Google 


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 
We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I 


i 


/. 


f. 


SERMONS 


ON 


IMPORTANT    SUBJECTS; 


BY    THE 


REV.  GEORGE  WHITEFIELD,  A.M. 


LATE  OF  PEMBROKE  COLLEGE,  OXFORD,  AND  CHAPLAIN  TO  TUE  RIGHT  HON. 

THE  COUNTESS  OF  HUNTINGDON. 


WITH   A  MEMOIR   OF   THE   AUTHOR,"'  '  '    ^' 

BY  SAMUEL  BREW,  A.  M. 
'  AND    A 

DISSERTATION  ON  HIS  CHARACTER,  PREACHING,  &c. 

BY  THE  REV.  JOSEPH  SMITH. 


LONDON: 
HENRY  FISHER,  SON,  AND  P.  JACKSON, 

38,    NEWGATE    STREET. 
1828. 


MEMOIR 


or  TBB 


REV.    GEORGE   WHITEFIELD. 


BT    SAMUEL   DEEWy   A.    M. 


The  erents  which  took  place  on  the  great  theatre  of  the  world,  during  the  eigh- 
teenth century,  will  always  render  it  memorable  in  die  annals  of  time.  Among  tha 
heroes  who  floarished  in  warp  the  names  of  Washington  and  Buonaparte  will  neTer 
be  effaced  from  the  tablets  of  fame ;  and  it  is  only  when  the  independence  of  America, 
and  the  revolution  in  France,  shall  cease  to  be  remembered,  that  this  important  eim 
can  be  blotted  from  the  recoids  of  mankind* 

But  it  was  not  merely  for  its  production  of  warriors,  that  this  period  has  been  so 
justly  celebrated.  The  revival  of  senuine  religion  which  took  place  both  in  England 
and  America,  during  its  latter  half|  has  easentudly  contributed  to  its  renown. 

A  few  honoured  individuals,  beholding  with  sorrow  the  principles  of  the  Reforma* 
tion,  as  to  their  experimental  and  practical  results,  sunk  into  a  state  of  torpor,  wera 
rendered  instrumental  in  the  hands  of  God,  in  calling  them  again  into  operation. 
The  effect  produced  has  been  both  powerful  and  permanent,  and,  in  its  distant  con- 
sequences, it  promises  to  introduce  a  new  epoch  in  the  morals  of  the  human  race. 

Among  these  highly  honoured  instruments  in  this  great  work,  John  Wesley  and 
George  Whitefield  stand  in  the  foremost  rank.  Being  engaged  in  the  work  of  the 
ministry,  and  acting  from  the  purest  of  motives,  each  in  Us  several  department,  waA 
called  in  a  peculiar  manner  to  dispense  the  word  of  eternal  life  to  perishing  sinnem. 
Their  labours  were  crowned  with  the  divine  approbation  ;  multitudes  flocked  to  the 
standard  of  the  cross,  which  they  were  direct^  to  display ;  and,  amidst  the  scoflh 
of  infidelity,  and  the  calumnies  with  which  they  were  assailed  from  the  tents  of 
ung:odliDess,  the  pleasure  of  the  Lord  prospered  in  their  hands.  They  lived  to  see 
that  reformation  which  accompanied  tneir  early  labours,  advancing  in  successful 
progress  wherever  their  efforts  had  been  exerted ;  and  since  their  happy  spirits  hav]Q 
entered  into  the  Joy  of  their  Lord,  the  Sun  of  righteousness,  which  shone  with 
increasing  bjiUiancy  at  the  periods  of  their  death,  has  encircled  their  names  with  a 
sacred  halo  of  heavenly  glory. 

George  Whitefield,  the  subject  of  this  memoir  was  a  native  of  Gloucester,  in 
which  city  he  was  bom  on  the  16th  of  December,  1714.  His  ancestors  were  persons  of 
high  respectability.  Some  among  them  had  sustained  the  ministerial  character,  and 
though  not  abounding  in  useless  affluence,  their  wealth  was  suitable  to  the  various 
stations  which  they  sustained  in  life.  His  father,  Mr.  Thomas  Whitefield,  was  fini 
bred  to  the  employment  of  a  wine  merchant  in  Bristol,  from  whence  he  removed  to 
the  city  of  Gloucester,  where  for  some  time  he  kept  an  inn,  and  was  distinguished 
fur  attention  to  business,  and. uniform  integrity  of  character.  <Of  this  parent,  yoong 
George  was  deprived  wnen  he  was  about  two  years  old  ;  but  maternal  tenderness 
and  care  in  a  g^reat  measure  supplied  the  deficiency,  and  repaired  the  loss  he  had 
unconsciously  sustained. 

The  son  being  designed  for  his  father's  business,  received  a  suitable  education  ia 
his  native  city,  while  at  the  same  time  he  made  a  commendable  proficiency  in  the 
Latin  classics.  At  school  he  was  distinguished  by  all  who  knew  him,  for  great 
strength  of  memory,  a  good  natural  understanding,  and  a  commanding  elocution. 
His  attachment  to  learning  was  also  accompanied  with  a  fondness  for  theatrical 
amusements,  in  which,  among  his  school-fellows,  he  frequently  engaged ;  and  it  is 
not  improbable,  that  the  applauses  which  his  eloquence  received,  tended  in  a  great 
measure  to  cherish  this  strong  propensity  of  his  natural  genius. 


IV  MEMOIR  OF  REV.  G.  WHITEFIELD. 

The  tide,  however,  which  had  for  some  years  been  flowint^  in  the  channel  of  learn- 
ing, began  to  decline  when  he  was  about  fifteen,  at  which  period  he  resolved  to  turn 
his  attention  to  the  business  in  which  his  mother  was  still  engaged,  and  with  whom 
he  had  liitherto  resided.  He  accortlingly  left  the  school,  and  became  her  assistant 
for  a  time,  but  did  not  hmg  retain  the  situation.  It  was,  however,  sufficiently  long 
to  furnish  his  enemies  w  ith  an  o<xasion  of  n>proach,  as  he  advanoi>d  in  life ;  and  from 
the  manner  in  which  they  have  mentioned  the  circumstance,  they  seem  to  have 
thought  that  this  was  a  great  drawback  from  his  popularity.  When  malice  resorts  to 
such  dishonourable  expedients,  it  bears  an  undesigned  testimony  in  favour  of  the 
character  it  intended  to  asperse. 

During  his  early  years,  he  was  the  subject  of  serious  impressions,  but  according  to 
his  own  account,  they  were  insufficient  to  restrain  the  evil  propensities  of  hb  nature. 
Of  these  he  has  given  a  melancholy  memorial,  accompanying  his  acknowledgments 
with  strong  expressions  of  shame  and  self-condemnation,  which  furnish  e\idi'ncc  of 
his  sincerity,  and  of  the  fidelity  with  which  he  has  recorded  the  inmost  feelings  of 
his  soul.  But  although  these  serious  impressions  were  so  powerful,  that  at  times  ht* 
walked  on  the  borders  of  despair,  anticipating  nothing  but  unmingled  wrath,  with 
scarcely  a  gleam  of  hope,  they  were  but  transient  in  their  duration.  The  vivacity  uf 
youtli,  the  allurement  of  companions,  and  a  fondness  for  theatrical  exhibitions,  sofin 
dissipated  their  force,  and  the  tide  of  folly  obliterated  all  images  of  terror  from 
hif  mind. 

At  the  age  of  fifteen,  these  gracious  visitations,  however,  again  returned  with  an 
overwhelming  influence,  and  speedily  brought  him  to  a  decision,  as  to  his  future 
arocation  in  life.  He  was  not  long  left  without  a  manifestation  of  the  divine  favour, 
and,  though  bn)ught  by  a  way  that  he  knew  not,  he  afterwards  found  that  God  was 
preparing  him  for  that  conspicuous  station  in  the  church  militant,  which  he  was 
destined  to  fill  with  so  much  lustre.  Though  attending  to  the  business  of  a  tavern, 
he  found  time  to  compose  several  sermons,  one  of  which  he  dedicated  to  his  brother 
in  Bristol,  to  whom  he  shortly  afterwards  paid  a  visit. 

On  returning  to  Gloucester,  he  resolved  to  abandon  his  present  employment ;  and, 
without  having  any  specific  object  in  view%  he  acconlingly  disengaged  himself  from 
his  former  pursuit  His  mother  at  this  time  was  only  able  to  furnish  him  with  a 
scanty  subsistence ;  tliis,  and  an  exposure  to  temptations  from  his  former  companions, 
rendered  his  situation  both  uncomfortable  and  dangerous ;  but  the  influence  of 
religion  retaining  its  dominion  in  his  bosom,  his  soul  was  frequently  filled  with 
horror  at  the  evil  deeds  to  which  he  was  tempted. 

At  the  age  of  seventeen,  he  became  particularly  watchful  over  his  conduct,  heart, 
and  conversation,  receiving  the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  supper,  and  spending  much 
time  in  fasting  and  prayer.  His  reading  also  was  confined  to  books  of  devotion, 
and  he  attended  divine  worship  t>vice  every  day.  These  exercises  so  engaged  iiis 
attention,  that  all  his  thoughts  were  constantly  set  on  the  things  which  maide  for  his 
everlasting  peace. 

His  mother  and  brothers,  on  finding  the  decided  turn  to  religion  that  his  mind  ha  1 
taken,  and  U'ing  satisfied  as  to  the  stability  of  his  resolution,  determined  on  sending 
him  to  the  university.  At  the  age  of  eighteen,  he  was  acconlingly  entered  at  Pem- 
broke college  Oxford,  where  he  was  admitted  as  a  servitor.  Arriving  at  tlie  colU'^'s 
he  was  again  exposed  to  the  society  of  the  profligate  ;  but  through  divine  grace  h.' 
was  enabled  to  withstand  all  their  allurements,  and  to  persevere  in  tlie  resolutions  he 
had  previously  formed. 

To  confirm  him  in  his  pious  determination,  he  soon  discovered  a  few  young  mm, 
whose  dispositions,  views,  and  experience  were  congenial  with  his  own.  Anion- 
these  associated,  were  the  two  brothers,  John  and  Charles  Wesley,  whose  names, 
exemplary  labours,  success,  and  character,  have  been  long  before  the  world.  Ilotween 
them  an  intimacy  speedily  commenced,  and  each  stimulated  the  other  to  perseverunce 
in  pietv,  and  an  entire  devoteilness  to  God. 

Distinguished  alike  for  sobriety,  and  an  unwearied  assiduity  in  the  improviinent 
of  their  time  and  talents,  they  could  not  long  remain  unnoticed,  in  a  place  tliat  had 
unhappily  been  remarkable  *for  an  ojjposite  behaviour.  With  many,  thr>  became 
the  butU  of  ridicule,  and  the  subjects  of  derision  ;  but  fortunately  there  were  others 
who  knew  how  to  estimate  their  worth,  and  to  turn  it  to  the  advantage  of  the  church, 
which  at  that  time  was  not  overburdened  with  pit»u8  ministers. 

At  this  period  Mr.  Whiletiehl,  in  common  with  his  pious  associates,  seized  every 
opportunity  to  visit  the  sick,  read  to  the  poor,  and  converse  with  the  prisonern  in 
jaiL  He  also  practised  on  himself  many  severe  bodily  austerities,  frequently  carrj-- 
inghis  abstemiousness  to  an  excess,  that  greatly  impaired  his  health,  an<l  brought 
clouds  of  darkness  over  his  mind.  His  state  was  s<K)n  made  known  to  the  two 
Wcsleys  ;  who,  w  ith  much  christian  and  brotheriy  sympathy,  endeavoured  to  rescue 


MBMOIR  OP  RBV.  G.  WHITBPIBLD:  T 

him  from  what  they  thoaght  a  mare  of  the  wicked  one.  At  first  their  advice  was 
nnarailing,  but  as  his  health  continued  to  decline,  a  physician  was  called  in  by  the 
tutor,  through  whose  care  and  medical  treatment,  his  recovery  was  soon  effected ; 
and  with  Ids  restoration  to  bodily  health,  he  soon  regained  his  wonted  serenity 
of  mind. 

To  establish  hij  health,  he  was  advised  to  pay  a  visit  to  his  native  air  in  Gloucester ; 
thither  he  accordingly  went,  and,  animated  with  love  to  God,  and  a  ceal  burning  for 
the  welfare  of  dying  sinners,  he  not  only  read  the  sacred  writings  for  himself,  but 
took  every  opportunity  to  communicate  their  doctrines  and  precepts  to  others.  By 
thus  conversing  with  young  men  of  nearly  his  own  age,  God  was  pleased  to  awaken 
them  to  a  sense  of  religion.  Several  accordingly  Joined  him,  and  times  were  set 
apart  for  their  pious  exercises,  notwithstanding  the  reproach  and  obloquy,  with  which 
they  well  knew  such  singular  practices-  were  sure  to  be  visited.  He  also  read  the 
Bible  to  some  poor  people  in  the  city,  twice  or  thrice  a  week,  and  every  day  visited 
the  county  gaol,  and  conversed  and  prayed  with  the  prisoners. 

His  fame  having  reached  tiie  ears  of  Dr.  Benson,  then  Bishop  of  Gloucester,  the 
worthy  prelate  made  strict  inquiry  respecting  this  extraordinary  young  man  ;  and 
having  obtained  satisfactory  information  as  to  the  state  of  his  mind,  his  religious 
views,  and  the  general  tenor  of  his  conduct,  he  held  out  to  him  the  hand  of  Christian 
friendship,  and  made  him  an  offer  of  ordination.  Mr.  Whitefield  being  at  this  time 
but  twenty-one,  hesitated  for  a  season,  whether  to  accept  or  decline  the  generous 
overture.  His  friends,  however,  prevailed  over  his  timidity,  and  he  was  ordained  a 
deacon  in  the  year  17S6. 

The  Sunday  following,  he  preached  in  Gloucester  his  first  sermon,  on  the  necessity 
and  benefit  of  religious  society.  The  church  was  much  crowded  with  attentive 
hearers,  and  his  discourse  gave  universal  satisfaction.  On  the  following  week  he 
returned  again  to  Oxford,  although  the  Bishop  had  offered  him  the  care  of  a  parish. 
Hb  preference  to  Oxford  on  this  occasion,  was  founded  on  a  conviction,  that  in 
this  seminary  of  learning  he  could  pursue  his  studies  to  much  greater  advantage, 
and,  by  enjoying  the  society  of  his  friends,  prepare  himself  for  much  greater  future 
usefulness. 

On  referring  to  his  first  sermon  in  Gloucester,  Mr.  Whitefield  observes  in  a  letter 
to  a  friend,  ^*  Some  few  mocked ;  but  most  for  the  present  seemed  struck :  and  I 
have  since  beard  that  a  complaint  had  been  made  to  the  Bishop,  that  I  dnive  fifteen 
mad,  the  first  sermon.  The  worthy  prelate,  I  am  informed,  wished  that  the  madness 
might  not  be  forgotten  before  next  Sunday.** 

Not  long  after  his  return  to  Oxford,  where  he  took  his  degree  of  Bachelor  of  Arts, 
he  was  invited  to  officiate  in  the  chapel  of  the  Tower  of  London  ;  but  his  first  ser- 
mon in  the  metropolis  was  at  Bishopgate  church,  in  August  1736.  His  aspect 
being  youthful,  many  were  surprised  at  his  appearance,  and  some  sneered  as  he 
ascehded  the  pulpit  stairs ;  but  they  had  not  heard  him  long,  before  their  contempt 
gave  place  to  solemnity,  and  their  smiles  were  succeeded  by  grave  countenances, 
and  occasional  tears.  From  hence  he  proceeded  to  the  Tower,  where  he  continuea 
two  months,  preaching,  chatechising,  and  visiting  the  soldiers,  and  where  several 
serious  young  men  attended  on  his  ministry,  from  various  parts  of  the  city ;  particu- 
larly to  hear  his  discourses  on  the  morning  of  the  Lord's  day. 

While  thus  engaged,  the  Wesleys  and  Mr.  Ingham  had  repaired  to  Georgia  to 
preach  the  gospel,  and  Mr.  Whitefield  having  received  letters  from  these  servants  of 
Gfid,  his  zeal  became  inflamed  to  follow  them  in  this  part  of  the  Lord's  vineyard. 
His  way  was,  however,  not  yet  made  clear.  He  therefore  remained  in  Oxford,  to 
which  he  ha4  returned  from  London,  and  found  himself  bappy  in  his  former  employ- 
ment, and  in  storing  his  mind  with  biblical  knowledge. 

In  November  17^,  he  was  again  called  from  Oxford,  to  Dummer  in  Hampshire, 
to  preach  to  a  poor  illiterate  people,  and  he  derived  no  small  portion  of  useful  know- 
ledge from  conversing  with  them.  At  this  time  he  divided  the  twenty-four  hours 
into  three  parts ;  eight  for  sleep  and  meals,  eight  for  public  prayers,  catechising, 
tnd  visiting ;  and  eight  for  study  and  retirement.  During  his  stay  here,  he  was 
offered  a  valuable  curacy  in  London,  but  being  intent  on  going  abroad,  he  declined  to 
accept  it. 

About  this  time  Mr.  Charles  Wesley  returned  from  Georgia,  to  seek  for -more 
labourers.  This,  Mr.  Whitefield  thought  a  clear  call  from  Providence,  and  accordingly 
made  arrangements  for  his  departure.  Preparatory  to  this,  he  repaired  to  Bristol 
and  Gloucester,  to  take  leave  of  his  friends.  Here,  and  in  many  other  places  which 
he  visited,  the  churches  were  crowded  in  an  unexampled  manner,  and  liberal  offers 
were  made  him,  if  be  would  relinquish  all  thoughts  of  embarking  for  a  foreign  land. 
Finding,  however,  that  nothing  could  shake  his  resolution,  the  people  of  Bath,  as  a 
token  of  affection  and  gratitode,  collected  £160  for  the  poor  of  Georgia,  the  distribo  - 
tion  of  which  was  entrusted  to  his  care. 


Tl  MBMOIR  OP  REV.  G.  WHITEPIBLD. 

The  time  of  Mr.  Whitefield's  departare.  befall  delayed  mach  longer  than  he  ex- 
pected, he  went  np  and  down  preaching  tne  word.  On  all  occasions  his  churches 
were  more  than  filled,  and  the  tide  of  his  popularity  rose  in  all  places,  to  a  height 
that  had  scarcely  erer  before  been  witnessed.  This  tide  was,  however,  in  some 
measure  counteracted  by  an  adverse  current  Many  were  ofiended  at  the  plainness 
of  his  obaervations,  ainoug  whom  were  some  clergymen,  who  fonnd  themselves 
indirectly  reproved  by  the  zeal  which  he  always  manifested,  and  the  success  which 
attended  his  preaching.  But  his  strength  was  equal  to  his  day,  and  at  the  time  of 
his  embarkation,  he  was  followed  by  &e  prayers  and  tears  of  thousands,  to  whose 
•ouls,  God  had  made  his  preaching  a  special  blessing. 

Towards  the  end  of  December  17S7,  Mr.  Whitefield  embarked  for  Georgia.  The 
•hip  had  many  soldiers  on  board,  who,  together  with  the  sailors  and  officers,  soon 
gave  him  to  understand  that  they  considered  him  as  an  impostor.  Added  to  this,  he 
found  the  first  Lord's  day  devoted  to  music  and  card  playing,  and  little  was  to  be 
heard  but  cursing  and  blasphemy.  These  circumstances  rendered  his  situation  rather 
uncomfortable  ;  but  after  some  time,  by  a  gentle  address,  and  unremitting  persever- 
ance, he  gained  the  confidence  of  nearly  all  on  board,  and  before  they  reached  the 
port  of  their  destination,  a  moral  revolution  had  been  wrought  throughout  the  ship, 
and  several,  among  whom  was  the  captain,  gave  endence  that  the  word  of  God  had 
aunk  deeply  into  their  hearts.  By  the  soldiers  and  sailors  the  cards  had  been 
thrown  overboard,  and  their  places  had  been  supplied  by  Bibles,  and  religious 
publications. 

Arriving  at  Savannah  in  May  17S8,  after  a  voyage  of  about  four  months,  Mr. 
Whitefield  found  much  to  discourage,  and  but  little  to  animate  his  spirits.  The  colony 
was  in  an.  infant  state,  and  seemed  likely  to  remain  so.  Sickness  and  death  were 
awfully  prevalent,  and  multitudes  of  children  were  left  without  a  home  and  without 
a  friend.  This  circumstance  suggested  the  idea  of  an  Orphan-house  ;  of  which  the 
utility  was  unquestionable,  but  how  to  procure  the  means  of  erecting  it,  and  defray- 
ing the  expenses  of  its  support,  were  points  that  required  mature  consideration. 
Being  however,  resolved  if  possible  to  establish  this  noble  charity,  he  visited  several 
places,  and  preaching  among  the  people,  made  arrangements  for  its  erection  ;  but  to 
accomplish  this,  he  found  it  necessary  to  revisit  England,  and  make  his  appeal  to 
British  benevolence. 

Prior  to  his  arrival  at  Georgia,  both  John  and  Charles  Wesley  had  left  the  colony, 
and  were  now  disseminating  the  great  truths  of  Christiunity  throughout  their  native 
laud,  the  shores  of  which  Mr.  Whitefield  was  soon  to  revisit.  Ue  accordingly  em- 
barked September  Cth,  1738,  on  board  a  ship  at  Charlestown  bound  for  London,  and 
after  a  perilous  voyage  of  nine  weeks,  reached  Limerick  harbour  in  a  state  of  great 
distress,  and  utter  destitution.  After  preaching  in  the  cathedral  of  Limerick,  he 
repaired  to  Dublin,  from  whence  he  took  ship  for  England,  and,  after  preaching 
twice  on  the  Lord's  day  in  Manchester,  reached  London  on  the  bth  of  Dccenibt  n 

On  presenting  himself  before  the  archbishop  of  Canterbury  and  the  Bishop  of 
London,  although  both  had  sanctioned  his  going  to  Georgia,  he  met  with  a  civil 
rather  than  a  warm  reception.  These  prelates  had  seen  his  journals,  and  thinking 
them  too  strongly  tinctured  with  enthusiasm,  they  took  this  occasion  to  express  their 
dissatisfaction.  Some  of  the  London  clergy  also  caught  the  alarm,  and  in  two  days 
five  churches  were  shut  against  him.  Numerous  churches,  however,  were  still  open, 
and  his  popularity  was  as  unbounded  as  ever. 

By  the  trustees  for  the  colony  of  Georgia,  he  was  received  with  the  greatest  cor- 
diality. They  expresse<l  themselves  highly  satisfied  with  his  conduct,  and,  pre- 
senting him  with  the  living  of  Savannah,  granted  five  hundred  acres  of  land  on 
which  to  erect  an  Orphan-house,  this  being  the  immediate  occasion  of  his  coming  to 
England. 

In  January  17S9,  he  visited  Oxford,  and  received  priest's  orders  from  the  hands 
of  his  former  friend  Bishop  Benson  ;  but  on  returning  to  London,  he  found  that  the 
opposition  to  his  preaching  in  the  churches  had  become  \er>'  general  tliroughout  the 
metropolis.  Hostility  having  led  him  and  his  friends  to  occupy  a  large  room  in 
Fetter-lane,  for  the  purpose  of  religious  meetings,  tliis  constituted  the  unpardonable 
sin,  and  but  few  ministers  would  allow  him  to  enter  their  pulpiU.  Even  these  fi*w 
were  soon  closed  ;  and  within  a  fortnight  from  the  time  of  his  return  from  OxfonI, 
every  door  was  shut,  l)esides  that  of  Newgate,  and  even  this  became  interdicted  by 
order  of  the  Lord  Mayor. 

Being  thus  ejected  from  tlie  pulpits  of  London,  he  resolved  on  \isiting  the  demi- 
•avages  of  Kingswood  collieries,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Bristol.  Thither  lie  went, 
and  after  once  or  twice  preaching  in  the  open  air,  found  hunself  encircled  with  a 
congregation  of  nearly  twenty  thousand  souls  ;  among  whom  were  many  ])erst)ns  of 
high  respectability  from  Bristol,  and  the  surrounding  country.      The  etUct   was 


MEMOIR  OP  RCV.  G.  WHITBPIBLD.  vU 

powerful  and  overwhelming.  Mnltitiideit,  who  had  never  before  heard  the  sound  of 
the  goepel,  now  inquired  **  what  mnat  we  do  to  be  sared  f 

Comrigning  this  opening  work  to  the  care  of  Mr.  Wesley,  Mr.  Whitefield  vimted 
▼arioos  narta  of  the  country,  uniformly  keeping  in  view  the  interests  of  the  Orphan- 
house.  In  some  few  places  he  had  access  to  the  churches,  but  nearly  all  were 
erentually  cloaed ;  and  when  this  was  the  ease,  he  took  his  stand  in  bowiing-greens, 
at  market-crosses,  and  in  high  ways,  or  fields,  to  deliver  to  the  assembled  thousanda, 
the  truths  of  the  everlasting  gospel.  At  tilie  close  of  this  excursion,  he  attempted  to 
preach  in  the  church  at  Idington,  having  obtained  liberty  of  Mr.  Stonehouse  tii6 
incumbent,  but  in  the  midst  of  the  prayers  the  churchwardens  forbidding  him,  he 
waited  tfll  the  service  was  concluded,  sind  preached  in  the  church-yard. 

Every  church  being  now  closed,  he  resolved  on  the  following  Sunday  to  attempt 
preachhig  in  Moorfields.  His  intentions  having  been  made  public,  an  incredible 
number  assembled,  from  whose  appearance  much  danger  was  to  be  apprehended ; 
and  not  a  few  of  Mr.  Whitefiekl's  friends  feared  that  he  would  never  be  permitted  to 
leave  the  place  alive.  At  the  time  appointed,  aecompanied  by  two  friends,  he  reached 
this  formidable  body  in  a  coach ;  on  leaving  which,  they  pressed  towards  the  centre^ 
but  were  soon  separated  by  the  throng.  Mr.  Whitefield,  however,  urged  his  way 
among  them,  and  reached  the  fragments  of  a  table,  that  had  been  placed  there  for  his 
reception,  but  wliich  the  mob  had  broken  to  pieces.  He  then  retired  to  a  wall,  and 
preached  without  any  molestation,  to  a  multitude  of  which  we  will  not  attempt  to 
estimate  the  amount.  From  Moorfields  he  repaired  on  the  evening  of  the  same  day, 
to  Kennington  eommon ;  and  preached  to  an  amazing  assembly,  whose  behaviour 
would  not  have  dishonoured  any  church  in  the  metropolis. 

Having  collected  in  the  open  air  about  one  thousand  pounds  for  the  Orphan-house, 
from  congregations,  which,  on  a  moderate  computation,  amounted  on  the  average  to 
about  twenty  thousand ;  assembled  chielly  on  Black-heath,  Kennington-common,  and 
in  Moorfields ;  Mr.  Whitefield  embarked  a  second  time  for  America,  on  the  14th  of 
August  1739,  and  after  a  passage  of  nine  weeks  landed  at  Philadelphia.  In  this  city 
tlie  churches  were  open  for  his  reception,  and  all  were  thronged  with  attentive  hearers, 
among  whom  very  many  were  evidently  serious.  Several  odier  places  were  visitea 
m  the  aorrounding  country  during  his  stay ;  and  it  was  evident  that  God  every  where 
owned  and  blessed  his  labour. 

In  the  meanwhile,  the  goods  which  had  been  purchased  for  the  American  market, 
with  the  money  collected  for  the  Orphan-house,  sold  well,  and  considerably  aug- 
oiented  the  funds.  With  this  sum,  and  additional  collections  made  during  Us 
jonneyliigs  in  America,  he  repaired  to  Georgia,  and  having  completed  his  arrange- 
menfs,  laid  the  foundation  of  the  Orphan-house  on  the  25th  of  March  1740.  At  thte 
thne  ha  had  nearly  forty  orphans  under  his  care,  for  whom  a  temporary  habitation 
had  bees  proeured.  •  These,  together  vnth  the  workmen,  amounted  to  nearly  one 
hundred,  for  whose  sustenance  he  had  daily  to  provide,  with  no  other  resources  than 
those  of  pobUc  charity. 

Every  thing  being  in  order  at  Georgia,  Mr.  Whitefield  again  visited  Pennsylvania, 
bat  found,  on  his  arrival  at  Philadelphia,  that  the  doors  of  the  churches  were  now 
shut  against  him.  •  Large  congregations  however  assembled  in  the  open  air,  to  whom 
he  preached,  and  from  tiieir  b^evolence,  in  a  short  period,  he  collected  in  money  and 
pnmsions  upwards  of  five  hundred  pounds  sterling,  with  which  amount  he  returned 
to  hie  orphan  family  in  Georgia. 

His  ease  and  design  being  made  known,  assistance  was  rendered  him  from  various 
quarters,  and  the  bmlding  went  forward  without  interruption.  •  The  most  unremitting 
exertioas,  however,  were  necessary  to  keep  alive  that  general  interest,  which  had  been 
awakened;  and  to  do  this,  he  continued  to  preach  and  travel  until  exhausted 
■atnre  partially  sunk  under  the  incessant  toil.  During  these  journeyings,  in  seventy- 
five  days,  he  preached  one  hundred  and  seventy-five  tmies  in  public,  besides  giving 
private  nbortations ;  travelled  upwards  of  eight  hundred  miles ;  and  in  goods,  pro- 
visions,  and  money  collected  for  his  orphan  eatablishment,  upwaids  of  seven  hundred 
pounds  sterling.  Having  made  this  provision  for  his  intended  abseiice,  on  the  3d  of 
iaauary  1741,  he  embarked  for  England,  and  landing  at  Falmoutli  on  the  11th  of 
Uarch,  preached  at  Kennington  common  on  the  Sunday  follovring. . 

On  arriving  in  England^  he  found  the  aspect  of  things  considerably  changed. 
Some  o€  his  writings  published  in  America  had  given  offence,  the  extreme  of  Cal- 
viaistic  principles,  wldch  he  had  now  embraced,  his  most  steady  friends  hesitated  to 
neeive,  and  his  popularity  seemed  to  have  found  a  grave.  This  ebb  was,  however, 
of  BO  long  continuance.  A  few  friends  agreed  to  erect  a  shed  to  shield  the  congrega- 
hoa  that  might  attend,  .from  the  inclemency  of  the  weather.  This  they  called  a 
Tihi  ■inJi ,  and  a  strong  and  permanent  building,  is  now  become  the  successor  of  that 
temporary  shelter  near  City-road,  and  still  retains  its  original  name  The  TabemacU. 


\ 


MKMOtR  OP  HPV,  R.  WHITEFIBLD. 


In  teveral  parts  of  Engluid  . 
visiting  ScollHiid,  a  considnmble 
cttiee  into  nhicb  be  entfied, 


nd  uneuppcted  doon  vrere  nprned,  anil  on  lira 
tion  waa  created  throughoul  lim  toimt  and 
reception  wut  rather  of  a  chequorRd  chararler 


■Itunig  the  teadinp;  otScen  of  the  church,  bnl  their  pulpits  were  open  to  liini,  Uiuiig:h 
tbe  buildioga  would  not  contain  the  congregatLons.  DurinR  this  tour  he  pollecti^il 
•bore  five  hondred  pounds  in  money  and  Koods,  and  proceeded  through  Wtttes  in  bis 
.  WBj  to  London. 

Arriving  at  AberpTeun;  in  October  1T41,  Mr.  Whitclield  entered  into  the  marriafre 
■tale  with  a  Mrs.  James,  a  nidow  ladj,  between  thirty  and  fuit;  years  of  age, 
"  nha,"  he  observes  in  one  of  his  letters,  "  has  been  a  housekeeper  man;  vears  i 
once  gay,  but  for  three  years  last  past,  a  dtspised  follnner  of  the  Lamb  of  Ood." 

After  visit! DR  many  places,  tottos,  and  cities  daring  bis  Journey  from  Wales  In 
England,  Mr.  H'hilefield  reached  the  melropotis  in  February  174!,  and  resolved  to 
.  venture  among  the  mountebanks,  players,  and  puppet-show  meu  who  infested  Moor- 
flelds.  Accordingly  on  Whit  Monday,  accompanied  by  many  pious  persous,  he  began  - 
in  tbe  morning  at  six,  and  collected  round  bim  some  thousunds  that  were  waiting 
there  for  their  usual  diversion.  Encouraged  by  their  peaceable  behaviour,  he  ven- 
tured again  at  noon,  and  soon  drew  from  tbe  merry-andrews  and  mountebanks,  all 
Bicir  congregations.  Several  attempts  were  made  to  drive  him  from  the  Geld,  but 
■II  proved  abortive,  and  God  seemed  to  bonour  this  bold  endeavour  with  unexampled 

The  accounts  received  Irom  Georgia  on  Mr.  WhiteAeld's  arrival  at  London,  were 
nther  of  a  discouraging  nature,  but  bis  lelters  from  Scotland  respecting  bis  late  visit, 
'  Induced  him  to  go  thither  agoiD-  He  accordingly  embarked  a  second  time,  and 
nached  Leith  early  in  June  ITla.  In  pauing  through  this  portion  of  the  Britisli 
empire,  be  found  that  a  great  revival  of  religion  bad  taken  place,  and  many  were 
ready  to  ascribe  it  to  bis  instrumentality.  Here  he  continued  to  preach  and  make 
tollectioos  for  his  orphan  establistunenl  until  tbe  end  of  October,  when  he  sgaio 
returned  to  London. 

During  his  absence,  a  powerful  awakening  had  taken  place  at  the  Tabernacle,  and 
tiie  congregations  had  become  exceedingly  large.  On  visiting  tbe  country,  a  great 
out-pouring  of  the  Spirit  was  also  felt,  and  his  congregalioni  were  every  where 
overwhelming.  Persecution  bad  however  reared  its  bead)  but  some  of  the  ring- 
leaders being  prosecuted  to  conviction,  peace  was  restored.  At  Plymontb  on  one 
occasion  his  liie  was  endangered,  by  a  brutal  officer,  who  found  his  nay  into  his  bed- 
,    room,  and  beat  bim  most  unmercifiill;. 

Uavini;  made  preparations  for  his  departure  for  America,  he  embarked  in  the 
beginning  of  August  ITU,  and,  after  a  tedious  voyage  of  eleven  weeks,  landed  at  York 
In  New  England,  in  a  very  weak  and  emaciated  conditioti.  The  flourishing  state  of 
religion  was  however  a  cordial  to  his  spirit,  and  this  in  some  measure  'compensnied 
Ar  his  bodily  weakness.  His  illness  conUnuing,  he  was  advised  to  visit  the  Ber- 
mudas, to  which  place  ho  repaired  when  unable  any  loager  to  bear  tbe  fatigues  of 
preaching. 

On  reaching  the  Somer's  Islands,  his  health  being  somewhat  (tetter,  he  preached 
(or  about  a  month  twice  every  day,  and  much  success  attended  his  ministry.  His 
journal  during  his  stay  in  these  islands  is  remarkably  interesting,  but  we  cannot  enter 
into  it*  particulars. 

Having  transmitted  to  Georgia  what  had  been  given  bim  for  the  Orphan -houoe. 
be  once  more  embarked  fur  England,  and  arrived  at  Deal  in  twenty-eight  days.  The 
next  day  he  reached  London,  after  an  absence  of  about  four  years.  Ilie  countess  of 
Huntingdon,  hearing  of  his  arrival,  invited  him  to  her  house,  and  at  her  request  he 
preached  before  many  of  the  nobility,  among  whom  were  the  P.arl  of  Cheslerfleld 
•nd  Lord  Bolinghroke,  who  expressed  themselves  highly  gratified  with  what  tbey 
bad  heard. 

In  September  II 18,  he  again  visited  Scotland,  with  hia  usual  success.     On  return- 
ing to  England,  he  laid  before  tbe  trustees  of  tbe  colony  in  Georgia,  a  plan  for 
.    making  tlw  Orphan-house  alio  a  seminary  of  learning.    This  plan  was  afterwards 
carried  into  cxecntion  with  some  alterations,  and  the  beneficial  effects  are  felt  and 
•cknowlcdged  bven  in  the  present  day. 

Having  travelled  tiimugh  tlie  western  part  of  tbe  kingdom,  and  preached  to  about 
ime  hundred  thousand  souls,  he  again  returned  to  London.  Here  also  he  preached, 
■nd  hjs  word  was  attended  with  divine  power.  In  ITGO  he  again  visited  Scotland, 
■nd  was  received  in  many  places  with  tears  of  joy.  On  returning  to  Fjigland  he 
preached  in  London,  and  visited  manv  other  places  until  May  ITSl  when  be  sailed 
fbr  Ireland,  where  his  fame  had  already  reached,  and  where  he  wai  most  cordially 
received.  Mere  he  continued  until  llie  following  July,  when,  aOet  preaching  s*oiiI 
eighty  tines,  he  again  visited  Scotland. 


MBIIOIR  OF  REV.  G.  WIIITBPIBLD.  IS 

la  Aogoflt  1751  he  again  returned  to  London,  to <>nibark  a  fourth  lime  for  Amrrka* 
But  hia  cooatitation  had  rei'eivcd  a  shock,  from  which  it  neri^r  full>  rrr<»«rn>(l.  la 
Edinburgh  he  had  thrown  op  moch  blood,  and  moat  of  hia  friends  berime  alarmed 
OB  account  of  hia  pracariona  state  of  health.  Being  somewhat  rmtc^red,  he  sailed 
in  the  Antelope  for  Georgia,  and  reached  SaTannah  on  the  27 th  of  October  1751,  and 
found  the  Orpfaan-bouae  in  a  flourishing  condition. 

After  preaching  in  numerous  places,  he  once  more  embarked  for  Lnnd<in,  and 
thence  again  Tisitcd  Scotland.  On  returning  to  London,  he  laid  the  fimndation  of 
the  New  Tabernacle  in  Moorfields,  which  was  completed  during  the  following  sum- 
mer. Here  he  continued  to  preach  with  his  usual  fervour  and  success,  from  June 
loth,  175S,  the  day  it  was  opened,  until  the  end  of  the  month,  when  he  a^n  preached 
his  way  towards  fiicotland,  Tisiting  such  towns  as  lay  in  his  Jtwd. 

Returning  to  London  in  August  175S  he  preached  frequently  in  the  metropolij| 
and  after  making  various  excursions  into  different  parts  of  the  kingdom,  once  more 
embarked  for  America  in  March  1754,  by  way  of  Lisbon,  where  he  tarrie«I  about  a 
week,  and  found  his  spirit  stirred  within  him  when  he  saw  the  whole  city  given  In 
idolatry.  Of  the  processions  which  he  witnessed,  he  gives  an  account  written  in  a 
strain  of  animated  melancholy. 

AIIct  a  passage  of  six  weeks,  he  reached  Beaufort  in  South  Carolina,  and  having 
seen  his  family  in  Georgia,  which  now  consisted  of  above  a  hundred  orphans,  he 
visited  the  Northern  States,  and  in  most  places  met  with  a  verv  favourable  reception. 
At  New  Jersey  the  President  and  Trustees  presented  him  with  the  degree  of  blaster 
of  Arts.  He  thus  continued  travelling  and  preaching  until  the  end  of  March, 
when  he  again  crossed  the  Atlantic,  and  landed  at  Newhavcn  in  Sussex  on  the  Mh 
of  May,  1755. 

In  London  he  found  the  work  of  God  in  a  state  of  prosperity,  and  in  travelling 
through  the  country  his  hopes  were  almost  uniformly  confirmed.  Persecution  had 
indeed  been  in  many  places  experienced,  particularly  by  himself  and  congregation  in 
Longacre,  but  by  having  recourse  to  authority  it  soon  died  away.  Thus  encouraged, 
he  took  a  piece  of  ground,  and  on  the  lOth  of  May  1756  laid  the  foundation  of  the 
large  chapel  in  Tottenham-Court  road. 

Whfle  this  chapel  was  being  built,  Mr.  Whitefield  visited  many  towns  and  countiee, 
and  nmde  another  excursion  into  Scotland,  and  in  all  places  found  his  congregatione 
as  large  and  attentive  as  ever:  the  work  of  the  Li>rd  secm«*d  ever>-  where  to 
prosper  In  his  hands.  Having  returned  to  London,  and  opened  his  large  chapel  In 
Tottenham-Court  road,  he  again  revisited  Scotland,  and  preached  to  all  ranks  with 
great  success. 

From  Scotland  he  again  visited  Ireland,  where,  while  his  prearhing  was  httended 
with  divine  power  to  many,  his  life  was  endan^ere<l  by  a  ]K)pit»h  rnhblr,  to  whose 
fury  he  became  sometimes  exposed.  After  again  visiting  Scotland,  and  preaching 
in  numerous  places,  he  repaired  to  liondon  in  the  end  of  OctoInT,  and  once  more 
turned  hiji  face  towards  America.  Prior  however  to  his  eml)arkation,  he  again  \  isiled 
Scotland,  preaching  in  numerous  places,  but  returned  to  London,  when*  he  g|M'nt  the 
winter  of  1759.  In  the  spring  and  summer  of  17G0  he  again  made  exeurhiouh  into 
the  country,  and  had  to  endure  a  new  species  of  perM'rution,  U'lng  e\hit>ite<l  on  the 
stage  in  a  comedy  called  the  Minor,  which  was  written  by  the  telebrateil  comedian 
Samuel  Foote.  This,  however,  rather  tended  to  inrreajH>  than  to  diminish  hia 
popularity ;  for  many  thousands,  viewing  the  profane  attt*in])t  with  al>horrence,  from 
this  very  circumstance  attend(*d  his  ministry,  and  became  his  friends. 

Finding  his  health  decline,  and  his  inability  to  presu-h  as  usual  inercnse,  he  mode 
a  voyage  to  Holland  in  17G2,  and  found  himself  much  lN*tter ;  but  his  stay  was  short, 
and  his  relief  only  temporary*.  From  Holland  he  n'tumed  to  Scotland,  and  eml>arked 
from  Greemick,  the  sixth  time,  for  America,  which  he  rt*ach<'<l  after  a  {Kissa^e  of 
twehe  weeks.  Here  he  nmtinued  preaching  as  he  was  aide,  but  with  much  su(t<*8«, 
until  he  again  retume<l  to  England,  which  he  rcachifl  in  July  17(i5. 

Having  opened  in  OctoIxT  Lady  Huntingdon's  <-liapel  in  Hath,  he  visited  many 
places,  as  his  strength  would  allow.  On  the  3d  of  Aupist  Mrs.  \l'hitefield  was 
attacked  willi  an  inflammator>-  fever,  of  whieh  she  die<l  on  the  9th,  and  on  the  14th 
he  preached  her  funeral  sormc»n.  His  health  however  still  continued  more  than 
precarious.  He  was  fn*qoently  attacked,  and  e\ory  onset  S4i>nied  to  make  a  new 
inroad  on  his  constitution.  His  preaehing  was  much  interrupted  l)>  his  complaint, 
but  lieing  still  resolved,  if  possible,  sure  more  to  visit  America,  and  iM'inp;  somewhat 
U^ter,  he  embarke<l  in  September  I7(i9  at  L<md(m,  the  si^venth  and  last  time,  for  the 
New  World,  and  reached  Charlies  Town  in  South  Carolina  on  the  30th  of  Nu\ ember 

following. 

Arri%in;r  at  his  establishment,  he  found  everything  agr«*eable  to  hi-  ui>li«<4,  the 

coion\  hn\ing  inrrras«-d  in  an  nlmost  inenMlible  m.n.nner.    Trom  this  plaer  he  MMted 

b 


X  MEMOIR  OF  RRV.  G.  WHITEFIELD. 

BUUiy  adjacent,  and  even  distant  towns,  as  his  strength  pennitted,  but  the  day  of  his 
▼iffour  was  gone,  to  return  no  more. 

From  the  17th  to  the  29th  of  September  1770,  he  preached  almost  every  day,  but 
on  this  latter  day,  preaching  at  Exeter  in  the  open  air,  no  house  beinp:  sufficient  to 
contain  the  multitudes,  he  continued  his  discourse  nearly  two  hours,  and  was  greatly 
fiitigued.  He  however  set  out  for  Newbury  Port,  where  he  arrived  in  tlie  evening; 
and  went  early  to  bed,  it  being  Saturday  night,  intending  to  preach  the  next  duy. 
He  awoke  several  times  in  the  night,  and  complained  much  of  a  difficulty  in  breath- 
ing. His  friends  being  apprehensive  of  danger,  sent  for  medical  aid,  but  it  was  too 
late,  for  on  the  Sunday  morning  about  six  o'clock,  September  80th,  1770,  he  expired 
In  a  fit  of  the  asthma,  in  the  66th  year  of  his  age. 

Thus  lived  and  thus  died  this  eminent  servant  of  the  I^rd  Jesus.  His  mortal 
renains  were  interred  at  Newbury  Port  near  Boston,  in  New  England,  there  to 
await  the  resurrection  .unto  eternal  life. 

That  Mr.  Whitefield  was  a  man  of  most  extraordinary  eloquence,  and  of  a  power- 
fnlly  commanding  voice.  Dr.  Franklin,  whom  all  must  allow  to  be  a  competent  judge, 
has  not  hesitated  to  assert 

In  reference  to  the  latter,  he  observes,  that  he  has  no  doubt  he  could  command  a 
eongregation  of  80,000  persons.  To  this  conclusion  he  was  led  by  the  following; 
experiment  On  one  occasion,  when  attending  Mr.  Whitefield's  preaching,  Dr. 
Franklin  receded  from  him  at  the  greatest  distance  in  which  he  could  distinctly  hear, 
and  understand  what  was  delivered.  He  then  travelled  round  the  speaker,  always 
taking  his  ability  to  hear  and  understand,  as  the  line  of  that  circle  which  he  formed. 
Having  fixed  these  boundaries,  he  proceeded,  after  the  congregation  had  withdraA^Ti, 
to  measure  the  enclosed  area,  which  he  found  would  contain  the  above  number, 
without  causing  them  to  be  immoderately  thronged. 

On  the  subject  of  Mr.  Whitefield's  eloquence,  the  same  venerable  philosopher 
relates  the  following  circumstances.  Having  frequently  heard  of  its  magic  influence, 
whenever  the  preacher  had  to  advocate  any  charity,  he  one  day  resolved  to  attend 
hif  discourse,  but  with  a  fixed  determination  to  give  nothing  to  the  collection  at  that 
time,  that  he  might  thus  prove  himself  above  the  common  weakness  of  his  country- 
men. At  first,  ttie  language  of  the  speaker  made  little  or  no  impression,  any  further 
than  to  excite  Dr.  Franklin's  admiration.  At  length  came  a  powerful  stroke,  that 
operated  like  an  electrical  shock.  Scarcely  had  he  recovered  from  this,  before  he 
was  assailed  with  another,  and  his  determination  to  give  nothing  began  to  soAen. 
Another  burst  of  eloquence  came,  and  Dr.  F.  resolved  he  would  give  to  the  collection 
all  the  copper  money  he  had  in  his  pocket  Here  he  fixed  for  some  time,  till  an 
impassioned  torrent  of  thought  and  language  attacked  the  pocket  containing  the  silver, 
and  before  he  had  exactly  adjusted  the  sum  he  intended  to  g^ive,  he  resolved  to  sur- 
render the  whole.  The  speaker  still  continuing  to  assail,  and  the  hearer  to  resist, 
remained  equally  balanced  for  some  time.  A  flash  of  oratory  at  length  so  far  excited 
Dr.  F.'s  admiration,  that,  thinking  such  noble  coruscations  of  mental  energ>'  ought  not 
to  be  expended  in  vain,  he  came  to  the  conclusion  of  rewarding  it  with  a  small  piece  of 
gold.  The  discourse  continued,  and  so  did  Dr.  Franklin,  but  not  the  money  in  his 
pocket,  for  at  the  termination  of  the  senrice,  when  the  collection  was  made,  copper, 
•Urer,  and  gold  all  went  into  the  hat  together,  and  the  philosopher  went  home 
penniless. 

Present  at  the  same  discourse  was  another  gentleman,  who.  having  less  confidence 
in  his  own  resolution  to  give  nothing,  than  Dr.  Franklin  had  in  his,  went  to  the 
preaching  with  empty  pockets.  The  fascinations  of  the  preacher's  eloquence,  how- 
ever, soon  brought  him  to  repentance ;  and  when  the  collection  was  about  to  be  made, 
he  turned  to  an  acquaintance,  a  Quaker,  who  stood  near  him,  and  asked  him  to  lenfl 
■ome  money.  To  this  application  he  received  the  following  reply  :  ''  I  will  lend 
thee  money  to-morrow,  friend,  but  at  present  I  fear  thou  art  a  little  beside  tJiyself." 
^  Tliis,"  says  the  relster,  *'  was  probably  the  only  person  in  the  whole  congregation, 
who  was  not  affected." 

Many  similar  anecdotes  have  been  recorded  of  the  powerful  effects  produced  by 
Mr.  IVhitefield's  preaching,  but  our  limits  forbid  us  to  insert  Uiem.  Men  of  Iiis 
gigantic  stature  are  not  to  be  drawn  in  miniature. 

The  outlines  of  his  character  may  be  found  in  the  preceding  narrative,  and  hi. 4 
works  continue  to  praise  him,  both  in  England  and  America.  His  name  every 
where  carries  with  it  its  own  eulogy.  On  both  sides  the  Atlantic,  thousands  have 
been  raised  up  to  call  him  blessed.  We  have  heard  the  voices  of  many,  and  we  muut 
wait  for  eternity  to  communicate  the  rest. 


XI 


CONTENTS. 


Memoir  of  the  Aotiior, 


Pageix. 


SERMON  I. 

THE   SEED  OP  THE  WOMAN,  AND   THE   SEED 
OP  THE  SERPENT. 

Amd  I  will  pui  mumhf  h^wt^n  tktt  and  th§ 
wpommm,  omf  iehvMH  tkff  Mtad  amd  ktr  teed ; 
a  shmll  6muf  tky  head,  and  ikaa  tkalt 
brw€  hi*  ktoL — 6«B.  iii.  6 Page  S8 

SERMON  II. 

WALKING   WITH    GOD. 

And  Enoch  walked  with  Chd,  and  he  wot  not. 
Jar  God  took  AtM«-»6eB.  t.  24. 46 


SERMON  III. 
Abraham's  ofrBRiNO  up*  nis  son. 
And  ha  mud,  Lojf  noi  thme  hand  tqton  the  lad, 
naUher  do  thorn  antf  thing  mifo  him ;  for  now 
I  know  that  thou  fearett  Ood,  eeeing  thou 
kati  not  withhdd  thg  eon,  tluna  only  eon, 
from  Mf«— Gen.  xxii.  IS 58 

SEI»fON  IV. 

THE  GREAT  DUTY  OP  PAMILY«ftELIGION. 
Ae  for  aw  and  my  honee,  we  wiO  eerve  the 
I.orA— ioikuzxiT.16 68 

SERMON  V. 

CHRIST     THE     BEST     HUSBAND  :     OR,     AN 
EARNEST   INVITATION  TO  YOUNG  WOMEN 
TO  COMB  AND  SIB  CHRIST. 
FMacted  to  ft  SmMj  of  Tcwsff  Woatn,  fa  Fetter 


Hearken,  O  daughter,  and  consider,  and  in- 
cline ihina  ear:  forget  aieo  thine  own  peo- 
ple, and  thy  faiher'e  houee :  eo  ehall  the 
King  greatly  desire  liy  beauty ;  for  he  it 
thy  Lord,  and  worthy  lAoii  him. — Peslm 

uT.  AVf  JLI.  ••.•.•....•••.•.••••••  •77' 

SERMON  VI. 

BtlTAIN'S    MERCIES,  AND  BRITAIN'S  DOTY. 

PrvarlMd  at  Philedelphie.  on  Sondey,  Angntt  S4th, 
17M,  wd  oecaeieved  by  tke  Sappreaiion  of  the 
late  maumnl  Rebe^ioa. 

Tkmt  they  aught  ohteroe  Idt  ttatatet,  and  keep 

hit  lawi, — Psalm  or.  45 •• 87 


SERMON  VII. 

THANKFULNESS   FOR    MERCIES  RECBIYED^  A 

NECESSARY    DOTY. 

A  Fareir«I1  Sermon,  preached  on  board  the  WMtaker. 
at  Anchor  neer  SeTanoah,  in  Georgia,  Saaday, 
May  I7ih,  1738. 

Then  are  they  glad,  because  they  are  at  reel, 
and  so  he  bringeth  them  unto  the  haven 
where  they  would  be.  O  that  nten  would 
therefore  praise  the  Lord  for  hie  goodness^ 
and  declare  the  wonders  that  he  doeth  far 
the  children  of  men ! — Psa.  o? ii.  80, 81.  »9S 

SERMON  VIII. 

THE   NECESSITY    AND    BENEFITS    OP     RELI- 
GIOUS  SOCIETY. 

Two  are  better  than  one»  because  they  have  a 
good  reward  for  their  labour.  For  if  they 
fall,  the  one  will  lift  up  his  fellow:  but  woe 
be  to  him  thai  is  alone  when  he  faUtth  !  for 
he  hath  not  another  to  help  him  up.  Again, 
if  two  lie  together,  then  they  have  heiU;  bui 
how  can  one  be  warm  alone?  And  ^  one 
prevail  against  him,  two  shall  withstand 
him;  and  a  threefold  cord  is  not  fuirkly 
6roi«fi.— Eodes.  h.  9, 10, 1 1, 12 107 

SERMON  IX. 

THE    FOLLY    AND    DANGER  OP    NOT  BEING 
RIGHTEOUS   ENOUGH. 

Be  not  righteous  over-wtueh,  neither  umke 
thyself  over-wise:  why  shouldest  thorn  de- 
stroy %m//?— Eoolei.  Tu.  16 118 

SERMON  X. 

A  PRESERVATIVE  AGAINST  UNSETTLED  NO- 
TIONS, AND  WANT  OF  PRINCIPLES,  IN 
REGARD  TO  RIGHTEOUSNESS  AND 
CHRISTIAN   PERFECTION. 

Being  a  more  particular  Answer  to  Dr.  Tjrapp*a  ibur 
Sermene  upon  the  sMne  Text. 


Be  nnt   righteous    over-much,  neither 

thyself  over-wise:  why  thouldett  thou  da- 
tlroy  thyself! — Eccles.  f  ii.  16 « •  •181 


Xl\ 


CONTENTS 


SERMON  XI. 

THB    BENEFITS   OF    AN    EARLY    PIETY. 

PrMched  ftt  Bow  Church,  London,  befor«  the  Reli- 
ffUms  SoeietiM. 

Bemembtr  now  thy  Creator  in  th«  days  of  thy 

youths — Eedes.  xii.  !.•.••• 14S 

SERMON  XII. 

CHRIST,   THE   BELIEVER^S   HUSBAND. 

For  thy  Maker  is  thy  Busbastd. — iMiab 
liv.  6 151 

SERMON  XIII. 

THE  POTTER  AND  THE  CLAY. 

ns  word  which  eanu  to  'Jsremiah  from  the 
Lord,  saying.  Arise,  ttnd  go  down  to  the 
potter*s  hotue,  and  there  I  wiU  cause  thee 
to  hear  my  words,  Tken  I  went  down  to 
the  potter* s  house,  md,  behold,  he  wrought 
a  work  on  the  wheels.  And  the  vessel  that 
he  made  of  clay  was  marred  in  the  hands 
of  the  potter,  so  he  made  U  again  another 
vessel,  as  seemed  good  to  the  potter  to  make 
it.  Then  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  me, 
saying,  O  house  of  Israel,  eannt^  I  do  with 
you  as  this  potter  ?  saith  the  Lord,  Be- 
hold, as  the  clay  is  in  the  potter's  hand,  so 
are  ye  in  mine,  O  house  of  IsraeL — Jerero. 
xtiii.  I— 6 170 

SERMON  XIV. 

THE    LORD   OOR    RIOHTE008NESB. 

ne  Lord  our  Righteousness, — Jeremiah 
xiili.6 184 

SERMON  XV. 

THE   RIGHTEOUSNESS   OF   CHRIST    AN 

EVERLASTING  RIGHTEOUSNESS. 

And  to  frrtny  m  everlasting  righteousness, — 

SERMON  XVI. 

TOE  OBSERVATION  OP  THE  BIRTH  OF 
CHRIST,  THE  DUTY  OF  ALL  CHRISTIANS; 
OR  THB  TRUE  WAY  OF  KEEPING  CHRIST- 
MAS. 

And  she  shall  bring  forth  a  son,  and  thou 
Aalt  call  his  name  Jesus  :  for  he  shall  save 
his  people  from  their  sins. — Matt  i.  21.  208 

SERMON  XVII. 

THE  TEMPTATION  OP  CHRIST. 
Then  was  Jesus  led  up  of  tie  Spirit  into  the 
wilderness,  to  be  tempted  of  the  deviL  And 
when  he  had  fasted  forty  days  and  forty 
nights,  he  was  afterwards  an  hungered. 
And  when  the  tempter  came  to  him,  he 
said,  If  thou  be  the  Son  of  God,  com- 
wuiud  thai  these  stones  be  made  bread. 
But  he  answered  and  said.  It  is  written, 
Man  shall  not  Hve  by  bread  ahne,  hui  by 
every  word  that  proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth 
of  God,  Then  the  devil  taketh  him  up  into 
ike  holy  city,  and  setteth  him  on  a  pinnacle 
of  the  tempie,  and  saith  unto  Hm,  If  thou  be 
ike  Son  of  God,  cast  thyself  down :  for  U 
is  written,  He  shall  give  his  angels  charge 
concerning  thee,  and  m  thtir  hands  they 


shall  bear  thee  up,  lest  at  any  lime  thou  dash 
thy  foot  against  a  stone.  Jesus  said  unto 
him.  It  is  written  again.  Thou  shalt  not 
tempt  the  Lord  thy  God,  Again,  the  devii 
taketk  him  up  into  an  exceeding  high  moun- 
tain, and  shewetk  him  all  the  kingdoms  of 
the  world,  and  the  glory  of  them :  and  saith 
unto  him.  All  these  things  will  I  give  thee, 
if  thou  wilt  fall  down  and  worship  me. 
Then  saith  Jesus  unto  him.  Get  thee  hence, 
Satan :  for  it  is  written.  Thou  shalt  worship 
the  Lord  thy  God,  and  him  only  shaU  thou 
serve.  Then  the  devil  Uaveth  him,  astd, 
behold,  angels  came  and  ministered  unto  him. 
—Matt  ir.  1—11 216 

SERMON  XVIII. 

THE     HEINOUS   SIN    OF    PROFANE    CURSING 
AND    SWEARING. 

But  I  say  unto  you.  Swear  not  at  all, — Matt« 
T.  34. • 226 

SERMON  XIX. 

CHRIST  THE    SUPPORT   OF   THE    TEMPTED. 

Lead  us  not  into  temptation, — Matt  ? i.  13.  234 

SERMON  XX. 

WORLDLY    BUSINESS    NO   PLEA    FOR    THB 
NEGLECT   OF    RELIGION. 

Let  the  dead  bury  their  dead. —  Matthew 
▼iii.  22 242 

SERMON  XXI. 

CHRIST  THB  ONLY  REST  FOR  THE  W^rV 
AND   HEAVY    LADEN. 

Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  are  weary  and  heavy 
laden,  and  I  wiU  give  you  rest, — Matthew 
xi.  28 248 

SERMON  XXII. 

THE  FOLLY  AND  DANGER  OF  PARTING 
WITH  CHRIST  FOR  THE  PLEASURES  AND 
PROFITS   OF    LIFE. 

And  when  he  was  entered  into  a  ship,  his 
disciples  followed  him.  And,  behold,  there 
arose  a  great  tempest  in  the  sea,  insomuch 
that  the  ship  was  covered  with  the  waves : 
But  he  was  asleep.  And  his  disciples  came 
to  him,  and  awoke  him,  saying,  Lord,  save 
us  we  perish.  And  he  saith  unto  them. 
Why  are  ye  fearfkl,  O  ye  of  Kttle  faith  J 
Then  he  arose,  and  rebuked  the  winds  and 
the  sea,  and  there  was  a  great  calm.  But 
the  men  marvelled,  saying,  What  manner  of 
man  is  this,  that  even  the  winds  and  the  sea 
obey  him  !  And  when  he  was  come  to  the 
other  side,  into  the  country  of  the  Gergesenes, 
there  met  him  two  possessed  with  dtvils, 
coming  out  of  the  tombs,  exceeding  fierce,  so 
that  no  man  might  pass  by  that  way.  And, 
behold,  they  cried  out,  saying,  WhtU  have 
we  to  do  with  thee,  Jesut,  thou  Son  of  God  f 
Art  thou  come  hither  to  torment  us  before 
the  time  f  And  there  was,  a  good  way  off 
from  them,  an  herd  of  many  swine,  feeding. 
So  the  deviis  besought  hsm,  saying,  If  thou 
cast  us  out,  suffer  us  to  go  away  into  the 


C0NTBNT8. 


xUi 


WrtfofMMM.  Amdk§9mimHoik0m,Go: 
And  w/kM  Uk«y  vtr*  cmm  Mrf,  fA«y  imiiI 
Mio  <&«  &«rrf  ./mwm  ;  «i^  Mbtf ,  f  A<  »A<a^ 

^ifK»  Mto  ik§  M0,  ami  ftruimi  m  tkt 
Amdiigfiludk^tUm,pd^md 
vm§9  lafo  Uk«  ekff,  mud  totf  fvtry 
liking  ;  mmd  wkmiwHuhefM^u  t9  ikt  poss^med 
of  iU  daUs.  Ami,  Mold,  tk»  wkoU  eily 
cmmt  omi  io  taoti  J4Mm9,  mmd  wlwii  tksp  mm 
him,  tk^  bommghi  him  tkmi  A«  10OI1M  depmrt 
omt  0/  tkeit  eoa$U. — Matthew  tUL  t%,  to 
tb«eiid.   S56 

SERMON  XXin. 

MARKS  OP  A  TSUE  OOWTBUIOM. 

md  htumm  •»  Uitk  tkildnm,  fo  tktM  not 
tmUr  mio  iU  hmgdom  tf  Ammii^— Matt 
XTiii.  S •••• •••.••  Mb 

SERMON  XXIV. 

WHAT   THIHE    YE   OP  CHEtST? 
Wkalikimk^ofCkntif-'UtU.XXilit.  S80 

SERMON  XXV. 

THE   WISE   AND    POOUSH    ▼lEOINS. 
WtUek,  tktrtfor;  for  y«  ktitm  tuitker  the  dttif 
nor   the   homr   in  tdkkh  the  8^  of  aum 
roaMlJkw— Matt.  zxT.  U 205 

SERMON  XXVI. 

THE   ETEENITY   OP    RELL-TORMEHTI. 

Them  thoil  go  momf  tirta  fMriaffwy  pmnieh- 
ment, — Malt.  suT.  40 808 

SERMON  XXni. 

BLIND  BARTIMECS. 

And  JeauM  Moid  mnto  him.  Go  thy  way;  thp 
faith  hath  made  thee  whole.  And  imme- 
diaUfy  ke  received  hie  eight,  mtd  foOoered 
Jeme  «  the  wag^—Umk  X.  63. 817 

SERMON  XXMIL 

DIRECTIONS    HOW    TO    HEAR    SERMONS. 

Take  heed,  therefore,  turn  fe  hem 4 — Lake 
▼iu.  18 SS7 

SERMON  XXIX. 

THE    EXTENT   AND    REASONABLENESS   OP 
SELP-DENIAL. 

And  he  eaid  nnlo  them  oU,  If  any  amn  wiU 
come  after  me,  let  him  deny  himeelf — Loke 
ix.  28 888 

SERMON  XXX. 
Christ's  transpiguration. 
And  it  came  tofttee  about  an  eight  daye  after 
thesm  eayinge,  he  took  Peter,  and  John,  and 
Jamtee,  and  went  np  into  a  atountain  to  prey. 
And  at  he  prayed,  thefa$hion  of  his  amn- 
tenance  was  altered,  and  hie  raiwkmt  was 
white  and  glistering.  And,  hehoU,  there 
telktd  with  him  two  nun,  which  were  Moses 
and  Elias :  mHu>  appeared  in  glory,  and 
spake  of  his  derease,%dueh  he  shomld  accom- 
plish at  JerumUem.  Bnt  Peter,  and  they 
thnt  ware  with  him,  wtre  /heavy  wilk  eletp  : 


and  when  they  wtre  mo&ke,  they  saeo  hie 
glory,  and  the  two  eean  that  stood  eeith  him. 
And  it  cmme  to  noes,  as  they  departed  from 
him,  Peter  eaid  mnto  Jeemt,  Master,  it  is 
^ooil  for  ms  to  he  here ;  aesd  let  ue  mato 
tkree  tdhemaclee,  one  for  thee,  aesd  oern  fer 
Moeee,  aesd  oese  for  SUae:  mot  knoenng 
what  ha  eaid.  While  ha  thme  epake,  there 
came  a  clomd  and  ooerthndoeeod  them,  and 
they  feared  me  theyessterod  imia  the  closed. 
And  ihere  oame  a  woice  omi  of  tha  clomd, 
enying,  Thie  is  my  h^ooed  Son ;  hear  kiau 
And  when  the  woice  not  poet,  Jeeme  mu 
fomsd  ahme.  And  they  kept  it  cloee,  and 
told  no  mem  in  those  daye  amy  of  tkoeo 
thimge  which  they  had  eetm, — htko  hu 
841 


SERMON  XXXL 
rat  care   op  tub  sool  dbobd  as  thb 

ONE   THING    NBBDPUL. 
Bmi  OM  thing  u  m»e4fml^--Uko  X.  48.  .  .384 

SERMON  XXXII. 

A      PENITENT      HEART,    THB      BEST      NEW 

tear's  OIPT. 
Except  ye  repent,  ye  ehall  all  likewise  periek, 
— Loka  xuL  8 ••••• 


SERMON  XXXIII. 

THE  GOSPEL  SUPPER. 
And  the  servant  eaid.  Lord,  ii  is  done  as  thorn 
haet  nmmand§d,  aesd  yet  there  ie  room. 
And  the  Lord  eaid  mnto  the  eervant,  Oo  omi 
into  the  highwmge  aesd  hedgee,  and  coaspel 
them  to  come  in,  that  my  hotuo  may  he 
filed.  For  I  say  onto  yon,  that  none  of 
thoee  men  which  were  bidden,  shall  taste  of 
oiy  supper.^Lako  biv.  33, 88,  34.. . .  .880 

SERMON  XXXIV. 

THE  PHARISEE  AND  PUBLICAN. 
/  teH  yon,  thie  man  went  down  to  hie  homm 
jmstiJUd  rather  than  the  other :  For  every 
one  that  cMalteth  himself  shall  be  abased; 
and  he  that  hnmbleth  haeeelf,  shall  be  em- 
aUed.—Lako  xjVu.  14.    891 

SERMON  XXXV. 

THE  CONVERSION  OP  BACCHECS. 
And  Jesus  said  unto  him.  This  day  is  stdvch 
tion  come  to  this  house  ;  forasmuch  as  he 
also  is  the  eon  of  Abraham.  For  the  Son 
of  man  is  come  to  seek  and  to  save  that 
whick  was  I  vt, — Lake  xix.  0,  10 401 

SERMON  XXXn. 

THE    MARRIAUE   UP    CANA. 

Tikis  beginnittg  of  miracles  did  J  tens  in  Cana 
of  (SaliUe,  and  manifested  forth  his  glory  : 
and  his  disciples  believed  on  him. — Joha 
ii-ll 418 

SERMON  XXXVII. 

THE    Dl'TY    OP    SEARCHING    THE 
SCRirrtlRES. 

Seearch  the  Scripimree.^JekLn  t.  80.  • .  •  •138 


XIT 


SERMON  XXXVIII. 


THE  INDWELLING  OF  THE  SPIRIT,  THE 
COMMON  PRIVILEGE  OF  ALL  BELIEVERS. 

In  tk€  iast  day,  that  great  day  of  tkt  fe€ut, 
Jenu  stood  and  cnad,  Maying^  if  any  man 
thirit,  Ut  him  torn*  onto  hm  imd  drink. 
Be  that  helieveth  on  me,  a$  the  eeriphwe 
hath  taid,  out  of  hie  heUy  shaU  flow  rivers 
of  Uving  water,  Bui  this  spoke  he  of  the 
Spirit,  w&irik  they  that  believe  on  him  should 
receive, — Jobo  vii.  S7, 88, 89 430 


GONTBNTS. 

SERMON  XLVr. 

OF   JUSTIFICATION    BY    CHRIST. 

Bui  ye  are  justified.  The  whole  verse  is : 
And  such  were  some  of  you;  but  ye  are 
washed,  but  ye  are  sanctified,  but  ye  are 
justified,  in  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  and  by  the  Spirit  of  our  Ood, — 
I  Cor.  Ti.  11 518 


SERMON  XXXIX. 

THE    RESURRECTION   OF    LAZARUS. 

And  whon  he  had  thus  jpoirm,  he  cried  with 
a  loud  voice,  Lasarus^  come  forth.  And  he 
that  was  dead  came  forth,  bound  hand  and 
foot  with  grmve-clalhes :  and  his  face  was. 
bound  about  with  a  nt^km,  Jesus  saiih 
unto  them.  Loose  him,  and  let  him  go. — 
Jobo  xi.  43,  44 •••••••• 440 

SERMON  XL. 

THE  HOLY  SPIRIT  CONVINCING  THE  WORLD 
OF  SIN,  RIGHTEOUSNESS,  AND  JUDG- 
MENT. 

And  when  he  is  conu,  he  unll  reprove  the  world 
of  sin,  and  of  righteousness,  and  of  judg^ 
HMMl.— John  xvi.  6.« • .458 

SERMON  XLI. 

SAUL'S    CONVERSION. 

But  Saul  increased  the  more  in  strength,  attd 
confounded  the  Jews  which  dweli  at  Damas- 
cue,  proving  thai  t^  is  very  Christ, — Acts 
is.2S 469 

SERMON  XLII. 

MARKS   OF    HAVING    RECEIVED   THE 

HOLY  GHOST. 

Have  ye  received  the  Holy  Ohost  since  ye  he* 


Uevedr-^ActM  zix.  S. 


.482 


SERMON  XUII. 

THE   ALMOST  CHRISTIAN. 
Almost  thou  persuadeet  wte  to  be  a  Christian. 


AoU  xxi'u  28. 


.491 


SERMON  XUV. 

CHRIST,  TUB  BRLIEVER'B  WISDOM,  RIGH- 
TEOUSNESS, BANCTIFICATION,  AND  RE- 
DEMPTION. 

Bui  of  him  ar«  yi  t»  Christ  Jesus,  who  of  God 
is  made  unto  me  wisdom,  righteousness, 
sanetificaium,  assd  redempOon, — 1  Corinth, 
i.80. 


SERMON  XLV. 


THE 


.500 


THE 


KNOWLEDGE   OF    JESUS    CHRIST, 
BEST    KNOWLEDGE. 

/  dfterwuned  not  to  knew  any  thing  auumg 
you,  save  Jesus  Christ,  and  him  crucified, 
^1  Cor.  ii.  2 611 


SERMON  XLVII. 

THE     GREAT     DUTY    OF   CHARITY     RECOM- 
MENDED. 
Charity  never  faiUth.-'l  Cor.xiii.  8 626 

SERMON  XLVIII. 
Satan's  devices. 
Lest  Satan  should  get  an  advantage  over  us  ; 
for  we  are  not  ignorant  of  his  devices. — 

1  Cor.  ii.  1 1 534 

SERMON  XLIX. 
ON  regeneration. 
If  any  man  be  in  Christ,  he  is  a  new  creature. 
— 2  Cor.  T.  17.» ,  ,543 

SERMON  L. 

CHRISTIANS,  TEMPLES  OF  THE   LIVING  COD. 

Ve  are  the  temple  of  the  Uving  God.— 2  Cor. 
▼i.  16 552 

SERMON  U. 

CHRIST  THE  ONLY  PAESERVATIVE   AGAINST 
A  REPROBATE  SPIRIT. 

Know  ye  not  your  own  selves,  how  that  Jesus 
Christ  is  in  you,  except  ye  be  reprobates 

2  Cor.  xiii.  5 ,, .561 

SERMON  UI. 

THE    HEINOUS    SIN   OF    DRUNKENNESS. 
Be  not  drunk  with  wine,  wherein  is  excess  ;  but 
be  filled  with  the  Spirit.— Eph,  t.  18. . .  570 

SERMON  LUI. 

THE  POWER  OF  CHRIST's  RESURRECTION. 
That  I  wsay  know  him,  and  the  power  of  his 
resurrection, — Phil.  iii.  10 578 

SERMON  UV. 
INTERCeSSION  EVERY  CHRISTIAN'S  DUTY. 

Brethren,  pray  for  us. — 1  Thess.  v.  26. .  .685 
SERMON  LV. 

PERSECUTION   EVERY    CHRISTIANAS    LOT. 

Vea,  and  all  that  will  live  godly  in  Christ 
Jesus,  shall  sufer  persecution^ — 2  Tin. 
UI.  12.  •••,••,,,. , ,503 

SERMON  LVI. 

AN  EXHORTATION  TO  THE  PEOPLE  OF 
GOD  NOT  TO  CB  DISCOURAGED  IN  THEIR 
WAY,  BY  THE  SCOFFS  AND  CONTEMPT 
OF   WICKED    MEN. 

There  remaineth,  therefore,  a  rest  to  the  people 
of  God, — Hebrews  iv.  9.  ..,,,,,., ,  «634 


CONTENTS. 


1 


I 


SERMON  LVII. 

4    CAUTION    AGAINST    DESPISING   THE   DAY 

or   SMALL   THINGS. 

Pr««cb«d  b*fbr«  Om  OoTtrnor  und  Cowietl.  ind  tlM 
}Io«M  of  AammMj,  tai  Ooorfia,  oa  Jan.  2Bik,  1770. 

Ft  nAo  Imih  dupUtd  ihg  doff  ofswtaU  things  ? 
if.lO 607 


SERMON  LVIU. 

A    PAITRFUL    minister's    PARTING 

BLESSING. 

A  Fviwall  S§num,  Ftteuqr  Od,  1763. 

Tk*  grace  of  <mr  hard  Juui  Christ  bs  with 

yoa  alL    Awum* — Rer.  zxii.  SI .  ....  .620 

SERMON  LIX. 

CHRIST  THE  BELIEVBR's   REFOGB. 
On  th«  DMth  of  Mr.BMkBta. 

Ood  is  omr  rsjugs  mtd  Hrtmglk, «  wry  present 
help  in  irteMe;  therefore  wiil  we  not  fear, 
ihmngh  ike  earth  be  removed,  amd  the  Motm- 
tmne  be  emrried  into  the  widsi  of  the  jca, 
thongh  the  waters  thereof  roar,  and  hs 
trmd^M,  themgh  the  momntaine  shaJ^  with 
the  sweiBng  thereof,  Selah.  There  is  a 
riv^,  the  etreaau  whereof  shali  make  glad 
the  citg  of  God,  the  holg  place  of  the  taber- 
nacles of  the  Most  Sigh :  Ood  is  in  the 
mudst  of  her,  she  shaU  not  be  moved;  Ood 
Mhali  kdp  her,  and  thmi  right  earhf, — Vse, 
ilvLl— 4» • 629 


SERMON  LXIV. 

THE    BELOVED   OP   GOD. 


SERMON  LX. 

SOUL   PROSPERITY,   i 

Behold,  I  mnsh  above  all  things  thai  thou  magest 
prosper,  and  be  in  health,  even  as  thy  soul 
prospereihm — S  John,  Yer.  9 610 

SERMON  LXI. 

THE  GOSPEL,  A  DYING  SAINT's  TRIUMPH. 
A  FaMrtl  Scrmoii. 

And  he  said  unto  them,  Oo  ys  into  all  the 
world,  etnd  preach  the  gospel  to  every  crea- 
ture. He  thai  btUeveth,  and  is  baptised, 
shall  be  saved,  bui  he  that  believeth  not, 
shaU  be  damned.— Mtiik  xyL  lb,  16. .  .649 

SERMON  LXII. 

REPENTANCE  AND  CONVERSION. 

Jtfpent  ye,  therefore,  and  be  converted,  that 
your  sins  may  be  blotted  out,  when  the  times 
of  rffreshmg  shall  rome  from  the  presence 
ef  the  I«riL— AcU  iii.  10. 660 

SERMON  LXIIL 

GLORIFYING  GOD  IN  THE  FIRE ;  OR,  THE 
EIGHT  IMPROVEMENT  OF  AFFLICTION. 

Wherefort  glorify  ye  the  Lord  in  the  free, — 
iMiah  AJUY.  15 670 


And  ef  Benjamin  he  said,  The  beloved  t/  the 
Lord  shall  dwell  in  safety  by  him;  and 
ths  Lord  shall  cover  him  all  the  day  hng, 
and  he  shall  dwell  between  his  shoulders, — 
Deat.  xxxiii.  18 .678 

SERMON  LXV. 

THE    FORIIaCE  OF    AFFLICTION. 
On  Um  DMth  ot  Um  R«t.  Mr.  MiddlHoa. 

/  have  chosen  thee  in  the  furnace  of  q§lietion, 
--iBtiah  xlviu.  10 687 

SERMON  LXVI. 

THE  LORD  OUR  LIGHT. 
The  «im  shall  be  no  more  thy  light  by  day, 
neither  for  brightness  shall  the  momi  givi 
Ught  unto  thee,  bui  the  Lord  shall  be  unto 
thee  an  everlasting  Ught,  and  thy  Ctod  thy 
glory.  Thy  sun  shall  no  more  go  down, 
neither  shall  thy  seoon  withdraw  itself,  for 
the  Lord  shall  be  thine  everlasting  Ught, 
and  the  days  of  thy  mourning  shall  be  ended. 
— liaiab  Ix.  19, 20 .645 

SERMON  LXVII. 

SELF-INQUIRY    CONCERNING   THE   WORK 
OF   GOD. 
According  to  this  time  it  shall  be  said  of  Jacob 
and  of  Israel,  What  hath  Ood  wrought/ — 
Nambers  xiiii.  23 ,  •  •  ,704 

SERMON  LXVIII. 

THE  BURNING  BUSH. 
And  he  looked,  and  behold  the  bush  burned 
with  fre,  and  the  bush  was  not  consuased ; 
and  Moses  said,  I  will  now  turn  aside,  and 
see  this  great  sight,  why  the  bush  is  not 
6iim<.-~Exodiu  iii.  2,  3 713 

SERMON  LXIX. 

SOUL   DEJECTION. 

Why  art  thou  cast  down^  O  my  soul,  and  why 

art  thou  disquieted  within  me  ?     Hope  thou 

m  Ood,  for  I  shall  yet  praise  him,  for  the 

help  of  his  countenance, — PsA.xlii.5...722 

• 

SERMON  LXX. 

SPIRITUAL  BAPTISM. 
Know  ye  not,  that  so  many  of  us  ae  were 
baptixed  into  Jesus  Christ,  were  baptised 
into  his  death?  Therefore  we  are  buried 
with  him  by  baptism  into  death :  that  like  as 
Christ  was  raised  up  from  the  dead  by  the 
giory  of  the  Father,  even  so  we  also  should 
walk  in  newness  of  life. — Rom.  yi.  3,4,  .730 

SERMON  LXXI. 

NEGLECT   OF   CHRIST,    THE   KILLING    SIN. 
And  ye  will  not  come  to  me,  that  ye  may  have 
life, — Jubn  r.  40 ,  ,739 


XVI 


CONTENTS. 


SERMON  LXXU. 

ALL    men's    place. 

Jh  not  uUgo  to  omplae*  ? — Eedei.  vi.  6. .  .740 
SERMON  LXXni. 

GOD,  A   believer's  GLORY. 
And  thy  God  %  glory^l§^  U.  19 769 

SERMON  LXXIV. 
Jacob's  ladder. 

A  Fv«v«11  Samon  «t  ToCtooham-Cowi-Chapel, 
Sandfty,  Aagtut  filth,  1769. 

And  kg  droamod,  and  behold  a  Itiddor  Met  agxra 
iho  earthf  and  the  top  of  ii  reached  to  hea- 
ven; andt  behold,  the  angels  of  God  aeeend- 
ing  and  descending  on  ii.  And  behoU,  the 
Lord  Mtood  abooe  ii,  amd  said,  I  am  the 
JLord  God  of  Abraham  thg  father,  and  the 
God  of  leaae:  the  land  whereon  thorn  liest, 
to  thse  will  Jgivo  ii,  amd  io  thy  teed.    And 


thy  teed  shall  be  at  the  dust  of  the  earth  ; 
and  thorn  thali  tpread  abroad  to  the  west, 
and  to  the  east,  tmd  to  the  north,  and  to  the 
south:  and  in  thee,  and  in  thy  seed,  shall  all 
the  famHiet  of  the  earth  be  blessea.  And, 
behold,  I  am  with  thee,  and  will  keep  thee  in 
all  placet  wkUher  thou  goeti,  and  will  bring 
thee  again  into  this  land :  for  I  will  not  leave 
thee,  until  I  have  done  that  which  I  have 
spoken  to  thee  of — Geoeftii  xiviii.  12 — 
15 7C9 

SERMON  LXXV. 

THE   GOOD   SHEPHERD. 

A  Fartirtll  Semon  at  the  Tftbernacle,  Wednetday, 
Aogost  auth,  1769. 

My  sheep  hear  my  voice,  and  I  know  them,  and 
they  follow  me.  And  I  give  unto  them 
eternal  Itfe,  and  they  shall  never  perish, 
neither  shall  any  pluck  them  out  of  my  hand, 
— Joluix.27,88 780 


The  Character,  Preaching,  &.c.  of    the    Kev.  George  Whitf.fi tld,  nv  thk 
Rev.  Joseph  Smith, Page  791 


WHITEFIELD'S  SERMONS. 


SERMON  I. 

IHE  SEED  OF  THE   WOMAN,  AND  THE  SEED  OF  THE  SERPENT. 

And  I  will  put  enmity  between  thf£  and  the  wamun,  and  between 
thy  seed  and  her  seed;  it  shall  bruise  thy  head,  and  thou  shalt 
bruise  his  heel. — Genesis  iii.  15. 

On  reading  to  you  these  words,  I  may  address  you  in  the  lan- 
guage of  the  holy  angels  to  the  shepherds,  that  were  watching 
their  flocks  by  night;  "Behold,  I  bring  you  glad  tidings  of  great 
joy/'  For  this  is  the  first  promise  that  was  made  of  a  Saviour  to 
the  apostate  race  of  Adanu  We  generally  look  for  Christ  only 
in  the  New  Testament ;  but  Christianity,  in  one  sense,  is  very 
near  as  old  as  the  creation.  It  is  wonderful  to  observe  how 
gradually  God  revealed  his  Son  to  mankind.  He  began  with 
the  promise  in  the  text,  and  this  the  elect  lived  upon,  till  the 
time  of  Abraham.  To  him,  God  made  further  discoveries  of  his 
eternal  council  concerning  man's  redemption.  Aferwards,  at 
sundry  times,  and  in  divers  manners,  God  spake  to  the  fathers 
by  the  prophets,  till  at  length  the  Lord  Jesus  himself  was  mani- 
fest in  flesh,  and  came  and  tabernacled  amongst  us. 

This  first  promise  must  certainly  be  but  dark  to  our  first 
parents,  in  comparison  of  that  great  light  which  we  enjoy :  and 
yet,  dark  as  it  was,  we  may  assure  ourselves  they  built  upon  it 
their  hopes  of  everlasting  salvation,  and  by  that  faith  were 
saved. 

How  they  came  to  stand  in  need  of  this  promise,  and  what  is 
the  extent  and  meaning  of  it,  I  intend,  God  willing,  to  make  the 
sDbject  matter  of  your  present  meditation. 

The  fall  of  man  is  written  in  too  legible  characters  not  to  be 
understood:  Those  that  deny  it,  by  their  denying,  prove  it. 
The  very  heathens  confessed,  and  bewailed  it ;  they  could  see 
the  streams  of  corruption  running  through  the  whole  race  of 
mankind,  but  could  not  trace  them  to  the  fountain-bead,  fiefore 
God  gave  a  revelation  of  his  Son,  man  was  a  riddle  to  himself. 
And  Moses  unfolds  more,  in  this  one  chapter  (out  of  which  the 
text  is  taken)  than  all  mankind  could  have  been  capable  of  find- 
ing out  of  themselves,  though  they  had  studied  to  all  eternity. 

In  the  preceding  chapter  he  had  given  us  a  full  account  how 
God  spake  the  world  into  being;  and  especially  how  he  formed 
man  of  the  dust  of  the  earth,  and  breathed  into  him  the  breath 
of  life,  so  that  he  became  a  living  soul.  A  council  of  the  Trinity 
was  called  concerning  the  formation  of  this  lovely  creature.  The 
result  of  that  council  was,  "  Let  us  make  man  in  our  image, 
after  oar  likeness.  So  God  created  man  in  his  own  image,  in 
the  image  of  Grod  created  he  him.''  Moses  remarkably  repeats 
these  words,  that  we  might  take  particular  notice  of  our  divine 
Original.  Never  was  so  much  exj>ressed  in  so  few  words :  none 
but  a  man  inspired  could  have  done  so.    But  it  is  remarkable, 

B 


34  THE   SEED   OF   THE   WOMAN,    .  [l. 

that  thoagh  Moses  mentions  our  being  made  in  the  image  of 
6od^  yet  he  mentions  it  but  twice^  and  that  in  a  transient  man- 
ner; as  though  he  would  have  said,  that  *' man  was  made  in 
honour,  God  made  him  upright,  'in  the  image  of  God,  male  and 
female,  created  he  them.'  But  man  so  soon  fell,  and  became  like 
the  beasts  that  perish,  nay,  like  the  devil  himself,  that  it  is 
scarce  worth  mentioning." 

How  soon  man  fell  after  he  was  created,  is  not  told  us ;  and 
therefore,  to  fix  any  time,  is  to  be  wise  above  what  is  written. 
And,  I  think,  they  who  suppose  that  man  fell  the  same  day  in 
which  he  was  made,  have  no  sufScient  ground  for  their  opinion. 
The  many  things  which  are  crowded  together  in  the  former  chap- 
ter, such  as  the  formation  of  Adam's  wife,  his  giving  names  to 
the  beasts,  and  his  being  put  into  the  garden  which  God  had 
planted,  I  think  require  a  longer  space  of  time  than  a  day,  to  be 
transacted  in.  However,  all  agree  in  this,  "man  stood  not  long." 
How  long,  or  how  short  a  while,  I  will  not  take  upon  me  to  de- 
termine. It  more  concerns  us  to  inquire,  how  he  came  to  fall 
from  his  steadfastness  and  what  was  the  rise  and  progress  of 
the  temptation  which  prevailed  over  him.  The  account  given 
us  in  this  chapter  concerning  it,  is  very  full;  and  it  may  do  us 
much  service,  under  God,  to  make  some  remarks  upon  it. 

"  Now  the  serpent  (says  the  sacred  historian)  was  more  sub- 
tile than  any  beast  of  the  field  which  the  Lord  God  had  made ; 
and  he  said  unto  the  woman.  Yea,  hath  God  said.  Ye  shall  not 
eat  of  every  tree  of  the  garden  V 

Though  this  was  a  real  serpent,  yet  he  that  spake  was  no 
other  than  the  devil ;  from  hence,  perhaps,  called  the  old  ser- 
pent, because  he  took  possession  of  the  serpent  when  he  came 
to  beguile  our  first  parents.  The  devil  euvied  the  happiness  of 
man,  who  was  made,  as  some  think,  to  supply  the  place  of  the 
fallen  angels.  God  made  man  upright,  and  with  full  power  to 
stand  if  he  would  :  He  was  just,  therefore,  in  sufiering  him  to  be 
tempted.  If  be  fell,  he  had  no  one  to  blame  except  himself. 
But  how  must  Satan  efiect  his  fall?  He  cannot  do  it  by  his 
power,  he  attempts  it  therefore  by  policy :  he  takes  possession 
of  a  serpent,  which  was  more  subtile  than  all  the  beasts  of  the 
field,  which  the  Lord  God  had  made ;  so  that  men,  who  are  full 
of  subtilty,  but  have  no  piety,  are  only  machines  for  the  devil 
to  work  upon  just  as  he  pleases. 

"And  he  said  unto  the  woman."  Here  is  an  instance  of  his 
subtilty.  He  says  unto  the  woman,  the  weaker  vessel,  and *when 
she  was  alone  from  her  husband,  and  therefore  was  more  liable 
to  be  overcome ;  "  Yea,  hath  God  said.  Ye  shall  not  eat  of  every 
tree  in  the  garden?"  These  words  are  certainly  spoken  in  an- 
swer to  something  which  the  devil  either  saw  or  heard.  In  all 
probability,  the  woman  was  now  near  the  tree  of  knowledge  of 
good  and  evil ;  (for  we  shall  find  her,  by  and  by,  plucking  an 
apple  from  it,)  perhaps  she  might  be  looking  at  it,  and  wonder- 
ing what  there  was  in  that  tree  more  than  the  others,  that  she 
and  her  husband  should  be  forbidden  to  taste  of  it.  Satan  seeing 


I.]  AND  THE  SEBD  OP  THE  SERPENT.  35 

this,  and  coveting  to  draw  herr  into  a  parley  with  him,  (for  if  the 
devil  can  persuade  us  not  to  resist,  but  to  commune  with  him, 
he  hath  gained  a  great  point,)  he  says,  **  Yea,  hath  God  said, 
ye  shall  not  eat  of  every  tree  in  the  garden?''  The  first  thing 
he  does  is  to  persuade  her,  if  possible,  to  entertain  hard 
thoughts  of  Grod:  this  is  his  genersd  way  of  dealing  with  God's 
children:  "Yea,  hath  God  said,  ye  shall  not  eat  of  every  tree 
"of  the  garden?  What!  hath  God  planted  a  gardeil,  and  placed 
you  in  the  midst  of  it,  only  to  tease  and  perplex  you?  hath  he 
planted  a  garden,  and  yet  forbid  yon  making  use  of  any  of  the 
fruits  of  it  at  all?"  It  was  impossible  for  him  to  ask  a  more 
ensnaring  question,  in  order  to  gain  his  end ;  for  Eve  was  here 
seemingly  obliged  to  answer,  and  vindicate  God's  goodness. 
And  therefore, — 

Ver.  2,  3.  The  woman  said  unto  the  serpent,  "We  may  eat 
of  the  fruit  of  the  trees  of  the  garden :  but  of  the  fruit  of  the 
tree  which  is  in  the  midst  of  the  garden,  God  hath  said.  Ye 
shall  not  eat  of  it,  neither  shall  ye  touch  it,  lest  ye  die." 

The  former  part  of  the  answer  was  good,  **  We  may  eat  of 
the  fruit  of  the  trees  of  the  garden ;  God  has  not  forbid  us  eating 
of  every  tree  of  the  garden.  No ;  we  may  eat  of  the  fruit  of  the 
trees  in  the  garden,  (and,  it  should  seem,  even  of  the  tree  of  life, 
which  was  as  a  sacrament  to  man  in  a  state  of  innocence;)  there 
is  only  one  tree  in  the  midst  of  the  garden,  of  which  God  hath 
said,  ye  shall  not  eat  of  it,  neither  shall  ye  touch  it,  lest  ye  die.'' 
Here  she  begins  to  warp,  and  sin  begins  to  conceive  in  her  heart. 
Already  she  has  contracted  some  of  the  serpent's  poison,  by 
talking  with  him,  which  she  ought  not  to  have  done  at  all.  For 
she  might  easily  suppose,  that  it  could  be  no  good  being,  that 
could  put  such  a  question  unto  her,  and  insinuate  such  disho- 
nourable thoughts  of  God.  She  should  therefore  have  fled  from 
him,  and  not  stood  to  have  parleyed  with  him  at  all.  Immedi- 
ately the  ill  effects  of  it  appear,  she  begins  to  soften  the  divine 
threatening.  God  had  said,  ^'  The  day  thou  eatest  thereof,  **  thou 
skalt  surely  die;"  or,  dying  thou  shalt  die.  But  Eve  says,  ^'  Ye 
shall  not  eat  of  it,  neither  shall  ye  touch  it,  lest  ye  die."  We 
muy  be  assured  we  are  fallen  into,  and  begin  to  fall  by  tempta- 
tion, when  we  begin  to  think  God  will  not  be  as  good  as  his 
word,  in  respect  to  the  execution  of  his  threatenings  denounced 
against  sin.    Satan  knew  this,  and  therefore  artfully 

"  Said  unto  the  woman,  (verse  4.)  Ye  shall  not  surely  die," 
in  an  insinuating  manner,  '^  Ye  shall  not  surely  die.  Surely, 
God  will  not  be  so  cruel  as  to  damn  you  only  for  eating  an 
apple ;  it  cannot  be."  Alas !  how  many  does  Satan  lead  captive 
at  his  will,  by  flattering  them,  that  they  shall  not  surely  die ; 
that  hell-torments  will  not  be  eternal ;  that  God  is  all  mercy ; 
that  he  therefore  will  not  punish  a  few  years'  sin  with  an  eter- 
nity of  misery  ?  But  Eve  found  God  as  good  as  his  word ;  and 
so  will  all  they  who  go  on  in  sin,  under  a  false  hope  that  they 
shall  not  surely  die. 
We  may  also  understand  thQ  words  spoken  positively^  and 

b2 


36  THB  8BBD   OP   THE  WOMAN,  [l. 

this  is  agreeabk  to  what  follows ;  ''  Yoa  shall  not  surely  die ; 
it  is  all  a  delasioD,  a  mere  bagbear,  to  keep  yoa  in  a  servile 
subjection/' 

For  Tver.  5.)  ''God  doth  know,  that  in  the  day  ye  eat  thereof, 
then  shall  your  eyes  be  opened,  and  ye  shall  be  as  gods,  know- 
ing good  and  evil." 

What  child  of  God  can  expect  to  escape  slander,  when  God 
himself  was  thus  slandered  even  in  paradise?  Surely  the  under- 
standing of  Eve  must  have  been,  in  some  measure,  blinded,  or 
she  woidd  not  have  suffered  the  tempter  to  speak  such  perverse 
things.  In  what  odious  colours  is  God  here  represented !  **  God 
doth  know,  that  in  the  day  ye  eat  thereof,  ye  shall  be  as  gods," 
(equal  with  God.)  So  that  the  grand  temptation  was,  that  they 
should  be  hereafter  under  no  control,  equal,  if  not  superior,  to 
God  that  made  them,  knowing  good  and  evil.  Eve  could  not 
tell  what  Satan  meant  by  this ;  but,  to  be  sure,  she  understood 
it  of  some  great  privilege  which  they  were  to  enjoy.  And  thus 
Satan  now  points  out  a  way  which  seems  right  to  sinners,  but 
does  not  tell  them  the  end  of  that  way  is  death. 

To  give  strength  and  force  to  this  temptation,  in  all  probability, 
Satan,  or  the  serpent,  at  this  time  plucked  an  apple  from  the 
tree,  and  ate  it  before  Eve ;  by  which  Eve  might  be  induced  to 
think,  that  the  sagacity  and  power  of  speech,  which  the  serpent 
had  above  the  other  beasts,  must  be  owing,  in  a  great  measure, 
to  his  eating  that  fruit ;  and  therefore,  if  he  received  so  much 
improvement,  she  might  also  expect  a  like  benefit  from  it.  All 
this,  I  think,  is  clear ;  for,  otherwise,  I  do  not  see  with  what 
propriety  it  could  be  said,  "  When  the  woman  saw  that  it  was 
good  for  food."  How  could  she  know  it  was  good  for  food, 
unless  she  had  seen  the  serpent  feed  upon  it. 

Satan  now  begins  to  get  ground  apace.  Lust  had  conceived  in 
Eve's  heart ;  shortly  it  will  bring  forth  sin.  Sin  being  conceived, 
brings  forth  death.  Verse  G.  '^  And  when  the  woman  saw  that 
the  tree  was  good  for  food,  and  that  it  was  pleasant  to  the  eyes, 
and  a  tree  to  be  desired  to  make  one  wise,  she  took  of  the  fruit 
thereof,  and  did  eat,  and  gave  also  unto  her  husband,  and  he 
did  eat.' 

Our  senses  are  the  landing  ports  of  our  spiritual  enemies* 
How  needful  is  that  resolution  of  holy  Job,  "  I  have  made  a 
covenant  with  mine  eyes !"  When  Eve  began  to  gaze  on  the 
forbidden  fruit  with  her  eyes,  she  soon  began  to  long  after  it  with 
her  heart.  When  she  saw  that  it  was  good  for  food,  and  pleasant 
to  the  eyes,  (here  was  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  and  lust  of  die  eye,) 
but,  above  all,  a  tree  to  be  desir^  to  make  one  wise,  wiser  than 
God  would  have  her  be,  nay,  as  wise  as  God  himself;  she  took 
of  the  fruit  thereof,  and  gave  also  unto  her  husband  with  her, 
and  he  did  eat.  As  soon  as  ever  she  sinned  herself,  she  turned 
tempter  to  her  husband.  It  is  dreadful,  when  those,  who  should 
be  help-meets  for  each  other  in  the  great  work  of  their  salvation, 
are  only  promoters  of  each  other's  damnation :  if  we  do  evil,  we 
shall  entice  others  to  do  evil  also.    There  is  a  close  connection 


JL]  and   THS  8E£0   or   TUK  SBRFBNT.  liT 

between  doing  and  teaching.  How  needful  then  is  it  for  u»  all 
to  take  heed  that  we  do  not  sin  any  way  ourselves,  lest  we 
should  beccMne  factors  for  the  devil^  and  ensnare,  perhaps,  our 
nearest  and  dearest  relatives?  ^'she  gave  also  unto  her  husband 
with  her,  and  he  did  eat." 

Alas !  what  a  complication  of  crimes  was  there  in  this  one 
single  act  of  sin !  Uere  is  an  utter  disbelief  of  God's  threatening ; 
the  utmost  ingratitude  to  their  Maker,  who  had  so  lately  planted 
this  garden,  and  placed  them  in  it,  with  such  a  glorious  and 
comprehensive  charter.  And  the  utmost  neglect  of  their  pos- 
terity, who  they  knew  were  to  stand  or  fall  with  them.  Here 
was  the  utmost  pride  of  heart:  they  wanted  to  be  equal  with 
€rod.  Here  is  the  utmost  contempt  put  upon  his  threatening 
and  his  law :  the  devil  is  credited  and  obeyed  before  him,  and  aU 
this  only  to  satisfy  their  sensual  appetite.  Never  was  a  crime 
of  such  a  complicated  nature  committed  by  any  here  below : 
nothing  but  the  devil's  apostacy  and  rebellion  could  equal  it. 

And  what  are  the  consequences  of  their  disobedience  ?  Are 
their  eyes  opened?  Yes,  their  eyes  are  opened ;  but,  alas !  it  is 
only  to  see  their  own  nakedness.  For  we  are  told  (ver.  7.) 
"That  the  eyes  o{  them  both  were  opened,  and  they  knew  that 
they  were  naked."  Naked  of  God,  naked  of  every  thing  that 
was  holy  and  good,  and  destitute  of  the  divine  image,  which 
they  before  enjoyed.  They  might  rightly  now  be  termed  Icha- 
bad;  for  the  glory  of  the  Lord  had  departed  from  them.  O  how 
low  did  these  sons  of  the  morning  then  fall !  out  of  God,  into 
themselves ;  from  being  partakers  of  the  divine  nature,  into  the 
nature  of  the  devil  and  the  beast.  Well,  therefore,  might  they 
know  that  they  were  naked,  not  only  in  body,  but  in  soul. 

And  how  do  they  behave,  now  they  are  naked?  Do  they  flee 
to  God  for  pardon?  Do  they  seek  to  God  for  a  robe  to  cover 
their  nakedness  ?  No,  they  were  now  dead  to  God,  and  became 
earthly,  sensual,  devilish:  therefore,  instead  of  applying  to  God 
for  mercy,  "  they  sewed  or  platted  fig-leaves  together,  and  made 
themselves  aprons,"  or  things  to  gird  about  them.  This  is  a 
lively  representation  of  all  natural  men :  'we  see  that  we  are 
naked;  we,  in  some  measure,  confess  it;  but  instead  of  looking 
up  to  Grod  for  succour,  we  patch  up  a  righteousness  of  our  own, 
(as  our  first  parents  platted  fig-leaves  together)  hoping  to  cover 
our'  nakedness  by  that.  But  our  righteousness  will  not  stand 
the  severity  of  God's  judgment;  it  will  do  us  no  more  service 
than  the  fig-leaves  did  Adam  and  Eve,  that  is,  none  at  all. 

For  (ver.  8.)  "  They  heard  the  voice  of  the  Lord  Grod  walking 
in  the  trees  of  the  garden  in  the  cool  of  the  day ;  and  Adam  and 
his  wife  (notwithstanding  their  fig-leaves)  hid  themselves  from 
the  presence  of  the  Lord  God,  among  the  trees  of  the  garden." 

They  heard  the  voice  of  the  Lord  God,  or  the  Word  of  the 
Lord  God,  even  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  ^'  the  Word  that 
was  with  God,  and  the  Word  that  was  God."  They  heard  him 
walking  in  the  trees  of  the  garden,  in  the  cool  of  the  day.  A 
ieason,  perhaps,  when  Adam  and  Eve  used  to  go,  in  an  especial 


38  THB   8BBD   OF  THB   WOMAN,  [f. 

manner/ and  offer  np  an  evening-sacrifice  of  praise  and  thanks- 
giving. The  cool  of  the  day.  Perhaps  the  sin  was  committed 
early  in  the  morning,  or  at  noon ;  but  God  wonld  not  come  upon 
them  immediately,  he  staid  till  the  cool  of  the  day.  And  if  we 
would  effectually  reprove  others,  we  should  not  do  it  when  they 
are  warmed  with  passion,  but  wait  till  the  cool  of  the  day. 

But  what  an  alteration  is  here!  Instead  of  rejoicing  at  the 
voice  of  their  beloved,  instead  of  meeting  him  with  open  arms 
and  enlarged  hearts,  as  before,  they  now  hide  themselves  in  the 
trees  of  the  garden.  Alas !  what  a  foolish  attempt  was  this  ? 
Surely  they  must  be  naked,  otherwise  how  could  they  think  of 
biding  themselves  from  God  ?  Whither  could  they  flee  from  his 
presence?  But,  by  their  fall,  they  had  contracted  an  enmity 
against  God :  they  now  hated,  and  were  afraid  to  converse  with 
God  their  Maker.  And  is  not  this  our  case  by  nature?  Assur- 
edly it  is.  We  labour  to  cover  our  nakedness  with  the  fig-leaves 
of  our  own  righteousness :  we  hide  ourselves  from  God  as  long 
as  we  can,  and  will  not  come,  and  never  should  come,  did  not 
the  Father  prevent,  draw,  and  sw  eetlyconstrain  us  by  his  grace, 
as  he  here  prevented  Adam. 

Verse  9«  "  And  the  Lord  God  called  unto  Adam,  and  said 
unto  him,  Adam,  where  art  thou?" 

"  The  Lord  God  called  unto  Adam,"  (for  omerwise  Adam 
would  never  have  called  unto  the  Lord  God,)  and  said,  "Adam, 
where  art  thou?  How  is  it  that  thou  comest  not  to  pay  thy 
devotions  as  usual?"  Christians,  remember  the  Lord  keeps  an 
account  when  you  fail  coming  to  worship.  Whenever  therefore 
you  are  tempted  to  withhold  your  attendance,  let  each  of  you 
fancy  you  hear  the  Lord  God  calling  unto  you,  and  saying,  "  O 
man,  O  woman,  where  art  thou  V  It  may  be  understood  in 
another  and  better  sense ;  "  Adam,  where  art  thou  V  What  a 
condition  is  thy  poor  soul  in  ?  This  is  the  first  thing  the  Lord 
asks  and  convinces  a  sinner  of;  when  he  prevents  and  calls  him 
effectually  by  his  grace ;  he  also  calls  him  by  name ;  for  unless 
God  speaks  to  us  in  particular,  and  we  know  where  we  are,  how 
poor,  how  miserable,  how  blind,  how  naked,  we  shall  never  value 
the  redemption  wrought  out  for  us  by  the  death  and  obedience 
of  the  dear  Lord  Jesus.     "  Adam,  where  art  thou  V 

Verse  10.  "And  he  said,  I  heard  thy  voice  in  the  garden, and 
I  was  afraid."  See  what  cowards  sin  makes  us.  If  we  knew 
no  sin,  we  should  know  no  fear.  "Because  I  was  naked,  and 
I  hid  myself."  Ver.  II.  "And  he  said,  who  told  thee  that  thou 
wast  naked?  Hast  thou  eaten  of  the  tree,  whereof  I  (thy  Maker 
and  Lawgiver)  commanded  thee,  that  thou  shouldst  not  eat?" 

God  knew  very  well  that  Adam  was  naked,  and  that  he  had 
eaten  of  the  forbidden  fruit.  But  God  would  know  it  from  Adam's 
own  mouth.  ThusGrod  knows  all  our  necessities. before  we  ask, 
but  yet  insists  upon  our  asking  for  his  grace,  and  confessing  our 
sins.  For,  by  such  acts,  we  acknowledge  our  dependence  upon 
God,  take  shame  to  ourselves,  and  thereby  give  glory  to  his 
great  name. 


f.j  AND  THB  SBBD  OF  THB  SERPENT.  39 

Verse  12.  ''And  the  man  said.  The  woman  which  thou  gavest 
to  be  with  me,  she  gave  me  of  the  tree,  and  I  did  eat." 

Never  was  nature  more  lively  delineated.  See  what  pride 
Adam  contracted  by  tne  fall !  How  unwilling  he  is  to  lay  the 
blame  upon,  or  take  shame  to,  himself.  This  answer  is  full  of 
insolence  towards  God,  enmity  against  his  wife,  and  disinge- 
nuity  in  respect  to  himself.  For  herein  he  tacitly  reflects  upon 
God.  ''  The  woman  that  thou  gavest  to  be  with  me."  As  much 
as  to  say.  If  thou  hadst  not  given  me  that  woman,  I  had  not 
eaten  the  forbidden  fruit,  llius,  when  men  sin,  they  lay  the 
fault  upon  their  passions ;  then  blame  and  reflect  upon  God  for 
givin;::  them  those  passions.  Their  language  is, ''  The  appetites 
that  thou  gavest  us,  they  deceived  us  ;  and  therefore  we  sinned 
against  thee."  But,  as  God,  notwithstanding,  punished  Adam 
for  hearkening  to  the  voice  of  his  wife,  so  he  will  punish  those 
who  hearken  to  the  dictates  of  their  corrupt  inclinations :  for 
God  compels  no  man  to  sin.  Adam  might  have  withstood  the 
solicitations  of  his  wife,  if  he  would.  And  so,  if  we  look  up  to 
Grod,  we  should  find  grace  to  help  in  the  time  of  need.  The  devil 
and  our  own  hearts  tempt,  but  they  cannot  force  us  to  consent, 
without  the  concurrence  of  our  own  will.  So  that  our  damnation 
is  of  ourselves,  as  it  will  evidently  appear  at  the  great  day,  not- 
fdthstanding  all  men's  present  impudent  replies  against  God.  As 
Adam  speaks  insolently  in  respect  to  God,  so  he  speaks  with 
enmity  against  his  wife ;  the  woman,  or  this  woman,  she  gave 
me.  He  lays  all  the  fault  upon  her,  and  speaks  of  her  with  much 
contempt.  He  does  not  say,  my  wife,  my  dear  wife ;  but  this 
woman.  Sin  disunites  the  most  united  hearts :  it  is  the  bane  of 
holy  fellowship.  Those  who  have  been  companions  in  sin  here, 
if  they  die  without  repentance,  will  both  hate  and  condemn  one 
another  hereafter.  AU  damned  soub  are  accusers  of  their  bre- 
tfiren.  Thus  it  is,  in  some  degree,  on  this  side  the  grave.  ''  The 
woman  whom  thou  gavest  to  be  with  me,  she  gave  me  of  the  tree, 
and  I  did  eat."  What  a  disingenuous  speech  was  here !  He 
makes  use  of  no  less  than  fifteen  words  to  excuse  himself,  and 
bat  one  or  two  (in  the  original)  to  confess  his  fault,  if  it  may  be 
called  a  confession  at  all.  ''  The  woman  whom  thou  gavest  to  be 
with  me,  she  gave  me  of  the  tree ;"  here  arc  fifteen  words ; ''  and 
I  did  eat."  With  what  reluctance  do  these  last  words  come  out? 
How  soon  are  they  uttered?  "And  I  did  eat."  But  thus  it  is 
with  an  unhumbled,  unregenerate  heart :  it  will  be  laying  the 
bolt  upon  the  dearest  friend  in  the  world,  nay,  upon  God  him- 
self, rather  than  take  shame  to  itself.  This  pride  we  are  all 
subject  to  by  the  fall ;  and  till  our  hearts  are  broken,  and  made 
contrite  by  the  Spirit  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  we  shall  be  always 
charging  God  foolishly.  ^'  Against  thee,  and  thee  only,  have  I 
sinned,  that  thpu  mightest  be  justified  in  thy  saying,  and  clear 
when  thou  art  judged,"  is  the  language  of  none  but  those,  who, 
like  David,  are  willing  to  confess  their  faults,  and  are  truly  sorry 
for  their  sins.  This  was  not  the  case  of  Adam;  his  heart  was  not 
broken ;  and  therefore  he  lays  the  fault  of  his  disobedience  upon 


40  THB  SEED   OF   THE   WOMAN,  [l. 

bis  wife  and  God,  and  not  npon  Umself ;  *^  The  woman  whom  thou 
gavest  to  be  with  me,  she  gare  me  of  the  tree,  and  I  did  eat/' 

Verse  13.  '*  And  the  Lord  God  said.  What  is  this  that  thou 
hast  done?"  What  a  wonderful  concern  does  God  express  in 
this  expostulation!  ''What  a  deluge  of  misery  hast  thou  brought 
upon  thyself,  thy  husband,  and  thy  posterity?  What  is  this  that 
thou  hast  done?  Disobeyed  thy  God,  obeyed  the  devil,  and 
mined  thy  husband,  for  whom  I  made  thee  to  be  an  help-meet ! 
What  is  this  that  thou  hast  done?"  Grod  would  here  awaken 
her  to  a  sense  of  her  crime  and  deCnger,  and  therefore,  as 
it  were,  thunders  in  her  ears ;  for  the  law  must  be  preached  to 
self-righteous  sinners.  We  must  take  care  of  healing  before  we 
see  sinners  wounded,  lest  we  should  say.  Peace,  peace,  where 
there  is  no  peace.  Secure  sinners  must  hear  the  thunderings  of 
mount  Sinai,  before  we  bring  them  to  mount  Zion.  They  who 
never  preach  up  the  law,  it  is  to  be  feared,  are  unskilful  in  deli- 
vering the  glad  tidings  of  the  gospel.  Every  minister  should  be  a 
Boanerges,  a  son  of  thunder,  as  well  as  a  Barnabas,  a  son  of  con- 
solation. There  was  an  earthquake  and  a  whirlwind,  before  the 
small  stUl  voice  came  to  Elijah:  we  must  first  shew  people  they 
are  condemned,  and  then  shew  them  how  they  must  be  saved. 
But  how  and  when  to  preach  the  law,  and  when  to  apply  the 
promises  of  the  gospel,  wisdom  is  profitable 'to  direct.  ''And 
the  Lord  God  said  unto  the  woman.  What  is  this  that  thou  hast 
done  ?" 

"  And  the  woman  said.  The  serpent  beguiled  me,  and  I  did  eat." 
She  does  not  make  use  of  so  many  words  to  excuse  herself,  as 
her  husband ;  but  her  heart  is  as  unhumbled  as  his.  What  is 
this,  says  God,  that  thou  hast  done?  God  here  charges  her  with 
doing  it.  She  dares  not  deny  the  fact,  or  say,  I  have  not  done 
it ;  but  she  takes  all  the  blame  off"  herself,  and  lays  it  upon  the 
serpent;  "The  serpent  beguiled  me,  and  I  did  eat."  She  does 
not  say,  "Lord,  I  was  to  blame  for  talking  with  the  serpent; 
Lord,  I  did  wrong,  in  not  hastening  to  my  husband  when  he  put 
the  first  question  to  me ;  Lord,  1  plead  guilty,  I  only  am  to  blame, 
O  let  not  my  poor  husband  suffer  for  my  wickedness!"  This 
would  have  been  the  language  of  her  heart,  had  she  now  been  a 
true  penitent,  fiut  both  were  now  alike  proud ;  therefore  neither 
will  lay  the  blame  upon  themselves :  "  The  serpent  beguiled  me, 
and  I  did  eat — ^The  woman  which  thou  gavest  to  be  with  me, 
she  gave  me  of  the  tree,  and  I  did  cat." 

I  have  been  the  more  particular  in  remarking  this  part  of  their 
behaviour  because  it  tends  so  much  to  the  magnifying  of  free- 
grace,  and  plainly  shews  us  that  salvation  cometh  only  from  the 
Lord.  Let  us  taJ^e  a  short  view  of  the  miserable  circumstances 
our  first  parents  were  now  in :  They  were  legally  and  spiritually 
dead,  children  of  wrath,  and  heirs  of  hell.  They  had  eaten  the 
fruit,  of  which  God  had  commanded  them  that  they  should  not 
eat;  and  when  arraigned  before  God,  notwithstanding  their 
crime  was  so  complicated,  they  could  not  be  brought  to  confess 
it.   What  reason  can  be  given  why  sentence  of  death  should  not 


I.]  AND  THB  8BBU  OP  TUB  8BRPBNT.  41 

be  pnmonDced  against  the  prisoners  at  the  bar?  All  mast  own 
they  are  worthy  to  die.  Nay»  how  can  Grod,  consistently  with  his 
justice,  possibly  forgive  them?  He  had  threatened,  that  the  day 
wherein  they  ate  of  the  forbidden  firait,  they  shoold  ''  surely  die ;" 
and,  if  he  did  not  execute  this  threatening,  the  devil  might  then 
slander  the  Almighty  indeed.  And  yet  mercy  cries,  spare  these 
sinners,  spare  the  work  of  thine  own  hands.  Behold,  then,  wis- 
dom contrives  a  scheme  how  God  may  be  just,  and  yet  be  mer- 
cifol ;  be  faithful  to  his  threatening,  punish  the  offence,  and  at 
the  same  time  spare  the  offender.  An  amazing  scene  of  divine 
love  here  opens  to  our  view,  which  had  been  from  all  eternity  hid 
in  the  heart  of  God!  Notwithstanding  Adam  and  Eve  were  thns 
nnhambled,  and  did  not  so  much  as  put  up  one  single  petition 
for  pardon,  God  immediately  passes  sentence  upon  the  serpent, 
and  reveals  to  them  a  Saviour. 

Verse  14.  '^  And  the  Lord  God  said  unto  the  serpent.  Because 
thoQ  hast  done  this,  thou  art  accursed  above  all  cattle,  and  above 
every  beast  of  the  field ;  upon  thy  belly  shalt  thou  go,  and  dust 
shalt  then  eat  all  the  days  of  thy  life ;"  that  is,  he  should  be  in 
subjection,  and  his  power  should  always  be  limited  and  restrain- 
ed. **  His  enemies  shall  lick  the  very  dust,"  says  the  Psalmist, 
(Yer.  15.)  *'  And  I  will  put  enmity  between  thee  and  the  wo- 
man, and  between  thy  seed  and  her  seed :  it  shall  bruise  thy  head, 
and  thou  shalt  bruise  his  heel." 

Before  I  proceed  to  the  explanation  of  this  verse,  I  cannot  but 
take  notice  of  one  great  mistake  which  the  author  of  the  Wbtde 
Duty  of  Man  is  gmlty  of,  in  making  this  verse  contain  a  cove- 
nant between  God  and  Adam,  as  though  God  now  personally 
treated  with  Adam,  as  before  the  fall.  For,  talking  of  the  second 
covenant  in  his  preface,  concerning  caring  for  the  soul,  says  he, 
"  This  second  covenant  was  made  with  Adam,  and  us  in  him, 
presently  after  the  fall,  and  is  briefly  contained  in  these  words, 
Cren.  iii.  15.  where  God  declares,  *  The  seed  of  the  woman  shall 
break  the  serpent's  head ;'  and  this  was  made  up,  as  the  first  was, 
of  some  mercies  to  be  afforded  by  God,  and  some  duties  to  be 
performed  by  us."  This  is  exceedingly  false  divinity;  for  these 
words  are  not  spoken  to  Adam;  they  are  directed  only  to  the  ser- 
pent. Adam  and  Eve  stood  by  as  criminals,  and  God  could  not 
treat  vritb  them,  because  they  had  broken  his  covenant.  And  it 
is  so  far  from  being  a  covenant  wherein  *^  some  mercies  are  to  t>e 
afforded  by  God,  and  some  duties  to  be  performed  by  us,"  that 
here  is  not  a  word  looking  that  way;  it  is  only  a  declaration  of 
a  firee  gift  of  salvation  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  God  the 
Father  and  God  the  Son  had  entered  into  a  covenant  concerning 
the  salvation  of  the  elect  from  all  eternity,  wherein  God  the  Fa^ 
ther  promised.  That,  if  the  Son  would  offer  his  soul  a  sacrifice 
for  sin,  he  should  see  his  seed.  Now  this  is  an  open  revelation 
of  this  secret  covenant,  and  therefore  God  speaks  in  the  most 
positive  terms,  **  It  shall  bruise  thy  head,  and  thou  shalt  bruise 
his  heel."  The  first  Adam,  God  had  treated  with  before ;  he 
proved  false :  Grod  therefore,  to  secure  the  second  covenant  from 


42  THB  6BBD  OP  TIlB  WOMAN,  lU 

being  broken^  puts  it  into  the  hands  of  the  second  Adam,  the  Lord 
from  heaven.  Adam,  after  the  fall,  stood  no  longer  as  our  repre- 
•sentative ;  he  and  Eve  were  only  private  persons,  as  we  are,  and 
were  only  to  lay  hold  on  the  declaration  of  mercy  contained  in 
this  promise,  by  faith,  (as  they  really  did,)  and  by  that  they  were 
saved.  I  do  not  say  but  we  are  to  believe  and  obey,  if  we  are 
everlastingly  saved.  Faith  and  obedience  are  conditions,  if  we 
only  mean  that  they  in  order  go  before  our  salvation ;  but  I  deny 
that  these  are  proposed  by  God  to  Adam,  or  that  God  treats  with 
him  in  this  promise,  as  he  did  before  the  fall  under  the  covenant 
of  works.  For  how  could  that  be,  when  Adam  and  Eve  were  now 
prisoners  at  the  bar,  without  strength  to  perform  any  conditions 
at  all?  The  truth  is  this:  God,  as  a  reward  of  Christ's  sufferings, 
promised  to  give  the  elect  faith  and  repentance,  in  order  to  bring 
them  to  eternal  life :  and  both  these,  and  every  thing  else  necessary 
for  their  everlasting  happiness,  are  infallibly  secured  to  them  in 
this  promise;  as  Mr.  Boston,  an  excellent  Scots  divine,  clearly 
shews,  in  a  book  entitled, "  A  view  of  the  covenant  of  grace." 

This  is  by  no  means  an  unnecessary  distinction ;  it  is  a  matter 
of  great  importance:  for  want  of  knowing  this,  people  have  been 
so  long  misled.  They  have  been  taught  ti^at  they  must  do  so  and 
so,  as  though  they  were  under  a  covenant  of  works,  and  then  for 
DOING  this,  they  should  be  saved.  Whereas,  on  the  contrary, 
people  should  be  taught.  That  the  Lord  Jesus  was  the  second 
Adam,  with  whom  the  Father  entered  into  covenant  for  fallen 
man ;  that  they  can  now  do  nothing  of  or  for  themselves,  and 
should  therefore  come  to  God  beseeching  him  to  give  them  faith, 
by  which  they  shall  be  enabled  to  lay  hold  on  the  righteousness 
of  Christ ;  and  that  faith  they  will  then  shew  forth  by  their  works, 
out  of  love  and  gratitude  to  the  ever  blessed  Jesus,  their  most 
glorious  Redeemer,  for  what  he  has  done  for  their  sonls.  This 
is  a  consistent  scriptural  scheme, ;  without  holding  this,  we  must 
run  into  one  of  those  two  bad  extremes ;  I  mean,  Antinomianism 
on  the  one  hand,  or  Armiuianism  on  the  other:  from  both  which 
may  the  good  Lord  deliver  us ! 

But  to  proceed :  By  the  seed  of  the  woman,  we  are  here  to  un- 
derstand the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who,  though  very  Grod  of  very 
God,  was,  for  us  men  and  our  salvation,  to  have  a  body  prepared 
for  him  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  to  be  bom  of  a  woman  who  never 
knew  man^  and  by  his  obedience  and  death  make  an  atonement 
for  man's  transgression,  and  bring  in  an  everlasting  righteous- 
ness, woriL  in  them  a  new  nature,  and  thereby  bruise  die  serpent's 
head,  that  is,  destroy  his  power  and  dominion  over  them.  By  the 
serpent's  seed,  we  are  to  understand  the  devil  and  all  his  chil- 
dren, who  aie  permitted  by  Crod  to  tempt  and  sift  his  children. 
But,  blessed  be  God,  he  can  reach  no  further  than  our  heel. 

It  is  not  to  be  doubted  but  Adam  and  Eve  understood  this 
promise  in  this  sense ;  for  it  is  plain,  in  the  latter  part  of  tho 
chapter,  sacrifices  were  instituted.  From  whence  should  those 
akins  come,  but  from  beasts  slain  for  sacrifice,  of  which  God  made 
them  coats?  We  find  Abel,  as  well  as  Cain,  offering  sacrifice  in 


!.]  AND   TfIB   SEED   OF   THE  SERPENT.  43 

the  Dcxt  chapter:  and  the  apostle  tells  us,  he  did  it  by  faitb^no 
doubt,  in  this  promise.  And  Eve,  when  Cain  was  boiu,  said,  **  I 
have  |ti;ottcn  a  man  from  the  Lord ;"  or,  (as  Mr.  Henry  observes, 
it  may  l3C  rendered,)  "  I  have  gotten  a  man, — the  Lord,— the  pro- 
mised Messiah.''  Some  further  suppose,  that  Eve  was  the  first 
believer;  and  therefore  they  translate  it  thus,  **  The  seed,  (not  of 
the,  but)  of  this  woman :"  which  magnifies  the  grace  of  God  so 
much  the  more,  that  she,  who  was  first  in  the  transgression, 
should  l>e  the  first  partaker  of  redemption.  Adam  believed  also, 
and  was  saved :  for  unto  Adam  and  his  wife  did  the  Lord  God 
make  coats  of  skins,  and  clothed  them:  which  was  a  remarkable 
type  of  their  being  clothed  with  the  righteousness  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ. 

This  promise  was  literally  fulfilled  in  the  person  ot  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  Satan  bruised  his  heel,  when  he  tempted  him  for 
forty  days  together  in  the  wilderness :  he  bruised  his  heel,  when 
he  raised  up  strong  persecution  against  him  during  the  time  of 
his  public  ministry;  he  in  an  especial  manner  bruised  his  heel, 
when  our  Lord  complained,  that  his  soul  was  exceeding  sorrow- 
ful, even  unto  death,  and  he  sweat  great  drops  of  blood  fulling 
upon  the  ground,  in  the  garden :  he  bruised  his  heel,  when  he  put 
it  into  the  heart  of  Judas  to  betray  him :  and  he  bruised  him  yet 
most  of  all,  when  his  emissaries  nailed  him  to  an  accursed  tree, 
and  our  Lord  cried  out,  "My  Grod,  my  God,  why  hast  thou  for- 
saken me?  •'  Yet,  in  all  this,  the  blessed  Jesus,  the  seed  of  the 
woman,  bruised  Satan's  accursed  head:  for,  in  that  he  was 
tempted,  he  was  able  to  succour  those  that  are  tempted.  By  his 
stripes  we  are  healed.  The  chastisement  of  our  peace  was  upon 
him.  By  dying,  he  destroyed  him  that  had  the  power  of  death, 
that  is,  the  devU.  He  thereby  spoiled  principalities  and  powers, 
and  made  a  shew  of  them  openly,  triumphing  over  them  upon 
the  cross. 

This  promise  has  been  fulfilled  in  the  elect  of  God,  considered 
collectively,  as  well  before,  as  since  the  coming  of  our  Lord  in 
the  flesh:  for  they  maybe  called  the  seed  of  the  woman.  Mar- 
vel not,  that  all  who  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus,  must  suflfer  per- 
secution. In  this  promise,  there  is  an  eternal  enmity  put  be- 
tween the  seed  of  the  woman,  and  the  seed  of  the  serpent ;  so 
that  those  that  are  born  after  the  flesh,  cannot  but  persecute 
those  that  are  born  after  the  spirit.  This  enmity  shewed  itself, 
soon  after  this  promise  was  revealed,  in  Cain's  bruising  the  heel 
of  Aliel :  it  continued  in  the  church  through  all  ages  before  Christ 
came  in  the  flesh,  as  the  history  of  the  Bible,  and  the  11th  chap- 
ter of  the  Hebrews,  plainly  shew.  It  raged  exceedingly  after 
oar  Lord's  ascension;  witness  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  and  the 
history  of  tlie  primitive  Christians.  It  now  rages,  and  will  con- 
tinue to  rage  and  shew  itscli*,  in  a  greater  or  less  degree,  to  the 
end  of  lime.  But  let  not  this  dismay  us ;  for  in  all  this,  the  seed 
of  the  woman  is  more  than  conqueror,  and  bruises  the  serpent's 
head.  Thus  the  Lsraelites,  the  more  they  were  oppressed,  the 
more  they  increased.    Thus  it  was  with  the  apostles ;  thus  it 


44  THE  SBED  OP   THE   WOMAN,  [f. 

was  with  their  immediate  followers.  So  that  TertuUian  compares 
the  church  in  his  time  to  a  mowed  field ;  the  more  frequently  it  is 
cut,  tbe  more  it  grows.  The  blood  of  the  martyrs  was  always 
the  seed  of  the  church.  And  I  have  often  sat  down  with  wonder 
and  delight,  and  admired  how  God  has  made  the  very  schemes 
which  his  enemies  contrived,  in  order  to  hinder,  become  the  most 
effectual  means  to  propagate  his  gospel.  Xbe  devil  has  had  so 
little  success  in  persecution,  that  if  I  did  not  know  that  he  and 
his  children,  according  to  this  verse,  could  not  but  persecute,  I 
should  think  he  would  count  it  his  strength  to  sit  still.  What 
did  he  get  by  persecuting  the  martyrs  in  queen  Mary's  time? 
Was  not  the  grace  of  Grod  exceedingly  glorified  in  their  support? 
What  did  he  get  by  persecuting  the  good  old  Puritans  ?  Did  it 
not  prove  the  peopling  of  New  England  ?  Or,  to  come  near  our 
own  times,  what  has  he  got  by  putting  us  out  of  the  synagogues? 
Hath  not  the  word  of  Grod,  since  that,  mightily  prevailed?  My 
dear  hearers,  you  must  excuse  me  for  enlarging  on  this  head  ; 
God  fills  my  soul  generaUy,  when  I  come  to  this  topic.  I  can  say 
with  Luther,  "  If  it  were  not  for  persecution,  I  should  not  under- 
fitand  the  scripture.''  If  Satan  should  be  suflfered  to  bruise  my 
heel  further,  and  his  servants  should  thrust  me  into  prison,  I  doubt 
not,  but  even  that  would  tend  only  to  the  more  effectual  bruising 
of  his  head.  I  remember  a  saying  of  the  then  Lord  Chancellor 
to  the  pious  Bradford :  **  Thou  hast  done  more  hurt,"  said  he, 
''  by  thy  exhortations  in  private  in  prison,  than  thou  didst  in 
preaching  before  thou  wast  put  in,"  or  words  to  this  efiect.  The 
promise  of  the  text  is  my  daily  support;  "  I  will  put  enmity  be- 
tween thy  seed  and  her  seed ;  it  shall  bruise  thy  head,  and  thou 
shalt  bruise  his  heel." 

Further :  this  promise  is  also  fulfilled,  not  only  in  the  church 
in  general,  but  in  every  individual  believer  in  particular.  In  every 
believer  there  are  two  seeds,  the  seed  of  the  woman,  and  the  seed 
of  the  serpent;  the  flesh  lusting  against  the  spirit,  and  the  spirit 
against  the  flesh.  It  is  with  the  believer,  when  quickened  with 
grace  in  his  heart,  as  it  was  with  Rebekah,  when  she  had  con- 
ceived Esau  and  Jacob  in  her  womb ;  she  felt  a  struggling,  and 
began  to  be  uneasy;  "  If  it  be  so,"  says  she,  "why  am  I  thus?" 
Thus  grace  and  nature  struggle  (if  I  may  so  speak)  in  the  womb 
of  a  believer*s  heart:  but,  as  it  was  there  said,  "The  elder  shall 
serve  the  younger;"  so  it  is  here, — grace  in  the  end  shall  get  the 
better  of  nature ;  the  seed  of  the  woman  shall  bruise  the  serpent's 
head.  Many  of  you  that  have  believed  in  Christ,  perhaps  may 
find  some  particular  corruption  yet  strong,  so  strong,  that  you 
are  sometimes  ready  to  cry  out  with  David,  "  I  shall  fall  one  day 
by  the  hand  of  Saul."  But,  fear  not,  the  promise  in  the  text  in- 
sures the  perseverance  and  victory  of  believers  over  sin,  Satan, 
death,  and  hell.  What  if  indwelling  corruption  does  yet  remain, 
and  the  seed  of  the  serpent  bruise  your  heel,  in  vexing  and  dis- 
turbing your  righteous  souls?  Fear  not,  though  faint,  yet  pur- 
sue: you  shall  yet  bruise  the  serpent's  head.  Christ  hath  died 
for  you ;  and  yet  a  little  while,  and  he  will  send  death  to  destroy 


I.]  AND  THE  SEED  OP  THE  SERPENT.  4ft 

the  very  being  of  sin  in  you.  Which  brings  me — To  shew  the 
most  extensive  manner  in  which  the  promise  of  the  text  shall  be 
fulfilled,  viz.  at  the  final  judgment,  when  the  Lord  Jesus  shall 
present  the  elect  to  his  Father,  without  spot  or  wrinkle,  or  any 
such  thing,  glorified  both  in  body  and  soul. 

Then  shall  the  seed  of  the  woman  give  the  last  and  fatal  Uow^ 
in  bruising  the  serpent's  head.  Satan,  the  accuser  of  the  brethren, 
and  all  his  accursed  seed,  shall  then  be  cast  out,  and  never  suf- 
fered to  disturb  the  seed  of  the  woman  any  more.  Then  shall 
the  righteous  shine  as  the  sun  in  the  kingdom  of  ttusir  Father, 
and  sit  with  Christ  on  tfirones  in  majesty  on  high. 

Let  us,  therefore,  not  be  weary  of  well-doing ;  for  we  shall  reap 
an  eternal  harvest  of  comfort,  if  we  faint  not.  Dare,  dare,  my 
dear  brethren  in  Christ,  to  follow  the  Captain  of  your  salvation, 
who  was  made  perfect  through  suflerings.  The  seed  of  the  wo* 
man  shall  bruise  the  serpent's  head.  Fear  not  men.  Be  not  too 
mncb  cast  down  at  the  deoeitfnlness  of  your  hearts.  Fear  not 
devils ;  you  shall  get  the  victory  even  over  them.  The  Lord  Jesus 
has  engaged  to  make  you  more  than  conquerors  over  all.  Plead 
with  your  Saviour,  plead :  plead  the  promise  in  the  text.  Wrestle, 
wresUe  with  Grod  in  prayer.  If  it  has  been  given  you  to  believe, 
fear  not  if  it  should  also  be  given  you  to  suffer.  Be  not  anywise 
terrified  by  your  adversaries ;  the  King  of  the  church  has  them 
all  in  a  chain :  be  kind  to  them ;  pray  for  them ;  but  fear  them 
not.  The  Lord  will  yet  bring  back  his  ark,  though  at  present 
driven^  into  the  wilderness ;  and  Satan  like  lightning  shall  fall 
from  heaven. 

Are  there  any  enemies  of  Grod  here?  The  promise  of  the  text 
encourages  me  to  bid  yon  defiance:  the  seed  of  the  woman,  the 
ever  blessed  Jesus,  shall  bruise  the  serpent's  head.  What  sig- 
nifies all  your  malice?  You  are  only  raging  waves  of  the  sea, 
foaming  out  your  own  shame.  For  you,  without  repentance,  is 
reserved  the  blackness  of  darkness  for  ever.  The  Lord  Jesus 
sits  in  heaven,  ruling  over  all,  and  causing  all  things  to  work  for 
his  children's  good ;  be  laughs  you  to  scorn :  he  hath  you  in  the 
utmost  derision,  and  therefore  so  will  I.  Who  are  you  that  per- 
secute the  children  of  the  ever-blessed  Grod?  Though  a  poor 
stripling,  the  Lord  Jesus,  the  seed  of  the  woman,  will  enable 
me  to  bruise  your  heads. 

My  brethren  in  Christ,  I  think  I  do  not  speak  thus  in  my  own 
strength,  but  in  the  strength  of  my  Redeemer.  I  know  in  whom 
I  have  believed :  I  am  persuaded  he  will  keep  that  safe,  which 
I  have  committed  unto  him.  He  is  faithful,  who  hath  promised 
that  the  seed  of  the  woman  shall  bruise  the  serpent's  head. 
Hay  we  all  experience  a  daily  completion  of  this  promise,  both 
in  the  church  and  in  onr  hearts,  till  we  come  to  the  church  of 
the  first-bom,  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect,  in  the  pre- 
sence and  actual  fruition  of  the  great  Grod  our  heavenly  Father. 

To  whom,  with  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  be  ascribed  all 
honour,  power,  might,  majesty,  and  dominion,  now  and  for 
evermore.     Amen. 


16  WALKING   WITH  GOD.  it^. 

SERMON  II. 

WALKING   WITH   GOD. 

And  Enoch  walked  with  God;  and  he  was  not,  for  God  took  him. 

Genesis  v.  24. 

Various  are  the  pleas  and  arguments,  which  men  of  cormpt 
minds  frequently  urge  against  yielding  obedience  to  the  just 
and  holy  commands  of  Grod.  But,  perhaps,  one  of  the  roost 
common  objections  that  they  make  is  this,  that  our  Lord's  com- 
mands are  not  practicable,  because  contrary  to  flesh  and  blood ; 
and  consequenUy,  that  he  is  "  an  hard  master,  reaping  where  he 
has  not  sown,  and  gathering  where  he  has  not  strewed.'*  These 
we  find  were  the  sentiments  entertained  by  that  wicked  and 
slothful  servant  mentioned  in  the  xxvth  of  St.  Matthew ;  and  are 
undoubtedly  the  same  with  many  which  are  maintained  in  the 
present  wicked  and  adulterous  generation.  The  Holy  Ghost 
foreseeing  this,  hath  taken  care  to  inspire  holy  men  of  old,  to 
record  the  examples  of  many  holy  men  and  women ;  who,  even 
under  the  Old  Testament  dispensation,  were  enabled  cheerfuliy 
to  take  Christ's  yoke  upon  them,  and  counted  his  service  perfect 
freedom.  The  large  catalogue  of  saints,  confessors,  and  martyrs, 
drawn  up  in  the  xith  chapter  to  tlie  Hebrews,  abundantly 
evidences  the  truth  of  this  observation.  What  a  great  cloud  of 
witnesses  have  we  there  presented  to  our  view?  All  eminent 
for  their  faith,  but  some  shining  with  a  greater  degree  of  lustre 
than  do  others.  The  protomartyr  Abel  leads  the  van.  And 
next  to  him  we  find  Enoch  mentioned,  not  only  because  he  was 
next  in  order  of  time,  but  also  on  account  of  his  exalted  piety. 
He  is  spoken  of  in  the  words  of  the  text  in  a  very  extraoroinary 
manner.  >ye  have  here  a  short  but  very  full  and  glorious  ac- 
count, both  of  his  behaviour  in  this  world,  and  the  triumphant 
manner  of  his  entry  into  the  next.  The  former  is  contained  in 
these  words,  ''  And  Enoch  walked  with  God."  The  latter  in 
these,  "  and  he  was  not:  for  God  took  him."  He  was  not;  that 
is.  He  was  not  found,  he  was  not  taken  away  in  the  common 
manner,  he  did  not  see  death ;  for  Heb.  xi.  5.  God  had  translated 
him.  Who  this  Enoch  was,  does  not  appear  so  plainly.  To  me, 
he  seems  to  have  been  a  person  of  public  character ;  I  suppose, 
like  Noah,  a  preacher  of  righteousness.  And,  if  we  may  credit 
the  apostle  Jude,  he  was  a  flaming  preacher.  For  he  quotes  one 
of  his  prophecies,  wherein  he  saith,  "  Behold,  the  Lord  coroeth 
with  ten  thousand  of  his  saints,  to  execute  judgment  upon  all, 
and  to  convince  all  that  are  ungodly  amongst  them,  of  all  their 
ungodly  deeds  which  they  have  ungodly  committed,  and  of  all 
their  hard  speeches,  which  ungodly  sinners  have  spoken  against 
him."  But  whether  a  public  or  private  person,  he  has  a  noble 
testimony  given  him  in  the  lively  oracles.  The  author  of  the 
epistle  to  the  Hebrews  saith,  that  before  his  translation  he  had 


If.]  WALKING  WITH  GOD.  47 

this  testimony,  "  that  he  pleased  God ;  and  his  being  translated^ 
i^as  a  proof  of  it  beyond  all  doubt.  And  I  would  observe^ 
that  it  was  wonderful  wisdom  in  Grod  to  translate  Enoch  and 
Elijah  under  the  Old  Testament  dispensation,  that  hereafter, 
when  it  should  be  asserted  that  the  Lord  Jesus  was  carried 
into  heaven,  it  might  not  seem  a  thing  altogether  incredible  to 
the  Jews ;  since  they  themselves  confessed,  that  two  of  their 
own  prophets  had  been  translated  several  hundred  years  before. 
But  it  is  not  my  design  to  detain  you  any  longer,  by  enlarging, 
or  making  observations,  on  Enoch's  short  but  comprehensive 
character :  the  thing  I  have  in  view,  being  to  give  a  discourse, 
as  the  Lord  shall  enable,  upon  a  weighty  and  a  very  important 
subject ;  I  mean,  walking  with  God.  ''  And  Enoch  walked 
with  €rod/'  If  so  much  as  this  can  be  truly  said  of  yon  and  me 
after  oar  decease,  we  shall  not  have  any  reason  to  complain  that 
we  have  lived  in  vain. — In  handling  my  intended  subject,  I  shall. 

First,  Endeavour  to  shew  what  is  implied  in  these  words, 
walked  with  God. 

Secondly  f  I  shall  prescribe  some  means,  upon  the  due  observ- 
ance of  which,  believers  may  keep  up  and  maintain  their  walk 
with  God.     And, 

Thirdly,  Oflfer  some  motives  to  stir  us  up,  if  we  never  walked 
with  God  before,  to  come  and  walk  with  God  now.  The  whole 
shall  be  closed  with  a  word  or  two  of  application. 

First,  I  am  to  shew  what  is  implied  in  these  words,  "  walked 
with  Grod ;"  or,  in  other  words,  what  we  are  to  understand  by 
walking  with  God. 

And  First,  Walking  with  God  implies,  that  the  prevailing 
power  of  the  enmity  of  a  person's  heart  be  taken  away  by  the 
blessed  Spirit  of  God.  Perhaps  it  may  seem  a  hard  saying  to 
some,  but  our  own  experience  daily  proves,  what  the  scriptures 
in  many  places  assert,  that  the  carnal  mind,  the  mind  of  the 
imconverted  natural  man,  nay,  the  mind  of  the  regenerate,  so 
far  as  any  part  of  him  remains  unrenewed,  is  enmity,  not  only 
an  enemy,  but  enmity  itself,  against  God ;  so  that  it  is  not  sub- 
iect  to  the  law  of  God,  neither  indeed  can  it  be.'^  Indeed,  one 
may  well  wonder  that  any  creature,  especially  that  lovely  crea- 
ture man,  made  after  his  Maker's  own  image,  should  ever  have  any 
enmity,  much  less  a  prevailing  enmity,  against  that  very  God  in 
whom  he  lives,  and  moves,  and  hath  his  being.  But,  alas !  so  it 
IS.  Our  first  parents  contracted  it  when  they  fell  from  Grod  by 
eating  the  forbidden  fruit,  and  the  bitter  and  malignant  conta- 
gion of  it  hath  descended  to,  and  quite  overspread,  their  whole 
posterity.  This  enmity  discovered  itself,  in  Adam's  endeavour- 
ing to  hide  himself  in  the  trees  of  the  garden.  When  he  heard 
the  voice  of  the  Lord  God,  instead  of  running  with  an  open 
heart,  saying  Here  am  I;  alas!  he  now  wanted  no  commu- 
nion with  God  ;  and  still  more  discovered  his  lately  contracted 
enmity,  by  the  excuse  he  made  to  the  Most  High :  ''  The  wo- 
man (or  this,  woman)  thou  gavest  to  be  with  me,  she  gave  me  of 
the  tree,  and  I  did  eat."    By  saying  thus,  he  in  effect  lays  all 


48  WALKING  WITH  GO0.  [ll. 

tbeiftiilt  upoa  Ctodr;  as  thoogh  he  tad  said.  If  thou  bad&t  not 
given  me  this  woman,  I  had  not  sinned  against  thee,  so  thou 
mayest  thank,  thyself  for  my  transgression.  In  the  same  manner 
this  enmity  works  in  the  hearts  of  Adam's  children.  They  now 
and  again  find  something  rising  against  Grod,  and  saying  even 
unto  God,  What  doest  tlK>u  ?  ''  It  scorns  any  meaner  competi- 
tor (says  the  learned  Dr.  Owen,  in  his  excellent  treatise  on 
indw^ing  sin)  than  God  himself."  Its  command  is  like  that  of 
the  Assyrians  in  respect  to  Ahab, — shoot  only  at  the  king.  And 
it  strikes  against  every  thing  that  has  the  ^pearance  of  real 

Biety,  as  tbe  Assyrians  shot  at  Jehoshaphat  in  Ahab's  clothes, 
ut  the  opposition  ceases  when  it  finds  that  it  is  only  an  appear- 
ance^  as  the  Assyrians  left  off  shooting  at  Jehoshaphat,  when  they 
perceived  it  was  not  Ahab  they  were  shooting  at  This  enmity 
discovered  itself  in  accursed  Cain ;  he  hated  and  slew  his  bro- 
ther Abel,  because  Abel  loved,  and  was  peculiarly  favoured  by, 
his  God.  And  this  same  enmity  rules  and  prevails  in  every 
man  that  is  naturally  engendered  of  the  ofispring  of  Adam. 
Hence  that  af  erseness  to  prayer  and  holy  duties  which  we  find 
in  children,  and  very  often  in  grown  persons,  who  have  notwith- 
standing been  blessed  with  a  religious  education.  And  all  that 
open  sin  and  wickedness,  which  like  a  deluge  has  overflowed 
the  world,  are  only  so  many  streams  running  from  this  dreadful 
contagious  fountain ;  I  mean  the  enmity  of  man's  desperately 
wick^  and  deceitful  heart.  He  that  cannot  set  his  seal  to  this, 
knows  nothing  yet,  in  a  saving  manner,  of  the  holy  scriptures, 
or  of  the  power  of  God.  And  all  that  do  know  this,  will  readily 
acknowledge,  that  before  a  person  can  be  said  to  walk  with  God, 
the  prevaiUng  power  of  this  heart-enmity  must  be  destroyed : 

for  persons  do  not  use  to  walk  and  keep  company  together,  who 
entertain  an  irreconcilable  enmity  and  hatred  against  one  an- 
other. Observe  me,  I  say,  the  prevailing  power  of  this  enmity 
must  be  taken  away ;  for  the  in-being  of  it  will  never  be  totally 
removed,  till  we  bow  down  our  heads,  and  give  up  the  ghost. 
The  apostle  Paul,  no  doubt,  speaks  of  himself,  and  that  too  not 
when  he  was  a  Pharisee,  but  a  real  Christian ;  when  he  com- 
plains, ''  that  when  he  would  do  good,  evil  was  present  with 
bin  ;*'  not  having  dominion  over  him,  but  opposing  and  resisting 
Ms  good  intentioBS  and  acttoiis,  so  that  he  could  not  do  the 
tfnngs  which  he  would,  in  that  perfection  which  the  new  man 
desired.  This  is  what  he  calls  sin  dwelling  in  him.  ^^And  this 
is  that  ^ft^nfHL  snpxoc,  which  (to  use  the  w^s  of  the  ninth  arti- 
•cle  of  our  church^  some  do  expoond  the  wisdom,  some  sensu- 
ality, some  the  afectation,  some  the  desire,  of  the  flesh,  which 
•doth  remain,  yea,  in  them  that  are  regenerated.'^  But  as  for  its 
prevailing  power,  it  is  destroyed  in  every  soul  that  is  truly  bom 
of  God,  and  gradually  more  aiid  more  weakened  as  the  believer 
frows  in  grace,  and  the  Spirit  of  God  gains  a  greater  and  greater 
ascendency  in  the  heait. 

But,  Secondly,  Walking  with  God,  not  only  implies,  that  the 
prevailing  power  of  the  enmity  of  a  man's  heart  be  taken  away 


If.]  WALKING  WITH  GOD.  49 

but  also  that  a  person  is  actuatty  reconciled  to  Ck>d  the  Fatber^ 
in  and  tttroogh  the  all'saffident  righteousness  and  atonement  of 
his  dear  Son.  **  Can  two  talk  together,  (says  Solomon,)  nnlesff 
they  are  agreed  V  Jesus  is  onr  peace  as  well  as  onr  peace- 
mak^.  When  we  are  jastified  by  faith  in  Christ,  then,  but  not 
tin  then,  we  ha^e  peace  with  God ;  and  consequently  cannot 
be  said  till  then  to  walk  with  him.  Walking  with  a  person, 
being  a  sign  and  token  that  we  are  friends  to  that  person,  or  at 
least,  tbongfa  we  haTO  been  at  variance,  yet  that  now  we  are 
xeconcil^  and  become  friends  again.  Tnis  is  the  great  errand 
thai  gospd  ministers  are  sent  out  npon.  To  us  is  committed 
the  ministry  of  reconciliated ;  as  ambassadors  for  God,  we  are 
to  beseech  sinners,  in  Christ's  stead,  to  be  reconciled  unto  God, 
and  when  they  comply  with  the  gracious  inritation,  and  are 
actoally  by  faith  brought  into  a  state  of  reconciliation  with  God, 
then,  and  not  till  then,  may  they  be  said  so  much  as  to  begin  to 
walk  with  God. 

Further,  Hardly^  Walking  with  God  implies,  a  settled  abid« 
ing  communion  uid  fellowship  with  Gvod,  or  what  in  scrip- 
ture is  called,  **  The  Holy  Ghost  dwelling  in  us."  This  is  what 
onr  Lord  promised  when  be  told  his  disciples,  that  **  the  Holy 
Spirit  should  be  in  and  with  them  ^*  not  to  be  like  a  wayfaring 
man,  to  stay  only  for  a  night,  but  to  reside  and  make  his  abode 
in  their  hearts.  This,  I  am  apt  to  believe,  is  what  the  apostle 
John  would  have  us  understand,  when  he  talks  of  a  person 
abiding  in  him,  in  Christ,  and  walking  as  he  himself  also  walk- 
ed." And  this  is  what  iis  particularly  meant  in  the  words  of 
our  text.  **  And  Enoch  walked  with  God,"  that  is,  he  kept  up 
and  maintained  a  holy,  settled,  habitual,  though  undoubtedly, 
not  altogether  uninterrupted  communion  and  fellowship  with 
God,  in  and  through  Christ  Jesus.  So  that  to  sum  up  what  has 
been  said  on  this  part  of  the  first  general  head,  walking  with 
God  consists  especially  in  the  fixed  habitual  bent  of  the  will 
for  Crod,  in  an  habitual  dependence  upon  his  power  and  pro- 
mise, in  an  habitual  vohintary  dedication  of  our  all  to  his  glory^ 
in  an  habitual  eyeing  of  his  precept  in  all  we  do,  and  in  aa 
habitual  complacence  kk  his  pleasure  in  all  we  sufier. 

Fmtrthly,  Waiting  with  Oad  implies,  our  making  progress  or 
advances  in  the  di^oe  life.  Walking,  in  the  very  first  idea  of 
the  word,  seems  to  suppose  a  progressive  motion.  A  person 
that  walks,  though  he  more  slowly,  yet  he  goes  fi>rward,  and 
doea  not  continue  in  one  place.  And  so  it  is  with  those  that 
walk  with  Grod.  They  go  on,  as  the  Psalmist  says,  ''  from 
strength  to  strength  f'  or,  in  the  language  of  the  apostle  Paul, 
'^  they  pass  from  glory  to  glory,  even  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord.'' 
Indeed,  in  one  saase,  the  divine  life  admits  of  neither  increase - 
nor  decrease.  When  a  soul  is  bom  of  God,  to  all  intents  and^ 
purposes  he  is  a  child  of  Grod ;  and  though  he  should  live  to  the 
age  of  Methuselah,  yet  he  would  then  be  only  a  child  ot  God' 
after  all.  But  in  another  sense,  the  divine  Hfe  admits  of  decays 
and  additioiiB*  Hence  it  is,  that  we  find  the  people  of  God  diargcd 
•  c 


fiO  WALKING  WITH  GOD.  [if. 

with  backslidings  and  losing  their  first  love.  And  hence  it  is  that 
we  hear  of  babes;  yonng  men,  and  fathers  in  Christ.  And  upon 
this  account  it  is  that  the  apostle  exhorts  Timothy, ''  to  let  his 
progress  be  made  known  to  all  men.''  And  what  is  here  required 
of  Timothy  in  particular,  by  St.  Peter  is  enjoined  all  Christians 
in  general,  **  But  grow  in  grace,  (says  be,)  and  in  the  knowledge  of 
our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ."  For  the  new  creature  in 
creases  in  spiritual  stature  ;  and  though  a  person  can  but  be  a 
new  creature,  yet  there  are  some  that  are  more  conformed  to  the 
divine  image  than  others,  and  will  after  death  be  admitted  to  a 
greater  degree  of  blessedness.  For  want  of  observing  this  distinc* 
tion,  even  some  gracious  souls,  that  have  better  hearts  than  heads, 
(as  well  as  men  of  corrupt  minds,  reprobates  concerning  the  faith) 
have  unawares  run  into  dovmright  Antinomian  principles,  deny-^ 
ing  all  growth  of  grace  in  a  believer,  or  any  marks  of  grace  to 
be  laid  down  in  the  scriptures  of  truth.  From  such  principles, 
and  more  especially  from  practices  naturally  consequent  on 
*  such  principles,  may  the  Lord  of  all  lords  deliver  us  ! 

From  what  then  has  been  said,  we  may  now  know  what  is 
implied  in  the  words,  ^*  walked  with  God,"  viz.  Our  having  the 
prevailing  enmity  of  our  hearts  taken  away  by  the  power  of  the 
Spirit  of  God  ;  our  being  actually  reconciled  and  united  to  him 
by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ ;  our  having  and  keeping  up  a  settled 
communion  and  fellowship  with  him  ;  and  our  making  a  daily 
progress  in  this  fellowship,  so  as  to  be  conformed  to  the  divine 
image  more  and  more. 

How  this  is  done,  or,  in  other  words,  by  what  means  believ- 
ers keep  uj>  and  maintain  their  walk  with  God,  comes  to  be  con- 
sidered under  our  second  general  bead. 

And,  Firsty  Believers  keep  up  and  maintain  their  walk  with 
God,  by  reading  of  his  holy  word.  **  Search  the  scriptures,"  says 
our  blessed  Lord,  "  for  these  are  they  that  testify  of  me."  And 
the  royal  Psalmist  tells  us  ''  that  Grod's  word  was  a  light  unto 
his  feet,  and  a  lanthom*  unto  his  paths  ;"  and  he  makes  it  one 
property  of  a  good  man,  '^  that  his  delight  is  in  the  law  of  the 
Lord,  and  that  he  exercises  himself  therein  day  and  night." 
''Give  thyself  to  reading,"  (says  Paul  to  Timothy;)  ''And  this 
book  of  the  law,  (says  God  to  Joshua)  shall  not  go  out  of 
thy  mouth."  For  whatsoever  was  written  aforetime,  was 
written  for  our  learning.  And  the  word  of  God  is  profitaUe 
for  reproof,  for  correction,  and  for  instruction  in  righteousness, 
and  every  way  sufficient  to  make  every  true  child  of  God 
thoroughly  furnished  unto  every  good  work.  If  we  once  get 
above  our  Bibles,  and  cease  making  the  written  word  of  Grod 
our  sole  rule  both  as  to  faith  and  practice,  we  shall  soon  lie 
open  to  all  manner  of  delusion,  and  be  in  great  danger  of  mak- 
ing shipwreck  of  faith  and  a  good  conscience.  Our  blessed 
Lord,  though  he  had  the  Spirit  of  God  without  measure,  yet 
always  was  governed  by,  and  fought  the  devil  with,  "  It  is  writ- 
ten." This  the  apostle  calls  the  "  sword  of  the  Spirit*"  We 
may  say  of  it,  as  David  said  of  Goliah's  sword, "  None  like  this/' 


II.]  WALKING    WITH   GOD.  51 

The  scriptures  are  called  the  lively  oracles  of  €rod :  not  only  be- 
cause they  are  generally  made  use  of  to  beget  in  us  a  new  life,  but 
also  to  keep  up  and  increase  it  in  the  sool.  The  apostle  Peter, 
in  his  2d  episde,  prefers  it  even  to  seeing  Christ  transfigured 
upon  the  mount  For  after  be  had  said,  chap.  i.  18. ''  That  the 
voice  which  came  from  heaven  we  heard,  when  we  were  with  hiih 
in  the  holy  mount;"  he  adds,  "  We  have  also  a  more  sure  word 
of  prophecy;  whereunto  ye  do  well  that  ye  take  heed,  as  unto  a 
light  shining  in  a  dark  place,  until  the  day  dawn,  and  the  day- 
star  arise  in  your  hearts :"  that  is,  till  we  shake  off  these  bodies, 
and  see  Jesus  face  to  face.  Till  then  we  must  see  and  converse 
with  him  through  the  glass  of  his  word.  We  must  make  his 
testimonies  our  counsellors,  and  daily,  with  Mary,  sit  at  Jesus' 
feet,  by  &ith  hearing  his  word.  We  shall  then  by  happy  ex« 
perience  find,  that  they  are  spirit  and  life,  meat  indeed,  and 
drink  indeed,  to  our  sonls. 

Secondly,  Believers  keep  up  and  maintain  their  walk  with  God 
by  secret  prayer.  The  spirit  of  grace  is  always  accompanied 
with  the  spirit  of  supplication.  It  is  the  very  breath  of  the  new 
creature,  Uie  fan  of  tiie  divine  life,  whereby  the  spark  of  holy 
fire,  kindled  in  the  soul  by  Grod,  is  not  only  kept  in,  but  raised 
into  a  flame.  A  neglect  of  secret  prayer  has  been  frequently  an 
inlet  to  many  spiritual  diseases,  and  has  been  attended  with 
fatal  consequences.  Origen  observed,  "  ThatHhe  day  he  offered 
incense  to  an  idol,  he  went  out  of  his  closet  without  making  use 
of  secret  prayer.''  It  is  one  of  the  most  noble  parts  of  the  be- 
liever's spiritual  armour.  **  Pra]ring  always,"  says  the  apostle, 
''  with  all  manner  of  supplication."  *'  Watch  and  pray,"  says  oar 
Lord,  **  that  ye  enter  not  into  temptation."  And  be  spake  a 
parable,  that  his  disciples  should  pray,  and  not  faint.  Not  that 
our  Lord  would  have  us  always  upon  our  knees,  or  in  our  clo- 
sets, to  the  neglect  of  our  other  relative  duties.  But  he  means, 
that  our  souls  should  be  kept  in  a  praying  frame,  so  that  we 
might  be  able  to  say,  as  a  good  man  in  Scotland  once  said  to 
his  firiehds  on  his  death-bed,  **  Could  these  curtains,  or  could 
these  walls  speak,  they  would  tell  you  what  sweet  communion  I 
have  had  with  my  Grod  here."  O  prayer !  prayer !  It  brings  and 
keeps  God  and  man  together.  It  raises  man  up  to  Grod,  and 
brings  God  down  to  man.  ^If  you  would  therefore,  O  believers, 
keep  up  your  walk  with  Gro4 ;  pray,  pray  without  ceasing.  Be 
much  in  secret,  set  prayer.  And  when  you  are  about  the  common 
business  of  life,  be  much  in  ejaculatory  prayer,  and  send,  from 
time  to  time,  short  letters  post  to  heaven  upon  the  wings  of  faith. 
lliey  wiU  reach  the  very  heart  of  God,  and  return  to  you  again 
loaded  with  spiritual  blessings. 

Thirdly,  Holy  and  frequent  meditation  is  another  blessed 
means  of  keeping  up  a  believer's  walk  with  God.  "  Prayer, 
reading,  temptation,  and  meditation,"  says  Luther,  ''  make  a., 
minister."  And  they  also  make,  and  perfect  a  Christian.  Me- 
ditation to  the  soul,  is  the  same  as  digestion  to  the  body.  Holy 
David  found  it  so,  and  therefore  he  was  frequently  employed  ia 

c2 


A3  WALKING    WITH   GOD.  [ll. 

meditatKHi,  even  in  the  night  season.  WeYead  also  of  Isaac's 
going  out  into  the  fields  to  meditate  in  the  erening;  or,  as  it  is 
in  the  margin,  to  pray.  For  meditation  is  a  kind  of  silent  prayer, 
whereby  the  soul  is  frequently  as  it  were  carried  out  of  itself  to 
Grod,  and  in  a  degree  made  like  unto  those  blessed  spirits,  who 
by  a  kind  of  immediate  intuition  always  behold  the  face  of  our 
heavenly  Father.  None  but  those  happy  souls  that  have  been 
accustomed  to  this  divine  employ,  can  tell  what  a  blessed  pro- 
moter of  the  divine  life,  meditation  is.  ^  Whilst  I  was  musing,'' 
says  David,  *'  Uie  fire  kindled.**  And  whilst  the  believer  is 
musing  on  the  woriLs  and  word  of  God ;  especially  that  work  of 
works,  that  wonder  of  wonders,  that  mystery  of  godliness,  "  God 
manifest  in  the  flesh,"  the  Lamb  of  God  slain  for  the  sins  of  the 
world ;  he  frequently  feels  the  fire  of  divine  love  kindle,  so  that 
he  is  obliged  to  speak  with  his  tongue,  and  tell  of  the  loving- 
kindness  of  the  Lord  to  his  soul.  Be  frequent  therefore  in  me- 
ditation, all  ye  that  desire  to  keep  up  and  maintain  a  close  and 
uniform  walk  with  the  most  high  GcnA. 

Fourthly,  Believers  keep  up  their  walk  with  God,  by  watching 
and  noting  his  providential  dealings  with  them.  If  we  believe 
the  scriptures,  we  must  believe  what  our  Lord  hath  declared 
therein,  *'  That  the  very  hairs  of  his  disciples'  heads  are  all  num- 
bered ;  and  that  a  sparrow  does  not  fall  to  the  ground,  (either  to 
tick  up  a  grain  of  com,  or  when  shot  by  a  fowler,)  without  the 
nowledge  of  our  heavenly  Father."  Every  cross  has  a  call  in 
it,  and  every  particular  dispensation  oT  divine  providence,  has 
some  particular  end  to  answer  in  those  to  whom  it  is  sent.  If 
it  be  m  an  afflictive  nature,  God  does  thereby  say,  ^  My  son, 
keep  thyself  from  idols:"  if  prosperous,  he  does,  as  it  were  by 
a  small  still  voice,  say,  ''  My  son,  give  me  thy  heart."  If  be- 
fievers,  therefore,  would  keep  up  their  walk  wiUi  God,  they  must 
fnmi  time  to  time  hear  what  Uie  Lord  has  to  say  concerning  them 
in  the  voice  of  his  providence.  Thus  we  find  Abraham's  servant, 
when  he  went  to  fetch  a  wife  for  his  master  Isaac,  eyed  and 
watched  the  providence  of  God,  and  by  that  means  found  out 
die  person  that  was  designed  for  his  master's  wife.  ''  For  a 
little  hint  from  providence,"  says  pious  Bishop  Hall,  **  is  enough 
bi  faith  to  feed  upon."  And  as  I  believe  it  will  be  one  part  of 
our  happiness  in  heaven,  to  take  a  view  of,  and  look  back  upoii^ 
the  various  links  of  the  golden  chain  which  drew  us  there;  so 
those  that  enjoy  most  of  heaven  below,  I  believe,  will  be  the  most 
minute  in  remarking  God's  various  dealings  with  them,  in  re- 
spect to  his  providential  dispensations  here  on  earth. 

Fifthly,  In  order  to  walk  closely  with  God,  his  chfldren  must 
not  only  watch  the  motions  of  God's  providence  without  them, 
but  the  motions  also  of  his  blessed  Spirit  in  their  hearts.  "  As 
many  as  are  the  sons  of  God,  are  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God," 
and  give  up  themselves  to  be  guided  by  the  Holy  Ghost^  as  a 
little  child  gives  its  hand  to  be  led  by  a  nurse  or  parent.  It  is 
DO  doubt  in  this  sense  that  we  are  to  be  converted,  and  become 
like  little  children.    And  though  it  is  the  quintessence  of  enthn- 


II.J  WALKING   WITH  GOD.  53 

siasm,  to  {Mnetend  to  be  guided  by  the  Spirit  without  the  written 
word ;  yet  it  u  every  Christian'ii  boonden  duty  to  be  giuded  by 
the  Spirit  in  conjonctian  with  the  written  word  of  God.  Watch^ 
therefore^  I  pray  you,  O  belierers,  the  motions  of  Grod's  blessed 
Spirit  in  your  soids^  and  always  try  the  suggestions  or  impres- 
sions that  you  may  at  any  time  fed,  by  the  unerring  rule  of  God's 
most  holy  word :  8^  if  wey  are  not  found  to  be  agreeable  to  that, 
reject  them  as  diabolicid  and  ddnsive.  By  observing  this  cau- 
tion, you  will  steer  a  middle  course  between  the  two  dangerous 
extremes  many  of  this  gMieration  are  in  danger  of  running  into; 
I  mean,  enthusiasm,  on  the  one  hand,  and  deism,  and  daumright 
infideliiy,  on  the  other. 

SixtUv,  They  that  would  maintain  a  holy  walk  with  God, 
mnst  walk  with  him  in  ordinances  as  well  as  providences,  &c. 
It  is  therefore  recorded  of  Zachary  and  Elisabelh,  that  ''  they 
walked  in  all  God's  ordinances,  as  well  as  commandments,  blame* 
less."  And  all  rightly  informed  Christians,  will  look  upon  ordi- 
nances, not  as  beggarly  elements,  but  as  so  many  conduit-pipes, 
wherefa^  the  infinitely  condescending  Jehovah  conveys  his  graQ$ 
to  their  souls.  They  will  look  upon  them  as  chUdren's  bread, 
and  as  their  highest  privileges.  Consequently  Uiey  will  be  glad 
when  they  hear  others  say,  *^  Come,  let  us  go  up  to  the  house  of 
the  Lord.''  They  will  delight  to  visit  the  place  where  God's 
honour  dwelleth,  and  be  very  eager  to  embrace  all  opportunities 
to  shew  forth  the  Lord  Christ's  death  till  he  come. 

Seventhly  and  lastly.  If  you  would  walk  with  God,  you  will 
associate  and  keep  company  with  those  that  do  walk  with  him. 
''  My  delight,"  says  holy  David,  ''  is  iu  them  that  do  excel "  in 
virtue.  "[Riey  were,  in  his  sight,  the  excellent  ones  of  the  earth. 
And  the  primitive  Christians,  no  doubt,  kept  up  their  vigour  and 
first  love,  by  continuing  in  fellowship  one  with  another.  The 
apostle  Paul  knew  this  full  well,  and  therefore  exhorts  the  Chris- 
tians to  see  to  it,  that  they  did  not  forsake  the  assembling  of 
tbemselres  togeUier.  For  how  can  one  be  warm  alone  ?  And 
has  not  the  wisest  of  men  told  us,  that,  '^  As  iron  sharpeneth 
iron,  so  doth  the  countenance  of  a  man  his  fiiend  f "  If  we  look, 
therefore,  into  church  history,  or  make  a  just  observation  of  our 
own  times,  I  believe  we  shsul  find,  that  as  the  power  of  God  pre- 
vaOs,  christian  societies,  and  fellowship  meetings  prevail  pro- 
portionably.  And  as  one  decays,  the  other  has  insensibly  de- 
cayed and  dwindled  away  at  the  same  time.  So  necessary  is  it 
for  those  that  would  walk  vrith  God,  and  keep  up  the  life  of  re- 
ligion, to  meet  together  as  they  have  opportunity,  in  order  to 
provoke  one  another  to  love  and  good  works. 

Proceed  we  now  to  the  third  general  thing  proposed.  To  offer 
some  motives  to  excite  all  to  come  and  walk  with  Grod. 

And,  First,  v^alking  vrith  Grod  is  a  very  honourable  thing. 
This  genendly  is  a  prevailing  motive  to  persons  of  all  ranks,  to 
stir  them  up  to  any  important  undertaking.  O  that  it  may  have 
its  due  weight  and  influence  vrith  you,  in  respect  to  the  matter 
DOW  befi>re  us !  I  suppose  you  wotdd  all  think  it  a  very  high  ho- 


54  WALKING  WITH  GOD.  [il. 

be  admitted  into  an  earthly  prince's  privy  council,  to  be  trusted 
with  his  secrets,  and  to  have  his  ear  at  all  times,  and  at  all 
seasons.  It  seems  Haman  thooghjt  it  so,  when  he  boasted,  Esth. 
V.  11,  that  i>esides  his  being  ''  advanced  above  the  princes  and 
servants  of  the  kin^ ;  yea,  moreover,  Esther  the  queen  did  let 
no  man  come  in  with  the  king  unto  the  banquet  that  she  had 
prepared,  but  myself;  and  to-morrow  am  I  invited  unto  her  also 
with  the  king."  And  when  afterwards  a  question  was  put  to  this 
same  Haman,  chap.  vi.  6.  *'  What  shall  be  done  unto  the  man 
whom  the  king  delighteth  to  honour  V*  he  answered,  ver.  8. ''  Let 
the  royal  apparel  l^  brought  which  the  king  useth  to  wear,  and 
the  horse  that  the  king  rideth  upon,  and  the  crown  royal  which 
is  set  upon  his  head ;  and  let  this  apparel  and  horse  be  deli- 
vered to  the  hand  of  one  of  tlie  king's  most  noble  princes,  that  they 
may  array  the  man  vrithal  whom  the  king  delights  to  honour,  and 
bring  him  on  horseback  through  the  street  of  the  city,  and  pro- 
claim before  him.  Thus  shall  it  be  done  to  the  man  whom  the 
king  delighteth  to  honour."  Tliis  was  all  then,  it  seems,  that 
an  ambitious  Haman  could  ask,  and  the  most  valuable  thing 
that  he  thought  Ahasuerus,  the  greatest  monarch  upon  earth, 
coald  give.  But,  alas,  what  is  this  honour  in  comparison  of  that 
which  the  meanest  of  those  enjoy,  that  walk  with  God  !  Think 
ye  it  a  small  thing,  sirs,  to  have  the  secret  of  the  Lord  of  lords 
with  you,  and  to  be  called  the  friends  of  God  ?  and  such  honour 
have  all  God's  saints.  The  secret  of  the  Lord  is  with  them 
that  fear  him :  and ''  Henceforth  (says  the  blessed  Jesus)  call  I 
you  no  longer  servants,  but  friends  ;  for  the  servant  knoweth 
not  the  will  of  his  master."  Whatever  you  may  think  of  it, 
holy  David  was  so  sensible  of  the  honour  attending  a  walk  vrith 
God,  that  he  declares, ''  he  had  rather  be  a  door-keeper  in  his 
house,  than  to  dwell  even  in  the  tents  of  ungodliness.'^  O  that 
all  were  like-minded  with  him ! 

But,  Secondly,  As  it  is  an  honourable,  so  it  is  a  pleasing  thing, 
to  walk  with  God.  The  wisest  of  men  has  told  us,  that  "  wis- 
dom's ways  are  ways  of  pleasantness,  and  all  her  paths  peace." 
And  I  remember  pious  Sir.  Henry,  when  he  was  just  about  to 
expire,  said  to  a  friend,  *'  You  have  heard  many  men's  dying 
words,  and  these  are  mine :  A  life  spent  in  communion  with 
God,  is  the  pleasantest  life  in  the  world."  I  am  sure  I  can  set 
to  my  seal  that  this  is  true.  Indeed,  I  have  been  listed  under 
Jesus's  banner  only  for  a  few  years ;  but  I  have  enjoyed  more 
solid  pleasure  in  one  moment's  communion  with  my  God,  than 
I  should  or  could  have  enjoyed  in  the  ways  of  sin,  though  I  had 
continued  tO  have  went  on  in  them  for  thousands  of  years.  And 
may  I  not  appeal  to  all  you  that  fear  and  walk  with  God,  for 
the  truth  of  this  ?  Has  not  one  day  in  the  Lord's  courts  been 
better  to  you  than  a  thousand  ?  In  keeping  God's  commandments, 
have  you  not  found  a  present,  and  very  great  reward  ?  Has 
not  his  word  been  sweeter  to  you  than  the  honey,  or  the  honey- 
comb ?  O  what  have  you  felt,  when,  Jacob-like,  you  have  been 
wrestling  vrith  your  God  ?  Has  not  Jesus  often  me^  you  when 


*     4» 


lu}  WALKING  WITH  GOD*  55 

mieditating  in  the  fields^  and  been  made  known,  to  vou  over  and 
over  again  in  breaking  of  bread  ?  Has  not  the  Holy  Ghost  fire- 
quently  shed  the  divine  love  abroad  in  your  hearts  abundantly, 
and  fiUed  you  with  joy  unspeakable,  even  joy  that  is  full  of 
glory  1  I  know  you  will  answer  all  these  questions  in  the 
affirmative,  and  freely  acknowledge  the  yoke  of  Christ  to  be 
easy,  and  his  burden  light ;  or  (to  use  the  words  of  one  of  our 
collects)  ''That  his  service. is  perfect  freedom."  And  what 
need  we  then  any  further  motive  to  excite  us  to  walk  with  Gqd? 
But  methinks  I  hear  some  among  you  say,  *'  How  can  these 
things  be?  For,  if  walking  with  Goo,  as  you  say,  is  such  an 
honourable  and  pleasant  thing,  whence  is  it  that  the  name  of 
the  people  of  this  way  is  cast  out  as  evil,  and  every  where  spo- 
ken against  ?  How  comes  it  to  pass  that  they  are  frequently 
afflicted,  tempted,  destitute,  and  tormented  ?  Is  this  the  honour, 
this  the  pleasure,  that  you  speak  of?"  I  answer.  Yes.  Stop  a 
while ;  be  not  over  hasty.  Judge  not  according  to  appearance, 
but  judge  righteous  judgment,  and  all  will  be  well,  it  is  true, 
we  acknowledge  the  "  people  of  this  way,"  as  you,  and  Paul 
before  you,  when  a  persecutor,  called  them,  have  their  names 
cast  out  as  evil,  and  are  a  sect  every  where  spoken  {igainst.  But 
by  whom  ?  Even  by  the  enemies  of  the  most  high  God.  And 
do  you  think  it  a  disgrace  to  be  spoken  evil  of  by  them  ?  Bless- 
ed be  God,  we  have  not  so  learned  Christ  Our  royal  Master 
has  pronounced  those  "  blessed,  who  are  persecuted,"  and  have 
all  manner  of  evil  spoken  against  them  falsely."  He  has  cpm- 
manded  them  to  rejoice  and  be  exceeding  glad,"  for  it  is  the 
privilege  of  their  discipleship ;  and  that  their  reward  will  be 
great  in  heaven.  He  himself  was  thus  treated.  And  can  there 
be  a  greater  honour  put  upon  a  creature,  than  to  be  conformed 
to  ever-blessed  Son  of  Grod?  And  further,  it  is  equallv 
true  that  the  people  of  this  way  are  frequently  afflicted,  tempted, 
destitute,  and  tormented.  But  what  of  all  this?  Does  this 
destroy,  the  pleasure  of  walking  with  Grod  ?  No,  in  no  wise ;  for 
those  that  walk  with  Grod  are  enabled,  through  Christ  strength- 
ening them,  to  joy  even  in  tribulation,  and  to  rejoice  when  they 
fall  into  divers  temptations.  And  I  believe  I  may  appeal  to  the 
experience  of  all  true  and  dose  walkers  with  God,  whether  or 
not  their  suffering  times  have  not  frequently  been  their  sweetest 
times,  and  that  they  enjoyed  most  of  God,  when  most  cast  out 
and  despised  by  men  ?  This  we  find  was  the  case  of  Christ's 
primitive  servants,  when  threatened  by  the  Jewish  sanhedrim, 
and  commanded  to  preach  no  more  in  the  name  of  Jesus  ;  they 
rejoiced  that  they  were  accounted  worthy  to  suffer  shame  for  the 
sake  of  Jesus.  Paul  and  Silas  sang  praises  even  in  a  dungeon ;  and 
the  face  of  Stephen,  that  glorious  proto-martyr  of  the  christian 
church,  shone  like  the  face  of  an  angel.  And  Jesus  is  the  same 
DOW  as  he  was  then,  and  takes  care  so  to  sweeten  sufferings  and 
afflictions  with  his  love,  that  his  disciples  find,  by  happy  expe- 
ri^ice,  that  as  afflictions  abound,  consolations  do-much  more 
abound.    And  therefore  these  objections,  instead  of  destroying^ 


M  WALKING  WITH  OOD.  [ll. 

ilo  ofdy  enforce  the  motiTes  before  urged,  to  excite  yon  to  walk 
with  God. 

But  supposing  the  objections  were  just,  mnd  walkers  with  God 
were  as  despicable  and  unhappy  as  you  would  represent  them 
to  be ;  yet  I  have  a  third  motive  to  offer,  which  if  weighed  in 
the  balanoe  of  the  sanctuary,  will  over-weigh  all  objections,  viz. 
That  there  is  a  heaven  at  the  end  of  this  walk.  For,  to  use  the 
words  of  pious  bishop  Beveridge,  '^  Though  the  way  be  nar- 
row, yet  it  is  not  long :  and  though  the  gate  be  strait,  yet  it 
opens  into  everlasting  life.''  Enoch  found  it  so.  He  walked 
with  God  on  earth,  and  God  took  him  to  sit  down  with  him  for 
ever  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  Not  that  we  are  to  expect  to 
be  taken  away  as  he  was :  no,  I  suppose  we  shall  all  die  the 
common  death  of  all  men.  But  after  death,  the  spirits  of  those 
who  have  walked  with  God,  shall  return  to  C^od  that  gave  them ; 
and  at  the  mominfl;  of  the  resurrection,  soul  and  body  shall  be 
for  ever  with  the  Lord ;  their  bodies  shall  be  fashioned  like  unto 
Christ's  glorious  body,  and  their  souls  filled  with  all  the  fulness 
of  Grod.  They  shall  sit  on  thrones ;  they  shall  judge  angels. 
They  shall  be  enabled  to  sustain  an  exceeding  and  eternal  weight 
of  glory,  even  that  glory  which  Jesus  Christ  enjoyed  with  the 
Father  before  the  world  began.  **  O  gloriam  quantam  et  qualem,'* 
says  the  learned  and  pious  Arndt,  just  before  he  bowed  down 
his  head,  and  gave  up  the  ghost.  The  very  thought  of  it  is 
enough  to  make  us  ''  wish  to  leap  our  seventy  years,"  as  good 
Dr.  Watts  expresses  himself,  and  to  make  us  break  out  into  the 
earnest  language  of  the  royal  Psalmist,  '^  My  soul  is  athirst  for 
God,  yea,  for  the  living  God.  When  diall  I  come  to  appear  in 
the  presence  of  my  God?"  I  wonder  not  that  a  sense  of  this, 
when  under  a  more  than  ordinary  irradiation  and  influx  of  divine 
life  and  love,  causes  some  persons  to  faint  away,  and  even  for  a 
-time  lose  the  power  of  their  senses.  A  less  sight  than  this, 
even  the  sight  of  Solomon's  glory,  made  Sheba's  queen  asto- 
nished ;  and  a  still  lesser  sight  than  that,  even  a  sight  of 
Joseph's  waggons,  made  holy  Jacob  to  faint,  and  for  a  while,  as  it 
were,  die  away.  Daniel,  when  admitted  to  a  distant  view  of 
this  excellent  glory,  fell  down  at  the  feet  of  the  angel  as  one 
dead.  And  if  a  distant  view  of  this  glory  be  so  excellent,  what 
must  the  actual  possession  of  it  be?  If  the  first  fruits  are  so  glo- 
rious, how  infinitely  must  the  harvest  succeed  in  glory? 

And  now,  what  shall  I,  or,  indeed,  what  can  I  well  say  more 
to  excite  you,  even  you  that  are  yet  strangers  to  Christ,  to  come 
and  walk  with  God  ?  If  you  love  honour,  pleasure,  and  a  crown 
of  glory,  come,  seek  it  where  alone  it  can  be  found.  Come,  put 
ye  on  the  Lord  Jesus.  Come,  haste  ye  away  and  walk  with 
God,  and  make  no  longer  provision  for  the  flesh,  to  fulfil  the 
lust  thereof.  Stop,  stop,  O  sinner !  turn  ye,  turn  ye,  O  ye  un- 
converted men,  for  the  end  of  that  way  you  are  now  walking  in, 
however  right  it  may  seem  in  your  blinded  eyes,  will  be  death, 
even  eternal  destruction  both  of  body  and  soul.  Make  no  longer 
tarrying,  I  say  :  at  your  peril  I  charge  you,  step  not  one  step 


II.  ]  WALKING  WITH  OOD.  Sf 

further  on  in  yonr  present  walk.  For  how  knowest  thou,  O  man« 
but  the  next  step  thoa  takes!  may  be  into  hell?  Death  may 
seise  tiiee,  judgment  find  thee,  and  then  the  great  golf  will  be 
fixed  between  thee  and  endless  glory  for  ever  and  ever.  O 
think  of  these  things,  all  ye  that  are  uivriUing  to  walk  with  God. 
Lay  them  to  heart.  Shew  yourselves  men,  and  in  the  strength 
irf*  Jesns  say.  Farewell  lost  of  the  flesh,  I  will  no  more  walk  with 
thee !  farewell  Inst  of  the  eye,  and  pride  of  life !  Farewell  car- 
nal acqoaintanoe  and  enemies  of  the  cross,  I  will  no  more  walk 
and  be  intimate  with  yon !  Welcome  Jesns^  welcome  thy  word, 
welcome  diy  ordinances,  welcome  thy  Spirit,  welcome  thy  peo* 
pie,  I  will  henceforth  walk  with  yon.  O  that  there  may  be  in 
yon  snch  a  mind !  God  will  set  his  almighty  fiat  to  it,  and  seal 
it  with  the  broad  seal  of  heaven,  even  the  signet  at  his  holy 
Spirit.  Tes,  he  will,  though  you  have  been  walking  with,  and 
follo¥ring  after,  the  devices  and  desires  of  yonr  desperately 
wicked  hearts  ever  since  you  have  been  bom.  *  I,  the  high 
and  lofty  One,"  says  the  great  Jehovah/'  that  inhabiteth  eternity, 
will  dwell  with  the  humble  and  contrite  heart,  even  with  the 
man  that  trembletb  at  my  word."  The  blood,  even  the  precious 
blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  if  you  come  to  the  Father  in  and  through 
him,  shall  cleanse  you  firom  all  sin. 

But  the  text  leads  me  to  speak  to  you  that  are  saints  as  well 
as  to  you  that  are  open  and  unconverted  sinners.  I  need  not 
tell  you,  that  walking  with  God  is  not  only  honourable,  but  plea- 
sant and  profitable  also;  for  ye  know  it  by  happy  experience, 
and  will  find  it  more  so  and  more  every  day.  Only  give  me  leave 
to  stir  up  your  pure  minds  by  way  of  remembrance,  and  to  be- 
seech you  by  the  mercies  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus,  to  take  heed  to 
yourselves,  and  walk  closer  with  your  Crod  than  you  have  in 
days  past :  for  the  nearer  you  walk  with  God,  the  more  you  will 
enjoy  of  him  whose  presence  is  life,  and  be  the  better  prepared 
for  being  placed  at  his  right  hand,  where  are  pleasures  for  ever- 
more. O  do  not  follow  Jesus  afar  ofi*  I  O  be  not  so  formal,  so 
dead  and  stupid,  in  your  attendance  on  holy  ordinances !  Do 
not  so  shamefiilly  forsake  the  assembling  yourselves  together, 
or  be  so  niggardly  or  indifferent  about  the  things  of  God.  Re- 
member what  Jesus  says  of  the  church  of  Laodicea,  '*  Because 
thou  art  neither  hot  nor  cold,  I  will  spew  thee  out  of  my  mouth." 
Think  of  the  love  of  Jesus,  and  let  that  love  constrain  you  to 
keep  near  unto  him  ;  and  though  you  die  for  him,  do  not  deny 
him,  do  not  keep  at  a  distance  from  him  in  any  wise. 

One  word  to  my  brethren  in  the  ministry  that  are  here  pre- 
sent, and  I  have  done.  You  see,  ray  brethren,  my  heart  is 
full;  I  could  almost  say  it  is  too  big  to  speak,  and  yet  too  big 
to  be  silent,  without  dropping  a  word  to  you.  For  does  not  the 
text  speak  in  a  particular  manner  to  those  who  have  the  honour 
of  being  styled  the  ambassadors  of  Christ,  and  stewards  of  the 
mysteries  of  Grod.  I  observed  at  the  beginning  of  this  discourse, 
that  Enoch  in  all  probability  was  a  public  person,  and  a  flaming 
preacher.    Though  be  be  dead,  does  he  not  yet  speak  to  us,  to 


S8  Abraham's  offering  [ui. 

quicken  our  aseal,  and  make  us  more  active  in  the  service  of  our 
glorious  and  ever-blessed  Master?  How  did  Enoch  preach? 
How  did  Enoch  walk  with  Grod,  though  he  lived  in  a  wicked  and 
adulterous  generation?  Let  us  then  follow  him,  as  he  followed 
Jesus  Christ,  and  ere  long^  where  he  is,  there  shall  we  be  also. 
He  is  now  entered  into  his  rest:  yet  a  little  while  and  we  shall 
enter  into  ours,  and  that  too  much  sooner  than  he  did.  He  so- 
journed here  below  three  hundred  years;  but  blessed  be  God, 
the  days  of  man  are  now  shortened,  and  in  a  few  days  our  work 
will  be  over.  The  Judge  is  before  the  door:  he  that  cometh  will 
come,  and  will  not  tarry :  his  reward  is  with  him.  And  we  shall 
all  (if  we  are  zealous  for  the  Lord  of  hosts)  ere  long  shine  as  the 
stars  in  the  firmament,  in  the  kingdom  of  our  heavenly  Father, 
for  ever  and  ever.  To  him,  the  blessed  Jesus,  and  eternal  Spi- 
rit, be  all  honour  and  glory,  now,  and  to  all  eternity.  Amen,  and 
Anien. 


SERMON  IIL 

ABRAHAM'S   OFFERING    UP   HIS   SON    ISAAC. 

And  he  said,  Ixiy  not  thine  hand  upon  the  lad,  neither  do  thou  any 
thing  unto  him;fornow  I  know  that  thou  fearest  God,  seeing 
thou  hast  not  withheld  thy  son,  thine  only  son,  from  me. — 
Genesis  xxii.  12. 

The  great  Apostle  Paul,  in  one  of  his  epistles,  informs  us,  that 
'*  whatsoever  was  written  aforetime  was  written  for  our  learn- 
ing, that  we  through  patience  and  comfort  of  the  holy  scripture 
might  have  hope."  And  as  without  faith  it  is  impossible  to  please 
God,  or  be  accepted  in  Jesus  the  Son  of  his  love ;  we  may  be  as- 
sured^ that  whatever  instances  of  a  more  than  common  faith  are 
recorded  in  the  book  of  God,  they  were  more  immediately  de- 
signed by  the  holy  Spirit  for  our  learning  and  imitation,  upon 
whom  the  ends  of  the  world  are  come.  For  this  reason  the  au- 
thor of  the  epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  in  the  xith  chapter  mentions 
such  a  noble  catalogue  of  Old  Testament  saints  and  martyrs, 
'^  who  subdued  kingdoms,  wrought  righteousness,  stopped  the 
mouths  of  lions,"  &c.  ''and  are  gone  before  us  to  inherit  the  pro- 
mises." A  sufficient  confutation,  I  think,  of  their  error,  who 
lightly  esteem  the  Old  Testament  saints,  and  would  not  have 
them  mentioned  to  Christians,  as  persons  whose  faith  and  pa- 
tience we  are  called  upon  more  immediately  to  follow.  If  this 
were  true,  the  apostle  would  never  have  produced  such  a  cloud 
of  witnesses  out  of  the  Old  Testament  to  excite  the  Christians  of 
the  first,  and  consequently  purest  age  of  the  church,  to  continue 
stedfast  and  unmoveable  in  the  profession  of  their  faith.  Amidst 
this  catalogue  of  saints,  methinks  the  patriarch  Abraham  shines 
the  brightest,  and  dififers  from  the  others,  as  one  star  diflereth 
from  another  star  in  glory ;  for  he  shone  with  such  distinguished 
lustre,  that  he  was  caUed  the  ''  friend  of  God,"  "  the  father  of  the 


III.]  UP   HIS   SON   ISAAC.  58 

faithfnl;*'  and  those  who  believe  on  CSirist,  are  said  to  be  ''sons 
and  dai^;hters  of,"  and  to  be  ''  blessed  witli,  faithful  Abraham.'^ 
Many  tnals  of  his  faith  did  God  send  this  is^eat  and  good  man 
alter  he  had  commanded  him  to  get  ont  from  his  country  and 
from  bis  kindred  onto  a  land  whidi  be  should  shew  him;  but  the 
last  was  the  most  severe  of  all,  I  mean  that  of  offering  up  bis 
only  son.  This,  by  the  divine  assistance,  I  propose  to  make  the 
subject  of  your  present  meditation,  and,  by  way  of  conclusion, 
to  draw  some  practical  infenmces,  as  God  shall  enable  me,  from 
this  instructive  story. 

The  sacred  penman  begins  the  narrative  thus:  verse  1. ''  And 
it  came  to  pass,  after  these  things,  God  did  tempt  Abraham.*' 
After  these  things,  that  is,  after  he  had  underwent  many  severe 
trials  before,  after  be  was  old,  full  of  days,  and  might  flatter  him- 
self perhaps  that  the  troubles  and  toils  of  life  were  now  finished ; 
"  after  these  things  God  did  tempt  Abraham.'"  Christians  you 
know  not  what  tnals  you  may  meet  with  before  you  die :  not- 
withstanding you  may  have  sufiered^  and  been  tried  much  alrea- 
^y>  yet,  it  may  be,  a  greater  measure  is  still  behind,  which  you 
are  to  fill  up.  ''  Be  not  high-minded,  but  fear."  Our  last  trials, 
in  all  probability,  will  be  the  greatest :  and  we  can  never  say  our 
warfare  is  accomplished,  or  our  trials  finished,  till  we  bow  down 
our  heads,  and  give  up  the  ghost.  ''  And  it  came  to  pass  after 
these  things,  that  God  did  tempt  Abraham." 

'^  Grod  did  tempt  Abraham."  But  can  the  scripture  contradict 
itself?  Does  not  the  apostle  James  tell  us  'Uhat  God  tempts 
no  man;"  and  God  does  tempt  no  man  to  evil^  or  on  purpose  to 
draw  him  into  sin;  for  when  a  man  is  thus  tempted,  be  is  drawn 
away  of  his  own  heart's  lust,  and  enticed.  But  in  another  sense 
God  may  be  said  to  tempt,  I  mean,  to  try  his  servants ;  and  in 
this  sense  we  are  to  understand  that  passage  of  Matthew,  where 
we  are  told  that  ^*  Jesus  was  led  up  by  the  Spirit  (the  good 
Spirit)  into  the  wilderness,  to  be  tempted  of  the  devil."  And  our 
Lord,  in  that  excellent  form  of  prayer  which  he  has  been 
pleased  to  give  us,  does  not  require  us  to  pray  that  we  may  not 
absolutely  be  led  into  temptation,  but  delivered  from  the  evil  of 
it ;  whence  we  may  plainly  infer,  that  God  sees  it  fit  sometimes  to 
lead  us  into  temptation,  that  is,  to  bring  us  into  such  circum- 
stances as  will  try  our  faith  and  other  christian  graces.  In  this 
sense  we  are  to  understand  the  expression  before  us ; ''  God  did 
tempt  or  try  Abraham." 

How  Giid  was  pleased  to  reveal  his  will  at  this  time  to  his 
faitbful  servant,  whether  by  the  iS»A€cAmaA,  or  divine  appearance, 
or  by  a  small  still  voice  as  he  spake  to  Elijah,  or  by  a  whisper 
like  that  of  the  Spirit  to  Philip,  when  he  commanded  him  to  go 
join  himself  to  the  eunuch's  chariot,  we  are  not  told,  nor  is  it 
material  to  inquire.  It  is  enough  that  we  are  informed,  God 
said  unto  him  "  Abraham;"  and  that  Abraham  knew  it  was  the 
voice  of  Grod :  for  he  said,  *'  Behold  here  I  am."  O  what  a  holy 
familiuity  ^if  I  may  so  speak)  is  there  between  God  and  those 
hcdy  souls  uat  are  united  to  him  by  faith  in  Jesus  Christ!  God 


60  ABRAHAM'S  OFFERING  [ill. 

says,  Abraham;  and  Abraham  said  Qt  should  seem  without  the 
least  surprise^ ''  Behold  here  I  sua"  Being  reconciled  to  God  by 
the  dea^  ancl  obedience  of  Christ,  which  he  rejoiced  in,  and  saw 
l^fai^  afar  off;  he  did  not,  like  guilty  Adam,  seek  the  trees  of 
the  garden  to  hide  himself  from,  but  takes  pleasure  in  convers- 
ing with  Grod,  and  talketh  with  him  as  a  man  talketh  with  his 
friend.  O  that  Christless  sinners  knew  what  it  is  to  have  fellow- 
ship with  the  Father  and  the  Son !  They  would  envy  the  hap- 
piness of  saints,  and  count  it  all  joy  to  be  termed  enthusiasts 
and  fools  for  Christ's  sake. 

But  what  does  God  say^to  Abraham?  Verse  2.  ''Take  now 
thy  son,  thine  only  son  Isaac,  whom  thon  lovest,  and  get  thee 
into  the  land  ot  Moriah,  and  offer  him  there  for  a  burnt-offering 
upon  one  of  the  mountains  which  I  shall  t^  thee  of." 

Every  word  deserves  our  particular  observation.  Whatever 
he  was  to  do,  he  must  do  it  now,  immediately,  without  conferring 
with  flesh  and  blood,  but  what  must  he  do !  ''  Take  now  thy  son." 
Had  God  said,  take  now  a  firstling,  or  choicest  lamb  or  beast  of 
thy  flock,  and  offer  it  up  for  a  burnt-offering,  it  would  not  have 
Appeared  so  ghastly;  but  for  God  to  say,  **  take  now  thy  son, 
and  offer  him  up  for  a  burnt-offering,"  one  would  have  imagined, 
was  enough  to  staler  the  strongest  faith.  But  this  is  not  all : 
it  must  not  only  be  a  son,  but ''  thine  only  son  Isaac,  whom  thou 
lovest."  If  it  must  be  a  son,  and  not  a  beast,  that  must  be  of- 
fer^, why  will  not  Ishmael  do,  the  son  of  the  bond-woman  ? 
No,  it  must  be  his  only  son,  the  heir  of  all,  his  Isaac,  by  inter- 
pretation laughter,  the  son  of  his  old  age,  in  whom  his  soul  de- 
&ghted, ''  whom  thou  lovest,"  says  God,  in  whose  life  his  own 
was  wrapped  up:  and  this  son,  this  only  son,  this  Isaac,  the  son 
of  his  love,  must  be  taken  now,  even  now,  without  delay,  and  be 
offered  up  by  his  own  father,  for  a  burnt-offering  upon  one  of 
the  mountains  of  the  which  God  would  tell  him. 

Well  might  the  apostle,  speaking  of  this  man  of  God,  say,  that 
*'  against  hope  he  believed  in  hope,  and  being  strong  in  faith, 
gave  glory  to  Grod :"  for,  had  he  not  been  blessed  with  faith  which 
man  never  before  had,  he  must  have  refnsed  to  comply  with  this 
severe  command.  For  how  many  arguments  might  nature  sug- 
gest to  prove  that  such  a  command  could  never  come  from  God, 
or  to  excuse  himself  from  obeying  it?  "  What !  (might  the  good 
man  have  said)  butcher  my  own  child!  it  is  contrary  to  the  very 
law  of  nature :  much  more  to  butcher  my  dear  son  Isaac,  in 
whose  seed  God  himself  has  assured  me  of  a  numerous  posterity. 
But  supposing  I  could  give  up  my  own  affections,  and  be  willing 
to  part  with  tum,  though  I  love  him  so  dearly,  yet,  if  I  murder 
him,  what  will  become  of  God's  promise?  Besides,  I  am  now 
like  a  city  built  upon  a  hill ;  I  shine  as  a  light  in  the  world,  in 
the  midst  of  a  crooked  and  perverse  generation:  how  then  shall 
I  cause  God's  name  to  be  blasphemed,  how  shall  I  become  a 
by- word  among  the  heathen,  if  they  hear  that  I  have  committed 
a  crime  which  they  abhor !  But,  above  all,  what  will  Sarah  my 
wife  say?    How  can  I  ever  return  to  her  again,  after  I  have 


III.I  UP   HIS   SOK  ISAAC.  61 

imbrued  my  hands  in  my  dear  child's  Uood?  O  that  God  would 
pardon  me  in  this  thing,  or  take  my  life  in  the  place  of  my  son's." 
Thos,  I  say,  Abraham  might  haye  argued,  and  that  too  seem- 
ingly with  great  reason,  against  complying  with  the  divine  corn- 
mand.  But  as  before  by  faith  he  considered  not  the  deadness 
of  Sarah's  womb,  when  she  was  past  age,  but  believed  on  him 
who  said, ''  Sarah  thy  wife  shall  bear  thee  a  son  indeed ;"  sa 
now,  being  convinced  that  the  same  God  spoke  to  and  com- 
manded Um  to  offer  up  that  son,  and  knowing  that  God  was 
able  to  raise  him  from  the  dead,  without  delay  he  obeys  the 
heavenly  caU. 

O  that  unbelievers  would  learn  of  faithful  Abraham,  and  be- 
lieve whatever  is  revealed  from  God,  thought  they  cannot  fully 
comprehend  it!  Abraham  knew  God  commanded  htm  to  offev 
up  his  son,  and  therefore  believed,  notwithstanding  carnal  rea- 
soning might  suggest  many  objections.  We  have  sufficient  tes- 
timony  that  God  has  spoken  to  us  by  his  Son ;  why  should  we  not 
also  believe,  though  many  things  in  the  New  Testament  are 
above  our  reason?  For,  where  reason  ends,  faith  begins.  And, 
however  infidels  may  style  themselves  reasoners,  of  ail  men  they 
are  die  most  unreasonable :  for  is  it  not  contrary  to  all  reason,  to 
measure  an  infinite  by  a  finite  understanding,  or  think  to  find 
out  the  mysteries  of  godliness  to  perfection? 

But  to  return  to  the  patriarch  Abraham :  we  ebserved  before 
what  plausible  objections  he  might  have  made;  but  he  answered 
not  a  single  word :  no,  without  replying  against  his  Maker,  we 
are  told,  verse  3.  that  "  Abraham  rose  up  early  in  the  morning, 
and  saddled  his  ass,  and  took  two  of  his  young  men  with  him, 
and  Isaac  his  son,  and  clave  the  wood  for  the  burnt-offering,  and 
rose  up  and  went  unto  the  place  of  which  God  had  told  him." 

From  this  verse  we  may  gather,  that  God  spoke  to  Abraham 
in  a  dream,  or  vision  of  the  night :  for  it  is  said,  he  **  rose  up 
early."  Perhaps  it  was  near  the  fourth  watch  of  die  night,  just 
before  break  of  day,  when  God  said,  ''  take  now  thy  son ;"  and 
Abraham  rises  up  early  to  do  so;  as  I  doubt  not  but  he  used  to 
rise  early  to  offer  up  his  morning-sacrifice  of  praise  and  thanks- 
giving. It  is  often  remarked  of  people  in  the  Old  Testament, 
that  tbey  rose  early  in  the  morning ;  and  particularly  of  our  Lord 
in  die  New,  that  he  rose  a  great  while  before  day  to  pray.  The 
morning  befiriends  devotion ;  and,  if  people  cannot  use  so  much 
self-de^Ud  as  to  rise  early  to  pray,  I  know  not  how  they  will  be 
able  to  die  at  a  stake  (if  caHed  to  it)  for  Jesus  Christ. 

The  humility  as  wdlas  the  piety  of  the  patriarch  is  observ- 
able :  he  saddUed  his  own  ass,  (great  men  should  be  humble ;) 
and  to  shew  bis  sincerity,  though  he  took  two  of  his  young  men 
with  him,  and  Isaac  his  son,  yet  he  keeps  his  design  a  secret 
from  them  all :  nay,  he  does  not  so  much  as  tell  SaiaJi  his  wife : 
for  he  knew  not  but  she  might  be  a  snare  unto  him  in  this  affair ; 
and,  as  Rebekah  afterwards,  on  another  occasion,  advised  Jacob 
to  flee,  so  Sanb  also  might  persuade  Jacob  to  hide  himself;  or 
the  young  men,  had  they  known  of  it,  might  have  forced  him 


62  ABRAHAM'S   OFFERING  [ill. 

away,  as  in  after -ages  the  soldiers  rescued  Jonathan  out  of  the 
bands  of  Saul.  But  Abraham  sought  no  such  evasion,  and 
therefore,  like  an  Israelite  indeed,  in  whom  there  was  no  guile, 
he  himself  resolutely  **  clave  the  wood  for  the  burnt-offering, 
rose  up  and  went  unto  the  place  of  which  God  had  told  him." 
In  the  second  verse  God  commanded  him  to  offer  up  his  son  upon 
one  of  the  mountains  which  he  would  tell  him  of.  He  command- 
ed him  to  offer  his  son  up,  but  would  not  then  directly  tell  him 
the  place  where:  this  was  to  keep  him  dependent  and  watching 
unto  prayer :  for  there  is  nothing  like  being  kept  waiting  upon 
God ;  and,  if  we  do,  assuredly  God  will  reveal  himself  unto  us 
yet  farther  in  his  own  time.  Let  us  practise  what  we  know,  follow 
providence  so  far  as  we  can  see  already ;  and  what  we  know  not, 
what  we  see  not  as  yet,  let  us  only  be  found  in  the  way  of  duty, 
and  the  Lord  will  reveal  even  that  unto  us.  Abraham  knew  not 
directly  where  he  was  to  offer  up  his  son ;  but  he  rises  up  and 
gets  forward,  and  behold  now  God  shews  him :  "And  he  went  to 
the  place  of  which  God  had  told  him."  Let  us  go,  and  do 
likewise. 

Verse  4.  "  Then  on  the  third  day  Abraham  lifted  up  his  eyes, 
and  saw  the  place  afar  off.'' 

So  that  the  place,  of  which  God  had  told  him,  was  no  less  than 
three  days'  journey  distant  from  the  place  where  Grod  first  ap- 
peared to  him,  and  commanded  him  to  take  his  son.  Was  not 
this  to  try  his  faith,  and  to  let  him  see  that  what  be  did,  was  not 
merely  from  a  sudden  pang  of  devotion,  but  a  matter  of  choice 
and  deliberation?  But  who  can  tell  what  the  aged  patriarch 
felt  during  these  three  days?  Strong  as  he  was  in  faith,  I  am 
persuaded  his  bowels  often  yearned  over  bis  dear  son  Isaac. 
Methinks  I  see  the  good  old  man  walking  with  his  dear  child  in 
his  hand,  and  now  and  then  looking  upon  him,  loving  him,  and 
then  turning  aside  to  weep.  And,  perhaps,  sometimes  he  stays 
a  little  behind  to  pour  out  bis  heart  before  God,  for  he  had  no 
mortal  to  tell  his  case  to.  Then,  methinks,  I  see  him  join  his 
son  and  servants  again,  and  talking  to  them  of  the  things  per- 
taining to  the  kingdom  of  God,  as  they  walked  by  the  way.  At 
length,  "  on  the  third  day,  he  lifts  up  his  eyes,  and  saw  the  place 
afar  off."  And  to  shew  that  he  was  yet  sincerely  resolved  to  do 
whatsoever  the  Lord  required  of  him,  he  even  now  will  not  dis- 
cover his  design  to  his  servants,  but "  said  (verse  5.)  to  his 
young  men,"  (as  we  should  say  to  our  worldly  thoughts,  when 
about  to  tread  the  courts  of  the  Lord's  house,)  *^  Abide  you  here 
with  the  ass ;  and  I  and  the  lad  will  go  up  yonder  and  worship, 
and  come  again  to  you."  This  was  a  sufficient  reason  for  their 
staying  behind ;  and,  it  being  their  master's  custom  to  go  fre- 
quently to  worship,  they  could  have  no  suspicion  of  what  he  was 
going  about.  And  by  Abraham's  saying,  that  he  and  the  lad 
would  come  again,  I  am  apt  to  think  he  believed  Grod  would 
raise  him  from  the  dead,  if  so  be  he  permitted  him  to  offer  his 
child  np  for  a  bumt»offering.  However  that  be,  he  is  yet  resolv- 
ed to  obey  God  to  the  uttermost;  and  therefore. 


11I.J  UP   HIS   SON    ISAAC.  G3 

Verse  6.  "  Abraham  took  the  wood  or  the  burnt-offering,  and 
Imd  it  upon  Isaac  his  son ;  and  he  took  fire  in  his  hand,  and  a 
knife,  and  they  went  both  of  them  together/'  Little  did  Isaac 
think  that  he  was  to  be  offered  on  that  very  wood  which  he  was 
carrying  upon  his  shoulders ;  and  therefore  Isaac  innocently  and 
with  a  holy  freedom  (foi'  good  men  should  not  keep  their  children 
at  too  great  a  distance)  "  spake  unto  Abraham  his  father,  and 
said.  My  father;  and  he  (with  equal  affection  and  holy  conde- 
scension) said.  Here  am  1,  my  son."  And  to  shew  how  careful 
Abraham  had  been  (as  all  Christian  parents  ought  to  be)  to  in- 
struct his  son  Isaac  how  to  sacrifice  to  God,  like  a  youth  trained 
up  in  the  way  wherein  he  should  go;  Isaac  said,  ^'Behold  the 
fire  and  the  wood;  but  where  is  the  lamb  for  a  burnt-offering?" 
How  beautiful  is  early  piety !  how  amiable  to  hear  young  peo- 
ple ask  questions  about  sacrificing  to  God  in  an  acceptable  way; 
Isaac  knew  very  well  that  a  lamb  was  wanting,  and  that  a  lamb 
was  necessary  for  a  proper  sacrifice:  *' Behold  the  fire  and  the 
wood ;  but  where  is  the  lamb  for  a  burnt-offering?*'  Toung men 
and  maidens,  learn  of  him. 

Hitherto,  it  is  plain,  Isaac  knew  nothing  of  his  father's  de-^ 
sign ;  but  I  believe,  by  what  his  father  said  in  answer  to  his 
question,  that  now  was  the  time  Abraham  revealed  it  unto  him. 

Verse  8.  "  And  Abraham  said.  My  son,  God  will  provide  him- 
self a  lamb  for  a  burnt-offering."  Some  think  that  Abraham  by 
faith  saw  the  Lord  Jesus  afar  off,  and  here  spake  prophetically 
of  that  Lamb  of  God  already  slain  in  decree,  and  hereafter  to  be 
actually  offered  up  for  sinners.  This  was  a  Lamb  of  God's  pro- 
viding indeed  (we  dared  not  have  thought  of  it)  to  satisfy  his 
own  justice,  and  to  render  him  just  in  justifjing  the  ungodly. 
What  is  all  our  fire  and  wood,  the  best  preparation  and  perform- 
ances we  can  make  or  present,  unless  God  had  provided  himself 
this  Lamb  for  a  burnt-offering?  He  could  not  away  with  them. 
The  words  will  bear  this  interpretation.  But  whatever  Abraham 
might  intend,  I  cannot  but  think  he  here  made  an  application 
and  acquainted  his  son  of  God's  dealing  with  his  soul:  and  at 
length  with  tears  in  his  eyes,  and  the  utmost  affection  in  his 
heart,  cried  out,  '^  Thou  art  to  be  the  lamb,  my  son;"  Grod  has 
commanded  me  to  provide  thee  for  a  burnt-offering,  and  to  offer 
thee  upon  the  mountain  which  we  are  now  ascending.  And  as 
it  appears  from  a  subsequent  verse,  Isaac,  convinced  that  it  was 
the  divine  will,  made  no  resistance  at  all :  for  it  is  said,  **  They 
went  both  of  them  together"  and  again  when  we  are  told  that 
Abraham  bound  Isaac,  we  do  'not  hear  of  his  complaining,  or 
endeavouring  to  escape,  which  he  might  have  done,  being  (as 
some  think)  near  thirty  years  of  age,  and,  it  is  plain,  capable  of 
carrying  wood  enough  for  a  burnt-offering.  But  he  was  par- 
taker of  the  like  precious  faith  with  his  aged  father,  and  there- 
fore is  as  willing  to  be  offered,  as  Abraham  is  to  offer  him :  and 
"  so  they  w^it  both  of  them  together." 

Verse  9.  At  length  ''  they  came  to  the  place  of  which  Grod 
had  told  Abraham.    He  built  an  altar  there,  and  laid  the  woo4 


G4  ABRAHAM'S   OFFERING  [ill. 

in  order,  and  bonnd  Isaac  his  son,  and  laid  him  ou  the  altar 
upon  the  wood." 

And  here  let  us  pause  a  while,  and  by  faith  take  a  view  of  the 
plaee  where  the  father  has  laid  him.  I  doubt  not  but  the  blessed 
angels  hovered  r6und  the  altar,  and  sang,  ^  Glory  be  to  God  in 
the  highest/'  for  giving  such  faith  to  man.  Come,  all  ye  tender- 
hearted parents,  who  know  what  it  is  to  look  over  a  dving  child : 
fSeincy  that  you  saw  the  altar  erected  before  you,  and  tl^  wood 
laid  in  order,  and  the  beloved  Isaac  bound  upon  it :  fancy  that 
you  saw  the  aged  parent  standing  by  weeping.  (For  why  may 
we  not  suppose  that  Abraham  wept,  since  Jesus  himself  wept 
at  the  grave  of  Lazarus?)  O  what  pious,  endearing  expressions 
passed  now  alternately  between  the  father  and  the  son !  Jose- 
phus  records  a  pathetic  speech  made  by  each,  whether  genuine  I 
know  not :  but  methinks  I  see  the  tears  trickle  down  Uie  patri- 
arch Abraham's  cheeks;  and  out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart, 
he  cries,  'Adieu,  adieu,  my  son:  the  Lord  gave  thee  to  me, and 
the  Lord  calls  thee  away ;  blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord ; 
adieu,  my  Isaac,  my  only  son,  whom  I  love  as  my  own  soul; 
adieu,  adieu.'  I  see  Isaac  at  the  same  time  meekly  resigning 
himself  into  his  heavenly  Father's  hands,  and  praying  to  the 
Most  High  to  strengthen  his  earthly  parent  to  strike  the  stroke. 
But  why  do  I  attempt  to  describe  what  either  son  or  father  felt? 
It  is  impossible:  we  may  indeed  form  some  tieiint  idea  of,  but 
shall  never  ftilly  comprehend  it,  till  we  come  and  sit  down  with 
them  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  and  hear  them  tell  the  pleasing 
story  over  again.  Hasten,  O  Lord,  that  blessed  time !  O  let 
thy  kingdom  come ! 

And  now  the  fatal  blow  is  going  to  be  given.  ''  And  Abraham 
stretched  forth  bis  hand,  and  took  the  knife  to  slay  his  son." 
But  do  you  not  think  he  intended  to  turn  away  his  head  when  he 
-  gave  the  Mow?  Nay,  why  may  we  not  suppose  he  sometimes 
drew  his  hand  in,  tStet  it  was  stretched  out,  willing  to  take 
another  last  fttrewefl  <^  his  beloved  Isaac,  and  desirous  to  defer 
it  a  little,  though  resolved  at  last  to  strike  home  ?  Be  that  as  it 
will,  his  arm  is  now  stretched  out,  the  knife  is  in  his  hand,  and 
he  is  about  to  put  it  to  his  dear  son's  throat. 

But  sing,  O  heavens!  and  rejoice,  O earth t  Man's  extremity 
is  God's  opportunity :  for  behold,  just  as  the  knife,  in  all  pro- 
bability, was  near  his  throat,  verse  11.  ''the  angel  of  the  Lord 
(or  rather  the  Lord  of  angels,  Jesus  Christ,  the  Ajigel  of  the  ever- 
lasting covenant)  called  unto  him,  (probably  in  a  very  audible 
manner)  from  heaven,  and  said,  Abraham,  Abraham.  (The  word 
is  doubled,  to  engage  his  attention ;  and  perhaps  the  suddenness 
of  the  call  made  him  draw  back  his  hand  just  as  he  was  going  to 
strike  his  son.)    And  Abraham  said.  Here  am  I." 

'*  And  he  said,  lay  not  thine  hand  upon  the  lad,  neither  do 
thou  any  thing  unto  him :  for  now  I  know  that  thou  fearest  Grod, 
seeing  thou  hast  not  withheld  thy  son,  thine  only  son,  from  me." 

Here  then  it  was  that  Abraham  received  his  son  Isaac  from 
the  dead  in  a  figure.    He  was  in  effect  offered  upon  the  altar. 


III.]  UP   HIS  SOK  ISAAC.         «  6S 

and  Crod  looked  upon  him  as  ofTered  and  given  unto  him.  NoW 
it  was  that  Abraham's  faith^  being  tried»  was  found  more  pre^ 
cions  than  gold  purified  seven  times  in  the  fire.  Now  as  a 
reward  of  grace,  tiiough  not  of  debt,  for  this  signal  act  of  obedi- 
ence>  by  an  oath,  God  gives  and  confirms  the  promise,  **  that  in 
his  seea  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  should  be  blessed,"  verse  17, 
18.  With  what  comfort  may  we  suppose  the  good  old  man  and 
his  son  went  down  from  the  mount,  and  returned  unto  the  young 
men !  With  what  joy  may  we  imagine  he  went  home ;  and  related 
all  that  had  passed  to  Sarah  1  And  above  all,  with  what  tri- 
umph is  be  now  exulting  in  the  paradise  of  Grod,  and  adoring 
rich,  free,  distinguishing,  electing,  everlasting  love,  which  alone 
made  hint  to  differ  from  the  rest  of  mankind,  and  rendered  him 
worthy  of  that  title  which  he  will  have  so  long  as  the  sun  and 
the  moon  endure,  *'  The  father  of  the  faithful !" 

But  let  us  now  draw  our  eyes  from  the  creature,  and  do  what 
Abraham,  if  he  were  present,  would  direct  to ;  I  mean,  fix  them 
on  the  Creator,  God  blessed  for  evermore. 

I  see  your  hearts  affected,  I  see  your  eyes  weep.  (And,  in- 
deed, who  can  refrain  weeping  at  the  relation  of  such  a  story?) 
But,  behold,  I  shew  you  a  mystery,  hid  under  the  sacrifice  of 
Abraham's  only  son,  which,  unless  your  hearts  are  hardened, 
must  cause  you  to  weep  tears  of  love,  and  that  plentifully  too. 
I  would  willingly  hope  you  even  prevent  me  here,  and  are  ready 
to  say,  **  It  is  the  love  of  God,  in  giving  Jesus  Christ  to  die  for 
our  sins.**  Yes,  that  is  it.  And  yet  perhaps  you  find  your 
hearts,  at  the  mentioning  of  this,  not  so  much  afiected.  Let  this 
e<mvince  you,  that  we  are  all  fallen  creatures,  and  that  we  do 
not  love  God  or  Christ  as  we  ought  to  do :  for,  if  you  admire 
Abraham  offering  up  his  Isaac,  how  much  more  ought  you 
to  extol,  magnify,  and  adore  the  love  of  God,  who  so  loved  the 
world  as  to  give  his  only  begotten  Son  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord, 
"  that  who  oever  believeth  on  him  should  not  perish,  but  have 
ererlastlng  life?"  May  we  not  well  cry  out.  Now  know  we,  O 
Lord,  that  thou  hast  loved  us,  since  thou  hast  not  withheld  thy 
Son,  thine  only  Son,  from  us?  Abraham  was  God's  creature, 
(and  God  was  Abraham's  friend,)  and  therefore  under  the  highest 
obligation  to  surrender  up  his  Isaac.  But  O  stupendous  love ! 
whibt  we  were  his  enemies,  God  sent  forth  his  Son,  made  of  a 
woman,  made  under  the  law,  that  he  mi^ht  become  a  curse  for 
«8.  O  the  fireeness,  as  well  as  the  infinity,  of  the  love  of 
God  our  Father !  It  is  unsearchable :  I  am  lost  in  contemplat- 
ing it ;  it  is  past  finding  out.  Thiuk,  O  believers,  think  of  the 
love  of  God,  in  giving  Jesus  Christ  to  bo  a  propitiation  for  our 
sins.  And  when  you  hear  how  Abraham  built  an  altar,  and  laid 
the  wood  in  order,  and  bound  Isaac  his  son,  and  laid  him  on  the 
altar  upon  the  wood;  think  how  your  heavenly  Father  bound 
Jesus  Christ  his  only  Son,  and  offered  him  upon  the  altar  of  hi^ 
justice,  and  laid  upon  him  the  iniquities  of  us  all.  When  you 
read  of  Abraham's  stretching  forth  his  hand  to  slay  his  son, 
think,  O  thiiJ^,  how  God  actually  suffered  his  son  to  be  slain, 


06  abraham'8  offering  Lii'* 

that  we  might  live  for  evermore.  Do  you  read  of  Isaac  carrying 
the  wood  upon  his  shoulders,  upon  which  he  was  to  be  offered  ? 
Let  this  lead  you  to  mount  Calvary  (this  very  mount  of  Moriah 
where  Isaac  was  offered,  as  some  think)  and  take  a  view  of  the 
antitype,  Jesus  Christ  the  Son  of  God,  bearing  and  ready  to  sink 
under  the  weight  of  that  cross  on  which  he  was  to  hang  for  us. 
Do  you  admire  Isaac  so  freely  consenting  to  die,  though  a  crea- 
ture, and  therefore  obliged  to  go  when  God  called :  O  do  not  for- 
get to  admire  infinitely  more  Uie  dear  Lord  Jesus,  that  promised 
seed^  who  willingly  said,  "  Lo,  I  come,"  though  under  no  obliga- 
tion so  to  do, "  to  do  thy  will,"  to  obey  and  die  for  men, "  O  God !" 
Did  you  weep  just  now,  when  I  bid  you  fancy  you  saw  the  altar, 
and  the  wood  laid  in  order,  and  Isaac  laid  bound  on  the  altar? 
Look  by  faith,  behold  the  blessed  Jesus,  our  all-glorious  Emma- 
nuel, not  bound,  but  nailed  on  an  accursed  tree :  see  how  he  hangs 
crowned  with  thorns,  and  had  in  derision  of  all  that  are  round 
about  him :  see  how  the  thorns  pierce  him,  and  how  the  blood 
in  purple  streams  trickle  down  his  sacred  temples !  Hark  how 
the  God  of  nature  groans!  See  how  he  bows  his  bead,  and  at 
length  humanity  ^ves  up  the  ghost !  Isaac  is  saved,  but  Jesus, 
the  God  of  Isaac,  dies :  a  ram  is  offered  up  in  Isaac's  room,  but 
Jesus  has  no  substitute;  Jesus  must  bleed,  Jesus  must  die;  God 
the  Father  provided  this  Lamb  for  himself  from  all  eternity.  He 
must  be  offered  in  time,  or  man  must  be  damned  for  evermore. 
And  now,  where  sgre  your  tears?  Shall  I  say,  refrain  your 
voice  from  weeping?  No;  rather  let  me  exhort  you  to  look  to 
him  whom  you  have  pierced,  and  mourn,  as  a  woman  moumeth 
ibr  her  first-bom :  for  we  have  been  the  betrayers,  we  have  been 
tiie  murderers^  of  this  Lord  of  glory ;  and  shall  we  not  bewail 
those  sins  which  brought  the  blessed  Jesus  to  the  accursed  tree  ? 
Having  so  much  done,  so  nluch  suffered  for  us,  so  much  forgiven, 
shall  we  not  love  much?  O !  let  us  love  Him  with  all  our  hearts, 
and  rainds^  and  strength,  and  glorify  him  in  our  souls  and  bodies, 
for  they  are  his.  Which  leads  me  to  a  second  inference  I  shall 
draw  from  the  foregoing  discourse. 

From  hence  we  may  learn  the  nature  of  true  justifying  faith. 
Whoever  understands  and  preaches  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus, 
must  acknowledge  that  salvation  is  God  s  free  gift,  and  that  we 
are  saved,  not  by  any  or  all  the  works  of  righteousness  which 
we  have  done,  or  can  do:  no ;  we  can  neither  wholly  nor  in  part 
justify  ourselves  in  the  sight  of  God.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is 
our  righteousness ;  and  if  we  are  accepted  with  God,  it  must  bo 
only  in  and  through  the  personal  righteousness,  the  active  and 
passive  obedience,  of  Jesus  Christ  his  beloved  Son.  This  righ- 
teousness must  be  imputed,  or  counted  over  to  us,  and  applied 
by  faith  to  our  hearts,  or  else  we  can  in  no  wise  be  justified  in 
God*s  sight :  and  that  very  moment  a  sinner  is  enabled  to  lay  hold 
on  Christ's  righteousness  by  faith,  he  is  freely  justified  from  all 
his  sins,  and  shall  never  enter  into  condemnation,  notwithstand- 
ing he  was  a  fire-brand  of  hell  before.  Thus  it  was  that  Abra- 
ham,  was  justified  before  he  did  any  good  work :  he  was  enabled 


II1.J  UP  HIS  SON   ISAAC.  6f 

to  believe  on  the  Lord  Christ ;  it  was  accoanted  to  him  for  righ- 
teoQsness;  that  b,  Christ's  righteoasness  was  made  over  to  him> 
and  so  accounted  his.  This^  this  is  gospel ;  this  is  the  only  way 
of  finding  acceptance  with  C^od :  good  works  have  nothing  to  do 
with  onr  justification  in  his  sight.  We  are  justified  by  faith  alone> 
as  saith  the  article  of  our  church ;  agreeable  to  which  the  apostle 
Paul  says,  '^  By  grace  ye  are  saved,  through  faith ;  and  that  not 
of  yourselves ;  it  is  the  gift  of  God/'  Notwithstanding,  good 
works  have  their  proper  place :  they  justify  our  faith,  though  not 
our  persons;  they  follow  it,  and  evidence  our  justification  in  the 
sight  of  men.  Hence  it  is  that  the  apostle  James  asks.  Was  not 
Abraham  justified  by  works?  (alluding  no  doubt  to  the  story  on 
which  we  have  been  discoursing,)  that  is,  did  he  not  prove  he  was 
in  a  justified  state,  because  his  faith  was  productive  of  good 
works  ?  This  declarative  justification  in  the  sight  of  men,  is 
what  is  directly  to  be  understood  in  the  words  of  the  text;  ^  Now 
know  I  (says  Grod)  that  thou  fearest  me,  since  thou  hast  not 
withheld  thy  son,  thine  only  son,  from  me."  Not  but  that  God 
knew  it  before ;  but  this  is  spoken  in  condescension  to  our  weak 
capacities,  and  plainly  shews,  that  his  offering  up  his  son  was 
accepted  with  God  as  an  evidence  of  the  sincerity  of  his  faith, 
and,  for  this,  was  left  on  record  to  future  ages.  Hence  then  yoti 
may  learn  whether  you  are  blessed  with,  and  are  the  sons  and 
daughters  of,  faitliful  Abraham.  You  say  you  believe ;  you  talk 
of  free  grace  and  free  justification :  you  do  well ;  the  devils  also 
believe,  and  tremble.  But  has  the  faith,  which  you  pretend  to, 
influenced  your  hearts,  renewed  your  souls,  and,  like  Abraham's, 
worked  by  love?^  Are  your  affections,  like  his,  set  on  things 
above?  Are  you  heavenly-minded,  and,  like  him,  do  you  con- 
fess yourselves  strangers  and  pilgrims  on  the  earth  ?  In  short, 
has  your  faith  enabled  you  to  overcome  the  world,  and  strength- 
ened you  to  give  up  your  Isaacs,  your  laughter,  your  most  be- 
loved lusts,  friends,  pleasures,  and  profits,  for  God?  If  so,  take 
the  comfort  of  it;  for  justly  may  you  say,  "We  know  assuredly, 
that  we  do  fear  and  love  God,  or  rather  are  loved  of  him."  But 
if  you  are  only  talking  believers,  have  only  a  faith  of  the  head, 
and  never  felt  the  power  of  it  in  your  hearts,  however  you  may 
bolster  yourselves  up,  and  say,  "  We  have  Abraham  for  our  fa- 
ther, or  Christ  is  our  Saviour ;  unless  you  get  a  faith  of  the  heart, 
a  faith  working  by  love,  you  shall  never  sit  with  Abraham,  Isaac, 
Jacob,  or  Jesus  Christ,  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 

But  I  must  draw  one  more  inference,  and  with  that  I  shall 
conclude. 

Learn,  O  saints !  from  what  has  been  said,  to  sit  loose  to  all 
your  worldly  comforts ;  and  stand  ready  prepared  to  part  with 
every  thing,  when  God  shall  require  it  at  your  hand.  Some  of 
you  perhaps  may  have  friends,  who  are  to  you  as  your  own  sonls ; 
and  others  may  have  children,  in  whose  lives  your  own  lives  are 
bound  up:  all  I  believe  have  their  Isaacs,  their  particular  de*" 
lights  of  some  kind  or  other.  Labour,  for  Christ's  sake,  labour, 
ye  80D8  and  daughters  of  Abraham,  to  resign  them  daily  in  affec- 

d3 


88  THB  GRBAT   DUTY   OP  [iV. 

tion  to  Grody  that,  when  he  shall  require  you  really  to  sacrifice 
them,  you  may  not  confer  with  flesh  and  blood,  any  more  than 
the  blessed  patriarch  now  before  us.  And  as  for  you  that  have 
been  in  any  measure  tried  like  unto  him,  let  his  example  encou- 
rage and  comfort  you.  Remember,  Abraham  your  father  was 
tried  so  before  you ;  think,  O  think  of  the  happiness  he  now 
enjoys,  and  how  he  is  incessantly  thanking  God  for  tempting  and 
trying  him  when  here  below.  Look  up  often  by  the  eye  of  faith, 
and  see  him  sitting  with  his  beloved  Isaac  in  the  world  of  spirits. 
Remember,  it  will  be  but  a  little  while,  and  you  shall  sit  with 
them  also,  and  tell  one  another  what  God  has  done  for  your 
souls.  There  I  hope  to  sit  with  you,  and  hear  this  story  of  his 
offering  up  his  son  from  his  own  mouth,  and  to  praise  the  Lamb 
that  sitteth  upon  the  throne,  for  what  he  hath  done  for  all  our 
souls,  for  ever  and  ever. 


SERMON  IV. 

THE   GRBAT    DUTY    OP    FAMILY    RELIGION. 

As  forme  and  my  house,  we  tvill  serve  the  Lord.— Joshuei  xxiv.  15. 

These  words  contain  the  holy  resolution  of  pious  Joshua,  who 
having  in  a  most  moving,  aflectionate  discourse,  recounted  to 
the  Israelites  what  great  things  God  had  done  for  them,  in  the 
verse  immediately  preceding  the  text,  comes  to  draw  a  proper 
inference  from  what  he  bad  been  delivering;  and  acquaints  them, 
in  the  most  pressing  terms,  that  since  God  had  been  so  exceed* 
ing  gracious  unto  them,  they  could  do  no  less,  than,  out  of  grati- 
tude for  such  uncommon  favours  and  mercies,  dedicate  both 
themselves  and  families  to  his  service.  '^  Now,  therefore,  fear 
the  Lord,  and  serve  him  in  sincerity  and  truth,  and  put  away 
the  gods  which  your  fathers  served  on  the  other  side  of  the 
flood.'*  And  by  the  same  engaging  motive  does  the  prophet 
Samu^  afterwards  enforce  their  obedience  to  the  commandments 
of  Grod,  1  Sam.  xii.  24.  "  Only  fear  the  Lord,  and  serve  him  in 
truth,  with  all  your  heart ;  for  consider  how  great  things  he  hath 
done  for  you.**  But  then,  that  they  might  not  excuse  themselves 
(as  too  many  might  be  apt  to  do)  by  his  giving  them  a  bad 
example,  or  think  he  was  laying  heavy  burdens  upon  them, 
whilst  he  himself  touched  them  not  with  one  of  his  fingers,  he 
tells  them  in  the  text,  that  whatever  regard  they  might  pay  to 
the  doctrine  he  had  be Ai  preaching,  yet  he  (as  all  ministers 
ought  to  do)  was  resolved  to  live  up  to,  and  practise  it  himself; 
"  Choose  you,  therefore,  whom  you  will  serve,  whether  the  gods 
which  your  fathers  served,  or  the  gods  of  the  Amorites,  in  whose 
land  ye  dwell:  but  as  f<^  me  and  my  honse,  we  will  serve  the 
Lord." 

A  resolution  this,  worthy  of  Joshua,  and  no  less  becoming,  no 
less  necessary,  for  every  true  son  of  Joshua,  that  is  intrusted 


IT.]  FAMILY   B&LIGION.  Od 

with  die  care  and  government  of  a  family  in  oar  day:  and,  if  it 
were  ever  ieasonable  for  ministers  to  preach  up,  or  people  to  put 
in  practice,  family  religion^  it  was  never  more  so  than  in  the  pre- 
sent age ;  since  it  is  greatly  to  be  feared,  that  out  of  those  many 
households  that  call  themselves  Christians,  there  are  but  few 
that  serve  God  in  their  respective  families  as  they  ought. 

It  is  true  indeed,  visit  our  churches,  and  you  may  perhaps  see 
something  of  the  form  of  godliness  still  subsisting  amongst  us; 
but  even  that  is  scarcely  to  be  met  with  in  private  houses.  So 
that  were  the  blessed  angels  to  come,  as  in  the  patriarchal  age, 
and  observe  our  spiritual  economy  at  home,  would  they  not  be 
tempted  to  say  as  Abraham  to  Abimelech,  *'  Surely  the  fear  of 
God  is  not  in  this  place?*'  Gen.  xx.  11. 

How  such  a  general  neglect  of  family  religion  first  began  to 
overspread  the  Christian  world,  is  difficult  to  determine.  As  for 
the  primitive  Christians,  I  am  positive  it  was  not  so  with  them : 
DO,  they  had  not  so  learned  Christ,  as  falsely  to  imagine  religion 
was  to  be  confined  solely  to  their  assemblies  for  public  worship : 
but,  on  the  contrary,  behaved  with  such  piety  and  exemplary 
holiness  in  their  private  families,  that  St.  Paul  often  styles  their 
house  a  church : ''  Salute  "  such  a  one,  says  he, ''  and  the  church 
which  is  in  his  house."  And  I  believe  we  must  for  ever  despair 
of  seeing  a  primitive  spirit  of  piety  revived  in  the  world,  till  we 
are  so  happy  as  to  see  a  revival  of  primitive  family  religion ;  and 
persons  unanimously  resolving  with  good  old  Joshua,  in  the 
words  of  the  text,  **  As  for  me  and  my  house^  we  will  serve  the 
Lord." 

From  which  words,  I  shall  beg  leave  to  insist  on  these  three 
things. 

First,  That  it  is  the  duty  of  every  governor  of  a  family  to  take 
care  that  not  only  he  himself,  but  also  that  those  conmiitted  to 
his  charge,  "  serve  the  Lord.^' 

Secondly,  I  shall  endeavour  to  shew  after  what  manner  a 
governor  and  his  household  ought  to  serve  the  liOrd.    And, 

Thirdly,  I  shall  offer  some  motives,  in  order  to  excite  all 
governors,  with  their  respective  households,  to  serve  the  Lord 
in  the  manner  that  shall  be  recommended. 

And  First,  I  am  to  shew  that  it  is  the  duty  of  every  governor 
of  a  family  to  take  care,  that  not  only  he  himself,  but  also  that 
those  committed  to  his  charge,  should  serve  the  Lord. 

And  this  will  appear,  if  we  consider  that  every  governor  of  a 
family  ought  to  look  upon  himself  as  obliged  to  act  in  three 
capacities :  as  a  prophet,  to  instruct ;  as  a  priest,  to  pray  for 
and  with ;  as  a  king,  to  govern,  direct,  and  provide  for  them. 
It  is  true  indeed,  the  latter  of  these,  their  kingly  office,  they  are 
not  so  frequentlj  deficient  in,  (nay,  in  this  they  are  geneially  too 
tK)licitoiis;)  but  as  for  the  two  former,  their  priestly  and  pro* 
pbetic  office,  like  Gallio,  they  care  for  no  such  things.  But  how* 
ever  indifferent  some  governors  may  be  about  it,  they  may  be 
assured,  that  God  will  require  a  due  discharge  ot  these  offices 
at  their  hands.    For  if,  as  the  apostle  argues,  '*  He  that  does 


70  THE   GREAT   DUTY   OP  [iV- 

not  provide  for  his  own  house^  in  temporal  things,  "  has  denied 
the  faith,  and  is  worse  than  an  infidel ;"  to  what  greater  degree 
of  apostacy  must  he  have  arrived,  who  takes  no  thought  to  pro- 
vide for  the  spiritual  welfare  of  his  family  ! 

But  farther,  persons  are  generally  very  liberal  of  their  invec- 
tives against  the  clergy,  and  think  they  justly  blame  the  conduct 
of  that  minister  who  does  not  take  heed  to  and  watch  over  the 
flock,  of  which  the  Holy  Ghost  has  made  him  overseer:  but 
may  not  every  governor  of  a  family  be  in  a  lower  degree  liable 
to  the  same  censure,  who  takes  no  thought  for  those  souls  that 
are  committed  to  his  charge?  For  every  house  is  as  it  were  a 
little  parish,  every  governor  (as  was  before  observed)  a  priest, 
every  family  a  flock ;  and  if  any  of  them  perish  through  the 
governor's  neglect,  their  blood  will  God  require  at  their  hands. 

Were  a  minister  to  disregard  teaching  his  people  publicly,  and 
from  house  to  house,  and  to  excuse  himself  by  saying,  that  ho 
had  enough  to  do  to  work  out  his  own  salvation  with  fear  and 
trembling,  without  concerning  himself  with  that  of  others ;  would 
you  not  be  apt  to  think  such  a  minister  to  be  like  the  unjust 
judge,  ''one  that  neither  feared  God,  nor  regarded  man?"  And 
yet,  odious  as  such  a  character  would  be,  it  is  no  worse  than 
that  governor  of  a  family  deserves,  who  thinks  himself  obliged 
only  to  save  his  own  soul,  without  paying  any  regard  to  the  souls 
of  his  household.  !For  (as  was  above  hinted)  every  house  is  as 
it  were  a  parish,  and  every  master  is  concerned  to  secure,  as 
much  as  in  him  lies,  the  spiritual  prosperity  of  every  one  under 
his  roof,  as  any  minister  whatever  is  obliged  to  look  to  the  spi- 
ritual welfare  of  every  individual  person  under  his  charge. 

What  precedents  men  who  neglect  their  duty  in  this  particular, 
can  plead  for  such  omission,  I  cannot  tell.  Doubtless  not  the 
example  of  holy  Job,  who  was  so  far  from  imagining  that  he  had 
no  concern,  as  governor  of  a  family,  with  any  one's  soul  but  his 
own,  that  the  scripture  acquaints  us,  "AYhen  the  days  of  his 
children's  feasting  were  gone  about,  that  Job  sent  and  sanctified 
them,  and  oflered  burnt-oflferings,  according  to  the  number  of 
them  all ;  for  Job  said.  It  may  be  that  my  sons  have  sinned,  and 
cursed  God  in  their  hearts :  thus  did  Job  continually."  Nor  can 
they  plead  the  practice  of  good  old  Joshua,  whom,  in  the  text, 
we  find  as  much  concerned  for  his  household's  welfare  as  his 
own.  Nor  lastly,  that  of  Cornelius,  who  feared  God,  not  only 
himself,  but  with  all  his  house :  and  were  Christians  but  of  the 
same  spirit  of  Job,  Joshua,  and  the  Gentile  centurion,  they  would 
act  as  Job,  Joshua,  and  Cornelius  did. 

But,  alas !  if  this  be  the  case,  and  all  governors  of  families  ought 
not  only  to  serve  the  Lord  themselves ;  but  likewise  to  see  that 
their  respective  households  do  so  too;  what  will  then  become  of 
those  who  not  only  neglect  serving  God  themselves,  but  also 
make  it  their  business  to  ridicule  and  scoff  at  any  of  their  house 
that  do?  who  are  not  content  with  ''not  entering  into  the  king- 
dom of  heaven  themselves;  but  those  also  that  are  willing  to 
enter  in,  tliey  hinder.*'  Surely  such  men  are  factors  for  the  devil 


IV.]  PAMILY   RELIGION.  71 

indeed.  Sorely  their  damnation  slumbereth  not;  for  although 
God  in  bis  good  providence  may  saffer  such  stumbling  blocks 
to  be  pat  in  his  children's  way,  and  suffer  their  greatest  enemies 
to  be  those  of  their  own  households,  for  a  trial  of  their  sincerity, 
and  improvement  of  their  faith ;  yet  we  cannot  but  pronounce  a 
woe  against  those  masters  by  whom  such  offences  come.  For 
if  those  that  only  take  care  of  their  own  souls,  can  scarcely  be 
saved,  where  wiU  such  monstrous  profane  and  wicked  governors 
appear  ? 

But  hoping  there  are  but  few  of  this  unhappy  stamp,  proceed 
we  now  to  the — 

Second  thing  proposed ;  To  shew  after  what  manner  a  governor 
and  his  household  ought  to  serve  the  Lord. 

1.  And  the  first  thing  I  shall  mention,  is  reading  the  word  of 
God.  This  is  a  duty  incumbent  on  every  private  person.  ''  Search 
the  scriptures,  for  in  them  ye  think  ye  have  eternal  life,"  is  a 
precept  given  by  our  blessed  Lord  indifferently  to  all ;  but  much 
more  so  ought  every  governor  of  a  family  to  think  it  in  a  peculiar 
manner  spoken  to  himself,  because  (as  hath  been  already  proved) 
he  ought  to  look  upon  himself  as  a  prophet,  and  therefore,  agree- 
ably to  such  a  character,  bound  to  instruct  those  under  his  charge 
in  the  knowledge  of  the  word  Of  God.  * 

This  we  find  was  the  order  God  gave  to  his  peculiar  people 
Israel ;  for  thus  speaks  his  representative  Moses,  Deut.  vi.  6,  7. 
"These  words,"  that  is,  the  scripture  words,  "which  I  command 
thee  this  day,  shall  be  in  thy  heart,  and  thou  shalt  teach  them 
diligently  unto  thy  children,"  that  is,  as  it  is  generally  explained, 
servants  as  well  as  children,  "and  shalt  talk  of  them  when  thou 
sittest  in  thy  house."  From  whence  we  may  infer,  that  the  only 
reason  why  so  many  neglect  to  read  the  words  of  scripture  dili- 
gently to  their  children  is,  because  the  words  of  scripture  are  not 
in  their  hearts :  for  if  they  were,  out  of  the  abundance  of  the 
heart  their  mouth  would  speak. 

Besides,  servants,  as  well  as  children,  are  for  the  generality 
very  ignorant,  and  mere  novices  in  the  laws  of  God :  and  how 
should  they  know,  unless  some  one  teach  them?  And  what  more 
proper  to  teach  them  by,  than  the  lively  oracles  of  God,  "  which 
are  able  to  make  them  wise  unto  salvation?"  And  who  more 
proper  to  instruct  them  by  these  lively  oracles,  than  parents  and 
masters,  who  (as  hath  been  more  than  once  observed)  are  as 
much  concerned  to  feed  them  with  spiritual,  as  with  bodily  bread, 
day  by  day? 

But  if  these  things  be  so,  what  a  miserable  condition  are  those 
unhappy  governors  in,  who  are  so  far  from  feeding  those  com- 
mitted to  their  care  with  the  sincere  milk  of  the  word,  to  the 
intent  they  may  grow  thereliy,  that  they  neither  search  the  scrip- 
tures themselves,  nor  are  careful  to  explain  them  to  others? 
Such  families  must  be  in  a  happy  way  indeed  to  do  their  Mas- 
ter's will,  who  take  such  prodigious  pains  to  know  it !  Would 
not  one  imagine  that  they  had  turned  converts  to  the  church  of 
Rome ;  that  they  thought  ignorance  to  be  the  mother  of  devo^ 


THB    GHBAT    DUTY    QP 

tlon ;  tknd  that  those  were  to  be  condemned  as  heretics  who  read 
their  Bibles?  And  yet  how  iew  families  are  there  amongst  ua, 
who  do  not  act  ader  this  unseemly  manner !  But  shall  I  praise 
them  ia  thisi  I  praise  them  not ;  bit-thren,  this  thing  ought  not 
so  to  be. 

3.  Pass  we  on  now  to  the  second  means  whereby  every  gover- 
nor and  his  household  ought  to  serve  the  Itord,— fa  mill/  prayer. 

This  ia  a  duty,  though  as  much  neglected,  yot  as  absolutely 
necessary,  as  the  former.  Heading  is  a  good  preparative  for 
prayer,  as  prayer  is  an  excellent  means  to  render  reading  effec- 
tual. And  the  reason  why  every  governor  of  a  family  should  join 
hoih  these  exercises  together,  is  plain,  because  a  goveraor  of  a 
family  cannot  perform  his  priestly  office  (which  we  before  ob- 
served he  is  in  some  degree  invested  with)  without  performing 
this  duty  of  family  prayer. 

We  find  it  therefore  remarked,  when  mention  is  made  of  Cain 
and  Abel's  ofleriug  sacrifices,  that  they  brought  them.  But  to 
whom  did  they  bring  them?  Why,  in  all  probability,  to  their 
father  Adam,  who,  as  priest  of  the  family,  was  to  offer  sacritice 
in  their  names.  And  so  ought  every  spiritual  son  of  the  second 
Adam, who  is  entrusted  with  the  care  of  a  household,  to  offerup 
the  spiritual  Racrihces  of  supplications  and  thanksgivings, 
acceptable  to  God  through  Jesus  Christ,  in  the  presence  and 
name  of  all  who  wait  upon,  or  eat  meat  at.  Lis  table. 

Thus  we  read  our  blessed  Lord  behaved,  when  ho  tabernacled 
amongst  us;  for  it  is  said  often,  that  he  prayed  with  his  twelve 
disciples,  which  was  then  his  little  family.  And  he  himself  has 
promised  a  particular  blessing  to  joint  supplications :  "  Where- 
soever two  or  three  are  gathered  together  in  my  name,  there  am 
1  in  the  midst  of  them."  And  a^ain,  "  if  two  or  three  are  agreed 
touching  any  thing  they  shall  ask,  it  shall  be  given  them."  Add 
to  tlus,  that  we  are  commanded  by  the  apostle  to  "  pray  always, 
with  all  manner  of  supplication,"  which  doubtless  includes 
family  prayer.  And  holy  Joshua,  when  he  set  up  tbe  good  reso- 
lution in  the  text,  that  he  and  his  household  would  serve  the 
Lord,  certainly  resolved  to  pray  with  his  famUy,  which  is  one 
of  the  best  testimonies  they  could  give  of  their  serving  him. 

Besides,  there  are  nc  families  but  what  have  some  common 
blessings,  of  which  they  have  been  all  partakers,  to  give  thanks 
far;  some  common  crosses  and  afflictions,  which  they  are  to 
pmy  against ;  some  common  sins,  which  they  are  all  to  lament 
and  bewail :  but  how  this  can  be  done,  without  joining  together 
in  one  common  act  of  humiliation,  supplication,  and  thanks- 
giving, is  difficult  to  devise. 

From  all  which  consideratious  put  together,  it  is  evident  that 
family  prayer  is  a  great  and  necessary  duty ;  and  consequently, 
those  governors  that  neglect  it,  are  certainly  without  excuse. 
And  it  is  much  to  bo  feared,  if  they  live  without  family  prayer, 
they  live  without  God  in  the  world. 

And  yet,  such  an  hateful  cbarncter  as  this  is,  it  is  to  be  feared, 
thiit  were  God  to  send  out  an  iu^el  to  destroy  us,  as  he  did  ones 


ir.]  FAMILY  RSUC16M.  7S 

to  defltrey  Ae  Egyptian  fiisi-boni,  and  withal  give  him  a  com 
mifisiae,  aa  then,  to  spaie  oo  hoaaes  hot  where  they  saw  Ae 
Uood  of  the  lintel,  sprinkled  on  the  door*poflt,  so  now,  to  let  no 
families  escape,  but  those  that  called  npon  him  in  morning  and 
evening  prayer;  few  wonld  lemain  nohnrt  by  his  avenging 
swoid.  Shall  I  term  snch  fiunihes  Christians  or  heathensf 
Donbtless  they  deserve  not  the  name  of  Christians ;  and  hea* 
thens  will  rise  np  in  judgment  against  snch  profane  fianilies  of 
this  generation :  for  they  bad  always  their  bouselndd  gods,  whom 
they  worshipped,  and  whose  assistance  they  frequently  invoked. 
And  a  pretty  pass  those  families  surely  are  arrived  at,  who  must 
be  sent  to  school  to  pagans.  But  will  not  the  Lord  be  avenged 
on  snch  profane  households  as  these  I  Will  he  not  pour  out  his 
fury  npon  those  that  call  not  upon  his  name ! 

3.  But  it  is  time  for  me  to  hasten  to  the  third  and  last  means 
I  shall  recommend,  whereby  every  governor  ought  with  bis 
honsdiold  to  serve  the  Lord,  catechUmg  and  instructing  their 
children  and  servants,  and  bringing  them  up  in  the  nurture  and 
admonition  of  the  Lord. 

That  this,  as  well  as  the  two  former,  is  a  duty  incumbent  on 
every  governor  of  a  house,  appears  from  that  famous  enccHuium 
or  commendation  God  gives  of  Abraham:  '*  I  know  that  he  will 
command  his  children  and  household  after  him,  to  keep  the  way 
of  the  Lord,  to  do  Justice  and  judgment"  And  indeed  scarce 
any  thing  is  more  frequentW  pressed  upon  us  in  holy  writ,  than 
this  duty  of  catechising.  Thus,  says  uod  in  a  passage  before 
cited,  '*  Thou  shalt  teach  these  words  diligentiy  unto  thy  chil- 
dren." And  parents  are  commanded  in  the  New  Testament,  to 
*'  bring  up  their  children  in  the  nurture  and  admonition  of  the 
Lord."  The  holy  Psalmist  acquaints  us,  that  one  great  end 
why  God  did  such  great  wonders  for  his  people,  was,  ''  to  the 
intent  that  when  they  grew  up,  they  should  shew  their  children 
or  servants  the  same."  And  in  Deut.  vi.  at  the  20th  and  fol- 
lowing verses,  God  strictly  commands  his  people  to  instruct 
their  children  in  the  true  nature  of  the  ceremonial  worship,  when 
they  should  inquire  about  it,  as  he  supposed  they  would  do,  in 
time  to  come.  And  if  servants  and  children  were  to  be  instructed 
in  the  nature  of  Jewish  rites,  much  more  ought  they  now  to  be 
initiated  and  grounded  in  the  doctrines  and  first  principles  of 
the  gospel  of  Christ ;  not  only  because  it  is  a  revelation,  which 
has  brought  life  and  immortality  to  a  fuller  and  clearer  light, 
bat  also  because  many  seducers  are  ^ono  abroad  into  the  world, 
who  do  their  utmost  endeavour  to  destroy  not  only  the  super- 
structure, but  likewise  to  sap  ttie  very  foundation  of  our  most 
holy  religion. 

Would  then  the  present  generation  have  their  posterity  be  true 
lovers  and  honourers  of  God ;  masters  and  parents  must  take 
Solomon's  good  advice,  and  train  up  and  catechise  their  respec-, 
tive  households  in  the  way  wherein  they  should  go. 

I  am  aware  but  of  one  objection,  that  can,  with  any  show  of 
reason,  be  urged  against  what  has  l>een  advanced ;  which  is,  that 


74  THB   6KEAT   DUTY    OP  [ir. 

such  a  procedure  as  this  will  take  up  too  much  time,  and  hinder 
families  too  long  from  their  worldly  business.  But  it  is  much  to 
be  questioned,  whether  persons  that  start  such  an  objection,  are 
not  of  the  same  hypocritical  spirit  as  the  traitor  Judas,  who  had 
indignation  against  devout  Mary,  for  being  so  profuse  of  her 
ointment  in  anointing  our  blessed  Lord,  and  asked  why  it  might 
not  be  sold  for  two  hundred  pence,  and  given  to  the  poor.  For 
has  God  given  us  so  much  time  to  work  for  ourselves,  and  shall 
we  not  allow  some  small  pittance  of  it,  morning  and  evening,  to 
be  devoted  to  his  more  immediate  worship  and  service?  Have 
not  people  read,  that  it  is  God  who  gives  men  power  to  get 
wealth,  and  therefore  that  the  best  way  to  prosper  in  the  world, 
is  to  secure  his  favour?  And  has  not  our  blessed  Lord  himself 
promised,  that  if  we  seekfirsTt  the  kingdom  of  God  and  his  righ- 
teousness, all  outward  necessaries  shall  be  added  unto  us? 

Abraham,  no  doubt,  was  a  man  of  as  great  business  as  such 
objectors  may  be ;  but  yet  he  would  find  time  to  command  his 
household  to  sen^e  the  Lord.  Nay,  David  was  a  king,  and  con- 
sequently, had  a  great  deal  of  business  upon  his  hands ;  yet  not- 
withstanding, he  professes  that  he  would  walk  in  his  house  with 
a  perfect  heart.  And,  to  instance  but  one  more,  holy  Joshua 
was  a  person  certainly  engaged  very  much  in  temporal  affairs : 
and  yet  he  solemnly  declares  before  all  Israel,  that  as  for  him 
and  his  household,  they  would  serve  the  Lord.  And  did  per- 
sons but  redeem  their  time,  as  Abraham,  David,  or  Joshua  did, 
they  would  no  longer  complain  that  family  duties  kept  them  too 
long  from  the  business  of  the  world. 

3.  But  my  Third  and  last  general  head,  under  which  I  was  to 
offer  some  motives,  in  order  to  excite  all  governors,  with  their 
respective  households,  to  serve  the  Lord  in  the  manner  before 
recommended,  I  hope,  will  serve  instead  of  a  thousand  argu- 
ments, to  prove  the  weakness  and  folly  of  such  an  objection. 

1.  And  the  first  motive  I  shall  mention  is  the  duty  of  gratis 
iude,  which  you  that  are  governors  of  families  owe  to  God. 
Your  lot,  every  one  must  confess,  is  cast  in  a  fair  ground :  Pro- 
vidence hath  given  you  a  goodly  heritage,  above  many  of  your 
fellow-creatures ;  and  therefore,  out  of  a  principle  of  gratitude, 
you  ought  to  endeavour,  as  much  as  in  you  lies,  to  make  every 
person  of  your  respective  households  to  call  upon  him  as  long 
as  they  live :  not  to  mention,  that  the  authority  with  which  God 
has  invested  you  as  parents  and  governors  of  families,  is  a 
talent  committed  to  your  trust,  and  which  you  are  bound  to 
improve  to  your  Master's  honour.  In  other  things,  we  find 
governors  and  parents  can  exercise  lordship  over  their  children 
and  servants  readily,  and  frequently  enough  can  say  to  one,  '*  Go, 
and  he  goeth ;  and  to  another,  come,  and  he  cometh ;  to  a  third, 
do  this,  and  be  doeth  it."  And  shall  this  power  be  so  often  em- 
ployed in  your  own  affairs,  and  never  exerted  in  the  tilings  of 
God  ?    Be  astonished,  O  heavens,  at  this ! 

Thus  did  not  faithful  Abraham:  no,  God  says,  that  he  knew 
Abraham  would  command  his  servants  and  children  after  him. 


IV.]  FAMILY    RELIGION.  75 

Thus  did  not  Joshua :  no^  he  was  resolved  not  only  to  walk  with 
God  himself,  but  to  improve  his  authority  in  malung  all  about 
him  do  so  too:  "  As  for  me  and  my  household,  we  wiU  serve  the 
Lord."    Let  us  go  and  do  likewise. 

2.  But  Secondly,  If  gratitude  to  God  will  not,  methinks  love 
and  pity  to  your  children  should  move  you  with  your  respective 
families,  to  serve  the  Lord. 

Host  people  express  a  great  fondness  for  their  children ;  nay, 
so  great,  that  very  often  their  own  lives  are  wrapped  up  in  those 
of  Uieir  offspring.  ''  Can  a  woman  forget  her  sucking  child,  that 
she  should  not  have  compassion  on  the  son  of  her  womb?"  says 
Grod  by  his  prophet  Isaiah.  He  speaks  of  it  as  a  monstrous 
thing,  and  scarce  credible ;  but  the  words  immediately  followiug 
affirm  it  to  be  possible^  Yea,  they  may  forget ;  and  experience 
also  assures  us  they  may.  Father  and  mother  may  both  forsake 
their  children :  for  what  greater  degree  of  forgetfulness  can  they 
express  towards  them,  than  to  neglect  the  improvement  of  their 
better  part,  and  not  bring  them  up  in  the  knowledge  and  fear  of 
God? 

It  is  true  indeed,  parents  seldom  forget  to  provide  for  their 
children's  bodies,  (though  it  is  to  be  feared,  some  men  are  so  far 
sank  beneath  the  beasts  that  perish,  as  to  neglect  even  that,)  but 
then  how  often  do  they  forget,  or  rather,  when  do  they  remember, 
to  secure  the  salvation  of  their  immortsil  souls?  But  is  this  their 
way  of  expressing  their  fondness  for  the  fruit  of  their  bodies?  Is 
this  the  best  testimony  they  can  give  of  their  affection  to  the 
darling  of  their  hearts?  Then  was  Delilah  fond  of  Samson,  when 
she  delivered  him  up  into  the  hands  of  the  Philistines:  then 
were  those  ruffians  well  affected  to  Daniel,  when  they  threw  him 
into  a  den  of  lions. 

3.  But  Thirdly,  If  neither  gratitude  to  God,  nor  love  and  pity 
to  your  children,  will  prevail  on  yon ;  yet  let  a  principle  of  com- 
mon honesty  and  jv^stice  move  you  to  set  up  the  holy  resolution 
in  the  text. 

This  is  a  principle  which  all  men  would  be  thought  to  act 
Dpon.  But  certainly,  if  any  may  be  truly  censured  for  their 
injustice,  none  can  be  more  liable  to  such  censure,  than  those 
who  think  themselves  injured  if  their  servants  withdraw  them- 
selves from  their  bodily  work,  and  yet  they  in  return  take  no 
care  of  their  inestimable  souls.  For  is  it  just  that  servants 
should  spend  their  time  and  strength  in  their  master's  service^ 
and  masters  not  at  the  same  time  give  them  what  is  just  and 
equal  for  their  service  ? 

It  is  true,  some  men  may  think  they  have  done  enough  when 
they  give  unto  their  servants  food  and  raiment,  and  say,  '  Did 
not  I  bargain  with  thee  for  so  much  a  year?'  But  if  they  give 
them  no  other  reward  than  this,  what  do  they  less  for  their  very 
beasts?  But  are  not  servants  better  than  they?  Doubtless 
they  are :  and  however  masters  may  put  off  their  convictions 
for  the  present,  they  will  find  a  time  will  come,  when  they  shall 
know  they  ought  to  have  given  them  some  spiritual  as  well  as 


76  THB  GREAT  DUTY  OP  FAMILY  RELIGION.  [lV« 

temporal  wages ;  and  the  cry  of  those  that  have  mowed  down 
their  fields^  will  enter  into  the  ea^s  of  the  Lord  of  Sabaolh. 

4.  Bat,  Fourthly,  If  neither  gratitude  to  Grod^  pity  to  children^ 
nor  a  principle  of  common  justice  to  servants,  is  sufficient  to 
balance  all  objections;  yet  let  that  darling,  that  prevailing 
motive  of  self-interest  turn  the  scale,  and  engage  you  with  your 
respective  households  to  serve  the  Lord. 

This  weighs  greatly  with  you  in  other  matters ;  be  then  per- 
suaded to  let  it  have  a  due  and  full  influence  on  you  in  this : 
and  if  it  has,  if  you  have  but  faith  as  a  grain  of  mustard-seed, 
how  can  you  avoid  believing,  that  promoting  family  religion, 
will  be  the  best  means  to  promote  your  own  temporal,  as  well 
as  eteraal  welfare  ?  For  "  godliness  has  the  promise  of  the  life 
that  now  is,  as  well  as  that  which  is  to  come.'' 

Besides,  you  all,  doubtless,  wish  for  honest  servants  and  pious 
children :  and  to  have  them  prove  otherwise,  would  be  as  great 
a  grief  to  you,  as  it  was  to  Elisba  to  have  a  treacherous  Gehazi, 
or  David  to  be  troubled  with  a  rebellious  Absalom.  But  how 
can  it  be  expected  they  should  learn  their  duty,  except  those 
set  over  them  take  care  to  teach  it  to  them  ?  Is  it  not  as  reason- 
able to  expect  you  should  reap  where  you  had  not  sown,  or 
gather  where  you  had  not  strewed. 

Did  Christianity  indeed,  give  any  countenance  to  children 
and  servants,  to  disregard  their  parents  and  masters  according 
to  the  flesh,  or  represent  their  duty  to  them  as  inconsistent  with 
their  entire  obedience  to  their  Father  and  Master  who  is  in  hea- 
ven, there  might  then  be  some  pretence  to  neglect  instructing 
them  in  the  principles  of  such  a  religion.  But  since  the  pre- 
cepts of  tliis  pure  and  undefiled  religion  are  all  of  them  holy, 
just,  and  good ;  and  the  more  they  are  taught  their  duty  to  God, 
the  better  they  will  perform  their  duties  to  you ;  methinks,  to 
neglect  the  improvement  of  their  souls,  out  of  a  dread  of  spend* 
ing  too  much  time  in  religious  duties,  is  acting  quite  contrary  to 
your  own  interest  as  well  as  duty. 

5.  Fifthly,  and  Lastly,  If  neither  gratitude  to  God,  love  to 
your  children,  common  justice  to  your  servants,  nor  even  that 
most  prevailing  motive  self-interest,  will  excite,  yet  let  a  consi- 
deration of  the  terrors  of  the  Lord  persuade  you  to  put  in  prac- 
tice the  pious  resolution  in  the  text.  Remember,  the  time  will 
come,  and  that  perhaps  very  shortly,  when  we  must  all  appear 
before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ,  where  we  must  give  a  solemn 
and  strict  account  how  we  have  had  our  conversation  in  our 
respective  families  in  this  world.  How  will  you  endure  to  see 
your  children  and  servants  (who  ought  to  be  your  joy  and  crown 
of  rejoicing  in  the  day  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ)  coming  out  as 
so  many  swift  witnesses  against  you ;  cursing  tlie  father  that 
begot  them,  the  womb  that  bare  them,  the  paps  which  thevjiavo 
sucked,  and  the  day  they  ever  entered  into  your  houses  ?  Think 
you  not,  the  damnation  which  men  must  endure  for  their jown 
sins,  will  be  sufficient,  that  they  need  load  themselves  with  the 
additional  guilt  of  being  accessary  to  the  damnation  of  others 


V.J  GHHIST  THE   BBST  HUSBAND.  77 

also?  O  consider  this^  all  ye  that  forget  to  serve  the  Lord  with 
your  respective  households,  ^'  lest  be  plock  yoa  away,  and  there 
be  Done  to  deliver  you !" 

But  God  forbid,  brethren,  that  any  such  evil  should  befall 
you :  no,  rather  will  I  hope,  that  you  have  been  in  some  mea- 
sure convinced  by  what  has  been  said  of  the  great  importance 
of  fionily-religion ;  and  therefore  are  ready  to  cry  out  in  the 
words  immediately  following  the  text,  *'  God  forbid  that  we 
should  forsake  the  Lord ;"  and  again,  ver.  21.  ^^  Nay,  but  we 
will  (with  our  several  households)  serve  the  Lord/' 

And  that  there  may  be  always  such  a  heart  in  you,  let  me 
exhort  all  governors  of  families,  in  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christy  often  to  reflect  on  the  inestimable  worth  of  their  own 
souls,  and  the  infinite  ransom,  even  the  precious  blood  of  Jesas 
Christ,  which  has  been  paid  down  for  them.  Bemember,  I  be- 
seech you  to  remember,  that  you  are  fallen  creatures ;  that  you 
are  by  nature  lost  and  estranged  from  God ;  and  that  you  can 
never  be  restored  to  your  primitive  happiness,  till,  by  being  bom 
again  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  you  arrive  at  your  primitive  state  of 
purity,  have  the  image  of  God  restamped  upon  your  souls,  and 
are  thereby  made  meet  to  be  partakers  of  the  inheritance  with 
the  saints  in  light.  Do,  I  say,  but  seriously  and  frequently 
reflect  on,  and  act  as  persons  that  believe  such  important  truths 
and  you  will  no  more  neglect  your  family's  spiritual  welfare  than 
your  own.  No,  the  love  of  God,  which  will  then  be  shed  abroad 
in  your  hearts,  will  constrain  you  to  do  your  utmost  to  preserve 
tb^ :  and  the  deep  sense  of  God's  free  grace  in  Christ  Jesus, 
(which  you  will  then  have)  in  calling  you,  will  excite  you  to  do 
your  utmost  to  save  others,  especially  those  of  your  own  house- 
hold. And  though,  after  all  your  picas  endeavours^  some  may 
continue  unreformed ;  yet  you  will  have  this  comfortable  reflection 
to  make,  that  you  did  what  you  could  to  make  your  families  reli- 
gious :  and  therefore  may  rest  assured  of  sitting  down  in  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  with  Abraham,  Jo^ua,  and  Cornelius,  and 
all  the  godly  householders,  who  in  their  several  generations 
shone  forth  as  so  many  lights  in  their  respective  households  upon 
earth.    Amen. 

SERMON  V. 

CHRIST  THB  BBST  HUSBAND,  OR  AN  EARNEST  INVITATION  TO 
YOUNG  WOMEN  TO  COME  AND  SEE  CHRIST. 

niEACHEO  TO  L  SOCIETY  OF  TOUVG  WOVEN,  IV  FETTER-LANE. 

PsALM  xlv.  10, 11. — Hearketi,  O  daughter^  and  consider,  and 
incUne  thine  ear :  forget  also  thine  own  people,  and  thy  father's 
house:  So  shall  the  King  greatly  desire  thy  beauty  ;  for  he  is 
thy  Lord,  and  toorship  thou  him. 

This  psalm  is  called  the  song  of  loves,  the  most  pure  and 
spiritual,  the  most  dear  and  delightful,  loves;  namely,  those 
which  are  between  Christ  the  beloved,  and  his  church,  which  is 


78  CHRIST  THB  BB8T  HUSBAND.  [V. 

his  spouse ;  wherein  is  set  forth,  first,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in 
regard  of  his  majesty,  power,  and  divinity,  his  truth,  meekness, 
and  equity :  and  then  the  spouse  is  set  forth  in  regard  of  her 
ornaments,  companions,  attendants,  and  posterity:  and  both  in 
regard  of  their  comeliness  and  beauty.  After  the  description  of 
Christ,  an  invitation  to  his  espousals  is  given  the  children  of 
men,  called  by  the  name  of  daughter ;  and  therefore  particu- 
larly applicable  unto  you,  my  dear  sisters,  as  being  the  daugh- 
ters of  men,  yet  not  so  as  excluding  the  sons  of  men. 

I  shall  now,  therefore,  consider  the  words  as  spoken  to  you  in 
particular,  and  containing  this  doctrine ; 

That  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  doth  invite  the  daughters  of  men 
to  be  his  spouse ;  and  is  exceeding  desirous  of  their  beauty  ; 
who,  forgetting  their  people  and  father's  house,  do  hearken, 
consider,  and  incline  to  his  invitation,  and  join  themselves  to 
him  in  this  relation. 

I  shall  shew, 

I.  How  Christ  doth  espouse  himself  unto  the  children,  but 
more  especially  unto  the  daughters  of  men. 

The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  doth  espouse  himself  unto  the  chil- 
dren of  men,  in  this  world,  but  the  public  solemnization  of  the 
marriage  is  reserved  till  the  last  day;  when  his  spouse  shall 
be  brought  forth  to  him  in  white  robes,  and  a  raiment  of  perfect 
righteousness,  more  rich  and  curious,  my  dear  sisters,  than  any 
of  your  needle- work ;  and  the  marriage  feast  will  be  kept  in  his 
Father's  house  in  heaven,  where  they  shall  be  received  into  the 
nearest  and  closest  embraces  of  his  love.  The  marriage  knot 
is  tied  here,  in  which  are  included  four  things. 

First,  Mutual  Choice.  Secondly,  Mutual  Affection.  Thirdly, 
Mutual  Union.     Fourthly,  Mutual  Obligation. 

First,  My  dear  sisters,  there  is  a  mutual  choice,  which  is  not 
only  in  Christ  as  Mediator,  but  also  by  Christ,  as  the  eternal  Son 
of  God,  yea,  God  himself;  notwithstanding  all  that  the  polite 
Arians  and  Socinians  say  to  the  contrary.  The  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  my  dear  sisters,  doth  choose  you  merely  by  his  free 
grace ;  it  is  freely  of  his  own  mercy,  that  he  brings  you  into  the 
marriage  covenant ;  you,  who  have  so  grievously  offended  him, 
yet  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  hath  chosen  you :  you  did  not,  you 
would  not,  have  chosen  him  ;  but  when  once,  my  dear  sisters,  be 
hath  chosen  you,  then,  and  not  till  then,  you  make  choice  of 
him  for  your  Lord  and  Husband. 

The  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  when  he  first  comes  to  you,  finds  you 
full  of  sin  and  pollution;  you  are  deformed,  defiled,  enslaved, 
poor,  miserable,  and  wretched,  very  despicable  and  loathsome, 
by  reason  of  sin,  and  he  maketh  choice  of  you,  not  because  of 
your  holiness,  nor  of  your  beauty,  nor  of  your  being  qualified  for 
them ;  no,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  puts  those  qualifications  upon 
you,  as  may  make  you  meet  for  his  embrace;  and  you  are 
drawn  to  make  choice  of  this  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  because  he 
first  chose  you. 

Secondly,  In  this  espousal  of  yours,  my  dear  sisters,  there  is 


T.j  CHHIST  THB  BEST  HUSBAND.  79 

a  mutual  affection,  this  doth  accompany  the  choice.  Year  hearts 
are  drawn  out  after  Christ ;  your  soals  pant  and  long  for  him, 
yon  cannot  be  at  rest  until  you  are  engaged  to  this  Jesus ;  you 
are  ready  to  cry  out  continually.  None  but  Christ,  none  but 
Christ :  this  is  the  language  of  your  hearts,  if  you  be  truly  sen« 
sible  of  your  need  of  him.  The  more  acquaintance  yon  have 
of  this  Ix>rd  Jesus,  the  more  pleased  you  are  with  your  choice, 
and  the  more  your  affections  are  drawn  towards  him.  And 
where  can  you  place  your  affections  better  than  upon  that  Jesus, 
who  shed  his  blood  for  your  sakes  ?  Surely  he  deserves  both 
your  loves  and  affections :  Go  on,  go  on,  my  dear  sisters,  that 
your  affections  may  grow  stronger  and  stronger. 

Thirdly,  there  is  not  only  mutual  choice,  and  mutual  affec- 
tion, but  likewise  mutual  union ;  and  here  doth  the  marriage  lie 
chiefly  in  this  union :  Christ  and  souls  are  contracted,  and  the 
knot  is  tied  so  fast,  that  neither  men  on  earth,  how  great  soever 
they  may  be,  nor  devils  in  hell,  though  they  should  combine  all 
their  wrath  and  rage  together,  still  they  cannot  dissolve,  they 
cannot  untie  it ;  no,  my  dear  sisters,  it  is  indissolvable,  for  the 
union  is  by  the  Spirit  on  Christ's  part,  and  by  faith  on  yours ; 
By  the  Spirit  Christ  doth  lay  hold  on  you  :  and  by  faith  you 
do  lay  hold  on  him  ;  and  thus  the  match  is  made :  Christ  be-* 
comes  yours,  his  person,  portion,  and  all  his  benefits,  are  yours ; 
and  you  become  Christ's,  your  persons,  your  hearts,  and  all  that 
you  have,  is  resigned  up  unto  turn ;  and  O  that  they  may  be  so 
more  and  more ! 

Fourthly,  There  is  a  mutual  obligation  between  Christ  and  his 
spouse.  Christ  obliges  himself  to  love  you  here ;  he  will  not^ 
indeed  be  never  will  leave  you,  he  will  protect  you  'from  the 
malice  of  the  Pharisees  of  this  generation,  he  will  provide  for 
you  in  all  difficulties,  he  will  live  with  you  here,  and  at  last  he 
will  take  you  to  himself,  to  live  with  him  for  ever.  And  you 
are  engaged  to  him  to  bo  loving,  loyal,  faithful,  and  obedient ; 
and  yon  are  to  stick  close  to  him  as  long  as  you  live ;  and  then 
you  will  find  yourselves  to  be  married  to  the  best  advantage^ 
both  for  soul  and  body,  for  time  and.  for  eternity. 

II.  Christ  doth  invite  all  of  you  to  be  his  spouse. 

And  it  is  on  this  account  that  he  sends  forth  his  ministers  to 
preach.  It  is  this  that  makes  me  thus  come  among  you ;  that  you 
would  accept  of  this  invitation,  to  which,  in  the  name  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  I  do  call  and  intreat  you  to  take  him,  on  his 
own  terms.  He  calls  all  of  you,  my  sisters,  whether  elder  or 
younger,  whether  married  or  unmarried,  of  higher  degree  or  of 
the  meanest  quality,  the  poorest  servants,  yea,  the  rabble  of 
this  world,  as  die  world  calls  you,  who  are  willing  to  be  espoused 
unto  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  I  say,  the  poor  are  as  welcome 
to  be  Christ's  s])ouse,  as  those  that  are  rich.  He  regardeth  not 
the  rich  more  than  the  poor :  he  chose  a  mean  virgin,  espoused 
to  a  carpenter,  to  be  bis  mother  ;  and  he  chooseth  and  calleth 
all  such  to  be  his  spouse ;  then  be  not  discouraged  at  your 
being  despised  in  the  world  ;  for  if  you  are  but  loved  by  Christ, 


80  0HRI8T  THB  BEST  HUSBAND.  [v* 

and  espoosed  to  hiniy  it  will  be  an  over-safficiency  for  all  the 
trouble  that  yoo  have  met  with  here. 

III.  Those  who  would  be  espoused  unto  Christ,  must  hearken, 
consider,  and  incline  to  his  invitation,  and  forget  even  their 
fetter's  house. 

Soch  as  would  be  espoused  unto  Christ,  must  hearken, 
'*  Hearken,  O  daughter."  Many  amongst  you,  my  sisters,  stop 
their  ears  against  the  calls  of  the  gospel ;  they  shut  their  ears 
like  the  des^  adder,  which  will  not  hearken  to  the  voice  of  the 
charmer,  though  he  charm  never  so  wisely.  You  will  not  heark- 
en unto  the  invitations  of  Christ,  you  can  hearken  to  the  vani- 
ties of  the  world,  and  be  delighted  with  the  espousals  of  the 
world,  but  never  think,  or  are  delighted  with,  the  espousals  of 
Christ. 

It  was  by  the  ear  that  the  temptation  of  sin  was  received 
by  the  first  man,  when  he  departed  from  God ;  and  by  the  ear, 
the  invitation  to  be  Christ's  spouse  must  be  received,  before 
the  heart  will  be  open  to  receive  Jesus  Christ  in  this  conjugal 
relation. 

If  you  would,  my  dear  sisters,  be  espoused  to  Christ,  you  must 
consider  Christ's  invitation.  It  is  not  a  slight  or  bare  hearing 
of  Christ's  invitation,  which  will  be  of  any  service  to  you,  or 
make  up  the  match  betwen  Christ  and  your  souls ;  no,  you  must 
receive  Christ  in  the  heart ;  you  must  consider  the  thing  itself, 
the  advantages  of  it,  the  difference  between  Christ's  invitations 
and  the  devil's  temptations,  or  any  of  the  world's  proffers. 

Those  who  would  be  espoused  to  Christ,  must  be  inclined  to 
accept  of  Christ's  invitation.  '^  Hearken,  O  daughter,  consider 
and  indine  thine  ear."  This  is  to  incline  your  hearts :  you  must 
consent  with  your  wills  ;  there  must  be  a  compliance  to  the 
motion  of  Christ,  and  you  must  have  desires  after  Christ,  and 
then  your  hearts  will  say,  *  Lord,  let  us  be  thy  spouse,  and  be 
thou  our  beloved.' 

You  must  likewise  forget  your  father's  house.  *^  Hearken,  O 
daughter,  and  consider,  and  forget  thy  father's  house.'*  You 
are  not  here  to  cast  off  all  affections  unto  natural  relations ;  but 
you  must  forget  all  relations,  so  as  to  be  ready  to  forego  all 
their  favour,  when  it  standeth  in  competition  with  that  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  and  do  not  let  your  carnal  friends  and  rela- 
tions hinder  you  from  closing  with,  and  espousing,  the  Lord 
Jesus.  I  earnestly  beseech  you  to  suffer  the  loss  of  any  thing, 
rather  than  to  lose  his  favours ;  you  must  indeed  forget  your 
own  people,  that  is,  you  must  forget  all  your  evil  customs  that 
you  have  learnt  in  your  father's  house,  and  forsake  all  your 
vain  conversation,  your  reading  of  plays,  novels,  or  roman- 
ces ;  and  you  must  keep  from  learning  to  sing  the  songs  of  the 
drunkard  ;  for  Christ,  if  you  be  his  spouse,  hath  redeemed  you. 

Such  of  you,  my  dear  sisters,  as  are  espoused  to  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  are  very  beautiful.  I  do  not  mean  in  respect  of 
your  bodies ;  you  may  have  less  of  external  comeliness  than 
0hers  in  respect  of  your  bodies,  but  as  to  your  3ouls,  you  wiU 


V.J  CHRIST  THB  BBST  HUSBAND.  81 

exceed  in  beaniy,  not  so  much  in  the  eyes  of  man^  as  In  the  eyes 
of  God  :  such  ha?e  the  most  beautifal  image  of  God  stamped 
upon  them ;  none  in  the  world  beside  them  have  the  least  spark 
ofspiiitoal  beanty.  Soch  as  are  not  married  to  Christ  are  nnre- 
^enerated^  they  are  not  born  a^in^  nor  brought  from  sin  onto 
€rod,  winch  must  be  done  before  yon  be  espoused  to  Christ. 

And  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  desireth  to  see  this  beauty  in  his 
spouse,  for  he  cries  out,  *'  O  my  dove,  thou  art  in  the  clefts  of  the 
rocky  in  the  secret  places  of  the  stairs,  let  me  see  thy  counte- 
nance, let  me  hear  thy  voice,  for  sweet  is  thy  voice,  and  thy 
countenance  is  comely/'  He  calleth  his  spouse  his  love,  being 
the  dear  object  of  his  love ;  and  he  admireth  her  loveliness ;  he 
repeats  it  twice  in  one  verse,  ^'Behold,  thou  art  fair,  my  love; 
behold,  thou  art  fair."  Thus  you  see  he  describes  their  beauty. 
And  then,  my  sisters,  we  have  a  wonderful  expression  of  Christ 
to  his  spouse,  '^  Thou  hast  ravished  my  heart,  ray  sister,  my 
spouse,  thou  hast  ravished  my  heart  with  one  of  thine  eyes,  with 
#ne  chain  of  thy  neck.'' 

Thus  you  see  how  pleased  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  with  his 
spouse ;  and  will  not  you  therefore  be  espoused  unto  the  Lord 
Jesus  ?  I  offer  Jesus  Christ  to  all  of  you ;  if  you  have  been  ever 
so  notorious  for  sin,  if  you  have  been  as  great  a  harlot  as  Mary 
Magdalen  was,  when  once  you  are  espoused  to  Christ,  you  shall 
be  foi^iven.  Therefore,  be  not  discouraged  at  whatever  slights 
and  contempts  the  world  may  pass  upon  you,  but  come  and 
join  yourselves  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  all  your  sins  shall 
be  washed  away  in  his  blood  ;  and  when  once  you  are  espoused 
to  Jesus,  you  are  disjoined  from  sin,  you  are  born  again.  You 
are  now  as  it  were  espoused  unto  sin ;  sm  is  your  husband,  and 
you  are  too  fond  of  it,  but  when  once  you  are  married  to  Christ, 
when  yon  are  bom  again,  then  you  may  be  said  to  die  unto  sin ; 
but  tiU  then  sin  liveth  in  your  affections :  therefore,  my  sisters, 
give  sin  its  death- wound  in  your  hearts ;  you  have  been  called 
by  the  word  time  after  time,  and  it  has  had  no  effect  upon  you  ; 
but  when  you  are  espoused  unto  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  then 
jou  will  be  brought  to  him  by  his  Spirit :  you  will  then  lay  hold 
of  him  by  faith,  his  Spirit  will  draw  you  unto  himself;  he  will 
make  you  to  be  willing  in  the  day  of  his  power ;  he  will  give  you 
faith  in  him.  Faith  is  the  hand  of  the  soul,  which  layeth  hold 
on  Christ :  therefore  do  not  rest  contented  till  you  have  this 
§[race  of  faith  wrought  in  you  with  power ;  do  not  be  contented 
till  you  have  received  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

Unbrace  Christ  in  the  arms  of  your  dearest  love ;  then  you 
love  the  Loid  Jesus  Christ  with  sincerity,  when  you  love  and 
esteem  him  before  father,  mother,  or  all  the  delights  and  plea- 
sures of  this  life ;  but  if  you  do  delight  in  any  thin^  that  this 
world  can  produce,  mere  than  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  you 
have  no  true  love  to  him. 

If  you  be  espoused  to  Christ,  you  have  acquaintance  and 
converse  with  him  ;  you  will  endeavour  to  promote  his  interest, 
and  advance  his  name  in  the  world  :  when  others  are  going  to 

B 


82  CHRIST   THE   BBST   HUSBAND.  [V. 

the  polite  aud  fashionable  diversions  of  life,  you  will  be  labour- 
ing  to  bring  honour  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  you  will  com- 
mend your  beloved  above  all  other  beloveds,  and  endeavour  to 
bring  others  into  love  to  him.  Can  you,  my  dear  sisters,  who 
are  now  assembled  to  worship  Grod,  shew  such  evidence  of 
your  espoussds  unto  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ?  O!  how  joyful, 
how  comfortable  an  estate,  is  this !  Surely  this  is  a  marriage 
worth  seeking  after;  this  is  the  only  desirable  marriage, 
and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  only  lover  that  is  worth  seek- 
ing after. 

Now,  my  dear  sisters,  I  shall  speak  a  few  words  to  those  of 

?ou  who  have  not  yet  espoused  yourselves  to  the  Lord  Jesus, 
t  is  a  great  sin,  and  surely  you  highly  affront  the  Lord  that 
bought  you.  It  is  likewise  your  folly  to  refuse  and  neglect  the 
gracious  proffers  of  being  the  spouse  of  Christ ;  hereby  you  for- 
feit all  that  love  which  he  would  bestow  upon  you ;  hereby  you 
choose  rags  before  robes,  dross  before  gold,  pebbles  before  jewels, 
guilt  before  a  pardon,  wounds  before  healing,  defilement  before 
cleansing,  deformity  before  comeliness,  trouble  before  peace, 
slavery  before  liberty,  the  service  of  the  devil  before  the  service 
of  Christ.  Hereby  you  choose  dishonour  before  a  crown,  death 
before  life,  hell  before  heaven,  eternal  misery  and  torment  before 
everlasting  joy  and  glory.  And  need  there  a  further  evidence 
of  your  folly  and  madness,  in  refusing  and  neglecting  Christ  to 
be  your  spouse. 

My  dear  sisters,  I  should  exceed  the  limits  of  your  time,  should 
I  particularize  all  the  advantages  which  you  would  obtain  by 
being  espoused  to  the  Lord  Jesus.  This  is  your  wisdom ;  they 
are  foolish  virgins  who  refuse ;  but  you  are  the  wise  virgins,  who 
have  accepted  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  have  disposed  oi 
yourselves  to  him :  you  have  made  the  wisest  choice ;  and  how- 
ever the  blind  world  may  deem  you  fools,  and  despise  you  as 
being  methodically  mad,  yet  you  are  wise  in  the  ^teem  of  Grod; 
and  will  one  day  appear  so  in  the  esteem  of  them  that  now 
despise  you.  It  is  your  glory  that  you  are  espoused  unto  the 
Lord  Jesus;  and  therefore  glory  in  your  espousal;  glory  not  in 
yourselves,  but  in  the  Lord,  who  hath  thus  freely  and  graciously 
bestowed  these  favours  upon  yon.  It  is  your  safety  to  bo 
espoused  unto  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  he  will  protect  and  defend 
you,  even  from  sin  and  Satan,  and  eternal  ruin ;  and  therefore 
thus  far  you  are  safe :  he  hath  a  regard  for  you  in  times  of  dan 
ger  from  men,  and  these  times  uf  danger  seem  to  be  hastening  \ 
it  is  now  arising  as  a  black  cloud  no  bigger  than  a  man's  hand, 
and  by  and  by  it  will  overspread  the  heavens,  and  when  it  is  full 
it  will  burst;  but  if  you  are  espoused  to  Christ,  you  are  safe. 

Now,  my  dear  sisters,  I  shall  conclude  with  an  earnest  exhorta 
tion  to  high  and  low,  rich  and  poor,  one  with  another,  to  bo 
espoused  unto  Christ. 

Let  me  speak  unto  you,  young  women,  who  are  not  yet  espous 
cd  unto  Christ,  in  an  especial  manner.     It  may  be,  to  satisfy 
your  curiosity  has  brought  many  of  you  here '  though  p«rhaps 


v.]  CHRIST   THE   BEST   HUSBAND.  83 

this  may  be  the  time  when  you  shall  be  brought  home  to  euibrace 
the  Lord  Jesus,  and  be  espoused  to  him.  And  O,  that  I  may 
persuade  you  by  his  Spirit,  to  espouse  yourselves  unto  the 
Lord  of  life. 

And  if  you  are  but  brought  to  close  with  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christy  I  shall  attain  my  end,  and  then  both  you  and  I  shall 
rejoice  that  I  preached  this  sermon  to  you. 

Come,  virgins,  will  you  give  me  leave  to  be  a  suitor  unto  you, 
not  in  my  own  name,  but  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  ?  O !  that  I 
may  prevail  with  you  for  your  affections,  and  persuade  you  to 
give  them  unto  Christ !  May  I  be  instrumental  of  bringing  your 
souls  to  Christ !  May  I  be  instrumental  to  join  you  and  Christ 
together  this  day ! 

Be  not  coy,  as  some  of  you  possibly  are  in  other  loves :  mo- 
desty and  the  virgin  blush  may  very  well  become  you,  when  pro- 
posals of  another  kind  are  made  unto  you ;  but  here  coyness  is 
lolly,  and  backwardness  to  accept  of  this  motion  is  shame :  you 
have  ten  thousand  times  more  reason  to  blush  at  the  refusal  of 
Christ  for  your  beloved,  than  at  the  acceptance ;  when  otherwise 
the  devil  and  sin  would  ravish  your  virgin  affections.  Never 
had  you  a  better  motion  made  to  you;  never  was  such  a  match 
proffered  to  you  as  this,  of  being  matched  and  espoused  unto 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

Consider  who  the  Lord  Jesus  is,  whom  you  are  invited  to 
espouse  yourselves  unto ;  he  is  the  best  husband ;  there  is  none 
comparable  to  Jesus  Christ. 

Do  you  desire  one  that  is  great?  He  is  of  the  highest  dig- 
nity, be  is  the  glory  of  heaven,  the  darling  of  eternity,  admired 
by  angels,  dreaded  by  devils,  and  adored  by  saints.  For  you  to 
be  espoused  to  so  great  a  king,  what  honour  will  you  have  by 
this  espousal ! 

Do  yon  desire  one  that  is  rich  ?  None  is  comparable  to  Christ : 
the  fulness  of  the  earth  belongs  to  him.  If  you  be  espoused  to 
Christ,  you  shall  share  in  his  unsearchable  riches ;  you  shall 
receive  of  bis  fulness,  even  grace  for  grace  here,  and  you  shall 
hereafter  be  admitted  to  glory,  and  shall  live  with  this  Jesus  to 
all  eternity. 

Do  you  desire  one  that  is  wise?  There  is  none  comparable 
to  Christ  for  wisdom.  His  knowledge  is  infinite,  and  his  wis- 
dom is  correspondent  thereto.  And  if  you  are  espoused  to 
Christ,  he  will  guide  and  counsel  you,  and  make  you  wise  unto 
salvation. 

Do  you  desire  one  that  is  potent,  who  may  defend  you  against 
your  enemies,  and  all  the  insults  and  reproaches  of  the  Phari- 
sees of  this  generation?  There  is  none  that  can  equal  Christ 
in  power;  for  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  hath  all  power. 

Do  you  desire  one  that  is  good?  There  is  none  like  unto 
Christ  in  this  regard:  others  may  have  some  goodness,  but  it  is 
imperfect;  Christ's  goodness  is  complete  and  perfect,  he  is  full 
of  goodness,  and  in  him  dwclleth  no  eviL 

Do  you  desire  one  that  is  beautiful?     His  eyes  are  most 

k2 


84  CHRIST  THB   BEST  HUSBAND.  [    . 

sparkling,  his  looks  and  glances  of  love  are  most  ravishing,  his 
smiles  are  most  delightful  and  refreshing  unto  the  soul ;  Christ 
is  the  most  lovely  person  of  all  others  in  the  world. 

Do  you  desire  one  that  can  love  you?  None  can  love  you 
like  Christ:  his  love,  my  dear  sisters,  is  incomprehensible;  his 
love  passeth  all  other  loves.  The  love  of  the  Lord  Jesus  is 
iirst,  without  beginning;  his  love 'is  free,  without  any  motive; 
bis  love  is  great,  without  any  measure ;  his  love  is  constant^  with- 
out any  change ;  and  his  love  is  everlasting. 

It  was  the  love  of  tlie  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  my  dear  sisters, 
which  brought  him  down  from  heaven ;  and  which  veUed  his 
divinity  in  a  human  soul  and  body ;  for  he  is  God  over  all 
blessed  for  ever:  it  was  love  that  made  him  subject  to  hunger, 
thirst,  and  sorrow ;  he  was  humbled,  even  unto  death  for  you : 
for  you  who  are  espoused  to  him,  he  underwent  the  painful, 
shameful,  and  ignominious  death  of  the  cross:  and  can  you,  my 
sisters,  hear  this,  and  not  be  concerned  to  think  that  the  blessed 
Jesus  underwent  all  this  for  such  sinful  creatures  as  you  and  I 
are?  And  when  out  of  love  he  had  finished  the  redemption  on 
earth,  as  to  what  was  needful  for  satisfaction ;  it  was  his  love 
that  carried  him  back  to  heaven,  where  he  was  before,  that  he 
might  make  application  of  what  he  had  purchased,  that  there  he 
might  make  intercession  for  those  whom  he  had  redeemed,  and 
prepare  a  place  for  them,  even  glorious  mansions  with  himself, 
in  the  house  not  made  with  hands,  which  is  eternal  in  the 
heavens.  It  is  out  of  love  that  he  sendeth  such  tokens  to  his 
people  from  heaven  to  earth,  which  he  conveys  through  his 
ordinances,  by  his  Spirit,  unto  them.  Surely  then  none  is 
so  deserving  as  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  for  you  to  espouse 
yourselves  unto:  if  you  be  espoused  unto  Christ  be  is  yours, 
all  that  he  is,  all  that  he  hath ;  you  shall  have  his  hearty  and 
share  in  the  choicest  expressions  of  his  dearest  love. 

The  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  my  dear  sisters,  doth  beseech  yon  to 
be  his  spouse.  We  ministers  have  a  commission  from  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  to  invite  you,  in  his  name,  unto  this  very  thing , 
and  Christ's  invitations  are  real,  general,  frequent,  earnest^  free. 

Christ's  invitations  of  you,  to  be  his  spouse,  are  real;  and  as 
the  thing  is  real,  so  you,  my  dear  sisters,  are  really  invited  unto 
it.  The  Lord  doth  not  mock  and  dissemble  with  you,  as  some 
pretending  lovers,  who  dissemble  love  unto  virgins,  until  they 
have  gained  their  affections,  and  then  falsely  and  basely  relin- 
quish them,  never  really  intending  either  to  espouse  or  many 
them :  but  the  Lord  doth  really  intend  the  thing,  in  his  invitations 
of  yon;  he  never  cast  off*  any  whose  consent  and  affections  he 
had  gained.    Again, 

Christ's  invitations  of  you,  my  dear  sisters,  are  getieral.  All 
of  you  are  invited,  none  of  you  are  excluded ;  all  sorts  of  sinners 
are  invited ;  the  most  vile  and  abominable  sinners,  the  most 
notorious  transgressors,  are  invited  to  be  Christ's  spouse,  and 
shall  be  as  welcome  as  any  unto  the  embraces  of  his  love. 

Christ's  invitations  of  yon  wee  frequent:  Jesus  Christ  calls  ou 


T.J  CHRIST  THE   BEST   HUSBAND.  85 

yoa  firequently ;  he  hath  waited  on  you  time  after  time,  one  year 
after  another ;  and  he  doth  now  invite  you,  by  me  this  day,  to 
come  onto  Him.  Do  not  slight  this  invitation,  but  receive  it 
with  joy  and  thankfulness.  Come,  I  beseech  you,  to  this  Jesus, 
who  thus  invites  you  to  be  his  spouse.     Again, 

Christ's  invitations  to  be  his  spouse  are  earnest;  he  doth  call 
upon  you,  and  not  only  call,  but  call  earnestly  too;  yea,  he 
useth  many  arguments  with  you:  he  will  press  you  to  come  unto 
him ;  he  is  loth  to  take  a  denial  from  you :  he  knocks,  and  knocks 
hard  at  the  door  of  your  hearts  for  entertainment;  and  surely 
you  will  not  deny  the  Lord  of  life  and  glory,  who  died  for  you, 
and  gave  himself  for  you :  O  my  dear  sisters,  let  this  be  tbe 
evening  of  your  espousals  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

He  invites  you  freely  to  be  his  spouse,  for  all  his  invitations 
are  free ;  he  doth  not  expect  a  portion  with  you,  as  worldly 
lovers  do ;  he  wants  nothing  of  you :  nay,  you  must  have  nothing, 
if  yon  be  espoused  unto  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  If  you  be  poor» 
miserable,  blind,  naked,  Jesus  Christ  will  supply  all  these 
defects  of  his  own  free  mercy;  he  will  fill  and  supply  you  with 
all  things  out  of  his  treasury ;  he  will  make  you  meet  for  him- 
self;  he  will  prepare  you  to  live  with  him  for  ever. 

Consider,  if  you  be  once  espoused  unto  Christ,  if  once  joined 
in  this  relation,  you  shall  never  be  separated  from  him ;  neither 
men  nor  devils  shall  be  able  to  separate  you :  none,  none  shall 
disjoin  you :  and  when  death  doth  break  all  other  bonds,  it  shall 
not  break  the  conjugal  bond  between  you  and  Christ,  but  bring 
you  unto  the  most  full  and  everlasting  possession  of  your  beloved. 

And  what  do  you  now  say,  young  women  ?  Shall  I  have  a 
grant  for  my  Master,  or  be  sent  away  with  a  repulse  and  refusal? 
No,  I  cannot  carry  such  a  message  to  my  Master;  I  hope  better 
things  of  you,  my  sisters,  and  things  which  accompany  salva- 
tion :  methinks  by  this  time  ye  should  begin  to  have  a  mind  unto 
Jesus  Christ;  you  look  as  if  you  did  desire;  you  hearken  as  if 
you  would  consent.  What  do  you  say  ?  Shall  tlie  match  be 
made  up  this  evening  between  Christ  and  your  souls?  O  that 
I  may  be  instrumental  in  joining  your  hands,  or  rather  your 
hearts^  together !  ^O  that  I  may  be  instrumental  to  tie  that  knot 
which  never  can  be  unloosed. 

Some  marry  in  haste,  and  repent  at  leisure ;  but  if  you  were 
once  espoused  unto  Jesus  Christ,  you  would  never  repent ; 
nothing  would  grieve  you,  but  that  you  were  not  joined  to  liim 
sooner;  and  you  would  not  be  disjoined  again  for  all  the 
world. 

Shall  this  be  the  day  of  your  espousals?  Some  of  you  have 
stayed  a  long  time;  and  will  you  defer  any  longer?  If  you  will 
not  now,  perhaps  you  may  never  have  another  opportunity ;  this 
may  be  tlie  last  time  of  asking;  and  therefore  it  is  dangerous  to 
refuse:  some  of  you  are  very  young,  too  young  for  other 
espousals  ;  bat  none  of  you,  my  dear  sisters,  are  too  young  to 
be  espoused  unto  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ :  in  other  espousals,  you 
must  have  the  consent  of  your  parents ;  but  in  this  you  are  at 


86  .  CHRIST   THE   BEST   HUSEAND.  [V. 

your  own  disposal ;  you  may  give,  and  ought  to  match  your- 
selves to  Christ,  whether  parents  do  consent  or  not. 

But  if  any  of  you  should  ask,  what  you  must  do  that  you  may 
be  espoused  unto  Christ?  You  must  be  sensible  of  your  need 
of  being  espoused  to  him :  and  until  you  are  sensible  of  your 
need  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  you  cannot  be  espoused  to  him  ; 
you  must  have  desires  after  this  Jesus,  and  seek  unto  him  for  an 
interest  in  him ;  you  must  cry  mightily  unto  him  to  espouse  you 
to  himself:  put  off  the  filthiness  of  sin,  and  all  its  defilements ; 
and  then,  my  sisters,  put  on  the  white  raiment,  and  clean  gar- 
ments, which  Christ  hath  provided  for  you,  the  robes  of  his 
righteousness  ;  in  these  garments  you  shall  be  beautiful ;  and  in 
these  garments  you  shall  be  accepted :  you  must  have  the  wed- 
ding garment  on ;  you  must  put  off  all  your  own  good  works, 
for  they  will  be  but  a  means  to  keep  you  from  Christ ;  no,  you 
must  come  as  not  having  your  own  righteousness,  which  is  of 
the  law,  but  you  must  have  the  righteousness  of  Christ.  There- 
fore, come  unto  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  he  will  give  it  to  you ; 
he  will  not  send  you  away  without  it.  Receive  him  upon  his 
own  terms,  and  he  is  yours  for  ever :  O  devote  yourselves  to  him, 
soul  and  body,  and  all,  to  be  his  for  ever ;  and  Christ  will  be 
yours,  and  then  happy,  happy  you,  that  ever  you  were  barn ! 
But  if  any  of  you  die  before  this  espousal  unto  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  then  woe,  woe  unto  you,  that  ever  you  had  a  being  in 
life ;  but  if  you  go  to  Christ,  you  shall  be  espoused  unto  the  Lord 
Jesus :  though  your  sins  have  been  ever  so  great,  yea,  the  blood 
of  Christ  will  cleanse  you  from  them  ;  the  marriage  covenant 
between  Christ  and  your  souls  will  dissolve  all  your  sins ;  you 
will  tlien  be  weary  of  your  old  ways,  for  all  things  will  become 
new  in  your  souls. 

Now,  my  dear  sisters,  I  shall  conclude  by  just  speaking  a 
word  or  two  to  those  of  you,  who  are  already  espoused  unto  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

0  admire,  admire  the  rich  and  free  grace  which  hath  brought 

?rou  to  this  relation  :  is  not  this  an  instance  of  the  greatness  of 
ove,  that  you  should  be  the  spouse  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ? 
You  that  had  no  beauty,  you  that  had  no  comeliness,  that  were 
full  of  sin,  that  he  should  embrace  such  as  you  and  I  are ;  that 
we  should  be  taken  into  the  embrace  of  this  Lord  Jesus.  (> 
infinite  condescending  kindness !  O  amazing  love !  Reverence, 
reverence,  I  beseech  you,  this  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

He  is  your  Ijord,  and  you  must  reverence  him,  love  and  be 
faithful  unto  him,  be  subject  to  him,  and  careful  to  please  him 
in  every  thing ;  endeavour  to  keep  up  a  daily  communion  with 
him ;  look,  long,  and  prepare  for  Christ's  second  appearance, 
when  the  nuptials  between  you  shall  be  solemnized,  and  you  live 
with  him  in  mansions  of  everlasting  joys,  where  you  shall  love 
and  live  with  this  King  of  g*ory  for  ever  and  ever. 

1  know  not  how  to  conclude :  methiuks  I  could  speak  to  yon 
till  midnight,  if  it  would  bring  you  unto  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
and  make  you  be  espoused  to  him,  for  indeed  that  will  be  the 


VI.]  BRITAIN'S  MBRCIBS,  AND   BRITAIN'S   DUTV.  87 

espousal  which  will  turn  to  the  greatest  advantage,  as  you  will 
find  by  experience,  if  you  do  but  make  the  trial ;  and  that  you 
may  do  so,  my  prayers,  and  my  constant  endeavours  shall  be 
used. 

I  will,  my  dear  sisters,  spend  and  be  spent  for  you,  and,  by 
the  assistance  of  God,  will  persevere  in  this  that  I  have  begun  : 
and,  as  many  of  you  may  have  opportunity  some  evening  in  the 
week,  without  breaking  in  on  the  business  of  life  ;  I  shall  therefore, 
my  sisters,  either  be  here,  or  where  you  shall  be  publicly  ac- 
quainted with ;  I  will  not  mind  being  reproached  or  despised  : 
the  men  of  this  world  may  use  what  language  they  please;  they 
may  say  I  am  a  Methodist.  Indeed,  my  sisters,  I  am  resolved 
by  the  grace  of  God,  to  use  all  methods  I  can,  to  pluck  you  from 
Satan,  that  you  may  be  as  brands  plucked  from  the  burning 
fire ;  this  shall  be  my  method,  which  I  hope  will  be  the  means 
of  effectually  saving  your  precious  and  immortal  souls. 

And  if  I  am  the  instrument  of  this,  I  shall  rejoice,  yea,  and 
I  will  rejoice,  in  spite  of  what  men  or  devils  can  say  or  do  to 
the  contrary :'  and  may  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  direct  and  assist 
me  at  aU  times,  to  act  what  will  be  most  for  his  glory  and  the 
welfare  of  your  souls :  and  may  you  all  say  a  hearty  amen 
thereto ! 

*'  Now  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  God  over  all,  blessed 
for  ever,  assist  and  waitch  over  you,  keep  you  from  all  evil  and 
sin  here,  and  present  you  before  his  Father  faultless,  at  the  great 
day  of  account !  To  this  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Father,  and 
the  blessed  Spirit,  three  persons,  and  but  one  eternal  and  invi- 
sible God,  be  ascribed  all  honour,  pow^sr,  glory,  might,  majesty, 
and  dominion,  now,  henceforth,  and  for  evermore.  Amen, 
Amen/' 

*^  The  grace  of  our  liord  Jesus  Christ,  the  love  of  God,  and 
the  fellowship  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  be  with  you  all,  to  comfort 
under,  and  deliver  you  from,  tribulation  ;  to  preserve  you  to  your 
respective  places  of  abode  ;  and  when  there,  to  keep  you  in  his 
fear,  that  you  may  live  to  his  glory ;  that  to  live  may  be  Christ's, 
and  to  die  be  your  eternal  gain ;  so  that  you  may  live  with 
him  through  eternal  ages,  and  sing  Hallelujabs  to  him  for  ever. 
Amen. 

SERMON  VI. 

BRITAIN'S  MERCIES,  AND  BRITAIN'S  DUTY. 

PREACHED  AT  Ptf'lLADF.LPUIA,  ON  SUNDAY,  AUGUST   24,  1746,  AND  OCCASIONED  BY 
THE  SUPPRESSION  OF  TUE  LATE  UNNATURAL  REBELLION. 

PsALM  cv.  45.  That  they  might  observe  his  statues,  and  keep  his 

laws. 

Men,  brethren,  and  fathers,  and  all  ye  to  whom  I  am  about 
to  preach  the  kingdom  of  God,  I  suppose  you  need  not  be  in- 
formed, that  being  indispensably  obliged  to  be  absent  on  your 
iate  thanksgiving-day,  I  could  not  shew  my  obedience  to  the 


8S  Britain's  mbrpibs,  [vf^ 

governor's  proclamation,  as  my  own  inclination  led  me,  or  as 
might  justly  be  expected  from,  and  demaiided  of  me.  Bnt  as 
the  occasion  of  that  day's  thanksgiving  is  yet,  and  I  trust  ever 
will  be,  fresh  in  our  memory,  I  cannot  think  that  a  discourse  on 
that  subject  can  eyen  now  be  altogether  unseasonable.  I  take 
it  for  granted,  further^  that  you  need  not  be  informed,  that 
among  the  Tarious  motives  which  are  generally  urged  to  enforce 
obedience  to  the  divine  commands,  that  of  love  is  the  most 
powerful  and  cogent.  The  terrors  of  the  law  may  affrieht  and 
awe,  but  love  dissolves  and  melts  the  heart.  '^The  love  of 
Christ,"  says  the  great  apostle  of  the  Gentiles,  "  constraineth 
us."  Nay,  love  is  so  absolutely  necessary  for  those  that  name 
the  name  of  Christ,  that  without  it  their  obedience  cannot  truly 
be  styled  evangelical,  or  be  acceptable  in  the  sight  of  God.  Al- 
though (says  the  apostle)  I  bestow  all  my  goods  to  feed  the 
poor,  and  though  I  give  my  body  to  be  burnt,  and  have  not  cha- 
rity," (that  is,  unless  unfeigned  love  to  God,  and  to  mankind, 
for  his  great  name's  sake,  be  the  principle  of  such  actions,  how- 
ever it  may  benefit  others)  *^  it  profiteth  me  nothing."  This  is 
the  constant  language  of  the  lively  oracles  of  God.  And  from 
them  it  is  equally  plain,  that  nothing  has  a  greater  tendency 
to  beget  and  excite  such  an  obediential  love  in  us,  than  a  serious 
and  frequent  consideration  of  the  manifold  mercies  we  receive 
time  after  time  from  the  bands  of  our  heavenly  Father.  The 
royal  Psalmist,  who  had  the  honour  of  being  styled,  ^*  the  man 
after  God's  own  heart,"  had  an  abundant  experience  of  this. 
Hence  it  is,  that  whilst  he  .is  musing  on  the  divine  goodness, 
the  fire  of  divine  love  kindles  in  his  soul :  and  out  of  the  abun- 
dance of  his  heart,  his  mouth  speaketh  such  grateful  and  ecsta- 
tic language  as  this :  "  What  shall  I  render  unto  the  Lord  for 
all  his  mercies  ?  Bless  the  Lord,  O  my  soul ;  and  all  that  is 
withii^  me,  bless  his  holy  name."  And  why  ?  '*  Who  forgiveth 
all  thine  iniquities,  who  healeth  all  thy  diseases,  who  redeemeth 
thy  life  from  destruction,  who  crowneth  thee  with  loving  kind- 
ness and  tender  mercies."  And  whep  the  same  holy  man  of 
God  had  a  mind  to  stir  up  the  people  of  the  Jews  to  set  about 
a  national  reformation,  as  the  most  weighty  and  prevailing 
argument  he  could  make  use  of  for  that  purpose,  he  lays  before 
them,  as  it  were  in  a  draught,  many  national  mercies,  and  dis- 
tinguishing deliverances^  which  have  been  conferred  upon,  and 
wrought  out  for  them,  by  the  most  high  God.  The  psalm  to 
which  the  words  of  our  text  belong,  is  a  pregnant  proof  of  this  ; 
it  being  a  kind  of  epitome  or  compendium  of  the  whole  Jewish 
history ;  at  least  it  contains  an  enumeration  of  many  signal  and 
extraordinary  blessings  the  Israelites  had  rcceivea  from  God, 
and  also  the  improvement  they  were  in  duty  bound  to  make  of 
them — ^'Observe  his  statues,  and  keep  his  laws." 

To  run  through  all  the  particulars  of  the  psalm,  or  draw  a 
parallel  (which  might  with  great  ease  and  justice  be  done)  be- 
tween God's  dealings  with  us  and  the  Israelites  of  old:  to  enu» 
meratc  all  the  national  mercies  liestowed  upon,  and  remarkable 


VI.J  AND  BRITAIN'S  DUTY.  89 

tleliyerances  wrought  out  for,  the  kingdoms  of  Great  Britain  aad 
Ireland,  from  the  infant  state  of  William  the  Norman,  to  their 
present  manhood,  and  more  than  Augustan  maturity,  under  the 
auspicious  reign  of  our  rightful  sovereign  king  George  II. ;  how- 
soever pleasing  and  profitable  it  might  be,  at  any  other  time, 
would  at  this  juncture  prove,  if  not  an  irksome,  yet  an  unrea- 
sonable undertaking. 

The  occasion  of  the  late  solemnity,  I  mean  the  suppression 
of  a  most  horrid  and  unnatural  rebellion,  will  aflford  more  than 
sufficient  matter  for  a  discourse  of  this  nature,  and  furnish  U9 
with  abundant  motives  to  love  and  obey  that  glorious  Jehovah, 
''  who  giveth  salvation  unto  kings,  and  delivers  bis  people  from 
the  hurtful  sword." 

Need  I  make  an  apology  before  this  auditory,  if,  in  order  to 
see  the  greatness  of  our  late  deliverance,  I  should  remind  you  of 
the  many  unspeakable  blessings  which  we  have  for  a  course  of 
years  enjoyed,  during  the  reign  of  his  present  majesty,  and  the 
gentle  nuld  administration  under  which  we  live.  Without  justly 
incurring  the  censure  of  giving  flattering  titles,  I  believe  all  who 
have  eyes  to  see,  and  ears  to  hear,  and  are  but  little  acquainted 
with  our  public  affairs,  must  acknowledge  that  we  have  one  of 
the  best  of  kings.  It  is  now  above  nineteen  years  since  he 
began  to  reign  over  us.  And  yet,  were  he  seated  on  a  royal 
throne,  and  were  all  his  subjects  placed  before  him,'  were  he  to 
address  them  as  Samuel  once  addressed  the  Israelites, ''  Behold 
here  I  am,  (old  and  grey-headed,)  witness  against  me  before  the 
Lord,  whose  ox  have  I  taken  ?  or  whose  ass  have  I  taken?  or 
whom  have  I  defrauded?  whom  have  I  oppressed?"  Thej 
must^  if  they  would  do  him  justice,  make  the  same  answer  as 
was  given  to  Samuel,  *'  Thou  hast  not  defrauded  us,  nor  oppress- 
ed us."  What  Tertullus,  by  way  of  flattery,  said  to  Felix,  may 
with  the  strictest  justice  be  applied  to  our  sovereign, ''  By  thee 
we  enjoy  great  quietness,  and  very  worthy  deeds  have  been 
done  unto  our  nation  by  thy  providence."  He  has  been  indeed 
Pater  PatruB,  a  father  to  pur  country,  and,  though  old  and  grey- 
headed, has  jeoparded  his  precious  life  for  us  in  the  high  places 
of  the  field.  Nor  has  he  less  deserved  the  great  and  glorious  title 
which  the  Lord  promises  that  kings  should  sustain  in  the  latter 
days,  (I  mean,  **  a  nursing  father  of  the  church,")  for  not  only  in 
the  church  of  England  as  by  law  established,  but  all  denominations 
of  Christians  whatsoever,  have  enjoyed  their  religious  as  well  as 
civil  liberties.  As  there  has  been  no  authorized  oppression  in  th» 
state,  so  there  has  been  no  publicly  allowed  persecution  in  tbt 
charch.  We  breathe  indeed  in  free  air,  as  free,  if  not  freer,  both 
as  to  temporals  and  spirituals,  than  any  nation  under  heaven.  Nor 
is  the  prospect  likely  to  terminate  in  his  majesty's  death,  which 
I  pray  God  to  defer.  Our  princesses  are  disposed  of  to  protestant 
powers.  And  we  have  great  reason  to  be  assured,  that  the  pre- 
sent heir  apparent,  and  his  consort,  are  like-minded  with  their 
royal  father.  And  I  cannot  help  thinking,  that  it  is  a  peculiar 
blessing  vouchsafed  us  by  the  King  of  kings,  that  his  present 


90  Britain's  mercies,  [vi. 

majesty  has  been  continued  so  long  among  us.  For  now,  his 
immediate  successor  (though  his  present  situation  obliges  him 
as  it  were  to  lie  dormant)  has  great  and  glorious  opportunities, 
which  we  have  reason  to  think  he  daUy  improves,  of  observing 
and  weighing  the  national  affairs,  considering  the  various  steps 
and  turns  of  government,  and  consequently  of  putting  in  a  large 
fund  of  experience,  to  make  him  a  wise  and  great  prince,  if  ever 
Grod  should  call  him  to  sway  the  British  sceptre.  Happy  art 
thou,  O  England  !  happy  art  thou,  O  America !  who  on  every 
side  art  thus  highly  favoured ! 

But,  alas !  how  soon  would  this  happy  scene  have  shifted,  and 
a  melancholy  gloomy  prospect  have  succeeded  in  its  room,  had 
the  rebels  gained  their  point,  and  a  popish  abjured  Pretender 
being  forced  upon  the  British  throne !  For,  supposing  his  birth 
not  to  be  spurious,  (as  we  have  great  reason  to  think  it  really  was,) 
what  could  we  expect  from  one  descended  from  a  father,  who, 
when  duke  of  York,  put  all  Scotland  into  confusion  ;  and  after- 
wards, when  crowned  king  of  England,  for  his  arbitrary  and 
tyrannical  government,  both  in  church  and  state,  was  justiy 
obliged  to  abdicate  the  throne,  by  the  assertorsof  British  liberty? 
Or,  supposing  the  horrid  plot,  first  hatched  in  hell,  and  after- 
afterwards  nursed  at  Rome,  had  taken  place :  supposing,  I  say, 
the  old  Pretender  should  have  obtained  the  triple  crown,  and 
have  transferred  his  pretended  tide  (bls  it  is  reported  he  has 
done)  to  his  eldest  son;  what  was  all  tbis  for,  but  that  by  being 
advanced  to  the  popedom,  he  might  rule  both  son  and  subjects 
with  less  control,  and,  by  their  united  interest,  keep  the  three 
kingdoms  of  England,  Scotland,  and  Ireland,  in  greater  vassal- 
age to  the  see  of  Rome  ?  Ever  since  this  unnatural  rebellion 
broke  out,  I  have  looked  upon  the  young  Pretender  as  the 
Phaeton  of  the  present  age.  He  is  ambitiously  and  presump- 
tuously aiming  to  seat  himself  in  the  throne  of  our  rightful 
sovereign  king  Greorge,  which  he  is  no  more  capable  of  keeping 
than  Phaeton  was  to  guide  the  chariot  of  the  sun ;  and  had  he 
succeeded  in  the  attempt,  like  him,  would  only  have  set  the 
world  on  fire.  It  is  true,  to  do  him  justice,  he  has  deserved 
well  of  the  church  of  Rome,  and  in  all  probability  will  hereafter 
be  canonized  among  the  noble  order  of  their  fictitious  saints. 
But,  with  what  an  iron  rod  we  might  expect  to  have  been 
bruised,  had  his  troops  been  victorious,  may  easily  be  gathered 
from  those  cruel  orders,  said  to  be  found  in  the  pockets  of  some 
of  his  officers,  ''Give  no  quarter  to  the  elector's  troops."  Add 
to  this,  that  there  was  great  reason  to  suspect,  that  upon  the 
first  news  of  the  success  of  the  rebels,  a  general  massacre  was 
intended.  So  that  if  the  Lord  had  not  been  on  our  side.  Great 
Britain,  not  to  say  America,  would  in  a  few  weeks,  or  months, 
bave  been  an  Aceldama,  a  field  of  blood. 

Besides,  was  a  popish  Pretender  to  rule  over  us,  instead  of 
being  represented  by  a  free  parliament,  and  governed  by  laws 
made  by  their  consent,  as  we  now  are ;  we  should  shortiy  have 
had  only  the  shadow  of  one,  and,  it  may  be,  no  parliament  at 


VI.  ]  AND  BRITAIN'S  DUTY.  91 

aU.  This  is  the  native  product  of  a  popish  gOYemment,  and 
\?bat  the  nnhappy  family  from  which  this  yonng  adventurer 
pretends  he  descended,  has  always  aimed  at.  Arbitrary  princi- 
ples he  has  sucked  in  with  his  mother's  milk,  and  if  he  had 
been  so  honest,  instead  of  that  immature  motto  upon  his  stand- 
ard. Tandem  triumphans,  only  to  have  put  Stet  pro  ratiane  Vih- 
luntasy  he  had  given  us  a  short,  but  true  portrait  of  the  nature 
of  his  intended,  but,  blessed  be  God,  now  defeated  reign.  And 
why  should  I  mention,  that  the  sinking  of  the  national  debt,  or 
rending  away  the  funded  property  of  the  people,  and  the  disso- 
lution of  the  present  happy  union  between  the  two  kingdoms, 
would  have  been  the  immediate  consequences  of  his  success, 
as  he  himself  declares  in  his  second  manifesto,  dated  from  Holy- 
rood  House.  These  are  evils,  and  great  ones  too  ;  but  then  they 
are  only  evils  of  a  temporary  nature.  They  chiefly  concern  the 
body,  and  must  necessarily  terminate  in  the  grave. 

But,  alas!  what  an  inundation  of  spiritual  mischief  would 
soon  have  overflowed  the  church,  and  what  unspeakable  dan- 
ger should  we  and  our  posterity  have  been  reduced  to,  in  respect 
to  our  better  parts,  our  precious  and  immortal  souls  ?  How 
soon  would  whole  swarms  of  monks,  dominicans,  and  friars, 
like  so  many  locusts,  have  overspread  and  plagued  the  nation  ; 
with  what  winged  speed  would  foreign  titular  bishops  have 
posted  over,  in  order  to  take  possession  of  their  respective  sees  ? 
How  quickly  would  our  universities  have  been  filled  with  youths 
who  have  been  sent  abroad  by  their  popish  parents,  in  order  to 
drink  in  all  the  superstitions  of  the  church  of  Rome  ?  What  a 
speedy  period  would  have  been  put  to  societies  of  all  kinds,  for 
promoting  Christian  knowledge,  and  propagating  the  gospel  in 
foreign  parts  ?  How  soon  would  our  pulpits  every  where  have 
been  filled  with  those  old  antichristian  doctrines,  free-will, 
meriting  by  works,  transubstantiation,  purgatory,  works  of  supe- 
rerogation, passive  obedience,  non-resistance,  and  all  other  abo- 
minations of  the  whore  of  Babylon.  How  soon  would  our  pro- 
testant  charity-schools  in  England,  Scotland,  and  Ireland,  have 
been  palled  down,  our  Bibles  forcibly  taken  from  us,  and  igno- 
rance every  where  set  up  as  the  mother  of  devotion  I  How 
soon  should  we  have  been  deprived  of  that  invaluable  blessing, 
liberty  of  conscience,  and  been  obliged  to  commence  (what  they 
falsely  call)  Catholics,  or  submit  to  all  the  tortures  which  a 
bigoted  zeal,  guided  by  the  most  cruel  principles,  could  possibly 
invent !  How  soon  would  that  mother  of  harlots  have  made 
herself  once  more  drunk  with  the  blood  of  the  saints  !  and  the 
whole  tribe,  even  of  free-thinkers  themselves,  been  brought  to 
this  dilemma,  either  to  die  martyrs  for,  (although  I  never  heard 
yet  of  one  that  did  so,)  or,  contrary  to  all  their  most  avowed 
principles,  renounce  their  great  Diana,  unassisted,  unenlightened 
reason !  But  I  must  have  done,  lest,  while  I  am  speaking  against 
antichrist,  I  should  unawares  fall  myself,  and  lead  my  hearers, 
into  an  antichristian  spirit.  True  and  undcfiled  religion  will 
regulate  oar  zeal,  and   teach  us  to  treat  even  the  man  of  sin 


92  BRITAIN'S   MERCIES,  [Vl. 

with  no  harsher  langaage  than  that  which  the  angel  gave  to  his 
grand  employer  Satan,  '^  The  Lord  rebnke  thee." 

Glory  be  to  God's  great  name  !  the  Lord  has  rebnked  him ; 
and  that  too  at  a  time  when  we  had  little  reason  to  expect  such 
a  blessing  at  God's  hands.  My  dear  hearers,  neither  the  pre- 
sent frame  of  my  heart,  nor  the  occasion  of  your  late  solemn 
meeting,  lead  me  to  give  yon  a  detaU  of  our  pubUc  vicei^.  Though, 
alas !  they  are  so  many,  so  notorious,  and  withal  of  such  a  crim- 
son-die, that  a  gospel,  minister  would  not  be  altogether  inex- 
cusable, were  be,  even  on  such  a  joyful  occasion,  to  lift  up  his 
voice  like  a  trumpet,  to  shew  the  British  nation  their  transgres- 
sion, and  the  people  of  America  their  sin.  However,  though  I 
would  not  cast  a  dismal  shade  upon  the  pleasing  picture  the 
cause  of  our  late  rejoicings  set  before  us ;  yet  thus  much  may, 
and  ought  to  be  said,  that  as  Grod  has  not  dealt  so  bountifully 
with  any  people  as  with  us,' so  no  nation  under  heaven  has  dealt 
more  ungratefully  with  Him.  We  have  been  like  Capernaum, 
lifted  up  to  heaven  in  privileges,  and  for  the  abuse  of  them,  like 
her,  have  deserved  to  be  thrust  down  into  hell.  How  well 
soever  it  may  be  with  us,  in  respect  to  our  civil  and  ecclesias* 
tical  constitution,  yet  in  regard  to  our  morals,  Isaiah's  descrip- 
tion of  the  Jewish  polity  is  too  applicable,  ''  The  whole  head  is 
sick,  the  whole  heart  is  faint;  from  the  crown  of  the  head  to  the 
sole  of  our  feet,  we  are  full  of  wounds,  and  bruises,  and  putrifying 
seres."  We  have,  Jeshurun-like,  waxed  fat  and  kicked.  We 
have  played  the  harlot  against  God,  both  in  regard  to  principles 
and  practices.  ^*  Our  gold  is  become  dim,  and  our  fine  gold 
changed."  We  have  crucified  the  Son  of  God  afresh,  and  pat 
bini  to  an  open  shame.  Nay,  Christ  has  been  wounded  in  the 
bouse  of  his  friends.  And  every  thing  long  ago  seemed  to  threaten 
an  immediate  storm.  But,  O  the  long-suflering  and  goodness  of 
Crod  to  US-ward !  When  all  things  seemed  ripe  for  destruction, 
and  matters  were  come  to  such  a  crisis,  that  God's  praying  peo- 
ple began  to  think,  that  though  Noah,  Daniel,  and  Job,  were 
living,  they  would  only  deliver  their  own  souls ;  yet  then  in  the 
midst  of  judgment  the  Most  High  remembered  mercy,  and  when 
a  popish  enemy  was  breaking  in  upon  us  like  a  AockI,  the  Lord 
himself  graciously  lifted  up  a  standard. 

This  to  me  does  not  seem  Ito  be  one  of  the  most  unfavourable 
circumstances  which  have  attended  this  mighty  deliverance ;  nor 
do  I  think  you  will  look  upon  it  as  a  circumstance  altogether 
nnworthy  your  observation.  Had  this  cockatrice  indeed  been 
crushed  in  the  egg,  and  the  young  Pretender  driven  back  upon 
his  first  arrival,  it  would  undoubtedly  have  been  a  great  bless- 
ing. But  not  so  great  as  that  for  which  you  lately  assembled  to 
give  God  thanks :  for  then  his  majesty  would  not  have  had  so 
good  an  opportunity  of  knowing  his  enemies  or  trying  his  friends. 
The  British  subjects  would  in  a  manner  have  lost  the  fairest 
occasion  that  ever  offered  to  express  their  loyalty  and  gratitude 
to  the  rightful  sovereign.  France  would  not  then  have  been  so 
greatly  humbled ;  nor  such  an  effectual  stop  have  been  put,  as 


TiJ  AND  BRITAIN'S   DUTY.  93 

we  trnst  there  now  is,  to  any  such  further  popish  plot  to  rob  us 
of  all  that  is  near  and  dear  to  us.  "  Out  of  the  eater  therefore 
hath  come  forth  meat,  and  out  of  the  strong  hath  come  forth 
sweetness."  The  Pretender*s  eldest  son  is  suffered  not  only  to 
land  in  the  north-west  Highlands  in  Scotland,  but  in  a  little 
while  he  becomes  a  great  band.  This  for  a  time  is  not  believed, 
but  treated  as  a  thing  altogether  incredible.  The  friends  of  the 
government  in  those  parts,  not  for  want' of  loyalty,  but  of  suffi- 
cient authority  to  take  up  arms,  could  not  resist  him.  He  is 
permitted  to  pass  on  with  his  terrible  banditti,  and,  like  the 
comet  that  was  lately  seen,  spreads  his  baleful  influences  all 
around  him.  He  is  likewise  permitted  to  gain  a  short-lived  tri- 
umph by  a  victory  over  a  body  of  our  troops  at  Preston-pans, 
and  to  take  a  temporary  possession  of  the  metropolis  of  Scot- 
land. Of  this  he  makes  his  boast,  and  informs  the  public,  ^^  that 
Providence  bad  hitherto  favoured  him  with  wonderful  success,  led 
him  in  the  way  to  victory,  and  to  the  capital  of  the  ancient  king- 
dom, though  he  came  without  foreign  aid."  Nay,  he  is  further 
permitted  to  press  into  the  very  heart  of  England.  But  now  the 
Almighty  interposes.  Hitherto  he  was  to  go,  and  no  further. 
Here  were  his  malicious  designs  to  be  staid.  His  troops  of  a 
sadden  are  driven  back.  Away  they  post  to  the  Highlands,  and 
there  they  are  suffered  not  only  to  increase,  but  also  to  collect 
themselves  into  a  large  body,  that  having,  as  it  were,  what  Ca« 
ligula  once  wished  Rome  had,  but  one  neck,  they  might  be  cut 
off  with  one  blow. 

The  time,  manner,  and  instrument  of  this  victory,  deserves  our 
notice.  It  was  on  a  general  fast-day,  when  the  clergy  and  good 
people  of  Scotland  were  lamenting  the  disloyalty  of  their  perfidi- 
ous countrymen,  and^  like  Moses,  lifting  up  their  hands,  that 
Amalek  might  not  prevail.  The  victory  was  total  and  decisive. 
little  blood  was  spilt  on  the  side  of  the  royalists.  And,  to 
crown  all,  duke  William,  his  majesty's  youngest  son,  has  the 
honour  of  first  driving  back,  and  then  defeating  the  rebel-army. 
A  prince,  who  in  his  infancy  and  youth  gave  early  proofs  of  an 
ancommoQ  bravery  and  nobleness  of  mind ;  a  prince,  whose  cou- 
rage has  increased  with  his  years  :  who  returned  wounded  from 
the  battle  of  Dettingen,  behaved  with  surprising  bravery  at  Fon- 
tenoy,  and  now,  by  a  conduct  and  magnanimity  becoming  the 
high  office  he  sustains,  like  his  glorious  predecessor  the  prince 
of  Orange,  has  delivered  three  kingdoms  from  the  dread  of  po^ 
pish  cruelty  and  arbitrary  power.  What  renders  it  still  more 
remarkable  is,  the  day  on  which  his  highness  gained  this  vic- 
tory, was  the  day  after  his  birth-day,  when  he  was  entering  on 
the  26th  year  of  his  age ;  and  when  Sullivan,  one  of  the  Pretend- 
er's privy-council,  like  another  Ahithophel,  advised  the  rebels  to 
give  oar  soldiers  battle,  presuming  they  were  surfeited  and  over- 
charged with  their  yesterday's  rejoicings,  and  consequently 
unfit  to  make  any  great  stand  against  them.  But,  glory  be  to 
God,  who  catches  the  wise  in  their  own  craftiness !  his  counsel, 
tike  Ahithopbel's,  pfoves  abortive.    Both  general  and  soldiers 


94  BRITAIN'S   MBRGIEfl,    '  [Vl. 

were  prepared  to  meet  them.  ^'  God  taught  their  hands  to  war, 
and  their  fingers  to  fight/'  and  brought  the  duke,  after  a  deserved 
slaughter  of  some  thousands  of  the  rebels,  with  most  of  his  brave 
soldiers,  victorious  from  the  field. 

If  we  then  take  a  distinct  view  of  this  notable  transaction,  and 
trace  it  in  all  the  particular  circumstances  that  have  attended  it, 
I  believe  we  must  with  one  heart  and  voice  confess,  that  if 
it  be  a  mercy  for  a  state  to  be  delivered  from  a  worse  than  a 
Cataline's  conspiracy,  or  a  church  to  be  rescued  from  a  hotter 
than  a  Dioclesian  persecution ;  if  it  be  a  mercy  to  be  delivered 
from  a  religion  that  turns  ploughshares  into  swords,  and  pruning- 
hooks  into  spears,  and  makes  it  meritorious  to  shed  protestant 
blood ;  if  it  be  a  mercy  to  have  all  our  present  in  valuable  privileges, 
both  in  church  and  state,  secured  to  us  more  than  ever;  if  it  be  a 
mercy  to  have  these  great  things  done  for  us,  at  a  season,  when,  for 
our  crying  sins,  both  church  and  state  deserved  to  be  overturned ; 
and  if  it  be  a  mercy  to  have  all  this  brought  about  for  us,  under 
God,  by  one  of  the  blood-royal,  a  prince  acting  with  an  experi- 
ence far  above  his  years ;  if  any  or  all  of  these  are  mercies,  then 
have  you  lately  commemorated  one  of  tlie  greatest  mercies  that 
ever  the  glorious  God  vouchsafed  to  the  British  nation. 

And  shall  we  not  rejoice  and  give  thanks  ?  Should  we  refuse, 
would  not  the  stones  cry  out  against  us?  Rejoice  then  we  may 
and  ought:  but,  O  let  our  rejoicing  be  in  the  Lord,  and  run  in 
a  religious  channel.  This,  we  find,  has  been  the  practice  of 
God's  people  in  all  ages.  When  he  was  pleased,  with  a  mighty 
hand  and  out-stretched  arm,  to  lead  the  Israelites  through  the 
Red  Sea,  as  on  dry  ground,  **  then  sang  Moses  and  the  chil- 
dren of  Israel :  and  Miriam  the  prophetess,  the  sister  of  Aaron, 
took  a  timbrel  in  her  hand,  and  all  the  women  went  out  after 
her.  And  Miriam  answered  them.  Sing  ye  unto  the  Lord ;  for 
be  bath  triumphed  gloriously."  When  God  subdued  Jabin,  the 
king  of  Canaan,  before  the  children  of  Israel,  ^*  then  sang  Debo- 
rah and  Barak  on  that  day,  sajring.  Praise  ye  the  Lord  for  the 
avenging  of  Israel."  When  the  ark  was  brought  back  out  of 
the  hands  of  the  Philistines,  David,  though  a  king,  danced  before 
it.  And,  to  mention  but  one  instance  more,  which  may  serve 
as  a  general  directory  to  us  on  this  and  such  like  occasions :  when 
the  great  Head  of  the  church  had  rescued  bis  people  from  the 
general  massacre  intended  to  be  executed  upon  them  by  a  cruel 
and  ambitious  Haman,  **  Mordecai  sent  letters  unto  all  the  Jews 
that  were  in  all  the  provinces  of  the  king  Ahasnerus,  both  nigh 
and  far,  to  establish  among  them,  that  they  should  keep  the  four- 
teenth day  of  the  month  Adar,  and  the  fifteenth  day  of  the  same, 
yearly,  as  the  days  wherein  the  Jews  rested  from  their  enemies, 
and  the  month  which  was  turned  unto  them  from  sorrow  unto 
joy,  and  from  mouroing  into  a  good  day :  that  they  should  make 
them  days  of  feasting  and  joy,  and  of  sending  portions  one  to 
another,  and  gifts  to  the  poor."  And  why  should  we  not  go 
and  do  likewise  ? 

And  shaU  we  not  also,  on  such  an  occasion,  express  our  gr&ti- 


VI.J  AND   BRITAIN'S   DUTY.  95 

tude  to^  and  make  honourable  mention  of^  those  worthies  who 
have  signalized  themselves,  and  been  ready  to  sacrifice  both 
lives  and  fortunes  at  this  critical  juncture? 

This  would  be  to  act  the  part  of  those  ungrateful  Israelites, 
who  are  branded  in  the  book  of  God,  for  not  shewing  kindness  to 
the  house  of ''  Jerubbaal,  namely,  Gideon,  according  to  all  the 
goodness  which  he  shewed  unto  Israel."  £ven  a  Pharaoh  could 
prefer  a  deserving  Joseph,  Ahasuerus  a  Mordecai,  and  Nebu- 
chadnezzar a  Daniel,  when  made  instruments  of  signal  service 
to  themselves  and  people.  **  My  heart  (says  Deborah)  is  towards 
(that  is,  I  have  a  particular  veneration  and  regard  for)  the  go- 
vernors of  Israel,  that  offered  themselves  willingly.  And  blessed 
above  women  shall  Jael  the  wife  of  Heber  the  Kenite  be ;  for 
she  put  her  hand  to  the  nail,  and  her  right  hand  to  the  workman's 
hammer,  and  with  the  hammer  she  smote  Sisera,  she  smote  off 
his  head,  when  she  had  pierced  and  stricken  through  his  tem 
pies/'  And  shall  we  not  say,  '^  Blessed  above  men  let  his  royal 
highness  the  duke  of  Cumberland  be ;  for  through  his  instru- 
mentality, the  great  and  glorious  Jehovah  hath  brought  mighty 
things  to  pass  V  Should  not  our  hearts  be  towards  the  worthy 
archbishop  of  York,  the  royal  hunters,  and  those  other  English 
heroes,  who  offered  themselves  so 'willingly?  Let  the  names  of 
Blakeney,  Bland,  and  Rea,  and  all  those  who  waxed  valiant  in 
fight  on  this  important  occasion,  live  for  ever  in  the  British 
annals.  And  let  the  name  of  that  great,  that  incomparable 
brave  soldier  cf  the  king,  and  a  good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ, 
cdonel  Gardiner,  (excuse  me  if  I  here  drop  a  tear — he  was  my 
btimate  friend,)  let  his  name,  I  say,  be  had  in  everlasting 
remembrance . 

But  after  all,  is  there  not  an  infinitely  greater  debt  of  grati- 
tude and  praise  due  from  us,  on  this  occasion,  to  Him  that  is 
higher  than  the  highest,  even  the  King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords, 
the  blessed  and  only  Potentate  ?  Is  it  not  his  arm,  his  strong  and 
mighty  arm,  (what  instruments  soever  may  have  been  made  use 
of)  that  hath  brought  us  this  salvation?  And  may  I  not  there- 
fore address  you  in  the  exulting  language  of  the  beginning  of 
this  psalm,  from  which  we  have  taken  our  text?  ''O  give 
thanks  unto  the  Lord,  call  upon  his  name,  make  known  his 
deeds  among  the  people.  Sing  unto  him ;  sing  psalms  unto  him ; 
talk  ye  of  dl  his  wondrous  works ;  glory  ye  in  his  holy  name : 
rmnember  his  marvellous  work  which  he  hath  done." 

But  shall  we  put  off  our  good  and  gracious  benefactor  with 
mere  lip-service?  God  forbid.  Your  worthy  governor  has 
honoured  Grod  in  his  late  excellent  proclamation,  and  God  will 
honour  him.  But  shall  our  thanks  terminate  with  the  day?  No, 
in  no  wise.  Our  text  reminds  us  of  a  more  noble  sacrifice,  and 
points  out  to  us  the  great  end  the  Almighty  Jehovah  proposes, 
in  bestowing  such  signal  favours  upon  a  people,  *^  That  they 
should  observe  his  statutes,  and  keep  his  laws." 

This  is  the  return  we  are  all  taught  to  pray,  that  we  may  make 
to  the  most  high  God,  the  Father  of  mercies,  in  the  daily  office 


96  BRITAIN'S  UBRCIB8,  [VI. 

of  our  charcb,  '*  That  onr  hearts  may  be  Unfeignedly  thatikfiil, 
and  that  we  may  shew  forth  his  praise,  not  only  with  our  lips, 
but  in  our  lives,  by  giving  up  ourselves  to  his  service,  and  by 
walking  before  him  in  lioliness  and  righteousness  all  our  days." 
O  that  these  words  were  the  real  language  of  all  that  use  them ! 
O  that  there  were  in  us  such  a  mind !  How  soon  would  our 
enemies  then  flee  before  us  ?  And  God,  even  our  own  God, 
would  yet  give  us  more  abundant  blessings  I 

And  why  should  not  we  '^  observe  Grod's  statutes,  and  keep 
Ydn  laws  7"  Dare  we  say,  that  any  of  his  commands  are  griev- 
ous ?  Is  not  Christ's  yoke,  to  a  renewed  soul,  as  far  as  renewed, 
easy ;  and  his  burden  comparatively  light  ?  May  I  not  appeal 
to  the  moilt  refined  reasoner,  whether  the  religion  of  Jesus  Christ 
be  not  a  social  religion?  whether  the  moral  law,  as  explained 
by  the  Lord  Jesus  in  the  gospel,  has  not  a  natural  tendency  to 
promote  the  present  good  and  happiness  of  a  whole  common- 
wealth, supposing  they  be  obedient  to  them,  as  well  as  the  hap- 
piness of  exetv  individual  ?  From  whence  come  wars  and  fight- 
ing among  us?  From  what  fountain  do  all  those  evils,  which 
the  present  and  past  ages  have  groaned  under,  flow,  but  from  a 
neglect  of  the  laws  and  statutes  of  our  great  and  all- wise  law- 
giver, Jesus  of  Nazareth?  Tell  me,  ye  men  of  letters,  whether 
Lycurgus  or  Solon,  Pythagoras  or  Plato,  Aristotle,  Seneca, 
Cicero,  or  all  the  ancient  lawgivers  and  heathen  moralists,  put 
them  fiJl  together,  ever  published  a  system  of  ethics,  any  way 
worthy  to  he  compared  with  the  glorious  system  laid  down  in 
that  much  despised  book,  (to  use  Sir  Richard  Steel's  expression) 
emphatically  called,  the  Scriptures  ?  Is  not  the  divine  image 
and  superscription  written  upon  every  precept  of  the  gospel  ? 
Do  they  not  shine  with  a  native  intrinsic  lustre?  And, 
though  many  things  in  them  are  above,  yet  is  there  any  thing 
contrary  to  the  strictest  laws  of  right  reason  ?  Is  not  Je9us  Christ, 
in  scripture,  styled  the  Word,  the  Logos,  the  Reason  ?  And  is 
not  his  service  a  reasonable  service?  What  if  there  be  myste- 
ries in  his  religion  ?  Are  they  not,  without  all  controversy,  great 
and  glorious  ?  Are  they  not  mysteries  of  godliness,  and  worthy 
of  that  God  who  reveals  them  ?  Nay,  is  it  not  the  greatest  mys- 
tery, that  men,  who  pretend  to  reason,  and  call  themselves  phi- 
losophers, who  search  into  the  arcana  naturts,  and  consequently 
find  a  mystery  in  every  blade  of  grass,  should  yet  be  so  irrational 
as  to  decry  all  mysteries  in  religion?  Where  is  the  scribe? 
where  is  the  wise  ?  where  is  the  disputer  against  the  Chris- 
tian revelation  ?  Does  not  every  thing  without  and  within  us, 
conspire  to  prove  its  divine  original  ?  And  would  not  self-interest, 
if  there  was  no  other  motive,  excite  us  to  observe  God's  statutes, 
and  keep  his  laws. 

Besides,  considered  as  a  protestant  people,  do  we  not  lie 
under  the  greatest  obligations  of  any  nation  under  heaven,  to 
pay  a  cheeriul,  unanimous,  universal,  persevering  obedience  to 
the  divine  commands. 

The  wonderful  and  surprising  manner  of  Crod's  bringing  about 


J 


V1.J  AND  brit^^in's  dutv.  97 

«  vefonnatum,m  the  reign  of  king  Henry  VIII. ;  his  carrying  it  on 
m  the  bleaaed  reign  of  king  Edward  VI.;  his  delivering  us  ont 
of  the  Moody  hands  of  queen  Mary,  and  destroying  the  Spanish 
isTiaciblc  armada,  under  her  immediate  protestant  successor 
oees  Elizabeth;  his  discovery  of  the  popish  plot  under  king 
ames;  the  glorious  revolution  by  king  William;  and,  to  come 
nearer  to  onr  own  times,  bis  driving  away  4500  Spaniards,  from 
a  weak  (though  important)  frontier  colony,  when  they  had,  in  a 
manner,  actually  taken  possession  of  it;  his  giving  us  Louis- 
bourg,  one  of  the  strongest  fortresses  of  our  enemies,  contrary 
to  afi  human  probability,  but  the  other  day,  into  our  hands : 
these,  I  say,  with  the  victory  which  you  have  lately  been  com- 
memorating, are  such  national  mercies,  not  to  mention  any 
more,  as  will  render  us  utterly  ipexcusable,  if  they  do  not  pro- 
duce a  national  reformation,  and  incite  us  all,  with  one  heart,  to 
keep  6od*s  statutes,  and  observe  his  laws. 

Need  I  remind  you  further,  in  order  to  excite  in  you  a  greater 
diligence  to  comply  with  the  intent  of  the  text,  that  though  the 
storm,  in  a  great  measure,  is  abated  by  his  royal  bighness's  late 
success,  yet  we  dare  not  say  it  is  altogether  blown  over? 

The  clouds  may  again  return  after  the  rain ;  and  the  few  sur- 
viving rebds  (which  I  pray  God  avert)  may  yet  be  suffered  to 
make  head  against  us.  We  are  still  engaged  in  a  bloody,  and, 
io  all  probability,  et,  tedious  war,  with  two  of  the  most  inveterate 
enemies  to  the  interests  of  Great  Britain.  And,  though  I  can- 
Aot  help  thinking,  that  their  present  intentions  are  so  iniquitous, 
their  conduct  so  perfidious,  and  their  schemes  so  directly  dero- 
gatory to  the  honour  of  the  most  high  God,  that  he  wOl  certainly 
knmble  them  in  the  end,  yet,  as  all  things  in  this  lifi^  happen  alike 
to  aB,  they  may,  for  (i  time,  be  dreadful  instruments  of  scourging 
as.  If  not,  God  haa  other  arrows  in  bis  quiver  to  smite  us  with, 
besides  the  French  kine,  his  Catholic  msyesty,  or  an  abjured 
Ptetender.  Not  only  the  sword,  but  plague,  pestilence,  and 
famine,  are  under  the  divine  command.  Who  knows  but  he  may 
say  to  them  all,  '^Pass  through  these  lands?"  A  fatal  murrain 
has  lately  swept  away  abundance  of  cattle  at  home  and  abroad. 
A  like  epidemical  disease  may  have  a  commission  to  seize  our 
persons,  as  well  as  our  beasts.  Thus  God  dealt  with  the  Egyp- 
tians :  who  dare  say,  he  will  not  deal  so  with  us?  Has  he  not 
thready  given  some  symptoms  of  it?  What  great  numbers  upon 
the  continent  have  been  latelytaken  off  by  the  bloody-flux, 
imall-poxj  imd  yellow-fever?  Who  can  tell  what  further  judg- 
ments are  yet  in  store?  However,  this  is  certain,  the  rod  )S  yet 
hanging  ever  us :  and  I  believe  it  will  be  granted  on  all  sides, 
that  if  supb  various  dispensations  of  mercy  and  judgment  do  not 
teach  tlie  inhabitants  of  any  land  to  learn  righteousness,  they 
win  oply  ripeq  then)  fpr  a  greater  ruin.  Give  me  leave,  there- 
ft>re«  tp  dismiss  you  at  this  time  with  that  solemn  awful  warning 
ViA  exiiairtatiaiij  with  which  the  venerable  Samuel,  on  a  public 
<>cc4sipn,  tool^  leave  of  the  people  of  Israel:  ''Only  fear  the 
I^rd,  and  serve  him  in  truth  with  all  your  heart:  for  consider 


98  THANKFULNESS   FOR   MERCIES   RECEIVED.  [VII. 

how  great  things  he  hath  done  for  yon.  Bnt  if  ye  shall  still'do 
wickedly,  [I  wUi  not  say  as  the  prophet  did,  you  shall  be  con- 
sumed; but]  ye  know  not  but  you  may  provoke  the  Lord 
Almighty  to  consume  both  yon  and  your  king/'  Which  God  of 
his  infinite  mercy  pi^^vent,  for  the  sake  of  Jesus  Christ:  to 
whom,  with  the  Father  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  three  persons,  but 
one  God,  be  all  honour  and  glory,  now  and  for  evermore. 
Amen,  amen. 


*    SERMON  VII. 

THANKFULNESS  FOR  MERCIES  RECEIVED,  A  NECESSARY  DUTY. 

A    FAREWELL    SERMON,   PREACHED   ON    BOARD   THE   WHITAKER,   AT   ANCHOR   NEAR 
SAVANNAH,    IN    GEORGIA,   SUNDAY,    MAT    17,    1738. 

TJien  are  they  glad,  because  they  are  at  rest,  and  so  he  bringeth 
them  unto  the  haven  where  tliey  would  be.  O  that  men  would 
therefore  praise  the  Lord  for  his  goodness,  and  declare  the  toon^ 
ders  that  he  doethfor  the  children  of  men, — Psalm  cvii.  30,  31. 

Numberless  marks  does  man  bear  in  his  soul,  that  he  is  fallen 
and  estranged  from  God;  but  nothing  gives  a  greater  proof 
thereof,  than  that  backwardness,  which  every  one  finds  within 
himself  to  the  duty  of  praise  and  thanksgiving. 

When  God  placed  the  first  man  in  paradise,  his  soul  no  doubt 
was  so  filled  with  a  sense  of  the  riches  of  the  divine  love,  that 
be  was  continually  employing  that  breath  of  life,  which  the 
Almighty  had  not  long  before  breathed  into  him,  in  blessing  and 
magnifying  that  all-bountiful,  all-gracious  God,  in  whom  he 
lived,  moved,  and  had  his  being. 

And  the  brightest  idea  we  can  form  of  the  angelical  hierarchy 
above,  and  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect,  is,  that  they  are 
continually  standing  round  the  throne  of  God,  and  cease  not  day 
and  night,  saying,  '^Worthy  art  thou,  O  Lamb  that  was  slain,  to 
receive  power,  and  riches,  and  wisdom,  and  strength,  and  honour, 
and  glory,  and  blessing,"  Rev.  v.  12. 

That,  then,  which  was  man's  perfection  when  time  first  began, 
and  will  be  his  employment  when  death  is  swallowed  up  in  vie* 
tory,  and  time  shall  be  no  more,  without  controversy  is  part  of 
our  perfection,  and  ought  to  be  our  frequent  exercise,  on  earth : 
and  I  doubt  not  but  those  blessed  spirits,  who  are  sent  forth  to 
minister  to  them  who  shall  be  heirs  of  salvation,  often  stand 
astonished,  when  they  encamp  around  us,  to  find  our  hearts  sor 
rarely  enlarged,  and  our  mouths  so  seldom  opened,  to  shew  forth 
the  loving-lundness  of  the  Lord,  or  to  speak  of  all  his  praise. 

Matter  for  praise  and  adoration  can  never  be  wanting  to  crea- 
tures redeemed  by  the  blood  of  the  Son  of  God ;  and  who  have 
such  continual  scenes  of  his  infinite  goodness  presented  to  their 
view,  that,  were  their  souls  duly  affected  with  a  sense  of  his 
universal  love,  they  could  not  but  be  continually  calling  on  hea- 
ven and  earth,  men  and  angels,  to  join  with  them  in  praising  and 
blessing  that  "  high  and  lofty  One,  who  inbabiteth  eternity,  who 


TII.J  THANKFULNESS   FOR   MERCIES    RBCEIYBD.  99 

maketh  his  sun  to  shine  on  the  evil  and  on  the  good/'  and  daily 
pours  down  his  blessings  on  the  whole  race  of  mankind. 

But  few  are  arrived  to  such  a  degree  of  charity  or  love,  as  to 
rejoice  with  those  that  do  rejoice,  and  to  be  as  thankful  for 
others'  mercies  as  their  own.  This  part  of  christian  perfection, 
though  begun  on  earth,  will  be  consummated  only  in  heaven ; 
where  our  hearts  will  glow  with  such  fervent  love  towards  God 
and  one  another,  that  every  fresh  degree  of  glory  communicated 
to  our  neighbour,  will  also  communicate  to  us  a  fresh  topic  of 
thankfulness  and  joy. 

That  which  has  the  greatest  tendency  to  excite  the  generality 
of  fallen  men  to  praise  and  thanksgiving,  is  a  sense  of  God's 
private  mercies,  and  particular  benefits  bestowed  upon  ourselves. 
For  as  these  come  nearer  our  own  hearts,  so  they  must  be  more 
affecting ;  and  as  they  are  peculiar  proofs,  whereby  we  may  know 
that  G(m1  does  in  a  more  especial  manner  favour  us  above  others, 
so  they  cannot  but  sensibly  touch  us ;  and  if  our  hearts  are  not 
quite  frozen,  like  coals  of  a  refiner's  fire  they  must  melt  us 
down  into  thankfulness  and  love.  It  was  a  consideration  of  the 
disting^uishing  favours  God  had  shewn  to  his  chosen  people 
Israel,  and  the  frequent  and  remarkable  deliverances  wrought 
by  him  in  behalf  of  *'  those  who  go  down  to  the  sea  in  ships, 
aod  occupy  their  business  in  great  waters,"  that  made  the  holy 
Psalmist  break  out  so  frequenUy  as  he  does  in  this  psalm,  into 
this  moving  pathetical  exclamation,''  O  that  men  would  therefore 

E raise  the  Ix>rd  for  his  goodness,  and  declare  the  wonders  that 
e  doeth  for  the  children  of  men !" 

His  expressing  himself  in  so  fervent  a  manner,  implies  both 
the  importance  and  neglect  of  the  duty.  As  when  Moses  on 
another  occasion  cried  out, ''  O  that  they  were  wise,  that  they 
understood  this,  that  they  would  (practically)  consider  their  latter 
end  !*'  Deut.  xxxii.  29. 

I  say,  importance  and  neglect  of  the  duty;  for  out  of  those 
many  thousands  that  receive  blessings  from  the  Lord,  how  few 
give  thanks  in  remembrance  of  his  holiness  !  The  account  given 
OS  of  the  ungrateful  lepers,  is  but  too  lively  a  representation  of 
the  ingratitude  of  msmkind  in  general ;  who,  like  them,  when 
imder  any  humbling  providence,  can  cry,  Jesus,  Master,  have 
mercy  on  us !"  Luke  xvii.  13.  but  when  healed  of  their  sickness, 
or  delivered  from  their  distress,  scarce  one  in  ten  can  be  found 
returning  to  give  thanks  to  God." 

And  yet  as  common  as  this  sin  of  ingratitude  is,  there  is 
nothing  we  ought  more  earnestly  to  pray  against.  For  what  is 
more  i3>soIntely  condenmed  in  holy  scripture  than  ingratitude  ? 
or  what  more  peremptorily  required  than  the  contrary  temper? 
Thus  says  the  apostle,  ''Rejoice  evermore;  in  every  thing 
give  thanks/'  1  Thess.  v.  16, 18.  "  Be  careful  for  nothing,  but 
in  erery  thing  by  praver  and  supplication,  with  thanksgiving,  let 
your  requests  be  maae  known  unto  God,"  Phil.  iv.  6. 

On  the  contrary,  the  apostle  mentions  it  as  one  of  the  highest 
crimes  of  the  Gentiles,  that  they  were  not  thankful :   ''  Neither 

F2 


100  THJkNKPULNBSS  FOR  MERGIB8  RECBIVfiD.  [vir. 

woie  they  thankful,"  Rom.  i.  21.  as  also  in  another  place,  he 
numbers  the  unthankful/'  2  Tim.  iii.  2.  amongst  those  unholy 
profane  persons  who  are  to  have  their  portion  in  the  lake  of  fire 
and  brimstone. 

As  for  our  sins,  God  puts  them  behind  his  back ;  but  his 
mercies  he  will  have  acknowledged,  '^  There  is  virtue  gone  out 
of  me/'  says  Jesus  Christ,  Luke  yiii.  46.  and  the  woman  who 
was  cured  of  her  bloody  issue  must  confess  it.  And  we  gene* 
rally  find,  when  God  sent  any  remarkable  punishment  upon  a 
particular  person,  he  reminded  him  of  the  favours  he  had  received, 
as  so  many  aggravations  of  his  ingratitude.  Thus,  when  God 
was  about  to  visit  Eli's  house,  he  thus  expostulates  vnih  him 
by  his  prophet :  *'  Did  I  plainly  appear  unto  the  house  of  thy 
fathers,  when  they  were  in  Egypt,  in  Pharaoh's  house?  And  did 
I  choose  him  out  of  all  the  tribes  of  Israel,  to  be  my  priest,  to 
offer  upon  mine  altar,  to  bum  incense,  and  to  wear  an  ephod 
before  me  ?  Wherefore  kick  ye  at  my  sacrifice  and  at  mine  ofier- 
ing,  which  I  have  commanded  in  my  habitation,  and  honourest 
thy  sons  above  me,  to  make  yourselves  fat  with  the  chiefest  of  all 
the  offerings  of  Israel  my  people  ?  Wherefore  the  Lord  God  of 
Israel  saith,  I  said  indeed,  that  thy  house,  and  the  house  of  thy 
father,  should  walk  before  me  for  ever :  but  now  the  Lord  saith, 
'*  Be  it  far  from  me,  for  them  that  honour  me  will  I  honour,  and 
they  that  despise  me  shall  be  lightly  esteemed,"  1  Sam.  ii.  27, 
28,  29,  80. 

It  was  this  and  such  like  instances  of  God's  severity  against 
the  unthankful,  that  inclined  me  to  choose  the  words  of  the  text, 
as  the  most  proper  subject  I  could  discourse  on  at  this  time. 

Four  months,  my  good  friends,  we  have  now  been  upon  the 
sea  in  this  ship,  and  ^'  have  occupied  our  business  in  the  great 
waters."  At  God  Almighty's  word,  we  have  seen  the  stormy 
wind  arise,  which  hath  lifted  up  the  waves  thereof.  We  have 
been  carried  up  to  the  heaven,  and  down  again  to  the  deep,  and 
some  of  our  souls  melted  away  because  of  the  trouble ;  but 
I  trust  we  cried  earnestly  unto  the  Lord,  and  he  delivered  us 
out  of  our  distress  :  for  he  made  the  storm  to  cease,  so  that 
the  waves  therebf  were  still.  And  now  we  are  glad  because 
we  are  at  rest,  for  God  hath  brought  us  to  the  haven  where 
we  would  be.  O  that  yon  would  therefore  praise  the  Lord  for 
his  goodness,  and  declare  the  wonders  that  he  hath  done  for  us, 
ti\e  un\>ortbiest  of  the  sons  of  men." 

Thus  Moses,  thus  Joshua,  behaved.  For  when  they  were  about 
to  take  their  leave  of  the  children  of  Israel,  they  recounted 
to  them  what  great  things  €k)d  had  done  for  them,  as  the  best 
arguments  and  motives  they  could  urge  to  engage  them  to  obe- 
dience. And  how  can  I  copy  after  better  examples?  What 
fitter,  what  more  noble  motives  to  holiness  and  purity  of 
living,  can  I  lay  before  you,  than  they  did  1 

Indeed,  I  cannot  say  that  we  have  seen  the  ''pillar  of  a  cloud 
by  day,  or  a  pillar  of  fire  by  night,"  going  visibly  before  us  to 
guide  our  course ;  but  this  I  can  say,  that  the  same  God  who 


yU.]  A  KBOBSBAftT   DUTT.  101 

was  in  that  pittar  of  a  cload  and  pillar  of  firei  which  departed 
not  from  the  Israelites,  and  who  has  made  the  son  to  mle  the 
day,  aad  the  moon  to  rule  the  night,  has  by  his  good  providence 
directed  as  in  the  right  way»  or  else  the  pilot  had  steered  us  in 
vain. 

Neither  can  I  say  fliat  we  have  seen  the  sun  stand  still,  as 
the  children  of  Israel  did  in  the  days  of  Joriiua.  Bat  surely  Gknl, 
dwing  part  of  onr  voyage,  has  caused  it  to  withhold  some  of  that 
teat  which  it  usually  sends  forth  in  these  warmer  climates,  or 
else  it  had  not  failed,  but  some  of  yoa  must  have  perished  in 
the  sickness  that  has  been,  and  does  yet  continue,  among  us. 

We  have  not  seen  the  waters  stand  purposely  on  a  heap,  that 
we  might  pass  through,  neither  have  we  been  pursued  by  Pha- 
raoh ajod  his  host,  and  delivered  out  of  their  hands;  but  we  have 
been  led  through  the  sea  as  through  a  vildemess,  and  were  once 
renuurkaUy  preserved  from  being  run  down  by  another  ship; 
which  had  God  permitted,  the  waters,  in  all  probability,  would 
immediately  have  overwhelmed  us,  and,  like  Pharaoh  and  his 
host,  we  should  have  sunk  as  stones  into  the  sea. 

We  may,  indeed,  atheist-like^  ascribe  all  these  things  to  natu- 
ral causes,  and  say,  ''  Our  own  skill  and  foresight  has  brought 
as  hither  in  safety."  But  as  certainly  as  Jesus  Christ,  the  Angel 
of  the  covenant,  in  the  days  of  his  flesh  walked  upon  the  water, 
and  said  to  his  sinking  disciples,  **  Be  not  afraid,  it  is  I/'  so 
surely  has  the  same  everlasting  I  AM,  *'  who  decketh  himself 
with  light  as  with  a  garment,  who  spreadeth  out  the  heavens  like 
a  curtain,  who  claspeth  the  winds  in  his  fist,  who  holdeth  the 
waters  in  the  ludlow  of  his  hands ;  and  guided  the  wise  men  by  a 
star  in  the  east :  so  surely  I  say,  has  he  spoken,  and  at  bis  com- 
mand the  winds  have  blown  us  where  we  are  now  arrived.  For 
his  providence  ruleth  all  things,  wind  and  storms  obey  his  word :" 
he  saith  to  it  at  one  time.  Go,  and  it  goeth ;  at  another.  Come, 
and  it  cometh;  and  at  a  third  time.  Blow  this  way,  and  it 
bloweth. 

It  is  he,  my  brethren,  and  not  we  ourselves,  that  has  of  late 
seat  us  such  prosperous  gales,  and  made  us  to  ride,  as  it  were, 
on  the  wings  of  the  wind,  into  the  haven  where  we  would  be. 

*'  O  that  you  would  therefore  praise  the  Lord  for  his  good- 
ness," and  by  your  lives  declare  that  you  are  truly  thankful  for 
the  wonders  he  hath  shewn  to  us,  who  are  less  than  the  least  of 
the  sons  of  men. 

I  say,  declare  it  by  your  lives.  For  to  give  him  thanks 
barely  with  your  lips,  while  your  hearts  are  far  from  him,  is  but 
a  mock  sacrifice,  nay,  an  abomination  unto  the  Lord. 

IMa  was  the  end  the  royal  psalmist  says,  God  had  in  view^ 
when  be  shewed  such  wonders,  from  time  to  time,  to  the  people 
of  Israel, ''  that  they  might  keep  his  statutes,  and  observe  his 
laws,*'  Psalm  cv.  44. ;  and  this,  my  good  friends,  is  the  end  God 
woald  have  accomplished  in  us,  and  the  only  return  he  desires 
us  to  make  him,  for  all  the  benefits  he  hath  conferred  upon  us. 

0  then  let  me  beseech  you^  give  to  God  your  hearts,  yx>ur 


102  THANKFULNESS   FOR  MBRCIBS   RBCBIVBD^  [VII, 

vrhole  hearts^  and  suffer  yourselves  to  be  drawn  by  the  cords  of 
infinite  love,  to  honour  and  obey  him. 

Assure  yourselves  you  can  never  serve  a  better  master ;  for  his 
service  is  perfect  freedom ;  his  yoke,  when  worn  a  little  while^  is 
exceeding  easy,  his  burden  light;  and  in  keeping  his  command- 
ments there  is  great  reward :  love,  peace,  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost, 
here ;  and  a  crown  of  glory  that  fadeth  not  away,  hereafter. 

You  may,  indeed,  let  other  lords  have  dominion  over  yon,  and 
Satan  may  promise  to  give  you  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world, 
and  the  glory  of  them,  if  you  will  fall  down  and  worship  him : 
but  he  is  a  liar,  and  was  so  from  the  beginning;  he  has  not  so 
much  to  give  you  as  you  may  tread  on  with  the  sole  c^  your 
foot ;  or,  could  he  give  you  the  whole  world,  yet  that  could  not 
make  you  happy  without  Crod.  It  is  God  alone,  my  brethren, 
whose  we  are,  in  whose  name  I  now  speak,  and  who  has  of  late 
shewed  us  such  mercies  in  the  deep,  that  can  give  solid,  lasting 
happiness  to  your  souls ;  and  he  for  this  reason  only  desires 
your  hearts,  because  without  him  you  must  be  miserable. 

Suffer  me  not  then  to  go  away  without  my  errand ;  as  it  is  the 
last  time  I  shall  speak  to  you,  let  me  not  speak  in  vain ;  but  let 
a  sense  of  the  divine  goodness  lead  you  to  repentance. 

Even  Saul,  that  abandoned  wretch,  when  David  shewed  him 
his  skirt  which  he  had  cut  off,  when  he  might  have  taken  his 
life,  was  so  melted  down  with  his  kindness,  that  he  lifted  up  his 
voice  and  wept.  And  we  must  have  hearts  harder  than  Saul's, 
nay,  harder  than  the  nether  millstone,  if  a  sense  of  God's  late 
loving-kindnesses,  notwithstanding  he  might  so  often  have 
destroyed  us,  does  not  even  compel  us  to  lay  down  our  arms 
against  him,  and  become  his  faithful  servants  and  soldiers  unto 
our  lives'  end. 

If  they  have  not  this  effect  upon  us,  we  shall  of  all  men  be 
most  miserable ;  for  God  is  just,  as  well  as  merciful ;  and  the 
more  blessings  we  have  received  here,  the  greater  damnation,  if 
we  do  not  improve  them,  shall  we  incur  hereafter. 

But  God  forbid  that  any  of  those  should  ever  suffer  the  ven- 
geance of  eternal  fire,  amongst  whom  I  have,  for  these  four 
months,  been  preaching  the  gospel  of  Christ ;  but  yet  thus  must 
it  be,  if  you  do  not  improve  the  divine  mercies :  and,  instead  of 
your  being  my  crown  of  rejoicing  in  the  day  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  I  must  appear  as  a  swift  witness  against  you. 

But,  brethren,  I  am  persuaded  better  things  of  you,  and  things 
that  accompany  salvation,  though  I  thus  speak. 

Blessed  be  God,  some  marks  of  a  partial  reformation  at  least, 
have  been  visible  amongst  you  that  are  soldiers.  And  my  weak, 
though  sincere  endeavours,  to  build  you  up  in  the  knowledge 
and  fear  of  God,  have  not  been  altogether  in  vain  in  the  Lord. 

Swearing,  I  hope,  is  in  a  great  measure  abated  with  you ;  and 
God,  I  trust,  has  blessed  his  late  visitations,  by  making  them  the 
means  of  awakening  your  consciences  to  a  more  solicitous 
inquiry  about  the  things  which  belong  to  your  everlasting  peace. 

Fulfil  you  then  my  joy  by  continuing  thus  minded,  and  labour 


TILJ  A   NECESSARY   DUTY.  103 

to  go  on  to  perfection.  For  I  shall  have  no  greater  pleasure 
than  to  see,  or  hear»  that  you  walk  in  the  truth. 

CkHisider,  my  good  friends^  you  are  npw,  as  it  were»  entering 
on  a  new  worlds  where  you  will  be  surrounded  with  multitudes 
of  heathens ;  and  if  you  take  not  heed  to  ''have  your  conversa- 
tion honest  among  them/'  and  to  ''  walk  worthy  of  the  holy 
Tocation  wherewith  you  are  called/'  you  will  act  the  hellish  part  of 
Herod's  soldiers  over  again ;  and  cau^e  Christ's  religion,  as  they 
did  his  person,  to  be  had  in  derision  of  those  that  are  round 
about  you. 

.  Consider  further,  what  peculiar  privileges  you  have  enjoyed 
above  many  others  that  are  entering  on  the  same  land.  They 
have  had,  as  it  were,  a  famine  of  the  word,  but  you  have  rather 
been  in  danger  of  being  surfeited  with  your  spiritucd  manna. 
And  therefore,  as  more  instructions  have  been  given  you,  so, 
from  you,  men  will  most  justly  expect  the  greater  improvement 
in  goodness. 

Indeed,  I  cannot  say  I  have  discharged  my  duty  towards  you 
as  I  ought.  No,  I  am  sensible  of  manv  faults  in  my  ministerial 
office,  and  for  which  I  have  not  failed,  nor  I  hope  ever  shall 
fail,  to  humble  myself  in  secret  before  God.  However,  this  I 
can  say,  that  except  a  few  idays  that  have  been  spent  necessa- 
rily on  other  persons,  whom  w>d  immediately  called  me  to  write 
and  minister  unto,  and  the  two  last  weeks  wherein  I  have  been 
confined  by  sickness ;  all  the  while  I  have  been  aboard,  I  have 
been  either  actually  engaged  in,  or  preparing  myself  for,  instruct- 
ing you.  And  though  you  are  now  to  be  committed  to  the  care  of 
another,  (whose  labours  I  heartily  beseech  God  to  bless  amongst 
you,)  yet  I  trust  I  shall  at  all  seasons,  if  need  be,  willingly  spend, 
and  be  spent,  for  the  good  of  your  souls,  though  the  more  abund- 
antly I  love  you,  the  less  I  should  be  loved. 

A^  for  your  military  affairs,  I  have  nothing  to  do  with  them. 
Fear  God,  and  you  must  honour  the  king.  Nor  am  I  well 
acquainted  with  the  nature  of  that  land  which  you  are  now  come 
over  to  protect ;  only  this  I  may  venture  to  affirm  in  the  general, 
that  you  must  necessarily  expect,  upon  your  arrival  at  a  new 
colony,  to  meet  with  many  difficulties.  But  your  very  profes- 
sion teaches  you  to  endure  hardship ;  "  be  not,  therefore,  faint- 
hearted, but  quit  yourselves  like  men,  and  be  strong/'  Numbers 
xiv.  Be  not  like  those  cowardly  persons,  who  were  affrighted 
at  the  report  of  the  false  spies,  that  came  and  said,  that  there 
were  people  tall  as  the  Anakims,  to  be  grappled  with ;  but  be  ye 
Uke  unto  Caleb  and  Joshua,  all  heart — and  say,  we  will  act 
valiantly,  for  we  shall  be  more  than  conquerors  over  all  difficul- 
ties, through  Jesus  Christ  that  loved  us.  Above  all  things,  my 
brethren,  take  heed  and  beware  of  murmuring,  like  the  perverse 
Isradites,  against  those  that  are  set  over  you ;  and  **  learn  what- 
soever state  you  shall  be  in,  therewith  to  be  content,"  Phil.  iv.  11. 

As  I  have  spoken  to  you,  I  hope  your  wives  also  will  suffer 
the  word  of  exhortation. 
*    Yonr  behaviour  on  shipboard,  especially  the  first  part  of  the 


IM  THANKPULKB8B  FOB  0KKCIBS  ttBOBIVBD,  Ivtti 

vayajge,  I  ehoote  to  tbnyw  a  doak  ortr ;  for  Id  t»e  tkt  mildest 
terins^  it  was  not  ^nch  m  becaoi«  the  gospel  of  our  Xord  Jesns 
Christ  Ho^pfever,  of  late,  blessed  be  God,  yoa  iiaTe  taken  more 
heed  to  your  ways,  and  some  of  yon  ha^e  walked  all  the  wlifle 
as  became  women  professing  godliness/'  Let  those  accept  my 
hearty  thanks,  and  persait  me  to  entreat  you  all  in  general,  bb 
yon  are  all  now  manried^  to  remember  the  solemn  vow  yon  mada 
at  your  entrance  into  the  marriage  state,  and  see  that  yoo  be 
subject  to  your  own  husbands  in  every  lawfol  thing :  beg  of 
God  to  keep  the  door  of  your  lips,  that  you  offend  not  with  your 
tongues ;  tund  walk  in  lore,  that  your  prayers  be  not  hmdered. 
You  that  have  children,  let  it  be  your  ch^f  concern  to  breed 
them  up  in  the  nurture  and  admonition  of  the  Lord.  And  live 
all  of  yoa  so  holy  and  unblameably,  that  you  may  not  so  mncii 
as  be  suspected  to  be  unchaste ;  and  as  some  of  you  have 
imitated  Mary  Magdalen  in  her  sin,  strive  to  imitate  her  also  in 
her  repentance. 

As  for  yoU)  sailors,  what  shall  I  say?  How  shaO  I  address 
m3^self  to  you  ?  How  shall  I  do  that  which  I  so  much  long  to 
do — touch  your  hearts  ?  Gratitude  obliges  me  to  wish  thus  well 
to  you.  For  you  have  often  taught  me  many  instructive  les- 
sons, and  reminded  me  to  put  up  many  prayers  to  God  for  yoo^ 
that  you  might  receive  your  spiritual  sight. 

Whai  I  have  seen  you  preparing  for  a  storm,  and  reefing 
your  sails,  to  gaard  against  it;  how  have  I  wished  that  you  and 
I  were  as  careful  to  avoid  that  storm  of  God's  wrath,  which  will 
certainly,  without  repentance,  quickly  overtake  us  ?  When  I 
have  observed  you  catch  at  every  fair  gale,  how  have  I  secretly 
cried,  Q  that  we  were  as  careful  to  know  the  things  that  belong 
to  our  peace,  before  they  are  for  ever  hid  from  our  eyes !  And 
when  I  have  taken  notice,  how  steadily  you  eyed  your  compass 
in  order  to  steer  aright,  how  have  I  wished,  that  we  as  steadily 
eyed  the  word  of  God,  which  alone  can  preserve  us  from  "  mak* 
ing  shipwreck  of  faith  and  a  good  conscience  V  In  short,  there 
is  scarce  any  thing  you  do,  which  has  not  been  a  lesson  of  instruct 
tion  to  me ;  and  therefore,  it  would  be  ungrateful  in  me»  did  I 
not  take  this  opportunity  of  exhorting  you  in  the  name  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  to  be  as  wise  in  the  things  which  concern  your 
soul,  as  I  have  observed  you  to  be  in  the  affairs  belonging  to 
your  ship. 

I  am  sensible,  that  the  sea  is  reckoned  but  iLn  ill  school  to 
learn  Christ  in :  and  to  sec  a  devout  sailor,  is  esteemed  as  un- 
common  a  thing,  as  to  see  a  Saul  amongst  the  prophets.  But 
whence  this  wondering  ?  Whence  this  looking  upon  a  godly 
sailor,  as  a  man  to  be  wimdered  aU  as  a  speckled  bird  in.  the 
creation  ?  I  am  sure,  for  the  little  time  I  have  come  in  and  out 
amongst  you,  and  as  far  as  I  can  judge  from  the  little  experi-- 
ence  I  have  had  of  things^  I  scaice  know  any  way  of  life  that 
is  capable  of  greater  improvements  than  yours. 

The  continual  danger  you  are  in  of  being  overwhelmed  by 
the  great  waters ;  the  many  opportunities  you  have  of  beholding 


TffJ  A   MIOBlBAftT  DUTT«  10ft 

God's  wmdera  in  the  deep ;  the  happj  retirenetit  you  eojoy 
bom  woddiy  temptatioDi^  and  the  daily  oocuions  that  ate 
offefed  yon  to  endure  hardships,  are  such  noble  means  of  pro« 
modflf  the  apiritnal  life,  that  were  your  hearts  bent  towards  Uod, 
you  wonid  acoonnt  it  yonr  happiness,  that  his  pioTidence  had 
called  yo«  to  '^  go  down  to  the  sea  in  ships,  and  to  occupy  yout 
basiiiesn  in  the  great  waters^'' 

The  royal  psalmist  knew  this,  and,  therelbfe,  in  the  words  of 
Ae  text,  calls  more  especially  on  men  of  yonr  employ,  Uk 
**  praise  the  Lord  for  his  goodness^  and  dedare  the  woadeib  he 
doth  for  the  chfldrai  of  mem" 

And  O  that  you  would  be  mse  in  time,  and  hearken  tt>  hi* 
▼oice  to^ay,  **  whilst  it  is  called  to-day  T  For  ye  yoursdlves 
know  how  Uttle  is  to  be  done  on  a  sick-bed.  God  has,  in  an 
especial  manner,  of  late,  invited  you  to  repentance :  two  cf  your 
crew  he  has  taken  off  by  death,  and  most  of  yon  he  has  mcrci^ 
fully  visited  with  a  grievous  sickness.  The  terrors  of  the  LonI 
kave  been  upon  you,  and  when  burnt  with  a  scorching  fever, 
some  of  you  have  cried  out,  "  What  shall  we  do  to  be  saved  ?^ 
Remember  then  the  resolutions  you  made,  when  you  thought 
God  was  ahoQt  to  take  away  your  souls ,  and  see,  that,  accord«- 
iDg  to  your  promises,  you  shew  forth  your  thankfulness,  not  only 
with  yoor  lips,  but  in  your  lives.  For  though  God  may  bear  long, 
he  will  not  forbear  always ;  and  if  these  signal  mercies  and  jikdg«- 
nents  do  not  lead  you  to  repentance,  assure  yourselves  there 
win  at  last  come  a  fiery  tempest  from  the  presence  of  the  Lord, 
which  will  sweep  away  you,  and  all  other  adversaries  of  God. 

I  an  positive,  neither  you  nor  the  soldiers  have  wanted,  nor 
will  want,  any  manner  of  encouragement  to  piety  and  holiness  of 
fiving,  fhmi  those  two  persons  who  have  here  the  government 
over  yon ;  for  they  have  been  such  helps  to  me  in  my  ministry, 
and  have  so  readUy  concurred  in  every  thing  for  your  good,  that 
they  may  jusUy  demand  a  public  acknowledgment  of  thanks 
both  from  yon  and  me. 

Permit  me,  my  honoured  friends,  in  the  name  of  both  classes  (^ 
your  people,  to  return  you  hearty  thanks  for  the  care  and  tender^^ 
ness  you  have  expressed  for  the  welfare  of  their  better  parts. 

As  for  the  private  fttvours  you  have  shewn  to  my  person,  I 
hope  so  deep  a  sense  of  them  is  imprinted  on  my  heart,  that  I 
shall  plead  them  before  God  in  prayer,  so  long  as  I  live. 

fiut  I  have  still  stronger  obligations  to  intercede  in  your  be- 
half. For  6od>  ever  adored  be  his  flree  grace  in  Christ  Jesus ! 
has  set  his  seal  to  my  ministry  in  your  hearts.  Some  distant 
p^ngtt  of  the  new-birth  I  have  observed  to  come  upon  you ;  and 
God  forbid  that  I  should  sin  against  the  Lord,  by  ceasing  to  prat 
ftM  the  good  work  begun  in  yonr  souls,  may  be  carried  on  till 
tiM  day  of  onr  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

The  time  of  onr  departure  from  each  other  is  now  at  hand, 
and  you  are  going  out  into  a  world  of  temptations.  But  though 
atisent  in  body>  let  us  be  present  with  each  other  in  spirit ;  and 
Ood,  i  (tu^,  wiH  enable  y<^u  to  be  singulariy  good,  to  be  ready 


F 


106  TBANKPUI.NHS8   POR   MERCIES   RECEIVED, 

to  l>e  accounted  fools  for  Christ's  sake ;  and  then  we  shall  meet 

never  to  part  again  in  the  kingdom  of  our  Father  which  is  in 

heaven. 

To  you,  my  companions  and  familiar  friends,  who  came  over 
with  me  to  sojourn  in  a  strange  land,  do  I  in  the  next  place 
address  myself  For  yon  I  especially  fear,  as  well  as  for  myself; 
because,  as  we  take  sweet  counsel  together  oftener  than  others, 
and  as  you  are  let  into  a  more  intimate  friendship  with  me  iu 
private  life,  the  eyes  of  all  men  will  be  upon  you,  to  note  e\eD 
the  minutest  miscarriage ;  and,  therefore,  it  highly  concerns  you 
to  "  walk  ciicumspcctly  towards  those  that  are  without. "  I  hope, 
that  nothing  but  a  single  eye  to  God's  glory,  and  the  salvation  of 
your  own  souls,  brought  you  from  your  native  country.  Re- 
member then  the  end  of  your  coming  hither,  and  you  can  never 
do  amiss.  Be  patterns  of  indu.stry,  as  well  as  of  piety,  to  those 
who  shall  be  around  you ;  and  above  all  things,  let  us  have  such 
fervent  charity  amongst  ourselves,  tliatit  may  be  said  of  us,  as 
of  the  primitive  Christians,  "  See  how  the  Christiana  love  one 
another." 

And  now  I  have  been  speaking  to  others  particularly,  I  have 
one  general  request  to  make  to  all,  and  that  with  reference  to 
myself. 

You  have  beard,  my  dear  friends,  how  I  have  been  exhorting 
every  one  of  you  to  shew  forth  your  thankfulness  for  the  divine 
goodness,  not  only  with  your  lips,  but  in  your  lives :  But  "  Phy- 
sician, hea!  thyself,"  may  justly  be  retorted  on  me.  For  (with- 
out any  false  pretences  to  humility)  I  find  my  own  heart  so 
little  inclined  to  this  duty  of  thanksgiving  for  the  benefits  I 
have  received,  that  I  had  need  fear  sliaring  Hezekiah's  fate, 
who,  because  he  was  lifed  up  by,  and  not  thankful  enough  for, 
the  great  things  God  had  done  for  him,  was  given  up  a  prey  to 
the  pride  of  his  own  heart. 

1  need,  therefore,  and  beg  your  most  importunate  petitiojis  at 
the  throne  of  grace,  that  no  such  evil  may  befall  me;  that  tlie 
more  God  exalts  me,  the  more  I  may  debase  myself;  and  that 
after  1  have  preached  to  others,  I  myself  may  not  be  cast  away. 

And  now,  brethren,  into  God's  bands  I  commend  your  spirits, 
who,  I  trust,  through  his  infinilc  mercies  in  Christ  Jesus,  will 
preserve  you  blameless,  till  his  second  coming  to  judge  the 
world. 

Excuse  my  detaining  you  so  long;  perhaps  it  is  the  last  time 
I  shall  speak  to  yuu :  my  heart  is  full,  and  out  of  the  abundance 
of  it,  I  could  continue  my  discourse  until  midnight.  But  I  must 
away  to  your  new  world ;  may  God  give  you  new  hearts,  and 
enable  you  to  put  in  practice  what  you  have  heard  from  time  to 
time,  to  be  your  duty,  and  I  need  not  wish  you  any  thing  better. 
For  then  God  will  so  bless  you,  tiiat  "  you  will  build  you  cities 
to  dwell  in ;  then  will  you  sow  your  lands  and  plant  vineyards, 
which  will  yield  you  fruits  of  increase,"  Psal.  cvii.  36, 37.  "  Tbea 
your  oxen  shall  be  strong  to  labour,  there  shall  be  no  leading 
into  captivity,  and  no  complaining  in  your  streets;  then  sludl 


TIIL]  TBI  1IB0B88ITY   OF  RBLIOIOU8  BOeiKTY.  lOT 

your  sons  grow  up  as  the  yoQDg  plants,  and  your  daii||rteni  be 
as  the  polished  comeis  of  the  temple:  then  sbaD  yoar  garners 
be  fiill  and  plenteous  mth  all  manner  of  store,  and  yoor  sheep 
bring  finrth  thousands,  and  ten  thousands,  in  your  streets, 
PsaL  cxliv.  In  short,  then  shall  the  Lord  be  your  God ;  and 
as  snrely  as  he  has  now  brought  us  to  this  haven  where  we 
would  be,  so  saieiy,  after  we  have  past  through  the  storms  and 
lOBpests  of  this  troublesome  world,  will  he  bring  us  to  the  hayen 
of  eternal  rest,  where  we  shall  have  nothing  to  do,  but  to  praise 
him  fiyr  ever  for  his  goodness,  and  declare,  in  never-ceasing 
songs  of  praise,  the  wonders  he  has  done  for  us,  and  all  the 
othor  sons  of  men. 

^  To  which  blessed  rest,  God  of  his  infinite  mercy  bring  us 
alU  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord !  To  whom,  with  the  Father 
and  Holy  Ghost,  be  all  honour  and  glory,  might,  majesty,  and 
doBiinion,  now,  henceforth,  and  for  evermore.    Awun,  am€n.'* 


SERMON  VIIL 

THft  MBCB88ITY  AND  BENEFITS  OP  RELIGIOUS  SOCIETY. 

Two  art  better  than  one,  because  they  have  a  good  reward  for 
tkebr  labour.  For  if  they  faU,  the  one  will  Uft  up  his  fellow  : 
but  woe  be  to  him  that  is  aUme  when  he  faUeth  ;  for  he  hath 
90f  another  to  he^  him  up.  Again,  if  two  lie  together,  then 
they  have  heat;  but  how  can  one  be  warm  alone?  And  if  one 
prevail  against  him,  two  shall  withstand  him  ;  and  a  threrfold 
cord  is  not  quichly  broken. — Eccles.  iv.  9, 10, 11, 12. 

Among  the  many  reasons  assignable  foi'  the  sad  decay  of  true 
Christianity,  perhaps  the  neglecting  to  assemble  ourselves  toge- 
ther, in  religions  societies,  may  not  be  one  of  the  least.  That  I 
may  therefore  do  my  endeavour  towards  promoting  so  excellent 
a  means  of  piety,  I  have  selected  a  passage  of  scripture,  drawn 
from  the  experience  of  the  wisest  of  men,  which  being  a  little 
enlarged  on,  and  illustrated,  will  fully  answer  my  present  de- 
sign ;  being  to  shew,  in  the  best  manner  I  can,  the  necessity 
and  benefits  of  society  in  general,  and  of  religious  society  in 
particular. 

"  Two  are  better  than  one/'  &c. 

From  which  words  I  shall  take  occasion  to  prove. 

First,  The  truth  of  the  wise  man's  assertion,  **  Two  are  better 
than  one,"  and  tliat  in  reference  to  society  in  general,  and  reli- 
gious society  in  particular. 

Secondly,  To  assign  some  reasons  why  two  are  better  than 
one,  especially  as  to  the  last  particular.  1.  Because  men  can 
raise  up  one  another  when  they  chance  to  slip :  "  For  if  they  fall, 
the  one  will  lift  up  his  fellow."  2.  Because  they  can  impart 
heat  to  each  other :  **  Again,  if  two  lie  together,  then  they  have 
heat;  but  how  can  one  be  warm  alone?"  3.  Because  the^ 
can  secure  each  other  from  those  that  do  oppose  them :  ''  And  if 


IM  TllS  tffiCSSSITY   AND   B11IKFIT8  IVUU 

one  prerail  agahist  hiuiy  two  shall  withsland  him :  and  a  three- 
Md  cord  is  not  ipacklj  broken."    From  hence, 

TOrdfy,  I  shaH  take  occasion  to  shew,  the  doty  incumbent 
on  ereiy  member  of  a  rdigioos  society. 

And  Pmartkfyf  t  shall  draw  an  infaence  or  two  from  what 
may  be  said;  and  tiieo  condnde  with  a  word  or  two  of 
exhortation. 

Pirfi,  I  am  to  prove  the  trath  of  die  wise  man's  assertion, 
that,  ''two  are  better  than  one,  and  that  in  reference  to  society 
in  general,  and  reUgioas  societies  in  particalar.'' 

And  how  can  tins  be  done  better,  than  by  shewing  that  it  is 
absolutely  necessary  for  the  welfare  both  of  the  bodies  and  souls 
of  men?  Indeed,  if  we  look  upon  man  as  he  came  out  of  the 
hands  of  his  Maker,  we  imagine  him  to  be  perfect,  entire,  lack^ 
ing  nothing.  Bat  God,  whose  thoughts  are  not  as  our  thoughts, 
saw  something  stiH  wantiDg  to  make  Adam  happy.  And  what 
was  that  ?  Why,  an  help  meet  for  hinu  For  thus  speaketh  the 
scripture :  '^  And  the  Lord  Grod  said.  It  is  not  good  that  the 
man  should  be  alone,  1  will  make  an  help  meet  for  him.'' 

Observe,  God  said,  "  It  is  not  good,"  thereby  implying,  that 
the  creation  would  have  been  imperfect  in  some  sort,  unless  an 
help  was  found  out  meet  for  Adam.  And  if  this  were  the  case 
of  man  before  the  fall ;  if  a  help  was  meet  for  him  in  a  state  of 

Crfection;  surely  since  the  fall,  when  we  come  naked  and 
Ipless  out  of  our  mother's  womb,  when  our  wants  increase 
with  our  years,  and  we  can  scarcely  subsist  a  day  without  the 
mutual  assistance  of  each  other,  well  may  we  say,  **  It  is  not 
good  for  man  to  be  alone." 

Societv,  then,  we  see,  is  absolutely  necessary  in  respect  to 
bur  bodily  and  personal  wants.  If  we  carry  our  view  farther, 
and  consider  mankind  as  divided  into  different  cities,  countries, 
and  nations,  the  necessity  of  it  will  appear  yet  more  evident. 
For  how  can  communities  be  kept  up,  or  commerce  carried  on, 
without  society  ?  Certainly  not  at  all,  since  Providence  seems 
wisely  to  have  assigned  a  particular  product  to  almost  each 
particular  country,  on  purpose,  as  it  were,  to  oblige  us  to  be 
social ;  and  hath  so  admirably  mingled  the  parts  of  the  whole 
body  of  mankind  together,  *'  that  the  eye  cannot  say  to  the  hand 
I  have  no  need  of  thee ;  nor  again,  the  band  to  the  foot,  I  have 
no  need  of  thee." 

Many  other  instances  might  be  given  of  the  necessity  of 
society,  in  reference  to  our  bodily,  personal,  and  national  wants. 
But  what  are  all  these  when  weighed  in  the  balance  of  the  sane- 
tuary4  in  comparison"^  of  the  infinite  greater  need  of  it  with 
respect  to  the  soul  ?  It  was  chiefly  in  regard  to  this  better  part, 
no  doubt,  that  God  said, "  It  is  not  good  for  the  man  to  be 
alone."  For,  let  us  suppose  Adam  to  be  as  happy  as  may  be, 
placed  as  the  Lord  of  the  creation  in  the  paradise  of  God,  and 
spending  all  his  hours  in  adoring  and  praising  the  blessed  Author 
oi  his  being;  yet  as  his  soul  was  the  very  copy  of  the  divine 
imture,whose  peculiar  property  it  is  to  be  communicative,  without 


Ttll.J  OF  RBU010U8  80CIKTT.  109 

the  diyine  all-sufficiency  he  could  not  be  cconpletely  happy^ 
because  he  was  alone,  and  inconununicathre,  nor  even  content 
in  patradise,  for  want  of  a  partner  in  hia  joys.  God  knew  this, 
and  therefore  said, ''  It  is  not  good  that  the  man  shall  be  alone, 
I  will  make  a  help  meet  for  hinu"  And  though  this  proved  a 
fiital  means  of  his  falling,  yet  that  was  not  owing  to  any  natu^ 
ral  consequence  of  society ;  but  partly  to  that  cursed  apostate, 
who  craftily  lies  in  wait  to  deceive ;  partly  to  Adam's  ovm  folly, 
in  rather  choosing  to  be  miserable  with  one  he  loved^  than  trust 
in  God  to  raise  him  up  another  spouse. 

If  we  reflect,  indeed,  on  that  familiar  intercourse  our  first 
patent  could  carry  on  with  heaven  in  a  state  of  innocence^ 
we  shall  be  apt  to  think  he  had  as  little  need  of  society,  aa 
to  his  soul,  as  before  we  supposed  him  to  have  ill  respect  to  his 
body*  But  yet,  as  God  and  the  holy  angels  were  ao  £Eur  above 
him  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  beasts  so  far  beneath  him  on  the 
othor,  there  was  nothing  like  having  one  to  converse  with,  who 
was  '^  bone  of  his  bone,  and  flesh  of  his  flesh.'^ 

Han,  then,  could  not  be  fully  happy,  we  see,  even  in  paradise, 
without  a  companion  of  his  own  species,  much  less  now  he  is 
driven  out.  For,  let  us  view  him  a  little  in  his  natural  estate 
now,  since  the  fhll,  as  '^  having  his  understanding  darkened,  his 
mind  alienated  from  the  life  of  God ;  as  no  more  able  to  see  hia 
way  wherein  he  should  go,  than  a  blind  man  to  describe  the  sun ; 
that  notwithstanding  this,  he  must  receive  his  sight  ere  he  can  see 
God :  and  that  if  he  never  sees  him,  he  never  can  be  happy.  Let 
OS  view  him  in  this  light  (or  rather  this  darkness)  and  dteny  the 
necessity  of  society  if  we  can.  A  divine  revelation  we  find  is 
absolutely  necessary,  we  being  by  nature  as  unable  to  know  as 
we  are  to  do  our  duty.  And  how  idiall  we  leam,  except  one  teach 
us?  But  were  Qod  to  do  this  himself,  how  should  we,  but  vrith 
MoaeSy  exceedingly  quake  and  fear?  Nor  would  the  ministry 
of  angels  in  this  afiair  be  without  too  much  terror.  It  is  neces-« 
sary  therefore,  (at  least  Crod's  dealing  with  us  hath  shewed  it  to 
be  so,)  that  we  should  be  drawn  with  the  cords  of  a  man ;  and 
that  a  divine  revelation  being  granted,  we  should  use  one  another's 
assistance,  under  God,  to  instruct  each  other  in  the  knowledge, 
and  to  exhort  one  another  to  the  practice,  of  those  things  whkh 
bdong  to  our  everlasting  peace.  This  is  undoubtedly  the  |n^eat 
cad  of  society  intended  by  God  since  the  fall,  and  a  strong  SLtfa^ 
ment  it  is  why  ''  two  are  better  than  one,"  and  why  we  should 
^  not  iersake  tfie  assembling  ourselves  together." 

But  &rther,  let  na  consider  ourselves  as  Gfaristiaas,  as  having 
this  natural  veil,  in  some  measure,  taken  ofi^  from  our  eyes,  by 
the  assistance  of  God's  holy  Spirit,  and  so  enabled  to  see  wluU 
he  requires  of  us.  Let  us  suppose  ourselves  in  some  degree  to 
have  tasted  the  good  word  of  life,  and  to  have  felt  the  poweni 
of  the  world  to  come,  influencing  and  moulding  our  souls  into  ^f 
ietigious  frame ;  to  be  fully  and  heartily  convinced  that  we  are 
soldiers  listed  under  the  banner  of  Christ,  and  tp  have  proclaim- 
ed open  war^  at  our  baptism,  against  the  worlds  the  flesh,  and 


110  THBMECBSRITY   AND   BENEFITS  [Vlll/ 

tlio  devil ;  and  have  perhaps,  frequently  renewed  our  oliligatioiis 
so  to  do  by  partaking  of  the  Lord's  supper ;  that  we  arc  sur- 
rounded with  millions  of  foes  without,  and  infested  with  a  legion 
of  enemies  within ;  that  we  are  commanded  to  shine  as  lights  in 
the  world,  in  the  midst  of  a  crooked  and  perverse  generation ; 
that  we  are  travelling  to  a  long  eternity,  and  need  all  imaginable 
helps  to  shew,  and  encourage  us  in,  our  way  thither.  Let  us,  I 
say,  reflect  on  all  this,  and  then  how  shall  each  of  us  cry  out, 
Brethren,  what  a  necessary  thing  it  is  to  meet  together  in  religi- 
ous societies  ? 

The  primitive  Christians  were  fully  sensible  of  this,  and  there- 
fore we  And  them  continually  keeping  up  communion  with  each 
other :  for  what  says  the  scripture?  They  continued  stedfastly 
in  the  apostles*  doctrine  and  fellowship.  Acts  ii.  42.  Peter  and 
John  were  no  sooner  dismissed  by  the  great  council,  than  they 
haste  away  to  their  companions.  ''And  being  set  at  liberty,  they 
came  to  their  own,  and  told  them  all  those  things  which  the  high 
priest  had  said  unto  them,"  Acts  iv.  23.  Paul,  as  soon  as  con- 
verted, "  tarried  three  days  with  the  disciples  that  were  at  Da- 
mascus," Acts  ix.  19.  And  Peter  afterwards,  when  released 
from  prison,  immediately  goes  to  the  house  of  Mary,  where  there 
were  great  multitudes  assembled,  praying,"  Acts  xii.  12.  And 
it  is  reported  of  the  Chivstians  in  after-ages,  that  they  used  to 
a.ssemble  together  before  day-light,  to  sing  a  psalm  to  Christ  as 
God.     So  precious  was  the  communion  of  saints  in  those  days. ' 

If  it  be  asked  what  advantages  we  shall  reap  from  such  a  pro- 
cedure now  ?  I  answer,  much  every  way.  "  Two  are  better  tnan 
one,  because  they  have  a  good  reward  for  their  labour :  for  if 
they  fall,  the  one  will  lift  up  his  fellow;  hut  woe  be  to  him  that 
is  alone  when  he  falleth,  for  he  hath  not  another  to  help  him  up. 
Again,  if  two  lie  together,  then  they  have  heat ;  but  how  can  one 
be  warm  alone  ?  And  if  one  prevail  against  him,  two  shall  witli- 
stand  him ;  and  a  threefold  cord  is  not  quickly  broken." 

Which  directly  leads  me  to  my  second  general  head,  under 
which  I  was  to  assign  some  reasons  why  "  two  are  better  than 
one,"  especially  in  religious  society. 

1.  As  man  in  his  present  condition  cannot  always  stand  up- 
right, but  by  reason  of  the  frailty  of  his  nature  cannot  but  faU ; 
one  eminent  reason  why  two  are  better  than  one,  or,  iu  other 
words,  one  great  advantage  of  religious  society,  is,  **  tliat  when 
thev  fall»  the  one  will  lift  up  his  fellow." 

And  an  excellent  reason  this,  indeed !  For  alas,  when  we 
reflect  how  prone  we  are  to  be  dravm  into  error  in  our  judgments, 
and  into  vice  in  our  practice ;  and  how  unable,  at  least  how  very 
unwilling,  to  espy  or  correct  our  own  miscarriages ;  when  we 
consider  how  apt  the  world  is  to  flatter  us  in  our  faults,  and  how 
few  there  are  so  kind  as  to  tell  us  the  truth :  what  an  inestimable 
privilege  must  it  be  to  have  a  set  of  true,  judicious,  hearty  friends 
about  us,  continually  watching  over  our  souls,  to  inform  us  where 
we  have  fallen,  and  to  warn  us  that  we  fall  not  again  for  the 
future.    Surely  it  is  such  a  privilege,  (to  use  the  words  of  an 


TIII.J  OF   RELIGIOUS   SOCIETY.   .  Ill 

eminent  Christian^)  wc  shall  never  know  the  value  thereof  till 
we  come  to  glory. 

But  this  is  not  all ;  for  supposing  that  we  could  always  stand 
upright,  yet  whosoever  reflects  on  the  difficulties  of  religion  in 
general,  and  his  own  propensity  to  lukewarmness  and  indiffer- 
ence in  particular,  will  find  that  he  must  be  zealous  as  well  as 
steady,  if  ever  he  expects  to  enter  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  Here 
then  the  wise  man  points  out  to  us  another  excellent  reason  why 
two  are  better  than  one.  '^  Again,  if  two  lie  together,  then  they 
have  heat ;  but  how  can  one  be  warm  idone  V  Which  was  the 
next  thing  to  be  considered. 

2.  A  second  reason  why  two  are  better  than  one,  is,  because 
they  can  impart  heat  to  each  other. 

It  is  an  observation  no  less  true  than  common,  that  kindled 
coals  if  placed  asunder  soon  go  out,  but  if  heaped  together 
quicken  and  enliven  each  other,  and  afford  a  lasting  heat.  The 
same  wiU  hold  good  in  the  case  now  before  us.  If  Christians 
kindled  by  the  grace  of  God  unite,  they  will  quicken  and  enliven 
each  other ;  but  if  they  separate  and  keep  asunder,  no  marvel  if 
they  soon  grow  cool  or  tepid.  If  two  or  three  meet  together  in 
Cbrisf  s  name,  they  will  have  heat :  but  how  can  one  be  warm 
alone? 

Observe,  ''How  can  one  be  warm  alone?"  The  wise  man's 
expressing  himself  by  way  of  question,  implies  an  impossibility, 
at  least  a  very  great  difficulty,  to  be  warm  in  religion  without 
company,  where  it  may  be  had.  Behold  here,  then,  another  ex- 
cdlent  benefit  flowing  from  religious  society;  it  will  keep  us 
xealous,  as  well  as  steady,  in  the  ways  of  godliness. 

Bat  to  illustrate  this  a  little  farther  by  a  comparison  or  two. 
Let  us  look  upon  ourselves  (as  was  above  hinted)  as  soldiers 
listed  under  Christ's  banner;  as  going  out  with  ''ten  thousand, 
to  meet  one  that  cometh  against  us  with  twentv  thousand ;"  as 
persons  that  are  to  "wresde  not  only  with  flesh  and  blood,  but 
against  principalities,  against  powers,  and  spiritual  wicked- 
nesses in  high  places."  And  then  tell  me,  all  ye  that  fear  God, 
if  it  be  not  an  invaluable  privilege  to  have  a  company  of  fellow- 
soldiers  continually  about  us,  animating  and  exhorting  each 
other  to  stand  our  ground,  to  keep  our  ranks,  and  manfiilly  to 
follow  the  Captain  of  our  salvation,  though  it  be  through  a  sea 
of  blood? 

Let  us  consider  ourselves  in  another  view,  before  mentioned, 
as  persons  travelling  to  a  long  eternity;  as  rescued  by  the' free 
grace  of  God,  in  some  measure,  from  our  natural  Egyptian  bon- 
dage, and  marching  under  the  conduct  of  our  spiritual  Joshua, 
through  the  wilderness  of  this  world,  to  the  land  of  our  heavenly 
Canaan.  Let  us  farther  reflect  how  apt  we  are  to  startle  at 
every  difficulty;  to  cry,  "There  are  lions!  There  are  lions  in 
the  way!  There  are  the  sons  of  Anak"  to  be  grappled  with,  ere 
we  can  possess  the  promised  land !  How  prone  we  are,  with 
Lot's  wife,  to  look  wishfully  back  on  our  spiritual  Sodom,  or 
with  the  foolish  Israelites,  to  long  again  for  the  flesh-pots  of 


112  THB  NECBgSITY  AND   BENEFITS  [VIIK 

Egypt;  and  to  retam  to  our  former  naton^l  state  of  bondage 
and  slavery.  Consider  this,  my  brethren^  and  see  wbat  a  blessed 
privilege  it  will  be  to  have  a  set  of  Israelites  indeed  about  us, 
always  reminding  ns  of  tbe  folly  of  any  such  cowardly  design, 
and  of  the  intolerable  misery  we  shall  mn  into,  if  we  fall  in  th^ 
least  short  of  the  promised  land. 

More  might  be  said  on  this  particular,  did  not  the  limits  of  a 
discourse  of  this  nature  oblige  me  to  hasten^ 

8.  To  give  a  third  reason,  mentioned  by  the  wise  man  in  the 
text,  why  two  are  better  than  one ;  because  they  can  secnre 
each  other  from  enemies  without :  ''And  if  one  prevail  against 
him,  ]^t  two  shall  withstand  him :  apd  a  threefold  cord  is  not 
quickly  broken." 

Hitherto  we  have  considered  the  advantages  of  religions  socie- 
ties, as  a  great  preservative  against  falling  Tat  least  danger* 
ously  falling)  into  sin  and  lukewarmness,  and  that  too  from  our 
own  corruptions.  But  what  says  the  wise  son  of  Sirach?  ^  My 
son,  when  thou  goest  to  serve  the  Lord,  prepare  thy  soul  for 
temptation:"  and  that  not  only  from  inward,  but  outward  foes; 
particularly  from  those  two  grand  adversaries,  the  world  and 
the  devil :  for  no  sooner  will  Uiine  eye  be  bept  heavenward,  but 
the  former  will  be  immediately  diverting  it  another  way,  telling 
thee  thou  needest  not  be  singular  in  order  to  be  religions ;  that 
you  may  be  a  Christian  without  going  so  much  out  of  the  com* 
moB  road. 

Nor  will  the  devil  be  wanting  in  his  artful  insinuations  or 
impious  suggestions,  to  divert  or  terrify  thee  from  pressing  for*- 
wards,  "  that  thou  mayest  lay  hold  on  the  crown  of  life."  And 
if  he  cannot  prevail  this  way,  he  will  try  another :  and,  in  order 
to  make  his  temptation  the  more  undiscemed,  but  withal  moie 
successful,  he  will  employ  perhaps  some  of  thy  nearest  relatives 
or  most  powerful  fVieods,  (as  he  set  Peter  on  our  blessed  Master) 
who  will  always  be  bidding  thee  to  spare  thyself;  telling  thecj 
thou  needest  not  to  take  so  much  pains  ;  that  it  is  not  so  dilB* 
cult  a  matter  to  get  to  heaven  as  some  people  would  make  of  it, 
nor  the  way  so  narrow  as  others  imagine  it  to  be. 

But  see  here  the  advantage  of  religious  coippany ;  for  suppos^^ 
ing  thou  findest  thyself  thus  surrounded  on  every  side,  and 
unable  to  withstand  such  borrid  (though  seemingly  friendly) 
counsels,  haste  away  to  thy  companions,  and  they  will  teach 
thee  a  truer  and  better  lesson ;  tney  will  tell  thee,  that  thou 
must  be  singular,  if  thou  wilt  be  religious ;  and  that  it  is  as  im- 
possible for  a  Christian,  as  for  a  city  set  upon  a  hiU,  to  be  hid* 
den :  that  if  thou  wilt  be  an  almost  Christian  ^and  as  good  be 
none  at  all)  thou  mayest  live  in  the  same  idle,  indifferent  man^ 
ner  as  thou  seest  most  other  people  do ;  but  if  thou  wilt  be 
not  only  almost,  bat  altogether  a  Christian,  they  will  inform  the^ 
thou  must  go  a  great  deal  farther :  that  thou  must  not  only  faintly 
seek,  but  **  earnestly  strive  to  enter  in  at  the  strait  gate:"  that 
there  is  but  one  way  now  to  heaven,  as  foimeriy,  even  through 
the  narrow  passage  of  a  sound  conversion }  and  that  in  order  to 


nil  J  di'  it&Lt6iQUS  Roci«tr.  tH 

bring  about  tbti  mighty  work>  thou  must  undergo  a  coliBtmit, 
bat  nec6Mary  discipline  of  fasting,  watching,  and  nrayer.  And, 
therefore,  the  only  reason  why  those  friendu  give  thee  such 
advice,  is,  because  they  are  not  willing  to  take  so  ttuch  pains 
thems^ves  ;  or»  as  our  Saviour  told  Peter  on  a  like  occasion, 
because  they  savour  not  the  things  that  be  of  God,  but  the 
things  that  t>e  of  men. 

This,  then,  is  another  excellent  blessing  arising  fifoin  religious 
society,  that  friends  can  hereby  secure  each  other  from  those 
who  oppose  them.  The  devil  is  fully  sensible  of  this,  and  there- 
fore be  has  always  done  his  utmost  to  suppress,  and  put  a  stop 
to,  the  commnnion  of  saints.  This  was  his  grand  artifice  at  the 
first  planting  of  the  gospel,  to  persecute  the  professors  of  it,  in 
order  to  separate  them*  Which,  though  God,  as  he  always 
will,  Qyer-rnled  for  the  better ;  yet  it  shews  what  an  enmity  he 
has  against  Christiims  assembling  themselves  together.  Nor 
has  he  yet  left  off  his  old  stratagem ;  it  being  his  usual  way  to 
Mitiee  na  by  ourselves,  in  order  to  tempt  Us  ;  where,  by  being 
destitute  of  one  another's  help,  he  hopes  to  lead  us  captive  at 
his  wilL 

Bat,  <m  the  contrary^  knovdng  his  own  interest  is  strengthened 
by  society,  he  would  first  persuade  us  to  neglect  the  communion 
of  saints,  and  then  bid  us  "  stand  in  the  way  of  siniiers>''  hoping 
thereby  to  put  us  into  the  seat  of  the  scornful.  Judas  and  Peter 
are  melancholy  instances  of  this.  The  former  had  no  sooner 
left  his  company  at  supper,  but  he  Went  out  and  betrayed  his 
Hastes ;  and  the  dismal  downfall  of  the  latter,  when  he  would 
venture  himself  amongst  a  company  of  enemies,  plainly  shews 
us  what  the  devil  will  endeavour  to  do,  when  he  gets  us  by  onr- 
aelves.  Bad  Peter  kept  his  own  company,  he  might  have  kept 
his  Integrity ;  but  a  single  cord,  alas !  how  quickly  was  it  bto-* 
ken !  Oar  blessed  Saidour  knew  this  full  well,  and  therefore  it 
is  very  observable,  that  he  always  sent  out  his  disciples  two 
by  two* 

And  now,  after  e6  many  advantages  to  be  reaped  from  reli- 
gioas  society,  may  we  not  very  jnstly  cry  out  with  the  wise  man 
is  my  text,  **  Woe  be  to  him  that  is  alone ;  for  when  he  falleth, 
he  hath  not  another  to  lift  him  up !"'  When  he  is  cold,  he  huth 
not  a  friend  to  warm  him ;  when  he  is  assaulted,  he  hath  not  a 
second  to  hdphim  tovdthstand  his  enemy. 

III.  I  now  come  to  my  third  general  head,  under  which  was 
to  be  shewn  the  several  duties  incumbent  on  every  member  of  a 
feHgioiis  society,  as  such,  which  are  three.  1.  Mutual  reproof; 
2.  Mntoal  exhortaii<m ;  3.  Mutual  assisting  and  defending  each 

other. ^1.  Mutual  reproof.  "  Two  are  better  than  one ;  for 

when  they  hU,  the  one  will  lift  up  bis  fellow.'' 

Now,  tfepfoof  may  be  taken  either  in  a  more  extensive  sense, 
and  then  it  simrfies  our  raising  a  brother  by  the  gentlest  means, 
when  ho fhlls  into  eAn  and  error;  or  \n  a  more  restrained  signi- 
Aeation,  as^  reaching  no  farther  tiian  those  miscarriages,  which 
navoidably  happen  in  the  most  holy  men  living. 

♦  G 


114  THE  NBC£88ITY  AND   BBNBPITS  [Vllf.- 

The  wise  man^  in  the  text,  supposes  aU  of  us  sobject  to  both : 
**  For  when  they  fall,  (thereby  impljring  that  each  of  us  may  fall) 
the  one  will  lift  up  his  fellow."  From  whence  we  may  infei, 
that  *' when  any  brother  is  overtaken  with  a  fault,  he  that  is  -spi- 
ritual (^that  is,  regenerate,  and  knows  the  corruption  and  weak- 
ness ot  human  nature)  ought  to  restore  such  an  one  in  the  spirit 
of  meekness."  And  why  he  should  do  so,  the  apostle  subjoins 
a  reason — **  considering  thyself,  lest  thou  also  be  tempted ;'  that 
is,  considering  thy  own  frailty,  lest  thou  also  fall  by  the  like 
temptation. 

We  are  all  frail  unstable  creatures ;  and  it  is  merely  owing 
to  the  free  grace  and  good  providence  of  Crod  that  we  run  not 
into  the  same  excess  of  riot  with  other  men.  Every  offending 
brother,  therefore,  claims  our  pity  rather  than  our  resentment; 
and  each  member  should  strive  to  be  the  most  forward,  as  well 
as  the  most  gentle,  in  restoring  him  to  his  former  state. 

But  supposing  a  person  not  to  be  overtaken,  but  to  fall  wil- 
fully into  a  crime ;  yet  who  art  thou  that  deniest  forgiveness  to 
thy  offending  brother  ?  '^  Let  him  that  standeth  take  heed  lest 
he  fall."  Take  ye,  brethren,  the  holy  apostles  as  eminent  exam- 
ples for  you  to  learn  by,  how  you  ought  to  behave  in  this  matter. 
Ck)nsider  how  quickly  they  joined  the  right  hand  of  fellowship 
with  Peter,  who  had  so  wilfully  denied  his  Master :  for  we  find 
John  and  him  together  but  two  days  after,  John  xx.  2.  And 
ver.  19,  we  find  him  assembled  with  the  rest.  So  soon  did  they 
forgive,  so  soon  associate  with  their  sinful,  yet  relenting  bro- 
ther.   '^  Let  us  go,  and  do  likewise." 

But  there  is  another  kind  of  reproof  incumbent  on  every  mem- 
ber of  a  religious  society :  namely,  a  gentle  rebuke  for  some 
miscarriage  or  other,  which,  though  not  actually  sinful,  yet  may 
become  the  occasion  of  sin.  .  This  indeed  seems  a  more  easy, 
but  perhaps  will  be  found  a  more  difficult  point  than  the  former; 
for  when  a  person  has  really  sinned,  he  cannot  but  own  his 
brethren's  reproof  to  be  just ;  whereas,  when  it  was  only  for 
some  little  misconduct,  the  pride  that  is  in  our  natures  will 
scarce  suffer  us  to  brook  it.  But  however  ungrateful  this  pill 
may  be  to  our  brother,  yet  if  we  have  any  concern  for  his  wel- 
fare, it  must  be  administered  by  some  friendly  hand  or  other. 
By  all  means  then  let  it  be  applied ;  only,  like  a  skilful  physi- 
cian, gild  over  the  ungrateful  pill,  and  endeavour,  if  possible,  to 
deceive  thy  brother  into  health  and  soundness.  ''Let  all  bitter- 
ness, and  wrath,  and  malice,  and  evil-speaking,  be  put  away 
from  it."  Let  the  patient  know  his  recovery  is  the  only  thing 
aimed  at,  and  that  thou  delightest  not  causelessly  to  grieve  thy 
brother ;  then  thou  canst  not  want  success. 

2.  Mutual  exhortation  is  the  second  duty  resulting  from  the 
words  of  the  text :  **  Again,  if  two  lie  together^  then  they  have 
beat." 

Observe,  the  wise  man  supposes  it  as  impossible  for  religious 
persons  to  meet  together,  and  not  to  be  the  warmer  for  each 
other's  company,  as  for  two  persons  to  lie  in  the  same  bed,  and 


vjil]  op  rblioious  socibty.  115 

yet  freeze  with  cold.  But  now  how  is  it  possible  to  commiini* 
cate  beat  to  each  other,  without  mutually  stirring  up  the  gift  of 
God  which  is  in  us,  by  brotherly  exhortation  ?  Let  every  mem- 
ber then  of  a  religious  society  write  that  zealous  apostle's  advice 
on  the  tables  of  his  heart : ''  See  that  ye  exhort  and  provoke  one 
another  to  love,  and  to  good  works ;  and  so  much  the  more,  as 
you  see  the  day  of  the  Lord  approaching/'  Believe  me,  brethren, 
we  have  need  of  exhortation  to  rouse  up  our  sleepy  souls,  to  set 
OS  upon  our  watch  against  the  temptations  of  the  world,  the 
flesh,  and  the  devil ;  to  excite  us  to  renounce  ourselves,  to  take 
up  our  crosses,  and  follow  our  blessed  Master  and  the  glorious 
company  of  saints  and  martyrs,  "  who  through  faith  have  fought 
the  good  fight,  and  are  gone  before  us  to  inherit  the  promises." 
A,  third  part,  therefore,  of  the  time  wherein  a  religious  society 
meets,  seems  necessary  to  be  spent  in  this  important  duty ;  for 
what  avails  it  to  have  our  understandings  enlightened  by  pious 
reading,  unless  our  wills  are  at  the  same  time  inclined  and 
inflamed  by  mutual  exhortation  to  put  it  in  practice?  Add  also, 
that  this  is  the  best  way  both  to  receive  and  impart  light,  and 
the  only  means  to  preserve  and  increase  that  warmth  and  heat, 
which  each  person  first  brought  with  him ;  God  so  ordering  this, 
as  all  other  spiritual  gifts,  that  '^  to  him  that  hath,  (that  is,  im- 
proves and  communicates  what  he  hath,)  shall  be  given ;  but  from 
him  that  hath  not  (or  does  not  improve  the  heat  he  hath)  shall  be 
taken  away  even  that  which  he  seemed  to  have."  So  needful, 
so  essentially  necessary,  is  exhortation  to  the  good  of  society. 

3.  Thirdly,  The  text  points  out  another  duty  incumbent  on 
every  member  of  a  religious  society— to  defend  each  other  from 
those  that  do  oppose  them :  "  And  if  one  prevail  against  him, 
yet  two  shall  withstand  him ;  and  a  threefold  cord  is  not  quickly 
broken/' 

Here  the  wise  man  takes  it  for  granted  that  oflences  will  come, 
nay,  and  that  they  may  prevail  too.  And  this  is  no  more  than 
our  blessed  Master  has  long  since  told  us.  Not,  indeed,  that 
there  is  any  thing  in  Christianity  itself  that  has  the  least  ten- 
dency to  give  rise  to,  or  promote  such  offences :  no,  on  the  con- 
trary, it  breathes  nothing  but  unity  and  love. 

But  so  it  is,  that  ever  since  the  fatal  sentence  pronounced  by 
God,  after  our  first  parents'  fall,  "  I  will  put  enmity  between  thy 
seed  and  her  seed ;"  he  that  is  bom  after  the  flesh,  the  unregene- 
rate,  unconverted  sinner,  has  in  all  ages  **  persecuted  him  that 
b  born  after  the  Spirit :"  and  so  it  always  will  be.  Accordingly 
we  find  an  early  proof  given  of  this  in  the  instance  of  Cain  and 
Abel;  of  Ishmael  and  Isaac;  and,  of  Jacob  and  Esau.  And  in- 
deed, the  whole  bible  contains  little  else  but  a  history  of  the 
great  and  continued  opposition  between  the  children  of  this 
world,  and  the  children  of  God.  The  first  Christians  were  remark- 
able examples  of  this ;  and  though  those  troublesome  times, 
blessed  be  God,  are  now  over,  yet  the  apostle  lias  laid  it  down 
as  a  general  rule,  and  all  who  are  sincere  experimentally  prove 
the  truth  of  it;  that  *'  they  that  will  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus, 

g2^ 


116  THB   NECESSITY    AND   BENEFITS  [Vlfl. 

must  (to  the  end  of  the  worid,  in  some  degree  or  other)  suffer 
persecution/'  That  therefore  this  may  not  make  us  desert  our 
blessed  Master's  cause,  every  member  should  unite  their  forces 
in  order  to  stand  against  it.  And  for  the  better  effecting  this, 
each  would  do  well,  from  time  to  time,  to  communicate  his  ex- 
periences, grievances,  and  temptations,  and  beg  his  companions 
(first  asking  God's  assistance,  without  which  all  is  nothing)  to 
administer  reproof,  exhortation,  or  comfort,  as  his  case  requires : 
so  that  ^'  if  one  cannot  prevail  against  it,  yet  two  shall  withstand 
it;  and  a  threefold  (much  less  a  many-fold)  cord  will  not  be 
quickly  broken  " 

IV.  But  it  is  time  for  me  to  proceed  to  the  fourth  general  thing 
proposed — to  draw  an  inference  or  two  from  what  has  been  said. 

1.  And  first,  if  *'  two  are  better  than  one/'  and  the  advantages 
of  religious  society  are  so  many  and  so  great;  then  it  is  the  duty 
of  every  true  Christian  to  set  on  foot,  establish,  and  promote,  as 
much  as  in  him  lies,  societies  of  this  nature.  And  I  believe  we 
may  venture  to  affirm,  that  if  ever  a  spirit  of  true  Christianity 
be  revived  in  the  world,  it  must  be  brought  about  by  some  such 
means  as  this.  Motives  surely  cannot  be  wanting,  to  stir  Ub 
up  to  this  commendable  and  necessary  undertaking;  for,  grant- 
ing all  hitherto  advanced  to  be  of  no  force,  yet  metbinks  the  sin- 
gle consideration,  that  great  part  of  our  happiness  in  heaven  wiU 
consist  in  the  communion  of  sahUs;  or  that  the  interest  as  well 
as  piety  of  those  who  differ  from  us,  is  strengthened  and  sup^ 
ported  by  nothing  more  than  their  frequent  meetings ;  either 
of  these  considerations,  I  say,  one  would  think,  should  induce 
us  to  do  our  utmost  to  copy  after  their  good  example,  and  settle 
a  lasting  and  pious  communion  of  the  saints  on  earth.  Add  to 
this,  that  we  find  the  kingdom  of  darkness  established  daily  by 
such  like  means ;  and  shall  not  the  kingdom  of  Christ  be  set  in 
opposition  against  it  ?  Shall  the  children  of  Belial  assemble  and 
strengthen  each  other  in  wickedness;  and  shall  not  the  children 
of  God  unite,  and  strengthen  themselves  in  piety?  Shall  socie- 
ties on  societies  be  countenanced  for  midnight  revellings,  and 
the  promoting  of  vice,  and  scarcely  one  be  found  intended  for 
the  propagation  of  virtue  ?    Be  astonished,  O  heavenSj  at  this ! 

2.  But  this  leads  me  to  a  second  inference ;  namely^  to  warn 
persons  of  the  great  danger  those  are  in,  who,  either  by  thdr 
subscriptions,  presence,  or  approbation,  promote  societies  of  a 
quite  opposite  nature  to  religion. 

And  here  I  would  not  be  understood  to  mean  only  those  pub- 
Uc  meetings  which  are  designed  manifestly  for  nothing  else  but 
revellings  and  banquetings,  for  chambering  and  wantonness,  and 
at  which  a  modest  heathen  would  blush  to  be  present;  but  also 
those  seemingly  innocent  entertainments  and  meetings,  which 
the  politer  part  of  the  world  are  so  very  fond  of,  and  spend  so 
much  time  in ;  but  which,  notwithstanding,  keep  as  many  persons 
from  a  sense  of  true  religion,  as  doth  intemperance,  debauchery, 
or  any  other  crime  whatever.  Indeed,  whilst  we  are  in  this 
world,  we  must  have  proper  relaxations,  to  fit  us  both  for  th« 


YllL]  OF   RELIGIOUS   SOCIETY.  117 

business  of  our  profession,  and  religion.  Bat  then,  for  persons 
ivlio  call  themselves  Christians,  that  have  solemnly  vowed,  at 
tfeir  baptism,  to  renounce  the  vanities  of  this  sinful  world;  that 
ale  commanded  in  scripture  "  to  abstain  from  all  appearance  of 
evil,  and  to  have  their  conversation  in  heaven ;"  for  such  persons 
as  these  to  support  meetings,  which  (to  say  no  worse  of  them) 
are  vain  and  trifling,  and  have  a  natural  tendency  to  draw  off 
oar  minds  from  God,  is  absurd,  ridiculous,  and  sinful.  Surely 
two  are  not  better  than  one  in  this  case;  no,  it  is  to  be  wished 
there  was  not  one  to  be  found  concerned  in  it.  The  sooner  we 
forsake  the  assembling  ourselves  together  in  such  a  manner,  the 
better;  and  no  matter  how  quickly  the  cord  that  holds  such 
societies  (was  it  a  thousand-fold)  is  broken. 

But  you,  brethren,  have  not  so  learned  Christ;  but,  on  the  con- 
trary, like  true  disciples  of  your  Lord  and  Master,  have  by  the 
blessing  of  God  (as  this  evening's  solemnity  abundantly  testifies) 
happily  formed  yourselves  into  such  societies,  which,  if  duly 
attended  on  and  improved,  cannot  but  strengthen  you  in  your 
Giristian  warfare,  and  '^  make  you  fruitful  in  every  good  word 
and  work." 

What  remains  for  me,  but,  as  was  proposed,  in  the  last  place, 
to  close  what  has  been  said,  in  a  word  or  two  by  way  of  exhorta- 
tion, and  to  beseech  you  in  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
to  go  on  in  the  way  you  have  begun :  and  by  a  constant  consci- 
entious attendance  on  your  respective  societies,  to  discoun- 
tenance vice,  encourage  virtue,  and  build  each  other  up  in  the 
knowledge  and  fear  of  God. 

Only  permit  me  to  "  stir  up  your  pure  minds,  by  way  of  remem- 
brance," and  to  exhort  you,  "if  there  be  any  consolation  in  Christ, 
any  fellowship  of  the  spirit,"  again  and  again  to  consider,  that  as 
an  Christians  in  general,  so  all  members  of  religious  societies  in 
particular,  are  in  an  especial  manner,  as  houses  built  upon  a  hill ; 
and  that  therefore  it  highly  concerns  you  to  walk  circumspectly 
towards  those  that  are  without,  and  to  take  heed  to  yourselves, 
tbat  your  conversation  in  common  life  be  as  becometh  such  an 
open  and  peculiar  profession  of  the  gospel  of  Christ;  knowing 
^t  the  eyes  of  all  men  are  upon  you,  narrowly  to  inspect  every 
ciicnmstance  of  your  behaviour:  and  that  every  notorious  wilful 
miscarriage  of  any  single  member  will,  in  some  measure,  redound 
Id  the  scandal  and  dishonour  of  your  whole  fraternity. 

Labour  therefore,  my  beloved  brethren,  to  let  your  practice 
correspond  to  your  profession :  and  think  not  that  it  will  be  suf- 
ficient for  you  to  plead  at  the  last  day.  Lord,  have  we  not  assem- 
bled ourselves  together  in  thy  name,  and  enlivened  each  other 
by  singing  psalms,  and  hymns,  and  spiritual  songs?  For  verily 
I  aay  unto  yon.  Notwithstanding  this,  our  blessed  Lord  will  bid 
yoD  depart  from  him;  nay,  yon  shall  receive  a  greater  damnation, 
tf,  in  t^  midst  of  these  great  pretensions,  you  are  found  to  be 
workers  of  iniquity. 

But  Grod  forbid  that  any  such  evil  should  befall  you ;  that  there 
diould  be  ever  a  Judas^  a  traitor^  amongst  such  distinguished 


118  THB   FOLLY    AND   DANGER  [iX. 

followers  of  our  common  Master.  No,  on  the  contrary^  the 
excellency  of  your  rules,  the  regularity  of  your  meetings^  and 
more  especially  your  pious  zeal  in  assembling  in  such  a  public 
and  solemn  manner  so  frequently  in  the  year,  persuade  me  to 
think  that  you  are  willing,  not  barely  to  seem,  but  to  be  in  reality. 
Christians ;  and  hope  to  be  found  at  the  last  day,  what  you  wotild 
be  esteemed  now,  holy,  sincere  disciples  of  a  crucified  Redeemer. 

Oh,  may  you  always  continue  thus  minded !  and  make  it  your 
daily,  constant  endeavour,  both  by  precept  and  example,  to  turn 
all  your  converse  with,  more  especially  those  of  your  own  socie- 
ties, into  the  same  most  blessed  spirit  and  temper.  Thus  will  you 
adorn  the  gospel  of  our  Lord  JesusChrist  in  all  things:  thus  will 
you  anticipate  the  happiness  of  a  future  state ;  and  by  attending  on, 
and  improving,  the  communion  of  saints  on  earth,  be  made  meet 
to  join  the  communion  and  fellowship  of  the  spirits  of  just  men 
made  perfect,  of  the  holy  angels,  nay,  of  the  ever-blessed  and 
eternal  God  in  heaven. 

Which  God  of  his  infinite  mercy  grant  through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord :  to  whom,  with  the  Father  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  three  per- 
sons and  one  God,  be  ascribed,  as  is  most  due,  all  honour  and 
praise,  might,  majesty,  and  dominion,  now  and  for  ever.    Amen. 


SERMON  IX. 

THE   FOLLY    AND    DANGER   OP    BEING    NOT    RIGHTEOUS 

ENOUGH. 

Be  not  righteous  over-much,  neither  make  thyself  over-wtse  ;  why 
shouldest  thou  destroy  thyself? — Eccles.  vii.  16. 

Nothing  is  more  frequent,  than,  while  people  are  living  in  a 
course  of  sin,  and  after  the  fashion  and  manner  of  the  world,  there 
is  no  notice  taken  of  them ;  neither  are  their  ways  displeasing  to 
their  companions  and  carnal  relations :  but  if  they  set  their  faces 
Zion-ward,  and  begin  to  feel  the  power  of  God  on  their  hearts, 
then  they  are  surrounded  with  temptations  from  their  friends, 
who  thus  act  the  devil's  part.  The  enemies,  the  greatest  enemies 
a  young  convert  meets  with,  my  dear  brethren,  are  those  of  his 
own  house.  They  that  will  be  godly,  must  suffer  persecution ; 
so  it  was  in  Christ's  time,  and  so  it  was  in  the  apostles'  time  too; 
for  our  Lord  came  not  to  send  peace,  but  a  sword.  Our  relations 
would  not  have  us  sit  in  the  scomer's  chair;  they  would  not  have 
us  be  prodigals,  consuming  our  substance  upon  harlots ;  neither 
would  they  have  us  rakes  or  libertines;  but  they  would  have  us 
be  contented  with  an  almost  Christianity.  To  keep  up  our  repu- 
tation by  going  to  church,  and  adhering  to  the  outward  forms  of 
religion,  saying  our  prayers,  reading  the  word  of  God,  and  taking 
the  sacraments;  this,  they  imagine,  is  all  that  is  necessary  for  to 
be  Christians  indeed ;  and  when  we  go  one  step  farther  than  this, 
their  mouths  are  open  against  us,  as  Peter's  was  to  Christ; 
"  Spare  thyself, — do  thyself  no  harm." 


IX.]  THE   FOLLY   AND   DANGBll  119 

And  of  this  nature  are  the  words  of  the  text.  They  are  not 
the  words  of  Solomon  himself^  but  the  words  of  an  infidel  speak- 
ing to  him,  whom  he  introduces  in  several  parts  of  this  book ;  for 
S^omon  had  been  shewing  the  misfortunes  which  attended  the 
tmly  good,  as  in  the  verse  before  our  text. 

Upon  this  the  infidel  says,  ''Be  not  righteous  over-much, 
neither  be  thou  over- wise :  why  shouldest  thou  destroy  thyself?" 
that  is.  Why  shouldest  thou  bring  these  misfortunes  upon  thy- 
self, by  being  over-strict?  Be  not  righteous  over-much;  eat, 
drink,  and  be  merry,  live  as  the  world  lives,  and  then  you  will 
avoid  those  misfortunes  which  may  attend  you  by  being  righ- 
teous over-much. 

This  text  has  another  meaning,  but  take  it  which  way  you  will, 
my  brethren,  it  was  spoken  by  an  unbeliever ;  therefore  it  was 
DO  credit  for  the  person  who  lately  preached  upon  this  text,  to 
take  it  for  granted  that  these  were  the  words  of  Solomon  :  the 
words  of  an  infidel  was  not  a  proper  text  to  a  christian  congre- 
gation. But  as  David  came  out  against  Goliath,  not  armed,  as 
the  champion  was,  with  sword  and  spear,  but  i^vith  a  sling  and 
stone,  and  then  cut  off  his  head  with  his  own  sword ;  so  1  come 
out  against  these  letter-learned  men,  in  the  strength  of  the  Lord 
Jesns  Christ ;  and,  my  dear  brethren,  I  trust  he  will  direct  me 
to  U5:e  my  sling,  so  that  our  enemies  may  not  gainsay  us ;  and  by 
the  sword  of  God's  word,  cut  off  the  heads  of  our  Redeemer's 
enemies. 

But  though  they  are  not  the  wotds  of  Solomon,  yet  we  will 
take  them  in  the  same  manner  the  late  writer  did ;  and,  from  the 
words  shall. 

First,  Shew  you  what  it  is,  not  to  be  righteous  over-much, 
that  we  may  not  destroy  ourselves. 

Secondly f  I  shall  let  you  see  what  it  is  to  be  righteous  over- 
much.    And  then. 

Thirdly,  Conclude  with  an  exhortation  to  all  of  you,  high 
and  low,  rich  and  poor,  one  with  another,  to  come  to  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ. 

First,  The  first  thing  proposed,  is  to  shew  you  what  it  is  not 
to  be  righteous  over- much.    And  here. 

It  is  by  no  means  to  be  righteous  over-much,  to  affirm  we 
must  have  the  same  Spirit  of  God  as  the  first  apostles  had,  and 
must  feel  that  Spirit  upon  our  hearts. 

By  receiving  the  Spirit  of  God,  is  not  to  be  understood,  that 
we  are  to  be  inspired  to  shew  outward  signs  and  wonders,  to 
raise  dead  bodies,  to  cure  leprous  persons,  or  to  give  sight 
to  the  blind :  these  miracles  were  only  of  use  in  the  first  ages 
of  the  church ;  and  therefore  Christians  (nominal  Christians, 
for  we  have  little  else  but  the  i)ame)  may  have  all  the  gifts 
of  the  Spirit,  and  yet  none  of  the  graces  of  it:  Thou,  O  man, 
mayest  be  enabled  by  faith  to  remove  mountains;  thou,  by 
the  power  of  Grod,  mayest  cast  out  devils;  thou,  by  that 
power,  mayest  speak  with  the  tongues  of  men  and  angels ; 
yea,  thou  mayest,  by  that  power,  hold  up  thy  finger,  and  stop 


l;^  OP   BlIKe  NOT   RIGHTBOUS   ENOUGH.  [iX* 

(he  sun  i^  the  firmament ;  nad  if  all  the$e  are  unsaoctified  by 
the  Spirit  of  God,  they  would  be  of  no  service  to  thee^  but 
would  hurry  thee  to  hell  with  the  greater  solemnity.  Saul 
received  the  spirit  of  prophesying,  cM^d  had  another  hearts  yet 
Saul  was  probably  a  cast-r%way.  We  must  receive  the  Spirit  of 
God  in  its  sanotitying  graces  upon  our  aools ;  for  Christ  says, 
*'  Unless  a  man  be  born  again  he  cannot  see  the  kigdom  of  God." 
We  are  all  by  nature  horn  in  sin>  and  at  as  great  a  distance  firom 
God  as  the  devils  themselves.  I  have  tcdd  you  c^ten,  and  now 
tell  you  again>  that  you  are  by  nature  a  motley  mixture  of  the 
beaat  and  devil»  and  we  cannot  recover  owrselves  from  the  state 
wherein  we  have  fallen,  therefore  must  be  renewed  by  the  Holy 
Ghost.  By  the  Holy  Ghost,  I  rnean^  the  third  person  of  the 
ever-blessed  Trinity^  co-equal,  co*essential,  co-eternal,  and 
consubstantial  with  the  Father  and  the  Son ;  and  therefore^ 
when  we  are  baptized,  it  is  into  the  nature  of  the  Father,  into 
the  nature  of  the  Son,  and  into  the  nature  of  the  Holy  Ghost : 
and  we  are  not  true  Christians  titt  we  are  sanctified  by  the  Spirit 
ot  God. 

Though  our  modem  preachers  do  not  actually  deny  the  Spirit 
of  God,  yet  they  say»  *'  Chri^itians  must  not  feel  him  ;"  which  is 
in  effect  to  deny  him.  When  Nicodemus  came  to  Christy  and 
the  Lord  Jesus  was  instructing  him  concerning  the  new  birth,  says 
he  to  our  Lord,  ^'  How  can  these  things  be  V*  Nicodemus,  though 
a  master  of  Israel,  acts  just  as  our  learned  rabbi's  do  now. 
Tiie  answer  that  Christ  gave  him  should  stop  the  mouthaof 
our  letter-learned  Pharisees:  '*The  wind  bloweth  where  it 
listeth,  and  we  hear  the  sound  thereof,  but  cannot  teS  whence  it 
cometh  nor  whither  it  goeth."  Now,  till  the  Spirit  of  Grod  is 
felt  on  our  souls,  as  the  wind  on  our  bodies,  indeed,  my  deaf 
brethren,  you  have  no  interest  in  him  :  religion  consists  not  in 
external  performance,  it  must  be  in  the  heart,  or  else  it  is  only  a 
name,  which  cannot  profit  us,  a  name  to  live  whilst  we  are  dead. 

A  late  preacher  upon  this  text  seeBoid  to  laugh  at  us  for  talk- 
ing of  the  spirit  in  a  sensible  manner,  and  talks  to  us  as  the 
Jews  did  to  Christ :  They  said,  ^^  How  can  this  man  give  us  his 
flesh  to  eat'  V  so  he  asks,  "  What  sign  or  proof  do  we  give  of  it." 
We  do  not  imagine  that  God  must  appear  to  us,  and  give  it  us : 
no,  but  there  may  be,  and  is,  a  fjrequent  receiving,  when  no 
seeing  of  it ;  and  it  is  as  plainly  felt  in  the  soul,  as  any  impres* 
siou  is,  or  can  be,  upon  the  body.  To  what  a  damnable 
condition  should  we  bring  poor  sinners,  if  they  could  not  be  sen* 
sible  of  the  Spirit  of  God  ;  namely,  a  reprobate  mind,  and  pas% 
feeling? 

''What  proof  do  they  give?''  says  the  writer.  What  sign 
would  they  have?  Do  they  expect  us  to  raise  the  dead,  to  give 
sight  to  the  blind,  to  cure  lepers,  to  make  the  lame  to  walk,,  and 
tike  deaf  to  hear  ?  If  these  are  what  they  expect^  I  speak  xfitik 
humility,  God,  by  us,  hath  done  greater  things  than  these ;  m^iy 
who  were  dead  in  sin  are  raised  to>  scriptuie  life  r  ttbose  who 
were  leprous  hjr  nature,  aie  cleansed  by  the  Spicit  of  God ; 


IX.}  OF  BBIKO  NOT  RICHTRaV8   RMOUGH.  131 

those^  who  weie  lame  in  duty,  now  nin  in  God*9  commands ;  those^ 
who  vero  deaf,  their  ears  are  unstoi^ed  to  bear  his  discipline, 
and  hearken  to  his  advice ;  and  the  poor  have  the  gospel  preach* 
ed  to  tbem.  No  wonder  people  talk  at  this  rate,  when  they  can 
tell  as,  ^^  That  the  SfMrit  of  God,  is  a  good  conscience,  conse* 
qnent  therenpon*"  My  dear  brethren,  Seneca^  Cicero,  Plato,  or 
any  of  the  heathen  philosophers,  would  have  giv^i  as  good  a 
definition  as  this :  it  means  no  more,  than  reflecting  that  we  have 
done  welL  This,  this  is  only  deism  refined :  deists  laa^  at  ns, 
when  we  pretcsnd  to  be  against  their  notions,  and  yet  tbtse  men 
use  no  other  reason  for  our  differing  from  them,  than  what  is 
agieeable  to  deists'  principles. 

This  writer  tells  us,  ^'  It  is  against  common-sense  to  talk  of  the 
feeling  of  the  Spirit  of  God."  Common-sense,  my  brethren^  was 
never  allowed  to  be  a  judge;  yea,  it  is  above  its  comprehension, 
neither  are,  nor  can  the  ways  of  God  be  known  by  common- 
sense.  We  should  never  have  known  the  things  of  God  at  ail 
by  our  common  senses :  no;  it  is  the  revelation  of  God  which  is 
to  be  oar  judge ;  it  is  that  we  appeal  to,  and  not  to  our  weak  and 
shallow  conceptions  of  things.  Thus  we  may  see,  it  is  by  no 
oieana  to  be  righteous  over-much,  to  affirm  we  must  have  the 
Sfirit  €)i  God  as  the  apostles  had.    Nor, 

Secondly,  Is  it  to  be  righteous  over-much,  to  frequent  religi* 
OQs  assemblies* 

The  preacher  upon  this  text  aims  at  putting  aside  all  the 
feligians  societies  that  are  in  the  kingdom  t  Indeed,  be  says, 
^  Yarn  may  go  to  church  as  often  as  opportunity  serves,,  and 
tu  Smukofs;  say  your  prayers,  read  the  word  of  God ;  and,  in 
bis  opinion,  every  thing  else  had  better  be  let  alone:  and  as  fov 
the  Spirit  of  God  upon  your  souls,  you  are  to  look  upon  it  as  use- 
leas  and  unnecessary."  If  this,  my  brethren,  be  the  doctrine  we 
have  now  preached,  ChristiaDity  is  at  a  low  ebb  indeed :  but  God 
finrbid  you  should  thus  learn  Jesus  Christ.  Do  you  not  forbear  tho 
fireqaenting  of  religious  assemblies ;  for  as  nothing  helps  to  build 
up  the  devil's  kingdom  inoce  than  the  societies  of  wicked  men^ 
aothiog  would  be  more  for  pulling  of  it  down,  than  the  people  of 
God  meeting  to  strengthen  each  other's  hatnds ;  and  as  the  devii 
has  so  many  friends,  will  ^one  of  you  be  friends  to  the  blessed 
J«8ust  Yes,  I  hope  many  of  you  will  be  of  the  Lord's  side,  and 
build  each  other  up  in  Christian  love  and  fellowship.  This  is 
vhat  the  primitive  Christiatts  delighted  in ;  aad  shall  we  not  foU 
fanr  so  excellent  an  example^  My  brethren,  till  Christian  con^ 
vecsatiOB  is  more  agreeable  to  us,  we  cannot  expect  to  see  the 
gospel  of  Christ  run  and  be  glorifed.  Thus  it  is  by  no  means  to 
he  righteous  over-much,,  to  frequent  selifious  assemblies.  Nor^ 

Thirdly,  Is  it  to  be  righteons  over-umch^  to  abstain  ijcom  the 
divecaions  and.  entert»nments  of  the  age. 

We  are  commanded  to  *'  abstain  from  the  appearance  of  evil/' 
and  that  '^  whatsoever  we  do,  whether  we  eat.  o«  drink,«  we  shatt 
io  alt  to  the  glory  of  God.''  The  writer  ufgpoiii  this;  text  teUs  us^ 
"^  That  it  will  be  accounted  unlawful  tosnaU  to  a  f06e;"  no>  myy 


132  THB   POLLY   AND   DANGER  [iX. 

dear  brethren^  yon  may  smell  to  a  pink^  and  rose  too^if  you  please, 
bu  t  take  care  to  avoid  the  appearance  of  sin.  They  talk  of  innocent 
diversions  and  recreations ;  for  my  part,  I  know  of  no  diversion 
but  that  of  doing  good:  if  you  can  find  any  diversion  which  is 
not  contrary  to  your  baptismal  vow  of  renouncing  the  pomps  and 
vanities  of  this  wicked  world ;  if  you  can  find  any  diversion  which 
tends  to  the  glory  of  God;  if  you  can  find  any  diversion  which 
you  would  be  wiUing  to  be  found  at  by  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  I 
give  you  free  license  to  go  to  them  and  welcome :  but  if,  on  the 
contrary,  they  be  found  to  keep  sinners  from  coming  to  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ ;  if  they  be  a  means  to  harden  the  heart,  and  such 
as  you  would  not  willingly  be  found  in  when  you  come  to  die; 
then,  my  dear  brethren,  keep  from  them;  for  indeed  the  diver- 
sions of  this  age  are  contrary  to  Christianity.  Many  of  you  may 
think  I  have  gone  too  far»  but  I  shall  go  a  great  deal  farther  yet; 
I  will  attack  the  devil  in  his  strongest  holds,  and  bear  my  testi- 
mony against  our  fashionable  and  polite  entertainments.  What 
satisfaction  can  it  be,  what  pleasure  is  there,  in  spending  several 
hours  at  cards?  Strange,  that  even  people  who  are  grown  old, 
can  spend  whole  nights  in  this  diversion.  *  Perhaps  many  of  you 
will  cry  out,  '^  What  harm  is  there  in  it?"  My  dear  brethren, 
whatsoever  is  not  of  faith,  or  for  the  glory  of  God,  is  a  sin :  Now, 
does  cards  tend  to  promote  this?  .  Is  it  not  mispending  your 
precious  time,  which  should  be  employed  in  working  out  your 
salvation  with  fear  and  trembling?  Do  play-houses^  horse-ractno, 
balls,  and  assemblies^  tend  to  promote  the  glory  of  God  T  Would 
you  be  willing  to  have  your  soul  demanded  of  you  while  you  are 
at  one  of  those  places  ?  Many  of  these  are,  (I  must  speak,  I 
cannot  forbear  to  speak  against  these  entertainments ;  come  what 
will,  I  will  declare  against  them,)  many,  I  say,  of  these  are  kept 
up  by  public  authority ;  the  play-houses  are  supported  by  a  pub- 
lic fund,  and  our  newspapers  are  full  of  horse-races  all  through 
the  kingdom :  these  things  are  sinful ;  indeed  they  are  exceeding 
sinful.  What  good  can  come  from  a  horse-race;  from  abusing 
God  Almighty's  creatures,  and  putting  them  to  that  use  he  never 
designed  for  them :  the  play-houses,  are  they  not  nurseries  of 
debauchery  in  the  age?  and  the  supporters  and  patrons  of  them 
are  encouragers  and  promoters  of  all  the  evil  that  is  done  by 
them ;  they  are  the  bane  of  the  age,  and  will  be  the  destruction 
of  those  who  frequent  them.  Is  it  not  high  time  for  the  true  mi- 
nisters of  Jesus  Christ,  who  have  been  partakers  of  the  heavenly 
gift,  to  lift  up  their  voices  as  a  trumpet,  and  cry  aloud  against 
these  diversions  of  the  age :  Are  they  not  earthly,  sensusd,  de- 
vilish? If  you  have  tasted  of  the  love  of  God,  and  have  felt  his 
power  upon  your  souls,  you  would  no  more  go  to  a  play  than  you 
would  run  your  head  into  a  furnace. 

And  what  occasions  these  places  to  be  so  much  frequented,  is 
the  clergy's  making  no  scruple  to  be  at  these  polite  places :  they 
frequent  play-houses,  they  go  to  horse-races,  they  go  to  balls  and 
assemblies,  they  frequent  taverns,  and  follow  all  the  entertain- 
ments that  the  age  affords ;  and  yet  these  are  the  persons  who 


IX.J  OP   BRING   NOT   RIGHTEOUS   ENOUGH.  128 

should  advise  tbdr  hearers  to  refrain  from  them;  but  instead 
thereof,  they  encourage  them  by  their  example.  Persons  are 
too  apt  to  rely  upon,  and  believe  their  pastors,  rather  than 
the  scriptures :  they  think  that  there  is  no  crime  in  going  to  plays 
or  horse-races,  to  balls  and  assemblies ;  for  if  there  were,  they 
think  those  persons,  who  are  their  ministers,  would  not  frequent 
them :  but,  my  dear  brethren,  observe,  they  always  go  disguis- 
ed, the  ministers  are  afraid  of  being  seen  in  their  gowns  and  cas- 
socks ;  the  reason  thereof  is  plain,  their  consciences  inform  them 
that  it  is  not  an  example  fit  for  the  ministers  of  the  gospel  to  set ; 
thus,  they  are  the  means  of  giving  that  offence  to  the  people  of 
God,  which  I  would  not  for  ten  thousand  worlds  :  they  lay  a 
stumbling-block  in  the  way  of  their  weak  brethren,  which  they 
will  not  remove,  though  it  is  a  stumbling-block  of  oflfence.  *^  Woe 
unto  the  world  because  of  offences,  but  woe  unto  that  man  by 
whom  the  offence  cometh/'  The  polite  gentlemen  of  the  age 
spend  their  time  in  following  these  diversions,  because  the  love 
(rf'Grod  is  not  in  their  hearts;  they  are  void  of  Christ,  and  desti- 
tute of  the  Spirit  o(  Grod ;  and  not  being  acquainted  with  the  de- 
light there  is  in  God  and  his  ways,  being  strangers  to  these  things, 
they  run  to  the  devil  for  diversions,  and  are  pleased  and  delight- 
ed with  the  silly  ones  he  shews  them. 

My  dear  bretiiren,  I  speak  of  these  things,  these  innocent  di- 
versions, as  the  polite  part  of  the  world  calls  them,  by  experi- 
ence; perhaps  none,  for  my  age,  hath  read  or  seen  more  plays 
than  I  have ;  I  took  delight  in,  and  was  pleased  with,  them.  It 
is  true,  I  went  to  church  frequently,  received  the  sacrament,  and 
was  diligent  in  the  use  of  the  forms  of  religion,  but  I  was  all  this 
while  ignorant  of  the  power  of  God  on  my  heart,  and  unacquaint- 
ed with  the  work  of  grace ;  but  when  God  was  pleased  to  shine 
with  power  upon  my  soul,  I  could  no  longer  be  contented  to  feed 
on  husks,  or  what  the  swine  did  eat :  the  bible  then  was  my  food ; 
there,  and  there  only,  I  took  delight :  and  till  you  feel  this  same 
power,  you  will  not  abstain  from  the  earthly  delights  of  this  age, 
you  will  take  no  comfort  in  God's  ways,  nor  receive  any  comfort 
from  him;  for  you  are  void  of  the  love  of  God,  having  only  the 
form  of  godliness,  while  you  are  denying  the  power  of  it ;  you  are 
nominal  Christians,  when  you  have  not  the  power  of  Christianity. 

The  polite  gentlemen  say,  ^^  Are  we  to  be  always  upon  our 
knees?  Would  you  have  us  be  always  at  prayer,  and  reading 
or  hearing  the  word  of  Grod  ?" 

My  dear  brethren,  the  fashionable  ones,  who  take  delight  in 
hunting,  are  not  tired  of  being  continually  on  horseback  after 
their  hounds ;  and  when  once  you  are  renewed  by  the  Spirit  of 
God,  it  will  be  a  continual  pleasure  to  be  walking  with  and  talk- 
ing of  God,  and  telling  t^hat  great  things  Jesus  Christ  hath  done 
for  your  souls ;  and  till  you  can  find  as  much  pleasure  in  con- 
versing with  Grod,  as  these  men  do  of  their  hounds,  you  have  no 
share  in  him ;  but  when  you  have  tasted  how  good  the  Lord  is, 

Iou  vrill  shew  forth  his  praise ;  out  of  the  abundance  of  your 
eart  your  mouth  will  speak. 


124  TH£  FOLLY  AKD  DANGBR  [iX* 

This  brings  me  to  the  second  thing  proposed^  which  is  an  ex^ 
tfcme  that  very  seldom  happens  : 

Sectmdly,  To  shew  what  it  is  to  be  righteous  over-much.  And 
here. 

First,  When  we  confine  the  Spirit  of  God  to  this  or  that  par^ 
ticular  church ;  and  are  not  willing  to  converse  with  any  but  those 
o(  the  same  communion ;  this  is  to  be  righteous  over-much,  with 
a  witness :  and  so  it  is«  to  confine  our  comnranion  within  church 
walls,  and  to  think  that  Jesus  could  not  preach  in  a  field  as  well 
as  on  consecrated  ground ;  this  is  Judaism,  this  is  bigotry :  this 
is  like  Peter,  who  would  not  go  to  preach  the  gospel  to  the  Gren* 
tiles,  till  he  had  a  vision  from  God:  and  when  bis  conduct  was 
blamed  by  the  disciples,  be  could  not  satisfy  them  till  he  had 
acquaint'id  them  with  the  vision  he  had  seen.  And,  therefore,  we 
may  justly  infer,  the  Spirit  of  God  is  the  centre  of  unity :  and 
wherever  I  see  the  image  of  my  Master,  I  never  inquire  of  them 
their  opinions ;  I  ask  them  not  what  they  are,  so  they  love  Jesus 
Christ  in  sincerity  and  truth,  but  embrace  them  as  my  brother, 
my  sister,  and  my  spouse :  and  this  is  the  spirit  of  Christianity. 
Many  persons,  who  are  bigots  to  this  or  that  opinion,  when  one 
of  a  difierent  way  of  thinking  hath  come  where  they  were,  have 
left  the  room  or  place  on  the  account :  this  is  the  spirit  of  the 
devil ;  and  if  it  were  possible  that  these  persons  could  be  admit- 
ted into  heaven  with  such  tempers,  that  very  place  would  be 
hell  to  them.  Christianity  will  never  flourish  till  we  are  all  of 
one  heart  and  of  one  mind ;  and  this  would  be  the  only  means  of 
seeing  the  gospel  of  Jesus  to  flourish,  more  than  ever  it  wiU  by 
persecuting  those  who  difier  from  us. 

This  may  be  esteemed  as  enthusiasm  and  madness,  and  as  a 
design  to  undermine  the  established  church:  No;  God  is  my 
judge,  I  should  rejoice  to  see  all  the  world  adhere  to  her  articles; 
I  should  rejoice  to  see  the  ministers  of  the  church  of  England 
preach  up  those  very  articles  they  have  subscribed  to;  but  those 
ministers  who  do  preach  up  the  articles,  are  esteemed  as  mad- 
men, enthusiasts,  schismatics,  and  underminers  of  the  establish- 
ed church :  and  though  they  say  these  things  of  me,  blessed  be 
God,  they  are  without  foundation.  My  dear  brethren,  I  am  a 
friend  to  her  articles,  I  am  a  friend  to  her  homilies,  I  am  a  friend 
to  her  liturgy ;  and,  if  they  did  not  thrust  me  out  of  their  churches, 
I  would  read  them  every  day :  but  I  do  not  confine  the  Spirit  of 
God  there,  for  I  say  it  again,  I  love  all  that  love  the  Lord  Jesu* 
Christ,  and  esteem  liim  my  brother,  my  friend,  my  spouse;  ay, 
my  very  soul  is  knit  to  that  person.  The  spirit  of  persecutioni 
will  never,  indeed  it  will  never  make  any  to  love  Jesus  Christ* 
The  Pharisees  make  this  to  be  madness,  so  much  as  to  menticnv 
persecution  in  a  Christian  country ;  but  there  is  as  much  the 
spirit  of  persecution  now  in  the  world  as  ever  there  was;  their 
will  is  as  great,  but,  blessed  be  God,  they  want  the  power,  otiber- 
wise  bow  soon  would  they  send  rae  to  prison,  make  my  feet  fast 
in  the  stocks,  yea,  would  think  they  did  God  service  in  kiUngr 
me,  and  would  rejoice  to  take  away  my.life. 


IX.j  OF   BIIKS   NOT   RIGHTEOUS   XNOUGH.  125 

This  is  not  ibe  Spirit  of  Christ,  m  j  dear  biethrea :  I  bad  not 
come  to  have  thus  preached ;  I  had  not  come  into  the  highways 
and  hedges ;  I  had  not  exposed  myself  to  the  ill  treatment  of  these 
fetter-learned  men,  bnt  for  the  sake  of  your  souls :  indeed,  I  had 
no  other  reason  bat  your  salvation;  and  for  that  (I  speak  the 
troth  in  Christ,  I  lie  not)  I  wonld  be  content  to  go  to  prison ;  yea, 
I  would  rejoice  to  die  for  you,  so  I  coidd  bat  be  a  means  to  bring 
iome  of  you  to  Jesus :  I  could  not  bear  to  see  so  many  in  the 
highway  to  destruction,  and  not  shew  them  their  danger ;  I  could 
not  bear,  my  brethren,  to  see  you  more  willing  to  learn  than  the 
teachers  are  to  instruct  you :  and  if  any  of  them  were  to  come 
and  preach  to  you,  I  should  not  envy  them,  I  should  not  call 
&em  enthusiasts  or  madmen ;  I  should  rejoice  to  hear  they  had 
ten  dionsand  times  more  success  than  I  have  met  with ;  I  would 
give  them  the  right  hand  of  fellowship ;  I  would  advise  them  to 
goon;  I  would  wish  them  good  luck  in  the  name  of  the  Lord, 
and  say  as  Christ  did,  when  the  disciples  informed  him  of  some 
casting  out  devils  in  his  name,  and  were  for  rebuking  of  them, 
''  ForUd  them  not,  for  they  that  are  not  against  us  are  for  us :" 
or  as  St.  Paul  says,  ^^  Some  preach  Christ  of  envy,  and  some  of 
good-will ;  notwithstanding,  so  Christ  is  but  preached,  I  rejoice ; 
yea,  and  will  rejoice.'^  The  gospel  of  Jesus,  is  a  gospel  of  peace. 
Thus  you  may  see,  that  to  be  righteous  over-much,  is  to  be 
nnchaiitable,  censorious,  and  to  persecute  persons  for  differing 
from  OS  in  religion. 

Secondly,  Persons  are  righteous  over-much,  when  they  spend 
so  mncfa  tune  in  religious  assemblies,  as  to  neglect  their  familias. 
There  is  no  license  given,  by  the  blessed  Jesus,  for  idleness ;  for 
in  the  very  infancy  of  the  world,  idleness  was  not  allowed  of.  In 
paradise,  Adam  and  Eve  dressed  the  garden,  Cain  was  a  tiller 
of  the  ground,  and  Abel  was  a  keeper  of  sheep ;  and  there  is  a 
proverb  amongst  the  Jews, "  That  he  who  brings  his  son  up  with- 
out a  business,  brings  him  up  to  be  a  thief;"  and  therefore  our 
Saviour  was  a  carpenter.  ^'  Is  not  this  the  carpenter's  son,''  said 
the  Jews:  and  St  Paul,  though  brought  up  at  the  feet  of  Gama- 
liel, was  a  tent-maker.  Labour,  my  brethren,  is  imposed  on  all 
mankind,  as  part  of  the  divine  curse ;  and  you  are  called  to  be 
osefol  in  the  society  to  which  you  belong  :  take  care  first  for  the 
kingdom  of  God,  and  all  things  necessary  shall  be  added.  To 
labour  for  the  meat  that  perisheth,  is  your  duty ;  only  take  care, 
that  yon  do  not  neglect  getting  the  meat  for  the  soul ;  that  is  of 
the  greatest  consequence,  for  this  plain  reason,  the  things  of  this 
life  are  temporal,  but  those  of  the  next  are  eternal.  I  would 
have  rich  men  to  work  as  well  as  poor:  it  is  owing  to  their  idle- 
ness that  the  devil  hurries  them  to  his  diversions ;  they  can  be 
is  their  beds  all  the  morning,  and  spend  the  afternoon  and  even- 
ing in  dressing,  visiting,  and  at  balls,  plays,  or  assemblies,  when 
tkey  should  be  woridng  out  their  salvation  with  fear  and  trem- 
btuig.  Such  a  life  as  this  occasions  a  spiritual  numbness  in  the 
tool ;  and  if  Jesii3  Christ  were  not  to  stop  those  who  thus  spend 
their  time,  t|icy  wonld  be  hurried  into  eternity,  without  once 


V. 


126  THE  POLLY   AMD   DANOBE  [iX; 

thinking  or  their  immortal  souls.  But  Jesus  Christ  has  compas- 
sion upon  many  of  them^  and  while  they  are  in  their  blood,  he 
bids  them  ''live/'  And  though  I  preach  this  doctrine  to  you, 
yet  I  do  not  bid  you  be  idle ;  no,  they  that  do  not  work  should 
not  eat.  You  have  two  caUings,  a  general  one,  and  a  special 
one :  as  we  are  to  regard  the  one  in  respect  to  our  bodies,  so 
we  are  to  regard  the  other  on  account  of  our  souls.  Take  heed, 
my  brethren,  I  beseech  you,  take  heed,  lest  you  labour  so  for 
the  meat  that  perisbeth,  as  to  forget  that  meat  which  endureth 
for  ever.  Seek  the  things  of  Gk^  first ;  look  well  to  obtain  oil 
in  your  lamps,  grace  in  your  hearts.  I  am  not  persuading  you 
to  take  no  care  about  the  things  of  the  world,  but  only  not  to 
be  encumbered  with  them,  so  as  to  neglect  your  duty  towards 
God,  and  a  proper  concern  for  your  soul^.  It  is  meet,  it  is  right, 
it  is  your  bounden  duty,  to  mind  the  callings  wherein  God  hath 
placed  you ;  and  you  may  be  said  to  be  righteous  over-much, 
not  to  regard  them. 

This  brings  me, 

Thirdly,  To  give  you  another  sign  of  being  righteous  over- 
much ;  and  that  is,  when  we  fast  and  use  corporal  austerities, 
so  as  to  unfit  us  for  the  service  of  God. 

This,  my  brethren,  you  may  think  there  is  no  occasion  at  all 
to  caution  you  against,  and  indeed  there  is  not  a  great  necessity 
for  it :  however,  many  persons,  upon  their  first  being  awakened 
to  a  sense  of  their  sin,  are  tempted  to  use  austerities  to  that 
excess  which  is  sinful.  It  is  our  duty  to  fast,  it  is  our  duty  to 
fast  often,  and  it  is  what  we  are  directed  to  by  Jesus  Christ 
himself;  but  then  we  are  to  take  care  to  do  it  in  a  proper  man- 
ner ;  to  bring  our  bodies  under  for  the  service  of  God,  is  that 
which  we  are  commanded  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

The  late  preacher  upon  this  text  runs  into  great  extremes,  and 
charges  us  with  saying  and  acting  things,  of  which  we  never 
thought,  but  I  do  not  regard  what  be  said  of  me :  I  do  not  mind 
his  bitter  invectives  against  my  ministry ;  I  do  not  mind  his 
despising  my  youth,  and  cailing  me  novice  and  enthusiast ;  I 
forgive  him  from  my  very  heart :  but  when  he  reflects  on  my 
Master,  when  he  speaks  against  my  Redeemer ;  when  Jesus 
Christ  is  spoken  against,  I  must  speak,  (I  must  speak  indeed, 
or  I  should  burst :)  when  he  gives  liberty  to  persons  to  take  a 
cheerful  glass,  and  alleges  Christ  for  an  example,  as  in  the  mar- 
riage feast,  saying, ''  Christ  turned  water  into  wine,  when  it  is 
plain  there  had  been  more  drank  than  was  necessary  before  :"* 
what  is  this  but  to  charge  Christ  with  encouraging  drunkenness  T 
It  is  true,  the  governor  says,  "  Every  man  in  the  beginning  sets 
forth  good  wine,  and  when  men  have  well  drunk  that  which  is  worse ; 
but  thou  hast  kept  the  good  wine  until  now :"  but  it  does  not  at 
all  follow  that  it  was  not  necessary,  or  that  there  had  been  a 
sufficient  quantity  before ;  I  would  not  speak  thus  slightingly  of 
one  of  my  Master's  miracles  for  the  whole  world.  And  we  may 
observe,  that  as  Christ  chiefly  visited  poor  people,  they  might 
not  have  wherewithal  to  buy  a  sufficient  quantity  of  wine ;  or 


1X0  O^   BBIMO    NOT   RIGHTEOUS   BNOU6H.  137 

baving  more  guests  than  were  expected^  the  wine  was  expended 
sooner  than  they  thought ;  then  the  mother  of  Jesus  tells  him, 
''  They  have  no  wine ;"  he  answers^  '^  Woman,  what  have  I  to  do 
with  thee  ?  My  hour  is  not  yet  come."  After  this  he  commanded 
them  to  fill  the  water-pots  with  water^  and  they  filled  them  to 
the  brim,  and  this  water  he  turned  into  wine  ;  now  it  does  not 
at  all  foUow  that  there  was  more  drunk  than  was  necessary ; 
neither  would  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  have  continued  in  the  house, 
if  there  had.  But  we  have  an  excellent  lesson  to  learn  from  this 
miracle :  by  the  water-pots  being  empty,  we  may  understand  the 
heart  of  man  being  by  nature  destitute  of  his  grace ;  his  speaking 
and  commanding  to  fill  them,  shews,  that  when  Christ  speaks  the 
heart  that  was  empty  of  grace  before,  shall  be  filled ;  and  the  water- 
pots  being  filled  to  the  brim,  shews  that  Christ  will  fill  believers' 
hearts,  brim-full  of  the  Holy  Ghost :  and  from  the  governor's 
observing,  that  the  last  wine  was  the  best,  learn  that  a  believer's 
best  comforts,  shall  be  the  last  and  greatest,  for  they  shall  come 
with  the  greatest  power  upon  the  soul,  and  continue  longest 
there :  this,  this,  my  dear  brethren,  is  the  lesson  we  may  learn 
from  this  miracle. 

But  one  great  inconsistency  I  cannot  avoid  taking  notice  of 
in  this  late  learned  preacher.  In  the  beginning  of  his  sermon, 
he  charges  us  with  laying  heavy  burdens  upon  people,  which 
they  are  not  able  to  bear ;  in  the  latter  part  he  charges  us  with 
being  Antinomians,  whose  tenets  are,  '^  So  you  say  you  believe 
in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  you  may  live  the  life  of  devils."  Now, 
be  charges  us  with  being  too  strict,  and  by  and  by  with  being 
too  loose.  Which  side,  my  brethren,  will  you  take  ?  Thus  you 
see,  when  persons  forsake  Christ,  they  make  strange  mistakes ; 
for  there  can  be  no  greater  opposition  of  sentiments  than  this 
letter-learned  vrriter  has  made  :  as  opposite  as  light  and  dark- 
ness, good  and  evil,  sweet  and  bitter.  And,  on  this  account,  to 
find  out  these  letter-learned  gentlemen's  notions  of  the  new-birth, 
I  put  a  paragraph  in  my  Journal :  and,  blessed  be  God,  I  have 
obtained  my  desires,  and  have  plainly  perceived,  that  the  persons 
who  have  lately  written  concerning  the  new-birth,  know  no 
more  of  it  than  a  blind  man  does  of  colours ;  nor  can  they  have 
any  more  notion  of  it,  (hy  all  their  learning,  falsely  so  called,) 
than  the  blind  man  wno  was  to  give  an  account  what  the 
sun  was,  and,  after  a  considerable  time  allowed  for  study,  he 
said,  "  It  was  like  the  sound  of  a  trumpet."  And  till  they  are 
taught  of  Crod,  they  will  be  unacquainted  with  the  new-birth : 
therefore  if  yon  have  a  mind  to  know  what  the  devil  has  to  say 
against  us,  read  Dr.  Trapp's  sermons. 

It  is  with  grief  I  speak  these  things,  and  were  not  the  wel- 
fare of  your  souls,  and  my  Redeemer's  honour,  at  stake,  I  would 
not  BOW  open  my  mouth ;  yea,  I  would  willingly  die  (God  is  my 
judge)  for  the  person  who  wrote  such  bitter  things  against  me^ 
so  it  would  be  a  means  of  saving  his  soul*  If  he  had  only  spo- 
ken againstme,  I  would  not  have  answered  him ;  but,  on  his  making 
my  Redeemer  a  pattern  of  vice,  if  I  were  not  to  speak,  the 


128  THB  POLLY  AND  DANaBR  [iX. 

Tenr  stones  would  cry  oat ;  therefore  the  honour  of  my  Redeemer 
and  love  to  you,  constrains  me  to  speak.  It  is  of  necessity  that 
I  speak :  when  the  divinity  of  Jesus  Christ  is  spc^en  against,  it 
is  the  duty  of  ministers  to  cry  aloud  and  spare  not  I  cannot 
forbear,  come  what  will ;  for  I  know  not  what  kind  of  divinity  we 
have  now  among  us :  we  must  have  a  righteousness  of  our  own, 
and  do  our  best  endeavours,  and  then  Christ  will  make  up  the 
deficiency;  that  is,  you  must  be  your  own  saviour  in  part.  This 
is  not  the  doctrine  of  the  gospel ;  this  is  not  the  doctrine  of  Jesus : 
no ;  Christ  is  all  in  all ;  Jesus  Christ  must  be  your  whole  wisdom ; 
Jesus  Christ  must  be  your  whole  righteousness,  Jesus  Christ  must 
be  your  whole  sauctification ;  or,  jfesus  Christ  will  never  be  your 
eternal  redemption  and  sanctification.  Inward  holiness  is  looked 
on  by  some  as  the  effect  of  enthusiasm  and  madness ;  and  preach- 
ers of  the  necessity  of  the  new-birth  are  esteemed  as  persons  fit 
for  Bedlam.  Our  polite  and  fashionable  doctrine  is,  **  That  thero 
is  a  fitness  in  man,  and  that  God,  seeing  you  a  good  creature, 
bestows  upon  you  his  grace.''  God  forbid,  my  dear  brethren, 
you  should  thus  learn  Jesus  Christ  I 

This  in  not  the  doctrine  I  preach  to  you :  I  say,  salvation  is 
the  free  gift  of  God.  It  is  God's  free  grace  I  preach  unto  you ;  not 
of  worics,  lest  any  one  should  boast.  Jesus  Christ  justifies  the 
ungodly ;  Jesus  Christ  passed  by,  and  saw  you  polluted  with  your 
blood,  and  bid  you  live.  It  is  not  of  works,  it  is  of  faith :  we  are 
not  justified  for  our  faith,  for  faith  is  the  instrument,  but  by  your 
faith,  the  active  as  well  as  the  passive  obedience  of  Christ  must 
be  applied  to  you.  Jesus  Christ  hath  fulfilled  the  law,  he  hath 
made  it  honourable;  Jesus  Christ  hath  made  satisfaction  to  his 
Father's  justice,  full  satisfaction ;  and  it  is  as  complete  as  it  is 
full,  and  God  will  not  demand  it  again.  Jesus  Christ  is  the  way; 
Jesus  Christ  is  the  truth ;  and  Jesus  Christ  is  the  life.  The  righ- 
teousness of  Jesus  Christ,  my  brethren,  must  be  imputed  to  you, 
or  you  can  never  have  any  interest  in  the  blood  of  Jesus;  your 
own  works  are  but  as  filthy  rags,  for  you  are  justified  before  God, 
without  any  respect  to  your  works  past,  present,  or  to  come. 
This  doctrine  is  denied  by  the  learned  rabbi's ;  but  if  they  deny 
these  truths  of  the  gospel,  they  must  not  be  offended,  though  a 
child  dare  speak  to  a  doctor;  and,  in  vindication  of  the  cause  of 
Jesus  Christ,  a  child,  a  boy,  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  can  speak  to 
the  learned  clergy  of  this  age. 

If  I  had  a  voice  so  great,  and  could  speak  so  loud,  as  that  the 
whole  world  could  hear  me,  I  would  cry,  "  Be  not  righteous  over- 
much," by  bringing  your  righteousness  to  Christ,  and  by  being 
righteous  in  your  own  eyes.  Man  must  be  abased,  that  (Sod 
may  be  exalted. 

The  imputed  righteousness  of  Jesus  Christ  is  a  comfortable 
doctrine  to  all  real  Christians ;  and  you,  sinners,  who  ask  what 
you  must  do  to  be  saved?  how  uncomfortable  would  it  be  to 
tell  you,  by  good  works,  when  perhaps  you  have  never  done  one 
good  work  in  all  your  life :  this  would  be  driving  you  to  despair, 
indeed :  no ;  '^  Believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  you  shall  bo 


I&O  OP   NOT   BKINd   RIGHTEOUS    BN0U6H.  129 

MTdd :"  therefore  none  of  you  need  go  away  despairing.  Come 
to  the  liord  Jesus  by  faidi,  and  he  shall  receive  you.  You 
have  DO  righteousness  of  your  own  to  depend  on.  If  you  are 
saved^  it  is  by  the  righteousness  of  Christ,  through  his  atonc« 
nenty  his  making  a  sacrifice  for  sin  :  his  righteousness  must  bo 
impnted  to  yon,  otherwise  you  cannot  be  saved.  There  is  no 
difference  between  you^  by  nature,  and  the  greatest  malefactor 
diat  ever  was  executed  at  Tyburn  :  the  difference  made  is  all 
owing  to  the  free,  the  rich,  the  undeserved  grace  of  God ;  this 
has  made  the  difference.  It  is  true,  talking  at  this  rate  will 
offend  the  Pharisees,  who  do  not  like  this  levelling  doctrine^  (as 
they  call  it ;)  but  if  ever  you  are  brought  to  Jesus  Christ  by 
fiutir,  you  will  experience  the  truth  of  it.  Come  by  faith  to 
JesQS  Christ ;  do  not  come,  pharisee-Iike,  telling  God  what  you 
have  done,  how  often  you  have  gone  to  church,  how  often  you 
have  received  the  sacrament,  fasted,  prayed,  or  the  like :  no ; 
oome  to  Christ  as  poor,  lost,  undone,  damned  sinners  ;  come  to 
him  in  this  manner,  and  ho  will  accept  of  you  :  do  not  be  rich 
ia  spirit,  proud  and  exalted,  for  there  is  no  blessing  attends 
rach ;  bat  be  ye  poor  in  spirit,  for  theirs  is  the  kingdom  of  God ; 
they  shall  be  made  members  of  his  mystical  body  here,  and  shall 
be  so  of  the  church  triumphant  hereafter.  Acknowledge  your- 
selves as  nothing  at  all,  and  when  you  have  done  all,  say  you 
tie  "unprofitable  servants."  There  is  no  salvation  but  by  Jesus 
Christ ;  there  is  no  other  name  given  under  heaven  amongst 
men  whereby  we  may  be  saved,  but  that  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  God 
out  of  Christ,  is  a  consuming  fire  ;  therefore  strive  for  an  inter- 
est in  his  Son  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  take  him  on  the  terms 
offered  to  you  in  the  gospel :  accept  of  him  in  God's  own  way, 
ky  hold  on  him  by  faith. 

Do  not  think  you  are  Christians  ;  do  not  flatter  yourselves 
with  being  righteous  enough,  and  good  enough,  because  you 
lead  moral  decent  lives,  do  no  one  any  harm,  go  to  church,  and 
ttltoad  upon  the  outward  means  of  grace ;  no,  my  brethren,  you 
■ay  do  this,  and  a  great  deal  more,  and  yet  be  very  fur  from 
having  a  saving  experimental  knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ. 

Beg  of  Christ  to  strike  home  upon  your  hearts,  that  you  may 
fad  the  power  of  religion.  Indeed,  you  must  feel  the  power  of 
God  here,  or  the  wraS  of  God  hereafter.  These  are  truths  of 
tibe  utmost  consequence ;  therefore  do  not  go  contradicting,  do 
BOt  go  blaspheming,  away.  Blessed  be  God,  yon  are  not  such 
cowards,  to  run  away  for  a  little  rain.  I  hope  good  things  of 
you ;  I  hope  you  have  felt  the  power  of  God  ;  and  if  God  should 
bring  any  of  you  to  himself  through  this  foolishness  of  preaching, 
yon  will  have  no  reason  to  complain  it  was  done  by  a  youth,  by 
a  child  :  no ;  if  I  could  be  made  an  instrument  to  bring  you  to 
Qod,  they  may  call  me  novice,  enthusiast,  or  what  tlie  y  please ; 
I  should  rejoice,  yea,  and  I  would  rejoice. 

0  that  some  sinner  might  be  brought  to  Jesus  Christ !  Do  not 
tay  I  preach  despair :  I  despair  of  no  one,  when  I  consider  God 
had  mercy  on  such  a  wretch  as  I,  who  was  running  in  a  full 

•  H 


130  THE  POLLY  AND  DANGER,  ETC,  [iX. 

career  to  hell :  I  was  hasting  thither^  but  Jesus  Christ  passed  by, 
and  stopped  mc ;  Jesus  Christ  passed  by  mc  while  I  was  in  my 
blood,  when  I  was  polluted  with  filth ;  he  passed  by  me,  and  bid 
me  live.  Thus  I  am  a  monument  of  God's  free  grace;  and  there- 
fore, my  brethren,  I  despair  of  none  of  you,  when  I  consider,  I 
say,  what  a  wretch  I  was.  I  am  not  speaking  now  out  of  a  false 
huinility,  a  pretended  sanctity,  as  the  Pharisees  call  it :  no,  the 
truth  in  Christ  I  speak,  and  therefore,  men  and  devils,  do  your 
worst;  I  have  a  gracious  Master  will  protect  me ;  it  is  his  work  I 
am  engaged  in,  and  Jesus  Christ  will  carry  me  above  their  rage. 

Those  who  are  come  here  this  night  out  of  curiosity  to  hear 
what  the  babbler  says ;  those  who  come  to  spend  an  idle  hour  to 
find  something  for  an  evening  conversation  at  a  cofiee-house ;  or 
you  who  have  stopped  in  your  coaches  as  you  passed  by,  remem- 
ber that  you  have  had  Jesus  Christ  ofi*ered  to  you ;  I  offer  Jesus 
Christ  to  every  one  of  you :  perhaps  you  may  not  regard  it,  be- 
cause it  is  in  a  field.  But  Jesus  Christ  is  wherever  his  people 
meet  in  sincerity  and  truth  to  worship  him :  he  is  not  confined 
to  church  walls :  he  has  met  us  here ;  many,  very  many  of  you 
know  be  has ;  and  therefore  you  may  believe  on  him  with  greater 
confidence. 

Can  you  bear  to  think  of  a  bleeding,  panting,  dying  Jesus* 
offering  himself  up  for  sinners^  and  you  will  not  accept  of  him? 
Do  not  say,  you  are  poor,  and  therefore  are  ashamed  to  go  to 
church,  for  God  hath  sent  the  gospel  out  unto  you.  Do  not 
harden  your  hearts :  oppose  not  the  will  of  Jesus. 

O  that  I  could  speak  to  your  hearts,  that  my  words  would 
centre  there.  My  heart  is  full  of  love  to  you.  I  would  speak 
till  I  could  speak  no  more,  so  I  could  but  bring  you  to  Christ.  I 
may  never  meet  you  all,  perhaps,  any  more.  The  cloud  of  God's 
providence  seems  to  be  moving.  God  calls  me  by  his  providence 
away  from  you,  for  a  while.  God  knows  whether  we  shall  ever 
see  each  other  in  the  flesh.  At  the  day  of  judgment  we  shall  all 
meet  again.  I  earnestly  desire  your  prayers.  Pray  that  I  may 
not  only  begin,  Jehu-like,  in  the  spirit,  but  that  I  may  continue 
in  it.  Pray  that  I  may  not  fall  away,  that  I  may  not  dedino 
suffering  for  you,  if  I  should  be  called  to  it.  Be  earnest,  O  be 
earnest  with  God  in  my  behalf,  that  while  I  am  preaching  to 
others,  I  may  not  be  a  cast-away.  Put  up  your  prayers  for  me, 
I  beseech  you.  Go  not  to  the  throne  of  grace  without  carrying 
me  upon  your  heart :  for  you  know  not  what  influence  your  pray- 
ers may  have.  As  for  you,  my  dear  brethren,  God  Inows  my 
heart,  I  continually  bear  you  on  my  mind,  when  I  go  in  and  out 
before  the  Lord ;  and  it  is  my  earnest  desire  you  may  not  perish 
for  lack  of  knowledge,  but  that  he  would  send  out  more  ministers 
to  water  what  his  own  right  hand  hath  planted.  May  the  Ancient 
of  days  come  forth  upon  his  white  horse,  and  may  all  opposition 
fall  to  the  ground.  As  we  have  begun  to  bruise  the  serpent's 
bead,  we  must  expect  he  will  bruise  our  heel.  The  devil  will 
not  let  his  kingdom  fall  without  ragmg  horribly.  He  will  noC 
suffer  the  ministers  of  Christ  to  go  on,  without  bringing  his  poweC 


X.]  A   PRKSBRVATIVB   AGAINST,   £TC.  131 

to  stop  them.  But  fear  not,  my  dear  brethren,  David,  though  a 
stripUng  encountered  the  great  Goliah ;  and  if  we  pray,  God  will 
give  us  strength  against  all  our  spiritual  enemies.  Shew  your 
(aith  by  your  works.  Give  the  world  the  lie.  Press  forward. 
Do  not  stop,  do  not  linger  in  your  journey,  but  strive  for  the 
mark  set  before  you.  Fight  the  good  fight  of  faith,  and  God  will 
^ve  you  spiritual  mercies.  I  hope  we  shall  all  meet  at  the  right 
kand  of  God.  Strive,  strive  to  enter  in  at  the  strait  gate,  that 
we  may  be  borne  to  Abraham's  bosom,  where  sin  and  sorrow 
shall  cease.  No  scoffer  will  be  there,  but  we  shall  see  Jesus, 
who  died  for  us ;  and  not  only  see  him,  but  live  with  him  for  ever. 
Which  God,  of  his  infinite  mercy,  &c. 


SERMON  X. 

A  PRESERVATIVE  AGAINI^T  UNSETTLED  NOTIONS  AND  WANT 
OP  PRINCIPLES  IN  REGARD  TO  RIGHTEOUSNESS  AND 
CHRISTIAN    PERFECTION. 

•UKC   A    MORE    PARTICULAR    ANSWER   TO    DOCTOR    TRAPP'S     FOUR   SERMONS    UPON 

THE   SAME    TEXT. 

To  All  the  true  Members  of  CkrisVs  Holy  Church. 

DEAR    PELLOW-CHRISTIANSj 

The  great,  and  indeed  the  only  motive  which  prompted  me  to 
pabiish  this  sermon,  was  the  desire  of  providing  for  your  secu- 
rity from  error,  at  a  time  when  the  deviators  from,  and  false  pre- 
tenders to,  truth,  are  so  numerous,  that  the  most  discerning  find 
it  a  matter  of  the  greatest  difficulty  to  avoid  being  led  astray  by 
one  or  by  other  into  downright  falsehood.  There  is  no  running  di- 
Tisions  upon  truth;  like  a  mathematical  point,  it  will  neither  admit 
of  subtraction  or  addition ;  and  as  it  is  indivisible  in  its  nature, 
there  is  no  splitting  the  difference,  where  truth  is  concerned. 
Irreligion  and  enthusiasm  are  diametrical  opposites,  and  true 
piety,  between  both,  like  the  centre  of  an  infinite  line,  is  at  an 
equal  infinite  distance  from  the  one  and  the  other,  and  therefore 
can  never  admit  of  a  coalition  with  either :  the  one  erring  by 
defect,  the  other  by  excess.  But  whether  we  err  by  defect,  or 
excess,  is  of  little  importance,  if  we  are  equally  wide  of  the  mark, 
as  we  certainly  are  in  either  case.  For  whatever  is  less  than  truth, 
cannot  be  truth ;  and  whatever  is  more  than  true,  must  be  false. 
Wherefore,  as  the  whole  of  this  great  nation  seems  now  more 
than  ever  in  danger  of  being  hurried  into  one  or  the  other  of  these 
equaUy  pernicious  extremes,  irreligion  or  fanaticism,  I  thought 
nyself  more  than  ordinarily  obliged  to  rouse  your,  perhaps, 
mwsy  vigilance,  by  warning  you  of  the  nearness  of  your  peril ; 
eantbniDg  you  from  leaning  towards  either  side,  though  but  to 
peep  at  the  slippery  precipice ;  and  stepping  between  you  and 
error,  before  it  comes  nigh  enough  to  grapple  with  you.  The 
Wppy  medium  of  true  Christian  piety,  in  which  it  has  pleased 
fhe  mercy  of  God  to  establish  you,  is  built  on  a  firm  rock, ''  and 

h2 


132  A    PRR8BRVATIV£   AGAINST  [S. 

the  gates  of  hell  shall  never  prevail  against  it."  While  then 
you  stand  steadily  upright  in  the  fulness  of  the  faith,  falsehood 
and  sin  shall  labour  in  vain  to  approach  you ;  whereas  the  least 
familiarity  with  error  will  make  you  giddy,  and,  if  once  yoa 
stagger  in  principles,  your  ruin  is  almost  inevitable. 

But  now  I  have  cautioned  you  of  the  danger  you  are  in  from 
the  enemies  who  threaten  your  subversion,  I  hope  your  own 
watchfulness  will  be  suflScient  to  guard  you  from  any  surprise. 
And  from  their  own  assaults  you  have  nothing  to  fear,  since 
while  you  persist  in  the  firm  resolution,  through  God's  grace,  to 
keep  them  out,  irreligion  and  enthusiasm,  falsehood  and  vice, 
impiety  and  false  piety,  will  combine  in  vain  to  force  an  entrance 
into  your  hearts. 

Take  then,  my  dearly  beloved  fellow-members  of  Cnrist's  mys- 
tical body,  take  the  friendly  caution  I  give  you  in  good  part,  and 
endeavour  to  profit  by  it ;  attend  wholly  to  the  saving  truths  I 
here  deliver  to  you,  and  be  persuaded  that  they  are  uttered  by 
one  who  has  your  eternal  salvation  as  much  at  heart  as  his  own. 

And  thou,  O  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  fountain  of  all  truth,  whence 
all  wisdom  flows,  open  the  understandings  of  thy  people  to  the 
light  of  thy  true  faith,  and  touch  their  hearts  with  thy  grace,  that 
they  may  both  be  able  to  see,  and  willing  to  perform,  what  thou 
requirest  of  them.  Drive  away  from  us  every  cloud  of  error 
and  perversity;  guard  us  alike  from  irreligion,  and  false  preten- 
sions to  piety ;  and  lead  us  on  perpetually  towards  that  per- 
fection to  which  thou  hast  taught  us  to  aspire;  that  keeping  us 
here  in  a  constant  imitation  of  thee,  and  peaceful  union  with 
each  other,  thou  mayest  at  length  bring  us  to  that  everlasting 
glory,  which  thou  hast  promised  to  all  such  as  shall  endeavour 
to  be  perfect,  even  as  the  Father  who  is  in  heaven  is  perfect; 
who  with  thee  and  the  Holy  Ghost  lives  and  reigns,  one  God, 
world  without  end !    Amen,  amen. 

Be  not  righteous  over-much,  neither  make  thyself  over-tmse:  why 
shouldest  thou  destroy  thyself? — Eccles.  vii.  16 

Righteous  over-much!  may  one  say;  Is  there  any  danger  of 
that?  Is  it  even  possible  ?  Can  we  be  too  good  ?  If  we  give 
any  credit  to  the  express  word  of  God,  we  cannot  be  too  good, 
we  cannot  be  righteous  over-much.  The  injunction  given  by 
God  to  Abraham  is  very  strong:  "Walk  before  me,  and  be  thou 
perfect."  The  same  he  again  lays  upon  all  Israel,  in  the  18th 
of  Deuteronomy:  "Thou  shalt  be  perfect,  and  without  blemish, 
with  the  Lord  thy  God."  And  lest  any  should  think  to  excuse 
themselves  from  this  obligation,  by  saying  it  ceased  when  the 
old  law  was  abolished,  our  blessed  Saviour  ratified  and  ex^ 
plained  it :  "  Be  ye,  therefore,  perfect,  even  as  your  Father  who 
is  in  heaven  is  perfect."  So  that  until  our  perfection  surpasses 
that  of  our  heavenly  Father,  we  can  never  be  too  good,  nor  righ-^ 
teous  over-much ;  and  as  it  is  impossible  we  should  ever  sor* 
pass,  or  even  come  up  to  him  in  the  perfection  of  goodness  and 
righteousness,  it  follows  in  course  that  we  never  can  be  good  or 


3lJ  unsettled  notions^  bto.  133 

fighteous  in  excess.  Nevertheless^  Doctor  Trapp  has  found  out 
that  we  may  be  righteous  over-much,  and  has  taken  no  small 
paiDs,  with  much  agitation  of  spirit,  to  prove,  that  it  is  a  great 
folly  and  weakness,  nay,  a  great  sin.  "  O  Lord !  rebuke  thou 
his  spirit,  and  grant  that  this  false  doctrine  may  not  be  pub« 
lished  to  his  confusion  in  the  day  of  judgment !" 

But  if  what  this  hasty,  this  deluded  man  advances  had  been 
true,  coald  there  be  any  occasion,  however,  of  warning  against 
it  in  these  times,  '*  when  the  danger  (as  he  himself  to  his  conf^ji- 
sion  owns)  is  on  the  contrary  extreme ;  when  all  manner  of  vice 
and  wick^ness  abounds  to  a  degree  almost  unheard  of?"  I 
answer  for  the  present,  that  "  there  must  be  heresies  amongst 
you,  that  they  who  are  approved  may  be  made  manifest.'^ 

However,  this  earthly-minded  minister  of  a  new  gospel,  has 
taken  a  text  which  seems  to  favour  his  naughty  purpose,  of 
weaning  the  well-disposed  little  ones  of  Christ  from  that  perfect 
parity  of  heart  and  spirit,  which  is  necessary  to  all  such  as  mean 
to  live  to  our  Lord  Jesus.  O  Lord,  what  shall  become  of  thy 
flock,  when  their  shepherds  betray  them  into  the  hands  of  the 
ravenoos  wolf!  when  a  minister  of  thy  word  perverts  it  to  over- 
throw thy  kingdom,  and  to  destroy  scripture  with  scripture  ! 

Solomon,  in  the  person  of  a  desponding,  ignorant,  indolent 
liver,  says  to  the  man  of  righteousness :  '^  Be  not  righteous  over- 
much, neither  make  thyself  over-*wise;  why  shouldest  thou  de» 
Uroy  thyself?"  But  must  my  angry  over-sighted  brother  Trapp, 
therefore,  personate  a  character  so  unbecoming  his  function, 
merely  to  overthrow  the  express  injunction  of  the  Lord  to  us ; 
which  obliges  us  never  to  give  over  pursuing  and  thirsting  after 
the  perfect  righteousness  of  Christ,  until  we  rest  in  him?  Father, 
forfi^ve  him,  for  he  knows  not  what  he  says ! 

What  advantage  might  not  Satan  gain  over  the  elect,  if  the 
false  construction,  put  upon  this  text  by  that  unseeing  teacher, 
should  prevail !  Yet  though  he  blushes  not  to  assist  Satan  to 
bruise  our  heel,  I  shall  endeavour  to  bruise  the  heads  of  both, 
by  shewing, 

I.  The  genuine  sense  of  the  text  in  question. 

II.  The  character  of  the  persons,  who  are  to  be  supposed 
speaking  here :  And, 

III.  The  character  of  the  persons  spoken  to. 

From  whence  will  naturally  result  these  consequences, 

Firsij  That  the  doctor  was  grossly  (Lord,  grant  he  was  not 
maliciously)  mistaken  in  his  explanatory  sermon  on  this  text, 
as  well  as  in  the  application  of  it. 

Secondly,  That  he  is  a  teacher  and  approver  of  worldly  maxims. 

Thirdly,  That  he  is  of  course  an  enemy  to  perfect  righteous- 
ness in  men,  through  Christ  Jesus,  and  therefore  no  friend  to 
Cbmt ;  And  therefore,  that  no  one  ought  to  be  deluded  by  the 
false  doctrine  he  advances,  to  beguile  the  innocent,  and  deceive, 
if  possible,  even  the  elect. 

1.  To  come  at  the  true  sense  of  the  text  in  question*  it  will 
be  necessary  to  look  back  to  the  preceding  verse^  where  the 


134  A   PRESBRVATIVB  AGAINST  [X* 

^vise  man,  reflecting  on  the  vanities  of  his  youth,  puts  on  for  a 
moment  bis  former  character.  ''  All  thincs  have  I  seen  in  the 
days  of  my  vanity  :  (and  among  the  restl  there  is  a  just  man 
'"lat  perisheth  in  his  righteousness,  and  tnere  is  a  wicked  man 
who  prolongeth  his  life  in  his  wickedness."  Now  it  is  very 
plain,  that  he  is  not  here  talking  of  a  man  who  is  righteous 
over-much,  in  the  doctor's  manner  of  understanding  the  words, 
that  is,  "  faulty  and  criminal  by  excess."  For  on  one  side  he  com- 
mends him  for  being  a  just  man,  and  full  of  righteousness ;  and 
yet  on  the  other  tells  us,  that  his  righteousness  is  the  shortening 
of  his  life.  Whereas,  had  he  looked  upon  his  perishing  in  righte- 
ousness, to  be  an  over-righteousness,  he  would  never  have  called 
him  a  just  man.  Neither  by  a  wicked  man  can  he  mean  a  man 
given  up  to  the  utmost  excess  of  wickedness,  since  he  tells  us, 
that  he  prolongeth  his  life  in  (or  by)  his  wickedness.  Who 
does  not  know,  that  the  excess  of  almost  every  kind  of  vice,  is 
of  itself  a  shortener  of  life.  So  that  the  whole  opposition  and 
contrast  lies  between  a  good  man  and  a  bad  man.  A  good 
man,  whose  goodness  shortens  his  life  ;  a  bad  man,  whose  ini- 
quity lengthens  his  life,  or  at  least  is  not  excessive  enough  to 
shorten  the  thread  of  it.  Solomon,  absorbed  in  these  reflections, 
speaks  here  by  way  of  prosopopeia,  not  the  sense  of  Solomon, 
the  experienced,  the  learned,  the  wise ;  but  of  the  former  Solo- 
mon, a  vain  young  fellow,  full  of  self-love,  and  the  strong  desires 
of  life.  In  the  quality  of  such  a  one,  then,  he  looks  with  the 
same  eye  upon  the  righteous  man,  who  perishes  in  his  righte- 
ousness, as  he  would  on  a  wicked  one  who  should  perish  in  his 
wickedness.  For  it  is  neither  the  righteousness  of  the  one,  nor 
tlie  wickedness  of  the  other,  that  ofiends  him,  but  the  superlative 
degrees  of  both  ;  which  tending  equally  to  shorten  life,  he  looks 
upon  them  as  equally  opposite  to  the  self-love  he  fondles  within 
him.  And,  therefore,  he  deems  an  excess  of  debauchery  as 
great  an  enemy  to  the  lasting  enjoyment  of  the  pleasures  of 
life,  as  an  extraordinary  righteousness  would  be.  Well  then 
might  he  say  to  the  latter,  in  this  character,  *'  Be  not  over-much 
wicked,  neither  be  thou  foolish :  why  shonldest  thou  die  before 
thy  time?*'  And  to  the  former:  '^Be  not  righteous  over-much, 
neither  make  thyself  over-wise :  why  shouldest  thou  destroy 
thyself? 

What  wonder,  then,  that  a  youth  of  sprightliness  and  sense, 
but  led  away  by  self-love  to  be  fond  of  the  pleasures  and  enjoy- 
ments of  life,  when  attained  without  hurry  and  possessed  with- 
out risk ;  what  wonder,  I  say,  that  such  a  youth  should  con- 
ceive an  equal  dislike  to  the  superlative  degrees  of  virtue  and 
vice,  and  therefore  advise  such  of  his  companions  as  give 
into  the  excess  of  debauchery,  to  refrain  from  it  :  as  it  must 
infallibly  tend  to  clog  their  understandings,  stupify  their  senses, 
and  entail  upon  their  constitutions  a  train  of  infirmities,  which 
cannot  but  debilitate  their  natural  vigour,  and  shorten  their 
days  ?  Be  not  over-much  wicked,  neither  be  thou  foolish,  why 
shouldest  thou  die  before  thy  time  T"  What  wonder  that  the  same 


X.J  UNSETTLED   NOTIONS,   ETC.  196 

self-love  should  prompt  him  to  dissuade  such  of  his  friends  or 
acquaintauce,  as  he  wishes  to  have  for  companions,  and  coun^ 
tenancers,  of  his  worldly  minded  pursuits,  from  pursuing  righte- 
ousoess  and  wisdom  to  a  degree  that  must  destroy  in  them  all 
taste  of  earthly  pleasures,  and  may  possibly  impair  their  con- 
stitutions, and  forward  their  end  ?  Be  not  righteous  over-much, 
neither  make  thyself  over  wise :  whyshouldest  thou  destroy  thyself. 

This  is  the  sense  in  which  Solomon  (placing  himself  in  the 
state  of  vanity  of  his  youth)  speaks  to  the  one  and  the  other : 
to  the  righteous,  and  to  the  ungodly.  This  is  the  true,  genuine 
sense  of  the  letter,  and  every  other  sense  put  upon  it  is  false  and 
groundless,  and  wrested  rather  to  pervert  than  explain  the  truth 
of  the  text.  O  Christian  simplicity,  whither  art  thou  fled  ?  Why 
will  not  the  clergy  speak  truth  !  and  why  must  this  false  pro- 
phet suffer  thy  people,  O  Lord,  to  believe  a  lie  ?  They  have  held 
the  truth  in  unrighteousness.  Raise  up,  I  beseech  thee,  O  Lord, 
some  true  pastors,  who  may  acquaint  them  with  the  nature  and 
necessity  of  perfect  righteousness,  and  lead  them  to  that  love 
of  Christian  perfection,  which  the  angry-minded,  pleasure-taking 
Dr.  Trapp,  labour^  to  divert  them  from,  by  teaching,  that  **  all 
Christians  must  have  to  do  with  some  vanities." 

Is  not  the  meaning  of  this  text  plain  to  the  weakest  capacity  ? 
I  have  here  given  it  to  you,  as  I  have  it  from  the  mouth  of  the 
royal  preacher  himself.  I  have  made  use  of  no  **  philosophy 
and  vain  deceit,  after  the  tradition  of  men,  after  the  rudiments 
of  the  world,  and  not  after  Christ,"  to  impose  a  fleshly  sense 
open  you,  for  the  sense  of  the  word  of  God.  No,  I  have  giv^n 
you  a  natural  exposition,  obvious  from  the  very  words  them- 
selves. Hence  you  may  see,  my  fellow-strugglers  in  righteous- 
ness, bow  grossly  our  angry  adversary  is  mistaken  in  his  expla- 
nation of  this  text.  Lord  !  open  his  eyes,  and  touch  his  heart ; 
and  convert  him,  and  all  those  erring  ministers,  who  have  seen 
vain  and  foolish  things  for  thy  people,  and  have  not  discovered 
their  iniquity,  to  turn  away  thy  captivity.  For  they  have  erred 
dirough  wine,  and  through  strong  drink  are  out  of  the  way  :  the 
priest  and  the  prophet  have  erred  through  strong  drink,  they  are 
swallowed  up  of  wine  ;  they  are  out  of  the  way  through  strong 
drink,  they  err  in  vision,  they  stumble  in  judgment. 

It  is  plain  from  the  words  of  the  text  that  the  royal  preacher 
was  speaking  in  the  person  of  a  vain  worldling,  when  he  said, 
**  Be  not  righteous  over-much ;"  whereby  he  meant  to  exhort 
the  truly  righteous  not  to  be  dismayed,  terrified,  or  disturbed 
from  their  constant  pursuit  of  greater  and  greater  perfection  of 
righteousness,  until  they  rest  in  Christ ;  notwithstanding  the 
derision,  fleshly  persuasion,  ill-treatment,  and  persecution  of 
worldly  men ;  who  one  day,  repenting  and  groaning  for  anguish 
of  spirit,  shall  say  within  themselves,  "  These  were  they  whom 
we  had  sometime  in  derision,  and  a  proverb  of  reproach.  We 
fools  accounted  their  lives  madness,  and  their  end  to  be  with- 
out honour.  How  are  they  numtyered  among  the  children  of 
God,  and  tboir  lot  is  among  the  saints !" 


IBQ  A   PH^SEKVATIVK   AGAINST  [X. 

How  blind  then  is  the  application  (not  to  say  perverse)  which 
this  self- wise  clergyman  makes  from  the  text,  to  such  as,  follow- 
ing the  advice  of  the  apostle,  (Colos.  iii.  2.)  ^^  set  their  affection 
on  things  above,  not  on  things  on  the  earth.**  Must  hastiness 
in  anger  get  the  better  of  sense  and  truth?  Must  the  people  be 
misled  because  the  pastor  cannot,  or  vnll  not,  see?  Or  must  the 
injunction  of  Christ,  ^^  fie  perfect,  even  as  your  Father  who  is  in 
heaven  is  perfect,"  give  place  to  the  maxim  of  the  heathen  Tully : 
The  greatest  reproach  to  a  philosopher,  is  to  confute  his  doctrine 
by  his  practice ;  if  this  be  the  case,  alas,  what  a  deplorable, 
unspeakably  deplorable,  condition  is  that  of  some  Christians! 
Wherefore,  *'  thus  saith  the  Lord  concerning  the  prophets  who 
make  his  people  to  err,  that  bite  with  their  teeth,  and  cry  peace; 
and  he  that  putteth  not  into  their  mouths,  they  even  prepare 
war  against  him ; — therefore  night  shall  be  unto  you,  that  ye  shall 
not  have  a  vision ;  and  it  shall  be  dark  unto  you,  that  ye  shall 
not  divine;  and  the  sun  shall  go  down  over  the  prophets,  and  the 
day  shall  be  dark  over  them." 

fiut  I  will  leave  these  lovers  oc  darkness,  and  turn  to  you,  O 
beloved,  elect  of  God !  I  beseech  you  by  the  bowels  of  Christ, 
suffer  not  yourselves  to  be  deceived  by  their  flattering,  sin-sootb* 
ing  speeches.  *'  Be  not  of  that  rebellious  people,  lying  children, 
children  who  will  not  hear  the  law  of  the  Lord :  who  say  to  the 
seers,'  see  not ;  and  to  the  prophets,  prophesy  not  unto  us  right 
things,  speak  unto  us  smooth  things,  prophesy  deceits."  Follow 
not  those  who  flatter  you  in  the  vanities  they  practise  them* 
selves.  O  may  you  never  be  of  the  number  of  those,  in  the  per- 
son of  whom  Solomon  here  says,  *'  fie  not  righteous  over-muoh  " 
for  their  character  is  the  character  of  the  beast. 

II.  The  character  of  the  persons,  who  are  to  be  supposed 
speaking  here  in  the  text,  is,  in  a  word,  the  same  with  the  charac* 
tcr  of  those  whom  Solomon  here  personates ;  who,  as  is  already 
shewn,  are  a  vain  set  of  men,  neither  righteous  enough  to  have  an 
habitual  desire  of  improving  virtue  to  its  perfection,  nor  quite  so 
flagitious  as  to  give  into  self-destroying  vices ;  in  a  wonl,  they 
are  self-lovers,  the  sole  end  of  whose  pursuits,  whether  indiffer- 
ent, bad,  or  laudable  in  themselves,  is  self-enjoyment.  Insomuch 
that  they  look  upon  virtue  and  vice,  righteousness  and  wicked- 
ness, with  the  same  eye,  and  their  fondness  or  aversion  for  both 
is  alike,  as  their  different  degrees  appear  to  be  the  means  to  en- 
hance and  prolong  the  enjoyment  of  pleasure,  or  to  lessen  and 
shorten  those  pleasures.  Thus  any  virtue,  while  it  is  kept  withiii 
such  bounds  as  may  render  it  subservient  to  the  pleasurable  de- 
grees of  vice,  will  meet  with  no  opposition  from  them;  on  the  con- 
trary, they  will  even  commend  it.  But  the  moment  it  becomes 
u  restraint  to  vice  in  moderation,  (if  I  may  be  allowed  to  make 
use  of  terms  adequate  to  their  system,)  from  that  moment  it  gives 
offence,  and  they  put  in  their  caveat,  "  Be  not  righteous  over- 
much." In  like  manner,  vice,  while  contined  to  certain  limits 
which  rather  improve  than  obstruct  pleasures,  is  with  thcni  a 
desirable  good ;  but  no  sooner  does  it  launch  out  into  any  deptli. 


X.]  UNSBTTLBD   NOTIONS,   RTO*  187 

safficient  to  drown  and  diminish  the  relish  of  those  pleasures, 
than  they  declare  open  war  against  it ;  *'  Be  not  over-much  wick- 
ed."   And  the  reason  they  assign  for  their  opposition  in  both 
cases,  is  the  same :  **  Why  shouldest  thou  destroy  thyself?  Why 
sbooldest  thou  die  before  thy  time  V    Such  is  the  prudence  of 
the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil ;  such  the  maxims  of  these 
lefined  libertines,  so  much  the  more  dangerous  as  they  are  less 
obvious :  so  much  the  more  insinuating,  as  they  arc  removed 
fiom  certain  extravagances  capable  of  shocking  every  man  who 
baa  the  least  sense  and  delicacy.  O  Lord,  how  true  is  it,  that  the 
SODS  of  darkness  are  wiser  in  their  generation  than  the  sons  of  light! 
Tou  are  not  then,  beloved  in  the  Lord,  to  imagine  that  your 
greatest  opposition,  in  struggling  for  perfect  righteousness,  is  to 
come  from  profligates,  from  men  whose  enormous  vices  create 
bomror  even  to  themselves:  no,  your  most  dangerous,  most  for* 
midable  enemies,  are  the  kind  of  men  I  have  painted  to  you,  who 
render  vice  relishable  with  a  mixture  of  apparent  virtue,  and 
clothe  wickedness  in  the  apparel  of  righteousness :  ''  Beware  of 
them,  for  they  come  to  you  in  the  clothing  of  sheep,  but  inwardly 
are  ravening  wolves." 

This  perverse  generation  will  ensnare  you  into  ungodliness,  by 
teeming  oppositions  to  vice,  and  allow  you  to  swallow  the  seem* 
ings  of  virtae  and  righteousness  like  an  emetic,  only  to  puke 
forth  the  reality  of  them.  They  paint  black,  white;  and  the  white 
tbey  convert  into  black.  Not  content  with  seeming  what  they 
are  not,  they  labour  to  make  you  what  they  are.  Righteous- 
ness and  wickedness  they  interweave  in  an  artful  tissue,  capable 
of  deceiving  the  very  elect,  and  diflScuIt  for  the  most  discerning 
among  them  to  unravel ;  as  almsgiving  and  avarice,  pride  and 
bomility,  temperance  and  luxury,  are  dexterously  blended  toge- 
ther;  while,  as  mutual  curbs  to  each  other,  they  combine  to  stem 
the  tide  of  impediments  to  worldly  enjoyment,  which  might  flow 
from  extraordinary  degrees  on  either  side.  Thus,  '^  almsgiving 
(you  are  told)  is  very  excellent,"  and  you  believe  the  proposi* 
tion,  without  knowing  the  particular  sense  it  is  spoken  in,  which 
is,  that  almsgiving  is  an  excellent  curb  upon  avarice,  by  pre* 
serving  a  rich  man  from  such  a  superlative  love  of  money  as  de* 
prives  him  of  the  self-enjoyment  of  it.  And,  upon  the  strength 
of  this  belief,  the  worldly-minded  man,  who  labours  to  deceive 
yon,  gains  credit  enough  with  you  to  establish  this  maxim,  that 
all  superlative  degrees  of  almsgiving,  are  great  sins,  and  that  a 
man  must  never  sell  all  he  has  and  give  it  to  the  poor,  because 
some  may  have  families  of  their  own,  and  ought  to  make  suffi- 
cient provision  for  them,  according  to  that  proverb,  ^'  Charity 
begins  at  home ;"  when  no  one,  at  least  scarce  any  one,  is  wise 
enoogb  to  know  when  he  has  a  sufficiency.  O  Lord,  which  are 
we  to  believe,  these  worldlings,  or  thee?  If  thou  dost  deceive 
us,  why  dost  thou  threaten  us  with  punishments  if  we  do  not 
heed  thee?  and  if  the  world  is  deceitful,  shall  we  not  flee  from 
it,  to  cleave  to  thee? 
''  Pride  is  a  gceat  sin/'  even  with  these  worldlings,  inasmuch 


140  A   PRE8ERVAT1VB  AGAINi$T.  [X 

and  be  exceeding  glad ;  for  great  is  your  reward  in  heaven :  for 
so  persecuted  they  the  prophets  who  were  before  you.*' 

Thus  far,  then,  may  suffice  to  shew  clearly  with  what  danger- 
ous views  the  worldly-minded  men,  whom  Solomon  personates 
in  the  text  before  us,  lay  siege  to  your  souls  in  fair  speeches. 
What  I  have  said  is  enough  to  convince  you,  that  their  charac* 
ter  is  that  of  the  beast,  whom  St.  John,  in  the  Revelation,  saw 
coming  up  from  the  sea  (that  is,  the  flagitious  world)  with  seven 
heads."  And  what  shall  we  say  of  a  man,  a  clergyman,  who 
teaches,  and  is  an  advocate  for,  their  perverse  docthnes  ?  May 
we  not,  nay,  must  we  not,  for  the  glory  of  God  and  your  good, 
inform  you,  that  he  is  a  teacher  and  approver  of  worldly  max* 
ims/'  May  I  not,  nay,  must  I  not,  give  you  this  caution  with 
the  royal  preacher :  ^'  When  he  speaketh  fair,  believe  him  not* 
for  there  are  seven  abominations  in  his  heart  ?"  But  how  difier* 
ent  is  the  character  I  have  given  you,  from  the  character  of  the 
persons  to  whom  the  text  under  consideration  is  spoken  :  thai 
is,  the  character  of  all  such,  as,  like  you,  are  resolved  never  to 
rest,  till  they  rest  in  Christ  Jesus.  To  shew  this»  I  shall  now 
pass  to  my  third  point. 

III.  To  what  sort  of  persons  does  Solomon  in  the  character 
of  a  worldling  address  himself,  when  he  says,  ^'  Be  not  righteous 
over- much,  neither  make  thy  self  over-wise:  why  shouldest  thou 
destroy  thyself?"  Not  to  the  wicked,  it  is  plain ;  for  besides  that 
it  would  have  been  an  unnecessary  precaution,  he  turns  to  these 
in  the  next  verse  with  another  kind  of  warning,  which  however 
has  some  analogy  with  this.  **  Be  not  over-much  wicked, 
neither  be  thou  foolish  :  why  shouldest  thou  die  before  thy  time  1" 
Was  it  then  to  the  righteous,  in  a  common  way  ;  that  is,  to 
such  as  content  themselves  with  the  observance  of  the  absolute 
essentials  of  God's  laws  ?  Surely  our  adversaries  will  not  allow 
this,  unless  they  be  of  opinion,  that  to  be  righteous  at  all  is  to  be 
righteous  over-much.  And  yet  it  cannot  possibly  be  supposed  that 
the  persons  spoken  to,  are  men  perfectly  righteous ;  since^  as  I 
proved  to  you  in  the  introduction  of  this  discourse,  till  we  come 
up  to  the  perfection  of  our  heavenly  Father,  we  can  never  be 
righteous  enough,  much  less  perfectly  righteous :  wherefore,  as 
in  this  life  men  cannot  attain  to  the  perfection  of  their  heavenly 
Father,  it  follows  in  course,  that  the  persons  here  spoken  to, 
cannot  be  men  perfectly  righteous,  there  being  no  such  men 
existing ;  for,  at  St  John  saith, "  If  we  say  that  we  have  no  sin, 
we  deceive  ourselves,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  us."  Alas,  O  Lord, 
when  shall  we  be  delivered  from  the  body  of  this  death  ? 

It  remains,  that  the  persons  spoken  to  in  the  text,  are  such, 
only,  as  persisting  steadfastly  in  a  firm  adherence  to  all  the 
essential  laws  of  God,  content  not  themselves  with  the  practice 
of  common  virtues  in  a  common  degree,  but  live  in  a  perpetual 
habitude  of  desires,  struggles,  and  yearnings  towards  an  intimate 
union  with  Christ,  the  perfection  of  righteousness.  They  are 
not  of  the  number  of  those  righteous  with  indifference,  who 
would  fain  blend  the  service  of  God  and  mammon,  would  fiua 


XI*]  VKBBTTLBD   MOTIONS^   BTO.  141 

hare  Christ  and  the  world  for  their  masters,  and  halting^  between 
twoy  like  the  children  of  Israel  of  old,  with  their  faces  to  hea- 
Ten,  and  their  hearts  to  the  earth,  are  neither  hot  nor  cold. 
Alas^  would  they  were  cold  or  hot !  But "  because  they  are 
laiewann,  and  neither  cold  nor  hot,  the  Lord  shall  spew  them 
oat  of  his  month/' 

Not  so  the  persons  spoken  to  in  my  text ;  not  so  you,  O  be- 
loved in  God,  who  having  shaken  off  the  world  and  worldly 
affections,  to  run  the  more  swiftly  after  righteousness,  hate 
your  own  lives  for  the  sake  of  Christ.  Happy,  happy,  are 
all  you  who  put  on  our  Lord  Jesus,  and  with  him  the  new 
man !  You  are  the  true  circumcision,  which  worship  God  in 
spirit,  and  rejoice  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  have  no  confidence  in 
the  flesh/' 

What  wonder  then.  Christians  ?  To  you  I  speak,  all  ye  lovers 
and  stragglers  after  the  perfect  righteousness  of  your  divine 
master,  Christ ;  what  wonder  is  it  that  you  shall  be  charged  with 
enthusiasm,  with  folly,  with  fanaticism,  and  madness  ?  Were 
not  the  apostles  so  before  you,  when  they  preached  Christ  Jesus? 
Nay,  were  they  not  reputed  dnink  with  wine?  Can  you  be 
amazed  at  it,  in  an  age  **  when  all  manner  of  vice  abounds  to  a 
degree  almost  unheard  of,"  when  the  land  is  full  of  adulterers, 
and  because  of  swearing  the  land  moumeth  ?  O  how  is  the 
&ithful  city  become  an  harlot!  My  heart  within  me  is  broken 
because' of  the  clergy ;  all  my  bones  shake ;  I  am  like  a  drunken 
man,  and  like  a  man  whom  wine  hath  overcome ;  because  of  the 
Lord,  and  because  of  the  words  of  his  holiness,  perverted  by 
this  deluded  clergyman. 

When  the  Clergy,  whom  Christ  has  appointed  to  teach 
his  people  ''to  walk  before  him  and  be  perfect,"  become 
teachers  of  worldly  maxims,  what  can  be  expected  from  the 
laity  ?  It  is  notorious,  that  for  the  moralizing  iniquity  of  the 
priest,  the  land  mourns.  They  have  preached  and  lived  many 
sincere  persons  out  of  the  church  of  England.  They  endeavour 
to  make  you  vain,  (as  the  prophets  did  in  the  days  of  Jeremiah :) 
they  speak  a  vision  out  of  their  own  mouth,  and  not  out  of  the 
month  of  the  Lord.  In  a  word, ''  both  prophet  and  priest  are 
profane,  and  do  wickedness  in  the  very  house  of  the  Lord." 
Nay,  they  still  say  to  them  iivho  despise  the  Lord,  The  Lord 
hath  said,  ye  shall  have  peace ;  and  they  say  to  every  one 
who  walketh  after  the  imagination  of  his  own  heart.  No  evil 
diall  come  upon  you. 

Such  is  the  language,  my  beloved  lovers  of  christian  perfec- 
tion, which  the  indolent,  earthly-minded,  pleasure-taking  clergy 
of  the  church  of  England  use,  to  strengthen  the  hand  of  evil- 
doers, that  none  may  return  from  his  wickedness.  Such  is  the 
doctrine  of  the  letter-learned  divine,  who  has  dipped  his  pen  in 
gall,  to  decry  perfect  righteousness,  and  to  delude  you  from 
it  with  a  false  application  of  that  text,  so  grossly  misunderstood 
by  him :  "  Be  not  righteous  over-much,  neither  be  thou  over- 
wise;  why  shouldest  thou  destroy  thyself?"     But  suffer  not 


142  A    PRRSERVATIVE   AGAINST  [X. 

yonrselves,  ray  fellow-christians,  to  be  deluded  by  bim.  For 
as  I  have  already  shewn  to  you,  he  is  grossly  (Lord,  grant  be 
was  not  maliciously)  mistaken  in  his  manner  of  explaining  this 
text ;  and  so  far  from  making  a  right  application  of  it  according 
to  the  wise,  the  experienced  Solomon's  intention,  he  acts  the 
character  of  a  vain  libertine,  full  of  self-love  and  earthly  desires, 
whom  Solomon  but  personated,  to  ridicule.  But  the  Doctor,  by 
realizing  that  character  in  himself,  becomes  the  teacher  and  ap- 
prover of  worldly  maxims,  which  be  applies  to  you,  on  purpose 
to  destroy  in  you  the  yearnings  after  perfect  righteousness  in 
Christ.  May  I  not  then,  nay,  must  I  not  warn  you,  my  beloved, 
that  this  man  is  an  enemy  to  perfect  righteousness  in  men, 
through  Jesus  Christ,  and,  therefore,  no  friend  to  Christ?  O 
that  my  head  were  an  ocean,  and  my  eyes  fountains  of  tears,  to 
weep  night  and  day  for  this  poor  creature,  this  hood-winked 
member  of  the  clergy  ! 

Pray  you,  O  true  Christians,  pray  and  sigh  mightily  to  the 
Lord  ;  importune  him  in  the  behalf  of  this  erring  pastor;  pray 
that  he  would  vouchsafe  to  open  the  eyes,  and  touch  the  stub- 
born heart,  of  this  scribe,  that  he  may  become  better  instructed. 
Other^vise,  as  the  Lord  said  by  the  mouth  of  his  true  prophet, 
Jeremiah,  ''  fiehold,  I  will  feed  him  with  wormwood,  and  make 
him  drink  the  water  of  gall ;  for  from  him  is  profaneness  gone 
forth  into  all  the  land." 

This  good,  however,  hath  he  done  by  attempting  to  shew  the 
folly,  sin,  and  danger  of  that  which  he  miscals  being  righteous 
over-much,  that  is,  being  superlatively  righteous,  in  desire  and 
habitual  struggles ;  he  has  thereby  given  me  the  occasion  to 
shew  you,  brethren,  in  the  course  of  this  sermon,  the  great  and 
real  folly,  sin,  and  danger,  of  not  being  righteous  enough ;  which, 
perhaps,  I  should  never  have  thought  of  doing,  had  not  his  false 
doctrine  pointed  out  to  me  the  necessity  of  doing  it.  Thus  does 
the  all-wise  providence  of  God  make  use  of  the  very  vices  of 
men  to  draw  good  out^  of  evil ;  and  choose  their  very  errors,  to 
confound  falsehood,  and  make  way  for  truth.  Though  this 
should  be  more  than  our  angry  adversary  intended,  yet.  Lord, 
reward  him  according  to  his  works;  and  suffer  him  no  longer  to 
be  hasty  in  his  words,  that  we  may  have  room  to  entertain  better 
hopes  of  him  for  the  futnra 

filessed  be  God  for  sending  you  better  guides !  I  am  convinc- 
ed it  was  his  divine  will :  our  dear  fellow-creature.  Doctor  Tf app, 
falling  into  such  errors,  has  given  so  great  a  shock  to  the  sound 
religion  of  Christian  perfection,  that  unless  I  had  opposed  him, 
1  verily  believe  the  whole  flock  who  listened  to  his  doctrine, 
would  have  been  scattered  abroad  like  sheep  having  no  shepherd. 
"  But  woe  to  ye,  scribes  and  Pharisees !  Woe  be  unto  the  pastors 
that  destroy  and  scatter  the  sheep  of  my  pasture,  saith  the  Lord." 

Full  well  I  know  that  this  sermon  will  not  be  pleasing  to  my 
poor,  peevish  adversary ;  but  correction  is  not  to  pleasure,  but  to 
profit :  few  children  can  be  brought  willingly  to  kiss  the  rod  which 
rebuketh  them ;  though,  when  they  become  of  riper  understand- 


Xt.j  THB   BBNEPITS   OP   AN    EARLY   PIETY.  143 

lag,  they  will  bless  the  hand  that  guided  it.  Thus  shall  this 
angry  man,  I  trust,  thauk  me  one  day  for  reproving  him,  when 
his  reason  shall  be  restored  to  him  by  the  light  of  the  holy  Spi- 
rit. O  liord,  grant  thou  this  light  unto  him,  and  suffer  him  to 
see  with  what  bowels  of  pity  and  tenderness  I  love  him  in  thee, 
even  while  I  chasten  him. 

Neither  am  I  insensible,  brethren,  how  offensive  my  words  will 
be  to  worldlings  in  general,  who  loving  falsehood  better  than 
troth,  and  the  flesh  before  the  Spirit,  wiU  still  prefer  the  Doctor's 
sin-soothing  doctrines  to  the  plain  gospel  verities  preached  by 
me.  O  how  my  soul  pities  them.  But  I  have  done  my  duty,  I 
wash  my  hands,  and  am  innocent  of  the  blood  of  all.  I  have  not 
sought  to  please  my  hearers,  but  have  spoken  plain  truth,  though 
it  should  offend.  For  what  things  were  gain  to  me,  those  I  count- 
ed loss  for  Christ ;  and  hope  I  shall  ever  do  so.  Not  that  I  pre- 
some  to  think  myself  already  perfect ;  *^  but  I  press  forwards 
towards  the  mark,  for  the  prize  of  the  high  calling  of  God  in 
Christ  Jesus." 

None  of  us,  as  I  before  told  you,  can  boast  of  having  attained 
the  summit  of  perfection ;  though,  he  is  the  nearest  to  it,  who  is 
widest  from  the  appetites  of  the  flesh  ;  and  he  stands  the  high- 
.  est,  who  is  the  lowliest  in  his  own  esteem :  wherefore,  as  many 
of  us  as  have  made  any  advances  towards  Christ  and  his  king- 
dom, "  whereto  we  have  already  attained,  let  us  walk  by  the  same 
rule,  let  ns  mind  the  same  thing." 

Walk  not  then,  brethren,  according  to  the  ways  of  the  world : 
but  be  followers  of  Christ  together  with  me.  And  if  any,  even 
an  angel  of  light,  should  presume  to  teach  you  any  other  gospel 
than  that  which  I  have  here  taught  you,  let  him  be  accursed. 
"  For  you  will  find  many  walking,  like  such  of  whom  I  have  told 
jou  already,  and  now  tell  you  weeping,  that  they  are  the  enemies 
of  the  cross  of  Christ;  whose  end  is  destruction,  whose  God  is 
their  belly^  and  whose  glory  is  in  their  shame,  for  they  mind 
woridly  things.  But  your  conversation  is  in  heaven,  from  whence 
also  you  look  for  the  Saviour,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ:  who  shall 
change  your  vile  bodies,  that  they  may  be  fashioned  like  unto 
his  glorious  body,  according  to  the  working  whereby  he  is  able 
to  subdue  even  all  things  unto  himself,"  even  the  stubborn  heart 
of  our  perverse  adversary. 

Which^  God  of  his  infinite  mercy  grant,  &c. 


SERMON  XI. 

THE    BENEFITS   OF   AN    EARLY   PIETY. 

PREACHED    AT   BOW    CHURCH,   LONDON,' BEFORE  THE   RELIGIOUS  SOCIETIES. 

Remembernow  thy  Creator  in  the  days  of  thy  youth — Eccles.xii.l. 

The  amiableness  of  religion  itself,  and  the  innumerable  advan- 
tages that  flow  from  it  to  society  in  general,  as  well  as  to  each 
fincere  professor  in  particular,  cannot  but  recommend  it  to  the 


•       '1 


;v  . 


142  di^    Ul^NEFirS   OF  [XI. 

^  .vv.ca.uc  i^erson, and  make  even  wicked  men, 

u  .;ic  .ioiith,  so,  in  their  more  sober  intervals,  to 
ic  :  i^iittim;:}.    And,  indeed,  we  must  do  the 
».icc.  lis  to  confess,  that  the  question  about 
c^uoliy  arise  from  a  dispute  whether  it  be  ne* 
oi  most  men  see  the  necessity  of  doing  something 
«  ...^-a  oi  iheir  souls,)  but  when  is  the  best  time  to  set 
l\isous  are  convinced  by  universal  experience,  that 
^^.(  V  s  or  endeavours,  towards  the  attainment  of  reli* 
iUi'uded  with  some  difficulty  and  trouble,  and  tbere- 
., .  \^  ould  willingly  defer  the  beginning  of  such  a  seemingly 
A  kUi  \\  ork,  as  long  as  they  can.  The  wanton  prodigal,  who 
X  .^^.uiing  bis  substance  in  riotous  living,  cries,  A  little  more 
..  .4c«uu\  a  little  more  sensuality,  and  then  I  will  be  sober  in 
.i.i^K^Ht.     'llic  covetous  worldling,  that  employs  all  his  care  and 
>a:a.s  iM  '*  heaping  up  riches,  though  he  cannot  tell  who  shall  ga- 
.[K'l  ihiMu/'  does  not  flatter  himself  that  this  will  do  always;  but 
;k»IK's.  with  the  rich  fool  in  the  Gospel,  to  lay  up  goods  for  a  few 
uKwre  years  on  earth,  and  then  he  will  begin  to  lay  up  treasures 
III  hoaven.     And,  in  short,  thus  it  is  that  most  people  are  con- 
^nirod  of  the  necessity  of  being  religious  some  time  or  another ; 
but  then,  like  Felix,  they  put  off  the  acting  suitably  to  their  con- 
Y lotions,  till  what  they  imagine  a  more  convenient    season: 
whereas,  would  we  be  so  humble  as  to  be  guided  by  the  expe- 
rience and  counsel  of  the  wisest  men,  wo  should  learn  that  youth 
Is  the  fittest  season  for  religion :  *'  Remember  now  thy  Creator 
(says  Solomon)  in  the  days  of  thy  youth."  By  the  word  remem- 
ber, we  are  not  to  understand  a  bare,  speculative  remembrance, 
or  calling  to  mind,  (for  that,  like  a  dead  faith,  will  profit  us  no- 
thing,) but  such  a  remembrance  as  will  constrain  us  to  obedi- 
ence, and  oblige  us,  out  of  gratitude,  to  pertbrm  all  that  the  Lord 
our  God  shall  require  of  us.  For,  as  the  forgetting  God,  in  scrip- 
ture language,  implies  a  total  neglect  of  our  duty,  in  like  man- 
ner, renioinbcring  him  signifies  a  perfect  performance  of  it :  so 
that,  when  Solomon  says,  "  Remember  thy  Creator  in  the  days 
of  thy  youth,"  it  is  the  same  as  if  he  had  said,  keep  God*s  com- 
mandments ;  or,  in  other  words,  be  religious  in  the  days  of  thy 
youth,  thereby  implying,  that  youth  is  the  most  proper  season 
for  it. 

I  shall,  in  the  following  discourse. 

First,  Endeavour  to  make  good  the  wise  man's  proposition, 
implied  in  the  words  of  the  text,  and  to  shew  that  youth  is  the 
fittest  season  tor  religion. 

SeroHiUj/,  By  way  of  motive,  I  shall  consider  the  many  un- 
speakable advantages  that  will  arise  from  ''Remembering  our 
Creator  in  the  days  of  our  youth."    And, 

Thirdly,  I  shall  conclude  with  a  word  or  two  of  exhortation 
to  the  yoiingerpart  of  this  audience. 

Firnt,  I  am  to  make  good  the  wise  man's  proposition,  implied 
in  tiN'  w«)rds  of  tho  text,  and  to  shew  that  youth  is  the  fittest 
tfieuson  for  religion :  "  Remember  now  thy  Creator  in  the  days  of 


YU.]  AN    BARLY    PIETY.  145 

tby  yoiith.'**Bat«  to  proceed  more  clearly  in  this  argument,  it  may 
oot  be  hnpioper^  first,  to  explain  what  I  mean  by  the  word  reli- 
mm.  By  this  term,  then,  I  would  not  be  understood  to  mean  a 
Miew  oatward  profession,  or  naming  the  name  of  Christ ;  for  we 
are  toM,  that  many  who  have  even  prophesied  in  his  name,  and 
in  his  name  cast  out  devils,  shall,  notwithstanding,  be  rejected 
by  him  at  the  last  day:  nor  woold  I  understand  by  it,  barely 
beicg  admitted  into  Ckurist's  church  by  baptism ;  for  then  Simon 
Hagns,  Arius,  and  the  heresiarchs  of  old,  might  pass  for  religious 
IMsona ;  for  these  were  baptized :  nor  yet  the  receiving  the  other 
seal  of  the  covenant,  for  then  Judas  himself  might  be  canoniaed 
fin*  a  saint ;  nor,  indeed,  do  I  mean  any  of  all  these  together, 
considered  by  themselves ;  but  a  thorough,  real,  inward  change 
df  natoie,  wrought  in  us  by  the  powerful  operations  of  the  H<dy 
€hosty  ccmveyed  to,  and  nourished  in,  our  hearts,  by  a  constant 
ise  of  all  the  means  of  grace,  evidenced  by  a  good  life,  and 
Ringing  forth  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit 

The  attaining  of  this  real,  inward  religion,  is  a  work  of  so  great 
fifficolty,  that  Nicodemus,  a  learned  doctor  and  teacher  in  Israel, 
thoQgfat  it  altogether  impossible,  and  therefore  ignorantly  asked 
cor  blessed  Lord, '^ How  this  thing  could  be?"  And,  truly y  to 
nctify  a  disordered  nature,  to  mortify  our  corrupt  passions,  to 
tUD  darkness  to  light,  to  put  off  the  old  man,  and  put  on  the 
new,  and  thareby  to  have  the  image  of  God  reinstamped  upon 
the  sonU  or,  in  one  word,  ''to  be  born  again,"  however  light  some 
nay  make  of  it,  must,  after  all  our  endeavours,  be  owned  by  man 
to  be  impossible.  It  is  true,  indeed,  Christ's  yoke  is  said  to  be 
an  easy  oc  a  gracious  yoke;  and  his  burden  light;  but  then  it  is 
to  those  only  to  whom  grace  has  been  given  to  bear  and  draw 
in  it*  For  as  the  wise  son  of  Sirach  observes,  ''At  first  Wisdom 
walka  with  her  children  in  crooked  ways,  and  brings  them  into 
fear;  and  torments  them  with  her  discipline,  and  does  not  turn 
to  comfort  and  rejoice  them,  till  she  has  tried  them  and  proved 
their  judgment."  No;  we  must  not  flatter  ourselves  that  we 
shall  walk  in  wisdom's  pleasant  ways,  unless  we  first  submit  to 
a  gnat  many  difficulties.  The  spiritual  birth  is  attended  with 
its  pangs,  as  well  as  the  natural ;  for  they  that  have  experienced 
it,  ^md  they  only  are  the  proper  judges,)  can  acquaint  you  that 
in  all  things  that  are  dear  to  corrupt  nature,  we  must  deny  our- 
selves, lest,  after  all,  when  we  come  to  the  birth,  we  should  want 
strength  to  bring  forth. 

Bnt  if  these  tilings  be  so ;  if  there  be  difficulties  and  pangs 
attending  our  being  bom  again ;  if  we  must  deny  ourselves, 
what  season  more  proper  than  that  of  youth?  when,  if  ever,  our 
bodies  are  robust  and  vigorous,  and  our  minds  active  and  cou* 
lageons ;  and  consequendy  we  are  then  best  qualified  to  endure 
hardness,  as  good  soldiers  of  Jesus  Christ. 

We  find  in  secular  matters,  |>eople  commonly  observe  this 

method,  and  send  their  children  abroad  among  the  toils  and 

Citigiies  of  business  in  their  younger  years,  as  well  knowing 

they  are  then  fittest  to  undergo  thenu    And  why  do  thoy  not  act 
•  I 


146  THE  BENKPITS   OF  £X|' 

with  the  same  consistency  in  the  grand  affair  of  religion  ?  Be-^ 
cause,  as  our  Sayiour  has*  told  us, ''  The  children  of  this  world 
are  wiser  in  their  generation  than  the  children  of  light/' 

But,  Secondly,  If  pure  and  undefiled  religion  consists  in  the 
renewal  of  our  corrupted  natures,  then  it  is  not  only  a  work  of 
difficulty,  but,  the  perfection  of  it,  of  time. 

And  if  this  be  the  case,  then  it  highly  concerns  every  one  to 
set  about  it  betimes,  and  to  *'  work  their  work  while  it  is  day» 
before  the  night  cometh  when  no  man  can  work/' 

Could  we,  indeed,  live  to  the  age  of  Methuselah,  and  had  but 
little  business  to  employ  ourselves  in,  we  might  then  be  more 
excusable,  if  we  made  no  other  use  of  this  world  than  what  too 
many  do,  take  our  pastime  therein ;  but  since  our  lives  are  so  very 
short,  and  we  are  called  to  work  out  our  salvation  with  fear  and 
trembling,  we  have  no  room  left  for  trifling,  lest  we  should  be 
snatched  away  whUe  our  lamps  are  untrimmed,  and  we  are 
entirely  unprepared  to  meet  the  bridegroom. 

Did  we  know  a  friend  or  neighbour,  who  had  a  long  journey 
of  the  utmost  importance  to  make,  and  yet  should  stand  all  tM 
day  idle,  neglecting  to  set  out  till  the  sun  was  about  to  go 
down,  we  cmild  not  but  pity  and  condemn,  his  egregious  foUy; 
And  yet  it  is  to  be  feared  most  men  are  just  such  fools ;  they 
have  a  long  journey  to  take,  nay,  a  journey  to  eternity,  a  jour- 
ney of  infinite  importance,  and  which  they  are  obliged  to  des- 
patch before  the  sun  of  their  natural  life  be  gone  down ;  and 
yet  they  loiter  away  the  time  allotted  them  to  perform  their 
journey  in,  till  sickness  or  death  surprises  them,  and  then  they 
cry  out  **  What  shall  we  do  to  inherit  eternal  life  V  But  leaving 
such  to  the  mercies  of  God  in  Christ,  who  can  call  at  the  eleventh 
hour,  I  pass  on  to — 

The  second  general  thing  proposed.  To  shew  the  advantagef 
that  will  arise  from  remembering  our  Creator  in  the  days  of  our 
youth;  which  may  servo  as  so  many  motives  to  excite  and 
quicken  all  persons  immediately  to  set  about  it. 

And  the  first  benefit  resulting  from  thence  is,  that  it  will  bring 
most  honour  and  glory  to  God.  This,  I  suppose,  every  serious 
person  will  grant,  ought  to  be  the  point  in  which  our  actions 
should  centre ;  for  to  this  end  were  we  bom,  and  to  this  end  were 
we  redeemed  by  the  precious  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  that  we 
should  promote  God's  eternal  glory.  And  as  the  glory  of  God 
is  most  advanced  by  paying  obedience  to  his  precepts,  they  that 
begin  soonest  to  walk  in  his  ways,  act  most  to  his  glory^  The 
common  objection  against  the  divine  laws  in  general,  and  the 
doctrines  of  the  gospel  in  particular,  is,  that  they  are  not  prao 
ticable;  that  they  are  contranr  to  flesh  and  blood ;  and  that  ail 
those  precepts  concerning  self-denial,  renunciation  of  and  dead* 
ness  to  the  world,  are  but  so  many  arbitrary  restraints  imposed 
upon  human  nature:  but  when  we  see  mere  striplings  not  only 
practising,  but  delighting  in  such  religious  duties,  and  in  thb 
days  of  their  youth,  when,  if  ever,  they  have  a  rdish  for  sensual 
pleasures,  subduing  and  dcspismg  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  the  laat 


Xl.j  AN    BARLY    PIBTY.  147 

of  the  eye,  and  the  pride  of  life;  this,  this  is  pleasing  to  God  ; 
thifl  Tiadicates  his  injured  honour;  this  shews  that  bis  service  isi 
perfect  freedom,  ''that  his  yoke  is  easy,  and  his  burden  light." 

Bat,  Secondly y  As  an  early  piety  redounds  most  to  the  honour 
of  God,  so  it  will  bring  most  honour  to  ourselves :  for  those  that 
hoDonr  God,  God  will  honour.  We  find  it,  therefore,  remarked 
to  the  praise  of  Obadiah,  that  he  served  the  Lord  from  his  youth : 
of  Samnel,  that  he  stood,  when  young,  before  God  in  a  linen 
e]^od :  of  Timothy,  that  from  a  child  he  had  known  the  holy 
aeriptores :  of  St.  John,  that  he  was  the  youngest  and  roost  bc- 
loT^  disciple:  and  of  our  blessed  Lord  himself,  that  at  twelve 
years  old  he  went  up  to  the  temple,  and  sat  among  the  doctors, 
both  bearing  and  asking  them  questions. 

Nor,  Thirdly,  will  an  early  piety  afford  us  less  comfort  than 
honour,  not  only  because  it  renders  religion  habitual  to  us,  but 
•iso  because  it  gives  us  a  well-grounded  assurance  of  the  sin- 
cerity of  our  profession.  Were  tliere  no  other  argument  against 
I  death-bed  repentance,  but  the  unsatisfactoriness  and  anxiety 
of  such  a  state,  that  should  be  sufficient  to  deter  all  thinking 
persons  from  deferring  the  most  important  business  of  their  life 
tosach  a  dreadful  period  of  it.  For  supposing  a  man  to  be  sin- 
Ctfe  in  his  profession  of  repentance  on  a  death-bed,  (which,  in 
Bost  cases,  is  very  much  to  be  doubted,)  yet,  he  is  often  afraid 
fart  his  convictions  and  remorse  proceed  not  from  a  true  sorrow 
for  sin,  but  a  servile  fear  of  punishment.  But  one,  who  is  a 
voong  saint,  need  fear  no  such  perplexity ;  he  knows  that  he 
unes  Crod  for  his  own  sake,  and  is  not  driven  to  him  by  a  dread 
•f  impending  evil ;  he  does  not  decline  the  gratifications  of  sense, 
because  he  can  no  longer  hear  the  voice  of  singing  men  and 
singing  women ;  but  willingly  takes  up  his  cross,  and  follows  his 
UMsed  Master  in  his  youth,  and  therefore  has  reason  to 
expect  greater  confidence  of  his  sincerity  towards  God.  But 
farther,  as  an  early  piety  assures  the  heart  of  its  sincerity,  so, 
likewise;^  it  brings  its  present  reward  with  it,  as  it  renders 
religioB  and  all  its  duties  habitual  and  easy.  A  young  saint, 
wete  3roa  to  ask  him,  would  joyfully  tell  you  the  unspeakable 
eomfert  of  beginning  to  be  religious  betimes ;  as  for  his  part,  he 
knows  not  what  men  mean  by  talking  of  mortification,  self-denial, 
and  retirement,  as  hard  and  rigorous  duties ;  for  he  has  so  ac- 
castomed  himself  to  them,  that,  by  the  grace  of  God  they  are 
now  become  even  natural,  and  he  takes  infinitely  more  plea- 
me  in  practising  the  severest  precepts  of  the  gospel,  than 
aluxorions  Dives  in  a  bed  of  state,  or  an  ambitious  Uaroan  at 
aioyal  banqnet.  And  O  how  happy  must  that  youth  be,  whose 
intyis  become  a  second  nature,  and  to  whom  those  things,  which 
seem  terrible  to  others,  are  grown  both  easy  and  delightful ! 

Bat  the  greatest  advantage  of  an  early  piety  is  still  behind. 
FMrtUy,  It  lays  in  the  best  provision  of  comfort  and  support 
wainstsuch  times  as  we  shall  stand  most  in  need  thereof,  namely, 
•fi  times  of  cor  tribulation,  and,  in  particular,  against  the  time 
if  old  age,  the  hour  of  death,  and  the  dfiy  of  judgment.  •     ^ 

i2 


148  THE   BfiNBFTS  OW  [XI* 

This  is  the  argument  the  wise  man  makes  use  of  In  the  words 
immediately  following  the  text :  ^'  Remember  now  thy  Creator 
in  the  days  of  thy  youth,  while  the  evil  days  come  not,  nor  the 
years  draw  nigh^^  wherein  thou  shalt  say,  I  have  no  pleasure  in 
them."  Observe,  the  time  of  old  age  is  an  evil  time,  years 
wherein  there  is  no  pleasure ;  and  ask  those  that  are  grown 
old,  aAd  they  will  inform  you  so.  Cordials  surely,  then,  must 
be  exceedingly  proper  to  support  our  droofMug  spirits  :  and  O 
what  cordial  comparable  to  the  recollection  of  early  piety,  de- 
pending wholly  on  the  righteousness  of  Christ ;  when  the  eyes, 
like  Isaac's,  are  grown  dim  with  age;  when  *^  the  keepers  of  the 
house  (the  hands)  shall  tremble ;"  as  the  wise  man  goes  on  to 
describe  the  infirmities  of  old  age ;  when  ^'  the  strong  men  bow 
themselves,"  or  the  legs  grow  feeble ;  and  the  *^  grinders/'  the 
teeth,  shall  cease  to  do  their  proper  office,  because  they  are 
few  ;  for  a  person  then  to  hear  the  precepts  of  the  gospel  read 
over  to  him,  and  to  be  able  to  lay  his  hand  on  his  heart,  and  to 
say^  sincerely,  notwithstanding  a  consciousness  of  numberless 
short-comings,  ^^  All  these  have  I  endeavoured,  through  grace, 
to  keep  from  my  youth :"  this  must  give  him,  through  Christ  who 
worketh  all,  comfort  that  I  want  words  to  express  and  thoughts 
to  conceive.  But,  supposing  it  were  possible  for  us  to  escape 
the  inconveniences  of  old  age,  yet  still  death  is  a  debt,  since 
the  fall,  we  all  must  pay ;  and,  what  is  worse,  it  generally  comes 
attended  with  such  dreadful  circumstances^  that  it  will  make 
even  a  Felix  to  tremble.  But  as  for  the  godly,  that  have  been 
enabled  to  serve  the  Lord  from  their  youth,  it  is  not  usually  so 
with  them ;  no,  they  have  faith  given  them  to  look  upon  death, 
not  as  a  king  of  terrors,  but  as  a  welcome  messenger,  that  if 
come  to  conduct  them  to  their  wished-for  home.  All  the  daja 
of  their  appointed  time  have  they  waited,  and  it  has  been  the 
business  of  their  whole  lives  to  study  to  prepare  themselves  for 
the  coming  of  their  great  change  ;  and,  therefore,  they  rejoice  to 
hear  that  they  are  called  to  meet  the  heavenly  Bridegroomu  Thus 
dies  the  early  pious,  whose  path  has  been  as  the  shining  light,  that 
shineth  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect  day."  But  follow  him 
beyond  the  grave,  and  see  with  what  an  holy  triumph  he  enters 
into  his  Master's  joy  ;  with  what  an  humble  boldness  he  stands 
at  the  dreadful  tribunal  of  Jesus  Christ ;  and  can  you  then  for- 
bear to  cry  out,  '^  Let  me  die  the  death  of  the  righteous^  and  lei 
my  latter  end  (and  future  state)  be  like  his  ?" 

Need  I  then,  after  having  shewn  so  many  advantages  to  arise 
from  an  early  piety,  use  any  more  arguments  to  persuade  the 
younger  part  of  this  audience*  to  whom  in  the  third  and  last 
place  I  address  myself,  to  **  Remember  their  CreatcHr  in  the  days 
of  their  youth  ?" 

What !  will  not  all  the  arguments  I  have  mentioned,  prevail 
with  them  to  leave  their  husks,  and  return  home  to  eat  of  the  fat- 
ted calf?  What !  will  they  thus  requite  our  Saviour's  love  ?  That 
be  far  from  them !  Did  he  come  down  and  shed  his  precious  blood , 
to  deliver  them  from  the  power  of  sin ;  and  will  they  spend  tfaeic 


ZI.J  AN    BARLY  PIBTT.  149 

youthful  strength  and  vigoar  in  the  service  of  it,  and  then  think 
to  senre  Christ  when  they  can  follow  their  lusts  no  longer  ?  Is 
it  fit,  that  many,  who  are  endowed  with  excellent  gifts,  and  are* 
thereby  qualified  to  be  supports  and  ornaments  of  our  sinking 
cfcur^,  should,  notwithstanding,  forget  the  God  who  gave  them, 
and  employ  them  in  things  that  will  not  profit  ?  O  why  will 
they  not  arise,  and,  like  so  many  Phinehas's,  be  zealous  for  the 
Lord  of  hosts?  Doubtless,  when  death  overtakes  them,  they 
will  wish  they  had  :  and  what  hinders  them,  but  that  they  l>egin 
now!  Think  you  that  any  one  ever  yet  repented  that  he  began 
to  be  religious  too  soon?  But  how  many,  on  the  contrary,  have 
repented  that  they  began  when  almost  too  late?  May  we  not 
well  imagine  that  young  Samuel  now  rejoices  that  he  waited 
10  soon  at  the  tabernacle  of  the  Lord  ?  or  young  Timothy,  that 
ftom  a  child  he  knew  the  holy  scriptures  ?  And  if  you  wish  to 
be  partakers  of  their  joy,  let  me  persuade  you  to  be  partakers  of 
their  piety. 

I  could  still  go  on  to  fill  my  mouth  with  arguments  ;  but  the 
circumstances  and  piety  of  those  amongst  whom  I  am  now 
IMPeaching  the  kingdom  of  God,  remind  me  to  change  my  style ; 
and  instead  of  urging  any  more  dissuasives  from  sin,  to  fill  up 
what  is  behind  of  this  discourse,  with  encouragements  to  perse* 
fere  in  holiness. 

Messed,  for  ever  blessed,  be  the  God  and  the  Father  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  I  am  not  speaking  to  persons  inflamed  with 
youthftil  lusts,  but  to  a  multitude  of  young  professors,  who  by 
firequently  assembling  together,  and  forming  themselves  into 
religious  societies,  are,  I  hope,  on  good  ground,  in  a  ready  way 
to  he  of  the  number  of  those  ''  young  men,  who  have  overcome 
the  wicked  one." 

Betieve  me,  it  gladdens  my  very  soul,  to  see  so  many  of  your 
faces  set  heavenwards,  and  the  visible  happy  effects  of  your 
uni^g  together,  cannot  but  rejoice  the  hearts  of  all  sincere 
Christians,  and  oblige  them  to  wish  you  good  luck  in  the  name 
of  the  Lord.  The  many  souls  who  are  nourished  weekly  with 
the  spiritual  body  and  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  by  your  means ; 
the  weekly  and  monthly  lectures  that  are  preached  by  your  con- 
tributions ;  the  daily  incense  of  thanksgiving  and  prayer  which 
is  publicly  sent  up  to  the  throne  of  grace  by  your  subscriptions ; 
the  many  children,  who  are  trained  up  in  the  nurture  and  admo- 
nition of  the  Lord,"  by  your  charities ;  and,  lastly,  the  com- 
mendable and  pious  eeal  you  exert  in  promoting  and  encourag- 
ing divine  psalmody,  are  such  plain  and  apparent  proofs  of  the 
benefit  of  your  religious  societies,  that  they  call  for  a  public 
acknowledgment  of  praise  and  thanksgiving  to  our  blessed  Mas- 
ter, who  has  not  only  put  into  your  hands  such  good  designs, 
but  enabled  you  also  to  bring  the  same  to  good  efiect. 

It  is  true  it  has  been  objected,  that  young  men  forming  them- 
sdves  into  religious  societies,  has  a  tendency  to  make  them 
^faitually  {ffoud,  and  to  think  more  highly  of  themselves  than 
mcj  ought  to  think  "    And,  periiaps,  the  imprudent,  imperious 


ISO  THB   fiBNBPITS  OF  [Zf« 

behaviour,  of  some  novices  in  religion,  v^ho,  though  they  !vrent 
out  from  you,  were  not  of  you/'  may  have  given  too  much  oc- 
casion for  such  an  aspersion. 

But  you,  brethren,  have  not  so  learned  Christ.  Far,  far  be  it 
from  you  to  look  upon  yourselves  as  righteous,  and  despise 
others,  because  you  often  assemble  yourselves  together.  No ; 
this,  instead  of  creating  pride,  ought  to  beget  an  holy  fear  in 
your  hearts,  lest  your  practice  should  not  correspond  with  your 
profession,  and  that,  si'teryou  have  benefited  and  edified  others, 
you  yourselves  should  become  cast-aways. 

Worldly-mindedness,  my  brethren,  is  another  rock,  against 
which  we  are  in  danger  of  splitting.  For,  if  other  sins  have 
slain  their  thousands  of  professing  Christians,  this  has  slain  its 
ten  thousands.  I  need  not  appeal  to  past  ages ;  your  own 
experience,  no  doubt,  has  furnished  you  with  many  unhappy 
instances  of  young  men,  who, ''  after  (as  one  would  have  ima- 
gined) they  had  escaped  the  pollutions  which  are  in  the  worid 
through  lust,  and  had  tasted  the  good  word  of  life,"  and  endured 
for  a  season,  whilst  under  the  tuition  and  inspection  of  others ; 
yet  when  they  have  come  to  be  their  own  masters,  through  a 
want  of  faith,  and  through  too  great  an  earnestness  in  '*  labour- 
ing for  the  meat  which  perisheth,"  have  cast  off  their  first  love, 
been  again  entangled  with  the  world,  and  returned  like  the  dog 
to  his  vomit,  and  like  the  sow  that  was  washed  to  her  wallowing 
in  the  mire.  You  would  therefore  do  well,  my  brethren,  fre- 
quently to  remind  each  other  of  this  dangerous  snare,  and  to 
exhort  one  another  to  begin,  pursue,  and  end  your  christian 
warfare,  in  a  thorough  renunciation  of  the  world,  and  worldly 
tempers  ;  so  that,  when  you  are  obliged  by  providence  to  pro- 
vide for  yourselves,  and  those  of  your  respective  households^ 
you  may  continue  to  walk  by  faith,  and  still  **  seek  first  the 
kingdom  of  God  and  his  righteousness :"  not  doubting  but  all 
other  things,  upon  your  honest  industry  and  endeavours,  shall 
be  added  unto  you. 

And  now,  what  shall  I  say  more?  To  speak  unto  you,  fathers, 
who  have  been  in  Christ  so  mahy  years  before  me,  and  know  the 
malignity  of  worldly-mindedness  and  pride  in  the  spiritual  life, 
would  be  altogether  needless.  To  you,  therefore,  O  young  men, 
(for  whom  I  am  distressed,  for  whom  I  fear  as  well  as  for  my- 
self, )  do  I  once  more  address  myself,  in  the  words  of  the  beloved 
disciple,  '^  Look  to  yourselves,  that  we  lose  not  those  things 
which  we  have  wrought,  but  receive  a  full  reward.'*  Be  ever 
mindful,  then,  of  the  words  that  have  been  spoken  to  us  by  the 
apostles  of  the  Lord  and  Saviour.  ''Give  diligence  to  make 
your  calling  and  election  sure.  Beware,  lest  ye  also,  being  led 
away  by  the  error  of  the  wicked,  fall  from  your  own  stedfastness. 
Let  him  that  thinketh  he  standeth,  take  heed  lest  he  fall.  Be 
not  high-minded,  but  fear.  -  But  we  are  persuaded  better  things 
of  you,  and  things  that  accompany  salvation,  though  we  thus 
speak.  For  God  is  not  unrighteous,  to  forget  your  works  and 
labours  of  love.    And  we  desire  that  every  one  of  yon  do  shew 


XU^  CHRIST  THE  BBLIBVBR'S  HUSBAND.  161 

Ike  suae  diligence,  to  the  fall  assurance  of  hope  unto  the  end : 
4hat  ye  be  not  slothfiil,  but  followers  of  them,  who  through  faith 
sod  patience  inherit  the  promises/'  It  is  true,  we  have  many 
difliailtie«  to  encounter,  many  powerful  enemies  to  overcome, 
are  we  can  get  possession  of  the  promised  land.  We  have  an 
infill  devilt  an  ensnaring  world,  and,  above  all,  the  treachery  of 
«r  own  bmrts,  to  withstand  and  strive  against.  *^  For  strait  is 
the  gate,  and  narrow  is  the  way,  that  leadeth  unto  eternal  life." 
But  wlicnrefore  should  we  fear,  since  he  that  is  with  us  is  far 
move  powerful  than  all  who  are  against  us?  Have  we  not 
already  experienced  his  almighty  power,  in  enabling  us  to  con- 
quer some  difficulties  which  seemed  as  insurmountable  then,  as 
tiiose  we  struggle  with  now?  And  cannot  he,  who  delivered  us 
Dot  of  the  paws  of  those  bears  and  lions,  preserve  us  also  from 
bdng  hart  by  the  strongest  Goliath? 

''  Be  stedfiist,  therefore,  my  brethren,  be  immoveable."  *^  Be 
Mi  ashamed  of  the  gospel  of  Christ:  for  it  is  the  power  of  God 
into  saltation."  Fear  not  man;  fear  not  the  contempt  and 
levilings  which  you  must  meet  with  in  the  way  of  duty ;  for  one 
•f  yon  shall  chase  a  thousand,  and  two  of  you  put  ten  thousand 
of  ycNir  enemies  to  flight.  And  if  you  will  be  contented,  through 
pace,  to  suffer  for  a  short  time  here ;  I  speak  the  truth  in  Christ, 
IJie  not;  then  may  ye  hope,  according  to  the  blessed  word  of 
fnunisey  that  ye  shall  be  exalted  to  sit  down  with  the  Son  of 
nan,  when  he  shall  come  in  the  glory  of  his  Father,  with  his 
holy  angels,  to  judgment  hereafter.  May  Almighty  God^give 
every  one  of  us  such  a  measure  of  his  grace,  that  we  may  not  be 
of  the  number  of  those  that  draw  back  unto  perdition,  but  of 
them  that  believe  and  endure  unto  the  end,  to  the  saving  of  our 
iools,  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ ! 

Which  (rod.  &c. 


SERMON  XII. 

CHRIST  THE   BELIEVBR'S  HUSBAND. 

Far  thy  Maker  is  thy  Htis&ancf.— Isaiah  liv.  5. 

Although  believers,  by  nature,  are  far  from  God,  and  children 
of  wrath  even  as  others,  yet  it  is  amazing  to  think  how  nigh 
they  are  brought  to  him  again  by  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ. 
Eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither  hath  it  entered  into  the 
heart  of  any  man  living,  fully  to  conceive  the  nearness  and  dear- 
aess  of  that  relation  in  which  they  stand  to  their  common  head. 
He  is  not  ashamed  to  call  them  brethren.  *'  Behold,"  says  the 
blessed  Jesus  in  the  days  of  his  flesh,  **  my  mother  and  my  bre- 
ihien.''  And  again,  after  his  resurrection,  '^  Go  tell  my  brethren/' 
Nay*  sometimes  he  is  pleased  to  term  believers  his  friends. 
^'  Hraceforth  call  I  you  no  longer  servants,  but  friends."  ''  Our 
fiiend  Lasams  sleepeth."  And  what  is  a  friend  ?  Why,  there 
k  a  friend  that  is  nearer  than  a  brother,  nay,  as  near  as  one's 


15S     '  CHIIIST   THS  BSLIST£R'8   HUMAMIk  [Xlf. 

own  soul.  Atid  ^  thy  friend,  (says  God,  in  the  book  of  Deoteio*- 
liomy)  which  is  bs  thy  o^n  aotii.'*  Kind  and  endearing  appd- 
lations  these,  that  undojibtedly  bespeak  a  very  near  and  inefh^ 
bly  intimate  anion  between  the  Lord  Jesns  and  the  true,  liTiag 
members  of  his  mystical  body!  But,  methinks,  the  words  ctf 
our  text  point  out  to  us  a  relation,  which  not  only  comprehends, 
but,  in  respect  to  nearness  and  deamess,  exceeds  all  other  rela« 
tions  whatsoever.  I  mean  that  of  a  husband.  **  For  thy  Maker 
is  thy  husband ;  the  Lord  of  hosts  is  his  name ;  and  thy  R^ 
deemer  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  the  God  of  the  whole  earth  shaJl 
he  be  called." 

These  words  were  originally  spoken  to  the  people  of  the  Jews, 
considered  collectively  as  a  peculiar  people,  whom  our  Lord  had 
betrothed  and  married  to  himself;  and  they  seem  to  be  sp<dLen, 
when  religion  was  on  the  decline  among  thdr  churches ;  when 
they  bad,  in  a  great  measure,  lost  that  life  and  power  which 
they  once  experienced ;  and  their  enemies  began  to  insult  them 
with  a  **  Where  is  now  your  God  ?"  Such  a  state  of  things  must 
undoubtedly  be  very  afflicting  to  the  true  mourners  in  Zion ;  and 
put  them  upon  crying  unto  the  Lord,  in  this  their  deep  distress. 
He  hears  their  prayer,  his  bowels  yearn  towards  them;  and,  in 
the  preceding  verse,  he  assures  them,  that  though  the  enemy  had 
broken  in  upon  them  like  a  flood,  yet  their  extremity  should  bs 
his  opportunity  to  lift  up  a  standard  against  him.  *'  Fear  not, 
(says  the  great  Head  and  King  of  his  church,)  for  thou  sbalt  not 
be  ashamed  (finally  or  totally);  neither  be  thou  confounded, 
(dissipated  or  dejected,  giving  up  all  for  gone,  as  though  thou 
never  shouldst  see  better  days,  or  another  revival  of  religion) 
for  thou  shalt  not  (entirely)  be  put  to  shame ;"  though  for  a 
while,  for  thy  humiliation,  and  the  greater  confusion  of  thy  ad* 
versaries,  I  suflfer  them  to  triumph  over  thee :  **  For  thou  sbalt 
forget  the  shame  of  thy  youth,  and  shalt  not  remember  the 
reproach  of  thy  widowhood  any  more  ;*'  that  is,  I  will  vouchsafe 
you  such  another  glorious  gale  of  my  blessed  Spirit,  that  you 
shall  quite  forget  your  former  troubled  widow-state,  and  give 
your  enemies  no  more  occasion  to  insult  yon  on  account  of  your 
infant-condition,  but  rather  to  envy  you,  and  gnash  their  teeth, 
and  melt  away,  at  the  sight  of  your  unthought-of  glory  and  pros- 
perity. And  why  vrill  the  infinitely  great  and  condescending 
Jesus  deal  thus  with  his  people?  Because  the  church  is  his 
spouse ;  '*  For,  (as  in  the  words  just  now  read  to  yon)  thy  Maker 
is  thy  husband;  thy  Redeemer,  the  Holy  One  of  Israel;"  modi 
therefore  he  loves  thee  too  well,  to  let  thy  enemies  always  tram* 
pie  thee  under  foot.  ^  The  Lord  of  hosts  is  his  name,  the  God 
of  the  whole  earth  shall  he  be  called ;"  and  therefore  he  is  ainwd 
with  sufficient  power  to  relieve  his  oppressed  people,  and  ovw* 
come  and  avenge  himsdf  of  all  their  haughty  and  insulting  foMk 

This  seems  to  be  the  prime  and  genuine  interpretation  of  the 
text  and  context,  especially  if  we  add,  that  we  may  have  a 
further  view  to  the  latter-day  of  glory,  and  that  blessed  state  id 
the  church,  which  the  people  of  QoA  have  been  looking  fcNT  infill 


XllO  CmUST  THB  BBIJXTBB'S  HU8BAlfIk  1S9 

agw»  «BBi  the  speedy  approach  of  which*  ura  ttadovbtodly  pray 
fimr,  wiwa  we  p«t  np  that  petition  of  oor  Lord's,  ''Thy  kingdom 


Bat,  though  the  words  wers  originally  spokon  to  the  f  ews,  yet 
they  are  undoubtedly  applicable  to  all  believers,  in  all  ages,  and, 
when  eiilaq;ed  on  in  a  proper  manner,  will  afford  us  suitable 
natter  of  discourse  both  for  sinners  and  for  saints ;  for  such  as 
know  God,  as  well  as  for  such  as  know  him  not ;  and  likewise 
for  those  who  once  walked  in  the  light  of  his  blessed  count e- 
ttUioe,  but  are  now  backslidden  from  him,  have  their  harps  hung 
vpon  the  wiUows,  and  are  afraid  that  their  Beloved  is  gone,  and 
inB  return  to  their  souls  no  more.  Accordingly,  without  prefac- 
ing this  discourse  any  fiu'ther,  as  I  suppose  Uiat  a  mixed  multi- 
tude of  saints,  unconverted  sinners,  and  backsliders,  are  present 
hne  this  day,  I  shcdl  endeavour  so  to  speak  from  the  words  of 
the  text,  that  each  may  have  a  proper  portion,  and  none  be  sent 
empty  away. 

In  prosecuting  this  design,  I  will, 

L  Sbdeavour  to  shew,  what  must  pass  between  Jesus  Christ 
and  our  sonls  before  we  can  say,  "  that  our  Maker  is  our  hus- 
band." 

II.  The  duties  of  love  which  they  owe  to  our  Lord,  who 
stand  in  so  near  a  relation  to  him. 

III.  Hie  miserable  condition  of  such  as  cannot  yet  say, 
**  their  Maker  is  their  husband."    And, 

IV.  I  shall  conclude  with  a  general  exhortation  to  all  such 
unhappy  souls,  to  come  and  match  with  the  dear  Lord  Jesus. 
And  O !  may  that  God  who  blessed  Abraham's  servant,  when  he 
went  out  to  seek  a  wife  for  his  son  Isaac,  bless  me,  even  me 
also,  now  I  am  come,  I  trust,  relying  on  divine  strength,  to 
inrite  poor  sinners,  and  recall  backsliders,  to  my  master,  Jesus! 

And  Firsts  I  am  to  shew,  what  must  pass  between  Jesus  Christ 
and  on  souls  before  we  can  say,  "  our  Maker  is  our  husband." 

But,  before  I  proceed  to  this,  it  may  not  be  improper  to  ob«- 
serve,  that  if  anv  of  you,  amongst  whom  I  am  now  preaching  the 
kingdom  of  God,  are  enemies  to  inward  religion,  and  explode  the 
doctrine  of  inward  feelings,  as  enthusiasm,  cant,  and  nonsense, 
I  shall  not  be  surprised  if  your  hearts  rise  against  me  whilst  I 
ta  pTeaching;  for  I  am  about  to  discourse  on  true,  vital,  inter- 
Btl  piety ;  and  an  inspired  apostle  hath  ixM  us, "  that  the  natural 
ma  discemeth  not  the  things  of  the  Spirit,  because  they  are  spi- 
litnally  discerned/'  But,  however,  be  noble  as  the  Bereans  were ; 
iearch  the  scriptures  as  they  did ;  lay  aside  prejudice ;  hear  like 
Natbanftei,  with  a  true  Israelitish  ear ;  be  wUling  to  do  the  will 
ef  Gk»d,  and  then  you  shall,  according  to  the  promise  of  our 
dearest  Lord,  ^  know  of  the  doctrine,  whether  it  be  of  God,  or 
idnrther  I  speak  of  myself." 

I  wodd  ftnrtiier  observe,  that  if  any  here  do  expect  fine  preach- 
ing from  me  this  day,  they  will,  in  all  probability,  go  away  dis- 
«ppc4nted.  For  I  came  not  here  to  shoot  over  people's  heads; 
ml,  if  the  Lord  shall  be  pleased  to  bless  me^  to  reach  their  hearts. 


154  CUBIST  THB  BBLtBVEK'S  HUSBAND.  [XU. 

Accordingly,  I  shall  endeaTour  to  clothe  my  ideas  in  such  plain 
langaagc,  that  the  meanest  negro  or  servant,  if  God  is  pleased  to 
give  a  hearing  ear,  may  understand  me ;  for  I  am  certain,  if  the 
poor  and  unlearned  can  comprehend,  the  learned  and  rich  must 

This  being  premised,  proceed  we  to  shew  what  must  pass 
between  Jesus  Christ  and  our  souls,  before  we  can  say,  '*  our 
Maker  is  our  husband/' 

Now,  that  we  may  discourse  more  pertinently,  and  intelligibly, 
upon  this  point,  it  may  not  be  amiss  to  consider,  what  is  neces- 
sary to  be  done,  before  a  marriage  between  two  parties,  amongst 
ourselves,  can  be  said  to  be  valid  in  the  sight  of  God  and  man. 
And  that  will  lead  us,  in  a  familiar  way,  to  shew  what  must  be 
done,  or  what  must  pass  between  us  and  Jesus  Christ,  before  we 
can  say,  '*  our  Maker  is  our  husband/' 

And  First,  In  all  lawful  marriages,  it  is  absolutely  necessary 
that  the  parties  to  be  joined  together  in  that  holy  and  honour- 
able estate,  be  actually  and  legally  freed  from  all  pre-engage- 
ments  whatsoever.  **  A  woman  is  bound  to  her  husband  ^saith 
the  apostle)  so  long  as  her  husband  liveth.''  The  same  holds 
ffood  in  respect  to  the  man.  And  so  likewise,  if  either  party  be 
betrothed  and  promised,  though  not  actually  married  to  anoUieTj 
the  marriage  is  not  lawful  till  that  pre-engagement  and  promise 
be  fairly  and  mutually  dissolved.  Now,  it  is  just  thus  between 
us  and  the  Lord  Jesus.  For,  we  are  all  by  nature  born  under, 
and  wedded  to,  the  law,  as  a  covenant  of  works.  Hence  it  is 
that  we  are  so  fond  of,  and  artfully  go  about,  in  order  to  establish 
a  righteousness  of  our  own.  It  is  as  natural  for  us  to  do  this,  as 
it  is  to  breathe.  Our  first  parents,  Adam  and  Eve,  even  after 
the  covenant  of  grace  was  revealed  to  them  in  that  promise,  ''the 
seed  of  the  woman  shall  bruise  the  serpent's  head/'  reached  out 
their  hands,  and  would  again  have  taken  hold  of,  the  tree  of  lifid, 
which  they  had  forfeited,  had  not  God  driven  them  out  of  para* 
disc,  and  compelled  them,  as  it  were,  to  be  saved  by  grace.  And 
thus,  all  their  descendants  naturally  run  to,  and  want  to  be  saved, 
partly  at  least,  if  not  wholly,  by  their  works.  And  even  graci- 
ous souls,  who  are  inwardly  renewed,  so  far  as  the  old  man 
abides  in  them,  find  a  strong  propensity  this  way.  Hence  it  is 
that  natural  men  are  generally  so  fond  of  Arminian  principles. 
'*  Do  and  live,"  is  the  native  language  of  a  proud  self-rigbteoos 
lieart.  But  before  we  can  say, ''  our  maker  is  our  husband/' 
we  must  be  divorced  from  our  old  husband  the  law ;  we  roust 
renounce  our  own  righteousness,  our  own  doings  and  perfor- 
mances, in  point  of  dependence,  whether  in  whole  or  part,  as 
dung  and  dross  for  the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ 
Jesus  our  Lord.  For  thus  speaks  the  apostle  Paul  to  the  Ro- 
mans, chap.  vii.  4. ''  Ye  also  are  become  dead  to  the  law  (as  a 
covenant  of  works)  by  the  body  of  Christ,  that  ye  should  be 
married  to  another,  even  to  him  who  is  raised  from  the  dead.  As 
he  also  speaketh  in  another  place,  I  have  espoused  you  as  a 
chaste  virgin  to  Jesus  Christ."  This  was  the  apostle's  own 
4)as6b    WUlst  he  depended  on  his  being  a  Hebrew  of  the^H^- 


XII.]  GHSIST  THB  BBLIBTBR'9  HI78BAMO*  1A5 

brewB,  and  Aoaght  himself  secare^  because  as  to  the  outward 
obserration  of  the  law,  he  was  blameless,  he  was  an  entire 
Btranger  to  the  divine  life :  but  when  be  began  to  experience  the 
power  of  Jesus  Christ's  resurrection,  we  find  him,  in  his  epistle 
to  the  Philippians,  absolutely  renouncing  all  his  external  privi- 
leges, and  all  his  pharisaical  righteousness :  "  Yea,  doubtless, 
aiHl  I  count  all  things  but  loss,  nay,  but  dung,  that  I  may  win 
Chiist^andbe found  in  him»  not  having  mine  own  righteousness, 
which  is  of  the  law,  but  that  which  is  through  the  faith  of  Jesus 
Oirist,  the  righteousness  which  is  of  God  by  faith/'  And  thus 
it  must  be  with  us,  ere  we  can  truly  say, ''  our  Maker  is  our  hus- 
band.'' 

Though  we  may  not  be  wrought  upon  in  that  extraordinary 
way  in  which  the  apostle  was,  yet  we  must  be  dead  to  the  law, 
we  must  be  espoused  as  chaste  virgins  to  Jesus  Christ,  and 
count  an  external  privileges,  and  our  most  splendid  performances, 
(as  was  before  observed)  only  as  "  dung  and  dross,  for  the  ex- 
oeDency  of  the  knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord." 

But  further ;  before  a  marriage  among  us  can  stand  good  in 
law,  both  parties  must  not  only  be  freed  from  all  pre-engage- 
ments,  but  there  must  be  a  mutual  consent  on  both  sides :  we 
are  not  used  to  marry  people  against  their  wills.  This  is  what 
the  Jews  called  betrothing,  or  espousing, — a  thing  previous  to 
the  solemnity  of  marriage.  Thus  we  find,  the  Virgin  Mary  is 
said  to  be  espoused  to  Joseph,  before  they  actually  came  toge- 
ther, Matth.  i.  18.  And  thus  it  is  among  us.  Both  parties  are 
pievioiisly  agreed,  and  as  it  were  espoused  to  each  other,  before 
we  publish  what  we  call  the  bans  of  marriage  concerning  them. 
Aad  BO  it  vnll  be  in  the  spiritual  marriage,  between  Jesus 
Qmst  and  our  souls.  Before  we  are  actually  married,  or  united 
to  him  by  faith,  or,  to  keep  to  the  terms  or  the  text,  before  we 
assuredly  <^an  say,  that,  "  our  Maker  is  our  husband,"  we  must 
be  nuftde  wiUing  people  in  the  day  of  God's  power ;  we  must  be 
sweetly  and  efiectually  persuaded  by  the  holy  Spirit  of  God,  that 
the  giorioas  Emmanuel  is  willing  to  accept  of  us  just  as  we  are, 
tod  also  that  we  are  willing  to  accept  of  him  upon  his  own 
terms,  yea,  upon  any  terms.  And  when  once  it  comes  to  this, 
the  spiritual  marriage  goes  on  apace,  and  there  is  but  one  thing 
hdking  to  make  it  complete.  And  what  is  that?  An  actual  union. 

This  is  absolutely  necessary  in  every  lawful  marriage  among 
nea.  There  must  be  a  joining  of  hands  before  witnesses,  ere 
they  can  be  deemed  lawfully  joined  together.  Some  men,  indeed, 
of  corropt  minds,  are  apt  to  look  upon  this  as  a  needless  cece- 
Bony,  and  think  it  sufficient  to  be  married,  as  they  term  it,  in 
the  sight  of  God.  But  whence  men  get  such  divinity,  I  know 
not.  I  am  positive  not  from  the  Bible ;  for  we  there  read,  that 
even  at  the  first  marriage  in  Paradise,  there  was  something  of 
Oitward  solemnity :  God  himself  (if  I  may  so  speak)  being  there 
the  priest.  For  we  are  told.  Gen.  ii.  22.  that  after  God  had  made 
the  woman,  he  *'  brought  her  unto  the  man."  And  indeed,  to  lay 
aside  al^.manner  of  outward  ceremony  in  marriage,  would.be 


156  CHRIST  THE  BBLIBVBR'B  HUSBAND.  [Xll. 

to  turn  the  world  into  a  den  of  bmte  beasts*  Men  wonld  then 
take  or  forsake  as  many  wives  as  they  pleased,  and  we  should 
soon  sink  into  as  bad  and  as  bmtai  a  state  as  those  nations  are 
amongst  whom  such  practices  are  allowed  of,  and  who  are 
utterly  destitute  of  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour 
Jesus  Christ  Whoever  has  experienced  the  power  of  his  re> 
sunrection,  I  am  persuaded  will  never  plead  for  such  a  licentious 
practice.  For  the  terms  made  use  of  in  scripture,  to  represent 
the  mystical  union  between  Christ  and  his  church,  such  as  our 
being  ^^  joined  to  the  Lord/'  and  *'  married  to  Jesus  Christ/'  are 
all  metaphorical  expressions,  taken  from  some  analogous  prac- 
tices among  men.  And  as  persons  when  "  married,  though  before 
tw^in,  are  now  one  flesh :  so  those  that  are  joined  to  the  Lord, 
and  can  truly  say,  **  Our  Maker  is  our  husband,''  are,  in  the 
apostle's  language,  one  spirit.  This  was  typified  in  the  origi* 
nal  marriage  of  our  first  parents.  When  God  brought  Eve  to 
Adam,  he  received  her  with  joy  at  bis  hands,  and  said.  This  is  bone 
of  my  bone,  and  flesh  of  my  flesh.  They  had  there,  primarily^ 
but  one  name.  For  thus  speaks  the  sacred  historian.  Gen.  v. 
1,  2.  "  In  the  day  that  God  created  man,  he  blessed  them,  and 
called  their  name  Adam."  And  why  ?  because  they  were  one 
flesh,  and  were  to  have  but  one  heart.  The  self-same  terms  are 
made  use  of  in  scripture  to  express  the  believer's  union  with 
Jesus  Christ.  We  are  called  Christians  after  Christ's  name,  be* 
cause  made  partakers  of  Christ's  nature.  Out  of  his  fulness^ 
believers  receive  grace  for  grace.  And  therefore  the  marriage 
state,  especially  by  the  apostle  Paul,  is  frequently  made  use  of 
to  figure  out  to  us  the  real,  vital  union  between  Jesus  Christ 
and  regenerate  souls.  This  is  termed  by  the  apostle,  Eph.  v.  32. 
**  A  great  mystery."  But  great  as  it  is,  we  must  all  experience 
it  before  we  can  say  assuredly,  that  **  our  Maker  is  our  husband." 
For  what  says  our  Lord,  in  that  prayer  he  put  up  to  his  Father 
before  his  bitter  passion  ?  '^  Father,  I  will,  that  those  whom  thou 
hast  given  me,  shall  be  where  I  am,  that  they  may  be  one  with 
thee ;  even  as  thou,  O  Father,  and  1  are  one ;  I  in  them,  and 
they  in  me,  that  we  all  may  be  made  perfect  in  one."  O  infinite 
condescension !  O  inefial)Ie  union !  Hence  it  is  that  believers 
are  said  to  be  members  of  his  body,  of  his  flesh,  and  of  his  bones. 
Hence  it  is,  that  the  apostle,  speaking  of  himself,  says,  *'  I  live» 
yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me."  What  an  expression  is 
that  I  How  much  does  it  comprehend !  And  that  we  might  not 
think  this  was  something  peculiar  to  himself,  he  puts  this  close 
question  to  the  Corinthians ;  **  Know  ye  not,  that  Christ  is  in 
vou,  unless  ye  be  reprobates  ?"  Agreeably  to  what  he  says  in 
nis  epistle  to  the  Colossians,  **  Christ  in  you,  the  hope  of  glory." 
And  hence  it  is  that  our  church,  in  the  communion  office, 
directs  the  minister  to  acquaint  all  those  who  receive  the  sacra- 
ment worthily,  that  they  are  one  with  Christ,  and  Christ  with 
them ;  that  they  dwell  in  Christ,  and  Christ  in  them.  Words 
that  deserve  to  be  written  in  letters  of  gold,  and  which  evidently 
•hew  wliat/>iir  reformers  believed  all  pArsoos  must  experieaoey 


ZII.]  ORRIST  THI  BBUKTHR'S  RUnAHD.  Ifl7 

befkure  flmj  could  tndy  and  assuredly  say,  that  **  tlieir  Biaker  is 
fheir  husband/' 

From  what  has  been  deliTered,  may  not  the  poorest  and  most 
illiterate  person  here  present,  easily  know  whether  or  not  he  is 
really  married  to  Jesus  Christ  Some  indeed,  I  am  afraid,  are 
so  presomptnous  as  to  affirm,  at  least  to  insinuate  that  there  is 
no  sn€:h  thing  as  knowing,  or  being  fully  assured,  whilst  here 
bdow,  whether  we  are  in  Christ  or  not.  Or  at  least,  if  there  be 
such  a  thing,  it  is  Tery  rare,  or  was  only  the  priyilege  of  the  pri« 
mitiTe  bdievers.  Part  of  this  is  true,  and  part  of  this  absolutely 
false.  That  this  glorious  privilege  of  a  full  assurance  is  very 
rare,  is  too,  too  true.  And  so  it  is  equally  too  true,  that  real 
Christians,  comparatively  speaking,  are  very  rare  also.  But  that 
there  is  no  such  thing,  or  that  this  was  only  the  privil^e  d  the 
first  followers  of  our  blessed  Lord,  is  directly  opposite  to  the 
word  of  God.  **  We  know  (says  St.  John,  speaking  of  believers 
in  general)  that  we  are  his,  by  the  Spirit  which  he  hath  given  us ;" 
and  "  He  that  believetb  hath  the  witness  in  himself:"  ''Because 
you  are  sons  (saith  St.  Paul)  God  hath  sent  forth  his  Spirit  into 
your  hearts,  even  the  Spirit  of  adoption,  whereby  we  cry,  Abba, 
Father."  Not  that  I  dare  affirm,  that  there  is  no  real  Christian, 
but  what  has  this  full  assurance  of  faith,  and  clearly  knows  that 
his  Maker  is  his  husband,  in  speaking  thus,  I  should  undoubt- 
edly condemn  some  of  the  generation  of  God's  dear  children,  who 
through  the  prevalence  of  unbelief,  indwelling  sin,  spiritual  sloth, 
or,  it  may  be,  for  want  of  being  informed  of  the  privileges  of  be- 
lievera,  may  walk  in  darkness,  and  see  no  light ;  therefore,  though 
I  dare  not  affirm  that  a  fidi  assurance  of  faith  is  absolutely  ne- 
cessary for  the  very  being,  yet  I  dare  assert  that  it  is  absolutely 
ascesaary  for  the  well-being,  oi  a  Christian.  And  for  my  own  part, 
1  cannot  conceive,  how  any  persons  that  pretend  to  Christianity^ 
tan  rest  satisfied  or  contented  without  it.  This  is  stopping  short 
on  this  side  Jordan,  with  a  witness;  and  gives  others  too  much 
reason  to  suspect,  that  such  persons,  however  high  their  profes- 
sion may  be,  have,  as  yet,  no  true  saving  grace  at  all. 

Men,  whose  hearts  are  set  on  this  world's  goods,  or,  to  use 
oar  Loid's  language,  **  the  children  of  this  world,"  act  not  so.    I 
snppose  there  is  scarce  a  single  merchant  in  this  great  congrega- 
tion, especially  in  these  troublous  times,  that  will  venture  out 
either  hia  ship  or  cargo,  without  first  insuring,  both  against  the 
fiolence  of  an  enemy,  and  a  storm.  And,  I  suppose  there  is  scarce 
a  single  house^  of  any  considerable  value,  in  any  populous  town 
tr  city,  but  the  owner  has  taken  out  a  policy  from  the  fire-office, 
to  insore  it,  in  case  of  fire.    And  can  I  be  so  irrational  as  to 
tUnk,  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  securing  my  goods,  and  my 
bouse,  and  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  insuring,  what  is  infi-* 
mtdy  more  valuable,  my  precious  and  immortal  soul  1    Or,  if 
tittre  be  such  a  thing,  as  undoubtedly  there  is,  what  foolishness 
rf  fbUy  must  it  needs  be  in  men,  that  pretend  to  be  men  of  parts, 
of  good  sense,  and  of  solid  reasoning,  to  be  so  anxious  to  secure 
tbeir  ships  against  a  storm,  and  their  houses  against  a  fire,  and 


1S8  OURIBT  THB*  BBLIBVBR'S   HUSBAND;  [Xin 

at  the  same  lime^  not  to  be  unspeakably  more  solictiotis  to  take 
a  policy  out  of  the  assurance-office  of  heaven^  eyen  the  seal  and 
witness  of  the  blessed  Spirit  of  God,  to  insure  their  souls  against 
that  storm  of  divine  wrath,  and  that  yjengeance  of  etemfd  fire, 
which  will,  at  the  last  decisive  day,  come  upon  all  those  who 
know  not  God,  and  have  not  obeyed  his  gracious  gospel?  To 
affirm,  therefore,  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  knowing,  that 
'*  our  Maker  is  our  husband ;"  or  that  it  was  a  privilege  peculiar 
to  the  first  Christians ;  to  speak  in  the  mildest  terms,  is  both 
irrational  and  unscriptural.  Not  that  all  who  can  say,  their 
Maker  is  their  husband,  can  give  the  same  clear  and  distinct  ac- 
count of  the  time,  manner,  and  means,  of  their  being  spiritually 
united,  and  married,  by  faith,  to  the  blessed  bridegroom  of  the 
church.  Some  there  may  be  now,  as  well  as  formerly,  sanctified 
from  the  womb ;  and  others,  in  their  infancy  and  nonage,  as  it 
were,  silently  converted.  Such,  perhaps  may  say,  with  a  little 
Scotch  maiden,  now  with  God,  when  I  asked  her  whether  Jesu0 
Christ  had  taken  away  her  old  heart,  and  given  her  a  new  onef 
''Sir,  it  may  be,  (said  she,)  I  cannot  directly  tell  you  the  time 
and  place,  but  diis  I  know,  it  is  done."  And  indeed,  it  is  not  so 
very  material,  though  no  doubt  it  is  very  satisfactory,  if  we  can*- 
not  relate  all  the  minute  and  particular  circumstances  that 
attended  our  conversion ;  if  so  be  we  are  truly  converted  now, 
and  can  say,  the  work  is  done,  and  that  **  our  Maker  is  our  hus- 
band.*' And  I  question  whether  there  be  one  single  adult  be« 
liever  now  on  earth,  who  lived  before  conversion,  either  in  a 
course  of  secret  or  open  sin,  but  can,  in  a  good  degree,  give  an 
account  of  the  beginning  and  progress  of  the  work  of  grace  in  hit 
heart. 

What  think  ye?  Need  I  tell  any  married  persons  in  this  ooii«^ 
gregation,  that  they  must  go  to  the  university,  and  learn  thelaU'^ 
guages,  before  they  can  tell  whether  they  are  married  or  not? 
Or,  if  their  marriage  were  to  be  doubted,  could  they  not,  think 
you,  bring  their  certificates,  to  certify  the  time  and  place  of  their 
marriage ;  and  the  minister  that  joined  them  together  in  that  holy, 
state?  And  if  you  are  adult,  and  are  indeed  married  to  Jesos 
Christ,  though  you  may  be  unlearned,  and  what  the  world  tema 
illiterate  men,  cannot  you  tell  me  the  rise,  and  progress,  and  cob^ 
summation  of  the  spiritual  marriage  between  Jesus  Christ  and 
your  souls  ?  Know  you  not  the  time,  when  you  were  first  under 
the  drawings  of  the  Father,  and  Jesus  began  to  woo  you  for  him* 
self?  Tell  me,  O  man,  tell  me,  O  woman,  knowest  thou  not  the 
time,  or,  at  least,  knowest  thou  not  that  there  was  a  time,  when 
the  blessed  Spirit  of  God  stripped  thee  of  the  fig-leaves  of  thy 
ovm  righteousness,  hunted  thee  out  of.  the  trees  of  the  garden 
of  thy  performances,  forced  thee  from  the  embraces  of  thy  old 
husband,  the  law,  and  made  thee  abhor  thy  own  righteousness, 
as  so  many  filUiy  rags  ?  Canst  thou  not  remember,  when,  after 
a  long  struggle  with  unbelief,  Jesus  appeared  to  thee  as  altoge* 
ther  lovely,  mighty,  and  willing  to  save?  And  canst  thou  not 
reflect  upon  a  season,  when  thy  own  stubborn  heart  was  made  to 


XII.]  CHRIST  THI^  believer's   HUSBANDw  159 

bend ;  and  thou  wast  made  vrilling  to  embrace  him,  as  freely 
offered  to  thee  in  the  eveilasting  gospel?  And  canst  thou  not, 
with  fieasure  unspeakable^  reflect  on  some  happy  period^  some 
oertam  point  of  time^  in  which  a  sacred  something  (perhaps  thou 
cooldest  not  then  wdl  tell  what)  did  captivate  and  fill  thy  heart, 
so  that  thou  couldst  say,  in  a  rapture  of  holy  surprise,  and  ecstacy 
of  divine  love,  ''My  Lord  and  my  God  !  my  Beloved  is  mine, 
and  I  am  his ;  I  know  that  my  Redeemer  liveth ;"  or,  to  keep  to 
the  words  of  our  text, ''My  Maker  is  my  husband.''  Surely, 
amidst  this  great  and  solemn  assembly,  there  are  many  that  can 
answer  these  questions  in  the  affirmative.  For  these  are  trans- 
actions not  easily  to  be  forgotten ;  and  the  day  of  our  espousals 
ii,  generally,  a  very  remarkable  day ;  a  day  to  be  had  in  ever- 
hsting  remembrance. 

And  can  any  of  you,  indeed,  upon  good  grounds  say,  that  your 
Maker  ia  your  husband?  May  I  not  then  (as  it  is  customary  to 
wish  persons  joy  who  are  just  entered  into  the  marriage  state) 
congratulate  you  upon  your  happy  change,  and  wish  you  joy, 
with  all  my  heart?  Sure  am  I  that  there  was  joy  in  heaven  on 
the  day  of  your  espousals :  and  why  should  not  the  blessed  news 
occasion  joy  on  earth?  May  I  not  address  you  in  the  language 
of  our  Iiord  to  the  women  that  came  to  visit  his  sepulchre,  "  jQl 
hail !"  for  ye  are  highly  favoured.  Blessed  are  ye  among  men, 
Uessed  are  ye  among  women !  All  generations  shall  csSl  you 
blessed.  What!  ''is  your  Maker  your  husband!  the  hol^  One 
of  Israel  your  Redeemer?"  Sing»  O  heavens,  and  rejoice,  O 
earth !  What  an  amazing  stoop  is  this !  What  a  new  thing  has 
God  created  on  the  earth !  Do  not  your  hearts,  O  believers, 
bom  within  you,  when  meditating  on  this  unspeakable  conde- 
Rcensiofi  of  the  high  and  lofty  One  that  inhabiteth  eternity  ? 
Whilst  yoa  are  musing,  does  not  the  sacred  fire  of  divine  love 
kindle  in  your  souls?  And,  out  of  the  abundance  of  your  hearts^ 
do  you  not  often  speak  with  your  tongues,  and  call  upon  all  that 
is  within  you,  to  laud  and  magnify  your  Redeemer's  holy  name? 
If  not  that  God  exalting,  self-abasing  expression  frequently  in 
yoor  Boatfas,  ^' Why  me.  Lord,  why  me?"  And  are  you  not  often 
ooDstrained  to  break  out  into  that  devout  exclamation  of  Solo- 
Bon,  when  the  glory  of  the  Lord  filled  the  temple,  ''And  will 
God  indeed  dwell  with  man?"  ungrateful,  rebellious,  ill  and  hell 
doierving  man !  O  my  brethren,  my  heart  is  enlarged  towards 
yoo!  Tears,  while  I  am  speaking,  are  ready  to  gush  out.  But 
they  are  tears  of  love  and  joy.  How  shall  I  give  it  vent?  How; 
shall  I  set  forth  thy  happiness,  O  believer,  thou  bride  of  God  ! 
And  is  thy  Maker  thy  husband  ?  Is  his  name,  "  The  Lord  of 
hosts?" — whom  then  shouldst  thou  fear?  And  is  thy  Redeemer 
the  holy  One  of  Israel?  the  God  of  the  whole  earth  should  he  be 
called  1  of  whom  then  shouldst  thou  be  afraid  ?  He  that  toucheth 
thee,  toucheth  the  very  apple  of  God's  eye.  '^  The  very  hairs  of 
thy  head  are  all  nnmbered ;"  and  *^  it  is  better  that  a  man  should 
have  a  millstone  tied  round  his  neck,  and  be  drowned  in  the  sea^ 
than  thai  he  should  justly  offend  thee." 


IGO  CHBIST  THE  BEJLIRVSR*d  BUSBAKD.  [Xlf. 

An  bail,  (I  must  again  repeat ity)thoa  Lamb's  bride!  For 
thou  art  all  glorious  within,  and  comely,  throagh  the  comdinasa 
thy  heavenly  bridegroom  hath  put  upon  thee.  Thy  garment  is 
indeed  of  wrought  gold ;  and,  erelong,  the  King  shall  bring  thee 
forth  with  a  raiment  of  needle- work,  and  present  thee  blame- 
less before  his  Father  without  spot,  or  wrinkle,  or  any  sudi 
thing.  In  the  mean  while,  well  shall  it  be  with  you,  and  happy 
shall  you  be,  who  are  married  to  Jesus  Christ ;  for  all  that 
Christ  has,  is  yours.  '^  He  is  made  of  Ood  to  you,  wisdom, 
righteousness,  sanctification,  and  eternal  redemption.*'  '' Whe- 
ther Paul,  or  Cephas,  or  the  world,  or  life,  or  death,  or  things 
present,  or  things  to  come ;  all  are  yours.''  All  bis  attributes 
are  engaged  for  your  preservation,  and  all  things  shall  work  toge- 
ther for  your  good,  who  love  God,  and,  by  being  thus  married 
to  the  Ijord  Jesus,  give  an  evident  proof  that  you  are  called 
according  to  his  purpose.  What  say  you?  When  yon  meditate 
on  these  things,  are  you  not  frequently  ready  to  cry  out.  What 
shall  we  render  unto  the  Lord  for  all  these  mercies,  which,  of 
his  free  unmerited  grace,  he  hath  been  pleased  to  bestow  upon 
us?  For,  though  you  are  dead  to  the  law,  as  a  covenant  of 
works,  yet  you  are  alive  to  the  law,  as  a  rule  of  life,  and  are  in, 
or  under  the  law,  (for  either  expresssion  seems  to  denote  the 
same  thing,)  to  your  glorious  hustmnd  Jesus  Christ 

Pass  we  on  therefore  to  the 

Second  general  head,  under  which  I  was  to  shew,  what  duties 
of  love  they  owe  to  Jesus  Christ,  who  are  so  happy  as  to  be  able 
to  say,  **  My  Maker  is  my  husband." 

I  say,  duties  of  love.  For  being  now  married  to  Jesus  Christ, 
you  work  not  for  life,  but  from  life.  The  loTe  of  God  constrains 
you,  so  that,  if  there  were  no  written  law,  or  supposing  Jesos 
would  set  you  at  liberty  from  his  yoke,  so  far  as  grace  prevails 
in  your  hearts,  you  would  say.  We  love  our  blessed  teidegroomy 
and  will  not  go  from  him. 

And  what  does  the  Lord  require  of  you  ?  That  we  may  speak 
on  this  head  as  plainly  as  may  be,  Ve  shall  pursue  the  method 
we  begun  with ;  and  by  carrying  on  the  allegory,  and  examining 
what  is  required  of  truly  Christian  wives  under  the  gospel,  infer 
what  our  Lord  may  justly  demand  of  those  who  are  united 
to  him  by  faith,  and  can  therefore  say  **  our  Maker  is  our  ims* 
band." 

And  here  let  us  go  to  the  law  and  to  the  testimony.  What 
says  the  scripture?  ^Let  the  wifb  see  that  she  reveroice  her 
husband."  It  is,  no  doubt,  the  duty  of  married  women  to  think 
highly  of  their  husbands.  From  whom  may  husbands  justly 
command  respect,  if  not  from  their  wives?  The  iq[H>stIe's  ex- 
pression is  emphaticaL  ^^  Let  the  wife  see  that  she  reverence 
her  husband ;"  thereby  implying,  that  women,  some  of  them  at 
least,  are  too  prone  to  disrespect  their  husbands:  as  Midud, 
Saul's  daughter,  despised  David  in  her  heart,  when  she  taunt- 
ingly said,  2  Sam.  vi.  20.  "How  glorious  was  the  king  of 
Israel  to-day,  who  uncovered  himself  to-day  in  the  eycyi  of  tUc 


Xll.j  CHRIST  THE   BELIRYBR*8   HUSBAND^  1^ 

handmaidsof  his  servants,  as  one  of  the  vain  fellows  shame- 
lessly nncoYereth  himself." 

l^is  is  a  source  and  fonntaift  from  whence  many  domestic 
evils  frequently  flow.  Women  should  remember  the  character 
that  husbands  sustain  in  scripture.  They  are  to  them  what 
Christ  is  to  the  church.  And  it  is  mentioned  to  the  honour  of 
Saiab,  that  she  called  Abraham  ''  lord."  <'  Shall  I  have  a  child 
who  am  old,  my  lord  being  old  also  ?"  It  is  remarkable,  there 
are  but  two  good  words  in  that  whole  sentence,  "  my  lord,"  (for 
all  the  others  are  the  language  of  unbelief)  and  yet  those  two 
words  the  Holy  Ghost  mentions  to  her  eternal  honour,  and 
bofies  as  it  were,  the  rest  in  oblivion.  *'  Even  as  Sarah  (says  St. 
Peter)  obeyed  Abraham,  calling  him  lord."  An  evident  proof, 
how  jdeasing  it  is  in  the  sight  of  God,  for  women  in  the  married 
state  to  reverence  and  respect  their  husbands.  Not  that  hus- 
bands, therefore,  should  lord  it  over  their  wives,  or  require  too 
Brach  respect  at  their  hands.  This  would  be  unchristian,  as  well 
as  ungenerous,  indeed.  They  ought  rather,  as  God  has  taken 
such  caro  to  keep  up  their  authority,  commanding  their  wives  to 
reverence  and  respect  them ;  they  ought,  I  say,  to  be  doubly 
careful,  that  they  live  so  holy  and  unblameably,  as  to  lay  their 
wives  under  no  temptation  to  despise  them.  But  to  return  from 
this  digression.  Does  the  apostle  say, ''  Let  the  wife  see  that 
she  reverence  her  husband?"  May  L  not  pertinently  apply  this 
caution  to  you,  who  are  married  to  Jesus  Christ?  See  to  it  that 
jou  reverence  and  respect  your  husband.  I  say,  see  to  it.  For 
the  devil  will  be  oi'ten  suggesting  to  you  hard  and  mean  thoughts 
against  your  husband.  It  was  thus  he  beset  our  mother  Eve, 
eren  in  a  state  of  innocence.  He  would  fain  persuade  her  to 
entertain  bard  thoughts  of  her  glorious  benefactor.  **  What,  has 
God  said,  ye  shall  not  eat  of  jthe  trees  of  the  garden?  Has  he 
been  so  cruel,  to  put  you  here  in  a  l)eautiful  garden,  only  to  vex 
and  teaze  you?'*  This  he  made  use  of  as  an  inlet  to  all  his  suc- 
ceeding insinuations.  And  this  trade  he  is  still  pursuing,  and 
will  be  pursuing,  to  the  very  end  of  time.  Besides,  in  the  eyes 
of  the  world,  Jesus  Christ  has  no  form  or  comeliness  that  they 
ikould  desire  him  ;  and  therefore,  unless  you  ''  watch  and  pray," 
you  will  be  led  into  temptation,  and  not  keep  up  such  high 
thoagbtsof  your  blessed  Jesus  as  he  justly  deserves.  In  this  you 
can  never  exceed.  Women,  perhaps,  may  sometimes  think  too 
Ugbly  of,  and,  through  excess  of  love,  idolize  their  earthly  com- 
forts. But  it  is  impossible  tor  you  to  think  too  highly  of  your 
heavenly  husband,  Jesus  Christ. 

Farther,;  what  says  the  apostle  in  his  epistle  to  the  Ephesians? 
Speaking  of  the  marriage  state,  he  says,  **  The  wife  is  the  glory 
of  her  husband;"  as  though  he  had  said,  a  Christian  wife  should 
so  behave,  and  so  walk,  as  to  be  a  credit  to  her  husband.  As 
Abigail  was  an  honour  toNabal,  and  by  Iver  sweet  deportment 
made  up^  in  some  degree,  for  her  husband's  churlishness.  This 
is  to  be  a  heip-meet  indeed.  Such  a  woman  will  be  praised  in- 
the  gate;  and  her  husband  get  glory,  and  meet  with  respect,  on 


162  CHRIST   THE   BELISVER'S   HUSBAND.  [XII. 

her  account.  And  ought  a  woman  to  be  the  glory  of  her  husband ; 
how.  much  more  ought  you^  that  are  the  Lamb's  bride,  so  to  live, 
and  so  to  walk,  as  to  bring  gl^ry,  and  gain  respect,  to  the  cause 
and  interest  of  your  husband  Jesus?  This  is  what  the  apostle 
every  where  supposes,  when  he  would  draw  a  parallel  between 
a  "  temporal  and  spiritual  marriage."  •'  The  woman  is  the  glory 
of  her  husband,  even  as  the  church  is  the  glory  of  Christ."  Agree- 
able to  this,  he  tells  the  Corinthians,  "  Whether  you  eat  or  drink, 
or  whatsoever  you  do,  do  all  to  the  glory  of  God ;"  and  as  he 
also  speaks  to  the  Thessalonians,  1  Thess.  ii.  11,  12.  ''As 
you  know  how  we  exhorted,  and  comforted,  and  charged  every 
one  of  you,  (as  a  father  doth  his  children,)  that  you  would  walk 
worthy  of  God,  who  hath  called  you  to  his  kingdom,  and  his 
glory."  What  an  expression  is  here !  •*  That  you  should  walk 
worthy  of  God."  O !  how  ought  this,  and  such  like  texts,  to  stir 
up  your  pure  minds,  O  believers,  so  to  have  your  conversation 
in  this  world,  that  you  may  be,  what  the  apostle  says  some  par- 
ticular persons  were,  even  "  the  glory  of  Christ."  You  are  hb 
glory ;  he  rejoices  over  you  with  singing :  and  you  should  so  walk, 
that  all  who  know  and  hear  of  you,  may  glorify  Christ  in  you. 

Subjection,  is  another  duty,  that  is  enjoined  married  women, 
in  the  word  of  God.  They  are  to  "  be  subject  to  their  own  hus- 
bands in  every  thing,"  every  lawful  thing :  "  For,  the  husband  is 
the  head  of  the  wife,  even  as  Christ  is  the  head  of  the  church." 
And  knowing  how  unapt  some  base  minds  would  be  to  submit  to 
the  husband's  authority,  he  takes  care  to  enforce  this  duty  of 
subjection  by  many  cogent  and  powerful  arguments.  "  For  Adam 
was  first  made,  and  not  Eve.  Neither  was  the  man  made  for 
the  woman,  but  the  woman  for  the  man."  And  again,  '*  The 
man  was  not  first  in  the  transgression,  but  the  woman."  Upon 
which  accounts,  subjection  was  imposed  on  her  as  a  part  of  her 
punishment.  ''Thy  desire  (says  God)  shall  be  to  thy  husband, 
and  he  shall  rule  (though  not  tyrannize)  over  thee."  So  that,  to 
use  the  words  of  pious  Mr.  Henry,  those  who  attempt  to  usurp 
authority  over  their  husbands,  not  only  contradict  a  divine  com- 
mand, but  thwart  a  divine  curse.  And  if  women  are  to  be  sub- 
ject to  their  own  husbands  in  every  thing,  how  much  more  ought 
believers,  whether  men  or  women,  to  be  subject  to  Jesus  Christ: 
for  he  is  the  head  of  the  church.  He  has  bought  her  by  his  blood. 
Believers  therefore  are  not  their  own,  but  are  under  the  highest 
obligations  to  glorify  and  obey  Jesus  Christ,  in  their  bodies  and 
their  souls,  which  are  his.  Add  to  this,  that  his  service,  as  it  is 
admirably  expressed  in  one  of  our  collects,  is  perfect  freedom. 
His  commandments  holy,  just,  and  good.  And  therefore  it  is 
your  highest  privilege,  O  believers,  to  submit  to,  and  obey  them. 
Earthly  husbands  may  be  so  mean  as  to  impose  some  things  up- 
on their  wives,  merely  to  shew  their  authority :  but  it  is  not  so 
with  Jesus  Christ.  He  can,  and  does  impose  nothing,  but  what 
immediately  conduces  to  our  present,  as  well  as  future  good. 
In  doing,  nay,  in  suflfering  for  Jesus  Christ,  there  is  a  present, 
unspeakable  reward.    And  therefore,  I  may  say  to  believers,  as 


Xlf.]  CHRIST  TH£   BELIEVER'S   HUSBAND.  163 

the  blessed  Virgin  said  to  the  servants  at  the  marriage  in  Cana, 
•'  Whatsoever  he  says  unto  you,  do  it."  "  For  his  yoke  is  easy, 
and  his  burden  is  light/'  And  I  believe  it  might  easily  be  proved, 
in  a  few  minutes,  that  all  the  disorders  which  are  now  in  the 
world,  whether  in  church  or  state,  are  owing  to  a  want  of  being 
universally,  unanimously,  cheerfully,  and  perseveringly  conformed 
to  the  laws  and  example  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ. 

Again,  Faithfulness,  in  the  marriage  state,  is  strictly  enjoined 
in  the  scriptures  of  truth.     **  Marriage  is  honourable  in  all,  and 
the  bed  undefiled :  but  whoremongers  and  adulterers  God  will 
judge."     Nay,  adultery  is  an  iniquity  to  be  punished  by  the 
earthly  judges ;  it  dissolves  the  marriage  relation.  '^  For  the  man 
has  not  power  over  his  own  body,  but  the  woman ;  neither  has 
the  woman  power  over  her  own  body,  but  the  man."    The  hea- 
thens themselves  have  been  taught  this  by  the  light  of  nature ; 
and  adultery,  among  some  of  them,  is  punished  with  immediate 
death.     And  ought  married  persons  to  be  thus  careful  to  keep 
the  marriage-bed  undefiled,  how  carefully  then  ought  believers 
to  keep  their  souls  chaste,  pure,  and  undefiled,  now  they  are 
espoused  to  Jesus  Christ?  For  there  is  such  a  thing  as  spiritual 
adultery;  ''O  ye  adulterers  and  adulteresses,"  saith  St.  James. 
And  God  frequently  complains  of  his  people's  playing  the  harlot. 
Hence  it  is,  that  St.  John,  in  the  most  endearing  manner,  exhorts 
believers  to  **  keep  themselves  from  idols."    For  the  lust  of  the 
eye,  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  and  pride  of  life,  are  always  ready  to 
steal  away  our  hearts  from  Jesus  Christ.    And  every  time  we 
place  our  affections  upon  any  thing  more  than  Christ,  we  do  un- 
doubtedly commit  spiritual  adultery.     For  we  admit  a  creature 
to  rival  the  Creator,  who  is  God  over  all,  blessed  for  evermore. 
**  Little  children,  therefore,  keep  yourselves  from  idols." 

But  it  is  time  for  me  to  draw  towards  the  close  of  this  head. 
Fruitfulness  was  a  blessing  promised  by  God  to  the  first  happy 
pair;  "  Increase  and  multiply,  and  replenish  the  earth."  "  Lo, 
children,  and  the  fruit  of  the  womb,  (says  the  Psalmist)  are  a 
gfift  and  heritage  which  cometh  of  the  Lord."  And  so,  if  we 
are  married  to  Jesus  Christ,  we  must  be  fruitful.  In  what?  In 
erery  good  word  and  work :  for  thus  speaks  the  apostle,  in  his 
epistle  to  the  Romans :  "  Wherefore,  my  brethren,  ye  also  are 
become  dead  to  the  law,  by  the  body  of  Christ,  that  ye  should  be 
married  to  another,  even  to  him  who  is  raised  from  the  dead. 
What  follows?  "  That  wc  should  bring  forth  fruit  unto  God. 
Glorious  words,  and  proper  to  be  considered  in  a  peculiar  man- 
ner, by  such  who  would  explode  the  doctrine  of  free  justification, 
as  an  antinomian  doctrine,  and  as  though  it  destroyed  good 
works.  No ;  it  establishes,  and  lays  a  solid  foundation,  whereon 
to  build  the  superstructure  of  good  works.  Titus  is  therefore 
commanded  to  **  exhort  believers  to  be  careful  to  maintain  good 
works."  And  "  herein  (says  our  Lord)  is  my  Father  glorified,  that 
ye  bring  forth  much  fruit.  Let  your  light  so  shine  before  men, 
that  they  may  see  your  good  works,  and  glorify  your  Father  which 
is  in  heaven ;''  with  a  multitude  of  passages  to  the  same  purpose. 

k2 


9* 
9t 


Iftl  CHRIST   THB   BELIEVER'S   HUSBAND.  [Xll. 

Moreover  it  is  required  of  wiyes^  that  they  not  only  love  and 
reverence  their  husbands^  but  that  they  also  love  and  respect 
their  husbands'  friends.  And  if  we  be  married  to  Jesus  Christ, 
we  shall  not  only  reverence  the  bridegroom,  but  we  shall  also  love 
and  honour  the  bridegroom*s  friends.  ''  By  this  shall  aU  men 
know  that  ye  are  my  disciples,  if  ye  love  one  another."  "  By 
this  we  know,  (says  the  beloved  disciple,)  that  we  have  passed 
from  death  to  life,  because  we  love  the  brethren."  Observe, 
the  brethren  indefinitely,  of  whatever  denomination.  And  this 
love  must  be  without  dissimulation,  and  with  "a  pure  heart  fer- 
vently." This  was  the  case  of  the  primitive  Christians.  They 
were  all  of  one  heart,  and  of  one  mind.  It  was  said  of  them,  (O 
that  it  could  be  said  of  us  !)  ''  See  how  these  Christians  love  one 
another!"  They  were  of  the  same  spirit,  as  a  good  woman  of 
Scotland  was,  who,  when  she  saw  a  great  multitude,  as  is  cus- 
tomary in  that  country,  coming  from  various  parts  to  receive 
tlie  blessed  sacrament,  saluted  them  with  a  **  Come  in,  ye  blessed 
of  the  Lord,  I  have  an  house  that  will  hold  an  hundred  of  you, 
and  a  heart  that  will  hold  ten  thousand."  Let  us  go  and  do 
likewise. 

Once  more.  Persons  that  are  married,  take  one  another  for 
better  or  for  worse,  for  richer  or  for  poorer,  to  love  and  to  cherish 
each  other,  in  sickness  and  in  health.  And  if  we  are  married  to 
Jesus  Christ,  wo  shall  be  willing  to  bear  his  cross,  as  well  as  to 
wear  his  crown.  "  if  any  man  will  come  after  me,  let  him  deny 
himself,  take  up  his  cross,  and  follow  me."  Neither  will  they 
be  compelled  to  do  this,  as  Simon  of  Cyrene  was,  but  they  wiU 
be  volunteers  in  his  service  ;  they  will  cry  out.  Crown  him,  crown 
him,  when  others  arc  crying  out,  "Crucify  him,  crucify  him." 
They  will  never  leave  or  forsake  him,  but  willingly  follow 
the  Captain  of  their  salvation,  though  it  be  through  a  sea  of 
blood. 

I  might  run  the  parallel  still  further,  and  also  enlarge  upon 
the  hints  already  given ;  but  I  fear  I  have  said  enough  already 
to  reproach  most  believers ;  I  am  sure  I  have  said  more  than 
enough  to  abash  and  upbraid  myself.  For,  alas!  how  vilely, 
treacherously,  and  ungratefully,  have  we  behaved  towards  our 
spiritual  husband,  the  dear  Lord  Jesus,  ever  since  the  day  of 
our  cspousfils  ?  Had  our  friends,  or  even  the  wives  of  our  own 
bosoms,  behaved  to  tis,  as  we  have  behaved  to  our  great  and 
best  friend,  our  glorious  Husband,  we  should  have  broken  off  our 
friendship,  and  sued  for  a  bill  of  divorcement  long  ago.  Under 
our  first  love,  what  promises  did  we  make  to  him  !  But  how  fro- 
wardly  have  we  behaved  ourselves  in  this  covenant !  How  little 
have  we  reverenced  him !  How  often  has  our  Beloved  been  no  more 
to  us  than  another  beloved  !  How  little  have  we  lived  to  his  glory ! 
Have  we  not  been  a  shame  and  reproach  to  his  gospel,  have  we 
not  crucified  him  afresh,  and  has  he  not  been  sorely  wounded 
in  the  house  of  his  friends?  ^lay,  has  not  his  holy  name  been 
blasphemed  throug  hour  means  ?  For,  alas !  how  little  have  we 
obeyed  him  1  How  careless  and  indiflerent  have  we  been  whether 


XII.]  CHRIST   TIJK    BFLIEVEK^S    HUSBAND.  165 

we  pleased  bim  or  not?  We  have  often  said,  indeed,  when  com- 
manded by  Iiim  to  go  work  in  his  vineyard.  We  go,  Lord^  but 
alas !  we  went  not.     Or  if  we  did  go,  with  what  reluctance  has  it 
been?  llow  unwilling  to  watch  with  our  dear  Lord  and  Master 
only  one  hour  ?  And  of  his  sabbaths,  how  often  have  we  said, 
what  a  weariness  is  this !  As  for  our  adulteries  and  spiritual 
fornications,  how  frequent,  how  aggravated  have  they  been  1 
Have  not  idols  of  all  sorts,  been  suflbred  to  fill  up  the  room  of  the 
ever-blessed  Jesus  in  our  hearts  ?  You  that  love  him  in  sincerity, 
will  not  be  offended  if  I  tell  you,  that  the  16th  chapter  of  Eze* 
kiel  gives,  in  my  opinion,  a  lively  descripticm  of  our  behaviour 
towards  our  Lord.     We  were,  like  base-bom  children,  cast  out 
io  the  field  to  the  loathicg  of  our  persons  :  no  eye  pitied,  or  had 
compassion  on  us.  Jesus  passed  by,  saw  us  polluted  in  our  own 
.  bloody  and  said  unto  us,  **  Live,"  that  is,  preserved  us  even  in 
our  natural  state  from  death.     And  when  his  time  of  love  was 
come,  he  spread  the  skirt  of  his  imputed  righteousness  over  us, 
and  covered  the  nakedness  of  our  souls,  entered  into  covenant 
with  ns,  and  we  became  his.     lie  washed  us  also  with  water, 
even  in  the  laver  of  regeneration,  and  thoroughly  washed  us  by 
his  precions  blood  from  the  guilt  of  all  our  sins.     He  clothed 
08  also  with  broidered  work,  and  decked  us  with  ornaments, 
even  with  righteousness,  and  peace,  and  joy  with  the  Holy  Ghost. 
We  did  eat  fine  fiour  and  honey  at  his  ordinances,  and  we  fed 
on  Jesus  Christ  in  our  hearts  by  faith,  with  thanksgiving.     In 
short  we  were  made  exceedingly  beautiful,  and  the  kingdom  of 
God  was  erected  in  our  hearts.     We  were  renowned  among  our 
neighbours  for  our  love  to  God,  and  all  that  knew  us  took  know- 
ledge of  us,  that  we  had  been  with  Jesus.     But,  alas  !  how  have 
we  fiillen,  who  were  once  sons  of  the  morning !  How  have  we 
tnisted  in  our  own  beauty,  have  grown  spiritually  proud,  and 
provoked  our  patient  and  unspeakably  long-suffering  Lord  to 
anger !  Where  is  that  ardent  love  we  spake  of,  when  we  told 
him,  tbat,  though  we  should  die  for  him,  we  would  not  deny  him 
in  any  wise?  How  desperately  wicked  and  deceitful  above  all 
things  hays  we  proved  our  hearts  to  be,  since  we  have  done  all 
these  things,  even  the  work  of  an  imperious  woman  ?  These  are 
peat  and  numerous  charges ;  but  great  and  numerous  as  they 
are,  there  is  not  a  single  believer  here  present,  but,  if  he  knows 
his  own  heart,  may  plead  guilty  to  some,  or  all  of  them.     But 
this  is  a  tender  point :  I  see  you  concerned :  your  tears,  O  be- 
lievers, are  a  proof  of  the  anguish  of  your  souls.     And  can  any 
of  us  give  any  reason,  why  Jesus  Christ  should  not  give  us  a 
bill  of  divorcement,  and  put  us  away  f  May  he  iiot  justly  speak 
to  us  as  he  did  to  his  adultress  Israel,  in  the  forementioned 
16th  of  Ezekiel,  **  Wherefore,  O  harlot,  hear  the  word  of  the 
Lord;  I  will  judge  thee  as  women  that  break  wedlock  and  shed 
blood,  are  judged.     I  will  give  thee  blood  in  fury  and  jealousy, 
because  thou  hast  not  remembered  the  days  of  thy  youth,  but 
has  firetted  me  in  all  these  things.     Behold,  therefore,  1  also  will 
teoompense  thy  way  upon  thy  head.    I  will  even  deal  with  thee 


1G6  CHRIST   THE    BBLIBVBR'S    HUSBAND  [Xfl. 

as  thou  hast  done  who  hast  despised  the  oath^  in  breaking  the 
covenant,  the  marriage  contract  that  was  between  us."  This  I 
am  persuaded,  you  will  confess  to  be  the  treatment  which  we 
all  most  justly  deserve.  But  be  not  overwhelmed  with  over- 
much sorrow :  for  though  the  Lord  our  God  is  a  jealous  God, 
and  will  certainly  visit  our  oflfences  with  a  rod,  and  our  back- 
slidings  with  a  spiritual  scourge,  yet  his  loving-kindness  will  he 
not  utterly  take  from  us,  nor  suffer  his  truth  to  fail.  Though  we 
have  changed,  yet  he  changeth  not :  He  abideth  faithful ;  his 
loving-kindness  abideth  for  evermore.  Hark  !  how  sweetly  he 
speaks  to  his  backsliding  people  of  old  ;  **  O  Israel,  thou  hast 
destroyed  thyself,  but  in  me  is  thy  help.  I  will  heal  their  back- 
sliding, and  love  them  freely."  And  in  the  verses  immediately 
following  the  words  of  the  text,  how  comfortably  does  he  address 
his  espoused  people !  'Mn  a  little  wrath  I  hid  my  face  from  thee 
for  a  moment ;  but  with  everlasting  kindness  will  I  have  mercy 
on  thee,  saith  the  Lord  thy  Redeemer.  For  this  is  as  the  waters 
of  Noah  unto  me :  For  as  I  have  sworn,  that  the  waters  of  Noah 
should  no  more  go  over  the  earth  ;  so  have  I  sworn  that  I  would 
not  be  wroth  with  thee,  nor  rebuke  thee.  For  the  mountains 
shall  depart,  and  the  hills  be  removed,  but  my  kindness  shall 
not  depart  from  thee,  neither  shall  the  covenant  of  my  peace  be 
removed,  saith  the  Lord  that  hath  mercy  on  thee."  O  that  this 
goodness  may  lead  us  to  repentance !  O  that  this  unparalleled 
infinite,  unchangeable  love  may  constrain  us  to  an  universal, 
uniform,  cheerful,  unanimous,  persevering  obedience  to  all  the 
commands  of  God ! 

Brethren,  my  heart  is  enlarged  towards  you,  and  I  could 
dwell  a  long  while  upon  the  many  great  and  precious  invitations 
made  to  backsliders,  to  return  to  their  first  love,  and  do  their 
first  works :  but  it  is  high  time  for  me,  if,  as  was  proposed, 

III.  I  give  10  every  one  their  proper  portion  ;  to  speak  to  those 
poor  souls  who  know  nothing  of  this  blessed  bridegroom  of  the 
church,  and  consequently  cannot  yet  say,  **  My  Maker  is  my  bus^ 
band." — Ah  !  I  pity  you  from  my  inmost  soul ;  I  could  weep  over, 
and  foryou,  though  you  will  not  perhaps  weep  for  yourselves.  But 
surely  you  would  weep  and  howl  too,  did  you  know  the  misera- 
ble condition  those  are  in,  who  are  not  married  to  Jesus  Christ 
Will  you  give  me  leave  (I  think  I  speak  it  in  much  love)  to  inform 
you,  that  if  you  are  not  married  to  Jesus  Christ,  you  are  mar- 
ried to  the  law,  the  world,  the  flesh  and  the  devil,  neither  of 
which  can  make  you  happy  ;  but  all,  on  the  contrary,  concur  to 
make  you  miserable.  Hear  ye  not,  ye  that  are  married  to  the 
law,  and  seek  to  be  justified  in  the  sight  of  God,  partly  at  least. 
If  not  wholly,  by  your  own  works,  what  the  law  saith  to  those 
that  are  under  it,  as  a  covenant  of  works  ;  "  Cursed  is  every 
one  that  continueth  not  in  all  things  that  are  written  in  the 
book  of  the  law,  to  do  them."  Every  word  breathes  threatening 
and  slaughter  to  poor  fallen  creatures.  Cursed  both  here  and 
hereafter,  be  this  man,  and  every  one,  naturally  engendered  of 
the  offspring  of  Adam,  without  exception,  that  continuetli  not. 


.211.}  CHRIST  THB   BBLIEVBR'S   HUSBAND.  167 

even  to  the  very  end  of  life,  in  all  things ;  not  only  in  some,  or 
many,  but  in  all  things^  that  are  written  in  the  book  of  the  law, 
to  do  them,  in  the  utmost  perfection :  for  **  he  that  offendetb  in 
one  point,  is  guilty  of  all."  So  that,  according  to  the  tenor  of 
the  covenant  of  works,  whosoever  is  guilty  of  one  wicked 
thought,  word,  or  action,  is  under  the  curse  of  an  angry,  sin- 
avenging  Grod.  *^  For  as  many  as  are  under  the  law,  are  under 
the  curse."  And  do  you  know  what  it  is  to  be  under  the  curse 
of  God,  and  to  have  the  wrath  of  God  abide  upon  yon?  If  you 
did,  I  believe  yon  would  not  be  so  unwilling  to  be  divorced  from 
the  law,  and  be  espoused,  as  chaste  virgins,  to  Jesus  Christ. 

And  why  are  ye  so  wedded  to  the  world  ?  Did  it  ever  prove 
faithful  or  satisfactory  to  any  of  its  votaries?  Has  not  Solomon 
reckoned  up  the  sum  total  of  worldly  happiness  ?  And  what  does 
it  amount  to?  "  Vanity,  vanity,  saith  the  preacher,  ail  is  vani- 
ty," nay,  he  adds,  "  and  vexation  of  spirit."  And  has  not  a 
greater  than  Solomon  informed  us,  that  a  man's  life,  the  happi- 
ness of  a  man's  life,  doth  not  consist  in  the  things  which  he  pos- 
sesseth?  Besides,  "  know  ye  not  that  the  friendship  of  this  world 
is  enmity  with  God ;  so  that  whosoever  will  be  a  friend  to  the 
world,  (to  the  corrupt  customs  and  vices  of  it,)  is  an  enemy  to 
Crod  V  And  what  better  reasons  can  you  give  for  being  wedded 
to  your  lusts?  Might  not  the  poor  slaves  in  the  galleys,  as  rea- 
sonably be  wedded  to  their  chains-?  For  do  not  your  lusts  fetter 
down  your  souls  from  God?  Do  they  not  lord  it,  and  have  they 
not  dominion  over  you?  Do  not  they  say.  Come,  and  ye  come; 
Go,  and  ye  go;  Do  this,  and  ye  do  it?  And  is  not  he  or  she  that 
liveth  in  pleasure,  dead,  whilst  he  liveth  ?  And  above  all,  how 
can  ye  bear  the  thoughts  of  being  wedded  to  the  devil,  as  every 
natural  man  is :  for  thus  speaks  the  scripture,  *'  He  now  ruleth 
in  the  children  of  disobedience*"  And  how  can  you  bear  to  be 
ruled  by  one,  who  is  such  a  professed,  open  enemy,  to  the  most 
high  and  holy  God?  who  will  make  a  drudge  of  you  whilst 
you  live,  and  be  your  companion  in  endless  and  extreme  torment, 
after  you  are  dead.  For  thus  will  our  Lord  say  to  those  on  the 
left  hand,  **  Depart  from  me,  ye  cursed,  into  everlasting  fire, 
prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels."    But, 

IV.  Will  you  permit  me,  O  sinners,  that  I  may  draw  towards 
a  close  of  this  discourse,  to  propose  a  better  match  to  your  souls. 
This  is  a  part  of  the  discourse  which  I  long  to  come  to,  it  being 
my  heart's  desire,  and  earnest  prayer  to  God,  that  your  souls 
may  be  saved.  "  And  now,  O  Lord  God  Almighty,  thou  Father 
of  mercies,  and  God  of  all  consolation,  thou  God  and  Father  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  hast  promised  to  give  thy  Son  the 
heathen  for  his  inheritance,  and  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth 
for  his  possession,  send  me  good  speed  this  day ;  O  Lord,  send 
me  now  prosperity.  Behold,  I  stand  here  without  the  camp, 
bearing  a  little  of  thy  dear  Son's  sacred  reproach !  Hear  me,  O 
Lord,  hear  me,  and  according  to  thy  word,  let  thy  dear,  thine 
only  begotten  Son,  see  of  the  travail  of  his  soul,  and  be  satisfied? 
0  help  me  so  to  speak,  that  many  may  believe  on,  and  cleave 
unto,  thy  blessed^  thy  holy  child,  Jesus."  ^ 


16B  CHRIST   THE   fiBLlBVER's   HUSBAND.  [XII. 

Bnt  who  am  I,  that  I  shoald  undertake  to  recommend  the 
blessed  Jesus  to  others^  who  am  myself  altogether  unworthy  to 
take  his  sacred  name  into  my  polluted  lips?  ludeed^  my  bre- 
thren^  I  do  not  count  myself  worthy  of  such  an  honour;  but  since 
it  has  pleased  him,  in  whom  all  fulness  dwells,  to  count  me  wor- 
thy, and  put  me  into  the  ministry,  the  very  stones  would  cry  out 
against  me,  did  I  not  attempt,  at  least,  to  lisp  out  his  praise,  and 
earnestly  recommend  the  ever-blessed  Jesus,  to  the  choice  of  all. 

Thus  Abraham's  faithful  servant  behaved,  when  sent  out  to 
fetch  a  wife  for  his  master  Isaac.  He  spake  of  the  riches  and 
honours  which  God  had  conferred  upon  him;  but  what  iniinitely 
greater  honour  and  riches,  has  the  God  and  Father  of  our  Lord 
Jesus,  conferred  on  his  only  Son,  to  whom  I  now  invite  every 
christless  sinner!  To  you,  therefore,  I  call,  O  ye  sons  of  men, 
assuring  you,  there  is  every  thing  in  Jesus  that  your  hearts  can 
desire,  or  hunger  and  thirst  after.  Do  people,  in  disposing  of 
themselves  or  their  children  in  marriage,  generally  covet  to  be 
matched  with  persons  of  great  names?  Let  this  consideration 
serve  as  a  motive  to  stir  you  up  to  match  with  Jesus.  For  God 
the  Father  has  given  him  a  name  above  every  name ;  he  has  up- 
on his  vesture  and  upon  his  thigh,  a  name  written,  "  The  King 
of  kings,  and  the  Lord  of  lords;"  and  here,  in  the  text,  we  are 
told,  "The  Lord  of  hosts  is  his  name."  Nor  has  he  an  empty 
title,  but  power  equivalent;  for  he  is  a  Prince,  as  well  as  a  Sa- 
viour. "  All  power  is  given  unto  hiui,  both  in  heaven  and  on 
earth:"  "Tiie  God  of  the  whole  earth  ^says  our  text)  he  shall 
be  called."  The  government  of  men,  of  tne  church,  and  of  devils, 
is  put  upon  his  shoulders:  ''Thrones,  principalities,  and  powers, 
are  made  subject  unto  him;  by  him  kings  reign,  and  princes  de- 
cree justice;  he  setteth  up  one,  and  puttcth  down  another:  and 
of  his  kingdom  there  shall  be  no  end."  Will  ricltes  be  an  induce- 
ment unto  you  to  come  and  match  with  Jesus?  Why  then,  I 
can  tell  you,  the  riches  of  Jesus  are  infinite:  for  unto  me,  who 
am  less  than  the  least  of  all  saints,  is  this  grace  given,  that  I 
should  preach  to  poor  sinners  the  unsearchable  riches  of  Jesus 
Christ.  I  appeal  to  you  that  are  his  saints,  whether  yoa  have 
not  found  this  true,  by  happy  experience;  and  though  some  of 
you  may  have  been  acquainted  with  him  thirty,  forty,  fifty  years 
ago,  do  you  not  find  his  Tiches  are  yet  unsearchable,  and  as 
much  past  finding  out,  as  they  were  the  very  first  moment  in 
which  you  gave  him  your  hearts! 

Would  you  match  with  a  wise  husband?  Haste  then,  sinners, 
come  away  to  Jesus :  he  is  tho  fountain  of  wisdom,  and  makes 
all  that  come  unto  him  wise  unto  salvation  ;  ''  lie  is  the  wisdom 
of  the  Father :  the  Lord  possessed  him  in  the  beginning  of  his 
way,  before  his  works  of  old.  When  he  prepared  the  heavens, 
he  was  there :  when  he  appointed  the  foundations  of  the  earth, 
then  was  he  with  him,  as  one  brought  up  with  him;  he  was  daily 
his  delight,  rejoicing  always  before  him."  As  he  is  wise,  so  is 
he  holy  /  and  therefore,  in  the  words  of  our  text,  he  is  styled, ''  Tbs 
Redeemer,  the  Holy  One  of  Israel:"  and  by  the  angel  Gabrieli 


XII.]  CHRIST   THB   BBLIBVER'S   UUSBAHD.  109 

"That  holy  thing."  The  apostles,  addressing  God  the  Father, 
style  him  his  "holy  child  Jesus:"  and  the  spirits  of  just  men 
made  perfect,  and  the  angels  in  heaven,  cease  not  day  or  nighty 
saying,  "  Holy,  holy,  holy."  Nor  is  his  beauty  inferior  to  his 
wisdom  or  holiness ;  the  seraphs  veil  their  faces,  when  they  ap- 
pear before  him:  "  He  is  the  chiefest  among  ten  thousand,  nay, 
he  is  altogether  lovely."  And,  as  he  is  altogether  lovely,  so  he 
is  altogether  loving;  his  name  and  his  nature  is  Love.  Grod,  God 
in  Christ,  is  love :  love  in  the  abstract.  And  in  this  has  he  mani- 
fested his  love,  in  that,  whilst  we  were  yet  sinners,  nay,  open 
enemies,  Jesus,  in  his  own  due  time,  died  for  the  ungodly.  He 
loved  us  so  as  to  give  himself  for  us.  O  what  manner  of  love  is 
this !  What  was  Jacob's  love  to  Rachel,  in  comparison  of  the 
love  which  Jesus  bore  to  a  perishing  world !  He  became  a  curse 
for  us.  For  it  Ls  written,  "  Cursed  is  every  man  that  hangeth 
upon  a  tree."  What  Zipporah  said  to  her  husband  improperly^. 
Jesus  may  say  properly  to  his  spouse  the  church,  *^  A  bloody 
wife  hast  thou  been  to  me,  because  of  the  crucifixion  :"  lor  ho 
has  purchased  her  with  his  own  blood.  And  having  once  loved 
his  people,  he  loves  them  unto  the  end.  His  love,  like  himself, 
is  from  everlasting  to  everlasting.  He  hates  putting  away :  though 
we  change,  yet  he  changeth  not;  he  abideth  faithful.  When  we 
are  married  here,  there  comes  in  that  shocking  clause,  to  use  the 
words  of  holy  Mr.  Boston, ''  Till  death  us  doth  part ;"  but  death 
itself  shall  not  separate  a  tnie  believer  from  the  love  of  God, 
which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  his  liord ;  for  he  will  never  cease  loving 
bis  bride,  till  he  has  loved  her  to  heaven,  and  presented  her  be- 
fore his  Father,  without  spot  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing.  Nay, 
his  love  will,  as  it  were,  but  be  beginning,  through  the  endless 
ages  of  eternity. 

And  now,  sirs,  what  say  you?  Shall  I  put  that  question  to 
you,  which  Rebecca's  relations,  upon  a  proposal  of  marriage, 
put  to  her?  "Will  ye  go  with  the  man?"  with  the  God-man, 
this  infinitely  great,  this  infinitely  powerful,  this  all-wise,  all- 
holy,  altogether  lovely,  ever-loving  Jesus  ?  What  objection  have 
you  to  make  against  such  a  gracious  ofier?  One  would  imagine 
you  had  not  a  single  one ;  but  it  is  to  be  feared,  through  the  pre* 
valency  of  unbelief,  and  the  corruption  of  your  desperately  wick- 
ed, deceitful  hearts,  you  are  ready  to  urge  several.  Methinksj 
I  hear  some  of  you  say  within  yourselves,  "  We  like  the  propo- 
sal, but,  alas!  we  are  poor."  Are  you  so?  If  that  be  all,  you 
may, notwithstanding,  be  welcome  to  Jesus:  "  For  has  not  God 
chosen  the  poor  of  this  world  to  make  them  rich  in  faith,  and 
heirs  of  his  everlasting  kingdom  ?"  And  what  says  that  Saviour, 
to  whom  I  am  now  inviting  you?  "  Blessed  are  the  poor  in  spi- 
rit, for  theirs  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  And  what  says  his 
apostle  concerning  him?  "Though  he  was  rich,  yet  for  our 
sakes  he  became  poor,  that  we  through  his  poverty  might  be 
made  rich."  But  say  you,  "  We  are  not  only  poor,  but  we  are 
in  debt ;  we  owe  God  ten  thousand  talents,  and  have  nothing  to 
pay :"  Bat  that  iicod  not  keep  you  back^  for  Grod  the  Father,  irom 


170  THE   POTTER   AND   THE   CLAY.  [XIIL 

the  Lord  Jesus,  his  dearly  beloved  Son,  has  received  double  for 
all  believers'  sins :  the  blood  of  Jesus  cleanseth  from  them  all. 
But  you  are  blind,  and  miserable,  and  naked ;  to  whom  then 
should  you  fly  for  succour,  but  to  Jesus,  who  came  to  open  the 
eyes  of  the  blind,  to  seek  and  save  the  miserable  and  lost,  and 
clothe  the  naked  with  his  perfect  and  spotless  righteousness.  And 
now,  what  can  hinder  your  espousals  with  the  dear  and  ever- 
blessed  Lamb  of  God  ?  I  know  but  of  one  thing,  that  dreadful  sin 
of  unbelief.  But  this  is  my  comfort,  Jesus  died  for  unbelief,  as 
well  as  for  other  sins,  and  has  promised  to  send  down  the  Holy 
Spirit  to  convince  the  world  of  this  sin  in  particular:  **  If  I  ^o 
not  away,  the  Comforter  will  not  come  unto  you;  but  if  I  go 
away,  I  will  send  the  Comforter,  and  he  will  convince  the  world 
of  sin."  What  sin?  Of  unbelief;  "  because  they  believe  not  on 
me.*'  O  that  this  promise  may  be  so  fulfilled  in  your  hearts,  and 
Jesus  may  so  become  the  author  of  divine  faith  in  your  souls, 
that  you  may  be  able  to  send  me  the  same  message  as  a  good 
woman  in  Scotland,  on  her  dying-bed,  sent  me  by  a  friend :  *•  Tell 
him  (says  she)  for  his  comfort,  that  at  such  a  time  he  married 
me  to  the  Lord  Jesus."  This  would  be  comfort  indeed.  Not 
that  we  can  marry  you  to  Christ :  No ;  the  Holy  Ghost  must  tie 
the  marriage  knot.  But  such  honour  have  all  God's  ministers ; 
under  him  they  espouse  poor  sinners  to  Jesus  Christ.  "  I  have 
espoused  you  (says  St.  Paul)  as  a  chaste  virgin  to  Jesus  Christ." 
O  that  you  may  say.  We  will  go  with  the  man ;  then  will  I  bow 
my  head,  as  Abraham's  servant  did,  and  go  with  joy  and  tell  my 
Master,  that  he  has  not  left  his  poor  servant  destitute  this  day: 
then  shall  I  rejoice  in  your  felicity.  For  I  know  my  Master 
will  take  you  into  the  banqueting-house  of  his  ordinances,  and 
his  banner  over  you  shall  be  love.  That  this  may  be  the  happy 
case  of  you  all,  may  the  glorious  God  grant,  for  the  sake  of  Jesus, 
bis  dearly  beloved  Son,  the  glorious  Bridegroom  of  his  church ; 
to  whom,  with  the  Father,  and  the  Holy  Spirit,  be  all  honour  and 
glory,  now  and  for  evermore.     Amen,  and  amen. 


SERMON  XIIL 

THB  POTTER  AND  THE  CLAY. 


The  word  which  came  to  Jeremiah  from  the  Lord,  saying,  Arise, 
and  go  down  to  the  potter's  house,  and  there  I  will  cause  thei 
to  hear  my  words.  Then  I  v)ent  down  to  the  potter's  house, 
and,  behold,  he  wrought  a  work  on  the  wheels.  And  the  vessel 
that  he  made  of  clay  was  marred  in  the  hands  of  the  potter,  so 
he  made  it  again  another  vessel,  as  seemed  good  to  the  potter 
to  make  it.  Then  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  me,  saying, 
O  house  of  Israel,  cannot  I  do  with  you  as  this  potter?  saith 
the  Lord.  Behold,  as  the  clay  is  in  the  potter's  hand,  so  are 
ye  in  mine  hand^  O  house  of  Israel, — Jer.  xviii.  1 — 6. , 

At  sundry  times,  and  in  divers  manners,  God  was  pleased  to 
speak  to  our  fathers  by  the  prophets^  before  he  spake  to  us  in 


XIII.]  THE   POTTBR  AND   THE   CLAY.  171 

these  last  days  by  his  Son.  To  Elijah^  he  revealed  himself  by  a 
small  still  voice.  To  Jacob,  by  a  dream.  To  Moses,  he  spake 
face  to  face.  Sometimes  he  was  pleased  to  send^  a  favourite 
prophet  on  some  especial  errand ;  and  whilst  he  was  thus  em- 
ployed, vouchsafed  to  give  him  a  particular  message,  which  ho 
was  ordered  to  deliver  without  reserve  to  all  the  inhabitants  of 
the  land.  A  very  instructive  instance  of  tliis  kind  we  have 
recorded  in  the  passage  now  read  to  yon.  The  first  verse  in- 
forms us  that  it  was  a  word,  or  message,  which  came  immedi- 
ately from  the  Lord  to  the  prophet  Jeremiah.  At  what  time,  or 
how  the  prophet  was  employed  when  it  came,  we  are  not  told. 
Perhaps,  whilst  he  was  praying  for  those  who  would  not  pray  for 
themselves :  perhaps,  near  the  morning,  when  he  was  slumber- 
ing, or  musing  on  his  bed.  For  the  word  came  to  him,  saying, 
"Arise.''  And  what  must  he  do  when  risen?  He  must  *'go 
down  to  the  potter's  house,  (the  prophet  knew  where  to  find  it,) 
and  there  (says  the  great  Jehovah)  I  will  cause  thee  to  hear  my 
words.''  Jeremiah  does  not  confer  with  flesh  and  blood,  he  does 
not  object  that  it  was  dark  or  cold,  or  desire  that  he  might  have 
his  message  given  him  there,  but  without  the  least  hesitation  is 
immediately  obedient  to  the  heavenly  vision.  **  Then  (says  he)  I 
went  down  to  the  potter's  house,  and  behold,  he  wrought  a  work 
upon  the  wheels."  Just  as  he  was  enteiing  into  the  house,  or 
workshop,  the  potter,  it  seems,  had  a  vessel  upon  his  wheel. 
And  was  there  any  thing  so  extraordinary  in  this,  that  it  should 
be  ushered  in  with  the  word  Behold?  What  a  dreaming 
visionary,  or  superstitious  enthusiast,  would  this  Jeremiah  be 
accoanted,  even  by  many  who  read  his  prophecies  with  seeming 
respect,  were  he  alive  now !  But  this  was  not  the  first  time 
Jeremiah  had  heard  from  heaven  in  this  manner.  He  therefore 
willingly  obeyed ;  and  had  you,  or  I,  accompanied  him  to  the 
potter's  house,  I  believe  we  should  have  seea  him  silently,  but 
intensely,  waiting  upon  his  great  and  all-wise  commander,  to 
know  wherefore  he  sent  him  thither.  Methinks  I  see  him  all 
attention.  He  takes  notice,  that  "  the  vessel  was  of  clay ;"  but 
as  he  held  it  in  his  hand,  and  turned  round  the  wheel,  in  order 
to  work  it  into  some  particular  form,  '^  it  was  marred  in  the 
hands  of  the  potter,"  and  consequently  unfit  for  the  use  he  before 
intended  to  put  it  to.  And  what  becomes  of  this  marred  vessel? 
Being  thus  marred,  I  suppose,  the  pottei*,  without  the  least  im- 
putation of  injustice,  might  have  thrown  it  aside,  and  taken  up 
another  piece  of  clay  in  its  room.  But  he  did  not.  **  He  made 
it  again  another  vessel."  And  does  the  potter  call  a  council  of 
his  domestics,  to  inquire  of  them  what  kind  of  vessel  they  would 
advise  him  to  make  of  it?  No,  in  no  wise.  **  He  made  it  again 
another  vessel,  as  seemed  good  to  the  potter  to  make  it." 

"Then,"  adds  Jeremiah,  whilst  he  was  in  the  way  of  duty — 
then — whilst  he  was  mentally  crying,  Lord,  what  wouldest  thou 
have  me  to  do? — "then  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  me. 
saying,  O  house  of  Israel,  cannot  I  do  with  you  as  this  potter? 
aaith  the  Lord.  Behold,  as  the  clay  is  in  the  hands  of  the  potter^ 


172  THE   POTTER  AND   THE   CLAY.  [Xllf. 

(marred^  and  unfit  for  the  first  desired  purpose,)  so  are  ye  in 
mine  hand,  O  house  of  Israel."  At  length,  tLen,  Jeremiah  bath 
his  sermon  given  to  him ;  short,  but  popular.  It  was  to  be  de- 
livered to  the  whole  house  of  Israel,  princes,  priests,  and  people: 
short,  but  pungent,  even  sharper  than  a  two-edged  sword. 
What !  says  the  sovereign  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth,  must  I  be 
denied  the  privilege  of  a  common  potter?  May  I  not  do  what  I 
will  with  my  own?  **  Behold,  as  the  clay  is  in  the  potter's  hands, 
so  are  ye  in  mine  hands,  O  house  of  Israel.  I  made  and  formed 
you  into  a  people,  and  blessed  you  above  any  other  nation  under 
heaven :  but,  O  Israel,  thou  by  thy  backslidings  hast  destroyed 
thyself.  As  the  potter,  therefore,  might  justly  have  thrown  aside 
his  marred  clay,  so  may  I  justly  unchurch  and  unpeople  you. 
But  what  if  I  should  come  over  the  mountains  of  your  guilt,  heal 
your  backslidings,  revive  my  work  in  the  midst  of  the  years,  and 
cause  your  latter  end  greatly  to  increase  ?  Behold,  as  the  clay 
is  in  the  hands  of  the  potter,  lying  at  his  disposal,  either  to  be 
destroyed,  or  forn^ed  into  another  vessel,  so  are  ye  in  my  hands, 

0  house  of  Israel :  I  may  either  reject,  and  thereby  ruin  you,  or 

1  may  revisit  and  revive  you  according  to  my  own  sovereign 
good-will  and  pleasure,  and  who  shall  say  unto  me,  what  dost 
thou?" 

This  seems  to  be  the  genuine  interpretation,  and  primary 
intention,  of  this  beautiful  part  of  holy  writ.  But  waving  all  fur- 
ther inquiries  about  its  primary  design  or  meaning,  I  shall  now 
proceed  to  shew,  that  what  the  glorious  Jehovah  here  says  of 
the  house  of  Israel  in  general,  is  applicable  to  every  individual  of 
mankind  in  particular.  And  as  I  presume  this  may  be  done,  with- 
out either  wire-drawing  scripture  on  the  one  hand,  or  wresting 
it  from  its  original  meaning  on  the  other,  not  to  detain  you  any 
longer,  I  shall,  trom  the  passage  thus  explained  and  paraphrased, 
deduce,  and  endeavour  to  enlarge  on,  these  two  general  heads. 

First,  I  shall  undertake  to  prove,  that  every  man,  naturally 
engendered  of  the  ofispring  of  Adam,  is,  in  the  sight  of  the  all- 
seeing,  heart- searching  God,  only  as  a  piece  of  marred  clay. 

Secondly,  That  being  thus  marred,  he  must  necessarily  be 
renewed :  and  under  this  head,  we  shall  likewise  point  out  by 
whose  agency  this  mighty  change  is  to  be  brought  about. 

These  particulars  being  discussed,  way  will  naturally  be  made 
for  a  short  word  of  application. 

First,  to  prove  that  every  man  naturally  engendered  of  the 
ofi*spring  of  Adam,  is,  in  the  sight  of  an  all-seeing,  heart-search- 
ing God,  only  as  a  piece  of  marred  clay. 

Be  pleased  to  observe,  that  we  say  every  man  naturally  en- 
gendered of  the  offspring  of  Adam,  or  every  man  since  the  fall : 
for  if  we  consider  man  as  he  first  came  out  of  the  hands  of  his 
Maker,  he  was  far  from  being  in  such  melancholy  circumstances. 
No:  he  v>^as  originally  made  upright;  or,  as  Moses,  that  sacred 
penman,  declares,  ^' God  made  him  after  his  own  image."  Surely 
never  was  so  much  expressed  in  so  few  words;  which  hath  often 
made  me  wonder  how  that  great  critic,  Longinus,  who  so  justly 


XIII.]  THE   POTTER   AND   THB   CLAV.  178 

admires  the  dignity  and  grandear  of  Moses*  account  of  the  ere- 
atioDy  "And  God  said.  Let  there  be  light,  and  there  was  light;" 
I  say,  I  have  often  wondered  why  he  did  not  read  a  little  further, 
and  bestow  as  just  an  encomium  upon  this  short,  but  withal 
inexpressibly  august  and  comprehensive  description  of  the  for- 
mation of  man,  **  So  God  created  man  in  his  own  image."  Struck 
with  a  deep  sense  oi  such  amazing  goodness,  and  that  he  might 
impress  yet  a  deeper  sense  of  it  upon  our  minds  too,  he  imme- 
diately aidds,  "in  the  image  of  God  made  he  him/'  A  council 
of  the  most  adorable  Trinity  was  called  on  this  important  occa- 
sion :  God  did  not  say.  Let  there  be  a  man,  and  there  was  a  man, 
but  God  said,  "  Let  us  make  man  in  our  image,  after  our  like- 
ness." This  is  the  account  which  the  lively  oracles  of  God  do 
give  us  of  man  in  his  first  estate :  but  it  is  very  remarkable,  that 
the  transition  from  the  account  of  his  creation  to  that  of  his 
misery,  is  very  quick ;  and  why  ?  For  a  very  good  reason,  because 
he  soon  fell  from  his  primeval  dignity ;  and  by  that  fali,  the 
divine  image  is  so  defaced,  that  he  is  now  to  be  valued,  only  as 
antiquarians  value  an  ancient  medal,  merely  for  the  sake  of  the 
image  and  superscription  once  stamped  upon  it ;  or  of  a  second 
divine  impress,  which,  through  grate,  it  may  yet  receive. 

Let  us  take  a  more  particular  survey  of  him,  and  see  whether 
these  things  are  so,  or  not:  and  first,  as  to  his  understanding. 
As  man  was  created  originally  ''-after  God  in  knowledge,"  as 
well  as  righteousness  and  true  holiness,  we  may  rationally  infer, 
that  his  understanding,  in  respect  to  things  natural,  as  well  as 
divine,  was  of  a  prodigious  extent:  for  he  was  made  but  a  little 
lower  than  the  angels,  and  consequently,  being  like  them,  excel- 
lent in  his  understanding,  he  knew  much  of  Gk)d,  of  himself,  and 
all  about  him ;  and  in  this,  as  well  as  every  other  respect,  was, 
as  Mr.  Collier  expresses  it  in  one  of  his  essays,  a  perfect  major : 
bat  this  is  far  from  being  our  case  now.  For  in  respect  to  na- 
tural things,  our  understandings  are  evidently  daiicened.  It  is 
bat  little  that  we  can  know,  and  even  that  little  knowledge  which 
we  can  acquire,  is  with  much  weariness  of  the  fiesh,  and  we  are 
doomed  to  gain  it  as  we  do  our  daily  bread,  I  mean,  by  the  sweat 
of  onr  brows. 

Men  of  low  and  narrow  minds  soon  commence  wise  in  their 
own  conceits ;  and  having  acquired  a  little  smattering  of  the 
learned  languages,  and  made  some  small  proficiency  in  the  dry 
sciences,  are  easily  tempted  to  look  upon  themselves  as  a  head 
taller  than  their  fellow  mortals,  and  accordingly,  too,  too  often 
put  forth  great  swelling  words  of  vanity.  But  persons  of  a  more 
exalted  and  extensive  reach  of  thought,  dare  not  boast.  No  : 
they  know  that  the  greatest  scholars  are  in  the  dark,  in  respect 
to  many  even  of  the  minutest  things  in  life :  and  after  all  their 
painfal  researches  into  the  arcaiia  nature,  they  find  such  an 
immense  void,  such  an  unmeasurable  expanse  yet  to  be  travel- 
led over,  that  they  are  obliged  at  last  to  conclude,  almost  with 
respect  to  every  thin<^,  "  that  they  know  nothing  yet  as  they 
ought  to  know."    This  consideration,  no  doubt,  led  Socrates, 


174  THE    POTTBR    AND   THE   CLAY.  [Xllf. 

when  he  was  asked  by  one  of  his  scholars^  why  the  oracle  pro- 
nounced him  the  wisest  man  on  earth,  to  give  him  this  judicious 
answer,  **  Perhaps  it  is  because  I  am  most  sensible  of  my  own 
ignorance."  Would  to  God,  that  all  who  call  themselves  Chris- 
tians, had  learned  so  much  as  this  heathen !  We  should  then 
no  longer  hear  so  many  learned  men,  fals^y  so  called,  betray 
their  ignorance  by  boasting  of  the  extent  of  their  shallow  under- 
standing, nor,  by  professing  themselves  so  wise,  prove  themselves 
such  arrant  pedantic  fools. 

If  we  view  our  understandings  in  respect  to  spiritual  things, 
we  shall  find  that  they  are  not  only  darkened,  but  become  dark- 
ness itself,  even  ''  darkness  that  may  be  felt,"  by  all  who  are 
not  past  feeling.  And  how  should  it  be  oUierwise,  since  the 
infallible  word  of  God  assures  us,  that  they  are  alienated  from 
the  light  and  life  of  God,  and  thereby  naturally  as  incapable  to 
judge  of  divine  and  spiritual  things,  comparatively  speaking,  as 
a  man  born  blind  is  incapacitated  to  distinguish  the  various 
colouis  of  the  rainbow.  ''The  natural  man,  (says  an  inspired 
apostle)  dlscemeth  not  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God ;"  so  far 
from  it,  ''they  are  foolishness  unto  him :"  and  why?  Because 
they  are  only  to  be  "  spirituatly  discerned."  Hence  it  was,  that 
Nicodemus,  who  was  blessed  with  an  outward  and  divine  reve- 
lation, who  was  a  ruler  of  the  Jews,  nay,  a  master  of  Israel, 
when  our  Lord  told  him, ''  he  must  be  born  again,"  appeared  to 
be  quite  grappled.  ''  How  (says  he)  can  a  man  be  bom  when 
he  is  old?  can  he  enter  a  second  time  into  his  mother's  womb, 
and  be  bom?  how  can  these  things  be?"  Were  three  more 
absurd  questions  ever  proposed  by  the  most  ignorant  man  alive? 
or  can  there  be  a  clearer  proof  of  the  blindness  of  man's  under- 
standing, in  respect  to  divine  as  well  as  natural  things?  Is  not 
man  then  a  piece  of  marred  clay? 

This  will  appear  yet  more  evident,  if  we  consider  the  perverse 
bent  of  his  will.  Being  mitde  in  the  very  image  of  God ;  undoubt- 
edly before  the  fall,  man  had  no  other  will  but^his  Maker's.  Grod's 
will,  and  Adam's,  were  then  like  unisons  in  music.  There  was 
not  the  least  disunion  or  discord  between  them.  But  now  he 
hath  a  will  as  directly  contrary  to  the  will  of  God,  as  light  is 
contrary  to  darkness,  or  heaven  to  hell.  We  all  bring  into  the 
world  with  us  a  carnal  mind,  which  is  not  only  an  enemy  to  God, 
but  ''enmity  itself,  and  which  is  therefore  not  subject  unto  the 
law  of  Grod,  neither  indeed  can  it  be."  A  great  many  shew  much 
zeal  in  talking  against  the  man  of  sin,  and  loudly  (and  indeed 
very  justly)  exclaim  against  the  pope  for  sitting  in  the  temple,  I 
mean  the  church,  of  Christ,  and  "exalting  himself  above  all  that 
is  called  God."  But  say  not  within  thyself,  who  shall  go  to 
Rome,  to  pull  down  this  spiritual  antichrist  ?  as  though  there 
were  no  antichrist  but  what  is  without  us.  For  know,  O  man, 
whoever  thou  art,  an  infinitely  more  dangerous  antichrist,  be- 
caiMse  less  discemed,  even  self-will,  sits  daily  in  the  temple  of 
thy  heart,  exalting  itself  above  all  that  is  called  God,  and  oblig- 
ing all  its  votaries  to  say  of  Christ  hims^elf,  that  Prince  of  peace. 


XIli;J  THE   POTTER   AND   THE   CLAY.  175 

•'  we  will  not  have  this  man  to  reign  over  us."  God's  people, 
whose  spiritual  senses  are  exercised  about  spiritual  things,  and 
whose  eyes  are  open  to  see  the  abominations  that  are  in  their 
hearts,  frequently  feel  this  to  their  sorrow.  Whether  they  will  or 
not,  this  enmity  from  time  to  time  bubbles  up,  and  in  spite  of  all 
their  watchfulness  and  care,  when  they  are  under  the  pressure  of 
some  sharp  afiUction,along  desertion,  or  tedious  night  of  tempta- 
tion, they  often  find  something  within  rising  in  rebellion  against 
the  all- wise  disposals  of  divine  Providence,  and  saying  unto  God 
their  heavenly  Father,  "  What  doest  thou  V*  This  makes  them  to 
cry  (and  no  wonder,  since  it  constrained  one  of  the  greatest 
saints  and  apostles  first  to  introduce  the  expression,)  ''O 
wretched  man  that  I  am,  who  shall  deliver  me  from  the  body  of 
his  death?"  The  spiritual  and  renewed  soul  groans  thus,  being 
burdened ;  but  as  for  the  natural  and  unawakened  man,  it  is 
not  so  with  him  :  self-will,  as  well  as  every  other  evil,  either  in 
a  more  latent  or  discernible  manner,  reigns  in  his  unrenewed 
soul,  and  proves  him,  even  to  a  demonstration  to  others,  whe- 
ther be  knows,  or  will  confess  it  himself  or  not,  that  in  respect 
to  the  disorders  of  his  will,  as  well  as  his  understanding,  man  is 
only  a  piece  of  marred  clay. 

A  transient  view  of  fallen  man's  afiections  will  yet  more 
firmly  corroborate  this  melancholy  truth.  ^These,  at  his  being 
first  placed  in  the  paradise  of  God,  were  always  kept  within  pro- 
per bounds,  fixed  upon  their  proper  objects,  and,  like  so  many 
gentle  rivers,  sweetly,  spontaneously,  and  habitually  glided  into 
their  ocean,  God  :  but  now  the  scene  is  changed ;  for  we  are 
now  naturally  full  of  vile  afiections,  which,  like  a  mighty  and 
impetuous  torrent,  carry  all  before  them.  We  love  what  we 
should  hate,  and  bate  what  we  should  love ;  we  fear  what  we 
should  hope  for,  and  hope  for  what  we  should  fear ;  nay,  to 
soch  an  ungovernable  height  do  our  affections  sometimes  rise, 
that  though  our  judgments  are  convinced  to  the  contrary,  yet 
we  will  gratify  our  passions,  though  it  be  at  the  expense  of  our 
present  and  eternal  welfare.  We  feel  a  war  of  our  afiections, 
warring  against  the  law  of  our  minds,  and  bringing  us  into  cap- 
tivity to  the  law  of  sin  and  death.  So  that  video  meliora  pro- 
boque,  deteriara  sequor — I  approve  of  better  things  but  follow 
worse — is  too,  too  often  the  practice  of  us  all. 

I  am  sensible,  that  many  are  oficnded,  when  mankind  are 
compared  to  beasts  and  devils.  And  they  might  have  some 
shadow  of  reason  for  being  so,  if  we  asserted,  in  a  physical  sense, 
that  they  were  really  beasts  and  really  devils.  For  then,  as  I 
once  heard  a  very  learned  prelate  who  was  objecting  against 
this  comparison,  observe,  "A  man  being  a  beast,  would  be 
incapable,  and  being  a  devil,  would  be  under  an  impossibility, 
of  being  saved."  But  when  we  make  use  of  such  shocking 
comparisons,  as  he  was  pleased  to  term  them,  we  would  be 
Dnd^stood  only  in  a  moral  sense ;  and  in  doing  so,  we  assert 
no  more  than  some  of  the  most  holy  men  of  God  have  said  of 
themselves  and  others,  in  the  lively  oracles,  many  ages  ago.  Holy 


176  THE   POTT  BR    AND   THB  CLAY.  [XIIl. 

David,  the  man  after  God's  own  heart>  speakings  of  himself,  anyn, 
**  So  foolish  was  I,  and  as  a  beast  before  thee  J'  And  holy  Job, 
speaking  of  man  in  general,  says,  that  ''  he  is  bom  as  a  wild 
ass's  colt/'  or  take  away  the  expletive  as,  which,  some  think, 
ought  to  be  done,  and  then  he  positively  asserts,  that  man  is 
a  wild  ass*s  colt  And  what  says  our  Lord,  "  Ye  are  of  your 
father  the  devil ;''  and  *'  the  whole  world  is  said  to  lie  in  him,  the 
wicked .  one»  who  now  rules  in  the  children  of  disobedience :" 
that  is,  in  all  unrenewed  souls.  Our  stupidity,  proneness  to 
fix  our  affections  on  the  things  of  the  earth,  and  our  eagerness 
to  make  provision  for  the  flesh,  to  fulfil  the  lust  thereof,  evidence 
US  to  be  earthly  and  brutiil ;  and  our  mental  passions,  anger,  ha- 
tred, malice,  envy,  and  such  like,  prove  with  equal  strength,  that 
we  are  also  devilish.  Both  together  conspire  to  evince,  that  in 
respect  to  his  affections,  as  well  as  his  understanding  and  will, 
man  deservedly  may  be  termed  a  piece  of  marred  clay. 

The  present  blindness  of  natural  conscience  makes  this  ap- 
pear in  a  yet  more  glaring  light :  In  the  soul  of  the  first  man 
Adam,  conscience  was,  no  doubt,  the  candle  of  the  Lord,  and 
enabled  him  rightly  and  instantaneously  to  discern  between 
good  and  evil,  right  and  wrong.  And,  blessed  be  God !  some 
remains  of  this  are  yet  left ;  but,  alas,  how  dimly  does  it  bum, 
and  how  easily  and  quickly  is  it  covered,  or  put  out  and  extin- 
guished. I  need  not  send  you  to  the  heathen  world,  to  learn  the 
troth  of  this;  you  all  know  it  by  experience.  Was  there  no 
other  evidence,  your  own  consciences  arc  instead  of  a  thousand 
witnesses,  that  man,  as  to  his  natural  conscience,  as  well  as 
understanding,  will,  and  affections,  is  much  marred  clay. 

Nor  does  tiiat  great  and  boasted  Diana,  I  mean  unassisted, 
nnenlightened  Reason,  less  demonstrate  the  justness  of  such  an 
assertion.  Far  be  it  iVoia  me  to  decry  or  exclaim  against  hu- 
man reason.  Christ  hiniselfis  called  the  *'  Logos,  the  lleason,'* 
and  I  believe  it  would  not  require  much  learning,  or  take  up 
much  time,  to  prove,  that  so  far,  and  no  farther,  than  as  we  act 
agreeably  to  the  laws  of  Christ  Jesus,  are  we  any  way  con- 
formable to  the  laws  of  ri<>lit  reason,  ilis  service  is  therefore 
called, ''  a  reasonable  service.*'  And  however  his  servants  and 
followers  may  now  be  looked  upon  as  fools  and  madmen  ;  yet 
there  will  come  a  time,  when  those  who  despise,  and  set  them- 
selves to  oppose  divine  revelation,  will  tind,  that  what  they  now 
call  reason,  is  only  reason  depraved,  and  as  utterly  incapable, 
of  itself,  to  guide  us  unto  the  way  of  peace,  or  shew  (he  way  ot 
salvation,  (is  t)ie  men  of  Sodinu  were  to  iitul  Lot's  door,  after 
they  were  struck  with  blimlness  by  the  angels  who  came  to  lead 
him  out  of  the  citv.  The  iioirid  and  dreadlul  mistakes  which 
the  most  reiined  reasoners  in  the  heatlu  n  world  ran  into,  both 
as  to  the  object  as  well  as  manner  of  divine  wcnship,  have  sufli- 
ciently  denior.strated  the  weakness  and  depr.ivity  of  human 
reasoit :  ntn*  do  onrnio(iern  boasters  affoni  us  a:iy  brtter  proofs 
of  the  greatness  of  its  strenu^tii,  since  the  hesl  i^lp^o^etnent  they 
generally  make  of  it,  is  only  to  reason  tiicmsclves  into  down* 


Xtth]  tUtt  PdttBR  AM 6  TUfi  CLAY.  l7f 

right  wUAll  infidelity^  i^  thereby  reason  themselves  ont  of 
eternal  salration.  Need  we  now  any  ftarther  witness,  that  man^ 
fiedlen  man.  Is  altogeUier  a  piece  of  marred  clay  T 

Bot  this  is  not  lUI,  we  have  yet  more  evidence  to  call;  for  do 
the  blindiiess  of  our  nnderstanditig;s>  the  perverseness  of  our 
will,  the  rebellion  of  our  affections,  the  corruption  of  our  con-^ 
sciences,  the  depravity  of  our  reason,  prove  this  charge  ;  and  does 
not  the  present  disordered  frame  and  constitution  of  our  bodies 
confirm  the  same  also  ?    Doubtless  in  this  respect,  man,  in  the 
most  literal  sense  of  the  word,  is  a  piece  of  marred  clay :  for 
Crod  originally  made  him  of  the  '^  dust  of  the  earth/'    So  that, 
notwithstanding  our  boasting  of  our  high  pedigrees,  and  differ'* 
ant  descent,  we  were  all  originally  upon  a  level,  and  a  little  red 
earth  was  the  common  substratum  out  of  which  we  were  all 
formed.     Clay  indeed  it  was,  but  clay  wonderfully  modified, 
even  by  the  immediate  hands  of  the  Creator  of  heaven  and  earth. 
One  therefore  hath  observed,  that  it  is  said,  "  God  built  the 
man  7*'  He  did  not  form  him  rashly  or  hastily,  but  built  and  finish- 
ad  him  according  to  the  plan  before  laid  down  in  his  own  eternal 
mind.    And  though^  as  the  great  God  is  without  body,  parts,  or 
passions,  we  cannot  suppose,  wheti  it  is  said, ''  God  made  man 
after  his  own  image,  that  it  has  any  reference  to  his  body  yet  I 
cannot  help  thinking  (with  Doctor  South)  that  as  the  eternal 
Logos  was  hereafter  to  appear,  God  manifest  in  the  flesh,  infi^ 
site  wisdom  was  undoubtedly  exerted  in  forming  a  casket  into 
which  so  invaluable  a  pearl  was  in  the  fulness  of  time  to  be 
deposited.    Some  of  the  ancients  are  said  to  have  asserted  that 
man  at  the  first,  had  what  we  call  a  glory  shining  round  him ; 
but  without  attempting  to  be  wise  alx)Ve  what  is  written,  we  may 
venture  to  afilrm,  that  be  had  a  glorious  body,  which,  knowing  < 
no  sin,  knew  neither  sickness  nor  pain.     But  now,  on  this,  as 
well  as  on  other  accounts,  he  tnay  justly  be  called  Ichabod ;  for 
its  primitive  strength  and  glory  are  sadly  departed  from  it,  atid, 
yke  the  ruins  of  some  ancient  and  stately  fabric,  only  so  much 
teft  as  to  give  us  some  faint  idea  of  what  it  was  when  it  first 
appeared  in  its  original  and  perfect  beauty.    The  apostle  Paul, 
Aerefore,  who  knew  how  to  call  things  by  their  proper  names 
as  well  as  any  man  living,  does  not  scruple  to  term  the  human 
body,  though  in  its  original  constitution  fearfully  and  wonder- 
fttDy  made,  a  'Wile  body:"  vile  indeed!  since  it  is  subject  to 
such  vile  diseases,  put  to  such  vile,  yea,  very  vile  uses,  and  at 
length  is  to  come  to  so  vile  an  end :    ''for  dust  we  are,  and  unto 
dost  we  must  return."    This  among  other  considerations^  we 
ttay  well  suppose,  cattsed  the  blessed  Jesus  to  weep  at  the 
grave  of  Lazarus.     He  wept,  not  only  because  his  friend  Laza- 
Its  was  dead,  but  he  wept  to  see  human  nature,  through  roan's 
ewn  default,  thus  laid  in  ruins,  by  being  subject  unto  such  a 
di»oIiition,  made  like  unto  the  beasts  that  perish. 

Let  us  here  pause  a  while,  and  with  our  sympathizing  Lord, 
ieeif  we  cannot  shed  a  few  silent  tears,  at  least,  upon  the  same 
HBowful  occaatoit.    Who,  who  is  there  amongst  us,  that  upon 


178  THE  POTTBR   AND  THE  CLAY.  [Xllt 

such  a  melancholy  review  of  man's  present,  real,  and  most  de- 
plorable depravity  both  in  body  and  soul,  can  refrain  from  weep- 
ing over  such  a  piece  of  marred  clay  ?  Who,  who  can  help  adopt- 
ing holy  David's  lamentation  over  Saul  and  Jonathan  ?  •*  How 
are  the  mighty  fallen  ?  how  are  they  slain  in  their  high  places  !'' 
Originally  it  was  not  so.  No  :  "  God  made  man  after  his  own 
image ;  in  the  image  of  God  made  he  man."  Never  was  there 
so  much  expressed  in  so  few  words.  He  was  created  after 
God  in  righteousness  and  true  holiness. 

This  is  the  account  which  the  sacred  volume  gives  us  of  this 
interesting  point.    This,  this  is  that  blessed  book,  that  book  of 
books,  from  whence,  together  with  an  appeal  to  the  experience 
of  our  own  hearts,  and  the  testimonies  of  all  past  ages,  we  have 
thought  proper  to  fetch  our  proofs  ;  for,  after  all,  we  must  be 
obliged  to  divine  revelation,   to  know  what  we  were,  what 
we  are,  and  what  we  are  to  be.     In  these,  as  in  a  true  glass, 
we  may  see  our  real  and  proper  likeness.     And  from  these  only 
can  we  trace  the  source  and  fountain  of  all  those  innumerable 
evils,  which  like  a  deluge  have  overflowed  the  natural  and  moral 
world.     If  any  should  object  against  the  authenticity  of  this 
revelation,  and  consequently  against  the  doctrine  this  day  drawn 
from  thence,  they  do  in  my  opinion  very  much  confirm  it.     For 
unless  a  man  was  very  much  disordered  indeed,  as  to  his  under- 
standing,  will,  aflections,  natural  conscience,  and  his  power  of 
reasoning,  he  could  never  possibly  deny  such  a  revelation,  which 
is  founded  on  a  multiplicity  of  infallible  external  evidences^ 
hath  so  many  internal  evidences  of  divine  stamp  in  every  page, 
is  so  suited  to  the  common  exigencies  of  all  mankind,  so  agree- 
able to  the  experience  of  all  men,  and  which  hath  been  so  won- 
derfully handed  and  preserved  to  us,  hath  been  so  instrumental 
to  the  convicting,  converting,  and  comforting  so  many  mUlions 
of  souls,  and  hath  stood  the  test  of  the  most  severe  scrutinies, 
and  exact  criticisms,  of  the  most  subtle  and  refined,  as  well  as 
of  the  most  malicious  and  persecuting  enemies,  that  ever  lived, 
even  from  the  beginning  of  time  to  this  very  day.     Persons  of 
such  a  turn  of  mind,  I  think,  are  rather  to  be  prayed  for  than 
disputed  with,  if  so  be  this  perverse  wickedness  of  their  hearts 
may  be  forgiven  them  2   they  are  in  the  very  "  gall  of  bitter- 
ness," and  must  have ''  their  consciences  seared  as  it  were  vnth  a 
red-hot  iron,"  and  must  have  their  eyes  ''  blinded  by  the  god 
of  this  world :"  otherwise  they  could  not  but  see  and  feel,  and 
assent  to,  the  truth  of  this  doctrine,  of  man's  being  universally 
depraved  ;  which  not  only  in  one  or  two,  but  in  one  or  two  thou- 
sands, Tin  every  page,  I  could  almost  say,)  is  written  in  such 
legible  characters,  that  he  that  runs  may  read.     Indeed,  revela- 
tion itself  is  founded  upon  the  doctrine  of  the  fall.   Had  we  kept 
our  original  integrity,  the  law  of  God  would  have  yet  been  writ- 
ten in  our  hearts,  and  thereby  the  want  of  a  divine  revelation, 
at  least  such  as  ours,  would  have  been  superseded ;  but  being 
fallen,  instead  of  rising  in  rebellion  against  God,  we  ought  to 
be  filled  with  unspeakable  thankfulness  to  our  all-bountiful  Cre- 


XIIK]  TffB  POTTER   AND   THB  CLAY.  179 

ator,  vrho  by  a  few  lines  in  his  own  books  hath  discovered  more 
to  ns,  than  all  the  philosophers  and  most  learned  men  in  the 
world  could,  or  would,  have  discovered,  though  they  had  studied 
to  all  eternity. 

I  am  well  aware,  that  some  who  pretend  to  own  the  validity  of 
divine  revelation,  are  notwithstanding  enemies  to  the  doctrine 
that  hath  this  day  been  delivered ;  ^nd  would  fain  elude  the 
force  of  the  proofs  generally  urged  in  defence  of  it,  by  saying  they 
only  bespeak  the  corruption  of  particular  persons,  or  have  refer- 
ence only  to  the  heathen  world :  but  such  persons  err,  not  know- 
ing their  own  hearts,  or  the  power  of  Jesus  Christ ;  for  by  natare 
there  is  no  difference  between  Jew  or  Gentile,  Greek  or  Barba- 
rian, bond  or  free.  We  are  altogether  equally  become  abomi- 
nable in  God's  sight,  all  equally  fallen  short  of  the  glory  of  God, 
and  consequently  all  alike  so  many  pieces -of  marred  clay. 

How  Grod  came  to  suffer  man  to  fall?  how  long,  man  stood  be- 
fore he  fell?  and  how  the  corruption,  contracted  by  the  fall, is  pro- 
pagated to  every  individual  of  his  species?  are  questions  of  such 
an  abstruse  and  critical  nature,  that,  should  I  undertake  to  an- 
swer them,  would  be  only  gratifying  a  sinful  curiosity,  and  tempt- 
iirg  you,  as  Satan  tempted  our  first  parents,  to  eat  forbidden 
froit.  It  will  much  better  answer  the  design** of  this  present 
discourse,  which  is  practical,  to  pass  on, 

II.  To  the  next  thing  proposed,  and  point  out  to  you  the  ab- 
solute necessity  there  is  of  this  fallen  nature's  being  renewed. 

This  I  have  done  all  along  in  my  eye,  and,  on  account  of  this, 
have  purposely  been  so  explicit  on  the  first  general  head :  for,  as 
Archimedes  once  said,  **  Give  me  a  place  where  I  may  fix  my 
fdot,  and  I  will  move  the  world ;"  so,  without  the  least  imputa- 
tion of  arrogance,  with  which  perhaps  be  was  justly  charge- 
idile,  we  may  venture  to  say,  Grant  the  foregoing  doctrine  to  be 
true,  and  tiien  deny  the  necessity  of  man's  being  renewed, 
who  can. 

I  suppose  I  may  take  it  for  granted,  that  all  of  you  amongst 
whom  I  am  now  preaching  the  kingdom  of  €rod,  hope  after  death 
to  go  to  a  place  which  we  call  heaven.  And  my 'heart's  desire 
and  prayer  to  God  for  you  is,  that  you  all  may  have  mansions 
prepared  for  you  there.  But  give  me  leave  to  tell  you,  were  you 
now  to  see  these  heavens  opened,  and  the  angel  (to  use  the  words 
of  the  seraphic  Harvey)  clothed  with  all  his  heavenly  drapery, 
with  one  foot  upon  the  earth,  and  another  upon  the  sea ;  nay, 
were  you  to  see  and  hear  the  angel  of  the  everlasting  covenant, 
Jesrts  Christ  himself,  proclaiming  "  Time  shall  be  no  more/'  and 
giving  you  all  an  invitation  immediately  to  come  to  heaven ; 
heaven  would  be  no  heaven  to  you,  nay,  it  would  be  a  hell  to 
your  souls,  unless  you  were  first  prepared  for  a  proper  enjoy- 
ment of  it  here  on  earth.  "  For  what  communion  hath  light  with 
darkness?'' or  what  fellowship  could  unrenewed  sons  of  Belial 
possibly  keep  up  with  the  pure  and  immaculate  Jesus  ? 

The  generality  of  people  form  strange  ideas  of  heaven.  And 
because  the  scriptures,  in  condescension  to  the  weakness  of  our 

l9 


180  THH  POTTER  AND  TRB  CLAY.  [Xlll. 

capacities,  describe  it  by  images  taken  from  earthly  delights  and 
baman  grandetiry  therefore  they  are  apt  to  carry  their  thoughts 
no  higher^  and  at  the  best  only  form  to  themselves  a  kind  of  Ma- 
hometan paradise.  But  permit  me  to  tell  you,  and  God  grant  it 
may  sink  deep  into  your  hearts !  heaven  is  rather  a  state  than 
a  place ;  and  consequently,  unless  you  are  previously  disposed 
by  a  suitable  state  of  mind,  you  could  not  be  happy  even  in 
heaven  itself.  For  what  is  grace,  but  glory  militant?  what  is 
glory,  but  grace  triumphant?  This  consideration  made  a  {nous 
i^uthor  say,  that  **  holiness,  happiness,  and  heaven,  were  only 
three  different  words  for  one  and  the  self-same  thing.''  And 
this  made  the  great  Preston,  when  he  was  about  to  die,  turn  to 
his  friends,  saying,  **  I  am  changing  my  place,  but  not  my  com- 
pany." He  had  conversed  with  God  and  good  men  on  earth ; 
he  was  going  to  keep  up  the  same,  aud  infinitely  more  refined 
communion  with  God,  his  holy  angels,  and  the  spirits  of  just  men 
made  perfect,  in  heaven. 

To  make  us  meet  to  be  blissfnl  partakers  of  such  heavenly 
company,  this  ^'  marred  clay,"  I  mean  these  depraved  natures 
of  ours,  must  necessarily  undergo  an  universal  moral  change  i 
our  understandings  must  be  enlightened  ;  our  wills,  reason^  and 
consciences,  must  be  renewed ;  our  afiectious  must  be  dtawft 
toward,  and  fixed  upon  things  above;  and  because  flesh  and 
blood  cannot  inherit  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  this  corruptible 
must  put  on  incorruption,  this  mortal  must  put  on  immortality. 
And  thus  old  things  must  literally  pass  away,  and  behold  all 
things,  even  the  body  as  well  as  the  fooulties  of  the  soul,  must 
become  new. 

This  moral  change  is  what  some  call  repentance,  some  con* 
version,  some  regeneration ;  choose  what  name  you  please,  I 
only  pray  God  that  we  all  may  have  the  thing.  The  scriptuies 
call  it  holiness,  sanctification,  the  new  creature,  and  our  Lord 
calls  it  a  **  new  birth,  or  being  born  again,  or  born  from  above^" 
These  are  but  barely  figurative  expressions,  or  the  flights  of 
eastern  language,  nor  do  they  barely  denote  a  relative  chaage  of 
state  conferred  on  all  those  who  are  admitted  into  Christ's 
church  by  baptism ;  but  they  denote  a  real,  moral  change  of 
heart  and  life,  a  real  participation  of  the  divine  life  in  the  soni 
of  man.  Some  indeed  content  themsdves  with  a  figurative  int^- 
pretation ;  but  unless  they  are  made  to  experience  the  power 
and  efficacy  thereof,  by  a  solid,  living  experience  in  their  own 
souls,  all  their  learning,  all  their  laboured  criticisms,  will  not 
exempt  them  from  a  real  damnation.  Christ  hath  said  it,  and 
Christ  will  stand,  ''  Unless,  a  man,"  learned  or  unlearned,  high 
or  low,  though  he  be  a  master  of  Israel  as  Nicodemus  was,  un- 
less he  ''  be  born  again,  he  cannot  see,  he  cannot  enter  into,  the 
kingdom  of  God." 

If  it  be  inquired,  who  is  to  be  the  potter?  and  by  whose  agency 
this  marred  clay  is  to  be  formed  into  another  vessel  ?  Or  in  other 
words,  if  it  be  asked,  how  this  great  and  mighty  change  is  to  be 
effected  ?    I  answer,  not  by  the  mere  dint  and  force  of  moral 


3^111*}  THB  FOTT^R  iND  THE  <;iiA1^«  161 

suasion.  This  is  good  in  its  place.  And  I  am  so  far  from  think- 
iog  ti^at  Christian  preachers  should  not  make  use  of  rational 
argument^  imd  motive^  in  their  sermons,  that  I  cannot  think 
they  are  fit  to  preach  at  alli  who  either  cannot,  pr  will  not  use 
tJiem.  We  have  tlie  example  of  the  great  God  himself  for  such 
^  practice  ?  ^*  Come,  (says  be)  and  let  us  reason  together.'*  And 
SiU  Paul>  th^it  priiire  of  preachers,  '*  reasoned  of  temperance,  and 
rigbteousfless,  and  a  judgment  to  come."  And  it  is  remarkable, 
**  that  whilst  he  was  leasoaipg  of  these  things,  Felix  trembled/' 
Nor  are  the  mo^t  persuasive  straias  of  holy  rhetoric  less  needful 
for  a  scribe  ready  instructed  to  the  kingdom  of  God.  The  scripr 
tures  both  uf  the  Old  and  New  Testament,  every  where  abound 
with  tliem-  And  when  can  they  be  more  properly  employed,  and 
brofigbt  forthf  than  when  we  are  acting  as  ambassadors  of  hea<r 
Ten*  and  beseeching  poor  sinners,  as  in  Christ's  stead,  to  be 
leoeociled  unto  Grod.  All  this  we  readily  grant.  Butntt  the 
same  time,  I  would  as  soon  go  to  yonder  church-yard,  and 
attempt  to  raise  the  dead  carcases,  with  a  ^'  Come  forth,"  as  to 
piaacb  to  dead  soqis,  did  I  not  hope  for  some  superior  power  to 
^laka  the  word  efiectual  to  the  designed  end.  I  should  only  be 
like  ft  sounding  brass  for  any  saving  purposes,  or  as  a  tinkling 
cymbal-  Neither  is  this  change  to  be  wrought  by  the  power  of 
ear  own  free-will.  This  is  an  idol  every  where  set  up,  but  we 
dare  9ot  fall  dow  u  and  worship  it,  "  No  man  (says  Christ)  can 
eeme  to  me,  unless  the  Father  draw  him/'  Our  own  free-will, 
if  improved,  may  restrain  us  frtmi  the  commission  of  many  evils, 
and  pat  us  in  the  way  of  conversion :  but,  after  exerting  our 
utmost  efforts,  (and  we  are  bound  in  duty  to  exert  them,)  we 
sball  find  the  words  of  our  own  church  article  to  be  true,  that 
"maa  since  the  fall  bath  no  power  to  turn  to  God."  No,  we 
night  aa  soon  attempt  to  stop  the  ebbing  and  flowing  of  the  tide, 
^d  calm  the  most  tempestuous  sea,  as  to  imagine  that  we  can 
s^Adve,  or  bring  under  proper  regulations,  our  own  unruly  wills 
aad  ftfleetions  by  any  strength  inherent  in  ourselves.       « 

And  tbeiefone,  that  J  may  keep  you  no  longer  in  suspense,  I 
inform  you,  that  this  heavenly  potter,  this  blessed  agent,  is  the 
Almighty  Spirit  of  God  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  third  person  in  the 
Viost  adorable  Trinity,  co-essential  with  the  Father  and  the  Son. 
Tbm  is  that  Spirit,  which  at  the  beginning  of  time  moved  on  the 
boe  of  tbe  waters,  when  nature  lay  in  one  universal  chaos.  This 
wa«  the  Spirit  that  overshadowed  the  holy  virgin,  before  that 
boly  thing  was  born  of  her :  and  this  same  Spirit  must  come  and 
move  upon  the  chaos  of  our  souls,  before  we  can  properly  be 
called  tbe  sons  of  God.  This  is  what  John  the  Baptist  calls 
"being  baptized  with  the  Holy  Ghost,"  without  which,  his  and 
^  otl^r  baptisms,  whether  infant  or  adult,  avail  nothing.  This 
is  that  fire  which  our  Lord  came  to  send  into  our  earthly  hearts, 
and  which  I  pray  the  lA>rd  of  all  lords  to  kindle  in  every  un- 
senewed  one  this  day. 

Aa  for  the  extraordinary  operations  of  the  Holy  Ghost  such  as 
noiiuDg  of  mimtcl^,  or  speaking  with  divers  kinds  of  tongues^ 


188  THE   POTTER    AND   THE   CLAIT,  £XIII. 

they  are  long  since  ceased.  But  as  for  this  miracle  of  miracles, 
turning  the  soul  to  God  by  the  more  ordinary  operations  of  the 
Holy  Ghost,  this  abides  yet,  and  will  abide  till  time  itself  shall 
be  no  more.  For  it  is  he  -that  sanctifieth  ns,  and  all  the  elect 
people  of  God.  On  this  account,  true  believers  are  said  to  be 
*'  born  from  above,  to  be  bom  not  of  blood,  nor  of  the  will  of 
man,  but  of  God.*'  Their  second,  as  well  as  their  first  creation, 
is  truly  and  purely  divine.  It  is,  therefore,  called  **a  creation;" 
''  but  put  ye  on  (says  the  apostle)  the  new  man,  which  is  cre- 
ated."— And  how  ?  £ven  as  the  first  man  was,  **  after  God,  in 
righteousness  and  true  holiness." 

These,  these  are  the  precious  truths,  which  a  scoffing  world 
would  fain  rally  or  ridicule  us  out  of.  To  produce  this  glorious 
change,this  new  creation,the  glorious  Jesus  left  his  Father's  bosom. 
For  this  he  led  a  persecuted  life,  for  this  he  died  an  ignominious 
and  accursed  death ;  for  this  he  rose  again ;  and  for  this  he  now 
sitteth  at  the  right  hand  of  his  Father.  All  the  precepts  of  bis  gos- 
pel, all  his  ordinances,  all  his  providences,  whether  of  an  afflictive 
or  prosperous  nature,  all  divine  revelation  from  the  beginning 
to  the  end,  all  centre  in  these  two  points,  to  shew  us  bow  we 
are  fallen,  and  to  begin,  carry  on,  and  complete  a  glorious  and 
blessed  change  in  our  souls.  This  is  an  end  worthy  of  the  com- 
ing of  so  divine  a  personage.  To  deliver  a  multitude  of  souls 
of  every  nation,  language,  and  tongue,  from  so  many  moral 
evils,  and  to  reinstate  them  in  an  incomparably  more  excellent 
condition  than  that  from  whence  they  are  fallen,  is  an  end  wor- 
thy the  shedding  of  such  precious  blood.  What  system  of  reli- 
gion is  there  now,  or  was  there  ever  any  exhibited  to  the  worid, 
any  way  to  be  compared  to  this  ?  Can  the  deistical  scheme  pre- 
tend in  any  degree  to  come  up  to  it?  Is  it  not,  noble,  rational, 
and  truly  divine?  And  why  then  will  not  all  that  hitherto  are. 
strangers  to  this  blessed  restoration  of  their  fallen  natures,  (for 
my  heart  is  too  full  to  abstain  any  longer  from  an  application,) 
why  will  you  any  longer  dispute  or  stand  out  against  it  ?  Why 
will  you  not  rather  bring  your  clay  to  this  heavenly  potter,  and 
say  from  your  inmost  souls,  ''Turn  us,  O  good  Lord,  and  so  shall 
we  be  turned  ?"  This,  you  may,  and  can  do :  and  if  you  go 
thus  far,  who  knows  but  that  this  very  day,  yea,  this  very  boor, 
the  heavenly  potter  may  take  you  in  hand,  and  make  you  ves- 
sels of  honour  fit  for  the  Redeemer's  use  ?  Others  that  were  once 
as  far  from  the  kingdom  of  God  as  you  are,  have  been  partakers 
of  this  blessedness?.  What  a  wretched  creature  was  Mary  Mag- 
dalen !  And  yet  out  of  her  Jesus  Christ  cast  seven  devils  ;  nay, 
he  appeared  to  her  first  after  he  rose  from  the  dead,  and  she  be- 
came as  it  were  an  apostle  to  the  very  apostles.  What  a  co- 
vetous creature  was  Zaccheus?  He  was  a  griping,  cheating 
publican ;  and  yet  perhaps,  in  one  quarter  of  an  hour's  time, 
bis  heart  is  enlarged,  and  he  made  quite  willing  to  give  hidf  of 
his  goods  to  feed  the  poor.  And,  to  mention  no  more,  what  a 
cruel  person  was  Paul.  He  was  a  persecutor,  a  blasphemer, 
injurious  ;  one  that  breathed  out  threatenings  against  the  dis* 


XIIJ.]  tHK  POTTBR  AND  THB  CLAY.  188 

ciples  of  the  Lord>  and  made  havock  of  the  church  of  Christ. 
And  yet  what  a  wonderful  turn  did  he  meet  with,  as  he  was 
joum^ing  to  Damascus !  from  a  persecutor,  he  became  a 
preacher ;  was  afterwards  made  a  spiritual  father  to  thousands, 
and  now,  probably,  sits  nearest  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  glory. 
And  why  all  this  ?  That  he  might  be  made  an  example  to  them 
that  should  hereafter  believe.  O  then  believe,  repent !  I  beseech 
you,  believe  the  gospel.  Indeed  it  is  glad  tidings,  even  tidings 
of  great  joy.  You  will  then  no  longer  have  any  thing  to  say 
against  the  doctrine  of  original  sin ;  or  charge  the  Almighty 
foolishly,  for  suffering  our  first  parents  to  be  prevailed  on  to  eat 
such  sour  grapes,  and  permitting  thereby  their  children's  teeth 
to  be  set  on  edge.  You  will  then  no  longer  cry  out  against  the 
doctrine  of  the  new  birth  as  enthusiasm,  or  brand  the  assert- 
ors  of  such  blessed  truths  with  the  opprobrious  names  of  fools 
and  madmen.  Having  felt,  you  will  then  believe;  having 
believed,  you  wUl  therefore  spe£ik;  and,  instead  of  being 
vessels  of  wrath,  and  growing  harder  and  harder  in  hell-fire,  like 
vessels  in  a  potter's  oven,  you  will  be  made  vessels  of  honour, 
and  be  presented  at  the  great  day  by  Jesus  to  his  heavenly 
Father,  and  be  translated  to  live  with  him  as  monuments  of  rich, 
free,  distinguishing,  and  sovereign  grace,  for  ever  and  ever. 

You,  that  have  in  some  degree  experienced  the  quickening 
influence,  (for  I  must  not  conclude  without  dropping  a  word  or 
two  to  God's  children,)  you  know  how  to  pity,  and  therefore  I 
beseech  you  also  to  pray  for,  those  to  whose  circumstances  this 
discourse  is  peculiariy  adapted.  But  will  you  be  content  in 
prajTing  for  them  ?  Will  you  not  see  reason  to  pray  for  yourselves 
also  ?  Yes,  doubtless,  for  yourselves  also :  for  you,  and  you 
only,  know  how  much  there  is  yet  lacking  in  your  faith,  and 
bow  far  you  are  from  being  partakers,  in  that  degree  which  you 
desire  to  be,  of  the  whole  mind  that  was  in  Christ  Jesus.  You 
know  what  a  body  of  sin  and  death  you  carry  about  with  you, 
and  that  you  must  necessarily  expect  many  turns  of  Grod's  pro- 
vidence and  grace,  before  you  will  be  wholly  delivered  from  it. 
But,  thanks  be  to  God,  we  are  in  safe  hands.  He  that  has  been 
the  author,  will  also  be  the  finisher  of  our  faith.  Yet  a  little 
while,  and  we,  like  him,  shall  say,  ^*  It  is  finished ;"  we  shall  bow 
down  our  heads,  and  give  up  the  ghost.  Till  then,  (for  to  thee, 
O  Lord,  will  we  now  direct  our  prayer,)  help  us,  O  Almighty 
Father,  in  patience  to  possess  our  souls.  Behold,  we  are  the 
clay,  and  thou  art  the  Potter.  Let  not  the  thing  formed  say  to 
him  that  formed  it,  whatever  the  dispensations  of  thy  future 
will  concerning  us  may  be.  Why  dost  thou  deal  with  us  thus  T 
Behold,  we  put  ourselves  as  blanks  in  thine  hands,  deal  with 
us  as  seemeth  good  in  thy  sight,  only  let  every  cross,  every 
affliction,  every  temptation,  be  over-ruled  to  the  stamping  thy 
blessed  image  in  more  lively  characters  on  our  hearts  ;  that  so, 
passing  from  glory  to  glory,  by  the  powerful  operations  of  thy 
blessed.  Spirit,  we  may  be  made  thereby  more  and  more  meet 
for,  and  at  last  be  translated  to,  a  full,  perfect,  endless,  and  unin- 


X84  THg   1«QRP  MUH   gIGHTEOVSNBflS.  {XIT. 

terrupted  ^i\joyipeQt  of  glury  hereafter*  witb  thee,  O  Father, 
thee,  O  Son,  an<|  thee«  O  bl^^sect  Spirit ;  to  whom,  three  persoos, 
but  one  God,  be  ascribed,  as  its  mpst  du^,  all  honour,  power, 
mifi'bt,  majesty,  and  do^u^ion,  now  and  to  all  eternity.  Amen 
and  Amen. 


^^m^^^^f 


SERMON  XIV. 

THE   LORD   OUR   RIGHTEOUSNESS. 

The  Lord  our  Righteousness. — Jer.  xxiii.  6.> 

Whoever  is  acquainted  with  the  nature  of  mankind  in  general, 
or  the  propensity  of  his  own  heart  in  particular*  must  acknow- 
ledge, that  self-righteousness  is  the  last  idol  that  is  rooted  out  of 
the  heart:  being  once  born  under  a  covenant  of  works,  it  is  na^ 
tural  for  us  all  to  have  recourse  to  a  covenant  of  works  for  our 
everlasting  salvation.  And  we  have  contracted  such  a  devilish 
pride  by  our  fall  from  Gpd,  that  we  would,  if  not  wholly,  yet  la 
part  at  least,  glory  in  being  the  cause  of  our  own  salvation.  We 
cry  out  against  popery^  ^nd  that  very  justly;  but  we  are  all 
Papists;  at  least,  |  am  sure,  we  are  all  Armlnians  by  nature; 
and,  therefore,  no  wonder  so  many  natural  men  embr^pe  that 
scheme.  It  is  true,  we  disclaim  the  doctrine  of  merit,  are  asham- 
ed directly  to  say  we  deserve  any  good  at  the  bands  of  God; 
therefore,  as  the  apostle  excellently  well  observes,  '^we  go 
abo^t,"  we  fetch  a  circuit,  *'  to  establish  a  righteoui»p6ss  of  our 
own,  and,"  like  the  Pharisees  of  old,  ^'  will  not  wholly  submit 
to  that  righteousness  which  is  of  God  through  Jesus  Christ 
Qur  Lord. 

This  is  the  sorest,  though,  alas !  the  most  common  evil  that 
was  ever  yet  seen  under  the  sun.  An  evil,  that  in  any  age, 
especially  in  these  dregs  of  time  wherein  we  live,  cannot  suffici- 
ently be  inveighed  against.  For  as  it  is  with  the  people,  so  it  is 
with  the  priests ;  and  it  is  to  be  feared,  even  in  those  places, 
where  once  the  truth,  as  it  is  in  Josus,  was  eminently  preached, 
many  ministers,  are  so  sadly  degenerated  from  their  pious 
ancestors,  that  the  doctrines  of  grace,  especially  the  personal, 
alUsyjfficient  righteousness  of  Jesus,  is  but  too  seldom,  too  slightly 
mentioned.  Hence  the  love  of  many  waxeth  cold ;  and  I  have 
often  thought,  were  it  possible,  that  this  single  consideration 
would  be  suflScient  to  raise  our  venerable  forefatberi,  again  from 
their  graves;  who  would  thunder  in  their  ears  their  fatal  error. 

The  righteousness  of  Jesus  Christ  is  one  of  those  great  myste-^ 
ries  which  the  angels  desire  to  look  into,  and  seems  to  be  one 
of  the  first  lessons  that  God  taught  men  after  the  fall.  For,  what 
were  the  coats  that  God  made  to  put  on  our  first  parents,  but 
types  of  the  application  of  the  merits  or  righteousness  of  Jesus 
Christ  to  believers'  heaVts?  We  are  told,  that  those  coats  were 
Qiade  of  skins  of  beasts ;  and,  as  beasts  were  not  then  food  for 
m^Pf  we  may  fairly  inter,  that  those  beasts  were  slain  in  sacn- 


XIV.]  T|i«  U>aD  OUR  RIGHTKOUSNBMf  199 

fice,  IQ  commemoratioQ  of  the  preat  sacrifice^  Jesus  CInrist>  there- 
after to  be  offered.  And  the  skins  of  the  beasts  thus  slain,  being 
Eot  on  Adam  and  Eve,  they  were  hereby  taught  how  their  na- 
edness  was  to  be  covered  with  the  righteousness  of  the  Lamb 
of  God. 

This  is  it  which  is  meant,  when  we  are  told,  '*  Abraham  believ- 
ed on  the  Lord,  and  it  was  accoqntecl  to  him  for  righteousness." 
In  short,  this  is  it  of  which  both  the  law  apd  the  prophets  have 
spoken,  especially  Jeremiah  w  the  word?  of  the  tei^t,  '*  The  Lord 
our  righteousnes9f" 

I  propose,  through  divine  grace, 

I.  To  consider  who  we  are  to  understand  by  the  word  Lord. 

IJ«  How  the  Lord  is  m£^n*s  righteousne^fs, 

IIL  I  will  consider  some  of  the  chief  oUJeotion^  that  are 
generally  urged  against  this  doctrine. 

IV.  I  sbiUl  shew  some  very  iU  copsequeoees  that  flow  natu- 
rally (ton)  denying  this  doctrine. 

y^  Shalt  copclude  with  an  exhortation  to  all  to  come  to 
Christ  by  faith,  that  they  may  be  enabled  to  say  with  the  pro- 
phet iQ  the  text,  **  The  Lord  our  righteousness.'* 

L  I  am  to  eon^ider  who  we  are  to  upderstand  by  the  word 
Lord.    The  Lord  our  righteousness. 

If  any  Arians  or  Sooinians  are  drawn  by  curiosity  to  hear  what 
tbe  bdu>ler  has  to  say,  let  them  be  ashamed  of  denying  the  divi- 
nity of  that  Lord,  who  ha«s  bought  poor  siqners  with  his  precious 
bloiod.  For  tbe  person  mentioned  in  the  tei^t^  under  the  charac- 
ter of  the  Lord,  is  Jesus  Christ,  Ver*  &•  ^'  Behold,  the  days 
come,  eaitb  the  l4>rd,  that  I  will  raise  nnto  David  a  righteous 
branch,  a  king  shall  reigo  and  prosper,  and  shall  execute  judg- 
oeot  and  justice  In  the  earth.  In  bis  days  (ver.  6.)  Judah 
sliall  be  saved,  and  Israel  shall  dwell  f  afely ;  and  this  is  his 
name  wbereby  be  shall  be  called.  The  l4>rd  our  righteousness." 
By  tbe  righteous  branch,  aJU  agree  that  we  are  to  understand 
Jesus  Christ.  He  it  is  that  is  called  the  Lord  in  our  text.  If 
so,  if  there  were  no  other  text  in  the  bible  to  prove  the  divinity 
of  Qirist,  this  is  sufficient :  for  if  the  word  Lord  may  properly 
belong  to  Jesus  Christ,  he  must  be  God.  And,  as  you  havejt 
in  the  margin  of  your  bibles,  tbe  word  Lord  is,  in  the  original, 
Jthovak,  which  is  the  essential  title  of  God  himself.  Come  then,  ye 
Ariana,  Idss  the  Son  of  God,  bow  down  before  him,  and  honour 
hiiD,  even  as  ye  honour  the  Father^  Learn  of  the  angels,  those 
Qoming-'jitars,  and  worship  him  as  truly  God :  for  otherwise  you 
are  aa  much  idolaters  as  those  that  worship  tbe  virgin  Mary. 
And  as  for  yon  Socinians,  who  say  Christ  was  a  mere  man,  and 
yet  profess  that  he  was  your  Saviour;  according  to  your  own 
priQci|4e8  you  are  accursed :  for,  if  Christ  be  a  mere  man,  then 
he  is  only  an  arm  of  flesh ;  and  it  is  written,  '^  Cursed  is  he  tbat 
tnisteth  on  an  arm  of  flesh."  But  I  would  hope  there  are  no 
snch  monsters  here ;  at  least,  that,  after  these  considerations, 
they  would  be  ashamed  of  broaching  such  monstrous  absurdities 
any  mom.    For  it  is  plaiDi  that,  by  the  word  Lord,  we  are  to 


18d  TRB   LORD   OUR  RIGHTEOUSKB88.  [XIV. 

understand  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  here  takes  to  himself  the 
title,  of  Jehovdhy  and  therefore  must  be  very  God  of  very  God ; 
or,  as  the  apostle  devoutly  expresses  it,  ^'God  blessed  for 


evermore." 


II.  How  the  Lord  is  to  be  man's  righteousness,  comes  next 
to  be  considered. 

And  that  is,  in  one  word,  by  imputation.  For  it  pleased  God, 
after  he  had  made  all  things  by  the  word  of  his  power,  to  create 
man  after  his  own  image.  And  so  infinite  was  the  condescension 
of  the  high  and  lofty  One  who  inhabiteth  eternity,  that  although 
he  might  have  insisted  on  the  everlasting  obedience  of  hikn  and 
his  posterity ;  yet  he  was  pleased  to  oblige  himself,  by  a  cove- 
nant, or  agreement,  made  with  his  own  creatures,  upon  condition 
of  an  unsinning  obedience,  to  give  them  immortality  and  eternal 
'life.  For  when  it  is  said,  ''The  day  thou  eatest  thereof,  thou 
shalt  surely  die :"  we  may  fairly  infer,  so  long  as  he  continued 
obedient,  and  did  not  eat  thereof,  he  should  surely  live.  The  3d 
of  Genesis  gives  us  a-full,  but  mournful  account,  how  our  first 
parents  broke  this  covenant,  and  thereby  stood  in  need  of  a 
better  righteousness  than  their  own,  in  order  to  procure  their 
future  acceptance  with  God.  For  what  must  they  do?  They 
were  as  much  under  a  covenant  of  works  as  ever.  And  though, 
after  their  disobedience,  they  were  without  strength;  yet  they  were 
obliged  not  only  to  do,  but  to  continue  to  do  all  things,  and  that 
too  in  the  most  perfect  manner,  which  the  Lord  had  required  of 
them :  and  not  only  so,  but  to  make  satisfaction  to  Grod*s  infi- 
nitely ofiended  justice  for  the  breach  they  had  already  been 
guilty  of.  Here  then  opens  the  amazing  scene  of  divine  philof^ 
thropy  ;  I  mean,  God's  love  to  man:  for,  behold,  what  man  could 
not  do,  Jesus  Christ,  the  Son  of  his  Father's  love,  undertakes  to 
do  for  him.  And  that  God  might  be  just  in  justifying  the  un- 
godly, though  ''he  was  in  the  form  of  Grod,  and  therefore  thought 
it  no  robbery  to  be  equal  with  God ;  yet  he  took  upon  him  the 
form  of  a  servant,"  even  human  nature.  In  that  nature  he  obey- 
ed, and  thereby  fulfilled  the  whole  moral  law  in  our  stead;  and 
also  died  a  painful  death  upon  the  cross,  and  thereby  became  a 
curse  for,  or  instead  of,  those  whom  the  Father  had  given  to 
him.  As  God,  he  satisfied,  at  the  same  time  that  he  obeyed  and 
sufiered  as  man;  and  being  God  and  man  in  one  person,  he 
wrought  out  a  full,  perfect,  and  sufficient  righteousness  for  all 
to  whom  it  was  to  be  imputed. 

Here  then  we  see  the  meaning  of  the  word  righteousness.  It 
implies  the  active  as  well  as  passive  obedience  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  We  generally,  when  talking  of  the  merits  of  Christ,  only 
mention  the  latter,  his  death;  whereas  the  former,  his  life  and' 
active  obedience,  is  equally  necessary.  Christ  is  not  such  a 
Saviour  as  becomes  us,  unless  we  join  both  together.  Christ  not 
only  died,  but  lived ;  not  only  sufiered,  but  obeyed  for,  or  instead 
of,  poor  sinners.  And  both  these  jointly  make  up  that  complete 
righteousness  which  is  to  be  imputed  to  us,  as  the  disobedience 
of  our  first  parents  was  made  ours  by  imputation.  In  this  senae^ 


:Xiy.]  TRB   LORD  OUR   RI6HTB0U8NB88.  187 

and  no  other,  are  we  to  nnderstand  that  parallel  which  the 
apostle  Paul  draws  in  the  fifth  of  the  Romans,  between  the  first 
and  second  Adam.  This  is  what  he  elsewhere  terms,  **  onr  being 
made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  him."  This  is  the  sense 
wherein  the  prophet  would  have  us  to  understand  the  words  of 
the  text;  therefore,  Jer.  xxxiii.  16.  ''She  (that  is,  the  church 
itself)  shall  be  called,  (having  this  righteousness  imputed  to  her,) 
the  Ix>rd  our  righteousness.''  A  passage,  I  think,  worthy  of  the 
profonndestmeditation  of  all  the  sons  and  daughters  of  Abraham. 
Many  are  the  objections  which  the  proud  hearts  of  fallen  men 
ate  continually  urging  against  this  wholesome,  this  divine,  this 
soul-saving  doctrine.     I  oome  now, 

IIL  To  answer  some  few  of  those  which  I  think  the  most 
considerable. 

And,  First,  They  say,  because  they  would  appear  friends  to 
morality,  **  That  the  doctrine  of  an  imputed  righteousness  10 
destructive  of  good  works,  and  leads  to  licentiousness." 

And  who,  pray,  are  the  persons  that  generally  urge  this  objec-* 
tionf  Are  they  men  full  of  faith,  and  men  really  concerned  for 
good  works?  No;  whatever  few  exceptions  there  maybe,  if 
diere  be  any  at  all,  it  is  notorious  they  are  generally  men  of  cor- 
mpt  minds,  reprobate  concerning  the  faith.  The  best  title  I  can 
give  them  is,  that  of  profane  moralists,  or  moralists  falsely  so 
called.  For  I  appeal  to  the  experience  of  the  present,  as  well 
past  ages,  if  iniquity  did  and  does  not  most  abound,  where  the 
doctrine  of  Christ's  whole  personal  righteousness  is  most  cried 
down,  and  most  seldom  mentioned :  Arminian,  being  antichris- 
tian  principles,  always  did,  and  always  will,  lead  to  antichristian 
practices.  And  never  was  there  a  reformation  brought  about  in 
the  church,  but  by  preaching  the  doctrine  of  an  imputed  righte- 
ousness. This,  as  that  man  of  God,  Luther,  calls  it,  is  *'  arti- 
cutis  stantis  aut  cadentis  ecclesite,'*  the  article  by  which  the 
church  stands  or  falls.  And  though  the  preachers  of  this  doc- 
trine are  generally  branded,  by  those  on  the  other  side,  with  the 
opprobrious  names  of  Antinomians,  deceivers,  and  what  not ; 
yet,  I  believe,  if  the  truth  of  the  doctrine,  on  both  sides,  was  to  be 
judged  of  by  the  lives  of  the  preachers  and  professors  of  it,  on 
onr  side  the  question  would  have  the  advantage  every  way. 

It  is  true,  this,  as  well  as  every  other  doctrine  of  grace,  may 
be  abused.  And  perhaps  the  unchristian  walk  of  some,  who 
have  talked  ot  Christ's  imputed  righteousness,  justification  by 
£uth,  and  the  like,  and  yet  never  felt  it  imputed  to  their  own 
souls,  has  given  the  enemies  of  the  Lord  thus  cause  to  blas- 
pheme. But  this  is  a  very  unsafe,  as  well  as  a  very  unfair,  way 
of  arguing.  The  only  question  should  be,  whether  or  not  this 
doctrine  of  an  imputed  righteousness  does  in  inself  cut  oflf  the 
occasion  of  good  works,  or  lead  to  licentiousness?  To  this  we 
may  boldly  answer,  In  no  wise.  It  excludes  works,  indeed,  from 
being  any  cause  of  our  justification  in  the  sight  of  God;  but  it 
vequires  good  works  as  a  proof  of  our  having  this  righteousness 
inpated  to  us,  and  as  a  declarative  evidence  of  our  justification 


188  TUB  MRP  QUE  DIQHT«QV»N«M*  [l^fV* 

in  the  sight  of  men*    And  then^  bow  ean  tba  doctrine  of  an 
imputed  righteousness  be  a  doctriine  leading  to  licentiousness  ? 

It  is  all  calumny.  The  apostle  P^ul  introduceth  an  infidel 
making  this  objection  in  his  epi(»tle  to  the  Romans ;  and  none 
but  infidels,  that  never  felt  the  power  of  Christ's  resurrection 
upon  their  souls,  will  urge  it  over  again*  And  therefore,  not- 
withstanding this  objection,  with  the  prophet  in  the  text  we 
may  boldly  say,  "The  Lord  is  our  righteousness/' 

But  Satan  (and  no  wonder  that  his  servants  imitate  him)  oft^n 
transforms  him  into  an  angel  of  light ;  and  therefore,  (such  per- 
verse things  will  infidelity  and  Arminianism  make  men  speak) 
in  order  to  dress  their  objections  in  the  best  colours,  some  urge, 
''  That  our  Saviour  preached  no  suqh  doctrine;  that  in  his  ser- 
mon on  the  mount,  he  mentions  only  morality ;  and  conse^ 
quently  the  doctrine  of  an  imputed  righteousness  falls  wholly  to 
the  ground." 

But  surely  the  men  who  urge  this  objection,  either  never  read, 
or  never  understood,  our  Lord's  blessed  discourse,  wherein  the 
doctrine  of  an  imputed  righteousness  is  so  plainly  taug^t^  that 
he  who  runs,  if  he  have  eyes  that  see,  may  read. 

Indeed,  our  Lord  does  recommend  morality  and  good  woiks, 
(as  all  faithful  ministers  will  do,)  and  clears  the  moral  law  from 
many  corrupt  glosses  put  upon  it  by  the  letter-learned  Pharisees. 
But  then,  before  he  comes  to  this,  it  is  remarkable,  he  talks  of 
inward  ptety,  such  as  poverty  of  spirit,  meekness,  holy  mourn- 
ing, purity  of  heart,  especially  hungering  and  thirsting ,  after 
righteousness^  and  then  recommends  good  works,  as  an  evi- 
dence of  our  having  his  righteousness  imputed  to  us,  and  these 
graces  and  divine  tempers  wrought  in  our  hearts.  '  Let  your  light 
(that  is,  the  divine  light  I  before  have  been  mentioning)  shine 
before  men  in  a  holy  life ;  that  they,  seeing  your  good  works,  may 
glorify  your  Father  which  is  in  heavenJ'  And  then  he  imme- 
diately adds,  *^  Think  not  that  I  am  come  to  destroy  the  moral 
law :  I  came  not  destroy,  (to  take  away  the  force  of  it  as  a  rule 
of  life,)  but  to  fulfil,  to  obey  it  in  its  whole  latitude,  and  give  the 
complete  sense  of  it."  And  then  he  goes  on  to  shew  how  ex- 
ceeding broad  the  moral  law  is.  So  that  our  Lord,  instead  of 
setting  aside  an  imputed  righteousness,  in  his  sermon  upon  the 
mount,  not  only  confirms  it,  but  also  answers  the  foregoing  ob- 
jection urged  against  it,  by  making  good  works  a  proof  and 
evidence  of  its  being  imputed  to  our  souls.  He,  therefore,  that 
hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear  what  the  prophet  says  in  the 
words  of  the  text,  *'  The  Lord  our  righteousness.'' 

But  as  Satan  not  only  quoted  scripture,  but  backed  one  temp- 
tation after  another  with  it,  when  he  attacked  Christ  in  the 
wilderness ;  so  his  children  generally  take  the  same  method  ia 
treating  his  doctrine.  And,  ^erefore,  they  urge  another  objec- 
tion against  the  doctrine  of  an  imputed  righteousness^  from  the 
example  of  the  young  man  in  the  gospel. 

We  may  state  it  thus :  *'  The  evangelist  Mark,  say  they» 
chap.  X.  mentions  a  young  man  that  came  to  Cbristi  roniung. 


XIVj  Tm  MRD  OUR  RIOHTIOUBKK88.  189 

and  Mldngr  What  he  should  do  to  inherit  etelil^  fife  ?  Christ  re^ 
ferred  him  to  the  commandikietits^  to  know  what  he  most  do  to 
inherit  eternal  life.  It  is  plain^  therefore,  works  were  to  be,  partly 
at  ieasty  the  canse  of  his  jnstification :  and  consequently  die  doc- 
trine of  an  imputed  righteousness  is  unscriptutal/'  This  is  the  ob- 
jection in  its  full  strength :  and  little  strength  in  all  its  fulness.  For, 
were  I  to  prove  the  necessity  of  an  imputed  righteousness,  I  scarco 
know  how  I  could  bring  a  better  instance  to  make  it  good. 

Let  us  take  a  nearer  View  of  this  young  man,  and  of  our  Lord's 
behatioai  towards  him. :  Mark  x.  17.  tiie  evangelist  tells  us, 
''That  when  Christ  was  gone  forth  into  the  way,  there  came 
eae  running  (it  should  seem  it  was  some  nobleman,  a  rarity  indeed 
to  see  such  a  one  running  to  Christ !)  and  not  only  so,  but  he 
kneeled  to  him,  (perhaps  many  of  his  rank  now,  scarce  know 
the  time  wheti  they  kneeled  to  Christ,)  and  asked  him,  sayings 
''Good  Master,  what  shall  I  do,  that  I  may  inherit  eternal  life?" 
Thmi  Jesus,  to  see  whether  or  not  he  believed  hira  to  be  what 
he  really  was,  truly  and  properly  Ood,  said  unto  him, ''  Why 
caOest  thou  me  good  ?  There  is  none  good  but  one,  that  is,  God." 
And  that  he  might  directly  answer  his  question,  says  he,  "  ThoU 
knowest  the  commandments :  do  not  commit  adultery,  do  not 
bear  false  witness,  defraud  not,  honour  thy  father  and  thy  mo-« 
ttier.''  This  was  a  direct  answer  to  his  question ;  namely,  That 
eternal  life  was  not  -to  be  attained  by  his  doings.  For  ouir 
Lord  by  referring  him  to  the  commandments,  did  not,  as  the 
objectors  insinuate,  in  the  least  hint  that  his  morality  would 
recommend  him  to  the  favour  and  mercy  of  God :  but  he  in* 
tended  thereby,  to  make  the  law  his  schoolmaster  to  bring 
km  to  himself;  that  the  young  man^  seeing  how  he  had  broken 
ermy  one  of  these  commandments,  might  thereby  be  convinced 
•f  the  insufficiency  of  his  own,  and  consequently  of  the  absolute 
seeessity  of  looking  out  for  a  better  righteousness,  whereon  be 
tugfat  depend  for  eternal  life. 

niis  was  what  our  Lord  designed.  The  young  man  being  self- 
righteous,  and  willing  to  justify  himself,  said,  *'  All  these  have 
I  observed  from  my  youth ;"  but  had  he  known  himself,  he  would 
have  oonfessed,  aU  these  have  I  broken  from  my  youth*  For^ 
mpposiDg  he  never  actually  committed  adultery,  had  he  never 
hated  affasr  a  woman  in  hid  heart  ?  What  if  he  had  not  really 
killed  another,  had  he  never  been  angry  without  a  cause>  or 
ipcAen  unadvisedly  with  his  lips?  If  so,  by  breaking  one  of  the 
least  commandments  in  the  least  degree,  he  became  liable  to  the 
enrse of  Gk>d ;  for'' cursed  is  he  (saith  the  law^  that  continueth 
not  to  do  all  things  that  are  written  in  this  book."  And  there- 
tofe,  aa  observed  before,  our  Lord  was  so  far  from  speaking 
against,  that  he  treated  the  young  man  in  that  manner,  on  purpose 
to  amvince  him  of  the  necessity  of>  an  imputed  righteousness. 

But,  perhaps,  they  will  reply^  it  is  said,/'  Jesus  beholding  him, 
loved  him/'  Ajid  what  then?  This  he  might  do  with  a  human 
love,  and  at  the  same  time  this  young  man  have  no  interest  in 
his  Uood«    Thus  Christ  is  said  to  wonder,  to  weep  over  Jem- 


190  THB  LORD  OUR   RIGHTKOUSNBSS.'  [:Xir« 

salem,  and  say,  **  O  that  thba  hadst  known/'  &c.  Bat  stich-Iike 
passages  are  to  be  referred  only  to  his  human  nature.  And  there 
is  a  great  deal  of  difference  between  the  love  wherewith  Christ 
loved  this  young  man,  and  that  wherewith  he  loved  Mary,  La- 
zarus, and  their  sister  Martha.  To  illustrate  this  by  a  compari- 
son :  a  minister  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  seeing  many  amiable 
dispositions,  such  as  a  readiness  to  hear  the  word,  a  decent 
behaviour  at  public  worship,  and  a  lifd  outwardly  spotless  in 
many,  cannot  but  so  far  love  them ;  but  then,  there  is  much  differ- 
ence betwixt  the  love  which  a  minister  feels  for  such,  and  that 
divine  love,  that  union  and  sympathy  of  soul,  which  he  feels  for 
those  that  he  is  satisfied  are  really  bom  again  of  God.  Apply 
this  to  oar  Lord*s  case,  as  a  faint  illustration  of  it.  Consider  what 
has  been  said  upon  the  young  man's  case  in  general,  and  then,  if 
before  you  were  fond  of  this  objection,  instead  of  triumphing, 
like  him  you  will  go  sorrowful  away.  Our  Saviour's  reply  to 
him,  more  and  more  convinces  us  of  the  truth  of  the  prophet's 
assertion  in  the  text,  that  "  the  Lord  is  our  righteousness." 

But  there  is  a  fourth,  and  a  grand  objection  yet  behind,  which 
is  taken  from  the  25th  chapter  of  Matthew,  ^'  where  our  Lord  is 
described  as  rewarding  people  with  eternal  life,  because  they 
fed  the  hungry,  clothed  the  naked,  and  such  like.  Their  works, 
therefore,  were  a  cause  of  their  justification,  consequently  the 
doctrine  of  imputed  righteousness  is  not  agreeable  to  scripture." 

This,  I  confess,  is  the  most  plausible  objection  that  is  brought 
against  the  doctrine  insisted  on  from  the  text ;  and  that  we  may 
answer  it  in  as  clear  and  brief  a  manner  as  may  be,  we  confess, 
with  the  article  of  the  Church  of  England,  ^*  That  albeit  good 
works  do  not  justify  us,  yet  they  will  follow  after  justification, 
as  fruits  of  it;  and  though  they  can  claim  no  reward  in  them- 
selves, yet  forasmuch  as  they  spring  from  faith  in  Christ,  and  a 
renewed  soul,  they  shall  receive  a  reward  of  grace,  though  not 
of  debt ;  and  consequently,  the  more  we  abound  in  such  good 
works^  the  greater  wUl  be  our  reward  when  Jesus  Christ  shall 
come  to  judgment."  . 

Take  these  considerations  along  with  us,  and  they  will  help 
us  much  to  answer  the  objection  now  before  us.  For  thus  saith 
Matthew,  *'  Then  shall  the  King  say  to  them  on  his  right  hand. 
Come,  ye  blessed  children  of  my  Father,  inherit  the  kingdom 
prepared  for  you  from  the  foundation  of  the  world.  For  I  was 
an  hungered,  and  ye  gave  me  meat ;  I  was  thirsty,  and  ye  gave 
me  drink ;  I  was  a  stranger,  and  ye  took  me  in  ;  naked,  and  ye 
clothed  me ;  I  was  sick,  and  ye  visited  me ;  I  was  in  prison,  and 
ye  came  unto  me.  I  will  therefore  reward  you,  because  you 
have  done  these  things  out  of  love  to  me,  and  hereby  have  evi- 
denced yourselves  to  be  my  true  disciples."  And  that  the  people 
did  not  depend  on  these  good  actions  for  their  justification  in  the 
sight  of  God,  is  evident:  ''  For  when  saw  we  thee  an  hungered, 
(say  they,) and  fed  thee?  or  thirsty,  and  gave  thee  drink?  When 
saw  we  thee  a  stranger,  and  took  thee  in ;  or  naked,  and  clothed 
thee?    Or  when  saw  we  thee  sick,  or  in  prison,  and  came  unto 


XIV.]  TAB  LORD  OUR   RIGHTEOUSNESS.  191 

thee^  Language,  and  questions,  quite  improper  for  persons 
relying  on  their  own  righteousness,  for  acceptance  and  acquit- 
tance in  the  sight  of  Grod. 

But  then  they  reply  against  this :  '^  In  the  latter  part  of  the 
chapter,  it  is  plain  that  Jesus  Christ  rejects  and  damns  the  others 
for  not  doing  these  things.  And  therefore,  if  he  damn  these  for 
not  doing,  he  saves  those  for  doing ;  and  consequently  the  doc- 
trine of  an  imputed  righteousness  is  good  for  nothing." 

But  that  is  no  consequence  at  all ;  for  Grod  may  justly  damn 
any  man  for  omitting  the  least  duty  of  the  moral  law,  and  yet  in 
himself  is  not  obliged  to  give  to  any  one  any  reward,  supposing 
he  has  done  all  that  he  can.  We  are  unprofitable  servants,  we 
have  not  done  near  so  much  as  it  was  our  duty  to  do, — must  be 
the  language  of  the  most  holy  souls  living ;  and  therefore,  from, 
or  in  ourselves,  cannot  be  justified  in  the  sight  of  God.  This  was 
the  fnune  of  the  devout  souls  just  now  referred  to.  Sensible  of 
this,  they  were  so  far  from  depending  on  their  works  for  justifi- 
cation in  the  sight  of  Grod,  that  they  were  filled,  as  it  were,  with 
a  holy  blushing,  to  think  our  Lord  should  condescend  to  mention, 
much  more  'to  reward  them  for,  their  poor  works  of  faith  and 
labours  of  love.  I  am  persuaded  their  hearts  would  rise  with  a 
holy  indignation  against  those  who  urge  this  passage  as  an 
objection  to  the  assertion  of  the  prophet,  that  "  the  Lord  is  our 
righteousness." 

Thus,  I  think,  we  have  fairly  answered  these  grand  objections, 
which  are  generally  urged  against  the  doctrine  of  an  imputed 
right€Ousnes9.  Was  I  to  stop  here,  I  think  I  may  say, ''  We  are 
made  more  than  conquerors  through  him  that  loved  us."  But 
there  is  a  way  of  arguing  which  1  have  always  admired,  because 
I  have  thought  it  always  very  convincing,  by  shewing  the  absur- 
dities that  will  follow  from  denying  any  particular  proposition 
ia  dispute. 

rV.  This  is  the  next  thing  that  was  proposed.  And  never 
did  greater  or  more  absurdities  flow  from  the  denying  any  doc- 
trine, than  will  flow  from  denying  the  doctrine  of  Christ's  im- 
puted righteousness. 

And  first f  If  we  deny  this  doctrine,  we  turn  the  truth,  T  mean 
the  word  of  God,  as  much  as  we  can,  into  a  lie,  and  utterly  sub- 
vert aU  those  places  of  scripture  which  say  that  we  are  saved  by 
grace ;  that  it  is  not  of  works,  lest  any  man  should  boast ;  that 
salvation  is  God's  free  gift ;  and  that  he  who  glorieth,  must  glory 
only  in  the  Lord.  For,  if  the  whole  personal  righteousness  of 
Jesus  Christ  be  not  the  sole  cause  of  my  acceptance  with  God, 
if  any  work  done  by  or  foreseen  in  me,  was  in  the  least  to  be 
joined  with  it,  or  looked  upon  by  Grod  as  an  inducing,  impulsive, 
cause  of  acquitting  my  soul  from  guilt,  then  I  have  somewhat 
whereof  I  mav  glory  in  myself.  Now,  boasting  is  excluded  in 
fhe  great  work  of  our  redemption ;  but  that  cann6t  be,  if  we  are 
enennes  to  the  doctrine  of  an  imputed  righteousness.  It  would 
be  endless  to  enumerate  how  many  texts  of  scripture  must  be 
ftlsOj  if  this  doctrine  be  not  true.    Let  it  suffice  to  affirm  in  the 


yetieral,  that  if  we  ^eny  lui  imputed  rigbteoaMe88>  nve  m&y  M 
ilrell  deny  a  divine  revelation  all  at  once :  for  it  ia  the  olpha  and 
omega,  the  beginning  and  the  end,  of  the  book  of  Grod.  We  iniist 
either  disbelieve  that,  or  believe  frhat  the  prophet  hath  spoken 
in  the  text,  that  ''  th6  Lord  is  our  righteousness/' 

But  farther :  I  observed  at  the  beginning  of  this  dlscoursei  that 
we  were  all  Arminians  and  Papists  by  nature ;  for,  as  one  says, 
'*  Arminianism  is  the  back  way  to  popery/'  Aiid  here  I  venture 
farther  to  affirm,  that  if  we  deny  the  doctrine  of  an  imputed  righ- 
teousness, whatever  we  may  style  ourselves^  we  are  really 
Papists  in  our  hearts,  and  deserve  no  other  title  from  roen« 

Sirs,  what  think  you  ?  Suppose  I  were  to  come  and  tell  you, 
that  you  must  intercede  with  saints,  for  them  to  intercede  with 
God  for  you ;  would  you  not  then  say,  I  was  justly  leputed  a 
popish  missionary  by  some,  and  deservedly  thrust  out  of  the 
synagogues  by  others  ?  I  suppose  you  would*  And  why  t  Be* 
cause,  you  would  say,  the  intercession  of  Jesus  Christ  was  suf«* 
ficient  of  itself,  without  the  intercession  of  saints ;  and  that  it 
was  blasphemous  to  Join  theirs  with  his,  as  though  it  was  not 
sufficient. 

Suppose  I  weAt  a  little  more  round  about,  and  told  you  that 
the  death  of  Christ  was  not  sufficient,  without  our  death  being 
added  to  it;  that  you  must  die  as  well  as  Christ,  join  your  death 
with  his,  and  then  it  would  be  sufficient.  Might  you  not  then, 
with  a  holy  indignation,  throw  dust  in  the  air,  and  justly  call 
me  a  "  setter  forth  of  strange  doctrines  ?"  And  now  then,  if  if 
be  not  only  absurd,  but  blasphemous,  to  join  the  intercession  ol 
saints  with  the  interccssjon  of  Christ,  as  though  his  intercessiofl 
Was  not  sufficient ;  or  our  death  with  the  death  of  Christ,  tu 
though  his  death  was  not  sufficient:  judge  ye,  if  it  be  Hot 
equally  absurd,  equally  blasphemous,  to  join  our  obedience, 
either  wholly  or  in  part,  with  the  obedience  of  Christ,  as  if  that 
Were  not  sufficient.  And  if  so,  what  absurdities  will  follow  the 
denying  that  the  Lord,  both  as  to  his  active  and  passive  obedi^ 
ence,  is  our  righteousness  ? 

One  more  absurdity  I  shall  mention,  as  following  the  denying 
this  doctrine,  and  I  have  done. 

I  remember  a  story  of  a  certain  prelate,  who  after  many  argu^^ 
mcqts,  in  vain  urged  to  convince  the  carl  of  Rochester  of  the 
invisible  realities  of  another  world,  took  his  leave  of  his  lordship 
with  some  such  words  as  these :  "  Well,  my  lord,  if  there  be  nO 
hell,  1  am  safe :  but  if  there  should  be  such  a  thing  as  hell,  what 
will  become  of  you?"  I  apply  (his  to  those  that  oppose  thedoc-* 
trine  now  insisted  on.  If  there  be  no  such  thing  as  the  doctrine 
of  an  imputed  righteousness,  those  who  hold  it,  dnd  bring  forth 
fruit  unto  holiness,  are  safe :  but  if  there  be  such  a  thin^  (as 
there  certainly  is)  whcit  will  become  of  you  that  deny  it  f  It 
is  no  difficult  matter  to  determine.  Your  portion  must  be  in 
the  lake  of  fire  and  brimstone  for  ever  and  ever.  Since  you 
will  rely  upon  your  works,  by  your  works  you  shall  be  judged. 
They  shall  be  weighed  in  the  balance  of  the  sanctuary ;  and 


Jiir.]  'WBM  LORD  OUR   RIOHTBOUSNXflHI.  lOt 

tiwy  win  be  foaild  warithig.  By  your  works,  therefore,  flfeall 
you  be  tondemned!  snd  you,  being  oat  of  Chiist,  shall  lind 
Crody  to  yoor  poor  wretobed  souls,  a  consttming  fire. 

The  great  Stoddard  of  Northampton,  in  New- England,  has 
therefore,  w^U  entitled  a  book  which  he  wrote,  (and  which  I 
would  take  this  opportunity  to  recommend,)  "  The  Safety  of  ap- 
pearing nt  the  Righteousness  of  Christ."  For  why  should  I 
lean  apon  a  broken  reed,  when  I  can  have  the  Rock  of  ages  to 
stand  upon,  that  never  can  be  moved? 

And  now,  before  I  come  to  a  more  particular  application,  give 
me  leave,  in  the  apostle's  language,  triumphantly  to  cry  out, 
^  Where  is  the  scribe,  where  is  the  disputer?"  Where  is  the 
reasoning  infidel  of  this  generation?  Can  any  thing  appear  more 
reasonable,  even  according  to  your  own  way  of  arguing,  than 
tiie  doctrine  here  laid  down?  Have  you  not  felt  a  convincing 
power  go  along  with  the  word?  Why  then  will  you  not  believe 
on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  so  be  may  become  the  Lord  your 
righteoosness  ? 

But  it  is  time  for  me  to  come  a  little  closer  to  your  con- 
sdences. 

Brethren,  though  some  may  be  offended  at  this  doctrine,  and 
Bay  account  it  foolishness;  yet,  to  many  of  you,  I  doubt  not 
but  it  is  precious,  it  being  agreeable  to  the  form  of  sound  words, 
which  from  your  infancy  has  been  delivered  to  you ;  and,  coming 
fiom  a  quarter  you  would  least  have  expected,  may  be  teceired 
with  more  pleasure  and  satisfaction.  But  give  me  leave  to  ask 
you  Cfoe  question:  Can  you  say, the  Lord  our  righteousness?  I 
say,  the  Lord  omr  righteousness.  For  entertaining  this  doctrine 
in  your  beads,  without  receiving  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  savingly 
by  a  lively  faith  into  your  hearts,  will  but  increase  your  damna* 
tioa.  As  I  have  often  told  you,  so  I  tell  you  again, — an  unap^ 
plied  Christ,  is  no  Christ  at  all.  Can  you  then,  with  believing 
Iboraas,  cry  out,  ^'  My  Lord,  and  my  God  V  Is  Christ  your  sanc- 
tification,  as  welt  as  your  outward  righteousness?  For  the  word 
righteousness,  in  the  text,  not  only  implies  Christ's  personal 
nghteonsness  imputed  to  us,  but  also  holiness  wrought  in  us. 
These  two,  God  has  joined  together.  He  never  did,  be  never 
iocBy  be  never  will,  put  them  asunder.  If  you  are  justified  by 
the  bkM>d,  you  are  also  sanctified  by  the  Spirit,  of  oui'  Lord.  Can 
you  then  in  thii^  sense  say,  TheXord  oar  righteousness  ?  Were 
yon  ever  made  to  abhor  yourselves  for  your  actual  and  original 
sina,  and  to  loathe  your  own  righteousness;  for,  as  the  prophet 
beantifttlly  expresses  it,  ^yomr  righteousness  is  as  filthy  rags?" 
Were  you  ever  made  to  see  and  admire  the  all-sufficiency  of 
Chrisfs  righteousness^  and  excited  by  the  Spirit  of  God  to 
hanger  and  thirst  after  it?  Could  you  ever  say.  My  soul  is 
athirst  for  Christ,  yea,  even  for  the  riffhteousness  of  Christ?  O 
when  shall  I  come  to  appear  before  uie  presence  of  my  God  in 
the  righteousness  of  Christ!  nothing  but  Christ!  nothing  but 
Cbrist !  Give  me  Christy  O  God>  and  I  am  satisfied !  my  seial 
shall  praise  thee  for  ever. 

♦  M 


194  THB   LORD   OUR   RIGHTB0USNB88.  [XIT. 

Was  this  ever  the  language  of  yoar  hearts?  and^  after  these 
inward  conflicts,  were  you  ever  enabled  to  reach  out  the  arm  of 
faith,  and  embrace  the  blessed  Jesus  in  your  souls,  so  that  you 
could  say,  "  My  beloved  is  mine,  and  I  am  his?"  If  so,  fear  not, 
whoever  you  are.  Hail,  all  hail,  you  happy  souls  1  The  Lord, 
the  Lord  Christ,  the  everlasting  God,  is  your  righteousness. 
Christ  has  justified  you,  who  is  he  that  condemneth  you  ?  Christ 
has  died  for  you,  nay,  rather,  is  risen  again,  and  ever  liveth  to 
make  intercession  for  you.  Being  now  justified  by  his  grace, 
you  have  peace  with  Grod,  and  shall,  ere  long,  be  with  Jesus  in 
glory,  reaping  everlasting  and  unspeakable  fruits  both  in  body 
and  soul.  For  there  is  no  condemnation  to  those  that  are  really 
in  Chiist  Jesus.  Whether  Paul',  or  Apollos,  or  life,  or  death,  all 
is  yours,  if  you  are  Christ's,  for  Christ  is  God's.  My  brethren, 
my  heart  is  enlarged  towards  you !  O  think  of  the  love  of  Christ 
in  dying  for  you !  If  the  Lord  be  your  righteousness,  let  the 
righteousness  of  your  Lord  be  continually  in  your  mouth.  Talk 
of,  O  talk  o^  and  recommend  the  righteousness  of  Christ,  when 
you  lie  down,  and  when  you  rise  up,  at  your  going  out  and  com- 
ing in !  Think  of  the  greatness  of  the  gift,  as  well  as  of  the  giver! 
Shew  to  all  the  world,  in  whom  you  have  believed !  Let  all  by 
your  fruits  know,  that  the  Lord  is  your  righteousness,  and  that 
you  are  waiting  for  your  Lord  from  heaven !  O  study  to  be  holy, 
even  as  he  who  has  called  you,  and  washed  you  in  his  own  blood, 
is  holy !  Let  not  the  righteousness  of  the  Lord  be  evil  spoken 
of,  through  you.  Let  not  Jesus  be  wounded  in  the  house  of  his 
friends ;  but  grow  in  grace,  and  in  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord  and 
Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  day  by  day.  O  think  of  his  dying  love! 
Let  that  love  constrain  you  to  obedience !  having  much  forgiven, 
love  much.  Be  always  asking.  What  shall  1  do,  to  express  my 
gratitude  to  the  Lord,  for  giving  me  his  righteousness?  Let  that 
self-abasing,  God-exalting  question,  be  always  in  your  mouths? 
"Why  me.  Lord?  why  me?"  why  am  I  taken,  and  others  left? 
why  is  the  Lord  my  righteousness  ?  why  is  he  become  my  sal- 
vation, who  have  so  often  deserved  damnation  at  his  hands  ? 

My  friends,  I  trust  I  feel  somewhat  of  a  sense  of  God's  dis- 
tinguishing love  upon  my  heart ;  therefore  I  must  divert  a  little 
from  congratulating  you,  to  invite  poor  christless  sinners  to  come 
to  him,  and  accept  of  his  righteousness,  that  they  may  have  life. 

Alas,  my  heart  almost  bleeds !  What  a  multitude  of  precious 
souls  are  now  before  me !  how  shortly  must  all  be  ushered  into 
eternity !  and  yet,  O  cutting  thought !  were  God  now  to  require 
all  your  souls,  how  few,  comparatively  speaking,  could  really 
say,  the  Lord  our  righteousness. 

And  think  you,  O  sinners,  that  you  will  be  able  to  stand  in  the 
day  of  judgment,  if  Christ  be  not  your  righteousness !  No,  that 
alone  is  the  wedding-garment  in  which  you  must  appear.  0 
christless  sinners,  I  am  distressed  for  you !  the  desires  of  my 
soul  are  enlarged.  O  that  this  may  be  an  accepted  time !  that 
the  Lord  may  be  your  righteousness !  For  whither  would  you 
flee,  if  death  shotdd  find  you  naked  ?    Indeed,  there  is  no 


XiyJ]  tHB   LORD   OUR   RIGHTEOUSNESS.  iSi 

yoarsdves  from  his  presence.  The  pitiful  fig-leaves  of  your  ovra 
lighteoasness  will  not  cover  your  nakedness,  when  God  shall 
call  you  to  stand  before  him.  Adam  found  them  ineffectual,  and 
so  will  you.  O  think  of  death !  O  think  of  judgment!  Yet  a 
little  while,  and  time  shall  be  no  more ;  and  then  what  will  be- 
come of  you,  if  the  Lord  be  not  your  righteousness  ?  Think  you 
that  Christ  will  spare  you?  No,  he  that  formed  you,  will  have 
no  mercy  on  you.  If  you  be  not  of  Christ,  if  Christ  be  not  your 
righteousness,  Christ  himself  shall  pronounce  you  damned.  And 
can  you  bear  to  think  of  being  damned  by  Christ?  Can  you  bear 
to  bear  the  Lord  Jesus  say  to  you,  '*  Depart  from  me,  ye  cursed, 
into  everlasting  fire,  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels."  Can 
you  live,  think  you,  in  everlasting  burnings?  Is  your  flesh  brass, 
and  your  bones  iron?  what  if  they  be?  hell-fire,  that  fire  pre- 
pared for  the  devil  and  his  angels,  will  heat  them  through  and 
through.  And  can  you  bear  to  depart  from  Christ?  O  that 
heart-piercing  thought!  Ask  those  holy  souls,  who  are  at  any 
time  bewailing  an  absent  God,  who  walk  in  darkness,  and  sec 
no  light,  though  but  a  few  days  or  hours ;  ask  them,  what  it  is 
to  lose  a  sight  and  presence  of  Christ?  See  how  they  seek  him 
sorrowing,  and  go  mourning  after  him  all  the  day  long !  And,  if 
it  be  so  dreadful  to  lose  the  sensible  presence  of  Christ  only  for 
a  day,  what  must  it  be  to  be  banished  from  him  to  all  eternity  / 
But  thus  it  must  be,  if  Christ  be  not  your  righteousness :  For 
God's  justice  must  be  satisfied ;  and,  unless  Christ's  righteous- 
Bess  is  imputed  and  applied  to  you  here,  you  must  hereafter  be 
satisfying  the  divine  justice  in  hell-torments  eternally;  nay,  Christ 
himself  shall  condemn  you  to  that  place  of  torment.  And  how 
cutting  is  that  thought!  Methinks  I  see  poor,  trembling,  Christ- 
less  wretches,  standing  before  the  bar  of  God,  crying  out.  Lord, 
if  we  must  be  damned,  let  some  angel,  or  some  archangel,  pro- 
Donnce  the  damnatory  sentence:  but  all  in  vain.  Christ  him- 
self shall  pronounce  the  irrevocable  sentence.  Knowing  there- 
fore the  terrors  of  the  Lord,  let  me  persuade  you  to  close  with 
Christ,  and  never  rest  till  you  can  say,  "  the  Lord  our  righteous- 
ness." Who  knows  but  the  Lord  may  have  mercy  on,  nay,  abun- 
dantly pardon  you  ?  Beg  of  God  to  give  you  faith;  and,  if  the 
Lord  give  you  that,  you  will  by  it  receive  Christ,  with  his  righ- 
teonsoess,  and  his  alL  You  need  not  fear  the  greatness  or 
number  of  your  sins.  For  are  you  sinners?  so  am  I.  Are  you 
thechief  of  sinners?  so  am  I.  Are  you  backsliding  sinners?  so 
am  L  And  yet  the  Lord  (for  ever  adored  be  his  rich,  free,  and 
sovereign  grace !)  the  Lord  is  my  righteousness.  Come,  then,  O 
young  men,  who  (as  I  acted  once  myself)  are  playing  the  pro- 
digal,  and  wandering  away  afar  off"  from  your  heavenly  Father's 
house,  come  home,  come  home,  and  leave  your  swine's  trough. 
Feed  no  longer  on  the  husks  of  sensual  delights :  for  Christ's 
sake  arise,  and  come  home  I  your  heavenly  Father  now  calls 
you.  See  yonder  the  best  robe,  even  the  righteousness  of  his 
dear  Son,  awaits  you.  See  it,  view  it  again  and  again.  Con- 
sider at  how  dear  a  rate  it  was  purchased^  even  by  the  blood  of 

M  2 


196  TUB  LORD  OUR  RIGHTBOU9Nm9»  [XIT; 

Crod.  Consider  what  great  need  you  have  of  it.  Ton  are  lost, 
undone,  damned  for  eyer^  without  it.  Come  then^  poor,  guSty 
prodigals,  come  home ;  indeed,  I  will  not,  like  the  elder  brother 
in  the  Gospel,  be  angry ;  no,  I  will  rejoice  with  the  angels  in  hea- 
ven. And  O  that  God  would  now  bow  the  heayens  and  come 
down !  Descend,  O  Son  of  God,  descend ;  and,  as  thou  hast 
shewn  in  me  such  mercy,  O  let  thy  blessed  Spirit  apply  thy  righ- 
teousness to  some  young  prodigals  now  before  thee,  and  clothe 
their  naked  souls  with  thy  best  robe ! 

But  I  must  speak  a  word  to  you,  young  maidens,  as  wdl  as 
young  men.  I  see  many  of  you  adorned,  as  to  ydur  bodies:  bat 
are  not  your  souls  naked?  Which  of  you  can  say,  the  Lord  is 
my  righteousness?  which  of  you  was  ever  solicitous  to  be  dress- 
ed in  this  robe  of  invaluable  price,  and  without  which  you  are 
no  better  than  whited  sepulchres  in  the  sight  of  God?  Let  not 
then  so  many  of  you,  young  maidens,  any  longer  forget  your  chief 
and  only  ornament.  O  seek  for  the  Lord  to  be  your  righteous- 
ness, or  otherwise  burning  will  soon  be  upon  you,  instead  of 
beauty ! 

And  what  shall  I  say  to  you  of  a  middle  age,  you  busy  mer^ 
chants,  you  cumbered  Marthas,  who,  with  all  yourgettings,  have 
not  yet  gotten  the  Lord  to  be  your  righteousness?  Alas!  what 
profit  will  there  be  of  all  your  labour  under  the  sun,  if  you  do  not 
secure  this  pearl  of  invaluable  price?  thia  one  thing  so  abso- 
lutely needful,  that  it  only  can  stand  you  in  stead,  when  all  other 
things  shall  be  taken  from  you.  Labour  therefore,  no  longer^so 
anxiously  for  the  meat  which  perisbeth,  but  henceforward  seek 
for  the  Lord  to  be  your  righteousness,  a  righteousness  that  will 
entitle  you  to  life  everlasting.  I  see,  also,  many  hoary  heads 
here,  and  perhaps  the  most  of  them  cannot  say,  the  Lord  is  my 
righteousness.  O  grey-headed  sinners,  I  could  weep  over  you ! 
your  grey  hairs,  which  ought  to  be  your  crown,  and  in  which 
perhaps  you  glory,  are  now  your  shame.  You  know  not  that 
the  Lord  is  your  righteousness :  O  haste  then,  haste  ye,  aged 
sinners,  and  seek  an  interest  in  redeeming  love !  Alas,  you  have 
one  foot  already  in  the  grave,  your  glass  is  just  run  out,  your 
sun  is  just  going  down,  and  it  will  set  and  leave  you  in  an  eter- 
nal' darkness,  unless  the  Lord  be  your  righteousness !  flee  then, 
O  flee  for  your  lives !  be  not  afraid.  All  things  are  possible  with 
God.  If  you  come,  though  it  be  at  the  eleventh  hour,  Christ  Jesus 
will  in  no  wise  cast  you  out.  Seek  then  for  the  Lord  to  be  your 
righteousness,  and  beseech  him  to  let  you  know  how  it  is  that  a 
man  may  be  born  again  when  he  is  old !  But  I  must  not  forget 
the  lambs  of  the  flock.  To  feed  them,  was  one  of  my  Lord's  last 
commands.  I  know  he  will  be  angpry  with  me,  if  I  do  not  tdl 
them,  that  the  Lord  may  be  their  righteousness ;  and  that  of  such 
is  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  Come  then,  ye  little  children,  come 
to  Christ;  the  Lord  Christ  shall  be  your  righteousness.  Do  not 
think  that  you  are  too  young  to  be  converted.  Perhaps  many 
of  you  may  be  nine  or  ten  years  old,  and  yet  cannot  say,  the 
Lord  is  our  righteousness ;  which  many  have  said,  though  younger 


IXr.  THE   RIGHTEOUSNESS  OP   CHRIST,    EtC.  I9t 

than  yoa.  Comey  theo,  while  you  are  young.  Perhaps  you  may 
Dot  live  to  be  old.  Do  not  stay  for  other  people.  If  your  fathers 
and  mothers  will  not  come  to  Christy  <lo  you  come  without  them. 
Let  children  lead  them>  and  shew  thenv  how  the  Lord  may  bb 
their  righteousness.  Our  Lord  Jesus  loyed  little  children.  YoU 
are  his  lambs;  he  bids  me  feed  you.  I  pray  God  make  you  will- 
ing betimes  to  take  the  Lord  for  your  righteousness. 

Here,  then,  I  could  conclude ;  but  I  must  not  forget  the  poor 
fitgroes :  no,  I  must  not.  Jesus  Christ  has  died  for  them,  as  weU 
as  for  others.  Nor  do  I  mention  you  last,  because  I  despise  your 
souls,  but  because  I  would  have  what  I  shall  say,  make  thd 
deeper  impression  upon  your  hearts.  O  that  you  would  seek 
the  Lord  to  be  your  righteousness !  Who  knows  but  he  may  be 
found  of  you?  For  in  Jesus  Christ  there  is  neither  male  nor 
female,  bond  nor  free;  even  you  may  be  the  children  of  God,  if 
jToa  b^eve  in  Jesus.  Did  you  never  read  of  the  eunuch  belong- 
ing to  the  queen  (^Candace?  a  negro,  like  yourselves.  He  be- 
lieved. The  Lord  was  his  righteousness.  He  was  baptized.  Do 
you  also  believe,  and  you  shall  be  saved.  Christ  Jesus  is  the 
same  now  as  he  was  yesterday,  and  will  wash  you  in  his  own 
blood.  Go  home  then,  turn  the  words  of  the  text  into  a  prayer, 
and  entreat  the  Lord  to  be  your  righteousness.  Even  so,  come 
Lord  Jesus,  come  quickly,  into  all  our  souls !  Amen,  Lord  Jesus, 
amen,  and  amen  I 


SERMON  XV. 

THB      RIGHTEOUSNESS     OP     CHRIST,     AN     EVERLASTING 

RIGHTEOUSNESS. 

And  to  bring  in  everlasting  righteousness. — Daniel  ix.  24. 

On  reading  these  words,  I  cannot  help  addressing  you  in  the 

language  of  the  angels  to  the  poor  shepherds,  who  kept  watch 

over  their  flocks  by  night,  "  Behold,  I  bring  you  glad  tidings  of 

great  joy  "  such  tidings,  that  if  we  have  ears  to  hear,  if  we  hav^ 

eyes  to  see,  and  if  our  hearts  have  indeed  experienced  the  grace 

of  God,  must  cause  us  to  cry  out  with  the  virgin  Mary,  "  My 

soul  doth  magnify  the  Lord,  and  my  spirit  doth  rejoice  in  God 

my  Saviour."    The  words  which  I  have  read  to  you,  are  part  of 

one  of  the  most  explicit  revelations  that  was  given  of  Jesus 

Christ,  before  be  made  his  public  entrance  into  this  our  world. 

It  has  been  observed  by  some,  and  very  properly  too,  that  it  is  one 

mark  of  the  divine  goodness  to  his  creatures,  that  he  is  pleased 

to  let  light  come  in  gradually  upon  the  natural  world.  If  the  sun, 

from  midnight  darkness,  was  immediately  to  shine  forth  in  his 

full  meridian  blaze,  his  great  splendour  would  be  apt  to  dazzle 

our  eyes,  and  strike  us  blind  again :  but  God  is  pleased  to  make 

light  come  gradually  in,  and  by  that  means  we  are  prepared  to 

receive  it.     And  as  God  is  pleased  to  deal  with  the  natural,  so 

lie  has  dealt  with  the  moral,  with  the  spiritual  world.   The  Lord 


WS  THR  RIGHTEOUSNESS  OF   CHRIST,  £XV. 

Jesus  Christ  did  not  appear  in  its  full  glory  all  at  once/but  as 
the  sun  rises  gradually,  so  did  the  Lord  Jesus^  the  Sun  of  righ- 
teousness, rise  gradually  upon  men,  with  healing  under  his  wings. 
Hence  it  was  that  our  first  parents  had  nothing  to  fix  their  faith 
upon,  but  that  first  promise,  "The  seed  of  the  woman  shall 
bruise  the  serpent's  head."  And  in  future  ages,  at  sundry  times, 
and  after  divers  manners,  God  was  pleased  to  speak  to  our 
lathers  by  the  prophets,  before  he  spake  to  us  in  these  last  days 
by  his  Son  :  and  the  prophets  that  were  more  peculiarly  dear  to 
God,  it  should  seem,  had  more  peculiar  and  extraordinary  reve- 
lations vouchsafed  to  them  concerning  Jesus  Christ. 

It  is  plain  from  the  accounts  we  have  in  scripture,  that  the 
prophet  Daniel  was  one  of  these  ;  he  is  styled  by  the  angel,  not 
only  a  man  that  was  beloved,  but  a  man  that  was  greatly  be- 
loved, or,  as  it  is  in  the  margin  of  some  of  your  Bibles,  **  he  was  a 
man  of  desires,"  of  large  and  extensive  desires  to  promote  the 
glory  of  God  ;  he  was  a  desirable  man,  a  man  that  did  much 
good  in  his  generation,  and  therefore  his  life  was  much  to  be 
desired  by  those  who  loved  God.  The  words  which  I  have 
chosen  for  the  subject  of  our  present  meditation,  contain  part  of 
a  revelation  made  to  this  man.  If  you  look  back  to  the  begin- 
ning of  this  chapter,  you  will  find  how  the  good  man  was  em- 
ployed when  God  was  pleased  to  give  him  this  revelation :  ver.  2, 
•*  In  the  first  year  of  Darius's  reign,  I  Daniel  understood  by 
books  the  number  of  the  years,  whereof  the  word  of  the  Lord 
came  to  Jeremiah  the  prophet,  that  he  would  accomplish  seventy 
years  in  the  desolations  of  Jerusalem."  Daniel  was  a  great 
man,  and  withal  a  good  man  ;  great  as  he  was.  it  seems  he  was 
not  above  reading  his  Bible ;  he  made  the  Bible  his  constant 
study ;  for  it  is  the  Bible  we  are  to  understand  by  what  is  here 
termed  books,  and  elsewhere  the  scriptures  of  truth.  He  found, 
that  the  time  for  God's  people  being  delivered  from  the  cap- 
tivity, was  now  at  hand.  Well,  one  would  have  thought  that 
therefore  Daniel  needed  not  to  pray;  but  this,  instead  of 
retarding,  quickened  him  in  his  prayers  ;  and  therefore  we  are 
told  in  the  third  verse,  ^'  I  set  my  lace  unto  the  Lord  God,  to 
seek  by  prayer  and  supplications,  with  fasting,  and  sackcloth, 
and  ashes."  It  is  beautifully  expressed  :  ''he  set  his  face,"  as 
though  he  were  resolved  never  to  let  his  eye  go  off"  God,  till 
God  was  pleased  to  give  him  an  answer ;  he  was  resolved, 
Jacob-like,  to  wrestle  with  the  Lord  God,  until  God  should 
be  pleased  to  give  him  the  desired  blessing.  We  are  told  in 
the  fourth  verse,  that  he  prayed  unto  the  Lord,  and  made  con- 
fession, not  only  of  his  own  sins,  but  the  sins  of  his  people. 
And  when  ye  retire  home  to  your  houses,  before  you  go  to  bed, 
I  would  recommend  to  you  the  reading  of  this  prayer;  every 
word  of  it  bespeaks  his  exceeding  concern  for  the  public  good. 
It  would  take  me  up  too  much  time,  were  I  to  make  such  ob- 
servations as  indeed  the  prayer  deserves,;  to  bring  you  sooner 
to  the  words  of  the  text,  let  us  go  forward  to  the  twentieth  verse, 
and  there  you  will  find  the  success  that  Daniel  met  with  when 


XV.]  AN    EVERLASTING   RI6HTE0USNB88.  190 

praying.  Says  he,  "  While  I  was  praying,  and  confessing  my 
sin,  and  the  sin  of  my  people  Israel,  and  presenting  my  suppli- 
cation before  the  Lord  my  Grod,  for  the  holy  mountain  of  my 
God ;  yea,  while  I  was  speaking  in  prayer,  even  the  man  Gabriel, 
whom  I  had  seen  in  the  vision  at  the  beginning,  being  caused 
to  fly  swiftly,  touched  me  about  the  time  of  the  evening  obla«* 
tion."  The  manner  in  which  Daniel  expresses  himself,  is  very 
emphatical :  "  While  I  was  speaking  in  prayer;"  implying  that 
God  suffers  ns,  when  we  draw  near  to  him  by  faith  in  prayer, 
to  lay  all  our  complaints  before  him ;  he  suffers  us  to  speak 
unto,  and  talk  with  him,  as  a  man  talketh  with  his  friend.  Daniel 
at  this  time,  too,  was  making  confession  one  part  of  his  prayer ; 
for  we  are  never,-  never  in  a  better  frame  to  receive  answers  from 
above,  than  when  we  are  humbling  ourselves  before  the  Lord. 
He  was  not  only  confessing  his  own  sins,  but  he  was  confessing 
the  sins  of  his  people ;  he  was  praying  for  those,  who  perhaps 
seldom  prayed  for  themselves :  ^^  while  I  was  speaking  in  prayer, 
the  man  Gabriel :"  which  word,  by  interpretation,  signifies  the 
strength  of  God;  a  very  proper  name,  says  Bishop  Hall,  for 
that  angel  who  was  to  come  and  bring  the  news  to  the  world,  of 
the  God  of  strength,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  This  angel  is  here 
represented  as  flying,  and  as  flying  swiftly ;  to  shew  us  how 
willing,  how  unspeakably  willing,  those  blessed  spirits  are  to 
bring  good  news  to  men.  And  it  is  upon  this  account,  1  sup- 
pose, that  we  are  taught  by  our  Lord  to  pray  ^'  that  God's  will 
may  be  done  by  us  on  earth,  as  it  is  done  in  heaven  ;"  that  we 
may  imitate  a  little  of  that  alacrity  and  vigour,  which  angels 
employ,  when  they  are  sent  on  errands  for  God. 

Well,  here  is  not  only  mention  made  of  the  angel's  flying  swiftly, 
but  there  is  mention  made  of  the  time  that  he  came ;  he  came 
and  touched  me,  about  the  time  of  the  evening  oblation,  that  is, 
about  three  o'clock  in  the  afternoon ;  at  this  time  there  was  a 
sacrifice  made  to  God,  and  this  sacrifice  was  in  a  peculiar  man- 
ner a  type  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  who  in  the  evening  of  the  world 
was  to  become  a  sacrifice  for  sinners.  We  are  told  in  the  22d 
verse  what  message  this  angel  delivered,  '*  He  informed  me,  and 
talked  with  me,  and  said,  O  Daniel,  I  am  now  come  forth  to 
give  thee  skill  and  understanding ;  at  the  beginning  of  thy  sup- 
plication, the  commandment  came  forth,  and  I  am  come  to  shew 
thee,  for  thou  art  greatly  beloved,  therefore  understand  the 
matter,  and  consider  the  vision."  This  passage,  with  such-like 
passages  of  scripture,  hath  often  comforted  my  soul,  and  may 
comfort  the  hearts  of  all  God's  people.  There  are  a  great 
many  of  you,  perhaps,  have  prayed,  and  prayed  again,  to  God, 
and  probably  you  do  not  find  any  answer  given  you :  you  pray 
for  an  enlarged  heart,  you  pray  for  comfort,  you  pray  for  deli- 
verance. God  is. pleased  to  withhold  it  fdrawhile;  then  the 
devil  strikes  in,  and  says,  God  has  shut  out  your  prayers,  God 
will  never  hear,  God  will  never  regard  you,  therefore  pray  no  more. 
But,  my  dear  friends,  this  is  a  mistake :  a  thousand  years  are 
with  God  as  one  day ;  and  the  Lord  Jesus  has  bid  us  to  pray; 


mo  TBB  BIOHTBOUSKBaS  OP  OHBIST,  [XT. 

itlways,  and  not  faint.    You  may  have  had  your  prayers  heard 
the  very  mcMnent  they  went  out  of  your  lips,  though  it  may  not 

(lease  your  God  (and  it  may  not  be  proper  for  you^  to  let  you 
now  that  they  are  heard.  ''  At  the  beginning  of  thy  supplica- 
tion, the  commandment  went  forth  ;**  and  this  very  angel,  some 
hundred  years  after,  told  Zacharias,  that  his  prayer  was  heard; 
ft  prayer  for  what?  a  prayer  for  a  child :  it  could  not  be  supposed 
that  at  the  very  time  Zacharias  was  praying  for  a  child ;  but  his 
prayer  he  had  put  up,  forty  years  before,  €rod  was  pleased  to 
answer  so  long  afterwards 

But  to  proceed  with  Gabriel's  declaration,  ver.  24.  ''  Seventy 
years  are  determined  upon  thy  people,  and  upon  thy  holy  city, 
to  finish  transgression,  to  make  an  end  of  sins,  and  to  make 
xeconciliation  for  iniquity,  and  to  bring  in  everlasting  righteous- 
ness.'' I  do  not  intend  to  trouble  you  about  the  critical  exposi- 
tion of  these  seventy  weeks;  commentators  are  divided  exceed- 
ingly qpon  this  subject;  some  of  them  explain  them  one  way, 
and  some  another,  and  perhaps  we  shall  never  know  till  the  day 
of  judgment,  till  the  glorious  day  spoken  of  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment, which  are  right.  My  intention  is  to  dwell  upon  this  par- 
ticular part  of  the  angel's  message,  that  some  one  person  was  to 
do  something  unspeakable  for  God's  people,  even  *^  to  bring  in 
an  everlasting  righteousness." 

If  you  want  to  know  who  was  the  person  that  vras  to  do  this, 
look  to  the  26th  verse,  and  you  will  find  the  person  mentioned, 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ :  <^  After  threescore  and  two  weeks  shall 
the  Messiah  he  cutoflf,  but  not  for  himself:"  he  is  the  person 
spoken  of,  he  was  '*  to  put  an  end  to  sin,  to  make  reconciliatioB 
for  iniquity,  and  to  bring  in  everlasting  righteousness." 

From  these  important  words,  I  shall  endeavour. 

First  J  To  shew  you  what  we  are  to  understand  by  the  word, 
^  righteousness." 

Seamdly,  1  shall  endeavour  to  shew  you,  upon  what  account 
it  is,  that  the  righteousness  mentioned  in  the  text,  is  called  an 
V  everlasting  righteousness." 

Thirdly  J  J  shall  shew,  what  we  are  to  understand  by  ''  bring- 
ing it  in."    And, 

Then  speak  a  word  to  saints  and  sinners.  And  while  I  am 
speaking  to  your  ears,  may  God,  for  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ's 
sake,  speak  to  your  hearts  ! 

Firetf  To  explain  what  we  are  to  understand  by  the  word 
**  righteousness."  If  I  were  to  ask  some  people  what  we  are  to 
mnderstand  by  the  word  righteousness;  if  the  person  were  an 
Arminian,  or  an  enemy  to  the  doctrine  of  free  grace,  be  would 
^piswev  me,  it  signifies  what  we  commonly  call  moral  honesty^  or 
justice  between  man  and  man.  And,  indeed,  in  various 
of  scripture,  the  word  righteousness  has  no  other  mean- 
at  least  it  bears  that  meaning.  I  suppose  we  are  to  under- 
It  ui  this  sense,  when  we  are  told,  that  Paul,  preaching 
Felix,  **  reasoned  of  temperance,  of  righteousness,  and  cm 
It  to  come."    Felix  had  been  a  very  unrighteous  and 


XT.]  AN    STERLASl^NO   RIGHTfiOUSNBSS.  901 

unjiist  man,  and  therefore  to  coDvince  him  of  his  wickedness^  to 
alarm  his  conscience^  to  put  him  upon  seeking  help  in  the  Lord 
Jesus,  Paul  preached  not  only  of  temperance,  (for  Felix  had  beea 
a  Tery  intemperate  man,)  but  he  preached  to  him  of  ri^hteous^- 
ness,  of  the  necessity  of  «doing  justice,  because  he  had  been  an 
unjust  man ;  and  he  puts  before  him  the  judgment  to  come,  in 
order  to  make  him  fly  to  Jesus  Christ,  for  deliverance  from  the 
bad  consequences  of  that  judgment ;  and  there  are  other  places 
of  scripture,  where  the  word  righteousness  may  be  understood 
in  this  sense. 

It  likewise  signifies  inward  holiness,  wrought  in  us  by  the 
blessed  Spirit  of  God.  But,  I  believe,  the  word  righteousness 
in  my  text  signifies,  what,  I  trust,  most  (I  should  be  glad  if  I 
could  say,  all,)  who  attend  this  night,  will  be  glad  to  hear  of: 
What  is  that?  It  is  what  all  reformed  divines,  that  have  clear 
heads  and  clean  hearts,  call  an  imputed  righteousness,  or  the 
righteousness  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  to  be  imputed  to  poor 
sinners  upon  their  believing:  and,  if  you  ask  me  what  I  mean 
by  an  imputed  righteousness ;  (not  to  shoot  over  your  heads,  but 
rather,  if  God  shall  be  pleased  to  make  me,  to  reach  your  hearts,) 
I  will  tell  you.  By  the  word  "  righteousness"  I  understand  all 
that  Christ  hath  done,  and  all  that  Christ  hath  suffered :  or,  to 
make  use  of  the  terms  generally  made  use  of  by  sound  divines, 
**  Christ's  active,  and  Chrisfs  passive  obedience :"  put  these  two 
together,  and  they  make  up  the  righteousness  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  My  dear  friends,  thus  stood  the  case  between  God  and 
man.  At  first  God  made  man  upright.  Moses  gives  us  a  short, 
but  never  was  so  full  a  description  of  the  origin  and  nature  of 
man  given  by  any  other  but  himself.  "  In  the  image  of  God  made 
he  man,"  says  that  sacred  historian,  being  inspired  by  the  Spirit 
of  God.  God  said,  and  it  was  done;  God  commanded,  and  the 
world  arose  before  him;  *'Let  there  be  light,"  and  instantane- 
ously behold  light  appeared :  but  when  that  lovely,  that  divine, 
that  blessed  creature,  man,  the  lord  of  the  creation,  God's  vice- 
gerent, was  to  be  made,  God  calls  a  council,  and  says,  ^*  Let  us 
make  man  after  our  own  image."  Now,  this  image  is  to  be  un- 
derstood, no  doubt,  in  respect  of  man's  soul :  for  God  being  no 
corporeal  substance,  man  could  not  be  made  after  his  image 
that  way.  Well,  in  this  condition  God  marie  man.  Adam  stood 
as  our  representative.  Adam  and  Eve  had  but  one  name  origi- 
ally ;  Crod  made  man,  and  called  their  name  Adam.  God  left; 
Adam  to  his  own  free  will ;  he  was  pleased  to  enter  into  a  cove- 
nant with  him,  which  indeed  is  an  amazing  instance  of  God's 
condescension.  God  might  have  ordered  man  to  do  so  and  so, 
and  net  made  him  any  promise  of  a  reward :  but  the  great  Cre- 
ator was  pleased  to  promise  him,  that  if  he  performed  an  unsin- 
ning  obedience,  if  he  abstained  from  eating  a  particular  tree, 
that  he  and  his  posterity  should  live  for  ever;  but  if  he  broke 
that  command,  in  the  day  that  he  ate  thereof,  he  and  all  his  pos- 
terity were  to  die.  ^ow,  I  verily  believe,  had  you  and  I  been 
V^re  present,  heweyer  some  people  may  object  against  God's^ 


202  THE   RIGHTEOUSNESS   OP   CHRIST^  [XT. 

severity^  in  imputing  Adam's  sin  to  us ;  yet  I  believe,  if  yon  and 
ly  and  all  the  world,  had  been  present,  we  should  have  heartily 
come  into  this  agreement.     Supposing  God  had  called  the  whole 
creation  together,  and  had  said,  ''Ye  my  creatures,  I  have  made 
here  a  man  after  my  own  image,  I  have  breathed  into  him  the 
breath  of  life,  I  have  caused  him  to  become  a  living  soul,  I  have 
filled  him  with  righteousness  and  true  holiness;  he  has  not  the 
least  propensity  to  sin,  only  he  is  a  fallible  and  mutable  crea- 
ture ;  all  that  I  desire  of  this  man  is,  that  he  abstain  from  yon- 
der tree :  I  have  given  to  him  all  the  trees  of  the  garden ;  I  have 
made  him,  and  planted  for  him  a  garden  with  mine  own  right  hand. 
I  desire  he  may  abstain  from  plucking  yonder  fruit:  Will  ye 
stand  or  fall  by  this  man,  will  ye  let  him  be  your  representative, 
will  ye  be  content  that  his  obedience  or  disobedience  be  imputed 
to  you?*'     If  we  had  been  all  there,  every  one  of  us  would  have 
said,  "  Lord  God,  we  will  let  him  be  our  representative ;"  the 
terms  were  so  easy,  the  improbability  of  his  falling  was  so  ex- 
ceeding great,  that  I  believe  every  one  of  us  should  have  all  put 
our  hand  to  the  covenant.   And  supposing  us  alive,  and  that  we 
had  agreed  to  that  covenant,  who  is  that  man  or  woman  that 
could  find  fault  with  God's  imputing  Adam's  sin  to  us  ?   Well, 
my  friends,  God  made  man  in  this  condition ;  the  devil  envied  his 
happiness ;  it  is  supposed  by  some,  that  man  was  made  to  sup- 
ply the  places  of  the  fallen  angels.     But  the  devil  envied  man, 
and  had  leave  to  tempt  him :  Eve  soon  reached  out  her  hand  and 
plucked  of  the  forbidden  fruit,  and  afterwards  Adam  transgress- 
ed also ;  and  from  that  very  moment,  to  make  use  of  Mr.  Bos- 
ton's words,  "  Man's  name  was  Ichabod"  the  glory  of  the  Lord 
departed  from  him.    Adam  and  Eve  then  fell :  you,  and  I,  and 
all  their  posterity,  (whom  they  represented,)  fell  in  them.   Man- 
kind had  but  one  neck ;  and  God  might  have  served  mankind,  as 
Caligula  would  have  served  Rome,  according  to  his  own  words,  **  I 
wish  it  had  but  one  neck,  and  I  would  cut  it  off  with  one  blow.'* 
God,  if  he  pleased,  might  have  sent  us  all  to  hell.    Here  Calvin 
represents  God's  attributes  as  struggling  one  with  another ;  Jus- 
tice saying  to  God,  seeing  Justice  had  framed  the  sanction, ''  Is 
the  law  broken;  damn  the  offender,  and  send  him  to  hell."    The 
Mercy  of  God,  hi3  darling  attribute,  cries  out,  *'  Spare  him»  spare 
him."    The  wisdom  of  God  contrives  a  way,  that  justice  might 
be  satisfied,  and  yet  mercy  be  triumphant  still.    How  was  that? 
the  liord  Jesas  interposes,  the  days-man,  the  dear  Redeemer ! 
he  saw  God  wielding  his  flaming  sword,  and  his  hand  taking 
hold  of  vengeance;  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  saw  the  sword  ready 
to  be  sheathed  in  the  blood  of  the  offender ;  when  no  eye  could 
pity,  when  no  angel  or  archangel  could  rescue,  just  as  God  was, 
as  it  were,  about  to  give  the  fatal  blow,  just  as  the  knife  was  put 
to  the  throat  of  the  offender,  the  Son  of  God,  the  eternal  Logos, 
says,  "  Father,  spare  the  sinner;  let  him  not  die;  Father,  Father, 
O  bold  thy  hand,  withdraw  thy  sword, for  I  come  to  do  thy  will; 
man  has  broken  thy  law,  and  violated  thy  covenant :  I  do  not  deny 
but  man  deserves  to  be  damned  for  ever ;  but.  Father,  what  Adam 


XV.j  AN    BTERLASTING    RIGHTEOUSNESS.  203 

could  not  do,  if  thou  wilt  prepare  me  a  body,  I,  in  the  fulness  of 
time  will  go,  and  die  for  him ;  be  has  broken  thy  law,  but  I  will 
go  and  keep  it,  that  thy  law  may  be  honoured ;  I  will  give  a  per- 
fect, unsinning  obedience,  to  all  thy  commandments ;  and  that 
thou  mayest  justify  ungodly  creatures,  I  will  not  only  go  down 
and  obey  thy  law,  but  I  will  go  down  and  bleed ;  I  will  go  down 
and  die :  here  I  am ;  I  will  sten  ki  between  thee  and  sinners, 
and  be  glad  to  have  thy  sword  siieathed  in  my  heart's  blood  for 
them." 

In  the  fulness  of  time  descends  the  eternal  Logos^  **  In  ,the 
fulness  of  time  God  sent  forth  his  Son,  made  of  a  woman,  made 
under  the  law,  to  redeem  them  that  are  under  the  law  from  the 
curse  of  it,  being  made  a  curse  for  us  "  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
being  clothed  in  human  nature,  fulfilled  all  righteousness ,  he  sub- 
mitted to  every  institution  of  God,  and  was  pleased  to  obey  th6 
whole  moral  law;  and  afterwards,  (O  can  we  think  of  it,  O  can 

Jou  hear  of  it,  without  a  heart  leaping  with  joy !)  at  last,  the  Lord 
esus  bled  and  died !  and  when  be  was  just  expiring,  just  as  he 
was  about  to  bow  down  his  head,  and  give  up  the  ghost,  what 
do  you  think  he  said?  He  said,  "  It  is  finished !"  As  much  as 
to  say, ''  Now  the  arduous  work,  the  difiicult  task  I  had  under- 
taken, blessed  be  God,  is  now  completely  over;  all  the  demands 
of  the  law  are  finished ;  now  God's  justice  is  satisfied ;  now  a 
new  and  living  way  is  opened  by  my  blood  to  the  holiest  of  all, 
for  poor  sinners." 

So  that  when  Christ's  righteousness  is  here  spoken  of,  we  are 
to  understand  '' Christ's  obedience  and  death ;'  all  that  Christ 
has  done,  and  all  that  Christ  has  sufiered,  for  an  elect  world— for 
all  that  will  believe  on  him.  And  blessed  be  God  for  this  righ- 
teousness !  blessed  be  God  for  the  epithet  which  in  the  text  is 
put  to  this  righteousness ;  it  might  be  called  a  blessed  righteous- 
ness, it  might  be  called  a  glorious  righteousness,  it  might  be 
called  an  invaluable  righteousness ;  but  the  angel  calls  it  an  ever^ 
lasting  righteousness:  God  give  you  to  take  the  comfort  of  it ! 

Secondly,  I  am  now  to  shew,  on  what  account  this  righteous- 
ness is  here  called  an  everlasting  righteousness ;  and  pray,  why 
do  you  think  Christ's  righteousness  is  called  an  everlasting  righ- 
teousness? 

I  suppose  it  is  called  an  everlasting  righteousness. 

First,  Because  Christ's  righteousness  was  intended  by  tb»  - 
great  GoA  to  extend  to  mankind  even  from  eternity.  All  of  you 
know,  that  old  love  is  the  best  love.  When  we  have  an  old 
acquaintance,  a  friend,  that  has  loved  us  for  many  years,  indeed 
that  love  is  sweet :  though  we  may  love  new  friends,  yet,  when 
an  old  friend  and  a  new  friend  meet  together,  we  may  say  that 
the  old  is  better.  Now,  this  should  endear  God  to  us,  to  think 
that  from  all  the  ages  of  eternity,  God  had  thoughts  of  you  ;  God 
intended  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  save  your  souls  and  mine : 
hence  it  is,  that  God,  to  endear  Jeremiah  to  him,  tells  him,  I 
have  loved  thee  with  an  everlasting  love.  Hence  it  is,  that  the 
Lord  Jesus,  when  he  calls  his  elect  people  up  to  heaven,  says. 


SM  THB  RIGHTEOUSNESS  OP   CHRIST,  fXIT. 

♦*  Come,  ye  blessed  of  my  Father ;"  what  follows  ?  *'  receive 
the  kingdom  prepared  for  yoa  ;"  how  long  ?  *'  from  the  foon- 
datioii  of  the  world."  AH  that  we  receive  in  time,  all  the 
streams  that  come  to  our  souls,  are  but  so  many  streams  flow- 
ing from  that  inexhaustible  fountain,  God's  electing,  God's  sove- 
reign, God's  distinguishing,  God's  everlasting  love  ;  and  there- 
fore the  righteousness  of  Jesus  Christ  may  properly  be  called 
an  everlasting  righteousness,  because  God  intended  it  from 
everlasting 

Secondly y  It  is  called  an  everlasting  righteousness,  because 
the  efficacy  of  Christ's   death  took   place  immediately  upon 
Adam's  fail :  Christianity  in  one  sense  is  as  old  as  the  creation. 
Great  professor  Franck,  of  Germany,  says,  "That  Christ  is  the 
sum  and  substance  of  all  righteousness."    Mr.  Henry  observes, 
**  That  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  treasure  hid  in  the  field  of 
the  Old  Testament,  under  the  types  ands  hadows  of  the  Mosaic 
dispensation."     We  have  the  Sun  of  righteousness  shining  in 
bis  full  meridian  in  the  New  Testament  dispensation.  Now,  the 
righteousness  of  Jesus  Christ  may  be  called  an  everlasting 
righteousness,  because  all  the  saints  that  have  been  saved,  or 
that  ever  will  be  saved,  are  all  saved  by  the  righteousness  of 
Christ.     A  great  many  censorious  people  are  mighty  inquisitive 
to  know  what  will  become  of  the  heathens,  that  never  heard  of 
Jesus  Christ.     I  would  say  to  such  persons,  as  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  did  to  another  curious  inquirer,  "What  is  that  to  thee? 
follow  thou  me."    Pray,  for  what  should  you  and  I  trouble 
ourselves  about  the  heathens  ?  Are  not  we  heathens  ?  It  is  too 
true,  that  we  have  too  much  of  the  heathen's  temper  and  prac- 
tice with  us.     But  why  should  we  lose  our  time  in  inquiring 
about  what  will  become  of  the  heathen,  and  not  rather  inquire 
what  will  become  of  our  own  souls  ?  We  may  be  sure  God  will 
deal  with  heathens  according  to  their  light ;  if  he  has  given  them 
no  revelation,  they  will  not  be  judged  by  a  revelation  ;  if  they 
have  not  had  a  law,  they  will  be  judged  without  law.     But  as 
for  the  Jews  and  Gentiles,  who  have  the  gospel  revealed  to 
them ;  however  deists  may  argue  contrary  to  it,  however  they 
may  set  up  reason  in  opposition  to  divine  revelation,  we  may 
be  sure  none  were  ever  saved,  or  wilLbe  saved,  but  by  the  righ- 
teousness of  Christ.     It  was  through  faith  in   him,  that  Abel 
-was  saved.;  it  was  through  the  sacrifice  of  Jesus  Christ  that 
Abraham  was  accepted,  and  that  all  the  prophets  of  old  were 
accepted  ;  and  there  is  none  other  name  given  under  heaven, 
whereby  we  can  be  saved,  but  that  of  Christ.     And  therefore, 
since  persons  under  the  law,  and  under  the  gospel,  are  to  be  saved 
only  through  Christ ;  therefore,  Christ's  righteousness  may  pro- 
perly be  called  an  everlasting  righteousness.  But  this  is  not  all. 
Thirdly y  The  righteousness  of  Jesus  Christ  is  not  only  to  be 
called  an  everlasting  righ  teousness,because  that  all  persons  under 
the  law,  and  all  persons  under  the  gospel,  are  saved  by  it ;  but  be- 
cause the  eflicacy  thereof  (blessed  be  God  for  it !)  is  to  continue  till 
time  shall  be  no  more.  Blessed  be  God  for  Jesus  Christ !  the  effi* 


XV.}  AN   BVSRLA8TIN6   RIGHTEOUSNESS.  205 

c^acy  of  whose  blood,  death,  and  atonement,  is  as  great  and  as 
effectaalnow  to  the  salvation  of  poor  sinners,  as  when  he  bowed 
his  blessed  head,  and  gave  up  the  ghost:  ''Jesus  Christ  is  the 
same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever  ;"  and  whosoever  believes 
on  him  now,  whosoever  comes  to,  and  accepts  of  him,  shall  now 
see  his  power,  shall  taste  of  his  grace,  and  shall  be  actually 
saved  by  him,  the  same  as  if  he  had  been  in  company  with  those 
who  saw  him  expiring. 

Fourthly f  Chnst's  righteousness  may  be  called  an  everlasting 
righteousness,  because  the  benefit  of  it  is  to  endure  to  everla^t* 
ing  life.  Indeed,  some  people  tell  us,  that  a  person  may  be  in 
Christ  to-day,  and  go  to  the  devil  to-morrow :  but,  blessed  be 
Qod,  ye  have  not  so  learned  Christ !  No,  my  dear  friends,  thanks 
be  to  God  for  that  divine  text,  ''  There  is  now  no  condemnation 
to  them  that  are  in  Christ  Jesns."  Though  God's  people  may  fall 
foully ;  and  though  many  are  full  of  doubts  and  fears,  and  say, 
"  One  day  I  shall  fall  by  the  hands  of  Saul ;"  however  ye  may 
say  in  your  haste,  "  All  men  are  liars ;"  however  your  poor  souls 
may  be  harassed,  yet  no  wicked  devil,  nor  your  own  depraved 
heart,  shall  be  able  to  separate  you  from  the  love  of  God :  God 
has  loved  you,  God  has  fixed  his  heart  upon  you,  and,  having 
loved  his  own,  he  loves  them  unto  the  end.  The  Lord  of  life 
and  of  glory,  the  blessed  Jesus,  w'dl  never  cease  loving  you,  till 
he  hath  loved  and  brought  you  to  heaven ;  when  he  will  rejoice 
and  say,  "  Behold  me,  O  my  Father,  and  the  dear  children  that 
thou  hast  given  me :  thou  gavest  them  me ;  thine  they  were ;  I 
have  bought  them  with  my  blood,  I  have  won  them  with  my 
sword  and  with  my  bow,  and  I  now  will  wear  them  as  so  many 
jewels  of  my  crown."  Therefore  Jesus  Christ's  righteousness 
may  be  called  an  everlasting  righteousness,  because  those  who 
once  take  hold  of,  and  are  interested  in  it,  shall  be  saved  ever- 
lastingly by  Christ : ''  It  is  God  that  justifies  us,  (says  St.  Paul,) 
who  is  he  that  condemneth  ?  It  is  Christ;  that  died,  yea  rather, 
that  is  risen  again."  He  gives,  devils  the  challenge,  "  O  death, 
where  is  thy  sting  ?  O  grave,  where  is  thy  victory  ?  Who  shall 
separate  us  from  the  love  of  God  ?  I  am  persuaded  that  neither 
death  nor  life,  neither  principalities  nor  powers,  nor  any  other 
creature,  shall  ever  be  able  to  separate  us  from  the  love  of  God 
which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord."  Those  whom  God  justi- 
fies, he  also  glorifies.  And  because  Christ  lives,  blessed  be 
€rod,  we  shall  five  also.  I  know  not  what  you  may  say ;  but  though 
I  trust  I  have  felt  the  grace  of  Christ,  yet  1  find  that  I  have  as 
much  need  to  come  to  Christ  every  day  for  fresh  strength,  as  if 
I  had  never  believed  before :  and  if  I  were  to  depend  upon  my 
own  faithfulness,  and  not  the  faithfulness  of  the  S(hi  of  God,  I 
am  sure  I  should  soon  desert  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  But,  glory 
be  to  God,  he  is  faithful  that  hath  promised  !  Glory  be  to  Grod, 
our  salvation  depends  not  upon  our  own  free  will,  but  upon 
God's  free  grace  !  here  is  a  sure  bottom ;  the  believer  may  build 
vpon  it ;  let  the  storms  blow  as  long  and  as  high  as  they  please, 
tune  shall  be  they  may  make  the  poor  creature  tremble,  but 


S06  THE  RI6IITBOUSNBSS  OP  CHRISr,  [XVl 

blessed  be  Grod,  they  never  shall  be  able  to  take  him  off  the 
foundation ;  though  they  may  shake  him^  they  shall  only  shake 
off  his  corrnption  :  and  I  believe  all  that  fear  6od«  will  be  glad 
to  part  with  it.  On  all  these  accounts,  Christ's  righteousness 
may  be  called  an  everlasting  righteousness. 

Thirdly,  It  is  said  in  iny  text«  that  Jesus  was  to  bring  it  in. 
What  are  we  to  understand  by  bis  bringing  it  in?  Our  Lord's 
promulgating  and  proclaiming  it  to  the  world.  Indeed,  it  was 
brought  in  under  the  law ;  but  then  it  was  brought  in  under  types 
and  shadows,  and  most  of  the  Jews  looked  no  further.  But 
Jesus  Christ  brought  life  and  immortality  to  light  by  the  gospel. 
The  light  of  Moses  was  only  twilight ;  the  light  of  the  gospel  is 
like  the  sun  at  noon-day,  shining  in  his  full  meridian.  Therefore* 
Jesus  Christ  may  be  said  to  bring  in  this  everlasting  righteous- 
ness, because  he  proclaimed  it  to  the  world,  and  commanded  it 
to  be  preached,  that  God  sent  his  Son  into  the  world,  that  the 
world  through  him  might  be  saved. 

Again,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  brought  in  this  righteousness, 
as  he  wrought  it  out  for  sinners  upon  the  cross.  Some  antino- 
mians,  for  want  of  a  proper  distinction,  run  into  a  grievous  error, 
telling  us,  because  God  intended  to  justify  by  the  righteousness  of 
Jesus  Christ,  therefore  man  is  justified  from  all  eternity ;  which 
is  absurd  :  a  person  cannot  be  justified,  till  he  is  actually  exist- 
ing ;  therefore,  though  man  is  justified,  as  it  lies  in  God's  mind 
from  all  eternity,  yet  it  was  not  actually  brought  in  till  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  pronounced  those  blessed  words,  '^  It  is  finished ;" 
the  grand  consummation !  then  Jesus  brought  it  in.  A  new 
and  a  living  way  was  to  be  opened  to  the  holy  of  holies,  for 
poor  sinners,  by  the  blood  of  Christ.  But  I  do  not  think  that 
the  expression,  brought  in,  is  to  be  limited  to  this  sense,  though 
I  suppose  it  is  the  primary  one ;  it  implies  not  only  Christ's 
bringing  it  into  the  world,  as  promulgating,  and  having  it  writ- 
ten in  the  word  of  God,  and  as  having  wrought  it  out  for  sinners 
in  his  life,  and  on  the  cross ;  but  he  brings  it  in,  in  a  manner 
which  I  pray  God  may  take  place  this  night ;  I  mean,  bringing  it, 
by  his  blessed  Spirit,  into  poor  believers'  hearts.  All  that 
Christ  hath  done,  all  that  Christ  hath  suffered,  all  Christ's  active 
obedience,  all  Christ's  passive  obedience,  will  do  us  no  good, 
unless  by  the  Spirit  of  God  it  is  brought  into  our  souls.  As 
one  expresses  it,  "  an  unapplied  Christ  is  no  Christ  at  all."  To 
hear  of  a  Christ  dying  for  sinners,  will  only  increase  your  dam- 
nation, will  only  sink  you  deeper  into  hell,  unless  we  have  ground 
to  say,  by  a  work  of  grace  wrought  in  our  hearts,  that  the  Lord 
Jesus  hath  brought  this  home  to  us.  Hence  it  is,  that  the 
apostle,  speaking  of  Christ,  says,  '^  who  loved  me,  and  gave 
himself  for  me."  O  that  dear,  that  great,  that  little,  but  impor- 
tant word  me.  Happy  they  who  can  adopt  the  apostle's  lan- 
guage ;  happy  they  that  can  apply  it  to  their  own  heart;  and, 
when  they  hear  that  Christ  has  brought  in  an  everlasting  righ- 
teousness, can  say.  Blessed  be  God,  it  is  brought  in  by  the 
blessed  Spirit  to  my  soul ! 


XT.J  AN   BVfiRLASTING    RIGHTEOUSNESS.  207 

Are  there  any  here  tbat  can  go  along  with  me  on  this  doc- 
trine ?  But  why  do  I  ask  this  question,  when  preaching  to  num- 
bers, who,  I  hope,  have  tasted  of  the  grace  of  God  long  ago  ?  1 
do  not  know,  I  cannot  distinguish  you ;  you  are  just  like  other 
people,  as  to  your  looks  and  habits ;  but  if  I  do  not,  and  if  your 
neighbours  cannot,  know  you,  that  great  God,  in  whose  presence 
you  are,  knows  you.  He,  before  whose  tribunal  we  are  shortly 
to  appear^  knows  you.  If  Christ  Jesus  hath  brought  in  his  ever- 
lasting righteousness  into  yourheait;  if  it  be  applied  by  the 
Spirit  of  God  to  your  soul,  what  shall  I  say  to  you ;  I  will  say 
as  the  angel  to  John,/''  Come  up  hither,"  thou  child  of  God !  Come 
up  hither,  thou  son,  thou  daughter  of  Abraham!  Come  and  join 
with  me,  in  calHng  upon  angels  and  archangels,  in  calling  upon 
the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect,  to  help  thee  to  praise  that 
loTing  Redeemer,  that  has  brought  in  an  everlasting  rigliteous- 
ness.  Oh !  was  ever  love  like  this !  When  Abraham  was  about 
to  offer  up  his  son,  God  said,  "  Now  I  know  that  thou  lovest  me, 
since  thou  hast  not  withheld  thy  son,  thine  only  son,  from  me/' 
Now  may  each  child  of  God  say,  "  Now,  O  God,  1  know  that 
thou  bast  loved  me,  since  thou  hast  not  withheld  thy  Son,  thy 
dear  Son,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  from  dying  for  me.'*  If  thou 
hast  got  Christ  brought  into  thy  soul  by  faith,  O  look  forward, 
look  towards,  a  happy  eternity ;  O  look  towards  those  everlast- 
ing mansions,  into  which  God  will  bring  thee  after  death.  My 
dear  friends,  I  could  say  much  from  this  text,  to  comfort  God's 
people:  but, 

I  must  address  myself  to  you,  poor  souls,  who  cannot  say, 
that  this  righteousness  has  been  brought  home  to  your  souls ;  but 
if  it  were  never  brought  home  before,  may  God,  for  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ's  sake,  bring  it  home  now !  Are  any  of  you  depend- 
ing upon  a  righteousness  of  your  own?  Do  any  of  you  here, 
think  to  save  yourselves  by  your  own  doings?  1  say  to  you,  as 
the  apostle  said  to  one  that  offered  money  for  a  power  to  confer 
the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  your  righteousness  shall  perish  with 
you.  Poor  miserable  creatures !  What  is  there  in  your  tears? 
what  in  your  prayers  ?  what  in  your  performances,  to  appease  the 
wrath  of  an  angry  God?  Away  from  the  trees  of  the  garden; 
come,  ye  guilty  vrretches,  come  as  poor,  lost,  undone,  and  wretch- 
ed creatures,  and  accept  of  a  better  righteousness  than  your  own. 
As  I  said  before,  so  I  tell  you  again,  the  righteousness  of  Jesus 
Christ  is  an  everlasting  righteousness ;  it  is  wrought  out  for  the 
very  chief  of  sinners.  Ho,  every  one  that  thirsteth,  let  him  come 
and  drink  of  this  water  of  life  freely.  Are  any  of  you  wounded  by 
sin?  Do  any  of  you  feel  you  have  no  righteousness  of  your  own? 
Are  any  of  you  perishing  for  hunger?  Are  any  of  you  afraid  ye 
will  perish  for  ever?  Come,  dear  souls,  in  all  your  rags;  come, 
thou  poor  man ;  come,  thou  poor,  distressed  woman ;  you,  who 
think  God  will  never  forgive  you,  and  that  your  sins  are  too 
great  to  be  forgiven:  come,  thou  doubting  creature,  who  art 
afraid  thou  wilt  never  get  comfort ;  arise,  take  comfort,  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  the  Lord  of  life,  the  Lord  of  glory,  calls  for  thee  * 


206  TRB  OBSBRVATIUK  OP   CHRIST'S  BIRTH.  fXTl. 

throiigh  his  righteoosness  tbere  is  hope  for  the  chief  of  sinners, 
for  the  worst  of  creatures.  What  if  thou  hadst  committed  all 
the  sins  in  the  world?  What  if  thou  hadst  committed  the  sins 
of  a  thousand,  what  if  thou  hadst  committed  the  sins  of  a  million 
of  worlds?  Christ's  righteousness  will  cover,  the  blood  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  will  cleanse,  thee  from  the  guilt  of  tbem  all. 
O  let  not  one  poor  soul  stand  at  a  distance  from  the  Saviour. 
My  dear  friends,  could  my  voice  hold  out,  were  my  strength  equkd 
to  my  will,  I  would  wrestle  with  you ;  I  would  strive  with  argu- 
ments, till  you  came  and  washed  in  this  blood  of  the  Lamb ;  till 
you  came  and  accepted  of  this  everlasting  righteousness.  O 
come,  come !  Now,  since  it  is  brought  into  the  world  by  Christ, 
so,  in  the  name,  in  the  strength,  and  by  the  assistance  of  the 
great  God,  I  bring  it  now  to  the  pulpit;  1  now  offer  this  righte- 
ousness, this  free,  this  imputed,  this  everlasting  righteousness, 
to  all  poor  sinners  who  will  accept  of  it.  For  God's  sake,  accept 
it  this  night:  you  do  not  know  but  ye  may  die  before  to-monrew. 
How  do  ye  know,  but  while  I  am  speaking,  a  fit  of  apoplexy  may 
seize,  and  death  arrest  you  ?  O  my  dear  friends,  where  can  ye 
go?  where  will  ye  appear?  How  will  ye  stand  before  an  angry 
God,  without  the  righteousness  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  put 
upon  your  souls?  Can  ye  stand  in  your  own  rags?  Will  ye  dare 
to  appear  before  a  heart-searching  God,  without  the  apparel  of 
your  elder  brother?  If  ye  do,  I  know  your  doom:  Christ  will 
frown  you  into  hell :  '*  Depart,  depart,  ye  cursed,  into  everlast- 
ing fire,"  shall  be  your  portion.  Think,  I  pray  you,  therefore, 
on  these  things ;  go  home,  go  home,  go  home,  pray  over  the  text, 
and  say,  *'  Lord  God,  thou  hast  brought  an  everlasting  righte- 
ousness into  the  world  by  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ;  by  the  blessed 
Spirit  bring  it  into  my  heart !"  then,  die  when  ye  will,  ye  are  safe ; 
if  it  be  to-morrow,  ye  shall  be  immediately  translated  into  the 
presence  of  the  everlasting  God :  that  will  be  sweet !  Happy 
they  who  have  got  this  Tobe  on ;  happy  they  that  can  say,  "My 
God  hath  loved  me,  and  I  shall  be  loved  by  him  with  an  everlast- 
ing love  V  That  every  one  of  you  may  be  aWe  to  say  so,  may 
God  grant,  for  the  sake  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  dear  Redeemer ;  to 
whom  be  glory  for  ever.    Amen. 


SERMON  XVL 

THE  OB8RRVATION  OF  THE  BIRTH  OF  CHRIST,  THE  DUTY 

OF  ALL  christians;   or  the   true  way  of   keeping 

CHRISTMAS. 

And  she  shall  bring  forth  a  Son,  and  thou  shatt  call  his  name 
Jesus:  for  he  shall  save  his  people  from  their  sins. — Matt.  i.  21. 

The  celebration  of  the  birth  of  Christ  hath  been  esteemed  a  duty 
by  most  who  profess  Christianity.  When  we  consider  the  coti- 
descension  and  love  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  in  subBHiting  to 
be  born  of  a  virgin,  a  poor  sinful  creature ;  and  especiaUy  as  he 


XTlJ  TitB  0B8BRVATI01I  OP  CHRIST'S  BIRTH.  SOO 

knew  how  he  was  to  be  treated  in  this  world ;  that  he  was  to  be 
despised,  scoffed  at,  and  at  last  to  die  a  painfal,  shameful,  and 
ignominious  death ;  that  he  should  be  treated  as  though  he  were 
tibe  off-scouring  of  all  mankind;  used  not  like  the  son  of  a  man, 
and,  therefore,  not  at  all  like  the  Son  of  God ;  the  consideration 
of  these  things  should  make  us  to  admire  the  love  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  who  was  so  willing  to  offer  himself  as  a  ransom  for 
the  sins  of  the  people,  that  when  the  fuluess  of  time  was  come, 
Christ  came,  made  of  a  woman,  made  under  the  law:  he  came 
according  to  the  eternal  counsel  of  the  Father;  he  came  not  in 
glory  or  in  splendour,  not  like  him  who  brought  all  salvation  with 
him;  no,  he  was  bom  in  a  stable,  and  laid  in  a  manger;  oxen 
were  his  companions.  O  amazing  condescension  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  to  stoop  to  such  low  and  poor  thiogs  for  our  sake. 
What  love  is  this,  what  great  and  wonderful  love  was  here,  that 
the  Son  of  God  should  come  into  our  world  in  so  mean  a  coniu 
tion,  to  deliver  us  from  the  sin  and  misery  in  which  we  were  in- 
volved by  our  fall  in  our  first  parents  I  And  as  all  that  proceeded 
from  the  springs  must  be  muddy,  because  the  fountain  was  so; 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  came  to  take  our  natures  upon  him,  to  die 
a  shameful,  a  painful,  and  an  accursed  deaths  for  our  sakes ;  he 
died  for  our  sins,  and  to  bring  us  to  God ;  he  cleansed  us  by  his 
blood  from  the  guilt  of  sin,  he  satisfied  for  our  imperfections; 
and  now,  my  brethren,  we  have  access  unto  him,  with  boldness  ; 
he  is  a  mediator  between  us  and  his  offended  Father. 

Therefore,  if  we  do  but  consider  into  what  state,  and  at  how 
great  a  distance  from  God,  we  are  fallen ;  how  vile  our  natures 
were ;  what  a  depravity,  and  how  incapable  to  restore  that  imago 
of  6<>d  to  our  souls,  which  we  lost  in  our  first  parents :  when  I 
consider  these  things,  my  brethren,  and  that  the  Lard  Jesus 
Christ  came  to  restore  us  to  that  favour  with  God  which  we  had 
lost,  and  that  Christ  not  only  came  down  with  an  intent  to  do  it^ 
but  actually  accomplished  all  that  was  in  his  heart  towards  us; 
that  he  raised  and  brought  us  into  favour  with  God,  that  we 
might  find  kindness  and  mercy  in  his  sight ;  surely  this  calls  for 
some  return  of  thanks  on  our  part  to  our  dear  Redeemer,  for  this 
love  and  kindness  to  our  souls.  How  just  would  it  have  been  of 
him,  to  have  left  us  in  that  deplorable  state,  wherein  we,  by  our 
guilt,  had  involved  ourselves !  For  God  could  not,  nor  can  receive 
any  additional  good  by  our'sal  vation ;  but  it  was  love,  mere  love ; 
it  was  free  love,  that  brought  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  into  our 
world  about  1700  years  ago.  What,  shall  we  not  remember  the 
birth  of  our  Jesus?  Shall  we  yearly  celebrate  the  birth  of  our 
temporal  king,  and  shall  that  of  the  King  of  kings  be  quite  for- 
e;otten  ?  Shall  that  only,  which  ought  to  be  had  chiefly  in  remem- 
brance, be  qtiite  forgotten?  God  forbid !  No,  my  dear  brethren^ 
let  us  celelmite  and  keep  this  festival  of  our  church,  with  joy  in 
OUT  hearts :  let  the  birih  of  a  Redeemer,  who  redeemed  us  from 
sin,  from  wrath,  from  death,  from  hell,  be  always  remembered ; 
may  this  Saviour's  love  never  be  forgotten !  but  may  we  sing 
forth  all  his  love  and  glory,  as  lon^  as  life  shall  la^t  here,  and 


no  TBB  OBtfKETATIOS   OT  CHmtfTS  BIKTH.  l^^^ 

throcfh  am  mdkai  eUxmtj  m  tke  warid  jdKyre!  saj  we  dttBMl 
Coirtb  tJie  mimien  of  rrdrriiiiig  love,  aad  tke  nckcs  of  fitee  gpno^ 
asidjt  asi^eis  and  aicfcaagelSy  ckervfaim  and  scfrnphim,  wilhoot 
iitcfiiuMOii,  for  erer  and  ercr !  Asd  as,  m j  brelkicny  the  time 
lor  kttfmf  this  festival  is  aj^miachiBg,  let  as  consider  oor  dotj 
in  tlie  tme  otiserration  thereof,  or  the  ri^  way  for  the  ^k>ry  oC 
God,  and  the  good  of  isunortal  souls,  to  celebrate  the  biith  of 
onr  Lord  Jesos  Christ;  an  erent  which  ought  to  be  had  in  eter- 
nal reMembrance. 

It  is  my  design  to  lay  down  roles  for  the  tme  keeping  of  that 
time  of  Ckristmas,  which  is  now  iq>{mMching. 

h  I  shaD  shew  yon  urtien  yoo  may  be  said,  not  to  observe  this 
festiral  aright. 

II.  I  sbaJI  shew  yoo,  when  yoor  observation  and  celebrating 
of  this  fiMtiral  is  done  according  to  the  ^ory  ci  Grod,  aad  to  the 
troe  manner  of  keefung  of  it. 

III.  Shall  conclode  with  an  exhortation  to  all  of  yoo,  high 
and  low,  rich  and  poor,  one  with  another,  to  have  a  regard  to 
yoor  befaavioor  at  all  times,  bat  more  espc^cially,  my  dear  bre- 
thren, on  this  solemn  occasion. 

I*  My  brethren,  I  am  to  shew  when  yoor  celebration  of  this 
festival  is  not  of  the  right  kind. 

And  First,  Yoo  do  not  celebrate  this  ari^t,  when  yoo  spend 
most  of  yoor  time  in  cards,  dice,  or  gaming  of  any  sort. 

This  is  a  season  for  which  there  is  no  more  allowance  for 
wasting  of  yoor  precioos  time  in  those  onlawfol  entertainments, 
than  any  other.  Persons  are  apt  to  flatter  themselves  that  they 
are  free,  and  at  liberty  to  spend  whole  evenings  now,  at  cards,  at 
dice,  or  any  diversion  whatsoever,  to  pass  away,  as  they  call  it, 
a  tedioos  evening.  They  can  do  any  thing  now  to  pass  away 
that,  which  is  hastening  as  fast  as  thought:  time  is  always  upon 
the  wing !  it  is  no  sooner  present  but  it  is  past,  and  no  sooner 
come  but  it  is  gone.  And  have  we  so  much  to  do,  and  so  little 
time  to  do  it  in,  and  yet  complain  of  time  lying  heavy  upon  our 
hands?  Have  we  not  the  devil  and  the  beast  to  get  out  of  oor 
sools  ?  Are  not  our  natures  to  be  changed,  our  corruptions  to  be 
subdued,  our  wills  to  be  brought  over  to  God,  our  hard  hearts  to 
be  softened,  all  old  things  fo  be  done  away,  and  all  things  to 
become  new  in  our  souls?  Is  there  not  all  this  to  be  done?  And 
yot  we  have  too  much  time  upon  our  hands!  It  is  well,  that  in- 
stead of  having  too  much  time,  it  be  not  found  that  we  have  got 
too  little,  when  we  come  to  die :  then  we  shall  wish,  my  brethren, 
that  we  bad  made  more  account  of  our  time,  that  we  had  improv- 
ed it  for  the  glory  of  God,  and  the  welfare  of  our  immortal  souls. 

Good  God !  how  amazing  is  the  consideration,  that  many  can 
BO  to  church  in  the  morning,  and  take  the  sacrament,  and  come 
home  and  spend  the  afternoon  and  evening  in  cards :  is  this,  my 
brethren,  discerning  the  Lord's  body?  Is  this  taking  the  sacra- 
ment according  to  its  institution?  Is  not  this  a  pollution  thereof, 
and  making  the  blood  of  the  covenant  an  unholy  thing? 

Therefore,  those  of  you  who  have  made  this  yoor  practice  in 


ZVI.]  TRY  0B6BRVATI0N   OF   CHRIST'S  BIRTH;  Sll 

times  past»  let  me  beseech  you,  in  the  bowels  of  mercy,  not  tb 
do  so  any  more ;  for«  indeed,  it  is  earthly,  it  is  sensual,  it  is  de« 
vilish.  Consider  what  is  said  of  those  who  eat  and  drink  at  the 
Lord's  table  unworthily,  that  they  eat  and  drink  their  own  dam- 
nation :  and  can  they,  my  brethren,  be  said  to  eat  and  drink  any 
otherwise,  who  no  sooner  go  from  the  table  of  the  Lord,  but  run 
to  the  diversions  of  the  devil?  Indeed,  this  is  exceeding  sinful, 
and  displeasing  unto  the  Lord :  then  forbear  those  diversions 
which  are  so  evil  in  themselves ;  O  be  not  found  in  those  exer^ 
cises,  and  in  that  pleasure,  which  you  would  not  be  found  in 
when  you  come  to  die.  Thus,  my  brethren,  you  see  it  is  not  a 
right  celebration  of  the  birth  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  to  spend  it  in 
cards,  dice,  or  any  other  diversions,  which  proceed  so  directly 
from  the  devil,  and  are  destrifctive  to  all  true  goodness. 

Secondly  J  They  cannot  be  said  truly  to  celebrate  this  time, 
who  spend  their  time  in  eating  and  drinking  to  excess. 

This  is  a  season  when  persons  are  apt  to  indulge  themselves 
in  all  manner  of  luxury:  iniquity  now  abounds  apace;  nothing 
is  scarcely  to  be  seen  but  things  of  the  greatest  extravagance 
imaginable;  not  only  for  the  necessities  of  the  body,  but  to  pam- 
per it  in  lust,  to  feed  its  vices,  to  make  us  go  on  in  sin,  to  be  a 
means  for  gratifying  our  carnal  appetite ;  and  this  is  a  means  to 
make  us  forget  the  Lord  of  glory.  This  makes  us  only  fit  to  do 
such  drudgery,  as  the  devil  shall  set  us  about :  this  is  only  pre- 
paring to  run  wheresoever  the  devil  sends ;  this,  instead  of  deny- 
ing ourselves,  is  indulging  ourselves;  this  is  not,  nor  cannot  be 
called,  a  celebration  of  the  birth  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  when 
we  are  making  ourselves  worse  than  the  beasts  that  perish« 

I  am  not  speaking  against  eating  and  drinking  of  the  good 
things  of  life,  but  against  the  eating  and  drinking  of  them  to  ex- 
cess, because  they  thus  unqualify  us  for  the  service  of  God ;  and 
to  DOT  fellow-creatures  they  make  us  unsociable,  and  may  occa- 
sion us  to  be  guilty  of  saying  and  acting  those  things,  which  we 
should  be  ashamed  to  think  of,  if  we  had  only  eat  or  drank  with 
moderation. 

Therefore,  my  dear  brethren,  let  me  beseech  you  to  set  a  watch 
over  yourselves;  be  careful  that  you  do  not  run  into  that  com- 
pany which  may  tempt  you  to  evil ;  for  would  a  man  run  himself 
into  danger  on  purpose?  Would  a  man  enter  himself  into  that 
company,  where,  before  he  goes,  he  knows  he  shall  be  exposed 
to  great  temptations ;  and  therefore,  if  you  have  any  reason  to 
think  that  the  company  you  are  going  into  will  be  a  temptation,^ 
I  beseech  you,  by  the  mercies  of  Grod  in  Christ  Jesus,  that  you 
would  not  run  into  it. 

How  can  you  say,  ''  lead  us  not  into  temptation,"  when  yoa 
are  resolved  to  lead  yourselves  into  it,  by  running  into  the  occa- 
sions of  sins.  You  are  commanded  to  keep  from  the  appear- 
ance of  evil ;  and  do  you  do  that,  by  running  into  the  place  and 
compai^  where  it  is  like  to  be  committed?  No,  this  is  so  far 
from  avoiding  and  shunning  it,  that  it  is  a  plain  proof  to  the 
Goutrary ;  therefore,  if  you  are  for  observing  this  time,  this  fes- 

n2 


S13  JHE  OBIftRYATION   OP   CHRIST'S  BIRTH.  [XVL 

tival  of  our  church,  let  it  not  be  done  by  ninning  to  excess ;  for 
you  plainly  see,  that  those  who  are  guilty  thereof,  cannot  be 
«aid  properly  to  celebrate  it. 

.  Thirdly,  Nor  can  they,  my  brethren,  be  said  to  keep,  or  rightly 
observe,  the  commemoration  of  the  birth  of  our  Redeemer,  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  neglect  their  worldly  callings,  to  follow 
pleasures  and  diversions. 

.  Alas !  many,  instead  of  keeping  this  time  as  it  ought  to  be,  run 
into  sin  with  greediness ;  instead  of  devoting  their  time  to  the 
Lord,  it  is  only  devoted  to  the  devil  and  their  own  lusts.  How 
many  who  thus  mispend  their  time,  at  this  season,  lay  by  the 
work  of  their  callings  for  a  considerable  time,  with  no  other  view, 
but  to  follow  earthly,  sensual,  and  devilish  pleasures.  If  they 
should  go  to  hear  'a  sermon,  or  to  a  society,  my  brethren,  the 
inouths  of  all  the  Pharisees  at  once  are  open  against  them,  that 
they  are  not  only  a-going  to  be  ruined  themselves,  but  are  going 
to  ruin  their  families  too;  they  think  it  needless  to  make  so  much 
ado ;  this  is  being  righteous  over-much  ;  but  you  may  be  as  wick- 
ed as  you  please,  and  tbey  will  not  cry  out :  however,  when  you 
are  wicked  over-much,  by  serving  the  devil  and  your  own  plea^ 
sures  for  a  week  or  a  month  together,  then,  my  brethren,  with 
them  you  are  only  taking  a  little  recreation,  spending  your  time 
in  innocent  diversions ;  no  one  cries  out  against  you,  there  is  no 
outcry  that  you  are  going  to  be  ruined.  Again,  if  you  give  ever 
so  small  a  matter  among  the  poor  people  of  God,  for  their  relief, 
then  you  are  robbing  your  families,  then  you  are  going  to  turn 
madmen,  and  in  a  few  days  will  be  so  methodisticaliy  mad,  that 
you  are  not  fit  for  a  polite  gentleman's  conversation ;  but  if  you 
spend  one  hundred  times  the  money  in  play-houses,  8cc.  on  your 
lusts  and  pleasures,  then  you  are  liked  and  esteemed  as  a  good 
friend  and  companion ;  but,  my  dear  brethren,  these  good  com* 
panions  in  the  world's  account,  are  never  so  in  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ's.  You  cannot  serve  God  and  mammon ;  you  must  either 
k>se  your  lusts,  your  pleasures,  and  your  delights,  or  you  cannot 
expect  to  find  favour  with  God ;  for,  indeed  and  indeed,  the  ways 
fliat  too  many  follow  at  this  time,  are  sinful,  yea,  they  are  ex- 
ceeding sinful.  You  see  they  cannot  be  said  to  celebrate  this 
holy  time,  who  thus  mispend  their  precious  time,  to  the  neglect 
of  their  families;  such  are  destroying  themselves  with  a 
witness. 

Thus,  my  dear  brethren,  I  have  shewn  you  who  they  are  who 
do  not  rightly  observe  this  holy  festival. 

II.  I  come  now^  in  the  second  place,  to  shew  you  who  they 
are  who  do  rightly  observe,  and  truly  celebrate,  the  birth  of  our 
Redeemer. 

And  I  shall  shew  you  who  they  are  in  two  particulars,  directly 
opposite  to  the  others ;  and  then,  my  brethren,  take  your  choice: 
you  must  choose  the  one  or  the  other,  there  is  no  medium,  you 
must  either  serve  the  Lord  or  Baal ;  and,  therefore,  my  dear 
brethren,  let  me  beg  of  you  to  consider. 

First,  That  those  spend  their  time  aright,  and  truly  observe 


XVi.y  THft  OBflBKVATlOK  OP  OHtHHr'S  BUtriT.  213 

this  festiyal,  who  spend  their  hours  in  reading,  praying,  and 
religions  conversation. 

What  can  we  do  to  employ  our  time  to  a  more  noble  purpose, 
than  reading  of  what  our  dear  Redeemer  has  done  and  suffered ; 
to  read,  thkt  the  King  of  kings,  and  the  Lord  of  lords,  came  from 
his  throne,  and  took  upon  him  the  form  of  the  meanest  of  his 
servants;  and  what  great  things  he  underwent.  This,  this  is  an 
history  worth  reading,  this  is  worth  employing  our  time  about: 
and  sorely  when  we  read  of  the  sufferings  of  our  Saviour,  it  should 
excite  ns  to  prayer,  that  we  might  have  an  interest  in  the  Lord 
Jesos Christ;  thattJie  blood  which  he  spilt  upon  mount  Calvary, 
and  his  death  and  crucifixion,  might  make  an  atonement  for  our 
sins,  that  we  might  be  made  holy;  that  we  might  be  enabled  to 
put  off  the  old  man  with  his  deeds,  and  put  on  the  new  man; 
even  the  Lord  Jesus- Christ;  that  we  may  throw  away  the  heavy 
yoke  of  sin,  and  put  on  the  yoke  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  In^ 
deed,  my  brethren,  these  things  call  for  prayer,  and  for  earnest 
prayer  too;  and  O  do  be  earnest  with  God,  that  you  may  have 
an  interest  in  this  Redeemer;  and  that  you  may  ]>ut  on  his  righ^ 
teousness,  so  that  yon  may  not  come  before  Mm  in  your  filthy 
rags,  nor  be  found  not  having  on  the  wedding  garment.  O  do 
not,  I  beseech  you,  trust  unto  vourselves  for  justification ;  you 
cannot,  indeed  you  cannot,  be  justified  by  the  works  of  the  law. 
I  entreat  that  your  time  may  be  thus  spent;  and  if  you  are  in 
company,  let  your  time  be  spent  in  that  conversation  which  pro^ 
fitetb :  let  it  not  be  about  your  dressing,  your  plays,  your  profits, 
or  your  worldly  concerns,  but  let  it  be  the  wonders  of  redeeming 
love ;  O  tell,  tell  to  each  other,  what  great  things  the  Lord  has 
done  for  your  souls ;  declare  unto  one  another,  how  you  werd 
delivered  from  the  hands  of  your  common  enemy,  Satan,  and  how 
the  Lord  has  brought  your  feet  from  the  clay,  and  has  set  them 
upon  the  Rock  of  ages,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  there,  my  brethren, 
is  BO  slipping:  other  conversation,  by  often  repeating,  you  he* 
eome  lolly  acquainted  with,  but  of  Christ  there  is  always  some« 
thing  new  to  raise  your  thoughts;  you  can  never  want  matter 
when  the  love  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  subject;  then  let 
Jesus  be  the  subject,  my  brethren,  of  all  your  conversation. 

Let  yotir  time  be  spent  on  Urn:  O  this,  this  is  an  employ, 
which  if  you  belong  to  Jesus,  will  last  you  to  all  eternity.  Let 
others  enjoy  their  cards,  their  dice,  and  gaming  hours ;  do  you, 
my  brethren,  let  your  time  be  spent  in  reading,  praying,  and 
religions  conversation.  Which  will  stand  the  trial  best  at  the 
last  day?  Which  do  you  think  will  bring  most  comfort,  most 
peace,  in  a  dying  hour?  O  live  and  spend  your  time  now,  as 
you  will  wish  to  have  done,  when  you  come  to  die. 

Secondly,  Let  the  good  things  of  life,  you  enjoy,  be  used  with 
moderation. 

I  am  not,  as  the  scoffers  of  this  day  tell  you,  againt  eating  and 
drinking  the  good  things  of  life ;  no,  my  brethren,  I  am  only 
against  their  being  used  to  an  excess ;  therefore,  let  me  beseech 
yoa  to  avoid  those  great  indiscretions,  those  sinful  actions^  which 


214  THE   OBSERVATION   OP  CHRIST'S   DBATff.  {XVl. 

\dll  give  the  enemies  of  God  room  to  blaspheme.  Let  me  beseech 
you,  to  have  aregard»  a  particular  regard,  to  your  behaviour  at 
this  time;  for  indeed  the  eyes  of  all  are  upon  you,  and  they 
would  rejoice  much  to  find  any  reason  to  complain  of  you.  They 
can  say  things  against  us  without  a  cause;  and  how  would  they 
rejoice  if  there  was  wherewith  they  might  blame  us  ?  Then  they 
would  triumph  and  rejoice  indeed ;  and  all  your  little  slips,  my 
dear  brethren,  are,  and  would  be,  charged  upon  me.  O  at  this 
time,  when  the  eyes  of  so  many  are  upon  you,  be  upon  your 
guard ;  and  if  you  use  the  good  things  of  this  life  with  modera- 
tion, you  do  then  celebrate  this  festival  in  the  manner  which  the 
institution  calls  for. 

And  instead  of  running  into  excess,  let  that  money,  which  you 
might  expend  to  pamper  your  own  bodies,  be  ^iven  to  feed  the 
poor :  now,  my  brethren,  is  the  season,  in  which  they  commonly 
require  relief;  and  sure  you  cannot  act  more  agreeably,  either  to 
the  season,  to  the  time,  or  for  the  glory  of  Grod,  than  in  relieving 
his  poor  distressed  servants.  Therefore  if  any  of  you  have  poor 
friends,  or  acquaintance,  who  are  in  distress,  I  beseech  you  to 
assist  them ;  and  not  only  those  of  your  acquaintance,  but  the 
poor  in  general.  O  my  dear  brethren,. that  will  turn  to  a  better 
account  another  day,  than  all  you  have  expended  to  please  the 
lust  of  the  flesh,  the  lust  of  the  eye,  or  the  pride  of  life.  Consider, 
Christ  was  always  willing  to  relieve  the  distressed ;  it  is  his 
command  also;  and  can  you  better  commemorate  the  birth  of 
your  King,  your  Saviour,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christy  than  in  dbeyr 
ing  one  of  his  commands? 

Do  not,  my  dear  brethren,  be  forgetful  of  the  poor  of  this  world ; 
consider,  if  Providence  has  smiled  upon  you,and  blessed  you  with 
abundance  of  the  things  of  this  life,  God  calls  for  some  returns 
of  gratitude  from  you :  be  ye  mindful  of  the  poor,  and  when 
you  are  so,  then  you  may  be  said  to  have  a  true  regard  for  that 
time  which  is  now  approaching ;  if  you  would  truly  observe 
this  festival,  let  it  be  done  with  moderation,  and  a  regard  to 
the  poor  of  this  world. 

Thirdly,  Let  me  beg  of  you  not  to  alienate  too  much  of  your 
time  from  the  worldly  business  of  this  life,  but  have  a  proper 
regard  thereunto,  and  then  you  may  be  said  rightly  to  observe 
this  festival. 

God  allows  none  to  be  idle :  in  all  ages,  business  was  com- 
inended ;  and  therefore  do  not  think,  that  any  season  will  excuse 
^B  in  our  callings :  we  are  not,  my  brethren,  to  labour  for  the 
things  of  this  life  inordinately,  but  we  are  to  labour  for  them 
with  all  moderation :  we  are  not  to  neglect  our  callings ;  no,  we 
are  to  regard  those  places  and  stations  of  life,  which  God  in  his 
providence  has  thought  convenient  for  us ;  and  therefore,  when 
you  neglect  your  business  to  the  hurt  of  your  families,  whatever 
pretence  you  thereby  make  for  so  doing,  you  are  guilty  of  sin  ; 
you  are  not  acting  according  to  the  doctrine  of  the  gospel,  but 
are  breaking  the  commands  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  both  ac- 
cording to  his  word,  and  to  his  own  practice. 


XTI.J       THB  OBSBRYATATION   OP   CHRIST'B  DEATH.  SI& 

At  this  festival,  persons  are  apt  to  take  a  little  more  liberty 
than  usual;  and  if  that  time  from  our  vocations  be  not  prejudi- 
cial to  ourselves  or  families,  and  be  spent  in  the  service  of  God, 
and  the  good  of  immortal  souls,  then  I  do  not  think  it  sinful ; 
but  there  is  too  much  reason  to  fear,  that  the  time  is  spent  upcm 
our  own  lusts,  and  then  it  is  exceeding  sinful ;  it  is  against  our 
own  souls,  and  it  is  against  the  good  of  our  families,  and  instead 
of  commemorating  the  birth  of  our  dear  Redeemer,  we  are  disho- 
nouring him  in  the  greatest  degree  possibly  we  can. 

Therefore,  inquire  strictly  into  your  end  and  design  in  spend- 
ing your  time :  see,  my  brethren,  whether  it  proceeds  from  a 
true  love  to  your  Redeemer,  or  whether  there  is  not  some 
worldly  pleasure  or  advantage  at  the  bottom  :  if  there  is,  our 
end  is  not  right ;  but  if  it  proceed  entirely  from  love  to  him  that 
died  and  gave  himself  for  us,  our  actions  will  be  a  proof  thereof; 
then  our  time  will  be  spent,  not  in  the  polite  pleasures  of  life, 
but  according  to  the  doctrines  and  commands  of  the  blessed 
Jesus ;  then  our  conversation  will  be  in  heaven :  and  O  that 
this  might  be  found  to  be  the  end  of  each  of  you,  who  now  hear 
me ;  then  we  should  truly  observe  this  festival,  and  have  a  true 
regard  to  the  occasion  thereof,  that  of  Christ's  coming  to  redeem 
the  souls  of  those  which  were  lost. 

Let  me  now  conclude,  my  dear  brethren,  with  a  few  words  of 

exhortation,  beseeching  ^ou  to  think  of  the  love  of  the  Lord 

Jesus  Christ.    Did  Jesus  come  into  the  world  to  save  us  from 

death,  and  shall  we  spend  no  part  of  our  time  in  conversing 

about  our  dear  Jesus :  shall  we  pay  no  regard  to  the  birth  or 

him,  who  came  to  redeem  us  from  the  worst  of  slavery,  from 

that  of  sin  and  the  devil ;  and  shall  this  Jesus  not  only  be  bora 

on  oar  account,  but  likevdse  die  in  our  stead,  and  yet  shall  we 

be  unmindful  of  him?  shall  we  spend  our  time  in  those  things 

which  are  offensive  to  him  ?  shall  we  not  rather  do  all  we  can 

to  promote  his  glory,  and  act  according  to  his  commands  ?   O 

my  dear  brethren,  be  found  in  the  ways  of  God ;   let  us  not 

disturb  our  dear  Redeemer  by  any  irregular  proceedings  ;  an4 

let  me  beseech  you  to  strive  to  love,  fear,  honour,  and  obey  him, 

jnore  than  ever  you  have  done  yet ;  let  not  the  devil  engross 

your  time,  and  that  dear  Saviour,  who  came  into  the  world  oil 

your  account,  have  so  little.     O  be  not  so  ungrateful  to  him 

who  has  been  so  kind  to  you :  what  could  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 

have  done  for  you  more  than  he  has  ?    Then  do  not  abuse  hia 

mercy,  but  let  your  time  be  spent  in  thinking  and  talking  of  thq 

love  of  Jesus,  who  was  incarnate  for  us,  who  was  bora  of  a 

woman,  and  made  under  the  law,  to  redeem  us  from  the  vnratli 

to  come. 

Now,  to  God  the  Father,  God  the  Son,  &c. 


916  THE  TEVPTATION    OF   CHRIST.  ptVII, 

SERMON  XVIL 

THE   TEMPTATION    OP   CHRIST 

Then  was  Jesus  led  up  of  the.  Spirit  into  the  wilderness,  to  be 
tempted  of  the  devil.  And  when  he  had  fasted  forty  days  and 
forty  nights,  he  was  qfterwards  an  hungered.  And  when  the 
tempter  came  to  him,  he  said.  If  thou  be  the  Son  of  God,  com- 
mand that  these  stones  may  be  made  bread.  But  he  ansuytred 
and  said.  It  is  written,  Man  shall  not  live  by  bread  alone,  but 
by  every  word  that  proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of  God.  Then 
the  devil  taketh  him  up  into  the  holy  city,  and  setteth  him  on 
a  pinnacle  of  the  temple,  and  saith  unto  him,  Jf  thou  be  the 
Son  of  God,  cast  thyself  down :  for  it  is  written,  he  shall  give 
his  angels  charge  concerning  thee,  and  in  their  hands  they  shah 
bear  thee  up,  lest  at  any  time  thou  dash  thy  foot  against  a 
stone.  Jesus  said  unto  him.  It  is  written  again.  Thou  shall  not 
tempt  the  Lord  thy  God.  Again,  the  devil  taketh  him  up  into  an 
exceeding  high  mountain,  and  sheweth  him  all  the  kingdoms  of 
the  world,  and  the  glory  of  them;  and  saith  unto  him,  Alt 
these  things  will  I  give  thee,  if  thou  wilt  fall  down  and  wor- 
ship  me.  Then  saith  Jesus  unto  him,  Get  thee  hence,  Satan, 
for  it  is  written.  Thou  shall  worship  the  Lord  thy  Ghd,  and 
him  only  shall  thou  serve.  Then  the  devil  Uaveth  kim,  and 
behold  angels  came  and  ministered  unto  him.   Matt.  it.  1 — 11. 

Dearly  beloved,  to-day  you  are  invited  to  take  a  walk  into 
the  wilderness,  to  behold,  sympathize  with,  and  get  instruction 
and  comfort  from,  a  Saviour  tempted.  In  the  conflict,  he  ap- 
proves himself  to  be  God's  beloved  Son ;  and  the  Father  gives 
itemonstrable  evidence,  that  with  and  in  him,  he  is  indeed  well 
pleased.  Let  us,  with  serious  attention  consider  when,  where, 
and  how,  our  great  Michael  fought  with,  and  overcame,  the  dra« 
goD.  The  evangelist  Matthew  is  very  particular  in  relating  the 
preparations  for,  the  beginning,  process,  and  issue,  of  this  gloria 
0U8  and  important  combat. 

''Then  was  Jesus  led  up  of  the  Spirit  into  the  wilderness,  to 
be  tempted  of  the  devil."  In  the  close  of  theforegoing  chapter, 
we  are  told,  that  the  blessed  Jesu3  had  been  publicly  baptized, 
and  was  also  solemnly  inaugurated  to  his  mediatorial  office,  by 
the  opening  of  the  heavens,  by  the  Spirit  of  God  descending  on 
him  like  a  dove,  and  by  a  voice  from  heaven,  saying,  "  This  is 
my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased  :  and  tbeii  it  was, 
when  he  came  from  the^solemn  ordinance  of  baptism ;  when  he 
was  about  to  shew  himself  openly  unto  Israel ;  when  he  was 
full  of  the  Holy  Ghost;  (Luke  iv.  1.)  even  then  was  be  led,  with 
a  holy  unconstrained  violence,  as  a  champion  into  the  fields  to 
engage  an  enemy  whom  he  was  sure  to  conquer.  But  whither 
is  this  conqueror  led  ?  Into  a  lonesome,  wide,  howling  wilder- 
ness :  probably,  says  Mr.  Henry,  into  the  great  wilderness  ol 
Sinai;  a  wilderness,  not  only  lonesome,  but  inhabited  by  wild 


JLriU}  THE  TEMPTATION   OP   CHRIST.  217 

beasts,  Mark  i.  13.  Hither  was  our  Lord  led,  not  only  that  he 
might  prepare  himself  by  retirement  and  prayer,  but  also  that 
he  might  be  alone,  and  thereby  give  Satan  aU  the  advantages 
he  could  desire.  In  this  combat,  as  well  as  that  of  his  last 
agony,  **  of  the  people  there  was  to  be  none  with  him.''  Nei*- 
ther  does  he  content  himself  with  praying,  but  he  fasts  also,  and 
that  forty  days  and  forty  nights,"  (ver.  2.)  as  Moses  and  Elias 
bad  done,  many  years  before ;  it  may  be,  in  the  very  same  place. 
All  these  fasts  were  miraculous ;  and  therefore,  though  we  are 
taught  hereby,  that  fasting  is  a  christian  duty,  yet  to  pretend^ 
in  an  ordinary  way,  to  imitate  them,  by  fasting  for  so  long  a 
term  together,  is  no  doubt  superstitious,  presumptuous,  and 
sinful :  but, few  people,  I  believe,  need  such  a  caution. 

During  these  forty  days,  we  may  suppose,  our  Lord  felt  no 
hunger :  converse  with  heaven,  to  him  was  instead  of  meat  and 
drink;  but  "afterwards  he  was  an  hungered ;"  exceedingly  so, 
no  doubt.  And  now,  the  important  fight  begins.  For  then,  "  the 
tempter,  emphatically  so  called,  because  he  first  tempted  our 
first  parents  to  sin,  and  hath  ever  since  been  unwearied  in 
tempting  their  descendants ;  then  the  tempter,  who  in  an  invisi- 
ble manner  had  been  attacking  our  blessed  Lord  all  the  whole 
forty  days,  when  he  saw  him  hungering,  and  in  such  distressing 
circumstances,  came  to  him,  as  it  should  seem,  in  a  visible  shape, 
and  probably  transformed  into  the  appearance  of  an  angel  of  light. 
And  what  does  he  tempt  him  to  ?  To  nothing  less  than  to  doubt 
of  his  being  the  Son  of  God."  ''  If  thou  be  the  Son  of  God."  What! 
put  an  if  to  this,  Satan,  after  the  glorious  Jesus  had  been  proved 
to  be  God's  Son,  and  repeatedly  too  in  such  a  glorious  manner? 
Surely,  tbou  thyself  couldest  not  but  see  the  heavens  opened,  and 
the  Spirit  descending ;  surely,  thou  didst  hear  Uic  voice  that  came 
to  him  fnmi  heaven,  immediately  after  his  baptism,  saying,  "  This 
is  my  beloved  Son :  and  dost  thou  now  say  unto  him,  '*  If  thou  be 
the  Son  of  God."  Yes ;  but  Satan  know  and  believed  he  was,  full 
well ;  but  he  wanted  to  make  our  Lord  to  doubt  of  it.  And  why  ? 
because  he  was  in  such  a  melancholy  situation.  As  though  he  had 
said, ''  If  God  were  thy  father,  he  would  never,  suffer  thee  to 
starve  to  death,  in  a  howling  wilderness,  among  wild  beasts. 
Surely,  the  v<Mce  thou  lately  didst  hear,  was  only  a  delusion.  If 
thoQ  wert  the  Son  of  God,  especially  his  beloved  Son,  in  whom 
be  was  so  pleased,  thou  wouldest  be  taken  more  care  of  by 
htm."  Thus  he  attacked  our  first  parents,  by  suggesting  to 
them  hard  thoughts  of  their  all-bountiful  Creator :  "  Yea,  hath 
God  said  ye  shall  not  eat  of  every  tree  in  the  garden  ?"  Hath 
be  placed  you  in  the  midst  kA  such  a  variety  of  delicious  fruits, 
only  to  teaze,  and  make  you  miserable  ?  and  how  artfully  now 
does  he  labour  to  insinuate  himself  into  our  Lord's  aflections, 
as  he  then  did  to  ingratiate  himself  with  our  first  parents  !  ''  If 
thou  be  the  Son  of  God,  (says  he,)  come,  prove  it  by  command- 
ing these  stones  (a  heap  of  which,  probably,  lay  very  near)  to 
be  made  bread ;  this  will  demonstrate  thy  divinity,  and  relieve 
thy  pressing  necessity  at  the  same  time."  Thus,  as  in  all  his  other 


S18  THB  TEMPTATION   OF  CHRIST.  [XVII. 

temptations,  Satan  wonld  fain  appear  to  be  his  very  kind  friend, 
but  the  holy  Jesus  saw  through  the  disguised  enmity  of  his 
antagonist ;  and  scorning  either  to  distrust  his  righteous  Father 
on  the  one  hand,  or  to  work  a  miracle  to  please  or  gratify 
the  devil  on  the  other,  although  he  had  the  Spirit  of  God  with- 
out measure,  and  might  have  made  use  of  a  thousand  other 
ways,  yet  answers  him  with  a  text  of  scripture :  "  It  is  written, 
that  man  shall  not  live  by  bread  alone,  but  by  every  word  that 
proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of  God."  This  is  a  quotation  from 
X>eut.  viii.  3.  and  contains  a  reason  given  by  the  great  Grod,  why 
he  chose  to  feed  the  Israelites  with  manna ;  that  they  might 
]eam  thereby,  man  doth  not  live  by  bread  alone,  but  by  every 
word  that  proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of  God.  This  our  blessed 
Lord  here  applies  to  himself;  and  his  being  in  the  wilderness, 
made  the  application  of  it  still  more  pertinent.  Israel  was  God's 
son :  out  of  Egypt  was  he  called,  to  sojourn  in  the  wilder- 
ness, where  he  was  miraculously  supported.  And  therefore 
our  Lord,  knowing  that  he  was  typified  by  this  Israel,  and  that, 
like  them,  he  was  now  in  a  wilderness,  quotes  this  scripture  as 
a  reason  why  he  should  not,  at  Satan's  suggestion,  either  despair 
of  receiving  help  from  his  Father  in  his  present  circumstances, 
or  distrust  the  validity  of  his  late  manifestations,  or  make  use 
of  any  unwarrantable  means  for  his  present  relief.  For  as  God 
was  his  Father,  he  would  therefore,  either  in  an  ordinary  way 
spread  a  table  for  him  in  the  wilderness,  or  support  and  sustain 
him,  as  he  did  his  Israel  of  old,  in  some  extraordinary  way  or 
other  without  it :  "  for  man  shall  not  live  by  bread  alone,  but 
by  every  word  that  proceedeth  out  of  the  mouth  of  God." 

Thus  is  the  tempter  foiled  in  the  first  onset ;  but  he  hath 
other  arrows  in  his  quiver,  with  which  he  will  farther  strive  to 
i^ound  the  immaculate  Lamb  of  God.  Since  he  cannot  draw 
him  in  either  to  distrust  or  despair,  he  will  now  try  if  he  cannot 
prevail  on  him  to  presume.  In  order  to  effect  this,  "  he  taketh 
the  blessed  Jesus  up  into  the  holy  city,"  or  Jerusalem,  called 
by  our  Saviour  the  city  of  the  great  King,  and  here  called  holy 
because  the  holy  temple  was  in  it,  and,  we  would  hope,  many 
holy  people.  This  was  a  populous  place,  and  therefore  would 
greatly  befriend  the  devil's  design.  And  not  only  so,  but  he 
setteth  him  on  a  pinnacle,  a  battlement  or  wing,  of  the  temple, 
the  top  of  which  was  so  very  high,  that,  as  Josephus  observes, 
it  would  make  a  man's  head  run  giddy  to  look  down  from  it. 
And  some  think  this  was  done  at  the  time  of  public  worship. 
How  the  holy  Jesus  sufiered  himself  to  be  taken  hither,  whe* 
ther  he  was  transported  through  the  air,  or  whether  he  followed 
Satan  on  foot,  is  uncertain  ;  but  certainly  it  was  an  instance  of 
amazing  condescension  in  our  Lord,  that  he  should  permit  so 
foul  a  fiend  to  carry  or  lead  his  holy  body  about  in  this  manner. 
Well !  Satan  hath  now  got  him  upon  the  pinnacle  of  the  temple, 
and  still  harping  upon  his  old  string,  '*  If  thou  be  the  Son  of  God, 
(says  he,)  cast  thyself  down,"  and  thereby  shew  to  this  large 
worshipping  assembly  (who  will  assuredly  then  believe)  that 


XVn.]  THB  TEMPTATION    OP  CHRIST.  219 

thou  art  God's  beloved  Son^  under  the  special  protection  of  Hea* 
Yen,  and  art  that  Messiah,  "  who  was  to  come  into  the  world/' 
This  was  artfol,  very  artful.    But  he  seems  to  improve  in  cun- 
ning :  for  he  brings  his  Bible  with  him,  and  backs  his  tempta-^ 
tion  with  a  text  of  scripture ;  ''  For  it  is  written,  (says  he,)  Ho 
shall  give  his  angels  charge  concerning  thee,  and  in  their  banda 
they  shall  bear  thee  up,  lest  at  any  time  thou  dash  thy  foot 
against  a  stone."    But  is  Saul  also  among  the  prophets  ?  Does 
the  devil  quote  scripture,  yea,  seemingly  such  a  very  apposite 
one  too  ?  I  suspect  some  design  without  doubt :  for  herein,  bo 
would  mimic  our  Lord,  who,  he  perceived,  intended  to  fight  him 
with  this  weapon ;  and  not  liking  the  sharp  edge  of  it,  he  thought 
that  if  he  quoted  scripture,  the  Lord  Jesus  would  not  employ 
it  against  him  any  more.    **  It  is  written  (therefore,  said  hejHe 
shall  give  his  angels  charge  concerning  thee,  and  in  their  hands 
they  shall  bear  thee  up,  lest  at  any  time  thou  dash  thy  foot 
against  a  stone :  and  therefore,  since  thou  art  sore  of  such  pro- 
tection, thou  needest  not  fear  to  cast  thyself  down."    This  was 
plausible,  and  by  the  length  of  it  one  would  be  apt  to  imagine 
it  was  a  fair  quotation ;  but  Satan  takes  care  not  only  to  mis- 
apply, but  also  to  maim  it,  purposely  omitting  these  important 
words,  ^'  in  all  thy  ways."    It  is  true,  God  had  given  charge  to 
his  angels  concerning  his  children  in  general,  and  his  beloved 
Son  in  particular,  that  they  should  keep  him  in  all  his  ways; 
but  if  our  Lord  bad  at  this  time,  at  the  devil's  request,  and  to 
gratify  pride,  thrown  himself  down  from  the  pinnacle,  and  there- 
by unnecessarily  presumed  on  his  Father's  protection,  he  would 
not  have  been  in  God's  way,  and  therefore  would  have  had 
no  right  to  the  promised  protection  at  all.    Satan  was  aware  of 
this,  and  therefore  slyly  left  out  what  be  knew  would  not  suit 
his  purpose.    But  is  scripture  the  worse,  for  being  abused  or 
perverted  by  the  devil,  or  his  emissaries  ?  No,  in  no  wise.    Oar 
Lord,  therefore,  lets  him  know  that  he  should  not  throw  asider 
this   important  weapon  upon  this   account,  but  puts  by  this 
home-thrust  with  another  scripture :  It  is  written  again.  Thou 
shalt  not  tempt  the  Lord  thy  God.  Still  oar  Lord  quotes  some- 
thing out  of  the  book  of  Deuteronomy,  and  hath  bis  eye  upon 
Israel  in  his  wilderness  state.     Originally  these  words  were 
directed  to  the  Israelites  in  general,  and  accordingly  are  in  the 
plural  number ;  but  here  our  Lord,  as  before,  makes  a  particular 
application  of  them  to  himself;  Satan  bids  him  cast  himself 
down,  assuring  him,  Grod  had  promised  in  his  word,  to  order 
his  angels  to  take  care  of  him :  Now,  says  our  Lord,  '^  It  is 
written  in  another  part  of  his  word,  that  the  Israelites  should 
not  tempt  the  Lord  their  God  by  distrusting  his  goodness  on 
the  one  hand,  or  presuming  on  his  protection  on  the  other :  And 
therefore,  as  I  would  not  by  commanding  these  stones  to  be  made 
bread,  needlessly  and  distrustfully  setup  to  provide  for  myself; 
neither  will  I  now  presume  unnecessarily  upon  God's  power,  by 
casting  myself  down,  though  placed  by  thee  in  such  a  danger- 
ous situation." 


S20  THB  TEMPTATION   OF   CHRIST.  [XYII 

Thas  onr  ^at  Michael  comes  off  conqneror  in  the  second 
assault.  And  doth  not  the  serpent  feel  his  head  bruised  enough 
yet  ?  Not  at  all :  on  the  contrary,  being  more  and  more  enraged 
at  such  nnusnal  opposition  and  want  of  success,  ^'  He  again 
taketh  him  up  into  an  exceeding  high  mountain,  Twhat  mountain, 
is  not  very  material,)  and  sheweth  him  all  the  Kingdoms  of  the 
world,  and  the  glory  of  them,"  St.  Luke  adds,  "  in  a  moment  of 
time :"  which  confirms  the  common  conjecture,  that  Satan  did 
not  shew  our  Lord  really  tho  kingdoms  of  the  world,  for  that 
must  have  taken  up  more  time,  but  only  took  him  up  into  an 
exceeding  high  mountain  to  humour  the  thing,  and,  by  exerting 
bis  utmost  art,  impressed  on  our  Lord's  imagination  all  at  once, 
a  very  strong,  and  to  any  but  innocence  itself,  a  very  striking 
prospect  of  the  kingdoms  of  the  world,  and  the  glory  of  them ; 
not  the  cares,  that  would  not  serve  Satan's  turn.  He  showed 
our  Saviour  crowns,  but  never  told  him  those  crowns  were 
gilded  with  thorns ;  ^*  He  shewed  him,  (says  Mr.  Henry,  my 
favorite  commentator,)  as  in  a  landscape  or  airy  representation 
in  u  cloud,  such  as  that  great  deceiver  could  easily  frame  and 
put  together,  the  glorious  and  splendid  appearance  of  princes, 
their  robes  and  retinue,  their  equipage  and  life-guards;  the 
pomps  of  thrones  and  courts,  and  stately  palaces :  the  sump- 
tuous buildings  in  cities ;  the  gardens  and  fields  about  the 
country  seats,  with  the  various  instances  of  their  wealth,  plea- 
sure, and  gaiety ;  so  as  might  be  most  likely  to  strike  the  mncy 
and  excite  the  admiration  and  affection.  Such  was  this  shew. 
Our  Saviour  very  well  knew  it,  only  lets  Satan  go  to  the  full 
length  of  his  string,  that  his  victory  over  him  might  be  the  more 
illustrious.  And  now,  says  the  devil,  ^'All  these  things  (a  mighty 
all  indeed ;  a  mere  imaginary  bubble !)  will  I  give  &ee,  if  thoa 
wilt  fall  down  and  worship  me.  He  would  fain  have  it  taken  for 
granted,  that  he  had  succeeded  in  the  two  preceding  temptations : 
*'  Come,  thou  seest  thou  art  not  the  Son  of  Grod,  or,  if  thou  art, 
thou  seest  what  an  unkind  Father  he  is ;  thou  art  here  in  a  starv- 
ing condition,  therefore  take  my  advice,  disown  thy  relation  to 
him,  set  up  for  thysdf,  and  call  me  father,  ask  of  me  blessings, 
and  all  these  will  I  give  thee ;  while  all  that  I  desire  in  return,  is 
but  a  bow,  only  fall  down  and  worship  me.''  Here  Satan  dis- 
covers himself  wi  th  a  wi  tness :  this  was  a  desperate  parting  stroke, 
indeed.  It  is  now  high  time  for  thee,  O  thou  enemy  of  souls,  to 
be  commanded  to  depart !  Filled  with  a  holy  resentment  at  such 
heUish  treatment,  and  impatient  of  the  very  thought  of  s  tting 
up  for  himself,  or  alienating  the  least  part  of  his  heart  and  affec- 
tions from  his  Father,  or  dividing  them  between  his  God  and  the 
worid ;  "  Then  said  Jesus  unto  him.  Get  thee  hence  Satan,  (I 
know  thee  who  thou  art,  under  all  thy  disguises  (get  thee  hence, 
thou  grand  adversary:  for  it  is  written.  Thou  shalt  worship  the 
Lord  thy  God,  and  him  only  shalt  thou  serve: — this  is  the  great 
commandment  of  the  law ;  this  is  the  commandment  my  Father 
gave  unto  his  Israel  of  old,  and  wouldst  thou  have  me,  who 
came  to  fulfil  the  law  and  the  prophets,  thus  shamefully  to  be  a 


XTnJ  THB  TEMPTATION   OP  CHRIST.  231 

transgressor  of  it?  Get  thee  hence,  I  will  bear  thy  insolenco  no 
longer :  thy  other  temptations  were  hellish,  like  thyself,  but  this 
intolerably  so :  get  thee  therefore  hence,  Satan :  my  heavenly 
Father  is  the  Lord  my  God,  and  him  only  will  I  serve." 

And  now  the  battle  is  over :  the  important  combat  is  ended ; 
Jesus  hath  won  the  field :  Satan  is  routed,  and  totally  put  to 
flight.  *'  Then/'  when  the  devil  found  that  Je^us  could  with- 
stand even  the  golden  bait,  the  lust  of  the  eye  and  pride  of  life, 
in  the  two  last,  as  well  as  the  lust  of  the  flesh  in  the  first  temp- 
tation, despairing  of  the  least  success,  and  quite  stunned  with 
that  all-powerful  Crel  thee  hence,  Satan,  **  he  leaveth  him." 

Hell,  we  may  well  suppose,  like  the  Philistines  bf  old,  was 
confounded,  and  gave  u  horrible  groan,  when  they  saw  their  . 
great  Goliath,  in  whom  they  had  so  long  trusted,  thus  shamefully 
and  totally  defisated  in  no  less  than  three  pitched  battles.  Ths 
first  Adam  was  attacked  but  once,  and  was  conquered ;  but  ths 
second  Adam,  though  thus  repeatedly  assaulted,  comes  ofi*  with- 
out the  least  sin,  not  only  conqueror,  but  more  than  conqueror. 
Think  you  not,  that  there  was  joy,  joy  unspeakable,  in  heaven^ 
npon  this  glorious  occasion?  Think  you  not  that  the  angels, 
those  sons  of  Grod,  and  the  multitude  of  the  heavenly  host,  who 
shouted  so  loud  at  our  Lord's  birth,  did  not  r^[)eat,  if  possible, 
with  yet  greater  ecstacy,  that  heavenly  anthem,  "  Glory  be  to  Grod 
in  the  highest."  For  a  while  they  were  only  spectators ;  orders, 
we  may  suppose,  being  issued  out,  that  they  should  only  wait 
around,  but  not  relieve  their  praying,  fasting,  tempted  Lord  t 
but  now  their  restraint  is  removed ;  Satan  departs,  and  "  behold, 
angds  came  and  ministered  unto  him  ;^  they  came  to  administ^ 
to  liis  bodily  necessities,  and  to  congratulate  him  upon  the  glo- 
rious and  complete  victory  which  he  had  gained :  some  of  them, ' 
it  may  be,  had  done  this  kind  office  for  Elijah  long  ago ;  and  , 
with  unspeakably  greater  joy,  they  repeat  it  to  the  Lord  of  Elijah 
now.  His  Father  sends  him  bread  from  heaven ;  and  by  this 
lets  him  know,  that  notwithstanding  the  horrid  temptations  with 
which  he  had  been  attacked,  he  is  his  own  beloved  Son,  in  and  ' 
with  whom  he  was  well  pleased.  { 

And  was  there  joy  in  heaven  on  this  happy  occasion?    What . 
equal,  and,  if  possible,  what  infinitely  greater  joy  ought  there  to  ) 
be  among  the  children  of  God  here  on  earth !  For  we  should  do  ' 
weU  to  remember,  that  our  blessed  Lord,  in  this  great  fight  with, 
and  conquest  over  the  dragon,  acted  as  a  public  person,  as  a 
federal  head  of  his  mystical  body  the  church,  even  the  common 
representative  of  all  believers.    We  may  therefore  from  this 
blessed  passage  gather  strong  consolation;  since  by  our  Lord's 
conquest  over  Satan,  we  are  thereby  assured  of  our  own,  and  im 
the  mean  while  can  apfdy  to  him  as  a  compassionate  high- 
priest,  who  was  in  all  things  tempted  as  we  are,  that  he  might 
experimentally  be  enabled  to  succour  us. when  we  are  tempted. 

Who,  who  after  hearing  of  or  reading  this,  can  think  them- 
lelves  hardly  used,  or  utterly  cast  off  by  God,  because  they  are 
tempted  to  self-murder,  blasphemy,  or  any  other  horrid  and 


822  THB  TEMPTATION   OF  CHRIST.  [XVIl. 

shocking  crimes?  Who  can  wonder  at  wave  being  permitted  to 
come  upon  wave,  and  one  trial  to  follow  upon  the  back  of 
another  ?  Who  can  admire  that  Satan  follows  them  to  holy 
ordinances,  and  tempts  them  to  doubt  of  the  reality  of  all  their 
manifestations,  and  of  their  being  God's  children,  even  after  they 
have  enjoyed  the  most  intimate  and  delightful  communion  with 
their  heavenly  Father  ?  Was  not  our  Lord  treated  thus  ?  And 
'^  shall  the  servant  be  above  his  Lord,  or  the  disciple  above  his 
faster  V  No,  it  is  sufficient  that  the  servant  be  as  his  Lord, 
mid  the  disciple  as  his  Master. 

But  not  to  dwell  on  a  general  improvement,  let  us  see  what 

Particular  lessons  may  be  learned  from  this  afifecting  portion  of 
oly  writ. 

And  First,  Was  our  Lord  thus  violently  beset  in  the  wilder^ 
ness?  Then  we  may  learn,  that  however  profitable  solitude  and 
retirement  may  be,  when  used  in  due  season,  yet  when  carried 
to  an  extreme  it  is  hurtful,  and  rather  befriends  than  prevents 
.temptation.  Woe  be  to  him  that  is  thus  always  alone ;  for  he 
^ath  not  another  to  lift  him  up  when  he  falleth,  or  to  advise 
.with  when  he  is  tempted.  As  a  hermit  in  America  once  told 
me,  when  I  asked  him  whether  he  found  that  way  of  life  lessened 
his  temptations  ?  "  Dost  not  thou  know,  friend,  (said  he)  that  a 
tree  which  grows  by  itself,  is  more  exposed  to  winds  and  storms 
than  another  that  stands  surrounded  with  other  trees  in  the 
woods  ?"  Our  Lord  knew  this,  and  therefore  he  was  led  by  the 
Spirit  into  the  wilderness  to  be  tempted  of  the  devil.  Lord, 
keep  us  from  leading  ourselves  into  this  temptation,  and  succour 
and  support  us  whenever  led  by  thy  providence  into  it!  Then, 
and  then  only,  shall  we  be  safe  amidst  the  fiery  darts  of  the  grand 
enemy  of  our  souls. 

Secondly,  Did  our  Lord,  by  prayer,  fasting,  and  temptation, 
prepare  himself  for  his  public  ministry  ?  Surely  then  sdl  those 
who  profess  to  be  inwardly  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost  to  take 
upon  them  the  office  and  administration  of  the  church,  should  be 
prepared  in  the  same  manner.  For  though  the  knowledge  of 
books  and  men  are  good  in  their  places,  yet  without  a  know- 
ledge of  Satan's  devices  be  superadded,  a  minister  will  be  only 
like  a  physician,  that  undertakes  to  prescribe  to  sick  people, 
without  having  studied  the  nature  of  herbs.  And  hence,  it  is  to 
be  feared,  many  heavy  laden  and  afflicted  souls  have  been  sent 
by  certain  ministers,  to  surgeons,  to  be  blooded  in  the  arm, 
instead  of  being  directed  to  apply  to  the  blood  of  Christ  to 
cleanse  their  hearts.  Hence,  conviction  is  looked  upon  as  a  deli- 
rium, and  violent  temptations  censured  as  downright  madness. 
Hence,  souls  that  are  truly  and  earnestly  repenting  of  their  sins, 
and  as  earnestly  seeking  after  rest  in  Christ,  have  been  directed 
to  plays,  novels,  romances,  and  merry  company,  to  divert  them 
from  being  righteous  over-much.  Miserable  comforters  are  such 
blind  guides !  Surely,  they  deserve  no  better  titles  than  that  of 
murderers  of  souls!  They  go  not  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
themselves,  and  those  who  are  entering  in  they  would  by  this 


2VIlJ  THE  TEMPTATION   OP  CHRIST.  289 

loeaas  hinder.  Go  not  afler  tbem,  all  ye  young  meti  who  would 
be  able  ministers  of  the  New  Testament ;  but  on  the  contrary^ 
if  you  would  be  useful  in  binding  up  the  broken-hearted^  and 
pouring  the  oil  of  consolation  into  wounded  souls,  prepare  your-» 
selves  for  manifold  temptations.  For,  as  Luther  says,  **  prayer 
and  meditation,  reading  and  temptation,  make  a  minister."  If 
now  exercised  with  spiritual  conflicts,  be  not  disheartened,  it  is 
a  good  sign  that  our  Lord  intends  to  make  use  of  you.  Being 
thus  tempted  like  unto  your  brethren,  you  will  the  better  be  en« 
abled  to  succour  and  advise  those  who  shall  apply  to  you  under 
their  temptations.  What  says  the  apostle  Paul?  ''If  we  be 
afilicted,  it  is  for  your  sake."  And  if  you  be  afflicted,  it  is  only 
that  yon  may  save  your  own  souls,  and  help  to  save  the  souls  of 
those  who  shall  be  committed  to  your  charge.  Be  strong,  there- 
fore, in  the  grace  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  learn  to  endure 
hardness,  like  good  soldiers,  that  are  hereafter  to  instruct  others 
how  they  are  to  fight  the  good  fight  of  faith. 

nUrdly,  Did  the  tempter  come  to  Christ  when  he  saw  him  an 
hungered?  Let  those  of  you  who  are  reduced  to  a  low  estate^ 
from  hence  learn,  that  an  hour  of  poverty  is  an  hour  of  tempta- 
tion, not  only  to  murmuring  and  doubting  of  our  sonship  and  the 
Divine  favour,  but  also  to  help  ourselves  by  unlawful  means. 
"  If  thou  be  the  Son  of  God,  said  Satan,  command  that  these 
stones  may  be  made  bread."  This  is  what  Agur  dreaded, ''  lest 
I  be  poor,  and  steal."  Learn,  ye  godly  poor,  to  be  upon  your 
guard,  and  remember  that  poverty  and  temptations  are  no  marks 
of  your  being  cast  off  by  God.  Your  Lord  was  an  hungered ; 
your  Lord  was  tempted  on  this  account  to  doubt  his  sonship, 
before  you.  Learn  of  him  not  to  distrust,  but  rather  to  trust  in, 
your  heavenly  Father.  Angels  came,  and  ministered  unto  Christ ; 
and  he  who  is  Lord  of  the  angels,  will  send  some  kind  messen- 
ger or  another  to  relieve  your  wants.  Your  extremity  shall  be 
tiie  Redeemer's  opportunity  to  help  you.  Make  your  wants 
known  unto  him,  he  careth  for  you.  Though  in  a  desert,  though 
no  visible  means  appear  at  present,  yet  you  shall  in  God's  due 
time  find  a  table  spread  for  you  and  yours  ;  "  for  man  doth  not 
live  by  bread  alone,  but  by  every  word  that  proceedeth  out  of 
the  mouth  of  God." 

And  mky  not  such  among  you,  who  are  exalted,  as  well  as 
those  who  are  brought  low,  from  Satan's  taking  the  Lord  Jesus, 
and  placing  him  upon  a  pinnacle  of  the  temple,  learn  also  a  les- 
son of  holy  watchfulness  and  caution.  High  places  are  slippery 
places,  and  are  apt  to  make  even  the  strongest  heads  and  most 
devout  hearts  to  turn  giddy.  How  necessary  therefore  is  that  ex- 
cellent petition  in  our  Litany,  "  in  all  time  of  our  wealth,  (as  well 
as  in  all  time  of  our  tribulation,)  good  Lord,  deliver  us  V  Agree* 
ably  to  this,  Agur  prays  as  much  against  riches  as  poverty ;  if 
he  were  poor,  he  feared  he  should  be  tempted  to  steal ;  if  rich,  that, 
he  should  trust  in  uncertain  riches,  and  say, "  who  is  the  Lord  ?" 

1  charge,  therefore,  all  of  you,  who  are  rich  and  high  in  this* 
world,  to  watch  and  pray,  lest  ye  fall  by  Satan's  temptation , 


TH<  TBMPTATIOM   OF  0RRI8T.  [XVU; 

Those  especially  of  yon,  that  are  placed  as  on  the  piimaeie  of  the 
temple,  exalted  above  your  fellows  in  the  church  of  God,  take 
heed  in  an  especial  manner  unto  yourseWes,  lest  by  spiritual 
pride,  vanity,  or  any  other  sin  that  doth  most  easily  beset  persons 
in  such  eminent  stations,  ye  cast  yourselves  down.  This  is  what 
Satan  aims  at :  he  strives  to  make  us  destroyers  of  ourselves. 
And  he  hath  a  particular  enmity  against  such  as  you ;  he  knows 
that  your  name  is  Legion;  and  that  if  you  cast  yourselves  down, 
be  shall  gain  a  great  advantage  over  many  others ;  you  cannot 
fall  alone.    0  that  it  may  be  said  of  us,  as  the  papists  used  to 
say  of  Luther,  '^  That  German  beast  doth  not  love  gold."    May 
the  fire  of  divine  love  bum  up  all  the  love  of  this  present  evil 
world,  and  pride  of  life,  out  of  your  hearts !   This,  Satan  reserv- 
ed for  his  last,  as  thinking  it  was  the  most  powerful  and  prevail- 
ing  temptation :  '^  He  took  our  Lord  up  into  an  exceeding  high 
mountain,  and  shewed  him  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world,  and  the 
glory  of  them."  He  cares  not  how  high  he  exalts  us,  or  how  high 
he  is  obliged  to  bid,  so  he  can  but  get  our  hearts  divided  between 
God  and  the  world.  All  this  will  he  ofier  to  give  us,  if  we  will  only 
fall  down  and  worship  him.  Arm  us,  dear  Lord  Jesus,  with  thy  Spi* 
fit,  and  help  us  under  all  such  circumstances,  to  learn  of  thee,  and 
say  unto  the  tempter,  ''Get  thee  hence,  Satan ;  for  it  is  written,  thou 
shalt  worship  the  Lord  thy  God,  and  him  oidy  shalt  thou  serve." 
Fourthly^  Whether  beset  with  this  or  any  other  temptation, 
let  all  of  us  learn  of  our  Lord  to  fight  the  devil  with  the  sword  of 
the  Spirit,  which  is  the  word  of  God.    Though  he  had  the  Spirit 
without  measure,  yet  he  always  made  use  of  this.    We  may  say 
of  it,  as  David  did  of  Croliath's  sword,  **  None  like  this,"  none  like 
this.    And  supposing  Satan  should  be  permitted  to  transform 
himself  into  an  angel  of  light,  and  by  false  impressions,  and 
delusive  applications  of  misquoted  texts,  attempt  to  turn  this 
weapon  upon  us  against  ourselves ;  let  us  not  therefore,  be  pre« 
vailed  on  to  let  go,  but,  by  comparing  spiritual  things  with  spiri- 
tual, as  our  Lord  did,  find  out  God's  mind  and  our  duty.     Had 
Christ's  children  and  ministers  only  observed  ttiis  one  lesson,  how 
much  strange  fire  wbnld  quickly  have  been  extinguished !  how 
much  real  enthusiasm  been  easily  stopped !  how  many  imaginary 
revelations  have  been  detected !  how  many  triumphs  of  Satan 
and  his  emissaries  been  prevented !  and  how  much  more  would 
the  comforts  of  Christ's  people  and  ministers  have  been  con* 
tinned  and  increased,  not  only  in  this  present,  but  also  in  every 
age  of  the  Christian  church !     But  let  us  not  be  discouraged,  or 
think  worse  of  Christ,  his  cause,  or  his  word,  because  tbrongh 
Satan's  subtlety,  any  of  us,  or  others,  ma^  have  been  drawn  in  to 
make  some  wrong  applications  of  it ;  others  have  been  tiius  tempt- 
ed and  mistaken  before  us.     However,  let  us  be  humbled  before 
God  and  man,  and  be  excited  by  our  past  ignorance  of  Satan's 
devices,  to  adhere  more  closely  to  the  written  word,  and  to  pray 
more  earnestly  for  Grod's  holy  Spirit  to  give  us  direction  by  it. 
^Then  will  it  still  be  a  lantern  unto  our  feet,  and  a  light  unto 
our  paths ;"  we  shsdl  yet  be  enabled  to  behave  more  skiUuUy 


XVn.]  THE  TEMPTATION    OP   CHRIST.  225 

under  all  onr  fatare  trials  Many  we  must  yet  expect ;  nay,  per- 
haps, onr  severest  temptations  are  yet  to  come ;  £atan  left  our 
Tiord,  after  his  attacking  him  in  the  wilderness,  **  only  for  a  sea«* 
son/'  as  8t  Luke  has  it,  until  the  season  of  his  death  and  pas- 
sion. And  thns  he  may  be  permitted  to  deal  with  us.  We  am 
not  yet  come  to  our  complete  rest ;  the  king  of  terrors  is  yet  to 
be  grappled  with,  and  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death  to  be 
passed  through ;  long  before  tiiat,  we  may  be  called  to  endure 
many  a  ^ery  trial,  and  be  beset  with  manifold  temptations,  under 
which  we  may  be  as  ignorant  bow  to  behave,  as  under  those  with 
which  we  have  already  been  visited.  Alas !  we  know  not  what 
remaining  corruptions  are  id  our  hearts,  which  time  and  tempta- 
tion may  draw  oat  and  discover.  Perhaps  Satan  hath  not  yet 
attacked  us  on  our  weakest  side;  when  he  does,  if  left  to  our^ 
selves,  how  weak  shall  we  be?  It  is  said  of  Achilles,  that  he 
was  invulnerable  except  in  the  heel,  and  by  a  wonnd  in  that, 
at  last  he  died.  **  Let  not  him,  therefore,  that  putteth  on  the 
harness,  boast  as  though  he  had  put  it  off."  Neither,  on  the 
other  hand,  let  us  be  faint-hearted  or  dismayed.  Satan  may 
tempt,  but  cannot  force ;  he  may  sift,  but  Christ  will  pray.  He 
who  hath  helped  us  already,  will  help  us  to  the  end.  He  who 
conquered  for  us  in  the  wUdemess,  will,  ere  long,  make  us  also 
more  than  conquerors  over  all  trials  and  teipptations,  inward  and 
oatward,  and  over  death  and  heli  itself,  through  bis  ajii^ighty, 
everiasting,  and  never  foiling  love.  We  now  sow  in  tears ;  in  a 
very  little  time,  and  we  shall  reap  with  joy :  we  may  now  go  on 
our  way  weeping,  by  reason  of  the  eiicmy  oppressing  us ;  but, 
ere  long,  aagels  shall  be  sent,  not  to  muiister  to  us  in  tl^  wil- 
derness, but  to  carry  us  to  a  heavenly  Canaan,  even  to  Abra- 
ham's bosom.  Then  shall  we  see  this  accuser  and  tempter  of 
OQM  liord,  oiovat  bretiunen,  and  of  ourselves,  cast  out :  this  wjk^ked 
one,  as  wdl  as  the  wicked  world  and  wicked  heart,  wjyU  aq  more 
be  permitted  to  vex*  disturb,  or  annoy  us. 

*^  But  woe  unto  you  that  laugh  now ;  for  ypu  shall  then  lament 
and  we^."  Woe  unto  you,  wj^  either  believe  there  is  no  devil^ 
or  never  felt  any  of  bts  iempstations !  Woe  unto  you  that  are  at 
ease  in  2(ion,  and  iniitead  of  staying  to  be  tempted  by  the  devil, 
by  idleness,  self-indulgenoe,  and  making  continual  provision  for 
the  lesh,  evien  tempt  the  devil  to  tempt  ypu  !  Wpe  unto  you, 
who,  not  content  with  sinning  yourselves,  tMru  factors  for  bell, 
and  make  a  trade  of  tempting  Others  to  sin.  Woe  unto  you,  who 
either  deny  divine  revelation,  or  never  make  use  of  it  but  to 
serve  a  bad  inm!  Woe  unto  you  who  sell  your  conscicinces,  and 
pawn  your  souls,  for  a  little  worldly  wealth  or  ho^^Mur.  Woe 
Ufito  yon  who  dimb  up  to  high  places,  when  in  .^^Woli  i^  state^ 
by  corroptioa,  bribery,  extortion,  cringing,  /IfUtory,  or  bowing 
down  to,  and  soothing  the  vices  of  those  by  whom  you  exp^t 
to  rise!  Woe  unto  you!  for  whether  you  will  own  the  TOlatioa 
or  not, sorely  you  are  of  your  father,  the  devil;  for  the  works  ojf 
yoor  fkther  yon  will  do ;  I  tremble  for  you.  How  can  you  escape 
the  damnation  of  hell? 


SS6  THE   HEINOUS   SIN   OP  [XVIll. 

But  I  have  not  time  to  follow  such  as  yoa  any  farther.  This 
discourse,  and  the  present  frame  of  my  mind,  lead  me  rather  to 
speak  to  those,  who  by  feeling  Satan's  fiery  darts,  know  assuredly 
that  there  is  a  devil.  Comfort  thou,  comfort  thou,  these  afQicted 
ones,  O  Lord.  O  thou  all-merciful  and  all-bountiful  God,  and 
thou  compassionate  High-Priest,  thou  once  tempted,  but  now 
triumphant  Saviour,  as  thou  once  didst  not  disdain  to  be  mini- 
stered unto  by  angels,  bless,  we  pray  thee,  this  discourse,  to 
the  support  and  strengthening  of  thy  tempted  people,  tliough 
delivered  by  the  meanest  messenger  thou  didst  ever  yet  employ 
in  thy  church ! 

I  add  no  more.  The  Lord  bless  you,  and  keep  you !  The 
Lord  lift  up  the  light  of  his  countenance,  stablish,  strengthen, 
and  settle  you,  and  bring  you  to  his  eternal  kingdom 


SERMON  XVill. 

THE   HEINOUS   SIN   OP   PROFANE   CURSING    AND    SWEARING. 

But  I  say  unto  you.  Swear  not  at  all. — Matt.  v.  34. 

Among  the  many  heinous  sins  for  which  this  nation  is  grown 
infamous,  perhaps  there  is  no  one  more  crying,  but  withal  more 
common,  than  the  abominable  custom  of  profane  swearing  and 
cursing.     Our  streets  abound  with  persons  of  all  degrees  and 
qualities,  who  are  continually  provoking  the  holy  One  of  Israel 
to  anger,  by  their  detestable  oaths  and  blasphemies :  and  our 
very  children,  ^'out  of  whose  mouths,"  thepsadmist  observes,  in 
his  days,  '^was  perfected  praise,"  are  now  grown  remarkable  for 
the  quite  opposite  ill  quality  of  cursing  and  swearing.     This 
cannot  but  be  a  melancholy  prospect,  for  every  sincere  and  honest 
minister  of  Jesus  Christ,  to  view  his  fellow  creatures  in ;  and  such 
as  will  put  him  on  contriving  some  means  to  prevent  the  spread- 
ing at  least  of  so  growing  an  evil ;  knowing  that  the  Lord  (with- 
out repentance)  will  assuredly  visit  for  these  things.     But  alas ! 
what  can  he  do?      Public    animadversions  are  so  neglected 
amongst  us,  that  we  seldom  find  a  common  swearer  punished 
as  the  laws  direct.    And  as  for  private  admonition,  men  are  now 
so  hardened  through  the  deceitfulness  of  sin,  that  to  give  them 
sober  and  pious  advice,  and  to  shew  them  the  evil  of  their  do- 
ings, is  but  like  "  casting  pearls  before  swine ;  they  only  turn 
agaiin  and  rend  you."  Since  matters  then  are  come  to  this  pass, 
aU  that  we  can  do  is,  that  as  we  are  appointed  watchmen  and 
ambassadors  of  the  Lord,  it  is  our  duty  from  time  to  time  to  shew 
the  people  their  transgression,  and  warn  them  of  their  sin ;  so 
that  whether  they  will  hear,  or  whether  they  will  forbear,  we  how- 
ever may  deliver  our  own  souls.  That  I  therefore  maydischargt 
my  duty  in  this  particular,  give  me  leave,  in  the  name  of  Gk>d, 
humbly  to  offer  to  your  most  serious  consideration  some  few 
observations  on  the  words  of  the  text,  in  order  to  shew  the 
heinousness  of  profane  cursing  and  swearing. 


XVIII.]  PROPANB   CURSIKG    AND   SWEARING.  23f 

Bat,  before  I  proceed  directly  to  the  prosecution  of  this  point, 
it  will  be  proper  to  clear  this  precept  of  our  Lord  from  a  mis- 
representation that  has  been  put  on  it  by  some,  who  infer  from 
hence,  that  our  Saviour  prohibits  swearing  before  a  magistrate,' 
when  required  on  a  solemn  and  proper  occasion.    But  that  all 
swearing  is  not  absolutely  unlawful  for  a  Christian,  is  evident 
from  the  writings  of  St.  Paul,  whom  we  often  find  upon  some 
solemn  occasions  nsing  several  forms  of  imprecation,  as,  '^  I  call 
•   Grod  to  witness ;"  "  God  is  my  judge ;"  "  By  your  rejoicing  in 
Christ  Jesus,''  and  such  like.    And  that  our  Saviour  does  by  no 
means  forbid  swearing  before  a  magistrate,  in  the  words  now 
l>efore  us,  is  plain,  if  we  consider  the  scope  and  design  he  had  in 
view,  when  he  gave  his  disciples  this  command.    Permit  me  to 
observe  to  you  then,  that  our  blessed  Master  had  set  himself, 
from  the  27th  verse  of  the  chapter  out  of  which  the  text  is 
taken,  to  vindicate  and  clear  the  moral  law  from  the  corrupt 
glosses  and  misconstruction  of  the  Pharisees,  who  then  sat  in 
Moses*  chair,  but  were  notoriously  faulty  in  adhering  too  closely 
to  the  literal  expression  of  the  law,  without  ever  considering 
the  due  extent  and  spiritual  meaning  of  it.    Accordingly  they 
imagined,  that  because  God  had  said.  Thou  shalt  not  commit 
adultery,  that  therefore,  supposing  a  person  was  not  guilty  of 
the  very  act  of  adultery,  he  was  not  chargeable  with  the  breach 
of  the  seventh  commandments    And  likewise  in  the  matter  of 
swearing,  because  God  had  forbidden  his  people,  in  the  books 
of  Exodus  and  Deuteronomy,  "  to  take  his  name  in  vain,"  or  to 
swear  falsely  by  his  name ;  they  therefore  judged  it  lawful  to 
swear  by  any  creature  in  common  discourse,  supposing  they  did 
not  directly  mention  the  name  of  God.     Our  blessed  Saviour 
therefore,  in  the  words  now  before  us,  rectifies  this  their  mis- 
take about  swearing,  as  he  had  done  in  the  verses  immediately 
foregoing,  concerning  adultery,  and  tells  the  people,  that  what- 
ever allowances  the  Pharisees  might  give  to  swear  by  any  crea- 
ture, yet  he  pronounced  it  absolutely  unlawful  for  any  of  his 
followers  to  do  so.   '^  You  have  heard  that  it  has  been  said  by 
them  of  old  time,"  (namely,  by  the  Pharisees  and  teachers  of 
the  Jewish  law,)  **  Thou  shsdt  not  forswear  thyself,  but  perform 
unto  the  Lord  thine  oaths :  but  I  say  unto  you,*'  (I  who  am 
appointed  by  the  Father  to  be  the  great  prophet  and  true  law- 
giver  of  his  church,)  ''  Swear  not  at  all,  (in  your  common  conver- 
sation ;y  neither  by  heaven,  for  it  is  God's  throne,  (and  therefore 
ta  swear  by  that,  is  to  swear  by  Him  that  sits  thereon ;)  neither 
by  the  earth,  for  it  is  his  footstool ;  nor  by  Jerusalem,  for  it  is 
the  city  of  the  g^at  King :  neither  shalt  thou  swear  by  thy  head, 
bccaose  thou  canst  not  make  one  hair  white  or  black:'  but> 
let  your  communications,  (which  plainly  shews  that  Christ  is . 
hete  speaking  of  swearing,  not  before  a  magistrate,  but  in  com- 
mon conversation,)  let  your  communication  be  yea,  yea ;  nay, 
nay  ;  (a  strong  affirmation  or  negation  at  the  most ;)  for  whatso- 
ever is  more  than  these,  cometh  of  evil :"  cometh  trom  an  evil 
principle,  from  the  evil  one,  the  devil,  that  is,  the  author  of  all  evil. ; 


2SB  THR  HBINOU8  BIN   OP  [XVTII. 

Whichy  by  the  way,  methinks,  should  be  a  caution  to  all  such 
persons,  who,  though  not  guilty  of  swearii^  in  the  gross  sense 
of  the  word,  yet  attest  the  truth  of  what  they  are  speaking  of, 
though  ever  so  trifling,  by  sajring, — upon  my  life, — as  I  live, — ^by 
my  faith — by  the  heavens,  and  such  like :  which  expressions, 
however  harmless  and  innocent  they  may  be  esteemed  by  some 
sorts  of  people,  yet  are  the  very  oaths  which  our  blessed  Lord 
condemns  in  the  words  immediately  following  the  text ;  and 
persons  who  use  such  unwarrantable  forms  of  speaking,  must 
expect  to  be  convicted  and.  condemned  cui  swearets,  at  our  Sa- 
viour's second  (Doming  to  judge  the  world. 

But  to  return :  It  appears  then,  from  the  whole  tenor  of  our« 
Saviour's  discourse,  that  in  the  words  of  the  text  he  does  by  no 
means  disannul,  or  forbid,  swearing  before  a  magistrate  (which, 
as  might  easily  be  shewn,  is  both  lawful  and  necessary)  but 
only  profane  swearing  in  common  conversation ;  the  heinousness 
and  sinfulness  of  which  I  come  now,  more  immediately  to  lay 
before  you. 

And  here,  not  to  mention  that  it  is  a  direct  breach  of  our 
blessed  Master's  and  great  Lawgiver's  command  in  the  words 
of  the  text,  as  likewise  of  the  third  commandment,  wherein  God 
positively  declares  '*  he  will  not  bold,  him  guiltless  ^tbat  Ls,  will 
assuredly  punish  him)  that  taketh  his  name  in  vain  :"  not  to 
mention  that  it  is  the  greatest  abuse  of  that  noble  faculty  of 
speech,  whereby  we  are  distinguished  from  the  brute  creation ; 
or  the  great  hazard  the  common  swearer  runs  of  being  perjured 
some  time  or  other :  not  to  mention  those  reasons  against  it, 
which  of  themselves  would  abundantly  prove  the  foUy  and  sin- 
fulness of  swearing,  1  shall  at  once  content  myself  with  instan- 
'Cing  four  particulars  which  highly  aggravate  the  crime  of  profane 
swearing,  and  those  are  such  as  follow: 

I.  Firsts  Because  there  is  no  temptation  in  nature  to  this  sin, 
nor  does  the  commission  of  it  afford  the  offender  the  least  plea- 
sore  or  satisfaction. 

IL  Secondly 9  Because  it  is  a  sin  which  may  be  so  often  re- 
peated. 

Ill  Thirdly y  Because  it  hardens  infidds  against  the  Christian 
religion,  and  must  give  great  offence,  and  occasion  much  sorrow 
and  concern,  to  every  true  disciple  of  Jesus  Christ 

IV.  Fourthly,  Because  it  is  an  extremity  of  sin,  which  can 
only  be  matched  in  hell. 

''1.  The  first  reason  then,  why  swearing  in  common  conversa- 
tion is  so  heinous  in  God's  sight,  and  why  we  should  not  swear 
at  all^  is,  because  it  has  no  temptation  in  nature,  nor  does  the 
commission  of  it,  unless  a  man  be  a  devil  incarnate,  afford  the 
offender  the  least  pleasure  or  satisfaction. 

Now  here,  I  presume,  we  mav  lay  it  down  as  a  maxim  univer- 
sally agreed  to,  that  the  guilt  of  any  crime  is  increased  or  lessen- 
ed in  proportion  to  the  weakness  or  strength  of  the  temptation, 
by  which  a  person  is  carried  to  the  commission  of  it.  It  was  this 
consideration  that  extenuated  and  diminished  the  guilt  of  Saul's 


XVIII.]  PROFANB   CURSING    AND  SWEARING.  SS9 

taking  upon  bim  to  offer  sacrifice  before  the  prophet  Samnri 
oame ;  and  of  Uzza's  touching  the  ark,  because  it  was  in  danger 
of  falling:  as,  on  the  contrary,  what  so  highly  aggravated  the 
disobedience  of  our  first  parents,  and  of  Lot's  wife,  was,  because 
tibe  former  had  so  little  reason  to  eat  the  forbidden  fruit,  and  the 
latter  so  small  a  temptation  to  look  back  on  Sodom. 

And  now,  if  this  be  granted,  surely  the  common  swearer  must, 
of  all  sinners,  be  the  most  without  excuse,  since  there  is  no  man- 
ner of  temptation  in  nature  to  the  commission  of  his  crime.  In 
most  of  the  other  conmiands,  persons  perhaps  may  plead  the 
force  of  natural  inclination,  in  excuse  for  the  breach  of  them : 
one,  for  instance,  may  allege  bis  strong  propensity  to  anger,  to 
excuse  bis  breaking  of  the  sixth ;  another,  his  proneness  to  lust, 
for  his  violation  of  the  seventh.  But,  surely  the  common  swearer 
has  nothing  of  this  kind  to  urge  in  his  behalif :  for,  though  he  may 
have  a  natural  inclination  to  this  or  that  crime,  yet  no  man,  it  is 
to  be  presumed,  can  say,  he  is  bom  with  a  swearing  constitution. 

But  farther,  as  there  is  no  temptation  to  it,  so  thete  is  no  plea- 
sore  or  profit  to  be  reaped  from  the  commission  of  it.  Ask  the 
drunkard  why  he  rises  up  early  to  follow  strong  drink,  i^nd  he 
will  tell-  you,  because  it  affords  his  sensual  appetite  some  kind 
of  pleasure  and  gratification,  though  it  be  no  higher  than  that  of 
a  brute*  Inquire  of  the  covetous  worldling,  why  he  defrauds 
and  OTcr-reaches  his  neighbour,  and  he  has  an  answer  ready :  to 
enrich  himself,  and  lay  up  goods  for  many  years.  But  it  must 
ceetainly  puzzle  the  profane  swearer  himself,  to  inform  you  what 

i>Ieasure  be  reaps  from  swearing :  for,  alas !  it  is  a  fruitless,  taste- 
ess  thing,  that  he  seUs  bis  soiU  for.  But  indeed  he  doA  not  sell 
^t  an ;  in  this  case  he  prodigally  gives  it  away  (without  repent- 
ance) to  the  devil;  and  parts  with  a  blessed  eternity,  and  runs 
into  everlasting  torment,  merely  for  nothing. 

IL  But  Seamdly,  what  increases  the  heinousness  of  profane 
swearing,  is,  that  it  is  a  sin  which  may  so  often  be  repeated. 

This  is  another  consideration  which  always  serves  to  lessen  or 
increase  the  guilt  and  malignity  of  any  sin.  It  was  some  excuse 
for  the  drunkenness  of  Noah,  and  the  adultery  of  David,  that 
they  committed  these  crimes  but  once :  as,  on  the  contrarv,  of 
the  patriarch  Abraham's  distrust  of  God,  that  he  repeated  the 
dissembling  of  Sarah  to  be  his  wife,  two  several  times.  And  if 
this  be  admitted  as  an  aggravation  of  other  persons*  crimes, 
surely  much  more  so  of  the  guilt  of  common  swearing,  because 
it  is  a  sin  which  may  be,  and  is,  for  the  generality,  often  repeat- 
ed. In  many  other  gross  sins  it  cannot  be  so :  if  a  man  be  over* 
Gome  in  drink,  there  must  be  a  considerable  time  ere  be  can 
recover  his  debauch,  and  return  to  his  cups  again;  or  if  he  be 
accustomed  to  profane  the  sabbath,  he  cannot  do  it  every  day, 
but  only  one  in  seven.  But  alas !  the  profane  swearer  is  ready 
for  another  oath  almost  before  the  sound  of  the  first  is  out  of 
our  ears :  yea,  some  double  them,  and  treble  them,  in  one  sens 
tence,  even  so  as  to  confound  the  sense  of  what  they  say,  by  a 
din  of  blasphemy !   Now,  if  the  great  and  terrible  Jehovah 


SSO  THB  HEINOUS  SIN   OF  [XVIlf. 

has  expressly  declared  that  he  vnR  not  hold  him  guiltless,  that 
is,  will  assuredly  punish  bim  that  taketh  bis  name  but  once  in 
yain ;  what  a  vast  heap  of  these  heinous  sins  lie  at  every  common 
swearer's  door!  It  would  be  apt  to  sink  him  into  an  intolerable 
despair,  did  he  but  see  the  whole  sum  of  them.  And  O !  what  a 
seared  conscience  must  that  wretch  have,  that  does  not  feel  this 
prodigious  weight. 

.  But  Thirdly,  what  makes  the  sin  of  profane  swearing  appear 
yet  more  exceeding  sinful,  is,  that  it  hardens  infidels  against  the 
Christian  religion. 

It  is  the  apostle  Peter's  advice  to  the  married  persons  of  his 
time,  that  they  should  walk  as  became  the  gospel  of  Christ,  that 
those  who  were  without,  might  be  won  to  embrace  the  Christian 
religion,  by  seeing  and  observing  their  pious  conversation  coupled 
together  with  fear.  And  what  the  apostle  presses  on  married 
persons,  we  find  elsewhere  enjoined  on  each  particular  member 
of  the  church.  Accordingly,  we  are  commanded  by  our  blessed 
Lord,  to  ''  let  our  light  so  shine  before  men,  that  they  may  see 
our  good  works,  and  glorify  our  Father  which  is  heaven  :*'  and 
the  apostle  Paul  bids  us  *'  walk  circumspectly  towards  them 
that  are  without,  redeeming  the  time;"  Uiat  is,  embracing  all 
opportunities  to  do  them  good,  '^  because  the  days  are  evil." 
But,  alas !  in  what  a  direct  contradiction  does  the  profane  swearer 
live  to  this  and  such  like  precepts,  who,  instead  of  gaining  prose- 
lytes to  Christ  from  the  unbelieving  part  of  the  world,  does  all 
he  can  to  oppose  it !  For,  how  can  it  be  expected,  that  infidels 
should  honour  our  God,  when  Christians  themselves  despise  hiniT 
or  that  ^y  should  embrace  our  religion,  when  professors  of  it 
themselves  make  so  light  of  one  of  its  strictest  commands?  No; 
to  our  grief  and  shame  be  it  spoken,  it  is  by  reason  of  such  im- 
pieties as  these,  that  our  holy  religion  (the  best  and  purest  in 
itself)  is  become  a  by- word  among  the  heathen ;  that  the  sacred 
authority  of  the  holy  Jesus,  and  his  doctrine,  is  despised;  and 
"  God's  name  (as  it  is  written)  blasphemed  among  the  Gentiles." 
;  These  cannot  but  be  sad  stumbling-blocks  and  offences  in  the 
way  of  our  brethren's  conversion :  "  But  woe  be  to  those  men  by 
whom  such  offences  come."  We  may  say  of  them,  as  our  blessed 
Lord  did  of  Judas,  **  It  had  been  better  for  such  men,  that  they 
had  never  been  bom :"  or,  as  he  threatens  in  another  place,  ^'  It 
shall  be  more  terrible  for  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  in  Uie  day  of 
judgment,  than  for  such  sinners." 

But  this  is  not  all :  As  profane  swearing  must  undoubtedly 
harden  those  in  their  infidelity,  that  are  without ;  so  it  must  no 
less  grieve,  and  give  great  offence  to,  those  honest  and  sincere 
persons  that  are  within  the  church.  We  hear  of  David's  com- 
plaining, and  crying  out,  "  Woe  is  me,  that  I  am  constrained  to 
dwell  with  Mesech,  and  to  have  my  habitation  amongst  the  tents 
of  Kedar;"  that  is,  that  he  was  obliged  to  live  and  converse  with 
a  people  exceedingly  wicked  and  profane.  And  St.  Peter  tells 
us,  that  *'  Lot's  righteous  soul  was  grieved  day  by  day,  whilst 
he  saw  and  observed  the  ungodly  conversation  of  the  wicked." 


xtiik]  propane  cursing  and  swbarino.  231 

And  no  doubt  it  was  one  great  part  of  oar  blessed  Master's  suf- 
ferings whilst  on  earth,  that  he  was  compelled  to  converse  with 
a  wicked  and  perverse  generation,  and  to  hear  his  heavenly  Fa- 
ther's sacred  name  profaned  and  scoffed  at  by  unrighteous  and 
wicked  men.  And  surely  it  cannot  but  pierce  the  heart  of  every 
true  and  sincere  Christian,  of  every  one  that  does  in  any  mea- 
sure partake  of  the  spirit  of  his  Master,  to  hear  the  multitudes 
of  oaths  and  curses  which  proceed  daily  and  hourly  out  of  the 
mouths  of  many  people,  and  those  too,  whose  liberal  education, 
and  seeming  regard  for  the  welfare  of  religion,  one  would  think, 
should  teach  them  a  more  becoming  behaviour.  To  hear  the 
great  and  terrible  name  of  God  polluted  by  men«  which  is  adored 
by  angels ;  and  to  consider  how  often  that  sacred  name  is  pro* 
faned  in  common  discourse,  which  we  are  not  worthy  to  mention 
in  our  prayers ;  this,  I  say,  cannot  but  make  each  of  them  cry 
out  with  holy  David,  '^  Woe  is  me,  that  I  am  constrained  to 
dwell  with  Mesech,  and  to  have  my  habitation  amongst  the  tents 
of  Kedar//  And  though  the  blasphemous  and  profane  discourses 
of  others  will  not  be  imputed  to  sincere  persons  for  sin,  so  long 
as  they  ''have  no  fellowship  with  such  hellish  fruits  of  darkness, 
but  rather  reprove  them;"  yet  it  will  greatly  enhance  the  present 
guilt,  and  sadly  increase  the  Aiture  punishment,  of  every  profane 
swearer,  by  whom  such  offences  come.  For  if,  as  our  Saviour  tells 
us,  "it  had  been  better  for  a  man  to  have  a  mill-stone  tied  about 
his  neck,  than  that  he  should  offend  one  of  his  little  ones,  (that  is, 
the  weakest  of  his  disciples,)  how  much  sorer  punishment  will  they 
be  thought  worthy  of,"  who  not  only  cause  God's  name  to  be 
blasphemed  among  the  Gentiles,  and  the  religion  of  our  dear  Re- 
deemer to  be  abhorred;  but  who  make  his  saints  to  weep  and  mourn, 
and  vex  their  righteous  souls  from  day  to  day,  by  their  ungodly, 
profane,  and  blasphemous  conversation?  Surely,  as  GodwUI 
put  the  tears  of  one  into  his  bottle,  60  it  will  be  just  in  him  to 
punish  the  other  with  eternal  Sorrow  for  all  their  ungodly  and 
hard  speeche-s,  and  cast  them  into  a  lake  of  fire  and  brimstone, 
where  they  shall  be  glad  of  a  drop  of  water  to  cool  those  tongues 
with  which  they  have  so  often  blasphemed  the  Lord  of  hosts, 
and  grieved  the  people  of  our  God. 

'  IV.  But  it  is  time  for  me  to  proceed  to  give  my  Fourth,  and 
last  reason,  why  common  swearing  is  so  exceeding  sinful;  and 
that  is,  because  it  is  such  an  extremity  of  sin,  that  can  only  be 
matched  in  hell,  where  all  are  desperate  and  without  hope  of  mercy. 
The  damned  devils,  and  damned  souls  of  men  in  bell,  may  be 
supposed  to  rave  and  blaspheme  in  their  torments,  because  they 
know  that  the  chains  wherein  they  are  held,  can  never  be  knocked 
off:  bat  for  men  that  swim  in  the  river  of  God's  goodness,  whose 
mercies  are  renewed  to  them  every  morning,  and  who  are  visited 
with  fresh  tokens  of  his  infinite,  unmerited  loving-kindness,  every 
moment ;  for  these  favourite  creatures  to  set  their  mouths  against 
heaven,  and  to  blaspheme  a  gracious,  patient,  all-bountiful  God; 
is  a  height  of  sin,  which  exceeds  the  blackness  and  impiety  of 
devils  and  hell  itself. 


S82  THE   HEINOUS    SIN   OV  [XVIII, 

And  now,  after  what  has  been  here  offered,  to  shew  the  hei- 
iiousness  of  profane  cursing  and  swearing  in  common  conversa- 
tion, may  I  not  very  justly  address  myself  to  you  in  the  words 
of  the  text,  *'  Therefore  I  say  unto  you.  Swear  not  at  all;''  since 
it  is  a  sin  that  has  no  temptation  in  nature,  nor  brings  any  plea- 
sure or  profit  to  the  committer  of  it;  since  it  hardens  intidels  in 
their  infidelity,  and  affords  sad  causes  of  grief  and  lamentation 
to  every  honest  Christian;  since  it  is  a  sin  that  generally  grows 
into  a  habit;  and,  lastly,  such  a  sin  that  can  only  be  matched 
in  heU. 

1.  And  first  then,  if  these  things  be  so,  and  the  sin  of  profane 
•wearing,  as  hath  been  in  some  measure  shewn,  is  so  exceeding 
sinful,  what  shall  we  say  to  such  unhappy  men,  who  think  it  not 
only  allowable,  but  fashionable  and  polite^  to  ^*  take  the  name  of 
God  in  vain  ;*'  who  imagine  that  swearing  makes  them  look  big 
among  their  companions,  and  really  think  it  a  piece  of  honour 
•to  abound  in  it?  But^  alas !  little  do  they  think  that  such  a  be* 
haviour  argues  the  greatest  degeneracy  of  mind  and  fool-hardi- 
ness, that  can  possibly  be  thought  of.  For  what  can  be  more 
base,  than  one  hour  to  pretend  to  adore  God  in  public  worship, 
and  the  very  next  moment  to  blaspheme  his  name!  indeed,  such 
a  behaviour,  from  persons  who  deny  the  being  of  a  Gk>d,  (if  any 
such  fools  there  be,)  is  not  altogether  so  much  to  be  wondered 
at;  but  for  men,  who  not  only  subscribe  to  the  belief  of  a  Deity, 
but  likewise  acknowledge  him  to  be  a  God  of  infinite  majesty 
and  power ;  for  such  men  to  blaspheme  his  holy  name,  by  pro- 
lane  cursing  and  swearing,  and  at  the  same  time  confess,  that 
this  very  God  has  expressly  declared,  that  he  will  not  hold  him 
guiltless,  but  will  certainly  and  eternally  punish  (without  repent- 
ance) him  that  taketh  his  name  in  vain;  is  such  an  instance  of 
fool-hardiness,  as  well  as  baseness,  as  can  scarcely  be  paral- 
leled. This  is  what  they  presume  not  to  do  in  other  cases  of  less 
danger ;  they  dare  not  revile  a  general  at  the  head  of  his  army, 
nor  rouse  a  sleeping  lion  when  within  reach  of  his  paw.  And  is 
the  Almighty  God,  the  great  Jehovah,  the  everlasting  King,  who 
can  consume  them  by  the  breath  of  his  nostrils,  and  frown  them 
to  hell  in  an  instant ;  is  he  the  only  contemptible  being  in  their 
account,  that  may  be  provoked  without  fear,  and  offended  with- 
out punishment?  No;  though  God  bear  long,  he  will  not  bear 
always :  the  time  will  come,  and  that  too,  perhaps,  much  sooner 
than  such  persons  may  expect,  when  God  will  vindicate  his 
injured  honour,  when  he  will  lay  bare  his  almighty  arm,  and 
make  those  wretches  feel  the  eternal  smart  of  his  justice,  whose 
power  and  name  they  have  so  often  vilified  and  blasphemed. 
Alas  !  what  will  become  of  all  their  bravery  then  ?  Will  they 
then  wantonly  sport  wjth  the  name  of  their  Maker,  and  call 
npon  the  King  of  all  the  earth  to  damn  them  any  more,  in  jest? 
No ;  their  note  will  then  be  changed  :  indeed,  they  shall  call, 
bat  it  will  be  for  ''  the  rocks  to  full  on  them,  and  the  hilU  to 
cover  them  from  the  wrath  of  Him  that  sitteth  upon  the  throne, 
and  from  the  Lamb,  for  ever."    It  is  true,  time  was  when  they 


Xrill.]  FROFANB  CURSING   AND   SWBARING.  238 

prayed,  though  without  thought,  perhaps,  for  damnation  both 
for  themselyes  and  others  :  and  now  they  will  find  their  prayefs 
answered.  '*  They  delighted  in  cursing,  therefore  shall  it  hap* 
pen  unto  them ;  they  loved  not'  Messing,  therefore  shall  it  be  far 
from  them :  they  clothed  themselves  with  cursing  like  as  with  a 
garment,  and  it  shall  come  into  their  bowels  like  water,  and  like 
oil  into  their  bones/' 

2.  But  farther,  if  the  sin  of  swearing  is  so  exceeding  heinous, 
and  >vithal  so  common,  then  it  is  every  particular  person's  duty, 
especially  those  that  are  in  authority,  to  do  their  utmost  towards 
discountenancing  and  suppressing  so  malignant  a  crime.  The 
duty  we  owe  both  to  God  and  our  neighbour  requires  this  at  our 
hands :  by  the  one  we  are  obliged  to  assert  our  Maker's  honour ; 
by  the  other  to  prevent  our  neighbour's  ruin :  and  it  is  but  doing 
as  we  would  be  done  by,  and  as  we  ourselves  act  in  cases  of 
lesser  consequence.  Were  we  to  hear  either  our  own  or  our 
friend's  good  name  vilified,  and  traduced,  we  should  think 
it  onr  bounden  duty  to  vindicate  the  wronged  reputation  of  each ; 
and  shall  the  great,  terrible,  and  holy  name  of  our  best  and  only 
friend,  our  King,  our  Father,  nay,  our  God:  shall  this  be  daily, 
nay,  every  moment  defied  and  blasphemed ;  and  will  no  one  dare 
to  stand  up  in  defence  of  his  honour  and  holiness  ?  Be  astonished^ 
O  heavens,  at  this !  No ;  let  us  scorn  all  such  base  and  treache^ 
rous  treatment ;  let  us  resolve  to  support  the  cause  of  religion, 
and,  vrith  a  becoming  prudent  courage,  manifest  our  zeal  for  the 
honour  of  the  Lord  of  hosts.  Men  in  authority  have  double 
the  advantages  of  ordinary  Christians ;  their  very  ofiBce  shews 
they  are  intended  for  the  punishment  of  evil-doers.  And  such 
is  the  degeneracy  of  mankind,  that  the  generality  of  them  will 
be  more  influenced  by  the  power  of  persons  in  authority,  than 
by  the  most  laboured  exhortations  n'om  the  pulpit.  To  such, 
therefore,  if  there  be  any  here  present,  I  humbly  address  myself^ 
beseeching  them  in  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  to  do 
their  utmost  to  put  a  stop  to,  and  restrain,  profane  cursing  and 
swearing.  And  though  it  must  be  confessed  that  this  is  a  work 
which  requires  a  great  deal  of  courage  and  pains,  yet  they  would 
do  wdl  to  consider,  it  is  for  Grod  they  undertake  it,  wno  cer- 
tainly will  support  and  bear  them  out  in  a  due  execution  of  their 
office  here,  and  reward  them  with  an  exceeding  and  eternal 
weight  of  glory  hereafter.  But  it  is  time  to  draw  towards  a 
conclusion. 

3.  Iiet  me  therefore  pnce  more  address  myself  to  every  person 
here  present,  in  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  and  if  any 
amongst  them  have  been  any  way  guilty  of  this  notorious  sin  of 
swearing,  let  me  entreat  them  by  all  that  is  near  and  dear  to 
them,  that  they  would  neither  give  the  magistrate  the  trouble 
to  punish,  nor  their  friends  any  reason  for  the  future  to  warn 
them  against  committing  the  crime ;  but  keep  a  constant  and 
careful  watch  over  the  door  of  their  lips,  and  withal  implore 
the  divine  assistance,  (without  which  all  is  nothing,)  that  they 
ofiend  no  more  so  scandalously  with  their  tongues.    Let  them 


234  v'HRfST  TRB  SUPPORT  OP  THE  TBMPT|I>.  [XIX 

seriously  lay  to  heart,  Mrhat  with  great  plainness  and  simplicity 
has  here  been  delivered ;  and  if  they  have  any  regard  for  them- 
selves as  men,  or  their  reputation  as  Christians ;  if  they  would 
not  be  a  public  scandal  to  their  profession,  or  a  grief  to  all  that 
know  or  converse  with  them ;  in  short,  if  they  would  not  be 
devils  incarnate  here,  and  provoke  Grod  to  punish  them  eternally 
hereafter ;  I  say  unto  them  in  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesuh 
Christ  "  Swear  not  at  all." 


SERMON  XIX. 

CHRIST   THE   SUPPORT   OP   THE   TEMPTED. 

Lead  us  not  into  temptation. — Matt.  vi.  13. 

The  great  and  important  duty  which  is  incumbent  on  Chris- 
tians, is  to  guard  against  all  appearance  of  evil ;  to  watch  against 
the  first  risings  in  the  heart  to  evil;  and  to  have  a  guard  upon 
our  actions,  that  they  may  not  be  sinful,  or  so  much  as  seem  to 
be  so.  It  is  true  the  devil  is  tempting  us  continually,  and  our 
own  evil  hearts  are  ready  to  join  with  the  tempter,  to  make  us 
fall  into  sins,  that  he  thereby  may  obtain  a  victory  over  us,  and 
that  we,  my  brethren,  may  be  his  subjects,  his  servants,  his 
slaves;  and  then  by-andbyhe  will  pay  us  our  wages,  which 
will  be  death  temporal,  and  death  eternal.  Our  I^rd  Jesus 
Christ  saw  how  his  people  would  be  tempted ;  and  that  the 
great  enemy  of  their  souls  would  lay  hold  of  every  opportunity, 
so  he  could  but  be  a  means  of  keeping  poor  sinners  from  coming 
to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ;  hurrying  you  with  temptation,  to 
drive  you  to  some  great  sins ;  and  Uien  if  he  cannot  gain  you 
over,  fall  into  a  smaller,  and  suit  his  temptations  time  afler  time  ; 
and  when  he  finds  none  of  these  things  will  do,  often  transform 
himself  into  an  angel  of  light,  and  by  that  means  make  the  soul 
fall  into  sin,  to  the  dishonour  of  God,  and  the  wounding  of  itself; 
the  Lord  Jesus,  I  say,  seeing  how  liable  his  disciples  and  all  others 
would  be  to  be  overcome  by  temptation,  therefore  advises  them 
when  they  pray,  to  beg  that  they  might  not  be  led  into  tempta- 
tion. It  is  so  dangerous  to  engage  so  subtle  and  powerful  an 
enemy  as  Satan  is,  that  we  shall  be  overcome  as  often  as  we 
engage,  unless  the  Lord  be  on  our  side.  My  brethren,  if  you 
were  left  to  yourselves,  you  would  be  overcome  by  every  temp- 
tation with  which  you  were  beset. 

These  words  are  part  of  the  prayer  which  Christ  taught  his 
disciples ;  and  I  shall,  therefore  make  no  doubt,  but  that  yon  all 
believe  them  to  be  true,  since  they  are  spoken  by  one  who  can 
not  lie.    I  shall, 

I.  Shew  you  who- it  is  that  tempts  you. 

II.  Shall  shew,  my  brethren,  why  be  tempts  you. 

III.  Mention  some  of  the  ways  and  means  he  makes  use  of, 
to  draw  you  over  to  his  temptations. 

IV.  Let  you  see  how  earnest  you  ought  to  be  to  the  Lord, 
that  he  may  preserve  you  from  being  led  into  temptation. 


XJX.]  CHRIST  THB  SUPPORT  OP   THB  TBMPTKD.  385 

V.  I  shall  make  some  application  by  way  of  entreaty  unto 
you,  to  come  nnto  Christ,  that  he,  my  brethren,  may  deliver  you 
from  being  tempted. 

I.  We  are  to  consider  who  it  is  that  tempts  yon. 

And  the  temptei  is  Satan,  the  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air, 
he  that  now  nileth  in  the  children  of  disobedience;  he  is  an  ene- 
my to  God  and  goodness,  he  is  a  hater  of  all  truth.  Why  else  did 
he  slander  God  in  paradise?  Why  did  he  tell  Eve,  ''You  shall 
not  surely  die?"  He  is  full  of  malice,  envy,  and  revenge:  for 
what  reasons  else  could  induce  him  to  molest  innocent  man  in 
paradise  ?  The  person  that  tempts  ye,  my  brethren,  is  remaric- 
able  for  his  subtilty :  for  not  having  power  given  him  from  above, 
he  is  obliged  to  wait  for  opportunities  to  betray  us,  and  to  catch 
us  by  g^ile ;  he,  therefore,  made  use  of  the  serpent  to  tempt  our 
first  parents :  and  to  lie  in  wait  to  deceive,  is  another  part  of  his 
character.  And  though  this  character  is  given  of  the  devil,  if 
we  were  to  examine  our  own  hearts,  we  should  find  many  of  the 
tempter's  characters  legible  in  us. 

Do  not  many  of  you  love  to  make  a  lie?  And  if  it  is  done  in 
your  trade,  you  therefore  look  on  it  as  excusable ;  but  whether 
you  believe  it  or  not,  it  is.  sinful,  it  is  exceedingly  sinful.  Though 
you  may  value  yourselves  as  fine  rational  creatures,  and  that 
you  are  noble  beings ;  and  you  were  so,  as  you  first  came  out  of 
Grod's  bands ;  but  now  you  are  fallen,  there  is  nothing  lovely, 
nothing  desirable  in  man ;  his  heart  is  a  sink  of  pollution,  full  of 
sin  and  uncleanness :  yet,  though  a  man's  own  heart  is  so  despe- 
rately wicked,  he  is  told  by  our  modem,  polite  preachers,  that  there 
is  a  fitness  in  men,  and  that  God,  seeing  you  a  good  creature,  gives 
you  bis  grace :  but  this,  though  it  is  a  modern,  polite,  and  fashion- 
able way  of  talking,  is  very  unscriptural :  it  is  very  contrary  to 
the  doctrines  of  the  Reformation,  and  to  our  own  articles.  But 
however  contrary  to  the  doctrines  of  the  church  of  England,  yet 
our  pulpits  ring  of  nothing  more,  than  doing  no  one  any  harm, 
living  honestly,  loving  your  neighbour  as  yourselves,  and  do 
what  you  can,  and  then  Christ  is  to  make  up  the  deficiency :  this 
is  making  Christ  to  be  half  a  Saviour,  and  man  the  other  part; 
but  I  say,  Christ  will  be  your  whole  righteousness,  your  whole 
wisdom,  your  whole  sanctification,  or  else  he  will  never  be  your 
whole  redemption.  How  amazing  is  it,  that  the  ministers  of  the 
church  of  England  should  speak  quite  contrary  to  what  they  have 
subscribed !  Good  God !  if  these  are  the  guides  of  the  ignorant, 
and  esteemed  to  be  the  true  ministers  of  Jesus,  because  they 
have  a  great  share  of  letter-learning;  when,  at  the  same  time, 
they  are  only  the  blind  leaders  of  the  blind ;  and,  without  a  spe- 
cial providence,  they  both  will  fall  into  the  ditch. 

No  wonder  at  people's  talking  of  the  fitness  and  unfitness  of 
things,  when  they  can  tell  us,  that  the  Spirit  of  God  is  a  good 
conscience,  and  the  comforts  of  the  Holy  Ghost  are  consequent 
thereupon.  But  this  is  wrong;  for  it  should  be  said,  the  Spirit 
of  Grod  are  the  comforts  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  a  good  con- 
science consequent  thereupon.    Seneca,  Cicero,  Plato,  or  any  of 


2S6  CHRIST  THB   SUPPORT   OP   TUB  TRilPTKD.  [XIX. 

the  heathen  philosophers,  would  have  giren  as  good  a  definition 
as  this ;  it  means  no  more  than  reflecting  we  have  done  well. 

But  let  these  modern,  polite  gentlemen,  and  let  my  letter- 
learned  brethren,  paint  man  in  as  lovely  colours  as  they  please, 
I  will  not  do  it:  I  dare  not  make  him  better  than  the  word  of 
God  does.  If  I  were  to  paint  man  in  his  proper  colours,  I  must 
go  to  the  kingdom  of  hell  for  a  copy :  for  man  is  by  nature  full  of 
pride,  subtilty,  malice,  envy,  revenge,  and  all  uncharitableness ; 
and  what  are  these,  but  the  tempers  of  the  devil?  and  lust,  sen- 
suality, pleasure,  these  are  the  tempers  of  the  beast.  Thus,  my 
brethren,  man  is  half  a  beast,  and  half  a  devil,  a  motley  mixture 
of  the  beast  and  devil.  And  this  is  the  creature,  who  has  made 
himself  so  obnoxious  to  the  wrath  of  God,  and  open  to  his  in- 
dignation, that  is  told,  that  he  must  be  part  his  own  saviour,  by 
doing  good  works,  and  what  he  cannot  do,  Christ  will  do  for  him. 

This  is  giving  the  tempter  great  room  to  come  in  with  his 
temptation ;  he  may  press  a  soul  to  foUow  moral  duties,  to  go  to 
church,  take  the  sacrament,  read,  pray,  meditate ;  the  derU  ia 
well  content  you  should  do  sill  these;  but  if  they  are  done  in  your 
own  strength,  or  if  you  go  no  farther  than  here,  you  are  only 
going  a  smoother  way  to  hell.  ' 

Thus,  my  brethren,  you  may  see  who  it  is  that  tempts  us.  But, 

II.  Why  he  tempts  you,  is  the  second  thing  I  am  to  shew  you. 

It  is  out  of  envy  to  you,  and  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  he  en- 
deavours to  keep  yon  from  closing  with  Jesus ;  and  if  he  can  but 
keep  you  from  laying  hold  by  faith  on  Christ,  he  knows  he  has 
you  safe  enough ;  and  the  more  temptations  you  are  under,  and 
according  to  their  nature  and  greatness,  you  are  more  hurried 
in  your  minds ;  and  the  more  unsettled  your  thoughts  and  aflec- 
tions  are,  the  more  apt  you  are  to  conclude,  that  if  you  ware  to 
go  to  Christ  at  present,  in  all  that  hurry  of  mind,  he  would  not 
receive  you ;  but  this  is  the  policy  of  the  tempter,  to  make  you 
have  low  and  dishonourable  thoughts  of  the  blessed  Jesus ;  and 
so  by  degrees  he  works  upon  your  minds,  that  you  are  careless 
and  indifferent  about  Christ  This,  this,  my  brethren,  is  the 
design  of  the  tempter.  Nothing  will  please  him  more,  than  to 
see  you  ruined  and  lost  for  ever.  He  tempts  you  for  that  end, 
that  you  may  lose  your  interest  in  Jesus  Christ,  and  that  you 
may  dwell  with  him  and  apostate  spirits  to  all  eternity.  He 
knows  that  Jesus  Christ  died  for  sinners,  yet  he  would  fain  keep 
souls  from  seeking  to  this  city  of  refuge  for  shelter,  and  from 
going  to  Gilead  for  the  true  balm. 

It  is  he  that  rules  in  thy  heart.  O  scoffer,  O  Pharisee ;  the  devil 
reigns  there,  and  endeavours  to  blind  your  eyes,  that  you  shall 
not  see  what  danger  you  are  in,  and  how  much  evil  there  is  in 
those  hearts  of  yours ;  and  as  long  as  he  can  keep  you  easy  and 
noconcemed  about  having  your  hearts  changed,  he  will  be  easy ; 
though,  if  he  can,  he  will  tempt  you  to  sin  against  him,  until  you 
be  hardened  in  your  iniquity.  O,  my  brethren,  do  not  give  tlie 
devil  a  handle  wherewith  he  may  lay  hold  on  you :  alas !  it  is  no 
wonder  that  the  devil  tempts  you,  when  he  finds  you  at  a  play. 


■■<■        • 


XIX.]  CHRItT  THE   SUPPORT   OP   THE   TEMPTED.  237 

a  ball,  or  nasquerade ;  if  you  be  doing  the  devil's  work,  it  is  no 
wonder  if  he  press  yoa  in  the  continaation  thereof;  and  how  can 
any  say,  **  Lead  us  not  into  temptation"  in  thejuorning,  when 
they  are  resolved  to  ran  into  it  at  night?  Good  God !  Are  these 
persons  members  of  the  church  of  England!  Alas,  when  you 
have  gone  to  church,  and  read  over  the  prayers,  it  is  oiFering  no 
more  than  the  sacrifice  of  fools ;  you  say  amm  to  ihem  with  your 
lips,  when  in  your  hearts  you  are  either  unconcerned  at  what 
you  are  about,  or  else  you  think  that  the  bare  saying  of  your 
prayers  is  sufficient,  and  that  then  God  and  you  have  balanced 
accounts. 

But,  my  dear  brethren,  do  not  deceive  yourselves,  God  is  not 
to  be  mocked.  You  are  only  ruining  yourselves  for  time  and 
eternity.  You  pray,  "  Lead  us  not  into  tonptation,"  when  you 
are  tempting  the  devil  to  come  and  tempt  you. 

IIL  I  shall  now  point  out  some  of  the  ways  and  means  he 
makes  use  of  to  draw  you  to  himself. 

But  Ais  is  a  field  so  large,  and  I  have  but  just  begun  to  be  a 
soldierof  Jesus  Christ,  that  I  cannot  name  many  unto  you.  I 
flinll  Aerefore  be  very  short  on  this  head. 

1.  He  oideavours  to  make  you  think  sin  is  not  so  great  as  it 
is;  that  there  is  no  occasion  of  being  so  over-strict^  and  that^ou 
are  righteous  over-much;  that  you  are  ostentatious,  and  will  do 
yourselves  barm  by  it;  and  that  you  will  destroy  yourselves.  He 
shews  you,  my  brethren,  the  bait,  but  he  hides  the  hook ;  he  shews 
you  the  pleasures,  profits,  and  advantages,  that  attend  abund- 
ance of  Uiis  world's  goods ;  but  he  does  not  shew  you  the  crosses, 
losses,  and  vexations,  that  you  may  have  while  you  are  in  the 
enjoyment  of  the  blessings  of  this  world. 

2.  When  he  finds  he  cannot  allure  you  by  flattery,  he  will  try 
you  by  frowns,  and  the  terrors  of  this  world ;  he  will  stir  up  peo- 
ple to  point  at  you,  and  cry,  ''  Here  comes  another  troop  of  his 
followers ;"  He  will  stir  them  up  to  jeer,  scofi*,  backbite,  and  hate 
you ;  but  if  he  still  find  this  will  not  do,  then  he  throws  doubts, 
my  brethren,  and  discouragements  in  your  miad^  whether  the 
way  jeu  are  in  be  the  true  way  or  not;  or  dse  be  will  suggest. 
What!  do  you  expect  to  be  saved  by  Christ?  Also,  He  did  not 
die  for  you;  you  have  been  too  great  a  sinner;  you  have  lived  in 
■in  so  long,  and  committed  such  sins  against  Christ,  which  he 
win  not  forgive,  llius  he  harries  poor  sinners  aliniost  into 
despair. 

And  very  often,  when  the  people  of  God  are  met  to  worship 
h»n,  he  sends  his  agents,  the  scoffers,  to  disturb  them.  We  saw 
aa  instance  of  tiieir  rage  just  now;  they  would  fain  have  dis- 
turbed os;  but  the  Lord  was  on  our  side,  and  so  prevented  aU 
tlie  attempts  of  wicked  and  designing  men  to  disturb  and  dis- 
quiet US.  Lord  Jesus,  forgive  them  who  are  thus  persecuting 
Uiy  trutk !  Jesus,  shew  thew  that  they  are  fighting  against  thee, 
and  that  it  is  hard  for  them  to  kick  against  the  pricks !  These, 
my  firetbren,  are  some  of  the  ways  Satan  takes,  in  bis  tempta- 
tions^ to  bring  you  from  Christ.  Many  more  might  be  named ;  hu^ 


288  CHRIST  THE  SUPPORT  OP   THE  TBMPTBD.  [XIX. 

these  are  sufficient,  I  hope,  to  keep  yoa  on  your  guard,  against 
all  that  the  enemy  can  do  to  hinder  you  from  coming  to  Christ. 

IV.  I  come  to  shew  you,  how  earnest  you  oaght  to  be  with 
Jesus  Christ,  either  not  to  suffer  you  not  to  be  led  into  tempta- 
tions, or  to  preserve  you  under  them. 

And  here,  my  dear  brethren,  let  me  beseech  you  to  go  to  Jesas 
Christ;  tell  him  how  you  are  assaulted  by  the  evil  one,  who  lies 
in  wait  for  your  souls;  tell  him, you  are  not  able  to  master  him, 
in  your  own  strength ;  beg  his  assistance,  and  you  shall  find  him 
ready  to  help  you;  ready  to  assist  you,  and  to  be  your  gaide, 
your  Comforter,  your  Saviour,  your  all ;  he  will  give  you  strength 
to  resist  the  fiery  darts  of  the  devil ;  and,  therefore,  you  can  no 
where  find  one  so  proper  to  relieve  you,  as  Jesus  Christ ;  he  knows 
what  it  is  to  be  tempted ;  he  was  tempted  by  Satan  in  the  wil- 
derness, and  he  will  give  you  the  assistance  of  his  Spirit,  to 
resist  the  evil  one^  and  then  he  will  fly  from  you.  In  Christ  Jesus 
you  shall  have  the  strength  you  stand  in  need  of,  the  devil  shall 
have  no  power ;  therefore  fear  not,  for  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 
we  shall  overcome  all  our  spiritual  Amalekites ;  let  the  devil  and 
his  agents  rage,  let  them  breathe  out  threatening,  yea,  let  them 
breathe  out  slaughters,  yet  we  can  rejoice  in  this,  that  Jesus 
Christ  hath  them  in  his  power,  they  shall  go  no  farther  than  he 
permits  them ;  they  may  rage,  they  may  rage  horribly,  but  they 
can  go  no  farther,  until  they  have  got  more  power  from  on  high. 

If  they  could  do  us  what  mischief  they  would,  very  few  of  us 
should  be  permitted  to  see  our  habitations  any  more ;  but,  blessed 
be  God,  we  can  commit  ourselves  to  his  protection;  he  has  been 
our  protector  hitherto,  he  will  be  so  still.  Then  earnestly  entreat 
of  the  Lord  to  support  you  under  those  temptations,  which  the 
devil  may  assault  you  with ;  he  is  a  powerful  adversary,  he  is  a 
cunning  one  too;  he  would  be  too  hard  for  us,  unless  we  have 
the  strength  of  Christ  to  be  with  us.  But  let  us  be  looking  up 
unto  Jesus,  that  he  would  send  his  Spirit  into  our  hearts,  and 
keep  us  from  falling.  O  my  dear  brethren  in  Christ  Jesus,  how 
stands  it  now  between  God  and  your  souls?  Is  Jesus  altogetiier 
lovely  to  your  souls?  is  he  precious  unto  you?  I  am  sure,  if 
you  have  not  gone  back  from  Christ,  he  will  not  from  you ;  he 
will  root  out  the  accursed  things  of  this  world,  and  dwell  in 
your  hearts.  You  are  candidates  for  heaven ;  and  will  you  mind 
earth?  What  are  all  the  pleasures  of  earth,  without  an  interest 
in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ?  And  one  smile  from  him  is  more  to 
be  desired  than  nibies,  yea,  more  than  the  whole  world. 

O  you  who  have  found  Jesus  Christ  assisting  you,  and  sup  • 
porting  you  under  all  the  temptations  of  this  life,  will  you  for- 
sake him?  have  you  not  found  him  a  gracious  master?  is  he  not 
the  chiefest  of  ten  thousand,  and  altogether  lovely?  Now  you 
see  a  form  and  comeliness  in  Christ,  which  you  never  saw  before. 
O !  how  do  you  and  I  wish  we  had  known  Jesus  sooner,  and 
that  we  had  more  of  his  love ;  it  is  condescending  love,  it  is 
amazing,  it  is  forgiving  love,  it  is  dying  love,  it  is  exalted  and 
interceding  love,  and  it  is  glorified  love.     Methinks  when  I  am 


XIX.]  CHRIST  THE  SUPPORT   OF   THB  TBMPTBD.  239 

talking  of  the  love  of  Jesus  Christ,  who  loved  me  before  I  loved 
him;  he  saw  me  polluted  in  blood,  full  of  sores,  a  slave  to  sin, 
to  death  and  hell,  running  to  destruction,  then  he  passed  by  me; 
and  said  unto  my  soul,  ''  Live ;''  he  snatched  me  as  a  brand 
plucked  from  the  burning.  It  was  love  that  saved  me,  it  was 
all  of  the  free  grace  of  God,  and  that  only.  The  little  experience 
I  have  had  of  this  love,  makes  me  amazed  at  the  condescension, 
the  love  and  mercifulness,  of  the  blessed  Jesus,  that  he  should 
have  mercy  upon  such  a  wretch.  O,  my  brethren,  the  kjngdom 
of  God  is  within  me,  and  this  fills  me  so  full  of  love,  that  I  would 
not  be  in  my  natural  state  again,  not  for  millions  of  millions  of 
worlds ;  I  long  to  be  with  Jesus,  to  live  with  the  Lord  that  bought 
me,  to  live  for  ever  with  the  Lamb  that  Was  slain,  and  to  sing 
hallebgahs  unto  hun.  Eternity  itself  will  be  too  short  to  set 
forth  die  love  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  I  cannot,  indeed  I 
cannot  forbear  speaking  again,  and  again,  and  again,  of  the 
Lord  Jesus* 

And  if  there  are  any  here  who  are  strangers  to  this  love  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  do  not  despair;  come,  come  unto  Christ,  and 
he  will  have  mercy  upon  you,  he  will  pardon  all  your  sins,  he 
will  heal  all  your  backslidings,  he  will  love  you  freely,  and  take 
you  to  be  with  himself.  Come  therefore,  O  my  guilty  brethren, 
unto  Jesus,  and  you  shall  find  rest  for  your  souls.  You  need 
not  fear,  you  need  not  despair,  when  God  has  had  mercy  upon 
such  a  wretch  as  I ;  and  he  will  save  you  also,  if  you  will  come 
unto  him  by  faith. 

Why  do  ye  delay  ?  What !  do  you  say  you  are  poor,  and  there- 
fore ashamed  to  come  ?  It  is  not  your  poverty  that  Christ  mind- 
eth ;  come  in  all  your  rags,  in  all  your  pollution,  and  he  will 
save  you.  Do  not  depend  upon  any  thing  but  the  blood  of  Jesus 
Christ ;  do  not  stand  out  an  hour  longer,  but  give  your  hearts  to 
Christ,  give  him  the  firstlings  of  the  flock :  come  unto  him  now, 
lest  he  should  cut  you  off  before  you  are  prepared,  and  your 
soul  be  sent  to  that  pit  from  whence  there  is  no  redemption. 

Do  not  waver,  but  give  him  that  which  he  desires,  your  hearts ; 
it  is  the  heart  the  Ix)rd  Jesus  Christ  wanteth :  and  when  you 
have  an  inward  principle  wrought  in  your  hearts  by  this  same 
Jesas,  then  you  will  feel  the  sweetness  and  pleasure  of  com- 
mimion  with  Grod.  O  consider,  my  brethren,  the  love  of  the  Lord 
Jesns  Christ  in  dying  for  you ;  and  are  you  resolved  to  slight 
his  dying  love  ?  Tour  sins  brought  Christ  from  heaven,  and  I 
humbly  pray  to  the  Lord,  that  they  may  not  be  a  means  of  send- 
ing you  to  hell.  What  language  will  make  you  leave  your  idns, 
and  come  to  Christ !  O  that  I  did  but  know !  and  that  it  lay  in 
my  power  to  give  you  this  grace ;  not  one  of  you,  not  the  greatest  ^ 
scoffer  here,  should  go  hence,  before  he  was  changed  from  a 
natural  to  a  spiritual  life ;  then,  then  wc  would  rejoice  and  take 
sweet  counsel  together :  but  all  this  is  not  in  my  power :  but  T 
tell  you  where  you  may  have  it,  even  of  the  Lord  Jesus ;  he  will 
f^ve  it  to  you  if  you  ask  it  of  him,  for  he  has  told  us, ''  Ask,  and 
yon  shall  receive ;"  therefore  ask  of  him,  and  if  you  are  repulsed 


840  0Hitl9T   THB  8UPPORT   OP   THB   TElfPTBD.  [XiH. 

again  and  again,  entreat  him  more»  and  he  will  be  unto  yon  as  he 
iva«  to  the  iK>or  Syro-phcenician  woman,  who  came  to  Christ  on 
account  of  her  daughter ;  and  if  she  was  so  importunate  to  him 
for  a  body,  bow  much  more  should  we  be  solicitous  for  our  souls? 
If  you  seek  to  him  in  faith,  his  answer  will  be  to  you  as  it  was 
to  her, ''  Thj  faith  hath  saved  thee,  be  it  as  thou  wouldest  have  it/' 

O,  do  not  forsake  the  seeking  of  the  Lord;  do  not,  I  beseech 
you,  neglect  the  opportunities  which  may  be  offered  to  you,  for 
the  salvation  of  your  souls ;  forsake  not  the  assembling  of  your- 
selves together,  to  build  up,  and  confirm,  and  strengthen,  those 
who  are  weak  in  faith :  to  convince  sinners,  that  they  may  feel 
the  power  of  God  pricking  them  in  their  hearts,  and  make  them 
cry  out,  *'  What  must  we  do  to  be  saved  V 

TThe  devil  and  his  agents  have  their  club^  of  revelling,  and 
their  societies  <^  drunkenness ;  they  are  not  ashamed  to  be  seen 
and  beard  doing  the  devil  their  master's  works;  they  are  not 
ashamed  to  proclaim  him;  and  sure  yo\i  arenot'ashamedof  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ;  you  dare  proclaim  that  Jesus,  who  died  that 
you  might  live,  and  who  will  own  you  before  his  Father  and  all 
the  holy  angels:  therefore,  dare  to  be  singularly  good;  be  not 
afraid  of  the  face  of  man ;  let  not  all  the  threats  of  the  men  of  this 
world  move  you :  what  is  the  loss  of  all  the  grandeur,  or  pleasure, 
or  reputation  of  this  life,  compared  to  the  loss  of  heaven,  of  Christ, 
and  of  yo\]r  souls?  and,  as  for  the  reproaches  of  the  world,  do  not 
mind  them ;  when  they  revile  yon,  never,  never  revile  again ;  do 
not  answer  railing  with  railing;  but  let  love,  kindness, meekness, 
patieace,  long-suffering,  be  found  in  you,  as  they  were  in  the 
blessed  Jesus ;  therefore,  I  beseech  you,  do  not  neglect  the  fre- 

Juent  coming  together,  and  telling  each  other  what  great  things 
esus  Christ  hath  done  for  your  souls. 

I  do  not  now,  as  the  Pharisees  say  I  do,  encourage  you  to 
leave  your  lawful  callings,  and  your  business,  in  which  God,  by 
his  providence,  bath  placed  you;  lor  you  have  two  callings,  the 
one  a  general,  and  the  other  a  spedal  one ;  it  is  your  duty  to 
regard  your  fajatties,  and  if  you  nciglect  them  out  of  any  pretence 
whatsoever,  as  going  to  chmt^,  or  to  societies,  you  are  out  of  the 
way  of  your  duty,  and  offering  that  to  God  which  he  command- 
ed you  not.  But  then,  my  brethren,  you  are  to  take  care  that 
the  things  of  this  life  do  not  hinder  the  preparing  for  that  which 
IS  to  come;  let  not  the  business  of  the  world  make  you  unmind- 
fiil  of  your  souls ;  but  in  all  your  moral  actions,  in  the  business 
of  life,  let  all  be  done  with  a  view  to  the  glory  of  God,  and  the 
salvation  of  your  souls. 

The  night  draws  on,  and  obUges  me  to  hasten  to  a  concIusioD ; 
though,  methinks,  I  could  speak  until  my  tongue  clave  to  the 
roof  of  my  mouth,  yea,  until  I  could  speal:  no  more,  if  it  were  to 
save  your  souls  from  the  paws  of  him  who  secketh  to  devour 
them. 

Therefore,  let  roe  beseech  you,  in  all  love  and  compassion : 
Consider,  you,  who  are  Pharisees ;  you,  who  will  not  come  to 
Christ,  but  are  trusting  to  yourselves  for  righteousness ;  who 


SIXJ  CHRIST  THB   SUPPORT   OP  THE  TBftlPTBO.  84t 

tliiiik,  because  you  lead  civile  honest,  decent  lives,  all  will  g^ 
well  at  last  ^  but  let  me  tell  you,  O  ye  Pharisees,  that  harlots, 
murderers,  and  tbieVes;  shall  ^nter  the  kHijgd()hi  of  Gdd  b^foftf 
you.  Do  not  flatter  yourselves  of  being  in  the  Way  tb  Ueiat^enV 
when  you  are  in  the  broad  way  to  hell ;  Vut  if  ydu  Witt  tbt^w 
away  your  righteousness,  and  come  to  Christ,  and  be  content  to 
let  Jesus  Christ  do  all  for  you,  and  in  you,  then  Christ  is  willing 
to  be  your  Saviour ;  but  if  you  bring  your  good  works  with  you, 
and  think  to  be  justified  on  the  account  of  them,  you  may  seek 
to  be  justified  by  them  for  ever,  and  never  be  justified;  no,  it  is 
only  the  blood  of  Jesus  that  cleanseth  us  from  the  filth  and  pol- 
lution of  all  our  sins ;  and  you  must  be  sanctified  before  you  are 
justified.  As  for  good  works,  we  are  justified  before  God^  without 
any  respect  to  them,  either  past,  present,  or  to  come :  when  we 
are  justified,  good  works  will  follow  our  justification,  for  we  can 
do  no  good  works,  until  we  are  deadsed  of  our  pollution,  by  iM 
sanctincation  of  the  Spirit  of  God. 

0  ye  scoffers,  come  and  see  this  Jestts,  this  Lord  of  gloty,  whotf^ 
yon  have  despised ;  and  if  you  will  but  come  to  Christ,  he  will  be 
willing  to  receive  you,  notwithstanding  all  the  perfi^eution  yotl 
have  used  towards  his  members :  however,  if  yoti  are  resolved  t<f 
persist  in  your  obstinacy,  remember,  salvation  Was  offered  to  y ouy 
that  Christ  and  free  grace  were  proposed;  but  you  refused  to 
accept  of  either,  and  therefore  yout  blood  will  be  required  at 
your  own  hands. 

1  shall  only  say  this  unto  you,  that  hb\^eVer  you  may  despise 
dther  me' or  my  ministry,  I  shall  not  regard  it,  but  shall  fre« 
quently  shew  you  your  danger,  and  pro^iose  to  you  the  remedy; 
and  shall  earnestly  pity  and  pray  for  you,  that  God  would  shew 
you  your  error,  and  bring  you  home  into  his  sheepfold,  that  yon, 
from  ravenous  lions,  may  become  peaceful  lambs. 

And  as  for  yon,  O  my  brethren,  who  desire  t6  choose  Christ 
for  your  Lord^  and  to  experience  his  power  tipoh  your  souls,  and 
as  yet  do  not  find  your  desires  and  prayers  answer^ ;  go  on^ 
and  C%rist  will  manifest  himself  unto  you,  as  he  does  not  unto 
the  world ;  you  shall  be  made  to  &^e  afid  fed  this  lovf  bf  Jesus 
upon  your  8<^ids;  you  shall  have  a  witness  in  your  own  breast^ 
that  you  are  the  Lord's ;  thereibre,  dof  not  fear,  the  Lord  J6sus 
Christ  win  gather  you  with  his  elect,  when  he  comes  at  that 
great  day  of  accounts,  to  judge  every  6*ne  according  to  the  deeds 
done  in  the  body,  whether  they  be  ^ood^  or  whetfier  they  be  evil ; 
and,  O  that  the  thought  of  answering  to  Grod  for  all  our  actions, 
would  make  us  more  mindful  about  the  consequences  that  will 
attend  it. 

And  nbW  let  me  address  all  of  you,  high  and  low,  rich  and 
poor,  one  with  another,  to  accept  of  mercy  and  grace  while  it  is 
offered  to  ybtl;  now  is  the  accepted  time,  now  is  the  day  of  sal^ 
vation ;  and  will  you  not  accept  it,  now  it  is  offered  untb  you  T 
do  not  stand  out  one  moment  longer;  but  come  and  accept  oi 
Jesus  Christ  in  his  own  way,  and  then  you  shall  be  taken  up  at 
the  last  day  I  and  be  with  him  for  evef  and  ever:  ahd  sure  thil 

p 


S42  WORLDLY   BU8INBSS   NO   PLBA  [XX. 

should  make  yoa  desirous  of  being  with  that  Jesus  who  has  done 
so  much  for  yon^  and  is  now  interceding  for  you,  and  preparing 
mansions  for  yon;  where  may  we  all  arrive,  and  sit  down  with 
Jesas  to  all  eternity ! 
Which  Grod  of  his  infinite  mercy  grant,  &c. 


SERMON  XX. 

WORLDLY   BUSINESS     NO    PLEA    FOR    THB    NEGLECT    OF 

RELIGION. 

Let  the  dead  bury  their  dead. — Matt.  viii.  22. 

St.  Paul  preaching  at  Athens,  tells  them,  that  as  be  passed  by 
and  beheld  their  devotions,  he  perceived  they  were  in  all  things 
too  superstitious.  But  was  this  apostle  to  rise,  and  come  pub- 
lishing the  g^ad  tidings  of  salvation  in  any  of  our  populous  cities, 
he  would  see  no  reason  why  he  should  charge  the  inhabitants 
with  this ;  but  rather,  as  he  passed  by  and  observed  the  tenor  of 
their  life,  say,  I  perceive  in  all  things  ye  are  too  worldly-minded  ; 
ye  are  too  eagerly  bent  on  pursuing  your  lawful  business ;  so 
eagerly,  as  either  wholly  to  neglect,  or  at  least  too  heedlessly  to 
attend  on,  the  one  thing  needful. 

There  cannot  then  be  a  greater  charity  shewn  to  the  Christian 
world,  than  to  sound  an  alarm  in  their  ears,  and  to  warn  them 
of  the  inexpressible  danger  of  continually  grasping  after  the 
things  of  this  life,  without  being  equally,  nay,  a  thousand  times 
more  concerned  for  their  well-being  in  a  future  state. 

And  there  is  still  the  more  occasion  for  such  an  alarm,  because 
worldly-mindedness  so  easily  and  craftily  besets  the  hearts  of 
men.  For  out  of  a  specious  pretence  of  serving  God,  in  labour- 
ing for  the  meat  which  perisheth,  they  are  insensibly  lulled  into 
such  a  spiritual  slumber,  as  scarce  to  perceive  their  neglect  to 
secure  that  which  endureth  to  everlasting  life. 
•  The  words  of  tlie  text,  if  not  at  first  view,  yet  when  examined 
and  explained,  will  be  found  applicable  to  this  case,  as  contain- 
ing an  admirable  caution  not  to  pursue  the  i^airs  of  this  world 
at  the  expense  of  our  happiness  in  the  next. 

They  are  the  words  of  Jesus  Christ  himself;  the  occasion  of 
their  being  spoken  was  this :  As  he  was  conversing  with  those 
that  were  gathered  round  about  him,  he  gave  one  of  them  an  im- 
mediate summons  to  follow  him :  but  he,  either  afraid  to  go  after 
such  a  persecuted  master,  or  rather,  loving  this  present  world, 
says,  **  Sufler  me  first  to  go  home  and  bury  my  father,"  or,  as 
most  explain  it.  Let  me  first  go  and  despatch  some  important 
business  I  have  now  in  hand.  But  Jesus  said  unto  him,  **  Let 
the  dead  bury  their  dead ;''  leave  worldly  business  to  worldly 
men;  let  thy  secular  business  be  left  undone,  rather  thaathon 
ihouldest  neglect  to  follow  me. 

•'  Whether  this  person  did  as  he  was  commanded,  I  know  not ; 
but  this  I  know,  that  what  Christ  said,  here  in  person,  he  has 


XX.]  FOR   THE   NEGLECT   OP   RELIGION.  2-^ 

often  whispered  with  the  small  still  voice  of  his  Holy  Spirit, 
and  said  to  many  here  present,  that  rise  up  early,  and  late  take 
rest,  and  eat  the  bread  of  carefulness.  Come  draw  oflf  your  affec- 
tions from  the  things  of  this  life ;  take  up  your  cross,  and  follow 
me.  But  they,  willing  to  justify  themselves,  make  answer. 
Lord,  suffer  us  first  to  bury  our  fathers,  or  despatch  our  secu- 
lar affairs.  I  say  unto  all  such,  "  Let  the  dead  bury  their  dead," 
let  your  worldly  business  be  left  undone,  rather  than  you  should 
neglect  to  follow  him. 

From  the  words  thus  explained  naturally  arises  this  propo- 
sition, that  no  business,  though  ever  so  important,  can  justify  a 
neglect  of  true  religion. 

The  truth  of  which  I  shall  first  shew^  and  then  make  an  appli- 
cation of  it 

I.  First,  then,  I  am  to  prove,  that  no  temporal  business,  though 
ever  so  important,  can  justify  a  neglect  of  true  religion. 

By  the  word  religion,  I  do  not  mean  any  set  of  moral  virtues, 
any  partial  amendment  of  ourselves,  or  formal  attendance  on 
any  outward  duties  whatsoever :  but  an  application  of  Christ's 
whole  and  personal  righteousness,  made  by  faith  to  our  hearts  ; 
a  thorough  real  change  of  nature  wrought  in  us  by  the  invisible 
yet  powerful  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  preserved  and  nou- 
rished in  our  souls  by  a  constant  use  of  all  the  means  of  grace, 
evidenced  by  a  good  life,  and  bringing  forth  the  fruits  of  the 
Spirit 

This  is  true  and  undefiled  religion,  and  for  the  perfecting  this 
good  work  in  our  hearts,  the  eternal  Son  of  God  came  down, 
and  shed  his  precious  blood ;  for  this  end  were  we  made,  and 
sent  into  the  world,  and  by  this  alone  can  we  become  the«ons 
of  God.  Were  we  indeed  to  judge  by  the  common  practice  of 
the  world,  we  might  think  we  were  sent  into  it  for  no  other  pur- 
pose than  to  care  and  toil  for  the  uncertain  riches  of  this  life ; 
but  if  we  consult  the  lively  oracles,  they  will  inform  us,  that  we 
were  born  for  nobler  ends,  even  to  be  bom  again  from  above,  to 
be  restored  to  the  divine  likeness  by  Jesus  Christ,  our  second 
Adam,  and  thereby  be  made  meet  to  inherit  the  kingdom  of  hea- 
ven ;  and  consequently^  there  is  an  obngation  laid  upon  all,  even 
the  most  busy  people,  to  secure  this  end  ;  it  being  an  undeniable 
truth,  that  all  creatures  ought  to  answer  the  end  for  which  they 
were  created. 

Some  indeed  are  for  confining  religion  to  the  clergy,  and  think 
it  only  belongs  to  those  who  serve  at  the  altar :  but  what  a  fatal 
mistaxe  is  this,  seeing  all  persons  are  indififerently  called  by 
God  to  the  same  state  of  inward  holiness.  As  we  are  all  corrupt 
in  our  nature,  so  must  we  all  be  renewed  and  sanctified.  And 
though  it  must  be  granted,  that  the  clergy  lie  under  double  obli- 
gations to  be  examples  to  believers,  in  faith,  zeal,  charity,  and 
whatever  else  is  commendable  and  of  good  report,  as  being  more 
immediately  dedicated  to  the  service  of  God  ;  yet  as  we  have 
been  all  baptized  with  one  baptism,  into  the  death  of  Christ, 
we  lure  all  under  the  necessity  of  performing  our  baptismal  cove- 

p2 


m^  wdl  m  of  <fcr 

?    For  vfau  drje»  cpsr  Sariovr,  bj  wilmg 

of  sf ,  twt  to  svMve  osr  cccimpt  irmsmbsv  to  looc  oat 
habfU,  to  nifnrfk  the  kcaTC&lj  cnces  W  God's  aoa  koty 
8pim  in  their  mom ;  aad^  is  one  word,  «>  iQ  as  vitk  ^  the 
fidBeM  of  God« 

Aod  will  men  be  lo  macii  their  own  enrmw^  as  to  afirm  this 
fcekpofs  oni J  to  those  who  minister  in  holj  thinss  ?  Does  it  not 
tqt22g!lf  cfmctm  the  most  aictiTe  mas  lirin^f  Is  it  the  end  of  re- 
Bf  ion  to  make  men  happj,  and  is  it  not  ererr  one  s  priTikfe  to 
be  as  happj  as  he  can  I  I>o  persons  in  bnsinessiind  the  comip* 
lions  of  their  natore  and  disorder  of  their  pa^^annsj  so  pleasia^, 
that  thej  care  not  whether  thej  erer  legidate,  or  root  them  ont  ? 
Or  wiU  thej  consent  that  ministers  shall  be  alone  partakers  of 
the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light  ?  If  not,  as  they  desire  the 
fame  end,  wtiy  will  thej  not  make  use  of  the  same  means?  Do 
thej  think  that  God  will  create  a  new  thing  npon  the  earth,  and, 
cootrarv  tii  the  paritj  of  his  natnre,  and  immutability  of  his 
eotinsel,  admit  them  into  hearen  in  ^eir  natural  state,  bccaasc 
thej  have  been  encumbered  about  man j  woridly  things  ?  Search 
the  scriptnres,  and  see  if  they  giTe  any  room  for  scch  a  ground- 
less bojpe. 

But  Urther,  one  would  imagine  thero  was  something  of  the 
highest  concern  and  utmost  importance  in  our  temporal  affairs, 
that  they  should  divert  so  many  from  purifying  their  hearts 
by  faith  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus. 

A  covetous  miser,  who  neglects  religion,  by  being  continually 
intent  on  seeking  great  things  for  himself,  and  those  of  his  own 
household,  flatters  himself  he  herein  acts  most  likely  ;  and  at 
the  same  time  will  censure  and  condemn  a  young  prodigal,  who 
has  DO  time  to  be  devout,  because  he  is  so  perpetually  engaged 
in  wasting  his  substance  by  riotous  living,  and  following  of  har- 
lots. But  yet  a  little  while,  and  men  will  be  convinced,  that 
they  are  as  much  without  excuse,  who  lose  their  souls  by  hunt- 
ing after  riches,  as  those  who  lose  them  by  hunting  after  sen- 
sual pleasures.  For  though  business  may  assume  an  air  of 
importance,  when  compared  with  other  trifling  amusments,  yet 
when  put  in  the  balance  with  the  loss  of  our  precious  and 
immortal  souls,  it  is  equally  frivolous,  according  to  that  of  our 
Saviour,  ''  What  shall  it  profit  a  mau,  if  he  shall  gain  the 
whole  world,  and  lose  his  own  soul?  or  what  shall  a  man  give  in 
exchange  for  his  soul  V 

And  now,  what  need  we  any  further  proof?  We  have  beard 
the  decision  out  of  Christ's  own  mouth.    But  because  it  is  so 


3(:|.]  POK   THE   NEQLECT   OP    RBLIGIOV.  S45 

difficult  to  convince  auch  of  this  important  truth,  whose  hearts  are 
blinded  by  the  deceitfulness  of  riches,  that  we  had  need  cry  out 
to  them  in  the  language  of  the  prophet,  "  O  earth,  earth,  hear  the. 
word  of  the  Lord,"  I  shall  lay  before  you  one  passage  of  scrip* 
ture  more,  which  I  could  wish  were  written  on  the  tables  of  all 
our  hearts.  In  the  14th  of  St.  Luke,  the  18th  and  following 
verses,  our  blessed  Lord  puts  forth  this*  parable,  ''  A  certain 
man  made  a  great  supper,  and  bade  many,  and  sent  his  ser«> 
vant  at  supper-time,  to  call  them  that  were  bidden :  but  they 
all  with  one  consent,  began  to  make  excuse.  The  one  said,  I 
have  bought  a  piece  of  ground,  and  I  must  needs  go  and  see  it ; 
I  pray  thee  have  me  excused.  And  another  said,  I  have  bought 
a  yoke  of  oxen^  and  I  must  needs  go  and  prove  them  ;  I  pray 
thee  therefore  have  me  excused.  So  the  servant  returned,  and 
shewed  bis  master  all  these  things."  And  what  follows  ?  Did 
the  master  accept  of  their  excuses?  No ;  the  text  tells  us,  the 
good  mfoi  was  angry,  and  said,  ^*  that  none  of  those  which  were 
bidden  should  taste  of  his  supper."  And  what  does  this  parable 
teach,  but  that  the  most  lawful  callings  cannot  justify  ourneglect  ? 
pay,  that  they  are  no  longer  lawful  when  they  in  any  wise  inter- 
fere with  the  great  concerns  of  religion !  For  the  marriage-sup- 
per here  spoken  of,  means  the  gospel ;  the  master  of  the  house  is 
Christ ;  the  servants  sent  out,  are  his  ministers,  whose  duty  it 
in,  from  time  to  time,  to  call  the  people  to  this  marriage-feast, 
or,  in  other  words,  to  be  religious.  Now,  we  find  those  that  were 
bidden  were  very  well  and  honestly  employed.  There  was  no 
harm  in  buying  or  seeing  a  piece  of  ground,  or  in  going  to  prove 
a  yoke  of  oxen ;  but  here  lay  their  fault,  they  were  doing  these 
things,  when  they  were  invited  to  come  to  the  marriage  feast. 

Without  doubt,  persons  may  be  very  honestly  and  commenda* 
Uy  employed  in  following  their  respective  callings ;  but  yet  if 
tbey  be  engaged  so  deeply  in  these,  as  to  hinder  their  working  out 
their  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling,  they  must  expect  the 
same  sentence  with  their  predecessors  in  the  parable,  that  none 
of  thetfD  shall  taste  of  Christ's  supper :  for  our  particular  calling, 
is  of  this  or  that  profession,  must  never  interfere  with  our  gene^ 
val  and  precious  calling  as  Christians.  Not  that  Christianity 
calls  as  entirely  out  of  the  world,  the  holy  scriptures  warrant 
■o  sncii  doctrine. 

.  It  is  very  remarkable,  that  in  the  book  of  life  we  find  some 
afanost  of  all  kinds  of  occupations,  who,  notwithstanding,  served 
God  in  their  respective  generations,  and  shone  as  so  many  lights 
in  the  world.  Thus  we  hear  of  a  good  centurion  in  the  Evan* 
gelists,  and  a  devout  Cornelius  in  the  Acts  ;  a  pious  lawyer,  and 
some  that  walked  with  God  even  of  Nero's  household,  in  the 
Epistles  :  and  our  divine  Master  himself,  on  his  check  to  Martha, 
does  not  condemn  her  for  minding,  but  for  being  cumbered  or 
perplexed  about,  many  things. 

No,  you  may,  nay,  you  must  labour,  out  of  obedience  to  God, 
•ven  for  the  meat  which  perisheth. 

But  I  come>  in  the  second  place,  to  apply  what  has  been  said* 


Worldly  buskJess  no  plea 

I  beseech  yon,  by  the  mercies  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus,  let  no 
your  concern  for  the  meat  which  perisheth  be  at  the  expense 
of  that  which  endureth  to  everlasting  life  ;  for,  to  repeat  onr 
blessed  Saviour's  word,  "What  shall  it  profit  a  man,  if  he  shall 
gain  the  whole  world,  and  lose  his  own  soul ;  or,  what  shall  a 
man  give  in  exchange  for  his  soul'?" 

Were  we  always  to  live  in  the  world,  then  worldly  wisdom 
would  be  our  highest  wisdom:  bat  forasmuch  as  we  have  here 
no  continuing  city,  and  were  only  sent  into  this  world  to  have 
our  natures  changed,  and  to  fit  ourselves  for  that  which  ts  to 
contc  ;  then  to  neglect  this  important  work  for  a  little  worldly 
gain,  what  is  it  but,  with  profane  Esau,  to  sell  our  birthright 
for  a  mess  of  pottage  ? 

Alas!  how  unlike  are  Christians  to  Christianity!  they  are 
commanded  to  "seek  first  the  kingdom  of  God  and  his  righie- 
ouaness,"  and  all  other  real  necessaries  shall  he  added  unto 
tJiem;"  but  they  are  fearful  (O  men  of  little  faith!)  that  if  they 
should  do  so,  all  other  necessaries  would  be  taken  from  them : 
they  are  strictly  forbidden  to  be  careful  for  the  morrow,  and  yet 
they  rest  not  night  or  day,  but  are  continually  heaping  up  riches 
for  many  years,  though  they  know  not  who  shall  gather  them. 
Is  this  acting  like  persons  that  are  strangers  and  pilgrims  upon 
earth?  Is  this  keeping  their  baptismal  vow?  Or  rather,  is  it 
not  directly  aposlatieing  from  it,  and  deserting  the  service  of 
Jesus  Christ,  to  list  themselves  under  the  banner  of  mammon? 

But  what  will  be  the  hope  of  such  worldlings,  when  God  shall 
take  away  their  souls?  What  if  the  Almighty  should  say  to 
eachof  ihem,  as  he  did  to  the  rich  fool  in  the  Gospel,  "This  night 
shall  thy  soul  be  required  of  thee?"  O  then,  what  would  all  those 
things  profit  them,  which  they  are  now  so  busy  in  proindiog? 

Were  eternal  life,  that  free  gift  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus,  to  be 
purchased  with  money,  or  could  men  carry  their  stocks  beyond 
the  grave,  to  buy  oil  for  their  lamps,  that  is,  grace  for  their 
hearts,  when  they  should  be  called  to  meet  the  bridegroom,  there 
might  be  some  reason  why  God  might  well  hear  with  them :  but 
since  their  money  is  to  perish  with  them  ;  since  it  is  certain,  as 
they  brought  nothing  into  the  world,  so  they  can  carry  nothing 
out;  orsupposing  they  could,  since  there  is  no  oil  to  be  bought,  ' 
no  grace  to  be  purchased,  when  once  the  lamp  of  their  natural 
life  is  gone  out;  would  it  not  be  much  more  prudent  to  spend 
the  short  time  they  have  here  allotted  them,  in  buying  oil  while 
it  may  be  had,  and  not,  for  fear  of  having  a  little  less  of  tliat 
which  will  quickly  be  another  man's,  eternally  lose  the  true  riches? 

What  think  you  ?  Is  it  to  be  supposed  il  grieved  that  covet- 
ous worldlhig-  before  mentioned,  when  his  soul  spruhg  into  the 
world  of  spirits,  that  he  could  not  stay  here  til)  lie  had  pulled 
down  bis  bams  and  built  greater?  Or  think  you  not,  that  all 
things  here  below  seemed  equally  little  to  him  then,  and  he  only 
repented  that  he  had  not  employed  more  time  in  pulling  down 
every  high  thought  that  exalted  itself  against  the  Almighty,  and 
building  up  bis  soul  in  the  knowledge  and  fear  of  God  ? 


XX.l  FOR  THB  KBGLECT  OP   RBLIGIOK.  247 

"  .  «  . 

And  thus  it  will  be  with  all  unhappy  men,  who  like  him  are 
disquieting  themselves  in  a  vain  pursuit  after  worldly  riches, 
and  at  the  same  time  are  not  rich  towards  God. 

They  may  for  a  season  seem  excellently  well  employed  in 
being  solicitously  careful  abaut  the  important  concerns  of  this 
life ;  but  when  once  their  eyes  are  opened  by  death,  and  their 
souls  launched  into  eternity,  they  will  then  see  the  littleness  of 
all  sublunary  cares,  and  wonder  they  should  be  so  besotted  to 
the  things  of  another  life,  while  they  were,  it  niay  be,  applauded 
for  their  great  wisdom  and  profound  sagacity  in  the  affairs  of 
this  world. 

Alas !  how  will  they  bemoan  themselves  for  acting  like  the 
unjust  steward,  so  very  wisely  in  their  temporal  concerns,  in 
calling  their  respective  debtors  so  carefully,  and  asking  how 
much  every  one  owes  to  them,  and  yet  never  remembering  to 
call  themselves  to  an  account,  or  inquire  how  much  they  owed 
to  their  own  great  Lord  and  Master  ? 

And  now  what  shall  I  say  more  ?  The  god  of  this  world,  and 
the  inordinate  desire  of  other  things,  must  have  wholly  stifled 
the  conscience  of  that  man,  who  does  not  see  the  force  of  these 
plain  reasonings. 

Permit  me  only  to  add  a  word  or  two  to  the  rich,  and  to  per- 
sons that  are  freed  Arom  the  business  of  this  life. 

But  here  I  must  pause  a  while,  for  I  am  sensible  that  it  is 

/^  but  an  ungrateful,  and  as  some  may  imagine  an  assuming  thing, 

for  such  a  novice  in  religion,  to  take  upon  him  to  instruct  men 

in  high  stations,  and  who  perhaps  would  disdain  to  set  me  with 

the  dogs  of  their  flock. 

But  however,  since  St.  Paul,  who  knew  what  best  became  a 
young  preacher,  commanded  Timothy,  young  as  he  was,  to 
exhort  and  charge  the  rich  with  all  authority ;  I  hope  none  here, 
that  are  so,  will  be  offended,  if  with  humility  I  beg  leave  to 
remind  them,  though  they  once  knew  this,  that  if  persons  in  the 
most  busy  employs  are  indispensably  obliged  to  *'  work  out  their 
salvation  with  fear  and  trembling,"  much  more  ought  they  to  dp 
so  who  are  free  from  the  toils  and  incumbrance  of  a  lower  way  of 
life,  and  consequently  have  greater  opportunities  and  leisure 
to  prepare  themselves  for  a  future  state. 

But  is  this  really  the  case  ?  or  do  we  not  find,  by  fatal  expe- 
rience, that  too  many  of  those  whom  God  has  exalted  above 
their  brethren,  who  are  ''  clothed  in  purple  and  fine  linen,  and 
fare  sumptuously  every  day,"  by  a  sad  abuse  of  God's  great 
bounty  towards  them,  think  that  their  stations  set  them  above 
leligion,  and  so  let  the  poor,  who  live  by  the  sweat  of  their 
brows,  attend  more  constantly  on  the  means  of  grace  than  do 
they  ? 

*   Bat  woe  unto  such  rich  men !  For  they  have  received  their 
consolation.     Happy  had  it  been,  if  they  had  never  been  born ! 
for  if  the  careless  irreligious  tradesman  cannot  be  saved,  where  * 
will  luxurious  and  wicked  gentlemen  appear? 

Let  me  therefore,  by  way  of  conclusion,  exhort  all  persons^ 


1^  •  CHRIST  THE  ONLY   REST  FOR  [XXU 

bigh  and  low«  rich  and  poor,  one  with  another,  to  make  the  re- 
newal of  tiieir  fallen  nature  the  one  business  of  their  lives,  and 
to  let  no  worldly  profit,  no  worldly  pleasure,  divert  them 
from  the  thoughts  of  it.  Let  this  cry,  *'  Behold,  the  bridegroom 
pometh,''  be  ever  sounding  in  our  cars ;  and  let  us  live  as  crea- 
tures that  are  every  moment  liable  to  be  hurried  away  by  death 
to  judgment :  let  us  remember  that  this  life  is  a  state  of  infiuite 
impqrtiince,  a  point  between  two  eternities,  and  that  after  these 
few  days  are  ended,  there  will  remain  no  more  sacrifice  for  sin ; 
let  us  b^  often  asking  ourselves,  how  we  shall  wish  we  had 
lived  when  we  leave  the  world  ?  And  then  we  shall  always  live 
in  such  a  atate  as  we  shall  never  fear  to  die  in.  Whether  we 
live,  we  shall  live  unto  the  Lord ;  or  whether  we  die,  we  shall  die 
^nto  the  Lord  ;  so  that«  living  or  dying,  we  may  be  the  Lord's. 

I'o  which  end,  let  us  beseech  God,  the  protector  of  all  them 
^s^t  put  t^eif  trust  in  him,  without  whom  nothing  is  strong,  no- 
thing is  holy,  to  increase  and  multiply  upon  us  his  mercy,  that 
}^p  being  our  ruler  and  guide,  we  may  so  pass  through  things  tem- 
poral, that  we  finally  lose  not  the  things  eternal ;  through  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord. 


SERMON  XXL 

CHRIST  THE  ONLY  REST  FOR  THE  WEARY  AND  HEAVY  LADEN. 

Coaie  unto  mCy  all  ye  that  are  weary  and  Iieavy  laden,  and  I  will 

give  you  rest. — Matthew  xi.  28. 

Nothing  is  more  generally  known  than  the  duties  which  belong 
to  Christianity,  and  yet,  how  amazing  is  it,  there  is  nothing  less 
practised !  There  is  i9uch  of  it  in  name  and  shew,  but  little  of 
it  in  the  heart  and  conversation  ;  indeed,  if  going  to  church,  and 
to  the  sacrament,  or,  if  our  being  called  after  the  name  of  Christ, 
and  being  baptized  in  that  name ;  if  that  will  make  us  Chris- 
tians, I  believe  all  of  us  would  have  a  claim  thereto:  but  if  it 
consist  in  the  heart,  that  there  must  be  an  inward  principle 
wrought  in  us  by  f^ith ;  that  there  must  be  a  change  of  the 
whole  nature,  a  putting  off  the  old  man  with  his  deeds,  a  turn- 
ing from  sin  unto  God,  a  cleaving  only  unto  the  Sun  of  righte- 
ousness ;  and  that  there  must  be  a  new  birth,  and  we  experience 
the  pangs  thereof;  and  that  you  must  feel  yourselves  weary 
and  heavy  laden  with  your  sins,  before  you  will  seek  for  deliver- 
ance from  them  ;  if  this  is  to  be  the  case,  if  there  is  so  much  in 
being  the  children  of  Qod,  alas !  how  many  who  please  themselves 
with  an  outside  shew,  a  name  to  live  whilst  they  are  dead  !  and 
how  few  that  have  any  share  in  this  spiritual  state,  in  this  true 
and  living  name  !  How  few  are  they  who  are  weary  and  heavy 
laden  with  their  sins,  and  seek  to  Christ  for  rest !  They  say  in 
a  formal  customary  manner.  We  are  sinners,  and  there  is  no  health 
in  us ;  but  how  few  feel  themselves  sinners,  and  are  so  oppressed 
in  theii:  o^p  spirits,  that  they  have  no  quiet  nor  rest  in  them, 
because  of  the  burden  of  their  sins,  and  the  weight  that  is  fallen 
find  lays  on  their  minds ! 


XXI.]  THB   WEARY   AND   HEAVY    LADEN.  S49 

Under  these  burdens^  these  heavy  burdens^  they  ^re  at  a  loss 
what  to  do  whereby  they  may  obtain  rest ;  they  fly  to  their  works^ 
they  go  to  a  minister,  and  he  tells  them  to  read,  to  pray  and  me^ 
ditate,  and  take  the  sacrament :  thus  they  go  away,  and  read, 
and  pray,  and  meditate,  almost  without  ceasing,  and  never 
neglect  the  sacrament  whenever  there  is  an  opportunity  for  the 
taking  of  it.  Well,  when  the  poor  soul  has  done  all  this,  it 
still  finds  no  ease,  there  is  yet  no  relief:  Well,  what  must  you 
do  then  ?  To  lie  still  upder  the  burden  they  cannot,  and  to  get 
rid  of  it  they  cannot :  O  what  must  the  burdened  soul  do !  Why, 
goes  to  the  clergyman  again,  and  tells  him  the  case,  and  what  it 
it  l^a^  do|ie,  and  that  it  is  no  better.  Well,  he  asks,  have  you 
givfin  aliQs  to  t^e  poor  ?  Why,  no.  Then  go  and  do  that,  and 
yoa  win  fipd  rest.  T!hu8  the  poor  sinner  is  hurried  from  duty  to 
duty,  and  still  finds  no  rest ;  all  things  are  uneasy  and  unquiet 
wfthiD^  and  there  recpains  no  rest  in  the  soul.  And  if  it  were  to 
go  through  all  the  duties  of  religion,  and  read  over  a  thousand 
n^anuals  of  prayer,  none  would  ever  give  the  soul  any  rest;  no- 
thing will,  ui^til  it  goes  to  t^e  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  for  there  is 
tbci  only  true  rest ;  that  is  the  rest  wi^ich  abideth,  and  will  con- 
tinue for  ever.  It  is  not  in  your  own  works,  nor  in  your  endea- 
vours :  no ;  when  Christ  comes  into  your  souls,  he  pardons  you, 
without  any  respect  to  your  works,  either  past,  presentj^  or  to 
come. 

From  the  words,  my  brethren,  I  have  now  read,  I  shall, 

I.  Shew  you  who  are  the  weary  and  heavy  laden. 

II.  Inquire  what  is  meant  by  coming  to  Christ.    And, 

III.  Conclude  with  exhorting  you  to  accept  of  the  invitation 
which  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  gives  unto  you  to  come  unto  him^ 
with  the  assurance  of  fin^ling  rest. 

First,  I  am  to  shew  you,  who  are  the  weary  and  heavy  laden, 

A.nd  here  it  will  be  necessary  to  consider  who  are  not ;  and 
then,  to  consider  who  they  are  that  are  really  so. 

1.  Those  who  think  themselves  good  enough,  and  are  pleased 
that  they  are  not  hq  bad  as  others,  these  are  not  weary  or  heavy 
laden. 

No^  these  Pharisees  are  not  thus  troubled :  they  laugh  and 
jest  at  those  who  talk  at  feeling  their  sins,  and  think  there  is  no 
occasion  to  make  so  much  ado  about  religion :  it  is  to  be  righte- 
ous over-much,  and  the  means  to  destroy  yourselves.  They  think 
if  they  do  but  me^n  well,  and  say  their  prayers,  as  they  call 
diem,  it  is  sufficient :  though  they  ms^y  say  a  prayer,  yea,  thou- 
sands of  prayers,  and  all  the  wfaUe  only  be  offering  up  the  sacri- 
fice of  fools.  They  may  call  God,  Father,  every  day,  when  it  is 
only  mocking  of  God,  and  offering  up  false  fire  unto  him ;  and  it 
would  b0  just  fo^  hii^  to  serve  them,  as  he  did  Nadab  and  Abihu, 
destroy  them,  cut  theopi  off  from  the  face  of  the  earth :  but  he  is 
waiting  to  be  gi^ious,  and  willing  to  try  a  little  longer,  whether 
you  will  bring  forth  any  thing  more  than  the^leavesof  an  out-^ 
ward  profession,  which  is  not  all  that  the  Lord  requires :  no,  he 
wants  the  heart ;  and  unless  you  honour  him  with  that,  he  does 


250  CHRIST   THB   ONLY    REST   FOR  [XXI. 

not  regard  your  mouths,  when  the  other  is  far  from  him.  Yon  may 
say  over  yoar  prayers  all  your  lives,  and  yet  you  may.  never  pray 
over  one :  therefore,  while  you  flatter  yourselves  you  are  good 
enough,  and  that  you  are  in  a  state  of  salvation,  you  are  only 
deceiving  your  own  souls,  and  hastening  on  your  own  destruc- 
tion. Come  unto  him,  not  as  being  good  enough,'T)ut  as  vile  sin* 
ners,  as  poor,  and  blind,  and  naked,  and  miserable,  and  then 
Jesus  will  have  compassion. 

O  ye  Pharisees,  what  firuits  do  ye  bring  forth  ?  Why,  you  are 
moral,  polite  creatures ;  you  do  your  endeavours,  you  do  what 
you  can,  and  so  Jesus  is  to  make  up  the  rest.  You  esteem  your- 
selves fine,  rational,  and  polite  beings,  and  think  it  is  toa  un- 
fashionable to  pray ;  it  is  not  polite  enough :  perhaps  you  have 
read  some  prayers,  but  knew  not  how  to  pray  from  your  hearts ; 
no,  by  no  means ;  that  was  being  righteous  over-much  indeed. 

But  when  once  you  are  sensible  of  your  being  lost,  damned 
creatures,  and  see  hell  gaping  ready  to  receive  you ;  if  God  were 
but  to  cut  the  thread  of  life,  O  then,  then  you  would  cry  earnestly 
unto  the  Lord  to  receive  yop,  to  open  the  door  of  mercy  unto 
you ;  your  tones  would  then  be  changed,  you  would  no  more 
flatter  yourselves  with  your  abilities  and  good  wishes :  no,  you 
would  see  how  unable  you  were,  how  incapable  to  save  your- 
selves ;  that  there  is  no  fitness,  no  free-will  in  you :  no  fitness, 
but  for  eternal  damnation  no  free-will,  but  that  of  doing  evil ; 
and  that  when  you  would  do  good,  evil  is  present  with  you,  and 
the  thing  that  ye  would  not,  that  do  ye.  He  knows  the  secret 
intent  of  every  heart;  and  this  is  a  pleasure  to  you,  my  dear 
brethren,  who  come  on  purpose  to  meet  with  him,  though  it  be 
in  a  field.  And,  however  some  may  esteem  me  a  mountebank, 
and  an  enthusiast,  one  that  is  only  going  to  make  you  methodi- 
cally mad :  they  may  breathe  out  their  invectives  against  me, 
yet  Christ  knows  all ;  he  takes  notice  of  it,  and  I  shall  leave  it 
to  him  to  plead  my  cause,  for  he  is  a  gracious  Master :  I  have 
already  found  him  so,  and  am  sure  he  will  continue  so.  Ven- 
geance is  his,  and  he  will  repay  it.  Let  them  revile  me ;  let  them 
cast  me  out  of  their  synagogues,  and  have  my  name  in  reproach  ; 
I  shall  not  answer  them  by  reviling  again,  or  in  speaking  evil 
against  them :  no,  that  is  not  the  spirit  of  Christ,  but  meekness, 
patience,  long-sufiering,  kindness,  &c. 

Ye  Pharisees,  who  are  going  about  to  establish  your  own 
righteousness ;  you,  who  are  too  polite  to  follow  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  in  sincerity  and  truth ;  you,  who  are  all  for  a  little  shew, 
a  little  outside  work ;  who  lead  moral,  civil,  decent  lives,  Christ 
will  not  know  you  at  the  great  day,  but  will  say  unto  you,  O  ye 
Pharisees,  was  there  any  place  for  me  in  your  love  ?  Alas !  you 
are  full  of  anger  and  malice,  and  self-will ;  yet  you  pretended  to 
love  and  serve  me,  and  to  be  my  people :  but,  however,  I  despise 
you ;  I,  who  am  God,  and  knoweth  the  secret  of  all  hearts  ;  I, 
who  am  truth  itself,  the  faithful  and  true  witness,  say  unto  you, 
**  Depart  from  me,  ye  workers  of  iniquity,  into  that  place  of  tor- 
ment prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels.    Good  God !  and 


XXlJ  TUB* WEARY   AND   HBAVY   LADBN.  261 

must  these  discreet  polite  creatures^  who  never  did  any  harm* 
bat  led  such  civil  decent  lives,  must  they  suffer  the  vengeance 
of  eternal  fire?  Cannot  their  righteous  souls  be  saved?,  where 
then  must  the  sinner,  and  the  ungodly,  appear?  where  wilt  thou^ 
O  sabbath-breaker,  appear  ?  thou,  who  canst  take  thy  pleasure, 
thy  recreation,  on  the  Lord's  day  ?  who  refusest  to  hear  the  word 
of  God,  who  wilt  not  come  to  church  to  be  instructed  in  the 
ways  of  the  Lord  ?  Where  will  you,  O  ye  adulterers,  fornicators, 
and  such  like,  of  this  generation,  appear  ?  Whoremongers  and 
adulterers  God  will  judge,  and  them  he  will  condemn.  Then 
you  will  not  call  these,  tricks  of  youth ;  no,  but  you  will  call  on 
the  rocks  and  mountains  to  fall  on  you,  to  hide  you  from  the 
fury  and  anger  of  the  Lord.  Where  wilt  thou,  O  man,  appeaf, 
that  takest  pleasure  in  making  a  mock  of  sin,  who  despisest  aU 
reproof,  who  throwest  about  thy  jests  as  a  madman  does  fire,  and 
askest  whether  thou  art  not  in  sport?  Where  wilt  thou,  O  man, 
appear,  that  makes  it  thy  business  to  preach  against  the  chil- 
dren of  the  Most  High;  thou  who  art  inventing  methods  in' 
order  to  stop  the  progress  of  the  gospel,  and  using  thy  utmost 
power  to  quash  the  preaching  thereof;- who  art  raising  of  evil 
reports  against  the  disciples  of  Christ,  and  esteemest  them 
madmen,  fools,  schismatics,  and  a  parcel  of  rabble?  Thou 
O  man,  with  all  thy  letter-learning,  wilt  surely  see  the  judgment- 
seat  of  Christ,  though,  perhaps,  sorely  against  thy  will ;  to  be 
cast  by  him  into  eternal  fire,  a  place  prepared  for  the  devil  and 
his  angels.  There  is  a  burning  Tophet,  kindled  by  the  fury  of 
an  avenging  God,,  which  will  never,  never  be  quenched.  The 
devil  longs  to  embrace  you  all  in  his^  hellish  arms,  whenever  the 
sentence  is  past,  where  you  must  for  ever  bear  the  weight  of 
your  sin :  there  is  no  redemption  then  ;  the  day  of  grace  is  past ; 
the  door  of  hope  is  shut ;  mercy  will  be  no  more  offered,  but 
you  must  be  shut  out  from  God  for  ever.  O  who  can  dwell  with 
^erlasting  burnings ! 

However  you  may  think  of  hell,  indeed  it  is  not  a  painted 
firj ;  it  is  not  an  imagination  to  keep  people  in  awe  :  then,  then 
you  will  feel  the  power  of  the  almighty  arm.  If  you  will  not 
lay  bold  on  his  golden  sceptre,  he  will  break  you  with  his  iron 
rod.  O  ye  Pharisees,  who  are  now  so  good,  so  much  better 
than  others,  how  will  ye  stand  before  Christ,  when  drest  in  his 
glory  as  judge?  You  Arians,  may  now  despise  his  divinity ;  then 
you  shall  have  a  proof  of  it ;  he  will  shew,  that  he  has  all 
power,  and  that  he  was  no  subordinate  God ;  he  will  shew  you 
that  he  has  all  power  in  heaven  and  earth ;  that  he  was  King  of 
kings,  and  Lord  of  lords ;  that  he  was  the  mighty  God,  the 
everlasting  Father ;  and  this  power  that  he  has,  he  will  exer- 
cise, *in  preserving  you  to  no  other  end,  but  to  punish  you  for 
ever.  Thus  you,  who  please  yourselves  with  being  good  enough 
now,  who  are  not  weary  and  heavy  laden  with  a  sense  of  your 
sins  here,  will  be  weary  and  heavy  laden  with  a  sense  of  your 
punishment  hereafter. 

2  Those,  my  brethren,  are  not  weary  and  heavy  ladon  with 


2Si  .  CHRIST   THB   ONLY   REST   FOR  [XXI. 

a  sense  of  their  bids,  who  can  delight  themselves  in  the  polite  en* 
tertainments  of  the  age,  and  follow  the  sinful  diversions  of  life. 

Now,  they  can  go  to  balls  and  assemblies,  play-houses  and 
liorse-racing ;  they  have  no  thought  of  their  sins  ;  they  know  not 
what  it  is  to  weep  for  sin,  or  humble  themselves  under  the  mighty 
hand  of  God ;  they  can  laugh  away  their  sorrows,  and  sing 
away  their  cares,  and  drive  away  these  melancholy  thoughts  ; 
tliey  are  too  polite  to  entertain  any  sad  thoughts ;  the  talk  of 
death  and  judgment  is  irksome  to  them,  because  it  damps  their 
inirth  :  they  could  not  endure  to  think  of  their  sin  and  danger  ; 
they  could  not  go  to  a  play,  and  think  of  hell ;  they  could  not 
go  quietly  to  a  masquerade^  and  think  of  their  danger;  they 
could  not  go  to  a  ball  or  an  assembly  in  peace,  if  they  thought 
of  their  sins. 

And  so  it  is  proved,  even  to  a  demonstration,  that  these  are 
not  weary  and  heavy  laden  ;  for  if  they  are  not  thoughtful  about 
their  sins,  they  will  never  be  weary  and  heavy  laden  of  them. 
But  at  the  day  of  judgment  all  will  be  over ;  they  shall  lose  all 
their  carnal  mirth ;  all  their  pleasure,  all  their  delight,  will  be 
gone  for  ever. 

They  will  say  then  of  their  laughter,  it  is  mad  ;  and  of  mirth, 
what  dost  thou  ?  Their  merry  conceits  and  witty  jests  against 
the  poor  despised  people  of  God,  are  then  over.  Their  mirth 
was  but  as  the  crackling  of  thorns  under  a  pot ;  it  made  a  great 
blaze  and  unseemly  noise  for  a  while,  but  it  was  presently  gone, 
and  will  return  no  more. 

They  think  now,  that  if  they  were  to  fast  or  to  pray,  and  me- 
ditate and  .mourn,  they  should  be  righteous  over-much,  and 
destroy  themselves ;  their  lives  would  be  a  continual  trouble, 
and  it  would  make  them  run  mad.  Alas,  my  brethren,  what 
misery  must  that  life  be^  where  there  is  no  more  pleasant  days, 
no  more  balls  or  plays,  no  more  cards  or  dice,  those  wasters  of 
precious  time,  no  horse-racing  and  cock-fighting,  from  whence 
no  good  ever  came,  unless  abusing  God  Almighty's  creatures, 
and  putting  them  to  that  use  which  he  never  designed  them, 
can  be  called  so.  How  miserable  will  your  life  be  when  all  your 
joys  are  over,  when  your  pleasures  are  all  past,  and  no  more 
mirth  or  pastime  I  Do  you  think  there  is  one  merry  heart  in 
hell  ?  one  pleasing  countenance  ?  or  jesting,  scoffing,  swearing 
tongue  ?  A  sermon  now  is  irksome  :  the  ofier  of  salvation  by  the 
blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  is  now  termed  enthusiasm ;  but  then  you 
would  give  thousands  of  worlds,  if  in  your  power,  for  one  ten- 
der of  mercy,  for  one  offer  of  grace,  which  now  you  so  much 
despise. 

iJow  you  are  not  weary  of  your  diversions,  nor  are  you  heavy 
laden  with  the  sins  with  which  they  are  accompanied ;  but  then 
you  will  be  weary  of  your  punishment,  and  the  aggravation 
which  attends  it.  Your  cards  and  dice,  your  hawk^  and  hounds, 
and  bowls,  and  your  pleasant  sports,  will  then  be  over.  What 
mirth  will  you  have  in  remembering  your  sports  and  diversions? 
I  would  not  have  you  mistake  me,  and  say,  I  am  only  preach- 


XXlJ]  THE   WEARY   AND   HEAVY   LAD^N.  36^ 

ing  death  and  damnation  to  yon  ;  I  am  only  shewing  you  what 
will  be  the  consequence  of  c6htinning;  in  thebe  sinful  pleasures, 
and  if  the  detil  does  not  hurry  you  away  with  half  a  sermon,  I 
shall  shew  you  how  to  avoid  these  dangers^  which  I  now  preach 
up  as  the  effect  of  sin  unrepented  of.  I  mention  this,  lest  you 
should  be  hurried  away  by  the  devil :  but  be  not  offended  if  I 
point  out  unto  you  more  of  the  terrors  which  will  attend  your 
following  these  polite  and  fashionable  entertainments  of  the 
present  age,  and  of  not  being  weary  and  heavy  laden  with  a 
sense  6f  your  sins. 

They  who  delight  in  drinking  wine  to  excess,  and  who  are  drunk- 
ards, what  bitter  draughts  will  they  have  instead  of  wine  and 
ale !  The  heat  of  lust  will  be  then  also  abated  ;  they  will  no 
more  sing  the  song  of  the  drunkard ;  no  more  spend  their  time 
in  courting  their  mistresses^  in  lascivious  discourse^  in  amorous 
songs,  in  wanton  dalliances^  in  brutish  defilements :  no,  these 
are  all  over ;  and  it  will  but  prick  each  other  to  the  hearty  ta 
look  one  another  in  the  face.  Then  they  will  wish,  that  instead 
of  sinning  together,  they  had  prayed  together ;  had  frequented 
religious  societies ;  had  stirred  up  each  other  to  love  and  holi- 
ness, and  endeavoured  to  convince  each  other  of  the  evil  of  sin, 
and  how  obnoxious  they  are  to  the  wrath  of  Grod  ;  and  the  ne- 
cessity of  being  weary  and  heavy  laden  wiUi  a  sense  thereof; 
that  they  might  have  escaped  the  punishment  which  they  suffer, 
by  their  following  the  sinful  and  polite  diversions  of  the  age 
they  fell  into.  But  as  it  was  against  Ood,  himself  they  had 
sinned,  so,  no  less  than  Grod  will  punish  them  for  their  offences : 
ha  bath  prepared  these  torments  for  his  enemies ;  his  c(mtinual 
anger  wUl  still  be  devouring  of  them  ;  his  breath  of  indignation 
will  kindle  the  flame ;  his  wrath  will  be  a  continual  burden  to 
their  souls.  Woe  be  to  him'  who  falls  under  the  stroke  of  the 
Almighty  I 

Thus  they  are  not  weary  and  heavy  laden  with  their  sins^ 
who  can  follow  the  polite  and  fashionable  entertainments  of  the 
age.    But, 

Secondly,  I  am  to  shew  you  what  it  is  to  be  weary  and  heavy 
laden  with  sins.    And, 

1.  Ton  may  be  said,  my  brethren,  to  be  weary  and  heavy^ 
lades,  when  your  sins  are  grievous  unto  you,  and  it  is  with 
grief  and  trouble  you  commit  them. 

Ton,  who  are  awakened  unto  a  sense  of  your  sins^  who  see 
how  bateful  they  are  to  God,  and  how  they  lay  you  open  to  his 
wrath  and  indignation,  and  would  willingly  avoid  them ;  who 
hate  yourselves  for  committing  them ;  when  you  are  thus  con- 
vinced of  sin,  when  you  see  the  terrors  of  the  law,  and  are  afraid 
of  bis  judgments;  then  you  may  be  said  to  be  weary  of  your 
ems.  And  O  how  terrible  do  they  appear  when  you  are  first 
awakened  to  a  sense  of  them,  when  you  see  nothing  but  the 
wrath  of  Grod  ready  to  fall  upon  you,  and  you  are  afraid  of  his 
Judgments !  O  how  heavy  is  your  sin  to  you  then !  Then  yon 
fed  the  weight  thereof,  and  that  it  is  grievous  to  be  borne.*. 


SS4  CHRIST  THE   ONLY   REST   FOR  [XXI. 

2.  When  jron  are  obliged  to  cry  oat  under  the  burden  of  your 
sins,  and  know  not  what  to  do  for  relief;  when  this  is  your  case, 
you  are  weary  of  your  sins.  It  does  not  consist  in  a  weariness 
all  of  a  sudden :  no,  it  is  the  continual  burden  of  your  soul,  it  is 
your  grief  and  concern  that  you  cannot  live  without  offending 
God,  and  sinniog  against  him ;  and  these  sins  are  so  many  and 
so  great,  that  you  fear  they  vriH  not  be  forgiven. 

I  come.  Secondly,  to  shew  you  what  is  meant  by  coming  to 
Christ* 

It  is  not,  my  brethren,  coming  with  your  own  works ;  no,  you 
must  come  in  full  dependence  upon  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
looking  on  him  as  the  Lord  who  died  to  save  sinners  :  Go  to 
him,  tell  him  you  are  lost,  undone,  miserable  sinners,  and  that 
you  deserve  nothing  but  hell;  and  when  yon  thus  go  to  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  out  of  yourselves,  in  full  dependence  on  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  you  will  find  him  an  able  and  a  willing 
Saviour :  he  is  pleased  to  see  sinners  coming  to  him  in  a  sense 
of  their  own  unworthiness ;  and  when  their  case  seems  to  be 
most  dangerous,  nfost  distressed,  then  the  Lord  in  his  mercy 
steps  in  and  gives  you  his  grace  ;  he  puts  his  Spirit  within  you, 
takes  away  your  heart  of  stone,  and  gives  you  a  heart  of  flesh. 
Stand  not  out  then  against  this  Lord,  but  go  unto  him,  not  in 
your  own  strength,  but  in  the  strength  of  Jesus  Christ. 

And  this  brings  me.  Thirdly,  to  consider  the  exhortation 
Christ  gives  unto  all  of  you,  high  and  low,  rich  and  poor,  one 
with  another,  to  come  unto  him  that  you  may.  have  rest.  And 
if  Jesus  Christ  give  you  rest,  you  may  be  sure  it  will  be  rest 
indeed ;  it  will  be  such  a  rest  as  your  soul  wants ;  it  will  be 
a  rest  which  the  world  can  neither  give  nor  take  away.  O  come 
all  of  ye  this  night,  and  you  shall  find  rest :  Jesus  Christ  hath 
promised  it.  Here  is  a  gracious  invitation,  and  do  not  let  a 
little  rain  hurry  you  away  from  the  hearing  of  it ;  do  but  consi- 
der what  the  devil  and  damned  spirits  would  give  to  have  the 
offer  of  mercy,  and  to  accept  of  Christ,  that  they  may  be  de- 
livered from  the  torments  they  labour  under,  and  must  do  so 
for  ever ;  or,  how  pleasing  would  this  rain  be  to  them  to  cool 
their  parched  tongues :  but  they  are  denied  both,  while  you  have 
mercy  offered  to  you ;  free  and  rich  mercy  to  come  to  Christ : 
here  is  food  for  your  souls,  and  the  rain  is  to  bring  forth  the 
fruits  of  the  earthy  as  food  for  your  bodies.  Here  is  mercy 
upon  mercy. 

Let  me  beseech  you  to  come  unto  Christ,  and  he  will  give 
you  rest:  you  shidl  find  rest  unto  your  souls.  O  you,  my 
weary,  burdened  brethren,  do  but  go  to  Christ  in  this  manner, 
and  though  you  go  to  him  weary,  you  shall  find  rest  before  you 
come  from  him :  let  not  any  thing  short  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
be  your  rest;  for  wherever  you  seek  you  will  be  disappointed  ; 
but  if  you  do  but  seek  unto  the  Ijord  Jesus  Christ,  there  you 
will  find  a  fulness  of  every  thing  which  your  weary  soul  wants. 
€rO  to  him  this  night ;  here  is  an  invitation  to  all  you  who  are 
weary  souls.     He  does  not  call  you,  O  Pharisees;  no,  it  is  only 


XXI.]       THB  W£ARY  AND  HEAVY  LADBN:  255 

you  weary  sinners ;  and  dure  you  will  not  stay  from  him,  but 
accept  of  his  invitation ;  do  not  delay ;  one  moment  may  be 
dangerous  :  death  may  take  you  off  suddenly.  You  know  not  but 
that  a  fit  of  the  apoplexy  may  hurry  you  from  time  into  eternity ; 
therefore,  be  not  for  staying  till  you  have  something  to  bring; 
come  in  all  yoar  rags,  in  all  your  filthiness,.in  all  your  distresses, 
and  you  will  soon  find  Jesus  Christ  ready  to  help  and  to  relieve 
you ;  he  loves  you  as  well  in  your  rags  as  in  your  best  garments  ; 
be  regards  not  your  dress ;  no,  do  but  come  unto  him,  and  you 
shall  soon  find  rest  for  your  souls. 

What  say  you  ?  Shall  I  tell  my  Master  you  will  come  unto 
him,  and  that  you  will  accept  him  on  his  own  terms.  Let  me, 
my  brethren,  beseech  you  to  take  Jesus  without  any  thing  of 
your  own  righteousness :  for  if  yon  expect  tomix  any  thing  of 
yourself  with  Christ,  you  build  upon  a  sandy  foundation ;  but  if 
yoQ  take  Christ  for  your  rest,  he  will  be  tiiat  u^to  you.  Let 
me  beseech  you  to  build  upon  this  Rock  of  ages.  O  my  bre- 
thren, think  of  the  gracious  invitation,  *^  Come  unto  me,"  to  J  esus 
Christ :  it  is  he  that  calls  you :  and  will  you  not  go  ? 

Come,  come  unto  him.  If  your  souls  were  not  immortal,  and 
you  in  danger  of  losing  them,  I  would  not  thus  speak  unto  you ; 
but  the  love  of  your  souls  constrains  me  to  speak ;  methinks 
this  would  constrain  me  to  speak  unto  you  for  ever.  Come  then 
by  faith,  and  lay  hold  of  the  Lord  Jesus ;  though  he  be  in  hea- 
ven, he  now  caileth  thee.  Come,  all  ye  drunkards,  swearers, 
sabbath-breakers,  adulterers,  fornicators ;  come,  all  ye  scoffers, 
harlots,  thieves,  and  murderers,  and  Jesus  Christ  will  save  you; 
he  will  give  you  rest,  if  you  are  weary  of  your  sins.  O  come  lay 
hold  upon  him.  Had  I  less  love  for  your  souls,  I  might  speak 
less ;  but  that  love  of  Ood,  which  is  shed  abroad  in  my  heart, 
will  not  permit  me  to  leave  yon,  till  I  see  whether  you  will  come 
to  Christ  or  no.  O,  for  your  life  receive  him,  for  fear  he  may 
never  call  you  any  more.  Behold  the  Bridegroom  cometh ;  it 
may  be  this  night  the  cry  may  be  made.  How  would  you  bear 
this,  if  you  were  sure  to  die  before  the  morning  light !  God  grant 
you  may  begin  to  live,  that  when  the  king  of  tierrors  shall  come, 
you  may  have  nothing  to  do  but  to  conmiit  your  souls  into  the 
hands  of  a  faithful  Redeemer. 

Now  to  God  the  Father,  God  the  Son,  and  God  the  Holy' 
Ghost,  be  cdl  honour,  praises,  dominion,  and  power,  henceform 
and  for  evermore.    Amen,  amen. 


286  THB  DANGER  OP  PARTING  WITH  OHRtST  [XXlt. 

SERMON  XXII. 

THE    FOLLY    AND    DANGER    OF    PARTING   WITH   CHRIST   FOR 
THE   PLEASURES   AND   PROFITS   OF   LIFE. 

And  when  he  tuas  entered  into  a  ship,  his  diseiples  followed  him. 
Andf  behold,  there  arose  a  great  tempest  in  the  sea,  insomuch 
that  the  ship  was  covered  with  the  waves :  but  he  was  asleep. 
And  his  disciples  came  to  him,  and  awoke  him,  saying.  Lord, 
save  us  ;  we  perish.  And  he  saith  unto  them.  Why  are  ye  fear- 
ful, O  yeof  little  faith  ?  Then  he  arose,  and  rebuked  the  winds 
and  the  sea,  and  there  was  a  great  calm.  But  the  men  mar" 
veiled,  saying.  What  manner  of  man  is  this,  that  even  the  winds 
and  tlie  sea  obey  him  I  And  when  he  was  come  to  the  other  side, 
into  the  country  of  the  Gergesenes,  there  met  him  two  possessed 
with  devils,  coming  out  of  the  tombs,  exceeding  fierce,  so  that  no 
man  miqht  pass  by  that  way.  And,  behold,  they  cried  out,  say^ 
ing.  What  have  we  to  do  with  thee,  Jesus,  tliou  Son  of  God  ? 
Art  thou  come  hither  to  torment  us  before  the  time  ?  And  there 
tjoas,  a  good  way  off  from  them,  an  herd  of  many  swine,  feeding. 
So  the  devils  besought  him,  saying.  If  thou  cast  us  out,  suffer 
us  to  go  away  into  the  herd  of  swine.  And  he  said  unto  them. 
Go:  And  when  they  were  come  out,  they  went  into  the  herd  of 
swine  ;  and,  behold,  the  whole  herd  of  swine  ran  violently  down 
a  steep  place  into  the  sea,  and  perished  in  the  waters.  And 
they  that  kept  them  fled,  and  went  their  ways  into  the  city,  and 
told  every  thing  ;  and  what  was  befallen  to  the  possessed  qfthe 
devils.  And,  behold,  the  whole  city  came  out  to  meet  Jesus;  and 
when  they  satv  him,  they  besought  him  that  he  uwuld  depart 
out  of  their  coasts. — Matt.  viii.  23,  to  the  end. 

If  we  were  bat  sensible  of  the  great  necessity  there  is,  in  this  onr 
day,  of  being  real  Christians,  snre  we  should  not  be  contented 
with  being  nominal  ones ;  but  we  are  sunk  into  I  know  not  what; 
we  are  no  better  than  baptized  heathens:  And  how  amazing  is  it, 
that  we  should  profess  tiie  name  of  Christ,  and  yet  so  little  con- 
Verse  about  him ;  surely,  this  name,  whereby  we  are  called,  should 
be  the  theme  of  our  discourse  here,  and  of  our  eternal  hallelujahs 
in  a  world  to  come.     But  is  it  not  more  amazing,  to  consider, 
that  instead  of  the  name  of  Jesus,  whereby  we  are  to  have  sal- 
vation, we  are  taught  to  look  for  it  in  ourselves,  and  that  there 
must  be  a  fitness  in  us  before  God  bestows  his  grace  and  favour 
upon  us.     But  what  doctrine  is  this  ?   Not  the  doctrine  of  the 
scripture,  not  the  doctrine  of  Jesus,  not  that  of  the  primitive 
Christians,  not  that  of  the  Reformation,  nor  that  of  the  Articles  of 
the  church  of  England :  No,  it  is  the  doctrine  of  the  devil :  this 
is  making  Christ  but  half  a  Saviour,  and  driving  man  into  an 
error  of  the  greatest  consequence,  in  making  him  go  to  Jesus  in 
his  own  strength,  and  not  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ : 
But,  my  brethren,  unless  you  go  in  the  strength  of  Jesus  Christ; 
unless  you  depend  only  upon  him  for  salvation ;  unless  he  is 


XSIU]      FOR  TRB  PLEASURES  AND  PROFITS  OF  UFS.  S57 

your  wisdom,  righteousness,  and  saoetification,  he  will  never  be 
your  redemption.  Oar  salvation  is  the  free  gift  of  God ;  it  is 
owing  to  his  free  love,  and  the  free  grace  of  Jesus  Christ,  that 
ever  yon  are  saved. 

Do  not  flatter  yourselves  of  being  good  enough,  because  yoa 
ai^  morally  so ;  because  you  go  to  church,  say  the  prayers,  and 
take  the  sacrament,  therefore  you  think  no  more  is  required : 
alas  !  you  are  deceiving  your  own  souls ;  and  if  God,  in  bis  free 
grace  and  mercy,  does  not  shew  you  your  error,  it  will  only  be 
leading  you  k  softer  way  to  your  eternal  ruin ;  but  God  forbid 
that  any  of  you,  to  whom  I  am  now  speaking,  should  imagine 
this ;  no,  you  must  be  abased,  and  God  roust  be  exalted,  or  you 
will  never  begin  at  the  right  end  ;  you  will  never  see  Jesus  with 
comfort  or  satisfaction,  unless  you  go  to  him  only  on  the  account 
of  what  he  has  done  and  suffered. ' 

Is  it  not  plain  to  a  demonstration,  that  we  are  acting  the  part 
of  the  Gcrgesenes,  who  came  and  desired  Jesus  to  depart  irom 
them  ?  Let  us  consider  the  words,  and  then  we  shall  see  how 
exactly  we  are  performing  the  part  of  these  men  over  again. 

And  when  he  was  entered  into  a  ship,  his  disciples  followed  him* 

Christ  had  been  working  of  many  miracles,  as  we  may  read  a 
few  verses  before ;  and  as  he  continually  went  about  doing  good, 
so  now  he  was  going  to  the  country  of  the  Gergesenes,  to  dis- 
possess two,  who  were  possessed  with  devils ;  and  his  disciples 
followed  him :  No  doubt,  they  were  reproached  and  pointea  at, 
for  following  such  a  babbler,  as  the  scribes  and  Pharisees  esteem- 
ed the  Lord  Jesus  Christ:  Doubtless  they  were  pointed  at,  jeered, 
scoffed,  and  esteemed  madmen,  enthusiasts,  and  aparcel  of  rabble ; 
but  still  they  followed  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  they  did  not  mind 
a  little  reproach;  no,  they  loved  their  Master  too  well  to  forbear 
following  him  for  the  sake  of  a  little  persecution.  And  if  you  do 
but  love  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  love  him  above  all,  ypu  will  fol- 
low him  in  spite  of  the  malice  of  all  the  scribes  and  Pharisees  of 
this  generation. 

And  behold,  there  arose  a  great  tempest  in  the  sea. 

The  presence  of  Christ  in  the  ship,  did  not  preserve  the  disci- 
ples from  fears  and  troubles ;  they  were  filled  with  uneasiness, 
although  Christ  was  with  th^m :  this  was  only  for  a  trial  of  their^ 
laitb,  to  see  if  they  would  stand  fast  for  the  Lord  in  a  persecut- 
ing time.  My  dear  brethren,  if  the  Lord  is  trying  of  you,  do  not 
give  out;  no,  stand  fast  in  all  that  the  Lord  may  call  you  to  suf- 
fer. It  is  easy  to  follow  Christ  when  all  things  are  safe ;  but  your 
love  to  Jesus  Christ  would  be  seen  more,  if  you  must  lose  your 
lives,  or  deny  your  Jesus ;  it  would  be  a  trial  of  your  love,  when 
fire  and  faggot  was  before  you,  if  you  would  rush  into  that^ 
rather  than  fly  from  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.  Tiiough  all  things 
are  calm  now,  the  storm  is  gathering,  and  by  and  by  it  will  break, 
and  then  you  will. see  whether  you  are  sound  Christians  or  not. 
Persecution  would  scatter  the  hypocrites,  and  make  nominal 
Christians  afraid  to  worship  God ;  they  would  tlien  soon  turu 
unto  the  world  and  the  things  of  it. 


266  /THB  DAKGBR  OF   PARTING   WITH   CHRIST        [XXII. 

And  his  dUdpks  came  to  km,  and  awoke  him,  saying^  Lord^ 
save  us,  we  perish.  And  he  saith  unto  them.  Why  are  yefearfuL 
O  ye  of  little  faith?  Then  he  arose,  and  rebuked  the  winds  and 
the  sea,  and  there  was  a  great  calm.  But  the  men  marvelled,  say- 
ing.  What  manner  of  man  is  this,  that  etten  the  winds  and  tlie  sea 
obey  him! 

'  Here  we  may  see  the  great  compassion  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ ;  no  sooner  had  the  disciples  awakened  him,  and  he  saw 
their  danger,  but  he  rebuked  the  winds  and  the  seas,  and  all 
things  were  calm :  Thus  it  was  in  a  natural  way,  aftid  will  be  so 
in  a  spiritual  one ;  for  no  sooner  does  Jesus  Christ  speak  peace 
to  a  troubled  soul,  but  all  is  calm  and  quiet :  Now,  none  but  God 
could  have  performed  this  great  miracle,  and  therefore  it  is  no 
wonder  that  nis  disciples,  and  the  men  of  the  ship,  were  amazed 
to  see  the  wonders  he  performed ;  and  they  could  not  forbear  to 
express  their  sense  thereof,  by  inquiring,  **  What  manner  of  man 
is  this !'' 

And  when  the  Lord  has  brought  you  out  of  trouble,  you  will 
be  amazed  at  the  gracious  dealings  of  the  Lord  with  you,  and 
wonder  that  he  would  so  easily  remove  your  troubles  from  you. 
when  yon  have  deserved  nothing  but  wrath  and  destruction,  and 
to  be  punished  to  all  eternity. 

And  when  he  was  come  to  the  other  side,  into  the  country  of  the 
Gergesenes,  there  met  him  tux)  possessed  with  devils,  coming  out 
of  the  tombs,  exceeding  fierce,  so  that  no  man  might  pass  by  that 
way.  And,  behold,  they  cried  out,  saying,  What  have  we  to  do 
with  thee,  Jesus^  thou  Son  of  God?  Art  thou  come.hither  to  tor- 
ment us  before  the  time? 

Two  men,  who  were  possessed  bodily  with  that  evil  one  who 
is  going  about  seeking  whom  he  may  devour,  met  Jesus ;  as  soon 
as  they  saw  him,  they  were  afraid,  and  cried  out :  though  they 
made  every  one  afraid  of  them,  yet  they  no  sooner  saw  Christ, 
but  their  power  left  them,  and  they  cried  out,  ^'  What  have  we 
to  do  with  thee,  Jesus,  thou  Son  of  God  V  We  know  that  thou 
art  God ;  we  do  not  want  thee,  we  have  no  power  over  thee, 
but  thou  hast  over  us,  and  we  fear  thou  art  come  to  torment  us 
before  our  time ;  we  know  that  we  are  to  be  brought  to  judg- 
ment, and  therefore  we  would  not  be  tormented  until  that  time 
come. 

And  there  was,  a  good  way  off  from  them,  a  herd  of  many 
swine,  feeding.  So  the  devils  besought  him,  saying.  If  thou  cast 
us  out,  suffer  us  to  go  into  the  herd  ofswiner 
'  The  evil  spirits  were  sensible  that  Christ  was  come  to  dispos- 
sess them,  and  that  their  time  was  now  come,  when  they  must 
leave  the  bodies  of  these  two  men ;  for  when  Christ  comes,  who 
is  stronger  than  the  strong  man  armed^  all  must  fall  befote  him; 
they  could  not  stand  against  the  power  of  Christ:  and  here  we 
may  observe,  that  though  the  devil  be  an  enemy,  yet  he  is  a 
chained  one ;  he  cannot  hurt  a  poor  swine,  until  he  have  a  power 
given  him  from  above :  and  we  may  likewise  see  the  malice  of 
the  devil,  that  he  would  hurt  a  poor  swine,  rather  than  do  no 


XXII.]      FOR  THB  PLEASURES  AND  PROFITS  OF  LIFE  259 

mischief;  and  the  devil  would,  if  in  his  power,  destroy  each  of 
your  souls,  but  Christ,  by  his  mighty  power,  prevents  him. 

And  he  said  unto  them.  Go;  And  when  they  were  come  out, 
they  went  into  the  herd  of  swine  ;  and,  behold,  the  whole  herd  of 
sivine  ran  violently  down  a  steep  place  into  the  sea,  and  perished 
in  the  waters.  And  they  that  kept  them  fled,  and  went  their 
ways  into  the  city,  and  told  every  thing,  and  what  was  befallen 
to  the  possessed  of  the  devils.  And,  behold,  the  whole  city  came 
out  to  meet  Jesus,  and  when  they  saw  him,  they  besought  him  that 
he  would  depart  out  of  their  coasts, 

Her6  observe,  that  no  sooner  had  Christ  given  the  devils  per- 
mission to  enter  the  swine,  but  they  did;  and  their  malice  was  so 
great,  that  the  swine  ran  violently  down  a  steep  place  into  the 
sea,  and  were  drowned. 

What  poor  spite  was  here,  that  the  devil  should  disturb  poor 
swine !  And  the  city,  therefore,  was  so  grieved  for  the  loss  of  a 
little  wealth,  that  they  came  and  besought  Christ  to  depart:  they 
did  not  want  his  company;  they  preferred  a  few  poor  swine 
before  the  company  of  Christ;  a  few  worldly  goods,  a  little  plea- 
sure, or  any  thing,  rather  than  Christ, — part  with  Christ  before 
any  thing :  but  one  who  is  sensible  of  the  love  of  Christ,  will 
part  with  all,  rather  than  with  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

Thus  far  the  letter  of  the  story  goes ;  perhaps  you  think  there 
Ls  nothing  to  be  learned  herefrom,  and  that  this  is  all  you  are  to 
understand  by  it :  but  if  so,  my  brethren,  you  are  much  mistaken ; 
for  here  is  an  excellent  lesson  to  be  learned,  and  that  you  will 
see,  by  considering  the  words  again,  in  a  spiritual  sense. 

And,  behold,  there  arose  a  great  tempest  in  the  sea,insomuch 
that  the  ship  was  covered  with  the  waves :  but  he  was  asleep. 

And  do  not  you  frequently  experience  great  tempests  in  this 
world?  does  not  the  sea  of  temptation  beat  over  your  souls? 
you  are  afraid  lest  you  should  be  overcome  by  them ;  you  can 
see  no  way  to  escape^  for  your  souls  arc  covered  with  waves, 
and  you  expect  to  be  swadlowed  up  in  the  tempest ;  you  aro 
afraid  lest  you  should  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  evil  one.  O  do 
not  fear,  for  Jesus  Christ,  though  he  may  be  asleep,  to  your 
thinking,  yet  will  keep  you,  he  will  preserve  you  from  the 
raging  of  the  men,  of  the  Pharisees,  of  this  world  ;  they  may  rage 
and  spit  forth  all  their  venom  against  you,  still  Christ  will  deli- 
ver, preserve,  and  protect  you ;  if  you  but  seek  unto  him  in  a 
sense  ctf  your  own  helplessness  and  un worthiness,  you  will  soon 
fiod  he  is  a  God  ready  to  pardon  and  forgive.  O  that  all  that 
hear  me  would  be  persuaded  to  bow  their  knee,  and  their  hearts, 
as  soon  as  they  go  home :  but,  alas !  how  many  of  our  Christians 
go  to  God,  day  by  day,  and  caJl  him  Father,  which  is  but  mock- 
ing of  God,  when  the  devil  is  their  father:  None  have  a  right  to 
call  him  Father,  but  those  who  have  received  the  Spirit  of  adop- 
tion, whereby  they  have  a  right  to  call  him,  ^' Abba,  Father.*' 
Could  the  brute  beasts  speak,  they  might  call  God  father, 
as  well  as  some  of  you ;  for  he  is  their  Creator,  to  whom  tliey 
owe  their  being :  but  this  will  not  entitle  you  to  call  God  father. 


SGO  THB  DANG£R  OF  PARTING  WITH  CHRIST  XX If* 

in  a  spiritaal  sense;  no,  yon  mnst  be  bom  again  of  God; 
however  you  may  flatter  yourselves^  you  must  have  an  inward 
principle  wrought  in  your  hearts  by  faith. 

This  you  must  experience,  this,  this  yon  must  feel,  before  you 
are  Christians  indeed. 

The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  takes  notice  of  each  of  you :  you  may 
think  that  the  Lord  does  not  tako  notice  of  us,  because  wo  are 
in  a  field,  and  out  of  church  walls ;  but  he  does  observe  with 
wiiat  view  you  came  this  evening  to  hear  his  word ;  ho  knows 
whether  it  was  to  satisfy  your  curiosity,  or  to  find  out  where- 
with you  might  ridicule  the  preacher.  The  thoughts  and  in- 
tentions of  sdl  your  hearts  are  not  hidden  from  Jesus  Christ; 
though  ho  may  seem  to  be  asleep,  because  you  are  at  pre- 
sent insensible  of  his  workings  upon  your  heart,  and  he  may  not 
seem  to  take  notice  of  you,  and  regard  you  no  more  than  he 
did  the  Syrophocnician  woman ;  yet  ho  will  turn  to  you,  and 
behold  you  with  lovo;  the  Lord  will  be  mindful  of  you  in  due 
time,  and  speak  peace  to  your  troubled  soul ;  though  the  sea  of 
troubles  be  beating  over  you,  though  tho  Pharisees  of  tlus  day  bo 
scofiing  at  you,  yet  when  Christ  rebukes,  then  they  shall  cease. 

Do  not  depend  on  yourselves :  say  unto  him,  **  Save  us.  Lord,  or 
we  perish  :"  beseech  him  to  be  your  guide,  and  your  salvation  ;  I 
beseech  you  by  the  tender  mercies  of  God,  which  are  in  Christ 
Jesus,  that  you  present  yourselves  to  him  as  your  reasonable 
service. 

Awake,  you  that  sleep,  and  arise  from  the  dead,  from  the  death 
of  sin,  and  Christ  then  will  give  you  th^  light  of  his  righteousness. 
Come  to  Christ,  and  you  shall  be  welcome ;  O  come  unto  this  bless- 
ed Jesus ;  come  notwithstanding  your  vilcness ;  for  if  you  come  not, 
you  will  perish :  if  Christ  docs  not  save  you,  your  own  good  mean- 
ing, your  own  good  intentions  cannot ;  no,  as  you  are  in  your  blood, 
so  you  must  perish  in  your  blood  ;  for  if  you  come  to  Christ,  you 
will  find  mercy,  you  shall  not  perish.  You  cannot  find  salvation 
in  any  other  but  in  Christ ;  if  the  disciples  could  have  saved  them- 
selves, they  would  not  have  awaked  Jesus  Christ ;  but  they  were 
sensible  that  no  one  could  save  them  but  he ;  and  therefore 
they  cried  out  unto  him ;  and  so  you,  who  are  under  the  sense 
of  sin,  who  are  in  fear  of  hell,  if  you  seek  unto  your  own  works, 
you  only  seek  your  own  death ;  for  there  is  no  fitness  in  you. 
I  speak  the  truth  in  Christ  Jesus,  I  lie  not,  there  is  no  fitness 
in  you,  but  a  fitness  for  eternal  damnation ;  for  what  are  you 
by  nature  but  children  of  wrath,  and  your  hearts  are  Satan's 
garrison  ?  Because  you  have  gone  to  church,  said  (he  prayers, 
gone  to  tho  sacrament,  and  done  no  one  any  harm,  you  speak 
peace  to  your  souls ;  and  all  is  in  peace  you  think,  and  yoor  case 
is  good  enough ;  but  indeed  all  is  a  false  peace,  and  if  you  have 
no  other  peace  than  this,  you  must  shortly  lie  down  in  ever- 
lasting flames  ;  this  is  an  ungrounded  self-created  peace,  and  if 
you  trust  to  this  peace,  you  will  perish. 

^But  do  as  the  disciples  did  when  they  were  in  distress ;  they 
go  to  Christy  and  say  to  him,  **  Lord,  save  us,  we  perish/*  I  oflfer 


:XXU.]      FOR  THB  PLEAStTRES  AND  PROFITS  OP  LIFE.  261 

you  salvation  this  day ;  the  door  of  mercy  is  not  yet  shut, 
fbere  does  yet  remain  a  sacrifice  for  sin,  for  all  tliat  will 
aocept  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ;  he  only  knows  the  inmost 
thoughts  of  thy  heart,  he  will  embrace  you  in  the  arms  of  his 
love  ;  he  sees  the  first  risings  of  grace  in  you,  and  would  will  • 
in^y  encourage  it :  the  angels  long  for  your  beiog  in  the  love 
and  favour  of  God ;  they  will  rejoice  to  see  you  turn  from  sin 
tanto  him.  All  the  ministers  of  the  blessed.  Jesus  would  be 
glad  to  be  instruments  to  turn  you  from  darkness  to  light,  and 
from  the  power  of  Satan  unto  God. 

And  he  saith  unto  them,  Why  are  ye  fearful^  O  ye  of  little 
faUh? 

And  so,  my  brethren,  I  may  say  to  you.  Why  arc  you  fearful 
to  leave  your  sins  and  turn  to  God  ?  O  turn  to  him,  turn  in  a 
senseof  yoar  own  unworthincss  ;  tell  him  how  polluted  you  are, 
how  vile,  and  be  not  faithless,  but  believing ;  do  not  go  in  your 
own  strength,  and  then  you  need  not  fear.  Why  fear  ye  that 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  will  not  accept  of  you?  your  sins  will 
be  so  binderance,  your  unworthiness  will  be  no  hiuderance;  if 
your  own  corrupt  hearts  do  not  keep  you  back,  or  if  your  own 
good  works  do  not  hinder  you  from  coming,  nothing  will  hinder 
Christ  from  receiving  of  you :  he  loves  to  see  poor  sinners 
coming  te  him,  he  is  pleased  to  see  them  lie  at  bis  feet  pleading 
his  promises ;  and  if  yon  thus  come  to  Christ,  he  will  not  send 
yon  away  without  his  Spirit;  no,  but  will  receive  and  bless 
you. 

O  do  not  put  a  slight  on  infinite  love :  what  would  you  have 
Christ  do  more?  Is  it  not  enough  for  him  to  come  on  purpose 
to  save?  Will  you  not  servo  God  in  your  souls,  as  well  as  with 
your  bodies  ?  If  not,  you  are  only  deceiving  yourselves,  and 
mocking  of  God  ;  he  must  have  the  heart.  O  ye  of  little  faith, 
why  are  ye  fearful  lest  he  should  not  accept  of  you?  If  you  will 
not  believe  me,  sure  you  will  believe  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  he 
has  told  you  that  he  will  receive  you,  then  why  tarry  ye,  and 
do  not  go  to  him  directly  ?  Does  he  desire  impossibilities  ?  It  is 
only,  *'  Give  me  thy  heart :  or,  does  he  want  your  heart  only 
for  the  same  end  as  the  devil  does,  to  make  you  miserable  ?  no, 
he  only  wants  you  to  believe  on  him,  that  you  might  be  saved. 
aids,  this  is  all  the  dear  Saviour  desires,  to  make  you  happy, 
that  you  may  leave  your  sins,  to  sit  down  eternally  with  him  at 
the  marriage  supper  of  the  Lamb. 

Then  he  arose,  and  rebuked  the  winds  and  the  sea,  and  there 
was  a  great  calm. 

Tlius,  you  see,  it  was  only  in  the  power  of  Christ  to  stop  the 
raging  of  the  sea ;  he  rebuked  it ;  the  disciples  might  have  spoken 
for  ever,  and  it  would  not  have  ceased :  ^o  it  is  with  the  word 
preached  ;  I  may  preach  to  you  while  I  live ;  I  may  speak  till 
I  can  speak  no  more ;  but  the  doctrines  of  Christ  will  never 
do  you  good,  unless  he  impress  them  upon  your  hearts:  O 
then,  in  all  thy  troubles  look  up  to  Christ,  that  he  may  rebuke 
them ;  and  if  be  speak  the  word,  then  they  shall  cease.    If  the 


262  THE  DANGER  OP  PARTING  WITH  CHRIST  [XXIf. 

Pharisees  of  this  generation  scoff  and  jeer  you,  if  they  say  all 
manner  of  evil  against  you,  do  not  answer  them ;  leave  it  unto 
Christ  to  rebuke  them ;  for  all  you  can  say,  will  be  of  no 
more  signification  than  the  disciples  speaking  to  the  sea ;  but 
when  Christ  speaks  the  word,  then  they  shall  cease  ;  let  it  not 
discourage  you,  for  if  you  will  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus,  you 
must  suffer  persecution. 

It  is  true,  that  those  that  are  sincerely  good,  are  set  up  for 
marks  for  every  one  to  shoot  at.  There  is  a  continual  enmity 
between  the  seed  of  the  woman  and  the  seed  of  the  serpent :  if 
you  were  of  the  world,  the  world  would  love  its  own;  but 
because  Christ  hath  chosen  you  out  of  the  world,  therefore  it 
hateth  you. 

Do  not  think  of  following  Christ  into  glory,  unless  you  go 
through  the  press  here.  Look  forward,  my  brethren,  into  eter- 
nity, and  behold  Christ  coming,  and  his  reward  with  him,  to  give 
a  kind  recompense  for  all  the  temptations  and  difficulties  of  this 
present  life. 

But  the  men  marvelled  saying,  What  manner  of  man  is  this, 
that  even  the  winds  and  the  seas  obey  him. 

The  men  of  the  ship  were  amazed,  to  see  the  miracle  that 
Jesus  Christ  wrought  only  by  his  word  ;  they  thought  be  was 
something  more  than  a  man.  And  have  not  we  as  much  reason 
to  admire,  that  when  we  are  overwhelmed  with  troubles  from 
within  and  without,  that  Jesus  Christ,  only  by  the  word  of  his 
power,  should  speak  peace,  and  then  there  is  peace  indeed. 
When  God  first  awakens  us  with  a  sense  of  sin,  and  sets  his 
terrors  in  array  against  us,  then  there  are  troubles  and  tempests ; 
for  Satan  having  got  possession,  before  he  will  give  place,  he 
will  fight  and  strive  hard  to  keep  the  soul  from  closing  with 
Jesus :  but  when  Christ  comes,  he  storms  the  heart,  he  breaks 
the  peace,  he  giveth  it  most  terrible  alarms  of  judgment  and 
hell,  he  sets  all  in  a  combustion  of  fear  and  sorrow,  till  he  hath 
forced  it  to  yield  to  his  mere  mercy,  and  take  him  for  its  gover- 
nor ;  then  Satan  is  cast  out,  then  the  storm  is  rebuked,  and  he 
establishes  a  firm  and  lasting  peace. 

Can  the  sea  be  still  while  the  wind  is  raging  ?  no,  it  is  impos- 
sible :  so  it  is,  that  there  can  be  no  peace  in  the  soul,  while  it 
is  at  enmity  with  Christ;  indeed,  it  may  flatter  itself,  and  speak 
peace,  but  there  oan  be  no  true  peace  :  though  thou,  O  Pharisee, 
may  harden  and  fortify  thy  hand  against  fear,  grief,  and  trouble, 
yet,  as  sure  as  God  is  true,  they  will  batter  down  thy  proud 
and  fortified  spirit,  and  seize  upon  it,  and  drive  thee  to  amaze- 
ment. This  will  be  done,  here  or  hereafter ;  here  in  mercy,  or 
hereafter  in  wrath  and  jujdgment 

O  my  brethren,  consider  what  Christ  hath  done,  and  you  will 
be  astonished  that  he  has  done  so  much  for  such  wicked  wretches 
as  you  and  I  arc.  If  you  are  easy  under  tlie  storm  and  tempest 
of  sin,  and  do  not  cry  to  Christ  for  salvation,  thou  art  in  a  dan- 
gerous condition :  and  it  is  a  wonder  to  consider,  how  a  man 
that  is  not  sure  of  having  made  his  peace  with  God,  can  cat. 


X%U.]     FOft  THE  PLEASURES  AND  PROFITS  OF  LIFE.  263 

or  drink,  or  live  in  peace ;  that  thou  art  not  afraid  when  thou 
liest  down,  that  thou  shouldest  awal^e  in  hell :  but  if  Christ 
speak  peace  unto  thy  soul,  who  can  then  spealktrouble  ?  None ; 
DO,  not  men  or  devils :  therefore  lie  down  at  the  feet  of  Christ 
whom  you  have  resisted,  and  say.  Lord,  what  wouldst  thou 
have  me  to  do  ?  and  he  will  rebuke  the  winds  and  seas  of  thy 
troubled  mind,  and  all  things  will  be  calm. 

And  when  he  was  came  to  the  other  side  into  the  country  of  the 
Gergesenes,  there  met  him  two  possessed  with  devils,  coming  out 
€f  tie  to»^,  exceeding  fierce,  so  that  no  man  might  pass  by  that 
way. 

The  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  went  about  doing  good  con- 
tinually, very  well  knew  that  he  should  meet  two  poor  men  in 
this  country  of  the  Gergesenes,  who  were  possessed  with  devils ; 
and  Jesus  Christ  went  on  purpose  that  way,  that  he  might 
relieve  them.  The  devil,  where  he  has  the  power,  never  wants 
will :  but  as  I  said  before,  so  I  say  again.  Though  the  devil  is  an 
enemy,  yet  he  is  a  chained  one ;  he  could  not  destroy  these  two 
poor  men,  he  could  not  hurt  the  people  that  passed  that  way, 
he  could  only  terrify  them :  and  thus  it  is  with  you;  the  devil 
tries  his  utmost  skill  and  power  to  frighten  you  from  coming 
to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  he  uses  the  utmost  of  his  endeavours 
to  keep  poor,  sick,  and  weary  sinners  from  coming  to  Jesus ; 
if  he  can  but  make  you  lose  your  souls,  it  is  the  end  he  aims  at.  • 

And  how  many  souls  does  he  keep  from  Christ,  for  fear  of 
reproach!  Many  thousands  would  willingly  see  Christ  in  his* 
glory,  in  the  world  to  come,  and  would  be  happy  with  him  there, 
but  they  are  afraid  of  being  now  laughed  at,  and  of  hearing  the 
Pharisees  say.  Here  is  another  of  his  followers :  they  are  sSrald 
of  losing  their  worldly  business,  and  of  being  counted  method- 
istically  mad,  and  fit  for  bedlam.  I  doubt  not  but  many  are  kept' 
from  Jesus  Christ,  for  fear  of  a  litUe  hurt  or  inconveniency. 

What  will  such  say,  when  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  shall  appear  in 
his  glory?  Would  you  be  glad  to  be  confessed  by  him  then,  you 
must  now  not  be  ashamed  of  confessing  him  before  men :  let  not- 
the  fierceness  of  the  devU  keep  you  back  from  Christ,  for  fear 
of  being  counted  fools ;  for  the  time  will  come,  when  it  will  be 
found  who  are  truly  wise,  and  who  are  truly  mad.  » 

Are  you  afraid  to  stand  up  for  the  cause  of  Christ  in  the 
world  ?  Dare  not  you  be  singularly  good  ?  Are  you  afraid  of 
being  members  of  Jesus  Christ  ?  I  tell  you,  such  persons  would 
cmcify  him  afresh,  were  he  in  the  world.  But  do  not  you,  my 
brethren,  so  learn  Christ ;  let  not  the  temptations  of  the  devil 
keep  yon  from  coming  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  he  may  be 
fierce,  he  may  hurry  you  from  place  to  place,  but  strive  with 
him,  so  that  he  may  not  drive  you  from  Christ ;  and  if  you  seek 
onto  Christ,  he  will  so  help  you,  that  you  shall  resist  the  devil, 
and  then  he  will  fly  from  you ;  Christ  will  dispossess  him,  be 
not  afraid  therefore  to  meet  Jesus  Christ ;  tdl  him  all  that  your 
souls  want,  and  he  will  give  it  to  you ;  and  you  shall  not  be  any  ■ 
k)nger  troubled  with  the  fierce  outrages  of  the  devil. 


M4  .  THB  DAKQBR   OP   PARTING   WITH   6HR1BT        [XXlt. 

And  they  cried  out,  spying.  What  have  we  to  do  with  thee,  Jesus, 

thou  Son  of  God!  Art  thou  come  to  torment  us  before  the  time  ? 

•  As  soon  as  the  devils  observed  Jesus  comiug  near,  then  they 

were  afraid,  lest  he  were  come  to  panish  thein  before  that  day 

of  accounts,  when  all  must  be  brought  to  judgment. 

The  devils  themselves  are  enough  to  convince  all  our  polite 
Arians  and  Socinians.  They  here  own  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
to  be  God  blessed  for  ever;  they  feel  his  power,  and  are  assured 
of  his  being  the  God  who  must  condemn  them  at  the  great  day 
of  accounts ;  and  tiiey  were  afraid  lest  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
were  come  to  punish  them  now.  But  though  the  devils  believe 
the  divinity  of  Christ,  yet  the  world  swarms  with  Arians  and 
Socinians. 

The  Arians  make  Christ  no  more  than  a  titular  God,  a  subor- 
dinate deity,  one  who  was  more  than  man,  and  yet  less  than  God ; 
that  he  was  a  prophet  sent  from  God,  they  own,  but  deny  him  to 
be  equal  with  the  Father.  But  I  hope,  my  brethren,  he  is  to 
you,  what  our  creed  makes  him,  God  of  God,  very  God  of  very 
Grod,  co-eternal  and  consubstantial  with  the  Father;  that  as 
tliere  was  not  a  moment  of  time  in  which  God  the  Father  was 
not,  so  there  is  not  a  moment  of  time  in  which  God  the  Son  was 
Bot.  For  he  says  himself,  **  AH  things  were  made  by  him ;"  and 
if  they  were  made  by  him,  he  must  be  God ;  and  wiroever  reads 
bat  the  word  of  God,  will  find  divine  homage  is  paid  to  him, 
^'and  that  he  thought  it  no  robbery  to  be  equal  with  God  ;"^  he  is 
^'  the  Alpha  and  Omega/'  These  and  a  great  many  more  places 
might  be  brought,  to  prove  the  divinity  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ; 
he  could  never  have  made  satisfaction  for  our  sins,  if  he  had  not 
been  God  as  well  as  man.  As  man,  he  sufiered ;  as  God,  he  satis- 
fied ;  so  was  God  and  man  in  one  person ;  he  took  our  natare 
upon  him,  and  was  ofiered  upon  the  cross  for  the  sins  of  all 
those  wlio  come  unto  him,  which  if  he  had  not  been  God,  he 
oould  have  never  satisfied  for.  It  may  be  proved,  even  to  a  de« 
monstration,  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  God,  and  that  he  is 
equal  with  the  Father. 

The  Socinians  do  not  go  so  far  as  the  others ;  they  look  on 
Christ  to  be  no  more  than  a  good  man,  who  told  the  people  their 
duty,  and  died  in  defence  of  the  doctrines  which  he  delivered 
onto  them. 

But  I  hope  there  are  none  such  liere,  that  have  so  low  and  dis- 
honourable thoughts  of  the  blessed  Jesus,  and  that  thus  despise 
the  divinity  of  the  Lord  who  bought  them.  No,  I  hope  better 
things  of  you,  and  things  that  accompany  salvation.  Think  you, 
that  any  one  who  denies  the  deity  ol*  Cln-ist  can  ever  be  saved 
by  him,  living  and  dying  in  that  state  ?  Surely  the  time  will  come, 
when  they  who  have  deuied  his  deity,  shall  feel  the  power  of  it 
hereaefter ;  they  shall  feel  that  he  is  God,  as  well  as  man ;  then  he 
will  be  owned  as  God  by  all  those  who  now  dare  to  deny  his 
truths ;  but  God  forbid  it  should  go  undetermined  till  then  !  Woe 
unto  the  polite  infidels  of  this  generation,  for  the  devils  will  rise 
up  in  judgment  against  them. 


XXJI.]        ROB  THB  PLBA6URE6  AND   PROFITS  OP  tlFB.         265 

If  any  such  are  here,  consider  what  you  ate  doing  of,  before 
it  is  too  late ;  retom,  return  ye  unto  the  Lord,  and  he  will  have 
merry  upon  you,  and  to  Jesus  Christ,  and  he  will  abundantly 
pardon.  O  my  friends,  let  me  beseech  you  to  consider  what 
you  are  about,  lest  you  fall  into  hell,  and  there  be  none  to  de- 
liver you. 

And  the  devils  besought  him^  saying.  If  thou  cast  ns  out^  suffer 
us  to  go  away  into  the  herd  of  swine.  And  he  said  unto  them^ 
Cro:  and  when  they  came  out,  they  went  into  the  herd  of  swine  ; 
and,  behold,  the  whole  herd  of  swine  ran  violently  down  a  steep 
place  into  the  sea,  and  perished  in  the  waters. 

Here  we  may  see,  that  no  sooner  had  the  devil  power,  but  ha 
puts  it  into  execution;  thus,  if  the  devil  has  but  power  to  tempt, 
or  to  hurry  a  soul,  O  how  grievous  a  tyrant  he  is,  hurrying  from 
one  temptation  to  another,  from  one  sin  unto  another,  and  would, 
if  it  were  possible,  hurry  you  ^  into  hell  with  as  much  violence 
as  he  did  the  poor  swine  into  the  sea ;  but  Christ  by  his  grace 
prevents  it  Jesus  Christ  died  for  souls,  and  therefore  the  devil 
cannot  do  with  them  as  he  will ;  he  may  have  the  will,  but  he 
cannot  get  the  power.  It  is  plain,  that  when  the  devil  himself, 
or  persecuting  men,  get  the  power,  they  will  harass  the  poor 
Christians ;  every  thing  is  too  good  for  them,  and  Ibey  are  not 
worthy  to  be  set  with  the  dogs  of  the  iBock.  My  brethren,  how 
joyftil  would  many  be,  if  die  laws  of  our  land  would  permit  them 
to  destroy  us ;  how  would  the  Pharisees  jiurry  uA  to  prison  and 
to  death  !  but  blessed  be  God,  he  does  not  say  to  them,  as  to  the 
devil,  "  Go :"  No,  he  bids  them  stay,  he  hedges  their  way  up  , 
with  thorns,  that  they  cannot  stir  to  hurt  us ;  they  would  fain, 
but  they  dare  not  destroy  us :  nothing  withholds  them  but  the 
power  of  the  blessed  Jesus.  And,  therefore,  be  not  afraid  of  their 
wrath,  though  it  is  cruel,  and  of  their  anger,  though  it  be  ierce : 
let  thera  shoot  their  arrows^  even  bitter  words,  against  us,  blessed 
be  God,  the  shield  of  faith  will  be  a  preservative  against  them  all. 

And  when  you  are  thus  preserved,  it  will  be  the  occasion  of 
joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost ;  though  many  look  on  the  joy  of  the  Holy 
Grfaost  as  enthusiasm  and  madness,  and  say  that  there  is  no  such 
thing ;  but  well  do  I  know  there  is,  it  carries  its  own  evidence 
along  with  it.  Plead  therefore  with  God,  in  the  name  of  Jesus 
Christ ;  continue  to  wrestle  with  him,  until  he  bestows  the  bless- 
ing upon  you,  and  gives  you  a  feeling  of  that  joy  which  the  world 
intermeddles  not  with,  and  which  they  are  strangers  to :  indeed, 
the  devil  may  stir  up  his  agents  to  hurry  us  from  one  trouble  to 
another;  but  it  wiUnot  signify,  for  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  will 
not  suffer  him  to  hurry  us  into  heU :  no,  but  will  give  us  his  Spi- 
rit, which  will  be  a  preservative  against  aH  the  assaults  of  the 
devil*  Now  see  what  followed  this  miracle,  which  Jesus  had 
wrought,  by  permitting  the  devil  to  enter  into  the  herd  of  swine. 

And  they  that  kept  them  fled,  and  went  their  ways  into  the 
cityj  and  told-every  thing,  and  what  was  btfallen  to  the  possess* 
id  of  the  devils. 

The  people  were  so  amazed  to  see  the  power  that  Christ  had. 


206  TUB  DANGER  OP  PARTING  WITH  CHRIST  [XXFI. 

and  the  malice  with  which  the  devil  was  possessed,  that  they 
were  afraid,  and  told  all  that  had  befallen  the  possessed  of  the 
devils ;  and  so,  when  the  Spirit  of  God  has  been  at  work  on 
your  souls,  and  you  are  brought  to  feel  the  power  of  God  upon 
your  hearts,  you  will  be  so  overjoyed,  that  you  will  tell  to  every 
one,  what  great  things  God  has  done  for  your  souls ;  you  wiU 
be  so  full  of  joy,  that  you  will  declare  the  whole  working  of  God 
on  your  hearts,  and  you  will  declare  how  you  have  been  enabled 
to  overcome  Satan,  and  how  you  were  affected  with  such  a  ser- 
mon, in  such  a  place,  and  at  such  a  time. 

You  will  then  love  to  talk  of  Jesus  ;  no  conversation  will  be 
so  pleasing  as  that  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  no,  he  will  be 
altogether  lovely  unto  you,  when  you  have  once  tasted  of  his 
love,  and  felt  the  power  of  his  grace  upon  your  hearts. 

And  behold  the  whole  dty  came  out  to  meet  Jesus,  and  when 
they  saw  him,  they  besought  him  that  he  loould  depart  out  of  their 
coasts. 

The  whole  city  came  to  meet  Jesus,  not  to  worship  nor  to 
thank  him  for  the  releasing  of  the  two  poor  men  who  were 
possessed ;  no,  but  to  beseech  him  to  go  from  them ;  they  valued 
their  swine  more  than  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  had  rather 
part  from  him,  than  them :  and  have  we  not  among  us  thousands 
who  call  themselves  Christians,  who  had  rather  part  with  Christ 
than  their  pleasures  ?  A  play,  a  ball,  or  an  assembly,  is  far  more 
agreeable  to  them  than  the  company  and  presence  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ :  if  they  can  but  indulge  their  sensual  appetite,  please 
and  pamper  their  bellies,  satisfy  the  lust  of  the  eye,  thelustof  the 
flesh,  and  the  prideof  life,  they  regard  no  more,  but  rest  contented, 
as  if  they  were  to  live  here  always.  O  my  dear  brethren,  I  hope 
none  of  you  can  rest  contented  with  such  proceedings  as  these, 
but  that  you  like  the  company  of  the  Lord  Jesus  too  well,  to  part 
with  him  for  a  few  delights  of  this  life :  and  are  there  not  many 
who  part  with  Christ  for  their  own  good  works,  and  think  they 
can  go  to  heaven  if  they  do  but  go  to  church,  and  say  their 
prayers,  and  take  the  sacrament  ?  But  alas !  they  will  be  much 
deceived,  for  if  they  rest  in  any  thing  short  of  the  Lord  Jesus, 
if  they  do  not  make  him  the  chief  comer-stone,  they  will  fail 
infinitely  short  of  what  they  flattered  themselves  to  attain  unto. 

I  would  speak  a  few  words  to  you  before  I  part  from  you 
this  evening,  by  way  of  application.  Let  me  beseech  you  to 
come  to  Jesus  Christ ;  I  invite  you  all  to  come  to  him,  and 
receive  him  as  your  Lord  and  Saviour ;  he  is  ready  to  receive 
you:  if  yon  are  afraid  to  go  because  you  are  in  a  lost  condition, 
he  came  to  save  such  ;  and  to  such  as  were  weary  and  heavy 
laden,  such  as  feel  the  weight  and  burden  of  their  sins,  he  has 
promised  he  will  give  rest :  such  as  feel  the  weight  and  burden  of 
their  sins  on  their  souls,  a  burden  too  heavy  for  them  to  bear, 
are  weary  of  it,  and  know  not  how  to  obtain  deliverance  of  it, 
in  the  name  of  my  Lord  and  Master,  I  invite  you  to  come  to  him, 
that  you  may  find  rest  for  your  souls. 

If  you  will  but  come  unto  him,  he  will  not  reproach  you^  as 


xxil]    for  thb  pleasures  and„propit8  op  .life.         207 

justly  he  might ;  be  will  not  reflect  upon  you  for  not  coming 
sooner  unto  him  ;  no,  my  dear  brethren,  he  will  rejoice  and  be 
glad,  and  will  say  unto  you, ''  Son,  daughter,  be  of  good  cheer, 
your  sins  are  forgiven  you,"  these  words  he  said  to  others ;  and 
if  you  will  but  come  unto  him,  by  faith  in  his  blood,  he  is  ready 
to  say  the  same  unto  you  now,  as  he  did  to  them  formerly,  for, 
''  be  is  the  same  to-day,  yesterday,  and  for  ever ;"  though  he 
sufiered  on  the  cross  seventeen  hundred  years  ago,  yet  he  is  the 
same  in  goodness  and  power  as  ever  he  was. 

He  calls  you  by  his  ministers ;  O  come  unto  him,  beg  of  him 
to  break  your  stubborn  hearts,  that  you  may  be  willing  tt>  be 
brought  to  him  in  his  own  way,  to  be  made  poor  in  spirit,  and 
entitled  to  an  inheritance  among  them  that  are  sanctified. 

O  come  and  drink  of  the  water  of  life ;  you  may  buy  without 
m<Miey  and  without  price ;  he  is  labouring  to  bring  you  back 
from  sin  and  from  Satan,  unto  himself:  open  the  door  of  your 
hearts,  and  the  King  of  glory  shall  enter  in.  But  if  you  are 
strangers  to  this  doctrine,  and  account  it  foolishness;  or^  if 
you  think  you  have  enough  of  your  own  to  recommend  you  to 
the  favour  of  God,  however  you  may  go  to  church,  or  receive 
the  sacrament,  you  have  no  true  love  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ; 
you  are  strangers  to  the  truth  of  grace  in  your  hearts,  and  are 
unacquainted  with  the  new-birth :  you  do  not  know  what  it  is 
to  have  your  natures  changed ;  and  till  you  do  experience  these 
things,  you  can  never  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God. 

What  shall  I  say,  my  brethren,  unto  you  ?  My  heart  is  full,  it 
is  quite  full,  and  I  must  speak,  or  I  shall  burst.  What,  do  you 
think  your  souls  of  no  value?  do  you  esteem  them  as  not  worth 
saving?  Are  your  pleasures  worth  more  than  your  souls?  Had 
you  rather  regard  the  diversions  of  this  life,  than  the  salvation 
of  your  souls  ?  If  so,  you  will  never  be  partakers  with  him  in 
glory ;  but  if  you  come  unto  him,  he  will  give  you  a  new  nature, 
supply  you  with  his  grace  here,  and  bring  you  to  glory  hereafter ; 
and  there  you  may  sing  praises  and  hallelujahs  to  the  Lamb  for 
ever. 

And  may  this  be  the  happy  end  of  all  who  hear  me!  may  the 
Lord  guide  you  by  his  counsel,  until  he  comes  to  fetch  you  to 
heaven,  and  make  you  partakers  of  his  glory  ! 

May  he  direct  you  in  his  ways,  and  lead  you  in  those  paths 
which  lead  to  everlasting  life !  May  you  be  holy  here,  and  happy 
hereafter :  may  your  lives  answer  the  professsion  you  make, 
that  we  may  all  be  found  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  when  he  shall  come  to  judge  the  world  according  to  our 
works,  whether  they  be  good  or  evil !  and  that  we  then  may  be 
presented  faultless  before  the  presence  of  his  glory  with  exceed- 

in^joy- 
Which  God  of  bis  infinite  mercy  grant,  &c. 


208  MARKB  OF  A  TBCB  COMVBRSIOV.  fXXIII. 

SERMON  XXIIl. 

MAEK8   OP   A    TRUS   CONVERSION. 

Venh/,  I  say  unto  you.  Except  ye  be  converted,  and  become  as 
little  children,ye  shall  not  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven. — 
Matt,  xiiii.  3. 

I  SUPPOSE  I  may  take  it  for  granted,  that  all  of  you,  among 
whom  I  am  oow  about  to  preach  the  kingdom  of  God,  are  fully 
convinced  that  it  is  appointed  for  all  mea  once  to  die,  and  that 
ye  all  really  believe  that  after  death  comes  the  judgment,  and 
that  the  conseqa»K)e  of  that  judgment  will  be,  that  ye  must  be 
doomed  io  dwell  in  the  blackness  of  darkness,  or  ascend  to 
dwell  with  the  blessed  God,  for  ever  and  ever.    I  may  take  it 
for  granted  also,  that  whatever  your  practice  in  common  life 
maybe,  there  is  not  one,  though  ever  so  profligate  and  abandoned, 
but  hopes  to  go  to  that  place  which  the  scriptures  call  heaven, 
whee  he  dies.    And,  {  think,  if  I  know  any  thing  of  mine  own 
heart,  my  heart's  desire,  as  well  as  my  prayer  to  God,  for  you 
|dl,  is,  that  I  may  see  you  »tting  down  in  the  kingdom  of  our 
heavenly  Father.   But  then,  thou^  we  all  hope  to  go  to  heaven 
when  we  die,  yet  if  we  may  judge  by  people's  lives,  and  our 
Lord  says,  '^  that  by  their  fruits  we  may  know  them  ;'M  am 
afraid  it  will  be  found,  that  thousands,  and  ten  thousands,  who 
hope  to  go  to  this  blessed  place  after  death,  are  not  now  in  the 
way  to  it  while  they  live.    Though  we  call  ourselves  Christians, 
and  would  consider  it  as  an  affront  put  upon  us,  for  any  one  to 
doubt  whether  we  are  Christians  or  not ;  yet  there  are  a  great 
many,  who  bear  the  name  of  Christ,  that  yet  do  not  so  much  as 
know  what  real  Christianity  is.     Hence  it  is,  that  if  you  ask  a 
great  many,  upon  what  their  hopes  of  heaven  are  founded,  they 
will  tell  you,  that  they  belong  to  this,  or  that,  or  the  other  deno- 
mination and  part  of  Christians,  into  which  Christendom  is  now 
unhappily  divided.  If  you  ask  others,  upon  what  foundation  they 
have  built  their  hope  of  heaven,  they  will  tell  you,  that  they  have 
been  baptised,  that  their  fathers  and  mothers  presented  them  to 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  their  infancy;  and  though  instead  of 
fighting  under  Christ's  banner,  they  have  been  fighting  against 
him  almost  ever  since  they  were  baptized,  yet  because  they 
have  been  admitted  to  church,  and  their  names  are  in  the  regis- 
ter-book of  the  parish,  therefore  they  will  make  us  believe  Uiat 
their  names  are  also  written  in  the  book  of  life.    But  a  great 
many,  who  will  not  build  their  hopes  of  salvation  upon  such  a 
sorry  rotten  foundation  as  this,  yet  if  they  are,  what  we  gene- 
rally call,  negatively  good  people ;  if  they  live  so  as  their  neigh- 
bours cannot  say  that  they  do  any  body  barm,  they  do  not  doubt 
but  they  shall  be  happy  when  they  die ;  nay,  I  have  found  many 
such  die,  as  the  scripture  speaks,  *' without  any  bands  in  their 
death/'    And  if  a  person  is  what  the  world  calls  an  honest 
moral  man,  if  he  does  justly,  and,  what  the  world  calls,  loves  a 


XXIIL]  marks  of   a   true  COMYBRBIOir.  909 

little  mercy,  is  now  and  then  good-natored,  reacheth  out  his 
liand  to  the  poor,  receives  the  sacrament  once  or  twice  a  year, 
and  is  ontwsurdly  sober  and  honest;  the  world  looks  npon  such 
an  one  as  a  Qiristian  indeed,  and  doubtless  we  are  to  judge 
charitably  of  eyery  such  person.  There  are  many  likewise  who 
go  on  in  a  round  of  duties,  a  modd  of  performances,  that  think 
they  shall  go  to  heaven;  but  if  you  examine  them,  tiioagh  they 
have  a  Christ  in  their  heads,  they  have  no  Christ  in  their 
hearts. 

Tiie  Lord  Jesus  Christ  luiew  this  full  wdl ;  be  knew  how  des- 
perately wicked  and  deceitful  men's  hearts  were ;  he  knew  very 
well  bow  many  would  go  to  hell  even  by  the  very  gates  of  hea- 
ven, how  many  would  climb  up  even  to  the  door,ai]^  go  so  near 
as  to  knock  at  it,  and  yet  after  all  be  dismissed  with  a  '^Verily, 
I  know  thee  not."  The  Lord,  therefore,  plainly  tells  us,  what 
great  change  must  be  wrought  in  us,  and  what  must  be  done  for 
us,  before  we  can  have  any  well-grounded  hopes  of  entering  into 
the  kingdom  of  heaven.  Hence,  be  tells  Nicodemus,  ^'that 
unless  a  man  be  bom  again,  and  from  above,  and  unless  a  man 
be  bom  of  water  and  of  die  Spirit,  he  cannot  enter  into  the  king- 
dom of  Grod."  And  of  all  the  solemn  declarations  of  our  Lord, 
I  mean  with  respect  to  this,  perhaps,  the  words  of  the  text  are 
one  of  the  most  solemn,  '^Except,  f  says  Christ)  ye  be  converted, 
and  become  as  little  children,  ye  shall  not  enter  into  the  king-, 
dom  of  heaven/'  The  words,  if  you  look  back  to  the  context, 
aro  plainly  directed  to  the  disciples ;  for  we  are  told,  ''  that  at 
the  same  time  came  the  disciples  unto  Jesus."  And  I  think  it 
is  plain  from  many  parts  of  scripture,  that  these  diciples,  to 
whom  our  Lord  addressed  himself  at  this  time,  were  in  some 
degree  converted  before.  If  we  take  the  words  strictly,  Uiey 
are  applicable  only  to  those,  that  have  already  gotten  some, 
though  but  weak,  faith  in  Christ.  Our  Lord  means,  that  though 
they  had  already  tasted  the  grace  of  God,  yet  there  was  so 
much  of  the  old  man,  so  much  indwdling  sin,  and  conruption, 
yet  remaining  in  their  hearts,  that  unless  they  were  more  con- 
verted than  iSkey  were,  unless  a  greater  diange  past  upon  their 
souls,  and  sanctification  was  still  carried  on,  they  could  give  but 
very  Uttle  evidence  of  their  belonging  to  his  kingdom,  which  was 
not  to  be  set  up  in  outward  grandeur,  as  they  supposed,  but 
was  to  be  a  spiritual  kingdom,  begun  here,  but  ccmpleted  in  the 
kingdom  of  God  hereafter*  But  diough  the  words  had  a  pecu- 
liar reference  to  our  Lord's  disciples ;  yet  as  our  Lord  makes 
such  a  declaration  as  this  in  other  places  of  scripture,  especially 
in  tiiat  discourse  to  Nicodemus,  I  bdieve  the  vrords  may  be 
justly  applied  to  saints  and  sinners;  and  as  I  suppose  there 
are  two  sorts  of  people  here,  some  who  know  Christ,  and  some 
of  yoa  who  do  not  know  him ;  some  who  are  converted,  and 
some  who  are  strangers  to  conversion,  I  shall  endeavour  so  to 
speak,  that  if  God  shall  be  pleased  to  assist  me,  and  to  give  you 
in  hearing  ear  and  an  obedient  hearty  both  saints  and  sinners 
may  have  tbeir  portion. 


270  MARKS   OP   A    TRUE   CONVERSION.  ^  [XXIH. 

First,  I  shall  endeayonr  to  shew  you  in  what  respects  we  are 
to  understand  this  assertion  of  our  Lord's,  *'  that  we  must  be 
converted,  and  become  like  little  children/'     I  shall  then, 

•  Secondly,  Speak  to  those  who  profess  a  little  of  this  childlike 
temper. 

And  Lastly,  Shall  speak  to  yon,  who  have  no  reason  to  think 
that  this  change  has  ever  past  upon  your  souls.     And, 

•  First,  I  shall  endeavour  to  shew  you,  what  we  are  to  under- 
stand by  our  Lord's  sayinj^,  "  Except  ye  be  converted  and  be- 
come as  little  children."  But  I  think,  before  I  speak  to  this 
point,  it  may  be  proper  to  premise  one  or  two  particulars. 

.  1.  I  think,  that  the  words  plainly  imply,  that  before  you  or  I 
can  have  any  well-grounded,  scriptural  hope,  of  being  happy  in 
a  future  state,  there  must  be  some  great,  some  notable,  and 
amazing  change  pass  upon  our  souls.  I  believe,  there  is  not 
one  adult  person  in  the  congregation,  but  will  readily  confess, 
that  a  great  change  hath  past  upon  their  bodies,  since  they  came 
first  into  the  world,  and  were  infants  dandled  upon  their  mothers 
knees.  It  is  true,  ye  have  no  more  members  than  ye  had  then ; 
but  how  are  these  altered !  Though  you  are  in  one  respect  the 
^ame  ye  were,  for  the  number  of  your  limbs,  and  as  to  the  shape 
of  your  body,  yet  if  a  person  that  knew  you  when  ye  were  in 
your  cradle,  had  been  absent  from  you  for  some  years,  and  saw 
you  when  grown  up,  ten  thousand  to  one  if  he  would  know  you 
at  all,  ye  are  so  altered,  so  different  from  what  ye  were,  when  yo 
were  little  ones.  And  as  the  words  plainly  imply,  that  there  has 
a  great  change  past  upon  our  bodies  since  we  were  children,  so 
before  we  can  go  to  heaven,  there  must  as  great  a  change  pass 
upon  our  souls :  our  souls  considered  in  a  physical  sense  are 
still  the  same,  there  is  to  be  no  philosophical  change  wrought  on 
them ;  but  then,  as  for  our  temper,  habit,  and  conduct,  we  must 
be  so  changed  and  altered,  that  those  who  knew  us  the  other 
day,  when  in  a  state  of  sin,  and  before  we  knew  Christ,  and  are 
acquainted  with  us  now,  must  see  such  an  alteration,  that  they 
may  stand  as  much  amazed  at  it,  as  a  person  at  the  alteration 
wrought  on  any  person  he  has  not  seen  for  twenty  years  from 
his  infancy. 

2.  But  I  think  it  proper  to  premise  something  farther,  because 
this  text  is  the  grand  stronghold  of  Arminians,  and  others. 
They  learn  of  the  devil  to  bring  texts  to  propagate  bad  princi* 
pies :  when  the  devil  had  a  mind  to  tempt  Jesus  Christ,  because 
Christ  quoted  scripture,  therefore  Satan  did  so  too.    And  such 

Eersons,  that  their  doctrine  and  bad  principles  may  go  down  the 
etter,  would  fain  persuade  unwary  and  unstable  souls,  that 
they  are  founded  upon  the  word  of  God.  Though  the  doctrine 
of  original  sin  is  a  doctrine  written  in  such  legible  characters 
in  the  word  of  Grod,  that  he  who  runs  may  read  it;  and  though, 
I  think,  every  thing  without  us,  and  every  thing  within  us, 
plainly  proclaims  that  we  are  fallen  creatures ;  though  the  very 
heathen,  who  had  no  other  light  but  the  dim  light  of  unassisted 
reason,  complained  of  this,  tor  they  felt  the  wound,  and  disco 


XXIU.]  MARK^   OP   A   TRUE   CONVERSION.  271 

vend  the  disease,  bat  were  igoorant  of  the  cause  of  it ;  yet  there 
are  too  many  persons,  of  those  who  have  been  baptized  in  the 
name  of  Christ,  that  dare  to  speak  against  the  doctrine  of  original 
sin,  and  are  angry  with  those  ill-natured  ministers,  who  paint 
man  in  such  black  colours.  Say  they,  ''  It  cannot  be  that  chil- 
dren come  into  the  world  with  the  guilt  of  Adam's  sin  lying 
upon  them/'  Why?  Desire  them  to  prove  it  from  scriptiire, 
and  they  will  urge  this  very  text,  our  Lord  tells  us,  *' Except  ye 
be  converted,  and  become  as  little  children,  ye  shall  nqt  enter 
into  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  Now,  their  argument  runs  thus. 
It  is  implied  in  the  words  of  the  text,  ''that  little  childrcfn  are 
innocent,  and  that  they  come  into  the  world  like  a  mere  blank 
piece  of  white  paper,  otherwise  our  Lord  must  ai^ue  absurdly, 
for  he  could  never  pretend  to  say,  that  we  must  be  converted, 
and  be  made  like  wicked  creatures ;  that  would  be  no  conver- 
sion.'' But,  my  dear  friends,  this  is  to  make  Jesus  Christ  speak 
what  he  never  intended,  and  what  cannot  be  deduced  from  his 
words.  That  little  children  are  guilty,  I  mean,  that  they,  are 
conceived  and  bom  in  sin,  is  plain  from  the  whole  tenor  of  the 
book  of  God.  David  was  a  man  after  Grod's  own  heart,  yet, 
says  he,  ''I  was  conceived  in  sin."  Jeremiah,  speaking  of  every 
one's  heart,  says,  ^*  The  heart  of  man  is  deceitful  and  desperately 
wicked  above  all  things."  God's  servants  unanimously  declare, 
(and  Paul  cites  it  from  one  of  them,)  "  that  we  are  altogether 
now  become  abominable,  altogether  gone  out  of  the  way  of  ori- 
ginal righteousness,  there  is  not  one  of  us  that  doeth  good,  (by 
nature,)  no,  not  one."  And  I  appeal  to  any  of  you  that  are 
mothers  and  fathers,  if  ye  do  not  discern  original  sin  or  corrup- 
tion in  your  children,  as  soon  as  they  come  into  the  world ;  and 
as  they  grow  up,  if  ye  do  not  discover  self-will,  and  an  aversion 
to  goodness.  What  is  the  reason  your  children  are  so  averse  to 
instruction,  but  because  they  bring  enmity  into  the  world  with 
them,  against  a  good  and  gracious  God?  So  then,  it  is  plain 
from  scripture  and  fact,  that  children  are  bom  in  sin,  and  con- 
sequently that  they  are  children  of  wrath.  And  for  my  part,  I 
think,  that  the  death  of  every  child  is  a  plain  proof  of  original 
sin ;  sickness  and  death  came  into  the  world  by  sin,  and  it  seems 
not  consistent  with  God's  goodness  and  justice,  to  let  a  little 
child  be  sick  or  die,  unless  Adam's  first  sin  was  imputed  to  him. 
If  any  charge  God  with  injustice  for  imputing  Adam's  sin  to  a 
Httle  chOd,  behold  we  have  gotten  a  second  Adam,  to  bring  our 
children  to  him.  Therefore,  when  our  Lord  says,  ''  Unless  ye 
are  converted,  and  become  as  little  children,"  we  are  not  to 
understand,  as  though  our  Lord  would  insinuate  that  little  chil- 
dren are  perfectly  innocent;  but  in  a  comparative,  and,  as  I 
shall  shew  you  by  and  by,  in  a  rational  sense.  Little  children 
are  innocent,  compare  them  with  grown  people ;  but  take  them  as 
they  ne,  and  as  they  come  into  the  world,  they  have  hearts  that 
are  sensual,  and  minds  which  are  carnal.  And  I  mention  this 
with  the  greatest  concern,  because  I  verily  believe,  unless 
parents  are  convinced  of  tUs,  they  will  never  take  proper  care 


272  MARKS  OF  A  TRUE  C0NVBR6I0N.  [XXIlf. 

of  their  children's  education.  If  parents  were  convinced^  that 
.children's  hearts  were  so  bad  as  they  are,  they  would  never  be 
fond  of  letting  them  go  to  balls,  assemblies,  and  plays,  the  natu- 
ral tendency  of  which  is,  to  debauch  their  minds,  and  make  them 
the  children  of  the  devil.  If  parents  were  convinced  of  this,  I 
believe  they  would  pray  more  when  they  bring  their  children  to 
be  baptized,  and  would  not  make  it  a  mere  matter  of  form.  And 
I  believe,  if  they  really  were  convinced  that  their  children  were 
conceived  in  sin,  they  would  always  put  up  that  petition  before 
their  children  came  into  the  world,  which  I  have  heard  a  good 
woman  always  did  put  up.  Lord  Jesus,  let  me  never  bear  a  child 
for  hell  or  the  devil !  O  !  is  it  not  to  be  feared,  that  thousands 
of  children  will  appear  at  the  great  day  before  God,  and  in  pre«- 
sence  of  angels  and  men  will  say.  Father  and  mother,  next  to 
the  wickedness  of  mine  own  heart,  I  owe  my  damnation  to  your 
bad  education  of  me. 

Having  premised  these  two  particulars,  I  now  proceed  to 
shew  in  what  sense  we  are  really  to  understand  the  words,  that 
we  must  be  converted,  and  become  like  little  children.  The 
evangelist  tdls  as,  that  the  disciples  at  this  time  came  unto 
Jesus,  saying,  Who  is  the  greatest  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  ? 
These  disciples  had  imbibed  the  common  prevailing  notion,  that 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  was  to  be  a  temporal  prince ;  they  dream* 
ed  of  nothing  but  of  being  ministers  of  state,  of  sitting  on  Christ's 
right  hand  in  his  kingdom,  and  lording  it  over  God's  people  ; 
they  thought  themselves  qualified  for  state  offices,  as  generally 
ignorant  people  are  apt  to  conceive  of  themselves.  Well,  say 
they,  ''Who  is  the  greatest  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  V  Which 
of  us  shall  have  the  chief  management  of  public  afiairs  ?  A  pretty 
question  for  a  few  poor  fishermen,  who  scarcely  knew  how  to 
drag  their  nets  to  snore,  much  less  how  to  govern  a  kingdom. 
Our.  Lord,  therefore,  in  the  second  verse,  to  mortify  them,  calls 
a  little  child,  and  sets  him  in  the  midst  of  them.  This  action 
was  as  much  as  if  our  Lord  had  said, ''  Poor  creatures,  your 
imaginations  are  verv  towering ;  you  dispute  who  shall  be  great- 
est in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  ;  I  will  make  this  little  child  preach 
to  you,  or  I  will  preach  to  you  by  him:  Verily  I  say  unto  you, 
I  who  am  truth  itself,  I  who  know  in  what  manner  my  subjects 
are  to  enter  into  my  kingdom ;  I  say  unto  you,  Ye  are  so  far 
from  being  in  a  right  temper  for  my  kingdom,  that  except  ye  be 
converted,  and  become  as  this  little  child,  ye  shall  not  enter 
into  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  unless  ye  be,  comparatively  speak- 
ing, as  loose  to  the  world,  as  loose  to  the  crowns,  sceptres, 
and  kindoms,  and  earthly  things,  as  this  poor  little  child  I  have 
in  my  hand,  ye  shall  not  enter  into  my  kingdom."  So  that  what 
our  Lord  is  speaking  of,  is  not  the  innocency  of  little  children, 
if  you  consider  the  relation  they  stand  in  to  God,  and  as  they 
are  in  themselves,  when  brought  into  the  world  ;  hut  what  our 
Lord  means  is,  that  as  to  ambition,  and  lust  after  the  world,  we 
must  in  this  sense  become  as  little  children.  Is  there  never  a 
little  boy  or  girl  in  this  congregation?  Ask  a  poor  little  child 


%   • 


[.]  MARKS   OP   A   TRUE   CONVERSION.  378 

that  can  jnst  speak  about  a  crown,  sceptre,  or  kingdom,  the 
poor  creature  has  no  notion  about  it :  give  a  little  boy  or  girl  a 
small  thing  to  play  with,  it  will  leave  the  world  to  other  people. 
Now,  ia  this  sense  we  must  be  converted  and  become  as  little 
children;  that  is,  we  must  be  as  loose  to  the  world,  compara- 
tively speaking,  as  a  little  child. 

Do  not  mistake  me,  I  am  not  going  to  persuade  you  to  shut 
up  your  shops,  or  leave  your  business ;  I  am  not  going  to  per- 
suade you,  that  if  you  will  be  Christians,  ye  must  be  turned  ^her- 
mits, and  retire  out  of  the  world  :  ye  cannot  leave  your  wicked 
hearts  behind  you,  when  you  leave  the  world  ;  for  I  find,  when  I 
am  alone,  my  wicked  heart  has  followed  me,  go  where  I  wilL 
No,  the  religion  of  Jesus  is  a  social  religion.  But  though  Jesus 
Christ  doth  not  call  us  to  go  out  of  the  world,  shut  up  our  shops^ 
and  leave  our  children  to  be  provided  for  by  miracles  ;  yet  this 
must  be  said,  to  the  honour  of  Christianity,  if  we  be  really  con- 
verted, we  shall  be  loose  from  the  world.  Though  we  be  engaged 
in  it;  and  be  obliged  to  work  for  our  children ;  though  we  be 
obliged  to  follow  trades  and  merchandise,  and  to  be  serviceable 
to  the  commonwealth,  yet  if  we  be  real  Christians,  we  shall  be 
loose  to  the  world  :  though  I  will  not  pretend  to  say,  that  all  real 
Christians  have  attained  to  the  same  degree  of  spiritual  minded- 
ness.  This  is  the  primary  meaning  of  these  words,  that  we  must 
be  converted,  and  become  as  little  children  ;  nevertheless,  I  sup- 
pose the  words  are  to  be  understood  in  other  senses. 

When  our  Lord  says  we  must  be  converted  and  become  as 
little  children,  I  suppose  he  means  also,  that  we  must  be  sensi-, 
hie  of  our  weakness,  comparatively  speaking,  as  a  little  child. 
Every  one  looks  upon  a  little  child  as  a  poor,  weak  creature, 
as  one  that  ought  to  go  to  school,  and  learn  some  new  lesson 
every  day ;  and  as  simple  and  artless :  one  without  guile,  hav- 
ing not  learned  the  abominable  art  called  dissimulation.  Now, 
in  all  these  senses,  I  believe,  we  are  to  understand  the  words  of 
the  text: — Are  little  children  sensible  of  their  weakness?  Must 
they  be  led  by  the  hand  ?  Must  we  take  hold  of  them  or  they 
will  fall  ?  So,  if  we  be  converted,  if  the  grace  of  God  be  really 
in  our  hearts,  my  dear  friends,  however  we  may  have  thought 
of  ourselves  once,  whatever  were  our  former  high  exalted  ima- 
ginations, yet  we  shall  now  be  sensible  of  our  weakness :  we 
shall  no  more  say,  "  We  are  rich  and  increased  with  goods,  and 
lack  nothing ;  we  shall  be  inwardly  poor,  we  shall  feel  '*  that  we 
are  poor,  miserable,  blind,  and  naked."  And  as  a  little  child 
gives  up  its  hand  to  be  guided  by  a  parent  or  a  nurse,  so  those 
who  are  truly  converted,  and  are  real  Christians,  will  give  up  their 
heart,  their  understandings,  their  wills,  their  affections,  to  be 
guided  by  the  word,  providence,  and  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord. 
Hence  it  is,  that  the  apostle,  speaking  of  the  sons  of  God,  says. 
As  many  as  are  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God;  they  are  (and  to  be  sure 
he  means  they  only  are)  thci  sons  of  God." 

And  as  little  children  look  upon  themselves  to  be  ignorant 
creatures,  so  those  that  are  converted  do  look  upon  themselves 

*  n 


374  MARKS   OF  A   TRUE   CONVERSION.  [XXIII. 

as  igDorant  too.  Hence  it  is^  that  John,  speaking  to  Christians, 
calls  them  little  children ;  **  I  have  written  unto  you,  little  chil- 
dren." And  Christ's  flock  is  called  a  little  flock,  not  only  because 
little  in  number,  but  also  because  those  who  are  members  of 
his  flock  are  indeed  little  in  their  own  eyes.  Hence  that  great 
man,  that  great  apostle  of  the  Gentiles,  that  spiritual  father  of 
so  many  thousands  oC  souls,  that  man,  who,  in  th»  opinion  of  Dr. 
Goodwin,  "  sits  nearest  the  Grod-man,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  in 
glory,"  that  chosen  vessel,  the  apostle  Paul,  when  he  speaks  of 
himself,  says,  **  Unto  me,  who  am  less  than  the  least  of  all  saints, 
is  this  grace  given,  that  I  should  preach  among  the  Gentiles  the 
unsearchable  riches  of  Christ."  Perhaps  some  of  you,  when  you 
read  these  words,  will  be  apt  to  think  that  Paul  did  not  speak 
true,  that  he  did  not  really  feel  what  he  said ;  because  you  judge 
Paul's  heart  by  your  own  proud  hearts  ;  but  the  more  ye  get  of 
the  grace  of  God,  and  the  more  ye  are  partakers  of  the  divine 
life,  the  more  will  ye  see  your  own  meanness  and  vileness,  and 
be  less  in  your  own  eyes.  Hence  it  is,  that  Mr.  Flavel,  in  his 
book  called.  Husbandry  Spiritualized,  compares  young  Chris- 
tians to  green  com ;  which,  before  it  is  ripe,  shoots  up  very 
high,  but  there  is  little  solidity  in  it :  whereas,  an  old  Christian 
is  like  ripe  com  ;  it  doth  not  lift  up  its  head  so  much,  but  then 
it  is  more  weighty,  and  fit  to  be  cut  down,  and  put  into  the  far- 
mer's bam.  Young  Christians  are  also  like  little  rivulets ;  ye 
know  rivulets  are  shallow,  yet  make  great  noise;  but  an  old 
Christian,  he  makes  not  much  noise,  he  goes  on  sweetly,  like  a 
deep  river  sliding  into  the  ocean. 

And  as  a  little  child  is  looked  upon  as  a  harmless  creature, 
and  generally  speaks  true ;  so,  if  we  are  converted  and  become 
as  little  children,  we  shall  be  guileless  as  well  as  harmless.  What 
said  the  dear  Redeemer  when  he  saw  Nathanael  ?  As  though 
it  were  a  rare  sight,  he  gazed  upon,  and  would  have  others  gas^ 
upon  it ;  "  Behold  an  Israelite  indeed !"  Why  so  ?  **  In  whom 
is  no  guile."  Do  not  mistake  me ;  I  am  not  saying  that  Chris- 
tians ought  not  to  be  prudent ;  they  ought  exceedingly  to  pray 
to  God  for  pradence,  otherwise  they  may  follow  the  delusions  of 
the  devil,  and  by  their  impradence  give  wrong  touches  to  the 
ark  of  God.  It  was  the  lamentation  of  a  great  man,  "  God  has 
given  me  many  things,  but  God  has  not  given  me  prudence." 
Therefore,  when  I  say  a  Christian  must  be  guileless,  I  no  not 
mean  he  should  expose  himself,  and  lie  open  to  every  one's 
assault :  we  should  pray  for  the  wisdom  of  the  serpent,  though 
we  shall  generally  learn  this  vrisdom  by  our  blunders  and  im- 
pmdence :  and  we  must  make  some  advance  in  Christianity,  be- 
fore we  know  our  imprudence.  A  person  really  converted,  can 
say,  as  it  is  reported  of  a  philosopher,  **  I  wish  there  was  a  vrin- 
dow  in  my  breast,  that  every  one  might  see  the  uprightness  of  my 
heart  and  intentions.  And  though  there  is  too  much  of  the  old 
man  in  us,  yet  if  we  are  really  converted,  there  wiU  be  in  us 
no  allowed  guile,  we  shall  be  harmless.  And  that  is  the  reason 
why  the  poor  Christian  is  too  often  imposed  upon ;  he  judgeth 


XXlllJ  MARKS   OP   A   TRUB   CONVERSION.  S75 

Other  people  by  himself ;  having  an  honest  heart,  he  thinks  every 
one  as  honest  as  himself,  and  therefore  is  a  prey  to  every  one* 
I  might  enlarge  upon  each  of  these  points,  it  is  a  copious  and 
important  tnith ;  but  I  do  not  intend  to  multiply  many  marks 
and  heads. 

And  therefore,  as  I  have  something  to  say  by  way  of  personal 
application,  give  me  leave  therefore,  with  the  utmost  tenderness, 
and  at  the  same  time  with  faithfulness,  to  call  upon  you,  my 
dear  friends.  My  text  is  introduced  in  an  awful  manner,  •*  Verily 
I  say  unto  you ;"  and  what  Jesus  said  then,  he  says  now  to  you, 
to  me,  and  to  as  many  as  sit  under  a  preached  gospel,  and  to  as 
many  as  the  Lord  our  God  shall  call, — let  me  exhort  you  to  see 
whether  ye  are  converted ;  whether  such  a  great  and  almighty 
change  has  passed  upon  any  of  your  souls.  As  I  told  you  be- 
fore, so  I  tell  you  again, — ye  all  hope  to  go  to  heaven,  and  I  pray 
God  Almighty  ye  may  be  all  there :  when  I  see  such  a  congregation 
as  this,  if  my  heart  is  in  a  proper  frame,  I  feel  myself  ready  to  lay 
down  my  life,  to  be  instrumental  only  to  save  one  soul.  It  makes 
my  heart  bleed  within  me,  it  makes  me  sometimes  most  unwilling 
to  preach,  lest  that  word  that  I  hope  will  do  good,  may  increase  the 
damnation  of  any,  and  perhaps  of  a  great  part  of  the  auditory, 
through  their  own  unbelief.  Give  me  leave  to  deal  faithfully  with 
your  souls.  I  have  your  dead  warrant  in  my  hand :  Christ  has 
said  it,  Jesus  will  stand  to  it ;  it  is  like  the  laws  of  the  Medes  and 
Persians,  it  altereth  not.  Hark,  O  man,  hark,  O  woman  !  he 
that  bath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear  what  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
says,  "Verily  I  say  unto  you.  Except  ye  be  converted  and  become 
as  little  children,  ye  shall  not  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven." 
Though  this  is  Saturday  night,  and  we  are  yet  preparing  for  the 
sabbath ;  for  what  you  know,  you  may  never  live  to  see  the  sab- 
bath. Tou  have  had  awful  proofs  of  this  lately ;  a  woman  died 
bat  yesterday,  a  man  died  the  day  before,  another  was  killed  by 
something  that  fell  from  a  house,  and  it  may  be,  in  twenty -four 
hours  more,  many  of  you  may  be  carried  into  an  unalterable 
state.  Now  then,  for  God's  sake,  for  your  own  souls'  sake,  if  ye 
have  a  mind  to  dwell  with  God,  and  cannot  bear  the  thought  of 
dwelling  in  everlasting  burning,  before  I  go  any  further,  silently 
put  up  one  prayer^  or  say  Amen  to  the  prayer  I  would  put  in 
your  mouths — Lord,  search  me,  and  try  me;  Lord,  examine  my 
heart,  and  let  my  conscience  speak;  O  let  me  know  whether  I 
lam  converted  or  not!"  What  say  ye, my  dear  hearers?  what 
say  ye,  my  fellow  sinners  ?  what  say  ye,  ray  guilty  brethren  ?  Has 
God  by  hiis  blessed  Spirit  wrought  such  a  change  iu  your  hearts? 
I  do  not  ask  you  whether  God  has  made  you  angels,  that  I  know 
will  never  be;  I  only  ask  you  whether  yon  have  any  well- 
gromided  hope  to  think  that  God  has  made  you  new  creatures 
in  Jesus  Christ?  so  renewed  and  changed  your  natures,  that 
you  can  say,  I  humbly  hope»  that  as  to  the  habitual  temper  and 
tendency  or  my  mind,  that  my  heart  is  free  from  wickedness ;  I 
have  a  husband,  I  have  a  wife,  1  have  also  children,  I  keep  a 
rbop,  I  mind  my  business ;  but  I  love  these  creatures  for  God's 

r2 


978  MAKKS  OF  A  TRUB  COHVBrnSlOlf.  [XXIIf. 

wake,  and  do  every  thing  for  Christ :  and  if  God  were  now  to 
call  me  away,  according  to  the  habitual  temper  of  my  mind,  I 
can  say.  Lord,  I  am  ready ;  and  however  I  love  the  creatures^ 
I  hope  I  can  say.  Whom  have  I  in  heaven  bat  thee  ?  Whom 
have  I  in  heaven,  O  my  Grod  and  my  dear  Redeemer,  that  I  de- 
sire in  comparison  of  thee?  Can  yon  thank  God  for  the  crea- 
tures, and  saj  at  the  same  time,  these  are  not  my  Christ  ?  I 
speak  in  plain  language,  yoo  know  my  way  of  preaching :  I 
do  not  want  to  play  the  orator,  I  do  not  want  to  be  codnted  a 
scholar;  I  want  to  speak  so  as  I  may  reach  poor  people's 
hearts.  What  say  ye,  my  dear  hearers  ?  Are  ye  sensible  of 
your  weakness  ?  Do  ye  feel  that  ye  are  poor,  miserable,  blind 
and  naked  by  nature  ?  Do  ye  give  up  your  hearts,  your  affec- 
tions, your  wills,  your  understanding,  to  be  guided  by  the  Spirit 
of  God,  as  a  little  child  gives  up  its  hand  to  be  guided  by  its 
parent  ?  Are  ye  little  in  your  own  eyes  ?  Do  ye  think  meanly  of 
yourselves  ?  And  do  you  want  to  learn  something  new  every 
day?  I  mention  these  marks,  because  I  am  apt  to  believe  they 
are  more  adapted  to  a  great  many  of  your  capacities.  A  great 
many  of  you  have  not  that  flowing  of  affection  ye  sometimes 
had,  therefore  ye  are  for  giving  up  all  your  evidences,  and  making 
way  for  the  devil's  coming  into  your  heart.  You  are  not  brought 
up  to  the  mount  as  ye  used  to  be,  therefore  ye  conclude  ye  have 
no  grace  at  all.  But  if  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  emptied  thee,  and 
humbled  thee,  if  he  is  giving  thee  to  see  and  know  that  thou  art 
nothing ;— though  thou  art  not  growing  upward,  thou  art  growing 
downward  ;  and  though  thou  hast  not  so  much  joy,  yet  thy  heart 
is  emptying,  to  be  more  abundantly  replenished  by  and  by.  Can 
any  of  you  follow  me  ?  Then  give  Grod  thanks,  and  take  the 
comfort  of  it. 

If  thou  art  thus  converted  and  become  a  little  child,  I  wel- 
come thee,  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  into  God's  dear  family ; 
I  welcome  thee,  in  the  name  of  the  dear  Redeemer,  into  the  com- 
pany of  God's  children.  O  ye  dear  souls,  though  the  world  sees 
nothing  in  you,  though  there  be  no  outward  difference  between 
you  and  others,  yet  I  look  upon  you  in  another  light,  even  as 
so  many  king's  sons  and  daughters :  all  hail !  in  the  name  of 
God,  I  wish  every  one  of  you  joy  from  my  soul,  ye  sons  and 
daughters  of  the  King  of  kings.  Will  not  you  henceforth  exer- 
cise a  childlike  temper  ?  Will  not  such  a  thought  melt  down 
your  hearts,  when  I  tell  you  that  the  great  God,  who  might  have 
frowned  you  to  hell  for  your  secret  sins,  that  nobody  knew  of 
but  God  and  your  own  souls,  and  who  might  have  damned  you 
times  without  number,  hath  cast  the  mantle  of  his  love  over  you ; 
his  voice  hath  been.  Let  that  man,  that  woman,  live,  for  I  have 
found  a  ransom.  O  will  ye  not  cry  out,  Why  me.  Lord  ?  Was 
King  George  to  send  for  any  of  your  children,  and  were  you  to 
hear  they  were  to  be  his  adopted  sons,  how  highly  honoured 
would  you  think  your  children  to  be !  What  great  condescen- 
sion was  it  for  Pharaoh's  daughter  to  take  up  Moses,  a  poor 
child  exposed  in  an  ark  of  bulrushes,  and  breed  him  up  for  her 


XXiH.]  MARKS   OP   A   TRUE  CONVBRSIOK.  277 

child  ?  But  what  is  that  happiness  in  comparison  of  thine^  who 
wast  the  other  day  a  child  of  the  devil,  but  now,  by  converting 
grace,  art  beccHne  a  child  of  God  ?  Are  ye  converted,  are  ye  be- 
come like  litde children  ?  Then  whatranst  ye  do?  My  dear  hear- 
ers, be  obedient  to  God,  remember  God  is  your  father ;  and  as 
every  one  of  you  must  know,  what  a  dreadful  cross  it  is  to  have  a 
wicked  disobedent  child  ;  if  ye  do  not  want  your  children  to  be  dis- 
obedient to  you,  for  Christ's  sake  be  not  disobedient  to  yoqr  hea- 
venly Parent.  If  God  be  your  father,  obey  him ;  if  God  be  your 
father,  serve  him;  love  him  with  all  your  heart,  love  him  with 
all  your  might,  with  all  your  soul,  and  with  all  your  strength. 
If  God  be  your  father,  fly  from  every  thing  that  may  displease 
him ;  and  walk  worthy  of  that  God  who  has  called  you  to  his 
kingdom  and  glory.  If  ye  are  converted  and  become  like  little 
children,  then  behave  as  little  children ;  they  long  for  the  breast, 
and  with  it  will  be  contented.  Are  ye  new-bom  babes  ?  Then 
desire  the  sincere  milk  of  the  word,  that  ye  may  grow  thereby. 
I  do  not  want,  that  Arminian  husks  should  go  down  with  you ; 
ye  are  king's  sons  and  daughters,  and  have  a  more  refined 
taste ;  you  must  have  the  doctrines  of  grace,  and  blessed  be 
God  that  you  dwell  in  a  country  where  the  sincere  word  is  so 
plainly  preached.  Are  ye  children,  then  grow  in  grace,  and  in 
tlie  knowledge  of  your  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.  Have 
any  of  you  children  that  do  not  grow  ?  do  not  ye  lament  these 
children,  and  cry  over  them ;  do  not  ye  say,  my  child  will  never 
be  fit  for  any  thing  in  the  world  ?  Well,  doth  it  grieve  you  to  see 
a  child  that  will  not  grow ;  how  much  must  it  grieve  the  heart 
of  Christ  to  see  you  grow  so  little  ?  Will  ye  be  always  children? 
Will  ye  be  always  learning  the  first  principles  of  Christianity, 
and  never  press  forward  toward  the  mark,  for  the  prize  of  the 
high  calling  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus?  God  forbid.  Let  the  lan- 
guage of  your  heart  be,  "  Lord  Jesus,  help  me  to  grow,  help  me 
to  learn  more,  learn  me  to  live  so  as  my  progress  may  be  known 
to  all! 

Are  ye  God*s  children  ?  Are  ye  converted,  and  become  like 
little  children  ?  Then  deal  with  God  as  your  little  children  do  with 
you;  as  soon  as  ever  they  want  any  thing,  or  if  any  body  hurts 
them^  I  appeal  to  yourselves  ii^  they  do  not  directly  run  to  their 
parent.  Well,  are  ye  God's  children  ?  Doth  the  devil  trouble 
you?  Doth  the  world  trouble  you  ?  Go  tell  your  Father  of  it,  go 
directly^  and  complain  to  God.  Perhaps  you  may  say,  I  cannot 
utter  fine  words :  but  do  any  of  you  expect  fine  words  from  your 
children?  If  they  come  crying,  and  can  speak  but  half  words, 
do  not  your  hearts  yearn  over  them  ?  And  has  not  God  unspeak- 
ably more  pity  to  you?  If  ye  can  only  make  signs  to  him ;  ''  As 
a  father  pitieth  his  children,  so  will  the  Lord  pity  them  that  fear 
him.'*  1  pray  you  therefore  be  bold  with  your  Father,  saying, 
"  Abba,  Father !  Satan  troubles  me,  the  world  troubles  me,  my 
own  mother's  children  are  angry  with  me;  heavenly  Father, 
plead  my  cause!"  the  Lord  will  then  speak  for  you  some  way 
or  other. 


278  MARKS  OP  A   TRUE  CQNVBRSIOIf.  [XXlff. 

Are  ye  converted,  and  become  as  little  children,  have  ye  en- 
tered into  God's  family?  Then  assure  yourselves  that  your 
heavenly  Father  will  chasten  you  now  and  then ;  *'  for  what  son 
is  he  whom  the  father  chasteneth  not :  if  ye  are  without  chas- 
tisement, of  which  all  are  partakers,  then  are  ye  bastards,  and 
not  sons/'  It  is  recorded  of  bishop  Latimer,  that  in  the  house 
where  he  came  to  lodge,  he  overheard  the  master  of  the  house 
say,  I  thank  God  I  never  had  a  cross  in  my  life:  O,  said  he, 
then  I  will  not  stay  here.  I  believe  there  is  not  a  child  of  God, 
when  in  a  good  frame,  but  has  prayed  for  great  humility ;  they 
have  prayed  for  great  faith,  they  have  prayed  for  great  love, 
they  have  prayed  for  all  the  graces  of  the  Spirit:  Do  ye  know, 
when  ye  put  up  these  prayers,  that  ye  did  also  say.  Lord,  send 
us  great  trials ;  for  how  is  it  possible  to  know  ye  have  great 
faith,  humility,  and  love,  unless  God  put  you  into  great  trials, 
that  ye  may  know  whether  ye  have  them  or  not.  I  inen- 
tion  this,  because  a  great  many  of  the  children  of  God  (I  am 
sure  it  has  been  a  temptation  to  me  many  times,  when  I  have 
been  under  God's  smarting  rod)  when  they  have  great  trials, 
think  God  is  giving  them  over.  If  therefore  ye  be  G^d's  chil- 
dren, if  ye  be  converted  and  become  as  little  children  ;  do  not 
expect  that  God  will  be  like  a  foolish  parent ;  no,  he  is  a  jealous 
God,  he  loves  his  child  too  well  to  spare  his  rod.  How  did  he 
correct  Miriam  ?  How  did  he  correct  Moses  ?  How  hath  God 
in  all  ages  corrected  his  dearest  children  ?  Therefore,  if  ye  are 
converted  and  become  as  little  children,  if  God  hath  taken  away 
a  child,  or  your  substance,  if  God  suffers  friends  to  forsake  you, 
and  if  you  are  forsaken  as  it  were  both  by  God  and  man,  say. 
Lord,  I  thank  thee !  I  am  a  perverse  child,  or  God  would  not. 
strike  me  so  often  and  so  hard.  Do  not  blame  your  heavenly 
Father,  but  blame  yourselves  ;  he  is  a  loving  God,  and  a  ten- 
der Father,  **  he  is  afflicted  in  all  our  afflictions :"  therefore 
when  God  spake  to  Moses,  he  spake  out  of  the  bush,  as  much 
as  to  say,  "  Moses,  this  bush  represents  my  people ;  as  this 
bush  is  burning  with  fire,  so  are  my  children  to  burn  with  afflic- 
tion: but  I  am  in  the  bush ;  if  the  bush  bums,  I  will  burn  with 
it,  I  will  be  with  them  in  the  furnace,  I  will  be  with  them  in  the 
water,  and  though  the  water  come  over  them,  it  shall  not  over- 
flow them." 

Are  ye  God's  children,  are  ye  converted  and  become  as  little 
children  ?  Then  will  ye  not  long  to  go  home  and  see  your  Father  ? 

0  happy  they  that  have  gotten  home  before  you ;  happy  they 
that  are  up  yonder,  happy  they  who  have  ascended  above  this 
field  of  conflict.  I  know  not  what  you  may  think  of  it,  but  since 

1  heard  that  some,  whose  hearts  God  was  pleased  to  work  upon, 
are  gone  to  glory,  I  am  sometimes  filled  with  grief,  that  God  is 
not  pleased  to  let  me  go  home  too.  How  can  you  see  so  much 
coldness  among  (Jod's  people  ?  How  can  you  see  God's  people 
like  the  moon,  waxing  and  waning  ?  Who  can  but  desire  to  be 
for  ever  with  the  Lord?  Thanks  be  to  God,  the  time  is  soon 
coming ;  thanks  be  to  God,  he  will  come,  and  will  not  tarry.  Do 


XXIIl.]  MARKS  OF  A  TRUB  OONYSRBldN.  279 

not  be  impatient,  God  in  his  own  time  will  fetch  yon  home.  And 
though  ye  may  be  brought  to  short  allowance  now,  though  some 
of  you  may  be  narrow  in  your  circumstances,  yet  do  not  repine : 
a  God  and  the  gospel  of  Christ,  with  brown  bread,  are  great 
riches.  In  thy  Father's  house  there  is  bread  enough  and  to 
spare;  though  thou  art  now  tormented,  yet  by  and  by  thou 
sbalt  be  comforted ;  the  angels  will  look  upon  it  as  an  honour  to 
convey  thee  to  Abraham's  bosom,  though  thou  art  but  a  Laza- 
rus here.  By  the  frame  of  my  heart,  I  am  much  inclined  to  speak 
comfortably  to  God's  people. 

But  I  only  mention  one  thing  more,  and  that  is,  if  ye  be  con- 
verted, and  become  as  little  children,  then  for  God's  sake  take 
care  of  doing  what  children  often  do  ;  they  are  too  apt  to  quarrel 
one  with  another.  O  love  one  another;  ''he  that  dwells  in 
love,  dwells  in  God,  and  God  in  him."  Joseph  knew  that  his 
brethren  were  in  danger  of  falling  out,  therefore  when  he  left 
them,  says  he, ''  Fall  not  out  by  the  way."  Ye  are  all  children  of 
the  same  Father,  ye  are  all  going  to  the  same  place ;  why  should 
ye  differ  ?  The  world  has  enough  against  us,  the  devil  has  enough 
against  us,  without  our  quarrelling  with  each  other ;  O  walk  in 
love.  If  I  could  preach  no  more,  if  I  were  not  able  to  hold  out 
to  the  end  of  my  sermon,  I  would  sav  as  John  did,  when  be 
was  grown  old  and  could  nbt  preach, ''  Little  children,  love 
one  another :"  if  ye  be  God's  children,  then  love  one  another. 
There  is  nothing  grieves  me  more  than  the  differences  amongst 
God's  people.  O  hasten  that  time,  when  we  shall  either  go  to 
heaven,  or  never  quarrel  any  more ! 

Would  to  God  I  could  speak  to  all  of  you  in  this  comfortable 
language ;  but  my  Master  tells  me,  I  must  not  give  that  which 
is  holy  to  dogs,  I  must  not  cast  pearls  before  swine ;  therefore, 
though  I  have  been  speaking  comfortably,  yet  what  I  have  been 
saying,  especially  in  this  latter  part  of  the  discourse,  belongs  to 
children ;  it  is  children's  bread,  it  belongs  to  God's  people.  If 
any  of  you  are  graceless,  christless,  unconverted  creatures,  I 
charge  you  not  to  touch  it,  I  fence  it  in  the  name  of  Grod ;  here 
is  a  flaming  sword,  turning  every  way,  to  keep  you  from  this 
bread  of  life,  till  ye  are  turned  to  Jesus  Christ.  And  therefore, 
as  I  suppose  many  of  you  are  unconverted  and  graceless,  go 
home,  and  away  to  your  closets,  and  down  with  your  stubborn 
hearts  before  G<)d ;  if  ye  have  not  done  it  before,  let  this  be  the 
night :  or,  do  not  stay  till  you  go  home ;  begin  now,  while  stand- 
ing here,  pray  to  God,  and  let  the  language  of  thy  heart  be. 
Lord,  convert  me !  Lord,  make  me  a  little  child ;  Lord  Jesus  let 
me  not  be  banished  from  thy  kingdom  :  my  dear  friends,  there 
is  a' great  deal  more  implied  in  the  words  than  is  expressed  : 
when  Christ  says,  **  Ye  shall  not  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  hea- 
ven/' it  is  as  much  as  to  say, ''  ye  shall  certainly  go  to  hell, 
ye  shall  certainly  be  damned,  and  dwell  in  the  blackness  of 
darkness  for  ever,  ye  shall  go  where  the  worm  dies  not,  and 
where  the  fire  is  not  quenched."  The  Lord  God  impress  it  upon 
year  souls !  may  an  arrow,  (as  one  lately  wrote  me  in  a  letter) 


880  WHAT  THINK    YB  OP  CHRIST?  [XXIT. 

dipped  in  the  blood  of  Chiist,  readi  every  HBconverted  sinner^ 
heart !  May  God  fulfil  the  text  to  every  one  of  your  souls  !  It  is 
he  alone  that  can  do  it.  If  ye  confess  your  sms,  and  leave  tbem, 
and  lay  hold  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Spirit  of  €rod  shall 
be  given  you ;  if  you  will  go  and  say.  Turn  me,  O  my  God  ! 
thou  knowest  not,  O  man^  what  the  return  of  God  may  be  to 
thee.  Did  I  think  that  preaching  would  be  to  the  purpose,  did  I 
think  that  arguments  would  induce  you  to  come,  I  would  con- 
tinue my  discourse  till  midnight.  And  however  some  of  you  may 
bate  me  without  a  cause,  would  to  Grod  every  one  in  this  congre- 
gation were  as  much  concerned  for  himself,  as  at  present  (bless- 
ed be  God)  I  feel  myself  concerned  for  him.  O  that  my 
head  were  waters,  O  that  mine  eyes  were  a  fountain  of  tears, 
that  I  might  weep  over  an  unconverted,  graceless,  wicked,  and 
adulterous  generation.  Precious  souls,  for  God's  sake  think 
what  will  become  of  you  when  ye  die,  if  you  die  without  being 
converted :  if  ye  go  hence  without  the  wedding  garment,  God 
will  strike  you  speechless,  and  ye  shsdl  be  banished  from  his  pre- 
sence for  ever  and  ever.  I  know^e  cannot  dwell  with  eveilast- 
ing  burnings  ;  behold  then,  I  shew  you  a  way  of  escape ;  Jesus 
is  the  way,  Jesus  is  the  truth,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the 
resurrection  and  the  life.  It  is  his  spirit  must  convert  you ; 
come  to  Christ,  and  ye  shall  have  it :  and  may  God  for  Christ's 
sake  give  it  to  yon  al1>  and  convert  you,  that  we  may  ail  meet 
never  to  part  again,  in  his  heavenly  kingdom :  even  so  Lord 
Jesus,  Amen,  and  Amen. 


SERMON  XXIV. 

WHAT   THINK    YE   OF    CHRIST? 

What  think  ye  of  Christ  ?— Matt.  xxii.  42. 

When  it  pleased  the  eternal  Son  of  God  to  tabernacle  among 
us.  and  pTeach  the  glad  tidings  of  salvation  to  a  fallen  world, 
different  opinions  were  entertained  by  different  parties  concern- 
ing him.  As  to  his  person,  some  said  he  was  Moses  ;  others, 
that  he  was  Elias,  Jeremias,  or  one  of  the  ancient  prophets  ; 
few  acknowledged  him  to  be  what  he  really  was,  God  blessed 
for  evermore.  And  as  to  his  doctrine,  though  the  common  peo- 
fle,  being  free  from  prejudice,  were  persuaded  of  the  heavenly 
tendency  of  his  going  about  to  do  good,  and  for  the  generality 
heard  him  gladly,  and  said  he  was  a  good  man;  yet  tbe 
envious  worldly-minded,  seit'-righteous  governors  and  teachers 
of  the  Jewish  church,  being  grieved  at  his  success  oir  the 
one  hand,  and  unable  (having  never  been  taught  of  God)  to 
understand  the  purity  of  his  doctrine,  on  the  other;  notwith- 
standing our-  Lord  spake  as  never  man  spake,  and  did  such 
miracles  which  no  man  could  possibly  do,  unless  God  was  with 
him ;  yet  they  not  only  were  so  infatuated  as  to  say  that  he 
deceived  the  people,  but  also  were  so  blasphemous  as  to  affirm 


XXIV.]  WH4T   THINK   YB  OF  CHftlST?  S81 

that  he  was  in  league  with  the  devil  himaelf,  and  cast  aat  devils 
by  Beelzebub  the  prince  of  devils.  Nay,  our  Lord's  own  bre* 
threu  and  kinsmen,  according  to  the  flesh,  were  so  blinded  by  pre- 
judice and  unbelief,  that  on  a  certain  day,  when  he  went  out  to 
teach  the  multitudes  in  the  fields,  they  sent  to  take  bold  on  him, 
urging  this  as  a  reason  for  their  conduct,  '^  That  he  was  beside 
himself/' 

Thus  was  the  King  and  the  Lord  of  glory  judged  by  man's 
judgment,  when  manifest  in  flesh :  far  be  it  from  any  of  his  mi- 
nisters to  expeot  better  treatment.  No,  if  we  come  in  the  spi- 
rit and  power  of  our  Master,  in  this,  as  in  every  other  part  of  his 
sufferings,  we  must  follow  his  steps.  The  like  reproadies  which 
were  cast  on  him,  will  be  thrown  on  us  also.  Those  that  received 
our  Lord  and  his  doctrine,  will  receive  and  hear  us  for  his  name's 
sake.  The  poor,  blessed  be  God,  as  our  present  meeting  abun- 
dandy  testifies,  receive  the  gospel,  and  the  common  people  hear 
us  gladly ;  whilst  those  who  are  sitting  in  Moses'  chair,  and 
love  to  wear  long  robes,  being  ignorant  of  the  righteousness 
which  is  of  God  by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  having  never  felt 
the  power  of  God  upon  their  hearts,  ^ill  be  continually  crying 
out  against  us,  as  madmen,  deceivers^of  the  people,  and  as  act- 
ing under  the  influence  of  evil  spirits. 

But  he  is  unworthy  the  name  of  a  minister  of  the  gospel  of  peace, 
who  is  unwilling,  not  only  to  have  his  name  cast  out  as  evil,  but 
ateo  to  die  for  the  truths  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  It  is  the  character 
of  hirelings  and  false  prophets,  who  care  not  for  the  sheep,  to 
have  all  men  speak  well  of  them.  "  Blessed  are  you,  (says  our 
Lord  to  his  first  apostles,  and  in  them  to  all  succeeding  minis- 
ters,) when  men  speak  all  manner  of  evil  against  you  falsely  for 
my  name's  sake."  And  indeed  it  is  impossible  but  such  ofiences 
must  come  :  for  men  will  always  judge  of  others  according  to  the 
principles  from  which  they  act  themselves.  And  if  they  care 
not  to  yield  obedience  to  the  doctrines  which  we  deliver,  they 
iBust  necessarily,  in  self-defence,  speak  against  the  preachers, 
lest  they  should  be  asked  that  question  which  the  Pharisees  of 
old  feared  to  have  retorted  on  them,  if  they  confessed  that  John 
was  a  prophet — "  Why  then  did  ye  not  believe  on  him  ?"  In  all 
such  cases,  we  have  nothing  to  do  but  to  search  our  own  hearts ; 
and  if  we  can  assure  our  consciences,  before  God,  that  we  act 
with  a  single  eye  to  his  glory,  we  are  cheerfully  to  go  on  in 
our  work,  and  not  in  the  least  to  regard  what  men  or  devils 
caa  say  against,  or  do  unto  us. 

But  to  return :  You  have  heard  what  various  thoughts  there 
were  concerning  Jesus  Christ,  whilst  here  on  earth :  nor  is 
be  otherwise  treated,  even  now  he  is  exalted  to  sit  down  at 
the  right  hand  of  his  Father  in  heaven.  A  stranger  to  Christia- 
nity, were  he  to  hear  that  we  all  profess  to  hold  one  Lord,  would 
naturaUy  infer  that  we  all  thought  and  spoke  one  and  the  same 
thing  about  him.  But,  alas !  to  our  shame  be  it  mentioned,  though 
Christ  be  not  divided  in  himself,  yet  professors  are  sadly  divided 
^n  their  thoughts  about  him ;  and  that  not  only  as  to  the  cir- 


283  WHAT  THINK   YB  OF  CHRIST f  [XXIV. 

cnmstaiices  of  bis  religion^  but  hIso  of  those  essential  tniths, 
which  most  necessarily  be  believed  and  received  by  us,  if  ever 
we  hope  to  be  heirs  of  eternal  salvation. 

Some,  and  I  fear  a  multitude  which  no  man  can  easily  num- 
ber, there  are  amongst  us,  who  call  themselves  Christians,  and 
yet  seldom  or  never  seriously  think  of  Jesus  Christ  at  all.  They 
can  think  of  their  shops  and  their  farms,  their  plays,  their  balls, 
their  assemblies  and  horse-races,  (entertainments  which  directly 
tend  to  exclude  religion  out  of  the  world,)  but  as  for  Christ, 
the  author  and  finisher  of  faith,  the  Lord  who  has  bought  poor 
sinners  with  his  precious  blood,  and  who  is  the  only  thing  worth 
thinking  of,  alas !  he  is  not  in  all,  or  at  most  in  very  few  of  their 
thoughts.  But  believe  me,  O  ye  earthly,  sensual,  carnally- 
minded  professors,  however  little  you  may  think  of  Christ  now, 
or  however  industriously  you  may  strive  to  keep  him  out  of 
your  thoughts,  by  pursuing  the  lust  of  the  eye,  the  lust  of  the 
flesh,  and  the  pride  of  life,  yet  there  is  a  time  coming,  when  you 
will  wish  you  had  thought  of  Christ  more,  and  of  your  profits 
and  pleasures  less.  For  the  gay,  the  polite,  the  rich,  also  must 
die  as  well  as  others,  and  leave  their  pomps,  and  vanities,  and 
all  their  wesdth,  behind  him.  Ana  O  !  what  thoughts  will  you 
entertain  concerning  Jesus  Christ  in  that  hour ! 

But  I  must  not  pursue  these  reflections :  they  would  carry 
me  too  far  from  the  main  design  of  this  discourse,  which  Ls  to 
shew,  what  those  who  are  truly  desirous  to  know  how  to  wor- 
ship God  in  spirit  and  in  truth,  ought  to  think  concerning  Jesus 
Christ,  whom  God  hath  sent  to  be  the  end  of  the  law  for  righ- 
teousness to  all  them  that  shall  believe. 

I  trust,  my  brethren,  you  are  more  noble  than  to  think  roe  too 
strict  or  scrupulous  in  thus  attempting  to  regulate  your  thoughts 
about  Jesus  Christ :  for  by  our  thoughts,  as  well  as  our  words 
and  actions,  are  we  to  be  judged  at  the  great  day.  And 
in  vain  do  we  hope  to  believe  in,  or  worship  Christ  aright, 
unless  our  principles,  on  which  our  faith  and  practice  are 
founded,  are  agreeable  to  the  form  of  sound  words  delivered  to 
us  in  the  scriptures  of  truth. 

Besides,  many  deceivers  are  gone  abroad  into  the  world. 
Mere  heathen  morality,  and  not  Jesus  Christ,  is  preached  in 
most  of  our  churches.  And  how  should  people  think  rightly  of 
Christ,  of  whom  they  have  scarcely  heard  ?  Bear  with  me  a 
little  then,  whilst,  to  inform  your  consciences,  I  ask  you  a  few 
questions  concerning  Jesus  Christ :  For  there  is  no  oUier  name 
given  under  heaven  whereby  we  can  be  saved,  but  his. 

First,  What  think  you  about  the  person  of  Christ?  "Whose 
Son  is  he  ?"  This  is  the  question  our  Lord  put  to  the  Pharisees 
in  the  words  following  the  text ;  and  never  was  it  more  neces- 
sary to  repeat  this  question  than  in  these  last  days.  For  num- 
bers that  are  called  after  the  name  of  Christ,  and,  I  fear,  many 
that  pretend  to  preach  him,  are  so  far  advanced  in  the  blasphe- 
mer's chair,  as  openly  to  deny  his  being  really,  truly,  and  pro- 
perly God.    But  no  one  that  ever  was  partaker  of  his  Spirit, 


XXIV.]  WHAT   THINK    Y  EOF  CHRIST?  283 

will  speak  thus  lightly  of  him.  No,  if  they  be  asked,  as  Peter 
and  his  brethren  were,  "  Bat  whom  say  ye  that  I  am  ?"  They 
will  reply  without  hesitation.  Thou  art  Christ,  the  Son  of  the 
ever-living  Grod.  For  the  confession  of  our  Lord's  divinity,  is 
the  rock  upon  which  he  builds  his  church.  Were  it  possible  to 
take  this  away,  the  gates  of  hell  would  quickly  prevail  against 
it.  My  brethren,  if  Jesus  Christ  be  not  very  God  of  very  God, 
I  would  never  preach  the  gospel  of  Christ  again :  for  it  would 
not  be  gospel ;  it  would  be  only  a  system  of  moral  ethics ; 
Seneca,  Cicero,  or  any  of  the  Grentile  philosophers,  would  be  as 
good  a  Saviour  as  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  It  is  the  divinity  of  our 
Lord  that  gives  a  sanction  to  his  death,  and  makes  him  such  a 
high  priest  as  became  us,  one  who,  by  the  infinite  merits  of  his 
suffering,  could  make  a  full,  perfect,  sufficient  sacrifice,  satis- 
faction, and  oblation,  to  infinitely  ofiended  justice.  And  what- 
soever minister  of  the  church  of  England  makes  use  of  her  forms, 
and  eats  of  her  bread,  and  yet  holds  not  this  doctrine,  (as  L  fear 
too  many  such  are  crept  in  amongst  us,)  such  a  one  belongs 
only  to  the  synagogue  of  Satan.  He  is  not  a  child  or  minister 
of  God  :  no,  he  is  a  wolf  in  sheep's  clothing ;  he  is  a  child  and 
minister  of  that  wicked  one  the  devil. 

Many  will  think  these  hard  sayings :  but  I  think  it  no  breach 
of  charity  to  affirm,  that  an  Arian  or  Socinian  cannot4)e  a  Chris- 
tian. The  one  would  make  us  believe  Jesus  Christ  is  only  a 
created  God,  which  is  a  self-contradiction :  and  the  other  would 
have  us  look  on  him  only  as  a  good  man ;  and  instead  of  own- 
ing his  death  to  be  an  atonement  for  the  sins  of  the  world,  would 
persuade  us,  that  Christ  died  only  to  seal  the  truth  of  his  doc- 
trine with  his  blood.  But  if  Jesus  Christ  be  no  more  than  a 
mere  man,  if  he  be  not  truly  God,  he  was  the  vilest  sinner  that 
ever  appeared  in  the  world  :  for  he  accepted  of  divine  adora- 
tion from  the  man  who  had  been  bom  blind,  as  we  read  John 
ix.  38.  **  And  he  said.  Lord,  I  believe ;  and  worshipped  him." 
Besides,  if  Christ  be  not  properly  God,  our  faith  is  vain,  we  are 
yet  in  our  sins :  for  no  created  being,  though  of  the  highest 
order,  could  possibly  merit  any  thing  at  God's  hands ;  it  was 
our  Lord's  divinity,  that  alone  qualified  him  to  take  away  the 
sins  of  the  world ;  and  therefore  we  hear  St.  John  pronouncing 
so  positively,  that  ^*  the  Word  (Jesus  Christ)  was  not  only  with 
God,  but  was  God."  For  the  like  reason,  St.  Paul  says,  ''  that 
be  was  in  the  form  of  God  :  that  in  him  dwelt  all  the  fulness 
of  the  Godhead  bodily."  Nay,  Jesus  Christ  assumed  the  title 
which  Crod  gave  to  himself  when  he  sent  Moses  to  deliver  his 
people  Israel :  '^  Before  Abraham  was,  I  am."  And  again,  '^  I 
and  my  Father  are  one."  Which  last  words,  though  our  modern 
infidels  would  evade  and  wrest,  as  they  do  other  scriptures,  to 
their  own  damnation,  yet  it  is  evident  that  the  Jews  understood 
our  Lord  when  he  spake  thus,  as  making  himself  equal  with 
God;  otherwise,  why  did  they  stone  him  as  a  blasphemer?  And 
DOW,  why  should  it  be  thought  a  breach  of  charity,  to  affirm 
that  those  who  deny  the  divinity  of  Jesus  Christ  in  the  strict- 


984  WHAT  THINK   YB   OF  CHRIST?  [XXIV. 

est  sense  (tf  die  word,  caiuaot  foe  Christians  ?  For  they  are  greater 
infidels  than  the  devils  themselves,  who  confessed  that  they 
knew  who  he  was,  '^even  the  holy  oske  of  Grod."  They  not  only 
believe,  but,  which  is  more  than  the  unbelieyevs  of  this  genera* 
lion  do,  they  tremble.  And  was  it  possible  for  arch-heretics  to 
be  released  from  their  chains  of  darkness,  under  which  (unless 
they  altered  their  principles  before  they  died)  they  are  now  re- 
served to  the  judgment  of  the  great  day,  I  am  persuaded  they 
would  inform  us,  bow  bell  had  convinced  them  of  the  divinity 
of  Jesus  Christ,  and  that  they  would  advise  their  followers  to 
abhor  their  priuciples,  lest  they  should  come  into  the  same 
place,  and  thereby  increase  each  other's  t<»iBents. 

Ikit,  Secondly,  What  think  you  of  the  manhood  or  incarna- 
tion of  Jesus  Christ  ?  For  Christ  was  not  only  Grod,  but  he  was 
God  and  man  in  one  p^son.  Thus  run  the  text  and  context, 
''When  the  Pharisees  were  gathered  together,  Jesus  asked 
them,  saying.  What  think  ye  of  Christ  ?  Whose  son  is  he  ?  Tliey 
say  unto  him.  The  son  of  David.  How  then,  (says  our  divine 
Master,)  does  David  in  spirit  call  him  Lord  V  From  which  pas- 
sage it  is  evident,  that  we  do  not  think  rightly  of  the  person  of 
Jesus  Christ,  unless  we  believe  him  to  be  perfect  God  ^uid  per- 
fect man,  of  a  reasonable  soul  and  human  flesh  subsisting. 

For  it  is  on  this  account  that  he  is  called  Christ,  or  the 
anointed  one,  who  through  his  own  voluntary  oifer  was  set  apart 
by  the  Father,  and  strengthened  and  qualified  by  the  anointing 
or  communication  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  to  be  a  mediator  between 
him  and  offending  man. 

The  reason  why  the  Son  of  God  took  upon  him  our  nature, 
was  the  fall  of  our  first  parents.  I  hope  there  is  no  one  pre- 
sent so  atheistical,  as  to  think  that  man  made  himself:  no,  it 
was  God  that  made  us,  and  not  we  ourselves.  And  I  would 
willingly  think  that  no  person  is  so  blasphemous  as  to  suppose, 
that  if  God  did  make  us,  he  made  us  such  creatures  as  we  now 
find  ourselves  to  be :  for  this  would  be  giving  God^s  word  the 
lie,  which  tells  us,  that, ''  in  the  image  of  God  (not  in  the  image 
which  we  now  bear  on  our  souls)  made  he  man."  As  God  made 
man,  so  God  made  him  perfect.  He  placed  him  in  the  garden 
of  Eden,  and  condescended  to  enter  into  a  covenant  wiUi  him, 
promising  him  eternal  life,  upon  condition  of  unsinning  obedi- 
ence ;  and  threatening  eternal  death,  if  he  broke  his  law,  and 
did  eat  the  forbidden  fVuit. 

Man  did  eat;  and  herein  acting  as  our  representative,  there- 
by involved  both  himself  and  us  in  that  curse,  which  God,  the 
righteous  judge,  had  said  should  be  the  consequence  of  his  dis- 
obedience. But  here  begins  that  mystery  of  godliness,  God 
manifested  in  the  flesh.  For  (sing,  O  heavens,  and  rc^ice,  O 
earth !)  the  eternal  Father,  foreseeing  how  Satan  would  bruise 
the  heel  of  man,  had  in  his  eternal  counsel  provided  a  means 
whereby  he  might  bruise  that  accursed  serpent's  bead.  Man  is 
permitted  to  fall,  and  become  subject  to  death ;  but  Jesus,  the 
only  begotten  S<m  of  God,  begotten  of  the  Father  before  all 


XXfy.]  WHAT   THINK   YB  OP  CHRIST?  S8S 

worUs,  lA^i  of  light,  very  God  of  rcry  €rod,  offers  to  die  to 
make  an  atonement  for  his  transgression,  and  to  fulfil  all  righ-* 
ieoasness  in  his  stead.  And  because  it  was  impossible  for  lum 
to  do  this  as  he  was  God,  and  yet  since  man  bad  offiended,  it 
was  necessary  it  should  be  done  in  the  person  of  man  ;  rather 
than  we  should  perish,  this  ererlasting  God,  this  Prince  of  peace, 
this  Ancient  of  days,  in  the  falness  of  time,  had  a  Uody  pre- 
pared for  him  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  became  an  infant.  In 
this  body  he  formed  a  complete  obedience  to  the  law  of  God ; 
whereby  he  in  our  stead  fulfilled  the  covenant  of  works,  and  at 
last  became  subject  to  death ;  even  death  upon  the  cross ;  that 
as  God  he  might  satisfy,  as  man  he  might  obey  and  suffer ;  and 
being  God  and  man- in  one  person,  might  once  more  procure  a 
union  between  Grod  and  our  souls. 

And  now,  what  think  you  of  this  love  of  Christ?  Do  not  you    ' 
think  it  was  wondrous  great?  especially  when  you  consider, 
that  we  were  Christ's  bitter  enemies,  and  that  he  would  have 
been  infinitely  happy  in  himself,  notwithstanding  we  had  pe- 
rished for  ever.    Whatever  you  may  think  of  it,  I  know  the 
blessed  cuigels,  who  are  not  so  much  concerned. in  this  m^rstery 
of  godliness  as  we,  think  most  highly  of  it.     They  do,  they  wiU 
desire  to  look  into,  and  admire  it,  tbrongh  ^11  eternity.    Why, 
why,  O  ye  sinners,  will  you  not  think  of  this  love  of  Christ  ? 
Surely  it  must  melt  down  the  most  hardened  heart.    Whilst  I ' 
am  speaking,  the  thought  of  this  infinite  and  condescending 
love  fires  and  warms  my  soul.    I  could  dwell  on  it  for  ever. 
Bat  it  is  expedient  for  you,  that  I  should  ask  you  another   « 
question  concerning  Jesus  Christ. 

Thirdly,  What  think  you  about  being  justified  by  Christ  1  I 
believe  I  can  answer  for  some  of  you :  for  many,  I  fear,  think 
to  be  justified,  or  looked  upon  as  righteous  in  God's  sight,  with- 
oat  ^esus  Christ.    But  such  will  find  themselves  dreadfully 
mistaken :  for  out  of  Christ,  **  God  is  a  consuming  fire."  Others 
sadsfy  themselves  with  believing  that  Christ  was  God  and  man, 
and  that  he  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners  in  general : 
whereas,  their  chief  concern  ought   to  be,  how  they  may  be 
assured  that  Jesus  Christ  came  into  the  worid  to  save  them  in 
particular.    '^  The  life  that  I  now  live  in  the  flesh,  (says  the 
apostle,)  is  by  faith  of  the  Son  of  Grod,  who  loved  me,  and  gave 
himsif  for  me."    Observe, /or  me:  it  is  this  inmiediate  applica- 
tion of  Jesus  Christ  to  our  own  hearts,  that  renders  his  merits 
effectual  to  our  eternal  salvation.    An  unapplied  Christ  will  do 
us  no  service  at  all.    Others  there  are,  who  go  still  farther ;  for 
they  tiiink  that  Jesus  Christ  is  God-man :  that  be  is  to  be  ap« 
plied  to  their  hearts;  and  that  they  can  be  justified  in  God's 
sight 9  only  in  or  through  him:   bat  then  they  make  him  only  in 
part  a  Saviour :  they  are  for  doing  what  they  can  themselves, 
aad  then  Jesus  Christ  is  to  make  up  the  deficiencies  of  their 
ri^teousness.    This  is  the  sum  and  substance  of  our  modem 
tivinity.    And  was  it  possible  for  me  to  know  the  thoughts  of 
nest  that  hear  me  this  day,  I  believe  they  would  tell  me,  tbul 


i. 


286  WHAT  THINK  YB  OP   CHRISTt  [XXIY. 

was  the  scheme  they  had  laid^  and  perhaps  depended  on  for 
some  years^  for  their  eternal  salvation.  Is  it  not  then  high  time^ 
my  brethren^  for  you  to  entertain  quite  different  thoughts  con- 
cerning justification  by  Jesus  Christ ;  for  if  you  think  thus^you 
are  in  the  case  of  those  unhappy  Jews,  who  went  about  to  es 
tablish  their  own  righteousness,  and  would  not  submit  to,  and 
consequently  missed  of,  that  righteousness,  which  is  of  Grod  by 
faith  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord.  What  think  you  then,  if  I  tell 
you  that  you  are  to  be  justified  freely  through  faith  in  Jesus 
Christ,  without  any  regard  to  any  work  or  fitness  foreseen  in  as 
at  all  ?  For  salvation  is  the  free  gift  of  God.  I  know  no  fitness 
in  man,  but  a  fitness  to  be  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire  and  brim- 
stone for  ever.  Our  righteousnesses,  in  God's  sight,  are^  but  as 
filthy  rags ;  he  cannot  away  with  them.  Our  holiness,  if  we 
have  any,  is  not  the  cause,  but  the  eflect,  of  our  justification  in 
God's  sight.  *'  We  love  God,  because  he  first  loved  us."  We 
must  not  come  to  God  as  the  proud  Pharisee  did,  bringing  in 
as  it  were  a  reckoning  of  our  services ;  we  must  come  in  the 
temper  and  language  of  the  poor  publican,  smiting  upon  our 
breasts,  and  saying,  '^  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner :"  for 
Jesus  Christ  justifies  us  whilst  we  are  ungodly.  He  came  not 
to  call  the  righteous,  but  sinners,  to  repentance.  The  poor  in 
spirit  only,  they  who  are  willing  to  go  out  of  themselves,  and 
rely  wholly  on  the  righteousness  of  another,  are  so  blessed  as 
to  be  members  of  his  kingdom.  The  righteousness,  the  whole 
righteousness  of  Jesus  Christ,  is  to  be  imputed  to  us,  instead  of 
our  own :  "  For  we  are  not  under  the  law,  but  under  grace  :  and 
to  as  many  as  walk  after  this  rule,  peace  be  on  them ;"  for  they, 
and  they  only,  are  the  true  Israel  of  God.  In  the  great  work  of 
man's  redemption,  boasting  is  entirely  excluded ;  which  could 
not  be,  if  only  one  of  our  works  were  to  be  joined  with  the  merits 
of  Christ.  Our  salvation  is  all  of  Grod,  from  the  beginning  to 
the  end  :  it  is  not  of  works,  lest  any  man  should  boast ;  man 
has  no  hand  in  it :  it  is  Christ  who  is  to  be  made  to  us,  of  Grod 
the  Father,  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctification,  and  eternal 
redemption.  His  active  as  well  as  his  passive  obedience,  is  to 
be  applied  to  poor  sinners.  He  has  fulfilled  all  righteousness 
in  our  stead,  that  we  might  become  the  righteousness  of  Grod  in 
him.  All  we  have  to  do  is,  to  lay  hold  on  this  righteousness  by 
faith ;  and  the  very  moment  we  do  apprehend  it  by  a  lively 
faith,  that  very  moment  we  may  be  assured  that  the  blood  of 
Jesus  Christ  has  cleansed  us  from  all  sin :  for  the  promise  is  to 
us  and  to  our  children,  and  to  as  many  as  the  Lord  our  Grod 
shall  call."  If  we  and  our  whole  houses  believe,  we  shall  be 
saved  as  well  as  the  jailor  and  his  house ;  for  the  righteousness 
of  Jesus  Christ  is  an  everlasting,  as  well  as  a  perfect  righteous- 
ness. It  is  as  effectual  to  all  who  believe  in  him  now,  as  for* 
merly ;  and  so  it  will  be,  till  time  shall  be  no  more.  Search  the 
scriptures,  as  the  Bereans  did,  and  see  whether  these  things  are 
not  so.  Search  St.  Paul's  epistle  to  the  Romans  and  Galatians, 
and  there  you  will  find  this  doctrine  so  plainly  taught  you,  that. 


:sxiv.]  What  think  ye  op  christ?  287 

unless  you  have  eyes  and  see  not^  he  that  runs  may  lead. 
Search  the  eleventh  article  of  our  church:  "We  are  ^accounted 
righteous  before  God^  only  for  the  merits  of  our  Lord  and  Sa- 
viour Jesus  Christ,  by  faith,  and  not  for  our  own  works  or  de- 
servings." 

This  doctrine  of  our  free  justification  by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus^ 
however  censured  and  evil  spoken  of  by  our  present  masters  in 
Israel,  was  highly  esteemed  by  our  wise  forefathers ;  for  in  the 
subsequent  words  of  the  forementioned  article,  it  is  called  a 
most  wholesome  doctrine,  and  very  fhU  of  comfort :  and  so  it 
is  to  all  that  are  weary  and  heavy  laden,  and  are  truly  willing  to 
find  rest  in  Jesus  Christ. 

This  is  gospel,  this  is  glad  tidings  of  great  joy  to  all  that  feel 
themselves  poor,  lost,  undone,  damned  sinners.  "  Ho,  every 
one  that  thirsteth,.come  unto  the  waters  of  life,  and  drink  freely; 
come  and  buy,  without  money  and  without  price."  Behold  a 
fountain  opened  in  your  Saviour's  side,  for  sin  and  for  all  un- 
cleanness.  "  Look  unto  him  whom  you  have  pierced  :"  look 
unto  him  by  faith,  and  verily  you  shall  be  saved,  though  you 
came  here  only  to  ridicule  and  blaspheme,  and  never  thought  of 
God  or  of  Christ  before. 

Not  that  you  must  think  Grod  will  save  you  because,  or  on 
account  of,  your  faith ;  for  faith  is  a  work,  and  then  you  would 
be  justified  for  your  works :  but  when  I  tell  you,  we  are  to  be 
justified  by  faith,  I  mean  that  faith  is  the  instrument  whereby 
the  sinner  applies  or  brings  home  the  redemption  of  Jesus  Christ 
to  his  heart.  And  to  whomsoever  God  gives  such  a  faith,  (for 
it  is  the  free  gift  of  Grod,)  he  may  lift  up  tus  head  vrith  boldness, 
he  need  not  fear ;  he  is  a  spiritual  son  of  our  spiritual  David  ;  he 
is  passed  from  death  to  life,  he  shall  never  come  into  condemna- 
tion. This  is  the  gospel  which  we  preach.  If  any  man  or  angel 
preach  any  other  gospel  than  this^  of  our  being  freely  justified 
through  faith  in  Christ  Jesus,  we  have  the  authority  of  the  great- 
est apostle,  to  pronounce  him  accursed. 

And  now,  my  brethren,  what  think  you  of  this  foolishness  of 
preaching  ?  To  you  that  have  tasted  the  good  word  of  life,  who 
have  been  enlightened  to  see  the  riches  of  God's  free  grace  in 
Christ  Jesus,  I  am  persuaded  it  is  precious,  and  has  distilled 
like  the  dew  into  your  souls.  And  Oh  that  all  were  like-minded ! 
But  I  am  afraid,  numbers  are  ready  to  go  away  contradicting 
and  blaspheming.  Tell  me,  are  there  not  many  of  you  saying 
within  yourselves,  *^  This  is  a  licentious  doctrine ;  this  preacher 
is  opening  a  door  for  encouragement  in  sin.  But  this  does  not 
surprise  me  at  all,  it  is  a  stale,  antiquated  objection,  as  old  as 
file  doctrine  of  justification  itself;  and  (which,  by  the  way,  is  not 
much  to  the  credit  of  those  who  urge  it  now)  it  was  made  by  an 
BifideL  St  Paul,  in  his  epistle  to  the  Romans,  after  he  had,  in 
the  first  five  chapters,  demonstrably  proved  the  doctrine  of  jus- 
tification bv  faith  alone ;  in  the  sixth,  brings  in  an  unbeliever, 
saying,  **  Shall  we  continue  in  sin  then,  that  grace  may  abound  T' 
Bat  as  be  rejected  such  an  interference  with  a  ^*  God  forbid ! 


99 


S88  WHAT. THINK  TB  OF  €HIU8T?  [XXtY. 

0»  do  I :  for  die  fidtb  wkicb  we  preachy  is  not  a  dead  ipe€«l»» 
tire  fiBuib^  an  assenting  to  things  credible,  as  credible,  as  it  is 
commonly  defined:  it  is  not  a  faith  of  the  head  only,  but  a 
faith  of  the  heart.  It  is  a  living  principle  wrought  in  the  soul, 
by  the  Spirit  of  the  ever-living  God,  convincing  the  sinner  of  his 
lost,  undone  condition  by  nature ;  enabling  Mm  to  apply,  and 
lay  hold  on,  the  perfect  righteousness  of  Jesus  Christ,  freely 
offered  him  in  the  gospel,  and  continually  exciting  him,  out  of  a 
principle  of  love  and  gratitude,  to  shew  forth  that  faith,  by 
abounding  in  evenr  good  word  and  work.  This  is  the  sum  and 
substance  of  the  aoctrine  that  has  been  delivered.  And  if  this 
be  a  licentious  doctrine,  judge  ye.  No,  my  brethren,  this  is  not 
destroying,  but  teaching  you  how  to  do  good  works,  from  a  pro- 
per principle.  For,  to  use  the  words  of  our  church  in  another 
of  her  Articles,  *^  Works  done  before  the  grace  of  Christ,  and  the 
inspiration  of  the  Spirit,  are  not  pleasant  to  God,  for  as  much  as 
they  spring  not  of  faith  in  Jesus  Christ ;  rather,  for  that  they 
are  not  done  as  God  has  willed  and  commanded  them  to  be 
done,  we  doubt  not  but  they  have  the  nature  of  sin."  So  that 
they  who  bid  you  do,  and  then  live,  are  just  as  wise  as  those 
who  would  persuade  you  to  build  a  beautiful  magnificent  house, 
without  laying  a  foundation. 

It  is  true,  the  doctrine  of  our  free  justification  by  faith  in 
Christ  Jesus,  like  other  gospel  truths,  may  and  will  be  abused 
by  men  of  corrupt  minds,  reprobate  concerning  the  faith :  bot 
they  who  receive  the  truth  of  Grod  in  the  love  of  it,  will  always 
be  shewing  their  faith  by  tbeir  works.  For  this  reason,  St.  Paul, 
after  he  had  told  the  Ephesians,  **  By  grace  they  were  saved 
through  faith,  not  of  works,  lest  any  man  should  boast,"  imme- 
diately adds,  *^  For  we  are  his  workmanship,  created  in  Christ 
Jesus  unto  good  works.'^  And  in  his  epistle  to  Titus,  having 
given  him  directions^ to  tell  the  people  they  were  justified  by 
grace,  directly  subjoins,  chap.  iii.  ver.  8.  *'I  will  that  you 
affirm  constantly,  that  they  who  have  believed  in  God  might  be 
careful  to  maintain  good  works."  Agreeably  to  this  we  are 
told  in  our  twelfth  Article, ''  That  albeit  good  works,  which  are 
the  fruits  of  faith,  and  follow  after  justification,  cannot  put  away 
our  sins,  and  endure  the  severity  of  God's  judgment;  yet  are 
they  pleasing  and  acceptable  to  God  in  Christ,  and  do  spring 
necessarily  out  of  a  true  and  lively  faith,  insomuch  that  a  lively 
faith  may  be  as  evidently  known  by  them,  as  a  tree  discerned 
by  the  fruit." 

What  would  I  give,  that  this  Article  was  duly  understood, 
and  preached  by  all  that  have  subscribed  to  it !  The  ark  of  the 
Lord  would  not  then  be  driven  into  the  wilderness,  nor  would 
so  many  persons  dissent  from  the  church  'of  England.  For  1 
am  fully  persuaded  that  it  is  not  so  much  on  account  of  rites 
and  ceremonies,  as  our  not  preaching  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus, 
that  so  many  have  been  obliged  to  go  and  seek  for  food  else- 
where. Did  not  we  fall  from  our  established  doctrines,  few, 
comparatively  speaking,  would  fall  from  the  established  church. 


JtXl?.}  WHiT  THINK    YE   OF  CIIRISTt  289 

Where  Cfarist  Li  preadied,  tiiougb  it  be  in  a  church  or  on  a  com^ 
mon^  dissenters  of  all  denominations  have,  and  do  most  freely 
come.  But  if  our  clergy  will  preach  only  the  law,  and  not 
shew  the  way  of  salvation  by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus,  the  charge 
of  schism  at  the  day  of  judgment,  1  lear,  will  chiefly  lie  at  thdr 
door.  The  true  sheep  of  Christ  know  the  voice  of  Christ's  true 
shepherds,  and  strangers  they  will  not  hear. 

Observe,  my  dear  brethren,  die  words  of  the  Artide,  ^'Oood 
works  are  the  fruits  of  faith,  and  follow  after  justificatimi." 
How  then  can  they  precede,  or  be  any  way  the  cause  of  it  ?  Our 
persons  must  be  justified,  before  our  performances  can  be  ac<- 
cepted.  God  had  respect  to  Abel  before  he  had  respect  to  his 
offering :  and  therefore  the  righteousness  off  Jesus  Christ  n^ust 
be  fredy  impfuted  to,  and  apprehended  by  us  through  faith, 
before  we  can  offer  ^n  acceptable  sacrifice  to  God :  for  out  of 
Christ,  as  I  hinted  .before,  God  is  a  consuming  fire ;  and  whatr 
soever  is  not  of  faith  in  Christ,  is  sin. 

That  people  mistake  the  doctrine  of  fitee  justification,  I  bdieve, 
is  purtly  o>ving  to  their  not  rightly  considering  the  different 
persons  to  whom  St.  Paul  and  St.  James  wrote  in  their  epis- 
tles ;  as  also  the  different  kind  of  justification  each  of  them 
writes  about.    The  former  asserts,  in  line  upon  line,  argument 
upon  argument, '* That  we  are  justified  by  faith  alone:''  The 
latter  put  this  question,  **  Was  not  Abraham  justified  by  works  ?'' 
From  whence  many,  not  considering  the  different  views  of  these 
boly  men,  and  the  ^i^Eerent  persons  they  wrote  to,  have  blended 
and  joined  faith  and  works,  in  order  to  justify  us  in  the  sight  of 
God.     But  this  is  a  capital  mistake ;  for  St.  Paul  was  writing 
to  the  Jewish  proselytes,  who  sought  righteousness  by  the  works 
not  of  the  ceremonial  only,  .but  of  the  moral  law.     In  contra- 
distinction to  that,  he  tells  them,  that  they  were  to  look  for  jus- 
tification in  Grod's  sight,  only  by  the  perfect  righteousness  of 
Jesus  Christ  apprehended  by  faith.    St.  James  had  a  different 
set  of  people  to  deal  with ;  such  who  abiused  the  doctrines  of 
free  jastificaticHi,  and  thought  they  should  be  saved  (as  num- 
bers among  us  do  now)  upon  their  barely  professing  to  bdieve 
on  Jesus  Christ.    These  the  holy  Apostle  endeavours  wisely  to 
convince,  that  such  a  faith  was  only  a  dead  and  false  faith ;  and 
therefore  it  behoved  all  who  would  be  blessed  with  £iithfui 
Abraham,  to  shew  forth  their  faith  by  their  works,  as  he  did : 
**  For  was  not  Abraham  justified  by  works,  did  he  not  prove 
that  his  faith  was  a  true  justifying  faith,  by  its  being  productive 
of  good  works?  From  whence  it  is  plain,  that  St.  James  is 
tallung  of  a  dedarative  justification  before  men ;  shew  me,  de- 
monstrate, evidence  to  me,  that  thou  hast  a  true  faith,  by  tliy 
works  :  ^vbereas  St.  Paul  is  talking  only  of  our  being  justified 
in  the  sight  ot  God ;  and  thus  he  proves  that  Abraham,  as  we 
also  are  to  be,  was  justified  before  ever  the  moral  or  ceremonial 
law  was  given  to  the  Jews :  for  it  is  written,  "  Abraham  believed 
in  the  Lord,  and  it  was  accounted  to  him  for  righteousness." 
Take  the  substance  of  what  has  been  said  on  this  head,  in  the 


I 


290  WHAT  THINK  YE   OP   CHRIST?  [XXIT. 

few  following  words.  Every  man  that  is  saved  is  justified  three 
ways :  First,  Meriioriously,  by  the  death  of  Jesus  Christ :  "  It 
is  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  alone  that  cleanses  us  from  all  sin." 
Secondly,  Instrumentally,  by  faith:  faith  is  the  means  or  instru- 
ment whereby  the  merits  of  Jesus  Christ  are  applied  to  the 
sinner's  heart :  '^Ye  are  all  the  children  of  God  by  faith  in 
Christ  Jesus."  Thirdly,  We  are  justified  Declaratively,  namely, 
by  good  works :  good  works  declare  and  prove  to  the  world, 
that  our  faith  is  a  true  saving  faith.  **  Was  not  Abraham  jus- 
tified by  works?"  And  again^  ''Shew  me  thy  faith  by  thy 
works." 

It  may  not  be  improper  to  illustrate  this  doctrine  with  an  ex- 
ample or  two.  I  suppose  no  one  will  pretend  to  say,  that  there 
was  any  fitness  for  salvation  in  Zaccheus  the  publican,  when 
he  came  to  see  Jesus,  out  of  no  better  principle,  than  that  whereby 
perhaps  thousands  are  led  to  hear  me  preach  ;  I  mean,  curiosity : 
hilt  Jesus  Christ  prevented  and  called  him  by  his  free  grace, 
and  sweetly,  but  irresistibly,  inclined  him  to  obey  that  call ;  as, 
I. pray  God,  he  may  influence  all  you  that  come  only  to  see 
who  ihe  preacher  is.  Zaccheus  received  our  Lord  joyfully  into 
his  house,  and  at  the  same  time  by  faith  received  him  into  his 
heart:  Zaccheus  was  then  freely  justified  in  the  sight  of  God. 
But  behold  the  immediate  fruits  of  that  justification.  He  stands 
forth  in  the  midst,  and,  as  before  he  had  believed  in  his  heart,  be 
now  makes  confession  with  his  mouth  to  salvation :  "  Behold, 
Lord,  the  half  of  my  goods  I  give  unto  the  poor;  and  if  I  have 
taken  any  thing  from  any  man  by  false  accusation,  I  restore 
him  fourfold."  And  thus  it  will  be  with  thee,  O  believer,  as 
soon  as  ever  God's  dear  Son  is  revealed  in  thee  by  a  living 
faith;  thou  wilt  have  no  rest  in  thy  spirit,  till  out  of  love  and 
gratitude  for  what  God  has  done  for  thy  soul,  thou  shewest 
forth  thy  faith  by  thy  works. 

Again,  I  suppose  every  body  will  grant  there  was  no  fitness 
for  salvation  in  the  persecutor  Saul ;  no  more  than  there  is  in 
those  persecuting  zealots  of  these  last  days,  who  are  already 
breathing  out  thrcatenings,  and,  if  in  their  power,  would  breathe 
out  slaughter  also,  against  the  disciples  of  the  Lord. 

Now,  our  Lord,  we  know,  freely  prevented  him  by  his  grace, 
(and  O  that  he  would  thus  effectually  call  the  persecutors  ol' 
this  generation)  and  by  a  light  from  heaven  struck  him  to  the 
ground.  At  the  same  time,  by  his  Spirit,  he  pricked  him  to  the 
heart,  convinced  him  of  sin,  and  caused  him  to  cry  out, ''  Who 
art  thou,  Lord  ?"  Christ  replies,  "  I  am  Jesus  whom  thou  perse- 
cutest."  Faith  then  was  instantaneously  given  tohim,  and  behold 
immediately  Saul  cries  out.  Lord,  what  wouldest  thou  have  roe 
to  do?"  And  so  will  every  poor  soul  that  believes  on  the  Lord 
Jesus  with  his  whole  heart.  He  will  be  always  asking,  Lord, 
what  shall  I  do  for  thee  ?  Lord,  what  wouldst  thou  have  me  to 
do  ?  Not  to  justify  himself,  but  only  to  evidence  the  sincerity 
of  his  love  and  thankfulness  to  his  all-merciful  High-priest,  for 
plucking  him  as  a  firebrand  out  of  the  fire. 


XXIV.]  WHAT   THINK    YE   OF   CHRIST?  291 

Perhaps  many  self-righteous  persons  amongst  you,  may  flatter 
jTourselves^  that  you  are  not  so  wicked  as  either  Zaccheus  or 
Saul  was,  and  consequently  there  is  a  greater  fitness  for  salva- 
tion in  you  than  in  them.  But  if  you  think  thus,  indeied  yoa 
think  more  highly  of  yourselves  tban  you  ought  to  think :  for 
by  nature  we  are  all  alike,  all  equally  fallen  short  of  the  glory  of 
(rod,  all  equally  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,  and  there  needs 
the  same  almighty  power  to  be  exerted  in  converting  any  one 
of  the  most  sober,  good-natured,  moral  persons  here  present,  as 
there  was  in  cotiverting  the  publican  Zaccheus,  or  that  notorious 
persecutor  Saul.  And  were  it  possible  for  you  to  ascend  into 
the  highest  heaven,  and  to  inquire  of  the  spirits  of  just  men 
made  perfect,  I  am  persuaded  they  would  tell  yon  this  doctrine 
is  from  God.  But  we  have  a  more  sure  word  of  prophecy,  to 
which  we  do  well  to  give  heed,  as  unto  a  light  shining  in  a  dark 
place.  My  brethren,  the  word  is  nigh  you ;  search  the  scrip- 
tures :  beg  of  God  to  make  you  willing  to  be  saved  in  this  day 
of  his  power ;  for  it  is  not  flesh  and  blood,  but  the  Spirit  of 
Jesus  Christ  that  alone  can  reveal  these  things  unto  you. 

Fourthly f  and  Lastly ^  What  think  you  of  Jesus  Christ  being 
formed  within  you?  for  whom  Christ  justifies,  them  he  also 
sanctifies.  Although  he  find,  yet  he  does  not  leave  us  unholy . 
A  true  Christian  may  not  so  properly  be  said  to  live,  as  Jesus 
Christ  to  live  in  him  :  for  they  only  that  are  led  by  the  Spirit 
of  Christ,  are  the  true  sons  of  God. 

As  I  observed  before,  so  I  tell  you  again,  the  faith  which  we 
preach  is  not  a  dead,  but  a  lively  active  faith  wrought  in  the  soul, 
working  a  thorough  change  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in 
the  whole  man  :  and  unless  Christ  be  thus  in  you,  notwithstand- 
ing you  ma^  be  orthodox  as  to  the  foregoing  principles,  notwith- 
standing yon  may  have  good  desires,  and  attend  constantly  on 
the  means  of  grace ;  yet,  in  St.  Paul's  opinion,  you  are  out  of  a 
state  of  salvation.  '^  Know  ye  not  (says  that  apostle  to  the 
Corinthians,  a  church  famous  for  its  gifts  above  any  other  church 
under  heaven,)  that  Christ  is  in  you  (by  his  Spirit)  unless  ye  be 
reprobates  V* 

For  Christ  came  not  only  to  save  us  from  the  guilt,  but  from 
the  power  of  sin ;  till  he  has  done  this,  however  he  may  be  a 
Saviour  to  others,  we  can  have  no  assurance  or  well-grounded 
hope,  that  he  has  saved  us ;  for  it  is  by  receiving  his  blessed 
Spirit  into  our  hearts,  and  feeling  him  witnessing  with  our  spirits^ 
that  we  are  the  sons  of  Gqd,  that  we  can  be  certified  of  our  being 
sealed  to  the  day  of  redemption. 

This  is  a  great  mystery  ;  but  I  speak  of  Christ  and  the  new- 
birth.  Marvel  not  at  my  asking  you,  what  you  think  about 
Christ  being  formed  within  you  ?  for  either  God  must  change 
his  nature,  or  we  ours.  For  as  in  Adam  we  all  have  spiritually 
died,  so  all  that  are  effectually  saved  by  Christ,  must  in  Christ 
be  spiritually  made  alive.  His  only  end  in  dying  and  rising 
again,  and  interceding  for  us  now  in  heaven,  is  to  redeem  us 
from  the  misery  of  our  fallen  nature^  and,  by  the  operation  of  his 

s2 


S92  Mthat  thihk  vb  of  cnMbtT  [%%\r. 

blessed  Spirit,  16  make  us  meet  to  bd  pattalcetd  of  the  heavetily 
inheritance  with  the  isiaints  in  light.  None  but  those  that  thtis 
are  changed  by  his  grace  her^,  shall  appear  with  him  in  glory 
hereafter. 

Examine  yourselves  therefore,  my  brethren,  whether  yon  are 
in  the  faith ;  prove  yourselves,  and  think  it  not  sufficient  to  say 
in  your  creed,  I  believe  in  Jesus  Christ ;  many  say  so,  who  do 
not  believe,  who  are  reprobates,  and  yel  in  a  state  of  death.  You 
take  Grod's  name  in  vain  when  you  call  him  Father,  and  your 
prayets  are  turned  into  sin,  unless  you  believe  in  Christ,  so  as 
to  have  your  life  hid  with  him  in  God,  and  to  receive  life  and 
nourishment  from  him,  as  branches  do  from  the  vine. 
*  I  know,  indeed,  the  meh  of  this  generation  deny  there  Ls  any 
such  thing  as  feeling  Christ  within  them ;  but,  alas  !  to  what  a 
dreadful  condition  would  such  reduce  us,  even  to  the  state  of  the 
abandoned  heathen,  who,  St.  Paul  tells  us,  ^*  were  past  feeling." 
The  apostle  prays  that  the  Ephesians  may  abound  in  all  know- 
ledge and  spiritual  understanding,  or,  as  it  might  be  rendered, 
spiritual  sensation.  And  in  the  office  for  the  visitation  of  the 
sitk,  the  minister  prays  that  the  Lord  may  make  the  sick  per- 
son know  and  feel  that  there  is  no  other  name  under  heaven 
given  unto  men,  in  whom,  and  through  whom,  they  may  receive 
health  and  salvation,  but  only  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus.  For 
there  is  a  spiritual  as  well  as  a  corporeal  feeling ;  and  though  this 
is  not  communicated  to  us  in  a  sensible  manner,  as  outward  ob- 
jects affect  our  senses,  yet  it  is  as  real  as  any  sensible  or  visible 
sensation,  and  may  be  as  truly  felt  and  discerned  by  the  souI» 
as  any  impression  ftom  without  can  be  felt  by  the  body.  All 
who  are  born  again  of  God,  know  that  I  lie  not. 

What  think  you,  sirs,  did  Naaman  feel»  when  he  was  cured 
of  his  leprosy  ?  Did  the  woman  feel  virtue  coming  out  of  Jesus 
Christ,  when  she  touched  the  hem  of  his  garment,  and  was  cured 
Of  her  bloody  issue  ?  So  surely  mayest  thou  feel,  O  believer, 
when  Jesus  Christ  dwelleth  in  thy  heart.  I  pray  God  to  make 
you  all  know  and  feel  this,  ere  ye  depart  hence. 

O  my  brethren,  my  heart  is  enlarged  towards  you.  I  trust  I 
feel  something  of  that  hidden  but  powerful  presence  of  Christ, 
whilst  I  am  preaching  to  you.  Indeed  it  is  sweet,  it  is  exceed- 
ingly comfortable.  All  the  harm  I  wish  you,  who  without  cause 
are  my  enemies,  is,  that  you  felt  the  Iflce.  Believe  me,  though 
it  would  be  hell  to  my  soul  to  return  to  a  natural  state  again, 
yet  I  would  willingly  change  states  with  you  for  a  little  while, 
that  you  might  know  what  it  is  to  have  Christ  dwelling  in  your 
hearts  by  faith.  Do  not  turn  your  backs  ;  do  not  let  the  devil 
hurry  you  away ;  be  not  afraid  of  convictions ;  do  not  think 
worse  of  the  doctrine,  because  preached  without  the  church 
walls.  Our  Lord,  in  the  days  of  his  flesh,  preached  on  a  mount, 
in  a  ship,  and  a  field ;  and  I  am  persuaded  many  have  felt  bis 
gracious  presence  here.  Indeed,  wc  speak  what  we  know.  Do 
not  reject  the  kingdom  of  God  against  yourselves :  be  so  wise 
as  to  receive  our  witness.    I  cannot  I  will  not  let  you  go ;  stay 


XJtlY.]  WHAT  THINE    Y«  QV  CHRIfliTf  899 

H  little.  let  us  reason  together.  HQW^ver  ligl^tlj  ;oi^  iqe^y  es. 
te^ip  your  ^uls^  I  know  our  ijord  has  set  an  unspeakable  valu^ 
pp  tbeps.  lie  thought  them  worthy  of  his  most  precious  blood. 
t  beseech  you  therefore,  O  sipners,  be  ye  recouciled  to  God.  \ 
hope  you  do  not  fear  beiqg  accepted  in  the  beloved.  Behold, 
he  calletb  you  ;  behold,  he  prevent^,  and  follows  you  with  hi^ 
mercy,  and  hath  sent  forth  his  seryai^ts  ipto  the  highwajs  and 
hedges,  to  compel  you  to  come  in.  Remember  then,  that  at 
such  an  hour  of  such  a  day,  in  such  a  year,  in  this  place,  you 
were  all  told  what  you  ought  to  think  concerning  Jesus  Christ. 
If  you  now  perish,  it  will  not  be  for  lack  of  knowledge :  I  am 
free  from  the  blood  of  you  all.  You  cannot  say  I  have  been 
preachipg  damnation  to  you ;  you  cannot  say  I  have,  like  legal 

Sreachers,  been  requiring  you  to  make  brick  without  straw.  I 
ave  not  bidden  you  to  make  yourselves  saints,  and  then  coma 
to  God ;  but  I  have  offered  you  salvation  on  as  cheap  terms  as 
you  can  desire.  I  have  offered  you  Christ's  whole  wisdom, 
Christ's  whole  righteousness,  Christ's  whole  sanctification  and 
eternal  redemption,  if  you  will  but  believe  on  him.  If  you  say 
you  cannot  believe,  you  say  right;  for  faith,  as  well  as  every  other 
blessing,  is  the  gift  of  God  :  but  then  wait  upon  God,  and  who 
knows  but  he  may  have  mercy  on  thee  ?  Why  do  we  not  enter- 
tain more  loving  thoughts  of  Christ  ?  or  do  you  think  he  will 
have  mercy  on  others,  and  not  on  you  ?  But  are  you  not  sin- 
ners ?  and  did  not  Jesus  Christ  come  |nto  the  world  to  save 
pinners  ?  If  you  say  you  are  tbe^chief  of  sinners,  I  answer,  that 
will  be  no  hinderance  to  your  salvation ;  indeed  it  will  not,  if 

J  on  lay  hold  on  him  by  faith.  Read  the  Evangelists,  and  see 
ow  kindly  he  behaved  to  his  disciples  who  fled  from  and  denied 
bim :  **  Go  tell  my  brethren,"  says  he.  He  did  not  say.  Go  tell 
(hose  traitors:  but,  ''Go  teUi  my  brethren,  and  Peter:"  as 
thoagh  he  had  said.  Go  tell  my  brethren  in  general,  and  poor 
Peter  in  particular,  "that  I  am  risen;"  O  comfort  his  poor 
drooping  heart,  tell  him  I  am  reconciled  to  him ;  bid  him  weep 
no  more  so  bitterly ;  for  though  with  oaths  and  curses  he  thrice 
denied  me,  yet  I  have  died  for  bis  sins,  I  am  risen  again  for  his 
justification :  I  freely  forgive  him  all.  Thus  slow  to  anger,  and 
of  great  kin4j»ess,  wai^  our  all-merciful  High  Priest.  And  do 
you  think  he  hs^s  changed  his  nature,  and  forgets  poor  sinners, 
now  be  is  exajted  to  the  right  hand  of  God?  No,  he  is  the  same 
yesterday,  to-day,  ^nd  for  ever,  ^nd  sittetb  there  only  to  make 
intercession  for  us.  Come  then  ye  harlots,  come  ye  publicans, 
come  ye  most  abandoned  of  sinners,  come  and  believe  on  Jesus 
Christ.  Though  the  whple  world  despise  you,  and  cast  you  out, 
yet  be  will  not  disdain  to  take  you  up.  O  amazing,  O  infinitely 
condescending  love !  even  you  he  will  not  be  ashamed  to  call  his 
brethren.  How  will  you  escape,  if  you  neglect  such  a  glorious 
offer  of  salvation?  What  would  the  damned  spirits,  now  in  the 
prison  of  hell,  give,  if  Christ  were  so  freely  offered  to  their  souls  ? 
And  why  are  not  we  lifting  up  our  eyes  in  torments  ?  Does 
any  one  out  of  this  great  multitude  dare  say,  he  does  not  deserve 


294  WHAT   THINK    YE  OF   CHRIST?  [XXIT. 

damnation  ?  If  not,  why  are  we  left^  and  others  taken  away  by 
death  ?  What  is  this  but  an  instance  of  God's  free  grace,  and  a 
sigpi  of  his  good-will  towards  ns  ?  Let  Grod's  goodness  lead  us 
to  repentance !  O  let  there  be  joy  in  heaven  over  some  of  you 
repenting  !  Though  we  are  in  a  field,  I  am  persuaded  the  blessed 
angels  are  hovering  now  around  us,  and  do  long,  "  as  the  hart 
panteth  after  the  water-brooks,"  to  sing  an  anthem  at  your  con- 
version. Blessed  be  God,  I  hope  their  joy  will  be  fulfilled. 
'  An  awful  silence  appears  amongst  us.  I  have  good  hope 
that  the  words  which  the  Lord  has  enabled  me  to  speak  in  your 
ears  this  day,  have  not  altogether  fallen  to  the  ground.  Your 
tears,  and  deep  attention,  are  an  evidence  that  the  Lord  God  is 
amongst  us  of  a  truth.  Come,  ye  Pharisees,  come  and  see,  in 
spite  of  your  satanical  rage  and  iury,  the  Lord  Jesus  is  getting 
himself  the  victory.  And,  brethren,  I  speak  the  truth  in  Christ, 
I  lie  not,  if  one  soul  of  you,  by  the  blessing  of  God,  be  brought 
to  think  savingly  of  Jesus  Christ  this  day,  I  care  not  if  my  ene- 
mies were  permitted  to  carry  me  to  prison,  and  put  my  feet  fast 
in  the  stocks,  as  soon  as  I  have  delivered  this  sermon.  Bre- 
thren, my  heart's  desire  and  prayer  to  God  is,  that  you  may  be 
saved.  For  this  cause  I  follow  my  Master  without  the  camp. 
I  care  not  how  much  of  his  sacred  reproach  I  bear,  so  that  some 
of  you  be  converted  from  the  error  of  your  ways.  I  rejoice, 
yea,  and  1  will  rejoice.  Ye  men,  ye  devils,  do  your  worst :  the 
Lord,  who  sent,  will  support  me.  And  when  Christ,  who  is 
our  life,  and  whom  I  have  now  been  preaching,  shall  appear,  I 
also,  together  with  his  despised  little  ones,  shall  appear  with 
him  in  glory.  And  then,  what  will  you  think  of  Christ  ?  I  know 
what  yon  will  think  of  him.  You  will  then  think  him  to  be 
the  fairest  among  ten  thousand :  you  will  then  think  and  fed 
him  to  be  a  just  and  sin-avenging  Judge.  Be  ye  then  persuaded 
to  kiss  him  lest  he  be  angry,  and  so  you  be  banished  for  ever 
from  the  presence  of  the  Lord.  Behold,  I  come  to  you  as  the 
angels  did  to  Lot.  Flee,  flee,  for  your  lives  ;  haste,  linger  no 
longer  in  your  spiritual  Sodom,  for  otherwise  you  will  be  eter- 
nally destroyed.  Numbers,  no  doubt,  there  are  amongst  you, 
that  may  regard  me  no  more  than  Lot's  sons-in-law  regarded 
him.  I  am  persuaded  I  seem  to  some  of  you  as  one  that  mock- 
eth  :  but  I  speak  the  truth  in  Christ,  I  lie  not ;  as  sure  as  fire 
and  brimstone  was  rained  from  the  Lord  out  of  heaven,  to  de- 
stroy Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  so  surely,  at  the  great  day,  shall 
the  vials  of  God's  wrath  be  poured  on  you,  if  you  do  not  think 
seriously  of,  and  act  agreeably  to,  the  gospel  of  the  Lord's  Christ. 
Behold,  I  have  told  you  before ;  and  I  pray  God,  all  you  that 
forget  him  may  seriously  think  of  what  has  been  said,  before 
he  pluck  you  away,  and  there  be  none  to  deliver  you. 
Now  to  God  the  Father,  &c. 


XXV.]  ;rHE   WISB   and   foolish   VIRGINfl.  295 

SERMON  XXV. 

THE   WISB   AND    FOOLISH    VIROINS. 

Watch  therefore,  for  ye  know  neither  the  day  nor  the  hour  in 
which  the  Son  of  man  cometh. — Matthew  xxv.  13. 

The  apostle  Paul^  in  his  epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  informs  us^ 
**  That  it  is  appointed  for  all  men  once  to  die ;  after  that,  is  the 
jadgmenf  And  I  think,  if  any  consideration  be  sufficient  to 
awaken  a  sleeping  drowsy  world,  it  must  be  this,  that  there  will 
be  a  day  wherein  these  heavens  shall  be  wrapt  up  like  a  scroll, 
this  element  melt  with  fervent  heat,  the  earth  and  all  things 
therein  be  burnt  up,  and  every  soul,  of  every  nation  and  lan- 
guage, summoned  to  appear  before  the  dreadful  tribunal  of  the 
right^us  Judge  of  quick  and  dead,  to  receive  rewards  and 

Sonishments  according  to  the  deeds  done  in  their  bodies, 
'he  great  apostle  just  mentioned,  when  brought  before  Felix, 
could  think  of  no  better  means  to  convert  that  sinful  man,  than 
to  reason  of  temperance,  righteousness,  and  more  especisilly  of 
a  judgment  to  come.  .  Tlie  first  might  in  some  measure  affect, 
but  I  am  persuaded  it  was  the  last  consideration,  a  judgment 
to  come,  that  made  him  to  tremble :  and  so  bad  as  the  world  is 
now  grown,  yet  there  are  few  have  their  consciences  so  far 
seared,  as  to  deny  that  there  will  be  a  reckoning  hereafter.  The 
promiscuous  dispensations  of  Providence  in  this  life,  wherein 
we  see  good  men  afflicted,  destitute,  tormented,  and  the  wicked 
permitted  triumphantly  to  ride  over  their  heads,  has  been  always 
looked  upon  as  an  indisputable  argument  by  the  generality  of 
Bien  ;  and  there  will  be  a  day  in  which  Grod  will  judge  the  world 
in  righteousness,  and  administer  equity  unto  his  people.  Some 
indeed  are  so  bold  as  to  deny  it,  while  they  are  engaged  in  the 
pursuit  of  the  lust  of  the  eye,  and  the  pride  of  life.  But  follow 
them  to  their  death-beds,  ask  them,  when  their  souls  are  ready 
to  launch  into  eternity,  what  tiiey  then  think  of  a  judgment  to 
come  ?  and  they  wiU  tell  you,  they  dare  not  give  their  con- 
sciences the  lie  any  longer.  They  feel  a  fearful  looking  for  of 
judgment  and  fiery  indignation  in  their  hearts.  Since  then  these 
thi^s  are  so,  does  it  not  highly  concern  each  of  us,  my  brethren, 
before  we  come  on  a  bed  of  sickness,  seriously  to  examine  how 
the  account  stands  between  God  and  our  souls,  and  how  it  will 
&re  with  us  in  that  day  ?  As  for  the  openly  profane,  the  drunk- 
ard, the  whoremonger,  the  adulterer,  and  such  like,  there  is  no 
doubt  of  what  will  become  of  them ;  without  repentance,  they 
shall  never  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God  and  his  Christ :  no  ; 
their  damnation  slumberetb  not ;  a  burning  fiery  Tophet,  kin- 
dled by  the  fury  of  God's  eternal  wrath,  is  prepared  for  their 
reception,  wherein  they  must  suffer  the  vengeance  of  eternal 
fire.  Nor  is  there  the  least  doubt  of  the  state  of  true  believers. 
For  though  they  are  despised  and  rejected  of  natural  mei^ 
yet  being  bom  again  of  God,  they  are  heirs  of  God,  and  joint- 
heurs  vriUi  Christ.    They  have  the  earnest  of  the  promised  i 


S&G  nth  WISE   AND   FOOLISH   VIRGINS.  [XSV. 

ritaace  in  their  hearts^  and  are  assured,  that  a  new  and  living: 
way  is  made  open  for  them  into  the  holy  of  holies^  by  the  blood 
of  Jesus  Christy  into  which  an  abundant  entrance  shall  be  ad- 
ministered at  the  great  day  of  account.  The  only  question  is, 
what  tvill  become  of  the  almost  Christian,  one  that  is  content  to 
go,  as  be  thiiiks,  in  a  middle  way  to  heaven,  without  being  pro- 
fane on  the  one  hand,  or,  as  he  falsely  imagines,  righteous  over- 
much oil  the  other  ?  Many  there  are  in  every  congregation,  and 
consequetitly  some  here'  present,  of  this  stamp.  And  what  is 
iv^orst  of  all,  it  is  more  easy  to  convince  the  most  notorious  pub- 
licans and  sinners  of  their  being  out  of  a  state  of  salvation,  than 
any  df  these.  Notwithstanding,  if  Jesus  Christ  may  be  our 
judge,  they  shall  as  certainly  be  rejected  and  disowned  by  him 
at  the  last  day,  as  thotigh  they  lived  in  open  defiance  of  all  bis 
laws.  For  what  says  our  Lord  in  the  parable,  of  which  the 
words  of  the  text  are  a  conclusion,  and  which  I  intend  to  make 
the  subject  of  my  present  discourse. 

''Then,"  at  the  ddy  of  judgment,  which  he  had  been  discours- 
ing of  in  the  foregoing,  and  prosecutes  in  this  chapter, ''  shall 
the  kingd6m  of  heaven,  the  state  of  professors  in  the  gospel 
church,  be  likened  unto  ten  virgins,  who  took  their  lamps,  and 
went  forth  to  meet  the  bridegroom."  In  which  words,  is  a 
manifest  allusion  to  a  custom  prevailing  in  our  Lord's  time 
among  the  Jews,  at  marriage  solemnities,  which  were  generally 
at  night,  and  at  which  it  was  customary  for  the  persons  of 
the  bride-chamber  to  go  out  in  procession  with  many  lights  to 
meet  the  bridegroom.  By  the  bridegrom  you  are  here  to  under- 
stand Jesus  Christ.  The  church,  that  is,  true  believers,  are  bis 
spouse ;  he  is  united  to  them  by  one  spirit,  even  in  this  life ; 
but  the  solemnizing  of  these  sacred  nuptials  is  reserved  till  the 
day  of  judgment,  when  he  shall  come  to  take  them  home  to  him- 
self, and  present  them  before  men  and  angels,  as  his  purchase 
.to  his  Father,  without  spot  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing.  By 
the  ten  virgins,  we  are  to  understand  the  professors  of  Chris- 
tianity in  general.  All  are  called  virgins,  because  all  are  called 
to  be  saints.  Whosoever  names  the  name  of  Christ,  is  obliged 
by  that  very  profession  to  depart  from  all  iniquity.  But  tb« 
pure  and  chaste  in  heart,  are  the  only  persons  that  will  be  so 
blessed  as  to  see  God. 

As  Christ  was  bom  of  a  virgin,  so  he  can  dwell  in  none  but 
virgin  souls,  made  pure  and  holy  by  the  cohabitation  of  his  holy 
Spirit.  What  says  the  apostle  ?  "  All  are  not  Israelites  that 
are  of  Israel,"  aU  are  not  Christians  that  are  called  after  the 
name  of  Christ:  no  says  our  Lord,  in  the  2d  verse,  **  Five  of 
those  virgin?  were  wise,"  true  believers,. "  and  five  were  foolish," 
formal  hypocrites.  But  why  are  five  said  to  be  wise,  and  the 
other  five  foolish  ?  Hear  what  our  Lord  says  in  the  following 
verses  ;  ''  They  that  were  foolish  took  their  lamps,  and  took  no 
oil  with  them :  but  the  wise  took  oil  in  their  vessels  with  their 
lamps.  They  that  were  foolish  took  their  lamps  of  an  outward 
-profession.    Tbey  would  go  to  ohurcb,  say  over  several  manuals 


:iXYJ]  tBl  WISE  AND  FOOLISH   V1BG1K9.  297 

of  prayerSj  com^  pethaps  into  afield  to  hear  a  sermons^  give  at  a 
oollectkm>  and  receive  the  sacrament  constantly,  nay  oft^ier  than 
once  a  month.  Bat  then  here  lay  the  raistaket;  they  had  no  <nl 
IB  their  lamps,  no  principle  of  grace,  no  living  faith  in  their  hearts, 
witboot  whlch^  though  we  should  give  all  our  goods  to  feed  the 
poor,  and  our  bodies  to  be  burnt,  it  would  profit  us  nothing.  In 
shoft^  they  were  exact,  nay,  perhaps  superstitious  bigots  as  to  the 
form,  btit  all  the  whOe  they  were  strangers  to,  and  in  effect  denied 
the  power  of  godliness  in  their  hearts.  They  would  go  to 
church,  but  at  the  same  time  think  it  no  harm  to  go  to  a  ball 
or  an  assembly,  notwithstanding  they  promised  at  their  baptism 
to  renounce  the  pomps  and  vanities  of  this  wicked  world.  They 
Were  so  exceedingly  fearful  of  being  righteous  over-much,  that 
they  would  even  persecute  those  that  were  truly  devout,  if  they 
attempted  to  go  a  step  farther  than  themselves.  In  one  word, 
they  never  efiectually  felt  the  power  of  the  world  to  come.  They 
thought  they  might  be  Christians  without  so  much  inward  feel- 
ing, and  therefore^  notwithstanding  their  high  pretensions,  had 
only  a  name  to  live. 

And  now,  sirs,  let  me  pause  a  while,  and  in  the  name  of  God, 
whom  I  endeayonr  to  serve  in  the  gospel  of  his  dear  Son,  give 
me  leave  to  ask  one  question.  Whilst  I  have  been  drawing, 
though  in  miniature,  the  character  of  these  foolish  virgins,  have 
not  many  of  your  consciences  made  the  a^^plication,  and  with  a 
small  still,  though  inarticulate  voice,  said.  Thou  man,  thou  wo- 
man, art  one  of  those  foolish  virgins,  for  thy  sentiments  and  prac- 
tice agree  thereto  ?  Stifle  not,  but  rather  encourage  these  convic- 
tions ;  and  who  knows,  but  that  Lord,  who  is  rich  in  mercy  to 
all  that  call  upon  him  faithfully,  may  so  work  upon  you,  even 
by  this  foolishness  of  preaching,  as  to  make  you  wise  virgins 
before  you  return  home  ? 

What  they  were,  you  shall  know  immediately :  "  But  the  wise 
took  oil  in  their  vessels  with  their  lamps."  Observe,  the  wise, 
the  true  believers,  had  their  lamps  as  well  as  the  foolish  virgins; 
Ibr  Christianity  does  not  require  of  us  to  cast  out  all  outward 
Ibrms ;  we  may  use  forms,  and  yet  not  be  formal :  for  instance, 
it  is  possible  to  worship  Grod  in  a  set  form  of  prayer,  and  yet 
Worship  him  in  spirit  and  in  truth.  And  tlierefore,  brethren,  let  us 
hot  judge  one  another.  The  wise  virgins  had  their  lamps  ;  herein 
did  not  lie  the  difference  between  them  and  the  foolish,  that  one 
worshipped  Grod  with  a  form,  and  the  other  did  not:  No :  as  the 
Pharisee  and  Publican  went  up  the  temple  to  pray,  so  these  wise 
and  ftiolish  virgins  might  |^  to  the  same  place  of  worship,  and  sit 
under  the  same  ministry ;  but  then  the  wise  took  oil  in  their  vessels 
with  their  lamps ;  they  kept  up  the  form,  but  did  not  rest  in  it ; 
their  words  in  prayer  were  the  language  of  their  hearts,  and 
they  were  no  strangers  to  inward  feelings ;  they  were  not  afraid 
of  searching  doctrines,  nor  affronted  when  ministers  told  them 
they  deserrcd  to  be  damned ;  they  were  not  self-righteous,  but 
wmng  that  Jesus  CJhrist  should  have  all  the  glory  of  their  sal- 
tutton ;  they  trere  t^onvinced  that  the  merits  of  Jesus  Cbiist 


298  THB   WISE   AND   FOOLI8H    VIRGINS.  [XXY. 

were  to  be  apprehendecl  only  by  faith ;  bat  yet,  were  they  as 
carefnl  to  maintain  good  works^  as  though  they  were  to  be  jus- 
tified by  them  :  in  shorty  their  obedience  flowed  from  love  and 
gratitude^  and  was  cheerful,  constant,  uniform,  universal,  like 
that  obedience  which  the  holy  angels  pay  our  Father  in  heaven. 

Here  then  let  me  exhort  you  to  pause  again ;  and  if  any  of 
you  can  faithfully  apply  these  characters  to  your  hearts,  give 
God  the  glory,  and  take  the  comfort  to  your  own  souls  ;  you  are 
not  false,  but  true  believers.  Jesus  Christ  has  been  made  of 
God  to  you,  wisdom,  even  that  wisdom  whereby  you  shall  be 
made  wise  unto  salvation.  God  sees  a  diflerence  between  you 
and  foolish  virgins,  if  natural  men  will  not.  You  need  not  be 
uneasy,  though  one  chance  and  fate  in  this  life  may  happen  to 
you  both.  I  say,  one  chance  and  fate ;  for  ver.  5.  "  while  the 
bridegroom  tarried,"  in  the  space  of  time  which- passed  between 
our  Lord's  ascension  and  his  coming  again  to  judgment,  ''they 
all  slumbered  and  slept."  The  wise  as  well  as  foolish  died, 
for  dust  we  are,  and  to  dust  we  must  return.  It  is  no  reflec* 
tion  at  all  upon  the  divine  goodness,  that  believers  as  well  as 
hypocrites  must  pass  through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death ; 
for  Christ  has  taken  away  the  sting  of  death,  30  that  we  need 
fear  no  evil.  It  is  to  them  a  passage  to  everlasting  life :  death 
is  only  terrible  to  those  who  have  no  hope,  because  they  live 
without  faith  in  the  i^orld.  Whosoever  there  are  amongst  you, 
that  have  received  the  first-fruits  of  the  Spirit,  I  am  persuaded 
you  are  ready  to  cry  out,  We  would  not  live  here  always  ;  we 
long  to  be  dissolved,  that  we  may  be  \iitb  Jesus  Christ ;  and 
though  worms  must  destroy  our  bodies  as  well  as  others,  yet  we 
are  content,  being  assured  that  our  Redeemer  liveth,  that  he  will 
stand  at  the  latter  days  upon  the  earth,  and  that  in  our  flesh 
we  shall  see  God. 

But  it  is  not  so  with  hypocrites  and  unbelievers  beyond  the 
grave ;  for  what  says  our  Lord  ?  ''  And  at  midnight :"  observe, 
at  midnight,  when  all  was  hushed  and  quiet,  and  no  one  dream- 
ing of  any  such  thing,  "  a  cry  was  made  ;"  the  voice  of  the  arch- 
angel and  the  trump  of  God  was  heard  sounding  this  general 
alarm — to  things  in  heaven,  to  things  in  earth,  and  to  things  in 
the  waters  under  the  earth — ''  Behold !"  mark  how  this  awful 
summons  is  ushered  in  with  the  word  behold,  to  engage  our  at- 
tention ?  ''  Behold,  the  bridegroom  cometh  !"  even  Jesus  Christ, 
the  desire  of  nations,  the  bridegroom  of  his  spouse  the  church. 
Because  he  tarried  for  a  while,  to  exercise  the  faith  of  saints, 
and  give  sinners  space  to  repent,  scofiers  were  apt  to  cry  out, 
*'  Where  is  the  promise  of  his  coining  ?  But  the  Lord  is  not 
slack  concerning  his  promise,  as  these  men  count  slackness." 
For,  behold,  he  that  was  to  come  now  cometh,  and  will  not  tarry 
any  longer:  he  cometh  to  be  glorified  in  his  saints,  and  to  take 
vengeance  on  them  that  know  not  God,  and  have  not  obeyed 
his  gospel :  he  cometh,  not  as  a  poor  despised  Galilean  ;  not  to 
be  laid  in  a  stinking  manger ;  not  to  be  despised  or  rejected  of 
men ;  not  to  be  blindfolded,  spit  upon,  and  bofieted ;  not  U>  be 


XXV.]  THB  WISE  AND   FOOLISH   VIRGINS.  209 

nailed  to  an  accursed  tree ;  he  cometh  not  as  the  Son  of  man^ 
but  as  he  really  vfas,  the  eternal  Son  of  the  eternal  God :  He 
cometh  riding  on  the  wings  of  the  wind^  in  tiie  glory  of  the 
Father  and  his  holy  angels^  and  to  be  had  in  everlasting  reve- 
rence of  all  that  shall  be  round  about  him.  '^  Go  ye  forth  to 
meet  him ;"  arise^  ye  dead^  ye  foolish  as  well  as  wise  virgins, 
arise,  and  come  to  judgroent.  Multitudes,  no  doubt,  that  hear 
this  awakening  cry,  would  rejoice  if  the  rocks  might  fall  on,  and 
the  hills  cover  them,  from  the  presence  of  the  Lamb ;  what  would 
they  give,  if  as  they  lived  as  beasts,  they  might  now  die  like  the 
beasts  that  perish !  How  would  they  rejoice,  if  those  satme 
excuses  which  they  made  on  this  side  eternity  for  not  attending 
on  holy  ordinances,  would  serve  to  keep  them  from  appearing 
before  the  heavenly  bridegroom !  But  as  Adam,  notwithstand- 
ing his  fig-leaves,  and  the  trees  of  the  garden,  could  not  hide 
himself  from  God,  when  arrested  with  an  **  Adam,  where  art 
thou  ?"  so  now  the  decree  is  gone  forth,  and  the  trump  of  God 
has  given  its  last  sound ;  all  tongues,  people,  nations,  and  lan- 
guages, both  wise  and  foolish  virgins,  must  come  into  his  pre- 
sence, and  bow  beneath  his  footstool;  even  Pontius  Pilate, 
Annas,  and  Caiaphas,  even  the  proud  persecuting  high-priests 
and  Pharisees  of  this  generation,  must  appear  before  him :  for, 
says  our  Lord,  "  then,"  (when  the  cry  was  made.  Behold,  the 
bridegroom  cometh !)  in  a  moment,  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye, 
the  graves  were  opened,  the  sea  gave  up  its  dead,  and  **  all  those 
virgins,  both  ^vise  and  foolish,  arose  and  trimmed  their  lamps,'' 
or  endeavoured  to  put  themselves  in  a  proper  posture  to  meet 
the  bridegroom. 

But  how  may  we  imagine  the  foolish  virgins  were  surprised, 
when,  notwithstanding  their  high  thoughts  and  proud  imagina- 
tions of  their  security,  they  now  find  themselves  wholly  naJced; 
and  void  of  that  inward  holiness  and  purity  of  heart,  without 
which  no  man  living  at  that  day  shall  comfortably  meet  the 
Lord !  I  doubt  not,  but  many  of  these  foolish  vifgins,  whilst  in 
this  world,  were  clothed  in  purple  and  fine  linen,  fared  sumptu- 
ously every  day,  and  disdained  to  set  the  wise  virgins,  some  of 
whom  mi^ht  be  as  poor  as  Lazarus,  even  with  the  dogs  of  their 
flock.  These  were  looked  upon  by  them  as  enthusiasts  and 
madmen,  as  persons  that  were  righteous  over-much,  and  who 
intended  to  turn  the  world  upside-down :  but  now  death  hath 
opened  their  eyes,  and  convinced  them,  to  their  eternal  sorrow, 
that  he  is  not  a  true  Christian,  who  is  only  one  outwardly.  Now 
they  find  (though,  alas !  too  late)  they,  and  not  the  wise  virgins, 
had  been  beside  themselves.  Now  their  proud  hearts  are  made 
to  stoop,  their  lofty  looks  are  brought  low:  and  as  Dives  en- 
treated (hat  Lazarus  might  dip  the  tip  of  his  finger  in  water,  and 
be  sent  to  cool  his  tongue ;  so  these  foolish  virgins,  these  formal 
hypocrites,  are  obliged  to  turn  beggars  to  those  whom  they  once 
despised :  *'  Give  us  of  your  oil ;"  O !  impart  to  us  a  little  of  that 
grace  and  holy  spirit,  for  the  insisting  on  which  we  fools  ac- 
comited  yoiur  lives  madness ;  for  alas ! ''  our  lamps  are  gone  oat;'' 


800  Ta9   WI8B   AND   POQLIiH   VIRGINS.  [l(XV. 

we  had  only  the  form  of  godliness;  we  were  wbited  8epuichre&; 
wo  were  heart-hypocrites;  we  contented  ourselves  with  desiring 
to  be  good ;  and  though  confident  of  salvation  whilst  we  lived, 
yet  onr  hope  is  entirely  gone,  now  God  ha,s  t^ken  away  our 
souls :  give  us  therefore,  O !  give  lis,  though  we  once  despised 
you,  give  us  of  your  oil,  for  our  lamps  of  an  outward  profession, 
and  transient  convictions,  are  quite  gone  out.  '*  Comfort  ye, 
comfort  ye,  my  people,  saith  the  Lord."  My  brethren  in  Christ, 
bear  what  the  foolish  say  to  the  wise  virgins,  and  learn  in 
patience  to  possess  your  souls.  If  you  are  true  followers  of  the 
lowly  Jesus,  I  am  persuaded  you  have  your  names  cast  out,  and 
all  manner  of  evil  spoken  falsely  against  you,  for  his  name's 
sake;  for  no  one  ever  did  or  will  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus, 
without  suffering  persecution ;  nay,  I  doubt  not  but  your  chief 
foes  are  those  of  your  own  household :  tell  me,  do  not  your  car- 
nal relations  and  friends  vex  your  tender  souls  day  by  day,  in 
bidding  you  spare  yourselves,  and  take  heed  lest  you  go  too  far: 
and  as  you  passed  dlong  to  come  and  hear  the  word  of  God,  have 
you  not  heard  many  a  Pharisee  cry  out,  here  comes  another 
troop  of  his  followers!  Brethren,  be  not  surprised,  Christ  s  ser- 
vants were  always  the  world's  fools ;  you  know  it  hated  him 
before  it  hated  you.  Rejoice,  and  be  exceeding  glad.  Yet  a 
little  while,  and  behold  the  bridegroom  cometh,  and  then  shall 
you  hear  these  formal  scoffing  Pharisees  saying  unto  you,  '^  Give 
us  of  your  oil,  for  our  lamps  are  gone  out."  When  you  are 
reviled,  revile  not  again ;  when  you  suffer,  threaten  not ;  commit 
your  souls  into  the  hands  of  Him  that  judgeth  righteously  :  for 
behold  the  day  cometh,  when  the  children  of  God  shall  speak 
fo€  Cbemselves. 

The  wise  virgins,  in  the  parable,  no  doubt,  endured  the  same 
cruel  mockings  as  you  may  do;  but  as  the  lamb  before  the 
shearers  is  dumb,  so  in  this  life  opened  they  not  their  mouths ; 
but  now  we  find  they  can  give  their  enemies  an  answer :  '^  Not 
»o,  lest  there  be  not  enough  for  us  and  you ;  but  go  ye  rather  to 
liiem  that  sell,  and  buy  tor  yourselves."  These  words  are  not 
io  be  understood  as  though  they  were  spoken  in  an  insulting 
manner ;  for  true  charity  teaches  us  to  use  the  worst  of  sinners, 
aad  onr  most  bitter  enemies,  with  the  meekness  and  gentleness 
4tf  Christ:  though  Dives  was  in  hell,  yet  Abraham  does  not  say. 
Thou  villain,  but  only,  **  Son,  remember :"  and  1  am  persuaded, 
bad  it  been  in  the  power  of  these  wise  virgins,  they  would  have 
dealt  with  the  foolish  virgins,  as,  God  knows,  I  would  wil- 
lingly deal  with  my  most  inveterate  enemies,  not  only  give  them 
id  their  oil,  but  also  exalt  them  to  the  right  hand  of  God.  It 
was  not  then  for  want  of  love,  but  the  fear  of  wanting  a  suffi- 
ciency for  themselves,  that  made  them  return  this  answer,  "Hot 
fio,  lest  there  be  not  enough  for  us  and  you :"  for  they  that  have 
most  grace,  have  none  to  spare;  none  but  self-righteous,  foolish 
^virgins  think  they  are  good  enough,  or  have  already  attained. 
Those  who  are  truly  wise  are  always  most  lUstrustful  of  them- 
adves,  pressing  forfrards  to  tbe  things  that  ftr#  iM^iH^^iSivA  Umk 


XXV.]  THfi   WI8E    AND   POOLISH   VIRGINS*  901 

it  well,  {f,  after  they  have  done  all,  they  can  make  their  calling 
and  election  sure.  ^*  Not  so,  lest  there  be  not  enough  for  xm 
and  you ;  but  go  ye  rather  to  them  that  sell,  and  buy  for  your- 
selves.^ These  words  indeed  seem  to  be  spoken  in  a  triumphant, 
but  certainly  they  were  uttered  in  the  most  compassionate  man* 
ner;  •'go  ye  to  them  that  sell,  and  buy  for  yourselves  ;'*  unhappy 
virgins!  you  accounted  our  lives  folly;  whilst  with  you  in  the 
body,  how  often  have  you  condemned  us  for  our  zeal  in  running 
to  hear  the  word  of  God,  and  looked  upon  us  as  enthusiasts,  for 
talking  and  affirming,  that  we  must  be  led  by  the  Spirit,  and 
walk  by  the  Spirit,  wad  feel  the  Spirit  of  God  witnessing  with 
our  spirits,  that  we  are  his  children  ?  But  now  yon  would  be 
glad  to  be  partakers  of  this  privilege,  but  it  is  not  ours  to  give. 
Yon  contented  yourselves  with  seeking,  when  you  should  have 
been  striving  to  enter  in  at  the  strait  gate.  And  now  go  to  then 
that  sell,  if  you  can,  and  buy  for  yourselves. 

And  what  say  you  to  tiiis,  ye  foolish  formal  professors  ?  for 
I  doubt  not  but  curiosity  and  novelty  hath  brought  many  such, 
even  to  this  despised  place,  to  hear  a  sermon.  Can  you  hear  this 
reply  to  the  foolish  virgins,  and  yet  not  tremble?  Why,  yet  a 
little  while,  and  thus  it  shall  be  done  to  you.  Rejoice  and 
bolster  yourselves  up  in  your  duties  and  forms ;  endeavour  to 
cover  your  nakedness  with  the  fig-leaves  of  an  ontwaid  profes- 
sion and  a  legal  righteousness,  and  despise  the  true  servants  of 
Christ  as  much  as  you  please ;  yet  know,  that  all  your  hopes 
will  fail  you,  when  God  brings  you  into  judgment :  for  not  he 
who  commendeth  himself  is  justified,  but  he  whom  the  Lord 
ecMnmandeth. 

But  to  return :  We  do  not  hear  of  any  reply  the  foolish  virgins 
make ;  no,  their  consciences  condemned  them ;  like  the  person 
without  a  wedding-garment,  they  are  struck  dumb,  and  are  now 
filled  with  anxious  thoughts  how  they  shall  buy  oil,  that  they 
may  lift  up  their  heads  befove  the  bridegroom.  *'  But  ^rttilst 
they  went  to  buy,''  ver  10.  whilst  they  were  thinking  what  they 
should  do,  the  bridegroom,  the  Lord  Jesus,  the  king,  the  hus- 
band of  his  spouse  the  church,  cometh,  attended  with  thousands 
and  twenty  times  ten  thousands  of  saints  and  angels,  publicly 
to  count  up  his  jewels ;  **  and  they  that  were  ready,''  the  wise 
virgins  who  had  oil  in  their  lamps,  amd  were  sealed  hy  has 
Spirit  to  the  day  of  redemption,  these  having  on  the  wedding- 
garment  of  an  imputed  rigbteonsness,  and  a  new  nature,  '*  went 
in  with  him  to  the  marriage." 

But  who  can  express  the  transports  that  these  wise  virgins 
fdt,  when  they  were  thus  admitted,  in  holy  triumph,  into  the 
presence  and  full  enjoyment  of  him  whom  their  souls  hungered 
and  thirsted  after !  No  doubt,  they  had  tasted  of  his  love,  and 
fay  faith  had  often  fed  on  him  in  their  hearts,  when  sitting  down 
to  commemorate  his  last  supper  here  on  earth ;  but  how  full 
nay  we  think  their  hearts  and  tongues  were  of  his  praises,  when 
they  see  themselves  seated  together,  to  eat  bread  in  his  heavenly 
kjBgdoHi*    And  what  was  l)est  of  aU> "  the  door  was  «faut,"  and 


802  TUB   WISE   AND    FOOLISH    VIRGINS.  [XXV. 

shut  theiii  in^  to  enjoy  the  ever-blessed  God,  and  the  company 
of  angels  and  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect^  without  inter- 
ruption for  evermore.  I  say^  without  interruption ;  for  in  this 
life,  their  eyes  often  gushed  out  with  water,  because  men  kept 
not  God's  law ;  and  they  could  never  come  to  appear  before  the 
Lord,  or  to  hear  his  word,  but  Satan  and  his  emissaries  would 
come  also  to  disturb  them ;  but  now  "  the  door  is  shut,"  now 
there  is  a  perfect  communion  of  saints,  which  they  in  vain  longed 
for  in  this  lower  world ;  now  tares  no  longer  grow  up  with  the 
wheat ;  not  one  single  hypocrite  or  unbeliever  can  screen  him- 
self amongst  them.  ''  Now  the  wicked  cease  from  troubling, 
and  now  their  weary  souls  enjoy  an  everlasting  rest." 

Once  more,  O  believers,  let  me  exhort  you  in  patience  to  pos- 
sess your  souls.  God,  if  he  has  freely  justified  you  by  faith  in 
his  Son,  and  given  you  his  Spirit,  has  sealed  you  to  be  his ;  and 
has  secured  you,  as  surely  as  he  secured  Noah,  when  he  locked 
him  in  the  ark.  But  though  heirs  of  God,  and  joint-heirs  with 
Christ,  and  neither  men  nor  devils  can  pluck  you  out  of  your 
heavenly  Father'^  hands,  yet  you  must  be  tossed  about  with 
manifold  temptations ;  however,  lift  up  your  heads,  the  day  of 
your  perfect,  complete  redemption  draweth  nigh.  Behold  the 
bridegroom  cometh  to  take  you  to  himself,  the  door  shall  be 
shut,  and  you  shall  be  for  ever  with  the  Lord. 

But  I  even  tremble  to  tell  you,  O  nominal  Christians,  that  the 
door  will  be  shut,  I  mean  the  door  of  mercy,  never,  never  to  be 
opened  to  give  you  admission,  though  you  should  continue 
knocking  to  all  eternity.  For  thus  speaks  our  Lord,  verse  11. 
"Afterwards,"  after  those  that  were  ready  went  in,  and  the  door 
was  shut ;  after  they  had,  to  their  sorrow,  found  that  no  oil  was 
to  be  bought,  no  grace  to  be  procured,  "came  also  the  other  vir- 
gins ;"  and  as  Esau,  after  Jacob  had  gotten  the  blessing,  cried  out 
with  an  exceeding  bitter  cry,  "  Bless  me,  even  me  also,  O  my 
father;"  so  they  came  saying,  " Lord,  Lord,  open  to  us."  Ob- 
serve the  importunity  of  these  foolish  virgins,  implied  m  the 
words,  "  Lord,  Lord."  Whilst  in  the  body,  I  suppose  they  only 
read,  did  not  pray  over  their  prayers.  If  you  now  tell  them 
they  should  "  pray  without  ceasing,"  they  should  pray  from  their 
hearts,  and  feel  the  want  of  what  they  prayed  for :  they  would 
answer,  they  could  not  tell  what  you  mean  by  inward  feelings ; 
that  Grod  did  not  require  us  to  be  always  on  our  knees ;  but  Lf  a 
man  did  justly,  and  loved  mercy,  and  did  as  the  church  forms 
required  him,  it  was  as  much  as  the  Lord  required  at  his  hands. 

I  fear,  sirs,  too  many  among  us  are  of  this  mind :  nay,  I  fear 
there  are  many  so  polite,  so  void  of  the  love  of  God,  as  to  think 
it  too  great  a  piece  of  self-denial,  to  rise  early  to  ofier  up  a 
sacrifice  of  praise  and  thanksgiving,  acceptable  to  God  through 
Jesus  Christ.  If  any  such,  by  the  good  providence  of  God,  be 
brought  hither  this  morning,  I  beseech  you  to  consider  your 
ways,  and  remember,  if  you  be  not  awakened  out  of  your  spiri- 
tual lethargy,  and  live  a  life  of  prayer  here,  you  shall  but  in  vain 
cry  out  with  the  foolish  yirgins,  "  Lord,  Lord^  open  unto  us/' 


XXV.]  THB   WISE   AND    FOOLISH   VIRGINS.  308 

hereafter.  Observe  farther,  the  impudence,  as  well  as  importu- 
nity, of  these  other  virgins  ;  "  Lord,  Lord,''  say  they,  as  Uiough 
they  were  intimately  acquainted  with  the  holy  Jesus.  Like 
numbers  among  us,  who  because  they  go  to  church,  repeat  their 
creeds,  and  receive  the  blessed  sacrament,  think  they  have  a 
right  to  call  Jesus  their  Saviour,  and  dare  call  God  their  Father, 
when  they  put  up  the  Lord's  prayer.  But  Jesus  is  not  your 
Saviour.  The  devil,  not  God,  is  your  father,  unless  your  hearts 
are  purified  by  faith,  and  you  are  born  again  from  above.  It  is 
not  merely  being  baptized  by  water,  but  being  born  again  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  that  must  qualify  you  for  salvation ;  and  it 
will  do  you  no  service  at  the  great  day,  to  say  unto  Christy  Lord, 
my  name  is  in  the  register  of  such  and  such  a  parish.  I  am 
persuaded  the  foolish  virgins  would  say  this,  and  more ;  but 
what  answer  did  Jesus  make?  He  answered  and  said,  ver.  12. 
"  Verily  I  say  unto  you :"  He  puts  the  word  verily,  to  assure 
them  he  was  in  earnest.  "  I  say  unto  you,"  1  who  am  truth 
itself,  I  whom  you  have  owned  in  words,,  but  in  works  denied, 
"  verily  I  say  unto  you,  I  know  you  not."  These  words  must 
not  be  understood  literally  ;  for  whatever  Arians  and  Socinians 
may  say  to  the  contrary,  yet  we  affirm. that  Jesus  Christ  is 
God,  God  blessed  for  ever,  and  therefore  knoweth  all  things.  He 
saw  Nathanael,  when  under  the  fig-tree ;  he  sees,  and  is  now 
looking  down  from  heaven,  his  dwelling-place,  upon  us,  to  see 
how  we  behave  in  these  fields.  Brethren,  I  know  nothing  of 
the  thoughts  and  intents  of  your  hearts,  in  coming  hither ;  but 
Jesus  Christ  knows  who  come  like  new-born  babes,  desirous  to 
be  fed  with  the  sincere  milk  of  the  word,  and  he  knows  who 
came  to  hear  what  the  babbler  says,  and  to  run  away  with  part 
of  a  broken  sentence,  that  they  may  have  whereof  to  accuse  himt 
This  expression  then,  **  I  know  you  not,"  must  not  be  understood 
literally ;  no,  it  implies  a  knowledge  of  approbation,  as  thougjh 
Christ  had  said.  You  call  me  Lord,  Lord,  but  you  have  not  done 
the  things  that  I  haye  said ;  you  desire  me  to  open  the  door,  but 
how  can  you  come  in  hither,  not  having  on  a  wedding-garment? 
Alas,  you  are  naked  !  Where  is  my  outward  righteousness  im- 
puted to  you?  Where  is  my  inherent  righteousness  wrought  in 
ypa?  Where  is  my  divine  image  stamped  upon  your  souls? 
How  dare  you  call  me  Lord,  Lord,  when  you  have  not  received 
the  Holy  Ghost,  whereby  I  seal  all  that  are  truly  mine  ?  Verily 
I  know  yon  not ;  depart  irom  me,  ye  cursed,  into  everlasting  fire, 
prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels. 

And  now  he  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear  what  manner 
of  persons  these  were,  whom  Jesus  Christ  dismissed  with  this 
answer.  Remember,  I  entreat  you  remember,  they  are  not  sent 
away  for  being  fornicators,  swearers,  sabbath-breakers,  or  pro- 
digals. No,  in  all  probability,  as  I  observed  before,  they  were, 
touching  the  outward  observances  of  the  moral  law,  blameless  ; 
they  were  constant  as  to  the  form  of  religion ;  and,  if  they  did  no 
good,  yet  no  one  could  say  they  did  any  one  any  harm.  The 
only  thing  for  which  they  were  condemned,  and  eternally  banished 


304  tllB  WI6B  AND   FOOLISH   VlfiGlKS.  [XXr- 

-from  the  prestfnee  of  the  Lord,  (for  so  much  is  implied  i&  'M 
knowyoa  not/')  was  this,  they  had  no  oil  in  their  lampSy  no  prin«> 
ciple  of  a  tnie  living  faith  and  holiness  in  their  hearts.    And  if 
persons  may  go  to  church,  receive  the  sacrament,  lead  honest, 
moral  lives,  and  yet  be  sent  to  hell  at  the  last  day,  as  they  cer<- 
tainly  will  be,  if  they  advance  no  farther ;  where  wilt  thoa,  O 
drunkard?  where  wilt  thou,*  O  swearer?   where  wiit  thou,  O 
sabbath-breaker  ?  where  wUt  thou  that  deniest  divine  revela- 
tion, and  even  the  form  of  godliness  ?  where  will  you,  and  such 
like  sinners,  appear?  I  know  very  well  you  must  appear  belore 
the  dreadful  tribunal  of  Jesus  Christ ;  however  you  may,  Uke 
Felix,  put  off  the  prosecution  of  your  convictions,  yet  you,  as 
well  as  others,  must  arise  after  death,  and  appear  in  judgment; 
you  will  then  find,  to  your  eternal  sorrow,  what  I  just  hinted  iU 
in  the  beginning  of  this  discourse,  that  your  daumation  slum- 
t>ereth  not:  sin  has  blinded  your  hearts,. and  hardened  your 
foreheads  now,  but  yet  a  little  while,  and  our  Lord  will  ease 
him  of  his  adversaries.     Methinks  by  faith  I  see  the  heavens 
opened,  and  the  holy  Jesus  coming,  with  bis  face  brighter  than 
ten  thousand  suns,  dartihg  fury  upon  you  from  his  eyes  ?  Me- 
thinks I  see  you  rising  from  your  graves  trembling  and  asto- 
nished, and  crying  out.  Who  can  abide  this  day  of  his  coming! 
And  now  what  inference  shall  I  draw  from  wlkat  has  beea 
delivered  ?  Our  Lord,  in  the  words  of  the  lext,  has  4rawn  one 
for  me ;  "  Watch  therefore,  for  ye  know  neither  the  day  wot  ^e 
hour  wherein  the  Son  of  man  cometh." 

"  Watch,"  that  is,  be  upon  your  guard,  and  keep  yemr  graces 
in  continusd  cKercise :  for  as  when  we  are  commanded  to  watch 
«nto  prayer,  it  signifies,  that  we  should  continue  instant  in  that 
duty ;  so  when  we  are  required  to  watch  in  general,  it  iveans 
that  we  should  put  on  the  whole  armour  of  God,  and  live  every 
day  as  though  it  ware  oar  last.  And  O !  that  the  Lord  rmay  now 
enable  me  to  lift  up  my  voice  like  a  trumpet !  For  had  I  a  thou- 
sand tongues,  or  could  I  spe^  so  loud  that  the  wiu>le  world 
might  hear  me,  I  could  not  sound  a  more  useful  alafm  than  Ihat 
which  is  contained  in  tl>e  text.  Watch  therefore,  my  bcethrQii, 
1  .beseech  you  by  the  mercies  ot*  God  in  Christ  Jesus,  watch; 
be  upon  your  guard  :  awake,  ye  that  sleep  in  the  dust ;  for  ye 
know  neither  the  day  nor  the  hour  wherein  the  Son#f  man  oometb. 
Perhaps  to-day,  perhaps  this  midnight,  the  cry  wAy  be  made : 
'*  for  in  a  moment,  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,"  the  .trump  is  to 
sound.     However,  supposing  the  final  day  of  jndgiaj^tt  may 

Jet  be  a  great  way  off,  the  day  of  death  is  oectainly  near  at 
and;  for  what  is  our  life?  ''It  is  but  a  vapour,"  but  a  span 
long ;  soon  passeth  it  away,  and  we  are  gone.  Blessed  he  ^xod, 
we  are  all  here  well;  but  who,  out  of  this  great  multitude  dares, 
say,  I  shall  go  home  to  my  house  in  safety?  Who  knows  but 
whilst  I  am  speaking,  God  may  commission  his  ministering 
spirits  immediately  to  call  some  of  you  away  by  a  suddco 
stroke,  to  give  an  account  with  what  attention  you  have  heard 
*this  sermon.    You  know,  my  brethren,  some  ssadx  iosiances  me 


XXV.J  THB   WISB   AND    FOOLISH   l^IRGINS.  SOS 

have  lately  had.  And  what  angel  or  spirit  hath  assurctd  n»p^ 
that  some  of  you  shall  not  be  the  next  1  "  Watch  thereibre,  foi! 
ye  know  neither  the  day  nor  the  hour,  wherein  the  Son  of  man 
will  come/'  And  it  i^  chiefly  for  this  reason,  that  God  has 
hidden  the  day  of  our  death  from  us.  For  since  I  know  not 
but  I  may  die  to-morro\y.  Why,  O  my  soul,  (may  each  of  us  say,) 
wilt  thou  not  watch  to-day?  Since  I  know  not  but  I  may  die. 
the  next  moment,  why  wilt  thou  not  prepare  for  dying  this  1* 
Many  such  reflections  as  these,  my  brethren,  crowd  in  upon  my 
mind.  At  present,  blessed  be  the  Lord,  who  delights  to  magnify 
his  strength  in  a  poor  worm's  weakness,  I  am  at.  a  stand,  not 
so  much  about  what  I  shall  say,  as  what  I  sliali  leave  unsaid. 
My  belly,  like  Elihu's,  is,  as  it  were,  full  of  new  wine;  *'out 
of  the  abundance  of  my  heart  my  mouth  speaketh."  The  seeing:, 
so  great  a  multitude  standing  before  me ;  a  sense  of  the  inflnitA 
majesty  of  that  God  in  whose  name  I  preach,  and  before  whoDi 
I  as  well  as  yon  must  appear,  to  give  an  account ;  and  the! 
uncertainty  there  is  whether  I  shall  live  another  day,  to  speak; 
to  you  any  more :  these  considerations,  especially  the  presence, 
of  God,  which  I  now  feel  upon  ray  soul,  furnishes  me  with  so 
much  matter,  that  I  scarce  Know  where  to  begin,  or  where  to 
end  my  application.  However,  for  method-sake,  b  the  divine 
assistance,  I  will  branch  it  into  three  particulars. 

And  First,  I  would  remind  you  that  are  notoriously  ungodly^ 
of  what  our  Lord  says  in  the  text :  for  though  I  have  said  that 
your  damnation  slumbereth  not,  while  you  continue  in  an  irnpe- 
nitent  state;  yet  that  was  only  to  set  you  upon  your  watch,  to 
convince  you  of  your  danger,  and  excite  you  to  cry  out,  "  What 
shall  we  do  to  be  saved  V  I  appeal  to  all  that  hear  me,  wbether 
I  have  said  the  door  of  mercy  should  be  shut  against  you,  iC 
you  believe  on  Jesus  Christ :  No,  if  you  are  the  chief  of  sinners ; 
if  you  are  murderers  of  fathers,  and  murderers  of  mothers ;  if  yoa 
are  emphatically  the  dung  and  ofiscouringof  all  things ;  yet  if  yoii 
believe  on  Jesus  Christ,  and  cry  unto  him  with  the  same  faith  aa 
the  expiring  thief.  Lord,  remember  me,  now  thou  art  in  thy  king- 
dom ;  I  will  pawn  my  eternal  salvation  upon  it,  if  he  does  not 
shortly  translate  you  to  his  heavenly  paradise.  Wonder  not  at 
my  speaking  with  so  much  assurance :  for  1  know  it  is  a  faithful 
and  true  saying,  and  worthy  of  all  acceptation,  that  Jesus  Christ 
came  into  the  world,  to  save  (all  truly  affected  and  believing)  sin- 
ners ;  nay,  so  great  is  his  love,  that  I  am  persuaded,  was  it  neces- 
sary, he  would  come  again  into  the  world,  and  die  a  second  tim^ 
for  ^em  on  a  cross.  But,  blessed  be  God,  when  our  Lord  bowed 
dowH  his  bead^  and  gave  up  the  ghost,  our  redemption  wa$k 
finished.  It  is  not  our  sins,  but  our  want  of  a  lively  faith  in  his: 
Mood,  that  wiH  prove  our  condemnation :  if  you,  draw  near  to 
bim  by  faith,  though  you  are  the  worst  of  sinners,  yet  he  will 
noC  say  unto  you,  "  Verily  I  know  you  not."  No,  a  door  of 
mercy  shall  be  .opened  to  you.  Look  then,  look  then  by  an 
eye  of  faith,  to  that  God-man  whom  ye  have  pierced.  Behold 
kim  bleeding,  panting,  dying  upon  the  cross,  with  arms  stnetched 


809  THE  W18B  AKD   FOOLISH   VIirGINS.  [XXVi 

out  ready  to  embrace  yon  all.    Hark!  how  he  gproans!  See 
how  all  nature  is  in  agony !  The  rocks  rend,  the  graves  open ; 
the  sun  withdraws  its  light,  ashamed  as  it  were  to  see  the  Grod 
of  nature  suffer ;  and  all  this  to  usher  in  man's  great  redemption. 
Nay,  the  holy  Jesus,  in  the  very  agonies  and  pangs  of  death, 
prays  for  his  very  murderers ;  **  Father,  forgive  them,  for  they. 
Know  not  what  they  do/'    If  then  you  have  crucified  ttie  Son  of 
God  afresh,  and  put  him  to  an  open  shame,  yet  do  not  despair, 
only  believe,  and  even  this  shall  be  forgiven.    You  have  read, 
at  least  you  have  heard,  no  doubt,  how  three  thousand  were  con- 
verted at  St.  Peter's  preaching  one  single  sermon,  after  our 
Lord's  ascension  into  heaven ;  and  many  of  the  crucifiers  of 
the  Lord  of  glory  undoubtedly  were  amongst  them ;  and  why 
should  you  despair  ?  for  **  Jesus  Christ  is  the  same  yesterday, 
to-day,  and  for  ever."    The  Holy  Ghost  shall  be  sent  down  on 
you,  as  well  as  on  them,  if  you  do  but  believe;   for  Christ 
ascended  up  on  high,  to  receive  this  gift  even  for  the  vilest  of 
men.    Come  then,  all  ye  that  are  weary  and  heavy  laden  with 
the  sense  of  your  sins,  lay  hold  on  Christ  by  faith,  and  he  will 
give  you  rest ;  for  salvation  is  the  free  gift  of  Grod  to  all  them 
that  believe.    And  though  you  think  this  too  good  news  to  be 
true,  yet  I  speak  the  trutik  in  Christ,  I  lie  not,  this  is  the  gospel, 
this  is  the  glad  tidings,  which  we  are  commissioned  to  preach 
to  every  creature.    Be  not  faithless  then,  but  believing.     Let 
not  the  devil  lead  you  captive  at  his  will  any  longer ;  for  all  the 
wages  he  gives  his  servants  is  death,  death  often  in  this  life, 
death  everlasting  in  the  next :  But  the  free  gift  of  Gro'd  is  eter- 
nal life  to  all  that  believe  in  Jesus  Christ.    Pharisees  are  and 
will  be  offended  at  my  coming  here  and  offering  you  salvation 
on  such  cheap  terms ;  but  the  more  they  bid  me  hold  my  peace, 
the  more  will  I  cry  out  and  proclaim  to  convicted  sinners,  that 
Jesus,  David's  son  according  to  the  flesh,  but  David's  Lord  as 
he  was  God,  will  have  mercy  upon  all  that  by  a  living  faith 
truly  turn  to  him.     If  this  be  to  be  vile,  I  pray  Grod  I  may  be 
more  vile.  If  they  will  not  let  me  preach  Christ  crucified,  and  offnr 
salvation  to  poor  sinners  in  a  church,  I  will  preach  him  in  the 
lanes,  streets,  highways,  and  hedges ;  and  nothing  pleases  me 
better  than  to  tliink  I  am  now  in  one  of  the  devil's  strongest 
holds.    Surely,  the  Lord  has  not  sent  me  and  all  you  hither  for 
nothing ;  no,  blessed  be  Grod,  the  fields  are  white,  ready  unto 
harvest,  and  many  souls,  I  hope,  will  be  gathered  into  his  hea- 
venly gamer.    It  is  true,  it  is  the  midnight  of  the  church,  espe- 
cially the  poor  church  of  England ;  but  Grod  has  lately  sent 
forth  his  servants  to  cry.  Behold  the  bridegroom  cometh :  I  be- 
seech you,  O  sinners,  hearken  unto  the  voice !  Let  me  espouse 
you  by  faith  to  my  dear  Master ;   and  henceforward  ^*  watch 
and  pray,*'  that  you  may  be  ready  to  go  forth  to  meet  him. 

Secondly,  I  would  apply  myself  to  those  amongst  yoo,  that 
are  not  openly  profane,  but,  by  depending  on  a  formal  round  of 
duties,  deceive  your  own  souls,  and  are  only  foolish  virgins. 
But  I  must  speak  to  your  conviction,  rather  than  your  comfort. 


XXV.]  THB  WISE  AND   FOOLISH   VIROIN8;  80T^ 

My  dear  brethren,  do  not  deceive  your  own  sonls.  Voii  bavo 
heard  bow  far  the  foolish  virgins  went,  and  yet  were  answered 
with,  "  Verily  I  know  you  not :"  The  reason  is,  because  none 
but  such  who  have  a  living  faith  in  Jesus  Christ,  and  are  truly 
bom  again,  can  possibly  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven*  You 
may,  perhaps,  live  honest  and  outwardly  moral  lives,  but  if  you 
depend  on  that  morality,  or  join  your  works  with  your  faith,  in 
order  to  justify  you  before  God,  you  have  no  lot  or  share  in. 
Christ's  redemption :  For  what  is  this  but  to  deny  the  Lord  that 
has  bought  you  ?  What  is  this  but  making  yourselves  your  own 
savionrsi  taking  the  crown  from  Jesus  Christ,  and  putting  it  on 
your  own  heads  ?  The  crime  of  the  devil,  some  have  supposed, 
consisted  in  this,  that  he  would  not  bow  to  Jesus  Christ,  when 
the  Father  commanded  all  the  angels  to  worship  him;  and  what 
do  ]rou  less  ?  You  will  not  own  and  submit  to  his  righteous* 
ness ;  and  though  you  pretend  to  worship  him  with  your  lips^ 
yet  your  hearts  are  far  from  him ;  besides,  you,  in  ef(ect,  deny 
the  operations  of  the  blessed  Spirit,  you  mistake  common  for 
effectual  grace ;  you  hope  to  be  saved,  because  you  have  good 
desires,  and  a  few  short  convictions ;  and  what  is  this,  but  to 
give  God,  his  word,  and  all  his  saints,  the  lie?  A  Jew,  a  Turk, 
has  equally  as  good  grounds  whereon  to  build  his  hopes  of  sal- 
vation. Need  I  not  then  to  cry  out  to  you,  ye  foolish  virgins, 
watch.  Beg  of  God  to  convince  you  of  your  self-righteousness, 
and  the  secret  unbelief  of  your  hearts;  or  otherwise,  whensoever 
the  cry  shall  be  made,  "  Behold,  the  bridegroom  cometh/'  you 
will  find  yourselves  utterly  unprepared  to  go  forth  to  meet  him : 
You  may  cry,  ^*  Lord,  Lord ;"  but  the  answer  will  be,  "  Verily, 
I  know  you  not/' 

Thirdly,  I  would  speak  a  word  or  two  by  way  of  exhortation 
to  those  who  are  wise  virgins,  and  are  assured  that  they  have  on 
a  wedding-garment*  That  there  are  many  such  amongst  you» 
who  by  grace  have  renounced  your  own  righteousness,  and  know 
that  the  righteousness  of  the  Lord  Jesus  is  imputed  to  you,  I 
make  no  doubt.  God  has  his  secret  ones  in  the  worst  of  times ; 
and  I  am  persuaded  he  has  not  let  so  loud  a  gospel  cry  bemada 
amongst  his  people,  as  of  late  has  been  heard,  for  nothing.  No» 
I  am  confident  the  Holy  Ghost  has  been  given  to  many  at  the 
pieachuig  of  faitB,  and  has  powerfully  fallen  upon  many,  whilst 
they  have  been  hearing  the  word,  i  on  are  now  then  no  longer 
foolish,  but  wise  virgins ;  notwithstanding,  I  beseech  you  also 
to  suffer  the  word  of  exhortation ;  for  wise  virgins  are  too  apt, 
whilst  the  bridegroom  tarries,  to  slumber  tod  sleep.  Watch 
therefore,  my  dear  brethren,  watch  and  pray,  at  this  time  espe- 
cially ;  for  perhaps  a  time  of  suffering  is  at  hand.  The  ark  of 
the  Lord  begins  already  to  bo  driven  into  the  wilderness.  Be 
ye  therefore  upon  your  watch,  and  still  persevere  in  following 
your  Lord,  even  without  the  camp,  bearing  his  reproach :  the 
cry  that  has  been  lately  made,  has  awakened  the  devil  and  his 
servants ;  they  begin  to  rage  horribly ;  and  well  they  may,  for 
I  hope  their  kingdom  is  in  danger.    Watch  therefore,  for  if  we 

t2 


808  THB   BTRRNTTY    OP   HELL   TORMENTS.  [^XVL 

are  not  always  upon  our  guard,  a  time  of  trial  may  overtake  us 
unawares ;  and,  instead  of  owning,  like  Peter  we  may  be  temipted 
to  deny  our  Master.  Set  death  and  eternity  often  before  you. 
Look  unto  Jesus,  the  author  and  finisher  of  your  faith,  and  con- 
sider how  little  a  while  it  will  be,  ere  he  comes  to  judgment ;  and 
then  our  reproach  shall  be  wiped  away ;  the  accusers  of  us  and 
our  brethren  shall  be  cast  down,  and  we  all  shall  be  lodged  in 
heaven  for  ever,  with  our  dear  Lord  Jesus^ 

Lastly f  What  I  say  unto  you,  I  say  unto  all,  watch :  high  and 
low,  rich  and  poor,  young  and  old,  one  with  another,  I  beseech 

Jou,  by  the  mercies  of  Jesus,  to  be  upon  your  guard :  fly,  fly  to 
esus  Christ,  that  heavenly  bridegroom :  behold,  he  desires  to 
take  you  to  himiself,  miserable,  poor,  blind,  and  naked  as  you 
are ;  he  is  willing  to  clothe  you  with  his  everlasting  righteous- 
ness, and  make  you  partakers  of  that  glory,  which  he  enjoyed 
with  the  Father  before  the  world  began.  Do  not  turn  a  deaf  ear 
to  me ;  do  not  reject  the  message  on  account  of  the  meanness 
of  the  messenger.  I  am  a  chUd ;  but  the  Lord  has  chosen  me, 
that  the  glory  might  be  all  his  own.  Had  he  sent  to  invite  yon 
by  a  learned  rabbi,  you  might  have  been  tempted  to  think  the 
man  had  done  something ;  but  now  Grod  has  sent  a  child,  that 
the  excellency  of  the  power  may  be  seen,  not  to  be  of  man,  but 
of  God.  Let  the  learned  Pharisees  then  despise  my  youth : 
I  care  not  how  vile  I  appear  in  the  sight  of  such  men;  I 
glory  in  it.  And  I  am  persuaded,  if  any  of  you  should  be  mar- 
ried to  Christ  by  this  preaching,  you  will  have  no  reason  to 
repent,  when  you  come  to  heaven,  that  Grod  sent  a  child  to  cry, 
*^  Behold,  the  bridegroom  cometh !  O !  my  brethren,  the  thought 
of  being  instrumental  in  bringing  one  of  you  to  -glory,  fills  me 
with  fresh  zeal.  Once  more  I  entreat  you  **  Watch,  watch  and 
pray:"  for  the  Lord  Jesus  will  receive  all  that  call  upon 
him  faithfully.  Let  that  cry,  '^Behold* the  bridegroom  cometh," 
be  continually  sounding  in  your  ears ;  and  begin  now  to  live,  as 
though  you  were  assured  this  night  you  were  to  "  go  forth  to 
meet  him."  I  could  say  more,  but  the  other  business  and  duties 
of  the  day  oblige  me  to  stop.  May  the  Lord  give  you  all  a  hear- 
ing ear,  and  o^dient  heart,  and  so  closely  unite  you  to  himself 
by  one  spirit,  that  when  he  shall  come  in  terrible  majesty,  to 
judge  mankind,  you  may  be  found  hs^ving  on  a  wedding^garment, 
and  ready  to  go  in  with  him  to  the  marriage. 
Grant  this,  O  Lord,  for  thy  dear  Son's  sake ! 


SERMON  XX VL 

THE    ETERNITY    OP    HELL    T0RMBNT1B. 


TO   THE    INHABITANTS   OF   SAVANNAH    IN   GEOEGIA. 

My  dear  Friends, 
Though  the  following  sermon  has  been  preached  elsewhere,  yet 
as  the  occasion  of  my  preaching  it  among  you  was  particular,  as 
yoxx  seemed  to  give  an  uncommon  attention  to  it  in  public,  and 


XXVfJ]  THE   ETERNITY   OP  HELL-T0RMBNT8.  309 

afterwards  expressed  yonr  satisfaction  in  it  to  me,  when  I  came 
to  visit  you  in  your  own  houses,  I  thought  proper  to  offer  it  to 
you. 

And  here  I  cannot  but  bless  God  for  the  general  dislike  of 
heretical  principles  that  I  have  found  among  you ;  as  also  for 
your  zeal,  and  approbation  of  my  conduct,  when  the  glory  of  God, 
and  your  welfare,  have  obliged  me  to  resent  and  publicly  declare 
against  the  antichristian  tenets  of  some  lately  under  my  charge. 

I  need  only  exhort  you  to  beg  of  God  to  give  you  a  true  faith, 
and  to  add  to  your  faith,  virtue,  that  you  may  adorn  the  gospel 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  all  things. 

Your  constant  daily  attendance  upon  public  worship,  the 
^gladness  wherewith  you  have  received  me  into  your  houses,  the 
knildness  wherewith  vou  have  submitted  to  my  reproofs,  more 
especially  the  great  (^though  unmerited)  concern  you  shewed  at 
my  departure,  induce  me  to  hope  this  will  be  your  endeavour. 

How  long  God  of  his  good  providence  will  Keep  me  from  you, 
I  know  not.  However,  you  may  assure  yourselves  I  will  re- 
turn according  to  my  promise,  as  soon  as  I  have  received 
imposition  of  hands,  and  completed  the  other  business  that 
called  me  hither. 

In  the  mean  while,  accept  of  this,  as  a  pledge  of  the  undis- 
sembled  love  of 

Your  affectionate  though  unworthy  pastor, 

Lamdom,  1738.  GeORGE  WHITPIELD. 


TTiese  shall  go  away  into  everlasting  punishment. 

Matthew  xxv.  46. 
The  excellency  of  the  gospel  dispensation,  is  greatly  evidenced 
by  those  sanctions  of  rewards  and  punishments,  which  it  offers 
to  the  choice  of  all  its  hearers,  in  order  to  engage  them  to  be 
obedient  to  its  precepts ;  for  it  promises  no  less  than  eternal 
happiness  to  the  good,  and  denounces  no  slighter  a  punishment 
than  everlasting  misery  against  the  wicked  :  On  the  one  hand, 
''it  is  a  savour  of  life  unto  life,"  on  the  other,  "a  savour  of 
death  unto  death."  And  though,  one  would  imagine,  the  bare 
mentioning  of  the  former,  would  be  sufficient  to  draw  men  to 
their  duty,  yet  ministers  in  all  ages  have  found  it  necessary 
frequently  to  remind  their  people  of  the  latter,  and  to  set  before 
them  the  terrors  of  the  Lord,  as  so  many  powerful  dissuasives 
from  sin. 

But  whence  is  it  that  men  are  so  disingenuous  ?  The  reason 
seems  to  be  this :  The  promise  of  eternal  happiness  is  so  agree- 
able to  the  inclinations  and  wishes  of  mankind,  that  all  who  call 
themselves  Christians,  universally  and  willingly  subscribe  to  the 
belief  of  it :  but  then  there  is  something  so  shocking  in  the  con 
sideration  of  eternal  torments,  and  seemingly  such  an  infinite 
disproportion  between  an  endless  duration  of  pain,  and  a  short 
life  spent  in  pleasure,  that  men  (some  at  least  of  them)  can 
scarcely  be  brought  to  confess  it  as  an  article  of  their  Jaith,  that 
an  eternity  of  misery  awaits  the  wicked  in  a  future  state. 


•810  tHB   BtERNITY   OP   HELL  TORUBNTS.  X^STTf. 

I  shall  therefore  at  this  time  beg  leave  to  insist  on  the  proof 
of  this  part  of  one  of  the  articles  of  our  creed  ;  and  endeaTomr 
to  make  good  what  our  blessed  Lord  has  here  threatened  in  the 
words  of  the  text,  '^  These  (that  is,  the  wicked)  shall  go  away 
into  everlasting  punishment." 

Accordingly,  without  considering  the  words  as  they  stand  in 
relation  to  the  context,  I  shall  resolve  all  I  have  to  say  into 
this  one  general  proposition,  **  That  the  torments  reserved  for 
the  wicked  hereafter,  are  eternal." 

But  before  I  proceed  to  make  good  this,  I  must  inform  you, 
that  I  take  it  for  granted. 

All  present  do  steadfastly  believe  they  have  something  within 
them,  which  we  call  a  soul,  and  which  is  capable  of  surviving 
the  dissolution  of  the  body,  or  of  being  miseratde  or  happy  to  all 
eternity. 

I  take  it  for  granted,  farther.  That  you  believe  a  divine  reve- 
lation; that  those  books,  emphatically  called  the  Scriptures, 
were  written  by  the  inspiration  of  God,  and  that  the  things 
therein  contained  are  founded  upon  eternal  truth. 

Z  take  it  for  granted.  That  you  believe,  that  the  Son  of  God 
came  down  to  die  for  sinners  ;  and  that  there  is  but  one  Medi* 
ator  between  God  and  man,  even  the  man  Christ  Jesus. 

These  things  being  granted,  and  they  were  necessary  to  be 
premised,  proceed  we  now  to  make  good  the  one  general  propo- 
sition asserted  in  the  text,  that  the  torments  reserved  for  the 
wicked  hereafter  are  eternal.  **  These  shall  go  away  into  ever- 
lasting punishment."    The 

First  argument  I  shall  advance,  to  prove  that  the  torments 
reserved  for  the  wicked  hereafter  are  eternal,  is, — That  the 
word  of  Grod  himself  assures  us,  in  line  upon  Ihie,  that  it  will 
be  so. 

To  quote  all  the  texts  that  might  be  produced  in  proof  of 
this  would  be  endless.  Let  it  suffice  to  instance  only  in  a  few. 
In  tho  Old  Testament,  in  the  book  of  Daniel,  chap.  xii.  ver.  2. 
we  are  told,  that  '*  some  shall  awake  to  everlasting  life,  and 
others  to  everlasting  contempt."  In  the  book  of  Isaiali,  it  is 
said,  that  "  the  worm  of  those  that  have  transgressed  God's  ]av(» 
and  die  impenitently,  shall  not  die,  nor  their  tire  be  quenched." 
And  in  another  place,  the  holy  prophet,  struck,  no  doubt,  with 
astonishment  and  horror  at  the  prospect  of  the  continuance  of 
the  torments  of  the  damned,  breaks  out  into  this  moving  expos- 
tulation, '^  Who  can  dwell  with  everlasting  burnings?" 

The  New  Testament  is  still  fuller  as  to  this  point,  it  being  a 
revelation  which  brought  this  and  such  like  particulars  to  a  clear 
light.  The  apostle  Jude  tells  us  of  the  profane  despisers  of  digni- 
ties in  his  days,  that  *'  for  them  was  reserved  the  blackness  of 
darkness  for  ever."  And  in  the  book  of  the  Revelation,  it  is  writ- 
ten, that "  the  smoke  of  the  torments  of  the  wicked  ascendeth  for 
ever  and  ever."  And  if  we  believe  the  witness  of  men  inspired, 
^he  witness  of  the  Son  of  God,  who  had  the  Spirit  given  him, 
as  Mediator,  without  measure,  is  still  far  greater ;  and  iu  St. 


^mrul  THE  ETERNITY   OP  HBLL  TORMBNTB.  311 

.  Mark's  Gospel,  he  repeats  this  solemn  declaration  three  several 
;  times,  ''  It  is  better  for  thee  to  enter  into  life  maimed ;"  that  is^ 
it  is  better  to  forego  the  gratification  of  thy  lust,  or  incur  the 
di^pleasare  of  a  friend  which  may  be  as  dear  to  thee  as  a  hand, 
or  as  useful  as  a  foot,  '^  than  having  two  hands  and  feet/'  that 
is,  for  indulging  the  one,  or  disobeying  God  to  oblige  the  other, 
**  to  be  cast  into  hell,  where  the  worm  dieth  not^  and  the  fire  is 
.not  quenched." 

And  here  again,  in  the  words  of  the  text,  ''These  (the  wicked) 
shall  go  away  into  everlasting  punishment/' 

I  know  it  has  been  objected  by  some  who  have  denied  the 

eternity  of  hell  torments,  That  the  words  everlasting  and  ever 

iOnd  ever,  are  often  used  in  the  holy  scriptures,  (especially  in  the 

•  Old  Testament)  when  they  sigodfy  not  an  endless  duration,  but  a 

limited  term  of  time. 

And  this  we  readily  grant :  but  then  we  reply.  That  when  the 
words  are  used  with  this  limitation,  they  either  manifestly  appear 
to  be  used  so  from  the  context ;  or  are  put  in  opposition  to 
occasional  types  which  God  gave  his  people  on  some  special 
.eoca£»ODS,  as  when  it  is  said,  ''  It  shall  be  a  perpetual  or  ever- 
lasting statute/'  or  ''  a  statute  for  ever :"  that  is,  a  standing 
t3^e,  and  not  merely  transient  or  occasional,  as  was  the  pillar 
of  cloud,  the  manna,  and  such  like.  Or,  lastly,  they  have  a 
relation  to  that  covenant,  Grod  made  with  his  spiritual  Israel ; 
which,  if  understood  in  a  spiritual  sense,  will  be  everlasting, 
though  the  ceremonial  dispensation  be  abolished. 

Besides,  it  ought  to  be  observed,  that  some  of  the  passages 
just  now  referred  to,  have  neither  of  these  words  so  much  as 
mentioned  in  them,  and  cannot  possibly  be  interpreted  so  as  to 
denote  only  a  limited  term  of  years. 

But  let  that  be  as  it  will,  it  is  evident  even  to  a  demonstration, 
that  the  words  of  the  text  will  not  admit  of  such  a  restrained 
signification,  as  appears  from  their  being  directly  opposed  to  the 
words  immediately  following,  ''  That  the  righteous  shall  go  into 
life  eternal:"  from  which  words,  all  are  ready  to  grant,  that 
the  life  promised  to  the  righteous  will  be  eternal.  And  why  the 
punishment  threatened  to  the  wicked  should  not  be  understood 
to  be  eternal  likewise,  when  the  very  same  word  in  the  original 
is  used  to  express  the  duration  of  each,  no  shadow  of  a  reason 
can  be  given. 

Bat,  Secondly,  There  cannot  be  one  argument  urged,  why  Grod 
should  reward  his  saints  with  everlasting  happiness,  which  will 
not  equally  prove  that  he  ought  to  punish  sinners  with  eternal 
misery. 

For,  since  we  know  nothing  (at  least  for  a  certainty)  how  he 
will  deal  with  either,  but  by  a  divine  revelation ;  and  since,  as 
was  proved  by  the  foregoing  argument,  he  hath  as  positively 
threatened  eternally  to  punish  the  wicked,  as  to  reward  the  good : 
It  follows,  that  his  truth  will  be  as  much  impeached  and  called 
in  question,  did  he  not  inflict  his  punishments,  as  it  would  be, 
if  1^  did  not  confer  bis  rewards. 


'ZI2  THB  BTERNiTY  OP  HILL  TORttBNTS.  [^±Vl. 

/  To  this  Mso  it  hai^  been  olyfected.  That  though  Grod  is  obliged 
by  promise  to  ^ve  bis  rewards,  yet  bis  veracity  could  not  be 
c^ed  in  question,  supposing  he  should  not  execute  his  threaten- 
logs,  as  he  actually  did  not  in  the  case  of  Nineveh ;  which  God 
expressly  declared  by  his  prophet  Jonah,  "  should  be  destroyed 
in  forty  days :"  notwithstanding  the  sequel  of  the  story  informs 
ts,  that  Nineveh  was  spared. 

But  in  answer  to  this  objection  we  affirm,  that  God's  tnreaten> 
higi^,  as  well  as  promises,  are  withpat  repentance ;  and  for  this 
reason,  because  they  are  both  founded  on  the  eternal  laws  ol 
right  reason.  Accordingly  we  always  find,  that  where  the  con- 
ditions were  not  performed,  on  the  non-performance  of  which 
the  threatenings  were  denounced,  God  always  executed  the 
punishment  threatened.  The  driving  Adam  out  of  Eden,  the 
destruction  of  the  old  world  by  a  deluge  of  water,  and  the  over- 
throw of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  are,  and  will  be  always,  so  many 
standing  monuments  of  God's  executing  his  threatenings  when 
denounced,  though,  to  our  weak  apprehensions,  the  punishment 
may  seem  far  to  exceed  the  crime. 

It  is  true,  God  did  spare  Nineveh,  and  that  because  the  inha- 
bitants did  actusdly  repent,  and  therefore  performed  the  condi- 
tions upon  which  it  was  supposed,  Vy  the  prophet's  being  sent 
to  warn  thetn,  the  threatened  punishment  should  be  withheld. 

And  so  in  respect  to  gospel  threatenings.  If  men  will  so  fiur 
consult  their  own  welfare,  as  to  comply  with  the  gospel,  €rod 
certainly  will  not  punish  them,  but,  on  the  contrary,  confer  upon 
them  his  rewards.  But  to  affirm  that  he  will  not  punish,  and 
that  eternally  too,  impenitent,  obstinate  sinners,  according,  as  he 
hath  threatened  ;  what  is  it,  in  effect,  but  to  make  God  Hke  a 
man,  that  he  should  lie,  or  the  son  of  man,  that  he  should  repent  f 

But  the  absurdity  of  such  an  opinion  will  appear  still  more 
'evident  from — 

The  Tliird  argument  I  shall  offer  to  prove,  that  the  torments 
Teserved  for  the  wicked  hereafter  are  eternal.  From  the  nature  of 
the  Christian  covenant. 

And  h^re  I  must  again  observe,  that  it  \^as  taken  for  granted 
kt  the  beginhing  of  this  discourse,  that  you  believe  the  Son  of 
Crod  came  down  to  save  sinners ;  and  that  there  is  but  one  Medi- 
ator between  God  and  man,  even  the  man  Christ  Jesus. 

And  here  I  take  it  for  granted  farther,  (unless  you  believe  the 
hbsurd  and  unwarrantable  doctrine  of  purgatory,)  that  you  are 
Rilly  persuaded,  this  life  is  the  only  time  allotted  by  Almighty 
God  for  working  out  our  salvation,  and  that,  after  a  few  year^ 
are  passed  over,  there  will  remain  no  more  sacrifice  for  sin. 

And  if  this  be  granted,  (and  who  dares  deny  it?)  it  follows, 
that  if  a  wicked  man  die  in  his  wickedness,  and  under  the  wrath 
of  God,  he  must  continue  in  that  state  to  all  eternity.  For  since 
there  is  no  possibility  of  their  being  delivered  out  of  such  a  con- 
dition, but  by  and  through  Christ ;  and  since,  at  the  hour  of 
death,  the  time  of  Christ's  mediation  and  intercession  for  him  Is 
irrecoverably  gone ;  the  same  reason  that  may  be  givto,  why 


KXV1.]  TRB  BTERNITY   OF   HELL-TORMENTB.  ^S 

God  B&oidd  paniish  a  sinner  that  dieth  uhder  the  guilt  of  hBs  mim 
for  a  single  day,  will  equally  bold  good,  why  he  should  continue 
to  punish  him  for  a  year,  ap  age,  nay,  to  all  eternity. 

But  I  hastoi  to  the  fourth  and  last  argument,  to  prove  that 
the  torments  reserved  for  the  wicked  heree^ter  are  eternal, — Be- 
cause the  devil's  punishment  is  to  be  so. 

That  there  is  such  a  being  whom  we  call  the  devil ;  that  he 
was  once  an  angel  of  light,  but,  for  his  pride  and  rebellion  against 
God,  was  cast  down  from  heaven,  and  is  now  permitted,  with 
the  rest  of  the  spiritual  wickednesses,  to  walk  to  and  fro,  seeking 
whom  they  may  devour ;  that  there  is  a  place  of  torment  re- 
served ibr  them,  or,  to  use  the  apostle's  words,  **  that  they  are 
it^serVed  in  everlasting  chains  under  darkness  unto  the  judgment 
of  the  great  day ;  are  truths,  all  here  present  were  supposed  to 
be  convinced  of,  at  the  beginning  of  this  discourse,  you  believing 
the  Holy  Scriptures  to  be  written  by  the  inspiration  of  God, 
wherein  these  truths  are  delivered. 

But  then  if  we  allow  all  this,  and  think  it  no  injustice  in  God 
to  publish  those  once  glorious  spirits  for  their  rebellion;  how 
can  we  think  it  unjuist  in  him  to  punish  wicked  men  for  their 
impenitehcy  to  all  eternity  ? 

Yon  tvillisay,  perhaps,  that  they  have  sinned  against  greater 
Ugh^  and  thex^fore  deserve  a  greater  punishment.  And  so  we 
^rant^  that  the  punishment  of  the  fallen  angels  may  be  greater 
as  to  degree,  than  that  of  wicked  men :  but  then  we  affirm,  it 
will  be  equsil  as  to  the  eternal  duration  of  it ;  for  in  that  day, 
as  the  Hvely  oracles  of  God  inform  us,  shall  the  Son  of  man  say 
to  them  on  his  left  hand, '' Depart  from  me,  ye  cursed,  into  ever- 
lasttog  fire,  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels."  Where  we  find 
that  im^peoitent  sinners  ^re  to  be  cast  into  the  same  everlasting 
fire  with  the  devil  and  his  angels :  and  that  too  very  justly ;  for 
though  tfaby  ibay  have  sinned  against  greater  light,  yet  Christians 
sill  against  greater  mercy ;  since  Christ  took  not  bold  of,  did 
aot  die  for,  the  fallen  angels,  but  for  men  and  for  our  salvation. 
So  that  if  Grod  spared  not  those  excellent  beings,  assure  thyself, 
0  obstinate  sinner,  whoever  thou  art,  he  will  by  no  means  spare 
thee. 

From  what  then  has  been  said,  it  plainly  appears,  that  verily 
the  torments  reserved  for  the  wicked  hereafter  are  eternal.  And 
if  so,  brethren,  how  ought  we  to  fly  to  Jesus  Christ  for  refuge ; 
how  holy  ought  we  to  be  in  all  manner  of  conversation  and 
godliness,  that  we  may  be  accounted  worthy  to  escape  this 
wrath  to  come ! 

But  before  I  proceed  to  a  practical  exhortation,  permit  me 
to  draw  an  inference  or  two  from  what  has  been  said. 

And  First,  If  the  torments  reserved  for  the  wicked  hereafter 
are  eternal,  what  shall  we  say  to  those,  who  make  an  open 
profession  in  their  creed  to  believe  a  life  everlasting,  a  life  of 
misery  as  well  as  happiness,  and  yet  dare  to  live  in  the  actual 
commission  of  those  sins  which  will  unavoidably,  without  repen** 
tance^  britog  them  into  that  place  of  tprnient  ?  Thou  believest 


914  THB  StBRNlTY    OF  HBLL  T0RIIBNT8.  [XXTf. 

«lbat  the  punishments  of  the  impenitently  wicked  in  another  life^ 
.are  eternal :  Thou  dost  well,  the  devils  also  believe,  and  trem- 
ble." But  know,  O  vain  man,  unless  this  belief  doth  influence 
thy  practice,  and  make  thee  bid  adieu  to  thy  sins ;  every  time 
thou  repeatest  thy  creed,  thou  dost  in  effect  say,  I  believe  I 
shall  be  undone  for  ever/' 

But,  Secondly f  If  the  torments  reserved  for  the  wicked  here- 
after are  eternal,  then  let  this  serve  as  a  caution  to  such  persons, 
/and  it  is  to  be  feared  there  are  some  such,)  who  go  about  to 
dissuade  others  from  the  belief  of  such  an  important  truth : 
there  being  no  surer  way,  in  all  probability,  to  encourage  and 
promote  infidelity  and  profaneness,  than  the  broaching  or  main- 
taining so  unwarrantable  a  doctrine.  For  if  the  positive  threats 
of  God,  concerning  the  eternity  of  hell-torments,  are  already 
found  insufficient  to  deter  men  from  sin,  what  a  higher  pitdi  of 
wickedness  may  we  imagine  they  will  quickly  arrive  at,  when 
they  are  taught  to  entertain  any  hopes  of  a  future  recovery  oot 
of  them ;  or,  what  is  still  worse,  that  their  souls  are  hereafter 
to  be  annihilated,  and  become  like  the  beasts  that  perish  ?  But 
'woe  unto  such  blind  leaders  of  the  blind!  No  wonder  if  they 
both  fall  into  the  ditch.  And  let  such  corrupters  of  God's  word 
know,  that  I  testify  unto  every  man  that  heareth  me  this  day, 
'^  That  if  any  one  shall  add  unto,  or  take  away  from,  the  words 
that  are  written  in  the  book  of  Gk>d,  God  shall  take  bis  part  out 
of  the  book  of  life,  and  shall  add  unto  him  all  the  plagues  that 
are  in  that  book." 

Thirdly  and  Lastly,  If  the  torments  reserved  for  the  wicked 
hereafter  be  eternal,  then  this  may  seive  as  a  reproof  for  those 
who  quarrel  with  God,  and  say  it  is  inconsistent  with  his  justice, 
to  punish  a  person  to  all  eternity,  only  for  enjojdng  the  pleasures 
of  sin  for  a  season.  But  such  persons  must  be  told,  that  it  is 
not  their  thinking  or  calling  Grod  unjust,  will  make  him  so,  do 
more  than  a  condemned  prisoner's  saying  the  law  or  judge  is 
unjust,  will  render  either  duly  chargeable  with  such  an  imputa- 
tion. But  knowest  thou,  O  worm,  what  blasphemy  thou  art 
guilty  of,  in  charging  God  with  injustice?  ''Shall  the  thing 
formed  say  to  him  that  formed  it,  why  hast  thou  made  me  thus?" 
Wilt  thou  presume  to  arraign  the  AL|iighty  at  the  bar  of  thy 
shallow  reasoning?  and  call  him  unjust  for  punishing  thee 
eternally,  only  because  thou  wishest  it  may  not  be  so?  But  hath 
God  said  it,  and  shall  he  not  do  it?  He  hath  said  it:  and  let 
God  be  true,  though  every  man  be  a  liar.  ''Shall  not  the  Judge 
of  all  the  earth  do  right? '  Assuredly  he  will.  And  if  sinners 
will  not  own  his  justice  in  bis  threatenings  here,  they  will  be 
compelled  ere  long  to  own  and  feel  them,  when  tormented  by 
him  hereafter. 

But  to  come  to  a  more  practical  application  of  what  hlus  been 
delivered : 

You  have  heard,  brethren,  the  eternity  of  hell-torments  plainly 
proved,  from  the  express  declarations  of  holy  scriptures,  and 
consequences  naturally  drawn  from  them.  And  now  then 


XXVI.]  THB   BTBRNITY   OP  HBLL  TORMBNTS.  SIS 

to  need  no  great  art  of  rhetoric  to  persuade  any  understanding 
person  to  avoid  and  abhor  those  sins,  which,  without  repentance, 
will  certainly  plunge  him  into  this  eternal  gulf.  The  dispropor- 
tion between  the  pleasure  and  the  pain  (if  there  be  any  pleasure 
in  sin)  is  so  infinitely  great,  that  supposing  it  were  only  pos- 
sible, though  not  certain,  that  the  wicked  would  be  everlast- 
ingly punished,  no  one  that  has  the  reason  of  a  man,  for  the 
enjojring  a  little  momentary  pleasure,  would,  one  might  imagine, 
ran  the  hazard  of  enduring  eternal  pain.  But  since  the  tor- 
ments of  the  damned  are  not  <mly*pos8iUe  but  certain,  (since 
God  himself,  who  cannot  lie,  has  told  as  so,)  for  men,  notwith- 
standing, to  persist  in  their  disobedience,  and  then  flatter  them- 
selves, that  God  will  not  make  good  his  thr^atenings,  is  a  most 
^r^ous  instance  of  folly  and  presumption. 

Dives  himself  supposed,  that  if  one  rose  from  the  dead,  his 
brethren  would  amend  their  lives ;  but  Christians,  it  seems,  will 
not  rep^it,  though  the  Son  of  God  died  and  rose  again,  and 
told  tlmn  what  they  must  expect,  if  they  continue  obstinate  in 
evil-doing. 

Would  we  now  and  then  draw  off  our  thoughts  from  sensible 
objects,  and  by  faith  meditate  a  while  on  the  miseries  of  the 
damned,  I  doubt  not  but  we  should,  as  it  were,  hear  many  an 
unhappy  soul  venting  his  fruitless  sorrows  in  some  such  piteous 
moans  as  these. 

"  O  wretched  man  that  I  am,  who  shall  deliver  me  from  this 
body  of  death !"  O  foolish  mortal  that  I  was,  thus  to  bring 
myself  into  these  never-ceasing  tortures,  for  the  transitory  enjoy- 
ment of  a  few  short-lived  pleasures,  which  scarcely  afforded  me 
any  satisfaction,  even  when  I  most  indulged  myself  in  them. 
Alas !  are  these  the  wages,  these  the  effects,  of  sin  ?  Are  all  the 
grand  deceiver's  inviting  promises  come  to  this?  O  damned 
apostate !— first  to  delude  me  with  pretended  promises  of  hap- 
piness, and,  after  several  years'  drudgery  in  his  ^ervice^  thus  to 
involve  me  in  eternal  woe.  O  that  I  had  never  hearkened  to 
bis  beguiling  insinuations !  O  that  I  had  rejected  his  very  first 
suggestions  with  the  utmost  detestation  and  abhorrence!  O 
that  I  had  taken  up  my  cross,  and  followed  Christ !  O  that  I 
had  never  ridiculed  serious  godliness,  and,  out  of  a  false  polite- 
ness, condemned  the  truly  pious  as  too  severe,  enthusiastic,  or 
superstitious !  Por  I  then  had  been  happy  indeed,  happy  be- 
yond expression,  happy  to  all  eternity,  yonder  in  those  blessed 
regions,  where  they  sit  clothed  with  unspeakable  glory,  and 
chanting  forth  their  seraphic  hallelujahs  to  the  Lamb  that  sitteth 
upon  the  throne  for  ever.  But,  alas !  these  reflections  come  now 
too  late :  these  wishes  now  are  vain  and  fruitless.  I  have  not 
suffered,  and  therefore  must  not  reign  with  him.  I  have  in  effect 
denied  the  Lord  that  bought  me,  and  therefore  justly  am  I  now 
denied  by  him.  But  must  I  live  for  ever  tormented  in  these 
'flames  ?  Must  this  body  of  mine,  which  not  long  since  lay  in 
state,  was  clothed  in  purple  and  fine  linen,  and  fared  sumptu- 
ously every  day,  must  it  be  here  eternally  confined,  and  made 


916  THE   ETERNITY    OF   HELL  TORMENTd.  {XXYI. 

tbe  mockeVy  of  insulting  devils  ?    O  eternity !  that  thouj^ht  fills 
me  with  despair :.  I  must  be  miserable  for  ever. 

Come  then,  all  ye  self-deluding,  self-deluded  sinners^  and 
imagine  yourselves  for  once  in  the  place  of  that  truly  wretched 
man  I  have  been  here  describing.  Think,  I  beseech  you,  by  the 
mercies  of  Grod  in  Christ  Jesus,  think  with  yourselves,  how 
racking,  how  unsupportable,  the  ne^r-dying  wprm  of  a  self- 
condemning  conscience  will  hereafter  be  to  you.  Think  how 
impossible  it  will  be  for  you  to  dwell  with  everlasting  burnings. 

Come,  all  ye  Christians  of  a  lukewarm,  Laodicean  spirit,  ye 
Gallios  in  religion,  who  care  a  little,  but  not  enough,"  for  the 
things  of  God  ;  O  tiiink,  think  with  yourselves,  how  deplorable 
it  wDl  be  to  lose  the  enjoyment  of  heaven^  and  run  into  endless 
torments,  merely  because  yon  will  be  content  to  be  almost,  and 
will  not  strive  to  be  altogether  Christians.  Consider,  I  beseech 
yon  consider,  how  you  will  rave  and  curse  that  fatal  stupidity 
which  made  you  believe  any  thing  less  than  true  faith  in  Jesas, 
productive  of  a  life  of  strict  piety,  self-denial,  and  mortification, 
can  keep  you  from  those  torments,  the  eternity  of  which  I  have 
b^en  endeavouring  to  prove. 

But  I  can  no  more.  These  thoughts  are  too  melancholy  for 
me  to  dwell  on,  as  well  as  for  yon  to  hear;  and  God  knows,  as 
puniiihing  is  his  strange  work,  so  denouncing  his  threatenings  is 
mine.  But  if  the  bare  mentioning  the  torments  of  the  damned 
be  so  shocking,  how  terrible  must  the  enduring  of  them  be ! 

And  now,  are  not  some  of  you  ready  to  cry  out,  '^  These  are 
iiard  sayings,  who  can  bear  them  V* 

But  let  not  sincere  Christians  be  in  the  least  terrified  at  what 
.has  been  delivered :  No,  for  you  is  reserved  a  crown,  a  kingdom, 
an  eternal  and  exceeding  weight  of  glory.  Christ  never  said  that 
the  righteous,  the  believing,  the  upright,  the  sincere,  but  tbe 
wicked,  merciless,  negatively  good  professors  before  described, 
shall  go  into  everlasting  punishment.  For  you,  who  love  him  in 
sincerity,  a  new  and  living  way  is  laid  open  into  the  holy  of 
holies  by  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ ;  and  an  abundant  entrance 
1^'ill  be  administefred  unto  you,  at  the  ereat  day  of  account,  into 
eternal  life.  TsJlc  heed,  therefore,  and  beware  that  there  be  not 
in  any  of  you  a  root  of  bitterness  springing  up  of  unbelief :  bnt, 
on  the  contrary,  stedfastiy  and  heartily  rely  on  the  many  pre- 
cious promises  reached  out  to  you  in  the  gospel,  knowing  that 
he  who  hath  promised  is  faithful,  and  therefore  will  perform. 

But  let  no  obstinately  wicked  professors  dare  to  apply  any  of 
the  divine  promises  to  themselves :  ''for  it  is  not  meet  to  take 
the  children's  meat,  and  give  it  unto  dogs :"  No,  to  such  the 
terrors  of  the  Lord  only  belong.  And  as  certainly  as  Christ  will 
say  to  his  true  followers, "  Come,  ye  blessed  children  of  my 
Father,  receive  the  kingdom  prepared  for  you  from  the  begin- 
ning of  the  world ;"  so  he  will  unalterably  pronounce  this  dread- 
ful sentence  against  all  that  die  in  their  sins,  "  Depart  from  me, 
ye  cursed,  into  everlasting  fire,  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his 
angels/' 


XXVII.}  BLIND   BARTIMBU8.  SL17 

ft 

From  whi^h  nnhappy  state,  may  God  of  his  infinite  metcy  de- 
liver ns  all  through  Jesus  Christ:  to  whom,  with  thee, O  Father, 
and  thee,  O  Holy  Ghost,  three  Persons  and  one  eternal  God,  be 
ascribed,  as  is  most  due,  all  honour,  power,  might,  majesty,  and 
dominion,  now  and  for  evermore. 


SERMON  XXVIl. 

BLIND   BARTIMBU8 

And  Jesus  said  unto  him,  Go  thy  way,  thy  faith  hath  made  thee 
whoh.  And  immediately  he  received  his  sight,  and  followed 
Jesus  in  the  way. — Mark  x.  52. 

When  the  apostle  Peter  was  recommending  Jesus  of  Nazareth, 
in  one  of  his  sermons  to  the  Jews,  he  gave  him  a  short,  but 
withal  a  glorious  and  exalted  character,  ''  that  he  went  aboiit 
doing  good."  He  went  about,  he  sought  occasions  of  doing 
good ;  it  was  his  meat  and  drink  to  do  the  works  of  him  that 
sent  him,  whilst  the  day  of  his  public  administration  last^. 
Justly  was  he  styled  by  the  prophet,  the  Sun  of  righteousness. 
For,  as  the  sun  in  the  natural  firmament  difiuses  hLs  quickening 
and  reviying  beams  through  the  universe,  so  wherever  the  Sun 
of  righteousness,  the  blessed  Jesus,  arose,  he  arose  with  healing 
under  his  wings.  He  was  indeed  a  prophet  like  unto  Moses, 
and  proved  that  he  was  the  Messiah  which  was  to  come  into 
the  world,  by  the  miracles  which  he  wrought,  though  with  thifl^ 
material  difference,  the  miracles  of  Moses,  agreeaUe  to  the  old 
testament  dispensation,  were  miracles  of  judgment:  the  mintclea 
of  Jesus,  who  came  to  bear  our  sicknesses  and  heal  bur  infir-' 
mities,  were  miracles  of  mercy,  and  were  wrought,  not  only  for 
the  care  of  people's  bodies,  but  also  for  the  conversion  of  their 
precious  and  immortal  souls.  Sometimes  one  and  the  same 
person  was  the  subject  of  both  these  mercies.  A  glorious  proof 
of  this,  we  have  in  the  miraculous  cure  wrought  upon  a  poor 
blind  beggar,  named  Bartimcus,  who  is  to  be  the  subject  of  the 
following  discourse,  and  to  whom  the  words  of  the  text  re&r* 
''Jesus  said  unto  him.  Go  thy  way,  thy  faith  bath  made  thee 
iRibole. .  And  iinmediately  he  received  his  sight,  and  ibllowed 
Jesas  in  the  way." 

My  design  is.  First,  To  make  some  observations  on  the  matn 
ter  of  fact,  as  recorded  by  the  evangelists.    And  then. 

Secondly,  To  point  out  the  improvement  that  may  be  made 
thereof.  May  Jesud  so  bless  this  following  discourse,  that  everjr 
spiritually  blind  hearer  may  receive  his  sight,  and,  after  the 
example  of  Bartimeus,  **  follow  Jesus  in  the  way !" 

If  we  would  take  a  view  of  the  whole  story,  we  must  go  back 
to  the  46tii  verse  of  this  chapter :  ''  And  they  (our  Lord  and  bis 
disciples,  who,  we  find  by  the  context,  had  been  conversing 
together)  came  to  Jericho,"  a  place  devoted  by  Joshua  to  the 
curse  of  God ;  and  yet,  even  this  place  yields  converts  to  Jesus  7 


818  BLIND   BARTIMBUS.  [XXVfl# 

SSaccheos  had  been  called  there  formerly :  and  Bartimens,  as  we 
shall  hear  by  and  by,  in  all  probability,  was  called  now.  Foif* 
some  good  may  come  even  oat  of  Nazareth.  Christ  himself  was 
bom  there,  and  his  sovereign  grace  can  reach  and  overcome  the 
worst  of  people,  in  the  very  worst  of  places.  Jesus  came  to 
Jericho.  Let  not  his  ministers,  if  Providence  point  out  their 
way,  shun  going  to  seemingly  the  most  unlikely  places  to  do 
good ;  some  chosen  vessels  may  be  therein.  Jesus  and  his  dis- 
ciples came  to  Jericho.  -They  were  itinerants;  and,  as  I  have 
frequently  observed,  seldom  stayed  long  in  a  place :  not  that 
this  is  any  argument  against  the  stated  settlement  of  particular 
pastors  over  particular  parishes :  but,  however,  our  Lord's 
practice,  in  this  respect,  gives  a  kind  of  sanction  to  itinerant 
preaching,  when  persons  are  properly  called  to,  and  qualified 
for,  such  an  employ.  And  I  believe  we  may  venture  to  affirm, 
(though  we  would  by  no  means  prescribe  or  dictate  to  the  Holy 
One  of  Israel,)  that,  whenever  there  shall  be  a  general  revival  of 
religion  in  any  country,  itinerant  preaching  will  be  more  in 
vogue.  And  it  is  to  be  feared,  that  those  who  condemn  it  now» 
merely  on  account  of  the  meanness  of  its  appearance,  would 
have  joined  with  the  self-righteous  scribes  and  Pharisees,  in 
condemning  even  the  Son  of  God  himself,  for  such  a  practice. 

"  And  as  he  went  out  of  Jericho  with  his  disciples,  and  a  great 
number  of  people ;"  vyXaiKavS  a  great  number  of  mob,  pr  rabble, 
as  the  high-priests  of  that  generation  termed  them,  for  these 
were  the  constant  followers  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth :  it  was  the 
poor  that  received  his  gospel,  the  common  people  heard  him 
gladly,  and  followed  him  from  place  to  place.    Not  that  all  wha 
followed  him,  were  his  true  disciples.     No,  some  followed  him 
only  for  his  loaves,  others  out  of  curiosity ;  though  some  un- 
doubtedly followed  to  hear,  and  be  edified  by,  the  gracious  words 
that  proceeded  out  of  his  mouth.    Jesus  knew  this,  and  was 
also  sensible  how  displeasing  this  crowding  after  him  was  to 
some  of  the  rulers  of  the  Jewish  church,'  who,  upon  every  occa- 
sion, were  ready  to  say,  **  Have  any  of  the  scribes  and  Phari- 
sees believed  on  him  V*    But,  notwithstanding,  I  do  not  bear  of 
out  Lord's  sending  them  home  but  once ;  and  that  was,  after 
they  had  been  with  him  three  days,  and  had  nothing  left  to  eat, 
he  saw  they  were  as  sheep  having  no  shepherd,  and  therefore 
bad  compassion  on  them,  and  taught  them.    A  sufficient  war- 
rant this  for  gospel-ministers  to  preach  to  poor  souls  that  follow 
to  hear  the  word,  whatever  principle  their  coming  may  proceed 
from.    At  the  same  time,  they  should  caution  people  agaidst 
thinking  themselves  Christians,  because  they  follow  Christ's 
ministers.    This  our  Lord  frequently  did.     For  there  are  many 
that  followed  Jesus,  and  now  follow  his  ministers,  and  hear 
them  gladly;  nay,  perhaps  do  many  things,  as  Herod  did,  who,  it 
is  to  be  feared,  will  never  follow  them  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 
Much  people  followed  Jesus  out  of  Jericho,  but  how  many  of 
them  were  offended  in  him !  and  afterwards,  it  may  be;  cried  out, 
^  Crucify  him,  crucify  him."  Who  would  depend  on  popularity? 


SXTIL.]  BLIND   BARTIHBV8.  8Ift 

It  is  like  the  morning  cload,  or  eaily  dew,  that  passeih  away. 
Bat  what  a  press,  and  seemingly  continued  harry  of  business 
did  the  blessed  Jesos  live  in !  he  could  not  be  hid ;  go  where  he 
would,  much  people  followed  him.  He  had  scarce  time  to  eat 
bread.  ^  Happy  is  it  for  such  who  are  called  to  act  in  a  public 
station  in  the  church,  and  to  be  more  abundant  in  labours,  that 
their  Jesus  has  trodden  in  this  dangerous  path  before  them. 
Popularity  is  a  fiery  furnace,  and  no  one,  but  he  who  kept  the 
three  children  amidst  Nebuchadnezzar's  flames,  can  preserve 
popular  ministers  from  being  hurt  by  it  But  we  can  do  all 
things  through  Christ  strengthening  us.  And  I  have  often 
thought,  that  there  is  one  consideration  sufficient  to  extinguish, 
or  moderate  at  least,  any  excess  of  joy  and  self-complacence, 
which  the  most  popular  preacher  may  feel,  when  followed  even 
by  the  greatest  multitudes ;  and  that  is  this,  '^  How  many  of 
these  hearers  will  go  away,  without  receiving  any  saving  benefit 
by  my  preaching ;  nay,  how  many,  it  may  be,  will  only  have 
their  damnation  increased  by  it!''  as  we  find  many  will  say  at 
the  gpreat  day,  ''Hast  thou  not  taught  in  our  streets?"  to  whom 
Jesus  shUl  answer,  ''  Verily  I  know  you  not" 

Bat  to  proceed,  ''  As  our  Lord  went  out  of  Jericho  with  his 
disciples,  and  a  great  number  of  people,  blind  Bartimeus,  (the 
son  of  'Timeus)  sat  by  the  highway-side  begging."  .  It  should 
seem  that  he  was  a  noted,  though  by  no  means  what  we  com- 
monly call,  a  sturdy  beggar ;  having,  no  other  way,  as  he  had 
lost  his  sight,  to  get  his  bread :  his  case  was  still  the  more  piti-^ 
aUe,  if  he  were,  as  some  think  the  name  imports,  the  blind  son 
of  a  blind  father.  It  may  be,  he  begged  for  his  father  and  him- 
self too;  and  if  so,  then  this  may  give  us  light  into  that  passage 
of  Matthew,  xx.  22.  where  we  are  told,  that  "  two  men  spake  to 
Jesus."  It  might  be  father  and  son,  though  only  one  is  men-^ 
tioned  here,  because  he  only  followed  Jesus  in  the  way.  Thus, 
that  holy,  judicious,  and  practical  expositor  of  holy  writ,  Mr. 
Henry.— But  however  this  be,  he  is  not  blamed  for  begging, 
neither  should  we  discommend  others  for  so  doing,  when  Provi- 
dence calls  to  it  It  was  the  unjust  steward  that  said,  "  To 
beg  I  am  ashamed."  It  is  our  pride  that  often  makes  us  unwil- 
ling to  be  beholden ;  Jesus  was  not  thus  minded,  he  lived,  as  it 
were,  upon  alms ;  the  women  that  followed  him,  ministered  to 
bim  of  their  substance.  Bartimeus,  not  being  able  to  dig,  begs 
for  bis  living ;  and,  in  order  to  make  a  better  trade  of  it,  sat  by 
the  highway-side— in  all  probability,  without  or  near  the  gate  of 
the  city,  where  people  must  necessarily  pass  in  and  out.  But 
though  he  had  lost  his  sight,  he  had  his  hearing  perfect ;  and  it 
should  comfort  us,  if  we  have  lost  one  sense,  that  we  have  the 
use  of  another,  and  that  we  are  not  deprived  of  the  benefit  of 
all.  Happy  was  it  for  Bartimeus  that  he  could  hear,  though 
not  see:  for  in  all  probability,  upon  hearing  the  noise  and 
clamour  of.  the  much  people  that  followed  after  our  Lord,  his 
curiosity  set  him  upon  inquiring  into  the  cause  of  it,  and  some 
one  or  another  told  him,  ^  that  Jesus  of  Nazareth  was  passings 


aaO  BLIND   BAETIMEUS.  [XXVIl. 

by  ;*'  Jesus  of  Nazarctb,  called  so,  because  he  was  bred  there^ 
or  out  of  contompt :  Nazareth  being  either  a  very  mean  or  very 
wicked  place,  or  both,  which  made  guileless  Nathanael  say, 
**  Can  any  good  come  out  of  Nazareth  V  And  what  does  Bar- 
tinieus  do  when  ho  hears  of  Jesus  T  Wc  arc  told,  vcr.  47,.  **  And 
when  he  heard  that  it  was  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  he  began  to  cry 
out."  This  plainly  denotes,  that  though  the  eyes  of  his  body 
were  shut,  yet  the  eyes  of  his  mind  were  in  some  degree  opened, 
80  that  he  saw,  perhaps,  more  than  most  of  the  maltitnde  that 
followed  after  Jesus ;  for,  as  soon  as'  he  heard  of  it,  he  began 
to  cry  out ;  which  he  would  not  have  done,  had  he  not  heard  of 
him  before,  and  believed  also  that  he  was  both  able  and  willing 
to  restore  sight  to  the  blind.  "  He  began  to  cry  out."  This 
implies,  that  he  had  a  deep  sense  of  his  own  misery,  and  the 
need  which  he  had  of  a  cure ;  his  prayers  did  not  freeze  as  they 
went  out  of  his  lips  ;  he  began  to  cry  out,. that  Jesus  might  hear 
him,  notwithstanding  the  noise  of  the  throng ;  and  ho  began  to 
cry  out,  as  soon  as  he  heard  he  was  passing  by,  not  knowing  whe- 
ther he  might  ever  enjoy  such  an  opportunity  any  moj^e.  *^  He 
began  to  cry  out,  Jesus,  thou  Son  of  David,  have  mercy  upon  me." 
The  people  called  him  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  Bartimeus  styles 
him,  ''Jesus  thou  Son  of  David."  Thereby  evidencing  that  he 
believed  him  to  be  the  Messiah  who  was  to  come  into  tho  world, 
unto  whom  the  Lord  God  was  to  give  the  throne  of  his  father 
David,  and  of  whose  kingdom  there  was  to  be  no  end.  ''  Jesus 
thou  Son  of  David ;"  or,  as  it  is  in  the  parallel  place  of  St 
Matthew  xx.  30. ''  O  Lord,  thou  Son  of  David ;"  of  whom  it  bad 
been  long  foretold,  Isaiah  xxxv.  that  when  he  shouid  come, 
**  the  eyes  of  the  blind  should  be  opened."  ''  Have  mercy  upon 
me,"  the  natural  language  of  a  soul  brought  to  lie  down  at  the 
feet  of  a  sovereign  God.  Here  is  no  laying  claim  to  a  cure  by 
way  of  merit  ;'no  proud,  self-righteous^ ''  Grod,  I  thank  thee  that 
I  am  not  as  other  men  are :"  no  bringing  in  a  reckoning  of  per- 
formances, nor  any  doubting  of  Jesus'  power  or  willingness  to 
heal  him ;  but  out  of  the  abundance  of  the  heart,  his  mouth  speak- 
eth,  and,  in  the  language  of  the  poor,  broken-hearted  publican, 
he  cries  out,  "Jesus,  thou  Son  of  David,  have  mercy  on  me:" 
Jesus,  thou  friend  of  sinners,  thou  Saviour,  who,  though  thoa 
be  the  true  God,  wast  pleased  to  become  the  Son  of  David,  and 
to  be  made  man,  that  thou  mightest  seek  and  save  those  that 
were  lost, — have  mercy  ai>on  me ;  let  thy  bowels  yearn  towards 
a  poor,  miserable^  blind  beggar ! 

One  would  have  thought  that  such  a  moving  petition  as  this 
"  would  have  melted  the  whole  multitude,  that  heard  his  piteous 
cry,  into  compassion,  and  induced  some  at  least  to  turn  snitors 
in  his  behalf,  or  help  to  carry  him  to  the  blessed  Jesus.  Bot 
instead  of  that,  we  are  told,  ver.  48,  that  **  many  charged  him." 
The  word  in  the  original  seems  to  imply  a  charge  attended  with 
threatening,  and  spoken  in  an  angry  manner.  They  charged  him 
"  to  hold  his  peace ;"  and,  it  may  be,  threatened  to  beat  him  if 
be  did  not.    They  looked  upon  him  beneath  the  notice  of  Jesus 


XZVffl.]  BLIND   BAKTIIffBU8«  921 

of  Nasareth,  and  were  ready  enough  to  ask  whether  he  thought 
JesoB  Christ  had  nothing  else  to  do  but  to  wait  upon  him.  THidm 
was,  no  doubt,  very  discoura^ng  to  blind  Bartimeus ;  for 
opposition  comes  closest  when  it  proceeds  from  those  who  are 
esteemed  followers  of  the  Lamb.  The  spouse  complains,  as  of 
something  peculiarly  afflicting,  that  her  own  mother's  children 
were  angry  with  her.  But  opposition  only  serves  to  whet  the 
edge  of  true  devotion,  and  therefore  Bartimeus,  instead  of  being 
aifeoced  by  their  charges  and  threatenings,  cried  out  the  more  a 
gieat  deal.  Thou  Son  of  David,  have  mercy  on  me."  Still  ho 
breaks  out  into  the  same  humble  language ;  and  if  Jesus  the 
Son  of  David  will  have  mercy  on  him,  he  cares  not  much  what 
lome  of  his  peevish  followers  said  of,  or  did  unto  him.  This 
was  not  a  vain  repetition,  but  a  devout  reiteration  of  his  request. 
We  may  sometimes  repeat  the  same  words,  and  yet  not  be 
gulty  crf'that  /3orroXoyui,  or  vain  speaking,  which  our  Lord  con- 
demns. For  our  Lord  himself  praved  in  his  agony,  and  said 
twic^e  the  same  words ;  **  Father,  if  it  be  possible,  let  this  cup 
pass  from  me.''  Thus  Bartimeus,  ''Jesus,  thou  Son  of  David, 
save  mercy  upon  me.*'  And  how  does  the  Son  of  David  treat 
kim  ?  Does  he  Join  issue  with  the  multitude,  and  charge  him  to 
hold  his  peace  t  or  does  he  go  on,  thinking  him  beneath  his 
BOtice  ?  No ;  for,  says  St  Mark,  ver.  40.  **  And  Jesus  stood 
ftiUy"  though  he  was  on  a  journey,  and  it  may  be  in  haste,  (for 
it  is  not  losing  time  to  stop  now  and  then  on  a  journey  to  do  a 
Kood  office  by  the  way,)  ''and  commanded  him  to  be  called :" 
Why  so?  To  teach  us  to  be  condescending  and  kind  even  to 
poor,  if  real  beggars,  and  tacitly  to  reprove  the  blind,  mis«2^uided 
leal  of  those  who  haid  charged  him  to  hold  his  peace.  By  this 
also  our  Lord  prepares  the  multitude  the  better  to  tcdce  the 
aMMTo  notioe  of  the  blind  man's  faith,  and  of  his  own  mercy  and 
power  exerted  in  the  healing  of  him.  For  there  are  times  and 
Masons  when  we  are  called  to  perform  acts  of  charity,  in  the 
sost  public  manner,  and  that  too  very  consistently  with  the 
iajonetion  of  our  Saviour,  "  not  to  let  our  right  band  know  what 
ear  left  hand  doeth."  For  there  is  a  great  deal  of  difference 
between  giving  alms,  and  exercising  acts  of  charity,  that  are 
leen  of  men, — and  doing  them,  that  they  may  be  seen ;  the  one  is 
always  sinful,  the  other  often  becomes  our  duty.  Jesus  com* 
mimded  Bartimeus  to  be  called,  "and  they  called  him/'  Who 
called  Uml  It  may  be,  those  who  a  little  before  charged  him 
to  bold  his  peace :  for  it  often  happens,  that  our  opposers  and 
liieaaragers  afterwards  become  our  friends.  "  When  a  man's 
ways  please  the  Lord,  he  makes  his  enemies  be  at  peace 
with  him."  And  it  is  to  be  wished,  that  all  who  have  charged 
poor  souls,  that  are  crying  after  Jesus,  to  hold  their  peace,  and 
to  spare  themselves,  and  not  be  righteous  over-much,  would 
imitate  the  people  here,  and  encourage  those  they  once  persecuted 
and  maligned.  "  They  call  the  blind  man,  saying  unto  him,  Be  of 
good  comfort,  rise,  be  calleth  thee."  The  words,  and  manner 
of  qpeiduiig  them,  implies  haste,  and  a  kind  of  solicitude  for  the 
♦  u 


S22  BLIND   BARTIMEUS.  [XXVIK 

blind  man's  relief.  O !  fliat  we  might  hereby  learn  to  be  patient 
and  long-suffering  towards  opposers :  for  it  may  be,  that  many 
may  oppose  awakened  souls,  not  out  of  enmity,  but  through  pre- 
judice and  misinformation,  through  ignorance  and  unbelief,  and 
a  real,  though  perhaps  false,  persuasion,  that  their  relations  are 
going  in  a  wrong  way.  By  and  by  they  may  be  convinced  that 
Christ  is  indeed  calling  them,  and  then  they  may  become  real 
and  open  friends  to  the  cause  and  work  of  God  ;  if  not,  it  is  oar 
duty,  to  behave  with  meekness  towards  all,  and  not  render  rail- 
ing for  railing,  but  contrariwise  blessing,  knowing  that  we  are 
thereunto  csdled,  that  we  may  inherit  a  blessing :  Jesus  did  not 
break  out  into  harsh  language  against  these  opposers,  neither 
did  Bartimeus.  '^  Our  Lord  stood  still,  and  commanded  him  to 
be  called ;  and  they  call  the  blind  man,  saying  unto  him.  Be  of 
good  comfort,  rise,  he  calleth  thee ;  and  he,  casting  away  his 
garment,  rose^  and  came  to  Jesus."  Had  Bartimeus  not  been 
in  earnest  when  he  cried,  ''Jesus,  thou  Son  of  David,  have  mercy 
upon  me,"  he  might  have  said,  why  do  you  mock  me?  Why  bid 
ye  me  arise  ^  rise  indeed  I  can,  but  after  I  am  risen,  how  can  I, 
being  blind,  find  my  way  unto  him?  If  he  will  come  to  me, 
it  is  well ;  if  not,  all  your  calling  availeth  nothing,  it  being  im- 
possible for  me  to  find  my  way.  Thus  thousands  nowadays 
object  to  evangelical  preachers,  saying.  Why  do  you  bid  us  como 
to  and  believe  on  Jesus  Christ,  when  you  tell  us  it  is  impossible 
of  ourselves  to  turn  to  God,  or  to  do  good  works ;  and  that  no 
one  can  come  unto  him,  unless  the  Father  draw  him.  Is  not  this 
like  the  people's  calling  upon  Bartimeus,  to  arise  and  come  to 
Jesus,  when  he  could  not  possibly  see  his  way  before  him? 
True,  it  is  so ;  and  would  to  God  that  all  who  make  this  objec- 
tion, would  imitate  Bartimeus,  and  put  forth  the  strength  they 
have !  What  if  we  do  call  you  to  como,  and  to  believe  on  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  you  may  be  saved  ?  Does  this  imply 
that  you  have  a  power  in  yourselves  to  do  so  ?  No,  in  no  wise» 
no  more  than  Jesus  saying  unto  Lazarus's  dead  and  stinking 
carcase,  ''  Come  forth,"  implied,  that  Lazarus  had  a  power  to 
raise  himself  from  the  grave.  We  call  to  you,  being  commanded 
to  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature,  hoping  and  prayings  tjiat 
Christ's  power  may  accompany  the  word,  and  make  it  effectaal 
to  the  quickening  and  raising  of  your  dead  souls.  liVe  also  call 
to  you  to  believe,  upon  the  same  account  as  Jesus  said  unto  the 
lawyer,  ''  Do  this,  and  thou  shalt  live ;"  that  you,  seeing  your 
utter  inability  to  come,  might  thereby  be  convinced  of  your 
unbelief,  and  be  led  to  asiL  for  faith  of  him  whose  gift  it  is,  and 
who  is  therefore  in  scripture  emphatically  styled  the  Author,  as 
well  as  Finisher,  of  our  faith.  Add  to  this,  that  it  is  your  duty 
to  wait  at  the  pool,  or  to  make  use  of  the  strength  you  have,  in 
the  earnest  and  steady  performance  of  all  commanded  duty. 
For  though  you  cannot  do  what  is  spiritually  good,  because  you 
want  spiritual  principles  of  action,  yet  ye  may  do  what  is  morally 
and  materially  good,  inasmuch  as  ye  are  reasonable  creatures ; 
and  though  doing  your  duty  as  you  can,  no  ways  deserves  merpy. 


XXVIlJ  BLIND   BARTIMKUS.  323 

or  entitles  you  to  it,  yet  it  is  the  way  in  which  you  are  required 
to  walk^.and  the  way  in  which  God  is  usually  found.  WhilQ 
you  are  attempting  to  stretch  out  your  withered  arm,  peradven- 
ture  it  may  be  restored ;  and  who  knows  but  Jesus  may  work 
fidth  in  you  by  his  almighty  power  ? 

Bartimeus  has  set  before  such  objectors  an  example  ;  O  that 
they  would  once  submit  to  be  taught  by  a  poor  blind  beggar! 
For  he,  casting  away  his  garment,  rose,  and,  blind  as  he  was, 
came  to  Jesus, ''  casting  away  his  garment/'  This  seems  to  be 
a  large  coat  or  cloak,  that  he  wore  to  screen  himself  from  the 
rain  and  cold ;  undoubtedly,  it  was  the  most  necessary  and 
Taluable  vestment  he  had,  and,  one  would  have  thought,  that  he 
should  have  taken  this  along  with  him ;  but  he  knew  very  well 
that  if  he  did  so,  it  might  hang  about  his  heels,  and  thereby  his 
leaching  Jesus  be  retarded  at  least,  if  not  prevented  entirely. 
Valuable  therefore  as  it  was  to  him,  he  cast  it  away.  The 
word  implies,  that  he  threw  it  from  off  his  shoulders  with  great 
precipitancy  and  resolution,  knowing  that  if  he  got  a  cure,  which 
he  now  hoped  for,  by  Christ's  calling  him,  he  should  never  want 
his  garment  again.  And  thus  will  all  do  that  are  in  earnest 
about  coming  to  Jesus  here,  or  seeing  and  enjoying  him  in  his 
kingdom  eternally  hereafter.  They  will  cut  off  a  right  hand, 
they  will  pluck  out  a  right  eye,  they  will  leave  father  and 
mother,  husband  and  wife,  yea,  and  their  own  lives  also,  rather 
than  not  be  his  disciples.  The  apostle  Paul,  therefore,  exhorts 
Christians  to  '^  lay  aside  every  weight,  and  the  sin  that  doth 
moist  easily  beset  them,"  or  hang  about  their  heels,  as  the  word 
in  the  original  imports ;  alluding  to  the  custom  of  the  Romans, 
who  wore  long  garments.  Such  a  one  was  this  which  Bartimeus 
bad  wrapped  round  him :  but  he,  to  shew  that  he  sincerely 
desired  to  recover  his  sight,  casting  it  away,  arose  and  came  to 
Jesus.  And  what  treatment  did  Jesus  give  him  ?  Did  he  say. 
Come  not  nigh  me,  thou  impudent  noisy  beggar  ?  No ;  "  he 
answered  and  said  unto  him.  What  wilt  thou,  that  I  should  do 
onto  thee  V  an  odd  question  this,  seemingly :  for  did  not  our 
Lord  know  that  he  wanted  ?  Yes,  he  did ;  but  the  Lord  Jesus 
dealt  with  him  as  he  deals  with  us.  He  will  make  us  acknow- 
ledge our  wants  ourselves,  that  we  thereby  may  confess  our 
dependence  upon  him,  and  be  made  more  sensible  of  the  need 
we  stand  in,  of  his  divine  assistance.  The  blind  man  immedi- 
ately replies,  **  Lord,  (thereby  intimating  his  belief  of  Christ^ 
divinity,)  that  I, might  receive  my  sight."  Methinks  I  see  the 
poor  creature  listening  to  the  voice  of  our  Saviour,  and,  with 
looks  and  gestures  bespeaking  the  inward  earnestness  of  his 
Mral,  he  cries  out,  ''  Lord,  that  I  may  receive  my  sight."  As 
though  he  had  said,  I  believe  thou  art  that  Messiah  who  was  to 
come  into  the  world.  I  have  heard  of  thy  fame,  O  Jesus !  and 
hearing  the  long-wished-for  glad  tidings  of  thy  coming  this  way, 
I  cry  unto  thee,  asking  not  for  silver  and  gold,  but  what  thou, 
thou  alone  canst  give  me.  Lord,  that  I  might  receive  my  sight. 
Jfo  sooner  does  be  ask,  but  he  receives :  for,  verse  52,  *'  Jesu^ 

u2 


BM  jftLIND   BARTIMBU9.  {XXVih 

said  unto  him.  Go  thy  way,  thy  faith  hath  made  thee  whole ; 
and  immediately  he  received  his  sight."  With  the  wqjrd  tin&n 
went  a  power;  and  he  that  spake  light  out  of  darkness,  saying, 
''Let  there  be  light,  and  there  was  light,"  commanded  light 
into  this  poor  blind  beggar's  eyes,  and  behold  there  was  li^U« 
The  miracle  was  instantaneous ;  immediately  he  received  his 
sight.  And  next  to  a  miracle  it  was,  that  by  breaking  into 
open  light  all  at  once,  he  was  not  struck  blind  again :  but  he 
that  gave  the  sight,  preserved  it  when  given.  O  happy  Bar- 
timeus !  thy  eyes  are  now  opened,  and  the  very  first  object  thou 
dost  behold,  is  the  ever-loving,  altogether-lovely  Jesus.  Me- 
thinks  I  see  thee  transported  with  wonder  and  admiration,^  and 
all  the  disciples,  and  the  multitude,  gazing  around  thee !  *  And 
now,  having  received  thy  sight,  why  dost  thou  not  obey  the 
Lord's  command,  and  go  thy  way?  Why  dost  thou  not  haste 
to  fetch  thy  garment,  that  thou  just  now  in  a  hurry  didst  cast 
away  ?  No,  no !  with  his  bodily  eyes,  I  believe  he  received  also 
a  fresh  addition  of  spiritual  sight,  and  though  others  saw  no 
form  or  comeliness  in  the  blessed  Jesus,  that  they  should  desire 
him ;  yet  he  by  an  eye  of  faith  discovered  such  transcendent 
excellencies  in  his  royal  person,  and  felt  at  the  same  time  such 
a  divine  attraction  towards  his  all-bountiful  benefactor,  that 
instead  of  going  his  way  to  fetch  his  garment,  ''  he  followed 
Jesus  in  the  way ;"  and  by  his  actions,  says,  with  faithful, 
honest-hearted  Ruth,  ''  entreat  me  not  to  leave  thee ;  for  whi- 
ther thou  goest,  I  will  go ;  where  thou  lodgest,  I  will  lodge : 
thy  people  shall  be  my  people ;  and  thy  God,  my  Gk>d."  He 
followed  J^sus  in  the  way ;  the  narrow  way,  the  way  of  the 
cross  ;  and  I  doubt  not  but  long  since  he  has  followed  aim  to 
his  crown,  and  is  at  this  time  sitting. with  him  at  the  right  hand 
of  his  Father. 

And  now,  my  dear  hearers,  how  find  you  your  hearts  affected 
at  the  relation  of  this  notable  miracle  which  Jesus  wrought  t 
Are  you  not  ready  to  break  out  into  the  language  of  the  song 
of  Moses,  and  to  say,  **  Who  is  like  unto  thee,  O  Lord,  glorious 
in  holiness,  fearful  in  praises,  continually  doing  wonders  T 
Marvellous  are  thy  works,  O  Jesus,  and  that  our  souhi  know 
Iright  well !  But  we  must  not  stop  here,  in  admiring  ^iriiat  the 
Jiord  did  for  Bartiroeus ;  this,  no  doubt,  as  well  as  other  parts 
of  scripture,  was  written  for  our  learning,  upon  whom  the  ends 
of  the  world  are  come ;  consequently,  as  was  proposed  in  the 

Second  place,  we  should  see  what  spiritual  improvement  catt 
be  made  of  this  history,  upon  which  we  have  already  tieen 
making  some  remarks. 

A  natural  man,  indeed,  goes  no  further  than  the  ontwmid 
court  of  the  scripture,  and  reads  this  and  th'e  other  miracles 
of  our  blessed  Saviour,  just  in  the  same  manner  as  he'  reads 
Homer's  battles,  or  th^  exploits  of  Alexander.  But  (Sod  for* 
bid  that  we  should  rest  in  only  hearing  this  matter  of  fiict: 
for  I  tell  thee,  O  man,  I  tell  thee.  O  woman,  whoever  thou  ait, 
that  sittest  this  day  under  a  preached-  gosyely  thai  IS'  iImmi 


xxvih}  jn^iNo  MAnrimvu.  325 

IB  a  natmal  state,  thoo  art  as  blind  in  thy  soul,  as  Bartimeus 
was  ia  iiis  body;  a  blind  child  of  a  blind  &ther,  even  of  thy 
Cftlhfr  Adam,  who  lost  his  sight  when  he  lost  his  innocence, 
aod  entailed  his  blindness,  justly  inflicted,  upon  thee,  and  me, 
and  bis  whole  posterity.  Some  think  indeed,  that  they  see ; 
bat,  alas  I  snch  talk  only  like  men  in  their  sleep,  like  persons 
beside  tb^nselves ;  the  scriptares  every  where  represent  fallen 
man,  not  only  as  spiritually  blind,  but  dead  also ;  and  we  no 
more  know,  by  nature,  savingly  the  way  of  salvation  by  Jesus 
Christ,  than  Bartimeus,  when  he  was  blind,  knew  the  colours 
of  the  rainbow.  This,  I  trust,  some  of  you  begin  to  feel,  I  see 
you  concerned,  I  see  you  weeping,  and  were  I  to  ask  some  of 
yoa,  what  you  want  to  have  done  unto  you  ?  I  know  your 
answer  would  be,  that  we  may  receive  our  sight.  And  God 
forbid  that  I  should  charge  you  to  hold  your  peace,  as  though 
Jesus  would  not  regard  you  I  no,  your  being  made  sensible  of 
your  flAtnral  blindness,  and  crying  thus  earnestly  after  Jesus, 
is  a  sign  at  least,  that  you  are  awakened  by  his  holy  Spirit 
(tboagb  it  is  possible,  that  you  may  cry  with  an  exceeding 
hittor  cry,  as  £sau  did,  and  be  lost  at  last ;)  however,  christian 
eharitf  induces  me  to  believe  and  hope  the  best ;  I  will  there* 
fiote,  in  the  language  of  those  who  afterwards  encouraged  Bar* 
tiflieQS,  say  unto  you.  Arise,  take  comfort ;  for,  I  trust,  Jesus  is 
calliag  you; 'follow  therefore  the  example  of  Bartimeus,  cast 
away  your  garment ;  lay  aside  every  weight,  and  the  sin  which 
doth  most  easily  beset  you,  arise,  and  come  to  Jesus.  He 
ooBunands  me,  by  his  written  woid,  to  call  to  you,  and  say, 
''Come  onto  him,  all  ye  that  are  weary  and  heavy  laden,  and 
be  irili  refrmh  you,  he  will  give  you  rest."  Be  not  afraid,  ye 
seek  Jesus  of  Nazareth ;  behold,  he  comes  forth  to  meet  you : 
ye  are  now  on  the  highway-side,  and  Jesus,  I  trust,  is  passing 
by  ;  I  £m1  his  presence,  I  hope  many  of  you  feel  it  too ;  O  then 
pry  flughtily  to  him,  who  is  mighty  and  willing  to  save  you ;  lay 
yooraelves  at  the  feet  of  sovereign  grace,  say  unto  him,  ^*  Jesus 
thoa  Bon  of  David,  have  mercy  on  me,*'  in  the  same  frame  as 
Baitimeus  did,  and  Jesus  will  answer  you,  he  will  not  cast  out 
yaaf  prayer:  according  to  your  fEUth,  so  shall  it  be  done  unto 
yaau  filind  as  you  are,  you  shall,  notwithstanding,  receive 
foor  sigkl:  Satan,  indeed,  and  unbelief,  will  suggest  many 
objections  to  you,  your  carnal  relations  will  also  join  issue 
with  them,  and  charge  yon  to  hold  your  peace ;  one  will  tell 
fmi^  that  your  blindness  is  too  inveterate  to  be  cured ;  another, 
ikat  it  is  too  late ;  a  third,  that  though  Jesus  can,  yet  he  will 
not  have  mercy  npon  such  poor,  blind,  despicable  beggars  as 
ye  are ;  but,  the  more  they  charge  you  to  hold  your  peace,  do 
yoa  cry  out  so  much  the  more  a  great  deal,  ^'  Jesus,  thou  Son 
of  DaTid,  have  mercy  on  us."  Jesus,  thou  Saviour,  thou  friend 
of  flinaerB,  thou  Son  of  David,  and  therefore  a  Son  of  man  I 
graeioBs  words i  endearing  appellations!  be  encouraged  by 
them,  to  draw  nigh  unto  huu.  Though  David's  Lqrd,  yet  he  is 
JHyUL'b  Sob,  after  the  flesh,  that  ye  throngfa  him  may 


d26  BLIND   BARTIMBUft.  [XXril 

be  made  the  sons  of  Crod  :  no  matter  what  thou  art,  O  wmnan, 
what  thou  art,  O  man ;  though  thou  art  literaUy  a  poor  beggar, 
think  not  thy  condition  too  mean  for  Jesus  to  take  notice  of;  he 
came  into  the  highways  and  hedges,  to  call  such  poor  beggars  in: 
or,  if  you  are  rich,  think  not  yourselves  too  high  to  stoop  to 
Jesus  ;  for  he  is  the  King  of  kings  ;  and  you  never  will  be  truly 
rich,  until  you  are  made  rich  in  Jesus :  fear  not  being  despised, 
or  losing  a  little  worldly  honour;  one  sight  of  Jesus  will  make 
amends  for  all :  you  will  find  something  so  inviting,  so  attract- 
ing, so  satisfying,  in  the  altogether-lovely  Lamb  of  God,  that 
every  sublunary  enjoyment  will  sicken,  and  die,  and  vanish  be- 
fore you ;  and  you  will  no  more  desire  your  former  vain  and 
trifling  amusements,  than  Bartimeus,  after  he  had  received  his 
sight,  desired  to  go  back  again  and  fetch  his  garment.  O  that 
there  may  be  many  such  blind  beggars  among  you  this  day! 

Here  is  a  great  multitude  of  people  following  me,  a  poor  worm^ 
this  day*  I  rejoice  to  see  the  fields  thus  white,  ready  unto  har- 
vest, and  to  spread  the  gospel-net  amidst  so  many  :  but,  alas ! 
I  shall  return  home  with  a  heavy  heart,  unless  some  of  you  will 
arise  and  come  to  my  Jesus ;  I  desire  to  preach  him,  and  not 
myself;  rest  not  in  hearing  and  following  me.  Behold,  believe 
on,  and  follow  the  Lamb  of  God,  who  came  to  take  away  the 
sins  of  the  world.  Indeed,  I  do  not  despair  of  any  of  you,  neither 
am  I  discouraged  on  account  of  my  preaching  in  the  highways 
and  hedges :  Jesus  called  Zaccheus,  Jesus  called  Bartimeus, 
as  he  passed  through  Jericho,  that  cursed,  that  devoted  place ; 
and  why  may  he  not  call  some  of  you,  out  of  these  despised 
fields?  Is  his  arm  shortened,  that  be  cannot  save?  Is  he  not 
as  mighty  now,  and  as  willing  to  save,  even  to  the  uttermost, 
all  that  come  to  the  Father  through  him,  as  he  was  seventeen 
hundred  years  ago?  Assuredly  he  is;  he  hath  said,  and  he  also 
will  do  it,  '^  Whosoever  cometh  to  me,  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out" 
In  no  wise,  or  by  no  means.  G  encouraging  words !  sinners, 
believe  ye  this  ?  Arise  then,  be  of  good  comfort,  for  Jesus  is 
indeed  calling  you.  Some  of  you,  I  trust,  have  obeyed  this  in- 
vitation, and  have  had  a  sight  of  him  long  ago  :  I  know,  then, 
you  will  bless  and  love  him  :  and  if  he  should  say  unto  you,  as 
he  did  unto  Bartimeus,  Go  you  your  way  ;  your  answer  would 
be.  We  love  our  Master,  and  will  not  go  from  him. — But  suffer 
ye  the  word  of  exhortion : 

Suffer  me  to  stir  up  your  pure  minds  by  way  of  remembrance: 
Shew  that  you  have  indeed  seen  him,  and  that  you  do  indeed 
love  him,  by  following  bim  in  the  way ;  I  mean,  in  the  way  of 
the  cross;  the  way  of  his  ordinances,  and  in  the  way  of  his  holy 
commandments ;  for,  alas !  the  love  of  many  waxeth  cold,  and 
few  there  are  that  follow  Jesus  rightly  in  the  way ;  few  theie 
are  that  cast  away  their  garments  so  heartily  as  they  should ; 
some  idol  or  another  hangs  about  us,  and  hinders  us  in  ntn* 
ning  the  race  that  is  set  before  us.  Awake  therefore,  ye  sleepy, 
though,  it  may  be,  wise  virgins.  Awake,  awake,  put  on  strength ; 
i|hake  your§elves  fr9m  th^  dust ;  arise  aQd  foUow  Jesos  more 


^XVIII.]        t)IRfiCTIONS  HOW  TO  HEAR  SERMONS.  327 

closely  in  the  way,  thaa  ever  you  did  yet.  lifl  up  the  hands 
that  hang  down,  and  strengthen  the  feeble  knees.  Provide  right 
paths  for  your  feet,  lest  that  which  is  lame  be  turned  out  of  the 
way,  but  rather  be  ye  healed.  For  though  the  way  be  narrow,  yet 
it  is  not  long ;  ^'though  the  gate  be  strait,  (to  use  the  words  of  pious 
Bishop  Beveridge)  yet  it  opens  into  everlasting  life."  O  that 
ye  may  get  a  fresh  sight  of  him  again  this  day !  that  would 
be  like  oil  to  the  wheels  of  your  graces,  and  make  your  souls 
like  the  chariots  of  Ammi-nadib.  It  is  only  owing  to  your  losing 
sight  of  him,  that  you  go  so  heavily  from  day  to  day.  A  sight 
of  Jesus,  like  the  sun  rising  in  the  morning,  dispels  the  dark- 
ness and  gloominess  that  lies  upon  the  soul.  Take  therefore  ik 
fresh  view  oi  him,  O  believers,  and  never  rest  until  you  are 
translated  to  see  him  as  he  is,  and  to  live  with  him  for  ever- 
more, in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  Even  so.  Lord  Jesus,  Amen 
and  Amen, 

SERMON  XXVIII. 

DIRECTIONS    HOW    TO    HEAR    SERMONS. 

Take  heed,  ther^ore,  how  ye  hear, — Luke  viii.  18. 

The  occasion  of  our  Lord's  giving  this  caution,  was  this :  Per- 
ceiving that  much  people  were  gathered  together  to  hear  him 
out  of  every  city,  and  knowing  (for  he  is  God,  and  knoweth  all 
things,)  that  many,  if  not  roost  of  them,  would  be  hearers  only, 
and  not  doers  of  the  word ;  he  spake  to  them  by  a  parable, 
wherein,  under  the  similitude  of  a  sower  that  went  out  to  sow 
his  seed,  he  plainly  intimated  how  few  there  were  amongst  them 
who  would  receive  any  saving  benefit  from  his  doctrine,  or  bring 
forth  fruit  unto  perfection; 

The  application,  one  would  imagine,  should  have  been  plain 
and  obvious;  but  the  disciples,  as  yet  unenlightened  in  any 
great  degree  by  the  holy  Spirit,  and  therefore  unable  to  see  into 
ihe  hidden  mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  desdt  with  our 
Saviour,  as  people  ought  todeal  with  their  ministers ;  they  dis- 
coursed with  him  privately  about  the  meaning  ot  what  he  had 
taught  them  in  public  ;  and  with  a  sincere  desire  of  doing  their 
doty,  asked  for  an  interpretation  of  the  parable. 

Our  blessed  Lord,  as  he  always  was  willing  to  instruct  those 
that  were  teachable,  (herein  setting  his  ministers  an  example  to 
be  courteous  and  easy  of  access,)  freely  told  them  the  significa- 
tion. And  withal,  to  make  them  more  cautious  and  more  at-> 
tentive  to  his  doctrine  for  the  future,  he  tells  them,  that  they 
were  in  an  especial  manner  to  be  the  light  of  the  world,  and  were 
to  proclaim  on  the  house-top  whatsoever  he  told  them  in  secret: 
and  as  their  improving  the  knowledge  already  imparted,  was 
the  only  condition  upon  which  more  was  to  be  given  them,  it 
therefore  highly  concerned  them  to  **  take  heed  how  they  heard." 

From  the  context  then  it  appears,  that  the  words  were  pri- 
Hiarily  spoken  to  the  apostles  themselves.    But^  as  it  is  to  be 


888  DIRECTIONS  HOW   TO   HBAB  8BRM0NC       (XXVfli. 

feared,  oat  of  thoBe  uiany  tbovsands  that  flock  to  hear  sermoDs^ 
but  few,  comparatively  speaking,  are  effectually  influepced  by 
ihem,  I  cannot  but  think  it  very  necessary  to  remind  you  of 
the  caution  given  by  our  Lord  to  bis  disciples,  and  to  exhort 
joa  with  the  utmost  earnestness,  to  '^  take  heed  how  you  hear/ 

In  prosecution  of  which  design  I  shall. 

First,  Prove  that  every  one  ought  to  take  all  opportunities  of 
bearing  sermons.    And, 

Secondly y  I  shall  lay  down  some  cautions  and  directions,  ia 
order  to  your  hearing  with  profit  and  advantage. 

First,  I  am  to  prove  that  every  one  ought  to  take  all  oppor* 
tonities  of  hearing  sermons. 

That  there  have  always  been  pcurticular  persons  set  apart  by 
God  to  instruct  and  exhort  his  people  to  practise  what  he  should 
require  of  them,  is  evident  from  many  passages  of  scriptaie. 
St.  Jude  teUs  us,  that  Enoch,  the  seventh  from  Adam,  prophe- 
sied (or  preached)  concerning  the  Lord's  coming  with  ten  thou- 
sand of  his  saints  to  judgment."  And  Noah,  who  lived  not 
long  after,  is  styled  by  St.  I^eter  ''a  preacher  of  righteousness." 
And  though  in  all  the  intermediate  space  between  the  flood  and 
giving  of  the  law,  we  hear  but  of  few  preachers,  yet  we  may 
reasonably  conclude,  that  God  never  left  himself  without  wit- 
ness, but  at  sundry  times,  and  after  divers  mannere«  spake  to 
our  fathers  by  the  patriarchs  and  prophets. 

But  however  it  was  before,  we  are  assured  that  after  the  de- 
livery of  the  law,  God  constantly  separated  to  himself  a  certain 
order  of  men  to  preach  to,  as  well  as  pray  for,  his  people ;  and 
commanded  them  to  inquire  their  duty  at  the  priests*  mouths. 
And  though  the  Jews  were  frequently  led  into  captivity,  and 
for  their  sins  scattered  abroad  on  the  ftice  of  the  earth,  yet  be 
never  utterly  forsook  his  church,  but  still  kept  up  a  remnant 
of  prophets  and  preachers,  as  Ezekiel,  Jeremiah,  Daniel,  and 
others,  to  reprove,  instruct,  and  call  them  to  repentance. 

Thus  was  it  under  the  law.  Nor  has  the  church  been  worse, 
hut  infinitely  better  provided  for  under  the  gospel :  for  when 
Jesus  Christ,  that  great  high  priest,  had  through  the  eternal  Spirit 
Offered  himself  as  a  full,  perfect,  sufficient  sacrifice  and  satis* 
(action  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world,  and  after  his  resurrection 
had  all  power  committed  to  him,  both  in  heaven  and  earth,  he 
gave  comiaissioa  to  his  apostles,  and  in  them  to  all  succeeding 
mtnistiers^  to  "  go  i^d  preach  his  gospel  to  every  creature ;"  pro- 
mising to  '^  be  with  them,  to  guide,  assist,  strengthen,  and  com- 
fort them  always,  ev«n  to  the  end  of  the  world." 

But  if  it  be  the  duty  of  ministers  to  preach,  (and  woe  be  to 
them  if  they  do  not  preach  the  gospel,  for  a  necessity  is  laid 
upon  them !)  no  doubt  the  people  are  obliged  to  attend  to  them; 
ior  otherwise,  wherefore  are  ministers  sent  ? 

And  how  can  we  here  avoid  admiring  the  love  and  tender  caro 
which  our  dear  Redeemer  lifts  expressed  for  his  spouse  the 
church  ?  who,  because  he  could  not  be  always  with  as  in  per- 
son, on  account  it  was  expedient  he  shoijdd  go  awair,  and  as 


JKXVIll.]       DISICTIONS  HOW  TO   HBAR  SBftlfOMS.  889 

our  foreranner  take  possession  of  that  glory  he  had  porchased 
hy  his  precious  blood,  yet  would  not  leave  us  comf<Mtless,  but 
first  settled  a  sufficient  number  of  pastors  and  teachers ;  and 
afterwards,  according  to  his  promise,  actually  did  and  vrill  con-* 
tinue  to  send  down  the  Holy  Ghos^  to  furnish  them  and  their 
successors  with  proper  gifts  and  graces  **  for  the  work  of  the 
ministry,  for  the  perfecting  of  the  saints,  for  the  edifying  of  his 
body  in  love,  till  we  all  ceme,  in  the  unity  of  the  spirit,  to  the 
fulness  of  the  measure  of  the  stature  of  Christ.'' 

O  how  insensible  are  those  persons  of  this  luispeakable  gift, 
who  do  despite  to  the  Spirit  of  grace,  who  crucify  the  Son  of  Grod 
afresh^  and  put  him  to  an  open  shame,  by  wilfully  refusing  to 
attend  on  so  great  a  means  of  their  salvation !  How  dreadful 
will  the  end  of  such  men  be  !  How  aggravating,  that  light  should 
come  into  the  world,  that  the  glad  tidings  of  salvation  should 
be  so  very  frequently  proclaimed  in  this  populous  city,  and  that 
so  many  should  lothe  this  spiritual  manna,  this  angel's  food, 
and  call  it  light  bread !  How  much  more  tolerable  wiU  it  be  for 
Tyre  and  Sidon,  for  Sodom  and  Gromorrah,  than  for  such  sin- 
ners !  Better,  that  men  had  never  heard  of  a  Saviour  being 
bom,  than  after  they  have  heard,  not  to  give  heed  to  the  minis- 
try of  those  who  are  employed  as  his  ambassadors,  to  transact 
affairs  between  God  and  their  souls. 

We  may,  though  at  a  distance,  without  a  spirit  of  prophecy, 
foretell  the  deplorable  condition  of  such  men ;  behold  them  cast 
iato  hell,  lifting  up  their  eyes,  being  in  torment,  and  crying  out. 
How  often  would  our  ministers  have  gathered  us,  as  a  hen 
gathereth  ber  chjckens  under  her  wings  !  But  we  would  not.  O 
that  we  had  known  in  that  our  day,the  things  that  belonged  to  our 
everlasting  peace  !  but  now  they  are  for  ever  hid  from  our  eyes. 

ThoB  wretched,  thus  tnconceivably  miserable,  will  such  be,  as 
slight  and  make  a*  mock  at  the  public  preaching  of  the  gospel. 
But  taking  it  for  granted  there  are  but  few,  if  any,  of  this  un- 
happy stamp,  who  think  it  worth  their  while  to  tread  the  courts 
of  the  Lord's  house,  I  pass  on  now  to  the — 

Second  general  thing  proposed^ — To  lay  down  some  cautions 
and  directions,  in  order  to  your  hearing  scraions  with  profit  and 
advantage. 

And  i^ie,  if  we  Teflect  on  what  has  been  already  delivered, 
and  consider  that  preaching  is  an  ordinance  of  God,  a  means 
appointed  by  Jesus  Christ  himself  for  promoting  his  kingdom 
amongst  men,  you  cannot  reasooaUy  be  offended,  if,  in  order 
that  you  may  hear  sermons  with  profit  and  advantage,  I, 

1.  I>irect  or  entreat  you  to  come  to  bear  them,  not  out  of 
coiiosity,  but  froin  a  sincere  desire  to  know  and  do  your  duty. 

FormaJky  and  hypocrisy  in  any  religious  exerise,  is  an  abomi- 
nation unto  the  Lord.  And  to  enter  his  house  merely  to  have 
oar  ears  eniertained,  and  not  our  hearts  reformed,  mast  certainly 
be  highly  displeasing  to  the  most  high  God,  as  well  as  u&pro« 
fitaUe  to  ourselves. 

Hence  it  is,  that  so  many  remain  unconverted,  yea,  unaffected 


Mo  DIRECTIONS  HOW^O  HEAR  SERMONS.        f XX VIII. 

with  the  most  evangelical  preaching ;  so  that,  like  St.  Paul's 
companions  before  tus  conversion,  they  only  hear  the  preacher's 
voice  with  their  outward  ears,  but  do  not  experience  the  power 
of  it  inwardly  in  their  hearts :  or,  like  the  ground  near  Gideon's 
fleece,  they  remain  untouched,  whilst  others,  who  came  to  be 
fed  with  the  sincere  milk  of  the  word,  like  the  fleece  itself,  are 
watered  by  the  dew  of  God's  heavenly  blessing,  and  grow  thereby. 

Flee  therefore,  my  brethren,  flee  curiosity,  and  prepare  your 
hearts  by  a  humble  disposition,  to  receive  with  mecKness  the  en- 
grafted word,  and  then  it  will  be  a  means,  under  Grod,  to  quicken, 
build  up,  purify,  and  save  your  souls. 

2. '  A  second  direction  I  shall  lay  down  for  the  same  purpose, 
is,  not  only  to  prepare  your  hearts  before  you  hear,  but  also  to 
give  diligent  heed  to  the  things  that  are  spoken  from  the  word 
of  God. 

If  an  earthly  king  were  to  issue  out  a  royal  proclamation,  on 
performing  or  not  performing  the  conditions  therein  contained, 
the  life  or  death  of  bis  subjects  entirely  depended,  how  solici- 
tous would  they  be  to  hear  what  those  conditions  were !  And 
shall  not  we  pay  the  same  respect  to  the  King  of  kings,  and 
Lord  of  lords,  and  lend  an  attentive  car  to  his  ministers,  when 
they  are  declaring,  in  his  name,  how  our  pardon,  peace,  and 
happiness  may  be  secured  T 

When  God  descended  on  mount  Sinai  in  terrible  majesty,  to 
give  unto  his  people  the  law,  how  attentive  were  they  to  his 
servant  Moses !  And  if  they  were  so  earnest  to  hear  the  thun- 
derings  or  threatenings  of  the  law,  shall  not  we  be  as  solicitous 
to  bear  from  the  ministers  of  Christ,  the  glad  tidings  of  the 
gospel? 

Whilst  Christ  was  himself  on  earth,  it  is  said,  that  the  people 
hung  upon  him  to  hear  the  gracious  words  that  proceeded  out 
of  his  mouth.  And  if  we  looked  on  ministers  as  we  ought,  as 
the  sent  of  Jesus  Christ,  we  should  hang  upon  them,  to  hear 
their  words  also. 

Besides;  the  sacred  truths  that  gospel  ministers  deliver,  are 
not  dry  insipid  lectures  on  moral  philosophy,  intended  only  to 
amuse  us  for  a  while;  but  the  great  mysteries  of  godliness, 
which,  therefore,  we  are  bound  studiously  to  listen  to,  lest 
through  our  negligence  We  should  either  not  understand  them, 
or  by  any  other  means  let  them  slip. 

But  how  regardless  are  those  of  this  direction,  who,  instead 
of  hanging  on  the  preacher  to  hear  him,  doze  or  sleep  whilst 
be  is  speaking  to  them  from  God  !  Unhappy  men !  Can  they 
not  watch  with  our  blessed  Lord  one  hour  ?  What !  have  they 
never  read  how  Eutychus  fell  down  as  he  was  sleeping,  (when 
St.  Paul  continued  his  discourse  till  midnight,)  and  was  taken 
up  dead  ? 

But  to  return.  Though  you  may  prepare  your  hearts,  as  you 
may  think,  by  a  teachable  disposition,  and  be  attentive  whilst 
discourses  are  delivering,  yet  this  will  profit  you  little,  unless 
jroa  observe — 


:(XirllI.]        DltlBCTIONS  HOW  TO  HBAR  SERMONS.  ^SH 

3.  A  third  direction.  Not  to  entertain  any,  the  least  preja- 
dioe,  against  th^  minister. 

For  could  a  preacher  speak  with  the  tongue  of  men  and 
angels,  if  his  audience  were  prejudiced  against  him,  he  would 
be  but  as  sounding  brass,  or  tinkling  cymbal. 

That  was  the  reason  why  Jesus  Christ  himself,  the  eternal 
Word,  could  not  do  many  mighty  works,  nor  preach  to  any 
great  effect,  among  those  of  his  own  country ;  for  they  were 
offended  at  him.  And  were  this  same  Jesus,  this  God  incar- 
nate, again  to  bow  the  heayens,  and  to  come  down  speaking  as 
never  man  spake,  yet,  if  we  were  prejudiced  against  him,  as  the 
Jews  were,  we  should  harden  our  hearts  as  the  Jews  did  theirs. 

Take  heed,  therefore,  my  brethren,  and  beware  of  entertaining 
any  disiike  against  those  whom  the  Holy  Ghost  has  made  over* 
seers  over  you.  Consider,  that  the  clergy  are  men  of  like  pas- 
sions with  yourselves :  and  though  we  should  even  hear  a  per- 
son teaching  others  to  do  what  he  has  not  learned  himself;  yet, 
that  is  no  sufficient  reason  for  rejecting  his  doctrine :  for  minis- 
ters speak  not  in  their  own,  but  Christ's  name.  And  we  know 
who  commanded  the  people  to  do  whatsoever  the  scribes  and 
Pharisees  should  say  unto  them,  tho'  they  said,  but  did  not. — But 

4.  Fourthly,  As  you  ought  not  to  be  prejudiced  against^  so 
yon  should  be  careful  not  to  depend  too  much  on  a  preacher,  or 
think  more  highly  of  him  than  you  ought  to  think.  For  though 
this  be  an  extreme  that  people  seldom  run  into,  yet  preferring 
one  teacher  in  opposition  to  another,  has  often  been  of  ill  con- 
sequence to  the  church, of  God.  It  was  a  fault  which  the  great 
apostle  of  the  Gentiles  condemned  in  the  Corinthians:  For 
whereas  one,  said,  *^  I  am  of  Paul ;  another,  I  am  of  ApoUos : 
are  ye  not  carnal,"  says  he?  "  For  who  is  Paul  and  who  is  Apol- 
los,  but,"  instruments  in  Grod's  hands  ^*  by  whom  you  believed  V* 
And  are  not  all  ministers  sent  forth  to  be  ministering  ambassa- 
dors to  those  who  shall  be  heirs  of  salvation?  And  are  they 
not  all  therefore  greatly  to  be  esteemed  for  their  works'  sake* 

The  apostle,  it  is  true,  commands  us  to  pay  double  honour  to 
those  who  labour  in  the  word  and  doctrine :  but  then  to  prefer 
one  minister  at  the  expense  of  another,  (perhaps,  to  such  a  de- 
gree, as,  when  you  have  actually  entered  a  church,  to  come  out 
again  because  he  does  not  preach,)  is  earthly,  sensual,  devilish. 

Not  to  mention,  that  popularity  and  applause  cannot  but  be 
exceedingly  dangerous,  even  to  a  rightly  informed  mind ;  and 
must  necessarily  fill  any  thinking  man  with  a  holy  jealousy  lest 
be  should  take  that  honour  to  himself,  which  is  due  only  to  God, 
who  alone  qualifies  him  for  his  ministerial  labours,  and  from 
whom  alone  every  good  and  perfect  gift  cometh. 

5.  A  Fifth  direction  I  would  recommend  is,  to  make  a  particular 
application  of  every  thing  that  is  delivered  to  your  own  hearts. 

When  our  Saviour  was  discoursing  at  the  last  supper  with 
his  beloved  disciples,  and  foretold  that  one  of  them  should  be- 
tray him,  each  of  them  immediately  applied  it  to  his  own  heart, 
«Bd  saidf  **  Lord^  is  it  I?''  And  would  persons,  in  like  manner. 


MEBCTI0N8  HOW  TO  H£AR  8BR1ION8.        [XXVIIK 

wben  preachers  are  dissuading  from  any  sin,  or  persuading  to 
any  duty,  instead  of  crying,  this  was  designed  against  snch  and 
sndi  a  one,  turn  their  thoagbts  inwardly,  and  say.  Lord,  is  it  I  ? 
how  far  more  beneficial  should  we  find  discourses  to  be,  than 
now  they  generally  are  ? 

But  we  are  apt  to  wander  too  much  abroad  ;  always  looking 
at  the  mote  which  is  in  our  neighbour's  eye,  rather  than  at  the 
beam  which  is  in  our  own.    Haste^we  now  to*  the— 

6.  Sixth  and  last  direction  :  If  you  would  receive  a  blessing 
from  the  Lord,  when  you  hear  his  word  preached,  pray  to  him, 
both  before,  in,  and  after  every  serm<Hi,  to  endue  the  minister 
with  power  to  speak,  and  to  grant  you  a  will  and  ability  to  put 
in  practice  what  he  shall  shew  from  the  book  of  God  to  be  your 
doty. 

This  would  be  an  excellent  means  to  render  the  word 
preached  effectual  to  the  enlightening  and  inflaming  your  hearts; 
and  without  this,  all  the  other  means  before  prescribed  will 
be  in  rain. 

No  doubt,  it  was  this  consideration  that  made  St.  Paul  so 
earnestly  entreat  his  beloved  £phesians  to  intercede  with  God 
for  him :  ''  Praying  always,  with  all  manner  of  prayer  and  sup- 
plication in  the  spirit,  and  for  me  also,  that  I  may  open  my 
month  with  boldness,  to  make  known  the  mysteries  of  the  gos* 
pel."  And  if  so  great  an  apostle  as  St.  Paul  needed  the  prayers 
of  his  people,  much  more  do  those  ministers  who  have  only  the 
ordinary  gifts  of  t^  holy  Spirit 

Besides,  this  would  be  a  good  proof  that  you  sincerely  desired 
to  do,  as  well  as  to  know,  the  will  of  God.  And  it  must  highly 
profit  both  ministers  and  people ;  because  God,  through  your 
prayers,  will  give  them  a  double  portion  of  his  holy  Spirit^  where- 
by they  will  be  enabled  to  instruct  you  more  fully  in  the  things 
which  pertain  to  the  kingdom  of  God* 

And  O  that  all  who  hear  me  this  day,  would  seriously  apply 
their  hearts  to  practise  what  has  now  been  told  them  {  How 
would  ministers  see  Satan,  like  lightning,  fall  from  heaven,  and 
people  find  the  word  preached  sharper  than  a  two-edged  sword, 
and  mighty,  tlnroug^  God,  to  the  pulling  down  of  Uie  devil's 
strong  holds ! 

The  Holy  Ghost  would  then  fall  on  all  them  that  hear  the 
word,  as  when  St.  Peter  preached ;  the  gospel  of  Christ  would 
have  free  course,  run  very  swiftly,  and  thousands  again  be  con- 
verted  by  a  sermon. 

For  ''  Jesus  Christ  is  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for 
ever."  He  has  promised  to  be  with  his  ministers  always,  evea 
unto  the  end  of  the  world.  And  the  reason  why  we  do  not  re- 
ceive larger  effusions  of  the  blessed  Spirit  of  God,  is  not  because 
our  all-powerful  Redeemer's  hand  is  shortened,  but  because  we 
do  not  expect  them^  and  confine  them  to  the  primitive  times. 

It  does  indeed  sometimes  happen,  that  G<>d,  to  magnify  bis 
free  grace  in  Christ  Jesus,  is  found  of  them  thatsought  him  not; 
a  ooEtorious  sinner  is  forcibly  worked  upon  by  a  public  sarman^ 


ZXTIffO        DIRBCT10N8  HOW  TO  RKAR  SBUfOMfl. 

and  plucked  as  a  firebrand  out  of  the  fire.  Bat  this  is  not  God's 
ofdinary  way  of  acting :  no,  for  the  generality^  he  only  visits 
those  with  the  power  of  his  w(Hd^  who  humbly  wait  to  know 
what  he  would  have  them  to  do ;  and  sends  unqualified  hearers 
not  only  empty,  but  hardened  away. 

Take  heed,  therefore,  ye  careless,  curious  professors,  if  any 
such  be  here  present,  how  you  hear.  Remember,  that  whether 
we  think  of  it  or  not, ''  we  must  aU  appear  before  the  judgment- 
seat  of  Christ ;"  where  ministers  must  give  a  strict  account  of 
the  doctrine  they  have  delivered,  and  you  as  strict  a  one,  how 
you  have  improved  under  it.  And,  good  Grod !  how  will  you  be 
able  to  stand  at  the  bar  of  an  angry,  sin-avenging  Judge,  and  see 
so  many  discourses  you  have  despised,  so  many  ministers  who 
once  longed  and  laboured  for  the  salvation  of  your  precious  and 
immortal  souls,  brought  oat  as  so  many  swift  witnesses  against 
you  ?  Will  it  be  sufficient  then,  think  you,  to  allege,  that  you' 
went  to  hear  them  only  out  of  curiosity,  to  pass  away  an  idle 
hour,  to  admire  the  oratory,  or  ridicule  the  simplicity,  of  the 
preacher?  No ;  God  will  then  let  you  know,  that  you  ought  to 
have  come  out  of  better  principles ;  that  every  sermon  has  been 
put  down  to  your  account,  and  that  you  must  then  be  justly 
punished  for  not  improving  by  them. 

But  fear  not,  you  little  flock,  who  with  meekness  receive  the 
engrafted  word,  and  bring  forth  the  peaceable  fruits  of  righteous- 
ness ;  for  it  shall  not  be  so  with  you.  No,  you  will  be  your 
ministers'  joy,  and  their  crown  of  rejoicing,  in  tho  day  of  our 
Lord  Jesus :  and  they  vrill  present  you  in  a  holy  triumph,  fault- 
less and  unblameable,  to  our  common  Redeemer,  saying,  **  Be- 
hold us  O  Lord,  and  the  children  which  thou  hast  given  us." 

Bat  still  take  heed  how  you  hear :  for,  upon  your  improving 
the  grace  you  have,  more  shall  be  given,  and  you  shall  have 
abundance.  *'  He  is  faithful  that  has  promised,  who  also  will 
do  it."  Nay,  God  from  out  of  Sion,  shall  so  bless  you,  that 
every  sermon  you  hear  shall  communicate  to  you  a  fresh  supply 
of  spiritual  knowledge.  The  word  of  Crod  shall  dwell  in  you 
richly ;  you  shall  go  on  from  strength  to  strength,  from  one  de- 
gree of  grace  unto  another,  till,  being  grown  up  to  be  perfect  men 
in  Christ  Jesus,  and  filled  with  all  the  fulness  of  Grod,  you  shall 
be  translated  by  death  to  see  him  as  he  is,  and  to  sing  praises 
before  his  throne  with  angels  and  archangels,  cherubim  and 
stfapfaim,  and  the  general  assembly  of  the .  first-bom,  whose 
names  are  written  in  heaven,  for  ever  and  ever. 

Which  God,  &c. 


SERMON  XXIX. 

THB   EXTBNT   AND   REASONABLENESS   OP  BBLF-DENIAL. 

And  he  said  unto  them  all.  If  any  man  toill  come  after  me,  M 

him  deny  himself. — Luke  Ik.  23. 
Whoever  reads  the  gospel  with  a  single  eye,  and  sincere  inten- 
tiaii,  will  fiad  that  our  blessed  Lord  took  all  opportunities  of 


ofBicn<ms  BOW  to  heak  skumissw      [xxls' 

faift  dfecipfes  that  his  kiagJiwa  was  boC  of  tUs  world : 
ttatbiii  doctrine  was  a  dodriae  of  the  ciosb;  and  that  their 
fgOkwrnn  theflMckes  to  be  his  fblowcn,  wovU  call  them  to  a 
c—if  aat  state  of  ▼oJ—taiy  ssSma^  aad  setf-dcuaL 

The  words  of  the  text  aidrd  as  one  iBstaace,  amoi^  inany ,  of 
ovr  Samoafm  beharioar  ia  this  antter:  Cdt  haTin^  in  the  pre- 
cediBf  Terses  revealed  hiaisrff  to  Peter  and  the  odier  apostles, 
to  be  "^  the  Christ  of  Ckid  ;^  lest  Aey  shoold  be  too  much  elated 
wMi  sach  a  pecaliar  discorerj  of  his  deitj,  or  tlmik  that  their 
friatioo  to  30  i^reat  a  personaf e  woold  be  attended  with  nothing 
bot  pomp  and  grandeur,  he  tells  them,  in  the  22d  Terse,  that 
^  the  Son  of  man  was  to  suffer  many  things^  in  this  world, 
though  he  was  to  be  crowned  with  eternal  g^ory  and  honoor  in 
ihe  next:  and  that  if  any  of  them  or  their  posterity  would  share 
in  the  same  honour,  they  must  bear  a  part  with  him  in  his  seli- 
denial  and  sufferings.  For  he  said  unto  them  aD,  **  If  any  man 
will  come  after  me,  let  bim  deny  himsdf." 

From  which  words  I  shall  consider  these  three  things  : 

I.  Fir$t,  The  nature  of  the  self-denial  recommended  in  the  text ; 
and  in  bow  many  respects  we  must  deny  ourselres,  in  order  to 
come  after  Jesus  Christ. 

II.  Secondly,  I  shall  endeavour  to  prove  the  universality  and 
reasonableness  of  this  duty  of  self-denial. 

III.  Thirdly f  I  shall  offer  some  considerations,  which  may 
serve  as  so  many  motives  to  reconcile  us  to,  and  quicken  us  in, 
the  practice  of  this  self-denial. 

I.  Firit,  I  am  to  shew  yon  the  nature  of  the  self-denial  recom- 
mended in  the  text :  or,  in  how  many  respects  we  must  deny 
ourselves,  in  order  to  follow  Jesus  Christ. 

Now,  as  the  faculties  of  the  soul  are  distinguished  by  the 
understanding,  will,  and  affections  ;  so  in  all  these  must  each  of 
us  deny  himself.  We  must  not  lean  to  our  own  understanding, 
being  wise  in  our  own  eyes,  and  prudent  in  our  own  sight ;  but  we 
must  submit  our  short-sighted  reason  to  the  light  of  divine  reve- 
lation. There  are  mysteries  in  religion,  which  are  above,  though 
not  contrary  to,  our  natural  reason :  and  therefore  we  shall 
never  become  Christians  unless  we  cast  down  imaginations, 
''  and  every  high  thing  that  exalteth  itself  against  the  knowledge 
of  God,  and  bring  into  captivity  every  thought  to  the  obedienoe 
of  Christ."  It  is  in  this  respect,  as  well  as  others,  that  we 
must  become  fools  for  Christ's  sake,  and  acknowledge  we 
know  nothing  without  revelation,  as  we  ought  to  know.  We 
must,  with  all  humility  and  reverence,  embrace  the  truths  re- 
Tcah  d  to  us  in  the  holy  scriptures ;  for  thus  only  can  we  be- 
come truly  wise,  even  ^*  wise  unto  salvation."  It  was  matter 
of  our  l)lessed  Lord's  thanksgiving  to  his  heavenly  Father,  that 
ho  had  **  hidden  these  things  from  the  wise  and  prudent,  and  had 
revealed  them  unto  babes."  And  in  this  respect  also  we  must 
^  be  converted,  and  become  as  little  cbUdren,"  teachable,  and 
willing  to  follow  the  Lamb  into  whatsoever  mysteries  he  shall 
lie  pleased  to  lead  us :  and  believe  and  practise  all  divine  truths^ 


XXIX.]  OF   SELF-DENIAL.  33ft 

not  because  we  can  demonstrate  them,  but  because  God,  *^  who 
cannot  lie/'  has  revealed  them  to  us. 

Hence  then  we  may  trace  infidelity  to  its  fountain  head  :  for 
it  is  nothing  else  but  a  pride  of  the  understanding,  an  unwilling- 
ness to  submit  to  the  truths  of  God,  that  makes  so  many,  pro- 
fessing themselves  wise,  to  become  such  fools  as  to  deny  the 
Lord  who  has  so  dearly  bought  them,  and  dispute  the  divinity 
of  that  eternal  Word,  *^  in  whom  they  live,  and  move,  and  have 
their  being :"  whereby  it  is  justly  to  be  feared  they  will  bring 
upon  themselves  sure,  if  not  swift,  destruction. 

But  as  we  must  deny  ourselves  in  our  understandings,  so 
must  we  deny,  or,  as  it  might  be  more  properly  rendered,  re- 
nounce our  wills :  that  is,  we  must  make  our  own  wills  no  prin- 
ciple of  action,  but  **  whether  we  eat  or  drink,  or  whatsoever  we 
do,  we  must  do  all  (not  merely  to  please  ourselves,  but)  to  the 
glory  of  God."  Not  that  we  are  therefore  to  imagine  we  have 
no  pleasure  in  any  thing  we  do ;  **  wisdom's  ways  are  ways  of 
pleasantness  ;"  but  pleasing  ourselves  must  not  be  the  princi- 
pal, but  only  the  subordinate,  end  of  our  actions. 

And  I  cannot  but  particularly  press  this  doctrine  upon  you, 
because  it  is  the  grand  secret  of  our  holy  religion.  It  is  this,  my 
brethren,  that  distinguishes  the  true  Christian  from  the  mere 
moralist  and  formal  professor ;  and  without  which,  none  of  our 
actions  are  acceptable  in  God's  sight :  for  *'  If  thine  eye  be 
single,"  says  our  blessed  Lord,  Matt.  vi.  22.  that  is,  if  thou 
aimest  simply  to  please  God,  without  any  regard  to  thy  own 
Will,  ^*  thy  whole  body  (or  all  thy  actions)  will  be  full  of  light :" 
agreeable  to  the  gospel,  which  is  called  light :  "  but  if  thine  eye 
be  evil,  (if  thine  intention  be  diverted  any  other  way,)  thy  whole 
body  (all  thy  actions)  will  be  full  of  darkness,"  sinful  and  un- 
profitable :  we  must  not  only  do  the  will  of  Grod,  but  do  it  be- 
cause it  is  his  will ;  since  we  pray  that  God's  will  ''may  be  done 
on  earth  as  it  is  in  heaven."  And,  no  doubt,  the  blessed  angels 
not  only  do  every  thing  that  God  willeth,  but  do  it  cheerfully 
out  of  this  principle,  because  God  willeth  it ;  and  if  we  would 
live  as  we  pray,  wq  must  go  and  do  likewise. 

But  farther ;  as  we  must  renounce  our  wills  in  doing,  so  like- 
wise must  we  renounce  them  insufiering,  the  will  of  God.  What- 
soever befalls  ys,  we  must  say,  with  good  old  Eli,  ''It  is  the 
Lord,  let  him  do  what  seemeth  him  good ;"  or  with  one  that  was 
infinitely  greater  than  Eli,  "  Father,  not  my  will,  but  thine  be 
done."  O  Jesus,  thine  was  an  innocent  wUl,  and  yet  thou  re-^ 
nouncedst  it :  teach  us,  even  us  also,  O  our  Saviour !  to  submit 
our  wills  to  thine,  in  all  the  evils  which  shall  be  brought  upon 
OS ;  and  in  every  thing  enable  us  to  give  thanks,  since  it  is  thy 
Uessed  will  concerning  us ! 

Thirdly t  We  must  deny  ourselves,  as  in  our  understandings 
and  wills,  so  likewise  in  our  a£fections.  More  particularly,  we 
must  deny  ourselves  the  pleasurable  indulgence  and  self-enjoy- 
ment of  riches :  "  If  any  man  will  come  after  me,  he  roust  for« 
take  all  and  follow  me."    And  agaip,  to  shew  the  utter  incon- 


896  THB   SXTBNT  AND   RIASONABLKNBSS  [XXIH- 

sislency  of  the  love  of  the  things  of  this  woild  (with  the  love  of 
the  Father)  he  tells  us,  *'  unless  a  man  forsake  all  thai  be  hat^ 
he  cannot  be  my  disciple." 

Far  it  be  from  me  to  think  that  these  texts  are  to  be  taken  ia 
a  literal  sense ;  as  though  they  obliged  rich  persons  to  go  sell 
all  that  they  have  and  give  to  the  poor,  (for  that  would  put  it 
out  of  their  power  to  be  serviceable  to  the  poor  for  the  fiituie,) 
but,  however,  they  certainly  imply  thus  much,  that  we  are  to  sit 
loose  to,  sell  and  forsake  all  in  affection,  and  be  willing  to  part 
with  every  thing,  when  Grod  shall  require  it  at  our  hands :  that 
is,  as  the  apostle  observes,  we  must  **  use  the  world  as  though 
we  used  it  not ;"  and  though  we  are  in  the  world,  we  must  not 
be  of  it«  We  must  look  upon  ourselves  as  stewards,  and  not 
proprietors,  of  the  manifold  gifts  of  Grod ;  provide  first  what  is 
necessary  for  ourselves  and  for  our  households,  and  expend  the 
rest,  not  in  indulgences  and  superfluous  ornaments,  forbidden 
by  the  apostle,  but  in  clothing,  feeding,  and  relieving  the  naked, 
hungry,  distressed  disciples  of  Jesus  Christ.  This  is  what  our 
blessed  Lord  would  have  us  understand  by  forsaking  all,  and  in 
this  sense  must  each  of  us  deny  himself. 

I  am  sensible  that  this  will  seem  a  hard  saying  to  many,  who 
will  be  (tended  because  they  are  covetous,  and  ''lovers  of  plea- 
sure more  than  lovers  of  God :"  but  if  I  yet  pleased  such  men, 
I  should  not  be  the  sei-vant  of  Christ.  No,  we  must  not,  like 
Ahab's  false  prophets,  have  a  lying  spirit  in  our  mouths,  bat 
declare  faithfully  the  whole  will  of  God ;  and  like  honest  Micaiah, 
out  of  pity  and  compsission,  tell  men  the  truth,  though  they 
may  falsely  think  we  prophesy  not  good,  but  evil,  concerning 
them. 

But  to  proceed :  As  we  must  renounce  our  afiection  for  riches, 
so  likewise  our  aflections  for  relations,  when  they  stand  in  oppo* 
sition  to  our  love  of,  and  duty  to  Grod ;  for  thus  saith  the  Saviour 
of  the  world :  '*  If  any  man  will  come  after  me,  and  hate  not 
his  father  and  mother,  his  children,  and  brethren,  and  sisters, 
yea,  and  his  own  life  also,  he  cannot  be  my  disciple."  Strange 
doctrine  this!  What!  bate  our  own  flesh!  What,  hate  the 
father  that  begat  us,  the  mother  that  bare  us !  How  can  these 
things  be  ?  Can  God  contradict  himself?  Has  he  not  bid  us  to 
honour  our  father  and  mother?  and  yet  we  are  here conunanded 
to  hate  them.  How  can  these  truths  be  reconciled  ?  By  inter* 
preting  the  word  hate^  not  in  a  rigorous  and  absolute  senAt^  but 
comparatively ;  not  as  implying  a  total  alienation,  but  a  less 
degree  of  afiection.  For  thus  our  blessed  Saviour  himself  (tho 
best  and  surest  expositor  of  his  own  meaning)  explains  it  in  a 
parallel  text.  Matt.  x.  87.  "  He  that  loveth  father  or  mother 
more  than  me,  is  not  worthy  of  me:  he  that  loveth  son  or 
daughter  more  than  me,  is  not  worthy  of  roe."  So  that  when 
tiie  persuasions  of  our  friends  (as  for  our  trial  they  may  be  per- 
mitted to  be^  are  contrary  to  the  will  of  God,  we  roust  say  with 
I«vi,  "We  have  not  known  them;"  or,  agreeably  to  our  blessed 
I«ord's  rebuke  to  Peter,  *'  Get  you  b^hijc^  me,  my  adversarias ; 


JLXIX.]  GF  SELF-DENIAL.  337 

for  you  savour  not  tiie  things  that  be  of  Grod^  but  the  tbidgS  that 
be  of  man/' 

Farther,  we  must  deny  ourselves  in  things  indifferent :  for  it 
might  easHy  be  shewn,  that  as  many,  if  not  more,  perish  by  an 
immoderate  use  of  tilings  in  themselves  indifferent,  as  by  any 
gross  sia  whatever.  A  prudent  Christian,  therefore,  will  con« 
aider  not  only  what  is  lawful,  but  what  is  expedient  also  :  not 
so  much  what  degrees  of  self-denial  best  suit  his  inclinations 
here^  as  what  will  most  effectually  break  his  will,  and  lit  him 
for  greater  degrees  of  glory  hereafter. 

Lastly,  To  conclude  this  head,  we  must  renounce  our  '^wn 
rigfateousness :  For,  though  we  should  give  all  our  goods  to 
feed  the  poor,  and  our  bodies  fo  be  burned,  yet,  if  we  in  tlie 
least  depend  on  that,  and  do  not  wholly  rely  on  the  perfect  ?!!♦ 
sufficient  righteousness  of  Jesus  Christ,  it  will  profit  us  nothings 
*'  Christ  is  the  end  of  the  law  for  righteousness  to  every  one  that 
believeth."  We  are  complete  in  him,  and  him  only.  OuroiX'a 
rightedusnesvses  are  but  as  filthy  rags.  We  must  count  all  things 
but  dung  and  dross,  so  that  we  may  bo  found  in  him,  not  hav- 
ing our  own  righteousness,  but  the  righteousness  which  is  of 
God,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 

And  is  tills  the  doctrine  of  Christianity?  Is  not  the  Chris* 
tian  world  then  asleep  ?  If  not,  whence  so  much  $elf-righteous- 
aess,  whence  the  self-indulgence,  whence  the  reigning  love  of 
riches,  which  we  every  where  meet  with?  Above  all,  whence 
that  predominant  greediness  after  sensual  pleasure,  that  has  so 
over-run  this  sinful  nation,  that  were  a  pious  strauger  to  cotne 
amongst  us,  he  would  be  tempted  to  thick  some  heathen  Venus 
was  worshipped  here,  and  that  temples  were  dedicated  to  her 
service.  But  we  have  the  authority  of  an  inspired  apostle  to 
affirm,  that  they  who  live  in  a  round  of  pleasure,  "  are  dead 
while  they  live."  Wherefore,  as  the  Holy  Ghost  saith, "  awake, 
thou  that  sleepest,  and  arise  from  the  dead,  and  Christ  shall 
give  thoc  light."  But  the  power  of  raising  the  spiritually  dead 
bdongeth  otAy  unto  God.  Do  thou  therefore,  O  holy  Jesus, 
who  by  thy  almighty  word  oommandedst  Lazarus  to  come  forth, 
though  he  had  lain  in  the  grave  some  days,  speak  aiso  as  effec- 
tually to  these  spiritually  dead  souls^  whom  Satan  for  many 
years  hath  so  fast  bound  by  sensual  pleasures,  that  they  are 
not  so  much  as  able  to  lift  up  their  eyes  or  hearts  to  heaven. 

II.  But  J  pass  on  to  the  second  general  thing  proposed,  to 
consider  the  universal  obligation  and  reasonableness  of  this 
doctrine  of  self-denial. 

When  our  blessed  Master  had  been  discoursing  publicly  con- 
cerning the  watchfulness  of  the  faithful  and  wise  steward,  his 
disciples  asked  him,  "  Speakest  thou  this  parable  to  all,  or  only 
to  us?"  The  same  question  1  am  aware  has  been,  and  will  be, 
put  cohceming  the  foregoing  doctrine :  for  too  many,  unwilling 
to  take  Christ's  easy  yoke  upon  them,  in  order  to  evade  the 
force  of  the  gospel  precepts,  would  pretend  that  all  those  com- 
mands concerning  self-denial^  and  renouncing  ourselves  and  the 


838  THE  BXTBKT  AND  RKASOIfABLBIIB88  [XXIX. 

world,  belonged  to  oar  Lord's  first  and  immediate  followers, 
and  not  to  ns  or  to  oar  children.  Bvt  such  persmis  greatly  err, 
not  knowing  the  scriptures,  nor  the  power  of  godliness  in  their 
hearts.  For  the  doctrine  of  Jesos  Christ,  like  his  blessed  self, 
is  *'  the  saice  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever."  What  he  said 
onto  one,  he  said  unto  all,  even  unto  the  ends  of  the  worid,  ^*  If 
any  man  will  come  after  me,  let  him  deny  himself:''  and  in  the 
text  it  is  particularly  mentioned,  that  he  said  it  unto  them  all. 
And  lest  we  should  still  absurdly  imagine  that  this  word  all 
was  to  be  confined  to  his  apostles,  with  whom  he  was  thai  dis- 
coursing, it  is  said  in  another  place,  that  Jesus  turned  unto  die 
multitude  and  said,  **  If  any  man  will  come  after  me,  and  hateth 
not  his  fathe"  and  mother,  yea,  and  his  own  life  also,  he  cannot  be 
my  disciple."  When  our  blessed  Lord  had  spoken  a  certain 
parable,  it  is  said,  **  The  scribes  and  Pharisees  were  offended, 
for  they  knew  the  parable  was  spoken  against  them."  And  if 
Christians  can  now  read  these  plain  and  positive  texts  of  scrip- 
ture, and  at  the  same  time  not  think  they  are  spoken  of  them, 
they  are  more  hardened  than  Jews,  and  more  insincere  than 
Pharisees.* 

In  the  former  part  of  this  discourse  I  observed,  that  the  pre- 
cepts concerning  forsaking  and  selling  all,  did  not  oblige  us  in  a 
literal  sense,  because  the  state  of  the  church  does  not  demand 
it  of  us,  as  it  did  of  the  primitive  Christians ;  but  still  the  same 
deadness  to  the  world,  the  same  abstemious  use  of  and  readiness 
to  part  with  our  goods  for  Christ's  sake,  is  as  absolutely  neces- 
sary for,  and  as  obligatory  on  us,  as  it  was  on  them.  For  though 
the  church  may  differ  as  to  the  outward  state  of  it,  in  different 
ages,  yet  as  to  the  purity  of  its  inward  state,  it  was,  is,  and 
always  will  be,  invariably  the  same.  And  all  the  commands 
which  we  meet  with  in  the  epistles,  about ''  mortifying  our  mem- 
bers which  are  upon  the  earth,  of  setting  our  affections  on  things 
above,  and  of  not  being  conformed  to  this  world  ;"  are  but  so 
many  incontestable  proofs  that  the  same  holiness,  heavenly- 
mindedness,  and  deadness  to  the  world,  is  as  necessary  for  us, 
as  for  our  Lord's  immediate  followers. 

But  farther,  as  such  an  objection  argues  an  ignorance  of  the 
scriptures,  so  it  is  a  manifest  proof  that  such  as  make  it  are 
strangers  to  the  power  of  godliness  in  their  hearts.  For  since 
the  sum  and  substance  of  religion  consists  in  recovery  from  our 
fallen  estate  in  Adam,  by  a  new-birth  in  Christ  Jesus,  there  is  an 
absolute  necessity  for  us  to  embrace  and  practise  the  self-denial 
before  spoken  of.  If  we  are  alive  unto  God,  we  shall  be  dead  to 
ourselves  and  the  world.  If  all  things  belonging  to  the  Spirit  live 
and  grow  in  us,  all  things  belonging  to  the  old  man  must  die  in  us. 
We  must  mourn  before  we  are  comforted,  and  receive  the  spirit 
of  bondage  before  we  are  blessed  with  the  unspeakable  privi- 
lege of  the  spirit  of  adoption,  and  with  a  full  assurance  of  faith 
can  say,  "  Abba,  Father." 

Were  we  indeed  in  a  state  of  innocence,  and  had  we,  like 

•  Lftw'f  OMeitfi  Perfeelimi. 


XXIX.J  .  OP   SELF-DENIAL.  33^ 

Adam  before  bis  fall,  the  divine  image  fully  stamped  upon  our 
souls,  we  then  should  have  no  need  of  self-denial ;  but  since  we 
are  fallen,  sickly,  disordered,  self-righteous  creatures,  we  must 
necessarily  deny  ourselves  (and  count  it  our  privilege  to  do  so) 
ere  we  can  follow  Jesus  Christ  to  glory.  To  reject  such  a  salu- 
tary j>ractice  on  account  of  the  difficulty  attending  it  at  first,  is 
but  too  like  the  obstinacy  of  a  perverse  sick  child,  who  nau- 
seates and  refuses  the  potion  reached  out  to  it  by  a  skilful 
physician  or  a  tender  parent,  because  it  is  a  little  ungrateful  to 
the  taste. 

Had  any  of  us  seen  Lazarus  when  he  lay  full  of  sores  at  the 
rich  man's  gate ;  or  Job  when  he  was  smitten  with  ulcers  from 
the  crown  of  his  head  to  the  sole  of  his  foot;  and  had  we  at  the 
same  time  prescribed  to  them  some  healing  medicines,  which, 
because  they  might  put  them  to  pain,  they  would  not  apply  to 
their  wounds;  should  we  not  most  justly  think,  that  they  were 
either  fond  of  a  distempered  body,  or  were  not  sensible  of  their 
distempers?  But  our  souls,  by  nature,  are  in  an  infinitely  more 
deplorable  condition  than  the  bodies  of  Job  or  Lazarus,  when 
full  of  ulcers  and  boils;  for,  alas!  '^our  whole  head  is  sick,  and 
our  whole  heart  faint,  from  the  crown  of  the  head  to  the  sole  of 
the  foot,  we  are  full  of  wounds  and  bruises  and  putrifying  sores, 
and  there  is  no  health  in  us.".  And  if  we  are  unwilling  to  deny 
ourselves,  and  come  after  Jesus  Christ  in  order  to  be  cured,  it 
is  a  sign  we  are  not  sensible  of  the  wretchedness  of  our  state, 
and  that  we  are  not  truly  made  whole. 

Even  Naaman's  servants  could  say,  when  he  refused  (pur- 
suant to  Elisha's  orders)  to  wash  in  the  river  Jordan,  that  he 
might  cure  his  leprosy,  "  Father,  if  the  prophet  had  bid  thee  do 
some  great  thing,  wouldst  thou  not  have  done  it?  how  much 
rather  then,  when  he  saith  to  thee,  wash  and  be  clean?"  And 
may  not  I  very  properly  address  myself  to  you  in  the  same 
manner,  my  brethren?  If  Jesus  Christ,  our  great  Prophet,  had 
bid  you  do  some  far  more  difficult  thing,  would  you  not  have 
done  it?  Much  more  then  should  you  do  it,  when  he  only  bids 
you  deny  yourselves  what  would  certainly  hurt  you  if  indulged 
in,  and  he  will  give  you  a  crown  of  life. 

But  to  illusrtate  this  by  another  comparison:  In  the  12th 
chapter  of  the  Acts,  we  read,  that  "  St.  Peter  was  kept  in  pri- 
son, and  was  sleeping  between  two  soldiers,  bound  with  two 
chains :  *^  and  behold  an  angel  of  the  Lord  came  upon  him,  and 
smote  Peter  on  the  side,  saying,  Arise  up  quickly ;  and  his 
chains  fell  ojff  from  his  hands."  But  had  this  great  apostle, 
instead  of  rising  up  quickly,  and  doing  as  the  blessed  angel 
commanded  him,  hugged  his  chains,  and  begged  that  they  might 
not  be  let  fall  from  his  hands ;  would  not  any  one  think  that  he 
was  in  love  with  slavery,  and  deserved  to  be  executed  next 
morning?  And  does  not  the  person  who  refuses  to  deny  him- 
self, act  as  inconsistently,  as  this  apostle  would  have  done,  if  he 
had  neglected  the  means  of  his  deliverance  ?  For  our  souls,  by 
natnre,  are  in  a  spiritual  dungeon,  sleeping  and  fast  bound  be- 

x2 


$40        THE  EXTENT  AND  REASON  A  BLBNK8S     [XXIX 

tween  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil,  not  with  two^  bnt  ten 
tiioasand  chains  of  lusts  and  corruptions.  Now  Jesus  Christ, 
like  St.  Peter's  good  angel,  by  the  power  of  his  gospel  comes 
and  opens  the  prison  door,  and  bids  us  deny  ourselves,  and 
follow  him.''  Bnt  if  we  do  not  arise,  gird  up  the  loins  of  our 
mind,  and  follow  him,  are  we  not  in  love  with  bondage,  atid  do 
we  not  deserve  never  to  be  delivered  from  it  t 

Indeed,  I  will  not  affirm  that  this  doctrine  of  self-denial  ap- 
pears in  this  just  light  to  every  one :  no,  I  am  sensible  that  to 
the  natural  man  it  is  foolishness,  and  to  the  young  convert  an 
bard  saying.  But  what  says  our  Saviour  ?  '^  If  any  man  will 
do  my  will,  he  shall  know  of  the  doctrine,  whether  it  be  of  God, 
or  whether  I  speak  of  myself."  This,  my  dear  friends,  is  the 
best,  the  only  way  of  conviction.  Let  us  up  and  j}e  doing;  let 
us  arise  quickly,  and  deny  ourselves,  and  the  Lord  Jesus  will 
remove  those  scales  from  the  eyes  of  our  minds,  which  now, 
like  so  many  veils,  hinder  us  from  seeing  clearly  the  reasonable- 
ness, necessity,  and  inexpressible  advantage,  of  the  doctrine 
that  has  been  delivered.  Let  us  but  once  thus  shew  ourselves 
men,  and  then  the  Spirit  of  God  will  move  on  the  face  of  onr 
souls,  as  he  did  once  upon  the  face  of  the  great  deep,  and 
cause  them  to  emei^e  out  of  that  confused  chaos,  in  which  they 
are  most  certainly  now  involved,  if  we  are  strangers  and  enemies 
to  self-denial  and  the  cross  of  Christ. 

III.  Proceed  we  therefore  now  to  the  third  and  last  general 
thing  proposed,  to  offer  some  considerations  which  may  serve 
as  so  many  motives  to  reconcile  us  to,  and  quicken  us  in,  the 
practice  of  this  duty  of  self-denial. 

1.  And  the  first  means  I  shall  recommend  to  you,  in  order  to 
reconcile  you  to  this  doctrine,  is,  to  meditate  frequently  on  the 
life  of  our  blessed  Lord  and  Master  Jesus  Christ.  Follow  him 
from  his  cradle  to  the  cross,  and  see  what  a  self-denying  life  he 
led !  And  shall  not  we  drink  of  the  cup  that  he  drank  of,  and 
be  baptized  with  the  baptism  that  he  was  baptized  with  ?  Or  think 
we,  that  Jesus  Christ  did  and  suffered  every  thing  in  order  to 
have  us  excused  and  exempted  from  sufferings?  No,  far  be  it  from 
any  sincere  Christian  to  judge  after  this  manner:  for  St.  Peter 
tells  us,  "  He  suffered  for  us,  leaving  us  an  example,  that  we 
should  follow  his  steps."  Had  Christ  indeed,  like  those  that 
sat  in  Moses'  chair,  laid  heavy  burdens  of  self-denial,  upon  us, 
(supposing  they  were  heavy,  which  they  are  not,)  and  refused  to 
touch  them  himself  with  one  of  his  fingers;  we  might  have  had 
some  pretence  to  complain :  but  since  he  has  enjoined  us 
nothing  but  what  he  first  put  in  practice  himself,  thou  art  in- 
excusable, O  disciple,  whoever  thou  art,  who  wouldest  be  above 
thy  persecuted  self-denying  Master:  and  thou  art  no  good  and 
faithful  servant,  who  art  .unwilling  to  suffer  and  sympathize  with 
thy  mortified,  heavenly-minded  Lord. 

2.  Next  to  the  pattern  of  our  blessed  Master,  think  often  on 
the  lives  of  the  glorious  company  of  the  apostles,  the  goodly  fel- 
lowship of  the  prophets,  and  the  noble  army  of  martyrs ;  who 


J(0(JX«]  OP  BPLP-PENIAL.  84} 

liy  a  constant  looking  to  the  author  ^pd  fiaisher  of  our  f^itli, 
have  fought  tlie  good  fight,  and  are  gone  before  us  to  inherit 
the  promises.  View  again  and  again^  how  holily,  how  self* 
denyingly,  how  unblameably  they  lived :  And  if  self-d/enial  was 
necessary  for  them,  why  not  for  us  also  T  Are  we  hot  men  of 
like  passions  with  them  ?  Do  we  not  live  in  the  same  wicked 
world  as  they  did  ?  Have  we  not  the  same  good  Spirit  to  assist, 
support,  and  purify  us,  as  they  had  ?  And  is  not  the  same  eternal 
inheritance  reached  out  to  us,  as  was  to  them  ?  And  if  we  have 
the  same  nature  to  change,  the  same  wicked  world  to  withstand, 
the  same  good  Spirit  to  help,  and  the  same  eternal  crown  at  the 
end;  why  should  not  we  lead  the  same  lives  as  they  did?  Do 
we  think  they  did  works  of  supererogation  ?  If  not,  why  do  not 
we  do  as  they  did  ?  Or  why  does  your  own  church  set  apart 
festivals  to  commemorate  the  deaths  and  sufferings  of  the 
saints,  but  in  order  to  excite  you  to  follow  them  as  they  did 
Christ? 

3.  Thirdly,  Think  often  on  the  pains  of  hell ;  consider,  whe- 
ther it  is  not  better  to  cut  off  a  right  hand  or  foot,  and  pull  out  a 
right  eye,  if  they  offend  us,  (or  c^use  us  to  sin,)  *'  ratlier  than  to 
be  cast  into  hell,  where  the  worm  dieth  not,  and  the  fire  is  not 
quenched."  Think  how  many  thousands  there  are  now  reserved 
with  damned  spirits  in  chains  of  darkness  unto  the  judgment 
of  the  great  day.  And  think  withal,  that  this,  this  must  be  our 
case  shortly,  unless  we  are  wise  in  time,  deny  ourselves,  and 
follow  Jesus  Christ.  Think  you  they  now  imagine  Jesus  Christ 
to  be  a  hard  master ;  or  rathe^  think  you  not  they  would  give 
ten  thousand  times  ten  thousand  worlds,  could  they  but  return 
to  life  again,  and  take  Christ's  easy  yoke  upon  them  ?  And  can 
we  dwell  with  everlasting  burnings  more  than  they  ?  No,  if  we 
cannot  bear  this  precept.  Deny  yourselves,  take  up  your  crosses  ; 
how  shall  we  hjsar  the  irrevocable  sentence,  ^'  Depart  from  me, 
ye  cursed,  into  everlasting  tire,  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his 
angels?'*  But  I  hope  those,  amongst  whom  I  am  now  preaching 
the  kingdom  of  God,  are  not  so  disingenuous  as  to  need  to  be 
driven  to  their  duty  by  the  terrors  of  the  Lord,  but  rather  desire 
to  be  drawn  by  the  cords  of  love. 

JLastfy,  Therefore,  often  meditate  on  the  joys  of  heaven  :  think, 
think  with  what  unspeakable  glory  those  happy  souls  are  now 
encircled,  who  when  on  earth  were  called  to  deny  themselves  as 
well  as  we,  and  were  not  disobedient  to  that  call :  lift  up  your 
hearts  frequently  towards  the  mansion  of  eternal  bliss,  and  with 
an  eye  of  faith,  like  Stephen,  see  the  heavens  opened,  and  the 
San  of  man,  vdth  his  glorious  retinue  of  departed  saints,  sitting 
and  Bolacing  themselves  in  eternal  joys.  Hark !  methinks  I 
bear  them  chanting  forth  their  everlasting  hallelujahs,  and  echo- 
ing triumphant  songs  of  joy.  And  do  you  not  long,  my  brethren, 
to  join  this  heavenly  choir  ?  Do  not  your  hearts  bum  within 
you?  As  the  hart  panteth  after  the  water-brooks,  do  not  your 
souls  «>  long  after  the  blessed  company  of  these  sons  of  God  t 
Behold  then  ft  heavenly  ladder  reached  down  to  you,  by  which 


ikSt  CHRf8T*S  TRANSFIGURATION.  [XXX. 

JOB  may  climb  to  this  holy  hill.  Let  ns  believe  on  the  Lord 
esiis  Christy  and  deny  ourselves !  By  this  alone,  every  saint 
that  ever  lived  ascended  into  the  joy  of  their  Lord :  And  then, 
Vfe,  even  we  also,  shall  ere  long  be  lifted  up  into  the  same  most 
blissful  regions,  there  to  enjoy  an  eternal  rest  with  the  people 
of  God,  and  join  with  them  in  singing  doxologies  and  songs  of 
praise,  to  the  everlasting,  blessed,  all-glorious,  most  adorable 
Trinity,  for  ever  and  ever. 
Which  God  of  his  infinite  mercy  grant,  &c. 


SERMON  XXX. 

Christ's  transfiguration. 

And  it  came  to  pass  about  an  eight  days  after  these  sayings,  he 
took  Peter,  and  John,  and  James,  and  went  up  into  a  moun- 
tain to  pray.  And  as  he  prayed,  the  fashion  of  his  counte* 
nance  was  altered,  and  his  raiment  was  white  and  glistering. 
And,  behold,  there  talked  with  him  two  men,  which  were  Moses 
and  Elias :  who  appeared  in  glory,  and  spake  of  his  decease, 
which  he  should  accomplish  at  Jerusalem.  But  Peter,  and 
they  that  were  with  him,  were  heavy  with  sleep :  and  when 
they  were  awake,  they  saw  his  glory,  and  the  two  men  that 
stood  with  him.  And  it  came  to  pass,  as  they  departed  from 
him,  Peter  said  unto  Jesus,  Master,  it  is  good  for  us  to  be 
here;  and  let  us  make  three  tabernacles,  one  for  thee,  and 
one  for  Moses,  and  one  for  Elias:  not  knowing  what  he  said. 
Wliile  he  thus  spake,  there  came  a  cloud  and  overshadoictd 
them,  and  th^y  feared  as  they  entered  into  the  cloud.  And 
there  came  a  voice  out  of  the  cloud,  saying.  This  is  my  beloved 
Son,  hear  him.  And  when  the  voice  was  past,  Jesus  tcm 
found  alone;  and  they  kept  it  close,  and  told  no  man  w 
those  days  any  of  those  things  which  they  had  seen. — Luke 
ix.  28—30. 

When  the  angel  was  sent  to  the  Redeemer's  beloved  discipk 
John,  we  arc  told  that  the  angei  said  unto  him,  "  Come  op 
hither :"  lie  was  to  be  exalted,  to  be  brought  nearer  heaven, 
that  his  mind  might  be  better  prepared  for  those  great  mani- 
festations, which  an  infinitely  great  and  condescending  God 
intended  to  vouchsafe  him.  And  on  reading  the  verses  that 
you  have  just  now  heard,  when  I  also  see  such  a  great  and 
serious  assembly  convened  in  the  presence  of  God,  I  think  I 
must  address  you,  as  the  angel  addressed  John,  and  say  onto 
you,  "  Come  up  hither :"  leave  your  worldly  thoughts,  for  a 
time  forget  the  earth.  And  as  it  is  the  Lord's  day,  a  time  in 
which  we  ought  more  particularly  to  think  of  heaven,  I  most 
desire  you  to  pray  to  God,  that  ye  may  get  up  on  Pisgidi's 
mount,  and  take  a  view  of  the  promised  land.  It  is  trve, 
indeed,  eye  hath  not  seen,  ear  hath  not  heard,  nor  hath  it 
entered  into  the  heart  of  any  man  to  conceive,  the  gfreat  and 
good  things  which  God  hath  prepared  for  his  people  here; 


:.]  Christ's  transfiguration.  948 

nmch  less  those  infinitely  greater  and  more  glorious  things,  • 
that  he  hath  laid  up  for  them  that  fear  him,  in  the  eternal 
world :  but,  blessed  be  God !  though  we  are  not  yet  in  heaven, 
unless  to  be  in  Christ  may  properly  be  termed  heaven,  and 
then  all  real  Christians  are  there  already ;  yet,  the  blessed 
Jesus  has  been  pleased  to  leave  upon  record  some  account  of 
himself,  of  what  happened  to  him  in  the  days  of  his  flesh, 
and  of  some  manifestations  he  was  pleased  to  grant  to  a  few 
of  bis  disciples ;  that  from  what  happened  to  them  here  below, 
we  may  form  some  faint,  though  but  a  faint,  idea  of  that  hap- 
piness that  awaits  his  people  in  his  kingdom  above.  If  any  of 
you  inquire,  in  what  part  of  our  Lord's  life  those  instances  are 
recorded,  I  have  an  answer  ready :  One  of  these  instances,  and 
that  a  very  remarkable  one^  is  recorded  in  the  verses  that  I  have 
DOW  chosen  for  the  subject  of  your  meditation. 

The  verses  give  us  an  account  of  what  is  generally  called 
our  Lord's  Transfiguration;  his  being  wonderfully  changed, 
and  his  being  wonderfully  owned  by  his  Father  upon  the 
mount.  Some  think  that  this  was  done  upon  a  sabbath-day ; 
and  the  particular  occasion  of  our  blessed  Lord's  con- 
descending to  let  his  servants  have  such  a  sight  as  this,  we 
may  gather  from  the  27th  verse.  It  seems  our  blessed  Lord 
had  been  promising  a  great  reward  to  those  who  should  not  be 
ashamed  of  him  :  '^  Whosoever  shall  be  ashamed  of  me  and  of 
my  words,  of  him  shall  the  Son  of  man  be  ashamed,  when  he 
shall  come  in  his  own  glory,  and  of  his  Father,  and  of  the  holy 
angels/'  In  this  threatening  is  implied,  a  reward  to  tliose  who 
should  not  be  ashamed  of  him :  *'  But^  (adds  he)  I  tell  ycu  of 
a  truth,  there  be  some  standing  here,  who  shall  not  taste  of 
death,  till  they  see  the  kingdom  of  God."  As  much  as  to  say. 
There  will  be  a  day,  when  I  will  come  in  the  glory  of  my 
Father  and  of  his  holy  angels :  but  I  tell  you  there  are  some 
of  my  favourites ;  I  tell  you  of  a  truth,  though  you  may  think 
it  too  good  news,  there  are  ^ome  of  you,  that  shall  not  taste  of 
death,  till  ye  shall  see  the  kingdom  of  God.  Some  divines 
think,  that  this  promise  has  reference  to  our  Lord's  erecting 
a  gospel  church ;  and  if  we  take  it  in  this  sense,  it  means  that 
the  apostles,  who  were  then  present,  some  of  them  at  least, 
should  not  die,  till  they  saw  Satan's  kingdom  in  a  great  mea- 
sure pulled  down,  and  the  Redeemer's  gospel-kingdom  erected. 
Some  think  it  has  a  peculiar  reference  to  John,  who,  it  seems^ 
survived  all  the  other  apostles,  and  lived  till  Christ  came; 
that  is,  till  he  came  to  destroy  Jerusalem.  But  it  is  the  opi- 
nion of  Mr.  Henry,  of  bishop  Hall,  of  Burkitt,  and  others,  who 
have  written  upon  this  passage,  that  our  blessed  Lord  has  a 
peculiar  reference  to  the  transfiguration  upon  the  mount: 
''  There  be  some  of  you  here,  that  shall  not  taste  of  death,  till 
ye  see  my  transfiguration  upon  the  mount;  till  ye  see  some 
glorified  saint  come  down  from  heaven  and  pay  me  a  visit, 
and  consequently  see  a  little  of  that  kingdom  of  God,  which 
ye  shaU  have  a  full  sight  of  when  ye  come  to  glory."    This 


844  CHRJST*S  TRANSPIGURilTION.  [XXX. 

seems  to  be  the  right  interpretation.  If  you  will  look  to  the 
margin  of  your  Bibles,  you  will  see  the  parallel  place  in  Mat- 
thew, where  the  account  of  our  Lord's  transfiguration  is  given, 
and  there  you  will  find  it  immediately  follows  upon  this  pro- 
mise of  our  Lord. 

Weil,  as  Christ  had  told  them,  that  they  should  not  taste  of 
death  till  they  had  seen  the  kingdom  of  God,  so  the  evan- 
gelist, at  the  28th  verse,  tells  us,  "  it  came  to  pass  about  an 
eight  days  after  these  sayings,  he  took  Peter,  and  John,  and 
James,  and  went  up  into  a  mountain  to  pray."  A  boot  an 
eight  days;  that  is,  as  bishop  Hall  thinks,  upon  the  sabbath- 
day;  or,  according  to  some,  the  first  day  of  the  week,  which 
was  hereafter  to  be  the  christian  sabbath ;  our  blessed  Lord 
takes  Peter,  John,  and  James.  Why  did  not  the  Lord  Jesns 
Christ  take  more  of  his  disciples?  Why  three,  and  these 
three?  And  why  three  only?  Our  blessed  Lord  was  pleased 
to  take  three  and  no  more,  to  shew  us  that  he  is  a  sovereign 
agent ;  to  shew  us,  that  though  he  loved  all  his  disciples,  yet 
there  are  some  to  whom  he  is  pleased  to  allow  peculiar  visits. 
He  loved  Peter,  and  all  the  other  disciples ;  yet  John  was  the 
disciple  that  he  peculiarly  loved.  And  he  took  three  rather 
than  one,  because  three  were  sufiicient  to  testify  the  truth  of 
his  being  transfigured :  "  Out  of  the  mouth  of  two  or  three 
witnesses  every  word  shall  be  established."  And  he  took  no 
more  than  three,  because  these  three  were  enough.  And  he 
took  these  three,  Peter,  John,  and  James,  in  particular, 
1)ecause  these  very  persons  that  were  now  to  see  Christ  trans- 
figured, were  hereafter  to  see  him  agonizing  in  the  garden, 
sweating  great  drops  of  blood  falling  unto  the  ground.  And 
had  not  these  three  disciples  seen  Christ  upon  the  mount,  the 
seeing  him  afterwards  in  the  garden  might  have  staggered 
them  exceedingly :  they  might  have  doubted  whether  it  were 
possible  for  the  Son  of  God  to  be  in  such  doleful  circum- 
stances. Well,  our  Lord  takes  these  three  *' up  into  a  moun- 
tain." Why  so  ?  Because  Christ  Jesus  was  to  be  like  Moses, 
who  was  taken  up  into  a  mountain,  when  God  intended  to 
deliver  unto  him  the  moral  law :  and  our  blessed  Lord  went 
up  into  a  mountain,  because  a  mountain  befriended  devotion. 
When  he  had  a  mind  to  retire  to  pray  to  his  Father,  he  went 
to  such  places  where  he  could  be  most  secret,  and  give  the 
greatest  vent  to  his  heart.  Thus  we  are  told,  that  once  when 
Peter  prayed,  it  was  upon  the  house-top.  And  if  we  have  a 
mind  to  be  near  Grod,  we  should  choose  such  places  as  are 
freest  from  ostentation,  and  that  most  befriend  our  commn- 
uion  with  God.  And  what  doth  Christ,  when  ho  got  up  into  a 
mountain?  We  are  told  he  went  up  into  a  mountain  **  to  pray." 
Christ  had  no  corruption  to  confess,  and  he  had  but  few  wants 
of  his  own  to  be  relieved ;  yet  we  hear  of  Christ  being  much 
in  prayer;  we  hear  of  his  going  up  to  a  mountain  to  pray; 
of  his  rising  up  a  great  while  before  it  was  day,  to  pray ;  and 
of  bis  spending  a  whole  night  in  prayer  to  God. 


XJUi.]  CHRIST'S  TRANSPIGURATIOTT.  9i& 

In  the  29ili  verse,  you  have  an  account  of  the  etfect  of  oiir 
Iiord's  praying:  ''As  he  prayed,  the  fashion  of  his  oounte* 
nance  was  altered,  and  his  raiment  was  white  and  glistering." 
I  would  have  you  take  notice,  that  our  Lord  was  not  changed 
in  respect  of  his  body,  while  he  was  going  up  to  the  mount, 
but  when  he  got  upon  the  mount,  and  while  engaged  in  prayer. 
It  is  sufficient  that  way  for  our  souls  to  be  transformed :  the 
time  we  are  more  particularly  to  expect  the  influences  of  God's 
Spirit,  is,  when  we  are  engaged  in  prayer.  There  seems  to  be 
a  very  great  propriety  in  our  Lord's  being  transfigured  or 
changed  upon  the  mount.  I  hope  I  need  inform  none  of  you, 
that  when  Moses  went  up  to  the  mount  of  God,  God  was 
pleased  to  speak  to  him  face  to  face ;  and  when  he  came  down 
from  the  mount,  the  people  of  Israel  observed  that  Moses*. face 
shone  so,  that  he  was  obliged  to  have  a  veil  put  upon  his  face. 
Now  the  shining  of  Moses'  face,  was  a  proof  to  the  people 
that  Moses  had  been  conversing  with  Gk>d.  And  Moses  told 
the  people,  ''That  the  Lord  would  raise  up  unto  them  a  pro- 
phet like  unto  him,  whom  the  people  were  to  hear."  God  the 
Father,  in  order  to  give  his  Son  (considering  him  as  man) 
a  testimony  that  he  was  a  prophet,  was  pleased  not  only  to  let 
bis  face  glitter  or  shine ;  but  to  shew  that  he  was  a  prophet 
far  superior  to  Moses,  he  was  pleased  to  let  his  garment  be 
white  and  glistering,  and  "  his  countenance  (as  we  are  told  by 
another  evangelist)  did  shine  as  the  sun."  What  a  change 
was  here !  What  a  sight !  Methinks  I  see  Peter,  James,  and 
John  surprised :  and,  indeed,  well  might  the  evangelist,  con* 
sidering  what  happened,  usher  in  the  following  part  of  the  story 
with  the  word  Behold;  "  Behold » there  talked  with  him  two 
men,  Moses  and  Elias:  and  in  the  31st  verse  you  have  an 
account  of  their  dress,  "They  appeared  in  glory;"  and  of 
their  discourse,  "They  spake  of  his  decease  which  he  should 
accomplish  at  Jerusalem." 

"  Behold,  two  men,  which  were  Moses  and  Elias ;"  these 
were  two  very  proper  persons  to  come  upon  this  embassy  to 
the  Son  of  God.  Moses  was  the  great  lawgiver,  Elias  was  the 
great  restorer  of  the  law :  the  body  of  Moses  was  hidden  and 
never  found,  Elias's  body  was  translated  immediately,  and 
carried  up  in  a  fiery  chariot  to  heaven:  and  it  may  be  that 
this  was  done  particularly,  because  these  two  were  hereafter 
to  have  the  honour  of  waiting  upon  the  Son  of  God.  "  They 
appeared  in  glory ;"  that  is,  their  bodies  were  now  in  that  glo- 
rious habit,  in  which  the  bodies  of  believers  are  to  be  at  the 
morning  of  the  resurrection.  Christ  was,  as  it  were,  now 
sitting  in  bis  royal  robes ;  and  as  it  is  usual  for  ambassadors, 
when  they  are  to  be  admitted  into  the  king's  presence,  on 
bringing  a  message  from  one  king  to  another,  to  appear  ia  al} 
tiieJr  grandeur,  to  make  the  message  more  solemn:  so  here, 
these  heavenly  messengers  being  to  wait  upon  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  are  invested  as  with  royal  dignity,  they  appeared  in 
glory,  and  "  they  spake  of  his  decease  which  he  should  accom- 


846  CHRIST'S  TRANSFIGURATION.  [XXX. 

plish  at  Jerusalem/'  they  came  to  tell  the  Redeemer  of  his 
sufferings,  and  of  the  place  of  his  sufferings,  and  to  acquaint 
bim,  that  his  sufferings,  however  great,  however  bitter,  were  to 
be  accomplished ;  that  there  was  to  be  an  end  put  to  them,  as 
our  Lord  himself  speaks,  "  l*he  things  concerning  rae  are  to 
have  an  end.'*  What  other  particulars  they  spoke  to  our 
Lord,  we  are  not  told..  But  what  effect  this  had  upon  the  dis- 
ciples, you  may  learn  from  the  32d  verse,  **  Peter,  and  they  that 
were  with  him,  were  heavy  with  sleep.'* 

We  are  not  to  suppose  that  Peter,  James,  and  John,  were 
now  asleep  in  a  literal  sense;  no,  if  we  compare  this  with 
another  passage  of  holy  writ,  I  mean  the  account  given  us  of 
Daniel's  being  impressed  and  overcome  when  he  saw. the  angel 
of  the  Lord,  you  will  find  that  this  sleep  implies  what  we  call  a 
swoon.  They  were  overcome  with  the  sight  of  the  glory  of 
Christ's  garments,  the  glistering  of  his  body,  and  the  glory  that 
appeared  in  Moses  and  Elias :  these  quite  overcame  them,  sunk 
them  down,  and,  like  the  queen  of  Sheba  when  she  saw  Solo- 
mon's glory,  they  had  no  life  in  them.  But  they  recovered  them- 
selves :  *'  when  they  were  awake,"  that  is,  when  they  had  reco- 
vered their  strength,  when  God  had  put  strength  into  them,  as 
the  angel  put  strength  into  Daniel,  "  they  saw  his  glory,  and 
the  two  men  that  stood  with  him."  And  how  do  you  think  they 
gazed  upon  Christ?  How  may  we  suppose  they  fixed  their  eyes 
upon  Moses  and  Elias?  Peter,  who  was  always  the  first  speaker, 
out  of  the  abundance  of  his  heart  spake  upon  this  occasion. 
Verse  33,  '*  And  it  came  to  pass  as  they  departed  from  him, 
Peter  said  unto  Jesus,  Master,  it  is  good  for  us  to  be  here ;  and 
let  us  make  three  tabernacles,  one  for  thee,  one  for  Moses,  and 
one  for  Elias,  not  knowing  what  he  said."  Peter,  when  he  had 
drank  a  little  of  Christ's  new  wine,  speaks  like  a  person  intoxica- 
ted ;  he  was  overpowered  with  the  brightness  of  the  manifestation, 
"  Let  us  make  three  tabernacles,  one  for  thee,  and  one  for  Moses, 
and  one  for  Elias."  It  is  well  added,  "  not  knowing  what  he 
said."  That  he  should  cry  out,  "  Master,  it  is  good  for  us  to  be 
here,"  in  such  good  company,  and  in  so  glorious  a  condition,  is 
no  wonder ;  which  of  us  all  would  not  have  been  apt  to  have 
done  the  same?  But  to  talk  of  building  tabernacles,  and  one 
for  Christ,  and  one  for  Moses,  and  one  for  Elias,  was  saying 
something  for  which  Peter  himself  must  stand  reproved.  Surely, 
Peter,  thou  wast  not  quite  awake !  thou  talkest  like  one  in  a 
dream !  if  thy  Lord  had  taken  thee  at  thy  word,  what  a  poor 
tabernacle  wouldst  thou  have  had,  in  comparison  of  that  house 
not  made  with  hands,*  eternal  in  the  heavens,  in  which  thou  hast 
long  since  dwelt,  now  the  earthly  house  of  the  tabernacle  of  tby 
body  is  dissolved !  What !  build  tabernacles  below,  and  have 
the  crown,  before  thou  hast  borne  the  cross?  O  Peter,  Peter! 
"Master,  spare  thyself,"  sticks  too,  too  closely  to  thee:  and  nhy 
so  selfish,  Peter?  Carest  thou  not  for  thy-fellow  disciples  that  are 
below,  who  came  not  up  with  thee  to  the  mount?  Carest  thou 
not  for  the  precious  souls  that  are  as  sheep  having  no  shepherd. 


XXX.]  CHRIST'S  TRANSFIGURATIOK.  S47 

and  must  perish  for  ever,  unless  thy  Master  descends  from  the 
mount  to  teach,  and  to  die  for  them  ?  Wouldst  thou  thus  oaf 
thy  spiritual  morsels  alone  ?  Besides,  if  thou  art  for  building 
tabernacles,  why  must  there  be  three  of  them,  one  for  Christ, 
and  one  for  Moses,  and  one  for  Elias?  Are  Christ  and  the  pro- 
phets divided  ?  Do  they  not  sweetly  harmonize  and  agree  in 
one  ?  Did  they  not  prophesy  concerning  the  sufferings  of  thy 
Lord,  as  well  as  of  the  glory  that  should  follow  ?  Alas,  how 
unlike  is  their  conversation  to  thine !  Moses  and  Elias  came 
down  to  talk  of  suffering,  and  thou  art  dreaming  of  building  I 
know  not  what  tabernacles.  Surely,  Peter,  thou  art  so  high 
upon  the  mount,  that  thy  head  runs  giddy. 

However,  in  the  midst  of  these  infirmities,  there  was  some- 
thing that  bespoke  the  honesty  and  integrity  of  his  heart.  Though 
he  knew  not  very  well  what  he  said,  yet  he  was  not  so  stupid  as 
his  pretended  successor  at  Rome.  He  does  not  fall  down  and 
worship  these  two  departed  saints,  neither  do  I  hear  him  say 
to  either,  Ora pro  nobis;  he  had  not  so  learned  Christ;  no,  he 
applies  himself  directly  to  the  head,  *'he  said  unto  Jesus, 
Master,  it  is  good  for  us  to  be  here."  And  though  he  was  for 
building,  yet  he  would  not  build  without  his  Master's  leave. 
"Master,  let  us  build,"  or,  as  St.  Mark  words  it,  "wilt  thou 
that  we  build  three  tabernacles,  one  for  thee,  and  one  for  Moses^ 
and  one  for  Elias?"  I  do  not  hear  him  add,  and  one  for  James, 
and  one  for  John,  and  one  for  Peter.  No,  he  would  will- 
ingly stay  out  with  them  upon  the  mount,  though  it  was  in  the 
cold  and  dark  night,  so  that  Christ  and  his  heavenly  attendants 
were  taken  care  of.  The  sweetenss  of  such  a  heavenly  vision 
would  more  than  compensate  for  any  bodily  suffering  that  might 
be  the  consequence  of  their  longer  abode  there :  nay  farther,  he 
does  not  desire  that  either  Christ,  or  Moses,  or  Elias,  should 
have  any  trouble  in  building;  neither  does  he  say,  let  my  curates, 
Jatnes  and  John,  build,  whilst  I  ,sit  idle  and  lord  it  over  my 
brethren;  but  he  says,  "let  us  build  ;"  he  will  work  as  hard,  if 
not  harder,  than  either  of  them,  and  desire  to  be  distinguished 
only  by  his  activity,  enduring  hardness,  and  his  zeal  to  promote 
the  welfare  of  their  common  Lord  and  Master. 

Doubtless,  Peter  had  read  how  the  glory  of  the  l4ord  filled  the 
tabernacle  and  the  temple  of  old ;  and  now  Jesus  is  transfigured, 
and  Moses  and  Elias  appear  in  glory,  he  thinks  it  right  that  new 
tabernacles  shall  be  erected  for  them.  Such  a  mixture  of  nature 
and  grace,  of  short-sightedness  and  infirmity,  is  there  in  the  most 
ardent  and  weU-meant  zeal  of  the  very  best  of  men,  when  liearest 
the  throne  of  grace,  or  even  upon  the  mount  with  God.  Per- 
fection in  any  grace  must  be  looked  for,  or  expected,  only 
among  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect  in  heaven.  Those 
who  talk  of  any  such  thing  on  earth,  like  Peter,  they  know  not 
what  they  say. 

But  how  came  Peter  so  readily  to  distinguish  which  was 
Moses,  and  which  was  Elias  ?  He  seems  to  speak  without  the 
least  hesitation^  "  Let  us  build  three  tabernacles,  one  for  thee. 


948  CHRIST'S  TRANSPIOUgATION.  [XXX. 

and  one  for  Moses^  and  one  for  Elias/'  as  though  he  was  very 
well  acquainted  with  them^  whereas  they  had  both  been  dead, 
long,  long  before  Peter  was  bom.  Was  there,  do  you  imagine, 
any  thing  distinguishing  in  their  apparel  ?  or  any  thing  in  their 
conversation  that  discovered  them  ?  or  rather,  did  he  not  know 
them  here  on  the  mount,  as  we  may  from  hence  infer  that  de- 
parted saints  do  and  will  know  each  other  in  heaven,  even  by 
intuition  and  immediate  revelation?  But,  alas!  how  transient 
are  our  views  of  heaven,  during  our  sojourning  here  on  earth : 
Verse  34,  **  Whilst  he  thus  spake,"  whilst  Peter  was  talking  of 
building  tabernacles,  whilst  he  was  saying,  '4t  is  good  for  us  to 
be  here,"  whilst  he  was  dreaming  that  his  mountain  was  so 
strong  that  it  never  could  be  moved,  *'  there  came  a  cloud  and 
overshadtwed  them."  St.  Matthew  observes,  it  was  a  bright 
cloud,  not  dark  like  that  on  mount  Sinai,  but  bright,  because 
the  gospel  opens  to  us  a  far  more  bright  dispensation  than  that 
of  the  law.  This  overshadowed,  and  thereby  not  only  filled 
them  with  an  holy  awe,  but  also  screened  them,  in  some  mea- 
sure, from  the  brightness  of  that  glory  with  which  they  were  now 
surrounded,  and  which  otherwise  would  have  been  insupportable. 
This  cloud  was  like  the  veil  thrown  on  the  face  of  Moses,  and 
prepared  them  for  the  voice  which  they  were  soon  to  hear  com- 
ing out  of  it.  I  am  not  much  surprised  at  being  informed  by 
St.  Matthew,  that ''  they  feared  as  they  entered  into  the  cloud/* 
or  by  St.  Mark,  that  ''they  were  sore  afraid."  For  since  the  fall, 
there  is  such  a  consciousness  in  us  all  of  deserved  wrath,  that 
we  cannot  help  fearing  when  we  enter  into  a  cloud,  even  though 
Jesus  Christ  himself  be  in  the  midst  of  it.  Ah!  Peter,  where  if 
thy  talk  of  building  tabernacles  now !  Is  thy  strong  mountain 
so  quickly  removed  ?  What,  come  down  so  soon  ?  Why  do  we 
not  now  hear  thee  saying,  ''  It  is  good  for  us  to  be  here?"  Alas! 
he  and  his  fellow-disciples  are  quite  struck  dumb ;  see  how  they 
tremble,  and,  like  Moses  upon  another  occasion,  exceedingly 
qufiko  and  fear.  But  how  quickly  are  those  fears  dispelled,  how 
soon  is  the  tumult  of  their  minds  hushed  and  calmed,  with  that 
soul-reviving  voice  that  came  from  the  excellent  glory,  verse  35, 
"  This  is  my  beloved  Son,  hear  him." 

St.  Mark  and  St.  Matthew  add,  ''in  whoqi  I  am  well  pleased.** 
The  same  testimony  that  God  the  Father  gave  to  the  blessed 
Jesus  at  his  baptism,  before  he  entered  upon  his  temptation,  is 
now  repeated,  in  order  to  strengthen  and  prepare  him  for  his 
impending  agony  in  the  garden.  Probably  it  was  a  small  still 
though  articulate  voice,  attended  neither  with  thunder  not  light- 
ning, nor  the  sound  of  a  trumpet,  but,  agreeable  to  the  blet^sed 
news  which  it  contained,  ushered  in  with  tokens  of  unspeakable 
complacency  and  love.  Uod  the  Father  hereby  gives  Moses 
and  £lias  a  solemn  discharge,  as  though  they  were  sent  from 
heaven  on  purpose  to  give  up  their  commission  to  their  rightful 
Lord,  and,  like  the  morning  star,  disappear  when  the  Sun  of 
righteousness  himself  arises  to  bring  in  a  gospel  day.  "  This 
\b  my  bdoved  Sop^  beigr  Uim."    But  the  emphasis  upon  ths 


\XX.]  CHRIST'S   TRANSFIGURAirON.  84d 

word  this;  this  Son  of  man,  this  Jesus,  whom  you  are  shortly  to 
see  in  a  bloody  sweat,  blindfolded,  spit  upon,  buffeted,  scourged, 
and  at  length  banging  upon  a  tree,  I  am  not  ashamed  to  own 
to  be  my  Son,  my  only  begotten  Sou,  who  was  with  me  before 
the  heavens  were  made,  or  the  foundations  of  the  earth  were 
laid ;  my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased, in  whom  my 
soul  delighteth>  and  whom  I  do  by  these  presents  publicly  con- 
stitute and  appoint  to  be  the  king,  priest,  and  prophet  of  the 
church.  "  Hear  ye  him."  No  longer  look  to  Moses  or  Elias, 
no  longer  expect  to  be  saved  by  the  works  of  the  law;  but  by 
the  preaching  and  application  of  the  ever-blcssed  gospel. 
Hear  ye  him,  so  as  to  believe  on,  love,  serve,  obey,  and,  if 
needs  be,  to  die  and  lay  down  your  very  lives  for  him.  "  Hear 
him ;"  hear  what  he  hath  to  say,  for  he  comes  with  a  com- 
mission from  above.  Hear  his  doctrine ;  hear  him,  so  as  to 
obey  him ;  hear  him,  so  as  to  put  in  practice  his  precepts,  and 
copy  after  his  good  example. 

In  the  36th  verse  we  have  the  close  of  this  heavenly  feast ; 
"  When  the  voice  was  past,  Jesus  was  found  alone ;  and  they 
kept  it  close,  and  told  no  man  in  4hose  days,  any  of  those 
things  which  they  had  seen."  If  we  compare  this  with  the 
account  v^ich  the  other  evangelists  give  of  our  blessed  Lord*s 
transfiguration,  you  will  find  this  was  done  by  Christ's  order : 
Peter,  James,  and  John,  would  otherwise  have  gone  down  and 
told  the  Mrhole  world,  that  they  had  seen  the  Lord  Christ  upon 
the  mount  of  transfiguration ;  but  our  Lord  ordered  them  to 
keep  it  silent.  Why  so?  If  they  had  gone  down  from  the 
mount,  and  told  it  to  the  other  disciples,  it  might  have  raised 
ill-blood  in  the  others ;  they  might  have  said.  Why  did  our 
Master  single  out  Peter,  James,  and  John  ?  Why  might  not 
we  have  had  the  privilege  of  going  up  to  the  mount  as  well  as 
they?  Had  they  said,  that  their  Lord  was  transfigured, 
people  would  not  have  believed  them;  they  would  have 
thought,  that  Peter,  James,  and  John  were  only  enthusiasts ; 
but  if  they  kept  it  till  after  his  resurrection,  and  he  had  broken 
the  f[ates  of  death,  for  them  then  to  say,  that  they  saw  him 
upon  the  mount  transfigured,  would  corroborate  the  evidence. 

I  have  thus  para^rased  the  words  for  your  better  under- 
standing the  account  the  evangelist  gives  of  our  blessed  Lord's 
transfiguration ;  but  I  have  not  yet  done :  I  have  been  speak- 
ing to  your  beads ;  the  practical  part  is  yet  to  come.  O  that 
God  may  reach  your  hearts !  And  though,  according;, to  order, 
I  ought  to  begin  with  the  practical  inferences  that  might  be 
drawn  from  the  first  P^rt ;  yet,  I  think  it  best  to  shew  you, 
who  are  the  people  of  God,  especially  you  young  converts,  that 
have  honesty,  but  not  much  prudence,  what  instructions  our 
Lord  would  here  have  you  to  leatn. 

^When  the  voice  was  past,  Jesus  was  found  alone,  and 
tfaey  kept  it  close,  and  told  no  man  in  those  days  any  of  those 
things  Whicfa  they  had  seen."  There  is  nothing  more  common, 
wlien  €k>d  voudisafes  communicatioi^s  to  a  poor  soul,  than  for 


360  Christ's  transfiguration.  [xxx. 

the  person  that  enjoys  them,  to  go  and  tell  all  that  he  has 
seen  and  felt,  and  often  at  improper  seasons  and  to  improper 
persons.  I  remember  that  Mr.  Henry  observes,  '^Joseph  had 
more  honesty  than  he  had  policy,  or  else  he  would  never  have 
told  his  brethren  of  his  dreams."  Young  Christians  are  apt  too 
blunder  thus :  I  am  sure,  it  is  a  fault  of  which  I  have  been 
exceedingly  guilty, — speaking  of  things  which,  perhaps,  had 
better  been  concealed ;  \yhich  is  a  fault  God's  people  are  too 
apt  to  fall  into.  Though  it  is  good  for  those  that  have  seen 
Christ,  and  that  have  felt  his  love,  to  tell  others  what  God 
hath  done  for  their  souls ;  yet,  however  you  may  think  of  it 
now,  when  you  come  down  from  the  mount,  and  know  your- 
selves a  little,  ye  will  find  reason  often  to  hold  your  tongue. 
Young  Christians  are  like  children,  to  whom  if  you  give  a  little 
money  in  their  pocket,  they  cannot  be  quiet  till  they  have 
spent  it  upon  something  or  other :  young  Christians,  when  they 
get  a  little  of  God,  are  ready  to  talk  too  much  of  it.  They 
should  therefore  beware,  and  know  wheri  to  speak,  and  when 
to  be  silent. 

But,  my  dear  friends,  did  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  take  Peter, 
James,  and  John  into  a  mountain  to  pray  ?  Are  any  of  you 
fathers,  mothers,  masters  and  mistresses  of  families?  Learn 
then  from  hence  to  take  your  children,  your  servants,  and 
those  that  belong  to  you,  from  the  world,  at  certain  times,  and 
not  only  pray  for  them,  but  pray  with  them.  If  Christ  did 
thus,  who  had  few  wants  of  his  own  to  be  supplied,  and 
nothing  to  confess  and  lament  over ;  if  Christ  were  such  a 
lover  of  prayer,  surely,  you  and  I,  who  have  so  many  wants  to 
be  supplied,  so  many  corruptions  to  mourn  over ;  you  and  I 
should  spend  much  time  in  prayer.  I  do  not  say  that  you  are 
to  lock  yourselves  up  in  your  closets,  and  not  mind  your  shops, 
or  farms,  or  worldly  business ;  I  only  say,  that  you  should  take 
care  to  husband  all  your  time:  and  if  you  are  God's  children, 
you  will  frequently  retire  from  the  world,  and  seek  a  visit  from 
your  God. 

Was  the  Lord  Jesus  transformed  or  transfigured,  while  he 
was  praying?  Learn  hence,  to  be  much  in  spiritual  prayer. 
The  way  to  have  the  soul  transformed,  changed  into,  and 
made  like  unto  God,  is  frequently  to  converse  with  God.  We 
say,  a  man  is  as  his  company.  Persons  by  conversing  toge- 
ther frequently  catch  each  others  tempers :  and  if  you  have 
a  mind  to  imbibe  the  divine  temper,  pray  much.  And  as  Christ's 
garments  became  white  and  glistering,  so  shall  your  souls  get  a 
little  of  God's  light  to  shine  upon  them. 

Did  Moses  and  Elias  appear  in  glory  ?  Are  there  any  old 
saints  here  ?  I  doubt  not  but  there  are  a  considerable  number. 
And  are  any  of  you  afraid  of  death?  Do  any  of  you  carry 
about  with  you  a  body  that  weighs  down  your  immortal  souJ  I 
I  am  sure  a  poor  creature  is  preaching  to  you,  that  every 
day  drags  a  crazy  load  along.  But  come,  believers,  come«  ye 
children  of  God,  come,  ye  aged  decrepit  saints,  come  and 


XXX.]  CHRIST'S  TRANSFIGURATION.  QSl 

trample  apon  that  monster  death.  As  thou  goest  over  yonder 
diarch-yard^  do,  as  I  know  an  old  excellent  Christian  in  Mary- 
land did ;  go,  sit  upon  the  grave,  and  meditate  on  thine  own  dis- 
solution. Thou  mayest,  perhaps,  have  a  natural  fear  of  dying: 
the  body  and  the  soul  do  not  care  to  part  without  a  little  sym- 
pathy and  a  groan  ;  but,  O  look  yonder,  look  up  to  heaven,  see 
there  thy  Jesus,  thy  Redeemer,  and  learn  that  thy  body  is  to 
be  fashioned  hereafter  like  unto  Christ's  most  glorious  body : 
that  poor  body  which  is  now  subject  to  gout  and  gravel,  and 
that  thou  canst  scarce  drag  along;  that  poor  body,  which 
hinders  thee  so  much  in  the  spiritual  life,  will  ere  long  hinder 
thee  no  more ;  it  shall  be  put  into  the  grave :  but  though  it  be 
sown  in  corruption,  it  shall  be  raised  in  incorruption ;  though 
it  be  sown  in  dishonour,  it  shall  be  raised  again  in  glory.  This 
consideration  made  blessed  Paul  to  cry  out,  '*  O  death,  where  is 
thy  sting !  O  grave,  where  is  thy  victory !"  Thy  soul  and 
body  shall  be  united  together  again,  and  thou  shalt  be  ''for 
ever  with  the  Lord."  Those  knees  of  thine,  which  perhaps 
are  hard  by  kneeling  in  prayer ;  that  tongue  of  thine,  which 
bath  sung  hymns  to  Christ ;  those  hands  of  thine,  which  have 
wrought  for  God  ;  those  feet,  which  have  run  to  Christ's  ordi- 
nances ;  'shall  all,  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  be  changed  ;  and 
thou  shalt  be  able  to  stand  under  an  exceeding  and  an  eternal 
weight  of  glory.  Come  then,  ye  believers  in  Christ,  look 
beyond  the  grave ;  come,  ye  dear  children  of  God,  and  however 
weak  and  sickly  ye  are  now,  say.  Blessed  be  God,  I  shall  soon 
have  a  body  strong,  full  of  vigour  and  of  glory 

But  as  this  speaks  comfort  to  saints,  it  speaks  terror  to 
sinners,  to  all  persons  that  live  and  die  out  of  Christ.  It  is 
the  opinion  of  archbishop  Usher,  that  as  the  bodies  of  the 
saints  shall  be  glorified,  so  the  bodies  of  the  damned  shall  be 
deformed.  And  if  this  be  true,  alas !  what  a  poor  figure  will  the 
fine  ladies  cut,  who  die  without  a  Christ !  What  a  poor  figure 
will  the  fine  gentleman  cut,  in  the  morning  of  the  resurrection, 
that  now  dresses  up  his  body,  and  at  the  same  time  neglects 
to  secure  an  interest  in  Christ,  and  eternal  happiness !  It  is 
the  opinion,  likewise,  of  archbishop  Usher,  that  damned  souls 
will  lose  all  the  good  tempers  they  had  here :  so  that  though  God 
gave  unregenerate  people  a  constitutional  meekness,  good 
nature,  and  courage,  for  the  benefit  of  the  commonwealth ;  yet, 
the  use  of  these  things  being  over,  and  they  having  died  with- 
out Christ,  and  it  being  impossible  there  will  be  an  appearance 
of  good  in  hell,  their  good  tempers  will  be  for  ever  lost.  If 
this  be  so,  it  is  an  awful  consideration  ;  and  I  think  persons 
who  love  their  bodies,  should  also  hence  take  care  to  secure  the 
wolfare  of  their  souls. 

Did  Peter  know  which  was  Moses  and  which  Elias  ?  Then 
f  think,  and  God  be  praised  for  it,  it  is  plain  from  this  and 
other  passages  of  scripture,  that  we  shall  know  one  another 
when  we  come  to  heaven.  Dives  knew  Lazarus :  **  Father 
Abraham,  send  Lazarus:"  and  we  are  told,  ''he  saw  Lazarus 


^1^  ohrist's  transfiguration.  [xxx. 

Kitting  In  Abraham's  bosom/^  Adam  knew  bis  wife  Eye; 
tboti^  cast  into  a  deep  sleep  when  God  made  her  out  of  bis  rib> 
yet^  by  a  kind  of  intiiition,  he  says,  *'  This  is  bone  of  my  bono, 
and  flesh  of  my  flesh."  And  it  is  on  this  account,  that  the 
apostle,  speaking  to  the  Philippians,  says,  "  Ye  are  my  joy 
and  crown  of  rejoicing,  in  the  day  of  the  Lord."  What  com- 
fort will  this  be  to  a  spiritual  father !  Says  one.  Here  is  the 
man,  O  Lord  Jesus,  that  brought  my  soul  to  taste  of  thy  love ; 
8ays  another.  This  is  the  man,  that  at  such  a  time,  and  with 
such  words,  struck  my  heart:  thou,  O  Lord,  knowcst  it.  Then 
the  spiritual  father  will  reioice  over  his  children.  You  that 
have  met  and  have  prayed  together,  sighed  and  sympathized 
together,  and  told  your  temptations  to  one  another,  shall  be  for 
ever  with  the  Lord  and  with  each  other.  There  we  shall  see 
Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob  sitting,  with  all  the  redeemed 
company ;  and  we  shall  know  the  names  of  every  one  men- 
tioned in  the  book  of  God.  O  blessed  pfx)spect!  O  blessed 
lime!  Who  that  thinks  of  this,  of  seeing  the  Lamb  sit- 
ting upon  the  throne,  with  all  God's  people  about  him,  bnt 
must  desire  to  go  to  heaven,  and  be  for  ever,  for  ever  with 
the  Lord  ? 

And  if  there  be  such  comfort  for  believers  to  know  one  another 
In  heaven,  with  what  comfort  may  any  of  you,  that  have  last 
fathers,  mothers, or  friends,  think  of  them:  we  are  parted  for  a 
little  while,  but  we  shall  see  them  again.  My  father  died  io 
Christ,  my  mother  died  in  the  Lord,  my  husband,  my  wife, 
•  was  a  follower  of  Jesus ;  I  shall  see  them,  though  not  now ; 
I  shall  go  to  them,  but  they  shall  not  return  to  me !  This  may 
keep  you  from  sorrowing  as  persons  without  hope ;  and  keep 
you  from  being  so  cruel,  as  to  wish  them  to  come  down  to  this 
evil  world. 

But  O  what  a  dreadful  consideration  is  this  for  dasaed 
souls!  I  believe,  that  a«  glorified  spirits  will  know  one 
another,  so  will  damned  scmLs  know  one  another  too.  And  as 
the  company  of  the  blessed  increases  the  happiness  of  beaven, 
so  the  company  of  the  damned  will  increase  their  tonnents. 
What 4nade  Dives  to  put  up  that  petition?  •' I  have  five  bre- 
thren; send  somebody  to  my  father's  .house,  to  testify  unto 
them,  lest  they  also  come  into  this  place  oi  torment.'*  One 
would  imagine  at  first  reading,  that  hell  had  made  Dives  cha- 
ritable, and  that  though  he  was  ill-natured  on  earth,  yei  he  bad 
acquired  some  good  nature  in  hell.  No,  no,  there  is  not  a 
spark  of  good  nature  in  the  place  of  torment.  Dut  Divrs 
knew,  if  his  five  brethren  came  there,  they  might  say,  Wc  may 
thank  you,  next  to  an  evil  heart,  for  coming  hither ;  yon  made 
us  drink  healths  till  we  were  dnink ;  you  taught  us  to  game, 
to  curse,  to  swear,  &c.  He  knew  very  well,  that  his  five  bre- 
thren being  brought  to  hell  by  his  example,  bell  would  be 
heated  five  times  hotter  to  torment  his  soul.  One  will  cry  out. 
Cursed  be  the  day  that  ever  I  was  companion  with  such  an  one 
in  sin ;  cursed  be  the  day  that  ever  we  hearkened  to  fine  aa- 


:«]  0HR1ST*S  TftAKSFlGUftATION. 

other's  advice,  and  were  allnred  by  each  other's  example  to  sin 
against  God. 

Bat  did  a  cloud  overshadow  Peter,  James,  and  John  ?  Were 
heavenly  and  divine  visits,  here,  but  short  ?  Then  wonder  not,  ye 
people  of  God,  if  ye  are  upon  the  mount  one  hour,  and  down  in 
the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death  the  next.  There  is  nothing  in 
tile  woild  more  common,  after  you  have  been  in  a  good  frame, 
tbao  for  a  cloud  to  overshadow  you.  We  generally  say,  "  It  is 
gpod  to  be  here,"  and  often  make  a  Christ  of  our  graces  ;  and  there* 
fore  the  Lord  sends  a  cloud  to  overshadow  us.  But  never  fear ; 
God  shall  speak  to  you  out  of  the  clond  ;  God  will  reveal  himself 
lo  you  :  this  cloud  shall  soon  be  gone ;  ere  long  we  shall  be  w 
heayen,  and  in  that  glory  where  no  power  can  possibly  reach  us. 

I  caa  now  only  mention  one  thing  more,  and  that  is,  Did  the  Fa* 
ther  say,  ''This  is  my  beloved  Son,  hear  liim?"  Then  let  every 
una  of  oar  hearts  echo  to  this  testimony  given  oi  Christ,  ''This 
if  my  beloved  Saviour."  Did  God  so  love  the  world,  as  to  send 
bis  only  begotten  Son,  his  well-beloved  Son,  to  preach  to  ns? 
Then,  my  dear  friends,  hear  Him.     What  God  said,  seventeen 
hundred  years  ago,  immediately  by  a  voice  from  heaven,  con^ 
oeming  his  Son,  upon  the  mount,  that  same  thing  God  says  to 
you  immediately  by  his  word,  "  Hear  him."     If  yo  never  heard 
him  before  hear  him  now.   Hear  him,  so  as  to  take  him  to  be  your 
prophot,  priest,  and  your  king ;  hear  him,  so  as  to  take  him  to 
be  yonr  God  and  your  all.     Hear  him  to-day,  ye  youth,  while 
it  is  called  to-day  ;  hear  him  now,  lest  God  should  cut  you  off 
before  you  have  another  invitation  ^  to  hear  him ;    hear  him 
while  be  cries, ''  Come  unto  me  ;"  hear  him  while  he  opens  his 
hand  and  his  heart  ;  hear  him  while  he  knocks  at  the  door 
of  your  souls,  lest  yon  should  hear  him   saying,   ^'  Depart, 
depart,  ye  cursed,  into  the  everlasting  fire  prepared  for   the 
devil  and  his  angels."     Hear  him,  ye  old  and  grey-headed ; 
bear  him,  ye  that  have  one  foot  in  the  grave ;  hear  him,  I  say : 
and  if  ye  are  dull  of  hearing,  beg  of  God  to  open  the  ears  of 
T#«T  hearts,  and  your  blind  eyes ;  beg  of  God  that  you  may 
have  an  enlarged  and  a  believing  heart,  and  that  ye  may  know 
wked  the  Lord  God  saith  concerning  you.    God  will  resent  it,: 
hit  will  avenge  himself  on  bis  adversaries,  if  you  do  not  hear 
a  blessed  Saviour.     He  is  God's  Son,  he  is  God's  beloved  Son ; 
be  came  upon  a  great  errand,  even  to  shed  his  precious  blood 
br  ainoers ;  he  came  to  cleanse  you  from  all  sin,  and  to  save 
feo  with  an  everlasting  salvation.    Ye  who  have  heard  him, 
beK  him  again ;  still  go  on,  believe  in,  and  obey  him,  and  by 
and  by  you  shall  hear  him  saying,  *^  Come,  ye  blessed  of  my 
l^h^,  receive  the  kingdom  prepared  for  you  from  the  founda- 
tion of  the  world."     May  God  grant  it  to  you  all,  for  the  Iiord 
leeiM  Christ's  sake.    Araeny  and  Amen. 


864  THB  CARB   OF  THE  SOUL  URGED  [XXXI. 

SERMON  XXXI. 

THE  CARB  OP  THB  SOUL  URGED  AS  THE  ONE  THING 

NEEDFUL. 

But  one  thing  is  neetlfuL — Luke  x.  42. 

It  was  the  amiable  character  of  our  blessed  Redeemer,  that  **  be 
went  about  doings  good  ;"  this  great  motive,  which  animated  all 
his  actions,  brought  him  to  the  house  of  his  friend  Lazarus  at 
Bethany,  and  directed  his  behaviour  there.  Though  it  was  a 
season  of  recess  from  public  labour,  our  Lord  brought  the  senti- 
ments and  the  pious  cares  of  a  preacher  of  righteousness  into  the 
parlour  of  a  friend ;  and  there  his  doctrine  dropped  as  the  rain, 
and  distilled  as  the  dew,  on  the  little  happy  circle  that  were 
then  surrounding  him.  Mary,  the  sister  of  Lazarus,  with  great 
delight  made  one  amongst  them ;  she  seated  herself  at  the  feet 
of  Jesus  in  the  posture  of  an  humble  disciple;  and  we  have  a 
great  deal  of  reason  to  believe,  that  Martha,  his  other  sister, 
would  gladly  have  been  with  her  there;  but  domestic  caies 
pressed  hard  upon  her,  and  she  ^*  was  cumbered  with  much 
serving,''  being  perhaps  too  solicitous  to  prepare  a  sumptuous 
entertainment  for  her  heavenly  Master,  and  the  train  that  at- 
tended him.  Happy  are  they,  who,  in  a  crowd  of  business,  do 
not  lose  something  of  the  spirituality  of  their  minds,  and  of  the 
composure  and  sweetness  of  their  tempers.  This  good  woman 
comes  to  our  Lord  with  too  impatient  a  complaint ;  insinaatinf 
some  little  reflection,  not  only  on  Mary,  but  on  himself  too. 
''Lord,  dost  thou  not  care  that  my  sister  hath  left  me  to  serve 
alone?  Bid  her  therefore,  that  she  help  me."  Our  Lord,  will- 
ing to  take  all  opportunities  of  suggesting  useful  thoughts, 
answers  her  in  these  words,  of  which  the  text  is  a  part,  **  Mar- 
tha, Martha,  thou  art  careful  and  troubled  about  many  things, 
but  one  thing  is  needful ;  and  Mary  has  chosen  that  good  part, 
which  shall  not  be  taken  away  from  her."  Alas,  Martha !  tbd 
concerns  of  the  soul  are  of  so  much  greater  importance  thaa 
those  of  the  body,  that  I  caunot  blame  your  sister  on  this  occa- 
sion :  I  rather  recommend  her  to  your  imitation,  and  caution  you, 
and  all  my  other  friends,  to  be  much  on  your  guard,  that  in  the 
midst  of  your  worldly  cares,  you  do  not  lose  sight  of  what  nmck 
better  deserves  your  attention. 

I  shall  consider  these  words, ''  One  thing  is  needful,"  as  a 
kind  of  aphorism,  or  wise  and  weighty  sentence,  which  dropped 
from  the  mouth  of  our  blessed  Redeemer,  and  is  evidently  wof^ 
thy  of  our  most  serioBs  regard.     I  shall, 

1.  Consider  what  we  are  to  understand  by  **  the  one  tUog^ 
here  spoken  of. 

IL  Shew  you  what  is  intended,  when  it  is  said  to  bemie'lhiBg 
needful. 

III.  Shew  how  justly  it  may  be  so  represented,  or  prove  that 
it  is,  indeed,  the  one  thing  needful.  And  then  conclude  with 
some  reflections. 


XXXI.]  A8  THE  ONE  THING   NEEDFUL.  855 

My  friends,  the  words  which  are  now  before  us,  are,  to  this 
day,  as  true  as  they  were  seventeen  hundred  years  ago.  Set 
your  hearts  to  attend  to  them.  O  that  yon  may,  by  divine 
grace,  be  awakened  to  hear  them  with  a  due  regard,  and  be  so 
impressed  with  the  plain  and  serious  things  which  are  now  to 
be  spoken,  as  you  probably  would,  if  I  were  speaking  by  your 
dying  beds,  and  you  had  the  near  and  lively  view  of  eternity ! 

First,  I  am  to  consider,  what  we  are  to  understand  by  the 
''  one  thing  needful." 

Now,  in  a  few  words,  it  is  the  ''  Care  of  the  soul,**,  opposed, 
as  you  see  in  the  text,  to  the  care,  the  excessive  care,  of  the 
body  :  to  which  Martha  was  gently  admonished  by  our  Lord. 
This  is  a  general  answer,  and  it  comprehends  a  variety  of  im- 
portant particulars,  which  is  the  business  of  our  ministry  often 
to  open  to  you  at  large :  the  care  of  the  soul,  implies  a  readi- 
ness to  hear  the  words  of  Christ,  to  seat  ourselves  with  Mary 
at  bis  feet,  and  to  receive  both  the  law  and  the  gospel  from  his 
Biouth.  It  supposes,  that  we  learn  from  this  divine  Teacher  the 
worth  of  our  souls,  their  danger,^  and  their  remedy ;  and  that 
we  become  above  all  things  solicitous  about  their  eternal  salva- 
tion. That,  heartily  repenting  of  all  our  sins,  and  cordially  be- 
lieving the  everlasting  gospel,  we  receive  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
for  righteousness  and  life,  resting  our  souls  on  the  value  of  his 
atonement,  and  the  efficacy  of  his  grace.  It  imports  the  sincere 
dedication  of  ourselves  to  the  service  of  Grod,  and  a  faithful 
adherence  to  it,  notwithstanding  all  oppositions  arising  from 
inward  corruptions,  or  outward  temptations ;  and  a  resolute 
perseverance  in  the  way  of  gospel  dependence,  till  we  receive 
the  end  of  our  faith  in  our  complete  salvation.  This  is  the 
''one  thing  needful,"  represented  indeed  in  various  scriptures 
by  Tarious  names.  Sometimes  it  is  called  *'  regeneration,"  or 
**  the  new  creature,"  because  it  is  the  blessed  work  of  God's 
efficacious  grace.  Sometimes  the  '*  fear  of  Grod,"  and  some- 
limes  ''  his  love,  and  the  keeping  his  commandments  ;**  and  very 
liequently  in  the  New  Testament  it  is  called  ''  faith,"  or  **  re- 
oetving  Christ  and  believing  on  him,"  which  therefore  is  repre- 
sented as  the  "  great  work  of  God,"  John  vL  29.  the  great  thing 
irludi  God  in  his  glorious  gospel  requires,  as  well  as  by  bis  Spi- 
iSti  produces  in  us :  each  of  these,  if  righUy  understood  and  ex- 
l^ained,  comprehends  all  that  I  have  said  on  this  head.  On 
the  whole  we  may  say,  that  as  the  body  is  one,  though  it  has 
BNUiy  members,  and  the  soul  is  one,  though  it  has  many  facul- 
ties, so  in  the  present  case,  this  real  vital  religion  is  **  one  thing," 
one  sacred  principle  of  divine  life,  bringing  us  to  attend  to  the 
eare  of  our  souls,  as  of  oar  greatest  treasure.  It  is  one  thing, 
notwithstanding  all  the  variety  of  views  in  which  it  may  be  con- 
sidered/and  of  characters  under  which  it  may  be  described.  I 
proceed. 

Secondly,  To  consider  what  may  be  intended  in  the  represen- 
iation  which  is  here  made  of  it,  as  the  **  one  thing  needful.'* 

Now  I  think  it  naturally  includes  these  three  particulars : 

y2 


.956  THfi  CAIB   OP  THE  SOUL  URGED  [ZXXI. 

it  is  a  matter  of  universal  concern ;  of  the  highest  importance ; 
and  of  so  comprehensive  a  nature^  that  every  thing  which  Is 
truly  worthy  of  our  regard,  may  be  considered  as  included  in, 
or  subservient  to  it  Let  me  a  little  illustrate  each  of  these 
particulars. 

I.  The  care  of  the  soul  may  be  called  the  *^  one  thing  need- 
ful/' as  it  is  matter  of  universal  concern. 

Our  Lord,  you  see,  speaks  of  it  as  needful  in  the  general. 
He  says  not,  for  this  or  that  particular  person ;  or  for  those  of 
$uch  an  age,  station,  or  circumstance  in  life,  but  needful  for 
all.  And  indeed,  when  discoursing  on  such  a  subject,  one 
might  properly  introduce  it  with  those  solemn  words  of  the 
psalmist,  **  Give  ear,  all  ye  people,  hear,  all  ye  inhabitants  of 
the  earth,  both  high  and  low,  rich  and  poor,  together,"  Psalm 
xlix.  !•  2.  For  it  is  the  concern  of  all,  from  the  king  that  sits 
upon  the  throne,  to  the  servant  that  grindeth  at  the  mill,  or  the 
beggar  that  lieth  upon  the  dunghill.  It  is  needful  for  us  that 
are  ministers,  for  our  own  salvation  is  concerned :  and  woe, 
insupportable  woe,  will  be  to  our  souls,  if  we  think  it  enough 
to  recommend  it  to  others,  and  to  talk  of  it  in  a  warm,  or  an 
awful  manner,  in  public  assemblies,  or  in  our  private  converse, 
while  it  does  not  penetrate  our  hearts,  as  our  own  greatest 
care.  Our  case  will  then  be  like  that  of  the  Israelitisb  lord  in 
Samaria,  2  Kings  vii.  2.  who  was  employed  to  distribute  the 
corn  when  the  siege  was  raised ;  though  we  see  it  with  our 
eyes,  and  dispense  it  with  our  hands,  we  shall  ourselves  die 
miserably,  without  tasting  the  blessings  we  impart.  It  is 
needful  to  all  you  that  are  our  hearers,  without  the  exception 
of  one  single  person.  It  is  needful  to  you  that  are  rich, 
though  it  may  on  some  accounts  be  peculiarly  difficult  for  you; 
even  as  difficult,  comparatively  speaking,  as  for  a  "  camel  to 
go  through  the  eye  of  a  needle,"  Matt.  xix.  24.  yet  if  it  be 
neglected,  you  are  poor  in  the  midst  of  all  your  wealth,  and 
miserable  in  all  your  abundance ;  a  wretch  starving  for  hunger, 
in  a  magnificent  palace  and  a  rich  dress,  would  be  less  the 
object  of  compassion  than  you.  It  is  needful  for  yon  that  are 
poor ;  though  you  are  distressed  with  so  many  anxious  cares, 
**  what  you  shall  eat,  and  what  you  shall  drink,  and  where- 
withal you  shidl  be  clothed,"  Matt.  vi.  31.  The  nature  that 
makes  you  capable  o£  such  anxieties  as  these,  argues  your 
much  greater  concern  in  the  *^  bread  which  endureth  to  eternal 
life,"  John  vi.  27.  than  in  that  by  which  this  mortal  body 
must  be  supported.  It  is  needful  for  you  that  are  advanced 
in  years ;  though  your  strength  be  impaired  so  that  the  ''grass* 
hopper  is  a  burden,"  Eccles.  xii.  5.  and  though  you  have  by 
your  long  continuance  in  sin  rendered  this  great  work  so  hard, 
that  were  it  less  important,  one  would  in  pity  let  you  alone 
without  reminding  you  of  it :  yet,  late  as  it  is,  it  must  be  done, 
or  your  hoa^  beads  will  be  brought  down  to  the  grave  with 
wrath,  and  sink  under  a  curse  aggravated  by  every  year  and 
by  every  day  of  your  lives.     It  is  needful  to  you  that  are 


XXXI.]  AS  THB  ONE  THING   NBBDPtlL.  fyf 

yoong,  though  solicited  by  so  many  gay  Tanities,  to  neglect 
it;  though  it  maybe  represented  as  an  unseasonable  care  at 
present,  yet,  I  repeat  it,  it  is  needful  to  you :  immediately 
needful,  unless  you  vtho  walk  so  frequently  over  the  dust  of 
your  brethren  and  companions,  that  died  in  the  bloom  and 
Tigour  of  their  days,  have  made  some  secret  covenant  with  the 
grave  for  yourselves,  and  found  out  some  wonderful  method, 
hitherto  unknown,  of  securing  this  precarious  life,  and  of 
answering  for  days  and  months  to  come^  while  others  cannot 
answer  for  one  single  moment. 

2.  The  care  of  the  soul  is  '*  a  matter  of  the  highest  impor- 
tance ;"  beyond  any  thing  which  can  be  brought  into  compa- 
rison with  it. 

As  Solomon  says  of  wisdom,  that  ^'  it  is  more  precious  than 
rubies,  and  that  all  things  which  can  be  desired  are  not  to  be 
compared  with  her,"  Prov.  iii.  15.  So  I  may  properly  say  rf 
this  great  and  most  important  branch  of  wisdom ;  whatever 
can  be  laid  in  the  balance  with  it,  will  be  found  altogether 
lighter  than  vanity.  This  is  strongly  implied  when  it  is  said 
in  the  text,  "one  thing  is  needful ;"  one  thing,  and  one  thing 
alone  is  so.  Just  as  the  blessed  God  is  said  to  be  ''only  wise/* 
1  Tim.  i.  17.  and  "  only  holy,"  Rev.  xv.  4.  because  the  w^»- 
dom  and  holiness  of  angels  and  men  is  as  nothing,  when  com- 
pared with  his.  What  seems  most  great  and  most  important 
in  life,  what  kings  and  senates,  what  the  wisest  and  greatest 
of  this  world,  are  employing  their  time,  th^ir  councils,  their 
pens,  their  labours,  upon,  are  trifles,  when  compared  with  this 
one  thing.  A  man  may  subsist,  he  may  in  some  considerable' 
measure  be  happy,  without  learning,  without  riches,  without 
titles,  without  health,  without  liberty,  without  friends,  nay, 
though  "  the  life  be  more  than  meat,  and  the  body  than  rai- 
ment," Matt.  vi.  25.  yet  may  he  be  happy,  unspeakably  happy, 
without  the  body  itself.  But  he  cannot  be  so,  in  the  neglect  of 
the  one  thing  needful.  I  must  therefore  bespeak  your  regard  to 
it  in  the  words  of  Moses^  **  It  is  not  a  light  thing,  but  it  is  your 
life,"  Deut.  xxxii.  47. 

3.  The  care  of  the  soul  is  of  so  comprehensive  a  nature,  that 
"every  thing  truly  worthy  of  our  regard  may  be  considered  as 
included  in  it,  or  subservient  to  it." 

As  David  observes,  that  'Mhe  commandment  of  God  is 
exceeding  broad,"  Psalm  cxix.  96.  so  we  may  say  of  this  one 
thing  needful ;  or,  as  Solomon  very  justly  and  emphatically 
expresses  it,  **  to  fear  God  and  to  keep  his  commandments  is 
the  whole  duty  of  man,"  Eccles.  xii.  13.  his  whole  duty,  and 
his  whole  interest ;  and  every  thing  which  is  wise  and  rational, 
does  in  its  proper  place  and  connexion  make  a  part  of  it*  We 
should  judge  very  ill  concerning  the  nature  of  this  care,  if  we 
imagined,  that  it  consisted  merely  in  acts  of  devotion,  or  reli-^ 
gions  contemplation ;  it  comprehends  all  the  lovely  and  har- 
monions  band  of  social  and  humane  virtues.  It  requires  a 
<Me  of  society,  a  care  of  our  bodies,  atid  of  our  temporal 


356  THE  CARB  OP  THE  SOUL  UROBD  [XXXf 

concerns ;  but  then  all  is  to  be  regulated,  directed,  and  ani* 
mated  by  proper  regards  to  God,  Christ,  and  immortality. 
Onr  food  and  our  rest,  our  trades  and  our  labours,  are  to  be 
attended  to,  and  all  the  offices  of  humanity  performed  in  obe- 
dience to  the  will  of  God,  for  the  glory  of  Christ,  and  in  a  Tiew 
to  improving  the  mind  in  a  growing  meetness  lor  a  state  of 
complete  perfection.  Name  any  thing  which  has  no  reference 
at  all  to  this,  and  you  name  a  worthless  trifle,  however  it  may 
be  gilded  to  allure  the  eye,  or  however  it  may  be  sweetened  to 
gratify  the  taste.  Name  a  thing,  which,  instead  of  thus  im* 
proving  the  soul,  has  u  tendency  to  debase  and  pollute,  to 
enslave  and  endanger  it,  and  you  name  what  is  most  unpro- 
fitable and  mischievous,  be  the  wages  of  iniquity  ever  so  great; 
most  foul  and  deformed,  be  it  in  the  eyes  of  men  ever  so 
honourable,  or  in  their  customs  ever  so  fashionable.  Thus  I 
have  endeavoured  to  shew  you  what  we  may  suppose  implied 
in  this  expression  of  ^*  one  thing  being  needful."     I  am  now. 

Thirdly,  To  shew  yon  with  how  much  propriety  the  care  of 
the  soul  may  be  represented  under  this  character,  as  the  one 
thing  neediiil,  or  as  a  matter  of  universal  and  most  serious 
concern,  to  which  every  thing  else  is  to  be  considered  as  sub- 
servient,  if  at  all  worthy  of  our  care  and  pursuit. 

There  let  me  appeal  to  the  sentiments  of  those  who  must  be 
allowed  most  capable  of  judginsr,  and  to  the  evident  reason  of 
the  case  itself,  as  it  must  appear  to  every  unprejudiced  mind. 

1.  Let  me  argue  ''  from  the  opinions  of  those  who  must  be 
allowed  most  capable  of  judging  in  such  an  affair,"  and  we  shall 
quickly  see  that  the  care  of  the  soul  appears  to  them,  the  one 
thing  needful. 

Is  the  judgment  of  the  blessed  God  *'  according  to  tnith,^' 
how  evidently  and  how  solemnly  is  that  judgment  declared, 
I  will  not  say  merely  in  this  or  the  other  particular  passage  of 
his  word,  but  in  the  whole  series  of  his  revelations  to  the  chil- 
dren of  men,  and  the  whole  tenor  of  his  addresses  to  then! 
Is  not  this  the  language  of  all,  from  the  early  days  of  Job  and 
Moses,  to  the  conclusion  of  the  canon  of  scripture,  Job  xxviii. 
21,  23,  28.  '*  If  wisdom  be  hid  from  the  eyes  of  all  the  living, 
surely  God  understandeth  the  way  thereof,  he  knoweth  the 
place  thereof;"  and  if  he  does,  it  is  plainly  pointed  out,  for 
*'  unto  man  he  still  saith,  Behold,  the  fear  of  the  Lord,  that  is 
wisdom ;  and  to  depa.rt  from  evil,  that  is  understanding."  By 
Moses  he  declared  to  the  Israelites,  that  '^  to  do  the  command- 
ments of  the  Lord  would  be  their  wisdom  and  their  under- 
standing in  the  sight  of  the  nations,  who  should  hear  bis  sta* 
tutes,  and  say.  Surely  this  is  a  wise  and  an  understanding 
people,"  Deut.  iv.  6.  When  he  had  raised  up  one  man  on  the 
throne  of  Israel,  with  the  character  of  the  wisest  that  ever 
lived  upon  the  face  of  the  earth,  he  chose  to  make  him  emi- 
nently a  teacher  of  this  great  truth.  And  though  now  all  that 
he  spoke  on  the  curious  and  less  concerning  subjects  of  natural 
philosophy  is  lost,  **  though  he  spake  of  trees  from  the  cedar 


XXXI.]  AS  THE  ONE  THING    NREDFITL.  859 

to  the  hyssop,  and  of  beasts,  and  of  fowls,  and  of  creeping 
things,  and  of  fishes,"  1  Kings  iv.  83.  that  saying  is  preserved 
in  which  he  testifies,  that  **  the  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  begin* 
ning  of  wisdom,"  Prov.  i.  7,  9,  10.  and  those  Proverbs,  in 
almost  every  line  of  which,  they  who  neglect  God  and  their 
own  souls,  are  spoken  of  as  fools,  as  if  that  were  the  most 
proper  signification  of  the  word,  while  the  religious  alone  are 
honoured  with  the  title  of  wise.  But  in  this  respect,  as  attest* 
ing  this  truth  in  the  name  of  God  and  in  his  own,  '^  a  greater 
than  Solomon  is  here." 

For  if  we  inquire  what  it  was  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
judged  to  be  the  one  thing  needful,  the  words  of  the  text  con- 
tain as  full  an  answer  as  can  be  imagined ;  and  the  sense  of 
them  is  repeated  in  a  very  lively  and  empbatical  manner,  in 
that  remarkable  passage,  wherein  our  Lord  not  only  declares 
his  own  judgment,  but  seems  to  appeal  to  the  consciences  of 
all,  as  obliged  by  their  own  secret  convictions  to  subscribe  to 
the  truth  of  it.  *'  What  is  a  man  profited,  if  he  gain  the  whole 
world,  and  lose  bis  own  soul  ?  or  what  shall  a  man  give  in 
exchange  for  his  soul?"  Matt.  xvi.  26.  If  it  were  once  lost, 
what  would  he  not  be  willing  to  give  to  redeem  it?  But  it 
depends  not  on  the  words  of  Christ  alone.  Let  his  actions, 
his  sufierings,  his  blood,  his  death,  speak  what  a  value  he  set 
on  the  souls  of  men.  Is  it  to  be  imagined,  that  he  would 
have  relinquished  heaven,  have  dwelt  upon  earth,  have 
laboured  by  night  and  by  day,  and  at  last  have  expired  on 
the  cross,  for  a  matter  of  light  importance  ?  Or  can  we  think 
that  he,  in  whom  "  dwell  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom  and 
knowledge,  and  all  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily,"  Col.  ii. 
8^  9.  was  mistaken  in  judgment  so  deliberately  formed,  and  so 
solemnly  declared  ? 

If»  after  this,  there  were  room  to  mention  human  judgment 
and  testimonies,  how  easy  would  it  be  to  produce  a  cloud  of 
witnesses  in  such  a  cause,  and  to  shew  that  the  wisest  and 
best  of  men  in  all  ages  of  the  world  have  agreed  in  this  point, 
that  amidst  all  the  diversities  of  opinion  and  profession,  which 
sacceeding  generations  have  produced,  this  has  been  the  una* 
lumoos  judgment,  this  the  common  and  most  solicitous  care* 
of  those  whose  characters  are  most  truly  valuable,  to  secure 
the  salvation  of  their  own  souls,  and  to  promote  the  solvation 
<€  others. 

And  let  me  beseech  you  seriously  to  reflect,  what  are  the 
characters  of  those  who  have  taken  the  liberty,  most  boldly 
and  freely,  to  declare  their  judgment  on  the  contrary  side?  The 
aambcr  of  such  is  comparatively  few ;  and  when  you  compare 
what  you  have  observed  of  their  temper  and  conduct,  I  will 
not  say  virith  what  you  read  of  holy  men  of  old,  but  with  what 
yofi  have  yourselves  seen  in  the  faithful,  active,  and  zealous 
servants  of  Christ,  in  these  latter  ages,  with  whom  you  hscve 
oooversed ;  do  you  on  the  whole  find,  that  the  rejecters  and 
denders  of  the  gospel,  are  in  other  respects  so  much  more 


TlCft  CARB  or  THE  SOUL  OKO&D  fxUXF. 

prndent  and  jodkioas,  so  much  wiser  for  themselves,  and  for 
Others,  that  are  ioflaenced  by  tbeniy  as  that  you  can  be  io  red* 
son  obliged  to  pay  any  great  deference  to  the  authority  of  a 
few  sncb  names  as  these,  in  opposition  to  those  to  whom  tbey 
are  here  opposed  ? 

But  you  will  say,  and  yon  will  say  it  too  tnily.  Though  but 
a  few  may  venture  in  words  to  declare  for  the  neglect  of  the 
soul  and  its  eternal  interest,  that  the  greater  part  of  mankind 
do  it  in  their  actions.  But  are  the  greater  part  of  mankind  so 
wise,  and  so  good,  as  implicitly  to  be  followed  in  matters  of 
the  highest  importance?  And  do  not  multitudes  of  these 
declare  themselves  on  the  other  side,  in  their  most  serious 
moments  ?  When  the  intoxications  of  worldly  business  and 
pleasures  are  over,  and  some  languishing  sickness  forces  men 
to  solitude  and  retirement ;  what  have  you  generally  observed 
to  be  the  effect  of  such  a  circumstance  ?  Have  they  not  then 
declared  themselves  convinced  of  the  truth  we  are  now 
labouring  to  establish  T  Nay,  do  we  not  sometimes  see,  that 
a  distemper  which  seizes  the  mind  with  violence,  yet  does  not 
fitterly  destroy  its  reasoning  faculties,  fixes  this  conviction  on 
the  soul  in  a  few  hours,  nay,  sometimes  in  a  few  moments? 
Have  you  never  seen  a  gay,  thoughtless  creature,  surprised  in 
the  giddy  round  of  pleasures  and  amusements,  and  presently 
brought  not  only  to  seriousness,  but  terror  and  trembling,  by 
the  near  views  of  death  ?  Have  you  never  seen  the  man  of 
business  and  care  interrupted,  like  the  rich  fool  in  the  parable, 
in  the  midst  of  his  schemes  for  the  present  world  ?  And  have 
you  not  heard  one  and  the  other  of  them  owning  the  vanity  of 
those  pleasures  and  cares,  which  but  a  few  days  ago  were 
every  thing  to  them? — confessing  that  religion  was  the  one 
thing  needful,  and  recommending  it  to  others  with  an  earnest- 
ness, as  if  they  hoped  thereby  to  atone  for  their  own  former 
neglect?  We  that  are  ministers,  frequently  are  witnesses  to 
such  things  as  these,  and  I  believe  few  of  our  hearers  are  entire 
strangers  to  them. 

Once  more :  What  if  to  the  testimony  of  the  dying,  we  could 
add  that  of  the  dead  ?  What  if  God  were  to  turn  aside  the  vail 
between  us  and  the  invi^ble  world,  and  permit  the  most  care- 
less sinner  in  the  assembly  to  converse  for  a  few  moments  with 
the  inhabitants  of  it?  If  you  were  touapply  yourself  to  a  happy 
spirit,  that  trod  the  most  thorny  road  to  paradise,  or  passed 
through  the  most  fiery  trial,  and  to  ask  him,  '^  Was  it  worth  your 
while  to  labour  so  much,  and  to  endure  so  much,  for  what  yon 
now  possess?"  Surely,  if  the  blessed  in  heaven  were  capable 
of  indignation,  it  would  move  them  to  hear  that  it  should  be 
made  a  question.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  if  you  could  inquire 
of  one  tormented  in  that  flame  below,  though  he  might  once  be 
''  clothed  in  purple  and  fine  linen,  and  fare  sumptuously  every 
day,"  Luke  xvi*  19.  ii'  you  could  ask  him,  *'  Whether  his  former 
enjoyments  were  an  equivalent  for  his  present  suffering  and 
despair?"    What  answer  do  you  suppose  be  would  return? 


XXXI.]  AS  THB  ONB  THING   NEBDFUL.  Mt 

Perhaps  an  answer  of  so  much  horror  and  rage^  as  yon  would 
tiot  be  able  so  much  as  to  endare.  Or  if  the  malignity  of  his 
nature  should  prevent  him  from  returning  any  answer  at  all^ 
sorely  there  would  be  a  language  even  in  that  silence,  a  Ian- 
gasige  in  the  darkness,  and  flames,  and  groans  of  that  infernal 
prison,  which  would  speak  to  your  very  soul  what  the  word  of 
Gk>d  is  with  equal  certainty,  though  less  forcible  conviction, 
speaking  to  your  ear,  that  ''  one  thing  is  needful."  You  see  it 
is  so  in  the  judgment  of  God  the  Father,  and  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  of  the  wisest  and  best  of  men,  of  many,  who  seemed  to 
judge  most  differently  of  it,  when  they  come  to  more  deliberate 
and  serious  thought,  and  not  only  of  the  dying,  but  of  the  dead 
too,  of  those  who  have  experimentally  known  both  worlds,  and 
most  surely  know  what  it  is  to  be  preferred.  But  I  will  not 
rest  the  whole  argument  here ;  therefore, 
'  2.  I  appeal  to  the  evident  reason  of  the  case  itself,  as  it  must 
appear  to  every  unprejudiced  mind,  that  the  care  of  the  soul  is 
indeed  the  one  thing  needful 

I  still  consider  myself  as  speaking  not  to  atheists,  or  to  deists, 
but  to  those  who  not  only  believe  the  existence  and  providence 
of  God,  and  a  future  state  of  happiness  and  misery,  but  likewise 
who  credit  the  truth  of  the  Christian  revelation,  as  many  un* 
doobtedly  do,  who  live  in  a  fatal  neglect  of  Gk>d,  and  their  own 
souls.  Now,  on  these  principles^  a  little  reflection  may  be  suffi- 
cient to  convince  you,  that  it  is  needful  to  the  present  repose  of 
your  own  mind ;  needful,  if  ever  you  would  secure  eternal  hap- 
piness; and  avoid  eternal  misery,  which  will  be  aggravated, 
rather  than  alleviated,  by  all  your  present  enjoyments. 

1.  The  care  of  the  soul  is  the  one  thing  needful,  because, 
"  without  it  you  cannot  secure  the  peace  of  your  own  mind,  nor 
avoid  the  upbraidiugs  of  your  conscience." 

That  noble  faculty  is  indeed  the  vicegerent  of  God  in  the  soul. 
It  is  sensible  of  the  dignity  and  worth  of  an  immortal  spirit,  and 
will  sometimes  cry  out  of  the  violence  that  is  offered  to  it,  and 
cry  so  loud,  as  to  compel  the  sinner  to  hear,  whether  he  will  or 
not.  Do  you  not  sometimes  And  it  yourselves?  When  you 
labour  most  to  forget  the  concerns  of  your  soul,  do  they  not 
sometimes  force  themselves  on  your  remembrance  ?  You  are 
afraid  of  the  reflections  of  your  own  mind^  but,  with  all  your 
artifice  and  all  your  resolution,  can  you  entirely  avoid  them  ? 
Does  not  conscience  follow  you  to  your  beds,  even  if  denied  the 
opportunity  of  meeting  you  in  your  closets,  and,  though  with 
an  unwelcome  voice,  there  warn  you,  **  that  your  soul  is  neg- 
lected, and  will  quickly  be  lost."  Does  it  not  follow  you  to 
your  shops  and  your  fields,  when  you  are  busiest  there  ?  Nay, 
I  will  add,  does  it  not  sometimes  follow  you  to  the  feast,  to  the 
club,  to  the  dance,  and  perhaps,  amidst  all  resistance,  to  the 
theatre  too?  Does  it  not  sometimes  mingle  your  sweetest 
draughts  with  wormwood,  and  your  gayest  scenes  with  horror? 
So  that  you  are  like  a  tradesman,  who,  suspecting  his  affairs  to 
ke  in  a  bad  posture,  lays  by  his  books  and  his  papers,  yet  some-^ 


862  TBB  CARE  OF  THK  SOUL  CURBD.  [XXXf. 

times  they  will  come  accidentally  in  his  way.  He  hardly  darei 
to  look  abroad  for  fear  of  meeting  a  creditor  or  an  arrest ;  and 
if  he  labour  to  forget  his  cares  and  his  dangers  in  a  course  of 
luxury  at  home»  the  remembrance  is  sometimes  awakened,  and 
the  alarm  increased,  by  those  very  extravagances  in  which  he 
is  attempting  to  lose  it.  Such  probably  is  the  case  of  yoar 
minds,  and  it  is  a  very  painful  state ;  and  while  things  are  thus 
within,  external  circumstances  can  no  more  make  you  happy, 
than  a  fine  dress  could  relieve  you  under  a  violent  fit  of  stone. 
Whereas,  if  this  great  aflfair  were  secured,  you  might  delight  in 
reflection,  as  much  as  you  now  dread  it ;  and  conscience,  of 
your  bitterest  enemy,  would  become  a  delightful  friend,  and  the 
testimony  of  it  your  greatest  rejoicing. 

2.  The  care  of  the  soul  is  the  one  thing  needful,  because 
'*  without  this  your  happiness  will  be  lost.'' 

A  crown  of  everlasting  glory  is  not  surely  such  a  trifle  as  to 
be  thrown  away  on  a  careless  creature,  that  will  not  in  good 
earnest  pursue  it.  God  doth  not  ordinarily  deal  thus,  even  with 
the  bounties  of  his  common  providence,  which  are  comparatively 
of  little  value.  As  to  these,  the  hand  of  the  diligent  generally 
makes  rich,  and  he  would  be  thought  distracted,  rather  than 
prudent,  who  should  expect  to  get  an  estate  merely  by  wishing 
for  it,  or  without  some  resolute  and  continued  application  to  a 
proper  course  of  action  for  that  purpose.  Now,  that  we  may 
not  foolbhly  dream  of  obtaining  heaven  in  the  midst  of  a  course 
of  indolence  and  sloth,  we  are  expressly  told  in  the  word  of  tiod, 
that  "  the  kingdom  of  heaven  suflers  violence,  and  the  violent 
take  it  by  force,"  Matt.  xi.  12.  and  are  therefore  exhorted  to 
*^  strive,"  with  the  greatest  intensencss  and  eagerness  of  mind, 
as  the  word  properly  signifies,  ''to  enter  in  at  the  strait  gate;" 
for  this  great  and  important  reason,  ''because  many  shall  another 
day  seek  to  enter  in,  and  shall  not  be  able,"  Lukj9  xiii.  24.  Nay, 
when  our  Lord  makes  the  most  gracious  promises  to  the  humble 
petitioner,  be  does  it  in  such  a  manner  as  to  exclude  the  hopes 
of  those  who  are  careless  and  indiflerent.  "Ask,  and  it  shall  be 
given  you;  seek,  and  you  shall  find;  knock,  and  it  shall  be 
opened  unto  you,"  Matt.  vii.  7.  If,  therefore,  you  do  not  ask, 
seek,  and  knock,  the  door  of  mercy  will  not  be  opened,  and 
eternal  happiness  will  be  lost.  Not  that  heaven  is  to  be  ob- 
tained by  our  own  good  works:  no,  no;  for  having  done  all, 
we  must  account  ourselves  unprofitable  servants. 

And  surely,  if  I  could  say  no  more  as  to  the  fatal  consequences 
of  your  neglect,  than  this,  that  eternal  happiness  will  be  lost,  I 
should  say  enouR^h  to  impress  every  mind,  that  considers  what 
eternity  means.  To  fall  into  a  state  of  everlasting  forgetfulness, 
might  indeed  appear  a  refuge  to  a  mind  filled  with  the  appre* 
hension  of  future  misery.  But  O  how  dreadful  a  refuge  is  it! 
Surely  it  is  such  a  refuge,  as  a  vast  precipice  (from  which  a 
man  falling  would  be  dashed  to  pieces  in  a  moment)  might  ap- 
pear to  a  person  pursued  by  the  officers  of  justice,  that  he 
might  be  brought  out  to  a  painful  and  lingering  execution.    If 


ZXOCI.]  AS  THB  ONE  THING   NBBDFUL. 

mu  extravagant  youth  would  have  reason  to  look  round  with 
mnguishy  on  some  fair  and  ample  paternal  inheritaQCO,  which  he 
had  sold  or  forfeited  merely  for  the  riot  of  a  few  davs :  how  much 
more  melancholy  would  it  be  for  a  rational  mind  to  think  that 
its  eternal  happiness  is  lost  for  any  earthly  consideration  what- 
ever? Tormenting  thought!  "Had  I  attended  to  that  one 
thing  which  I  have  neglected,  I  might  have  been,  through  the 
grace  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus,  great  and  happy  beyond  expres* 
sion,  beyond  conception :  not  merely  for  the  little  span  of  ten 
thousand  thousand  ages,  but  for  ever.  A  liuje  reaching  even  to 
the  remotest  star  would  not  have  been  able  to  contain  the  num- 
ber of  ages,  nor  would  millions  of  years  have  been  sufficient  to 
figure  them  down ;  this  is  eternity,  but  I  have  lost  it,  and  am 
BOW  on  the  verge  of  being.  This  lamp,  which  might  have  out* 
lasted  those  of  the  firmament,  will  presently  be  extinguished, 
and  I  blotted  out  from  amongst  the  works  of  God,  and  cut  off 
from  all  the  bounties  of  his  hand."  Would  not  this  be  a  very 
flriseraUe  case,  if  this  were  all  ?  And  would  it  not  be  sufficient  to 
prove  this  to  be  the  better  part,  which,  as  our  Lord  observes,  can 
"*  never  be  taken  away  ?"  But  God  forbid  that  we  should  be  so 
ttnfaithful  to  him,  and  to  the  souls  of  men,  as  Ho  rest  in  such  a 
^presentation  alone.     I  therefore  add  once  more, 

3.  The  care  of  the  soul  is  the  one  thing  needful,  because, 
"without  it  yon  cannot  avoid  a  state  of  eternal  misery,  which 
will  be  aggravated,  rather  than  alleviated  by  all  your  present  en* 
joyments."— Nothing  can  be  more  evident  from  the  word  of  the  God 
of  truth.  It  there  plainly  appears  to  be  a  determined  case,  which 
leaves  no  room  for  a  more  favourable  conjecture  or  hope.  "The 
wicked  shall  be  turned  into  hell,  even  all  the  nations  that  forget 
€rod/'  Ps.  ix.  17.  **  These  shall  go  away  into  everlasting  punish- 
ment/' Matt.  XXV.  46.  into  a  state  where  they  shall  in  vain  seek 
death,  and  death  shall  flee  from  them.  Oh !  brethren,  it  is  a 
eertain,  iiut  an  awful  truth,  that  your  souls  will  be  thinking  and 
iflimortal  beings,  even  in  spite  of  themselves.  They  may  indeed 
torment,  but  they  cannot  destroy  themselves.  They  can  no 
more  suspend  their  power  of  thought  and  perceptiou,  than  a 
Biirror  its  property  of  reflecting  rays  that  fall  on  its  surface.  Do 
you  suspect  the  contrary  ?  Make  the  trial  immediately.  Com* 
mand  your  minds  to  cease  from  thinking  but  for  one  quarter  of 
an  hour,  or  for  half  that  time,  and  exclude  every  idea  and  every 
reflection.  Can  you  succeed  in  that  attempt?  Or  rather,  does 
BOt  thought  press  in  with  a  more  sensible  violence  on  that  resist- 
ance ;  as  an  anxious  desire  to  sleep,  makes  us  so  much  the  more 
wakeful.  Thus  will  thuught  follow  you  beyond  the  grave,  thus 
will  it,  as  an  unwelcome  guest,  force  itself  upon  you,  when  it 
can  serve  only  to  perplex  and  distress  the  mind.  It  will  for  ever 
upbraid  you,  that  notwithstanding  all  the  kind  expostulations  of 
God  and  man,  notwithstanding  all  the  keen  remonstrances  of 
conscience,  and  the  pleadings  of  the  blood  of  Christ,  you  have 
foneon  in  your  folly,  till  heaven  is  lost,  and  damnation  incurred; 
and  all  for  what !  for  a  shadow  and  a  dream. 


364  TH8   GARB   OF  THE   SOUL   URGBD  [XXXI. 

Oh  think  not,  sinners,  that  the  remembrance  of  your  past 
pleasures,  and  of  your  success  in  your  other  cares,  livhilst  that 
of  the  one  thing  needful  was  forgotten ;  think  not  that  this  will 
ease  your  minds !  It  will  rather  torment  them  the  more.  ''  Son, 
.  remember  that  thou  in  thy  life-time  receivedst  thy  good  tilings." 
Bitter  remembrance !  Well  might  the  heathen  poets  represent 
the  unhappy  spirits  in  the  shades  below,  as  eagerly  catching  at 
the  water  of  forgctfulness,  yet  unable  to  reach  it.  Your  present 
comforts  will  only  serve  to  give  you  a  livelier  sense  of  your 
misery,  as  having  tasted  such  degrees  of  enjoyment ;  and  to 
inflame  the  reckoning,  as  you  have  misimprovcd  those  talents 
lodged  in  your  hands  for  better  purposes.  Surely,  if  these  things 
were  believed,  and  seriously  considered,  the  sinner  would  have 
no  more  heart  to  rejoice  in  his  present  prosperity,  than  a  man 
would  have  to  amuse  himself  with  the  curiosities  of  a  fine  gar* 
den,  through  which  he  was  led  to  be  broken  upon  the  rack. 

But  I  will  enlarge  no  farther  on  these  things.  Would  to  God 
that  the  unaccountable  stupidity  of  men's  minds,  and  their  fatal 
attachment  to  the  pleasures  and  cares  of  the  present  life,  did  not 
make  it  necessary  to  insist  on  them  so  frequently  and  so  copi- 
ously ! 

I  now  proceed  to  the  reflections  which  naturally  arise  from 
hence,  and  shall  only  nfention  two. 

1.  How  much  reason  have  we  to  lament  the  folly  of  mankind 
in  neglecting  the  one  thing  needful. 

If  religion  be  indeed  the  truest  wisdom,  then  surely  we  have 
thejustest  reason  to  say  with  Solomon,  '' that  folly  and  mad- 
ness is  in  men's  hearts,"  Eccl.  ix.  3.  Is  it  the  one  thing  need- 
ful? Look  on  the  conduct  of  the  generality  of  mankind,  and 
you  would  imagine  they  thought  it  the  one  thing  needless: 
the  vainest  dream,  and  the  idlest  amusement,  of  the  mind. 
God  is  admonishing  them  by  ordinances,  and  ^providences, 
sometimes  by  such  as  are  most  awful,  to  lay  it  to  heart ;  he 
speaks  once,  yea  twice,  (yea,  a  multitude  of  times)  but  man 
regards  not«  Job  xxxiii.  14.  They  profess  perhaps  to  believe 
all  that  I  have  been  saying,  but  act  as  if  the  contrary  were 
self-evident ;  they  will  risk  their  souls  and  eternity  for  a  thing 
of  nought,  for  that,  for  the  sake  of  which  they  would  not  risk 
so  much  as  a  hand,  or  a  finger,  or  a  joint,  no,  nor  perhaps  a 
toy  that  adorns  it.  Surely  this  is  the  wonder  of  angels,  and 
perhaps  of  devils  too,  unless  the  observation  of  so  many  ages 
may  have  rendered  it  familiar  to  both.  And  can  we,  my 
christian  brethren,  behold  such  a  scene  with  indifierence?  If 
some  epidemical  madness  had  seized  our  country,  or  the  places 
where  we  live,  so  that  as  wo  went  from  one  place  to  another, 
we  every  where  met  with  lunatics,  and  saw  amongst  the  rest, 
some  perhaps  of  the  finest  genius,  in  the  most  eminent  sta- 
tions in  life,  amusing  themselves  with  straws  and  bubbles,  or 
wounding  themselves  and  others;  surely  were  we  ever  so  secure 
from  the  danger  of  infection  or  assault,  the  sight  would  cut  us 
to  the  licurt.     A  good-natured  man  would  hardly  be  able  to  go 


XXXI.]  AS  THE  ONE  THING   NBEDFVi^*  3S5 

abroad,  or  even  be  desirous  to  Jive,  if  it  must  be  amongst  so 
many  sad  spectacles.  Yet  these  poor  creatures  might,  notwith** 
standing  this,  be  the  children  of  God,  and  the  higher  their  frenzy 
rose,  the  nearer  might  their  complete  happiness  be.  But,  alas ! 
the  greater  part  of  mankind  are  seized  with  a  worse  kind  of  mad* 
ness,  in  which  they  are  mining  their  souls  :  and  can  we  behold  it 
with  indifference  ?  The  Lord  awaken  our  compassion,  our  pray^ 
ers,  and  our  endeavours,  in  dependence  on  divine  grace,  that 
we  may  be  instrumental  in  bringing  them  to  their  mind,  and 
making  them  wise  indeed,  that  is,  wise  to  salvation ! 

2.  How  necessary  is  it  that  we  should  seriously  inquire,  how 
this  one  thing  needful  is  regarded  by  us ! 

Liet  me  .entreat  you  to  remember  your  own  concern  in  it,  and 
inquire-**Haye  I  thought  seriously  of  it?  Have  I  seen  the  im* 
portance  of  it  F  Has  it  lain  with  a  due  and  abiding  weight  on 
my  mind  ?  Has  it  brought  me  to  Christ*  that  I  might  lay  the 
stress  of  these  great  eternal  interests  on  him  ?  And  am  I  acting 
m  the  main  of  my  life,  as  one  that  has  these  convictions  ?  Am  I 
willing,  in  fact,  to  give  up  other  things,  my  interests,  my  plea- 
sures, my  passions,  to  this  ?  Am  I  conversing  with  God  and 
with  man,  as  one  that  believes  these  things ;  as  one  that  has 
delitierately  chosen  the  better  part,  and  is  determined  to  abide 
by  that  choice  ? 

Observe  the  answer  which  conscience  retnrns  to  these  inqui* 
ries,  and  you  will  know  your  own  part  in  that  more  particular 
application  with  which  I  shall  conclude. 

1.  liet  me  address  those  that  are  entirely  unconcerned  about 
(he  one  thing  needful. 

Brethren,  I  have  been  stating  the  case  at  large,  and  now  I 
appeal  to  your  consciences,  are  these  things  so,  or  are  they  not? 
God  and  your  own  hearts  best  know  for  what  the  care  of  your 
goal  is  neglected ;  but  be  it  what  it  will,  the  difference  between 
one  grain  of  sand  and  another  is  not  great,  when  it  comes  to  be 
weighed  against  a  talent  of  gold.  Whatever  it  is,  you  had  need 
to  examine  it  carefully.  You  had  need  to  view  that  commodity 
om  all  sides,  of  which  you  do  in  effect  say.  For  this  will  I  sell 
my  soiil ;  for  this  will  I  give  up  heaven  and  venture  hell,  be  hea«- 
i^en  and  hell  whatever  they  may.  In  the  name  of  God,  brethren,  is 
this  the  part  of  a  man,  of  a  rational  creature — to  go  on  with 
your  eyes  open  towards  a  pit  of  eternal  ruin,  because  there  are 
a  few  gay  flowers  in  the  way  ?  or  what  if  you  shut  your  eyes, 
will  that  prevent  your  fall  ?  It  signifies  little  to  say,  I  will  not 
think  of  these  things,  I  will  not  consider  them :  God  has  said, 
**  In  the  last  days  they  shall  consider  it  perfectly,"  Jer.  xxiii. 
20.  TIm  revels  of  a  drunken  malefactor,  will  not  prevent  nor 
respite  bis  exacntion.  Pardon  my  plainness  ;  if  it  were  a  fable 
or  a  tale,  I  would  endeavour  to  amuse  you  with  words,  but  I 
cannot  do  it,  where  your  souls  are  at  stake. 

3.  I  would  apply  to  those  who  are,  in  some  sense,  convinced 
of  tbe  importance  of  their  souls,  and  yet  are  inclined  to  defet 
that  cave  of  them  a  little  longer,  which,  in  the  general^  they  see 
to  be  necessary. 


906  THE  CARE   OF  THE  SOUL   tfRGEO  [XXXT. 

I  know,  you  that  are  young  are  under  peculiar  temptations 
to  do  this ;  though  it  is  strange  that  the  death  of  so  many  of 
your  companions  should  not  be  an  answer  to  some  of  the  most 
specious  and  dangerous  of  those  temptations.     Methinks,  if 
there  were  the  least  degree  of  uncertainty,  the  importance  is 
too  weighty  to  put  matters  to  the  venture.    But  here  the  uncer- 
tainty is  great  and  apparent.   You  must  surely  know  that  there 
are  critical  seasons  of  life  for  managing  the  concerns  of  it,  which 
are  of  such  a  nature,  that  if  once  lost,  they  may  never  return  : 
here  is  a  critical  season  ;  '^  now  is  the  accepted  time,  now  is  the 
day  of  salvation,''  2  Cor.  vi.  2.   '*  To-day  if  ye  will  hear  his 
voice,  harden  not  your  hearts,"  Heb.'iii.  7,  8.    This  language 
may  not  be  spoken  to-morrow.    Talk  not  of  a  more  convenient 
season ;  none  can  be  more  convenient ;  and  that  to  which  yon 
would  probably  refer  it,  is  least  of  all  so,  a  dying  time.     Yoa 
would  not  choose  then  to  have  any  important  business  in  hand ; 
and  will  you  of  choice  refer  the  greatest  business  of  all,  to  that 
languishing,  hurrying,  amazing  hour  ?   If  a  friend  were  then  to 
come  to  you  with  the  balance  of  an  intricate  account,  or  a  view 
of  a  title  to  an  estate,  you  would  shake  your  fainting  bead,  and 
lift  up  your  pale  trembling  hand,  and  say,  perhaps  with  a  fee- 
ble voice,  ''Alas,  is  this  a  time  for  these  things?"  And  is  it  a 
time  for  so  much  greater  things  than  these  ?  I  wish  you  knew, 
and  would  consider,  into  what  a  strait  we  that  are  ministers  are 
sometimes  brought,  when  we  are  called  to  the  dying  beds  of  those 
who  have  spent  their  lives  in  the  neglect  of  the  one  thing  need- 
ful.   On  the  one  hand,  we  fear,  lest,  if  we  palliate  malters,  and 
speak  smooth  things,  we  shall  betray  and  ruin  their  souls  :  and 
on  the  other,  that  if  we  use  a  becoming  plainness  and  seriousness 
in  warning  them  of  their  danger,  we  shall  quite  overwhelm  them, 
and  hasten  the  dying  moment  which  is  advancing  by  such  swift 
steps.    O  let  me  entreat  you  for  our  sakes,  and  much  more 
for  your  own,  that  you  do  not  drive  us  to  such  sad  extremities ; 
but  if  you  are  convinced,  as  I  hope  some  of  yon  may  now  be, 
that  the  care  of  the  soul  is  that  needful  thing  we  have  repre- 
iiented,  lot  the  conviction  work,  let  it  drive  you  immediately  to 
the  throne  of  grace ;  from  thence  yon  may  derive  that  wisdom 
and  strength,  which  will  direct  you  in  all  the  intricacies  which 
entangle  you,  and  animate  you  in  the  midst  of  difficulty  and 
discouragement. 

3.  I  would  in  the  last  place  address  myself  to  those  happy 
aouls,  who  have  in  good  earnest  attended  to  the  one  thing 
needful. 

I  hope  that  when  you  see  how  commonly  it  is  neglected, 
neglected  indeed  by  many,  whose  natural  capacities,  improve- 
ments, and  circumstances  in  life,  appear  to  you  superior  to  year 
own ;  you  will  humbly  acknowledge,  that  it  was  distinguishing 
grace  which  brought  you  into  this  happy  state,  and  formed  yoa 
to  this  most  necessary  care.  Bless  the  Lord,  therefore,  who 
hath  given  you  that  counsel,  in  virtue  of  which  you  can  say, 
'*  He  is  your  portion."  Rejoice  in  the  thought,  tnat  the  great 


XXXI.]  A8   THE   ONE   THING   NEEDFUL.  867 

concern  is  secured :  as  it  is  natural  for  us  to  do,  when  some 
important  affair  is  despatched,  which  has  long  lain  before  us, 
and  which  we  have  been  inclined  to  put  off  from  one  day  to 
another,  but  have  at  length  strenuously  and  successfully 
attended.  Remember  still  to  endeavour  to  continue  acting  on 
these  great  principles,  which  at  first  determined  your  choice ; 
and  seriously  consider,  that  those  who  desire  their  life  may  at 
last  be  given  them  for  a  prey,  must  continue  on  their  guard, 
in  all  stages  of  their  journey  through  a  wilderness,  where  daily 
dangers  are  still  surrounding  them.  Being  enabled  to  secure 
4be  great  concern,  make  yourselves  easy  as  to  others  of 
amaller  importance:  you  have  chosen  the  kingdom  of  God, 
and  his  righteousness ;  other  things,  therefore,  shall  be  added 
unto  you:  and  if  any  which  you  desire,  should  not  be  added, 
comfort  yourselves  with  this  thought,  that  you  have  the  good 
pcut,  which  can  never  be  taken  away.  And,  not  to  enlarge 
<»i  these  obvious  hints,  which  must  so  often  occur,  be  very 
aolicitoas  that  others  may  be  brought  to  a  care  about  the  one 
UiiDg  needful.  If  it  be  needful  for  you,  it  is  so  for  your  chil- 
dren, your  friends,  your  servants.  Let  them,  therefore,  see 
your  concern  in  this  respect  for  them,  as  well  as  for  yourselves. 
Iiet  parents  especially  attend  to  this  exhortation,  whose  care 
for  their  offspring  often  exceeds  in  other  respects,  and  fails  in 
this.  Remember  that  your  children  may  never  live  to  enjoy 
Ibe  effects  of  your  labour  and  concern  to  get  them  estates  and 
portions :  the  charges  of  their  funerals  may,  perhaps,  be  all 
:their  share  of  what  you  are  so  anxiously  careful  to  lay  up  for 
them.  And  O  think  what  a  sword  would  pierce  through  your 
very  heart,  if  you  should  stand  by  the  corpse  of  a  beloved 
child  with  this  reflection !  ^*  This  poor  creature  has  done  with 
Hk,  before  it  learned  its  great  business  in  it ;  and  is  gone  to 
eternity,  which  I  have  seldom  been  warning  it  to  prepare  for, 
and  which,  perhaps,  it  learned  of  me  to  forget." 

.  On  the  whole,  may  this  grand  care  be  awakened  in  those  by 
.whom  it  has  been  hitherto  neglected !  may  it  be  revived  in  each 
^oar  minds!  And  that  you  may  be  encouraged  to  pursue  it 
Jirith  greater  cheerfulness,  let  me  conclude  with  this  comfort- 
able thought,  that  in  proportion  to  the  necessity  of  the  case, 
through  the  merits  of  Christ  Jesus,  is  the  provision  which 
divine  grace  has  made  for  our  assistance.  If  you  are  disposed 
lo  sit  down  at  Christ's  feet,  he  will  teach  you  by  his  word  and 
Spirit.  If  you  commit  this  precious  jewel,  which  is  your 
eternal  all,  into  his  hand,  he  will  preserve  it  unto  that  day,  and 

nvill  then  produce  it,  richly  adorned  and  gloriously  improved,  to 
Jms  own  honour,  and  to  your  everlasting  joy. 
Which  God  of  his  infinite  mercy  grant,  &c« 


968  A  PBNITBKT   HBART,  [XXXII. 

SERMON  XXXU. 

A    PENITENT    HEART,   THE    BEST   NEW    YEAR'S   GIFT. 

Except  ye  repent,  ye  sJmll  all  likewise  perish, — Luko  iii.  3. 

Whbn  we  consider  how  heinous  and  aggravating  our  offences 
are  in  the  sight  of  a  just  and  holy  God,  that  they  bring  down 
his  wrath  upon  our  heads^  and  occasion  us  to  live  under  his 
indignation ;  how  ought  we  thereby  to  be  deterred  from  evil, 
or  at  least  engaged  to  study  to  repent  thereof,  and  not  commit 
the  same  again !  but  man  is  so  thoughtless  of  an  eternal  state, 
and  has  so  little  consideration  of  the  welfare  of  his  immortal 
soul,  that  he  can  sin  without  any  thought  that  he  must  give 
an  account  of  his  actions  at  the  day  of  judgment;  or  if  he,  at 
times,  has  any  reflections  on  his  behaviour,  they  do  not  drive 
him  to  true  repentance :  he  may,  for  a  short  time,  refrain  from 
falling  into  some  gross  sins  which  he  had  lately  committed ; 
but  then,  when  the  temptation  comes  again  with  power,  he  is 
carried  away  with  the  lust :  and  thus  he  goes  on  promising  and 
resolving,  and  in  breaking  both  his  resolutions  and  his  pro- 
mises, as  fast  almost  as  he  has  made  them.  This  is  highly 
offensive  to  God,  it  is  mocking  of  him.  My  brethren,  when 
grace  is  given  us  to  repent  truly,  we  shall  turn  wholly  unto 
God ;  and  let  me  beseech  you  to  repent  of  your  sins,  for  the 
time  is  hastening  when  you  will  have  neither  time  nor  call  to 
repent ;  there  is  none  in  the  grave,  whither  we  are  going ;  but 
do  not  be  afraid,  for  God  often  receives  the  greatest  sinner  to 
mercy  through  the  merits  of  Christ  Jesus ;  this  magnifies  the 
riches  of  bis  free  grace ;  and  should  be  an  encouragement  for 
you,  who  are  great  and  notorious  sinners,  to  repent,  for  he 
will  have  mercy  upon  you,  if  you  through  Christ  return  unto 
him. 

St.  Paul  was  an  eminent  instance  of  this :  he  speaks  of  him- 
self as  "the  chief  of  sinners,"  and  he  declares  how  God 
shewed  mercy  unto  him.  Christ  loves  to  shew  mercy  unto 
sinners,  and  if  you  repent,  he  will  have  mercy  upon  you. 
But  as  no  word  is  more  mistaken  than  that  of  repentance, 
I  shall, 

I.  Shew  you  what  the  nature  of  repentance  is. 

II.  Consider  the  several  parts  and  causes  of  repentance. 

III.  I  shall  give  you  some  reasons,  why  repentance  is  neces- 
sary to  salvation.    And, 

IV.  Exhort  all  of  you,  high  and  low,  rich  and  poor,  one  with 
another,  to  endeavour  after  repentance. 

I.  Repentance,  my  brethren,  in  the  first  place,  as  to  its 
nature,  is  the  carnal  and  corrupt  disposition  of  men  being 
changed  into  a  renewed  and  sanctified  disposition.  A  man 
that  has  truly  repented,  is  truly  regenerated :  it  is  a  different 
word  for  one  and  the  same  thing ;  the  motley  mixture  of  the 
beast  and  devil  is  gone :  there  is,  as  it  were,  a  new  creation 
wrought  in  your  hearts.     If  your  repentance  is  true,  you  are 


XXXII.]  THB    PEST   NBW    VBAR's   GIFT.  809 

renewed  throuo^hout,  both  in  soul  and  body ;  your  understand- 
ings are  enlightened  with  the  knowledge  of  God^  and  of  tlie 
Lord  Jesus  Cbrist ;  and  your  wills,  whicii  were  stubborn,  obsti- 
nate, and  hated  ail  good,  are  obedient  and  conformable  to  the 
will  of  God.  Indeed,  our  deists  tell  us,  that  man  now  has  a 
4ree  will  to  do  good,  to  love  God,  a^ul  to  repextt  w^eu  he  will : 
but  indeed,  there  is  no  free  will  in  any  of  you,  but  to  sin ;  nay, 
your  free  will  leads  you  so  far,  that  you  would,  if  possible, 
pull  God  from  his  throne.  This  may,  perhaps,  otfend  the  Pha- 
risees; but  (it  is  the  truth  in  Christ  which  1  speak,  I  lie  not) 
every  man  by  his  own  natural  will  hates  God ;  but  v\.hen  he  is 
turned  unto  the  Lord  by  evangelical  repentance,  then  his  will 
is  changed ;  then  your  consciences,  now  hardened  and 
benombed,  shall  be  quickened  and  awakened ;  then  your  hard 
hearts  shall  be  melted,  and  your  unruly  alSections  shall  be 
crucified.  Thus,  by  that  repentance,  the  whole  soul  will  be 
changed,  you  will  have  new  inclinatiops,  new  desires,  and  new 
habits. 

You  may  see  how  vile  we  are  by  nature,  that  it  requires  so 
great  a  change  to  be  made  upon  us,  to  recover  us  from  this 
state  of  sin,  and  therefore  the  consideration  of  our  dreadful 
state  should  make  us  earnest  with  God  to  change  our  con- 
dition, and  that  change  true  repentance  implies ;  therefore,  my 
brethren,  consider  how  hateful  your  ways  are  to  God,  while 
you  continue  in  sin ;  how  abominable  you  are  unto  him,  while 
you  run  into  evil :  you  cannot  be  said  to  be  Christians  while 
you  are  hating  Christ,  and  his  people;  true  repentance  will 
entirely  change  you,  the  bias  of  your  souls  will  be  changed, 
then  you  will  delight  in  God,  in  Cbrist,  in  his  law,  and  in  his 
people;  you  will  then  believe  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as 
inward  feeling,  though  now  you  may  esteem  it  madness  and 
enthusiasm ;  you  will  not  then  be  ashamed  of  becoming  fools 
for  Christ's  sake;  you  will  not  regard  being  scoffed  at;  it  is 
not  then  their  pointing  after  you  and  crying,  ''  Here  comes 
another  troop  of  his  followers,"  will  dismay  you ;  no,  your  soul 
will  abhor  such  proceedings,  the  ways  of  Christ^  and  his  people 
will  be  your  whole  delight. 

It  is  the  nature  of  such  repentance  to  make  a  change,  and 
the  greatest  change  as  can  be  made  here  in  the  soul.  Thus 
yoQ  see  what  repentance  implies  in  its  own  nature ;  it  denotes 
an  abhorrence  of  all  evil,  and  a  forsaking  of  it.  I  shall  now 
proceed. 

Secondly,  To  shew  you  the  parts  of  it,  and  the  causes  con- 
curring thereto. 
The  parts  are,  sorrow,  hatred,  and  an  entire  forsaking  of  sin. 
Our  sorrow  and  grief  for  sin,  must  not  spring  merely  from  a 
fear  of  wrath  ;  for  if  we  have  no  other  ground  but  that,  it  pro- 
<^ceds  from  self-love,  .and  not  from  any  love  to  God  ;  and  if  love 
to  God  is  not  the  chiejf  motive  of  your  repentance,  your  repen- 
tance is  in  vain,  and  not  to  be  esteemed  true. 
Many,  in  our  days,  think  their  crying,  (lod  forgive  me !  ^v, 
*  '  z  * 


370  A    PBNITRNT   HEART,  [XXXIf. 

I4>rd  have  mercy  upon  me !  or  I  am  sorry  for  it !  is  repentance, 
and  that  G^d  wUI  esteem  it  as  such  :  but,  indeed,  they  are  mis- 
taken ;  it  is  not  the  drawing  near  to  God  with  our  lips,  while 
our  hearts  are  far  from  hjm,  which  he  regards.  Repentance 
does  not  come  by  fits  and  starts  ;  no,  it  is  one  continued  act  of 
our  lives ;  for  as  we  dciily  commit  sin,  so  we  need  a  daily 
repentance  before  God,  to  obtain  forgiveness  for  those  sins  we 
commit. 

It  is  not  your  confessing  yourselves  to  be  sinners,  it  is  not 
knowing  your  condition  to  be  sad  and  deplorable,  so  long  as 
you  continue  in  your  sins :  your  care  and  endeavours  should  be, 
to  get  the  heart  thoroughly  afiected  therewith,  that  you  may 
feel  yourselves  to  be  lost  and  undone  creatures,  for  Christ  came 
to  save  such  as  are  lost :  and  if  you  are  enabled  to  groan  under 
the  weight  and  burden  of  your  sins,  then  Christ  will  ease  you 
and  give  you  rest. 

And  till  you  are  thus  sensible  of  your  misery  and  lost  condition, 
you  arc  a  servant  to  sin  and  to  your  lusts,  under  the  bondage 
and  command  of  Satan,  doing  his  drudgery :  thou  art  under  the 
curse  of  God,  and  liable  to  his  judgment.  Consider  how  dreadful 
thy  state  will  be  at  death,  and  after  the  day  of  judgment,  when 
thou  wilt  be  exposed  to  such  miseries  which  the  ear  hath  not 
heard,  neither  can  the  heart  conceive,  and  that  to  all  eternity,  if 
you  die  impenitent. 

But  I  hope  better  things  of  you,  my  brethren,  though  I  thus 
speak,  and  things  which  accompany  salvation ;  go  to  God  in 
prayer,  and  be  earnest  with  him,  that  by  his  Spirit  he  would 
convince  you  of  your  miserable  condition  by  nature,  and  make 
you  truly  sensible  thereof.  O  be  humbled,  be  humbled,  I  beseech 
you,  for  your  sins !  Having  spent  so  many  years  in  sinning, 
what  canst  thou  do  less,  than  be  concerned  to  spend  some  hours 
in  mourning  and  sorrowing  for  the  same,  and  be  humbled 
before  God  ? 

Look  back  into  your  lives,  call  to  mind  thy  sins,  as  many  as 
possibly  thou  canst,  the  sins  of  thy  youth,  as  well  as  of  thy  riper 
years :  see  how  you  have  departed  from  a  gracious  Father,  and 
wandered  in  the  way  of  wickedness,  in  which  you  have  lost 
yourselves,  the  favour  of  God,  the  comforts  of  his  Spirit,  and 
the  peace  of  your  own  consciences ;  then  go  and  beg  pardon  of 
the  Lord,  through  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  fot  the  evil  thou  hast 
committed,  and  for  the  good  thou  hast  omitted.  Consider,  like- 
wise, the  heinousness  of  thy  sins ;  see  what  very  aggravatiA? 
circumstances  thy  sins  are  attended  with,  how  you  have  abused 
the  patience  of  God,  which  should  have  led  you  to  repentance; 
and  when  thou  findest  thy  heart  hard,  beg  of  Grod  to  soften  it, 
cry  mightily  unto  him,  and  he  will  take  away  thy  stony  heart, 
and  give  thee  a  heart  of  flesh. 

Resolve  to  leave  all  thy  sinful  lusts  and  pleasures ;  renounce* 
forsake,  and  abhor,  thy  old  sinful  course  of  life,  and  serve  God  in 
holiness  and  righteousness  all  the  remaining  part  of  life.  If  yoQ 
lament  and  bewail  past  sins,  and  do  not  forsake  them,  your  r^ 


ZXXII.]  THE   BEST  NEW   YEAS*S  GIFT.  971 

peiitance  is  in  vain^  yoa  are  mocking  of  God,  and  deceiving  jroar 
own  son! ;  yoa  must  put  off  the  old  man,  with  his  deeds,  before 
you  can  put  on  the  new  man,  Christ  Jesus. 

You,  therefore,  who  have  been  swearers  and  cursers,  you,  who 
have  been  harlots  and  drunkards,  you,  who  have  been  thieves 
and  robbers,  you,  who  have  hitherto  followed  the  sinful  pleasures 
and  diversions  of  life,  let  me  beseech  you,  by  the  mercies  of  Grod 
in  Christ  /esus,  that  you  would  no  longer  continue  therein,  but 
that  you  would  forsake  your  evil  ways,  and  turn  unto  the  Lord,  for 
be  waiteth  to  be  gracious  unto  you,  he  is  ready,  he  is  willing,  to 
pardon  you  of  all  your  sins :  but  do  not  expect  Christ  to  pardon 
you  of  sin,  when  you  run  into  it,  and  will  not  abstain  from  com- 
plying with  the  temptations ;  but,  if  you  will  be  persuaded  to 
abstain  from  evil  and  choose  the  good,  to  return  unto  the  Lord, 
and  repent  of  your  wickedness*  he  hath  promised  he  will  abun- 
dantly pardon  you,  he  will  heal  your  backslidings,  and  will  love 
you  freely.  Resolve  now  this  day  to  have  done  with  your  sins 
for  ever ;  let  your  old  ways  and  you  be  separated ;  you  must 
resolve  against  it,  for  there  can  be  no  true  repentance  without 
a  resolution  to  forsake  it.  Resolve  for  Christ,  resolve  against 
the  devil  and  his  works,  and  go  on  fighting  the  Lord's  battles 
against  the  devil  and  his  emissaries ;  attack  him  in  the  strongest 
holds  he  has,  fight  him  as  men,  as  Christians,  and  you  will  soon 
find  him  to  be  a  coward ;  resist  him,  and  he  will  fly  from  you. 
Resolve,  through  grace  to  do  this,  and  your  repentance  is  half 
done:  but  then  take  care  that  you  do  not  ground  your  resolu- 
tions on  your  own  strength,  but  in  the  strength  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ ;  he  is  the  way,  he  is  the  truth,  and  he  is  the  life ;  without 
his  assistance  you  can  do  nothing,  but  through  his  grace  strength- 
ening thee,  thou  wilt  be  enabled  to  do  all  things ;  and  the  more 
thou  art  sensible  of  thy  own  weakness  and  inability,  the  more 
ready  Christ  will  be  to  help  thee ;  and  what  can  all  the  men  of 
the  world  do  to  thee  when  Christ  is  for  thee  ?  thou  wilt  not 
regard  what  they  say  against  thee,  for  thou  wilt  have  the  testi- 
mony of  a  good  conscience. 

Resolve  to  cast  thyself  at  the  feet  of  Christ  in  subjection  to 
him,  and  throw  thyself  into  the  arms  of  Christ  for  salvation  by 
him.  Consider,  my  dear  brethren,  the  many  invitations  he  has 
given  you  to  come  unto  him,  to  be  saved  by  him ;  God  has  ^*  laid 
on  liim  the  iniquity  of  us  all."  O  let  me  prevail  with  you,  above 
all  things,  to  make  choice  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  resign  your- 
selves unto  him,  take  him,  O  take  him  upon  his  own  terms ; 
and  whosoever  thou  art,  how  great  a  sinner  soever  thou  hast 
been,  this  evening,  in  the  name  of  the  great  God  do  I  offer 
Jesus  Christ  unto  thee;  as  thou  vainest  thy  life  and  soul, 
refuse  him  not,  but  stir  up  thyself  to  accept  of  the  Lord  Jesus^ 
take  bim  wholly  as  he  is,  for  he  will  be  applied  wholly  unto 
you,  or  else  not  at  all.  Jesus  Christ  must  be  your  whole  wis- 
dom, Jesus  Christ  must  be  your  whole  righteousness,  Jesus 
Qirist  must  be  your  whole  sanctification,  or  he  will  never  be 
your  eternal  redemption. 

z2 


378  A   FRUITBNT   HEART,  {IXXlt. 

What  thd^h  fou  have  beten  ever  so  wicked  and  profligate, 
yet  if  you  wi]l  now  abandon  your  sins,  and  turn  unto  the  JLiOrd 
Jesus  Christ,  thou  shalt  have  him  given  to  thee,  and  all  thy  sins 
shall  be  freely  forgiven.  O  why  will  you  neglect  the  great  Work 
of  your  repentance  ;  do  not  defer  the  doing  of  it  one  day  longer, 
but  to-day,  even  now,  take  that  Christ  who  is  freely  oflered  to 
you. 

Now,  as  to  the  causes  hereof,  the  first  cause  is  God ;  he  is 
the  author,  "we  are  bom  of  God."  G6d  hath  begotten  its,  even 
God,  tile  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  it  is  he  that  stirs  ns 
up  to  will  and  to  do  of  his  own  good  pleasure:  and  another 
€au5^e  is,  God's  free  grace ;  it  is  owing  to  the  "  riches  of  his  free 
^race,"  my  brethren,  that  we  have  been  prevented  from  going 
down  to  hell  long  ago;  it  is  because  the  compassions  of  the 
Lord  fail  not,  they  are  new  every  morning,  and  fresh  ever}' 
evening. 

Sometimes  the  instruments  are  very  unlikely  :  a  poor  de.<:pised 
minister  or  member  of  Jesus  Christ,  may,  by  the  power  of  God, 
be  made  an  instrument  in  the  hands  of  God,  of  bringing  you  to 
true  evangelical  repentance ;  and  this  may  be  done,  to  shew 
that  the  power  is  not  in  men,  but  that  it  is  entirely  owing  to  the 
good  pleasure  of  God  ;  and  if  there  has  been  any  good  done 
among  any  of  you,  by  preaching  the  word,  as  I  trust  there  ha?, 
though  it  were  preached  in  a  field,  if  God  has  met  and  owned 
us,  and  blessed  his  word,  though  preached  by  an  enthusiastic 
babbler,  a  boy,  a  madman  ;  I  do  rejoice,  yea,  and  will  rejoice, 
let  foes  say  what  they  will.  I  shall  now. 

Thirdly,  Shew  the  reasons  why  repentance  is  necessary  to 
salvation. 

And  this,  my  brethren,  is  plainly  revealed  to  us  in  the  word 
of  God,  "  The  soul  that  does  not  repent  and  turn  unto  the  Lord, 
shall  die  in  its  sins,  and  their  blood  shall  be  required  at  their 
own  hands."  It  is  necessary,  as  we  have  sinned,  we  should 
repent :  for  a  holy  God  could  not,  nor  ever  can,  or  will,  admit 
any  thing  that  is  unholy  into  his  presence:  this  is  the  beginning 
of  grace  in  the  soul ;  there  must  be  a  change  in  heart  and  life, 
before  there  can  be  a  dwelling  with  a  holy  God.  Yoa  cannot 
love  sin  and  God  too,  you  cannot  love  God  and  Mammon ;  do 
unclean  person  can  stand  in  the  jSresence  of  God,  it  is  contrary 
to  the  holiness  of  his  nature;  there  is  a  contrariety  between  the 
holy  nature  of  God,  and  the  unholy  nature  of  carnal  and  unre- 
generate  men. 

What  communication  can  there  be  between  a  sinless  God, 
and  creatures  full  of  sin,  between  a  pure  God,  and  impure 
creatures?  If  you  were  to  be  admitted  into  heaven,  with  yoor 
present  tempers,  in  your  impenitent  condition,  heaven  itself 
would  be  a  hell  to  you  ;  the  songs  of  angels  woUld  be  as  eutba- 
siasm,  and  would  be  intolerable  to  you  ;  therefore  you  nia$t 
have  these  tempers  changed,  you  must  be  holy  as  God  is:  be 
must  be  your  Ood  here,  and  yoa  must  be  his  people,  or  you  will 
never  dwell  together  to  all  eternity.     If  you  hate  the  ways  ol 


XXXII.]  THE   BRST   NEW    Y^Afl'S   GIFT.  873 

God,  and  cannot  spend  ^n  hour  in  bis  spyice,  how  will  you  thinly 
to  be  easy  to  all  eternity,  in  singing  praises  t.q  him  that  sits  upon 
the  throne,  and  to  the  Lamb  for  ever. 

And  this  is  to  be  the  employment,  my  brethren,  of  all  those 
who  are  admitted  into  this  glorious  place,  where  neither  sin  nor 
sinner  is  admitted,  where  no  scoffer  ever  can  cume,  without  re- 
pentance from  his  evil  ways,  a  turning  unto  God,  and  a  cleaving 
unto  him:  this  must  be  done,.before  any  can  be  admitted  into 
the  glorious  mansions  of  God,  which  are  prepared  for  all  that 
love  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  sincerity  and  truth :  repent  ye 
then  of  all  your  sins.  O  my  dear  brethren,  it  makes  my  blood 
run  cold,  in  thinking  that  any  of  you  should  be  admitted  into 
the  glorious  mansions  above.  O  that  it  were  in  my  power,  I 
would  place  all  of  you,  yea,  you  my  scoffing  brethren,  and  the 
greatest  enemy  I  have  on  earth,  at  the  right  hand  of  Jesus ;  but 
this  I  cannot  do :  however,  I  advise  and  exhort  you,  with  ail 
love  and  tenderness,  to  make  Jesus  your  refuge :  fly  to  him  for 
relief:  Jesus  died  to  save  such  as  you ;  he  is  full  of  compassion ; 
and  if  you  go  to  him,  as  poor,  lost,  undone  sinners,  Jesus  will  give 
yon  his  Spirit ;  yon  shall  live  and  reign,  and  reign  and  live,you  shall 
love  and  live,  and  live  and  love,  with  this  Jesus  to  all  eternity. 

I  am.  Fourthly,  to  exhort  all  of  you,  high  and  low,  rich  and 
poor,  one  with  another,  to  repent  of  all  your  sins,  and  turn  unto 
the  Lord. 

And  I  shall  speak  to  each  of  you  ;  for  you  have  either  repented, 
or  you  have  not,  you  are  believers  in  Christ  Jesus,  or  unbelievers. 

And  first,  you  who  never  have  truly  repented  of  your  sins,  and 
never  have  truly  forsaken  your  lusts,  be  not  offended  if  I  speak 
plain  to  you ;  for  it  is  Jove,  love  to  your  souls,  that  constrains 
me  to  speak:  I  shall  lay  before  you  your  danger,  and  the  misery 
to  which  you  are  exposed,  while  you  remain  impenitent  in  sin. 
And  O  that  this  may  be  a  means  of  making  you  fly  to  Christ  for 
pardon  and  forgiveness. 

While  thy  sins  are  not  repented  of,  thou  art  in  danger  of  death ; 
and  if  you  should  die,  you  would  perish  for  ever.  There  is  no 
hope  of  any  who  live  and  die  in  their  sins,  but  that  they  will 
dwell  with  devils  and  damned  spirits  to  all  eternity.  And  how 
do  we  know  we  shall  live  much  longer?  we  are  not  sure  of  see- 
ing our  own  habitations  this  nitrht  in  safety.  What  mean  ye 
then  being  at  ease  and  pleasure  while  your  sins  are  not  pardon- 
ed. As  sure  as  ever  the  word  of  God  is  true,  if  you  die  in  that 
condition,  you  are  shut  out  of  all  hope  and  mercy  for  ever,  and 
shall  pass  into  easeless  and  endless  misery. 

What  is  all  thy  pleasnres  and  diversions  worth  ?  They  last  but 
for  a  moment,  they  are  of  no  worth,  and  but  of  short  continuance. 
And  sure  it  must  be  gross  folly,  eagerly  to  pursue  those  sinful 
lusts  and  pleasures,  which  war  against  the  sou!,  which  tend  to 
■harden  the  heart, and  keep  us  from  closing  with  the  Lord  Jesus; 
indeed,  these  are  destructive  of  our  peace  here,  and,  without 
repentance,  will  be  of  our  peace  hereafter. 

O  the  folly  and  madness  of  this  sensual  world ;  sure  if  there 


374  A  PBNITBNT  HEART,  [XXXII. 

were  nothing  in  sin  bat  present  slavery,  it  would  keep  an  inge- 
nuous spirit  from  it  But  to  do  the  devil's  dmdgery !  and  if  wo 
do  that,  we  shall  have  his  wages,  which  is  eternal  death  and 
condemnation :  O  consider  this,  my  guilty  brethren,  you  that 
think  it  no  crime  to  swear,  whore,  drink,  or  scoflf  and  jeer  at  the 
people  of  God ;  consider  how  your  voices  will  then  be  changed, 
and  you,  that  counted  their  lives  madness,  and  their  end  without 
honour,  shall  howl  and  lament  at  your  own  madness  and  folly, 
that  should  bring  you  to  so  much  wo  and  distress !  Then  you 
will  lament  and  bemoan  your  own  dreadful  condition :  but  it 
will  be  of  no  signification ;  for  he  that  is  now  your  merciful 
Saviour,  will  then  become  your  inexorable  Judge.  Now  be  is 
easy  to  be  entreated ;  but  then,  all  your  tears  and  prayers  wiU 
be  in  vain :  for  Grod  hath  allotted  to  every  man  a  day  of  grace, 
a  time  of  repentance,  which,  if  he  does  not  improve,  but  neglects 
and  desjMses  the  means  which  are  offered  to  nim,  he  cannot  l)e 
saved. 

Consider,  therefore,  while  you  are  going  on  in  a  course  of  sin 
and  unrighteousness,  I  beseech  you,  my  brethren,  to  think  of  the 
consequence  that  wiU  attend  your  thus  mispending  your  precious 
time ;  your  souls  are  worth  being  concerned  about :  for  if  you 
can  enjoy  all  the  pleasures  and  diversions  of  life,  at  death  you 
must  leave  them ;  that  will  put  an  end  to  all  your  worldly  con- 
cerns. And  will  it  not  be  very  deplorable,  to  have  your  good 
things  here,  all  your  earthly,  sensual,  devilish  pleasures,  which 
you  have  been  so  much  taken  up  with,  all  over:  and  the  thought 
for  how  trifling  a  concern  thou  hast  lost  eternal  welfare,  will 
gnaw  thy  very  soul. 

Thy  wealth  and  grandeur  will  stand  in  no  stead ;  thou  canst 
carry  nothing  of  it  into  the  other  world :  then  the  consideratioD 
of  thy  uncharitableness  to  the  poor,  and  the  ways  thou  didst 
take  to  obtain  thy  wealth,  will  be  a  very  hell  unto  thee. 

Now  you  enjoy  the  means  of  grace,  as  the  preaching  of  his 
word,  prayer,  and  sacraments ;  and  God  has  sent  his  ministers 
out  into  the  fields  and  highways,  to  invite,  to  woo  you  to  come 
in ;  but  they  are  tiresome  to  thee,  thou  hadst  rather  be  at  thy 
pleasures :  ere  long,  my  brethren,  they  will  be  over,  and  you  will 
be  no  more  troubled  with  them ;  but  then  thou  wouldest  give 
ten  thousand  worlds  for  one  moment  of  that  merciful  time  of 
grace  which  thou  hast  abused ;  then  thou  will  cry  for  a  drop  of 
that  precious  blood  which  now  you  trample  under  your  feet; 
then  you  will  wish  for  one  more  oficr  of  mercy,  for  Christ  and 
his  free  grace  to  be  offered  to  you  again ;  but  your  crying  will  be 
in  vain :  for  as  you  would  not  repent  here,  God  will  not  give  yoa 
an  opportunity  to  repent  hereafter ;  if  you  would  not  in  Christ's 
time,  you  shall  not  in  your  own.  In  what  a  dreadful  condition 
will  you  then  be  ?  What  horror  and  astonishment  will  possess 
your  souls  ?  Then  all  thy  lies  and  oaths,  thy  scoff's  and  jeers, 
at  the  people  of  God,  all  thy  filthy  and  unclean  thoughts  and 
actions,  thy  mispent  tjme  in  balls,  plays,  and  assemblies,  thy 
spending  whole  evenings  at  cards,  dice,  and  masquerades,  thy 


XXXII.}  THE   BEST   NEW    YEAR'S   GIFT.  375 

freqnentiiig  of  taverns  and  alehouses,  thy  worldliness,  covetous- 
ness,  and  thy  uncharitableoess,  will  be  brought  at  once  to  thy 
remembrance^  and  at  once  charged  upon  thy  guilty  soul.  And 
how  can  yoa  bear  the  thoughts  of  these  things?  Indeed  I  am 
full  of  compassion  towards  you,  to  think  that  this  should  be  the 
portion  of  any  who  now  hear  me.  These  are  truths,  though 
awful  ones ;  my  brethren,  these  are  the  trutlis  of  the  gospel ;  and 
if  there  were  not  a  necessity  for  thus  speaking,  I  would  willingly 
forbear :  for  it  is  no  pleasing  subject  to  me,  any  more  than  it  is 
to  you  ;  but  it  is  my  duty  to  shew  you  the  dreadful  consequences 
of  continuing  in  sin.  I  am  only  now  acting  the  part  of  a  skilful 
surgeon,  that  searches  a  wound  before  he  heals  it:  I  would  shew 
yoa  your  danger  first ;  that  deliverance  may  be  the  more  readily 
accepted  by  you. 

Consider,  tiiat  however  you  may  be  for  putting  the  evil  day 
away  from  you,  and  are  now  striving  to  hide  your  sins,  at  the 
the  day  of  judgment  there  shall  be  a  full  discovery  of  all ; 
hidden  things  on  that  day  shall  be  brought  to  light;  and  after 
all  thy  sins  have  been  revealed  to  thp  whole  world,  then  you 
must  depart  into  everlasting  fire  in  hel],  which  will  not  be 
quenched  night  and  day ;  it  will  be  without  intermission,  with- 
out end.  O  then,  what  stupidity  and  senselessness  hath  pos- 
sessed your  hearts,  that  you  are  not  frighted  from  your  sins. 
The  fear  of  Nebuchadnezzar's  fiery  furnace,  made  men  do  any 
thing  to  avoid  it ;  and  shall  not  an  everlasting  fire  make  men, 
make  you,  do  any  thing  to  avoid  it? 

O  that  this  would  awaken  and  cause  you  to  humble  your- 
selves for  your  sins,  and  to  beg  pardon  for  them,  that  you 
might  find  mercy  in  the  Lord. 

Do  not  go  away,  let  not  the  devil  hurry  you  away  before  the 
sermon  is  over ;  but  stay,  and  you  shall  have  a  Jesus  offered  to 
you,  who  has  made  full  satisfaction  for  all  your  sins. 

Let  me  beseech  you  to  cast  away  your  transgressions,  to 
strive  against  sin,  to  watch  against  it,  and  to  beg  power  and 
strength  from  Christ,  to  keep  down  the  power  of  those  lusts 
that  hurry  you  on  in  your  sinful  ways. 

Bat  if  you  will  not  do  any  of  these  things,  if  yon  are  resolved 
to  sin  on,  you  must  expect  eternal  death  to  be  the  conse- 
quence ;  you  must  expect  to  be  seized  with  horror  and  trem- 
bling, with  horror  and  amazement,  to  hear  the  dreadful  sentence 
of  condemnation  pronounced  against  you :  and  then  you  will 
run,  and  call  upon  the  mountains  to  fall  on  you,  to  hide  you  from 
the  Lord,  and  from  the  fierce  anger  of  his  wrath. 

Had  you  now  a  heart  to  turn  from  your  sins  unto  Uie  living 
€rod,  by  true  and  unfeigned  repentance,  and  to  pray  unto  him 
for  mercy,  in  and  through  the  merits  of  Jesus  Christ,  there 
were  hope :  but  at  the  day  of  judgment,  thy  prayers  and  tears 
will  be  of  no  signification ;  they  will  be  of  no  service  to  thee ; 
the  Judge  will  not  be  entreated  by  thee:  as  you  would  not 
hearken  to  him  when  he  called  unto  thee,  but  despised  botii 
bim  and  his  ministers,  and  would  not  leave  your  iniquities ; 


976  A  P^fllTENT  nUARt,  {lixxth 

ihcrefotc,  on  that  day  he  will  not  be  entreated^  ifotwitbjHflndingl 
all  thy  crie§  and  tears ;  for  God  himself  hath  safd,  "  fiecanse 
t  have  called,  and  you  refused ;  1  have  stretched  out  my  hand^ 
and  no  man  regarded,  but  ye  have  set  at  nought  all  my  coun- 
sel, and  would  have  none  of  my  reproof;  I  will  also  laii(;h  at 
your  calamity,  and  mock  when  your  fear  coroeth  as  desolation^ 
and  yotir  destruction  cometh  as  a  whirlwind ;  when  distress 
and  anguish  cometh  upon  you :  then  shall  they  call  upon  me, 
biit  I  will  not  answer,  they  shall  seek  me  early^  but  they  shall 
hot  find  me/' 

Now,  ydu  may  cnll  (his  enthusiasm  and  madness ;  but  at 
that  great  day,  if  you  repent  not  of  your  sins  here,  you  will 
find,  by  ^Vdonil  experience,  that  your  own  ways  were  madness 
indeed  ;  but  God  forbid  it  should  be  left  undone  till  then :  seek 
after  the  Lord  while  be  is  to  be  found  ;  call  upon  him  while  he 
is  near,  and  you  shall  find  mercy ;  repent  this  hour,  and  Cbribt 
will  joyfully  receive  you. 

What  say  you  ?  Must  1  g^o  to  my  Master^  and  tell  him  you 
will  not  come  unto  him,  and  will  have  none  of  lis  counsels  ? 
No;  do  not  send  me  on  so  unhappy  ao  errand  :  I  cannot,  I 
Will  not  tell  him  any  such  thing.  Shall  not  I  rather  tell  him, 
you  are  willing  to  repent  and  to  be  converted^  to  become  new 
men,  and  take  up  a  new  course  of  life :  this  is  the  only  wise 
resolution  you  can  make.  Let  me  tell  my  Master,  that  you 
will  come  unto  and  will  wait  upon  him :  for  if  you  do  not,  it 
will  be  your  ruin  in  time,  and  to  eternity. 

You  will  at  death  wish  you  had  lived  the  life  of  the  righ- 
teous, that  you  might  have  died  his  death.  Be  advised  then; 
consider  what  is  before  you,  Christ  and  the  world,  holiness 
and  sin,  life  and  death  :  choose  now  for  yourselves ;  let  your 
choice  be  made  immediately,  and  let  that  choice  be  your  dying 
choice. 

If  you  would  not  choose  to  die  in  your  sins,  to  die  drunk- 
ards, to  die  adulterers,  to  die  swearers  and  scoflers,  &c.  live 
not  out  this  nijrht  in  the  dreadfful  condition  you  are  in.  Some 
of  you,  it  may  be,  may  say,  You  have  not  power,  you  have  no 
strength  :.  but  have  not  you  been  wanting  to  yourselves  in 
such  things  that  were  within  your  power?  Have  you  not  as 
much  powtr  to  go  to  hear  a  sermon,  as  to  go  into  a  play- 
house, or  to  a  ball,  or  masquerade?  You  have  as  much  power 
to  read  the  bible,  as  to  read  plays,  novels,  and  romances ;  and 
you  can  associate  as  well  with  the  godly,  as  with  the  wicked 
and  profane ;  this  is  but  an  idle  excuse,  my  brethren,  to  go  on 
in  your  sins  :  and  if  you  will  be  found  in  the  means  of  grace, 
Christ  hath  promised  he  will  give  you  strength.  While  Peter 
was  preaching,  the  Holy  Ghost  fell  on  all  that  heard  the 
word :  how  then  should  you  be  found  in  the  way  of  your  duty ! 
Jesus  Christ  will  then  give  thee  strength ;  he  will  put  his 
'  Spirit  within  thee;  thou  shalt  find  he  will  be  thy  wisdom,  thy 
righteousness,  thy  sanctification,  and  thy  redemption.  Dc^ 
but  try  what  a  gracious,  a  kind,  and  loving  Master  he  is,  ' 


ItXXtUi  THE   BB8T   NEW   YEAR'S  OIPT.  377 

will  be  a  help  to  thee  in  all  thy  burdens :  and  if  the  burden  of 
sin  be  on  thy  soul,  go  to  him  as  weary  and  heavy  laden,  and 
thou  shalt  find  rest. 

Do  not  say,  that  your  sins  are  too  many  and  too  great  to 
expect  to  find  mercy :  No ;  be  they  ever  so  many,  or  ever  so 
great,  the  blood  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  will  cleanse  you 
from  all  sin.s.  God's  grace^  my  brethren,  is  free,  rich,  and 
Sbverei^n.  Manasseh  was  a  great  sinner,  and  yet  he  was , 
pardoned  ;  Zaccheus  was  gone  far  from  God,  and  went  out  to 
see  Christ,  with  no  other  view  but  to  satisfy  his  curiosity ; 
and  yet  Jesus  met  him,  and  brought  salvation  to  his  house. 
Manasseh  was  an  idolater  and  murderer,  yet  he  received 
itaercy ;  the  other  was  an  oppressor  and  extortioner,  who  had 
gotten  riches  by  fraud  and  deceit,  and  by  grinding  the  faces  of 
the  poor:  so  did  Matthew  too,  and  yet  they  found  mercy. 

Hdvc  you  been  blasphemers  and  persecutors  of  the  saints 
and  servants  of  God?  So  was  St.  Paul,  yet  he  received 
m^Tcy :  have  you  been  common  harlots,  filthy  and  unclean 
persons?  So  was  Mary  Magdalene,  and  yet  she  received 
mercy.  Hast  thoti  been  a  thief?  The  thief  upon  the  cross 
found  met-cy.  I  despair  of  none  of  you,  however  vile  and  pro- 
fligate you  have  been  ;  I  say,  I  despair  of  none  of  you,  espe- 
cially when  God  has  had  mercy  on  such  a  wretch  as  I  am. 

Remember  the  poor  Publican,  how  he  found  favour  with 
God,  when  the  proud,  self-conceited  Pharisee,  who,  pufled  up 
with  his  own  righteodsness,  was  rejected.  And  if  you  will  go 
to  JesuB,  as  the  poor  Publican  did,  under  a  sense  of  you;  own 
unworthiness,  you  shall  find  favour  as  he  did :  there  is  virtue 
enough  in  the  blood  of  Jesus,  to  pardon  greater  sinners  than 
he  has  yet  pardoned.  Then  be  not  discouraged,  but  come 
unto  Jesus,  and  you  will  find  him  ready  to  help  in  all  thy  dis- 
tnesses,  to  lead  thee  Into  all  truth,  to  bring  thee  from  daikness 
to  light,  and  from  the  power  of  Satan  unto  God. 

Do  not  let  the  devil  deceive  you,  by  telling  you,  that  then  all 

yoor  delights  and   pleasures  will  be  over :  No ;  this  is  so  far 

from  depriving  you  of   all   pleasure,  that  it  is  an  inlet  unto 

unspeakable  delights,  peculiar  to  all  who  are  truly  regenerated. 

The  new  birth  is  the  very  beginning  of  a  life  of  peace  and 

comfort ;  and  the  greatest  pleasantness  is  to  be  found  in  the 

Ways  of  holiness.     Solomon,  who  had  experiuice  of  all  other 

pleasures,  yet  saitli  of  the  ways  of  godliness,   ''That  all  her 

Wa^'s  arc  ways  of  pleasantness,  and  all  her  paths  are  paths  of 

|>euce."    Then  sure  you  will  not  let  the  devil  deceive  you ;  it 

is  ail  he  wants,  it  is  that  he  aims  at,  to  make  religion  appear 

to  be  melancholy,  miserable,  and  enthusiristic :  but  let  him  say 

what  he  will,  give  not  ear  to  him,  regard  him   not,  for  he 

always  was  and  will  be  a  liar. 

What  words,  what  entreaties,  shall  I  use,  to  make  you  come 
unto  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ?  The  little  love  I  have  expe- 
rienced since  I  have  beem  brought  from  sin  to  God,  is  so  great, 
Hmft  1  would  116^  be  in  a  natural  state  for  ten  thousand  worlds; 


378  A  PENITBKT  HEART,  [XXXlI; 

and  wbat  I  have  felt  is  but  little  to  what  I  hope  to  feel ;  but 
that  little  love  which  I  have  experienced,  is  a  sufficient  buoy 
against  all  the  stoims  and  tempests  of  this  boisterous  worid : 
and  let  men  and  devils  do  their  worst,  I  rejoice  in  the  Lord 
Jesus,  yea,  and  I  will  rejoice. 

And  O  if  you  repent  and  come  to  Jesus,  I  would  rejoice  on 
your  accounts  too ;  and  we  should  rejoice  together  to  all  eter- 
nity, when  once  passed  on  the  other  side  of  the  grave.  O 
come  to  Jesus.  The  arms  of  Jesus  Christ  will  embrace  you ; 
he  Mill  wash  away  all  your  sins  in  his  blood,  and  will  love  yoa 
freely. 

Come,  I  beseech  you  to  come  unto  Jesus  Christ  O  that 
my  words  would  pierce  to  the  very  soul !  O  that  Jesus  Christ 
was  formed  in  you !  O  that  you  would  turn  to  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  that  he  might  have  mercy  upon  you ! 

I  would  speak  till  midnight,  yea,  I  would  speak  till  I  could 
speak  no  more,  so  it  might  be  a  means  to  bring  you  to  Jesus : 
let  the  Lord  Jesus  but  enter  your  souls,  and  you  shall  find 
peace  which  the  world  can  neither  give  nor  take  away.  There 
18  mercy  for  the  greatest  sinner  amongst  you ;  go  unto  the  Lord 
as  sinners,  helpless  and  undone  without  it,  and  then  you  shall 
find  comfort  in  your  souls,  and  be  admitted  at  last  amongst 
those  who  sing  praises  unto  the  Lord  to  all  eternity. 

Now,  my  brethren,  let  mc  speak  a  word  of  exhortation  to 
those  of  you,  who  are  already  brought  to  the  Lord  Jesus,  who 
are  bom  again,  who  do  belong  to  Grod,  to  whom  it  has  been 
given  to  repent  of  your  sins,  and  are  cleansed  from  their  guilt ; 
and  that  is.  Be  thankful  to  €rod  for  his  mercies  towards  you. 
O  admire  the  grace  of  God,  and  bless  his  name  for  ever !  Are 
you  made  alive  in  Christ  Jesus  ?  Is  the  life  of  God  begun  in 
your  souls,  and  have  you  the  evidence  thereof?  Be  thankful 
for  this  unspeakable  mercy  to  you :  never  forget  to  speak  of 
his  mercy.  And  as  your  life- was  formerly  devoted  to  sin,  and 
to  the  pleasures  of  the  world,  let  it  now  be  spent  wholly  in  the 
ways  of  God;  and  O  embrace  every  opportunity  of  doing  and 
of  receiving  good.  Whatsoever  opportunity  you  have,  do  it 
vigorously,  do  it  speedily,  do  not  defer  it.  If  thou  seest  one 
hurrying  on  to  destruction,  use  the  utmost  of  thy  endeavour  to 
stop  him  in  his  course ;  shew  h'm  the  need  he  has  of  repen- 
tance, aind  that  without  it  he  is  lost  for  ever ;  do  not  regard  his 
despising  of  you ;  still  go  on  to  shew  him  his  danger :  and  if 
thy  friends  mock  and  despise,  do  not  let  that  discourage  you ; 
hold  on,  hold  out  to  the  end,  so  you  shall  have  a  crown  which 
Is  immutable,  and  that  fadetb  not  away. 

Let  the  love  of  Jesus  to  you,  keep  you  also  humble ;  do  not 
be  high-minded,  keep  close  unto  the  Lord,  observe  the  rules 
which  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  given  in  his  word,  and  let 
not  the  instructions  be  lost  which  you  are  capable  of  giving. 
O  consider  what  reason  you  have  to  be  thankful,  to  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  for  giving  you  that  repentance  you  yourselves 
had  need  of:  a  repentance  which  worketh  by  love.    Now  you 


ItXXII.]  THB   BEST  NEW   YBAR'8  OIPT.  879 

find  more  pleasure  in  walking  with  God  one  hour,  than  in  alt 
your  former  carnal  delights,  and  cdl  the  pleasures  of  sin.  O ! 
the  joy  you  feel  in  your  own  souls>  which  all  the  men  of  this 
world,  and  all  the  devils  in  hell,  though  they  were  to  combine 
together,  could  not  destroy.  Then  fear  not  their  wrath  or 
malice,  for  through  many  tribulations  we  must  enter  into  glory. 
A  few  days,  or  weeks,  or  years  more,  and  then  you  will  be 
beyond  their  reach,  you  will  be  in  the  heavenly  Jerusalem; 
there  is  all  harmony  and  love,  there  is  idl  joy  and  delight ; 
there  the  weary  soul  is  at  rest. 

Now  we  have  many  enemies,  but  at  death  they  are  all  lost ; 
they  cannot  follow  us  beyond  the  grave :  and  this  is  a  great 
encouragement  to  us  not  to  regard  tne  scoffs  and  jeers  of  the 
men  of  this  world. 

O  let  the  love  of  Jesus  be  in  your  thoughts  continually.  It 
was  his  dying  that  brought  you  life ;  it  was  his  crucifixion  that 
paid  the  satisfaction  for  your  sins ;  his  death,  burial,  and  resur- 
rection, that  completed  the  work ;  and  he  is  now  in  heaven, 
interceding  for  you  at  the  right  hand  of  his  Father.  And  can 
you  do  too  much  for  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  has  done  so 
much  for  you?  His  love  to  you  is  unfathomable.  O  the 
height,  the  depth,  the  length  and  breadth,  of  this  love,  that 
brought  the  King  of  glory  from  his  throne,  to  die  for  such 
rebels  as  we  are,  when  we  had  acted  so  unkindly  against  him, 
and  deserved  nothing  but  eternal  damnation.  He  came  down 
and  took  our  nature  upon  him ;  he  was  made  of  flesh,  and 
dwelt  among  us  ?  he  was  put  to  death  on  our  account ;  he  paid 
our  ransom :  surely  this  should  make  us  love  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ ;  should  make  us  rejoice  in  him,  and  not  do  as  too  many 
do,  and  as  we  ourselves  have  too  often,  crucify  this  Jesus  fresh. 
Let  us  do  all  we  can,  my  dear  brethren,  to  honour  him. 

Gome,  all  of  you,  come,  and  behold  him  stretched  out  for 
yoa;  see  his  hands  and  feet  nailed  to  the  cross.  O  come, 
come,  my  brethren,  and  nail  your  sins  thereto ;  come,  come  and 
8ee  his  side  pierced ;  there  is  a  fountain  open  for  sin,  and  for 
uocleanness :  O  wash,  wash,  and  be  clean :  come  and  see  his 
head  crowned  with  thorns,  and  all  for  you.  Can  you  think  of 
a  panting,  bleeding,  dying  Jesus,  and  not  be  filled  with  pity 
towards  him?  He  underwent  all  this  for  you.  Come  unto 
him  by  faith  ;  lay  hold  on  him :  there  is  mercy  for  every  soul 
of  you  that  will  come  unto  biro.  Then  do  not  delay ;  fly  unto 
tfao  arms  of  this  Jesus,  and  you  shall  be  made  clean  in  his  blood. 
O  what  shall  I  say  unto  you,  to  make  you  come  to  Jesus : 
I  have  shewed  you  the  dreadful  consec|uence  of  not  repenting 
of  your  sins ;  and  if,  after  all  I  have  said,  you  are  resolved  to 

Ecrsist,  your  blood  will  be  required  at  your  own  hands :  but  I 
ope  better  things  of  you,  and  things  that  accompany  salva- 
tion. Let  me  beg  of  you  to  pray  in  good  earnest  for  the  grace 
of  repentance.  I  may  never  see  your  faces  again ;  but  at  the 
day  of  judgment  I  will  meet  you :  there  you  will  either  bless 
Grod  that  ever  you  were  moved  to  repentance  ;  or  else  this  scr- 


880  TUB  GOSPKLoSUPf  911.  [X91IUI- 

moD,  thoQ^  in  a  field,  will  be  as  i^  swift  witqess  against  yon. 
Repent,  repent  therefore,  my  dear  brethren,  as  John  the  Baptist* 
and  our  blessed  Redeemer  himself  earnestly  exhorted,  and  turn 
from  your  evil  ways,  and  the  Lord  will  have  mercy  on  you. 

Shew  them,  O  Father,  wherein  they  have  ofiiended  thee ;  make 
ihem  to  see  their  own  vileness,  and  that  they  are  lost  and  un- 
done without  true  repentance ;  and  O  give  them  that  repentance, 
we  beseech  of  thee,  that  they  may  turn  from  sin  unto  thee,  the 
living  and  true  God.  These  things,  and  whatever  else  thou 
seest  needful  for  us,  we  entreat  that  thou  wouldest  bestow  upon 
US,  on  account  of  what  the  dear  Jesus  Christ  has  done  and 
suffered ;  to  whom,  vfiih  thyself  and  holy  Spirit,  three  persons, 
and  one  God,  be  ascribed,  as  is  most  due,  all  power,  glory, 
might,  majesty,  and  dominion,  now,  henceforth,  and  for  ever- 
more.   Amen» 


SERMON  XXXIIL 

THE     GOSPEL     SUPPER. 


And  the  servant  said,  Lord,  it  is  done  as  thou  hast  commandtd, 
and  yet  there  is  room.  And  the  Lord  said  unto  the  servant.  Go 
out  into  the  highways  and  hedges,  and  compel  them  to  come  in, 
that  my  house  vtay  be  filled.  For  I  say  unto  you,  that  none  of 
those  meti  which  were  bidden  shall  taste  of  my  supper. — Luke  ^v. 
22,  23,  24. 

Though  here  is  a  large  and  solemn  assembly,  yet  I  suppose 
you  are  all  convinced,  that  you  are  not  to  live  in  this  world 
always.  May  I  not  take  it  for  granted,  that  even  the  most 
profane  amongst  you  do  in  your  heart  believe,  what  the  sacred 
oracles  have  most  clearly  revealed,  "  That  as  it  is  appointed 
lor  all  men  once  to  die,  so  after  death  comes  the  judgment  V*  Yes, 
J  know  you  believe,  that  nothing  is  more  certain  than  that  we 
are  to  '' appear  before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ,  to  be  re- 
warded according  to  the  deeds  done  in  the  body,  whether  they 
have  been  good,  or  whether  they  have  been  evil."  And  how- 
ever hard  the  saying  may  seem  to  you  at  the  first  hearing,  yet 
I  cannot  help  informiiig  you,  that  I  am  thoroughly  persuaded, 
us  many  will  be  driven  from  that  judgment-seat,  with  a  **  De- 
part, ye  cursed,  into  everlasting  fire,"  lor  pursuing  things  in 
themselves  lawful,  out  of  a  wrong  principle,  and  in  too  intense 
a  decree ;  as  for  drunkenness,  adultery,  fornication,  or  any  other 
gross  enorinity  whatsoever.  Bad  as  the  world  is,  blessed  be 
God,  there  arc  great  numbers  yet  left  amongst  us,  who,  either 
through  the  restraiuts  of  a  religious  education,  or  self-love  and 
outward  reputation,  abstain  from  gross  sin  themselves,  and 
look  with  detestation  and  abhorrence  upon  others  who  indulge 
themhclves  in  it.  But  then,  through  an  over-eager  pursuit 
after  the  things  of  sense  and  time,  Mieir  souls  are  insensibly 
lolled  into  a  spiritual  slumber,  and  by  degrees  become  as  dead 
to  (Sod,  and  as  deaf  io  all  the  gracious  invitations  of  the  gM- 


ItXXIII.}  THfi   GOSPEL   8UPPBR.  881 

pel»  as  the  most  abandoned  prodigals.  It  is  reinarkabie,  there* 
fore,  that  our  Saviour,  knowing  bow  desperately  wicked  and 
treacherous  the  heart  of  man  was,  in  this,  as  well  as  other 
respects,  after  he  had  cautioned  his  disciples^  and  us  in  them, 
to  *Uake  heed  that  their  hearts  were  not  at  any  time  overcharged 
with  surfeiting  and  drunkenness/'  immediately  adds,  ''and  the 
cares  (the  immoderate  anxious  cares)  of  this  life :"  far  they 
are  of  a  distracting,  intoxicating  nature,  and  soon  overcharge 
and  weigh  down  the  hearts  of  the  children  of  men.  To  prevent 
or  remedy  this  evil,  our  Lord,  duriftg  the  time  of  his  tabernacling 
here  below,  spake  many  parables,  but  not  one  more  pertinent, 
not  one,  in  which  the  freeness  of  the  gospel  call,  and  the  frivo- 
lous pretences  men  frame  to  excuse  themselves  from  embracing 
it,  and  the  dreadful  doom  they  incur  by  so  doing,  are  more  dis- 
played, or  set  off  in  livelier  colours,  than  that  to  which  the 
words  of  the  text  refer.  "  And  the  Lord  said  unto  the  servant. 
Go  out  into  the  highways  and  hedges,  and  compel  them  t<>  come 
in,  that  my  house  may  be  Ailed :  for  I  say  unto  you,  none  of 
those  that  were  bidden  shall  taste  of  my  supper." 

In  order  to  have  a  clear  view  of  the  occasion,  scope,  and  con- 
tents of  the  parable  to  which  these  words  belong,  it  is  necessary 
for  us  to  look  back  to  the  very  beginning  of  this  chapter.  '*  And 
It  came  to  pass,  as  he  went  into  the  house  of  one  of  the  chief 
I^harisees  to  eat  bread,  on  the  sabbath-day,  that  they  watched 
him."    The  person  here  spoken  of,  as  going  into  this  Pharisee's 
house,  is  our  blessed  Siiviour.     For  as  he  came  eating  and 
drinking,  agreeable  to  his  character,  hu  was  free,  courteous,  and 
affable  to  all ;  and  therefore,  though  it  was  on  the  sabbath-day, 
he  accepted  an  invitation,  and  went  into  the  house  of  one  of  the 
chief  Pharisees  to  eat  bread,  notwithstanding  he  knew  the  Pha- 
Hsees  were  his  professed  enemies,  and  that  they  watched  him, 
hoping  to  find  some  occasion  to  upbraid  him,  either  for  his  dis- 
course or  behaviour.     If  the  Pharisee,  into  whose  house  the 
liord  went,  was  one  of  this  stamp,  his  invitation  bespeaks  him 
to  be  a  very  ill  man,  and  may  serve  to  teach  us,  that  much 
rancour  and  heart-enmity  against  Jesus  Christ,  may  be  con- 
cealed and  cloaked  under  a  great  and  blazing  profession  of 
Teligion.     However,  our  Saviour  was  more  than  a  match  for  all 
his  enemies,  and,  by  accepting  this  invitation,  hath  warranted 
his  ministers  and  disciples  to  comply  with  the  like  invitations, 
and  converse  freely  about  the  things  of  Grod,  though  those  who 
invite  them  may  not  have  real  religion  at  heart.     For  how 
knowest  thou,  O  man,  but  thou  mayest  drop  something  that 
may  benefit  their  souls,  and  make  them  religious  indeed  ?   And 
supposing  they  should  watch   thee,  watch  thou  unto  prayer 
whilst  thou  art  in  their  company,  and  that  same  Jesus,  who 
went  into  this  Pharisee's  house,  and  was  so  faithful  and  edify- 
ing in  his  conversation  when  there,  will  enable  thee  to  go  and 
do  likewise. 

That  our  Lord's  conversatioa  was  not  trifling,  but  such  as 
tended  to  the  use  of  edifying,  and  that  he  behaved  among  the 


SB2  THB  608PBL  SUPPER.  [XXXIII. 

guests  as  a  faithful  physician,  rather  than  as  a  careless,  indiffer- 
ent companion,  is  evident  from  the  7th  verse  of  this  chapter, 
where  we  are  told,  that  **  he  marked  how  they  chose  the  chief 
rooms ;"  or,  to  speak  in  our  common  way,  were  desirous  of  sitting 
at  the  upper  end  of  the  table.     And  whether  we  think  of  it  or 
not,  the  Lord  Jesus  takes  notice  of  our  behaviour,  even  when  we 
are  going  to  sit  down  only  at  our  common  meals.    Would  to 
€rod,  all  that  make  a  profession  of  real  Christianity  considered 
this  well !    Religion  then  would  not  be  so  much  confined  to 
church  or  meeting,  but  be  brought  home  to  our  private  houses, 
and  many  needless  unchristian  compliments  be  prevented :  for 
(with  grief  I  speak  it)  is  it  not  too  true,  that  abundance  of  pro- 
fessors love  and  are  too  fond  of,  the  uppermost  places  in  houses, 
as  well  as  synagogues  ?  This  was  what  our  Lord  blamed  in  the 
guests  where  he  now  was.    He  marked,  he  took  notice,  he  looked 
before  he  spake  (as  we  should  always  do,  if  we  would  speak  to 
the  purpose)  how  they  chose  out  the  chief  rooms.    Therefore, 
though  they  were  rich  in  this  world's  goods,  and  were  none  of 
his  guests,  yet,  unwilling  to  suffer  the  least  sin  upon  them,  or 
lose  any  opportunity  of  giving  instruction,  he  gave  them  a  lecture 
upon  humility ;  saying  unto  them,  or  directing  his  discourse  to 
all  in  general,  though  probably  he  spake  to  one  in  particular, 
who  sat  near  him,  and  whom,  it  may  be,  he  took  notice  of,  as 
more  than  ordinarily  solicitous  in  choosing  a  chief  room,  or 
couch,  on  which  they  lay  at  meals,  after  the  custom  of  the 
Romans :  "  When  thou  art  bidden  of  any  man  to  a  wedding 
(which  seems  to  intimate  that  this  was  a  wedding  feast)  sit  not 
down  in  the  highest  room,  lest  a  more  honourable  man  than  thou 
be  bidden  of  him ;  and  he  that  bade  thee  and  him  come  and  say 
to  thee.  Give  tliis  man  place ;  and  thou  begin  with  shame  to  take 
the  lowest  room.    But  when  thou  art  bidden,  go  and  srt  down  in 
the  lowest  room ;  that  when  he  that  bade  thee  cometh,  he  may 
say  unto  thee,  Friend,  go  up  higher :  then  shalt  thou  have  wor- 
ship Tor  respect)  in  the  presence  of  them  who  sit  at  meat  with 
thee.      O  glorious  example  of  faithfulness  and  love  to  souls ! 
How  ought  ministers,  especially,  to  copy  after  their  blessed 
Master,  and,  with  simplicity  and  godly  sincerity,  mildly  and 
opportunely  rebuke  the  faults  of  the  company  they  are  in,  though 
superior  to  them  in  outward  circumstances?    What  rightly  in- 
formed person,  after  reading  this  passage,  can  think  they  teach 
ightly,  and  agreeably  to  the  word  of  God  in  this  respect,  who 
say,  we  must  not,  at  least  need  not,  reprove  natural  men  ?  Surely 
such  doctrine  comes  not  from  above !    For  are  we  not  com- 
manded, in  anywise,  to  reprove  our  neighbour  (whether  he  be  a 
child  of  God  or  no)  and  not  to  suffer  sin  upon  him  ?     Is  it  not 
more  than  probable,  that  all  these  guests  were  natural  men  ? 
And  yet  our  Lord  reproved  them.     Help  us,  then,  O  Saviour,  in 
this  and  every  other  instance  of  thy  moral  conduct,  to  walk  as 
thou  hast  set  us  an  example ! 

Neither  did  our  Lord  stop  here;  but,  observing  that  none  but 
the  rich,  the  mighty,  and  the  noble,  were  called  to  the  feast,  he 


III.]  THE  GOSPEL  SUPPER. 

look  occasion  also  from  thence,  to  give  even  his  host,  (for  the  best 
return  we  make  our  friends  for  their  kindness,  is  to  be  faithful 
to  their  souls)  one  of  the  chief  Pharisees,  a  wholesome  piece  of 
advice.  "  Then  said  he  also  to  him  Uiat  bade  him.  When  thou 
makest  a  dinner  or  a  supper,  call  not  thy  friends,  nor  thy  brethren, 
neither  thy  kinsmen,  nor  thy  rich  neighbours,  lest  diey  also  bid 
thee  again,  and  a  recompense  be  made  thee.  But  when  thou 
makest  a  feast,  call  the  poor,  the  maimed,  the  lame,  the  blind, 
and  thou  shalt  he  blessed ;  for  they  cannot  recompense  thee : 
Tor  thou  shalt  be  recompensed  at  the  resurrection  of  the  iust!'' 
Thus  did  our  Lord  entertain  the  company.  Words  spoken  in 
such  due  season,  how  good  are  they !  Would  Christ's  followers 
thus  exert  themselves,  and,  when  in  company,  begin  some  useful 
discourse  for  their  great  Master,  they  know  not  what  good  they 
might  do,  and  how  many  might  be  influenced,  by  their  good 
example,  to  second  them  in  it. 

An  instance  of  this  we  have  in  the  14th  verse ;  **  And  when 
one  of  them  that  sat  at  meat  with  him  heard  these  things,  he  said 
unto  him.  Blessed  is  he  that  shall  eat  bread  in  the  kingdom  of 
God."  Happy  they  who  shall  be  recompensed  at  that  resurrec- 
tion of  the  just,  which  thou  hast  been  speaking  of.  A  very  per- 
tinent saying  this !  every  way  suitable  to  persons  sitting  down 
to  cat  bread  on  earth,  which  we  should  never  do,  without  talking 
of,  and  longing  for  that  time,  when  we  shall  sit  down  and  eat 
bread  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  This  opened  to  our  Lord  a 
fresh  topic  of  conversation,  and  occasioned  the  parable  which 
is  to  be  the  more  immediate  subject  of  your  present  meditation. 
As  though  he  had  said  to  the  person  that  spoke  last.  Thou  sayest 
right :  blessed  are  they  indeed,  who  shall  sit  down  to  eat  bread 
in  the  kingdom  of  God  :  but,  alas !  most  men,  especially  you 
Pharisees,  act  as  if  you  did  not  believe  this ;  and,  therefore,  be 
said  unto  him,  **  A  certain  man  made  a  great  supper,  and  bade 
many.*'  By  the  certain  man  making  a  great  supper,  we  are  to 
naderstand  God  the  Father,  who  has  made  provision  for  perish- 
ing souls,  by  the  obedience  and  death  of  his  beloved  Son  Christ 
Jesus.  This  provision  is  here  represented  under  the  character 
of  a  supper,  because  the  Ccena,  or  supper,  among  the  ancients, 
Was  their  grand  meal :  men  could  never  have  made  such  pro- 
Hsion  for  themselves,  or  angels  for  them.  No,  our  salvation  is 
III  from  God,  from  the  beginning  to  the  end.  He  made  it,  and 
Hot  we  ourselves ;  and  it  is  wholly  owing  to  the  divine  wisdom, 
ind  not  our  own,  that  we  are  become  God's  people,  and  the  sheep 
>f  his  pasture.  This  provision  for  perishing  souls,  may  be 
astly  called  great,  because  there  is  rich  and  ample  provision 
uade  in  the  gospel  for  a  great  many  souls.  For  however 
[lyrist's  flock  may  be  but  a  little  flock,  when  asunder,  yet,  when 
Jiey  come  all  together,  they  will  be  a  multitude  which  no  man 
ZBii  number.  And  it  is  especially  called  great,  because  it  was 
purchased  at  so  great  a  price,  the  price  of  Christ's  most  precious 
blood.  And,  therefore,  when  the  apostle  would  exhort  the 
Christians  to  glorify  God  in  their  souls  and  bodies,  he  makes  use 


S84  THE  G06PBL  8UPPBR.  [KXXIll 

of  this  glorious  motive,  ^'  that  tfaey  were  boogfat  widi  a  price.** 
He  does  not  say  what  price,  but  barely  a  price,  einphaticHliy 
so  called;  as  though  all  the  prices  in  the  world  were  nothing  (as 
indeed  they  are  uot)  when  compared  to  this  price  of  Christ's 
most  precious  blood. 

For  these  reasons,  Jesus  said  in  the  parable,  '^^  A  certain  ma« 
made  a  great  supper,  and  bade  many,  aad  sent  his  servant  at 
supper-time,  to  say  to  them  that  were  bidden.  Come,  for  all 
things  are  now  ready."  He  bade  many :  the  eternal  God  took  the 
Jews  for  his  peculiar  people,  under  the  Mos.)ic  dispensation; 
and  by  types,  f;hadows,  aiMl  prophecies  of  the  Old  TesUtment, 
invited  them  to  partake  of  the  glorious  privileges  of  the  gospel. 
'"  But  at  supper-time/'  in  the  fulness  of  time,  which  God  the 
Father  had  decided  from  eternity,  in  the  evening  of  the  world 
(for  which  reason  the  gospel-tiDies  are  called  the  last  times) 
•*  he  sent  his  servant,"  Christ  his  Son,  here  called  his  servant, 
because,  acting  as  Mediator,  be  was  inferior  to  the  Father;  there- 
fore says  the  prophet  Isaiah,  ''Sehold  my  servant  whom  T  have 
chosen :"  *'  to  say  to  them  that  were  bidden,"  to  the  professing 
Jews,  called  by  St.  John,  ''his  oivn,"  that  is,  his  peculiar  pro- 
fessing people — with  this  message,  "Come;"  repent  and  believe 
•the  gospel.  Nothing  is  required  on  roan's  part,  but  to  come, 
or  accept  the  gospel  offer,  it  is  not  according  to  the  old  cove- 
nant, "Do  and  live;"  but  only  "Come,  believe,  and  thou  shalt 
be  saved."  All  things  are  ready.  Nothing  is  wanting  on  God's 
ipart.  "All  things  are  now  ready."  There  sceras  to  be  a  par- 
.ticular  emphasis  to  be  put  upon  now^,  implying,  this  was  an 
especial  season  of  grace,  and  God  was  now  exerting  his  last 
efforts,  to  save  lost  man.  Well  then,  if  the  great  God  be  at  so 
igreat  an  expense,  to  make  so  great  a  snpper  for  perishing  crea- 
tures, and  sends  so  great  a  person  as  his  own  Son,  in  the  tbrm 
of  a  servant,  to  iavite  them  to  come  to  it;  one  would  imagine, 
that  all  who  heard  these  glad  tidings,  should  readily  say.  Lord, 
lo  we  come.  But  instead  of  this,  we  are  told,  "They  all  (the 
greatest  part  of  the  Jews)  with  one  consent  began  to  make 
excuse."  Conscience  told  them  they  ought  to  come,  and  in  all 
probability  they  had  some  faint  desire  to  come ;  and  they  had 
nothing,  as  we  bear  of,  to  object  either  against  the  person  who 
prepared  the  supper,  or  the  person  who  invited  them,  or  the 
entertainment  itself;  neither  do  we  hear  that  they  treated  either 
with  contempt,  as  is  the  f  ustom  of  too  many  in  the  days  wherein 
we  live.  In  all  probability,  they  acknowledge  all  was  very  good, 
and  that  it  was  kind  in  that  certain  man,  to  send  them  such  an 
invitation.  But  being  very  busy,  and,  as  they  thought,  very  law- 
fully engaged,  tliey  began  to  maike  excuse. 

But  the  excuses  they  made,  rendered  their  refusal  inexcusable. 

''The  first  said  unto  him,  I  have  bought  a  piece  of  ground,  and 

I  must  needs  go  and  see  it:"  Thou  fool'— buy  a  piece  of  ground, 

^and  then  go  and  see  it !     A  prudent  man  would  have  gone  and 

seen  the  ground  first,  and  bought  it  afterwards.    Why  must  be 

go?    At  least,  why  must  he  needs  go  noio?    The  land 


I 


ZXXIII.}  THB  GOSPEL  SUPPER.  485 

was  his  own,  could  he  not  therefore  have  accepted  the  inyitation 
to-day,  and  gone  and  seen  his  estate,  or  plantation,  on  the  mor- 
row? As  he  had  bonght  it,  he  need  not  Tear  losing  his  bargain, 
by  another's  buying  it  from  him.  But  notwithstanding  all  this, 
there  Is  a  needs  must  for  his  going,  and  therefore- says  he,  "I 
pray  thee  have  me  excused,"  and  improve  thy  interest  with  thy 
master  in  my  behalf.     This  was  a  bad  excuse. 

The  second  was  rather  worse.  For  what  says  the  evangelist? 
Verse  19,  "And  another  said,  I  have  bought  five  yoke  of  oxen, 
and  I  go  to  prove  them  :"  One,  it  seems,  had  been  buying  an 
estate ;  another,  cattle,  to  stock  an  estate  already  bonght ;  and 
both  equally  foolish  in  making  their  bargains:  for  this  second 
had  bought  five  yoke  of  oven,  which  must  needs  cost  him  a  con- 
siderable sum,  perhaps  all  he  had  in  the  world,  and  now  he  must 
go  and  prove  them.  A  wise  dealer  would  have  proved  the  oxen 
firsthand  bought  them  afterwards:  but  our  Saviour  speaks  this, 
to  shew  us,  that  we  will  trust  one  another,  nay,  I  may  add,  the 
devil  himself,  more  than  we  will  trust  God. 

The  excuse  which  the  third  makes,  is  worst  of  all.     "  I  have 
married  a  wife,  and  therefore  1  cannot  come."     Had  he  said,  I 
irill  not  come,  he  had  spoken  the  real  sentiments  of  his  heart: 
for  it  is  not  so  much  men's  impotency,  as  their  want  of  a  will 
and  inclination,  that  keeps  them  from  the  gospel-feast.     But 
why  cannot  he  come?     He  has  ''married  a  wife."    Has  he  so? 
Why,  then,  by  all  means  he  should  come :  for  the  supper  to 
which  he  was  invited,  as  it  should  seem,  was  a  wedding-supper, 
and  would  have  saved  him  the  trouble  of  a  nuptial  entertain- 
ment.    It  was  a  great  supper,  and  consequently  there  was  pro- 
vision enough  for  him  and  his  bride  too.   And  it  was  made  by  a 
icreat  man,  who  sent  out  his  servant  to  bid  many,  so  that  he  need 
not  to  have  doubted  of  meeting  with  a  heatty  welcome,  though 
be  should  bring  his  wife  with  him.     Or,  supposing  his  wife  were 
unwilling  to  come,  yet  as  the  husband  is  the  head  of  the  wife, 
lie  ought  to  have  laid  his  commands  on  her,  to  accompany  him. 
For  we  cannot  do  better  for  our  yoke-fellows,  than  to  bring  them 
U>  the  gospel-feast.     Or,  supposing,  after  all,  she  would  not  be 
prevailed  upon,  he  ought  to  have  gone  without  her :  for  *'  those 
that  have  wives,  must  be  as  though  they  had  none ;"  and  we 
BMist  not  let  carnal  afl*ection  get  such  an  ascendancy  over  us, 
is  to  be  kept  thereby  from  spiritual  entertainments.  Adam  paid 
^r  for  hearkening  to  the  voice  of  his  wife ;  and  sometimes, 
^ess  we  forsake  wives,  as  well  as  bouses  and  lands,  we  cau- 
M  be  the  Lord's  disciples. 

This  then  was  the  reception  the  servant  met  with,  and  such 
^ere  the  excuses  and  answers  that  were  sent  back.  And  what 
^as  the  consequence?  "  So  that  servant  came  (no  doubt  with  a 
jonrowfiil  heart)  and  shewed  his  Lord  these  things."  However 
"We  it  be  thought  of,  yet  ministers  must  shew  the  Lord,  what 
Jttccess  their  ministry  meets  with.  We  must  shew  it  to  our  Lord 
•^,  We  must  spread  the  case  before  him  in  prayer.  We  must 
^w  it  to  our  Lord  hereafter,  before  the  general  assembly  of  the 
♦  2a 


386  THB  GOSPEL   SUPPER.  [XXXIII. 

whole  world.  But  how  dreadful  is  it^when  ministers  arc  obliged 
to  go  upon  their  knees^  crying,    "  O !  my  leanness,  my  lean- 
ness !"  and,  Elias-Iike,  to  intercede  as  it  were  against  those  to 
whom  they  would  not  only  have  imparted  the  gospel,  but  even 
their  own  lives.     It  is  a  heart-breaking  consideration.     But 
thus  it  must  be ;  '^  The  servant  came  and  shewed  the  Lord  these 
things ;"  so  must  we.    Well,  and  what  says  the  Lord  ?    We  are 
told,  ver.  21.  that  "  the  master  of  the  house  was  angry."     Not 
with  the  servant :  for  though  Israel  be  not  gathered,  yet  shall 
Christ  be  glorious;  and  faithful  ministers  shall  be  rewarded, 
whether  people  obey  the  gospel  or  not.     "We  are  a  sweet 
savour  unto  God,  whether  the  word  be  a  savour  of  life  unto 
life,  or  a  savour  of  death  unto  death."   The  master  of  the  house, 
therefore,  was  angry,  not  with  the  servant,  but  with   these 
worldly-minded,  pleasure-taking  refusers  of  his  gracious  invita- 
tion ;  who,  in  all  probability,  went  to  see  and  stock  their  estates, 
and  attend  upon  their  brides,  not  doubting  but  their  excuses 
would  be  taken,  because  they  were  lawfully  employed.     And, 
indeed,  in  one  sense,  their  excuses  were  accepted :  for  I  do  not 
hear  that  they  were  ever  invited  any  more.     God  took  them  at 
their  word,  though  they  would  not  take  him  at  his.     They  beg- 
ged to  be  excused,  and  they  were  excused,  as  we  shall  see  in  the 
sequel  of  this  parable.     Let  us  not  therefore  harden  our  hearts, 
as  in  the  day  of  provocation ;  "  Now  is  the  accepted  time,  now 
is  the  day  of  salvation."     But  must  the  feast  want  guests  ?   No, 
if  they  cannot  or  will  not  come,  others  shall  and  will.     The 
master  of  the  house,  therefore,  being  angry,  sent  the  servant 
upon  a  second  errand,  "Go  out  quickly  into  the  streets  and 
lanes  of  the  city,  and  bring  in  hither  the  poor,  and  the  maim^, 
and  the  halt,  and  the  blind."     Every  word  bespeaks  a  spirit  of 
resentment  and  importunity.     Go  out  quickly,  make  no  delay, 
dread  no  attempt  or  danger,  into  the  streets  and  lanes  of  the 
city,  and  bring  in  hither,  not  only  call  them,  but  bring  them 
in,  (for  the  master  here,  to  encourage  the  servant,  assures  him 
of  success,)  the  poor,  and  the  maimed,  and  the  halt,  and  the 
blind.     This  was  fulfilled,  when  Jesus  Christ,  after  tho  gospel 
was  rejected  by  the  Jews,  went  and  invited  the  Gentiles,  and 
when  the  publicans  and  harlots  took  the  kingdom  of  Grod  by  a 
holy  violence,  whilst  the  self-righteous  scribes  and   Pharisees 
rejected  the  kingdom  of  God  against  themselves.     Tliis  was 
also  a  home  reproof  to  the  rich  Pharisee,  at  whose  house  the 
Lord  Jesus  was,  as  well  as  a  cutting  lesson  to  the  other  guests: 
for  our  Saviour  would  hereby  shew  them,  that  God  took  a  quite 
different  method  from  his  host,  and  was  not  above  receiving  tbe 
poor,  and  halt,  and  blind,  and  maimed,  to  the  gospel  supper, 
though  he  had  called  none  such  to  sit  down  at  his  table.    Whe- 
ther the  guests  resented  it  or  not,  we  are  not  told.     But  if  they 
were  not  quite  blind,  both  host  and  guests  might  easily  see  that 
the  parable  was  spoken  against  them.    But  to  proceed. 

The  serv' ant  again  returns,  but  with  a  more  pleasing  answer 
than  before, "  Lord,  it  is  done  as  thou  hast  commanded,  and  yet 


XXXIII.]  THE  GOSPEL   SUPPBR.  S87 

there  is  room."  The  words  bespeak  the  servant  to  be  full  of 
joy  at  the  thoughts  of  the  success  he  had  met  with.  None  can 
tell,  but  those  who  experience  it,  what  comfort  ministers  have 
in  seeing  their  labours  blest.  ^'Now  I  live,  (says  the  apostle,) 
il'  you  stand  fast  in  the  Lord.  Ye  arc  our  joy  and  crown  of  re- 
joicing in  the  day  of  the  Lord  Jesus."  **  Lord,  it  is  done  as 
ihou  hast  commanded."  The  poor,  and  maimed,  and  halt,  and 
blind,  have  been  called,  and  have  obeyed  the  summons,  and  I 
have  brought  them  with  me ;  yet.  Lord,  thy  house,  and  thy  sup- 
per, is  so  great,  there  is  room  for  more.  Hereby  he  insinuated 
that  he  wanted  to  be  employed  again,  in  calling  more  souls ; 
and  the  more  we  do,  the  more  may  we  do,  for  God :  ''  To  him 
that  hath,  shall  be  given ;"  and  present  success  is  a  great  en- 
couragement to  future  diligence.  Such  hints  are  pleasing  to  our 
Saviour.  He  delights  to  see  his  ministers  ready  for  new  work, 
and  waiting  for  fresh  orders.  ^'  The  Lord,  therefore,  (we  are 
told,  ver.  23.)  said  unto  his  servant,  (the  same  servant,)  Go  out 
into  the  highways  and  hedges,  and  compel  them  to  come  in,  that 
my  house  may  be  filled ;  (ver  24.)  For  t  say  unto  you,  that . 
none  of  those  who  are  bidden,  shall  taste  of  my  supper."  O 
catting  words  to  those  that  sat  at  meat,  if  they  had  hearts  to 
make  the  application!  but  glad  tidings  of  great  joy  to  the 

fablicans,  harlots,  and  GentUes,  who  were  rejected  by  the  proud 
harisees,  as  aliens  to  the  commonwealth  of  Israel,  and  strangers 
to  the  covenant  of  promise !    This  was  fulfilled,  when  our  Lord 
sent  the  apostles,  not  only  into  the  streets  and  lanes  of  the  city> 
and  places  bordering  upon  Jerusalem  and  Judea,  but  when  he 
gave  them  a  commission  to  go  out  into  all  the  world,  and  preach 
the  gospel  to  every  creature.  Gentile  as  well  as  Jew ;  and  not 
only  gave  them  a  command,  but  blessed  their  labours  with  such 
success,  that  three  thousand  were  converted  in  one  day.    And  I 
am  not  without  hopes  that  it  will  be  still  further  fulfilled,  by  the 
calling  of  some  of  you  home  this  day :  for,  however  this  parable  was 
spoken  originally  to  the  Jews,  and  upon  a  particular  occasion, 
as  at  a  feast,  yet  it  is  applicable  to  us  and  to  our  children,  and 
to  as  many  as  are  afar  off;  yea,  to  as  many  as  the  Lord  our  God 
shall  call.     It  gives  a  sanction,  methinks,  to  preaching  in  the 
fields,  and  other  places  besides  the  synagogues ;  and  points  out 
tbe  reception  the  gospel  meets  with  in  these  days,  in  such  a  lively 
nuumer,  that  one  would  think  it  had  a  particular  reference  to  the 
present  age :  for  is  it  not  too,  too  plain,  that  the  gospel-offers, 
and  gospel-grace,  have  been  slighted^  and  made  light  of,  by  many 
pmfessors  of  this  generation  ?     We  have  been  in  the  churches, 
telling  them,  again  and  again,  that  God  has  made  a  great  supper, 
(and  has  invited  many,  even  them,)  and  sent  us  by  his  provi- 
dence and  his  Spirit, "  to  say  unto  them  that  were  bidden.  Come, 
for  all  things  are  now  ready.     Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus,  and 
Joa  shall  be  saved/*     But  the  generality  of  the  laity  have  made 
light  of  it,  they  have  given  us  the  hearing,  but  are  too  busy  in 
^mi  merchandises,  their  marrying  and  giving  in  marriage,  to 
come  and  be  blessed  in  the  Lord  of  life.     We  have  told  them, 

2a  2 


388  THE   GOSPEL   SUPPER.  [XXXIII. 

again  and  again,  that  we  do  not  want  them  to  hide  themselves 
from  the  world,  but  to  teach  them  how  they  may  live  in,  and 
yet  not  be  of  it.  But  all  will  not  do.  Many  of  the  clergy  also 
(like  the  letter-learned  scribes  and  Pharisees  in  our  Saviour's 
time)  reject  the  kingdom  of  God  against  themselves,  and  deny 
us  the  use  of  the  pulpits,  for  no  other  reason  but  because  we 
preach  the  doctrine  of  justification  in  the  sight  of  God  by  faith 
alone,  and  invite  sinners  to  come  and  taste  of  the  gospel-feast 
freely,  without  money  and  without  price. 

Whatever   they   may   think,  we  are  persuaded,  the  great 
Master  of  the  house  is  angry  with  them,  for  being  angry  with 
us  without  a  cause.    H3  therefore  now,  by  his   providence, 
bids  us,  ''  Go  out  quickly  into  the  streets  and  lanes  of  the  city, 
and  bring  in  the  poor,  and  the  maimed,  and  the  halt,  and  the 
blind,"   or  call  in    the    publicans    and   harlots,  the  common 
cursers,  and  swearers,  and  sabbath-breakers,  and  adulterers, 
who,  perhaps,  never  entered  a  church  door,  or  heard  that  Jesus 
Christ  died  for  such  sinners  as  they  are.     We,  through  grace, 
have  obeyed  the  command,  we  have  gone  out,  though  exposed 
to  much  contempt  for  so  doing,  and,  blessed  be  God,  our  labour 
has  not  been  in  vain  in  the  Lord :  for  many  have  been  made 
willing  in  the  day  of  God's  power;  and,  we  would  speak  it 
with  humility,  we  can  go  cheerfully  to  our  Saviour,  and  say, 
*^  It  is  done.  Lord,  as  thou  hast  commanded,  and  yet  there  is 
room."      He  is  therefore   pleased,  in  spite  of  all  opposition 
from  men  or  devils,  to  continue,  and  renew,  and  enlarge  our 
commission;  he  hath  sent  us  literally  into  the  highways  and 
hedges;  and,  I  trust,  has  given  us  a  commission  to  compel 
sinners  to  come:   for,  could  we  speak  with   the  tongues  of 
men  and  angels,  yet  if  the  Lord  did  not  attend  the  word  with 
his  power,  and   sweetly  incline   men's  wills  to  comply  with 
the  gospel-call,  we  should  be  as  a  sounding  brass,  or  a  tinkling 
cymbal.     But  this  we  believe  our  Saviour  will  do,  for  his  house 
must  be  filled :  every  soul  for  whom  he  has  shed  his  blood, 
shall  finally  be  saved ;  "  and  all  that  the  Father  hath  given 
him,  shall  come  unto   him ;  and  whosoever  cometh  unto  him, 
he   will   in   no   wise   cast   out."      This  comforted  our  Lord, 
when  his  gospel  was  rejected  by  the  Jews.     As  though  he  had 
said.  Well,  though  you  despise  the  ofiers  of  my  grace,  yet  I 
shall  not  shed  my  blood  in  vain ;  for  all  that  the  Father  hath 
given  me  shall  come  unto  me. 

Supported  by  this  consideration,  I  am  not  ashamed  to  come 
out  this  day  into  the  highways  and  hedges,  and  to  confess  that 
my  business  is  to  call  the  poor,  and  the  maimed,  and  the  halt, 
and  the  blind,  self-condemned,  helpless  sinners,  to  the  mar- 
riage-feast of  the  supper  of  the  Lamb.  My  cry  is,  Ck>me, 
believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus ;  throw  yourselves  at  the  footstool 
of  his  mercy,  and  you  shall  be  saved ;  for  all  things  are  now 
ready.  God  the  Father  is  ready,  God  the  Son  is  ready,  and 
God  the  Holy  Ghost  is  ready ;  the  blessed  angels  above  are 
ready,  and  the  blessed  saints  below  are  ready,  to  welcome  yoa 


XXXIII.]  THB   GOSPBL   SUPPBR.  tI89 

to  the  gospel-feast.  A  perfect  and  everlasting  righteousness 
is  now  wrought  out  by  Jesus  Christ.  God,  now,  upon  fapnour- 
able  terms,  can  acquit  the  guilty.  God  can  now  be  just,  and 
yet  justify  the  ungodly.  "  For  he  hath  made  Christ  to  be  sin 
for  us,  who  knew  no  sin,  that  we  might  be  made  the  righteous- 
ness of  God  in  him."  The  fatted  calf  is  now  killed,  and 
"  Christ,  our  passover,  is  sacrificed  for  us."  Come,  sinners. 
and  feed  upon  him  in  your  hearts  by  faith,  with  thanksgiving. 
For  Jesus  Christ's  sake,  do  not  with  one  consent  begin  to 
make  excuse.  Do  not  let  a  piece  of  ground,  five  yoke  of 
oxen,  or  even  a  wife,  keep  you  from  this  great  supper,  lliese 
you  may  enjoy,  as  the  gifts  of  God,  and  make  use  of  them  for 
the  Mediator's  glory,  and  yet  be  present  at  the  gospel-feast. 
True  and  undefiied  religion  does  not  take  away,  but  rather 
greatly  enhances,  the  comforts  of  life :  and  our  Lord  did  not 
pray  that  we  should  be  taken  out  of  the  world,  but  "  that  we 
should  be  delivered  from  the  evil  of  it."  O  then  that  you 
would  all,  with  one  consent,  say,  Lo !  we  come.  Assure  your- 
selves there  is  provision  enough.  For  it  is  a  great  supper. 
In  our  Father's  liouse  there  is  bread  enough,  and  to  spare. 
And  though  a  great  God  makes  the  supper,  yet  he  is  as  good 
and  condescending  as  he  is  great.  Though  he  be  the  high  and 
lofty  One  that  inUabiteth  eternity,  yet  he  will  dwell  with  the 
bumble  and  contrite  heart,  even  with  the  man  that  treinbleth 
at  his  word.  Neither  can  you  complain  for  want  of  room ; 
"for  yet  there  is  room.  In  our  Father's  house  are  many  man- 
fdons."  If  it  were  not  so,  our  Saviour  would  have  told  us. 
The  grace  of  Christ  is  as  rich,  as  free,  and  as  powerful  as 
ever.  He  is  '*  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever :"  He 
is  full  of  grace  and  truth ;  and  out  of  his  fulness,  all  that  come 
to  him  may  receive  grace  for  grace.  He  giveth  liberally,  and 
upbraideth  not.  He  willeth  not  the  death  of  a  sinner,  but 
rather  that  he  should  believe  and  live.  Come  then,  all  ye  halt, 
poor,  maimed,  and  blind  sinners;  take  comfort,  the  Lord 
Jesus  has  sent  his  servant  to  call  you.  It  is  now  supper-time, 
and  a  day  of  uncommon  grace.  The  day  may  be  far  spenL 
Haste,  therefore,  and  away  to  the  supper  of  the  Lamb.  If 
you  do  not  come,  I  know  the  Master  will  be  angry.  And  who 
can  stand  before  him  when  he  is  angry?  "Harden- not  there- 
fore your  hearts,  as  in  the  day  of  provocation,  as  in  the  day 
of  temptation  in  the  wilderness."  Do  not  provoke  the  Lord 
to  say,  ^'  None  of  those  that  were  bidden  shall  taste  of  my 
snpper."  O  dreadful  words !  Much  more  is  implied  in  them 
than  is  expressed.  It  is  the  same  with  that  in  the  Psalms, 
"  I  swarein  my  wrath,  that  they  should  not  enter  into  my  rest." 
And  if  you  do  not  enter  into  God's  rest,  nor  taste  of  Christ's 
supper,  you  must  lift  up  your  eyes  in  torments,  where  you 
will  have  no  rest,  and  must  sup  with  the  damned  devils  for 
evermore. 

Knowing  therefore  the  terrors  of  the  Lord,  we  persuade  you 
to  haste  away,  and  make   no    more  frivolous   excuses :    for* 


aOff  THE   GOSPEL  SUPPER.  [XXXHI. 

there  U  no  excuse  against  believing.  Perhaps  you  say.  Yon 
call  to  the  halt^  and  maimed^  and  blind,  and  poor.  But  if  we 
are  halt,  and  maimed,  how  can  we  come  ?  If*  we  are  blind, 
how  can  we  i*ee  our  way?  If  we  are  poor,  how  can  uc 
expect  admission  to  so  great  a  table?  Ah!  happy  are  ye,  if 
you  are  sensible  that  you  are  halt  and  maimed  :  for  if  you 
feel  yourselves  so,  and  are  lamenting  it,  who  knows  but  whilst 
I  am  speaking,  God  may  send  his  Spirit  with  the  word,  and 
fetch  you  homo  ?  Though  you  are  blind,  Jesus  has  eye-salve 
to  anoint  you.  Though  you  are  poor,  yet  you  are  welcome 
to  this  rich  feast.  It  cost  JTesus  Christ  a  great  price,  but  you 
shall  have  it  gratis.  For  such  as  you  was  it  designed. 
''  Blessed  are  the  poor  in  spirit,  for  theirs  is  the  kir.gdom  of 
heaven."  Rich,  self-righteous,  self-sufficient  sinners,  I  know, 
will  scorn  both  the  feast  and  its  great  provider.  They  hare 
done  so  alreadv,  therefore  the  Lord  has  sent  us  into  the  high- 
ways and  hedges,  to  bring  such  poor  souls  as  you  are,  in. 
N'enturo  then,  my  dear  friends,  and  honour  God,  by  taking  him 
at  his  word.  Come  to  the  marriage-feast.  Believe  me,  you  will 
there  partake  of  most  delicious  fare. 

Tell  me,  ye  that  have  been  made  to  taste  tbat  the  Lord  is 
gracious,  will  you  not  recommend  this  feast  to  all  ?    Are  yoa 
not,  whilst  I  am  speaking,  ready  to  cry  out,  Come  all  ye  that 
are  without,  come  ye,  obey  the  call,  for  we  have  sat  under  the 
Redeemer's  shadow  with  great  delight,  and  his  fruit  has  beeo 
pleasant  to  our  taste.    Whilst  I  am  speaking,  does  not  the 
fire  kindle,  do  not  your  hearts  burn  with  a  desire  that  others 
may  come  and  be  bles5;ed  too?    If  you  are  Christians  indeed, 
I  know  you  will  ho  thus  minded,  and  the  language  of  your 
hearts  will  be.  Lord,  whilst  he  is  calling,  let  thy  Spirit  compel 
them  to  come  in.    O  that  the  Lord  may  say,  Amenf    And 
why  should  we  doubt?    Surely  our  Saviour  wiU  not  let  me 
complain  this  day  that  I  have  laboured  in  vain,  and  spent  my 
strength  for  nought.     Methinks  I  see  many  desiring  to  come. 
O  how  shall  I  compel  you  to  come  forwards.     I  will  not  use 
liro  or  swonl,  as  the  Papists  do,  by  terribly  perverting  thi* 
te\t  of  scripture.     But  I  will  tell  you  of  the  love  of  God,  the 
love  of  God  in  Christ*  and  surely  that  must  compel  you,  that 
must  constrain  you,  \\hether  you  will  or  not.     Sinners,  mj 
heart  is  enlarged  towards  you.     I  could  fill  my  mouth  witb 
arguments.     Consider  the  greatness  of  the  God  who  makc^ 
the  supper.     Consider  the  greatness  of  the  price  wherewith  it 
was  purchased.    Consider  the  greatness  of  the  provisio*  oiade  • 
for  you.     What  would  you  have  more  ?   Consider  God's  iafr 
wite  condescension,  in  calling  you  now,  when  yon  lucht  bate 
lH>on  in  hell,  **  where  the  worm  dieth  not,  and  the   fire  is  lol 
quenched."    And  that  you  might  be  withcui  excuse,  he  ha* 
sent  his  servant  into  the  highways  ard   hedges,  to  invite  ?«■ 
thcTW      O  th.it  you  tasred  what  I  ^lo  now!     1  am  sure  joi 
wouM  not  want  arvrumtnts  to  induce  >ou  to  cv»mc  ia:  Xo.  uo 
vo«kl  fly  to  the  ^wpri-teast,  as  doves  to  ikc  wiadovs. 


ti 


X3CXIII.]  THE   GOSPEL   SUPPER.  391 

But,  poor  souls!  many  of  you,  perhaps,  are  not  hungry. 
You  do  not  feel  yourselves  halt,  or  maimed,  or  blind,  and 
therefore  you  have  no  relish  for  this  spiritual  entertainment. 
Well,  be  not  angry  with  me  for  calling  you ;  be  cot  offende<} 
if  I  weep  over  you :  because  you  know  not  the  day  of  your 
visitation :  If  I  must  appear  in  judgment  as  a  swift  witness 
against  you,  I  must.  But  that  thought  chills  my  blood  !  I 
cannot  bear  it ;  I  feel  that  I  could  lay  down  my  life  for  you. 
But  I  am  not  willing  to  go  without  you.  What  say  you,  my 
dear  friends?  I  would  put  the  question  to  you  once  more, 
will  you  taste  of  Christ's  supper,  or  will  you  not  ?  You  shall 
all  be  welcome.  There  is  milk  at  this  feast  for  babes,  as  well 
as  meat  for  strong  men,  and  for  persons  of  riper  years.  There 
is  room  and  provision  for  high  and  low,  rich  and  poor,  one 
with  another;  and  our  Saviour  will  thank  you  for  coming. 
Amazing  condescension !  Astonishing  love !  The  thought  of 
it  quite  overcomes  me.  Help  me,  help  me,  O  believers,  to  bless 
and  praise  him. 

And  O !  that  his  love  may  excite  us  to  come  afresh  to  him, 
as  though  we  had  never  come  before !     For,  though  we  have 
been  often  feasted,  yet  our  souls  will  starve,  unless  we  renew 
our  acts  of  faith,  and  throw  ourselves,  as  lost,  undone  sinners, 
continually  at  the  feet  of  Christ.     Feeding  upon  past  expe- 
riences will  not  satisfy  our  souls,  any  more  than  what  we  did 
eat  yesterday  will  sustain  our  bodies  to-day.    No,  believers 
must  look  for  fresh  influences  of  divine  grace,  and  beg  of  the 
Lord  to  water  them  every  moment.     The  parable  therefore 
speaks  to  saints  as  well  as  sinners.     Come  ye  to  the  marriage- 
wast  ;  you  are  as  welcome  now  as  ever.    And  may  God  set 
your  souls  a-longing  for  that  time  when  we  shall  sit  down  and 
«at  bread  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven !  There  we  shall  have  full 
draughts  of  divine  love,  and  enjoy  the  glorious  Emmanuel  for 
evermore.     Even  so.  Lord  JTesus,  Amen. 


SERMON  XXXIV. 

THB   PHARISEE   AND   PUBLICAN. 

'  tell  you,  this  man  went  down  to  his  house  justified  rather 
than  the  oilier :  For  every  one  that  exalteth  himself,  shall  be 
abased;  and  he  that  humbleth  himself,  shall  be  exalted. — 
Lake  xviii.  14. 

'    ^uouGH  there  be  some  who  dare  to  deny  the  Lord  Jesus,  and 

disbelieve  the  revelation  he  has  been  pleased  to  give  us,  and 

^hereby  bring  upon  themselves  swift  destruction ;  yet  I  would 

<^baritably  hope  there  are  but  few  if  any  such  among  you,  to 

^bom  I  am  now  to  preach  the  kingdom  of  God.     Were  I  to 

^k  you,  how  you  expect  to   be  justified  in  the  sight  of  an 

Offended  God  ?     I   suppose  you  would  answer.  Only  for  the 

^ake  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.      But,  were  I  to  come  more 

home  to  your  consciences,  I  fear  that  most  would  make  the 


302  THB  PHARISBB   AND   PUBLICAN.  '[X^^<^- 

Lord  JTesQS  but  in  part  their  Saviour^  and  go  about  as  it  were 
to  establish  a  righteousness  of  their  own.  And  this  is  not  think- 
ing contrary  to  the  rules  of  christian  charity :  for  we  are  aU 
self-righteous  by  nature ;  it  is  as  natural  for  us  to  turn  to  a 
covenant  of  works,  as  for  the  sparks  to  fly  upwards.  We  have 
had  so  many  legal,  and  so  few  free^-grace  preachers,  for  these 
many  years,  that  most  professors  now  seem  ta  be  settled  upon 
their  lees,  and  rather  deserve  the  title  of  Pharisees  than  Chris- 
tians. 

Thus  it  was  with  the  generality  of  the  people  during  the  time 
of  our  Lord's  public  ministration  :  and  therefore,  in  almost  all 
his  discourses,  he  preached  the  gospel  to  poor  sinners,  and  de- 
nounced terrible  woes  against  proud  self-justiciaries.  Tie 
parable  to  which  the  words  of  the  text  belong,  looks  both  theie 
ways :  For  the  evangelist  informs  us  (ver.  9,)  that  our  Lord 
'^  spake  it  unto  certain  who  trusted  in  themselves  that  they 
were  righteous,  and  despised  others."  And  a  notable  parabk 
it  is ;  a  parable  worthy  of  your  most  serious  attention.  **  He 
that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  -him  hear"'  what  Jesus  Christ  speaks 
to  all  visible  professors  in  it. 

Verse  10.  "  Two  men  went  up  to  the  temple  to  pray,  (and 
never  two  men  of  more  opposite  characters,)  the  one  a  Pharisee 
and  the  other  a  Publican."    The  Pharisc^es  were  the  strictest 
sect  among  the  Jews.    ^^  I  was  of  the  strictest  sect  of  the  Pha- 
risees," says  Paul.    They  prayed  often ;  not  only  so,  but  they 
made  long  prayers  ;  and,  that  they  might  appear  extraordinary 
devout,  they  would  pray  at  the  comers  of  the  street,  where 
two  ways  met,  that  people  going  or  coming  both  ways,  might 
see  them.     '^They  made  broad  (as  our  Lord  informs  us)  the 
borders  of  their  phylacteries,"  they  had  pieces  of  parchment 
sewed  to  their  long  robes,  on  which  some  parts  of  the  scripture 
were  written,  that  people  might  from  thence  infer,  that  they 
were  lovers  of  the  law  of  God.     They  were  so  very  punctual 
and  exact  in  outward  purifications,  that  they  washed  at  their 
going  out  and  coming  in.  They  held  the  washing  of  pots,  brazen 
vessels,  and  tables,  and  many  other  such  like  things  they  did. 
They  were  very  zealous  for  the  traditions  of  the  fathers,  and 
for  the  observation  of  the  rites  and  ceremonies  of  the  church, 
notwithstanding  they  frequently  made  void  the  law  of  God  by 
their  traditions.    And  they  were  so  exceedingly  exact  in  the 
outward  observation  of  the  sabbath,  that  they  condemned  our 
Lord  for  making  a  little  clay  with  his  spittle ;  and  called  him  a 
sinner,  and  said  he  was  not  of  God,  l>ecause  he  had  given  sight 
to  a  man  born  blind  on  the  sabbath-day.     For  these  reasons, 
they  were  had  in  high  veneration  among  the  people,  who  were 
sadly  misled  by  these  blind  guides :  they  had  the  uppermost 
places  in  the  synagogues,  and  greetings  in  the  market  places, 
(which  they  loved  dearly)  and  were  called  of  men.  Rabbi ;  in 
short,  they  had  such  a  reputation  for  piety,  that  it  became  a 
proverb  among  the  Jews,  tliat  if  there  were  but  two  men  saved, 
the  one  of  them  mqst  be  a  PharLi>ee. 


XXXIV.]  THE   PHARISEE  AND   PUBLICAN.  Q88 

As  for  the  Pablicans,  it  was  not  so  with  them.  It  seems  they 
were  sometimes  Jews,  or  at  least  proselytes  of  the  gate ;  for  we 
find  one  here  coming  up  to  the  temple :  but  for  the  generality^  I 
am  apt  to  think  they  were  Gentiles ;  for  they  were  gatherers  of 
the  Roman  taxes,  and  used  to  amass  mnch  wealth  (as  appears 
by  the  confession  of  Zaccheus,  one  of  the  chief  of  them)  by 
wronging  men  with  false  accusations.  They  were  so  univer- 
sally infamous,  that  our  Lord  himself  tells  his  disciples,  "  the 
excommunicated  man  should  be  to  them  as  a  heathen  man,  or 
a  Publican."  And  the  Pharisees  thought  it  a  sufficient  impeach- 
ment of  our  Lord's  character,  that  he  was  a  friend  to  Publicans 
and  sinners,  and  went  to  sit  down  with  them  at  meat. 

But,  however  they  disagreed  in  other  tilings,  they  agreed  in 
this,  that  public  worship  is  a  duty  incumbent  upon  all :  for  they 
hoih  came  up  to  the  temple.  The  very  heathens  were  observers 
of  temple-worship.  We  have  very  early  notice  of  men  sacri- 
ficing to,  and  calling  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord,  in  the  Old 
Testament :  and  I  find  it  no  where  contradicted  in  the  New. 
Our  Lord  and  bis  apostles  went  up  to  the  temple  ;  and  we  are 
commanded  by  the  apostle  ^*  not  to  forsake  the  assembling  our- 
selves together,"  as  the  manner  of  too  many  is  in  our  days ; 
and  such  too,  as  would  have  us  think  well  of  them,  though  they 
seldom  or  never  tread  the  courts  of  the  Lord's  house.  But 
though  our  devotions  begin  in  our  closets,  they  must  not  end 
there.  And  if  people  never  shew  their  devotions  abroad,  I  must 
suspect  they  have  little  or  none  at  home.  ''  Two  men  ^ent  up  to 
the  temple."  And  what  went  they  thither  for?  Not  (as  multi- 
tudes among  us  do)  to  make  the  house  of  God  a  house  of  mer- 
chandise, or  turn  it  into  a  den  of  thieves  ;  much  less  to  ridi- 
cole  the  preacher,  or  disturb  the  congregation ;  no,  they  came 
to  the  temple,  says  our  Lord,  "  to  pray."  Thither  should  the 
tribes  of  God's  spiritual  Israel  go  up,  to  talk  w  itb,  and  pour  out 
their  hearts  before,  the  mighty  God  of  Jacob. 

"  Two  men  went  up  to  the  temple  to  pray."  I  fear  one  of 
them  forgot  his  errand.  I  have  often  been  at  a  loss  what  to 
call  the  Pharisee's  address ;  it  certainly  does  not  deserve  the 
name  of  a  prayer :  be  may  rather  be  said  to  come  to  the  tem- 
ple to  boast,  than  to  pray ;  for  I  do  not  find  one  word  of  con- 
fession of  bis  original  guilt ;  not  one  single  petition  for  pardon 
of  bis  psist  actual  sins,  or  for  grace  to  help  and  assist  him  for 
the  time  to  come  :  he  only  brings  to  God,  as  it  were,  a  reckon- 
ing of  his  performances;  and  does  that  which  no  flesh  can 
Justly  do,  I  mean,  glory  in  his  presence. 

Verse  II.  *'  The  Pharisee  stood,  and  prayed  thus  with  him- 
self; God,  I  thank  thee  that  I  am  not  as  other  men  are,  extor- 
tioners, unjust,  adulterers,  or  even  as  this  Publican." 

Our  Lord  first  takes  notice  of  his  posture ;  *'  the  Pharisee 
stood  :"  he  is  not  to  be  condemned  for  that ;  for  standing,  as 
well  as  kneeling,  is  u  proper  posture  for  prayer.  "  When  you 
stand,  praying,"  says  our  Lord  ;  though  sometimes  our  Lord 
kneeled,  nay,  lay  flat  on  his  face  upon  the  ground ;  his  apostles 


894  THE   PHARISEE   AND    PUBLICAN.  [XXXIV, 

also  kneeled,  as  %?e  read  in  the  Acts,  which  has  made  me  won- 
der at  some,  who  are  so  bigoted  to  standing  in  family,  as  well 
as  public  prayer,  that  they  will  not  kneel,  notwithstanding  all 
kneel  that  are  around  them.     I  fear  there  is  something  of  the 
Pharisee  in  this  conduct.     Kneeling  and  standing  are  indifferent, 
if  the  knee  of  the  soul  be  bent,  and  the  heart  upright  towards 
God.   We  should  study  not  to  be  particular  in  indifferent  things, 
lest  we  offend  weak  minds.    What  the  Pharisee  is  remarked  for, 
is  his  ''  standing  by  himself:''  for  the  words  may  be  rendered,  he 
stood  by  himself,  upon  some  eminent  place,  at  the  upper  part  of 
the  temple,  near  the  holy  of  holies,  that  the  congregation  might 
see  what  a  devout  man  he  was :  or  it  may  be  understood  as  we 
read  it,  he  prayed  by  himself,  or  of  himself,  out  of  his  own  heart ; 
he  did  not  pray  by  form ;  it  was  an  extempore  prayer :  for  there 
are  many  Pharisees  that  pray,  and  preach  too,  extempore.    I 
do  not  see  why  these  may  not  be  acquired,  as  well  as  oUier  arts 
and  sciences.    A  man,  with  a  good  elocution,  ready  turn  of 
thought,  and  good  memory,  may  repeat  his  own  or  other  men's 
sermons,  and,  by  the  help  of  a  Wilkins  or  Henry,  may  pray 
seemingly  excellently  well,  and  yet  not  have  the  least  grain  of 
true  grace  in  his  heart ;  I  speak  this,  not  to  cry  down  extempore 
prayer,  or  to  discourage  those  dear  souls  who  really  pray  by  the 
spirit ;  I  only  would  hereby  give  a  word  of  reproof  to  those  who 
are  so  bigoted  to  extempore  prayer,  that  they  condemn,  at  least 
judge,  all  that  use  forms,  as  though  not  so  holy  and  heavenly,  as 
others  who  pray  without  them.    Alas!  this  is  wrong.     Not 
every  one  that  prays  extempore  is  a  spiritual,  nor  every  one  that 
prays  with  a  form,  a  formal  man.     Let  us  not  judge  one  an- 
other; let  not  him  that  uses  a  form,  judge  him  that  prays  ex- 
tempore, on  that  account ;  and  let  not  him  that  prays  extempore, 
despise  him  who  uses  a  form. 

"  The  Pharisee  stood,  and  prayed  thus  by  himself."  Which 
may  signify  also  praying  inwardly  in  his  heart;  for  there  is  a 
way  (and  that  an  excellent  one  too)  of  praying  when  we  cannot 
speak ;  thus  Anna  prayed,  when  she  spoke  not  aloud,  only  ber 
lips  moved.  Thus  God  says  to  Moses,  "  Why  criest  thou?" 
when,  it  is  plain,  he  did  not  speak  a  word.  This  is  what  the 
apostle  means  by  the  ^'  Spirit  making  intercession  (for  believers) 
with  groanings  which  cannot  be  nttered."  For  there  are  times 
when  the  soul  is  too  big  to  speak ;  when  God  fills  it,  as  it  were, 
and  overshadows  it  with  his  presence,  so  that  it  can  only  fall 
down,  worship,  adore,  and  lie  in  the  dust  before  the  Lord. 
Again,  there  is  a  time  when  the  soul  is  benumbed,  barren,  and 
dry,  and  the  believer  has  not  a  word  to  say  to  his  heavenly 
Father ;  and  then  the  heart  only  can  speak.  And  I  mention 
this  for  the  encouragement  of  weak  Christians,  who  think  they 
never  are  accepted  but  when  they  have  a  flow  of  words,  and 
fancy  they  do  not  please  God  at  the  bottom,  for  no  other  reason 
but  because  they  do  not  please  themselves.  Such  would  do 
well  to  consider,  that  God  knows  the  language  of  the  heart, 
BMkd  the  mind  of  the  spirit ;  and  that  we  make  use  of  words,  not  to 


:X:XXIV.]  THE   PHARISRB    AND    PUBLICAN.  896 

inform  God^  but  to  affect  ourselves.  Whenever,  therefore,  any 
of  you  find  yourselves  in  such  a  frame,  be  not  discouraged :  offer 
yourselves  up  in  silence  before  God,  as  clay  in  the  hands  of  the 
potter,  for  him  to  write  and  stamp  his  own  divine  image  upon 
your  souls.  But  I  believe  the  Pharisee  knew  nothing  of  this 
way  of  prayer :  he  was  self-righteous,  a  stranger  to  the  divine 
life ;  and,  therefore,  either  of  the  former  explanations  may  be 
best  put  upon  these  words. 

"  He  stood,  and  prayed  thus  with  himself;  God,  I  thank  thee 
that  I  am  not  as  other  men  are,  extortioner,  unjust,  adulterer,  or 
even  as  this  Publican.''    Here  is  some  appearance  of  devotion, 
but  it  is  only  in  appearance.    To  thank  God  that  we  are  not 
extortioners,  unjust,  adulterers,  and  as  wicked  in  our  practices 
as  other  men  are,  is  certainly  meet,  right,  and  our  bounden  duty : 
for  whatever  degrees  of  goodness  there  may  be  in  us,  more  than 
in  others,  it  is  owing  to  God's  restraining,  preventing,  and 
assisting  grace.    We  are  all  equally  conceived  and  born  in  sin ; 
all  are  fallen  short  of  the  glory  of  God,  and  liable  to  all  the 
curses  and  maledictions  of  the  law ;  so  that  ^^  he  who  glorieth, 
roust  glory  only  in  the  Lord."    For  none  of  us  have  any  thing 
which  we  did  not  receive ;  and  whatever  we  have  received,  we 
did  not  in  the  least  merit  it,  nor  could  we  lay  the  least  claim  to 
it  on  any  account  whatever :  we  are  wholly  indebted  to  free 
fjVLce  for  all.    Had  the  Pharisee  thought  thus,  when  he  said, 
'*  God,  I  thank  thee  that  I  am  not  a^  other  ^men  are,"  it  would 
have  been  an  excellent  introduction  to  bis  prayer :  but  he  was 
a  free- wilier,  as  well  as  self-righteous,  (for  he  that  is  one  must 
be  the  other,)  and  thought,  by  his  own  power  and  strength  he 
had  kept  himself  from  these  vices.    And  yet  1  do  not  see  what 
reason  he  had  to  trust  in  himself  that  he  was  righteous,  merely 
because  he  was  not  an  extortioner,  unjust,  adulterer ;  for  all  this 
while  he  might  be,  as  he  certainly  was  (as  is  also  every  self- 
righteous  person)  as  proud  as  the  devil.    But  he  not  only  boasts, 
but  lies  before  God,  (as  all  self-justiciaries  will  be  found  liars 
here  or  hereafter.)    He  thanks  God  that  he  was  not  unjust : 
but  is  it  not  an  act  of  the  highest  injustice  to  rob  Grod  of  his 
prerogative?    Is  it  not  an  act  of  injustice,  to  judge  our  neigh- 
hour?    And  yet  of  both  these  crimes  this  self-righteous  vaunter 
is  guilty.    "  Even  as  this  Publican !"     He  seems  to  speak  with 
^e  utmost  disdain ;  this  Publican !     Perhaps  he  pointed  at  the 
poor  man,  that  others  might  treat  him  with  the  like  contempt. 
I'hoa  proud,  confident  boaster,  what  hadst  thou  to  do  with  that 
poor  Publican  ?    Supposing  other  Publicans  were  unjust,  and 
extortioners,  did  it  therefore  follow  that  he  must  be  so?    Or,  if 
he  had  been  such  a  sinner,  how  knowest  thou  but  he  has  re- 
pented of  those  sins  ?    His  coming  up  to  the  temple  to  pray,  is 
one  good  sign  of  a  reformation  at  least.    Thou  art  therefore  in- 
excusable, O  Pharisee,  who  thus  judgest  the  Publican :  ft)r  thou 
that  judgest  him  to  be  unjust,  art,  in  the  very  act  of  judging,  un- 
just thyself:  thy  sacrifice  is  only  the  sacrifice  of  a  fool. 
We  have  seen  what  the  Pharisee's  negative  goodness  comes 


396  THB  PHARI8BB  AND   PUfiLIQAN.  (XJLXiV. 

to ;  I  think,  nothing  at  alK  I^et  us  see  how  (kr  his  positive 
goodness  extends ;  for,  if  we  are  truly  religious,  we  shall  not 
only  eschew  evil,  but  also  do  good :  "  I  fast  twice  in  the  week,  I 
give  tithes  of  all  that  I  possess/' 

The  Pharisee  is  not  here  condemned  for  his  fasting,  for  fast* 
ing  is  a  Christian  duty ; ''  when  you  fast,''  says  our  Lord,  thereby 
taking  it  for  granted  that  his  disciples  would  fast :  and  **  when 
the  bridegroom  shall  be  taken  away,  then  shall  they  fast  in 
those  days."  ^'  In  fastings  often,"  says  the  apostle.  And  all 
that  would  not  be  cast-aways,  will  take  care,  as  their  privilege, 
without  legal  constraint,  to  "  keep  their  bodies  under,  and  bring 
them  into  subjection."  The  Pharisee  is  only  condemned  for 
making  a  righteousness  of  his  fasting,  and  thinking  that  God 
would  accept  him,  or  that  he  was  any  better  than  his  neigh- 
bours, merely  on  account  of  his  fasting :  this  is  what  he  was 
blamed  for.  The  Pharisee  was  not  to  be  discommended  for 
fasting  twice  in  a  week ;  I  wish  some  Christians  would  imitate 
him  more  in  this :  but  to  depend  on  fasting  in  the  least,  for  his 
justification  in  the  sight  of  God,  was  really  abominable.  *^  I 
give  tithes  of  all  that  I  possess."  He  might  as  well  have  said, 
I  pay  tithes.  But  self-righteous  people  (whatever  they  may  say 
to  the  contrary)  think  they  give  something  to  God.  *'  I  give 
tithes  of  all  that  I  possess :"  I  make  conscience  of  giving  tithes, 
not  only  of  all  that  the  law  requires,  but  of  my  mint,  anise,  and 
cummin,  of  all  things  whatsoever  I  possess ;  this  was  well ;  but 
to  boast  of  such  things,  or  of  fasting,  is  pharisaical  and  devdisb. 
Now  then  let  us  sum  up  all  the  righteousness  of  this  boasting 
Pharisee,  and  see  what  little  reason  he  had  to  trust  in  himseV 
that  he  was  righteous,  or  to  despise  others.  He  is  not  unjust, 
(but  we  have  only  his  word  for  that,  I  think  I  have  proved  the 
contrary ;)  he  is  no  adulterer,  no  extortioner ;  he  fasts  twice  in 
the  week,  and  gives  tithes  of  all  that  he  possesses ;  and  all  this 
he  might  do,  and  a  great  deal  more,  and  yet  be  a  child  of  tbe 
devil :  for  here  is  no  mention  made  of  his  loving  the  Lord  his 
God  with  air  his  heart,  which  was  the  "  first  and  great  com- 
mandment of  the  law :"  here  is  not  a  single  syllable  of  inward 
religion ;  and  he  was  not  a  true  Jew,  who  was  only  one  out- 
wardly. It  has  only  an  outside  piety  at  the  best ;  inwardly  he  is 
full  of  pride,  self-justification,  free-will,  and  great  uncharitable- 
ness. 

Were  not  the  Pharisees,  do  you  think,  highly  offended  at 
this  character?  for  they  might  easily  know  it  was  spoken 
against  them.  And  though,  perhaps,  some  of  you  may  be 
offended  at  me,  yet,  out  of  love,  I  must  tell  you,  I  fear  this 
parable  is  spoken  against  many  of  you:  for  are  there  not 
many  of  you,  who  go  up  to  the  temple  to  pray,  with  no  better 
spirit  than  this  Pharisee  did  ?  And  because  you  fast,  it  may 
be,  in  the  Lent,  or  every  Friday,  and  because  you  do  nobody 
any  harm,  receive  the  sacrament,  pay  tithes,  and  give  an  aims 
now  and  then ;  you  think  that  you  are  safe,  and  trust  in  your- 
selves that  you  are  righteous,  and  inwardly  despise  those. 


XXXIV.]  THE   PHARISEE   AND   PUBLIOAK.  807 

who  do  not  come  tip  to  you  in  these  outward  duties  ?  this^  I 
am  persuaded,  is  the  case  of  many  of  you,  though,  .alas !  it  is 
a  desperate  one,  as  1  shall  endeavour  to  shew  at  the  close  of 
this  discourse. 

Iiet  us  now  take  a  view  of  the  Publican,  ver.  13.  "  And  the 
Publican,, standing  afar  off,  would  not  lift  up  so  much  as  his 
eyes  unto  heaven,  but  smote  upon  his  breast,  saying,  God  be 
merciful  to  me  a  sinner." 

"The  Publican  standing  afar  off:"  Perhaps  in  the  outward 
court  of  the  temple,  conscious  to  himself  that  he  was  not  wor- 
thy to  approach   the   holy  of  holies;   so   conscious   and  so 
weighed  down  with  a  sense  of  his  own  unworthiness,  that  he 
would  not  so  much  as  lift  up  his  eyes  unto  heaven,  which  he 
knew  was  God's  throne.     Poor  heart !  what  did  he  feel  at  this 
time!    none   but  returning  Publicans,  like  himself,  can   tell. 
Methinks  I  see  him  standing  afar  off,  pensive,  oppressed,  and 
even  overwhelmed  with  sorrow :  sometimes  he  attempts  to  look 
up;  but  then,  thinks  he,  the  heavens  are  unclean  in  God's 
sight,  and  the  very  angels  are  charged  with  folly ;  how  then 
shall  such  a  wretch  as  I  dare  to  lift  up  my  guilty  head !    And 
to  shew  that  his  heart  was  full  of  holy  self-resentment,  and 
that  he  sorrowed  after  a  godly  sort,  he  smote  upon  his  breast; 
the  word  in  the  original  implies,  that  he  struck  hard  upon  his 
breast:  he  will  lay  the  blame  upon  none  but  his  own  wicked 
heart.      He  will  not,  like  unhumbled  Adam,  tacitly  lay  the 
fault  of  his  vileness  upon  God,  and  say,  The  passions  which 
thou  gavest  me,  they  deceived  me,  and  I  sinned:  be  is  too 
penitent  thus    to    reproach  his  Maker;   he  smites  upon   his 
breast,  bis  treacherous,  ungrateful,  desperately  wicked  breast; 
ft  breast  now  ready  to  burst :  and  at  length,  out  of  the  abun- 
i      dance  of  his  heart,  I  doubt  not,  with  many  tears,  he  at  last 
I     cries  out.    **  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner."     Not,  God  be 
f     merciful  to  yonder  proud  Pharisee :  he  found  enough  in  him- 
^      8df  to  vent  his  resentment  against,  without   looking  abroad 
t      ^^  others.      Not,  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  saint;  for  ho 
?      hew  "all  his  righteousnesses  were  but  filthy  rags."     Not, 
!^      &)d  be  merciful  to  such  or  such  a  one ;  but,  God  be  merciful 
to  me,  even   to  me  a  sinner,  a  sinner  by  birth,  a  sinner  in 
thoQ^t,  word,  and  deed  ;  a  sinner  as  to  my  person,  a  sinner 
fts  to  all  my  performances ;  a  sinner  in  whom  is  no  health,  in 
^hom  dwelleth  no  good  thing ;  a  sinner,  poor,  miserable,  blind, 
^d  naked,  from  the  crown  of  the  head  to  the  sole  of  the  feet, 
^QU  of  wounds,  and    bruises,  and    putrifying    sores ;   a  self- 
accused,  self-condemned    sinner.    What  think  you?    Would 
^8  Publican  have  been  offended,  if  any  minister  had  told 
iiim  that  he  deserved  to  be  damned  ?    Would  he  have  been 
ftogry,  if  any  one  had  told  him,  that  by  nature  he  was  half  a 
devil  and  h^f  a  beast  ?    No :  he  would  have  confessed  a  thou- 
^nd  hells  to  have  been  his  due,  and  that  he  was  an  earthly, 
devilish  sinner.     He  felt  now  what  a  dreadful  thing  it  was  to 
depart  ftom  the  living  God :  he  felt  that  be  was  inexcusable 


396  THE  PHARISBfi  AND   PUBLICAN.  [XXXIV. 

every  vfa,y :  that  he  coDld  in  no  wise,  upon  account  of  any 
thing  in  himself,  be  justified  in  the  sight  of  Grod  ;  and  there- 
fore lays  himself  at  the  feet  of  sovereign  mercy,  "  God  be  mer- 
ciful to  me  a  sinner."  Here  is  no  confidence  in  the  flesh,  no 
plea  fetched  from  fasting,  paying  tithes,  or  the  performance  ot 
any  other  duty  ;  here  is  no  boasting  that  he  was  not  an  extor- 
tioner, unjust,  or  an  adulterer.  Perhaps  he  had  been  guilty 
of  all  these  crimes,  at  least  he  knew  he  would  have  been 
guilty  of  all  these,  had  he  been  left  to  follow  the  devices  and 
desires  of  his  own  heart;  and  therefore,  with  a  broken  and 
contrite  spirit,  he  cries  out,  *^  Grod  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner." 

This  man  came  up  to  the  temple  to  pray,  and  he  prayed 
indeed.  And  a  broken  and  contrite  heart,  God  will  not  despise. 
"  I  tell  you,"  says  our  Lord,  I  who  lay  in  the  bosom  of  the 
Father  from  all  eternity ;  I  who  am  God,  and  therefore  know  all 
things;  I  who  can  neither  deceive  nor  be  deceived,  whose  judg- 
ment is  according  to  right ;  I  tell  you,  whatever  you  may  thii^ 
of  it,  or  think  of  me  for  telling  you  so,  "  this  man,"  this  Publi- 
can, this  despised,  sinful,  but  broken-hearted  man,  ^^  went  down 
to  his  house  justified  (acquitted,  and  looked  upon  as  righteous 
in  the  sight  of  God)  rather  than  the  other." 

Let  Pharisees  take  heed  that  they  do  not  pervert  this  text : 
for  when  it  is  said,  '^This  man  went  down  to  his  house  justi- 
fied rather  than  the  other,"  our  Lord  does  not  mean  that  both 
were  justified,  and  that  the  Publican  had  rather  more  justi- 
fication than  the  Pharisee:  but  it  implies,  either  that  the 
Publican  was  actually  justified,  and  the  Pharisee  was  not; 
or  that  the  Publican  was  in  a  better  way  to  receive  justi- 
fication, than  the  Pharisee ;  according  to  our  Lord's  saying, 
'^  The  Publicans  and  harlots  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven 
before  you."  That  the  Pharisee  was  not  justified,  is  certain, 
for  ^*  Gi>d  resisteth  the  proud ;"  and  that  the  Publican  was  at 
this  time  actually  justified,  (and  perhaps  went  home  with  a 
sense  of  it  in  his  heart,)  we  have  great  reason  to  infer  from 
the  latter  part  of  the  text:  '^for  every  one  that  exalteth 
himself  shall  be  abased,  and  he  that  humbleth  himself  shall  be 
exalted." 

The  parable  therefore  now  speaks  to  all  who  hear  me  this 
day :  for  that  our  Lord  intended  it  for  our  learning,  is  evident, 
from  his  making  such  a  general  application ;  ''  For  every  one 
that  exalteth  himself  shall  be  abased,  and  he  that  humbktb 
himself  shall  be  exalted." 

The  parable  of  the  Publican  and  Pharisee,  is  but  as  it  were 
a  glass,  wherein  we  may  see  the  difierent  dispositions  of  all 
mankind ;  for  all  mankind  may  be  divided  into  two  'genertl 
classes.  Either  they  trust  wholly  in  themselves,  or  in  part, 
that  they  are  righteous,  and  then  they  are  Pharisees ;  or  they 
have  no  confidence  in  the  flesh,  are  self-condemned  sinners, 
and  then  they  come  under  the  character  of  the  Publican  jast 
now  described.  And  we  may  add  also,  that  the  different 
reception  these  men  met  with,  points  out  to  us  in  lively  colooffi 


XXXIV.]  THE   PHARISEE   AND   PUBLICAN.  800 

tbe  different  treatment  the  self-justiciary  and  self-condemned 
crimioal  will  meet  with  at  the  terrible  day  of  judgment:  ''Every 
ewe  that  exalts  himself  shall  be  abased,  but  he  that  humbleth 
bimself  shall  be  exalted." 

"Every  one,"  without  exception,  young  or  old,  high  or  low, 
ffch  or  poor,  (for  God  is  no  respecter  of  persons,)  "  every  one," 
whosoever  he  be,  that  exalteth  himself,  and  not  free  grace ; 
•very  one  that  trusteth  in  himself  that  he  is  righteous,  that 
tots  in  his  duties,  or  thinks  to  join  them  with  the  righteous- 
mss  of  Jesus  Christ,  for  justification  in  the  sight  of  God, 
though  he  be  no  adulterer,  no  extortioner,  though  he  be  not 
Mwardly  unjust,  nay,  though  he  fast  twice  in  the  week,  and 
'  five  tithes  of  all  that  he  possesses ;  yet  shall  he  be  abased  in 
Ike  sight  of  all  good  men  who  know  him  here,  and  before  men 
ittd  angels,  and  God  himself,  when  Jesus  Christ  comes  to 
ippear  in  judgment  hereafter.  How  low,  none  but  the  almighty 
Qii  can  tell.  lie  shall  be  abased  to  live  with  devils^  and  make 
Ms  abode  in  the  lowest  hell  for  evermore. 
-  Hear  this,  all  ye  self-justiciaries,  tremble,  and  behold  your 
doom !  a  dreadful  doom,  more  dreadful  than  words  can  express, 
or  thought  conceive !  If  you  refuse  to  humble  yourselves, 
after  hearing  this  parable,  I. call  heaven  and  earth  to  witness 
Against  you  this  day,  that  God  shall  visit  you  with  all  his 
norms,  and  pour  all  the  vials  of  his  wrath  upon  your  rebellious 
heads ;  you  exalted  yourselves  here,  and  God  shall  abase  you 
hereafter ;  you  are  as  proud  as  the  devil,  and  with  devils  shall 
yon  dwell  to  all  eternity.  *' Be  not  deceived,  God  is  not 
lacked ;"  he  sees  your  hearts,  he  knows  all  things.  And,  not- 
vithstanding  you  may  come  up  to  the  temple  to  pray,  your 
ptayers  are  turned  into  sin,  and  you  go  down  to  your  houses 
iBjustified,  if  you  are  self-justiciaries;  and  do  you  know  what 
it  is  to  be  unjustified?  Why,  if  you  are  unjustified,  the  wrath 
of  God  abideth  upon  you ;  you  are  in  your  blood ;  all  the 
Cirses  of  the  law  belong  to  you :  cursed  are  you  when  you  go 
*iit,  cursed  are  you  when  you  come  in;  cursed  are  your 
Oughts,  cursed  are  your  words,  cursed  are  your  deeds ;  every 
thing  you  do,  say,  or  think,  from  morning  to  night,  is  only  one 
continued  series  of  sin.  However  highly  you  may  be  esteemed 
ii  the  sight  of  men,  however  you  may  be  honoured  with  the 
Vppermost  seats  in  the  synagogues,  in  the  church  militant, 
you  will  have  no  place  in  the  church  triumphant.  '*  Humble 
yourselves  therefore  under  the  mighty  hand  of  God  r'  pull  down 
every  self-righteous  thought,  and  every  proud  imagination, 
that  now  exsdteth  itself  against  the  perfect,  personal,  imputed 
righteousness  of  the  dear  Lord  Jesus :  *'  For  he  (and  he  alone) 
that  humbleth  himself  stiall  be  exalted." 

He  that  humbleth  himself,  whatever  he  be:  if,  instead  of 
fasting  twice  in  the  week,  he  have  been  drunk  twice  in  th^ 
week ;  if,  instead  of  giving  tithes  of  all  that  he  possesses,  he 
have  cheated  the  minister  of  his  tithes,  and  the  king  of  his 
taxes ;  notwithstanding  he  be  unjust,  an  extortioner,  an  adyl- 


4XiO  THE   PHARISEE  AND   PUBLICAN.  [XXXIV. 

tcrcr,  nay,  notwithstanding  the  sins  of  all  mankind  centre  and 
unite  in  him ;  yet  if,  through  grace,  like  the  Publican,  he  be 
enabled  to  humble  himself,  he  shall  be  exalted  ;  not  in  a  t^n- 
poral  manner  ;•  for  Christians  must  rather  expect  to  be  abased, 
and  to  have  their  names  cast  out  as  evil,  and  to  lay  down  thdr 
lives  for  Christ  Jesus  in  this  world  :  but  he  shall  be  exalted  in 
a  spiritual  sense ;  he  shall  be  freely  justified  from  all  his  sinf 
by  the  blood  of  Jesus ;  he  shall  have  peace  with  God,  a  peace 
which  passcth  all  understanding ;  not  only  peace,  but  joy  ia 
believing ;  he  shall  be  translated  from  the  kingdom  of  Satao, 
to  the  kingdom  of  Grod's  dear  Son :  he  shall  dwell  in  Christy 
and  Christ  in  him :  he  shall  be  one  with  Christ,  and  Christ  one 
with  him :  he  shall  drink  of  divine  pleasures,  as  out  of  a  riv^; 
he  shall  be  sanctified  throughout,  in  spirit,  soul,  and  body ;  in 
one  word,  he  shall  be  filled  with  all  the  fulness  of  God.    Thus 
shall  the  man  that  humbleth  himself  be  exalted  here ;  but  0, 
how  high  shall  he  be  exalted  hereafter !  as  high  as  the  highest 
heavens,  even  to  the  right  hand  of  God :  there  he  shall  sit, 
happy  both  in  soul  and  body,  and  judge  angels;  high,  out  oi 
the  reach  of  all  sin  and  trouble,  eternally  secure  from  all  dan* 
ger  of  falling.     O  sinners,  did  you  but  know  how  highly  God 
intends  to  exalt  those  who  humble  themselves,  and  believe  in 
Jesus,  surely  you  would  humble  yourselves,  at  least  beg  of 
God  to  humble  you ;  for  it  is  he  that  must  strike  the  rock  of 
your  hearts,  and  cause  floods  of  contrite  tears  to  flow  there* 
from.     O  that  God  would  give  this  sermon  such  a  commissioii 
as  he  once  gave  to  the  rod  of  Moses!     I  would  strike  yoi 
through  and  through  with  the  rod  of  his  word,  until  each  of  yoi 
were  brought  to  cry  out  with  the  poor  Publican,  "  God  be  nlc^ 
ciful  to  me  a  sinner !"    What  pleasant  language  would  this  be 
in  the  ears  of  the  Lord  of  sabaoth ! 

Are  there  no  poor  sinners  among  you  ?  What,  are  you  al 
Pharisees  ?  Surely,  you  cannot  bear  the  thoughts  of  retnrniif 
home  unjustified ;  can  you  ?  What,  if  a  fit  of  the  apoplexy  shooM 
seize  you,  and  your  souls  be  hurried  away  before  the  awful  Judge 
of  quick  and  dead  ?  What  will  you  do  without  Christ's  rigfateoiii^ 
ness  ?  If  you  go  out  of  the  world  unjustified,  you  must  remain  et 
for  ever.  O  that  you  would  humble  yourselves !  then  would  the 
Lord  exalt  you ;  it  may  be>  that,  whilst  I  am  speaking,  the  Lorf 
might  ''justify  you  freely  by  his  grace."  I  observed,  that  perfaapi 
the  Publican  had  a  sense  of  his  justification  before  he  went  froa 
the  temple,  and  knew  that^is  pardon  was  sealed  in  heaven :  aid 
who  knows  but  you  may  be  thus  exalted  before  you  go  home,  ft 
you  humble  yourselves  ?  O  what  peace,  love,  and  joy,  would  yfli 
then  feel  in  your  hearts !  you  would  have  a  heaven  upon  earth.  0 
that  I  could  hear  any  of  you  say,  (as  I  once  heard  a  poor  sinnei; 
under  my  preaching,  cry  out,)  He  is  come  !  He  is  came !  How 
would  you  then,  like  him,  extol  a  precious,  a  free-hearted  Christ! 
how  would  yon  magnify  him  for  being  such  a  friend  to  Publicaae 
and  sinners !  Greater  love  can  no  man  shew,  than  to  lay  down  hif 
life  for  a  friend ;  but  Christ  laid  down  his  life  for  bis  enemiei, 


\]  THE  CONVERSION  OP  ZAGGIIEU8*  401 

rm  for  you,  if  you  are  enabled  to  humble  yourselves  as  the 
'oUicaD  did.  Sinners,  I  know  not  how  to  leave  off  talking  with 
ou ;  I  would  fill  my  mouth  with  arguments,  I  would  plead  with 
ou.  "  Come,  let  ns  reason  together ;"  though  your  sins  be  as 
GMrlet,  yet,  if  you  humble  yourselves,  they  shall  be  as  white  as 
•aw.  One  act  of  true  faith  in  Christ,  justifies  you  for  ever  and 
nrer :  he  has  not  promised  you  what  he  cannot  perform ;  he  is 
dde  to  exalt  you ;  for  God  has  exalted,  and  given  him  a  name 
ibove  every  name,  that  at  the  name  of  Jesus  every  knee  shall 
hwr ;  nay,  God  has  exalted  him  to  be  not  only  a  Prince,  but  a 
Bifiour.  May  he  be  a  Saviour  to  you !  and  then  I  shall  have 
mien  to  rejoice,  in  the  day  of  judgment,  that  I  have  not 
Poached  in  vain,  nor  laboured  in  vain. 


SERMON  XXXV. 

THE   CONVERSION   OP   ZACCHEUH. 

And  Jesus  said  unto  him,  TIds  day  is  salvation  come  to  this 
louse  ;  forasmuch  as  he  also  is  the  son  of  Abraham.  For  the 
San  of  man  is  come  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was  lost. — 
Lake  xix.  9, 10. 

Salvation,  every  where,  through  the  whole  scripture,  is  said  to 
to  the  free  gift  of  God,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  Not 
iftiv  free,  because  God  is  a  sovereign  agent,  and  therefore  may 
iiuhold  it  from,  or  confer  it  on,  whom  he  pleases ;  but  free, 
•cause  there  is  nothing  to  \ye  found  in  man,  that  can  any  way 
tduce  God  to  be  merciful  unto  him.  The  righteousness  of 
eias  Christ  is  the  sole  cause  of  ouV  finding  favour  in  God's 
ght :  this  righteousness  apprehended  by  faith  Twhich  is  also 
16  gift  of  God)  makes  it  our  own ;  and  this  faith,  if  true,  will 
Ofk  by  love. 

These  are  parts  of  those  glad  tidings  which  are  published  in 
4  gospel ;  and  of  the  certainty  of  them,  next  to  the  express 
md  of  God,  the  experience  of  all  -such  as  have  been  saved,  is 
»  best,  and,  as  I  take  it,  the  most  undoubted  proof.  That 
od  might  teach  us  every  way,  he  has  been  pleased  to  leave 
Mm  record  many  instances  of  the  power  of  his  grace  exerted 
the  salvation  of  several  persons,  that  we,  hearing  how  he 
idt  with  them,  might  from  thence  infer  the  manner  we  must 
:p6Ct  to  be  dealt  with  ourselves,  and  learn  in  what  way  we 
ut  look  for  salvation,  if  we  truly  desire  to  be  made  partakers 
'Ihe  inheritance  with  the  saints  in  light* 
The  conversion  of  the  person  referred  to  in  the  text,  I  think, 
U  be  of  no  small  service  to  us  in  this  matter,  if  rightly  im- 
mred.  I  would  hope,  most  of  you  know  who  the  person  is,  to 
Imn  the  Lord  Jesus  speaks ;  it  is  the  publican  Zaccheus,  to 
iMMie  house  the  blessed  Jesus  said,  salvation  came,  and  whom 
t  Branonnces  a  son  of  Abraham. 

II  iM  my  design  (God  helping)  to  make  some  remarks  upon 
e  2  b 


402  THB  CONVERSION   OF   ZAGCHBU8.  [XXXT. 

his  conversion  recorded  at  large  in  the  preceding  verses,  and 
then  to  enforce  the  latter  part  of  the  text,  as  an  encooragesiienl 
to  poor  undone  sinners  to  come  to  Jesus  Christ.  "  For  the  Sob 
of  man  is  come  to  seek  and  to  sake  that  which  was  lost." 

The  evangelist  Luke  introduces  the  acdbunt  of  this  man's  con- 
version thus,  verse  1.  "  And  Jesus  entered,  and  passed  through 
Jericho."  The  holy  Jesus  made  it  his  business  to  go  about  doing 
good.  As  the  sun  in  the  firmament  is  continually  spreading  ik 
benign,  quickening,  and  cheering  influences  over  the  natural; 
so  the  Sun  of  righteousness  arose  with  healing  under  his  wings^ 
and  was  daily  and  hourly  diffusing  his  gracious  influences  over 
the  moral'  world.  The  preceding  chapter  acquaints  us  of  a 
notable  miracle  wrought,  by  the  holy  Jesus,  on  poor  blind  Ba^ 
timeus  ;  and  in  this,  a  greater  presents  itself  to  our  considera- 
tion. The  evangelist  would  have  us  take  particular  notice  of  it; 
for  he  introduces  it  with  the  word  "  behold :"  ^*  And,  behold,  there 
was  a  man  named  Zaccheus,  who  was  the  chief  among  the 
publicans,  and  he  was  rich.'' 

Well  might  the  evangelist  usher  in  the  relation  of  this  man's 
conversion  with  the  word  **  behold  !*'  For,  according  to  human 
judgment,  how  many  unsurmountable  obstacles  lay  in  the  way 
of  it !  Surely  no  one  will  say  there  was  any  fitness  in  Zaccbens 
for  salvation ;  for  we  are  told  that  he  was  a  publican,  and 
therefore  in  all  probability  a  notorious  sinner.  The  publicans 
were  gatherers  of  the  Roman  taxes ;  they  were  infamous  ibr 
their  abominable  extortion ;  their  very  name  therefore  became 
so  odious,  that  we  find  the  Pharisees  often  reproached  tmt 
Lord,  as  very  wicked,  because  he  was  a  friend  unto,  and  sit 
down  to  meat  with  them.  Zaccheus  then,  being  a  publican, 
was  no  doubt  a  sinner;  and,  being  chief  among  the  publicaas, 
consequently  was  chief  among  sinners.  Nay,  *'  he  was  rtcb.** 
One  inspired  apostle  has  told  us,  that  *^not  many  mighty,  not 
many  noble,  are  called."  Another  says, ''  Grod  has  chosen  the 
poor  of  this  world,  rich  in  faith."  And  he  who  was  the  Maker 
and  Redeemer  of  the  apostles,  assures  us,  '*  that  it  is  easier  for 
a  camel  (or  cable*rope)  to  go  through  the  eye  of  a  needle,  tbaa 
for  a  rich  man  to  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  Grod."  Let  not, 
therefore,  the  rich  glory  in  the  multitude  of  their  riches. 

But,  rich  as  he  was,  we  are  told,  ver.  3,  that ''  he  sought  to 
see  Jesus«''  A  wonder  indeed!  The  common  people  heard 
our  Lord  gladly,  and  the  poor  received  the  gospel.  The  multi* 
tude,  the  <>x^c,  the  mob,  the  people  that  knew  not  the  law,  as 
the  proud  high-priests  called  them,  used  to  follow  him  on  foot  into 
the  country,  and  sometimes  staid  with  him  three  days  together, 
to  hear  him  preach :  But  did  the  rich  believe  or  attend  on  hint 
No.  Our  Lord  preached  up  the  doctrine  of  the  cross ;  be 
preached  too  searching  for  them,  and  therefore  they  counted  him 
their  enemy,  persecuted  and  spoke  all  manner  of  evil  against 
him  falsely.  Let  not  the  ministers  of  Christ  marvel,  if  tbey 
meet  with  the  like  treatment  from  the  rich  men  of  this  wicked 
and  adulterous  generation.    I  should  think  it  no  scandal  (sup- 


KXXV.}  THE  CONVERSION    OP  ZACCHBUB  403 

jKMing  it  true)  to  hear  it  aflirmed,  that  none  but  the  poor 
Uttended  my  ministry.  Their  souls  are  as  precious  to  our  Lord 
lesuK  Christ,  as  the  souls  of  the  greatest  men.  They  were  the 
poor  that  attended  him  in  the  days  of  his  flesh :  these  are  they 
whom  he  hath  chosen  to  be  rich  in  faith,  and  to  be  the  greatest 
m  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  Were  the  rich  in  this  world's  goods 
ftrnteradly  to  speak  well  of  me,  woe  be  unto  me ;  I  should  think 
it  a  dreadful  sign  that  I  was  only  a  wolf  in  sheep  s  clothing, 
that  I  spoke  peace,  peace,  when  there  was  no  peace,  and  pro- 
phesied smoother  things  than  the  gospel  v/ould  allow  of.  Hear 
r)  this,  O  ye  rich.  Let  who  will  dare  to  do  it,  God  forbid  that 
should  despise  the  poor ;  in  doing  so,  I  should  rt^proach  my 
Maker.  The  poor  are  dear  to  my  soul ;  I  rejoice  to  see  them 
iy  to  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  like  the  doves  to  their  windows. 
I  only  pray,  that  the  poor  who  attend,  may  be  evangelized,  and 
tuned  into  the  spirit  of  the  gospel :  if  so,  "  blessed  are  ye  ;  for 
yours  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven." 

But  we  must  return  to  Zaccheus.  **  He  sought  to  see  Jesus." 
That  is  good  news.     I  heartily  wish  I  could  say,  it  was  out  of 
a  good  principle :  but,  without  speaking  contrary  to  that  cha- 
rity which  hopes  and  believes  all  things  for  the  best,  we  may 
tay,  that  the  same  principle  drew  him  after  Christ,  which  now 
dmws  multitudes  (to  speak  plainly,  it  may  be  multitudes  of 
jod)  to  hear  a  particular  preacher,  even  curiosity  :  for  we  arc 
told,  that  he  came  not  to  hear  his  doctrine,  but  to  view  his  per- 
son, or,  to  use  the  words  of  the  evangelist,  *'  to  see  who  he  was.*' 
Onr  Lord's  fame  was  now  spread  abroad  through  all  Jerusalem, 
and  all  the  country  round  about :   some  said  he  was  a  ^ood 
man  ;  others,  *'  Nay,  but  he  deceiveth  the  people."    And  there- 
fore curiosity  drew  out  this  rich  publican  Zaccheus,  to  see 
who  this  person  was,  of  whom  he  had  heard  such  various  ac- 
ooonts.     But  it  seems  he  could  not  conveniently  get  a  sight  of 
him  for  the  press,  and  because  he  was  little  of  stature.    Ahus  ! 
how  many  are  kept  from  seeing  Christ  in  glory,  by  reason  of 
the  press !    1  mean,  how  many  are  ashamed  of  bciu*^  singularly 
good,  and  therefore  follow  a  multitude  to  do  evil,  because  tliey 
have  a  press  or  throng  of  polite  acquaintance !  And,  for  fear  of 
being  set  at  naught  by  those  with  whom  they  used  to  sit  at 
meat,  they  deny  the  Lord  of  glory,  and  are  ashamed  to  confess 
hnn  before  men.     This  base,  this  servile  fear  of  man,  is  the 
buieoftme  Christianity;  it  brings  a  dreadful  snare  upon  the 
sonl,  and  is  the  ruin  of  ten  thousands  :  for  1  am  fully  pt^rsua- 
ded,  numbers  are  rationally  convinced  of  gospel-truths ;  but, 
not  being  able  to  brook  contempt,  they  will  not  prosecute  tlu'ir 
convictions,  nor  reduce  them  to  practice.     Happy  those,  who 
io  this  respect,  like  Zaccheus,  are  resolved  to  overcome  all 
impediments  that  lie  in  their  way  to  a  sight  of  Christ :  for, 
finding  he  could  not  see  Christ  because  of  the  press,  and  tlie 
littleness  of  his  natural  state,  he  did  not  smite  upon  his  breast, 
and  depart,  saying,  "  It  is  in  vain  to  seek  after  a  si^^lit  of  him 
any  longer,  I  can  never  attain  unto  it.*'     No,  fuiding  he  could 

'^  B  'J 


404  THE   CONVERSION   OF    ZAGCHEUS.  [XXXV. 

not  see  Christ,  if  he  continued  in  the  midst  of,  h^  ran  l)efore  the 
multitude^  and  climbed  up  into  a  sycamore  tree,  to  see  him ; 
for  he  was  to  pass  that  way." 

There  is  no  seeing  Christ  in  glory  unless  we  run  before  the 
multitude,  and  arc  willing  to  be  in  the  number  of  those  despised 
few^  who  take  the  kingdom  of  God  by  violence.  The  broad  way*^ 
in  which  so  many  go,  can  never  be  that  strait  and  narroiv* 
way  which  leads  to  life.     Our  Lord's  flock  was>  and  always 
will  be,  comparatively  a  little  one :  and  unless  we  dare  to  ma 
before  the  multitude  in  a  holy  singularity,  and  can  rejoice  in 
being  accounted  fools  for  Christ's  sake,  we  shall  never  see  Jesas 
with  comfort,  when  he  appears  in  glory.     From  mentioning  the 
sycamore  tree,  and  considering  the  difficulty  with  which  Zac- 
cneus  must  climb  it,  we  may  farther  learn,  that  those  who  would 
see  Christ,  must    undergo  other  difficulties    and    hardships, 
besides  contempt.      Zaccheus,  without  doubt,  went  through 
both.    Did  not  many,  think  you,  laugh  at  him  as  he  ran  along, 
and  in  the  language  of  Michal,  Saul's  daughter,  cry  out,  ''  How 
glorious  did  the  rich  Zaccheus  look  to-day.  when,  forgettiDg 
the  g^atness  of  his  station,  he  ran  before  a  pitiful  giddy  mob, 
and  climbed  up  a  sycamore- tree,  to  see  an  enthusiastic  preacher !" 
But  Zaccheus  cares  not  for  all  that:  his  curiosity  was  strong; 
if  he  could  but  see  who  Jesus  was,  he  did  not  value  what  scot- 
fers  said  of  him.    Thus  and  much  more  will  it  be  with  all  those 
who  have  an  effectual  desire  to  see  Jesus  in  heaven  :  they  will 
go  on  from  strength  to  strength,  break  through  every  difficulty 
lying  in  their  way,  and  care  not  what  men  or  devils  say  of,  or 
do  unto  them.    May  the  Lord  make  us  all  thus  minded,  for  his 
dear  Son's  sake ! 

At  length,  after  taking  much  pains,  and  going  (as  we  may 
well  suppose)  through  much  contempt,  Zaccheus  has  climbed 
the  tree,  and  there  he  sits,  as  he  thinks,  hid  in  the  leaves  of  it, 
and  watching  when  he  should  see  Jesus  pass  by ;  for  he  was 
to  pass  by  that  way. 

But  sing,  O  heavens,  and  rejoice,  O  earth !  praise,  magnify, 
and  adore  sovereign,  electing,  free,  preventing  love ;  Jesus,  the 
everlasting  God,  the  Prince  of  peace,  who  saw  Nathanael  under 
the  fig-tree,  and  Zaccheus  from  eternity,  now  sees  him  in  the 
sycamore  tree,  and  calls  him  in  time. 

Verse  5.  **  And  when  Jesus  came  to  the  place,  he  looked  np, 
and  saw  him,  and  said  unto  him,  Zaccheus,  make  haste  and 
come  down ;  for  this  day  I  must  abide  at  thy  house."  Amazing 
love !  Well  might  Luke  usher  in  the  account  with  ''  behold !" 
It  is  worthy  of  our  highest  admiration.  When  Zaccheus 
thought  of  no  such  thing,  nay,  thought  that  Christ  Jesus  did 
not  know  him ;  behold,  Christ  does  what  we  never  bear  be  did 
before  or  after,  I  mean,  invite  himself  to  the  house  of  Zaccheus, 
saying,  ^*  Zaccheus,  make  haste  and  come  down ;  for  this  day 
I  must  abide  at  thy  house."  Not,  Pray  let  mc  abide,  but  1 
must  abide  this  day  at  thy  house.  He  also  calls  him  by  name, 
as  though  he  were  well  acquainted  with  him :  and  indeed  weB 


XXXy.]  THB  CONVERSION   OP  ZACCHEUS.  406 

he  mig^ht ;  for  his  name  was  written  in  the  book  of  life^  he  was 
owe  of  those  whom  the  Father  had  given  him  from  aU  eternity : 
therefore  he  must  abide  at  his  house  that  day.  "  For  whom  he 
did  predestinate^  them  he  also  called." 

Here  then,  as  through  a  glass,  we  may  see  the  doctrine  of 
free  grace  evidently  exemplified  before  ns.  Here  was  no  fitness 
in  Zacchens.  He  was  a  publican,  chief  among  the  publicans; 
not  only  so,  but  rich,  and  came  to  see  Christ  only  out  of  curi<- 
osity  :^  but  sovereign  grace  triumphs  over  all.  And  if'  we  do 
Gk>d  justice,  and  are  efiectually  wrought  upon,  we  must 
ad^nowledge  there  was  no  more  fitness  in  us  than  in  Zaccheus ; 
and,  had  not  Christ  prevented  us  by  his  call,  we  had  remained 
dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,  and  alienated  from  the  divine  life, 
e?en  as  others.  "  Jesus  looked  up,  and  saw  him,  and  said  unto 
lihn,  Zaccheus,  make  haste  and  come  down;  for  this  day  I 
mvst  abide  at  thy  house." 

With  what  difierent  emotions  of  heart  may  we  suppose  Zac* 
dieus  received  this  invitation?    Think  you  not  that  he  was 
surprised  to  hear  Jesus  Christ  call  him  by  name,  and  not  only 
80,  but  invite  himself  to  his  house?    Surely,  thinks  Zaccheus, 
I  dream :  it  cannot  be ;  how  should  he  know  me  ?    I  never  saw 
lum  before:    besides,  I  shall  undergo  much   contempt,  if  I 
receive  him  under  my  roof.     Thus,  I  say^  we  may  suppose 
Zaccheus  thought  within  himself.    But  wnat  saith  the  scrip- 
ture ?  "  I  will  make  a  willing  people  in  the  day  of  my  power." 
With  this  outward  call,  there  went  an  efficacious  power  from 
God,  which  sweetly  over-ruled  his  natural  will :  and  therefore, 
verse  6.  '^  He  made  haste,  and  came  down,  and  received  him 
joyfully ;"  not  only  into  his  house,  but  also  into  his  heart. 

Thus  it  is  the  great  God  brings  home  his  children.  He  calls 
Ihem  by  name,  by  his  word  or  providence ;  he  speaks  to  them 
ibo  by  his  Spirit.  Hereby  they  are  enabled  to  open  their 
learts,  and  are  made  willing  to  receive  the  King  of  glory.  For 
Zaccheus'  sake,  let  us  not  entirely  condemn  people  that  come 
tnder  the  word  out  of  no  better  principle  than  curiosity.  Who 
Imows  but  God  may  call  them  ?  It  is  good  to  be  where  the 
[iOrd  is  passing  by.  May  all  who  are  now  present  out  of  this 
mnciple,  hear  the  voice  of  the  Son  of  God  speaking  to  their 
lools,  and  so  hear  that  they  may  live !  Not  that  men  ought 
tierefore  to  take  encouragement  to  come  out  of  curiosity :  for 
leihaps  a  thousand  more,  at  other  times,  came  to  see  Christ 
mi  of  curiosity,  as  well  as  Zacchens,  who  were  not  efiectually 
»ned  by  his  grace.  I  only  mention  this  for  the  encouragement 
if  my  own  soul,  and  the  consolation  of  God's  children,  who 
ire  too  apt  to  be  angry  with  those  who  do  not  attend  on  the 
ford  out  Of  love  to  God :  but  let  them  alone.  Brethren,  pray 
or  them.  How  do  you  know  but  Jesus  Christ  may  speak  to 
heir  hearts?  A  few  words  from  Christ,  applied  by  his  Spirit, 
?ill  save  their  souls.  "  Zaccheus,  (says  Christ,)  make  haste 
md  come  down.  And  he  made  haste  and  came  down,  and 
eceived  him  joyfully." 


406  THE   CONVERSlOlii    OP  ZACCHBUS.  fXXlT 

I  have  observed,  in  holy  scripture,  how  particularly  it  i$ 
remarked^  that  persons  rejoiced  upon  believing  in  Christ*.  Thas 
the  converted  Eunuch  went  on  his  way  rejoicing;  thus  the 
Jailor  rejoiced  with  his  whole  house ;  thus  Zaccheus  recei?ed 
Christ  jovfully.  And  well  may  those  rejoice  who  receive  JesDs 
Christ ;  for  with  him  they  receive  righteousness,  sanctificatioii, 
and  eternal  redemption.  Many  have  brought  up  an  ill  report 
upon  our  good  land,  and  would  fain  persuade  people  that  leli- 
gion  will  make  them  melancholy  mad.  So  far  from  it,  that  joy 
is  one  ingredient  of  the  kingdom  of  God  in  the  heart  c^  a 
believer ;  **  The  kingdom  of  God  is  righteousness,  peace,  aad 
joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost."  To  rejoice  in  the  Lord,  is  a  gospel- 
duty.  *'  Rejoice  in  the  Lord  always ;  and  again  I  say,  rejmce." 
And  who  can  be  so  joyful,  as  those  who  know  that  their  panhm 
is  sealed  before  they  go  hence  and  are  no  more  seen  ?  Tiic 
godly  may,  but  I  cannot  see  how  any  ungodly  men  can,  rejoice: 
they  cannot  be  truly  cheerful.  What  if  wicked  men  may  some- 
times have  laughter  among  them  ?  It  is  only  the  laughter  of 
fools ;  in  the  midst  of  it  there  is  heaviness :  at  the  b^t  it  u 
but  like  the  crackling  of  thorns  under  a  pot ;  it  makes  a  blaze, 
but  soon  goes  out.  But,  as  for  the  godly,  it  is  not  so  with 
them ;  their  joy  is  solid  and  lasting.  As  it  is  a  joy  that  a 
stranger  intermeddleth  not  with,  so  it  is  a  joy  that  no  maa 
taketh  from  them :  it  is  a  joy  in  God,  a  '^  joy  unspeakable,  and 
full  of  glory." 

It  should  seem  that  Zaccheus  was  under  soul-distress  bot  a 
little  while ;  perhaps  (says  Guthrie,  in  his  book  entitled.  Tile 
Trial  conceiving  a  saving  Interest  in  Christ,)  not  above  a  quar- 
ter of  an  hour.  I  add,  perhaps  not  so  long:  for  as  one 
observes,  sometimes  the  Lord  Jesus  delights  to  deliver  speedily. 
God  is  a  sovereign  agent,  and  works  upon  his  children  in  their 
effectual  calling,  according  to  the  counsel  of  his  eternal  wilL 
It  is  with  the  spiritual,  as  natural  birth :  all  women  have  not 
the  like  pangs ;  all  Christians  have  not  the  like  degree  of  con- 
viction. But  all  agree  in  this,  that  all  have  Jesus  Christ 
formed  in  their  hearts :  and  those  who  have  not  so  many  trials 
at  first,  may  be  visited  with  the  greater  conflicts  hereafter;  < 
though  they  never  come  into  bondage  again,  after  they  have 
once  received  the  spirit  of  adoption.  **  We  have  not  (says  Panl) 
received  the  spirit  of  bondage  again  unto  fear."  We  know  not 
what  Zaccheus  underwent  before  he  died :  however,  this  one 
thing  I  know,  he  now  believed  in  Christ,  and  was  justified,  or 
acquitted,  and  looked  upon  as  righteous  in  God's  sight,  thongh 
a  publican,  chief  among  the  publicans,  not  many  moments 
before.  And  thus  it  is  with  all,  that,  like  Zaccheus,  receive 
Jesus  Christ  by  faith  into  their  hearts :  the  very  moment  they 
find  rest  in  him,  they  are  freely  justified  from  all  things  from 
which  they  could  not  be  justified  by  the  law  of  Moses ;  *'  for  by 
grace  are  wc  saved,  through  faith,  and  that  not  of  ourselves,  it 
is  the  gift  of  God." 

Say  not  within  yourselves,  this  is  a  licentious  antinomiun 


JIXXV.]  THE   CONVERSION    OF  ZACCHEU9.  407 

doctrine ;  for  this  faith,  if  true,  i^vill  work  by  love,  and  be  pro- 
ductive of  the  fruits  of  holiness.  See  an  instance  in  this  con- 
vert jZacchens:  no  sooner  had  he  received  Jesus  Christ  by 
lieutb  into  his  heart,  but  he  evidences  it  by  his  works ;  for,  ver.  8. 
we  are  told,  '^  Zaccheus  stood  forth,  and  said  unto  the  Lord, 
Behold,  Lord,  the  half  of  my  goods  I  give  unto  the  poor ;  and 
if  I  have  taken  any  thing  from  any  man  by  false  accusation,  I 
lestore  him  four-fold." 

Having  believed  on  Jesus  in  his  heart,  he  now  makes  con- 
fession of  him  with  his  mouth  to  salvation.  '*  Zaccheus  stood 
forth ;"  he  was  not  ashamed,  but  stood  forth  before  his  brother 
pablicans;  for  true  faith  casts  out  all  servile,  sinful  fear  of 
man ;  *'  and  said.  Behold,  Lord."  It  is  remarkable,  how  readily 
people  in  scripture  have  owned  the  divinity  of  Christ  imme- 
diately upon  their  conversion.  Thus  the  wom|ui  at  Jacob's 
well;  ''Is  not  this  the  Christ?"  Thus  the  man  bom  blind; 
^Lord,  I  believe;  and  worshipped  him."  Thus  Zaccheus, 
^  Behold,  Lord."  An  incontestable  proof  this  to  me,  that  those 
who  deny  our  Lord's  divinity,  never  effectually  felt  his  power : 
if  they  had,  they  would  not  speak  so  lightly  of  him;  they  would 
scorn  to  deny  his  eternal  power  and  godhead.  ''Zaccheus 
stood  forth,  and  said,  Behold,  Lord,  the  half  of  my  goods  I  give 
to  the  poor ;  and  if  1  have  taken  any  thing  from  any  man  by 
fidse  accusation,  I  restore  him  four-fold."  Noble  fruits  of  a 
true  living  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus !  Every  word  calls  for  our 
notice.  Not  some  small,  not  the  tenth  part,  but  the  half.  Of 
what?  My  goods;  things  that  were  valuable.  My  goods,  his 
own,  not  another's.  I  give ;  not,  I  will  give  when  I  die,  when 
I  can  keep  them  no  longer ;  but,  I  give  now,  even  now.  Zac- 
cheus would  be  his  own  executor:  for  whilst  we  have  time 
we  should  do  good.  But  to  whom  would  he  give  half  of  his 
goods  ?  Not  to  the  rich,  not  to  those  who  were  already  clothed 
in  purple  and  fine  linen,  whom  he  might  be  recompensed  again ; 
but  to  the  poor,  the  maimed,  the  halt,  the  blind,  from  which  he 
ceuld  expect  no  recompense  till  the  resurrection  of  the  dead. 
^  I  give  to  the  poor."  But  knowing  that  he  must  be  just  before 
lie  could  be  charitable,  and  conscious  to  himself  that  in  his 
pablic  administrations  he  iiad  wronged  many  persons,  he  adds, 
"And  if  I  have  taken  any  thing  from  any  man  by  false  accu- 
sation, I  restore  him  four-fold."  Hear  ye  this,  all  ye  that  make 
no  conscience  of  cheating  the  king  of  his  taxes,  or  of  buying 
or  selling  run  goods.  If  ever  God  give  you  true  faith,  you  will 
sever  rest,  till,  like  Zaccheus,  you  have  made  restitution  to  the 
utmost  of  your  power.  I  suppose,  before  his  conversion,  he 
thought  it  no  harm  to  cheat  thus,  no  more  than  you  may  do 
now,  and  pleased  himself  frequently,  to  be  sure,  that  ho  got 
rich  by  doing  so :  but  now  he  is  grieved  for  it  at  his  heart;  he 
oonfesses  his  injustice  before  men,  and  promises  to  make  ample 
restitution.  Go,  ye  cheating  publicans,  learn  of  Zaccheus ;  go 
away,  and  do  likewise.  If  you  do  not  make  restitution  here, 
the  liord  Jesus  shall  make  you  confess  your  sins  before  men 


406  THE  CONVBRSION   OF  ZACCHEU8.  [XXXT. 

and  angels,  and  condemn  yon  for  it,  when  he  comes  in  the  g^oiy 
of  bis  Father  to  judgment  hereafter. 

After  all  this,  with  good  reason  might  onr  Lord  say.  unto 
him,  "  This  day  is  salvation  come  to  this  house ;  forasmuch  as 
he  also  is  the  son  of  Abraham  ;*'  not  so  much  by  a  natural,  as 
by  a  spiritual  birth.  He  was  made  partaker  of  like  precioot 
faith  with  Abraham :  like  Abraham,  he  believed  on  the  Lord» 
and  it  was  accounted  to  him  for  righteousness ;  his  faith,  like 
Abraham's,  worked  by  love ;  and  I  doubt  not  but  he  has  beoi 
long  since  sitting  in  Abraham's  harbour. 

And  now,  are  you  not  ashamed  of  yourselves,  who  speak 
against  the  doctrines  of  grace,  especially  that  doctrine  of  betnf 
justified  by  faith  alone,  as  though  it  led  to  licentioasneasT 
What  can  be  more  unjust  than  such  a  charge?  Is  not  Ae 
instance  of  Zaccheus,  a  sufficient  proof  to  the  contrary  ?  Have 
I  strained  it,  to  serve  my  own  turn?  Grod  forbid.  To  the  best 
of  mv  knowledge  I  have  spoken  the  truth  in  sincerity,  and  the 
truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus.  I  do  affirm  that  we  are  saved  by  graces 
and  that  we  are  justified  by  faith  alone :  but  I  do  also  affinn, 
that  faith  must  be  evidenced  by  good  works,  where  there  is  aa 
opportunity  of  performing  them. 

What  therefore  has  been  said  of  Zaccheus,  may  serve  as  a 
rule,  whereby  all  may  judge  whether  they  have  faith,  or  not 
You  say  you  have  faith  :  but  how  do  you  prove  it?  Did  yoQ 
ever  hear  the  Lord  Jesus  call  you  by  name  ?  Were  you  ever 
made  to  obey  that  call  ?  Did  you  ever,  like  Zaccheus,  receive  . 
Jesus  Christ  joyfully  into  your  hearts  ?  Are  you  influenced  by 
the  faith  you  say  you  have,  to  stand  up  and  confess  the  Lord 
Jesus  before  men  ?  Were  you  ever  made  willing  to  own,  and 
humble  yourselves  for,  your  past  offences?  Does  your  faith 
work  by  love,  so  that  you  conscientiously  lay  up,  according  as 
God  has  prospered  you,  for  the  support  of  the  poor  ?  Do  yoa 
give  alms  of  all  things  that  you  possess  ?  And  have  yoa 
made  due  restitution  to  those  you  have  wronged?  If  so, 
happy  are  ye ;  salvation  is  come  to  your  souls,  you  are  sons, 
you  are  daughters  of,  you  shall  shortly  be  everlastingly  blessed 
with,  faithful  Abraham.  But,  if  you  are  not  thus  minded,  do 
not  deceive  your  own  souls.  Though  you  may  talk  of  justi- 
iication  by  faith,  like  angels,  it  will  do  you  no  good ;  it  will 
only  increase  your  damnation.  You  hold  the  truth,  but  it  is  in 
unrighteousness :  your  faith  being  without  works,  is  dead ;  yoa 
have  the  devil,  not  Abraham,  for  your  father.  Unless  you  get 
a  faith  of  the  heart,  a  faith  working  by  love,  with  devils  and 
damned  spirits  shall  you  dwell  for  evermore. 

But  it  is  time  now  to  enforce  the  latter  part  of  the  text :  '^  For 
the  Son  of  man  is  come  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was  lost." 
These  words  are  spoken 'hy  our  Saviour  in  answer  to  some  self* 
righteous  Pharisees,  who,  instead  of  rejoicing  with  the  angels  in 
heaven,  at  the  conversion  of  such  a  sinner,  murmured,  "  That 
he  was  gone  to  be  guest  \vith  a  man  that  was  -sl  sinner."  To 
vindicate  his  conduct,  he  tells  thciii,  that  this  was  an  act  agree- 


:SXV.]  THE  CONVERSION   OF  ZAGCHBUS.  400 

ble  to  the  design  of  his  coming :  '^  For  the  Son  of  man  is  come 
o  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was  lost."    He  might  have  said, 
be  Son  of  God.    But  O  the  wonderful  condescension  of  oar 
Ledeemer !    He  delights  to  style  himself  the  Son  of  man.     He 
lame  not  only  to  save,  but  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was 
omU  He  came  to  Jericho  to  seek  and  save  Zaccheus ;  for  other- 
irise  Zaccheus  would  never  have  been  saved  by  him.  But  from 
whence  came  he?    Even  from  heaven,  his  dwelling-place,  to 
tUs  lower  earth,  this  vale  of  tears,  to  seek  and  save  that  which 
was  lost ;  or  all  that  feel  themselves  lost,  and  are  willing,  like 
Zaccheus,  to  receive  him  into  their  hearts,  to  save  them :  With 
kow  great  a  salvation  ?    Even  from  the  guilt,  and  also  from  the 
power,  of  their  sins ;  to  make  them  heirs  of  God,  and  joint-heirs 
vith  himself,  and  partakers  of  that  glory  which  he  enjoyed  with 
the  Father  before  the  world  began.    Thus  will  the  Son  of  man 
tare  that  which  is  lost.    He  was  made  the  Son  of  man,  on  pur- 
pose that  he  might  save  them.    He  had  no  other  end  but  this  in 
leaving  his  Father's  throne,  in  obeying  the  moral  law,  and  hang- 
ing upon  the  cross ;  all  that  was  done  and  suffered,  merely  to 
satisfy,  and  procure  a  righteousness  for  poor,  lost,  undone  sin- 
ners, and  that  too  without  respect  of  persons.    '^  That  which 
was  lost  ;'*  all  of  every  nation  and  language,  that  feel,  bewail, 
tad  are  truly  desirous  of  being  delivered  from,  their  lost  state, 
did  the  Son  of  man  come  down  to  seek  and  to  save :  for  he  is 
Blighty,  not  only  so,  but  willing,  to  save  to  the  uttermost  all  that 
<^e  to  God  through  him.     He  will  in  no  wise  cast  th^n  out : 
for  he  is  the  same  to-day,  as  he  was  yesterday.     He  comes  now 
to  sinners,  as  well  as  formerly ;  and,  I  hope,  hath  sent  me  out 
this  day  to  seek,  and,  under  him,  to  bring  home  some  of  you,  the 
lost  sheep  of  the  house  of  Israel. 

What  say  you  ?  Shall  I  go  home  rejoicing,  saying.  That  many 
^  sheep  have  gone  astray,  but  they  have  now  believed  on 
'esos  Christ,  and  so  returned  home  to  the  great  Shepherd  and 
Bishop  of  their  souls  ?  If  the  Lord  would  be  pleased  thus  to 
prosper  my  handy-work,  I  care  not  how  many  legalists  and 
<jBlf-rigbteous  Pharisees  murmur  against  me,  for  offering  salva- 
^  to  the  worst  of  sinners :  for  I  know  the  Son  of  man  came 
to  seek  and  to  save  them ;  and  the  Lord  Jesus  will  now  be  a 
toest  to  the  worst  Publican,  the  vilest  sinner  that  is  amongst 
TOQ,  if  he  does  but  believe  on  him.  Make  haste  then,  O  sin- 
^^,  make  haste,  and  come  by  faith  to  Christ.  Then,  this  day, 
^ea  this  hour,  nay,  this  moment,  if  you  believe,  Jesus  Christ 
^hall  come  and  make  his  eternal  abode  in  your  hearts.  Which 
^fyott  is  made  willing  to  receive  the  King  of  glory?  Which  of 
Toa  obeys  the  call,  as  Zaccheus  did  ?  Alas !  why  do  you  stand 
*till?  How  know  you,  whether  Jesus  Christ  may  ever  call  you 
^in?  Come  then,  poor,  guilty  sinners ;  come  away,  poor,  lost, 
Qadone  publicans ;  make  haste,  I  say,  and  come  away  to  Jesus 
Christ.  The  Lord  condescends  to  invite  himself  to  come  under 
the  filthy  roofs  of  the  houses  of  your  souls.  Do  not  be  afraid 
)f entertaining  him;  he  will  fill  you  with  all  peace  and  joy  in 


410  THE   CONVERSION   OF   ZACGHKU0.  [XXXV. 

believing.  Do  not  be  ashamed  to  run  before  the  raultitode^and 
to  have  all  manner  of  evil  spoken  against  you  falsely  for  his 
sake :  one  sight  of  Christ  will  make  amends  for  all.  Zaccheiu 
was  laughed  at ;  and  all  that  will  live  godly  in  Christ  jesus, 
shall  suffer  persecution.  But  what  of  that?  Zacchea»is  im)w 
crowned  in  glory ;  as  you  also  shall  shortly  be,  if  you  believe 
on,  and  are  reproached  for  Christ's  sake.  Do  not,  therefore,  put 
me  off  with  frivolous  excuses :  there  is  no  excuse  can  be  given 
for  your  not  coming  to  Christ.  You  are  lost,  undone,  withoat 
him ;  and  if  he  be  not  glorified  in  your  salvation,  he  will  be  glo- 
rified in  your  destruction;  if  he  do  not  come  and  make  his 
abode  in  your  hearts,  you  must  take  up  an  eternal  abode  with 
the  devil  and  his  angels.  O  that  the  Lord  would  be  pleased  to 
pass  by  some  of  you  at  this  time !  O  that  he  may  call  you  by 
his  Spirit,  and  make  you  a  willing  people  in  Uus  day  of  bis 
power !  .  For  I  know  my  calling  will  not  do,  unless  he,  by  bis 
efficacious  grace,  compel  you  to  come  in.  O  that  you  once  Mi 
what  it  is  to  receive  Jesus  Christ  into  your  hearts !  You  would 
soon,  like  Zaccheus,  give  him  every  thing.  You  do  not  love 
Christ,  because  you  do  not  know  him ;  you  do  not  come  to  him, 
because  you  do  not  feel  your  want  of  him :  you  are  whole,  and 
not  broken-hearted ;  you  are  not  sick,  at  least  not  sensible  of 
your  sickness ;  and,  therefore,  no  wonder  you  do  not  apply  to 
Jesus  Christ,  that  great,  that  almighty  physician.  You  do  not 
feel  yourselves  lost,  and  therefore  do  not  seek  to.  be  found  in 
Christ.  O  that  God  would  wound  you  with  the  sword  of  bis 
Spirit,  and  cause  his  arrows  of  conviction  to  stick  deep  in  your 
hearts !  O  that  he  would  dart  a  ray  of  divine  light  into  your 
souls !  For  if  you  do  not  feel  yourselves  lost  without  Christ, 
you  are  of  all  men  most  miserable :  your  souls  are  dead ;  you 
are  not  only  an  image  of  hell,  but  in  some  degree  hell  itself:  you 
carry  hell  about  with  you,  and  you  know  it  not.  O  that  I  could 
see  some  of  you  sensible  of  this,  and  hear  you  cry  out,  "  Lord, 
break  this  hard  heart ;  Lord,  deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this 
death ;  draw  me.  Lord,  make  me  willing  to  come  after  thee ;  I 
am  lost ;  Lord,  save  me,  or  I  perish  !"  Were  this  your  case, 
how  soon  would  the  Lord  stretch  forth  his  almighty  hand,  and 
say,  fie  of  good  cheer,  it  is  I ;  be  not  afraid  ?  What  a  wonder- 
ful calm  would  then  possess  your  troubled  souls  ?  Your  fellow- 
ship would  then  be  with  the  Father  and  the  Son:  your  life  would 
be  hid  with  Christ  in  God . 

Some  of  you,  I  hope,  have  experienced  this,  and  can  say,  I 
was  lost,  but  I  am  found  ;  I  was  dead,  but  am  alive  again :  the 
Sou  of  man  came  and  sought  me  in  the  day  of  his  power,  and 
saved  my  sinful  soul.  And  do  you  repent  that  you  came  to 
Christ?  Has  ho  not  been  a  good  master?  Is  not  his  presence 
sweet  to  your  souls  ?  Has  he  not  been  faithful  to  his  promise? 
And  have  you  not  found,  that  even  in  doing  and  suffering  for 
him,  there  is  an  exceeding  present  great  reward  ?  I  am  per- 
suaded you  will  answer,  Yes.  O  then,  ye  saints,  recommend 
and  talk  of  the   love  of  Christ  to  others,  and  tell  them,  O  IcU 


XXXVJ]  THE   CONVERSION  OP  ZA0CH£I78.  411 

tell  them  ^hat  great  things  the  Lord  has  done  for  you !  This 
may  encourage  others  to  come  unto  hira.  And  who  knows  but 
the  Lord  may  make  you  fishers  of  men  ?  The  story  of  Zaccheus 
was  left  on  record  for  this  purpose.  No  traly  convinced  soul, 
after  such  an  instance  of  divine  grace  has  been  laid  before  him, 
need  despair  of  mercy.  What  if  you  are  publicans  ?  Was  not 
Zaccheus  a  publican  ?  What  if  you  are  chief  among  the  publi- 
cans ?  Was  not  Zaccheus  likewise  ?  What  if  you  are  rich  ? 
Was  not  Zaccheus  rich  also?  And  yet  almighty  grace  made 
him  more  than  conqueror  overall  these  binderances.  All  things 
are  possible  to  Jesus  Christ ;  nothing  is  too  hard  for  him ;  he  is 
the  Lord  Almighty.  Our  mountains  of  sins  must  all  fall  before 
this  great  Zerubbabel.  On  him  Grod  the  Father  has  laid  the 
iniquities  of  all  that  shall  believe  on  him ;  and  in  his  own  body  he 
bare  them  on  the  tree.  There,  there,  by  faith,  O  mourners  in 
Sion,  may  you  see  your  Saviour  hanging  with  arms  stretched 
oat,  and  hear  him,  as  it  were,  thus  speaking  to  your  souls ; 
**  Behold  how  I  have  loved  you !  Behold  my  hands  and  my 
feet !  Look,  look  into  my  wounded  side,  and  see  a  heart  flaming 
with  love :  love  stronger  than  death.  Come  into  my  arms,  O 
sinners,  come  wash  your  spotted  souls  in  my  heart's  blood.  See 
here  is  a  fountain  opened  for  all  sin  and  all  uncleanness !  See, 
O  guilty  souls,  how  the  virrath  of  God  is  now  abiding  upon  you  : 
come,  haste  away,  and  hide  yourselves  in  the  clefts  of  my 
wounds ;  for  I  am  wounded  for  your  transgressions ;  I  am  dying, 
Ihat  you  may  live  for  evermore.  Behold,  as  Moses  lifted  up  the 
serpent  in  the  wilderness,  so  am  I  here  lifted  up  upon  a  tree.  See 
bow  I  am  become  a  curse  for  you :  the  chastisement  of  your 
peace  is  upon  me.  I  am  thus  scourged,  thus  wounded,  thus 
crucified,  that  you,  by  my  stripes,  may  be  healed.  O  look  unto 
me,  all  ye  trembling  sinners,  even  to  the  ends  of  the  earth ! 
Look  unto  me  by  faith,  and  you  shall  be  saved :  for  I  came  thus 
to  be  obedient  even  unto  death,  that  I  might  save  that  which 
was  lost." 

And  what  say  you  to  this,  O  sinners  ?  Suppose  you  saw  the 
King  of  glory  dying,  and  thus  speaking  to  you ;  would  you 
believe  on  him  ?  No,  you  would  not,  unless  you  believe  on  him 
now :  for  though  he  is  dead,  he  yet  speaks  all  this  in  the  scrip- 
ture ;  nay,  in  effect  says  all  this  in  the  words  of  the  text,  *'  The 
Son  of  man  is  come  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  is  lost.*' 
Do  not  therefore  any  longer  crucify  the  Lord  of  glory.  Bring 
those  rebels,  your  sins,  which  will  not  have  him  to  reign  over 
them,  bring  them  out  to  him :  though  you  cannot  slay  them 
yourselves,  yet  he  will  slay  them  for  you.  The  power  of  his 
death  and  resurrection  is  as  great  now  as  formerly.  Make 
haste,  therefore,  make  haste,  O  ye  publicans  and  sinners,  and 
give  the  dear  Lord  Jesus  your  hearts,  your  whole  hearts.  If  you 
refuse  to  hearken  to  this  call  of  the  Lord,  remember  your  dam- 
nation will  be  just :  I  am  free  from  the  blood  of  you  all :  you 
must  acquit  my  Master  and  me  at  the  terrible  day  of  judg- 
ment. 


412  THB  MARRIAGE  OP   GAKA.  [XXXYI. 

O  that  you  may  know  the  thing^s  that  belong  to  your  everlasting 
peace,  before  they  are  eternally  hid  from  yonr  eyes !  Let  all  that 
lave  the  Lord  Jesos  Christ  in  sincerity  say.  Amen. 


SERMON  XXXVL 

THE     MARRIAGE     OF     CAN  A. 

This  beginning  of  miracles  did  Jesus  in  Cana  of  Galilee,  and 
manifested  forth  his  glory  ;  a9id  his  disciples  believed  oh  him, 
— John  ii.  11. 

I  HAVE  more  than  once  had  occasion  to  observe^  that  the  chief 
end  St.  John  had  in  view,  when  he  wrote  his  Gospel,  was  to 
prove  the  divinity  of  Jesus  Christ,  (that  Word,  who  not  ovly 
was  from  everlasting  with  Grod,  but  also  was  really  Grod  blessed 
for  evermore,)  against  those  arch-heretics  Ebion  and  Cerinthiis, 
whose  pernicious  principles  too  many  follow  in  these  last  days. 
For  this  purpose,  you  may  take  notice,  that  he  is  more  particu- 
lar than  any  other  evangelist,  in  relating  our  Lord's  divine  dis- 
courses, as  also  the  glorious  miracles  which  he  wrought,  not  by 
a  power  derived  from  another,  like  Moses  and  other  prophets, 
but  from  a  power  inherent  in  himself. 

The  words  of  the  text  have  a  reference  to  a  notable  miracle 
which  Christ  performed,  and  thereby  gave  proof  of  his  eternal 
power  and  godhead.  '^This  beginning  of  miracles  did  Jesus  in 
Cana  of  Galilee,  and  manifested  forth  his  glory ;  and  his  dis- 
ciples believed  on  him." 

The  miracle  here  spoken  of,  is  that  of  our  Lord's  turning 
water  into  wine,  at  a  marriage  feast.  I  design,  at  present,  by 
God's  help,  to  make  some  observations  on  the  circumstances 
and  certainty  of  the  miracle,  and  then  conclude  with  some  prac- 
tical instructions;  that  you,  by  hearing  how  Jesus  Christ  has 
shewed  forth  his  glory,  may,  by  the  operation  of  God's  Spirit 
upon  your  hearts,  with  the  disciples  mentioned  in  the  text,  be 
brought  to  believe  on  him. 

Firsts  then,  I  would  make  some  observations  on  the  miracle  it- 
self.— Verse  1,2.  "  And  the  third  day  there  was  a  marriage  in  Cana 
of  Galilee ;  and  the  mother  of  Jesus  was  there.  And  both  Jesus 
was  called,  and  his  disciples,  to  the  marriage."  By  our  Lord's 
being  at  a  feast,  we  may  learn,  that  feasting  upon  solemn  occa^ 
sions  is  not  absolutely  unlawful :  but  then  we  must  be  exceedinf 
careful  at  such  seasons,  that  the  occasion  be  solemn,  and  that 
we  go  not  for  the  sake  of  eating  and  drinking,  but  to  edify  one 
another  in  love.  Feasting  in  any  other  manner,  I  think  absolutely 
unlawful  for  the  followers  of  Jesus  Christ :  because  if  we  eat 
and  drink  out  of  another  view,  it  cannot  be  to  the  glory  of  God. 
The  Son  of  man,  we  know,  **  came  eating  and  drinking."  If  t 
Pharisee  asked  him  to  come  to  his  house,  our  Lord  went,  and 
HHt  down  with  him.  But  then  we  find  his  discourse  was  always 
such  as  tended  to  the  use  of  edifying.  We  may  then,  no  doubt, 
go  and  do  likewise. 


IXXVI.]  THE   MARRIAGE   OP   CANA.  418 

We  may  observe,  farther,  that  if  our  Lord  were  present  at  a 
marriage  feast,  then,  to  deny  marriat^e  to  any  order  of  men,  is 
certainly  a  "  doctrine  of  devils."  "  Marriage  (says  the  aposUe) 
is  honourable  in  all."  Our  Lord  graced  a  marriage- feast  with 
his  first  public  miracle.  It  was  an  institution  of  God  himself, 
e?en  in  paradise:  and  therefore,  no  doubt, lawful  for  all  Chris- 
^ans,  even  for  those  who  are  made  perfect  in  holiness  through 
flie  faith  of  Jesus  Christ.  But  then,  we  may  learn  the  reason 
Why  we  have  so  many  unhappy  marriages  in  the  world ;  it  is 
because  the  parties  concerned  do  not  call  Jesus  Christ  by 
prayer,  nor  ask  the  advice  of  his  true  disciples  when  they  are 
about  to  marry :  No  ;  Christ  and  religion  are  the  last  things  that 
aie  consulted:  and  no  wonder  then  iT matches  of  the  devil's 
Baking  (a&  all  such  are,  which  are  contracted  only  on  account 
af  outward  beauty,  or  for  filthy  lucre's  sake)  prove  most  miser- 
able, and  grievous  to  be  borne. 

I  cannot  but  dwell  a  little  on  this  particular ;  because  I  am 
persuaded  the  devil  cannot  lay  a  greater  snare  for  young  Chris- 
tians, than  to  tempt  them  unequally  to  yoke  themselves  with 
mbelievers :  as  are  all  who  are  not  bom  again  of  God.  This 
was  tlie  snare  wherein  the  sons  of  God  were  entangled  before 
the  flood,  and  one  great  cause  why  God  brought  that  flood  upon 
the  world.  For  what  says  Moses,  Gen.  vi.  2, 3.  "  The  sons  of 
God  (the  posterity  of  pious  Seth)  saw  the  daughters  of  men, 
(or  the  posterity  of  wicked  Cain)  that  they  were  fair,  (not 
uat  they  were  pious,)  and  they  took  them  wives  of  all  which 
they  chose,"  not  which  God  chose  for  them.  What  follows  ? 
''And  the  Lord  said.  My  Spirit  shall  not  always  strive  with 
nan,  for  that  he  also  is  flesh ;"  that  is,  even  the  few  righteous 
souls  being  now  grown  carnal  by  their  ungodly  marriages,  the 
whole  world  was  altogether  become  abominable,  and  had  made 
themselves  vessels  of  wrath  fitted  for  destruction.  I  might  in- 
stance farther,  the  care  the  ancient  patriarchs  took  to  choose 
wives  for  their  children  out  of  their  own  religious  families ;  and 
it  was  one  great  mark  of  Esau's  rebellion  against  his  father, 
that  he  took  unto  himself  wives  of  the  daughters  of  the  Canaan- 
ites,  who  were  strangers  to  the  covenant  of  promise  made  unto 
his  fathers.  But  I  forbear.  Time  will  not  permit  me  to  enlarge 
here.  Let  it  suffice  to  advise  all,  whenever  they  enter  into  a 
Carriage  state,  to  imitate  the  people  of  Cana  in  Galilee,  to  call 
Christ  to  the  marriage :  he  certainly  will  hear,  and  choose  ior 
you ;  and  you  will  always  find  his  choice  to  be  the  best.  He 
then  will  direct  you  to  such  yoke-fellows  as  shall  be  helps  meet 
fer  yoo,  in  the  great  work  of  your  salvation,  and  then  he  will 
tbo  enable  you  to  serve  him  without  distraction,  and  cause  you 
to  walk,  as  Zachary  and  Elizabeth,  in  all  his  commandments 
^d  ordinances  blameless. 

But  to  proceed.  Who  these  persons  were  that  called  our  Lord 
and  his  >clisciples  to  the  marriage,  is  not  certain.  Some  (because 
it  is  said,  that  the  mother  of  Jesus  was  there)  have  supposed 
that  they  were  related  to  the  virgin,  and  that,  therefore,  our  Lord 


414  THE   MARRIAGE  OP   CANA.  [XXXVl. 

and  bis  disciples  were  invited  on  her  account.     However  that 
he,  it  sbonid  seem  they  were  not  very  rich,  (for  what  had  rick 
folks  to  do  with  a  despised  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  and  his  mean 
followers  ?)  because  we  find  they  were  unfurnished  with  a  snfi- 
cient  quantity  of  wine  for  a  large  company,  and    therefoiap 
''  when  they  wanted  wine,  the  mother  of  Jesus,"  having^,  as  it 
should  seem  by  her  applying  to  him  so  readily  on  this  occasioOj 
even  in  his  private  life,  seen  some  instances  of  his  miracuions 
power,  "  saith  unto  him.  They  have  no  wine."    She  thought  it 
sufficient  only  to  inform  him  of  the  wants  of  the  host,  knowing 
that  he  was  as  ready  to  give  as  she  to  ask.     In  this  light  the 
blessed  Virgin's  request  appears  to  us  at  the  first  view ;  but 
if  we  examine  our  Lord^s  answer,  we  shall  have  reason  to  think 
there  was  something  which  was  not  right;  for  Jesus,  saith  untir 
her,  ver.  4.  "Woman,  what  have  I  to  do  with  thee?"    Obseive 
he  calls  her  woman,  not  mother ;  to  shew  her,  that  though  sha 
was  his  mother,  as  he  was  man,  yet  she  was  his  creature,  as  he 
was  God.    ''  What  have  I  to  do  with  thee?"    Think  you  that 
I  must  work  miracles  at  your  bidding  ?    Some  have  thought  that 
she  spoke  as  though  she  had  an  authority  over  him,  which  was 
a  proud  motion,  and  our  Lord  therefore  checks  her  for  it.   Ani 
if  Jesus  Christ  would  not  turn  a  little  water  into  wine,  whilst 
be  was  here  on  earth,  at  her  command,  how  idolatrous  is  that 
church,  and  how  justly  do  we  separate  from  her,  which  pre- 
scribes forms,  wherein  the  Virgin  is  desired  to  command  her  Son 
to  have  compassion  on  us ! 

But  notwithstanding  the  holy  Virgin  were  blameable  in  this 
respect,  yet  she  has  herein  set  rich  and  poor  an  example  whick 
it  is  your  duty  to  follow.  You  that  are  rich,  and  live  in  ceiled 
houses,  learn  of  her  to  go  into  the  cottages  of  the  poor ;  your 
Lord  was  not  above  it,  and  why  should  you?  And  when  yoa 
do  visit  them,  like  the  virgin-mother,  examine  their  wants ;  and 
when  you  see  they  have  no  wine,  and  are  ready  to  perish  Mrith 
hunger,  shut  not  up  your  bowels  of  compassion,  but  bless  (be 
Lord  for  putting  it  in  your  power  to  administer  to  their  neccs- 
sities.  Believe  me,  such  visits  would  do  you  good.  You  would 
leam  then  to  be  thankful  that  God  has  given  you  bread  enoogb 
and  to  spare.  And  I  am  persuaded,  every  mite  that  you  be- 
stow on  feeding  the  hungry  and  clothinii:  the  naked  disciples  of 
Jesus  Christ,  will  afibrd  you  more  satisfaction  at  the  hour  of 
death,  and  in  the  day  of  judgment,  than  all  the  thousands 
squandered  away  in  balls  and  assemblies,  and  such-like  enter* 
tainments. 

You  that  arc  poor  in  this  world's  goods,  and  thereby  are  dis« 
abled  from  helping,  yet  you  may  learn  from  the  Virgin,  to  pray 
for  one  another.  She  could  not  turn  the  water  into  wine,  but 
she  could  entreat  her  Son  to  do  it:  and  so  may  you ;  and  doubt 
not  of  the  Lord's  hearing  you ;  for  God  has  chosen  the  poor  in  this 
world,  rich  in  faith :  and,  by  your  fervent  prayers,  you  may 
draw  down  many  a  blessing  on  your  poor  fellow-creatures.  O 
that  I  may  ever  be  remembered  by  yoa  before  the  throne  of  our 


XXXVlJ  THB  MARRIAOB  OF  CANA.  415 

dear  Lord  Jeiiis !  But  what  shall  we  say  t  Will  oar  Lord  en- 
tirely disregard  this  motion  of  his  mother?  No ;  though  he  check 
her  with  *^  Woman,  what  have  I  to  do  with  thee  ?"  yet  he  inti- 
mates that  he  would  do  as  she  desired  by  and  by :  **  Mine  hour 
is  not  yet  come."  As  though  he  had  said.  The  wine  is  almost, 
bat  not  quite  out;  when  they  are  come  to  an  extremity,  and 
sensiUe  of  the  want  of  my  assistance*  then  will  I  shew  forth  my 
glory,  that  they  may  behold  it,  and  believe  on  me. 

Thus,  sirs,  hath  our  Lord  been  frequently  pleased  to  deal 
with  me,  and,  I  doubt  not,  with  many  of  you  also.  Often,  often, 
when  I  have  found  his  presence  as  it  were  hidden  from  my 
soal,  and  his  comforts  well-nigh  gone»  I  have  went  unto  him, 
complaining  that  1  had  no  visit  and  token  of  his  love  as  usual. 
Sometimes  he  has  seemed  to  turn  a  deaf  ear  to  my  request,  and, 
as  it  were,  said, ''  What  have  I  to  do  with  thee  t"  Which  has 
made  me  go  sorrowing  all  the  day  long ;  so  foolish  was  I,  and 
before  him :  for  I  have  always  found  he  lovetl  me  not- 
p,  as  he  did  Lazarus,  though  be  stayed  two  days 
after  be  heard  he  was  sick.  But  when  my  hour  of  extremity 
has  been  come,  and  my  will  broken,  then  hath  he  lifted  up  the 
light  of  his  blessed  countenance  afresh ;  he  has  shewed  forth 
hM  i^ory,  and  made  me  ashamed  for  disbelieving  him,  who  often 
bath  turned  my  water  into  wine.  Be  not  then  discouraged,  if 
the  Lord  do  not  immediately  seem  to  regard  the  voice  of  your 
prayer,  when  you  cry  unto  him.  The  holy  Virgin  we  find  was 
not ;  no,  she  was  convinced  his  time  was  the  best  time,  and 
therefore,  ver.  5.  '*  saith  unto  the  servants,  (O  that  we  could 
follow  her  advice !)  whatsoever  he  saith  unto  you,  do  it" 

And  now,  behold,  the  hour  is  come,  when  the  eternal  Son  of 
God  will  shew  forth  his  glory.  The  circumstance  of  the  miracle 
is  very  remarkable :  ver.  6.  '*  And  there  were  set  six  water-pots 
of  water,  after  the  manner  of  the  purifying  of  the  Jews,  contain- 
ing two  or  three  firkins  apiece."  The  manner  of  this  purifying 
we  have  an  account  of  in  the  other  evangelists,  especially  St. 
Mark,  who  informs  us,  that  the  Pharisees  and  all  the  Jews, 
except  they  wash  their  hands  oft,  cat  not ;  and  when  they  come 
from  the  market,  except  they  wash,  they  eat  not.  This  was  a 
superstitious  custom ;  but,  however,  we  may  learn  from  it, 
whenever  we  come  in  from  conversing  with  those  that  are  with- 
out, to  purify  our  hearts  by  self-examination  and  prayer ;  for 
it  is  hard  to  go  through  the  world,  and  to  be  kept  unspotted 
from  it. 

Observe  further,  ver.  7.  ''Jesus  saith  unto  them,"  not  to  his 
own  disciples,  but  unto  the  servants  of  the  house,  who  were 
stmngers  to  the  holy  Jesus,  and  whom  the  Virgin  had  before 
charged  to  do  whatsoever  he  said  unto  them ;  *'  Fill  the  water- 
pots  with  water.  And  they  filled  them  to  the  brim.  And  he 
saith  anlo  them,  Draw  out  now,  and  bear  to  the  governor  of  the 
feast.  And  they  bare  it."  How  our  Lord  turned  the  water 
into  wine,  we  are  not  told.  What  have  we  to  do  with  that  T 
Why  should  we  desire  to  be  wise  above  what  is  written  7  It  is 


416  TUB   MARRIAGE   OP  OANA.  [XXXTI. 

sufficient  for  the  manifestation  of  his  glorioas  Godhead^  that  ^m  J 
are  assured  he  did  do  it :  For  we  are  told,  ver.  9, 10.  ^  When 
the  ruler  of  the  feast  bad  tasted  the  water  that  was  made  wine, 
and  knew  not  whence  it  was,  (but  the  servants  that  drew  the 
water  knew,)  the  governor  of  the  feast  called  the  bridegtoooi, 
and  saith  unto  him,  Every  man  at  the  beginning  doth  set  foith 
good  wine,  and  when  they  have  well  drunk,  then  that  which  ii 
worse ;  but  thou  hast  kept  the  good  wine  untO  now." 

To  explain  this  passage  you  must  observe,  it  was  the  cmiUm 
of  the  Jews,  nay,  even  of  the  heathens  themselves,  (to  the  shano 
of  our  Christian-baptized  heathens  be  it  spoken,)  at  their  pubBo 
feasts  to  choose  a  governor,  who  was  to  oversee  and  regnlatt 
the  behaviour  of  the  guests,  and  to  take  care  that  all  Unop 
were  carried  on  with  decency  and  order.    To  this  person  thai 
did  the  servants  bear  the  wine ;  and  we  may  judge  how  rich  it 
was  by  his  commendation  of  it,  '^  Every  man  at  the  beginning,** 
&c.    Judge  ye  then,  whether  Jesus  did  not  shew  forth  bis  glorf» 
and  whether  you  have  not  good  reason,  like  the  disciples  here 
mentioned,  to  believe  on  him  ? 

Thus,  my  brethren,  I  have  endeavoured  to  make  some  obMr- 
vations  on  the  miracle  itself.  But,  alas!  this  is  only  the  out- 
ward court  thereof,  the  veil  is  yet  before  our  eyes ;  turn  that 
aside,  and  we  shall  see  such  mysteries  under  it»  as  will  make 
our  hearts  to  dance  for  joy,  and  fill  our  mouths  with  praise  for 
evermore ! 

But  here  I  cannot  help  remarking  what  a  sad  inference  one 
of  our  masters  of  Israel,  in  a  printed  sermon,  has  lately  drawn 
from  this  commendation  of  the  bridegroom.  His  words  an 
these :  '^  Our  blessed  Saviour  came  eating  and  drinking,  was 
present  at  weddings,  and  other  entertainments,  (though  I  beif 
of  his  being  only  at  one ;)  nay,  at  one  of  them  ^which  I  suppose 
is  that  of  which  I  am  now  discoursing)  worlced  a  miracle  to 
make  wine,  when  it  is  plain  there  had  been  more  drank  thaa 
was  absolutely  necessary  for  the  support  of  nature,  and  con* 
sequently  something  had  been  indulged  to  pleasure  and  cheer- 
fulness."* 

I  am  sorry  such  words  should  come  from  the  mouth  and  pea 
of  a  dignified  clergyman  of  the  church  of  England.  Alas  !  bow 
is  she  fallen !  or  at  least  in  what  danger  must  her  tottering  aii 
be,  when  such  unhallowed  hands  arc  stretched  out  to  supppit 
it !  Well  may  I  bear  patiently  to  be  styled  a  blasphemer,  and  a 
setter  forth  of  strange  doctrines,  when  my  dear  Lord  Jesos  is 
thus  traduced  ;  and  when  those  who  pretend  to  preach  in  his 
name,  urge  this  example,  to  patronize  licentiousness  and  excess. 
It  is  true  (as  I  observed  at  the  beginning  of  this  discourse)  our 
blessed  Saviour  did  come  eating  and  drinking;  he  was  present 
at  a  wedding  and  other  entertainments ;  nay,  at  one  of  them 
worked  a  miracle  to  make  wine,  (you  see  I  have  been  makin; 
some  observations  on  it.)  but  then  it  is  not  plain  there  had  been 
more  wine  drank  than  was  absolutely  necessary  for  the  support 

*  See  Dr.  Tnp*8  Sermon  against  being  ri^teou  over  nmeb. 


▼I.]  THB   MARRIAGE   OP   CANA.  417 

of  Qatare ;  much  less  does  it  appear^  that  something  had  been 
iadnlged  to  pleasure  and  cheerfulness. 

The  governor  does  indeed  say,  "When  men  have  well  drunk/' 

tat  it  no  where  appears  that  they  were  the  men.     Is  it  to  be 

Mqpposed,  that  the  most  holy  and  unspotted  Lamb  of  God,  who 

was  manifested  to  destroy  the  works  of  the  devil,  and  who. 

nhea  at  a  Pharisee's  house,  took  notice  of  even  the  gestures  of 

tkose  with  whom  he  sat  at  meat :  is  it  to  be  supposed  that 

iBT  dear  Redeemer^  whose  constant  practice  it  was,  to  tell  peo- 

fle  they  must  deny  themselves^  and  take  up  their  crosses  daily ; 

nho  bid  his  disciples  to  take  heed  lest  at  any  time  their  hearts 

he  overcharged  with  surfeiting  and  drunkenness;  can  it  be  sup- 

fosed,  that  such  a  self-denying  Jesus  should  now  turn  six  large 

witer-pots  of  water  into  the  richest  wine,  to  encourage  excess 

iDd  drunkenness  in  persons,  who,  according  to  this  writer,  had 

Mulged  to  pleasure  and  cheerfulness  already  ?  Had  our  Lord 

M  by,  and  seen  them  indulge,  without  telling  them  of  it,  would 

hnot  be  a  sin  ?  But  to  insinuate  he  not  only  did  thus,  but  also 

tamed  water  into  wine,  to  increase  that  indulgence ;  this  is 

leaking  Christ  a  minister  of  sin  indeed !     What  is  this  but  using 

Ub  like  the  Pharisees  of  old,  who  called  him  a  glutton  and  a 

winebibber?    Alas!  how  may  we  expect  our  dear  Lord's  ene- 

i&ies  will  treat  him,  when  he  is  thus  wounded  in  the  house  of 

Us  seeming  friends  ?  Sirs,  if  you  follow  such  doctirne  as  this, 

you  will  not  be  righteous,  but  I  am  persuaded  you  will  be  wicked 

^i^er^much. 

But  God  forbid  you  should  think  our  Lord  behaved  so  much 
mlike  himself  in  this  matter.  No,  he  bad  nobler  ends  in  \iew, 
when  he  wrought  this  miracle.  One,  the  evangelist  mentions 
ia  the  words  of  the  text,  **  to  shew  forth  his  glory,"  or  to  give  a 
proof  of  his  eternal  power  and  godhead. 

Here  seems  to  be  an  allusion  to  the  appearance  of  God  in 
the  tabernacle,  which  this  same  evangelist  takes  notice  of  in 
bia  first  chapter,  where  he  says,  "  The  Word  (Jesus  Christ) 
was  made  flesh,  and  dwelt  (or,  as  it  is  rendered  in  the  margin, 
tabernacled)  amongst  us."  Our  dear  Lord,  though  very  God 
of  very  God,  and  also  most  perfect  and  glorious  in  himself  as 
man,  was  pleased  to  throw  a  veil  of  flesh  over  this  his  great 
glory,  when  he  came  to  make  his  soul  an  oflering  for  sin.  And 
that  the  world  might  know  and  believe  in  him  as  the  Saviour 
(tf  all  men,  he  performed  many  miracles,  and  this  in  particular; 
fiur  thus  speaks  the  evangelist,  "  This  first,"  &c. 

This  then  was  the  chief  design  of  our  Lord's  turning  the 
water  into  wine.  But  there  are  more,  which  our  Lord  may  be 
Bopposed'  to  ha  e  had  in  view,  some  of  which  I  shall  proceed 
lo  mention. 

Secondly f  He  might  do  this  to  reward  the  host  for  calling 
him  and  his  disciples  to  the  marriage.  Jesus  Christ  will  not 
be  behind-hand  with  those  who  receive  him  or  his  followers, 
for  his  name's  sake.  Those  who  thus  honour  him,  he  will 
honour.  A  cup  of  cold  water  given  in  the  name  of  a  disciple, 
♦  2c 


418  THB   MARRIAGE   OP   CANA.  [XXXVl. 

shall  ill  no  \visc  lose  its  reward.  He  will  turn  water  into  wine. 
Though  those  who  abound  in  alms-deeds,  out  of  a  true  faith  in, 
and  love  for  Jesus,  may  seem  as  it  were  to  throw  their  bread 
upon  the  waters,  yet  they  shall  find  it  again  after  many  days. 
For  they  who  give  to  the  poor  out  of  this  principle,  lend  unto 
the  Lord ;  and  look,  whatsoever  they  lay  out,  it  shall  be  repaid 
them  again.  Even  in  this  life,  God  often  orders  good  measure, 
pressed  down  and  running  over,  to  be  returned  into  bis  ser- 
vants' bosoms.  It  is  the  same  in  spirituals.  To  him  (hat 
hath,  and  improves  what  he  hath,  for  the  sake  of  Christ  and 
his  disciples,  shall  be  given,  and  he  shall  have  abundance. 
Brethren,  I  would  not  boast ;  but,  to  my  Master's  honour  and 
free  grace  be  it  spoken,  F  can  prove  this  to  be  true  by  happy 
experience.  When  I  have  considered  that  I  am  a  child,  and 
cannot  speak,  and  have  seen  so  many  of  you  come  out  into 
the  wilderness  to  be  fed,  I  have  often  said  within  myself.  What 
can  I  do  with  my  little  stock  of  grace  and  knowledge  among  so 
great  a  multitude?  But,  at  my  Lord's  command,  1  have  giveo 
you  to  eat  of  such  spiritual  food  as  I  had,  and,  before  I  have 
done  speaking,  have  had  my  soul  richly  fed  with  the  bread 
which  Cometh  down  from  heaven.  Thus  shall  it  be  done  to  all 
such  who  are  willing  to  spend  and  be  spent  for  Christ  or  his 
disciples ;  for  there  is  no  respect  of  persons  with  God. 

Thirdly,  Our  Lord's  turning  the  water,  which  was  pouced 
out  so  plentifully,  into  wine,  is  a  sign  of  the  plentiful  pouring 
out  of  his  Spirit  into  the  hearts  of  believers.  The  holy  Spirit 
is  in  scripture  compared  unto  wine ;  and  therefore  the  prophet 
calls  us  to  buy  wine  as  well  as  milk,  that  is,  the  Spirit  of  lovc^ 
which  fills  and  gladdens  the  soul  as  it  were  with  new  wine. 
The  apostle  alludes  to  this,  when  he  bids  the  Ephesians 
"  not  to  be  drunk  with  wine,  wherein  is  excess,  but  be  filled 
with  the  Spirit."  And  our  Lord  shews  us  thus  much  by 
choosing  wine,  to  shew  forth  the  strength  and  refreshment  of 
his  blood,  in  the  blessed  sacrament.  I  know  these  terms  are 
unintelligible  to  natural  men,  they  can  no  more  understand  me, 
than  if  I  spake  to  them  in  an  unknown  tongue,  for  they  are 
only  to  be  spiritually  discerned.  To  you  then  that  are  spiritual 
do  I  speak,  to  you  who  are  justified  by  faith,  and  feel  the 
blessed  Spirit  of  Jesus  Christ  working  upon  your  hearts,  yoa 
can  judge  of  what  I  say ;  you  have  already  (I  am  persuaded) 
been  as  it  were  filled  with  new  wine  by  the  inspiration  of  hia 
holy  Spirit.  But,  alas!  you  have  not  yet  had  half  your  portioo; 
these  are  only  earnests,  and  in  comparison  but  shadows,  of 
good  things  to  come ;  our  Lord  keeps  his  best  wine  for  you  till 
the  last ;  and  though  you  have  drank  deep  of  it  already,  yet 
he  intends  to  give  you  more :  He  will  not  leave  you,  till  he  baa 
filled  you  to  the  brim,  till  you  are  ready  to  cry  out.  Lord,  stay 
thine  hand,  thy  poor  creatures  can  hold  no  more!  Be  not 
straitened  in  your  own  bowels,  since  Jesus  Christ  is  not  straitened 
in  his.  Open  your  hearts  as  wide  as  ever  you  will,  the  Spirit 
of  the  Lord  shall  fill  them.    Christ  deals  with  true  believeKSn 


XXXVl.]  THE   MARRIAGE   OP   CANA.  419 

as  Elijah  did  with  the  poor  woman,  whose  oil  increased  to  pay 
her  husband's  debts ;  as  lon^  as  she  brought  pitchers,  the  oil 
continued.  It  did  not  cease  till  she  ceased  bringing  vessels  te 
contain  it.  My  brethren,  our  hearts  are  like  those  pitchers ; 
open  them  freely  by  faith,  and  the  oil  of  God's  free  gift,  the  oil 
of  gladness,  the  love  of  God  through  Christ,  shall  be  continually 
pouring  in ;  for  believers  are  to  be  filled  with  all  the  fulness 
of  God. 

Fourthly,  Our  Lord's  turning  water  into  wine,  and  keeping 
the  best  until  last,  may  shew  forth  the  glory  of  the  latter  days 
of  his  marriage  feast  with  his  church.  Great  things  God  has 
done  already,  whereat  millions  of  saints  have  rejoiced,  and  do 
yet  rejoice.  Great  things  God  is  doing  now,  but  yet,  my  bre- 
thren, we  shall  see  greater  things  than  these.  It  is  meet, 
right,  and  our  bounden  duty,  to  give  thanks  unto  God,  even 
the  Father ;  for  many  righteous  men  have  desired  to  see  the 
things  which  we  see,  and  have  not  seen  them ;  and  to  hear  the 
things  which  we  hear,  and  have  not  heard  them.  But  still 
there  are  more  excellent  things  behind.  Glorious  things  are 
spoken  of  these  times,  '^  when  the  earth  shall  be  filled  with  the 
knowledge  of  the  Lord,  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea.''  There 
is  a  general  expectation  among  the  people  of  God,  when  the 
partition-wall  between  Jew  and  Gentile  shall  be  broken  down, 
and  all  Israel  be  saved.  Happy  those  who  live  when  God 
does  this.  They  shall  see  Satan,  like  lightning,  fall  from  hea- 
ven. They  shall  not  weep,  as  the  Jews  did  at  the  building  of 
the  second  temple.  No,  tiiey  shall  rejoice  with  exceeding  great 
joy.  For  all  the  former  glory  of  the  christian  church  shall  be 
nothing  in  comparison  of  that  glory  which  shall  excel.  Then 
shall  they  cry  out  with  the  governor  of  the  feast,  **Thou  hast 
kept  thy  good  wine  until  now !" 

Fifthly,  and  lastly,  this  shews  us  the  happiness  of  that 
blessed  state,  when  we  shall  all  sit  together  at  the  marriage 
supper  of  the  Lamb,  and  drink  of  the  new  wine  in  his  eternal 
and  glorious  kingdom ! 

The  rewards  which  Jesus  Christ  confers  on  his  faithful  ser- 
vants, and  the  comforts  of  his  love  wherewith  he  comforts  them, 
whilst  pilgrims  here  on  earth,  are  often  so  exceeding  great,  that 
were  it  not  promised,  it  were  almost  presumption  for  them  to 
hope  for  any  reward  hereafter.  But,  my  brethren,  all  the  mani- 
festations of  God  that  we  can  possibly  be  favoured  with  here, 
when  compared  with  the  glory  that  is  to  be  revealed  in  us, 
are  no  more  than  a  drop  of  water  when  compared  with  an 
unbotinded  ocean.  Though  Christ  frequently  fills  his  saints 
eren  to  the  brim,  yet  their  corruptible  bodies  weigh  down  their 
souls,  and  cause  them  to  cry,  **  Who  shall  deliver  us  from  these 
bodies  of  death?"  These  earthly  tabernacles  can  hold  no 
more :  but,  blessed  be  God,  these  earthly  tabernacles  are  to  be 
dissolved ;  this  corruptible  is  to  put  on  incorruption ;  this  mor- 
tal is  to  put  on  immortality :  and  when  God  shall  cause  all  his 
glory  to  pass  before  us,  then  shall  wc  cry  out,  Lord,  thou  hast 

2c2 


420  THE   MARRIAGE   OP   CANA.  [XXXTl. 

kept  thy  good  wine  until  now.  We  have  drank  deeply  of  thy 
Spirit ;  we  have  heard  glorious  things  spoken  of  this  thy  city, 

0  God !  but  we  now  find,  that  not  the  half,  not  the  thousandth 
part,  hath  been  told  us.  O  the  invisible  realities  of  the  worid 
of  faith  !  Eye  hath  not  seen,  ear  hath  not  heard,  neither  hatb 
it  entered  into  the  heart  of  the  greatest  saint  to  conceive  how 
Christ  will  shew  forth  his  glory  there!  St.  Paul,  who  ww 
carried  up  into  the  third  heavens,  could  give  us  little  or  no 
account  of  it.  And  well  he  might  not — for  he  heard  and  saw 
such  things  as  is  not  possible  for  a  man  clothed  with  flesh  and 
blood  to  utter.  Whilst  I  am  thinking,  and  only  speaking  of 
those  things  unto  you,  I  am  almost  carried  beyond  myseiC 
Methinks  I  now  receive  some  little  foretastes  of  that  new  wine 
which  I  hope  to  drink  with  you  in  the  heavenly  kingdom  for 
ever  and  ever. 

And  wherefore  do  you  think  I  have  been  saying  these  thingsl 
Many,  perhaps,  may  be  ready  to  say,  to  manifest  thy  own  vain- 
glory. But  it  is  a  small  matter  with  me  to  be  judged  of  man's 
judgment.  He  that  judgeth  me  is  the  Lord.  He  knows  that  I 
have  spoken  of  his  miracle,  only  for  the  same  end  for  which  be 
at  first  performed  it,  and  which  I  at  first  proposed,  that  is,  "to 
shew  forth  his  glory,"  that  you  also  may  be  brought  to  believe 
on  him. 

Did  I  come  to  preach  myself,  and  not  Christ  Jesus  my  Lord, 

1  would  come  to  you,  not  in  this  plainness  of  speech,  but  with 
the  enticing  words  of  man's  wisdom.  Did  I  desire  to  plea^ 
natural  men,  I  need  not  preach  here  in  the  wilderness.  I  hope 
my  heart  aims  at  nothing  else,  than  what  our  Lord*s  great  for^ 
runner  aimed  at,  and  which  ought  to  be  the  business  of  ever; 
gospel  minister,  that  is,  to  point  out  to  you  the  God-man  Christ 
Jesus.  *'  Behold  then  (by  faith  behold)  the  Lamb  of  God,  who 
taketh  away  the  sins  of  the  world."  Look  unto  him,  and  be 
saved.  You  have  heard  how  ho  manifested,  and  will  yet  mani- 
fest, his  glory  to  true  believers ;  and  why  then,  O  sinners,  will 
you  not  believe  in  him  ?  I  say,  O  sinners,  for  now  I  hate 
spoken  to  the  saints,  I  have  many  things  to  say  to  you.  And 
may  God  give  you  all  a  hearing  ear,  and  an  obedient  heart! 

The  Lord  Jesus  who  shewed  forth  his  glory  above  seventeen 
hundred  years  ago,  has  made  a  marriage  feast,  and  offers  to 
espouse  sdl  sinners  to  himself,  and  to  make  them  flesh  of  hii 
flesh,  and  bone  of  his  bone.  He  is  willing  to  be  united  to  yoa 
by  one  Spirit.  In  every  age,  at  sundry  times,  and  after  diven 
manners,  he  hath  sent  forth  his  servants,  and  they  have  bidden 
many,  but  yet,  my  brethren,  there  is  room.  The  Lord  therefore 
now  has  given  a  commission  in  these  last  days  to  others  of  hii 
servants,  even  to  compel  poor  sinners  by  the  cords  of  love  to 
come  in.  For  our  Master's  house  must  and  shall  be  fiUed. 
He  will  not  shed  his  precious  blood  in  vain.  Come  then,  come 
to  the  marriage.  Let  this  be  the  day  of  your  espousals  with 
Jesus  Christ ;  he  is  willing  to  receive  you,  though  other  lords 
have  had  dominion  over  you.    Come  tlien  to  the  marriagti 


^XXVI.]  THE   MARRIAGE   OP  CANA.  ^21 

Behold  the  oxen  and  fallings  are  killed,  and  all  things  are 
ready;  let  me  hear  you  say,  as  Rebecca  did,  when  they  asked 
her,  whether  she  would  go  and  be  a  wife  to  Isaac ;  O  let  roe 
hear  you  say,  We  will  come.  Indeed,  you  will  not  repent  it. 
The  Lord  shall  turn  your  water  into  wine.  He  shall  fill  your 
souls  with  marrow  and  fatness,  and  cause  you  to  praise  him 
with  jojrful  lips. 

Do  not  say  you  are  miserable,  and  poor,  and  blind,  and 
naked,  and  therefore  ashamed  to  come,  for  it  is  to  such  that 
this  invitation  is  now  sent.  The  polite,  the  rich,  the  busy,  self- 
righteous  Pharisees  of  this  generation  have  been  oidden 
already,  but  they  have  rejected  the  counsel  of  God  against 
themselves.  They  are  too  deeply  engaged  in  going,  one  to  his 
country  house,  another  to  his  merchandise.  They  are  so  deeply 
wedded  to  the  pomps  and  vanities  of  this  wicked  worid,  that 
they,  as  it  were  with  one  consent,  have  made  excuse.  And 
though  they  have  been  often  called  in  their  own  synagogues, 
yet  all  the  return  they  make,  is  to  thrust  us  out,  and  thereby  in 
effect  say,  they  will  not  come.  But  God  forbid,  my  brethren, 
that  you  should  learn  of  them ;  no,  since  our  Lord  condescends 
to  call  first,  (because  if  left  to  yourselves  you  would  never  call 
after  him)  let  me  beseech  you  to  answer  him,  as  he  answered 
,  for  you,  when  called  upon  by  infinite  offended  justice  to  die  for 
your  sins,  "  Lo !  I  come  to  do  thy  will,  O  God  !"  What  if  you 
are  miserable,  and  poor,  and  blind,  and  naked,  that  is  no 
excuse;  faith  is  the  only  wedding  garment  which  Christ 
requires ;  he  does  not  call  you  because  you  already  are,  but 
because  he  intends  to  make  you  saints.     It  pities  him  to  see 

Jon  naked.  He  wants  to  cover  you  with  his  righteousness. 
n  short,  he  desires  to  shew  forth  his  glory,  that  is,  his  free  lovo, 
through  your  faith  in  him.  Not  but  that  he  will  be  glorified, 
whether  you  believe  in  him  or  not ;  for  the  infinitely  free  love 
of  Jesus  Christ  will  be  ever  the  same,  whether  you  believe  it, 
and  so  receive  it,  or  the  contrary.  But  our  Lord  will  not 
always  send  out  his  servants  in  vain,  to  call  you;  the  time 
will  come  when  he  will  say,  none  of  those  which  were  bidden, 
and  would  not  come,  shall  taste  of  my  supper.  Our  Lord  is  a 
God  of  justice,  as  well  as  of  love ;  and  if  sinners  will  not  take 
bold  of  his  golden  sceptre,  verily  he  will  bruise  them  with  his 
iron  rod.  It  is  for  your  sakes,  O  sinners,  and  not  his  own, 
that  he  thus  condescends  to  invite  you :  suffer  him  then  to  shew 
forth  his  glory,  even  the  glory  of  the  exceeding  riches  of  his 
tree  grace,  by  believing  on  him,  "  for  wo  are  saved  by  grace 
through  faith/'  It  was  grace,  free  grace,  that  moved  the  Father 
so  to  love  the  world,  as  to  "  give  his  only  begotten  Son,  that 
whosoever  belicveth  in  him  should  not  perish,  but  have  ever- 
lasting life !"  It  was  grace  that  made  the  Son  to  come  down 
and  die.  It  was  grace,  free  grace,  that  moved  the  Holy  Ghost 
to  undertake  to  sanctify  the  elect  people  of  God :  and  it  was 
grace,  free  grace,  that  moved  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  send 
forth  his  ministers   to  call  poor   sinners  this  day.     Let  roe 


423  TUB   MARRIAGE   OP   CANA.  [XXXV], 

not  then,  my  brethren,  go  without  my  errand.  Why  will 
yoQ  not  believe  in  him  ?  Will  the  devil  do  such  great  and 
good  things  for  yon  as  Christ  will  ?  No,  indeed,  he  will  not 
Perhaps,  he  may  give  you  to  drink  at  first  of  a  little  brutish 
pleasure;  but  what  will  he  give  you  to  drink  at  last?  A  cup 
of  fury  and  of  trembling;  a  never-dying  worm,  a  self-con- 
demning conscience,  and  the  bitter  pains  of  eternal  death.  Bat 
as  for  the  servants  of  Jesus  Christ,  it  is  not  so  with  them.  No, 
he  keeps  his  best  wine  till  the  last.  And  though  he  may  canse 
you  to  drink  of  the  brook  in  the  way  to  heaven,  and  of  the  cup 
of  afBiction,  yet  he  sweetens  it  with  a  sense  of  his  goodness, 
and  makes  it  pleasant  drink,  such  as  their  souls  do  love.  I 
appeal  to  the  experience  of  any  saint  here  present,  (as  I  doabt 
not  but  there  are  many  such  in  this  field,)  whether  Christ  has 
not  proved  faithful,  ever  since  you  have  been  espoused  to  him? 
Has  he  not  shewed  forth  his  glory,  ever  since  you  have  believed 
on  him? 

And  now,  sinners,  what  have  you  to  object?  I  see  you  are  all 
silent :  and  well  you  may ;  for  if  you  will  not  be  drawn  by  the 
cords  of  infinite  and  everlasting  love,  what  will  draw  you?    I 
could  urge  many  terrors  of  the  Lord  to  persuade  you ;  but  if 
the  love  of  Jesus  Christ  will  not  constrain  you,  your  ease  is 
desperate.   Remember  then,  this  day  I  have  invited  all,  even  tk 
worst  of  sinners,  to  be  married  to  the  Lord  Jesns.     If  yon 
perish,  remember  you  do  not  perish  for  lack  of  invitation.    Yon 
yourselves  shall  stand  forth  at  the  last  day,  and  I  here  give  yon 
a  summons  to  meet  me  at  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ,  and  to 
clear  both  ray  Master  and  me.    Would  weeping,  would  tears 
prevail  on  you,  I  could  wish  my  head  were  waters,  and  my  eyes 
fountains  of  tears,  that  I  might  weep  out  every  argument,  and 
melt  you  into  love.     Would  any  thing  I  could  do  or  sufier,  in- 
fluence your  hearts,  I  think  I  could  bear  to  pluck  out  my  eyes, 
or  even  to  lay  down  my  life,  for  your  sakes.     Or  were  I  sure  to 
prevail  on  you  by  importunity,  I  could  continue  my  discourse 
till  midnight,  I  would  wrestle  with  you  even  till  the  momiog 
watch,  as  Jacob  did  with  the  ahgel,  and  would  not  go  away  till 
I  had  overcome.     But  such  power  belongs  unto  the  Lord,  I  can 
only  invite ;  it  is  He  only  can  work  in  you  both  to  will  and  to 
do  after  his  good  pleasure ;  it  is  his  property  to  take  away  tbe 
heart  of  stone,  and  give  you  a  heart  of  flesh ;  it  is  bis  Spirit 
that  must  convince  you  of  unbelief,  and  of  the  everlasting  righ- 
teousness of  his  dear  Son ;  it  is  He  alone  must  give  faith  to 
apply  his  righteousness  to  your  hearts ;  it  is  He  alone  can  give 
you  a  wedding  garment,  and  bring  you  to  sit  down  and  drink 
new  wine  in  his  kingdom.     As  to  spirituals,  we  are  quite  dead, 
and  have  no  more  power  to  turn  to  God  of  ourselves,  than 
Lazarus  had  to  raise  himself,  after  he  luid  lain  stinking  in  tbe 
grave  four  days.     If  thou  canst  go,  O  man,  and  breathe  upon 
all  the  dry  bones  that  lie  in  the  graves,  and  bid  them  live ;  il 
thou  canst  take  thy  mantle  and  divide  yonder  river,  as  ElijuSi 
did  the  river  Jordan ;  then  will  we  believe  thou  bast  a  power  to 


XXXVI.]  OF   SEARCHING   THE  SCRIPTURES.  4SSi 

tnro  to  Grod  of  thyself:  but  as  thou  must  despair  of  the  one,  so 
thoa  must  despair  of  the  other,  without  Christ's  quickening^ 
grace ;  in  him  is  thy  only  help ;  fly  to  him  then  by  faith  ;  say 
unto  him,  as  the  poor  leper  did,  ^*  Lord,  if  thou  wilt/'  thou  canst 
make  me  willing ;  and  be  will  stretch  forth  the  right  hand  of  his 
power  to  assist  and  relieve  you :  He  will  sweetly  guide  yon  by 
his  wisdom  on  earth,  and  afterwards  take  you  up  to  partake  of 
his  glory  in  heaven. 

To  his  mercy,  therefore,  and  almighty  protection,  do  I  earn- 
estly, humbly,  and  most  affectionately  commit  you :  the  Lord 
Uess  you  and  keep  you ;  the  Lord  lift  up  the  light  of  his  blessed 
countenance  upon  you,  and  give  you  all  peace  and  joy  in  be* 
lieving,  now  and  for  evermore ! 


SERMON  XXXVIL 

THE   DUTY    OP   SEARCHING   THE  SCRIPTURES. 

Search  the  Scriptures, — John  v.  39. 

When  the  Sadducees  came  to  our  blessed  Lord,  and  put  to  him 
the  question,  ^'  Whose  wife  that  woman  should  be  in  the  next 
life,  who  had  seven  husbands  in  this?"  he  told  them  '^they 
erred,  not  knowing  the  scriptures."  And  if  we  would  know 
whence  all  the  errors,  that  have  overspread  the  church  of  Christ, 
first  arose,  we  should  find  that  in  a  great  measure  they  flowed 
from  the  same  fountain,  ignorance  of  the  word  of  God. 

Our  blessed  Lord,  thoagh  he  was  the  eternal  God,  yet,  as 
man,  he  made  the  scriptures  his  constant  rule  and  g^ide.  And, 
therefore,  when  he  was  asked  by  the  lawyer,  which  was  the 
great  commandment  of  the  law,  he  referred  him  to  his  Bible  for 
an  answer,  "  What  readest  thou  V  And  thus,  when  led  by  the 
Spirit  to  be  tempted  by  the  devil,  he  repelled  all  his  assaults, 
with  "  It  is  written." 

A  sufficient  confutation  this,  of  their  opinion,  who  say, ''  the 
Spirit  only,  and  not  the  Spirit  by  the  Word,  is  to  be  our  rule  of 
action."  If  so,  our  Saviour,  who  had  the  Spirit  without  measure^ 
needed  not  always  to  have  referred  to  the  written  word. 

But  how  few  copy  after  the  example  of  Christ !  How  many 
are  there  who  do  not  regard  the  word  of  Grod  at  all,  but  throw 
the  sacred  oracles  aside,  as  an  antiquated  book,  fit  only  for 
illiterate  men ! 

Such  do  greatly  err,  not  knowing  what  the  scriptures  are,  or 
for  what  they  are  designed. 

I  shall,  therefore. 

First,  Shew,  that  it  is  everyone's  duty  to  search  them. 

And,  Secondly,  Lay  down  some  directions  for  you,  to  search 
them  with  advantage. 

1.  I  am  to  shew,  that  it  is  every  person's  duty  to  search  the 
Scriptures. 

By  the  Scriptures,  t  understand  the  law  and  the  prophets. 


424  THB   DUTY   OP   SEARCHING  [XXXTIl. 

and  those  books  which  have  in  all  ages  been  accounted  can<>- 
nica),  and  which  make  up  that  volume  commonly  called  the 
Bible. 

These  are  emphatically  styled  the  Scriptures,  and,  in  one 
place,  the  "  Scriptures  of  truth/'  as  though  no  other  books 
deserved  the  name  of  true  writings,  or  scriptures^  in  comparison 
of  them. 

They  are  not  of  any  private  interpretation,  authority,  or  in- 
vention, but  holy  men  of  old  wrote  them,  as  they  were  moved 
by  the  Holy  Ghost. 

The  foundation  of  God's  revealing  himself  thus  to  mankind, 
was  our  fall  in  Adam,  aud  the  necessity  of  our  new  birth  in 
Christ  JesUs.  And  if  \vc  search  the  scriptures  as  we  ought, 
\vc  shall  find  the  sum  and  substance,  the  alpha  and  omega,  the 
beginning  and  end  of  them,  is  to  lead  us  to  a  knowledge  of  those 
two  great  truths. 

All  the  threats,  promises,  and  precepts,  all  the  exhortations 
and  doctrines,  contained  therein,  all  the  rites,  ceremonies,  and 
sacrifices  appointed  under  the  Jewish  law;  nay,  almost  all  tl'^ 
historical  parts  of  holy  scripture,  suppose  our  being  fallen  in 
Adam,  and  either  point  out  to  us  a  Mediator  to  come,  or  speak 
of  him  as  already  come  in  the  flesh. 

Had  man  continued  in  a  state  of  innocence,  he  would  not 
have  needed  an  outward  revelation,  because  the  law  of  God 
w^as  so  deeply  written  in  the  tables  of  his  heart.  But  having 
eaten  the  forbidden  fruit,  he  incurred  the  displeasure  of  God, 
and  lost  t^e  divine  image,  and,  therefore,  without  an  external 
revelation,  could  never  tell  how  God  would  be  reconciled  unto 
him,  or  how  he  should  be  saved  from  the  misery  and  darkness 
of  his  fallen  nature. 

That  these  truths  are  so,  I  need  not  refer  you  to  any  other 
book  than  your  own  hearts. 

For  unless  we  are  fallen  creatures,  whence  those  abominable 
corruptions  which  daily  arise  in  our  hearts?  We  could  not 
come  thus  corrupt  out  of  the  hands  of  our  Maker,  because  be 
being  goodness  itself  could  make  nothing  but  what  is  like  him* 
self,  holy,  just,  and  good.  And  that  we  want  to  be  delivered 
from  these  disorders  of  our  nature,  is  evident,  because  we  find 
an  unwillingness  within  ourselves  to  own  we  are  thus  depraved, 
and  are  always  striving  to  appear  to  others  of  a  quite  dificreiit 
frame  and  temper  of  mind  than  what  we  are. 

I  appeal  to  the  experience  of  the  most  learned  disputor 
against  divine  revelation,  whether  he  does  not  find  in  himself 
that  he  is  naturally  proud,  angry,  revengeful,  and  full  of  other 
passions  contrary  to  the  purity,  holiness,  and  long-sufiering  of 
God  ?  And  is  not  this  a  demonstration  that  some  way  or  other 
he  is  fallen  from  God?  And  I  appeal  also,  whether,  at  tlie  same 
time  that  he  finds  these  hurtful  lusts  in  his  heart,  he  does  not 
strive  to  seem  amiable,  courteous,  kind,  and  aflfabie ;  and  is  not 
this  a  manifest  proof  that  ho  is  sensible  he  is  miserable,  and 
wants,  be  knows  not  how,  to  be  redeemed  or  delivered  from  itt 


XXXYII.]  THB  8CRfPTC7R£8.  4S5 

Here  then,  God  by  his  word  steps  in,  and  opens  to  his  view 
such  a  scene  of  divine  love,  and  infinite  goodness,  in  the  hoiy 
scriptures,  that  none  but  men  of  such  corrupt  and  reprobate 
minds  as  our  modem  deists,  would  shut  their  eyes  against  it. 

What  does  God  in  his  written  word  do  more  or  less  than  shew 
thee,  O  man,  how  thou  art  fallen  into  that  blindness,  darkness, 
and  misery,  of  which  thou  feelest  and  complainest?  And,  at 
the  same  time,  he  points  out  the  way  to  what  thou  desirest, 
even  how  thou  mayest  be  redeemed  out  of  it  by  believing  in, 
and  copying  after,  the  Son  of  his  love. 

As  I  told  you  before,  so  I  tell  you  again.  Upon  these  two  truths 
rest  all  divine  revelation.  It  being  given  us  for  no  other  end, 
but  to  shew  us  our  misery,  and  our  happiness ;  our  fall,  and 
recovery ;  or,  ita  one  word,  after  what  manner  we  died  in  Adam, 
and  how  in  Christ  we  may  again  be  made  alive. 

Kence  then  arises  the  necessity  of  searching  the  scriptures : 
for  since  they  are  nothing  else  but  the  grand  charter  of  our  sal- 
vation, the  revelation  of  a  covenant  made  by  God  with  men  in 
Christ,  and  a  light  to  guide  us  in  the  way  of  peace ;  it  follows, 
that  all  are  obliged  to  read  and  search  them,  because  all  are 
equally  fallen  from  God,  all  equally  stand  in  need  of  being- 
informed  how  they  must  be  restored  to»  and  again  united  with 
him. 

How  foolishly  then  do  the  disputing  infidels  of  this  genera- 
tion act,  who  are  continually  either  calling  for  signs  from  hea- 
ven, or  seeking  for  outward  eyidence  to  prove  the  truth  of  divine 
revelation !  Whereas,  what  they  so  earnestly  seek  for  is  nigh 
unto,  nay,  within  them.  For  let  them  but  consult  their  own 
hearts,  they  cannot  but  feel  what  they  want.  Let  them  but 
consult  the  lively  oracles  of  God,  and  they  cannot  but  sec  a 
remedy  reveided  for  all  their  wants,  and  that  the  written  word 
does  as  exactly  answer  the  wants  and  desires  of  their  hearts,  as 
face  answers  to  face  in  the  water.  Where  then  is  the  scribe, 
where  is  the  wise,  where  is  the  solidity  of  the  reaaoning  of  the 
dispnters  of  this  world  ?  Has  not  God  revealed  himself  unto 
them,  as  plain  as  their  own  hearts  could  wish  ?  And  yet  they 
require  a  sign :  but  there  shall  no  other  sign  be  given  them.  For 
if  they  believe  not  a  revelation  which  is  every  way  so  suited  to 
their  wants,  neither  will  they  be  persuaded,  though  one  should 
rise  from  the  dead. 

But  this  discourse  is  not  designed  so  much  for  them  that  be- 
lieve not,  as  for  them  who  both  know  and  believe  that  the 
scriptures  contain  a  revelation  which  came  from  God,  and  that 
it  is  their  duty,  as  being  chief  parties  concerned,  not  only  to 
read,  but  search  them  also. 

I  pass  on,  therefore,  in  the 

Second  place,  to  lay  down  some  directions  how  you  may 
search  them  with  advanta^ze. 

Firsts  Have  always  in  view,  the  end  for  which  the  scriptures 
were  written,  even  to  shew  us  the  way  of  salvation,  by  Jesus 
Christ. 


426  THE   DUTY   OF   SEARCHING  [XXXVtI. 

'^  Search  the  scriptures/' says  our  blessed  Lord, ''for  they  are 
they  that  testify  of  me."  Look^  therefore,  always  for  Christ  in 
the  scripture.  He  is  tho  treasure  hid  in  the  field,  both  of  the 
Old  and  New  Testament.  In  the  Old,  you  will  find  him  under 
prophecies,  types,  sacrifices,  and  shadows ;  in  the  New,  mani- 
fested in  the  flesh,  to  become  a  propitiation  for  our  sins  as  a 
Priest,  and  as  a  Prophet  to  reveal  the  whole  will  of  his  hea- 
venly Father. 

Have  Christ,  then,  always  in  view,  when  you  are  reading  tbe 
word  of  God,  and  this,  like  the  star  in  the  cast,  will  guide  yoo 
to  the  Messiah,  will  serve  as  a  key  to  every  thing  that  is  ob- 
scure, and  unlock  to  you  the  wisdom  and  riches  of  all  the  mys- 
teries of  the  kingdom  of  God. 

Secondly,  Search  the  scriptures  with  an  humble  child-lii[e 
disposition. 

For  whosoever  does  not  read  them  with  this  temper,  shall  in 
no  wise  enter  into  the  knowledge  of  the  things  contained  in 
them.  For  God  hides  the  sense  of  them  from  those  that  are 
wise  and  prudent  in  their  own  eyes,  and  reveals  them  only  to 
babes  in  Christ ;  who  think  they  know  nothing  yet  as  they  ought 
to  know ;  who  hunger  and  thirst  after  righteousness,  and  hum- 
bly desire  to  be  fed  with  the  sincere  milk  of  the  word,  that  they 
may  grow  thereby. 

Fancy  yourselves,  therefore,  when  you  are  searching  the 
scriptures,  especially  when  you  are  reading  the  New  Testament, 
to  be  with  Mary  sitting  at  the  feet  of  the  holy  Jesus :  and  be  as 
willing  to  learn  what  God  shall  teach  you,  as  Samuel  was,  when 
he  said,  "Speak,  Lord,  for  thy  servant  heareth." 

Oh  that  the  unbelievers  would  pull  down  every  high  thought 
and  imagination  that  exalts  itself  against  the  revealed  will  of 
God !  O  that  they  would,  like  new-born  babes,  desire  to  be  fed 
with  the  pure  milk  of  the  word  !  then  we  should  have  them  no 
longer  scoffing  at  divine  revelation,  nor  would  they  read  the 
Bible  any  more  with  the  same  intent  the  Philistines  brought 
out  Samson,  to  make  sport  at  it ;  but  they  would  see  the  divine 
image  and  superscription  written  upon  every  line.  They  would 
hear  God  speaking  unto  their  souls  by  it,  and,  consequently,  be 
built  up  in  the  knowledge  and  fear  of  him,  who  is  the  Author 
thereof. 

Thirdly,  Search  the  scriptures,  with  a  sincere  intention  to  put 
in  practice  what  you  read. 

A  desire  to  do  the  will  of  God  is  the  only  way  to  know  it;  if 
any  man  will  do  my  will,  says  Jesus  Christ,  *'  he  shall  know  of 
my  doctrine,  whether  it  be  of  God,  or  whether  I  speak  of  my- 
self." As  he  also  speaks  in  another  place  to  his  disciples,  "  to 
you  (who  are  willing  to  practise  your  duty)  it  is  given  to  know 
the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of  God,  but  to  those  that  are 
without,  (who  only  want  to  raise  cavils  against  my  doctrine,) 
all  these  things  arc  spoken  in  parables,  that  seeing  they  may 
see,  and  not  pcrccivo,  and  hearing  they  may  hear,  and  not 
understand.*' 


VII.]  TUB   SCRIPTURBS.  43^1 

For  it  is  but  just  in  God  to  send  those  strong  delusions,  that 
they  may  believe  a  lie,  and  to  conceal  the  knowledge  of  himself 
firom  all  such  as  do  not  seek  him  with  a  single  intention. 

Jesus  Christ  is  the  same  now,  as  formerly,  to  those  who 
desire  to  know  from  his  word  who  he  is,  that  they  may  believe 
on,  and  live  by  him ,  and  to  him  he  will  reveal  himself  as  clearly 
as  he  did  to  the  woman  of  Samaria,  when  he  said,  "  I  that  speak 
to  thee,  am  he,"  or  as  he  did  to  the  man  that  was  bom  blind, 
whom  the  Jews  had  cast  out  for  his  name's  sake,  ''  He  that 
talketh  with  thee,  is  he."  But  to  those  who  consult  his  word 
with  a  desire  neither  to  know  him,  nor  keep  his  commandments, 
but  either  merely  for  their  entertainment,  or  to  scoff  at  the  sim- 
plicity of  the  manner  in  which  he  is  revealed,  to  those,  I 
say,  he  never  will  reveal  himself,  though  they  should  search 
the  scriptures  to  all  eternity.  As  he  never  would  tell  those 
whether  he  was  the  Messiah  or  nut,  who  put  that  question  to 
ilim  either  out  of  curiosity,  or  what  tliey  might  have  whereof  to 
accuse  him. 

Fourthly^  In  order  to  search  the  scriptures  still  more  effec- 
taally,  make  an  application  of  every  thing  you  read  to  your 
own  hearts. 

For  whatever  was  written  in  the  book  of  God,  was  written 
for  our  learning.  And  what  Christ  said  unto  those  aforetime, 
we  must  look  upon  as  spoken  to  us  also :  for  since  the  holy 
scriptures  are  nothing  but  a  revelation  from  God,  how  fallen 
man  is  to  be  restored  by  Jesus  Christ ;  all  the  precepts,  threats, 
and  promises,  belong  to  us  and  to  our  children,  as  well  as  to 
those  to  whom  they  were  immediately  made  known. 

Thus  the  apostle,  when  he  tells  us  that  he  lived  by  the  faith 
of  the  Son  of  God,  adds,  **  who  died,  and  gave  himself  for  me." 
It  is  this  application  of  Jesus  Christ  to  our  hearts,  that  makes 
his  redemption  effectual  to  each  of  us. 

And  it  is  this  application  of  all  the  doctrinal  and  historical 
parts  of  scripture,  when  we  are  reading  them  over,  that  must 
fender  them  profitable  to  us,  as  they  were  designed  for  reproof, 
for  correction,  for  instruction  in  righteousness,  and  to  make 
every  child  of  God  perfect,  thorougUy  furnished  to  every  good 
work. — I  dare  appeal  to  the  experience  of  every  spiritual  reader 
of  holy  writ,  whether  or  not,  if  he  consulted  the  word  of  God  in 
this  manner,  he  was  not  at  all  times  and  at  all  seasons,  as 
plainly  directed  how  to  act,  as  though  he  had  consulted  the 
Urira  and  Thummim  which  was  upon  the  high  priest's  breast. 
For  this  is  the  way  God  now  reveals  himself  to  man :  not  by 
making  new  revelations,  but  by  applying  general  things  that  are 
revealed  already  to  every  sincere  reader's  heart. 

And  this,  by  the  way,  answers  an  objection  made  by  those 
who  say,  "  The  word  of  God  is  not  a  perfect  rule  of  action, 
because  it  cannot  direct  us  how  to  act  or  how  to  determine  in 
particular  cases,  or  what  place  to  go  to,  when  we  are  in  doubt, 
and  therefore  the  Spirit,  and  not  the  word,  is  to  be  our  rule  of 
action." 


428  THE  DUTY    OF  8EARGHINO  [itXXVII. 

Bat  this  I  deny^  and  affirm,  on  the  contrary,  that  God  at  all 
times,  circumstances,  and  places,  though  ever  so  minute,  ever 
so  particular.  Mill,  if  we  diligently  seek  the  assistance  of  his 
holy  Spirit,  apply  general  things  to  our  hearts,  and  thereby,  to 
use  the  words  of  the  holy  Jesus,  will  lead  us  into  all  truth, 
and  give  us  the  particular  assistance  we  want :  But  this  leads 
me  to  a 

Fifth  direction  how  to  search  the  scriptures  with  profit :  La- 
bour to  attain  that  Spirit  by  which  they  were  written. 

For  the  natural  man  discerneth  not  the  words  of  the  Spirit  of 
God,  because  they  are  spiritually  discerned;  the  words  that 
Christ  hath  spoken,  they  are  spirit,  and  they  are  life,  and  can 
be  no  more  understood  as  to  the  true  sense  and  meaning  of 
them,  by  the  mere  natural  man,  than  a  person  who  never  had 
learned  a  language  can  understand  another  speaking  in  it 
The  scriptures,  therefore,  have  not  unfitly  been  compared,  by 
some,  to  the  cloud  which  went  before  the  Israelites,  they  are 
dark  and  hard  to  be  understood  by  the  natural  man,  as  the 
cloud  appeared  dark  to  the  Egyptians ;  but  they  are  light,  they 
are- life  to  Christians  indeed,  as  that  same  cloud  which  seemed 
dark  to  Pharaoh  and  bis  house,  appeared  bright  and  altogether 
glorious  to  the  Israel  of  Grod. 

It  was  the  want  of  the  assistance  of  this  Spirit,  that  made 
Nicodcmus,  a  teacher  of  Israel,  and  a  ruler  of  the  Jews,  so 
utterly  ignorant  in  the  doctrine  of  regeneration :  for  being  only 
a  natural  man,  he  could  not  tell  how  that  thing  could  be :  it 
was  the  want  of  this  Spirit  that  made  our  Saviour's  disciples, 
though  he  so  frequently  conversed  with  them,  daily  mistake 
the  nature  of  the  doctrines  he  delivered  ;  and  it  is  because  the 
natural  veil  is  not  taken  ofi*  from  their  hearts,  that  so  many  who 
now  pretend  to  search  the  scriptures,  yet  see  no  farther  than 
into  the  bare  letter  of  them,  and  continue  entire  strangers  to 
the  spiritu^  meaning  couched  under  every  parable,  and  con- 
tained in  almost  all  the  precepts  of  the  book  of  God. 

Indeed,  how  should  it  be  otherwise,  for  God  being  a  Spirit, 
he  cannot  communicate  himself  any  otherwise  than  in  a  spi- 
ritual manner  to  the  hearts  of  men ;  and  consequently  if  we  are 
strangers  to  his  Spirit,  we  must  continue  strangers  to  his  word, 
because  it  is  altogether  like  himself,  spiritual.  Labour,  there- 
fore, earnestly  for  to  attain  this  blessed  Spirit ;  otherwise,  your 
understandings  will  never  t)e  opened  to  understand  the  scrip- 
tures aright :  and  remember,  prayer  is  one  of  the  most  imme- 
diate means  to  get  this  holy  Spirit.     Therefore, 

Sixthly,  Let  me  advise  you,  before  you  read  the  scriptures, 
to  pray,  that  Christ,  according  to  his  promise,  would  send  his 
Spirit  to  guide  you  into  all  truth ;  intersperse  short  ejaculations 
whilst  you  are  engaged  in  reading ;  pray  over  every  word  and 
Terse,  if  possible;  and  when  you  close  up  the  book,  most  ear- 
nestly beseech  God,  that  the  words  which  you  have  read,  may 
be  inwardly  engrafted  into  your  hearts,  and  bring  forth  in  yon 
the  fruits  of  a  good  life. 


XXXYIf.]  THE   8CRIPTURB8.  439 

Do  this,  and  you  will,  with  a  holy  violence,  draw  down  Grod's 
boly  Spirit  into  your  hearts ;  you  will  oxpcricnce  his  gracious 
influence,  and  feel  him  enlightening,  quickening,  and  inflaming 
your  souls  by  the  word  of  God ;  you  will  then  not  only  read, 
but  mark,  learn,  and  inwardly  digest  what  you  read :  and  tho 
word  of  God  will  be  meat  indeed,  and  drink  indeed,  unto  your 
souls :  you  then  will  be,  as  Apollos  was,  powerful  in  the  scrip«- 
tures;  be  scribes  ready  instructed  to  the  kingdom  of  God,  and 
bring  out  of  the  good  treasures  of  your  heart,  things  both  from 
the  Old  and  New  Testament,  to  entertain  all  those  you  con-* 
verse  with. 

One  direction  more,  which  shall  be  the  last :  Seventhly^  Read 
the  scripture  constantly,  or,  to  use  our  Saviour's  expression  in 
the  text, "  Search  the  scriptures ;"  dig  in  them  as  for  hid  treasure ; 
for  here  is  a  manifest  allusion  to  those  who  dig  in  mines  ;  and 
our  Saviour  would  thereby  teach  us,  that  wo  must  take  as 
much  pains  in  constantly  reading  his  word,  if  we  would  grow 
wise  thereby,  as  those  who  dig  for  gold  and  silver.  The  scrip- 
tures contain  the  deep  things  of  God,  and  therefore,  can  never 
be  sufiiciently  searched  into  by  a  careless,  superficial,  cursory 
way  of  reading  them,  butl)y  an  industrious,  close,  and  humble 
application. 

The  psalmist  makes  it  the  characteristic  of  a  good  man^  that 
he  **  meditates  on  God's  law  day  and  night."  And  "  this  book 
of  the  law  (says  God  to  Joshua)  shall  not  go  out  of  thy  mouth, 
but  thou  sbalt  meditate  therein  day  and  night ;"  for  then  thou 
shalt  make  thy  way  prosperous,  and  thou  shalt  have  good  suc- 
cess. Search,  therefore,  the  scriptures,  not  only  devoutly,  but 
daily,  for  in  them  are  tho  words  of  eternal  life;  wait  constantly 
at  wisdom's  gate,  and  she  will  then,  and  not  till  then,  display 
and  lay  open  to  you  her  heavenly  treasures.  You  that  are 
rich,  are  without  excuse  if  you  do  not ;  and  you  that  are  poor,* 
ought  to  take  heed  and  improve  that  little  time  you  have :  for 
by  the  scriptures  you  are  to  be  acquitted,  and  by  the  scriptures 
you  are  to  be  condemned  at  the  last  day. 

But  perhaps  you  have  no  taste  for  this  despised  book  ;  per- 
haps plays,  romances,  and  books  of  polite  entertainment,  suit 
your  taste  better :  if  this  be  your  case,  give  me  leave  to  tell  you 
your  taste  is  vitiated,  and  unless  corrected  by  the  Spirit  and 
word  of  God,  you  shall  never  enter  into  his  heavenly  kingdom  : 
for  unless  vou  delight  in  God  here,  how  will  you  be  made  meet 
to  dwell  with  him  hereafter?  Is  it  a  sin  then,  you  will  say,  to 
read  useless  impertinent  books  ?  I  answer.  Yes :  and  that  for 
the  same  reason  as  it  is  a  sin  to  indulge  useless  conversation, 
because  both  immediately  tend  to  grieve  and  quench  that  Spi- 
rit by  which  alone  we  can  be  sealed  to  the  day  of  redemption. 
You  may  reply,  How  shall  we  know  this  ?  Why,  put  in  prac- 
tice the  precept  in  the  text ;  search  the  scripture  in  the  manner 
that  has  been  recommended,  and  then  you  will  be  convinced  of 
the  danger,  sinfulness,  and  unsatisfactoriness  of  reading  any 
others  tluui  the  book  of  God,  or  such  as  are  wrote  in  the  same 


480  THE   INDWELLING   OP  THE  SPIRIT,       [XXXvm. 

spirit.  You  will  then  say^  When  I  was  a  child,  and  ignonoit  of  tke 
excellency  of  the  word  of  God,  I  read  what  the  world  call  haim- 
les8  books^  as  other  children  in  knowledge,  though  old  in  years, 
have  done,  and  still  do ;  but  now  I  have  tasted  the  g^ood  word 
of  life,  and  am  come  to  a  more  perfect  knowledge  of  Christ 
Jesus  my  Lord,  I  put  away  these  childish  trifling  things,  and 
am  determined  to  read  no  other  books  but  what  lead  me  to  a 
knowledge  of  myself  and  of  Christ  Jesus. 

Search,  therefore,  the  scriptures,  my  dear  brethren  ;  taste  and 
see  how  good  the  word  of  God  is,  and  then  you  will  never  leave 
that  heavenly  manna,  that  angel's  food,  to  feed  on  dry  husks, 
that  light  bread,  those  trifling  sinful  compositions,  in  which 
men  of  false  taste  delight  themselves :  no,  you  will  then  disdain, 
such  poor  entertainment,  and  blush  that  yourselves  once  we 
fond  of  it.  The  word  of  God  will  ihen  be  sweeter  to  you  tii 
honey  and  the  honey-comb,  and  dearer  than  gold  and  silver 
your  souls  by  reading  it  will  be  filled,  as  it  were,  with  marro 
and  fatness,  and  your  hearts  insensibly  moulded  into  the  Spiri 
of  its  blessed  Author.  In  short,  you  will  be  guided  by  Gk>d' 
wisdom  here,  and  conducted  by  the  light  of  his  divine  word  int 
glory  hereafter. 


SERMON  XXXVIII. 

THE   INDWELLING   OP   THE   SPIRIT,  THE   COMMON    PRIVILEGF 

OP   ALL   BELIEVERS. 

In  the  last  day^  that  great  day  of  the  feast ^  Jesus  stood  and  cried, 
saying,  If  any  man  thirst,  let  him  come  unto  me  and  drink.  Hi 
that  believeth  on  me,  as  the  scripture  hath  said,  out  of  his  belh/ 
shall  flow  rivers  of  living  water.  But  this  spake  he  of  the  Spi^ 
rit,  which  they  that  believe  on  him  should  receive.— J oYm  Tii« 
37,  38,  39. 

Nothing  has  rendered  the  cross  of  Christ  of  less  effect ;  nothing 
has  been  a  greater  stumbling-block  and  rock  of  offence  to  weak 
minds,  than  a  supposition  now  current  among  us,  that  most  of 
what  is  contained  in  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  was  designed 
only  for  our  Lord's  first  and  immediate  followers,  and  .conse- 
quently calculated  but  for  one  or  two  hundred  years.     Accofd 
ingly,  many  now  read  the  life,  sufferings,  death,  and  resurrec 
tion  of  Jesus  Christ,  in  the  same  manner  as  Cassar's  comiMi 
taries,  or  the  conquests  of  Alexander,  are  read  :  as  things  ratb 
intended  to  afford  matter  for  speculation,  than  to  be  acted  o\ 
again  in  and  by  us. 

As  this  is  true  of  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel  in  general^  m 
is  of  the  operation  of  God's  Spirit  upon  the  hearts  of  beliet 
in  particular ;  for  we  no  sooner  mention  the  necessity  of 
receiving  the  Holy  Ghost  in  these  last  days,  as  well  as  fomu 
but  we  are  looked  upon  by  some  as  enthusiasts  and  madn 


HXXYIII.]      THB  PRIVILEGE  OF  ALL  UELIEVEUS.  431 

aiid  by  others,  represented  as  wilfully  deceiving  the  people,  and 
undermining  the  established  constitution  of  the  church. 

Judge  ye  then^  whether  it  is  not  high  time  for  the  true  minis* 
ters  of  Jesus  Christ,  who  have  been  made  partakers  of  this 
heavenly  gift,  to  lift  up  their  voices  like  a  trumpet ;  and  if  they 
would  not  have  those  souls  perish,  for  which  the  Lord  Jesus 
has  shed  his  precious  blood,  to  declare  with  all  boldness,  that 
the  holy  Spirit  is  the  common  privilege  and  portion  of  all  be^ 
licvers  in  all  ages  ;  and  that  we,  as  well  as  the  first  Christians, 
must  receive  the  Holy  Ghost,  before  we  can  be  truly  called  the 
children  of  God. 

For  this  reason,  (and  also  that  I  might  answer  the  design  of 
our  church  in  appointing  the  present  festival^*)  I  have  chosen 
the  words  of  the  text. 

They  were  spoken  by  Jesus  Christ,  when  he  was  at  the  feast 
of  tabernacles.  Our  Lord  attended  on  the  temple  service  in 
general,  and  the  festivals  of  the  Jewish  church  in  particular. 
The  festival  at  which  he  was  now  present,  was  that  of  the  feast 
of  tabernacles,  which  the  Jews  observed,  according  to  God's 
appointment,  in  commemoration  of  their  living  in  tents.  At  the 
last  day  of  this  feast,  it  was  customary  for  many  pious  people 
to  fetch  water  from  a  certain  place,  and  bring  it  on  their  heads 
singing  this  anthem  out  of  Isaiah, "  And  with  joy  shall  they  draw 
water  out  of  the  wells  of  salvation."  Our  Lord  observing  this, 
and  it  being  his  constant  practice  to  spiritualize  every  thing  he 
met  with,  cries  out,  ^'  If  any  man  thirst,  let  him  come  unto  me, 
(rather  than  unto  that  well,)  and  drink.  He  that  believeth  on 
me,  as  the  scripture  hath  spoken,  (where  it  is  said  God  will 
make  water  to  spring  out  of  a  dry  rock,  and  such-like,)  out  of 
his  belly  shall  flow  rivers  of  living  water."  And  that  we  might 
know  what  our  Saviour  meant  by  this  living  water,  the  evan- 
gelist immediately  adds,  '*  But  this  spake  he  of  the  Spirit,  which 
they  that  believe  on  him  should  receive.*' 

The  last  words  I  shall  chiefly  insist  on  in  the  ensuing  dis- 
course: And, 

First,  I  shall  briefly  shew  what  is  meant  by  the  word  Spirit. 

Secondly,  That  this  Spirit  is  the  common  privilege  of  all 
believers. 

Thirdly,  I  shall  shew  the  reason  on  which  this  doctrine  is 
founded.    And, 

Lastly,  Conclude  with  a  general  exhortation  to  believe  on 
Jesus  Christ,  whereby  alone  we  can  receive  this  Spirit. 

First,  I  am  to  shew  what  is  meant  by  the  word  Spirit. 

By  the  Spirit  is  evidently  to  be  understood  the  Holy  Ghost, 
the  third  person  in  the  ever-blessed  Trinity,  consubstantial 
and  coeternal  with  the  Father  and  the  Son,  proceeding  from, 
vet  equal  to  them  both.  For,  to  use  the  words  of  the  church 
m  this  day's  office,  that  which  we  believe  of  the  glory  of  the 
Father,  the  same  we  believe  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
any  difierence  or  inequality. 

•  Whitsimtide 


432  THB   INDWELLING    OF   THB  SPIRIT,       [XXXiail. 

ThuSy  says  St.  John,  in  his  first  epistle,  chap.  v.  yer.  7. 
^*  There  are  three  that  bear  record  in  heaven,  the  Father,  the 
Word,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  these  three  are  one/'  And 
our  Lord,  when  he  gave  his  apostles  commission  to  go  and 
teach  all  nations,  commanded  them  to  baptize  in  the  name  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  as  well  as  of  the  Father  and  the  Son.  And 
St.  Peter,  Acts  v.  3.  said  to  Ananias,  "  Why  hath  Satan  filled 
thine  heart  to  lie  to  the  Holy  Ghost  7"  And,  ver.  4.  he  says, 
**  Thou  hast  not  lied  unto  men,  but  unto  Grod."  From  all  which 
passages  it  is  plain,  that  the  Holy  Ghost  is  truly  and  properly 
God,  as  well  as  the  Father  and  the  Son.  This  is  an  unspeak- 
able  mystery,  but  a  mystery  of  God's  revealing,  and,  therefore, 
to  be  assented  to  with  our  whole  hearts :  seeing  God  is  not  a 
man  that  he  should  lie,  nor  the  son  of  man  that  he  should  de- 
ceive.    I  proceed. 

Secondly,  To  prove  that  the  Holy  Ghost  is  the  common  pri* 
vilege  of  all  believers. 

But  here  I  would  not  be  understood  of  so  receiving  the  Holy 
Ghost,  as  to  enable  us  to  work  miracles,  or  shew  outward  signs 
and  wonders.  I  allow  our  adversaries,  that  to  pretend  to  be 
inspired,  in  this  sense,  is  being  wise  above  what  is  written. 
Perhaps  it  cannot  be  proved  that  God  ever  interposed  in  this 
extraordinary  manner,  but  when  some  new  revelation  was 
to  be  established,  as  at  the  first  settling  of  the  Mosaic  and  gos- 
pel  dispensations :  and  as  for  my  own  part,  I  cannot  but  suspect 
the  spirit  of  those  who  insist  upon  a  repetition  of  such  miracles 
at  this  time;  for  the  world  being  now  become  nominally 
christian,  (though,  God  knows,  little  of  the  power  is  left  among 
us,)  there  need  not  outward  miracles,  but  only  an  inward  co* 
operation  of  the  holy  Spirit  with  the  word,  to  prove  that  Jesus 
is  the  Messiah  which  was  to  come  into  the  world. 

Besides,  if  it  were  possible  for  thee,  O  man,  to  have  faith, 
so  as  to  be  able  to  remove  mountains  or  cast  out  devils ;  nay, 
couldst  thou  speak  with  the  tongue  of  men  and  angels,  yea, 
and  bid  the  sun  stand  still  in  the  midst  of  heaven  ;  what  would 
all  these  gifts  of  the  Spirit  avail  thee,  without  being  made  par- 
taker of  his  sanctifying  graces  ?  Saul  had  the  spirit  of  govein- 
ment  for  a  while,  so  as  to  become  another  man,  and  yet  pro- 


bably was  a  cast-away.  And  many,  who  cast  out  devils  in 
Christ's  name,  at  the  last  will  be  disowned  by  him.  IS,  there- 
fore, thou  hadst  only  the  gifts,  and  was  destitute  of  the  graces 
of  the  Holy  Ghost,  they  would  only  serve  to  lead  thee  with  so 
much  the  more  solemnity  to  hell. 

Here  then  we  join  issue  with  our  adversaries,  and  will  readily 
grant  that  we  are  not  in  this  sense  to  be  inspired  as  were  oar 
Lord's  first  apostles.  But  unless  men  have  eyes  which  see  not» 
and  cars  that  hear  not,  how  can  they  read  the  latter  part  of  the 
text,  and  not  confess  that  the  holy  Spirit,  in  another  sense,  is 
the  common  privilege  of  all  believers,  even  to  the  end  of  the 
world?  <<This  spake  he  of  the  Spirit,  which  they  that  beliefe 
on  him  should  receive."    Observe,  he  does  not  say,  they  that 


XXXVIII.]      TIIR   PRIVILEGE   OP   ALL   BBLIBVBR8.  488 

briieve  od  bim  for  one  or  two  ages,  but  they  that  believe  on 
kimin  general,  or  at  all  times,  and  in  all  places.  So  that,  unless 
we  can  prove  that  St.  John  was  under  a  delusion  when  ho 
wrote  these  words,  we  most  believe  that  even  we  also  shall 
receive  the  Holy  Ghost,  if  wc  believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  with 
our  whole  hearts. 

Again»  oar  Lord,  just  before  bis  bitter  passion,  when  he  was 
M^out  to  offer  up  his  soul  an  offering  for  the  sins  of  the  elect  world 
when  his  heart  was  most  enlarged,  and  he  would  undoubtedly 
dmnand  the  most  excellent  gift  for  bis  disciples,  prays,  *'That 
tbey  all  may  be  one,  as  thou.  Father,  art  in  me,  and  I  in  thee ; 
tJiat  they  also  may  be  one  in  us,  I  in  them,  and  thou  in  nie, 
that  they  may  be  made  perfect  in  one ;"  that  is,  that  all  his 
true  followers  might  be  united  to  him  by  his  holy  Spirit,  by  as 
real,  vital,  and  mystical  an  union  as  there  was  between  Jesus 
Christ  and  the  Father.  I  say,  all  his  tme  followers,  for  it  is 
evident,  from  our  Lord's  own  words,  that  he  had  us,  and  all 
believers,  in  view,  when  he  put  up  this  prayer  :  **  Neither  pray 
I  for  thciie  alone,  but  for  them  also  which  shall  believe  on  mo 
flirough  their  word ;"  so  that  unless  we  treat  our  Lord  as  the 
high  priests  did,  and  count  him  a  blasphemer,  we  must  confess, 
that  all  who  believe  in  Jesus  Christ,  tiirough  the  word  or  minis- 
tration of  his  servants,  are  to  be  joined  to  Jesus  Christ,  by  beiug 
made  partakers  of  the  holy  Spirit. 

A  great  noise  hath  been  made  of  late  about  the  word  enthtisi- 
Oitt  and  it  has  been  cast  upon  thcpreachers  of  the  gospel,  as  a 
term  of  reproach  ;  but  every  Christian,  in  the  proper  sense  of  the 
word,  must  be  an  enthusiast ;  that  is,  must  be  inspired  of  God,  or 
have  God,  by  his  Spirit,  in  him.  St.  Peter  tells  us  wc  have  many 
great  and  precious  promises,  that  we  may  be  made  partakers  oi 
tho  divine  nature ;"  our  Lord  prays, ''  that  we  may  be  one,  as  tlie 
Father  and  ho  are  one ;  and  our  own  church,  in  conformity  to 
these  texts  of  scripture,  in  her  excellent  communion-office,  tells 
VB,  that  those  who  receive  the  sacrament  worthily,  **  dwell  in 
Christ,  and  Christ  in  them ;  that  they  are  one  with  Christ,  and 
Christ  with  them.'^  And  yet.  Christians  must  have  their  names 
cast  out  as  evil,  and  ministers  in  particular  must  be  looked 
BfMm  as  deceivers  of  the  people,  for  affirming  that  we  must  be 
be  really  united  to  God,  by  receiving  the  Holy  Ghost.  Be  aston- 
ished, O  heavens,  at  this ! 

Indeed,  I  will  not  say,  all  our  letter-learned  preachers  deny 
this  doctrine  in  express  words ;  but,  however,  they  do  in  effect ; 
for  they  talk  professedly  against  inward  teelings,  and  say,  we 
BMiy  have  God's  Spirit  without  feeling  it,  which  is  in  reality  to 
deny  the  thing  itself.  And  had  I  a  mind  to  hinder  the  progress 
of  the  gospel,  and  to  establish  the  kingdom  of  darkness,  I 
w«uld  go  about  telling  })eoplti,  they  might  have  the  Spirit  of 
God,  and  yet  not  feel  it. 

But  to   return:    When  our   Lord    was   about  to  ascend  to 
his  Father  and  our  Father,  to  his  God  and  our  God,  he  gave 
hia  apostles  this  commission,    ''Go    and  teach  all  nations, 
#  2d 


434  THB   INDWELLING   OF   THB  SPIRIT,  [XXXIlL 

baptizing  them  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Sod, 
and  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  And  accordingly,  by  authority  of  this 
commission,  we  do  teach  and  baptize  in  this,  and  every  age  of 
the  church.  And  though  we  translate  the  words,  "baptizing 
them  in  the  name;"  yet,  as  the  name  of  God,  in  the  Lord's 
prayer,  and  several  other  places,  signifies  his  nature,  they  might 
as  well  be  translated  thus,  "  baptizing  them  into  the  naiure  of 
the  Father,  into  the  nature  of  the  Son,  and  into  the  nature  of 
the  Holy  Ghost."  Consequently,  if  we  are  all  to  be  baptized 
into  the  nature  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  before  our  baptism  be  effec- 
tual to  salvation,  it  is  evident  that  we  all  must  actually  receive 
the  Holy  Ghost,  ere  we  can  say,  we  truly  believe  in  Jesus  Christ: 
for  no  one  can  say,  that  Jesus  is  my^Lord,  but  he  that  has  thus 
received  the  Holy  Ghost. 

Numbers  of  other  texts  might  be  quoted,  to  make  this  doc- 
trine, if  possible,  still  more  plain ;  but  I  am  astonished,  that  any 
who  call  themselves  members,  much  more,  that  many  who  are 
preachers  in  the  church  of  England,  should  dare  so  much  as  to 
open  their  lips  against  it.  And  yet,  with  grief  I  speak  it,  God 
is  my  judge,  persons  of  the  established  church  seem  more  gene- 
rally to  be  ignorant  of  it,  than  any  dissenters  whatsoever. 

But,  my  dear  brethren,  what  have  you  been  doing?  How 
often  have  your  hearts  given  your  lips  the  lie?  How  often  hare 
you  offered  to  God  the  sacrifice  of  fools,  and  had  your  prayers 
turned  into  sin,  if  you  approve  of,  and  use  our  church-lituigy, 
and  yet  deny  the  Holy  Spirit  to  be  the  portion  of  all  believers? 
In  the  daily  absolution,  the  minister  exhorts  the  people  to  pray» 
that  "  God  would  grant  them  repentance  and  his  holy  Spirit  ;*' 
in  the  collect  for  Christmas-day,  we  beseech  God,  "  that  he  would 
daily  renew  us  by  his  holy  Spirit ;"  in  the  last  week's  collect, 
we  prayed  that  *'  we  may  evermore  rejoice  in  the  comforts  of  the 
Holy  Ghost ;"  and  in  the  concluding  prayer,  which  we  put  up 
every  day,  we  pray,  not  only  that  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesns 
Christ,  and  the  love  of  God,  but  that  ''the  fellowship  of  the 
Holy  Ghost"  may  be  with  us  all  evermore. 

But  farther,  a  solemn  season,  to  some,  is  now  approaching;  I 
mean  the  E^mber-days,  at  the  end  of  which,  all  that  are  to  be 
ordained  to  the  office  of  a  deacon,  are,  in  the  sight  of  Grod,  and 
in  the  presence  of  the  congregation,  to  declare,  that  "  they  tmst 
they  are  inwardly  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  to  take  upon  them 
that  administration ;"  and  to  those,  who  are  to  be  ordained 
priests,  the  bishop  is  to  repeat  these  solemn  words,  ''  Receive 
thou  the  Holy  Ghost,  now  committed  unto  thee,  by  the  impo- 
sition of  our  bands."  And  yet,  O  that  I  had  no  reason  to  speak 
it,  many  that  use  our  forms,  and  many  who  have  witnessed  this 
good  confession,  yet  dare  to  both  talk  and  preach  against  the 
necessity  of  receiving  the  Holy  Ghost  now ;  and  not  only  so, 
but  cry  out  against  those  who  do  insist  upon  it,  as  madmen, 
enthusiasts,  schismatics,  and  underminers  of  the  established 
constitution  \ 

But  you  are  the  schismatics,  you  are  the  bane  of  the  church 


XXXVIII.]      THK   PRIVILEGE  OF  ALL   BELIEVERS.  435 

of  England^  who  are  always  crying  out,  **The  temple  of  the  Lord, 
the  temple  of  the  Lord ;"  and  yet  starve  the  people  out  of  our 
communion,  by  feeding  them  only  with  the  dry  husks  of  dead 
morality,  and  not  bringing  out  to  them  the  fatted  calf;  I  mean, 
the  doctrines  of  the  operations  of  the  blessed  Spirit  of  God. 
But  here  is  the  misfortune ;  many  of  us  are  not  led  by,  and 
therefore  no  wonder  that  we  cannot  talk  feelin^y  of,  the 
Holy  Ghost ;  we  subscribe  to  our  Articles,  and  make  them 
serve  for  a  key  to  get  into  church -preferment,  and  then  preach 
contrary  to  those  very  Articles  to  which  we  have  subscribed. 
Far  be  it  from  me  to  charge  all  the  clergy  with  this  hateful 
hypocrisy ;  no,  blessed  be  God,  there  are  some  left  among  us 
who  dare  maintain  the  doctrines  of  the  Reformation,  and 
preach  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus :  but,  I  speak  the  truth  in 
Christ,  I  lie  not ;  the  generality  of  the  clergy  are  fallen  from 
our  Articles,  and  do  not  speak  agreeably  to  them,  or  to  the  form 
of  sound  words  delivered  in  the  scriptures ;  woe  be  unto  such 
blind  leaders  of  the  blind  !  how  can  you  escape  the  damnation 
of  hell?  It  is  not  all  your  learning,  (^falsely  so  called,)  it  is  not 
all  your  preferments,  can  keep  you  irom  the  just  judgment  of 
God.  Yet  a  little  while,  and  we  shall  all  appear  before  the 
tribunal  of  Christ :  there,  there  will  I  meet  you ;  there  Jesus 
Christ,  the  great  Shepherd  and  Bishop  of  souls,  shall  determine 
who  are  the  false  prophets,  who  are  the  wolves  in  sheep's 
clothing — those  who  say,  that  we  must  now  receive  and  feel 
the  Holy  Ghost,  or  those  who  exclaim  against  it  as  the  doc- 
trine of  devils. 

But  I  can  no  more;  it  is  an  unpleasing  task  to  censure 
any  order  of  men,  especially  those  who  are  in  the  ministry ; 
nor  would  any  thing  excuse  it,  but  necessity — that  necessity 
which  extorted  from  our  Lord  himself  so  many  woes  against 
the  scribes  and  Pharisees,  the  letter-learned  rulers  and 
teachers  of  the  Jewish  church ;  and  surely,  if  I  could  bear  to 
see  people  perish  for  lack  of  knowledge,  and  yet  be  silent 
towards  those  who  keep  from  them  the  key  of  true  kuowlecjge, 
the  very  stones  would  cry  out. 

Would  we  restore  the  church  to  its  primitive  dignity,  the 
only  way  is  to  live  and  preach  the  doctrine  of  Christ,  and  the 
Articles  to  which  we  have  subscribed ;  then  we  shall  find  the 
number  of  dissenters  will  daily  decrease,  and  the  church  of 
England  become  the  joy  of  the  whole  earth. 

1  am,  in  the  Third  place,  to  shew  the  reasonableness  of  this  doc- 
trine.— I  say,  the  reasonableness  of  this  doctrine ;  for  however  it 
may  seem  foolishness  to  the  natural  man,  yet  to  those  who 
have  tasted  of  the  good  word  of  life,  and  have  felt  the  power 
of  the  world  to  come,  it  will  appear  to  be  founded  on  the  high- 
est reason ;  and  is  capable,  to  those  who  have  eyes  to  see, 
even  of  a  demonstration :  I  say  of  demonstration ;  for  it  stands 
on  this  self-evident  truth,  that  we  are  fallen  creatures,  or,  to  use 
the  scripture  expression,  ''  have  all  died  in  Adam." 

I  know  indeed,  it  is  now  no  uncommon  thing  amongst  us  to 

2d2 


4:%  THE   INDWELLING   OF  THE   SPIRIT^  [XXXTIII. 

deny  the  doctrine  of  original  sin,  as  well  as  the  divinity  of 
Jesus  Christ;  but  it  is  incumbent  on  those  who  deny  it,  first  to 
disprove  the  authority  of  the  holy  scriptures:  if  thou  canst 
prove,  thou  unbeliever,  that  the  book,  which  we  call  The  Bible, 
does  not  contain  the  lively  oracles  of  God ;  if  thou  canst  shew, 
that  holy  men  of  old,  did  not  ^vrite  this  book,  as  they  were 
inwardly  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  theo  will  we  give  op  the 
doctrine  of  original  sin ;  but  unless  thou  canst  do  this,  we  must 
insist  upoirit,  that  we  are  all  conceived  and  bom  in  sin ;  if  for 
no  other,  yet  for  this  one  reason,  because  that  God,  who  cannot 
lie,  has  told  us  so. 

But  what  has  light  to  do  with  darkness,  or  polite  infidels 
with  the  Bible?  Alas  !  as  they  are  strangers  to  the  power,  so 
they  are  generally  as  great  strangers  to  the  word  of  God.  And 
therefore,  if  we  will  preach  to  them,  we  must  preach  to  and 
from  the  heart:  for  talking  in  the  language  of  scripture,  to 
them,  is  but  like  talking  in  an  unknown  tongue.  Tell  me  then, 
O  man,  whosoever  thou  art,  that  dealest  the  doctrine  of  ori- 
ginal sin,  if  thy  conscience  be  not  seared  as  with  a  hot  iron  ? 
Tell  me,  if  thou  dost  not  find  thyself,  by  nature,  to  be  a  motley 
mixture  of  brute  and  devil  ?  I  know  these  terms  will  stir  up 
the  whole  Pharisee  in  thy  heart;  but  let  not  Satan  hurry  theo 
hence;  stop  a  little,  and  lei  us  reason  together;  dost  thou  not 
find,  that  by  nature  thou  art  prone  to  pride  ?  otlicrwisc,  w  here- 
fore  art  thou  now  offended  ?  Again,  dost  not  thou  find  in  thy- 
self the  seeds  of  malice,  revenge,  and  all  uncharitableness  ?  and 
what  are  these  but  the  very  tempers  of  the  devil?  Again,  do 
we  not  all  by  nature  follow,  and  suffer  ourselves  to  be  led  by, 
our  natural  appetites,  always  looking  downwards,  never  look- 
ing upwards  to  that  God  in  whom  we  live,  move,  and  have  our 
being?  And  what  is  this  but  the  very  nature  of  the  beasts  that 
perish?  Out  of  thy  own  heart,  therefore,  will  I  oblige  thee  to 
confess,  what  an  inspired  apostle  has  long  since  told  us,  that 
"  the  whole  world  (by  nature)  lies  in  the  wicked  one :"  we  are 
no  better  than  those  whom  St.  Jude  calls  '^ brute  beasts;'*  for 
we  have  tempers  in  us  all  by  nature,  that  prove  to  a  demon- 
stration, that  we  are  earthly,  sensual,  devilish. 

And  this  will  serve  as  another  argument,  to  prove  the  reality 
of  the  operations  of  the  blessed  Spirit  on  the  hearts  of  believers, 
against  those  false  professors,  who  deny  there  is  any  such  thing 
as  the  influences  of  the  holy  Spirit,  that  may  be  felt.  For  if 
they  will  grant  that  the  devil  worketh,  and  so  as  to  be  felt  in 
the  hearts  of  the  children  of  disobedience,  (which  they  must 
grant,  unless  they  will  give  an  apostle  the  lie,)  where  is  the 
wonder  that  the  good  Spirit  should  have  the  same  power  over 
those  who  are  truly  obedient  to  the  faith  of  Jesus  Christ? 

If  it  be  true  then,  that  we  are  all  by  nature,  since  tbo  fall,  a 
mixture  of  brute  and  devil,  it  is  evident,  that  we  all  must  receive 
the  Holy  Ghost,  ere  we  can  dwell  with  and  enjoy  God. 

When  you  read  how  the  prodigal,  in  the  gospel,  was  reduced 
to  so  low  a  condition  as  to  eat  husks  with  swine,  and  bow  Ne- 


l^XXVlll.]       THB   PRIVILEGE  OP  ALL   BCLIBVBRS.  437 

bachadnczzar  was  turned  out  to  graze  with  oxen ;  I  am  con- 
fident, you  pity  their  unhappy  state.  And  when  you  hear,  how 
Jesus  Christ  will  say,  at  the  last  day,  to  ail  that  are  not  bom 
again  of  God,  **  Depart  from  rae,  ye  cursed,  into  everlasting 
fire,  prepared  for  tlie  devil  and  his  angels,"  do  not  your  hearts 
shrink  within  yon,  with  a  secret  horror?  And  if  creatures, 
with  only  our  degree  of  goodness,  cannot  bear  even  the 
thoughts  of  dwelling  with  beasts  or  devils,  to  whose  nature  we 
are  so  nearly  allied,  how  do  we  imagine  God,  who  is  infinite 
goodness,  and  purity  itself,  can  dwell  with  us,  while  we  are 
partakers  of  both  their  natures?  we  might  as  well  think  to 
reconcile  heaven  and  hell. 

When  Adam  had  eaten  the  forbidden  fruit,  he  fled  and  hid 
himself  from  God;  why?  Because  he  was  naked;  he  was 
alienated  from  the  life  of  God,  the  due  punishment  of  his  dis- 
obedience. Now,  we  are  all  by  nature  naked  and  void  of  God, 
as  he  was  at  that  time,  and  consequently  until  we  ai'e  changed, 
renewed,  and  clothed  with  a  divine  nature  again,  we  must  fly 
from  God  also. 

Hence  then  appears  the  reasonableness  of  our  being  obliged 
to  receive  the  ^Spirit  of  God.  It  is  founded  on  the  doctrine  of 
original  sin ;  and,  therefore,  you  will  always  find,  that  those 
who  talk  against  feeling  the  operations  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
very  rarely,  or  slightly  at  least,  mention  our  fall  in  Adam ;  no, 
they  refer  to  St.  Paul's  account  of  the  depravity  of  unbelievers, 
only  to  those  of  old  time.  Whereas  it  is  obvious,  on  the  con- 
trary, that  we  are  all  equally  included  under  the  guilt  and  con- 
sequences of  our  first  parent's  sin,  even  as  others ;  and,  to  use 
the  language  of  our  own  church-article,  "  bring  into  the  world 
with  us,  a  corruption,  which  renders  us  liable  to  God's  wrath, 
and  eternal  damnation." 

Should  I  preach  to  you  any  other  doctrine,  I  should  wrong 
my  own  soul ;  I  should  be  found  a  false  witness  towards  God 
and  you :  and  he  that  preaches  any  other  doctrine,  howsoever 
dignified  and  distinguished,  shall  bear  his  punishment,  whoso- 
ever he  be. 

From  this  plain  reason  then  appears  the  necessity  why  we, 
as  well  as  the  first  apostles,  in  this  sense,  must  receive  the 
Spirit  of  God. 

For  the  great  work  of  sanctification,  or  making  us  holy,  is 
particularly  referred  to  the  Holy  Ghost;  therefore,  our  Lord 
says,  ''  Unless  a  man  be  born  of  the  Spirit,  he  cannot  enter  into 
the  kingdom  of  God." 

Jesus  Christ  came  down  to  save  us,  not  only  from  the  guilt, 
but  also  from  the  power  of  sin :  and  however  often  we  have 
repeated  our  creed,  and  told  God  we  believe  in  the  Holy  Ghost, 
yet,  if  we  have  not  believed  in  him,  so  as  to  be  really  united  to 
Jesus  Christ  by  him,  we  have  no  more  concord  with  Jesus 
Christ  than  Belial  himself. 

And  now,  my  brethren,  what  shall  I  say  more  ?  Tell  me,  are 
not  many  of  you  offended  at  what  has  been  said  already  ?    Do 


438  THE   INDWELLING   OF   THE  SPIRIT,        [XXXVIIL 

not  some  of  you  think,  though  I  mean  well,  yet  I  have  carried 
the  point  a  litUe  too  far?  Are  not  others  ready  to  cry  out.  If 
this  be  true,  who  then  can  be  saved  ?  Is  not  this  driving  peo- 
ple into  despair  ? 

Yes,  I  ingenuously  confess  it  is ;  but  into  what  despair  ?  A 
despair  of  mercy  through  Christ?  No,  God  forbid;  but  a 
despair  of  living  with  God  without  receiving  the  Holy  Ghost 
And  I  would  to  God,  that  not  only  all  you  that  hear  me  this 
day,  but  that  the  whole  world  were  filled  with  this  despair. 
Believe  me,  I  have  been  doing  no  more  than  you  allow  your 
bodily  physicians  to  do  every  dky :  if  you  have  a  wound,  and 
are  in  earnest  about  a  cure,  you  bid  the  surgeon  probe  it  to  the 
very  bottom;  and  shall  not  the  physician  of  your  souls  be 
allowed  the  same  freedom?  What  have  I  been  doing  but 
searching  your  natural  wounds,  that  I  might  convince  you  of 
your  danger,  and  put  you  upon  applying  to  Jesus  Christ  for  a 
remedy  ?  Indeed,  I  have  dealt  with  you  as  gently  as  I  could  ; 
and  now  I  have  wounded,  I  will  attempt  to  heal  you.  For  I 
was,  in  the 

Last  place.  To  exhort  you  all  to  come  to  Jesus  Christ  by  faith, 
whereby  you,  even  you  also,  shall  receive  the  Holy  Ghost.  "  For 
this  spake  he  of  the  Spirit,  which  they  that  believe  on  him  should 


receive." 


V   This,  this  is  what  I  long  to  come  to.     Hitherto  I  have  been 
preaching  only  the  law ;  but  behold  I  bring  you  glad  tidings  of 

freat  joy.  If  I  have  wounded  you,  be  not  afraid ;  behold,  I  now 
ring  a  remedy  for  all  your  wounds.  Notwithstanding  you  are 
sunk  into  the  nature  of  the  beast  and  devil,  yet,  if  you  truly  be- 
lieve on  Jesus  Christ,  you  shall  receive  the  quickening  Spirit 
promised  in  the  text,  and  be  restored  to  the  glorious  liberty  of 
the  sons  of  God ;  I  say,  if  you  believe  on  Jesus  Christ.  "  For 
by  faith  we  are  saved ;  it  is  not  of  works,  lest  any  one  should 
boast."  And,  however  some  men  may  say,  there  is  a  fitness 
required  in  the  creature,  and  that  we  must  have  a  righteous- 
ness of  our  own,  before  we  can  lay  hold  on  the  righteousness  of 
Christ ;  yet,  if  we  believe  the  scripture,  salvation  is  the  free  gift 
of  God,  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord ;  and  whosoever  believeth  on 
him  with  his  whole  heart,  though  his  soul  be  as  black  as  heO 
itself,  shall  receive  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Behold,  then,  I 
stand  up,  and  cry  out,  in  this  great  day  of  the  feast.  Let  every 
one  that  thirsteth  come  unto  Jesus  Christ  and  drink.  "  He 
that  believeth  on  him,  out  of  his  belly  shall  flow  (not  only 
streams  or  rivulets,  but  whole)  rivers  of  living  water."  This 
I  speak  of  the  Spirit,  which  they  that  believe  on  Jesus  shall 
certainly  receive.  For  Jesus  Christ  is  the  same  yesterday,  to- 
day, and  for  ever;  he  is  the  way,  the  truth,  the  resurrection, 
and  the  life ;  "  whosoever  believeth  on  him,  though  he  were  dead, 
yet  shall  he  live."  There  is  no  respect  of  persons  with  Jesus 
Christ ;  high  and  low,  rich  and  poor,  one  with  another,  may  come 
to  him  with  a  humble  confidence,  if  tliey  draw  near  by  faith ; 
from  him  we  may  all  receive  grace  upon  grace  ;  for  Jesus  Christ 


XXXVIII.]      THE    PRIVILEGE   OF    ALL    BELIEVERS.  439 

is  full  of  grace  and  truth,  and  ready  to  save  to  the  uttermost,  all 
that  by  a  true  faith  turn  unto  him.  Indeed,  the  poor  generally 
receive  the  gospel,  and ''  God  has  chosen  the  poor  in  this  world, 
rich  in  faith."  But  though  not  many  mighty,  not  many  noble 
are  'Called;  and  though  it  be  easier  for  a  camel  to  go  through 
the  eye  of  a  needle,  than  for  a  rich  man  to  enter  into  the  king- 
dom of  God,  yet,  even  to  you  that  are  rich,  do  I  now  freely  offer 
salvation  by  Jesus  Christ,  if  you  will  renounce  yourselves,  and 
come  to  Jesus  Christ  as  poor  sinners ;  I  say,  as  poor  sinners ; 
for  the  "  poor  in  spirit"  are  only  so  blessed,  as  to  have  a  right 
to  the  kingdom  of  God.  And  Jesus  Christ  calls  none  to  him,  but 
those  who  thirst  after  his  righteousness,  and  feel  themselves 
weary  and  heavy  laden  with  the  burden  of  their  sins.  Jesus 
Christ  justifies  the  ungodly  ;  he  came  not  to  call  the  righteous, 
but  sinners,  to  repentance. 

Do  not  then  say  you  are  unworthy ;  for  this  is  a  faithful  and 
true  saying,  and  worthy  of  all  men  to  be  received,  "  that  Jesus 
Christ  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners ;"  and  if  you  are  the 
chief  of  sinners,  if  you  feel  yourselves  such,  verily  Jesus  Christ 
came  into  the  world  chiefly  to  save  you.  When  Joseph  was 
called  out  of  the  prison-house  to  Pharaoh's  court,  we  are  told 
that  he  staid  some  time  to  prepare  himself;  but  do  you  come 
with  all  your  prison-clothes  about  you :  come,  poor,  and  miser- 
able, and  blind,  and  naked,  as  you  are,  and  God  the  Father  shall 
receive  you  with  open  arms,  as  was  the  returning  prodigal.  Ho 
shall  cover  your  nakedness  with  the  best  robe  of  his  dear  Son's 
righteousness,  shall  seal  you  with  the  signet  of  his  Spirit,  and 
feed  you  with  the  fatted  calf,  even  with  the  comforts  of  the  Holy 
Qhost.  O,  let  there  then  be  joy  in  heaven  over  some  of  you,  as 
believing ;  let  me  not  go  back  to  my  Master,  and  say.  Lord,  they 
will  not  believe  my  report.  Harden  no  longer  your  hearts,  but 
open  them  wide,  and  let  the  King  of  glory  enter  in ;  believe  me, 
I  am  willing  to  go  to  prison  or  death  for  you ;  but  I  am  not  will- 
ing to  go  to  heaven  without  you.  The  love  of  Jesus  Christ 
constrains  me  to  lift  up  my  voice  like  a  trumpet.  My  heart  is 
now  full ;  out  of  the  abundance  of  the  love  which  I  have  for 
your  precious  and  immortal  souls,  my  mouth  now  speaks ;  and 
I  could  now  not  only  continue  my  discourse  until  midnight,  but 
I  could  speak  until  I  could  speak  no  more.  And  why  should  I 
despair  of  any  ?  No,  I  can  despair  of  no  one,  when  I  consider 
Jesus  Christ  has  had  mercy  on  such  a  wretch  as  I  am :  but  the 
ffee  grace  of  Christ  prevented  me;  he  saw  me  in  my  blood,  he 
passed  by  me,  and  said  unto  me.  Live ;  and  the  same  grace 
which  was  sufficient  for  me,  is  sufficient  for  you  also ;  behold, 
the  same  blessed  Spirit  is  ready  to  breathe  on  all  your  dry  bones, 
if  yon  will  believe  on  Jesus  Christ,  whom  God  has  sent;  indeed, 
yoD  can  never  believe  on,  or  serve  a  better  master,  one  that  is 
more  mighty,  or  more  willing  to  save ;  I  can  say,  the  Lord  Christ 
is  gracious,  his  yoke  his  easy,  his  burden  exceeding  light ;  after 

ifou  have  served  him  many  years,  like  the  servants  under  the 
aw,  were  he  willing  to  discharge  you,  you  would  say,  We  love 


440  THC    KESl'URECTION    OF    LAZARUS.  [XXXIX. 

our  Master,  and  will  not  go  from  him.  Come  then,  my  gfuiltj 
brethren,  come  and  believe  on  the  Lord  that  bought  you  with 
his  precious  blood ;  look  up  by  faith,  and  see  him  whom  yoa 
have  pierced ;  behold  him  bleeding,  panting,  dying !  Behold  him 
with  arms  stretched  out  ready  to  receive  you  all ;  cry  unto-Jiim 
as  the  penitent  thief  did.  Lord,  remember  us  now  thou  art  io 
thy  kingdom,  and  he  shall  say  to  your  souls,  Shortly  shall  you 
be  with  me  in  paradise.  For  those  whom  Christ  justifies,  them 
he  also  glorifies,  even  with  that  glory  which  he  enjoyed  with 
the  Father  before  the  world  began.  Do  not  say  I  have  bought 
a  piece  of  ground,  and  must  needs  go  see  it;  or  I  have  bought 
a  yoke  of  oxen,  and  must  needs  go  and  prove  them  ;  or  I  have 
married  a  wife,  I  am  engaged  in  an  eager  pursuit  alter  the  lust 
of  the  eye  and  the  pride  of  life,  and  therefore  cannot  come.  Do 
not  fear  having  your  name  cast  out  as  evil,  or  being  accounted 
a  fool  for  Christ's  sake;  yet  a  little  while,  and  you  shall  shine 
like  the  stars  in  the  firmament  for  ever.  Only  believe,  and 
Jesus  Christ  shall  be  to  you  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctifi- 
cation,  and  eternal  redemption;  your  bodies  shall  be  fashioned 
like  unto  his  glorious  body,  and  your  souls  be  partakers  of  all 
the  fulness  of  Grod. 
Which  God  of  his  infinite  mercy,  &c. 


SERMON  XXXIX. 

THE  RESURRECTION  OF  LAZARUS. 

And  when  he  had  thns  spoken,  he  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  Laza- 
rus, come  forth.  And  he  that  was  dead  came  forth,  l)onnd 
hand  and  foot  with  grave-clolhes :  and  his  face  was  hound 
about  with  a  napkin.  Jesus  saith  unto  them,  Loose  him,  and 
let  him  go. — John  xi.  43,  44. 

When  Jesus  Christ,  the  eternal  Word,  was  pleased  to  make 
all  things  by  the  word  of  liis  power,  his  last  works  were  the 
best.  When  he  looked  back  upon,  and  beheld  the  first  pro- 
ducts of  his  almighty  power,  he  pronounced  them  "good  ;'*  but 
when  that  last,  that  lovely  creature  man,  was  formed,  be 
pronounced  them  "  very  good.*'  So,  the  same  Jesus,  when  ho 
came  to  tabernacle  among  us,  and  to  begin  and  carry  on  a 
new  and  second  creation,  though  all  his  works  were  miracles 
of  wonder,  and  manifested  forth  the  glory  of  his  eternal  godhead, 
yet  the  nearer  he  came  to  the  end  of  his  public  ministrationSi 
the  greater  and  more  noble  did  the  miracles  which  be  wrought 
appear.  The  resurrection  of  Lazarus,  that  is  to  be  the  subject 
of  the  following  discourse,  I  think  is  a  sufficient  proof  of  thi.«. 
To  an  eye  of  sense,  it  seems  to  bo  one  of  the  greatest,  if  not 
the  very  greatest  miracle  of  all  which  our  blc.'zscd  Lord  per- 
fonncd.  When  our  Saviour  bid  John's  disciples  go  and  tell 
Uieir  Master  what  things  they  had  seen  and  heard,  he  commands 
them  to  inform  him^  that  by  his  divine  power  "  the  dead  wcro 


XXXIX.]  THB  RE8URRRCTION   OF   LAEARU8.  441 

raised  ;"  allading,  no  doubt,  to  tbe  Ruler's  daughter,  who  was 
raised  immediately  after  her  decease :  and  the  Widow's  son, 
who,  at  the  command  of  Jesus,  rose  out  of  bis  coffin,  as  they 
were  carrying  his  corpse  to  the  burial.  These  were  pregnant 
proofs,  that  Jesus  was  indeed  the  Messiah  that  was  to  come 
into  the  world.  But  his  raising  of  Lazarus  from  the  dead, 
after  he  had  lain  four  days  dead,  and  saw  corruption,  is  stilly 
if  possible,  a  greater  miracle;  and  consequently  a  stronger 
proof  of  his  being  the  Anointed,  the  Christ  of  God.  The  evan<- 
gelist  John  is  very  particular  in  giving  us  an  account  of  this 
Biiracle;  even  so  particular,  as  to  spend  a  whole  chapter 
in  relating  the  circumstances  which  preceded,  attended,  and 
followed  after  it.  And  as  he  was  undoubtedly  directed  herein 
by  the  all-wise,  unerring  Spirit  of  God,  does  it  not  point  out 
unto  us,  that  this  miracle,  with  all  its  respectire  circumstances, 
calls  for  our  particular  and  most  serious  meditation  ?  It  appears 
to  me  in  this  light ;  and  therefore,  as  our  Lord  shall  be  pleased 
to  assist,  I  shall  go  back  to  the  beginning  of -this  chapter,  foI« 
low  the  evangelist  step  by  step,  and  consider  the  particulars  of 
this  wondrous  miracle,  make  some  practical  observations  as 
I  go  along,  and  conclude  with  some  suitable  instructions  and 
exhortations,  which  will  naturally  arise  from  the  body  of  the 
discourse. 

The  evangelist,  in  the  first  verse,  makes  mention  of  the  sick^ 
ness  of  Lazarus.  '^  Now  a  certain  man  was  sick,  named  Laza- 
rus, of  Bethany,  the  town  of  Mary  and  her  sister  Martha.'' 
Some  think  these  sisters  were  very  wealthy,  so  as  to  own  good 
part  of  the  town,  or,  as  the  original  word  seems  to  imply,  the 
village.  But  then  it  is  probable  the  evangelist  would  have  said 
the  town  of  Lazarus,  estates  usually  descending,  as  with  us, 
in  the  male  line :  it  means,  therefore,  no  more  than  that  Martha 
and  Mary  lived  in  Bethany.  The  Holy  Ghost  pointing  out  to 
us  hereby,  that  nothing  makes  a  town  so  worthy  of  a  gracious 
soul's  remark,  or  esteem,  as  its  having  many  of  God's  dear  chil- 
dren for  its  inhabitants.  Bethany,  though  a  little  place,  is  more 
famous  because  it  was  the  town  of  Martha  and  Mary,  than  if 
Alexander  had  fought  in  it  one  of  his  greatest  battles.  Both 
these  women  loved  Jesus  in  sincerity,  and  were  as  good  as  they 
were  great.  But  Mary,  though  the  younger  sister,  seems  to  be 
the  most  eminent :  for  the  evangelist,  in  the  second  verse, 
speaks  of  her  in  a  very  distinguishing  manner.  *'  It  was  that 
Mary^  (that  never-to-be-forgotten  Mary,)  which  anointed  the 
Lord  with  ointment,  (expensive  as  it  was)  and  wiped  his  feet 
(after  she  had  washed  them  with  tears  of  love)  with  her  hair," 
even  the  hair  of  her  head.  What  notice  is  taken  of  this 
action !  With  what  an  eulogy,  and  in  what  a  high  strain  of 
commendation,  is  it  here  spoken  of !— 4ind  such  are  the  honours 
of  all  God's  saints.  Though  all  our  good  works  are  not 
recorded  as  Mary's  are,  yet  God  is  not  unmindful,  that  he 
should  forget  our  works  of  faith,  and  labours  which  have  pro- 
ceeded of  love.    Every  tear  we  shed,  every  sigh  we  fetch,  every 


44:2  TBB   K£SrK&£CT10N   OF   LJLZARUS.  [XXXIX. 

aims  vre  give,  tboa^  ii  be  only  a  cup  of  cold  water,  are  all 
T^corded  in  the  Lamb's  bcN)k  of  remembFaD€;e^  and  shall  be  pro- 
duced to  our  eternal  hoDoor.  and  rewarded  with  a  reward  of 
p^ce»  tboofh  not  of  de^^t,  at  the  frreat  and  terrible  day  of  the 
Lord.  *'  I  was  an  hnnsered,  and  ye  gave  me  meat;  I  was 
thirsty,  and  ye  fraTe  me  drink :  naked,  and  ye  clothed  me ;  sick 
and  in  prison,  auod  ye  came  unto  me."  What  reason  hare  «e 
then  to  be  steadfast  and  nnmoreable,  always  abounding  in  tlie 
work  of  the  Laid,  forasmuch  as  we  are  assured  that  our  laboors 
will  not  be  in  i^ain  or  forgiouen  by  the  Lord  ?"  ft  was  that 
Mary  that  anointed  the  Lord  niih  ointment,  and  wiped  his  feet 
with  her  hair.  And  nhat  follows!  ''Whose  brother  Lazarus 
was  sick.  *  So  that  being  related  to  Christ  or  his  disciples, 
will  not  exempt  persons  from  sickness.  In  this  life,  time  and 
chance  happen  to  all,  only  with  this  material  difference,  those 
afflictions  which  harden  the  obstinately  impenitent,  soften  and 
purify  the  heart  of  a  true  believer.  "  My  son,  therefore  despise 
not  the  chastening  of  the  Lord  (on  one  hand)  nor  faint  when 
thou  art  rebuked  of  him  (on  the  other :)  for  whom  tlie  Lord 
loveth  he  chasteneth,  and  scourgeth  every  son  whom  he  re- 
ceiveth." 

Jesus  loved  Laiarus,  and  yet  Laxarus  was  sick.  And  what 
do  his  sisters  do  for  him,  now  he  is  sick  ?  No  doubt  they  applied 
to  a  physician,  for  it  is  tempting  God  to  neglect  making  use  of 
means  for  the  recovery  of  our  health,  when  it  is  impaired.  But 
then  they  were  not  guilty  of  Asa's  crime,  **  who  sought  to  the 
physicians,  but  not  to  the  Lord.**  No ;  they  knew  the  most 
skilful  prescriptions  would  be  of  no  effect,  unless  attended  with 
a  blessing  from  Jesus,  the  great  and  almighty  Physician ;  and 
therefore  his  sisters  sent  unto  him,  probably  at  the  beginning  of 
their  brother*s  illness.  How  unlike  is  their  conduct  to  that  of 
the  generality  of  people,  especially  the  rich  and  great !  Uow 
unfashionable  is  it  now-a-days  for  persons  to  send  to  Jesus  in 
behalf  of  their  sick  relations!*  It  is  so  very  uncustomary,  thstt 
in  some  places,  if  a  minister  be  sent  for  to  a  sick  person,  it  is  a 
sad  symptom  that  the  patient  is  almost  past  hopes  of  recovery. 
Thus  did  not  Martha  and  her  sister  Mary ;  they  sent  unto  Jesus, 
though  he  was  now  beyond  Jordan,  (chap.  40.)  where  he  abode, 
or  chiefly  resided,  for  some  time.  Hence  it  was  that  they  knew 
where  to  send  to  him.  But  what  kind  of  message  did  they 
send?  A  very  humble  and  suitable  one:  ''Lord,  behold,  be 
whom  thou  lovest  is  sick."  They  might  have  said.  Lord,  he 
who  loveth  thee  is  sick.  But  they  knew,  that  our  love  was  not 
worth  mentioning,  and  that  we  love  Jesus  only  because  he  first 
loved  us.  Besides,  here  is  no  prescribing  to  our  Lord  what  be 
should  do,  or  what  means  he  should  make  use  of.  They  do  not 
so  much  as  say.  We  pray  thee  to  come,  or  only  speak  the  word, 
and  our  sick  brother  shall  be  restored.  They  simply  tell  Jesuii 
the  case,  knowing  it  was  sufficient  barely  to  lay  it  before  an  in- 
finitely compassionate  Redeemer,  and  leave  it  to  him  to  act 
according  to  his  own  sovereign  good- will  and  pleasure :'' Lordi 


XXXIX.]  THB   RESURRECTION   OP   LAZARUS.  443 

Behold,  he  whom  thoa  lovest  is  sick."  Oh  how  sweet  is  it  when 
the  soul  is  brought  to  this !  And  with  what  a  holy  confidence 
inay  we  pray  to,  and  intercede  with,  the  holy  Jesus,  when  we 
have  reason  to  hope,  that  those  we  pray  and  intercede  for,  are 
lovers  of,  and  are  beloved  of  him  !  For  his  eyes  are  in  a  peculiar 
manner  over  the  righteous,  and  his  ears  always  open  to  their 
prayers.  This  was  their  message,  and  it  soon  reached  Jesus 
Christ.  And  how  does  he  receive  it?  We  are  told,  ver.  4. 
**  W  hen  Jesus  heard  that,  (that  he  whom  he  loved  was  sick,)  he 
said.  This  sickness  is  not  unto  death,  but  unto  the  glory  of  God, 
that  the  Son  of  God  maybe  glorified  thereby."  To  whom  these 
words  were  spoken,  is  not  certain.  In  all  probability,  Jesus 
spoke  them  to  the  persons  that  delivered  Martha's  and  Mary's 
message.  And  if  so,  it  was,  no  doubt,  a  comfortable  answer  for 
the  present,  though  it  must  afterwards  puzzle  them,  as  well  as 
his  disciples,  how  to  explain  it,  when  they  found  that  Lazarus 
was  actually  dead.  "  This  sickness  is  not  unto  death,"  not  unto 
an  abiding  death,  because  he  intended  to  raise  him  again  soon 
'  after  his  decease.  It  is  like  that  expression  of  our  Lord  in  St. 
Mark,  ^'  The  damsel  is  not  dead,  but  sleepeth ;"  which  must  not 
be  understood  in  a  literal,  but  metaphorical  sense.  And  this, 
and  such-like  instances,  ought  to  teach  us  to  weigh  carefully  our 
blessed  Lord's  words,  and  to  wait  for  an  explication  of  them  by 
subsequent  providences;  otherwise  we  shall  be  in  danger  of 
misapplying  them,  and  thereby  bring  our  souls  into  unspeakable 
bondage.  ''  This  sickness  is  not  unto  death,  but  unto  the  glory 
of  God,  that  the  Son  of  God  may  be  glorified  thereby."  This 
is  the  end  both  of  the  afilictions  and  the  deaths  of  God's 
people.  By  all  that  happens  to  them  he  will  be  glorified  one 
way  or  another,  and  cause  every  thing  to  work  together  for  their 
good.  And  who  then  but  would  be  content  to  be  sick,  or  willing 
to  submit  to  death  itself,  if  so  be  the  Son  of  God  may  be  glori- 
fied thereby  ?  This  answer,  no  doubt,  proceeded  from  love ;  for 
we  are  told. 

Verse  5.  That  "  Jesus  loved  Martha  and  her  sister,  and  Laza- 
rus." Oh  happy  family !  Three  in  it,  beloved  of  Jesus  with  a 
peculiar,  everlasting  love.  '*  Very  often  it  so  happens,  (to  use 
the  words  of  the  pious  Bishop  Beveridge,)  that  there  is  but  one 
in  a  city,  and  two  in  a  country,  of  this  stamp."  But  here  are 
two  sisters  and  a  brother,  all  lovers  of,  and  beloved  by,  the 
glorious  Jesus.  What  shall  we  say  to  these  things  ?  Why,  that 
our  Saviour's  grace  is  free  and  sovereign,  and  that  he  may  do 
what  be  will  with  his  own.  They  who  are  thus  so  highly  favoured, 
as  to  have  so  many  converted  in  one  house,  ought  to  be  doubly 
thankful !  Such  a  blessing  have  not  all  his  saints.  No ;  many, 
very  many,  go  mourning  over  their  perverse  and  graceless  re- 
lations all  their  lives  long ;  and  find,  even  to  their  dying  day,  that 
their  greatest  foes  are  those  of  their  own  household.  Surely 
these  three  relations  lived  a  heaven  upon  earth.  For  what  can 
they  want,  what  could  make  them  miserable,  who  are  assured 
of  Jesus' love?    But  surely  if  Jesus  loves  this  dear  little  family. 


444  THB   RBSURRECTION    or    LAZARUS.  [XXXIX. 

the  next  news  one  might  think  we  should  hear,  would  be,  that 
he  went  immediately,  and  healed  Lazarus ;  or  at  least  cured 
him  at  a  distance.  But  instead  of  thut,  we  are  told,  verse  6. 
"  When  he  had  heard  that  he  was  sick,  he  abode  two  days  still 
in  the  same  place  where  he  was."  A  strange  wa^  this,  in  the 
eye  of  natural  reason,  of  expressing  love :  but  not  so  strange 
in  the  eye  of  faith ;  for  the  Lord  Jesus  very  often  sheweth  his 
love,  by  deferring  to  give  immediate  answers  to  our  prayers. 
Hereby  he  tries  our  faith  and  patience,  and  exercises  all  oar 
passive  graces.  We  have  a  proof  of  this  in  the  Syrophenician 
woman,  upon  whom  the  blessed  Jesus  frowned,  and  spake 
roughly  to  at  first,  only  (hat  he  might  afterwards  turn  unto 
her,  and  say,  "  O  woman,  great  is  thy  faith."  Let  not  those 
then  who  believe,  make  too  much  haste;  or  immediately  in 
their  hearts  repine  against  the  Lord,  because  he  may  not 
answer  their  requests  in  their  own  time  and  way.  Cod's  time 
and  way  is  best.  And  we  shall  find  it  to  be  so  in  the  end. 
Martha  and  Mary  experienced  the  truth  of  this,  though 
undoubtedly  our  Lord's  seeming  delay  to  come  and  heal  their' 
brother,  cost  them  great  searchings  of  heart.  But  will  the 
Lord  Jesus  forget  his  dear  Lazarus,  whom  his  soul  loveth ' 
''Can  a  woman  forget  her  sucking  child  !"  Indeed^  she  may; 
but  the  Lord  never  faileth  those  that  fear  him.  Neither  is  he 
slack  concerning  his  promise,  as  some  men  count  slackness:  for 
his  very  delays  are  answers.  The  vision  is  for  an  appointed 
time ;  in  the  end  it  will  speak,  and  not  lie. 

Though  our  Lord  abode  two  days  where  he  was,  to  try  the 
faith  of  these  sisters,  yet  after  this,  he  said  unto  his  disciples^ 
ver.  7.  "  Let  us  go  into  Judca  again."  With  what  a  holy 
familiarity  does  Jesus  converse  with  his  dear  children !  Our 
Saviour  seems  to  speak  to  his  disciples,  as  though  he  were 
only  their  brother,  and  as  it  were  upon  a  level  with  them ; 
"  Let  us  go  into  Judea  again."  How  gently,  according  to  what 
was  predicted  of  him,  does  he  lead  those  that  are  with  young! 
Jesus  very  well  knew  the  weakness  of  his  disciples,  and  also 
what  a  dangerous  place  Judea  was ;  how  gradually  therefore 
does  he  make  known  unto  them  his  design  of  going  thither ! 
And  how  does  he  admit  his  disciples  to  expostulate  with  hin 
on  this  account !  "  Master,  (say  they,)  the  Jews  of  late  sought 
to  stone  thee,  and  goest  thou  thither  again?"  They  were 
amazed  at  our  Lord's  boldness,  and  were  ready  to  call  it  pre* 
sumption ;  as  we  generally  are  prone  to  censure  and  condemn 
other  zealous  and  enterprishig  persons,  as  carrying  matters 
too  far;  it  may  be  for  no  other  reason,  if  we  examine  the  bot- 
tom of  our  hearts,  but  because  they  go  before  and  excel  our- 
selves. The  disciples,  no  doubt,  thought  that  they  spoke  out 
of  love  to  their  Lord,  and  assuredly  they  did  ;  but  what  a  deal 
of  self-love  was  there  mixed  and  blended  with  it !  They  seciB 
much  concerned  for  their  Master,  but  they  were  more  con- 
cerned for  themselves.  However,  Jesus  overlooks  their  weak- 
ness, and  mildly  replies,  ver.  9  and  10.  ''  Are  there  not  twelve 


XXXIX.]  THB   RKSURRECTION    OP    LAaVRITS.  445 

hoars  in  the  day  T  If  aay  man  walk  in  the  day^  he  stumbleth 
not,  because  he  seeth  the  light  of  the  world ;  but  if  any  man 
walk  in  the  night,  he  stumbleth,  because  there  is  no  light  in 
him."  As  though  our  Lord  had  said.  My  dear  disciples,  I 
thank  you  for  your  care  and  concern  for  me.  Judea  is  a  dan- 
gerous place,  and  what  you  say  of  the  treatment  I  met  with 
from  its  inhabitants,  is  just  and  true :  but  be  not  afraid  of 
going  there  upon  my  account.  For  as  a  man  walketh  safely 
twelve  hours  of  the  day,  because  he  walketh  in  the  light :  so, 
as  long  as  the  time'  appointed  by  my  Father  for  my  public 
administration  lasts,  I  shall  be  as  secure  from  the  hands  of  my 
enemies,  as  a  man  that  walks  in  broad-day  is  secure  from  fall* 
ing.  But  as  a  man  stumbleth  if  he  walketh  in  the  night,  so 
when  the  niglit  of  my  passion  cometh,  then,  but  not  till  then, 
shall  I  be  given  up  into  the  hands  of  my  spiteful  foes.  Oh  what 
comfort  have  these  words,  by  the  blessing  of  God,  frequently 
brought  to  my  soul !  How  may  all  Christ's  ministers  strengthen 
themselves  with  this  consideration,  that  so  long  as  God  hath 
work  for  them  to  do,  they  are  immortal !  And  if  after  our  work 
is  over,  our  Lord  should  call  us  to  lay  down  our  lives  for  the 
brethren,  and  to  seal  the  truth  of  our  doctrine  with  our  blood,  it 
would  certainly  be  the  highest  honour  that  can  be  put  upon  us. 
'*  To  you  it  is  given,  not  only  to  believe,  but  also  to  suffer,"  says 
the  apostle  to  the  Philippians. 

**  These  things  (the  evangelist  tells  us,  ver.  11.)  said  Jesus, 
and  after  that,  (to  satisfy  them  that  he  was  not  going  into 
Judea  without  a  proper  call,)  he  saith  unto  them.  Our  friend 
Lazarus  sleepeth."  Our  friend.  Amazing !  For  what  is  a 
friend  ?  As  one's  own  soul.  How  dear  then,  and  near,  are 
true  believers  to  the  most  adorable  Jesus  !  **  Our  friend  Laza- 
rus." Still  more  amazing  !  Here  is  condescension,  here  is 
unparalleled  familiarity,  indeed.  And  what  of  him?  ''He 
aleepcth."  A  figurative  way  of  expression.  For  what  is  death 
to  the  lovers  of  Jesus  Christ,  but  a  sleep,  and  a  refreshing  one 
too  ?  Thus  it  is  said  of  Stephen  when  he  died,  that  ''  be  fell 
asleep."  Christ  indeed  died,  but  believers  only  sleep.  And 
''  those  that  sleep  in  Jesus,  (says  the  scripture^)  wUl  God  bring 
with  him."  ''  Our  friend  Lazarus  sleepeth."  For  though  he 
be  dead,  I  shall  raise  him  from  the  graTe  so  soon,  that  his 
dying  will  be  only  like  a  person's  taking  a  short  sleep.  ''  Our 
friend  Lazarus  sleepeth,  but  I  go  that  I  may  awake  him  out  of 
sleep."  By  this  time,  one  would  imagine  oar  Lord's  disciples 
should  have  understood  him:  but  how  unwilling  are  we  to 
believe  any  thing  that  we  do  not  like !  **  Then  said  his  dis- 
ciples. Lord,  if  he  sleep,  he  shall  do  well.**  Oh  fearful,  and 
slow  of  heart  to  believe !  How  fain  waaM  they  excuse  them- 
selves from  going  into  Judea,  for  fear  of  a  few  stones !  By  this 
way  of  talking,  how  do  they  in  effect  impeach  their  blessed 
Master's  conduct,  and,  under  a  pretence  of  preserving  his  person, 
foster,  and  as  it  were  plead  for  their  own  (though  perhaps 
nndiscemed)  cowardice  and  unbelief?     That  charity,  wfaick 


446  THE  RR8URRECTIOM    OP   LAZAAU8.  [XXXll. 

bopeth  and  believeth  all  things  for  the  best,  teacheth  ns  to 
judge  thus  favourably  of  them.  For,  **  Howbeit  Jesus  spake 
of  his  death :  they  thought  that  he  had  spoken  of  taking  rest 
in  sleep."  The  great  and  compassionate  High-Priest,  knowing 
and  remembering  they  were  but  dust,  throws  a  veil  of  love 
over  their  infirmity ;  and  at  length,  ver.  14.  ''  saith  unto  them 
plainly  (for  if  we  wait  on  Jesus,  we  shall  know  his  will  plainly, 
one  way  or  another,)  Lazarus  is  dead."  And  even  then,  lest 
they  should  be  swallowed  up  with  overmuch  sorrow,  he  imme- 
diately adds,  ver.  15.  ''  And  I  am  glad  for  your  sakes  that  I 
was  not  there,  to  the  intent  ye  may  believe,"  or  have  more  faith, 
or  have  that  faith  which  you  already  possess,  increased  and 
confirmed.  A  plain  proof  this,  that  all  Jesus'  delays  to  answer 
prayer,  are  only  to  strengthen  our  faith. 

"  Nevertheless,  says  our  Lord,  let  us  go  unto  him."  This  was 
a  sufficient  hint,  if  they  knew  how  to  improve  it,  that  he  intended 
to  do  something  extraordinary,  though  he  would  not  tell  them 
directly  what  he  intended.  For  the  Lord  Jesus  will  keep  those 
whom  he  loves,  at  his  feet,  and  dependent  on  him.  ''  Let  us  go 
unto  him."  He  still  speaks  as  though  they  were  his  equak. 
Oh  that  Christians  in  general,  oh  that  ministers  in  particular, 
would  learn  of  him,  their  great  exemplar,  to  condescend  to  men 
of  low  degree  !  Well,  the  secret  is  now  out.  Jesus  has  said 
unto  them  plainly,  Lazarus  is  dead.  And  what  reception  does 
this  melancholy  news  meet  with  ?  With  great  condolence,  es- 
pecially from  Thomas ;  for  ver.  16.  "  Then  said  Thomas,  who  is 
called  Didymus,  unto  his  feliow-disciplesi  let  us  also  go  and 
die  with  faini ;"  that  is,  according  to  some,  with  Lazarus,  with 
whom,  it  may  be,  Thomas  had  contracted  an  intimate  acquain- 
tance. But  granting  it  was  so ;  shall  I  conmiend  him  for  this 
passionate  expression  ?  I  commend  him  not.  Surely  he  spake 
unadvisedly  with  his  lips ;  *'  Let  us  also  go,  and  die  with  him." 
As  though  there  were  no  comfort  to  be  expected  in  the  world, 
now  his  friend  Lazarus  was  gone.  This  was  a  great  fault,  and 
yet  a  fault  that  many  of  God's  children  run  into  daily,  by 
mourning  for  their  deceased  relations  over-much,  like  persons 
that  have  no  hope.  But  this  infirmity  ought  not  to  be  indulged : 
for  if  our  friends  and  dear  relatives  are  dead,  Jesus,  that  friend 
of  sinders,  is  not  dead.  He  will  be  better  to  us  than  seven 
sons,  and  will  abundantly  supply  the  place  of  all  creature-com- 
forts. But  I  am  more  inclined  to  think  that  the  word  Aim,  refers 
to  Jesus,  his  dear  Master ;  and  if  so,  he  is  so  far  from  being 
blamed,  that  he  spake  like  a  good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ.  Let 
us  also  go,  that  we  may  die  with  him.  If  our  dear  Master  will 
go  into  Judea,  and  hazard  his  precious  life,  let  us  not  any  lon- 
ger make  such  frivolous  excuses,  but  let  us  manfully  accom- 
pany him ;  and  if  the  Jews  should  not  only  be  permitted  to  litonc, 
but  also  to  kill  him,  let  us  also  go  and  die  with  him,  we  cannot 
die  in  a  better  cause.  This  was  a  speech  worthy  of  a  Christian 
hero,  and  Thomas  herein  has  set  us  an  example,  that  we  should 
follow  his  steps,  by  exciting  and  provoking  one  another  closely 


XXXIX.]  itits.   RESURRECTION  OP   LAZARUS.  447 

to  adhere  to  the  blessed  Jesus,  especially  when  his  cause  and 
interest  is  in  any  immediate  danger.  This  exhortation,  it  seems, 
had  a  proper  effect.  They  all  went,  and,  as  far  as  we  know^ 
cheerfully  accompanied  their  glorious  Master. 

How  their  thoughts  were  exercised  on  the  road,  we  are  not 
told.  But  I  am  apt  to  believe  they  were  a  little  discouraged 
when  they  came  to  Bethany :  for  ''when  Jesus  came,  he  found 
that  Lazarus  had  Iain  in  the  grave  for  four  days  already."'  And 
what  would  it  avail  them,  to  come  so  many  miles  only  to  see  a 
dead  man's  tomb  ?  But  how  wisely  were  all  things  ordered  by 
the  blessed  Jesus,  to  manifest  his  glory  in  the  most  extraor- 
dinary manner,  that  not  only  his  disciples  might  have  their 
faith  confirmed,  but  many  also  of  the  Jews  might  believe  on 
him.  This  Bethany,  it  seems,  ver.  18.  "  was  nigh  unto  Jeru- 
salem, about  fifteen  furlongs  off;"  or  about  two  miles;  and 
Martha  and  Mary,  being  what  we  may  call  people  of  fashion^ 
and  devout  likewii^e ;  many  of  the  devout,  and  we  may  suppose 
many  of  the  wealthy  Jews,  came  from  the  metropolis,  as  well  as 
other  adjacent  places,  ver.  19.  to  Martha  and  Mary ;  not  to  pay 
an  idle,  trifling,  but  a  serious,  profitable  visit,  '*  to  comfort  them 
concerning  their  brother."  This  was  kind  and  neighbourly.  To 
weep  with  those  that  weep,  and  to  visit  the  afflicted  in  their 
distresses,  is  one  essential  branch  of  true  and  undefiled  religno. 
And  O  how  sweet  is  it  when  we  visit  surviving  friends,  that  wo 
have  reason  to  think  that  their  departed  relations  died  in  the 
Lord !  And  we  can  therefore  give  them  comfort  concerning 
them  ;  for  "  blessed  are  the  dead,  that  die  in  the  Lord ;  even  so, 
saith  the  Spirit,  for  they  rest  from  their  labours."  This,  and 
such-like  arguments,  no  doubt,  these  visitors  made  use  of,  to 
comfort  Martha  and  Mary.  And,  indeed,  they  stood  in  much 
need  of  consolation :  for  we  have  reason  to  suppose,  from 
our  Lord's  answer,  "  This  sickness  is  not  unto  death,  but  the 
glory  of  God ;"  that  they  had  entertained  thoughts  of  the  reco- 
very of  their  brother.  But  who  can  tell  what  these  two  holy 
souls  must  feel,  when  they  found  their  brother  did  not  recover, 
but  was  dead,  laid  out,  and  now  stinking  in  the  silent  grave! 
What  hard  thoughts,  without  judging  them,  may  we  suppose 
they  entertained  concerning  Jesus !  Think  ye  not  that  they 
were  ready  to  cry  out,  in  the  language  of  the  prophet,  '*  Thou 
bast  deceived  us,  and  we  are  deceived  ?"  But  man's  extremity 
is  Jesus'  opportunity.  In  the  multitude  of  the  sorrows  that 
they  had  in  their  hearts,  the  news  of  Christ's  coming  refreshes 
tiieir  souls.  Somebody  or  another,  commendably  officious, 
privately  informs  Martha  of  it :  ^'  who,  as  soon  as  she  heard 
that  Jesus  was  come,  (without  making  any  apology  to  the  com- 
pany for  her  rudeness,)  went  and  met  him :  but  Mary  sat  still 
in  the  house."  But  why  so,  Mary?  I  thought  thou  hadst  been 
most  forward  to  attend  on  Jesus,  and  thy  sister  Martha  more 
prone  to  be  cumbered  about  the  many  things  of  this  life.  Why 
sittest  thou  still?  It  may  be  the  news  was  brought  only  pri- 
yately  to  Martha,  (for  it  is  plain  from  ver.  31.  that  tike  Jews  who 


4i8  THB   BBBURRfiCTION   Or   LAZARUS.  {XXXIX. 

were  in  tbe  house  knew  not  of  it ;)  and  Martha  knowing  how 
our  Lord  had  chid  her  once,  was  resolved  he  sbocld  have  no 
reason  on  tbe  same  account  to  chide  her  any  more;  therefore, 
when  the  news  was  brought,  she  would  not  so  much  as  stay  to 
inform  her  sister,  but  went  out  to  see  whether  it  were  true  or 
not,  and  if  so,  as  the  eldest  sister,  she  would  inrite  the  blessed 
Jesus  in.  How  happy  is  it,  when  Christ's  reproofs  for  past 
neglects,  excite  our  future  zeal  to  come  out  and  meet  him! 
Such  reproofs  are  an  excellent  oil.  Or,  it  may  be,  tbe  news 
reached  Mary's  ears,  as  well  as  Martha's,  but  being  overcume 
with  sorrow,  she  thought  it  too  good  news  to  be  true,  mod 
therefore  sat  still  in  the  house.  O  how  careful  ought  believers 
to  be,  to  cherish  and  niaintuin,  even  in  the  midst  of  tribulatioD, 
a  holy  confidence  and  joy  in  God !  for  the  joy  of  the  Lord  is 
a  believer's  strength.  Whereas  giving  way  to  melancholy  and 
unbelief,  raises  gloom  and  vapours  in  the  mind,  clouds  tbe  un» 
derstanding,  clogs  us  in  the  way  of  duty,  and  gives  the  enemy, 
who  loves  to  fish  in  troubled  waters,  a  very  great  advantage 
over  us. 

Mary,  perhaps,  through  the  prevalence  of  this,  and  being  also 
naturally  of  asendentary  disposition,'^  sat  still  in  the  house,"  while 
her  sister  Martha  got  the  start  of  her,  and  went  out  to  meet  Jesus. 
And  how  does  she  accost  him?  Why,  in  a  language  bespeaking 
the  distress  of  a  burdened  and  disordered  mind.  For  she  said 
unto  Jesus,  ver.  21.  '*  Lord,  if  thou  hadst  been  here,  my  brother 
bad  not  died."  Here  is  a  mixture  of  faith  and  unbelief.  Faith 
made  her  say,  '^  Lord,  if  thou  hadst  been  here,  my  brother  had 
not  died."  But  unbelief  made  her  confine  Christ's  power  to  his 
bodily  presence.  Besides,  here  was  a  tacit  accusation  of  the 
blessed  Jesus  of  unkindness,  for  not  coming  when  they  sent 
unto  him  the  message,  ''Lord,  he  whom  thou  lovest  is  sick." 
Once  she  charged  Jesus  with  want  of  care ; ''  Lord,  carest  thou 
not,  that  my  sister  hath  left  me  to  serve  alone  ?"  Now  she 
taxes  him  with  want  of  kindness.  ''  If  thou  hadst  been  here ;" 
as  much  as  to  say,  if  thou  hadst  been  so  kind  as  to  have  come 
when  we  sent  for  thee,  **  my  brother  had  not  died ;"  and  by  saying 
thus,  she  does,  as  it  were,  lay  her  brother's  death  to  Jesos 
Christ.  O  how  apt  are  even  those  whom  Jesus  loves  in  a 
peculiar  manner,  to  charge  him  foolishly !  How  often  does  the 
enmity  of  our  desperately  wicked  hearts  rise  against  Christ, 
when  we  are  under  the  afilicting  hand  of  his  providence !  Art 
not  the  very  best  of  us  frequently  tempted  in  such  drcnmstances, 
to  say  within  ourselves  at  last.  Why  does  God  thus  ernelly  deal 
with  us  ?  Why  did  not  he  keep  off  this  stroke,  seeing  it  was  in 
his  power  to  have  prevented  it  ?  How  should  we  bo  ashamed 
and  confounded  betbre  him  upon  this  account?  How  should 
we  pray  and  labour  to  be  delivered  from  this  oemaining  enmity 
of  the  hearty  and  long  for  that  time,  when  mortality  shall  be 
swallowed  up  of  life,  and  we  shall  never  feel  one  single  risiaf 
of  heart  against  a  good  and  gracious,  an  all-  wise  and  glorious 
Redeemer,  any  more?    Howevor^  to  do  Martha  jastict,  ske 


XXXIX.J  THE   RESURRRCTION    OF    LAZAtLXJ9.  449 

pretty  well  recovers  herself^  ver.  22.  '^  But  I  know,  that  even 
DOW,  whatsoever  thou  wilt  ask  of  God,  God  will  give  it  to  thee." 
Whether  these  words  imply  an  actual  belief  of  our  Lord's 
divinity,  is  not  certain.  To  me  they  do;  because  we  shall 
presently  find,  that  she  did  believe  our  Lord  was  the  Son  oi 
God,  and  the  Messiah  which  was  to  come  into  tjie  world. 
Therefore,  when  she  said,  she  knew  that  whatsoever  he  asked 
of  God,  God  would  give  it  to  him,  she  may  be  understood  as 
referring  to  God'the  Father,  under  whom  the  Lord  Jesus  acted 
as  Mediator,  though  equal  to  him  in  respect  to  his  eternal  glory 
and  godhead.  Tliis  mystery  we  may  well  suppose  her  ac** 
quainted  with,  I)ecause  Jesus  had  been  frequently  preaching  at 
her  house,  and  consequently  had  opened  that  mystery  unto  ben 
O  what  a  blessed  thing  must  it  be  to  have  such  a  Mediator, 
such  an  high-priest  and  intercessor,  at  the  Father's  right  hand, 
that  whatever  he  asks  the  Father  in  our  behalf,  he  will  give 
unto  us  !  Jesus  takes  this  kindly  at  Martha's  hand,  and  passes 
over  her  infirmity.  For  if  the  Lord  were  exact  to  mark  every 
thing  that  we  say  or  do  amiss,  alas  !  who  could  abide  ?  He  only 
calmly  says  unto  her,  ver.  23.  "  Thy  brother  shall  rise  again." 

Glad  tidings  these  of  great  joy.  This  should  comfort  us  con* 
ceming  our  deceased,  pious  relations,  that  ere  long  they  shall 
rise  again,  and  both  soul  and  body  be  for  ever  with  the  Lord. 
Howbeit,  Jesus  spoke  here  of  an  immediate  resurrection,  though 
he  did  not  speak  plainly :  for  Christ  loves  to  exercise  the  faith 
and  patience  of  his  disciples,  and  frequently  leaves  them  to  find 
out  his  meaning  by  degrees.  It  is  best  for  us,  in  our  present 
state,  that  it  should  be  so.  In  heaven  it  will  be  otherwise. 
*'Thy  brother  (says  Christ  to  Martha)  shall  rise  again."  She 
might  immediately  have  replied.  When,  Lord  ?  But  she  fetches 
a  circuit  as  it  were,  and  labours  to  find  out  the  mind  of  Jesus 
by  degrees.  ''I  know  (says  she)  that  he  shall  rise  again  at  the 
resurrection  of  the  last  day."  These  words  seem  to  imply,  that 
she  had  some  distant  thought  of  our  Lord's  design  to  raise  bet 
brother  now,  and  that  she  spake  thus  only  to  draw  our  Saviour 
to  speak,  and  tell  her  plainly  whether  he  meant  to  do  so  or  not. 
Those  who  are  acquainted  with  Jesus,  are  taught  an  holy  art 
by  the  blessed  Spirit,  in  dealing  with  their  blessed  Master,  "  I 
know,  (says  she,;  he  shall  rise  again  at  the  resurrection  of  the 
last  day,"  (a  notable  proof  this,  by  the  way,  that  the  pious 
Jews  believed  the  resurrection  of  the  body.)  It  is  just  the  same 
as  though  she  had  said^  Lord,  dost  thou  mean  that  my  brother 
shflil  rise  again  before  that  time  ?  Our  Saviour  wisdy  keeps  off 
from  giving  lier  a  direct  answer,  but  chooses  rather  to  preach 
to  ber  heart.  "  Jesus  said  unto  her,  I  am  the  resurrection  and 
the  life :  he  that  believeth  in  me,  though  he  were  dead,  yet  shall 
be  live."  On  this,  Martha's  faith,  if  in  exercise,  might  take 
hold.  O  glorious  words !  How  encouraging  to  you  poor  sin- 
ners lying  in  your  blood !  Though  you  are  dead  in  trespassed 
and  sins,  and  might  justly  be  condemned  to  die  the  second 
death,  yet  if  you  believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus,  you  shall  live.  He 
«  2b 


450  THE   RESURRECTION    OP   LAZARUS.  [XXXIX. 

adds,  **  And  whosoever  believeth  in  me  shall  never  die  ;**  never 
die  as  to  their  soals,  never  die  eternally,  and  consequently  never 
finally  fall  away  from  God.    This  is  an  encouraging,  soul-coni* 
forting  declaration  for  you,  O  believers,  who  are  thus  kept  in 
a  garrison,  by  the  mighty  power  of  Grod,  through  faith  unto 
salvation !   *'  Believest  thou  this  ?"  says  Christ  to  Martha,  yer. 
26.    What  avail  all  tike  many  great  and  precious  promises  of 
the  gospel,  unless  they  are  applied  and  brought  home  in  par- 
ticular to  each  of  our  souls  ?  The  word  does  not  profit,  unless 
it  is  mixed  with  faith.    We  therefore  do  well,  when  we  are 
reading  Christ's  words,  to  'put  this  question  to  ourselves :  O 
my  soul,  believest  thou  this  ?    And  well  would  it  be  for  us,  if, 
upon  putting  this  question  to  ourselves,  we  could,  with  the 
same  holy  confidence,  and  in  tlie  same  delightful  frame,  say 
with  Martha,  ver.  27.  "  Yea,  Lord :  I  believe  that  thou  art  the 
Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  which  should  come  into  the  world." 
This  I  think  is  a  direct  confession  of  our  Lord's  divinity.     How 
full  was  her  heart  when  she  spoke  these  words !  I  am  per- 
suaded it  burnt  within  her.  What  a  divine  warmth  had  she  con- 
tracted by  talking  with  Jesus !     How  does  she  long  that  her 
sister  might  share  in  her  holy  joy !  For  when  she  had  so  said, 
ver.  28.  "  she  went  away,"  full  of  love,  no  doubt,  and  called 
Mary  her  sister,  as  all  will  endeavour  to  call  their  near  relations, 
who  have  felt  the  Lord  Jesus  to  be  the  resurrection  and  the 
life  themselves.     But  Martha  took  care,  in  the  midst  of  her 
zeal,  (as  we  should  always  do,)  to  behave  with  prudence ;  and 
therefore  she  called  her  sister  secretly,  saying.  The  Master  is 
come,  and  calleth  for  thee."    The  Master  is  come,  she  need  say 
no  more ;    Mary  knew  very  well  whom  she  meant :   for  holy 
souls   easily  understand  one  another  when    talking  of  their 
Master,  Jesus.     The  divine  Herbert  used  to  delight  (when 
speaking  of  Jesus)  to  say,  my  Master :  perhaps  he  learned  it 
cf  Martha,  who  said  here,  ''  The  Master  is  come,  and  calleth 
for  thee?"  But  what  is  this  thou  sayest,  Martha?   The  Master 
is  come,  and  calleth  for  thee?  Surely  a  person  of  thy  exalted 
piety  will  not  tell  a  deliberate  lie,  and,  in  order  to  induce  thy 
sister  to  come  to  Jesus,  acquaint  her  that  Jesus  called  her, 
when  indeed  he  did  not.     Thou  needest  not  put  thyself  to  such 
an  expense,  or  do  so  much  evil,  that  good  may  conic  of  it.  Only 
mention  Jesus  to  Mary,  and  let  her  know  for  a  certainty  that 
the  Master  is  indeed  come,  and  I  am  persuaded  she  will  sit  no 
longer.- -Martha,  no  doubt,  knew,  and  therefore  I  cannot  judge 
her  as  some  do,  as  though  in  her  haste  she  said  what  was  not 
true.     For  Jesus  might  bid  her  to  call  her  sister^  jthough  it  be 
not  directly  mentioned  in  this  chapter.     And  it  is  very  proba- 
ble that  our  Lord  did  inquire  after  Mary,  because  she  used  to 
take  such  great  delight  in  sitting  at  his  feet,  and  hearing  the 
gracious  words  that  proceeded  out  of  his  mouth.    *'  The  Master 
is  come,  (saith  Martha  to  her  sister,)  and  calleth  for  thee."  And 
so  say  I  to  all  poor  sinners,  Jesus,  your  Lord  and  Master,  year 
Prince  and  Saviour,  is  come,  come  unto  this  lower  world,  and 


XX XIX.]  THE   RR&URRECTION    OP  .LAZARU8.  451 

is  come  this  day  in  his  word,  and  by  me^  who  am  less  than  the 
least  of  all  his  servants,  and  calleth  for  you.  O  that  he  may 
also  come  in  the  demonstration  of  the  Spirit,  and  by  his  mighty 
power  bow  your  stubborn  hearts  and  wills  to  obey  the  call,  as 
holy  Mary  did  ! 

For  we  are  told,  ver.  29.  "  When  she  heard  that,  she  rose 
quickly,  and  came  to  Jesus."  Sinners,  when  will  you  do  so? 
Or  why  do  you  not  do  so  ?  How  know  you  whether  Jesus  will 
call  for  you  any  more,  before  he  calls  you  by  death  to  judg- 
ment ?  Linger,  O  linger  no  longer,  fly,  fly  for  your  lives. 
Arise  quickly,  and  with  Mary  come  to  Jesus.  She  obeyed  the 
call  so  very  speedily,  that  her  baste  was  taken  notice  of  by  her 
visitors.  "  The  Jews  then,  who  were  with  her  in  the  house, 
and  comforted  her,  when  they  saw  Mary  that  she  rose  up  has- 
tily (without  any  ceremony  at  all)  and  went  out,  followed  her, 
saying.  She  goeth  to  the  grave,  to  weep  there."  How  wisely 
does  our  Lord  permit  and  order  all  this,  to  bring  the  Jews  out 
to  behold  the  wonderful  miracle  that  he  was  about  to  perform ! 
Little  did  Mary  and  the  Jews  think  for  what  end,  they  were 
thus  providentially  led  out.  But  when  Jesus  hath  work  to  bo 
done,  he  will  bring  souls  to  the  place  where  he  intends  to  call 
them,  in  spite  of  men  or  devils.  But  how  does  Mary  behave 
when  she  comes  to  Jesus?  We  maybe  assured,  not  without 
great  humility.  No  wonder  then  we  are  told,  verse  32,  that 
"  when  she  saw  him,  she  immediately  fell  down  at  his  feet,  (a 
placo  Mary  had  been  used  to,  and  in  an  agony  of  grief  says, 
as  her  sister  had  done  before  her,)  Lord,  if  thou  hadst  been 
here,  my  brother  had  not  died."  Poor  Mary !  Her  concern 
was  great  indeed.  Though  she  were  a  holy  woman,  she  could 
not  well  bear  the  loss  of  her  brother.  She  knew  very  well, 
that  the  world  would  miss  him,  and  no  doubt  he  had  been  a 
kind  and  tender  brother  to  her.  But  I  am  afraid  she  was  sin- 
fully overcome  with  over-much  sorrow.  However,  had  we 
been  there,  the  sight  must  have  affected  us.  It  seems  to  have 
affected  the  visitors,  especially  the  blessed  Jesus.  He,  instead 
of  blaming  her,  for  her  tacitly  accusing  him  of  unkindness,  and 
for  not  coming  to  her  brother's  relief,  pities  and  sympathizes 
both  with  Mary  and  her  weeping  friends !  "  When  Jesus'  saw 
her  weep,  and  the  Jews  also  weeeping,  he  groaned  in  his  spirit, 
and  was  troubled."  Troubled :  not  with  any  sinful  pertur- 
bation, we  may  be  assured  ;  nothing  of  that  nature  coidd  pos- 
sibly be  in  his  sinless  soul.  And,  therefore,  some  have  judi- 
ciously enough  compared  the  trouble  our  Lord  now  felt,  to 
some  crystal  water  shaken  in  a  glass  or  bottle;  you  may 
shake  it,  but  there  will  be  no  sediment:  it  will  be  crystal 
water  still.  "  He  groaned  in  his  spirit."  I  do  not  see  why  this 
may  not  be  understood  of  his  praying  in  the  spirit,  which 
maketh  intercession  for  the  saints,  with  aXaXtrrcis  ^tvay  fioig, 
'' groanings  that  cannot  be  uttered."  Methinks  I  see  the  im- 
maculate Lamb  of  God,  secretly,  but  powerfully  agonizing 
with  his  Father;  bis  heart  js  big  with  sympathy!    At  length, 

2b2 


452  THB   RBSURRECTION    OP    LAZARU8.  [XXXIX 

out  of  the  fulness  of  it^  he  said,  vcr.  24.  ^' Where  have  ye  laid 
him?  They  (I  suppose  Mary  and  Martha)  say  unto  him. 
Lord,  come  and  see."  He  came,  he  saw,  "  He  wept/*  ver.  35. 
It  is  put  in  a  verse  by  itself,  that  we  might  pause  a  while,  and 
ask  why  Jesus  wept  ? 

He  wept,  to  shew  us,  that  it  was  no  sin  to  shed  a  tear  of 
love  and  resignation  at  the  grave  of  a  deceased  friend ;  he 
wept,  to  see  what  havock  sin  had  made  in  the  world,  and 
how  it  had  reduced  man,  who  was  originally  little  lower  than 
the  angels,  (by  making  him  subject  to  death,)  to  a  level  with 
the  beasts  that  perish :  but,  above  all,  he  wept  at  the  foresight 
of  the  people's  unbelief;  he  wept,  to  think  how  many  then 
present,  would  not  only  not  believe  on,  but  would  be  hardened, 
and  have  their  prejudices  increased  more  and  more  against 
him,  though  he  should  raise  Lazarus  from  the  dead  before  their 
eyes.  Well  then  may  ministers  be  excused,  who,  whilst  they 
are  preaching,  now  and  then  drop  a  few  tears,  at  the  con- 
sideration of  their  sermons  being,  through  the  penrerseness 
and  unbelief  of  many  of  their  audience,  a  savour  of  death  unto 
death,  instead  of  a  savour  of  life  unto  life.  Upon  a  like  occa- 
sion, Jesus  wept.  AVhat  an  affecting  sight  was  here  !"  Let  us 
for  a  while  suppose  ourselves  placed  amidst  these  holy 
mourners  ;  let  us  imagine  that  we  see  the  sepulchre  just  before 
us,  and  the  Jews,  and  Mary,  and  the  blessed  Jesus,  weeping 
round  it.  Surely,  the  most  obdurate  of  us  all  must  drop  a 
tear,  or  at  least  be  affected  with  the  sight;  we  find  that  it 
affected  those  who  were  really  by-standers :  for  then  said  the 
Jews,  ver.  36.  "  Behold,  how  he  loved  him."  And  did  they 
say.  Behold,  how  he  loved  him,  when  Jesus  only  shed  a  few 
tears  over  the  grave  of  his  departed  Lazarus  ?  Ck>me  then,  O 
sinners,  and  view  Christ  dying  and  pouring  out  hiis^  precious 
heart's  blood  for  you  upon  an  accursed  tree,  and  then  surely 
you  must  needs  cry  out,  Behold,  how  he  loved  us ! 

But,  alas,  though  all  were  affected,  yet,  it  seems,  all  were  not 
well  affected  at  seeing  Jesus  weep !  For  we  are  told,  verse  97. 
that  some  of  them  said,  '*  Could  not  this  man,  who  opened  the 
eyes  of  the  blind,  have  caused  that  even  this  man,  should  not 
have  died  ?"  One  would  imagine,  that  iSatan  himself  could 
scarce  have  uttered  a  more  perverse  speech :  every  word  is  full 
of  spite  and  rancour.  Could  not  this  man,  this  fellow,  this 
deceiver,  who  pretends  to  say  that  he  opened  the  eyes  of  the 
blind,  have  caused  that  this  man,  whom  he  seems  to  love  so, 
should  not  have  died?  Is  not  this  a  sufficient  proof  that  he  is 
a  cheat?  Have  we  catched  him  at  last?  Is  it  likely  that  he 
really  helped  others,  when  he  could  not  help  his  own  flriend  ?— 
O  how  patient  ought  the  servants  of  our  Lord  to  be !  and  bow 
may  they  expect  to  be  censured,  and  have  their  good  deeds 
questioned,  and  lessened,  when  their  blessed  Master  has  been 
thus  treated  before  them  !  However,  Jesus  will  do  good,  not- 
withstanding all  these  slights  put  upon  him ;  and  therefore,  again 
groaning  in  himself,  ^*  he  cometb  to  the  grave ;  it  was  a  cave. 


XXXIX.J  THB   RESURRECTION    OP    LAZARUS.  453 

(or  vaults  as  is  customary  in  great  families^)  and  a  stone  lay 
upon  it;  Jesus  said,  ver.  39,  "Take  ye  away  the  stone."  How 
gradually  does  our  Lord  proceed,  in  ord5r  to  engage  the  peo- 
ple's attention  the  more  !  Methinks  I  see  them  all  eye,  all  ear, 
and  eagerly  waiting  to  see  the  issue  of  this  affair.  But  Martha 
now  returning  with  the  rest  of  the  company,  seems  to  have  lost 
that  good  frame  which  she  was  in  when  she  went  to  call  her 
sister;  "She  saith  unto  him,  (ver.  39.)  Lord,  by  this  time  he 
stinketh :  for  he  hath  been  either  dead  or  buried  for  days."  O 
the  dismal  effects  of  carnal  reasoning !  How  naturally  do  wo 
fall  into  doubts  and  fears,  when  we  have  not  our  eye  simply 
directed  to  the  blessed  Jesus !  Martha,  instead  of  looking  up  to 
bim,  looks  down  into  the  grave,  and,  poring  upon  her  brother's 
stinking  corpse,  falls  into  a  fit  of  unbelief:  "  By  this  time  he 
stinketh ;"  and,  therefore,  a  sight  of  him  will  only  be  offensive. 
Perhaps  she  might  think  our  Lord  only  wanted  to  take  a  view 
of  her  brother  Lazarus ;  Jesus,  therefore,  to  give  her  yet  a  ftir- 
ther  hint  that  he  intended  to  do  something  extraordinary,  saith 
unto  her,  ver.  40.  "  Said  I  not  unto  thee,  that  if  thou  wouldest 
believe,  thou  shouldest  see  the  glory  of  G<>d  ?"  Our  Lord  speaks 
here  with  some  degree  of  warmth :  for  nothing  displeases  him 
more  than  the  unbelief  of  his  own  disciples.  "  Said  I  not  unto 
thee.  If  thou  wouldst  believe,  thou  shouldst  see  the  glory  of 
Grod  V  When  Christ  first  spake  these  words  unto  her,  we  are 
not  told  ;  it  might  be,  this  was  part  of  their  conversation  upon 
another  occasion  some  tinie  before:  however,  he  checks  her 
openly  for  her  unbelief  now :  for  those  whom  Jesus  loves,  must 
expect  to  be  rebuked  sharply  by  him,  whenever  they  dishonour 
him  by  unbelief.    The  reproof  is  taken. 

Without  making  any  more  objections,  "  They  took  away  the 
stone  from  the  place  where  the  dead  was  laid."  And  now  be- 
hold with  what  solemnity  the  holy  Jesus  prepares  himself  to 
execute  his  gracious  design !  '^  And  Jesus  lift  up  his  eyes,  and 
said.  Father,  I  thank  thee  that  thou  hast  heard  me ;  and  I  knew 
that  thou  hearest  me  always :  but  because  of  the  people  which 
stand  by,  I  said  it,  that  they  may  believe  that  thou  hast  sent 
me."  Who  can  express  with  what  fervour  and  intenseness  of 
spirit,  our  glorious  High-Priest  uttered  these  words !  They  are 
a  thanksgiving  arising  from  an  assurance  that  his  Father  had 
heard  him :  for  Christ,  as  Mediator,  was  inferior  to  the  Father. 
*^  I  knew  that  thou  hearest  me  always  (and  so  may  every  be- 
liever in  his  degree  say  too ;)  but  because  of  the  people  which 
stand  by,  I  said  it." — Said  what?  We  do  not  hear  that  Jesus 
said  any  thing  by  way  of  prayer  before ;  and  that  is  true,  if  we 
mean  vocally,  but  mentally  he  did  say  something,  even  when 
he  groaned  in  the  spirit  once  and  again,  and  was  troubled. 
There  is  a  way  of  praying,  e?en  when  we  do  not,  and  cannot 
speak.  **  Why  criest  thou,"  said  God  to  Moses;  though  we  do 
not  bear  that  he  spoke  one  single  word :  but  he  cried  in  his 
heart.  And  I  observe  this  for  the  comfort  of  some  weak,  but 
real  Christians,  who  think  they  never  pray,  unless  they  can 


454  TUB  RB8URRECT10N  OP  LAZARU8.  [XXXtX. 

haye  a  great  flow  of  words ;  bat  this  is  a  great  mistake :  for  we 
often  pray  best,  when  we  can  speak  least.  There  are  times 
when  the  heart  is  too  big  to  speak :  and  the  spirit  itself  maketh 
intercession  for  the  saints,  and  that  too  according  to  the  will  of 
God,  with  gri^anings  that  cannot  be  uttered.  Such  was  Han- 
nah's prayer  for  a  son,  **  She  spake  not,  only  her  lips  moved :" 
and  such  was  our  Lord's  way  of  praying  at  this  time.  And 
perhaps  tlie  soul  is  never  in  a  better  frame,  than  when,  in  a  holy 
stillness,  and  unspeakable  serenity,  it  can  put  itself  as  a  blank 
in  Jeisus'  hand,  for  him  to  stamp  on  it  just  what  he  pleases. 

And  now  the  hour  of  our  Saviour's  performing  this  long- 
expected  miracle,  is  come.  Verse  43,  ''When  he  thus  had 
spoken,  he  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  Lazarus,  come  forth."  With 
the  word  there  went  an  irresistible  power ;  he  spake,  and  it  was 
done :  he  cried,  and  behold,  "  He  that  was  dead  came  forth, 
bound  hand  and  foot  with  grave-clothes;  and  his  face  was 
bound  about  with  a  napkin."  What  a  sight  was  here !  Me- 
thinks  I  see  surprise  sit  upon  each  spectator's  face :  as  the 
body  rises,  their  wonder  rises  too.  See  how  they  gaze !  See 
how  their  looks  bespeak  the  language  of  astonished  hearts ;  and 
all  with  a  kind  of  silent,  but  expressive  oratory,  ready  to  say, 
What  manner  of  man  is  this?  Surely  this  is  the  Messiah  that 
was  to  come  into  the  world.  How  did  the  hearts  of  Martha  and 
Mary,  as  we  may  very  well  suppose,  leap  for  joy !  How  were 
they  ashamed  of  themselves,  for  charging  Jesus  foolishly,  and 
taxing  him  with  unkindness,  for  not  coming  to  prevent  their 
brother's  dying!  It  is  true,  Christ  suffered  him  to  die,  but 
behold  he  is  now  alive  again !  Jesus  never  denies  us  one  thicg, 
but  he  intends  to  give  us  something  better  in  the  stead  of  it 
Think  you  not  that  Martha  and  Mary  were  now  the  most  offi- 
cious to  obey  our  blessed  Lord's  command, "  Loose  him,  and  let 
him  go  ?"  That  same  power  that  had  raised  Lazarus  from  the 
dead,  might  have  also  taken  the  grave-clothes  from  him:  but 
Jesus  Christ  never  did,  and  never  will  work  a  needless  miracle. 
Others  could  unloose  his  grave-clothes,  but  Jesus  alone  could 
unloose  the  bands  of  death. 

And  now,  perhaps,  some  may  be  ready  to  ask.  What  news  has 
Lazarus  brought  from  the  other  world  ?  But  stop,  O  man,  thy 
vain  curiosity  !  It  is  forbidden,  and  therefore  useless  knowledge. 
The  scriptures  are  silent  concerning  it.  W  hy  should  we  desire 
to  be  wise  above  what  is  written?  It  becomes  us  rather  to  be 
wholly  employed  in  adoring  the  gracious  hand  of  that  mighty 
Redeemer  who  raised  him  from  the  dead,  and  to  see  (now  we 
have  heard  the  history)  what  improvement  we  can  make  of  such 
a  remarkable  and  instructive  transaction. 

Would  to  God  that  my  preaching  upon  the  resurrection  of 
Lazarus  to-day,  may  have  the  same  blessed  effects  upon  you,  as 
the  sight  of  it  had  upon  some  of  the  standers-by:  for  we  are 
told,  ver.  45.  ''  Then  many  of  the  Jews  who  came  to  Mary,  and 
bad  seen  the  things  which  Jesus  did,  believed  on  him."  A  pro- 
Atable  visit  this !  the  best,  no  doubt,  that  they  ever  paid  io 


XXXIX.]  THB   RESURRECTION   OP   LAZARUS.  455 

their  lives.  And  this  was  in  answer  to  onr  Saviour's  prayer, 
**  fiat  because  of  the  people  who  stand  by,  I  said  it^  that  they 
may  believe  that  thou  hast  sent  me."  One  wonid  imagine^  that 
all  who  saw  this  miracle^  were  induced  thereby  really  to  believe 
on  him :  but,  alas !  I  could  almost  say,  that  I  can  tell  you  of  a 
greater  miracle  than  raising  Lazarus  from  the  dead.  And  what 
is  that  ?  Why,  that  some  of  these  very  persons  who  were  on  the 
spot,  instead  of  believing  on  him,  ^'  went  their  way  to  the  Pha- 
risees, and  told  them  what  Jesus  had  done,"  ver.  46.  It  was  so 
far  from  convincing  them,  that  it  only  excited  their  envy,  stirred 
up  the  whole  hell  of  their  self-righteous  hearts,  and  made  them, 
from  that  day  forward,  "take  counsel  together"  to  execute 
what  they  had  long  before  designed,  to  put  the  innocent  Jesus 
to  death.  See  how  busy  they  are,  ver.  47.  "  Then  gathered  the 
chief  priests  and  the  Pharisees  a  council,  and  said.  What  do 
we?  for  this  man  doeth  many  miracles."  Envy  itself,  it  seems, 
could  not  deny  that.  And  need  they  say  then,  "  What  do  we," 
or  what  should  we  do  ?  Believe  in,  to  be  sure,  and  submit  to 
bim;  take  up  the  cross,  and  follow  him.  No;  on  the  contrary, 
say  they,  ver.  48.  "  If  we  let  him  thus  alone,  (which  they  would 
not  have  done  so  long,  had  not  God  put  a  hook  in  the  levia- 
than's jaws)  all  men  will  believe  on  him."  And  suppose  they 
did?  then  all  men  would  be  blessed  indeed,  and  have  a  title 
to  true  happiness.  No.  say  they,  "then  the  Romans  shall 
come  and  take  away  both  our  place  and  nation."  But  were 
not  the  Romans  come  already  ?  Were  they  not  at  this  time  tri- 
butaries to  Cesar?  But  they  were  afraid  of  the  church,  as  well 
as  the  state :  "  They  will  come  and  take  away  our  place,"  our 
place  of  worship ;  and,  consequently,  they  look  upon  Jesus 
Christ,  and  his  proceedings  and  adherents,  as  dangerous  both 
to  church  and  state. 

This  has  been  always  the  method  of  Pharisees  and  high- 
priests,  when  they  have  been  taking  counsel  against  the  Lord 
Jesus,  and  his  dear  anointed  ones.  But  they  need  not  have 
been  afraid  on  this  account ;  for  our  Saviour's  kingdom  neither 
was  nor  is  of  this  world  :  and  the  only  way  to  have  preserved 
their  place  and  nation,  was  to  have  countenanced,  and  as  much 
as  in  them  lay,  caused  all  to  believe  on  Jesus.  How  miserably 
were  they  out  in  their  politics !  The  death  of  Jesus,  which  they 
thought  would  save,  was  the  grand  cause  of  the  utter  destruc- 
tion .  both  of  their  place  and  nation :  and  so  will  all  politics 
formed  against  Christ  and  his  gospel  end  at  last  in  the  destruc- 
tion of  those  who  contrived  them. 

O  the  desperate  wickedness  and  treachery  of  man^s  deceitful 
heart !  Where  are  the  scribes,  where  are  the  infidels,  where  are 
the  letter-learned  disputers  of  this  world,  who  are  daily  calling 
for  a  repetition  of  miracles,  in  order  to  confirm  and  evidence 
the  truth  of  the  Christian  religion?  Surely,  if  they  believe  not 
Moses  and  the  prophets,  neither  would  they  believe,  though  one 
rose  from  the  dead.  Here  was  one  raised  from  the  dead  before 
many  witnesses,  and  yet  all  those  witnesses  did  by  no  means 


450  THE   HB8URREGTI0N    OP   LAZARUS.  [XXXIX. 

believe  on  Jesus :  for  dirine  faith  is  not  wrought  in  the  heart  by 
moral  persuasion  (though  moral  suasion  is  very  often  made  use 
of  as  a  means  to  convey  it ;)  faith  is  the  peculiar  gift  of  Crod : 
BO  one  can  come  to  Jesus,  unless  the  Father  draw  him ;  and, 
therefore,  that  I  may  draw  near  the  close  of  this  discourse,  let 
me  shut  up  all  with  a  word  of  exhortation. 

Come,  ye  dead,  christless,  unconverted  sinners,  come  and  see 
the  place  where  they  laid  the  body  of  the  deceased  Lazarus ; 
behold  him  laid  out,  bound  hand  and  foot  with  graye-clothes, 
locked  up  and  stinking  in  a  dark  cave,  with  a  great  stone 
placed  on  the  top  of  it !  View  him  again  and  again ;  go  nearer 
to  him ;  be  not  afraid ;  smell  him,  ah !  how  he  stinks.  Stop  there 
now,  pause  awhile ;  and  whilst  thou  art  gazing  upon  the  corpse 
of  Lazarus,  give  me  leave  to  tell  thee  with  great  plainness,  bat 
greater  love,  that  this  dead,  bound,  entombed,  stinking  carcase, 
is  but  a  faint  representation  of  thy  poor  soul  in  its  natural 
state :  for,  whether  thou  believest  it  or  not,  thy  spirit  which  thou 
bearest  about  with  thee,  sepulchred  in  flesh  and  blood,  is  as 
literally  dead  to  God,  and  as  truly  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins, 
as  the  body  of  Lazarus  was  in  the  cave.  Was  he  bound  hand 
and  foot  with  grave-clothes  ?  So  art  thou  bound  hand  and  foot 
with  thy  corruptions :  and  as  a  stone  was  laid  on  the  sepulchre, 
so  is  there  a  stone  of  unbelief  upon  tby  stupid  heart.  Perhaps 
thou  hast  lain  in  this  state,  not  only  four  days,  but  many  years, 
stinking  in  God's  nostrils.  And  what  is  still  more  affecting, 
thou  art  as  unable  to  raise  thyself  out  of  this  loathsome,  dead 
state,  to  a  life  of  righteousness  and  true  holiness,  as  ever  Laza- 
rus was  to  raise  himself  from  the  cave  in  which  he  lay  so  long. 
Thou  mayest  try  the  power  of  thy  own  boasted  free-will,  and 
the  force  and  energy  of  moral  persuasion  and  rational  arguments, 
(which,  without  all  doubt,  have  their  proper  place  in  religion ;) 
but  all  thy  efforts,  exerted  with  ever  so  much  vigour,  will  prove 
quite  fruitless  and  abortive,  till  that  same  Jesus,  who  said, 
'•  Take  away  the  stone,"  and  cried, "  Lazarus,  come  forth,"  comes 
by  his  mighty  power,  removes  the  stone  of  unbelief,  speaks  life 
to  thy  dead  soul,  looses  thee  from  the  fetters  of  thy  sins  and 
corruptions,  and,  by  the  influences  of  his  blessed  Spirit,  enables 
thee  to  arise,  and  to  walk  in  the  way  of  his  holy  commandments. 
And  O  that  he  would  now  rend  the  heavens,  and  come  down 
aoiongst  you  !  O  that  there  may  be  a  stirring  among  the  dry 
bones  this  day !  O  that,  whilst  I  am  speaking,  and  saying, 
''Dead  sinners,  come  forth,"  a  power,  an  almighty  power, might 
accompany  the  word,  and  cause  you  to  emerge  into  new  life ! 

If  the  Lord  should  vouchsafe  me  such  a  mercy,  and  but  one 
single  soul,  in  this  great  congregation,  should  arise  and  shake 
himself  from  the  dust  of  his  natural  state ;  according  to  the 
present  frame  of  my  heart,  I  should  not  care  if  preaching  this 
sermon  here  in  the  fields,  were  an  occasion  of  hastening  my 
death,  as  raising  Lazarus  hastened  the  death  of  my  blessed 
Master.  For  methinks  death,  in  some  respects,  is  more  tole- 
rable, than  to  see  poor  sinners  day  by  day  lying  sepulchred, 


XXXIX.  THB  RESURRECTION   OP  LAZARUS.  457 

dead  and  stinking'  in  sin.  O  that  you  saw  how  loathsome  you 
are  in  the  sight  of  God,  whilst  you  continue  in  your  natural 
state  !  I  believe  you  would  not  so  contentedly  hug  your  chains^ 
and  refuse  to  be  set  at  liberty. 

Methinks  I  see  some  of  you  affected  at  this  part  of  my  dis- 
course :  What  say  you  ?  Are  there  not  some  ready  to  complain, 
Alas  I  we  have  some  relations  present,  who  are  so  notoriously 
wicked,  that  they  not  only  hug  their  chains,  but  make  a  mock 
of  sin ;  and  stink,  not  only  in  the  sight  of  God,  but  man.  •  Dear 
souls !  you  are  ready  to  urge  this  as  a  reason  why  Jesus  will 
not  raise  them ;  and  think  it  hard,  perhaps,  that  Jesus  does  not 
come,  in  answer  to  your  repeated  groans  and  prayers,  to  con- 
vert and  save  them.  But  what  Jesus  said  unto  Martha,  I  say 
unto  you,  '^  Believe^  and  you  shall  see  the  glory  of  God." 
Think  it  not  a  thing  incredible,  that  Grod  should  raise  their 
dead  souls.  Think  not  hard  of  Jesus  for  delaying  an  answer  to 
your  prayers  :  assure  yourselves  he  heareth  you  always.  And 
who  knows,  but  this  day  Jesus  may  visit  some  of  your  dear 
relations'  hearts,  upon  whose  account  you  have  travailed  in 
birth,  till  Christ  be  formed  in  them  ?  You  have  already  sympa- 
thized with  Martha  and  Mary,  in  their  doubts  and  fears  ;  who 
knows  but  you  may  also  be  partakers  of  that  joy  which  their 
souls  experienced,  when  they  received  their  risen  brother  into 
their  longing  arms? 

O  christless  souls,  you  do  not  know  what  grief  your  conti- 
nuance in  sin  occasions  to  your  godly  relations !  You  do  not 
know  how  you  grieve  the  heart  of  Jesus.  I  beseech  you  give 
him  no  fresh  cause  to  weep  over  you  upon  account  of  your  un- 
belief: let  him  not  again  groan  in  his  spirit,  and  be  troubled. 
Behold  how  he  has  loved  you,  even  so  as  to  lay  down  his  life 
for  you.  What  could  he  do  more  ?  I  pray  you  therefore,  dead 
sinners,  come  forth ;  arise,  and  sup  with  Jesus.  This  was  an  ho- 
nour conferred  on  Lazarus,  and  the  same  honour  awaits  you : 
not  that  you  shall  sit  down  with  him  personally  in  this  life,  as 
Lazarus  did ;  but  you  shall  sit  down  with  him  at  the  table  of 
his  ordinances,  especially  at  the  table  of  the  Lord's  supper^ 
and  ere  long  sit  down  with  him  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 
'  Happy,  thrice  happy  ye,  who  are  already  raised  from  spiri- 
tual death,  and  have  an  earnest  of  an  infinitely  better  and  more 
glorious  resurrection  in  your  hearts.  You  know  a  little,  how 
delightful  it  must  have  been  to  Martha,  and  Mary,  and  Lazarus, 
to  sit  down  with  the  blessed  Jesus  here  below ;  but  how  infi- 
nitely more  delightful  will  it  be,  to  sit  down  not  only  with  Mary 
and  Martha,  but  with  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  and  edl  your 
other  dear  brethren  and  sisters,  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  Do 
you  not  long  for  that  time,  when  Jesus  shall  say  unto  you,  **  Come 
up  hither?"  Well,  blessed  be  God  !  yet  a  little  while,  and  that 
same  Jesus  who  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  Lazarus  come  forth  t 
shall  with  the  same  voice,  and  with  the  same  power,  speak  unto 
all  that  a^  in  their  graves,  and  they  shall  come  forth.  That  all 
who  bear  me  this  day,  may  be  then  enabled  to  lift  up  their 


rai  Biit?  i^tiTT  i.:^^ri*::^«  ^  r 


2L 


i**^»: .    »n»:  's^f.inK  "uaz  -Hit  liii  it 

•  *  — 

.  iit*»*^:  ful-T  ■i.vfni*.  3ia"T  •'t'jnsi  rT-iniK  r**''"  iir  Jii 


:uif 


<ZRMO>  XL 


A    .-: 


**rir7  ti"**r*r7^^   7=2 


:ii:    :? 


i::5- 


2  1 T  *  *  i.*  *      i.*Z     •"!—•?  HZ" 


5  pr:r_>f.   tiJ.ra  tie 


.  V     _r:     .-- 


r  -'fij.  zz:   "»i.-:-i3< 


■/:l  tL^:;-  h?ht  wii*a  'nt  o:  "L*  «^£t  either  iz  pr^<.::-e  :r  j>rac- 
t>,<t.  H^  'x,f:\\h*:r  caiiei  nor  u*<d  riezi  as  scm-.-^.  bnt  as 
in^,ri*\s:  ar.d  he  rt^oal^'i  Lis  secreTs  10  tiez:  ir:—  --^  to  'ine. 
H^:  fjp^.T:f.4  their  crifJer^^ar-dl'iz^,  ihit  ihrv  n;;i:  iLr.i^rjMnd 
t.^i-,  r.r/r'r^\nrfT^. ;  oxplair.vi  to  t?-er:i  the  ii-liia  nijsterlc^  of"  the 
Jcin'/dom  of  God,  when  he  sp'tke  to  others  in  r^r  ii-'es  :  ^av.  he 
I>*rc4m';  the  .cervanl  of  them  all,  ar*i  e\cn  o^cdescfn.ic-:  to  wa<h 
their  f'M.  The  thoughts  of  pirtiur  with  so  dc.r  :.zd  lovin^a 
Master  a-i  this,  e>pecialJy  for  a  ion::  season,  m->:  needs  anect 
them  njweh.  When  on  a  ceriuin  ocrasioo  he  inter-ded  to  be 
ahserit  from  them  only  for  a  ni^'h",  we  are  told  he  w.is  obliged 
to  constrain  them  to  leave  him  ;  no  wonder  then,  thai  when  be 
ii'Mv  informer!  them  he  must  entirely  goauay^and  that  the  Pha- 
TiHccH  ill  his  absence  .should  put  them  out  of  their  synasoeues, 
nnd  excommunicate  them ;  yea,  that  the  time  should  come, 
that  whosoever  killed  them,  would  think  they  did  God  service, 
(it  prophecy,  one  would  imagine,  in  an  especial  manner  designed 
for  the  Miifferinp^  ministers  of  this  generation;)  no  wonder,  I  sav, 
conHiderin^'  all  this,  that  we  are  told,  ver.  6.  sorrow  bad  filled 
their  hearts :  '^  Because  I  have  said  these  things  unto  you,  sor- 
TOW  hath  filled  your  hearts."  The  expression  is  very  emphati- 
cal ;  their  hearts  were  so  full  of  concern,  that  they  were  ready 
to  burst     III  order,  therefore,  to  reconcile  them  to  this  mouru- 


Astboagb .    ^  *     , 

wan  oat  of  anger ;  no,  it  is  for  your  sakes,  for  your  profit,  that  I 
CO  %VP^^'^<S^^  if  I  go  not  away,  if  I  die  not  upon  the  cross  for 
S^p^  >ind  ribe  again  for  your  justification,  and  ascend  into 

Z^^  \ake  intercession,  and  plead  my  merits  before  my 

7  P0  ff  the  Ckmiforter,  the  Holy  Ghost,  will  not,  can- 


XL.]  OF  8IN^   RIGHTEOUSNESS^   AND  JUDGMENT.  459 

not  come  unto  you ;  but  if  I  depart,  I  will  send  bim  unto  you. 
And  that  they  might  know  what  he  has  to  do,  **  When  he  is 
come,  he  will  reprove  the  world  of  sin,  and  of  righteousness, 
and  of  judgment." 

The  person  referred  to  in  the  words  of  the  text,  is  plainly  the 
Comforter,  the  Holy  Ghost ;  and  the  promise  was  first  made  to 
our  Lord's  apostles.  But  though-  it  was  primarily  made  to 
them,  and  was  literally  and  remarkably  fulfilled  at  the  day  of 
Pentecost,  when  the  Holy  Ghost  came  down  as  a  mighty 
rushing  wind,  and  also  when  three  thousand  were  pricked  to 
the  heart  by  Peter's  preaching ;  yet,  as  the  apostles  were  the 
representatives  of  the  whole  body  of  believers,  we  must  infer, 
that  this  promise  must  be  looked  upon  as  spoken  to  us,  and  to 
our  children,  and  to  as  many  as  the  Lord  our  God  shall  call. 

My  desi»:n  from  these  words,  is  to  shew  the  manner  in  which 
the  Holy  Ghost  generally  works  upon  the  hearts  of  those,  who, 
through  grace,  are  made  vessels  of  mercy,  and  translated  from 
the  kingdom  of  darkness  into  the  kingdom  of  God's  dear  Son. 

I  say,  generally :  For,  as  God  is  a  sovereign  agent,  his  sacred 
Spirit  bloweth  not  only  on  whom,  but  when  and  how  it  listeth. 
Therefore,  far  be  it  from  me  to  confine  the  Almighty  to  one  way 
of  acting,  or  say  that  all  undergo  an  equal  degree  of  convic* 
tion :  no,  there  is  a  holy  variety  in  God's  methods  of  calling 
home  his  elect.  But  this  we  may  affirm  assuredly,  that; 
wherever  there  is  a  work  of  true  conviction  and  conversion 
wrought  upon  a  sinner's  heart,  the  Holy  Ghost,  whether  by  a 
greater  or  less  degree  of  inward  soul-trouble,  does  that  which 
our  Lord  Jesus  told  the  disciples,  in  the  words  of  the  text,  that 
be  should  do  when  he  came. 

If  any  of  you  ridicule  inward  religion,  or  think  there  is  no 
such  thing  as  our  feeling  or  receiving  the  Holy  Ghost,  I  fear 
my  preaching  will  be  quite  foolishness  to  you,  and  that  you 
will  understand  me  no  more  than  if  I  spoke  to  you  in  an 
unknown  tongue.  But  as  the  promise  in  the  text,  is  made  to 
the  world,  and  as  I  know  it  will  be  fulfilling  till  time  shall  be 
no  more,  I  shall  proceed  to  explain  the  general  way  whereby 
the  Holy  Ghost  works  upon  every  converted  sinner's  heart; 
and  I  hope  that  the  Lord,  even  whilst  I  am  speaking,  will  be 
pleased  to  fulfil  it  in  many  of  your  hearts.  "  And  when  he  is 
come,  he  will  reprove  the  world  of  sin,  of  righteousness,  and  of 
jodgment." 

The  word,  which  we  translate  reprove,  ought  to  be  rendered 
convince  ;  and  in  the  original  it  implies  a  conviction  by  way  of 
argumentation,  and  coming  with  a  power  upon  the  mind  equal 
to  a  demonstration.  A  great  many  scofiers  of  these  last  days, 
will  ask  such  as  they  term  pretenders  to  the  Spirit,  how  they 
fed  the  Spirit,  and  how  they  know  the  Spirit?  They  might  as 
well  ask,  how  they  know,  and  how  they  feel,  the  sun  wlien  it 
shines  upon  the  body?  for  with  equal  power  and  demon- 
stratioii  does  the  Spirit  of  God  work  upon  and  convince  the 
MttL    And, 


400  THB  HOLY  SPIRIT  CONVINCING  THE  WORLD  [XL. 

First,  It  coDTinces  of  sin ;  and  generally  of  some  enormous 
sin,  the  worst  perhaps  the  convicted  person  ever  was  guilty  of. 
Thus,  when  our  Lord  was  conversing  with  .the  woman  of  Sa- 
maria,  he  convinced  her  first  of  her  adultery :  ''  Woman,  go 
call  thy  husband.  The  woman  answered,  ana  said,  I  have  no 
husband.  Jesus  said  unto  her.  Thou  hast  well  said,  I  have 
no  husband ;  for  thou  hast  had  five  husbands,  and  he  whom 
thou  now  hast,  is  not  thy  husband  :  in  this  saidst  thou  truly." 
With  this  there  went  such  a  p'owerful  conviction  of  all  her 
other  actual  sins,  that  soon  after  "  she  left  her  water-pot,  and 
went  her  way  into  the  city,  and  saith  to  the  men.  Come,  and 
see  a  man  that  told  me  all  things  that  ever  I  did  :  is  not  this 
the  Christ?"  Thus  our  Lord  aJso  dealt  with  the  persecutor 
Saul :  he  convinced  him  first  of  the  horrid  sin  of  persecution ; 
''  Saul,  Saul,  why  persecutest  thou  me  V  Such  a  sense  of  all 
his  other  sins,  probably  at  the  same  time  revived  in  his  mind, 
that  immediately  he  died ;  that  is,  died  to  all  his  false  confi- 
dences, and  was  thrown  into  such  an  agony  of  soul,  that  be 
continued  three  days,  and  neither  did  eat  nor  drink.  This  is 
the  method  the  Spirit  of  God  generally  takes  in  dealing  with 
sinners ;  he  first  convinces  them  of  some  heinous  actual  sio, 
and  at  the  same  time  brings  all  their  other  sins  into  remem- 
brance, and,  as  it  were,  sets  them  in  battle-array  before  them : 
"  When  he  is  come,  he  will  reprove  the  world  of  sin." 

And  was  it  ever  thus  with  you,  my  dear  hearers  ?  (For  I 
must  question  you  as  I  go  along,  because  I  intend,  by  the 
Divine  help,  to  preach  not  only  to  your  heads,  but  your  hearts.) 
Did  the  Spirit  of  God  ever  bring  all  your  sins  thus  to  remem- 
brance, and  make  you  cry  out  to  God,  ''  Thou  w'ritest  bitter 
things  against  me  ?"  Did  your  actual  sins  ever  appear  before 
you,  as  though  drawn  in  a  map  ?  If  not,  you  have  great  rea- 
son (unless  you  were  sanctified  from  the  womb)  to  suspect 
that  you  are  not  convicted,  much  more  not  converted,  and  that 
the  promise  of  the  text  was  never  yet  fulfilled  in  your  hearts. 

Farther :  When  the  Comforter  comes  into  a  sinner's  heart, 
though  it  generally  convinces  the  sinner  of  his  actual  sin  first, 
yet  it  leads  him  to  see  and  bewail  his  original  sin,  the  fountain 
from  which  all  these  polluted  streams  do  flow. 

Though  every  thing  in  the  earth,  air,  and  water;  every  thing 
both  without  and  within,  concur  to  prove  the  truth  of  the 
assertion  in  the  scripture,  "  in  Adam  we  all  have  died  ;"  yet 
most  are  so  hardened,  through  the  deceitfulness  of  sin,  that 
notwithstanding  they  may  give  an  assent  to  the  truth  of  the 
proposition  in  their  heads,  yet  they  never  fdt  it  really  in  their 
hearts.  Nay,  some  in  words  professedly  deny  it,  though  their 
works  too,  too  plainly  prove  them  to  be  degenerate  sons  of  a 
degenerate  father.  But  when  the  Comforter,  the  Spirit  of  God, 
arrests  a  sinner,  and  convinces  him  of  sin,  all  carnal  reasoning 
against  original  corruption,  every  proud  and  high  imaginatkHi, 
which  cxalteth  itself  against  that  doctrine,  is  immediately 
thrown  down ;  and  he  is  made  to  cry  out,  ''  Who  shall  deliver 


XL.]  OP   BIN,   RIGHTEOUSNESS,   AND   JUDGMENT/  461 

me  from  the  body  of  this  death  ?"  He  now  finds  that  conca- 
pisceuce  is  sin;  and  does  not  so  mnch  bewail  his  actaal 
sin^,  as  the  inward  perverseness  of  his  heart,  which  he  now 
finds  not  only  to  be  an  enemy  to,  but  also  direct  enmity 
against,  God. 

And  did  the  Comforter,  my  dear  friends,  ever  come  with  such 
a  convincing  power  as  this  into  your  hearts  ?  Were  yon  ever 
made  to  see  and  feel,  that  in  your  fiesh  dwelleth  no  good  thing; 
that  you  are  conceived  and  bom  in  sin ;  that  you  are  by  nature 
children  of  wrath;  that  God  would  be  just  if  he  damned  you, 
though  you  never  committed  an  actual  sin  in  your  lives?  So 
often  as  you  have  been  at  church  and  sacrament,  did  you  evier 
feelingly  confess,  that  there  was  no  health  in  you ;  that  the 
remembrance  of  your  original  and  actual  sins  was  grievous 
unto  you,  and  the  burden  of  them  intolerable?  If  not,  you 
have  been  only  oflfering  to  God  vain  oblations ;  you  never  yet 
prayed  in  your  lives ;  the  Comforter  never  yet  came  efiectually 
into  your  souls :  consequently  you  are  not  in  the  faith,  properly 
so  called ;  no,  you  are  at  present  in  a  state  of  death  and  dam- 
nation. 

Again,  the  Comforter,  when  he  comes  efiectually  to  work  upon 
a  sinner,  not  only  convinces  him  of  the  sin  of  his  nature,  and 
the  sin  of  his  life,  but  also  of  the  sin  of  his  duties. 

We  all  naturally  are  legalists,  thinking  to  be  justified  by  the 
works  of  the  law.  When  somewhat  awakened  by  the  terrors  of 
the  Lord,  we  immediately,  like  the  Pharisees  of  old,  go  about  to 
establish  our  own  righteousness,  and  think  we  shall  find  acep- 
tance  with  God,  if  we  seek  it  with  tears :  finding  ourselves 
damned  by  nature  and  our  actual  sins,  we  then  think  to  recom- 
mend ourselves  to  God  by  our  duties,  and  hope,  by  our  doings 
of  one  kind  or  another,  to  inherit  eternal  life.  But,  when- 
ever the  Comforter  comes  into  the  heart,  it  convinces  the  soul 
of  these  false  rests,  and  makes  the  sinner  to  see  that  all  his 
righteousnesses  are  but  as  filthy  rags;  and  that,  for  the  most  pom- 
pous services,  he  deserves  no  better  a  doom  than  that  of  the 
unprofitable  servant,  "  to  be  thrown  into  outer  darkness,  wh^« 
is  weeping,  and  wailing,  and  gnashing  of  teeth.'' 

And  was  this  degree  of  conviction  ever  wrought  in  any  of 
your  souls  ?  Did  the  Comforter  ever  come  into  your  hearts,  so 
as  to  make  you  sick  of  your  duties,  as  well  ^s  your  sins  f  Were 
you  ever,  with  the  great  apostle  of  the  Gentiles,  made  to  abhoi 
your  own  righteousness,  which  is  by  the  law,  and  acknowledge 
that  you  deserve  to  be  damned,  though  you  should  give  all  your 
goods  to  feed  the  poor  ?  Were  you  made  to  feel,  that  your  very 
repentance  needed  to  be  repented  of,  and  that  every  thing  in 
yourselves  is  but  dung  and  dross  ?  And  that  all  the  arguments 
you  can  fetch  for  mercy,  must  be  out  of  the  heart  and  pure  un- 
merited love  of  God  ?  Were  you  ever  made  to  lie  at  the  feet  of 
sovereign  Grace,  and  to  say,  Lord,  if  thou  wilt,  thou  mayest 
save  me ;  if  not,  thou  mayest  justly  damn  me ;  I  have  nothing 
(o  plead,  I  can  in  no  wise  justify  myself  in  thy  sight ;  my  best 


I 


402  TNB    HOLY    SI'IRIT    CONVINCING    TH  B    WORLD  P^^l 

performances,  I  see,  will  condeniD  mc ;  and  all  I  have  to  depend 
upon  is  thy  free  grace  ?  What  say  you  1  Was  this  ever,  or  is 
this  now,  the  habitual  language  of  your  hearts?  You  have  been 
frequently  at  the  temple  ;  but  did  you  ever  approach  it  in  the 
temper  of  the  poor  Publican,  and,  after  you  have  done  all, 
acknowledge  that  you  have  done  nothing  ;  and,  upon  a  feeiing 
experimental  sense  of  your  own  unwortbincss  and  sinfulness 
every  way,  smite  upon  your  breasts,  and  say,  "  God  be  merci- 
ful to  us,  sinners  ?"  If  you  never  were  thus  minded,  the  Com- 
forter never  yet  effectually  came  into  your  souls,  you  are  out 
of  Christ;  and  if  God  should  require  your  souls  in  that  coodi- 
tiun,  he  would  be  no  belter  to  you  than  a  consuming  Arc. 

But  tbcre  is  a  fourth  sin,  of  which  the  Comforter,  when  he 
comes,  convinces  the  soul,  and  which  alone  (it  is  very  remark- 
able) our  Lord  mentions,  as  though  it  were  the  only  sin  worth 
mentioning  ;  for  indeed  it  is  the  root  of  all  other  sins  whatso- 
ever ;  it  is  the  reigning  as  well  as  the  damning  sin  of  the  world. 
And  what  now  do  you  imagine  that  sin  may  be  ?  It  is  that 
cursed  sin,  that  rout  of  all  other  evils,  I  mean  the  sin  of  unbelief. 
Says  our  Lord,  ver.  9.  "Of  sin,  because  they  believe  not  on  me." 

But  does  the  Christian  world,  or  any  of  yoa  that  hear  mo  this 
day,  want  llie  Holy  Ghost  to  convince  you  of  unbelief?  Are 
there  any  inBdcIs  here?  Yes,  (O  that  I  hud  not  too  great  rea- 
son to  think  so  !)  I  fear  most  are  such  :  not  indeed  sucb  infidels 
R8  professedly  deny  the  Lord  that  bought  lis,  (though  I  fear  too 
many  even  of  such  monsters  are  in  every  country;)  but  I  mcnn 
such  unbelievers,  that  have  no  more  fuilh  in  Christ  than  the 
devils  themselves.  Perhaps  you  may  think  you  believe,  \k- 
cause  you  repeat  the  Creed,  or  subscribe  to  a  Confession  of 
Faith  ;  because  you  go  to  church  or  meeting,  receive  the  sacra- 
ment, and  are  taken  into  full  communion.  These  arc  blessed 
privileges  ;  but  all  this  may  be  done,  without  our  being  true  be- 
lievers. And  I  know  not  how  to  detect  your  fal.se  hypocritical 
faith  better,  than  by  putting  to  you  this  question  :  How  long 
have  you  believed  ?  Would  not  most  of  you  say,  As  long  as  we 
can  remember;  we  never  did  disbelieve?  Then  this  is  a  certain 
sign  that  you  have  no  true  faith  at  all ;  no,  not  so  much  as  a 
grain  of  mustard-seed :  for,  if  you  believe  now,  (unless  yoa 
were  sanctified  from  your  infancy,  which  is  the  case  of  some,) 
you  must  know  tbjNt  there  was  a  time  in  which  you  did  not  be* 
lieve  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  if  ever 
you  received  it,  convinced  you  of  this.  Eternal  Truth  has  de- 
clared, "  When  he  is  come,  he  will  convince  the  world  of  Kin, 
because  they  believe  not  on  mo," 

None  of  us  believe  by  nature  :  but  after  the  Holy  Ghost  has 
convinced  us  of  the  sin  of  our  natures,  and  the  sin  of  our  lives 
and  duties,  in  order  to  convince  us  of  our  utter  inability  to  save 
ourselves,  and  that  we  must  be  beholden  to  God,  as  for  every 
thing  else,  so  for  faith,  (without  which  it  is  impossible  to  please, 
or  be  saved  by,  Ctirist,)  he  convinces  us  also,  that  we  have  no 
faith.     "  Dost  thou  believe  on  the  Son  of  God  ?  is  the  grand 


XL.]  OF  SIN,   RIGHTI^0U8NB8S,   AND  JUDGMENT.  463 

question  which  the  Holy  Ghost  now  pats  to  the  soul :  at  the 
same  time  he  works  with  such  power  and  demonstration,  that 
the  soul  sees,  and  is  obliged  to  confess,  that  it  has  no  faith. 

This  is  a  thing  little  thought  of  by  most  who  call  themselves 
believers.  They  dream  they  arc  Christians,  because  they  live 
in  a  Christian  country  :  if  they  were  bom  Turks,  they  would 
believe  on  Mahomet ;  for  what  is  that  which  men  commonly  call 
faith,  but  an  outward  consent  to  the  established  religion  ?  But 
do  not  you  thus  deceive  your  own  selves  ;  true  faith  is  quite 
another  thing.  Ask  yourselves,  therefore,  whether  or  not  the 
Holy  Ghost  ever  powerfully  convinced  you  of  the  sin  of  unbe- 
lief ?  You  are  perhaps  so  devout  (you  may  imagine)  as  to  get  a 
catalogue  of  sins  ;  which  you  look  over,  and  confess  in  a  formal 
manner,  as  often  as  you  go  to  the  holy  sacrament :  but  among 
all  your  sins,  did  you  ever  once  confess  and  bewail  that  damn- 
ing sin  of  unbelief?  Were  you  ever  made  to  cry  out,  "Lord, 
give  me  faith ;  Lord,  give  me  to  believe  on  thee  ;  O  that  I  had 
faith  !  O  that  I  could  believe !"  If  you  never  were  thus  dis- 
tressed, at  least,  if  you  never  saw  and  felt  that  you  had  no  faith, 
it  is  a  certain  sign  that  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  Comforter,  never 
came  into  and  worked  savingly  upon  your  souls. 

But  is  it  not  odd,  that  the  Holy  Ghost  should  be  called  a 
Comforter,  when  it  is  plain,  by  the  experience  of  all  God's 
children,  that  this  work  of  conviction  is  usually  attended  with 
sore  inward  conflicts,  and  a  great  deal  of  soul- trouble  ?  I  an- 
swer. The  Holy  Ghost  may  well  be  termed  a  Comforter,  even  in 
this  work  ;  because  it  is  the  only  way  to,  and  ends  in,  true  solid 
comfort.  Blessed  are  they  that  are  thus  convicted  by  him,  for 
they  shall  be  comforted.  Nay,  not  only  so,  but  there  is  present 
comfort,  even  in  the  midst  of  these  convictions :  the  soul  secretly 
rejoices  in  the  sight  of  its  own  misery,  blesses  God  for  bringing 
it  out  of  darkness  into  light,  and  looks  ron;\'ard  with  a  comfort- 
able prospect  of  future  deliverances,  knowing,  that,  "  though 
sorrow  may  endure  for  a  night,  joy  will  come  in  the  morning." 

Thus  it  is  that  the  Holy  Ghost  convinces  thp  soul  of  sin. 
And,  if  so,  how  wretchedly  are  they  mistaken,  that  blend  the 
light  of  the  Spirit  with  the  light  of  conscience,  as  all  such  do, 
who  say,  that  Christ  lights  every  man  that  comes  into  the  world, 
and  that  light,  if  improved,  will  bring  us  to  Jesus  Christ?  If 
such  doctrine  be  true,  the  promise  in  the  text  was  needless  : 
our  Lord's  apostles  hiid  already  that  light;  the  world,  hereafter 
to  be  convinced,  had  that  light;  and,  if  that  were  sufficient  to 
bring  them  to  Christ,  why  was  it  expedient  that  Christ  should 
go  away  to  heaven,  to  send  down  the  Holy  Ghost  to  do  this  for 
them?  Alas!  all  have  not  this  Spirit:  it  is  the  special  gift  of 
God,  and,  without  this  special  gift,  we  can  never  come  to  Christ. 

The  light  of  conscience  will  accuse  or  convince  us  of  any 
common  sin ;  but  the  light  of  natural  conscience  never  did,  never 
will,  and  never  can,  convince  of  unbelief.  If  it  could,  how 
comes  it  to  pass,  that  not  one  of  the  heathens,  who  improved 
the  light  of  nature  in  such  an  eminent  degree,  was  ever  con- 


4G4  TUK   UOL.Y   SPIRIT   CONVIKCISS   TBB    WOXLD         [XL. 

TiDced  of  unbelief?  No^  natmal  conscience  cannoc  tSect  this; 
it  is  the  pecoliar  property  of  the  Holy  Ghost  the  Ccnoforter: 
**  Wlien  be  is  come,  he  will  reprove  (or  convince)  the  wodd  of 
sin,  of  rig;hteoasness,  and  of  judgment.*' 

We  have  heard  how  he  convinces  of  sin :  wc  come  now  t» 
shew, 

SeanuUy,  What  is  the  righteoosness,  of  which  the  Comlbrter 
convinces  the  world. 

By  the  word  righteousness,  in  some  places  of  scripture,  we  are 
to  understand  tbat  common  justice  which  we  ought  to  practise 
between  man  and  man ;  as  when  Paul  is  said  to  reascm  of  tem- 
perance and  righteousness  before  a  trembling  Fdix.  Bot  here 
(as  in  a  multitude  of  other  places  in  holy  writ)  we  are  to  un- 
derstand by  the  word  righteousness,  the  active  and  passive 
obedience  of  the  dear  Lord  Jesus ;  even  that  perfect,  personal, 
all-sufficient  righteousness,  which  he  has  wrought  out  for  that 
world  which  the  Spirit  is  to  convince.  **  Of  righteousness, 
(says  our  Lord,)  because  I  go  to  the  Father,  and  ye  see,  me  do 
more."  This  is  one  ai^ument  that  the  Holy  Spirit  makes  use 
of  to  prove  Christ's  righteousness,  because  he  is  gone  to  the 
^  Father,  and  we  see  him  no  more.  For,  had  he  not  wrought  oot 
a  sufficient  righteousness,  the  Father  would  have  sent  him  back, 
as  not  having  done  what  be  undertook ;  and  we  should  have 
seen  him  again. 

O  the  righteousness  of  Christ !  It  so  coinforts  my  soul,  that 
I  must  be  excused  if  I  mention  it  in  almost  all  my  discourses. 
I  would  not,  if  I  could  help  it,  have  one  sermon  without  it. 
Whatever  infidels  may  object,  or  Arminians  sophistically  argue, 
against  an  imputed  righteousness  ;  yet,  whoever  know  themselves 
and  jGrod,  must  acknowledge,  that  **  Jesus  Christ  is  the  end  of 
the  law  for  righteousness,  (and  perfect  justification  in  the  sight 
of  God,)  to  every  one  that  believeth,"  and  that  we  are  to  be 
made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  him.  This,  and  this  only,  a 
poor  sinner  can  lay  hold  of,  as  a  sure  anchor  of  his  hope. 
Whatever  other  scheme  of  salvation  men  may  lay,  I  acknow- 
ledge I  can  see  no  other  foundation  whereon  to  buUd  my  hopes 
of  salvation,  but  on  the  rock  of  Christ's  personal  righteoosness, 
imputed  to  my  soul. 

Many,  I  believe,  have  a  rational  conviction  of,  and  agree  with 
me  in  this :  but  rational  convictions,  if  rested  in,  avail  but  little; 
it  must  be  a  spiritual,  experimental  conviction  of  the  truth, 
which  is  saving.  And  therefore  our  Lord  says.  When  the  Holy 
Ghost  comes  in  the  day  of  his  power,  it  convinces  of  this  righ- 
teousness, of  the  reality,  completeuess,  and  sufficiency  of  it,  to 
save  a  poor  sinner. 

Wc  have  seen  how  the  Holy  Ghost  convinces  the  sinner  of  the 
sin  of  his  nature,  life,  duties,  and  of  the  sin  of  unbelief;  and  what 
then  must  the  poor  creature  do  ?  He  must,  be  must  inevitably 
despair,  if  there  be  no  hope  but  ki  himself.  When  tbereibre  the 
Spirit  has  hunted  the  sinner  out  of  all  his  false  rests  and  hiding* 
pboes,  takm  off  the  pitiful  fig-leaves  of  his  own  woriui,  and 


XL.]  OF  SIN,   RIGRTBOUSNERS,   AND  JUD0ME9T.  46& 

driven  him  out  of  the  trees  of  the  garden  (bis  outward  referma- 
tions)  and  placed  him  naked  before  the  bar  of  a  sovereign,  holy, 
just,  and  sin-avenging  God ;  then,  then  it  is,  when  the  sodl, 
having  the  sentence  of  death  within  itself  because  of  unbelief, 
has  a  sweet  display  of  Christ's  righteousness  made  to  it  by  the 
Holy  Spirit  of  God.  Here  it  is,  that  he  begins  more  imme- 
diately to  act  in  the  quahty  of  a  Comforter,^  and  convinces  the 
soul  so  powerfully  of  the  reality  and  all-sufBciency  of  Christ's 
righteousness,  that  the  soul  is  immediately  set  a  hungering  and 
thirsting  after  it.  Now  the  sinner  begins  to  see,  that  though  he 
has  destroyed  himself,  yet  in  Christ  is  his  help ;  that,  though  he 
has  no  righteousness  of  his  own  to  recommend  him^  there  is  a 
fulness  of  grace,  a  fulness  of  truth,  a  fulness  of  righteousness,  in 
the  dear  Lord  Jesus,  which,  if  once  imputed  to  him,  will  make 
him  happy  for  ever  and  ever. 

None  can  tell,  but  those  happy  souls  who  have  experienced 
it,  with  what  demonstration  of  the  Spirit  this  conviction  comcs^ 
O  bow  amiable,  as  well  as  all-sufficient,  does  the  blessed  Jesus 
now  appear  i  With  what  new  eyes  does  the  soul  now  see  the 
Lord  its  righteousness!  Brethren,  it  is  unutterable.  If  yoa 
were  never  thus  convinced  of  Christ's  righteousness  in  your 
own  souls,  though  you  may  believe  it  doctrinally,  it  will  avail 
you  nothing,  if  the  Comforter  never  came  savingly  into  your 
souls,  then  you  are  comfortless  indeed.    But, 

What  will  this  righteousness  avail,  if  the  soul  has  it  not  in 
possession  ? 

Thirdly f  The  next  thing  therefore  the  Comforter,  when  he 
comes,  convinces  the  soul  of,  is  judgment. 

By  the  word  judgment^  I  understand  that  well-grouBded 
peace,  that  settled  judgment,  which  the  soul  forms  of  itself, 
when  it  is  enabled  by  the  Spirit  of  God  to  lay  hold  on  Christ's 
righteousness,  which  I  believe  it  always  does,  when  convinced 
in  the  matter  before  mentioned.  ''Of  judgment  (says  our 
Lord)  because  the  prince  of  this  world  is  judged ;"  the  soul, 
keing  enabled  to  lay  hold  on  Christ's  perfect  righteousness  by 
a  lively  fiaiith,  has  a  conviction  wrought  in  it  by  the  Holy 
Spirit,  that  the  prince  of  this  world  is  judged.  The  soul  being 
oow  justified  by  faith,  ha^  peace  with  God  through  our  Lord 
Jesos  Christ,  and  can  triumphantly  say.  It  is  Christ  that  jus- 
tifies me,  who  is  he  that  condemns  me?  The  strong  man 
anned  is  now  cast  out ;  my  soul  is  in  a  true  peace ;  the  prince 
of  this  world  will  come  and  accuse,  but  he  has  now  no  share  in 
me:  the  blessed  Spirit  which  I  have  received,  and  whereby  I 
am  enabled  to  apply  Christ's  righteousness  to  my  poor  soul, 
powerfully  convinces  me  of  this:  why  should  I  fearl  or  of  what 
shall  I  be  afraid,  since  God's  Spirit  witnesses  with  my  spirit 
that  I  am  a  child  of  God  ?  The  Lord  is  ascended  up  on  high ; 
be  has  led  captivity  captive ;  he  has  received  the  Holy  Ghost 
the  Comfcorter,  that  best  of  gifts,  for  men ;  and  that  Comforter  is 
coiiie:into  my  heart :  he  is  faithful  that  bath  promised :  I,  even 
f,  am  powerfully,  rationaSy,  spiritualty  convicted  of  sin,  righ* 
♦  2  p  ' 


466  THB  HOLY   SPIRIT   CONVINCING   THE  WORLD         [XL. 

teoasnesSy  and  judgment.     By  this  I  know  the  prince  of  tbi» 
world  is  judged. 

Thus,  I  say,  may  we  suppose  that  soul  to  triumph,  in  which 
the  promise  of  the  text  is  happily  fulfilled.  And  though,  at 
the  beginning  of  this  discourse,  I  said  most  had  never  expe- 
rienced any  thing  of  this,  and  that  therefore  this  preaching 
must  be  foolishness  to  such ;  yet  I  doubt  not  but  there  are 
some  few  happy  souls,  who,  through  grace,  have  been  enabled 
to  follow  me  step  by  step;  and  notwithstanding  the  Holy 
Ghost  might  not  directly  work  in  the  same  order  as  I  have 
described,  and  perhaps  they  cannot  exactly  say  the  time  when, 
yet  they  have  a  well-grounded  confidence  that  the  work  is 
done,  and  that  they  have  really  been  convinced  of  sin,  righ- 
teousness, and  judgment  in  some  way,  or  at  some  time  or 
another. 

And  now,  what  shall  I  say  to  you  ?  O  thank  God,  thank 
the  Lord  Jesus,  thank  the  ever-blessed  Trinity,  for  this 
unspeakable  gift :  for  you  would  never  have  been  thus  highly 
favoured,  had  not  he  who  first  spoke  darkness  into  light,  loved 
you  with  an  everlasting  love,  and  enlightened  you  by  his  holy 
Spirit,  and  that  too,  not  on  account  of  any  good  thing  foreseen 
in  you,  but  for  his  own  name's  sake. 

Be  humble,  therefore,  O  believers,  be  humble :  look  to  the 
Rock  from  whence  you  have  been  hewn :  extol  free  grace ; 
admire  electing  love,  which  alone  has  made  you  to  difier  firom 
the  rest  of  your  brethren.  Has  God  brought  you  into  light  1 
Walk  as  becometh  children  of  light.  Provoke  not  the  holy 
Spirit  to  depart  from  you :  for  though  he  hath  sealed  you  to 
the  day  of  redemption,  and  you  know  that  the  prince  of  this 
world  is  judged ;  yet  if  you  backslide,  grow  lukewarm,  or  for- 
get your  first  love,  the  Lord  will  visit  your  ofiences  with  the 
rod  of  afBiction,  and  your  sin  with  spiritual  scourges.  Be  not 
therefore  high-minded,  but  fear.  Rejoice,  but  let  it  be  with 
trembling.  As  the  elect  of  God,  put  on,  not  only  humbleness 
of  mind,  but  bowels  of  compassion ;  and  pray,  O  pray  for 
your  unconverted  brethren !  Help  me,  help  me  now,  O  chil- 
dren of  God,  and  hold  up  my  hands,  as  Aaron  and  Hur  once 
held  up  the  hands  of  Moses.  Pray,  whilst  I  am  preaching 
that  the  Lord  may  enable  me  to  say,  this  day  is  the  promise  ia 
the  text  fulfilled  in  some  poor  sinners'  hearts.  Cry  mightily 
to  God,  and,  with  the  cords  of  holy  violence,  pull  down  Mess- 
ings  on  your  neighbours'  heads.  Christ  yet  lives  and  reigns  in 
heaven :  the  residue  of  the  Spirit  is  yet  in  his  hand»  and  a 
plentiful  efiusion  of  it  is  promised  in  the  latter  days  of  the 
church.  And  O  that  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  blessed  Coniforter» 
would  now  come  down,  and  convince  those  that  are  christless 
among  you,  of  sin,  of  righteousness,  and  of  judgment  I  O  thai 
you  were  once  made  willing  to  be  convinced ! 

But  perhaps  you  had  rather  be  filled  with  wine  than  with  the 
Spirit,  and  are  daily  chasing  that  Holy  Ghost  from  your  souls. 
What  shall  I  say  for  you,  to  God  ?  ''  Father,  forgive  them^  for 


XL.]  OF  SIN,  R16HTB0USNESH,   AND  JUDGMENT.  467 

they  know  not  what  they  do."  What  shall  I  say  from  God  to 
you  ?  Why  ?  That  "  God  was  in  Christ  reconciling  the  world 
unto  himself:"  Therefore  I  beseech  you,  as  in  Christ's  stead, 
be  ye  reconciled  to  God.  Do  not  go  away  contradicting  and 
blaspheming.  I  know  Satan  would  have  you  be  gone.  Many 
of  you  may  be  uneasy,  and  are  ready  to  cry  out,  "  What  a 
weariness  is  this  I"  But  I  will  not  let  you  go :  I  have  wrestled 
with  God  for  my  hearers  in  private,  and  I  must  wrestle  with 
you  here  in  public.  Though  of  myself  I  can  do  nothing,  and 
you  can  no  more  by  your  own  power  come  to  and  believe  on 
Christ,  than  Lazarus  could  come  forth  from  the  grave;  yet 
who  knows  but  God  may  beget  some  of  you  again  to  a  livejy 
hope  by  this  foolishness  of  preaching,  and  that  you  may  be 
some  of  that  world  which  the  Comforter  is  to  convince  of  sin, 
of  righteousness,  and  of  judgment?  Poor  christless  souls ! 
do  you  know  what  a  condition  you  are  in?  Why,  you  are 
lying  in  the  wicked  one,  the  devil ;  he  rules  in  you,  he  walks 
and  dwells  in  you,  unless  you  dwell  in  Christ,  and  the  Com- 
forter is  come  into  your  hearts.  And  will  you  contentedly  lie 
in  that  wicked  one,  the  devil?  What  wages  will  he  give  you? 
Eternal  death.  O  that  you  would  come  to  Christ !  The  free 
gift  of  God  through  him  is  eternal  life.  He  will  accept  of  you 
even  now,  if  you  will  believe  in  him.  The  Comforter  may  yet 
come  into  your  hearts,  even  yours.  All  that  are  now  his  living 
temples,  were  once  lying  in  the  wicked  one,  as  well  as  you. 
This  blessed  gift,  this  Holy  Ghost,  the  blessed  Jesus  received 
even  for  the  rebellious. 

I  see  many  of  you  affected:  but  are  your  passions  only  a 
little  wrought  upon,  or  are  your  souls  really  touched  with  a 
lively  sense  of  the  heinousness  of  your  sins,  your  want  of 
faith,  and  the  preciousness  of  the  righteousness  of  Jesus 
Christ  ?  If  so,  I  hope  the  Lord  has  been  gracious,  and  that 
the  Comforter  is  coming  into  your  hearts.  Do  not  stifle  these 
convictions !  Do  not  go  away,  and  straightway  forget  what 
manner  of  doctrine  you  have  heard,  and  thereby  shew  that 
these  are  only  common  workings  of  a  few  transient  convic- 
tions, floating  upon  the  surface  of  your  hearts.  Beg  of  God 
that  you  may  be  sincere,  (for  he  alone  can  make  you  so,)  and 
that  you  may  indeed  desire  the  promise  of  the  text  to  be  ful- 
filled in  your  souls.  Who  knows  but  the  Lord  may  be  gra- 
cious ?  Remember,  you  have  no  plea  but  sovereign  mercy ; 
but,  for  your  encouragement  also,  remember  it  is  the  world, 
such  as  you  are,  to  whom  the  Comforter  is  to  come,  and  whom 
be  is  to  convince  :  wait  therefore  at  wisdom's  gates.  The  bare 
probability  of  having  a  door  of  mercy  opened,  is  enough  to 
keep  you  striving.  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save 
sinners,  the  chief  of  them  :  you  know  not  but  he  came  to  save 
you.  Do  not  go  and  quarrel  with  God's  decrees,  and  say.  If 
I  am  a  reprobate,  I  shall  be  damned  ;  if  I  am  elected,  I  shall 
be  saved ;  and  therefore  I  will  do  nothing.  What  have  you 
to  do  with  God's  decrees  ?     Secret  things  belong  to  him  ;  it  is 

2f2 


468  THE  HOLY  8TIB1T  CONVINCING  THB  WOUJUIB-  [XL. 

your  business  to  "  give  all  diligence  to  make  your  calliag  and 
election  sure/'  If  there  are  but  few  who  find  the  way  that 
leads  to  life,  do  you  strive  to  be  some  of  them :  you  know  not 
but  you  may  be  in  the  number  of  those  few,  and  that  your 
striving  may  be  the  means  which  Grod  intends  to  bless,  to  give 
you  an  entrance  in.  If  you  do  not  act  thus,  you  are  not  sin- 
cere ;  and  if  you  do,  who  knows  but  you  may  find  mercy  ?  for 
though,  after  you  have  done  all  that  you  can,  God  may  justly 
cut  you  ofi*,  yet  never  was  a  single  person  damned  who  cUd  aU 
that  he  could.  Though  therefore  your  hands  are  withered, 
stretch  them  out :  though  you  are  impotent,  sick,  and  lame, 
come  lie  at  the  pool.  Who  knows  but  by  and  by  the  I^rd 
Jesus  may  have  compassion  on  you,  and  send  the  Comforter 
to  convince  you  of  sin,  righteousness,  and  of  Judgment !  He  is 
a  God  full  of  compassion  and  long-suflfering,  otherwise  you  and 
I  had  been  long  since  lifting  up  our  eyes  in  torments.  But  still 
he  is  patient  with  us ! 

O  christless  sinners,  you  are  alive,  and  who  knows  but  God 
intends  to  bring  you  to  repentance  ?  Could  ray  prayers  or  tears 
effect  it,  you  should  have  voUies  of  the  one,  and  floods  of  the 
other.  My  heart  is  touched  with  a  sense  of  your  condition : 
May  our  merciful  High-Priest  now  send  down  the  Comforter, 
and  make  you  sensible  of  it  also !  O  the  love  of  Christ !  It 
constrains  me  yet  to  beseech  you  to  come  to  him ;  what  do  yoa 
reject,  if  you  reject  Christ,  the  Lord  of  glory !  Sinners,  give  the 
dear  Redeemer  a  lodging  in  your  souls.  Do  not  be  Bethsbe- 
niites ;  give  Christ  your  hearts,  your  whole  hearts.  Indeed,  he 
is  worthy.  He  made  you,  and  not  you  yourselves.  You  are 
not  your  own ;  give  Christ  then  your  bodies  and  souls,  which 
are  bis  !  Is  it  not  enough  to  melt  you  down,  to  think  that  tiie 
high  and  lofty  One,  who  inhabiteth  eternity,  should  condescend 
to  invite  you  by  his  ministers  ?  How  soon  can  he  frown  yon  to 
hell  ?  And  how  know  you,  but  he  may,  this  very  instant,  if  yoa 
do  not  hear  his  voice  ?  Did  any  yet  harden  their  hearts  against 
Christ,  and  prosper  ?  Come  then,  do  not  send  me  sorrowful 
away :  do  not  let  me  have  reason  to  cry  out,  O  my  leanness, 
my  leanness !  Do  not  let  me  go  weeping  into  my  closet,  and 
say, "  Lord,  they  will  not  believe  my  report ;  Lord,  I  have  called 
them,  and  they  will  not  answer ;  I  am  unto  them  as  a  very  plea- 
sant song,  and  as  one  that  plays  upon  a  pleasant  instrument ; 
but  their  hearts  are  running  after  the  lust  of  the  eye,  the  lust  of 
tlie  flesh,  and  the  pride  of  life."  Would  you  be  willing  that  I 
should  give  such  an  account  of  you,  or  make  such  a  prayer 
before  God?  And  yet  I  must  not  only  do  so  here,  but  appear 
in  judgment  against  you  hereafter,  unless  you  will  come  to 
Christ.  Once  more  therefore  I  entreat  you  to  come.  What 
objections  have  you  to  make  ?  Behold,  I  stand  here  in  the  name 
of  God,  to  answer  all  that  you  can  ofier.  But  I  know  no  one 
can  come,  unless  the  Father  draw  him :  I  will  therefore  address 
me  to  my  God,  and  intercede  with  him  to  send  the  CSomforter 
into  your  hearts. 


XLI.]  SAUL*S    GONVERglON.  400 

O  blessed  J^esus^  who  art  a  God  whose  compassions  fail  liot, 
and  in  whom  all  the  promises  are  yea  and  amen ;  thou  that 
sittest  between  the  cherabims,  shew  thyself  amongst  ns.  Let 
Us  now  see  thy  outgoings !  O  let  us  now  taste  that  thou  art 
gracious,  and  reveal  thy  almighty  arm  !  Get  thyself  the  victory 
In  these  poor  sinners'  hearts.  Let  not  the  word  spoken  prove 
like  water  spilt  upon  the  ground.  Send  down,  send  down,  O 
great  High-Priest,  the  Holy  Spirit,  to  convince  the  world  of 
8in,  of  righteousness,  and  of  judgment.  So  will  we  give  thanks 
and  praise  to  thee,  O  Father,  thee,  O  Son,  and  thee,  O  blessed 
Spirit ;  to  whom,  as  three  Persons,  but  one  God,  be  ascribed,  by 
angels  and  archangels,  by  cherubims  and  seraphims,  and  all  the 
heavenly  hosts,  all  possible  power,  might,  majesty,  and  domi* 
nion,  now  and  for  evermore,  Ame?i, 


SERMON  XLI. 

Saul's  conversion. 


But  Saul  increased  the  more  in  strength,  and  confounded  the 
Jews  which  dwelt  at  Danuiscus,  proving  that  this  is  very 
Christ. — Acts  ix.  22. 

It  is  an  undoubted  truth,  however  paradoxical  it  may  seem  to 
natural  men,  that  whosoever  will  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus,  shall 
suffer  persecution."  And  therefore  it  is  very  remarkable,  that 
our  blessed  Lord,  in  his  glorious  sermon  on  the  mount,  after  he 
had  been  pronouncing  those  blessed,  who  are  poor  in  spirit, 
meek,  pure  in  heart,  and  such-like,  immediately  adds,  (and 
spends  no  less  than  three  verses  in  this  beatitude,)  **  Blessed 
are  they  who  are  persecuted  for  righteousness'  sake."  No  one 
ever  was,  or  ever  will  be  endowed  with  the  forementioned 
graces,  in  any  degree,  but  he  will  be  persecuted  for  it  in  a  measure. 
There  is  an  irreconcileable  enmity  between  the  seed  of  the  woman 
and  the  seed  of  the  serpent.  And  if  we  are  not  of  the  world, 
but  shew  by  our  firults  that  we  arc  of  the  number  of  those  whom 
Jesus  Christ  hath  chosen  out  of  the  world,  for  that  very  reason 
the  world  will  hate  us.  As  this  is  true  of  every  particular 
Christian,  so  it  is  true  of  every  Christian  church  in  general.  For 
0ome  years  past  we  have  heard  but  little  of  a  public  persecution  : 
Why?  Because  but  little  of  the  power  of  godliness  has  prevailed 
amongst  all  denominations.  The  strong  man  armed  has  had 
fall  possession  of  most  professors'  hearts,  and  therefore  he  has 
let  them  rest  in  a  false  peace.  But  we  ^ay  assure  ourselves, 
when  Jesus  Christ  tfegins  to  gather  in  his  elect  in  any  remark- 
ftble  manner,  and  opens  an  effectual  door  for  preaching  the  ever- 
lasting gospel,  persecution  will  flame  out,  and  Satan  and  his 
emissaries  will  do  their  utmost  (though  all  in  vain)  to  stop  the 
work  of  God.  Tiiua  it  was  in  the  first  ages,  thus  it  is  in  our 
days,  and  thus  it  will  be  till  time  shall  be  no  more. 

Christians  and  Christian  churches  must  then  expect  enemies. 


470  Saul's  conversion.  [xli. 

Our  chief  concern  should  be,  to  learn  how  to  behave  towards 
them  in  a  christian  manner :  For,  unless  we  take  good  heed  to 
ourselves,  we  shall  imbitter  our  spirits,  and  act  unbecoming  the 
followers  of  that  Lord,  ^*  who,  when  he  was  reviled,  reviled  not 
again ;  when  he  suffered,  threatened  not ;  and,  as  a  lamb  before 
his  shearers  is  dumb,  so  opened  he  not  his  mouth."  But  what 
motive  shall  we  make  use  of  to  bring  ourselves  to  this  blessed 
lamb-like  temper?  !N!ext  to  the  immediate  operation  of  the 
holy  Spirit  upon  our  hearts,  I  know  of  no  consideration  more 
conducive  to  teach  us  long-suffering  towards  our  most  bitter  per- 
secutors, than  this,  ''That,  for  all  we  know  to  the  contrary,  some 
of  those  very  persons,  who  are  now  persecuting,  may  be  chosen 
from  all  eternity  by  God,  and  hereafter  called  in  time,  to  edify 
and  build  up  the  church  of  Christ." 

The  persecutor  Saul,  mentioned  in  the  words  of  the  text,  (and 
whose  conversion,  God  willing,  I  propose  to  treat  on  in  the  fol- 
lowing discourse,)  is  a  noble  instance  of  this  kind. 

I  say,  a  persecutor,  and  that  a  bloody  one:  for  see  how  he  is 
introduced  in  the  beginning  of  this  chapter;  ''And  Saul,  yet 
breathing  out  threatenings  and  slaughter  against  .the  disciples 
of  our  Lord,  went  unto  the  high-priest,  and  desired  of  him  let- 
ters to  Damascus  to  the  synagogues,  that  if  he  found  any  of  this 
way,  whether  they  were  men  or  women,  he  might  bring  them 
bound  to  Jerusalem." 

"  And  Saul  yet  breathing  out."  This  implies  that  he  had  been 
a  persecutor  before.  To  prove  which,  we  need  only  look  badL 
to  the  viith  chapter,  where  we  shall  find  him  so  very  remarkably 
active  at  Stephen's  death,  that  "  the  witnesses  laid  down  their 
clothes  at  a  young  man's  feet  whose  name  was  Saul."  He  seems, 
though  young,  to  be  in  some  authority.  Perhaps,  for  his  zeal 
against  the  Christians,  he  was  preferred  in  the  church,  and  was 
allowed  to  sit  in  the  great  council  or  sanhedrim :  For  we  are 
told,  chap.  viii.  ver.  1. "  That  Saul  was  consenting  unto  his  death  ;'* 
and  again,  at  ver.  3.  he  is  brought  in  as  exceeding  all  in  his  op- 
position ;  for  thus  speaks  the  evangelist,  "As  for  Saul,  he  made 
havock  of  the  church,  entering  into  every  house,  and  haling  men 
and  women,  committed  them  to  prison."  One  would  have  ima* 
gined,  that  this  should  have  satisfied,  at  least  abated  the  fury^ 
of  this  young  zealot.  No :  being  exceedingly  mad  against  them, 
as  he  himself  informs  Agrippa,  and  having  made  havock  of  all  in 
Jerusalem,  he  now  is  resolved  to  persecute  the  disciples  of  the 
Lord,  even  to  strange  cities ;  and  therefore  yet  breathing  oat 
threatenings.  "  Breathing  out:"  The  words  are  very  emphati- 
cal,  and  expressive  of  his  bilter  enmity.  It  was  as  natural  to 
him  now  to  threaten  the  Christians,  as  it  was  for  him  to  breathe: 
he  could  scarce  i&peak,  but  it  was  some  threatenings  against 
them.  Nay,  he  not  only  breathed  out  threatenings,  but  slaugh- 
ters also,  (and  those  who  threaten,  would  also  slaughter,  if  it 
were  in  their  power,)  against  the  disciples  of  the  Lord.  Insa- 
tiable therefore  as  hell,  finding  he  could  not  confute  or  stop  the 
Christians  by  force  of  argument,  he  is  resolved  to  do  it  by  foac 


XLI.]  SAUL'8  C0NVBR8I0N.  471 

€f  aims ;  and  therefore  went  to  the  high-priest,  (for  there  never 
was  a  persecution  yet  without  a  high-priest  at  the  head  of  it,) 
and  desired  of  him  letters,  issued  out  of  his  spiritual  court,  to 
the  synagogues  or  ecclesiastical  courts  at  Damascus,  giving 
him  authority,  'Uhat  if  he  found  any  of  this  way,  whether  they 
were  men  or  women,  he  might  bring  them  bound  unto  Jerusalem, 
I  suppose,  there  to  be  arraigned  and  condemned  in  the  high- 
priest's  court.  Observe  how  he  speaks  of  the  Christians.  Luke, 
who  wrote  the  Acts,  calls  them  ''  disciples  of  the  Lord,'*  and 
Saul  styles  them  **  men  and  women  of  this  way."  I  doubt  not 
but  he  represented  them  as  a  company  of  upstart  enthusiasts, 
that  had  lately  gotten  into  a  new  method  or  way  of  living ;  that 
would  not  be  content  with  the  temple-service,  but  they  must  be 
righteous  over-much,  and  have  their  private  meetings  or  con- 
venticles, and  break  bread,  as  they  called  it,  from  house  to  house, 
to  the  great  disturbance  of  the  established  clergy,  and  to  the 
utter  subversion  of  all  order  and  decency.  I  do  not  hear  that 
the  high-priest  makes  any  objection :  no,  he  was  as  willing  to 
grant  letters,  as  Saul  was  to  ask  them ;  and  wonderfully  pleased 
within  himself,  to  find  he  had  such  an  active  zealot  to  employ 
against  the  Christians. 

Well  then,  a  judicial  process  is  immediately  issued  out,  with 
the  high-priest's  seal  affixed  to  it.  And  now  methiuks  I  see  the 
young  persecutor  finely  equipped,  and  pleasing  himself  with 
thoughts,  how  triumphantly  he  should  ride  back  with  the  ''  men 
and  women  of  this  way,"  dragging  them  after  him  to  Jerusalem. 

What  a  condition  may  we  imagine  the  poor  disciples  at  Da- 
mascus were  in  at  this  time !  No  doubt  they  had  heard  of 
Saul's  imprisoning  and  making  havock  of  the  saints  at  Jerusalem, 
and  we  may  well  suppose  they  were  apprised  of  his  design 
against  them.  I  am  persuaded  this  was  a  growing,  because  a 
trying  time  with  these  dear  people.  O  how  did  they  wrestle 
with  God  in  prayer,  beseeching  him  either  to  deliver  them  from, 
or  give  them  grace  sufficient  to  enable  them  to  bear  up  under, 
the  fury  of  their  persecutors !  The  high-priest  doubtless,  with 
the  rest  of  his  reverend  brethren,  flattered  themselves,  that  they 
should  now  put  an  eficctual  stop  to  this  growing  heresy,  and 
waited  with  impatience  for  Saul's  return. 

But "  He  that  sitteth  in  heaven  laughs  them  to  scorn,  tho 
Lord  has  them  in  derision."  And  therefore,  ver.  3.  ''As  Saul 
journeyed,  and  came  even  near  unto  Damascus,"  perhaps  to  the 
very  gates,  (our  Lord  permitting  this,  to  try  the  faith  of  his 
disciples,  and  more  conspicuously  to  baffle  the  designs  of  his 
enemies,)  *' suddenly  (at  mid-day,  as  he  acquaints  Agrippa) 
there  shined  round  about  him  a  light  from  heaven,"  a  light 
brighter  than  the  sun ;  **  and  he  fell  to  the  earth,  (why  not  into 
hell  ?)  and  heard  a  voice  saying  unto  him,  Saul,  Saul,  why  pcr- 
Sticutest  thou  me?"  The  word  is  doubled, "  Saul,  Saul :"  Like 
that  of  our  Lord  to  Martha ;  *^  Martha,  Martha ;"  or  the  prophet, 
**  O  earth,  earth,  earth  !*'  Perhaps  these  words  came  like  thun- 
der to  his  soul.   That  they  were  spoken  audibly,  we  are  as 


472  SAUli'S    CONVERSION.  [XLL 

from  ver.  7.  ^*  Hi3  companions  heard  the  voice."  Our  Lord  now 
arrests  the  persecuting  zealot>  calling  him  by  name ;  for  the  word 
never  does  us  good,  till  we  find  it  spoken  to  us  in  particular. 
^'Saul,  Saul>  why  persecutest  thou  me?"  Put  the  emphasis 
upon  the  word  why^  what  evil  have  I  done?  Put  it  upon  the 
word  persecutest,  why  persecutest?  I  suppose  Saul  thought  it 
was  not  persecuting ;  no,  he  was  only  putting  the  laws  of  the 
ecclesiastical  court  into  execution ;  but  Jesus,  whose  eyes  are 
as  a  flame  of  fire,  saw  through  the  hypocrisy  of  his  heart,  that, 
notwithstanding  his  specious  pretences,  all  this  proceeded  from 
a  persecuting  spirit,  and  secret  enmity  of  heart  against  God ; 
and  therefore  says,  "  Why  persecutest  thou  me  V  Put  the  em- 
phasis upon  the  word  me,  why  persecutest  thou  me  ?  Alas ! 
Saul  was  not  persecuting  Christ,  was  he?  He  was  only  taking 
care  to  prevent  innovations  in  the  church,  and  bringing  a  com- 
pany of  enthusiasts  to  justice,  who  otherwise  would  overturn 
the  established  constitution.  But  Jesus  says,  **Why  perse- 
cutest thou  me?"  for  what  is  done  to  Christ's  disciples,  he  takes 
as  done  to  himself,  whether  it  be  good  or  whether  it  be  evil.  He 
that  touches  Christ's  disciples,  touches  the  apple  of  his  eye; 
and  they  who  persecute  the  followers  of  our  Lord,  would  per- 
secute our  Lord  himself,  were  he  again  to  come  and  tabernacle 
amongst  us. 

I  do  not  find  that  Saul  gives  any  reason  why  he  did  perse- 
cute; no,  he  was  struck  dumb;  as  every  persecutor  will  be, 
when  Jesus  Christ  puts  this  same  question  to  them  at  the  ter- 
rible day  of  judgment.  But  being  pricked  at  the  heart,  no  doubt 
with  a  sense  not  only  of  this,  but  of  all  his  other  ofiences  against 
the  great  God,  he  said,  ver.  5.  **  Who  art  thou.  Lord  ?"  See  how 
soon  God  can  change  the  heart  and  voice  of  his  most  bitter 
enemies.  Not  many  days  ago,  Saul  was  not  only  blaspheming 
Christ  himself,  but,  as  much  as  in  him  lay,  compelling  others  to 
blaspheme  also :  but  now,  he,  who  before  was  an  impostor,  is 
called  Lord;  **Who  art  thou.  Lord?"  This  admirably  points 
out  the  way  in  which  God's  Spirit  works  upon  the  heart :  it  first 
powerfully  convinces  of  sin,  and  of  our  damnable  state ;  and 
then  puts  us  upon  inquiring  after  Jesus  Christ.  Saul  being 
struck  to  the  ground,  or  pricked  to  the  heart,  cries  out  alter 
Jesus,  "Who  art  thou,  Lord?"  As  many  of  you  that  were 
never  so  far  made  sensible  of  your  damnable  state  as  to  be  made 
feelingly  to  seek  after  Jesus  Christ,  were  never  yet  truly  con- 
victed by,  much  less  converted  to,  God.  May  the  Lord,  who 
struck  Saul,  eflectually  now  strike  all  my  christless  bearers,  and 
set  them  upon  inquiring  after  Jesus,  as  their  all  in  all !  Saul 
said,  "  Who  art  thou.  Lord  ?"  and  the  Lord  said,  "  I  am  Jesus, 
whom  thou  persecutest."  Never  did  any  one  inquire  truly  after 
Jesus  Christ,  but  Christ  made  a  saving  discovery  of  himself  to 
his  soul.  It  should  soem,  our  Lord  appeared  to  him  in  person ; 
for  Ananias,  afterwards,  s<iys, "  The  Lord,  who  appeared  to  thee 
in  the  way  which  thou  earnest ;"  though  this  may  only  imply 
Christ's  meeting  him  in  the  way ;  it  is  not  much  matter:  it  is 


XLL]  BAVl/9  CONVSRSIOK.  jf78 

plain  Chriat  here  speaks  to  him,  and  sajrs, ''  i  am  Je3iM,'whom 
thou  persecntest."  It  is  remarkable,  how  onr  Lord  takes  to 
himself  the  name  o(  Jesus  ;  for  it  is  a  name  in  whicfa  he  delights : 
I  am  Jesus,  a  Saviour  of  my  people,  both  from  the  guilt  and 
power  of  their  sins ;  **  a  Jesus,  whom  thou  persecutest/'  This 
seems  to  be  spoken  to  convince  Saul  more  and  more  of  his  sin ; 
and  I  doubt  not  but  every  word  was  sharper  than  a  two-edged 
sword,  and  came  like  so  many  daggers  to  his  heart:  O  how  did 
these  words  affect  him ! — a  Jesus !  a  Saviour !  and  yet  I  am  per- 
secuting him !  this  strikes  him  with  horror ;  but  then  the  word 
Jesus,  though  he  was  a  persecutor,  might  give  him  some  hope. 
However,  our  dear  Lord,  to  convince  Saul  that  he  was  to  be 
saved  by  grace,  and  that  be  was  not  afraid  of  his  power  and 
enmity,  tells  him, ''  It  is  hard  for  thee  to  kick  against  the  prides/' 
As  much  as  to  say.  Though  he  was  persecuting,  yet  he  could  not 
overthrow  the  church  of  Christ :  for  he  would  sit  as  King  upon 
his  holy  hill  of  Zion ;  the  malice  of  men  or  devils  should  never 
be  able  to  prevail  against  him. 

Verse  6.  ^*  And  he,  trembling  and  astonished,  said.  Lord, 
what  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do?"  Those,  who  think  Saul  had  a 
discovery  of  Jesus  made  to  his  heart  before,  think  that  this 
question  is  the  result  of  his  faith,  and  that  he  now  desires  to 
know  what  he  shall  do,  out  of  gratitude  for  what  the  Lord  had 
done  for  his  soul ;  in  this  sense  it  may  be  understood ;  and  I 
have  made  use  of  it  as  an  instance  to  prove,  that  faith  will 
work  by  love :  but  perhaps  it  may  be  more  agreeable  to  the  con- 
text,  if  we  suppose  that  Saul  had  only  some  distant  discovery 
of  Christ  made  to  him,  and  not  a  full  assurance  of  faith ;  for  we 
are  told,  ''he,  trembling  and  astonished,''  trembling  at  the 
thoughts  of  his  persecuting  a  Jesus,  and  astonished  at  his  own 
vilencss,  and  the  infinite  condescension  of  this  Jesus,  cries  out, 
"  Lord,  what  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do  ?"  Persons  under  soul- 
trouble,  and  sore  conviction,  would  be  glad  to  do  any  thing,  or 
comply  on  any  terms,  to  get  peace  with  God.  **  Arise,  Ysays  our 
Lord,)  and  go  into  the  city,  and  it  shall  he  told  thee  what  thou 
Shalt  do." 

And  here  we  will  leave  Saul  a  while,  and  see  what  is  become 
of  his  companions.  But  what  shall  we  say  ?  God  is  a  sove- 
reign agent;  his  sacred  Spirit bloweth  when  and  where  it  listeth  ; 
"  he  will  have  mercy  on  whom  he  will  have  mercy."  Saul  is 
taken,  but,  as  far  as  we  know  to  the  contrary,  his  fellow-travel- 
lers are  left  to  perish  in  their  sins :  for  we  are  told,  ver.  7. 
'^Tbat  the  men  who  journeyed  with  him  stood,  indeed,  speech- 
less, and  hearing  a  confused  voice ;"  f  say  a  confused  voice, 
for  so  the  word  signifies,  and  must  be  so  interpreted,  in  order 
to  reconcile  it  with  chap.  xxii.  ver.  9.  where  Saul,  giving  an 
account  of  these  men,  tells  Agrippa,  they  heard  not  the  voice 
of  him  that  spake  to  me."  They  heard  a  voice,  a  confused  noise, 
but  not  the  articulate  voice  of  him  that  spake  to  Saul,  and  there* 
fore  remained  unconverted.  For  what  are  all  ordinances,  all* 
even  the  most  extraordinary  dispensations  of  providence,  with- 


474  Saul's  conversion.  [xli. 

out  Christ  speaks  to  the  soul  in  them?  Thus  it  is  now,  under 
the  word  preached :  many,  like  Saul's  companions,  are  some- 
times so  struck  with  the  outgoings  of  God  appearing  in  the 
sanctuary,  that  they  even  stand  speechless;  they  hear  the 
preacher's  voice,  but  not  the  voice  of  the  Son  of  God,  who, 
perhaps  at  the  same  time,  is  speaking  effectually  to  many  other 
hearts ;  this  I  have  known  often :  and  what  shall  we  say  to 
these  things  ?  O  the  depth  of  the  sovereignty  of  God !  it  is  past 
finding  out.  Lord,  I  desire  to  adore  what  I  cannot  compre- 
hend. ''Even  so.  Father,  for  so  it  seemeth  good  in  thy  sight !" 

But  to  return  to  Saul :  The  Lord  bids  him  *'  arise  and  go  into 
the  city ;"  and  we  are  told,  ver.  8.  that ''  Saul  arose  from  tha 
earth ;  and  when  his  eyes  were  opened,  (he  was  so  overpowered 
with  the  greatness  of  the  light  that  shone  upon  them,  that)  be 
saw  no  man ;  but  they  led  him  by  the  hand,  and  brought  him 
into  Damascus,"  that  very  city  which  was  to  be  the  place  of 
his  executing  or  imprisoning  the  disciples  of  the  Lord.  ''  And 
he  was  three  days  without  sight,  and  neither  did  eat  nor  drink." 
But  who  can  tell  what  horrors  of  conscience,  what  convulsions 
of  soul,  what  deep  and  pungent  convictions  of  sin,  he  under- 
went during  these  three  long  days  ?  It  was  this  took  away  his 
appetite  when  under  a  sense  of  the  wrath  of  God  for  sin  1)  and 
being  to  be  greatly  employed  hereafter,  he  must  be  greatly  hum- 
bled now ;  therefore  the  Lord  leaves  him  three  days  groaning 
under  the  spirit  of  bondage,  and  buffeted,  no  doubt,  with  the 
fiery  darts  of  the  devil,  that,  being  tempted  like  unto  his  brethren, 
he  might  be  able  hereafter  to  succour  those  that  were  tempted. 
Had  Saul  applied  to  any  of  the  blind  guides  of  the  Jewish  church 
under  these  circumstances,  they  would  have  said,  he  was  mad, 
or  going  besides  himself:  as  many  carnal  teachers,  and  blind 
Pharisees  now  deal  with,  and  so  more  and  more  distress,  poor 
souls  labouring  under  awakening  convictions  of  their  damnable 
state.  But  God  often  at  our  first  awakenings  visits  us  with 
sore  trials,  especially  those  who  are,  like  Said,  to  shine  in  the 
church,  and  to  be  used  as  instruments  in  bringing  many  sons 
to  glory :  those  who  are  to  be  highly  exalted,  must  first  be 
deeply  humbled ;  and  this  I  speak  for  the  comfort  of  such,  who 
may  be  now  groaning  under  the  spirit  of  bondage,  and  perhaps, 
like  Saul,  can  neither  eat  nor  drink  ;  for  I  have  generally  ob- 
served, that  those  who  have  had  the  deepest  convictions,  have 
afterwards  been  favoured  with  the  most  precious  communications, 
and  enjoyed  most  of  the  divine  presence  in  their  souls.  This 
was  afterwards  remarkably  exemplified  in  Saul,  who  was  three 
days  without  sight,  and  neither  did  eat  nor  drink. 

But  will  the  Lord  leave  his  poor  servant  in  this  distress  ?  No: 
his  Jesus  (though  Saul  persecuted  him)  promised  (and  he  will 
perform)  that ''  it  should  be  told  him  what  he  must  do.  And 
there  was  a  certain  disciple  at  Damascus,  named  Ananias ;  and 
unto  him  said  the  Lord,  in  a  vision,  Ananias ;  and  he  said, 
Behold  I  am  here,  *'  Lord."  What  a  holy  familiarity  is  there 
between  Jesus  Christ  and  regenerate  souls !  Ananias  bad  been 


XLi.]  Saul's  conversion.  475 

used  to  suck  love  visits,  and  therefore  knew  the  voice  of  his 
beloved.  The  Lord  says, "  Ananias ;"  Ananias  says,  "  Behold, 
I  am  here.  Lord."  Thus  it  is  that  Christ  now,  as  well  as 
formerly,  often  talks  with  his  children  at  sundry  times  and  after 
divers  manners,  as  a  man  talketh  with  his  friend.  But  what  has 
the  Lord  to  say  to  Ananias  ? 

Verse  11.  '^  And  the  Lord  said  unto  him.  Arise,  and  go  into 
the  street  which  is  called  Straight,  and  inquire  in  the  house  of 
Judas,  for  one  called  Saul  of  Tarsus ;"  (see  here,  for  your  com- 
fort, O  children  of  the  Most  High  Grod,  what  notice  Jesus 
Christ  takes  of  the  street  and  the  house  where  his  own  dear 
servants  lodge ;)  "  For,  behold,  he  prayeth :"  but  why  is  this  usher- 
ed  in  with  the  word  behold  ?  What,  was  it  such  a  wonder  to 
bear  that  Saul  was  praying?  Why,  Saul  was  a  Pharisee,  and 
therefore,  no  doubt,  fasted  and  made  long  prayers  :  and,  since 
we  are  told  that  he  profited  above  many  of  his  equals,  I  doubt 
not  but  he  was  taken  notice  of  for  his  gift  in  prayer ;  and  yet  it 
seems  that  before  these  three  days,  Saul  never  prayed  in  his 
life ;  and  why  ?  Because,  before  these  three  days  he  never  felt 
himself  a  condemned  creature :  he  was  alive  in  his  own  opinion, 
because  without  a  knowledge  of  the  spiritual  meaning  of  the 
law ;  he  felt  not  a  want  of,  and  therefore,  before  now,  cried  not 
after,  a  Jesus ;  and  consequently,  though  he  might  have  said  or 
made  a  prayer,  (as  many  Pharisees  do  now-a-days,)  he  never 
prayed  a  prayer :  but  now,  '*  behold !  he  prayed  indeed ;"  and 
this  was  urged  as  one  reason  why  he  was  converted.  None  of 
God's  children,  as  one  observes,  comes  into  the  world  still-bom  ; 
prayer  is  the  very  breath  of  the  new  creature :  and  therefore, 
if  we  are  prayerless,  we  are  christless ;  if  we  never  had  the 
spirit  of  supplication,  it  is  a  sad  sign  that  we  never  had  the  spirit 
of  grace  in  our  souls  :  and  you  may  be  assured  you  never  did 
pray,  unless  you  have  felt  yourselves  sinners,  and  seen  the 
want  of  Jesus  to  be  your  Saviour.  May  the  Lord,  whom  I 
serve  in  the  gospel  of  his  dear  Son,  prick  you  all  to  the  heart, 
and  may  it  be  said  of  you  all,  as  it  was  of  Saul,  Behold,  they 
pray ! 

I'he  Lord  goes  on  to  encourage  Ananias  to  go  to  Saul :  says 
be,  ver.  12.  **  For  he  hath  seen  in  a  vision  a  man  named  Ana* 
nias,  coming  in,  and  putting  his  hand  on  him,  that  he  might 
receive  his  sight."  So  that  though  Christ  converted  Saul  im- 
mediately by  himself,  yet  he  will  carry  on  the  work,  thus  begun, 
by  a  minister.  Happy  they,  who  under  soul-troubles  have 
such  experienced  guides,  and  as  well  acquainted  with  Jesus 
Christ,  as  Ananias  was :  you  that  have  such,  make  much  of, 
and  be  thankful  for  them ;  and  you  who  have  them  not,  trust 
in  Grod  ;  he  will  carry  on  his  own  work  without  them. 

Doubtless,  Ananias  was  a  good  man ;  but  shall  I  commend 
him  for  his  answer  to  our  Lord  ?  I  commend  him  not :  for  says 
be,  ver.  13.  ''Lord,  I  have  heard  by  many  of  this  man,  how 
much  evil  he  hath  done  to  thy  saints  at  Jerusalem :  and  here, 
he  hatb  authority  from  the  chief  priests  to  bind  all  that  call 


476  8AUL*8   CONVERSION.  [XLl. 

upon  thy  name."     I  fear  this  answer  proceeded  from  some 
relics  of  self-righteoasness»  as  well  as    infidelity,    that    laj 
undiscovered  in  the  heart  of  Ananias    *'  Arise,  (said  our  Lord) 
and  go  into  the  street  which  is  called  Straight,  and  inquire  in 
the  house  of  Judas,  for  one  called  Saul  of  Tarsus ;  for,  behold, 
he  prayeth !"     One  would  think  this  was  sufficient  to  satisfy 
him ;  but  says  Ananias,  ^*  liord,  I  have  heard  by  many  of  this 
man,  (he  seems  to  speak  of  him  with  much  contempt ;  for  even 
good  men  are  apt  to  think  too  contemptuously  of  those  who 
are  yet  in  their  sins,  Vhow  much  evil  he  hath  done  to  thy  saints 
in  Jerusalem:    And  here    he   hath  authority  from  the   chief 
-  priests,  to  bind  all  that  call  upon  thy  name/'    And  what  then, 
Ananias  ?     Is  any  thing  too  hard  for  the  Lord  ?    Who  made 
thee  to  differ  ?    Could  not  he  who  converted  thee,  convert  him 
also  ?     Surely  Ananias  here  forgets  himself,  or  perhaps  fears 
lest  this  man,  who  had  authority  from  the  chief  priests  to  bind 
fill  that  call  upon  Christ's  name,  should  bind  him  also,  if  be 
went  unto  him ;  but  the  Lord  silences  all  objections,  with  a 
**  Go  thy  way,  for  he  is  a  chosen  vessel  unto  me,  to  bear  my 
name  before  the  Gentiles,  and  kings,  and  the  children  of  Israel: 
for  I  will  shew  him  how  great  things  he  must  suffer  for  my 
name's  sake."     Here  God  stops  his  mouth  immediately,  by 
asserting  his  sovereignty,  and  preaching  to  him  the  doctrine 
of  election.     And  the  frequent  conversion  of  notorious  sinners 
to  God,  to  me  is  one  great  proof,  amongst  a  thousand  others, 
of  that  precious,  but  too  much  exploded  and  sadly  misrepre- 
sented, doctrine  of  God's  electing  love ,    for  whence  is  it  that 
such  are  taken,  whilst  thousands,  not  near  so  vUe,  die  sense- 
less and  stupid  ?     All  the  answer  that  can  be  given,  is,  ikey 
are  chosen  vessels  ;  "  Go  thy  way,  (says  God)  for  he  is  a  chosen 
vessel  unto  me,  to  bear  my  name  before  the  Gentiles,  and 
kings,  and  the  children  of  Israel :  for  I  will  shew  him  how 
great  things  he  must  suffer  for  my  name's  sake."     Observe 
what  a  close  connexion  there  is  between  doing  and  suffering 
for  Christ.     If  any  of  my  brethren  in  the  ministry  are  present, 
let  them  hear  what   preferment  we   must  expect,  if  we  are 
called  out  to  work  remarkably  for  God :  not  great  prebendaries  or 
bishoprics,  but  great  sufferings  for  our  Lord's  name's  sake;  these 
are  the  fruits  of  our  labour :  and  he  that  will  not  contentedly 
suffer  great  things  for  preaching  Christ,  is  not  worthy  of  him. 
Suffering  will  be  found  to  be  the  best  preferment,  when  we  arc 
called  to  give  an  account  of  our  ministry  at  the  great  day. 

I  do  not  hear  that  Ananias  quarrelled  with  God  concerning 
the  doctrine  of  election ;  no,  (O  that  all  good  men  would,  in 
this,  learn  of  him !)  '*  lie  went  his  way,  and  entered  into  the 
house ;  and  put  his  hands  on  him,  and  said.  Brother  Saul ;" 
just  now,  it  was  this  man;  now  it  is  brother  Saul:  it  is  no 
matter  what  a  man  has  been,  if  he  be  now  a  Christian ;  the 
same  should  be  our  brother,  our  sister,  and  mother ;  God  blots 
out  every  convert's  transgressions  as  with  a  thick  cloud,  and 
B^  should  we ;  the  more  vOe  a  man  has  been,  the  more  sbooM 


XU'}  Saul's  coi^vRBsioN,  477 

we  love  him  when  believing  in  Christ,  because  Christ  will  be 
more  glorified  on  his  behalf.  I  doubt  not,  bat  Ananias  was 
wonderfully  delighted  to  hear  that  so  remarkable  a  persecutor 
was  brought  home  to  God :  I  am  persuaded  he  felt  his  soul 
immediately  united  to  him  by  love,  and  therefore  addresses 
him  not  with,  thon  persecutor,  thou  murderer,  that  camest  to 
butcher  me  and  my  friends ;  but,  '^  brother  Saul."  It  is  remark* 
able  that  the  primitive  Christians  much  used  the  word  brother 
and  brethren  ;  I  know  it  is  a  term  now  much  in  reproach ;  but 
those  who  despise  it,  I  believe,  would  be  glad  to  be  of  our 
brotherhood,  when  they  see  us  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of  the 
Majesty  on  high.  **  Brother  Saul«  the  I^rd  (even  Jesus  that 
appeared  unto  thee  in  the  way  as  thou  camest)  hath  sent  me, 
that  thou  mightest  receive  thy  sight,  and  be  filled  with  the 
Holy  Ghost."  At  this  time,  we  may  suppose,  he  laid  bis  bands 
upon  him.     See  the  consequences. 

Verse  18.  **  Immediately  there  fell  from  his  eyes  as  it  had 
been  scales,  and  he  received  sight  forthwith  ;'*  not  only  bodily, 
but  spiritual  sight:  he  emerged  as  it  were  into  a  new  world ; 
he  saw,  and  felt  too,  things  unutterable :  he  felt  a  union  of 
soul  with  God ;  he  received  the  Spirit  of  adoption ;  he  could 
now,  with  a  full  assurance  of  faith,  cry,  "Abba,  Father."  Now 
was  he  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost;  and  had  the  love  of  God 
shed  abroad  in  his  heart ;  now  were  the  days  of  his  iiu)uming 
ended ;  now  was  Christ  formed  in  his  soul ;  now  he  could  give 
men  and  devils  the  challenge,  knowing  that  Christ  had  justified 
him ;  now  he  saw  the  excellencies  of  Christ,  and  esteemed  him 
the  fairest  among  ten  thousand.  You  only  know  how  to  sym- 
pathize with  the  apostle  in  his  joy,  who,  after  a  long  night  of 
bondage,  have  been  set  free  by  the  Spirit,  and  have  received 
joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost.  May  all  that  are  now  mourning,  as 
Saul  was,  be  comforted  in  like  manner ! 

The  scales  are  now  removed  from  the  eyes  of  Saul's  mind  ^ 
Ananias  has  done  that  for  him,  under  God :  he  must  now  do 
another  office— baptize  him,  and  so  receive  him  into  the  visible 
church  of  Christ:  a  good  proof  to  me  of  the  necessity  of  bap-^ 
tism,  where  it  may  be  had ;  for  I  find  here,  as  well  as  elsewhere, 
that  baptism  is  administered  even  to  those  who  bad  received 
the  Holy  Ghost;  Saul  was  convinced  of  this,  and  therefore 
arose  and  was  baptized :  and  now  it  is  time  for  him  tq  recruit 
the  outward  man,  which,  by  three  days'  abstinence  and  spl*> 
ritual  conflicts,  had  been  much  impaired:  we  are  therefore 
told,  (verse  19.)  "  when  he  had  received  meat^  he  wa3 
strengthened/' 

But  O,  with  what  comfort  did  the  apostle  now  eat  bis  food  I 
I  am  sure  it  was  with  singleness,  I  am  persuaded  alsio  witb 
gladness  of  heart;  and  why?  He  knew  that  he  was  recon- 
ciled to  Gpd ;  and,  for  my  own  part,  did  1  not  know  how  blind 
and  flinty  our  hearts  are  by  nature,  I  should  wonder  how  any 
one  could  eat  even  his  common  food  with  any  aati$fact|ou, 
wtio  hfu  nei;  aome  weU*gronnded  hope  of  bis  tiemg  lecanciled 


478  SAUL'S  C0NTBR8I0N.  [XLI. 

to  God.  Our  Lord  intimates  thus  mnch  to  us :  for  in  his  glo- 
rious prayer,  after  he  has  taught  us  to  pray  for  our  daily 
bread,  immediately  adds  that  petition,  ''  Forgive  us  our  tres- 
passes;" as  though  our  daily  bread  would  do  us  no  service, 
unless  we  were  sensible  of  having  the  forgiveness  of  our  sins. 

To  proceed :  Saul  hath  received  meat,  and  is  strengthened ; 
whither  will  he  go  now?  To  see  the  brethren ;  "  then  was  Saul 
certain  days  with  the  disciples  that  were  at  Damascus.''  If  we 
know  and  love  Christy  we  shall  also  love  and  desire  to  be  ac- 
quainted with  the  brethren  .of  Christ:  we  may  generally  know 
a  man  by  his  company.  And  though  all  are  not  saints  that 
associate  with  saints,  (for  tares  will  be  always  springing  up 
amongst  the  wheat  till  the  time  of  harvest,)  yet,  if  we  never  keep 
company,  but  are  shy  and  ashamed  of  the  despised  children  of 
God,  it  is  a  certain  sign  we  have  not  yet  experimentally  learned 
Jesus,  or  received  him  into  our  hearts.  My  dear  friends,  be  not 
deceived;  if  we  are  friends  to  the  Bridegroom,  we  shall  be 
friends  to  the  children  of  the  Bridegroom.  Saul,  as  soon  as  he 
was  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  ''was  certain  days  with  the 
disciples  that  were  at  Damascus." 

But  who  can  tell  what  joy  these  disciples  felt  when  Saul  came 
amongst  them.  I  suppose  holy  Ananias  introduced  him.  Me- 
thinks  I  see  the  once  persecuting  zealot,  when  they  came  to 
salute  him  with  a  holy  kiss,  throwing  himself  upon  each  of  their 
necks,  weeping  over  them  with  floods  of  tears,  and  saying,  ''O 
my  brother,  O  my  sister,  can  you  forgive  me?  can  yon  give 
such  a  wretch  as  I  the  right-hand  of  fellowship,  who  intended 
to  drag  you  behind  me  bound  unto  Jenisalem !"  Thus,  I  say,  we 
may  suppose  Saul  addressed  himself  to  his  fellow-disciples ; 
and  I  doubt  not  but  they  were  as  ready  to  forgive  and  forget  as 
Ananias  was,  and  saluted  him  with  the  endearing  title  of ''  brother 
Saul."  Lovely  was  this  meeting;  so  lovely,  that  it  seemed  Saul 
continued  certain  days  with  them,  to  communicate  experience, 
and  to  learn  the  way  of  God  more  perfectly ;  to  pray  for  a  bless- 
ing on  his  future  ministry,  and  to  praise  Christ  Jesus  for  what 
be  had  done  for  their  souls.  Saul,  perhaps,  had  sat  certain 
years  at  the  feet  of  Gamaliel,  but  undoubtedly  learned  more 
these  certain  days,  than  he  had  learned  before  in  all  his  life. 
It  pleases  me  to  think  how  this  great  scholar  is  transformed  by 
the  renewing  of  his  mind.  What  a  mighty  change  was  here! 
That  so  great  a  man  as  Saul  was,  both  as  to  his  station  in  life, 
and  internal  qualifications,  and  such  a  bitter  enemy  to  the  Chris- 
tians ;  for  him,  I  say,  to  go  and  be  certain  days  with  the  people 
of  this  mad  way,  and  to  sit  quietly,  and  be  taught  of  illiterate 
men,  as  many  of  these  disciples  we  may  be  sure  were ;  what  a 
substantial  proof  was  this  of  the  reality  of  his  conversion ! 

What  a  hurry  and  confusion  may  we  suppose  the  chief  priests 
were  now  in !  I  warrant  they  were  ready  to  cry  out.  What !  is 
he  also  deceived?  As  for  the  common  people,  who  know  not  the 
law,  and  are  accursed,  for  them  to  be  carried  away,  is  no  sodi 
wonder ;  but  for  a  man  bred  up  at  the  feet  of  Gamaliel,  for  asch 


XLi.]  Saul's  conversion.  479 

a  scholar,  such  an  enemy  to  the  cause  as  Saul ;  for  him  to  be 
led  away  with  a  company  of  silly,  deceived  men  and  women, 
surely  it  is  impossible :  we  cannot  believe  it.  But  Saul  soon 
convinces  them  of  the  reality  of  his  becoming  a  fool  for  Christ's 
sake:  for  straightway,  instead  of  going  to  deliver  the  letters  from 
the  high  priests,  as  they  expected,  in  order  to  bring  the  dis* 
ciples  that  were  at  Damascus  bound  to  Jerusalem,  ''he  preached 
Christ  in  the  synagogues,  that  he  is  the  Son  of  God."  This  was 
another  proof  of  his  being  converted.  He  not  only  conversed 
with  Christians  in  private,  but  he  preached  Christ  publicly  in 
the  synagogues :  especially,  he  insisted  on  the  divinity  of  our 
Lord,  proving,  notwithstanding  his  state  of  humiliation,  that  be 
was  really  the  Son  of  God. 

But  why  did  Saul  preach  Christ  thus?  Because  he  had  felt 
the  power  of  Christ  upon  his  own  soul.  And  here  is  the  reason 
why  Christ  is  so  seldom  preached,  and  his  divinity  so  slightly 
insisted  on  in  our  synagogues :  because  the  generality  of  those 
that  pretend  to  preach  him,  never  felt  a  saving  work  of  conver- 
sion upon  their  own  souls.  How  can  they  preach,  unless  they 
are  first  taught  of,  and  then  sent  by  Grod?  Saul  did  not  preach 
Christ  before  he  knew  him ;  no  more  should  any  one  else.  An 
unconverted  minister,  though  he  could  speak  with  the  tongues 
of  men  and  angels,  will  be  but  as  a  sounding  brass  and  tinkling 
cymbal  to  those  whose  senses  are  exercised  to  discern  spiritu^d 
things.  Ministers  that  are  unconverted,  may  talk  and  declaim 
of  Christ,  and  prove  from  books  that  he  is  the  Son  of  Grod ;  but 
they  cannot  preach  with  the  demonstration  of  the  Spirit  and 
with  power,  unless  they  preach  from  experience,  and  have  had 
a  proof  of  his  divinity,  by  a  work  of  grace  wrought  upon  their 
own  souls.  God  forgive  those  who  lay  hands  on  an  uncon- 
verted man,  knowing  that  he  is  such :  I  would  not  do  it  for  a 
thousand  worlds.  Lord  Jesus,  keep  thy  own  faithful  servants 
pure,  and  tet  them  not  be  partakers  of  other  men's  sins ! 

Such  an  instance  as  was  Saul's  conversion,  we  may  be  assured, 
must  make  a  great  deal  of  noise ;  and,  therefore,  no  wonder  we 
are  told,  ver.  21.  "  But  all  that  heard  him  were  amazed,  and 
said.  Is  not  this  he  that  destroyed  them  who  called  on  this  name 
in  Jerusalem,  and  came  hither  for  that  intent,  that  be  might 
bring  them  bound  to  the  chief  priests  T" 

Thus  it  will  be  with  all  that  appear  publicly  for  Jesus  Christ; 
and  it  is  as  impossible  for  a  true  Christian  to  be  hid,  as  a  city 
built  upon  a  hill.  Brethren,  if  you  be  faithful  to,  you  must  be 
reproached,  and  have  remarks  made  on  you,  for  Christ;  especi* 
ally  if  you  have  been  remarkably  wicked  before  your  conversion. 
Your  friends  will  say,  is  not  this  he,  or  she,  who  a  little  while 
ago  would  run  to  as  great  an  excess  of  riot  and  vanity  as  the 
worst  of  us  all  ?  what  has  turned  your  brain  ? — Or  if  you  have 
been  close,  false,  formal  hypocrites,  as  Saul  was,  they  wUI  won- 
der that  you  should  be  so  deceived  as  to  think  you  were  not  in 
a  safe  state  before.  No  doubt,  numbers  were  surprised  to  hear 
Saul^  who  was  touching  the  law  blameless,  affirm  that  he  was 


480  Saul's  convbrsion.  [xli. 

in  a  damnable  condition  (as  in  all  probability  he  did)  a  few 
days  before. 

Brethren,  you  must  expect  to  meet  with  many  such  difficol- 
tics  as  these.  The  scourge  of  the  tongue,  is  generally  the  first 
cross  we  are  called  to  bear  for  the  sake  of  Christ.  Let  not, 
therefore,  this  move  you:  it  did  not  intimidate,  no,  it  rather 
encouraged  Saul:  says  the  text,  ''But  Saul  increased  the  more 
in  strength,  and  confounded  the  Jews  who  dwelt  at  Damascus, 
proving  that  this  is  very  Christ."  Opposition  never  yet  did,  nor 
ever  will  hurt  a  sincere  convert :  Nothing  like  opposition  to 
make  the  man  of  God  perfect.  None  but  a  hireling,  who  cnureth 
not  for  the  sheep,  will  be  affrighted  at  the  approach  or  bari^iog 
of  wolves.  Christ's  ministers  are  as  bold  as  lions ;  it  is  not  for 
such  men  as  they  to  flee. 

And  therefore  (that  I  may  draw  towards  a  conclusion)  let  the 
ministers  and  disciples  of  Christ  learn  from  Saul,  not  to  fear 
men  or  their  revilings  ;  but,  like  him,  increase  in  strength,  the 
more  wicked  men  endeavour  to  weaken  their  hands.  We  can- 
not be  Christians  without  being  opposed  :  no ;  disciples  in  gene- 
ral must  suffer ;  ministers  in  particular  must  suffer  gpreat  tUngs. 
But  let  not  this  move  any  of  us  from  our  stedfastness  in  Uie 
gospel:  He  that  stood  by  and  strengthened  Saol,  will  abo 
stand  by  and  strengthen  us;  He  is  a  God  mighty  to  save  all 
that  put  their  trust  in  him.  If  we  look  up  with  an  eye  of  faith, 
we,  as  well  as  the  first  martyr  Stephen,  may  see  Jesus  standing 
at  the  right  band  of  God,  ready  to  assist  and  protect  us.  Thongb 
the  Lord's  seat  is  in  heaven,  yet  he  has  respect  to  his  saints  in 
an  especial  manner,  when  suffering  here  on  earth :  then  the 
Spirit  of  Christ  and  of  glory  rests  upon  thdr  souls.  And,  if  I 
may  speak  my  own  experience,  '^  I  never  enjoy  more  rich  com- 
munications from  God,  than  when  despised  and  rejected  of  m^i 
for  the  sake  of  Jesus  Christ."  However  little  they  may  design 
it,  my  enemies  are  my  greatest  friends.  What  I  most  fear,  is  a 
calm ;  but  the  enmity  which  is  in  the  hearts  of  natural  men 
against  Christ,  will  not  suffer  them  to  be  quiet  long :  No ;  as  I 
hope  the  work  of  God  will  increase,  so,  the  rage  of  men  and 
devils  will  increase  also.  Let  us  put  on,  therefore,  the  whols 
armour  of  God  :  let  us  not  fear  the  face  of  men ;  ''  let  ns  fear 
Him  only,  who  can  destroy  both  body  and  soul  in  hell :"  I  saf 
unto  you,  let  us  fear  Him  al^ate.  You  see  how  soon  G^  can 
stop  the  fury  of  bis  enemies. 

You  have  just  now  beard  of  a  proud,  powerful  sealot  stopt  im 
his  full  career,  struck  down  to  the  earth  with  a  light  from  heavcBt 
converted  by  the  almighty  power  of  eflSicacious  grace,  and  there- 
upon zealously  prpmotiag,  nay,  resolutely  suffering  for,  tlMi  fiiithi 
wnich  once  with  threatenings  and  slaughters  he  cttdeavoiirod  la 
destroy.  Let  this  teach  us  to  pity  and  pray  for  our  Lord's  mofi 
inveterate  enemies.  Who  knows,  but  in  answer  thereunto,  our 
Lord  may  give  theYn  repentance  unto  life  T  Moat  think,  that 
Christ  had  respect  to  Stephen's  prayer,  when  he  converted  SaaL 
Perhaps  for  this  reason  God  suffers  his  adveisariea  to  go  ob»  that 


XLI«]  SAUL'S   CONVERSION.  481 

bis  goodness  and  power  may  shine  more  bright  in  their  conver- 
sion.— But  let  not  the  persecutors  of  Christ  take  encouragement 
from  this  to  continue  in  their  opposition.  Remember^  though  Saul 
was  converted^  yet  the  high  priest,  and  Saul's  companions,  were 
left  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins :  and,  if  this  should  be  your 
case,  you  will  of  all  men  be  most  miserable ;  for  persecutors 
have  the  lowest  place  in  hell.  And,  if  Saul  was  struck  to  the 
earth  by  a  light  from  heaven,  how  will  you  be  able  to  stand  be- 
fore Jesus  Christ,  when  he  comes  in  terrible  majesty,  to  take 
vengeance  on  all  those  who  have  persecuted  his  gospel  ?  Then 
the  question,  "  Why  persecutest  thou  me?''  will  cut  you  through 
and  through.  The  secret  enmity  of  your  hearts  shall  be  then 
detected  before  men  and  angels,  and  you  shall  be  doomed  to 
dwell  in  the  blackness  of  darkness  for  evermore.  Kiss  the  Son, 
therefore,  lest  be  be  angry  ;  for  even  you  may  yet  find  mercy,  if 
yoo  believe  on  the  Son  of  God :  though  you  persecute  him,  yet 
he  will  be  your  Jesus.  I  cannot  despair  of  any  of  you,  when  I 
find  a  Saul  among  the  disciples  at  Damascus.  What  though 
your  sins  are  as  scarlet,  the  blood  of  Christ  shall  wash  them  as 
white  as  snow.  Having  much  to  be  forgiven,  despair  not ;  only 
believe,  and  like  Saul,  of  whom  I  have  now  been  speaking,  love 
much.  He  counted  himself  the  chicfest  sinner  of  all,  and  there- 
fore laboured  more  abundantly  than  all. 

Who  is  there  among  you  fearing  the  Lord  ?  Whose  hearts 
bath  the  Lord  now  opened  to  hearken  to  the  voice  of  his  poor 
unworthy  servant  ?  Surely,  the  Lord  will  not  let  me  preach  in 
vain.  Who  is  the  happy  soul  that  is  this  day  to  be  washed  in 
the  blood  of  the  Lamb  t  Will  no  poor  sinner  take  encourage- 
ment from  Saul  to  come  to  Jesus  Christ  ?  You  are  all  throng- 
ing round,  but  which  of  you  will  touch  the  Lord  Jesus  ?  What 
a  comfort  will  it  be  to  Saul,  and  to  yoiir  own  souls,  when  you 
meet  faim  in  heaven,  to  tell  him,  that  hearing  of  his,  was  a  means, 
under  God,  of  your  conversion  !  Doubtless  it  was  written  for 
the  encouragement  of  all  poor,  returning  sinners ;  he  himself 
tdls  us  so :  for  **  in  me  God  shewed  all  long-suiTering,  that  I 
might  be  an  example  to  them  that  should  hereafter  believe." 
Were  Saul  here  himself,  he  would  tell  you  so,  indeed  he 
woidd ;  but  being  dead,  by  this  account  of  his  conversion  he 
yet  speaketh.  O  that  God  may  speak  by  it  to  your  hearts !  O 
that  the  arrows  of  God  might  this  day  stick  fast  in  your  souls, 
and  you  made  to  cry  out,  ^  Who  art  thou.  Lord  ?  Are  there  any 
ffuch  amongst  you  i  Methinks  I  feel  something  of  what  this  Saul 
felt,  when  he  said,  "  I  travail  in  birth  again  for  you  till  Christ 
be  formed  again  in  your  hearts."  O  come,  come  away  to  Jesus, 
in  wiiom  Saul  believed  ;  and  then  I  care  not  if  the  high-priests 
issue  out  never  so  many  writs,  or  injuriously  drag  me  to  a  pri- 
son. The  thoughts  of  being  instrumental  in  saving  you,  will 
mak«  me  sing  praises  even  at  midnight :  and  I  know  you  will 
be  iBy  joy  and  crown  of  rejoicing,  when  I  am  delivered  from 
this  earthly  prison,  and  meet  you  in  the  kingdom  of  God  herei 
after. — Now  to  God,  &c. 

♦  2g 


482  MARKS   OF    HAVING    RECEIVED  [XLII. 

SERMON  XLII. 

MARKS    OF    HAVING    RECBIVEU   THE   HOLY    GHOST. 

Have  ye  received  the  Holy  Ghost  since  ye  believed  ?— Acts  xix.  2L 

Two  different  significations  have  been  given  of  these  words. 
Some  have  supposed,  that  the  question  here  put^  is,  whether 
these  disciplesy  whom  St.  Paul  found  at  Ephesus,  had  received 
the  Holy  Ghost  by  imposition  of  hands  at  confirmation  ?  Others 
think  these  disciples  had  been  already  baptized  into  John's 
baptism ;  which  not  being  attended  with  an  immediate  effusion 
of  the  holy  Spirit,  the  apostle  here  asks  them,  whether  they  had 
received  the  Holy  Ghost  by  being  baptized  into  Jesus  Christ? 
And,  upon  their  answering  in  the  negative,  he  first  baptized^  and 
then  confirmed  them  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus. 

Which  of  these  interpretations  is  the  most  true,  is  neither 
easy  nor  very  necessary  to  determine.  However,  as  the  words 
contain  a  most  important  inquiry,  without  any  reference  to  the 
context,  I  shall  from  them. 

First,  Shew  who  the  Holy  Ghost  here  spoken  of,  is :  and  that 
we  must  all  receive  him,  before  we  can  be  styled  true  believers. 

Secondly y  I  shall  lay  down  some  scripture  marks  whereby  we 
may  know  whether  we  have  thus  received  the  Holy  Ghost,  or 
not.    And, 

Thirdly,  By  way  of  conclusion,  address  myself  to  several 
distinct  classes  of  professors,  concerning  the  doctrine  that  shall 
have  been  delivered. 

First,  I  am  to  shew  who  the  Holy  Ghost,  spoken  of  in  the 
text,  is :  and  that  we  must  all  receive  him  before  we  can  be 
styled  true  believers. 

By  the  Holy  Ghost  is  plainly  signified  the  holy  Spirit,  the 
third  Person  in  the  ever-blessed  Trinity,  consubstantial  and  co- 
eternal  with  the  Father  and  the  Son,  proceeding  from,  yet  equal 
to  them  both.  He  is  emphatically  called  Holy,  because  in- 
finitely holy  in  himself,  and  the  author  and  finisher  of  all  holi- 
ness in  us. 

This  blessed  Spirit,  who  once  moved  on  the  face  of  the  great 
deep ;  who  overshadowed  the  blessed  Virgin  before  that  holy 
child  was  bom  of  her ;  who  descended  in  a  bodily  shape,  like  a 
dove,  on  our  blessed  Lord,  when  he  came  up  out  of  the  water 
at  his  baptism ;  and  afterwards  came  down  in  fiery  tong^ues  on 
the  heads  of  all  his  apostles  at  the  day  of  Pentecost ;  this  is  the 
Holy  Ghost,  who  must  move  on  the  faces  of  our  souls ;  this 
power  of  the  Most  High,  must  come  upon  us,  and  we  most  ba 
baptized  with  this  baptism  and  refining  fire,  before  we  can  be 
styled  true  members  of  Christ's  mystical  body. 

Thus  says  the  apostle  Paul,  **  Know  ye  not  that  Jesos  Chiist 
is  in  you,  (that  is,  by  his  spirit)  unless  you  are  reprobates  t" 
And,  *'  If  any  man  hath  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  he  is  none  of 
bis."  And  again,  says  St.  John,  '^  We  know  that  we  are  his^by 
the  Spirit  that  he  hath  given  us." 


XLII.]  THB   HOLY    GHOST.  483 

It  is  not,  indeed,  necessary  that  we  should  have  the  Spirit 
now  given  in  that  miracnlons  manner  in  which  he  was  at  first 
given  to  our  Lord's  apostles,  by  signs  and  wonders ;  but  it  is 
absolutely  necessary  that  we  should  receive  the  Holy  Ghost  in 
his  sanctifying  graces,  as  really  as  they  did :  and  so  will  it  con« 
tinue  t9  be  till  the  end  of  the  world. 

For  thus  stands  the  case  between  God  and  man :  God  at  first 
made  roan  upright,  or,  as  the  sacred  penman  expresses  it,  'Mn 
the  image  of  God  made  he  man  ;"  that  is,  his  soul  was  the  very 
copy,  the  transcript,  of  the  divine  nature.  He,  who  before,  by 
his  almighty  fiat,  spake  the  world  into  being,  breathed  into  man 
jthe  breath  of  spiritual  life,  and  his  soul  was  adorned  with  a 
resemblance  of  the  perfections  of  Deity.  This  was  the  finishing 
stroke  of  the  creation ;  the  perfection  both  of  the  moral  and 
material  world.  And  so  near  did  man  resemble  his  divine 
Original,  that  God  could  not  but  rejoice  and  take  pleasure  in  his 
own  likeness:  and,  therefore,  we  read,  that  when  God  had 
finished  the  inanimate  and  brutish  part  of  the  creation,  he  looked 
upon  it,  and  beheld  it  was  good;  but  when  that  lovely,  god- 
like creature  man  was  made,  behold  it  was  vety  good. 

Happy,  unspeakably  happy  must  man  needs  be,  when  thus  a 
partaker  of  the  divine  nature.  And  thus  might  he  have  still 
continued,  had  he  continued  holy.  But  God  placed  him  in  a 
state  of  probation,  with  a  free  grant  to  eat  of  every  tree  in  the 
garden  of  Eden,  except  the  tree  of  knowledge  of  good  and  evil : 
the  day  he  should  eat  thereof^  he  was  surely  to  die ;  that  is,  not 
only  to  be  subject  to  temporal,  but  spiritual  death ;  and,  conse- 
quently, to  lose  that  divine  image,  that  spiritual  life  God  had 
not  long  since  breathed  into  him,  and  which  was  as  much  his 
happiness  as  his  glory. 

These,  one  would  imagine,  were  easy  conditions  for  a  finite 
creature's  happiness  to  depend  on.  But  man,  unhappy  man, 
being  seduced  by  the  devil,  and  desiring,  like  him,  to  be  equal 
with  bis  Maker,  did  eat  of  the  forbidden  fruit ;  and  thereby  be- 
came liable  to  that  curse,  which  the  eternal  God,  who  cannot 
lie^  had  denounced  against  his  disobedience. 

Accordingly  we  read,  that  soon  after  Adam  had  fallen,  he 
complained  that  he  was  naked ;  naked,  not  only  as  to  his  body, 
but  naked  and  destitute  of  those  divine  graces  which  before 
decked  and  beautified  his  soul.  The  unhappy  mutiny  and  dis- 
order which  the  visible  creation  fell  into,  the  briars  and  thorns 
which  now  sprung  up  and  overspread  the  earthy  were  but  poor 
emblems,  lifeless  representations,  of  that  confusion  and  rebel- 
lion^ and  those  divers  lusts  and  passions,  which  sprung  up  in, 
and  quite  overwhelmed,  the  soul  of  man  immediately  after  the 
fall.  Alas !  he  was  now  no  longer  the  image  of  the  invisible 
God;  but  as  he  bad  imitated  the  devil's  sin,  he  became,  as  it 
were,  a  partidcer  of  the  devil's  nature,  and  from  an  union  witb« 
sunk  into  a  state  of  direct  enmity  against,  God. 

Now»  in  thid  dreadful  disordered  condition  are  all  of  us  brought 
into  the  world :  for  as  the  root  is,  such  must  the  branches  be« 

2g2 


484  MARKS   OK   HAVING    RECEIVED  [XLII. 

Accordingly  we  are  told,  ''  That  Adam  begat  a  son  in  his  own 
likeness ;"  or,  with  the  same  corrupt  nature  which  he  himself 
had,  after  he  had  eaten  the  forbidden  fruit.  And  experience  as 
well  as  scripture  proves,  that  we  also  are  altogether  bom  in  sin 
and  corruption ;  and  therefore  incapable,  whilst  in  snch  a  state, 
to  hold  communion  with  God.  For  as  light  cannot  have  com* 
munion  with  darkness,  so  God  can  have  no  commanion  with 
such  polluted  sons  of  Belial. 

Here  then  appears  the  end  and  design  why  Christ  was  mani- 
fest in  the  flesh ;  to  put  an  end  to  these  disorders,  and  to  re* 
store  us  to  that  primitive  dignity  in  which  we  were  at  first  cre- 
ated. Accordingly  he  shed  his  precious  blood  to  satisfy  his 
Father's  justice  for  our  sins ;  and  thereby  also  he  procured  for 
us  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  should  once  more  re-instamp  the  divine 
image  upon  our  hearts,  and  make  us  capable  of  living  with  and 
enjoying  the  blessed  God. 

This  was  the  great  end  of  our  Lord's  coming  into  the  worid; 
nay,  this  is  the  only  end  why  the  world  itself  is  now  kept  in 
being.  For  as  soon  as  a  sufficient  number  are  sanctified  oat  of 
it,  the  heavens  shall  be  wrapped  up  like  a  scroll,  the  elements 
shall  melt  with  fervent  heat,  the  earth,  and  all  that  therein  is, 
shall  be  burnt  up. 

This  sanctification  of  the  Spirit,  is  that  new  birth  mentioned 
by  our  blessed  Lord  to  Nicodemus,  **  without  which  we  cannot 
see  the  kingdom  of  God.''  This  is  what  St.  Paut  calls  betog 
*'  renewed  in  the  spirit  of  our  minds ;"  and  it  is  the  spring  of  that 
holiness,  without  which  no  man  shall  see  tlie  Lord. 

Thus,  then,  it  is  undeniably  certain,  we  must  receive  the 
Holy  Ghost  ere  we  can  be  styled  true  members  of  Christ's  mys* 
tical  body.     I  come,  in  the 

Second  place.  To  lay  down  some  scriptural  marks,  whereby 
we  may  easily  judge,  whether  we  have  thus  received  the  Holy 
Ghost  or  not.    And  the 

First  I  shall  mention,  is,  our  having  received  a  spirit  of  prayer 
and  supplication ;  for  that  always  accompanies  the  spirit  ot 
grace.  No  sooner  was  Paul  converted,  but  ''behold  he  pray- 
eth."  And  this  was  urged  as  an  argam2nt,to  convince  Ananias 
that  he  was  converted.  And  God's  elect  are  also  said  to  ''cry 
to  him  day  and  night." 

And  since  one  great  work  of  the  holy  Spirit  is  to  convince  cs 
of  sin,  and  to  set  us  upon  seeking  pardon  and  renewiag  grace 
through  the  all-sufficient  merits  of  a  crucified  Redeemer ;  whoso- 
ever has  felt  the  power  of  the  world  to  come,  awakening  him 
from  his  spiritual  lethargy,  cannot  but  be  always  crying  out, 
"Lord,  what  wouldst  thou  have  me  to  do?"  Or,  in  the  lan- 
guage of  the  importnnate  blind  Bartimeus, "  Jesus,  thou  Son  of 
David,  have  mercy  upon  me." 

The  blessed  Jesus,  as  he  received  the  Holy  Ghost  witkoat 
measure,  so  he  evidenced  it  by  nothing  more  than  his  frequent 
addresses  at  the  throne  of  grace.  Accordingly  we  read,  XiM  he 
was  often  alone  on  the  mountain  praying ;  that  be  rose  a  great 


XLll,]  THE   HOLY    GHOST.  465 

%vbile  before  day  to  pray ;  nay,  that  be  spent  wbole  nights  in 
prayer.  And  whosoever  is  made  partaker  of  the  same  Spirit 
with  the  holy  Jesus^  will  be  of  the  same  mind,  and  delight  in 
nothing  so  much  as  to  '^  draw  nigh  unto  God,"  and  lift  up  holy 
bands  and  hearts  in  frequent  and  devout  prayer. 

It  must  be  confessed,  indeed,  that  this  spirit  of  supplication 
is  often  as  it  were  sensibly  lost,  and  decays,  for  some  time,  even 
in  those  who  have  actually  received  the  Holy  Ghost.  Through 
spiritual  dryness  and  barrenness  of  soul,  they  find  in  them- 
selves a  listlessness  and  backwardness  to  this  duty  of  prayer ; 
but  then  they  esteem  it  as  their  ^ross,  and  still  persevere  in 
seeking  Jesus,  though  it  be  sorrowing :  and  their  hearts,  not* 
withstanding,  are  fixed  upon  God,  though  they  cannot  exert 
their  affections  so  strongly  as  usual,  on  account  of  that  spiritual 
deadness,  which  God,  for  wise  reasons,  has  sufiered  to  benumb 
their  souls. 

But  as  for  the  formal  believer,  it  is  not  so  with  him  :  no,  he 
either  prays  not  at  all,  or,  if  he  does  enter  into  his  closet,  it  is 
with  reluctance,  out  of  custom,  or  to  satisfy  the  checks  of  his 
conscience.  Whereas  the  true  believer  can  no  more  live  with- 
out prayer,  than  without  food  day  by  day.  And  he  finds  his 
soul  as  really  and  perceptibly  fed  by  the  one,  as  bis  body  is 
nouri;shed  and  supported  by  the  other. 

A  Second  scripture  mark  of  our  having  received  the  Holy 
Ghost,  is,  Not  committing  sin. 

"  Whosoever  is  bom  of  God,  (says  St.  John,)  sinneth  not, 
neither  can  he  sin,  because  his  seed  remaineth  in  him."  Neither 
can  he  siyi.  This  expression  does  not  imply  the  impossibility  ol 
a  Christian's  sinning;  for  we  are  told,  that  ''in  many  things  we 
offend  all :"  it  only  means  thus  much,  that  a  man  who  is  really 
born  again  of  God,  does  not  wilfully  commit  sin,  much  less  live 
in  the  habitual  practice  of  it ;  for  how  shall  he  that  it;  dead  to 
sin,  as  every  converted  person  is,  live  any  longer  therein  ? 

It  is  true,  a  man  that  is  bom  again  of  God,  may,  through 
surprise,  or  the  violence  of  a  temptation,  fall  into  an  act  of  sin  : 
witness  the  adultery  of  David,  and  Peter's  denial  of  his  Master. 
But  then,  like  them,  he  quickly  rises  again,  goes  out  from  the 
world,  and  weeps  bitteriy ;  washes  the  guilt  of  sin  away  by  the 
tears  of  a  sincere  repentance,  joined  with  faith  in  the  blood  of 
Jesus  Christ ;  takes  double  heed  to  his  ways  for  the  future,  and 
perfects  holiness  in  the  fear  of  God. 

The  meaning  of  this  expression  of  the  apostle,  that  **  a  man 
who  is  born  of  God,  cannot  commit  sin,"  has  been*  fitly  illus- 
trated, by  the  example  of  a  covetous  worldling,  to  the  genera) 
bent  of  whose  inclinations,  liberality  and  profuseness  are  directly 
opposite :  but  if,  upon  some  unexpected,  sudden  occasion,  he 
does  play  the  prodigal,  he  immediately  repents  him  of  his  fault, 
liiid  returns  with  double  care  to  his  niggardliness  again.  And 
so  is  every  one  that  is  born  again :  to  commit  sin,  is  as  contrary 
to  the  habitual  frame  and  tendency  of  his  mind,  as  generosity  is 

*  Law*!  ChrifltiaB  Peifeetion. 


486  MARKS   OP   HAVING    RECEIVED.  [XLII. 

to  the  inclinations  of  a  miser ;  but  if  at  any  time  he  is  drawn  into 
sin,  he  immediately,  with  doable  zeal,  returns  to  his  duty,  and 
brings  forth  fruit  meet  for  repentance.  Whereas,  the  uncon- 
verted sinner  is  quite  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins :  or  if  he  does 
abstain  from  gross  acts  of  it,  through  worldly  selfish  motives, 
yet  there  is  some  right  eye  he  will  not  pluck  out ;  some  right 
hand  which  he  will  not  cut  off;  some  specious  Agag  that  be 
will  not  sacrifice  for  God ;  and  thereby  he  is  convinced  that  be  is 
but  a  mere  Saul :  and  consequently,  whatever  pretensions  he  may 
make  to  the  contrary,  he  has  not  yet  received  the  Holy  Grhost 

A  Third  mark  whereby  we  may  know,  whether  or  not  we 
have  received  the  Holy  Ghost,  is»  Our  conquest  over  the  world. 

"  For  whosoever  is  bom  of  God,  (says  the  apostle,)  over- 
Cometh  the  world."  By  the  world,  we  are  to  understand,  as 
St.  John  expresses  it,  ^'  all  that  is  in  the  world,  the  lust  of  the 
eye,  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  and  the  pride  of  life."  And  by  over- 
coming  of  it,  is  meant  our  renouncing  these,  so  as  not  to  fol- 
low, or  be  led  by  them  :  for  whosoever  is  born  from  above,  has 
bis  affections  set  on  things  above:  he  feels  a  divine  attraction 
in  his  soul,  which  forcibly  draws  his  mind  heavenwards ;  and 
as  the  hart  pantetli  after  the  water-brooks,  so  doth  it  make  bis 
soul  to  long  after  the  enjoyment  of  his  God. 

Not  that  he  is  so  taken  up  with  the  affairs  of  another  life, 
as  to  neglect  the  business  of  this :  no ;  a  truly  spiritual  mao 
dares  not  stand  any  day  idle ;  but  then  he  takes  care,  thou«;h 
he  laboureth  for  the  meat  which  perisheth,  first  to  secure  that 
which  endureth  to  everlasting  life.  Or  if  God  has  exalted  him 
above  his  brethren,  yet,  like  Moses,  Joseph,  and  Daniel,  he, 
notwithstanding,  looks  upon  himself  as  a  stranger  and  pilgrim 
upon  earth :  having  received  a  principle  of  new  life,  he  walks 
by  faith,  and  not  by  sight ;  and  his  hopes  being  full  of  immor- 
tality, he  can  look  on  all  things  here  below,  as  vanity  and 
vexation  of  spirit :  In  short,  though  he  is  in,  yet  he  is  not  of  the 
world;  and  as  he  was  made  for  the  enjoyment  of  God,  so 
nothing  but  God  can  satisfy  his  soul. 

The  ever-blessed  Jesus  was  a  perfect  instance  of  overcoming 
the  world.  For  though  he  went  about  continually  doing  goodl, 
and  always  lived  as  in  a  press  and  throng ;  yet  wherever  be 
was,  his  conversation  tended  heavenwards.  In  like  manner, 
be  that  is  joined  to  the  Lord  in  one  spirit,  will  so  order  his 
thoughts,  words,  and  actions,  that  he  will  evidence  to  all,  that 
his  conversation  is  in  heaven. 

On  the  contrary,  an  unconverted  man  being  of -the  earth,  is 
earthy ;  and  having  no  spiritual  eye  to  discern  spiritual  things, 
he  is  always  seeking  for  happiness  in  this  life,  where  it  never 
was,  will,  or  can  be  found.  Being  not  born  again  from  above, 
he  is  bowed  down  by  a  spirit  of  natural  infirmity :  the  serpent's 
curse  becomes  his  choice,  and  he  eats  of  the  dust  of  the  earth  all 
the  days  of  his  life. 

A  Fourth  scripture  mark  of  our  having  received  the  Holy 
Ghost,  is.  Our  loving  one  anojther. 


XUf.]  THB   HOLY.  GHOST.  487 

"  We  know  (says  St.  John)  we  are  passed  from  death  unto 
lifey  because  we  love  the  brethren."  And  by  this  (says  Christ 
himself)  shall  ^11  men  know  that  ye  are  my  disciples,  if  ye  have 
love  one  towards  another/'  Love  is  the  fulfilling  of  the  gospel, 
as  well  as  of  the  law ;  for  "  God  is  love ;  and  whosoever  dwell- 
eth  in  love,  dwelleth  in  God." 

But  by  this  love  we  are  not  {o  understand  a  softness  and 
tenderness  of  mere  nature,  or  a  love  founded  on  worldly  motives 
(for  this  a  natural  man  may  have  Q  but  a  love  of  our  brethren, 
proceeding  from  love  towards  God :  loving  all  men  in  general, 
because  of  their  relation  to  God ;  and  loving  good  men  in  par- 
ticular, for  the  grace  we  see  in  them,  and  because  they  love  our 
Lord  Jesus  in  sincerity. 

This  is  christian  charity,  and  that  new  commandment  which 
Christ  gave  to  his  disciples.  New,  not  in  in  its  object,  but  in 
the  motive  and  example  whereon  it  is  founded,  even  Jesus 
Christ.  This  is  that  love  which  the  primitive  Christians  were 
so  renowned  for,  that  it  became  a  proverb.  See  how  these  Chris- 
tians love  one  another.  And  without  this  love,  though  we 
should  give  all  our  goods  to  feed  the  poor,  and  our  bodies  to  be 
burnt,  it  would  profit  us  nothing. 

Further,  this  love  is  not  confined  to  any  particular  set  of 
men,  but  is  impartial  and  catholic:  a  love  that  embraces  God's 
image  wherever  it  beholds  it,  and  that  delights  in  nothing  so 
much  as  to  see  Christ's  kingdom  come. 

This  is  the  love  wherewith  Jesus  Christ  loved  mankind :  He 
loved  all,  even  the  worst  of  men,  as  appears  by  his  weeping 
over  the  obstinately  perverse ;  but  wherever  he  saw  the  least 
appearance  of  the  divine  likeness,  that  soul  he  loved  in  par- 
ticular. Thus  we  read,  that  when  he  heard  the  young  man 
say,  "  All  these  things  have  I  kept  from  my  youth,"  that  so 
far  he  loved  him.  And  when  he  saw  any  noble  instance  of  ^ 
faith,  though  in  a  Centurion  and  a  Syrophenician,  aliens  to  the  " 
commonwealth  of  Israel,  how  is  he  said  to  marvel  at,  to 
rejoice  in,  speak  of,  and  commend  it !  So  every  spiritual 
disciple  of  Jesus  Christ  will  cordially  embrace  all  who  worship 
God  in  spirit  and  in  truth,  however  they  may  difier  as  to  the 
appendages  of  religion,  and  in  things  not  essentially  necessary 
to  salvation. 

I  confess,  indeed,  that  the  heart  of  a  natural  man  is  not  thus 
enlarged  all  at  once ;  and  a  person  may  really  have  received 
the  Holy  Ghost,  (as  Peter,  no  doubt,  had  when  he  was  unwil- 
ling to  go  to  Cornelius)  though  he  be  not  arrived  to  this :  but 
then,  where  a  person  is  truly  in  Christ,  all  narrowness  of  spirit 
decreases  in  him  daily ;  the  partition  wall  of  bigotry  and  party 
zeal  is  broken  down  more  and  more ;  and  the  nearer  he  comes 
to  heaven,  the  more  his  heart  is  enlarged  with  that  love,  which 
there  will  make  no  difference  between  any  people,  nation,  or 
language,  but  we  shall  all,  with  one  heart,  and  one  voice,  sing 
praises  to  him  that  sitteth  upon  the  throne  for  ever.  But  I 
hasten  to  a — 


488  MARKS   OP   HAVING   RBCBIVBD  [XLII. 

Fifth  scripture  mark»  Loving  oar  enemies. 

'^  I  say  onto  you^  (says  Jesus  Cbrist»)  Love  your  enemies, 
bless  them  that  curse  you,  do  good  to  those  that  hate  yoa,  aad 
pray  for  them  that  despitefuUy  use  you  and  persecute  yoa.'' 
And  this  duty  of  loving  your  enemies  is  so  necessary,  that 
ivithout  it,  our  righteousness  does  not  exceed  the  righteousness 
of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees,  or  even  of  publicans  and  sinners; 
*f  For  if  you  do  good  to  them  only,  who  do  good  to  you,  what  da 
you  more  than  others?"  What  do  you,  extraordinary?  ''  Do  not 
even  the  publicans  the  same?"  And  these  precepts  our  Lord 
confirmed  by  his  own  example ;  when  he  wept  over  the  bloody 
city;  when  he  suffered  himself  to  be  led  as  a  sheep  to  the 
slaughter ;  when  he  made  that  mild  reply  to  the  traitor  Judas, 
''Judas,  betrayest  thou  the  Son  of  man  with  a  kiss ;"  and  more 
especially,  when,  in  the  agonies  and  pangs  of  death,  he  prayed 
for  his  very  murderers,  ''  Father,  forgive  them,  for  they  know 
not  what  they  do." 

This  is  a  difficult  duty  to  the  natural  man ;  but  whosoevar  is 
made  partaker  of  the  promise  of  the  Spirit,  will  find  it  practi* 
cable  and  easy :  for  if  we  are  bom  again  of  God,  we  must  be 
like  him,  and  consequently  delight  to  be  perfect  in  this  duty  of 
doing  good  to  our  w  orst  enemies  in  the  same  manner,  though 
not  in  the  same  degree,  as  he  is  perfect :  He  sends  his  rain  on 
the  evil  and  the  good  ;  causeth  his  sun  to  shine  on  the  just  and 
unjust ;  and  more  especially  commended  his  love  towards  us,  that 
whilst  we  were  his  enemies,  he  sent  forth  his  Son,  born  of  a  wo- 
man, made  under  the  law,  that  he  might  become  a  curse  for  us. 

Many  other  marks  are  scattered  up  and  down  the  scriptures, 
whereby  wo  may  know  whether  or  not  we  have  received  the 
Holy  Ghost :  such  as,  **  to  be  carnally  minded  is  death,  but  to 
be  spiritually  minded  is  life  and  peace."  "  Now  the  fruits  <f 
the  Spirit  are  joy,  peace,  long-suffering,  meekness,"  with  a  mul- 
titude of  texts  to  the  same  purpose.  But  as  most,  if  not  all  of 
them,  are  comprehended  in  the  duties  already  laid  down,  I  dam 
affirm,  whosoever,  upon  an  impartial  examination,  can  find  ths 
aforesaid  marks  on  his  soul,  may  be  as  certain,  as  though  aft 
angel  were  to  tell  him,  that  his  pardon  is  sealed  in  heaven* 

As  for  my  own  part,  I  had  rather  see  these  divine  graces,  and 
this  heavenly  temper,  stamped  upon  my  soul,  than  to  hear  as 
angel  from  heaven  saying  unto  me^  Son,  be  of  good  cheer,  tby 
sins  are  forgiven  thee. 

These  are  infallible  witnesses;  these  are  Emmanuel,  God wilk 
and  in  us ;  these  make  up  that  white  stone,  which  none  know^ 
saving  he  who  hath  received  it ;  these  are  the  earnests  of  Ihi 
heavenly  inheritance  in  our  hearts:  in  short,  these  are  gleiy 
begun,  and  are  that  good  thing,  that  better  part,  which,  if  jM 
continue  to  stir  up  this  gift  of  God,  neither  men  nor  deviU  shal 
ever  be  able  to  take  from  us. 

I  proceed,  as  was  proposed,  in  the  Tliird  place,  to  make  M 
application  of  the  doctrine  delivered,  to  several  distinct  classii 
of  professors.    And, 


JLLIi.]  THB  HOLT   SPIRIT.  489 

First,  I  shall  address  mysolf  to  those  who  are  dead  in  tres- 
passes and  sins.  And,  O  how  conld  I  weep  over  yoa^  as  our 
Lord  wept  over  Jerasalem !  For,  alas !  how  distant  must  you 
be  from  Grod !  What  a  prodigious  work  have  you  to  finish^  who, 
instead  of  praying  day  and  night,  seldom  or  never  pray  at  all ! 
And,  instead  of  being  bom  again  of  Grod,  so  as  not  to  commit 
sin,  are  so  deeply  sunk  into  the  nature  of  devils,  as  to  make 
a  mock  at  it?  Or,  instead  of  overcoming  the  world,  so  as  not 
to  follow  or  be  led  by  it,  are  continually  making  provision  for 
the  flesh,  to  fulfil  the  lusts  thereof.  And,  instead  of  being  en- 
dued with  the  godlike  disposition  of  loving  all  men,  even  your 
enemies,  have  your  hearts  full  of  hatred,  malice,  and  revenge, 
and  deride  those  who  are  the  sincere  followers  of  the  lowly  Jesus. 
But  think  you,  O  sinners,  that  God  will  admit  such  polluted 
wretches  into  his  sight  1  Or  should  he  admit  you,  do  you  ima- 
gine you  could  take  any  pleasure  in  him?  No;  heaven  itself 
would  be  no  heaven  to  you ;  the  devilish  dispositions  which  are 
in  your  hearts,  would  render  all  the  spiritual  enjoyments  of 
those  blessed  mansions,  ineffectual  to  make  you  happy.  To 
qualify  you  to  be  blissful  partakers  of  that  heavenly  inheritance 
with  the  saints  in  light,  there  is  a  meetness  required  ;  to  attain 
which,  ought  to  be  the  chief  business  of  your  lives. 

It  is  true,  you,  as  well  as  the  righteous,  in  one  sense,  shall 
see  Grod,  (for  we  must  all  appear  before  the  judgment-seat  of 
Christ ;)  but  you  must  see  him  once,  never  to  see  him  more. 
For  as  you  carry  about  in  you  the  devil's  image,  with  devils 
you  must  dwell :  being  of  the  same  nature,  you  must  riiare  the 
same  doom.  '^  Repent,  therefore,  and  be  converted,  that  your 
sins  may  be  blotted  out.*'  See  that  you  receive  the  Holy 
Ghost,  before  you  go  hence :  for  otherwise,  how  can  you  escape 
the  daimnation  of  hell  ? 

Secondly f  Let  me  apply  myself  to  those  who  deceive  them- 
selves with  false  hopes  of  salvation.  Some,  through  the  influ- 
ence of  a  good  education,  or  other  providential  restraints,  have 
■ot  run  into  the  same  excess  of  riot  with  other  men,  and  they 
think  they  have  no  need  to  receive  the  Holy  Ghost,  but  flatter 
themselves  that  they  are  really  bom  again. 

But  do  you  shew  it  by  bringing  forth  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit? 
Do  you  pray  without  ceasing  T  Do  you  not  commit  sin  ?  Have 
you  overcome  the  world  ?  And  do  you  love  your  enemies,  and 
all  mankind,  in  the  same  manner  as  Jesus  Christ  loved  them? 

If  these  things,  brethren,  be  in  you  and  abound,  then  may 
you  have  confidence  towards  Grod ;  but  if  not,  although  you 
inay  be  civilized,  yet  you  are  not  converted :  no,  you  are  yet 
in  your  sins.  The  nature  of  the  old  Adam  still  reigneth  in 
your  souls;  and  unless  the  nature  of  the  second  Adam  be 
grafted  in  its  room,  you  can  never  see  God. 

Think  not,  therefore,  to  dress  yourselves  up  in  the  ornaments 
of  a  good  nature  and  civil  education,  and  say,  with  Agag,. 
sorely  the  bitterness  of  death  is  past :"  for  God's  justice,  not^ 
withstanding  that,  like    Samuel,  shall    hew  you    to   pieces. 


400  MABES   OP   HAVING    SECEITED  '  [XLIf. 

Uofrever  yoo  may  be  highly  esteemed  in  the  sight  of  men,  yet, 
in  the  sight  of  God,  you  are  but  like  the  apples  of  Sodom, 
dongfaiUs  covered  over  with  sdow,  mere  whited  sepolchres, 
appearing  a  little  beautiful  without,  but  inwardly  fiill  of  cor- 
ruption and  of  all  uncleanness :  and  consequently  will  be  dis- 
missed at  the  last  day  with  a  *'  Verily  I  know  you  not.** 

But  the  word  of  God  is  profitable  for  comfort,  as  well  as  cor- 
rection. 

Thirdly^  Therefore  I  address  myself  to  those  who  are  under 
the  drawings  of  the  Father,  and  are  exercised  with  the  Spirit  of 
bondage,  and,  not  finding  the  marks  before  mentioned,  are  cry- 
ing oat,  Who  shall  deliver  us  from  the  body  of  this  death  ? 

But  fear  not,  little  flock ;  for  notwithstanding  your  present 
infant  state  of  grace,  it  shall  be  your  Father's  gcxHl  pleasure  to 
give  you  the  kingdom.  The  grace  of  God,  through  Jesus  Christ, 
shall  deliver  you,  and  give  you  what  you  thirst  after:  He  hath 
promised,  he  will  also  do  it.  Ye  shall  receive  the  Spirit  of 
adoption,  that  promise  of  the  Father,  if  you  faint  not :  only  per- 
severe in  seeking  it ;  and  determine  not  to  be  at  rest  in  your 
soul,  till  you  know  and  feel  that  you  are  thus  bom  again  from 
above,  and  God's  Spirit  witnesseth  with  your  spirits  that  yon 
are  the  children  of  God. 

Fourthly  and  Lastly,  I  address  myself  to  those  who  have 
received  the^  Holy  Ghost  in  all  his  sanctifying  graces,  and  are 
almost  ripe  for  glory. 

Hail,  happy  saints !  for  your  heaven  is  begun  on  earth :  you 
have  already  received  the  first-fmits  of  the  Spirit,  and  are  pa- 
tiently waiting  till  that  blessed  change  come,  when  your  harvest 
shall  be  complete.  I  see  and  admire  you,  though,  alas !  at  so 
great  a  distance  from  you :  your  life,  I  know,  is  hid  with  Christ  in 
God.  You  have  comforts,  you  have  meat  to  eat,  which  a  sinful, 
carnal,  ridiculing  world  knows  nothing  of.  Christ's  yoke  is  now 
become  easy  to  you,  and  his  burden  light.  You  have  passed 
through  the  pangs  of  the  new  birth,  and  now  rejoice  that  Christ 
Jesus  is  spiritually  formed  in  your  hearts.  You  know  what  it 
is  to  dwell  in  Christ,  and  Christ  in  you.  Like  Jacob's  ladder, 
although  your  bodies  are  on  earth,  yet  your  souls  and  hearts 
are  in  heaven ;  and  by  your  faith  and  constant  recollection,  like 
the  blessed  angels,  you  do  always  behold  the  face  of  your 
Father  which  is  in  heaven. 

I  need  not  exhort  you  to  press  forward,  for  you  know  that  id 
walking  in  the  Spirit  there  is  a  great  reward.  Rather  will  1 
exhort  you,  in  patience  to  possess  your  souls  yet  a  little  while, 
and  Jesus  Christ  will  deliver  you  from  the  burden  of  the  flesh, 
and  an  abundant  entrance  shall  be  administered  to  you,  into  the 
eternal  joy  and  uninterrupted  felicity  of  his  heavenly  kingdom. 

Which  God  of  his  infinite  mercy  grant,  through  Jesus  Christ 
our  Lord :  To  whom,  with  the  Father,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  three 
Persons,  and  one  God,  be  ascribed  all  honour,  power,  and  glory, 
for  ever  and  over. 


k 


3LLIJI.]  THB   ALMOST  CHRISTIAN.  491 

SERMON  XLIU. 

THE     ALMOST     CHRISTIAN. 

Almost  thou  persuadest  me  to  be  a  Christian.z^Acis  xxvi.  28. 

These  words  contain  the  ingenuous  confession  of  king  Agrippa; 
whicti  having  some  reference  to^  it  may  not  be  improper  to 
relate  the  substance  of  the  preceding  verses,  with  which  the 
words  are  so  closely  connected.  , 

The  chapter,  out  of  which  the  text  is  taken,  contains  an 
admirable  account  which  the  great  St.  Paul  gave  of  his  won- 
derful  conversion  from  Judaism  to  Christianity,  when  he  was 
called  to  make  his  defence  before  Festus  a  Gentile  governor, 
and  king  Agrippa.  Oar  blessed  Lord  had  long  since  foretold, 
that  when  the  Son  of  man  should  be  lifted  up,  ''his  disciples 
should  be  brought  before  kings  and  rulers,  for  his  name's  sake, 
for  a  testimony  unto  them."  And  very  good  was  the  design 
of  Infinite  Wisdom  in  thus  ordaining  it ;  for  Christianity  being, 
from  the  beginning,  a  doctrine  of  the  Cross,  the  princes  and 
rulers  of  the  earth  thought  themselves  too  high  to  be  instructed 
by  such  mean  teachers,  or  too  happy  to  be  disturbed  by  such 
unwelcome  truths ;  and  therefore  would  have  always  continued 
strangers  to  Jesus  Christ  and  him  crucified,  had  not  the 
aposdes,  by  being  arraigned  before  them,  gained  opportunities 
of  preaching  to  them  "Jesus  and  the  resurrection."  St.  Paul 
knew  full  well  that  this  was  the  main  reason  why  his  blessed 
Master  permitted  his  enemies  at  this  time  to  arraign  him  at  a 
public  bar ;  and  therefore,  in  compliance  with  the  divine  will, 
Uiinks  it  not  sufficient,  barely  to  make  his  defence,  but  endea- 
vours at  the  same  time  to  convert  his  judges.  And  this  he  did 
with  such  demonstration  of  the  Spirit  and  of  power,  that 
Festus,  unwilling  to  be  convinced  by  the  strongest  evidence, 
cries  out  with  a  loud  voice,  "  Paul,  much  learning  doth  make 
thee  mad."  To  which  the  brave  apostle  (like  a  true  follower 
of  the  holy  Jesus)  meekly  replies,  I  am  not  mad,  most  noble 
Festus,  but  speak  forth  the  words  of  truth  and  soberness." 
But  in  all  probability,  seeing  king  Agrippa  more  affected  with 
his  discourse,  and  observing  in  him  an  inclination  to  know  the 
truth,  he  applies  himself  more  particularly  to  him.  "  The  king 
knoweth  of  these  things ;  before  whom  also  I  speak  freely,  for 
I  am  persuaded  that  none  of  these  things  are  hidden  from  him." 
And  then,  that  if  possible  he  might  complete  his  wished-for 
conversion,  he,  with  an  inimitable  strain  of  oratory,  addressed 
himself  still  more  closely,  "  King  Agrippa,  believes t  thou  the 
prophets  ?  I  know  that  thou  believest  them."  At  which  the 
passions  of  the  king  began  to  work  so  strongly,  that  he  was 
obliged  in  open  court  to  own  himself  affected  by  the  prisoner's 
preaching,  and  ingenuously  to  cry  out,  "  Paul,  almost  thou  per- 
suadest me  to  be  a  Christian." 


402  THB   ALMOST   CHRISTIAN.  [XLIIf. 

Which  words,  taken  with  the  context,  affcrd  us  a  lively  repre- 
sentation of  the  different  reception  which  the  doctrine  of  Christ's 
ministers^  who  come  in  the  power  and  spirit  of  St.  Paul,  meets 
with  now-a-days  in  the  minds  of  men.  For  notwithstanding 
they,  like  this  great  apostle,  '*  speak  forth  the  words  of  truth 
and  soberness  ;"  and  with  such  energy  and  power,  that  all  their 
adversaries  cannot  justly  gainsay  or  resist;  yet,  too  many,  with 
the  noble  Festus  before-mentioned,  being,  like  him,  either  too 
proud  to  be  taught,  or  too  sensual,  too  careless,  or  two  worldly- 
minded  to  live  up  to  the  doctrine,  in  order  to  excuse  themselves, 
cry  out,  that "  much  learning,  (much  study,  or,  what  is  more  un- 
accountable,) much  piety,  hath  made  them  mad."  And  though, 
blessed  be  God !  all  do  not  thus  disbelieve  our  report ;  yet 
amongst  those  who  gladly  receive  the  word,  and  confess  that  we 
speak  the  words  of  truth  and  soberness,  there  are  so  few,  who 
arrive  at  any  higher  degree  of  piety  than  that  of  Agrippa,  or  are 
any  farther  persuaded  than  to  be  almost  Christians,  that  I  can- 
not but  think  it  highly  necessary  to  warn  my  dear  hearers  of  the 
danger  of  such  a  state.  And  therefore,  from  the  words  of  the 
text,  shall  endeavour  to  shew  these  three  things : 

Firsty  What  is  meant  by  an  almost  Christian. 

Secondly,  What  are  the  chief  reasons,  why  so  many  are  no 
more  than  almost  Christians. 

Thirdly,  I  shall  consider  the  ineffectnalness,  danger,  absurdity, 
and  uneasiness  which  attends  those  who  are  but  almost  Chris- 
tians ;  and  then  conclude  with  a  general  exhortation,  to  set  all 
upon  striving  not  only  to  be  almost,  but  altogether  Christians. 

I.  And,  First,  I  am  to  consider  what  is  meant  by  an  almost 
Christian. 

An  almost  Christian,  if  we  consider  him  in  respect  to  his  duty 
to  God,  is  one  that  halts  between  two  opinions ;  that  wavers 
between  Christ  and  the  worid ;  that  would  reconcile  God  and 
Mammon,  light  and  darkness,  Christ  and  Belial.     It  is  true,  be 
has  an  inclination  to  religion,  but  then  he  is  very  cautious  how 
he  goes  too  fur  in  it :  his  false  heart  is  always  crying  out,  Spai« 
thyself,  do  thyself  no  harm.     He  prays  indeed,  that  **  God*s  will 
may  be  done  on  earth,  as  it  is  in  heaven."     But  notwithstand- 
ing, he  is  very  partial  in  his  obedience,  and  fondly  hopes  that 
Grod  will  not  be  extreme  to  mark  every  thing  that  he  wilfully 
does  amiss  ;  though  an  inspired  apostle  has  told  him,  that  **  be 
who  offends  in  one  point  is  guilty  of  all."     But  chiefly,  be  is 
one  that  depends  much  on  outward  ordinances,  and  on  tbtt 
account  looks  upon  himself  as  righteous,  and  desjHses  others; 
though  at  the  same  time  he  is  as  great  a  stranger  to  the  divine 
life  as  any  other  person  whatsoever.     In  short,  he  is  fond  of  the 
form,  but  never  experiences  the  power  of  godliness  in  his  heart 
He  goes  on  year  after  year,  attending  on  the  means  of  grace, 
but  then,  like  Pharaoh's  lean  kine,  he  is  never  the  better,  bol 
rather  the  worse  for  them. 

If  you  consider  him  in  respect  to  his  neighbour,  he  is  oae  tkat 
is  strictly  just  to  all ;  but  then  this  does  not  proceed  from  aay 


^Lill.]  THE  ALMOST  CHRISTIAN-  493 

love  to  God  or  regard  to  man^  bat  only  through  a  principle  of 
self-love  :  because  he  knows  dishonesty  will  spoil  his  repntation, 
and  consequently  hinder  his  thriving  in  the  world. 

He  is  one  that  depends  much  upon  being  negatively  good, 
and  contents  himselt*  with  the  consciousness  of  having  done  no 
one  any  harm  ;  though  he  reads  in  the  gospel,  that  "  the  unpro- 
fitable servant  was  cast  into  outer  darkness/'  and  the  barren 
fig-tree  was  cursed  and  dried  up  from  the  roots,  not  for  bearing^ 
bad,  but  no  fruit. 

He  is  no  enemy  to  charitable  contributions  in  public,  if  not 
too  frequently  recommended  :  but  tl^en  he  is  unacquainted  with 
the  kind  offices  of  visiting  the  sick  and  imprisoned,  cloth- 
ing the  naked,  and  relieving  the  hungry  in  a  private  manner. 
He  thinks  that  these  things  belong  only  to  the  clergy,  though 
his  own  false  heart  tells  him,  that  nothing  but  pride  keeps  him 
from  exercising  these  acts  of  humility ;  and  that  Jesus  Christy 
in  the  25th  chapter  of  St.  Matthew,  condemns  persons  to  ever- 
lasting punishment,  not  merely  for  being  fornicators,  drunkards^ 
or  extortioners^  but  for  neglecting  these  charitable  offices ; 
*'  When  the  Son  of  man  shall  come  in  his  glory,  he  shall  set  the 
sheep  on  his  right  hand^  and  the  goats  on  his  left.  And  then 
shall  he  say  unto  them  on  his  left  hand.  Depart  from  me,  ye  cursed, 
into  everlasting  fire,  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels :  for  I 
was  an  hungered,  and  ye  gave  me  no  meat ;  I  was  thirsty,  and 
ye  gave  me  no  drink;  I  was  a  stranger,  and  ye  took  me  not  in ; 
naked,  and  ye  clothed  me  not ;  sick  and  in  prison,  and  ye  visited 
me  not.  Then  shall  they  also  say.  Lord,  when  saw  we  thee  an 
hungered,  or  athirst,  or  a  stranger,  or  naked,  or  sick,  or  in  pri- 
son, and  did  not  minister  unto  thee  ?  Then  shall  he  answer 
them.  Verily  I  say  unto  you.  Inasmuch  as  ye  have  not  done  it 
unto  one  of  the  least  of  these  my  brethren,  ye  did  it  not  unto 
me :  and  these  shall  go  away  into  everlasting  punishment.'*  I 
thought  proper  to  give  you  this  whole  passage  of  scripture  at 
large,  because  our  Saviour  lays  such  a  particular  stress  upon  it; 
and  yet  it  is  so  little  regarded,  that  were  we  to  judge  by  the  prac- 
tice of  Christians,  one  should  be  tempted  to  tlunk  there  were  no 
such  verses  in  the  Bible. 

But  to  proceed  to  the  character  of  an  atmast  Christian : — If 
we  consider  him  in  respect  of  himself;  as  we  said  he  was  strictly 
honest  to  his  neighbour,  so  he  is  likewise  strictly  sober  in  him* 
self:  but  then  both  his  honesty  and  sobriety  proceed  from  the 
same  principle  of  a  false  self-love.  It  is  true,  he  runs  not  into 
the  same  excess  of  riot  with  other  men  ;  but  then  it  is  not  out 
of  obedience  to  the  laws  of  God,  but  either  because  his  consti- 
tution will  not  away  with  intemperance ;  or  rather  because  he 
is  cantious  of  forfeiting  his  reputation,  or  unfitting  himself  for 
temporal  business.  But  though  he  is  so  prudent  as  to  avoid 
intemperance  and  excess,  for  the  reasons  before  mentioned ;  vet 
be  aTways  goes  to  the  extremity  of  what  is  lawful.  It  is  true, 
he  is  no  drunkard;  but  then  he  has  no  Christian  self-denial* 
He  cannot  think  our  Saviour  to  bo  so  austere  a  Master^  as  to 


494  .  THE   ALMOST   CHRISTIAN.  [XLIII. 

deny  us  to  indulge  ourselves  in  some  particulars:  and  so  by 
this  means  he  is  destitute  of  a  sense  of  true  religion,  as  mndi 
us  if  he  lived  in  debauchery,  or  any  other  crime  whatever.  As 
to  settling  his  principles  as  well  as  practice,  he  is  guided  more 
by  the  world  than  by  the  word  of  God  :  for  his  part,  be  cannot 
think  the  way  to  heaven  so  narrow  as  some  would  make  it ;  and 
therefore  considers  not  so  much  what  scripture  requires,  as  what 
such  and  such  a  good  man  does,  or  what  will  best  suit  his  own 
corrupt  inclinations.  Upon  this  account  he  is  not  only  very 
cautious  himself,  but  likewise  very  careful  of  young  converts, 
whose  faces  are  set  heavenward  ;  and  therefore  is  always  act- 
ing the  devil's  part,  and  bidding  them  spare  themselves,  though 
they  are  doing  no  more  than  what  the  scripture  strictly  requires 
them  to  do :  the  consequence  of  which  is,  that  he  suffers  not 
himself  to  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  those  that  are 
entering  in  he  hinders. 

Thus  lives  the  almost  Christian :  not  that  I  can  say,  I  have 
fully  described  him  to  you ;  but  from  these  outlines  and  sketch* 
es  of  his  character,  if  your  consciences  have  done  their  proper 
office,  and  made  a  particular  application  of  what  has  been  said 
to  your  own  hearts,  I  cannot  but  fear  that  some  of  you  may 
observe  some  features  in  his  picture,  odious  as  it  is,  too  neariy 
resembling  your  own ;  and  therefore  I  cannot  but  hope,  that 
you  will  join  with  the  apostle  in  the  words  immediately  follow- 
ing the  text,  and  wish  yourselves  '*  to  be  not  only  almost,  but 
altogether  Christians." 

II.  I  proceed  to  the  second  general  thing  proposed;  to  consider 
the  reason  why  so  many  are  no  more  than  almost  Christians. 

1.  And  the  first  reason  I  shall  mention  is,  because  so  many 
set  out  with  false  notions  of  religion;  though  they  live  in  a 
christian  country,  yet  they  know  not  what  Christianity  is.  This 
perhaps  may  be  esteemed  a  hard  saying,  but  experience  sadly 
evince^  the  truth  of  it ;  for  some  place  religion  in  being  of  this 
or  that  communion  ;  more,  in  morality  ;  most,  in  a  round  of  da- 
ties,  and  a  model  of  performances  ;  and  few,  very  few,  acknow- 
ledge it  to  be,  what  it  really  is,  a  thorough  inward  change  of 
nature,  a  divine  life,  a  vital  participation  of  Jesus  Christ,  an 
union  of  the  soul  with  God ;  which  the  apostle  expresses  by 
saying,  "  He  that  is  joined  to  the  Lord  is  one  spirit.     Hence 
it  happens,  that  so  many,  even  of  the  most  knowing  professors, 
when  you  come  to  converse  with  them  concerning  the  essence, 
the  life,  the  soul  of  religion,  I  mean  our  new  birth  in  Jesas 
Christ,  confess  themselves  quite  ignorant  of  the  matter,  and 
cry  out  with  Nicodemus,  "  How  can  this  thing  be  Y*     And  no 
wonder  then,  that  so  many  are  only  almost  Christians,  when  so 
many  know  not  what  Christianity  is  :  no  marvel,  that  so  many 
take  up  with  the  form,  when  they  are  quite  strangers  to  the 
power  of  godliness ;  or  content  themselves  with  the  shadow, 
when  they  know  so  little  about  the  substance  of  it.    And  this 
is  one  cause  why  so  many  are  almost,  and  so  few  are  alt<^[etlief 
Christians. 


XLIII.J  THR   ALMOST  CHRISTIAN.  495 

2.  A  second  reason  that  may  be  assigned  why  so  many  are 
no  more  than  almost  Christians,  is  a  servile  fear  of  man  :  multi- 
tudes there  are,  and  have  been,  who,  though  awakened  to  a 
sense  of  the  divine  life,  and  have  tasted  and  felt  the  powers  of 
the  world  to  come ;  yet  out  of  a  base  sinful  fear  of  l>eing  counted 
singular,  or  contemned  by  men,  have  suffered  all  those  good 
impresssions  to  wear  off.  It  is  true,  they  have  some  esteem 
for  Jesus  Christ ;  but  then,  like  Nicodemus,  they  would  come  to 
him  only  by  night :  they  are  willing  to  serve  him ;  but  then  they 
would  do  it  secretly,  for  fear  of  the  Jews  ;  they  have  a  mind  to 
see  Jesus,  but  then  they  cannot  come  to  him  because  of  the 
press,  and  for  fear  of  being  laughed  at  and  ridiculed  by  those 
with  whom  they  used  to  sit  at  meat.  But  well  did  our  Saviour 
prophesy  of  such  persons,  "  How  can  ye  love  me,  who  receive 
honour  one  of  another?"  Alas!  have  they  never  read,  that 
"  The  friendship  of  this  world  is  enmity  with  God :"  and  that 
our  Lord  himself  has  threatened, ''  Whosoever  shall  be  ashamed 
of  me  or  of  my  words,  in  this  wicked  and  adulterous  generation, 
of  him  shall  the  Son  of  man  be  ashamed,  when  he  cometh  in  the 
glory  of  his  Father,  and  of  his  holy  angels?"  No  wcmder  that  so 
many  are  no  more  than  almost  Christians,  since  so  many  **  love 
the  praise  of  men  more  than  the  honour  which  cometh  of  God." 

3.  A  third  reason  why  so  many  are  no  more  than  almost 
Christians,  is  a  reigning  love  of  money.  This  was  the  pitiable 
case  of  that  forward  young  man  in  the  gospel,  who  came  running 
to  our  blessed  Lord,  and,  kneeling  before  him,  inquired  what 
he  must  do  to  inherit  eternal  life ;"  to  whom  our  blessed  Mas- 
ter replied,  '^  Thou  knowest  the  commandments.  Do  not  kill. 
Do  not  commit  adultery.  Do  not  steal :"  To  which  the  young 
man  replied,  "  All  these  have  I  kept  from  my  youth."  But 
when  our  Lord  proceeded  to  tell  him,  '^  Yet  lackest  thou  one 
thing ;  Go  sell  all  that  thou  hast,  and  give  to  the  poor ;"  he  was 
grieved  at  that  saying,  and  went  away  sorrowful,  for  he  had 
great  possessions  !"  Poor  youth !  he  had  a  good  mind  to  be  a 
Christian,  and  to  inherit  eternal  life,  but  thought  it  too  dear,  if 
it  could  be  purchased  at  no  less  an  expense  than  of  bis  estate  ! 
And  thus  many,  both  young  and  old,  now-a-days,  come  running 
to  worship  our  blessed  Lord  in  public,  and  kneel  before  him 
in  private,  and  inquire  at  his  gospel,  what  they  roust  do  to 
inherit  eternal  life :  but  when  they  find  they  must  renounce  the 
self-enjoyment  of  riches,  and  forsake  all  in  affection  to  follow 
him,  they  cry,  "  The  Lord  pardon  us  in  this  thing !  We  pray 
thee,  have  us  excused." 

But  is  heaven  so  small  a  trifle  in  men's  esteem,  as  not  to  be 
worth  a  little  gilded  earth.  Is  eternal  life  so  mean  a  purchase^ 
as  not  to  deserve  a  temporary  renunciation  of  a  few  transitory 
riches  ?  Surely  it  is.  But  however  inconsistent  such  a  beha- 
Tioor  may  be,  this  inordinate  love  of  money  is  too  evidently  the 
common  and  fatal  cause  why  so  many  are  no  more  than  almost 
Christianis.  f 

4.  Nbr  is^  the  love  of  pleasure  a  less  uncommon  or  a  less  fatal 


496  TH£   ALMOST  CHRISTIAN.  [XLIII. 

cause  why  so  many  are  no  more  than  almost  Christians.  Tboo- 
sands  and  ten  thousands  there  are,  who  despise  riches,  and 
wonld  willingly  be  true  disciples  of  Jesns  Christ,  if  parting  with 
their  money  would  make  them  so ;  but  when  they  are  told  that 
our  blessed  Lord  has  said,  **  Whosoever  will  come  after  him, 
must  deny  himself ;"  like  the  pitiable  young  man  before-men- 
tioned, ''  they  go  away  sc^rowful  :*'  for  they  have  too  great  a 
love  for  sensual  pleasures.  They  will  perhaps  send  for  the 
ministers  of  Christ,  as  Herod  did  for  John,  and  hear  them 
gladly :  but  touch  them  in  their  Uerodias,  tell  them  they  must 
part  with  such  or  such  a  darling  pleasure ;  and  with  wicked 
Ahab  they  cry  out,  '^  Hast  thou  found  us,  O  our  enemy  ?"  TeD 
them  of  the  necessity  of  mortification  and  self-denial,  and  it  if 
as  difficult  for  them  to  hear,  as  if  you  were  to  bid  them  *'  cut  oft 
a  right  hand,  or  pluck  out  a  right  eye."  They  cannot  think  our 
blessed  liord  requires  so  much  at  their  hands,  though  an  in- 
spired apostle  has  commanded  us  to  '^  mortify  our  membos 
which  are  upon  earth."  And  who  himself,  even  after  he  had 
converted  thousands,  and  was  very  nearly  arrived  to  the  end  oi 
his  race,  yet  professed  that  it  was  his  daily  practice  to  "keep 
under  his  body,  and  bring  it  into  subjection,  lest,  after  he  had 
preached  to  others,  he  himself  should  be  a  cast-away .'* 

But  some  men  would  be  wiser  than  this  great  apostle,  and 
chalk  out  to  us  what  they  falsely  imagine  an  easier  way  to  hap* 
piness.  They  would  flatter  us,  we  may  go  to  heaven  without 
offering  violence  to  our  sensual  appetites ;  and  enter  into  the 
strait  gate  without  striving  against  our  carnal  inclinaticms. 
And  this  is  another  reason  why  so  many  are  only  almost,  and 
not  altogether  Christians. 

5.  The  fifth  and  last  reason  I  shall  assign  why  so  many  an 
only  almost  Christians,  is  a  fickleness  and  instability  of  temper. 

It  has  been,  no  doubt,  a  misfortune  that  many  a  minister  ud 
sincere  Christian  has  met  witb»  to  weep  and  wail  over  namben 
of  promising  converts,  who  seemingly  began  in  the  Spirit,  but 
after  a  while  fell  away,  and  basely  ended  in  the  flesh ;  and  this 
not  for  want  of  right  notions  in  religion,  nor  out  of  a  servile 
fear  of  man,  nor  from  the  love  of  money,  or  of  sensual  fileasure, 
but  through  an  instability  and  fickleness  of  temper.  They  looked 
upon  religion,  merely  for  novelty,  as  something  which  pleased 
them  for  a  while ;  but  after  their  curiosity  was  satisfied,  they 
laid  it  aside  again :  like  the  young  man  that  came  to  see  Jesns 
with  a  linen  cloth  about  his  naked  body,  they  have  followed 
him  for  a  season,  but  when  temptations  came  to  take  hold  as 
them,  for  want  of  a  little  more  resolution,  they  have  been  strip- 
ped of  all  their  good  intentions,  and  fled  away  naked.  Tbey  at 
first,  like  a  tree  planted  by  the  water-side,  grew  up  and  floorislied 
for  a  while ;  but  having  no  root  in  themselves,  no  inward  pris- 
ciple  of  holiness  and  piety,  like  Jonah's  gourd,  they  weve  soon 
dried  up  and  withered.  Their  good  intentions  are  too  like  the 
violent  motions  of  the  animal  spirits  of  a  body  newly  briieaded, 
which,  thecq^  impetuous,  ane  not  lasting.    In  short,  they  set 


XLIII.J  TH£   ALMOST   CinUSTIAN.  49?. 

out  well  in  their  journey  to  heaven,  but  iSnding  the  way  eithpr 
narrower  ot  longer  than  they  expected,  through  an  unsteadiness 
of  temper,  they  have  made  an  eternal  halt,  and  so  '*  returned 
like  the  dog  to  his  votnit,  or  like  the  sow  that  was  washed  to 
her  wallowing  in  the  mire !'' 

But  I  tremble  to  pronounce  the  fate  of  such  unstable  pro- 
fessors, who,  having  put  their  hands  to  the  plough,  for  want  of 
a  little  more  resolution,  shamefully  look  back.  How  shall  I 
repeat  to  them,  that  dreadful  threatening,  "  If  any  man  draw 
Ixack,  my  soul  shall  have  no  pleasure  in  him :"  and  again,  '^  It 
is  impossible  (that  is,  exceeding  difficult  at  least)  for  those  that 
have  been  once  enlightened,  and  have  tasted  of  the  heavenly 
gift^  and  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come,  if  they  should  fall 
away,  to  be  renewed  again  unto  repentance."  But  notwith- 
standing the  gospel  is  so  severe  against  apostates,  yet  many 
that  begun  well,  through  a  fickleness  of  temper,  (O  that  none  of 
qs  here  present  may  ever  be  such !)  have  been  by  this  means^  of 
jthe  number  of  those  that  turn  back  unto  perdition.  And  this  is 
the  fifth,  and  the  last  reason  I  shall  givc;^  why  so  many  are  only 
.almost,  and  not  altogether  Christians. 

III.  Proceed  we  now  to  the  third  general  thing  proposed, 
namely,  to  consider  the  folly  of  being  no  more  than  an  ahnost 
Christian. 

i.  And  the  first  proof  I  shall  give  of  the  foUy  of  such  a  pro- 

^ceeding  is,  that  it  is  ineffectual  to  salvation,     it  is  true,  such 

.men  are  almost  good ;  but  almost  to  hit  the  mark,  is  really  to 

jniss  it.   .God  requires  us  "  to  love  him  with  all  our  hearts,  with 

.all  our  souls,  and  with  all  our  strength."    He  loves  us  too  well 

to  admit  any  rival ;  because,  so  far  as  our  hearts  are  empty  of 

God,  so  far  must  they  be  unhappy.    The  devil,  indeed,  like  the 

false  mother  that  came  before  Solomon,  would  have  our  hearts 

.divided,  as  she  would  have  had  the  child;  but  God,  like  the 

true  mother,  will  have  all  or  none.    "  My  son,  give  me  thy 

.heart,"  thy  whole  heart,  is  the  general  call  to  all :  and  if  this  be 

not  done,  we  never  can  expect  the  divine  mercy. 

Persons  may  play  the  hypocrite ;  but  God  at  the  great  day 

will  strike  them  dead,  (as  he  did  Ananias  and  Sapphira  by  the 

mouth  of  his  servant  Peter,)  for  pretending  to  offer  him  all  their 

tbearts,  when  they  keep  back  from  him  the  greatest  part.    They 

Qiay  perhaps  impose  upon  their  fellow-creatures  for  a  while ;  but 

.be  that  enabled  Elijah  to  cry  out,  "  Come  in,  thou  wife  of  Jero- 

.boam/'  when  she  came  disguised  to  inquire  aboutiier  sick  son, 

.will  also  discover  them  through  their  most  artful  dissimulations ; 

.and  if  their  hearts  are  not  wholly  with  him,  appoint  them  their 

,  jportion  with  hypocrites  and  unbelievers. 

2.  But,  Secondly y  What  renders  a  half-way  piety  more  inex- 
,  c.qsable  is,  that  it  is  npt  only  insufficient  to  our  own  salvation, 
jtiit  also  very  prejudicial  to  that  of  others. 

An  almost  Christian  is  one  of  the  most  hurtful  creatures  in 
,Jhe  jfcvorld:  he.  is  a  wolf  in  sheep's  clothing :  he  is  one  of  those 
liiJse  jprophe^,  our  blessed  Lord  bids  us  beware  of,  in  his  sermon 
*  2h 


496  THE   ALMOST   CHRISTIAN.  [XLIH. 

on  the  mount,  who  would  persuade  men  that  the  way  to  hearen 
is  broader  than  it  really  is ;  and  thereby,  as  it  was  observed 
before,  "  enter  not  into  the  kingdom  of  God  themselves  ;  and 
those  that  are  entering  in,  they  hinder."  These,  these  are  the 
men  that  tarn  the  world  into  a  lukewarm  Laodicean  spirit; 
that  hang  out  false  lights,  and  so  shipwreck  unthinking 
benighted  souls  in  their  voyage  to  the  haven  of  eternity.  These 
are  they  who  are  greater  enemies  to  the  cross  of  Christ,  than 
inlidcis  themselves:  for  of  an  unbeliever  every  one  will  be 
aware ;  but  an  almost  Christian,  through  his  subtle  hypocrisy, 
draws  away  many  after  him ;  and  therefore  must  expect  to 
receive  the  greater  damnation. 

3.  But,  Thirdly^  As  it  is  most  prejudicial  to  ourselves  and 
hurtful  to  others,  so  it  is  the  greatest  instance  of  ingratitude 
we  can  express  towards  our  Lord  and  Master  Jesus  Christ. 
For  did  he  come  down  from  heaven,  and  shed  his  precious 
blood,  to  purchase  these  hearts  of  ours,  and  shall  we  only  %vvt 
him  half  of  them?  O  how  can  we  say  we  love -him,  when  oor 
hearts  are  not  wholly  with  him  ?  How  can  we  call  him  our 
Saviour,  when  we  wiU  not  endeavour  sincerely  to  approve  our- 
selves to  him,  and  so  let  him  see  the  travail  of  his  soul,  and  be 
satisfied ! 

Had  any  of  us  purchased  a  slave  at  a  most  expensive  rate, 
and  who  was  before  involved  in  the  utmost  miseries  and  tor- 
ments, and  so  must  have  continued  for  ever,  had  we  shut  up 
our  bowels  of  compassion  from  him ;  and  was  this  slave  after- 
wards to  grow  rebellious,  or  deny  giving  us  but  half  bis  ser- 
vice ;  how,  how  should  we  exclaim  against  his  base  ingrati- 
tude !  And  yet  this  base  ungrateful  slave  thou  art,  O  mao, 
who  acknowledgest  thyself  to  be  redeemed  from  infinite 
unavoidable  misery  and  punishment  by  the  death  of  Jesus 
Christ,  and  yet  wilt  not  give  thyself  wholly  to  him.  But  shall 
we  deal  with  God  our  Maker  in  a  manner  we  would  not  be 
dealt  with  by  a  man  like  ourselves  ?  God  forbid  !  No.  Suffer 
me,  therefore. 

To  add  a  word  or  two  of  exhortation  to  you,  to  excite  yon 
to  be  not  only  almost,  but  altogether  Christians.  O  let  us  scorn 
all  base  and  treacherous  treatment  of  our  King  and  Saviour, 
of  our  God  and  Creator.  Let  us  not  take  some  pains  all  our 
lives  to  go  to  heaven,  and  yet  plunge  ourselves  into  hell  at  last 
Let  us  give  to  God  our  whole  hearts,  and  no  longer  bait 
between  two  opinions  :  if  the  world  be  god,  let  us  serve  that ; 
if  pleasure  be  a  god,  let  us  serve  that ;  but  if  the  Lord,  be  be 
God,  let  us,  O  let  us  serve  him  alone.  Alas!  why,  why  should 
we  stand  out  any  longer  ?  Why  should  we  be  so  in  love  with 
slavery,  as  not  wholly  to  renounce  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the 
devil,  which,  like  so  many  spiritual  chains,  bind  down  oor 
souls,  and  hinder  them  from  flying  up  to  God.  Alas !  what  are 
we  afraid  of?  Is  not  God  able  to  reward  our  entire  obedience? 
If  he  is,  as  the  almost  Christian's  lame  way  of  serving  him 
seems  to  grant,  why  then  will  we  not  serve  him  entirely  ?    For 


XLIII.]  THB   ALMOST    CHRISTIAN.  499 

the  same  reason  we  do  so  mucb^  M'hy  do  we  not  do  more?     Or 
do  you  think  that  being  only  half  religious  will  make  you 
happy^  but  that  going  farther^  will  render  you  miserable  and 
unea.sy?     Alas!   this,  my  brethren,  is  delusion  all  over;   for 
what  is  it  but  this  half  piety,  this  wavering  between  God  and 
the  world,  that  makes  so  many,  that  are  seemingly  well  dis- 
posed, such  utter  strangers  to  the  comforts  of  ireligion?    They 
choose  just  so  much  of  religion  as  will  disturb  them  in  their 
lusts,  and  follow  their  lusts  so  far  as  to  deprive  themselves  of 
the  comforts  of  religion.    Whereas,  on  the  contrary,  would  they 
sincerely  leave  all  in  affection,  and  give  their  hearts  wholly  to 
God,  they  would  then  (and  they  cannot  till  then)  experience 
the  unspeakable  pleasure  of  having  a  mind  at  unity  with  itself, 
and  enjoy  such  a  peace  of  God,  which  even  in  this  life  passes 
all  understanding,  and  which  they  were  entire  strangers  to 
before.    It  is  true,  if  we  will  devote  ourselves  entirely  to  God, 
we  must  meet  with  contempt;  but  then  it  is  because  con- 
tempt is  necessary  to  heal  our  pride.    We  must  renounce  some 
sensual  pleasures;  but  then  it  is  because  those  unfit  us  for 
spiritual  ones,  which  are  infinitely  better.    We  must  renounce 
the  love  of  the  world  ;  but  then  it  is  that  we  may  be  filled  with 
the  love  of  God  :  and  when  that  has  once  enlarged  our  hearts, 
we  shall,  like  Jacob  when  he  served  for  his  beloved  Rachel, 
think  nothing  too  difficult  to  undergo,  no  hardships  too  tedious 
to  endure,  because  of  the  love  we  shall  then  have  for  our  dear 
Redeemer.     Thus  easy,  thus  delightful  will  be  the  ways  of 
God  even  in  this  life :  but  when  once  we  throw  off  these  bodies, 
and  our  souls  are  filled  with  all  the  fulness  of  God,  O !  what 
heart   can    conceive,   what    tongue    can  express,  with  waat 
unspeakable  joy  and  consolation  shall  we  then  look  back  on 
our  past  sincere  and  hearty  services !    Think  you  then,  my  dear 
hearers,  we  shall  repent  we  had  done  too  much ;  or  rather  think 
yon  not,  we  shall  be  ashamed  that  we  did  no  more ;  and  blush 
Vie  were  so  backward  to  give  up  all  to  God ;  when  be  intended 
hereafter  to  give  us  himself? 

Let  me  therefore,  to  conclude,  exhort  yon,  my  brethren,  to 
have  always  before  you  the  unspeakable  happiness  of  enjoying 
Ood.  And  think  withal,  that  every  degree  of  holiness  you 
neglect,  every  act  of  piety  you  omit,  is  a  jewel  taken  out  of 
your  crown,  a  degree  of  blessedness  lost  in  the  vision  of  God. 
O !  do  but  always  think  and  act  thus,  and  you  will  no  longer 
be  labouring  to  compound  matters  between  God  and  the  world; 
but,  on  the  contrary,  be  daily  endeavouring  to  give  up  your- 
^yes  more  and  more  unto  him ;  you  will  be  always  watching, 
always  praying,  always  aspiring  after  farther  degrees  of  purity 
and  love,  and  consequently  always  preparing  yourselves  for  a 
fuller  sight  and  enjoyment  of  that  G(>d,in  whose  presence  there 
is  fulness  of  joy,  and  at  whose  right  hand  there  are  pleasures 
for  evermore.    Amen!  Amen! 


2h3 


600  CHRIST   THE    BELIEVER'S   WISDOM,   ETC.  [XLIV. 

SERMON  XLIV. 

CHRIST   THE    BELIEVER'S   WISDOM,  RIGHTEOUSNESS,  SANCTI- 

FICATION,   AND    REDEMPTION. 

But  of  him  are  ye  in  Christ  Jesus,  who  of  God  is  made  unto  us 
unsdom,  righteousness,  sanctification,  and  redemption. — 
1  Cor.  i.  30. 

Op  all  the  verses  in  the  book  of  God,  this  which  I  have  now 
read  to  you,  is,  I  believe,  oni#  of  the  most  comprehensive :  what 
glad  tidings  does  it  bring  to  believers  !  what  precious  privileges 
are  they  he'rein  invested  with !  how  are  they  here  led  to  the 
fountain  of  them  all,  I  mean,  the  love,  the  everlasting  love  of 
God  the  Father !  "  Of  him  are  ye  in  Christ  Jesus,  who  of  God 
is  made  unto  us  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctification,  and  re- 
demption." 

Without  referring  you  to  the  context,  I  shall  from  the  words. 

First,  Point  out  to  you  the  fountain,  from  which  all  those  bless- 
ings flow,  that  the  elect  of  God  partake  of  in  Jesus  Christ, 
"  Who  of  God  is  made  unto  us."    And, 

Secondly,  I  shall  consider  what  these  blessings  are,  **  Wisdom, 
righteousness,  sanctification,  and  redemption." 

First,  I  would  point  out  to  you  the  fountain,  from  which  all 
those  blessings  flow,  that  the  elect  of  God  partake  of  in  Jesus, 
**  who  of  God  is  made  unto  us,"  the  Father,  he  it  is  who  is 
spoken  of  here.  Not  as  though  Jesus  Christ  was  not  God  also; 
but  God  the  Father  is  the  fountain  of  tlie  Deity ;  and  if  we  con- 
sider Jesus  Christ  acting  as  Mediator,  God  the  Father  is  greater 
than  he ;  there  was  an  eternal  contract  between  the  Father  and 
the  Son :  '*  I  have  made  a  covenant  with  my  chosen,  and  I  have 
sworn  unto  David  ray  servant ;"  now  David  was  a  type  of  Christ, 
with  whom  the  Father  made  a  covenant,  that  if  he  would  obey  and 
snfier,and  make  himself  a  sacrifice  for  sin,  he  should  ''see  bis  seed, 
he  should  prolong  bis  days,  and  the  pleasure  of  the  Liord  should 
prosper  in  his  hands."  This  compact  our  Lord  refers  to,  in  that 
glorious  prayer  recorded  in  the  17th  chapter  of  John  ;  and  there- 
fore he  prays  for,  or  rather  demands  with  a  full  assurance,  all  that 
were  given  to  him  by  the  Father :  '*  Father,  I  will  that  they  also 
whom  thou  hast  given  me,  be  with  me  where  I  am."  For  this 
same  reason,  the  apostle  breaks  out  into  praises  of  God,  even 
the  Father  of  our  I/ord  Jesus  Christ ;  for  he  loved  the  elect  with 
an  everlasting  love,  or,  as  our  Lord  expresses  it,  "  before  the 
foundation  of  the  world ;"  and,  therefore,  to  shew  them  to  whom 
they  were  beholden  for  their  salvation,  our  Lord,  in  the  25th  of 
Matthew,  represents  himself,  saying/^  Come,  ye  blessed  childrea 
of  my  Father,  receive  the  kingdom  prepared  for  you  from  the 
foundation  of  the  world."  And  thus,  in  reply  to  the  mother  of 
Zebedee's  children,  he  says,  *'  It  is  not  mine  to  give,  but  it  shall 
be  given  to  them  for  whom  it  is  prepared  of  the  Father."  The 
apostle  therefore,  when  here  speaking  of  the  Christian's  pri- 
vileges, lest  they  should  sacrifice  to  their  own  drag,  or  think 


ICLIV.]  CHRIST   THE   B^L|EY£R'S    WIBDO^^  ^T€.  SQ^ 

their  salvation  was  owing  to  their  own  faithfulness,  or  improve- 
ment of  their  own  free-will,  reminds  them  to  1oo|l  back  on  the 
everlasting  love  of  God  the  tather ;  **  who  of  pod  is  made  unto 
us/'&c. 

Would  to  God  this  point  of  doctrine  was  considered  more, 
and  people  were  more  studious  of  the  covenant  of  redemption 
between  the  Father  and  the  Son !  we  should  not  then  have  so 
much  disputing  against  the  doctrine  of  election,  or  hear  it  con- 
demned (even  by  good  men)  as  a  doctrine  of  devils.  For  my 
own  part,  I  cannot  see  how  true  humbleness  of  mind  can  be 
attained  without  a  knowledge  of  it ;  and  though  I  \yill  not  say, 
that  every  one  who  denies  election  is  a  bad  man,  yet  I  will  say, 
with  that  sweet  singer,  Mr.  Trail,  it  is  a  very  bad  sign :  such  a 
one,  whoever  he  be,  I  think  cannot  truly  know  himself;  for,  if  we 
deny  election,  we  must,  partly  at  least,  glory  in  ourselves ;  but 
our  redemption  is  so  ordered,  that  no  flesh  should  glory  in  the 
Divine  presence ;  and  hence  it  is,  that  the  pride  of  man  opposes 
this  doctrine,  because,  according  to  this  doctrine,  and  no  other, 
"  he  that  glories,  must  glory  only  in  the  Lord."  But  what  shall  I 
say  ?  Election  is  a  mystery  that  shines  with  such  resplendent 
brightness,  that,  to  make  use  of  the  words  of  one  who  has  drank 
deeply  of  electing  love,  it  dazzles  the  weak  eyes  even  of  some 
of  God's  dear  children;  however,  though  they  know  it  not,  all 
the  blessings  they  receive,  all  the  privileges  they  do  or  will 
enjoy,  through  Jesus  Christ,  flow  from  the  everlasting  love  of 
God  the  Father :  '^  But  of  him  are  you  in  Christ  Jesus,  who  of 
God  is  made  unto  us,  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctification,  and 
redemption." 

Secondly y  I  come  to  shew  what  these  blessings  are,  which  are 
here,  through  Christ,  made  over  to  the  elect.    And, 

1.  First y  Christ'  is  made  to  them  Wisdom  ;  but  wherein  does 
true  wisdom  consist?  Were  I  to  ask  some  of  you,  perhaps  you 
would  say,  in  indulging  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  and  saying  to  your 
souls,  eat,  drink,  and  be  merry :  but  this  is  only  the  wisdom  of 
brutes ;  they  have  as  good  a  gust  and  relish  for  sensual  plea- 
sures, as  the  greatest  epicure  on  earth.  Others  would  tell  me, 
true  wisdom  consisted  in  adding  house  to  house,  and  field  to 
field,  and  calling  lands  after  their  own  names  :  but  this  cannot 
be  true  wisdom ;  for  riches  often  take  to  themselves  wings,  and 
fly  away,  like  an  eagle  towards  heaven.  Even  wisdom  itself 
assures  us,  '^  that  a  man's  life  doth  not  consist  in  the  abundance 
of  the  things  which  he  possesses  ;*'  vanity,  vanity,  all  these 
things  are  vanity ;  for,  if  riches  leave  not  the  owner,  the  owners 
roust  soon  leave  tliem ;  '^  for  rich  men  must  also  die,  and  leave 
their  riches  for  others ;"  their  riches  cannot  procure  them  re- 
demption from  the  grave,  whither  we  are  all  hastening  apace. 

But  perhaps  you  despise  riches  and  pleasure,  and  therefore 
place  wisdom  in  the  knowledge  of  books :  but  it  is  possible  for 
you  to  tell  the  numbers  of  the  stars,  and  call  them  all  by  their 
names,  and  yet  be  mere  fools ;  learned  men  are  not  always  wise ; 
nay,  our  common  learning,  so  much  cried  up,  makes  men  only 


SOS  cHKirr  trb  bblibtsr's  wisdom,  btc.       [xliv. 

BO  many  accomplished  fools ;  to  keep  you  therefore  no  longer  in 
BQspense,  and  withal  to  humble  yon,  I  wiU  send  yon  to  a  heathen 
to  school,  to  learn  what  true  wisdom  is :  **  Know  thyself"  was 
a  saying  of  one  of  the  wise  men  of  Greece ;  this  is  certainly  true 
wisdom,  and  this  is  that  wisdom  spoken  of  in  the  text,  and 
which  Jesus  Christ  is  made  to  all  elect  sinners — they  are  made 
to  know  themselves,  so  as  not  to  think  more  highly  of  them- 
selves than  they  ought  to  think.  Before,  they  were  darkness ; 
now,  they  are  light  in  the  Lord ;  and  in  that  light  they  see  their 
own  darkness ;  they  now  bewail  themselves  as  fallen  creatures 
by  nature,  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,  sons  and  heirs  of  heU, 
and  chHdren  of  wrath ;  they  now  see  that  all  their  righteous- 
nesses are  but  as  filthy  rags ;  that  there  is  no  health  in  their 
souls ;  that  they  are  poor  and  miserable,  blind  and  naked  ;  and 
that  there  is  no  name  given  under  heaven,  whereby  they  can  be 
saved,  but  that  of  Jesus  Christ.  They  see  the  necessity  of 
closing  with  a  Saviour ;  and  behold  the  wisdom  of  Grod  in  ap- 
pointing him  to  be  a  Saviour ;  they  are  also  made  willing  to 
accept  of  salvation  upon  our  Lord's  own  terms,  and  receive  him 
as  their  all  in  all :  thus  Christ  is  made  to  them  wisdom. 

2.  Secondly,  Righteousness,  "Who  of  God  is  made  unto  us, 
wisdom,  righteousness :"  Christ's  whole  personal  righteousness 
is  made  over  to,  and  accounted  theirs.  Being  enabled  to  lay 
hold  on  Christ  by  faith,  God  the  Father  blots  out  their  trans- 
eresnons,  as  with  a  thick  cloud :  their  sins  and  their  iniquities 
he  remembers  no  more ;  they  are  made  the  righteousness  of  God 
in  Christ  Jesus,  "  who  is  the  end  of  the  law  for  righteousness 
to  every  one  that  believe th."  In  one  sense,  Grod  now  sees  no 
sin  in  them ;  the  whole  covenant  of  works  is  fulfilled  in  them  ;  they 
arc  actually  justified,  acquitted,  and  looked  upon  as  righteous  in 
the  sight  of  God  ;  they  are  perfectly  accepted  in  the  beloved  ;  they 
are  complete  in  him ;  the  flaming  sword  of  God's  wrath,  which 
before  moved  every  way,  is  now  removed,  and  free  access  given 
to  the  tree  of  life ;  they  are  enabled  to  reach  out  the  arm  of 
faith,  and  pluck,  and  live  for  evermore.  Hence  it  is  that  the 
apostle,  under  a  sense  of  this  blessed  privilege,  breaks  out  into 
this  triumphant  language ;  "  It  is  Christ  that  justifies,  who  is 
he  that  condemns  ?"  Does  sin  condemn  ?  Christ's  righteousness 
delivers  believers  from  the  guilt  of  it :  Christ  is  their  Saviour, 
and  is  become  a  propitiation  for  their  sins :  who  therefore  shall 
lay  any  thing  to  the  charge  of  Grod's  elect  ?  Does  the  law  con- 
demn ?  By  having  Christ's  righteousness  imputed  to  them,  they 
are  dead  to  the  law,  as  a  covenant  of  works ;  Christ  has  ful- 
filled it  for  them,  and  in  their  stead.  Does  death  threaten  themt 
They  need  not  fear :  the  sting  of  death  is  sin,  the  strength  of 
sin  is  the  law ;  but  God  has  given  them  the  victory,  by  imputing 
to  them  the  righteousness  of  the  Lord  Jesus. 

And  what  a  privilege  is  here !  Well  might  the  angels  at  the 
birth  of  Christ,  say  to  the  humble  shepherds,  "  Behold,  I  bring 
you  glad  tidings  of  great  joy ;"  unto  you  that  believe  in  Christ, 
''a  Saviour  is  born."  And  well  may  angels  rejoice  at  the  con- 


XLIY.]  CHRIST   THB   BELIEVER'S   WISDOM,   ETC.  503 

version  of  poor  sinners ;  for  the  Lord  is  their  righteousness ; 
they  have  peace  with  God  through  faith  in  Christ's  blood,  and 
shall  never  enter  into  condemnation.  O  believers !  (for  this 
discourse  is  intended  in  a  special  manner  for  you)  lift  up  your 
heads  ;  *'  rejoice  in  the  Lord  always ;  again  I  say,  rejoice. 
Christ  is  made  to  you  of  God  righteousness,  what  then  should 
you  fear  ?  You  are  made  the  righteousness  of  Grod  in  him ;  you 
may  be  called,  "  The  Lord  our  righteousness."  Of  what  then 
should  you  be  afraid?  What  shall  separate  you  henceforward 
from  the  love  of  Christ?  '^  Shall  tribulation,  or  distress,  or  perr 
secutiou,  or  famine,  or  nakedness,  or  peril,  or  sword  ?  No,  I  am 
persuaded,  neither  death,  nor  life,  nor  angels,  nor  principalities, 
nor  powers,  nor  things  present,  nor  things  to  come,  nor  height, 
nor  depth,  nor  any  other  creature,  shall  be  able  to  separate 
you  from  the  love  of  God,  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord," 
who  of  God  is  made  unto  you  righteousness. 

This  is  a  glorious  privilege,  but  this  is  only  the  beginning  of 
the  happiness  of  believers:  For, 

3.  Thirdly y  Christ  is  not  only  made  to  them  righteousness, 
but  sanctification ;  by  sanctification,  I  do  not  mean  a  bare  hy- 
pocritical attendance  on  outward  ordinances,  though  rightly 
informed  Christians  will  think  it  their  duty  and  privilege  con 
stantly  to  attend  on  all  outward  ordinances.  Nor  do  I  mean  by 
sanctification  a  bare  outward  reformation,  and  a  few  transient  con- 
victions, or  a  little  legal  sorrow  ;  for  all  this  an  unsanctified  man 
may  have ;  but,  by  sanctification  I  mean  a  total  renovation  of  the 
whole  man :  by  the  righteousness  of  Christ,  believers  come  legally, 
by  sanctification  they  are  made  spiritually,  alive ;  by  the  one  they 
are  entitled  to,  by  the  other  they  are  made  meet  for,  glory.  They 
are  sanctified,  therefore,  throughout,  in  spirit,  soul,  and  body. 

Their  understandings,  which  were  before  dark,  now  become 
light  in  the  Lord  ;  and  their  wills,  before  contrary  to,  now  be- 
come one  with  the  will  of  God  ;  their  afiections  are  now  set 
on  things  above ;  their  memory  is  now  filled  with  divine  things ; 
their  natural  consciences  are  now  enlightened  ;  their  members, 
which  were  before  instruments  of  uncleanness,  and  of  iniquity 
unto  iniquity,  are  now  instruments  of  righteousness  and  true  - 
boliness ;  in  short,  they  are  new  creatures ;  "  old  things  are 
passed  away,  all  things  are  become  new,"  in  their  hearts  :  sin 
has  now  no  longer  .dominion  over  them  ;  they  are  freed  from  the 
power,  though  not  the  indwelling  and  being,  of  it ;  they  are  holy 
both  in  heart  and  life,  in  all  manner  of  conversation ;  they  are 
made  partakers  of  a  divine  nature,  and  from  Jesus  Christ,  they 
receive  grace  for  grace ;  and  every  grace  that  is  in  Christ,  is 
copied  and  transcribed  into  their  souls ;  they  are  transformed 
into  his  likeness  ;  he  is  formed  within  them  ;  they  dwell  in  him, 
and  he  in  them  ;  they  are  led  by  the  Spirit,  and  bring  forth  the 
fruits  thereof;  they  know  that  Christ  is  their  Emmanuel,  God 
with  and  in  them;  they  are  living  temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
And  therefore,  being  a  holy  habitation  unto  the  Lord,  the  whole 
Trinity  dwells  and  walks  in  them ;  even  here,  they  sit  together 


504  CHRIST   THE   BELIEVERS   WISDOM,  ETC.  ^^LIV. 

^ith  Christ  in  heavenly  places,  and  are  vitally  united  to  him,  their 
head,  by  a  living  faith ;  their  Redeemer,  their  Maker,  is  their 
husband ;  ihcy  are  flesh  of  his  flesh,  bone  of  his  bone;  they  talk, 
they  walk  with  him,  as  a  man  talketh  and  walketh  with  his 
friend ;  in  short,  they  are  one  with  Christ,  even  as  Jesus  Christ 
and  the  Father  are  one. 

Thus  is  Christ  made  'to  believers  sanctiflcation.  And  O 
what  a  privilege  is  this !  to  be  changed  from  beasts  into  saints, 
and  from  a  devilish,  to  be  made  partakers  of  a  divine  nature ; 
to  be  translated  from  the  kingdom  of  Satan,  into  the  king 
dom  of  God's  dear  Son !  to  put  o(F  the  old  man,  which  is  cor- 
rupt, and  to  put  on  the  new  man,  which  is  created  after  God, 
in  righteousness  and  true  holiness.  O  what  an  unspeakable 
blessing  is  this !  I  almost  stand  amazed  at  the  contemplation 
thereof.  Well  might  the  apostle  exhort  believers  to  rejoice  ia 
the  Lord ;  indeed  they  have  reason  always  to  rejoice,  yea,  te 
tejoice  on  a  dying  bed ;  for  the  kingdom  of  God  is  in  thetn  ;  they 
are  changed  from  glory  to  glory,  even  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Liord: 
well  may  this  be  a  mystery  to  the  natural,  for  it  is  a  mystery 
even  to  thet  spiritual  man  himself,  a  mystery  which  he  cannot 
fathom.  Does  it  not  often  dazzle  your  eyes,  O  ye  childrea 
of  God,  to  look  at  your  own  brightness,  when  the  candle  of 
the  Lord  shines  out,  and  your  Redeemer  lifts  up  the  light 
of  his  blessed  countenance  upon  your  souls?  Are  not  yon  as- 
tonished, when  you  feel  the  love  of  God  shed  abroad  in  your 
hearts  by  the  Iloly  Ghost,  and  God  holds  out  the  golden  scep- 
tre of  his  mercy,  and  bids  you  ask  what  you  will,  and  it  shaH 
be  given  you  ?  Does  not  that  peace  of  God,  which  keeps  and 
rules  your  hearts,  surpass  the  utmost  limits  of  your  understand- 
ings ?  And  is  not  the  joy  you  feel  unspeakable?  Is  it  not  full 
of  glory  ?  I  am  persuaded  it  is ;  and  in  your  secret  communion, 
when  the  Lord's  love  flows  in  upon  your  souls,  you  are  as  it 
"were  sw  allowed  up  in,  or,  to  use  the  apostle's  phrase,  "  filled 
with  all  the  fulness  of  God."  Are  not  you  ready  to  cry  out 
with  Solomon,  "And  will  the  Lord,  indeed,  dwell  thus  with  men!" 
How  is  it  that  we  should  be  thus  thy  sons  and  daughters,  0 
Lord  God  Almighty ! 

If  you  are  children  of  God,  and  know  what  it  is  to  have  fel- 
lowship with  the  Father  and  the  Son  ;  if  you  walk  by  faith,  and 
not  by  sight ;  I  am  assured  this  is  frequently  the  language  of 
your  hearts. 

But  look  forward,  and  see  an  unbounded  prospect  of  eternal 
happiness  lying  before  thee,  O  believer!  what  thou  hast  already 
received,  are  only  the  first-fruits,  like  the  cluster  of  grapes 
brought  out  of  the  land  of  Canaan  ;  only  an  earnest  and  pledge 
of  yet  infinitely  better  things  to  come:  the  h  jrvest  is  to  follow; 
thy  grace  is  hereafter  to  be  swallowed  up  in  glory.  Thy  great 
Joshua,  and  merciful  lligh-Priest,  shall  administer  an  abundaot 
entrance  to  thee  into  the  land  of  promise,  that  rest  which  awaits 
the  children  of  God :  for  Christ  is  not  only  made  to  believers, 
wisdom,  righteousness,  and  sanctiflcation^  but  also  rtdempiicm. 


XLIV.]  ORftlgt  THE   BELIEVERS  WISDOM^  ETC.  505 

But,  before  we  enter  upon  the  explanation  and  contemplation 
of  this  privilege. 

First,  Learn  hence  the  great  mistake  of  those  writers  and 
clergy,  who,  notwithstanding  they  talk  of  sanctification  and  in- 
ward holiness,  (as  indeed  sometimes  they  do,  though  in  a  very 
loose  and  superficial  manner,)  yet  they  generally  make  it  the 
cause,  whereas  they  should  consider  it  as  the  effect,  of  our  justi- 
fication. '^  Of  him  are  ye  in  Christ  Jesus,  who  of  God  is  made 
nnto  us,  wisdom,  righteousness,  (and  then)  sanctification/'  For 
Christ's  righteousness,  or  that  which  Christ  has  done  in  our 
stead  without  us.  is  the  sole  cause  of  our  acceptance  in  the  sight 
of  God,  and  of  all  holiness  wrought  in  us  :  to  this,  and  not  to  the 
light  Within,  or  any  thing  wrought  within,  should  poor  sinners 
seek  for  justification  in  the  sight  of  God  :  for  the  sake  of  Christ's 
righteousness  alone,  and  not  any  thing  wrought  in  us^  does  God 
look  favourably  upon  us  ;  our  sanctification  at  best,  in  this  life, 
is  not  complete  :  though  we  be  delivered  from  the  power,  we  are 
not  freed  from  the  in-being  of  sin ;  but  not  only  the  dominion, 
but  the  in-being  of  sin,  is  forbidden,  by  the  perfect  law  of  God  : 
for  it  is  not  said,  thou  shalt  not  give  way  to  lust,  but,  "  thou 
shalt  not  lust."  So  that  whilst  the  principle  of  lust  remains  in 
the  least  degree  in  our  hearts,  though  we  are  otherwise  ever  so 
holy,  yet  we  cannot,  on  account  of  that,  hope  for  acceptance 
ivitb  God.  We  must  first,  therefore,  look  for  a  righteousness 
tirithout  us,  even  the  righteousness  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ:  for 
this  reason  the  apostle  mentions  it,  and  puts  it  before  santifica- 
tion,  in  the  words  of  t^  text.  And  whosoever  teacheth  any 
other  doctrine,  doth  not  preach  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus. 

Secondly,  From  hence  also,  the  Antinomians  and  formal  hypo- 
crites may  be  confuted,  who  talk  of^  Christ  without,  but  know 
nothing,  experimentally,  of  a  work  of  sanctification  wrought 
within  them.  Whatever  they  may  pretend  to,  since  Christ  is 
not  in  them,  the  Lord  is  not  their  righteousness^  and  they  have 
no  well-grounded  hope  of  glory :  for  though  sanctification  is  not 
the  catise,  yet  it  is  the  eff*ecft  of  our  acceptance  with  God  ;  "Who 
t>f  God  is  made  unto  us  righteousness  and  sanctification."  He, 
therefore,  that  is  really  in  Christ,  is  a  new  creature ;  it  is  not 
going  back  to  a  covenant  of  works,  to  look  into  our  hearts,  and, 
seeing  that  they  are  changed  and  renewed,  from  thence  form  a 
comfortable  and  well-grounded  assurance  of  the  safety  of  our 
states  :  no,  bdt  this  is  what  we  are  directed  to  in  scripture ;  by 
our  bringing  forth  the  fruits,  we  are  to  judge  whether  or  no  we 
ever  did  truly  partake  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  "  We  know  (says 
John)  that  we  are  passed  from  death  unto  life,  because  we  love 
the  brethren."  And  however  we  may  talk  of  Christ's  righteous- 
ness, and  exclaim  against  legal  preachers  ;  yet,  if  we  be  not  holy 
in  heart  and  life,  if  we  be  not  sanctified  and  renewed  by  the 
Spirit  in  CUT  minds,  we  are  self-^deceivers,  we  are  only  formal 
iypocrites:  for  we  must  not  put  asunder  what  God  has  joined 
'together ;  we  must  keep  the  medium  between  the  two  extremes; 
tidtiBsistsamuch  on  the  one  hand  upon  ^Christ  without,  as  to 


506  CHRIST   THE   BELIEVER'S    WISDON,   ETC.  [XLIT. 

excluije  Christ  within,  as  an  evidence  of  our  being  bis,  and  as 
a  preparation  for  future  happiness  ;  nor,  on  the -other  band,  so 
depend  on  inherent  righteousness  or  holiness  wrought  in  as, 
as  to  exdudc  the  righteousness  of  Jesus  Christ  without  us.  Bat^ 

4.  Fourthly y  Let  us  now  go  on,  and  take  a  view  of  the  other 
link,  or  rather  the  end,  of  the  believer's  golden  chain  of  privi- 
leges. Redemption,  But  we  must  look  very  high ;  for  the  top 
of  it,  like  Jacob's  ladder,  reaches  heaven,  where  all  believers 
will  ascend,  and  be  placed  at  the  right  hand  of  God.  ''Who  of 
God  is  made  unto  us,  wisdom,  righteousness,  sanctification^  and 
redemption.'* 

This  is  a  golden  chain  indeed  !  and,  what  is  best  of  all^  not 
one  link  can  ever  be  broken  asunder  from  another.  Was  there 
no  other  text  in  the  book  of  God,  this  single  one  sufficiently 
proves  the  final  perseverance  of  true  believers :  for  never  did 
God  yet  justify  a  man,  whom  be  did  not  sanctify ;  nor  sanc- 
tify one,  whom  he  did  not  completely  redeem  and  glorify:  no; 
as  for  God,  his  way,  his  work,  is  perfect ;  he  always  carried  od 
and  finished  the  work  he  begun ;  thus  it  was  in  the  first,  so  it 
is  in  the  new  creation ;  when  God  says,  **  Let  there  be  light." 
there  is  light,  that  shines  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect  day, 
when  believers  enter  into  their  eternal  rest,  as  God  entered 
into  his.  Those  whom  God  has  justified,  he  has  in  efiect  glo- 
rified :  for  as  a  man's  worthiness  was  not  the  cause  of  God's 
giving  him  Christ's  righteousness ;  so  neither  shall  his  unwor- 
thiness  be  a  cause  of  his  taking  it  away ;  God's  gifts  and  call- 
ings are  without  repentance ;  and  I  cannot  think  they  are  clear 
in  the  notion  of  Christ's  righteousness,  who  deny  the  final  per- 
severance of  the  saints ;  I  fear  they  understand  justification 
in  that  low  sense,  which  I  understood  it  in  a  few  years  ago,  as 
implying  no  more  than  remission  of  sins :  but  it  not  only  sig- 
nifies remission  of  sins  past,  but  also  2i  federal  right  to  idl 
good  things  to  come.  If  God  has  given  us  his  only  Son,  how 
shall  he  not  with  him  freely  give  us  all  things  ?  Therefore,  the 
apostle,  after  he  says,  ''  Who  of  God  is  made  unto  us  righ- 
teousness," does  not  say,  perhaps  he  may  be  made  to  us  sano- 
tification  and  redemption :  but,  ''  he  is  made :"  for  there  is  an 
eternal,  indissoluble  connexion  between  these  blessed  privi- 
leges. As  the  obedieBce  of  Christ  is  imputed  to  believers,  so 
his  perseverance  in  that  obedience  is  to  be  imputed  to  them 
also ;  and  it  argues  great  ignorance  of  the  covenant  of  grace 
and  redemption,  to  object  against  it. 

By  the  word  redemption^  we  are  to  understand,  not  only  a 
complete  deliverance  from  all  evil,  but  also  a  full  enjoyment 
of  all  good  both  in  body  and  soul :  I  say,  both  in  body  and 
soul ;  for  the  Lord  is  also  for  the  body ;  the  bodies  of  the  saints 
in  this  life  are  temples  of  ^  the  Holy  Ghost ;  Grod  makes  a  cove- 
nant with  the  dust  of  believers;  after  death,  though  worms 
destroy  them,  yet,  even  in  their  flesh  shall  they  see  God.  I 
fear,  indeed,  there  are  some  Sadducees  in  our  days,  or  at  least 
heretics,  who  say,  either,  that  there  is  no  resurrection  of  tho 


XLIV,]  CHRIST   THE   BBLIBVER's   WISDOM^    ETC.  507 

body^  or  that  the  resurrection  is  past  already,  namely,  in  our 
regeneration :  Hence  it  is,  that  our  Lord's  coming  in  the  flesh, 
at  the  day  of  judgment,  is  denied ;  and  consequently,  we  must 
throw  aside  the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  supper.     For  why 
should  we  remember  the  Lord's  death  until  he  come  to  judg- 
ment, when  he  is  already  come  to  judge  our  hearts,  and  will 
not  come  a  second  time  ?    But  all  this  is  only  the  reasoning  of 
unlearned,  unstable  men,  who  certainly  know  not  what  they 
say,  nor  whereof  they  affirm.    That  we  must  follow  our  Lord 
in  the  regeneration,  be  partakers  of  a  new  birth,  and  that  Christ 
must  come  into  our  hearts,  we  freely  confess ;  and  we  hope, 
when  speaking  of  these  things,  we  speak  no  more  than  what 
we  know  and  feel :  but  then  it  is  plain,  that  Jesqs  Christ  will 
come,  hereafter,  to  judgment,  and  that  he  ascended  into  heaven 
with  the  body  which  he  had  here  on  earth ;  for  says  he,  after 
his  resurrection,  "  Handle  me,  and  see ;  a  spirit  has  not  flesh 
and  bones,  as  you  see  me  have."    And  it  is  plain,  that  Christ's 
resurrection  was  an   earnest  of  ours :    for  says  the    apostle, 
*'  Christ  is  risen  from  the  dead,  and  become  the  first-fruits  of 
them  that  sleep ;  and  as  in  Adam  all  die,  and  are  subject  to 
mortality;  so  all  that  are  in  Christ,  the  second  Adam,  who 
represented  believers  as  their  federal  head,  shall  certainly  be 
made  alive,  or  rise  again  with  their  bodies  at  the  last  day. 

Here  then,  O  believers !  is  one,  though  the  lowest,  degree  of 
that  redemption  which  you  are  to  be  partakers  of  hereafter ; 
I  mean,  the  redemption  of  your  bodies:  for  this  corruptible 
must  put  on  incorruption^  this  mortal  must  put  on  immortality. 
Lour  bodies,  as  well  as  souls,  were  given  to  Jesus  Christ  by 
the  Father ;  they  have  been  companions  in  watching,  and  fast- 
ing, and  praying:  your  bodies,  therefore,  as  well  as  souls,  shall 
Jesus  Christ  raise  up  at  the  last  day.  Fear  not,  therefore,  O 
believers,  to  look  into  the  grave :  for  to  you  it  is  no  other  than 
a  consecrated  dormitory,  where  your  bodies  shall  sleep  quietly 
imtil  the  morning  of  the  resurrection ;  when  the  voice  of  the 
archangel  shall  sound,  and  the  trump  of  God  give  the  general 
alarm,  ''Arise,  ye  dead,  and  come  to  judgment;"  earth,  air, 
fire,  water,  shall  give  up  your  scattered  atoms,  and  both  in 
body  and  soul  shall  you  be  ever  with  the  Lord.  I  doubt  not, 
but  many  of  you  are  groaning  under  crazy  bodies,  and  com- 
plain often  that  the  mortal  body  weighs  down  the  immortal 
soul ;  at  least  this  is  my  case ;  but  let  us  have  a  little  patience, 
and  we  shall  be  delivered  from  our  earthly  prisons ;  ere  long, 
these  tabernacles  of  clay  shall  be  dissolved,  and  we  shall  be 
clothed  with  our  house  which  is  from  heaven ;  hereafter,  our 
bodies  shall  be  spiritualized,  and  shall  be  so  far  from  hindering 
our  souls  through  weakness,  that  they  shall  become  strong ;  so 
strong,  as  to  bear  up  under  an  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of 
glory ;  others  again  may  have  deformed  bodies,  emaciated  also 
with  sickness,  and  worn  out  with  labour  and  age ;  but  wait  a 
little,  until  your  blessed  change  by  death  comes ;  then  your 
bodies  shall  be  renewed  and  made  glorious,  like  unto  Christ's 


506  CHRIST  THE   BBLlfiVER'S   WISDOM,   BXe,  [XLIT. 

glorious  body :  of  which  we  may  form  some  faint  idea,  from 
the  account  given  us  of  our  Lord's  transfigoration  on  the 
mount,  when  it  is  said,  *^  His  raiment  became  bright  and  glis- 
tering, and  bis  face  brighter  than  the  sun."  Well  then  may  a 
believer  break  out  in  the  apostle's  triumphant  language,  '*  0 
death,  where  is  thy  sting !     O  grave,  where  is  thy  victory  !" 

But  what  is  the  redemption  of  the  body,  in  comparison  of 
the  redemption  of  the  better  part,  our  souls  ?     I  must,  therefore 
say  to  you  believers,  as  the  angel  said  to  John,  *'  Come  up 
higher ;"  and  let  us  take  as  clear  a  view  as  we  can,  at  such  a 
distance,  of  the  redemption  Christ  has  purchased  for,  and  will 
shortly  put  you  in  actual  possession  of.     Already  you  are 
justified,  already  you  are  sanctified,  and  thereby  freed  from  the 
guilt  and  dominion  of  sin :  but,  as  I  have  observed,  the  being 
and  indwelling  of  sin  yet  remains  in  you ;  God  sees  it  proper 
to  leave  some  Amalekites  in  the  land,  to  keep  his  Israel  in 
action.    The  most  perfect  Christian,  I  am  persuaded,  must 
agree,  according  to  one  of  our  Articles,  ^*  That  the  cormption 
of  nature  remains  even  in  the  regenerate ;  that  the  flesh  lusteth 
always  against  the  spirit,  and  the  spirit  against  the  flesh."    So 
that  believers  cannot  do  things  for  God  jvith  that  perfection 
they  desire ;  this  grieves  their  righteous  souls  day  by  day,  and, 
with  the  holy  apostle,  makes  them  cry  out,  *^  Who  shall  deliver 
ns  from  the  body  of  this  death !"    I  thank  God,  our  Lord  Jesas 
Christ  will,  but  not  completely  before  the  day  of  our  dissolu- 
tion ;  then  will  the  very  being  of  sin  be  destroyed,  and  an 
eternal  stop  put  to  inbred,  indwelling  corruption.     And  is  not 
this  a  great  redemption  ?    I  am  sure  believers  esteem  it  so : 
for  there  is  nothing  grieves  the  heart  of  a  child  of  God  so 
much,  as  the  remains  of  indwdling  sin.     Again,  believers  are 
often  in  heaviness  through  manifold  temptations;   God  sees 
that  it  is  needful  and  good  for  them  so  to  be ;  and  though  they 
may  be  highly  favoured,  and  wrapt  up  in  communion  with  God, 
even  to  the  third  heavens ;  yet  a  messenger  of  Satan  is  often 
sent  to  buffet  them,  lest  they  should  be  puffed  np  with  the 
abundance  of  revelations.    But  be  not  weary,  be  not  faint  in 
your  minds :  the  time  of  your  complete  redemption  draweth 
nigh.     In  heaven  the  wicked  one  shall  cease  from   troubling 
'  you,  and  your  weary  souls  shall  enjoy  an  everlasting  rest ;  his 
fiery  darts  cannot  reach  those   blissful    regions:    Satan  will 
never  come  any  more  to  appear  with,  disturb,  or  accuse  the 
sons  of  God,  when  once  the  liord  Jesus  Christ  shuts  the  door. 
Your  righteous  souls   are  now  grieved,  day  by  day,  at  the 
ungodly   conversation   of  the    wicked;    tares    now  grow  up 
among  the  wheat ;  wolves  come  in  sheep's  clothing :  but  the 
redemption  spoken  of  in  the  text,  will  free  your  sou&  from  all 
anxiety  on  these  accounts ;  hereafter  yon  shall  enjoy  a  perfect 
communion  of  saints ;  nothing  that  is  unholy  or  uusanctiiicil 
shall  enter  into  the  holy  of  holies,  which  is  prepared  for  yoa 
above :  this,  and  all  manner  of  evil  whatsoever,  you  shall  be 
delivered  firom,  when  your  redemption  is  herei^r  made  com- 


XLIV.]  CHRIST   THE    BELIEVER'S   WtSDOll,   BTO.  609 

plete  in  heaven ;  not  only  so^  but  you  shall  enter,  into  the  full 
enjoyment  of  all  good.  It  is  true^  all  saints  will  not  have  the 
same  degree  of  happiness^  but  all  will  be  as  happy  as  their 
hearts  can  desire.  Believers,  you  shall  judge  the  evil,  and 
familiarly  converse  with  good,  angels :  you  shall  sit  down  witii 
Abraham,  Isaac,  Jacob,  and  all  the  spirits  of  just  meti  Ynade 
perfect ;  and,  to  sum  up  all  your  happiness  in  one  word,  yo« 
shall  see  God  the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost ;  and,  by  seed- 
ing God,  be  more  and  more  like  unto  him,  and  pass  from  giory 
to  glory,  even  to  all  eternity. 

But  I  must  stop :  the  glories  of  the  upper  World  crowd  in  so 
fast  upon  my  soul,  that  I  am  lost  in  the  contemplation  of  them. 
Brethren,  the  redemption  spoken  of  is  unutterable;  we  cannot 
here  find  it  out ;  eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  nor  has  it 
entered  into  the  hearts  of  the  most  holy  inen  living  to  conceive, 
how  great  it  is.  Were  I  to  entertain  you  whole  ages  with  an 
account  of  it,  when  you  come  to  heaven,  you  must  say,  with  the 
queen  of  Sheba,  ^'  Not  half,  no,  not  one  thousandth  part  was  told 
ujs.*'  All  we  can  do  here,  is  to  go  upon  mount  Pisgah,  and,  by 
the  eye  of  faith,  take  a  distant  view  of  the  promised  Itfnd :  we 
may  see  it,  as  Abraham  did  Christ,  afar  off,  and  rejoice  in  it ; 
but  here  we  only  know  in  part.  Blessed  be  God,  there  is  a 
time  coming,  when  we  shall  know  God,  eveti  as  we  are  known, 
and  God  be  all  in  all.  Lord  Jesus,  accomplish  the  number  of 
thine  elect !    Lord  Jesus,  hasten  thy  kingdom ! 

And.now,  where  ate  .the  scoffers  of  these  last  days,  who  count 
the  lives  of  Christians  to  be  madness,  and  their  end  to  be  with- 
out honour?  Unhappy  men !  you  know  not  what  you  do.  Were 
your  eyes  open,  and  had  you  senses  to  discern  spiritual  things, 
you  would  not  speak  all  manner  of  evil  against  the  <5hildren  of 
God,  but  you  would  esteem  them  as  the  excellent  ones  of  the 
earth,  and  envy  their  happiness :  your  souls  would  hunger  and 
thirst  after  it :  you  also  would  become  fools  for  Christ's  sake. 
You  boast  of  wisdom  ;  so  did  the  philosophers  of  Corinth :  but 
your  wisdom  is  the  foolishness  of  folly  in  the  sight  of  God. 
What  wUl  your  wisdom  avail  you,  if  it  does  not  make  you  wise 
unto  salvation  ?  Can  you,  with  all  your  wisdom,  propose  a 
more  consistent  scheme  to  build  your  hopes  of  salvation  on, 
than  what  has  been  now  laid  before  you?  Can  you,  with  all 
the  strength  of  natural  reason,  find  out  a  better  way  of  accep- 
tance with  God,  than  by  the  righteousness  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ?  Is  it  right  to  think  your  own  works  can  in  any  measure 
deservie  or  procure  it?  If  not,  why  will  you  not  believe  in  him? 
Why  will  you  not  submit  to  his  righteousness  ?  Can  you  deny 
that  you  fire  fallen  creatures  ?  Do  not  you  find  that  you  are  full 
of  disorders,  and  that  these  disorders  make  you  unhappy  ?  Do 
not  you  find  that  you  cannot  change  'your  own  hearts?  Have 
-you  not  resolved  many  aiid  many  a  time,  and  have  not  your 
corruptions  yet. dominion  over  you  ?  Are  you  not  bond-slaves  to 
•your  lusts,  and  led  captive  by  the  d6vil  at  his  will?  Why  then 
-will  you  not  come  to 'Christ  for  Banctification  ?   Do  you  iiot 


510  CHRIST   THE    BELl EVERTS    WISDOM,    ETC.  [XLIT 

desire  to  die  the  death  of  the  righteous,  and  that  year  fatme 
state  may  be  like  theirs ;  I  am  persaaded  you  cannot  bear  the 
thoughts  of  being  annihilated^  much  less  of  being  miserable  for 
ever.  Whatever  you  may  pretend,  ii  you  speak  truth,  yoa  must 
confess,  that  conscience  breaks  in  upon  you  in  your  more  sober 
intervals  whether  you  will  or  not,  and  even  constrains  you  to 
believe  that  hell  is  no  painted  fire.  And  why  then  will  yoa  not 
come  to  Christ?  He  alone  can  procure  you  everlasting  redemp- 
tion. Haste,  haste  away  to  him,  poor  beguiled  sinners.  Yoa 
lack  wisdom ;  ask  it  of  Christ.  Who  knows  but  he  may  give  it 
you  ?  He  is  able :  for  he  is  the  wisdom  of  the  Father ;  he  is  that 
wisdom  which  was  from  everlasting.  You  have  no  righteous- 
ness ;  away,  therefore,  to  Christ :  "  He  is  the  end  of  the  law  for 
righteousness  to  every  one  that  believeth."  You  are  unholy : 
flee  to  the  Lord  Jesus :  He  is  fiill  of  grace  and  truth ;  and  of  his 
fulness  all  may  receive  that  believe  in  him.  You  are  afraid  to 
die ;  let  this  drive  you  to  Christ:  he  has  the  keys  of  death  and 
hell :  in  him  is  plenteous  redemption ;  he  alone  can  open  the 
door  which  leads  to  everlasting  Ufe. 

Let  not,  therefore,  the  deceived  reasoner  boast  any  longer  of 
his  pretended  reason.  Whatever  you  may  think,  it  is  the  most 
unreasonable  thing  in  the  world,  not  to  believe  on  Jesus  Christ, 
whom  God  has  sent.  Why,  why  will  you  die?  Why  will  yoa 
not  come  unto  him,  that  you  may  have  life  ?  "  Ho !  every  one 
that  thirsteth,  come  unto  the  waters  of  life,  and  drink  freely : 
come,  buy  without  money  and  without  price."  Were  these 
blessed  privileges  in  the  text  to  be  purchased  with  money,  yoa 
might  say,  we  are  poor,  and  cannot  buy :  or,  were  they  to  be 
conferred  only  on  sinners  of  such  a  rank  or  degree,  then  yoa 
might  say,  how  can  such  sinners  as  we,  expect  to  be  so  highly 
favoured  ?  But  they  are  to  be  freely  given  of  God  to  the  worst 
of  sinners.  "To  us,"  says  the  apostle;  to  me  a  persecutor,  to 
you  Corinthians,  who  were  "  unclean,  drunkards,  covetous  per- 
sons, idolaters."  Therefore,  each  poor  sinner  may  say  then, 
why  not  unto  me?  Has  Christ  but  one  blessing?  What  if  he 
has  blessed  millions  already,  by  turning  them  away  from  their 
iniquities ;  yet  he  still  continues  the  same :  he  lives  for  ever  to 
make  intercession,  and  therefore  will  bless  you,  even  you  also. 
Though,  Esau-like,  you  have  been  profane,  and  hitherto  de- 
spised your  heavenly  Father's  birth-right;  even  now,  if  yoa 
believe, "  Christ  will  be  made  to  you  ofGod,  wisdom^  righteous- 
ness, sanctification,  and  redemption." 

But  I  must  turn  again  to  believers,  for  whose  instructioD,  as 
I  observed  before,  this  discourse  was  particularly  intended. 
You  see,  brethren,  partakers  of  the  heavenly  calling,  what  great 
blessings  are  treasured  up  for  you  in  Jesus  Christ  your  head,  and 
what  you  are  entitled  to  by  believing  on  his  name.  Take  heed, 
tiierefore,  that  ye  walk  worthy  of  the  vocation  wherewith  ye  are 
called.  Think  often  how  highly  you  are  favoured ;  and  remem- 
ber, you  have  not  chosen  Christ,  but  Christ  has  chosen  yoa. 
Put  on  (as  the  elect  of  God)  humbleness  of  mind,  and  glory,  bat 


XLV.]         THE   KNOWLEDGE   OF   JESUS   CHRIST^  ETC.  611 

let  it  be  only  in  the  Lord ;  for  you  have  nothing  but  what  you 
have  received  of  God.  By  nature  ye  were  as  foolish,  as  legal, 
as  unholy,  and  in  as  damnable  a  condition,  as  others.  Be  pitiful, 
therefore,  be  courteous ;  and,  as  sanctification  is  a  progressive 
work,  beware  of  thinking  you  have  already  attained.  Let  him 
that  is  holy,  be  holy  still ;  knowing,  that  he  who  is  most  pure  in 
heart,  shall  hereafter  enjoy  the  clearest  vision  of  God.  Let  in- 
dwelling sin  be  your  daily  burden ;  and  not  only  bewail  and 
lament,  but  see  that  you  subdue  it  daily  by  the  power  of  divine 
grace ;  and  look  up  to  Jesus  continually  to  be  the  finisher,  as 
well  as  author,  of  your  faith.  Build  not  on  your  own  faithful- 
ness, but  on  God's  unchangeableness.  Take  heed  of  thinking 
you  stand  by  the  power  of  your  own  free  will.  The  everlasting 
love  of  God  the  Father,  must  be  your  only  hope  and  consola- 
tion ;  let  this  support  you  under  all  trials.  Remember  that  God's 
gifts  and  callings  are  without  repentance;  that  Christ  having 
once  loved  you,  will  love  you  to  the  end.  Let  this  constrain 
you  to  obedience,  and  make  yoa  long  and  look  for  that  blessed 
time,  when  he  shall  not  only  be  your  wisdom,  and  righteous- 
ness, and  sanctification,  but  also  complete  and  everlasting  re- 
demption. ' 

Glory  be  to  God  in  the  highest ! 


SERMON  XLV. 

THE  KNOWLEDGE  OF  JKSUS  CHRIST,  THE  BEST  KNOWLEDGE. 

I  determined  not  to  know  any  thing  among  you,  save  Jesus  Christ, 

and  him  crucified. — 1  Cor.  ii.  2. 

The  persons  to  whom  these  words  were  written,  were  the  mem- 
bers of  the  church  of  Corinth :  who,  as  appears  by  the  foregoing 
chapter,  were  not  only  divided  into  different  sects,  by  one  say- 
ing, "  I  am  of  Paul,  and  another,  I  am  of  Apollos ;"  but  also 
had  many  amongst  them,  who  were  so  full  of  the  wisdom  of  this 
world,  and  so  wise  in  their  own  eyes,  that  they  set  at  nought 
the  simplicity  of  the  gospel,  and  accounted  tlie  apostle's  preach- 
ing foolishness. 

Never  had  the  apostle  more  need  of  the  wisdom  of  the  ser- 
pent, mingled  with  the  innocency  of  the  dove,  than  now.  What 
IS  the  sum  of  all  his  wisdom  ?  He  tells  them,  in  the  words  of 
the  text,  "  I  determined  not  to  know*  any  thing  amongst  vou, 
save  Jesus  Christ,  and  him  crucified." 

A  resolution  this,  worthy  of  the  great  St.  Paul ;  and  no  less 
worthy,  no  less  necessary,  for  every  minister,  and  every  disciple 
of  Christ,  to  make  always,  even  unto  the  end  of  the  world. 

In  the  following  discourse,  I  shall. 

First,  Explain  what  is  meant  by,  '*  not  knowing  any  thing, 
save  Jesus  Christ,  and  him  crucified." 

Secondly,  Give  some  reasons  why  every  Christian  should  de- 
termine not  to  know  any  thing  else.    And, 


THE   KNOWLEDGE  OF    CHRIST,  [iLT. 

Thirdly,  Conclade  utith  a  general  exbortation  to  put  tUs  it- 
termination  into  practice. 

First,  I  am  to  explain  what  is  meant  by  "  not  L&ofrii^  aij 
thing,  save  Jesns  Christ,  and  him  crucified." 

By  Jesus  Christ,  we  are  to  understand  the  eternal  Sob  of  G^ 
He  is  called  Jesns,  a  Saviour,  because  he  was  to  save  os  firon 
the  guilt  and  power  of  our  sins ;  and,  like  Josbadi,  bj  uboB  faf 
was  remarkably  typified,  to  lead  God  s  spiritual  Israel  thiougk 
the  wilderness  of  this  world,  to  the  heavenly  Canaan  tbe  pro- 
mised inheritance  of  the  children  of  God. 

He  is  called  Christ,  which  signifies  anointed,  becaase  he  vis 
anointed  by  the  Holy  Ghost  at  his  baptism,  to  be  a  prophet  to 
instruct,  a  priest  to  make  an  atonement  for,  and  a  king  lo  ^roTcn 
and  protect  his  church.  And  he  was  crucified,  or  hung  (0,§ti- 
pendons  love !)  till  he  was  dead  upon  the  cross,  that  he  mi^ 
become  a  curse  for  us ;  for  it  is  written,  "  Cursed  is  every  mu 
that  hangeth  upon  a  tree.'' 

The  foundation  or  first  cause  of  his  suffering,  was  our  faUii 
Adam ;  in  whom,  as  the  living  oracles  of  God  declare,  **  we  al 
died  f"  his  sin  was  imputed  to  us  all.  It  pleased  God,  after  be 
had  spoken  the  world  into  being,  to  create  man  after  his  oin 
divine  image,  to  breathe  into  him  the  breath  of  life,  and  to  place 
him  as  our  representative  in  the  garden  of  Eden. 

But  he  being  left  to  his  own  free  will,  did  eat  of  the  forbiddes 
fruit,  notwithstanding  God  had  told  him,  *'  The  day  in  which  be 
ate  thereof,  he  should  surely  die :"  and  thereby  he,  with  bis 
whole  posterity,  in  whose  name  he  acted,  became  liable  to  tbe 
wrath  of  God,  and  sunk  into  a  spiritual  death. 

But  behold  the  goodness,  as  well  as  the  severity,  of  God !  For 
no  sooner  had  man  been  convicted  as  a  sinner,  but,  lo  !  a  Saviour 
is  revealed  to  him,  under  the  character  of  the  seed  of  the  wcaHnt: 
the  merits  of  whose  sacrifice  were  then  immediately  to  take  place, 
and  who  should,  in  the  fulness  of  time,  by  suffering  deatb, 
satisfy  for  the  guilt  wc  had  contracted  ;  by  obeying  the  whok 
moral  law,  work  out  for  us  an  everlasting  righteousness ;  and 
b^'  becoming  a  principle  of  new  life  in  us,  destroy  tbe  power  of 
the  devil,  and  thereby  restore  us  to  a  better  state  than  that  if 
which  wc  were  at  first  created. 

This  is  the  plain,  scriptural  account  of  tiiat  mystery,  of  godU- 
ness,  God  manifested  in  the  flesh  ;  and  to  this  our  own  hearts* 
unless  blinded  by  the  god  of  this  world,  cannot  but  yieU  ab 
immediate  assent. 

For,  let  us  but  search  our  own  hearts,  and  ask  ourselves,  if 
we  could  create  our  own  children,  whether  or  not  we  wooU 
create  them  with  a  less  mixture  of  good  and  evil,  than  we  6ad 
in  ourselves?  Supposing  God  then  only  to  have  our  goodnesii 
he  could  not  at  first  make  us  so  sinful,  so  polluted  as  we  are. 
But  supposing  him  to  be  as  he  is,  infinitely  good,  or  goodness 
itself,  then  it  is  absolutely  impossible  that  he  should  create  any 
thing  but  what  is  like  himself,  perfect,  entire,  lacking  nothion:- 
Man  then  could  not  come  out  of  the  hands  of  his  AUtov^ 


XLV.]  THB   BEST  KNOWLEDGE.  6l8 

miserably  blind  and  naked,  with  such  a  mixtare  of  the  beast 
and  devil,  as  he  finds  now  in  himself,  but  must  have  fallen  from 
what  he  was ;  and  as  it  does  not  suit  with  the  goodness  and 
justice  of  God,  to  punish  the  whole  race  of  mankind  with 
these  disorders  merely  for  nothing;  and  since  men  bring  these 
disorders  into  the  world  with  them ;  it  follows,  that  as  they 
could  not  sin  themselves,  being  yet  unborn,  some  other  man's 
sin  must  have  been  imputed  to  them ;  from  whence,  as  from  a 
fountain,  all  these  evils  flow. 

I  know  this  doctrine  of  our  original  sin,  or  fall  in  Adam,,  is 
esteemed  foolishness  by  the  wise  disputer  of  this  world,  who 
will  reply.  How  does  it  suit  the  goodness  of  God,  to  impute 
one  man's  sin  to  an  innocent  posterity  ?  But  has  it  not  been 
proved  to  a  demonstration,  that  it  is  so  ?  And  therefore,  sup« 
posing  we  cannot  reconcile  it  to  our  shallow  comprehensions, 
that  is  no  argument  at  ail :  for  if  it  appear  that  God  has  done 
a  thing,  we  may  be  sure  it  is  right,  whether  we  can  see  the 
reasons  for  it  or  not. 

But  this  is  entirely  cleared  up  by  what  was  said  before,  that 
no  sooner  was  the  sin  imputed,  but  a  Christ  was  revealed  ;  and 
this  Christ,  this  God  incarnate,  who  was  conceived  by  the  Holy 
Ghost,  that  he  might  be  freed  from  the  guilt  of  our  original  sin ; 
who  was  born  of  the  virgin  Mary,  that  he  might  be  the  seed  of 
the  woman  only ;  who  suffered  under  Pontius  Pilate,  a  Gentile 
governor,  to  fulfil  those  prophecies  which  signified  what  death 
h^  should  die :  this  same  Jesus,  who  was  crucified  in  weak- 
ness, but  raised  in  power,  is  that  divine  person,  that  Emma- 
nuel, that  God  with  us,  whom  we  preach,  in  whom  ye  believe, 
and  whom  alone,  the  apostle,  in  the  text,  was  determined  to 
know. 

By  which  word  know,  we  are  not  to  understand  a  bare  his- 
torical knowledge ;  for  to  know  that  Christ  was  crucified  by 
his  enemies  at  Jerusalem,  in  this  manner  only,  will  do  us  no 
more  service,  than  to  know  that  Caesar  was  butchered  by  his 
friends  dt  Rome :  but  the  word  know,  means  to  know,  so  as  to 
approve  of  him ;  as  when  Christ  says,  "  Verily  I  know  you 
not ;"  I  know  you  not,  so  as  to  approve  of  you.  It  signified 
to  know  him,  so  as  to  embrace  him  in  all  his  offices  ;  to  take 
him  to  be  our  prophet,  priest,  and  king ;  so  as  to  give  up  our- 
mItcs  wholly  to  be  instructed,  saved,  and  governed  by  him. 
It  implies  an  experimental  knowledge  of  his  crucifixion,  so  as 
to  feel  the  power  of  it,  and  to  be  crucified  unto  the  world,  as 
the  apostle  explains  himself  in  the  epistle  to  the  Philippians, 
where  be  says,  '^  I  count  all  things  but  dung  and  dross,  that  I 
mig^ht  know  him,  and  the  power  of  his  resurrection.*' 

This  knowledge  the  apostle  was  so  swallowed  up  in,  that  he 
was  determined  not  to  know  any  thing  else  ;  he  was  resolved 
to  make  that  bis  only  study,  the  governing  principle  of  his  life, 
the  point  and  end  in  which  all  his  thoughts,  words,  and  actions^ 
shpuld  centre. 

Secondly,  I  pass  on  to  give  some  reasons  why  every  Christian 
♦  2i 


514  THE   KNOWLEDGE   OP   JESUS   CHRIST,  [XLT. 

sbouldy  with  the  apostle,  determine  *'  not  to  know  any  thing, 
save  Jesus  Christ,  and  him  crucified." 

First,  Without  this,  our  persons  will  not  be  accepted  in  the 
sight  of  God.  ''This  (and  consequently  this  only)  is  life 
eternal,  to  know  thee,  the  only  true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ, 
whom  thou  hast  sent.  As  also  St.  Peter  says,  ''  There  is  now 
no  other  name  given  under  heaven,  whereby  we  can  be  saved, 
but  that  of  Jesus  Christ." 

Some,  indeed,  may  please  themselves  in  knowing  the  world, 
others  boast  themselves  in  the  knowledge  of  a  multitude  of  lan- 
guages ;  but  could  we  speak  with  the  tongue  of  men  and  angek, 
or  did  we  know  the  number  of  the  stars,  and  could  call  them  all 
by  their  names,  yet,  without  this  experimental  knowledge  of 
Jesus  Christ,  and  him  crucified,  it  would  profit  us  nothing. 

The  former,  indeed,  may  procure  us  a  little  honour  which 
cometh  of  man ;  but  the  latter  only  can  render  us  acceptable  in 
the  sight  of  God :  for  if  we  are  ignorant  of  Christ,  Grod  wiD 
be  to  us  a  consuming  fire. 

Christ  is  the  way,  the  truth,  and  the  life ;  ''  No  one  cometh  to 
the  Father,  but  through  him ;"  "  He  is  the  Lamb  slain  from  the 
foundation  of  the  world ;"  and  none  ever  were,  or  ever  will  be 
received  up  into  glory,  but  by  an  experimental  application  of 
his  merits  to  their  hearts. 

We  might  as  well  think  to  rebuild  the  tower  of  Babel,  or 
reach  heaven  with  our  hands,  as  to  imagine  we  could  enter 
therein  by  any  other  door,  than  that  of  the  knowledge  of  Jesus 
Christ.  Other  knowledge  may  make  you  wise  in  your  own 
eyes,  and  pufi*  you  up ;  but  this  alone  edifieth  and  maketh  wise 
unto  salvation. 

As  the  meanest  Christian,  if  he  know  but  this,  though  be 
know  nothing  else,  will  be  accepted ;  so  the  greatest  master  in 
Israel,  the  most  letter-learned  teacher,  without  this,  will  be  re- 
jected.  His  philosophy  is  mere  nonsense,  his  wisdom  mere 
foolishness,  in  the  sight  of  God. 

The  author  of  the  words  now  before  us,  was  a  remarkable  in- 
stance of  this ;  never,  perhaps,  was  a  greater  scholar,  in  all  that 
the  world  calls  fine  learning,  than  he  ;  for  he  was  bred  up  at  the 
feet  of  Gamaliel,  and  profited  in  the  knowledge  of  books,  as 
well  as  in  the  Jewish  religion,  above  many  of  his  equals,  as  ap- 
pears by  the  language,  rhetoric,  and  spirit  of  his  writings ;  and 
yet,  when  he  came  to  know  what  it  was  to  be  a  Christian,  be 
^'  counted  all  things  but  loss,  so  he  might  win  Christ."  And, 
though  he  was  now  at  Corinth,  that  seat  of  polite  learning,  yet 
he  was  absolutely  determined  not  to  know  any  thing,  or  to  make 
nothing  his  study,  but  what  taught  him  to  know  Jesus  Christ, 
and  him  crucified. 

Hence,  then,  appears  the  folly  of  those  who  spend  their  whole 
lives  in  heaping  up  other  knowledge ;  and,  instead  of  searching 
the  scriptures,  which  testify  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  are  alone  able 
to  make  them  wise  unto  salvation,  disquiet  themselves  in  a  por- 

^  afkipr  the  knowledge  of  such  things,  as,  when  known,  ooo- 


Hi. 


XLV.J  THB   BEST   KNOWLBOGB.  515 

cent  them  do  more,  than  to  know  that  a  bird  dropped  a  feather 
upon  one  of  the  Pyrenean  mountains. 

Hence  it  is,  that  so  many,  who  profess  themselves  vrise,  be- 
cause they  can  dispute  of  the  causes  and  effects,  the  moral  fit- 
ness and  uYifitness  of  things,  appear  mere  fools  in  the  things  of 
God  ;  so  that  when  you  come  to  converse  with  them  about  the 
great  work  of  redemption  wrought  out  for  us  by  Jesus  Christ, 
and  of  his  being  a  propitiation  for  our  sins,  a  fulfiller  of  the 
covenant  of  works,  and  a  principle  of  new  life  to  our  souls,  they 
are  quite  ignorant  of  the  whole  matter ;  and  prove,  to  a  demon- 
stration, that  with  all  their  learning,  they  know  nothing  yet,  as 
they  ought  to  know. 

But,  alas !  how  must  it  surprise  a  man,  when  the  Most  High 
is  about  to  take  away  his  soul,  to  think  that  he  has  passed  for 
a  wise  man,  and  a  learned  disputer  in  this  world,  and  yet  is  left 
destitute  of  that  knowledge  which  alone  can  make  him  appear 
with  boldness  before  the  judgment- seat  of  Jesus  Christ!  How 
must  it  grieve  him,  in  a  future  state,  to  see  others,  whom  he 
despised  as  illiterate  men,  because  they  experimentally  knew 
Christ,  and  him  crucified,  exalted  to  the  right  hand  of  God ; 
and  himself,  with  ail  his  fine  accomplishments,  because  he  knew 
every  thing,  perhaps,  but  Christ,  thrust  down  into  hell? 

Well  might  the  apostle,  in  a  holy  triumph,  cry  out,  '^  Where 
is  the  wise?  where  is  the  scribe?  where  is  the  disputer  of 
this  world  V*  For,  God  will  then  make  foolish  the  wisdom  of  this 
world,  and  bring  to  nought  the  wisdom  of  those  who  were  so 
knowing  in  their  o^^n  eyes» 

1  have  made  this  digression  from  the  main  point  before  us, 
not  to  condemn  or  decry  human  literature,  but  to  shew,  that  it 
ought  to  be  used  only  in  subordination  to  divine ;  and  that  a 
Christian,  if  the  holy  Spirit  guided  the  pen  of  the  apostle  when 
be  wrote  this  epistle,  ought  to  study  no  books,  but  such  as  lead 
him  to  a  farther  knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  him  crucified. 

And  there  is  the  more  reason  for  this,  because  of  the  great 
mischief  the  contrary  practice  has  done  to  the  church  of  God : 
for,  what  was  it  but  this  learning,  or  rather  this  ignorance,  that 
kept  so  many  of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees  from  the  saving  know- 
ledge of  Jesus  Christ?  And  what  is  it,  but  this  human  wisdom^ 
this  science,  falsely  so  called,  that  blinds  the  understanding,  and 
corrupts  the  hearts,  of  so  many  modern  unbelievers,  and  makes 
them  unwilling  to  submit  to  the  righteousness  which  is  of  God 
by  faidi  in  Christ  Jesus  ?  But, 

Secondly,  Without  this  knowledge,  our  performances,  as  well 
as  persons,  will  not  be  acceptable  in  the  sight  of  God. 

'^Through  faith,''  says  the  apostle,  that  is,  through  a  lively 
fittlb  in  a  Mediator  to  come,  "  Abel  offered  a  more  acceptable 
sacrifice  than  Cain."  And  it  is  through  a  like  faith,  or  an  ex- 
perimental knowledge  of  the  same  divine  Mediator,  that  our 
sacrifices  of  prayer,  praise,  and  thanksgivings,  come  up  as  an 
incense  before  the  throne  of  grace. 

Two  persons  may  go  up  to  the  temple  and  pray ;  but  he  only 


V  II   r'''.'j-i   .  .  :..t    :.s:::j- :    vn.  .  ;:  "-I't    ^iii^rii^jj^i  o:  ^'i.'  Cvlltt'^ 

i  .»'  :-  ;-  li:*  i-r-...:  t.-..iiir-.:'i:>*  1:^^.-  iJ:-sL.nu  it  1 1  ^acriiil:^ 
viii'.L  fei.»:.-  "r-L  t-^*.  ui-  lujUi^-a?  '  .  :':«"^-.»a:L  v- lil  ■•crprayeh 
'.'.  Mt  111*:}  '.».•  I  jiii." :  L!iC  lit  iiiL'.  ;!r-:  sunii-f  1:-  iT"  \miic*b;  iLis.aci* 

•::,t  1-ij'jv  jvi:'*.-  o'  J  .^::'  •.:.:■..':.  v  ...  .♦:.:  uiib  i»:  c:itt"::y  lorntt, 
'jk  u'-',*-:^'-.-.  :. ;.  !.-!:.  F.r  .  .>  v. t  ::.-it  i-l^  t»i::  i::i.K*?«  ;•.•  uediLi 
p'jjr.iiz  ^^'  V  r-.  :>-!_::•«•.  •.■:  :.->  lu  v".i-."ijt.  ::  v-  ::i.]profiiu> 
:■  :  .:.;..  1  :.  •  .-!  ^^.^>•:-  Lt.  ri  ir.zi  >•:'.:  ii-L.aiL*;-.  >  *!.  i;t>lh  Mat- 
'i  v.vir.  :.^  •.'rll5  iij:»>?  vl-l  LiiCl  Ii'-.-l  rjch  il  rL>c»d  worb. 
"  7  lie.",  -i.u-::  li-  :.  i.-  ::kt  cjci  ::  ;.ii:c  oin  v»i  iiir  ]vh>i  of  hisbre- 
r:  r». !  ,  -.:.«.}  -saC  ;:  'jl::.  i^iit:.'  Fr^'ii:  ^  ricuct  ht  may  plainlrin- 
i'T,  Tiiii!  j'  i^  -»t.--.iLir  Clt.?:  il  LiS  n.tii:L>tT>.  and  doiDi:  iroodw 
tLi.:u  r..*^:  of  t u  t::>t'r.rLtJi:aj  kiiowitdc:  o:   iii>  io^t-   xo  us,  iwt 

Iyi*-ilu.  Afc  iit;-.L-.r  our  acia  ca'  :*.ei>  L'or  cuaFiTT  .  5.:i  utiiher  wiil 
o'jr  f.ivjj  i.f.ir  r.-jorsl  :  cii-:-:  *.  \jc  ucc>]':«Mt  10  Gcid,  "wiilioul  ib:* 

O-r  j;.o-ji.n)  p:t:»::-der*  ::»  reL-sc»:i.  iii^^.-td.  sci  up  ac^iiinr 
jjr.-.'.Jpl'.  to  uft  ii-iij:  :L-:y  i.»Ik  I  ku-'W  d^-i  what,  ol  doiu?: 
ij.oraJ  aii  ]  «.l\ii  ci.'.iC<  oi  iijc.  l.-'.'iii  iLt  u:v.r.ii  rjires^  and  uniii* 
Uf:-\  iA  lu'w.v^.  but  .*u^.h  c.iQ  arc  Liiiid.  howe^ir  i hey  may 
prr;i#:r*d  to  s- '.  :  tiL.'i  sroine  thus  al»."*ui  10  esidbhsh  their  own 
ri•.:li•^o'J-IJ' -r.  :.!■.  ■.:uriv  ij^nc«:/iu  of  the  rishtcuusiiess  v^hicbis 

lux  Tii';U'jlj  we  'jTc'ini  t:.':it  nioralitv  is  a  substantial  part  oi 
C.firi.stiu/jii\,  aiid  ih'ti  Christ  came  not  to  dcstrov  or  lake  oa 
th*:  ijtoral  itw.  as  a  rule  of  action,  but  to  explaiu.  and  so  I'ulDl 
it:  >*rt  wc  afiirijj.  ihut  o»jr  niural  and  civil  actions  are  now  iid 
farther  accepiahic  in  the  sicht  of  God  the  Father,  than  as  ihov 
prcxxf-d  Irufii  the  principle  of  a  new  nature,  and  an  experi- 
ujental  knowledsre  of,  or  vital  faith  in,  his  dear  Sou. 

I'hc  di-aih  of  Je.«>u.s  Christ  has  turned  our  whole  lives  intoime 
continued  sacrifice  ;  and  v.hether  we  eat  or  drink,  whether  we 
pray  to  ( Jod,  or  do  any  thing  to  man,  it  must  all  be  done  out 
oi'  a  lo\  c  for,  and  knowledge  of,  him  who  died  and  rose  again. 
to  render  all,  even  our  most  ordinary  deeds,  acceptable  in  tbc 
.si;;ht  of  Cjod. 

Il  \wr  live  by  this  principle,  if  Christ  be  the  Alpha  and  Ome- 
^ii  of  all  our  actions,  then  our  least  are  acceptable  sacriiiccs; 
but  if  this  principle  be  wanting,  our  most  pompous  service> 
avail  nothing :  we  are  but  spiritual  idolaters ;  we  sacrilice  to 
our  own  net ;  we  make  an  idol  of  ourselves,  by  making  ourselves, 
and  not  Christ,  the  end  of  our  actions :  and,  therefore,  sucb 
actions  arc  so  far  from  being  accepted  by  God,  that,  according 
to  the  lannfuage  of  one  of  the  Articles  of  our  church,  ''we  doubt 
fiot  but  they  have  the  nature  of  sin,  because  the.y  spring  not 
lt«»ui  an  experimental  Ikith  in,  and  knowledge  of,  Jesus  Chnst." 


XLV.]  THE   BBST    KNOWLUDGE.  517 

Were  we  not  fallen  creatures,  we  might  then  act,  perhaps, 
from  other  principles ;  bat  since  we  are  fallen  from  God  in 
Adam,  and  are  restored  again,  only  by  the  obedience  and  death 
of  Jesus  Christ,  the  face  of  thinj^s  is  entirely  changed,  and  all 
we  think,  speak,  or  do,  is  only  accepted  in  and  through  him. 

Justly,  therefore,  may  I,  in  the. 

Third  and  Last  place,  exhort  you  to  put  the  apostle's  reso- 
lution in  practice,  and  beseech  you,  with  him,  to  determine, 
*'  not  to  know  any  thing,  save  Jesus  Christ,  and  him  crucified." 

I  say,  determine,  for  unless  you  sit  down  first,  and  count  the 
cost,  and,  from  a  well-grounded  conviction  of  the  excellency  of 
this,  above  all  other  knowledge  whatsoever,  resolve  to  make 
this  your  chief  study,  your  only  end,  your  one  thing  needful, 
every  frivolous  temptation  will  draw  you  aside  from  the  pursuit 
after  it. 

Your  friends  and  carnal  acquaintance^  and,  above  all,  your 
grand  adversary  the  devil,  will  be  persuading  you  to  determine 
not  to  know  any  thing,  but  how  to  lay  up  goods  for  many 
years,  and  to  get  a  knowledge  and  taste  of  the  pomps  and  vani- 
ties of  this  wicked  world ;  but  do  you  determine  not  to  follow, 
or  be  led  by  them  ;  and  the  more  they  persuade  you  to  know 
other  things,  the  more  do  you  "  determine  not  to  know  any 
thing,  save  Jesus  Christ,  and  him  crucified."  For,  this  know- 
ledge never  faileth  :  but  whether  they  be  riches,  they  shall  fail, 
whether  they  be  pomps,  they  shall  cease  ;  whether  they  be  vani- 
ties, they  shall  fade  away  ;  but  the  knowledge  of  Jesus  Christ, 
and  him  crucified,  abideth  for  ever. 

Whatever,  therefore,  you  are  ignorant  of,  be  not  ignorant  of 
this.  If  you  know  Christ,  and  him  crucified,  you  know  enough 
to  make  you  happy,  supposing  you  know  nothing  else ;  and 
v^ithout  this,  all  your  other  knowledge  cannot  keep  you  from 
being  everlastingly  miserable. 

Value  not,  then,  the  contempt  of  friends,  which.you  must  ne- 
cessarily meet  with  upon  your  open  profession  to  act  according 
to  this  determination.  For  your  Master,  whose  you  are,  was 
despised  before  you ;  and  all  that  will  know  nothing  else  but 
Jesus  Christ,  and  him  crucified,  must,  in  some  degree  or  other, 
suffer  persecution. 

It  is  necessary  that  offences  should  come,  to  try  what  is  in 
our  hearts,  and  whether  we  will  be  faithful  soldiers  of  Jesu3 
Christ,  or  not. 

Dare  ye  then  to  confess  our  blessed  Master  before  men,  and 
to  shine  as  lights  in  the  world,  amidst  a  crooked  and  perverse 
generation  !  Det  us  not  be  content  with  following  him  afar  off; 
for  then  we  shall,  as  Peter  did,  soon  deny  him  ;  but  let  us  be 
altogether  Christians,  and  let  our  speech  and  all  our  actions  de- 
clare to  the  world  whose  disciples  we  are,  and  that  we  have, 
indeed,  determined  not  to  know  any  thing,  save  Jesus  Christ, 
and  him  crucified."  Then,  well  will  it  be  with  us,  and  happy, 
unspeakably  happy  shall  we  be,  even  here ;  and,  what  is  inn- 
iiitely  better,  when  others  that  despised  us,  shall  be  calling  upon 


Sid  OP  JUSTIFICATION   BY   CHRIST.  [XLVI, 

the  ifioontains  to  fall  on  thcntn,  and  hills  to  cover  them,  we  shall 
be  exalted  to  sit  down  on  the  right  band  of  God^  and  shine  as 
the  sun  in  the  firmament,  in  the  kingdom  of  our  most  adorable 
Redeemer,  for  ever  and  ever. 
Which  Grod  of  his  infinite  mercy  grant,  &c. 


SERMON  XLVI. 

OF   JUSTIFICATION    BY    CHRIST. 

But  ye  are  justified. — 1  Cor.  vi.  11. 
The  whole  verse  is :  And  such  were  some  of  you :  but  ye  an 
washed^  but  ye  are  sanctified,  but  ye  are  justified,  in  the  name 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  by  the  Spirit  of  our  God. 

It  has  been  objected  by  some  who  dissent  from,  nay,  I  may 
add,  by  others  also,  who  actually  are  friends  to  the  present 
ecclesiastical  establishment,  that  the  ministers  of  the  church  of 
England  preach  themselves,  and  not  Christ  Jesus  the  Lord; 
that  they  entertain  their  people  with  lectures  of  mere  morality, 
without  declaring  to  them  the  glad  tidings  of  salvation  by  Jesns 
Christ.  How  well-grounded  such  an  objection  may  be,  is  not 
my  business  to  inquire :  All  I  shall  say  at  present  to  the  point 
is,  that  whenever  such  a  grand  objection  is  urged  against  the 
whole  body  of  the  clergy  in  general,  every  honest  minister  of 
Jesus  Christ  should  do  his  utmost  to  cut  oflf  all  manner  of 
occasion,  from  those  who  desire  an  occasion  to  take  offence  at 
us  ;  that  so  by  hearing  us  continually  sounding  forth  the  word 
of  truth,  and  declaring  with  all  boldness  and  assurance  of  faith, 
'^  that  there  is  no  other  name  given  under  heaven  whereby  they 
can  be  saved,  but  that  of  Jesus  Christ,"  they  may  be  ashamed 
of  this  their  saroe  confident  boasting  against  us. 

It  was  an  eye  to  this  objection,  joined  with  the  agreeableness 
and  delightfulness  of  the  subject,  (for  who  can  but  delight  to 
talk  of  that  which  the  blessed  angels  desire  to  look  into?)  that 
induces  me  to  discourse  a  little  on  that  great  and  fundamental 
article  of  our  faith  ;  namely,  our  being  freely  justified  by  the 
precious  blood  of  Jesus  Christ.  *'  But  ye  are  washed,  but  ye 
are  sanctified,  but  ye  are  justified,  in  the  name  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  and  by  the  Spirit  of  our  God." 

The  words  beginning  with  the  particle  **  but,"  have  plainly  a 
reference  to  something  before;  it  may  not  therefore  be  impfo- 
per,  before  I  descend  to  particulars,  to  consider  the  words  as 
they  stand  in  relation  to  the  context.  The  apostle,  in  the  verses 
immediately  foregoing,  had  been  reckoning  up  many  noto- 
rious sins,  drunkenness  adultery,  fornication,  and  such  like, 
the  commission  of  which,  without  a  true  and  hearty  repentance, 
he  tells  the  Corinthians,  would  entirely  shut  them  out  of  the 
kingdom  of  Grod.  But  then,  lest  they  should  on  the  one  hand 
grow  spiritually  proud  by  seeing  themselves  differ  from  their 
unconverted  brethren,  and  therefore  be  tempted  to  set  tbem  at 
nought,  and  say  with  the  self-conceited  hypocrite,  in  the  pro- 
phet, *'  Come  not  nigh  me,  for  I  am  holier  than  thoa  ;"*  ot»  oo 


XLVI.]  OP  JUSTIFICATION    BY   CHRIST.  fil9 

the  other  hand,  by  looking  back  on  tlie  multitade  of  their  past 
offences,  should  be  apt  to  think  their  sins  were  too  many  and 
grievous  to  be  forgiven,  he  first,  in  order  to  keep  them  humble, 
reminds  them  of  their  sad  state  before  conversion,  telling 
them  in  plain  terms,  ''such  (or  as  it  might  be  read,  these 
things,)  were  some  of  you ;'"  not  only  one,  but  all  that  sad 
catalogue  of  vices  I  have  been  drawing  up,  souxe  of  you  were 
once  guilty  of;  but  then,  at  the  same  time,  to  preserve  them  from 
despair,  behold  he  brings  them  glad  tidings  of  great  joy : ''  But 
ye  are  washed,  but  ye  are  sanctified,  but  ye  are  justified,  iiv  the 
name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  by  the  Spirit  of  our  God/' 

The  former  part  of  this  text,  pur  being  sanctified,  I  have  in 
some  measure  treated  of  already ;  I  would  now  enlarge  on  our 
being  freely  justified  by  the  precious,  obedience  and  death  of 
Jesus  Christ :  "  But  ye  are  justified  in  the  name  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.'^  From  which  words  I  shall  consider  three  things : 

First,  what  is  meant  by  the  vrotd  justified. 

Secondly,  I  shall  endeavour  to  prove  that  all  mankind  in 
general,  and  every  individual  person  in  particular,  stands  in 
need  of  being  justified. 

Thirdly,  That  there  is  no  possibility  of  obtaining  this  justifi- 
cation, which  we  so  much  want,  but  by  the  all-perfect  obedience 
and  precious  death  of  Jesus  Christ. 

First,  I  am  to  consider  what  is  meant  by  the  word  justified. 

**  But  ye  are  justified,"  says  the  apostle ;  which  is  as  though 
he  had  said.  You  have  your  sins  forgiven,  and  are  looked  upon 
by  God  as  though  you  never  had  offended  him  at  all :  for  that  is 
the. meaning  of  the  word  justified,  in  almost  all  the  passages  of 
holy  scripture  where  this  word  is  mentioned.  Thus,  when  this 
same  apostle  writes  to  the  Romans,  he  tells  them,  that  **  whom 
God  called,  those  he  also  justified :"  and  that  this  word  justified, 
implies  a  blotting  out  of  all  our  transgressions,  is  manifest  from 
what  follows,  "  them  he  also  glorified,"  which  could  not  be  if  a 
justified  person  was  not  looked  upon  by  God  as  though  he  never 
had  offended  him  at  all.  And  again,  speaking  of  Abraham's 
faith,  he  tells  them^  that  '^  Abraham  believed  on  him  that  justi- 
fies the  ungodly,"  who  acquits  and  clears  the  ungodly  man ;  for 
it  is  a  law-term,  and  alludes  to  a  judge  acquitting  an  accused 
criminal  of  the  thing  laid  to  his  charge.  Which  expression  the 
apostle  himself  explains  by  a  quotation  out  of  the  Psalms : 
''  Blessed  is  the  man  to  whom  the  Lord  imputeth  not  sin."  From 
all  which  proofs,  and  many  others  that  might  be  urged,  it  is 
evident,  that  by  being  justified,  we  are  to  understand,  being  so 
acquitted  in  the  sight  of  God,  as  to  be  looked  upon  as  though 
wc  never  had  offended  him  at  all.  And  in  this  sense  we  are  to 
understand  that  Article,  which  we  profess  to  believe  in  our  Creed, 
when  each  of  us  declares  in  his  own  person,  I  believe  the  for- 
giveness of  sins.    This  leads  me  to  the — 

Second  thing  proposed,  to  prove  that  all  mankind  in  general, 
and  every  individual  person  in  particular,  stands  in  need  of 
being  justified. 


620  OP  JUSTIFICATION    BY   CHRIST^  [XLVU 

And  indeed  the  apostle  supposes  this  in  the  words  of  the 
text:  "But  ye  are  justified/'  thereby  implying  that  the  Corinth- 
ians (and  consequently  all  mankind,  there  being  no  difference, 
as  will  be  shewn  hereafter)  stood  in  need  of  being  justified. 

But^  not  to  rest  in  bare  suppositions,  in  my  farther  enlarge- 
ment on  this  head,  I  shall  endeavour  to  prove,  that  we  all  stand 
in  need  of  being  justified  on  account  of  the  sin  of  our  natures, 
and  the  sin  of  our  lives. 

1.  Firsty  I  afiirm  that  we  all  stand  in  need  of  being  justified, 
on  account  of  the  sin  of  our  natures :  for  we  are  all  chargeable 
with  original  sin,  or  the  sin  of  our  first  parents.  Which,  though 
a  proposition  that  may  be  denied  by  a  self-justifying  infidel,  who 
"  will  not  come  to  Christ  that  he  may  have  life ;"  yet  can  never 
be  denied  by  any  one  who  believes  that  St.  Paul's  epistles  were 
written  by  divine  inspiration ;  where  we  are  told,  that ''  in  Adam 
all  died ;"  that  is,  Adam's  sin  was  imputed  to  all :  and  lest  we 
should  forget  to  make  a  particular  application,  it  is  added,  in 
another  place,  '^  that  there  is  none  that  doeth  good,  (that  is,  bj 
nature,)  no,  not  one :  that  we  are  all  gone  out  of  the  way,  (of 
original  righteousness,)  and  are  by  nature  the  children  of  wrath." 
And  even  David,  who  was  a  man  after  God's  own  heart,  and,  if 
any  one  could,  might  surely  plead  an  exemption  from  this  uni- 
versal corruption,  yet  he  confesses,  that  **  he  was  shapen  in 
iniquity,  and  that  in  sin  did  his  mother  conceive  him."  And,  to 
mention  but  one  text  more,  as  immediately  applicable  to  the 
present  purpose,  St.  Paul,  in  his  epistle  to  the  Romans,  says, 
that  '*  Death  came  upon  all  men,  for  the  disobedience  of  one, 
namely,  of  Adam,  even  upon  those,  (that  is,  little  children,)  who 
had  not  sinned  after  the  similitude  of  Adam's  transgression  ;*' 
who  had  not  been  guilty  of  actual  sin,  and  therefore  could  not 
be  punished  with  temporal  death,  (which  came  into  the  world, 
as  this  same  apostle  elsewhere  informs  us,  only  by  sin,)  had  not 
the  disobedience  of  our  first  parents  been  imputed  to  them.  So 
that  what  has  been  said  on  this  point,  seems  to  be  excellently 
summed  up  in  that  Article  of  our  church,  where  she  declares, 
that  '^  Original  sin  standeth  not  in  the  following  of  Adam, 
but  it  is  the  fault  and  corruption  of  every  man,  that  naturally 
is  engendered  of  the  ofispring  of  Adam ;  whereby  man  is  very 
far  gone  from  original  righteousness,  and  is  of  his  own  nature 
inclined  to  evil,  so  that  the  flesh  lusteth  always  contrary  to  the 
spirit ;  and  therefore  in  every  person  born  into  this  world,  it 
descrveth  God's  wrath  and  damnation." 

I  have  been  more  particular  in  treating  of  this  point,  because 
it  is  the  very  foundation  of  the  Christian  religion  :  For  I  am 
verily  persuaded,  that  it  is  nothing  but  a  want  of  being  well 
grounded  in  the  doctrine  of  original  sin,  and  of  the  helpless,  nay, 
I  may  say,  damnable  condition,  each  of  us  comes  into  the  world 
in,  that  makes  so  many  infidels  oppose,  and  so  many  who  call 
themselves  Christians,  so  very  lukewarm  in  their  love  and  affec- 
tions to  Jesus  Christ.  It  is  this,  and,  I  could  almost  say,  this 
only,  that  makes  infidelity  abound  among  us  so  much  as  it  doc& 


XLVI.]  OP  JUSTIFICATION   BY    CHRIST.  62l 

For,  alas  I  we  are  mistaken  if  we  imagine  that  men  now  com- 
mence or  continue  infidels,  and  set  up  corrupted  reason  in  op- 
position to  divine  revelation  merely  for  want  of  evidence,  (for  I 
believe  it  might  easily  be  proved,  that  a  modern  unbeliever  is 
the  most  credulous  creature  living ;)  no,  it  is  only  for  want  of 
a  humble  mind,  of  a  sense  of  their  original  depravity,  and  a 
willingness  to  own  themselves  so  depraved,  that  makes  them  so 
obstinately  shut  their  eyes  against  the  light  of  the  glorious  gospel 
of  Christ.  Whereas,  on  the  contrary,  were  they  but  once  pricked 
to  the  heart  with  a  due  and  lively  sense  of  their  natural  corrup- 
tion and  liableness  to  condemnation,  we  should  have  them  no 
more  scoffing  at  divine  revelation,  and  looking  on  it  as  an  idle 
tale ;  but  they  would  cry  out,  with  the  trembling  jailor,  **  What 
shall  I  do  to  be  saved  V  It  was  an  error  in  this  fundamental 
point,  that  made  so  many  resist  the  evidence  the  Son  of  God 
himself  gave  of  his  divine  mission,  when  he  tabernacled  amongst 
us.  Every  word  he  spake,  every  action  he  did,  every  miracle  he 
wrought,  proved  that  he  came  from  God.  And  why  then  did  so 
many  harden  their  hearts,  and  would  not  believe  his  report  t 
Why,  he  himself  informs  us,  "They  will  not  come  unto  me,  that 
they  may  have  life  :'*  they  will  obstinately  stand  out  against 
those  means  God  hath  appointed  for  their  salvation.  And  St. 
Paul  tells  us,  that  if  the  gospel  be  hid,  it  is  hid  to  them  that  are 
lost ;  in  whom  the  god  of  this  world  hath  blinded  the  eyes  of 
them  which  believe  not,  lest  the  light  of  the  glorious  gospel  of 
Christ,  who  is  the  image  of  God,  should  shine  upon  them,'* 
2  Cor.  iv.  3,  4. 

If  it  be  asked,  how  it  suits  with  the  divine  goodness,  to  impute 
the  guilt  of,  an  innocent  poterity  ?  I  should  think  it  sufficient  to 
make  use  of  the  apostle's  words  :  "  Nay,  but,  O  man,  who  art 
thou  that  repliest  against  God?  Shall  the  thing  formed,  say 
to  him  that  formed  it.  Why  hast  thou  made  me  thus?''  fiut 
to  come  to  a  more  direct  reply:  Persons  would  do  well  to 
consider,  that  in  the  first  cbvenant  God  made  with  man,  Adam 
acted  as  a  public  person,  as  the  proper  representative  of  all  man- 
kind, and  consequently  we  must  stand  or  fall  with  him.  Had 
he  continued  in  his  obedience,  and  not  eaten  the  forbidden 
fruit,  the  benefits  of  that  obedience  would  doubtless  have 
been  imputed  to  us  :  but  since  he  did  not  persist  in  it,  but  broke 
the  covenant  made  with  him,  and  us  in  him  ;  who  dares  charge 
the  righteous  Judge  of  all  the  earth  with  injustice,  for  imputing 
that  to  us  also  ?  I  proceed. 

Secondly,  To  prove  that  we  stand  in  need  of  being  justified, 
on  account  of  the  sjn  of  our  lives. 

That  God,  as  he  made  man,  has  a  right  to  demand  his  obe- 
dience, I  suppose  is  a  truth  no  one  will  deny  :  that  he  hath  also 
given  us  both  a  natural  and  ^  written  law,  whereby  we  are  to 
be  judged,  cannot  l>e  questioned  by  any  one  who  believes  St. 
Paul's  epistle  to  the  Romans  to  be  of  divine  authority :  for  in 
in  it  we  are  told  of  a  law  written  in  the  heart,  and  a  law  given 
by  JMoses,  and  that  each  of  us  hath  broken  these  laws  is  too  evi- 


522  OP   JUSTIFICATION    BV    CHRIST.  [XL^I. 

dent  from  our  sad  and  frequent  experience.  Accordingly,  the 
holy  scriptures  inform  us  that  there  is  no  man  which  livetb  and 
sinneth  not;''  that  'Mnmany  things  we  oiTend  all ;"  that  ''if we 
say  we  have  no  sin,  we  deceive  ourselves/'  and  such  like.  And 
if  we  are  thus  offenders  against  God,  it  follows,  that  we  staud 
in  need  of  forgiveness  for  thus  offending  him ;  unless  we  suppuise 
God  to  enact  laws,  and  at  the  same  time  not  care  whether  they 
are  obeyed,  or  not ;  which  is  as  absurd  as  to  suppose,  that  a 
prince  should  establish  laws  for  the  proper  government  of  his 
country,  and  yet  let  every  violator  of  them  come  off  with  im- 
punity. But  God  has  not  dealt  so  foolishly  with  his  creatures: 
no,  as  he  gave  us  a  law,  he  demands  our  obedience  to  that  law, 
and  has  obliged  us,  universally  and  perseveringly  to  obey  it, 
under  no  less  a  penalty  than  incurring  his  curse  and  eternal 
death  for  every  breach  of  it :  for  thus  speaks  the  scripture, 
''  Cursed  is  he  that  continueth  not  in  all  things  that  are  writtcu 
in  the  law  to  do  them ;  as  the  scripture  also  speaketh  in  an- 
other  place,  "  The  soul  that  sinneth,  it  shall  die."  Now,  it  has 
already  been  proved,  that  we  have  all  of  us  sinned ;  and  there- 
fore, unless  some  means  can  be  found  to  satisfy  God's  justice, 
wc  must  perish  eternally. 

Let  us  then  stand  a  while,  and  see  in  what  a  deplorable  con- 
dition each  of  us  comes  into  the  world,  and  still  continues  till 
we  are  translated  into  a  state  of  grace.  For  surely  nothing 
can  well  be  supposed  more  deplorable,  than  to  be  born  under 
the  curse  of  God ;  to  be  charged  with  original  guilt ;  and  not 
only  so,  but  to  be  convicted  as  actual  breakers  of  God's  law, 
the  least  breach  of  which  justly  deserves  eternal  damnation. 
Surely  this  can  but  be  a  melancholy  prospect  to  view  ourselves 
in,  and  must  put  us  upon  contriving  some  means  whereby  we 
may  satisfy  and  appease  our  offended  Judge.  But  what  must 
those  means  be  ?  Shall  we  repent?  Alas  !  there  is  not  one  word 
of  repentance  mentioned  in  the  first  covenant :  "  The  day  that 
thou  eatest  thereof,  thou  shalt  surely  die."  So  that  if  God  be  true, 
unless  there  be  some  way  found  out  to  satisfy  divine  justice,  we 
must  perish  :  and  there  is  no  room  left  for  us  to  expect  a  chauge 
of  mind  in  God,  though  we  should  seek  it  with  tears.  Well  then, 
if  repentance  will  not  do,  shall  we  plead  the  law  of  works .' 
Alas  !  "By  the  law  shall  no  man  living  be  justified :  for  by  tbe 
law  comes  the  knowledge  of  sin."  It  is  that  which  convicts  and 
condemns,  and  therefore  can  by  no  means  justify  us  ;  and  ".-ill 
our  righteousnesses  (says  the  prophet)  are  but  as  filthy  raj^s.'* 
Wherewith  then  shall  we  come  before  the  Lord,  and  bow  donn 
before  the  most  high  God  ?  Shall  we  come  before  him  with  calves 
of  a  year  old,  with  thousands  of  rams,  or  ten  thousands  of  rivrrs 
of  oil?  Alas!  God  has  shewed  thee,  O  man,  that  this  will  not 
avail :  for  he  hath  declared,  **  I  will  take  no  bullock  out  of  thy 
housey  nor  he-goat  out  of  thy  fold :  for  all  the  beasts  of  the 
fiMPesta  are  mine,  and  so  are  the  cattle  upon  a  thousand  hills." 
Will  the  Lord  then  be  pleased  to  accept  our  first-bom  for  our 
tnuugression^  the  fruit  of  our  bodies  for  the  sin  of  our  souls  ? 


XLVI.]  OP   JUSTIFICATION    BY   CHRIST.  528 

Even  this  ivill  not  purchase  our  pardon  :  for  he  hath  declared 
that ''  the  children  shall  not  bear  the  iniquities  of  their  parents." 
Besides,  they  are  sinners,  and  therefore,  being  under  the  same 
condemnation,  equally  stand  in  need  of  forgiveness  with  our- 
selves. They  are  impure,  and  will  the  Lord  accept  the  blind 
and  lame  for  sacrifice?  Shall  some  angel  then,  or  archangel, 
undertake  to  fulfil  the  covenant  which  wo  have  broken,  and 
make  atonement  for  us  ?  Alas  !  they  are  only  creatures,  though 
creatures  of  the  highest  order;  and  therefore  are  obliged  to 
obey  God  as  well  as  we ;  and  after  they  have  done  all,  must 
say  they  have  done  no  more  than  what  was  their  duty  to  do. 
And  supposing  it  were  possible  for  them  to  die,  yet  how  could 
the  death  of  a  finite  creature  satisfy  an  infinitely  offended  jus- 
tice ?  O  wretched  men  that  we  are !  Who  shall  deliver  us  ?  I 
thank  God,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Which  naturally  leads  me 
to  the 

JTiird  thing  proposed,  which  was  to  endeavour  to  prove,  that 
there  is  no  possibility  of  obtaining  this  justification,  which  we 
so  much  want,  but  by  the  all-perfect  obedience  and  precious 
death  of  Jesus  Christ :  '^  But  ye  are  justified  in  the  name  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ/' 

But  this  having  been  in  some  measure  proved  by  what  has 
been  said  under  the  foregoing  head,  wherein  I  have  shewn  that 
neither  our  repentance,  righteousness,  nor  sacrifice,  no,  not  the 
obedience  and  death  of  angels  themselves,  could  possibly  pro- 
care  justification  for  us,  nothing  remains  for  me  to  do  under  this 
head,  but  to  shew  that  Jesus  Christ  has  procured  it  for  us. 

And  here  I  shall  still  have  recourse  "  to  the  law  and  to  the 
testimony."  For  after  all  the  most  subtle  disputations  on  either 
side,  nothing  but  the  lively  oracles  of  God  can  give  us  any  satis- 
faction in  this  momentous  point :  it  being  such  an  inconceiv- 
able mystery,  that  the  eternal  only-begotten  Son  of  God  should 
die  for  sinful  man,  that  we  durst  not  have  presumed  so  much  as 
to  have  thought  of  it,  had  not  Grod  revealed  it  in  his  holy  word. 
It  is  true,  reason  may  shew  us  the  wound,  but  revelation  only 
can  lead  us  to  the  means  of  our  cure.  And  though  the  method 
God  has  been  pleased  to  take  to  make  us  happy,  may  be  to  the 
infidel  a  stumbling-block,  and  to  the  wise  opiniator  and  disputer 
of  this  world,  foolishness ;  yet  wisdom,  that  is,  the  dispensa- 
tion of  our  redemption,  will  be  justified,  approved  of,  and  sub- 
mitted to,  by  all  her  truly  wise  and  holy  children,  by  every  sin- 
cere and  upright  Christian. 

But  to  come  more  directly  to  the  point  before  us.  Two  things, 
as  was  before  observed,  we  wanted,  in  order  to  be  at  peace  with 
God. 

1.  To  be  freed  from  the  guilt  of  the  sin  of  our  nature. 

2.  From  the  sin  of  our  lives. 

And  both  these  (thanks  be  to  God  for  this  unspeakable  gift) 
are  secured  to  believers  by  the  obedience  and  death  of  Jesus 
Christ.     For  what  says  the  scripture  ? 

1.  As  to  the  first,  it  informs  us,  that  **  as  by  the  disobedience 


624  OP   JUSTIFICATION    BY    CHRIST.  [XLVI. 

1.  As  to  the  first,  it  informs  us,  that  "as  by  the  disobedience 
of  one  man,  (or  by  one  transgression,  namely,  that  of  Adam) 
many  were  made  sinners ;  so  by  the  obedience  of  one,  Jesus 
Christ, (therein  including  his  passive  as  well  as  active  obedience,) 
many  were  made  righteous.''  And  again,  "  As  by  the  disobe- 
dience of  one  man,  judgment  camo  upon  all  men  unto  condem- 
nation;" or  all  men  were  condemned  on  having  Adam's  sin 
imputed  to  them ;  "  so  by  the  obedience  of  one,  that  is,  Jesus 
Christ,  the  free  gift  of  pardon  and  peace  came  upon  all  men, 
(all  sorts  of  men,)  unto  justification  of  life."  I  say  all  sorts  of 
men ;  for  the  apostle  in  this  chapter  is  only  drawing  a  parallel 
between  the  first  and  second  Adam  in  this  respect,  that  they 
acted  both  as  representatives ;  and  as  the  posterity  of  Adam 
had  his  sin  imputed  to  them,  so  those  for  whom  Christ  died, 
and  whose  representative  he  is,  shall  have  his  merits  imputed  to 
them  also.  Whoever  run  the  parallel  farther,  in  order  to  prove 
universal  redemption,  (whatever  arguments  they  may  draw  for 
the  proof  of  it  from  other  passages  of  scripture,)  if  they  would 
draw  one  from  this  for  that  purpose,  I  think  they  stretch  their 
line  of  interpretation  beyond  the  limits  of  scripture. 

2.  Pardon  for  the  sin  of  our  lives  was  another  thing,  which 
we  wanted  to  have  secured  to  us,  before  we  could  be  at  peace 
with  God. 

And  this,  the  holy  spriptures  inform  us,  is  abundantly  done 
by  the  death  of  Jesus  Christ.  The  evangelical  prophet  foretold 
that  the  promised  Redeemer  should  be  "  wounded  for  onr 
transgressions,  and  bruised  for  our  iniquities ;  that  the  chas- 
tisement of  our  peace  should  be  upon  him ;  and  that  by  hi^ 
stripes  we  should  be  healed,"  Isa.  liii.  6.  The  angels  at  his 
birth  said,  that  he  should  "  save  his  peopio  from  their  sins.'* 
And  St.  Paul  declares,  that  '^this  is  a  faithful  saying,  and 
worthy  of  all  acceptation,  that  Jesus  Christ  came  into  the 
world  to  save  sinners."  And  here,  in  the  words  of  the  text, 
^'  such  (or,  as  I  observed  before,  these  things)  were  some  of 
you  ;  but  ye  are  washed,"  &c.  and  again,  ^' Jesus  Christ  is  the 
end  of  the  law  for  righteousness  to  every  one  that  believeth." 
And  to  shew  us  that  none  but  Jesus  Christ  can  do  all  this,  the 
apostle  St.  Peter  says,  *'  neither  is  there  salvation  in  any  otiier; 
for  there  is  no  other  name  under  heaven  given  among  men, 
whereby  we  must  be  saved,  but  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ." 

How  God  will  be  pleased  to  deal  with  the  Grentiles,  who  yet 
sit  in  darkness  and  under  the  shadow  of  death,  and  upon  whom 
the  Sun  of  righteousness  never  yet  arose,  is  not  for  as  to 
inquire.  "  What  have  we  to  do,  to  judge  those  that  are  with- 
out ?"  To  God's  mercy  let  us  recommend  them,  and  wait  for  a 
solution  of  this  and  every  other  difficult  point,  till  the  great  day 
of  accounts,  when  all  God*s  dispensations,  both  of  providence 
and  grace,  will  be  fully  cleared  up  by  methods  to  us  as  yet 
unknown,  because  unrevealed.  However,  this  we  know,  that 
the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  will,  most  assuredly,  do  right. 

Bat  it  18  time  for  me  to  draw  towards  a  conclusion. 


XLVI.]  OF   JUSTIFICATION    BY   CHRIST.  585 

I  have  now,  brethren,  by  the  blessing  of  God,  discoursed  on 
the  words  of  the  text  in  the  method  I  proposed.  Many  useful 
inferences  might  be  drawn  from  what  has  been  delivered ;  but 
as  I  have  detained  you,  I  fear,  too  long  already,  permit  me 
only  to  make  a  reflection  or  two  on  what  has  been  said,  and  I 
have  done. 

If  then  we  are  freely  justified  by  the  death  and  obedience  of 
Jesus  Christ,  let  us  here  pause  a  whil^ ;  and  as  before  we  have 
reflected  on  the  misery  of  a  fallen,  let  us  now  turn  aside  and 
see  the  happiness  of  the  believing,  soul.  But,  alas  I  how  am  I 
lost  to  think  that  God  the  Father,  when  we  were  in  a  state  of 
enmity  and  rebellion  against  him,  should  notwithstanding 
yearn  in  his  bowels  towards  us  his  fallen,  his  apostate  crea- 
tures: and  because  nothing  but  an  infinite  ransom  could  satisfy 
an  infinitely  ofiended  justice,  that  should  send  his  only  and 
dear  Son  Jesus  Christ  (who  is  God  blessed  for  ever^  and  who 
had  lain  in  his  bosom  from  all  eternity)  to  fulfil  the  covenant  of 
works,  and  die  a  cursed,  painful,  ignominious  death,  for  us  and 
for  our  salvation !  who  can  avoid  crying  out,  at  the  consider- 
ation of  this  mystery  of  godliness,  ''Oh  the  depth  of  the 
riches  of  God's  love"  to  us  his  wretched,  miserable,  and 
undone  creatures !  "  How  unsearchable  is  his  mercy,  and  his 
ways  past  finding  out!''  Now  know  we  of  a  truth,  O  God, 
that  thou  hast  loved  us,  '*  since  thou  hast  not  withheld  thy 
Son,  thine  only  Son  Jesus  Christ/'  from  thus  doing  and  dying 
for  us. 

But  as  we  admire  the  Father  sending,  let  us  likewise  humbly 
and  thankfully  adore  the  Son  coming,  when  sent  to  die  for  man. 
But,  O!  what  thoughts  can  conceive,  what  words  express,  the 
infinite  greatness  of  that  unparalleled  love,  which  engaged  the 
Son  of  God  to  come  down  from  the  mansions  of  bis  Father's 
glory,  to  obey  and  die  for  sinful  man  I  The  Jews,  when  he  only 
shed  a  tear  at  poor  Lazarus'  funeral,  said,  ''  Behold  how  he 
loved  him."  How  much  more  justly  then  may  we  cry  out. 
Behold  how  he  loved  us !  when  he  not  only  filled  the  whole 
moral  law,  but  did  not  spare  to  shed  his  own  most  precious 
blood  for  us. 

And  can  any  poor  truly -convicted  sinner*  ailer  this,  despair 
of  mercy  ?  What,  can  they  see  their  Saviour  hanging  on  a  tree, 
with  arms  stretched  out  ready  to  embrace  them,  and  yet,  on 
their  truly  believing  on  him,  donbt  of  finding  acceptance  with 
him?  No,  away  with  all  such  dishonourable,  desponding 
thoughts.  Look  on  his  hands,  bored  with  pins  of  iron ;  look  on 
bis  side,  pierced  with  a  cruel  spear,  to  let  loose  the  sluices  of 
his  Uood,  and  open  a  fountain  for  sin,  and  for  all  uncleanness ; 
and  then  despair  of  mercy,  if  you  can !  N^o,  only  believe  in 
him,  and  then,  though  you  have  crucified  him  afresh,  yet  will 
be  abundantly  pardon  you ;  .^^  though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet, 
yet  shall  they  be  as  wool ;  though  deeper  than  crimson,  yet 
shall  they  be  whiter  than  snow." 

Which  God  of  his  infinite  mercy  grant,  &c. 


626  THB   GREAT    DUTY    OP  [XLVII. 

SERMON  XLVII. 

THE  GREAT  DUTY  OP  CHARITY  RECOMMENDED. 

Charity  never  faileth. — 1  Cor.  xiii.  8. 
Nothing  is  more  valuable  and  commendable,  and  yet  not  one 
duty  is  less  practised,  than  that  of  charity.  We  often  pretend 
concern  and  pity  for  the  misery  and  distress  of  our  fellow-crea- 
tures, but  yiet  we  seldom  commiserate  their  condition,  so  much 
as  to  relieve  them  according  to  our  abilities ;  but  unless  we 
assist  them  with  what  they  may  stand  in  need  of,  for  the  body, 
as  well  as  for  the  soul,  all  our  wishes  are  no  more  than  words 
of  no  value  or  regard,  and  are  not  to  be  esteemed  or  regarded : 
for  when  we  hear  of  any  deplorable  circumstance,  in  which  oar 
fellow-creatures  are  involved,  be  they  friends  or  enemies,  it  is  onr 
duty,  as  Christians,  to  assist  them  to  the  utmost  of  our  power. 

Indeed,  we  are  not,  my  brethren,  to  hurt  ourselves  or  cor 
families ;  this  is  not  that  charity  which  is  so  much  recommended 
by  St.  Paul :  no,  but  if  wc  are  any  ways  capable  of  relieving 
them  without  injuring  either  ourselves  or  families,  then  it  is  oor 
duty  to  do  it ;  and  this  never  faileth,  where  it  proceeds  from  a 
right  end,  and  with  a  right  view. 

St.  Paul  had  been  shewing,  in  the  preceding  chapter,  that 
spiritual  gifts  were  diverse ;  that  God  had  disposed  of  one  bless- 
ing to  one,  and  another  to  another ;  and  though  there  was  a 
diversity  of  blessings,  God  did  not  bestow  them  to  one  person, 
but  gave  to  one  a  blessing  which  he  denied  to  another,  and 
gave  a  blessing  or  a  gift  to  the  other,  which  might  make  him  as 
eminent  in  one  way,  as  the  other's  gift  made  him  so  in  another: 
but  though  there  are  these  divers  spiritual  gifts,  they  are  all 
given  for  some  wise  end,  even  to  profit  withal,  and  to  that  end 
they  are  thus  diversely  bestowed.  We  are  not,  on  the  one 
hand,  to  hide  those  gifts  which  God  has  given  us ;  neither  arc 
we,  on  the  other,  to  be  so  lavish  of  them,  as  to  spend  them 
upon  our  lusts  and  pleasures,  to  satisfy  our  sensual  appetites, 
but  they  are  to  be  used  for  the  glory  of  God  and  the  good  of 
immortal  souls.  After  he  had  particularly  illustrated  this,  he 
comes  to  shew,  that  all  gifts,  however  great  they  may  be  in  them- 
selves, are  of  no  value,  unless  we  have  charity,  as  yoa  may  see 
particularly,  by  considering  from  the  beginning  of  this  chapter. 

But  before  I  go  any  further,  I  shall  inform  you  what  the 
apostle  means  by  charity ;  and  that  is.  Love ;  if  there  is  true 
love,  there  will  be  charitv;  there  will  be  an  endeavour  to  assist, 
help,  and  relieve  according  to  that  ability  wherewith  God  has 
blessed  us :  and,  since  this  is  so  much  recommended  by  the 
apostle,  let  us  see  how  valuable  this  charity  is,  and  how  com- 
mendable in  all  those  who  pursue  it.     I  shall, 

I.  Consider  this  blessing  as  relating  to  the  bodies  of  men. 

II.  I  shall  shew  how  much  more  valuable  it  is,  when  relatinf 
to  the  souls  of  men. 

,111.  Shall  shew  you  when  your  charity  is  of  the  right  kind. 
IV.  Why  this  charity,  or  the  grace  of  love,  never  faileth. 


XLVII.]  CHARITY    RECOMMENDED.  fi27 

V.  Shall  conclude  all^  \«'ith  an  exhortation  to  high  and  low^ 
rich  and  poor,  one  with  another,  to  be  found  in  the  constant 
practice  of  this  valuable  and  commendable  duty. 

First,  I  shall  consider  this  duty»  as  relating  to  the  bodies  of 
men. — And,    1.  O  that  the  rich  would  consider  how  praise- 
worthy this  duty  is,  in  helping  their  fellow-creatures !  We  were 
created  to  be  a  help  to  each  other ;  God  has  made  no  one  so 
independent  as  not  to  need  the  assistance  of  another ;  the  rich- 
est  and  most  powerful  man  upon  the  face  of  this  earth,  needs 
the  help  and  assistance  of  those  who  are  around  him;  and 
though  he  may  be  great  to-day,  a  thousand  accidents  may 
make  him  as  low  to-morrow;  he  that  is  rolling  in  plenty  to-dav, 
may  be  in  as  much  scarcity  to-morrow.     If  our  rich  men  would 
be  more  charitable  to  their  poor  friends  and  neighbours,  it 
would  be  a  means  of  recommending  them  to  the  favour  at 
others,  if  Providence  should  frown  upon  them ;  but,  alas !  onr 
great  men  had  much  rather  spend  their  money  in  a  playhouse, 
at  a  ball,  an  assembly,  or  a  masquerade,  than  relieve  a  poor 
distressed  servant  of  Jesus  Christ.    They  had  rather  spend 
their  estates  on  their  hawks  and  hounds,  on  their  whores,  and 
earthly,  sensual,  devilish  pleasures,  than  comfort,  nourish,  or 
relieve  one  of  their  distressed  fellow-creatures.    What  differ- 
ence is  there  between  the  king  on  the  throne,  and  the  beggar 
on  the  dunghill,  when  God  demands  their  breaths  ?    There  is 
no  difference,  my  brethren,  in  the  grave,  nor  will  there  be  any 
at  the  day  of  judgment.    You  will  not  be  excused  because  you 
have  had  a  great  estate,  a  fine  house,  and  lived  in  all  the  plea- 
sures that  earth  could  afford  you ;  no,  these  things  will  be  one 
means    of  your   condemnation;   neither  will  you    be  judged 
according  to  the  largeness  of  your  estate,  but  according  to  the 
use  you  have  made  of  it. 

Now,  you  may  think  nothing  but  of  your  pleasures'  and 
deligiits,  of  living  in  case  and  plenty,  and  never  consider  how 
many  thousands  of  your  fellow-creatures  would  rejoice  at  what 
you  arc  making  waste  of,  and  setting  no  account  by.  Let  me 
beseech  you,  my  rich  brethren,  to  consider  the  poor  of  the 
world,  and  how  commendable  and  praise-worthy  it  is  to  relieve 
those  who  arc  distressed.  Consider,  how  pleasing  this  is  to 
God,  how  delightful  it  is  to  man,  and  how  many  prayers  you 
wfll  have  put  up  for  your  welfare,  by  those  persons  whom  you 
relieve ;  and  let  this  be  a  consideration  to  spare  a  little  out  of 
the  abundance  wherewith  God  has  blessed  you,  for  the  relief  of 
bis  poor.  He  could  have  placed  you  in  their  low  condition, 
and  tbey  in  your  high  state ;  it  is  only  his  good  pleasure  that 
has  thus  made  the  difference,  and  shall  not  this  make  you 
remember  your  distressed  fellow-creatures  ? 

liet  me  beseech  you  to  consider,  which  will  stand  yon  best 
at  the  day  of  judgment,  so  much  money  expended  at  a  horse- 
race, at  a  cockpit,  at  a  play  or  masquerade,  or  so  much  given 
for  the  relief  of  your  fellow-creatures,  and  for  the  distressed 
members  of  Jesus  Christ. 


OSS  TH£  GREAT   DUTY    OP  [XLVIK 

I  beseech  you,  that  you  would  consider  how  vahiable  and 
commendable  this  duty  is :  do  not  be  angry  at  my  thus  exhort- 
ing you  to  that  duty,  which  is  so  much  recommended  by  Jesus 
Christ  himself,  and  by  all  his  apostles :  I  speak  particularly  to 
you,  my  rich  brethren,  to  entreat  you  to  consider  those  that  are 
poor  in  this  world,  and  help  them  fiom  time  to  time,  as  their 
necessity  calls  for  it.  Consider,  that  there  is  a  curse  denounced 
against  the  riches  of  those  who  do  not  thus  do  good  with 
them ;  namely,  *'  Go  to  now,  you  rich  men,  weep  and  howl  for 
your  miseries  that  shall  come  upon  you :  your  riches  are  cor- 
rupted, your  garments  are  moth-eaten,  your  gold  and  silver  ii 
cankered,  and  the  rust  of  them  shall  be  a  witness  against  yoo, 
and  shall  eat  your  flesh  as  it  were  fire ;  ye  have  heaped  your 
treasure  together  for  the  last  day."    You  see  the  dreadful  woe 
pronounced  against  all  those  who  hoard  up  the  abundance  of 
the  things  of  this  life,  without  relieving  the  distresses  of  those 
who  are  in  want  thereof:  and  the  apostle  James  goes  on  also 
to  speak  against  those  who  have  acquired  estates  by  fraud,  as 
too  many  have  in  these  days.    **  Behold  the  hire  of  the  labooi* 
ers,  which  have  reaped  down  your  fields,  which  is  by  you  kept 
back  by  fraud,  crieUi;  and  tl.e  cries  of  them  who  have  reaped, 
are  entered  into  the  ears  of  the  Lord  God  of  sabaoth.    Ye  have 
lived  in  pleasure  on  the  earth,  and  been  wanton ;  ye  have  noo* 
jrished  your  hearts,  as  in  a  day  of  slaughter."    Thus,  if  yon  go 
on  to  live  after  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  to  pamper  your  bellies^ 
and  make  them  a  god,  while  the  poor  all  round  you  are  starv- 
ing, God  will  make  these  things  a  witness  against  you,  which 
shall  be  as  a  worm  to  your  souls,  and  gnaw  your  consciences 
to  all  eternity ;  therefore,  let  me  once  more  recommend  charity 
unto  the  bodies  of  men,  and  beseech  you  to  remember  what  the 
blessed  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  prooiised  unto  those  who  thus 
love  his  members,  that  **  as  they  have  done  it  to  the  least  of  his 
members,  they  have  done  it  unto  me." 

I  am  not  now  speaking  for  myself;  I  am  not  recommendiog 
my  little  flock  in  Georgia  to  you  ;  then  you  might  say,  as  many 
wantonly  do,  that  I  wanted  the  money  for  myself:  no,  my  bre- 
thren, I  am  now  recommending  the  poor  of  this  land  to  yoo« 
your  poor  neighbours,  poor  friends,  yea,  your  poor  enemies 
they  are  whom  I  am  now  speaking  ibr :  and  when  I  see  so 
many  starving  in  the  streets,  and  almost  naked,  my  bowels  an 
moved  with  pity  and  concern,  to  consider,  that  many,  in  whoss 
power  it  is  to  lend  their  assisting  hand,  shonld  shut  up  their 
bowels  of  compassion,  and  will  not  relieve  their  fieUow-creatures, 
though  in  the  most  deplorable  condition  for  the  want  thereof* 

As  I  have  thus  recommended  charity  particularly  to  tbe  ikh 
among  you ;  so  now  I  would, 

2.  Secondly,  Recommend  this  to  another  set  of  people  among 
us,  who,  instead  of  being  the  most  forward  in  acts  of  charity, 
are  commonly  the  most  backward ;  I  mean  the  clergy  o(  this  land. 

Good  God  I  How  amazing  is  the  consideration,  that  those. 
whom  God  has  called  out  to  labour  in  spiritual  things,  6hoal4 


XLVII.]  CFTARITY   RBCOMMENDfiD.  5Z> 

be  SO  backward  in  this  duty,  as  fatal  experience  teacheth.  Our 
clergy  (that  is^the  generality  thereof)  are  only  seeking  after  pre- 
ferment, running  up .  and  down  to  obtain  one  benefice  after 
another,  and  to  heap  up  an  estate,  either  to  spend  on  the  plea- 
sures of  life,  or  to  gratify  their  sensual  appetites,  while  the  poor 
of  their  flock  are  forgotten ;  nay,  worse,  they  are  scorned,  hated, 
and  disdained. 

I  am  not  now,  my  brethren,  speaking  of  all  the  clergy  ;  no, 
blessed  be  God,  there  are  some  among  them,  who  abhor  such 
proceedings,  and  are  willing  to  relieve  ttie  necessitous ;  but  God 
knows,  these  are  but  very  few,  while  many  take  no  thought  of 
the  poor  among  them. — They  can  visit  the  rich  and  the  great, 
but  the  poor  they  cannot  bear  in  their  sight ;  they  are  forgetful, 
vrilfuUy  forgetful  of  the  poor  members  of  Jesus  Christ.  They 
have  gone  out  of  the  old  paths,  and  turned  into  a  new  polite  way, 
but  which  is  not  warranted  in  the  word  of  God :  they  are  sunk 
into  a  fine  way  of  acting ;  but  as  fine  as  it  is,  it  was  not  the 
practice  of  the  apostles,  or  of  the  Christians  in  any  age  of  the 
church  ;  for  they  visited  and  relieved  the  poor  among  them ;  but 
how  rare  is  this  among  us,  how  seldom  do  we  find  charity  in  a 
clergyman ! — It  is  with  grief  I  speak  these  things,  but  woful 
experience  is  a  witness  of  the  truth  thereof:  and  if  all  the  clergy 
of  this  land  were  here,  I  would  tell  them  boldly,  that  they  did 
not  keep  in  the  ways  of  charity,  but  were  remiss  in  their  duty ; 
instead  of  "selling  all,  and  giving  to  the  poor,"  they  will  not  sell 
any  thing,  nor  give  at  all  to  the  poor. 

3.  Thirdly y  I  would  exhort  you  who  are  poor,  to  be  charitable 
to  one  another. — Though  you  may  not  have  money,  or  the  things 
of  this  life,  to  bestow  upon  one  another ;  yet  you  may  assist 
them,  by  comforting,  and  advising  them  not  to  be  discouraged, 
though  they  are  low  in  the  world  ;  or  in  sickness  you  may  help 
them  according  as  you  have  time  or  ability  :  do  not  be  unkind 
to  one  another ;  do  not  grieve,  or  vex,  or  be  angry  with  each 
other;  for  this  is  giving  the  world  an  advantage  over  you. 
And  if  God  stirs  up  any  to  relieve  you,  do  not  make  an  ill  use 
of  what  his  providence,  by  the  hands  of  some  Christian,  hath 
bestowed  upon  you  :  be  always  humble,  and  wait  on  God ;  do 
not  murmur  or  repine,  if  you  see  any  relieved,  and  you  are  not ; 
still  wait  on  the  Lord,  and  help  one  another,  according  to  your 
abilities,  from  time  to  time. — Having  shewed  you  how  valuable 
this  is  to  the  bodies  of  men,  I  now  proceed. 

Secondly,  To  shew  you  how  much  more  valuable  this  charity 
is^  when  it  extends  to  the  souls  of  men. — And  is  not  the  soul 
more  valuable  than  the  body?  It  would  be  of  no  advantage, 
but  an  infinite  disadvantage,  to  obtain  all  the  world,  if  we  were 
to  lose  our  souls.  The  soul  is  of  infinite  value,  and  of  infinite 
concern,  and  therefore  we  should  extend  our  charity  whenever 
we  see  it  needful,  and  likewise  should  reprove,  rebuke,  and  ex- 
hort, with  aU  godliness  and  love.  We  should,  my  dear  brethren, 
use  all  means  and  opportunities  for  the  salvation  of  our  own 
iloals,  and  of  the  souls  of  others.    We  may  have  a  great  deal 


530  THE  GREAT  DUTY   OP  [XLVII. 

of  charity  and  concern  for  the  bodies  of  our  fellow-creatures, 
\vhen  we  have  no  thought^  or  concern^  for  their  immortal  sonls: 
but  O  how  sad  is  it,  to  have  thought  for  a  morta]^  but  not  for 
the  immortal  part ;  to  have  charity  for  the  body  of  our  fellow- 
creatures,  while  we  have  no  concern  for  their  immortal  souls ; 
it  may  be,  we  help  them  to  ruin  them,  but  have  no  concern  in 
the  saving  of  them. 

You  may  love  to  spend  a  merry  evening,  to  go  to  a  play,  or  a 
horse-race,  with  them ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  you  cannot  bear 
the  thoughts  of  going  to  a  sermon,  or  a  religious  society,  with 
them ;  no,  you  would  sing  the  songs  of  the  drunkard,  but  yoa 
will  not  sing  hymns,  with  them ;  this  is  not  polite  enough,  this 
is  unbecoming  a  gentleman  of  taste,  unfashionable,  and  only 
practised  among  a  parcel  of  enthusiasts  and  madmen.  Thus, 
you  will  be  so  uncharitable  as  to  join  hand  in  hand  with  those 
who  are  hastening  to  their  own  damnation,  while  you  will  not 
be  so  charitable  as  to  assist  them  in  being  brought  from  dark- 
ness to  light,  and  from  the  power  of  Satan  unto  God.  But 
this,  this,  my  dear  brethren,  is  the  greatest  charity  that  can  be, 
to  save  a  soul  from  death :  this  is'  of  far  greater  advantage, 
than  relieving  the  body  of  a  fellow*creature :  for  the  most  mise- 
rable object  that  could  be,  death  would  deliver  it  from  all.  fiut 
death,  to  those  who  are  not  bom  again,  would  be  so  far  from 
being  a  release  from  all  misery,  that  it  would  be  an  inlet  to  all 
torment,  and  that  to  all  eternity.  Therefore,  we  should  assist, 
as  much  as  possible,  to  keep  a  soul  from  falling  into  the  hands 
of  Satan :  for  he  is  the  grand  enemy  of  souls.  How  should 
this  excite  you  to  watch  over  your  own  and  other's  souls  ?  for 
unless  you  are  earnest  with  God,  Satan  will  be  too  bard  for 
you.  Surely,  it  is  the  greatest  charity  to  watch  over  odc 
another's  words  an^  actions,  that  we  may  forewarn  each  other 
when  danger  is  nigh,  or  when  the  enemy  of  souls  approaches. 

And  if  you  have  once  known  the  value  of  your  own  souls, 
and  know  what  it  is  to  be  snatched  as  brands  out  of  the  burn- 
ing fire,  you  will  be  solicitous  that  others  may  be  brought  out 
of  the  same  state.  It  is  not  the  leading  of  a  moral  life,  being 
honest,  and  paying  every  man  his  just  due :  this  is  not  a  proof 
of  your  being  in  a  state  of  grace,  or  of  being  bom  again,  and 
renewed  in  the  spirit  of  your  minds  :  no,  you  may  die  honest, 
just,  charitable,  and  yet  not  be  in  a  state  of  salvation.  It  is 
not  the  preaching  of  that  morality>  which  most  of  our  pulpits 
now  bring  forth,  that  is  sufficient  to  bring  you  from  sin  unto 
Gods  I  saw  you  willing  to  leara,  and  yet  were  ignorant  of  the 
necessity  of  being  born  again,  regenerated,  of  having  all  old 
things  dione  away,  and  all  things  becoming  new  in  your  souls: 
I  could  not  bear,  my  brethren,  to  see  you  in  the  highway  to 
destruction,  and  none  to  bring  you  back.  It  was  love  to  yooc 
souls,  it  was  a  desire  to  see  Christ  formed  in  vpu^  which 
brought  me  into   the    fields,  the    highways  and    hedges,  to 

{reach  unto  you  Jesus,  a  cracified  Jesus,  as  dying  for  you. 
(  was  charity,  indeed  it  was  charity  to  your  soulsj  whicii  has 


XLVII.]  CHARITY    RRCQMMBNDED.  531 

exposed  me  to  the  present  ill  treatment  of  my  letter-learned 
brethren. 

Therefore,  let  me  advise  you  to  be  charitable  to  the  souls  df 
one  another ;  that  is,  by  advising  them  with  all  love  and  tender- 
ness, to  follow  after  Christy  and  the  things  which  belong  to  their 
immortal  peace,  before  they  be  for  ever  hid  from  their  eyes, — 
I  now  proceed,  in  the 

Third  place.  To  shew  when  your  charity  is  of  the  right  kind. 

And  here,  my  brethren,  I  shall  shew.  First,  When  it  is  not : 
and.  Secondly,  When  it  is  of  the  right  kind. 

1.  First,  Your  charity  is  not  of  the  right  kind,  when  it  pro- 
ceeds from  worldly  views  or  ends.— If  it  is  to  be  seen  of  men,, 
to  receive  any  advantage  from  them,  to  be  esteemed,  or  to  gain 
a  reputation  in  the  world  ;  or  if  you  have  any  pride  in  it,  and 
expect  to  reap  benefit  from  God  merely  for  it ;  if  all,  or  each  of 
these  is  the  end  of  your  charity,  then  it  is  all  in  vain ;  your 
charity  does  not  proceed  from  a  right  end,  but  yon  are  hereby 
deceiving  your  own  souls.  If  you  give  an  alms  purely  to  be 
observed  by  man,  or  as  expecting  favour  from  God  merely  on 
the  account  thereof,  then  you  have  not  the  glory  of  God  or  the 
benefit  of  your  fellow-creatures  at  heart,  but  merely  yourself: 
this,  this  is  not  charity.     Nor, 

Secondly,  Is  that  true  charity,  when  we  give  any  thing  to  our 
fellow-creatures  purely  to  indulge  them  in  vice :  this  is  so  far  from 
being  charity,  that  it  is  a  sin,  both  against  God,  and  against  our 
fellow-creatures.  And  yet,  this  is  as  common  as  it  is  sinful,  to 
carry  our  friends,  under  a  specious  pretence  of  charity,  to  one  or 
the  other  entertainment,  with  no  other  view  but  to  make  them 
guilty  of  excess.  Hereby  you  are  guilty  of  a  double  sin :  we  are 
not  to  sin  ourselves,  much  less  should  we  endeavour  to  make 
another  sin  likewise.     But, 

Thirdly,  Our  charity  conies  from  a  right  end,  when  it  proceeds 
from  love  to  God,  and  for  the  welfare  both  of  the  body  and  soul 
of  our  fellow-creatures. — When  this  is  the  sole  end  of  relieving 
ear  distressed  fellow-creatures,  then  our  charity  comes  from  a 
right  end,  and  we  may  expect  to  reap  advantage  by  it :  this  is 
the  charity  which  is  pleasing  to  God.  God  is  well  pleased,  when 
all  our  actions  proceed  from  love,  love  to  himself,  and  love  to 
immortal  souls.  Consider,  my  dear  brethren,  that  it  was  love 
for  souls,  that  brought  the  blessed  Jesus  down  from  the  bosom 
of  his  Father ;  that  made  him,  who  was  equal  in  power  and 
glory,  to  come  and  take  upon  him  our  nature ;  that  caused  the 
Lord  of  life  to  die  the  painful,  ignominious,  and  accursed  death 
of  the  cross.  It  was  love  to  immortal  souls,  that  brought  this 
blessed  Jesus  among  us.  And  O  that  we  might  hence  consider 
bow  great  the  value  of  souls  was,  and  is :  it  was  that  which  made 
Jesus  to  bleed,  pant,  and  die.  And  surely  souls  must  be  of  in- 
finite worth,  which  made  the  Lamb  of  God  to  die  so  shameful  a 
death. — And  shall  not  this  make  you  have  a  true  value  for  souls? 
It  is  of  the  greatest  worth ;  and  this,  this  is  the  greatest  charity, 
when  it  comes  from  love  to  God,  and  from  love  to  .souls.    This 

2k2 


532  THE  GREAT   DUTY  OP  [XLVIf. 

will  be  a  charity,  the  satisfaction  of  which  will  last  to  all  eter- 
nity. O  that  this  may  make  you  have  so  much  regard  for  the 
Value  of  souls,  as  not  to  neglect  all  opportunities  for  the  doing 
of  them  good :  here  is  something  worth  having  charity  for,  be- 
cause they  remain  to  all  eternity.  Therefore,  let  me  earnestly 
beseech  you  both  to  consider  the  worth  of  immortal  souls,  and 
let  your  charity  extend  to  them,  that  by  your  advice  and  ad- 
monition, you  may  be  an  instrument,  in  the  hands  of  God,  in 
bringing  souls  to  the  Lord  Jesus. — I  am  in  the  next  place  to 
consider, 

Fourthly,  Why  this  charity,  or  grace  of  love,  never  failetb.— 
And  it  never  faileth  in  respect  of  its  proceeding  from  an  un- 
changeable God.  We  are  not  to  understand,  that  our  charity  is 
always  the  same :  no,  there  may,  and  frequently  are,  ebbs  and 
ilowings ;  but  still  it  never  totally  faileth ;  no,  the  grace  of  love 
remains  for  ever.  There  is,  and  will  be,  a  charity  to  all  who 
have  erred  and  run  astray  from  God.  We  cannot  be  easy  to  see 
souls  in  the  highway  to  destruction,  and  not  use  our  utmost 
endeavour  to  bring  them  back  from  sin,  and  shew  them  the 
dreadful  consequence  of  running  into  evil.  Christians  cannot 
bear  to  see  those  souls  for  whom  Christ  died,  perish  for  want  of 
knowledge :  and  if  they  see  any  of  the  bodies  of  their  fellow- 
creatures  in  want,  they  will  do  the  utmost  in  their  power  to  re- 
lieve them. 

Charity  will  never  fail,  among  those  who  have  a  true  love  to 
the  Lord  Jesus,  and  know  the  value  of  souls:  they  will  be 
charitable  to  those  who  are  in  distress.  And  thus  you  see,  that 
true  charity,  if  it  proceed  from  a  right  end,  never  faileth. — I  now 
proceed,  my  brethren,  in  the 

Last  place,  To  exhort  all  of  you,  high  and  low,  rich  and  poor, 
one  with  another,  to  practise  this  valuable  and  commendable 
duty  of  charity. — It  is  not  rolling  in  your  coaches,  taking  your 
pleasure,  and  not  considering  the  miseries  of  your  fellow-crea- 
tures, that  is  commendable  or  praise-worthy  ;  but  the  relieving 
your  distressed  poor  fellow-creatures,  is  valuable  and  praise- 
worthy wherever  it  is  found.  But,  alas !  how  very  few  of  oar 
gay  and  polite  gentlemen  consider  their  poor  friends ;  rather 
they  despise,  and  do  not  regard  them.  They  can  indulge  them- 
selves in  the  follies  of  life,  and  had  much  rather  spend  their 
estates  in  lusts  and  pleasures,  while  the  poor  all  round  them  are 
not  thought  worthy  to  be  set  with  the  dogs  of  their  flock.  If 
you  have  an  abundance  of  the  things  of  this  world,  then  yon 
are  esteemed  as  companions  for  the  polite  and  gay  in  life ;  bat 
if  you  are  poor,  then  you  must  not  expect  to  find  any  lavour, 
but  be  hated,  or  not  thought  fit  for  company  or  conversatioB : 
and  if  you  have  an  abundance  of  the  things  of  this  life,  and  do 
not  want  any  assistance,  then  you  have  many  ready  to  help  yoo. 
My  dear  brethren,  I  do  not  doubt  but  your  own  experience  is  a 
proof  of  my  assertions ;  as  also,  that  if  any  come  into  distress, 
then  those,  who  promised  to  give  relief,  quite  forget  what  thej 
promiMd,  4uid  vriil  despise,  because  Providence  has  ffowMi. 


XLVll.]  CHARITY    REOOMMRNDBD.  M3 

But  this  is  not  acting  like  those  who  are  bound  for  the  heavenly 
Jerusalem ;  thus  our  hearts  and  our  actions  give  our  lips  the 
lie :  for  if  we  profess  the  name  of  Christ,  and  do  not  depart  from 
all  iniquity,  we  are  not  those,  who  are  worthy  of  being  esteemed 
Christians  indeed.  For,  if  we  have  not  charity,  we  are  not 
Christians :  charity  is  the  great  duty  of  Christians :  and  where 
is  our  Christianity^if  we  want  charity  ?  Therefore,  let  me  be.- 
secch  you  to  exercise  charity  to  your  distressed  fellow-creatures. 
Indeed,  my  dear  brethren,  this  is  truly  commendable,  truly 
valuable ;  and  therefore,  I  beseech  you,  in  the  bowels  of  tender 
mercy  to  Christ,  to  consider  his  poor  distressed  members ;  exer- 
cise, exercise,  I  beseech  you,  this  charity :  if  you  have  no  com- 
passion, you  are  not  true  disciples  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  I 
humbly  beg  you  to  consider  those  who  want  relief,  and  are 
really  destitute,  and  relieve  them  according  to  your  abilities. 
Consider,  that  the  more  favourable  Providence  has  been  to  yon, 
it  should  make  you  the  more  earnest  and  solicitous  to  relieve 
those  whom  you  may  find  in  distress :  it  is  of  the  utmost  conse- 
quence, what  is  well  pleasing  to  your  fellow-creatures,  and 
doing  your  duty  to  God. 

When  you  are  called  hence,  then  all  riches  and  grandeur  will 
be  over ;  the  grave  will  make  no  distinction ;  great  estates 
will  be  of  no  signification  in  the  other  world  ;  and  if  you  have 
made  a  bad  use  of  the  talents  which  God  hath  put  into  your 
hands,  it  will  be  only  an  aggravation  of  your  condemnation  at 
the  great  day  of  account,  when  God  shall  come  to  demand  youf 
souls,  and  to  call  you  to  an  account  for  the  use  to  which  you 
have  put  the  abundance  of  the  things  of  this  life. 

To  conclude.  Let  me  once  more  beseech  each  of  you  to  act 
according  to  the  circumstances  of  life,  which  God,  in  his  rich 
and  free  mercy,  has  given  you. — If  you  were  sensible  of  the 
great  consequences  which  would  attend  your  acting  in  this 
charitable  manner,  and  considered  it  as  a  proof  of  your  love  to 
God,  the  loving  his  members  ;  you  could  not  be  uncharitable  in 
your  tempers,  nor  fail  to  relieve  any  of  your  distressed  fellow- 
creatures.  Consider  how  easy  it  is  for  many  of  you,  by  putting 
your  mites  together,  to  help  one  who  is  in  distress ;  and  how 
can  you  tell,  but  that  the  little  you  give,  may  be  the  means  of 
bringing  one  from  distress,  into  flourishing  circumstances ;  and 
then,  if  there  be  a  true  spirit  of  a  Christian  in  them,  they  can 
never  be  sufficiently  thankful  to  God  the  autlior,  and  to  you  as 
the  instrument,  in  being  so  great  a  friend  to  tbem  in  their  me- 
lancholy circumstances :  consider  also,  once  more,  how  much 
better  your  account  will  be  at  the  day  of  judgment,  and  what 
peace  of  conscience  you  will  enjoy.  How  satisfactory  must  be 
the  thought  of  having  relieved  the  widow  and  the  fatherless ! 
This  is  recommended  by  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  has  been 
practised  in  all  ages  of  the  church ;  and  therefore,  my  brethren, 
be  ye  now  found  in  the  practice  of  this  duty. 

Ihave  been  the  larger  upon  this,  because  our  enemies  say 
we-depyall  moral  actions;  but,  blessed  be  Grod,  they  speak 


534  SATAN'S   DEVICES.  [XLVIU. 

against  us  without  cause :  we  highly  value  them ;  bat  nn 
say,  that  faith  in  Christ,  the  love  of  God,  and  being  bom  again, 
are  of  infinitely  more  worth ;  but  you  cannot  be  true  Chris- 
tians without  having  charity  to  your  fellow-creatures,  be  they 
friends  or  enemies,  if  in  distress.  And,  therefore,  exert  yourselves 
in  this  duty,  as  is  commanded  by  the  blessed  Jesus ;  and  if  yoo 
have  true  charity,  you  shall  live  and  reign  with  him  for  ever. 

Now  to  God  the  Father,  God  the  Son,  and  God  the  Holy 
Ghost,  be  all  honour,  power,  glory,  might,  majesty,  and  domi- 
nion, both  now  and  for  evermore.    Amen. 

SERMON  XLVIII. 

SATAN'S   DEVICES. 

Lest  Satan  should  get  an  advantage  over  us;  for  we  are  not 

ignorant  of  his  devices. — 2  Cor.  ii.  11. 

The  occasion  of  these  words  was  as  follows :  In  the  church  of 
Porinth  there  was  an  unhappy  person,  who  had  committed  such 
incest,  as  was  not  so  much  as  named  among  the  Gentiles,  in 
taking  his  father's   wife ;  but  either  on  accqunt  of  his  wealth, 
power,  or  some  such  reason,  like  many  notorious  ofienders  now- 
a-days,  he  had  not  been  exposed  to  the  censures  of  the  church. 
St.  Paul,  therefore,  in  his  first  epistle,  severely  chides  them  for 
this  neglect  of  discipline,  and  commands  them  ''in  the  name  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  when  they  were  gathered  together,  to 
deliver  such  a  one,  whoever  he  was,  to  Satan,  for  the  destructioD 
of  the  flesh,  that  his  spirit  might  be  saved  in  the  day  of  the 
Lord ;"  that  is,  they  should  solemnly  excommunicate  him ;  which 
was  then  commonly  attended  with  some  bodily  disease.    The 
Corinthians,  being  obedient  to  the  apostle  as  dear  children,  do 
sooner  received  this  reproof,  butthey  submitted  to  it,  and  cast 
the  ofiending  party  out  of  the  church.     But  whilst  they  wefe 
endeavouring  to  amend  one  fault,  they  unhappily  ran  into  an- 
other ;  and  as  they  formerly  had  been  too  mild  and  remiss,  so 
now  they  behaved  towards  him  with  too  much  severity  and 
resentment.    The  apostle,  therefore,  in  this  chapter  reproves 
this,  and  tells  them,  that "  sufficient  to  the  ofiender's  shame, 
was  the  punishment  which  had  been  inflicted  of  many  :"  that  be 
had  now  suflered  enough ;  and  that,  therefore,  lest  he  should  be 
tempted  to  say  with  Cain, ''  My  punishment  is  greater  than  I 
can  bear ;"  or,  to  use  the  apostle's  own  words,  "  lest  he  shooM 
be  swallowed  up  with  over-much  sorrow ;"  they  ought,  now  he 
had  given  proof  of  his  repentance,  to  forgive  him«  to  confirm 
their  love  towards  him,  and  so  restore  him  in  the  spirit  of  meek- 
ness ;  *'  lest  Satan  (to  whose  buffetings  he  was  now  given,  by 
tempting  him  to  despair)  should  get  an  advantage  over  us:'* 
and  8o  by  representing  you  as  merciless  and  cruel,  cause  that 
holy  name  to  be  blasphemed,  by  which  you  are  called:  *'for  ire 
are  not  ignorant  of  his  devices :"  we  know  very  well  how  many 
subtle  ways  he  has  to  draw  aside  and  beguile  unguarded  on- 
thinking  men. — Thus  then,  stand  the  words  in  relation  to  the 
context :  but  as  Satan  has  many  devices,  and  a^  his  quiver  is 


XLVIII.]  SATAN'S   DBVICBS.  535 

full  of  other  poisonous  darts^  besides  those  which  he  shoots  at 
us  to  drive  us  to  despair,  I  shall,  in  the  following  discourse. 

First,  Briefly  observe  who  we  are  to  understand  by  Satan .  And; 

Secondly,  Point  out  to  you,  what  are  the  chief  devices  he 
generally  makes  use  of,  to  draw  off  converts  from  Christ,  and 
also  prescribe  some  remedies  against  them. 

First,  Who  we  are  to  understand  by  Satan? — The  word  Satan, 
in  its  original  signification,  means  an  adversary;  and  in  its 
general  acceptation,  is  made  use  of,  to  point  out  to  us  the  chief 
of  the  devils,  who,  for  striving  to  be  as  God,  was  cast  down  from 
heaven,  and  is  now  permitted,  "  with  the  rest  of  his  spiritual 
wickednesses  in  high  places,  to  walk  up  and  down,  seeking 
whom  he  may  devour."  We  hear  of  him  immediately  after  the 
creation,  when,  in  the  shape  of  a  serpent,  he  lay  in  wait  to  de- 
ceive our  first  parents.  He  is  called  Satan  in  the  book  of  Job, 
where  we  are  told,  that  '^  when  the  sons  of  God  came  to  present 
themselves  before  the  Lord,  Satan  also  came  amongst  them.*' 
As  the  scripture  also  speaks  in  the  book  of  Chronicles ;  **  And 
Satan  moved  David  to  number  the  people/'  In  the  New  Tes- 
tament he  goes  under  different  denominations ;  sometimes  he  is 
called  the  evil  One,  because  he  is  evil  in  himself,  and  tempts  us 
to  evil.  Sometimes,  "  the  Prince  of  the  power  of  the  air ;"  and, 
"  the  Spirit  that  now  ruleth  in  the  children  of  disobedience ;" 
because  he  resides  chiefly  in  the  air,  and  through  the  whole 
world ;  and  all  that  are  not  bom  of  God,  and  are  said  to  lie  in  him. 

He  is  an  enemy  to  God  and  goodness ;  he  is  a  hater  of  all 
truth :  why  else  did  he  slander  God  in  paradise  ?  why  did  he  tell 
Eve,  "  You  shall  not  surely  die  ?"  and  why  did  he  promise  to 
give  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world,  and  the  glories  of  them,  to 
Jesus  Christ,  if  he  would  fall  down  and  worship  him? — 
He  is  full  of  malice,  envy,  and  revenge :  for  what  other  motives 
could  induce  him  to  molest  innocent  man  in  paradise  T  And  why 
is  he  still  so  restless  in  his  attempts  to  destroy  us,  who  have 
done  him  no  wrong  ? — He  is  a  being  of  great  power,  as  appears 
in  his  being  able  to  act  on  the  imagination  of  otir  blessed  Lord, 
so  as  to  represent  to  him  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world,  and  the 
glories  of  them,  in  a  moment  of  time.  As  also  in  carrpng  his 
sacred  body  through  the  air  up  to  a  pinnacle  of  the  temple ;  and 
his  driving  a  herd  of  swine  so  furiously  into  the  deep.  Nay,  so 
great  is  his  might,  that  I  doubt  not,  were  God  to  let  him  use 
his  full  strength,  but  he  could  turn  the  earth  upside-down,  or 
pull  the  sun  from  its  orb. — But  what  he  is  most  remarkable  for 
is,  his  subtlety :  for  not  having  power  given  him  from  above,  to 
take  us  by  force,  he  is  obliged  to  wait  for  opportunities  to  betray 
us,  and  to  catch  us  by  guile.  He,  therefore,  made  use  of  the 
serpent,  which  was  subtle  above  all  the  beasts  of  the  field,  in 
order  to  tempt  our  first  parents ;  and  accordingly  he  is  said,  in 
the  New  Testament, "  to  lie  in  wait  to  deceive  ;*'  and,  in  the 
words  of  the  text,  the  apostle  says, ''  We  are  not  ignorant  of  his 
devices ;  thereby  implying,  that  we  are  more  in  danger  of  being 
seduced  by  his  policy,  than  overborne  by  his  power. 


596  Satan's  devices.  £xi«¥iii. 

From  this  short  description  of  Satan,  we  may  easily  judge 
whose  children  they  are,  who  love  to  make  a  lie^  who  speak  enl 
of,  and  slander  their  neighbour,  and  whose  hearts  are  foil  of 
pride,  sabtlety,  malice,  envy,  revenge,  and  all  uncharitaUeness. 
Surely  they  have  Satan  for  their  father :  for  the  tempers  of 
Satan  they  know,  and  the  works  of  Satan  they  do.  But  were 
they  to  see  either  themselves  or  Satan  as  he  is,  they  could  not 
but  be  terrified  at  their  own  likeness,  and  abhor  themselves  in 
dust  and  ashes. 

But,  the  justice  of  Grod  in  suffering  us  to  be  tempted,  is  vin- 
dicated from  the  following  considerations :  That  we  are  here  in 
a  state  of  disorder ;  that  he  has  promised  not  to  suffer  us  to  be 
tempted  above  what  we  are  able  to  bear ;  and  not  only  so,  but  to 
him  that  overcometh  he  will  give  a  crown  of  life.  The  holy  angek 
themselves,  it  should  seem,  were  once  put  to  a  trial  whether  tiiej 
would  t>e  faithful  or  not.  The  first  Adam  was  tempted,  even  in 
paradise.  And  Jesus  Christ,  that  second  Adam,  though  he  was 
a  Son,  yet  was  carried,  as  our  representative,  by  the  holy  Spirit, 
into  the  wilderness,  to  be  tempted  of  the  devil.  And  there  is 
not  one  single  saint  in  paradise,  amongst  the  goodly  fellowship 
of  the  prophets,  the  glorious  company  of  the  apostles,  the  noble 
army  of  martyrs,  and  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect,  who, 
when  on  earth,  was  not  assaulted  by  the  fiery  darts  of  that 
wicked  one,  the  devil.  What  then  has  been  the  common  lot  of 
all  God's  children,  and  of  the  angels,  nay,  of  the  eternal  Son  of 
God  himself,  we  must  not  think  to  be  exempted  from :  no,  it  is 
suflicient  if  we  be  made  perfect  through  temptations,  as  they 
were.  And,  therefore,  since  we  cannot  but  be  tempted,  unless 
we  could  unmake  human  nature,  instead  of  repining  at  our  con- 
dition, we  should  rather  be  inquiring,  at  what  time  of  our  lives 
Satan  most  violently  assaults  us?  and  what  those  devices  are, 
which  he  commonly  makes  use  of,  in  order  to  ''  get  an  advan- 
tage over  us  ?*' 

As  to  the  first  question,  what  time  of  life  ?  I  answer,  we  must 
expect  to  be  tempted  by  him,  in  some  degree  or  other,  all  oar 
lives  long.  For  this  life  being  a  continual  warfare,  we  most 
never  expect  to  have  rest  from  our  spiritual  adversary,  the  devil, 
or  to  say,  or  combat  with  him  is  finished,  till,  with  our  blessed 
Master,  we  bow  down  our  heads,  and  give  up  the  ghost. — Bat 
since  the  time  of  our  conversion,  or  first  entering  upon  the 
spiritual  life,  is  the  most  critical  time  at  which  he,  for  the  most 
part,  violently  besets  us,  as  well  knowing,  if  he  can  prevent  oar 
setting  out,  he  can  lead  us  captive  at  his  will ;  and  since  the 
wise  son  of  Sirach  particularly  warns  us,  when  we  are  going  to 
serve  the  Lord,  to  prepare  our  souls  for  temptation,  I  shall  io 
answer  to  the  other  question,  pass  on  to  the 

Second  general  thing  proposed  ;  and  point  out  some  of  those 
devices,  which  Satan  generally  makes  use  of  at  our  first  conver- 
sion, in  order  to  get  an  advantage  over  us. — But  let  me  observe 
to  you,  that  whatsoever  shall  be  delivered  in  the  following  dis- 
course is  only  designed  for  such  as  have  actually  entered  upon 


XLVIII.]  SATAN'S    DEVICES.  637 

the  divine  life ;  and  not  for  carnal  almost^christians^  who  have 
the  form  of  godliness,  but  yet  never  felt  the  power  of  it  in  their 
hearts.     This  beinp^  premised,  the 

First  device  I  shall  mention,  which  Satan  makes  use  of,  is, 
to  drive  us  to  despair. — When  God  the  Father  awakens  a  sinner 
by  the  terrors  of  the  law,  and  by  his  holy  Spirit  convinceth 
him  of  sin,  in  order  to  lead  him  to  Christ,  and  shew  him  the 
necessity  of  a  Redeemer;  then  Satan  generally  strikes  in,  and 
aggravates  those  convictions  to  such  a  de^ee,  as  to  make  the 
sinner  doubt  of  finding  mercy  through  the  Mediator.  Thus  in 
all  his  temptations  of  the  holy  Jesus,  he  chiefly  aimed  to  make 
him  question  whether  he  were  the  Son  of  God  V  ''  If  thou  be 
the  Son  of  God,"  do  so  and  so.  With  many  such  desponding 
thoughts,  no  doubt,  he  filled  the  heart  of  the  great  St.  Paul,  when 
he  continued  three  days,  neither  eating  bread,  nor  drinking  water ; 
and  therefore  he  speaks  by  experience,  when  he  says  in  the  words 
of  the  text,  "We  are  not  ignorant  of  his  devices,"  that  he 
would  endeavour  to  drive  the  incestuous  person  to  despair. 

But  let  not  any  of  you  be  influenced  by  him  to  despair  of 
finding  mercy.  For  it  is  not  the  greatness  or  number  of  our 
crimes,  but  impenitence  and  unbelief,  that  will  prove  our  ruin : 
No,  were  our  sins  more  in  number  than  the  hairs  of  our  head, 
or  of  a  deeper  die  than  the  brightest  scarlet ;  yet  the  merits 
of  the  death  of  Jesus  Christ  are  infinitely  greater,  and  faith  in 
his  blood  will  make  them  white  as  snow.  Answer  always, 
therefore,  his  despairing  suggestions,  as  your  blessed  Lord  did, 
with  an,  "It  is  written."'  Tell  him  you  know  that  your  Re- 
deemer liveth,  ever  to  make  intercession  for  you ;  that  the  Lord 
hath  received  from  him  double  for  all  your  crimes ;  and  though 
you  have  sinned  much,  that  is  no  reason  why  you  should  de* 
spair,  but  only  why  you  should  love  much,  having  so  much  for- 
given. 

A  Second  device  that  Satan  generally  makes  use  of,  to  get 
an  advantage  over  young  converts,  is,  to  tempt  them  to  presume 
or  to  think  more  highly  of  themselves  than  they  ought  to  think. 
When  a  person  has  for  some  little  time,  tasted  the  good  word 
of  life,  and  felt  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come,  he  is  com- 
monly (as  indeed  well  he  may)  most  highly  transported  with 
Aat  sudden  change  he  finds  in  himself.  But  then  Satan  will 
not  be  wanting  at  such  a  time,  to  puff  him  up  with  a  high  con- 
ceit of  his  own  attainments,  as  if  he  were  some  great  person ; 
and  will  tempt  him  to  set  at  nought  his  brethren,  as  though  he 
were  holier  than  they.  Take  heed  therefore,  and  let  us  beware 
of  this  device  of  our  spiritual  adversary  ;  for  as  before  honour 
is  humility,  so  a  haughty  spirit  generally  goes  before  a  fall ;  and 
God  is  obliged,  when  under  such  circumstances,  to  send  us 
some  humbling  visitation,  or  permit  us  to  fall,  as  be  did  Peter, 
into  some  grievous  sin,  that  we  may  learn  not  to  be  too  high* 
minded. 

To  check  therefore  all  suggestion  to  spiritual  pride,  let  us 
consider  that  we  did  not  apprehend  Christ,  but  were  appre- 


538  SATAN'S    DEVICES.  [XLVIIL 

bended  of  bim :  that  we  bave  nothing  bat  what  vre  have 
received :  that  the  free  grace  of  God  has  alone  made  the  differ- 
ence between  ns  and  others ;  and  was  God  to  leave  us  to  the 
deceitfulness  of  our  own  hearts  but  one  moment,  we  should  be- 
come weak  and  wicked,  like  other  men.  We  should  farther 
consider,  that  being  proud  of  grace,  is  the  most  ready  way  to  lose 
it:  '*  for  God  resisteth^e  proud,  and  giveth  more  grace  only 
to  the  humble.  And  were  we  endowed  with  the  perfections  of 
the  seraphim  ;  yet  if  we  were  proud  of  these  perfections,  they 
would  but  render  us  more  accomplished  devils.  Above  all,  we 
should  pray  earnestly  to  almighty  God,  that  we  may  learn  of 
Jesus  Christ,  to  be  lowly  in  heart:  that  his  grace,  through 
the  subtlety  and  deceivableness  of  Satan,  may  not  be  our  poi- 
son :  but  that  we  may  always  think  soberly  of  ourselves,  as 
we  ought  to  think. 

A  Third  device  I  shall  mention,  which  Satan  generally  makes 
use  of,  *'  to  get  an  advantage  over  us/'  is,  to  tempt  us  to  unea- 
siness, and  to  have  hard  thoughts  of  God^  when  we  are  dead 
and  barren  in  prayer. — Though  this  be  a  term  not  understood 
by  the  natural  man,  yet,  whosoever  there  are  amongst  you,  who 
have  passed  through  the  pangs  of  the  new  birth,  they  know  full 
well  what  I  mean,  when  I  talk  of  deadness  and  dryness  in 
prayer :  and,  I  doubt  not  but  many  of  you,  amongst  whom  I 
am  now  preaching  the  kingdom  of  God,  are  at  this  very  time 
labouring  under  it.  For,  when  persons  are  first  awakened  to 
the  divine  life,  because  grace  is  weak  and  nature  strong,  God  is 
often  pleased  to  vouchsafe  them  some  extraordinary  illumina- 
tions of  his  holy  Spirit ;  but  when  they  are  grown  to  be  more 
perfect  men  in  Christ,  then  he  frequently  seems  to  leave  them 
to  themselves  ;  and  not  only  so,  but  permits  a  horrible  deadness 
and  dread  to  overwhelm  them ;  at  which  times  Satan  will  not  be 
wanting  to  vex  and  tempt  them  to  impatience,  to  the  great  dis- 
comfort of  their  souls. 

But  be  not  afraid ;  for  this  is  no  more  than  your  blessed  Re- 
deemer, that  spotless  lamb  of  God,  has  undergone  before  you : 
witness  his  bitter  agony  in  the  garden,  when  his  soul  was  ex- 
ceeding sorrowful,  even  unto  death ;  when  he  sweat  great  drops  of 
blood  falling  on  the  ground ;  when  the  sense  of  the  divinity 
was  drawn  from  him  ;  and  Satan,  in  all  probability,  was  per- 
mitted to  set  all  his  terrors  in  array  before  him.  Rejoice  there- 
fore, my  brethren,  when  you  fall  into  the  like  circumstances  ;  as 
knowing  that  you  are  therein  partakers  of  the  sufferings  of 
Jesus  Christ. '  Consider  that  it  is  necessary  such  inward  trials 
should  come,  to  wean  us  from  the  immoderate  love  of  sensible 
devotion,  and  teach  us  to  follow  Christ,  not  merely  for  his  loaves, 
but  out  of  a  principle  of  love  and  obedience.  In  patience  there- 
fore possess  your  souls,  and  be  not  terrified  by  Satan's  sug- 
gestions. Still  persevere  in  seeking  Jesus  in  the  use  of  means, 
though  it  bo  sorrowing,  and  though,  through  barrenness  of  soal. 
you  may  go  mourning  all  the  day  long.  Consider  that  the  spouse 
is  With  you,  though  behind  the  curtain ;  as  he  was  T*^  Mary 


XL VIII.]  SATAN'S    DBVIGES.  539 

at  the  sepulchre,  though  she  knew  it  not :  that  he  has  with- 
drawn but  for  a  little  while,  to  make  his  next  visit  more  wel- 
come :  that  though  he  may  now  seem  to  frown  and  look  back 
on  you,  as  he  did  on  the  Syrophenician  woman ;  yet  if  you,  like 
her,  or  blind  Bartimeus,  cry  out  so  much  the  more  earnest! y, 
"  Jesus,  thou  Son  of  David,  have  mercy  on  us ;"  he  will  be  made 
known  unto  you  again,  either  in  the  temple  by  breaking  of 
bread,  or  some  other  way. 

But  among  all  the  devices  that  Satan  makes  use  of, "  to  get  an 
advantage  over  us,"  there  is  none  in  which  he  is  more  success- 
ful, or  by  which  he  grieves  the  children  of  God  worse,  than  a 

Fourth  device  I  am  going  to  mention, — ^his  troubling  you  with 
blasphemous,  profane,  unbelieving  thoughts;  and  sometimes  to 
such  a  degree,  that  they  are  as  tormenting  as  the  rack. — Some 
indeed  are  apt  to  impute  all  such  evil  thoughts  to  a  disorder  of 
body.  But  those  who  know  any  thing  of  the  spiritual  life,  can 
inform  you,  with  greater  certainty,  that  for  the  generality,  they 
proceed  from  that  wicked  one,  the  devil ;  who,  no  doubt,  has 
power  given  him  from  above,  as  well  now  as  formerly,  to  dis- 
order the  body,  as  he  did  Job's,  that  he  may,  with  the  more 
secrecy  and  success,  work  upon,  ruffle,  and  torment  the  soul. 

You  that  have  felt  his  fiery  darts,  can  subscribe  to  the  truth  of 
this,  and  by  fatal  experience  can  tell,  how  often  he  has  bid  you 
''  curse  God  and  die,"  and  darted  into  your  thoughts  a  thousand 
blasphemous  suggestions,  even  in  your  most  secret  and  solemn 
retirements ;  the  bare  looking  back  on  which  makes  your  very 
hearts  to  tremble.  I  appeal  to  your  own  consciences ;  have 
not  some  of  you,  when  yon  have  been  lifting  up  holy  hands  in 
prayer,  been  pestered  with  such  a  crowd  of  the  most  horrid 
insinuations,  that  you  have  been  often  tempted  to  rise  off  from 
your  knee^,  and  been  made  to  believe  your  prayer  were  an 
abomination  to  the  Lord  ?  Nay,  when,  with  the  rest  of  your 
Christian  brethren,  you  have  crowded  round  the  holy  table,  and 
taken  the  sacred  symbols  of  Christ's  most  blessed  body  and 
blood  into  your  hands,  instead  of  remembering  the  death  of 
your  Saviour,  have  you  not  been  employed  in  driving  out  evil 
thoughts,  as  Abraham  was  in  driving  away  the  birds  that  came 
to  devour  his  sacrifice ;  and  thereby  have  been  terrified,  lest  you 
have  eat  and  drank  your  own  damnation  ? 

But  marvel  not,  as  though  some  strange  thing  happened  unto 
you ;  for  this  has  been  the  common  lot  of  all  God's  children.  We 
read,  even  in  Job's  time,  that ''  when  the  sons  of  God  came  to 
appear  before  their  Maker,  (at  public  worship,)  Satan  also  came 
amongst  them,"  to  disturb  their  devotions.  And  think  not  that 
God  is  angry  with  you  for  these  distracting,  though  ever  so 
blasphemous,  thoughts :  no,  he  knows  it  is  not  you,  but  Satan 
working  in  you ;  and  therefore,  notwithstanding  he  may  be  dis- 
pleased with,  and  certainly  will  punish  him ;  yet  he  will  both 
pity  and  reward  you.  And  though  it  be  difficult  to  make  per- 
sons in  your  circumstances  to  believe  so ;  yet  I  doubt  not  but 
you  are  more  acceptable  to  God,  when  performing  your  holy 


MO  satan'h  detices.  (xltiii. 

duties  in  tbe  midst  of  such  inrolantary  distrmctioiiSy  than  when 
you  are  wrapped  np  by  devotion,  as  it  were,  into  the  third 
heavens :  for  you  are  then  snflering  as  well  as  doing  the  will  of 
God  at  the  same  time ;  and,  like  Nebemiah's  servant  at  tbe 
building  of  the  temple,  are  holding  a  trowel  in  one  band,  and  a 
sword  in  tbe  other.  Be  not  driven  from  the  nse  of  any  ordi- 
nance whatever,  on  account  of  those  abominable  su^estions; 
lor  then  yon  let  Satan  get  bis  desired  advantage  over  yon :  it 
being  his  chief  design,  by  these  thoughts,  to  mi^  yon  Csdl  out 
with  tbe  means  of  grace ;  and  to  tempt  you  to  believe  you  do 
not  please  Crod,  for  no  other  reason  than  because  you  do  not 
please  yourselves.  Rather  persevere  in  the  use  of  the  holy  com- 
munion especially,  and  all  other  means  whatever ;  and  wbea 
these  temptations  bave  wrought  that  resignation  in  you,  for 
which  they  were  permitted,  God  will  visit  you  with  fresh  tokens 
of  his  love,  as  he  met  Abraham  when  be  returned  from  the 
slaughter  of  the  five  kings ;  and  will  send  an  angel  from  beaveu, 
as  he  did  to  his  Son,  on  purpose  to  streogtben  you. 

Hitherto  we  have  only  observed  such  devices  as  Satan  makes 
nse  of  immediately  by  himself;  but  there  is  a 

Fifth  I  shall  mention,  which  is  not  the  least ;  tempting  us  by 
our  carnal  friends  and  relations. — This  is  one  of  the  most  com- 
mon, as  well  as  most  artful  devices  he  makes  use  of,  to  draw 
young  converts  from  God ;  for  when  he  cannot  prevail  over  them 
by  himself,  he  will  try  what  he  can  do  by  the  influence  and 
mediation  of  others.  Thus  he  tempted  Eve,  that  she  might 
tempt  Adam.  Thus  he  stirred  up  Job's  wife,  to  bid  him  '^  curse 
God,  and  die."  And  thus  he  made  use  of  Peter's  tongue,  to  per- 
suade our  blessed  Lord  **  to  spare  himself,"  and  thereby  decline 
those  sufierings,  by  which  alone  he  could  be  preserved  from 
suffering  the  vengeance  of  eternal  fire.  And  thus,  in  these  last 
days,  he  often  stirs  up  our  most  powerful  friends  and  dearest 
intimates,  to  dissuade  us  from  going  in  that  narrow  way,  which 
alone  leadeth  unto  life  eternal. 

But  our  blessed  Lord  has  furnished  us  with  a  sufficient  an- 
swer to  all  such  suggestions.  ^'  Get  you  behind  roe,  my  adver- 
saries ;"  for  otherwise  they  will  be  an  offence  unto  you  ;  and  the 
only  reason  why  they  give  such  advice  is,  because  ''  they  savour 
not  the  things  that  be  of  God,  but  the  things  that  be  of  men." 
Whoever,  therefore,  among  you  are  resolved  to  serve  the  Lord, 
prepare  your  souls  for  many  such  temptations  as  these ;  for  it  is 
necessary  that  such  offences  should  come,  to  try  your  sincerity, 
to  teach  us  to  cease  from  man,  and  to  see  if  we  will  forsake  ail 
to  follow  Christ. 

Indeed  our  modernizers  of  Christianity  would  persuade  us,  that 
the  gospel  was  calculated  only  for  about  two  hundred  years ;  and 
that  now  there  is  no  need  of  hating  father  and  mother,  or  of  beiiif 
persecuted  for  the  sake  of  Christ  and  bis  gospel.     But  such 

{>ersons  err,  not  knowing  the  scriptures,  and  the  power  of  god- 
iness  in  their  hearts  :  for  whosoever  receives  the  love  of  Gk>d  in 
tbe  truth  of  it,  will  find»  that  Christ  came  to  send  not  peace,  hot 


:xlviik]  Satan's  d£vicb8.  541 

a  sword  upon  earth,  as  much  now  as  ever ;  that  the  father-in- 
law  shall  be  against  the  daughter-in-law,  in  these  latter,  as  well 
as  in  the  primitive  times ;  and  that  if  we.wiU  live  godly  in  Christ 
Jesus,  we  must,  as  then,  so  now,  from  carnal  friends  and  rela- 
tions, sufler  persecution.    But  the  devil  has  a 

Sixth  device,  which  is  as  dangerous  as  any  of  the  former,  by 
not  tempting  us  at  all,  or  rather,  by  withdrawing  himself  for  a 
while,  in  order  to  come  upon  us  at  an  hour  when  we 'think  not 
of  it. — Thus  it  is  said,  that  he  left  Jesus  Christ  only  for  a  sea- 
son ;  and  our  blessed  Lord  has  bid  us  to  watch  and  pray 
always,  that  we  enter  not  into  temptation ;  thereby  implying^ 
that  Satan,  whether  we  think  of  it  or  not,  is  always  seeking  how 
he  may  devour  us. 

If  we  would  therefore  behave  like  good  soldiers  of  Jesus 
Christ,  we  must  be  always  upon  our  guard,  and  never  pretend 
to  lay  down  our  spiritual  weapons  of  prayer  and  watching, 
till  our  warfare  is  accomplished  b^  death ;  for  if  we  do,  our 
spiritual  Amalek  will  quickly  prevail  against  us.  What  if  he 
has  left  us  ?  it  is  only  for  a  season ;  yet  a  little  while,  and,  like 
a  roaring  lion,  with  double  fury  he  will  break  out  upon  us 
again.  So  great  a  coward  as  the  devil  is,  he  seldom  leaves  us 
at  the  first  onset.  As  he  followed  our  blessed  Lord  with  one 
temptation  after  another,  so  will  he  treat  his  servants.  And 
the  reason  why  he  does  not  renew  bis  attacks,  is,  sometimes, 
because  God  knows  we  are  yet  weak  and  unable  to  bear  them ; 
sometimes,  because  our  grand  adversary  thinks  to  beset  us  at 
a  more  convenient  .leason. 

Watch  carefully  therefore  over  thy  heart,  O  Christian ;  and 
whenever  thou  perceivest  thyself  to  be  falling  into  a  spiritual 
slumber,  say  to  it,  as  Christ  to  his  disciples,  "  Arise  (my  soul) 
why  sleepest  thou  V*  Awake,  awake ;  put  on  strength,  watch 
and  pray,  or  otherwise  the  Philistines  will  be  upon  thee,  and 
lead  thee  whither  thou  wouldest  not.  Alas  !  Is  this  life  a  time 
to  lie  down  and  slumber  in?  Arise,  and  call  upon  thy  God; 
thy  spiritual  enemy  is  not  dead,  but  lurketh  in  some  secret 
place,  seeking  a  convenient  opportunity  how  he  may  betray 
thee.  If  thou  ceasest  to  strive  with  him,  thou  ceasest  to  be  a 
friend  of  God ;  thou  ceasest  to  go  in  that  narrow  way  which 
leadeth  unto  life. 

Thus  have  I  endeavoured  to  point  out  to  you  some  of  those 
devices,  that  Satan  generally  makes  use  of  "  to  get  an  advan- 
tage over  us ;"  many  others  there  are,  no  doubt,  which  he  often 
use^.  But  these,  on  account  of  my  youth  and  want  of  expe- 
rience, I  cannot  yet  apprise  you  of;  they  who  have  been  listed 
for  many  years  in  their  Master's  service,  and  fought  under  his 
banner  against  our  spiritual  Amalek,  are  able  to  discover  mor# 
of  bis  artifices ;  and,  being  tempted  in  all  things,  like  unto  their 
brethren,  can,  in  all  things,  advise  and  succour  those  that  are 
tempted.  In  the  mean  while,  let  me  exhort  my  young  fellow- 
soldiers,  who,  like  myself,  are  but  just  entering  the  field,  and 
for  whose  sake  this  was  written,  not  to  be  discoaragod  at  the 


542  Satan's  devigbs.  [xlviii. 

fiery  trial  wherewith  they  must  be  tried,  if  they  would  be  fonnd 
faithful  servants  of  Jesas  Christ.  You  see,  my  dearly  beloved 
brethren,  by  what  has  been  delivered,  that  our  way  through 
the  wilderness  of  this  world  to  the  heavenly  Canaan,  is  beset 
with  thorns,  and  that  there  are  sons  of  Anak  to  be  grappled 
with,  ere  you  can  possess  the  promised  land.  But  let  not 
these,  like  so  many  false  spies,  discourage  you  from  going  up 
to  fight  the  Lord's  battles,  but  say,  with  Caleb  and  Joshua, 
**  Nay,  but  we  will  go  up,  for  we  are  able  to  conquer  them/' 
Jesus  Christ,  that  great  Captain  of  our  salvation,  has  in  oar 
stead,  and  as  our  representative,  baffled  the  grand  enemy  of 
mankind,  and  we  have  nothing  to  do,  but  manfully  to  fight 
under  his  banner,  and  to  go  on  from  conquering  to  conquer. 
Our  glory  does  not  consist  in  being  exempted  from,  but  in 
enduring  temptations.  ^'  Blessed  is  the  man  (says  the  apostle) 
that  endureth  temptation ;"  and  again,  **  Brethren,  count  it  all 
joy,  when  you  fall  into  divers  temptations  :*'  And  in  that  per- 
fect form  our  blessed  Lord  has  prescribed  to  us,  we  are  taught 
to  pray,  not  so  much  to  be  delivered  from  all  temptation,  as, 
•*  from  the  evil"  of  it.  Whilst  we  are  on  this  side  eternity,  it 
must  needs  be  that  temptations  come ;  and,  no  doubt,  <'  Satan 
has  desired  to  have  all  of  us,  to  sift  us  as  wheat."  But  where- 
fore should  we  fear  ?  For  he  that  is  for  us,  is  by  far  more 
powerful  than  all  that  are  against  us.  Jesus  Christ,  our  great 
high-priest,  is  exalted  to  the  right  hand  of  God,  and  there 
sitteth  to  make  intercession  for  us,  that  our  faith  fail  not. 
^  Since  then  Christ  is  praying,  whom  should  we  fear  ?  And 
since  he  has  promised  to  make  us  more  than  conquerors,  of 
whom  should  we  be  afraid  ?  No,  though  an  host  of  devils  are 
set  in  array  against  us,  let  us  not  bo  afraid;  thongh  there 
should  rise  up  the  hottest  persecution  against  us,  yet  let  us 
put  our  trust  in  Grod.  What  though  Satan,  and  the  rest  of  his 
apostate  spirits,  are  powerful,  when  compared  with  us ;  yet  if 
put  in  competition  with  the  Almighty,  they  are  as  weak  as  the 
meanest  worms.  God  has  them  all  reserved  in  chains  of  dark- 
ness unto  the  judgment  of  the  great  day.  So  far  as  he  permits 
them,  they  shall  go,  but  no  farther;  and  where  he  pleases, 
there  shall  their  proud  malicious  designs  be  stayed.  We  read 
in  the  Gospel,  that  though  a  legion  of  them  possessed  one  man, 
yet  they  could  not  destroy  him ;  nor '  could  they  so  much  as 
enter  into  a  swine,  without  first  having  leave  given  them  from 
above.  It  is  true,  we  often  find  they  foil  us,  when  we  are 
assaulted  by  them ;  but  let  us  be  strong,  and  very  courageous; 
for,  though  they  bruise  our  heels,  we  shall,  at  length,  bruise 
their  heads.  Yet  a  little  while,  and  he  that  shall  come,  wiB 
come;  and  then  we  shall  see  all  our  spiritual  enemies  pat 
under  our  feet.  What  if  they  do  come  out  against  us,  like  so 
many  great  Goliahs ;  yet,  if  we  can  go  forth,  as  the  strifding 
David,  in  the  name  and  strength  of  ^e  Lord  of  hosts,  we  may 
say,  O  Satan,  where  is  thy  power  ?  O  fallen  spirits,  where  is 
your  victory  ? 


XLIX.]  OP   REGENERATION.  543 

Once  more,  therefore,  and  to  conclude ;  let  as  be  strong,  and 
very  courageous,  and  let  us  put  on  the  whole  armour  of  God, 
that  we  may  be  able  to  stand  against  the  fiery  darts  of  the 
wicked  one.  Let  us  renounce  ourselves  and  the  world,  and 
then  we  shall  take  away  the  armour  in  which  he  trusteth,  and 
he  will  find  nothing  in  us  for  his  temptations  to  work  upon. 
We  shall  then  prevent  his  malicious  designs ;  and  being  willing 
to  suffer  ourselves,  shall  need  less  sufferings  to  be  sent  us  from 
above.  Let  us  have  our  loins  girt  about  with  truth ;  and  for 
an  helmet,  the  hope  of  salvation ;  "  praying  always  with  all 
manner  of  supplication.'*  Above  all  tilings,  "  Let  us  take  the 
sword  of  the  Spirit,  which  is  the  word  of  God,  and  the  shield 
of  faith,"  looking  always  to  Jesus,  the  author  and  finisher  of 
our  faith,  who  for  the  joy  that  was  set  before  him,  endured  the 
cross,  despising  the  shame,  and  is  now  set  down  at  the  right 
hand  of  God.  To  which  happy  place,  may  God  of  his  infinite 
mercy  translate  us  all,  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.— To 
whom,  with  the  Father,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  three  persons 
and  one  eternal  God,  be  all  honour  and  glory,  now  and  for 
evermore.    Amen. 


SERMON  XLIX. 

ON      REGENERATION. 

If  any  man  be  in  Christ,  he  is  a  new  creature. — 2  Cor.  v.  17. 

The  doctrine  of  our  regeneration,  or  new  birth  in  Christ  Jesus, 
though  one  of  the  most  fundamental  doctrines  of  our  holy  reli- 
gion ;  though  so  plainly  and  often  pressed  on  us  in  sacred  writ, 
"  that  he  who  runs  may  read ;  nay,  though  it  is  the  very  hingo 
on  which  the  salvation  of  each  of  us  turns,  and  a  point  too  in 
which  all  sincere  Christians,  of  every  denomination,  agree ;  yet 
it  is  so  seldom  considered,  and  so  little  experimentally  under- 
stood, by  the  generality  of  professors,  that  were  we  to  judge  of 
the  tnith  of  it,  by  the  experience  of  most  who  call  themselves 
Christians,  we  should  be  apt  to  imagine  they  had  ''  not  so  much 
as  heard"  whether  there  be  any  such  thing  as  regeneration,  or 
not.  It  is  true,  men  for  the  most  part  are  orthodox  in  the 
common  articles  of  their  Creed  ;  they  believe  **  there  is  but  one 
God,  and  one  Mediator  between  God  and  men,  even  the  man 
Christ  Jesus ;''  and  that  there  is  no  other  name  given  under 
heaven,  whereby  they  can  be  saved,  besides  his  :  but  then,  teU 
them  they  must  be  regenerated,  they  must  be  bom  again,  they 
mast  be  renewed  in  the  very  spirit,  in  the  inmost  faculties  of 
their  minds,  ere  they  can  truly  call  Christ  **  Lord,' Lord,'*  o^ 
have  an  evidence  that  they  have  any  share  in  the  merits  of  his 
precious  blood ;  and  they  are  ready  to  cry  out  with  Nicodemus, 
"  How  can  these  things  be?*'  or  with  the  Athenians,  on  another 
occasion,  *'  What  will  this  babbler  say  t"  He.  seemeth  to  be  a 
setter  forth  of  strange  doctrines :  because  we  preach  unto  them 
Christ,  and  the  new  birth. 
That  I  may  therefore  contribute  my  mite  towards  coring  thd 


544  OP    REGENERATION.  [XL1X« 

fatal  mistake  of  snch  persons^  who  would  thus  pnt  asunder 
what  God  has  inseparably  joined  together,  and  vainly  think 
they  are  justified  by  Christ,  or  have  their  sins  forgiven,  and  his 
perfect  obedience  imputed  to  them,  when  they  are  not  sanc- 
tified, have  not  their  natures  changed  and  made  holy,  I  shall 
beg  leave  to  enlarge  on  the  words  of  the  text  in  the  following 
manner. 

First,  I  shall  endeavour  to  explain  what  is  meant  by  being 
in  Christ :  **  If  any  man  be  in  Christ." 

Secondly,  What  we  are  to  understand  by  being  a  new  crea- 
ture :  "  If  any  man  be  in  Christ,  he  is  a  new  creature." 

Thirdly,  I  shall  produce  some  arguments  to  make  good  the 
apostle's  assertion.    And, 

Fourthly,  I  shall  draw  some  inferences  from  what  may  be  de- 
livered, and  then  conclude  with  a  word  or  two  of  exhortation. 

First,  I  am  to  endeavour  to  explain  what  is  meant  by  this 
expression  in  the  text,  *^  If  any  man  be  in  Christ." 

Now  a  person  may  be  said  to  be  in  Christ  two  ways. 

First,  Only  by  an  outward  profession.  And  in  this  sense, 
every  one  that  is  called  a  Christian,  or  baptized  into  Christ's 
church,  may  be  said  to  be  in  Christ.  But  that  this  is  not  the  sole 
meaning  of  the  apostle's  phrase  before  us,  is  evident,  because 
then,  every  one  that  names  the  name  of  Christ,  or  is  baptized 
into  his  visible  church,  would  be  a  new  creature.  Which  is 
notoriously  false,  it  being  too  plain  beyond  all  contradiction, 
that  comparatively  but  few  of  those  that  arc  *'  bom  of  water," 
are  ''  born  of  the  Spirit"  likewise ;  to  use  another  spiritual 
way  of  speaking,  many  are  baptized  with  water,  which  were 
never  baptized  with  the  Holy  Ghost.  To  be  in  Christ,  therefore, 
in  the  full  import  of  the  word,  must  certainly  mean  something 
more  than  a  bare  outward  profession,  or  being  called  after  his 
name.  For,  as  this  same  apostle  tell  us,  "  All  are  not  Israel- 
ites, that  are  of  Israel ;"  so  when  applied  to  Christianity,  all  are 
not  real  Christians  that  are  nominally  such.  Nay,  this  is  so 
far  from  being  the  case,  that  our  blessed  Lord  himself  informs 
us,  that  many  who  have  prophesied  or  preached  in  his  name, 
and  in  his  name  cast  out  devils,  and  done  many  wonderful 
works,  shall  notwithstanding  be  dismissed  at  the  last  day,  with 
*'  Depart  from  me,  I  know  you  not,  ye  workers  of  iniquity."^ 
It  remains,  therefore,  that  this  expression,  "  if  any  man  be  in 
Christ,"  must  be  understood  in  a 

Second  and  closer  signification, — to  be  in  him  so  as  to  partake 
of  the  benefits  of  God's  sufierings.  To  be  in  him  not  on^  by  an 
outward  profession,  but  by  an  inward  change  and  purity  of  heart, 
and  cohabitation  of  his  holy  Spirit.  To  be  in  him,  so  as  to  be 
mystically  united  to  him  by  a  true  and  lively  faith,  and  thereby 
to  receive  spiritual  virtue  from  him,  as  ihe  members  of  Che 
natural  body  do  from  the  head,  or  the  branches  from  the  vine. 
To  be  in  him  in  such  a  manner  as  the  apostle,  speaking  of  him* 
self,  acquaints  us  tie  knew  a  person  was,  *'  I  knew  a  man  in 
Christ,"  a  true  Christian ;  or,  as  be  himsdf  desires  to  be  in 


XLiX.]  ON    RBGfiNBRATlON.  545 

Christ,  when  be  wishes,  in  hi^  epistle  to  the  Philippians,  that  he 
niig^t  be  found  in  him.  This  is  undoubtedly  the  proper  mean* 
inis>:  of  the  apostle's  expression  in  the  words  of  the  text;  so  that 
what  he  says  in  his  epistle  to  the  Romans  about  circumcision, 
may  very  well  be  applied  to  the  present  subject :  that  he  is  not 
a  real  Christian  who  is  only  one  outwardly ;  nor  is  that  true 
baptism,  which  is  only  outward  in  the  flesh.  But  he  is  a  true 
Christian,  who  is  one  inwardly,  whose  baptism  is  that  of  the 
heart,  in  the  spirit,  and  not  merely  in  the  water,  whose  praise 
is  not  of  man,  but  of  God.  Or,  as  he  speaks  in  another  place, 
'^  Neither  circumcision  nor  uncircnmcision  availeth  any  thing, 
(of  itself,)  but  a  new  creature."  Which  amounts  to  what  he 
here  declares  in  the  verse  now  under  consideration,  that  if  any 
man  be  truly  and  properly  in  Christ,  he  is  a  new  creature. 
Which  brings  me  to  shew. 

Secondly f  What  we  are  to  understand  by  being  a  neto  creature. 
— And  here  it  is  evident  at  the  first  view,  that  this  expression  is 
not  to  be  so  explained  as  though  there  were  a  physical  change 
required  to  be  made  in  us  ;  or  as  though  we  were  to  be  reduced 
to  our  primitive  nothings,  and  then  created  and  formed  again. 
For,  supposing  we  were,  as  Nicodemus  ignorantly  imagined,  to 
enter  a  '*  second  time  into  our  mother's  womb,  and  t^  bom," 
alas !  what  would  it  contribute  towards  rendering  us  spiritually 
new  creatures  ?  Since  ''  that  which  was  bom  of  the  flesh  would 
be  flesh  still ;"  we  should  be  the  same  carnal  persons  as  ever, 
being  derived  from  camal  parents,  and  consequently  receiving 
the  seeds  of*  all  manner  of  sin  and  corruption  from  them.  No, 
it  only  means,  that  we  must  be  so  altered  as  to  the  qualities 
and  tempers  of  our  minds,  that  we  must  entirely  forget  what 
manner  of  persons  we  once  were.  As  it  may  be  said  of  a  piece 
of  gold,  that  was  once  in  the  ore,  after  it  has  been  cleansed, 
purified,  and  polished,  that  it  is  a  new  piece  of  gold ;  as  it  may 
be  said  of  a  bright  glass  that  has  been  covered  over  with  filth, 
when  it  is  wiped,  and  so  become  transparent  and  clear,  that  it 
is  a  new  glass ;  or,  as  it  might  be  said  of  Naaman,  when  he  re- 
covered of  his  leprosy,  and  his  flesh  returned  unto  him  like  the 
flesh  of  a  young  child,  that  he  was  a  new  man :  so  our  souls, 
though  still  the  same  as  to  essence,  yet  are  so  purged,  purified,, 
and  cleansed  from  their  natural  dross,  filth,  and  leprosy,  by  the 
blessed  influences  of  the  holy  Spirit,  that  they  may  be  properly 
said  to  be  made  anew. — How  this  glorious  change  is  wrought 
in  the  soul,  cannot  easily  be  explained :  for  no  one  knows  the 
ways  of  the  Spirit,  save  the  Spirit  of  God  himself.  Not  that 
this  ought  to  be  any  argument  against  this  doctrine ;  for,  as  our 
Messed  Lord  observed  to  Nicodemus,  when  he  was  discoursing 
ma,  this  very  subject,  "  The  wind  Moweth  where  it  listetb,  and 
4mxi  beasest  the  sound  thereof,  but  knowest  not  whence  it 

sthy  and  wliither  it  goeth ;"  and  if  we  are  told  of  natural 
and  we  understand  them  not,  how  much  less  ought  we 
to  wander,  if  we  cannot  immediately  account  for  the  invisible 
woduDffs  of  Ibd  holy  Spirit?    The  truth  of  the  matter  is  this: 

♦  2l 


546  ON    REGENERATION.  [XLIX. 

the  doctrine  of  our  regeneration,  or  new  birth  in  Christ  Jesus,  is 
hard  to  be  understood  by  the  natural  man.  But  that  there  is 
really  such  a  thing,  and  that  each  of  us  must  be  spiritually  bom 
again,  I  shall  endeavour  to  shew  under  my 

Third  general  head,  in  which  I  was  to  produce  some  argu- 
ments to  make  good  the  apostle's  assertion. 

And  here  one  would  think  it  sufficient  to  affirm, — First,  That 
God  himself,  in  his  holy  word,  has  told  us  so.     Mamy  texts 
might  be  produced  out  of  the  Old  Testament,  to  prove  this  point; 
and,  indeed,  one  would  wonder  how  Nicodemus,  who  was  a 
teacher  in  Israel,  and  who  was  therefore  to  instruct  the  people 
in  the  spiritual  meaning  of  the  law,  should  be  so  ignorant  of 
this  grand  article,  as  we  find  he  really  was,  by  his  asking  our 
blessed  Lord,  when  he  was  pressing  on  him  this  topic.  How  can 
these  things  be  ?    Surely,  he  could  not  forget  how  often  the 
psalmist  had  begged  of  God,  to  make  him  a  ''new  heart,"  and 
"  to  renew  a  right  spirit  within  him ;"  as  likewise,  how  fre- 
quently the  prophets  had  warned  the  people  to  make  them 
*'  new  hearts"  and  new  minds,  and  so  turn  unto  the  Lord  their 
God.     But  not  to  mention  these  and  such-like  texts  out  of  the 
Old  Testament,  this  doctrine  is  so  often  and  plainly  repeated  in 
the  New,  that,  as  I  observed  before,  he  who  runs  may  read. 
For  what  says  the  great  Prophet  and  Instructor  of  the  world 
himself:  ''Except  a  man  (every  one  that  is  naturally  the  off- 
spring of  Adam)  be  bom  again  of  water  and  the  Spirit,  he  can- 
not enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God."    And  lest  we  should  be 
apt  to  slight  this  assertion,  and,  Nicodemus-like,  reject  the 
doctrine,  because  we  cannot   immediately  explain  "  how  this 
thing  can  be  ;*'  our  blessed  Master  therefore  affirms  it,  as  it 
were,  by  an  oath,  "  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you,"  or,  as  it 
may  be  read,  I  the  Amen ;  I,  who  am  Truth  itself,  say  unto  you, 
that  it  is  the  unalterable  appointment  of  my  heavenly  Father, 
that  "  unless  a  man  be  bom  again,  he  cannot  enter  into  the 
kingdom  of  God." 

Agreeable  to  this,  are  those  many  passages  we  meet  with  in 
the  epistles,  where  we  are  commanded  to  be  "  renewed  in  the 
spirit,"  or,  which  was  before  explained,  in  the  inmost  faculties 
of  our  minds;  "to  put  off  the  old  man,  which  is  corrupt; 
and  to  put  on  the  new  man,  which  is  created  after  Crod, 
in  righteousness  and  true  holiness ;"  that "  old  things  must  pass 
away,  and  that  all  things  must  become  new ;"  that  we  are  to  be 
"  saved  by  the  washing  of  regeneration,  and  the  renewing  of  the 
Holy  Ghost."  Or,  methinks,  were  there  no  other  passage  to  be 
produced  besides  the  words  of  the  text,  it  would  ba  full  enough, 
since  the  apostle  therein  affirms,  that  '^  If  any  man  be  in  Christ, 
he  is  a  new  creature." — Now,  what  can  be  understood  by  all 
these  different  terms  of  being  bom  again,  of  putting  off  the  old 
mauy  and  putting  on  the  new,  of  being  renewed  in  the  spirit  ofontr 
minds,  and  becoming  7/6u?  creatures;  but  that  Christianity  requires 
a  thorough,  real,  inward  change  of  heart?  Do  we  think  these, 
^nd  such-like  forms  of  speaking  are  mere  metaphors,  words  of  a 


XLIX.]  ON    REGENERATION.  547 

bare  sound,  without  any  real  solid  signification  ?  Indeed,  it  is 
to  be  feared,  some  men  would  have  them  interpreted  so ;  but, 
alas !  unhappy  men !  they  are  not  to  be  envied  in  their  meta- 
phorical interpretation :  it  will  be  well,  if  they  do  not  interpret 
themselves  out  of  their  salvation. 

Multitudes  of  other  texts  might  be  produced,  to  confirm  this 
same  truth ;  but  those  already  quoted  are  so  plain  and  convinc- 
ing, that  one  would  imagine  no  one  should  deny  it ;  were  we 
not  told  there  are  some,  "  who  having  eyes  see  not,  and  ears 
hear  not,  and  that  will  not  understand  with  their  hearts,  or  hear 
with  their  ears,  lest  they  should  be  converted,  and  Christ  should 
heal  them." — But  I  proceed  to  a 

Second  argument ;  and  that  shall  be  taken  from  the  purity  of 
God,  and  the  present  corrupt  and  polluted  state  of  man.  God 
is  described  in  holy  scripture  (and  I  speak  to  those  who  pro- 
fess to  know  the  scripture)  as  a  spirit;  as  a  being  of  such  infi- 
nite sanctity,  as  to  be  of  **  purer  eyes  than  to  behold  iniquity  ;" 
as  to  be  so  transcendently  holy,  that  it  is  said  "  the  very  hea- 
vens are  not  clean  in  his  sight ;  and  the  angels  themselves  he 
chargeth  witb  folly."  On  the  other  hand,  man  is  described  (and 
every  regenerate  person  will  find  it  true  by  his  own  experience) 
as  a  creature  altogether  ''  conceived  and  born  in  sin  ;"  as  having 
**  no  good  thing  dwelling  in  him  ;"  as  being  carnal,  sold  under  sin;" 
nay,  as  having  a  mind  which  is  at  enmity  with  God,"  and  such- 
like. And  since  there  is  such  an  infinite  disparity,  can  any  one 
conceive  how  a  filthy,  corrupted,  polluted  wretch,  can  dwell  with 
an  infinitely  pure  and  holy  God,  before  he  is  changed,  and  ren- 
dered, in  some  measure,  like  him?  Can  he,  who  is  of  purer  eyes 
than  to  behold  iniquity,  dwell  with  it?  Can  he,  in  whose  sight 
the  heavens  are  not  clean,  delight  to  dwell  with  uncleanness 
itself?  No^  we  might  as  well  suppose  light  to  have  communion 
with  darkness,  or  Christ  to  have  concord  with  Belial. — But  I 
pass  on  to  a 

Third  argument,  which  shall  be  founded  on  the  consideraticm 
of  the  nature  of  that  happiness  God  has  prepared  for  those  that 
unfeignedly  love  him. — To  enter  indeed  on  a  minute  and  parti- 
cular description  of  heaven,  would  be  vain  and  presumptuous, 
since  we  are  told  that  "  eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  nei- 
ther hath  it. entered  into  the  heart  of  man  to  conceive,  the  things 
that  are  there  prepared"  for  the  sincere  followers  of  the  holy 
Jesus,  even  in  this-  life,  much  less  in  that  which  is  to  come. 
However,  this  we  may  venture  to  affirm  in  general,  that  as  God 
is  a  spirit,  so  the  happiness  he  has  laid  up  for  his  people  is 
spiritual  likewise :  and  consequently,  unless  our  carnal  minds 
are  changed  and  spiritualized,  we  can  never  be  made  meet  to 
partake  of  that  inheritance  with  the  saints  in  light. 

It  is  true,  we  may  flatter  ourselves,  that  supposing  we  conti- 
nue in  our  natural  corrupt  estate,  and  carry  all  our  lusts  along 
with  us,  we  should,  notwithstanding,  relish  heaven,  was  God  to 
admit  us  therein.  And  so  we  might,  was  it  a  Mahometan  para- 
dise, wherein  we  were  to  take  our  full  swing  in  sensual  delights. 

2l2 


548  ON    RRGENERATION.  [XUX* 

since  its  joys  are  only  spiritual,  and  no  unclean  thing  can  pos- 
sibly enter  those  blessed  mansions,  there  is  an  absolute  neces- 
sity oi*  our  being  changed,  and  undergoing  a  total  renovation  of 
our  depraved  natures,  before  we  can  have  any  taste  or  relish  of 
those  heavenly  pleasures.  It  is,  doubtless,  for  this  reason,  that 
the  apostle  declares  it  to  be  the  irrevocable  decree  of  the  Al- 
mighty, that  "without  holiness,  (without  being  made  pure  by 
regeneration,  and  having  the  image  of  God  thereby  reinstamped 
upon  the  soul,)  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord."  And  it  is  very 
observable,  that  our  divine  Master,  in  the  famous  passage  before 
referred  to,  concerning  the  absolute  necessity  of  regeneration, 
does  not  say.  Unless  a  man  be  bom  again,  he  shcdl  not,  bat 
"  unless  a  man  be  bom  again,  he  cannot  enter  into  the  kingdom 
of  God."  It  is  founded  in  the  very  nature  of  things,  that  unless 
we  have  dispositions  wrought  in  us  suitable  to  the  objects  that 
are  to  entertain  us,  we  can  take  no  manner  of  complacency  or 
satisfaction  in  them.  For  instance,  what  delight  can  the  most 
harmonious  music  afford  to  a  deaf,  or  what  pleasure  can  the 
most  excellent  picture  give  to  a  blind,  man?  Can  a  tasteless 
palate  relish  the  richest  dainties,  or  a  filthy  swine  be  pleased 
with  the  finest  garden  of  flowers?  No  :  and  what  reason  can  be 
assigned  for  it  ?  An  answer  is  ready  :  Because  they  have  neither 
of  them  any  tempers  of  mind  correspondent  or  agreeable  to 
what  they  are  to  be  diverted  with.  And  thus  it  is  with  the 
soul  hereafter  :  for  death  makes  no  alteration,  in  the  soul,  than 
as  it  enlarges  its  faculties,  and  makes  it  capable  of  receiving 
deeper  impressions  either  of  pleasure  or  pain.  If  it  delighted 
to  converse  with  God  here,  it  will  be  transported  with  the  sight 
of  his  glorious  majesty  hereafter.  If  it  were  pleased  with  the 
common  saints  on  earth,  it  will  be  infinitely  more  so  with  the 
communion  and  society  of  holy  angels,  and  the  spirits  of  just 
men  made  perfect  in  heaven.  But  if  the  opposite  of  all  this  be 
true,  we  may  assure  ourselves,  the  soul  could  not  be  happy, 
were  God  himself  to  admit  it  (which  he  never  will  do)  into  the 
regions  of  the  blessed. — But  it  is  time  for  me  to  hasten  to  the 

Fourth — argument,  because  Christ*s  redemption  will  not  be 
complete  in  us,  unless  we  are  new  creatures.  If  we  reflect, 
indeed,  on  the  first  and  chief  end  of  our  blessed  Lord's  coming, 
we  shall  find  it  was  to  be  a  propitiation  for  our  sins,  to  give 
his  life  a  ransom  for  many.  But,  then,  if  the  benefits  of  our  dear 
Redeemer's  death  were  to  extend  no  farther  than  barely  to  pro- 
cure forgiveness  of  our  sins,  we  should  have  as  little  reason  to 
rejoice  in  it,  as  a  poor  condemned  criminal,  that  is  ready  to 
perish  by  some  fatal  disease,  would  have  in  receiving  a  pardon 
from  his  judge.  For  Christians  would  do  well  to  consider,  that 
there  is  not  only  a  legal  hinderance  to  our  happiness,  as  w» 
are  breakers  of  God's  law,  but  also  a  moral  impurity  in  oar 
natures,  which  renders  us  incapable  of  enjoying  heaven,  (as 
hath  been  already  proved,)  till  some  mighty  change  have  bee& 
wrought  in  us.  It  is  necessary,  therefore,  in  order  to  make 
Christ's  redemption  complete,  that  we  should  have  a  grant  of 


XLIX.]  ON    REGENERATION.  549 

God's  Holy  Spirit  to  change  our  natures,  and  so  prepare  us 
for  the  enjoyment  of  that  happiness  our  Saviour  has  purchased 
by  his  precious  blood.  Accordingly,  the  holy  scriptures  inform 
us,  that  whom  Christ  justifies,  or  whose  sins  he  forgives,  and 
to  whom  he  imputes  his  perfect  obedience,  those  he  also  sane* 
tifies,  purifies,  and  cleanses,  and  totally  cbangeth  their  cor- 
rupted natures.  As  the  scripture  also  speaketh  in  another 
place,  "  Christ  is  to  us  justification,  sanctification,  and  then 
redemption."     But, 

Fourthly,  Proceed  we  now  to  the  next  general  thing  proposed, 
to  draw  some  inferences  from  what  has  been  delivered.     And, 

First,  If  he  that  is  in  Christ  be  a  new  creature,  this  may  serve 
as  a  reproof  for  those  who  rest  in  a  bare  performance  pf  outward 
duties,  without  perceiving  any  real  inward  change  of  heart. — -We 
may  observe  a  great  many  persons  to  be  very  punctual  in  the 
regular  returns  of  public  and  private  prayer,  as  likewise  of 
receiving  the  holy  communion,  and  perhaps  now  and  then  too 
in  keeping  a  fast.  But  here  is  the  misfortune,  they  rest  barely 
in  the  use  of  the  means,  and  think  all  is  over,  when  they  have 
thus  complied  with  those  sacred  institutions;  whereas,  were 
they  rightly  informed,  they  would  consider,  that  all  the  insti- 
tuted means  of  grace,  as  prayer,  fasting,  hearing  and  reading 
the  word  of  God,  receiving  the  blessed  sacrament,  and  such- 
like, arc  no  farther  serviceable  to  us,  than  as  they  are  found  to 
make  us  inwardly  better,  and  to  carry  on  the  spiritual  life  in 
the  soul.  It  is  true,  they  are  means ;  but  then  they  are  only 
means ;  they  arc  part,  but  not  the  whole  of  religion :  for  if  so, 
ivho  more  religious  than  the  Pharisee?  He  fasted  twice  in 
the  week,  and  gave  tithes  of  all  that  he  possessed,  and  yet 
was  not  justified,  as  our  Saviour  himself  informs  us,  in  the 
sight  of  God. 

You  perhaps,  like  the  Pharisee,  may  fast  often,  and  make 
long  prayers ;  you  may,  with  Herod,  hear  good  sermons  gladly. 
But  yet,  if  you  continue  vain  and  trifling,  immoral  or  worldly- 
minded,  and  differ  from  the  rest  of  your  neighbours  barely  in 
going  to  church,  or  in  complying  with  some  outward  perform- 
ances, are  you  better  than  they  ?  No,  in  no  wise ;  you  are  by 
far  much  worse :  for  if  you  use  them,  and  at  the  same  time 
abuse  them,  you  thereby  encourage  others  to  think  there  i$ 
nothing  in  them,  and  therefore  must  expect  to  receive  the 
greater  damnation.     But, 

Secondly,  If  he  that  is  in  Christ  be  a  new  creature,  then  this 
may  check  the  groundless  presumption  of  ailother  class  of  pro- 
fessors, who  rest  in  the  attainment  of  some  moral  virtues,  and 
falsely  imagine  they  are  good  Christians,  if  they  are  just  in 
their  dealings,  temperate  in  their  diet,  and  do  no  hurt  or  vio- 
lence to  any  man.  But  if  this  were  all  that  is  requisite  to 
make  us  Christians,  why  might  not  the  heathens  of  old  be  good 
Christians,  who  were  remarkable  for  these  virtues  ?  or  St.  Paul 
before  his  conversion,  who  tells  us,  that  he  lived  in  all  good 
conscience  ?  But  we  find  he  renounces  all  dependence  on  works 


550  ON    RE6BNBRAT10N.  XLIX. 

of  this  nature,  and  only  desires  to  be  found  in  Christ,  and  to 
know  the  power  of  his  resurrection,  or  have  an  experimental 
proof  of  receiving  the  Holy  Ghost  purchased  for  him  by  the 
death,  and  ensured  and  applied  to  him  by  the  resarrectioo,  of 
Jesus  Christ. 

The  sum  of  the  matter  is  this :  Christianity  includes  moralitr, 
as  grace  does  reason ;  but  if  we  are  only  mere  moralists,  if  we 
are  not  inwardly  wrought  upon,  and  changed  by  the  powerful 
operations  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  our  moral  actions  proceed 
from  a  principle  of  a  new  nature,  however  we  may  call  our- 
selves Christians,  we  shall  be  found  naked  at  the  great  daj, 
and  in  the  number  of  those  who  have  neither  Christ's  righte- 
ousness imputed  to  them  for  their  justification  in  the  sight,  nor 
holiness  enough  in  their  souls  as  the  consequence  of  that,  io 
order  to  make  them  meet  for  the  enjoyment,  of  God.     Nor, 

Thirdly y  Will  this  doctrine  less  condemn  those,  who  rest  in  a 
partial  amendment  of  themselves,  without  experiencing  a  tho- 
rough, real,  inward  change  of  heart. — A  little  acquaintance 
with  the  world  will  furnish  us  with  instances,  of  no  small  4inm- 
ber  of  persons,  who,  perhaps,  were  before  openly  profane ;  hot 
seeing  the  ill  consequences  of  their  vices,  and  the  many  worldly 
inconveniences  it  has  reduced  them  to,  on  a  sudden,  as  it  were, 
grow  civilized ;  and  thereupon  flatter  themselves  that  they  are 
very  religious,  because  they  differ  a  little  from  their  former 
selves,  and  are  not  so  scandalously  wicked  as  once  they  were: 
whereas,  at  the  same  time,  they  shall  have  some  secret  darling 
sin  or  other,  some  beloved  Delilah  or  Herodias,  which  thej 
will  not  part  with ;  some  hidden  lust,  which  they  will  not  mor- 
tify ;  some  vicious  habit,  which  they  will  not  take  pains  to  root 
out.  But  wouldst  thou  know,  O  vain  man !  whoever  thou  art, 
what  the  Lord  thy  God  requires  of  thee?  Thou  must  be 
informed,  that  nothing  short  of  a  thorough  sound  conversion 
w^ill  fit  thee  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  It  is  not  enough  to 
turn  from  profaneness  to  civility ;  but  thou  must  turn  fron 
civility  to  godliness.  Not  only  some,  but  ''all  things  must 
become  new"  in  thy  soul.  It  will  profit  thee  but  little  to  do 
many  things,  if  yet  some  One  thing  thou  lackest.  In  short,  tboo 
must  not  only  be  an  almost,  but  altogether  a  new  creature,  or 
in  vain  thou  boastest  that  thou  art  a  Christian. 

Fourthly y  If  he  that  is  in  Christ  be  a  new  creature,  then  this 
may  be  prescribed  as  an  infallible  rule  for  every  person,  of 
whatever  denomination,  age,  degree,  or  quality,  to  judge  him- 
self by  ;  this  being  the  only  solid  foundation,  whereon  we  can 
build  a  well-grounded  assurance  of  pardon,  peace,  and  happi* 
ness.  We  may  indeed  depend  on  the  broken  reed  of  an  exter- 
nal profession ;  we  may  think  we  are  good  enough,  if  we  lead 
such  sober,  honest,  moral  lives,  as  many  heathens  did.  We 
may  imagine  we  are  in  a  safe  condition,  if  we  attend  on  the 
public  offices  of  religion,  and  are  constant  in  the  duties  of  onr 
closets.  But  unless  all  these  tend  to  reform  our  lives,  and 
change  our  hearts,  and  are  only  used  as  so  many  channeb  of 


XLIX.]  ON    REGENERATION.  551 

divine  grace :  as  I  told  you  before^  so  I  tell  you  again^  Chris- 
tianity >vili  profit  you  nothing. 

Let  each  of  us  therefore  seriously  put  this  question  to  our 
hearts :  Have  we  received  the  Holy  Ghost  since  we  believed  ? 
Are  we  new  creatures  in  Christ,  or  no  ?  At  least,  if  we  are  not 
so  yet,  is  it  our  daily  endeavour  to  become  such?  Do  we  con- 
stantly and  conscientiously  use  all  the  means  of  grace  required 
thereto  ?  Do  we  fast,  watch,  and  pray  ?  Do  we,  not  lazily 
seek,  but  laboriously  strive  to  enter  in  at  the  strait  gate  ?  In 
short,  do  we  renounce  our  own  righteousness,  take  up  our 
crosses,  and  follow  Christ?  If  so,  we  are  in  that  narrow  way 
which  leads  to  life ;  the  good  seed  is  sown  in  our  hearts,  and 
will,  if  duly  watered  and  nourished  by  a  regular  persevering 
use  of  ail  the  means  of  grace,  grow  up  to  eternal  life.  But,  on 
the  contrary,  if  we  have  only  heard,  and  know  not  experimen- 
tally, whether  there  be  any  Holy  Ghost;  if  we  are  strangers  to 
fasting,  watching,  and  prayer,  and  all  the  other  spiritual  exer- 
cises of  devotion ;  if  we  are  content  to  go  in  the  broad  way, 
merely  because  we  see  most  other  people  do  so,  without  once 
reflecting  whether  it  be  the  right  one  or  not ;  in  short,  if  we  are 
strangers,  nay,  enemies  to  the  cross  of  Christ,  by  lives  of 
worldly-raindedness  and  sensual  pleasure,  and  thereby  make 
others  think  that  Christianity  is  but  an  empty  name,  a  bare 
formal  profession ;  if  this  be  the  case,  I  say,  Christ  is  as  yet 
dead  in  vain,  to  us ;  we  are  under  the  guilt  of  our  sins ;  and  are 
unacquainted  with  a  true  and  thorough  conversion. 

£ut,  beloved,  I  am  persuaded  better  things  of  you,  and  things 
that  accompany  salvation,  though  I  thus  speak  ;  I  would 
humbly  hope  that  you  are  sincerely  persuaded,  that  he  who  has 
not  the  Spirit  of  Christ  is  none  of  his ;  and  that,  unless  the 
Spirit,  which  raised  Jesus  from  the  dead,  dwell  in  you  here, 
neither  will  your  mortal  bodies  be  quickened  by  the  same  Spirit 
to  dwell  with  him  hereafter. 

Let  me,  therefore,  (as  was  proposed  in  the  last  place,)  ear- 
nestly exhort  you,  in  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  to  act 
suitably  to  those  convictions,  and  to  live  as  Christians,  that  are 
commanded  in  holy  writ,  to  "  put  off  their  former  conversation 
concerning  the  old  man,  and  to  put  on  the  new  man,  which  is 
created  after  God  in  righteousness  and  true  holiness." 

It  must  be  owned,  indeed,  that  this  is  a  great  and  difficult 
work ;  but,  blessed  be  God,  it  is  not  impossible.  Many  thou- 
sands of  happy  souls  have  been  assisted  by  a  divine  power  to 
bring  it  about.  And  why  should  we  despair  of  success  ?  Is 
God's  band  shortened,  that  it  cannot  save?  Was  he  the  God  of 
our  fathers ;  is  he  not  the  God  of  their  children  also?  Yes,  doubt- 
less, of  their  children  also.  It  is  a  task  likewise,  that  will  put 
us  to  some  pain ;  it  will  oblige  us  to  part  with  some  lust,  to 
break  with  some  friend,  to  mortify  some  beloved  passion,  which 
may  be  exceeding  dear  to  us,  and  perhaps  as  hard  to  leave,  as 
to  cut  off  a  right  hand,  or  pluck  out  a  right  eye.  But  what  of 
all  this  ?  Will  not  the  being  made  a  real  living  member  of  Christy 


052  CHRfSriANSy  TEMPLES   OF   THE    LIVING   OOD.  [l. 

a  child  of  God,  and  an  inheritor  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven, 
abundantly  make  amends  for  all  this  trouble?  Undoubtedly  it 
vrill.  The  setting  about  and  carrying  on  this  great  and  neces- 
sary work,  perhaps  may,  nay,  assuredly  will,  expose  us  also  to 
the  ridicule  of  the  unthinking  part  of  mankind,  who  will  won- 
der that  we  run  not  into  the  same  excess  of  riot  with  them- 
selves ;  and  because  we  deny  our  sinful  appetites,  and  are  not 
conformed  to  this  world,  being  commanded  in  scripture  to  do 
the  one,  and  to  have  our  conversation  in  heaven,  in  opposition 
to  the  other,  they  may  count  our  lives  folly,  and  our  end  to  be 
without  honour.  But  will  not  the  being  numbered  among  the 
saints,  and  shining  as  the  stars  for  ever  and  ever,  be  a  more 
than  sufficient  recompense  for  all  the  ridicule,  calumny,  or  re- 
proach, we  can  possibly  meet  with  here  ? 

Indeed,  were  there  no  other  reward  attended  a  thorough  con- 
version, but  that  peace  of  God,  which  is  the  unavoidable  conse- 
quence of  it,  and  which,  even  in  this  life,  '^  passetb  all  under- 
standing," we  should  have  great  reason  to  rejoice.  But  when 
we  consider,  that  this  is  the  least  of  those  mercies  God  has  pre- 
pared for  those  that  are  in  Christ,  and  become  new  creatures ; 
that  this  is  but  the  beginning  of  an  eternal  succession  of  plea- 
sures ;  that  the  day  of  our  deaths,  which  the  unconverted,  unre- 
newed sinner  must  so  much  dread,  will  be,  as  it  were,  but  the 
first  day  of  our  new  births,  and  open  to  us  an  everlasting  scene 
of  happiness  and  comfort ;  in  short,  if  we  remember,  that  they 
who  are  regenerate  and  born  again,  have  a  real  title  to  all  the 
glorious  promises  of  the  gospel,  and  are  infallibly  certain  of 
being  as  happy,  both  here  and  hereafter,  as  an  all-wise,  all- 
gracious,  all-powerful  God  can  make  them;  methinks,  every 
one  that  has  but  the  least  concern  for  the  salvation  of  bis  pre- 
cious and  immortal  soul,  having  such  promises,  such  a  hope, 
such  an  eternity  of  happiness  set  before  him,  should  never 
cease  watching,  praying,  and  striving,  till  he  find  a  real,  inward 
saving  change  wrought  in  his  heart,  and  thereby  doth  know  of 
a  truth,  that  he  dwells  in  Christ,  and  Christ  in  him ;  that  he  is 
a  new  creature,  therefore  a  child  of  God ;  that  he  is  already  an 
inheritor,  and  will  ere  long  be  an  actual  possessor,  of  the  king- 
dom of  heaven. — Which  God  of  his  infinite  mercy  grant,  through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.    To  whom,  &c. 


SERMON  L. 

CHRISTIANS,   TEMPLES   OF  THE    LIVING    GOD. 

Ye  are  tlie  temple  of  the  living  God. — 2  Corin.  vi.  16, 

Isaiah,  speaking  of  the  glory  of  gospel  days,  said,  **  Men  have 
not  heard  nor  perceived  by  the  ear,  neither  bath  the  eye  seen, 
O  God,  besides  thee,  what  he  hath  prepared  for  him  that  wait- 
eth  for  him."  Chap.  Ixiv.  4.  Could  a  world  lying  in  the  wicked 
one,  be  really  convinced  of  this,  they  would  need  no  other 
motive  to  induce  them  to  renounce  themselves,  take  up  their 
cross,  and  follow  Jesus  Christ.    And  bad  belieyera  this  Inith 


L.]  CHRISTIANS,   TEMPLES   OF   THB   LIVING  GOD.  553 

always  deeply  impressed  upon  their  soals,  they  coald  not  but 
abstain  from  every  evil,  be  continually  aspiring  after  every 
good ;  and,  in  a  word,  use  all  diligence  to  walk  worthy  of  him 
who  hath  called  them  to  his  kingdom  and  glory.  If  I  mistake 
not,  that  is  the  end  proposed  by  the  apostle  Paul,  in  the  words 
of  the  text,  "  Ye  are  the  temple  of  the  living  God."  Words 
originally  directed  to  the  church  of  Corinth,  but  which  equally 
belon&r  to  us,  and  to  our  children,  and  to  as  many  as  the  Lord 
our  God  shall  call.  To  give  you  the  true  meaning  of,  and  then 
practically  to  Improve  them,  shall  be  my  endeavour  in  the  fol- 
lowing discourse. 

First,  I  shall  endeavour  to  give  you  the  true  meaning  of  these 
words,  "Ye  are  the  temple  of  the  living  God."  The  expres- 
sion undoubtedly  is  metaphorical  or  figurative :  but  under  the 
metaphor,  something  real,  and  of  infinite  importance,  is  to  be 
understood.  And  there  seems  to  be  a  manifest  allusion,  not 
only  to  what  we  call  temples  or  churches  in  general,  but  to  the 
Jewish  temple  in  particular.  I  trust,  that  but  few,  if  any  here, 
need  be  informed,  that  the  preparations  for  this  edifice  were 
exceedingly  grand,  that  it  was  modelled  and  built  by  a  divine 
order,  and,  when  completed,  was  separated  from  common  uses, 
and  dedicated  to  the  service  of  the  incomprehensible  Jehovah, 
with  the  utmost  solemnity. 

It  is  thus  that  Christians  are  **  the  temple  of  the  living  God," 
of  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost ;  they  who  once  held  a  consul- 
tation to  create,  are  all  equally  concerned  in  making  prepara- 
tions for,  and  effectually  bringing  about  the  redemption  of  man. 
The  Father  creates,  the  Son  redeems,  and  the  Holy  Ghost  sanc- 
tifies all  the  elect  people  of  God.  Being  loved  from  eternity, 
they  are  effectually  called  in  time,  they  are  chosen  out  of  tho 
world,  and  not  only  by  an  external  formal  dedication  at  bap- 
tism, or  at  the  Lord's  supper,  but  by  a  free,  voluntary,  uncon- 
strained oblation,  they  devote  themselves,  spirit,  soul,  and  body, 
to  the  entire  service  of  Him,  who  hath  loved,  and  given  himself 
for  them.  This  is  true  and  undefiled  religion  before  God  our 
heavenly  Father :  This  is  the  real  Christian's  reasonable  ser^ 
vice,  or,  as  some  think  the  word  imports,  this  is  the  service  re« 
quired  of  us  in  the  word  of  God.  It  implies  no  less  than  a  total 
renunciation  of  the  world  ;  in  short,  .turns  the  Christian's  whole 
life  into  one  continued  sacrifice  of  love  to  God ;  so  that,  ^^  whe- 
ther he  eats  or  drinks,  he  does  all  to  his  glory."  Not  that  I 
fiould  hereby  insinuate,  that  to  be  Christians,  or,  to  keep  the 
words  of  our  text,  in  order  to  be  temples  of  the  living  God,  we 
must  become  hermits,  or  shut  ourselves  up  in  nunneries  or 
cloisters ;  this  be  far  from  me  !  No.  The  religion,  which  this 
Bible  in  my  hand  prescribes,  is  a  social  religion,  a  religion 
equally  practicable  by  high  and  low,  rich  and  poor,  and  which 
absolutely  requires  a  due  discharge  of  all  relative  duties,  in 
whatsoever  state  of  life  God  shall  be  pleased  to  place  and  con* 
tiaue  us. — That  some,  in  all  ages  of  the  church,  have  literally 
separated  themselves  from  the  world,  and  from  a  sincere  desire 


654  CHRISTIANS,  TBMPLBS   OP   THE   LIVING  GOD.  [l. 

to  save  their  souls,  and  attain  higher  degrees  of  Christian  per- 
fection ;  have  wholly  devoted  themselves  to  solitude  and  retire- 
ment, is  what  I  make  no  doubt  of.  But  then  such  a  zeal  is  in 
no  wise  according  to  knowledge  ;  for  private  Christians,  as  well 
as  ministers,  are  said  to  be  *^  the  salt  of  the  earth,  and  the  lights 
of  the  world,"  and  are  commanded  to  "  let  their  light  shine  be- 
fore men/'  But  how  can  this  be  done,  if  we  shut  ourselves  up, 
and  thereby  entirely  exclude  ourselves  from  all  manner  of  con- 
versation with  the  world?  Or,  supposing  we  could  take  the 
wings  of  the  morning,  and  fly  into  the  most  distant  and  desolate 
parts  of  the  earth,  what  would  this  avail  us,  unless  we  could 
agree  with  a  wicked  heart  and  wicked  tempter  not  to  pursue 
and  molest  us  there  ? 

So  far  should  we  be  from  thus  getting  ease  and  comfort,  that 
I  believe  we  should  on  the  contrary  soon  find  by  our  experience 
the  truth  of  what  a  hermit  himself  once  told  me,  that  a  tree  which 
stands  by  itself,  is  most  exposed  and  liable  to  the  strongest 
blasts.  When  our  Saviour  was  to  be  tempted  by  the  devil,  he 
was  led  by  the  Spirit  into  the  wilderness.  How  contrary  this  to 
their  practice,  who  go  into  a  wilderness  to  avoid  temptatioo ! 
Surely  such  are  unmindful  of  the  petition  put  up  for  us  by  oar 
blessed  Lord,  '^Father,  I  pray  not  that  thou  wouldest  take 
them  out  of  the  world,  but  that  thou  wouldest  keep  them  from 
the  evil."  This  then  is  to  be  a  Christian  indeed ;  to  be  in  the 
world,  and  yet  not  of  it ;  to  have  our  hands,  according  to  our 
respective  stations  in  life,  employed  on  earth,  and  our  hearts 
at  the  same  time  fixed  on  things  above.  Then,  indeed,  are  we 
*^  temples  of  the  living  God,"  when  with  a  humble  boldness  we 
can  say  with  a  great  and  good  soldier  of  Jesus  Christ,  We  are 
the  same  in  the  parlour,  as  wo  are  in  the  closet ;  and  can  at 
night  throw  off  our  cares,  as  we  throw  off  our  clothes ;  and 
being  at  peace  with  the  world,  ourselves,  and  Grod^  are  indif- 
ferent whether  we  sleep  or  die. 

Farther,  the  Jewish  temple  was  a  house  of  prayer :  ''  My 
house  (says  the  great  God)  shall  be  called  a  house  of  prayer :" 
and  implies  that  the  hearts  of  true  believers  are  the  seats  of 
prayer.  For  this  end  was  it  built,  and  adorned  with  such  fur- 
niture. Solomon,  in  that  admirable  prayer  which  he  put  up  to 
God  at  the  dedication  of  the  temple,  saith,  '^  Hearken  therefore 
unto  the  supplication  of  thy  servant,  and  of  thy  people  Israel, 
which  they  shall  make  towards  this  place."  And  hence  I  sup- 
pose it  was,  that  Daniel,  that  man  greatly  beloved,  in  the  time  of 
captivity  "  prayed  as  aforetime  three  times  a  day  with  his  face 
towards  the  temple."  And  what  was  said  of  the  first,  our  Lord 
applies  to  the  second  temple,  ''My  house  shall  be  caHed  a 
house  of  prayer."  On  this  account  also,  true  believers  may  be 
styled, ''  the  temple  of  the  living  God,"  For  being  wholly  devoted 
and  dedicated  to  God,  even  a  God  in  Christ,  their  heart  becomes 
the  seats  of  prayer,  from  whence,  as  so  many  living  altars,  a  per- 
petual sacrifice  of  prayer  and  praise  (like  unto,  though  infinitely 
superior  to  the  perpetual  oblation  under  the  Mosaic  dispoi- 


L.J  CHRISTIANS,   TEMPLES   OP   THE   LIVING   GOD.  555 

sation,)  is  continually  ascending,  and  offered  up,  to  the  Father 
of  mercies,  the  God  of  all  consolations.  Such,  and  such  only, 
who  thus  worship  God  in  the  temple  of  their  hearts,  can  truly 
be  said  to  be  made  priests  unto  God,  or  be  styled,  a  royal 
priesthood ;  such,  and  such  only,  can  truly  be  styled,  "  the  tem- 
ple of  the  living  God,"  because  such  only  pray  to  him,  as  one 
expresses  it,  in  the  temple  of  their  hearts,  and  consequently 
worship  him  in  spirit  and  in  truth. 

Let  no  one  say  that  such  a  devotion  is  impracticable,  or  at 
least  only  practicable  by  a  few,  and  those  such  who  have 
nothing  to  do  with  the  common  affairs  of  life;  for  this  is  the 
common  duty  and  privilege  of  all  true  Christians.  "To  pray 
without  ceasing,"  and  "to  rejoice  in  the  Lord  always,"  are  pre- 
cepts equally  obligatory  on  all  that  name  the  name  of  Christ. 
And  though  it  must  be  owned,  that  it  is  hard  for  persons  that 
are  immersed  in  the  world,  to  serve  the  Lord  without  distrac- 
tion ;  and  though  we  must  confess,  that  the  lamp  of  devotion, 
even  in  the  best  of  saints,  sometimes  burns  too  dimly,  yet 
those  who  are  the  temple  of  the  living  God,  find  prayer  to  be 
their  very  element :  And  when  those  who  make  this  objection, 
once  come  to  love  prayer,  as  some  unhappy  men  love  swearing, 
they  will  find  no  more  difficulty  in  praying  to  and  praising  God 
always,  than  these  unhappy  creatures  do  in  cursing  and  swear- 
ing always.  What  hath  been  advanced,  is  far  from  being  a  state 
peculiar  to  persons  wholly  retired  from  the  world. 

My  brethren,  the  love  of  God  is  all  in  all.  When  once  pos- 
sessed of  this,  as  we  certainly  must  be,  if  we  be  "  the  temple 
of  the  living  God,"  meditation,  prayer,  praise,  and  other  spi- 
ritual exercises,  become  habitual  and  delightful.  When  once 
touched  with  this  divine  magnet,  for  ever  after,  the  soul  feels  a 
divine  attraction,  and  continually  turns  to  its  centre,  God  ;  and 
if  diverted  therefrom  by  any  sudden  or  violent  temptation,  yet 
when  that  obstruction  is  removed,  (like  as  a  needle  touched  by 
a  loadstone,  when  your  finger  is  taken  away,)  it  turns  to  its  rest, 
its  centre,  its  God,  its  All,  again. 

The  Jewish  temple  was  also  a  place  where  the  great  Jehovah 
was  pleased  in  a  more  immediate  manner  to  reside.  Hence, 
he  is  said  to  putand  record  his  name  there^  and  to  sit  or  dwell 
between  the  cherubims ;  and  when  Solomon  first  dedicated  it, 
we  are  told,  "  the  house  was  filled  with  a  cloud,  so  that  the 
priests  could  not  stand  to  minister  by  reason  of  the  cloud,  for 
the  glory  of  the  Lord  had  filled  the  house."  And  wherefore  all 
this  amazing  manifestation  of  the  divine  glory  ?  Even  for  this^ 
O  man,  to  shew  thee  how  the  high  and  lofty  One  that  inhabit- 
eth  eternity,  would  make  believers'  hearts  his  living  temple, 
and  dwell  and  make  his  abode  in  all  those  that  tremble  at  bis 
word.  To  this,  the  apostle  more  particularly  alludes  in  the 
words  immediately  following  our  text ;  for  having  called  the 
Corinthians,  "  the  temple  of  the  living  God,"  he  adds,  "as  God 
hath  said,  I  will  dwell  in  them,  and  I  will  walk  in  them,  and  I 
will  be  their  God,  and  they  shall  be  my  people."    Strange  and 


656  CHEISTIANS,  TEMPLES   OP   THE   LIVING   GOD.  [l. 

Strong  expressions  these !  Bat  strange  and  strong  as  they  are, 
must  be  experienced  by  all  who  are  indeed  ^*  the  temple  of  the 
living  God/'  For  they  are  said,  to  be  ^*  chosen  to  be  a  holy 
habitation  through  the  Spirit ;  to  dwell  in  God.  and  Crod  in 
them ;  to  have  the  witness  in  themselves,  and  to  have  Grod's 
Spirit  witnessing  with  their  spirits  that  they  are  the  children  of 
God."  Which  expressions  import  no  more  or  less  than  that 
prayer  of  our  Lord  which  he  put  np  for  his  church  and  people 
a  little  before  his  bitter  passion,  *^  That  they  may  be  one,  even 
as  we  are  one ;  I  in  them,  and  thou  in  me,  that  they  may  be 
made  perfect  in  one :''  This  glorious  passage  our  church  adopts 
in  her  excellent  communion  office,  and  is  so  far  from  thinking 
that  this  was  only  the  privilege  of  the  apostles,  that  she  asserts 
in  the  strongest  terms,  that  it  is  tlie  privilege  of  every  worthy 
€X>mmunicant.  For  then  (says  she)  if  we  receive  the  sacrament 
worthily,  we  are  one  with  Christ,  and  Christ  is  one  with  us ; 
we  dwell  in  Christ,  and  Christ  in  us.  And  what  is  it,  but  that 
inspiration  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  which  we  pray  for  in  the  begin- 
ning of  that  office,  and  that  fellowship  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
which  the  minister,  in  the  conclusion  of  every  day's  pubUc 
prayer,  entreats  the  Lord  to  be  with  us  all  evermore  ? 

Brethren,  the  time  would  fail  me  to  mention  all  the  scrip- 
tures, and  the  various  branches  of  our  liturgy,  articles,  and 
homilies,  that  speak  of  this  inestimable  blessing,  the  indwelling 
of  the  blessed  Spirit,  whereby  we  do  indeed  become  **  the  tem- 
ples of  the  living  God."  If  you  have  eyes  that  see,  or  ears 
that  hear,  you  may  view  it  almost  in  every  page  of  the  lively 
oracles,  and  every  part  of  those  offices,  which  some  of  you 
daily  use,  and  hear  read  to  you,  in  the  public  worship  of 
Almighty  Grod.  In  asserting  therefore  this  doctrine,  we  do  not 
vent  the  whimsies  of  a  disordered  brain  and  heated  imagina- 
tion ;  neither  do  we  broach  any  new  doctrines,  or  set  up  the 
peculiar  opinions  of  any  particular  sect  or  denomination  of 
Christians  whatsoever ;  but  we  speak  the  words  of  truth  and 
soberness,  we  shew  you  the  right  and  good  old  way,  even  that 
in  which  the  articles  of  all  the  reformed  churches,  and  all  sin- 
cere Christians  of  all  parties,  however  differing  in  other 
respects,  do  universally  agree.  We  are  now  insisting  upon  a 
point,  which  may  properly  be  termed  the  Christian  shibboleik, 
something  which  is  the  grand  criterion  of  our  most  holy  reli- 
gion ;  and  on  account  of  which,  the  holy  Ignatius,  one  of  the 
first  fathers  of  the  church,  was  used  to  style  himself  a  bearer 
of  (xod,  and  the  people  to  whom  he  wrote,  bearers  of  Ood:  For 
Uiis,  as  it  is  recorded  of  him,  he  was  arraigned  before  Trajan, 
who  imperiously  said.  Where  is  this  man,  that  says,  he  carries 
Ck)d  about  with  him?  With  an  humble  boldness  he  answered, 
I  am  he,  and  then  quoted  the  passage  in  the  text,  '^  Ye  are  the 
temple  of  the  living  God ;  as  God  hath  said,  I  will  dweD  in 
them,  and  walk  in  them«  and  I  will  be  their  God,  and  they  sbaD 
be  my  people.**  Upon  this,  to  cure  him  of  his  enthusiasm,  he 
was  condemned  to  be  devoured  by  lions. 


L.]  CHRISTIANS,  TEMPLES   OF  THB   LIVING  OOD.  557 

Blessed  be  God  !  we  are  not  in  danger  of  being  called  before 
such  persecuting  Trajans  now :  under  our  present  mild  and 
happy  administration,  the  scourge  of  the  tongue  is  all  that  they 
can  legally  lash  us  with.  But  if  permitted  to  go  farther,  we  need 
not  be  ashamed  of  witnessing  this  good  confession.  Suffering 
grace  will  be  given  for  suffering  times ;  and  if,  like  Ignatius,  we 
are  bearers  of  God,  we  also  shall  be  enabled  to  say  with  him, 
when  led  to  the  devouring  lions.  Now  I  begin  to  be  a  disciple 
of  Christ. — But  it  is  time  for  me. 

Secondly,  To  make  some  practical  improvement  of  what  has 
been  delivered.  You  have  heard  in  what  sense  it  is  that  real 
Christians  are  '^  the  temple  of  the  living  God."  Shall  I  ask« 
Believe  ye  these  things  ?  I  know  and  am  persuaded  that  some 
of  you  do  indeed  believe  them,  not  because  I  have  told  you,  but 
because  you  yourselves  have  experienced  the  same.  I  congra- 
tulate you  from  my  inmost  soul.  O  that  your  hearts  may  be  in 
tunc  this  day  to  '*  magnify  the  Lord,''  and  your  spirits  prepared 
to  "  rejoice  in  God  your  Saviour."  Like  the  virgin  Mary,  you 
are  highly  favoured,  and  from  henceforth  all  the  generations  of 
God's  people  shall  call  you  blessed.  You  can  call  Christ, 
Lord,  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  thereby  have  an  internal,  as  well 
as  external  evidence  of  the  divinity,  both  of  his  person,  and  of 
his  holy  word.  You  can  now  prove  that  despised  book,  em- 
phatically called  the  Scriptures,  doth  contain  the  perfect  and 
acceptable  will  of  God.  You  have  found  the  second  Adam  to 
be  a  quickening  spirit;  He  hath  raised  you  from  death  to  life* 
And  being  thus  taught,  and  bom  of  God,  however  unlearned  iii' 
other  respects,  you  can  say,"  Is  not  this  the  Christ?"  O  ineffa«« 
ble  blessing  !  inconceivable  privilege !  God's  Spirit  witnessetb 
with  your  spirits,  that  you  are  the  children  of  Grod.  When  yoa 
think  of  this,  are  you  not  ready  to  cry  out  with  the  beloved  dish> 
ciple,  **  What  manner  of  love  is  this,  that  we  should  be  called 
the  children  of  God !"  I  believe  that  holy  man  was  in  an  ecatacy 
when  he  wrote  these  words ;  and  though  he  has  been  in  heaven 
so  long,  yet  his  ecstatic  surprise  is  but  now  beginning,  and 
will  be  but  as  beginning  through  the  ages  of  eternity.  Thu» 
shall  it  be  with  all  you  likewise,  whom  the  high  and  lofty  One^ 
that  inhabiteth  eternity,  hath  made  his  living  temples.  For 
he  hath  sealed  you  to  the  day  of  redemption,  and  hath  gives 
you  the  earnest  of  your  future  inheritance.  His  eyes  and  heart 
shall  therefore  be  upon  you  continually  :  and  in  spite  of  all  op* 
position  from  men  or  devils,  the  top-stone  of  this  spiritual  build-^ 
ing  shall  be  brought  forth,  and  you  shall  shout  Grace,  grace' 
unto  it:  your  bodies  shall  be  fashioned  like  unto  the  Redeemer's 
glorious  body,  and  your  souls,  in  which  (O  infinite  condescen-H 
sion  !)  he  now  delights  to  dwell,  shall  be  filled  with  all  the  ful^. 
ness  of  God.  You  shall  then  go  no  more  out ;  you  shall  tha» 
no  more  need  the  light  of  the  sun  or  the  light  of  the  moon,  ibv 
tlie  Lord  himself  will  be  your  temple,  and  the  Lamb  in  the  midat 
thereof  shall  be  your  glory.  Dearly  beloved  in  the  Lord,  what 
say  you  to  these  things?     Do  not  your  hearts  bum  withift 


558  CHRISTIANS^   TEMPLES   OF   THE   LIVING   GOD.  [l. 

you  i¥hilst  thinking  of  these  deep,  but  glorious  truths  of  God. 
Whilst  I  am  mnsing,  and  speaking  of  theniy  methinks  a  fire 
kindles  even  in  this  cold,  icy  heart  of  mine :  O  what  shall  we 
render  unto  the  Lord  for  all  these  mercies !   Surely  he  bath 
done  great  things  for  us :     How  great  is  his  goodness,  and  his 
bounty !  O  the  height,  the  depth,  the  length,  and  the  breadth 
of  the  love  of  God  !  Surely  it  passeth  knowledge.  O  for  humility ! 
and  a  soul-abasing,  God-exalting  sense  of  these  things  !   When 
the  blessed  Virgin  went  into  the  hill-country,  to  pay  a  visit  to 
her  cousin  Elizabeth,  amazed  at  such  a  favour,  she  cried  out, 
**  Whence  is  it,  that  the  mother  of  my  Lord  vouchsafes  to  come 
to  me  ?"    And  when  the  great  Jehovah  filled  the  temple  with 
his  glory,  out  of  the  abundance  of  his  heart,  king  Solomon  burst 
forth  into  this  pathetic  exclamation,  *'But  will  God  in  very 
deed  dwell  with  men  on  the  earth  ?"    With  how  much  greater 
astonishment  ought  we  to  say;  And  will  the  Lord  himself  in 
very  deed  come  to  as  ?    Will  the  high  and  lofty  One  that  in- 
habiteth  eternity,  dwell  in,  and  make  our  earthly  hearts  his  liv- 
ing temples  ?     My  brethren,  whence  is  this?  From  any  fitness 
in  us  foreseen  ?  No,  I  know  you  disclaim  such  an  unbecoming? 
thought.     Was  it  then  from  the  improvem^t  of  our  own  free- 
will ?  No,  I  am  persuaded  you  will  not  thus  debase  the  riches 
of  God's  free  grace.    Are  you  not  all  ready  to  say.  Not  unto 
us,  not  unto  us,  but  unto  thy  free,  thy  unmerited,  thy  sovereign, 
distinguishing  love  and  mercy,  O  Lord,  be  all  the  glory.     It  is 
this,  and  this  alone,  hath  made  the  difference  between  us  and 
others.    We  have  nothing  but  what  is  freely  given  us  from 
above  :  if  we  love  God,  it  is  because  God  first  loved  us.     Let 
us  look  then  unto  the  rock  from  whence  we  have  been  hewn,  and 
the  hole  of  the  pit  from  .whence  we  have  been  digged.     And  if 
there  be  any  consolation  in  Christ,  if  any  comfort  of  love,  if  any 
fellowship  of  the  spirii,  if  any  bowels  and  mercies,  let  us  study 
and  strive  to  walk  as  becometh  those  who  are  made  the  temples 
of  the  living  God,  or,  as  the  apostle  elsewhere  expresseth  him- 
self, "  a  holy  temple  unto  the  Lord."    What  manner  of  persons 
ought  such  to  be  in  all  holy  conversation  and  godliness  ?  How 
holily  and  how  purely  should  we  live!  As  our  apostle  argues 
in  another  place, ''  For  what  fellowship  hath  righteousness  with 
unrighteousness?    What  communion  hath  light  with  darkness? 
Or  what  concord  hath  Christ  with  Belial?"    Shall  those  who 
are  temples  of  the  living  God,  suffer  themselves  to  be  dens  of 
thieves  and  cages  of  unclean  birds  ?  Shall  vain  unchaste  thoughts 
be  suffered  to  dwell  within  them?  much  less  shall  anything 
that  is  impure  be  conceived  or  acted  by  them  ?  Shall  we  provoke 
the  Lord  to  jealousy  ?   God  forbid !    We  all  know  with  what 
distinguished  ardour  our  blessed  Redeemer  purged  an  earthly 
temple ;  a  zeal  for  his  Father's  house  even  ate  him  up :  with 
what  a  holy  vehemence  did  he  overturn  the  tables  of  the  money- 
changers, and  scourge  the  buyers  and  sellers  out  before  him ! 
Why  ?  They  made  his  Father's  house  a  house  of  merchandise: 
they  had  turned  the  house  of  prayer  into  a  den  of  thieves. 


1..]  CHRISTIANS^   TEMPLES   OP   THB   LIVING   OOD.  559 

O  my  brethren^  how  often  have  you  and  I  been  guilty  of  this 
great  evil !  How  often  have  the  lust  of  the  fleshy  the  lust  of  the 
eye,  and  the  pride  of  life,  insensibly  stolen  away  our  hearts 
from  God!  Once  they  were  indeed  houses  of  prayer;  faith, 
hope,  love,  peace,  joy,  and  all  the  other  fruits  of  the  blessed 
Spirit,  lodged  within  them ;  but  now,  O  now,  it  may  be,  thieves 
and  robbers.  Hinc  ilia  lachrymcB:  Hence  those  hidings  of 
God's  face,  that  dryness,  and  deadness,  and  barrenness  of  soul, 
those  wearisome  nights  and  days,  which  many  of  us  have  felt 
from  time  to  time,  and  have  been  made  to  groan  under.  Hence 
those  dolorous  and  heart-breaking  complaints,  O  that  I  knew 
where  I  might  find  him !  O  that  it  were  with  me  as  in  days  of 
old,  when  the  candle  of  the  Lord  shone  bright  upon  my  soul !" 
Hence  those  domestic  trials,  those  personal  losses  and  disap- 
pointments ;  and  to  this  perhaps  some  of  us  may  add,  hence  b\\ 
those  public  rebukes  with  which  we  have  been  visited :  they 
are  all  only  as  so  many  scourges  of  small  cords  in  the  loving 
Redeemer's  hands,  to  scourge  the  buyers  and  sellers  out  of  the 
temple  of  our  hearts.  O  that  we  may  know  the  rod,  and  who 
hath  appointed  it !  He  hath  chastised  us  with  whips :  may  we 
be  wise,  and,  by  a  more  close  and  circumspect  walk,  prevent  his 
chastising  us  in  time  to  come  with  scorpions !  But  who  is  sufii- 
cient  for  this  thing?  None  but  thou,  O  Lord,  to  whom  alone  all 
hearts  are  open,  all  desires  known,  and  from  whom  no  secrets 
are  hidden !  Cleanse  thou  therefore  the  thoughts  of  our  hearts 
by  the  inspiration  of  thy  blessed  Spirit,  that  henceforward  we 
may  more  perfectly  love  thee,  and  more  worthily  magnify  thy 
holy  name ! 

But  are  not  some  of  you  ready  to  object,  and  to  fear  that  the 
Lord  has  forgotten  to  be  gracious,  that  he  has  shut  up  his  lov- 
ing kindness  in  displeasure,  and  that  he  ^vill  be  no  more  en-- 
treated?  Thus  the  psalmist  once  thought,  when  visited  for  his 
backslidings  with  6od*s  heavy  hand.  ]3ut  he  acknowledged 
this  to  be  his  infirmity :  and  whether  you  think  of  it  or  no,  I 
tell  you,  this  is  your  infirmity.  O  ye  dejected,  desponding,  dis- 
trustful souls,  hear  ye  the  word  of  the  Lord,  and  call  to  mind 
his  wonderful  declarations  of  old  to  his  people.  *^  I,  even  I 
am  he  that  blotteth  out  thy  transgressions :  for  a  small  moment 
have  I  forsaken  thee,  but  with  everlasting  mercies  will  I  gather 
thee.  Can  a  woman  forget  her  sucking  child  ?  Yes,  she  may, 
but  the  Lord  will  not  forget  you,  O  ye  of  little  faith :  for  as  a 
father  pitieth  his  own  children,  so  doth  the  Lord  pity  them  that 
fear  him.  How  shall  I  give  thee  up,  O  Ephraim  ?  How  shall 
I  make  thee  as  Admah  ?  How  shall  I  set  thee  as  Zeboim  V* 
And  what  is  the  result  of  all  these  interrogations  ?  "  My  re- 
pentings  are  kindled  together :  I  will  not  return  to  execute  the 
fierceness  of  my  anger  against  Ephraim :  for  I  am  God,  and  not 
man.''  And  is  not  the  language  of  all  these  endearing  passages, 
like  that  of  Joseph  to  his  self-convicted  troubled  brethren, 
"  Come  near  to  me?"  O  that  it  may  be  said  of  you,  as  it  is  said 
of  them,  "  And  they  came  near  unto  him."    Then  should  you 


560  CHRISTIANS,   TEMPLES   OP   THE   LIVIK6   GOD.  [L. 

(indy  by  happy  experience,  that  the  Lord,  the  Lord  God,  mer- 
ciful and  gracious,  is  indeed  slow  to  anger  and  of  great  kind- 
ness, and  repenteth  him  of  the  evil.  Who  knows  bat  he  may 
come  down  this  day,  this  hour,  nay,  this  moment,  and  suddenly 
revisit  the  temple  of  your  hearts?  Who  knows  but  he  may 
revive  his  work  in  your  precious  souls,  cause  you  to  return  to 
your  first  love,  help  you  to  do  your  first  works,  and  even  exceed 
your  hopes,  and  cause  the  glory  of  this  second  visitation  even 
to  surpass  that  glory  which  filled  your  hearts,  in  that  happy, 
never-to-be-forgotten  day,  in  which  he  first  vouchsafed  to  make 
you  his  living  temples  ?  Even  so.  Father,  let  it  seem  good  in 
thy  sight! 

But  the  improvement  of  our  subject  must  not  end  here. 
Hitherto  T  have  been  giving  bread  to  the  children ;  and  it  is 
my  meat  and  drink  so  to  do :  but  must  nothing  be  said  to  those 
of  you  who  are  without?  I  mean  to  such  as  cannot  yet  say,  that 
they  are  "  the  temple  of  the  living  God."  And  O  how  great,  pot 
you  all  together,  may  the  number  of  you  be !  by  far,  in  all  pro- 
bability, the  greatest  part  of  this  auditory.  Say  not  I  am  un- 
charitable ;  the  God  of  truth  has  said  it,  *^  Strait  is  the  gate,  and 
narrow  is  the  way,  which  leadeth  ^unto  life,  and  few  there  be 
that  find  it."  Suffer  me  to  speak  plainly  to  you,  my  brethren ; 
you  have  heard  what  has  been  said  upon  the  words  of  our  text, 
and  what  must  be  wrought  in  us,  ere  we  can  truly  say  that  we 
are  "  the  temple  of  the  living  God."  Is  it  so  with  yon  ?  Are 
ye  separated  from  the  world  and  worldly  tempers  ?  Are  yovr 
hearts  become  houses  of  prayer?  Does  the  Spirit  of  €rod  dwell 
in  your  souls?  And  whether  you  eat  or  drink,  or  whatsoever 
you  do,  as  to  the  habitual  bent  of  your  minds,  ck>  you  do  all  to 
the  glory  of  God  ?  These  are  short,  but  plain,  and,  let  me  tell 
you,  very  important  questions.  What  answer  can  you  make  to 
them  ?  Say  not,  **  Go  thy  way,  and  at  a  more  convenient  season 
I  will  call  for  thee."  I  will  not,  I  must  not  suffer  yoo  to  put  me 
off  so ;  I  demand  an  answer  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  of  hosts. 
What  say  ye  ?  Methinks  I  hear  you  say.  We  have  been  dedicated 
to  God  in  baptism,  we  go  to  church  or  meeting,  we  say  our 
prayers,  repeat  our  creeds,  or  have  subscribed  the  articles,  and 
the  confession  of  faith ;  we  are  quite  orthodox,  and  great  friends 
to  the  doctrines  of  grace;  we  do  nobody  any  harm,  we  are 
church  members,  we  keep  up  family  prayer,  and  constantly  go 
to  the  table  of  the  Lord."  All  these  things  are  good  in  their 
places.  But  thus  far,  nay,  much  farther  may  you  go,  and  yet 
be  far  from  the  kingdom  of  God.  The  unprofitable  servant  did 
no  one  any  harm ;  and  the  foolish  virgins  had  a  lamp  of  an  oot- 
ward  profession,  and  went  up  even  to  heaven^s  gate,  callinf: 
Christ,  ^^Lord,  Lord."  These  things  may  make  yon  whited 
sepulchres,  but  not 'Uhe  temples  of  the  living  God."  Alas! 
alas !  one  thing  you  yet  lack,  the  one  chief  thing,  and  without 
which  all  is  nothing;  I  mean  the  indwelling  of  God's  blessed 
Spirit,  without  which  you  can  never  become  **  the  temples  of 
the    living  God."    Awake,  therefore,  ye  d.ecei^'ad  fomalistJ^ 


LI.J  CHRIST  THE   ONLY    PRESERVATIVE*  56t 

a  wake ;  who,  vainly  puffed  up  with  your  model  of  performances^ 
boastingly  cry  out,  "  The  temple  of  the  Lord,  the  temple  of  the 
Lord,  the  temple  of  the  Lord,  are  we."  Awake,  ye  outward* 
court  worshippers :  ye  are  building  on  a  sandy  foundation  ;*-^ 
take  heed  lest  you  also  go  to  hell  by  the  very  door  of  heaven. 
Behold,  and  remember  I  have  told  you  before. 

And  as  for  you  who  have  done  none  of  these  things,  who  in- 
stead of  making  an  outward  profession  of  religion,  have,  as  it 
were,  renounced  your  baptism,  proclaim  your  sin  like  Sodom, 
and  wilfully  and  daringly  live  as  without  God  in  the  world; 
I  ask   you,   how  can    you  think  to  escape,  if  you  persist  in 
neglecting  such  a  great  salvation?    Verily  I  should  utterly 
despair  of  ycur  ever  attaining  the  blessed  privilege  of  being 
temples  of  the  living  God,  did  I  not  hear  of  thousands,  who 
through  the  grace  of  God  have  been  translated  from  a  like  state* 
of  darkness  into  his  marvellous  light.     Such,  says  the  apostle 
Paul,  writing  to  these  very  Corinthians,  who  were  now  God's 
living  temples,  (drunkards,  whoremongers,  adulterers,  and  such- 
like,) '*  such  were  some  of  you.     But  ye  are  washed,  but  ye  are 
sanctified,  but  ye  are  justified,  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus, 
and  by  the  Spirit  of  our  God."     O  that  the  same  blessed  Spirit 
may  this  day  vouchsafe  to  come  and  pluck  you  also  as  brands 
out  of  the  burning !    Behold,  I  warn  you  to  flee  from  the  wrath 
to  come.     Go  home,  and  meditate  on  these  things ;  and  think 
whether  it  is  not  infinitely  better,  even  here,  to  be  temples  of 
the  living  God,  than  to  be  bond-slaves  to  every  brutish  lust, 
and  to  be  led  captive  by  the  devil  at  his  will.     The  Lord  Jesus 
can,  and  if  you  fly  to  him  for  refuge  he  will,  set  your  souls 
at  liberty.     He  hath  led  captivity  captive,  he  hath  ascended 
up  on  high,  on  purpose  to  receive  this  gift  of  the  blessed  Spirit  of 
God  for  men,  "  even  for  the  rebellious,"  that  he  might  dwell  in 
yonr  hearts  by  faith  here,  and  thereby  prepare  you  to  dwell  with 
him  and  all  the  heavenly  host,  in  his  kingdom  hereafter. 

That  this  may  be  the  happy  lot  of  you  all,  may  God  of  his 
infinite  mercy  grant,  for  the  sake  of  our  dear  Son  Christ  Jesus 
OUT  Lord :  to  whom  with  the  Father,  and  the  blessed  Spirit, 
three  persons,  but  one  God,  be  ascribed  all  power,  might,  ma- 
jesty, and  dominion,  now,  and  for  evermore.  Amen  !  and  Amen! 


SERMON  LI. 

CHRIST    THE    ONLY    PRESERVATIVE   AGAINST   A    REPROBATE 

SPIRIT. 

Kf90tJ0  ye  not  your  own  selves,  that  Jesus  Christ  is  in  you,  except 

ye  be  reprobates. — 2  Cor.  xiii.  5. 

The  doctrines  of  the  gospel  arc  doctrines  of  peace,  and  they 
bringcorafbrt  to  all  who  believe  in  them ;  they  are  not  like  the  law 
ffren  by  Moses,  which  consisted  of  troublesome  and  painful 
ceremonies ;  neither  do  they  carry  with  them  that  terror  which 
the  law  did ;  as,  "  Cursed  is  every  one  who  continueth  not  to 
do  all  things  which  are  writt^  in  the  book  of  the  law  -J'  If  you 
♦  2m    • 


562  CHRIST   THE   ONLY    PRESERVATIVE  [lI. 

were  to  keep  the  whole  law,  and  break  but  in  one  point,  yoaare 
guilty  of  the  breach  of  all.  The  law  denounces  threatenings 
against  all  who  do  not  conform  to  her  strict  commands ;  bot  the 
gospel  is  a  declaration  of  grace,  peace,  and  mercy ;  here  yoa 
have  an  account  of  the  blood  of  Christy  blood  which  speaketh 
better  things  than  that  of  Abel :  for  Abel's  blood  cried  aloud 
for  vengeance,  vengeance  ;  but  Jesus  Christ  crieth,  mercy,  mercy, 
mercy  upon  the  guUty  sinner.  If  he  come  to  Christ,  confess  and 
forsake  his  sin,  then  Jesus  will  have  mercy  upoA  him  :  and  if,  my 
brethren,  you  are  but  sensible  of  your  sins,  convinced  of  your  ini- 
quities, and  feel  yourselves  lost,  undone  sinners,  and  con;ie  and 
tell  Christ  of  your  lost  condition,  you  will  soon  find  how  ready  be 
is  to  help  you ;  he  will  give  you  his  Spirit ;  and  if  you  have  bis 
Spirit,  you  cannot  be  reprobates  :  you  will  find  his  Spirit  to  be 
quickening  and  refreshing ;  not  like  the  spirit  of  the  world,  a 
spirit  of  reproach,  envy,  and  all  uncharitableness. 

Most  of  your  own  experiences -will  confirm  the  truth  hereof; 
for  are  not  you  reproached  and  slandered,  and  does  not  the 
world  say  all  manner  of  evil  against  you,  merely  because  you 
follow  Jesus  Christ ;  because  you  will  not  go  to  the  same  excess 
of  riot  with  them?  While  they  are  singing  the  songs  of  the 
drunkard,  you  are  singing  psalms  and  hymns  :  while  they  are 
at  a  playhouse,  you  are  hearing  a  sermon :  while  they  are  drink- 
ing, revelling,  and  mispending  their  precious  time,  and  hastening 
on  their  own  destruction,  you  are  reading,  praying,  meditating, 
and  working  out  your  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling.  This 
is  matter  enough  for  a  world  to  reproach  you  ;  you  are  not  polite 
and  fashionable  enough  for  them.  If  you  will  live  godly,  you 
must  sufier  persecution ;  you  must  not  expect  to  go  through 
this  world  without  being  persecuted  and  reviled.  If  you  were 
of  the  world,  the  world  would  love  you  ;  for  it  always  loves  its 
own  :  but  if  you  are  not  of  the  world,  it  will  hate  you  ;  it  has 
done  so  in  all  ages,  it  never  loved  any  but  those  who  were  pleased 
with  its  vanities  and  allurements.  It  has  been  the  death  of  many 
a  lover  of  Jesus,  merely  because  they  have  loved  him:  and 
therefore,  my  brethren,  do  not  be  surprised  if  you  meet  witb  a 
fiery  trial,  for  all  those  things  will  be  a  means  of  sending  yoa  to 
your  Master  the  sooner. 

The  spirit  of  the  world  is  hatred  ;  that  of  Christ  is  love :  the 
spirit  of  the  world  is  vexation  ;  that  of  Christ  is  pleasure :  the 
spirit  of  the  world  is  sorrow  ;  that  of  Christ  is  joy :  the  spirit 
of  the  world  is  evil,  and  that  of  Christ  is  good  :  the  spirit  of  the 
world  will  never  satisfy  us,  but'Christ's  spirit  is  all  satisfaction: 
the  spirit  of  the  world  is  misery  ;  that  of  Christ  is  ease.  In  one 
word,  the  spirit  of  the  world  has  nothing  lasting,  but  the  spirit 
of  Christ  is  durable,  and  will  last  through  an  eternity  of  ages; 
the  spirit  of  Christ  will  remove  every  difficulty,  satifiy  eveiy 
doubt,  and  be  a  means  of  bringing  you  to  hims^^  to  live  with 
him  for  ever  and  ever. — From  the  words  of  my  text  I  shall 
shew  you, 

I.  The  necessity  of  receiving  the  Spirit  of  Christ. 


LI.]  AOAINST   A   REPROBATE   SPIRIT.  563 

II.  Who  Christ  is,  whose  Spirit  you  arc  to  receive.  And  then. 

Shall  conclude  with  an  exhortation  to  all  of  you,  high  and 
low,  rich  and  poor,  to  come  unto  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and 
to  beg  that  you  may  receive  his  Spirit,  so  that  you  may  not  be 
reprobates. 

Firsts  I  am  to  shew  you  the  necessity  there  is  of  receiving 
the  Spirit  of  Christ. — And  here,  my  brethren,  it  will  be  neces- 
sary to  consider  you  as  in  your  first  state;  that  is,  when  God 
first  created  Adam,  and  placed  him  in  the  garden  of  Eden,  and 
gave  him  a  privilege  of  eating  of  all  the  trees  in  the  garden^ 
except  the  tree  of  knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  which  stood  in 
the  midst  thereof.  Our  first  parents  had  not  been  long  in  this 
state  of  innocence,  before  they  fell  from  it,  they  broke  the  divine 
commands,  and  involved  all  their  posterity  in  guilt;  for  as 
Adam  was  our  representative,  so  we  were  to  stand  or  fall  in 
him;  and  as  he  was  our  federal  head,  his  falling  involved  all 
our  race  under  the  power  of  death,  for  death  came  into  the 
world  by  sin ;  and  we  all  became  liable  to  the  eternal  punishment 
due  from  God,  for  man's  disobedience  to  the  divine  command. 

Now,  as  man  had  sinned,  and  a  satisfaction  was  demanded, 
it  was  impossible  for  a  finite  creature  to  satisfy  him,  who  was  a 
God  of  so  strict  purity  as  not  to  behold  iniquity:  and  man  by 
the  justice  of  God  would  have  been  sent  down  into  the  pit, 
which  was  prepared  of  old  for  the  devil  and  his  angels ;  but 
when  justice  was  going  to  pass  the  irrevocable  sentence,  then 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  came  and  offered  himself  a  ransom  for 
poor  sinners.  Here  was  admirable  condescension  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ !  that  he  who  was  in  the  bosom  of  his  Father, 
should  come  down  from  all  that  glory,  to  die  for  such  rebels  as 
you  and  I  are,  who,  if  it  lay  in  our  power,  would  pull  the  Al- 
mighty from  his  throne :  now,  can  you  think  that  if  there  was  no 
need  of  Christ's  death,  canyon  think  that  if  there  could  have 
been  any  other  ransom  found,  whereby  poor  sinners  might  have 
been  saved,  God  would  not  have  spared  his  only  begotten  Son, 
and  not  have  delivered  him  up  for  all  that  believe  in  him  7 — 
This,  my  brethren,  I  think  proves  to  a  demonstration,  that  it 
was  necessary  for  Christ  to  die:  but  consider,  it  will  be  of  no 
service  to  know  that  Christ  died  for  sinners,  if  you  do  not  accept 
of  his  Spirit,  that  you  may  be  sanctified,  and  fitted  for  the  re- 
ception of  that  Jesus,  who  died  for  all  those  that  believe  in 
him.  The  sin  of  your  nature,  your  original  sin,  is  sufiicient  to 
sink  you  into  torments,  of  which  there  will  be  no  end ;  therefore, 
unless  you  receive  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  you  are  reprobates,  and 
you  cannot  be  saved ;  nothing  short  of  the  blood  of  Jesus 
applied  to  your  souls,  will  make  you  happy  to  all  eternity  :  then, 
seeing  this  is  so  absolutely  necessary,  that  you  cannot  be  saved 
without  having  received  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  but  that  ye  are 
reprobates,  do  not  rest  contented  till  you  have  good  hopes, 
through  grace,  that  the  good  work  is  begun  in  your  souls ;  that 
you  have  received  a  pardon  for  your  sins ;  that  Christ  came 
down  from  heaven,  died,  and  made  satisfaction  for  your.  sins. 

2m2 


564  CHRIST   THE   ONLY    PRESERVATIVE  [u. 

Do  not  flatter  yourselves  that  a  little  morality  will  be  sufficient 
to  save  you ;  that  going  to  church,  or  prayers,  and  sacrament, 
and  doing  all  the  duties  of  religion  in  an  external  manner,  will 
ever  carry  you  to  heaven ;  no,  you  must  have  grace  in  year 
hearts ;  there  must  be  a  change  of  the  whole  man. 

You  must  be  born  again,  and  become  new  creatures,  and 
have  the  Spirit  of  Christ  within  you :  and  until  you  have  that 
Spirit  of  Christ,  however  you  may  think  to  the  contrary,  and 
please  yourselves  in  your  own  imagination,  I  say,  yoa  are  do 
better  than  reprobates.  You  may  content  yourselves  with 
leading  civil,  outwardly  decent  lives,  but  what  will  that  avail  yon, 
unless  you  have  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  yoor 
hearts  ?  his  kingdom  must  be  set  up  in  your  souls  ;  there  must 
be  the  life  of  God  in  the  soul  of  man,  else  you  belong  not  to 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  and  until  you  belong  to  him,  you  are 
reprobates. 

This  may  seem  as  enthusiasm  to  some  of  you  :  but  if  it  is  so, 
it  is  what  the  apostle  Paul  taught ;  and  therefore,  my  brethren, 
they  are  the  words  of  truth.  I  beseech  you,  in  the  mercies  of 
God  in  Christ  Jesus,  not  to  despise  these  words,  as  if  they  do 
not  concern  you,  but  were  only  calculated  for  the  first  ages  of 
Christianity,  and  therefore  of  no  signification  :  if  you  think  thus, 
you  are  wronging  your  own  souls ;  for  whatever  is  written,  was 
written  for  you  in  these  times,  as  well  as  for  the  Christians  in 
the  first  ages  of  the  church.  For  the  case  stands  thus  between 
God  and  man :  God,  at  first,  made  man  upright,  or,  as  the 
sacred  penman  expresses  it,  *'  in  the  image  of  Gtod  made  be 
man  ;"  his  soul  was  the  very  copy,  the  transcript,  of  the  divine 
nature.  He  who  had,  by  his  almighty  power,  spoken  the  worU 
into  being,  breathed  into  man  the  breath  of  spiritual  life ;  and 
his  soul  became  adorned  with  purity  and  perfection.  This  was 
the  finishing  stroke  of  the  creation ;  the  perfection  both  of  the 
moral  and  material  world  ;  and  it  so  resembled  the  divine  Ori- 
ginal, that  God  could  not  but  rejoice  and  take  pleasure  in  his 
own  likeness  :  therefore,  we  read,  that  when  God  had  finisbedl 
tiie  inanimate  and  brutish  part  of  the  creation, ''  be  looked,  and 
behold  it  was  good."  But  when  that  lovely,  god-like  creatnre 
man  was  made,  "  behold,  it  was  very  good/' 

Happy,  unspeakably  happy,  to  be  thus  partaker  of  a  divine 
nature ;  and  thus  man  might  have  continued  still,  had  he  con- 
tinued holy ;  but  God  placed  him  in  a  state  of  probation,  with 
a  free  grant  to  eat  of  every  tree  in  the  garden,  except  the  tree 
of  knowledge  of  good  and  evil.  The  day  he  did  not  eat  thereof^ 
he  was  not  only  to  become  subject  to  temporal,  but  spiritsti 
death ;  and  so  lose  that  divine  image,  that  spiritual  life  which 
God  had  breathed  into  him,  and  which  was  as  much  his  hap- 
piness as  his  glory. 

But  man.  unhappy  man,  being  seduced  by  the  devil,  did  eat 
of  the  forbidden  fruit,  and  thereby  became  liable  to  that  cofse 
which  the  eternal  God  had  pronounced  on  him  for  his  disobedi- 
ence.    And  we  read,  that  soon  after  Adam  was  fidlen,  he 


LI.]  AGAINST   A   RBPROBATB   SPIRIT^  505 

plained  that  he  was  naked  ;  naked,  not  only  as  to  his  body,  bat 
naked  and  destitute  of  those  divine  graces  which  before  beauti- 
fied his  soul.  An  unhappy  mutiny  and  disorder  then  fell  upon 
this  world ;  those  briars  and  thorns  which  now  spring  up  and 
overspread  the  earth,  were  but  poor  emblems,  lifeless  represen- 
tations, of  that  confusion  and  rebellion  which  sprung  up  in,  and 
overwhelmed,  the  soul  of  man,  immediately  after  the  fall.  Ho 
now  sunk  into  the  temper  of  a  beast  and  devil. 

In  this  dreadful  and  disordered  condition  are  all  of  us  brought 
into  the  world  :  we  are  told,  my  brethren,  that  "Adam  had  a 
son  in  his  own  likeness,"  or  with  the  same  corrupt  nature  which 
he  himself  had  sunk  into,  after  eating  the  forbidden  fruit :  and 
experience,  as  well  as  scripture,  proves  that  we  are  altogether 
bom  in  sin,  and,  therefore,  incapable,  whilst  in  such  a  state,  to 
have  communion  with  God.  For  as  light  cannot  have  com- 
munion with  darkness,  so  God  can  have  no  communion  with 
such  polluted  sons  of  Belial.  Here,  here  appears  the  great  and 
glorious  end,  why  Christ  was  manifest  in  the  flesh,  to  put  an 
end  to  these  disorders,  and  to  restore  us  unto  the  favour  of  God. 
He  came  down  from  heaven,  and  shed  his  precious  blood  upon 
the  cross,  to  satisfy  the  divine  justice  of  his  Father  for  our  sins  ; 
and  so  he  purchased  this  Holy  Ghost,  who  must  once  more 
restamp  the  divine  image  on  our  hearts,  and  make  us  capable  of 
living  with,  and  enjoying  of  God.  We  must  be  renewed  by  the 
Spirit  of  God  ;  he  must  dwell  in  us,  before  we  can  be  new  crea- 
tures, and  be  freed  from  a  reprobate  spirit:  the  Spirit  of  Christ 
must  bring  us  home  unto  that  fold  where  all  his  sheep  are,  and 
implant  his  grace  in  our  hearts,  and  take  from  us  that  spirit  of 
sin  which  reigns  in  us  ;  and  till  this  is  rooted  out  of  our  hearts, 
however  we  may  flatter  ourselves  with  being  good  Christians^ 
because  we  are  good  moralists,  and  lead  civil,  moral,  decent 
lives,  yet  if  we  live  and  die,  my  brethren,  in  this  way,  we  are 
only^attering  ourselves  into  hell.— I  think  I  have  proved,  to  a 
demonstration,  the  necessity  there  is^  of  receiving  the  Spirit  of 
Christ :  I  now  come  to  shew  you, 

Secondly y  Who  Christ  is,  whose  Spirit  you  are  to  receive* 
My  brethren,  Jesus  Christ  is  co*equal,  co-essential,  co-eternal, 
and  consubstantial  with  the  Father,  very  God  of  very  God ;  and 
as  there  was  not  a  moment  of  time  in  which  God  the  Father 
was  not,  so  there  was  not  a  moment  of  time  in  which  God  the 
Son  was  not.  Arians  and  Socinians  deny  this  Godhead  of  Christ, 
and  esteem  him  only  as  a  creature :  the  Arians  look  on  him 
as  a  titular  Deity,  as  a  created  and  subordinate  God  ;  but  if 
they  would  humbly  search  the  scriptures,  they  would  find  divine 
homage  paid  to  Christ.  He  is  called  God  in  scripture,  parti- 
cularly when  the  great  evangelical  prophet  says,  "  He  shall  be 
called  the  mighty  God,  the  everlasting  Father,  and  the  govern- 
ment shall  be  upon  his  shoulders :"  and  Jesus  Christ  himself 
says,  "  that  he  is  the  Alpha  and  Omega ;  and  that  the  world 
was  made  by  him  :"  but  though  this  be  ever  so  plain,  our  gay 
airy  sparks  of  this  age  will  not  believe  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 


S06  CHRIST  THB   ONLY    PRESBRVATIVB  fu. 

to  be  equal  with  his  Father,  .and  that  for  no  other  reason,  but 
because  it  is  a  fashionable  and  polite  doctrine  to  deny  his 
divinity,  and  esteem  him  only  as  a  created  God. 

Our  Socinians  do  not  go  so  far :  they  look  upon  Christ  only 
to  be  a  good  man  sent  from  Grod,  to  shew  the  people  the  way 
they  should  go,  on  their  forsaking  of  Judaism  ;  that  he  was  to 
be  also  an  example  to  the  world,  and  that  his  death  was  only 
to  prove  the  truth  of  his  doctrines.  Many  of  those  who  call 
themselves  members,  yea,  teachers  of  the  church  of  England, 
have  got  into  this  polite  scheme.  Good  God !  my  very  soul 
shudders  at  the  thoughts  of  the  consequence  that  will  att^ 
such  a  belief.  O  my  brethren,  do  not  think  so  dishonouraUy 
of  the  Lord  who  bought  you;  of  the  Jesus  who  died  for  yon: 
he  must  be  all  in  all  unto  your  souls,  if  ever  you  be  save^  bf 
him :  Christ  must  be  your  active,  as  well  as  passive  obedience; 
his  righteousness  must  be  imputed  to  you.  The  doctrine  of 
Christ's  righteousness  being  imputed,  is  a  comfortable,  a  desir- 
able doctrine  to  all  real  Christians :  and  to  you,  sinners,  who  an 
inquiring  what  you  mus^  do  to  be  saved  ?  how  uncomfortaUe 
would  it  be  to  tell  you,  ^  by  your  own  good  works,'  when,  perhaps, 
you  have  never  done  one  good  work  in  all  your  lives :  this 
would  be  driving  you  to  despair  indeed !  No :  "believe  in  the  Loid 
Jesus  Christ,  and  you  shall  be  saved  ;"  come  to  the  Lord  Jesns 
by  faith,  and  he  shall  receive  you.  He  is  able  and  willing  to 
save  you. 

This  second  person  in  the  Trinity,  who  is  God-man,  the  me* 
diator  of  the  new  covenant ;  he,  my  brethren,  hath  virtue  enough, 
in  his  blood,  to  atone  for  the  sins  of  millions  of  worids :  as 
man,  he  died,  he  was  crucified,  nailed  to,  and  pierced  on  the 
accursed  tree ;  this  was  the  love  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  te 
-  you  ;  and  will  you  then  have  low  and  dishonourable  thoughts 
of  Jesus  Christ,  after  his  having  done  so  much  for  you  ?  O  mf 
dear  brethren,  do  not  be  so  polite  as  to  deny  the  deity  of  Christ; 
though  you  may  -be  counted  fools  in  the  eye  of  the  world,  yet  ii 
God's  account  you  shall  be  esteemed  wise,  wise  for  salvation. 

You  may  now  be  looked  upon  as^  fools  and  madmen,  as  t 
parcel  of  rabble,  and,  in  a  short  time,  fit  for  Bedlam.  They 
may  say  yoU"  are  going  to  undermine  the  established  church; 
but  God,  who  knows  the  secrets  of  all  hearts,  knows  our  imia- 
cency  :  and  I  speak  the  truth  in  Christ,  I  lie  not,  I  should  le- 
joice  to  see  all  the  world  adhere  to  her  Articles  ;  I  should  lo- 
joice  to  see  the  teachers,  the  ministers  of  the  church  of  £ngla>i 
preach  up  those  very  Articles  they  have  subscribed  to ;  but  thosi 
ministers  who  do  preach  them  up,  they  esteem  as  madmen,  aii 
look  on  them  as  the  ofi*scouring  of  the  earth,  unfit  for  compaif 
and  conversation.  The  evil  things  they  say  of  me,  blessed  lis 
God,  are  without  foundation ;  I  am  a  friend  to  the  church  bosi- 
lies  ;  I  am  a  friend  to  her  liturgy;  and  if  they  did  not  thruitfli 
out  of  their  churches,  I  would  read  it  every  day. 

My  brethren,  I  am  not  for  limiting  the  Spirit  of  God,  bat  10 
for  uniting  all  into  the  bonds  of  love  ;  I  love  all  that  love  tb 


M.]  AGAINST    A    REPROBATE   SPIRIT.  SG7 

Lord  Jesus  Christ :  This  will  make  more  Christians^  than  will 
the  spirit  of  persecution.  The  Pharisees  may  think  it  madness 
to  mention  persecution  in  a  Christian  country,  but  the  spirit  of 
persecution  resides  in  many :  their  will  is  as  great,  but,  blessed 
be  God,  they  want  the  power ;  if  they  had  that,  my  brethren, 
fire  and  faggot  is  what  we  must  expect,  for  the  devil*s  temple 
is  shaken.  Many  are  coming  unto  Jesus,  I  hope  many  of  you 
are  already  come,  and  many  more  coming ;  this  must  make 
Satan  rage,  to  see  his  kingdom  weakened ;  he  will  stir  up  all 
his  malice  against  the  people  of  God.  We  must  expect,  that  a 
suffering  time  will  certainly  come ;  it  is  now  hastening  on,  it  is 
ripening  apace  ;  then  it  will  be  proved,  to  a  demonstration,  whe- 
ther you  are  hypocrites  or  not ;  for  suffering  times  are  always 
trying  times.  ()  my  brethren^  be  nut  afraid  of  a  little  reproach, 
but  look  on  it  as  a  forcninner  of  what  will  be  the  attendant  upon 
it.    Therefore,  let  me,  by  way  of  application. 

Exhort  all  of  you,  high  and  low,  rich  and  poor,  one  with  an- 
other, to  come  unto  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  he  may  give 
you  strength  to  underp:o  whatsoever  he  in  his  wisdom  calls  you 
to.  Come,  come,  my  brethren,  to  Jesus  Christ,  and  he  will  give 
you  grace,  which  will  make  you  willing  and  ready  to  suffer  all 
things  for  Jesus  Christ 

It  is  not  being  pointed  at ;  it  is  not  being  despised  and  looked 
on  as  a  mad  and  deluded  people:  Alas!  what  does  this  signify 
to  a  soul  who  has  Jesus  Christ !  Do  not  be  afraid  to  confess  the 
blessed  Jesus ;  dare  to  be  singularly  good :  Do  not  be  afraid  of 
singing  of  hymns,  or  of  meeting  together  to  build  each  other  up 
in  the  ways  of  the  Lord  :  Shine  ye  as  lights  in  the  world,  amidst  a 
crooked  and  perverse  generation.  It  is  necessary  that  offences 
should  come,  to  try  what  is  in  our  hearts,  and  whether  we  will 
be  faithful  soldiers  of  Jesus  Christ,  or  not :  Be  not  content  with 
following  Christ  afar  off,  for  then  we  shall,  as  Peter  did,  soon 
deny  him ;  but  let  us  be  altogether  Christians.  Let  our  speech 
and  all  our  actions  declare  to  the  whole  world,  whose  disciples 
we  are.  and  that  we  are  determined  to  know  nothing  but  Jesus 
Christ,  and  him  crucified.  O  then,  then  will  it  be  well  with  us, 
happy,  unspeakably  happy,  shall  we  be,  even  here ;  and,  what 
is  infiilftely  better,  when  others  that  despised  us  shall  be  calling 
for  the  mountains  to  fall  on  them,  and  the  hills  to  cover  them, 
we  shall  be  exalted  to  sit  down  on  the  right  hand  of  God,  and 
shine  as  the  sun  in  the  firmament,  and  live  for  ever  with  our 
Redeemer.  And  will  not  this  be  a  sufficient  recompense  for  all 
the  sufferings  you  have  undergone  here?  Therefore  do  not 
strive  to  have  the  greatness,  the  riches,  the  honour,  and  plea- 
sores  of  this  world,  but  strive  to  have  Jesus  Christ. 

Your  friends  and  carnal  acquaintance,  and,  above  all,  your 
grand  adversary  the  devil,  will  be  persuading  you  not  -to  have 
Christ  until  you  are  grown  old ;  he  would  have  you  lay  up  goods 
for  many  years ;  to  see  plays,  play  at  cards ;  go  to  balls  and 
masquerades ;  and,  to  mue  you  the  more  willing  to  draw  you 
m,  be  caUs  sinful  pleasures  innocent  diversions.   A  late  learned 


5C8  CHRIST   THE   ONLY    PRESERVATIVB  [U. 

rabbi  of  our  church,  told  the  people,  in  a  sermon  which  I  myself 
heard,  that  if  people  went  to  church  of  a  Sunday,  and  said  the 
prayers  while  there,  that  it  was  no  harm,  neither  would  Gtyi 
count  it  a  sin,  to  take  their  recreation  after  the  service  of  the 
church  was  over :  But  I  say,  my  brethren,  and  the  command  of 
God  says  so  too,  that  the  whole  sabbath  must  be  kept  holy; 
and  that  as  God  has  allowed  you  six  days  for  yourselves,  to  do 
the  duties  in  those  several  stations  wherein  providence  has 
'placed  you,  he  expects  you  should  give  him  one  day  to  himself; 
and  will  you  waste  that  sabbath  which  should  be  spent  in  ga- 
thering provisions  for  your  souls  ?  God  forbid ! 

You  had  ten  thousand  times  better  be  ignorant  of  all  the 
polite  diversions  of  the  age,  than  to  be  ignorant  of  the  Spirit  of 
Christ's  being  within  you ;  and  that  it  must  be,  before  you  are 
new  creatures,  and  are  in  Christ;  and  if  you  have  not  an  inte- 
rest in  Christ,  you  are  lost,  your  damnation  is  hastening  on. 
'^Ile  that  believeth  shall  be  saved,  and  he  that  believeth  not 
shall  be  damned." 

If  you  stand  out  against  Christ,  you  are  fighting  against 
yourselves.  O  come  unto  him,  do  not  stay  to  bring  gtiod  works 
with  you,  for  they  will  be  of  no  service  ;  all  your  works  will 
never  carry  you  to  heaven,  they  will  never  pardon  one  sin,  nor 
give  you  the  least  comfort  in  a  dying  hour  ;  if  you  have  notbin? 
more  than  your  own  works  to  recommend  you  to  God,  they  will 
not  prevent  your  sinking  into  that  eternal  abyss,  where  there 
is  no  bottom. 

But  come  unto  Christ,  and  he  will  give  you  that  righteous- 
ness which  will  stand  you  in  good  account  at  the  great  day  of 
the  Lord,  when  he  sh^Ul  come  to  take  notice  of  them  that  love 
him,  and  of  those  who  have  the  wedding  garment  on.  Let  all 
your  actions  spring  from  the  love  of  Jesus  ;  jet  him  be  the  Al- 
pha and  Omega  of  all  your  actions ;  then,  my  brethren,  oar 
indififerent  ones  are  acceptable  sacrifices,  but  if  this  princi- 
ple be  wanting,  our  most  pompous  services  avail  nothing ;  we 
are  only  spiritual  idolaters ;  we  sacrifice  to  our  own  net,  and 
make  an  idol  of  ourselves,  by  making  ourselves,  and  not  Christ, 
the  spring  of  our  actions!  and  therefore,  my  brethren,  snch 
actions  are  so  far  from  being  accepted  by  God,  that,  according 
to  the  language  of  one  of  the  Articles  of  our  church,  "  we  doubt 
not  but  that  they  have  the  nature  of  sin,  because  they  spring  not 
from  an  experimental  faith  in,  and  knowledge  of,  Jesus  Christ" 

Were  we  not  fallen  creatures,  we  might  then  act  upon  other 
principles ;  but  since  we  are  fallen  in  Adam,  and  are  restored 
again  only  by  the  death  of  Jesus  Christ,  the  face  of  things  is 
entirely  changed,  and  all  we  think,  speak,  or  do,  is  only  accepted 
in  and  through  him.  Therefore,  my  brethren,  I  beseech  you 
in  the  bowels  of  love  and  compassion,  that  you  would  come 
unto  Jesus:  Do  not  go  away  scoffing,  offended,  or  blaspheming:. 
Indeed,  all  I  say  is  in  love  to  your  souls ;  and  if  I  could  he 
but  an  instrument  of  bringing  you  to  Jesus  Christ,  if  you  were 
to  bo  ever  so  much  exalted,  I  should  not  envy,  but  rejoic« 


Lf.]  AGAINST   A    REPROBATE   SPIRIT.  560 

in  yonr  happiness  :  If  I  were  to  make  up  the  last  of  the  train  of 
the  companions  of  the  blessed  Jesus,  it  would  rejoice  me  to  see 
you  above  me  in  glory.  I  do  not  speak  out  of  a  false  humility, 
a  pretended  sanctity  ;  no,  God  is  ray  judge,  I  speak  the  truth 
in  Christ,  I  lie  not,  I  would  willingly  go  to  prison  or  to  death 
for  you,  so  I  could  but  bring  one  soul  from  the  devil's  strong 
holds,  into  the  salvation  which  is  by  Christ  Jesus. 

Come  then  unto  Christ  every  one  that  hears  me  this  night ; 
I  offer  Jesus  Christ,  pardon,  and  salvation,  to  all  you  who  will 
accept  thereof.  Come,  O  ye  drunkards,  lay  aside  your  cups, 
drink  no  more  to  excess  ;  come  and  drink  of  the  water  which 
Christ  will  give  you,  and  then  you  will  thirst  no  more:  come, 
O  ye  thieves ;  let  him  that  has  stolen,  steal  no  more,  but  fly 
unto  Christ,  and  he  will  receive  you.  Come  unto  him,  O  ye  har- 
lots ;  lay  aside  your  lusts,  and  turn  unto  the  Lord,  and  he  will 
havemercyupon  you,  he  will  cleanse  you  of  all  your  sins,  and  wash 
you  in  his  blood.  Come,  all  ye  liars  ;  come,  all  ye  Pharisees  ; 
come,  all  ye  fornicators,  adulterers,  swearers,  and  blasphemers, 
come  to  Christ,  and  he  will  take  away  all  your  filth,  he  will 
cleanse  you  from  your  pollution,  and  your  sins  shall  be  done 
away.  Come,  come,  my  guilty  brethren ;  I  beseech  you  for 
Christ's  sake,  and  for  your  immortal  souls''  sake,  to  come  unto 
Christ :  Do  not  let  me  knock  at  the  door  of  your  hearts  in  vain, 
but  open,  and  let  the  King  of  glory  in ;  and  he  will  dwell  with 
you,  he  will  come  and  sup  with  you  this  night ;  this  hour,  this 
moment,  he  is  ready  to  receive  you,  therefore  come  unto  him. 
Do  not  consult  with  flesh  and  blood,  let  not  the  world  hinder  yoa 
from  coming  to  the  Lord  of  life.  What  are  a  few  transitory 
pleasures  of  this  life  worth  ?  They  are  not  worth  your  having ; 
but  Jesus  Christ  is  a  pearl  of  great  price,  he  is  worth  the  laying 
out  all  you  have,  to  buy. 

And  if  you  are  under  afflictions,  fly  not  to  company  to  divert 
you,  neither  read  what  the  world  calls  harmless  books ;  they 
only  tend  to  harden  the  heart,  and  to  keep  you  from  closing 
with  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  When  I  was  a  child,  yea,  when  I 
came  to  riper  years,  God  knows,  it  is  with  grief  I  speak  it,  when 
ignorant  of  the  excellency  of  the  word  of  God,  I  read  as  many 
of  these  harmless  books  as  any  one  ;  but  now  I  have  tasted  the 
good  word  of  life,  and  am  come  to  a  more  perfect  knowledge  of 
Christ  Jesus  my  Lord,  I  put  away  these  childish  trifling  things, 
and  am  determined  to  read  no  other  books  but  what  lead  me  to 
a  knowledge  of  myself,  and  Jesus  Christ. 

Methinks  I  could  speak  till  midnight  unto  you,  my  brethren ; 
I  am  full  of  love  towards  you ;  let  me  beseech  you  to  fly  to 
Christ  for  succour :  "  Now  is  the  accepted  time,  now  is  the  day 
of  salvation ;"  therefore  delay  not,  but  strive  to  enter  in  at  the 
strait  gate;  do  not  go  the  broad  way  of  the  polite  world,  but 
choose  to  suffer  affliction  with  the  people  of  God,  rather  than  to 
enjoy  the  pleasures  of  sin  for  a  season  :  You  will  have  a  reward 
afterwards,  that  will  make  amends  for  all  the  taunts,  jeers,  and 
calamities  you  may  undergo  here.    And  will  not  the  presence 


570  THE   HEINOUS   SIN   OF   DRUNKENNESS.  [LII. 

of  Christ  be  a  sufficient  reward  for  all  you  have  suffered  for  his 
name's  sake?  Why  will  you  not  accept  of  the  Lord  of  glory  ?  Do 
not  say  you  have  not  heard  of  Christ,  for  he  is  now  offered  to 
you,  and  you  will  not  accept  of  him ;  do  not  blaipe  my  Master, 
he  is  willing  to  save  you,  if  you  will  but  lay  hold  on  him  by  faith ; 
and  if  you  do  not,  your  blood  will  be  required  of  your  own  hands. 

But  I  hope  that  you  will  not  let  the  blood  of  Jesus  be  shed 
in  vain,  and  that  you  will  not  let  my  preaching  be  of  no  signifi- 
cation. Would  you  have  me  go  and  tell  my  Master,  you  will 
not  come,  and  that  I  have  spent  my  strength  in  vain  ;  I  cannot 
bear  to  carry  so  unpleasing  a  message  unto  him,  I  would  not 
ind^d,  I  would  not  be  a  swift  witness  against  any  of  you  at 
the  great  day  of  accounts  ;  but  if  you  will  refuse  these  gracious 
invitations,  and  not  accept  of  them,  I  must  do  it :  and  will  it  not 
move  your  tender  hearts  to  see  your  friends  taken  up  into  heaven, 
and  you  yourselves  thrust  down  into  hell  ?  But  I  hope  better 
things  of  most  of  you,  even  that  you  will  turn  unto  the  Lord  of 
love,  the  Jesus  who  died  for  you,  that  in  the  day  when  he  shall 
come  to  take  his  people  to  the  mansions  of  everlasting  rest,  you 
may  hear  his  vcice^  *•  Come,  ye  blessed  of  my  Father,  enter  into 
the  kingdom  prepared  for  you  before  the  foundation  of  the  world." 
And  that  we  may  all  enter  into  that  glory,  do  thou,  O  Jesus, 
prepare  us,  by  thy  grace ;  give  us  thy  Spirit ;  and  may  our 
hearts  be  united  to  thee:  may  the  word  that  has  now  been 
spoken,  take  deep  root  in  thy  people*s  hearts,  that  it  may  spring 
up  and  bring  forth  fruit,  in  some  thirty,  in  some  forty,  and  in 
some  a  hundred  fold :  do  thou  preserve  them  while  in  this  life 
from  all  evil,  and  keep  them  from  falling,  and  at  last  present 
them  faultless  before  thy  Father,  when  thou  comest  to  judge 
the  world;  that  where  thou  art,  they  may  be  also.  Grant  this, 
O  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  with  whatever  else  thou  seest  needful  for 
us,  both  at  this  time  and  for  evermore. 

Now  to  God  the  Father,  God  the  Son,  and  God  the  Holy 
Ghost,  be  ascribed  all  honour,  power,  glory,  might,  majesty,  and 
dominion,  both  now  and  for  evermore,  Atnen. 

SERiMON  LII. 

THE   HEINOUS   SIN    OF    DRUNKENNESS. 

Be  not  drunk  with  wine,  wherein  is  excess;  but  be  filled  with  the 

Spirit. — Eph.  v.  18. 

The  persons  to  whom  these  words  were  written,  were  the  in- 
habitants of  Ephesus,  as  we  are  told  in  the  Acts,  had  been  wor- 
shippers of  the  great  goddess  Diana,  and,  in  all  probability, 
worshipped  the  god  Bacchus  also  ;  at  the  celebration  of  whose 
festivals,  it  was  always  customary,  nay,  part  of  their  religion,  to 
get  drunk  ;  as  though  there  was  no  other  way  to  please  their 
god,  but  by  turning  themselves  into  brutes. 

The  apostle  therefore  in  this  chapter,  amongst  many  otkcr 
precepts  more  especially  applicable  to  them,  lays  down  this  is 
the  text ;  and  exhorts  them,  as  they  had  now,  by  the  free  grace 


Lll.]  THB   HBINOUS   SIN    OP   DRUNKBNNB88.  571 

of  GocI,  been  turned  from  heathenish  darkness  to  the  light  of 
the  gospel^  to  walk  as  children  of  light,  and  no  longer  make  it 
part  of  their  religion  or  practice  to  be  '*  drunk  with  wine,  wherein 
is  excess  ;'' but,  on  the  contrary,  strive  to^'be  filled  with  the 
Spirit"  of  that  Saviour,  after  whose  name  they  were  called,  and 
whose  religion  taught  them  to  abstain  from  a  filthy  sin,  and  to 
live  soberly  as  they  ought  to  live. — The  world  being  now  Chris- 
tian, and  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel  every  where  received,  one 
would  imagine,  there  should  be  no  reason  for  repeating  the  pre- 
cept now  before  us.  But,  alas.  Christians  !  I  mean  Christians 
falsely  so  called,  are  led  captive  by  all  sin  in  general,  and  by 
this  of  drunkenness  in  particular;  that  were  St.  Paul  to  rise 
again  from  the  dead,  he  might  be  tempted  to  think  most  of  us 
were  turned  back  to  the  worship  of  dumb  idols ;  had  set  up 
temples  in  honour  of  Bacchus ;  and  made  it  part  of  our  religion^ 
as  the  tiphcsians  did  of  theirs,  ^*  to  be  drunk  with  wine,  wherein 


is  excess." 


Some  of  our  civil  magistrates  have  not  been  wanting  to  use 
the  power  given  them  from  above,  for  the  punishment  and  re- 
straint of  such  evil  doings  ;  and  I  wish  it  could  be  said  this 
plague  of  drinking,  by  wh<it  they  have  done,  had  been  stayed 
amongst  us.  But,  alas !  though  their  labour,  we  trust,  has  not 
been  altogether  in  vain  in  the  Lord,  yet  thousands,  and  I  could 
almost  say  ten  thousands,  fall  daily  at  our  right  hand,  by  this 
sin  of  drunkenness,  in  our  streets ;  nay,  men  seem  to  have  made 
a  covenant  with  hell ;  and  though  the  power  of  the  civil  magis- 
trate is  exerted  against  them,  nay,  though  they  cannot  but  daily 
see  the  companions  of  their  riot  hourly,  by  this  sin,  brought  to 
the  grave,  yet  •*  they  will  rise  up  early  to  follow  strong  drink^ 
and  cry,  to-morrow  shall  be  as  to-day,  and  so  much  the  more 
abundantly ;  when  we  awake,  we  will  seek  it  yet  again."  It  is 
high  time  therefore,  for  thy  ministers,  O  God.  to  lift  up  their 
voices  like  a  trumpet :  and  since  human  threats  cannot  prevail, 
to  set  before  them  the  terrors  of  the  Lord,  and  try  if  these  will 
not  persuade  them  to  cease  from  the  evil  of  their  doings. 

But,  alas !  how  shall  I  address  myself  to  them?  I  fear  excess 
of  drinking  has  made  them  such  mere  Nabals,  that  there  is  no 
speaking  to  them.  And  many  of  God's  servants  have  toiled 
all  their  lifetime  in  dissuading  them  from  this  sin  of  drunken- 
ness, yet  they  will  not  forbear.  However,  at  thy  command,  I 
will  speak  also,  though  they  be  a  rebellious  house.  Magnify 
thy  strength,  O  Lord,  in  my  weakness,  and  grant  that  I  may 
speak  with  such  demonstration  of  the  Spirit,  and  power,  that 
from  henceforward  they  may  cease  to  act  so  unwisely;  and  this 
sin  of  drunkenness  may  not  be  their  ruin  ! — Believe  me,  ye  un- 
happy men  of  Belial,  (for  such,  alas !  this  sin  has  made  you,)  it 
is  not  without  the  strongest  reasons,  as  well  as  utmost  concern 
for  your  precious  and  immortal  souls,  that  I  now  conjure  you, 
in  the  apostle's  words,  "  not  to  be  drunk  with  wine,  (or  any 
other  liquor,)  wherein  is  excess."     For, 

First,  Drunkenness  is  a  sin  which  must  be  highly  displeasing 


572  THB  HEINOUS   SIN   OP   DRtJNKENNBflS.  [lII; 

to  Grod ;  because  it  is  an  abuse  of  his  good  creatures. — When 
God  first  made  roan,  and  had  breathed  into  him  the  breath  of 
life,  he  gave  him  dominion  over  the  works  of  his  hands ;  and 
every  herb  bearing  seed,  and  every  tree  in  which  was  the  fruit 
of  a  tree  yielding  seed,  to  him  was  given  for  meat :  but  when 
Adam  had  tasted  the  forbidden  fruit,  which  was  the  only  re- 
straint laid  upon  him,  he  forfeited  his  privilege,  and  had  no  right, 
after  he  had  disobeyed  his  Creator,  to  the  use  of  any  one  of  the 
creatures.  But,  blessed  be  God,  this  charter,  as  well  as  all 
other  privileges,  is  restored  to  us  by  the  death  of  the  second 
Adam,  our  Lord  and  Master  Jesus  Christ.  Of  every  beast 
of  the  field,  every  fish  of  the  sea,  and  whatsoever  fiieth  in 
the  air,  or  moveth  on  the  face  of  the  earth,  that  is  fit  for  food, 
•*  we  may  freely  eat,"  without  scruple  take  and  eat ;  but  then, 
with  this  limitation,  that  we  use  them  moderately.  For  Grod, 
by  the  death  of  Jesus,  has  given  no  man  license  to  be  intem- 
perate ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  has  laid  us  under  the  strongest 
obligations  to  live  soberly,  as  well  as  godly,  in  this  present 
world.  But  the  drunkard,  despising  the  goodness  and  bounty 
of  God,  in  restoring  to  us  what  we  had  so  justly  forfeited,  turn^ 
grace  into  wantonness  ;  and  as  though  the  creature  was  not  of 
itself  enough  subject  to  vanity,  by  being  cursed  for  our  sake,  he 
abuses  it  still  more,  by  making  it  administer  to  his  lusts  ;  and 
turns  that  wine,  which  was  intended  to  make  glad  his  heart,  into 
a  deadly  poison. 

But  thinkest  thou,  O  drunkard,  whosoever  thou  art,  thou  shalt 
escape  the  righteous  judgment  of  God  ?  No,  the  time  will  shortly 
come  that  thou  must  be  no  longer  steward,  and  then  the  Sove- 
reign Lord  of  all  the  earth  will  reckon  with  thee  for  thus  wast- 
ing his  goods.  Alas !  wilt  thou  then  wrest  scripture  any  longer 
to  thy  own  damnation?  And  because  Jesus  Christ  turned 
water  into  wine  at  the  marriage -feast,  to  supply  the  wants  of 
bis  indigent  host,  say,  that  it  is  therefore  meet  to  make  merry, 
and  be  drunken.  No,  thou  shalt  be  silent  before  him;  and 
know,  that  though  thou  hast  encouraged  thyself  in  drunkenness 
by  such-like  arguments,  yet  for  all  these  things  Grod  will  bring 
thee  into  judgment.     But, 

Secondly,  What  makes  drunkenness  more  exceedingly  sinful, 
is,  that  a  man,  by  falling  into  it,  sinneth  against  his  own  body. 
— When  the  apostle  would  dissuade  the  Corinthians  from  forni- 
cation, be  urges  this  as  an  argument,  **  Flee  fornication,  bre- 
thren ;  for  he  that  committeth  fornication,  sinneth  against  his 
own  body."  And  may  not  I  as  justly  cry  out.  Flee  drunkenness, 
my  brethren,  since  he  that  committeth  that  crime,  sinneth  against 
bis  own  body  ?  For,  from  whence  come  so  many  diseases  and 
distempers  in  your  bodies?  Come  they  not  from  hence,  eveo 
from  your  intemperance  in  drinking?  Who  hath  pains  in  the 
bead  ?  Who  hath  rottenness  in  the  bones  ?  Who  hath  redness 
of  eyes?  He  that  tarries  long  at  tlie  wine,  he  that  rises  early  to 
seek  new  wine.  How  many  walking  skeletons  have  you  seen» 
wbose  bodies  were  once  exceeding  tair  to  look  upon,  fat  and  wdl- 


LII.]  THB   HEINOUS   SIN   OF   DRUNKBNNB88.  573 

favoured ;  but,  by  this  sin  of  drinking,  how  has  their  beauty 
departed  from  them,  and  how  have  they  been  permitted  to  walk 
to  and  fro  upon  the  earth,  as  though  God  intended  to  set  them 
up,  as  he  did  Lot's  wife,  for  monuments  of  his  justice,  that 
otiiers  might  learn  not  to  get  drunk !  Nay,  I  appeal  to  your- 
selves :  are  not  many,  for  this  cause,  even  now  sickly  among 
you  ?  And  have  not  many  of  your  companions,  whom  you  once 
saw  so  flourishing,  like  green  bay-trees,  been  brought  by  it  with 
sorrow  to  their  graves  f 

We  might,  perhaps,  think  ourselves  hardly  dealt  with 
by  God,  were  he  to  send  us,  as  he  did  the  royal  psalmist,  to 
choose  one  plague  out  of  three,  whereby  we  should  be  destroyed. 
But  had  the  Almighty  decreed  to  cut  off  man  from  the  face  of 
the  earth,  and  to  shorten  his  days,  he  could  not  well  send  a  more 
effectual  plague,  than  to  permit  men,  as  they  pleased,  to  over* 
charge  themselves  with  drunkenness ;  for  though  it  be  a  slow, 
yet  it  is  a  certain  poison.  And  if  the  sword  has  slain  its  thou- 
sands, drunkenness  has  slain  its  ten  thousands.  And  will  not 
this  alarm  you,  O  ye  transgressors  ?  Will  not  this  persuade  you 
to  spare  yourselves,  and  to  do  your  bodies  no  harm?  What! 
have  you  lost  the  first  principles  of  human  nature,  the  funda* 
mental  law  of  self-preservation  ?  You  seem  to  have  a  great 
fondness  lor  your  bodies  ;  why,  otherwise,  to  gratify  the  inordi- 
nate  appetites,  do  you  drink  to  excess  ?  But  surely,  if  you  truly 
loved  them,  you  would  not  thus  destroy  them ;  and  were  there 
no  other  argument  to  be  urged  against  drunkenness,  the  con* 
sideration  that  it  will  destroy  those  lives  you  are  so  fond  of,  one 
would  imagine,  should  be  sufficient. 

I  know,  indeed,  that  it  is  a  common  answer,  which  drunkards 
make  to  those,  who,  out  of  love,  would  pull  them  as  firebrands 
out  of  the  fire.  We  are  nobody's  enemy  but  our  own.  But  this, 
instead  of  being  an  excuse  for,  is  an  aggravation,  of  their  guilt : 
for  (not  to  mention  that  the  drunkenness  of  one  man  has  clothed 
many  a  family  with  rags,  and  that  it  is  scarce  possible  for  a  per- 
son to  be  drunk,  without  tempting  his  neighbour  also)  not  to 
mention  these,  and  many. other  ill  consequences,  which  would 
prove  such  an  excuse  to  be  entirely  false  :  yet,  what  is  dearer  to 
a  man  than  himself?  And  if  he  himself  be  lost,  what  would  all 
the  whole  world  avail  him?  But  how  wilt  thou  stand,  O  man, 
before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ,  and  make  such  an  excuse, 
when  thou  shalt  be  arraigned  before  him  as  a  self-murderer  ? 
Will  it  then  be  sufiicient,  thinkest  thou,  to  say,  I  was  no  man's 
enemy  but  my  own  ?  No ;  God  will  liien  tell  thee,  that  thou 
oughtest  to  have  glorified  him  with  thy  spirit  and  with  thy  body^ 
which  were  his ;  and  since  thou  hast,  by  intemperance,  destroyed 
thy  body,  he  will  destroy  both  thy  body  and  soul  in  hell.  But, 

Thirdly y  What  renders  drunkenness  more  inexcusable,  is,  that 
it  robs  a  man  of  his  reason. — Reason  is  the  glory  of  a  man ;  the 
chief  thing  whereby  God  has  made  us  to  differ  from  the  brute 
creation.  And  our  modem  unbelievers  have  exalted  it  to  such 
a  high  degree,  as  even  to  set  it  in  opposition  to  revelation,  and 


674  TUB  HBIKOUS  SIN   OP   DRUNKBNNB88.  [Llf. 

SO  deny  the  Lord  that  bought  them.  But  though,  in  doing  this, 
they  greatly  err,  and  whilst  they  profess  themselves  wise,  be- 
come real  fools ;  yet  we  must  acknowledge,  that  reason  is  the 
candle  of  the  Lord,  and  whosoever  puts  it  out,  shall  bear  his 
punishment,  whosoever  he  be.  But  yet,  this  the  dronkard  does. 
Nebuchadnezzar's  curse  he  makes  his  choice,  his  reason  de- 
parteth  from  him ;  and  then  what  is  he  better  than  a  brute?  The 
very  heathen  kings  were  so  sensible  of  this,  that,  in  order  to 
deter  their  young  princes  from  drinking,  they  used  to  make  their 
slaves  get  drunk,  and  be  Exposed  before  tliem.  And  didst  thou 
but  see  thine  own  picture,  O  drunkard,  when,  after  baviDji; 
drowned  thy  reason,  thou  staggerest  to  and  fro,  like  one  of  the 
fools  in  Israel,  and  seest  thy  very  companions  making  songs 
upon  thee,  surely  thou  wouldest  not  return  to  thy  vomit  again, 
but  abhor  thyself  in  dust  and  ashes  ! 

When  David,  in  a  holy  ecstacy,  was  dancing  before  the  ark. 
Michal,  Saul's  daughter,  despised  him  in  her  heart ;  and  when 
he  came  home,  she  said,  *^  How  glorious  was  the  king  of  Israd 
to-day !  who  uncovered  himself  to-day  in  the  eyes  of  the  band- 
maids  of  his  servants,  as  one  of  the  vain  fellows  shamelessly 
uncovereth  himself."  But  may  not  every  one  tfiat  meets  a 
drunkard,  more  justly  say,  How  glorious  does  he,  that  was 
made  a  little  lower  than  the  angels,  look  to-day,  when,  unmind- 
ful of  his  dignity,  he  has  by  drinking  robbed  himself  of  his  rea- 
son, and  reduced  himself  to  a  level  with  the  beasts  that  perish  !— 
But  what  if  God,  in  the  midst  of  one  of  these  drunken  fits,  should 
arrest  thee  by  death,  and  say  unto  thee,  **  Thou  fool,  this  mo- 
menl  shall  thy  soul  be  required  of  thee."  O  !  how  wouldest 
thou  appear  in  those  filthy  garments  before  that  God,  in  whose 
sight  the  heavens  are  not  clean.  And  how  knowest  thou,  0 
man !  but  this  may  be  thy  lot  ?  Hast  thou  not  known  many  sum- 
moned at  such  an  unguarded  hour?  And  what  assurance  hast 
thou, that  thou  shalt  not  be  the  next?  Because  God  has-forborne 
thee  so  long,  thinkest  thou  he  will  forbear  always  ?  No,  this  is 
rather  a  sign  that  he  will  come  at  an  hour  thou  lookest  not  for 
him ;  and  since  his  goodness  and  long-suffering  has  not  led  thee 
to  repentance,  he  will  cut  thee  down,  and  not  permit  thee  to 
cumber  the  ground  any  longer.  Consider  this  then,  all  ye  that 
count  it  a  pleasure  to  turn  yourselves  into  brutes,  lest  God  pluck 
you  away  by  a  sudden  death,  and  there  be  none  to  deliver  yoo. 

Fourthly,  There  is  a  farther  aggravation  of  this  crime,  that  it 
is  an  inlet  to,  and  forerunner  of,  many  other  sins  ;  for  it  seldom 
comes  alone. — We  may  say  of  drunkenness,  as  Solomon  does  of 
strife,  that  it  is  like  the  letting  out  of  water ;  for  we  know  not 
what  will  be  the  end  thereof.  Its  name  is  Legion  ;  behold,  a 
troop  of  sins  cometh  after  it.  And,  for  my  own  part,  when  I 
see  a  drunkard,  with  the  holy  prophet  when  he  looked  in  Ha- 
zael's  face,  I  can  hardly  forbear  weeping,  to  consider  how  many 
vices  he  may  fall  into,  ere  he  come  to  himself  again. 

What  horrid  incest  did  righteous  Lot  commit  with  his  own 
daughters,  when  they  had  mfule  him  drunk !    And,  I  doubt  not. 


Lll.]  THfi   HEINOUS   SIN    OF    DRUNKENKB88.  575 

but  there  are  many  amongst  you^  who  have  committed  such 
crimes  when  you  have  deprived  yourselves  of  your  reason  by 
-  drinking,  that  were  you  to  hear  of  them,  •your  heart,  like 
NabaFs,  after  he  was  told  how  he  had  abused  David  when  he 
was  drunk,  would  die  within  you.  And,  had  any  one  told  you, 
Avhen  vou  were  sober,  that  you  would  have  been  guilty  of 
such  crimes,  you  would  have  cried  out,  with  Hazael  before- 
mentioned,  *'  Are  thy  servants  so  many  dogs,  that  they  should 
do  thus  V — But  no  marvel  that  drunkards  commit  such  crimes ; 
for  drunkenness  drives  the  Holy  Spirit  from  them ;  they  be- 
come mere  machines  for  the  devil  to  work  up  to  what  he 
pleases ;  he  enters  into  them,  as  he  entered  into  the  herd  of 
swine;  and  no  wonder  if  they  then  commit  all  uncleanness^  and 
any  other  crime,  with  greediness.     But  this  leads  me  to  a 

Fifth  consideration  which  highly  aggravates  the  sin  of  drunk- 
enness :  It  separates  the  Holy  Spirit  from  us. — It  is  to  be  hoped, 
that  no  one  here  present  need  be  informed,  that  before  we  can 
be  assured  we  are  Christians  indeed,  we  must  receive  the  Holy 
Ghost,  must  be  born  again  from  above,  and  have  the  Spirit  of 
God  witnessing  with  our  spirits,  that  we  are  the  sons  of  God. 
This,  this  alone  is  true  Christianity ;  and  without  the  cohabi- 
tation of  this  blessed  Spirit  in  our  hearts,  our  righteousness 
does  not  exceed  the  righteousness  of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees, 
and  we  shall  in  no  wise  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God.  But 
now,  drunkards  do  in  effect  bid  this  blessed  Spirit  to  depart 
from  them:  for  what  has  he  to  do  with  such  filthy  swine?  They 
have  no  lot  or  share  in  the  Spirit- of  the  Son  of  David.  They 
have  chased  him  out  of  their  hearts,  by  defiling  his  temple ;  I 
mean  their  bodies.  And  he  can  no  more  hold  communion  with 
them,  than  light  can  have  communion  with  darkness,  or  Christ 
have  concord  with  Belial.  The  apostle,  therefore,  in  the  words 
of  the  text,  exhorts  the  Ephesians,  **not  to  be  drunk  with 
wine,  wherein  is  excess,  but  to  be  filled  with  the  Spirit;" 
thereby  implying,  that  drunkenness  and  the  Spirit  of  God 
could  never  dwell  in  the  same  heart.  And  in  another  epistle^ 
he  bids  them  tQ  avoid  unprofitable  conversation,  as  a  thing 
which  grieved  the  Holy  Spirit :  whereby  alone  they  could  be 
sealed  to  the  day  of  redemption.  And  if  unprofitable  conver- 
sation grieve  the  Holy  Spirit,  at  what  an  infinite  distance  must 
dtunkenness  drive  him  from  the  hearts  of  men  ? 

O  that  you  were  wise!  that  you  would  consider  what  a 
dreadful  thing  it  is  to  have  the  Spirit  of  the  living  God  depart 
from  you !  for  assure  yourselves,  if  you  live  without  him,  you 
will  live  without  God  in  the  world.  You  are  in  the  same 
miserable  forlorn  condition  as  Saul  was,  when  an  evil  spirit 
of  the  Lord  came  upon  him ;  and  you  are  only  so  many  vessels 
of  wrath  fitted  for  destruction.     But  this  brings  me  to  a 

Sixth  reason  against  the  sin  of  drunkenness ;  it  absolutely 
unfits  a  man  for  the  enjoyment  of  God  in  heaven,  and  exposes 
him  to  his  eternal  wrath. — To  see  and  enjoy  God,  and  to  be 
like  the  blessed  angels,  always  beholding  the  face  of  our  hea* 


576  THE  HBiNOUS   SIN    OF   DRUNKBMNE88.  [LIL 

venly  Father,  in  the  glories  of  his  kingdom,  is  such  an 
unspeakable  happiness,  that  even  wicked  men,  though  they 
will  not  live  th6  life  of  the  righteous,  cannot  but  wish  their 
future  state  to  be  like  his. 

But  think  you,  O  ye  drunkards,  that  you  shall  ever  be  par- 
takers of  this  inheritance  with  the  saints  in  light?  Do  jou 
flatter  yourselves,  that  you,  who  have  made  them  often  the 
subject  of  your  drunken  songs,  shall  now  be  exalted  to  sing 
with  them  the  heavenly  songs  of  Zion?  No,  as  by  drunkenness 
you  have  made  your  hearts  cages  of  unclean  birds,  with  impare 
and  unclean  spirits  must  you  dwell.  A  burning  Topbet,  kin- 
dled by  God's  wVath,  is  prepared  for  your  reception,  where  yoo 
must  suffer  the  vengeance  of  eternal  fire,  and  in  vain  cry  out 
for  a  drop  of  water  to  cool  your  tongues.  Indeed,  you  shall 
drink,  but  it  shall  be  a  cup  of  God's  fury:  for  in  the  hand  of 
the  Lord  there  will  be  a  cup  of  fury,  it  will  be  full  mixed  ;  and 
as  for  the  dregs  thereof,  all  the  drunkards  of  the  land  shall 
suck  them  out. 

But  perhaps  you  may  not  believe  this  report.  These  words 
may  be  looked  upon  by  you  as  idle  tales,  and  I  may  seem  to 
you  as  Lot  did  to  his  sons-in-law,  when  he  came  to  warn  them 
to  get  up  out  of  Sodom,  **as  one  that  mocketh.'*  But  if  too 
believe  not  me,  believe  eternal  Truth  itself,  which  has  positively 
declared,  that  no  drunkard  shall  ever  enter  into  his  kingdom. 
And  I  call  heaven  and  earth  to  witness  against  you  this  day, 
that  as  surely  as  the  Lord  rained  fire  and  brimstone  as  sood 
as  Lot  went  out  of  Sodom,  so  surely  will  God  cast  you  into  a 
lake  of  fire  and  brimstone,  when  he  shall  come  to  take  ven- 
geance on  them  that  know  not  God,  and  have  not  obeyed  the 
gospel  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. — Behold  then  I  have  told  yoa 
before ;  remember,  that  you  this  day  were  informed  what  the 
end  of  drunkenness  would  be.  And  I  summon  you,  in  the 
name  of  that  God  whom  I  serve,  to  meet  me  at  the  judgment- 
seat  of  Christ,  that  you  may  acquit  both  my  Master  and  me; 
and  confess,  with  your  own  mouths,  that  your  damnation  wai 
of  yourselves,  and  that  we  are  free  from  the  blood  of  yoo  aU. 

But,  Lord,  has  no  one  believed  our  report?  Wilt  thou  suffer 
so  many  words  to  be  spoken  in  vain,  if  it  be  yet  in  vain  ?  No, 
methinks  I  see  some  pricked  to  the  heart,  and  ready  to  cry 
out,  in  the  language  of  David  to  Abigail,  ^'Blessed  be  the 
Lord  God  of  Israel,  who  sent  thee  this  day  to  speak  unto  ns."* 
For  surely,  unless  he  had  sent  thee,  this  sin  of  drunkenness 
had  been  our  ruin :  but  now,  since  we  find  whither  it  will  lead 
us,  we  are  resolved  to  drink  no  liquor  to  excess  while  the 
world  stands,  lest  we  should  be  tormented  in  the  flames  of  belL 
But,  alas  !  how  shall  we  be  delivered  from  the  power  of  this 
sin  ?  Can  the  Ethiopian  change  his  skin,  or  the  leopard  his 
spots  ?  So  hard,  almost,  will  it  be  for  you  who  have  been 
accustomed  to  be  intemperate,  to  learn  to  live  sober.  Bot  do 
not  despair  ;  for  what  is  impossible  with  man,  is  possible  witk 
God.    Of  whom  then  should  you  seek  for  succour,  but  of  Ub 


L.1I.1  THB   HEINOUS   SIN    OF    DRUNKENNESS.  577 

your  Lord?  Who,  though  for  this  sin  of  drunkenness^  he  might 
justly  turn  away  his  face  from  you ;  yet  observe. 

First,  If  you  pour  out  your  hearts  before  him  in  daily  jirayer, 
and  ask  assistance  from  above,  it  rbay  be,  God  will  endue  you 
with  power  from  on  high,  and  make  you  more  than  conquerors 
through  Jesus  Christ.  Had  you  kept  up  communion  with  him 
in  prayer,  you  would  not  so  long,  by  drunkenness,  have  had 
conmiunion  with  devils.  But,  like  the  prodigal,  you  have  de- 
sired to  be  your  own  masters ;  you  have  lived  without  prayer, 
depended  on  your  own  strength  ;  and  now  see,  alas  !  on  what 
a  broken  reed  you  have  leaned.  How  soon  have  you  made 
yourselves  like  the  beasts  that  have  no  understandmg  ?  But 
torn  ye,  turn  ye  from  your  evil  ways.  Come  to  him  with  the 
repenting  prodigal,  saying,  "  Father,  we  have  sinned ;"  we  be- 
seech thee,  let  not  this  sin  of  drunkenness  have  any  longer 
dominion  over  us.  Lay  hold  on  Christ  by  faith,  and,  lo  !  it  shall 
happen  to  you  even  as  you  will. 

A  Second  means  I  would  recommend  to  you,  in  order  to  get 
better  of  drunkenness,  is  to  avoid  evil  company :  for  it  is  the  evil 
communication  of  wicked  men,  that  has  drawn  many  thousands 
into  this  sin,  and  so  corrupted  their  good  manners. — But  you 
may  say,  if  I  leave  my  companions,  I  must  expect  contempt : 
for  they  will  certainly  despise  me  for  being  singular.  And 
thinkest  thou,  O  man,  ever  to  enter  in  at  the  strait  g;ate  by  a  true 
conversion,  without  being  had  in  derision  of  them  that  are  round 
about  thee  ?  No ;  though  thou  mayest  be  despised,  and  not  go 
to  heaven,  yet  thou  canst  not  go  to  heaven  without  being  de- 
spised :  "  for  the  friendship  of  the  world  is  enmity  with  God." 
And  they  that  are  born  after  the  flesh,  will  persecute  those  that 
are  bom  after  the  Spirit.  Let  not,therefore,  a  servile  fear  of  being 
despised  by  a  man  that  shall  die,  hinder  thy  turning  unto  the 
living  God.  F*or  what  is  a  little  contempt  ?  It  is  but  a  vapour 
which  vanisheth  away,  and  cometh  not  again.  Better  be  derided 
by  a  few  companions  here,  than  be  made  ashamed  before  men 
and  angels  hereafter.  Better  be  the  song  of  a  few  drunkards  on 
earth,  than  dwell  with  them,  where  they  will  be  eternally 
reproaching  and  cursing  each  other  in  hell.  Yet  a  little  while, 
and  they  themselves  shall  praise  thy  doings,  and  shall  say.  We, 
fools,  counted  his  leaving  us  to  be  folly,  and  his  end  to  be  with- 
oilt  honour:  but  how  is  he  numbered  among  the  sons  of  God, 
and  his  lot  among  the  saints ! 

But  I  hasten  to  lay  down  a  Third  means  for  those  who  would 
overcome  the  sin  of  drunkenness,  to  enter  upon  a  life  of  strict 
wlf'denial  and  mortification :  for  this  kind  of  sih  goeth  not  forth 
but  by  prayer  and  fasting.  It  is  true,  this  may  seem  a  difficult 
task ;  but  then,  we  must  thank  ourselves  for  it ;  for  had  we  be- 
gun sooner,  our  work  would  have  been  the  easier.  And  even 
now,  if  you  will  but  strive,  the  yoke  of  mortification  wDl  grow 
lighter  and  lighter  every  day. 

And  now,  by  way  of  conclusion,  I  cannot  but  exhort  all  per- 
Mms,  high  and  low,  rich  and  poor,  to  practise  a  strict  self-denial 
♦  2n 


578  TAB   POWER   OF    CHRIST'S    RKSLRftRCTIOIf.  [UlL 

in  eatJDg  and  drinking.     For  though  "  the  kingdum  €if  God  txm- 
si5t.s  not  in  meats  and  drinks/'  yet  an  abstemiocs  use  of  Go£% 
good  creatures,  greatly  promotes  the  spiritaal  life.     AmA  per- 
haps there  are  more  destroyed  by  living  in  a  regular  seDsvalitT, 
than  even  by  the  Tery  sin  I  have  now  been  warning:  yoaoC  I  kmr 
indeed,  that  many,  who  are  only  almost  Christiaas,  and  i^ 
seek,  bnt  do  not  strive,  to  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God,  urge  i 
text  of  scriptare  to  justify  their  indulgence,  sairing,  that  "^  ft  is 
not  what  entereth  into  the  man,  defileth  the  man/'     And  so  we 
grant,  when  taken  moderately ;  bnt  then  they  shoold  consider, 
tiiat  it  is  possible,  nay,  it  is  proved  by  daily  experience,  tint  i 
person  may  eat  and  drink  so  much  as  not  to  hurt  his  body,  lad 
yet  do  infinite  prejudice  to  his  soul :  for  self-indulgencre  loDs  the 
soul  into  a  spiritual  slumber,  as  well  as  direct  intempeianoe: 
and  though  the  latter  may  expose  us  to  more  contempt  amoD^ 
men,  yet  the  former,  if  continued  in,  will  as  certainly  shut  u 
out  from  the  presence  of  God.     St.  Paul  knew  this  foU  weD; 
and  therefore,  though  he  was  the  spiritual  father  of  thonsaiids. 
and  was  near  upon  finishing  his  course,  yet  he  says,  it  was  Us 
daily  practice  to  **  keep  his  body  under,  and  bring  it  into  sub- 
jection, lest  ailter  he  had  preached  to  others,  he  himself  shooU 
be  a  cast-away,"  or  disapproved  of,  or  do  something  that  ni^' 
make  him  an  offence  or  stumbling-block  to  any  of  God's  chil 
dren  :  for  of  bis  own,  and  all  other  saints'  final  perseverance, 
he  makes  no  doubt,  as  is  evident  from  many  of  his  epistles ;  afid 
the  word  Acoki^ioc  bears  this  sense,  2  Cor.  xiii.  5.  and  saodrj 
other  places.     But  why  urge  I  the  apostle's  example,  to  excite 
you  to  a  strict  temperance  in  eating  and  drinking  ?     Rathn*,  let 
me  exhort  you  only  to  put  in  practice  the  latter  part  of  the  text, 
to  labour  to  ''  be  filled  with  the  Spirit  of  God,"  and  then  yoa 
will  no  longer  search  the  scriptures  to  find  arguments  for  self- 
indulgence ;  but  you  will  deal  sincerely  with   yourselves,  aod 
eat  and  drink  no  more  at  any  time,  than  what  is  consistent  witk 
the  strictest  precepts  of  the  gospel.     O  beg  of  God,  that  yot 
see  how  you  are  fallen  in  Adam,  and  the  necessity  of  being're- 
newed,  ere  you  can  be  happy,  by  the  Spirit  of  Jesus  Christ! 
Let  us  beseech  him  to  enlighten  us  to  see  the  treachery  <tf  our 
corrupt  hearts,  and  bow  pure  and  holy  these  bodies  ought  to  be, 
that  they  ought  to  be  living  temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  tben 
we  shall  shew  ourselves  men.     And  being  made  temples  otihfi 
Holy  Ghost,  by  his  dwelling  in  our  bodies  here,  though  i^ 
death  worms  may  destroy  them,  yet  shall  they  be  raised  by  the 
same  Spirit  at  the  general  resurrection  of  Uie  last  day,  to  be 
fasliioned  like  unto  Christ's  glorious  body  hereafter. — Wbicb 
God  of  his  infinite  mercy  grant,  &c. 

SERMON  LIII. 

THE    POWER   OF   CHRIST'S    RESURRECTION. 

That  I  may  know  him,  and  the  power  of  his  resurrection.  Phil.  iii.lO. 
The  apostle,  in  the  verses  before  the  text,  had  been  cautioning 
the  Philippians  to  ''  beware  of  the  concision/'  Judaizing  teacb^ 


LIII.]  THfi   POWBR   OF   CHRIST*S   RBSURRECTION.  579 

ers,  who  endeavoured  to  subvert  them  from  the  simplicity  of 
the  gospel,  by  telling  them,  they  still  ought  to  be  subject  to  cir- 
cumcision, and  all  the  other  ordinances  of  Moses.  And  that 
they  might  not  think  he  spoke  out  of  prejudice,  and  condemned 
their  tenets  because  he  himself  was  a  stranger  to  the  Jewish  dis- 
pensation, he  acquaints  them,  that  if  any  other  man  thought  he 
had  whereof  he  might  trust  in  the  flesh,  or  seek  to  be  justified  by 
the  outward  privileges  of  the  Jews,  he  had  more :  for  he  was 
"  circumcised  the  eighth  day ;  of  the  stock  of  Israel,  (not  a  pro- 
selyte, but  a  native  Israelite ;)  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin,  (the  tribe 
which  adhered  to  Judah  when  the  others  revolted;)  an  Hebrew 
of  the  Hebrews,  (a  Jew  both  on  the  father's  and  mother*s  side ;) 
and  as  touching  the  law,  a  Pharisee,"  the  strictest  sect  amongst 
all  Israel.  To  shew  that  he  was  no  Gallio  in  religion,  through 
his  great,  though  misguided  zeal,  he  had  persecuted  the  church 
of  Christ ;  and  **  as  touching  the  righteousness  of  the  law,  (as 
far  as  the  Pharisees'  exposition  of  it  went,)  he  was  blameless," 
and  had  kept  it  from  his  youth.  But  when  it'pleased  God,  who 
had  separated  him  from  his  mother's  womb,  to  reveal  his  Son  in 
him, ''  what  things  were  gain  to  me,"  (he  sayis,)  those  privileges  I 
boasted  myself  in,  and  sought  to  be  justified  by, "  I  counted  loss 
for  Christ."  And  that  they  might  not  think  he  repented  that  he 
had  done  so,  he  tells  them,  he  was  now  more  confirmed  than  ever 
in  his  judgment.  For,  says  he, "  yea,  doubtless,  (the  expression  in 
the  original  rises  with  a  holy  triumph)  and  I  do  count  all  things 
but  loss  for  the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus  my 
Liord."  And  that  they  might  not  object  that  he  said,  and  did 
not,  he  acquaints  them  he  had  given  proofs  of  the  sincerity  of 
these  professions,  because  for  the  sake  of  them,  he  had  suffered 
the  loss  of  all  his  worldly  things,  and  still  was  willing  to  do  more ; 
for,  '^I  count  them  but  dung,  (no  more  than  offals  thrown  out  to 
dogs,)  so  that  I  may  win  (or  have  a  saving  interest  in)  Christ, 
and  be  found  in  him,  (as  the  manslayer  in  the  city  of  refuge,) 
not  having  my  own  righteousness  which  is  of  the  law,  (not  de- 
pending on  having  Abraham  for  my  father,  or  on  any  works  of 
righteousness  which  I  have  done,  either  to  atone,  or  serve  as  a 
balance,  for  my  evil  deeds  (but  that  which  is  through  the  faith 
of  Christ,  the  righteousness  which  is  of  God  by  faith,"  a  righte- 
ousness of  God's  appointing,  and  will  be  imputed  to  me,  if  I  be- 
lieve in  Christ,  "  that  I  may  know  him^  and  the  power  of  his  re- 
surrection ;"  that  I  may  have  an  experimental  knowledge  of  the 
efficacy  of  his  resurrection,  by  feeling  the  influences  of  his  blessed 
Spirit  on  my  soul.     In  which  words,  two  things  are  implied. 

First,  That  Jesus  Christ  did  rise  from  the  dead. 

Secondly,  That  it  highly  concerns  us  to  know  the  power  of 
his  rising  again.^-Accordingly,  in  the  following  discourse  I  shall 
endeavour  to  shew. 

First,  That  Christ  is  risen  indeed  from  the  dead ;  and  that  it 
was  necessary  for  him  so  to  do ;  and. 

Secondly,  That  it  highly  concerns  us  to  know  and  experience 
the  power  of  his  resurrection. 


580  THB   POWER   OP   CHR1ST*S   RESURABCTION«  [lIIL 

First,  Christ  is  indeed  risen. 

That  Jesus  should  rise  from  the  dead,  was  absolately  neces- 
sary :  1.  First,  On  his  own  account.  He  had  often  appealed 
to  this  as  the  last  and  most  convincing  proof  he  wonld  give  them 
that  he  was  the  true  Messiah,  ^' There  shall  no  other  sign  be  gi?eB 
you,  than  the  sign  of  the  prophet  Jonas."  And  again,  **  Destroy 
this  temple  of  my  body,  and  in  three  days  I  will  build  it  np." 

Which  words  his  enemies  remembered,  and  urged  it  as  ao 
argument  to  induce  Pilate  to  grant  them  a  watch,  to  prevent  his 
being  stolen  out  ot  the  grave.  "  We  know  that  that  deceiver 
said,  whilst  he  was  yet  alive,  After  three  days  I  will  rise  again.'* 
So  that  had  he  not  risen  again,  they  might  have  justly  said.  We 
know  that  this  man  was  an  impostor. 

2.  Secondly,  It  was  necessary  on  our  account.  *'He  rose 
again  (says  the  apostle)  for  our  justification ;"  or  that  the  debt 
we  owed  to  God  for  our  sins,  might  bo  fully  satisfied  and  dis- 
charged.— It  had  pleased  the  Father  (for  ever  adored  be  his  in- 
finite love  and  free  grace !)  to  wound  his  only  Son  for  our  trans- 
gressions, and  to  arrest  and  confine  him  in  the  prison  of  the  grave, 
as  our  surety,  for  the  guilt  we  had  contracted  by  setting  at  nought 
his  commandments.  Now,  had  Christ  continued  always  in  the 
grave,  we  could  have  had  no  more  assurance  that  our  sins  were 
satisfied  for,  than  any  common  debtor  can  have  of  hi.s  creditor's 
being  satisfied,  whilst  his  surety  is  kept  confined.  But  he  being 
released  from  the  power  of  death,  we  are  thereby  assured,  that 
with  his  sacrifice  God  was  well  pleased,  that  our  atonement  was 
finished  on  the  cross,  and  that  he  hath  made  a  full,  perfect,  and 
sufiicient  sacrifice,  oblation,  and  satisfaction  for  the  sins  of  the 
world. 

3.  Thirdly,  It  was  necessary  that  our  Lord  Jesus  should  rise 
again  from  the  dead,  to  assure  us  of  the  certainty  of  the  resurrec- 
tion of  our  own  bodies. — The  doctrine  of  the  resurrection  of  the 
body  was  entirely  exploded  and  set  at  nought  among  the  Gen- 
tiles, as  appears  from  the  Athenians  mocking  at,  and  calling  St 
Paul  ''a  babbler,  and  a  setter  forth  of  strange  doctrines/'  whet 
he  preached  to  them  Jesus,  and  the  resurrection.  And  though 
it  was  believed  by  most  of  the  Jews,  as  is  evident  from  many 
passages  of  scripture,  yet  not  by  all ;  the  whole  sect  of  the  Sad- 
ducees  denied  it.  But  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  put  it 
out  of  dispute.  For  as  he  acted  as  our  i-cpresentative,  if  he  oor 
head  be  risen,  then  must  we  also,  who  are  bis  members,  rise  with 
him.  And  as  in  the  first  Adam  we  all  died,  even  so  in  him  oor 
second  Adam  we  must  all,  in  this  sense,  be  made  alive. 

As  it  was  necessary,  on  these  accounts,  tbat  our  blesMd 
Lord  should  rise  from  the  dead ;  so  it  is  plain  beyond  contradic- 
tion, that  he  did.  Never  was  any  matter  of  fact  better  attested, 
never  were  more  precautions  made  use  of  to  prevent  a  cheat 
He  was  buried  in  a  sepulchre,  hewn  out  of  a  rock/so  that  it 
could  not  be  said  that  any  digged  under,  and  conveyed  him  away. 
It  was  a  sepulchre  also  wherein  never  man  before  was  laid;  so 
that  if  any  body  did  rise  from  thence^  it  must  be  the  body  of  JeM 


hill.]         THE   POWER   OP   CHR1ST*S   RKSURRBCTION.  581 

of  Nazareth.     Besides,  the  sepulchre  was  sealed ;  a  great  stone 
rolled  over  the  mouth  of  it ;  and  a  band  of  soldiers  (consisting 
not  of  friends,  but  of  his  professed  enemies)  was  set  to  guard  it. 
And  as  for  his  disciples  coming  by  night  and  stealing  him  away, 
it  was  altogetlier  improbable :  for  it  was  not  long  since,  that  they 
had  all  forsaken  him,  and  they  were  the  most  backward  in  be- 
lieving his  resurrection.     And  supposing  it  was  true,  that  they 
came  whilst  the  soldiers  slept;  yet  the  soldiers  must  be  cast  into 
a  deep  sleep  indeed,  that  the  rolling  away  so  great  a  stone  did 
not  awake  some  of  them.     And  our  blessed  Lord's  afterwards  ap- 
pearing at  sundry  times,  and  in  divers  manners,  to  his  disciples, 
as  when  they  were  assembled  together,  when  they  were  walking 
to  Emmaus,  when  they  were  fishing ;  nay,  and  condescending  to 
shew  them  his  hands  and  feet,  and  his  appearing  to  above  five 
hundred  brethren  at  once,  put  the  truth  of  his  resurrection  out  of 
all  dispute.     Indeed,  there  is  one  objection  that  may  be  made 
against  what  has  been  said,  that  the  books  wherein  these  facts 
are  recorded  were  written  by  his  disciples.     And  who  more  pro- 
per persons  than  those  who  were  eye-witnesses  of  what  they  re- 
lated, and  ate  and  drank  with  him  after  his  resurrection?  ''But 
they  were  illiterate  and  ignorant  men."     Yet  as  good  witnesses 
of  a  plain  matter  of  fact,  as  the  most  learned  masters  in  Israel. 
Nay,  this  rendered  them  more  proper  witnesses.    For  being  plain 
men,  they  were  therefore  less  to  be  suspected  of  telling  or  mak- 
ing a  lie,  particularly,  since  they  laid  down  their  lives  for  a  tes- 
timony of  the  truth  of  it.    We  read  indeed  of  Jacob's  telling  a 
Ke,  though  he  was  a  plain  man,  in  order  to  get  his  father's  bless- 
ing.   But  it  was  never  beard  since  the  world  began,  that  any 
man,  much  less  a  whole  set  of  men,  died  martyrs  for  the  sake  of 
an  iintruth,  when  they  themselves  were  to  reap  no  advantage  from 
it.     No,  this  single  circumstance  proves  them  to  be  Israelites 
indeed,  in  whom  was  no  guile.    And  the  wonderful  success  God  ' 
gave  to  their  ministry  afterwards,  when  three  thousand  were  con- 
verted by  one  sermon,  and  twelve  poor  fishermen,  in  a  very  short 
time  enabled  to  be  more  than  conquerors  over  all  the  opposition 
men  or  devils  could  make,  was  as  plain  a  demonstration,  that 
Christ  was  risen,  according  to  their  gospel,  as  that  a  divine  power, 
at  the  sound  of  a  few  rams'  horns,  caused  the  walls  of  Jericho  to 
fall  down. — But  what  need  we  any  farther  witnesses?    Believe 
yoa  the  resurrection  of  our  blessed  Lord  ?   I  know  that  you 
believe  it,  as  your  gathering  together  on  this  first  day  of  the 
week  in  the  courts  of  the  Lord's  house  abundantly  testifies. — 
What  concerns  us  most  to  be  assured  of,  and  which  is  the 

Second  thing  I  was  to  speak  to,  is.  Whether  we  have  experi- 
mentally known  the  power  of  his  resurrection ;  that  is,  whether  or 
Act  we  have  received  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  by  his  powerful  ope- 
rations in  our  hearts  have  been  raised  from  the  death  of  sin,  to  a 
life  of  righteousness  and  true  holiness.  It  was  this  the  great 
apostle  was  chiefly  desirous  to  know.  The  resurrection  of 
Christ's  body  he  was  satisfied  would  avaO  him  nothing,  unless 
he  experienced  the  power  of  it  in  raising  his  dead  soal.    For 


682  THE    POWER   OF   CHRIST'S    RESURRECTION.  [UII. 

another^  and  that  a  chief  end  of  our  blessed  Lord's  rising  from 
the  dead^  was  to  enter  heaven  as  our  representative,  and  to  sGoi 
down  the  Holy  Ghost  to  apply  that  redemption  be  had  finished 
on  the  cross,  to  our  hearts,  by  working  an  entire  change  in  them. 
Without  this,  Christ  would  have  died  in  vain.  For  it  wooid 
have  done  us  no  service  to  have  had  his  outward  righteonsnesf 
imputed  to  us,  unless  we  had  an  inward  inherent  righteoasnesg 
wrought  in  us.  Because,  being  altogether  conceived  and  booi 
in  sin,  and  consequently  unfit  to  hold  communion  with  an  infi- 
nitely pure  and  holy  God,  we  cannot  possibly  be  made  meet  to 
see  or  enjoy  him,  till  a  thorough  renovation  has  passed  upon  oo 
hearts.  Without  this,  we  leave  out  the  Holy  Ghost,  in  the  great 
work  of  our  redemption.  But  as  we  were  made  by  the  joint  con- 
currence and  consultation  of  the  blessed  Trinity ;  and  as  we 
were  baptized  in  their  name,  so  must  all  of  them  concnr  in  onr 
salvation :  As  the  Father  made,  and  the  Son  redeemed,  so  most 
the  Holy  Ghost  sanctify  and  seal  us,  or  otherwise  we  have  be- 
lieved in  vain. 

This  then  is  what  the  apostle  means  by  thq  ''power  of  Christ's 
resurrection/'  and  this  is  what  we  are  as  much  concerned  experi- 
mentally to  know,  as  that  he  rose  at  all.  Withont  this,  thoogfa 
we  may  be  moralists,  though  we  may  be  civilized,  good-natured 
people,  yet  we  are  no  Christians.  For  he  is  not  a  tme  Christian, 
who  is  only  one  outwardly ;  nor  have  we  therefore  a  right,  because 
we  daily  profess  to  believe  that  Christ  rose  again  the  third  day 
from  the  dead.  But  he  is  a  true  Christian  who  is  one  inwardly ;  and 
then  only  can  we  be  styled  true  believers,  when  we  not  only  profess 
to  believe,  but  have  felt  the  power  of  our  blessed  Lord's  risinf 
from  the  dead,  by  being  quickened  and  raised  by  his  Spirit,  when 
dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,  to  a  thorough  newness  both  of  heart 
and  life.  The  devils  themselves  cannot  but  believe  the  doctrine 
of  the  resurrection,  and  tremble ;  but  yet  they  continue  devils, 
because  the  benefits  of  this  resurrection  have  not  been  applied 
to  them,  nor  have  they  received  a  renovating  power  from  it,  to 
change  and  put  off  their  diabolical  nature.  And  so,  unless  we 
not  only  profess  to  know,  but  also  feel  that  Christ  is  risen  in- 
deed, by  being  bom  again  from  above,  we  shall  be  as  far  fiom 
the  kingdom  of  God  as  they :  our  faith  will  be  as  ineffectual  as 
the  faith  of  devils. 

Nothing  has  done  more  harm  to  the  christian  world,  nothing 
has  rendered  the  cross  of  Christ  of  less  effect,  than  a  vain  sup- 
position that  religion  is  something  without  us.  Whereas  we 
should  consider  that  every  thing  that  Christ  did  outwardly,  mast 
be  done  over  again  in  our  souls ;  or  otherwise,  the  believing  theie 
was  such  a  divine  person  once  on  earth,  who  triumphed  over  beH 
and  the  grave,  will  profit  us  no  more,  than  believing  there  was 
once  such  a  person  as  Alexander,  who  conquered  the  worid. 
As  Christ  was  bom  of  the  virgin's  womb,  so  must  tie  be  spiri- 
tually formed  in  our  hearts.  As  he  died  for  sin,  so  must  we  die  to 
sin.  And  as  he  rose  again  from  the  dead,  so  must  we  also  rise 
to  a  divine  life.    None  but  those  who  have  f(dlowed  him  in  tkis 


IJll.l  THE   POWER    OF   GHRIST'u   RESURRBGTION.  583 

regeneration,  or  new-birth,  shall  sit  on  thrones  as  approvers  of 
his  sentence,  when  he  shall  come  in  terrible  majesty  to  judge  the 
twelve  tribes  of  Israel. 

It  is  true,  as  for  the  outwork  of  our  redemption,  it  was  a  tran- 
sient act,  and  was  certainly  finished  on  the  cross;  but  the  appli- 
cation of  that  redemption  to  our  hearts,  is  a  work  that  will  con- 
tinue always,  even  to  the  end  of  the  world.  So  long  as  there  is 
an  elect  man  breathing  on  the  earth,  who  is  naturally  engendered 
of  the  ofispring  of  the  first  Adam,  so  long  must  the  quickening 
Spirit,  which  was  purchased  by  the  resurrection  of  the  second 
Adam,  that  Lord  from  heaven,  be  breathing  upon  his  soul.  For 
though  we  may  exist  by  Christ,  yet  we  cannot  be  said  to  exist 
in  him,  till  we  are  united  to  him  by  one  spirit,  and  enter  into  a 
new  state  of  things,  as  certainly  as  he  entered  into  a  new  state  of 
things  after  that  he  rose  from  the^ead.  We  may  throng  and 
crowd  round  about  Christ,  and  call  him  **  Lord,  Lord,"  when  we 
come  to  worship  before  his  footstool ;  but  we  have  not  effectually, 
touched  him,  till,  by  a  lively  faith  in  his  resurrection,  we  perceive 
a  divine  virtue  coming  out  of  him,  to  renew  and  purify  our  souls. 

How  greatly  then  do  they  err,  who  rest  in  a  bare  historical  faith 
of  our  Saviour's  resurrection,  and  look  only  for  external  proofs 
to  evidence  it !  Whereas,  were  we  the  most  learned  disputers  of 
this  world,  and  could  speak  of  the  certainty  of  this  fact  with  the 
tongue  of  men  and  angels,  yet  without  this  inward  testimony  of 
it  in  our  hearts,  though  we  might  convince  others,  yet  we  should 
never  be  saved  by  it  ourselves.  For  we  are  but  dead  men,  we 
are  like  so  many  carcases  wrapt  up  in  grave  clothes,  till  that 
same  Jesus  who  called  Lazarus  from  his  tomb,  and  at  whose  own 
resorection  many  that  slept  arose,  doth  raise  us  also  by  his  quick- 
ening Spirit  from  our  natural  death,  in  which  we  have  so  long^ 
lain,  to  a  holy  and  heavenly  life. 

We  might  think  ourselves  happy,  if  we  had  seen  the  holy  Jesus^ 
after  he  was  risen  from  the  dead,  and  our  hands  had  handled  that 
liord  of  life.  But  more  happy  are  they  who  have  not  seen  him, 
and  yet,  having  felt  the  power  of  his  resurrection,  therefore  be- 
lieve in  him.  For  many  saw  our  divine  Master,  who  were  not 
saved  by  him ;  but  whosoever  has  thus  felt  the  power  of  his  re- 
surrection, has  the  earnest  of  his  inheritance  in  his  heart,  he  has 
passed  from  death  to  life,  and  shall  never  fall  into  final  condem- 
nation.— I  am  very  sensible  that  this  is  foolishness  to  the  natural 
man,  as  were  many  such-like  truths  to  our  Lord's  own  disciples, 
when  only  weak  in  faith,  before  he  rose  again.  But  when  these 
natural  men,  like  them,  have  folly  felt  the  power  of  his  resurrec- 
tion, they  will  then  own  that  this  doctrine  is  from  God,  and  say 
with  the  Samaritans,  ''Now  we  believe,  not  because  of  thy  say- 
ing," for  we  ourselves  have  experienced  it  in  our  hearts. 

And  O  that  all  unbelievers,  all  letter-learned  masters  of  Israel, 
who  now  look  upon  the  doctrine  of  the  power  of  Christ's  resur- 
rection, or  our  new-birth,  as  an  idle  tale,  and  condemn  the 
preachers  of  it  as  enthusiasts  and  madmen,  did  but  thus  feel  the 
power  of  it  in  their  souls,  they  would  no  longer  ask,  how  this  thing 


&M'  THE   POWER   OP   CHRIST'S   RESURREQTION.  [Ull. 

could  be !  But  they  would  be  conviuced  of  it^  as  much  as  Thomas 
was^  when  he  saw  the  Lord's  Christ;  and  like  him,  wheu  Jesus 
bid  him  reach  out  his  hands^  and  thrust  them  into  his  side,  io  a 
holy  confusion  they  would  cry  out,  "  My  Lord,  aqd  my  God !" 

But  how  shall  an  unbeliever,  how  shall  the  formal  Christian, 
cpme  thus  to  '^know  Christ,  and  the  power  of  his  resurrection?" 
(jiod,  who  cannot  lie,  has  told  us,  **  I  am  the  resurrection  and 
the  life ;  whosoever  liveth  and  believeth  in  me,  though  he  were 
dead,  yet  shall  he  live."  Again,  says  the  apostle,  **  By  faith  ne 
are  saved,  and  that  not  of  ourselves,  it  is  the  gift  of  God." 
This,  this  is  the  way,  walk  in  it.  Believe,  and  you  shall  live  in 
Christ,  and  Christ  in  you ;  you  shall  be  one  with  Christ,  and 
Christ  one  with  you.  But  without  this^  your  outward  goodness 
and  professions  will  avail  you  nothing. 

But  then,  by  this  faith  we  are  not  to  understand  a  dead  spe- 
culative faith,  a  faith  in  the  head ;  but  a  living  principle  wrought 
in  the  heart  by  the  powerful  operation  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  a  faith 
that  will  enable  us  to  overcome  the  world,  and  forsake  all,  in 
affection  for  Jesus  Christ.  For  thus  speaks  our  blessed  Master, 
**  Unless  a  man  forsake  all  that  he  hath,  he  cannot  be  my  disciple." 
— And  so  the  apostle,  in  the  words  immediately  following  the 
text,  says,  *'  being  made  conformable  to  his  death  :"  thereby  im- 
plying>  that  we  cannot  know  the  power  of  Christ's  resurrection, 
unless  wc  are  made  conformable  to  him  in  his  death.  If  we  can 
reconcile  light  and  darkness,  heaven  and  hell,  then  we  may 
hope  to  know  the  power  of  Christ's  resurrection  without  dying 
to  ourselves  and  the  world.  But  till  we  can  do  this,  we  might 
as  well  expect  that  Christ  will  have  concord  with  Belial.  For 
there  is  such  a  contrariety  between  the  spirit  of  this  world,  and 
the  spirit  of  Jesus  Christ,  that  he  who  will  be  at  friendship 
with  the  one  must  be  at  enmity  with  the  other :  "  We  cannot 
serve  God  and  mammon."  This  may,  indeed,  seem  a  hard 
saying ;  and  many,  with  the  young  man  in  the  gospel,  may  be 
tempted  to  go  away  sorrowful.  But  wherefore  should  this  offend 
them  ?  For  what  is  all  that  is  in  the  world,  the  lust  of  the  eye, 
the  lust  of  the  flesh,  and  the  pride  of  life,  but  vanity,  and  vexa- 
tion of  spirit? 

God  is  love  ;  and  therefore,  could  our  own  wills,  or  the  worid, 
have  made  us  happy,  he  never  would  have  sent  his  own  dear 
Son  Jesus  Christ  to  die  and  rise  again,  to  deliver  us  from  the 
power  of  them.  But  because  they  only  torment,  and  cannot 
satisfy,  therefore  God  bids  us  to  renounce  them.  Had  any  one 
persuaded  profane  Esau  not  to  lose  so  glorious  a  privilege, 
merely  for  the  sake  of  gratifying  a  present  corrupt  inclination, 
when  ho  saw  him  about  to  sell  his  birth-right  for  a  Uttle  red  pot- 
tage, would  not  one  think  that  man  to  have  been  Esau's  friend? 
And  just  thus  stands  the  case  between  God  and  us.  By  the 
death  and  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ,  we  are  new-born  to  an 
heavenly  inheritance  amongst  all  them  which  are  sanctified ;  bnt 
our  own  corrupt  wills,  would  tempt  us  to  sell  this  fflorious  birth- 
rigbt  for  the  vanities  of  the  world,  which,  like  Esau  s  red  pottagi^ 


MV.]  INTGRPE8SION    EVERY   CHRISTIAN'S    DUTY.  585 

v.xixy  please  us  for  a  while,  but  will  soon  be  taken  away  from  us. 
God  knows  this,  and  therefore  rather  bids  us  renounce  them  for 
a  season,  than  for  the  short  enjoyment  of  them  lose  the  privilege 
of  that  glorious  birth-right,  to  which,  by  knowing  the  power  of 
the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ,  vfe  are  entitled. 

()  the  depth  of  the  riches  and  excellency  of  Christianity !  Well 
might  the  great  St.  Paul  count  all  things  but  dung  and  dross  for 
the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  it.  Well  might  he  desire  so 
ardently  to  know  Jesus,  and  the  power  of  his  resurrection.  For 
even  on  this  side  eternity  it  raises  us  above  the  world,  and  makes 
us  to  sit  in  heavenly  places  in  Christ  Jesus.  Well  might  that 
glorious  company  of  worthies,  recorded  in  the  holy  scriptures^ 
^supported  with  a  deep  sense  of  their  heavenly  calling,  despise 
the  pleasures  and  profits  of  this  life,  and  wander  about  in  sheep- 
skins, and  goat-skins,  in  dens  and  caves  of  the  earth,  being 
destitute,  ajSIicted,  tormented.  And  O  that  we  were  all  like- 
minded  !  that  we  felt  the  power  of  Christ's  resurrection  as  they 
did  !  IIow  should  we  then  ''count  all  things  as  dung  and  dross 
for  the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord  !" 
How  should  we  then  recover  our  primitive  dignity,  trample  the 
earth  under  our  feet,  and  with  our  souls  be  continually  gasping 
after  God. 

And  what  hinders  but  we  may  be  thus  minded  ?  Is  Jesus  Christ 
our  great  High-Priest,  altered  from  what  he  was?  No,  "he  is 
the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever."  And  though  he  be 
exalted  to  the  right-hand  of  God,  yet  he  is  not  ashamed  to  cal^ 
us  brethren.  The  power  of  bis  resurrection  is  as  great  now  as 
formerly,  and  the  Holy  Spirit,  whicl^  was  assured  to  us  by  his 
resurrection,  as  ready  and  able  to  quicken  us  who  are  dead  in 
trespasses  and  sins,  as  any  saint  that  ever  lived.  Let  us  but 
cry,  and  that  instantly,  to  him  that  is  mighty,  and  able  to  save ; 
let  us,  in  sincerity  aud  truth,  without  secretly  keeping  back  the 
least  part,  renounce  ourselves  and  the  world ;  then  we  shall  be 
Christians  indeed.  And  though  the  world  may  cast  us  put,  and 
separate  from  our  company,  yet  Jesus  Christ  will  walk  with,  audi 
abide  in  us.  And  at  tlie  general  resurrection  of  the  last  day^ 
when  the  voice  of  the  archangel  and  trump  of  God  shall  bid  the 
sea  and  the  graves  to  give  up  theii:  dead^  anci  all  nations  shall 
appear  before  him,  then  will  he  confess  us  before  his  Father  and 
the  holy  angels,  and  we  shall  receive  that  invitation  which  he 
shall  then  pronounce  to  all  who  love  and  ie^^r  him,  **  Come,  ye 
blessed  children  of  my  Father,  inherit  the  kingdom  prepared, 
for  you  from  the  beginning  of  the  world.'' — Grant  this,  O  Father,, 
for  thy  dear  Son's  sake,  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  ;  to  whom,  with 
thee,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  &c. 


SERMON  LIV. 

INTERCESSION    EVEEY   CHRISTIAN'S   DUTY. 

Brethren,  pray  for  its. — 1  Thess.  v.  25. 
If  Yfo  inquire,  why  there  is  so  little  love  to  be  found  amongst 
Christians,  why  the  very  characteristic,  by  which  every  one 


686  INTERCESSION    BVERV    CHRISTIANAS   DUTY.  [LIV. 

should  know  that  we  are  disciples  of  the  holy  Jesus»  is  almost 
banished  out  of  the  Christian  worlds  we  shall  find  it,  in  a  great 
measure-,  owing  to  a  neglect,  or  superficial  performance,  of  that 
excellent  part  of  prayer,  intercession,  or  imploring  the  divine 
grace  and  mercy  in  behalf  of  others. — Some  forget  this  duty  of 
praying  for  others,  because  they  seldom  remember  to  pray  for 
themselves :  and  even  those  who  are  constant  in  praying  to 
their  Father  who  is  in  heaven,  are  often  so  selfish  in  their 
addresses  to  the  throne  of  grace,  that  they  do  not  enlarge  their 
petitions  for  the  welfare  of  their  fellow  Christians  as  they 
ought ;  and  thereby  fall  short  of  attaining  that  Christian  cha- 
rity, that  unfeigned  love  to  their  brethren,  which  their  sacred 
profession  obliges  them  to  aspire  after,  and  without  which, 
though  they  should  bestow  all  their  goods  to  feed  the  poor, 
and  even  give  their  bodies  to  be  burned,  yet  it  would  profit 
them  nothing.  Since  these  things  are  so,  I  shall  from  the 
words  of  the  text  (though  originally  intended  to  be  more  con- 
fined) endeavour  to  shew, 

I.  First,  That  it  is  every  Christian's  duty  to  pray  for  others, 
as  well  as  for  himself. 

II.  Secondly,  Shew  whom  we  ought  to  pray  for,  and  in 
what  manner  we  should  do  it.     And, 

III.  Thirdly,  I  shall  offer  some  motives  to  excite  all  Chris- 
tians to  abound  in  this  great  duty  of  intercession. 

I.  First,  I  shall  endeavour  to  shew.  That  it  is  every  Chris- 
tian's duty  to  pray  for  others,  as  well  as  for  himself. 

Now,  prayer  is  a  duty  founded  on  natural  religion  ;  the  very 
heathens  never  neglected  it,  though  many  Christian  heathens 
amongst  us  do  :  and  it  is  so  essential  to  Christianity,  that  you 
might  as  reasonably  expect  to  find  a  living  man  without  breath, 
as  a  true  Christian  without  the  spirit  of  prayer  and  supplica- 
tion. Thus,  no  sooner  was  St.  Paul  converted,  but  '^behold 
he  prayeth,"  saith  the  Lord  Almighty.  And  thus  will  it  be 
with  every  child  of  God,  as  soon  as  he  becomes  such ;  prayer 
being  truly  called,  the  natural  cry  of  the  new-born  soul :  for  in 
the  heart  of  every  true  believer  there  is  a  heavenly  tendency, 
a  divine  attraction,  which  as  sensibly  draws  him  to  converse 
with  God,  as  the  loadstone  attracts  the  needle. 

A  deep  sense  of  their  own  weakness,  and  of  Christ's  fulness; 
a  strong  conviction  of  their  natural  corruption,  and  of  the 
necessity  of  renewing  grace ;  will  not  let  them  rest  from  crying 
day  and  night  to  their  almighty  Redeemer,  that  the  divine 
image,  which  they  lost  in  Adam,  may,  through  his  all-powerfnl 
mediation,  and  the  sanctifying  operations  of  his  blessed  Spirit, 
be  begun,  carried  on,  and  fully  perfected,  both  in  their  souls 
and  bodies.  Thus  earnest,  thus  importunate,  are  all  sincere 
Christians  in  praying  for  themselves :  but  thens  not  having  so 
lively,  lasting,  and  deep  a  sense  of  the  wants  of  their  Christian 
brethren,  they  are  for  the  most  part  too  remiss  and  defective 
in  their  prayers  for  them.  Whereas,  was  the  love  of  Grod  shed 
abroad  in  our  hearts,  and  did  we  love  our  neighboor  in  Ibat 


LIV.]  INTERCESSION    EVERY    CHRISTIAN'S    DUTY.  687 

manner,  in  which  the  Son  of  God  our  Saviour  loved  us,  and, 
according  to  his  command  and  example,  we  could  not  but  be 
as  importunate  for  their  spiritual  and  temporal  welfare^  as  for 
our  own ;  and  as  earnestly  desire  and  endeavour  that  others 
should  share  in  the  benefits  of  the  death  and  passion  of  Jesus 
Christ,  as  we  ourselves. 

Let  not  any  one  think,  that  this  is  an  uncommon  degree  of 
charity ;  an  high  pitch  of  perfection,  to  which  not  every  one 
can  attain :  for,  if  we  are  all  commanded  to  "  love  our  neigh- 
bour (that  is,  every  man)  even  as  ourselves/'  nay,  to  "lay  down 
our  lives  for  the  brethren ;"  then  it  is  the  duty  of  all  to  pray 
for  their  neighbours  as  much  as  for  themselves,  and,  by  all  pos- 
sible acts  and  expressions  of  love  and  afiection  towards  them, 
at  all  times,  to  shew  their  readiness  even  to  lay  down  their 
lives  for  them,  if  ever  it  should  please  God  to  call  them  to  it. 
Our  blessed  Saviour,  as  ''he  hath  set  us  an  example  that  we 
should  follow  his  steps"  in  every  thing  else,  so  hath  he  more 
especially  in  this :  for  in  that  divine,  that  perfect  and  inimita- 
ble prayer  (recorded  in  the  xviith  of  St.  John)  which  he  put 
up  just  before  his  passion,  we  find  but  few  petitions  for  his 
own,  though  many  for  his  disciples'  welfare :  and  in  that  per- 
fect form  which  he  has  been  pleased  to  prescribe  us,  we  are 
taught  to  say,  not  My,  but  "  Our  Father,"  thereby  to  put  us 
in  mind,  that,  whenever  we  approach  the  throne  of  grace,  we 
ought  to  pray  not  for  ourselves  alone,  but  for  all  our  brethren 
in  Christ. — Intercession  then  is  certainly  a  duty  incumbent  upon 
all  Christians. 

II.  Whom  we  are  to  intercede  for,  and  how  this  duty  is  to  be 
performed,  comes  next  to  be  considered. 

1.  And  first,  our  intercession  must  be  universal.  "  I  will, 
(says  the  apostle)  that  prayers,  supplications,  and  intercessions 
be  made  for  all  men."  For  as  God's  mercy  is  over  all  his 
works,  as  *Jesus  Christ  died  to  redeem  a  people  out  of  all 
nations  and  languages ;  so  we  should  pray,  that  "  all  men  may 
come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth,  and  be  saved."  Many 
precious  promises  are  made  in  holy  writ,  that  the  gospel  shall 
be  published  through  the  whole  world,  that  ''  the  earth  shall 
be  covered  with  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord,  as  the  waters 
cover  the  sea :"  and  therefore  it  is  our  duty  not  to  confine  our 
petitions  to  our  own  nation,  but  to  pray  that  all  those  nations, 
who  now  sit  in  darkness  and  in  the  shadow  of  death,  may  have 
the  glorious  gospel  shine  out  upon  them,  as  well  as  upon  us. 
But  you  need  not  that  any  man  should  teach  you  this,  since  ye 
yourselves  are  taught  of  God,  and  of  Jesus  Christ  himself,  to 
pray,  that  his  kingdom  may  come;  part  of  the  meaning  of 
which  petition  is,  that ''  God's  ways  may  be  known  upon  earth, 
and  his  saving  health  among  all  nations." 

2.  Next  to  the  praying  for  all  men,  we  should,  according  to 
St.  Paul's  rule,  pray  for  kings;  particularly  for  our  present 
sovereign  king  Oeorge,  and  all  that  are  put  in  authority  under 
him :  that  we  may  lead  quiet  lives  in  all  godliness  and  honesty. 


588  INTBRGESSION    EVERY   CHRISTIAN'S    DUTY.  [l1?. 

For,  if  we  consider  how  heavy  the  burden  of  government  is, 
and  how  much  the  welfare  of  any  people  depends  on  the  zeal 
and  godly  conversation  of  those  that  have  the  rule  over  them: 
if  we  set  before  us  the  many  dangers  and  difficulties  to  which 
governors  by  their  station  are  exposed^  and  the  continaal 
temptations  they  lie  under  to  luxury  and  self-indulgence ;  we 
shall  not  only  pity,  but  pray  for  them — that  he  who  preserved 
Esther,  David,  and  Josiah,  ^'unspotted  from  the  world"  amidst 
the  grandeur  of  a  court,  and  gave  success  to  their  designs, 
would  also  preserve  them  holy  and  unblameable,  and  prosper 
all  the  works  of  their  hands  upon  them.     But, 

3.  Thirdly y  You  ought,  in  a  more  especial  manner,  to  pray 
for  those,  whom  "  the  Holy  Ghost  hath  made  overseers  over 
you."    This  is  what  St.  Paul  begs,  again  and  again,  of  the 
churches  to  whom  he  writes :  Says  he  in  the  text,  "  Brethren, 
pray  for  us;"   and  again,  in   his   epistle   to    the  Ephesians, 
**  praying  always,  with  all  manner  of  supplication ;  and  for  me 
also,  that  I  may  open  my  mouth  boldly,  to  declare  the  mystery 
of  the  gospel."    And  in  another  place,  to  express  bis  earnest- 
ness in  this  request,  and  the  great  importance  of  their  prayers 
for.  him,  he  bids  the  church  "  strive,  (or,  as  the  original  word  sig- 
nifies, be  in  an  agony)  together  with  him  in  their  prayers*"  And 
surely,  if  the  great  St.  Paul,  that  chosen  vessel,  that  favourite 
of  heaven,  needed  the  most  importunate  prayers  of  his  Chris- 
tian converts ;   much  more  do  the  ordinary  ministers  of  the 
gospel  stand  in  need  of  the  intercession  of  their  respective 
flocks.    And  I  cannot  but  in  a  more  especial  mani^r  insist 
upon  this  branch  of  your  duty,  because  it  is  a  matter  of  such 
importance :  for,  no  doubt,  much  good  is  frequently  withheld 
from  many,  by  reason  of  their  neglecting  to   pray  for  their 
ministers,    and  which  they  would   have   received,    had   they 
prayed  for  them  as  they  ought.     Not  to  mention,  that  people 
often  complain  of  the  want  of  diligent  and  faithful   pastors. 
,  But  how  do  they  deserve  good  pastors,  who  will  not  earnestly 
pray  to  God  for  such  ?     If  we  will  not  pray  to  the  Lord  of  the 
harvest,  can  it  be  expected  he  will  send  forth  labourers  into 
his  harvest  ? — Besides,  what  ingratitude  is  it,  not  to  pray  for 
your  ministers  !     For  shall  they  watch  and  labour  in  the  word 
and  doctrine  for  you  and  your  salvation,  and  shall  not  yon 
pray  for  them  in  return  1     If  any  bestow  favours   on  your 
bodies,  you  think  it  right,  meet,  and  your  bounden  duty,  to 
pray  for  them;    and  shall  not  they  be  remembered  in  your 
prayers,  who  daily  feed  and  nourish  your  souls  ?     Add  to  all 
this,  that  praying  for  your  minisfers  will  be  a  manifest  proof 
of  your  believing,  that  though  Paul  plant,  and  Apollos  water, 
yet  it  is  Grod  alone  who  giveth  the  increase.    And  you  will 
also  find  it  the  best  means  you  can  use,  to  promote  your  own 
welfare ;  because  God,  in  answer  to  your  prayers,  may  impart 
a  double  portion  of  his  holy  Spirit  to  them,  whereby  they  will 
be  qualified  to  deal  out  to  you  larger  measures  of  knowledp 
in  spiritual  things,  and  be  enabled  miore  skilfully  to  divide  the 


LIV.]  iNTBtlOESSION    EVERY   CHltlSTIAK'S   DUTV.  689 

word  of  truth.  Would  men  but  constantly  observe  this  direc- 
tion, and  when  their  ministers  are  praying  in  their  name  to 
God,  humbly  beseech  him  to  perform  all  their  petitions ;  or, 
when  they  are  speaking  in  God  s  name  to  them,  pray  that  the 
Holy  Ghost  mtjy  fall  on  all  them  that  hear  the  word;  we 
should  find  a  more  visible  good  effect  of  their  doctrine,  and  a 
greater  mutual  love  between  niitiisters  and  their  people.  For 
ministers'  hands  would  then  be  held  up  by  the  people's  inter- 
cessions, and  the  people  will  never  dare  to  vilify  or  traduce 
those  who  are  the  constant  subjects  of  their  prayers. 

4.  Next  to  our  ministers,  our  friends  claim  a  place  in  our 
intercessions ;  but  then  we  should  not  content  ourselves  with 
praying  in  general  terms  for  them,  but  suit  our  prayers  to  their 
particular  circumstances.  When  Miriam  was  afflicted  with  a 
leprosy  from  God,  Moses  cried  and  said,  "Lord,  heal  her." 
And  when  the  nobleman  came  to  apply  to  Jesus  Christ  in 
behalf  of  bis  child,  he  said,  "Lord,  my  little  daughter  lieth  at 
the  point  of  death,  I  pray  thee  to  come  and  heal  her."  In  like 
manner,  when  our  friends  are  under  any  afflicting  circum* 
stances,  we  should  endeavour  to  pray  for  them,  with  a  par- 
ticular regard  to  those  circumstances.  Foir  instance:  is  a 
friend  sick  ?  We  should  pray,  that,  if  it  be  God's  good  plea- 
sure, it  may  not  be  unto  death ;  but  if  otherwise,  that  he  would 
give  him  grace  so  to  take  his  visitation,  that,  after  this  painful 
life  is  ended,  he  may  dwell  with  him  in  life  everlasting.  Ls  a 
friend  in  doubt  in  an  important  matter  ?  We  should  lay  his 
case  before  God,  as  Moses  did  that  of  the  daughters  of  Zelo* 
phehad,  and  pray  that  God's  Holy  Spirit  may  lead  him  into  all 
truth,  and  give  all  seasonable  direction.  Is  he  in  want  ?  We 
should  pray  that  his  faith  may  never  fail,,  and  that  iii  God's 
due  time  he  may  be  relieved.  And  in  all  other  cases,  we 
should  not  pray  for  our  friends  only  in  generals,  but  suit  our 
petitions  to  their  particular  sufferings  and  afflictions ;  for  other- 
wise, we  may  never  ask  perhaps  for  the  things  our  friends  most 
want. — It  must  be  confessed,  that  such  a  procedure  will  oblige 
some  often  to  break  from  the  forms  they  use ;  but  if  we  accus- 
tom ourselves  to  it,  and  have  a  deep  sense  of  what  we  ask  for^ 
the  most  illiterate  Christian  will  not  want  proper  words  to 
express  themselves.  We  have  many  noble  instances  in  holy 
scripture  of  the  success  of  this  kind  of  partictilar  intercession; 
but  none  more  remarkable  than  that  of  Abraham's  servant,  id 
the  book  of  Genesis,  who  being  sent  to  seek  a  wife  for  his  son 
Isaac,  prayed  in  a  most  particnlar  manner  in  his  behalf.  And 
the  sequel  of  the  story  informs  us,  how  remarkably  his  prayer 
was  answered.  And  did  Christians  now  pray  for  their  friends 
in  the  same  particular  manneri  and  with  the  same  faith,  as 
Abraham's  servant  did  for  his  master ;  they  would,  no  donbt^ 
in  many  instances,  receive  as  visible  answers,  and  have  as 
much  reason  to  bless  God  for  them,  as  he  had.     But, 

5.  As  we  ought  thus  to  intercfede  for  onr  friends,  so  in  like 
maBiier  must  we  also  pray  for  otir  inemks.    *'  Bless  them  thhftt 


500  INTBRGBSSION    EVERY   CHRISTIAN'S   DUTY.  [LIV, 

curse  you,  (says  Jesus  Christ,)  and  pray  for  them  that  despite- 
fully  use  you,  and  persecute  you."  Which  commands  he 
enforced  in  the  strongest  manner  by  his  own  example :  in  the 
very  agonies  and  pangs  of  death,  he  prayed  even  for  bis  mur- 
derers, "  Father,  forgive  them,  for  they  know  not  what  they 
do !"  This,  it  must  needs  be  confessed,  is  a  difScult  duty,  yet 
not  impracticable,  to  those  who  have  renounced  the  things  of 
this  present  life,  (from  an  inordinate  love  of  which  all  enmities 
arise,)  and  who,  knowing  the  terrible  woes  denounced  against 
those  who  ofifend  Christ's  little  ones,  can,  out  of  real  pity,  ain) 
a  sense  of  their  danger,  pray  for  those  by  whom  such  offences 
come. 

6.  Lastly,  and  to  conclude  this  head,  we  should  intercede  for 
all  that  are  any  ways  afflicted  in  mind,  body,  or  estate ;  for  all 
who  desire,  and  stand  in  need  of,  our  prayers,  and  for  all  who 
do  not  pray  for  themselves.  And  Oh !  that  all  who  hear  me 
would  set  apart  some  time  every  day  for  the  due  performaDce 
of  this  most  necessary  duty  !  In  order  to  which,  I  shall  now 
proceed, 

III.  To  shew  the  advantages,  and  oSer  some  considerations 
to  excite  you  to  the  practice  of  daily  intercession.     And, 

1.  First,  It  will  fill  your  hearts  with  love  one  to  another. 
He  that  every  day  heartily  intercedes  at  the  throne  of  grace  lor 
all  mankind,  cannot  but  in  a  short  time  be  filled  with  love  aod 
charity  to  all :  and  the  frequent  exercise  of  his  love  in  this 
manner,  will  insensibly  enlarge  his  heart,  and  make  him  par- 
taker of  that  exceeding  abundance  of  it  which  is  in  Christ 
Jesus  our  Lord  !  Envy,  malice,  revenge,  and  such-like  hellish 
tempers,  can  never  long  harbour  in  a  gracious  intercessors 
breast ;  but  he  will  be  filled  with  joy,  peace,  meekness,  long- 
suiTering,  and  all  other  graces  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  By  fre- 
quently laying  his  neighbour's  wants  before  God,  he  will  be 
touched  with  a  fellow-feeling  of  them;  he  will  rejoice  with 
those  that  do  rejoice,  and  weep  with  those  that  weep.  Every 
blessing  bestowed  on  others,  instead  of  exciting  envy  in  him, 
will  be  looked  on  as  an  answer  to  his  particular  intercessioD, 
and  fill  his  soul  with  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory. 

Abound  therefore  in  acts  of  general  and  particular  interces* 
sion ;  and  tvhen  you  hear  of  your  neighbour's  faults,  instead 
of  relating  them  to,  and  exposing  them  before  others,  lay  them 
in  secret  before  God,  and  beg  of  him  to  correct  and  amend 
them.  When  you  hear  of  a  notorious  sinner,  instead  of  think- 
ing you  do  well  to  be  angry,  beg  of  Jesus  Christ  to  convert, 
and  make  him  a  monument  of  his  free  grace  :  you  cannot  ima- 
gine what  a  blessed  alteration  this  practice  will  make  in  your 
heart,  and  how  much  you  will  increase  day  by  day  in  the  i»pirit 
of  love  and  meekness  towards  all  mankind  ! 

But  farther,  to  excite  you  to  the  constant  practice  of  this 
duty  of  intercession,  consider  the  many  instances  in  holy  scrip- 
ture, of  the  power  and  efficacy  of  it.  Great  and  excellent 
things  are  there  recorded  as  tlie  efiects  of  this  divine  employ. 


LIV.]  INTERCESSION    EVERY    GHRISTIAT^'S    DVTY,  S9i 

It  has  stopped  plagues,  it  has  opened  and  shut  heaven,  and  has 
frequently  turned  away  God's  fury  from  his  people.  How  was 
Abimelech's  house  freed  from  the  disease  God  sent  amongst 
them,  at  the  intercession  of  Abraham!  When  '^Phinehas  stood 
up  and  prayed/'  how  soon  did  the  plague  cease !  When  Daniel 
humbled  and  afflicted  his  soul,  and  interceded  for  the  Lord's 
inheritance,  how  quickly  was  an  angel  despatched,  to  tell  him 
"  his  prayer  was  heard  !"  And,  to  mention  but  one  instance  moro, 
how  does  Grod  own  himself  as  it  were  overcome  with  the  impor- 
tunity of  Moses,  when  he  was  interceding  for  his  idolatrous 
people;  " Let  me  alone,"  says  God! — This  sufficiently  shews, 
I  could  almost  say,  the  omnipotency  of  intercession,  and  how 
we  may,  like  Jacob,  wrestle  with  God,  and  by  an  holy  violence 
prevail  both  for  ourselves  and  others.  And  no  doubt  it  is  owing 
to  the'  secret  and  prevailing  intercessions  of  the  few  righteous 
souls  who  still  remain  among  us,  that  God  has  yet  spared  this 
miserably  sinful  nation :  for  were  there  not  some  such  faithful 
ones,  like  Moses,  left  to  stand  in  the  gap,  we  should  soon  be  de- 
stroyed, even  as  was  Sodom,  and  reduced  to  ashes  like  unto 
Gomorrah. 

But,  to  stir  you  up  yet  farther  to  this  exercise  of  intercession, 
consider,  that  in  all  probability,  it  is  the  frequent  employment 
even  of  the  glorified  saints  :  for  though  they  are  delivered  from 
the  burden  of  the  flesh,  and  restored  to  the  glorious  liberty  of 
the  sons  of  God,  yet  as  their  happiness  cannot  be  perfectly  con- 
summated till  the  resurrection  of  the  last  day,  when  all  their 
brethren  will  be  glorified  with  them,  we  cannot  but  think  they  are 
often  importunate  in  beseeching  our  heavenly  Father,  shortly  to 
accomplish  the  number  of  his  elect,  and  to  hasten  his  kingdom. 
And  shall  not  we,  who  are  on  earth,  be  often  exercised  in  this 
divine  employ  with  the  glorious  company  of  the  spirits  of  just 
men  made  perfect  ?  Since  our  happiness  is  so  much  to  consist  in 
the  communion  of  saints  in  the  church  triumphant  above,  shall 
wc  not  frequently  intercede  for  the  church  militant  here  below ; 
and  earnestly  beg,  that  we  may  all  be  one,  even  as  the  holy  Jesus 
and  his  Father  are  one,  that  we  may  also  be  made  perfect  in  one? 

To  provokeyou  to  this  great  work  and  labour  of  love,  remem- 
ber, that  it  is  the  never-ceasing  employment  of  the  holy  and 
highly  exalted  Jesus  himself,  who  sits  at  the  right  hand  of  God, 
to  hear  all  our  prayers,  and  to  make  continual  intercession  for 
us  !  So  that  he  who  is  constantly  employed  in  interceding  for 
others,  is  doing  that  on  earth,  which  the  eternal  Son  of  God  is 
always  doing  in  heaven.  Imagine  therefore,  when  you  are  lifting 
up  holy  hands  in  prayer  for  one  another,  that  you  see  the  hea- 
vens opened,  and  the  Son  of  God  in  all  his  glory,  as  the  great 
High-Priest  of  your  salvation,  pleading  for  you  the  all-sufficient 
merit  of  his  sacrifice,  before  the  throne  of  his  heavenly  Father ! 

Join  then  your  intercessions  with  his,  and  beseech  him,  that 
they  may,  through  him,  come  up  as  incense,  and  be  received  as 
a  sweet-smelling  savour,  acceptable  in  the  sight  of  God  !  This 
imagination  will  strengthen  your  faith,  excite  a  holy  earnestness 


592  INTERCESSION    EVERY   CHRISTIAN'S   DUTY.  [hlY. 

In  your  prayers,  and  make  you  wrestle  with  God  as  Jacob  did^ 
when  he  saw  hun  face  to  face,  and  his  life  was  preserved ;  as 
Abraham,  when  he  pleaded  for  Sodom ;  and  as  Jesus  Christ 
himself,  when  he  prayed,  being  in  an  agony,  so  much  the  more 
eahiestly,  the'  night  before  his  bitter  passion. 

And  now,  brethren,  what  shall  I  say  more,  since  you  are 
taught  of  Jesus  Christ  himself,  to  abound  in  love,  and  in  this 
good  work  of  praying  one  for  another.  Though  ever  so  mean, 
though  as  poor  as  Lazarus,  you  will  then  become  benefactors  to 
all  mankind ;  thousands,  and  twenty  times  ten  thousands,  wiH 
then  be  blessed  for  your  sakes !  and  after  you  have  employed  a 
few  years  in  this  divine  exercise  here,  you  will  be  translated  to 
that  happy  place  where  you  have  so  often  wished  others  might 
be  advanced ;  and  be  exalted  to  sit  at  the  right  hand  of  our  all- 
powerful,  all-prevailing  Intercessor,  in  the  Ungdom  of  bis  hea- 
venly Father  hereafter.  However,  I  cannot  but  in  an  especial 
manner  press  this  upon  you  now,  because  k\l  ye,  amongst  whom 
I  have  now  been  preaching,  in  all  probability  will  see  me  no 
more ;  for  I  am  now  going  (I  trust  under  the  conduct  of  Grod's 
most  holy  Spirit)  from  you,  knowing  not  what  shall  befall  me;  I 
need  therefore  your  most  importunate  intercessions,  that  nothing 
may  move  me  from  my  duty,  and  that  I  may  not  ''count  even 
my  life  dear  unto  myself,  so  that  I  may  finish  my  course  with 
joy,  and  the  ministry  I  have  received  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  to  testify 
the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God  !'* 

Whilst  I  have  been  here,  to  the  best  of  my  knowledge,  I  have 
hot  failed  to  declare  unto  you  the  whole  will  of  God:  and 
though  my  preaching  may  have  been  a  savour  of  death  unto 
death  to  some,  yet  I  trust  it  has  been  also  a  Savour  of  life  unto 
life  to  others ;  and  therefore  I  earnestly  hope  that  these  ¥riU 
not  fail  to  remember  me  in  their  prayers.  As  for  my  own  part, 
the  many  unmerited  kindnesses  I  have  received  from  you,  wiU 
not  suffer  me  to  forget  you :  out  of  the  deep,  therefore,  I  trust, 
shall  my  cry  come  unto  God ;  and  whilst  the  winds  and  storms 
are  blowing  over  me,  unto  the  Lord  will  I  make  my  supplication 
for  you.  For  it  is  but  a  little  while,  and  ''  we  must  all  appear 
before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ ;"  where  I  must  give  a  strict 
account  of  the  doctrine  I  have  preached,  and  you  of  your  im- 
proyeinent  under  it.  And  O  that  I  may  never  be  called  out  as 
a  swift  witness  against  any  of  those,  for  whose  salvation  i 
have  sincerely,  though  too  faintly,  longed  and  laboured !  It 
is  true,  I  have  been  censured  by  some  as  acting  out  of  siaistef 
and  selfish  views ;  ''but  it  is  a  small  matter  with  me  to  be  judged 
by  man's  judgment ;"  I  hope  my  eye  is  single ;  but  I  beseed 
you,  brethren,  by  the  mercies  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus,  pray  Oa/t 
it  may  be  more  so !  and  that  I  may  increase  with  the  increase 
of  grace  in  the  knowledge  and  love  of  Grod,  through  Jesus  Onist 
our  Lord. 

And  now,  brethren,  what  shall  I  say  more  ?  I  eould  wish  to 
continue  my  discourse  much  longer;  for  I  can  never  fidly 
express  the  desire  of  my  soul  towards  you !    Finally,  therdbre, 


LV.]  PERSECUTION    EVERY    CHRISTIAN'S    LOT.  593 

brethren,  "  whatsoever  things  are  holy,  whatsoever  things  are 
pare,  whatsoever  things  are  honest,  whatsoever  things  are  of 
good  report :  if  there  be  any  consolation  in  Christ,  if  any  fel- 
lowship of  the  Spirit,"  if  any*hopes  of  our  appearing  to  the 
comfort  of  each  other  at  the  awful  tribunal  of  Jesus  Christ, 
''  tliink  of  the  thk:igs  that  you  have  heard,"  and  of  those  which 
your  pastors  have  declared,  and  will  yet  declare  unto  you ; 
and  continue  under  their  ministry  to  ''work  out  your  own  sal- 
vation with  fear  and  trembling:"  so  that  whether  I  should 
never  see  you  any  more,  or  whether  it  shall  please  God  to 
bring  me  back  again  at  any  time,  I  may  always  have  the 
satisfaction  of  knowing  that  your  conversation  is  such  ''  as 
becometh  the  gospel  of  Christ." — I  almost  persuade  myself, 
that  I  could  willingly  suffer  all  things,  so  that  it  might  any 
ways  promote  the  salvation  of  your  precious  and  immortal 
souls;  and  I  beseech  you,  as  my  last  request,  ''obey  them  that 
have  the  rule  over  you  in  the  Lord ;"  and  be  always  ready  to 
attend  on  their  ministry,  as  it  is  your  bounden  duty.  Think 
not  that  I  desire  to  have  myself  exalted  at  the  expense  of 
another's  character;  but  rather  think  this,  not  to  have  any  man's 
person  too  much  in  admiration,  but  esteem  all  your  ministers 
highly  in  love,  as  they  justly  deserve  for  their  work's  sake. 

And  now,  "brethren,  I  commend  you  to  God,  and  to  the 
word  of  his  grace,  which  is  able  to  build  you  up,  and  give  you 
an  inheritance  amongst  all  them  that  are  sanctified."  May 
God  reward  you  for  all  your  works  of  faith,  and  labours  of 
love,  and  make  you  to  abound  more  and  more  in  every  good 
word  and  work  towards  all  men.  May  he  truly  convert  all 
that  have  been  convinced,  and  awaken  all  that  are  dead  in 
trespasses  and  sins !  May  he  confirm  all  that  are  wavering ! 
And  may  you  all  go  on  from  one  degree  of  grace  unto  another, 
till  you  arrive  unto  the  measure  of  the  stature  of  the  fulness 
of  Christ ;  and  thereby  be  made  meet  to  stand  before  that  God, 
"  in  whose  presence  is  the  fulness  of  joy,  and  at  whose  right 
hand  there  are  pleasures  for  evermore!"  Amen!  Amen! 

SERMON  LV. 

PERSECUTION    BVERY    CHRISTIAN'S    LOT. 

Yea,  and  all  that  will  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus,  shall  suffer 

persecution. — 2  Tim.  iiL  12. 

When  our  Lord  was  pleased  to  take  upon  himself  the  form 
o£  a  servant,  and  to  go  about  preaching  the  kingdom  of  God ; 
he  took  all  opportunities  in  public,  and  more  especially  in  pri- 
Yate,  to  caution  his  disciples  against  seeking  great  things  for 
themselves,  and  also  to  forewarn  them  of  the  many  distresses, 
afflictions,  and  persecutions,  which  they  must  expect  to  endure 
for  his  name's  sake.  The  great  apostle  P^ul  therefore,  the 
author  of  this  epistle,  in  this,  as  in  all  other  things,  following 
the  steps  of  his  blessed  Master,  takes  particular  care,  among 
other  apostolical  admonitions,  to  warn  young  Timothy  of  th^ 
♦  2o 


504  PBRSRCUTION    BVERY    CHRISTIAN'S   LOT.  [lv. 

difficulties  he  mast  expect  to  meet  with  in  the  coarse  of  his 
ministry :  "  this  know  also,  that  in  the  last  days  perilous  times 
shall  come.  For  men  shall  be  lovers  of  their  own  selves^ 
covetous,  proud,  blasphemers,  disobedient  to  parents,  unthank- 
ful, unholy,  without  natural  affection,  truce-breakers,  false 
accusers,  incontinent,  fierce,  despisers  of  those  that  are  good, 
traitors,  heady,  high-minded,  lovers  of  pleasure  more  than 
lovers  of  God ;  having  a  form  of  godliness,  but  denying  the 
power  thereof:  from  such  turn  away.  For  of  this  sort  are 
they  who  creep  into  houses,  and  lead  captive  silly  women 
laden  with  sins,  led  away  with  divers  lusts,  ever  learning,  and 
never  able  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth.  Now,  as 
JTannes  and  Jambres  (two  of  the  Egyptian  magicians)  with- 
stood Moses,  (by  working  sham  miracles,)  so  do  they  also  resist 
the  truth ;  and  (notwithstanding  they  keep  up  the  form  of 
religion)  are  men  of  corrupt  minds,  reprobate  concerning  tho 
faith."  But,  in  order  to  keep  him  from  sinking  under  their 
opposition,  he  tells  him,  that  thougli  God,  for  wise  ends,  per- 
mitted these  false  teachers,  as  he  did  the  magicians,  to  oppose 
for  some  time,  yet  they  should  now  proceed  no  farther :  **  for 
their  folly  (says  he)  shall  be  made  manifest  unto  all  men,  as 
theirs  (the  magicians)  also  was,"  when  they  could  not  stand 
before  Moses  because  of  the  boil ;  for  the  boil  was  upon  the 
magicians,  as  well  as  upon  all  the  Egyptians.  And  then,  to 
encourage  Timothy  yet  the  more,  he  propounds  to  him  his 
own  example ;  **  But  thou  hast  fully  known  my  doctrine,  man- 
ner of  life,  purpose,  faith,  long-suffering,  charity,  pat*ence, 
persecutions,  afflictions,  which  came  unto  me  at  Antioch,  at 
Iconium,  at  Lystra ;  what  persecutions  I  endured ;  but  out  of 
them  all  the  Lord  delivered  me."  And  then,  lest  Timothy 
might  think  that  this  was  only  the  particular  case  of  Paul,  says 
he  in  the  words  of  the  text,  ''  yea,  and  all  that  will  live  godly 
in  Christ  Jesus,  shall  suffer  persecution." 

The  words,  without  considering  them  as  they  stand  in  rela- 
tion to  the  context,  contain  an  important  truth,  that  persecu- 
tion is  the  common  lot  of  every  godly  man.  This  is  a  hard 
saying,  how  few  can  bear  it  ?  I  trust,  God,  in  the  following 
discourse,  will  enable  me  to  make  it  good,  by  shewing, 

I.  What  it  is  to  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus. 

II.  The  different  kinds  of  persecution  to  which  they,  vrho  lire 
godly,  are  exposed. 

III.  Why  it  is,  that  godly  men  must  expect  to  suffer  persecution. 
Lastly,  We  shall  apply  the  w  hole. — 1.  First,  Let  us  consider 

what  it  is  to  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus.  This  supposes  that 
we  are  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  Christ,  that  we  are 
bom  again,  and  are  one  with  Christ  by  a  living  faith  and  t 
vital  union,  even  as  Jesus  Christ  and  the  Father  are  One 
Unless  we  are  thus  converted,  and  transformed  by  the  renew- 
ing of  our  minds,  we  cannot  properly  be  said  to  be  in  Christ, 
much  less  to  live  godly  in  him.  To  be  in  Christ  merely  by 
baptism,  and  an  outward  profession^  is  not  to  be  in  him  in  the 


LV.]  PERSECUTION    EVERY    CHRISTIAN'S    LOT.  696 

Strict  sense  of  the  word  :  no,  "  they  that  ate  in  Christy  are  new 
creatures ;  old  things  are  passed  away,  and  all  things  are 
become  new"  in  their  hearts.  Their  lite  is  hid  with  Christ  ia 
God  ;  their  souls  daily  feed  on  the  invisible  realities  of  another 
world.  To  *Mive  godly  in  Christ,"  is  to  make  the  divine  will, 
and  not  our  own,  the  sole  principle  of  all  our  thoughts,  words, 
and  actions ;  so  that,  ''  whether  we  eat  or  drink,  or  whatsoever 
wc  do,  we  do  all  to  the  glory  of  God."  Those  who  live  godly 
in  Christ,  may  not  so  much  be  said  to  live,  as  Christ  to  live  in 
them  :  he  is  their  Alpha  and  Omega,  their  first  and  last,  their 
beginning  and  end.  They  are  led  by  his  Spirit,  as  ^  child  is 
led  by  the  hand  of  its  father;  and  are  willing  to  follow  the 
Lamb  whithersoever  he  leads  them.  They  hear,  know,  and 
obey  his  voice.  Their  affections  are  set  on  things  above ;  their 
hopes  are  full  of  immortality ;  their  citizenship  is  in  heaven. 
Being  born  again  of  God,  they  habitually  live  to,  and  daily 
walk  with,  God.  They  are  pure  in  heart ;  and,  from  a  prin- 
ciple of  faith  in  Christ,  are  holy  in  all  manner  of  conversation 
and  godliness.  This  is  to  'Mive  godly  in  Christ  Jesus  :"  and 
hence  we  may  easily  learn  why  so  few  suffer  persecution  ? 
Because,  so  few  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus.  You  may  live 
formally  in  Christ,  you  may  attend  on  outward  duties ;  yoa 
may  live  morally  in  Christ,  you  may  (as  they  term  it)  do  no 
one  any  harm,  and  avoid  persecution  :  but  they  **  that  will  live 
godly  in  Christ  Jesus,  shall  suffer  persecution." 

2.  Secondly,  What  is  the  meaning  of  the  word  Persecution, 
and  how  many  kinds  there  are  of  it,  I  come  now  to  consider. 

The  word  Persecution,  is  derived  from  a  Greek  word  signi- 
fying to  pursue,  and  generally  implies  pursuing  a  person  for  the 
sake  of  his  goodness,  or  God's  good-will  to  him.  The  First 
kind  of  it,  is  that  of  the  heart.  We  have  an  early  example 
of  this  in  that  wicked  one  Cain,  who,  because  the  Lord  had 
respect  to  Abel  and  his  offering,  and  not  to  him  and  his  offer- 
ing, was  very  wroth,  his  countenance  fell,  and  at  length  he 
cruelly  slew  his  envied  brother.  Thus  the  Pharisees  hated 
and  persecuted  our  Lord  long  before  they  laid  hold  on  him  : 
and  our  Lord  mentions  being  inwardly  hated  of  men,  as  one 
kind  of  persecution  his  disciples  were  to  undergo.  This  heart 
enmity  (if  I  may  so  term  it)  is  the  root  of  all  other  kinds  of 
persecution,  and  is,  in  some  degree  or  other,  to  be  found  in  the 
soul  of  every  unregenerate  man ;  and  numbers  are  guilty  of 
this  persecution,  who  never  have  it  in  their  power  to  persecute 
any  other  way.  Nay,  numbers  would  actually  put  in  practice 
all  other  degrees  of  persecution,  were  not  the  name  of  perse- 
cution become  odious  amongst  mankind,  and  did  they  not 
hereby  run  the  hazard  of  losing  their  reputation.  Alas  !  how 
many  at  the  great  day,  whom  we  know  not  now,  will  be  con- 
vi«.ted  and  condemned,  that  all  their  life  harboured  a  secret 
evil-will  against  Zion  !  They  may  now  screen  it  before  men ; 
but  God  seeth  the  enmity  of  their  hearts,  and  will  judge  them 
as  persecutors  at  the  great  and  terrible  day  of  judgment. 

2o2 


596  PERSECUTION    EVERY    CHRISTIAN'S    LOT.  [LT. 

A  Second  degree  of  persecution  is  that  of  the  tongue:  "oat 
of  the  abundance  of  the  heart,  the  mouth  speaketh."  Many, 
I  suppose,  think  it  no  harm  to  shoot  out  arrows,  even  bitter 
words,  against  the  disciples  of  the  Lord :  they  scatter  their 
firebrands,  arrows,  and  death,  saying,  **  Are  we  not  in  sport?" 
But,  however  they  may  esteem  it,  in  God's  account  evil-speak- 
ing is  a  high  degree  of  persecution.  Thus  Ishmaels  mocking 
Isaac,  ir  termed  persecuting  him.  '*  Blessed  are  ye  (says  our 
Lord)  when  men  shall  revile  you  and  persecute  you,  and  shall 
say  all  manner  of  evil  against  you  falsely  for  my  name's  sake." 
For  whence  we  may  gather,  that  reviling,  and  speaking  all 
manner  of  evil,  for  Christ's  sake,  is  a  high  degree  of  persecu- 
tion. For  "  a  good  name  (says  the  wise  man)  is  ^jetter  than 
precious  ointment,"  and,  to  many,  is  dearer  than  life  itself.  It 
is  a  great  breach  of  the  sixth  commandment,  to  slander  any 
one :  but  to  speak  evil  of  and  slander  the  disciples  of  Christ, 
merely  because  they  are  his  disciples,  must  be  highly  provok- 
ing in  the  sight  of  God ;  and  such  who  are  guilty  of  it  (without 
repentance)  will  find  that  Jesus  Christ  will  call  them  to  an 
account,  and  punish  tliem  for  all  their  ungodly  and  hard 
speeches,  in  a  lake  of  fire  and  brimstone.  This  shall  be  their 
portion  to  drink. 

The  Third  and  last  kind  of  persecution,  is  that  which 
expresses  itself  in  actions :  as  when  wicked  men  separate  the 
children  of  God  from  their  company:  "Blessed  are  ye,  (says 
our  Lord,)  when  they  shall  separate  you  from  their  company:" 
or  expose  them  to  church-censures.  "  They  shall  put  you  out 
of  their  synagogues ;"  threatening  and  prohibiting  {liem  from 
making  an  open  profession  of  his  religion  or  worship;  or  inter- 
dicting ministers  for  preaching  his  word,  as  the  high-priests 
threatened  the  apostles,  and  "  forbade  them  any  more  to  speak 
in  the  name  of  Jesus;"  and  Paul  breathed  out  threatenings 
and  slaughters  against  the  disciples  of  the  Lord :  or  when  they 
call  them  into  courts ;  "  you  shall  be  called  before  governors," 
says  our  Lord  :  or  when  they  fine,  imprison,  or  punish  them,  by 
confiscation  of  goods,  cruel  scourging,  and,  lastly,  death  itself. 

ft  would  be  impossible  to  enumerate  in  what  various  shapes 
persecution  has  appeared.  It  is  a  many-headed  monster,  cruel 
as  the  grave,  insatiable  as  hell ;  and,  what  is  worse,  it  gene- 
rally appears  under  the  cloak  of  religion.  But,  cmel,  insa- 
tiable, and  horrid  as  it  is,  they  that  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus, 
must  expect  to  sufiTer  and  encounter  with  it  in  all  its  forms. 
This  is  what  we  are  to  make  good  under  our  next  general  head. 

3.  Thirdly^  Why  is  it  that  godly  men  must  expect  to  suffer 
persecution? — And,  jFiVif,  This  appears  from  the  whole  tenor 
of  our  Lord's  doctrine.  We  will  begin  with  his  divine  seimoa 
on  the  mount.  ''  Blessed  are  they  w^ho  are  persecuted  for  righ- 
teousness' sake;  for  theirs  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  So 
tliat,  if  our  Lord  spake  truth,  we  are  not  so  blessed  as  to  have 
an  interest  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  unless  we  are  or  have 
been  persecuted  for  righteousness'  sake.     Nay,  ooi  Lord  (it  i« 


LVj  PERSECUTION    EVERY    CHRISTIAN'S   LOT,  507 

remarkable)  employs  three  verses  in  this  beatitudey  and  only 
one  in  each  of  the  others ;  not  only  to  shew  that  it  was  a  thing 
which  men  (as  men)  are  unwilling  to  believe,  but  also  the 
necessary  consequence  of  it  upon  our  being  Christians.     This 
is  likewise  evident  from  all  those  passages,  wherein  our  Lord 
informs  us,  that  he  came  upon  the  earth,  ''  not  to  send  peace, 
but  a  sword ;"  and  that  the  father-in-law  should  be  against  the 
mother-in-law,  and  a  man's  foes  should  l)e  those  of  his  own 
household :   passages  which,  though    confined    by  false    pro- 
phets to  the  first,  I  am  persuaded  will  be  verified  by  the  expe- 
rience of  all  true  Christians  in  this,  and  every  age  of  the  church. 
It  would  be  endless  to  recount  all  the  places,  wherein  our  Lord 
forewarns  his  disciples,  that  they  should  be  called  before  rulers, 
and  thrust  out  of  synagogues,  nay,  that  the  time  would  come, 
wherein  men  should  think  they  did  God  service,  to  kill  them. 
For  this  reason  he  so  frequently  declared,  that  '^  unless  a  man 
forsook  all  that  he  had,  and  even  hated  life  itself,  he  could  not 
be  his  disciple."     And  therefore  it  is  wortliy  our  observation, 
that  in  the  remarkable  passage,  wherein  our  Lord  makes  such 
an  extensive  promise  to  those  who  left  all  for  him,  he  cau-* 
tiously  inserts  persecution.     "  And  Jesus  answered  and  said. 
Verily  I  say  unto  you.  There  is  no  man  that  hath  left  house,  or 
brethren,  or  sisters,  or  father,  or  mother,  or  wife,  or  children, 
or  lands,  for  my  sake  and  the  gospel's,  but  he  shall  receive  an 
hundred-fold  now  in  this  time;  houses,  and  brethren,  and  sisters 
and  mothers,  and  children,  and  lands,  with  persecutions ;  (the 
word  is  in  the  plural  number,  including  all  kinds  of  persecu** 
tion ;)  and  in  the  world  to  come  eternal  life."    He  that  hath  ears 
to  hear,  let  him  hear  what  Christ  says  in  all  these  passages, 
and  then  confess,  that  all  who  will  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus, 
shall  suffer  persecution. 

As  this  is  proved  from  our  Lord's  doctrine,  so  it  is  no  less 
evident  from  his  life.  Follow  him  from  the  manger  to  the 
cross,  and  see  whether  any  persecution  was  like  that  which 
the  Son  of  God,  the  Lord  of  glory,  underwent  whilst  here  on 
earth.  How  was  he  hated  by  wicked  men  !  How  often  would 
that  hatred  have  excited  them  to  lay  hold  of  him,  had  it  not  been 
for  fear  of  the  people  !  How  was  he  reviled,  counted  and  called 
a  Blasphemer,  a  Winebibber,  a  Samaritan,  nay,  a  Devil,  and,  in 
one  word,  had  all  manner  of  evil  spoken  against  him  falsely  I 
What  contradiction  of  sinners  did  he  endure  against  himself  I 
How  did  men  separate  from  his  company,  and  were  ashamed 
to  walk  with  him  openly  !  Insomuch  that  he  once  said  to  his 
own  disciples,  **  Will  you  also  go  away !"  Again,  How  was 
be  stoned,  thrust  out  of  the  synagogues,  arraigned  as  a 
deceiver  of  the  people,  a  seditious  and  pestilent  fellow,  an 
enemy  to  Caesar,  and  as  such  scourged,  blindfolded,  spit 
apop,  and  at  length  condemned,  and  nailed  to  an  accursed 
tree!  Thus  was  the  Master  persecuted,  thus  did  the  Lord 
suffer  ;  and  the  servant  is  not  above  his  Master,  nor  the  dis- 
eiirie  above  his  Lord  :  ''  If  they  have  persecuted  me,  they  will 


592  INTERCESSION    EVERY   CHRISTIAN'S    DUTY.  [LIV. 

in  your  prayers,  and  make  you  wrestle  with  God  as  Jacob  did, 
when  he  saw  him  face  to  face,  and  his  life  was  preserved ;  as 
Abraham,  when  he  pleaded  for  Sodom ;  and  as  Jesus  Christ 
himself,  when  he  prayed,  being  in  an  agony,  so  much  the  more 
earnestly,  the  night  before  his  bftter  passion. 

And  now,  brethren,  what  shall  I  say  more,  since  you  are 
taught  of  Jesus  Christ  himself,  to  abound  in  love,  and  in  this 
good  work  of  praying  one  for  another.  Though  ever  so  meoD, 
though  as  poor  as  Lazarus,  you  will  then  become  benefactors  to 
all  mankind ;  thousands,  and  twenty  times  ten  thousands,  will 
then  be  blessed  for  your  sakes !  and  after  you  have  employed  a 
few  years  in  this  divine  exercise  here,  you  will  be  translated  to 
that  happy  place  where  you  have  so  often  wished  others  might 
be  advanced ;  and  be  exalted  to  sit  at  the  right  hand  of  our  all- 
powerful,  all-prevailing  Intercessor,  in  the  kingdom  of  his  hea- 
venly Father  hereafter.  However,  I  cannot  but  in  an  especial 
manner  press  this  upon  you  now,  because  all  ye,  amongst  whom 
I  have  now  been  preaching,  in  all  probability  will  see  me  no 
more ;  for  I  am  now  going  (I  trust  under  the  conduct  of  God's 
most  holy  Spirit)  from  you,  knowing  not  what  shall  befall  me;  I 
need  therefore  your  most  importunate  intercessions,  that  nothing 
may  move  me  from  my  duty,  and  that  I  may  not  "count  even 
my  life  dear  unto  myself,  so  that  I  may  finish  my  course  with 
joy,  and  the  ministry  I  have  received  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  to  testify 
the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God !" 

Whilst  I  have  been  here,  to  the  best  of  my  knowledge,  I  have 
hot  failed  to  declare  unto  you  the  whole  will  of  God:  and 
though  my  preaching  may  have  been  a  savour  of  death  unto 
death  to  some,  yet  I  trust  it  has  been  also  a  Savour  of  life  unto 
life  to  others ;  and  therefore  I  earnestly  hope  that  these  will 
not  fail  to  remember  me  in  their  prayers.  As  for  my  own  part, 
the  many  unmerited  kindnesses  I  have  received  from  you,  wiU 
not  suffer  me  to  forget  you :  out  of  the  deep,  therefore,  I  trust, 
shall  my  cry  come  unto  God ;  and  whilst  the  winds  and  storms 
are  blowing  over  me,  unto  the  Lord  will  I  make  my  supplication 
for  you.  For  it  is  but  a  little  while,  and  "  we  must  all  appear 
before  the  judgment-seat  of  Christ ;"  where  I  must  gire  a  strict 
account  of  the  doctrine  I  have  preached,  and  you  of  your  im- 
provement under  it.  And  O  that  I  may  never  be  called  out  as 
a  swift  witness  against  any  of  those,  for  whose  salvation  I 
have  sincerely,  though  too  faintly,  longed  and  laboured !  It 
is  true,  I  have  been  censured  by  some  as  acting  out  of  sinister 
and  selfish  views ;  ''but  it  is  a  small  matter  with  me  to  be  jodgd 
by  man's  judgment ;'"  I  hope  my  eye  is  single ;  but  I  beseed 
you,  brethren,  by  the  mercies  of  God  in  Christ  Jesas,  pray  tint 
it  may  be  more  so !  and  that  I  may  increase  with  the  increase 
of  grace  in  the  knowledge  and  love  of  God,  through  Jesus  Oirist 
our  Lord. 

And  now,  brethren,  what  shall  I  say  more  ?  I  could  wiA  to 
continue  my  discourse  much  longer;  for  I  can  never  fvDf 
express  the  desire  of  my  soul  towards  you !    Finally,  thercAff, 


LV.]  PERSECUTION    EVERY    CHRISTIAN'S    LOT.  293 

brethren,  "  whatsoever  things  are  holy,  whatsoever  things  are 
pore,  whatsoever  things  are  honest,  whatsoever  things  are  of 
good  report :  if  there  be  any  consolation  in  Christ,  if  any  fel- 
lowship of  the  Spirit,"  if  any*hopes  of  our  appearing  to  the 
comfort  of  each  other  at  the  awful  tribunal  of  Jesus  Christ, 
**  think  of  the  things  that  you  have  heard,"  and  of  those  which 
your  pastors  have  declared,  and  will  yet  declare  unto  you ; 
and  continue  under  their  ministry  to  '*  work  out  your  own  sal- 
vation with  fear  and  trembling:*'  so  that  whether  I  should 
never  see  you  any  more,  or  whether  it  shall  please  God  to 
bring  me  back  again  at  any  time,  I  may  always  have  the 
satisfaction  of  knowing  that  your  conversation  is  such  ''  as 
becometh  the  gospel  of  Christ." — I  almost  persuade  myself^ 
that  I  could  willingly  suffer  all  things,  so  that  it  might  any 
ways  promote  the  salvation  of  your  precious  and  immortal 
souls;  and  I  beseech  you,  as  my  last  request,  ''obey  them  that 
have  the  rule  over  you  in  the  Lord  ;"  and  be  always  ready  to 
attend  on  their  ministry,  as  it  is  your  bounden  duty.  Think 
not  that  I  desire  to  have  myself  exalted  at  the  expense  of 
another^s  character;  but  rather  think  this,  not  to  have  any  man's 
person  too  much  in  admiration,  but  esteem  all  your  ministers 
higiily  in  love,  as  they  justly  deserve  for  their  work's  sake. 

And  now,  ''brethren,  I  commend  you  to  God,  and  to  the 
word  of  his  grace,  which  is  able  to  build  you  up,  and  give  you 
an  inheritance  amongst  all  them  that  are  sanctified."  May 
God  reward  you  for  all  your  works  of  faith,  and  labours  of 
love,  and  make  you  to  abound  more  and  more  in  every  good 
word  and  work  towards  all  men.  May  he  truly  convert  all 
that  have  been  convinced,  and  awaken  all  that  are  dead  in 
trespasses  and  sins !  May  he  confirm  all  that  are  wavering ! 
And  may  you  all  go  on  from  one  degree  of  grace  unto  another, 
till  you  arrive  unto  the  measure  of  the  stature  of  the  fulness 
of  Christ ;  and  thereby  be  made  meet  to  stand  before  that  God, 
"  in  whose  presence  is  the  fulness  of  joy,  and  at  whose  right 
hand  there  are  pleasures  for  evermore!"  Amen!  Amen! 

SERMON  LV. 

PERSECUTION    BVERY    CHRISTIAN'S    LOT. 

Yea,  and  all  that  will  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus,  shall  suffer 

persecution. — 2  Tim.  iiL  12. 

When  our  Lord  was  pleased  to  take  upon  himself  the  form 
c^  a  servant,  and  to  go  about  preaching  the  kingdom  of  God ; 
^e  took  all  opportunities  in  public,  and  more  especially  in  pri- 
vate, to  caution  his  disciples  against  seeking  great  things  for 
Uiemselves,  and  also  to  forewarn  them  of  the  many  distresses, 
afflictions,  and  persecutions,  which  they  must  expect  to  endure 
for  bis  name's  sake.  The  great  apostle  P^ul  therefore,  the 
author  of  this  epistle,  in  this,  as  in  all  other  things,  following 
the  steps  of  bis  blessed  Master,  takes  particular  care,  among 
other  apostolical  admonitions,  to  warn  young  Timothy  of  tb^ 
♦  2o  * 


504  PBRSRCUTION    BVERY    CHRISTIANAS    LOT.  [LV. 

difficulties  he  mast  expect  to  meet  with  in  the  course  of  his 
ministry :  *'  this  know  also^  that  in  the  last  days  perilous  times 
shall  come.  For  men  shall  be  lovers  of  their  own  selves, 
covetous^  proud,  blasphemers,  disobedient  to  parents,  unthank* 
ful,  unholy,  without  natural  affection,  truce-breakers,  false 
accusers,  incontinent,  fierce,  despisers  of  those  that  are  good, 
traitors,  heady,  high-minded,  lovers  of  pleasure  more  than 
lovers  of  God ;  having  a  form  of  godliness,  but  denying  the 
power  thereof:  from  such  turn  away.  For  of  this  sort  are 
they  who  creep  into  houses,  and  lead  captive  silly  women 
laden  with  sins,  led  away  with  divers  lusts,  ever  learning,  and 
never  able  to  come  to  the  knowledge  of  the  truth.  Now,  as 
Jannes  and  Jambres  (two  of  the  Egyptian  magicians)  with- 
stood Moses,  (by  working  sham  miracles,)  so  do  they  also  resist 
the  truth ;  and  (notwithstanding  they  keep  up  the  form  of 
religion)  are  men  of  corrupt  minds,  reprobate  concerning  tho 
faith."  But,  in  order  to  keep  him  from  sinking  under  their 
opposition,  he  tells  him,  that  though  God,  for  wise  ends,  per- 
mitted these  false  teachers,  as  he  did  the  magicians,  to  oppose 
for  some  time,  yet  they  should  now  proceed  no  farther :  **  for 
their  folly  (says  he)  shall  be  made  manifest  unto  all  men,  as 
theirs  (the  magicians)  also  was,"  when  they  could  not  stand 
before  Moses  because  of  the  boil ;  for  the  boil  was  upon  the 
magicians,  as  well  as  upon  all  the  Egyptians.  And  then,  to 
encourage  Timothy  yet  the  more,  he  propounds  to  him  his 
own  example ;  '^  But  thou  hast  fully  known  my  doctrine,  man- 
ner of  life,  purpose,  faith,  long-suffering,  charity,  patience, 
persecutions,  afflictions,  which  came  unto  me  at  Antioch,  at 
Iconium,  at  Lystra ;  what  persecutions  I  endured  ;  but  out  of 
them  all  the  Lord  delivered  me."  And  then,  lest  Timothy 
might  think  that  this  was  only  the  particular  case  of  Paul,  says 
he  in  the  words  of  the  text,  ''  yea,  and  all  that  will  live  godly 
in  Christ  Jesus,  shall  suffer  persecution." 

The  words,  without  considering  them  as  they  stand  in  rela- 
tion to  the  context,  contain  an  important  truth,  that  persecu- 
tion is  the  common  lot  of  every  godly  man.  This  is  a  hard 
saying,  how  few  can  bear  it  ?  I  trust,  God,  in  the  foUowiog 
discourse,  will  enable  me  to  make  it  good,  by  shewing^ 

I.  What  it  is  to  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus. 

II.  The  different  kinds  of  persecution  to  which  thej,  vfho  live 
godly,  are  exposed. 

III.  Why  it  is,  that  godly  men  must  expect  to  suffer  persecution. 
Lastly,  We  shall  apply  the  whole. — 1.  First,  Let  us  consider 

what  it  is  to  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus.  This  supposes  that 
we  are  made  the  righteousness  of  God  in  Christ,  that  we  an 
born  again,  and  are  one  with  Christ  by  a  living  faith  and  a 
vital  union,  even  as  Jesus  Christ  and  the  Father  are  Oucl 
Unless  we  are  thus  converted,  and  transformed  by  the  iwieir* 
ing  of  our  minds,  we  cannot  properly  be  said  to  be  in  Christ, 
much  less  to  live  godly  in  him.  To  be  in  Christ  merely  by 
baptism^  and  an  outward  profession^  is  not  to  be  in  him  in  the 


LV,]  PERSECUTION    EVERY    CHRISTIAN'S    LOT.  696 

Strict  sense  of  the  word  :  no,  "  they  that  ate  in  Christ,  are  new 
creatures ;  old  things  are  passed  away,  and  all  things  are 
become  new"  in  their  hearts.  Their  lite  is  hid  with  Christ  ia 
God  ;  their  souls  daily  feed  on  the  invisible  realities  of  another 
world.  To  **live  godly  in  Christ,"  is  to  make  the  divine  will, 
and  not  our  own,  the  sole  principle  of  all  our  thoughts,  words, 
and  actions ;  so  that,  **  whether  we  eat  or  drink,  or  whatsoever 
we  do,  we  do  all  to  the  glory  of  God."  Those  who  live  godly 
in  Christ,  may  not  so  much  be  said  to  live,  as  Christ  to  live  in 
them  :  he  is  their  Alpha  and  Omega,  their  first  and  last,  their 
beginning  and  end.  They  are  led  by  his  Spirit,  as  li  child  is 
led  by  the  hand  of  its  father;  and  are  willing  to  follow  the 
Lamb  w^hithersoever  he  leads  them.  They  hear,  know,  and 
obey  his  voice.  Their  aifections  are  set  on  things  above ;  their 
hopes  are  full  of  immortality ;  their  citizenship  is  in  heaven. 
Being  born  again  of  God,  they  habitually  live  to,  and  daily 
walk  with,  God.  They  are  pure  in  heart ;  and,  from  a  prin- 
ciple of  faith  in  Christ,  are  holy  in  all  manner  of  conversation 
and  godliness.  This  is  to  "live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus:"  and 
hence  we  may  easily  learn  why  so  few  suflfer  persecution  ? 
Because,  so  few  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus.  You  may  live 
formally  in  Christ,  you  may  attend  on  outward  duties ;  yoa 
may  live  morally  in  Christ,  you  may  (as  they  term  it)  do  no 
one  any  harm,  and  avoid  persecution  :  but  they  "  that  will  live 
godly  in  Christ  Jesus,  shall  suffer  persecution." 

2.  Secondly y  What  is  the  meaning  of  the  word  Persecution, 
and  how  many  kinds  there  are  of  it,  I  come  now  to  consider. 

The  word  Persecution,  is  derived  from  a  Greek  word  signi- 
fying to  pursve,  and  generally  implies  pursuing  a  person  for  the 
sake  of  his  goodness,  or  God's  good-will  to  him.  The  First 
kind  of  it,  is  that  of  the  heart.  We  have  an  early  example 
of  this  in  that  wicked  one  Cain,  who,  because  the  Lord  had 
respect  to  Abel  and  his  offering,  and  not  to  him  and  his  offer- 
ing-, was  very  wroth,  his  countenance  fell,  and  at  length  he 
cruelly  slew  his  envied  brother.  Thus  the  Pharisees  hated 
and  persecuted  our  Lord  long  before  they  laid  hold  on  him  : 
and  our  Lord  mentions  being  inwardly  hated  of  men,  as  one 
kind  of  persecution  his  disciples  were  to  undergo.  This  heart 
enmity  (if  I  may  so  term  it)  is  the  root  of  all  other  kinds  of 
ipersecution,  and  is,  in  some  degree  or  other,  to  be  found  in  the 
soul  of  every  unregenerate  man ;  and  numbers  are  guilty  of 
this  persecution,  who  never  have  it  in  their  power  to  persecute 
any  other  way.  Nay,  numbers  would  actually  put  in  practice 
all  other  degrees  of  persecution,  were  not  the  name  of  perse- 
cution become  odious  amongst  mankind,  and  did  they  not 
hereby  run  the  hazard  of  losing  their  reputation.  Alas  !  how 
many  at  the  great  day,  whom  we  know  not  now,  will  be  con- 
vi«.ted  and  condemned,  that  all  their  life  harboured  a  secret 
evil-will  against  Zion  !  They  may  now  screen  it  before  men ; 
but  God  seeth  the  enmity  of  their  hearts,  and  will  judge  them 
as  persecutors  at  the  great  and  terrible  day  of  judgment. 

2o2 


596  PERSECUTION    EVERY    CHRISTIANAS    LOT.  [LT. 

A  Second  degree  of  persecution  is  that  of  the  tongue:  "ont 
of  the  abundance  of  the  heart,  the  mouth  spcaketh."  Many, 
I  suppose,  think  it  no  harm  to  shoot  out  arrows,  even  bitter 
words,  against  the  disciples  of  the  Lord :  they  scatter  their 
firebrands,  arrows^and  death,  saying,  ^*  Are  we  not  in  sport?" 
But,  however  they  may  esteem  it,  in  God's  account  evil-speak- 
ing is  a  high  degree  of  persecution.  Thus  Ishmaels  mocking 
Isaac,  IT  termed  persecuting  him.  ^'  Blessed  are  ye  (says  our 
Lord)  when  men  shall  revile  you  and  persecute  you,  and  shall 
say  all  manner  of  evil  against  you  falsely  for  my  name's  sake." 
For  whence  we  may  gather,  that  reviling,  and  speaking  all 
manner  of  evil,  for  Christ's  sake,  is  a  high  degree  of  persecu- 
tion. For  "  a  good  name  (says  the  wise  man)  is  4>etter  than 
precious  ointment,"  and,  to  many,  is  dearer  than  life  itself.  It 
is  a  great  breach  of  the  sixth  commandment,  to  slander  any 
one :  but  to  speak  evil  of  and  slander  the  disciples  of  Christ, 
merely  because  they  are  his  disciples,  must  be  highly  provok- 
ing in  the  sight  of  God ;  and  such  who  are  guilty  of  it  (without 
repentance)  will  find  that  Jesus  Christ  will  call  them  to  an 
account,  and  punish  tliem  for  all  their  ungodly  and  hard 
speeches,  in  a  lake  of  fire  and  brimstone.  This  shall  be  their 
portion  to  drink. 

The  Third  and  last  kind  of  persecution,  is  that  which 
expresses  itself  in  actions:  as  when  wicked  men  separate  the 
children  of  God  from  their  company:  "Blessed  are  ye,  (says 
our  Lord,)  when  they  shall  separate  you  from  their  company  :'* 
or  expose  them  to  church-censures.  "  They  shall  put  you  out 
of  their  synagogues  ;*'  threatening  and  prohibiting  {hem  from 
making  an  open  profession  of  his  religion  or  worship;  or  inter- 
dicting ministers  for  preaching  his  word,  as  the  high-priests 
threatened  the  apostles,  and  ''  forbade  them  any  more  to  speak 
in  the  name  of  Jesus;"  and  Paul  breathed  out  threatenings 
and  slaughters  against  the  disciples  of  the  Lord :  or  when  they 
call  them  into  courts ;  "  you  shall  be  called  before  governors/* 
says  our  Lord  :  or  when  they  fine,  imprison,  or  punish  them,  by 
confiscation  of  goods,  cruel  scourging,  and,  lastly,  death  itself. 

ft  would  be  impossible  to  enumerate  in  what  various  shapes 
persecution  has  appeared.  It  is  a  many-headed  monster,  cruel 
as  the  grave,  insatiable  as  hell ;  and,  what  is  worse,  it  gene* 
rally  appears  under  the  cloak  of  religion.  But,  crael,  insa- 
tiable, and  horrid  as  it  is,  they  that  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesns, 
roust  expect  to  sufier  and  encounter  with  it  in  all  its  forms. 
This  is  what  we  are  to  make  good  under  our  next  general  bead. 

3.  Thirdly^  Why  is  it  that  godly  men  must  expect  to  suffer 
persecution  ? — And,  First,  This  appears  from  the  whole  tenor 
of  our  Lord's  doctrine.  We  will  begin  with  his  divine  sermon 
on  the  mount.  "  Blessed  are  they  who  are  persecuted  for  righ- 
teousness* sake;  for  theirs  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  So 
that,  if  our  Lord  spake  truth,  we  are  not  so  blessed  as  to  haTe 
an  interest  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  unless  we  are  or  have 
been  persecuted  for  righteousness'  sake.    Nay,  our  Lord  (it  is 


LV.j  FERSKCUTION    EVERY    CHRISTIAN'S   LOT.  697 

reiuarkable)  employs  three  verses  in  this  beatitude,  and  only 
one  in  each  of  the  others ;  not  only  to  shew  that  it  was  a  thing 
which  men  (as  men)  are  unwilling  to  believe,  but  also  the 
necessary  consequence  of  it  upon  our  being  Christians.     This 
is  likewise  evident  from  all  those  passages,  wherein  our  Lord 
informs  us,  that  he  came  upon  the  earth,  ''  not  to  send  peace, 
but  a  sword ;'  and  that  the  father-in-law  should  be  against  the 
mother-in-law,  and  a  man's  foes  should  \ye  those  of  his  own 
household :   passages  which,  though    confined    by  false    pro- 
phets to  the  first,  I  am  persuaded  will  be  verified  by  the  expe- 
rience of  all  true  Christians  in  this,  and  every  age  of  the  church. 
It  would  be  endless  to  recount  all  the  places,  wherein  our  Lord 
forewarns  his  disciples,  that  they  should  bo  called  before  rulers, 
and  thrust  out  of  synagogues,  nay,  that  the  time  would  come, 
wherein  men  should  think  they  did  God  service,  to  kill  them. 
For  this  reason  he  so  frequently  declared,  that  '^  unless  a  man 
forsook  all  that  he  had,  and  ^ven  hated  life  itself,  he  could  not 
be  his  disciple."     And  therefore  it  is  wortliy  our  observation, 
that  in  the  remarkable  passage,  wherein  our  Lord  makes  such 
an  extensive  promise  to  those  who  left  all  for  him,  he  cau- 
tiously inserts  persecution.     "  And  Jesus  answered  and  said. 
Verily  I  say  unto  you.  There  is  no  man  that  hath  left  house,  or 
brethren,  or  sisters,  or  father,  or  mother,  or  wife,  or  children, 
or  lands,  for  my  sake  and  the  gospel's,  but  he  shall  receive  an 
faundred-fold  now  in  this  time;  houses,  and  brethren,  and  sisters 
and  mothers,  and  children,  and  lands,  with  persecutions;  (the 
word  is  in  the  plural  number,  including  all  kinds  of  persecu** 
tton ;)  and  in  the  world  to  come  eternal  life."    He  that  hath  ears 
to  hear,  let  him  hear  what  Christ  says  in  all  these  passages, 
and  then  confess,  that  all  who  will  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus, 
flhall  suffer  persecution. 

As  this  is  proved  from  our  Lord's  doctrine,  so  it  is  no  less 
evident  from  his  life.  Follow  him  from  the  manger  to  the 
cross,  and  see  whether  any  persecution  was  like  that  which 
the  Son  of  God,  the  Lord  of  glory,  underwent  whilst  here  on 
earth.  How  was  he  hated  by  wicked  men  !  How  often  would 
that  hatred  have  excited  them  to  lay  hold  of  him,  had  it  not  been 
for  fear  of  the  people  !  How  was  he  reviled,  counted  and  called 
a  Blasphemer,  a  Winebibber,  a  Samaritan,  nay,  a  Devil,  and,  in 
one  word,  had  all  manner  of  evil  spoken  against  him  falsely  I 
What  contradiction  of  sinners  did  he  endure  against  himself! 
How  did  men  separate  from  his  company,  and  were  ashamed 
to  walk  with  him  openly  !  Insomuch  that  he  once  said  to  his 
own  disciples,  **  Will  you  also  go  away  !"  Again,  How  was 
be  stoned,  thrust  out  of  the  synagogues,  arraigned  as  a 
deceiver  of  the  people,  a  seditious  and  pestilent  fellow,  an 
eBemy  to  Caesar,  and  as  such  scourged,  blindfolded,  spit 
opop,  and  at  length  condemned,  and  nailed  to  an  accursed 
tree!  Thus  was  the  Master  persecuted,  thus  did  the  Lord 
suffer  ;  asd  the  servant  is  not  above  his  Master,  nor  the  dis-> 
ciirie  above  his  Lord  :  ''  If  they  have  persecuted  me,  they  will 


508  PBRSECUTION   EVERY   CHRISTIAN'S    COT.  [LT. 

also  persecute  yon/'  says  the  blessed  Jesus.  And  agaio, 
''  Every  man  that  is  perfect  (a  true  Christian)  most  be  as  his 
Master^"  or  suffer  as  he  did.  For  in  all  these  things  oar  Lord 
has  set  us  an  example,  that  we  should  follow  his  steps :  and 
therefore,  far  be  it  that  any,  who  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesos, 
should  henceforward  expect  to  escape  suffering  persecution. 

But  farther  :  Not  only  our  Lord's  example,  but  the  exam]de 
of  all  the  saints  that  ever  lived,  evidently  demonstrates  the 
truth  of  the  apostle's  assertion  in  the  text.  How  soon  was 
Abel  made  a  martyr  for  his  religion  !  How  was  Isaac  mocked 
by  the  son  of  the  bond-woman  !  And  what  a  large  catalogiie 
of  suffering  old  testament  saints,  have  we  recorded  in  tiie 
xith  chapter  of  the  Hebrews  !  Read  the  Acts  of  the  Apostlo, 
and  see  how  the  first  Christians  were  threatened,  stoned, 
imprisoned,  scourged,  and  persecuted,  even  unto  death.  Exa- 
mine church  history  in  after-ages,  and  you  will  find  the  mur- 
der of  the  innocents  by  Herod  was  but  an  earnest  of  the 
innocent  blood  which  should  be  shed  for  the  sake  of  Jesas. 
Examine  the  experience  of  saints  now  living  on  earth  ;  and,  if 
if  it  were  possible  to  consult  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  per- 
fect, I  am  persuaded  each  would  concur  with  the  apostle  in 
asserting,  that  ''  all  who  will  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus,  shall 
suffer  persecution." 

How  can  it  be  otherwise,  in  the  very  nature  of  things  ?  Ever 
since  the  fall,  there  has  been  an  irreconcfleable  enmity  between 
the  seed  of  the  woman  and  the  seed  of  the  serpent.  Wicked 
men  hate  God,  and  therefore  cannot  but  hate  those  who  are 
Uke  him :  they  hate  to  be  reformed,  and  therefore  mast  hate 
and  persecute  those  who,  by  a  contrary  behaviour,  testify  of 
them,  that  their  deeds  are  evil.  Besides,  pride  of  heart  leads 
men  to  persecute  the  servants  of  Jesus  Christ.  If  they  com- 
mend them,  they  are  afraid  of  being  asked.  Why  do  not  yon 
follow  them?  And  therefore  because  they  dare  not  imitate, 
though  they  may  sometimes  be  even  forced  to  approve  their 
way,  yet  pride  and  envy  make  them  turn  persecutors.  Hence 
it  is,  that  as  it  was  formerly,  so  it  is  now,  and  so  will  it  be  to 
tlie  end  of  time ;  **  He  that  is  bora  after  the  flesh,  (the  natural 
man,  does  and)  will  persecute  him  that  is  bora  after  the  Spirit," 
the  regenerate  man.  Because  Christians  are  not  of  the  world, 
but  Christ  hath  chosen  them  out  of  the  world,  therefore  the 
world  will  hate  them.  If  it  be  objected  against  this  doctrine, 
that  we  now  live  in  a  Christian  world,  and  therefore  mast  not 
expect  such  persecution  as  formerly;  I  answer.  All  are  not 
Christians  that  are  called  so ;  and,  till  the  heart  be  changed, 
the  enmity  against  God  (which  is  the  root  of  all  persecation) 
remains;  and  consequently  Christians,  falsely  so  called^  will 
persecute  as  well  as  others.  I  observed  therefore,  in  the 
beginning  of  this  discourse,  that  Paul  mentions  those  that  had 
a  foi*m  of  religion,  as  persons  of  whom  Timothy  bad  need  be 
chiefly  aware :  for,  as  our  Lord  and  his  apostles  were  mostlj 
persecuted  by  their  countrymen  the  Jews,  so  we  most  expect  the 


LV]  PERSECUTION    EVERY    CFIRISTIAN'S  LOT.  599 

like  usage  from  the  formalists  of  our  own  nation,  the  Pharisees^ 
who  seem  to  be  religious.  The  most  horrid  and  barbarous  per« 
secutions  have  been  carried  on  by  those  who  have  called  them- 
selves Christians ;  witness  the  days  of  queen  Mary  :  and  the 
iiucs,  banishments^  and  imprisonments  of  the  children  of  God  in 
the  last  century,  and  the  bitter  irreconcileable  hatred  that 
appears  in  thousands  who  call  themselves  Christians,  even  in 
the  present  days  wherein  we  live. 

Persons,  who  argue  against  persecution,  are  not  sufficiently 
sensible  of  the  bitter  enmity  of  the  heart  of  every  unregenerate 
man  against  God.  For  my  own  part,  I  am  so  far  from  won- 
dering that  Christians  are  persecuted,  that  I  wonder  our  streets 
do  not  run  with  the  blood  of  the  saints:  were  men's  power  equal 
to  their  wills,  such  a  horrid  spectacle  would  soon  appear.     But, 

Persecution  is  necessary  in  respect  to  the  godly  themselves. 
If  we  have  not  all  manner  of  evil  spoken  of  us,  how  can  we 
know  whether  we  seek  only  that  honour  which  cometh  from 
above  ?  If  we  have  no  persecutors,  how  can  our  passive  graces 
be  kept  in  exercise?  How  can  many  christian  precepts  be  put 
in  practice  ?  How  can  we  love,  pray  for,  and  do  good  to  those 
who  despitefully  use  us  ?  How  can  we  overcome  evil  with  good? 
In  short,  how  can  we  know  we  love  God  better  than  life  itself? 
Paul  was  sensible  of  all  this,  and  therefore  so  positively  and  pe- 
remptorily asserts,  that  "  all  who  will  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus, 
shall  suO'er  persecution."  Not  that  I  affirm,  ail  are  persecuted 
in  a  like  degree.  No:  this  would  be  contrary  both  to  scripture 
and  experience.  But  though  all  Christians  are  not  really  called 
to  suffer  every  kind  of  persecution,  yet  all  Christians  are  liable 
thereto :  and  notwithstanding  some  may  live  in  more  peaceful 
times  of  the  church  than  others,  yet  all  Christians,  in  all  ages, 
will  find  by  their  own  experience,  that  whether  they  act  in  a 
private  or  public  capacity,  they  must,  in  some  degree  or  other, 
suffer  persecution. 

Here  then  I  would  pause,  and,  lastly,  by  way  of  application, 
exhort  all  persons.  First,  To  stand  a  while,  and  examine  them- 
selves. For,  by  what  has  been  said,  you  may  gather  one  mark, 
whereby  you  may  judge  whether  you  are  Christians  or  not. 
Were  you  ever  persecuted  for  righteousness'  sake?  If  not,  you 
never  yet  lived  godly  in  Christ  our  Lord.  Whatever  you  may 
say  to  the  contrary,  the  inspired  apostle,  in  the  words  of  the 
text  (the  tru^hof  which,  I  think,  I  have  sufficiently  proved) 
positively  asserts,  that  all  who  will  live  godly  in  him,  shall  suffer 
persecution.  Not  that  all  who  are  persecuted,  are  real  Chris- 
tians ;  for  many  sometimes  suffer,  and  are  persecuted,  on  other 
accounts  than  for  righteousness'  sake.  The  great  question  there- 
fore is.  Whether  you  were  ever  persecuted  for  living  godly  ? 
You  may  boast  of  your  great  prudence  and  sagacity,  (and  indeed 
these  are  excellent  things,)  and  glory  because  you  have  not  run 
such  lengths,  and  made  yourselves  so  singular,  and  liable  to 
such  contempt,  as  some  others  have.  But,  alas !  this  is  not  a 
mark  of  your  being  of  a  Christian,  but  of  a  Laodicean  spirit. 


flOO  FmSS£CL'TiO!C    £\  £RY   CHBIST1ASI*«    LOT.  [LT. 

neiUier  hot  nor  cold,  and  fit  only  to  be  spewed  out  of  tbe  vouth 
of  God.  Hiat  which  joa  call  pradeDce,  is  often  obIj  oov- 
ardice,  dreadful  hypocrisy,  pride  of  heart,  whick  makes  yoa 
dread  contempt,  and  afraid  to  gis-e  up  your  repvtmtiaB-ibr  God. 
Ytm  are  ashamed  of  Christ  and  his  gospel;  and  in  all  proba- 
bility, were  be  to  appear  a  second  time  upon  earth,  in  words, 
as  well  as  works,  yoo  would  deny  him.  Awake  therefore,  aB 
ye  that  live  only  formally  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  no  longiK  seek 
that  hcmour  which  cometh  of  man.  I  do  not  desire  to  coort 
you,  but  I  entreat  yon  to  live  godly,  and  fear  not  contempt  for 
the  sake  of  Jesus  Christ.  Beg  of  God  to  give  yoa  his  holy 
Spirit,  that  yoa  may  see  through,  and  discover  the  ^atent 
hypocrisy  of  your  hearts,  and  no  loneer  deceive  yonr  own 
sools.  Remember,  you  cannot  reconcile  two  irreconcileable 
differences,  God  aud  mammon,  the  friendship  of  this  worid 
with  the  favour  of  God.  Know  yon  not  who  hath  told  yom 
that  ''  the  friendship  of  this  world  is  enmity  with  God  ?**  If 
therefore  you  are  in  friendship  with  the  world,  notwithstanding 
all  your  specious  pretences  to  piety,  you  are  at  enmity  with 
God :  you  are  only  heart  hypocrites ;  and,  **  What  is  the  hope 
of  the  hypocrite,  when  God  shall  take  away  his  sonl  V  Let 
the  words  of  the  text  sound  an  alarm  in  your  ears ;  O  let  them 
sink  deep  into  your  hearts;  *'  Yea,  and  aU  that  will  live  godly 
in  Christ  Jesus,  shall  suffer  persecution." 

Secondly,  From  the  words  of  the  text,  I  would  take  occaskm 
to  speak  to  those,  who  are  about  to  list  themselves  under  the 
banner  of  Christ*s  cross.  What  say  you  ?  Are  yoa  resolved 
to  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus,  notwithstanding  the  consequence 
will  be,  that  you  must  suffer  persecution  ?  You  are  beginning 
to  build ;  but  have  you  taken  our  Lord's  advice,  to  **  sit  down 
first,  and  count  the  cost  V  Have  you  well  weighed  with  your- 
selves that  weighty  declaration,  '*  He  that  loveth  father  or 
mother  more  than  me,  is  not  worthy  of  me;"  and  again, 
*^  Unless  a  man  forsake  all  that  he  hath,  he  cannot  be  my  dis- 
ciple?" Perhaps  some  of  you  have  great  possessions;  will 
not  you  go  away  sorrowful,  if  Christ  should  require  you  to  sell 
all  that  you  have !  Others  of  you  again  may  be  kinsmen,  or 
some  way  related,  or  under  obligations,  to  the  high-priest,  or 
other  great  personages,  who  may  be  persecuting  the  church  of 
Christ :  What  say  you  ?  Will  you,  with  Moses,  "  rather  choose 
to  suffer  aiDiction  with  the  people  of  God,  than  enjoy  the  plea- 
sures of  sin  for  a  season?"  Perhaps  you  may  say,  my  friends 
will  not  oppose  me.  That  is  more  than  you  know :  in  all  pro- 
bability your  chief  enemies  will  be  those  of  your  own  house- 
hold. If  therefore  they  should  oppose  you,  are  you  willing 
naked  to  follow  a  naked  Christ?  and  to  wander  about  in  sheep- 
skins and  goats'-skins,  in  dens  and  caves  of  the  earth,  being 
alQictcd,  destitute,  tormented,  rather  than  not  be  Christ's  dis- 
ciples ?  You  arc  now  all  following  with  zeal,  as  Rnth  and 
Orpah  did  Naomi,  and  may  weep  under  the  word ;  but  are 
not  your  tears  crocodile's  tears  ?     And,  when  diflicutties  comf. 


LV.]  PKR8BCUTI0N    EVERY   CHRISTIANAS   LOT.  001 

will  you  not  go  back  from  following  yonr  Lord,  as  Orpah 
departed  from  following  Naomi  ?  Have  you  really  the  root  of 
grace  in  your  hearts  ?  or  are  you  only  stony-ground  hearers  ? 
You  receive  the  word  with  joy ;  but,  when  persecution  arises 
because  of  the  word,  will  you  not  be  immediately  offended? 
Be  not  angry  with  me  for  putting  these  questions  to  you.  I 
am  jealous  over  you,  but  it  is  with  a  godly  jealousy :  for,  alas ! 
how  many  have  put  their  hands  to  the  plough,  and  afterwards 
have  shamefully  looked  back?  I  only  deal  with  you,  as  our 
Lord  did  with  the  person  that  said,  ''Lord,  I  will  follow  thee, 
whithersoever  thou  wilt."  "The  foxes  have  holes,  and  the 
birds  of  the  air  have  nests,  but  the  Son  of  man  (says  he)  hath 
not  where  to  lay  his  head."  What  say  you?  Are  you  willing 
to  endure  hardness,  and  thereby  approve  yourselves  good  sol- 
diers of  Jesus  Christ?  You  now  come  on  foot  out  of  the 
towns  and  villages  to  hear  the  word,  and  receive  me  as  a  mes* 
senger  of  God  :  but  will  you  not  by  and  by  cry  out.  Away  with 
him,  away  with  him ;  it  is  not  fit  such  a  fellow  should  live 
upon  the  earth  ?  Perhaps  some  of  you,  like  Hazael,  may  say, 
"  Are  we  dogs,  that  we  should  do  this  ?"  But,  alas !  I  have 
met  with  many  unhappy  souls,  who  have  drawn  back  unto 
perdition,  and  have  afterwards  accounted  me  their  enemy,  for 
dealing  faithfully  with  them ;  though  once,  if  it  were  possible, 
they  would  have  plucked  out  their  own  eyes,  and  have  given 
them  uuto  me.  Sit  down  therefore,  I  beseech  you,  and 
seriously  count  the  cost,  and  ask  yourselves  again  and  again, 
whether  you  count  all  things  but  dung  and  dross,  and  are 
willing  to  suffer  the  loss  of  all  things,  so  that  you  may  win 
Christ,  and  be  found  in  him :  for  you  may  assure  yourselves, 
the  apostle  hath  not  spoken  in  vain,  "All  that  will  live  godly 
in  Christ  Jesus,  shall  suffer  persecution." 

Thirdly,  The  text  speaks  to  you  that  are  patiently  suffering 
for  the  truth's  sake :  "  Rejoice,  and  be  exceeding  glad ;  great 
shall  be  your  reward  in  heaven."  For  to  you  it  is  given,  not 
only  to  believe,  but  also  to  suffer,  and  perhaps  remarkably  too, 
for  the  sake  of  Jesus !  This  is  a  mark  of  your  discipleship, 
an  evidence  that  you  do  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus.  Fear  not, 
therefore,  neither  be  dismayed.  O  be  not  weary  and  faint  in 
your  minds !  Jesus,  your  Lord,  your  life,  cometh,  and  his 
reward  is  with  him.  Though  all  men  forsake  you,  yet  will  not 
"he  :  no  ;  the  Spirit  of  Christ  and  of  glory  shall  rest  upon  you. 
In  patience  therefore  possess  your  souls.  Sanctify  the  Lord 
God  in  your  hearts.  Be  in  nothing  terrified  by  your  adver- 
saries :  on  their  part  Christ  is  evil  spoken  of;  on  your  part  he 
is  glorified.  Be  not  ashamed  of  your  glory,  since  others  can 
glory  in  their  shame.  Think  it  not  strange  concerning  the  fiery 
trial,  wherewith  you  are  or  may  be  tried.  The  devil  rages, 
knowing  that  he  hath  but  a  short  time  to  reign.  He  or  his 
emissaries  have  no  more  power  than  what  is  given  them  from 
above :  God  sets  them  their  bounds,  which  they  cannot  pass ; 
and  the  very  hairs  of  your  head  are  all  numbered.     Fear  not ; 


602  PKRSECUTION    EVERY    CHRISTIAN'S   LOT.  [LV. 

no  one  shall  set  upon  you  to  hurt  you^  without  your  heavenly 
Father*s  knowledge.  Do  your  earthly  friends  and  parents  for- 
sake you  ?  Are  you  cast  out  of  the  synagogues  ?  The  Lord 
shall  reveal,  himself  to  you^  as  to  the  man  that  was, born  bliud? 
Jesus  Christ  shall  take  you  up.  If  they  carry  you  to  prison, 
and  load  you  with  chains,  so  that  the  iron  enter  into  your 
souls^  even  there  shall  Christ  send  an  angel  from  heaven  to 
strengthen  you^  and  enable  you^  with  Paul  and  Silas,  to  ^'  sing 
praises  at  midnight."  Are  you  threatened  to  be  thrown  into  a 
den  of  lions,  or  cast  into  a  burning  fiery  furnace,  because  yon 
will  not  bow  down  and  worship  the  beast?  Fear  not;  the  God, 
whom  you  serve,  is  able  to  deliver  you  :  or,  if  he  should  suffer 
the  fiames  to  devour  your  bodies,  they  would  only  serve,  as  so 
many  fiery  chariots,  to  carry  your  souls  to  God.  Thus  it  was 
with  the  martyrs  of  old ;  so  that  one,  when  he  was  burning, 
cried  out,  "Come,  you  papists,  if  you  want  a  miracle,  here 
behold  one !  This  bed  of  flames  is  to  me  a  bed  of  down." 
Thus  it  was  with  almost  all  that  suffered  in  former  times:  for 
Jesus,  notwithstanding  he  withdrew  his  own  divinity  from  him- 
self, yet  he  has  always  lifted  up  the  light  of  his  countenance  upon 
the  souls  of  suffering  saints.  "  Fear  not  therefore  those  that 
can  kill  the  body,  and  after  that  have  no  more  that  they  can 
do ;  but  fear  him  only,  who  is  able  to  destroy  both  body  and 
soul  in  hell."  Dare,  dare  to  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus,  though 
you  suffer  all  manner  of  persecution.     But, 

Fourthly,  Are  there  any  true  ministers  of  Jesus  Christ  here? 
You  will  not  be  offended  if  I  tell  you,  that  the  words  of  the 
text  are,  in  an  especial  manner,  applicable  to  you.  Paul  wrote 
them  to  Timothy;  and  we,  of  all  men,  that  live  godly  in  Christ 
Jesus,  must  expect  to  suffer  the  severest  persecution.  Satan 
will  endeavour  to  bruise  our  heels,  let  who  will  escape  :  and  it 
has  been  the  general  way  of  God's  providence,  in  times  of  per- 
secution, to  permit  the  shepherds  first  to  be  smitten,  before  the 
siieep  are  scattered.  Let  us  not  therefore  shew  that  we  are 
only  hirelings,  who  care  not  for  the  sheep ;  but,  like  the  great 
Shepherd  and  Bishop  of  souls,  let  us  readily  lay  down  oar 
lives  for  the  sheep.  Whilst  others  are  boasting  of  their  great 
preferments,  let  us  rather  glory  in  our  great  afflictions  and 
persecutions  for  the  sake  of  Christ.  Paul  rejoiced  that  he 
suffered  afflictions  and  persecutions  at  Iconium  and  Lystra: 
out  of  all,  the  Lord  delivered  him ;  out  of  all,  the  Liord  will 
deliver  us,  and  cause  us  hereafter  to  sit  down  with  him  on 
thrones,  when  he  comes  to  judge  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel. 

I  could  proceed  ;  but  I  am  conscious,  in  this  part  of  my  dis- 
course, I  ought  more  particularly  to  speak  to  myself,  knowin^r 
that  Satan  has  desired  to  have  me,  that  he  may  sift  me  as 
wheat.  Without  a  spirit  of  prophecy,  we  may  easily  discern 
the  signs  of  the  times.  Persecution  is  even  at  the  doors:  the 
tabernacle  of  the  Lord  is  already  driven  into  the  wilderness; 
the  ark  of  the  Lord  is  fallen  into  the  unhallowed  hands  of 
uncircumcised  Philistines.     They  have  long  since  put  us  out  of 


LV.]  PBR8BGUT10N    EVERY    CHRISTIAN'S   LOT.  603 

their  synagogues,  and  high-priests  have  been  calling  on  civil 
magistrates  to  exert  their  authority  against  the  disciples  of  the 
Lord.  Men  in  power  have  been  breathing  out  threatenings : 
we  may  easily  guess  what  will  follow,  imprisonment  and  slaugh- 
ter. The  storm  has  been  gathering  some  time  ;  it  must  break 
shortly.     Perhaps  it  may  fall  on  me  first. 

Brethren,  therefore,  whether  in  the  ministry  or  not,  I  beseech 
you,  "pray  for  me  '  that  I  may  never  sufier  justly,  as  an  evil- 
doer, but,  only  for  righteousness'  sake.  O  pray  that  I  may 
not  deny  my  Lord  in  any  wise,  but  I  may  joyfully  follow  him, 
both  to  prison  and  to  death,  if  he  is  pleased  to  call  me  to  seal 
his  truths  with  my  blood.  Be  not  ashamed  of  Christ,  or  of 
his  gospel,  though  I  should  become  a  prisoner  of  the  Lord. 
Though  I  am  bound,  the  word  of  God  will  not  be  bound  :  no; 
an  open,  an  efiectuui  door,  is  opened  for  preaching  the  everlast- 
ing gospel,  and  men  or  devils  shall  never  be  able  to  prevail 
against  it.  Only  pray,  that,  whether  it  be  in  life  or  death, 
Christ  may  be  glorified  in  me ;  then  I  shall  rejoice,  yea,  and  will 
rejoice. — And  now,  to  whom  shall  I  address  myself  next  ? 

Fifthly,  To  those,  who  persecute  their  neighbours  for  living 
godly  in  Christ  Jesus.  But,  what  shall  I  say  to  you?  Howl 
and  weep  for  the  miseries  that  shall  come  upon  you :  for  a  little 
while  the  Lord  permits  you  to  ride  over  the  heads  of  his  people; 
but,  by  and  by,  death  will  arrest  you,  judgment  will  find  you, 
and  Jesus  Christ  shall  put  a  question  to  you,  which  will  strike 
you  dimib:  Wliy  persecuted  you  me?  You  may  plead  your 
laws  and  your  canons,  and  pretend  ^what  you  do  is  out  of  zeal 
for  God  ;  but  God  shall  discover  the  cursed  hypocrisy  and  ser- 
pentine enmity  of  your  hearts,  and  give  you  over  to  the  tormen- 
tors. It  is  well  if  in  this  life  God  does  not  set  some  mark 
upon  you.  He  pleaded  the  calise  of  Naboth,  when  innocently 
condemned  for  blaspheming  God  and  the  king;  and  our  Lord 
sent  forth  his  armies,  and  destroyed  the  city  of  those  who  killed 
the  prophets,  and  stoned  them  that  were  sent  unto  them.  If  you 
have  a  mind  therefore  to  fill  up  the  measure  of  your  iniquities, 
go  on,  persecute  and  despise  the  disciples  of  the  Lord ;  but 
know,  ''that  for  all  these  things,  God  shall  bring  you  into  judg- 
ment." Nay,  those  you  now  persecute,  shall  be  in  part  your 
judges,  and  sit  on  the  right  hand  of  the  Majesty  on  high,  whilst 
you  are  dragged  by  infernal  spirits  into  a  lake  that  bumeth 
with  fire  and  brimstone,  and  the  smoke  of  your  torment  shall 
be  ascending  up  for  ever  and  ever.  Lay  down  therefore,  ye 
rebels,  your  arms  against  the  most  high  God,  and  no  longer 
persecute  those  who  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus.  The  Lord  will 
plead,  the  Lord  will  avenge  their  cause.  You  may  be  permit- 
ted to  bruise  their  heels,  yet  in  the  end  they  shall  bruise  your 
accursed  heads.  I  speak  not  this,  as  though  I  were  afraid  of 
you ;  for  I  know  in  whom  I  have  believed :  only  out  of  pure 
love  I  warn  you  ;  and  because  I  know  not  but  Jesus  Christ  may 
make  some  of  you  vessels  of  mercy,  and  snatch  you,  even  you 
persecutors,  as  firebrands  out  of  the  fire.    Jesus  Christ  came 


604       AN   ISXHORTATION  TO   THB   PEOPLE  OF  GOD,  ETC.   [lVI. 

into  the  world  to  save  sinners,  even  persecutors,  the  worst  of 
sinners :  his  righteousness  is  sufficient  for  them ;  his  Spirit  is 
able  to  purify  and  change  their  hearts.  He  once  converted  Saal : 
may  the  same  God  magnify  his  power,  in  converting  all  those 
who  are  causing  the  godly  in  Christ  Jesus,  as  much  as  in  them 
lies,  to  suffer  persecution !  The  Lord  be  with  you  all.  Amen. 


SERMON  LVI. 

AN  EXHORTATION  TO  THE  PEOPLE  OF  GOD  NOT  TO  BE  DIS- 
COURAGED IN  THEIR  WAY,  BY  THE  SCOFFS  AND  CONTEMPT 
OF   WICKED    MEN. 

Heb/iY.  9.     Tliere  remaineth  therefore  a  rest  to  the  people  of  God. 

When  we  consider  the  persecutions  they  are  e.t posed  to,  who 
live  righteously  and  godly  in  this  present  world ;  it  is  amazing 
to  consider,  that  the  people  of  this  generation  should  be  ^o  fond 
o[  a  name  to  live,  while  they  arc  in  effect  dead.  The  people  of 
God  are  to  expect  little  else  but  troubles  and  trials  while  they 
are  in  this  world  ;  common  experience  is  a  contradiction  to  mj 
text,  that  there  is  a  rest  to  the  people  of  God ;  but  the  author  of 
the  Hebrews,  when  speaking  of  this  rest,  did  not  mean  that 
they  should  have  a  rest  here.  No  ;  he  too  well  knew  that  the 
people  of  God,  all  who  would  seek  and  serve  the  Lord  Jesus, 
must  be  despised,  hated,  scoffed,  slandered,  and  evil  intreated ; 
but  the  time  was  hastening  when  they  shoul^l  have  a  perfect 
rest:  there  is  a  rest  laid  up  for  them,  and  this  is  an  encourairr- 
ment  for  you,  my  brethren,  to  hold  on,  and  hold  out  your  way 
rejoicing  ;  after  death  there  will  be  a  rest  for  ever  ;  at  judgment, 
you  shall  be  taken  up  to  dwell  with  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ;  and 
there,  you  shall  be  for  ever  exempted  from  sin  ;  you  shall  rest 
from  all  manner  of  sorrow,  and  be  no  more  troubled  w  ith  the 
temptations  of  satan.  Now,  you  can  set  about  nothing  for  the 
glory  of  God,  or  for  your  own  soul's  welfare,  but  the  devil  is 
dissuading  you  from  it,  or  distracting  you  in  it,  or  discouraging^ 
you  after  it  Here  we  are  scoffed  and  derided ;  as  the  world 
hated  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  so  will  it  hate  you :  but  be  not  dis- 
couraged, though  we  are  the  scorn  and  offscouring  of  all  things; 
and  are  as  a  gazing-stock  to  men  and  angels.  Though  they  pat 
us  out  of  their  synagogues,  cast  out  our  name  as  evil,  and  look 
on  us  as  persons  unfit  for  their  company ;  yet  in  that  rest  which 
is  prepared  for  you,  my  brethren,  we  shall  then  be  gazed  at  for 
our  glory,  and  they  shut  out  of  the  assembly  of  the  saints,  and 
separated  from  us,  whether  they  will  or  no ;  unless  the  Lord  Jesas 
Christ,  by  his  free,  rich,  and  sovereign  grace,  brings  them  unto 
himself. 

The  letter-learned  scribes  and  Pharisees  of  this  day,  look  ob 
us  as  madmen  and  enthusiasts :  but  though  they  make  so  much 
noise  about  the  word  entbiisiast,  it  means  no  more  than  this,  OBf 
in  God  ;  and  what  Christian  can  say,  he  is  not  in  God,  and  God 
in  him  ?  And  if  this  is  to  be  an  enthusiast,  God  grant  I  may  be 
more  and  more  so ;  if  we  being  in  Christ,  and  Christ  in  us,  makes 


AN    EXHORTATION    TO   THE    PEOPLE   OP   GOD,   ETC.      605 

US  enthusiasts,  I  would  to  God  we  were  all  more  and  more 
enthusiasts.  They  now  think  it  strange,  tkkat  we  run  not  with 
them  into  all  excess  of  riot,  and  because  we  will  not  go  to  the 
devil's  diversions  with  them,  therefore  they  speak  evil  of  us» 
We  cannot  now  go  along  the  street,  but  every  one  is  pointing 
out  his  finger  with  scorn,  and  cries.  Here  comes  another  of  his 
followers  ;  what !  you  are  become  one  of  his  disciples  too !  But 
there  is  a  rest  which  will  be  a  complete  deliverance  for  you.  Let 
none  of  these  things  move  you  ;  for,  though  you  are  thus  treated 
here,  consider,  you  shall  in  heaven  have  no  discouraging  company^ 
nor  any  but  what  will  be^  an  assistance  to  you  ;  you  will  have 
no  scoiler  there,  all  will  be  ready  to  join  with  heart  and  voice  in 
your  everlasting  joy  and  praises.  You  will  not  be  counted  en- 
thusiasts, madmen,  and  rabble,  in  that  rest  which  remaineth  for 
the  people  of  God.  Therefore,  possess  your  souls  in  patience  ; 
account  it  matter  of  joy  when  you  fall  into  tribulation  ;  Grod,  in 
his  own  time,  will  deliver  us ;  let  not  their  hindering  us  from 
preaching  in  the  church,  be  any  discouragement ;  do  not  shrink^ 
and  draw  back,  because  of  opposition  ;  be  not  ashamed  of  your 
work  or  Master :  but  hold  fast  your  integrity.  You  must 
expect  to  go  through  evil  report,  and  good  report ;  fear  not  the 
violence  of  unreasonable  men ;  let  them  hate  you,  and  cast  you 
out  for  the  Lord's  sake,  behold  he  shall  appear  to  your  joy,  and 
they  shall  be  ashamed  :  therefore  hold  on,  and  hold  out  to  the 
end.  fie  steadfast  and  patient,  and  bear  the  troubles  of  the 
world  ;  if  you  be  the  people  of  God,  there  is  a  rest  provided  for 
you,  which  you  shall  certainly  obtain. 

I  shall  not  speak  unto  you,  Pharisees,  this  morning,  nor  to 
any,  except  to  you  who  have  experienced  the  pangs  of  the  new- 
birth,  or  are  at  present  under  them,  and  who  know  what  it  is  to 
love  the  Lord  Jesus  in  sincerity  and  tiruth :  do  not  be  dis-* 
couraged,  or  think  hard  of  the  ways  of  God,  my  dear  brethren, 
because  you  are  not  loved  by  the  men  of  this  world ;  if  you  were 
of  the  world,  it  would  love  you ;  it  would  then  be  pleased  with 
your  company ;  it  would  not  thrus£  you  from  a  tavern,  or  an 
alehouse ;  it  would  not  dislike  you  for  singing  the  songs  of  the 
drunkard,  or  for  going  to  plays,  balls,  or  other  polite  and  fashion- 
able entertainments,  as  they  are  called  ;  no,  these  the  children 
of  the  world  like ;  but  if  you  will  sing  hymns  and  psalms,  and 
go  to  hear  what  God  hath  to  say  unto  your  souls,  and  spend 
your  time  in  reading,  praying,  and  frequenting  religious  assem- 
blies, then  it  is  that  they  dislike  you,  and  thrust  you  out  of 
their  company,  as  unworthy  thereof;  but  let  none  of  these  things 
move  you,  for  the  rest  which  Jesus  Christ  hath  prepared  for  you, 
is  an  ample  recompense  for  all  you  may  meet  with  here. 

This  rest  is  the  fruit  of  the  blood  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ :  O 
how  will  it  fill  our  souls  with  love,  to  think  that  through  the 
streams  of  this  blood,  we  have  overcome  the  violence  of  the 
world,  and  the  snares  of  the  devil.  My  dear  brethren,  be  not 
discouraged  at  the  treatment  you  meet  with  here,  but  let  it  be 
a  means  to  stir  you  up  to  advance  in  the  love  of  the  Lord  iestm 


606      AN    EXHORTATION    TO    THE    PEOPLE   OP   GOD,    ETC. 

Christy  who  hath  prepared  a  rest  for  you.  Can  you  consider, 
what  Christ  has  done  and  suffered  for  you,  and  have  your  hearts 
stupified  with  vile  and  senseless  pleasures?  Can  you  hear  of  a 
panting,  bleeding,  dying  Jesus,  and  yet  be  dull  and  unaffected? 
Was  there  any  sorrow  like  unto  his  sorrow  ?  and  all  this,  he 
underwent  to  save  you,  who  were  vile,  and  polluted,  and  by 
nature,  since  the  fall,  a  motley  mixture  of  the  beast  and  devil. 
Jesus  Christ,  by  dying  upon  the  cross,  intended  to  take  away 
the  devil  and  beast  from  your  heart,  and  to  prepare  it  for  him- 
self to  dwell  in.  Think  of  the  love  of  this  your  Jesus,  and  then 
will  a  little  reproach  and  scorn  move  you  ?  Sure  it  will  not.  I 
hope  better  things  of  you,  and  things  that  accompany  salva- 
tion. O  think  with  what  pleasing  astonishment  you  will  see 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  when  he  comes  to  take  you  to  his  rest : 
now  his  heart  is  open  to  us  ;  but  our  hearts  are  shut  against  him ; 
then,  then,  his  heart  shall  be  open,  and  ours  shall  be  so  too.  0 
my  brethren,  how  will  your  love  be  increased  ?  With  what  rap- 
tures will  you  see  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ?  Therefore,  undergo 
a  few  reproaches  here  patiently,  and  revile  not  again.  Let  them 
say  what  they  please  of  me,  the  reproaches,  scorns,  and  con- 
tempt of  this  world,  will  no  ways  hurt  me,  but  will  recoil  upon 
their  own  heads ;  leave  it  to  the  Lord,  who  knows  what  is  best 
for  you  and  me  :  do  not  question  his  love ;  he  will  be  with  you; 
only  do  you,  who  have  tasted  the  Lord  to  be  gracious,  follow 
hard  after  him. 

And  now,  let  me  speak  a  word  unto  you,  who  have  not  yet 
experienced  the  love  of  Christ  to  your  souls,  but  are  waiting 
for  his  appearance.  I  shall  be  but  very  short,  because  I  would 
not  break  in  upon  the  duties  of  the  day.  I  shall  speak  unto 
you  a  word  of  invitation ;  even,  to  wait  still  on  the  Lord ;  do 
not  forsake  him,  though  he  may  not  answer  your  petitions  at 
once  or  twice  seeking^unto  him ;  hold  on,  do  not  leave  seeking 
him,  and  you  shall  have  an  answer  of  peace ;  remember  the 
poor  man  who  was  lame,  and  had  lain  at  the  pool  of  Bethesda 
thirty-eight  years  for  relief,  yet  at  last  he  found  that  it  was 
worth  waiting  for,  he  obtained  his  desire. 

And  if  you  are  but  zealous  for  the  Lord,  and  seek  unto  Jesus, 
if  your  zeal  be  according  to  godliness,  and  you  pray  unto  him 
for  his  Spirit,  you  shall  certainly  have  an  answer  of  peace ;  you 
shall  find  it  is  good  to  seek  unto  the  Lord,  you  will  be  adopted 
into  his  family,  and  by  his  Spirit  be  enabled  to  cry,  "  Abba, 
Father."  O  then  do  not  leave,  but  be  continually  waiting  at 
wisdom's  gate,  and  you  shall  find  all  her  ways  to  be  ways  of 
pleasantness,  and  all  her  paths  are  peace ;  then,  you  shall  find 
that  it  is  worth  waiting  on  the  Lord  Jesus ;  and  when  you  have 
got  his  Spirit  within  you,  ail  the  power  of  men  or  devils  cannot 
make  you  forsake  the  ways  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  If  you 
do  but  once  taste  of  his  pardoning  love,  it  will  be  so  delight- 
ful unto  you,  that  you  will  cry  for  more  and  more  thereof;  yoa 
will  be  as  full  as  you  can  hold,  and  still  not  be  satisfied  ;  you  will 
desire  more  and  more  of  this  love  of  Jesus,  you  will  hunger  sjmI 


LVII.]  A   CAUTION    AGAINST   DESPISING,   ETC.  607 

thirsty  and  hunger  and  thirst  again,  and  never  be  satisfied  till 
you  come  to  that  rest  which  is  prepared  for  the  people  of  God, 
where  all  hungering  and  thirsting  will  cease,  and  will  be  turned 
into  songs  and  hallelujahs,  and  that  for  ever  and  ever. 

As  many  of  you  as  design  to  partake  of  the  emblems  of  the 
body  and  blood  of  our  dying  Lord,  examine  well  yourselves, 
lest  by  eating  and  drinking  unworthily,  you  eat  and  drink 
damnation  unto  yourselves :  remember  the  dying  love  of  your 
dying  Lord,  and  eat  and  drink  in  commemoration  thereof;  do 
not  let  the  world  keep  you  from  partaking  hereof;  and  when 
you  have  eaten  and  drunk,  do  not  go  away  and  run  into  the 
world  ;  let  the  world  see  that  you  have  been  with  Jesus ;  give 
them  no  room  to  speak  unseemly,  they  do  that  enough  without 
occasion ;  but  how  would  they  rejoice  if  they  had  just  reason. 
Look  well  then  unto  your  paths,  that  you  do  not  slip ;  remem- 
ber that  all  your  faults  are  magnified,  and  that  all  your  little 
slips  are  laid  upon  me ;  therefore,  look  well  unto  your  ways, 
your  words,  your  actions,  that  they  may  silence  gainsayers  ;  let 
them  see  that  we  have  the  presence  of  God  with  us,  and  that 
there  has  been  good  done  by  field-preaching. 

Let  me  exhort  you  once  more  to  consider  the  love  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  O  do  not  forget  his  love.  Consider,  I  beseech  you, 
how  great  it  has  been  unto  you,  and  do  not  slight  this  his  grace, 
the  riches,  the  love,  the  kindness  of  your  dear  Redeemer,  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  has  prepared  this  eternal  rest  for  you ; 
he  also  laid  down  his  life  for  your  sakes :  what  great  love  was 
here !  that  while  you  were  enemies  to  Ihe  Lord  of  glory,  he  died 
for  you,  to  redeem  you  from  sin,  from  hell  and  wrath,  that  you 
might  live  and  reign  with  him,  world  without  end. 

The  Lamb  that  died, and  was  buried,  is  now  risen  and  exalted, 
and  sits  on  the  right  hand  of  God  the  Father ;  and  when  he  shall 
come  to  judge  all  the  world,  then,  my  brethren,  it  will  be  seen 
whether  we  have  deserved  the  usage  the  world  has  givep  us ; 
then  it  will  be  known  who  are  the  true  followers  of  the  Lord  Jesus, 
and  who  are  madmen  and  fools :  but,  may  it  be  determined  in 
this  world,  that  we  and  our  present  enemies  may  enter  into  that 
rest  which  God  has  prepared  for  those  that  love  him. — Which 
God  of  his  infinite  mercy  grant ! 

My  brethren,  let  not  these  few  words  of  exhortation  be  for- 
gotten, but  lay  them  up  in  your  hearts,  and  remember  they  must 
be  called  over  another  day.  I  should  have  enlarged,  but,  the 
duties  of  the  day  obliged  me  to  forbear. — Now  to  God  the 
Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  be  all  power,  &c. 

SERMON  LVII. 

A  CAUTION  AGAINST   DESPISING  THE  DAY  OP  SMALL  THINGS. 

PEEACHED  BEFORE  THE  GOVERKOR,  AND  COUNCIL,  AND  THE  HOUSE  OF 
ASSEMBLY,  IN  GEORGIA,  ON  JANUARY  28,  1770. 

For  who  hath  despised  the  day  of  small  things?    Zech.  iv.  10. 
Men,  brethren,  and  fathers,  at  sundry  times  and  in  divers  man- 
ners, God  spake  to  the  fathers  by  the  prophets,  before  he  spake 


GOS  A    CAUTION    AGAINST    DKSI'ISING  [LVII. 

to  lis  in  these  last  days  by  his  Son.  And  as  God  is  a  sovereign 
agent,  and  his  sacred  Spirit  bloweth  when  and  where  it  listedi, 
surely  he  may  reveal  and  make  known  his  will  to  his  creatures, 
when,  where,  and  how  he  pleases ;  "  and  who  shall  say  unto  him, 
what  doest  thou?"  Indeed,  this  seems  to  be  one  reason,  to  dis- 
play his  sovereignty,  why  he  chose,  before  the  canon  of  scrip- 
ture was  settled,  to  make  known  his  mind  in  such  various  me- 
thods, and  to  such  a  variety  of  his  servants  and  messengers. 

Hence  it  is,  that  we  hear,  he  talked  with  Abraham  as  *'  a  man 
talketh  with  a  friend."  To  Moses  he  spake  "  face  to  face."  To 
others  by  "  dreams  in  the  night,"  or  by  "  visions"  impressed 
strongly  on  their  imaginations.  This  seems  to  be  frequently  the 
happy  lot  of  the  favourite  evangelical  prophet  Zechariah ;  I  call 
him  evangelical propJtetf  because  his  predictions,  however  they 
pointed  at  some  approaching  or  immediate  event,  ultimately 
terminated  in  Him  who  is  the  Alpha  and  Omega,  the  beginning 
and  the  end,  of  all  the  lively  oracles  of  God.  The  chapter  from, 
which  our  text  is  selected,  among  many  other  pass:!gcs,isastrik- 
ing  proof  of  this  :  an  angel,  that  had  been  more  than  once  sent  (o 
him  on  former  occasions,  appears  again  to  him,  and  by  way  of 
vision,  an<l  "  waked  him,  (to  use  his  own  words)  as  a  man  that  is 
wakened  out  of  his  sleep."  Prophets,  and  the  greatest  servants 
of  God,  need  waking  sometimes  out  of  their  drowsy  frames. 

Metfainks  I  see  this  man  of  God  starting  out  of  his  sleep,  and 
being  all  attention  :  the  angel  asked  him,  *•  What  seest  thou?" 
He  answers,  **  I  have  looked,  and  behold,  a  candlestick  all  of 
gold,"  an  emblem  of  the  church  of  God,  "with  a  bowl  upo&  the 
top  of  it,  and  seven  lamps  thereon,  and  seven  pipes  to  the  seven 
lamps,  which  were  upon  the  top  thereof;"  implying,  that  the 
church,  however  reduced  to  the  lowest  ebb,  should  be  preserved, 
be  kept  supplied,  and  shining,  through  the  invisible,  (but  not  less 
real  because  invisible,)  aids  and  operations  of  tht;  blessed  Spirit 
of  God.  The  occasion  of  such  an  extraordinary  vision,  if  we 
compare  this  passage  with  the  second  chapter  of  the  prophecy 
of  the  prophet  Haggai,  seems  to  be  this :  it  was  now  near 
eighteen  years  since  the  Jewish  people  had  been  delivered  frca 
their  long  and  grievous  Babylonish  captivity ;  and  being  so  long 
deprived  of  their  temple  and  its  worship,  which  fabric  had  been 
razed  even  to  the  ground,  one  would  have  imagined,  that  im- 
mediately upon  their  return,  they  should  have  postponed  all 
private  works,  and  with  their  united  strength  have  first  bct 
about  rebuilding  that  once  stately  and  magnificeiU  stractnie 
But  they,  like  too  many  Christians  of  a  like  lukewarm  stamps 
though  all  acknowledged  that  this  church  work  was  anecessai; 
work,  yet  put  themselves  and  others  oft',  with  this  godly  pretence, 
''  the  time  is  not  come,  the  time  that  the  Lord's  house  shovU 
be  built."  The  time  is  not  come !  what,  not  in  eighteen  years! 
for  so  long  had  they  now  been  returned  from  their  state  of 
bondage :  and  pray,  why  has  not  the  time  come?  The  prophrt 
Hag<^ai  tells  them ;  their  whole  time  was  so  taken  up  in  building 
for  themselves  ceiled  houses,  that  they  had  no  time  left  to  boM 


L.V11.]  THB  DAY   OP  SMALL  THIKGfl.  GOO 

an  habitation  for  their  great  and  glorions  benefactor,  the  mighty 
God  of  Jacob. 

This  ingratitude  mast  not  be  passed  by  unpunished.  Omni- 
science observes.  Omnipotence  resents  it!  And  that  they 
might  read  their  sin  in  their  puuishment,  as  they  thought  it 
best  to  get  rich,  and  secure  houses  and  lands  and  estates  for 
themselves,  before  they  set  about  unnecessary  church-work, 
the  prophet  tells  them,  **  Yon  have  sown  much,  but  bring  la 
little :  ye  eat,  but  ye  have  not  enough :  ye  drink,  but  ye  are 
Rot  filled  with  drink:  ye  clothe  you,  but  there  is  none  warm: 
and  he  that  eameth  wages,  earneth  wages  to  put  it  into  a  bag 
with  holes."  Still  he  goes  on  thundering  and  lightening  ^'ye 
looked  for  much,  and,  lo,  it  came  to  little:  and  when  ye  brought 
it  home,  (pleasing  yourselves  with  your  fine  crops,)  I  did  blow 
upon  it :  why  ?  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts ;  because  of  mine  house 
that  is  waste,  and  ye  run  every  man  unto  his  own  house."  A 
thundering  sermon  this!  delivered  not  only  to  the  common 
people,  but  also  unto,  and  in  the  presence  of  Zerubbabel,  the 
son  of  Shealtiel,  governor  of  Judah,  and  to  Joshua,  the  son  of 
Josedech  the  high-priest.  The  prophet's  report  is  believed; 
and  the  arm  of  the  Lord  was  revealed.  Zerubbabel,  the  son 
of  Shealtiel,  and  Joshua,  the  son  of  Josedech,  (O  happy  times, 
when  church  and  state  are  thus  combined !)  with  all  the  remnant 
of  the  people,  obeyed  the  voice  of  the  Lord  their  God,  and  the 
words  of  Haggai  the  prophet,"  The  spirit  of  Zerubbabel,  and 
of  Joshua,  and  the  spirits  of  all  the  remnant  of  the  people,  were 
stirred  up,  and  they  immediately  came,  disregarding,  as  it  were, 
their  own  private  buildings,  '^  and  did  work  in  the  house  of  tbo 
Lord  of  hosts  their  God."  For  a  while,  they  proceeded  with 
vigour ;  the  foundation  of  the  house  is  laid,  and  the  superstruc- 
ture raised  to  some  considerable  height :  but  whether  this  fit 
of  hot  seal  soon  cooled,  as  is  too  common,  or  the  people  were 
discouraged  by  the  false  representations  of  their  enemies,  which 
perhaps  met  with  too  favourable  a  reception  at  the  court  of 
Darius ;  it  so  happened,  that  the  hearts  of  the  magistrates  and 
ministers  of  the  people  waxed  faint;  and  an  awful  chasm  inter-* 
Tened,  between  the  finishing  and  laying  the  foundation  of  this 
promising  and  glorious  work. 

Upon  this,  another  prophet,  even  Zechariah,  (who  with  Hag- 
gai had  been  joint-sufierer  in  the  captivity,.)  is  sent  to  lift  up 
the  hands  that  hang  down,  to  strengthen  the  feeble  knees,  and, 
by  the  foregoing  instructive  vision,  to  reanimate  Joshua  and 
the  people  in  general,  and  the  heart  of  Zerubbabel  the  son  of 
Shealtiel  in  particular,  maugre  all  discouragements,  either  from 
inveterate  enemies,  or  from  timid  unstable  friends,  or  all  other 
obstacles  whatsoever.  If  Haggai  thunders,  Zechariah's  mes- 
sage is  as  lightning.  ''  This  is  the  word  of  the  Lord  unto  Ze- 
rabbabel,  saying.  Not  by  might,  nor  by  power,  (not  by  barely 
human  power  or  policy,)  but  by  ray  Spirit,  saitb  the  Lord  of 
hosts :  Who  art  thou,  O  great  mountain  ?  (thou  Sanballat  and 
thy  associateSi  who  have  been  so  long  crying  out.  What  mean 


610  A    CAUTION   AGAINST   DESPISING  [LVIU 

these  feeble  Jews  ?  however  great,  formidable,  and  seemingly 
insurmountable)  before  Zerubbabel  thou  shalt  (not  only  be  low- 
ered and  rendered  more  accessible,  but)  become  a  plain ;"  thy 
very  opposition  shall,  in  the  end,  promote  the  work,  and  help 
to  expedite  that  very  building,  which  thou  intendest  to  pot  a 
stop  to,  and  destroy. 

And  lest  Zerubbabel,  through  unbelief  and  outward  opposi- 
tion, or  for  want  of  more  bodily  strength,  should   think  this 
would  be  a  work  of  time,  and  that  he  should  not  live  to  see  it 
completed  in  his  days,  "  The  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  Zecha- 
riah,  saying.  The  hands  of  Zerubbabel  have  laid  the  foundation 
of  this-  house ;  his  hands  also  shall  finish  it,  and  he  shall  bring 
forth  the  headstone  thereof  with  shoutings,  crying,  Grace,  grace 
unto  it."    Grace!    grace!   unto  it:  a  double  acclamation,  to 
shew,  that  out  of  the  abundance  of  their  hearts,  their  mouths 
spake :  and  this  with  shoutings  and  crying  from  all  quarters. 
Even  their  enemies  should  see  the  hand  and  providence  of 
God  in  the  beginning,  continuance,  and  ending  of  this  seem- 
ingly  improbable  and  impracticable  work ;  so  that  they  should 
be  constrained  to  cry,  ''Grace  unto  it;"  and  wish  both  the 
work  and  the  builders  much  prosperity  :  but  as  for  its  friends, 
they  should  be  so  transported  with  heart-felt  joy  in  the  reflec- 
tion upon  the  signal   providences  which  had  attended  them 
through  the  whole  process,  that  they  would  shout  and  cry, 
"  Grace,  grace  unto  it :"  or,  this  is  nothing  but  the  Lord's 
doing ;  God  prosper  and  bless  this  work  more  and  more,  and 
make  it  a  place  where  his  free  grace  and  glory  may  be  abun- 
dantly displayed.    Then  by  a  beautiful  and  pungent  sarcasm, 
turning  to  the  Insulting  enemies,  he  utters  the  spirited  interro- 
gation in  my  text,   *'  Who  hath  despised  the    day  of  small 
things?"    Who  are  you,  that  vauntingly  said.  What  can  these 
feeble  Jews  do,  pretending  to  lay  the  foundation  of  a  house 
which  they  never  will  have  money,  or  strength^  or  power,  to 
finish  ?     Or,  who  are  you,  O  timorous,  short-sighted,  doubting, 
though  well-meaning  people,  who,  through  unbelief,  were  dis- 
couraged at  the  small  beginnings  and  feebleness  of  the  attempt 
to  build  a  second  temple  ?    And,  because  you  thought  it  coold 
not  come  up  to  the  magni6cence  of  the  first,  therefore  were  dis- 
couraged from  so  much  as  beginning  to  build  a  second  at  aUT 

A  close  instructive  question  this ;  a  question,  implying,  tbit 
whenever  God  intends  to  bring  about  any  great  thing,  Jie  gene- 
rally begins  with  a  day  of  small  things. 

As  a  proof  of  this,  I  will  not  lead  you  so  far  back,  as  to  the 
beginning  of  time,  when  the  everlasting  "  I  am"  spake  all  things 
into  existence,  by  his  almighty)ia^  ;  and  out  of  a  confused  chaos, 
"  without  form  and  void,"  produced  a  world  worthy  of  a  God  to 
create,  and  of  his  favourite  creature  man,  his  vicegerent  and 
representative  here  below,  to  inhabit,  and  enjoy  in  it  both  hioh 
self  and  his  God.  And  yet,  though  the  heavens  declare  hii 
glory,  and  the  firmament  sheweth  his  handy  work,  though  thece 
is  no  speech  nor  language  where  their  voice  is  not  heaid,  and 


l.Vn.]  THE   DAY    OF   SMALL   THINGS.  611 

their  line  is  gone  out  through  all  the  earth ;  and  by  a  dumb,  yet 
persuasive  language,  proves  the  hand  that  made  them  to  be 
divine;  yet  there  have  been,  and  are  now,  such  fools  in  the 
world,  as  to  "  say  in  their  hearts.  There  is  no  God ;"  or  so  wise, 
as  by  their  wisdom,  not  to  know  God,  or  own  his  divine  image  to 
be  stamped  on  that  book,  wherein  these  grand  things  are  recorded, 
and  that  in  such  legible  characters,  that  he  who  runs  may  read. 

Neither  will  I  divert  your  attention,  honoured  fathers,  to  the 
histories  of  Greece  and  Kome,  or  any  of  the  great  kingdoms  and 
renowned  monarchies,  which  constitute  so  great  a  part  of  an- 
cient history  ;  but  whose  beginnings  were  very  small,  (witness 
Romulus's  ditch)  their  progress  as  remarkably  great,  and  their 
declension  and  downfall,  when  arrived  at  their  appointed  zenith, 
as  sudden,  unexpected,  and  marvellous.  These  make  the  chief 
subjects  of  the  learning  of  our  schools  ;  though  they  make  but  a 
mean  figure  in  sacred  history,  and  would  not  perhaps  have  beea 
mentioned  at  all,  had  they  not  been,  in  some  measure,  con- 
nected with  the  history  of  God's  people,  which  is  the  grand 
subject  of  that  much  despised  book,  emphatically  called,  tbc^ 
Scriptures.  Whoever  has  a  mind  to  inform  himself  of  the  one, 
may  read  Rollings  Ancient  History ;  and  whoever  would  see  the 
connexion  with  the  other,  may  consult  the  learned  Prideaux's 
admirable  and  judicious  Connexion :  books  which,  I  hope,  will 
be  strenously  recommended,  and  carefully  studied,  when  this 
present  infant  institution  gathers  more  strength,  and  grows  up 
into  a  seat  of  learning.  I  can  hardly  forbear  mentioning  the 
small  beginnings  of  Great  Britain,  now  so  distinguished  for 
liberty,  opulence,  and  renown ;  and  the  rise  and  rapid  progress 
of  the  American  colonies,  which  promises  to  be  one  of  the  most 
opulent  and  powerful  empires  in  the  world.  But  my  present 
views,  and  the  honours  done  this  infant  institution  this  day,  and 
the  words  of  my  text,  as  well  as  the  feelings  of  my  own  heart, 
and  I  trust,  of  the  hearts  of  all  that  hear  me,  lead  me  to  confine 
your  meditations  to  the  history  of  Grod's  own  peculiar  people^ 
which  for  the  simplicity  and  sublimity  of  its  language,  the 
veracity  of  its  author,  and  the  importance  and  wonders  of  the 
facts  therein  recorded,  if  weighed  in  a  proper  balance,  has  not 
its  equal  under  the  sun.  And  yet,  though  God  himself  has 
become  an  author  among  us,  we  will  not  condescend  to  give  his 
book  one  thorough  reading.    Be  astonished,  O  heavens,  at  this ! 

Who  would  have  thought  that  from  one,  even  from  Abraham, 
and  from  so  small  a  beginning,  as  the  emigration  of  a  single 
private  family,  called  out  of  a  land  wholly  given  to  idolatry,  to 
M. sojourners  and  pilgrims  in  a  strange  land  ;  who  would  have 
tiiought,  that  from  a  man,  who  for  a  long  season  was  written 
cluldless,  a  man  whose  first  possession  in  this  strange  land,  was 
by  porchasing  a  burying-place  for  his  wife,  and  in  whose  grave 
one  might  have  imagined  he  would  have  buried  all  future  ex- 
pectations ;  who  would  have  thought,  that  from  this  very  man 
and  woman,  according  to  the  course  of  nature,  both  as  good  as- 
dead,  should  descend  a  numerous  ofispring,  like  unto  the  stara 

2p2 


612  A  CAUTION  AGAINST   DESPI81NO  [LYII. 

of  heaven  for  multitude,  and  as  the  sand  which  is  apoa  the  sea 
shore  innumerable?  Nay,  who  would  have  imagined,  that 
against  all  probability,  and  in  all  human  appearance  impossible, 
a  kingdom  should  arise  ?  Behold  a  poor  captive  slave,  eyen 
Joseph,  who  was  cruelly  separated  from  his  brethren,  became 
second  in  Pharaoh's  kingdom :  he  was  sent  before  to  work  oat 
a  great  deliverance,  and  to  introduce  a  family  which  should  take 
root,  deep  root  downwards,  and  bear  fruit  upwards,  and  fill  the 
land*  How  could  it  enter  into  the  heart  of  man  to  conceive, 
that  when  oppressed  by  a  king,  who  knew  not  Joseph,  thougii 
they  were  the  best,  most  loyal,  industrious  subjects  this  king 
had,  when  an  edict  was  issued  forth  as  impolitic  as  cruel,  (since 
the  safety  and  glory  of  all  kingdoms  chiefly  consist  in  the  num- 
ber of  its  inhabitants,)  that  an  outcast,  helpless  infant  should  be 
taken,  and  bred  up  in  all  the  learning  of  the  Egyptians,  and  in 
that  very  court  from  which,  and  by  ^at  very  tyrant  from  whom 
the  edict  came,  and  that  the  deliverer  should  be  nurtured  to  be 
king  in  Jeshurun  ? — But  time  as  well  as  strength  would  fail  m^ 
were  I  to  give  you  a  detail  of  all  the  important  particulars  re- 
specting God's  peculiar  people :  as,  their  miraculous  support  ia 
the  wilderness,  the  events  which  took  place  while  they  were 
under  a  divine  theocracy,  and  during  their  settlement  in  Canaan, 
to  the  time  of  their  return  from  Babylon,  and  from  thence  to  the 
destruction  of  their  second  temple,  &c.  by  the  Romans.  Indeed, 
considering  to  whom  I  am  speaking,  persons  conversant  in  the 
sacred  and  profane  history,  I  have  mentioned  these  things  only 
to  stir  up  your  minds  by  way  of  remembrance. 

But  if  we  descend  from  the  Jewish  to  the  Christian  fera,  we 
shall  find,  that  its  commencement  was,  in  the  eyes  of  the  world, 
a  "  day  of  small  things"  indeed.  Our  blessed  Lord  compares  the 
beginning  of  its  progress  in  the  world,  to  a  grain  of  mustard* 
seed,  which,  thpugh  the  smallest  of  all  seeds  when  sown,  soon 
becomes  a  great  tree,  and  so  spread,  that  the  '^  birds  of  the  air," 
or  a  multitude  of  every  nation,  language,  and  tongue,  came  and 
lodged  in  its  branches :  and  its  inward  progress  in  the  believer's 
heart,  Christ  likens  to  a  little  leaven  which  a  woman  hid  ut 
three  measures  of  meal.  How  both  the  Jewish  and  ChristiiB 
dispensations  have  been,  and  even  to  this  day  are  despised,  by 
the  wise  disputers  of  this  world,  on  this  very  account,  is  maniftsl 
to  all  who  read  the  lively  oracles  with  a  becoming  attentioa. 
What  ridicule,  obloquy,  and  inveterate  opposition  Christianity 
ineets  with,  in  this  our  day,  not  only  from  the  open  deist,  hot 
from  formal  professors,  is  too  evident  to  every  truly  pious  sooL 
And  what  opposition  the  kingdom  of  grace  meets  ¥ritli  in  the 
heart,  is  well  known  by  all  those  who  are  expcrimeataOy  ac- 
quainted  with  their  hearts :  they  know,  to  their  sorrow,  what  the 
great  apostle  of  the  Gtentiles  means,  by  *'  the  Spirit  strivi^ 
against  the  fiesb,  and  the  flesh  against  the  Spirit/' 

But  the  sacred  oracles,  and  the  histories  of  all  ages,  acquaint 
ns,  that  God  brings  about  the  greatest  things,  not  only  by  sbmB 
and  unlikely  means,  but  by  ways  and  means  divecliy  oppflsits 


L.VII.']  TRB  DAY  OP  SMALL  THINGS.  618 

to  the  carnal  resonings  of  unthinking  men :  he  chooses  things 
that  be  not^  to  bring  to  nought  those  which  are.  How  did 
Christianity  spread  and  fioarish,  by  one  who  was  despised  and 
rejected  of  men,  a  man  of  sorrows,  and  aquainted  with  grief,  and 
who  expired  on  a  cross  ?  He  was  despised  and  rejected,  not 
merely  by  the  vulgar  and  illiterate,  but  the  rabbi's  and  masters 
of  Israel,  the  scribes  and  Pharisees,  who  by  the  Jewish  churchr 
men  were  held  too  in  so  high  a  reputation  for  their  outward 
sanctity,  that  it  became  a  common  proverb,  '^  If  only  two  went 
to  heaven,  the  one  would  be  a  scribe,  and  the  other  a  Pharisee." 
Yet  there  were  they  who  endeavoured  to  silence  the  voice  of  all 
his  miracles,  and  heavenly  doctrine,  with,  '*  Is  not  this  the  car*- 
penter's  son  V  Nay,  **  He  is  mad,  why  hear  you  him  ?  He 
hath  a  devil,  and  casteth  out  devils  by  Beelzebub  the  prince  of 
the  devils."  And  their  despite  not  only  followed  him  to,  but 
after  death,  and  when  in  his  grave :  ''  We  remember  (said  they) 
that  this  deceiver  said.  After  three  days  I  will  rise  again ;  com- 
mand therefore  that  the  sepulchre  be  made  sure  :*'  but,  maugre 
all  your  impotent  precautions,  in  sealing  the  stone  and  setting; 
a  watch,  he  burst  the  bars  of  death  asunder,  and,  according  to 
his  repeated  predictions,  proved  himself  to  be  the  Son  of  God 
with  power,  by  rising  the  third  day  from  the  dead.  And  after- 
wards, in  presence  of  great  multitudes,  was  he  received  up  into- 
glory ;  as  a  proof  thereof,  he  sent  down  the  Holy  Ghost,  (on  the 
mission  of  whom  he  pawned  ail  his  credit  with  bis  disciples,)  in 
such  an  instantaneous,  amazing  manner,  as,  one  would  imagine, 
should  have  forced  and  compelled  all  who  saw  it  to  own,  that 
this  was  indeed  the  finger  of  God. 

And  yet  how  was  this  grand  transaction  treated  ?  With  the 
utmost  contempt :  when  instantaneously  the  apostles  commen- 
ced orators  and  linguists,  and  with  a  divine  profusion  spake  of 
the  wonderful  things  of  God  ;  *^  These  men  (said  some)  are  full 
of  new  wine."  And  yet  by  these  men,  mean  fishermen,  illiterate 
men,  idiots,  in  the  opinion  of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees,  and 
notwithstanding  all  the  opposition  of  earth  and  heD,  and  that  too 
only  by  the  foolishness  ot  preaching,  did  this  grain  of  mustard- 
seed  grow  up,  till  thousands,  ten  thousands  of  thousands,  a  mul- 
titude which  no  man  can  number,  out  of  every  nation,  language^ 
and  people,  came  and  lodged  under  the  branches  of  it. — Neither 
shall  it  rest  here;  whatever  dark  parenthesis  may  intervene,  we 
ate  assured,  that  being  still  watered  by  the  same  divine  hand,  it 
shall  take  deeper  and  deeper  root  downward,  and  bear  more  and 
more  fruit  upward,  till  the  whole  earth  be  filled  with  the  know- 
ledge of  the  Lord,  as  the  waters  cover  the  sea.  Who  shall  live 
when  God  doth  this  ?  Hasten,  O  Lord,  that  blessed  time !  O  let 
this  thy  kingdom  come !  come,  not  only  by  the  external  preach- 
ing of  the  gospel  in  the  world,  but  by  its  renovating,  heart- 
renewing,  soul-transforming  power,  to  awaken  sinners!  For 
want  of  this,  alas !  alas  !  though  we  understood  all  mysteries, 
could  speak  vrith  the  tongues  of  men  and  angels,  we  should  bo 
only  like  sounding  brass^  or  so  many  tinkling  cymbals. 


614  A   CAUTION   AGAINST   DESPISING  [LML 

And  yet^  what  **  a  day  of  small  things"  is  the  first  invplantft- 
tion  of  the  seed  of  divine  life  in  the  soul  of  man  ?  Well  might 
our  Lord,  who  alone  is  the  author  and  finisher  of  our  faith,  com- 
pare it  to  a  little  leaven,  which  a  woman  took  and  bid  in  three 
measures  of  meal,  till  the  whole  was  leavened.  Low  similes, 
mean  comparisons  these,  in  the  eyes  of  those,  who  having  eyes, 
see  not ;  who  having  ears,  hear  not ;  whose  heart,  being  waxed 
gross,  cannot,  will  not  understand !  To  such,  it  is  despicable, 
mysterious,  and  unintelligible  in  its  description  ;  and,  if  pos- 
sible, infinitely  more  so,  when  made  effectual  by  the  power  of 
God  to  the  salvation  of  any  individual  soul.  For  the  wisdom 
of  God  will  always  be  foolishness  to  natural  men.  As  it  was 
formerly,  so  it  is  now ;  they  who  are  bom  after  the  fleshy  will 
persecute  those  that  are  born  after  the  Spirit ;  the  disciple  most 
be  as  his  Master :  they  that  will  live  godly  in  him,  they  that 
live  most  godly  in  him,  must,  shall  suffer  persecution.  This  is 
so  interwoven  in  the  very  nature  and  existence  of  the  gospel, 
that  our  Lord  makes  it  one  part  of  the  beatitudes,  in  that 
blessed  sermon  which  he  preached,  when,  to  use  the  words  of 
my  old  familiar  friend,  the  seraphic  Hervey,  "  a  mount  was  his 
pulpit,  and  the  heavens  his  sounding  board."  A  part,  which, 
like  others  of  the  same  nature,  I  believe,  will  be  little  relished 
by  such  who  are  always  clamouring  against  those  few  highly 
favoured  souls  who  dare  stand  up  and  preach  the  doctrine  of 
justification  by  faith  alone  in  the  imputed  righteousness  of 
Jesus  Christ,  and  are  reproached  with  not  preaching,  like  their 
Master,  morality,  as  they  term  it,  in  his  glorious  sermon  od 
the  mount :  for  did  we  more  preach  and  more  live  it,  we  should 
soon  find  .  all  manner  of  evil  would  be  spoken  against  us  for 
Christ's  sake. 

But  shall  this  hinder  the  progress,  the  growth,  and  consum- 
mation? and  shall  the  Christian  therefore  be  dismayed  and  dis- 
couraged ?  God  forbid !  On  the  contrary,  the  weakest  believer 
may,  and  ought,  to  rejoice  and  be  exceeding  glad.  And  why? 
for  a  very  good  reason ;  because,  he  that  hath  begun  the  good 
work,  hath  engaged  also  to  finish  it ;  though  Christ  found  him 
as  black  as  hell,  he  shall  present  him,  and  every  individual 
purchased  with  his  blood,  without  spot  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such 
thing,  before  the  Divine  presence.  O  glorious  prospect !  how 
will  the  saints  triumph,  and  the  sons  of  God  then  shout  for 
joy?  If  they  shouted  when  God  said,  "  Let  there  be  light,  aud 
there  was  light ;"  and  if  there  is  joy  in  heaven  over  one  sinner 
only  that  repenteth,  how  will  the  heavenly  arches  echo  and 
rebound  with  praise,  when  all  the  redeemed  of  the  Lord  shall 
appear  together,  and  the  Son  of  God  shall  say,  "  Of  all  those 
that  thou  hast  given  me,  have  I  lost  nothing.''  On  the  con- 
trary, what  weeping,  wailing,  and  gnashing  of  teetli,  will  there 
be,*not  only  amongst  the  devil  and  his  angels,  but  amongst  the* 
fearful  and  unbelieving,  when  they  see  that  all  the  hellish 
temptations  and  devices,  instead  of  destroying,  were  over-ruled 
to  the  furtherance  .of  the  gospel  in  general^  and  to  the  increase 


X^VlI.l  THE   DAY   OF   SMALL  THINGS.  616 

and  growth  of  grace  in  every  individual  believer  in"  particular. 
And  how  will  despisers  then  behold,  and  wonder,  and  perish, 
when  they  shall  be  obliged  to  say,  "  We  fools  counted  their 
lives  madness,  and  their  end  to  be  without  honour ;  but  how 
are  they  numbered  among  the  children  of  God,  and  how  happy 
is  their  lot  among  the  saints !" 

But  whither  am  I  going  ?  Pardon  me,  my  dear  hearers,  if 
you  think  this  to  be  a  digression  from  my  main  point.  It  is 
true,  whilst  I  am  musing,  the  fire  begins  to  kindle :  I  am  flying, 
but  not  so  high,  I  trust,  as  to  lose  sight  of  my  main  subject. 
And  yet,  after  meditating  and  talking  of  the  rise  and  progress 
of  the  gospel  of  the  kingdom,  I  shall  find  it  somewhat  difficult 
to  descend  so  low,  as  to  entertain  you  with  the  small  begin* 
nings  of  this  infant  colony,  and  of  the  orphan-house,  in  which 
I  am  now  preaching.  But  I  should  judge  myself  inexcusable 
on  this  occasion,  if  I  did  not  detain  you  a  little  longer  in 
taking  a  transient  view  of  the  traces  of  divine  providence,  in 
the  rise  and  progress  of  the  colony  in  general,  and  the  insti- 
tution of  this  orphan- house  in  particular.  Children  yet  unborn, 
I  trust,  will  have  occasion  to  bless  God  for  both. — The  very 
design  of  this  settlement,  as  charity  inclines  us  to  hope  aU 
things,  was,  that  it  might  be  an  asylum,  and  a  place  of  busi- 
ness, for  as  many  as  were  in  distress  ;  for  foreigners  as  well  as 
natives ;  for  Jews  and  Gentiles. — On  February  1st,  a  day,  the 
memory  of  which,  I  think,  should  still  be  perpetuated,  the  first 
embarkation  was  made  with  forty-five  English  families ;  men, 
who  had  once  lived  well  in  their  native  country,  and  who,  with 
many  persecuted  Saltzburgers,  headed  by  a  good  old  soldier  of 
Jesus,  lately  deceased,  the  Rev.  Mr.  Boltzius,  came  to  find  a 
refuge  here.  They  came,  they  saw,  they  laboured,  and  endea- 
voured to  settle ;  but  by  an  essential,  though  well-meant  defect, 
in  the  very  beginning  of  the  settlement,  too  well  known  by  some 
now  present,  and  too  long,  and  too  much  felt  to  bear  repeating, 
prohibiting  the  importation  and  use  of  negroes,  &c.  their  num- 
bers gradually  diminished,  and  matters  were  brought  to  so  low 
an  ebb,  that  the  whole  colony  became  a  proverb  of  reproach. 

About  this  time,  in  the  year  1737,  being  previously  stirred  up 
thereto  by  a  strong  impulse,  which  I  could  by  no  means  resist, 
I  came  here,  after  the  example  of  my  worthy  and  reverend 
friends.  Messieurs  John  and  Charles  Wesley,  and  Mr.  Ingham, 
i;»ho,  with  the  most  disinterested  views,  had  come  hither  to 
serve  the  colony,  by  endeavouring  to  convert  the  Indians.  I 
came  rejoicing  to  serve  the  colony  also,  and  to  become  your 
iprilling  servant  for  Christ's  sake.  My  friend  and  father,  good 
Bishop  Benson,  encouraged  me,  though  my  brethren  and  kins- 
men after  the  flesh,  as  well  as  religious  friends,  opposed  it.  I 
came,  and  I  saw  (you  will  not  be  ofiended  with  me  to  speak 
the  truth)  the  nakedness  of  the  land.  Gladly  did  I  distribute 
about  the  four  hundred  pounds  sterling,  which  I  had  collected 
in  England  among  my  poor  parishioners.  The  necessity  and 
propriety  of  erecting  an   orphan-house  was  mentioned  au4 


S16  A  CAUTION   AGAINST  OB8PISIN6  XLTIL 

recommended  before  my  first  embarkation.  But  thinking  it  a 
matter  of  too  great  importance  to  be  set  about  uawanly,  I 
deferred  the  farther  prosecution  of  this  laudable  destga  till  my 
return  to  England  in  the  year  1738,  for  to  have  priest's  orders. 

Miserable  was  the  condition  of  many  grown  persons,  as  wdl 
as  children,  whom  I  left  behind.  Their  cause  I  ^ideavoured  to 
plead,  immediately  upon  my  arrival;  but  being  denied  the 
churches,  in  which  I  had  the  year  before  collected  many  hun- 
dreds for  the  London  charity-schools,  I  endeavoured  to  plead 
their  cause  in  the  fields.  The  people  threw  in  their  mites  most 
willingly ;  once  or  twice,  I  think,  twenty-two  pounds  were  col- 
lected in  copper;  the  alms  were  accompanied  with  many 
prayers,  and  which,  as  I  told  them,  laid»  I  am  persuaded,  a 
blessed  foundation  to  the  future  charitable  superstructure.  la 
a  short  time,  though  plucked  as  it  were  out  of  the  fire,  the  col- 
lections and  charitable  contributions  amounted  to  more  tban  a 
thousand  pounds  sterling. 

With  that  I  re-embarked,  taking  Philadelphia  in  my  way, 
and  upon  my  second  arrival,  found  the  spot  fixed  upon;  bat, 
alas  !  who  can  describe  the  low  estate  to  which  it  was  reduced! 
the  whole  country  almost  was  left  desolate,  and  the  metropolis, 
Savannah,  was  but  like  a  cottage  in  a  vineyard,  or  as  a  lodge 
in  a  garden  of  cucumbers.  Many  orphans,  whose  parents  had 
been  taken  from  them  by  the  distresses  that  naturally  attcad 
new  settlements,  were  dispersed  here  and  there  in  a  very  for- 
lorn helpless  condition ;  my  bowels  yearned  towards  them,  and, 
animated  by  the  example  of  the  great  professor  Franck,  pre- 
vious to  bringing  them  here,  I  hired  a  house,  furnished  aa 
infirmary,  employed  all  that  were  capable  of  employment,  and 
in  a  few  weeks  walked  to  the  house  of  God  with  a  large  family 
of  above  sixty  orphans,  and  others  in  as  bad  a  condition. 

On  March  25th,  1740,  in  full  assurance  of  faith,  I  laid  the 
foandation  of  this  house ;  and  in  the  year  following,  brought  ia 
my  orphan  family,  who»  with  the  workmen,  now  made  up  the 
number  of  one  hundred  and  fifty :  by  the  money  which  was 
expended  on  these,  the  remaining  few  were  kept  in  the  colony, 
and  were  enabled  to  pay  the  debts  they  owed ;  so  that  in  a 
representation  made  to  the  House  of  Commons,  by  some,  who 
for  very  good  reasons  wanted  the  constitution  of  the  ctdony 
altered ;  they  declared,  that  the  very  existence  of  the  colony 
was  in  a  great  measure,  if  not  totally,  owing  to  the  building  and 
supporting  of  the  orphan-house. — Finduig  the  care  of  such  a 
family,  incompatible  with  the  care  due  to  a  parish,  upon  giviDg 
previous  warning  to  the  then  trustees,  I  gave  up  the  living  of 
Savannah,  which  without  fee  or  reward  I  had  voluntarily  taken 
upon  me :  I  then  ranged  through  the  northern  colonies,  and 
afterwards  once  more  returned  home.  What  calumny,  what 
loads  of  reproach,  I  for  many  years  was  called  to  undergo,  ia 
thus  turning  beggar  for  a  family,  few  here  present  need  to  be 
informed ;  a  family  utterly  unconnected  by  any  ties  of  nature; 
a  family,  not  <mly  to  be  maintained  with  food,  but  clothed  and 


f.Vll,]  THB   DAY   OP   SMALL   THIN-GS.  617 

educated  also^  and  that  too  in  the  dearest  part  of  hid  majesty^s 
dominions^  on  a  piDe-barreo,  and  in  a  colony  where  the  use  of 
negroes  was  totally  denied ;  this  appeared  so  very  improbable^ 
that  all  beholders  looked  daily  for  its  decline  and  annihilation. 

Bat,  blessed  be  God,  the  building  advanced  and  flourished, 
and  the  wisfaed-for  period  is  now  come;  after  having  supported 
the  family  for  thirty-two  years,  by  a  change  of  constitution  and 
the  smiles  of  government,  with  liberal  donations  from  the 
northern,  and  especially  the  adjacent  provinces,  the  same  hands 
that  laid  the  foundation,  are  now  called  to  finish  it,  by  making 
an  addition  of  a  seat  of  learning,  the  whole  products  and  pro- 
fits of  which  are  to  go  towards  the  increase  of  the  fund,  as  at 
the  beginning:,  for  destitute  orphans,  or  such  youths  as  may  be 
called  of  God  to  the  sacred  ministry  of  his  gospel*  I  need  not 
call  on  any  here,  to  cry,  "  Grace,  grace,  unto  it"  For  on  the 
utmost  scrutiny  of  the  intention  of  those  employed,  and  con- 
sidering the  various  exercises  they  have  been  called  to  under- 
go, and  the  opposition  the  building  hath  every  where  met  with^ 
we  may-  justly  say,  "  Not  by  might  nor  by  power,  but  by  thy 
Spirit,  O  Lord,"  hath  this  work  been  carried  on  thus  far;  it  is 
his  doing,  let  it  be  marvellous  in  our  eyes.  With  humble  grati- 
tude, therefore,  would  we  now  set  up  our  Ebenezer,  and  say, 
**  Hitherto  thou,  Lord,  hast  helped  us ;  and  wherefore  should  we 
doubt,  but  that  he,  who  hath  thus  far  helped,  will  continue  to 
help,  when  the  weary  heads  of  the  first  founders,  and  present 
helpers,  are  laid  in  the  silent  grave  ? 

I  am  very  well  aware,  what  an  invidious  task  it  must  bo  to  a 
person  in  my  circumstances,  thus  to  speak  on  an  affair  in  which 
he  hath  been  so  much  concerned.  Some  may  perhaps  think,  I 
am  become  a  fool  in  thus  glorying.  But  as  I  am  now,  blessed 
be  God,  in  the  decline  of  life,  and  as,  in  all  probability,  I  shall 
never  be  present  to  celebrate  another  anniversary,  I  thought  it 
best  to  be  a  little  more  explicit,  that  if  I  have  spoken  any  thing 
bat  truth,  I  may  be  confronted ;  and  if  not,  that  future  ages, 
and  future  successors,  may  see  with  what  a  purity  of  intention, 
and  what  various  interpositions  of  Providence,  the  work  was 
begun,  and  hath  been  carried  on  to  its  present  height.  It  was 
the  reading  of  a  like  accoant,  written  by  the  late  professor 
Franck,  that  encouraged  me  ;  who  knows  but  hereafter,  the  read** 
ing  something  of  a  similar  nature,  may  encourage  others  to  be- 
gin and  carry  on  a  like  work  elsewhere  P  I  have  said  its  present 
height,  for  I  would  humbly  hope,  that  this  is,  comparatively 
speaking,  only  a  '*  day  of  small  things,"  only  the  dawn  of  brighter 
scenes.  Private  geniuses  and  individuals,  as  well  as  collective 
bodies,  have,  like  the  human  body,  the  nonage,  puerile,  juvenile 
estate,  before  they  arrive  at  their  zenith ;  and  their  lives  as 
gradually  decline.  But  yet  I  would  hope,  that  both  the  pro* 
vince,  and  Bethesda,  are  but  in  their  puerile  or  juvenile  state. 
And  long,  long  may  they  increase,  and  make  large  strides,  tilt 
they  arrive  at  a  glorious  zenith!  I  mean  not  merely  in  trade^ 
merchandise,  and  opulence,  (though  I  would  be  far  from  seclud- 


618  A  CAUTION   AGAINST   DESPISING  [LVII. 

ing  them  from  the  province,  aud  would  be  thankful  for  the  ad* 
vances  it  bath  already  made,)  but  a  zenith  of  glorious  gospel 
blessings,  without  which^  all  outward  emoluments  are  less  than 
nothing,  or  as  the  small  dust  of  the  balance :  '^For  what  shall  it  pro- 
fit a  man,  if  he  shall  gain  the  whole  world,  and  lose  bis  own  soul." 
— Who  can  imagine,  that  the  prophet  Zechariah  would  be  sent 
to  strengthen  the  hands  of  Zerubbabel,  in  building  and  laying 
the  foundation  of  the  temple,  if  that  temple  was  not  to  be  fre- 
quented with  worshippers  that  worshipped  the  Father  in  spirit 
and  in  truth  ?  The  most  gaudy  fabrics,  stately  temples,  new- 
moon  sabbaths,  and  solemn  assemblies^  are  only  solemn  mock- 
eries God  cannot  away  with.  This,  God  hath  shewn  by  the 
destruction  of  both  the  first  and  second  temples.  What  is  be- 
come of  the  seven  churches  of  Asia?  How  are  all  their  golden 
candlesticks  overthrown  ?  *^  God  is  a  spirit,  and  they  who  wor- 
ship him  must  worship  him  in  spirit  and  in  truth/'  And  no 
longer  do  I  expect  that  this  house  will  flourish,  than  when  the 
power  of  religion  is  encouraged  and  promoted,  and  the  persons 
educated  here^  prosecute  their  studies,  not  only  to  be  great  scho- 
lars, but  good  saints. 

Blessed  be  God !  I  can  say  with  professor  Franck,  that  it  is 
in  a  great  measure  owing  to  the  disinterested  spirit  of  my  first 
fellow-helpers,  as  well  as  those  who  are  now  employed,  that  the 
building  hath  reached  to  its  present  height.    This  I  am  bound 
to  speak,  not  only  in  honour  to  those  who  are  now  with  God, 
but  those  at  present  before  me. — Nor  dare  I  conclude,  without 
oflering  to  Your  Excellency  our  pepper  com   of  acknowledg- 
ment for  the  countenance  you  have  always  shewn  Bethesda's 
institution,  and  the  honour  you  did  us  last  year,  in  laying  the 
first  brick  of  yonder  wings  :  in  thus  doing,  you  have  honoured 
Bethesda's  God.    May  he  long  delight  to  honour  yoo  here  on 
earth !  and  after  a  life  spent  to  his  glory  and  your  conntry*s 
good,  may  he   honour  you  to  all  eternity,  in  placing  you  at 
Christ's  right  hand  in  the  kingdom  above ! — Next  to  your  Ex- 
cellency, my  dear  Mr.  President,  I  must  beg  your  acceptance 
both  of  thanks  and  congratulation  on  the  annual  return  of  this 
festival :   for  you  were  not  only  my  dear  familiar  friend,  and 
first  fellow-traveller  in  this  infant  province;    but  you  were 
directed  by  Providence  to  this  spot,  laid  the  second  brick  of 
this  house,  watched,  prayed,  and  wrought  for  the  family's  good : 
A  witness  of  Innumerable  trials,  partner  of  my  joys  and  grieis; 
you  will  have  now  the  pleasure  of  seeing  the  orphan-house  a 
fruitful  bough,  its  branches  running  over  the  wall.     For  this, 
no  doubt,  God  hath  smiled  upon  and  blessed  you,  in  a  manner 
we  could  not  expect,  much  less  design  ;  and  may  he  continue  to 
bless  you  with  all  spiritual  blessings  in  heavenly  places  in  Christ 
Jesus !     Look  to  the  rock  from  whence  you  have  been  hewn, 
and  may  your  children  never  be  ashamed,  that  their  father  kit 
his  native  country,  and  married  a  real  Christian,  bom  again 
under  this  roof.     May  Bethesda's  God  grant  this  may  be  the 
happy  portion  of  your  children,  and  children's  children ! 


LVIlJ  THB   DAY    OP   SMALL   THINGS.  619 

Gentlemen  of  his  majesty's  council : — Mr.  Speaker^  and  yoa 
members  of  the  General  Assembly,  many  thanks  are  owing  to 
you,  lor  your  late  address  to  his  Excellency  in  favour  of 
Bethesda.  Your  joint  recommendation  of  it,  when  I  was  last 
here,  which,  though  in  some  measure,  through  the  bigotry  of 
some,  for  the  present  is  rendered  abortive,  by  their  wanting  to 
have  it  confined  to  a  party,  yet  I  trust  the  event  will  prove  that 
every  thing  shall  be  overruled  to  the  furtherance  of  the  work. 
Here  I  repeat,  what  I  have  often  declared,  that  as  far  as  lies  in 
my  power,  before  and  after  my  decease,  Bethesda  shall  be  always 
on  a  broad  bottom.  All  denominations  have  freely  given ;  all 
denominations,  all  the  continent,  God  being  my  helper,  shall 
receive  benefit  from  it.  May  Bethesda's  God  bless  you  all,  in 
your  private  a^well  as  public  capacity !  and  as  you  are  honoured 
to  be  the  representative  of  a  now  flourishing  increasing  people, 
may  you  be  directed  in  all  your  ways !  May  truth,  justice, religion, 
and  piety,  be  established  amongst  you  through  all  generations ! 

Lastly,  My  reverend  brethren,  and  you  inhabitants  of  the 
colony,  accept  unfeigned  thanks  for  the  honour  done  me,  in 
letting  us  see  you  at  Bethesda  this  day.  You,  sir,  for  the  ser- 
mon preached  here  last  year.  Tell  it  in  Germany,  tell  my  great 
good  friend,  professor  Franck,  that  Bethesda's  God,  is  a  God 
whose  mercy  endureth  for  ever.  O  let  us  have  your  earnest 
prayers !  encourage  your  people  not  to  despise  **  the  day  of  small 
things."  What  has  God  wrought!  From  its  infancy,  this 
colony  has  been  blessed  with  many  faithful  gospel  ministers :  O 
that  this  may  be  a  nursery  to  many  more !  This  has  been  the 
case  of  the  New  England  college  for  almost  a  century,  and  why 
not  the  orphan-house  academy  at  Georgia? 

Men,  brethren,  fathers,  as  many  of  you,  whether  inhabitants 
or  strangers,  who  have  honoured  this  day  with  your  presence, 
give  us  the  additional  blessings  of  your  prayers.  And  O  that 
Jlethesda's  Grod  may  make  this  day,  though  but  a  day  of  small 
things,  productive  of  great  things  to  the  souls  of  all  amongst 
whom  I  have  been  now  preaching  the  kingdom  of  God.  A 
great  and  good  day  will  it  be  indeed,  if  Jesus  Christ,  our  great 
Zerubbabel,  should,  by  the  power  of  the  eternal  Spirit,  bless 
any  thing  that  has  now  been  said,  to  cause  every  mountain  of 
difficulty  that  lies  in  the  way  of  your  conversion,  to  become  a 
plain.  And  what  art  thou,  O  great  mountain,  whether  the  lust  of 
the  flesh,  the  lust  of  the  eye,  or  the  pride  of  life,  sin  or  self-righ- 
teousness? Before  our  Bethesda's  Grod,  thou  shalt  become  a  plain. 

Brethren,  my  heart  is  enlarged  towards  you :  it  is  written, 
blessed  be  God  that  it  is  written,  **  In  the  name  of  Jesus  every 
knee  shall  bow,  whether  things  in  heaven,  or  things  in  earth,  or 
things  under  the  earth.''  O  that  we  may  be  made  a  willing 
people  in  the  day  of  his  power!  Look,  look  unto  him,  all  ye 
that  are  placed  in  these  ends  of  the  earth.  This  house  has  often 
been  a  house  of  God,  a  gate  of  heaven,  to  some  of  your  fathers. 
May  it  be  a  house  of  God,  a  gate  of  heaven,  to  the  children 
also !  Come  unto  him,  all  ye  that  fire  weary  and  heavy  laden,  ho 


6S0  A    FAITHFUL   MINISTBR'8  [LVIII. 

will  give  yoa  rest ;  rest  from  the  guilt,  rest  from  the  power,  rest 
from  the  punishment,  of  sin ;  rest  from  the  fear  of  divine  judg^ 
meats  here,  rest  with  himself  eternally  hereafter.  Fear  not, 
though  the  beginnings  are  but  small,  Christ  will  not  despise  the 
day  of  small  things.  A  bruised  reed  will  he  not  break,  and  the 
smoking  flax  will  he  not  quench,  until  he  bring  forth  judgment 
unto  victory.  His  hands  that  laid  the  foundation,  also  shall 
finish  it :  yet  a  little  while,  and  the  top-stone  shall  be  brought  forth 
with  shouting,  and  men  and  angels  join  in  crying,  '^  Grace !  grace! 
unto  it."  That  all  present  may  be  in  this  happy  number,  may 
God  of  his  infinite  mercy  grant,  through  Jesus  our  Lord. 

SERMON  LVIII. 

A   FAITHFUL   MINISTER'S   PARTING   BLESSING. 

The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  be  with  you  ali.    Amen. 

'  Rev.  xxii.21. 

It  is  very  remarkable  that  the  Old  Testament  ends  with  the 
word  curse;  whereby  we  are  taught,  that  the  law  made  nothing 
perfect :  but,  blessed  be  God,  the  New  Testament  ends  other* 
wise,  even  a  precious  blessing,  that  glorioas  grace  put  into  the 
heart,  and  dropt  by  the  pen  of  the  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved. 

My  brethren,  as  the  providence  of  God  calls  us  now  to  bid 
each  other  a  long  farewell,  can  I  part  from  you  better  than  in 
enlarging  a  little  upon  this  short  but  glorious  prayer?  can  I  wish 
you,  or  you  me,  better  in  time  and  eternity,  than  that  the  words 
of  our  text  may  be  fulfilled  in  our  hearts,  the  grace  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  be  with  you  all,  Amen  ?    In  opening  which. 

First,  It  will  be  proper  to  explain  what  we  are  to  understand 
by  the  word  grace. 

Secondly,  What  by  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and 
its  being  with  us  all;  and  then  to  observe  upon  the  word 
Amen :  shewing  you  why  it  is  that  every  one  of  us  may  wish, 
that  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  may  be  with  us  all. 

Perhaps  there  is  not  a  word  in  the  book  of  Qoi,  that  has  a 
greater  variety  of  interpretations  put  upon  it  than  this  little,  this 
great  word  grace :  I  do  not  intend  to  spin  out,  or  waste  the  time 
by  giving  you  all.  It  will  be  enough  in  general  to  observe,  that 
the  word  grace  signifies  favour,  or  may  imply  the  general  kind* 
ness  that  God  bears  to  the  world ;  but  it  signifies  that  here, 
which  I  pray  God  we  may  all  experience,  I  mean  the  grace,  the 
special  grace  of  the  blessed  God  communicated  to  bis  people; 
not  only  his  favour  displayed  to  us  outwardly,  but  the  woik  of 
the  blessed  Spirit  imparted  and  conveyed  inwardly  and  most 
powerfully  to  our  souls,  and  this  is  what  our  church  in  the 
catechism  calls  special  grace ;  for  though  Jesus  Christ  in  one 
respect  is  the  Saviour  of  all,  and  we  are  to  ofier  (preach)  Jesus 
Christ  universally  to  all,  yet  he  is  said  in  a  special  manner  (o 
be  the  Saviour  of  them  that  believe ;  so  that  the  word  grace  u 
a  very  complex  word,  and  takes  in  all  that  the  blessed  Spirit 
of  God  does  for  a  poor  sinner,  from  the  moment  he  first  draws 


LTIII.]  PARTING   BLBS8ING.     '  G21 

his  breath,  and  brings  him  to  Jesus  Christ,  till  he  is  pleased  to 
call  him  by  death ;  and  as  it  is  begun  in  grace,  it  wiU  be  swal- 
lowed up  in  an  endless  eternity  of  gfory  hereafter ;  this  is  called 
the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ :  why  so  ?  because  it  is  pur- 
chased (procured)  for  us  by  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ :  the  law  was 
given  by  Moses,  but  grace  and  truth,  in  the  most  emphatical 
manner,  came  by  Jesus  Christ  the  Son  of  God.  If  it  were  not 
for  the  purchase  of  a  Mediator's  Uood,  if  it  were  not  that  Jesus 
Christ  had  bought  us  with  a  price,  even  with  the  price  of  his 
own  blood,  you  and  I  should  never  have  had,  you  and  I  could 
never  have  had  the  grace  of  God  manifested  at  all  to  our  80uls» 
The  covenant  of  works  being  broken,  our  first  parents  stood 
convicted  before  Grod :  they  were  criminals,  though  they  did  not 
care  to  own  it;  condemned  before  God,  and  in  themselves,  so 
that  like  their  children  they  make  excuses  for  their  sin.  Man 
by  nature  had  but  one  neck,  and,  if  God  had  pleased  to  have 
done  it,  he  might  justly  have  cut  it  off  at  one  blow ;  but  no 
sooner  had  man  incurred  the  curse  of  the  law,  but  behold  a 
Mediator  is  provided,  under  the  character  of  the  Seed  of  the 
woman,  which  should  bruise  the  serpent's  head :  implying  what 
the  Redeemer  was  first  to  do  without,  and  afterwards  to  do  in 
the  hearts  of  all  his  people ;  well,  therefore,  are  we  taught  in 
our  church  collects  to  end  all  our  prayers  with  the  words, 
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord. 

Moreover,  brethren,  this  grace  may  be  called  the  grace  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  because  it  is  not  only  purchased  (pro- 
cured) by  him,  but  it  is  conveyed  into  our  hearts  through 
Christ ;  the  federal  head  of  his  glorious  body,  is  a  head  of  influ- 
ence to  those  for  whom  he  shed  his  blood :  thus  his  disciples 
said,  he  was  full  of  grace  and  truth,  and  out  of  his  fulness  we, 
all  that  are  true  believers,  receive  grace  for  grace ;  grace  upon 
g^ace,  says  Mr.  Blackwall,  in  his  Sacred  Clcussics:  grace  for 
grace,  that  is,  says  Luther,  every  grace  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus, 
will  be  by  his  blessed  Spirit  transcribed  into  every  believer's 
beart,  even  as  the  warm  wax  receives  the  impress  of  the  seal 
upon  it ;  as  there  is  line  upon  line  upon  the  seal  left  upon  the 
wax,  so  in  a  degree,  though  we  come  greatly  short  of  what  the 
law  requires,  the  grace  that  is  in  Jesus  Christ  is,  in  a  measure, 
implanted  in  our  souls ;  but  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  blessed  be 
G<kl,  has  our  stock  in  his  hands.  God  trusted  man  once,  but 
never  will  more ;  he  set  Adam  up,  gave  him  a  blessed  stock, 
placed  him  in  a  paradise  of  love,  and  he  soon  became  a  bank- 
rapt,  some  think  in  twenty^bnr  hours,  however,  all  agree  it 
was  in  six  or  seven  days,  and  that  he  never  had  but  one  sab- 
bath ;  but  now,  blessed  be  God,  we  are  under  a  better  dispen- 
sation, our  stock  is  put  into  Christ's  hands,  he  knows  how  to 
k^ep  it,  and  us  too ;  so  this  grace  may  be  said  to  be  the  grace 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  secured  by  his  blood,  and  conveyed 
to  oar  souls  by  his  being  the  head  of  his  church  and  people. 
This  grace  has  a  variety  of  epithets  put  to  it,  and  I  question 
whether  there  is  any  kind  of  grace  but  what  the  Lord  Jesus 


632  A   FAITHFUL   MINISTER'S  [lVIII. 

Christ  exercises  towards  his  people  some  way  or  other,  every 
boar,  every  moment  of  the  day. 

First,  His  restraining  grace ;  why,  if  it  were  not  for  this, 
Grod's  people  would  be  just  as  weak  and  wicked  as  other  folks 
are :  remember  what  David  said  when  Abigail  came  to  him ; 
he  was  going  to  kill  a  neighbour  for  affronting  him,  forgot  that 
he  was  a  psalmist,  and  was  only  acting  as  a  creature :  Blessed 
be  God,  says  he,  that  has  sent  thee  to  meet,  and  keep  me.  Hy 
brethren,  we  may  talk  what  we  please,  and  build  upon  our  own 
stock ;  we  are  just  like  little  children,  that  will  walk  by  them* 
selves ;  well,  says  the  father,  walk  alone  then, — they  tumble 
down,  get  a  broken  brow,  and  then  are  glad  to  take  hold  of  the 
father :  thus  Jesus  Christ  is  always  acting  in  a  restraining  waj 
to  his  people ;  if  it  were  not  so,  by  the  blindness  of  their  under- 
standings, the  corruptions  of  their  hearts  and  affections,  toge* 
ther  with  the  perverseness  of  their  will,  alas !  alas !  there  is 
not  a  child  of  God  that  would  not  run  away  every  day,  if  Christ 
did  not  restrain  him ! 

Secondly f  There  is  convicting  grace,  which  from  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  acts  every  day  and  hour.  Oh !  it  is  a  blessed 
thing  to  be  under  the  Redeemer's  convicting  grace?  A  man  may 
speak  to  the  ear,  but  it  is  the  Spirit  of  God  alone  can  speak  to 
the  heart :  I  am  not  speaking  of  convicting  gprace  that  wounds 
before  conversion,  and  gives  us  a  sense  of  our  sin  and  misery; 
no,  I  mean  convicting  grace,  that  follows  the  believer  from  time 
to  time.  If  a  heathen  Socrates  could  say,  that  he  had  always 
a  monitor  with  him  to  check  him  when  he  did  amiss,  and  direct 
him  when  he  went  right,  surely  the  Christian  may  say,  and 
blessed  be  God  for  it,  that  he  has  got  a  Jesus  that  kindly  shews 
him  when  he  goes  astray,  and  by  his  grace  puts  him  into  the 
way  of  righteousness,  that  his  feet  may  not  slip ;  this  is  what 
the  shepherd  does  to  his  sheep, when  they  have  wandered; 
what  does  the  shepherd  do,  but  sends  some  little  cur,  his  do;, 
after  them,  to  bring  them  to  the  fold  a^ain  ?  What  does  Jesu 
Christ  do  in  temptation^,  trials,  and  afflictions  ?  He  fetches  bis 
people  home,  and  convinces  them  that  they  have  done  amiss. 

Then,  Thirdly,  There  is  the  converting  grace  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  Oh!  what  poor  unhappy  creatures  are  they, 
that  think  they  can  turn  to  God  when  they  please,  to  which 
abominable  principle  it  is  owing,  that  they  leave  it  till  tbejr 
cannot  turn  in  their  beds :  Satan  tells  them  then,  it  is  too  late, 
their  consciences  are  filled  with  horror,  and  they  go  off  in  a 
whirlwind  ;  may  this  be  the  case  of  none  here !  That  is  a  most 
excellent  prayer  in  our  Communion  Office,  Turn  us,  Ogooi 
Lord,  and  we  shall  be  turned;  we  can  no  more  turn  our  hearts 
than  we  can  turn  the  world  upside-down ;  it  is  the  Redeemer, 
by  his  Spirit,  must  take  away  the  heart  of  stone,  and  by  the 
influence  of  the  holy  Spirit  give  us  a  heart  of  flesh*  I  might 
as  well  attempt  to  reach  the  heavens  with  my  hand ;  I  might 
as  well  go  to  some  church-yard,  and  command  the  dead  to  rise; 
1  might  as  soon  shake  my  handkerchief,  and  bid  the  aticass 


I«^III.]  '  PARTING    BLESSING.  623 

divide^  and  they  give  way,  as  to  expect  a  soul  to  turn  to  God 
without  the  grace  of  the  Mediator.  Com^,  my  dear  hearers, 
I  am  of  a  good  man's  opinion,  that  prayed  he  might  be  con- 
verted every  day.  In  the  divine  life,  not  to  go  forwards  is  to 
go  backwards ;  and  it  is  one  great  part  of  the  work  of  the  Spirit 
of  God,  to  convert  the  soul  from  something  that  is  wrong  to 
something  that  is  right,  every  day,  hour,  and  moment  of  the 
believer's  life,  so  that  in  short  his  life  is  one  continued  act  of  . 
converting  grace :  there  is  not  a  day  but  there  is  something 
wrong ;  there  is  something  we  want  to  have  taken  away ;  we 
want  to  get  rid  of  the  old  man,  and  to  get  more  of  the  new  man ; 
and  so  the  Spirit  of  God  works  every  day:  O!  my  brethren, 
God  give  us  more  of  this  converting  grace ! 

Then  there  is  establishing  grace.  David  prays,  Create  in  me 
a  new  heart,  and  renew  a  right  spirit  within  me;  in  the  margin, 
it  is,  constant  spirit ;  and  you  hear  of  some  that  are  rooted  and 
grounded  in  the  love  of  God,  and  the  apostle  prays,  that  they 
may  always  abound  in  the  work  of  the  Lord :  again,  it  is  good 
to  have  the  heart  established  with  grace ;  there  is  a  good  many 
people  have  some  religion  in  them, but  they  are  not  established; 
hence  they  are  mere  weather-cocks,  turned  about  by  every  wind 
of  doctrine ;  and  you  may  as  soon  measure  the  moon  for  a  suit 
of  clothes,  as  some  people  that  are  always  changing ;  this  is 
for  want  of  more  grace,  more  of  the  Spirit  of  God ;  and  as  chil- 
dren grow  that  are  got  stronger  and  riper,  so  as  people  grow  in 
grace,  and  in  the  knowledge  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  they 
will  be  more  settled,  more  confirmed  :  on  first  setting  out  they 
prattle,  but  they  will  be  more  manly,  more  firm,  more  steady : 
young  Christians  are  like  little  rivulets,  that  make  a  great  noise, 
and  have  shallow  water ;  old  Christians  are  like  deep  water, 
that  makes  little  noise,  carries  a  good  load,  and  gives  not  way« 

What  think  you,  my  brethren,  of  the  Redeemer's  comforting 
grace?  O  !  what  can  you  do  without  it?  In  the  multitude  of 
my  thoughts  within  me,  says  the  psalmist,  thy  comforts  have 
refreshed  my  soul.  I  believe  you  will  all  find  what  lord  Bolin- 
broke,  in  spite  of  all  his  fine  learning  and  deistical  principles, 
found  when  under  affliction ;  he  sent  a  letter,  which  I  saw  and 
heard  read  to  me,  at  least  that  part  of  it  in  which  he  says. 
Now  I  am  under  this  affliction,  I  find  my  philosophy  fails  me. 
With  all  our  philosophy  and  striving,  it  is  too  hard  to  work 
ourselves  into  a  passive  state:  alas!  it  is  commendable  to 
strive,  but  we  shall  never  be  content,  we  shall  never  be  cheerful 
under  sufferings,  but  through  the  assistance  of  the  Redeemer, 
£ven  now,  in  respect  of  parting  from  one  another,  what  can 
comfort  friends  when  separated,  but  the  Spirit  of  God  ?  Paul, 
when  going  away  for  Jerusalem,  said.  What  mean  ye  to  weep, 
and  to  break  my  heart  ?  He  also  says,  I  am  ready  not  to  be 
bound  only,  but  also  to  die  at  Jerusalem,  for  the  name  of  the 
JLard  Jesus,  which  he  could  not  have  said,  had  he  not  felt  the 
comforting  grace  of  Jesus  Christ.  Our  Lord,  when  going  away, 
«ays,  /  wM  send  the  Coa^orter;  I  will  not  leave  you  comfort- 


624  A  PAITHPUL  ministbr's  [ltiii 

less  and  helpless,  I  will  come  again:  the  Lord  helps  (be 
believer  from  time  to  time.  We  can  easily,  my  brethren,  talk 
when  not  under  the  rod  ourselves ;  there  is  not  a  physiGian  or 
apothecary  in  London,  but  can  give  good  advice,  yet  when 
they  are  sick  themselves,  poor  souls !  they  are  just  like  thdr 
patients,  and  many  times  are  more  impatient  than  those  they 
used  to  preach  patience  to :  so  it  is  with  the  greatest  Christian, 
we  are  all  men  of  like  passions,  there  is  not  one  of  hs,  when 
tinder  the  rod,  if  left  to  ourselves,  but  would  curse  God,  and, 
Ephraim-liko»  be  as  a  bullock  unaccustomed  te  the  yoke ;  and 
there  are  many  here,  I  do  not  doubt,  that  have  said  to  the 
Redeemer,  What  dost  thou  ?  Or,  perhaps,  with  Jonah,  We  do 
well  to  be  angry ;  if  the  liord  does  but  take  away  bis  gonid 
from  us,  if  he  is  pleased  to  balk  us  in  regard  to  the  creatures, 
how  uncomfortable  are  we !  And  there  are  so  many  aflUctions 
and  trials,  that  if  it  were  not  for  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ's  com- 
fortings,  no  flesh  could  bear  them. 

In  a  word,  what  think  you,  my  brethren,  of  the  qaickeniBg 
grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ?  Remember  David  says,  Qukkm 
me  according  to  thy  word,  quicken  me  in  thy  way,  quicken  me  in 
thy  righteousness:  God's  people  want  quickening  every  day; 
this  is  trimming  our  lamps,  girding  up  the  loins  of  our  minds, 
stirring  up  the  gift  of  God  that  is  in  us.  It  is  just  vatb  a  sod 
as  it  is  with  the  plants  and  trees ;  how  would  it  be  with  them, 
if  the  Lord  did  not  command  quickening  life  to  them  after  the 
winter  ?  The  believer  has  his  frosty  and  winter  days,  and  woe 
be  to  them  that  think  they  have  always  a  summer ;  the  believer 
at  times  can  say.  The  winter  is  past,  the  rain  is  over  and  gone, 
the  flowers  appear  on  the  earth,  the  time  of  the  singing  ofhirdz 
is  come,  and  the  voice  of  the  turtle  is  heard  in  our  land,  the  fig-tree 
putteth  forth  her  greeti  figs,  and  the  vines  with  the  tender  grapes 
give  a  good  smell.  Cant.  ii.  12.  What  is  all  this  but  God's  quick- 
ening grace,  restoring  the  believer  to  his  blessed  joy.  Oh !  my 
brethren,  I  have  not  time  to  shew  you  in  how  many  ways  the 
Redeemer's  grace  is  displayed ;  but  wherever  this  graee  is,  what 
reason  have  you  that  are  partakers  of  it,  and  I,  to  pray  that  it 
may  be  with  us  all — the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  mB 
John  here,  be  with  you  all :  it  is  not  said  all  ministers,  it  is  nloC 
said  all  of  this  or  that  particular  people,  but  with  all  believers. 
O !  my  friends,  remember  what  Mr.  Henry  said,  he  desired  fs 
be  a  Catholic,  but  not  a  Roman  Catholic.  I  have  often  thovgM 
since  I  went  to  see  the  water-works,  that  it  was  aa  emblem  ef 
Christ:  there  is  a  great  reservoir  of  water  from  which  this  great 
city  is  supplied ;  but  how  is  it  supplied  from  that  reservoir! 
Why,  by  hundreds  and  hundreds  of  pipes :  but  where  does  this 
water  go,  does  it  go  only  to  the  dissenters  or  to  the  chofdl 
people,  only  to  this  or  that  people?  No,  the  pipes  convey  tke 
water  to  all ;  and  I  remember  when  I  saw  it,  it  pat  me  in  mmi 
of  the  great  reservoir  of  grace,  that  living  water  that  is  in  Christ 
Jesus,  and  the  pipes  are  the  ordinances  by  which  his  grace  is  coa- 
veyed  to  all  believing  souls.  God  grant  we  may  be  of  that  hBffff 


LVIIl.]  PARtINO    BLBSSING.  C25 

number.  O  what  a  mercy  it  is  that  Christ  has  said>  /  wilt  be  with 
you  always^  even  to  the  end  of  the  world,  Matt,  xxviii.  20.  and 
therefore  we  must  look  upon  this  prayer  to  be  as  efficacious  now, 
as  it  was  the  moment  the  words  dropt  from  the  apostle's  pen. 
I  believe  the  most  minute  philosophers,  and  those  that  have  the 
greatest  skill  in  astronomy,  cannot  perceive  there  has  been  any 
abatement  in  the  heat  of  the  sun  since  God  first  commanded  it 
to  rule  the  day ;  then  surely,  if  my  God  can  make  a  sun  that  lor  so 
many  thousands  of  years  shall  irradiate,  enlighten,  and  warm 
the  world,  without  losing  any  of  its  light  and  heat,  so  does  the 
San  of  righteoasness,  the  Son  of  God,  arise  upon  the  children 
of  God  with  healing  under  his  wings ;  ho  raised,  warms,  nourishes, 
and  comforts  his  people,  and  we  have  the  gospel  on  the  ends  of 
the  earth,  as  well  as  those  who  had  the  honour  of  conversing 
with  him  in  the  days  of  his  flesh.  I  mention  this  in  answer  to 
all  those  who  have  wrote  against  the  Methodists,  and  repre- 
sented them  as  fanatics:  there  is  no  other  way  of  talking 
against  the  divine  influence,  but  by  allowing  it  was  so  formerly, 
but  that  it  is  not  so  now ;  they  say  the  primitive  Christians  had 
it,  but  it  is  not  to  be  so  with  us  now  as  it  was  formerly.  O  my 
brethren,  what  fools  these  great  men  are  when  they  talk  about 
things  they  know  nothing  of ;  give  them  a  polyglot,  give  them  a 
lexicon,  give  them  a  geographical  text,  or  the  chronological  part 
of  the  Scripture,  they  have  something  to  say ;  but  when  they 
come  to  talk  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  they  see  the  word  Spirit,  and 
they  read  the  word  grace,  but  while  they  read  it,  their  hearts 
cry>  because  their  knowledge  puffs  them  up.  Surely  if  it  were  so, 
we  great  men  that  have  been  in  the  university  should  have  it, 
God  would  give  it  us ;  and  because  they  find  it  not  in  them- 
selves, their  abominable  pride  will  not  own  it  may  be  in  any. 
Pray  what  was  Peter,  James,  and  John?  I  do  not  mean  to 
speak  disrespectfully  of  them — they  were  as  weak,  as  blind,  as 
obstinate,  and  worldly-minded  as  others,  till  Jesus  Christ 
changed  their  hearts ;  and  that  same  grace  that  changed  their 
hearts,  changes  now  the  hearts  of  God's  people ;  and  blessed 
be  GrOd,  that  same  grace  is  with  all  his  people. 

It  is  so  in  his  ordinances.  Here  is  the  aifference  between  a 
formalist  and  a  Christian ;  the  formalist  goes  to  ordinances, 
bat  then  he  does  not  feel  the  God  of  ordinacnces,  and  that  is  the 
reason  most  formal  people  do  not  care  to  go  to  church  very  often  : 
who  cares  to  go  to  the  house  of  a  person  he  does  not  love  ?  they 
livill  only  just  knock  at  the  door,  and  ask  if  such  a  person  is  at 
home,  and  are  very  glad  to  hear  the  servants  say  their  master 
or  mistress  is  not  at  home ;  the  visit  is  paid  :  so  it  is  with  many 
p<M>ple  that  go  to  church  and  meeting';  and  I  do  not  doubt  but 
there  are  many  Methodists,  hundreds  and  hundreds,  that  have 
been  at  the  ordinances,  who  never  felt  the  God  of  ordinances 
converting  them  to  this  day. 

The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  with  his  people  in 
prayer.  Who  can  pray  without  grace  ?  They  may  laugh  at  it 
as  they  will,  but  God  give  you  and  I  a  spirit  of  prayer ;  let  them 
♦  2q 


626  A   FAITHFUL   MINISTKR'S  [LTJIL 

laugh  as  they  please ;  what  profit  will  it  be  to  us  to  read  this 
book,  without  the  grace  of  God?  What  a  horrid  blunder  has  the 
bishop  of  G — r  been  guilty  of!    What  do  you  think  his  lordship 
says,  in  order  to  expose  the  fanaticism  of  the  Methodists? 
Why,  says  he,  they  say  they  cannot  understand  the  Scriptures 
without  theSpiritof  God.— Can  any  man  understand  the  Scrip- 
tures without  the  Spirit  of  God  helps  him  ?    Jesus  Christ  must 
open  our  understanding  to  understand  the  Scriptures,  and  the 
Spirit  of  God  must  take  of  the  things  of  Christ,  and  shew  them 
unto  us ;  as  we  are  taught  to  pray,  O  Lord,  thou  bast  caused  ihtf 
holy  Scriptures  to  be  u)ritten,  &c.  as  in  the  second  Sunday  in 
Advent;  and  here  the  bishop  pretends  to  tell  us,  there  is  na 
need  of  it ;  here  our  collect  and  bishop  disagree  very  much.   So, 
with  respect  to  all  ordinances,  it  is  the  same :  what  signifies  my 
preaching,  and  your  hearing,  if  the  Spirit  of  God  does  not  ea- 
lighten?    Formal  ministers  can  steal  a  sermon,  and  add  a  litde 
out  of  their  own  heads,  but  a  minister  of  the  gospel  canoot 
preach  to  purpose  without  the  assistance  of  the  Spirit  of  God, 
no  more  than  a  ship  can  sail  without  wind.     As  for  a  carnal 
man,  he  may  take  his  sermon  in  his  pocket,  and  you  will  find 
his  sermons  always  the  same ;  but  spiritual  preachers  are  seMon 
so ;  sometimes  they  are  in  darkness,  so  as  to  speak  to  those  that 
are  in  darkness ;  sometimes  they  are  tempted,  so  as  to  speak  to 
those  that  are  tempted ;  sometimes  they  have  a  full  gale,  and  go 
before  the  wind,  and  this  is  all  by  the  assistance  of  the  Spirit  of 
God,  and  without  this,  a  man  may  preach  like  an  angel,  and  do 
no  good  at  all.    So,  in  respect  to  hearing  the  word  of  God,  I 
declare  I  would  not  preach  again,  if  I  did  not  think  that  God 
would  accompany  the  word  by  bis  Spirit :  what  are  we  but 
sounding  brass  and  tinkling  cymbals?    If  the  word  is  preached 
in  the  strength  of  the  Spirit,  it  will  be  attended  with  cona- 
tions and  conversions,  and  the  grace  of  God  will  be  both  with 
preacher  and  hearer. 

7%€  grace  of  God  is  with  his  people  in  his  providence*  Ob! 
says  bishop  Hall,  a  little  aid  is  not  enough  for  me. — My  goin^ 
on  the  waters  puts  me  in  mind  of  what  I  have  6een  many  times: 
if  the  sailors  perceive  a  storm  coming,  they  do  not  choose  to 
speak  to  the  passengers,  for  fear  of  frightening  them ;  they  will  go 
quietly  on  deck,  and  pve  orders  for  proper  care  to  be  taken; 
and  if  a  sailor  can  tell  of  storms  approaching  by  the  clouds, 
why  cannot  God's  people  tell  why  God  does  so  and  so  with 
them  ?  The  people  of  God  eye  him  in  his  providence  ;  the  very 
hairs  of  their  heads  are  all  numbered,  and  the  grace  of  God  is 
with  them  in  the  common  business  of  life.  Some  people  think 
that  the  Methodists  preach  so  and  so,  to  make  them  n^lect 
their  business,  and  we  preach  at  unseasonable  times :  we  wooU 
not  preach  at  this  time,  but  that  we  are  going  to  part  from  one 
another ;  no,  we  preach  that  the  grace  of  God  may  attend  them 
in  their  counting-houses,  and  woe  be  to  those  persons  that  do 
not  take  the  grace  of  God  with  them  into  their  counting-bonsec^ 
imd  in  their  common  business !   O  what  blessed  times  would  ii 


L.VIII.]  PARTING    BLESSING.  627 

be,  if  every  one  made  tbe  grace  of  God  their  employ,  that 
when  the  Lord  comes  he  may  say.  Lord,  here  I  am  waiting 
for  thee. 

The  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  with  his  people  when  sick 
and  when  dying. — O  my  dear  souls,  what  shall  we  do  when  death 
comes !  What  a  mercy  it  is  that  we  have  got  a  good  Master  to 
carry  us  through  that  time !  As  a  poor  converted  negro  that  saw 
a  believer  who  was  dying  in  comfort,  said.  Master,  do  not  fear, 
Jesus  Christ  will  carry  you  safe  through  the  dark  valley  of  the 
shadow  of  death. — But  the  time  would  fail,  if  I  were  to  shew  you 
in  how  many  respects  ^A^  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  helps  us  ; 
but  what  I  have  said  will  shew,  that  we  need  all  join  in  a  hearty 
Amen ;  Amen,  I  pray  God  it  may  be  so,  so  it  is,  so  may  it  be  ! 
May  be  what  ?  Why,  that  the  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  con- 
victing,  restraining,  converting,  establishing  and  comforting  gra>ce, 
may  be  with  us  in  his  ordinances,  in  his  providences,  in  sick- 
ness, and  when  dying :  then,  blessed  be  God,  we  shall  carry  it 
with  us  after  time.  And  now,  my  dear  hearers,  by  the  help  of 
my  Grod,  in  whose  strength  I  desire  once  more  to  go  upon  the 
waters,  I  shall  pray,  wherever  I  am,  that  this  grace  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  may  be  with  you  all. 

To  whom  shail  I  speak  first  by  way  of  improvement  ?  Are 
there  any  of  you  here  unconverted  ?  No  doubt,  too  many.  Are 
there  any  of  you  here  this  morning  come  out  of  curiosity  to  hear 
what  the  babbler  has  to  say?  Many,  perhaps,  are  glad 'it  is 
my  last  sermon,  and  that  London  is  to  be  rid  of  such  a  monster : 
I  do  not  doubt  but  it  has  been  a  pleasant  paragraph  for  many 
to  read  ;  but  whoever  there  are  of  you  that  are  unconverted,  or 
whatever  you  may  think,  sure  you  cannot  be  angry  for  my  wish- 
ing that  the  grace  of  God  may  be  with  you,  O  that  it  may 
lie  with  every  unconverted  soul.  O  pray  for  me,  my  dear  friends, 
that  the  Lord  may  bless  me  to  some  unconverted  soul !  What 
wilt  thou  do,  if  the  grace  of  God  is  not  with  thee !  What  wilt 
thou  do  with  the  favour  of  man,  if  thou  hast  not  got  the  grace  of 
€rod?  You  will  find,  my  brethren,  it  will  not  do,  you  cannot  do 
without  the  grace  of  God  when  you  come  to  die.  There  was  a 
nobleman  that  kept  a  deistical  chaplain,  and  his  lady  a  Chris- 
^tian  one ;  when  he  was  dying,  he  says  to  his  chaplain,  I  liked 
yon  very  well  when  I  was  in  health,  but  it  is  ray  lady's  chap- 
Iain  I  must  have  when  I  am  sick. — Do  you  know  that  you  are 
nothing  but  devils  incarnate  ?  Do  you  know  that  every  moment 
you  are  liable  to  eternal  pains  ?    The  Lord  help  thee  to  awake, 

0  sinner,  awake,  awake,  thou  stupid  soul,  if  the  grace  of  God 
was  never  with  thee  before,  God  grant  it  may  now.    Do  not  say 

1  part  with  you  in  an  ill  humour ;  do  not  say  that  a  madman 
left  you  with  a  curse.  Blessed  be  God,  that  when  first  I  entered 
into  the  field,  (and  blessed  be  God  that  honoured  me  with  being 
a  field-preacher,)  I  proclaimed  the  grace  of  God  to  the  worst  of 
sinners,  and  I  proclaim  it  now  to  the  vilest  sinner  under  heaven; 
cotdd  I  speak  so  loud  as  that  the  whole  world  might  hear  me,  I 
would  declare  that  the  grace  of  God  is  free  for  all  poor  soulu 

2q2 


628  A    FAITHFUL   minister's   PARTING    BLESSING.   [LFIU. 

ibat  arc  willing  to  accept  of  it  by  Christ :  God  make  yon  all 
willing  this  day ! 

There  are  many  of  you,  I  doubt  not,  but  have  got  this  grace, 
and  I  believe  there  are  many  of  you  that  can  say  that  this  poor 
despised  place  was  that  which  God  honoured  first  with  giviofr 
it  you :  but  whether  you  were  converted  here  or  elsewhere,  if 
you  have  got  the  grace  of  God,  the  Lord  grant  you  more  grace ; 
grace,  mercy y  and  peace  be  multiplied  unto  you  all.  My  bre- 
thren, they  that  have  got  Christ  never  have  enough  of  him  ;  yoa 
want  more  grace  every  day,  and  hour,  and  nuiment :  I  see  for  my 
part  more  of  my  want  of  grace  than  I  did  ten  or  twenty  years  a^o; 
may  be  that  is  because  I  do  not  grow  in  grace ;  but  those  that 
grow  in  grace  will  grow  every  day  more  sensible  of  their  want 
of  grace,  they  will  feel  their  weakness  more  and  more  every 
day.  Some  who  are  called  Christians  are  a  most  foul-mouth 
people,  they  abuse  their  neighbours,  but  real  believers  abuse  them- 
selves most,  and  call  themselves,  that  is,  what  is  in  themselves^ 
the  worst  of  neighbours.  O  my  brethren,  may  the  Liord  Jesus 
Christ's  grace  be  with  you  more  and  more,  that  yon  may  be 
transformed  into  the  divine  likeness,  and  pass  from  glory  to 
glory  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord.  May  God  grant  that  this  grace 
may  be  with  you  all,  particularly  those  young  men  that  have 
given  up  their  souls  to  Christ.  It  delights  my  soul  when  I  go 
round  the  communion  table,  to  see  how  many  young  souls  hare 
given  themselves  to  Christ :  the  Lord  grant  that  you  may  Bot 
return  again  unto  folly.  O  young  men,  flee  youthful  lusts ;  0 
young  women,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  grant  that  grace  may  be  witk 
you  aJl,  that  you  may  study  the  beauties  of  the  mind,  shine  in 
the  beauties  of  holiness,  and  be  wise  to  everlasting  salvation. 

May  the  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  you  all  that 
are  in  the  marriage  state.  It  needs  much  grace  to  bear  with 
heavy  trials,  much  grace  to  deal  with  servants,  children,  and 
under  disappointments  in  trade ;  to  walk  with  Grod  with  a  pore 
heart.  Some  people  think  it  clever  to  have  wives  and  childrei, 
but  they  want  a  thousand  times  more  grace  than  they  bad  when 
they  were  single ;  you  have  need  of  much  grace  to  honoar  God 
in  your  houses,  much  grace  to  teach  you  to  be  prophets,  moch 
grace  to  teach  you  to  be  kings  in  the  family ;  to  know,  when  to 
be  pleased  ;  to  know,  when  to  be  silent ;  to  know,  when  to  be 
angry  :  but  the  greatest  grace  is,  to  be  angry  when  called  to  it, 
to  be  angry  without  sin.  O  !  may  the  grace  of  God  be  with  yuu 
all  in  your  closets,  every  time  you  pray,  every  time  you  come  lo 
an  ordinance  ;  O  !  may  the  grace  of  God  be  with  you  all  when 
you  frequent  this  despised  place  !  Blessed  be  God,  some  ma; 
say,  that  ever  it  was  built :  though  as  soon  as  it  was  built  I  was 
called  away.  As  soon  also  as  the  chapel  was  buUt,  I  was  then 
called  away,  and  so  am  now ;  and  when  I  came  out  of  my 
chamber,  I  could  hardly  support  it.  I  would  as  lieve  go  to 
an  execution,  if  my  way  were  not  very  clear:  what  if 
dying  ?  that  is  but  for  a  moment.  O  may  the  grace  of  God 
be  with  all  that  preach  the  gospel  here.      Blessed  be  God, 


LIX.]  dtfRtSt  TUB  BfiLIBTBR'B  RBftTOm  030 

his  ^race  has  been  with  them ;  do  not  let  the  world  say.  He 
is  gone,  and  all  the  people  are  gone  now :  do  not  weaken  the 
hands  of  those  that  shall  labour  here ;  I  should  not  mention 
such  a  word,  if  I  were  not  going  away.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
grant  that  you  may  keep  steady,  and  honour  the  preachers  more 
and  more ;  there  will  be  good  Mr.  Adams,  blessed  be  God,  from 
time  to  time,  with  Mr.  i^ridge,  and  so  there  will  be  a  blessed 
change :  may  the  Spirit  of  God  be  with  them  and  you,  more  and 
more !  and  O  my  dear  friends,  if  the  Lord  God  has  vouchsafed 
to  own  these  labours  to  any  of  you,  do  remember  me  in  a  parti« 
cular  manner,  when  gone ;  for  though  my  body  has  been  weak,  yet 
I  thank  God  that  he  has  enabled  me  to  speak  when  called  to  it^ 
And  so  T  must  go,  whether  well  or  ill ;  pray,  that  if  it  should 
please  God  to  spare  roe,  that  I  may  speak  more  effectually  to 
you,  when  I  come  back  again ;  pray,  that  the  grace  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  may  be  with  me,  in  a  restraining,  comforting,  sup-^ 
porting,  and  transforming  way,  that  it  may  be  with  me  when  I 
am  sick,  and  when  I  die.  O  my  brethren,  I  see  I  want  the 
grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  every  one  of  these  respects, 
every  moment ;  O  may  the  Lord  God  bless  you  all  that  have 
been  kind  to  me,  and  forgive  every  thing  that  I  have  done 
amiss.  I  am  ashamed  of  myself,  so  much  of  the  man  come» 
up  with  me,  tho'  I  humbly  hope,  and  dareto  say,  that  at  the  bot- 
tom my  heart  is  upright  towards  God ;  I  would  employ  it  to  his 
praise,  but  there  is  so  much  sin  mixed  with  all  I  do,  that  were 
not  the  blood  of  Christ  constantly  applied  to  my  soul,  and 
the  grace  of  Grod  continually  manifested  to  me,  I  could  not 
preach  any  more.  You  may  see  a  thousand  things  wrong  in  me, 
but  I  see  ten  thousand  more.  O  may  the  grace  of  God  be  with  you 
all. — ^Now,  dear  friends,  farewell !  dear  tabernacle,  farewell !  if 
I  never  preach  here  any  more,  O  that  we  may  meet  hi  a  better 
tabernacle,  when  these  tabernacles  are  taken  down,  when  these 
bodies  shall  drop,  when  we  shall  be  for  ever  with  the  Lord. 
I  must  have  done,  I  cannot  bear  it ;  the  Lord  bless  you,  the  Lord 
Ood  cause  his  face  to  shine  upon  you,  I  cannot  say  more,  T 
dare  not:  The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  be  tvith  you  all.  Amen,    ' 

SERMON  LIX. 

CHRIST   TH£    BELIEVER'S   REFUGE. 

Ood  is  our  refuge  and  strength,  a  very  present  help  in  trouble  ^ 
therefore  will  we  not  fear,  though  the  earth  be  removed,  and 
the  mountains  be  carried  into  the  midst  of  the  sea,  though  the- 
waters  thereof  roar,  and  be  troubled,  though  the  mountains 
sJuike  with  the  swelling  thereof  Selah,  There  is  a  river,  the 
streams  whereof  shall  make  glad  the  city  of  God,  the  holy 
place  of  the  tabernacles  of  tlie  Most  High :  God  is  in  the  midst 
of  her,  she  shall  not  be  moved  ;  God  shall  Itelp  her,  and  that 
right  early.  Psalm  xlvi.  1 — 6. 

TffBRE  was  a  tradition  among  the  ancient  Jews,  that  themamfta 
which  came  down  from  heaven,  though  it  was  a  little  grain  like 


83d  CnRIST  TtfB  BBLIBVEIl'5  RBVUGB.  [blX. 

coriander-seed,  yet  suited  every  taste ;  as  milk  unto  babes^  and 
strong;  meat  to  grown  persons.    Whether  this  supposition  be 
founded  on  fact  or  not,  the  observation  will  hold  good  in  a  great 
measure  respecting  the  sayings  of  David ,  for  if  we  have  eyes  to 
see,  and  ears  to  hear,  if  God  has  been  pleased  to  take  away  the 
veil  from  our  hearts,  we  shall  find,  by  happy  experience,  that 
let  our  circumstances  be  what  they  will,  the  book  of  Psalms  may 
serve  as  a  spiritual  magazine,  out  of  which  we  may  draw  spin* 
tual  weapons  in  the  time  of  the  hottest  fight,  especially  tnose 
that  are  under  trouble,  when  the  hand  qfthe  Lord  is  gone  seem- 
ingly/or/ft  against  them ;  when  unbelief  is  apt  to  make  them  say. 
All  tliese  things  are  against  me!  if  we  can  have  the  presence  of 
mind  to  turn  to  the  book  of  Psalms,  we  may  find  something  then 
suitable  to  our  case,  a  word  to  refresh  us  in  pursuing  our  spin* 
tual  enemy.    This  is  true  of  the  46th  psalm  in  particular,  part 
of  which  I  have  just  now  read  to  you,  and  which  I  pray  the 
blessed  Spirit  of  God  to  apply  to  every  one  of  our  hearts.    It  is 
uncertain  at  what  time,  or  upon  what  occasion,  David  wrote  it; 
probably  under  some  sharp  affliction,  which  made  him  eloquent; 
or  when  the  affliction  was  over,  when  his  heart  was  swimming 
with  gratitude  and  love,  and  when  out  cf  the  fulness  of  it  his 
pen  was  made  the  pen  of  a  ready  writer.    It  was  a  favourite 
psalm  with  Luther;  for  whenever  Melancthon,  who  was  of  a 
melancholy  turn,  or  any  other  of  his  friends,  told  him  some  sad 
news,  he  used  to  say.  Gome  come,  let  us  sing  the  46th  psalm; 
and  when  he  had  sung  that,  his  heart  was  quiet.     May  every 
true  mourner  here^  and  afflicted  person,  experience  the  same ;  I 
know  not,  when  I  read  it,  which  to  admire  most,  the  piety  or  the 
poetry,  the  matter  or  the  manner ;  and  I  believe  I  may  venture 
to  defy  all  the  critics  on  earth  to  shew  me  any  composition  of 
Pindar  or  Horace,  that  any  way  comes  up  to  the  diction  of 
this  psalm,  considered  only  as  human :  he  that  hath  an  ear  to 
hear,  let  him  hear,  God  is  our  refuge  and  strength,  a  very  pre- 
sent help  in  trouble.     Stop  here,  my  friends,  let  us  pause  a  while, 
and  before  we  go  further,  may  the  Lord  help  us  to  draw  soma 
comfort  from  this  very  first  verse :  for  observe,  it  is  not  said 
God  is  my  refuge ;  David  says  so  in  another  psalm,  but  he  says 
here,  Godf  is  our  refuge :  he  speaks  in  the  plural  number,  imjdy- 
ing,  that  this  psalm  was  of  no  private  interpretation,  but  was 
intended  for  the  comfort  and  encouragement  of  all  believers,  till 
time  shall  be  no  more.     Observe  the  climax,  Ood  is  our  r^fytg^ 
is  one  degree ;  God  is  our  strength,  another ;  Ctod  is  our  kelp, 
and  not  only  so,  but  is  a  present  help,  yea,  is  a  very  present  kdp, 
and  at  a  time  when  we  want  it  most,  in  the  time  of  trouble.    It 
is  here  supposed,  that  all  God's  people  will  have  their  troubles, 
man  is  bom  to  trouble,  as  the  sparks  fly  uptoard;  and  if  we  are 
bom  to  trouble  as  men,  we  are  much  more  so  as  Christians.  We 
forget  ourselves,  and  the  station  in  which  God  has  placed  w^ 
when  we  so  much  as  begin  to  dream  of  having  much  respite  firott 
trouble  while  we  are  here  below.  The  decree  is  gone  forth^  like  tbo 
laws  of  the  Medes  and  Persians,  it  alters  not ;  through  tribvla- 


L.1X.]  CHRIST  THB   BBLIBVBR*8   RBPUGB.  SSI 

tion,  throagh  much  tribulation,  we  must  all  go;  but  blessed  be 
Gh>d, we  are  to  be  carried  through  it;  and  blessed  be  God, glory  is 
to  be  the  end  of  it:  may  God  give  us  to  know  this  by  happy  ex- 
perience !  In  the  vxMrld,  says  our  blessed  Lord,  ye  shall  have  tribu* 
iaiUm,  tribulation  and  trouble  of  different  kinds ;  and  in  an- 
other place,  If  any  nian  will  come  after  me,  says  he,  let  him  take  up 
his  crass  daily,  and  follow  me ;  so  that  the  day,  when  we  take  up 
no  cross,  we  may  say  as  Titus  did,  when  he  reflected  that  he  had 
done  no  good  that  day,  I  have  lost  a  day !  But  then  what  shall  wo 
do,  my  dear  hearers,  when  trouble  comes,  when  one  trouble  comes 
after  another,  and  afflictions  seem  to  pursue  us  wherever  we  go^ 
toem  to  arise  up  out  of  the  ground,  meet  us  as  we  are  walking 
along  ?  Why,blessed  be  God,  if  we  have  an  interest  in  Christ  (mind 
that,  if  we  have  an  interest  in  Christ,)  God  is  our  help,  God  is  our 
asylum,  our  city  of  refuge,  a  place  appointed  by  God  himself* 
to  which  the  pursued  saints  may  fly  by  faith,  and  be  safe.  The 
wicked  have  no  notion  of  this  :  when  they  are  in  trouble,  what  is 
their  refuge  ?  Let  a  soul  be  under  spiritual  trouble,  and  cry  out, 
what  shall  I  do  to  be  saved  ?  Let  him  go  to  a  carnal  minister,  an 
upconverted  wretch,that  knows  nothing  about  the  matter,  he  shall 
be  told,  Oh  !  go,  and  play  an  innocent  game  at  cards,  and  divert 
yourself: — that  is  to  say,  the  devil  must  be  your  refuge.  Worldly 
people  have  worldly  refliges ;  and  Cain  would  seem  as  if  he 
were  in  earnest  when  he  said.  My  punishment  is  greater  tlian  I 
can  bear:  what  does  he  do,  he  goes  and  diverts  himself  by  build- 
ing a  city,  goes  and  amuses  himself  by  building.  The  devil,  my 
brethren,  will  give  you  leave  to  amuse  yourselves ;  you  may  have 
your  choice  of  diversions,  only  take  care  to  be  diverted  from 
God,  and  the  devil  is  sure  of  you ;  but  the  believer  has  some- 
thing better :  faith  sweeps  away  the  r^uge  of  lies,  and  the  be- 
liever turns  to  his  God,  and  says,  Omy  Uod,  thou  shall  be  my 
refuge.  The  devil  pursues  me,  my  false  friends  have  designs 
against  me,  my  own  wicked  heart  itself  molests  me,  my  foes  are 
those  of  my  own  house;  but  do  thou,  O  God,  be  my  refuge,  I 
will  fly  there ;  by  these  it  may  be  said.  Cod  is  our  refuge.  The 

Juestion  is,  iwhat  shall  I  do  to  make  him  my  refuge?  How  shall 
be  helped  to  do  so  1  You  bid  me  fly ;  you  say,  I  may  fly 
there,  but  where  shall  I  get  wings  ?  How  shall  I  be  supported? 
Here  is  a  blessed  word,  God  shall  not  only  be  our  refuge,  hut 
Cfod  shall  be  our  strength  also.  Strength,  what  is  strength  ? 
Why,  my  brethren,  to  make  every  day  of  trouble  so  easy  to  us 
by  his  power,  as  to  carry  us  through  it ;  God  has  said,  and  will 
stand  to  it.  As  thy  day  is,  so  shall  thy  strength  be.  Afflictions 
even  at  a  distance  will  appear  very  formidable,  when  viewed 
by  unbelief.  Our  fears  say,  O  my  God,  if  I  come  to  be  tried 
this  or  that  way,  how  shall  I  bear  it  ?  But  we  do  not  know 
what  we  can  bear  till  the  trial  comes  ;  and  we  do  not  know  what 
strength  God  can  give  us,  or  what  a  strong  God  he  will  be,  till 
he  is  pleased  to  put  us  into  a  furnace  of  affliction ;  and  therefore 
it  is  said,  not  only  that  God  is  our  refuge  and  our  strength,  but 
that  God  is  our  help  also.    What  help  ?  Why,  my  dear  friendsj. 


632  CHRIST  THB  BELIBVBR'S  R9V|K»B.  [UX« 

help  to  support  us  under  the  trouble ;  help  so  as  to  comfort  as 
as  long  as  the  trouble  lasts ;  and,  blessed  be  God,  that  the  help 
will  never  leave  us  till  we  are  helped  quite  over  and  quite  tbro- 
it.    But  what  kind  of  an  help  is  it  ?    O  blessed  be  God,  he  km 
very  present  help.     We  may  have  a  helper,  bat  he  may  be 
afar  off;  I  may  be  sick,  I  may  want  a  physician,  and  may  be 
obliged  to  send  miles  for  one ;  he  inight  he  a  help  if  ho  were 
here,  but  what  shall  I  do,  now  he  is  at  a  distance !  This  cannot 
be  said  of  God,  he  is  not  only  a  help,  but  he  is  a  present  kdp: 
the  gates  of  the  new  Jerusalem  are  open  night  and  day.  We  iu»d 
not  be  afraid  to  cry  unto  God  ;  we  cannot  say  of  our  God  as 
Elijah  does  of  Baal,  perhaps  he  is  asleep,  or  talking,  or  gone  a 
Journey :  it  is  not  so  with  our  God,  he  is  a  present  help ,-  be  is 
likewise  a  sufficient  help,  that  is,  a  very  present  help,  ai^  thai 
too  in  the  time  of  trouble.    It  is  but  to  send  a  short  letter,  I 
mean  a  short  prayer,  upon  thq  wings  of  faith  and  love,  and  God« 
my  brethren,  will  come  down  and  help  us.    Now,  -to  this  David 
affixes  his  probatum  est,  David  proves  it  by  his  own  experieDce» 
and  therefore  if  God  is  our  refuge,  thc^refore  if  God  is.  our  etrengih, 
if  God  is  our  help,  if  Chd  is  a  present  help,  if  God  is  a  very  prs* 
sent  help,  and  that  too  in  a  time  of  trouble,  what  then  ?    TTkert* 
fore  will  we  not  fear. — Therefore,  is  an  inference,  and  it  is  a 
very  natural  one,  a  conclusion  naturally  drawn  from  the  foia* 
going  premises ;  for  Paul  says,  if  God  be  for  us,  who  cam  b$ 
against  us?    There  is  not  a  greater  enemy  to  faith,  than  aenrile 
fear  and  unbelief.     My  brethren,  the  devil  has  got  an  advaih 
tage  over  us  when  he  has  brought  us  into  a  state  of  fear  ;  indeed, 
in  one  sense  we  should  always  fear,  I  mean  with  a  filial  fear; 
blessed  is  th^  man,  in  this  sense,  that  feareth  always  :  bnt,  my 
brethren,  have  we  strong  faith  in  a  God  of  refuge  1     This  for- 
bids us  to  fear;  says  Nehemiah,  «SAa// 5ticA  a  man  as  IjUel 
And  the  Christian  may  say.  Shall  a  believer  in  Je&iis  Christ  fear? 
Shall  I  fear  that  my  God  will  leave  me  ?  Shall  I  fear  that  ay 
God  will  not  succour  me  ?  No,  says  David,  we  will  not  fear; 
how  so  ?  Why,  though  the  mountains  be  carried  into  the  midst  ^ 
the  sea,  though  the  waters  thereof  roar  and  be  troubled,  themgk 
the  mountains  shake  unth  the  swelling  thereof  Where  is  Horace^ 
where  is  Pindar,  now  ?    Let  them  come  here,  and  throw  their 
palms  down  before  the  sweet  singer  of  Israel.     There  is  not 
such  a  bold  piece  of  imagery  in  any  human  composition  in  the 
world.    Can  any  thing  appear  more  great,  more  considerable* 
than  this  ?     Imagine  how  it  was  with  us  some  years  ago,  when 
an  enthusiastic  fool  threatened  us  with  a  third  earUiquake; 
imagine  how  it  was  with  us  when  God  sent  us  the  same  yetf 
two  dreadful  earthquakes :  had  the  earth  been  at  that  time  nol 
only  shook,  but  removed,  bad  the  fountains  of  the  sea  been  per- 
mitted  to  break  in  upon  us,  and  carry  all  the  mountaina  of  Esf* 
laud  before  it,  what  a  dreadful  tremor  must  we  all  unavoidabif 
have  been  in?  David  supposes  that  this  may  be  the  case,  and  I 
believe  at  the  great  day  it  will  be  something  like  it ;  the  eartk, 
and  all  things  therein,  are  to  be  burnt  up ;  an^  my  bietbieii,  wfaU 


LIX.]  CHRIST  THB  BBLIBVER'S  BSVUQIO  QSSf 

shall  we  do  then,  if  God  is  not  our  refuge,  if  God  is  not  our 
strength  ? 

We  may  apply  it  to  civil  commotions ;  David  had  lately  been 
beset  with  the  Philistines  and  other  enemies,  that  threatened  to 
deprive  him  of  his  life;  and  there  are  certain  times  when  we^ 
shall  be  leflt  alone.  This  also,  my  brethren,  may  be  applied  to 
creature  comforts:  sometimes  the  earth  seems  to  be  removed, 
what  then  ?  Why,  all  the  friends  we  take  delight  in,  our  most 
familiar  friends,  our  soul-friends,  friends  by  nature,  and  friends 
by  grace,  may  be  removed  from  us  by  the  stroke  of  death ;  we. 
know  not  how  soon  that  stroke  may  come,  it  may  come  at  an 
hour  we  thought  not  of;  the  mountains  themselves,  all  the. 
things  that  seem  to  surround  and  promise  us  a  lasting  scene  of 
comfort,  they  themselves  may  soon  be  removed  out  of  our  sight ; 
what  then  shall  we  do  1  They  niay  be  carried  into  the  midst  of  the 
sea;  what  is  that?  Our  friends  may  be  laid  in  the  silent  grave, 
and  the  places  tliat  knew  them  may  know  them  no  more.  It  is  easy 
talking,  but  it  is  not  so  easy  to  bear  up  under  these  things ;  but 
faith,  my  brethren,  teaches  us  to  say.  Though  all  friends  are 
gone,  blessed  be  God,  God  is  not  gone.  As  a  noble  lady's 
daughter  told  her  mother,  when  she  was  weeping  for  the  death 
of  one  of  her  little  children,  a  daughter  four  years  old,  said.  Dear 
mamma,  is  God  Almighty  dead,  that  you  cry  so  long  after  my 
sister  ? — No,  he  is  not  dead,  neither  does  he  sleep.  But  here  the 
imagery  grows  bolder,  the  painting  stronger*  and  the  resem- 
blance more  striking,  though  the  waters  thereof  roar  and  bet 
trofubledy  though  the  mountains  shake  with  the  swelling  therecf;^ 
what,  will  not  this  make  us  fearful?  will  not  this  shake  us  off 
our  bottom,  our  foundation,  and  take  up  the  roots?  No,  no,- 
even  then  the  believer  need  not  fear ;  why,  God  is  in  the  midst  cf 
her.  Do  not  you  remember  God  spake  to  Moses  out  of  th^ 
bush  ?  Did  he  stand  at  a  distance,  and  call  to  him  at  a  distance 
from  the  bush?  No,  the  voice  came  out  of  the  bush,  ATo^e^ /- 
Moses!  as  Mr.  Ain&worth,  who  ways  a  spiritual  critic,  says. 

Learn  from  hence,  that  in  all  our  affiictUms  God  is  afflicted;  he 
ts  in  the  midst  of  the  bush;  and  oh  !  it  is  a  sweet  time  with  the, 
soul  when  God  speaks  to  him  out  of  the  bush,  when  he  is  under, 
affliction,  and  talks  to  him  all  the  while.  Though  it  were 
threatened  by  the  fire  which  surrounded  it  with  immediate  and 
total  desolation ;  yet  the  bush  burned^  and  was  not  consumed*  I 
do  not  know  whether  I  told  you,  but  I  believe  I  told  them  at 
Tottenham*court,  and  perhaps  here,  that  every  Christian  has  got 
a  coat  of  arms,  and  I  will  give  it  you  out  of  Christ's  heraldryi^ 
that  is,  the  burning  bush ;  every  Christian  is  burned,  but  not_ 
consumed.  But  how  is  it  the-saint  is  held  up,  whence  does  he' 
get  this  strength  ?  or  how  is  this  strength,  this  supporting,  com* 
fortiBg  strength,  conveyed  to  his  heart  ?  Read  a  little  further, 
yen  shall  find  David  say,  there  is  a  river,  mind  that,  there  is  a 
river  J,  the  streams  whereof  make  glad  the  city  of  God,  the  hohf 
place  of  the  tabernacles  cfthe  Most  High  ;  need  I  tell  you,  that 
probably:  here  ia  an  allusion  ta  the  situation  of  Jerusalem,  and 


684  OnftfST  THB  BBLIBVBR'8  bbpuqb.  [juix. 

the  waters  of  ShOoah,  that  flowed  geatly  throagh  the  city  of 
Jerusalem^  which  the  people  found  sweet  and  refreshing:  in  the 
time  of  its  being  besieged.  So  the  rivers  ron  throngh  most  of 
the  cities  in  Holland,  and  bring  their  commodities  even  to  the 
doors  of  the  inhabitants.  Pray,  what  do  you  think  this  river 
is  ?  Why,  I  believe  it  means  the  covenant  of  grace ;  O,  that  is  a 
river,  the  springs  of  which  first  burst  out  in  Paradise,  when 
God  said,  the  seed  of  the  woman  shall  bruise  the  serpeni^s  head; 
Uien  God  made  this  river  visit  the  habitation  of  man,  as  the 
first  opening  of  his  everlasting  covenant. 

No  sooner  had  the  devil  betrayed  man,  and  thought  he  was 
sure  to  get  him  into  the  pit,  even  when  he  was  laughing  at  man's 
misery,  and  thinking  he  was  revenged  of  God  for  driving  him 
out  of  heaven;  at  that  very  time  did  the  great  Grod  open  this 
river,  and  made  it  flow  down  in  that  blessed  stream  to  mankind, 
implied  in  those  words,  it  shall  bruise  thy  head.  O  this  is  a 
stream,  which,  I  pray,  may  this  night  make  glad  this  part  of  tie 
city  of  God.  If  by  the  river  we  understand  the  covenant  of 
grace,  then,  my  brethren,  the  promises  of  God  are  the  streams 
that  flow  from  it.  There  is  no  promise  in  the  Bible  made  to  an 
unbeliever,  but  to  a  believer ;  all  the  promises  of  God  axe  his, 
and  no  one  knows,  but  the  poor  believer  that  experiences  it, 
how  glad  it  makes  his  heart.  God  only  speaks  one  single  word, 
or  applies  one  single  promise :  for  if  when  one's  heart  is  over^ 
whelmed  with  sorrow,  wc  find  relief  by  unfolding  ourselves  to  a 
faithful  disinterested  friend ;  if  a  word  of  comfort  sometimei 
gives  us  such  support  from  a  minister  of  Christ,  O  my  friends, 
what  support  must  a  promise  from  God  applied  to  the  soul 
give  ?  And  this  made  a  good  woman  say,  I  have  oft  had  a 
blessed  meal  on  the  promises,  when  I  have  had  no  bread  to 
make  a  meal  for  my  body. 

But  by  the  river  we  may  likewise  understand,  the  Spirit  of 
the  living  God.  If  you  remember,  Jesus  Christ  declared  at  the 
great  day  of  the  feast,  if  any  man  believe  on  me^  out  of  his  belbf 
shall  flow  rivers  of  living  water  ;  this,  saith  the  beloved  disciple, 
spake  he  of  the  Spirit,  which  they  that  believe  on  him  shoM 
receive.  My  brethren,  the  divine  influences  are  not  only  a 
conduit,  but  a  deep  river,  a  river  of  broad  waters.  Here  is 
room  for  the  babes  to  walk,  and  for  the  man  of  God  to  badls 
and  swim  in  from  time  to  time ;  and  supposing  that  the  river 
mean  the  Spirit  of  Grod,  as  I  believe  really  it  does,  why,  then  the 
streams  that  flow  from  this  river  are  the  means  of  grace,  the 
ordinances  of  God,  which  God  makes  use  of  as  channels, 
whereby  to  convey  his  blessed  Spirit  to  the  soul.  Nay,  by  the 
river  we  may  understand  God  himself  who  is  the  believer's 
river,  the  Three-One,  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost.  This  river 
is  in  the  midst  of  the  city,  not  at  the  court-end  of  the  towa 
only,  or  one  corner  or  end,  but  quite  through,  in  a  variety  cf 
streams,  so  that  high  and  low  may  come  to  it  for  supply ;  tod 
not  only  be  supported,  but  have  their  hearts  made  glad  daily 
thereby :  God  help  us  to  drink  afresh  of  this  river !    If  this  be 


X.1X.]  OHBIST  THE  BBLItVBm'S  nMWVOM.  UBS 

the  case/ well  may  David  triuinph  and  aaj^aloriaiis  thing$  art 
$pokm  if  the  city  of  God;  are  spoken  of  her,  in  the  feminine 
gender.  The  church  is  spoken  of  in  that  sense,  because  'Eve, 
the  first  wofnauy  was  the  mother  of  ail  lieiievers;  we  may 
apply  this  to  a  single  saint,  as  well  as  to  a  community,  under 
trouble,  she  shall  not  be  wwved.  Not  moyed  ?  Pray,  would  you 
have  them  stupid  ?  Do  you  love,  when  you  strike  a  child,  to 
see  it  hardened  and  regardless?  Do  you  not  like  the  child 
sliould  smart  under  it  and  cry,  and  when  it  is  a  little  penitent, 

Jou  almost  wish  you  had  not  struck  it  at  all.  God  expects,  when 
e  strikes,  that  we  should  be  moved ;  and  there  is  not  a  greater 
sign  of  a  reprobate  heart,  of  a  soul  given  over  by  God,  to  have 
affliction  upon  affliction,  and  yet  come  out  like  a  fool  brayed  in  a 
mortar,  unmoved  and  hardened.  My  brethren,  this  is  the 
worst  sign  of  a  man  or  woman's  being  given  over  by  God. 
Jesus  was  moved,  when  he  was  under  the  rod;  he  cries. 
Father!  if  it  be  possible,  let  this  cup  pass  from  me  I  he  was 
moved  so  as  to  shed  tears,  tears  of  blood,  falling  to  the  ground. 
Woe,  woe,  woe  be  to  us,  if  when  God  knock  at  the  door  by 
some  shocking  domestic  or  foreign  trial,  we  do  not  say.  My 
£rod  !  my  God  !  wherefore  dost  thou  strike  ?  When  we  are  sick, 
we  allow  physicians  to  feel  our  pulse,  whether  it  be  high  or 
languid ;  and  when  we  are  sick  and  tried  with  affliction,  it  is 
time  to  feel  our  pulse,  to  see  if  we  were  not  going  into  a  high 
fever,  and  do  not  want  some  salutary  purge.  It  is  expected 
therefore  that  we  should  be  moved ;  we  may  speak,  but  not  in 
a  munnuring  way ;  Job  was  moved,  and  God  knows,  when  we 
are  under  the  rod,  we  are  all  moved  more  than  we  ought  to  be, 
in  a  wrong  way ;  but  when  it  is  said  here,  she  shall  not  be  moved, 
it  implies,  not  totally  removed ;  perplexed,  says  the  apostle,  but 
not  in  despair ;  persecuted,  but  not  forsaken ;  cast  down,  but 
not  destroyed ;  therefore  removal  means  destruction:  when  the 
earth  is  moved,  the  mountains  shake,  and  the  voaters  roar,  where 
can  we  flee?  What  can  we  see  but  destruction  all  round  us? 
But,  my  brethren,  since  there  is  a  river,  the  streams  whereof  make 
glad  the  city  of  God,  since  God  is  our  refuge,  since  God  is  our 
strength,  silice  God  is  our  help,  since  God  is  a  present  help,  since 
God  is  a  very  present  help  in  the  time  of  trouble,  since  God  is  in 
the  midst  ofh  r,  since  God  causes  the  streams  to  make  her  glad, 
blessed  be  God,  we  shall  not,  my  brethren,  be  totally  moved ; 
Day,  though  death  itself  do  remove  our  bodies,  though  the  king 
of  terrors,  that  grisly  king,  should  come  armed  with  all  his 
shafts,  yet  in  the  midst  of  death  we  are  in  life,  even  then  u^e  shall 
not  be  moved;  even  though  the  body  be  removed  in  sleep,  the 
soul  id  gone  where  it  shall  be  sorrowful  no  more.  One  would 
have  imagined  that  David  had  said  enough,  but  pray  observe 
bow  he  goes  on,  he  repeats  it  again,  for  when  we  are  in  an 
Qobelieving  frame  we  have  need  of  line  upon  line,  words  upon 
words,  God  shall  help  Aer ;  ah !  but  when  ?  when  ?  when  will 
be  help  her  ?  when  wfll  he  help  her  ?  why,  right  early ;  God 
MimU  kelp  her,  and  that  right  early.    Why,  sometimes  we  knoek 


698  OBRIST  THE  BBLIBTBA'B  REVUOB.  [LU, 

for  a  friend,  but  he  will  DOt  get  np  early  in  the  momiiig,  bat  G^i 
shall  help  us,  and  that  right  early,  in  the  morning.  Ah !  but, 
say  you,  I  have  been  under  trouble  a  long  while ;  why^  God'f 
morning  is  not  come:  you  said  right  early;  yes»  but  you  are 
not  yet  prepared  for  it,  you  must  wait  till  the  precioos  right 
moment  come,  and  you  may  be  assured  of  it.  Grod  noTer  gives 
you  one  doubt  more  than  you  want,  or  ever  defers  help  one 
moment  longer  than  it  ought  to  be. 

Now,  my  dear  hearers,  if  these  things  are  so,  who  dares  eall 
the  Christian  a  madman?  If  these  things  are  so,  who  wooM 
but  be  a  believer?  Who  would  not  be  a  faithful  follower  of 
the  Son  of  Grod  ?  My  brethren,  did  you  ever  hear  any  of  the 
devil's  children  compose  an  ode,  that  the  devil  is  our  refuge; 
the  god  of  this  world,  whom  we  have  served  so  heartily,  we 
have  found  to  be  a  present  help  in  time  of  trouble?  Ah !  a  pre> 
sent  help  to  help  us  after  the  devil :  or  did  you  ever  hear,  sinoe 
the  creation,  of  one  single  man  that  dared  to  say,  that  all  the 
forty-sis^th  psalm  was  founded  on  a  lie  ?  No,  it  is  founded  on 
matters  of  fact,  and  therefore,  believer,  believer,  I  wish  yoB 
joy,  although  it  is  a  tautology.  I  pray  God,  that  from  this  tiaio 
forUi  till  we  die,  you  and  I,  when  under  trouble,  may  say  with 
Luther,  Come  let  us  sing  the  forty-sixth  psalm. 

As  for  you  that  are  wicked,  what  shall  I  say  to  you  1  Are  yos 
in  high  spirits  to-night?  has  curiosity  brought  you  here  to  bear 
what  the  babbler  has  to  say  on  a  funeral  occasion  ?  Well,  I 
am  glad  to  see  you  here,  though  I  have  scarce  strength  to  speak 
for  the  violence  of  the  heat,  yet  I  pray  God  to  magniiy  his 
strength  in  my  weakness ;  and  may  the  God  of  all  mercy  over- 
rule curiosity  for  good  to  you !  I  intend  to  speak  about  this 
death  to  the  surviving  friends ;  but,  my  dear  hearers^  the  grand 
intention  of  having  the  funeral  sermon  to-night,  is  to  teach  the 
living  how  to  die.  Give  me  leave  to  tell  you,  that  however 
brisk  you  may  be  now,  there  will  a  time  come  when  you  will 
want  God  to  be  your  help.  Some  pulpit  may  eie  long  be  hong 
in  mourning  for  you;  the  black,  the  dreary  appendages  of  death, 
may  ere  long  be  brought  to  your  home ;  and  if  you  moTe  in  a  high 
sphere,  some  such  escutcheon  as  this,  some  achievement,  may 
be  placed  at  year  door,  and  woe,  woe,  woe  be  to  those  who  in 
an  hour  of  death  cannot  say,  God  is  my  refuge,  Yoa  may  fbm 
schemes  as  you  please ;  after  you  have  been  driven  out  of  one 
fool's  paradise,  you  may  retreat  into  another ;  yon  may  saj, 
now  I  will  sing  a  requiem  to  my  heart,  and  now  I  shall  have 
some  pleasant  season ;  but  if  God  love  you,  he  will  knock  off 
your  hands  from  that,  yon  shall  have  thorns  even  in  roses,  and 
it  will  imbitter  your  comforts.  O  what  will  you  do  when  the 
elements  shall  melt  with  fervent  heat ;  when  this  earth,  with  ail 
its  fine  furniture,  shall  be  burnt  up;  when  the  archaagel  shall 
cry  time  shall  be  no  more!  whither  then,  ye  wicJied  ones,  ye 
unconverted  ones,  will  ye  flee  for  refuge?  O,  says  one,  I  wiU 
fly  to  the  mountains :  O  silly  fool,  O  silly  fool,  fly  to  the  moua* 
tains^  that  are  themselves  to  be  burnt  up  and  BM^ved  I    O^  ssyi 


UX.}  CHRIST  TfiB  BELIBTBR'S   RBRVOB.  687 

you,  I  will  flee  to  tbe  sea ;  O  yoa  fool,  that  will  be  boiling  like 
a  pot :  O  then  I  will  flee  to  the  elements ;  they  will  be  melting 
with  fervent  heat  I  can  scarce  bear  tliis  hot  day,  and  how 
can  you  bear  a  hot  element  ?  There  is  no  fan  there,  not  a  drop 
of  water  to  cool  your  tongue.  Will  you  fly  to  the  moon  ?  That 
will  be  turned  into  blood :  will  you  stand  by  one  of  the  stars  T 
They  will  fall  away :  I  know  but  of  one  place  you  can  go  to 
that  is,  to  the  devil ;  God  keep  you  from  that !  Happy  they 
that  draw  this  inference ;  since  every  thing  else  will  be  a  refuge 
of  lies,  God  help  me  from  this  moment,  God  help  me  to  make 
God  my  refuge !  here  you  can  never  fail ;  your  expectations 
here  can  never  be  raised  too  high ;  but  if  you  stop  short  of  this, 
as  the  Lord  liveth,  in  whose  name  I  speak,  you  will  only  be  a 
sport  for  devils ;  a  day  of  judgment  will  be  no  day  of  refuge  to 
you,  you  will  only  be  summoned  like  a  criminal,  that  has  been 
cast  already,  to  the  bar,  to  receive  tbe  dreadful  sentence.  Depart, 
ye  cursed,  into  everlasting  fire,  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his 
angels.  There  is  no  river  to  make  glad  the  inhabitants  of  hell, 
no  streams  to  cool  them  in  that  scorching  element :  were  those 
who  are  in  hell,  to  have  such  an  oflfer  of  mercy  as  you  have,  how 
would  their  chains  rattle !  how  would  they  come  with  the  flames 
of  hell  about  their  ears !  how  would  they  rejoice,  even  there,  if 
a  minister  were  to  tell  them.  Come,  come,  after  you  have  been 
here  millions  and  millions  of  years,  there  shall  come  a  river 
here  to  make  you  glad.  But  the  day  is  over ;  God  help  us  to 
take  warning:  and,  oh!  with  what  gratitude  should  we  ap- 
proach him  to-night,  for  bearing  with,  and  for  forbearing  us  so 
long ;  let  each  say  to-night,  why  am  I  out  of  hell  ?  How  came 
I  not  to  be  damned,  when  I  have  made  every  thing  else  my 
god,  my  refcige,  for  so  many  years  ?  May  goodness  lead  every 
unconverted  soul  to  repentance,  and  may  love  constrain  us  to 
obedience :  fly,  fly,  God  help  thee  to  fly,  sinner ;  hark !  hear  the 
word  of  the  Lord,  see  the  world  consumed,  the  avenger  of 
Mood,  this  grim  death,  is  just  at  thy  heels,  and  if  thou  dost 
not  this  moment  take  refuge  in  God,  to-night,  before  to-morrow, 
;f  ou  may  be  damned  for  ever ;  the  arms  of  Jesus  yet  lie  open, 
bis  loving  heart  yet  streams  with  love,  and  bids  a  hearty  wel- 
come to  every  poor  soul  that  is  seeking  happiness  in  God« 
May  God  grant  that  every  unconverted  soul  may  be  of  the 
happy  number ! 

But,my  brethren,  the  most  heavy  task  of  this  night  yet  lies 
unperformed ;  indeed,  if  my  friendship  for  the  deceased  did  not 
lead  me  to  it,  I  should  pray  to  be  excused ;  toy  body  is  so  weak, 
my  nerves  so  unstrung,  and  the  heat  beats  too  intensely  on  this 
tottering  frame,  for  me  to  give  such  a  vent  to  my  affections  as 
I  am  sure  I  should  give,  if  I  were  in  vigorous  health :  you  may 
easily  see,  though  I  have  not  made  that  application,  with  what 
design  I  have  chosen  this  psalm ;  you  may  easily  see  by  tbe  turn, 
I  hope  no  unnatural  one,  that  has  been  given  to  the  text  as  we 
kave  passed  along,  that  I  have  had  in  my  view  a  mournful 
"Widow  here  before  me.    ]>id  I  think|  when  this  black  furniture 


638  CHRIST  THE   BELIEVER'S   REFUOE*  (^IX; 

was  taken  from  the  pulpit  when  two  branches  were  lopt  off 
within  about  a  year  one  after  another,  both  lopt  oflf  from  on  earth, 
I  hope  and  believe^  to  be  planted  for  ever  in  heaven  ;  little  did  I 
think  that  the  axe  was  in  a  few  months'  time  to  be  laid  to 
the  root  of  the  father ;  little  did  I  think  that  this  pulpit  was  then 
to  be  hung  in  mourning  for  the  dear,  the  generous,  the  valuable, 
the  universally  benevolent,  Mr.  Beckman ;  a  benefactor  to  every 
body,  a  benefactor  to  the  tabernacle ;  he  has  largely  contributed 
both  to  the  chapel  and  tabernacle,  and,  my  dear  hearers,  now 
his  works  follow  him,  for  he  is  gone  beyond  the  grave.  Such 
a  singular  circumstance  I  believe  rarely  happens,  that  thou^  I 
was  last  night,  at  near  eleven  o'clock,  dead  almost  with  heat, 
I  thought  if  death  were  th^  consequence,  I  would  go  to  the 
grave,  and  have  the  last  look  at  my  dear  departed  friend :  to  see 
a  new  vault  opened ;  to  see  a  place  of  which  he  has  been,  in  a 
great  measure,  the  founder ;  to  see  a  place  which  he  was  en- 
larging at  the  very  time  he  died ;  to  see  a  new  vault  there,  first 
inhabited  by  the  father,  and  two  only  sons,  and  all  pat 
there  in  the  space  of  two  years'  time :  Oh !  it  was  almost  too 
much  for  me,  it  weighed  me  down,  it  kept  me  in  my  bed  all  this 
day ;  and  now  I  have  risen,  God  grant  it  may  be  to  give  a 
seasonable  word  to  your  souls.  Oh !  my  friends,  put  yourselves 
in  the  state  of  a  surviving  widow,  and  then  see  who  is  secure  from 
cutting  providences.  The  very  children,  when  they  are  young, 
are  a  trial ;  but  the  young  man,  for  whom  a  handsome  fortune 
awaited ;  for  a  tender  loving  father,  to  have  his  son  taken  away ; 
for  the  widow,  to  have  the  husband  taken  away  soon  after; 
indeed,  dear  madam,  you  had  need  read  the  forty-sixth  psalm ; 
you  may  well  say,  call  me  no  more  Naomi,  that  signifies  plea- 
sant, but  call  me  Marah,  for  the  Lord  hath  dealt  bitterly  tciik 
me.  These  are  strokes  that  are  not  always  given  to  the  greatest 
saints.  Such  sudden  strokes,  such  blow  upon  blow.  Oh !  if  God 
is  not  a  strength  and  refuge,  how  can  the  believer  support  under 
it  T  But  blessed  be  the  living  God,  I  am  witness  God  has 
been  your  strength,  I  am  witness  that  God  has  been  your 
refuge ;  you  have  found,  I  know  you  have,  already,  that  thert 
is  a  river,  a  river  in  which  you  have  swam  now  for  some  years, 
the  streams  whereof  make  glad  your  waiting  heart.  Surely  I 
shall  never  forget  the  moment  in  which  I  visited  your  deceased 
husband,  when  the  hiccoughs  came,  and  death  was  supposed 
to  be  really  come,  to  see  the  disconsolate  widow  flying  out  of 
the  room,  unable  to  bear  the  sight  of  a  departing  husband :  I 
know  that  God  was  then  your  refuge,  and  God  will  continue  to 
be  your  refuge.  You  are  now  God's  peculiar  care,  and  as  t 
proof  that  you  will  make  God  your  refuge,  you  have  chosen  to 
make  your  first  appearance  in  the  house  of  God,  in  the  taber- 
nacle, where  I  hope  Grod  delights  to  dwell,  and  where  you  met 
with  God,  and  which  I  hope  you  will  never  leave  till  God  le* 
moves  you  hence.  Whatever  trials  way  yet  await  you,  re- 
member you  are  now  become  God's  peculiar  care.  You  had 
before  a  husband  to  plead  for  you ;  he  is  gone,  but  yoor  pleftda 


LIX.]  CHRIST   THR   BBLIBVBR'S   RBPU6B.  639 

is  not  dead,  he  lives,  and  will  plead  your  cause :  may  you  find 
him  better  to  you  than  ten  thousand  husbands ;  may  he  make 
up  the  aw^ul  chasm  that  death  has  made,  and  may  the  Lord 
God  be  your  refuge  in  time,  and  your  portion  to  all  eternity ;  and 
then  you  will  have  a  blessed  change.  You  are  properly  a 
Naonii  ;  I  would  humbly  hope  that  your  daughter-in-law,  which 
so  lately  met  with  a  stroke  of  the  same  nature,  will  prove  a  Ruth 
to  you,  and  though  young,  and  having  a  fortune,  she  may  be 
tempted  to  take  a  walk  in  the  world,  yet  I  hope  she  will  say, 
where  thou  aoest,  I  will  go;  where  thou  lodgest,Iwill  lodge;  thy 
people  shall  be  my  people,  and  thy  God  my  God;  where  thou 
diest,  will  I  die,  and  there  will  I  be  buried;  the  Lord  do  so  to  me, 
and  more  also,  if  ought  but  death  part  thee  and  me.  It  is  to 
your  honour,  madam,  and  I  think  it  right  to  speak  of  it,  yoa 
had  the  smiles  of  your  departed  father-in-law;  you  had  be- 
haved with  deference  and  love ;  he  was  very  fond  of  you ;  God 
make  you  a  comfort  to  your  surviving  mother,  who  has  adopted 
you,  and  may  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  enable  you  to  take  God  to 
be  your  portion ! 

As  for  you  that  are  the  relations  of  the  deceased,  there  is  one 
of  you  that  has  been  honourably  called  to  the  service  of  the 
ministry :  you,  sir,  was  sent  for  over  by  an  endearing  uncle,  you 
have  been  a  stranger  in  a  strange  land :  the  Palatines  will  bless 
your  ministry ;  God  has,  I  hope,  blessed  it,  and  provided  you  a 
place  to  preach  in.  May  God  grant  that  that  church  may  be 
filled  with  his  presence  and  his  glory ;  and  vou,  madam,  be 
made  the  instrument  of  sending  Uie  news  to  neaven  to  your 
husband,  that  this  and  that  man  was  bom  of  God  there.  As 
for  you,  the  other  friends  of  the  deceased,  may  God  grant  that 
when  you  die,  and  when  you  are  buried,  the  people  may  follow 
you  with  tears  as  they  did  dear  Mr.  Beckman  last  night.  I  was 
told  by  one  this  morning,  that  walked  along  with  the  funeral, 
that  it  was  delightful  to  hear  what  the  people  said  when  the 
coffin  passed  by ;  they  blessed  the  person  contained  therein : 
Oh !  he  was  a  father  to  the  poor.  The  poor  have  indeed  lost  a 
friend ;  apd  I  believe  there  has  not  been  a  man,  a  tradesman  in 
London,  for  these  many  years,  that  has  been  more  lamented 
than  the  dear  man  who  now,  I  hope,  is  at  rest.  You  well 
know  how  mindful  he  has  been  of  you,  and  that  soon  after  the 
decease  of  his  disconsolate  widow,  his  substance  will  be  divided 
among  some  of  you.  Give  me  leave  to  charge  and  entreat  you, 
by  the  mercies  of  God  in  Jesus  Christ,  to  be  kind  to  the 
honoured  widow.  Do  not  say,  Mr.  Beckman  my  uncle  is  dead, 
come  pluck  up,  let  us  plague  her  now  she  is  living,  we  shall 
have  all  when  she  is  dead.  The  plague  of  God  will  follow  you, 
if  you  do :  if  you  valued  your  dear  uncle,  do  all  you  can  to  make 
her  life  easy ;  pay  her  that  respect  which  you  would  pay  the 
deceased  were  he  now  living;  this  will  shew  your  love  is  genuine 
and  not  counterfeit,  and  do  not  lay  up  ivrath  against  the  day  of 
wrath.  Follow  the  example  of  your  dear  deceased  uncle ;  the  gen- 
tleman  was  visible  in  him,  as  well  as  the  Christian ;  he  would  be  in 


< 


640  BOUL  PROSPERITY.  [LX. 

bis  warehouse  early  in  the  mornings  that  he  might  come  sooa 
to  his  count ry-house,  and  there  employ  himself  in  his  friendlT 
life,  and  open  the  door  to  the  disciples  of  Jesus. — It  is  time  to 
draw  to  an  end,  but  I  will  speak  a  word  to  the  servants  of  the 
family,  who  have  lost  a  good  and  a  dear  master.  May  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  your  Master  for  ever,  that  you  may  be 
the  Lord's  servants,  however  you  may  be  disposed  of  in  this 
world ;  that  you  may  meet  your  master,  your  mistress,  and  all 
the  family,  in  the  kingdom  of  the  living  God,  then  we  shall 
have  a  whole  eternity  to  reflect  upon  the  goodness  of.  a  gra- 
cious God.  O  may  God  help  us  to  sing  the  forty-sixth  psalm; 
may  we  find  him  to  be  our  strength  and  our  refuge,  a  very  pre* 
sent  help  in  the  time  of  trouble;  may  the  river  of  the  living  God 
make  glad  your  hearts,  and  may  you  be  with  God  to  all  eter- 
nity ;  even  so.  Lord  Jesus,  Amen  and  Amen. 

SERMON  LX. 

SOUL    PROSPERITY. 

Beloved^  I  wish  above  all  things  that  thou  mayest  prosper,  tmd  bi 
in  health,  even  as  thy  soul prospereth. — 3d  Epistle  John,  Ter.2. 
What  a  horrid  blunder  has  one  of  the  famous,  or  rather  in 
ibmous,  deistical  writers  made,  when  he  says,  that  the  gospel 
cannot  be  of  God,  because  tliere  is  no  such  thing  as  friendship 
mentioned  in  it.    Surely  if  be  ever  read  the  gospel, "  having  eyes 
he  saw  not,  having  ears  he  heard  not;"  but  I  believe  the  chief 
reason  is,  his  heart  being  waxen  gross,  be  could  not  understand ; 
for  this  is  so  far  from  being  the  case,  that  the  worid  never  yet  saw 
such  a  specimen  of  steady  and  disinterested  friendship,  as  was 
displayed  in  the  life,  example,  and  conduct  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth, 
jfohn,  the  writer  of  this  epistle,  had  the  honour  of  leaning  on 
his  bosom,  and  of  being  called,  by  way  of  emphasis,  "  the  dis* 
ciple  whoni  Jesus  loved,"  and  that  very  disciple,  which  is  very 
remarkable  concerning  him,  though  he  was  one  of  those  whom 
the  Lord  himself  named  sons  of  thunder,  Mark  iv.  17,  and  was 
so  suddenly,  as  bishop  Hall  observes,  turned  into  a  son  of  light- 
ning, that  he  would  have  called  down  fire  from  heaven  to  con- 
sume his  Master's  enemies;  consequently,  though  he  was  oft 
naturally  fiery  temper,  yet  the  change  in  his  heart  was  so  remark- 
able, that  if  a  judgment  may  be  formed  by  his  writings^  he  seemi 
as  full  of  love,  if  not  fuller,  than  any  of  his  fellow-apostles.   He 
learned  pity  and  benevolence  of  the  Father  of  mercies :  and  to 
shew  how  christian  friendship  is  to  be  cultivated,  he  not  only 
Wrote  letters  to  churches  in  general,  even  to  those  be  never  sair 
in  the  flesh,  but  private  letters  to  particular  saints,  friends  to 
whom  he  was  attached,  and  wealthy  rich  friends,  whom  God 
had,  by  his  Spirit,  raised  up  to  be  helpers  of  the  distressed. 
Uappy  would  it  be  for  us,  if  we  could  all  learn  that  simplicity 
of  heart  which  is  displayed  in  these  particular  Words ;  happy  it 
we  could  learn  this  one  rule,  never  to  write  a  letter  withoot 
Bomething  of  Jesus  Christ  in  it ;  for,  as  Mr  Henry  observes,  if 
are  to  answer  for  idle  words,  much  more  for  idle  letten; 


LX.J  SOUL   PROSPERITY,  641 

and  if  God  has  given  us  oar  pens,  especially  if  he  has  given  us 
*'  the  pen  of  a  ready  writer,"  it  will  be  happy  if  we  can  improve 
our  literary  correspondence  for  his  glory  and  one  another's  good. 
But  what  an  unfashionable  style,  if  compared  to  our  modem 
ones,  is  that  of  the  apostle  to  Gains.  The  superscription  '^  From 
the  Elder,  to  the  well-beloved  Gaius,  whom  I  love  in  the  truth ;" 
there  is  fine  language  for  you !  Many  who  call  themselves  Christ's 
disciples  would  be  ashamed  to  write  so  now.  *  I  send  this,  and 
that,  and  the  other ;  I  send  my  compliments.'  Observe  what  he 
styles  himself,  not  as  the  pope;^  but  he  styles  himself  the  elder. 
A  judicious  expositor  is  of  opinion,  that  all  the  other  apostles 
were  dead,  and  only  poor  John  left  behind.  I  remember  a 
remark  of  his,  '  the  taller  we  grow,  the  lower  we  shall  stoop.' 
The  apostle  puts  himself  upon  a  level  with  the  common  elders 
of  a  church,  that  he  might  not  seem  to  take  state  upon  him,  not 
to  rule  as  a  lion,  but  with  a  rod  of  love ;  ^'  the  elder  to  the  well- 
beloved  Gaius,  whom  1  serve  in  the  truth."  This  Gaius  seems 
to  be,  in  our  modem  language,  what  we  call  a  gentleman,  par- 
ticularly remarkable  for  his  hospitality,  ^*  Gaius  mine  host ;'' 
and  this  Gaius  was  well-beloved,  not  only  beloved,  but  well- 
beloved  ;  that  is,  one  whom  I  greatly  esteem  and  am  fond  of; 
but  then  he  shews  us  likewise  upon  what  this  fondness  is 
founded,  *^  whom  I  love  in  the  truth.'^  There  are  a  great  many 
people  in  writing  say,  *  dear  sir,'  or  ^  good  sir,'  and  subscribe 
'  your  bumble  servant,  sir;'  and  not  one  word  of  truth  either  in 
the  beginning  or  end ;  but  John  and  Gains'  love  was  in  tmth, 
not  only  in  words,  '^  but  in  deed  and  in  truth ;''  as  if  he  had 
said,  my  heart  goes  along  with  my  hand  while  I  am  writing, 
and  it  gives  me  pleasure  in  such  a  correspondence  as  this,  or 
*'  whom  I  love  for  the  truth's  sake,"  that  is,  whom  I  love  for 
being  particularly  attached  to  the  truth ;  and  then  our  friend- 
ship has  a  proper  foundation,  when  the  love  of  God,  and  the 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  is  the  basis  and  bond  of  it.  One 
would  think  this  was  enough  now ;  the  epistles  originally  were 
Bot  divided  into  verses  as  now,  that  people  may  the  better  find 
OQt  particular  places,  though  perhaps  not  altogether  so  pro- 
perly as  they  might.  The  apostie's  saying  beloved,  is  not  need- 
less tautology,  but  proves  the  strength  of  his  afiection ;  ^^  I  wish 
that  thou  mayest  prosper,  and  be  in  health,  even  as  thy  soul 
prospereth."  Gaius,  it  seems,  at  this  time  felt  a  weak  consti- 
tution, or  a  bad  habit  of  body ;  this  may  shew,  that  the  most 
useful  persons,  the  choicest  favourites  of  heaven,  must  not 
expect  to  be  without  the  common  infirmities  of  the  human 
frame ;  so  far  from  this,  that  it  is  often  found  that  a  thousand 
useful  Christians  have  weakly  constitutions.  That  great  and 
sweet  singer  of  Israel,  Dr.  Watts,  I  remember,  about  two  and 
thirty  years  ago  told  me  that  he  had  got  no  sleep  for  three 
months,  but  what  was  procured  by  the  most  exquisite  art  of 

*  Whether  Universal  Bishop,  or  Vicar  of  Christ,  Supreme  Head,  Lord  or  Governor 
of  the  vrorld,  or  a  more  blasphemous  title,  is  uncertain,  the  writer  not  hearing  distinctly 
the  Latin  words  in  which  it  was  expressed. 

•  2r 


642  SOUL   PROSPERITY.  [LX. 

the  most  eminent  physicians ;  and^  my  dear  hearers^  none  but 
those  that  have    such    habits  of  body  can  sympathize  with 
those  that  are  under  them.     When  we  are  in  high  spirits  we 
think  people  might  do  if  they  would,  but  when  brought  down 
ourselves  we  cannot ;  but  notwithstanding  his  body  was  in  this 
condition,  his  soul  prospered  so  eminently,  so  very  emineotly, 
that  the  apostle  could  not  think  it  a  greater  mercy,  or  the 
church  a  greater  blessing,  than  that  his  bodily  health  might  be 
as  vigorous  as  the  health  of  his  soul.     I  remember  the  great 
colonel  Gardiner,  who  had  the  honour  of  being  killed  in  hu 
country's  cause,  closes  one  of  his  last  letters  to  me,  with  wish- 
ing I  might  enjoy  a  thriving  soul  in  a  healthy  body ;  but  this 
is  peculiar  to  the  followers  of  Jesus,  they  find  the  soul  pros- 
pers most  when  the  body  is  worst ;  and  observe,  he  wishes  him 
a  prospering  body  above  all  things,  that  he  might  have  joy  and 
health  with  a  prosperous  soul ;  for  if  we  have  a  good  heart, 
and  good  health  at  the  same,  and  our  hearts  arc  alive  to  God, 
we  go  on  with  a  fresh  gale.     I  observe,  that  the  soul  of  man 
in  general  must  be  made  a  partaker  of  a  divine  life^  before  it 
can  be  said  to  prosper  at  all.    The  words  of  our  text  are  par- 
ticularly applicable  to  a  renewed  heart,  to  one  that  is  really 
alive  to  God.    When  a  tree  is  dead,  we  do  not  so  much  as 
expect  leaves  from  it,  nor  to  see  any  beauty  at  all  in  a  plant  or 
flower  that  we  know  is  absolutely  dead ;   and  therefore  the 
foundation  of  the  apostle*s  wish  lies  here,  that  the  soul  of 
Gaius,  and  consequently  the  souls  of  all  true  believers,  have 
life  communicated  to  them  from  the  Spirit  of  the  living  God. 
Such  a  life  may  God  of  his  infinite  mercy  impart  to  each  of  us! 
and  I  think,  if  I  am  not  mistaken,  and  I  believe  I  may  venture 
to  say  that  I  am  not,  that  where  the  divine  life  is  implanted  by 
the  Spirit  of  the  living  God,  that  life  admits  of  decrease  and 
increase,  admits  of  dreadful  decays,  and  also  of  some  blessed 
revivings.    The  rays  of  the  divine  life  being  once  implanted,  it 
will  grow  up  to  eternal  life;  the  new  creation  is  just  like  the  old, 
when  God  said,  ^'Let  there  be  light,  and  there  was  light,"  which 
never  ceased  since  the  universe  was  made,  and  the  favoaiite 
creature  man  was  bom.     Upon  a  survey  of  his  own  works,  God 
pronounced  ^' every  thing  good,  and  entered  into  his  rest;'*  so  it 
will  be  with  all  those  who  are  made  partakers  of  the  divine 
nature.    ''  The  water  that  I  shall  give  him,  shall  be  a  well  ct 
water,  springing  up  into  everlasting  life.*' 

My  brethren,  from  our  first  coming  into  the  world,  till  our 
passing  out  of  it  to  '^  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect," 
all  the  Lord's  children  have  found,  some  more,  and  others  less, 
that  they  have  had  dreadful  as  well  as  blessed  times,  and  ali 
has  been  over-ruled  to  bring  them  nearer  unto  God :  bat  I 
believe,  I  am  sure,  I  speak  to  some  this  night,  that  if  it  it  were 
put  to  their  choice,  had  rather  know  that  their  souls  prospered, 
than  to  have  ten  thousand  pounds  left  them :  and  it  is  sup- 
posed that  we  may  not  only  know  it  ourselves,  but  that  others 
may  know  it,  "  that  their  profiting  (as  Paul  says)  may  appear 


I*X,]  SOUL   PROSPfiRlTV.  643 

to  all."  Because  John  says,  "  I  wish  above  all  things,  that 
thy  body  may  be  in  health,  as  thy  soul  prospers."  O  may  all 
that  converse  with  us  see  it  in  us !  We  may  frequently  sit 
under  the  gospel,  but  if  we  do  not  take  a  great  deal  of  care, 
however  orthodox  we  are,  we  shall  fall  into  practical  Antino- 
mianism,  and  be  contented  that  we  were  converted  twenty  or 
thirty  years  ago,  and  learn,  as  some  Antinomians,  '^  to  live  by 
faith."  Thank  God,  say  some,  we  met  with  God  so  many 
months  ago,  but  are  not  at  all  solicitous  whether  they  meet 
with  him  any  more ;  and  there  is  not  a  single  individual  here 
that  is  savingly  acquainted  with  Jesus  Christ,  but  wishes  his 
soul  prospered  more  than  his  body. 

The  great  question  is,  how  shall  I  know  that  my  soul  pros- 
pers ?  I  have  been  told  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  knowing 
this,  and  that  I  can  be  conscious  of  it  myself,  and  others  too. 
It  may  not  be  mispending  an  hour,  to  lay  down  some  marks 
whereby  we  may  know  whether  our  souls  prosper  or  no.  If 
there  be  any  of  you  of  an  Antinomran  turn  of  mind,  (I  do  not 
know  there  are  any  of  you,)  I  do  not  know  but  you  will  be  of 
the  same  mind  as  the  man  that  came  to  me  in  Leadenhall 
twenty-five  years  ago:  Sir,  savs  he,  yon  preached  upon  the 
marks  of  the  new  birth.  Marks,  says  I ;  yes,  sir :  O  thank 
Grod,  says  he,  I  am  above  marks,  I  do  not  mind  marks  at  all! — 
and  you  may  be  assured  persons  are  upon  the  brink  of  Antino- 
mianism,  that  say.  Away  with  your  legal  preaching.  I  wonder 
they  do  not  say,  as  they  go  along  the  streets,  Away  with  your 
dials,  away  with  your  dials,  we  do  not  want  marks,  we  know 
what  it  is  o'clock  without  any.  If  the  marks  upon  the  soul  of 
a  believer  are  like  a  sun-dial,  they  are  marks  to  prove  that  we 
are  upon  the  right  foundation :  if  the  sun  does  not  shine  on 
the  sun-dial,  there  is  no  knowing  what  o'clock  it  is;  but  let  it 
shine,  and  instantaneously  you  know  the  time  of  the  day;  this 
is  not  known  when  it  is  cloudy ;  and  who  dare  to  say  but  that 
a  child  of  God,  for  want  of  the  Sun  of  righteousness  shining 
apon  his  heart,  may  write  bitter  things  against  himself?  A  good 
man  may  have  the  vapours ;  as  one  Mr.  Brown  had,  that  wrote 
a  book  of  good  hymns,  who  was  so  vapourish,  that  no  body 
could  make  him  believe  he  had  a  soul  at  all.  Let  the  sun 
shine,  the  believer  can  see  whether  the  sun  is  in  the  meridian, 
at  the  sixth,  ninth,  or  twelfth  hour.  O  that  there  might  be 
great  searching  of  heart.  I  have  been  looking  up  to  God  for 
direction :  I  hope  the  preaching  of  this  may  be  to  awaken 
some,  to  call  back  some  backsliders,  to  awaken  some  sinners 
that  do  not  care  whether  their  souls  prosper  or  no.  I  do  not 
mean  the  Tabernacle  comers,  or  the  Foundry  comers,  or  the 
church,  or  dissenters,  but  I  speak  to  all  of  you,  of  whatever 
denomination  you  are ;  God  of  his  infinite  mercy  give  you  his 
Spirit. 

You  that  are  believers,  come,  let  us  have  that  common  name 
among  us  all ;  if  we  have  got  it,  we  go  off^  well.  If  you  want 
to  know  whether  your  souls  prosper,  that  is,  whether  they  are^ 

2r2 


644  SOUL   PROSPERITY.  [lX. 

healthy ;  you  know  what  a  person  means  when  he  wishes  your 
body  to  prosper ;  let  me  ask  you  how  it  is  between  yon  and 
Gody  with  respect  to  secret  prayer?  Good  Mr.  Banyan  says,  if 
we  are  prayerless^  we  are  Christless.  None  of  God's  people, 
says  he,  come  into  the  world  still-bom.  Good  Mr  Burkitt  (whose 
commentary  has  gone  through  five  or  six-and-twenty  editions; 
and  yet  I  think  if  he  were  now  alive,  and  to  preach  once  or 
twice  a  day,  they  would  cry.  Away  with  his  commentary,  and 
preaching,  and  ail)  speaks  to  the  same  purpose.  '^  Come  into 
the  world  still-bom!"  what  language  is  that  in  a  preacher's 
mouth !  but  it  will  do  for  those  that  like  to  use  marks  and  signs. 
*'  I  will  pour  out  a  Spirit  of  grace  and  supplication,"  says  the 
Lord ;  and  I  will  venture  to  say,  if  the  Spirit  of  grace  resides  io 
the  heart,  the  Spirit  of  supplication  will  not  be  wanting.  Per- 
sons under  their  first  love  dare  not  go  without  God  ;  they  go  to 
God,  not  as  the  formalist  does,  not  for  fear  of  going  to  heU,  or 
being  damned.  It  is  a  mercy  any  thing  drives  to  prayer ;  and 
a  person  under  the  spirit  of  bondage,  that  has  been  just  brought 
to  the  liberty  of  the  sons  of  God,  goes  freely  to  his  heavenly 
Father,  under  the  discoveries  and  constraints  of  divine  love. 
Come,  I  will  appeal  to  yourselves  ;  did  not  you,  like  a  dear  fond 
mother,  if  the  cnild,  the  beloved  child,  made  but  the  least  noise 
in  the  world,  O  says  the  mother,  the  dear  child  cries,  I  must  go 
and  hush  it :  so,  time  was  when  many  hearkened  to  the  call  of 
God,  and  could  no  more  keep  from  the  presence  of  God  in 
secret,  than  a  fond  mother  from  the  presence  of  her  dear  child. 
Now,  if  your  souls  do  prosper,  this  connexion  between  you  and 
God  will  be  kept  up : '  I  do  not  say  tliat  you  will  always  have 
the  same  fervour  as  when  you  first  set  out;  I  do  not  say  yon  will 
always  be  carried  up  into  the  third  heavens ;  the  animal  spirib 
possibly  will  not  admit  of  such  solace ;  but  you  should  inquire 
with  yourselves,  whether  you  would  be  easy  to  be  out  of  God's 
company  ?  Steal  from  behind  your  counter,  and  go  and  converse 
with  God.  Sir  Thomas  Abney,  who  was  observable  for  keepinf 
up  constant  prayer  in  his  family,  being  asked  how  he  kept  up 
prayer  that  night  he  was  sworn  in  lord  mayor?  Very  well, 
says  be,  I  got  the  company  into  my  room,  and  entertained  tbeniy 
and  when  Uie  time  came,  I  told  them  I  must  leave  them  a  little, 
while  I  went  and  prayed  with  my  family,  and  returned  agaia. 
God  grant  we  may  have  many  such  lord  mayors.  If  our  souls 
prosper,  the  same  principle  will  reign  in  us,  and  make  as  con- 
scientiously attend  on  the  means  of  grace.  It  is  a  most  dread- 
ful mark  of  an  enthusiastic  turn  of  mind,  when  persons  think 
they  are  so  high  in  grace,  that  they  thank  God  they  have  no 
need  of  ordinances.  Our  being  the  children  of  Grod,  is  so  far 
from  being  the  cause  of  our  wanting  no  ordinances,  that,  pro- 
perly speaking,  the  ordinances  are  intended  for  the  nourishing  of 
the  children  of  God ;  not  only  for  awaking  the  soul  at  first 
but  for  feeding  the  soul  afterwards.  If  the  same  nourishmeot 
the  child  receives  before,  feeds  it  after  it  is  bom ;  and  as  the 
manna  never  failed,  but  the  ohtidren  of  Israel  partook  of  it  daily 


LX.]  SOUL   PROSPBRITV.  64d 

while  in  the  wilderness,  till  they  came  to  Canaan,  so  we  shall 
want  our  daily  bread,  we  shall  want  the  God  of  g^ace  and  mercy 
to  convey  his  divine  life  into  oar  hearts,  till  we  get  into  the 
heavenly  Canaan.  There  faith  will  be  turned  into  vision,  and 
then  we  shall  not  want  ordinances ;  and  let  people  say  what 
they  will,  if  our  souls  prosper  we  shall  be  glad  of  ordinances, 
we  shall  love  the  place  where  God  dwells;  we  shall  not  say, 
**  such  a  one  preaches,  and  I  will  not  go,"  but  if  we  arc  among 
them  we  shall  be  glad  of  a  good  plain  country  dish,  as  well  as 
a  fine  garnished  dessert ;  and  if  our  souls  prosper,  we  shall  be 
fond  of  the  messengers  as  well  as  the  message :  we  shall  admire 
as  much  to  hear  a  good  ram's-hom,  such  as  blowed  down  the 
walls  of  Jericho,  as  a  fine  silver  trumpet.  So,  in  all  the  ordinan- 
ces of  the  Lord,  that  of  the  Lord's-supper  for  example ;  if  the 
soul  does  not  attend  thereon,  it  is  an  evidence  that  it  does  not 
prosper.  It  is  a  wonder,  if  that  soul  has  not  done  something  to 
make  it  afraid  to  meet  God  at  his  table.  **  Adam,  where  art 
thou  V*  says  the  eternal  Logos  to  his  fallen  creature ;  and  every 
time  we  miss,  whether  we  think  of  it  or  no,  the  Redeemer  puts 
it  down ;  but  if  our  souls  prosper,  how  shall  we  run  to  the  table 
of  the  Lord,  and  be  glad  to  come  often  to  the  commemoration 
of  his  death ! 

I  will  venture  to  afiirm  farther,  that  if  your  souls  prosper,  you 
will  grow  downwards.  What,  is  that  ?  Why,  you  will  grow  in 
the  knowledge  of  yourselves.  I  heard,  when  I  was  at  Lisbon, 
that  some  people  there  began  at  the  top  of  the  house  first.  It 
is  odd  kind  of  preaching  that  will  do  for  the  Papists,  resting 
merely  in  externals.  The  knowledge  of  ourselves  is  the  first 
thing  God  implants.  "  Lord,  let  me  know  myself,"  was  a  prayer 
that  one  of  the  fathers  put  up  for  sixteen  years  together; 
and  if  you  have  high  thoughts  of  yourselves,  you  may  know  you 
are  light-headed,  you  forget  what  poor  silly  creatures  you  are. 
As  our  soul^  prosper,  we  shall  be  more  and  more  sensible,  not 
only  of  the  outside,  but  of  the  inside;  we  first  battle  with  the 
outward  man,  but  as  we  advance  in  the  divine  life,  we  have 
nearer  views  of  the  chambers  of  imagery  that  are  in  our  hearts; 
and  one  day  after  another  we  shall  find  more  and  more  abomi* 
nations  there,  and  consequently  we  shall  see  more  of  the  glory 
of  Jesus  Christ,  the  wonders  of  that  Immanuel,  who  daily 
delivers  us  from  this  body  of  sin  and  death ;  and  I  mention  this, 
because  there  is  nothing  mcfre  common,  especially  with  young 
Christians.  I  used  formerly  to  have  at  least  a  hundred  or  two 
hundred  in  a  day,  who  would  come  and  say,  O  dear,  I  am  so 
and  so,  I  met  with  God  ;  ah,  that  is  quite  well:  a  week  after 
they  would  come  and  say,  O,  sir,  it  is  all  delusion,  there  was 
nothing  in  it;  what  is  the  matter?  O  never  was  such  a  wretch 
as  I  am,  I  never  thought  I  had  such  a  wicked  heart.  Oh !  God 
cannot  love  me ;  now,  sir,  all  my  fervour,  and  all  that  I  felt,  is 
gone.  And  what  then  ?  Does  a  tree  never  grow,  but  when  it  grows 
upward  .  Some  trees  I  fancy  grow  downward ;  and  the  deeper 
y<m  grow  in  the  knowledge  of  yourself^  the  deeper  you  grow  io 


646  SOUL   PROSPERITY.  [LX. 

the  knowledge  of  God  and  bis  grace,  that  discovers  the  cor- 
raptions  of  your  hearts.  Do  not  yon  find  that  aged  men  look 
back  npon  some  former  states  ?  I  know  some  people  cannot 
look  back  to  see  how  many  sins  they  have  been  gnilty  of;  bnC 
if  grace  help  us  to  a  sight  of  our  inherent  corruptions,  it  will 
make  us  weary  of  it^  and  lead  us  to  the  blood  of  Christ,  to 
cleanse  us  from  it;  consequently,  if  your  souls  prosper,  the 
more  you  will  fall  in  love  with  the  glorious  -Redeemer,  and 
with  his  righteousness.  I  never  knew  a  person  in  my  life  that 
diligently  used  the  word,  and  other  means,  but  as  they 
improved  in  grace,  saw  more  and  ihore  the  necessity  of  depend- 
ing upon  a  better  righteousness  than  their  own.  Grenerally, 
when  we  first  set  out,  we  have  got  better  hearts  than  heads; 
but  if  we  grow  in  tlie  divine  life,  our  heads  will  grow  as  well 
as  our  hearts  ;  and  the  Spirit  of  God  leads  out  of  abominable 
self,  and  causes  us  to  flee  more  and  more  to  that  glorious  and 
complete  righteousness  that  Jesus  Christ  wrought  out. — Tbe 
more  your  souls  prosper,  the  more  you  will  see  of  the  freeness 
and  distinguishing  nature  of  God*s  grace,  that  all  is  of  grace. 
^ye  are  all  naturally  freewillers,  and  generally  young  ones  say, 

0  we  have  found  the  Messiah,  of  whom  Moses  and  the  pro- 
phets spake ;  which  is  right,  except  that  word  we  have  found; 
for  the  believer  a  little  after  learns,  that  the  Messiah  had  found 
him.  r  mention  this,  because  we  ought  not  to  make  persons 
ofienders  for  a  word ;  we  should  bear  with  young  Christians, 
and  not  knock  a  young  child's  brains  out,  because  he  cannot 
speak  in  blank  verse. 

Let  it  not  be  forgotten  also,  that  the  more  your  souls  prosper, 
the  more  you  wil  get  above  the  world.     You  cannot  think  that 

1  mean  you  should  be  negligent  about  the  things  of  this  life. 
Nothing  tries  my  temper  more,  than  to  see  any  about  me  idle; 
an  idle  person  tompts  the  devil  to  tempt  him.  In  the  state  of 
paradise,  Adam  and  Eve  were  to  dress  the  garden,  and  not  to 
be  idle  there ;  after  the  fall,  they  were  to  till  the  ground :  but  if 
any  body  says  that  the  Methodists  teach  to  be  Idle,  they  injure 
them.  We  tell  people  to  rise  and  be  at  their  work  early  and 
late,  that  they  may  redeem  time  to  attend  the  word.  If  aH 
that  speak  against  the  Methodists  were  as  diligent,  it  would 
be  better  for  their  wives  and  families.  What,  do  you  think  a 
true  Methodist  will  be  idle  ?  No,  he  will  be  busy  with  his  hands, 
he  knows  time  is  precious,  and  therefore  he  will  work  hard 
that  he  may  have  to  give  to  them  that  need,  and  at  the  same 
time  he  w  ill  live  above  the  world  ;  and  you  know  the  earth  is 
under  your  feet,  so  is  the  world.  When  he  goes  to  sleep,  he 
will  say,  I  care  not  whether  I  wake  more.  I  can  look  back, 
and  tell  you  of  hundreds  and  hundreds  that  once  seemed  alive 
to  God,  and  have  been  drawn  away  with  a  little  filthy,  nasty 
dirt.  How  many  places  are  there  empty  here,  that  have  been 
filled  with  persons  that  once  were  zealous  in  their  attendance! 
As  a  person  the  other  day,  to  t.  hose  having  a  place  it  was 
objected,  that  he  was  a  Methodist ;  No«  says  be,  I  bave  not 


LX.]  SOUL   PROSPERITY.  647 

been  a  Methodist  these  two  years. — I  do  not^  for  my  part,  wish 
people  joy  when  they  get  money ;  only  take  care  it  does  not 
get  into,  and  pat  your  eyes  out ;  if  your  money  increase,  let 
your  zeal  for  good  works  increase.  Perhaps  some  stranger 
will  say,  I  thought  you  were  against  good  works.  I  tell  you 
the  truth,  I  am  against  good  works,  (do  not  run  away  before  I 
have  finished  my  sentence ;)  we  are  against  good  works  being 
put  in  the  room  of  Christ,  as  the  ground  of  our  acceptance ; 
but  we  look  upon  it,  if  we  have  a  right  faith,  our  faith  will 
work  by  love.  Ever  since  I  was  a  boy,  I  remember  to  have 
heard  a  story  of  a  poor  indigent  beggar,  who  asked  a  clergy- 
man to  give  him  his  alms,  which  being  refused,  he  said.  Will 
you  please,  sir,  to  give  me  your  blessing?  Says  he,  God  bless 
you.  O,  replied  the  beggar,  you  would  not  give  me  that,  if  it 
were  worth  any  thing.  There  are  many  who  will  talk  very 
friendly  to  you,  but  if  they  suppose  you  are  come  for  any  thing, 
they  will  run  away  as  from  a  pickpocket;  whereas,  if  our 
souls  prospered,  we  should  ''count  it  more  blessed  to  give 
than  to  receive.'*  When  we  rise  from  our  beds,  this  would  be 
our  question  to  ourselves.  What  can  I  do  for  God  to-day? 
What  can  I  do  for  the  poor?  Have  I  two,  or  five,  or  ten  talents? 
€rod  help  me  to  do  for  the  poor  as  much  as  if  1  knew  I  were  to 
live  only  this  day. 

In  a  word,  if  your  souls  prosper,  my  dear  hearers,  you  will 
grow  in  love.  There  are  some  good  souls,  but  very  narrow 
souls ;  they  are  so  afraid  of  loving  people  that  difier  from  them, 
that  it  makes  me  uneasy  to  see  it.  Party  spirits  creep  in 
among  Christians,  and  whereas  it  was  formerly  said,  ''See  how 
these  Christians  love  one  another  V  now  it  may  be  said,  "  See 
how  these  Christians  hate  one  another!*'  I  declare  from  the 
bottom  of  my  heart,  that  I  am  more  and  more  convinced  that 
the  principles  I  have  preached  are  the  word  of  God.  Pray 
i^hat  do  you  do  at  'Change ;  is  there  such  a  thing  as  a  Presby- 
terian, or  Independent,  or  Church-walk,  there  ?  Is  there  any 
chambers  there  for  the  Presbyterians,  and  Independents,  and 
church-men,  to  deal  in  ?  People  may  boast  of  their  wildfire- 
zeal  for  God,  till  they  cannot  bear  the  sight  of  a  person  that 
differs  from  them.  The  apostle  commends  Gains  for  his 
catholic  love,  for  bis  love  to  strangers.  That  was  a  glorious 
saying  of  a  good  woman  in  Scotland,  "  Come  in,  (says  she,) 
ye  blessed  of  the  Lord ;"  I  have  a  bouse  that  will  bold  a  hun- 
dred, and  a  heart  that  will  hold  ten  thousand.  God  give  us 
such  a  heart;  "he  that  dwelletb  in  love,  dwellcth  in  God." 
I  could  mention  twenty  marks,  and  so  go  on  wire-drawing  till 
nine  or  ten  o'clock  ;  but  it  is  best  to  deal  with  our  souls  as  with 
our  bodies,  to  eat  but  little  at  a  time.  It  is  so  with  preaching ; 
though  I  do  not  proceed  any  farther  in  my  discourse,  God  bless 
Vfhat  has  been  said. 

But  is  there  a  child  of  God  here  that  can  go  away  without  a 
drooping  heart  ?  I  do  not  speak  that  you  may  think  me  humble : 
jl  love  sincerity^  inward  and  oujtward,  and  hate  guile.    When  I 


64S  THE   GOSPEL  [LX. 

think  what  God  has  done  to  me,  bow  often  he  has  pruned  roe,aDd 
dugand  dunged  about  me^  and  \?heu  1  think  bof\'  little  I  have  done 
for  God,  it  makes  me  weep  if  possible  tears  of  blood  ;  it  makes 
me  cry, ''  O  my  leanness,  my  leanness,"  as  I  expressed  myself 
with  my  friend  to-day.    This  makes  me  long,  if  my  strength  of 
body  would  permit,  to  begin  to  be  earnest  for  my  Lord.    What 
say  you,  my  dear  friends,  have  all  of  you  got  the  same  temper? 
Have  you  made  the  progress  you  ought  to  have  done  ?  O  Lon- 
don !  Jiondon  !  highly  favoured  London  !  what  would  some  peo- 
ple give  for  thy  privileges !    What  would  the  people  I  was 
called  to  preach  to  but  this  day  sevennight  ?     A  good,  a  right 
honourable  lady,  about  three-and-twenty  miles  off,  has  broogfat 
the  gospel  there.     The  people  that  I  preached  to,  longed  wi 
thirsted  after  the  same  messagfe ;  they  said,  they  thought  thej 
never  heard  the  truth  before.     You  have  the  manna  poored  oit 
round  the  camp,  and  I  am  afraid  you  are  calling  it  light  bread; 
at  least,  I  am  afraid  you  have  had  a  bad  digestion.     Consider 
of  it,  and  for  Jesus  Christ's  sake  tremble  for  fear  ''  God  shooid 
remove  his  candlestick  from  among  you.''    Labourers  are  sick; 
those  that  did  once  labour  are  almost  worn  out,  and  otben 
only  bring  themselves  into  a  narrow  sphere,  and  so  confine 
their  usefulness.    There  are  few  that  like  to  go  oat  in  the  fields; 
broken  heads  and  dead  cats  are  no  more  the  ornaments  of  a 
Methodist,  but  silk  scarves.    Those  honourable  badges  are  now 
no  more  :  the  languor  has  got  from  the  ministers  to  the  people, 
and  if  you  do  not  take  care,  we  shall  all  fall  dead  together. 
The  Lord  Jesus  rouse  us  !  the  Son  of  God  rouse  us  all !    Ye 
should  shew  the  world  the  way,  and  ye  that  have  been  Method- 
ists of  many  years  standing,  shew  the  young  ones,  that  have  not 
the  cross  to  bear  as  we  once  had,  what  ancient  Methodism  was. 

As  for  you  who  are  quite  negligent  about  the  prosperity  of 
your  souls,  who  only  mind  your  bodies,  who  are  more  afraid  of 
a  pimple  in  your  faces,  than  of  the  rottenness  of  your  hearts; 
that  will  say,  O  give  me  a  good  bottle  and  a  fowl,  and  keep  the 
prosperity  of  your  souls  to  yourselves.  You  had  better  tilt 
care  what  you  say,  for  fear  God  should  take  you  at  your  wofd. 
I  knew  some  tradesmen  and  farmers,  and  one  had  got  a  wife 
perhaps  with  a  fortune  too,  who  prayed  they  might  be  excoaed: 
they  never  came  to  the  supper,  and  God  sent  them  to  hell  for  it 
too;  this  may  be  your  case.  I  was  told  to-day  of  a  yosas 
woman,  that  was  very  well  on  Sunday  when  she  left  her  friads, 
when  she  came  home  was  racked  with  pain,  had  au  inflamma- 
tion in  her  bowels,  and  is  now  a  breathless  corpse.  Anodier 
that  1  heard  of,  a  Christless  preacher,  that  always  minded  his 
body,  when  he  was  near  death  he  said  to  his  wife,  I  see  hell 
opened  for  me,  I  see  the  damned  tormented,  1  see  such  a  one  ia 
hell,  that  I  debauched ;  in  the  midst  of  his  agony  be  said,  1  amcom- 
in^  to  thee,  I  must  be  damned,  God  will  damn  my  soul,— and 
died.  Take  care  of  jesting  with  God  ;  there  is  room  enough  ia 
hell,  and  if  you  neglect  the  prosperity  of  your  souls,  what  wifl 
become  of  you  ?    What  will  you  give  for  a  graiq  of  hope,  whet 


hXU]  A    DYING   SAINT'S  TRIUMPH.  649 

God  requires  your  souls  i  "  Awake,  thou  that  sleepest  ;"bark ! 
hark  !  hark  !  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord,  the  living  God.  Help 
me,  O  ye  children  of  God :  I  am  come  with  a  warrant  from 
Jesus  of  Nazareth  to-night.  Ye  ministers  of  Christ  that  are 
here,  help  me  with  your  prayers  ;  yo  servants  of  the  living  God, 
help  me  with  your  prayers.  O  with  what  success  did  I  preach 
in  Moorfields,  when  I  had  ten  thousand  of  God's  people  pray- 
ing for  me ;  pray  to  God  to  strengthen  ray  body:  do  not  be 
afraid  I  shall  hurt  myself  to-night :  I  do  not  care  what  hurt  I  do 
myself,  if  God  may  bless  it ;  I  can  preach  but  little,  but  may 
God  bless  that  little.  I  weep  and  cry  and  humble  myself  before 
God  daily,  for  being  laid  aside ;  I  would  not  give  others  the 
trouble,  if  I  could  preach  myself.  You  have  had  the  first  of  me, 
and  you  will  have  the  last  of  me :  the  angels  of  God  waited  for 
your  conversion,  and  are  now  ready  to  take  care  of  the  soul 
when  it  leaves  the  rotten  carcase.  The  worst  creature  under 
heaven,  that  has  not  a  penny  in  the  world,  may  be  welcome 
unto  God.  However  it  has  been  with  us  in  times  past,  may 
our  souls  prosper  in  time  to  come ;  which  God  grant  of  his  in* 
finite  mercy.  Amen. 

SERMON  LXI. 

THE  GOSPEL  A  DYING  SAINT'S  TRIUMPH.— A  FUNERAL  SERMON, 

And  he  said  unto  them.  Go  ye  into  all  the  worlds  and  preach  the 
gospel  to  every  creature.  He  that  believeth  and  is  baptized 
shall  be  saved,  but  he  that  believeth  not  shall  be  dantned.^^ 
Mark  xvi.  15,  IG. 

I  AM  persuaded  I  need  not  inform  this  auditory,  that  when  ara« 
bassadors  are  sent  to  a  prince,  or  when  judges  go  their  respec- 
tive circuits,  it  is  always  customary  for  them  to  shew  their  cre- 
dentials, to  open  and  read  their  commissions,  by  which  they  act 
in  his  majesty's  name.  The  same  is  absolutely  necessary  for 
those  who  are  ambassadors  of  the  Son  of  God,  as  they  would  be 
faithful  to  their  Lord  ;  since  they  are  to  sit  with  him  on  the 
throne,  when  he  shall  come  the  second  time  to  judge  both  evil 
angels  and  men.  If  any  should  ask  me,  where  is  their  commis- 
sion ?  It  has  been  just  now  read  unto  you.  Here  it  is  in  my 
band,  it  is  written  with  the  King's  own  hand,  by  the  finger  of 
the  ever-blessed  God,  and  scaled  with  the  signet  of  his  eternal 
Spirit,  with  his  broad  seal  annexed  to  it.  The  commission  is 
short,  but  very  extensive  ;  and  it  is  remarkable,  it  was  given 
out  just  before  the  Redeemer  went  to  heaven  ;  he  reserved  it  in 
infinite  wisdom  for  his  last  blessing,  to  appoint  and  employ  vice- 
gerents to  carry  on  his  work  on  earth.  "  He  that  hath  an  ear 
to  hear,  let  him  hear"  what  the  Son  of  God  says  to  a  company 
of  poor  fishermen.  Tliere  was  not  one  scholar  among  them  alt 
What  does  he  say  ?  "Go  ye  into  all  the  world,  and  preach  the 
gospel  to  every  creature.  Let  us  pause  a  while,  and  before  we 
go  further  let  us  see  what  mercy,  what  love,  and  yet,  withal, 
what  equal  majesty,  are  blended  in  this  expression  or  commis* 


660  THB  GOSPBL  [LXL 

sion.    ''Go  ye/'  ye  poor  fishermen,  ye  that  the  letter-learned 
doctors  will  look  upon  as  illiterate  men ;  ''Go  ye/'  that  have 
hitherto  been  dreaming  of  temporal   preferments,  quarreling 
"  who  should  sit  on  my  right  hand  and  on  my  left  hand  in  my 
kingdom ;  Go  ye/'  not  stay  till  the  people  come  to  you,  bat 
imitate  the  conduct  of  your  Master ;  *'  Go  ye,"  remembering  that 
the  devil  will  not  permit  souls  to  be  fond  of  hearing  you :  Go 
therefore  ;  where  ?  "  Into  all  the  world ;  there  is  a  commission 
for  you  ;  there  never  was  such  a  commission  on  the  earth  ;  there 
never  was  any  like  this  ;  "  Go  into  all  the  world,"  that  is,  into 
the  Gentile  as  well  as  the  Jewish  world.     Hitherto  my  gospel 
has  been  confined  to  the  Jews ;  I  once  told  you,  yoa  must  not 
go  to  the  Gentiles ;  I  once  told  a  poor  woman  that  came  to  me, 
"  It  is  not  meet  to  take  the  children's  bread,  and  give  it  unto 
dogs  :  but  the  partition  wall  being  now  broken  down,  the  veil 
of  the  temple  being  now  rent  in  twain,  he  gave  them  a  univer- 
sal commission ;  "  Go  ye,  therefore,  into  all  the  world  :"  how! 
what,  go  into  other  ministers'  parishes  ?  for  there  was  not  a  dis- 
trict then  but  what  was  settled  with  shepherds,  such  as  they 
were  :  yes,  yes,  "  Go  into  all  the  world  ;"  and  though  I  will4M>t 
pretend  to  say,  that  this  enjoins  ministers  to  go  into  every  part 
of  the  world  ;  yet  I  insist  upon  it,  and  by  the  grace  of  God,  if  I 
were  to  die  for  it,  I  will  say,  that  no  power  on  earth  has  power 
to  restrain  ministers  from  preaching,  where  a  company  of  peo- 
ple are  willing  to  hear ;  and  if  ministers  were  of  a  right  temper, 
'  they  would  say  as  a  minister  did  at  Oxford,  that  used  to  visit 
the  prisoners  there ;  I  remember  once  I  went  to  ask  him  whe- 
ther I  might  go  and  visit  some  of  his  parish,  whether  be  were 
offended  at  our  going  to  visit  the  prisoners  !  No,  no,  says  be,  1 
am  glad  I  have  any  such  young  curates  as  you. — And  if  minis- 
ters were  of  such  a  temper  now,  O  dear,  the  devil  would  fiy  be- 
fore us.     As  good  Mr.  Philip  Henry  said  to  the  minister  of 
Broad  Oak,  from   whence  he  was  ejected,  but  preached  after- 
wards in  a  barn,  and  meeting  the  minister  after  his  sermon  was 
over ;  '  Sir,'  says  Mr.  Henry, '  I  have  been  making  bold  to  throw 
a  handful  of  seed  into  your  ground.'    Thank  you,  sir,  says  fae, 
God  bless  it,  there  is  work  enough  for  us  both.     We  may  talk 
of  what  we  will,  search  into  the  bottom,  it  is  not  for  want  of 
light,  but  of  more  zeal  and  love  to  the  Son  of  God  :  if  we  were 
as  warm,  and  full  of  the  love  of  God,  as  we  ought  to  be,  these 
pretty  excuses  we  urge  to  save  our  bones,  would  not  be  so 
much  as  mentioned  ;  we  should  go  out  and  leave  these  carcases 
to  the  grace  of  God.     I  do  not  see  how  we  can  act  as  priests 
of  the  church  of  England  without  doing  it.     Be  so  kind  as 
read  the  Ordination  Service  as  soon  as  you  go  home ;  for  the 
office  of  ordination  and  consecration  of  bishops,  priests,  and  dea- 
cons, is  left  out  of  most  of  the  common  prayer  books,  so  that 
people  are  as  ignorant  of  it  as  if  it  were  not.     The  office  of  a 
priest  is  this :  he  is  not  to  confine  himself  to  his  place,  no ;  what 
then  ?  Why,  he  is  "  to  go  forth,  and  seek  after  the  childrai  of 
God  that  are  dispersed  in  this  naughty  world ;'  these  are  (ho 


LXI.J  A    DYING   saint's   TRIUMPH.  OSl 

very  words  that  the  bishop  speaks  to  us  when  we  are  ordained ; 
but  if  we  are  confined  to  one  particular  place,  and  are  to  be  shut 
up  in  one  comer,  pray  how  do  we  seek  the  children  of  God  that  are 
dispersed  in  this  naughty  world  ?  Parishes  and  settled  ministers 
there  must  be,  but  we  are  not,  I  insist  on  it,  to  be  hindered  from 
preaching  Christ  any  where,  because  he  bids  us  *^  go  into  all  the 
world ;"   here  is  our  license.     I  acknowledge  the  chapel  is 
licensed ;  here  is  my  license,  and  wherever  I  go  I  will  produce 
my  license.    Where  ?  Why  out  of  the  16th  of  Mark  ;  *'  Go  ye, 
and  preach  the  gospel  to  all  the  world  :"  there  is  the  license,  and 
the  Spirit  of  Christ  helping  us  to  preach  by  that  license,  will 
make  all  the  devil's  children  cowards  before  us.     We  have  tried 
them  these  thirty  years,  would  to  God  we  set  about  it  now !  if 
I  had  strength,  I  would  set  about  it  to-moriow;  I  only  grieve 
that  my  body  will  not  hold,  out  for  field  preaching,  else  Ken- 
nington-Common  should  be  my  pulpit,  for  any  place  is  conse- 
crated where  Christ  is  present.     Well,  what  must  we  go  forth  to 
do  ?  ''Go  ye  into  all  the  world,  and  preach ;"  preach !  what  is  that  ? 
Why  the  original  word  for  preach  is  to  speak  out,  as  a  crier  does 
that  cries  goods  that  are  lost ;  proclaim  it.  And  Tsaiah  would  be 
reckoned  a  dreadful  enthusiast  if  now  alive.  How  does  he  preach? 
He  preaches  in  the  king's  chapels  such  language  aud  eloquence 
as  would  carry  all  before  it ;  and  yet  how  does  he  preach  ?  ''  Ho, 
every  one  that  thirsteth."  O,  **  he  lifts  up  his  voice  like  a  trum- 
pet.'' And  the  word  preach  signifies  to  proclaim ;  ''  to  cry  aloud, 
and  spare  not."  How  do  you  like  on^  that  cries  your  lost  goods, 
if  he  only  whisper?    Would  you  choose  to  employ  a  man  that 
you  could  not  hear  two  yards  ?  O,  say  you,  I  shall  never  find 
ray  goods :  and  if  persons  have  what  qualifications  they  may,  if 
they  cannot  be  heard  at  all ;  they  need  not  preach  at  all.  I  know 
a  prebend  in  the  cathedral  of  York,  who  spoke  so  very  low,  no- 
body heard  him ;  somebody  said,  they  never  heard  such  a  moving 
sermon  in  all  their  lives  in  that  cathedral,  for  it  made  all  the  peo- 
ple move  out,  because  they  could  not  hear.    The  matter  of  the 
ministry  of  the  gospel  is  of  infinite  importance  :  unless,  my  bre- 
thren, we  could  be  heard,  what  do  we  preach  for  ?    It  implies 
earnestness  in  the  preaching,  and  the  preacher.    You  expect  a 
person,  like  one  that  is  crying  your  goods,  to  be  in  earnest ;  and 
if  we  preach,  and  make  the  King's  proclamation,  we  should  be 
in  earnest.     It  is  said, ''  Christ  opened  his  mouth,  and  taught." 
Now,  a  modem  critic  would  laugh  at  that :  Open  his  mouth,  say 
they,  how  could  he  speak  without  opening  his  mouth?  Would  it 
not  be  better  to  say,  '*  he  taught  them?  No,  no,  there  is  no  idle 
'word  in  God's  book.     It  is  said,  'Uhe  Lord  Jesus  opened  his 
mouth :"  what  for  ?  Why,  to  get  in  breath  that  he  might  speak 
loud  to  the  people,  when  the  heavens  were  his  sounding  board ; 
then  did  he  open  his  mouth,  and  taught  them  in  earnest,  power- 
fully ;  and  therefore  the  people  made  this  observation  when  he 
bad  done  speaking,  **  that  he  spake  as  one  having  authority, 
^nd  not  as  the  scribes."    There  is  no  dispensation  from  preach- 
ing, but  sickness  or  want  of  abilities,  to  those  that  are  ordained 


653  THE  GOSPEL  [LXL 

to  preach;  and  therefore  it  was  a  proverb  in  the  primitiTo 
church,  *^  that  it  becomes  a  bishop  to  die  preaching/'  Bishop 
Jewell,  that  blessed  minister  of  the  church  of  England,  gave 
that  answer  to  a  person  that  met  his  lordship  walking  on  foot 
in  the  dirt,  going  to  preach  to  a  few  people.  Why  does  your 
lordship,  weak  as  you  are,  expose  yourself  thus  ?  Says  he,  it 
becomes  a  bishop  to  die  preaching.  Lord,  send  all  the  world 
that  have  bishops  such  jewels  as  he  was !  Pray  what  are  they 
to  preach  ?  Not  themselves.  What  are  they  to  preach  ?  Why, 
they  are  to  preach,  not  morality :  Not  morality !  (come,  do  not  be 
frightened,  any  of  you  that  are  afraid  of  good  works,  do  not  be 
frightened  this  morning :)  I  say,  not  morality ;  that  is,  moraUty 
is  not  to  be  the  grand  point  of  their  preaching ;  they  are  not  to 
preach  as  a  heathen  philosopher  would.  A  late  bishop  of  liii- 
coln,  who  has  not  been  dead  a  long  while,  said  to  his  chaplaiiiy 
You  are  not  a  minister  of  Cicero,  or  any  of  the  heathen  philoso- 
phers ;  you  are  not  to  entertain  your  people  ¥rith  dry  morality, 
but  remember  you  are  a  minister  of  Christ ;  you  are,  therefore, 
to  preach  the  gospel ;  and  if  you  will  not  preach  the  gospel  ia 
the  church,  you  must  not  be  angry  for  the  poor  people's  goiog 
out  into  the  fields,  where  they  hear  the  gospel;  that  is  to  be  your 
grand  theme,  "  Go  into  all  the  world,  and  preach  the  gospel." 

Now  the  gospel  signifies  good  news,  glad  tidings :  **  Behold  I 
bring  you,"  said  the  angel,  "  glad  tidings  of  great  joy."  Mean 
and  contemptible  as  the  office  of  a  preacher  may  be  thought 
now,  the  angels  were  glad  of  the  commission  to  preach  this 
gospel :  and  Dr.  Goodwin,  that  learned  pious  soul,  says  in  his 
familiar  way,  and  that  is  the  best  way  of  writing,  God  had  hot 
one  Son,  and  he  made  a  minister  of  him ;  and  I  add,  he  made  to 
itinerant  minister  of  him  too.  Well,  and  some  say,  you  most 
not  preach  the  law;  you  cannot  preach  the  gospel  witboat 
preaching  the  law ;  for  you  shall  fipd,  by  and  by,  we  are  to 
preach  something  that  the  people  must  be  saved  by :  it  is  im* 
possible  to  tell  them  how  they  are  to  be  saved,  unless  we  tell 
them  what  they  are  to  be  saved  from.  The  way  the  Spirit  of 
God  takes,  is  like  that  we  take  in  preparing  the  ground :  do  voa 
think  any  farmers  would  have  a  crop  of  corn  next  year  unless 
they  plow  now  ?  and  you  may  as  well  expect  a  crop  of  com 
on  unplowed  ground,  as  a  crop  of  grace,  until  the  soul  is  con- 
vinced of  its  being  undone  without  a  Saviour.  That  is  the 
reason  we  have  so  many  mushroom  converts,  so  many  persois 
that  are  always  happy!  happy!  happy!  and  never  were 
miserable ;  why  ?  Because  their  stony  ground  is  not  plowed 
up  ;  they  have  not  got  a  conviction  of  the  law ;  they 
are  stony  ground  bearers;  "they  hear  the  word  with  joy, 
and  in  a  time  of  temptation,"  which  will  soon  come  after  a 
seeming  or  real  conversion,  "  they  fall  away.*'  They  serve 
Christ  as  the  young  man  served  the  Jews  that  laid  hold  of  him, 
who,  when  he  found  he  was  to  be  a  prisoner  for  following  Christ, 
left  his  garments ;  and  so  some  people  leave  their  profess  ion. 
That  makes  me  so  cautious  now,  which  I  was  not  thirty  yeais 


LXI.]  A    DYING   saint's   TRIUMPH.  65S 

ajQfOy  of  dubbing  people  converts  so  soon.  I  love  now  to  wait  a 
little,  and  see  if  people  bring  forth  fruit ;  for  there  are  so  many 
blossoms  which  March  winds  you  know  blow  away,  that  I  can- 
not believe  they  are  converts  till  I  see  fruit  brought  forth.  It 
-will  do  converts  no  harm  to  keep  them  a  little  back ;  it  will 
never  do  a  sincere  soul  any  harm. 

We  are  to  preach  the  gospel :  to  whom  ?  "  to  every  creature :" 
here  is  the  commission,  every  creature.  I  suppose  the  apostles 
were  not  to  see  every  creature ;  they  did  not  go  into  all  nations ; 
they  had  particular  districts ;  but  wherever  they  did  go,  they 
preached.  Did  you  ever  hear  Paul,  or  any  of  the  apostles,  sent 
away  a  congregation  without  a  sermon  ?  No,  no :  when  turned 
out  of  the  temple,  they  preached  in  the  highways,  hedges, 
streets,  and  lanes  of  the  city :  they  went  to  the  water-side ;  there 
Lydia  was  caught.  My  brethren,  we  have  got  a  commission 
here  from  Christ.;  and  not  only  a  commission,  but  we  have  a 
command  '^  to  preach  to  every  creature  ;*'  ail  that  are  willing  to 
bear.  *^  He  that  hath  an  ear  to  hear,  let  him  hear ;"  and  if  some 
shall  say,  they  will  not  come  if  we  do  preach ;  would  to  God  we 
tried  them !  '^  where  the  carcase  is,  there  will  the  eagles  bo 
gathered  together.  We  are  to  preach  glad  tidings  of  salvation ; 
to  tell  a  poor  benighted  world,  lying  in  the  wicked  one,  the  devil, 
their  state  and  condition :  we  are  to  tell  them,  **  Grod  is  love ;" 
to  tell  them,  that  God  loves  them  better  than  they  do  them- 
selves. We  must  preach  the  law,  but  not  leave  the  people 
there.  We  must  tell  them  how  Moses  brings  them  to  the 
borders  of  Canaan,  and  then  tell  them  of  a  glorious  Joshua  that 
will  carry  them  over  Jordan ;  first,  to  shew  them  their  wants,  and 
then  point  out  to  them  a  Jesus  that  can  supply,  and  more  than 
supply,  all  their  wants.  This  we  are  "to  tell  every  creature;" 
and  it  is  for  this  that  people  stone  gospel  preachers.  I  do  not 
think  the  prisoners  would  be  angry  with  us,  if  we  were  to  tell 
them,  the  king  commissions  us  to  declare  to  them  that  they 
might  come  out  of  their  prison,  that  their  chains  may  be  knocked 
off.  If  you  were  to  go  to  one  of  them  and  say.  Here  you  have 
your  chains ;  and  he  were  to  say,  I  have  no  chains  on  at  all, 
you  would  think  that  man's  brains  turned ;  and  so  are  every 
Bian's  that  does  not  see  himself  to  be  in  the  chains  of  sin  and 
deceit.  We  are  "  to  preach  liberty  to  the  captives,  to  proclaim 
^e  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord ;  sound  the  jubilee  trumpet,  and 
ten  them  the  year  of  release  is  come ;"  that  Jesus  can  make  them 
haiq;>y. — But,  pray,  if  we  are  to  preach,  what  are  the  creatures 
to  do  that  see  their  need  of  this  salvation  ?  I  will  tell  you ;  they 
are  to  believe.  "  He  that  believeth,  and  is  baptized,"  8cc.  The 
grand  topics  Christ's  ministers  are  to  preach,  are,  **  repentance 
towards  God,  and  faith  in  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  The  men 
of  the  world  fancy  they  have  believed  already,  and  some  of  them 
lift  up  their  heads  and  say.  Thank  God,  we  have  believed  ever 
since  we  were  bom ;  and  in  one  sense  many  people  believe,  but 
in  what  sense  P  Just  as  the  devil  believes ;  they  believe,  and 
still  continue  devils  in  their  carnal  state ;  that  is,  they  assent  to 


654  TH£  G06PEL  [LXI. 

the  gospel^  they  assent  to  it  as  a  thing  that  is  credible.  This 
is  our  school  definition  of  faith ;  and  I  believe  there  are  thou- 
sands that  call  themselves  Christians,  that  do  not  believe  a 
thousandth  part  of  what  the  devil  does.  The  devil  believes 
more  than  an  Arian,  for  he  does  not  believe  Christ  to  be  God; 
the  devil  says,  '*  I  know  whom  thou  art,  the  holy  One  of  Crod." 
The  devil  will  rise  up  ia  judgment  against  him.  He  believes 
more  than  a  Socinian,  who  believes  Jesus  Christ  to  be  no  more 
than  an  extraordinary  man ;  and  he  believes  more  of  Jesus 
Christ  than  thousands  of  professors  do,  who  are  neither  Arians 
nor  Socinians.  There  are  a  thousand  things  in  this  book*  that 
many  people,  if  you  come  to  close-quarters  with  them,  will  say, 
they  do  not  believe,  though  they  are  ashamed  to  own  it.  The 
furthest  that  they  go,  is  to  assent  to  the  creed,  to  the  Lord's 
prayer,  and  ten  commandments ;  and  if  a  person  can  say  these 
in  their  mother  tongue,  and  have  been  baptized  by  the  priest, 
and  confirmed  by  the  bishop,  and  go  to  church  once  a  week,  and 
DOW  and  then  on  holidays,  .they  think  they  are  not  only  believen^ 
but  strong  believers.  I  am  not  against  going  to  chnrch,  nor 
against  the  creed,  the  Lord*s  prayer,  and  the  commandments; 
I  love  and  honour  them,  and  I  pray  Grod  we  may  always  lia?e 
them ;  and  I  would  not  have  our  liturgy  or  articles  departed 
from  for  ten  thovsand  worlds.  Many  would  have  them  altered, 
because  there  are  some  faults  in  them;  but,  if  our  modern 
people  were  to  alter  them,  they  would  make  them  ten  thousa^ 
times  worse  than  they  are.  But  believing  is  something  more;  it 
is  a  coming  to  Jesus  Christ,  receiving  Jesus,  rolling  ourselves  on 
Jesus ;  it  is  a  trusting  in  the  Lord  Jesus.  I  do  not  know  any 
one  single  thing  more  variously  expressed  in  the  Scriptures  than 
believing;  why?  Because  it  is  the  marrow  of  the  gospel. 
Without  faith  we  cannot  be  justified,  either  in  our  persons  or 
performances  ;  and  therefore  the  Holy  Ghost  has  variously  ex- 
pressed it,  to  let  us  see  the  importance  of  the  point.  It  is  ex- 
pressed by  a  coming,  trusting,  receiving,  and  relying,  (all  which 
amounts  to  the  same  thing,)  under  a  felt  conviction  that  we  are 
lost,  undone,  condemned  without  him :  for  as  a  good  old  Puritan 
observes,  Christ  is  beholden  to  none  of  us  for  our  hearts ;  we 
never  should  come  to  Jesus  Christ,  the  sinner's  last  shift,  till  we 
feel  we  cannot  do  without  him.  We  are  like  the  woman  wiA 
the  bloody  issue  ;  she  spent  a  great  deal  of  money  upon  phy- 
sicians ;  if  she  had  had  the  sum  of  one  half-guinea  more,  tiD 
that  was  gone  she  neVer  would  have  come  to  Christ ;  but  having 
spent  all,  and  then  hearing  that  Jesus  was  to  come  that  way,  a 
sense  of  her  need,  a  feeling  sense  of  her  impotence,  and  insufi- 
ciency  of  all  other  applications,  made  her  come  to  Christ ;  say- 
ing in  her  heart, ''  If  I  could  but  touch  the  hem  of  his  garment, 
I  should  be  whole ;  Jesus,  the  son  of  David,  would  have  mercy 
on  me ;"  or  words  to  that  purpose.  She  did  not  go  about  and 
s^y*  pr&y  lend  me  a  common  prayer  book ;  it  was  not  in  print 
then.    Where  must  she  borrow  one?     Her  heart,  touched  by 

"  *  Holding  out  his  Bible. 


A-^l.]  A    DYING   saint's  TRIUMPH.  655 

God,  was  the  best  common  prayer ;  and  a  few  words,  nttered 

from  a  sense  of  her  weakness  and  misery,  was  more  rhetoric, 

was  more  music  in  the  ears  of  God,  than  an  extempore  prayer 

by  a  gifted  man,  admiring  himself,  for  an  hour  and  a  half.   As  a 

person  told  mc  but  yesterday,  of  a  poor  outlandish  Papist  that 

was  condemned  to  die,  held  out  for  a  long  while ;  he  would  not 

speak  to  a  Protestant  minister,  but  a  night  or  two  before  he 

8uffered,  comes  out  to  him,  and  says, ''  Me  now  see  the  necessity 

of  a  greater  absolution  than  a  priest  can  give  me ;"  and  then,  in 

his  broken  language,  cries  out, ''  Dear  Lord  Jesus,  shew  thy 

charity  to  thy  poor  sinner !"    There  is  language !  there  is  rhetoric 

for  you !  and  we  ourselves  like  such  language.     You  do  not  like 

fawning  people  that  come  into  your  room,  and  by  their  very 

manner  of  coming  prove  they  are  not  sincere ;  but  a  poor  crea« 

ture  that  comes  to  pour  out  two  or  three  words  you  see  is  honest, 

you  will  not  say  to  such  a  one.  Why  do  you  come  to  me,  and  not 

speak  blank  verse  7    Why  do  you  come  to  me,  and  not  speak 

fine  language?  No ;  sincerity  is  the  thing ;  sincerity  is  all  in  all. 

When  we  are  once  convinced  of  our  need  and  helplessness,  and 

of  Jesus  being  a  Redeemer  that  is  mighty  and  willing  to  save, 

a  poor  soul  then  throws  himself  upon  this  Jesus,  receives  this 

Jesus,  ventures  upon  this  Jesus,  believes  the  word,  and  by  thus 

venturing  on  the  promise,  receives  from  Jesus  the  thing  promised. 

*'  Faith  comes  by  hearing,  and  hearing  by  the  word  of  God." 

But  then,  where  there  is  true  faith,  that  will,  my  dear  hearers, 

be  attended — with  what?  Why,  with  salvation.     ''  He  that  be- 

licveth,  and  is  baptized,*'  saith  our  Lord,  ^'  shall  he  saved :"  saved 

from  what?  Why,  from  every  thing  that  he  wants  to  be  saved 

from,  and  receives  every  thing  that  God  can  give  to  complete 

his  whole  salvation.  What  is  it  a  poor  sinner  wants  to  be  saved 

from?    O,  sin,  sin,  the  guilt  of  sin.     The  first  conviction  brings 

the  creatures  to  God  by  force ;  there  are  very  few  that  are  drawn 

by  love  entirely :  and  I  seldom  find  any  of  those  that  have  been 

drawn  by  love,  but  have  had  dreadful  conflicts  afterwards :  for 

either  before  or  after  conversion,  our  hearts  must  be  plowed  up, 

or  we  shall  never  be  prepared  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 

Ye  shall  be  saved  from  the  painful  guilt  of  sin :  what  is  that? 
Why,  the  common  prayer  book  will  tell  you,  in  the  communion 
office;  ''the  remembrance  of  our  sins  is  grievous  unto  us,  and 
the  burden  of  them  is  intolerable.  There  is  methodistical  lan- 
guage. Cranmcr,  Latimer,  or  Hooper,  were,  my  brethren— what  ? 
Why,  they  were  Methodist  preachers ;  and  they  used  to  preach 
in  Paul's  Cross,  a  pulpit  said  to  be  made  in  the  shape  of  a  cross, 
near  St.  Paul's  church ;  and  a  salary  given  for  that  very  purpose, 
I  believe,  to  this  day.  No  matter  where  we  preach,  so  that  sin- 
ners feel  Christ's  power  in  delivering  them  from  this,  which  cer- 
tainly implies  a  consciousness  of  pardon.  I  do  not  think  the 
poor  creature  that  was  respited  the  other  day,  would  have  be- 
lieved it,  had  he  not  seen  the  king's  warrant  just  before  the  others 
were  carried  out.  Why,  say  they,  here  is  his  majesty's  pardon , 
be  takes  and  receives  it  with  joy,  and  is  now  freed  from  the  gal- 


65G  TUB   GOSPEL  [LXI. 

lows.    And  if  persons  can  give  tiiis  credence  to  an  earthly  kin«:, 
why  cannot  a  believer  have  a  sense  of  the  pardon  of  his  sins 
from  God  7    If  a  person*s  reading  this  to  me^  telling  me  the  Vin^ 
has  pardoned  roe,  has  such  ari  efiect,  why  may  not  God's  word, 
backed  by  his  Spirit,  be  brought  home  with  such  power  on  my 
hearty  that  I  may  be  assured  God  has  pardoned  me,  as  well  ast 
criminal  that  his  king  has  saved  ?  If  this  is  gospel,  away  with  it, 
say  some,  who  think  we  are  not  to  be  justified  till  wc  come  to 
judgment.     O  blessed  creatures !  this  is  modem  divinity ;  our 
reformers  knew  nothing  about  it.    We  are  to  be  declared,  if  yoo 
please,  justified,  in  the  day  of  Jesus  Christ,  who  will  prononnce 
it  before  all  mankind.     But,  my  brethren,  we  are  to  be  married 
to  Jesus  Christ  in  this  world,  and  the  marriage  is  to  be  declared 
in  another ;  and  I  will  insist  upon  it,  though  I  will  not  pretend 
to  say  that  all  that  liave  not  full  assurance  are  not  Christians, 
yet  I  will  say,  that  assurance  is  necessary  for  the  well-being  of 
a  Christian;   the  comfortable  being,  though  not  for  his  very 
existence :  and  I  will  venture  to  say,  that  a  soul  was  neTcr 
brought  to  Christ,  but  what  had  some  ground  of  assaranoe  of 
pardon ;  though,  for  want  of  knowing  better,  be  pnt  it  by,  and 
did  not  know  the  gift  of  God  when  it  came.    But,  my  brethren, 
*'  we  shall  be  saved  from  all  our  sins."    Here  is  ''  glad  tidiags 
of  great  joy"  now  come:  Satan  may  hear  that;  and  any  of  yo« 
here  that  are  coming  into  the  chapel  as  you  pass  along.    I  an 
glad  to  see  poor  creatures  come,  that  I  may  tell  them,  **  God  is 
love."    Believers,  yon  shall  be  saved  from  all  your  sins,  ercfy 
one  of  them ;  they  shall  all  be  blotted  out.    Generally,  whes 
persons  are  convinced,  the  devil  preaches  despair ;  some  great 
sin  lies  upon  them ;  and,  says  the  poor  sinner,  I  shall  be  saved 
from  all  but  that;  had  I  not  been  guilty  of  such  a  crime,  I  migkt 
have  hope,  but  I  am  guilty  of  such  a  sin,  which  is  so  awfiL 
with  such  dreadful  aggravations,  I  am  afraid  I  shall  never  ke 
pardoned.    But,, my  dear  souls,  Christ  is  love;  and  when  k 
loves  to  forgive,  he  forgives  like  a  God ;  '^  I  will  blot  out  yoo 
iniquities,  transgressions,  and  sins."    **  Come  now,  (saith  the 
Lord,)  let  us  reason  together;  though  your  sins  are  as  sciifet, 
yet  they  shall  be  as  white  as  snow."    I  am  so  far  from  bciif 
unwilling  to  save  or  pardon,  that  the  angels,  every  time  tk 
gospel  is  preached,  are  ready  to  tune  their  harps,  and  long  to 
sing  an  anthem  to  some  poor  sinner's  conversion. 

They  shall  be  saved  from  the  power  of  sin.  Do  not  job 
remember  that  when  Joshua  was  going  on  with  bis  cmiqiKSti, 
that  there  were  some  kings  in  a  cave ;  and  when  he  retimed, 
he  ordered  them  to  bring  the  kings  out  for  Grod's  people  t» 
tread  upon  them.  When  I  read  that  passage,  I  used  to  think 
these  kings  were  like  our  corruptions  hid  in  the  cave  of  oar 
hearts,  and  the  stone  of  unbelief  rolled  to  keep  them  in ;  iMit 
when  we  receive  Christ  by  faith,  and  have  pardon  in  him,  oar 

Beat  Joshua  takes  away  the  stone,  and  says,  <'  Bring  out  thtff 
ngs,  these  corruptions,  that  have  reigned  over  my  peopk« 
and  by  faith  let  them  tread  on  the  necks  of  them.    Our  gmt 


L.XI.]  A   DYING   saint's   TRIUMPH.  657 

Master,  ^hen  he  gave  the  command  in  tlie  text>  says,  '^  These 
signs  shall  follow  them  that  believe  in  my  name ;  they  shall  cast 
out  devils,  they  shall  speak  with  new  tongnes,  they  shall  take 
up  serpents,  and  if  they  drink  any  deadly  thing  it  shall  not 
hurt  them."  These  were  things  peculiar,  in  one  sense,  to  the 
apostles ;  but  in  the  power  of  faith,  and  as  brought  home  to 
every  believer,  he  casts  out  devilish  lusts;  and  if  they  had 
drunk  any  deadly  thing,  as  God  knows  we  have,  they  may  do 
by  them  as  Paul  did  by  the  viper,  through  the  power  of  fkith 
cast  them  off,  and  by  this  means  prove  that  Christ  is  God. 

This  is,  my  dear  hearers,  a  present  salvation.  The  wickedest 
wretch  in  the  world  will  cry,  I  hope  to  be  saved,  though  they 
have  no  notion  of  being  saved  but  after  their  death ;  as  a 
woman  in  Virginia  told  me  once,  when  [  said  she  must  be 
born  again ;  I  believe  you,  sir,  but  that  must  be  after  I  am 
dead.  And  by  people's  living  as  they  do,  one  would  suppose 
that  they  think  they  are  not  to  be  saved  till  they  die,  because 
they  live  so.  But  as  I  have  told  you,  I  tell  yon  again,  Christ'si 
salvation  is  a  great  salvation ;  and  all  that  Christ  does  for  his 
people  on  earth,  is  but  an  earnest  of  good  things  to  come,  an 
anticipation  of  what  ho  is  to  do  for  them  in  heaven.  Our  Lord 
says,  **  The  kingdom  of  God  is  within  you ;  the  kingdom  is 
come  nigh  unto  you."  You  must  not  (hily  believe  on  Christ, 
but  believe  in  him :  we  are  not  only  to  be  baptized  in  the  name 
of  the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  but  we  are  to  be  baptized 
kite  the  nature  of  the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost ;  this  is  the 
baptism  of  the  Spirit,  and  this  is  that  salvation,  which  God 
grant  we  may  all  partake  of. 

We  are  to  be  saved,  my  brethren — from  what?  Why,  from  the 
fear  of  death.  "  He  came  to  deliver  them  who,  through  the  feat 
of  death,  were  all  their  life-time  subject  to  bondage."  What, 
mre  there  no  children  of  God,  but  those  that  have  full  assurance? 
IToa  never  heard  me  say  so ;  yet  I  am  apt  to  speak  a  little  fast, 
but  at  the  same  time  I  would  choose  not  to  speak  so  fast  as  to 
apeak  contrary  to  the  word  of  God.  There  are  a  great  many 
good  souls,  that  at  times  may  doubt  of  the  reality  of  this  work 
opon  thehr^ souls;  a  relaxed  habit  of  body,  a  nervous  disorder, 
you  may  say  what  you  please,  will  make  a  weak  child  of  God 
doubt  of  what  God  has  done  in  them,  and  that  hurts  the  mind, 
as  it  has  such  a  close  connexion  with  the  body ;  but  then  a 
believer  is  low,  God's  people  are  low  persons ;  as  the  greatest 
geniuses  are  most  liable  to  lowness  of  spirit,  for  the  scabbard 
10  not  strong  enough  for  the  sword,  and  persons  that  talk  much 
Blast  wear  out  in  time :  but  this  I  stand  to,  it  is  our  privilege 
to  live  above  the  fears  of  death.  We  do  not  live  up  to  our 
dignity  till  every  day  we  are  waiting  for  the  coming  of  our  Lord 
from  heaven;  and  I  am  persuaded  of  this,  though  I  believe 
there  may  be  some  exceptions,  that  the  reason  why  we  do  not 
live  more  above  the  fear  of  death  is,  because  we  keep  in  so 
much  with  these  nasty  earthly  things.  You  may  have  the  best 
•jres  in  the  world,  and  only  put  your  hands  before  them,  you 
*  2s 


658  THE   GOSPEL  [LXI. 

Mill  find  the  sun  hi^  from  you ;  and  so  you  may  have  a  large 
fire,  but  throw  some  earth  upon  the  fire  that  is  in  your  parlour, 
or  drawing-rooms,  and  you  will  find  the  fire  damped.  And  how 
can  people  have  much  of  God  or  heaven,  when  they  have  so 
much  of  the  earth  in  their  hearts  ?  It  is  our  privilege  to  live 
above  the  fear  of  death,  though  we  are  not  to  be  saved  from 
dying;  and  I  am  sure  a  believer  would  not  be  saved  from 
dying  for  a  million  of  worlds ;  it  would  be  death  to  him  not  to 
die ;  but  a  soul  touched  with  the  love  of  God,  even  in  sickness, 
in  the  midst  of  a  burning  fever,  in  the  midst  of  a  fire  that  i^ill 
burn  a  thousand  bodies  up,  convulsed  with  tortures  and  pains  in 
every  limb;  a  believer  is  enabled  sometimes  to  say,  **  O  my  God, 

0  my  God,  thou  art  love ;  I  am  ready  to  come  to  thee  in  the 
midst  of  all.*'  Blessed  be  God,  I  need  not  go  far  for  example; 
yonder,  under  the  gallery,  lies  the  remains,  the  carcase,  of  a  dear 
saint,  who  was  for  twenty-five  days  together  burned  with  a  fever, 
enough  to  scorch  any  creature  up ;  yet  one  filled  with  love  and 
power  divine,  blessed  be  the  Lord  Jesus;  though  she  cried  out,If 

1  were  not  supported,  the  agony  of  my  body  would  make  me 
impatient ;  yet  never  said  a  murmuring  word,  but  in  the  midst 
of  all  cried  out  to  those  about  her,  ''God  is  love!  O  my  joys! 
O  the  comforts  that  I  feel !"  and  in  her  very  last  moments  cned 
out,  ''  I  am  a-coming ;  dear  Lord,  I  am  a-coming ;''  and  so 
sweetly  slept  in  Jesus.  If  this  is  enthusiasm,  God  give  as  a 
good  share  of  it  when  when  we  come  to  die !  These  are  dyiiy 
and  yet  living  witnesses  that ''  God  is  love !  She  was  in  rap- 
tures when  Mr.  Sheppard  went  to  visit  her :  she  desired  me  to  tell 
you,  that ''  God  is  love  ;"  desired  me  to  tell  you  in  the  chapel 
pulpit,  that  she  was  called  about  four  years  ago.  I  think  Mr. 
Lee  was  the  instrument  of  her  conversion.  Now  her  body  is  to 
be  put  to  bed  at  noon ;  but  her  soul  is  crying,  O  the  joys !  the 
joys !  the  joys !  of  being  saved  by  a  blessed  £mmanuel !  Now  will 
any  one  dare  to  deny  this  evidence  ?  Do  you  see  worldly  peo- 
ple work  themselves  up  into  that  frame  when  they  die  ?  Visit 
them  when  they  are  near  death :  ah,  dear !  they  are  in  the  va- 
pours ;  they  are  so  afraid  of  dying,  that  the  doctor  will  not  sofa 
us  to  come  near  them,  no,  not  common  clergymen,  for  fear  we 
should  damp  their  spirits ;  till  they  find  they  are  just  gone,  and 
then  they  give  us  leave  to  say  the  farewell  prayer  to  them :  bat 
they  that  are  bom  from  above,  that  are  made  new  creatures  ii 
Christ,  feel  something  that  smiles  upon  them  in  death.  Siw 
told  them, "  she  believed  God  would  let  her  go  over  Jordan  dry- 
shod  :"  that  was  her  expression.  If  this  is  salvation  on  earti^ 
what  must  it  be  in  heaven  ?  If  in  the  midst  of  the  tortures  of  a 
burning  fever,  a' raptured  soul  can  cry,  O  the  joys !  O  the  con- 
forts  !  Lord,  I  am  coming !  I  am  coming !  what  must  that  bo 
when  enclosed  in  a  Redeemer's  arms  7  In  order  to  which,  the 
glorious  angels  stand  at  the  top  of  the  ladder,  to  take  a  poor 
wearied  pilgrim  home.  Lord,  give  us  not  only  such  a  firaM 
when  we  are  dying,  but  while  we  are  living;  for  if  it  is  oom* 
fortable  to  die  in  such  a  frame,  why  not  to  live  in  it  T  to  live  m 


LXI.]  A    DYING   saint's   TRIUMPH.  650 

]icaven  on  earth.  O,  say  you^  I  thank  God  I  walk  by  faith ;  I 
have  got  the  promise.  Well,  thank  God  you  have  the  promise^ 
but,  with  the  promise,  learn  to  walk  by  that  "  faith  which  is  the 
evidence  of  things  not  seen,"  which  brings  God  down,  brings 
heaven  near,  and  gives  the  soul  a  heart-felt  experience,  that 
''  God  is  love."  Here  is  a  salvation  worthy  of  a  God  !  here  is  a 
salvation  worthy  of  the  Mediator's  blood  !  for  this  he  groaned, 
for  this  he  bled,  for  this  he  died,  for  this  he  arose,  for  this  be 
ascended,  for  this  he  sent  the  Holy  Ghost,  and  for  this  purpose 
be  now  sends  him  into  the  hearts  of  his  people. 

My  brethren,  what  say  you  to  this  i  I  hope  it  is  enough  to 
make  you  cry  ^out, ''  Lord,  let  my  latter  end  be  like  hers."  This 
may  comfort  you  that  are  mourners  about  her  corpse,  this  may 
comfort  a  fond  husband,  whose  beloved  is  now  taken  away  by 
a  stroke.  What  a  mercy  is  it,  sif,  that  you  was  instrumental 
to  bring  her  under  the  word !  She  was  once  averse  to  coming 
here :  "  What,  leave  my  parish  church !"  said  she ;  "  what,  go  to 
a  conventicle,  to  a  tabernacle  of  Methodists  !"  he  advised  her 
again  and  again  to  come  :  at  last,  one  day  as  they  were  going 
to  St.  Giles's,  she  says,  Well,  come  put  up  your  walking-stick — 
if  it  fall  towards  St.  Giles's,  I  will  go  there  ;  if  to  the  chapel,  I 
will  go  there  :  the  stick  fell  towards  the  chapel,  she  came,  and 
was  converted  to  God.  O  with  what  joy  must  her  husband 
meet  her  again  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven !  and  O  happy  day,  in 
which  she  was  encouraged  to  seek  after  God.  Last  week, 
another  was  buried  in  the  like  circumstances ;  and,  blessed  be 
God,  in  yonder  burying-ground  are  the  remains  of  many  pre- 
cious souls,  that  in  the  day  of  judgment  will  let  the  world  know 
whether  this  chapel  was  built  for  God,  or  not. 

O  what  an  awful  word  is  that  in  the  latter  clause  of  the  text, 
•'  He  that  believeth  not  shall  be  damned,"  Pause :  I  will  give  you 
time  to  think  a  little;  if  you  would  have  Christ  as  goc^  as  his 
word  of  promi'^e,  remember  he  will  be  as  good  as  his  word  of 
threatening.  You  hear  the  necessity  of  preaching  the  gospel, 
because  upon  believing  or  non-believing,  our  salvation  or  dam- 
nation will  turn.  What,  will  you  laugh  at  the  minister  that 
cries  out.  Lord, help  you  to  come,  come,  come;  do  you  think 
that  we  have  nothing  else  to  say,  and  are  at  a  loss  for  words, 
when  we  cry  come,  come,  come,  to  fill  up  our  sermons  ?  No; 
it  is  part  of  our  commission,  it  is  one  great  part.  And,  my 
fellow-sinners,  we  are  come  to  tell  you,  that  our  Master  has  a 
two*edged  sword,  as  well  as  a  golden  sceptre ;  and  if  you  will 
not  come  under  the  sound  of  the  word,  and  do  not  feel  the  con- 
Tcrting  power  of  it,  you  must  feel  the  confounding  weight  of  it. 
I  repeat  it  again  to  you,  '*  He  that  believeth  not,  shall  be  dam- 
ned ;"  the  very  word  is  terrible,  God  grant  that  you  may  never 
know  how  terrible  it  is.  You  are  condemned  already ;  he  that 
believeth  not,  is  so,  John  iii.  18.  why  ?  "  Because  he  hath  not 
believed  on  the  name  of  the  Son  of  God.*'  It  is  not  his  being  a 
whoremonger  or  adulterer  that  will  damn  him,  but  his  unbelief 
is  Ibe  damning  sin ;  for  this  he  will  be  condemned  :  for  ever 

2s2 


660  REPENTANCE  AND   CONVERSION.  [LXIL 

banished  from  the  presence  of  the  ever-blessed  God  :  and  bow 
will  you  rave,  how  will  you  tear,  and  how  will  you  wring  your 
hands,  when  you  see  your  relations,  your  friends,  those  whom 
you  despised,  and  were  glad  they  were  dead  out  of  your  way, 
''see  them  in  Abraham's  bosom,  and  yourselves  lifting  up  your 
eyes  in  torment !"  O  my  dear  hearers,  do  let  me  plead,  let  me 
entreat  you  ;  if  that  would  do,  I  would  down  on  my  knees ;  if 
that  would  do,  I  would  come  down  from  the  pulpit,  I  would 
bang  on  your  necks,  I  would  not  let  you  go,  I  would  offer  myself 
to  be  trodden  under  ygur  feet ;  I  have  known  what  it  is  to  be 
trodden  under  the  foot  of  men  thirty  years  ago,  and  I  am  of  the 
same  temper  still :  use  me  as  you  will,  I  am  a  poor  sinner ;  and 
if  I  were  to  be  killed  a  thousand  ways,  I  suffer  no  more  than  my 
reward  as  an  unprotitable  servant  of  God  :  but  do  not  trample 
the  dear  Jesus  under  foot ;  what  has  he  done  to  you  !     Was  it 
any  harm  to  leave  his  Father's  bosom,  come  down  and  die,  aad 
plead  for  sinners  ?  See  him  yonder  hang  on  the  tree !  behold  him 
with  his  arm  stretched  out !  see  him  all  of  a  bloody  gore»  and  in 
bis  last  agony  preaching  love !    Would  yon  give  him  a  fresh 
stab  ?  Are  there  any  of  you  here  that  think  the  sword  did  not 
pierce  him  enough  ?  that  they  did  not  knock  the  briers  and 
thorns  into  his  head  deep  enough  ?  And  will  you  give  him  the 
other  slash,  the  other  thorns  ?  and  will  you  pierce  him  afresh, 
and  go  away  without  believing  he  is  love  ?  I  cannot  help  it;  I 
am  free  from  the  blood  of  you  alL     Oh  that  you  may  not  damn 
your  own  souls  !     Do  not  be  murderers;  nor,  like  Csan,  ''sell 
your  birth-right  for  a  mess  of  pottage."  God  convince  you;  God 
convert  you:   God  help  those  that  never  believed^  to  believe; 
God  help  those  that  have  believed,  to  believe  more  ;  that  tbej 
may  experience  more  and  more  this  salvation,  till  faith  is  tomed 
into  vision,  and  hope  into  fruition ;  till  we  have  all,  with  yonder 
*  saint,  and  all  that  have  gone  before  us,  experienced  complete 
salvation  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven:    even  so^  Lord  Jesus. 
Amen  and  Amen. 


SERMON  LXn. 

REPENTANCE  AND   CONVERSION. 

Repent  ye,  therefore y  and  he  converted,  that  your  sins  may  ht 
blotted  out,  when  the  times  of  refreshing  shall  come  from  tii 
presence  of  the  Lord. — Acts  iii.  19. 

What  a  pity  is  it  that  modem  preachers  attend  no  more  to  the 
method  those  took  who  were  first  inspired  by  the  Holy  Ghost, 
in  preaching  Jesus  Christ !  the  success  they  were  honoured  with, 
gave  a  sanction  to  their  manner  of  preaching,  and  the  divine 
authority  of  their  discourses,  and  energy  of  their  elocution,  one 
would  think,  should  have  more  weight  with  those  that  are  called 
to  dispense  the  gospel,  than  all  modern  schemes  whaterer.  If 
this  wore  the  case,  ministers  would  then  learn  first  to  sow,  a^ 
then  to  reap ;  they  would  endeavour  to  plough  up  the  iaUow 
ground,  and  thereby  prepare  the  people  for  Grod's  lainii^  dovB 


LXll.]  RBPBNTANCE   AND   CONVERSION.  G6I 

blessings  upon  them.  Thus  Peter  preached  when  under  a  divine 
inflaence^  as  I  mentioned  last  Wednesday  night :  be  charged 
the  audience  home^  though  many  of  them  were  learned  and  high 
and  great,  with  having  been  the  murderers  of  the  Son  of  Grod. 
No  doubt  but  the  charge  entered  deep  into  their  conscience,  and 
that  faithful  monitor  beginning  to  give  them  a  proper  sense  of 
themselves,  the  apostle  lets  them  know,  that  great  as  their  sin 
was,  it  was  not  unpardonable;  that  though  they  had  been  con- 
cerned in  the  horrid  crime  of  murdering  the  Lord  of  life,  notwith- 
standing they  had  thereby  incurred  the  penalty  of  eternal  death, 
yet  there  was  mercy  for  them,  the  way  to  which  he  points  out 
in  the  text ;  "  Repent  ye  therefore,"  says  he,  "  and  be  convert- 
ed," and  adds,  *'  that  your  sins  may  be  blotted  out."  Though 
they  are  but  few  words,  they  are  weighty ;  a  short  sentence  this, 
but  sweet:  may  God  make  it  a  blessed  sweetness  to  every  one 
of  your  hearts ! 

But  must  we  preach  conversion  to  a  professing  people  ?  Some 
of  you,  perhaps  are  ready  to  say.  Go  to  America,  go  among  the 
savages,  and  preach  repentance  and  conversion  there ;  or,  il'you 
must  be  a  field  preacher,  go  to  the  highways  and  hedges ;  go  to 
the  colliers ;  go  ramble  up  and  down,  as  you  used  to  do;  preach 
conversion  to  the  drunkards:  would  to  God  my  commission  might 
be  renewed,  that  I  might  have  strength  and  spirit  to  take  the 
advice !  Possibly  others  will  say.  Do  not  preach  it  to  us  ;  pray 
ivho  arc  you  ?  1  answer.  One  sent  to  call  you  to  repentance  ; 
and  although  I  might,  yet  I  will  not  come  so  close  to  you  at 
present,  as  to  inquire  in  my  turn,  who  are  you  ?  yet  permit  me 
to  pray,  that  while  I  am  preaching,  God's  Spirit  may  find  you 
out ;  and  not  only  let  you  know  who  you  are,  but  what  you  are ; 
and  then  you  will  not  be  easy  with  yourselves,  nor  angry  with 
a  minister  of  Jesus  Christ  for  preaching  conversion  to  your 
souls.  Repentance  and  conversion  are  nearly  the  same.  The 
expression  in  the  text  is  complex,  and  seems  to  include  both 
what  goes  before  and  follows  "  turning  to  God :"  and  if  the  Lord 
be  pleased  to  honour  me  so  far  to-night,  to  be  useful  to  sinners, 
as  well  as  saints,  I  will  endeavour  to  shew  you. 

First,  What  it  is  not  to  be  converted  :  Secondly,  What  it  is 
to  be  truly  converted  :  Tlnrdly,  Ofier  some  motives  why  you 
should  repent  and  be  converted :  and.  Fourthly,  Answer  some 
objections  that  have  been  made  against  persons  repenting  and 
being  converted ;  and  may  God  so  bless  my  preaching,  and  your 
hearing,  that  every  one  may  go  away  and  say.  Lord,  convert 
sne  more  and  more  !  * 

First,  I  shall  endeavour  to  shew  you  what  it  is  not  to  be  con- 
certed ;  for  I  do  verily  believe  there  are  thousands,  and  ten  thou- 
sands, that  think  themselves  converted,  and  yet  at  the  same 
time,  if  you  come  and  examine  them,  they  know  not  so  much  as 
speculatively  what  real  conversion  is :  the  general  notion  many 
have  of  it  is,  a  person's  being  a  convert  from  the  church  el'  Rome 
to  the  church  of  England.  There  is  a  particular  office  in  the 
large  prayer  book^  to  be  used  when  any  one  publicly  reuouor 


662  RBPENTANCB   AND   CONVBRSIOH.  [hJLiU 

ces  popery  in  the  great  congregation.  When  this  is  done,  that 
prayer  is  read^  and  the  person  said  Amen  to  the  collects  upon 
the  occasion^  every  body  wishes  him  joy,  and  thanks  Grod  he  is 
concerted  :  whereas  if  this  be  all,  he  is  as  mach  unconverted  to 
608  as  ever ;  he  has  in  words  renounced  popery,  but  never  tod^ 
leave  of  the  sins  of  his  heart.  Well,  after  this  he  looks  into  the 
church,  and  does  not  like  that  white  thing  called  a  surplice ;  be 
looks,  and  thinks  there  are  some  rags  of  the  whore  of  Babyloa 
left  still :  now,  says  he,  I  will  be  converted ;  how  T  I  will  tam 
dissenter ;  so,  after  he  is  converted  from  the  church  of  Rome  to 
the  church  of  England,  he  goes  to  the  dissenting  church ;  may 
be,  curiosity  may  bring  him  to  the  Methodists,  those  nionstroiu 
troublesome  creatures,  and,  perhaps,  he  may  then  be  converted 
a  third  time ;  like  their  preaching,  like  their  singing ;  Oh  dear,  I 
must  have  a  Tabemaclo-ticket,  I  must  have  a  psalm-book,  I 
will  come  as  often  as  there  is  preaching,  or  at  least  as  often  as  I 
can ;  and  there  he  sits  down,  and  becomes  an  outside  conyerted 
Methodist,  as  demure  as  possible :  this  is  going  a  prodigious  way, 
and  yet  all  this  is  conversion  from  one  party  only  to  another. 
If  the  minister  give  a  rub  or  two,  he  will  take  miff  perhaps,  and 
be  converted  to  some  other  persuasion,  and  all  the  while  Jesus 
Christ  is  left  unthoughtof;  but  this  is  conversion  only  froo 
party  to  party,  not  real,  and  that  which  will  bring  a  soul  to 
heaven. 

Possibly,  a  person  may  go  further,  and  be  converted  from  one 
set  of  principles  to  another ;  he  may,  for  instance,  be  bom  an 
Arminian,  whichHill  men  naturally  are  :  and  one  reason  why  I 
think  Calvinism  right  is,  because  proud  nature  will  not  stoop  to 
be  saved  by  grace.  You  that  are  brought  up  in  an  orthodox  be- 
lief, under  an  orthodox  ministry,  cannot  easily  make  an  allow- 
ance for  thousands,  that  have  nothing  ringing  in  their  ears  hot 
Arminianism  ;  you  have  sucked  in  orthodoxy  with  your  mother's 
milk,  and  that  makes  so  many  sour  and  severe  professors.  I 
knew  a  rigid  man  that  Would  beat  Christianity  into  his  wife ;  and 
so  many  beat  people  with  their  Bibles,  that  they  are  likely,  by 
their  bitter  proceeding,  to  hinder  them  front  attending  totbo 
means  God  has  designed  for  conversion.  What  is  this  but  being 
converted  from  one  set  of  principles  to  another  ?  And  I  may 
be  very  zealous  for  ihem,  without  being  transformed  by  them 
into  the  image  of  God.  But  some  go  further,  they  think  they 
are  converted  because  they  are  reformed :  they  say,  **  a  reformed 
rake  makes  a  good  husband,"  but  I  think  a  renewed  rake  will 
make  a  better.  Reformation  is  not  renovation :  I  may  have  the 
outside  of  the  platter  washed  ;  I  may  be  turned  from  profane- 
ness  to  a  regard  for  morality ;  and  because  I  do  not  swear  nor 
go  to  the  play,  as  I  used  to  do;  have  left  off  cards,  and  perhaps 
put  on  a  plain  dress ;  and  so  believe,  or  rather  fancy,  that  1  am 
converted ;  yet  the  old  man  remains  unmortified,  and  the  heart 
is  unrenewed  still.  Comparing  mydelf  with  what  I  once  was, 
and  looking  on  my  companions  with  disdain,  I  may  there  stick 
faster  in  sdf,  and  get  into  a  worse  and  mor^  dangerous  state 


LXII.]  RBPBNTANCB   AND   CONVBRSION.  068 

than  I  was  before.  If  any  of  you  think  me  too  severe,  remember 
you  are  the  person  I  mean ;  for  you  think  mo^so,  only  because  I 
touch  your  case.  The  drunkards  and  sabbath-breakers,  cursers 
and  swearers,  say  to  us,  You  can  never  preach  but  you  preach 
afrainst  us  :  as  a  good  man  once  replied  to  a  person,  who  com- 
plained against  us  ministers  for  thus  preaching :  I  will  put  you 
in  a  way,  said  he,  that  we  shall  never  preach  against  you ;  how 
is  that  ?  Why,  leave  off  cursing  and  swearing,  &c.  then  your 
consciences  will  be  clear,  and  the  minister  will  look  over  your 
heads  :  happy  they  that  are  convinced  of  it !  You  have  not 
heard  me,  I  hope,  speak  a  word  against  reformation  ;  you  have 
not  heard  me  spealc  a  word  against  being  converted  from  the 
church  of  Rome ;  against  being  converted  to  the  church  of 
England ;  or,  against  being  good :  no ;  all  these  are  right  in 
their  place ;  but  all  these  conversions  you  may  have,  and  yet 
never  be  truly  converted  at  all.  What  is  conversion  then  7  I 
will  not  keep  you  longer  in  suspense,  my  brethren :  man  must 
be  a  new  creature,  and  converted  from  his  own  righteousness 
to  the  righteousness  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  conviction  will 
always  precede  spiritual  conversion ;  and  therefore  the  Pro- 
testant divines  make  this  distinction.  You  may  be  convinced 
and  not  converted,  but  you  cannot  be  converted  without  being 
convinced  ;  and  if  we  are  truly  converted,  we  shall  not  only  be 
turned  and  converted  from  sinful  self,  but  we  shall  be  con- 
verted from  righteous  self;  that  is  the  devil  of  devils:  for 
righteous  self  can  run  and  hide  itself  in  its  own  doings,  which 
is  the  reason  self-rlghteoas  people  are  so  angry  with  gospel 
preachers  ;  there  are  no  such  enemies  to  the  gospel  as  these : 
**  there  were  Jews  who  trusted  in  themselves  that  they  were 
righteous/'  that  set  all  in  an  uproar,  and  raised  the  mob  on  the 
apostles.  Oar  Lord  denounced  dreadful  woes  against  the  self- 
righteous  Pharisees  :  so  ministers  must  cut  and  hack  them,  and 
not  spare,  but  say  woe,  woe,  woe,  to  all  those  that  will  not 
submit  to  the  righteousness  of  Jesus  Christ !  I  could  almost 
say,  this  is  tlie  last  stroke  the  Lord  Jesus  gave  Paul,  I  mean 
in  turning  him  to  real  Christianity  ;  for  having  given  him  a  blow 
as  a  persecutor  and  injurious,  he  then  brought  him  out  of  himself, 
by  revealing  his  person  and  office  as  a  Saviour.  "  I  am  Jesus." — 
Hence  says  the  apostle,  *^  I  count  all  things  but  loss — that  I 
may  win  Christ,  and  be  found  in  him ;  not  having  my  own  righ- 
teousness, which  is  of  the  law,  but  that  which  is  through  the 
fhith  of  Christ,  the  righteousness  which  is  of  God  by  faith." 
You  hear  him  not  only  speak  of  himself  as  injurious,  as  a  blas- 
phemer, but  also  as  a  Pharisee ;  and  in  vain  we  may  talk  of 
being  converted  till  we  are  brought  out  of  ourselves ;  to  come 
as  poor,  lost,  undone  sinners,  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  to  be 
washed  in  his  blood;  to  be  clothed  in  his  glorious  imputed 
righteousness :  the  consequence  of  this  imputation,  or  appli- 
cation of  a  Mediator's  righteousness  to  the  soul,  will  be  a  con- 
version from  sin  to  holiness.  I  am  almost  tempted  to  say,  it 
is  perverseness  in  people  to  preach  against  the  doctrine  of 


664  REPENTANCE  AND   GONYBRRIOK;  [LXII; 

imputed  righteousness^  because  they  love  holiness^  and  charge 
the  Calvinists  with  being  enemies  to  it :  how  can  they  be 
charged  with  being  enemies  to  sanctificatioUy  who  so  strenu* 
ously  insist  on  its  being  the  genuine  fruit,  and  unquestionable 
proof,  of  the  imputation  of  the  righteousness  of  Christ,  and 
application  of  it  by  the  Spirit  of  grace  ?  Tbey  that  are  truly 
converted  to  Jesus,  and  are  justified  by  faith  in  the  Son  oi 
God,  will  take  care  to  evidence  their  conversion,  not  only  by 
the  having  grace  implanted  in  their  hearts,  but  by  that  grace 
diffusing  itself  through  every  faculty  of  the  soul,  and  making  a 
universal  change  in  the  whole  man.  I  am  preaching  froni  a 
Bible  that  saith,  ^*  He  that  is  in  Christ  is  a  new  creature,  old 
things,  (not  will  be,  but)  are  passed  away,  all  things,  (not  only 
will,  but)  are  become  new."  As  a  child  when  bom  has  all  Ikit 
several  parts  of  a  man,  it  will  have  no  more  limbs  than  it  hu 
now,  if  it  live  to  fourscore  years  and  ten ;  so  when  a  pers<Hi  is 
converted  to  God,  there  are  all  the  features  of  the  new  creatut 
and  growth,  till  he  become  a  young  man  and  a  father  in  Christ; 
till  he  become  ripe  in  grace,  and  God  trani^late  him  to  glory. 
Any  thing  short  of  this  is  but  the  shadow  instead  of  the  sub* 
stance ;  and  however  persons  may  charge  us  with  being  entbo* 
Blasts,  yet  we  need  not  be  moved  either  to  anger  or  sorrow, 
since  St.  Paul  says,  **  I  travail  in  birth  till  Christ  be  formed  ii 
your  hearts." 

The  author  of  this  conversion  is  the  Holy  Ghost :  it  is  not 
their  own  free  will ;  it  is  not  moral  suasion ;  nothing  short  of 
the  influence  of  the  Spirit  of  the  living  God  can  effect  this 
change  in  our  hearts ;  therefore  we  arc  said  to  "  be  bom  again, 
born  of  God,  of  the  Spirit,  not  of  water  only,  but  of  the  Hdy 
Ghost ;  that  which  is  born  of  the  flesh  is  flesh,  but  that  whid 
is  bom  of  the  Spirit  is  spirit :"  and  though  there  is  and  will  be 
a  contest  between  these  two  opposites,  flesh  and  spirit,  yet  if 
we  are  truly  converted,  the  spirit  will  get  the  ascendency ;  and 
though  for  a  while  nature  and  grace  may  struggle  in  the  wonb 
of  a  converted  soul,  like  Jacob  and  Esau,  yet  the  elder  shall 
serve  the  younger,  Jacob  shall  supplant  and  turn  out  Esaa,  or 
at  least  keep  him  under :  God  grant  we  may  all  thus  proTe 
that  we  are  converted.  This  conversion,  however  it  begins  at 
home,  will  soon  walk  abroad ;  as  the  Virgin  Mary  was  soon 
found  out  to  be  with  child,  so  it  will  be  soon  found  out  whether 
Christ  is  formed  in  the  heart.  There  will  be  new  principles, 
new  ways,  new  company,  new  works ;  there  will  be  a  thorough 
change  in  the  heart  and  life ;  this  is  conversion :  at  first  it 
begins  with  terror  and  legal  sorrow,  afterwards  it  leads  to  joy- 
fulness;  first  we  work  for  spiritual  life,  afterwards  from  it:  firet 
We  are  in  bondage,  afterwards  we  receive  the  Spirit  of  adoption 
to  long  and  thirst  for  God,  because  he  has  been  pleased  to  let 
us  know  that  he  will  take  us  to  heaven.  Conversion  means  a 
being  turned  from  hell  to  heaven,  from  the  world  to  God.  W« 
have  not  so  much  as  asked  a  person  to  sell  his  all,  to  leave  his 
shop,  to  lay  any  thing  at  our  feet :  when  we  talk  of  beiog  coi- 


LXII.]  RBPBNTANCB   AND   COMVBRSiON.  Q65 

verted  from  the  world,  we  mean  being  conyerted  irom  the  love 
of  it ;  the  heart  once  touched  with  the  magnet  of  divine  love, 
ever  after  turns  to  the  pole.  I  think  it  is  said  of  a  sunflower, 
though  I  question  whether  it  will  always  hold  true,  that  it  turns 
to  the  sun ;  I  am  sure  it  is  true  of  the  Redeemer's  flowers  that 
grow  in  his  garden,  they  not  only  look  to  the  sun,  but  they  find 
fresh  life,  warmth,  and  transforming  influence,  from  him  who  is 
their  all  in  all.  Here  Christianity  appears  in  its  glory ;  here 
the  work  done  is  worthy  the  Son  of  God.  To  be  converted 
only  to  a  party,  is  that  worth  Christ's  coming  from  heaven  to 
earth  for — that  we  might  have  a  set  of  principles  without  having 
them  affect  the  heart?  For  to  be  baptized  when  young,  or,  as 
some,  to  come  out  of  the  water  at  age,  and  turn  out  as  bad  as 
ever,  is  a  plain  proof  of  the  necessity  of  being  baptized  by  the 
Holy  Ghost. 

What  say  you  to  this  change,  my  dear  souls  ?  Is  it  not  god* 
like,  is  it  not  divine,  is  it  not  heaven  brought  down  to  the  soul? 
have  you  felt  it,  have  you  experienced  it?  I  begin  to  catechize 
you  already,  for  I  could  spend  a  whole  sermon  in  speaking  of 
conversion;  but  I  am  afraid  those  that  sit  under  the  gospel 
bave  more  need  of  heat  than  light :  would  to  Grod  we  bad  as 
much  warmth  in  our  hearts,  as  light  in  our  understandings  t 
But  if  there  be  any  of  you  here  that  are  not  yet  converted,  upon 
"what  grounds  do  you  hope  for  conversion  ?  Give  me  leave  to 
say,  that  you  ought  to  repent  and  be  converted,  for  till  then  you 
never  can,  never  will,  never  shall,  find  true  rest  for  your  souls^ 
What  wrong  notions  have  people  got  of  conversion  !  they  think 
it  is  a  wretched  thing,  and  dread  being  converted  ;  not  knowing 
what  it  is,  they  think  it  is  a  frightful  thing.  I  knew  one  some 
time  ago  that  came  to  some  Methodists ;  dear,  says  the  person, 
you  are  cheerful,  I  could  be  glad  if  I  were  a  Methodist  too,  if 
there  were  a  majority  of  them  in  the  land  :  but  God  help  us  to 
fro  to  heaven  with  the  minority,  if  the  majority  will  not  follow. 
But,  my  dear  hearers,  there  is  not  a  single  soul  of  you  all  that 
are  satisfied  in  your  stations:  is  not  the  language  of  your  hearts 
when  apprentices.  We  think  we  shall  do  very  well  when  journey- 
men ;  when  journeymen,  that  we  should  do  very  well  when  masters ; 
when  single,  that  we  shall  do  well  when  married ;  and  to  be  sure 
you  think  you  shall  well  when  you  keep  a  carriage.  I  have  heard 
of  one  who  began  low :  he  first  wanted  a  house,  then,  says  he, 
I  want  two,  then  four,  then  six ;  and  when  he  had  them,  he 
said,  I  think  I  want  nothing  else ;  yes,  says  his  friend,  you  will 
soon  want  another  thing,  that  is,  a  hearse-and-six  to  carry  you 
to  your  grave ;  and  that  made  him  tremble.  O  if  you  are  Chris-^ 
tians,  if  the  Lord  love  you,  he  will  put  a  thorn  in  your  flesh.  I 
have  often  thought  of  what  a  good  man  says  in  his  diary— the 
Lord  put  a  thorn  in  my  flesh.  Among  politicians,  when  they 
find  a  man  ambitious,  they  say,  kick  him  up,  that  he  may  fall 
and  break  his  neck :  so  it  is  in  every  condition ;  there  is  not 
one  of  you  fifty  years  old,  but  have  had  many  changes:  have 
iiot  you  found  thoras  even  on  the  rose  that  smelt  so  sweet,  and 


066  REPBNTANCB   AND   CONVERSION.  [LZII. 

thorns  perhaps  that  pricked  you  so  closely,  that  you  have  for- 
got the  scent  of  the  rose  by  it?  And  what  is  all  this  for,  but 
to  teach  you  that  happiness  is  only  to  be  found  in  the  Lord.  If 
a  soul  is  truly  converted,  there  will  be  a  battle,  and  an  awful 
chasm,  that  will  never  be  filled  up  but  with  the  love  of  Crod; 
and  therefore  when  we  say,  Repent  and  be  converted,  it  is  no 
more  than  saying.  Repent  and  be  happy.  Indeed  we  shall  never 
be  completely  happy  till  we  get  to  heaven.  O  that  every  man 
could  see  the  good  of  every  thing  of  a  sublunary  nature  dn^ 
off  like  leaves  in  autumn :  God  grant  this  may  be  known  by 
every  one  of  you ! 

If  it  be  asked,  why  you  should  repent  and  be  converted t 
I  answer,   because  else  you  can   never  be  happy  hereafter. 
What  do  you  think  heaven  is  7    Why,  says  the  covetous  maa, 
I  think  it  is  a  place  full  of  gold :  so  you  think  to  steal  some  oft 
the  gold,  do  you  ?    Others  would  like  heaven  very  well  if  then 
were  a  good  gaming-table  in  heaven ;  if  there  were  card  play- 
ing in  heaven.    I  have  heard  of  a  lady  that  was  so  fond  of 
gaming,  that  though  she  had  the  pangs  of  death  upon  her,  yet 
when  in  the  midst  of  her  fits,  or  just  coming  out  of  one,  inst^ 
of  asking  after  Jesus,  where  he  was  to  be  found,  she  asked, 
what  is  trumps  l    So  the  gamester  will  ask,  where  is  the  bad- 
gammon  table  ?  where  is  the  box  ?     He  will  want  to  shake  his 
ungodly  hand  in  heaven ;  he  will  say,  let  us  have  a  gaming- 
table in  heaven,  where,  as  he  will  find,  he  has  lost  the  game; 
that  God  has  damned  him,  without  an  interest  in  Christ.  ''Can 
two  walk  together  unless  they  are  agreed?*'    If  you  die,  and  do 
not  love  God  here,  if  you  cannot  love  praying  to  God  here,  and 
cannot  watch  one  hour,  suppose  you  were  to  be  struck  by  death 
and  be  taken  to  heaven,  there  is  no  such  language  and  amuse- 
ment there,  what  would  you  do  ?  Why,  say  you,  these  Method- 
ists are  presumptuous  people,  they  can  tell  us  whether  we  are 
to  go  to  heaven,  or  no.     Good  Mr.  Rogers,  a  Welsh  Boanerges, 
preaching  in  the  mountains,  said,  Christ  is  heaven,  if  I  worship 
God  here,  and  do  all  to  God,  and  for  God,  without  any  hopes 
of  reward  upon  the  earth.     My  dear  brethren,  the  devils  wooid 
never  be  troubled  with  such  a  wretch  in  hell,  he  would  set  all 
hell  in  an  uproar ;  if  a  true  Methodist  were  to  go  to   hell,  the 
devil  would  say.  Turn  that  Methodist  out,  he  is  come  to  tormeot 
us :  therefore  you  must  be  converted,  if  you  will  go  to  heavcD. 
Dr.  Scott  says,  if  a  natural  man  were  to  be  put  into  heaven,  it 
would  be  such  a  hell  to  him,  that  he  would  be  glad  to  go  to  hell 
for  shelter:  angels  they  hate,  God  they  hate;  and,  as  Adam 
was  afraid  to  meet  with  God  when  he  first  fell  from  him,  so  bis 
sons  hate  God  and  flee  away. 

I  mention  one  thing  more,  which  is,  that  you  must  be  con- 
verted or  be  damned,  and  that  is  plain  English,  but  not  plainer 
than  my  Master  made  use  of, ''  He  that  believetb  not  shall  be 
damned."  I  did  not  speak  that  word  strong  enough  that  says, 
*'  He  that  believetb  not  shall  be  damned  ;"  that  is  the  language 
of  our  Lord :  and  it  is  said  of  one  of  the  primitive  preacher»-4o 


I.XI1.]  BBPENTANCB  AMD   CONVBHSIOK.  007 

xised  to  speak  the  wordilaninedyso  that  it  strack  all  his  aaditorj. 
We  are  afraid  of  speaking  the  word  damned  for  fear  of  offending 
such  and  sach  a  one ;  at  the  same  time  they  despise  the  minister 
for  not  being  honest  to  his  Master.  Some  have  said,  and  stand 
to  it,  that  hell  is  only  a  temporary  punishment :  who  told  them 
sio?  A  temporary  punishment!  Nothing  but  a  guilty  conscience. 
O  go  to  Bedlam !  Do  ask  a  child  of  God  what  he  feels  when  his 
Ix>rd  is  absent?  Ask  the  spouse  what  she  felt. when  she  cried, 
**  Saw  ye  him  whom  my  soul  loveth  ?"  Ask  a  child  of  God,  when 
be  is  using  this  plaintive  language, '^  Why  standest  thou  afar 
off,  O  Lord  ?"  And  he  will  tell  you.  It  is  hell  to  my  soul  to  be  but 
one  moment  without  the  presence  of  my  Beloved.  And  if  his 
absence  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour  can  scarce  be  borne  by  a  child 
of  God,  whatmust  that  soul  undergo  that  is  commanded  to  depart 
from  him  for  ever?  And  yet  these  very  words  were  said  to  those 
that  thought  they  bid  fair  for  heaven ;  to  these  Jesus  says,  *'  I 
know  ye  not."  God  grant  you  may  never  know  the  meaning  of 
these  words  by  awful  experience !  Now,  what  say  you  ?  I  could 
make  a  hundred  heads  more,  but  I  choose  to  make  as  few  as  pos- 
sible, that  you  may  remember  them.  I  say,  conversion  makes 
you  happy  hereafter,  and  without  it  you  are  damned  for  ever. 

"Are  these  things  so?*'  Why  then,  my  dear  hearers,  do  you 
think  there  can  be  any  objection  raised  against  conversion, 
do  you  think  there  can  be  any  argument  raised  against  turning 
to  God  directly  ?  Is  there  any  person  here,  that  will  give  himself 
time  to  consider  a  moment,  that  will  not  say.  Though  you  speak 
in  a  rough,  incoherent  manner,  yet  there  is  some  truth  in  what 
you  say  ?  I  believe  men  ought  to  be  converted,  but  the  common 
saying  is,  I  do  not  care  to  be  converted  yet ;  we  think  it  is  time 
enough  to  be  converted.  Is  not  this  acting  like  the  cardinal, 
^hcn  told  he  was  elected  pope,  and  desired  to  come  that  night 
and  have  the  honour  of  pope  conferred  on  him ;  because  it  was 
pretty  late,  said.  It  is  not  a  work  of  darkness,  I  will  put  it  off  till 
the  morning :  before  which  they  chose  another  pope,  and  he  lost 
his  triple  crown.  You  may  think  to  put  it  off  till  the  morning, 
though  before  the  morning  you  may  be  damned.  Pray  why  will 
you  not  be  converted  now  ?  If  you  were  in  prison,  and  a  person 
"would  take  you  out,  you  would  choose  to  be  let  out  to-night 
before  morning,  that  you  might  sleep  the  better ;  why  will  you 
not  do  that  for  your  soul,  you  would  for  your  body  ?  Well,  I 
would  be  converted,  but  I  shall  be  laughed  at :  suppose  you  were 
to  have  it  promised  you  should  have  a  ten  thousand  pound  lot- 
tery ticket,  but  you  must  be  laughed  at  all  your  life-time ;  there 
is  none  but  would  say.  Give  me  the  ten  thousand  pounds,  and 
call  me  Methodist  as  long  as  I  live :  so,  if  you  loved  God  and  your 
souls,  you  would  say.  Give  me  God,  and  call  me  what  you  will. 
You  are  afraid  of  being  laughed  at  and  nick-named,  and  skulk 
into  this  and  that  place,  because  it  does  not  stink  so  much  of 
Methodism  as  this.  Put  your  cockades  in  your'  hats,  and  let  the 
world  see  that  you  are  not  ashamed  of  God's  badge:  let  the  devil 
and  his  agents  preach  to  you ;  they  can  proclaim  their  sin  like 


668  SSPBNTANCB  AND   CONVSRSIOK.  [lICII. 

Sodom ;  they  are  not  ashamed  of  going  to  balls  and  assemblies, 
to  parties  of  pleasure,  and  subscribing  to  horse-races.  Is  the 
gospel  the  glory  of  the  land,  and  are  you  ashamed  of  the  gospel  t 
What  think  you,  if  you  had  given  a  hundred  pounds  to  leara 
such  a  trade,  would  you  say,  I  shall  never  attain  it  ?  no,  you  will 
persevere,  and  by  giving  diligence  make  an  excellent  mechanic, 
an  admirable  tradesman ;  and  do  you  think  to  go  to  heaven  with- 
out some  trouble?  Do  you  think  the  leopard  can  change  his 
spots,  the  Ethiopian  put  his  skin  entirely  off?  Can  we  have  any 
thing  to  nourish  our  bodies,  without  the  labour  of  particular  per* 
sons  ?  And  therefore  we  are  commanded  *'  to  work  out  our  sal- 
vation with  fear  and  trembling/'  Remember,  our  Redeemer 
''will  not  quench  the  smoking  flax,  nor  break  the  bruised  reed; 
be  will  gently  lead  those  that  are  with  young/'  We  are  like  poor 
swimmers :  some  people  will  put  one  foot  in  and  cry  oh !  and 
then  another,  but  a  good  swimmer  plunges  in  at  once,  and  comes 
out  braced  up :  would  to  God  we  could  do  so,  plunge  into  God 
at  once,  and  God  will  bear  up  our  souls  indeed. 

But,  say  you,  all  in  good  time,  I  do  not  choose  to  be  converted 
yet;  why,  what  age  are  you  now?  I  will  come  down  to  a  pretty 
moderate' age ;  suppose  you  are  fourteen :  and  do  not  you  thisk 
it  time  to  be  converted  ?  And  yet  there  are  a  great  many  here, 
I  dare  say,  twenty  years  old,  and  not  converted.  Some  are  of 
opinion,  that  most  people  that  are  converted,  are  so  before 
thirty.  There  was  a  young  man  buried  last  night  at  Tottenham* 
court  but  seventeen,  an  early  monument  of  free  grace !  Are  yoi 
forty  or  fifty,  is  not  that  time  ?  Is  it  time  for  the  poor  prisoners 
to  be  converted,  that  are  to  be  hanged  to-morrow  morning?  If  it 
is  time  for  tbem,  it  is  time  for  you,  for  you  may  be  dead  before 
them.  There  was  a  poor  woman,  but  two  or  three  days  ago, 
thatwas  damning  and  cursing  most  shockingly ;  now  she  is  a  d^ 
corpse, — was  taken  suddenly,  and  died  away.  God  grant  that 
may  not  be  the  case  with  any  of  you ;  the  only  way  to  prevent  it 
is,  to  be  enabled  to  think  that "  now  is  an  accepted  time,  that  DOir 
is  the  day  of  salvation."  Let  me  look  round,  and  what  doyoa 
suppose  I  was  thinking  ?  Why,  that  it  is  a  mercy  we  have  not 
been  in  hell  a  thousand  times.  How  many  are  there  in  hell  tbat 
used  to  say.  Lord  convert  me,  but  not  now  ?  One  of  the  good 
old  Puritans  says,  hell  is  paved  with  good  intentions.  Now, 
can  you  blame  me,  can  you  blame  the  ministers  of  Christ,  if  tbis 
is  the  case,  can  you  blame  us  for  calling  after  you,  for  spending 
and  being  spent  for  your  souls  ?  It  is  easy  for  you  to  come  to 
hear  the  gospel,  but  you  do  not  know  what  nights  and  days  we 
have ;  what  pangs  we  have  in  our  hearts,  and  "  how  we  travail 
in  birth  till  Jesus  Christ  be  formed  in  your  souls."  Men,  bre- 
thren, and  fathers,  hearken ;  God  help  you,  save,  save,  save 
yourselves  "from  an  untoward  generation."  To-night  some- 
body sits  up  with  the  prisoners ;  if  they  find  any  of  them  asleep, 
or  no  sign  of  their  being  awake,  they  knock  and  call,  and  the 
keepers  cry,  awake !  and  I  have  heard  that  the  present  ordioaiy 
sits  up  with  them  all  the  night  before  their  execution :  theitfoiVr 


L.X11.]  REPENTANCE   AND   CONVERSION.  669 

do  not  be  angry  with  mc  if  I  knock  at  your  doors^  and  cry,  poor 
sioDerfly  awake !  awake!  and  God  help  thee  to  take  care  that 
thou  dost  not  sleep  in  an  unconverted  state  to-night.  The  court 
ia  Jast  sitting,  the  executioner  stands  ready,  and  before  to-mor- 
row, long  before  to-morrow,  Jesus  may  say  of  some  of  you,  *'  Bind 
tbem  hand  and  foot." 

The  prisoners  to-morrow  will  have  their  hands  tied  behind  them, 
their  thumb-strings  must  be  put  on,  and  their  fetters  knocked 
off;  they  must  be  tied  fast  to  the  cart,  the  cap  put  over  their 
&ce8y  and  the  dreadful  signal  given :  if  you  were  their  relations, 
woold  not  you  weep?  Do  not  be  angry  then  with  a  poor  minister 
for  weeping  over  them  that  will  not  weep  for  themselves.  If  you 
laagh  at  me,  I  know  Jesus  smiles.  I  cannot  force  a  cry  when  I 
will ;  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  praised,  "  I  am  free  from  the 
blood  of  you  all :"  if  you  are  damned  for  want  of  conversion, 
remember  you  are  not  damned  for  want  of  warning.  Thousands 
that  have  no  gospel  preached  to  them,  may  say,  Lord,  we  never 
beard  what  conversion  is  :  but  you  are  gospel-proof;  and  if  there 
Ifl  any  deeper  place  in  hell  than  other,  God  will  order  a  gospel- 
despising  Methodist  to  be  put  in  there.  You  will  have  dreadful 
torments ;  to  whom  so  much  is  given, much  will  be  required.  How 
dreadful  to  have  minister  after  minister,  preacher  after  preacher, 
say,  **  Lord  God,  I  preached,  but  they  would  not  hear."  Think 
of  this,  professors,  and  God  make  you  possessors  ! 

You  that  do  possess  a  little,  and  are  really  converted,  God 
convert  you  and  me  every  hour  in  the  day ;  for  tlicre  is  not  a 
believer  in  the  world,  but  has  got  something  in  him  that  he 
vbould  be  converted  from ;  the  pulling  down  of  the  old  house, 
and  building  up  the  new  one,  will  be  a  work  till  death.  Do  not 
think  I  am  speaking  to  the  unconverted  only,  but  to  you  that 
ue  converted.  God  convert  you  from  lying  a- bed  in  the  morn- 
ing; God  convert  you  from  your  conformity  to  the  world ;  God 
convert  you  from  lukewarmness ;  God  convert  us  from  ten  thou- 
pand  things  which  our  own  hearts  must  say  we  want  to  be  con- 
Torted  from;  then  you  will  have  the  Spirit  of  the  living  God. 
Do  not  get  into  a  cursed  Antinomian  way  of  thinking,  and  say, 
I  thank  God,  I  have  the  root  of  the  matter  in  me :  I  thamk  God, 
fhat  I  was  converted  twenty  or  thirty  years  ago ;  and  once  in 
Christ  always  in  Christ ;  and  though  I  can  go  to  a  public  house 
and  play  at  cards,  or  the  like,  yet,  I  bless  God,  I  am  converted. 
Whether  you  was  converted  formerly  or  not,you  jue  perverted  now; 
luid  may  God  convert  you  all  to  close  Christianity  with  God ! 

You  that  are  old  professors,  do  not  draw  young  ones  back 
from  God,  by  saying,  Ah !  you  will  come  down  from  the  mount 
by  and  by ;  you  will  not  always  be  so  hot :  and  instead  of  en- 
eoaraging  poor  souls,  you  will  pull  them  down,  because  you 
bave  left  your  first  love ;  would  you  have  Jesus  Christ  catch  you 
napping,  with  your  lamps  untrimmed  ? 

O  ye  servants  of  the  most  high  God,  if  any  of  you  are  here  to- 
night, though  I  am  the  chief  of  sinners,  and  the  least  of  all  saints, 
coffer  the  word  of  exhortation.    I  am  sure  I  preach  feelingly 


670  IlfPROVEM£NT    OP   APPLICTIOMS.  [LXIII. 

DOW ;  God  knows  I  seldom  sleep  after  three  in  the  morning;  I 
pray  every  inoming>  Lord,  convert  me,  and  make  me  more  a  new 
creature  to-day.  I  know  I  want  to  be  conyerted  from  a  thonsaDd 
things,  and  from  ten  thousand  more:  Lord  God,  confirm  me; 
Lord  Grod,  revive  his  work. 

You  young  people,  T  charge  you  to  consider ;  God  help  yoi 
to  repent  and  be  converted,  who  woo's  and  invites  yon.  Yoa 
middle-aged  people,  O  that  you  would  repent  and  be  converted. 
You  old  gray-headed  people.  Lord  make  you  repent  and  be 
converted,  that  you  may  thereby  prove  that  your  sins  are  blotted 
out.  O  I  could  preach  till  I  preached  myself  dead  ;  I  could  be 
glad  to  preach  myself  dead,  if  God  would  convert  yon  !  O  God 
bless  his  work  on  you,  that  you  may  blossom  and  bring  forth 
fruits  unto  God.    Amen  and  Amen. 


SERMON  LXIIL 

GLORIFYING    GOD    IN   THE   FIRE  ;     OR,    THE    RIGHT    IMPROTE- 

MENT   OP    AFFLICTIONS. 

Wherefore,  glorify  ye  the  Lord  in  the  fires. — Isaiah  xxiv.  15. 
You  have  oft,  ray  dear  hearers,  let  me  tell  yoo,  met  with  afflic- 
tion ;  and  I  believe  you  may  persuade  yourselves  affliction  Lsat 
hand,  which  makes  such  deep  impressions,  when  sent  and  bless- 
ed by  heaven,  as  to  thaw  the  very  heart.  Faith,  like  some 
glasses  to  view  objects  near  us,  sets  them  in  so  strong  a  light, 
that  we  cannot  help  being  affected  with  the  weight  of  the  Im- 
pression ;  hence  the  prophets,  when  under  a  divine  impulse, 
foresaw  things  at  a  distance;  spoke  and  wrote  of  them  as 
though  actually  present.  *'  They  sung  both  of  judgment  and 
mercy,"  in  such  strong  and  persuasive  strains,  as  to  convince  of 
the  reality  of  their  existence.  Isaiah,  w*ho  had  a  courtly  educa- 
tion, being  probably  brother  to  a  king,  seems  to  excel  in  tins 
kind  of  speaking ;  a  person  of  good  natural,  as  well  as  acquired 
abilities,  which  being  tempered  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  made  him  a 
kind  of  an  angel  of  an  orator,  of  a  writer,  and  a  prophet.  When 
he  penned  this  chapter,  he  probably  foresaw  the  dreadful  cala- 
mities coming  on  the  land :  and  so  strong  was  his  persuasroii, 
that  he  writes  as  though  he  saw  the  things  taking  place. 
*'  Behold,  (say  s  he,)  the  Lord  maketh  the  earth  empty,  maketh  it, 
waste,  and  tumeth  it  upside  down,  and  scattereth  abroad  the  in* 
habitants  thereof."  How  much  is  expressed  in  a  few  words!  ^As 
with  the  people,  so  witfi  the  priests,"  who,  perhaps,  on  account  of 
their  situation  in  the  church,  might  think  they  should  be  exempt- 
ed; but  if  the  priests  sin  with  the  people,  they  shall  be  punifbed 
with  the  people.  ''As  with  the  servant,  so  with  his  master ;  as  witk 
the  maid,  so  with  her  mistress ;  as  with  the  buyer,  so  with  the  seiieff ; 
as  with  the  lender,  so  with  the  borrower ;  as  with  the  taker  o£ 
usury,  so  with  the  giver  of  usury  to  him."  So  you  see  that  tfie  visi- 
tation would  be  universal ;  that  it  should  fall  on  all  sorts  of  people. 
Ver.  3.  **  The  land  shall  be  utterly  emptied  and  utterly  spoiled :" 
probably,  by  a  foreign  foe  taking  advantage  of  the  domestic 


LXIII.]  IMPROVEMBNT   OP   AFFLICTIONS.  671 

confusions,  who  shall  destroy  the  fruits  of  the  earth.  Some  may 
think,  perhaps,  that  this  will  never  come  to  pass;  but  saith 
Isaiah, ''  The  Lord  hath  spoken  it."  It  pleased  Grod  the  nation 
should  be  devoted  to  a  dreadful  stroke:  ''The  earth  mourneth 
and  fadeth  away,  the  world  languisheth  and  fddeth  away,  the 
haughty  people  of  the  earth  do  languish,"  whose  crimes,  one 
would  think,  would  never  be  brought  to  punishment,  on  account 
of  the  eminence  of  their  stations;  they  thought  themselves  out 
of  danger,  but  they  shall  feel  the  common  scourge :  ''  For  the 
earth  sdso,"  as  in  die  fifth  verse,  '^  is  defiled  under  the  inhabi- 
tants thereof;  because  they  have  transgressed  the  laws,  changed 
the  ordinances,  broken  the  everlasting  covenant.*'  God  did  not 
strike  without  a  cause ;  for  the  earth  groaned,  as  it  were,  under 
the  sins  of  the  inhabitants,  for  their  neglect  of  religion,  for  dis- 
owning God,  for  turning  their  back  on  the  Most  High.  **  There- 
fore hath  the  curse  devoured  the  earth,  (ver.  6.)  and  they  that 
dwell  therein  are  desolate."  He  does  not  say  it  shall  be,  but  it 
is  done.  "  The  inhabitants,  of  the  earth  are  burned,"  with 
dreadful  fire  of  consuming  vengeance,  ''and  few  men  left."  All 
the  merry-hearted,  that  minded  nothing  but  jollity  and  mirth, 
even  "  they  do  sigh.  «  The  joy  of  the  harp  ceaseth ;  they  shall 
not  drink  wine  with  a  song,  strong  drink  shall  be  bitter  to  them 
that  drink  it.  The  (very  great)  city  (the  metropolis)  is  broken 
down;  every  house  is  shut  up,  because  desolation  is  left  in  it." 
The  inhabitants  forsake  it,  their  houses  are  left,  shut  up,  because 
they  are  afraid  some  foreign  power  should  come  to  their  de- 
struction. "There  is  a  crying  for  wine  in  the  streets,  all  joy  is 
is  darkened,  the  mirth  of  the  land  is  gone :"  no  plays,  no  routs, 
no  assemblies  now ;  "  the  city  is  left  desolate,"  the  court  not 
excepted ;  desolation  herself  takes  her  seat,  and  ravages  there. 
''  The  earth  shall  reel  to  and  fro  like  a  drunkard,  and  shall  be 
removed  like  a  cottage ;  and  the  transgressions  thereof  shall  be 
heavy  upon  it,  and  it  shall  fall,  and  not  rise  again."  What  an 
amazing  scene  is  this !  enough  to  fill  us  with  horror,  even  at  this 
distance  of  time  and  place !  But  is  there  no  way  for  escape  ?  Is 
there  no  light  breaking  through  this  dark  shade  7  Blessed  be 
God,  there  is ;  look  at  ver.  13.  you  will  find  in  the  midst  of  dan- 
gers, God  shall  lend  his  presence.  "When  thus  it  shall  be, 
(pray  mind  that,)  "  in  the  midst  of  the  land  among  the  people, 
what  follows  ?  "  there  shall  be  as  the  shaking  of  an  olive  tree, 
and  as  the  gleaning  grapes  when  the  vintage  is  done ;"  there 
shall  be  a  few  godly  people  left,  let  the  devil  do  what  he  will ; 
bat  there  will  be  but  few.  You  know,  after  the  people  have 
gathered  the  fruits  from  the  tree,  they  shake  it  to  bring  down 
tlie  remainder;  and  after  reaping  of  corn,  there  are  a  few  glean- 
ings :  so  the  Lk>rd  says,  it  shall  destroy  most  people,  yet  in  so 
discriminating  a  way,  that  God's  people  should  be  safe. 

I  cannot  well  recollect  how  archbishop  Usher  applies  this ; 
but  this  I  am  sure  he  says,  there  will  certainly  come  a  time 
iffben  the  world  will  undergo  the  greatest  scourge  that  ever  it 
felt,  which  shall  chiefly  fall  on  the  outward-court  worshippers. 


9» 

I 

9> 


673  IMPItOVEMBKT  OP  AFFLICTIOHS.  [LXUL 

upon  those  that  know  not  God ;  God  will  take  particnlar  cam 
of  secnring  hia  own ;  and  when  the  wicked  are  all  destroyed,  the 
Christians  shall  go  to  a  little  city,  and  there  shall  dwell  in  Gosben* 
till  God  shall  call  home  his  ancient  people  the  Jews.     So  God 
will  take  care  of  his  people,  that  they  shall  be  safe  :  pray  look 
to  ver.  14.  "  they  shall  lift  np  their  voice ;"  what,  to  cry  ?  No, 
they  have  done  with  prayers,  they  have  done  with  fasting;  they 
have  lifted  up  their  voice,  and  often  exhorted  their  neighboun 
to  ''flee  fron  the  wrath  to  come;"  but  now  they  shall  singfiiff 
the  majesty  of  God ;  when  all  people  are  mourning,  they  shall 
rejoice.    And  at  the  great  day,  when  Jesus  Christ  pronounoei 
the  wicked  damned, ''  Depart,  ye  cursed,"  God's  people  will  tbco 
lift  up  their  voices  with  majesty  and  triumph ;  which  made  a 
good  man  say  to  his  son,  just  before  he  died,  1  am  afraid  1  sbtll 
never  see  thee  any  more  till  I  hear  Jesus  Christ  say  unto  the^ 
**  Depart,  thou  cursed  V    Some  years  ago,  being  present  attiw 
trial  of  a  very  vile  person  at  the  Old  Bailey,  and  being  in  sos- 
pcnce  whether  he  would  be  brought  in  guilty  or  no,  when  tbi 
word  ''  guilty"  came,  and  the  people  heard  of  it,  they  did  k 
effect  give  an  eclat  to  it;  whether  just  or  unjust,  I  thought  it 
was  an  emblem  of  that  awful  day,  when  all  the  angels  of  God 
and  his  saints  shall  say  Amen  ;  when  God  consigns  the  wicked 
to  hell :  God  grant  this  may  not  be  any  of  your  case !     Says  tks 
prophet,  **  They  shall  cry  aloud  from  the  sea :"  some  of  them  may 
be  on  the  other  side  of  the  water,  gone  abroad,  while  others  staj 
at  home ;   but  whether  at  home  or  abroad,  though  they  ban 
been  banished  by  persecution,  though  they  have  been  driven  to 
the  other  side  of  the  water,  which  has  been  the  case  of  manr 
persons  before  now,  "  yet  they  shall  cry  aloud  ;"  they  shall  fiad 
the  same  God  abroad  as  they  did  at  home.    A  judge  said  to  a 
good  old  Christian  that  was  persecuted  in  Charles  II.'s  time,  I 
will  banish  you  to  America  :  says  she,  Very  well,  you  cannot 
send  me  out  of  my  Father's  country.  They  shall  cry  aloud  froa 
the  sea,  "  Wherefore  glorify  ye  the  Ijord  in  the  fires ;"  if  this  ii 
the  case,  the  prophet  draws  the  inference :  what  must  they  do 
under  these  circumstances ;  why,  they  must  study  how  to  gkrilf 
God  in  the  fires,  not  how  to  escape  or  run  away  from  bin,  hot 
how  to  glorify  him ;  "  wherefore,"  saith  he, "  glorify  me,"  glorify 
me  the  Lord,  **  in  the  fires ;"  not  the  fire,  in  the  singular  number, 
but  in  the  plural  number,  fires.    We  are,  my  brethren,  very  much 
mistaken,  if  we  think  we  have  but  one  fire  to  go  through. 

Thee  words  imply,  in  order  to  bring  them  home  to  ourselveit 
that  all  God's  people  must  be  put  into, the  fires.  Fire  some* 
times  denotes  the  love  of  God,  sometimes  the  work  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  and  very  often  it  denotes  affliction ;  therefore  theapostlo 
talks  ot  a  *'  fiery  trial ;"  and  let  it  be  of  whatever  kind  it  will,  let 
it  be  ponumind,  body,  or  estate;  whether  it  comes  from  friend 
or  foe,  or  whether  it  comes  immediately  from  the  hand  of  God 
himself  upon  the  soul,  it  may  well  be  compared  to  fire,  for  yot 
all  know  that  fire  scorches :  God  expects,  when  he  strikes,  tbtt 
wfi  should  feel.    Of  all  things  in  the  worid  to  be  avoided,  a  stooy 


LXllI.]  lliPBOVBMEKT  OF*  AFPL1CTIOK8.  673 

heart,  or  a  stupidity  under  God's  afflicting  band»  is  most  to  be 

deprecated.    I  suppose  you  have  beard  of  the  Stoics,*  with 

whom  the  apostle  Paul  disputed  in  the  place  of  public  traffic  in 

Athens.    Paul  did  not  take  a  walk  to  Change  to  talk  en  trade, 

he  went  to  talk  about  Jesus  Christ,  if  he  could  meet  with  one  to 

talk  with :  I  wish  the  clergy  took  no  other  walks  but  these. 

Every  thing  is  to  be  tried  by  fire ;  we  may  talk  what  we  please, 

but  we  shall  never  know  what  metal  we  are  made  of,  till  God 

puts  us  into  the  fire.     It  is  very  easy  talking  what  wo  can  bear, 

and  what  we  can  do,  but  let  God  lay  bis  hand  on  us,  and  we 

shall  see  what  we  are.    We  are  apt  to  find  iiiult,  and  be  peevish 

iF^lth  our  friends  and  relations,  under  such  circumstances ;  they 

are  apt  to  say,  you  should  be  patient,  and  patient,  and  patient ; 

ah !  put  these  reprovers  into  the  same  furnace,  and  see  how 

patient  they  will  be :  they  say,  there  is  no  putting  old  men's 

heads  upon  young  men's  shoulders ;  and  there  is  no  putting  old 

heads  upon  souls  young  in  experience.    The  devil  knew  very 

well  how  it  was,  when  he  said,  **  Hast  thou  not  made  an  hedge 

about  Job,  and  about  his  house,  and  about  all  that  he  hath  on 

every  side ;  thou  hast  blessed  the  work  of  his  hands,  and  his 

substance  is  increased  in  the  land ;  but  put  forth  thy  hand  now, 

and  touch  all  that  he  hath,  and  he  will  curse  thee  to  thy  face :" 

so  we  should  all  do,  if  God  were  to  leave  us  to  ourselves,  and 

our  faith  is  not  of  the  right  sort. 

How  shall  we  know  if  our  faith  is  good  ?  We  often  pray.  Lord, 
give  us  Abraham's  faith,  but  never  pray,  give  us  Abraham's  tiial 
at  the  same  time.  I  was  once  in  Scotland,  at  a  great  man's 
house,  where  several  rich  people  were,  that  knew  Jesus  Christ : 
God  having  blessed  my  labours  at  a  former  visit,  I  was  desired 
by  the  noblemen  to  pray ;  and  I  remember,  I  prayed  the  Lord 
to  give  us  great  faith  and  patience : — O,  said  Satan,  as  strong  as 
if  he  had  spoke  to  me,  do  not  pray  for  that,  for  thou  shalt  have 
great  trials.  O,  said  I,  if  that  be  the  case,  I  will  turn  the  de- 
vil's prayer  against  himself;  and  I  prayed,  *'0  Lord,  give  us 
great  grace,  and  never  mind  what  trials."  Often,  when  we  are 
under  temptations,  God  takes  us  at  our  words :  O,  says  one, 
what  a  prayer  I  had,  I  prayed  for  iaith  and  patience ;  I  was 
upon  the  mount,  and  never  thought  of  coming  down,  and  feeling 
a  storm  again. 

Fire,  my  brethren,  not  only  bums  and  purges,  but  yon  know  it 
separates  one  thing  from  another,  and  is  made  use  of  in  chemis- 
try and  mechanical  businesses.  What  could  we  do  without  fire  ? 
It  tries  metal,  to  purge  it.  God  Almighty  knows,  we  are  often 
purged  more  in  one  hour  by  a  good  sound  trial,  than  by  a  thou-* 
sand  manifestations  of  his  love.  It  is  a  fine  thing  to  come  puri- 
iled,  to  come  pardoned,  out  of  the  furnace  of  affliction ;  it  is 
intended  to  purge  us,  ^'  to  separate  the  precious  from  the  vile, 
the  chaff  from  the  wheat;"  and  God,  in  order  to  do  this,  is 
pleased  to  put  us  into  one  fire  alYer  another,  which  makes  me 

*  They  tanght,  that  a  wise  man  abovld  be  free  ihnn  all  affoctiona  and  paaaiona 
trfialioeTer. 

♦  2t 


(fH  IMPROVEMENT  OP  APPLICTION8.  [LXIII. 

love  to  sec  a  good  man  under  afflictions^  because  it  teaches 
something  of  the  work  of  Grod  in  the  heart.     I  remember,  some 
years  ago,  when  I  first  preached  in  the  north  of  England,  at 
Shields,  near  Newcastle,  I  went  into  a  glass-house,  and  stand- 
ing very  attentive,  I  saw  several  masses  of  burning  glass,  of 
various  forms :  the  workman  took  one  piece  of  glass  and  put  it 
into  one  furnace,  then  he  put  it  into  a  second,  and  then  into  a 
third ;  when  I  asked  him,  why  do  you  put  this  into  so  many 
fires  ?     He  answered,  O,  sir,  the  first  was  not  hot  enough,  nor 
the  second,  and  therefore  we  put  it  into  the  third,  and  that  will 
make  it  transparent.    Taking  leave  of  him  in  a  proper  manner, 
it  occurred  to  me,  this  would  make  a  good  sermon  :  O,  thought  I, 
does  this  man  put  this  glass  into  one  furnace  after  another,  that 
M'e  may  see  through  it ;  O  may  God  put  me  into  one  furnace  after 
another,  that  my  soul  may  be  transparent ;  that  I  may  see  God 
as  he  is.     My  brethren,  we  need  to  be  purged  ;  how  apt  are  we 
to  want  to  go  to  heaven  upon  a  feather-bed ;  many  go  lyin; 
upon  beds  of  pain  and  languishing,  which  is  the  King's  highway 
thither.    You  know  there  are  some  ways  in  London  called  the 
king's  road,  and  they  are  finely  gravelled,  but  the  King's  road 
to  heaven  is  strewed  with  crosses  and  afflictions*     We  are  all 
apt  to  think  well  of  being  Christians;  it  is  very  pretty  talking 
of  being  Christians,  till  we  are  put  into  one  furnace  after  another; 
'*  think  it  not  strange,"  saith  the  apostle,  '*  concerning  the  fi'ery 
trial  which  is  to  try  you."    What  must  I  do  ?     Why,  since  I 
must  be  in  the  fire,  I  must  thank  my  corruptions  for  it;  God  will 
not  put  you  or  me  into  the  fire,  if  there  were  not  something  to 
be  purged  away ;'  the  grand  thing  is,  to  learn  to  glorify  God  io 
the  tire.     "  Wherefore,  glorify  ye  the  Lord  in  the  fire.'* 

When  do  we  glorify  him  ?  when  we  endeavour  to  get  siicb 
grace  from  the  Lord,  that  we  may  not  dishonour  him  when  we 
are  under  the  cross,  and  therefore  we  glorify  God  in  the  fire  when 
we  quietly  endure  it  as  a  chastisement  for  our  sins :  if  yon  keep 
watch  now,  and  live  near  to  God,  you  will  never  find  that  you 
are  put  into  a  fire,  but  you  first  brought  yourselves  into  it;  and 
I  do  verily  believe  from  my  heart,  that  our  sin  is  always  to  be 
seen  in  our  punishment.  If  any  of  you  part  from  a  child  that  he 
love's  dearly,  upon  examination  he  will  say,  I  find,  now  the  crea- 
ture's gone,  that  the  ivy  twined  too  much  about  the  oak;  and 
then  be  turns  off;  ah !  says  he,  God  has  met  with  me  now.  Aad 
you  will  find  in  all  the  Old  and  New  Testament,  that  the  aflic- 
tions  of  God's  people  were  suitable  to  their  faults  :  Jacob  was 
over-persuaded  by  his  mother  to  get  the  blessing  by  a  lie*  bot 
he  was  a  simple-hearted  poor  creature.  Some  persons  fKJ"^ 
nothing  of  a  lie  ;  if  they  can  but  get  by  it,  they  do  not  mind  it; 
but  an  honest  man  will  shun  it.  Jacob  argues  with  his  mother 
against  it ;  O,  says  she,  '*  the  curse  be  on  me,  my  son  !*'  O  diead- 
fni !  for  a  good  woman  to  say  so.  Doubtless,  she  was  persuaded 
God  would  give  Jacob  the  blessing,  but  she  took  a  wrong  waj 
to  obtain  it ;  she  might  have  waited  for  the  blessing  to  come 
with  a  blessing.   How  did  God  punish  Jacob  ?  Why,  in  anv^^ 


1.X11I.]  IMPROVEMENT   OF   APPLI0TIOM8.  075 

afterwards  poor  Jacob  was  imposed  upon  by  a  wrong  wife,  he 
got  a  Leah  instead  of  a  Rachel ;  the  poor  creature  was  imposed 
upon  there,  and  so  all  along  almost  to  the  end  of  his  life ;  he 
had  a  furnace  of  affliction.  Happy  they  who  pray  in  the  fur- 
nace, Lord,  let  me  know  why  thou  dost  contend  with  me. 
Therefore  God  sends  this  message  to  Eli  by  Samuel,  "  The  thing 
that  thou  knowest/'  seems  to  me  to  refer  to  his  too  great  lenity 
to  his  sons :  '*  the  thing  that  thou  knowest ;"  thou  dost  not  act 
like  a  magistrate.  These  sons  were  the  means  of  bringing  a 
judgment  on  his  house,  and  breaking  their  father's  neck :  God 
Almighty  keep  us  from  bringing  a  rod  upon  ourselves! 

We  glorify  God  in  the  fire,  when  we  bear  it  patiently.  It  is  a 
dreadful  thing  when  we  are  saying  with  Cain,  *'  My  punishment 
is  greater  than  I  can  bear;  but  the  language  of  a  soul  that  glori- 
fies God  in  the  fire  is  this.  Shall  I,  Lord,  shall  I,  a  sinful  man, 
complain  for  the  punishment  of  my  sins  ?  It  is  a  glorious  thing 
when  we  can  say  with  a  good  man,  one  of  whose  particular 
friends  told  me  more  than  once,  that  when  he  was  racked  with 

Eain,  and  groaning  all  night  with  trouble,  he  would  often  say, 
lOrd,  I  groan ;  Lord,  I  groan  ;  Lord^  I  groan ;  but.  Lord  Jesus, 
I  appeal  to  thee,  thou  knowest  I  do  not  grumble.  Then  we 
glorify  God  in  the  fire,  when,  though  we  feel  pain  and  auguish, 
we  at  the  same  time  say,  Lord,  we  deserve  this  and  ten  thousand 
times  more. — We  glorify  God  in  the  fire  also,  when  we  are  really 
and  fully  persuaded,  God  will  not  put  us  in  the  fire  but  for  our 
good,  and  his  own  glory.  I  am  afraid  some  people  think  God 
does  as  some  clieating  apothecaries,  that  bring  five  things  when 
they  need  not  bring  but  one,  especially  when  they  have  some 
silly  patients  that  love  to  be  taking  physic ;  they  send  one  after 
another,  when,  perhaps,  the  best  thing  would  be  to  throw  then 
all  away :  so  we  think  of  God,  but  it  is  a  mistake ;  he  never 
sends  one  but  what  is  necessary,  and  something  to  be  purged 
away. — We  glorify  God  in  the  fire,  when  we  say.  Lord,  do  not 
let  the  fire  go  out  till  it  has  purged  away  all  my  dross.  Then 
vre  glorify  God  when  we  wish  for  the  good  of  the  fire,  and  not  to 
have  it  extinguished ;  when  the  soul  can  say,  ^*  Here  I  am,  my 
God,  do  with  me  as  scemeth  good  in  thy  sight;"  I  know  I  shall 
Bot  have  one  stroke  but  thou  wilt  give  me  a  plaster,  and  let  me 
know  wherefore  thou  contendest  with  me. — We  glorify  God  in 
the  fire,  when  we  are  content  to  say,  **  I  know  not  what  God 
does  with  roe  now,  but  I  shall  know  hereafter.  Do  you  tell  your 
children  that  are  five  years  old  the  reason  of  things,  no  ;  and  do 
you  think  God  will  tell  us  ?  '*  What  shall  this  man  do  ?"  saith 
the  disciples ;  **  What  is  that  to  thee  ?"  saith  Christ,  "  follow 
thou  me."  You  glorify  God  in  the  fire,  when  you  are  content 
to  walk  by  faith  and  not  by  sight. — You  glorify  God  in  the  fire, 
when  you  are  not  grumbling,  but  humbly  submitting  to  his  will ; 
a  humble  spirit  walks  not  in  sulkiness  and  stubbornness :  there 
are  some  spirits  too  stout,  they  will  not  speak.  When  that 
awful  message  was  brought  to  Eli,  what  does  he  say, ''  It  is  the 
liord,  let  him  do  what  scemeth  him  good  ;"  ^et  ray  children  Ik> 

2t2 


€76  IMPROVBMBNT  OF  APFLIOTIOKS.  [LXUL 

killed,  \vbatever  be  done  it  is  the  Lord's  doing ;  only,  liord,  saie 
my  soul  at  last. — Wo  glorify  God  in  the  fire,  when  in  the  midst 
of  the  fire  we  can  sing  God's  high  praises.  Thus  the  children  of 
Israel  glorified  the  Lord ;  the  song  of  the  three  children  in  tbe 
fiery  furnace  is  a  sweet  song,  as  arc  all  that  are  made  in  tbe 
fire :  "  O  all  the  works  of  the  Lord,  praise  and  magnify  hin 
for  eTcr  !' — Then  we  glorify  God  in  the  fire,  when  we  rejoice  is 
him,  when  we  not  only  think,  but  know  it  best,  and  can  thank 
God  for  striking  us ;  can  thank  God  for  whipping  us  ;  can  bless 
God  for  not  letting  us  alone  ;  thank  God  for  not  saying,  ''Let 
him  alone  :"  this  is  to  glorify  God  in  the  fire.  ''  Not  only  so," 
salth  the  apostle,  "  but  we  glory  in  tribulation,  knowing  that 
tribulation  worketh  patience." 

In  a  wordy  we  glorify  the  Lord  in  the  fire,  when  we  have  in 
exercise,  jpatience,  meekness,  humility ;  learning  more  to  dis- 
trust ourselves,  having  a  deeper  knowledge  of  our  own  weakness, 
and  of  God's  omnipotence  and  grace.  Happy  when  we  can  look 
back  and  say.  Thus  have  I  been  enabled  to  glorify  God  in  the  fire: 
who  can  put  his  hand  to  his  heart,  and  say,  I  have  glorified  God 
in  the  fire  as  I  ought?  instead, of  that,  I  am  afraid  the  soul  most 
say,  that  instead  of  being  thankful  and  resigned,  I  have  been 
fretful;  and  because  I  will  not  find  fault  with  myself,  nor kt 
the  world  know  I  find  fault  with  God,  I  find  fault  with  all  about 
me.  Did  you  never  find  yourself  in  such  a  humour  when  you 
spirits  were  low  ?  I  heard  a  good  man  once  speak  on  those 
words,  "  They  shall  bring  forth  fruit  in  old  age  :"  O,  the  fruit, 
said  he,  is  peevishness  ;  I  thought  it  was  the  infirmity  of  old 
age,  the  fruit  of  which  ought  to  be  heavenly* mindedness,  dead- 
ness  to  the  world,  and  a  liveliness  to  God. 

My  brethren,  let  us  humble  ourselves  to-night,  and  let  us  be 
ashamed  and  abashed  before  God,  and  wonder  be  bath  not  struck 
us  into  hell  when  we  have  been  complaining  the  fire  was  too 
hot,  that  God  sent  us  not  to  the  devil.  Let  us  weep,  let  us  weep, 
let  us  weep  for  our  stubbornness.  Happy  they  who  are  used  to 
be  put  into  the  fire  betimes !  ''  It  is  good  for  a  man  to  bear  tbe 
yoke  in  his  youth."  Some  years  ago,  when  I  was  at  the  Ophan- 
house^  they  told  me  they  were  going  to  yoke  two  steers  together, 
one  sturdy  and  old,  the  other  a  Uttle  one ;  on  which  they  no 
sooner  put  the  yoke,  but  he  kicked  once  or  twice,  and  then  bore 
it  very  well :  O,  thought  I,  it  is  a  good  thing  to  have  the  yoke 
betimes. 

Are  any  of  you  now  in  the  furnace,  are  any  of  you  troubled,  or 
can  any  of  you  say,  I  have  no  trouble  T  A  calm  is  sometimes  tbe 
forerunner  of  a  storm;  thank  God,  you  are  not  in  the  fire; 
surely  you  have  been  in  the  fire.  There  is  the  devil's  fire,  the 
fires  of  "  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  the  lust  of  the  eye,  and  the  pride 
of  life  'y'  God  help  you  to  come  out  of  these  fires,  lest  they  oamn 
your  souls  for  ever.  You  must  be  put  either  in  the  devil's  fiie 
or  God's  fire,  and  the  devil's  fires  are  hottest,  because  then  is 
no  God  to  support  under  tlie  trouble  they  bring  upon  the  soul. 
O  what  a  dreadful  thing  it  is  to  be  in  the  devil's  fire  coDtino- 


L.XIII.]  IMPROVEMENT   OF    APRLIOTIONS.  677 

ally,  and  to  go  out  of  the  fire  of  the  devil  here  to  barn  with  the 

devil  in  hell  hereafter !     If  there  are  any  of  you  in  this  case, 

Ijord  Jesus  Christ  shorten  them.  Lord  Jesus  Christ  sanctify  his 

afflictions  to  his  people^  as  he  did  to  one  of  the  prisoners  last 

Wednesday :  how  sweetly  he  behaved !  while  the  others  were 

cursing  and  swearing,  tossing  up  who  should  sit  on  the  right 

band  in  the  cart,  he  was  glorifying  God,  thanking  God  he  was 

sent  there,  and  going  to  be  executed :  God,  saith  he,  hath  stopt 

me,  I  might  have  gone  on  in  sin  to  ruin.     O  send  to  my  father, 

go  to  him,  warn  him  to  *'flee  from  the  \vrath  to  come:"  some* 

body  went  to  his  parent,  arid  the  father  sent  back  this  loving 

message,  Tell  him  to  mind  his  own  soul,  and  be  damned  !    O 

dear  Lord,  what  lengths  has  man  gone  !  never  was  such  a  mes* 

sage  sent  to  a  son  before ;  he  bid  him  mind  his  own  soul,  and 

be  damned !  God  grant  none  of  you  may  ever  have  such  a 

frame  of  mind  as  that !    O  remember,  fire  hardens  as  well  as 

softens ;  and  if  you  are  not  better  by  afilictions,  you  will  be 

worse :  and  indeed  you  will  know  you  cannot  come  out  of  the 

fhmace  as  you  went  in,  you  will  either  be  hardened  or  else  be 

purified ;  and  if  this  be  the  case,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  help 

you  to  bear  the  fire  now,  that  you  may  never  be  cast  into  the 

fire  of  hell.  God  haste  you ;  hasten,  3'ou  that  are  out  of  the  deviPs 

fire,  to  flee;  flee,  ye  weary  souls,  to  Jesus  Christ;  fly  to  the 

liamb  of  God,  from  hell  to  heaven,  as  far  as  you  can  from  these 

hellish  fires,  to  the  fire  of  his  blessed  merit  and  love. 

Happy  you  that  have  got  into  Christ's  fire !  happy  you  that 
have  found  his  fires  in  your  souls !  I  believe  many  souls  have: 
O  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  help  you  to  glorify  him  in  whatever  nres 
he  shall  be  pleased  to  send  you,  and  into  whatever  furnaces  he 
shall  be  pleased  to  put  you :  we  shall  then  sing  "  the  church 
triumphant,"  much  better  than  we  sing  to-night;  we  shall  see 
Jesus  Christ  ready  to  help  us  when  we  are  in  the  furnace :  O 
that  this  thought  may  make  every  poor  sinner  say,  By  the  help 
of  God,  I  will  be  a  Christian ;  by  the  help  of  God,  if  I  must 
born,  it  shall  be  burning  with  the  love  of  Christ.  I  will  say 
iben,  O  Lord,  glorify  thyself  by  snatching  me  as  a  brand  from 
the  devil's  fire.    O  that  this  might  be  the  cry  of  every  heart ! 

I  am  going  to  ask  a  favour  of  you  to-night  which  I  never  did 
before,  and  perhaps,  may  not  again  for  some  time :  I  have  had 
complaints  made  to  me  by  the  persons  that  take  care  of  the 
poor,  that  the  poor's  stock  is  very  low ;  though  I  cannot  speak 
on  Sunday  night,  yet  I  will  speak  a  word  to  the  poor  on  Wed^ 
nesday  evening.  There  are  numbers  of  poor  that  are  ready  to 
perish,  and  if  you  drop  something  to  them  in  love,  Grod  will 
take  care  to  repay  you  when  you  come  to  judgment.  We  shall 
not  only  glorify  God  by  a  submission  to  bis  will,  when  he  is 
putting  us  in  the  fire,  but  in  doing  any  good,  when  we  lay  all 
Lhe  glory  at  the  foot  of  Jesus ;  which  God  grant  for  Christ's 
sake.    Amen. 


67S  TUB    BELOVED   OF   GOD.  [LXIT. 

SERMON  LXIV. 

THE     BELOVED     OP     GOD. 

And  of  Benjamin,  lie  said,  Tlie  beloved  of  the  Lord  shall  dwell  in 
safety  by  him;  and  the  Lord  shall  cover  him  all  the  day  long, 
and  he  shall  dwell  between  his  shoulders. — Deut.  xxxiii.  12. 

Oh  !  what  a  dismal  sight  is  it,  to  see  an  old  man  with  his  hoary 
head  grown  grey  in  sin,  and  hardened  in  iniquity ! 
.    On  the  other  hand,  I  believe,  to  all  that  consider  rightly,  tboe 
is  no  grander  sight  almost  under  the  sun,  than  to  see  an  old 
grey-headed  man  keeping  ap  a  consistent  character ;  and  pror- 
ing>  hy  his  conduct,  that  ''  his  path,  (like  that  of  the  just,)  is 
as  the  shining  light,  that  shineth  more  and  more  to  the  peifect 
day ;"  especially  when  persons  have  been  called  to  act  in  a  pob- 
lic  character ;  when  they  have  been  eminent  either  for  the  hi^ 
ness  of  their  station,  or  for  the  largeness  of  their  income.    It  is 
on  this  account  that  I  admire  old  Jacob ;  how  grand  he  looked 
when  leaning  on  his  staff,  with  all  the  composure  in  the  world, 
under  a  divine  influence,  blessing  his  children  standing  round 
him !    But,  methinks,  there  is  one  who  was  called  to  act  a  more 
public  part,  namely,  Moses,  who  was  honoured  of  God  to  be 
a  great    legislator,   king    in   Jeshurun,  a   law^ver    between 
Judah's  feet,  as  pupils  used  to  be  at  the  feet  of  iheir  teachers, 
to  receive  their  instruction ;  if  you  have  a  mind   to  see  how 
bright  he  shines,  you  must  read  Dcut.  xxxii.  indeed  you  must 
read  all  Deuteronomy,  which  is  nothing  but  a  sermon  that 
Moses,  at  various  times,  preached  to  the  children  of  Israel; 
and  having  done  preaching,  he  sang  a  hymn  of  his  own  com- 
posing, and  that  too  at  a  time  when  he  knew,  at  the  very  finish- 
ing of  the  song,  he  should  immediately  have  his  soul  kissed 
away,  and  be  called  to  sing  a  better  song  in  the  kingdom  of 
heaven.    A  person  would  need  a  good  deal  of  composure,  a 
good  deal  of  the  Spirit's  influences,  a  large  measure  of  it, 
cheerfully  thus  to  stand  in  view  of  death,  just  on  the  very  bor- 
ders of  the  grave;  you  see  this  in  chap,  xxxii.  and   here  in 
chap,  xxxiii.     One  would  have  thought  he  had  said  enough,  yet 
he  seems  as  it  were  not  to  know  how  to  leave  off;  he  puled 
from  the  people  blessing  them ;  they  had  used   him  ill,  they 
provoked  him  in  the  wilderness ;  he  had  bore  with  them  many, 
many  long  years ;  sure  you  would  have  thought  he  would  hare 
went  away  in  a  huff:  no,  that  eminent  sun  by  no  means  goes 
down  in  wrath ;  his  eyes  did  not  so  much  as  wax   dim,  nor  bis 
intellectual  powers  impair  in  all  that  time :  he  sweetly  gives 
them  all  a  blessing  before  he  goes.     If  you  read  this  chap, 
xxxiii.  you  will  find  how  various,  yet  special,  are  the  blessing 
which,  in  a  prophetic  strain,  he  foretells  should   attend  par- 
ticular persons,  or  tribes.     I  have  been  reading  them  over,  and 
though  I  admire  them  all,  I  was  at  a  loss  which  to  speak  from, 
till  the  blessing  of  Benjamin  fixed  my  attention,  not  only  as 
sweet,  but  instructing.     '*  The  beloved  of  the  Ijord  shall  direil 
in  safety,  by  him  ;  and  the  Lord  shall  covec  him  all  the  dar 


LXIV.]  THE   BBLOVBD  OP   GOD.  679 

long,  he  shall  dwell  between  his  shoulders."  This  is  a  blessing 
indeed,  if  we  look  only  to  the  literal  interpretation  of  the  words, 
and  a  literal  commentator  can  go  no  further ;  he  must  confine 
them  to  Benjamin ;  and  will  tell  us,  that  this  Scripture  was 
fulfilled  at  the  building  of  the  temple.  The  temple  was  built 
upon  two  hills,  one  in  the  tribe  of  Benjamin,  the  other  in  the 
tribe  of  Judah ;  the  temple  being  built  there,  and  Benjamin  being 
placed  near  it,  then  Benjamin  dwells  in  safety  by  the  Lord,  by 
having  his  lot  cast  near  the  temple.  How  often,  alas !  is  it  the 
case,  I  am  sure  it  is  very  often  the  case  in  London,  the  nearer 
the  church,  the  further  from  God ;  but  some  make  good  use  of  it, 
and  are  glad  to  get  near  the  church,  that  they  may  be  nearer 
God.  The  temple  being  placed  between  two  hills,  so  Benjamin 
as  it  were  dwells  between  God's  shoulders  ;  so  far  a  literal  com- 
mentator can  go,  here  he  stops :  a  spiritual  commentator,  and  a 
spiritual  reader,  go  further ;  O,  says  he,  this  is  true,  but  at  the 
same  time  this  is  not  the  whole  truth ;  and  I  am  persuaded, 
*when  a  person  is  helped  by  the  Spirit  to  read  the  Scriptures, 
the  declarations  that  are  made,  and  those  particular  promises, 
the  true  believer  applies  with  great  propriety  to  himself;  and 
therefore  I  think  I  may  venture  to  aver,  that  the  blessing  which 
Moses  here  pronounces  upon  him  in  the  name  of  the  Lord,  be- 
longs to  God's  people  in  all  ages  whatever.  God,  in  his  infinite 
mercy,  grant  that  this  blessing  may  descend  upon  us  and  ours, 
that  it  may  descend  to  your  latest  posterity. 

Observe  how  wonderfully  the  persons  to  whom  the  blessing 
is  given  are  characterized :  of  Benjamin  it  is  said,  *'  The  beloved 
of  the  Lord ;"  the  beloved  of  the  Lord,  pray  who  are  they  ? 
Why,  the  men  that  the  Scriptures  always  speak  of,  whose  con- 
stant uniform  character  is,  they  love  God  in  all  ages.  It  is  not 
said,  the  Presbyterians  shall  dwell  in  safety ;  Moses  never  heard 
of  a  Presbyterian  in  his  life ;  he  never  heard  of  the  name :  nor  is 
it  said,  the  Independents  shall  dwell  in  safety ;  he  never  heard 
of  that  word  :  nor  is  it  said  the  Papists  shall  dwell  in  safety ;  he 
never  heard  of  Papists,  nor  of  the  pope :  nor  is  it  said,  that  the 
church  of  England  shall  dwell  in  safety ;  no,  neither  ii  it  said, 
that  the  Methodists  shall  dwell  in  safety,  though  I  trust  there 
are  a  great  many  good  people  among  these  mongrels  of  the 
church :  but  it  is  spoken  of  all  the  people  of  God ;  God  help  us 
all  to  apply  it  to  ourselves ! 

Here  is  a  dispute  between  the  Arminians  and  the  Calvinists : 
ask  an  Arminian  what  is  meant  by ''  the  beloved  of  the  Lord  ;"  O, 
say  they  that  are  for  general  redemption,  the  beloved  of  the  Lord 
signifies  all  the  men  that  were  ever  bom  into  the  world ;  that 
is  a  good  broad  bridge  to  take  them  in,  but  broad  bridges  are 
not  always  the  strongest  bridges  in  the  world.  The  Arminians 
will  assert  it,  that  Judas  was  as  much  beloved  of  God  as  Peter, 
or  any  other  of  the  apostles ;  and  those  that  are  not  Arminians, 
but  are  what  you  call  Quakers,  and  there  are  a  good  many,  I 
believe,  among  them,  that  have  better  hearts  than  heads ;  they 
say,  that  we  are  all  alike,  that  we  all  come  into  the  world  with 


680  THB   BBLOVBD   OF  GOD.  [LXIV. 

a  seed  of  grace,  and  shall  be  happy  according  to  the  improve- 
ment  of  that  grace ;  hence  they  taJk  nothine  of  a  Christ  wiihoMif 
but  within  ;  happy  they  that  experience  a  Christ  within !   God's 
mercy  is  sure,  and  over  all  his  works ;  and  in  on&  sense,  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Saviour  of  all  men,  that  is,  of  all  sorts 
of  men ;  even  the  wicked  are  beholden  to  Jesus  Christ,  whom 
they  despise,  for  every  worldly  comfort  they  enjoy ;  in  this  sense 
we  should  learn  to  love  as  our  Lor^,  we  are  told,  loved  the 
young  man  when  he  saw  he  had  been  a  harmless  and  good  liver. 
•—But  we  must  go  more  to  what  we  call  Calvinism,  what  I  call 
Scriptural  truth.    The  love  which  Jesus  Christ  bore  for  the 
young  man,  quite  differed  from  that  love  with  which  he  loved 
Martha,  Mary,  and  their  brother:  there  was  a  cargo  for  yon! 
three  in  one  family;  God  grant  it  may  be  your  happy  lot  and 
mine !  two  sisters  and  one  brother,  three  to  entertain  Jesos 
Christ,  all  in  a  peculiar  manner  beloved  of  the  Lord.     It  is  not 
said  of  Benjamin,  they  shall  ^that  is,  they  that  love  the  Lord) 
they  shall  dwell  in  safety,  no ;  it  would  not  be  so  strong  to  them, 
as  to  say,  "  the  beloved  of  the  Lord ;"  for  God  knows  our  love 
is  not  worth  a  shilling:  all  the  faith  of  God's  people,  says  bbhop 
Hall,  is  but  mere  infidelity ;  and  all  the  love  of  the  people  of 
God  is  but  mere  hatred,  compared  with  God's  love,  or  that  which 
his  law  justly  requires ;  therefore  it  is  said,  '^  beloved  of  the 
Lord,"  and  that  because  if  ever  wc  love  Grod,  he  first  loved  ns, 
which  is  what  Moses'  very  expression  means ;  as  streams  flow 
from  the  fountain,  so  they  shall  return  to  it.    Hence  the  apostle 
says,  "  Knowing  your  election,  brethren,  beloved  of  God."    I 
know  very  well  the  Mystics  talk  of  loving  God  with  a  love  for 
himself  only,  without  any  respect  to  the  creature  at  all ;  that  is, 
we  must  love  God  without  any  regard  at  all  for  what  God  has 
done  for  us ;  nay,  some  go  so  far  as  to  say,  that  if  we  do  not  so 
love  God,  we  are  not  converted,  though  we  have  as  much  grace 
as  we  can  have ;  that  we  do  not  love  God  properly  till  we  love 
him  for  what  he  is,  not  what  he  has  done  for  us :  I  verily  believe, 
the  angels  do  not  love  God  in  that  manner ;  and  we  cannot  love 
God  till  we  are  made  partakers  of  a  divine  nature,  and  have 
eyes  given  us  to  see  his  glory. 

The  grand  inquiry  is  then,  how  shall  I  know  that  I  am  one  of 
the  beloved  of  the  Lord  ?  The  natural  man  never  minds  the  love 
of  God ;  he  flatters  himself  he  loves  God  naturally,  that  the  lore 
of  God  is  a  plant  that  grows  in  nature's  garden ;  but  a  spiritual 
person  does  not  so.    What,  does  the  king  take  notice  of  me  ? 
Does  the  king  look  pleasant  upon  me  in  a  drawings-room?  Am 
I  called  to  wait  upon  him?  Am  I  beloved  of  this,  and  that, and 
the  other  person  ?  If  I  be,  let  God  go,  I  care  not ;  if  I  have  hot 
the  love  of  this,  and  that  courtier,  I  care  not  whether  God  loves 
me  or  ho :  this  will  not  do  for  an  awakened  soul ;  and  therefore 
the  grand  inquiry,  and  one  proof  of  a  person's  being  awakened. 
is,  how  shall  I  know  whether  God  loves  me,  or  not?  Why,  tiy; 
I  am  persuaded  of  it,  that  we  may  as  well  know  that  God  lores 
us,  and  V7e  love  God,  as  we  may  know  that  the  sun  shines  at 


LXIT.]  THS  BSLOVBD  OF  QOD.  flSl 

noon-day ;  how  shall  I  know  it^  but  by  the  effseta  of  Ihia  love, 
by  the  fruits  of  it  ?    That  great  man.  Dr.  Watts,  who  was  called 
the  sweet  singer  of  Israel,  says,  '<  We  should  go  first  to  the  gram- 
snar-school  of  faitli  and  repentance,  before  we  go  to  the  uni- 
versity of  predestination :"  whereas,  the  devil  would  have  them 
go  first  to  the  university,  to  examine  whether  they  were  elected 
or  rejected,  or  no :  they  should  do  as  a  good  woman  once  did, 
when  Satan  tempted  her,  and  wanted  to  distress  her,  that  there 
were  but  few  to  be  saved ;  she  said,  if  there  were  but  two  to  be 
saved,  she  would  strive  to  be  one  of  them.  Surely  I  am  beloved 
of  the  Lord,  if  my  natural  enmity  against  the  Lord  is  slain.  How 
do  I  know  I  love  a  person  ?   how  can  you  prove  that  you  love 
me?  Why, say  you,  I  hated  you  the  other  day.  How  many  peo- 
ple met  I  with  the  other  day,  that  could  a  few  weeks  ago  have 
pulled  me  out  of  Tottenham-court ;  but  God  has  overcome  their 
hearts.     The  person  now  confesses  his  former  enmity,  and  when 
that  enmity  is  removed,  and  you  are  reconciled  to  them,  cannot 
you  know  that  you  love  them?     And  if  God  has  removed  that 
enmity  to  Christ  out  of  your  hearts,  surely  you  are  one  of  the 
beloved  of  the  Lord. 

We  are  the  beloved  of  the  Lord,  if  we  are  brought  to  abhor 
and  renounce  that  which  stands  between  us  and  the  Lord;  I 
mean,  our  cursed  self-righteousness.  Can  I  prove  that  I  have 
renounced  my  own  duties,  that  I  ain  sick  of  my  duties,  as  well 
as  my  ^ns ;  none  but  the  beloved  of  the  Lord  see  this :  an  enemy 
to  the  Lord  may  have  this  in  his  head,  but  it  is  only  a  friend 
of  the  Lord  that  has  this  in  his  heart :  a  talkative  professor  can 
speak  of  it ;  you  may  teach,  perhaps,  a  parrot  to  pray,  but  it  is 
odds  to  talk  like  a  parrot  and  experience  like  a  Christian.  Now, 
if  I  have  renonnced  my  own  righteousness,  and  been  helped  to 
trust  to  Christ's,  to  believe  on  the  Son  of  God,  let  Satan  say 
what  he  will,  I  am  sure  I  am  the  beloved  of  the  Lord,  for  none 
but  those  that  are  beloved  by  him  with  an  everlasting  love,  are 
brought  to  believe  on  him. — I  may  know  I  am  beloved  of  the 
Lord,  from  what?  Why,  experiencing  "his  love  shed  abroad  in 
my  heart  by  the  Holy  Ghost."  Jonathan  loved  David  as  his 
own  soul.  Most  of  you  know  what  love  is,  in  a  carnal  sense ; 
and  if  there  be  a  union  of  souls  between  creature  and  creature, 
surely  there  must  be  a  union  of  souls  between  the  Creator  and 
the  creature  beloved  of  God  ;  it  caunot  be  otherwise ;  this  love 
will  have  its  effects. 

If  I  am  beloved  of  the  Lord,  if,  having  his  love  in  my  heart,  I 
shew  it  by  loving  those  he  has  loved. — Some  people  may  say,  I 
love  you,  but  I  do  not  love  those  about  you,  your  friends ;  why, 
you  are  not  bound  to  love  all  alike,  but  it  may  teach  you  to  be 
civil  to  that  person's  beloved.  As  soon  as  ever  we  near  of  a 
Christian,  as  soon  as  ever  we  hear  of  a  believer,  as  soon  as  ever 
we  hear  of  a  sinner  turning  to  (rod,  O  it  vrill  rejoice  us ;  and  we 
shall  be  like  the  angels  in  heaven,  who  "  rejoice  over  one  sinner's 
repentance,  more  than  over  ninety-nine  just  persons  that  need 
no  repentance."    Some  people  may  say,  I  love  dearly  to  bear 


O^  THE    BE1X>T£D   OF    COSl.  ILIS^. 

of  a  persoB's  bcisf  oooTcned  bj  5«ch  a  BiiMSKr  :  I 

to  bear  of  persons  cooTerted  by  a  disscBicK.  I  ^ 

bear  of  persons  conrcrtcd  bj  a  cb«irb»B»,  bvi  1  do 

peo|^  should  be  cooTened  by  this  and  tkai 

beliere  there  arc  a  ertat  many  people  wbo«e 

narrow,  bat  this  mixtore  is  not  of  God  ;  and  I 

may  know  it  by  experience :   that  tbey 

beloTcd  of  GodJ"  then  they  will  rejoice  i 

broo^t  to  beliere  on  him,  whoever  is  OAde 

**  Grace  and  mercy  be  with  all  them  that 

Christ  in  sincerity."    What  would  hare  becogae  of  pcwr  Vui, 

if  he  had  only  lored  his  own  followers :  the  Rocsasc  be  cef  o 

saw  till  he  was  taken  there  a  prisoner,  bat  be  lorcd  adl  the  tcs: 

of  the  apostles,  wrote  letters  to  all  sorts,  not  to  tbeir  parbnibi 

parties  or  churches,  bat  to  all  those  '^  that  loved   the  Loid 

Jesos  in  siacerity  ;'*  and  if  ne  do  love  in  this  manner,  we  bit 

be  assured  we  are  beloved  cf  the  liDrd,  for  none  bat  the  Lari 

could  beget  such  love  in  as. 

If  we  are  beloved  of  the  liord,  we  shall  be  hated  bv  the  voiU 
"  If  you  were  of  the  world,  the  world  would  love  you.  hot  b^ 
cause  you  are  not  of  the  world,  but  I  have  chotsen  yoa  oat  of 
the  world,  therefore  the  world  hatedi  yoa."  Will  vcmi  make  ne 
believe  that  any  of  yoa  arc  beloved  of  the  Ijord,  that  never  last 
your  good  character  by  it  ?  Why,  you  may  as  well  make  me  Ik- 
lieve  that  you  are  emperors  of  the  world :  Where  is  the  blesais 
the  sermon  on  the  mount  speaks  of?  Where  is  the  blessinr  of 
persecution  ?  Where  is  the  blessing  of  being  hated  of  all  ineo  ^ 
Where  is  the  blessing  of  being  hated  for  the  cross  ?  Yon  lore 
the  Lord,  and  not  carry  the  cross  after  you  !  Yoa  love  the  Lord. 
and  not  be  hated  as  your  Lord  was !  I  do  not  say  all  are  hatfd 
alike ;  poor  ministers  are  set  in  the  front  of  the  battle  ;  ia  pfo- 
portion  to  onr  successes  we  shall  be  bated.  There  are  nmcbrr; 
of  ministers  now  sleep  in  whole  skins,  that  were  formerly  is  a 
worse  plight ;  the  devil  disturbs  them  not,  because  they  anr 
quite  civil,  and  do  not  trouble  and  contradict  him;  but  if  too 
oppose  the  world  and  the  devil,  the  world  will  hate  you ;  and  do 
greater  proof  of  being  beloved  of  the  Lord,  than  the  world  hatin; 
you, — but  it  mast  be  for  Christ's  sake.  So  Ahab  said  of  the  pro- 

Ehet,  *^  all  his  prophesying  is  against  me ;"  I  hate  him  ;  the  worU 
ated  him  ;  ''  the  world  bated  me,"  says  our  Lord,  **  before  it 
hated  you  ;"  and  the  apostles,  when  they  began  to  speak  for  God 
too,  they  were  hated  like  their  I^ord  ;  and  glory  to  Cod  for  it. 
for  it  is  a  blessed  mark  of  their  belonging  to  God,  when  they  are 
honoured  to  suffer  for  him,  and  we  are  never  right  till  we  are 
bearing  the  cross :  to  see  men  or  women  sleeping  under  the  cross, 
sculking  and  hiding  from  it;  is  this  love?  Give  me  a  profes^^r 
that  will  wear  a  cockade  in  his  hat,  and  is  never  easier  thau 
when  he  is  combating  the  enemies  of  his  King. 

If  I  am  the  beloved  of  the  Lord,  I  really  shall  live  above  tbr 
world.     You  may  say  what  you  will,  and  yoa  may  bring  tbe 
*^'  i^g  as  low  as  you  think  proper, '^  but  the  friendship  of 


L\IV.]  THE  BELOVED  OP  GOD.  488 

the  world  is  hatred  to  God  ;  and  if  any  man  love  the  world,  the 
love  of  the  Father  isnot  in  him."  Now,  by  not  loving  the  world, 
I  do  not  mean  that  you  should  shut  up  your  shops,  and  run 
into  a  convent :  how  idle  for  persons  to  say  they  love  God,  and 
bide  themselves  from  the  world ;  that  is  no  relijicion  at  all.  But  the 
greatest  proof  of  a  Christian's  loving  God  is,  1  am  in  the  world, 
but  not  of  it ;  I  work  with  my  hands  all  the  day,  but  my  heart 
is  from  it.  I  remember  a  dear  friend  once  sent  me  word,  many 
years  ago,  how  busy  he  was  morning  and  night,  up  early  and 
late ;  perhaps,  says  he,  you  will  think  by  this  account,  I  am 
worldly ;  he  said.  No,  sir,  I  thank  God  that  my  heart  is  above 
the  world  :  God  grant  we  may  thus  prove  we  love  God  !  I  do 
not  say,  but  many  that  love  the  Lord  may  be  in  another  situa- 
tion ;  but  when  persons  are  enabled  to  leave  all  for  Christ,  it  is 
a  great  mercy :  God  be  praised,  we  have  some  such ;  God  add 
to  their  happiness ! 

They  that  love  the  Lord,,  will  study  to  keep  ftom  offending 
.God,  not  for  fear  of  being  damned,  but  because  sin  murdered 
bis  dear  Son :  there  are  a  great  many  people  abstain  from  sin 
for  fear  of  punishment;  but  hear  what  Joseph  said,  ''My  master 
has  done  thus  and  thus  by  me,  how  can  I  then  do  this  great  wick- 
edness and  sin  against  God  V  my  God  that  loves  me  ?  so  they 
would  not  stab  him,because  he  has  been  wounded  enough  already. 

If  we  are  the  beloved  of  the  Lord,  we  shall  be  willing  to  work 
for  the  Lord :  faith  without  works  is  the  religion  of  every  carnal 
man ;  make  an  end  of  one  good  work,  and  then  begin  another, 
and  lay  it  down,  and  wonder  that  Jesus  Christ  should  accept 
any  thing  at  your  hands.  I  knew  a  lady  some  time  ago,  that 
wanted  still  more  to  be  employed  for  God ;  says  she.  If  Jesus 
Christ  would  but  help  me  to  do  such  aud  such  a  thing  I  have  in 
▼lew,  O  I  would  kiss  his  feet,  and  dedicate  myself  more  and 
more  to  his  honour:  a  true  Christian  loves  to  be  thus  employed, 
but,  above  all,  he  is  glad  he  has  the  blood  of  Christ  to  wash  his 
duties  in. 

I  shall  mention  but  one  thing  more,  though  I  might  mention 
twenty :  If  we  have  the  love  of  God  in  our  hearts,  though  we  can- 
not get  over  the  fears  of  death  at  all  times,  yet  I  think  the  bent 
of  the  mind  of  such  a  person  will  be.  When  shall  I  see  the  object 
of  my  love, ''  him  whom  my  soul  loves  ?*'  They  sit  at  ordinances, 
and  long  to  be  led  to  the  fountain-head.  '  ''  I  am  in  a  strait  be- 
tween two,"  says  Paul ;  the  word  signifies  a  strong,  an  intense 
desire  to  be  with  Christ :  he  does  not  say  to  be  in  heaven,  but 
^*  to  be  with  Christ,  which  is  far  better ;"  but  to  stay  here  is  bet- 
ter for  you,  therefore  you  should  be  content  to  stay,  not  because 
you  love  the  world,  but  as  willing  to  wait  your  Master's  call.  I 
could  not  help  admiring  while  I  was  reading  it,  that  when  Christ 
ascended  to  heaven,  one  aogel,  one  particular  angel,  (it  must  have 
been  a  blessed  one,)  left  those  that  were  attending  Christ  into 
glory,  stopped  in  the  way, — for  what  ?  Why,  to  preach  to  the 
aposdes :  **  Why  stand  ye  thus  gazing  into  heaven  V  I  am 
ashamed  of  you,  says  he :  here  is  an  angel,  one  of  the  convoy^ 


684  THE   BBLOVBD   OP   GOD.  [LXIV. 

waiting  apon  them :  he  does  not  say.  Let  me  go  to  heaven  with 
thee,  and  let  me  come  down  again  and  preach ;  no,  he  stays 
down  thus>  to  preach  to  a  few  poor  fishermen.     Lnonl  search  os, 
Lord  try  us^  Lord  God  Almighty  help  us  to  examine  ourselves^ 
that  we  may  know  whether  we  are  beloved  of  the  Lord  or  not 
So  that  some  may  say,  I  think  I  can  apply  all  the  marb^ 
though  I  do  not  depend  upon  marks.     I  have  a  number  of  hilli 
here  to-night :  One  says,  if  I  am  beloved  of  the  Lord,  why  am  I 
so  poor  ?    Another  says,  if  I  am  beloved  of  the  Lord,  why  am 
I  so  afflicted  ?    Says  another,  if  I  am  beloved  of  the  Lord,  why 
am  I  left  to  starve?  can  I  think  God  loves  me,  when  I  see (hoo- 
sands  and  thousands  squandered  away  every  day,  and  yet  my 
poor  babes  groaning,  my    poor  children  quite  emaciated,  for 
want  only  of  a  little  bread  that  I  see  in  the  baker's  shop  as  I 
go  along?  if  I  am  beloved  of  the  Lord,  how  is  it  my  poor  childrea 
are  ready  to  cry  for  bread,  and  I  have  none  to  give  them?  that 
others  are  adorned  with  diamonds,  but  I  have  not  so  much  as  a 
rag  to  put  on  my  little  one's  back  ?  If  I  am  beloved  of  the  Lord, 
how  is  it  that  my  friends  are  against  me ;  my  children,  instead 
of  being  a  blessing,  are  a  curse,  and  break  my  heart.     If  I  am 
beloved  of  the  Lord,  how  is  it  that  1  have  so  many  domestic 
trials,  that  cause  me  to  cry  out,  **  Woe  is  me  that  I  sojourn  in  Me* 
shech,  and  dwell  in  the  tents  of  Kedar."  If  I  am  beloved  of  tbe 
Lord,  how  is  it  that  I  am  harassed  with  blasphemous  thoughts 
thus ;  the  trials  I  meet  with  in  bringing  down  the  outward  maa. 
If  I  am  beloved  of  the  Lord,  how  is  it  that  instead  of  living  ia 
plenty,  I  now  want  bread  to  eat,  and  should  bo  glad  to  have  it 
from  those  ^*  I  once  scorned  to  set  with  the  dogs  of  my  flock  ?— 
Whom  the  Lord  lovcth  he  chasteneth,  and  scourgeth  every  soa 
whom  he  receiveth."    Our  dear  Jesus  was  never  more  beloTcd 
of  his  Father  than  when  he  cried  out,  ''My  God  !  my  God!  why 
hast  thou  forsaken  me?"  never    more  beloved  of  his  Father 
than  when  he  was  sweating  great  drops  of  blood,  when  be  cried, 
''  Father,  if  it  be  possible,  let  this  cup  pass  from  me."  I  remem- 
ber a  dear  minister  of  Christ,  now  in  Suffolk,  told  me,  when  be 
was  in  Scotland,  going  to  receive  tbe  sacrament,  he  was  so  dry 
and  dark,  and  benumbed  and  tempted,  that  he  thought  he  would 
go  away ;  as  he  was  going,  this  word  came  to  bis  mind,  Wbea 
was  Jesus  Christ  most  acceptable  to  his  Father  ?  When  did  be 
give  the  greatest  trial  of  his  love?  when  he  cried  out,  "My 
God  !  my  God  !  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  V     Why  then,  says 
he,  upon  this  I  will  venture ;  if  I  perish,  I  perish  at  Christ's 
feet ;  and  he  came  away  filled  with  comfort  from  his  blessed 
God  and  Father  in  Christ. 

Well  then,  what  is  to  be  done  to  those  that  are  beloved  of  the 
Lord  ?  Here  is  for  you,  "  they  shall  dwell  in  safety  ;"  why  ?  *•  they 
shall  dwell  between  his  shoulders;"  observe  the  expression, tbe 
prophet,  says,  "  they  shall  dwell  in  love.  Will  God  indeed  dwell 
on  earth  ?  says  Solomon :  yes,  God,  says  he,  dwells  in  my 
earthly  heart,  made  hevaenly  by  the  grace  of  God.  Did  erer 
any  hear  such  an  expression  from  the  mouth  of  God,  "^  I  will 


LXIV.]  THB  BBLOVBD   OF   GOD. 

be  thy  God;  I  am  thy  shield^  and  thy  exceeding  great  reward?*' 
He  does  not  say  an  angel  shall  go ;  if  God  bad  only  said  in  his 
wordy  that  I  was  to  be  kept  by  angels,  I  am  sure  my  wicked 
heart  would  despair,  because  it  would  deceive  all  the  angels  in 
heaven :  but  God  saith,  *^  I  wUl  be  thy  keeper ;"  so  they  that 
would  hurt  his  people,  must  go  through  God  himself.  *'  They 
ilhall  dwell  on  high ;  bread  shall  be  given  to  them,  and  their 
water  shall  be  sure.  They  are  kept  by  the  mighty  power  of 
God,  through  faith,  to  everlasting  salvation.'*  It  is  said,  **  they 
shall  dwell  between  his  shoulders:**  the  government  of  the 
church,  and  the  world,  and  all,  are  upon  the  Redeemer's  shoul- 
ders, and  the  Lord's  everlasting  arms  are  under  his  people. 
Observe  it  is  said,  **  they  dwell  in  safety ;"  and  very  often  we 
arc  safest  when  we  think  we  are  most  in  danger. 

"  They  shall  dwell  in  safety ;"  those  that  are  lovers  of  the 
liord  Jesus  shall  dwell  safely  with  God  on  earth,  and  eternally 
with  him  in  heaven.  O  may  God  bless  this  foolishness  of 
preaching  to  some  of  God's  poor,  and,  perhaps,  doubting 
beloved  ones.  Come  you  poor  souls,  I  often  think  that  this 
field  preaching  is  particularly  comfortable  to  the  poor ;  when- 
ever field  preaching  is  stopped,  farewell  to  the  power  of  reli- 
pon.  When  poor  people  have  been  working  hard  all  day,  how 
■weet  must  it  be  for  them  to  come  to  a  place  of  worship,  and 
get  a  lift  for  to-morrow :  may  the  Lord  God  bless  this  barley- 
bread  !  If  you  can  wrap  yourselves  in  God,  let  the  world  hate 
you ;  Grod's  children  are  the  greatest  plagues  and  trials  one  to 
another,  but  God  loves  them,  God  smiles  upon  them,  and  there- 
fore they  shall  dwell  in  safety.  The  devil  told  me  I  should  not 
dwell  in  safety,  but  I  bid  him  defiance,  and  turned  him  to  Deut. 
xxxiii.  and  told  him  Benjamin's  lot  was  mine ;  *^  the  beloved  of 
the  Lord  shall  dwell  in  safety  by  him.'* 

Woe,  woe,  woe  be  to  you  that  have  no  marks  of  being 
beloved  of  the  Lord.  Have  we  any  pro&ne  Esaus  here  to- 
night, that  are  saying.  Do  not  tell  me  of  your  being  beloved  of 
the  Lord ;  if  I  can  have  the  love  of  such  a  person,  I  do  not 
eare  whether  God  loves  me  or  not ;  you  may  tell  me  God  loves 
people  when  they  are  afflicted,  I  want  none  of  these  marks,  I 
think  God  loves  me  because  I  am  in  a  good  frame;  I  think  God 
loves  me  because  I  prosper ;  I  think  God  loves  mo  because  I 
am  very  healthy  and  strong;  I  do  not  care  whether  I  wait  upon 
dod  or  not,  or  give  to  the  poor  or  not?*-I  will  not  soften  the 
matter,  there  is  no  going  to  heaven  without  wearing  a  fool's 
coat.  O,  you  may  say,  that  is  your  imprudence ;  you  make 
people  uneasy,  and  set  tiiem  upon  a  false  scent,  and  make  them 
their  own  persecutors ;  thank  God,  I  can  go  into  a  hundred 
companies,  and  not  giv^  them  reason  to  say  I  am  a  Methodist : 
I  can  go  into  company  and  sing  an  innocent  song,  I  do  not  tell 
them  I  have  a  Tabernacle  hymn-book  in  my  pocket.  There 
are  few  have  the  courage  that  the  gentleman  had  who  loved 
QoA,  and  went  to  see  some  carnal  relations  after  he  became  a 
fool  for  Christ's  sake :  Bays  one  of  th6  relations,  It  is  always 


688  THE  PURHAGB  OP  APFLIGTIOM.  [LXf. 

contrary,  it  is  the  fulfilling  it ;  for,  saith  God,  in  the  words  of 
onr  text,  '^  I  have  chosen  thee  in  the  furnace  of  affliction/' 

Though  the  words  are  spoken  in  the  singular  number,  yet 
they  are  of  a  complex  and  large  import :  the  great  Grod  not  only 
speaks  to  them  as  a  people  collectively  considered,  but  partica- 
larises  them  in  this  manner ;  not,  **  I  have  chosen  yea,  bat  I 
have  chosen  thee ;"  for  the  word  of  God  itself  will  never,  never, 
never  do  us  good,  if  it  is  not  applied  by  the  blessed  Spirit  of 
God  to  you  and  I.  The  wisdom  and  kindness  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  deserves  our  notice ;  had  the  prophet  gone  on  and  said, 
'^  I  have  chosen  you,"  unbelief  might  have  said,  Ab,  this  pro- 
phecy belongs  only  to  the  people  of  Israel,  the  words  were  ad- 
dressed to  those  who  were  under  the  Jewish  dispensation,  what 
have  I  to  do  with  them  ?  or  unbelief  would  persuade  us  to  say 
so  of  such  a  general  i>romise  as  this ;  but  when  it  is  said,  I  have 
chosen  //lee,  and  we  know  that  no  scripture  is  of  private  inter- 
pretation, but,  like  its  blessed  Author,  is  ''  the  same  yesterday, 
to-day,  and  for  ever,"  there  is  no  loop-hole,  as  it  were,  for  nn- 
belief  to  creep  out  at ;  but  every  believer  may,  in  all  ages,  in  the 
words  of  the  text,  say  to  himself,  *'  God  has  chosen  me  in  the 
furnace  of  affliction."  Perhaps,  there  is  not  a  more  comfortable 
passage  in  the  whole  book  of  God ;  I  do  not  know  of  one  that 
has  a  greater  tendency  to  silence  a  complaining  child  of  God, or 
to  make  a  poor  sufiering  believer  happy,  and  to  rest  under  the 
promise,  to  kiss  the  rod  of  God  that  strikes  the  blow. 

Where  shall  I  begin  ?  where  shall  I  end  ?  The  very  first  words 
open  such  a  field,  that  eternity  itself  will  be  but  just  long  enough 
for  us  to  take  a  view  of  it ;  the  time  is  come  that  even  .some  good 
people,  that  have  the  grace  of  God  in  their  hearts,  have  such 
muddy  heads  as  to  kick  at  the  doctrine  of  election,  and  \wk 
upon  it  as  having  a  tendency  to  make  us  bad  in  oar  beads,  or 
Antinomians  in  our  hearts ;  but  if  we  have  eyes  to  see,  and  ean 
to  hear,  and  if  our  hearts  are  really  informed  by  the  Spirit,  if  ire 
have  been  anointed  with  his  eye-salve;  O  then  electing,  sove- 
reign, distinguishing  love  flows  in  such  a  scene,  such  a  trans- 
porting scene,  as  will  make  a  believer's  heart  leap  for  joy.   For 
my  own  part,  I  know  no  other  doctrine  that  can  truly  hamhb 
the  man :  for  either  God  must  choose  us,  or  we  must  choose 
God ;  either  God  must  be  the  first  mover,  or  man  must  be  the 
first  mover ;  either  God  must  choose  them  on  account  of  some 
goodness,  on  account  of  some  purity,  or  acts  of  piety,  or  God 
must  choose  them  merely  of  his  grace,  for  his  own  name's  sake, 
and  to  let  us  know  that  we  have  not  chosen  him,  but  he  has 
chosen  us.     I  verily  believe,  tiiat  the  grand  reason  why  such 
doctrine  is  so  spurned  at  and  hated  by  carnal  people,  is,  that  it 
strikes  at  the  very  root  of  human  pride,  cuts  the  sinews  of  free- 
will all  to  pieces,  and  brings  the  poor  sinner  to  lie  down  at  the 
foot  of  sovereign  grace ;  and,  let  his  attainments  in  the  school  of 
Christ  be  ever  so  great,  it  constrains  him  to  cry  out.  Lord,  ^hy 
me  ?  why  me  ?    Our  Master  (and  I  think  we  should  not  attempt 
to  be  wiser  than  our  Master  was)  speaks  particularly  of  aod  to 


l^XV.]  THB   PURNACB  OP   AFFLICTION.  688 

Ii^is  own  school,  his  little  college  of  apostles :  "  Thine  they  were, 
a&d  tbou  gavest  them  me ;  I  have  chosen  you,  but  ye  have  not 
chosen  me.  Because  I  have  chosen  you  out  of  the  world,  there- 
fore the  world  huteth  you/'  Before  they  were  fully  enlightened, 
they  were  afterwards  brought  more  to  the  light,  two  of  them  at 
first  said,  "We  have  found  tlie  Messiah;"  yet,  when  they  were 
sunk  deeper  in  the  knowledge  of  themselves,  they  changed  their 
note,  and  said.  The  Messiah  has  found  us.  Observe  the  manner 
of  the  Redeemer's  addressing  our  first  parents,  when  their  guilt 
liad  caused  them  to  hide  themselves,  '*  Adam,  where  art  thou?" 
Pray  who  called  first,  did  Adam  call  after  Christ,  or  did  Christ 
call  after  him ;  or  do  you  think  there  is  any  difference  between 
us  and  Adiim,  or  that  we  have  got  better  hearts  than  Adam  had  ; 
do  you  think  we  are  wiser  and  better  now  ?  Adam  run  away 
irom  God,  and  so  should  we  to  this  very  day,  unless  Jesus 
Christ  had  culled  us  to  himself. 

Some  persons,  perhaps,  may  say,  Well,  I  like  your  doctrine 
very  well ;  God  chooses  us,  you  say,  when  we  have  had  no 
regard  to  any  good  works  at  all,  therefore  I  will  go  on  sinning, 
because  the  fitter  I  shall  be  for  God  s  grace. — And  the  fitter  thou 
maycst  be  for  hell.  Grace  does  not  destroy  the  use  of  the  law  ; 
an  honest  heart  will  draw  that  inference  from  it,  as  a  good 
ivoman  once  did  when  the  devil  told  her,  that  either  God  had 
.chosen  her  and  she  should  be  saved,  or  if  she  were  rejected  she 
should  be  damned,  so,  said  he,  you  need  not  strive  ;  she  answer- 
ed, if  there  were  two  to  be  saved,  I  would  strive  to  be  one  of 
them :  God  help  us  to  draw  that  inference. 

Now  this  word  chosen,  refers  us  to  God's  eternal  election  ;  it 
comprehends,  and  is  the  source  of  all  that  God  has  done  for  be- 
lievers, for  every  individual  believer  in  particular,  when  Jesus 
bowed  his  head  and  gave  up  the  ghost.  Hence  the  apostle,  in 
the  eighth  of  the  Romans,  mentioning  this  doctrine  in  the  clearest 
manner,  triumphs  over  the  accuser  by  asking, "  Who  shall  lay  any 
thing  to  the  charge  of  God 'select?"  And  in  the  same  chapter  de- 
clares, '*  that  it  is  God  that  glorifies  :"  for  though  glorification  is 
tbuB  last  thing  done  to  us,  yet  it  is  the  first  thing  God  designs  for  us. 
"What  is  the  great  thing  for  a  natural  man  to  hear?  what  is  it? 
Why,  not  only  that  God  has  chosen  us,  but "  chosen  us  in  the  fur- 
pace  of  aflBiction :"  O  that  the  Spirit  of  God  may  vouchsafe  to 
-transcribe  these  words  into  our  hearts  !  God  help  thee  to  take 
it  to  thyself,  O  man ;  to  take  it  to  thyself,  O  woman  ;  to  take  it 
to  thyself  whoever  thou  art,  that  art  either  a  Christian  now,  or 
desires  or  hopes  to  be  a  Christian  before  thou  diest, ''  I  have 
chosen  thee  in  the  furnace  of  affliction."  What  can  be  the  mean- 
ing of  the  words  ?  Why,  it  is  very  plain  that  the  import  of  them 
must  be  this;  I  have  chosen  thee,  and  it  is  my  determination 
from  everlasting  to  the  end  of  time,  and  for  ever.  I  have  chosen 
thee  with  this  determination,  that  the  way  to  heaven  should  be 
through  the  road  of  affliction  :  this  is  the  believer's  way,  espe- 
cially the  ministers  of  Christ.  When  Paul  Avas  converted,  pray 
what  preferment  did  God  promise  him  ?  Was  it  to  be  a  great 
•  2u 


990  THB  PURNACB   OF   AFFLICTtON.  [LXT. 

dignitary  in  the  chutch  ?  No^  nothing  about  the  church  ?  Was 
it  any  more  ease,  was  it  to  wear  a  triple  crown,  were  persons 
to  come  and  kiss  his  toe,  what  preferment  did  Ood  choose  hin 
to?  What?  says  God,  **  I  will  shew  him  what  great  things  he 
must  suffer  for  my  name's  sake."  I  verily  believe,  that  St  we 
were  to  have  no  other  preferment  than  this  of  Paul,  there  is  not 
one  in  a  thousand  of  the  ministers  that  would  ask  for  a  living, 
if  they  knew  they  were  to  have  such  poor  wages  as  Paul  bad. 
Ministers  that  hold  the  standard  up,  must  expect  the  enemy  viD 
fire  on  them  from  every  quarter  ;  and  if  they  happen  to  be  ii- 
strumental  in  comforting  others  *' with  the  same  comforts  wbeie- 
with  they  themselves  are  comforted  of  God,"  they  must  expect 
to  bear  their  part,  not  only  for  their  own  purification,  but  for  the 
benefit  of  those  to  whom  they  minister ;  and  I  believe  audiences 
find  that  ministers  ininister  best,  and  the  bread  comes  best,  wbea 
it  comes  out  of  the  furnace  of  a  minister's  alHiction. 

The  word  afiSiction  is  of  a  very  complex  kind  ;  it  is  like  the 
word  tribulation,  which  comes  from  the  Latin  tribulus,  signify- 
ing a  pricking  thorn,  a  scratching  briar,  or  wounding  spikes  con- 
cealed in  the  way ;  and  the  word  affliction  arises  from  a  word 
that  signifies  something  that  beats  down,  presses  sore,  and  is 
very  grievous  and  tormenting  ;  it  is  a  word  of  so  general  import, 
that  it  takes  in  all  the  trouble  we  meet  with  from  men,  all  the 
wounds  we  receive  from  enemies,  as  well  as  in  the  house  of  oor 
friends ;  it  takes  in  all  our  domestic  trials,  all  our  inward  strag- 
gles and  dreadful  temptations  occasioned  by  the  fiery  darts  of 
a  watchful  devil ;  and  if  I  am  not  mistaken,  when  the  great  God 
said^  *'  I  have  chosen  thee  in  the  furnace  of  affliction,"  it  implies, 
that  this  is  really  to  continue  with  us  even  to  the  very  end  of 
our  days :  this  is  what  young  converts,  in  the  time  of  their  fint 
love^  do  not  see;  that  is,  do  not  wholly  see  it;  for  if  yonn; 
Christians  were  to  know  all  they  have  to  suffer,  it  would  dread- 
fully discourage  them.     God  says,  his  people  shall  not  do  so 
and  so,  because  at  their  first  setting  out  they  would  be  dis- 
heartened, and  think  of  going  back.     It  is  our  happiness  God 
lets  us  know  our  trials  but  very  little  beforehand,  very  little 
notice  of  them  have  we  before  the  time,  and  then,  perhaps,  gires 
us  but  little  respite ;  but  O  when  one  trial  is  gone,  God  does 
with  us  as  masters  do  with  their  scholars,  turns  over  a  new  leaf 
with  us  ;  and  when  one  trial  is  over,  teaches  us  another ;  hence' 
our  trials  are  not  only  new,  but  constant ;  hence  many  a  Iw- 
liever  is  apt  to  say,  '^  My  trials  rise  out  of  the  ground  ;*'  and 
many  believers  are  saying,  Who  would  have  thought  such  atrial 
would  have  befallen  me  at  such  a  time,  from  such  a  hand  T  This 
may,  perhaps,  open  to  us  a  gloomy  scene ;  it  would  be  gloomy 
indeed,  if  we  were  not  living  in  a  state  of  preparation  ;  it  wooU 
be  gloomy  indeed,  if  God  were  to  afflict  without  a  cause ;  hot 
there  is  so  much  corruption,  such  remainders  of  indwelling  m 
even  in  Grod's  own  children,  that  are  to  stand  nearest  to  him  is 
glory,  that  are  the  dearest  to  him,  and  who  are  to  be  blessed 
with  being  in  his  bosom,  that  if  God  were  not  to  send  them  afflic- 


LXV.]  THE   FIJRNACB   OP   AFFLICTION,  691 

tions^  there  is  not  a  child  of  God  but  wonld  overset  even  with 
the  comforts  God  vouchsafes  to  them.     We  find  it  so  with  our 
bodies,  that  if  we  live  without  exercise  we  are  liable  to  havie  a 
variety  of  diseases,  we  therefore  submit  to  various  ways  and 
means  that  a  physician  can  prescribe ;  and  if  the  disorders  to 
"which  we  are  exposed  in  our  bodies,  make  us  willing  to  submit 
to  a  regimen  prescribed  by  a  skilful  physician,  does  it  not  fol- 
low by  a  parity  of  reasoning,  that  we  for  our  souls  want  some- 
times lenitives  and  corrosives,  and  something  like  a  caustic  to  eat 
off  the  proud  flesh  that  cleaves  to  us  ?    And  it  vindicates  God's 
ivays  to  man,  that  there  is  an  hereafter  appointed  for  us^  that 
there  is  another  world,  to  which,  perhaps,  we  shall  be  called 
to  go  before  the  morning, ''  where  the  inhabitants  shall  no  more 
say,  I  am  sick."     Believers  know  this,  and  if  they  cannot  keep 
a  ledger  book,  if  they  cannot  post  a  merchant's  book,  they  may 
learn  so  much  of  divine  arithmetic,  as  to  know  that  *'  the  light 
afflictions  which  are  but  for  a  moment,  work  for  us  a  far  more 
exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory."    The  way  to  heaven, 
good  bishop  Beveridge  says,  is  narrow,  but  it  is  not  long ;  the 
gates  are  strait,  but  open  to  everlasting  life;  and  therefore  '*  God 
has  chosen  us  in  the  furnace  of  aflSiction,"  because  if  we  were 
Tiot  afflicted,  we  should  never  know  what  we  were  made  of. 
Mr.  Bohem,  who  was  chaplain  to  the  prince  of  Denmark^  that 
^as  married  to  queen  Anne,  in  one  of  his  excellent  sermons  upon 
affliction,  has  this  observation,   **  Afflictions  and  temptations 
are  like  sun-beams  falling  upon  a  dunghill ;  they  do  not  bring 
Tapours  into  the  dunghill,  but,  exhale  the  vapours."    So  they 
afflictions  do  not  bring  the  corruptions  into  us  ;  we  blame  such 
and  such  a  one  for  stirring  up  such  and  such  corruptions  in  us, 
but  these  tend  to  draw  out  the  vapours,  and  prepare  us  for  the 
more  lasting  sunshine  of  a  smiling  God.     God  does  not  intend 
to  destroy  thee,  but  to  refme  thee,  and  to  humble  thee  by  it. 
The  devil  wants  to  sift  thee  as  wheat;  he  thinks  to  let  the 
grain  go  through  the  sieve,  but  Christ  will  only  let  the  chaff  fall 
through,  and  the  sooner  that  is  gone,  the  better :  so,  it  is  no 
ways  derogatory  to  the  honour  of  Christ,  but  agreeable  to  the 
state  in  which  we  are,  agreeable  to  the  state  and  the  prepara- 
tions to  be  made  for  eternity,  agreeable  to  the  militant  dispo- 
sition that  our  graces  must  retain.  -  Hence  our  Lord  was  con- 
tent to  be  called  God's  servant,  **  Behold  my  servant  whom  I 
have  chosen,  mine  elect  in  whom  my  soul  delighteth.— Though 
be  was  a  son,  he  learned  obedience  by  the  things  that  he  suf- 
fered ;"  he  was  made  perfect  by  his  sufferings.    We  cannot 
avoid  trouble  as  men,  as  Christians  we  should  not  attempt  it : 
'^  man  is  born  to  trouble,  as  the  sparks  fly  upwards ;"    and 
Christians,  especially  the   man  new-bom.     ^'  If  these  thinR:s 
-were  done  to  the  green  tree,  what  shall  be  done  to  the  dry  ?" 
The  cross  is  the  high-road  to  heaven,  and  so  the  King's  high- 
way: you  know  there  is  always  a  bar  upon  the  king's  road, 
the  king  has  a  particular  road  for  himself;  but  the  King  of 
kings  will  make  all  bars  to  be  removed^  and  then  his  people  go 

2u2 


092  THE   FURNACE  OF   AFFLICTION.  [hXl. 

the  same  road  he  himself  went!  this  was  the  road  of  all  the 
children  of  God ;  there  is  not  an  heir  of  God  in  heaven,  but  is 
now  thanking  God  for  his  sufferings  here  below ;  there  is  not  a 
child  of  God  ever  received  into  glory,  but,  I  believe,  as  soob 
as  he  comes  there,  is  made  to  know  why  he  met  with  suck 
a  trial,  and  from  such  a  quarter ;  why  he  was  under  such  a 
rod,  why  under  it  so  long ;  why  it  was  shifted,  why  it  was 
changed,  why  the  whip  sometimes  was  turned  to  a  scorpioB, 
and  the  furnace  heated  seven  times  hotter;  then  the  be> 
liever  sees  the  need  of  it :  in  heaven,  it  makes  him  wonder 
he  was  not  afflicted  seven  times  more  on  earth.  I  rememiMr 
Virgil  makes  his  hero  in  the  ^Eneid  to  say,  "  'twould  all  end 
well."*  He  comforts  himself  with  this  consideration  under  \u$ 
trouble,  that  the  discharge  from  it  would  be  the  better ;  and  H 
a  child  of  God  would  think  of  that,  hereafter  he  will  look  witk 
pleasure  on  what  he  suffered  here ;  much  more  a  Christias 
enriched  with  the  grace  of  God,  will  be  willing  to  die  when  he 
considers  he  is  hereafter  to  sit  in  Abraham's  bosom,  and  God 
says  to  him*  ^*  Remember  thou  in  thy  life-time  received  tby 
evil  things."  O  my  brethren,  a  fine  school  is  the  school  df 
Christ !  I  never  knew  any  one  of  my  acquaintance  that  wen 
believers,  and  I  have  been  acquainted  with  some  these  twenty- 
eight  years  last  past,  but  what  flourished  most  under  the  afflicting 
hand  of  God.  I  believe  if  the  devil  had  his  will,  he  wonld  bid 
too  high  for  every  believer ;  he  does  not  love  money ;  a  covet- 
ous man  is  worse  than  the  devil,  he  loves  that  which  the  devil 
squanders  away;  but  say  they,  we  think  we  should  be  very 
good  if  we  had  a  coach-and-six ;  so  when  they  have  it,  they 
think  they  are  too  good  to  go  to  that  chapel  or  Foundry;  it 
was  a  good  place  when  we  walked  afoot,  but  now  we  have  a 
coach  we  will  drive  by.  Happy  is  it  for  us  that  we  are  chosen 
in  the  furnace  of  affliction ;  that  is  a  glorious  petition  in  cor 
litany,  "That  in  all  time  of  our  tribulation,  good  Lord  dehvef 
us !"  You  may  very  well  excuse  me  for  preaching  from  sack 
a  text  as  this,  because  I  have  been  in  the  furnace,  and  I  find  it 
is  very  sweet ;  it  is  very  sweet  walking  in  a  burning  fiery  fur- 
nace, when  the  Son  of  God  leads  by  the  arm.  In  the  accoant 
we  have  of  the  three  children  being  in  the  fiery  furnace,  the 
king  could  say,  ''  I  see  one  walking  with  them :"  what  an 
emblem  of  the  children  of  God  !  O,  say  you,  does  the  Son  of 
God  walk  with  you  in  the  furnace  ?  I  answer,  yes  ;  make  the 
M'orst  of  it,  tell  them  the  enthusiast,  the  babbler,  says,  God 
walks  with  his  people  in  the  furnace ;  he  walks  with  all  that 
walk  with  him,  and  never  walks  closer  with  them  than  when 
they  are  in  the  furnace.  Daniel  is  generally  painted  yoaag» 
but  he  was  fourscore  years  old  when  he  was  throw^n  in  amon^ 
the  lions  ;  there  he  sits  as  sweet  and  easy,  and  no  lion  dare  to 

*  Dabit  Deus  his  qoquc  (inem, 

Forsan  et  hscc  olini  meniinisse  juvabit, 
Per  varios  casus,  per  lot  dismmina  remm, 
Tendimua  in  Latium. 


£*XV.J  THE   FURNACE   OF   AFFLICTION.  698 

touch  one  of  his  grey  hairs.  Nothing  proves  the  truth  of  grace, 
and  shews  the  love  of  God  more,  and  you  may  be  assured  of 
it  as  you  are  of  being  in  this  place  alive,  that  sanctified  afflic- 
tions are  the  greatest  evidence  God  can  give  you  of  his  love  ; 
so  that  if  we  are  chosen  in  the  furnace  of  affliction,  we  are  to 
expect  it ;  and  is  it  not  a  great  shame  for  us,  that  the  heathens 
out-do  us  ?  When  one  came  and  told  one  of  the  heathens  that 
bis  son,  a  darling  son,  was  dead,  he  said,  ^'  I  know  that  1  begot 
him  mortal."  So  Job  said,  "  The  Lord  hath  given,  and  the 
liOrd  hath  taken  away."  O  that  God  may  bless  this  poor 
preaching  to  the  raising  up  some  drooping  soul.  Underneath 
thee,  O  believer,  O  sufferer,  are  God's  everlasting  arms ;  there- 
fore "  the  beloved  of  the  Lord  shall  dwell  in  safety,"  because 
they  dwell  near  him,  and  ''  he  that  toucheth  them,  tonchetb  the 
apple  of  God's  eyes." 

This  may  teach  us,  when  one  trouble  is  over  to  expect  an- 
other; none  of  your  requiems  here.  Abraham,  I  believe,  thouj^ht 
-flrhen  he  had  got  his  Isaac,  he  was  to  be  tried  no  more ;  but 
**  after  these  things  God  did  tempt  Abraham."  We  know  not 
inrhat  trials  we  are  to  have,  but  remember  they  are  marks  of 
oar  adoption :  not  that  all  afflictions  do  prove  us  children  of 
God,  because  there  are  some  afflictions  that  are  not  sanctified  : 
God  give  us  all  to  have  sanctified  afflictions  ! 

If  this  is  the  case,  let  young  believers  know  what  they  are  to 
meet  with ;  God  forgive  those,  and  visible  churches  are  too  much 
pestered  wilh  them,  that  daub  with  untempered  mortar ;  formerly, 
'^hen  the  church  was  under  persecution,  they  would  forsake 
father,  mother,  and  all ;  but  now,  "  blessed  be  God,  we  are  for 
becoming  Christians ;  we  live  in  London,  we  live  where  the 
church  is  smiled  upon,  we  may  live  where  we  are  at  ease."  My 
dear  hearers,  do  you  think  that  all  the  Londoners  are  converted  ? 
Do  you  think  they  all  bring  forth  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit ;  or  have 
you  heard  that  the  devil  is  converted  ?  Can  any  body  prove  to 
me  that  the  devil  is  not  the  same  ?  can  you  prove  that  God  is 
not  the  same  ?  can  you  prove  that  the  world  is  not  the  same, 
that  the  human  heart  is  not  that  the  same?  If  you  can  prove 
that  neither  of  these  are  what  they  were  when  Christ  came  into 
the  world,  I  will  give  up  the  point ;  but  if  they  are  the  same,  we 
must  expect  the  same  trials  our  forefathers  met  with,  if  ever 
vre  hope  to  meet  with  them  in  glory ;  "  God  forbid  I  should 
glory,  save  in  tlic  cross  of  Jesus  Christ."  Therefore,  if  any  of 
us  have  a  mind  to  set  out  for  heaven,  expect  trouble.  Indeed, 
if  we  have  enlisted  under  the  devil's  banner,  he  shews  you  the 
kingdoms  of  the  world,  and  the  glory  of  them.  When  Peter  said 
to  our  Lord,  concerning  his  sufferings,  "Far  be  that  from  thee;" 
after  having  shewn  his  displeasure  at  it,  as  a  suggestion  of 
Satan's,  he  says  to  all  his  disciples,  "  If  any  man  will  come 
after  me,  let  him  take  up  his  cross,  and  follow  me."  And  I  re- 
member Mr.  Law,  who  was  a  great  man,  notwithstanding  some 
great  blunders  and  mistakes,  told  me,  thirty-two  years  ago,  all 
principles,  all  doctrines,  are  comprehended  in  these  few  words. 


6D4  THiS   FURNACE   OP   AFFLICTION.  [LX^ 

''  If  any  man  will  come  after  me,  let  him  deny  himself,  and  tale 
up  his  cross  and  follow  me."  And  if  you  do  not  choose  the  fur- 
nace of  aflSiction,  if  you  are  too  nice  to  enter  in,  you  forsaJ^e  Urn 
Lord^  and  are  only  preparing  to  be  company  for  the  damned  it 
bell.    This  was  the  case  with  Dives ;  ^^  Son,  thou  in  thy  life- 
time receivedst  thy  good  things :"  and  for  a  man  that  fares  saicp- 
tuously  every  day ;  for  a  man  that  is  clothed  in  fine  linen,  to  be 
tormented  by  the  devil ;  to  see  God,  Christ,  heayen,  with  all  ke 
had,  lost ;  and  the  torments  must  never  cease.     One  momeoft 
thought  of  this  is  very  awful !  God  grant  this  may  not  be  the  lot 
of  any  of  us !     Come,  my  dear  hearers,  may  God  of  his  infinilB 
mercy  grant  this  night,  that  some  poor  soul  may  be  rescued  fnni 
the  devil,  and  enlist  under  Christ's  banner !  I  have  borne  the  cnm 
thirty-four  years  ;  I  never  wore  it  long,  but  I  found  to  my  grett 
comfort  it  was  lined  with  the  love  of  God.    **  My  yoke  is  easTi 
my  burden  is  light,"  saith  our  blessed  Lord.     Suffering  grace  is 
given  for  suflfering  times ;  the  reason  we  have  not  more  comfort 
is,  because  we  have  not  more  crosses ;  happy  they  that  say  ui 
this  visitation,  my  Jesus,  my  Lord,  I  give  up  all  for  thee;  nqr 
life,  and  all  things,  I  cast  behind. 

'^  A  heart  that  no, desire  -will  move, 
But  still  to  adore,  obey,  and  love, 
Give  me,  my  Lord,  my  life,  my  all.'' 

I  wish  you  joy  that  run  this  course;  do  not  be  weary  of  it,  do 
not  think  hard  of  God,  do  not  say.  Never  w£Ui  any  bodfy  tried  as 
I  am,  never  was  any  body  tempted  as  I  am,  for  if  you  were  to  go 
and  tell  your  cross,  there  are  a  thousand  in  the  congregatioo 
would,  perhaps,  say.  Dear,  I  have  had  that,  and  ten  times  worse. 
One  Mr.  Buchanan,  a  Scotchman,  who  died  the  other  day, 
having  lost  his  last  child,  said,  "I  am  now  childless,  but, 
blessed  be  God,  I  am  not  Cbristless."  A  noble  lady  told  me 
herself,  that  when  she  was  crying  on  account  of  one  of  her 
children's  death,  her  little  daughter  came  innocently  to  her  om 
day,  and  said.  Mamma,  is  God  Almighty  dead,  you  cry  so? 
The  lady  blushing,  said.  No ;  she  replied.  Madam,  will  you  lend 
me  your  glove?  She  let  her  take  it,  and  after  that  asked  ftur it 
again ;  upon  which  the  child  said.  Now  you  have  taken  thegiore 
from  me,  shall  I  cry  because  you  have  taken  away  your  own 
glove  ?  And  shall  you  cry  because  God  has  taken  away  mj 
sister?  ''Out  of  the  mouths  of  babes  has  God  perfected 
praise,"  and  will  for  ever.    O  glorify  God  in  the  furnace  ? 

If  any  of  you  are  saying.  Do  not  tell  me  of  your  afflictions,  I 
will  live,  I  will  drink,  "  to-morrow  shall  be  as  to-day,  and  w 
much  the  more."  If  there  be  any  of  you  that  say  so,  takecarv, 
take  care ;  God  himself  cannot  issue  out  a  worse  sentence  against 
you  than  this, ''  Iict  him  alone,  let  him  alone :"  whom  the  Lord 
loves,  he  chastens.  What  a  pretty  creature  would  you  make  ii 
heaven,  if  you  were  to  go  there,  without  one  of  Christ's  crosses 
on  your  back,  you  would  be  turned  out ;  no,  there  are  none  socb 
there. 

.Christians,  endure  the  cross ;  happy  ye  that  are  tried,  wd 


LXV.]  THE   FURNACB   OP   AFFLICTION.  685 

happy  they  that  are  gone  to  glory.  Where  is  Mr.  Middleton 
now  ?  Where  is  iny  dear  fellow-lahourer,  that  honesty  that  steady 
man  of  God  ?  Oh !  he  was  thanking  God  for  the  gout  in  his 
bead^  in  his  feet,  in  his  stomach,  all  decays ;  thanking  God  for 
that  last  trouble  that  cut  the  thread  of  life,  and  gave  the  soul  a 
passage  for  heaven ;  if,  in  the  midst  of  that  torture,  he  could 
answer  his  daughter  and  say,''  heaven  upon  earth, heaven  upon 
earth/'  and  went  to  heaven  but  a  little  after ;  now  surely  he  must 
say, ''  heaven  in  heaven  ;"  must  he  not,  now  he  sees  God,  and 
sees  Christ?  And  by  his  comfort,  though  in  such  great  pain,  it 
shews  that  God  was  kissing  away  bis  soul,  he  died  at  the  very 
mouth  of  God.  O  may  the  blessed  God  bless  his  parents  and 
children  that  are  here  to-night;  I  believe  you  may  be  glad  that 
God  has  chosen  him  in  the  furnace  of  affliction.  I  am  glad  to 
hear  that  so  many  are  desirous  that  something  may  be  done  for 

his  family,  and  Mr. ,  and  Mr. ,  and  Mr. , 

are  willing  to  take  in  the  subscriptions  that  any  may  be  inclined 
to  send  them.  May  God  bless  the  family,  and  grant  that  his 
children  may  not  disgrace  the  memory  of  their  father ;  that  they 
may  live  as  followers  of  his  faith,  who  is  now  gone  to  inherit  the 
promises  of  God.  You  know  not  how  your  children  may  be  left 
by  you,  though  there  is  not  one  of  you  here  but  may  be  called 
that  have  children,  to  say.  By  and  by  my  children  must  be  left 
to  the  goodness  of  God :  and  it  is  a  great  happiness  to  see  so 
many  fatherless  children  provided  for  of  late;  there  was  never 
a  time  when  persons  were  more  beneficent  to  the  distressed ;  let 
it  not  be  said  that  believers  in  London  live  on  bread  alone,  but 
may  they  be  continuing  to  lay  up  treasure  in  heaven  !  when  we 
plead,  not  by  way  of  merit.  Remember  me,  O  Lord,  I  did  so  and 
so  when  others  were  in  trouble.  Lord  Jesus,  I  plead  thy  pro- 
mises, if  thou  hast  chosen  me  in  the  furnace  of  affliction ;  O 
Ix>rd,  help  me  to  lay  hold  on  thee :  O  that  this  may  be  your  and 
my  lot.  1  am  hastening  to  the  grave ;  I  am  astonished  that  1 
have  again  an  opportunity  to  preach  the  word  of  God.  May 
God  prepare  us  to  follow  those  that  have  gone  before  us, "  where 
the  wicked  cease  from  troubling,"  and  the  weary  soul  enjoys 
everlasting  rest  with  thee,  O  Father^  with  thee,  O  Son,  and  with 
the  Holy  Ghost;  to  whom,  three  persons  but  one  God,  be  all 
honour  and  glory,  now  and  for  evermore.    Amen. 


SERMON  LXVI. 

THE    LORD   OUR    LIGHT. 

The  sun  shall  be  no  more  thy  light  by  day,  neither  for  briahtness 
shall  the  moon  give  light  unto  thee,  but  the  Lord  shall  be  unto 
thee  an  everlastina  light,  and  thy  God  thy  glory.  Thy  sun 
shall  no  more  go  down,  neither  shall  thy  moon  withdraw  itself, 
for  the  Lord  shall  be  thine  everlastina  light,  and  the  days  of 
thy  mourning  shall  be  €/ided.— Isaiah  fx.  19,  20. 

Upon  reading  those  words  I  cannot  help  thinking  of  what  the 
iroyal  psalmist  said, ''  Glorious  things  are  spoken  of  thee,  O  city 


696  THB   LORD   OUR    LlOHt.  [LXVI. 

of  God.  Selah."  I  am  afraid,  my  dear  hearers,  that  even  belieyers 
themscl  veSy  who  have  tasted  of  the  grace  of  God,  reflect  not  and 
meditate  as  they  ought^  on  the  glorious  and  amazing  felicity  they 
are  called  by  the  Spirit  of  God  to  experience  in  this  life.  Wc 
content  ourselves  too  much  v^ith  our  hopes,  and  if  we  attain  to 
"  a  gocd  hope  through  grace/*  we  are  ready  to  think  we  have 
got  up  to  the  last  step  of  the  gospel  ladder,  and  have  nothinf 
more  to  do  but  to  rest  in  that  hope,  w^ithout  ever  attaining  toao 
abiding,  full  assurance  of  faith.  If  wc  would  examine  the  scrip- 
tures, and  not  choose  to  bring  them  down  to  us,  but  beg  of  CM 
to  raise  our  hearts  up  to  them,  we  shall  find  the  believer  is  made 
partaker  of  the  grace  of  life,  as  well  as  an  heir  of  it ;  the  one '» 
on  earth,  the  other  in  heaven,  and  one  is  only  a  prelibatioQ  of 
the  other.  This  blessed  prophet  Isaiah,  speaking  of  the  privi- 
leges of  the  children  of  God,  saith,  "'Eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear 
heard,  neither  hath  it  entered  into  the  heart  of  man  to  conceive 
the  things  that  God  hath  prepared  (and  that  even  here  below) 
for  those  that  love  him  :*'  God  grant  that  we  may  be  of  tint 
happy  number !  Hence,  like  an  evangelist,  the  prophet  draws 
aside  the  veil,  and,  as  one  inspired  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  aid 
filled  with  the  rays  of  divine  light,  gives  us  a  transporting  view 
of  the  gospel  state,  and  the  glory  which  the  church  militant 
enjoys  below,  before  its  triumphant  state  above. 

The  text  probably  refers  to  the  great  change  that  should  be 
made  in  the  affairs  of  the  Jews  after  their  captivity,  how  woo- 
derfully  God  would  appear  for  them,  after  their  harps  had  beeo 
long  hanging  on  the  willows,  and  they  could  make  no  other  an- 
swer to  their  insulting  foes  than  this  mournful  one,  **  How  can 
we  sing  the  Lord's  song  in  a  strange  land?"     The  gospel  is, 
doubtless,  glad  tidings  of  great  joy;  and  however  the  people  of 
God  might  be  encouraged  to  hope  that  the  time  wonld  come, 
when  they  should  tread  on  the  necks  of  their  enemies,  the  pio- 
phet  teaches  them  to  look  further,  and  lets  them  know  that  their 
happiness  was  not  to  consist  in  any  external  created  good,  bot 
in  a  larger  possession  of  the  graces  and  comforts  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.     So  that  this  chapter  speaks  not  only  of  a  temporal 
deliverance  and  rest,  which  they  should  enjoy  after  their  trooUe, 
but  a  spiritual  rest,  which  by  faith  they  should  enter  into  k^> 
as  the  earnest  and  pledge  of  the  rest  and  enjoyment  of  the  better 
world  hereafter.     As  we  know  no  more  of  heaven  than  is  dis- 
covered by  the  eye  of  faith,  for  even  St.  Paul  acknowledge^ 
that  the  things  he  saw  were  unutterable,  it  is  observable  tlmt 
heaven  in  scripture  is  described  to  us  more  by  what  it  is  not, 
than  by  what  it  is.  So  in  the  words  of  the  text,  **Thy  sunsbaH 
no  more  go  down,  neither  shall  thy  moon  withdraw  itself,  for  tbe 
Lord  shall  be  thine  everlasting  light,  and  the  days  of  thy  mourxh 
ning  shall  be  ended."     Here  are  three  negatives,  and  bat  one 
positive,  namely,    **the  Lord  shall  be  thy  everlasting  light," 
which  is  a  beautiful  allusion  to  the  sun,  that  should  teach  us  to 
spiritualize  natural  things ;  and  if  we  feared  God,  and  lived  aaar 
to  him  as  we  ongbt,  there  is  no  object  of  our  bodily  eyes  M 


»-XVI.]  THK   LORD   OUR   LIGHT.  607 

might  improve  our  spiritual  sight.  You  cannot  suppose  the 
prophet  meant  a  time  should  come,  when  the  sun  should  not 
literally  go  down,  that  there  should  not  be  night  and  day  as 
now :  God  indeed  permitted  a  man  once  to  say,  "  Sun,  stand 
thou  still,"  and  it  was  done ;  but,  perhaps,  there  never  will  be 
any  such  thing  again  till  the  sun  be  removed  from  its  station, 
and  the  moon  forsake  her  orbit,  and  be  turned  into  blood.  The 
word  must  therefore  be  understood  in  a  figurative  sense ;  and 
then,  comparing  spiritual  things  with  spiritual,  it  must  certainly 
import,  that  Jesus  Christ,  the  Sun  of  righteousness,  shall  be 
what  the  sun  is  to  the  visible  world,  that  is,  the  light  and  life 
of  all  his  people ;  I  say,  all  the  people  of  God.  You  see  now, 
the  sun  shines  on  us  all :  I  never  heard  that  the  sun  said.  Lord, 
I  will  not  shine  on  the  Presbyterians,  I  will  not  shine  on  the 
Independents,  I  will  not  shine  on  the  people  called  Methodists, 
those  great  enthusiasts ;  the  sun  never  said  yet,  I  will  not 
shine  on  the  Papists  ;  the  sun  shines  on  all,  which  shews  that 
Jesus  Christ's  love  is  open  to  all  that  are  made  willing  by  the 
Holy  Ghost  to  accept  of  him  ;  and  therefore  it  is  said,  "  the 
Sun  of  righteousness  shall  arise  with  healing  under  bis  wings." 
If  you  were  all  up  this  morning  before  the  sun  arose  at  five 
o'clock,  how  beautiful  was  his  first  appearance  !  how  pleasant 
to. behold  the  flowers  opening  to  the  rising  sun !  I  appeal  to 
you  yourselves,  when  you  were  looking  out  at  the  window,  or 
walking  about,  or  opening  your  shop,  if  in  a  spiritual  frame, 
whether  you  did  not  say.  Arise,  thou  Sun  of  righteousness,  with 
healing  under  thy  wings,  on  me.  All  that  the  natural  sun  is  to 
the  world,  Jesus  Christ  is,  and  more,  to  his  people ;  without 
the  sun,  we  should  have  no  com,  or  fruit  of  any  kind  :  what  a 
dark  place  would  the  world  be  without  the  sun,  and  how  dark 
would  the  world  be  without  Jesus  Christ ;  and  as  the  sun  does 
really  communicate  its  rays  to  the  earth,  the  plants,  and  to  all 
this  lower  creation,  so  the  Son  of  God  does  really  communicate 
his  life  and  power  to  every  new-created  soul,  otherwise  Christ 
is  but  a  painted  sun :  and  is  Christ  nothing  but  a  painted  Christ 
to  us,  while  we  receive  heat  and  benefit  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  on 
account  of  the  virtue  of  his  blood  ?  .Sometimes  the  sun  shines 
brighter  than  at  other  times,  and  does  not  always  appear  alike; 
clouds  intervene,  and  interrupt  its  rays ;  so  it  is  between  a 
renewed  soul  and  the  Lord  Jesus,  the  Sun  of  righteousness ; 
O  my  brethren,  I  believe  you  know  it  by  fatal  experience :  hold 
but  your  hand  now,  when  the  sun  shines  in  its  meridian, 
between  it  and  you,  and  if  by  the  breadth  of  that  you  can  keep 
the  sun  from  you,  ah  !  how  very  little  earth  will  keep  off  thy 
heart  from  Jesus  Christ !  It  was  a  very  excellent  saying  of 
one  of  the  ancients,  that  God  never  leaves  a  person  till  he  first 
leaves  him.  Some  people  think  God  does  so  of  bis  sovereignty, 
but  I  am  apt  to  think  when  the  sun  shines,  we  shall  find  some 
people  have  taken  up  with  something  short  of  the  Sun  of  righ-> 
teousness;  and  I  believe  there  are  times,  w*hen  the  poor 
believer  thinks  his  sun  will  quite  go  down^  and  rise  no  more : 


43%  THE   LORD   OUR    LIGHT.  [LXVt 

he  loses  his  rdlsh,  his  taste  and  evideDce,  of  diviue  things ;  not 
only  are  the  rays  intercepted  tor  a  while,  but  doubts  and  fean, 
a  dreadful  cloud  of  them^  come  on.  Though  I  hold  with  a  foQ 
assursmce  of  faith^  yet  I  am  of  opinion  that  it  is  not  always  ia 
a  like  exercise ;  and  therefore  pray  that  doubting  people  will 
not  take  hold  of  that,  and  say,  Blessed  be  God,  I  am  in  a 
doubting  state,  and  I  am  content.  The  Lord  deliver  you  fium 
a  mind  to  stay  in  prison,  and  prevent  the  devil  from  locking  th^ 
door  upon  you,  and  keeping  you  there  as  long  as  he  can.  Tbe 
Lord  help  you  to  come ;  come,  come,  and  break  out  of  prisoB, 
that  you  may  know  how  pleasant  it  is  to  behold  the  Sun,  and 
praise  his  name. 

Sometimes,  instead  of  the  sun  there  is  only  moonlight,  which 
shews  the  difference  a  believer  feels  in  his  soul,  both  in  relation 
to  grace  and  comfort.     Both  sun  and  moon  give  light,  hot  0 
how  far  superior  is  the  one  to  the  other :  the  moon  gives  a  very 
faint,  uncertain  light,  waxes  and  wanes,  and  at  best  is  almost 
nothing  when  compared  with  the  light,  and  the  blessed  reviving 
heat  of  the  sun.     Hence,  my  brethren,  this  world  sometimes 
is  a  world  of  mourners :    it  is  said,  "  that  the  days  of  our 
mourning  shall  be  ended;'*  for  if  the  text  refer  to  the  fatora 
state,  as  no  doubt  it  does,  it  means  that  the  days  of  believen 
here   below  are    very  often    mournful,  trying,  and   afflictinj^ 
though  they  end  in  joy,  as  our  Lord  intimates  in  his  opening 
his  gospel-sermon  almost  with  these  very  words,  **  Blessed  are 
they  that  mourn,  for  they  shall  be  comforted.'*    Some,  perhaps, 
may  think  it  is  an  odd  kind  of  blessing :  and  though  worldly 
people  are  fond  of  the  fifth  of  Matthew,  and  wonder  that  Me- 
thodists and  gospel-mitiisters  do  not  preach  oftener  on  that 
chapter,  I  am  apt  to  believe,  when  you  come  to  preach  and 
open  that  word,  they  will  not  like  that  chapter  any  more  than 
any  other,  because  they  are  for  a  joyful  Christ,  and  not  for  any 
mourning  at  all.     Do  you  know  God  in  Christ  ?     Let  me  tell 
you,  the  more  you  are  acquainted  with  him,  the  more  year 
souls  will  be  kept  in  a  mourning  state.    A  mournful  state!— 
O,  say  you,  people  will  mourn  betore  they  are  converted. — Ah, 
that  they  will. — I  do  not  love  to  hear  of  conversions  withoot 
any  secret  mourning ;  I  seldom  see  such  sonls  established.    I 
have  heard  of  a  person  who  was  in  company  once  with  fourteen 
ministers  of  the  gospel,  some  of  whom  were  eminent  servants 
of  Christ,  and  yet  not  one  of  them  could  tell  the  time  God  first 
manifested  himself  to  their  soul.    Zaccheus's  was  a  very  quick 
conversion,  perhaps  not  a  quarter  of  an  hour's  conviction :  thii 
I  mention,  that  we  may  not  condemn  one  another.     We  do  not 
love  the  pope,  because  we  love  to  be  popes  ourselves,  and  set 
up  our  own  experience  as  a  standard  to  others.     Those  that 
had  such  a  conversion  as  the  jailor,  or  the  Jews ;  O,  say  you, 
we  do  not  like  to  hear  you  talk  of  shaking  over  hell,  we  love  to 
hear  of  conversion  by  the  love  of  God ;  while  others  that  were 
so  shaken,  as  Mr.  Bolton  and  other  eminent  men  were,  may 
s^Yf  you  are  not  Christians,  because  you  bad  not  the  like  ter 


LXVI.]  THE    LORD   OUR    LIGHT.  G09 

rible  experience.  You  may  as  well  say  to  your  neighbour,  ypu 
have  not  had  a  child,  for  you  were  not  in  labour  all  night.  The 
question  is,  whether  a  real  child  be  bom,  not  how  long  was  the 
preceding  pain,  but  whether  it  were  productive  of  a  new  birth, 
and  whether  Christ  have  been  formed  in  your  hearts :  it  is  the 
birth,  proves  the  reality  of  the  thing. 

Some  allow  that  there  is  mourning  before,  but  no  mourning 
after  conversion ;  pray  who  says  so?  None  but  an  Antinomian^ 
a  rank  Antinomian ;  and  when  you  hear  a  person  say,  that  after 
conversion  you  will  have  no  mourning,  you  may  be  assured  that 
person  is  at  best  walking  by  moon-light ;  he  does  not  walk  by 
the  sun,  he  has  got  some  doctrine  in  his  head,  but  very  little 
grace,  I  am  afraid,  in  his  heart.  How !  how !  my  brethren,  not 
mourn  after  we  are  converted ;  why,  till  then  there  is  no  true 
mourning  at  all.  The  damned  in  hell  are  mourning  now,  they 
put  on  their  mourning  as  soon  as  they  get  there.  How  am  I 
tqrmented  in  this  flame,  says  Dives ;  and  Cain,  My  punishment 
is  greater  than  I  can  bear<  How  many  worldly  people  break 
their  hearts  for  the  loss  of  the  world !  they  cannot  keep  their 
usual  equipage,  nor  do  as  they  would ;  and  come  not  to  wor- 
ship on  Sunday,  because  they  cannot  appear  so  fine  as  for- 
merly they  did :  this  is  a  sorrow  of  the  world  that  worketh 
death;  but  there  is  a  blessed,  a  more  evangelical  mourning, 
which  is  the  habitual,  blessed  state  and  frameof  a  converted 
soul.  How  strong  the  expression,  "  They  shall  look  on  him 
whom  they  have  pierced,  and  shall  mourn;"  how  shall  they 
mourn  ?  "  As  one  mourneth  for  a  first-born,  an  only  child." 
Have  you  ever  been  called  to  bury  a  child  ?  Is  there  any 
tender  mother  here  ?  Were  you  merry  directly  after  the  child 
was  dead  ?  No,  perhaps  till  this  very  day,  you  continually 
call  to  remembrance  your  little  one,  and  shed  a  tear ;  every 
thing  relating  to  it,  causes  the  repetition  of  your  sorrow. 
When  a  poor  believer  is  acquainted  with  Jesus  Christ,  he 
mourns  for  having  crucified  the  Son  of  God,  and  you  will 
mourn  for  the  same  sin  after  conversion  as  before.  Surely,  says 
some,  I  mourn  for  my  sins  I  committed  before  my  conversion. 
I  do  not  know  whether  you  do  or  no,  but  I  know  you  should. 
O,  says  David,  *'  Remember  not  against  me  the  sins  of  my 
youth,"  in  a  psalm  which  was  written  when  he  was  an  old  man ; 
and  Paul  says,  "  I  was  a  blasphemer  and  injurious,  and  there- 
fore not  worthy  to  be  called  an  apostle,  because  I  persecuted 
the  church  of  God  ;"  and  this  after  he  had  been  wrapped  up  to 
the  third  heaven.  See  Mary  rushing  into  the  house,  if^asbing 
her  Lord's  feet  with  her  tears,  and  wiping  them  with  her  hair : 
I  do  not  suppose  she  was  dressed  as  our  ladies  are  now;  they 
did  not  make  such  apes  of  themselves ;  but  her  hair  was  very 
fine  in  an  honest  way :  though  she  breaks  the  alabaster  box  of 
ointment,  given  her  perhaps  by  some  poor  silly  creature  that 
would  die  by  her  frowns,  and  live  upon  her  smiles,  see  her  at 
the  feet  of  her  Saviour ;  and  Jesus  Christ  answers  for  her, 
(some  having  thought  she  was  profuse,)  that  having  had  much 


9^00  tHB   LORD   OUR   LIGHT.  [LXVL 

forgiveD,  she  loved  much.  The  more  the  love  of  Crod  is  mau- 
foBted,  the  more  it  ^ill  melt  the  soal  down:  I  appeal  to  ym 
Christians,  whether  the  sweetest  times  yoa  ever  CBJoyed,  Were 
not  those  when  you  were  much  melted  at  the  sigfat  of  a  cmcidcd 
Saviour;  when  you  could  say,  Ix>rd,  then  foreivcsit  me,  I  fed 
it,  I  know  it,  but  I  cannot  forgive  myself;  this  will  always  be 
the  effect  of  an  ingenuous  mind,  and  a  person  that  is  realir 
converted  will  thus  mourn ;  and  if  you  do  not  know  thi«,  tui 
may  he  assured  you  know  nothing  savingly  of  Jcsas  Chrisi. 
You  may  go  and  hear  this  and  that  warning,  and  you  are  right 
to  gather  honey  from  every  flower,  but  you  have  not  got  withn 
the  inner  court,  but  arc  yet  without.  God  give  you  to  see  your 
folly  herein. 

A  true  believer  will  mourn  over  his  corruptions :  I  wonder 
what  they  can  think,  who  suppose  they  have  no  corroptions? 
I  remember  a  poor  creature  of  Rhode-Island,  who  looked  the 
most  like  the  old  Puritans  I  ever  saw,  when  I  was  talking  with 
him,  and  said.  Some  people  say  there  are  some  men  that  have 
no  sin ;  he  said,  if  you  send  such  a  man  to  me,  I  will  pay  his 
charges  even  from  England,  and  back  again.      I  have  often 
learned  something  from  the  difference  of  glasses :  yon  look  into  the 
common  glasses,  and  see  yourselves  there  so  fine,  and  admire 
your  person,  dress,  &c.  but  when  you  view  yourselves  through 
a  microscope,  how  many  worms  arc  discovered  in  that  fine  sLio 
of  yours,  enough  to  make  you  ashamed  of  the  vermin  and  tilth 
that  is  seated  there :  so  it  is  in  faith,  that  gla.ss  would  shew  yoa 
so  much  corruption  cleaving  to  every  action  of  your  lives,  that 
would  make  you  sin-sick,  and  mourn  that  you  have  known  God 
so  long,  and  are  like  him  so  little.     What  says  Paul  i    *^  Who 
shall  deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death  V  Notwithstanding 
be  knew  that  "  there  is  no  condemnation  to  them  that  are  in 
Christ  Jesus,"  yet  cries  out,  '*  O  wretched  man  that  I  am !"    1 
should  have  thought,  O  happy  man  that  thou  art!  formerly  a 
persecutor,  and  now  a  preacher ;  a  man  that  has  been  honoured 
so  much  above  every  man  in  planting  churches^  which  is  the 
highest  honour  a  man  can  have  under  heaven ;  here  Ls  a  man 
that  has  been  wrapt  up  to  the  third  heaven, — what  of  himf 
*'  O  wretched  man  that  I  am,  who  shall  deliver  me  from  this 
body  of  sin  and  death  V*    Do  you  think  that  it  was  only  a  little 
qualm  of  conscience?    No,  it  was  the  habitual   temper  of  his 
heart.     Some  people  arc  much  humbled  by  fits  and  starts,  bat 
'Paul  felt  this  daily :  many  things  that  we  are  not  concerned 
about,  Paul  looked  upon  them  as  such  that  made  his  heart  ache, 
because  he  thought  he  could  not  live  near  enough  to  God.    He 
not  only  watched  to  do  good,  but  he  watched  how  he  did  that 
good ;  and  nature  was  so  mixed  with  it,  that  he  said,  I  cannot 
do  as  I  would  do,  [  would  have  served  God  like  an  angel,  but  I 
find  myself  to  be  a  poor  sinner  after  all ;  and  if  we  are  hke- 
minded  with  Paul,  we  shall  mourn  over  our  corruptions,  ive 
shall  mourn  over  our  hidden  sins,  that  none  know  but  God  and 
ourselves.    It  is  a  very  dangerous  thing  to  trust  gospel-gossips, 


LXVI.]  THE   LORD   OUR   LIGHT.  Wl 

.^ho  being  strangers  to  themselves^  bear  with  wonder  and  con- 
tempt^ and  often  betray ;  however^  a  judicious  friend,  into  whose 
bosom  wc  can  pour  out  our  souls^  and  tell  our  corruptions  as 
well  as  our  comforts,  is  a  very  great  privilege.  When  our  cor- 
ruptions do  not  drive  us  from  Christ,  but  drive  us  to  him,  it  is 
the  greatest  blessing  to  commune  with  Christ  on  this  side  hea- 
ven :  and,  my  brethren,  if  your  hearts  are  right  with  God,  you 
will  see  such  things  as  nobody  else  could  think  of.  A  good 
woman,  who  was  charmed  with  Dr.  Mauton,  said,  O,  sir,  you 
have  made  an  excellent  sermon  to-day,  I  wish  I  had  your  heart : 
Do  you  so,  said  he,  good  woman,  you  had  better  not  wish  for  it, 
for  if  you  had  it,  you  would  wish  for  your  own  again.  The  best 
of  men  see  themselves  in  the  worst  light. 

How  many  thousand  things  are  there  that  make  you  mourn 
here  below !  who  can  tell  the  tears  that  godly  parents  shed  for 
ungodly  children !  O  you  young  folks,  you  do  not  know  what 
plague  your  children  may  be  to  you  !  O  they  are  pretty  things 
while  young,  like  rattlesnakes  and  alligators,  which  I  have 
seen  when  little ;  but  put  them  in  your  bosom,  and  you  will  find 
they  are  dangerous.  How  many  are  there  in  the  world  that 
would  wish,  if  it  were  lawful,  that  God  had  written  them  child- 
less :  there  is  many  a  poor  creature  that  makes  his  father's  heart 
ache.  I  once  asked  a  godly  widow.  Madam,  how  is  your  son  ? 
she  turned  aside  with  tears,  and  said.  Sir,  be  is  no  son  to  me 
now.  What  in  the  world  can  come  up  to  that !  Here,  says  one, 
I  have  bred  up  my  children,  I  cannot  charge  myself  with  edu- 
cating them  wrong,  though  few  parents  can  say  that,  for  many 
parents  lead  them  into  the  paths  of  death,  and  so  are  murderers 
of  their  own  children,  and  by  their  manner  of  education  help  to 
damn  them  for  ever ;  but  if  you  can  say,  I  have  done  all  I  could, 
and  yet,  O  my  God,  tny  children  are  worse  than  any  other  peo- 
ple's ;  this  is  a  dreadful  state  indeed :  and  the  more  you  mourn, 
the  more  they  laugh  at  you;  O  these  are  my  godly  parents. 
They  increase  their  trouble,  like  Dr.  Horneck's  son,  who  said, 
"  There  is  not  a  post  in  my  father's  house  but  stinks  of  piety." 
J  one  saw  a  man  that  was  aw^O^ened  at  the  Orphan-house,  fall 
down  and  throw  himself  on  one  of  their  beds,  crying  out,  O  sir, 
what  will  become  of  my  poor  gray-headed  'father,  who  knows 
nothing  of  this  birth !  It  is  a  difficulty  with  some  to  know  how 
to  behave  towards  unconverted  relations :  if  you  do  not  go  to 
them,  they  will  say  you  are  precise ;  if  you  do,  and  are  faithful, 
the  will  soon  shew  you  they  have  enough  of  your  company : 
this  sends  a  godly  person  home  mourning ;  and  then  there  comes 
a  thought,  Shall  I  speak  to  them  any  more,  or  let  them  go  to  the 
devil?  This  is  not  like  parting  from  your  friends  by  death,  but 
burying  them  alive  ;  when  dead,  we  know  we  must  submit,  but 
to  part  from  friends,  those  we  loved,  and  thought  to  have  lived 
with  till  we  came  to  heaven,  is  mournful  indeed. — Moreover,  the 
poor  state  of  the  church  makes  many  a  minister  and  close- walker 
with  God  to  weep  over  the  desolatioud  of  the  sanctuary,  and  to 
mourn  for  those  that  will  not  mourj^  for  themselves :  thus  our 


702  THB   LORD   OUR   LIOHt.  [LXVI. 

Lord  wept  over  Jerusalem,  "  O  Jerusalem^  Jemsalem,  how 
often  would  I  have  gathered  thy  children,  as  a  hen  gathereth  her 
chickens,"  but  it  is  over  with  thee  now ;  the  decree  is  gone  forth, 
and  Jerusalem  shaU  suffer. 

Brethren,  the  time  will  fail,  and  therefore  I  leave  it  to  you  to 
supply  more  cases  :  for  if  I  were  to  preach  till  to-morrow  morn- 
ing, I  doubt  not  but  a  thousand  here  would  say,  there  are  many 
things  you  have  not  mentioned  yet.  You  know  the  state  of  yom 
own  heart,  and  the  many  particular  trials  in  your  own  case; 
and  you  may  also  know,  though  your  trial  seems  over^  it  is  only 
changed  :  but  let  it  be  observed,  the  day  of  your  mourning  shall 
be  ended ;  mind,  it  is  but  days,  though  sometimes  made  very 
sad  ones  indeed,  by  the  neglect  and  ingratitude  of  those  vbo 
have  made  the  people  of  God  serve  them  with  rigour,  as  though 
all  the  world  was  made  for  them,  as  well  as  their  incapacity  to 
help  themselves,  by  poverty,  pain,  sore  sicknesses,  and  of  long 
continuance.  This  has  been,  and  is  the  lot  of  many  a  child  of 
God  ;  blessed  be  sovereign  mercy,  it  is  but  a  few  days.  An  end 
shall  arrive,  and  that  end  shall  be  happy,  when  deaths  the  be- 
liever's friend,  shall  come  with  an  angel's  face,  to  dismiss  them 
from  all  their  sin  and  sorrow.  When  I  was  last  at  Bristol,  I 
could  not  help  remembering  good  Mr.  Middleton,  who  usck),  yon 
kno^,  to  have  the  gout  very  much,  and  in  that  closet  were  kept 
his  crutches  :  now,  thought  I,  he  needs  them  no  more,  the  days 
of  his  mourning  are  ended,  and  so  shall  ours  by  and  by  too, 
when  we  shall  no  longer  want  our  spiritual  crutohes  or  armonr, 
but  shall  say  to  the  helmet  of  hope,  the  shield  of  faith,  I  have  no 
more  need  of  thee ;  and  the  all-prevailing  weapon  of  prayer  be 
changed  into  songs  of  endless  praise ;  when  God  himself  shall 
be  our  everlasting  light,  a  sun  that  shall  never  go  down  more, 
but  shall  beam  forth  his  infinite  and  eternal  love  in  a  beatific 
state  for  ever.  The  prospect  of  this  made  one  of  the  fathers  cry 
out,  O  glory !  how  great !  how  great !  what  art  thou  ?  A  friend 
asking  him  what  he  saw?  he  answered,  I  see  the  glory  of  the 
only  begotten  Son  of  God.  And  if  a  sight  of  Christ  on  earth  is 
so  great,  as  could  make  good  Mr.  Wardrobe,  an  excellent  Scotch 
minister,  say,  after  he  was  given  over,  starting  up  in  the  arms  of 
an  excellent  friend  who  told  it  me,  in  a  rapture  of  joy,  Croims! 
crowns  !  crowns  of  glory  shall  adorn  this  head  of  mine  ere  lon^- 
and  stretching  up,  added,  palms  !  palms  !  palms  shall  ere  loof 
fill  these  hands  of  mine  !  and  so  sweetly  fell  asleep  in  Jesos: 
what  a  pleasing,  awful  trial  is  that  for  an  kfifectionate  friend! 
So  our  dear  sister,  who  is  to  be  buried  to-morrow  night  at  Tot- 
tenham-court, talked  with  her  friends  for  an  hour  or  two,  and 
took  leave  of  her  husband  and  children,  and  said.  Now  come,  ye 
heavenly  chariots  !  We  shall  thank  God  then  for  all  onrlosses* 
crosses,  and  disappointments  ;  and  I  believe  those  things  wlucft 
we  mourn  for  most,  and  puts  us  most  to  the  trial,  will  give  w 
most  comfort  when  we  come  to  die  :  God  shall  be  our  everlast- 
ing light,  as  well  as  the  days  of  our  mourning  shall  be  ended.— 
Take  care,  do  not  be  secure,  pray  do  not  think  the  day  of  yoar 


I:.XVI.]  THE  LORD  OUR   LIGHT.  703 

mourning  to  be  ended  yet :  you  may  put  off  mourning  for  your 
friends,  but  may  have  fresh  cause  of  mourning  for  your  souls ; 
whilst  you  remember  that  holy  mourning  is  consistent  with  holy 
>valking,  following  the  Lord  in  all  his  ways.  You  have  often 
heard  me  speak  of  one  of  our  ministers,  who  was  not  one  of  your 
fine  velvet  mouths,  that  said  once  in  the  pulpit.  As  sure  as  you 
see  the  sun  shine  on  my  breast,  which  at  that  time  it  did,  so 
sure  does  the  Spirit  of  God  dwell  in  the  souls  of  true  believers. 
How  often  has  he  told  you,  "  I  am  for  having  you  have  godly 
sorrow,  I  wish  your  hearts  were  full  of  it,  because  it  will  end  in 
everlasting  joy.  Comfort,  my  brethren,  one  another  with  these 
things,  the  day  of  your  mourning  shall  soon  be  ended  for  ever. 

But  what  am  I  to  say?  I  apprehend  I  shall  grow  forgetful  to- 
night;— I  have  spoken  so  much  to  saints,  I  am  afraid  I  shall 
have  but  little  time  to  speak  to  sinners :  I  mean,  I  have  taken 
so  much  time  up  in  speaking  to  you  that  know  God,  that  I  have 
but  little  to  speak  to  you  that  know  him  not.  How  different 
your  state,  poor  hearts  !  poor  hearts !  my  soul  mourns  for  you  ; 
my  blood,  whilst  I  am  speaking,  is  ready  to  curdle  in  my  veins. 
The  seraphic  Mr.  Hervey,  when  he  did  me  the  honour  to  sojourn 
under  my  roof,  said.  My  dear  friend,  it  is  an  awful  thing,  when 
we  see  an  unconverted  man  die,  and  his  eyes  closed,  to  think 
that  that  poor  soul  will  never  see  one  gleam  of  comfort  or  life 
more  ;  to  have  a  sight  of  God,  of  Christ,  and  the  heavenly  angels 
and  saints ;  but  to  see  what  the  rich  man  saw,  a  God  they  want; 
to  see  Lazarus,  whom  he  would  not  permit  to  be  seen  at  his 
door,  now  taken  particular  notice  of  in  heaven ;  and  to  see  him- 
self now  a  beggar  in  hell.  The  Lord  help  you  to  think  !  O 
think  how  soon  your  sun  will  go  down,  and  even  your  bodies 
will  feel  damnation,  not  only  in  respect  to  pain,  but  loss. 

Bishop  Usher's  opinion  was,  and  I  heartily  concur  in  it,  that 
those  w^bo  value  themselves  most  on  their  beauty  and  dress,  and 
do  not  love  God  on  earth,  will  be  most  deformed  in  hell,  and  their 
bodies  suffer  proportionally  there.  There  is  no  dressing  inheU, 
nothing  but  fire  and  brimstone  there,  and  the  wrath  of  God 
always  awaiting  on  thee,  O  sinner,  whoever  thou  art,  man  or 
woman.  It  was  a  fine  saying  of  Maclane,  who  was  executed 
some  years  ago,  when  the  cap  was  pulling  over  his  eyeSy  Must 
I  never  see  the  light  of  yon  sun  any  more?  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
thou  Sun  of  righteousness,  arise  with  healing  under  thy  wings 
6n  my  departing  soul !— May  the  Jx)rd  Jesus  Christ  do  that  for 
us  all  I  When  you  are  damned,  the  days  of  your  mourning  will 
be  but  at  their  beginning  ;  there  is  no  end  of  your  mourning  in 
hell.  There  is  but  one  song,  if  it  may  be  called  so,  in  hell,  to 
wit,  that  of  Dives,  which  will  be  always  repeating,  *'  How  am  I 
tormented  in  this  flame  !"  Consider  this,  ye  that  forget  God  ; 
and  O  that  God  may  bless  you  to-night  with  godly  sorrow.  Be- 
lievers, pray  for  them  :  Lord  help  you, sinners,  to  pray  for  your 
vile  selves.  Some  may  think,  what  do  you  cry  for?  why,  I  cry 
for  you.  Perhaps  you  will  say  as  a  wicked  one  did  to  a  poor 
woman  in  Scotland,  when  thousands  were  awakened  there ;  sec- 


JAC  faer  veep,  he  f^ii^d,  « Vat  ^^o  yoj  v«cp  £ar?  For  Ats  foofk, 
.v^jrs  dke ;  Weep  Um  joorself,  savs  be :  skt  ffc^ttied,  I  do;  ta 
t»ft^t  is  my  5<KiJ,  u>  aJl  tbe:^  pxir  soals !  O  tkxi  ■OTJTtnr  bit 
ip^ier  rue  sp  in  jodricebC  a^unat  joa:  O  Bk^j  Moses,  btkie 
b^jMl  id  the  Spiht,  make  joa  nhoarm !  oaj  the  love^f  God  ndue 
joa  crj!  may  yoa  not  so  booie  to-nighc  withovt  mm  uiw 
steeped  in  the  hioffd  oT  Christ.  It  w^s  woodev^ld  vhat  a  sw^ 
wookan,  atrakinz,  thoocfat  she  saw  written  o^rcr  her  heaiC  *0 
eanb,eafth,eanh,bear  ti^  word  cpf  the  Lord  r*  May  excfjcartlib 
soul  be  made  to  bear  it ;  to  awake,  arise  from  their  sleep  in  a 
The  son  is  goio^  down,  and  death  may  pat  an  end  to  aO  to-nifk: 
the  I»rd  help  yoo  to  come,  thoosh  it  is  the  eleventh  hoar:  0 
that  yon  would  fly,  fly  this  night  to  Christ,  lest  God  destroy  yoi 
for  efer.  Jesns  stands  ready  with  opoi  anus  to  recetTe  yoi 
\%bom  he  has  flrst  pricked  to  the  heart,  and  made  joa  cry  oit, 
"  What  shall  I  do  to  be  saved!''  he  will  then  make  joa  Ixlim 
jn  bis  name,  that  yoa  may  be  saved :  God  ^rant  this  may  he  tk 
case  of  all  here  to-ni?ht.     Amen. 


SERMON  LX\7I. 

SELF-INQUIRY   CONCBRMNG   THE   WORK    OF    GOD. 

According  to  this  time  i!  shall  be  said  of  Jacob  amd  qflsnul, 
What  hath  God  wrought ! — Xambers  xxiii.  23. 

When  I  read  you,  my  dear  hearers,  these  words ;  when  I  coaa- 
der  on  what  occasion,  and  by  whom  they  were  originally  spokei, 
I  cannot  help  thinking  of  that  triamphant  expression  of  the  rojal 
psalmist,  ^^Wby  do  the  heathen  rage?"  ^lien  Pontius  Pilate 
and  the  Jews  conspire  to  destroy  the  cause  of  God,  "he  that 
sitteth  in  heaven  laaghs  them  to  scorn ;  the  Lord  not  only  haf 
them  in  derision,  but  over-roles  even  their  malice  and  violeDoe 
(no  thanks  to  them)  to  promote  that  very  cause  they  attempted 
to  destroy  ;  so  that  it  is  a  very  wrong  maxim,  and  argnes  great 
ignorance  in  us,  to  imagine  that  God  never  brings  about  his 
designs  by  the  means  and  instrumentality  of  wicked  men.  TUs 
is  the  Papists'  objection  against  the  Reformation :  great  pains 
have  been  taken  to  blacken  the  reformers,  and  to  make  it  be- 
lieved that  a  reformation  could  no  the  good,  that  was  begun  by 
people  of  bad  character,  and  a  king  of  an  immoral  life      Bat  so 
far  is  this  from  eclipsing,  that  it  illustrates  the  wisdom  and  good- 
ness of  divine  Providence,  in  obliging  the  wicked  to  do  what 
they  never  designed,  and  over-ruling  their  counsels  for  the  ful- 
filling God's  holy,  wise,  and  sovereign  decree.     This  observa- 
tion naturally  arises  from  the  words  of  our  text,  which  were 
spoken  by,  as  far  as  I  can  judge,  one  of  the  vilest  men  upoa 
the  earth;  you  doubtless  know  his  name,  Balaam,  who,  thoogh 
florid  in  his  expressions,  and  high  in  profession  of  intercourse 
with  God,  and  puts  on  a  fine  face  of  religion,  was  but  a  rotten- 
hearted  hypocrite,  for  he  divined  for  money,  made  a  trade  of  le* 
ligion  ;  and  so  loved  the  wages  of  unrighteousness,  as  to  bane 
wished  to  curse  even  those  whom  God  had  blessed.     I  need  boC 


LKVII.]  THB   WORK    OP   QQD.  705 

hifonu  you,  that  tbi$  w^s  the  end  for  which  Balak  seat  for  him ; 
and  no  wonder  he  >vas  so  willing  to  go,  when  he  knew  he  was 
to  be  well  paid  for  his  journey.  Acliilles,  the  Grecian  hero^  is 
said  to  be  capable  of  being  wounded  only  in  the  heel,  but  bcul 
priests,  ministers,  and  people,  huvp  ^  great  deal  more  dangerous 

fart  to  be  wounded  in,  that  is,  the  palin  of  the  hand :  if  you  can 
eep  that  secure  from  being  wounded  with  gold,  never  fear ;  the 
devil  cannot  have  his  end.  Balak  promised  him  great  prefer- 
ment,  if  he  would  but  come  and  curse  the  people  of  God.  A 
prophet,  or  soothsayer,  is  one  that  pretends  to  have  intercourse 
witli  God  or  the  devil,  and  Balak  did  not  care  by  which  of  them 
it  was,  so  that  he  could  but  get  the  Israelites  cursed  ;  Balaam 
catches  at  the  golden  bait,  pretends  to  ask  counsel  of  God,  and, 
what  seems  strange,  God  bids  him  go,  and  yet  sends  an  angel 
to  meet  him  in  the  way,  who  stands  ready  to  slay  him  for  going. 
Does  it  not  seem  very  strange,  that  God  should  bid  a  man  go, 
and  then  offer  to  slay  him  for  going  ?  but  people  that  read  this 
passage,  should  carefully  mind  the  particulars  of  it.  God  said, 
if  the  men  come  and  call  thee,  go ;  but  he  did  not  wait  for  that, 
but  saddles  bis  ass,  and  goes:  this  is  called  by  St.  Peter,  the 
madness  of  the  prophet ;  witness  his  rising  early  in  the  mornings 
not  waiting  for  the  call  of  the  princes,  which  shewed  how  eager 
he  was  to  be  gone :  and  though  this  solution  should  not  be  al- 
lowed, God  was  justly  angry  for  his  going  with  an  ill  design, 
that  is,  maliciously  to  curse  a  people  whom  he  knew  God  resolved 
should  be  blessed,  and  that  for  the  sake  of  the  wages  of  unrighte- 
oasness.*  The  king  and  his  nobles  wait  upon  him,  in  hopes 
this  soothsayer  will  answer  their  purpose ;  but  after  all,  he  can 
do  nothing  without  God*s  leave:  however,  no  cost  is  spared  to 
obtain  the  end  ;  so  true  is  it,  that  the  devirs  children  are  ten 
thousand  times  more  expensive  in  persecuting  the  people  of 
God,  than  God's  people  are  in  promoting  his  glory.  This  sooth- 
saying priest  pretends  to  go  to.  God,  which  is  permitted,  but 
forced  to  speak  what  God  would  have  him ;  once  and  again  his 
mouth  is  stopped,  or  rather  his  curses  are  stopped,  and  turned 
into  a  blessing.  Balak,  enraged  at  his  repeated  disappointment^ 
llids  him  neither  to  curse  nor  bless  th^m  at  all ;  and  thinking, 
perhaps,  that  the  sight  of  the  people  affected  him,  carries  him 
to  a  place  where  he  would  see  but  a  sipall  part  of  them ;  he 
goes,  and  there  God  made  him  confirm  the  blessing  instead  of 
the  curse,  more  abundantly  than  before.  Oratory  i$  beautiful^ 
though  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  worst  of  men.  "  Sorely,''  said  he, 
^  tber^  is  no  enchantment  against  Jacob,  neither  is  there  any 
divination  against  Israel.  Behold,  the  people  shall  rise  up  as  a 
great  lion,  and  lift  up  himself  as  a  youpg  lion ;  h®  shall  not  lie 
iowo  until  he  eat  of  the  prey,  and  drink  the  blpod  of  the  slain  j 
having  said  just  before,  '* According  to  this  time  it  shall  be  ^aia 
^f  Jacob  and  of  Israel,  What  bath  God  wrougj^t !" 

*  It  is  DO  iiQusual  thing  in  holy  writ,  for  Hcii/cn  to  resent  and  punish  even  those 
actions  that  it  has  permitted.  Witness  Oeut  i.  20—35.  comp.  with  Numb.  xiii.  2. 
Has.  juik  11.  coup,  with  I  Sam.  riU.  7.  chap.  xv.  33.  ckap.  xtLI.  Psal.  IxxxL  11. 18,  ^c 

*  2  X 


706  SBLF-INQtJIRY   CONCBRT^INO  [j^XTI  • 

What  words  are  here  out  of  the  mouth  of  a  wicked  man !  and 
yet  I  hope  it  will  do  no  hurt  to  choose  them  as  a  proper  subject 
for  an  evening  meditation.  Let  us  leave  this  profane  diviner, 
and  the  king  his  employer,  vexed  that  they  could  not  get  their 
end  of  the  people  of  God  :  let  us  snatch  the  words  oat  of  the 
vile  prophet's  mouth,  and  see  if  we  can  serve  him  as  David  did 
Goliah, — take  his  sword,  and  cut  off  his  head.  Some  people  im 
to  extremes,  and  because  some  have  abused  religion,  therefore 
they  think  there  is  no  religion  at  all.  Perhaps  it  is  for  tins 
reason,  that  so  many  offences  are  permitted  to  happen  in  the 
churches,  that  one  of  the  twelve  should  be  a  traitor,  and  that  the 
devil  should  come  with  his  Bible  under  his  arm,  to  tempt  os  to 
disbelieve  or  abuse  it ;  by  which  God  stirs  up  the  people  of  God 
to  watch,  figtit,  and  pray. 

How  should  we  take  the  words  of  our  text :  by  way  of  inter- 
rogation? or  admiration?  as  speaking  in  a  prophetic  strain  hoir 
God  had  wrought,  and  did  then  work,  and  would  afterwards 
work,  for  the  prosperity  of  his  faithful  Jacob  and  bis  posterity, 
the  Israel  of  God.  Suppose  we  take  them  in  the  way  of  ques- 
tion, which  perhaps  is  most  agreeable  to  the  context,  and  it  may 
be  most  serviceable  to  you  and  to  me ;  and  in  order  that  I  may 
not  run  into  too  great  a  field  to-night,  I  will  confine  myselif 
to  what  Balaam  confines  himself,  '^  From  this  time  it  shall  be 
said  of  Jacob  and  Israel,"  in  a  way  of  inquiry,  **  What  batb 
God  wrought?" 

If  we  look  round  the  world,  and  survey  the  works  of  creation, 
**  the  heavens  declare  God's  glory,  and  the  firmament  sheweth 
his  handiwork  :"  If  we  look  further,  my  brethren,  down  apoo 
these  bodies  of  ours,  if  we  consider  the  curious  form  of  them,  we 
may  cry,  "  What  hath  God  wrought?"  surely  I  am  fearfully  and 
wonderfully  made :  and  when  we  consider  that  we  are  made  op 
of  the  four  elements  ;  when  we  consider  to  what  casualties  we 
are  exposed,  how  wonderfully  these  bodies  have  been  kept  up, 
when  thouands  have  dropped  into  the  grave  before  us,  we  may 
well  say,  "  What  hath  God  wrought  ?  "  but  I  rather  choose  to 
confine  myself  to  that  better  part ;  and  I  am  persnaded  of  it,  we 
shall  never  go  to  heaven  unless  God  works  powerfully  on  oar 
souls :  Supposing  you  and  I  now  were  to  forget  all  created  iMUiigs, 
supposing  we  were  to  forget  our  neighbours  to-night,  and  to  httu 
only  for  ourselves,  as  the  shades  of  the  evening  are  comiog  on, 
and  as  we  are  going  shortly  to  rest,  may  be  to  rise  no  more  in 
this  lower  world,  what  if  we  should  steal  a  little  time  from  o«r 
shop,  a  little  time  from  our  worldly  business,  as  we  know  not 
but  we  may  be  called  to  judgment  to-morrow,  and  ask  and  say, 
O  my  soul,  what  hath  Grod  wrought  in  thy  heart  ?  I  am  glad  to 
hear  you  are  so  inquisitive.  Observe,  what  hath  God  wrought? 
now  whatever  is  done  in  us,  is  all  done  by  God ;  it  is  all  doM 
by  an  almighty  power,  and  it  is  all  the  effect  of  infinite  wisdoa; 
supposing  then  you  and  I  are  new  creatures,  hath  Grod,  O  ny 
soul,  wrought  in  thee  a  deep,  a  penitent,  a  humbling  sense  ci 
thy  transgressions  against  bis  holy  law  ?  this  is  a  most  inpor* 


liXVlI.]  THB   WORK  OK   GOD.  707 

tant  qaestioD,  this  is  the  very  beginning  of  religion,  this  is  the 
▼ery  first  letter  of  the  Christian's  alphabet,  the  first  line  in  his 
book ;  with  this,  Christ  himself  began  to  teach  fallen  man. 
''Adam,  where  art  thou  ?"  was  the  first  question  that  the  Son  of 
God  put  to  his  fallen  creatures ;  what  condition  art  thou  in  ? 
How  art  thou  fallen,  thou  son  of  the  morning !  and  when  he 
came  to  the  woman,  he  took  the  same  way,  he  preached,  and 
ministers  should  preach,  conviction  first;  "What  is  this  (saith 
God)  that  thou  hast  done  ?"  to  break  thy  husband,and  bring  all  thy 
posterity  unto  ruin;  and  it  seems  to  me  that  there  was  a  con- 
sciousness in  this ;  and  I  wonder  sometimes  the  Deists  have  not 
run  so  far  as  to  do  it  in  jest.  I  do  not  know  that  I  ever  heard 
of  a  female  child's  name  called  Eve ;  probably,  wo  are  ashamed 
to  call  a  child  by  that  name,  because  of  the  guilt  of  our  mother 
Eve,  that  brought  us  all  into  sin.     Now,  has  God  wrought  in 

Jou?  Has  he  even  given  this  conviction  to  you ;  not  a  little 
ight  now  and  then,  or  a  qualm  of  thy  conscience ;  the  devil 
and  natural  conscience  may  do  this  ;  but  when  it  is  wrought  in 
tiiy  heart  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  it  goes  to  the  bottom,  the  arrow 
sticks  fast,  and  a  poor  soul  sometimes  endeavours  to  pray, 
endeavours  to  pull  it  out,  but  in  vain.  Hath  God  wrought 
this  in  thy  soul?  Now,  when  God  works  this  change  in 
the  soul,  the  devil  is  always  busy  in  tempting  the  poor  convic- 
ted sinner  to  despond,  if  not  despair.  Ignorant  formalists,  who 
are  some  of  the  worst  people  under  heaven,  when  a  person  is 
under  conviction,  think  the  devil  is  got  into  them,  whereas  the 
devil  is  in  themselves ;  for  the  devil  hoodwinks  people,  and  he 
endeavours  to  persuade  them,  that  there  is  no  harm  done  to  God 
by  sinning  against  him.  It  is  God  wounds  the  soul,  and  it  is  he 
that  heals  it ;  has  he  wrought  in  thee  not  only  a  deep  and  hum- 
bling sense  of  the  outward  acts  of  sin,  but  a  humbling  sense  of 
the  inward  corruptions  of  thy  heart  ?  Has  he  led  thee  beyond 
the  streams,  through  the  powerful  operations  of  his  Spirit,  to 
the  fountain-head  ?  When  he  has  done  so,  then  are  we  Chris- 
tians indeed ;  and  this  cannot  be  the  work  of  the  devil,  who 
never  did,  nor  do  I  know  whether  he  can,  shew  a  person  the  in- 
ward corruptions  of  his  heart ;  it  must  be  the  Spirit  of  Grod  ;  the 
devil  may  frighten  a  person  as  to  outward  things,  but  I  very 
mnch  question  whether  it  is  in  the  power  or  will  of  the  devil  to 
shew  a  person  that  he  is  totally  depraved,  that  the  whole  foun- 
tain is  corrupt ;  this  cannot  be,  because  this  would  make  the 
devil  omnipotent,  of  equal  power  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  who 
alone  shews  thee  the  guilt  and  corruption  of  thy  heart.  This  I 
have  found  to  be  the  fact,  from  thirty  years'  observation  and  ex- 
perience of  thousands,  thousands,  thousands,  with  whom  I  have 
spoken  about  their  hearts.  So  it  was,  I  remember,  when  I  went 
first  to  Georgia,  when  I  was  about  twenty-five  years  old,  I  had 
them  day  after  day,  week  after  week,  and  night  after  night,  say- 
ing, "  What  shall  I  do  to  be  saved  ?  O  my  wicked  heart,  my 
deceitful  heart!"  from  morning  to  night.  Hath  God  wrought  this 
in  any  of  you  ?   Are  you  complaining  of  your  wicked  heart  and 

2x2 


708  SELF-INQUIRY   CONGERMINO  [LXVII. 

corrupt  nature  ?  Have  yon  found  out  that  your  hearts  are  caget 
of  unclean  birds,  only  a  lodging  for  vain  thoughts  to  dwell  in?— « 
O  my  friends,  my  dear  hearers,  O  may  you  turn  the  question  into 
a  note  of  admiration,  and  say,  **  What  hath  God  wrought !"  be 
has  not  only  convinced  me  of  my  outward  sins,  but  powerfully 
convinced  me  of  the  corruptions  of  my  heart.   Do  ask  yourselvea 
this  question.  Has  God  wrought  in  me  a  view  of  the  spirituality 
of  his  holy  law  ?    Till  this  is  done,  you  are  as  fast  in  the  devil's 
arms  as  he  can  clasp  you.   Of  all  the  children  the  devil  has  in  the 
world,  I  believe  he  mostly  loves  his  pharisaical  cbildreu  :  I  was 
talking  with  one  of  them  some  time  ago,  and  somebody  very  in* 
nocently  asked  me  where  the  Pharisees  lived  7  O,  said  I,  they  live 
every  where.  Some  people  think  that  they  only  lived  in  the  times 
of  the  apostles.     Do  you  know,  vipers  and  toads  have  the  most 
eggs  and  most  numerous  progeny  ?    If  you  were  to  see  the  eggs 
of  a  toad  through  a  microscope,  you  would  wonder  at  the  innu* 
merable  multitude ;  and  the  Pharisees  are  an  increasing  gene- 
ration of  vipers,  which  hatch  and  spread  all  over  the  world :  if 
you  want  to  know  what  a  Pharisee  is,  he  is  one  who  pretends 
to  endeavour,  and  talks  about  keeping  the  law  of  God,  and  does 
not  know  its  spirituality  ;  they  are  some  of  them  very  great  meo 
in  their  own  opinion,  and  always  made  the  greatest  figure  in 
the  church  :  one  of  them,  a  gentleman's  son,  because  be  had  not 
broke  the  letter  of  the  law,  thought  he  was  right,  and  without 
sin :  O,  says  he,  if  I  have  nothing  else  to  do  but  to  keep  the 
commandments,  I  am  safe ;   I  have  honoured  roy  fcither  and 
mother ;  I  never  stole — what  need  he  steal,  that  had  so  good  aa 
estate?  I  never  committed  adultery ; 'no,  no,  he  loved  his  cha- 
racter too  well :  but  our  Lord  opeus  to  him  the  law,  **  This  one 
thing  thou  lackest,  go  sell  all  thou  hast;"  he  loved  his  money 
more  than  his  God :  Christ  brought  him  back  to  the  first  com- 
mandment, though  he  catechized  him  first  in  the  fifth.   So  Paul 
was  a  Pharisee ;  he  says,  **  I  was  alive  without  the  law  once;  I 
was,  touching  the  law,  blameless :"  how  can  that  be  ?  can  a  man 
be  without  the  law,  and  yet,  touching  the  law,  blameless  ?  says 
he,  '*  I  was  without  the  law  ;*'  that  is,  I  was  not  brought  to  see 
the  spirituality  of  it ;  I  thought  myself  a  very  good  man,  no  man 
could  say  of  Paul,  black  is  his  eye;  but,  saith  he,  when  God 
brought  the  commandment  with  power  upon  my  soul^  then  I  sav 
my  specks,  and  do  now.    Pray  mind  and  sav  the   command- 
ments ;  if  you  go  to  church  you  see  them,  and  if  you  go  to  meet- 
ing I  hope  you  have  not  forget  them ;  ''  Thou  shadt  not  bear  false 
witness  against  thy  neighbour ;  thou  shalt  not  covet :"  from  re- 
peating the  last  commandment,  we  are  taught  that  God*s  law  is 
spiritual,  **  I  should  not  have  known  sin,  (as  the  apostle  said,) 
if  the  law  had  not  said,  thou  shalt  not  covet;"  now,  has  God 
wrought  in  you  these  things  ?     Hast  thou  really  seen  his  lav, 
that  it  is  spiritual  ?  Have  you  been  made  to  see  that  the  law  of 
God  requires  perfect,  sinless  obedience  ?    Have  you  been  made 
to  see  that  you  are  under  the  curse,  because  you  have  sinned^bj 
the  inward  teaching  of  the  blessed  Spirit  of  God  ?    For  theo^be 


L.XVII.]  THE   WORK    OP  GOD,  709 

assured^  as  sure  as  tbou  art  in  this  place,  God  has  wrought  this 
in  thy  soul,  and  thou  mayest  turn  the  question  to  admiration, 
and  say,  "  What  has  God  wrought !"  has  he  wrought  in  thee  a 
sense  of  unbelief,  that  thou  canst  no  more  l)elieve,  than  thou 
canst  create  a  world  ?  I  mention  this,  because  I  hare  told  you 
often,  and  I  am  in  the  same  mind ;  yet  there  are  very  few  books 
that  talk  about  unbelief,  there  is  a  long  catalogue  of  sins,  but 
not  one  word  about  unbelief;  why  7  (),  because  these  good  folks, 
that  have  wrote  communion  books,  take  it  for  granted,  all  folks 
that  go  to  church  are  believers ;  I  take  it,  there  are  more  un* 
believers  in  the  church  than  out  of  it ;  why,  say  you,  do  not  they 
assent  to  the  gospel  ?  So  does  the  devil :  do  not  they  assent  to 
all  the  articles  of  the  Christian  faith  ?  So  does  the  devil :  the 
devil  is  a  stronger  believer  than  an  Arian :  the  devil  is  a  stronger 
believer  than  a  Socinian,  he  believes  Christ  is  God,  for  he  has 
felt  his  power  by  his  damning  him  to  hell :  '^  We  know  thee  who 
thou  art,  the  holy  One  of  God."  But  remember,  Christ  says, 
when  he  is  gone,  the  Spirit  of  God  shall  come  to  reprove  the 
world ;  in  the  margin  it  is  convince,  and  not  a  transient  convic- 
tion, but  a  conviction  that  fastens,  that  brings  salvation  with  it ; 
if  conviction  brings  its  own  evidence,  surely  faith  must  bring  its 
own  evidence  along  with  it  too ;  "  now  he  shall  convince  the 
world,  (saith  our  Lord)  of  sin ;  (what  sin?  the  sin  of  unbelief,) 
because  they  believe  not  in  me."  It  is  mentioned  by  the  dear 
Mr.  Hervey,  by  the  dear  Mr.  Marshall  himself,  and  also  by 
somebody  else,  that  when  complaining  to  a  minister  that  he 
could  get  no  ease  to  his  soul,  and  told  the  minister  he  confessed 
his  sins  every  day,  he  put  them  all  down,  (a  man  must  have  a 
good  memory  that  can  do  that,)  the  minister  said  to  him,  I  think 
your  catalogue  is  worth  nothing  at  all,  the  grand  sin  is  not  men- 
tioned ;  what  is  that?  Sir,  said  he,  the  sin  of  unbelief ;  a  sin  the 
poor  creature  thought  he  had  never  been  guilty  of.  Has  God 
wrought  in  thee  a  sense  of  thy  unbelief?  What  blessed  times 
have  I  seen  in  New,  as  well  as  Old  England  and  Scotland,  when 
thousands  were  awakened  at  Edinburgh,  at  Glasgow,  and  many 
other  places,  when  I  have  seen  them  taken  out  of  the  congregar 
tion  by  scores,  and  asked,  what  is  the  matter  ?  What  do  you 
want?  I  cannot  believe !  I  cannot  believe !  I  cannot  believe ! 
We  think  we  can  believe  when  we  will,  but  the  Spirit  alone  can 
convince  us  we  have  no  faith,  the  Spirit  alone  can  convince  us 
of  our  want  of  faith,  and  can  alone  impart  it  to  the  poor  awak- 
ened sinner ;  consequently,  you  may  ask  yourselves  whether 
God  has  wrought  in  you,  not  only  a  sense  of  your  own  misery, 
but  also  a  sense  of  your  remedy ;  set  you  upon  hungering  and 
thirsting,  such  a  hungering  and  thirsting  as  has  never  been  satis- 
fied but  by  an  application  of  the  blood  of  Christ  imputed  to  you. 
I  do  not  want  to  dispute  upon  the  scriptures  with  any  body : 
there  are  a  great  many  good  men  have  been  prejudiced  by  Anti- 
nomian  principles  and  practices ;  and  because  s(Hne  people  have 
ran  to  a  dangerous  extreme,  others  have  not  thought  proper  to 
make  use  of  the  word  imputed  at  alL    The  best  truth  may  be 


710  SELF-INQUIRY   CONCERNING  [LXI^IL 

spoiled  by  bad  books ;  but,  for  my  part,  I  am  more  than  erer 
oonvincedy  that  the  doctrine  of  imputed  rightecasness  is  a  doc- 
trine of  the  gospel ;  and  that  as  Adam's  sin  is  impated  to  me,  so 
the  righteousness  of  Christ  must  be  imputed  also  :   I  stand  not 
only  as  a  pardoned  sinner,  but  as  a  justified  sinner;   I  stand 
before  God  justified,  and  so  do  all  whom  Jesus  Christ  has  par- 
chased.     Now,  has  God  wrought  this  in  thee,  O  man ;  in  th€e,0 
woman  ?    I  am  not  going  to  ask,  whether  it  was  wrought  in  thee 
by  hearing  a  sermon  or  reading  a  book,  God  may  make  nse  of  a 
minister,  or  of  a  book;  and  I  do  not  like  people  to  get  above 
ministers  and  books,  saying,  we  do  not  want  these.    Grod  draws 
with  the  cords  of  a  man,  and  generally  draws  us  with  chords  bj 
men  such  as  ourselves.    Canst  thou  say,  there  is  the  book,  there 
is  the  minister,  in  reading  or  hearing  which,  Christ's  blood  was 
applied,  and  the  Spirit  of  God  witnessed  with  my  spirit  that  I 
was  one  of  his  children?  Now  this  is  all  God's  working,  indeed 
it  is,  the  devil  cannot  do  this,  it  is  out  of  his  power ;  he  maj 
attempt  to  persuade  them  that  he  has  done  it,  when  he  has  not, 
and  cannot.   The  magicians  turned  their  rods  into  serpents,  bat 
the  rod  of  Jehovah  swallowed  them  all  up.    Has  the  Lord  Gci 
wrought  a  change  of  heart  in  thee,  and  a  change  of  life  as  a 
consequence  of  that?  I  mention  this,  but  I  would  have  evefj 
body  that  stands  up  for  Christ's  imputed  righteousness,  espe- 
cially as  some  good  people  are  apt  to  speak  of  it  and  carry  it 
very  high,  to  be  careful  in  the  same  discourse  to  speak  as  highlj 
of  obedience  too,  to  Christ's  commandments.     I  do  not  like  only 
to  mention  the  word  promises ;  when  people  tell  me  they  ban; 
upon  the  promises,  I  always  ask  them.  How  do  yoa  hang  upoo 
them  ?  Have  you  got  the  thing  promised  ?   The  promise  is»  that 
the  Promiser  should  come  to  my  soul ;  the  promise,  is, — what, 
my  brethren?    The  promise  is,  for  this  and  that  good  thing; 
have  I  got  it?     How  would  you  do  if  yon  were  to  take  false 
bank-notes,  if  you  were  to  take  false  bills  ?  The  people  generally 
ask,  Is  the  man  that  has  given  me  this  note  worth  any  thing? 
If  you  have  a  bad  note,  you  go  to  the  notary,  and  note  it;  yea 
say,  I  was  to  have  had  this  note  paid  ten,  twenty,  thirty  days 
after  sight,  or  upon  sight ;  where  is  the  notary  ?     They  note  it 
and  protest  it :  let  us  be  careful  then  to  see  that  God  pays  his 
notes,  as  we  are  that  man  does.     Hast  thou  got  the  thing  pro- 
mised ?  The  thing  promised,  is,  all  peace  and  all  joy ;  the  thii^ 
promised  is,  a  new  heart;  the  thing  promised  is,  a  new  nature; 
and  therefore  David  goes  to  God  for  the  thing  promised,  and 
says,  "  Create  in  me  a  clean  heart,  O  God,  and  renew  a  rigfct 
spirit  within  me."     Now,  is  this  the  case  of  thy  heart?    Tbe 
devil  never  can  make  a  new  creature ;  I  am  sure  nothing  hot  an 
ahnighty  power  can  take  away  the  heart  of  stone,  and  give  a 
heart  of  flesh:  has  God  wrought  this  in  thee?     If  he  bavr, 
though  it  be  not  come  to  such  a  height  as  thou  wooldest  wisk, 
yet  be  thankful  for  what  he  has  done,  and  say.  What  has  God 
wrought  in  me !    Attend  to  the  word,  I  do  not  mean  lasilj'T 
there  is  not  a  thing  upon  the  face  of  tbe  earth  that  I  abhor  so 


LXVII.]  THE   WORK    OK  GOD.  71,1 

much  as  idleness  or  idle  people ;  I  am  so  far  from  having  a  love 
to  people  that  are  lazy,  that  if  I  had  the  dealing  with  a  number 
that  are  called  Christians,  they  should  go  to  bed  sooner,  and  get 
up  sooner ;  there  is  one  thing  that  will  make  people  rise  sooner 
in  the  morning  in  London,  and  that  is,  for  merchants  to  agree 
to  have  the  'Change  opened  at  six,  and  that  will  make  people 
as  much  alive  in  the  morning,  as  the  markets  are  after  people 
have  been  travelling  all  night  to  prepare  ibr  them. 

Has  God  wrought  in  you  a  spirit  of  zeal  and  love?  flas  he 
wrought  in  you  a  love  to  his  name,  a  zeal  for  his  cause  ?  Has  he 
wrought  in  thy  heart  a  deadness  to  the  world,  that  you  can  live 
above  it  from  morning  to  night,  having  your  conversation  in 
heaven  ?  Has  he  wrought  in  thee  a  love  to  his  people,  not  peo- 
ple that  are  Calvinists  only ;  not  people  that  hold  universal  re- 
demption only  ?  O  be  careful  as  to  that :  O  what  nonsense  is 
that,  for  people  to  hold  universal  redemption,  and  yet  not  love 
all  mankind ;  what  nonsense  is  it  to  hold  election,  and  not  **  as 
the  elect  of  God  to  put  on  bowels  of  mercy,  kindness,  humble- 
ness of  mind,  meekness,  and  long-suffering ;"  as  the  woman 
said,  I  have  a  house  will  hold  a  hundred,  a  heart  ten  thousand. 
Has  he  wrought  in  thee  a  love  to  thine  enemies,  so  that  thou 
dost  not  only  love  them  that  love  thee,  but  them  that  hate  thee  T 
What  say  you?  must  I  put  a  snake  in  my  bosom,  no,  no ;  1  may 
hate  the  conduct,  and  at  the  same  time  pray  to  God  for  them. 
Enmity  is,  "  an  eye  for  an  eye,  a  tooth  for  a  tooth."  Love  as 
archbishop  Cranmer  did,  that  it  became  a  proverb  concerning 
him,  that  if  any  man  would  make  him  his  friend,  he  must  do 
him  an  injury.  Has  he  wrought  in  thee  a  desire  to  go  to  heaven? 
Has  he  wrought  in  thee  such  a  love  to  Jesus,  that  you  prefer 
him  to  the  heaven  he  dwells  in  ?  We  count  heaven  a  fine  place, 
and  we  may  say,  I  am  glad  to  see  the  departed  saints  and  the 
angels,  but  all  that  will  be  nothing  unless  I  see  the  Lamb  in  the 
midst  of  the  throne.  Has  God  wrought  in  thee  a  desire  to 
promote  his  glory,  to  be  upon  the  stretch  for  God,  to  deny  thy- 
self, to  take  up  the  cross  daily,  and  follow  him  ?  If  God  have 
wrought  this  in  thee,  and  I  verily  believe  from  my  soul  he  has 
wrought  it  in  some  degree  in  many  of  you,  O  you  may  well  say, 
*'  What  has  God  wrought !"  especiallv  if  you  consider  the  man- 
ner, and  the  time,  in  which  he  wrougnt  it ;  if  you  consider  the 
instruments  he  made  use  of,  when,  and  by  which  he  wrought 
it;  and  if  you  consider  the  inestimable  price  that  was  paid  for 
it,  and  the  Spirit  taking  possession  of  your  hearts.  One  part 
of  our  entertainment  in  heaven  will  be,  to  count  the  steps  of  the 
ladder  by  which  God  brought  us  there:  one  will  say,  Grod 
wrought  in  me  when  I  was  young;  another,  when  I  had  gray 
hairs.  Mary  Magdalen  will  say,  God  wrought  in  me  when  I  was 
a  sinner ;  the  expiring  criminal  will  say,  God  wrought  in  me 
just  as  I  was  turned  off,  I  was  a  brand  plucked  out  of  the  burn- 
ing. The  anthem,  as  good  Mr.  Erskine  observes,  will  be  in 
b^ven,  **  What  has  God  wrought !"  Curiosity  led  me  to  hear 
ibe  preacher,  and  God  touched  my  heart ;  there  was  a  yoonf 


712  SELF-INQUIRY   CONCBRNlNG  [lXVU. 

fellow,  cnlled  emphatically  "  Wicked  Will  of  Plymouth,"  who 
6ame,  ns  he  said,  to  pick  a  hole  in  the  preacher'^  coat,  and  th^ 
Holy  Ghost  picked  a  hole  In  his  heart.  What  has  God 
wrought)  to  work  it  in  you,  and  not  in  your  father ;  you,  and 
not  your  children ;  work  it  in  you,  and  not  a  fellow-senrant; 
work  it  in  ouo  brother,  and  not  in  another  ?  all  these  thinf^s  will 
make  us  cry,  "What  has  God  wrought!"  Well,  1  do  not  waot 
you  to  rest  in  this  by  no  means ;  I  do  not  like  to  hear  people 
talk  and  speak  against  inward  frames  and  inward  works,  wok 
do  I  like  to  hear  people  legal ;  let  every  thing  have  its  proper 
place.  It  is  about  thirty-three  years  ago,  or  very  near,  whn 
a  man  came  to  me,  after  I  had  preached  upon  marks  and  en- 
dences,  (at  Whitechapel  I  think  it  was,)  and  said,  I  am  come  to 
tell  you,  that  I  do  not  choose  any  marks  at  all ;  theti,  said  I, 
you  must  be  content  with  the  marks  of  the  devil,  for  you  rnnst 
have  the  one  or  the  other. 

Now,  my  brethren,  if  God  have  wrought  this  in  us,  what 
shall  I  say  ?  Why,  I  pray  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  that  yonr  life 
and  mine  may  be  a  life  of  praise.  I  would  have  you  not  only 
dwell  upon  particular  words  of  God  set  home  upon  your  hearts, 
but  his  various  providences,  the  numerous  trials  he  has  bron^t 
you  through :  O  think  how  often  you  have  been  kept,  think 
how  often  you  would  have  run  away  from  God>  if  he  had  not 
stopped  you :  what  has  God  wrought,  by  preventing  me  fifoa 
sin !  what  has  God  wrought,  by  delivering  me  from  blasphe- 
mous thoughts !  what  has  God  wrought^  in  snatching  me  oat 
of  the  jaws  of  ruin !  even  after  conversion,  when  I  was  dam- 
ning my  own  soul,  his  grace  arrested  me.  Have  we  brought 
ourselves  into  trials,  how  has  he  made  these  very  trials  woik 
for  good ;  made  our  scolding  husbands  and  wives,  pcrsecutin; 
fathers,  friends,  and  relations,  that  you  have  thought  would 
devour  you,  made  the  bulls  of  Bashan,  instruments  of  bringing 
you  nearer  to  God  ;  and  eternity  will  be  too  short  to  cry  per- 
petually, "What  hath  God  wrought!" 

And  if  God  have  not  wrought  this  in  any  of  you  that  ate 
here,  which  perhaps  may  be  the  case,  though  I  cannot  think 
what  should  bring  any  body  here,  if  they  had  not  a  desire  of 
the  salvation  of  their  souls;  if  God  hath  not  wrought  it  in  you 
yet,  O  that  this  may  be  the  time ;  O  that  God  may  give  w 
some  parting  blessing ;  that  some  poor  creatures,  that  hare 
nothing  but  the  devil's  work  in  them  yet,  may  now  seek  after 
the  blessed  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  If  we  may  ask  what  God 
has  wrought,  let  me  ask  you  what  the  devil  has  wrou^t  ki 
you?  O  thou  unconvert<^d  soul,  sin  has  tnade  thee  a  beast, 
made  thy  body,  which  ouirht  to  be  the  temple  of  the  living  God, 
a  cage  of  every  unclean  bird ;  what  hath  Satan  wrought  in  thee! 
but  made  thee  a  nest  of  vile  stinking  swine ;  and  what  will  he 
give  thee?  hell,  hell,  hell.  The  wages  the  devil  gives,  no  man  cii 
live  by ;  "  the  wages  of  sin  is  death :"  and  here  I  come  to  britf 
you  good  news,  glad  tidings  of  great  joy;  O  that  God  may  W 
counterwork  the  devil,  and  take  thee  into  his  own  woriJnii- 


liXVIII.]  THB   BURNING   BUSH.  719 

ahip,  create  thee  anew  in  Christ  Jesus,  ^ve  thee  to  feel  a  little 
of  bis  Spirit's  worit  6n  thy  heart,  and  make  thee,  of  a  child  of 
the  devil,  a  child  of  God !  Say  not,  it  cannot  be;  say  not,  it 
shall  not  be ;  say  not,  it  is  too  late ;  say  not,  it  is  for  others, 
but  not  for  me ;  ray  brethren,  God  help  you  to  cry,  and  to  try 
to-night  if  thou  canst  turn  the  text  into  a  prayer.  Lord  God,  I 
have  felt  the  devil  Work  in  me,  now,  good  God,  let  me  know 
what  it  is  for  thee  to  work  in  me ;  make  me  a  new  creature^ 
Create  a  new  spirit  within  me,  that  I  may  join  with  thy  dear 
people  in  singing,  *^  What  hath  God  wrought !"  O  remember^ 
if  this  is  not  the  case  with  you,  you  must  have  a  dreadfully  dif* 
ferent  ditty  in  hell ;  the  note  there  will  be.  What  hath  the  devil 
wrought !  what  hath  sin  wrought !  how  am  I  come  to  this  place 
of  torment !  I  sold  my  birthright  for  a  mess  of  pottage! — Hea-^ 
ven  or  hell  is  set  before  you  to-night ;  Jesus  grant,  that  the 
terrors  of  the  Lord  may  awaken  yon  to-night,  and  that  you  may 
not  rest  till  you  have  comfort  and  support  fVom  God. 

You  that  have  this  work  begun  in  you,  look  still  for  better 
things  to  come,  even  after  death,  when  our  bodies  are  made 
like  Christ's  glorious  body,  and  our  souls  filled  with  the  fulness 
of  God,  we  shall  then  cry.  Churchmen  and  Dissenters,  Method-* 
ists  and  Foundrymen,  and  the  Lock  too,  we  shall  all  then  join 
without  any  bickerings,  saying,  "  What  has  God  wrought!'* 

Ixould  enlarge,  but  I  am  afraid  I  have  been  too  long  already) 
yet  as  I  think  the  providence  of  God  calls  me,  and  I  shall  give 
a  particular  account  of  my  call  to-morrow  evening,  at  the  other 
end  of  the  town,  I  think  if  I  should  keep  you  a  few  minutes 
longer,  it  might  be  excused.  I  begin  to  feel  already  it  must  be 
executed  in  a  few  days;  I  feel  already  that  I  shall  soon  part 
from  you,  and  O  that  God  may  awaken  many  of  you  poor 
nna wakened  souls ;  my  heart  bleeds  for  you  ;  O  may  the  oil  of 
the  blessed  Spirit  soften  every  hard  unconverted  heart,  that  we 
may  go  away  praising  and  blessing  God  that  we  shall  at  last 
meet,  whether  we  go  by  land  or  by  water,  before  the  throne, 
where  we  shall  ascribe  glory,  and  honour,  and  power,  to  him 
for  evermore.    Amen, 

SERMON  LXVIII. 

THE     BURNING     BUSH. 

And  he  looked,  and  behold  the  bush  burned  tmthfire,  and  the  bush 
was  not  consumed  ;  and  Moses  said,  I  will  now  turn  amde,  and 
see  this  great  sight,  why  the  bitsh  is  not  burnt. — Exod.  iii.  2, 3. 
It  is  a  comraoh  saying,  ^and  common  sayings  are  genemlly 
fbdnded  on  matter  of  fact,  that  it  is  always  darkest  before  break 
of  day;  and  t  am  persuaded,  that  if  we  do  justice  to  our  own 
experience,  bs  well  as  consider  God's  dealings  with  his  people 
ill  preteding  ages,  we  shall  find  that  man's  extremity  has  beenr 
Bsnally  made  God's  opportunity^  and  that  **  when  the  enemy 
h^  broken  in  like  a  flood,  the  Spirit  and  providence  of  God  ha^ 
lifted  up  a  standard  against  him  t"  and  I  believe  at  the  Mine 
ikM,  that  however  we  may  dream  of  a  continued  scene  of  pros^ 


714  THB   BURNING    BU8II.  I^LXVIIU 

perity  in  church  or  state,  either  in  respect  to  our  bodies,  sooli; 
or  temporal  affairs,  we  shall  iSnd  this  life  to  be  chequered,  tiial 
the  clouds  return  after  the  rain,  and  the  most  prosperous  state 
attended  with  such  cloudy  days,  as  may  make  even  the  people 
of  God  sometimes  cry,  **  All  men  are  liars,  and  God  has  Ibrgot- 
ten  to  be  gracious/' 

The  chapter  in  which  is  our  text,  is  an  instance  of  tfais.  What 
a  glorious  day  of  the  Son  of  man  was  that  when  Joseph  sent  fat 
his  father  to  Egypt ;  and  the  good  old  patriarch,  after  he  bad 
thought  his  son  had  been  dead  many  years,  agreeably  surprised 
by  a  message  from  him  to  come  to  him  with  all  his  family,  and 
are  by  him  comfortably  settled  in  Goshen ;  where  the  good  old 

Eatriarch,  after  many  a  stormy  day,  died  in  peace,  and  was  higiilf 
onoured  at  his  funeral  by  Pharaoh  and  his  serrants,  and  at* 
tended  to  the  sepulchre  of  his  fathers  in  Canaan  by  all  his  sooi. 
Ai*ter  which,  Joseph  continued  to  live  in  splendour,  lord  of  all  the 
land  of  Egypt ;  and  his  brethren,  doubtless,  in  the  height  of  pros- 
perity :  but  how  sadly  did  the  scene  change  at  Pharaoh's  deitk, 
soon  after  which,  *'  another  king  arose  that  knew  not  Joseph," 
verifying  the  observation, '  new  lords,  new  laws,'  by  whom  t||e 
descendants  of  Jacob,  instead  of  reigning  in  Groshen,  were  made 
bond-slaves;  many,  many  long  years,  employed  in  makiiif 
bricks,  and,  in  all  probability,  had  what  we  call  their  Bibles 
taken  from  them,  by  being  forced  to  conform  to  the  idolatry  of 
Egypt,  and  so  were  in  a  worse  state  than  the  unhappy  negroes 
in  America  are  at  this  day.  No  doubt,  numbers  of  them  either 
wondered  that  ever  they  had  been  prospered  at  all,  or  that  God 
had  forgot  them  now  ;  but  what  a  mercy  it  is  that  "  a  thousand 
years  in  God's  sight  are  but  as  one  day,"  and  therefore  when 
God's  time  is  come,  the  set  time  that  he  has  appointed,  he  will, 
maugre  all  the  opposition  of  men  and  devils,  he  will  come  dowa 
and  deliver  his  people,  and  in  such  a  manner,  that  the  eneay 
shall  know,  as  well  as  friends,  it  is  the  Lord's  doing.  A  delivcfef 
is  bom  and  bred  in  Pharaoh's  court,  a  Moses  is  brought  up  ia 
all  the  learning  of  the  Egyptians,  for  Pharaoh  intended  him  ibr 
a  high  and  exalted  post :  but  when  offers  of  the  highest  piefer* 
ment  are  made  to  him,  he  did  not  catch  at  them  as  some  fofts 
now  do,  who  are  very  good  and  humble  till  something  occuri  to 
take  them  from  God.  Young  as  he  was,  he  refused  the  highest 
dignity,  and  spurned  at  it  with  an  holy  contempt ;  and  cboosef 
rather  to  suffer  affliction  with  the  people  of  God,  than  eujoy  all 
the  grandeur  and  pleasures  of,  perhaps,  one  of  the  greatest 
courts  on  earth.  Forty  years  continued  he  in  this  state  of  ob- 
scurity, in  which  time  he  acquired  such  a  competent  degree  aad 
yariety  of  knowledge,  as  qualified  him  for  every  thing  Grod  in- 
tended him  for:  the  occasion  of  this,  was  his  kind  attempt  to 
compose  a  difference  between  two  of  his  brethren,  one  of  whom 
accused  him  of  murder,  on  which,  he  that  was  to  be  king  ta 
Jeshurun  is  forced  to  fly  into  a  strange  land ;  there  he  sobmits 
to  the  humble  office  of  a  servant,  marries,  and  lives  in  a  state 
of  subjection  for  forty  years^  as  was  said  b^ore.     At  kflftlb 


LXYIII.]  THE   BURNING    BUSH.  715 

when  he  was  eighty  years  old^  dreaming  of  no  such  thing, 
behold  Ood  calls,  and  commands  him  to  go  and  deliver  his 
people ;  as  he  himself  informs  ns,  who  is  the  author  of  this  book, 
ver.  1.  "  Now  Moses  kept  the  flock  of  Jethro  his  father-in-law, 
priest  of  Midian:  he  might  have  said.  What,  such  a  scholar  as 
I,  keep  a  parcel  of  sheep  !  such  a  learned  man  as  I  am,  employed 
in  such  a  menial  service !  some  proud  hearts  would  break  first, 
but  you  never  knew  a  truly  great  roan,  but  would  stoop ;  some 
that  are  called  great  men,  swell  till  they  burst;  like  sturdy  oaks, 
they  think  they  can  stand  every  wind,  till  some  dreadful  storm 
come  and  blow  them  up  by  the  roots,  while  the  humble  reed  bends 
and  rises  again.  Moses  was  one  of  the  latter,  he  keeps  the 
flock  of  Jethro  his  father-in-law,  and  leads  them  to  the  moun- 
tain of  God,  even  to  Horeb.  This  shews  how  persons  ought  to 
methodize  their  time  ;  but  however  the  name  of  a  Methodist  is 
despised,  they  will  never  be  bad  servants  and  masters ;  you 
would  be  only  weathercocks,  unless  you  took  care  to  order  things 
in  proper  seasons :  the  devotion  and  business  of  a  Methodist 
go  hand  in  hand ;  I  will  assure  you,  Moses  was  a  Methodist, 
a  very  fine  one,  a  very  strong  one  too ;  he  kept  his  flock,  but  that 
did  not  hinder  his  going  to  Horeb,  he  took  them  to  the  desert, 
and  being  thus  employed  in  his  lawful  business,  God  met  him. 

Some  say,  we  encourage  people  in  idleness:  I  deny  it;  we 
say,  people  ought  to  be  industrious ;  and  I  defy  any  one  to  say, 
a  person  is  called  by  God,  that  is  negligent  in  his  calling.  "  Tbo 
angel  of  the  Lord  appeared  to  him  in  a  flame  of  fire  out  of  the 
bush  :**  some  think  this  angel  was  Gabriel,  but  most  agree,  and 
I  believe  with  the  greatest  probability,  that  it  was  Jesus  Christ, 
*'  the  angel  of  the  everlasting  covenant;"  and  an  expositor  tells 
you,  that  the  eternal  Lagos,  longing  to  become  man,  often  visited 
tbis  earth  in  that  form,  as  an  evidence  of  his  coming  by  and  by, 
and  dying  a  cursed  death  for  man.  The  manner  of  this  angel's 
appearing  is  taken  particular  notice  of,  it  was  to  Moses  when 
nobody  was  with  him ;  I  do  not  hear  he  had  so  much  as  a  boy, 
or  one  companion ;  and  I  mention  this,  because  I  believe  we 
have  often  found  we  are  never  less  alone  than  when  with  God ; 
we  often  want  this  and  that  companion,  but  happy  they  that  can 
say.  Lord,  thy  company  is  enough.  Moses  was  startled  at  the 
ai^t,  and  I  do  not  know  that  he  is  to  be  discommended  for  it, 
it  was  not  to  gratify  a  bare  curiosity,  but  seeing  a  bush  burning, 
it  engaged  his  attention,  and  made  him  think  that  something 
was  uncommon  ;  "  the  bush  burned  with  fire,  and  yet  was  not 
consomed;"  this  startled  him,  as  it  was  intended  to  do;  for 
where  God  designs  to  speak,  he  will  first  gain  attention  from  the 
person  spoken  to ;  Moses  therefore  says, "  I  will  now  torn  aside 
and  see  this  great  sight,  why  the  bush  is  not  bnmed ;"  he  did 
not  know  but  the  bush  might  take  fire  by  some  accident;  be 
saw  no  fire  come  from  above,  he  saw  no  fire  round  tbe  bush,  yet 
that  did  not  so  much  startle  him,  as  to  see,  though  it  did  bnm^ 
ii  was  not  consumed,  or  in  the  least  diminished ;  it  was  a  strange 
aigfaty  tHit  it  was,  my  brethren,  a  gh>rioai  one ;  a  sight  which. 


716  THE   BURNING    BUSH.  [LXYIH. 

I  pray  God,  you  and  I  may  behold  with  faith  and  comfort  this 
evening;  for,  my  dear  hearers,  this  bush,  and  the  account  of  it, 
was  given  for  our  learning;  and  I  will  venture  to  say,  could 
Moses  arise  from  the  dead,  he  would  not  be  angry  with  me  for 
telling  you  this  is  of  no  private  interpretation,  but,  is  intended 
as  a  standing  lesson,  as  a  significant  emblem  of  the  church,  and 
every  individual  child  of  God,  till  time  itself  shall  lie  no  more. 
«^I  would  therefore  observe  to  you,  that  this  bush. 

In  the  first  place,  is  typical  of  the  church  of  God  in  all  ages; 
the  bush  was  burning,  why  might  it  not  be  a  tall  cedar,  whj 
might  it  not  he  some  large  or  some  glorious  tree,  why  should  the 
great  God  choose  a  bosh,  a  little  bush  of  briars  and  thorns,  abotr 
any  other  thing,  but  because  the  church  of  Christ  genendlj 
consists  of  poor,  mean,  despicable  creatures  ?  though  it  be  all 
glorious  witliin,  yet  it  is  all  despicable  without.  It  is  obsenr- 
able,  that  when  the  church  came  to  prosper,  w^hen  Constantine 
smiled  on  it,  it  was  soon  hugged  to  death ;  and  that  great  poet, 
Milton,  observes,  that  when  that  emperor  gave  ministers  rich 
vestments,  high  honours,  great  livings,  and  golden  pulpits,  there 
was  a  voice  heard  from  heaven,  saying,  this  day  there  is  poison 
come  into  the  church ;  and  I  have  sometimes  suid  in  di8Coun»e, 
I  do  not  doubt  but  if  any  one  made  an  experiment,  and  left 
^100,000  or  «£200,000  only  among  the  Methodists,  there  wouM 
be  hundreds  and  thousands  that  would  not  be  reckoned  Method- 
ists now,  that  would  turn  Methodfsts  presently,  that  would 
buy  a  hymn>book,  because  a  part  of  the  legacy  would  pay  for 
the  hymn-book,  and  would  wish  to  have  a  living  into  the  bar- 
gain :  but  though  "  not  many  mighty  men,  not  many  noble,  are 
called/'  yet  some  are ;  if  any  of  you  be  rich  here,  and  are  Chris- 
tians, thank  God  for  it,  you  ought  to  be  doubly  thankful  for  it ; 
God's  people  are  but  like  a  little  bramble  bush.  I  remember  an 
eminent  minister  said  once,  when  I  heard  him  preach  npon 
Christmas-day,  "  Christ  personal  is  very  rich,  but  Christ  bits- 
tical  is  very  poor ;"  and  Jesus  Christ  does  this  on  purpose  ta 
confound  the  world.  When  he  comes  to  judgment,  millions  that 
have  their  thousands  now,  will  be  damned  and  burnt  to  all  eter- 
nity, and  Christ's  church  will  bo  rich  to  all  eternity,  that  is  now 
like  a  bramble  all  on  fire. 

'^The  bush  burned,"  what  is  that  for?  It  shewed  that  Christ'^ 
church  while  in  this  world,  will  be  a  bush  burning  with  fiery  triab 
and  afflictions  of  various  kinds ;  this  was  a  lively  emblem  of 
the  state  of  religion,  and  liberty  of  Israel,  at  that  time :  tktj 
were  busy  making  of  brick,  and  there  consequently  were  bern- 
ing  continually ;  as  though  the  Lord  had  said,  this  bush  is  bam- 
ing  with  fire,  so  my  people  are  burning  with  slavery.  Ah,  bot» 
^y  you>  that  was  only  the  case  of  the  Israelites  when  the? 
were  under  Pharaoh  ;  pray  is  not  that  the  case  of  the  church  i 
all  ages  ?  Yes,  it  has  been ;  read  your  Bibles,  and  yon  may  ia- 
stantiy  see  it  is  little  else  than  an  historical  account  of  ahunn 
ing  bush ;  and  though  there  might  besome  periods  wbeieia  tbe 
church  had  rest^  yet  these  periods  have  been  of  a  shoit  date; 


I^XVJII.]  THE  BURNING   BUSH.  717 

and  if  God's  people  have  *^  walked  in  the  comforts  of  the  H0I7 
Ghost/'  it  is  only  like  a  calm  that  precedes  an  earthquake.  If 
yon  remember,  before  the  last  oaKhquake  it  was  a  fine  morning, 
and  who,  when  they  arose  in  the  morning,  would  have  thought 
the  earth  should  shake  under  them  before  night :  and  so  with  the 
church,  when  they,  are  in  a  calm,  and  all  seems  safe  there,  then 
comes  a  storm :  God  prepare  us  for  it. 

But  this  is  not  only  the  case  with  the  church  of  Christ  collect* 
ed,  but  also  it  Ls  so  with  individual  believers,  especially  those 
that  God  intends  to  make  great  use  of  as  prophets  in  his  church. 
I  know  very  well  that  it  is  said,  that  now  the  case  is  altered : 
modern  commentators  therefore,  and  our  great  Dr.  Young  calls 
them  downy  doctors  ;  they  tell  us,  now  we  have  got  a  Christian 
king  and  governor,  and  are  under  the  toleration  act,  we  shall  have 
no  persecution ;  and,  blessed  be  God,  we  have  had  none  since 
this  family  has  been  on  the  throne  :  may  God  .continue  it  till 
time  shall  be  no  more !  Yet,  my  dear  hearers,  we  shall  find,  if 
God's  word  is  true,  whether  we  are  bom  under  a  despotic 
power  or  a  free  government,  that  they  that  will  live  godly  in 
Christ  Jesus  must  suffer  persecution.  Yon  have  heard  of  that 
laying,  '*  Wonder  not  at  the  fiery  trial  wherewith  you  are  to  be 
tried :  (and  God  saith,)  I  have  chosen  thee  (whicii  is  applicable 
to  every  believer)  in  the  furnace  of  afiliction.'^  Now,  the  fur- 
nace is  a  hot  place,  and  they  that  are  tried  in  the  furnace  must 
be  burnt  surely.  Now,  what  must  the  Christian  burn  with? 
With  tribulation  and  persecution.  I  heard  a  person  not  long 
ago  say,  I  have  no  enemies.  Bishop  Latimer  came  to  a  house 
one  day,  and  the  man  of  the  house  said,  he  had  not  met  with  a 
cross  in  all  his  life  ;  give  me  my  horse,  says  the  good  bishop,  I 
am  sure  God  is  not  here,  where  no  cross  is.  But  suppose  we 
are  not  persecuted  by  the  world,  is  there  one  Christian  but  is 
persecuted  by  his  friends ;  if  there  is  an  Isaac  in  the  family,  I 
warrant  there  is  an  Ishmacl  to  mock  at  him,  "  Woe  is  me,  (says 
David,)  that  I  must  dwell  with  Meshech,  and  in  Kedur:"  end  in 
one's  own  family,  one's  own  brothers  and  sisters,  one's  own  de- 

Endants,  though  they  wait  for  our  death,  and  perhaps,  long  to 
re  us  gone,  that  they  may  run  away  with  our  substance,  to 
have  these  persons  mock  at  us,  and,  if  they  dare  not  speak  out, 
jet  let  us  see  they  hate  the  God  we  worship ;  if  this  is  thy  case, 
why,  God  knows,  poor  soul,  thou  art  a  burning  bush :  but  if  we 
have  no  such  thing  as  mocking,  yet  if  we  are  surrounded  with 
afflictions,  domestic  trials,  the  loss  of  dear  and  near  friends,  the 
bad  conduct  of  our  children,  the  dreadful  misconduct  of  those 
tiiat  are  dependent  upon  us  ?  O  there  is  many  a  parent  here 
that  is  a  burning  bush ;  burning  with  what  ?  With  family  afflic- 
tions ;  some  do  not  care  what  becomes  of  their  children  ;  O,  I 
thank  God,  I  have  left  my  boy  so  much,  and  my  daughter  a 
coach,  perhaps  ;  ah !  well  your  son  and  daughter  may  ride  in 
that  coach  post  to  the  devil :  but  the  godly  man  says,  I  want 
an  eternal  inheritance  for  my  son ;  I  want  God*s  blessing  for 
hin ;  this  is  the  poor  man's  prayer,  while  the  poor  deluded  youth 


718  THE   BURNING   BUSH.  [LX\IU. 

mocks  him  :    or  supposing  this  is  not  the  case,  a  person  may 
bum  with  inward  temptation  ;  you  have  heard  of  the  fiery  darts 
of  the  devil,  and  were  you  to  feel  them,  I  believe  you  would  Gad 
them  fiery  darts  indeed  !  and  you  have  great  reason  to  suspect 
your  experience,  your  having  any  interest  in  the  love  of  theSoa 
of  God  at  all,  if  you  never  found  the  fiery  darts  of  the  devil.  0, 
says  one»  I  never  felt  the  devil :  I  am  sure  thou  mayest  feel  him 
now;  thou  art  dadda's  own  child;  thou  art  speaking  the  very 
language  of  the  devil,  and  he  is  teaching  thee  to  deny  thy  owa 
father ;  therefore,  graceless  child  of  the  devil,  you  never  felt 
the  devil's  fiery  darts,  it  is  because  the  devil  is  sure  of  thee:  lie 
has  got  thee  into  a  damnable  sluml>er;  may  the  God  of  lovemke 
thee  before  real  damnation  comes !    The  fiery  darts  of  Satai 
are  poisoned,  and  wherever  they  stick,  they  fill  the  person  witk 
tormenting  pain  like  fire;  this  I  mention,  because  there  aie 
some  poor  souls  perhaps  here  to-night,  whom  the  devil  tells 
thou  hast  committed  the  unpardonable  sin ;  you  are  afraid  to 
come  to  sacrament,  you  are  afraid  to  go  to  prayer,  because  at 
these  seasons  the  devil  disturbs  thee  most,  and  tempts  you  to 
leave  these  seasons ;  and  there  are  some  go  on  thus  buroinga 
great  while.     My  brethren,  the  time  would  fail,  and  I  sImU 
draw  this  discourse  to  too  great  a  length,  and  hinder  you  IroB 
your  families,  if  I  were  to  mention  but  a  few  mure  of  those 
thousands  that  the  believer  burns  with — the  trials  without,  and, 
what  is  still  worse,  their  trials  within.    Why,  says  one,  it  is 
very  strange  you  talk  thus  to-night.    1  am  sorry  it  is  strange  to 
any  of  you;    sure  you  are  not  much  acquainted  with  yoir 
Bibles,  and  less  w  ith  your  hearts,  if  you  know  not  this.    Why 
sure,  say  some,  you  make  God  a  tyrant:  no,  but  having  made 
ourselves  devils  incarnate,  we  are  now  in  a  state  of  preparatioo, 
and  these  various  trials  are  intended  by  the  great  God  to  trail 
us  up  for  heaven ;  and  therefore,  that  you  may  not  think  I  as 
drawing  a  picture  without  any  life,  give  me  leave  to  observe, 
that  it  is    particularly  remarkable,    that   though    '^  the   bash 
burned,  it  was  not  consumed :"  it  was  this  struck  Moses,  k 
looked  to  see  why  the  bush  was  not  consumed.     But  the  hom- 
ing I  have  been  here  painting  forth  to  you,  is  not  a  conswoiaf, 
but  a  purifying  fire ;  is  not  that  enough  to  answer  the  shade 
that  has  been  already  drawn?  it  is  true  the  bush  bums, the 
Christian  is  persecuted,  the  Christian  is  oppressed,  the  Chris- 
tian is  burned  with  inward  trials,  he  is  perplexed  at  times,  he 
is  *'  cast  down,  but  (blessed  be  God)  he  is  not  destroyed,"  be 
is  not  in  despair.     Who  is  that,  that  says  he  has  got  into  snch 
an  estate  that  nothing  disturbs  him  ?  vain  man !  he  discofers 
an  ignorance  of  Christ :  are  you  greater  then  than  the  apostle 
Paul  ?    Some  people  think  that  the  apostles  had  no  trials;  » 
they  think,  perhaps,  of  some  ministers,  that  they  are  always 
on  the  mount,  while,  perhaps,  they  have  been  in  the  buroing  to 
get  that  seimon  for  them.     We  that  are  to  speak  for  otbeis, 
must  expect  to  be  tempted  in  all  things  like  to  our  biethiet, 
or  we  should  be  only  poor  whip-syllabub  preachers^  and  Mt 


LXyill.J  THE  BURNING   BUSH.  719 

reach  men's  hearts.  Bat  whether  ministers  or  people  bum, 
the  great  God,  the  angel  of  the  everlasting  covenant,  spake  to 
Moses  out  ot*  the  bush ;  he  did  not  stand  at  a  distance  from 
the  bush,  he  did  not  speak  to  him  so  much  as  one  yard  or  foot 
from  the  bush,  but  he  spake  to  him  out  of  the  bush ;  ho  said, 
Moses,  Moses,  my  people  shall  burn  in  this  bush  to  the  end  of 
time,  but  be  not  afraid,  I  will  succour  them ;  when  they  bum, 
I  will  burn  too.    There  is  a  scripture  vastly  strong  to  tliis 

{rarpose,  in  which  it  is  not  said,  '^  the  good  will  of  him  that  was 
n  the  bush,"  but  **  the  good  will  of  him  that  dwelt  in  the  bush." 
Amazing!  I  thought  God  dwelt  in  heaven;  but  as  a  poor 
woman  who  was  once  in  darkness  fourteen  years,  before  she 
was  brought  out  of  it,  said,  God  has  two  homes,  one  in  heaven, 
the  other  in  the  lowest  heart.  He  dwells  in  the  bush,  and  I 
am  sure  if  he  did  not,  the  devil  and  their  own  cursed  hearts 
would  bum  the  bush  to  ashes.  How  is  it  that  it  is  not  con- 
sumed ?  Why,  it  is  because  God  has  declared  it  shall  not  be 
Gonsumed ;  he  has  made  an  everlasting  covenant,  and  I  pity 
those  that  are  not  acquainted  with  an  interest  in  God's  cove- 
nant ;  and  it  would  be  better  that  people  would  pity  them,  than 
dispute  with  them :  I  really  believe  a  disputing  devil  is  one 
of  the  worst  devils  that  can  be  brought  into  God's  church,  for 
he  comes  with  his  gown  and  book  in  his  hand,  and  I  should 
always  suspect  the  devil  when  he  comes  in  his  gown  and  band, 
and  this  is  the  cause  they  agree  and  disagree.  Some,  who  it 
is  to  be  hoped  are  God's  children,  if  you  tell  them  that  God 
has  loved  them  with  an  everlasting  love,  they  are  afraid  to  suck 
it  in,  and  especially  if  you  pop  out  the  word  election,  or  that 
bard  word  predestination,  they  will  be  quite  frightened ;  but 
talk  to  them  in  another  way,  their  dear  hearts  will  rejoice. 
God  has  said,  •*  As  the  waters  of  Noah  shall  cease  for  ever,  so 
he  will  not  forget  the  covenant  of  his  peace;  nothing  shall  pluck 
them  out  of  his  hand."  Ah !  say  some,  the  apostle  has  said, 
'*  that  neither  things  present,  nor  things  to  come,  shall  separate 
US  from  the  love  of  Christ ;"  but  he  has  not  said  an  evil  heart 
shall  not.  I  fancy  that  is  one  of  the  **  present  things."  The 
bush  is  not  consumed,  because  if  the  devil  is  in  the  bush,  God 
is  in  the  bush  too ;  if  the  devil  acts  one  way,  the  Lord,  the 
Spirit,  acts  another  to  balance  it,  and  the  Spirit  of  God  is 
engaged  to  train  up  the  souls  of  his  people;  and  God  has 
determined  the  bush  shiill  not  be  consumed  ;  his  Spirit  stands 
near  believers  to  support  and  guide,  and  make  them  more  than 
(Minqnerors :  all  that  are  given  to  Jesus  Christ  shall  come,  he 
will  not  lose  one  of  them ;  this  is  food  for  the  children  of  God ; 
a  bad  mind  will  turn  every  thing  to  poison ;  and  if  it  were  not 
for  this,  that  God  had  promised  to  keep  tliem,  my  soul  within 
these  thirty  years  would  have  sunk  a  thousand  times  over. 

Come  then,  O  suffering  saints,  to  you  the  word  of  this  sal- 
vation is  sent.     I  do  not  know  who  of  you  are  the  followers  of 
the  Lamb ;  may  the  Spirit  of  the  living  God  point  them  out 
may  every  one  be  enabled  to  say,  1  am  the  man.    O,  says  one. 


720  THE   8UBN1NG    BUSfi-  [liXl^ilL 

I  have  been  watching  and  very  attentive  to-Qight«  bat  yon  have 
not  mentioned  my  burnings ;  what  do  you  tbiok  of  my  burpiof 
lustii  ?    What  do  you  think  of  my  burning  corraptions  ?     Whai 
do  you  think  of  my  burning  pride  i    O,  perhaps  some  of  voi 
will  say,  thank  God,  I  have  no  pride  at  all ;  like  the  bbbop  §t 
Cambray,  as  mentioned   by  Dr.   Watts,  who    said,    he   M 
received  many  sins  from  his  father  Adam,  but,  thank  God,  be 
had  no  pride.    Alas  !  alas  I  we  are  all  a9  proud  ag  the  defiL 
Pray  what  do  you  think  of  passion,  that  burns  Bot  only  them- 
selves but  all  around  them  ?    What  do  you  think  of  ^tUBity ! 
What  do  you  think  of  jealousy,  is  not  this  something  that  bomi 
the  bush  ?    And  there  arc  some  people  that  pride  themselvci 
they  have  not  got  so  much  of  tlie  beast  about  them,  they  nevei 
got  drunk,  scorn  to  commit  murder,  and  at  the  same  time  are 
as  full  of  enmity,  of  envy,  malice,  and  pride,  as  the  devil:  tk 
Lord  God  help  such  to  see  their  condition.     Happy  is  it  Christ 
can  dwell  in  the  bush,  when  we  cannot  dwell  ourselves  there: 
there  are  few  Christians  can  live  together,  very  few  relations 
can  live  together  under  one  roof;  we  can  take  that  from  otber 
people,  that  we  cannot  bear  from  our  own  flesh  and  blood  ;  and 
if  God  did  not  bear  with  us  more  than  we  bear  with  one  an- 
other, we  should  all  have  been  destroyed  every  day.     Does  tim 
devil  make  you  say,  that  you  will  give  all  up ;  I  will  go  to  tlie 
Tabernacle  no  more ;  I  will  lay  upon  my  couch,  and  take  my 
ease?  Oh  !  if  this  is  the  case  of  any  to-night,  thus  tempted  by 
Satan,  may  God  rescue  their  souls.    G  poor  dear  soul,  you 
never  will  have  such  sweet  words  fron^  God  as  when  yoo  are 
in  the  bush ;  our  suffering  times  will  be  our  best  times.    I  know 
we  had  more  comfort  in  Moorfields,  ou  Kennington-Commeo, 
and  especially  when  the  rotten  eggs,  the  cats  and  dogs,  wen 
thrown  upon  me,  and  my  gown  was  filled  with   clods  of  dirt 
that  I  could  scarce  move  it ;  I  haye  had  more  comfort  in  tbii 
burning  bush,  than  when  I  have  been  in  ease.     I  remember 
when  I  was  preaching  at  Exeter,  a  stone  came  and  made  mj 
forehead  bleed  ;  I  found  at  that  very  time  the  word  came  witii 
double  power  to  a  labourer  that  was  gazing  at  me,  who  was 
wounded  at  the  same  time  by  another  stone :   I  felt  for  the  lad 
more  than  for  myself,  went  to  a  friend,  and  the  lad  came  to  De» 
Sir,  says  he,  the  man  gave  me  a  wound,  but  Jesus  healed  me; 
I  never  had  my  bonds  broke,  till  I  had  my  head  broke. — I  appeal 
to  you,  whether  you  were  not  better  when  it  was  colder  Ihaa 
now,  because  your  nerves  were  braced  up;  you  have  a  day  like 
a  dog-day,  now  you  are  weak,  and  are  obliged   t^  fan  foor- 
selves :  thus  it  is  prosperity  lulls  the  soi|l,  and  I  fear  Chris- 
tians are  spoiled  by  it. 

Whatever  your  trials  are,  let  this  be  your  prayer.  Lord,  tboii{h 
the  bush  is  burning,  let  it  not  be  consumed.  I  think  that  is  (oa 
low,  let  it  be  thus ;  Lord,  when  the  bush  is  burmng,  let  me  not 
burn  lower  as  the  fire  does,  but  let  me  burn  higher  and  higher:  1 
tliank  thee,  my  God,  for  trouble ;  I  thank  thee,  my  God,  fur  pet- 
ting me  into  these  afflictions  one  after  another;    I  tb^^(l 


liXVIII.]  THB   BURNING   BUSH.  721 

could  sing  a  requiem  to  myself,  that  I  should  have  a  little  rest, 
but  trouble  came  from  that  very  quarter  where  I  might  reason- 
Ably  expect  the  greatest  comfort:  I  thank  thee  lor  knocking  my 
h£^nds  off  from  the  creature  ;  Lord,  I  believe,  help  my  unbelief; 
and  thus  you  will  go  on  blessing  God  to  all  eternity :  by  and  by 
the  bush  shall  be  translated  to  the  paradise  of  God  ;  no  burning 
bush  in  heaven,  except  the  fire  of  love,  wonder,  and  gratitude ; 
no  trials  there,  troubles  are  limited  to  this  earth;  above,  our  ene- 
mies cannot  reach  us. 

Perhaps  there  are  some  of  you  here  are  saying.  Burning  bush ! 
a  bush  burnt,  and  not  consumed !  I  do  not  know  what  to  make 
of  this  nonsense.  Come,  come,  go  on,  I  am  used  to  it,  and  I 
g^ess  what  are  the  thoughts  of  your  hearts :  I  pray  God,  that 
every  one  of  you  here  maybe  afraid  of  comfort,  lest  tl>ey  should 
be  tossed  about  by  the  devil.  What  is  it  I  have'  said  ?  How 
have  I  talked  in  such  an  unintelligible  manner?  Why,  say  you, 
what  do  you  mean  by  a  burning  bush  ?  Why,  thou  art  the  very 
man,  how  so  ?  Why,  you  are  burning  with  the  devil  in  your 
hearts !  you  are  burning  with  foppery,  with  nonsense,  with  "  the 
lust  of  the  flesh,"  with  "the  lust  of  the  eye,  and  pride  of  life;" 
and  if  you  do  not  get  out  of  this  state,  as  Lot  said  to  his  sons« 
in-IaWy  ere  long  you  shall  be  burning  in  hell,  and  not  consumed  : 
the  same  angel  of  the  covenant  who  spake  to  Moses  out  of  the 
bush^  he  shall  ere  long  descend,  surrounded  with  millions  of  the 
heavenly  hosts,  and  sentence  you  to  everlasting  burnings.  O 
you  frighten  me !  Did  you  think  I  did  not  intend  to  frighten  yon? 
Would  to  God  I  might  frighten  you  enough  ?  I  believe  it  will 
be  no  harm  for  you  to  be  frightened  out  of  hell,  to  be  frightened 
out  of  an  unconverted  state :  O  go  and  tell  your  companions 
that  the  madman  said,  that  wicked  men  are  as  firebrands  of  hell : 
God  pluck  you  as  brands  out  of  that  burning. 

Blessed  be  God,  that  there  is  yet  a  day  of  grace;  Oh  !  that 
this  might  prove  *'  the  accepted  time ;"  Oh  !  that  this  might  prove 
"  the  day  of  salvation ;"  Oh  !  Angel  of  the  everlasting  covenant, 
come  down  ;  thou  blessed,  dear  comforter,  have  mercy,  mercy, 
mercy  upon  the  unconverted,  upon  our  unconverted  friends,  upon 
the  unconverted  part  of  this  auditory  ;  "  speak,  and  it  shall  be 
done ;  command,  O  Lord,  and  it  shall  come  to  pass  ;"  turn  the 
burning  bushes  of  the  devil  into  burning  bushes  of  the  Son  of 
God  :  who  knows  but  God  may  hear  our  prayer,  who  knows 
but  God  may  hear  this  cry,  "  I  have  seen,  I  have  seen  the  afilic- 
tions  of  my  people ;  the  cry  of  the  children  of  Israel  is  come  up 
to  me,  and  I  am  come  down  to  deliver  them  :''  God  grant  this 
may  be  his  word  to  you  under  all  your  trouble ;  God  grant  he 
may  be  your  comforter.  The  Lord  awaken  you  that  are  dead 
in  sin,  and  though  on  the  precipice  of  hell,  God  keep  you  from 
tumbling  in  :  and  you  that  are  God's  burning  bushes,  God  help 

Jou  to  stand  to  keep  this  coat  of  arms,  to  say  when  you  go 
ome.  Blessed  be  God,  '^  the  bush  is  burning,  but  not  con- 
sumed ''    Amen  !  even  so,  Xord  Jesus.  Amen  ! 

*  Sy 


723  80UL   DBJBOTION.  [LXII. 

SERMON  LXIX. 

SOUL     DEJECTION. 

Why  art  thou  cast  doum,  O  my  soul,  and  why  art  thou  disquieted 
within  me  ?  Hope  thou  in  God,  for  I  shall  yet  praise  him,  for 
the  help  of  his  countenance. — Psalm  xliL  5. 

I  HAVE  often  told  you,  in  my  plain  way  of  speaking,  that  gnoe 
is  very  frequently  grafted  on  a  crab-stock ;  that  the  Liord  Jesis 
picks  out  persons  of  the  most  peevish,  churlish  disposition,  and 
imparts  to  them  the  largest  measure  of  grace,  but  for  want  of  t 
better  natural  temper,  a  great  deal  of  grace  does  not  shine  so 
bright  in  them,  as  a  small  degree  in  those  that  are  constitutioii- 
ally  good-natured :    persons  of  this  disposition  are  generally 
Ci»mplaining,  and  are  not  only  tormentors  of  themselves,  hot 
are  great  plagues  to  those  that  are  about  them  ;  you  will  bear 
them  always  complaining  something  or  other  is   the  matter. 
What  a  pity  it  is  we  cannot  all  agree  in  one  thing,  to  leave  off 
chiding  others,  to  chide  our  own  selves,'  till  we  can  find  nothinf 
in  ourselves  to  chide  for ;  this  we  shall  iSnd  will  be  a  good  war 
to  grow  in  the  divine  life,  when,  by  constant  application  to  the 
Lamb  of    God,  we  get  a  mastery  over   those   things  which 
hitherto  have  had  the  mastery  over  us.    But  are  these  the  only 
people  that  complain  ?  are  people  of  a  melancholy  dispositioD 
only,  subject  to  a  disquietude    of  heart  ?    I  will   ventnre  to 
aflirm,  that  the  greatest,  the  dearest  children  of  God,  have  got 
their  complaining  and  their  dreary  hours.     Those  who  haTe 
been  favoured  with  large  measures  of  grace,  even  those  that 
have  been  wrapped  up  as  it  were  to  the  third  heavens,  baskiif 
on  the  mount  in  the  sunshine  of  redeeming  grace,  and  in  rap- 
tures uf  love  crying  out,  **  It  is  good  for  us  to  be  here,"  even 
these  must  go  down  to  Gcthsemane ;  and  if  they  would  not  be 
scorched  with  a^ strong  burning  fever  from  the  sun  of  prosperity, 
shall  iSnd  clouds  from  time  to  time  overshadowing  them,  not  to 
l;)um,  but  to  keep  them  low.    It  is  on  this  accoant,  that  yoa 
see  good  men  in  different  frames  at  different  times :  oar  Loid 
himself  was  so,  he  rejoiced  sometimes  in  spirit,  but  at  other 
times  you  find  him,  especially  near  the  last,  crying  oat»  "  My 
soul  is  exceeding  sorrowful,  even  unto  death,  tarry  yon  here  aid 
watch."    And  I  am  going  to  tell  yon  of  one  to-night,  who  had 
the  honour  of  being  called  'Hhe  man  after  Grod*s  own  heart;" 
and  who,  though  an  Old  Testament,  was  greatly  blessed  with 
a  New  Testament  spirit,  and  had  the  honour  of  oompoda^ 
psalms,  which  in  all  past  ages  of  the  church  have  been,  aod  ia 
future  ones  will  be,  a  rich  magazine  and  storehouse  of  spiritual 
experience,  from  which  the  children  of  God  may  draw  spiritnai 
armour  for  fighting  the  good  fight  of  faith,  until  God  shall  call 
them  to  life  eternal :  may  this  be  your  happy  lot !     What  fna» 
was  this  good  man  in  when  he  composed  this  forty-secottl 
psalm?   the  psalm  itself  can  best  tell.     It  seems  compoicd 
when  he  was  either  persecuted  by  Saul^  or  driven  from  bis  ovn 
court  by  his  fondling,  beloved   son,  Absalom;    then  Darid 


I^XIX.]  SOUL   DEJECTION.  723 

appeared  truly  great ;  I  honour  him  when  I  see  him  yonder, 
attending  a  few  sheep :  but  I  admire  the  young  stripling,  when 
I  see  bim  come  out  with  his  sling  and  stone,  and  aiming  it  at 
the  head  of  Goliath,  the  enemy  of  God ;  or,  when  exalted  and 
filling  the  seat  of  justice;  but  to  me  he  never  appears  greater, 
than  when  he  is  bowed  down  in  low  circumstances,  l>eset  on 
every  side,  struggling  between  sense  and  faith ;  and,  as  the 
sun  after  an  eclipse,  breaking  forth  with  greater  lustre  to  all 
the  spectators.  In  this  view  we  must  consider  this  great,  this 
good  man  David,  when  he  cries  out,  "Why  art  thou  cast 
down,  O  my  soul^  why  art  thou  disquieted  within  me  ?  Hope 
thou  in  God/' 

Supposing  you  understand  the  words  as  a  question,  "  Why 
art  thou  cast  down,  O  my  soul,"  though  thou  art  in  such  cir- 
cumstances? pray  now,  what  is  the  cause  of  thy  being  so  deject- 
ed ?  The  word  implies,  that  he  was  sinking  under  the  weight  of 
his  present  burden,  like  a  person  stooping  under  a  load  that  lies 
on  his  shoulders ;  and  the  consequence  of  this  pressure  without, 
was  disquietude,  uneasiness,  and  anxiety  within  ;  for,  say  what 
you  will  to  the  contrary,  there  is  such  a  connexion  between 
soul  and  body,  that  when  one  is  disordered,  the  other  must  sym* 
pathize  with  its  ever-loving  friend. 

Or  you  may  understand  it  as  chiding  himself,  "  Why  art  thou 
cast  down,  O  my  soul,  why  art  thou  disquieted  within  me?"  how 
foolish  is  it  to  be  thus  drooping  and  dejected  ;  how  improper  for 
one  favoured  of  God  with  so  many  providences,  and  special 
particular  privileges,  for  such  a  one  as  thou  art  thus  to  stoop, 
and  be  made  subject  to  every  temptation  ;  why  dost  thou  giv^ 
thy  enemies  such  room  to  find  fault  with  thy  religion  on  account 
of  thy  gloomy  looks,  and  the  disquietude  of  thy  heart?  A  yoke 
which  thou  wilt  find  to  be  lined  with  love,  and  God  will  keep  it 
from  galling  thy  shoulders.  You  see,  he  speaks  not  to  others, 
but  to  himself;  would  to  God  we  did  thus  learn  that  charity  be- 
gins at  home !  Then  he  goes  to  God  with  his  case,  O  my  God, 
says  he,  "  my  soul  is  cast  down  within  me/'  G  that  we  could 
leam,when  in  these  moods,  to  go  more  to  God,  and  less  to  man, 
we  should  find  more  relief,  and  religion  would  be  less  dishon- 
oured. But  see  how  faith  triumphs  in  the  midst  of  all,  no  sooner 
does  unbelief  pop  up  its  head,  but  faith  immediately  knocks  it 
down.  A  never-failing  maxim  is  here  proposed,  "  Hope  thou  in 
God,"  trust  in  God,  believe  in  God  ;  for  I  am  sure,  and  all  of 
you  that  know  Jesus  Christ  are  persuaded  of  it  too,  that  all 
our  troubles  arise  from  our  unbelief:  O  unbelief,  injurious  bar  to 
comfort,  source  of  tormenting  fear !  on  the  contrary,  faith  bears 
every  thing.  ''  Put  thy  trust  in  Grod,  (as  in  the  old  translation;) 
hope  in  God,  (as  in  the  new,)  I  shall  yet  praise  him."  The 
devil  tells  me  my  trouble  is  so  great,  I  shall  never  lift  up  my 
head  again ;  but  unbelief  and  the  devil  are  liars ;  *^  I  shall  yet 
praise  him ;"  my  God  will  carry  me  through  all ;  I  shall  yet 
praise  him,  even  for  casting  me  down ;  I  shall  praise  him«  even 
ibr  that  which  is  the  cause  of  all  my  disquietude ;   he  will  be 

2y2  ^ 


724  SOUL   DfiJBCTION.  [LXil. 

'^the  health  of  my  countenance ;''  though  my  afflictions  hare 
now  made  my  body  low,  suck  up  my  spirits,  and  hurt  my  aol* 
mal  frame,  '*  he  will  be  the  help  of  my  countenance ;"  I  shall 
by  and  by  see  him  again,  and  be  favoured  with  those  trans- 
forming  views,  which  my  God  has  favoured  me  with  in  times 
past;  ''he  is  the  health  of  my  countenance,  and  my  God:" 
though  the  devil  tempts  me,  and  my  evil  neighbours  say, 
'*  Where  is  now  thy  God  ?"  Dost  thou  think  thou  art  a  chiid 
of  God,  and  thy  Father  suffers  thee  to  be  cast  down  ?  I  tett 
thee,  I  tell  thee,  O  Satan,  that  God  who  I  have  been  so  vilely 
tempted  as  to  believe  has  forsaken  me,  will  come  over  the 
mountains  of  my  guilt,  will  forgive  my  backslidings  against 
himself,  my  unbelief  shall  not  make  his  promises  of  none  effect; 
I  shall  praise  him  even  while  I  live,  I  shall  praise  him  before  1 
die,  [  shall  praise  him  for  ever  in  heaven,  where  he  will  be, 
after  death,  '*  the  health  of  my  countenance,  and  my  God  ;** 
thus  faith  will  get  the  better  in  a  saint.  David  was  sometimes 
left  to  say,  in  effect,  all  things  are  against  me ;  yet  still  in  most 
of  the  psalms,  in  this,  the  next,  the  cxiiith,  and  many  of  the 
rest,  he  triumphs  in  God ;  and  he  composed  but  very  few  with- 
out praising  at  the  end,  though  he  complains  at  the  beginning: 
God  help  us  thus  to  do ! 

But  it  is  time  to  leave  off  speaking  particularly  of  David, 
and  to  turn  to  you,  to  whom  these  words,  I  pray  God  may 
prove  salutary  and  useful.  I  have  had  a  great  struggle  in  my 
mind  this  afternoon,  what  I  should  preach  from  ;  I  have  beea 
praying  and  looking  up  to  God,  and  could  not  preach  for  my 
life  on  any  other  text,  which  has  often  been  the  case  before, 
and  whenever  it  was,  some  poor  soul  has  been  comforted  and 
raised  up ;  and  among  such  a  mixed  multitude,  there  are  some, 
no  doubt,  come  to  this  poor  despised  place,  cast  down  and  dis- 
quieted within;  I  shall  endeavour  to  inquire  what  yoo  are  cast 
down  for,  and  then  I  shall  propose  a  great  cure  for  yoo, 
namely,  trust  in  God :  and  I  pray,  that  what  was  David's  com- 
fort, may  be  yours.  Why  should  not  we  expect  an  answer  when 
we  pray  that  God  before  you  go  home  may  make  you,  whether 
you  wiU  or  no,  leave  your  burdens  behind  you ;  and  God  keep 
you  from  taking  them  up  as  you  go  home ! 

Probably,  there  may  be  some  of  you  that  are  real  belierers; 
perhaps,  I  ought  to  ask  your  pardon :  where  am  I  preacfain^i 
in  the  Tabernacle,  the  most  despised  place  in  Liondon!  so 
scandalous  a  place,  that  many  of  the  children  of  God  wooM 
rather  go  elsewhere !  God  help  us  to  keep  up  our  scandal ! 
But  yet  I  believe  there  are  many  King's  daughters  here,  many 
of  you  whom  God  enabled  in  this  place  first  to  say,  **  My  Lon), 
and  my  God."  When  you  put  your  fingers,  as  it  were,  on  the 
print  of  Christ's  nails,  and  put  your  hands  into  his  side,  aod 
were  no  longer  faithless,  but  believing,  you  thought  you  should 
never  be  cast  down  any  more,  but  now  you  have  found  your- 
selves mistaken ;  and  I  shall  endeavour,  in  the  prosecution  ci 
this  text,  to  speak  to  all  that  are  cast  down^  whether  befioiv  tf 


LXIX.}  SOUL   DEIBCTION.  725 

after  conversion,  and  then  to  such  that  were  never  cast  doyni 
at  all;  and  if  you  were  never  cast  down  before,  God  cast  you 
down  now! 

What  are  persons  cast  down  for?  What  are  some  of  you  dis- 
quieted within  you  for?  I  have  reason  to  believe,  from  the  notes 
put  up  at  both  ends  of  the  town,  that  there  are  many  of  you 
that  have  arrows  of  conviction  stuck  fast  in  your  souls ;  I  have 
taken  in  near  two  hundred  at  the  other  end  of  the  town,  within 
a  fortnight;  if  this  be  the  case,  that  God  is  thus  at  work,  let 
the  devil  roar,  and  we  will  go  on  in  the  name  of  the  Lord. 
And  what  arc  you  cast  down  for?  Some  poor  soul  will  say, 
vvith  a  sense  of  sin,  the  guilt  of  it,  the  enmity  of  it,  the  very 
aggravated  circumstances  that  attend  it,  appear  and  set  them- 
selves as  in  battle-array  before  me :  once  I  thought  I  had  no 
sin,  at  least  I  thought  that  sin  was  not  so  exceeding  sinful ; 
but  I  now  find  it  such  a  burden,  I  could  almost  say  with  Cain, 
•*it  is  greater  than  I  can  bear."  And,  perhaps,  some  of  you 
are  so  cast  down,  as  in  your  baste  to  say,  as  colonel  Gardiner, 
that  great  man  of  God,  told  me  himself  had  said  when  under 
conviction,  '^  I  believe  God  cannot  be  just,  unless  he  damn  my 
wicked  soul."  Is  this  thy  case  ?  Art  thou  wicked,  art  thou  so 
cast  down,  so  disquieted,  that  thou  canst  not  rest  night  nor 
day,  shall  I  send  thee  away  without  any  comfort?  Shall  I 
send  thee  away  as  the  legal  preachers  do  ?  as  a  minister  some 
time  ago  did,  when  a  man  told  him  how  wicked  he  had  been ; 
Oh,  says  he,  if  you  are  so  wicked,  you  are  damned  to  be  sure,  I 
shall  not  trouble  myself  with  you  ?  When  a  poor  negro  was 
taken  up  for  thieving,  another  went  to  him  and  said.  You  are 
so  bad,  I  must  turn  my  back  to  you :  that  is  the  law,  but  the 
gaspel  is.  Turn  thy  face  to  God ;  think  not  that  God  is  dealing 
with  thee  as  an  absolute  God,  a  God  out  of  Christ.  I  would 
have  nothing  to  do,  says  Luther,  with  an  absoiute  God;  as  such 
he  is  a  consuming  fire.  Trust  God  in  Christ,  throw  thyself 
upon  him,  throw  thyself  on  the  Son  of  God  ;  cry  with  thy  bro- 
ther, (and  now  thou  art  in  that  temper,  thou  wilt  not  be  ashamed 
to  call  the  thief  thy  brother,)  say  with  him,  "  Lord,  remember 
ine  when  thou  art  in  thy  kingdom:"  thou  shalt  yet  praise 
him,  thou  shalt  yet  have  the  forgiveness  of  thy  sins  ;  thy  par- 
don shall  not  only  be  sealed  in  heaven,  but  thou  shalt  have  it 
in  thy  heart :  these  are  only  the  pangs  of  the  new  birth,  the  first 
strugglings  of  the  soul  immersing  into  the  divine  life ;  he  shall 
yet  be  the  health  of  thy  countenance :  these  poor  cheeks, 
though  bedewed  with  tears,  shall  by  and  by  have  a  fine  blush, 
when  a  pardoning  God  comes  with  his  love ;  it  shall  even  make 
a  change  in  thy  countenance,  for  as  a  heavy  heart  makes  a 
man's  countenance  sad,  so  a  cheerful  heart  makes  the  counte- 
nance pleasant :  thou  shalt  know  him  to  be  thy  God,  thou  shalt 
say,  ^'  My  Lord,  and  my  God  :"  Lord  Jesus,  grant  this  may  be 
the  happy  moment.  Were  Jesus  here,  were  the  Redeemer  now 
in  this  metropolis,  I  am  sure  he  would  go  about  the  streets,  he 
would  be  a  field-preacher,  he  would  go  out  into  the  high-ways 


726  SOUL   DB^ECTION.  [LXIX. 

and  hedges,  lie  woald  invite,  he  would  ran  after  them ;  Lord 
Jesus,  take  the  veil  from  our  hearts,  and  let  us  see  to-night  thy 
loving  heart  as  the  Son  of  God  !  Trust  in  God  ;  you  will  say, 
it  is  very  easy  for  you  to  say  so,  but  I  cannot  trust  in  God: 
caiinot  you?  who  told  you  that 7  That  is  the  work  of  God; 
you  are  not  far  from  the  kingdom  of  God.  Who  convinced 
thee  of  thy  inability  to  believe,  do  you  think  the  devil  did? 
No,  it  was  the  Spirit  of  God,  procured  by.  the  blood  of  the 
Lamb,  that  was  to  come  to  convince  the  world  of  sin.  If  thou 
canst  not  trust  as  thou  wouldest,  say^  "  Lord,  I  believe,  help 
my  unbelief;"  stretch  out  thy  poor  hand/  I  am  thinking  of 
Sunday  last,  when  I  was  giving  the  sacrament,  I  observed 
there  was  one  blind  communicant,  that  could  not  see,  but  be 
thrust  out  his  hand;  I  observed  several  lame  persons,  but  there 
were  enough  to  give  it  to  them ;  I  saw  also  a  poor  barrow- 
woman,  and  I  took  particular  care  to  give  the  cup  to  her ;  so  I 
put  it  up  to  the  mouth  of  the  poor  blind  man :  if  that  is  the  case, 
what  love  must  there  be  in  God  to  the  poor  soul ! 

But,  methinks,  I  hear  some  poor  soul  say,  that  is  not  my  case, 
I  am  not  cast  down  for  that,  but  I  am  cast  down  because  after 
that  I  knew  God  to  be  my  God,  after  I  knew  Jesus  to  be  my 
King,  and  after  I  had  mounted  upon  my  high  places,  the  defU 
and  my  unbelieving  heart  threw  me  down  again ;  would  you  not 
have  me  cast  down  ?  Would  you  not  have  me  disquieted  7  A 
person  of  an  Antinomian  spirit  would  say.  Do  not  tell  me  of  your 
frames,  I  have  learned  to  live  by  faith,  I  do  not  care  whether 
Christ  manifests  himself  to  me  or  no,  I  have  got  the  word  and 
the  promise,  I  am  content  with  a  promise  now ;  so  these  poor 
creatures  go  on  without  any  frame,  because  they  will  not  live  iq 
it :  from  such  Antinomianism,  good  God,  deliver  me.  How  ! 
how !  how !  not  cast  down  at  an  absent  God,  not  disquieted 
when  God  withdraws  !  Where  are  you  gone  ?  You  are  gone 
far  from  your  Father's  house ;  if  nothing  else  will  do,  may  your 
Father  whip  you  home  again !  But  tender  hearts,  when  they  re* 
fleet  how  it  was  once,  are  cast  down  ;  David  says,  **  my  tears 
have  been  my  meat  day  and  night,  for  I  had  gone  with  a  multi- 
tude to  the  house  of  God,"  Here  he  looks  back  upon  his  for- 
mer enjoyments,  his  spiritual  prosperity,  (as  Job  looks  back  up- 
on his  temporal,)  and  says, "  Why  art  thou  cast  down,  O  mr 
sou)  ;*'  it  is  because  I  do  not  meet  God  in  his  ordinances  as  I 
used  to  do ;  poor  deserted,  panting  soul !  poor  disquieted  soul! 
he  must  be  the  help  of  thy  countenance,  he  will  y^  be  thy  God. 
Who  was  it  sought  Jesus  sorrowing  ?  What  would  you  bare 
thought  of  the  virgin  Mary  if  she  had  said,  1  do  not  care  whe- 
ther 1  see  my  son  or  not :  she  sought  him,  and  found  him  in  the 
temple  ;  God  grant  every  poor  deserted  soul  may  find  him  to- 
night—I mean,  in  the  temple  of  his  heart.  And  in  the  case  of 
Mary,  she  says,  "  They  have  taken  away  my  Lord,  and  I  know 
not  where  they  have  laid  him :"  if  they  had  not  taken  away 
her  Lord,  Mary  would  have  been  rich ;  so  you  may  say  your  cor- 
ruptions, your  backslidings  and  ingratitude^  have  taken  away 


I.XIX.]  SOUL   OBJECTION.  727 

your  Lord :  Lord,  grant  thou  mayest  find  him  to-night.  He  that 
said,  *'  Mary/'  can  call  thee  to>night,  and  can  make  thee  say. 
My  dear  Lord,  I  come  to-night:  he  caa  call  thee  by  thy  name. 

But,  say  you,  I  am  cast  down,  because  I  am  wearied  with 
temptation  ;  not  only  my  God  is  departed  from  me,  but  an  evil 
spirit  is  come  upon  me,  to  torment  me  ;  I  am  haunted  with  this 
and  that  evil  suggestion,  that  I  am  a  terror  to  myself.  Come, 
come,  hear  what  Oavid  saith  in  the  beginning  of  the  psalm, 
"  As  the  hart  panteth  after  the  water-brooks,  so  panteth  my  soul 
after  thee,  O  God."  What  say  you  to  that?  If  you  have  a 
mind  to  see  the  beauty  of  this  verse,  read  Mr  Hervey's  Theron 
and  Aspasio,  which  will  live  when  its  despisers  are  dead ;  and 
those  that  have  endeavoured  to  disparage  him  will  be  obliged 
to  own,  that  he  was  one  of  the  greatest  luminaries  we  ever  had^ 
and  one  that  has  laid  down  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel  in  a  man- 
ner to  charm  and  allure  the  great  and  noble.  Well,  is  it  thy 
case,  that  unbelief  dogs  thee,  go  where  thou  wilt  ?  Well,  still 
trust  in  God,  **  thou  shalt  yet  praise  him  for  the  help  of  his 
countenance ;  he  will  command  his  lovingkindness  in  the  day, 
and  his  song  shall  be  with  thee  in  the  night. "  Though  it  be 
night,  there  is  some  moon,  blessed  be  God,  or  some  stars  ;  and 
if  there  is  a  fog  that  you  cannot  see,  God  can  quiet  his  people 
in  the  dark,  he  will  make  the  enemy  flee ;  fear  him  not,  God  will 
comfort  thee,  and  punish  the  devil  for  tempting  thee^  if  thou 
trust  in  him. 

But,  say  you,  I  am  cast  down,  and  disquieted  within  me ; 
why  ?  Because  I  have  one  affliction  after  another,  no  sooner  is 
one  trial  gone,  but  another  succeeds;  now  I  think  I  shall  have 
a  little  rest,  the  tormentor  will  not  come  nigh  me  to*day ;  but  no 
sooner  has  the  Christian  so  said,  but  another  storm  comes,  and 
the  clouds  retarn  after  the  rain :  then  we  think  we  must  be  cast 
down,  and  that  we  ought  to  be  disquieted  ;  this  was  David's 
case  ;  what  does  he  say  ?  ''  All  thy  waves  and  thy  billows  are 
^one  over  me."  I  believe  he  found  after  that,  there  were  more 
waves  to  come  than  he  had  yet  felt :  why  ?  says  a  poor  distressr 
ed  soul,  because  I  have  been  so  long  in  Christ,  and  have  got 
these  cursed  corruptions  yet  within.  I  thought  to  have  been  rid 
of  them  all  long  ago  ;  I  thought  I  had  no  corruptions  left  thirty- 
three  years  ago,  and  that  the  Canaanites  were  all  rooted  out  of 
the  land,  that  Pharaoh  and  his  host  were  all  drowned  in  the 
Red  Sea ;  but  I  find  the  old  man  is  strong  in  me,  I  look  upon 
myself  to  be  less  than  the  least  of  all  saints,  God  knows  ;  and 
you  that  walk  near  God,  and  have  made  great  advances  in  the 
divine  life,  if  you  are  honest,  must  say,  O  this  body  of  sin  and 
death,  if  I  shut  this  old  man  out  at  the  fore-door,  he  comes  in 
at  the  back-door.  Come,  come,  come,  my  soul,  trust  in  God,  he 
will  give  power  to  the  faint,  he  will  give  strength,  and  in  due  time 
deliver  thee :  go  to  God,  tell  him  of  them ;  beg  thy  Redeemer  to 
take  his  whip  into  his  hand,  either  of  small  or  large  cords,  and 
use  it,  rather  than  your  corruptions  should  get  head  again. 

Time  would  fail  to  mention  all  that  are  cast  down  on  these 


72S  .SOUL  OfiJBCTION«  [usix, 

accounts,  bot  I  must  mention  one  more ;  perhaps,  aome  erf*  yon 
may  be  cast  down  with  the  fear,  not  of  death  only,  bat  ofjadg- 
ment.  I  believe  there  are  thousands  of  people  die  a  thousaiid 
times,  for  fear  of  dying  once.  Dr.  Mather  and  Mr.  PembertoB, 
of  New  England,  were  always  afraid  of  dying,  bat  when  they 
came  to  die,  one  or  both  of  them  said  to  some  that  were  intimate 
with  them,  '^  Is  this  all,  I  can  bear  this  very  well :"  and  I  bare 
generally  found  that  a  poor  soul,  that  cannot  act  that  faith  on 
God  it  once  did,  or  in  old  age  when  the  body  grows  infiim, 
as  they  used  to  do,  yet  they  go  off  rejoicing  in  God,  as  a  good 
soul  that  was  buried  at  the  chapel  the  other  day,  said,  ''I am 
going  over  Jordan."  Therefore,  O  poor  soul,  leave  this  to  God, 
he  will  take  care  of  thy  dying  hour.  If  any  of  you  are  poor 
here,  and  I  were  to  promise  to  give  you  a  coffin  and  a  shrood, 
you  would  be  easy  ;  now,  can  you  trust  the  word  of  a  man,  and 
not  that  of  a  God  ?  Well,  the  Lord  help  you  to  trust  in  bim; 
*^  having  loved  his  own,  he  loves  them  to  the  end  i'  he  is  a  (kith- 
ful,  unchangeable  friend,  that  sticketh  closer  tlian  a  brother. 

Who  would  not  be  a  Christian,  who  would  but  be  a  beUever, 
my  brethren !  sec  the  preciousness  of  a  believer's  faith ;  the 
quacks  will  say,  here  buy  this  packet,  which  is  good  for  all  dis- 
eases, and  is  really  worth  nothing  ;  but  this  will  never  fail  the 
soul.  Now,  I  wish  I  could  make  you  all  angry  ;  I  am  a  sad 
mischief-maker  ;  but  I  will  assure  you,  I  do  not  want  to  make 
you  angry  with  one  another :  some  people  that  profess  to  have 
grace  in  their  hearts  seem  resolved  to  set  all  God's  people  at 
variance ;  they  are  like  Samson's  foxes  with  firebrands  in  tbdr 
tails,  setting  fire  to  all  about  them.  Are  any  of  you  come  from 
the  Foundry,  or  any  other  place,  to-night?  I  do  not  care  where 
you  come  from,  I  pray  God  you  may  all  quarrel  to-night  :1 
want  you  to  fall  out  with  your  own  hearts ;  if  we  were  employed 
as  we  ought  to  be,  we  should  have  less  time  to  talk  about  tbe 
vain  things  that  are  the  subjects  of  conversation :  God  grant 
your  crosses  may  be  left  at  the  cross  of  the  liamb  of  God 
this  night. 

And  if  there  be  any  of  you  here,  as  no  doubt  there  are  many, 
that  are  crying,  what  nonsense  he  is  preaching  to-night !  I  shonM 
not  wonder  if  they  were  to  mimic  me  when  they  go  home ;  if 
they  should  say,  I  thank  God,  I  was  never  cast  down :  yon 
take  God's  name  in  vain ;  you  thank  God  you  never  was  cast 
down,  the  very  answer  you  have  given  makes  me  cast  down  /or 
you ;  why  so  ?  Why,  as  the  Lord  liveth,  I  speak  out  of  compas* 
ston,  there  is  but  one  step  between  thee  and  death.  Do  not  yon 
know  the  sessions  began  at  the  Old-Bailey  to-day  ;  if  there  were 
any  capitally  convicted,  what  would  you  think  to  see  tbem 
playing  at  cards,  or  go  on  rattling  and  drinking  and  swearing? 
*  Would  not  you  yourself  cry,  and,  if  it  were  a  child  of  your  own, 
would  it  not  break  your  heart  ?  But  yet  thou  art  that  wretch ; 
1  must  weep  for  thee,  my  brother-sisner ;  we  had  both  one  father 
and 'mother,  Adam  and  Eve  ;  this  was  our  sad  original. 

Dear  Christians,  pray  for  me  to-night.     I  remember  once  1 


LXIX.j  SOUL   DBJECTIOK.  729 

was  preaching  in  Scotland,  and  saw  ten  thousand  affected  in  a 
moment,  some  with  joy,  others  crying,  I  cannot  believe  ;  others, 
God  has  given  me  faith  ;  some,  fainting  in  their  friends'  arms ; 
seeing  two  stout  creatures  upon  a  tombstone,  hardened  indeed, 
I  cried  out.  You  rebels,  come  down ;  and  down  they  fell  directly, 
and  cried  before  they  went  away,  "  What  shall  we  do  to  be 
saved  ?"    Have  any  of  you  got  apprentices,  whom  you  have 
brought  from  time  to  time  to  the  Tabernacle,  but  now  will  not 
let  them  come,  because  you  think  they  grow  worse  and  worse, 
and  you  will  be  tempted  to  leave  off  praying  for  them?    Do  not 
do  that:  who  knows  but  this  may  be  the  happy  time!     Chil- 
dren of  godly  parents,  apprentices  of  godly  people,  servants  of 
people  who  fear  the  Lord,  that  hear  gospel-preachers,  that  are 
on  the  watch  for  every  infirmity,  that  go  to  their  fellow-servants 
and  say.  These  saints  love  good  eating  and  drinking,  they  are 
only  gospel  gossips;  is  this  the  case  of  any  of  yon  ?  if  it  is,  you 
are  in  a  deplorable  condition — under  the  gospel,  and  not  convin- 
ced thereby !  O  may  God  bring  down  you  rebels  to-night ;  may 
this  be  the  happy  hour  you  may  be  cast  down  and  disquieted 
within  you.    What  can  I  say  more?  I  would  speak  till  I  burst* 
I  would  speak  till  I  could  say  no  more.   O  poor  sod,  that  hast 
been  never  yet  cast  down,  I  will  tell  yon,  if  you  die  without 
being  cast  down,  however  you  may  die  and  have  no  pangs  in 
your  death,  and  your  carnal  relations  may  thank  God  that  you 
died  like  lambs,  but  no  sooner  will  your  souls  be  out  of  your 
bodies,  but  God  will  cast  you  down  to  hell,  you  will  be  lifting  up 
your  eyes  in  yonder  place  of  torment,  you  will  be  disquieted, 
but  there  will  be  nobody  there  to  say,  "  Hope  thou  in  God,  for 
I  shall  yet  praise  him,''  &c.     O  my  God,  when  I  think  of  this,  I 
could  go  to  the  very  gates  of  hell  to  preach.     I  thought  the 
other  day,  O  if  I  had  my  health,  I  would  stand  on  the  top  of 
every  hackney  coach,  and  preach  Christ  to  those  poor  creatures. 
XJnconverted  old  people,  unconverted  young  people,  will  you 
have  no  compassion  on  your  own  souls  ?  if  you  will  damn  your- 
selves, remember  I  am  iree  from  the  blood  of  you  all.  O  if  it  be 
thy  blessed  will.  Lord  most  holy,   O  God  most  mighty,  take  the 
hearts  of  these  sinners  into  thy  hand.  Methinks  I  see  the  heavens 
opened,  the  Judge  sitting  on  his  throne,  the  sea  boiling  like  a 
pot,  and  the  Lord  Jesus  coming  to  judge  the  world  ;  well,  if  you 
are  damned,  it  shall  not  be  for  want  of  calling  after.    O  come, 
come,  God  help  you  to  come,  whilst  Jesus  is  standing  ready  to 
receive  yon,  O  fly  to  the  Saviour  this  night  for  refuge  ;   remem- 
ber, if  you  die  in  an  unconverted  state^  you  must  be  damned 
for  ever. 

O  that  I  could  but  persuade  one  poor  soul  to  fly  to  Jesus 
Christ !  make  him  your  refuge,  and  then,  however  you  may  be 
cast  down,  ^'  hope  in  God,  and  you  shall  yet  praise  him/'  God 
help  those  that  have  believed,  to  hope  more  and  more  in  his  sal- 
vation, till  faith  be  turned  into  vision,  and  hope  into  fruition, 
Even  so.  Lord  Jesus,     il men, and  Amen, 


7-)0  SPIRITUAI^  BAPTISM.  [LXI. 

SERMON  LXX. 

SPIRITUAL    BAPTISM. 

Know  you  not^  that  so  many  of  us  as  were  baptized  into  Jtstu 
Christy  icere  baptized  into  his  death  ?  Therefore  we  art  tm- 
Tied  with  him  by  Iniptism  into  death  :  that  tike  its  Christ  wm 
raised  up  from  the  dead  by  the  glorj/  of  the  Father,  even  so  w 
also  should  walk  in  newness  of  life. — Rom.  ri.  3,  4. 

I  BELIEVE,  my  dear  hearers,  I  may  Tenture  to  tell  yon,  that  the 
longer  yoa  live,  the  more  you  will  find  that  the  royal  preadici 
spoke  truth  when  he  said,  "  There  is  nothing  new  under  tk 
sun  :"  for  as  God  is  always  the  same,  so  the  world,  the  flesh, 
and  the  devil  will  be  always  the  same-^frail,  vile,  inimical,  asd 
deceitful.   New  scenes  will  always  surprise  us,  not  because  tbej 
are  really  new,  but  because  they  are  new  to  as  :    our  lives  ire 
mostly  taken  up  with  viewing  only  the  present  appearance  of 
things ;   we  have  neither  time  or  leisure  to  look  back  as  we 
ought,  or  might,  upon  the  events  of  providence,  or  the  effects  of 
the  doctrines  of  grace.     I  will  not  say,  my  thoughts  always  nn 
in  a  religious  channel,  but  I  will  say,  I  wish   they  did.    The 
words  in  our  text,  as  connected  with  what  precedes  and  foUoirs^ 
contain  the  unchangeable  truths  of  God ;   nor  am  I  any  wajs 
staggered  by  opposition  to  the  vindication  of  what  the  good  oU 
Puritans,  and  the  Dissenters  of  the  present  age,  call  evangeiicil 
doctrine.  I  do  not  know  a  man  that  has  written  in  a  legal  strain, 
or  that  reads,  or  talks  in  common  conversation  in  a  legal  strain, 
but  discovers  his  ignorance  of,  if  not  his  enmity  to,  the  doctrine 
of  justification  by  faith  alone,  by  charging  it  with  very  bad 
consequences,  and  endeavouring  to  explode  it  as  a  dangerous 
doctrine,  destructive  of  holiness,  which  they  would  seem  to  pa- 
tronize ;  though  if  one  were  always  to  judge  of  them  by  their  ca« 
lumniatlng  practice,  one  would  imagine  they  had  never  read  vbith 
proper  attention,  either  the  preceding  or  following  chapters,  aor 
that  wherein  is  our  text,  which  proves  it  to  be  a  doctrine  accord- 
ing to  godliness,  and  therefore  properly  begins,  '*  What  shall 
we  say  then,  shall  we  continue  in  sin,  that  grace  may  abound  f 
You  will  say,  I  have  been  insisting  upon  the  universal  depra- 
vity of  nature,  I  have  been  bringing  all  down  upon  an  equal  level; 
that  I  have  not  only  mentioned  the  dreadful  state  of  Heathens, 
but  the  equally  dreadful  state  of  the  haughty  Jews,  and  igno- 
rant Gentiles,  one  only  sinning  against  the  light  of  nature,  and 
the  other  sinning  against  the  light  of  revelation,  by  which  bodi, 
in  one  sense,  stand  on  an  equal  footing,  though  the  last,  who 
thinks  he  stands  upon  higher  ground,  appears  to  be  only  superior 
in  sin  ;  why  then,  how  must  either  or  both  be  saved,  since  tbey 
have  nothing  to    recommend    them,  nothing    to   plead  as  an 
atonement  for  their  sins  ?    Here  comes  in  the  blessed  doctrine 
of  justification  by  the  glorious  imputed  righteousness  of  Jesvn 
Christ,  to  be  received  by  faith  as  an  instrument  by  the  poor  con- 
victed sinner.     If  this  be  the  case,  **  shall  we  sin,  that  grace  maj 
abound  V    This  serves  as  a  foil^  to  set  off  the  riches  of  gnce 


L.XX.]  SPIRITUAL   BAPTISM.  731 

with  a  ^cater  lustre.     Is  not  this  a  very  unfair  deduction^  to 

say^  Never  mind  holiness,  but  sin  that  grace  may  abound,  that 

God's  grace  may  be  more  conspicuous  ?     Pray  how  does  the 

apostle  treat  this  ?  with  the  utmost  abhorrence  ;  •*  God  forbid/* 

says  he  ;  how  dare  you  charge  the  doctrine  of  grace  with  such 

a  horrid  consequence  ?  God  forbid  that  it  should  enter  into  our 

'     hearts;  for  **  how  shall  we  that  are  dead  to  sin,  live  any  longer 

therein  ?     Know  ye  not,  (saith  he,)  that  as  many  of  us  as  were 

L     baptized  into  Christ,  are  baptized  into  his  death :"  therefore, 

i*    saith  he,  so  far  from  sinning  that  grace  may  abound,  Ave  look 

I    upon  ourselves  as  ''  being  buried  with  Christ  by  baptism  into 

>j    death,  that  like  as  Christ  was  raised  from  the  dead  by  the  glory 

B    of  the  Father,  even  so  we  also  should  walk  in  newness  of  life.'* 

a    This  I  thought  a  proper  supplement  to  some  discourses  I  have 

f,    endeavoured  to  deliver  you  for  some  days  last  past,  when  treat- 

0    ing  on  the  credibility  and  authenticity  of  our  blessed  Lord's 

'^    resurrection. 

31  I  cannot  make  sport  for  the  devil  by  railing  against  infant  or 
jii  adult  baptism :  it  is  a  strange  thing  how  bigots  can  set  the 
iri  world  on  fire  by  throwing  water  at  one  another,  and  that  people 
'^  cannot  be  baptized,  or  sprinkled  as  the  others  call  it,  without 
.|i  bespattering  one  another,  and  shew  that  the  chief  thing  they 
|i  have  been  baptized  into,  are  the  waters  of  strife ;  this  is  catch-* 
?fi  ing  at  shadows,  and  making  sport  for  the  devil,  while  the  com-- 
[j(  batants  on  both  sides,  being  thus  engaged  in  throwing  the  sha^ 
^  dewy  water  at  one  another,  lose  the  substantials  of  religion,  while 
J.  they  are  defending  the  outside  of  it.  For  my  part,  I  do  not  en- 
^i  ter  into  the  debate  about  infant  or  adult  baptism :  there  has 
^1  been  a  dispute  about  the  mode,  as  well  as  the  subjects  of  bap- 

0  tism :  persons  equally  skilled  in  languages,  pretend  to  bring 
Pf  various  texts  from  the  original,  to  prove  that  the  word  flam-lCta 
^   signifies  either  sprinkling  or  plunging ;  and  I  believe  you  and  I 

1  might  as  well  attempt  to  draw  two  parallel  lines,  and  brin^ 
^  them  to  meet  at  some  certain  place,  as  to  bring  these  learned 
f  combatants  together ;  for  of  all  disputants,  religious  disputants 
f  are  the  most  fiery  and  obstinate  ;  therefore,  I  am  for  those  that 
,  have  learned  to  throw  water  upon  bigoted  fire, ''  to  think,  and 
^     let  think,"  about  the  mode,  and  consider  what  it  imports. 

,  It  is  certain,  that  in  the  words  of  our  text  there  is  an  allusion 
to  the  manner  of  baptism,  which  was  by  immersion,  which  our 
own  church  allows,  and  insists  upon  it  that  children  should  be 
immersed  in  water,  unless  those  that  bring  the  children  to  be 
baptized  assure  the  minister  that  they  cannot  bear  the  plunging. 
We  will  allow  this  then,  that  one  was  plunged  when  he  was 
young,  another  plunged  when  he  was  old ;  and  in  fact,  when 
adults  are  plunged  as  they  ought,  it  is  backwards  at  once :  but 
whether  I  am  plunged  in  a  great  deal,  or  '  buried'  with  a  little 
water,  as  a  body  is  when  it  is  said,  ^  Earth  to  earth,  ashes  to 
ashes,  dust  to  dust,'  what  signifies  it,  if  I  go  in  and  come  oatj 
and  continue  just  the  same  as  before,  unless  you  can  say, '  In 
Heathen,  and  out  Christian ;'  but  we  see  very  often  tbey  are  not 


789  aPIRITtXAI^    BAPTISM.  [LXX« 

one  bit  tbe  better,  they  have  not  one  grain  ot  Christianity  moie. 
Supposing  a  child  when  young  grows  up  to  a  man,  be  sprinkled, 
or  dipped  as  the  children  I  saw  at  I^sbon,  or  in  our  font,  as 
they  are  made  large  enough  to  dip  in,  though  now  they  sprinkle; 
suppose  one  of  these  grow  up  a  child  of  the  devil»  and  says,  I 
do  not  look  upon  what  was  done  in  my  infancy  to  be  baptising 
I  will  be  oaptizcd  really  ;  and  yet  suppose  also,  that  person  takes 
up  only  the  outward  sign,  and  both  of  them  die  and  go  to  tfw 
devil,  would  it  give  either  of  them  satisfaction  to  say,  I  am  is 
hell,  but  I  was  baptized  when  an  infant,  or  adult  ?  Both  of 
them  would  have  to  lament  they  were  tormented  in  the  flaaet 
Would  it  not  be  better  for  us  to  take  care  not  to  offend  oir 
brethren,  not  to  raise  one  another*s  spirits  and  corraptions^  M 
rather,  when  we  come  together,  talk  of  tbe  heart,  and  inqoin 
whether,  when  we  received  the  outward  sign  by  sprinkling  or 
dipping,  we  really  received  the  thing  signified  in  our  hearts,  asd 
exemplify  that  thing  signified,  in  our  lives. 

Now  pray  what  is  the  thing  signified?  We  need  not  go  far- 
ther for  an  answer  than  our  text,  "  As  many  of  them  as  woe 
baptized  into  Jesus  Christ,  were  baptized  into  his  death :"  and 
it  is  worthy  remarking,  that  our  Lord  told  his  disciples,  that 
they  were  to  **  baptize  all  nations  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  and 
of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost."  Now  I  believe  all  persons 
that  have  but  a  little  skill  in  scripture  interpretatioo,  must  alknr 
that  the  word  name  signifies  Christ ;  ''my  name  is  in  him,"  speak- 
ing in  the  Old  Testament  of  Christ's  name ;  and  when  we  say,  ''in 
or  by  the  name,"  it  has  a  peculiar  reference  to  every  thing  that 
belongs  to  God  :  and  I  verily  believe  that  when  the  Redeemer 
said,  "  baptize  them  in  the  name  of  Father,  Son,  and  Holy 
Ghost,"  he  not  ouly  intended  to  establish  the  doctrine  of  three 
persons  in  one  God,  but  also  to  point  out  the  nature  of  tnw 
baptism,  namely,  to  be  baptized  into  tbe  nature  of  the  Father, 
into  the  nature  of  the  Son,  and  into  the  nature  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  and  this  seems  to  be  the  meaning  of  our  text,  "Know  je 
not  that  so  many  as  were  baptized  :"  if  we  had  been  baptised 
aright,  have  been  baptized  not  only  in  the  name  of  Christ,  hot 
have  been  baptized  into  Christ ;  that  is,  we  have  not  only  pnt 
on  Christ  in  an  outward  profession,  but  have  been  so  baptised 
by  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  to  be  made  members  of  Christ's  mystical 
body,  united  to  him  by  the  blessed  Spirit ;  so  that  in  a  degree^ 
though  not  in  every  sense,  we  are  one  with  Christ,  and  tlie 
Father,  through  him.  This  is  religion  common  to  all,  whetbtf 
we  are  Baptist  or  Pedo-baptist ;  for  we  may  call  one  anotkcr 
by  this  and  that  name,  it  is  no  matter  what  we  are  called,  tiw 
grand  matter  is,  what  God  looks  upon  us  to  be  ;  whether  we 
are  become  by  baptism,  and  with  the  powerful  operations  of  liie 
Spirit  of  God  accompanying  that  ordinance,  branches  of  Jesos 


children  arc  not  to  be  baptised,  they  are  left  inferior  io  Ih* 


l^XX.]  SPIRITUAL    BAPTISM.  93^] 

privileges  to  the  Jews,  their  children  were  circa mcised  to  God, 
and  why  should  not  our  children  be  as  soon  initiated  into  Christ 
as  they  ?  The  apostle  saith,  **  He  is  not  a  Jew  that  is  one  out- 
wardly, neither  is  that  circumcision  which  is  outward  in  tho 
flesh,  (but  circumcision  is,)  that  of  the  heart  and  of  the  spirit, 
whose  praise  is  not  of  men,  but  of  God :"  so  it  may  be  said  of 
outward  baptism ;  he  is  not  a  Christian  who  is  baptized  only 
outwardly,  but  be  that  is  baptized  inwardly  of  the  Spirit,  **  whose 
praise  is  not  of  men,  but  of  God."  When  we  get  proselytes, 
we  are  so  fond  of  them,  that  we  hug  them  to  death  :  I  have  got 
the  praise  of  men,  especially  wlien  religion  walks  in  silver  slip- 
.  pers ;  when  a  person  says,  I  may  get  business,  if  I  get  into  such 
a  church,  into  such  a  society  :  a  man  may  become  religious,  as 
he  may  go  to  'Change,  for  trade;  but  he  is  a  Christian  who  is 
one  inwardly,  who  has  no  worldly  views,  no  designs  but  what 
are  subordinate  to  the  glory  of  God.  The  primitive  Christians 
g^ve  great  proof  of  their  sincerity,  they  were  baptized  over  the 
dead  ;  ''  what  shall  they  do  who  are  baptized  for  (or  over  )  the 
dead  ?*'  Notwithstanding  they  saw  their  fellow-creatures  mur- 
dered, they  dared  to  go  openly  to  be  baptized ;  though  they 
knew  very  well,  soon  after,  that  for  their  baptism  witli  water, 
they  should  be  baptized  with  fire,  yet  they  dared  openly  to 
avow  their  profession  of  Christ.  This  is  being  baptized  into 
Christ;  well,  what  then?  why,  then  we  are  baptized  into  his 
death.  Can  you  tell  me  what  that  is  ?  I  cannot  fully,  I  do  not 
know  that  myself;  and  we  should  preach  according  to  our  experi- 
Mice,  (a  man  of  little  true  grace,  he  will  give  you  a  little,  little, 
little  practical  application ;  very  little,  because  he  has  but  little 
himself;  a  man  that  has  a  good  deal  of  it  in  his  heart,  he  will 
not  neglect  his  principles,  but  he  will  give  the  people  a  good 
sound  meal  of  practical  religion  :)  though  I  am  but  a  babe  in 
Christ,  though  I  have  been  in  Christ  four  or  five  and  thirty 

Sears,  and  know  but  little  of  Christ,  yet  I  think  I  can  tell  you  a 
ttle  what  it  is  to  be  baptized  into  Christ,  to  be  baptized  into 
bis  death.  Ami  immediately  to  die  in  the  body?  That  does 
•ot  always  follow,  but  we  are  to  die  daily,  we  are  to  be  con- 
formed to*  Christ's  death,  which  we  never  can  till  we  have  been 
baptized  into  Christ;  we  can  never  die,  till  we  have  been  enabled 
by  his  power  to  die.  When  we  talk  of  dying  the  death  of  Christ, 
we  mean  being  crucified  to  the  world  with  him.  "  1  live,  (says 
Paul,)  yet  not  I,  but  Christ  lives  in  me ;  and  the  world  is  cruci- 
fied to  me,  and  I  unto  the  world."  Now,  we  all  come  into  the 
world  alive  to  the  world,  the  flesh,  and  the  devil.  Some  people 
say,  a  child  must  cry,  in  order  to  prove  itself  an  heir :  what  do 
you  think  it  cries  for?  I  believe  some  people  think  it  is  because 
k  is  in  pain,  but  I  am  afraid  the  child  cries  because  he  is  hurt ; 
I  believe  he  finds  the  air  too  cool  for  him  ;  and  the  first  thing 
he  does,  is  giving  a  proof  of  original  sin  to  his  parents,  and  all 
the  attendants  about  him ;  this  is  called  in  scripture,  the  old 
man ;  and  however  some  may  find  fault  with  the  church  of  Eng- 
land and  its  forms,  (perhaps  they  m^y  be  mended,  but  I  qaes* 


734  SPIRITUAL   BAPTISM.  [LXL 

lion  whether  we  have  men  capable  of  mending  tbem  Dow-ft> 
days, either  for  zeal  or  spiritual  knowledge,)  yet  I  am  sare  thm 
is  something  in  it  very  good,  particularly  there  is  that  prayer  w 
be  put  up  by  a  child,  deserves  to  be  written  in  letters  of  gold, 
''  Grant,  O  Lord,  that  all  things  belonging  to  the  old  man  maj 
die  in  me  ;**  and  then  follows,  (what  I  shall  speak  of  by  and  bj J 
*'  and  all  belonging  to  the  new  man  may  live  and  grow  in  se.' 
There  is  the  whole  sum  and  substance  of  religion,  the  Alphanl 
Omega,  the  beginning,  the  middle,  and  the  end,  as  Mr.  Am- 
brose's works  are  entitled.  We  want  nothing  but  all  thingsb6> 
longing  to  the  old  man  to  die  in  us,  and  all  things  belonging  li 
the  new  to  live,  to  make  us  fit  for  the  kingdom  of  Christ ;  ai^if 
we  can  find  this  in  us,  God  grant  we  may  not  quarrel  one  wick 
another,  though  I  verily  believe  young  men  think  the  old  man  ii 
very  troublesome.  There  is  one  does  not  live  very  far  froa 
hence,  who  is  a  very  worthy  man ;  I  remember  a  few  years  agi 
he  came  in,  in  his  first  love,  saying,  ''he  had  got  on  the  moont: 
the  fire  burnt  upwards,  though  there  were  a  good  deal  of  smobt 
Pray,  says  I,  is  the  old  man  dead  yet  ?  No,  said  he,  he  is  do! 
quite  dead,— but  spoke  as  if  he  thought  he  were  expiring:  saji 
I,  I  will  speak  to  '  you  three  or  four  years  hence.  Some  tioe 
after  that,  meeting  him,  I  asked  him  concerning  the  old  man;  he 
said  he  thought  he  was  alive,  and  worse  than  ever,  and  that  ba 
was  a  sly  creature,  would  lie  down  as  if  he  were  asleep,  that  k 
may  attack  you  when  off  your  guard  the  better."  I  heard  of  a 
good  man  in  the  country,  who  said,  he  found  his  corruptioai 
were  a  monster  of  a  thousand  heads ;  now  this  is  called  a  cnid- 
fixion,  which  is  a  painful  and  a  gradual  death,  but  a  cerUii 
death,  God  forbid  any  of  you  now  should  turn  the  food  inlt 
poison,  saying,  this  is  a  very  good  doctrine,  I  like  it ;  the  minu- 
ter says  the  old  man  dies  slow,  so  I  will  not  crucify  him ;  tk) 
tell  me  he  will  die  by  and  by,  but  not  yet,  so  I  will  not  troaUi 
myself  much  about  him ;  why  then,  my  dear  hearer,  whoem 
thou  art,  thou  talkest  like  a  stinking  hypocrite,  or  a  rank,  jik 
Antinomian  :  how,  how,  is  the  old  man  such  a  pleasant  compa- 
nion, that  you  love  to  have  him  dwelling  under  your  roof  t  Wow 
you  choose  to  have  a  parcel  of  whores  and  rogues  to  liveia 
your  houses  ?  would  you  like,  if  you  lived  by  letting  of  hif 
ings,  two  or  three  rooms  suppose,  to  have  a  parcel  of  thieves,  aal 
robbers,  and  pickpockets,  come  to  tell  you  their  professkx^ 
would  it  not  be  foolish  for  you  to  let  such  people  in,  wooU  it 
not?  And  just  such  fools  you  are  to  let  pickpockets,  street-m^ 
bers,  God-robbers,  vile  prostitutes,  in  your  wicked  hearts,  (tbe 
lusts  of  the  flesh,  the  lusts  of  the  eye,  and  the  pride  of  life,) stay 
not  only  till  quarter-day,  but  long  after ;  before  you  torn  tfaea 
out,  you  may  be  dead  :  no,  no,  it  is  not  an  instantaneous,  hot  i 
gradual,  progressive  work. 

Then  we  are  baptized  into  Christ,  when  we  study  to  gioriff 
Christ;  that  is  the  reason  that  God  Almighty  sends  yoa« 
many  trials,  that  you  may  be  baptized  into  his  death :  and  ^ittt 
rally  you  will  find,  when  you  have  had  most   conunoaicalMii 


i;XX.]  SPIRITUAL   BAPTISM^  73& 

from  God,  that  some  cross  trials  soon  follow.  Hast  thou  been 
praying  for  resignation?  Perhaps  God  takes  away  a  beloved 
child ;  you  have  been  praying  for  great  patience,  perhaps  a  cross 
wife,  a  Nabal  of  a  husband,  bad  servants,  undutiful  children,  or 
something  or  other,  and  the  devil  at  the  head  of  them,  making 
you  uneasy  :  so  that  you  find  you  have  not  so  much  patience  as 

{rou  thought  you  had  ;  you  never  was  upon  the  mount  in  your 
ives,  but  when  you  came  down  you  were  tempted  to  break  the 
tables :  was  it  not  so  with  Moses,  after  forty  days'  communion 
with  God  ?  down  he  came,  and  seeing  the  people  dancing  round 
the  calf,  down  he  throws  the  tables,  and  breaks  them  all  to 
pieces ;  and  if  God  were  not  to  keep  us,  after  all  our  communion 
with  him,  we  should  break  the  tables  to  pieces,  and  be  damned. 
After  all,  that  person  then  is  dying  every  day,  who  looks  upon 
himself  every  morning  as  one  that  is  to  be  crucified  afresh,  that 
looks  for  crosses,  and  at  the  same  time  walks  so  inoffensively  as 
to  bring  no  cross  upon  himself.  I  spoke  to  a  person  yesterday 
about  the  cross :  pray,  sir,  says  he,  would  you  have  me  bring  a 
cross  upon  myself?  no,  said  I,  only  be  honest,  and  you  will  find 
crosses  enough. 

Then  we  must  be  raised  to  newness  of  life,  as  Christ  was  rais- 
ed from  the  dead  by  the  glory  of  the  Father :  this  points  out  to 
na  in  what  sense  Jesus  Christ  is  the  resurrection  and  the  life, 
imd  shews  us  that  every  thing  Jesus  Christ  did  and  suffered, 
must  be  spiritually  experienced  in  our  hearts.  You  have  often 
beard  me  say.  As  he  was  bom  in  the  virgin's  womb,  he  must  be 
born  in  our  hearts ;  and  as  he  died  for  sin,  we  must  die  to  sin ; 
as  h^  rose  again,  we  must  rise  to  newness  of  heart  and  life. 
What  is  the  new  birth  ?  says  a  great  doctor :  suppose  any  of 
these  doctors  were  to  come  to  any  woman  when  her  travailing 
pains  were  upon  her,  and  she  were  crying  out,  and  labour  pains 
menne  on  faster  and  faster,  and  they  should  stand  preaching  at 
Itbe  door,  and  say.  Good  woman,  these  are  only  metaphorical 
pains,  this  is  only  a  bold  expression  of  the  Easterns,  it  is  only 
metaphorical ;  I  question  whether  the  woman  would  not  wish  the 
^ctor  some  of  these  metaphorical  pains  for  talking  so,  which 
be  would  find  real  ones ;  though  she  could  not  read,  she  might 
^Bel.    But  notwithstanding  the  reality  of  the  new  birth,  and  the 

fains  that  attend  it,  yet  they  say  it  is  only  a  metaphorical  thing, 
am  of  an  odd  temper,  and  of  such  a  temper,  that  I  heartily 
wish  they  may  be  put  under  the  pangs  of  the  new  birth,  and 
know  what  it  is  by  their  own  experience,  know  there  is  nothing 
ia  nature  more  real  than  the  new  birth.  The  apostle  Paul  said, 
I  travail  in  birth  till  Christ  be  formed  in  you  :'*  Now,  do  not  you 
ibink  the  apostle  had  this  metaphorical  expression  of  something 
teal  ?  the  apostle's  travailing  in  birth  must  be  something  analogous 
to  the  natural  birth ;  must  I  say  there  is  no  such  thing  as  pangs, 
because  I  do  not  feel  them?  I  am  fearfully  and  wonderfuUy 
Blade,  that  my  soul  knows  right  well ;  and  in  respect  to  the  new 
Urth  we  may  say,  I  am  fearfully  and  wonderfully  redeemed  by 
Christ,  and  renewed  by  the^  Holy  Ghost ;  the  new  life  imparts 


7S6  SPIRITUAL   BAPTISir.  [LXX. 

fiew  principles,  a  new  understanding,  a  new  wiO,  lEuid  new  affcc* 
tionSy  a  renewed  conscience,  a  renewed  memoiy,  nmy,  a  renewed 
body,  by  making  it  the  temple  of  the  living  Grod,  an  habitatkn 
of  God  throngh  the  Spirit,  and  walking  in  newness  of  life;  if  I 
am  not  mistidcen,  it  implies  a  progressive  motion^  going  fton 
strength  to  strength,  from  one  degree  'of  grace  to  another,  passiii|^ 
from  glory  to  glory,  for  grace  is  only  glory  in  the  bud,  till  gnceis 
swallowed  up  in  endless  glory.  A  person  that  walks,  thooghin 
may  not  walk  equally  as  fast  as  others,  yet  may  get  grooiid : 
hence,  **  not  to  go  forward,  is  to  go  backward."  Enoch  walked 
with  God  :  it  bespoke  the  habitual  tendency  of  his  heart,  tbo 
actual  exercise  of  grace,  that  he  was  kept  in  a  lively  fiaae, 
walked  with  God  among  a  very  wicked  generation,  dared  to  be 
good  when  all  were  wicked  around  him,  and  he  was  so  finvoared 
as  to  be  translated  to  heaven  ;  this  was  the  case  with  Elijah. 
^^  Moses,  (says  the  Lord,)  go  up  to  the  mount,  and  die:"  God 
made  him  undress  himself,  and  put  on  his  own  grave-dothes, 
gives  him  a  sight  of  Caanan ;  but  to  let  him  know  that  he  even  to 
the  very  last  would  chastise  his  people,  when  he  is  even  takia; 
them  to  heaven,  tells  him,  thou  shait  not  go  into  the  earthly  Ca- 
naan, but  I  will  take  thee  to  the  heavenly  one,  which  is  far  bet- 
ter.— Being  baptized  into  the  death  of  Christ,  bespeaks  the 
habitual  tendency  and  practice  of  the  heart  and  life :  the  old  nno 
must  die,  hence  the  new  man  must  live;  it  must  be  emptied  of 
self,  that  there  may  be  more  and  more  room  for  God :  now  lap- 
peal  to  your  hearts,  how  far  yon  have  experienced  this.  I  be- 
lieve the  world  pretty  well  knows  the  temper  of  my  mind,  both 
in  respect  to  politics  and  church-government,  and  church-pria- 
ciples :  I  am  a  professed  avower  of  moderation,  and  I  heartily 
wish  that  all  who  are  concerned  in  church  and  state,  may  par- 
ticularly take  care  to  let  their  moderation  be  known  to  all  men; 
for  if  we  quarrel  with  one  another,  we  shall  only  make  sport  for 
the  devil,  and  occasion  destruction.  I  do  not  care  whether  yon 
go  to  church  or  meeting ;  I  am,  I  profess,  a  member  of  the 
church  of  England,  and  if  they  will  not  let  me  preach  in  the 
church,  I  will  preach  any  where ;  all  the  world  is  my  parish, 
and  I  will  preach  wherever  God  gives  me  opportunity,  but  yoa 
will  never  find  me  disputing  about  the  outward  appendages  of 
religion  ;  do  not  tell  me  you  are  a  Baptist,  an  Independent,  a 
Presbyterian,  a  Dissenter,  tell  me  you  are  a  Christian,  that  is 
all  I  want ;  this  is  the  religion  of  heaven,  and  most  be  ours 
upon  earth ;  I  say,  are  there  any  of  you  under  the  gallery,  or  io 
the  green-seat,  or  any  where,  I  will  try  to  find  you  out  before  I 
have  done  my  sermon,  though  you  are  come  in  the  dark. 

But  I  will  just  at  present  speak  to  you  who  understand  the 
gospel,  to  you  that  are  my  brethren,  though  in  all  probabilitv 
my  elder  brethren,  in  the  gospel.  Methhiks  there  is  somethioir 
solemn  in  meeting  in  the  evening,  something  solemn  in  conin; 
to  worship  after  we  have  been  in  the  labours  of  the  day ;  and  i 
verily  believe,  that  when  weekly  preaching  is  banished  iioa 
London,  that  all  Christianity  will  be  bani^ed^  it  cannot  be  verv 


LtXX.]  8P1KITDAL  BAPTISM.  797 

long  ufter  it»  there  have  been  sach  instances^  yov  may  die  be« 
fore  to-morrow.  I  think  a  good  tradesman,  whether  he  deals 
largely  or  not,  will  take  care  to  keep  his  day-book  well ;  if  a 
man  will  not  keep  his  day-book  well,  it  is  ten  to  one  but  he 
loses  a  good  deal  when  he  comes  to  count  up  his  things  at  Christ- 
mas :  now  I  take  it  for  granted,  a  good  spiritual  tradesman  wilF 
keep  his  spiritual  day-book  well ;  can  you  say,  this  day  f  hope 
I  have  died  a  little  more  to  the  world  than  yesterday,  this  day  f 
hope  I  have  been  a  little  more  alive  to  God  than  I  was  yesterday  ; 
and  yet  when  I  look  upon  my  family,  whether  a  man  traden 
wholesale  or  retail,  whea  he  finds  he  has  done  but  little  business 
tkat  day,  great  going  out,  and  little  coming  in.  I  hope  when: 
you  die  but  little  daily,  that  you  go  to  bed  begging  pardon,  and 
D^ging  grace  that  you  may  die  more  to  yourselves  and  the 
vorld,  and  live  more  to  God,  to-morrow :  for  I  am  sure  I  can 
<^11  you  to  witness,  that  you  never  lived  so  comfortably  as  when 
you  li^cd  near  to  God  :  you  may  as  well  pretend  to  say,  that  a 
person  in  a  cold  winter's  day  is  warmest  when  he  keeps  from 
the  fire,  as  to  say,  a  soul  can  live  near  to  God  when  he  does  not 
die  daily  to  sin.  O  says  one,  do'not  tell  me  of  your  frames,  do 
not  mind  them :  I  will  tell  you  of  tliem,  *'  do  not  mind  your 
frames,"  I  do  not  in  respect  to  justification,  but  I  will  to  the 
well-being  and  comfort  of  my  soul :  a  man  that  has  got  but  very 
little  spirits  may  be  alive,  but  there  is  a  wide  difierencc  between 
having  a  disorder  that  one  can  hardly  speak,  having  no  spirits 
at  all,  or  but  very  few,  and  having  solid  health ;  Grod  grant  we 
may  be  healthy  Christians  ;  the  more  you  live  to  God,  the  more 
you  will  have  health;  be  not  angry  with  me,  assure  yourselves 
a  lukewarm  Christian  does  more  hurt  to  religion  than  all  the 
open  infidels  in  the  kingdom ;  we  have  God  himself  asserting 
this,.  ^  Thou  art  neither  hot  nor  cold,  I  would  thou  wcrt  either 
cold  or  hot,  but  because  thou  art  neither  cold  nor  hot,  but  luke- 
warm, I  will  spew  thee  out  of  my  mouth  ;"  what  an  expression 
is  that!  what  a  nauseous  thing  is  lukewarm  water  to  a  sick  sto- 
mach !  ^'  I  will  come  and  remove  my  candlestick  from  you.^ 
Therefore,  I  believe,  it  is  tha.opinion  of  all  judicious  men,  that 
if  we  should  have  a  severe  rod  of  correction  to  stir  us  up,  it  is 
because  of  the  lukewarmness  of  most  Christians  :  my  brethren, 
God  make  us  all  alive  to  Christ  to-night ;  come,  come,  if  your 
soul  is  for  Christ,  to  arms,  to  arms,  put  on  your  cockades,  you 
that  have  them  in  your  pockets  for  fear  you  should  be  known 
to  be  Christ's.  O  you  cowards !  many  soldiers  put  off  their 
cockades,  as  if  they  were  not  soldiers ;  as  many  of  our  clergy 
affect  to  dress  like  the  laity,  that  they  may  go  to  pluys,  that 
the  orange-women  may  not  know  them,  and  they  do  not  care 
v^hether  God  sees  them  or  no.  I  desire  you  will  all  appear  in  your 

E roper  dresses,  let  us  see  it  painted  on  the  breast-plates  of  your 
earts  by  the  blessed  monitor,  the  eternal  Spirit  of  Grod  ;  I  do 
not  want  you  to  wear  them  as  the  Papists,  upon  your  faces,  no ; 
you  that  are  for  infant-baptism  were  signed  with  the  sign  of  the 
cross  ;  for  what?  That  you  might,  when  you  came  of  age,  *' prove 

2  z 


788  SPIRITUAL   BAPTISM.  [LXI. 

Christ's  faithfal  soldiers  to  the  end :'"   God  grant,  the  nearer  we 
come  to  the  end,  the  bolder  we  may  be  for  Christ ! 

If  there  be  any  of  you  here  that  are  formalists,  "  that  have  a 
name  to  live,  arid  are  dead/'  the  Lord  grant  that  our  Ix>rd  Jesus 
Christ,  who  was  raised  from  the  dead  by  the  glory  of  his  Father, 
cause  a  stirring  among  these  dry  bones.  Think  what  it  will  be 
to  go  to  hell  to-night,  to  want  a  drop  of  water,  wherewith  yoa 
were  sprinkled,  to  cool  your  tongues  in  hell ;  think  what  it  will 
be  to  go  to  hell  by  the  way  of  heaven,  which  is  the  worst  wa? 
you  can  take  ;  think  what  it  will  be  to  be  just  at  the  threshold 
and  not  have  religion  enough  to  take  you  over :  my  heart  bleeds 
for  you.  Had  you  a  son,  a  father,  a  mother,  a  relation,  to  be 
tried  at  the  Old-Bailey  this  sessions,  how  would  you  be  concern- 
ed, how  carefully  would  you  inquire  when  your  relation  would 
be  tried,  how  anxious  would  you  be  to  hear  whether  he  is  con- 
demned, or  no;  and  if  somebody  were  to  come  to  tell  you,  now 
he  is  about  to  be  tried  and  cast,  and  now  the  judge  is  going  tp 
put  his  cap  on,  to  pass  sentence  on  him  ;  how  would  you  bear 
it  ?  I  believe  some  of  you  would  drop  a  tear,  and  say,  O  that 
this  poor  creature  should  be  born  for  this !  And  can  yon  blame 
a  poor  minister  of  Christ,  a  poor  sinner  that  has  been  redeemed 
by  the  blood  of  Christ,  and  I  humbly  believe  and  hope  has  been 
made  a  partaker  of  the  Spirit,  will  you  blame  roe  for  being  con- 
cerned for  you,  my  brethren  and  my  sisters,  for  you  and  I  sprang 
from  one  father  and  mother,  Adam  and  Eve,  the  common  parents 
of  us  all ;  can  you  blame  me  for  pouring  out  my  soul,cun  you  blame 
me  for  speaking  a  little  home  when  the  Judge  is  just  ready  to 
mount  the  throne,when  the  books  are  open,when  I  see  the  elements 
melting  with  fervent  heat, when  I  see  all  nature  concurring  to  usher 
in  the  awful  coming  of  th^  Son  of  God  ?  Sinners  in  Zion,  baptized 
heathens,professors  but  not  possesors,  formalists,  believing  nnbe^ 
lievers,talking  of  Christ,  talking  of  grace,  orthodox  in  your  creeds, 
but  heterodox  in  your  lives,  turn  ye,  turn  ye.  Lord  help  you  to 
turn  to  him,  turn  ye  to  Jesus  Christ,  and  may  God  turn  you  inside 
out  to-night ;  may  the  power  of  the  highest  overshadow  you,  and 
may  that  glorious  Father  that  raised  Christ  from  the  dead,  raise 
your  dead  souls!  Turn  the  text  into  a  prayer,  go  home  and  say.  For 
whatpurpose  have  I  lived?  into  what  have  I  been  baptized?  I  have 
not  so  much  as  yet  been  baptized  into  Jordan ;  I  have  never  led 
a  life  one  day  of  reformation,  but  when  I  was  obliged  to  it ;  bless 
God  that  you  are  not  now  among  the  damned ;  bless  God  that  yon 
are  not  now  howling  in  hell ;  bless  the  Lord  that  Jesus  stands 
with  pitying  eyes,  and  outstretched  arms,  to  receive  you  now: 
Will  you  go  with  the  man  ?  Will  you  accept  of  Christ  ?  Will 
you  begin  to  live  now  ?  May  God  say,  Amen;  may  God  pass 
by,  not  in  anger,  but  in  love  ;  may  he,  as  he  hath  hitherto  seen 
you  in  your  blood,  has  said  to  you,  live,  and  has  preserved  yoa 
in  your  natural  state,  may  that  same  God  of  love,  mercy,  and 
life,  pass  by  you,  and  cast  the  skirts  of  his  love  over  you,  and 
say  to  you  dead  sinners,  come  forth,  live  a  life  of  faith  on  eartli, 
live  a  life  of  vision  in  heaven  :  even  so,  Lord  Jesus,     Amen 


1.XXI.]        NEGLECT   OP   CHRIST,   THE   KILLING    SIN.  739 

SERMON  LXXI. 

NEGLECT   OP   CHRIST,   THE   KILLING    SIN. 

And  ye  will  not  come  to  me,  that  ye  may  have  life.— John  v.  40. 

The  great  apostle  of  the  Gentiles,  after  he  had  set  before  the 
Hebrews  the  great  cloud  of  witnesses  of  Old  Testament  believers, 
exhorts  them  to  look  higher,  even  to  Jestis,  the  common  Saviour, 
and  that  not  transiently,  but  earnestly  and  constantly,  in  his  me- 
diatorial character  of  humiliation,  as  enduring  unheard-of,  un- 
paralleled contradiction  of  sinners  against  himself;  '^  Lest  (says 
he)  ye  be  weary,  and  faint  in  your  minds."  If  we  had  not  such 
an  example  set  before  us,  and  brought  to  us  by  the  Holy  Ghost 
in  a  suffering  hour,  we  should  never  hold  out  to  the  end  :  this 
was  not  the  contradiction  of  the  openly  profane  and  scandalous, 
th6se  that  were  without,  so  much  as  from  those  that  were  within 
the  pale  of  the  church,  even  those  to  whom  were  committed  the 
Kvely  oracles  of  God,  who  had  not  only  the  very  Bible  in  their 
own  hands,  but  were  set  apart  to  explain  it  to  others.  That 
the  words  of  our  text  were  spoken  to  them,  appears  from  the 
preceding  verse,  in  which  he  bids  them  '*  Search  the  scriptures ;" 
as  a  person  digs  for  a  milie,  or  searches  from  some  hidden  trea- 
sure. The  word  Bible,  or  book,  which  I  have  in  my  hand,  is 
nvell  applied  to  the  holy  scriptures,  because  it  is  the  book  of 
God,  written  by  him,  that  is,  by  his  order,  and  by  those  who 
^ere  inspired  by  him  for  that  end ;  and  yet,  of  all  writings  in  the 
world,  these  are  most  neglected  !  God  has  condescended  to  be- 
come an  authbr,  and  yet  people  will  not  read  his  writings.  There 
are  very  few  that  ever  gave  this  book  of  God,  the  grand  charter 
of  salvation,  one  fair  reading  through :  though  we  profess  to  have 
assented  to  the  truth  of  scripture,  as  our  Lord  said,  "  In  them 
we  think  we  have  eternal  life,"  yet  most  read  them  as  they  would 
a  proclamation,  a  romance,  a  play,  or  novels,  that  help  only  to 
bring  them  to  the  devil,  but  choose  not  to  read  God's  book, 
which  is  to  be  our  guide  to  glory ;  •*  they  are  they  (says  Christ) 
which  testify  of  me  f '  Lord  God,  convert  and  change  our  hearts. 

However,  this  was  spoken  in  reference  to  the  Old  Testament, 
and  certainly  shews  us,  that  Christ  is  the  treasure  hid  in  that  field, 
yet,  as  there  are  equal  proofs  of  the  divinity  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment, the  word  Holy  Scriptures  include  both,  especially  as  Christ 
is  the  antitype  of  all  the  types,  the  Alpha  and  Omega,  the  be- 
ginning and  the  end,  of  all  divine  revelation :  would  to  God  he 
were  your  Alpha  and  Omega  too !  Now,  says  Christ,  you  pre- 
tend to  reverence  the  scpptures ;  you  that  are  set  apart  as  per- 
sons learned  in  the  scriptures,  ye  scribes,  ye  lawyers,  such  as 
were  mentioned  in  the  gospel  to-day.  I  fancy  some  people 
think  that  when  we  read  of  lawyers  in  the  scriptures,  that  we 
mean  such  lawyers  as  ours,  who  deal  only  in  the  civil  and  com- 
mon law;  but  they  were  those  that  opened  and  explained  the  law 
to  the  people ;  these  were  the  persons  who  thought  and  professed, 
that  in  them  they  had  eternal  life,  that  they  testify  of  Christ  the 
great  Prophet  that  was  promised  in  the  scriptures  to  come  into 

<^  z  <^ 


740  NEGLBCT   OF   CHRIST,  [LXXL 

the  world ;  yet  says  our  divine  Master  to  these  very  professors, 
these  masters  in  Israel^  *'  Ye  will  not  come  to  me^  that  ye  may 
have  life ;"  though  I  am  now  present  with  you,  though  I  am  now 
come  to  explain  the  scriptures^  and  fulfil  them,  am  now  come  to 
proclaim  to  you  that  life,  that  eternal  life,  which  the  scriptuics 
declare  was  to  be  published  and  proclaimed  hy  me,  yet "  je 
will  not  cometinto  me,  that  ye  may  have  life/' 

By  eternal  life,  we  are  to  understand  all  the  blessings  <tf  a 
converted  state,  particularly  the  pardon  of  sins,  not  only  before 
conversion  but  after.  It  is  impossible  that  thefe  should  be  sia 
every  day  and  every  hour  in  every  professing  person.  My  dear 
hearers,  as  I  shall  not  have  an,  opportunity  for  some  time  to 
speak  to  you,  I  do  not  choose,  especially  when  I  am  about  to 
take  my  leave  of  you,  to  speak  any  thing  that  is  severe,  but  I 
assure  you,  without  attempting  to  ofiend,  with  a  broken  heart  I 
assure  you,  that  this  was  the  treatment  Jesus  Christ  inet  with  nl 
old,  and,  God  knows,  this  is  the  treatment  Jesus  Christ  meets  with 
now :  "  Ye  will  not  come  to  me,  that  ye  may  have  eternal  life." 

If  I  am  not  mistaken,  and  I  think  I  am  not,  the  words  sup- 
pose, that  they  and  we  are  all  dead  in  sin,  for  if  we  are  not,  I 
do  not  know  why  we  need  come  to  have  life ;  and  I  mention  tUs, 
because  for  want  of  believing  and  knowing  this,  some  that  pre- 
tend to  know  Christ  and  to  preach  him,  forget  to  lay  the  propei 
foundation,  original  sin ;  and  that  there  is  no  ability  or  inclina- 
Uon  in  the  heart  of  a  natural  man,  so  much  as  to  do  any  thing 
spiritual ;  he  is  stupid  and  dead.  But  if  we  have  eyes  to  see,^ 
we  have  ears  to  hear,  and  if  our  hearts  are  not  waxed  hard, 
doubtless  it  would  appear  as  clear  to  us  as  the  snn  shining  in 
its  meridian  brightness,  that  man  was  dead  tiU  God  breathed 
into  him  the  breath  of  life,  and  then  he  became  a  living  souL  I 
know  some  people  believe  that  the  words  mean  this,  that  God 
breathed  into  man,  and  he  became  a  natural  living  sonl,  Uke 
other  animals ;  but  then  they  do  not  consider  what  a  life  God 
did  breathe  into  the  soul,  he  breathed  into  it  the  life  of  Crod,  a 
spiritual  life  was  breathed  into  the  soul ;  it  is  expressed  in  the 
strongest,  but  at  the  same  time  in  the  most  concise  tenns  that 
is  possible ;  none  but  God,  none  but  a  man  inspired  by  God, 
could  say  so  much  in  so  few  words ;  it  shews  great  skill  in  men 
to  say  so  much  in  a  little ;  what  uninspired  man  ever  wrote  so 
as  Moses  did  ?  Now  Moses,  when  he  penned  the  scriptures, 
said,  "  God  made  man  after  his  own  image,"  and  you  know  ten 
thousand  volumes  could  not  have  said  more  than  that.  How 
long  do  you  think  it  was  that  man  continued  in  his  original  pority  ? 
I  do  not  know  that  I  ever  yet  heard  that  any  one  thought  be  cod- 
tinned  in  his  blessed  state ^o  long  as  from  Saturday  to  Saturday. 
Mr.  Boston,  who  perhaps  is  one  of  the  best  writers  that  ever 
Scotland  produced,  says,  that  there  i^  an  allusion  in  one  of  the 
Psalms  to  man's  sudden  fall,  *'  Man  being  (boiqn)  in  honour, 
continued  not ;"  that  is,  but  a  night  before  be  fell.  O  much  good 
may  it  do  those  that  boast  of  their  free-will,  that  think  they  can 
stand  by  a  power  of  their  own,  when  father  Adwt,  who  bad  no 


I.]  THB  KILLING  SIN.  741 

corraption,  did  not  staiid  a  week,  perhaps  not  two  days ;  and  how 
can  we  pretend  to  standi  let  us  have  what  grace  we  wUl,  when  that 
grace  has  so  much  corruption  to  expose  it  ?  If  Jesus  Christ  did 
not  take  care  to  secure  our  standing,  we  should  fall  to  our  ruin. 
Adam  fell^  and,  being  our  federal  head,  we  fell  in  him.  Why, 
says  a  Deist,  and  too  many  professors  also,  pray  what  business 
had  God  Almighty  to  tnake  our  fall  or  our  ^standing  depend  on 
another?  You  will  not  object. to  this,  you  church  of  England 
men,  will  you  ?  Then  why  have  you  godfathers  and  godmothers  to 
promise  for  you  ?  Why  have  we  members  of  parliament  to  be 
the  heads  of  the  people,  and  what  the  parliament  does,  the  people 
do,  you  have  constituted  them  your  heads  and  representatives, 
you  must  stand  and  fall  by  them ;  so  if  you  are  bound  for  a  per- 
son, you  must  stand  and  fall  with  him,  must  not  you  ?  I  remem- 
ber one  of  the  ministers  that  preached  the  morning  exercises, 
when  most,  if  not  all  the  churches  in  this  city,  were  filled  with 
gospel-preachers,  till,  on  Bartholomew-day,  near  2500  of  them 
in  the  whole  were  turned  out,  and  the  other  ministers  that  did 
not  preach  the  gospel  continued  till  the  plague  came,  and  then 
they  ran  away,  and  left  the  pulpits  to  those  that  were  turned 
out,  who  were  willing  to  go  into  them,  though  they  expected  the 
plague  would  seize  them  in  preaching  Christ  there ;  one  of  those 
ministers  says,  Suppose  Qod  had  chosen  all  that  were  to  be 
created,  and  to  proceed  firom  the  loins  of  Adam,  had  been  pre- 
sent, and  that  he  should  have  said  to  them,  I  have  been  seven 
days  employed  in  preparing  the  whole  creation ;  I  have  made  a 
garden,  and  will  have  one  chosen  by  you  to  dwell  in  it>  as  my 
vicegerent  and  your  representative,  here  below;  here  is  Adam, 
the  father  of  you  all,  whom  I  haviB  blessed  with  a  partner,  that 
is  bone  of  bis  bone,  and  flesh  of  his  flesh,  a  creature  like  himself; 
all  that  I  desire  of  your  head  and  representative  is,  that  he  ab-> 
stains  from  yonder  tree,  of  every  other  tree  in  the  garden  he  may 
freely  eat,  except  that ;  this  I  ordain  as  a  test  of  his  obedience, 
to  see  whether  it  is  fulfilled,  and  you  shall  stand  or  fall  by  this ; 
who  shall  be  the  man?  Would  they  not  all  say.  Our  first  parent, 
to  be  sure.  O,  there  is  not  a  single  man  but  would  have  chosen 
Adam  to  be  their  representative,  they  would  rather  stand  and 
fall  by  him  than  by  any  body  else  ;  now,  pray  why  should  we 
quarrel  with  him  for  acting  in  the  manner  we  ourselves  should 
have  done,  had  we  been  in  his  situation?  ''God  (says  the 
apostle)  included  all  under  sin."  What  is  sin  but  a  breach,  that 
is,  a  transgression,  of  the  law ;  "  the  wages  of  sin  is  death ;"  every 
transgression  of  the  law  incurs  damnation.  Have  we  eaten  of 
the  forbidden  fruit  ?  We  must  die,  we  are  legally  dead ;  and 
there  is  not  a  little  child  in  the  world  that  is  not.  It  is  enough 
to  make  the  parents  pray  night  and  day  for  their  children ;  there 
is  not  a  child  ,born,  but,  to  use  the  words  of  our  own  church, 
brings  in  with  it  corruption,  which  renders  it  liable  to  the  wrath 
of  God  for  ever.  Then,  say  some,  it  is  true  what  I  have  heard 
say  of  you,  that  there  are  little  children  in  hell  a  span  long:  I 
never  had  such  a  thought  in  my  life ;  I  never  believed  that  any 


743  NBGIiECT   OF   CHRIST,  [LXXL 

infants,  black  or  white,  were  damned  in  bell.     I  think  a  poor 
child,  though  it  is  bom  in  a  state  of  original  sin,  and  I  have  often 
thought  thit  is  the  reason  why  little  children  are  seized  with  soch 
terrible  disorders  as  often  carry  them  out  of  the  world  with  ten 
times  more  agony  than  parents  feel :  a  great  proof  of  man's 
offence.    We  see  a  poor  Uttle  infant  soon  after  it  is  bom,  in  two 
or  three  montiis  taken  with  fits,  lie  screaming  and  struggling; 
while  the  distressed  parents  are  breaking  their  hearts,  and  wish- 
ing, though  they  lovait  dearly,  that  Grod  would  take  it  out  of  its 
pain.    Is  not  this  a  strong  proof  that  man  is  fallen  firom  God? 
else  who  can  tell  what  G^d  designs  hereby :  however,  I  verilj 
believe  that  by  his  grace  he  fits  them  for  heaven.     We  have 
broken  God's  law,  and  are  liable  to  eternal  condemnation,  we 
are  therefore  legally  dead,  every  one  of  us  without  distinction; 
we  are  all  upon  a  level,  from  the  greatest  king  in  the  world,  who 
has  it  in  his  power  to  write  death  or  life  upon  the  poor  con- 
demned malefactors ;  bring  him  to  the  bar  of  Grod*s  holy  lair, 
and  it  will  tell  him  there,  thou  art  the  malefactor  in  the  sight  of 
God,  thou  thyself,  and  thus  God  is  glorified.    It  is  not  greatness 
of  station,  nor  external  differences,  that  make  a  difference  in  the 
internal  state  of  the  soul.    A  nobleman  may  come  with  his  star 
and  garter  to  the  king's  bar,  and  be  tried  by  his  peers  at  West- 
minster-hall, and  may  be  attended  from  the  Tower  by  some  of 
the  king's  officers ;  but  whether  a  nobleman  be  tried  at  West- 
minster-hall, or  a  criminal  in  rags  at  the  Old  Bailey,  the  law 
must  be  executed  upon  both :  this  is  our  state  towards  God,  we 
have  lived  in  trespasses  and  sins,  are  legally  dead  now ;  is  that 
all  ?   Dr.  Taylor,  of  Norwich,  says,  that  ail  the  loss  we  have  had 
by  the  fall  is,  that  our  misery  is  temporary.    Alas !  alas !  when 
Arminians  talk  of  the  fall,  you  will  find  very  few  of  them  have 
courage  enough  to  stab  themselves.    Conscience  makes  them 
cowards ;  they  have  lost  all  by  Adam's  fall.    What  death  have 
we  suffered,  not  only  legally,  but  spiritually  dead  :   what  do  I 
mean  by  that?  Why,  that  we  are  deprived  of  that  life  of  Grod  in 
which  we  originally  stood.    Have  you  ever  seen  any  body  die? 
I  have.    Have  you  ever  seen  one  of  your  friends  die  ?  Have  you 
ever  stole  into  the  room,  and  looked  but  once  at  the  dear  object 
of  your  love,  the  partner  of  your  life;  but  wait  till  the  next  day, 
and  especially  in  the  summer  season,  and  see  how  changed!  the 
last  object  I  saw,  put  me  in  mind  of  the  fall  I  saw  nature  in. 
O  what  a  change !  the  glory  is  departed ! 

But,  besides  this  legal  death,  there  is  a  spiritual  death,  and 
the  consequence  of  that  is  eternal  death ;  if  I  die  in  that  state,  I 
must  die  for  ever ;  that  is,  I  must  be  a  creature  living  eternally 
banished  from  God :  if  I  be  annihilated  when  I  die,  then,  indeed, 
temporal  death  is  all ;  but  it  is  not  so,  I  am  to  live  in  another 
world  ;  the  wisest  man  upon  earth  tell  us,  that  there  is  a  future 
state.  And  therefore,  by  legal  and  spiritual  death,  I  am  liaUe 
to  death  eternal.  I  have  the  longer  insisted  on  this,  because  it 
is  impossible  to  know,  or  to  value,  that  life  that  Jesus  Christ 
came  into  the  world   to  impart  to  us,  and   procure   for  us, 


LXXI.l  THE   KILLING   SIN.  743 

without  considering  the  Mature  of  the  death  he  delivers  us  from. 
— Now  let  us  attend  to  what  our  Lord  says,  "  Ye  mtIII  not  come 
to  me,  that  ye  may  have  life ;"'  in  the  tenth  chapter,  he  says,  '^  I 
am  come  that  they  might  have  life,  and  that  they  might  have  it 
more  abundantly ;"  now  what  life  is  that?    to  be  sure,  the  life 
which  a  malefactor  wants,  who  is  tried  by  a  jury;  why,  he 
wants  to  have  the  chain  taken  off;  what  do  you  and  I  want?  for 
we  may  want  to  eternity,  if  we  plead  our  innocence ;   there  is 
not  one  of  us  but  must  plead  guilty  before  God ;  well,  what 
must  I  do  ?  Why,  if  ever  I  have  life,  I  must  be  acquitted,  some- 
thing must  pronounce  me  not  guilty ;  my  conscience  says,  guilty; 
why,  then  Jesus  Christ  came  that  we  might  have  a  legal  life, 
that  we  might  be  acquitted  from  all  that  condemnation  which 
we  are  under  by  our  breaking  his  law ;    so  far  the  remedy  an* 
swcrs  the  disease,  but  the  remedy  would  not  be  extensive  enough, 
if  that  were  all ;  therefore,  it  was  an  excellent  answer  a  poor,  wo- 
man made  at  the  Old  Bailey,  I  heard  of  it  twenty  years  ago ;  she 
was  brought  sick  to  the  bar,  to  receive  a  pardon :  the  judge  said. 
Woman,  his  majesty  has  given  you  a  pardon ;  My  lord,  says 
she,  I  thank  his  majesty  for  a  pardon,  and  you  for  pronouncing 
it,  but  that  is  not  all  I  want ;  what  my  poor  soul  wants  is,  a 
pardon  from  Jesus  Christ ;  what  signifies  a  pardon  from  a  judge, 
if  I  have  a  disease  in  me  that  will  kill  me  ?     Whether  I  be  par- 
doned or  not,  I  must  have  my  disease  cured,  that  the  pardon 
may  do  me  good.     I  thought  it  a  strange  plea  of  a  man,  a  cap- 
tain of  a  ship,  that  T  heard  tried  some  years  ago  for  throwing  a 
poor  negro  overboard  :  he  asked  the  surgeon,  do  you  think  that 
the  child  will  die  ?    Sir,  said  he,  it  will  not  live  above  an  hour ; 
then,  says  he,  you  may  let  it  down  now :  O,  says  the  judge,  you 
have  murdered  the  child. — I  must  have  a  pardon  from  my  God, 
or  I  am  damned ;   and  if  I  have  lost  the  divine  image,  which 
was  the  original  dignity  of  man,  I  shall  never  get  to  glory  with 
oat  the  restoration  of  that  image  I  have  lost  by  my  sin.     Spiri- 
tual life  in  the  heart,  is  that  which  comes  from  Jesus  Christ,  and 
this  is  the  life  of  God  in  the  soul  of  man :  it  is  not  a  metaphori- 
cal but  a  real  thing,  a  resurrection  to  life  by  the  power  of  Christ, 
''  who  is  the  resurrection  and  the  life,"  so  there  is  a  connection 
between  a  legal  and  a  spiritual  life ;  the  type  and  antitype  an- 
swers as  face  answers  to  face  in  water ;  thus,  as  allin  Adam  have 
died,  so  all  in  Jesus  Christ,  the  second  Adam,  are  made  alive. 
We  are  apt  to  think  that  such  a  one,  and  such  a  one  were 
sound  Christians,  and  gone  to  heaven,  but  there  is  a  great  deal 
of  false  charity  in  the  world  ;  without  this  life,  we  are  all  un- 
done. 

Now,  my  brethren,  if  this  be  the  case,  how  must  I  have  my 
life  in  glory  ?  How  must  a  dead  creature  be  a  Christian  ?  How 
must  a  sinner  that  is  spiritually  dead  have  divine  life  ?  And 
how  must  a  creature,  every  moment  liable  to  death  eternal,  be 
made  eternally  alive?  Can  anybody  answer  that  question? 
Will  reason  tell  me?  No;  will  philosophy  help  me?  No;  for  if 
'*  the  world  by  wisdom  knew  not  God,"  surely,  the  world  by 


in  NCGLBGT  OF  CHEI6T.  \LSJLi 

wisdom  knows  not  how  to  turn  to  Ood ;  iherdSore,  yov  will  find 
the  greatest  scholars  the  greatest  fools,  proadest  deists,  and 
most  scornful  atheists ;  for  knowledge  pnffetb  up :  and  if  bare 
knowledge  makes  a  Christian,  the  devil  must  be  very  good,  be  is 
the  most  knowing,  and  yet  the  most  wicked.  Tbe  only  waj  to 
get  this  life  restored,  is  to  come  to  Jesus  Christ ;  *'  yc  will  not 
come  unto  me,"  saith  our  text,  ^'  that  ye  may  bave  life  ;"  inlay- 
ing, that  without  coming  to  faim  they  canuQt  have  life :  **  there  k 
BO  other  name  given  under  heaven  whereby  we  can  be  saved,  bit 
that  of  Jesus  Christ*  I  am  the  way,  tbe  truth,  and  tbe  life.  I 
am  the  resurrection  and  the  life,"  saith  the  Lord.  In  order  to 
have  this  life,  we  must  come  to  Christ  for  it :  I  hope  you  do  not 
think  coming  to  Christ,  means  coming  to  see  bis  person, — that 
can  never  be ;  for  our  Lord  talks  of  coming  to  him  when  be  him- 
self was  the  preacher,  and  they  were  all  aJMut  him ;  thoash  so 
many  round  him,  yet  there  was  but  one  that  toacbed  him.  A 
great  many  people  say.  Dear,  if  Christ  were  here,  bow  would  1 
caress  him !  I  would  let  him  in !  when,  perhaps,  they  at  tbe  sane 
time  turn  out  one  of  his  members.  Would  yon  like  to  see  Jesss 
Christ  with  a  parcel  of  boys  and  girls  running  before  him,  a 
parcel  of  poor  fishermen  with  him,  and  Mary  Magdalen,  with  a 
mob  of  poor  people  and  publicans,  following  him  ?  .  We  bave  got 
the  same  spirit  the  people  had  then,  we  should  boot  at  hira  aod 
despise  him,  as  the  Pharisees  did.  A  great  many  people  think, 
coming  to  Christ  is  to  come  to  the  sacrament:  you  know  very 
well  I  love  that  privilege;  and  one  of  the  greatest  afflictions  I 
have  is,  that  my  health  will  not  permit  me  to  attend  all  the  ordi- 
nances ;  but  thousands  come  to  ordinances,  that  bave  no  view 
of  the  God  of  ordinances  in  them,  therefore  you  will  find,  that  in 
all  our  public  places  it  is  as  mach  the  fashion  to  go  to  public 
worship  about  eleven  o'clock,  as  any  where  else.  They  are  not 
up  time  enough  to  their  matins  ;  they  go  and  say,  we  thank  God 
who  has  brought  us  to  the  beginning  of  this  day,  and  that  wheo 
perhaps  the  clock  strikes  twelve,  and  they  just  up ;  thus  people 
go  to  church  as  to  a  play,  to  see  and  be  seen,  and  as  soon  as 
they  go  out  of  church,  they  ask  where  they  are  to  go  to  next,  and 
what  party?  Thousands  go  to  church,  or  to  meeting  and  sacra- 
ment, and  do  not  come  to  Christ;  come  and  like  this  preaching, 
and  numbers,  who  are  called  fools  for  following  us,  eat  the  frag- 
ments that  are  left,  that  bear  preaching,  eat  tbe  fisb  and  tbe 
loaves,  and  are  only  feasting  upon  shadows,  and  not  upoo 
Christ :  this  should  make  us  extremely  careful  to  examine,  whe- 
ther we  ever  came  to  Christ,  or  no.  A  great  moral  preacher  skjs 
of  our  preaching,  when  all  their  st6ck  is  out,  then  they  cry 
come,  come,  come,  and  that  is  the  burden  of  their  song,  say  they : 
and  I  hope  that  will  be  tbe  burden  of  our  song  till  Christ  says, 
*^  Come,  ye  blessed  of  my  Father ;"  what  would  you  bave  us  say  ^ 
O  say  you,  bid  a  man  do  and  live ;  so  we  will,  and  in  the  saine 
sense  Christ  in  the  gospel  says,  thou  art  dead ;  what  shall  I 
do,  says  the  man,  to  inherit  eternal  life  f  thou  knowest,  om 
Lord  said  to  him.  Keep  the  law.    Our  Lord  always  spoke  to 


LXXI.]  THB   KILLING   SIN.  749 

the  people  In  their  own  language ;  that  is,  thou  sbalt  lore  the 
Lord  thy  Grod  with  all  thy  heart ;  he  began  with  morality  at 
the  right  place,  we  begin  at  the  fifth  comviandment.  The  great 
morality,  says  Dr.  Young,  is  beginning  with  the  love  of  God* 
'*  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbour  as  thyself;  thou  hast  answered 
right,"  says  he,  ''  do  this,  and  thou  shalt  live/'  Whoever  loves 
the  Lord  God  as  he  ought  to  do,  with  all  his  soul  and  strength* 
shall  certainly  live;  but  our  Lord  takes  pains  to  convince 
him  of  his  ignorance  and  folly ;  says  he,  ^'  who  is  my  neighbour  V 
as  to  the  love  of  God,  he  had  no  thought  oi  that.  Thus  we 
deceive  our  own  souls,  till  Jesus  Christ  opens  our  eyes.  What 
must  we  come  to  Christ  for? — to  be  acquitted;  come  to  his 
blood  to  be  pardoned ;  you  must  believe  on  him,  not  only  with 
a  bare  speculative  belief^  {that  the  devil  has,  and  cdl  the  damned 
in  hell,)  but  to  have  his  blood  applied  smd  brought  home  to  the 
soul;  we  must  qorae  to  him  as  the  author  and  finisher  of  our 
faith.  Did  not  you  just  now  say,  I  believe  in  the  Holy  GMiost, 
the  Lord  and  giver  of  life ;  and  the  form  of  baptism  is  in  the 
name  of  the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost ;  it  means,  baptize 
them  into  the  nature  of  the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost ;  and  I 
remember,  about  three  or  four  and  thirty  years,  ago,  a  friend  men-^ 
tioned  that.^ord  in  private  conversation  to  me : — ^we  translate  it, 
we  believe  lii'God ;  said  he,  we  should  translate  it,  ''we  believe 
it  in  Grod ;"  for  we  never  do  till  God  has  put  his  faith  in  us,  then 
we  have  in  our  souls  a  new  life  in  Christ,  then  we  live  a  life  of 
faith ;  "  the  life  I  now  live  is  by  faith  in  the  Son  of  God.  I  live, 
yet  not  I,  but  Christ  liveth  in  me."  In  order  to  this,  I  must  come 
to  Jesus  Christ,  and  believe  on  him  for  life  eternal,  the  earnest 
of  which  eternal  life  I  must  have  in  my  hecurt,  before  I  can  be 
assured  I  do  believe  on  him.  O  my  dear  hearers,  do  we  think 
of  this,  this  is  no  new  doctrine;  I  set  out,  blessed  be  God,  with 
this  doctrine.  The  second  sermon  I  ever  made,  the  second  ser* 
mon  I  ever  preached,  was  on  these  words,  "  He  that  is  in  Christ 
is  a  new  creature ;"  I  was  then  about  twenty  years  and  a  half 
old.  The  next  sermon  I  preached  was  upon, ''  Ye  are  justified ;'' 
the  next  sermon, ''  Ye  are  glorified ;"  which  shews,  that  though 
I  am  near  fifty-five  years  old,  yet,  I  thank  my  God,  I  am  so  far 
from  changing  my  principles,  which  I  am  sure  I  was  taught  by 
Grod's  word  and  Spirit,  that  I  am  more  and  more  confirmed ;  and 
if  I  were  to  die  this  moment,  I  hope  I  should  have  strength 
and  courage  given  me  to  say,  I  am  more  convinced  of  the  effi- 
cacy and  the  power  of  those  truths,  which  I  preached  when  I  was 
twenty  years  old,  than  when  I  first  preached  them. 

Now,  my  dear  hearers,  what  could  enter  into  the  heart  of  any 
person  in  the  world,  to  reject  such  a  salvation  as  this?  Can  ypa 
think,  that  when  a  king  saith  to  a  prisoner,  let  him  go,  he  would 
refuse  it  1  there  are  some  persons  that  refuse  Christ.  I  remem- 
ber when,  by  the  bounty  of  the  people  here,  we  begged  fojr  the 
]K>or,  one  man  went  to  the  turnpike,  and  said.  This  is  Dr.  White- 
field's  bread,  and  be  damned.  Human  nature,  what  is  it  with- 
out Christ,  the  bread  of  life !    We  will  not  come  to  him,  that  we 


746  NEGLECT  OF   CHRIST.  [lXXT. 

may  have  life,  though  we  may  haye  it  for  asking ;  no,  not  for  life 
eternal,  as  a  free  gift:  we  will  not  come  to  Christ,  and  accept  it 
at  his  hand  ;  we  mil  not :  it  is  not  said,  we  shall  not,  but  we  uM 
not.    Pray,  why  will  not  people  come  to  Christ  to  have  life  ? 
Because  they  do  not  think  that  they  are  dead,  and  do  not  want 
it ;  remember  when  you  say,  **  you  are  rich,  and  increased  in 
goods,"  that  you  know  not,  saith  Christ,  that  ^'  ye  are  poor,  and 
miserable,  and  blind,  and  naked."  We  do  not  see  ourselves  falko 
creatures,  we  do  not  know  that :  God  give  thee  to  know  ifnd 
feel,  that  *^  there  is  no  name  given  under  heaven  whereby  we  can 
be  saved,  but  Jesus  Christ."    What,  saith  one,  must  I  have  in- 
ward feeling?  What  would  the  polite  world  do  without  feding? 
Do  you  think  they  would  go  to  the  playhouse,  and  places  of  pub- 
lic diversion,  widiout  feeling?    If  I  can  feel  other  things  diat 
do  not  concern  religion,  how  can  I  come  to  God  till  I  fed  a 
need  of  him?    We  do  not  choose  to  come  to  Christ,  because  we 
do  not  choose  to  have  him  as  a  free  gift ;  we  do  not  Uke  to 
come  to  him  as  poor  and  needy.    I  remember  I  heard  an  excd- 
lent  minister  of  Christ  in  Scotland,  one  Mr.  Wallis,  of  Dundee, 
preaching  upon  these  words,  ^'  Behold,  I  stand  at  the  door  and 
knock ;"  says  he,  Christ  comes  knocking  at  the  door  to  come 
into  your  houses,  but  you  will  not  come  down  to  accept  of  his 
mercy.    When  the  prodigal  said,  "  I  will  arise  and  go  to  mj 
Father,  and  will  say  unto  him,  I  have  sinned  against  heaveo 
and  in  thy  sight,  and  am  no  more  worthy  to  be  called  thy  soo, 
make  me  as  one  of  thy  hired  servants :"  now  you  think  that  it 
was  very  humble  in  him,  he  who  was  a  son  of  the  head  of  the 
bouse,  to  be  willing  to  be  a  servant.    It  is  true,  he  says,  I  mifl 
go  to  my  father's  house,  but  at  the  same  time  he  says,  I  wiB 
work  for  my  living,  he  shall  not  maintain  me  for  nottung ;  hot 
when  be  comes  to  his  father,  he  is  quite  brought  down,  be  says, 
''  I  have  sinned  against  heaven,  and  in  thy  sight ;"  the  joyful 
father  clasps  him  in  his  withered  arms,  and  takes  the  poor  rag- 
ged wanderer  home.    The  lawyers  and  other  Jews  thought  they 
were  righteous,  and  therefore  they  would  not  come  to  Jesus 
Christ.     Our  Lord  spoke  of  the  Pharisees,  who  trusted  in  them- 
selves that  they  were  righteous,  and  would  not  come  to  him  that 
they  might  have  life ;  and  if  we  trust  in  ourselves,  neither  shall 
we.     Our  Lord  says,  *'  I  receive  not  honour  from  men.     How 
can  you   come  to   him,    that  receive  honour  one  of  another. 
Honour  to  whom   honour  is  due."    To  such  as  are  in  poirer, 
whether  in  church  or  state,  respect  is  due  to  their  outward  situa- 
tion.    I  am  for  no  levelling  principles  at  all ;  but,  my  brethren, 
at  the  same  time  there  is  a  fault,  that  we  love  to  be  applauded. 
There  is  no  going  to  heaven,  saith  Mr.  Gumal,  without  weariBg 
a  fool's  cap  and  a  fool's  coat,  and  there  is  no  going  to  heaveo 
without  being  accounted  fools:  so  you  see  many  professors  fol- 
low the  world,  they  have  not  courage  enough  to  live  in  holy  non- 
conformity to  the  world ;  and  many  people  are  frightened  from 
Christ,  because  they  would  not  then  be  counted  Methodists ; 
the  fear  of  man  has  damned  thousands.     You  will  not  come  ta 


liXXI.]  THB   KILLING   SIN.  747 

him,  because  yoa  cannot  trust  God ;  and  then  we  love  the  world 
more  than  Christ.  *'  If  any  man  love  the  worlds  the  love  of  the 
Father  is  not  in  him.  If  I  had  the  management  of  people,  their 
shops  would  be  open  three  or  four  hours  before  they  are  now ;  I 
do  not  want  to  hinder  men's  business;  those  that  hare  most 
money  and  most  power,  if  they  acted  as  they  ought  to  do,  would 
be  the  greatest  slaves  to  their  fellow-creatures.  When  I  talk  of 
loving  the  world,  I  mean  an  inordinate  love :  I  may  live  in  the 
world,  and  not  live  upon  it ;  my  heart  may  be  towards  God  :  the 
love  of  the  world  is  to  be  renounced,  and  therefore  they  will 
not  come  to  Jesus  Christ,  they  think,  till  they  are  going  out  of 
the  world.  If  you  are  one  of  those  who  hate  Christ,  why,  you 
are  the  man  that  will  not  come  to  him :  Why,  say  you,  does  any 
body  hate  Christ  ?  Pray  hold  your  tongue»  for  fear  of  discover- 
ing your  ignorance :  O,  say  you,  God  forbid  I  should  hate  him. 
But,  my  dear  soul,  learn  from  this  time  forward,  that  every  one 
of  us  by  nature  hates  Jesus  Christ :  we  sent  this  message  to 
him ;  we  will  not  have  this  man  to  reign  over  us  ;  we  hate  him 
because  he  is  despised,  we  hate  him  because  of  the  appearance 
of  the  people  that  are  his  followers,  we  hate  him  because  of  the 
narrowness  of  the  way  we  are  to  pass  in  to  him,  because  we 
must  part  with  our  lusts ;  we  hate  him  because  we  must  be  non- 
conformists. I  hate  that  rag  of  the  whore  of  Babylon,  O  that 
form  of  prayer,  O  all  that  stuff,  I  thank  God  I  was  bom  a  Dis- 
senter, I  love  to  be  a  Puritan,  I  do  not  love  rites  and  ceremo- 
nies, no,  not  in  the  church ;  and  yet  perhaps,  are  more  conformed 
to  the  world  than  numbers  of  the  church,  and  have  nothing 
but  rites  and  ceremonies  about  their  houses  and  families.  What 
do  we  more  than  others  ?  A  churchman  should  prove  himself  a 
churchman,  by  having  his  articles,  and  keeping  up  the  practice 
of  religion ;  and  a  Dissenter  should  prove  himself  one,  not  by 
dissenting  from  the  church,  but  from  the  ^Musts  of  the  flesh,  the 
lust  of  the  eye,  and  the  pride  of  life,''  and  then  we  shall  agree 
very  well  together,  though  one  went  to  a  place  called  a  churchy 
and  another  to  a  place  called  a  meeting :  would  to  God  every 
soul  now  present  would  put  this  question  to  himself.  Am  I  come 
to  Christ,  or  am  I  not?  There  is  a  great  number  of  persons 
here ;  you  have  heard  of  Providence  calling  me  abroad,  no  doubt 
curiosity  brings  many  of  you  here,  to  hear  what  the  poor  babbler 
says :  I  tell  yon  what  I  will  say  to  you,  that  without  you  have 
an  interest  in  the  Son  of  God,  you  must  be  damned.  *'  Examine 
yourselves  whether  you  are  in  the  faith,"  whether  your  religion 
reach  any  farther  than  the  church-door,  whether  you  are  the  in- 
ward court  worshippers :  conscience,  conscience,  conscience, 
thou  faithful  monitor,  God  help  thee  to  give  a  proper  verdict. 

When  I  had  the  honour  of  opening  lady  Huntingdon's  chapel, 
as  I  turned  about,  I  observed  over  my  head  were  these  words, 
'*  Earth,  earth,  earth,  hear  the  word  of  the  Lord  :"  O  that  every 
earthly  soul  may  hear  God's  word  this  day.  Do  not  be  angry 
with  me,  I  am  now  upon  the  decline  of  life,  going  toward  three- 
score, surely  now  I  may  claim  leave  to  speak  to  you  freely ; 


748  NBGLBCT   OP   GHftlST,   THB   KILLING   8IK.        [LXXI. 

after  next  Sunday,  perhaps,  yoa  may  never  hear  me  aay  moce, 
Aoagh  I  do  not  intend  to  live  abroad,  but  retiim,  if  please  God, 
in  a  proper  time ;  bat  long  before  tha^  thoa  mayest  be  in  bell  or 
heaven.  As  the  Lord  lives,  in  whose  name  I  speak,  if  yon  wiH 
not  come  to  Christ  to  have  life,  yon  must  come  to  hia  bar  to  hear 
him  pronounce  yon  damned  to  all  eternity.  If  yoo  come  to  hia 
that  yon  may  have  Ufe,  **  Come,  ye  Messed,"  will  be  the  K^ntfuft 
there ;  bat  if  3^a  refnse  now, ''  Depart  ye  cursed/'  wfll  be  yov 
sentence  then  f^om  the  Lord,  for  in  a  little  while*  he  that  shal 
come  wfll  come,  and  will  not  tarry.  Hark !  haik !  do  not  job 
hear  him,  do  not  you  hear  him,  do  not  jrou  hear  hhn  yonder! 
hear !  methinks  I  bear  him,  what  does  he  say  T  See  yonder,  do 
not  you  see,  good  people,  that  yonder  son  is  darkened,  and  tk 
moon  turned  into  blood?  ''O,  who  can  abide  the  day  of  Ui 
coming?"  O,  to  think  of  bis  coming,  may  the  sinner  say,  wfaea  I 
know  his  coming  is  only  to  damn  my  soul !  How  do  the  miir- 
derers  dread  the  assizes,  but  pardoned  sinners,  pardoned  cri- 
minals, are  glad  when  they  hear  the  high-sheriff  coming ;  0,siy 
they,  I  long  to  go  to  the  bar,  because  I  am  going  there  only  to 
plead  the  king's  pardon.  Happy,  happy,  happy  yon,  that  hire 
come  to  this  Jesus  Christ  that  you  might  have  life,  that  yoo 
might  vralk  becoming  him  in  your  life  and  cooversation.  0, 
Christ  will  come,  and  come  to  you  as  his  children ;  bat  God 
grant  this  life  may  be  displayed  in  you  and  me  more  and  more! 
if  we  are  helped  to  know  that  Christ  came  that  we  might  have 
life,  and  might  have  it  more  abundantly,  O,  pray  that  others  may 
come,  bring  your  children  to  Christ  I  was  pleased  one  day, 
after  I  had  been  preaching  on  **  Moses  lifting  vtp  the  serpent  in 
the  wilderness,"'  I  think  it  was  in  New  England,  I  was  taken  np 
into  a  room  to  repose  myself,  there  was  a  mantle-piece,  repre- 
senting the  children  brought  in  the  arms  of  their  parents  to  look 
at  the  brazen  serpent :  O  may  God  help  you  to  bring  your  chO* 
dren  and  your  relations  to  view  Christ  O  Lord,  help  my  mother, 
my  father,  my  child,  my  servant,  to  come  to  Jesus  Christ,  that 
they  may  have  life.  The  Lord  help  you  to  come,  c<Mne  yomif 
people.  O,  I  was  charmed  this  morning,  and  every  morning  I 
give  the  sacrament,  to  see  so  many  young  men  there  crowduig 
to  the  table ;  may  the  Spirit  of  God  keep  yoa  near  to  Jesu 
Christ ;  and  you  young  women,  may  God  draw  yoa  nearer  oato 
Christ  I  remember  when  God  touched  my  hearty  and  sent  bm 
down  to  see  my  friends  in  the  country,  I  prajred  Ck>d  to  Vka 
me  to  those  to  whom  I  was  called  to  dance  and  to  play  at  cards 
with,  and,  blessed  be  God,  he  blessed  me  to  them  aD  bcAro 
I  was  twenty  years  of  age ;  and  after  that  he  s^nt  me  to  a  prisoa, 
I  there  preached  to  a  murderer,  and  some  others,  and,  Uened 
be  Grod,  they  came  to  Jesus  Christ,  and,  one  of  them  went  off 
most  triumphantly.  A  poor  creature,  fourscore  yean  ct  agf, 
who  has  made  it  a  practice  to  go  and  read  to  poor  people,  tad 
to  the  prisoners,  said,  "  Sir,  I  began  late,  but,  by  the  help  of 
God,  I  now  work  the  harder  for  Jesas  Christ."  May  he  incUor 
you  to  come,  O  young  women  and  young  men.     There  was  a 


L.XXII.]  ALL  men's  placs.  749 

good  ^oman  who  died  some  time  ago,  who&e  last  woid  I  think 

I     was,  I  now  go  to  my  God.    Will  yoa  come  and  go  too^  yoa  old 

t    gray-headed  sinners,  that  have  one  foot  in  the  grave,  God  help 

r    you  to  go,  God  remove  every  obstacle  ;  God  grant  that  every; 

I    mountain  may  be  brought  low,  and  a  highway  made  into  youi 

I    hearts  for  Jesus  Christ.    Do  not  bei  angry  with  m/e ;  in  a  week 

I    or  two  I  shall  be  tossing  on  the  ocean,  while  yo«  are  hiring 

i    God's  word  here ;  while  I  am  amidst  stonas  aiid  tempests,  you 

I    wiU  be  upon  the  earth.    Paul  could  stand  the  whipping,  but  it 

H    19  not  a  whipping,  but  weeping,  that  breaks  my  heart ;  my 

greatest  trial  is,  \vhat  if  this  sennon  should  help  to  sink  these 

I    people  deeper  in  the  pit !  that  makes  my  blood  run  cold.  O  that 

my  sennon  may  never  rise  in  judgment  against  you,  my  pooc 

dear  souls.    I  believe  you  find  it  hard  when  any  of  you  are 

forced  to  be  witnesses  against  your  own  children,  your  own 

firiends ;  and  whoever  deals  with  the  word  with  a  disinterested 

spirit,  must  do  it ;  the  only  way  to  prevent  it,  is  to  come  ta 

Christ ;  and  if  you  cannot  come,  if  you  are  sensible  of  it,  God 

be  praised ;  he  will  come  to  you  if  you  csoinot  come  to  Christy 

be  will  come  and  make  you  willing  in  the  day  of  his  power  i 

that  this  may  be  the  happy  case,  God  grant  to  us  all,  for  bia 

name's  sake.    Amen. 

SERMON    LXXII. 

A.LL  MEl^'S  FLAGS. 

Do  not  all  go  ta  one  place  ?— Eccles.  vi.  6. 
I  RBMEMBBR  an  ingeuious  writer^  who  bad  been  very  copious 
in  bis  publications,  observed,  that  the  best  and  most  profitable! 
livere  written  after  he  was  fifty  years  of  age :  it  is  supposed,  then 
tisie  judgment  is  ripened,  and  the  genius  is  as  it  were  advanced 
to  maturity  ^nd  knowledge;  and  experience  gathered  when 
young,  will  be  more  useful  iu  the  decUne  of  life,  when  gray  hairs. 
ave  seen  here  and  there  upon  them.  It  is  said,  indeed,  that  old 
men  are  twice  children ;  but  there  are  some  whose  geniuses  are 
so  very  low  that  they  cannot  be  twice  children,  because  they  are 
BO  better  than  children  from  their  cradle  to  their  grave ;  but  this 
10  not  the  case  with  God's  children,  for  upon  a  reflection  of  the 
-wrong  steps  they  have  taken,  if  it  proceed  from  the  sanctified 
sense  of  afBictions,  they  serve  to  make  them  more  instructive 
in  their  latter  (lay.  This  was  the  case  of  Solomon,  though  highly 
^voured  when  young,  for  the  Lord,  appeared  unto  him  twice, 
yet  he  fell  most  awfully,  and  had  we  not  read  of  bis  recovery 
again,  the  doctrine  of  the  final  perseverance  of  the  saints  must 
seem  to  fall  to  the  ground ;  but  we  have  reason  to  think  that  he 
was  restored,  and  gave  evidence  of  his  recovery  by  writing  in 
such  amanner,  that  none  could  butone  that  knew  much  of  God  and 
himself;  witness  the  book  of  Ecclesiastes,  which  in  all  ages  of 
the  church  has  been  received  with  a  peculiar  respect.  £ccle- 
siastes  signifies  a  Preacher ;  such  Solomon  was  from  his  own 
experience,  and  exceeded  by  none  but  him  ''who  spake  as  no 
man  ever  did." 


750  ALL  men's  place.  [lxxil 

The  chapter  in  which  is  the  text,  describes  the  vanitj  and 
misery  of  our  present  state,  if  ansanctified.  **  There  is  an  erfl 
(saith  be)  that  I  have  seen  under  the  snn,  and  it  is  cammoo 
among  men :"  though  he  is  going  about  to  describe  a  monster, 
yet  it  is  a  monster  that  walks  and  stalks  abroad,  a  man  to 
whom  God  has  given  riches,  wealth,  and  honour,  so  that  be 
wants  nothing  for  his  soul  of  all  that  he  desires,  though  God 
gives  him  not  power  to  eat,  this  is  vanity  and  a  great  disease. 
Was  there  ever  a  more  striking  description  of  an  old  covetous 
miser,  who  leaves  his  wealth  to  some  person  that  spends  it  faster 
than  the  poor  wretch  got  it !  He  goes  on,  and  says,  **  If  a  man 
beget  an  hundred  children,  and  live  many  years,  so  that  the  days 
of  his  years  be  many,  and  his  soul  be  not  filled  with  good,  and 
also  that  he  have  no  burial,  I  say,  that  an  untimely  birth  » 
better  than  he,  for  he  cometh  in  with  vanity,  and  departeth  io 
darkness,  and  his  name  shall  be  covered  with  darkness.  More- 
over, he  hath  not  seen  the  sun,  nor  known  any  tbiDg^ ;  this  hath 
more  rest  than  the  other/'  And  then,  though  this  creature 
should  be  supposed  to  live  a  thousand  years  twice  told,  nrhv, 
saith  he,  yet  hath  be  seen  no  good,  he  has  never  been  possessed 
of  real  good  to  make  him  happy  here  or  hereafter,  for,  adds  be, 
do  not  all  go,  both  the  abortive  and  the  aged,  young  and  old, 
high  and  low,  rich  and  poor,  whether  blessed  with  children,  or 
have  no  children,  whether  like  Lazarus,  that  beg  their  bread,  or 
Dives,  clothed  in  purple  and  fine  linen,  and  fare  sumptuously 
every  day,  "  Do  not  all  go  to  one  place  ?'* 

An  important  question!  shall  I  propose  it  to  you  to-night? 
Do  you  know  what  the  wise  man  means  when  he  offers  tlus 
question  to  your  consideration,  ''Do  not  all  go  to  one  place T 
What  can  be  the  design  of  this  ?  the  thing,  no  doubt,  here  spdLOi 
of  is  death ;  the  place  here  spoken  of,  no  doubt,  is  the  grave. 
An  amazing  consideration !  part  of  the  first  sentence  that  the 
great  and  holy  God  ever  denounced  against  fallen  man,  to  oae 
and  all,  **  Dust  thou  art,  and  unto  dust  thou  shalt  return."  Ob 
account  of  our  first  parents'  transgression,  it  is  appointed  QDto 
all  men,  all  sorts  of  men,  all  the  inhabitants  under  heaven,  once 
to  die ;  and  therefore  the  apostle  says,  **  Death  hath  passed  opoa 
all  men,  even  upon  those  who  have  not  sinned  after  the  sini- 
litude  of  the  transgression  of  Adam,"  that  is,  virho  have  not 
been  guilty  of  actual  sin.  Can  there  be  a  stronger  proof  of  tbr 
imputation  of  Adam's  guilt,  of  original  sin,  or  a  more  cottii^ 
trial  that  a  tender  lather  and  nursing  mother  can  undergo,  thai 
to  see  a  dear  little  child  just  bom,  or  but  lent  to  the  loviaf 
parents  for  a  few  months,  taken  away  often  in  the  greatest  agonies 
that  we  can  conceive  ?  And  if  God,  my  dear  hearers,  has  ever 
suffered  your  dear  children  suddenly  to  be  seized  with  convul- 
sions, and  continue  in  anguish  and  agonizing  pains  for  many 
days  together,  you  have  had  sufiicient  proof  of  it.  A  friend  ol 
mine  in  London,  about  thirty-two  years  ago,  that  was  dotiogif 
fond  of  every  child  he  had,  to  whom  I  wrote  a  letter  froa 
Georgia,  beginning  with  these  words,  Is  your  idol  dead  yet  ?  for 


LXXII.]  ALL   men's   PLACE.  751 

I  thought  it  was  such  an  idol  tbat  would  soon  go.  The  account 
he  gave  me  the  first  time  I  saw  him  was^  that  the  day  before 
my  letter  was  received,  the  child  died  in  such  agony  and  tor« 
tu  re,  that  its  excrements  came  out  of  its  mouth,  which  made  the 
fond  and  too  indulgent  parent  wish  to  have  rather  died  a  thou- 
sand deaths  himself,  than  that  his  child  should  die  in  such  a 
way ;  and  added,  I  was  obliged  to  go  to  God,  and  desire  him  to 
take  my  darling  away.  What  an  awful  proof  are  their  suffer- 
ings, that  children  come  into  the  world  with  a  corruption  that 
renders  them  liable  to  God's  wrath  and  damnation ;  but  the 
blood,  the  precious  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  it  is  to  be  hoped, 
cleanses  them  from  the  guilt  and  filth  of  sin.  So,  any  of  you 
that  have  got  children  dead  in  infancy,  O  may  you  improve 
what  I  shall  say  by  and  by  from  the  text,  and  pray  and  endea- 
vour to  go  to  that  place,  where  T  hope  you  will  see  your  children 
making  a  blessed  constellation  in  the  firmament  of  heaven :  in 
this  respect  all  go  to  the  same  place,  some  at  the  beginning  of 
life,  some  at  the  middle,  and  some  at  the  decline  ;  and  happy, 
happy  they  who  go  to  bed  soonest,  if  their  souls  are  saved  ! 
.  But,  my  dear  hearers,  in  another  case  we  may  venture  to  con- 
tradict even  Solomon :  for  if  we  consider  the  words  of  our  text  in 
another  view,  all  do  not  go  to  one  place ;  it  is  true,  all  are  buried 
ill  the  grave  either  of  earth  or  water,  but  then  after  death  comes 
Judgment ;  death  gives  the  decisive,  the  separating  blow.  Su{{- 
pose  then,  in  our  enlarging  on  the  text,  we  should  confine  the 
word  all  to  the  unregenerate,  and  to  those  that  are  not  bom  of 
God ;  these  indeed,  die  when  they  will,  all  go  to  one  place.  If 
you  should  ask  me,  for  I  love  dearly  to  have  an  inquisitive  audi- 
tory, who  I  mean  by  unregenerate  ?  who  I  mean  by  those  that 
are  not  born  of  God  ?  I  answer,  I  do  not  mean  all  that  only  bear 
the  name  of  Jesus  Christ ;  I  mention  this,  because  a  great  many 
people  think  that  all  that  are  baptized,  either  when  they  are 
adult  or  when  they  are  young,  whether  sprinkled  or  put  under 
water ;  i  believe  a  great  many  people  think  that  all  these  go  to 
heaven.  I  remember  when  I  began  to  speak  against  baptismal 
regeneration  in  my  first  sermon,  printed  when  I  was  about 
twenty-two  years  old,  or  a  little  more ;  the  first  quarrel  many  had 
with  me  was,  because  I  did  not  say  that  all  people  who  were 
baptized  were  bom  again ;  I  would  as  soon  believe  the  doctrine 
of  transubstantiation.  Can  I  believe  that  a  person  who  gives 
no  evidence  of  being  a  saint,  from  the  time  of  hi^  baptism  to  the 
time  perhaps  of  his  death,  that  never  fights  against  the  world, 
the  flesh,  and  the  devil,  and  never  minds  one  word  of  what  his 
godfathers  and  godmothers  promised  for  him;  can  I  believe 
that  person  is  a  real  Christian  ?  No,  I  can  as  soon  believe  that 
a  little  water  in  the  priest's  hand,  about  a  quarter  of  an  inch  long, 
is  the  very  blood  and  bones  of  Jesus  Christ,  who  was  hung  upon 
the  cross  without  the  gates  of  Jemsalem.  I  do  believe  bap- 
tism to  be  an  ordinance  of  Christ,  but  at  the  same  time  no  can- 
did person  can  be  angry  for  my  asserting,  that  there  are  num- 
bers that  have  been  baptized  when  grown  up,  or  when  ver/ 


752  ALL  men's  place.  [lxxil 

young,  that  are  not  regenerated  by  God's  Spirit,  wLo  will  aH  go 
to  one  place»  and  that  place  is  where  there  will  be  no  water  ta 
quench  that  dreadful  fire  that  will  parch  them,  with  thirst.  I  to 
speaking  out  of  a  book  which  coatains  the  Uvely  oracles  of  G«d, 
and  in  the  name  of  one  who  is  truth  itself,  who,  knowing  vm 
well  what  he  spoke,  is  pleased  in  the  most  solenm  and  awM 
manner  to  say,  and  that  to  a  master  in  Israel,  that  **  if  a  imi 
be  not  born  again  of  water,  and  of  the  Spirit,  he  cannot  see  tfe 
kingdom  of  God ;"  he  can  have  no  idea,  no  proper,  no  adequate 
notion  of  it,  much  less  is  he  to  expect  to  be  happy  etemaHy  wA 
God  hereafter ;  and  therefore,  as  our  Lord  spoke  to  this  many 
give  me  leave  to  observe  to  you :  I  do  not  mean  the  Deistsonly 
by  unregenerate  sinners  ;  I  do  not  mean  the  profane  mocker, 
who  is  advanced  to  the  scomer*s  chair,  nor  yonr  open  profli- 
gate, adulterers,  fornicators,  abusers  of  themselves  with  man- 
kind, these  have  damnation  as  it  were  written  upon  their  fine- 
heads  with  a  sun- beam;  and  they  may  know  that  God  is  not 
mocked,  for  if  they  die  without  repenting  of  these  things,  they 
shew  they  are  in  an  unregenerate  state,  and  will  all  go  to  oac 
place :  if  any  of  you  are  going  thither,  may  God  stop  yon  this  night 
But,  my  brethren,  I  will  come  closer :  there  are  more  unbelier- 
ers  within  the  pale  than  without  the  pale  of  the  chnrch  ;  let  w 
repeat  it  again,  you  may  think  of  it  when  I  am  tossing  upon  the 
mighty  waters,  there  are  more  unbelievers  within  the  pale  of  the 
church  than  without :  all  are  not  possessors  that  are  professor^ 
all  have  not  got  the  thing  promised,  all  are  not  partakers  of  the 
promise,  that  talk  and  bless  God  they  have  got  the  promised 
Saviour ;  I  may  have  him  in  my  mouth  and  upon  my  tOBgoc, 
without  having  the  thing  promised,  or  the  blessed  promise  n 
iny  heart.  A  moral  man  that  can  walk  touching  the  law  bhune- 
less,  a  person  that  thinks  he  is  righteous,  becanse  he  dees  not 
know  why  a  person  who  has  got  no  other  naligion  but  tio»  go  to  a 
particular  place  of  worship,  values  himself  upon.being  a  church- 
man or  dissenter ;  he  is  such  a  bigpt,  that  he  thinks  no  man  will 
go  to  heaven  but  himself;  these,  however  they  may  think  then- 
selves  safe,  will  ere  long  go  to  one  place,  whether  they  think  so, 
or  no ;  they  will  be  soon  summoned  to  one  bar,  and  the  voice 
of  the  archangel  sounding,  ''Aiise,  ye  diead,.  and  cometojodg^ 
ment,*'  will  be  the  great  alarm ;  the  dead  shall  arise,  and  appear 
before  the  Son  of  God,  as  Judge  of  ail  roaiddnd;  these,  as  veH 
as  the  infidels,  would  gladly  be  excused;  and  as  they  once  sai4, 
I  pray  to  have  me  excused  from  coming  to  Christ,,  so  they  wflt 
fain  be  excused  from  appearing  before,  and  being  condemned 
by  him,  but  they  must  all  go  to  one  place :  and  as  they  know 
not  God,  and  are  unacquainted  with  the  divine  life,  they  most 
hear  and  suffer  the  dreadful  sentence,  ^'Depart,  ye  cursed,  into 
everlasting  Ore,  prepared  for  the  devil  and  bis  angels^."  This  is 
a  thought,  that  if  our  hearts,  my  dear  hearers^  were  propedy 
awakened,  would  make  our  blood  run  cold :  to  be  in  a  place  of 
absence  from  God,  a  place  where  damned  souls  will  be  for  evcf 
cursing  God  and  one  another:  give  me  lea^i^  to  dwell  upon  it  a 


Lxxu.]  ALL  hen's  placs.  753 

little,  and  may  it  be  blessed,  under  God,  to  awaken  some  care- 
less person  who  perhaps  may  be  taking  a  walk  to-niglit,  and 
jast  step  in  to  hear  what  the  babbler  has  to  say  white  he  ia 
about  to  take  his  leave  of  the  people.  When  I  saw  you  from  my 
study  crowding  to  come  in,  when  I  saw  you  puslung  forward, 
some  to  go  up  to  the  Tabernacle,  or  into  the  vestry,  $ome  to  fill 
the  area,  and  others  to  stand  at  the  door.  I  thought  how  shall  I 
manage  with  myself  to-night,  shall  I  endeavour  to  make  these 
vreep  and  cry,  shall  I  not  earnestly  address  so  many  precious 
souls  in  a  practical  way,  to  bring  them  not  to  the  preacher,  but 
the  preacher's  Master?  Knowing  the  terrors  of  the  JU)rd,  we 
^ould  fain  persuade  all  to  flee  from  this  wrath  to  come. 

O  awful  thought !  and  yet  it  is  a  certain  truth,  all  on  earth 
must  go  to  one  place ;  if  we  live  like,  and  are  devils,  here,  we 
must  go  to,  and  be  with  them,  when  we  die,  for  ever!  A  blessed 
minister  of  Christ,  in  Scotland,  told  me  a  story  he  knew  for 
truth,  of  a  dreadful  answer  a  poor  creature  gave  on  her  death- 
bed, for  the  Scotch,  except  the  people  of  New  England,  are  the 
most  knowing  people  in  religious  matters,  perhaps  any  where ; 
this  person  when  dying  was  asked  by  a  minister^  where  do  you 
hope  to  go  when  you  die?  says  she,  I  do  not  care  where  I  go; 
vrhat,  says  he,  do  not  you  care  whether  you  go  to  heaven  or 
hell?  no,  says  she,  I  do  not  care  whither  I  go ;  but,  says  he,  if 
you  were  put  to  your  choice,  where  would  you  go  ?  says  she,  to 
bell ;  to  that  he  replied,  are  you  mad,  wiU  you  go  to  hell  ?  yes, 
says  she,  I  will :  why  so  ?  says  he ;  why,  says  she,  all  my  rela- 
tions are  there.  The  dear  minister  of  Christ  preached  after  her 
death,  told  the  story,  and  asked,  is  it  not  shocking  to  hear  a 
woman  say  she  would  go  to  hell,  because  her  relations  were 
there?  Why,  you  that  are  unregcnerate  must  go  to  hell,  for  all 
your  unregenerate  relations  are  there ;  your  father  the  devil  is 
there ;  all  damned  angels  and  damned  spirits ;  your  brothers  and 
sisters  are  there;  as  they  went  one  way  here,  so  they  must  be 
banished  from  Jesus  Christ  to  one  place  hereafter. 

But  I  must  close  this  mournful  theme,  it  is  too  gloomy  to 
dwell  upon  ;  blessed  be  God,  I  iiave  another  place  to  tell  you 
of,  and  another  sort  of  people  to  speak  of,  who  shall  all,  as  well 
as  those  I  have  spoken, of,  go  to  one  place ;  perhaps,  here  are 
some  of  them ;  blessed  is  it  to  live  in  God.  When  death  closes 
the  eyes,  an  actual  separation  is  made,  and  instead  of  hearing 
*'  Depart,  ye  cursed,  (they  will  hear,)  Come  ye  blessed  of  my 
Father,  inherit  the  kingdom  prepared  for  you  from  the  founda- 
tion of  the  world."  Our  blessed  Master  (and  who  speaks  like 
him?)  gives  us  an  awful  view  of  Dives  and  Lazarus,  the  one 
feasting  and  fattening  his  body  to  the  grave,  not  keeping  one 
fast-day  in  a  year,  and  the  other  starving  at  his  gate,  perhaps 
buried  in  the  ditch,  denied  a  grave  by  the  parish,  while  this  vUe 
wretch,  who  died  also,  had  a  pompous  funeral ;  there  he  was, 
carried  to  one  place  ;  he  was,  perhaps,  laid  in  state,  two  mutes 
attending  round  the  coffin,  whUe  damned  devils  were  gnawing 
bis  soul ;  he  lift  up  his  eyes  in  torment.  Hark  !  do  not  you  hear 
♦  3  a 


754  ALL  MBN'S  PLAC£.  [lxiii. 

him,  J  will  stop  a  little  that  you  may :  you  ungodly  ones,  do  not 
you  hear  your  brother  cry  ?  He  would  not  pray  while  aiivey  bat 
hell  makes  him  pray,  not  to  God,  but  to  Abraham ;  *'  Father 
Abraham  (says  he)  send  Lazarus  to  dip  the  tip  of  his  finger  in 
water,  and  cool  my  tongue ;"  and  I  verily  believe^  the  damned 
will  have  a  sight  of  those  that  are  in  heaven,  to  let  them  know 
what  a  heaven,  what  a  Christ,  what  a  glory,  they  have  lost :  God 
grant  this  may  be  none  of  your  case ;  it  will  not  be,  if  yon  are  of 
the  number  of  those  who  are  bom  from  above,  that  are  made 
new  creatures  in  Christ  Jesus ;  for  by  being  bom  aigain  from 
above,  I  mean  receiving  a  principle  of  new  life,  imparted  to  oar 
hearts  by  the   Holy   Ghost,    changing  you,  giving   you  new 
thoughts,  new  words,  new  actions,  new  views,  so  that  old  tfaiiig5 
pass  away,  and  all  things  become  new  in  our  souls.     I  know 
very  well,  that  the  doctrine  of  a  divine  influence  is  exploded:  I 
have  often  told  yon,  and  I  tell  you  again,  now  I  am  about 
going  to  another  clime  for  a  while,  that  the  grand  quarrel  that 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  with  England,  and  I  do  not  speak  it 
as  a  prophet,  or  the  son  of  a  prophet,  but  as  the  Lord  GUxl  livetb, 
in  whose  name^  J  spe^k,  for  whose  glory  I  am  going  abroad,  ami 
in  whose  fear  I  desire  to  die,  if  the  Spirit  of  God  and  his  divine 
influence  is  not  more  regarded  in  this  land  than  it  has  been, 
woe,  woe,  woe  to  those  that  despise  it,  they  may  by  and  by,  one 
day  or  otiier,  wonder  and  perish.     Blessed  be  God,  there  are  a 
happy  few  who  do  regard  it ;  and  I  am  persuaded  in  my  very 
soul,  that  the  number  in  England,  in  Scotland,  in  Ireland,  in 
Wales,  and  in  America,  does,  and  I  pray  it  may  still,  greatly 
increase.     Yet,  notwithstanding  the  word  of  God  does  run  and 
is  glorified,  how  many  are  there  at  this  day,  that  wilfully  do 
despite  to  the  Spirit  of  God ;  that  bate  the  doctrine  of  the 
Spirit's  divine  influences ;  that  if  it  were  in  their  power, — but  wc 
live  under  Revolution  principles,  and  are  blessed  with  toleration, 
which  is  the  bulwark  of  liberty  of  conscience,  otherwise  the 
street  would  run  with  the  blood  of  both  churchmen  and  dis- 
senters :  but  whether  the  world  will  hear  or  forbear,  blessed  be 
God,  when  we  speak  of  the  new  birth,  we  do  not  speak  of  a  cun- 
ningly devised  fable ;  what  our  eyes  have  seen,  what  our  hands 
have  handled,  and  what  our  hearts  have  felt,  of  the  word  of  life, 
that  declare  we  unto  you.    When  I  was  sixteen  years  of  age,  I 
began  to  fast  twice  a  week  for  thirty-six  hours  together,  prayed 
many  times  a  day,  received  the  sacrament  every  Lord's  day. 
fasting  myself  almost  to  death  all  the  forty  days  of  Lent,  daring 
which  I  made  it  a  point  of  duty  never  to  go  less  than  three 
times  a  day  to  public  worship,  besides  seven  times  a  day  to 
my  private  prayers,  yet  I  knew  no  more  that  I  was  ^  be  bom 
again  in  God,  born  a  new  creature  in  Christ  JTesns,  than  if  I 
were  never  born  at  alL     I  had  a  mind  to  be  upon  the  stage.  M 
then  I  had  a  qualm  of  conscience ;  J  used  to  ask  people.  Pray 
can  I  be  a  player,  and  yet  go  to  the  sacrament  and  bo  a  Christian  ? 
O,  say  they,  such  a  one,  who  is  a  player,  goes  to  the  sacrament; 
though,  according  to  the  law  of  the  land,  no  player  shosM 


LXXII.]  ALL   men's   PLACE.  755 

receive  the  sacrament,  unless  they  give  proof  that  they  repent ; 
that  ^as  archbishop  Tillotson's  doctrine :  well  then,  it*  that  be 
the  case,  said  I^  I  will  be  a  player,  and  I  thought  to  act  my  part 
for  the  devil  as  well  as  any  body ;  but,  blessed  be  God,  he  stop- 

Sed  me  in  my  journey.  I  must  bear  testimony  to  my  old  friend, 
[r.  Charles  Wesley,  he  put  a  book  into  my  hands,  called.  The 
Life  of  God  in  the  Soul  of  Man^  whereby  God  shewed  me,  that 
I  must  be  bom  again,  or  be  damned.  [  know  the  place :  it  may 
be  superstitious,  perhaps,  but  whenever  I  go  to  Oxford,  I  can- 
not help  running  to  that  place  where  Jesus  Christ  first  revealed 
himself  to  me,  and  gave  me  the  new  birth.  As  a  good  writer 
says^  a  man  may  go  to  church,  say  his  prayers,  receive  the 
sacrament,  and  yet,  my  brethren,  not  be  a  Christian.  How  did 
my  heart  rise,  how  did  my  heart  shudder,  like  a  poor  man  that 
is  afraid  to  look  into  his  account-books,  lest  he  should  find  him- 
8elf  a  bankrupt :  yet  shall  I  burn  that  book,  shall  I  throw  it 
down,  shall  I  put  it  by,  or  shall  I  search  into  it?  I  did,  and 
holding  the  book  in  my  hand,  thus  addressed  the  God  of  heaven 
and  earth :  Lord,  if  I  am  not  a  Christian,  if  I  am  not  a  real  one» 
God,  for  Jesus  Christ's  sake,  shew  me  what  Christianity  is,  that 
T  may  not  be  damned  at  last  I  read  a  little  further,  and  the 
cheat  was  discovered  ;  O,  says  the  author,  they  that  know  any 
thing  of  religion,  know  it  is  a  vital  union  with  the  Son  of  God, 
Christ  formed  in  the  heart ;  O  what  a  ray  of  divine  life  did  then 
break  in  upon  my  poor  soul,  I  fell  a  writing  to  all  my  brethren, 
to  my  sisters,  talked  to  the  students  as  they  came  in  my  room, 
put  ofi*  all  trifling  conversation,  put  all  trifling  books  away,  and 
was  determined  to  study  to  be  a  saint,  and  then  to  be  a  scholar ; 
and  from  that  moment  God  has  been  carrying  on  his  blessed 
work  in  my  soul :  and  as  I  am  now  fifty-five  years  of  age,  going 
towards  sixty,  I  tell  you,  my  brethren,  as  I  shall  leave  you  in  a 
few  days,  I  am  more  and  more  convinced  that  this  is  the  truth 
of  God,  and  without  it  you  never  can  be  saved  by  Jesus  Christ : 
all  those  born  of  God,  whether  when  young  or  old,  at  the  sixth, 
ninth,  or  eleventh  hour,  however  separated  from  one  another, 
through  the  grace  of  God  they  shall  all  go  to  one  place. 

If  you  ask  where  that  place  is  ?  I  answer,  blessed  be  God^  to 
heaven ;  if  you  ask  to  whom  they  shall  go  ?  I  answer,  to  the 
spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect;  and,  what  will  be  best  of  all, 
to  Jesus  Christ,  the  heavenly  inheritance.  If  we  were  not  to  go 
to  him,  what  would  heaven  be?  If  we  were  not  to  see  him,  what 
would  glory  be  ?  I  know  some  people  think  heaven  is  a  fine 
place,  so  it  is ;  but  what  makes  it  so,  but  the  presence  and  joy 
of  the  God  of  glory  ?  I  would  rather  die  a  thousand  deaths,  than 
sacrifice  my  affections  as  I  have  done :  after  I  had  taken  leave 
of  all  my  friends  some  years  ago  at  Deptford,  I  burst  out  into 
tears,  and  said.  Lord,  I  would  not  suffer  all  I  feel  for  ray  friends, 
but  for  thee ;  then  returned  to  my  friends,  and  said.  Now  the 
bitterness  of  death  is  passed,  I  am  going  to  be  executed,  €rod*s 
will  be  done.  Blessed  be  God,  after  death  there  are  no  Repara- 
tions, we  shall  all  go  to  one  place ;  ministers  that  could  not 

dA2 


756  ALL  men's  place.  [lxxii. 

preach  in  one  pnlpit,  and  Christians  that  could  not  agree  with 
one  another,  blessed  be  God,  shall  by  and  by  go  to  one  heaven ; 
whether  they  go  to  one  place  or  no  in  this  world,  does  not  sig- 
nify :  says  one,  I  go  to  the  Dissenters ;  another,  I  go  to  chnrch ; 
and  a  great  many  Christians  judge  of  one  another  as  infidels, 
because  they  are  not  of  one  sentiment.  A.  good  woman  came 
to  me  some  years  ago,  just  as  I  had  done  preaching,  (some 
people  love  to  be  impertinent,)  What  do  you  think,  says  she,  of 
Cotton  Mather  and  another  minister ;  one  said,  I  ought  to  re- 
ceive the  sacrament  before  my  experience  was  given  in,  the 
other  said  not,  and  I  believe  the  angels  were  glad  to  carry  them 
both  to  heaven.  J  said.  Good  woman,  I  believe  they  have  not 
talked  about  it  since,  for  they  will  no  more  talk  aboat  these 
things.  We  have  but  one  Father,  one  Holy  Ghost,  we  have 
lived  in  one  communion  of  faith;  blessed  be  the  living  Grod,  ere 
long  the  angels  shall  come  and  call  the  elect  from  the  east,  the 
west,  the  north,  and  the  south,  to  be  at  home  with  the  Lord. 

If  this  be  the  case,  my  brethren,  it  may  support  ns  under  aU 
the  changes  and  partings  of  this  mortal  state.  As  I  have  beca 
in  a  public  character,  I  suppose  I  may  venture  to  say  that  do 
one  has  been  called  to  such  frequent  partings  from  6od*s  peo- 
pie  as  I  have ;  I  am  going  now  the  thirteentth  time  over  the 
water ;  yes,  I  find  what  is  said  of  St.  Paul  is  true,  he  could 
bear  a  whipping,  not  a  weeping ;  What  mean  you^  says  be,  to 
weep,  and  break  my  heart ;  he  never  said,  whip  me  and  break  my 
back,  no,  no.  All  get  to  one  place :  what  a  blessed  state !  to  see 
one's  spiritual  father,  to  see  one's  spiritual  children,  and  hear 
them  say,  Such  and  such  a  time  God  begat  me  to  himself  by 
your  ministry !  what  a  blessing  will  it  be  to  hear  them  say. 
Blessed  be  God,  next  to  the  Spirit,  I  owe  my  coming  here  to 
that  servant  of  thine!  and  with  what  ravishment  will  the 
minister  say.  Behold  me,  and  the  children  thou  hast  given  me ! 
with  what  holy  triumph  will  they  all  then  cast  their  crowns  at 
the  foot  of  the  Lamb !  with  what  joy  will  they  cry,  grace,  grace, 
when  the  top-stone  is  brought  forth,  and  how  will  they  then  try 
who  shall  praise  redeeming  love  and  rich  free-grace  in  the  highest 
strain !  The  difierence  here  is,  you  know,  that  we  sing  in  part5, 
some  sing  treble,  some  tenor,  and  some  bass ;  what  then  1  each 
part  helps  the  other ;  were  all  to  sing  alike,  the  harmony  would 
not  be  complete ;  however  shocking  it  is  in  this  world,  all  the 
differences  that  have  been  among  the  people  of  Grod,  wiU  only 
make  us  sing,  and  unite  us  the  better  in  a  future  state. 

Well,  my  dear  hearers,  by  this  time,  then,  I  hope  you  have 
begun  to  ask.  To  what  place  am  I  going?  Suppose  now  yon 
reason  thus  ;  I  have  heard  to-night  that  all  unregenerate  persons 
go  to  hell,  and  dwell  among  the  damned;  I  have  heard  that  aD 
that  are  born  again  of  God,  and  all  that  believe  in  Jesos  Christ, 
whether  Jew  or  Gentile,  whether  bond  or  free,  all  go  to  dwdl 
with  God,  with  angels,  and  the  spirits  of  just  men  made  perfect; 
I  have  heard  the  minister  say,  though  he  seems  sometimes  to 
ramble  in  his  discourse,  that  we  all  go  to  one  place,  that  i^^  the 


I.XX1I.]  ALL  men's  place.  757 

grave :  I  am  hastening  there,  autumn  is  coming  on^  the  fall  of 
the  leaf  is   approaching,  a  blast,  occasioned  by  the  sudden 
change  of  weather,  or  a  surfeit,  by  feasting  too  luxuriantly  on 
the  fruits  of  God's  bounty ;  another  illness  may  take  me  to  my 
long  home.     I  hear  of  such  a  one's  dying,  and  of  such  a  one, 
perhaps  in  an  apoplectic,  perhaps  in  a  paralytic  fit:  I  am  lusty 
and  strong,  I  am  glorying  in  my  strength,  but  who  knows  but 
that  may  be  only  making  me  food  for  a  fever?  one  would  stand 
it  better  that  was  more  emaciated  than  I  am.     If  I  should  be 
taken  this  night,  am  I  going  the  way  to  hell,  or  the  way  to 
Jiieaven?    Adrian,  the  emperor,  cried  out  upon  a  time,  ''My 
trembling,  dear,  departing  soul,  whither  art  thou  going  V  These 
were  his  words.    Won't  you  hear  an  emperor  preach,  preach  on 
his  dying  bed,  when  the  silver  cords  of  life  are  loosed  ?  Con- 
science, conscience,  conscience,  thou  candle  of  the  Lord,  may 
he  help  thee  to  light  a  poor  sinner  into  a  knowledge  of  himself. 
I  charge  thee  in  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  in  the  name 
of  that  Saviour,  in  whose  name  and  by  whose  power^  I  trust,  I 
now  preach ;  O  conscience !  thou  faithful  monitor,  let  every  one 
hear  their  own.   Come,  if  conscience  were  to  speak,  what  would 
it  say  ?    Why,  that  if  you  be  not  acquainted  with  yourself  and 
Christ,  you  are  lost  for  ever.     The  Americans  are  the  most 
hospitable  people  under  heaven,  t}iey  love  to  entertain  strangers, 
who  may  be  hereby  kindly  provided  for  without  going  to  an  inn : 
I  always  endeavoured  to  drop  a  word  for  Christ  when  I  came 
to  their  houses.    I  remember  Mr.  Seeward,  and  some  other 
good  friends,  were  with  me ;  when  I  first  got  into  the  house,  I 
began  to  talk  of  Christ ;  tjbie  master  of  it  said.  Sir,  I  believe  you 
are  right ;  I  cannot  open  a  leaf  in  my  Bible,  but  I  find  I  am  no 
Christian:  would  to  God  all  here  minded  the  same  leaf!     May 
be,  many  here  say.  Sir,  I  scorn  your  words ;  Well,  do  not  I, 
does  not  God,  tell  you  that  won't  do  ?  You  are  a  moral  man, 
but  do  not  love  God ;  you  do  not  get  drunk,  because  it  will 
make  your  head    ache ;   you  do  not  commit  fornication  and 
adultery,  which  is  common  among  the  great,  and  therefore  they 
think  God  will  not  punish  them  for  it ;  perhaps  you  are  not  a 
fornicator,  lest  you  should  stand  in  a  sheet,  though  we  have  no 
discipline  among  us  now ;  you  do  not  do  these  things,  for  fear 
of  maintaining  the  bastard,  or  being  taken  up;  but  does  your 
obedience  proceed  from  love  to  God,  to  Christ?  if  not,  may 
God  convince  you  of  your  miserable  state  before  you  go  hence ! 
But,  blessed  be  God,  there  are  numbers  of  dear  souls  here, 
that  I  hope  ere~long  to  live  in  one  place  and  to  eternal  ages  with. 
All  hail,  my  fellow  Christians ;  all  hail,  my  dear  brethren  and 
friends  ;  all  hail,  ye  that  are  children  of  one  parent,  bom  of  one 
Spirit,  and  bring  forth  the  fruits  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  your  con- 
versation ;  yet  a  little  while,  and  we  must  part ;  whether  I  die, 
or  you  die,  blessed  be  God,  one  place,  shall  ere  long  hold  us ; 
in  yonder  blessed  world  we  shall  ere  long  m^t  and  praise  free 
grace ;  my  brethren,  we  shall  be  then  for  ever  with  the  Lord, 
for  ever  one  with  Christ :  and  if  this  be  the  case,  let  us  comfort 


758  ALL   MBN^S   PLACE.  [LXXII. 

one  another  with  these  things ;  and  if  we  be  all  going  to  uoe 
place,  God,  of  his  infinite  mercy,  keep  ns  from  falling  cot  bj 
the  way.  Do  not  say,  I  am  of  the  Foundery ;  do  not  say,  I  aa 
of  the  Tabernacle ;  do  not  spend  your  time  in  talking  against 
John  Wesley  and  George  Wbitefield  ;  do  not  say,  you  go  to  the 
Tabernacle,  I  will  go  to  the  chapel ;  no,  do  not  speak  of  Paul 
and  Cephas :  God  unite  us  more  and  more  to  Jesus  Christ ; 
and  if  yon  be  going  to  heaven,  God  help  you  to  travel  a  little 
faster  than  we  do.  My  brethren;  let  us  press  forward  toward 
the  mark  of  the  prize  of  our  high  calling  in  Christ  Jesus.  0 
that  the  God  of  love  may  fill  us  with  such  peace  and  sachjoj, 
that  every  storm,  every  trial,  every  temptation  we  meet  with, 
may  be  over-ruled  to  good  for  us ;  all  our  afflictions,  all  ov 
temptations,  are  to  make  heaven  more  desirable,  and  eartk 
more  loathsome. 

If  this  be  not  the  case  with  some  of  you,  God  convert  yoa 
to-night.  Help  me,  my  dear  Tabernacle  and  London  hearers, 
help  me,  help  me,  help  me  for  Jesus  Christ's  sake.  Ton  were 
once  going  to  hell  yourselves,  for  God's  sake  endeavour  to  stop 
those  that  are  going  there :  pray  for  your  unconverted  friends. 
Young  people,  young  people,  that  are  going  to  hell  giddily,  may 
God  stop  you  this  night :  were  I  to  talk  to  you  seriously,  yoB 
would  say  as  a  young  gentleman  did,  when  I  desired  be  would 
not  swear ;  he  turned  to  me  and  said.  Doctor,  (I  was  no  more  a 
doctor  then  than  now,  and  but  young  too,)  it  is  very  hard  yoQ 
will  not  let  a  man  go  to  hell  his  own  way :  if  any  of  you  be  of  this 
stamp,  God  grant  ho  may  not  let  you  go  to  hell  your  own  way, 
but  go  to  heaven  in  God's  way,  in  Christ's  way.  I  am  sure  yon 
are  not  happy  ;  the  devil  never  had  a  happy  child  in  the  world: 
O  that  God  may  turn  your  feet  into  the  way  of  peace  to-night: 
O  that  it  may  be  with  you  as  with  a  young  man  one  m^t 
formerly :  I  remember  I  had  about  two  hundred  notes  then ;  I 
came  into  Moorfields  this  morning  at  six  o'clock,  says  he,  to 
to  meet  my  sweetheart,  blessed  be  God,  I  met  with  Jesus  Christ, 
my  sweet-heart :  would  to  God  you  may  do  so,  young  men, 
to-night !  when  you  have  gone  on  to  that  place,  O  that  it  may 
be  with  you  as  it  was  with  good  Mr.  Crane,  who  is  appointed 
steward  of  the  Orphan-house ;  he  went  once  to  see  a  play  at 
Drury-lane,  but  that  being  full,  he  went  to  Covent-Garden,  and 
that  was  so  full  he  could  not  put  his  head  in ;  well,  says  he,  (he 
told  it  me  himself,  and  he  is  an  Israelite  indeed,  one  of  the  most 
honest  men,  perhaps,  in  the  world,)  I  will  go  and  hear  Dr.  White- 
field  ;  there  God  reached  his  heart,  and  now  he  shines.  I  had 
letters  yesterday  or  the  day  before  from  Georgia,  that  made  my 
heart  leap  for  joy  ;  honest  Mr.  Wright,  that  ingenious,  inde- 
fatigable man,  and  Mr.  Crane,  have  gone  on  so  well,  and  bare 
managed  the  Orphan-house  so  well,  that  all  letters  from  all 
parts  give  me  a  pleasure:  would  to  God,  one  says,  you  couM 
send  ten  thousand  such  people  as  Mr.  Wright  and  Mr.  Crane; 
would  to  God  you  could  send  a  thousand  such  over,  and  ai 
hundred  preachers  to  preach  Christ  among  us.   O  that  curiosity 


IjXXIii.]  god  a  bblibver's  glory.  759 

may  be  over-ruled  for  good  to  some  of  you  to-night:  but  I  for- 
got royseify  and  can  you  blame  me  if  I  should  detain  you  a  little  ? 
though  I  am  really  afraid  of  unfitting  myself  for  my  voyage,  if 
I  tire  myself  before  I  go :  to-morrow  I  am  to  go  to  sea,  where  I 
am  to  sleep.  I  intend,  God  willing,  to  have  a  sacrament  here 
to-morrow,  and  another  next  Sabbath-day  morning.  I  intend, 
God  willing,  to  give  you  a  parting  word  on  Sunday  evening,  and 
give  you  notice  of  taking  my  kist  farewell  in  Uie  week,  for  I 
must  get  a  day  or  two  to  despatch  my  private  business,  and  be 
ready  to  go  where  my  God  calleth  me. 

I  shall,  I  think,  be  called  to  do  something  which  I  would,  if 
possible,  have  avoided,  and  that  is,  as  this  place  has  been  re- 
paired, you  see  it  is  fresh  done,  which  is  expensive,  and  I  am 
willing  to  leave  every  thing  clear  before  I  go,  a  collection  must 
be  made  for  defraying  the  charge.  The  world  thinks  I  am  very 
rich ;  a  man  the  other  day  was  so  persuaded  of  my  riches,  that 
he  sent  me  w6rd,  if  I  did  not  lay  thirty  pounds  in  such  a  place, 
I  should  be  killed  as  sure  as  I  was  alive!  but,  blessed  be  God, 
I  am  alive  yet ;  I  do  not  fear  dying  suddenly,  or  being  despatch- 
ed by  a  poniard  or  pistol,  to  make  a  passage  for  my  soul  to  flee 
to  God.  You  may  think,  perhaps,  I  get  a  deal  by  preaching 
here  ;  and  now  I  am  going  away,  what  do  you  think  my  stated 
allowance  is  for  preaching  at  the  Tabernacle?  I  have  no  more 
from  this  place  than  one  hundred  pounds  a  year ;  and  I  asked 
but  last  night  how  it  stood,  and,  instead  of  having  a  single  six- 
pence, I  was  told  there  were  fifty  pounds  arrears ;  well,  said  I, 
ungrateful  as  it  is  to  me,  I  will  make  a  collection  to-night,  that 
all  may  be  left  free ;  and  if  others  are  left  to  make  an  advantage 
of  it,  may  God  make  it  a  blessing.  There  are  not  six  people  in 
this  place  that  I  have  had  the  value  of  a  guinea  of  from  Janu- 
ary to  August ;  nor  have  I  had  a  guinea  from  all  these  ordinan- 
ces, towards  bearing  the  expenses  of  my  voyage.  When  I  come, 
my  brethren,  to  heaven,  you  shall  then  know  with  what  a  spirit 
I  have  served  you  ;  you  shall  then  know  that  all  I  have  done  is 
to  build  places  for  others,  where  I  hope  God  will  meet  you  and 
your  children  when  J  am  dead  and  gone.  O  that  we  may  meet 
in  one  place,  when  God  calls  me  hence :  the  Lord  quicken  you, 
the  Lord  strengthen  you,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  with  you,  and 
grant  that  ere  long  we  may  be  where  there  shall  be  no  more  sor- 
row, but  we  shall  dwell  with  God  and  one  another  for  ever: 
even  so.  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Amen. 

SERMON  LXXin. 

GOD    A   BBLIEVBR'S   GLORY. 

And  thy  God  thy  Glory. — Isaiah  Ix.  19. 
I  LATBLY  had  occasion  to  speak  on  the  verse  immediately  fol- 
lowing that  of  our  text :  but  when  I  am  reading  God's  word,  I 
often  find  it  is  like  being  in  a  tempting  garden,  when  we  pluck 
a  little  fruit  and  find  it  good,  we  are  apt  to  look  after  and  pluck 
a  little  more,  only  with  this  difierence,  the  fruit  we  gather  below 
often  hurts  the  body  at  the  same  time  that  it  pleases  the  appe*? 


7C0  Gt)D   A    fiELIKVBk'8   GLORV.  [LXXIII. 

lite,  but  when  we  walk  in  God's  garden,  when  we  gather  fruit 
of  the  Redeemer's  plants,  the  more  we  eat,  the  more  we  are  de- 
lighted, and  \he  freer  we  are,  the  more  welcome  ;  if  any  chapter 
in  the  &ible  deserves  this  character  and  description  of  an  evan- 
gclical  Eden,  this  does. 

It  is  very  remarkable,  and  I  have  often  told  yon  of  it,  that  all 
the  apostles  preach  first  the  law,  and  then  the  gospel,  which 
fidds  man  in  a  state  of  death,  points  out  to  him  how  he  is  to  get 
life,  and  thev  sweetly  conducts  him  to  it.     Gteat  and  glorioes 
things  are  spoken  of  the  church  of  God  in  this  chapter  ;  and  it 
i^track  me  very  much  this  evening  ever  since  I  came  into  the 
'  pulpit,  that  the  great  God  speaks  of  the  church  in  the  singular 
number ;    how  can  that  be,  when  the  church  is  composed  of  so 
many  millions   gathered  out  of   all  nations,   lan^ages,  and 
tongues?     How  is  it.  that  God  says,  thy  Maker,  and  not  your 
Maker,  that  he  speaks  of  the  church  as  though  it  consisted  ooiy 
of  one  individual  person  ?    The  reason  of  it  is  this,  and  is  very 
obvious,  that  though  the  church  is  composed  of  many  member, 
they  have  but  one  Head,  and  they  are  united  by  the  bond  of 
one  Spirit,  by  whom  they  have  the  same  vital  union  of  the  sobI, 
with  God  ?  and  therefore  it  teaches  Christians  not  to  say  to  one 
another,  "  I  am  of  Patd,  I  am  of  ApoUos,  or  Cephas,"  hut  to 
behave  and  live  so,  that  the  world  may  know  that  we  all  belong 
to  one  common  Christ :  God  revive,  continue,  and  increase  this 
true  christian  love  among  us !    Of  this  church,  thus  collectively 
considered,  united  under  one  Head,  the  blessed  evangelical  pro- 
phet thus  speaks,  **  Violence  shall  no  more  be  heard  in  thy  land, 
wasting  nor  destruction  within  thy  borders,  but  thou  shalt  call  thy 
walls  salvation,  and  thy  gates,  (where  the  magistrates  assemble, 
and  the  people  go  in  and  out,)  praise."     From  this  text,  a  great 
inany  good  and  great  men  have  gathered  what  they  call  the  Mil- 
lennium, that  Jesus  Christ  is  to  come  and  reign  a  thonsand  yean 
on  earth  ;  but  I  must  acknowledge  that  I  have  always  rejected 
a  great  many  good  men's    positive  opinion  abont  the  season 
when  this  state  commences,  and  I  would  warn  yon  all  against 
fixing  any  time ;  for  what  signifies  whether  Christ  comes  to  reifs 
a  thousand  years,  or  when  he  comes,  since  yon  and  I  are  to  ^ 
very  soon  ?  and  therefore  instead  of  puzzling  our  heads  abost 
it,  God  grant  we  may  live  so  that  we  may  reign  with  him  for 
ever ;  and  it  seems  to  me,  that  whatsoever  is  said  of  this  state 
on  earth,  that  the  millennium  is  to  be  understood  in  a  spiritmd 
sense,  as  an  emblem  of  a  glorious,  eternal,  beatific  state  in  the 
kingdom  of  heaven.    ''The  sun  shall  no  more  be  thy  light  by 
day,  nor  for  brightness  shall  the  moon  give  light  unto  thee,  hot 
the  Lord  shall  be  unto  thee  an  everlasting  light  :**  and  in  order 
to  prepare  us  for  that  light,  and  shew  us  the  natnre  of  it,  while 
we  speak  of  it,  may  it  come  with  light  and  power  to  our  souls! 
He  adds  in  our  text,  "  And  thy  God  shall  be  thy  glory ;"  this  is 
spoken  to  all  believers  in  general,  but  it  is  spoken  to  aH  fearful 
believers  in  particular ;  and  I  do  not  know  that  I  can  possibly 
close  my  poor,  feeble  ministration  among  you  here^  better  than 


Llt}tlll.]  GOD   A   BELIKVBR'S   GLORTr  761 

with  these  words ;  though,  God  willing,  I  intend,  if  he  shall 
strengthen  me  this  week,  to  give  you  a  parting  word  next  Wed- 
nesday  morning ;  and  O  that  what  has  been  my  comfort  this  day 
in  the  meditation  on  this  passage,  may  be  yours  and  mine  to  aU 
eternity.  He  that  hath  an  ear  to  hear,  let  him  hear  what  the 
evangelic  prophet  saith,  "  Thy  God  thy  glory." 

Tlie  Holy  Ghost  seems,  as  it  Were,  particularly  fond  of  this 
expression :  when  God  published  the  ten  commandments  upon 
mount  Sinai,  he  prefaced  it  thus,  *'  I  am  the  Lord,"  and  not  con-^ 
tent  with  that,  he  adds  "  thy  God ;"  and  the  frequency  of  it,  I 
suppose,  made  Luther  say,  that  'the  gospel  deals  much  in  pro- 
nouns, in  which  consists  a  belierer's  comfort :'  but  if  there  were 
no  other  argument  than  this,  it  would  cut  up  that  deslructive 
principle  by  the  very  root,  that  pretends  to  tell  us  that  there  is 
no  such  thing  as  appropriation  in  the  Bible ;  that  our  faith  is 
only  to  be  a  rational  assent  to  the  word  of  God,  without  a  par- 
ticular application  of  that  word  made  to  our  souls :  this  is  as 
contrary  to  the  gospel,  and  to  the  experience  of  every  real  saint, 
as  light  is  contrary  to  darkness,  and  heaven  to  hell.  My  brethren, 
I  appeal  to  any  of  you,  wliat  good  would  it  do  you,  if  you  had 
ten  thousand  notes  written  in  large  characters  by  the  finest  hand 
in  London ;  suppose  you  have  got  them,  as  many  men  have, 
and  it  is  a  very  convenieHt  way,  that  they  were  put  into  your 
little  pockets  made  on  the  inside  of  your  coat ;  suppose  you 
should  say,  my  coat  is  buttoned,  I  have  all  these  here  next  my 
heart :  when  I  come  to  lock  at  them,  I  find  there  ts  not  one  note 
payable  to  me,  chey  are  aH  either  forged,  or  payable  to  somebody 
else,  and  therefore  are  good  for  nothing  to  me.  All  the  promises 
of  the  gospel,  all  that  is  said  of  God  and  Christ,  can  do  us  no 
good,  except  that  God  and  Christ  be  ours.  The  great  question 
therefore  is,  whether  the  God  we  profess  to  believe  in,  is  our 
God  ?  not  only,  whether  he  be  so  in  general,  Ikat  the  devils  may 
say ;  but  whether  he  be  our  Grod  in  particular.  The  devils  can 
say,  O  God  ;  but  the  devils  cannot  say,  my  God,  that  is  a  pri- 
vilege peculiar  to  God's  choscft  people,  w1*o  really  believe  on 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  and  therefore,  my  brethren,  a  Deist  can- 
not say,  my  God,  my  Christ,  because  he  does  not  believe  on 
that  medium  by  which  God  becomes  our  God.  That  was  a  no- 
ble saying  of  Luther,  **  I  will  have  nothing  to  do  with  an  abso- 
Inte  God  ;"  that  is,  I  will  have  nothing  to  do  with  a  God  out  of 
Christ.  Now,  this  is  a  Deist's  glory  ;  Lord  fiolingbroke  values 
himself  upon  it ;  I  am  astonished  at  that  man's  infidelity  and 
cowardice.  I  do  not  like  those  men  that  leave  their  writings  lo 
be  published  after  their  death :  1  love  to  see  men  bold  in  their 
writings :  I  like  an  honest  man,  that  will  put  out  his  writings 
while  alive,  that  he  may  see  what  men  can  say  against  him,  and 
then  answer  them;  but  it  is  mere  cowardice  to  leave  it  to  the 
world  to  answer  for  it,  to  set  us  a  cavilling  after  they  are  got  into 
the  grave :  says  he,  I  will  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  God  of  Mo- 
ses ;  and  I  suppose  the  principles  of  that  Deist  made  one  prcftty 
near  to  him  ask  as  soon  as  his  breath  was  out  of  his  body,  wher^ 


762  GOD   A    BELIBVBR^S   GLO&Y.  [l^XXlll. 

do  you  think  he  is  gone  to?  another  replies,  where  do  yoo 
think,  bat  to  bell  7  God  grant  that  may  not  be  tbe  portion  id 
any  here. 

The  question  then  is,  how  God  is  our  God ;  thy  God,  Hy 
brethren,  our  all  depends  upon  it;  what  signifies  saying.  This  \s 
mine,  and  that  is  mine,  if  you  cannot  say,  Grod  is  mine.  The 
best  thing  that  God  has  left  in  the  New  Testament,  is  himsdf : 
'*  I  will  1^  their  Grod,**  that  is  one  of  the  legacies  ;  and  ''  a  new 
heart  also  will  I  give  them,*'  that  is  another ;  **  I  will  pot  my 
laws  in  their  mind,  and  write  them  in  their  hearts,"  that  is  an- 
other ;  but  all  that  is  good  for  nothing,  comparatively  speaking, 
unless  God  have  said  at  the  same  time,  for  they  are  all  inse- 
parable^ '^  I  will  be  their  God>  and  they  shall  be  my  peotde." 
rS'ow,  how  shall  I  know  that  God  is  my  God  ?  I  am  amid, 
some  people  think  there  is  no  knowing ;  well  then,  if  you  think 
so,  you  set  up  a  worship,  and  go  and  erect  an  altar,  and  instead 
of  receiving  God  in  the  sacrament  as  yours,  go  and  worship  an 
unknown  God.  I  am  so  far  from  believing  that  we  cannot  know 
that  God  is  ours,  that  I  am  fully  persuaded  of  it,  and  woold 
speak  it  with  humility,  and  I  woidd  not  choose  to  leave  yon 
with  a  lie  in  my  mouth,  that  I  have  known  it  for  about  thirty- 
five  years,  as  clear  as  the  sun  is  in  the  meridian,  that  God  is  my 
God.  And  how  shall  I  know  it,  my  brethren  ?  I  would  ask 
you  this  question.  Didst  thou  ever  feel  the  want  of  Grod  to  be 
thy  God  ?  Nobody  knows  God  to  be  their  God,  that  did  not 
feel  him  to  be  his  God  in  Christ :  out  of  Christ,  God  is  a  con- 
suming fire.  I  know  there  are  a  great  variety  of  ways  in  peo- 
ple's conversions,  but  still,  my  brethren,  we  must  all  feel  onr 
misery,  we  must  all  feel  our  distance  from  God,  all  feel  that  vre 
are  estranged  firom  God,  that  we  bring  into  the  world  with  us  a 
nature  that  is  not  agreeable  to  the  law  of  Grod,  nor  possibly  can 
be ;  we  cannot  be  said  to  believe  that  God  is  our  Grod,  till  we 
are  brought  to  be  reconciled  to  him  through  his  Son.  Ckm  I  say, 
a  person  is  my  friend,  till  I  am  reconciled  to  him  ?  and  therefore 
the  gospel  only  is  the  ministration  of  reconciliation.  Paul  says, 
''We  beseech  you,  as  ambassadors  of  Christ,  that  yon  would 
be  reconciled  unto  God :"  this  is  to  be  the  grand  topic  of  oor 
preaching ;  we  are  to  beseech  them,  and  God  himself  tarns  beg- 
gar to  his  own  creatures,  to  be  reconciled  to  him :  now  this  re- 
conciliation is  brought  about  by  a  poor  sinner's  being  brought 
to  Jesus  Christ ;  and  when  once  he  sees  his  enmity  and  hatred 
to  God,  feeling  the  misery  of  departing  from  him,  and  bein^ 
conscious  that  he  is  obnoxious  to  eternal  wrath,  flies  to  Jesos 
as  to  a  place  of  refuge,  and  expects  only  a  reconciliation  through 
the  blood  of  the  Lamb ;  without  this,  neither  you  nor  I  can  say, 
God  is  my  God :  "  There  is  no  peace,  saith  my  Grod,  to  tbe 
wicked."  The  ministers  of  Christ  must  take  care  that  they  do 
not  preach  an  unknown  God,  and  we  must  take  care  we  do  not 
pretend  to  live  upon  an  unknown  God,  a  God  that  is  not  ap- 
propriated and  brought  home  to  our  souls  by  the  efficacy  of  tb:* 
Spirit.    But,  my  brethren,  we  cannot  say,  God  is  our  Gotl 


LXXIII.]  GOD   A    believer's   GLORY.  763 

unless  we  are  in  Jesus  Christ.  Can  you  say,  such  a  one  is  your 
father,  unless  you  can  give  proof  of  it  7  Yon  may  be  bastards, 
there  are  many  bastards  laid  at  Christ's  door.  Now,  God  cannot 
be  my  God,  at  least  I  cannot  know  him  to  be  so,  unless  be  be 
pleased  to  send  into  my  heart  the  Spirit  of  adoption,  and  to 
admit  me  to  enjoy  familiarity  with  Christ. 

My  brethren,  I  told  you  the  other  night  that  the  grand  con- 
troversy God  has  with  England  is  for  the  slight  put  on  the 
Holy  Ghost.  As  soon  as  a  person  begins  to  talk  of  the  work  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  they  cry.  You  are  a  Methodist :  as  soon  as  you 
speak  about  the  divine  influences  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  O !  say 
they,  you  are  an  enthusiast.  May  the  Lord  keep  these  metho- 
distical  enthusiasts  among  us  to  the  latest  posterity.  Ignatius, 
supposed  to  have  been  one  of  the  children  that  Jesus  took  up 
in  his  arms,  in  his  first  Epistle,  (pray  read  it,)  written  soon  after 
St.  John's  death,  and  we  value  nothing  so  authentic  as  what 
was  written  in  the  three  first  centuries,  bears  a  noble  testimony 
to  this  truth.  When  I  was  performing  my  first  exercises  at 
Oxford,  I  used  to  take  delight  to  walk  and  read  it,  and  could 
not  help  noting  and  putting  down,  from  time  to  time,  several 
remarkable  passages.  In  the  superscription  of  all  his  Epistles, 
I  remember,  he  styles  himself  T%eopAort£«,  that  is.  Bearer  of 
God,^  and  believed  that  those  he  wrote  to,  were  so  too.  Some 
body  went  and  told  Trajan,  that  one  Ignatius  was  an  enthu- 
siast, that  he  carried  God  about  him :  being  brought  before  the 
emperor,  who  (though  in  other  respects  a  good  prince)  was  a 
cruel  enemy  to  the  Christians :  but  many  a  good  prince,  does 
bad  things  by  the  influence  of  wicked  counsellors,  like  our  king 
Henry  the  Vth,  who  was  brought  in  to  persecute  the  poor 
lioUards,  for  assembling  in  St.  Giles's  fields  to  hear  the  pure 
gospel,  by  false  accusation  of  being  rebels  against  him.  Before 
such  a  prince  was  Ignatius  brought ;  says  Trajan,  who  is  this 
that  calls  himself  *'  a  bearer  of  God  ?"  says  Ignatius,  I  am  he, 
for  which  he  quotes  this  passage,  '^  I  will  dwell  in  them,  and 
will  walk  in  them,  and  they  shall  be  my  sons  and  daughters, 
says  the  Lord  Almighty."  The  emperor  was  so  enraged,  that, 
in  order  to  cure  him  of  his  enthusiasm,  he  ordered  him  to  be 
devoured  by  lions ;  at  which  Ignatius  laughed  for  joy :  O  !  says 
he,  am  I  going  to.be  devoured!  and  when  his  friends  came 
about  him,  he  almost  danced  for  gladness ;  when  they  carried 
him  to  execution,  he  smiled,  and  turning  about,  said.  Now  I 
begin  to  be  a  martyr  of  Jesus  Christ !  I  have  heard  thai  the 
lions  have  leaped  from  the  martyrs,  but,  when  they  come  to  me, 
I  will  encourage  them  to  fall  on  me  with  all  their  violence. — Grod 
give  you  such  enthusiasm  in  a  trying  hour !  This  is  to  have 
God  for  our  God :  *'  he  that  believeth,  hath  the  witness  in  him* 
self,"  as  it  is  written  in  this  blessed  word  of  God,  and  I  hope  it 
will  be  the  last  book  that  I  shall  read.  Farewell,  father,  fare- 
well, mother,  farewell,  sun,  moon,  and  stars !  was  the  language 
of  one  of  the  Scotch  martyrs  in  king  Charles's  time,  and  it  is 

*  Deum  (erenBf-^inspiredf  dhme,  holy. 


764  QOD  A  belibver's  glory.  [lxxiil 

amazing  to  me  Uiat  even  Mr.  Hume  (I  believe)  a  professed 
Deist^  in  bis  History  of  England  mentions  this  as  a  grand  exit, 
and  also  that  seraphic  soul,  Mr.  Hervey,  now  with  God»  that 
the  last  words  of  the  martyr  were.  Farewell  thou  precious  BiUe, 
thou  blessed  book  of  God.— This  is  my  rock,  this  is  my  founda- 
tion^ it  is  now  about  thirty-five  years  since  I  have  begun  to 
read  the  Bible  upon  my  pillow.    I  love  to  read   this  book,  bat 
the  book  is  nothing  but  an  account  of  the  promises  which  it 
contains,  and  almost  every  word^  from  the  beginning  to  the  end 
of  it,  speaks  of  a  spiritual  dispensation,  and  the  Holy  Ghost, 
that  unites  our  souls  to  Grod,  and  helps  a  believer  to  say.  My 
Lord,  and  my  God  !    If  you  content  yourselves  with  that,  the 
devil  will  let  you  talk  of  doctrines  enough :  O,  yoa   shall  turn 
from  Arminianism  to  Calvinism ;  O  you  shall  be  orthodox  enough, 
if  you  will  be  content  to  live  without  Christ's  living  in  yoa. 
Now  when  you  have  got  the  Spirit,  then  you  may  say,  God  is 
mine.     O  this  is  very  fine,  say  some,  every  body  pretends  to  the 
Spirit :  and  then  you  may  go  on,  as  a  bishop  once  told  a  noble- 
man. My  lord,  these  MeUiodists  say  they  do  all  by  the  Spirit, 
BO  if  the  devil  bids  them  murder  any  body,  they  will  say  the 
Spirit  bid  them  do  it;  and  that  very  bishop  died,  bow?  why, 
horrid !  the  last  words  he  spoke  were  these,  **  The  battle  is 
fought,  the  battle  is  fought,  the  battle  is  fought,  but  the  victory 
is  lost  for  ever."    God  grant,  you  and  I  may  not  die  with  such 
words  as  these.     I  hope  you  and  I  shall  die  and  say,  '*  The 
battle  is  fought,  the  battle  is  fought,  the  battle  is  fought,  I  have 
fought  the  good  fight,  and  the  victory  is  gained  for  ever."    Thos 
died  Mr.  Ralph  Erskine,  his  last  words  were,  Victorj-^,  victory, 
victory !  and  they  that  can  call  God  their  God,  shaU  by  and  by 
cry,  Victoiy,  victory  1  and  that  for  ever.    God  grant  we  may  ail 
be  of  that  happy  number. 

If  wc  can  call  God  our  God,  we  shsdl  endeavour,  by  the  Holy 
Ghost,  to  be  like  God,  we  shall  have  his  divine  image  stamped 
upon  our  souls,  and  endeavour  to  be  followers  of  that  God  who 
is  our  Father :  and  this  brings  in  the  other  part  of  the  text, 
''Thy  God  thy  glory."  What  is  that?  The  greatest  honov 
that  a  poor  believer  thinks  he  can  have  on  earth,  is  to  boast 
that  God  is  his  God.  When  it  was  proposed  to  David,  that  if 
he  killed  an  hundred  Philistines,  he  should  have  the  kings 
daughter  for  his  wife,  (and  a  very  sorry  wife  she  was^  no  great 
gain  turned  out  to  him ;)  says  he, ''  Do  you  think  it  is  a  small 
thing  to  be  the  son-in-law  to  a  king  ?  a  poor  stripling  as  I  an 
here,  come  with  my  shepherd's  crook,  what !  to  l^  married  Co 
a  king's  daughter,  do  you  think  that  is. a  small  thiag?  And  if 
David  thought  it  no  small  thing  to  be  allied  to  a  kiag  by  his 
daughter,  what  a  great  thing  must  it  be  to  be  allied  to  the  Lord 
by  one  Spirit  ?  I  am  afraid  there  are  some  people  that  were  once 
poor  that  are  now  ridi,  that  think  it  a  great  things  that  wish,  O 
that  my  family  had  a  coat  of  arms;  some  people  would  give  a 
thousand  pounds,  I  believe,  for  one.  Coats  of  arms  are  very 
proper  to  make  distinction  in  life,  a  great  many  people  wear 


Lxxiii.]  GOD  A  Believer's  cLORr.  765 

coats  of  arms  that  their  ancestors  got  honourably,  bat  they  are 
a  disgrace  to  them  as  they  wear  them  on  their  coaches.  But 
this  is  our  glory,  whether  we  walk  or  ride,  whatever  oar  pedigree 
may  be  in  life,  this  is  our  honour,  that  our  God  may  be  our  g^ory. 
*'  O  what  manner  of  love  is  this,  (saith  one,)  that  the  Lord  doth 
bestow  on  us,  that  we  should  be  called  the  sons  of  God !"  born 
not  of  the  will  of  man,  bom  not  of  flesh,  but  born  from  above. 
O  God,  grant  that  this  may  be  your  glory  and  mine ! 

My  brethren,  if  God  is  our  God  and  our  glory,  I  will  tell  you 
what  we  shall  prove  it  by :  whether  we  eat  or  drink,  or  whatever 
we  do,  we  shall  do  all  to  the  glory  of  Grod.  Religion,  as  I 
have  often  told  you,  turns  our  whole  life  into  one  continued 
sacrifice  of  love  to  God.  As  a  needle,  when  once  touched  by  a 
loadstone,  turns  to  a  particular  pole,  so  the  heart  that  is  touched 
by  the  love  of  God,  turns  to  his  God  again.  I  shall  have  occa- 
sion to  take  notice  of  it  by  and  by,  when  I  am  aboard  a  ship : 
for  as  soon  as  J  get  on  board,  I  generally  place  myself  in  one 
particular  place  under  the  compass  that  hangs  over  my  head,  i 
often  look  at  it  by  night  and  by  day ;  when  I  rise,  the  needle 
turns  to  one  point,  when  I  go  to  bed,  I  find  it  turns  to  the  same 
point ;  and  often,  while  I  have  been  looking  at  it,  my  heart  has 
been  turned  to  God,  saying.  Lord  Jesus,'as  that  needle,  touched 
by  the  loadstone,  turns  to  one  point,  O  may  my  heart,  touched 
by  the  magnet  of  God's  love,  turn,  to  himi  A  great  many  people 
think  they  never  worship  God  but  when  at  church ;  and  a  great 
many  are  very  demure  on  Lord's  days,  though  many  begin  to  leave 
that  off.  I  know  of  no  place,  upon  the  face  of  the  earth,  where 
the  sabbath  is  kept  as  it  is  at  Boston :  if  a  single  person  were 
to  walk  in  Boston  streets  in  time  of  worship,  he  would  be  taken 
up ;  it  is  not  trusted  to  poor  insignificant  men,  but  the  justices 
go  out  in  time  of  worship,  they  walk  with  a  white  wand,  and  if 
they  catch  any  person  walking  in  the  streets,  they  put  them 
under  a  black  rod.  O!  the  great  mischiefs  the  poor  pious  peo- 
ple have  suffered  lately  through  the  town's  being  disturbed  by 
the  soldiers !  When  the  drums  were  beating  before  the  house 
of  Dr.  Sawell,  one  of  the  holiest  men  that  ever  was,  when 
he  was  sick  and  dying,  on  the  sabbath  day,  by  his  meeting; 
where  the  noise  of  a  single  person  was  never  heard  before,  and 
he  begged  that  for  Christ's  sake  they  would  not  beat  the  drum ; 
they  damned,  and  said,  that  they  would  beat,  to  make  him 
worse :  this  is  not  acting  for  the  glory  of  God ;  but,  when  a  soul 
is  turned  to  God,  every  day  is  a  sabbath,  every  meal  is  a  spiritual 
refreshment,  and  every  sentence  he  speaks  should  be  a  ser- 
mon ;  and  .whether  he  stays  abroad  or  at  home,  whether  he 
is  on  the  exchange,  or  locked  up  in  a  closet,  he  can  say,0  Ood, 
thou  art  my  God ! 

Now,  my  dear  friends,  can  you,  dare  you  say,  that  your  God 
is  your  glory,  and  do  you  aim  at  glorifying  the  Lord  your  God  ? 
if  your  God  is  your  glory,  then  say, "  O  God,  forbid  that  I 
should  glory,  save  in  the  cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  by 
whom  the  world  is  crucified  to  me,  and  1  am  crucified  to  the 


7G6  60D   A    BBLIBVBR'S  GLORY.  [LXXIII. 

MTorld.'^  What  say  you  to  that  now?  do  not  talk  of  God's  beini: 
your  glory,  if  you  do  not  love  bis  cross.  If  God  is  our  glory,  we 
shall  glory  not  only  in  doing,  but  in  suffering  for  him ;  we  shaU 
glory  in  tribulation,  and  count  ourselves  most  highly  honoored 
when  we  are  called  to  suffer  most  for  his  great  name's  sake.  1 
might  enlarge,  but  you  may  easily  judge,  by  my  poor  feeble 
voice  this  last  week,  that  neither  my  strength  of  voice  or  body 
will  permit  me  to  be  long  to-night,  and  yet  I  will  venture  to  g:iTe 
you  your  last  parting  salutation;  and  though  I  have  been  dis- 
suaded from  getting  up  to  preach  this  night,  yet  I  thought,  as 
my  God  was  my  glory,  I  should  glory  in  preaching  till  I  died,  0 
that  God  may  be  all  our  glory !  All  our  own  glory  fades  awaj, 
there  is  nothing  will  be  valuable  at  the  great  day  but  this,  Tboo 
art  my  God,  and  thou  art  my  glory.  It  was  a  glorious  tan 
that  good  Mr.  Shepherd,  of  Bradford,  mentions  in  one  of  bis 
sermons,  where  he  represents  Jesus  Christ  as  coming  to  judg- 
ment, seated  upon  his  throne,  in  a  sermon  preached  before  some 
ministers.  Christ  calls  one  minister  to  him.  Pray  what  broo^bt 
you  into  the  church  ?  O,  says  be.  Lord,  there  was  a  living  in  tbe 
family,  and  I  was  presented  to  it  because  it  was  a  family  living: 
Stand  thou  by,  says  Christ.  A  second  comes.  What  didst  tboa 
enter  into  the  church  for  ?  O  Lord,  says  he,  I  had  a  fine  elocQ- 
tion,  I  had  pretty  parts,  and  I  went  into  the  church  to  sh^7  my 
oratory  and  my  parts :  Stand  thou  by,  thou  hast  thy  reward. 
A  third  was  called,  And  what  brought  you  into  tbe  chorch? 
Lord,  says  he,  thou  knowest  all  things,  thou  knowest  that  I  am 
a  poor  creature,  vile,  and  miserable,  and*unwortby,  and  helpless, 
but  I  appeal  to  thee  my  glory,  thou  sittest  upon  the  throne,  that 
thy  glory  and  the  good  of  souls  brought  me  there :  Christ  imme- 
diately says,  Make  room,  men,  make  room,  angels,  and  bring  op 
that  soul  to  sit  near  me  on  my  throne. — ^Thus  shall  it  be  done  to 
all  that  make  God  their  glory  here  below.  Glorify  God  on  earth, 
and  he  will  glorify  you  in  heaven.  ''  Come,  ye  blessed  of  my 
Father,  receive  the  kingdom  prepared  for  you  from  the  foooda- 
tion  of  the  world,"  shall  be  your  portion :  and  if  so.  Lord  (Sod 
Almighty  make  us  content  to  be  vilified  whilst  here,  make  us 
content  to  be  despised  while  below,  make  us  content  to  hare 
evil  things  spoken  of  us,  all  for  Christ's  sake,  yet  a  little  while, 
and  Christ  will  roll  away  the  stone:  and  tlie  more  we  are 
honoured  by  his  grace  to  sufier,  the  more  we  shall  be  honoured 
in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  O  that  thought !  O  that  blessed 
thought !  O  that  soul- transporting  thought !  it  is  enough  to  make 
us  leap  into  a  fiery  furnace ;  in  Uiis  spirit,  in  this  temper,  ma; 
God  put  every  one  of  us. 

If  there  be  any  of  you  that  have  not  yet  called  God  your  God, 
may  God  help  you  to  do  so  to-night.  When  I  was  reasoning 
within  myself,  whether  I  should  come  up,  or  whether  it  was  my 
duty  or  not,  I  could  not  help  thinking,  who  knows  but  God  will 
bless  a  poor  feeble  worm  to-night?  I  remember,  a  dear  friend 
sent  me  word  after  I  was  gone  to  Georgia,  "  Your  last  sermoa 
at  the  Tabernacle  was  blessed  to  a  particular  person  ;*'  I  heaid 


^LXXIII.]  GOD   A   BBLI£VER'S   GLORY.  7(St 

from  that  person  to-day :  and  who  knows  bnt  some  may  come 
to-day^  and  say,  I  will  go  and  bear  what  the  babbler  has  to 
say  ?  Who  knows  but  curiosity  may  be  overruled  for  good  ? 
Who  knows  but  those  that  have  served  the  lust  of  the  flesh  and 
the  pride  of  life  for  their  god,  may  now  take  the  Lord  to  be  their 
God  ?  O  !  if  1  could  but  see  this,  I  think  I  could  drop  down 
dead  for  you. 

My  dear  Christians,  will  you  not  help  roe  to-night,  you  that 
can  go  and  call  God  your  Ood  ?  Go  and  beg  of  God  for  me,  pray 
to  heaven  for  me,  do  pray  for  those  that  are  in  the  gall  of  bitter- 
ness, that  have  no  God,  no  Christ,  to  go  to,  and  if  they  were  to 
die  to-night,  would  be  damned  for  ever.  O  poor  sinner, 
where  is  your  glory  then  ?  Where  is  your  purple  and  fine  linen 
then?  Your  purple  robes  will  be  turned  into  purple  fire,  and 
instead  of  calling  God  your  God,  will  be  damned  with  the  devil: 

0  think  of  your  danger !  **  O  earth,  earth,  earth,  hear  the  word 
of  the  Lord !" 

If  you  never  were  awakened  before,  may  the  arrows  of  God, 
steeped  in  the  blood  of  Je'sns  Christ,  reach  your  hearts  now ! 
Think  how  you  live  at  enmity  with  God/  think  of  yoar  danger 
every  day  and  every  hour,  your  danger  of  dropping  into  hell ; 
think  how  your  friends  in  glory  wUl  leave  you ;  and  may  this 
consideration,  under  the  influences  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  excite 
you  to  choose  God  for  your  God !  Though  the  sun  is  going 
down,  though  the  shadow  of  the  evening  is  coming  on,  God  is 
willing,  O  man,  God  is  willing,  O  woman,  to  be  a  sinner's  God, 
he  has  found  out  a  way  whereby  he^  can  be  reconciled  to  you. 

1  remember,  when  I  saw  a  nobleman  condemned  to  be  hanged, 
the  lord  high  steward  told  him,  that  however  he  was  obliged 
to  pass  sentence  on  him,  and  did  not  know  that  justice  would  be 
satisfied  but  by  the  execution  of  the  law  in  this  world,  yet  there 
might  be  a  way  whereby  justice  might  be  satisfied  and  mercy 
take  place  in  another :  when  I  heard  his  lordship  speak,  I  wished 
that  he  had  not  only  said,  there  might  be  a  way,  but  that  he  had 
found  out  the  way  wherein  God  could  be  jiist,  and  yet  a  poor 
murderer  coming  to  Jesus  Christ  should  be  pardoned. 

You  that  can  call  God  yours,  God  help  you  from  this  moment 
to  glorify  him  more  and  more :  and  if  God  be  your  God  and  your 
glory,  I  am  persuaded,  if  the  love  of  God  abounds  in  your  hearts, 
you  will  be  willing,  on  every  occasion,  to  do  every  thing  to  pro- 
mote his  honour  and  glory,  and  therefore  you  will  be  willing  at 
all  times  to  assist  and  help,  as  far  as  lies  in  your  power,  to  keep 
up  places  of  worship,  to  promote  his  glory  in  the  salvation  and 
conversion  of  sinners ;  and  I  mention  this  because  there  is  to  be 
a  collection  this  night :  I  would  have  chosen,  if  possible,  to  have 
evaded  this  point,  but  as  this  Tabernacle  has  been  repaired, 
and  as  the  expense  is  pretty  large,  and  as  I  would  choose  to 
leave  every  thing  unencumbered,  I  told  my  friends,  I  would 
undertake  to  make  a  collection,  that  every  thing  might  be  ledt 
quite  clear :  remember,  it  is  not  for  me,  but  for  yourselves ;  I 
told  you  on  Wednesday  how  matters  were ;  I  am  now  going  a 


768  OOD  A   B^LIBVBR'S  GLORY.  [l^XXIlL 

thirteenth  time  over  the  water  on  my  own  expense,  and  you 
shall  know  at  the  great  day,  what  little,  very  little  assistance  I 
have  had  from  tfa^se  who  owed,  under  God,  tbeir  soals  to  my 
being  here :  but  this  is  for  the  place  where  you  are  to  meet,  and 
where  I  hope  God  will  meet  you,  when  I  am  tossing  on  the  wa- 
ter, when  I  am  in  a  foreign  clime.  I  think  I  can  say,  thy  glory, 
O  God,  calls  me  away  ;  and  as  I  am  going  towards  sixty  years 
of  age,  I  shall  make  what  despatch  I  can ;  and  I  hope,  if  I  am 
spared  to  come  back,  that  I  shall  hear  that  some  of  you  arc 
gone  to  heaven,  or  are  nearer  heaven  than  yon  were.  I  find 
there  is  near  £70  arrears ;  I  hope  you  will  not  run  away ;  if  you 
can  say  God  is  my  glory,  you  will  not  push  one  upon  another, 
as  though  you  would  lose  yourselves  in  the  crowd,  and  say  no 
body  sees  me;  but  does  not  God  Almighty  see  you?  I  hope 
you  will  be  ready  to  communicate,  and  when  I  am  gone,  that 
God  will  be  with  you — as  many  of  you  will  not  hear  me  on  Wed- 
nesday morning.  O  may  this  be  your  prayer,  O  for  Jesus 
Christ's  sake,  in  whose  name  I  preach,  in  whose  strength  I 
desire  to  come  up,  and  for  whose  honour  I  desire  to  be  spent, 
O  do  put  up  a  word  for  me,  it  will  not  cost  you  mach  time, 
it  will  not  keep  you  a  moment  from  your  business ;  O  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  thou  art  his  Grod  !  and.  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  let 
him  be  thy  glory! — If  I  die  in  the  waters,  I  shall  go  by  water 
to  heaven;  if  I  land  at  the  Orphan-house,  I  hope  it  will 
be  a  means  to  settle  a  foundation  for  ten  thousand  persons 
to  be  instructed ;  and  if  I  go  by  the  continent,  as  I  intend  to 
do,  I  hope  God  will  enable  me  to  preach  Christ ;  and  if  I  re- 
turn again,  my  life  will  be  devoted  to  your  service.  You  most 
excuse  me,  I  cannot  say  much  more, — affection  works ;  and  1 
could  heartily  wish,  and  beg  it  as  a  favour,  when  I  come  to  leaTO 
you,  that  you  will  excuse  me  from  a  particular  parting  witk 
you ;  take  my  public  farewell :  I  will  pray  for  you  when  in  the 
cabin,  I  will  pray  for  you  when  storms  and  tempests  are  about 
me ;  and  this  shall  be  my  prayer  for  the  dear  people  of  the  Ta- 
bernacle, for  the  dear  people  of  the  Chapel,  for  the  dear  people 
of  London,  O  God,  be  thou  their  God !  and  grant  that  their  God 
may  be  their  glory.    Even  so.  Lord  Jesus !    Amen. 


Lxxiv.}  Jacob's  ladder.  _  TCS^ 

SERMON  LXXIV. 

JACOB'^  ladder. — A  FAREWELL  SERMON. 

And  he  dreamed,  and  behold  a  ladder  set  upon  the  earth,  and  the 
top  of  it  reached  to  heaven :  and  behold,  the  angels  of  God 
ascending  and  descending  on  it.  And  behold,  the  Lord  stood 
above  it,  and  said,  I  am  the  Lord  God  of  Abraham  thy  father, 
and  the  Crod  of  Isaac :  the  land  whereon  thou  liest,  to  thee 
will  I  give  it,  and  to  thy  seed.  And  thy  seed  shall  be  as  the 
dust  of  the  earth  ;  and  thou  shalt  spread  abroad  to  the  west, 
and  to  the  east,  and  to  the  north,  and  to  the  south  :  and  in  thee, 
and  in  thy  seed,  shall  all  the  families  of  the  earth  be  blessed. 
And  behold,  I  am  with  thee,  and  will  keep  thee  in  all  places 
whither  thou  goest,  and  will  bring  tliee  again  into  this  land  : 
for  I  will  not  leave  thee,  until  I  have  done  that  which  J  have 
spoken  to  thee  of — Genesis  xxviii.  12,  &c. 

The  wise  man  observes^  that  '^  in  the  multitude  of  dreams  tiiere 
are  many  vanities/'  being  often  the  effects  of  a  peculiar  disorder 
of  body,  or  owing  to  some  disturbance  of  the  mind.  They  whosel 
nervous  system  has  been  long  relaxed,  who  baye  had  severe  domesr 
tic  trials,  or  have  been  greatly  affected  by  extraordinary  occnrf 
rences,  know  this  to  be  true  by  their  own  experience ;  but  how'^ 
ever  this  may  be,  there  have  been,  and  possibly  may  be  still, 
dreams  that  have  no  manner  of  dependence  on  the  indisposition 
of  the  body,  or  other  natural  cause,  but  seem  to  bring  a  divine 
sanction  with  them,  and  make  peculiar  impressions  on  the  p^rty, 
though  this  was  more  iVequent  before  the  canon  of  scripture  wa^ 
closed,  than  now.  God  spake  to  his  people  in  a  dream,  in  a 
Tision  of  the'  night ;  witness  the  subject  of  our  present  medita- 
tion, a  dream  of  the  patriarch  Jacob's,  when  going  forth  as  a 
poor  pilgrim  with  a  staff  in  his  hand,  from  his  father's  bouse^ 
deprived  of  his  mother*s  company  and  instruction,  persecuted 
by  an  elder  brother,  without  attendants  or  necessaries,  only 
leaning  on  an  invisible  power.  I  need  not  inform  you  in  how 
extraordinary  a  way  he  got  the  blessing,  which  provoked  his 
brother  to  such  a  degree,  as  determined  him  to  be  the  death  of 
Jacob,  as  soon  as  ever  his  aged  father  dropped :  to  what  a 
height  did  this  wicked  man's  envy  rise  when  he  said,  "The  days 
of  mourning  for  my  father  will  soon  come  ;*'  and  what  then?  Why, 
though  I  have  some  compassion  for  the  old  man,  and  therefore 
will  not  lay  violent  hands  upon  my  brother  while  my  father  is 
alive,  yet  I  am  resolved  to  kill  him  before  my  father  is  cold  in 
his  grave.  This  is  the  very  spirit  of  Cain,  who  talked  to  bis 
brother,  and  then  slew  him :  this  coming  to  the  ears  of  his  mo* 
tber,  she  tells  the  good  old  patriarch  her  husband,  who,  loving 
peace  and  quietness,  takes  the  good  advice  of  the  weaker  vessel, 
and  orders  Jacob  to  go  to  his  mother's  brother,  Laban,  and  stay 
a  little  while  out  of  Esau's  sight,  (perhaps  out  of  sight,  out  of 
mind,)  and  by  and  by  probably,  said  he,  thou  mayest  conic  to 
thy  father  and  mother  again  in  peace  and  safety.  Jacob,  though 
♦  3  b 


770  Jacob's  ladder.  [lxxiv. 

sare  of  the  blessing  in  the  end^  by  his  father's  confirmation  of 
it,  yet  prudently  makes  use  of  proper  means ;    therefore  be 
obeyed  his  parents :   and  woe,  woe  be  to  those  i;?ho  think  a 
parent's  blessing  not  worth  their  asking  for!*  Having  had  his 
mother's  blessing,  as  well  as  his  father's,  without  saying,  I  will 
try  it  out  with  my  brother,  I  will  let  him  know  that  I  am  not 
afraid  of  him,  he  views  it  as  the  call  of  Grod,  and,  like  an  honest, 
simple  pilgrim,  went  out  from  Beersheba  towards  Et^ran.    Was 
it  not  a  little  unkind  in  his  parents  not  to  furnish  him  with  some 
necessaries  and  conveniencies  ?    When  the  servant  was  sent  to 
fetch  a  wife  for  Isaac,  he  had  a  great  deal  of  attendance,  wby 
should  not  Jacob  have  it  now  ?  his  father  might  have  sent  him 
away  with  great  parade ;  but  I  am  apt  to  believe  this  did  not 
suit  Jacob's  real,  pilgrim  spirit :  he  was  a  plain  man,  and  dwelt 
in  tents,  when,  perhaps,  he  might  have  dwelt  under  cedar  roofs; 
he  chose  a  pilgrim's  life,  and  prudence  directed  him  to  go  thus 
in  a  private  manner,  to  prevent  increasing  Esau's  envy,  and 
giving  the  fatal  blow. 

Methinks  I  see  the  young  pilgrim  weeping  when  he  Jock  his 
leave  of  his  father  and  mother ;  he  went  on  foot,  and  they  that  are 
acquainted  with  the  geography  of  the  place,  say,  that  the  first 
day  of  his  journey  he  walked  not  less  than  forty  English  miles : 
what  exercise  must  he  have  had  all  that  way !  no  wonder,  there- 
fore^ that  by  the  time  the  sun  was  going  down,  poor  Jacob  felt 
himself  very  weary,  for  we  are  told,  ver.  11.  **  that  he  lighted  on 
a  certain  place,  and  tarried  there  all  night,  because  the  sun  was 
set."  There  is  a  particular  emphasis  to  be  put  upon  this  term, 
'^a  certain  place;"  he  saw  the  sun  going  down,  he  was  a 
stranger  in  a  strange  land. — You  that  are  bom  in  England  can 
have  very  little  idea  of  it,  but  persons  that  travel  in  the  Ameri- 
can woods  can  form  a  more  proper  idea,  for  you  may  there 
travel  a  hundred  and  a  thousand  miles,  and  go  through  one  con- 
tinued  tract  of  tall  green  trees,  like  the  tall  cedars  of  Lebanon; 
and  the  gentlemen  of  America,  from  one  end  to  the  other,  are  of 
such  an  hospitable  temper,  as  I  have  not  only  been  told,  bat 
have  found  among  them  upwards  of  thirty  years,  that  thej 
would  not  let  public  houses  be  licensed,  that  they  may  hare  aa 
opportunity  of  entertaining  English  friends :  may  God^  of  his 
infinite  mercy,  grant  this  union  may  never  be  dissolved! 

Well,  Jacob  got  to  a  certain  place,  and  perhaps  he  saw  a 
good  tree  that  would  serve  him  for  a  canopy ;  however,  this  we  are 
told,  he  tarried  there  all  night  because  the  sun  was  set,  and  be 
took  of  the  stones  of  that  place,  and  put  them  for  his  pillow,  and 
laid  down  in  that  place  to  sleep ;  hard  lodgings  for  him  wbo 
was  used  to  lie  otherwise  at  home !  I  do  not  hear  him  say,  1 
wish  I  were  got  back  to  my  mother  again,  I  wish  I  had  not  set 
out ;  but  upon  the  hard  ground  and  hard  pillow  he  lies  doTin; 
I  believe  never  poor  man  slept  sweeter  in  his  life,  for  it  is  cer- 
tainly sweet  sleep  when  God  is  near  us ;  he  did  not  know  but 
bis  brother  might  follow  and  kill  him  while  he  was  asleep,  or 
that  the  wild  beasts  might  devour  him ;  (inAmerica,  when  tbtj 


I.XXIV.]  JACOB'S    LADLBR-  771 

sleep  in  the  woods,  and  I  expect  to  have  some  such  sleeping 
times  in  them  before  a  twelvemonth  is  over  ;  we  are  obliged  to 
make  a  fire  to  keep  the  beasts  from  us :  I  have  often  said  then, 
and  I  hope  I  shall  never  forget  it,  when  I  rise  in  the  morning, 
ibis  fire  in  the  woods^  that  keeps  the  wild  beasts  from  hurting  us, 
is  like  the  fire  of  God's  love,  that  keeps  the  devil  from  hurting 
us  :)  thus  weary  and  solitary  befalls  asleep,  and  sweetly  dreams, 
**  and  behold :"  I  do  not  remember  many  passages  of  Scripture 
where  the  word  ^'behold" is  repeated  so  many  times  in  so  short 
a  space  as  in  the  passage  before  us ;  doubtless,  the  Lord  would 
have  us  particularly  take  notice  of  it,  even  us  upon  whom  the 
ends  of  the  world  are  come:  Behold,  *'  a  ladder  set  upon  the 
earth,  and  the  top  reached  to  heaven ;  and  (behold)  the  angels 
of  God  ascending  and  descending  upon  it;  and  (behold)  the 
Lord  stood  above  it;"  so  here  are  three  "  beholds"  in  a  very  few 
lines.  Was  there  any  thing  very  extraordinary  in  that?  per- 
haps the  Deists  would  say,  your  patriarch  was  tired,  and 
dreamed  among  other  things  of  a  ladder:  Yes,  he  did,  but  this 
dream  was  of  God ;  and  how  kind  was  he  to  meet  him  at  the 
end  of  the  first  day's  journey,  to  strengthen  and  animate  him  to 
go  forward  in  this  lonesome  pilgrimage  ! 

'  This  ladder  is  reckoned  by  some  to  denote  the  providence  of 
God  :   it  was  let  down  as  it  were  from  heaven,  particularly  at 
this  time,  to  poor  Jacob,  that  he  might  know  that,  however  he 
was  become  a  pilgrim,  and  left  his  all,  all  for  God's  glory,  that 
God  would  take  care  for  his  comfort,  and  give  his  angels  charge 
over  him,  to  keep  him  in  all  his  ways,  which  was  denoted  by 
the  angels  ascending  and  descending  upon  the  ladder.     Some 
think  that  particular  saints  and  countries  have  particular  guard- 
ian angels,  and  therefore  that  the  angels  that  ascended  were  those 
that  had  the  particular  charge  of  that  place,  so  far  as  Jacob  had 
come ;   that  the  angels  that  descended  were  another  set  of  an- 
gels, sent  down  from  heaven  to  guard  him  in  his  future  journey ; 
Ferbaps  this  is  more  a  fancy,  than  the  word  of  (Jod.     However, 
very  much  like  the  observation  of  good  Mr.  Burkitt,  "  Why 
should  we  dispute  whether  every  individual  believer  has  got  a 
particular  angel,  when   there  is  not  one  believer  but  has  got 
guards  of  angels  to  attend  him,"  which  are  a  great  deal  better 
than  a  great  many  servants,  that  prove  our  plagues,  and,  instead 
of  waiting  upon  us,  make  us  wait  upon  them. 
-    But,  my  dear  hearers,  I  do  not  know  one  spiritual  commenta- 
tor, but  agrees  that  this  ladder  was  a  type  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Clirist ;  and  that  as  Jacob  was  now  banished  from  his  father's 
bouse,  and  while  sleeping  upon  a  hard,  cold  stone,  God  was 
pleased  not  only  to  give  him  an  assurance  that  he  would  be 
with  him  in  the  way,  but  gave  him  a  blessed  sight  of  Jesus 
Christ,  in  whom  Jacob  believed. 

.  A  ladder,  you  know,  is  something  by  which  we  cUmb  from  one 
place  to  another ;  hence,  in  condescension  to  our  weak  capaci- 
ties, God  ordered  a  ladder  to  be  let  down,  to  shew  us  that  Christ 
is  the  way  to  heaven ;  "I  am  the  way,  the  truth,  and  the  life;  I 

3b2 


772  JAOOB'8  Li^DDBR.^  [I.XXIT. 

am  the  door,  says  he  ;  neither  is  there  salvatkm  in  any  others 
for  there  is  no  other  name  given  under  hearen  whereby  we  most 
be  sayed.  The  Deists,  who  own  a  God,  bnt  deny  his  Soci,  dart 
go  to  a  God  out  of  Christ ;  but  Jacob  is  here  tan^t  better ;  bow 
soon  does  God  reyeal  the  gospel  unto  him ;  bete  is  a  ladder,  by 
which  God  preaches  to  us;  if  you  have  a  mind  to  climb  from 
earth  to  heaven,  you  must  get  up  by  the  Son  of  God;  no  om 
ever  pointed  out  a  proper  way  to  heaven  ibr  us,  but  bimseif. 
When  Adam  and  Eve  fell  from  God,  a  flaming  sword  tamed 
every  way  to  keep  them  from  tbe  tree  of  life ;  but  Jesus  akmeis 
a  new  and  living  way,  not  only  to  the  holy  of  holies  below, 
but  into  the  immediate  presence  of  God ;  and  that  we  might 
know  that  he  was  a  proper  Saviour,  the  top  of  it  reached  to  hea« 
yen ;  if  it  had  stopped  short,  Jacob  might  have  said,  ah !  the  lad- 
der is  within  a  little  way  of  heaven,  but  does  not  quite  reach  it; 
if  I  climb  to  the  top,  I  shall  not  get  there,  after  all ;  bnt  the  top 
reached  to  heaven,  to  point  out  the  divinity  and  exaltation  dT 
the  Son  of  God ;  such  a  Saviour  became  us,  who  was  God,  God 
over  all,  blessed  for  evermore  r  and  therefore  the  Arian  scheme 
is  most  uncomfortable  and  destructive ;  to  talk  of  Christ  as  a 
Saviour  that  is  not  God,  is  no  Christ  at  all.  1  would  tarn  Deist 
to-morrow,  if  I  did  not  know  that  Christ  was  God  :  **  bnt  cursed 
is  the  man  that  builds  his  faith  upon  an  arm  of  flesh.''  If  Christ 
be  God,  the  Arians  and  Socinians,  by  their  own  principles,  are 
undone  for  ever ;  but  Jesus  Christ  is  very  God  and  very  mao, 
begotten  (and  not  made)  of  the  Father :  God,  of  his  infinite  mer- 
cy, write  his  divinity  deep  in  our  hearts ! 

The  bottom  of  the  ladder  reached  to  the  earth ;  this  points  out 
to  us  the  humiliation  of  the  blessed  Lord :  for  us  men  be  came 
down  from  heaven ;  we  pray  to,  and  for,  a  descending  God.  All 
the  sufferings  which  our  Lord  voluntarily  exposed  himself  to, 
were,  that  he  might  become  a  ladder  for  you  and  I  to  climb  sp 
to  heaven  by.  Come  down  from  the  cross,  say  they,  and  we  wiU 
believe  thee ;  if  he  had,  what  would  have  become  of  us  ?  Did 
they  believe  on  him  when  he  was  dead,  buried,  and  risen  again  t 
No.  Some  people  say,  if  Christ  were  here,  O  dear,  we  should 
love  him :  just  as  much  as  they  did  when  they  turned  him  out  of 
doors,  when  he  came  down  before.  If  he  had  come  down  firom 
the  cross,  they  would  have  hung  him  up  ag^n :  O  that  you  and 
I  might  make  his  cross  a  step  to  glory ! 

As  the  top  of  the  ladder  pointed  out  his  exaltation,  the  bot- 
tom  his  humiliation,  the  two  sides  of  the  ladder  being  joined  to- 
gether, point  out  the  union  of  the  Deity  and  manhood  in  the  per- 
son of  Christ;  and  that  as  this  ladder  had  steps  to  it,  so.  Mess- 
ed be  Grod,  Jesus  Christ  has  found  out  a  way  whereby  we  maj 
go,  step  after  step,  to  glory.  The  first  step  is  the  righteousness  of 
Christ,  the  active  and  passive  obedience  of  the  Redeemer;  ao 
setting  one  foot  upon  this  ladder  without  coming  out  of  our- 
selves,  and  relying  wholly  upon  a  better  righteousness  than  our 
own.  Again,  all  the  other  steps  are  the  graces  of  the  blessed 
Spirit ;  therefore,  yon  need  not  be  afraid  of  our  destroying  in- 


.Lxxiv.j  Jacob's  ladder.  773 

.ward  holiness,  by  preaching  the  doctrine  of  the  imputation  of 
-Christ's  righteousness,  that  one  is  the  foundation,  the  other  the 
superstructure ;  to  talk  of  my  having  the  righteousness  of  Christ 
imputed  to  my  soul,  without  my  having  the  holiness  of  Christ 
imparted  to  it,  and  bringing  forth  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit  as  an 
evidence  of  it,  is  only  deceiving  ourselves.     I  would  never 

{reach  upon  imputed  righteousness,  without  speaking  of  inward 
oliness,  for  if  yon  do  not  take  a  great  deal  of  care,  you  will  un- 
awares, under  a  pretence  of  exalting  Christ,  run  into  Antino- 
mianism,  depths  that  Calvin  never  went  into ;  probably,  you 
will  imbitter  other  spirits  that  do  not  agree  with  you,  and  at  the 
same  time  hurt  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit :  may  God  give  you  clear 
heads,  and  at  the  same  time  warm  hearts. 

On  the  ladder,  Jacob  saw  the  angels  of  God  ascending  and 
descending;  what  is  that  for?  To  shew  that  they  are  minister- 
ing spirits,  sent  forth  to  minister  to  them  that  shall  be  heirs  of 
salvation ;  therefore  we  find  them  attending  upon  Christ.  We 
do  not  hear  much  of  them  after  the  canon  of  scripture  was 
closed,  but  as  soon  as  ever  Christ  was  bom,  the  angels  san^, 
till  then  we  never  hear  of  their  singing  below,  as  far  as  I  can 
judge,  since  the  creation ;  then  the  sons  of  God  shouted  for  joy ; 
but  when  Eve  reached  out  her  hand  to  pluck  the  fatal  apple,  and 
gave  to  Adam,  earth  groaned,  and  the  angels  hung,  as  it  were, 
their  harps  upon  the  willows;  but  when  Christ,  the  second 
Adam,  was  bom,  the  angels  sang  at  midnight,  **  Glory  to  God 
in  the  highest."  I  pray  to  God  we  may  all  die  singing  that  anthem, 
and  sing  it  to  all  eternity.  After  his  temptation,  they  came  and 
ministered  to  him,  as  some  think,  food  for  his  body,  and  wished 
tiimjoy  and  comfort  in  his  soul :  and  in  his  agonies  in  the  garden, 
an  angel  strengthened  him.  After  his  resurrection,  two  appeared 
again,  one  at  the  head  and  another  at  the  foot  of  his  sepulchre, 
to  let  those  that  looked  into  the  sepulchre  know,  that  they  would 
not  only  wait  upon  the  head,  but  the  foot ;  and  the  angels  are 
glad  to  wait  upon  the  meanest  of  the  children  of  God.  When 
our  Lord  departed,  a  cloud  received  him  out  of  their  sight,  which 
probably  was  a  cloud  of  angels :  having  led  his  disciples  out  of 
the  city,  he  blessed  them,  and  then  away  he  went  to  heaven ; 
may  that  blessing  rest  upon  you  and  your  children! 

This  intimates  that  God  makes  use  of  angels  to  attend  his 
people,  especially  when  they  are  departing  into  eternity :  per- 
haps, part  of  our  entertainment  in  heaven  will  be,  to  hear  the 
angels  declare  how  many  millions  of  times  they  have  assisted 
and  helped  us.  Our  Lord  says,  angels  do  there  behold  the  face 
of  the  Father  of  his  little  ones ;  and  therefore  I  love  to  talk  to 
the  lambs  of  the  flock,  and  why  should  I  not  talk  to  them  whom 
angels  think  it  their  honour  to  guard  ?  and  if  it  were  not  for  this, 
how  would  any  children  escape  the  dangers  they  are  exposed  to 
in  their  tetider  age?  It  is  owing  to  the  particular  providence  of 
God,  that  any  one  child  is  brought  to  manhood ;  therefore  I 
cannot  help  admiring  that  part  of  the  Litany,  in  which  we  pray, 
that  Oed  would  take  care  not  only  of  the  grown  people,  but  of 


*••»- 


777 

.igain  and  agaiu,  and 

,  but  the  consideration 

Do  pray  for  me,  ye 

us  a  parting  blessing. 

jur  foot  on  this  ladder ; 

a  ladder,  but  it  reaches 

J  down,  not  up :  the  bot* 

le  depths  of  the  damned, 

i  when  death  comes,  then 

•••  iu  down;  for  Gods  sake, 

,  climb,  climb,  dear  young 

y  night  at  the  Tabernacle, 

"^     *  «  rament ;  and  it  delighted  me 

<«i  men  at  the  table ;  God  add 

jmen,  put  your  feet  upon  this 

m  -n  from  heaven,  and  the  devil 

^«  say  you,  I  would  climb  up 

iUt  I  shall  be  laughed  at:  do 

.  it  being  laughed  at?  the  Lord 

o  heaven ;  come,  climb  till  you 

laughter.     O  trust  not  to  your 

lUd  good  resolutions. 

,  have  climbed  up  this  ladder,  at 

•h  you  joy,  God  be  praised  for 

,  God  be  praised  for  letting  down 

word  to  say  to  you,  for  Jesus 

oo,  climb  a  little  faster ;  take  care 

of  your  heels.     It  is  a  shame  the 

lb  faster;  you  may  talk  what  you 

ukewarmness  is  more  provoking  to 

nation.  We  cry  out  against  the  sins 

.ve  did  cry  out  more  of  the  sins  of 

a  out  of  my  mouth,  because  you  are 

and  if  any  of  you  say  you  cannot 

ue-footed,  look  to  Jesus  Christ,  my 

liction  shall  make  you  climb :  and  if 

>wn  the  ladder  again,  the  Lord  Jesus 

ss  of  preaching  to  help  you  up  again. 

,  I  shall  fall ;  here,  I  will  give  you  a 

it;  just  as  the  sailors  do  when  you  go 

own  a  rope,  so  God  lets  down  a  pro- 

I,  till  you  have  got  higher,  into  a  better 

)ut  his  hand  out  by  and  by,  when  you 

dcr,  to  receive  you  to  himself.     Blo5>>ed 

)e  and  believe  I  shall  meet  many  of  you 

jn,  it  is  time  for  mc  to  preach  my  own 

would  humbly  hope  that,  as  a  poor  sin- 

jlaim  for  what  God  promised  Jacob;  and 

11  assurance  of  faith  that  God  will  be  with 

,  for  the  thirteenth  time  to  cross  the  Atlan- 


774  JACOB'S   LADDER.  [LXXK. 

children  also :  God  take  care  of  yours  both  in  body  and  sou]. 
But  what  gave  the  greatest  comfort  to  Jacob  was,  that  the 
Lord  was  on  the  top  of  the  ladder^  which  I  do  not  know  whe- 
ther it  would  have  beenso^  if  Jacob  had  not  seen  God  there,  h 
comforts  me,  I  assure  you,  to  think,  that  whenever  God  shall 
call  for  me,  I  shall  be  carried  by  angels  into  Abraham's  bosom; 
and  I  have  often  thought  that  whenever  that  time  conies,  that 
blessed,  long  longed-for  moment  comes,  as  soon  as  ever  they 
have  called  upon  me,  my  first  question  will  be  to  them,  where 
is  my  dear  Master?  where  is  Jesus?  where  is  that  dear  Ema- 
uael,  who  has  loved  me  with  an  everlasting  love,  and  has  called 
me  by  his  grace,  and  have  sent  you  to  fetch  me  home  to  see  his 
face  ?  But  I  believe  you  and  1  shall  have  no  occasion  to  ask 
where  he  is,  for  he  will  me  to  meet  us,  he  will  stand  at  the  top 
of  his  ladder,  to  take  his  pilgrims  in ;  so  God  was  at  the  top  ot 
the  ladder,  pray  mind  that.  He  appears  not  sitting,  as  be  is 
often  represented  in  heaven,  but  standing :  as  much  as  to  say, 
here,  here,  Jacob,  thy  brother  wants  to  kill  thee  ;  here  then  art 
come  out  without  a  servant,  art  lying  upon  a  hard  bed,  but  here 
I  am  ready  in  order  to  preserve  thee ;  I  stand  above,  and  1  set 
thy  weariness,  I  see  the  fatigue  and  hardships  thou  hast  yet  to 
undergo,  though  thou  dost  not  see  it  thyself;  thon  hast  throvo 
thyself  upon  my  providence  and  protection,  and  I  will  give  tbfc 
the  word  of  a  God,  that  I  will  stand  by  thee ;  *^  the  Ix>rd  stood 
above  ;*'  if  he  had  said  nothing,  that  would  have  been  enough 
to  have  shewn  his  readiness  to  help. 

But  God  speaks,  behold:  well  might  this  be  ushered  in  witii 
the  word  behold;  a  ladder  set  on  the  earth,  and  behold  the  an- 
gels of  God  ascending  and  descending  on  it ;  and,  above  MM 
hold  God  speaking  from  it !  what  doth  he  say  1  "I  am  the  Lord  Gui 
of  Abraham  thy  father.    Oh !  happy  they  that  can  say,  the  Lord 
God  of  ray  father :  happy  you  that  have  got  fathers  and  motbens 
in  heaven.     I  remember,  about  twenty-five  years  ago,  as  I  wa? 
travelling  from  Bristol,  I  met  with  a  man  on  the  road,  and  beiii£ 
desirous  to  know  whether  he  was  serious  or  not,  I  began  to  pot 
in  a  word  for  Christ,  (and  God  forbid  I  should  travel  uith  aci 
body  a  quarter  of  an  hour  without  speaking  of  Christ  to  them.! 
he  told  me  what  a  wicked  creature  he  bad  been  ;  but,  sir,  S3\> 
he,  in  the  midst  of  my  wickedness,  people  used  to  tell  me,  v'i 
have  got  a  good  many  prayers  upon  the  file  for  you,  your  giidiy 
father  and  mother  have  prayed  very  often  for  yon  ;  and  it  v  j 
the  pleasure  of  God  he  was  wrought  upon,  and  brought  to  Chri>i. 
Lay  in  a  good  stock  for  your  children,  get  a  good  many  prayer> 
in  for  them,  they  )nay  be  answered  when  yon  are  dead  aixii 
gone.    **  1  am  the  God  of  Abrahan^  thy  father,"  not  thy  grafiti- 
father ;  to  put  in  him  in  mind  what  an  honour  God  would  ps^ 
upon  him,  to  make  him  as  it  were  the  father   of  the  churti- 
Though  you  have  many  instructors,  says  Panl,  you  have  bs^ 
one  father :  "  and  the  God  of  Isaac,  the  land  whereon  tint 
liest,  to  thee  will  I  give  it,  and  to  thy  seed."     Amazing!  am*** 
ing !  you  know  very  well,  when  persons  buy  or  come  to  tf 


Lxxiv.]  Jacob's  ladder.  775 

estate,  they  usually  take  possession  of  it  by  fiome  ceremony; 
such  as  receiving  or  taking  up  a  piece  of  dirt,  or  twig,  in  their 
hand,  as  a  sign  of  their  title.  Now,  says  God,  Poor  Jacob,  thou 
dost  little  think  that  this  very  spot  of  ground  that  thou  liest  on 
to-night,  cold  and  stiff,  I  intend  to  give  to  tfaee»  and  thy  poste- 
rity, for  an  inheritance.  O  my  brethren,  give  all  to  God,  and 
God  will  give  all  to  you :  who  would  of  thought  of  this  ?  pro- 
bably Jacob  did  not:  it  is  as  if  God  took  a  pleasure  in  seeing 
his  dear  children  lie  on  such  a  hard  ground:  if  he  had  been  on 
a  feather-bed,  he  might  not  have  had  such  a  vi^it :  thou  shalt 
have  now  a  God  to  lean  .upon,  "  to  thee  will  I  give  it,  and  to 
thy  seed,  which  shall  be  as  the  dust  of  the  earth,  and  thou  shalt 
spread  abroad  to  the  west,  and  to  the  east,  and  to  the  north,  and 
to  the  south  ;  and  in  thee,  and  in  thy  seed,  shall  all  the  families 
of  the  earth  be  blessed."  Thus  did  heaven  balance  the  loss  of 
the  comforts  of  his  father's  house,  by  the  discovery  of  his  and 
his  offspring's  prosperity,  by  an  interest  in  the  promised  seed 

My  particular  circumstances  call  me  to  observe,  and  I  believe 
God  has  done  it  on  purpose  to  encourage  me,  that  faith,  resting 
on  the  promise,  is  easily  resigned  to  the  loss  of  present  good^ 
whereas  worldly  hearts  consider  prosperity  as  a  portion,  they 
do  not  care  if  the  devil  take  them  hereafter,  so  they  have  it 
now ;  and  that  makes  carnal  people  wonder  bow  we  can  give 
up  things  in  this  world,  for  the  sake  of  those  not  yet  bom ;  but 
it  is  to  glorify  God,  and  lay  a  foundation  for  others'  happiness. 
Here  God  gives  Jacob  to  know,  that  hereafter  his  seed  should 
spread  on  the  east,  west,  north,  and  south,  his  branches  should 
multiply,  and  at  last  from  his  loins  should  Jesus  Christ  come ; 
what  for?  "  In  whom  all  the  families  of  the  earth  should  be 
blessed  :"  God  Almighty  grant  we  may  be  blessed  in  him ! 

Then  if  Jacob  should  say  in  his  heart,  hast  thou  no  promise 
for  me?  here  is  another  behold  comes  in;  '^  Behold,  I  am  with 
^  thee,  and  will  keep  thee  in  all  places  whither  thou  goest."  What 
a  word  is  this!  thou  hast  nobody  with  thee,  nothing  but  a  staff; 
(he  could  not  carry  much  upon  his  back,  like  a  poor  soldier  with 
a  knapsack  behind,  and  a  little  bread  in  his  pocket,)  well,  saith 
God,  I  do  not  despise  thee  because  thou  art  destitute,  but  I 
love  thee  the  better  for  it ;  thy  brother  Esau  longs  to  kill  thee, 
but  if  Esau  stabs  thee,  he  shall  stab  thy  God  first ;  1  will  not 
only  be  with  thee  now,  but  I  will  watch  every  step  thou  takest, 
**  I  will  be  with  thee  in  all  places  whither  thou  goest;"  as  much 
as  to  say,  Jacob,  thou  art  a  pilgrim,  thy  life  is  to  be  a  moving 
life,  I  do  not  intend  thou  shalt  settle  and  keep  in  one  place ;  thy 
life  is  to  be  a  life  of  changes,  thou  art  to  move  from  place  to 
place,  but  **  I  will  be  with  thee  in  all  places  whither  thou 
goest,"  and  thereby  it  shall  be  known  that  1  am  Jacob's  God, 
and  also  by  my  bringing  thee  again  into  this  land.  H«  not  only 
assures  him  of  a  successful  journey,  whither  he  was  now' going, 
but  promises  to  bring  him  back  once  more  to  see  his  dear  father 
and  mother,  and  relations,  again :  **  I  will  bring  thee  back  to 
this  land ;"  and  to  confirm  bid  faith  and  hope,  the  great  God 


Vf6  JACCfh*8  lAddar.  iLXXt^. 

jkAda,  **  I  will  not  leaVe  th«e  till  I  ImTe  done  that  I  have  spd^eii 
to  tbee  of;''  that  is,  all  the  good  he  had  jast  now  pronuMd. 
(Some  people  promiae,  bat  they  cannot  do  ft  to-day,  and  they 
irill  not  do  it  to-morrow.  I  haye  known  the  world,  and  haTe 
rnn^r  the  ebanges  of  it  ever  since  I  have  been  here ;  bot,  blessed 
be  God  9  an  uocbangeable  Christ  having  loved  his  own,  be  loved 
them  to  the  end  ;  ''  I  will  not  leave  you  till  I  have  performed 
all  things  I  have  promised  yon  t"  may  this  promise  come  upoa 
you  and  your  children,  and  all  that  Qod  shall  calL 

Thus  spake  the  great  Jehovah  to  poor  Jacob,  just  setting  out 
to  a  strange  land,  knowing  not  whither  be  went ;  but  now  God 
speaks  not  only  to  Jacob,  but  he  speaks  to  you ;  and,  blessed 
be  the  living  God,  he  speaks  to  me  also,  less  than  the  least  of  all; 
«nd  as  mv  design  is  (though  I  cannot  tell  but  this  may  be  the  last 
opportunity)  to  speak  something  to  yoti  about  my  departure; 
yet,  brethren,  my  grand  design  in  preaching  to  you  is,  to  recom- 
mend the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  your  sotils ;  and  before  I  go,  to 
make  a  particular,  personal  application.  Give  me  leave,  there- 
fore, to  ask  you,  it  may  be  the  last  time  I  may  ask  many  of 
you.  Whether  you  have  ever  set  your  foot  upon  this  blessed 
ladder,  the  Son  of  God  ?  I  ask  you  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ,  in  the  name  of  the  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost, 
did  you  ever  set  your  foot,  I  say,  upon  this  ladder  ?  that  is,  did 
you  ever  yet  believe  on  Jesus  Christ,  and  come  to  him  as  poor 
lost  sinners^  relying  upon  no  other  righteousness  than  that  of 
the  Son  of  God  ?  Perhaps,  if  yon  were  to  speak,  some  of  yon 
would  say,  away  with  your  ladder ;  and  what  will  you  do  then  ? 
Why,  say  you,  I  will  climb  to  heaven  without  it ;  what  ladder 
will  you  climb  upon  ?  O,  I  think  to  go  to  heaven  because  I 
have  been  baptized :  that  ladder  will  break  under  you ;  what,  a 
ladder  made  of  water,  what  are  you  dreaming  of!  No ;  O,  I 
think  1  shall  go  to  heaven,  because  1  have  done  nobodv  any 
harm :  what,  a  ladder  made  of  negative  goodness !  No  ;  I  think 
to  go,  you  will  say,  by  good  works :  a  ladder  made  of  good 
works,  that  has  not  Christ  for  its  bottom,  what  is  that?  I  think, 
say  you,  to  go  to  heaven  by  my  prayers  and  fastings :  all  these 
are  good  in  their  place ;  but,  my  brethren,  do  not  think  to  climb 
to  heaven  by  these  ropes  of  sand.  If  you  never  before  set  your 
foot  on  Christ,  this  blessed  ladder,  God  grant  this  may  be*  the 
happy  time. 

I  have  been  praying  before  most  of  you  were  up,  I  belicTe, 
that  God  would  give  me  a  parting  blessing.  I  remember,  sooq 
after  I  left  England  last,  that  a  dear  Christian  friend  told  me, 
that  there  was  one  woman,  who  came  only  out  of  curiosity,  that 
dated  her  conversion  from  hearing  my  last  sermon  ;  and,  I  blesi 
God,  I  never  once  left  England,  but  some  poor  soul  has  dated 
their  conversion  from  my  last  sermon.  When  I  put  on  my  sur- 
plice, to  come  out  to  read  the  second  service,  I  thought  it  was 
just  like  a  person's  being  decently  dressed  to  go  out  to  be  exe- 
cuted ;  I  would  rather,  was  it  the  will  of  God,  it  should  be  so, 
than  to  feel  what  I  do  in  parting  from  you,  then  death  would  put 


IjXxiv.]  Jacob's  ladder.  777 

an  end  to  all ;  but  I  am  to  be  executed  again  and  again^  and 
nothing  will  support  me  under  the  tortare,  but  the  consideration 
of  Grod's  blessing  me  to  some  poor  souls.  Do  pray  for  me»  ye 
children  of  God,  that  God  would  give  us  a  parting  blessing. 
God  help  yoUy  young  people,  to  put  your  foot  on  this  ladder ; 
do  not  climb  wrong :  the  devil  has  got  a  ladder,  but  it  reaches 
«4lown  to  hell ;  all  the  devil's  children  go  down,  not  up :  the  bot- 
tom of  the  devil's  ladder  reaches  to  the  depths  of  the  damned^ 
the  top  of  it  reaches  to  the  earth;  and  when  death  comes,  then 
up  comes  the  devil's  ladder,  to  Jet  yon  down;  for  God  s  sake, 
come  away  from  the  devil's  ladder;  climb,  climb,  dear  young 
.men.  Q  it  delighted  me  on  Friday  night  at  the  Tabernacle^ 
when  we  had  a  melting,  parting  sacrament ;  and  it  delighted  me 
this  morning  to  see  so  many  young  men  at  the  table ;  God  add 
to  the  blessed  number !  Young  women,  put  your  feet  upon  this 
ladder ;  God  lets  one  ladder  down  from  heaven,  and  the  devil 
brings  another  up  from  hell.  O,  say  you,  I  would  climb  up 
God  s  ladder,  I  think  it  is  right,  but  I  shall  be  laughed  at :  do 
you  think  to  go  to  heaven  without  being  laughed  at  ?  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  help  you  to  climb  to  heaven ;  come,  climb  till  you 
get  out  of  the  hearing  of  their  laughter.  O  trust  not  to  your 
own  righteousness,  your  vows,  and  good  resolutions. 

Some  of  you,  blessed  be  God,  have  climbed  up  this  ladder,  ajt 
least  are  cUmbing ;  well,  I  wish  you  joy,  God  be  praised  for 
setting  your  feet  on  this  ladder,  God  be  praised  for  letting  down 
this  ladder ;  I  have  only  one  word  to  say  to  you,  for  Jesus 
Christ's  sake,  and  your  own  too,  climb  a  little  faster ;  take  care 
the  world  does  not  get  hold  of  your  heels.  It  is  a  shame  the 
children  of  God  do  not  climb  faster;  you  may  talk  what  yoa 
please,  but  God's  people's  lukewarmness  is  more  provoking  to 
faim  than  all  the  sins  of  the  nation.  We  cry  out  against  the  sins 
of  the  land,  would  to  God  we  did  cry  out  more  of  the  sins  of 
the  saints ;  ^'  I  will  spew  you  out  of  my  mouth,  because  you  are 
lukewarm,"  says  Christ;  and  if  any  of  you  say  you  cannot 
climb  because  you  are  lame-footed,  look  to  Jesus  Christ,  my 
dear  friends,  and  your  affliction  shall  make  you  climb :  and  tf 
any  of  you  are  coming  down  the  ladder  again,  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  bless  the  foolishness  of  preaching  to  help  you  up  again. 
O,  say  you,  I  am  giddy,  I  shall  fall ;  here,  I  will  give  you  a 
rope,  be  sure  lay  hold  of  it;  just  as  the  sailors  do  when  you  go 
al>oard  a  ship,  they  let  down  a  rope,  so  God  lets  down  a  pro- 
mise :  climb,  climb,  then,  till  you  have  got  higher,  into  a  better 
climate,  and  God  shall  put  his  hand  out  by  and  by,  when  yoa 
get  to  the  top  of  the  ladder,  to  receive  you  to  himself.  Blessed 
be  the  living  God,  I  hope  and  believe  I  shall  meet  many  of  you 
by  and  by. 

And  now,  my  brethren,  it  is  time  for  me  to  preach  my  own 
funeral  sermon ;  and  I  would  humbly  hope  that,  as  a  poor  sin- 
ner, I  may  put  in  my  claim  for  what  God  promised  Jacob;  and 
I  do  put  it  in,  with  full  assurance  of  faith  that  God  will  be  with 
me.    I  am  now  going  for  the  thirteenth  time  to  cross  the  Atlan- 


778  Jacob's  ladder.  [Lxxir. 

tic :  when  I  came  from  America  last,  I  took  my  leave  cf  all  the 
Continent,  from  the  one  end  of  the  provinces  to  the  other, 
except  some  places  which  we  had  not  then  taken  ;  I  took  my 
leave  for  life,  without  the  least  design  of  returning  ti)eit 
again,  my  health  was  so  bad ;  and  the  prospect  of  getting  the 
Orphan-house  into  other  hands  made  me  say,  when  I  first 
came  over,  I  have  no  other  river  to  go  over  than  the  river  Jor- 
dan. I  thought  then  of  retiring,  for  I  did  not  choose  to  appear 
when  my  nerves  were  so  relaxed,  that  I  could  not  serve  God  as 
I  could  wish  to  do ;  but  as  it  hath  pleased  God  to  restore  my 
health  much,  and  has  so  ordered  it  by  his  providence,  that  I 
intend  to  give  up  the  Orphan-house,  and  all  the  land  adjoining, 
for  a  public  college,  I  wished  to  have  had  a  public  sanction, 
but  his  grace  the  late  archbishop  of  Canterbury  put  a  stop  to  it; 
they  would  give  me  a  charter,  which  was  all  I  desired,  but  tbey 
insisted  upon,  at  least  his  grace  and  another  did,  that  I  should 
confine  it  totally  to  the  church  of  England,  and  that  no  extem- 
pore prayer  should  be  used  in  a  public  way  in  that  house, 
though  Dissenters,  and  all  sorts  of  people,  had  contributed  to 
it.  I  would  sooner  cut  my  head  off  than  betray  my  trust,  by 
confining  it  to  a  narrow  bottom ;  I  always  meant  it  should  be 
kept  upon  a  broad  bottom,  for  people  of  all  denominations,  tbat 
their  children  might  be  brought  up  in  the  fear  of  God.  By  this 
.means  the  Orphan-house  reverted  into  my  hands;  I  have  once 
more,  as  my  health  was  restored,  determined  to  pursue  the  plan 
I  had  fixed  on;  and,  through  the  tender  mercies  of  God,  Georgia, 
(which  about  thirty-two  years  ago  was  a  desolate  place,  and 
when  the  land,  as  it  was  given  me  by  the  house  of  com- 
mons, would  have  been  totally  deserted,  and  the  colony  have 
quite  ceased,  had  it  not  been  for  the  money  I  have  laid  out 
for  the  Orphan- house,  to  keep  the  poor  people  together,)  that 
colony  is  rising  to  a  most  amazing  height :  by  the  schemci 
now  going  on,  public  buildings  are  erecting.  I  had  news  last 
week  of  the  great  prosperity  of  the  negroes;  and  I  hope  by  the 
twenty-fifth  of  March,  which  is  the  day,  the  anniversary  day,  I 
laid  the  first  brick,  in  the  year  1739;  I  say,  I  hope  by  that  time 
all  things  will  be  finished,  and  a  blessed  provision  will  be  made 
for  orphans  and  poor  students  that  will  be  broaght  up  there;  it 
will  be  a  blessed  source  of  provision  for  the  children  of  God  iu 
another  part  of  the  world. 

This  is  the  grand  design  I  am  going  upon;  this  is  my 
visible  cause;  but  I  never  yet  went  to  them,  but  God  has 
been  pleased  to  bless  my  ministration  among  them ;  and 
therefore,  after  I  have  finished  the  Orphan-house  affair.  I  in- 
tend to  go  all  along  the  Continent  by  land,  (which  will  keep  me 
all  the  winter  and  spring,)  and  when  I  come  to  the  end  of  it, 
which  will  be  Canada  and  New  England,  then  I  hope  to  return 
again  to  this  place ;  for,  let  people  say  what  they  w^ill,  I  have 
not  so  much  as  a  single  thought  of  settling  abroad,  on  this  side 
ity ;  and  I  am  going  in  no  public  capacity,  I  shall  set  out 
r  pilgrim,  at  my  own  expense^  trusting  upon  God  to 


LXXIV.]  JACOB'S   LADDER.  779 

take  care  of  me^  and  to  bear  my  charges ;  and  I  call  God  to  wit* 
neas,  and  I  must  be  a  cursed  devil  and  hypocrite,  to  stand  here 
in  the  pulpit,  and  provoke  God  to  strike  me  dead  for  lying,  I 
never  had  the  love  of  the  world,  nor  ever  felt  it  one  quarter  of 
an  hour  in  my  heart,  since  I  was  twenty  years  old.  I  might 
have  been  rich :  but  though  the  Chapel  is  built,  and  I  have  a 
comfortable  room  to  lie  in,  I  assure  you  I  built  it  at  my  own  ex- 
pense, it  cost  nobody  but  myself  any  thing.  I  have  a  watch-coat 
made  me,  and*  in  that  I  shall  lie  every  night  on  the  ground,  and 
may  Jacob's  God  bless  me !  I  will  not  say  much  of  myself,  but 
livhen  I  have  been  preaching,  I  have  read  and  thought  of  those 
words  with  pleasure,  "  Surely  this  is  the  house  of  God.  And  I 
will  bring  thee  again  to  this  land."  Whether  that  will  be  my 
experience  or  not,  blessed  be  God,  I  have  a  better  land  in  view; 
and,  my  dear  brethren,  I  do  not  look  upon  myself  at  home  till  I 
land  in  my  Father's  kingdom ;  and  if  I  am  to  die  in  the  way,  if 
I  am  to  die  in  the  ship,  it  comforts  roe  that  I  know  I  am  as  clear 
as  the  sun,  that  I  go  by  the  will  of  God :  and  though  people  may 
say.  Will  you  leave  the  world  !  Will  you  leave  the  Chapel  ?  O, 
I  am  astonished  that  we  cannot  leave  every  thing  for  Christ ; 
my  greatei^t  trial  is,  to  part  with  those  who  are  as  dear  to  me 
as  my  own  soul ;  and  however  others  may  forget  me,  as  thou- 
sands have,  and  do  forget  me,  yet  I  cannot  forget  them :  and  now 
may  Jacob's  God  be  with  you ;  O  keep  close  to  God,  my  dear 
London  friends ;  I  do  not  bid  you  keep  close  to  Chapel,  you 
have  done  so  always :  I  shall  endeavour  to  keep  up  the  word 
of  God  among  you  in  my  absence:  I  shall  have  the  same  per- 
sons that  managed  for  me  when  I  was  out  last,  and  they  sent 
me  word  again  and  again,  by  letter,  that  it  was  remarkable,  that 
the  Tottenham-court  people  were  always  present,  when  ordi- 
nances were  there. 

You  see  I  went  upon  a  fair  bottom ;  T  might  have  had  a  thou- 
sand a  year  out  of  this  place,  if  I  had  chose  it :  when  I  am  gone 
to  heaven  you  will  see  what  I  have  got  on  earth  ;*  I  do  not  like 
to  speak  now,  because  it  may  be  thought  boasting ;  hut  I  am 
sure  there  are  numbers  of  people  here,  if  they  knew  what  I  have, 
would  love  me  as  much  as  they  now  hate  me.  When  we  come 
before  the  great  Judge  of  quick  and  dead,  while  T  stand  before 
him,  God  grant  you  may  not  part  with  me  then,  it  will  be  a 
dreadful  parting  then,  it  will  be  worse  then,  to  go  into  the  fire, 
to  be  among  the  devil  and  his  angels ;  God  forbid  it!  God  for- 
bid it !  God  forbid  it !  O  remember  that  my  last  words  were, 
come,  come  to  Christ;  the  Lord  help  you  to  come  to  Christ; 
come  to  Christ,  come  to  Jacob's  God ;  God  give  you  faith 
like  Jacob's  faith. 

You  that  have  been  kind  to  me,  that  have  helped  me  when  I 
•vra.s  sick,  ^ome  of  whom  are  here,  that  have  been  very  kind 
to  me ;  may  God  reward  you,  my  friends,  and  God  forgive  my 
enemies;  God,  of  his  infinite  mercy,  bless  you  all ;   you,  will  be 

*  The  greatest  part  of  the  substance  this  man  of  God  left  behind  him,  which  was 
act  mach,  was  bequeathed  to  him  by  deceased  friends. 


780  TH£  GOOD  SIIEPUEBI/.  [LXIV. 

amply  provided  for^  I  believe^  here ;  may  God  spread  the  gospel 
every  where ;  and  may  God  never  leave  yoo^  nor  forsake  you. 
£ven  so,  Lord  Jesus.  Amen,  and  Amen. 


SERMON  LXXV. 

THB  GOOD  SHEPHBRD.^A  FAREWELL  8BRMON. 

My  sheep  hear  my  voice,  and  I  know  them,  and  they  follow  me. 
And  I  give  unto  them  eternal  life,  and  they  shaJl  never  perish, 
neither  shall  any  pluck  them  out  of  my  hand, — John  x.  27, 28. 

It  is  a  common,  and  I  believe^  generally  speaking,  my  dear 
hearers,  a  true  saying,  that  bad  manners  beget  good  laws.  Whe- 
ther this  will  hold  good  in  every  particular^  in  respect  to  the 
affairs  of  this  world,  I  am  persuaded  the  observation  is  very 
pertinent  in  respect  to  the  things  of  another :  I  mean  bad  man- 
ners, bad  treatment,  bad  words^  have  been  over-ruled  by  the 
sovereign  grace  of  God>  to  produce,  and  to  be  the  cause  of,  the 
best  sermons  that  were  ever  delivered  from  the  mouth  of  the  God- 
man^  Christ  Jesus. 

One  would  have  imagined^  that  as  he  came  clothed  with  divine 
efficience,  as  he  came  with  divine  credentials,  as  he  spake  as 
never  man  spake,  that  no  one  should  have  been  able  to  have 
resisted  the  wisdom  with  which  he  spake ;  one  would  imagine^ 
they  should  have  been  so  struck  with  the  demonstration  of  the 
Spirit,  that  with  one  consent  they  should  all  own,  that  he  was 
**  that  prophet  that  was  to  be  raised  up  like  unto  Moses."  But 
you  seldom  find  our  Lord  preaching  a  sermon,  but  something  or 
other  that  he  said  was  cavilled  at ;  nay,  their  enmity  frequently 
broke  through  all  good  manners :  they  often,  therefore,  inter- 
rupted him  whilst  he  was  preaching,  which  shews  the  enmity  of 
their  hearts  long  before  God  permitted  it  to  be  in  their  power  to 
shed  his  innocent  blood.  If  we  look  no  farther  than  this  chap- 
ter, where  he  represents  himself  as  a  good  shepherd,  one  that 
laid  down  his  life  for  his  sheep ;  we  see  the  best  return  he  had, 
was  to  be  looked  upon  as  possessed  or  distracted ;  for  we  are 
told,  that  there  was  a  division  therefore  again  among  the  Jews 
for  these  sayings,  and  many  of  them  said>  "  He  hath  a  devil,  and 
is  mad,  why  hear  ye  him?"  If  the  master  of  the  house  was 
served  so,  pray  what  are  the  servants  to  expect  ?  Others,  t 
little  more  sober-minded,  said,  ^'  These  are  not  the  words  of  hint 
that  hath  a  devil ;"  the  devil  never  used  to  preach  or  act  in  tius 
way,  "  Can  a  devil  open  the  eyes  of  the  blind  ?"  So  he  had 
0ome  friends  among  these  rabble.  This  did  not  discourage  cor 
Lord,  he  goes  on  in  his  work ;  and  we  shall  never,  never  go  on 
with  the  work  of  God,  till,  like  our  Master^  we  are  willing  to  ^ 
through  good  and  through  evil  report ;  and  let  the  devil  see  wf 
are  not  so  complaisant  as  to  stop  one  moment  for  his  barking  at 
us  as  we  go  along. 

We  are  told,  that  our  Lord  was  at  Jerusalem  at  the  feast  of 
ihe  dedication,  and  it  was  winter ;  the  feast  of  dedication  htH 


L.'^^XV.]  THE  GOOD   SHBPHBRD.  781 

I  think,  seven  or  eight  days,  for  the  commemoration  of  the 
restoration  of  the  temple  and  altar,  after  its  prefanation  by 
Antiochus.  Now  this  was  certainly  a  mere  human  institution, 
and  had  no  divine  image,  bad  no  divine  superscription  upon  it; 
and  yet  I  do  not  find  that  our  blessed  Lord  and  Master  preached 
against  it;  I  do  not  find  that  he  spent  his  time  about  this ;  hi9 
heart  was  too  big  with  superior  things ;  and  I  believe  when  we, 
like  him,  are  filled  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  we  shall  not  entertain 
our  audiences  with  disputes  about  rites  and  ceremonies,  but 
shall  treat  upon  the  essentials  of  the  gospel,  and  then  rites  and 
ceremonies  will  appear  with  more  indifiierence.  Our  Lord  doe^ 
not  say,  that  he  would  not  go  up  to  the  feast,  for,  on  the  con* 
tralry,  he  did  go  there,  not  so  much  to  keep  the  feast,  as  to  have 
an  opportunity  to  spread  the  gospel-net;  and  that  should  be  our 
method,  not  to  follow  disputing;  and  it  is  the  glory  of  the  Metho- 
dists, that  we  have  been  now  forty  years,  and,  I  thank  God, 
there  has  not  been  one  single  pamphlet  written  by  any  of  our 
preachers,  about  the  non-essentials  of  religion* 

Our  Lord  always  made  the  best  of  every  opportunity ;  and  we 
are  told,  *'  he  walked  in  the  temple  in  Solomon's  porch."  One 
v^ould  have  thought  the  scribes  and  Pharisees  would  have  put 
bim  in  one  of  their  stalls,  and  have  complimented  him  with  de« 
siring  him  to  preach :  no,  they  let  him  walk  in  Solomon's  porch  ; 
some  think  he  walked  by  himself,  nobody  choosing  to  keep' 
company  with  him.  Methinks  I  see  him  walking  and  looking 
at  the  temple,  and  foreseeing  within  himself  how  soon  it  would 
be  destroyed ;  he  walked  pensive,  to  see  the  dreadful  calamities 
that  would  come  upon  the  land,  for  not  knowing  the  day  of  its 
Tisitation ;  and  it  was  to  let  the  world  see  he  was  not  afraid  to 
appear  in  public :  he  walked,  as  much  as  to  say,  have  any  of 
you  any  thing  to  say  to  me?  and  he  put  himself  in  their  way, 
that  if  they  had  any  thing  to  ask  him,  he  was  ready  to  resolve 
them ;  and  to  shew  them,  that  though  they  had  treated  him  so 
ill,  yet  he  was  ready  to  preach  salvation  to  them. 

In  the  twenty-fourth  verse  we  are  told,  "  Then  came  the  Jews 
round  about  htm,  and  said  unto  him.  How  long  dost  thou  make 
ns  to  doubt?"  They  came  round  about  him  when  they  saw 
him  walking  in  Solomon's  porch ;  now,  say  they,  we  will  have 
him,  now  we  will  attack  him.  Aud  now  was  fulfilled  that  pas- 
sage in  the  Psalms,  "  they  compassed  me  about  like  bees,"  to 
sting  me,  or  rather  like  wasps.  Now,  say  they,  we  will  get  him 
in  the  middle  of  us,  and  see  what  sort  of  a  man  he  is;  we  will 
see  whether  we  cannot  conquer  him ;  they  came  to  him,  and 
they  say,  **  How  long  dost  thou  make  us  to  doubt?"  Now  this 
seems  a  plausible  question,  "  How  long  dost  thou  make  us  to 
doubt?"  Pray  how  long,  sir,  do  you  intend  to  keep  us  in  sus- 
pense ?  Some  think  the  words  will  bear  this  interpretation ; 
Pray,  sir,  how  long  do  you  intend  thus  to  steal  away  our  hearts  I 
they  would  represent  him  to  be  a  designing  man,  like  Absalom, 
to  get  the  people  on  his  side,  and  th^  set  up  himself  for  the 
Messiah;    thus    carnal    minds  always  interpret  gopd  men's 


782  THB  ©OOD   SHEPHBRD.  [lXX>. 

actions.  But  the  meaning  seems  to  be  this,  they  were  doubting 
concerning  Christ ;  doubting  Christians  may  think  it  is  God's 
fault  that  they  doubt^  but^  God  knows,  it  is  all  their  own. 
**How  long  dost  thou  make  us  to  doubt?"  I  wish  you  would 
speak  a  little  plainer,  sir,  and  not  let  us  have  any  more  of  your 
parables ;  pray  let  us  know  who  you  are,  let  us  have  it  from 
your  own  mouth ;  "  if  thou  be  the  Christ,  tell  us  plainly ;"  and 
I  do  not  doubt,  but  they  put  on  a  very  sanctified  face,  and 
looked  very  demure ;  "  if  thou  be  the  Christ,  tell  us  plainly," 
intending  to  catch  him:  if  he  do  not  say  he  is  the  Christ, \\e 
will  say  he  is  ashamed  of  his  own  cause;  if  he  tells  us 
plainly  that  he  is  the  Christ,  then  we  will  impeach  him  to  the 
governor,  we  will  go  and  tell  the  governor  that  this  man  says 
he  is  the  Messiah ;  now  we  know  of  no  Messiah,  but  what  is  to 
jostle  Caesar  out  of  his  throne. — The  devil  always  wants  to 
make  it  believed  that  God's  people,  who  are  the  most  loyal 
people  in  the  world,  are  rebels  to  the  government  under  which 
they  live ; "  If  thou  be  the  Christ, tell  us  plainly."  Our  Lord  does 
not  let  them  wait  long  for  an  answer ;  honesty  can  soon  speak : 
*'  I  told  you,  and  ye  believed  not;  the  works  that  I  do  in  my 
Father's  name,  they  bear  witness  of  me."  Had  our  Lord  said, 
I  aiii  the  Messiah,  they  would  have  taken  him  up;  he  knew 
that,  and  therefore  he  joined  "  the  wisdom  of  the  serpent"  with 
'*  the  innocence  of  the  dove :"  says  he,  I  appeal  to  my  works 
and  doctrine,  and  if  you  will  not  infer  from  tbem  that  I  am  the 
Messiah,  I  have  no  further  argument.  "  But,"  he  adds,  "  ye 
believe  not,  because  ye  are  not  of  my  sheep."  He  complains 
twice ;  for  their  unbelief  was  the  greatest  grief  of  heart  to 
Christ :  then  he  goes  on  in  the  words  of  our  text,  "  My  sheep 
hear  my  voice,  and  I  know  them,  and  they  follow  me.  And  I 
give  unto  them  eternal  life,  and  they  shall  never  perish,  neither 
shall  any  pluck  them  out  of  my  hand."  My  sheep  hear  my 
voice ;  you  think  to  puzzle  me,  you  think  to  chagrin  me  with 
this  kind  of  conduct,  but  you  are  mistaken  ;  you  do  not  believe 
on  me,  because  you  are  not  of  my  sheep.  The  g^reat  Mr. 
Stodart,of  New  England,  (and  no  place  under  heaven  produces 
greater  divines  than  New  England,)  preached  once  from  these 
words,  "  But  ye  believe  not,  because  ye  are  not  of  my  sheep :' 
a  very  strange  text  to  preach  upon,  to  convince  a  congregation, 
yet  God  so  blessed  it,  that  two  or  three  hundred  souls  were 
awakened  by  that  sermon :  God  grant  such  success  to  attend 
the  labours  of  all  his  faithful  ministers. 

"  My  sheep  hear  my  voice,  and  they  follow  me."  It  is  verr 
remarkable,  there  are  but  two  sorts  of  people  mentioned  in  scrip- 
ture :  it  does  not  say  the  Baptists  and  Independents,  nor  the 
Methodists  and  Presbyterians;  no,  Jesus  Christ  divides  the 
whole  world  into  but  two  classes,  sheep  and  goats :  the  Lord 
give  Us  to  see  this  morning  to  which  of  these  classes  we  beloD?. 

But  it  is  observable,  believers  are  always  compared  to  some- 
thing that  is  good  and  profitable,  and  unbelievers  are  alwavs  de- 
scribed by  something  that  is  bad,  and  good  for  little  or  nothiii^. 


LXXV.}  THB    GOOD   SHEPHERD.  783 

If  you  ask  me  why  Christ's  people  are  called  sheep  ?  as  God 
shall  enable  me,  I  will  give  you  a  short,  and  I  hope  it  will  be  to 
you  an  answer  of  peace.  Sheep,  you  know,  generally  love  to  be 
together;  we  say  a  flock  of  sheep,  we  do  not  say  a  herd  of  sheep ; 
sheep  are  little  creatures,  and  Christ's  people  may  be  called 
sheep,  because  they  are  little  in  the  eyes  of  the  world,  and  they 
are  yet  less  in  their  own  eyes.  O,  some  people  think,  if  the  great 
men  were  on  our  side,  if  we  had  king,  lords,  and  commons  on 
our  side,  I  mean  if  they  were  all  true  believers,  O  if  we  had  all 
the  kings  upon  the  earth  on  our  side!  Suppose  you  had:  alas! 
alas !  do  you  think  the  church  would  go  on  the  better?  Why,  if 
it  were  fashionable  to  be  a  Methodist  at  court,  if  it  were  fashion- 
able to  be  a  Methodist  abroad,  they  would  go  with  a  Bible  or  a 
hymn-book,  instead  of  a  novel ;  but  religion  never  thrives  under 
too  much  sun-shine.  "  Not  many  mighty,  not  many  noble,  are 
called,  but  God  hath  chosen  the  foolish  things  of  the  world  to 
confound  the  wise,  and  God  hath  chosen  the  weak  things  of  the 
world  to  confound  the  things  which  are  mighty."  Dr.  Watts 
says.  Here  and  there  I  see  a  king,  and  here  and  there  a  great 
man  in  heaven,  but  their  number  is  but  small. 

Sheep  are  looked  upon  to  be  the  most  harmless,  quiet  crea<* 
tnres  that  God  hath  made :  O  may  God,  of  his  infinite  mercy; 
give  us  to  know  that  we  are  his  sheep,  by  our  having  this  bless* 
ed  temper  infused  into  our  hearts  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  *  Learn 
of  me,"  saith  our  bjessed  Lord ;  what  to  do,  to  work  miracles  ? 
no ;  ^'  Learn  of  me,  for  I  am  meek  and  lowly  in  heart."  A  very 
good  man,  now  living,  said  once,  if  there  be  any  one  particular 
temper  I  desire  more  than  another,  it  is  the  grace  of  meekness, 
quietly  to  bear  bad  treatment,  to  forget  and  to  forgive :  and  at 
the  same  time  that  I  am  sensible  I  am  injured,  not  to  be  over- 
come of  evil,  but  to  have  grace  given  me  to  overcome  evil  with 
good.  To  the  honour  of  Moses,  it  is  declared,  that  he  was  the 
meekest  man  upon  earth.  Meekness  is  necessary  for  people  in 
power ;  a  man  that  is  passionate  is  dangerous ;  every  governor 
should  have  a  warm  temper,  but  a  man  of  an  unrelenting,  unfor- 
giving temper,  is  no  more  fitfor  government  than  Phaeton  to  drive 
the  chariot  of  the  sun,  he  only  sets  the  'world  on  fire. 

You  all  know,  that  sheep  of  all  creatures  in  the  world  are  tho 
most  apt  to  stray  and  be  lost ;  Christ's  people  may  justly,  in 
that  respect,  be  compared  to  sheep ;  therefore,  in  the  introduce 
tion  to  our  morning  service,  we  say,  "We  have  erred  and  stray* 
ed  from  thy  ways  like  lost  sheep."  Turn  out  a  horse,  or  a  dog, 
and  they  will  find  their  way  home,  but  a  sheep  wanders  about, 
he  bleats  here  and  there,  as  much  as  to  say.  Dear  stranger,  shew 
me  my  way  home  again ;  thus  Christ's  sheep  are  too  apt  to  wan- 
der from  the  fold ;  having  their  eye  off  the  great  Shepherd,  they 
go  into  this  field  and  that  field,  over  this  hedge  and  that,  and 
often  return  home  with  the  loss  of  their  wool. 

But  at  the  same  time  sheep  are  the  most  useful  creatures  in 
the  world ;  they  manure  the  land,  and  thereby  prepare  it  for  the 
seed;  they  clothe  our  bodies  with  wool,  and  there  i^p|^^ 


784  THE  GOOD   SHBPHBRD.  [L?(XT. 

least  part  of  a  sheep  but  is  asefal  to  man :  O  my  bretbreo,  God 
grant  that  yoa  and  I  may,  in  this  respect,  answer  the  cbancter 
of  sheep.  The  world  says,  beeanse  we  preach  faith  we  deny 
good  works ;  this  is  the  nsnal  objection  against  the  doctrine  of 
imputed  righteousness,  but  it  is  a  slander,  an  impodent  slander. 
It  was  a  maxim  in  the  first  reformers'  time,  that  though  the  kr- 
minians  preached  up  good  works,  you  must  go  to  the  Calvinisii 
for  tbem.  Christ's  sheep  study  to  be  useful,  and  to  clothe  «D 
they  can  ;  we  should  labour  with  our  hands,  that  we  may  haTe 
to  give  to  all  those  that  need. 

Believers  consider  Christ's  property  in  tbem  ;  he  says,  '^mj 
sheep:''  O  blessed  be  God  for  that  little,  dear,  great  word  Jfy. 
We  are  hiis  by  eternal  election :  ''  the  sheep  which  thou  ha&t 
given  me/'  says  Christ.  They  were  given  by  God  the  Father  to 
Christ  Jesus,  in  the  covenant  made  t^tween  the  Father  and  tk 
Son  from  all  eternity.^  They  that  are  not  led  to  see  this,  I  wish 
them  better  heads ;  though,  I  believe,  numbers  that  are  against  it 
have  got  better  hearts:  the  Lord  help  us  to  bear  with  one 
another  where  there  is  an  honest  heart. 

He  calls  them  my  sheep ;  they  are  his  by  purchase.  O  sinner, 
sinner,  you  are  come  this  morning  to  hear  a  poor  creature  Ud^e 
,'  his  last  farewell :'  but  I  want  you  to  forget  the  creature  that  \a 
preaching,  I  want  to  lead  you  farther  than  the  Tabernacle: 
Where  do  you  want  to  lead  us?  why,  to  mount  Calvary,  thereto 
see  at  what  an  expense  of  blood  Christ  purchased  those  whom 
be  calls  his  own ;  he  redeemed  them  with  his  own  blood,  so  that 
they  are  not  only  his  by  eternal  election,  but  also  by  actual  re- 
demption in  time ;  and  they  were  given  to  him  by  the  Father, 
upon  condition  that  he  should  redeem  them  by  his  heart's  blood. 
It  was  a  hard  bargain,  but  Christ  was  willing  to  strike  the  bar- 
gain, that  you  and  I  might  not  be  damned  for  ever. 

They  are  his,  because  they  are  enabled  in  a  day  of  God  s 
power  voluntarily  to  give  themselves  up  unto  him ;  Christ  says  of 
these  sheep  especially,  '^  that  they  hear  his  voice,  and  that  they 
follow  him."  Will  you  be  so  good  as  to  mind  that !  here  is  an 
allusion  to  a  shepherd ;  now  in  some  places  in  scripture,  the 
shepherd  is  represented  as  going  after  his  sheep ;  2  Saioa,  vii.  8. 
Psal.lxxviii.  71.  that  is  our  way  in  England ;  but  in  the  Eastern 
nations,  the  shepherds  genemlly  went  before;  tbey  held  up 
their  crook,  and  they  had  a  particular  call  that  the  sheep  under- 
stood. Now,  says  Christ,  **  My  sheep  bear  mv  voice.  This  is 
my  beloved  Son,"  saith  God,  **  hear  ye  him."  And  again, "  The 
dead  shall  hear  the  voice  of  the  Son  of  God,  and  live :"  now  the 
question  is,  what  do  we  understand  by  hearing  Christ's  voice? 

First,  we  hear  Moses'  voice,  we  bear  the  voice  of  the  law ; 
there  is  no  going  to  Mount  Zion  but  by  the  way  of  mount  Sinai, 
that  is  the  right  straight  road.  I  know  some  say«  they  do  not 
know  when  they  were  converted ;  those  are,  I  believe,  very  kxi\ 
generally,  nay,  I  may  say  almost  always,  God  deals  otherwise. 
Some  are,  indeed,  called  sooner  by  the  Lord  than  others,  but 
before  they  are  made  to  see  the  glory  of  Giod,  they  must  beir 


1.XXV.]  ^  THE   GOOD    SHEPH£RD.  785 

the  voice  of  the  law ;  so  you  must  hear  th^  voice  of  the  law, 
before  ever  you  will  be  savingly  called  unto  God.  You  never 
throw  oflF  your  cloak  in  a  storm,  but  you  hug  it  the  closer ;  so 
the  law  makes  a  man  hug  close  his  corruptions,  (Rom.  vii.7,8,9.) 
but  when  the  gospel  of  the  Son  of  God  shines  into  their  souls, 
then  they  throw  oflF  the  corruptions  which  they  have  hugj^^ed  so 
closely;  they  hear  his  voice  saying.  Son,  daughter,  be  of  good 
cheer,  thy  sins,  which  are  many,  are  all  forgiven  thee.  "  They 
hear  his  voice ;"  that  bespeaks  the  habitual  temper  of  their 
minds :  the  wicked  hear  the  voice  of  the  devil,  the  lusts  of  the 
flesh,  the  lusts  of  the  eye,  and  the  pride  of  life;  and  Christ's 
sheep  themselves  attended  to  them  before  conversion ;  but  when 
called  afterwards  by  God,  they  hear  the  voice  of  a  Redeemer's 
blood  speaking  peace  unto  them,  they  hear  the  voice  of  his  word 
and  of  his  Spirit. 

The  consequence  of  hearing  his  voice,  and  the  proof  that  we 
do  hear  his  voice,  will  be — to  follow  him.  Jesus  said  unto  his 
disciples,  *'  If  any  man  will  come  after  me,  let  him  deny  him- 
self, and  take  up  his  cross  and  follow  me."  And  it  is  said  of 
the  saints  in  glory,  that  *'  they  followed  the  Lamb  whithersoever 
he  went."  Wherever  the  shepherd  turns  his  crook,  and  the 
sheep  hear  Tiis  voice,  they  follow  him ;  they  often  tread  upon 
one  another,  and  hurt  one  another,  they  are  in  such  haste  in 
their  way  to  heaven.  Following  Christ,  means  following  him 
through  life,  following  him  in  every  word  and  gesture,  following 
him  out  of  one  clime  into  another*  "  Bid  me  come  to  thee  upon 
the  water,"  said  Peter :  and  if  we  are  commanded  to  go  over  the 
water  for  Christ,  God,  of  his  infinite  mercy,  follow  us !  We 
must  first  bs  sure  that  the  great  Shepherd  points  his  crook  for 
us :  but  this  is  the  character  of  a  true  servant  of  Christ,  that  he 
endeavours  to  follow  Christ  in  thought,  word,  and  work. 

Now^  my  brethren,  before  we  go  farther,  as  this  is  the  last 
opportunity  I  shall  have  of  speaking  to  you  for  some  months,  if 
we  live ;  some  of  you,  I  suppose,  do  not  choose,  in  general,  to 
rise  so  soon  as  you  have  this  morning ;  now  I  hope  the  world 
did  not  get  into  your  hearts  before  you  left  your  beds ;  now  you 
are  here,  do  let  me  entreat  you  to  inquire  whether  you  beloncr 
to  Christ's  sheep,  or  no.  Man,  woman,  sinner,  put  thy  hand  to 
thy  heart,  and  answer  me,  didst  thou  ever  hear  Christ's  voice  so 
as  to  follow  him,  to  give  up  thyself  without  reserve  to  him !  1 
verily  do  believe  from  my  inmost  soul,  (and  that  is  my  comfort, 
now  I  am  about  to  take  my  leave  of  you,)  that  I  am  preaching 
to  a  vast  body,  a  multijtude  of  dear,  precious  souls,  who,  if  it 
were  proper  for  you  to  speak,  would  say.  Thanks  be  unto  God, 
that  we  can  follow  Jesus  in  the  character  of  sheep,  though  we 
are  ashamed  to  think  how  often  we  wander  from  thee,  and  what 
little  fruit  we  bring  unto  thee ;  if  that  is  the  language  of  your 
hearts,  I  wish  you  joy ;  welcome,  welcome,  dear  soul,  to  Christ. 
O  blessed  be  God  for  his  rich  grace,  his  distinguishing, 
sovereign,  electing  love,  by  which  he  has  distinguished  you  and 
me.    ^d  if  he  has  been  pleased  to  kt  you  hear  his  voice. 


780  THR    GOOD   SUKPHKKD.  [LXXV, 

through  the  mioistration  of  a  poor  miserable  sinner ;  a  poor, 
but  happy  pilgrim^  may  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  have  all  the 
glory. 

If  you  belong  to  Jesus  Christy  he  is  speaking  of  you;  for^  says 
he,  "  I  know  my  sheep."  I  know  them^  what  does  that  mean? 
Why,  he  knows  their  number,  he  knows  their  names,  he  knows 
every  one  for  whom  he  died ;  and  if  there  were  to  be  one  missing 
for  whom  ^Christ  died,  God  the  Father  would  send  him  down 
again  from  heaven  to  fetch  him.  **  Of  all,"  saith  he,  **  that  thoa 
hast  given  me,  have  I  lost  none."  Christ  knows  his  sheep;  he 
not  only  knows  their  number,  but  the  words  speak  the  peculiar 
knowledge  and  notice  he  takes  of  them ;  he  takes  as  much  care 
of  each  of  them,  as  if  there  were  but  that  one  single  sheep  in 
the  world.  To  the  hypocrite  he  saith,  "  Verily,  I  know  yon 
not ;"  but  he  knows  his  saints,  he  is  acquainted  with  all  their 
sorrows,  their  trials,  and  temptations ;  he  bottles  op  all  their 
tears,  he  knows  their  domestic  trials,  he  knows  their  inward 
corruptions,  he  knows  all  their  wanderings,  and  he  takes  care 
to  fetch  them  back  again.  I  remember,  I  heard  good  Dr. 
Maryat,  who  was  a  good  market-language  preacher,  once  say 
at  Pinner's-hall,  (I  hope  that  pulpit  will  be  always  filled  with 
such  preachers,)  '  God  has  got  a  great  dog,  to  fetch  his  sheep 
back,'  says  he.  Do  not  you  know,  that  when  the  sheep 
wander,  the  shepherd  sends  his  dog  after  them,  to  fetch  them 
back  again  ?  So  when  Christ's  sheep  wander,  be  lets  the  devil 
go  after  them,  and  suffers  him  to  bark  at  them,  who,  instead  of 
driving  them  farther  off,  is  made  a  means  to  bring  them  back 
again  to  Christ's  fold. 

There  is  a  precious  word  I  would  have  you  take  notice  of, 
**  I  know  them ;"  that  may  comfort  you  under  all  your  trials. 
We  sometimes  think  that  Christ  does  not  hear  our  prayers,  that 
he  does  not  know  us ;  we  are  ready  to  suspect  that  he  has  for- 
gotten to  be  gracious  ;  but  what  a  mercy  it  is  that  he  does  know 
us.  We  accuse  one  another,  we  turn  devils  to  one  another,  are 
accusers  of  the  brethren ;  and  what  will  support  two  of  God's 
people  when  judged  by  one  another  but  this.  Lord,  thou  knowcst 
my  integrity,  thou  knowest  how  matters  are  with  me  ? 

But,  my  brethren,  here  is  something  better,  here  is  good  news 
for  you;  what  is  that?  say  you  :  why,  "  I  give  unto  them  eter- 
nal life,  and  they  shall  never  perish,  neither  shall  any  plack 
them  out  of  my  hand."  O  that  the  words  may  come  to  yoor 
hearts  with  as  much  warmth  and  power  as  they  did  to  mine 
thirty-five  years  ago.  I  never  prayed  against  any  corruption  1 
had  in  my  life,  so  much  as  I  did  against  going  into  holy  orders, 
so  soon  as  my  friends  were  for  having  me  go :  and  bishop  Ben- 
son was  pleased  to  honour  me  with  peculiar  friendship,  so  as  to 
offer  me  preferment,  or  do  any  thing  for  me  :  my  friends  wanted 
me  to  mount  the  church  betimes,  they  wanted  me  to  knock  my 
head  against  the  pulpit  too  youns: ;  but  how  some  young  men 
stand  up  here  and  there  and  preach,  I  do  not  know  how  it  may 
be  to  them ;  but  God  knows  how  deep  a  concern  entering  iat^ 


LXXV.]  THK   GOOD   SHBPIIERD.  7S7 

the  ministry  and  preaching,  was  to  mo ;  I  have  prayed  a  thou- 
sand times,  till  the  sweat  has  dropped  from  my  face  like  rain, 
that  God,  of  his  infinite  mercy,  would  not  let  me  enter  the 
church  before  he  called  me  to,  and  thrust  me  forth  in,  his  work. 
I  remember  once  in  Gloucester^  I  know  the  room,  I  look  up  at 
the  window  when  I  am  there,  and  walk  along  the  street;  I  know 
the  window,  the  bedside,  and  the  floor,  upon  which  I  have  laid 
prostrate  f  I  said.  Lord,  I  cannot  go,  I  shall  be  puffed  up  with 

Jmde,  and  fall  into  the  condemnation  of  the  devil ;  Lord,  do  not 
et  me  go  yet ;  I  pleaded  to  be  at  Oxford  two  or  three  years 
more ;  I  intended  to  make  an  hundred  and  fifty  sermons,  and 
thought  I  would  set  up  with  a  good  stock  in  trade,  however ;  but 
I  remember  praying,  wrestling,  and  striving  with  God ;  I  said,  I 
am  undone,  1  am  unfit  to  preach  in  thy  great  name,  send  me 
not,  pray.  Lord,  send  me  not  yet.  I  wrote  to  all  mjf  friends  in 
town  and  country,  to  pray  against  the  bishop's  soliqitation,  but 
they  insisted  I  should  go  into  orders  before  I  was  twenty-two. 
After  all  their  solicitations,  these  words  came  into  my  mind, 
•*  Nothing  shall  pluck  you  out  of  my  hand."  O  may  the  words 
be  blessed  to  you,  my  dear  friends,  that  I  am  parting  with,  as 
they  were  to  me  when  they  came  warm  upon  my  heart ;  then, 
and  not  till  then,  I  said.  Lord,  I  will  go,  send  me  when  thou  wilt. 
I  remember  when  I  was  in  a  place  called  Dover-Island,  near 
Georgia,  we  put  in  with  bad  winds;  I  had  an  hundred  and  fifty 
in  family  to  maintain,  and  not  a  single  farihing  to  do  it  with,  in 
the  dearest  part  of  the  king's  dominions ;  I  remember,  I  told  a 
minister  of  Christ,  now  in  heaven,  I  had  these  words  once,  sir, 
*•  Nothing  shall  pluck  you  out  of  my  hand."  O,  says  he,  take 
comfort  from  them,  you  may  be  sure  God  will  be  as  good  as  his 
word,  if  he  never  tells  you  so  again.  And  our  Lord  knew  his 
poor  sheep  would  be  always  doubting  they  should  never  reach 
heaven,  therefore  says  he,  "  I  give  to  them  eternal  life,  and  tiiey 
shall  never  perish." 

Here  are  in  our  text  three  blessed  declarations,  or  promises : 
'    First.    /  know  them. 

Second.  T/tey  shall  never  perish;  though  they  often  think 
they  shall  perish  by  the  hand  of  their  lusts  and  corruptions ; 
they  think  they  shall  perish  by  the  deceitfulness  of  their  hearts ; 
but  Christ  says,  "  they  shall  never  perish."  I  have  brought 
them  out  of  the  world  to  myself,  and  do  you  think  I  will  let 
them  go  to  hell  after  that  ?  "  I  give  to  them  eternal  life ;"  pray 
mind  that;  not  I  will,  but  I  do.  Some  talk  of  being  justified 
at  the  day  of  judgment,  that  is  nonsense  ;  if  we  are  not  justified 
here,  we  shall  not  be  justified  there.  He  gives  them  eternal 
life,  that  is,  the  earnest,  the  pledge,  and  assurance  of  it ;  the 
indwelling  of  the  Spirit  of  God  here,  is  the  earnest  of  glory 
hereafter. 

Third.  Neither  shall  any  pluck  them  out  of  my  Jiand,  He 
holds  them  in  his  hand,  that  is,  he  holds  them  by  his  power, 
none  shall  pluck  them  thence ;  there  is  always  something  pluck- 
ing at  Christ's  sheep  ;  the  devil,  the  lusts  of  the  flesh,  the  lusts  of 


788  TH£  GOOD    SHEPHERD.  [LXXT« 

the  eye,  and  the  pride  of  life,  all  try  to  plack  them  out  of 
Christ's  hand.  O  my  brethren,  they  need  not  pluck  us,  for  we 
help  all  three  to  pluck  ourselves  out  of  the  hand  of  Jesus ;  but 
"  none  shall  pluck  them  out  of  my  hand,"  says  Christ.  "  I  give 
to  them  eternal  Vii'e.  I  am  going  to  heaven  to  prepare  a  place 
for  them,  ^nd  there  they  shall  be."  O  my  brethren,  if  it  were 
not  for  keeping  you  too  long,  and  too  much  exhausting  my  o^n 
spirits,  I  could  call  upon  you  to  leap  for  joy ;  there  is  not  a 
more  blessed  text  to  support  the  final  perseverance  of  the 
saints ;  and  I  am  astonished  any  poor  soul,  and  good  people  I 
hope  too,  can  fight  against  the  doctrine  of  the  perseverance  of 
the  saints:  What,  if  a  person  say  they  should  persevere  in 
wickedness  ?  Ah !  that  is  an  abuse  of  the  doctrine  ;  what,  be- 
cause some  people  spoil  good  food,  are  we  never  to  eat  it  ?  But, 
my  brethrdh,  upon  this  text  I  can  leave  rny  cares,  all  my  friends, 
and  all  Christ's  sheep,  to  the  protection  of  Christ  Jesus'  never- 
failing  love. 

I  thought  this  morning,  when  I  came  here  riding  from  the 
other  end  of  the  town,  it  was  to  me  like  coming  to  be  executed 
publicly ;  and  when  the  carriage  turned  just  at  the  end  of  the 
walk,  and  I  saw  you  running  here,  O,  thinks  I,  it  is  like  a  person 
now  coming  just  to  the  place  where  he  is  to  be  executed :  when 
I  went  up  to  put  on  my  gown,  I  thought  it  was  just  like  dressing 
myself  to  be  made  a  public  spectacle  to  shed  my  blood  for 
Christ;  and  I  take  all  heaven  and  earth  to  witness,  and  (rod 
and  the  holy  angels  to  witness,  that  though  I  had  preferment 
enough  offered  me,  that  though  the  bishop  took  me  in  his  arms, 
and  offered  me  two  parishes  when  I  was  but  twenty-two  years 
old,  and  always  took  me  to  his  table ;  though  I  had  preferment 
enough  offered  me  when  I  was  ordained,  thou,  O  God,  knowest, 
that  when  the  bishop  put  his  hand  upon  my  bead,  I  looked  for 
no  other  preferment  than  publicly  to  suffer  for  the  Lamb  of 
God  :  in  this  spirit  I  came  out,  in  this  spirit  I  came  up  to  this 
metropolis.  I  was  thinking,  when  I  read  of  Jacob's  going  over 
the  brook  with  a  staff,  that  I  would  not  say  so  much,  but  I  came 
up  without  a  friend,  I  went  to  Oxford  without  a  friend,  I  had 
not  a  servant,  I  had  not  one  to  introduce  me;  but  God,  by  bis 
holy  Spirit,  was  pleased  to  raise  me  up  to  preach  for  his  great 
name's  sake :  through  his  divine  Spirit  I  continue  to  this  day, 
and  feel  my  affections  are  as  strong  as  ever  towards  the  work 
and  the  people  of  the  living  God.  The  congregations  at  both 
ends  of  the  town  are  dear  to  me :  God  has  honoured  me  to  build 
this  and  the  other  place  ;<iand,  blessed  be  his  name,  as  he  called 
me  to  Georgia  at  first,  and  I  left  all  London  affairs  to  God  s 
cure,  when  I  had  most  of  tlie  churches  in  London  open  for  me, 
and  had  twelve  or  fourteen  constables  to  keep  the  doors,  that 
people  might  not  crowd  too  much  ;  I  had  offers  of  hundreds 
then  to  settle  in  London,  yet  I  gave  it  up  for  God,  to  go  into  a 
foreign  clime ;  and  1  hope  with  that  same  single  intention  I  am 
goin^::  now. 

When  I  came  from  America  last,  I  thought  I  had  no  other 


LXXV.]  THB   GOOD   SHEPHERD.  789 

river  to  pass  over  but  the  river  Jordan,  I  remember  I  told  you 
you  so;  and  as  the  Orphan-house  was  then  to  be  given,  I 
thought,  out  of  my  hands,  I  then  intended  to  retire  into  some 
little  comer,  and  pray  when  I  could  not  preach,  my  spirits  were 
so  low,  and  my  nerves  and  animal  frame  so  weak,  but  God,  of 
his  infinite  mercy,  has  renewed  my  strength,  and  is  pleased  to 
raise  my  spirits,  so  that  I  find  my  heart  is  willing  to  go  here  or 
there,  wherever  God  shaH  call. 

The  Orphan-house  being  turned  into  a  college,  is  a  matter  of 
great  consequence  ;  you  that  have  not  been  in  America  cannot 
tell,  but  I  heartily  wish,  (I  am  neither  a  prophet,  nor  the  son  of 
a  prophet,)  and  hope  none  of  us  will  ever  be  driven  to  America 
for  an  asylum,  where  God's  people  were  driven  from  this  land 
an  hundred  years  ago :  clouds  are  growing  thick,  and  if  a  spirit 
of  moderation  does  not  prevail  among  governors  and  governed, 
what  but  confusion  must  happen  to  persons  who  strive  one  with 
another,  and  are  making  sport  for  the  devil  by  destroying  one 
another  ?  May  the  great  and  graqious  God  avert  every  impend- 
ing storm ;  and  by  diffusing  a  spirit  of  moderation,  and  of  a 
soiHid  mind,  and  by  keeping  his  people  close  to  himself,  avert 
those  storms,  those  terrible  judgments,  that  we  have  reason  to 
expect  from  our  repeated  provocations.  I  am  going  now  to  set- 
tle the  Orphan-house  upon  a  proper  basis ;  I  go  now  in  the  fall, 
that  I  may  be  in  Georgia  in  the  winter,  which  is  fine  weather 
there.  The  twenty-fifth  of  March  is  the  anniversary  of  the  day 
on  which  I  laid  the  first  brick  of  the  Orphan-house ;  by  that 
time,  I  hope,  all  the  buildings  will  be  finished,  and  the  plantation 
settled ;  and  then  I  hope  to  go  and  preach  along  the  continent 
to  New  England,  and  from  thence  I  intend,  if  God  permit  me, 
to  return  to  my  dear  London  and  English  friends  again. 

I  have  blessed  news  from  the  Orphan-house :  one  writes  me 
word.  Would  to  God  you  could  send  a  thousand  such  as  you 
have  sent,  Mr.  Dixon  and  his  wife,  that  have  been  old  servants 
there ;  Mr.  Wright,  Mr.  Crayne,  and  Mr.  Wright's  brother,  and 
those  that  have  been  employed  with  them  to  carry  on  the  work 
of  the  Lord;  and  I  cannot  think  but  God  intends  to  lay  a  foun- 
dation for  a  blessed  seminary  for  Christ :  Lord  Jesus,  hear  our 
prayers  upon  that  account. 

Now,  I  must  come  to  the  hai^dest  part  I  have  to  act ;  I  was 
afraid  when  I  came  out  from  home,  that  I  could  not  bear  the 
shock,  but  I  hope  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  will  help  me  to  bear  it, 
and  help  you  to  give  me  up  to  the  blessed  God,  let  him  do  with 
me  what  he  will.  This  is  the  thirteenth  time  of  my  crossing  the 
mighty  waters ;  it  is  a  little  difficult  at  this  time  of  life ;  and 
though  my  spirits  are  improved  in  some  degree,  yet  weakness  is 
the  best  of  my  strength  :  but  I  delight  in  the  cause,  and  God 
fills  we  with  a  peace  that  is  unutterable,  which  nobody  knows, 
and  a  stranger  intermeddles  not  with :  into  his  hands  I  com- 
mend my  spirit ;  and  I  beg  that  this  may  be  the  language  of 
your  hearts.  Lord,  keep  him,  let  nothing  pluck  him  out  of  thy 
hands.     I  expect  many  a  trial  while  I  am  on  board,  Satan 


790  aHB  good  shepherd.         [lxxv. 

always  meets  me  there ;  but  that  God  who  has  kept  me,  I  l>e- 
lieve  will  keep  me.  I  thank  God,  I  have  the  honour  of  leaving 
every  thing  quite  well  and  easy  at  both  ends  of  the  town ;  and, 
my  dear  hearers,  my  prayers  to  God  shall  be,  that  nothing  may 
pluck  you  out  of  Christ's  hands.  Witness  against  me,  if  I  ever 
set  up  a  party  for  myself;  did  ever  any  minister,  or  ceuld  any 
minister  in  the  world  say,  that  I  ever  spoke  against  any  one 
^oing  to  any  dear  minister?  I  thank  Grod,  that  he  has  enabled 
me  to  be  always  strengthening  the  hands  of  all,  though  some 
have  afterwards  been  ashamed  to  own  me.  I  declare  to  you, 
that  I  believe  God  will  be  with  me,  and  will  strengthen  me ;  and 
I  believe  it  is  in  answer  to  your  prayers,  that  God  is  pleased  to 
revive  my  spirits  :  may  the  Lord  help  you  to  pray  on.  If  I  am 
drowned  in  the  waves,  I  will  say.  Lord,  take  care  of  my  London, 
take  care  of  my  English  friends,  let  nothing  pluck  them  out  of 
thy  hands. 

And  as  Christ  has  given  us  eternal  life,  O  my  brethren,  some 
of  you,  I  doubt  not,  will  be  gone  to  him  before  my  return;  but, 
my  dear  brethren,  my  dear  hearers,  never  mind  that ;  we  shall 
part,  but  it  will  be  to  meet  again  for  ever.  I  dare  not  meet  you 
now,  I  cannot  bear  your  coming  to  me,  to  part  from  me  ;  it  cuts 
me  to  the  heart,  and  quite  overcomes  me,  but  by  and  by  all  part- 
ing will  be  over,  and  all  tears  shall  be  wiped  away  from  our 
eyes.  God  grant  that  none  that  weep  now  at  my  parting,  may 
weep  at  our  meeting  at  the  day  of  judgment;  and  if  you  never 
were  among  Christ's  sheep  before,  may  Christ  Jesus  bring  you 
now.  O  come,  come,  see  what  it  is  to  have  eternal  life  ;  do  not 
rethse  it ;  haste,  sinner,  haste  away :  may  the  great,  the  good 
Shepherd,  draw  your  souls.  Oh !  if  you  never  heard  his  voice 
before,  God  grant  you  may  hear  it  now ;  that  I  may  have  this 
comfort  when  I  am  gone,  that  I  had  last,  that  some  souls  are 
awakened  at  the  parting  sermon.  O  that  it  may  be  a  farewell 
sermon  to  you;  that  it  may  be  a  means  of  your  taking  a  fare- 
well of  the  world,  thelusts  of  the  flesh,  the  lusts  of  the  eye,  and 
the  pride  of  life.  O  come,  come,  come,  to  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ;  to  him  I  leave  you. 

And  you,  dear  sheep,  that  are  already  in  his  hands,  O  may 
God  keep  you  from  wandering ;  God  keep  you  near  Christ's 
feet;  I  do  not  care  what  shepherds  keep  you,  so  as  you  are 
kept  near  the  great  Shepherd  and  Bishop  of  souls.  The  Lord 
God  keep  you,  lift  up  the  light  of  his  countenance  upon  you, 
and  give  you  peace.     Anien» 


791 


THB 


CHARACTER,  PREACHING,  &c. 


OF   THE 


REV.  GEORGE   WHITEFIELD, 

IN  A  SERMON  PREACHED  AT  CHARLESTOWN,  SOUTH  CAROLINA, 
MARCH  26th,  1740,  BY  JOSEPH  SMITH,  V.  D.  M. 


Job  xxxii.  17. — /  said,  I  will  answer  also  my  part;  I  also  will  shew  my 

opinion. 

My  desi^  from  this  text,  is  to  shew  my  impartial  opinic^n  of  that  '^  son 
of  thunder,"  who  has  lately  graced  and  warmed  this  desk ;  and  would 
have  been  an  ornament,  I  think,  to  the  best  pulpit  in  the  pro?ince. — 
Happy  shall  I  think  myself,  if  I  can  only  clinch  the  nails  this  great  master 
of  assemblies*  has  already  fastened.  Like  Elihu,  the  gallant  youth  before 
us,  "  I  am  now  full  of  matter ;  the  spirit  within  me  constraineth  me :  m j 
belly  is  as  wine  which  hath  no  vent ;  it  is  ready  to  burst  like  new  bottles  ; 
I  will  speak,  that  I  may  be  refreshed."  Others  have  freely  spoken  their 
sentiments  of  the  wondrous  man  before  me;  and  I  have  heard  the 
defaming,  as  well  as  the  applause,  of  many.  **  I  said,  therefore,  I  will 
answer  also  my  part;  I  will  also  shew  mv  opinion/*  In  this  I  design  no 
offence— nor  would  I  give  flattering  titles  to  any  man,  lest  my  Maker 
should  take  me  away. 
The  scheme  proposed  is^ 

I.  To  shew  my  opinion  of  the  doctrines  he  insisted  upon,  and  wdl 
established. 

II.  To  speak  something  of  the  manner  of  his  preaching. 

III.  To  offer  my  sentiments  upon  his  personal  character. 

Lastly.  To  give  my  thoughts,  what  Providence  seems  to  have  in  its 
view  in  raising  up  men  of  this  stamp,  in  our  day,  almost  every  where 
spoken  against — yet  crowded  after,  and  justly  admired.  ^ 

*  That  xnhiisterB  of  the  Oospel  are  called  **  masters  of  assemblies,"  see  Paul's  Anao- 
tations  on  £ccl.  xii.  11. 


792  CHARACTER,  PREACHING,  ETC.  OP 

I.  I  shall  give  you  my  opinions  of  the  doctrines  he  insisted  upon 
among  us. 

To  speak  more  generally — 

They  were  doctrines,  I  am  of  opinion,  agreeable  to  the  dictates  of 
reason ;  evidently  founded  upon  scripture ;  exactly  correspondent  with  the 
articles  of  the  establishment ;  of  great  use  and  necessity  in  forming  the 
Christian  life,  which  I  had  early  imbibed  from  the  best  writers  and  sji- 
tems;  from  which  I  had  never  yet  seen  reason  to  recede — and  which, 
therefore,  you  are  witnesses  I  have  not  failed  to  introduce  and  inculcate 
in  the  course  of  my  ministry  among  you. 

To  be  more  particular ; 

One  of  the  doctrines,  which  he  has  hardly  passed  over  in  silence,  in  any 
single  discourse,  is  that  of  original  sin ;  a  truth  so  manifest  in  scripture, 
that  I  am  almost  of  opinion  it  is  impossible  any  sincere,  diligent,  and 
unprejudiced  inquirer  should  miss  it — for  it  is  written  in  sun-beams,  that  a 
man  may  run  and  read. 

By  original  sin,  I  mean  nothing  less  than  the  imputation  of  Adam's  first 
sin  to  all  his  posterity,  by  ordinary  generation ;  which  imputation  is  the 
resultance  of  his  being  constituted  to  act  for  them  in  the  extensive  capacity 
of  a  legal  representative ;  the  consequence  of  which  is,  that  inherent  cor- 
ruption of  nature,  and  those  sinful  propensities,  we  are  now  bom  with  into 
the  world.     As  to  the  point  of  imputation,  it  is  a  doctrine,  it  must  be  con- 
fessed, of  more  intricacy ;  about  which,  it  is  therefore  possible,  a  well- 
meaning  man  may  labour  under  some  scruples,  while,  perhaps,  he  allows 
the  depravity  of  human  nature ;  though  I  must  beg  leave  to  express  my 
surprise,  that  any  person  of  judgment  should  maintain  this  depravity,  and 
not  immediately  discover  its  necessary  connection  with  imputation,  and 
how  impossible  it  is  to  secure  the  justice  of  God,  without  having  recourse 
to  it:  for,  certainly,  the  corruption  of  human  nature,  so  universal  and 
inseparable,  is  one  of  the  greatest  punishments  that  could  be  inflicted  upon 
the  species ;  and  that  it  is  inflicted,  appears  from  hence,  that  "  God  made 
man  at  first  upright^"     Now,  if  there  be  no  previous  imputation,  to  lay  a 
legal  foundation  for  this  punishment,  then  God  has  inflicted  an  evident 
punishment  upon  a  race  of  men  perfectly  innocent,  ^and  which  had  neidjer 
sinned  personally,  nor  yet  by  imputation;  and  thus,  while  we  imagfioe  ve 
honour  the  justice  of  God  by  renouncing  imputation,  we,  in  fact,  pour  tb« 
highest  dishonour  upon  that  sacred  attribute.     This,  I  fear,  is  the  grand 
reason  why  the  adversaries  of  original  sin  labour  so  hard  to  explode  the 
depravity  of  nature ;  for,  should  they  once  admit  that,  they  are  conscious 
they  roust  admit  imputation  too.     I  say,  1  fear  this  is  the  grand  reason. 
How  else  is  it  possible  a  man  should  question  a  truth,  written,  in  capitals, 
upon  the  moral  world  ?  a  truth  we  feel  in  every  power  of  our  souls !  what 
we  read  upon  our  own  hearts— and  is,  indeed,  stamped  upon  universal 
nature,  within  our  horizon ;    and  which  the  more  righteous  any  man  ii, 
the  more  he  feels  and  groans  under.     We  need  not  wonder,  then,  our  late 
incomparable  preacher  should  insist  upon  original  sin,  when  we  consider 
not  only  in  what  an  incontestable  manner  he  proved  it,  but  of  what  vast 
importance  it  must  be.     For,  to  give  my  opinion  freely,  I  cannot  think,  I 
cannot  see,  how  the  Christian  scheme  can  be  consistent  with  itself,  or  sup- 
ported with  honour,  without  this  basis.     I  look  upon  it,  not  merely  as  a 
doctrine  of  the  scriptures,  the  great  fountain  of  truth,  but  a  very  fun- 
damental one ;    from  which,  I  hope,  God  will  suffer  none  of  you  to  be 
enticed  by  any  sophistry  of  the  subtle  disputers  of  this  world,  or  channi  of 
language. 


THE   REV.  G.  WHITEPIELD.  793 

But  to  proceed : — 

Another  doctrine  we  have  lately  had,  in  the  wannest  language,  impressed 
upon  U8,  i»  that  Pauline  one,  of  justification  by  faith  alone.  And  here  you 
will  remember  how  the  preacher  vindicated  himself  from  all  suspicions  of 
Antinomian  error,  and  opening  a  door  to  licentious  manners ;  for  while,  on 
the  one  hand,  he  earnestly  contended  for  our  justification  asXhe  free  gift  of 
God,  by  faith  alone  in  the  blood  of  Christ,  an  article  of  faith  delivered  to 
the  saints  of  old — so,  on  the  other  hand,  he  took  special  care  to  guard 
against  the  licentious  abuse  of  it,  and  would  not  make  void  the  law,  when 
he  asserted  that  good  works  were  the  necessary  fruits  and  evidences  of 
true  faith  ;  telling  us  plainly,  and  with  the  clearest  distinction,  that  a  man 
was  justified  these  three  ways ;  meritoriously  by  Christ,  instrumentally  by 
faith  alone,  declaratively  by  good  works.  Ana  believe  me,  my  brethren,  this 
is  the  true  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  writings  of  the  apostles.  For 
when  Abraham  believed  God,  was  not  it  (his  faith)  imputed  to  him  for 
righteousness  ?  And  yet  was  not  Abraham,  our  father,  justified  by  works, 
when  he  had  offered  Isaac,  his  son,  upon  the  altar  ?  How  shs^l  we,  then, 
reconcile  this?  Why,  very  easily.  The  act  of  this  faith  justified  him 
through  Christ,  and  the  offering  of  Isaac  justified  that  faith  ;  the  first  in 
the  sight  of  God,  the  other  in  the  sight  of  man.  In  justification  faith 
precedes,  works  follow  after ;  for  if  works  precede,  or  had  any  causal  in- 
fluence in  our  justification,  we  might  seem  to  have  whereof  to  glory 
before  God.  But  here  it  is  the  free  gift  of  God,  and  boasting  for  ever 
excluded.  God,  when  he  justifies  a  man,  never  finds,  but  makes  him 
holy,  without  any  previous  merit,  of  which  there  can  be  no  shadow  in  aa 
apostate  creature.  No ;  ''  By  grace  ye  are  saved,  through  faith,  and  that 
not  of  yourselves ;  it  is  the  «gift  of  God/'  And,  could  I  live  the  most 
exact  life  ever  man  lived ;  could  I  even  excel  the  virtues  of  the  pious 
preacher  himself;  could  I  produce  as  many  good  works  as  the  saints,  m  all 
.  ages,  collected  together,  I  would  not,  for  ten  thousand  worlds,  put  my 
justification  upon  them ;  I  would  only  consider  them  as  bright  and  pleasant 
evidences  of  the  truth  of  my  faith  in  Christ.  Good  works  are  valuable 
things ;  God  forbid  we  should  lisp  a  word  against  them  in  their  proper 
place ;  we  plead  for  them,  we  press  the  practice  of  them,  as  incumbent 
upon  all  Christians;  but  we  cannot  allow  them  any  share  in  our  justifi* 
cation  before  God.  They  may  prove  we  are  justified ;  but  they  cannot 
justify  us.  No,  verily — "Not  by  works  of  rignteousness,  which  we  have 
done,  but  of  his  own  mercy,  God  saveth  us.^  Hitherto,  then,  our  preacher 
is  orthodox  in  his  doctrine,  which  both  excludes  licentiousness,  establishes 
the  law,  and  exalts  free  grace — the  evident  design  and  language  of  the 
gospel ;  and  which,  I  am  of  opinion,  every  minister  of  Christ  should  ear- 
nestly contend  for :  because  the  sinner  must  first  see  himself  naked,  before 
he  vTill  come  to  Christ  for  his  white  raiment — the  pure  and  fine  lineui^ 
which  is  the  righteousness  of  the  saints,  and  which  I  counsel  you  all  to 
buy  of  him. 

Regeneration  was  another  great  doctrine  which  the  excellent  man  much 
insisteid  upon ;  hardly  a  single  sermon  but  he  mentioned  it,  sometimes 
more  than  twice ;  and  one,  and  perhaps  the  best  of  his  discourses,  was  ex 
professo  upon  this  subject.  Nor  can  any  man  be  surprised,  that  a  minis- 
ter of  the  New  Testament  should  so  heartily  espouse  a  principle  which  our 
Lord  himself  began  to  speak,  and  asserted  as  a  tundamental  point  of  Chris- 
tianity, indispensably  requisite  to  eternal  life;  and  this  with  so  much 
vehemency,  and  earnest  repetition.  "  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  thee.  Except 
a  man  be  born  again^  (from  above,)  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God.'' 

.3  n 


794  CHARACTER,  PRKACHING,  £TC.  OP 

He  assures  us,  "  We  must' be  born  of  water,  and  of  the  Spirit,'*  Our  refe- 
neration  results,  in  its  necessity,  from  original  sin.  They  that  are  "  shapen 
in  iniquity,  and  conceiyed  in  sin,"  must  be  washed  and  cleansed :  by  which 
is  not  meant  the  mere  forms  and  rites  of  baptism  ;  not  the  washing  awaj 
the  filth  of  the  flesh,  as  the  corrupt  Pharisees  might  wash  their  hands,  aod 
the  outside  of  the  cup,  but  the  answer  of  a  good  conscience  towards  God, 
purged  by  the  blood. of  Christ.  For  we  can  only  be  "  saved  by  the  wasb> 
iDg  of  regeneration,  and  the  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost;  "*  the  infusion  of 
a  new  life — a  divine,  heavenly,  and  prolific  principle.  As  we  are  by  nature 
dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,  God  must  quicken  us  by  his  Spirit — and 
through  that  we  must  "  mortify  the  deeds  of  the  body,  and  cmcify  the 
flesh,  with  its  aflections  and  lusts : "  for,  until  we  know  (until  we  feel  the 
exceeding  greatness  of)  the  power  of  Christ*s  resurrection,  we  have  no  part 
in  him :  we  cannot  enter  into  heaven ;  or,  if  we  should,  our  first  petitioQ 
would  be,  to  be  discharged  as  soon  as  possible.  Pleasure  is  the  result  of 
harmony  ;  the  nature  must  agree  with  the  object :  there  must  be  a  g^reat 
change  upon  the  nature,  to  make  us  susceptive  of  the  pleasure  of  God*s 
presence. 

CavOlers  and  scoflers,  I  know  there  are  enough,  in  these  last  days, 
against  this  doctrine.  Some  master  of  Israel  may  ask,  **  How  can  these 
things  be?  can  a  roan,  when  he  is  old,  enter  a  second  time  into  b» 
mother's  womb,  and  be  bom?"  Who  ever  said  he  could?  Or  vhat 
would  it  avail,  if  be  should  ?  But  I  hope  there  may  be  such  a  thing  as  a 
spiritual  birth,  subsequent  to  the  natural.  May  we  not  be  again  begottea 
to  a  lively  hope?  May  not  Grod,  of  his  own  will,  do  it  by  his  virord  aod 
Spirit  ?  And  may  we  not  then  become  as  '^  little  children,**  and  ''  new-born 
babes :  *\  bom  **  not  of  blood,  nor  of  the  will  of  man,  nor  of  the  will  of  the 
flesh,  but  of  G9d  ?  "  Are  we  not  told,  in  the  most  express  language,  '*  thai 
which  is  bom  of  the  flesh  is  flesh,  and  that  which  is  bom  of  the  Spirit  is 
spirit  ?  *'  Are  not  here  two  births,  one  natural,  the  other  spiritual  ?  I  am 
really  astonished  any  man  should  read  his  Bible,  and  his  own  heart,  and  he 
a  stranger  to  this  doctrine  of  the  new-birth  ;  without  which  all  our  boasted 
morality,  and  ethical  virtues,  however  splendid,  and  rhetoricated  upon,  can 
never  adorn  us  in  the  sight  of  God,  nor  qualify  us  for  his  redeeming  love. 

True  religion  is  an  inward  thing— a  thing  of  the  heart ;  it  chiefly  resides 
there,  and  consists  in  a  right  disposition,  and  sanctified  temper,  of  the  will 
and  affections ;  and,  as  we  have  been  lately  told,  "  in  righteousness,  peace, 
and  ioy  in  the  Holy  Ghost  ;**  which  naturally  introduces  another  doctzine, 
nearly  allied  to  this,  and  which  was  very  strongly  insisted  on,  viz. 

The  impressions,  or  (which  was  the  preacher*s  own  phrase)  inward  feel- 
ings of  the  Spirit.  And  here  you  remember  how  he  guarded  against  the 
invidious  censure  of  assuming  the  character  of  an  apostle. 

He  renounced  all  pretensions  to  the  extraordinary  powers  and  signs  of 
apostleship---gifts  of  healing,  speaking  with  tongues,  the  faith  of  mirades; 
things  peculiar  to  the  age  of  inspiration,  and  extinct  with  them.  He  also 
allowed  these,  feelings  of  the  Spirit  were  not  in  every  person,  or  at  til 
times,  in  the  same  degree ;  and  that  though  a  fuTI  assurance  were  attain- 
able, and  what  every  one  should  labour  to  attain,  yet  not  of  absnlute 
necessity  to  the  being  of  a  Christian.  Only  he  asserted  that  we  might  feel 
the  Spirit  of  God,  in  his  sanctifying  and  saving  impressions,  and  witnessinf: 
^  with  our  own  spirits.  And  what  is  there  in  all  this,  repugnant  to  reason  ? 
What  is  there  in  it  but  what  is  perfectly  agreeable  to  scriptare?  How  ess 
we  be  led  by  the  Spirit,  or  have  joy  in  the  Holy  Grhost,  without  some 
sensible  perceptions  of  it?  Can  I;  at  any  time,  feel  my  soul  in  sacied  lap- 


THE   REV.    6.  WIlirBPIRLD.  795 

tures,  burning  with  the  love  of  God  and  of  Christ,  and  all  my  best  pas- 
sions alive?  Can  I  feel  a  secret  pleasure  in  the  word,  ordinances,  and 
communion  of  God?  Can  **  I  taste  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come?" 
Can  I  feel  the  threatenings  of  God  impressed  upon  my  conscience,  or 
promises  of  Paradise  working  upon  my  hopes?  Can  I  groan  under  the 
burden  of  my  corruptions,  or  exult  in  the  liberty  of  spirit  I  may  sometimes 
have,  in  a  calm  and  retired  hour,  in  the  meditation  of  my  pardon,  and  the 
contemplation  of  heaven  and  immortality  ?  I  say,  can  I  have  all  these 
things  in  me,  and  do  I  feel  them  upon  my  soul,  and  yet  this  doctrine  of 
feeling  the  Spirit  be  burlesqued  and  ridiculed,  in  an  age  of  infidelity,  and 
of  men  who  love  to  speak  evil  of  the  things  which  they  know  not  ?  Indeed, 
a  sinful  and  adulterous  generation  may  seek  after  a  sign.  But  what  sign 
can  we  give  them  of  things  that  must  be  known  by  being  felt  ?  Or  what 
ideas  can  I  convey  of  light  to  the  blind,  and  of  harmony  to  the  deaf?  Let 
God  touch  their  hearts,  as  he  has  done  ours,  and  they  shall  feel  what  we 
feel ;  and  what  I  would  not  but  feel  for  millions  of  worlds.  But  till  then 
it  is  impossible  in  nature  to  represent  it  in  a  full  adequate  light  to  them ; 
and  they  may  as  well  ask  for  mathematical  demonstrations  in  a  point  of 
pure  morality.  This  is  a  doctrine  I  have  been  acquainted  with  many 
years ;  it  is  not  new  or  surprising  to  me ;  you  have  heard  me  preach  it 
scores  of  times,  though,  perhaps,  clothed  in  other  expressions,  and  the 
influences  of  the  Spirit,  the  impressions  of  grace.  And  however  derided  by 
tome,  who  set  up  and  caress  a  system  of  rational  religion,  I  hope  to  have 
always  enthusiasm  enough  to  maintain,  that  the  Spirit  of  God  may  be  felt. 
To  conclude  this  head,  all  the  doctrines  now  mentioned,  are  primitive,  pro- 
testant,  puritanic  ones,  which  our  good  fathers,  conformists  and  dissenters, 
have  filled  their  writings  with;  and  as  Dr.  Watts  has  well  observed,  "  They 
fill  heaven  apace,  for  God  was  with  them." 

Yet  all  that  vast  reverence  with  which  I  heard  these  doctrines  from  the 
mouth  of  our  famous  preacher,  could  not  win  my  applause  or  approbation 
of  some  few  harsher  epithets  and  expressions  (you  know  what  I  mean) 
which  dropt  from  his  lips.  These,  in  my  opinion,  may  be  pronounced 
failings ;  but  such  as* often  attend  a  warm  zeal  for  orthodoxy,  in  the  points 
of  the  last  importance ;  arise  from  a  principle  of  conscience,  and  are  found 
interwoven  with  the  brightest  characters ;  and  he  that  has  none,  let  him 
cast  the  first  stone. 

II.  I  shall  next  give  you  my  opinion  of  the  manner  of  his  preaching. 

And  here  I  need  not  say,  nor  can  my  pen  describe  his  action  and  ges- 
ture, in  all  their  strength  and  decencies.  He  is  certainly  a  finished 
preacher,  and  a  great  master  of  pulpit-oratory  and  elocution,  while  a  noble 
negligence  ran  through  his  style.  Yet  his  discourses  were  very  extraor* 
dinary,  when  we  consider  how  little  t^ey  were  premeditated,  and  how 
many  of  them  h&-gave  us,  the  little  time  he  was  with  us.  Many,  I  trust,' 
have  felt,  and  will  long  feel,  the  impressions  of  his  zeal  and  fire,  the  passion 
and  flame  of  his  expressions ;  which  were  such,  that  I  cannot  think  my 
public  character  of  him*  in  the  least  exceeds  the  bounds  of  truth  and 
strict  verity ;  only  making  that  allowance  for  figures  of  speech,  which  is 
always  expected,  upon  extraordinary  occasions,  and  in  the  portraiture  of 
great  characters. 

He  appeared  to  me,  in  all  his  discourses,  very  deeply  affected  and  im- 
pressed in  his  own  heart.     How  did  that  bum  and  boil  within  him,  whei 

*  South  Carolina  Oaxctte,  No.  10. 


796  GHARAGTBR^   PREACHING,  ETC.  OP 

he  spake  of  the  things  he  had  made,  touching  the  King  t  How  was  his 
tongue  like  the  pen  of  a  ready  writer !  touchbg,  as  with  a  coal  from  die 
altar  I  With  what  a  flow  of  words,  what  a  ready  profasioo  of  language,  did 
he  speak  to  us  upon  the  great  conoems  of  our  souls !  In  what  a  flamiof 
light  did  he  set  our  eternity  before  us  !  How  earnestly  did  he  pren  Chiiit 
upon  us  ?  How  did  he  move  our  passions  with  the  constraining  lore  of 
such  a  Redeemer  ?  The  awe,  the  silence,  the  attention,  which  sat  upon  the 
face  of  so  great  an  audience,  was  an  argument  how  he  could  reign  over  aU 
their  powers.  Many  thought  he  spake  as  never  man  spake  before  him. 
So  charmed  were  people  with  his  manner  of  address,  that  they  shut  vp 
their  shops,  forgot  their  secular  business,  and  laid  aside  their  schemes  for 
the  world;  and  the  oftener  he  preached,  the  keener  edge  he  seemed  to  pot 
upon  their  desires  of  hearing  him  again.  How  awfully,  with  what  thunder 
and  sound,  did  he  discharge  the  artilleiy  of  heaven  upon  us?  And  yet 
how  could  he  soften  and  melt,  even  a  soldier  of  Ulysses,  with  the  lofe  and 
mercy  of  God !  How  close,  strong,  and  pungent  were  his  apfdicaftioiis 
to  the  conscience;  mingling  light  and  heat,  pointing  the  arrows  of  tbt 
Almighty  at  the  hearts  of  sinners,  while  he  poured  in  the  balm  upon  ibe 
wounds  of  the  contrite,  and  made  broken  bones  rejoice  !  Eternal  thesMi, 
the  tremendous  solemnities  of  our  relig^n*  were  all  ahve  upon  his  tongse! 
So,  methinks,  (if  you  will  forgive  the  figure,)  St.  Paul  would  look  and  spetk 
in  a  pulpit,  and  in  some  such  manner,  I  have  been  tempted  to  conoeive  ef 
a  seraph,  were  he  sent  down  to  preach  among  us,  and  to  tell  ns  what  tkiap 
he  had  seen  and  heard  above !  How  bold  and  courageous  did  he  look  I 
He  was  no  flatterer — would  not  sufier  men  to  settle  upon  their  lees—did 
not  prophesy  smooth  diings,  nor  sew  pillows.  **  He  taught  the  way  ol 
God  in  truth,  and  regarded  not  the  person  of  men."  The  politest,  the 
most  modish,  of  our  vices,  he  struck  at,  the  most  fashionable  entertain* 
meats,  regardless  of  every  one's  presence  but  His  in  whose  name  he  spake 
with  this  authority.  He  delivered  his  own  soul,  very  sharply  rebuked  oar 
balls  and  midnight  assemblies,  that  bane  of  all  that  is  serious  and  religious; 
and  I  dare  warrant,  if  none  would  go  to  these  .diversions  till  they  hate 
answered  the  solemn  questions  he  put  to  their  consciences,  our  theatre 
would  soon  sink  and  perish. 

You  may  be  sure  I  was  not  displeased  with  this  part  of  his  eooduct, 
when  I  have  so  often  mentioned  these  things,  as  of  pernicions  tendency  to 
our  morals,  religion,  and  prosperity.  And  who  can  blame  a  minister*! 
freedom  and  zeal?  what  bard  measures,  what  cruel  treatment,  would  it  be 
to  censure  our  plainness  of  speech  ?  when  our  very  commission  requires 
us  to  lift  up  our  voice  like  a  trumpet,  to  cry  aloud,  and  not  spare,  to 
shew  people  their  transgressions  ?  and  when  the  blood  of  your  souls,  tke 
most  insupportable  thing  in  the  world,  must  be  required  at  our  hands,  if 
we  be  afraid  to  warn  I  I  am  sure,  would  people  consider  this,  and  that  we 
cannot  possibly  propose  any  temporal  advantage  to  ourselves,  by  striking 
at  the  right  eye,  they  would  applaud,  and  not  censure,  our  warmth  and 
freedom.  I  must  tell  you,  over  and  over  again,  such  things  are  dangeroos 
to  your  souls ;  this  cannot  consist  with  your  christian  profession  and  bap- 
tism ;  they  tend  to  devour  the  seeds,  and  to  weaken  all  the  young  spnogs 
of  virtue,  and  to  erase  the  most  pious  impressions. 

But  if  the  voice  of  ministers  cannot  be  heard,  at  least  let  the  circoiii- 
stances  of  our  country,  and  the  louder  roarings  of  Providence,  awe  and 
restrain  us;  for  I  am  sure  it  is  now  a  time  to  mourn,  and  not  to  dance; 
and  the  scripture  severely  threatens  a  people  that  disregarded  the  opera- 
tions of  Grod*8  h|inds. 


THE   RBV,   G,  WHITEFIEID.  797 

III.  I  now  proceed  to  shew  my  opinion  of  our  preacher,  in  his  personal 
character  and  behaviour. 

Here  I  may  take  courage,  and  challenge  his  woral  enemies  to  lay  any 
thing  to  the  charge  of  his  morals,  or  to  arraign  his  sihcerity,  so  visible  in 
his  whole  deportment. 

While  he  preaches  up  faith  alone,  in  our  justificaticm  before  God»  yet  he 
is  careful  to  maintain  good  works,  and  denying  ungodliness  and  worldly  lusts^ 
to  live  soberly,  righteously,  and  godly.  These  things  the  grace  of  God. 
teacheth  us ;  and  how  much  of  this  doctrine  has  he  transcribed  into  his 
life  I  How  rich  has  he  been  in  all  good  works  (  What  an  eminent  pattern 
•of  piety  towards  God!  How  holy  and  unblameable  in  all  conversation  and 
godliness !  How  seasoned,  how  much  to  the  use  of  edifying,  all  his  dis- 
courses !  How  naturally  does  he  turn  them  to  religion !  How  much  is  he 
given  to  meditation  himself, and  how  does  he  labour  to  excite  it  in  others! 

It  is  indisputable,  with  me,  that  he  aflfects  no  party  religion,  nor  sets 
himself  at  the  head  of  any :  had  this  been  his  aim,  no  man  living  has  had 
fairer  occasions  offered ;  but  he  abhors  the  spirit — he  endeavours  to  sup- 
press it  He  is  always  careful  to  time  his  sabbath  discourses,  so  as  not  to 
interfere  with  the  stated  hours  of  worship  in  that  church,  of  which  he  is  a 
professed  member  and  minister,  and,  in  the  opinion  of  many  people,  a  very 
bright  ornament ;  because,  as  he  told  us,  he  would  not  tempt  away  hearers 
from  their  proper  and  respective  pastors.  And  is  not  this  a  zioble  and 
generous,  a  catholic  and  christian  spirit?  He  is  not  bigoted  to  the 
modelities  and  lesser  rites  and  forms  of  religion,  while  zealous  enough,  and 
very  warm  and  jealous,  in  all  its  essentials,  especially  in  the  divine  ho- 
nours and  godhead  of  his  Saviour.  He  professes  love  to  good  men  of 
every  denomination,  and  told  us,  that  the  **  kiiigdom  of  heaven  consisted 
not  of  meats  and  drinks.''  He  appears  to  me  a  man  full  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  and  of  faith.  Though  his  prayers,  in  this  pulpit,  were  all  extem- 
pore, yet  how  copious,  how  ardent,  with  what  compass  of  thought !  The 
Spirit  of  grace  and  supplication  seemed  to  be  poured  out  upon  him  in 
plenty,  and  to  kindle  and  animate  his  devotions.  He  prays  in  public  with 
that  spirit,  variety,  and  fluency,  which  could  only  be  expected  urom  a  man 
who  was  no  stranger  to  the  sacred  duty  in  private.  He  lives  much  by 
faith,  and  above  3ie  world ;  despises  preferments  and  riches ;  of  which 
last,  I  am  told,  he  has  had  great  offers  in  Europe :  his  heart  seems  set 
upon  doing  good.  He  goes  about  his  great  Master's  work  with  diligence 
and  application ;  and  with  such  cheerfulness,  as  would  make  one  in  love 
with  a  life  of  religion,  which  has  so  many  inward  springs  of  the  best  com- 
forts, and  is  not  that  gloomy,  melancholy  thing,  which  prejudice  and 
imagmation  make  it.  He  is  proof  against  reproach  and  invective.  When 
he  is  reviled,  revileth  not  again,  but  prays  heartily  for  all  his  enemies,  and 
that  such  as  oppose  the  truth,  may  be  converted  to  it.  He  professes  him- 
self to  lay  down  his  life  for  Christ,  and  to  spend,  and  be  spent,  in  the 
service  of  souls.  Such  a  man  has  all  imaginable  claim  to  our  highest 
love  and  honour.  I  freely  own  he  has  taken  my  heart,  and  I  feel  his 
reproaches.  God  seems  to  be  with  him  of  a  truth  ;  has  set  his  seal  upon 
him :  his  rod  has  budded,  and  he  has  many  to  whom  he  can  say,  ^  Ye  are 
my  epistle."  Wherever  he  has  preached,  he  has  been  thronged — and  many 
have  come  to  him  pricked  in  their  hearts,  saying,  **  What  shall  we  do  to 
be  saved  ?"  He  has  put  a  new  face  upon  religion,  my  letters  inform  me, 
in  some  populous  cities  and  parts  of  our  neighbouring  continent ;  given 
new  life  to  ministers  and  people ;  made  sermons,  once  a  drug,  a  vendible 
commodity  among  them;   evening  and  weekly  lectures  are  set  up,  and 


798  CHARACTER,   PREACHING,   ETC.   OF 

always  crowded  with  persons  of  difierent  persuasions ;  while  he  has  put  a 
damp  upon  their  polite  diversions,  which  always  dwindle  as  Chnstianity 
revives.  Surely  no  man  could  do  these  things,  I  bad  almost  said  these 
miracles,  unless  God  were  with  him,  who  gives  the  increase,  even  ^  when 
Paul  plants  and  Apollos  waters."  Had  ecclesiastic  prefermenta  been  bis 
idol,  mme  and  reputation  his  motive,  as  he  has  taken  a  preposterous  waj 
to  acquire  them,  so  I  can  never  suffer  myself  to  think  God  would  have 
•owned  him  so  visibly,  or  given  him  so  many  seals  of  his  ministry.  Our 
Saviour  himself  makes  good  fruits  the  general  characteristic  of  good  minis- 
ters. *^  Ye  shall  know  them  by  their  fruits.**  Either  the  fruits  and  suc- 
cess of  their  ministry,  the  design  and  tendency  of  their  doctrines,  or  tha 
fruits  of  the  Spirit  in  their  lives.  And  which  of  these  hare  been  wanting 
in  this  extraordinary  man  ?  Who  can  object  against  the  tendency  of  hii 
doctrines?  And  for  success,  his  enemies  know  it  to  their  own  confusioo. 
And  who  can  say  his  life  is  unfruitful,  or  that  he  has  appeared  like  an 
immoral  man  ?  He  renders  to  all  their  due.  While  zealous  for  the  thiDgs 
of  GUxl,  he  is  a  friend  to  Csesar — a  lo3ral  subject  to  king  Greorg^ — heaitiJj 
prays  for  him  and  his  royal  house,  <'  May  it  abide  before  God  I''  A  pitTet 
to  which,  I  doubt  not,  you  are  all  ready  to  say,  Amen. 

But  to  proceed  with  our  character  of  the  preacher.  Whom  hath  he 
wronged  or  defVauded  ?  ^<  Whose  ox  or  whose  ass  hath  he  taken  ?**  Saj, 
if  any  man  hath  found  aught  in  his  hands ;  so  far  from  it,  that  he  seems 
to  live  not  by  bread  alone,  but  by  the  word  and  promise  of  Grod ;  without 
taking  thought  for  the  morrow,  ''  what  he  shall  eat,  or  drink,  or  put  oo.** 

And  for  charity,  aa  it  consists  in  compassion  and  acts  of  beneficence,  ve 
have  few  men  like-minded.  In  this  grand  circle  of  practical  religion,  he 
seems  to  be  a  second  Job,  as  well  as  for  patience ;  and  deserves  a  good 
report  of  all  men,  and  of  the  truth  itself.  Had  he  been  under  any  criminal 
influence  of  a  mercenary,  covetous  temper — had  he  collected  money  for 
himself,  in  his  journeying  often,  and  itinerant  preachings,  under  the  pre- 
text of  doing  it  for  the  poor,  as  he  was  slanderously  reported,  he  had  cer- 
tainly a  fair  opportunity  to  enrich  himself.  But  we  have  seen  a  plain  fact, 
cannot  be  denied — that  he  cast  all  into  the  treasury,  and  serves  the  table 
of  the  poor  with  it.  Strolling  and  vagabond  orphans,  poor  and  helpless, 
without  father,  without  mother,  without  purse,  and  without  friend,  he  seeb 
out,  picks  up,  and  adopts  into  his  family  :  he  is  now  building  acconuno- 
dations,  and  laying  the  best  foundation  for  their  support,  and  religions 
instruction,  without  any  visible  fund  :  encouraged  to  go  on  in  faith,  from 
the  shining  example  of  the  great  professor  in  Germany,  who  began  a  like 
pious  work  with  almost  nothing;  and  raised  it  to  such  perfection,  as  is  the 
wonder  and  astonishment  of  all  that  hear  of  it  This  is  a  sacrifice  well 
pleasing  to  God  !  The  loins  of  the  poor  will  bless  him  I  ^'  The  blessing  of 
him  that  was  ready  to  perish  will  come  upon  him !  ^  He  hath  dispersed 
abroad— he  hath  given  to  the  poor ;  his  righteousness  ought  to  endure  and 
be  celebrated  among  us.  After  this,  let  none  call  him  an  uncharitable 
man ;  for  what  brighter  evidence  of  pure  religion  than  this,  to  visit  the 
fatherless  in  their  affliction. 

And  permit  me  here  to  join  in  iny  thanks  to  you,  and  the  other  chari- 
table disposed  Christians,  who  have  shewn  their  bowels  of  mercy  in  the 
late  very  large  collection  (six  hundred  pounds)  for  the  Orphan-house  in 
Georgia.  This  is  an  honour  to  our  whole  tovm ;  and,  believe  me,  ve  will 
never  be  a  penny  the  poorer,  for  helping  the  poor :  "  Iliem  we  have  always 
with  us — and  insomuch  as  we  have  done  unto  them,  we  have  done  it  unto 
Christ,"  and  cannot  fail  of  a  reward  ;  at  least  the  reflection  we  make  upoo 


THE   RRV.   G.    WHITRPIBLD.  799 

it,  on  our  last  bed,  will  giv^  us  more  satisfaction  than  what  we  contribute 
to  the  support  of  balls,  and  assemblies  of  music,  to  the  pride  and  luxuries 
of  life ;  nor  can  it  fail  to  occasion  many  thanksgivings  unto  God. 

I  now  proceed,  under  the  last  head,  to  give  my  opinion  what  views  Pro- 
vidence may  have  in  raising  up  men  of  this  stamp,  now  among  us. 

And  this  I  desire  to  do  with  all  humility  and  modesty. 

I  pretend  to  no  spirit  of  prophecy,  and  can  only  conjecture,  and  offer 
the  result  of  observation,  reason,  and  the  usual  tendencies  of  things,  cor- 
roborated by  the  great  promises  scattered  up  and  down  in  our  Bibles, 
wherein  **  glorious  things  are  spoken  of  thee,  thou  city  of  our  God!" 
The  prophecies  are  usually  too  dark  and  mystic  to  be  fully  understood : 
the  seals  of  that  book  are  seldom  broken  until  the  several  periods  of  ac- 
complishment, which  makes  time  the  best  and  surest  expositor.  But,  cer- 
tainly, if  we  can  discern  the  face  of  the  sky  in  the  morning,  we  might 
make  some  humble  and  faint  conjectures  at  the  times  and  seasons,  which 
the  Father  keeps  in  his  own  power.  Now  we  are  none  of  us  ignorant  how 
far  the  primitive  spirit  of  Christianity  has  sunk  into  a  mere  form  of  god- 
liness. Irreligion  has  been  rushing  in,  even  upon  the  Protestant  world, 
like  a  flood :  the  dearest  and  most  obvious  doctrines  of  the  Bible  have 
fallen  into  low  contempt ;  the  principles  and  systems  of  our  good  and 
pious  fathers  have  been  more  and  more  exploded.  And  now,  behold! 
God  seems  to  have  revived  the  ancient  spirit  and  doctrines.  He  is  raising 
up  our  young  men,  with  zeal  and  courage,  to  stem  the  torrent.  They  have 
been  in  ^*  labour  more  abundant;**  they  have  preached  with  such  fire, 
assiduity,  and  success ;  such  a  solemn  awe  have  they  struck  upon  their 
hearers ;  so  unaoooantably  have  they  conquered  the  preiudices  of  many 
persons ;  such  deep  convictions  have  their  sermons  prodfuced ;  so  much 
nave  they  roused  and  kindled  the  zeal  of  ministers  and  people ;  so  intre- 
pidly do  they  push  through  all  opposition,  that  my  soul  overflows  with  joy, 
and  my  heart  is  too  full  to  express  my  hopes.  It  looks  as  if  some  happy 
period  were  opening,  to  bless  the  world  with  another  reformation.  Some 
great  things  seem  to  be  put  upon  the  anvil — some  big  prophecy  at  the 
birth :  G(^  give  it  strength  to  bring  forth !  May  he  especially  water  the 
eood  seed  his  servant  has  plentifully  sown  amon|^  us;  may  we  remember 
now  we  have  heard,  and  hold  fast ;  may  we  chensh  conviction ;  be  fixed 
and  rooted  in  our  Christian  faith ;  not  rebel  against  the  light,  nor  make 
shipwreck  at  last,  by  the  various  winds  of  doctrine  which  are  blowing 
upon  us. 

Thus  have  I  answered,  for  my  part,  and  shewn  my  opinion :  I  have 
done  it  in  the  inte|prity  of  my  heart ;  I  have  designed  no  offence ;  only 
supported  the  doctnnes  and  character  of  a  preacher,  which  love  and  duty 
constrain  me  to  honour  and  defend :  while  I  preclude  no  man  from  shew- 
ing his  opinion,  who  shall  do  it  with  the  same  impartiality. 


FINIS. 


LONDON: 

HINRY  PISH£R»  SON,  &  P.  JACKSON,  PRINTERS, 

38,  NCWOATE  8TEEET. 


