THE  LIBRARY 

OF 

THE  UNIVERSITY 
OF  CALIFORNIA 

LOS  ANGELES 

IN  MEMORY  OF 

Lucius  K.  Chase 
Maria  Catkins  Chase 

PRESENTED  BY 

Ransome  W.  Chase 
David  P.  Chase 


SERMONS 


O  N 


Various  Subjects. 


VIZ. 


1   Of  our  New  Birth   in 

CHRIST  JESUS. 
If.  On   Religious  Society. 

III.  On  the  Benefits  of  an 
Early  Piety. 

IV.  On  Self-Denial . 

V.  On  Interceflion. 

VI.  The  Almoft-Chriftian. 

VII.  On  Juftification. 


VIII.  Of  the   heinous  Sin 
of   profane  Curfing  and 
Swearing. 

IX.  On  the  great  Duty  of 
Family  Religion. 

X.  Thankfulnefs  for  Mer- 
cies   received    a    neceC- 
fary  Duty. 


By  GEORGE    WHITEFIELD,    A.  B. 

of  Pembroke-College,  Oxford. 


LONDON, 

Printed  for  C.  RIVINGTON  at  the  Bihle  and  Cro-wn  in  St. 
Paul's  Church-yard^  and  J.  HUTTON  at  the  Bible  and 
Suft}  next  the  Rofe  Tavern  without  Temple-Bar.     1739. 
Price  bound  3*.  6d, 


ex 


THE 

CONTENTS. 

SERMON     I. 

THE  Nature    and  Ncceffity  of 
our  New-Birth  in  Chrifl  Jefus> 
in  order  to  Salvation. 

Preach'd  in  the  Church  of  St.  Mary  Radcliff'm 
BriJloL 

i  COR.  17. 

If  any  Man  be  in  Chriftt  he  is  a  new  Creature. 

Page  5 

SER- 

937305 


CONTENTS. 

SERMON     II. 

The  Nature  and  Neceffity  of  Society 
in  general,  and  of  Religious  Society 
in  particular. 

Preach'd  in  the  Parifh  Church  of  St.  Nicholas 
in  Briftol;  and  before  the  Religious  Socie- 
ties, at  one  of  their  General  QuarterJy- 
Meetlngs,  \nBow-Churcb  London,  intheYear 


E  CCLES    IV.  9,    10,    12. 

Vivo  are  better  than  one,  becaufe  they  have  a 
good  Reward  for  their  Labour. 

For  if  they  fall,  the  one  will  lift  up  his  Fellow  : 
But  woe  be  to  him  that  is  alone  when  he  fall- 
etb  ;  for  he  hath  not  an  another  to  help  him  up. 

Again,  if  two  lye  together,  then  they  have  Heat-, 
but  how  can  one  be  warm  alone  ? 

And  if  one  prevail  againjl  him,  two  flail  witb- 
ftand  him  ;  and  a  threefold  Cord  is  not  quickly 
broken.  _  P-  35 

SERMON     III. 
The  Benefits  of  an  Early  Piety. 

Preach'd  at  Bow-Church  London,  &c.  on  Wed- 
nefday,  Sept.  28.  1737. 

ECCLES  xii.  i. 

Remember  tby  Creator  in  the  Days  of  thy  Youth. 

65 

SER- 


CONTENTS. 

SERMON     IV. 

The  Extent  and  Reafonablenefs  of  Self- 
Denial. 

Preach 'd  at  the  Parifh  Church  of  St.  Andrew 
Holborn,  on  Sunday  Oflober  9.  1737. 

LUKE  ix.  23. 

And  he  faid  unto  them  all.    If  any  Man  'will 
com?  after  me,  let  him  deny  bimfelf.       p.  89 

SERMON     V. 

Interceffion  every  Chriftian's  Duty. 

Preach'd  at  the  Parifh  Church  of  Great  St. 
He  lien  t  on  T'uefday  December  27,  1737. 

i  TH  ESS.  v.  35. 
Brethren^  Pray  for  us.  1 1 3 

SERMON     VI. 

The  Almoft-Chriftian. 

Preach'd  at    the  Parifli  Church  of  St.  John, 

Wapping. 

ACTS  xxvi.  28. 

Almoft  thou  perfuadejl  me  to  be  a  Cbriftian.  137 

SER- 


CONTENTS. 

SERMON     VII. 

Of  Juftification  by  Chrtft. 

Preach 'd  at  the  Parifh  Church  of  St.  Anthotin. 

i  COR  vi.  ii. 

But  ye  are  juftified.  163 

SERMON     VIII. 

The  heinous   Sin  of  profane  Curfing 
and  Swearing. 

Preach'd  at  the  Parifti  Church  of  St.  Nicholas 
Cole-Abbey. 

MATTH.  v  34. 
But  I  fay  unto  you.  Swear  not  at  all.  187 

SERMON     IX. 

The  great  Duty  of  Family  Religion. 

Preach'd  at  the  Parifli  Church  of  St.  VedaJI, 

Fo/ier-Lane. 

JOSHUA  xxiv.  15. 

As  for  me  and  my  Houfet   we  will  ferve  the 
Lord.  207 

SER- 


CONTENTS. 

SERMON     X. 

Thankfulnefs  for  Mercies  received  a 
neceffary  Duty. 

A  Farewell  Sermon  preach'd  on  Board  the 
Whitaker,  at  Anchor  near  Savannah  in 
Georgia,  on  Sunday  May  17,  1738. 

PSALM  cvii.  30,  31. 

Then  are  they  glad  becaufe  they  are  at  Reft,  and 
Jo  he  bringeth  them  unto  the  Haven  where 
they  would  be. 

O  that  Men  would  therefore  praife  the  Lord 
for  his  Goodnefs,  and  declare  the  Wonders 
that  he  doethfor  the  Children  of  Men.  233 


SER- 


THE 

NATURE  andNECEssiTY 
o  F  o  u  R 

NEW    BIRTH 

I  N 

CHRIST  JESUS, 

In  order   to    SALVATION. 

A  SERMON  preached  in    the  Church  of 
St.  Mary  Radclife  in  BrifloL 


(3) 


THE 


PREFACE. 


THE  Importunity  of  Friends,  the  Aft 
per fiom  of  Enemies,  the  great  Scarcity  of 
Sermons  on  this  SubjeSt  among  the  Divines  of 
our  own  Church,  and  not  any  overweening  Con- 
celt,  I  trufl,  of  the  Worth  of  the  Perfor- 
mance, were,  amongfl  divers  others,  the  Reaforis. 
that  induced  me  to  permit  the  Publication  of 
this  very  plain  Difcourfe. 

What  Reception  it  may  meet  with  from  tbe 
Publick,  it  behoves  me,  for  my  own  fake,  to  be 
very  little  concerned  about.  But  I  humbly  hope, 
that  as  God  was  pleafed  to  give  it  furprizing 
Succefs  when  delivered  from  the  Pulpit,  fo  tht 
fame  Gracious  Being  will  continue  to  co-ope- 
rate with  it  from  the  Prefs :  And  then,  if  it 
be  thereby  made  injlrumental  towards  the  con- 
viewing  any  one  Sitmer,  or  confirming  any  one 
Saint,  I  fiall  not  be  folicitous  about  the  Cen- 
fures  that  may  be  pajftd,  either  on  the  Simpli- 
B  2  aty 


(4) 

city  of  the  Style,   or, on  the  Touth  of  the  Au- 
thor. 

I  hope  it  will  be  permitted  me  to  add  my 
hearty  Wijhes,  that  my  Reverend  Brethren,    the 
Minifters  of  the  Church  of  England,   (iffucb 
an  one  as  I  may  be  worthy  to  call  them  Brethren) 
would  more  frequently   entertain   their  People 
with  Difcourfes  of  this  Nature,  than  they  com- 
monly do :   And  that  they  would  not,    out  of  a 
fertile  Fear  of  difpleafmg  fome  particular  Per- 
Jbnsy  fail  to  declare  the   whole  Will  of  GOD 
to   their    refpeftive  Congregations-,     nor  fuffer 
their  People  to  rejl  fatisfied  with  the  Shell  and 
Shadow  of  Religion,  without  acquainting  them 
with  the  Nature  and  NeceJJity  of  that  Inward 
Holinefs,    and  Vital  Purity  of  Heart,    which 
their  ProfeJ/ion  obliges  them    to   afpire    after, 
and  without  which  no  Man  living  can  comfort- 
My  fee  the  LORD. 


SERMON 


(5) 


SERMON    I. 

Of  our  New  Birth  in  C  H  R  i  s  T 

JESUS. 


2  Go  R.  v.    17. 

If  any  Man  be   /#  CHRIST,  he   is  a 
new  Creature. 

THE   Do&rine   of   our  REGENERA- 
TION,  or  NEW  BIRTH  in  CHRIST 
JESUS,   tho'  one   of  the   moft  fun- 
damental  Doctrines   of    our  holy  Religion ; 
though  fo  plainly  and  often  prefled  on  us  in 
Sacred  Writ,    that  he  that  rum  may  read ;  nay, 
though   it  is  the  very  Hinge  on  which  the 
Salvation   of   each  of  us  turns,    and  a  PoinC 
too  in  which  all  fincere  Chriftians,    of  what- 
ever Denomination,  agree  j   yet  it  is  fo  feldom 
confidcred,  and  fo  little  experimentally  under- 
ilood    by  the  Generality  of   ProfefTors,    that 
B  3  were 


-}  Of  our  NEW  BIRTH 

were  we  to  judge  of  the  Truth  of  it  by 
the  Experience  of  moft  who  call  themfelves 
Cbriftians,  we  mould  be  apt  to  imagine  they 
bad  not  fo  much  as  heard  whether  there  be 
any  fuch  thing  as  Regeneration  or  no.  It 
is  true,  Men,  for  the  moft  part,  are  Orthodox 
in  the  common  Articles  of  their  Creed  j  they 
believe  there  is  but  one  GOD,  and  one  Medi- 
ator between  Gop  and  Man,  even  the  Man 
CHRIST  JESUS  ;  and  that  there  is  no  other 
Name  given  under  Heaven,  whereby  they  can 
be  faved,  befides  His  :  But  then  tell  them, 
They  mutt  be  REGENERATE,  they  muft  be 
PORN  AGAIN,  they  mufl  be  renewed  in  the 
very  Spirit,  i.  e.  in  the  inmofl  Faculties  of  their 
Minds,  e'er  they  can  truly  call  CHRIST  Lord, 
Lord,  or  have  any  Share  in  the  Merits  of  his 
precious  Blood;  and  they  are  ready  to  cry  out 
with  Nicodemus,  How  can  thefe  things  be  ? 
or,  with  the  Athenians,  on  another  Occa- 
fion,  What  will  this  Babbler  fay  ?  He  feem- 
eth  to  be  a  letter-forth  of  Jlrange  Dotfrines, 
bccaufe  we  preach  unto  them  CHRIST,  and  the 
New  Birth. 

THAT  I  may  therefore  contribute  my  Mite 
towards  curing  the  fatal  Miftake  of  fuch  Per- 
fons,  who  would  thus  put  afunder  what  GOD 
has  infeparably  joined  together,  and  vainly  ex- 
peft  to  be  juflined  by  CHRIST,  /.  e.  have  their 

Sins 


in  CHRIST  JESUS, 

Sins  forgiven,  unlefs  they  are  alfo  fan&ifi 
*.  e.  have  their  Natures  changed,  and  made 
holy ;  I  fhall  beg  Leave  to  inlarge  on  the  Words 
of  the  Text  in  the  following  manner. 

Fir/t,  I  fhall  endeavour  to  explain  what  is 
meant  by  being  in  CHRIST:  If  any  Man 
be  in  CHRIST. 

Secondly,  What  we  are  to  underfhnd  by  be- 
ing a  New  Creature.  If  any  Man  be 
in  CHRIST,  (fays  the  Apoftle)  he  is  a  new 
Creature. 

Thirdly^  I  fhall  produce  fome  Arguments  to 
prove  Why  we  muft  be  New  Creatures 
e'er  we  can  be  in  CHRIST. 

Fourthly  and  lajily,  I  mail  draw  fome  In- 
ferences from  what  will  have  been  deli- 
vered, and  then  conclude  with  a  Word  or 
two  of  Exhortation  from  the  Whole. 

I.  AND  firfl  then,  I  am  to  endeavour  to  ex- 
plain what  is  meant  by  this  Expreflion  in  the 
Text,  If  any  Man  be  in  CHRIST. 

Now  a  Perfon  may  be  faid  to  be  "tn  CHRIST 
two  Ways.  Firft,  only  by  an  outward  Pro- 
feflion.  And  in  this  Senfe,  every  one  that  is 
called  a  Chriftian,  or  baptized  into  CHRIST'S 
Church,  may  be  faid  to  be  tn  CHRIST.  But 
that  this  is  not  the  fole  Meaning  of  the  Apo- 
B  4  flic's 


I  Of  our  NEW  BIRTH 

ftle's  Phrafe  now  before  us,  is  evident,  becaufe 
then  every  one  that  names  the  Name  of 
CHRIST,  or  is  baptized  into  his  vifible  Church, 
would  be  a  new  Creature.  Which  is  notori- 
oufly  falfej  it  being  too  plain,  beyond  all 
Contradiction,  that  comparatively  but  few  of 
thofe  that  are  born  of  Water^  are  born  of  the 
Spirit  likewife  j  or,  to  ufe  another  Scriptu- 
ral way  of  fpeaking,  Many  are  baptized  with 
Water,  which  were  never,  effectually  at  leaft, 
baptized  with  the  HOLY  GHOST. 

To  be  in  CHRIST  therefore,  in  the  full 
Import  of  the  Word,  muft  certainly  mean 
fomething  more  than  a  bare  outward  Profef- 
iion,  or  being  called  after  his  Name  For,  as 
this  fame  Apoftle  tells  us,  All  are  not  Ifra- 
elites  that  are  of  Ifrael,  i.  e.  when  applied 
to  Chriftianity,  all  are  not  real  Chriftians  that 
are  nominally  fuch.  Nay,  that  is  fo  far  from 
being  the  Cafe,  that  our  BleiTed  LORD  himfelf 
informs  us,  That  many  that  have  prophefied 
or  preached  in  his  Name,  and  in  his  Name 
caft  out  Devils,  and  done  many  wonderful 
Works,  mall  notwithflanding  be  difmifled  at 
the  laft  Day  with  a  Depart  from  me,  I  know 
you  noty  ye  Workers  of  Iniquity. 

IT  remains  therefore,  that  this  Exprefilon, 
If  any  Man  be  in  CHRIST,  muft:  be  underftood 
ia  a  fecond  and  clofer  Signification;  viz.  to  be 

in 


in  C  H  R  i  s  T  J  E  s  u  s.  9 

in  him  fo  as  to  partake  of  the  Benefits  of  his 
Sufferings :  To  be  in  him  not  only  by  an  out- 
ward Profeffion,  but  by  an  inward  Change 
and  Purity  of  Heart,  and  Cohabitation  of  his 
Holy  Spirit :  To  be  in  him  fo  as  to  be  myfti- 
cally  united  to  him  by  a  true  and  lively  Faith, 
and  thereby  to  receive  fpiritual  Virtue  from 
him,  as  the  Members  of  the  natural  Body  do 
from  the  Head,  or  the  Branches  from  the 
Vine :  To  be  in  him  in  fuch  a  manner  as  the 
Apoftle,  fpeaking  of  himfelf,  acquaints  us  he 
knew  a  Perfon  was  -,  I  knew  a  Man  in  CHRIST, 
fays  he,  /.  e.  a  true  Chriftian  ;  or,  as  he  him- 
felf defires  to  be  in  CHRIST,  when  he  wifhes, 
in  his  Epiftle  to  the  Pbi/iffians,  that  he  might 
be  found  in  him. 

THIS  is  undoubtedly  the  full  Purport  of  the 
Apoftle's  Expreffion  in  the  Words  of  the  Text ; 
fo  that  what  he  fays  in  his  Epiftle  to  the  Ro- 
mans about  Circnmcifion,  may  very  well  be 
applied  to  the  prefent  Subjecl,  viz.  That  he 
is  not  a  real  Chriftian,  who  is  only  one  out- 
wardly y  nor  is  that  true  Baptifm,  which  is 
only  outward  in  the  Flejh :  But  he  is  a  true 
Chriftian,  who  is  one  inwardly,  whofe  Bap- 
tifm is  that  of  the  Heart,  in  the  Spirit,  and 
not  merely  in  the  Water,  whofe  Praife  is  not 
of  Man,  but  of  GOD.  Or,  as  he  fpeaketh  in 
another  Place,  Neither  Circumcifon  nor  Un- 

circumci/ion 


td  Of  our  NEW  BIRTH 

circumcifion  availeth  any  thing  of  itfelf,  but 
a  new  Creature.  Which  amounts  to  what*  he 
here  declares  in  the  Verfe  now  under  Confi- 
deration,  that  if  any  Man  be  truly  and  proper- 
ly in  CHRIST,  he  is  a  new  Creature. 

II.  WHAT  we  are  to  underftand  by  being  & 
New  Creature,  was  the  next  and  fecond 
[        general  Thing  to  be  confidered. 

AND  here  it  is  evident  at  the  firflView, 
that  this  Expreffion  is  not  to  be  fo  explained 
as  tho'  there  was  a  Phyfical  Change  required 
to  be  made  in  us,  i.  e.  as  tho'  we  were  to  be 
reduced  to  our  primitive  Nothings  and  then 
created  and  formed  again.  For,  fuppofing  we 
were,  as  Nicodemus  ignorantly  imagined,  to 
enter  a  fecond  time  into  our  Mother's  Womby 
and  be  born,  alas !  what  would  it  contribute 
towards  rendering  us  fpiritually  new  Crea- 
tures? Since  that  which  was  born  of  Flefh 
would  be  Flem  ftill,  i.  e.  we  mould  be  the 
fame  carnal  Perfons  as  ever,  being  derived 
from  carnal  Parents,  and  confequently  receiv- 
ing the  Seeds  of  all  manner  of  Sin  and  Cor- 
ruption from  them.  No,  it  only  means,  that 
we  muft  be  fo  altered  as  to  the  Qualities  and 
Tempers  of  our  Minds,  that  we  muft  intirely 
forget  what  manner  of  Perfons  we  once  were. 

Aa 


in  C H R  i  s T  J  E  s u  s\  'if 

As  it  may  be  faid  of  a  Piece  of  Gold  that  was 
in  the  Ore,  after  it  has  been  cleanfed,  purified 
and  polifhed,  that  it  is  a  new  Piece  of  Gold: 
As  it  may  be  faid  of  a  bright  Glafs  that  has 
been  covered  over  with  Filth,  when  it  is  wiped, 
and  fo  become  tranfparent  and  clear,  that  it 
is  a  new  Glafs ;  Or,  as  it  might  be  faid  of 
Naaman,  when  he  recovered  of  his  Leprofy, 
and  his  Flefh  returned  unto  him  like  the  Flefh 
of  a  young  Child,  that  he  was  a  new  Man : 
So  our  Souls,  tho'  ftill  the  fame  as  to  Effence, 
yet  are  fo  purged,  purified  and  cleanfed  from 
their  natural  Drofs,  Filth  and  Leprofy,  by  the 
bleffed  Influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  that  they 
may  properly  be  faid  to  be  made  anew. 

How  this  glorious  Change  is  wrought  in 
the  Soul,  cannot  eafily  be  explained:  For  no 
One  knows  the  Ways  of  the  Spirit,  fave  the 
Spirit  of  GOD  Himfelf.  Not  that  this  ought 
to  be  any  Argument  againft  this  Doctrine ;  for, 
as  our  BlefTed  LORD  obferved  to  Nicodemus, 
when  he  was  difcourfing  on  this  very  Subject, 
The  Windy  fays  he,  bloweth  where  it  lifteth, 
and  thou  heareft  the  Sound  thereof;  but  knoweft 
not  whence  it  cometh,  and  whither  it  goeth ; 
and  if  we  are  told  of  natural  Things,  and  we 
underftand  them  not,  how  much  lefs  ought 
we  to  wonder,  if  we  cannot  immediately  ac- 
£ount  for  the  invifible  Workings  of  the  HQLY 

SPIRIT  ? 


12  Of  our  NEW  BIRTH 

SPIRIT?  The  Truth  of  the  Matter  is  this: 
The  Doclrine  of  our  Regeneration r,  or  New 
Birth  in  CHRIST  JESUS,  is  dark  and  bard 
to  be  underftood  by  the  natural  Man.  But 
that  there  is  really  fuch  a  Thing,  and  that 
each  of  us  muft  be  fpiritually  born  again  be- 
fore we  can  enter  into  the  Kingdom  of  GOD; 
or,  to  keep  to  the  Terms  made  ufe  of  in  the 
Text,  muft  be  new  Creatures  before  we  can  be 
in  CHRIST,  I  fiiall  endeavour  to  mew  under 
my 

III.  tfbird  general  Head,  in  which  I  was  to 
produce  fome  Arguments  to  prove,  Why 
we  muft  be  New  Creatures,  in  order  to 
qualify  us  for  being  favingly  in  CHRIST. 

AND  here  one  would  think  ic  fufEcient  to 
affirm,  that  GOD  himfelf,  in  his  holy  Word, 
hath  told  us  fo.  For,  not  to  mention  many 
Texts,  that  might  be  produced  out  of  the  Old 
*TeJlament  to  prove  this  Point,  (and  indeed, 
by  the  way,  one  would  wonder  how  Nicode- 
mus,  who  was  a  'Teacher  in  IfraeJr  and  who. 
was  therefore  to- indraft  the  People  in  the  fpi- 
ritual  Meaning  of  the  Law,  mould  be  fo  ig- 
norant of  this  grand  Article,  as  we  find  he 
really  was,  by  his  afking  our  bleffed  LORD, 
when  he  was  preffing  on  him  this  Topic, 

How 


In  CHRIST  JESUS. 
can  theft  things  be  ?    Surely,    he  <. 
not  forget  how  often  the  Pfalmift  had  bf;gg'd 
of  GOD  to  make  him    a  new  Heart,    and  re- 
new a  right  Spirit  within  him  ;    as    like  wife, 
how  frequently  the  Prophets  had  wa 
People   to  make  them   new  Hearts, 
Minds,  and  fo  turn  unto  the  LORD  tl 
But  not  to  mention  thcfe  and  fuch-like  '< 
out  of  the  Old  tfeftament)    this  Do&rine  is  fo 
plainly  and  often  repeated  in  the  New,  that, 
as  I  obferved  before,  He  that  rum  may  read. 
For  what  fays  the  great  Prophet  andJnftrudlor 
of  the  World  himfelf  ?    Except  a  Man 
every  one  that  is  naturally  ingendered  of  the 
Offspring  of  Adam)  be  born  again  of  Water, 
and  the  Spirit,  he  cannot  enter  into  the  King- 
dom of  GOD.     And  left  we  mould  be  apt  to 
flight  this  AfTerdon,  and,  Niccdemus-Yike,  re- 
ject the  Doctrine,  becaufe  we  cannot  imme- 
diately explain,    How  this  thing  can  be  }  our; 
BlefTed  Mafter  therefore  affirms  it,  as  it  were, 
by  an  Oath,    Verily  >  verily,    I  Jay   unto  you, 
or,  as  it  may  be  read,    I  the  Amen,  I  who  am 
Truth  itfelf,  fay  unto  you,  that  it  is  the  unal- 
terable Appointment  of  my  heavenly  Father, 
that  unlefs  a  Man  be  born  again,    he  cannot 
enter  into  the  Kingdom  of  GOD. 

AGREEABLE  to  this  are  thofe  manyPaflages 
w«  meet  with  in  the  EpiJHes,  where  we  are 

commanded 


14  Of  our  NEW  BIRTI* 

Commanded  to  be  renewed  in  the  Spirit,  i.  e£ 
as  was  before  explained,  in  the  inmoft  Facul- 
ties of  our  Minds ;  to  put  off  the  Old  Man> 
which  is  corrupt ;  and  to  put  on  the  New 
Man,  which  is  created  after  GOD,  in  Righte- 
oufnefe  and  true  Holinefs;  That  Old  Things 
mufl  pafs  away,  and  that  all  Things  muft  be- 
come New  -,  That  we  are  to  be  faved  by  the 
Waflring  of  Regeneration,  and  the  Rene-wing 
of  the  HOLY  GHOST.  Or,  methinks,  was 
there  no  other  PafTage  to  be  produced  befides 
the  Words  of  the  Text,  it  would  be  full 
enough,  fince  the  Apoftle  therein  pofitively 
affirms,  that  if  any  Man  be  in  CHRIST,  be  is 
a  new  Creature. 

Now  what  can  be  underflood  by  all  thefe 
different  Terms  of  being  born  again,  of  put- 
ting  off  the  Old  Man,  and  putting  on  theNew> 
of  being  renewed  in  the  Spirit  of  our  Minds, 
and  becoming  new  Creatures;  but  that  Chri- 
ftianity  requires  a  thorough^  real,  inward 
Change  of  Heart  ?  Do  we  think  thefe,  and 
fuch-like  Forms  of  fpeaking,  are  mere  Meta- 
phors, Words  of  a  bare  Sound,  without  any 
real  folid  Signification  ?  Indeed  it  is  to  be 
feared,  fome  Men  would  have  them  interpreted 
fo;  but,  alas!  unhappy  Men  !  they  are  not  to 
be  envied  their  Metaphorical  Interpretation : 

It 


vi  CHRIST  JESUS.  i$ 

It  Will  be  well,  if  they  do  not  interpret  them- 
felves  out  of  their  Salvation. 

MULTITUDES  of  other  Texts  might  be  pro- 
duced to  confirm  this  fame  Truth  :  But  thofe 
already  quoted  are  fo  plain  and  convincing, 
that  one  would  imagine  no  one  fhould  deny 
it;  were  we  not  told,  There  are  fome,  who 
having  Eyes,  fee  not,  and  Ears,  hear  noty 
and  that  will  not  under/land  with  their 
Hearts,  or  hear  with  their  Ears,  left  they 
fiould  be  converted,  and  CHRIST  ftould  heal 
them. 

BUT  I  proceed  to  a  fecond  Argument  to 
prove,  Why  we  muft  be  new  Creatures,  in  order 
to  be  rightly  in  CHRIST  :  And  that  fhall  be 
taken  from  the  Purity  of  GOD,  and  the  prefent 
corrupt  and  polluted  State  of  Man. 

Now  GOD  is  defcribed  in  Holy  Scripture 
(and  I  fpeak  to  thofe  who  profefs  to  know" 
the  Scripture)  as  a  Spirit  -,  as  a  Being  of  fuch 
infinite  Sanctity,  as  to  be  of  purer  Eyes  than 
to  behold  Iniquity  ;  as  to  be  fo  tranfcendently 
holy>  that  it  is  faid  the  very  Heavens  are  not 
clean  in  his  Sight;  and  the  Angeh  tbemfelves 
he  chargeth  with  Folly.  On  the  other  hand, 
Man  is  defcribed  (and  every  regenerate  Perfon 
will  find  it  true  by  his  own  Experience)  as  a 
Creature  altogether  conceived  and  born  in  Sin ; 
as  haying  no  good  Thing  dwelling  in  him ;  33 

being 


16  Of  our  NEW  BIRTH 

being  carnal,  fold  under  Sin ;  nay,  as  having  a 
Mind  which  is  Enmity  with  GOD,  and  fuch- 
like.  And  fince  then  there  is  fuch  an  infinite 
Difparity,  can  any  one  conceive,  how  fuch  a 
filthy,  corrupted,  polluted  Wretch  can  dwell 
with  an  infinitely  pure  and  holy  GOD,  before 
he  is  changed,  and  rendered,  in  Tome  meafure, 
like  him  ?  Can  He,  that  is  of  purer  Eyes  than 
to  behold  Iniquity,  dwell  with  it  ?  Can  He, 
In  whofe  Sight  the  Heavens  are  not  clean,  de- 
light to  dwell  with  Uncleannefs  itfelf?  No;  we 
might  as  well  fuppofe  Light  to  have  Commu- 
nion with  Dark&efs,  or  CHRIST  to  have  Con- 
cord with  Belial.  But  I  pafs  on  to  a 

THIRD  Argument  to  make  good  the  Apo- 
jftle's  AiTertion  in  the  Text,  which  fliall  be 
founded  on  the  Confideration  of  the  Nature 
of  that  Happinefs  GOD  has  prepared  for  thofe 
that  unfeignedly  love  him. 

To  enter  indeed  on  a  minute  and  particular 
Defcription  of  Heaven,  would  be  vain  and 
prefumptuous,  fince  we  are  told,  that  Eye 
hath  not  Jeen,  nor  Ear  beard,  neither  hath  it 
entered  into  the  Heart  of  Man  to  conceive, 
the  Things  that  are  prepared  for  Cuejincere 
Followers  of  the  Holy  JESUS  even  in  this  Life, 
much  lefs  in  that  which  is  to  come.  How- 
ever, this  we  may  venture  to  affinn  in  the 
general,  that  as  GOD  is  a  SfiHt,  fo  the  Hap- 
pinefs 


in  CH  RIST  JESUS.  17 

pinefs  he  has  laid  up  for  his  People,  is  fpiri- 
tual  likewife  j  and  confequently,  unlefs  our 
carnal  Minds  are  changed,  and  become  fpiri- 
tualized,  we  can  never  be  made  meet  to 
partake  of  that  inheritance. with  the  Saints  in 
Light. 

IT  is  true,  we  may  flatter  ourfelves,  that, 
fuppofing  we  continue  in  our  natural  corrupt 
Eftate,  and  carry  all  our  Lufts  along  with  us, 
we  mould,  notwithstanding,  relifh  Heaven, 
was^GoD  to  admit  us  therein.  And  fo  we 
might,  was  it  a  Mahometan  Paradife,  wherein 
we  were  to  take  our  full  Swing  in  fenfual 
Delights.  But  fince  its  Joys  are  onlyfpirifuaf, 
and  no  unclean  Thing  can  poffibly  enter  thofe 
blefled  Manfions,  there  is  an  abfolute  Necef- 
iity  of  our  being  changed,  and  undergoing  a 
total  Renovation  of  our  depraved  Natures,  be- 
fore we  can  have  any  Tafte  or  Relifh  of  thofe 
heavenly  Pleafures. 

IT  is,  doubtlefs,  for  this  Reafon,   that  the 
Apoflle  declares  it  to  be  the  irrevocable  Decree 
of  the  Almighty,    that  without  Holinefs,  i.  e. 
without    being   made   pure  by  Regeneration, 
and  having  the  Image  of  GOD  thereby  rein- 
llamped  upon  the  Soul,    no  Man  living  fl:all 
fee  the  Lord.     And  it  is  very  obfervable,  that 
our  Divine  Mafter,  in  the  famous  Paflage  be- 
fore referred  to,  concerning  the  abfolute  Ne- 
C  ceffif 


i8  Of  our  NEW  BIRTH 

ceffity  of  Regeneration,    does  not  fay,  Unlefs 
a  Man  be  born   again,   he  SHALL  NOT,   but 
Unlefs.  a  Man  be  born  again,  he  CANNOT  enter 
into  the  Kingdom  of  GO  D.     For  it  is  founded 
in  the  very  Nature  of  Things,    that  uniefs 
we  have  Difpofitions  wrought  in  us   fuitable 
and  anfwerable  to  the  Objects  that  are  to  en- 
tertain us,   we  can  take  no  manner  of  Com- 
placency or  Satisfaction   in   them.      For  In<- 
fiance  ;   What  Delight  can  the  moft  harmo- 
nious Mufick  afford  a  deaf,    or  what  Pleafure 
the  moft  excellent  Pi&ure  give  a  blind  Man  ? 
Can  a  taftelefs  Palate  relifh   the  richeft  Dain- 
ties, or  a  filthy  Swine  be  pleafed  with  the  fineft 
Garden  of  Flowers  ?    No  :   And  what  Reafon 
can  be  afiigned  for  it  ?    An  Anfwer  is  ready  5 
Becaufe  they  have  neither  of  them  any  Tem- 
pers of  Mind  correfpondent   or  agreeable  to 
what  they  are  to  be  diverted  with.     And  thus 
it  is  with  the  Soul  hereafter :    For  Death  makes 
no   more  Alteration  in  the  Soul,    than  as   it 
inlarges  its  Faculties,  and  makes  it  capable  of 
receiving  deeper  Impreffions  either  of  Plea- 
fure or  Pain.     If  it  delighted  to  converfe  with 
GOD  here,  it  will  be  tranfported  with  the  Sight 
of  his  glorious  Majefty  hereafter  :     If  it  was 
pleafed   with  the  Communion   of  Saints  on 
Earth,  it  will  be  infinitely  more  fo  with  the 
Communion  and  Society  of  holy  Angels,  and 
•  *  the 


in  CHR  IST  JESUS.  19 

the  Spirits  of  juft  Men  made  perfect  in  Heaven. 
But  if  theOppofite  of  all  this  be  true,  we  may 
allure  ourfelves,  it  could  not  be  happy,  was 
GOD  himfelf  to.  admit  it  (which  he  never  will 
do)  into  the  Regions  of  the  Bleffed.  But  it 
is  Time  for  me  to  haften  to  the 

FOURTH  and  laft  Argument  I  mall  offer  tc* 
prove,  that  we  muft  be  new  Creatures  ere  we 
can  be  in  CHRIST,  viz.  becaufe  CHRIST'S, 
Redemption  will  not  be  compleat  without  it. 

IF  we  reflect  indeed  on  the  firfl  and  chief 
End  of  our  BleiTed  LORD'S  Coming,  we  mall 
find  it  was  to  fave  us  from  our  Sins,  to  be  a 
Propitiation  for  our  Sins,  to  give  his  Life  a 
Ranfom  for  many.  But  then,  if  the  Benefits 
of  our  dear  Redeemer's  Death  were  to  extend 
no  further  than  barely  to  procure  Forgivenefs 
of  our  Sins,  we  mould  have  as  little  Reafon 
to  rejoice  in  it,  as  a  poor  condemned  Crimi- 
nal, that  is  ready  to  perifh  by  fome  fatal  Dif- 
eafe,  would  have  in  receiving  a  Pardon  from 
his  Judge.  For  Chriftians  would  do  well  to 
confider,  that  there  is  not  only"~a  legal  Hin- 
drance to  our  Happinefs,  as  we  are  Breakers  of 
GOD'S  Law,  but  alfo^a  moral  Impurity  in  our 
Natures,  which  renders  us  incapable  of  enjoy- 
ing Heaven,  (as  hath  been  already  prov'd)  till 
fome  mighty  Change  hath  been  wrought  in 
us.  It  is  neceflary  therefore,  in  order  to  make 
C  2  CHRIST'S 


20  Of  our  NEW  BIRTH 

CHRIST'S  Redemption  compleat,  that  we 
fliould  have  a  Grant  of  GOD'S  Holy  Spirit  to 
change  our  Natures,  and  fo  prepare  us  for  the 
Enjoyment  of  that  Happinefs  our  Saviour  has 
purchafed  by  his  precious  Blood. 

ACCORDINGLY  the  Holy  Scriptures  inform 
us,  that  whom  CHRIST  jujlifies,  i.  e.  (as  we 
faid  before)  whofe  Sins  bej&rgn&J,  thofe  he 
alfo  fantfifies,  i.  e.  purifies  and  cleanfes,  and 
totally  changeth  their  corrupted  Natures. 
Nay,  in  one  Place  of  Scripture,  Sanftifaatipn 
is  put  before  Juftification,  on  purpofe,  as  it 
were,  to  convince  us  that  there  is  no  Salva- 
tion to  be  had  without  it :  But  ye  are  wajhed^ 
fays  the  Apoftle,  but  ye  are  fanftified;  and 
then  follows,  but  ye-  are  juftified.  As  the 
Scripture  alfo  fpeaketh  in  another  Place, 
CHRIST  is  to  us  Juftifaation,  Sanftifaationt 
and  then  Redemption.  Let  this  therefore 
be  admitted  as  another  indifputable  Argu- 
ment why  we  muft  be  new  Creatures,  ere  we 
can  be  in  CHRIST,  becaufe  without  it  CHRIST 
is  dead  in  vain. 

PROCEED  we  now  to  the  next  general  Thing 

propofed,  viz.  To  draw  fome  Inferences 

from  what  has  been  delivered. 

.  I.  AND  Fir  ft  then,  If  he  that  is  in  CHRIST 

uiuil  be  a  new  Creature^  this  may  ferve  as  a 

Reproof 


in  CHRIST  JESUS.  21 

Reproof  for  fome,  who  reft  in  a  bare  Perfor- 
mance of  outward  Duties,  without  perceiving 
any  real  inward  Change  of  Heart. 

WE  may  obferve  a  great  many  Perfons  to  be 
very  punctual  in  the  regular  Returns  of  publick 
and  private  Prayer,  as  likewife  of  receiving  the 
Holy  Communion,  and  perhaps,  now  and  then 
too,  in  keeping  a  Faft.  And  fo  far  we  grant 
they  do  well.  But  then  here  is  the  Misfortune, 
they  reft  barely  in  theUfe  of  the  Means,  and  think 
all  is  over,  when  they  have  juft  complied  with 
thefe  facred  Inftitutions :  Whereas,  were  they 
rightly  informed,  they  would  confider,  that  all 
the  inftituted  Means  of  Grace;  as  Prayer,  Faft- 
ing,  Hearing  and  Reading  the  Word  of  GOD, 
Receiving  the  BlefTed  Sacrament,  and  fuch- 
like,  are  no  further  ferviceable  to  us,  than  as 
they  are  found  to  make  us  inwardly  better,  and 
to  carry  on  the  fpiritual  Life  in  the  Soul. 

IT  is  true,  they  are  Means,  and  Effential 
ones  too ;  but  then  they  are  only  Means ;  they 
are  Part,  but  not  the  Whole  of  Religion  :  For 
if  fo,  Who  more  religious  than  the  Pharifee  ? 
who  fafted  twice  in  the  Week,  and  gave  Tythes 
of  all  that  he  pofTefled,  and  yet  was  not  jufti- 
fied,  as  our  Saviour  himfelf  informs  us,  in  the 
Sight  of  GOD. 

You  perhaps,    like  the  Pharifee,    may  faft 

often,  and  make  long  Prayers ;  you  may,  with 

C  3  Htrod> 


22  Of  cur  NEW  BIRTH 

Herod,  hear  good  Sermons  gladly  ;  or,  as 
Judas  himfelf,  according  to  the  Opinion  of 
our  Church,  did  *,  receive  the  BlefTed  Sacra- 
ment. But  yet,  if  you  continue  vain  and  tri- 
fling, immoral  or  worldly-minded  in  your 
Converfations,  and  differ  from  the  reft  of  your 
Neighbours  barely  in  going  to  Church,  or  in 
complying  with  fome  outward  Performances, 
are  you  better  than  they  ?  No,  in  no  wife  : 
You  are  by  far  much  worfe,  becaufe  thofe  that 
wholly  neglect  the  Means,  are  anfwerable  only 
for  omitting  the  Ufe  of  GOD'S  Ordinances  ; 
whereas  if  you  ufe  them,  and  at  the  fame  time 
abufe  them,  by  not  letting  them  produce  their 
intended  Effect,  you  thereby  encourage  others 
to  think  there  is  nothing  in  them,  and  therefore 
muft  expect  to  receive  the  greater  Damnation. 

2.  BUT,  Secondly,  If  he  that  is  in  CHRIST 
muft  be  a  new  Creature ',  then  this  may  check  the 
groundlefs  Prefumption  of  another  Clafs  of 
ProfefTors,  who  reft  in  the  Attainment  of  fome 
Moral  Virtues,  and  falfely  imagine  they  are 
good  Chriftians  j  if  they  are  juft  in  their  Deal- 
ings, or  temperate  in  their  Diet,  and  do  Hurt 
or  Violence  to  no  Man. 

BUT  if  this  was  all  that  is  requifite  to  make 
us  CKriftianSi  Why  might  not  the  Heathens  of 

*  See  the  firjl  Exportation  to  be  read  tkz  Week  before  tie  Corn- 
old 


in  CH  RI  ST  JESUS.  23 

old?  be  good  Chriftiansy  who  were  remarkable 
for  thefe  Virtues  ?  Or  St.  Paul,-  before  his 
Converfion,  who  tells  us,  That  then  he  lived 
in  all  good  Confcience,  and  was,  touching  the 
Law,  blamelefs?  And  yet,  after  his  Converfion, 
we  find  he  renounces  all  Dependance  on  Works 
of  this  Nature,  and  only  defires  to  be  found  in 
CHRIST,  and  to  know  the  Power  of  his  Refur- 
rection  j  /.  e.  to  have  an  experimental  Proof  of 
receiving  the  HOLY  GHOST,  purchafed  for  him 
by  the  Death,  and  infured  and  applied  to  him 
by  the  Refurrection  of  JESUS  CHRIST. 

THE  Sum  of  the  Matter  is  this :  Chriflia- 
nity  includes  Morality,  as  Grace  does  Reafon  ; 
but  if  we  are  only  mere  Moralifts,  if  we  are 
not  inwardly  wrought  upon,  and  changed  by 
the  powerful  Operations  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
and  our  Moral  Actions  proceed  from  a  Prin- 
ciple of  a  new  Nature,  however  we  may  call 
ourfelves  Chrtftians,  it  is  to  be  feared  we  mall 
be  found  naked  at  the  Great  Day,  and  in  the 
Number  of  thofe,  who  vainly  depend  on  their 
own  Righteoufnefs,  and  not  on  the  Righte- 
oufnefs  of  JESUS  CHRIST,  imputed  to  and  in- 
herent in  them,  as  necefTary  to  their  eternal 
Salvation. 

3.  NOR,  Thirdly,  will  this  Doctrine  lefs  con- 
demn thofe,    who  reft  in  a   Partial  Amend- 
ment of  themfelves,  without  going  on  to  Per-'- 
C  4    ' 


24  Of  our  NEW  BIRTH 

fedlion,    and   experiencing  a  thorough,    real, 

inward  Change  of  Heart. 

A  little  Acquaintance  with  the  World  will 
furnifh  us  with  Inftances  of  no  fmall  Number 
of  Perfons,  who,  perhaps,  were  before  openly 
profane ;  but  feeing  the  ill  Confequences  of 
their  Vice,  and  the  many  worldy  Inconveniencies 
it  has  reduced  them  to,  on  a  fudden,  as  it  were, 
grow  civilized  ;  and  thereupon  flatter  them- 
leives  that  they  are  very  religious,  becaufe  they' 
differ  a  little  from  their  former  Selves,  and 
are  not  fo  fcandaloufly  wicked  as  once  they 
were :  Whereas  at  the  fame  time  they  mall 
have  fome  fecret  darling  Sin  or  other,  fome 
beloved  Dalilah  or  Herodias,  which  they  will 
not  part  with  j  fome  hidden  Luft;  which  they 
will  not  mortify  j  fome  vicious  Habit,  which 

they  will  not  take  pains  to  root  out. But 

wouldft  thou  know,  O  vain  Man !  whoever 
thou  art,  what  the  LORD  thy  GOD  requires  of 
thee?  thou  muft  be  inform'd,  that  nothing 
fhort  of  a  thorough,  found  Converfion  will  avail 
for  the  Salvation  of  thy  Soul :  It  is  not  enough 
to  turn  from  Profanenefs  to  Civility ;  but  thou 
muft  turn  from  Civility  to  Godlinefs :  Not  only 
feme,  but  all  Things  muft  become  new  in  thy 
Soul :  It  will  profit  thee  but  little  to  do  many 
Things,  if  yet  fome  one  Thing  thou  lackeft  :  In 
ihort,  thou  muft  not  be  only  an  almoft,  but 

altogether 


*«•  CHRIST  JESUS^  15 

altogether  a  new  Creature,  or  in  vain  thou 
hopeft  for  a  faving  Intereft  in  CHRIST. 

4.  Fourthly  andlaftly,If  he  that  is  in  CHRIST 
muft  be  a  new  Creature,  then  this  may  be 
prefcribed  as  an  infallible  Rule  for  every  Per- 
fon  of  whatever  Denomination,  Age,  Degree 
or  Quality,  to -judge  himfelf  by;  this  being 
the  only  folid  Foundation,  whereon  we  can 
build  a  well-grounded  AfTurance  of  Pardon, 
Peace,  and  Happinefs. 

WE  may  indeed  depend  on  the  broken 
Reed  of  an  external  Profeffion ;  we  may  think 
we  have  done  enough,  if  we  lead  fuch  fober, 
honeft,  moral  Lives,  as  many  Heathens  did. 
We  may  imagine  we  are  in  a  fafe  Condition, 
if  we  attend  on  the  publick  Offices  of  Reli- 
gion, and  are  conftant  in  the  Duties  of  our 
Clofets.  But  unlefs  all  thefe  tend  to  reform 
our  Lives,  and  change  our  Hearts,  and  are 
only  ufed  as  fo  many  Chanels  of  Divine  Grace ; 
as  I  told  you  before,  fo  I  tell  you  again,  Chri- 
ftianity  will  profit  us  nothing. 

LET  each  of  us  therefore  ferioufly  put  this 
Queftion  to  our  Hearts :  Have  we  received  the 
HOLY  GHOST  fince  we  believed  ?  Are  we  new 
Creatures  in  CHRIST,  or  no?  At  leaft,  if  we 
are  not  fo  yet,  it  is  our  daily  Endeavour  to 
become  fuch?  Do  we  make  a  conftant  and  con- 
fcientious  Ufe  of  all  the  Means  of  Grace  re- 
quired 


2.6  Of  our  NEW  BI'RTH 

quired  thereto  ?  Do  we  faft,  watch,  and  pray  ? 
Do  we  not  only  lazily  feek,   but   laborioufly 
ftrive  to  enter  in  at  the  ftrait  Gate  ?   In  fhort 
Do  we  renounce  ourfelves,  take  up  our  Crofles, 
and  follow  CHRIST?    If  fo,    we  are  in  that 
narrow  Way  which  leads  to  Life  :    We  are,  at 
lead  fliall  in  Time,    become  pew  Creatures  in 
CHRIST:    The  good  See$   is   fown    in    our 
Hearts,  and  will,  if  duly  water'd  andnourim'd 
by  a  regular  perfevering  Ufe  of  all  the  Means 
of  Grace,   grow  up  to  ternal  Life.      But,    on 
the  contrary,  if  we  have  only  heard,  and  know 
not  experimentally,  whether  there  be  any  HO- 
LY GHOST;    if  we  are  Strangers  -^o  Fafting, 
Watching,  and  Prayer,  and  all  the  other  fpi- 
ritual  Exercifes  of  Devotion ;    if  we  are  con- 
tent to  go  in  the  broad  Way,  merely  becaufe 
we  fee  mofl  other  People  do  fo,  without  once 
reflecting  whether  it  be  the  right  one  or  not ; 
in  fhort,    if   we  are  Strangers,  nay,  Enemies 
to  theCrofs  of  CHRIST,   by  leading  Lives  of 
Softnefs,    Worldly-mindednefs,     and     fenfual 
Pleafure ;  and  thereby  make  others  think,  that 
Chriftianity  is  but  an   empty  Name,    a  bare 
formal  Profeffion ;   if  this  be  the  Cafe,  I  fay, » 
then  CHRIST  is  as  yet  dead  in  vain  as  to  us; 
we  are  yet  under  the  Guilt  of  our  Sins ;  we  are 
unacquainted  with   that  true   and   thorough 

Con- 


in  CHRIST  JESUS.  27 

Converfion,  which  alone  can  intitle  us  to  the 
Salvation  of  our  Souls. 

BUT,  Beloved,  I  am  perfuaded  better  Things 
of  you,  and  Things  that  accompany  Salvation, 
tho'  we  thus  fpeak ;  and  humbly  hope,  that 
you  are  fully  and  heartily  convinced,  that  no- 
thing but  the  Wedding  Garment  of  a  new 
Nature,  can  gain  Admiffion  for  you  at  the 
Marriage  Feaft  of  the  Supper  of  the  Lamb  -, 
that  you  are  fincerely  perfuaded,  that  h^  that 
hath  not  the  Spirit  of  CHRIST,  is  none  of  his ; 
and  that,  unlefs  the  SPIRIT,  which  raifed  JE- 
SUS from  the  Dead,  dwell  in  you  here,  neither 
will  your  mortal  Bodies  be  quickened  by  the 
fame  SPIRIT  to  dwell  with  him  hereafter. 
.  LET  me  therefore  (as  was  propofed  in  the 
laft  Place)  earneftly  exhort  you,  in  the  Name 
of  our  Lord  JESUS  CHRIST,  to  ac~l  fuitable  to 
thofe  Convictions,  and  to  live  as  Chriftians, 
that  are  commanded  in  Holy  Writ,  to  put  off 
their  former  Converfation  concerning  the  Old 
Man,  and  to  put  on  the  New  Many  which  is 
created  after  GOD,  in  Righteoufnefs  and  true 
Holinefs. 

IT  muflbe  owned  indeed,  that  this  is  a  great 
and  difficult  Work;  but,  blefled  be  GOD,  it  is 
not  impofiible.  Many  Thoufands  of  happy 
Souls  have  been  affifted  by  a  Divine  Power  to 
bring  it  about,  and  why  fhould  We  defpair  of 

Succefs  ? 


28  Of  our  NEW  BIRTH 

Succefs?  Is  GOD'S  Hand  mortened,  that  it  can- 
not fave  ?  Was  He  the  GOD  of  our  Fathers, 
is  He  not  the  GOD  of  their  Children  alfo  ?  Yes, 
doubtlefs,  of  their  Children  alfo.  It  is  aTafk 
likewife  that  will  put  us  to  fome  Pain ;  it  will 
oblige  us  to  part  with  fome  Luft,  to  break  with 
fome  Friend,  to  mortify  fome  beloved  Paffion, 
which  may  be  exceeding  dear  to  us,  and  per- 
haps as  hard  to  leave,  as  to  cut  off  a  right 
Han$,  or  pluck  out  a  right  Eye.  But  what 
of  all  this  ?  Will  not  the  being  made  a  real 
living  Member  of  CHRIST,  a  Child  of  GOD, 
and  Inheritor  of  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven, 
abundantly  make  Amends  for  all  this  Trouble  ? 
Undoubtedly  it  will.  Laflly,  Setting  about  and 
carrying  on  this  great  and  neceflary  Work, 
perhaps  may,  nay,  afiuredly  will,  expofe  us  to 
the  Ridicule  of  the  unthinking  Part  of  Man- 
kind, who  will  wonder,  that  we  run  not  into 
the  fame  Excefs  of  Riot  with  themfelves  ;  and 
becaufe  we  may  deny  our  finful  Appetites,  and 
are  not  conformed  to  this  World,  being  com- 
manded in  Scripture  to  do  the  one,  and  to 
have  our  Converfation  in  Heaven  in  Oppofi- 
tion  to  the  other,  they  may  count  our  Lives 
Folly,  and  our  End  to  be  without  Honour. 
But  will  not  the  being  numbered  among  the 
Saints,  and  mining  as  the  Stars  for  ever  and 
ever,  be  a  more  than  a  fufficient  Recompenfe 

for 


in  C  H  R  i  s  T  J  E  s  u  s.  29 

for  all  the  Ridicule,   Calumny,  or  Reproach 
we  can  poflibly  meet  with  here  ? 

INDEED,  was  there  no  other  Reward  attend- 
ed a  thorough  Converfion,  but  that  Peace  of 
GOD,  which  is  the  unavoidable  Confequence 
of  it,  and  which,  even  in  this  Life,  pafleth 
all  Understanding,  we  mould  have  great  Rea- 
fon  to  rejoice.  But  when  we  confider  this  is 
the  lead  of  thofe  Mercies  GOD  has  prepared 
for  thofe  that  are  in  CHRIST  new  Creatures-, 
that  this  is  but  the  Beginning  of  an  eternal 
Succeffion  of  Pleafures ;  that  the  Day  of  our 
Deaths,  which  the  unconverted,  unrenewed 
Sinner  muft  fo  much  dread,  will  be,  as  it 
were,  but  the^/r/2  Day  of  our  new  Births, 
and  open  to  us  an  everlafting  Scene  of  Hap- 
pinefs  and  Comfort ;  in  more,  if  we  remem- 
ber, that  they  who  are  regenerate  and  born 
again,  have  a  real  Title  to  all  the  glorious  Pro- 
mifes  of  the  Gofpel,  and  are  infallibly  certain 
of  being  as  happy,  both  here  and  hereafter,  as 
an  All-wife,  All-gracious,  All-powerful  GOD 
can  make  them ;  methinks,  every  one  that  has 
but  the  lead  Concern  for  the  Salvation  of  his 
precious,  his  immortal  Soul,  having  fuch  Pro- 
mifes,  fuch  an  Hope,  fuch  an  Eternity  of 
Happincfs  fet  before  him,  mould  never  ceale 
watching,  praying,  and  driving,  till  he  find  a 
real,  inward,  faving  Change  wrought  in  his 

Heart ; 


30  Of  our  NEW  BIRTH,  &c. 
Heart  -,  and  thereby  knoweth  of  a  Truth,  that 
he  dwells  in  CHRIST,  and  CHRIST  in  him  5 
that  he  is  a  new  Creature  in  CHRIST  j  that  he 
is  therefore  a  Child  of  GOD;  that  he  is  already 
an  Inheritor,  and  will  ere  long,  if  he  endure 
to  the  End,  be  an  adlual  Poneflor  of  the  King- 
dom of  Heaven. 

Which  GOD  of  his  Infinite  Mercy  grant, 
through  JESUS  CHRIST  our  LORD  5  To 
whom,  &c. 


THE 


THE 

NECESSITY  and  BENEFITS 
o  F 

SOCIETY   in  general, 

AND    OF 

Religious  Society  in  particular. 

A    SERMON    preached  in  the  Parifh 

Church  of  St.  Nicholas  in  Brijlol,  and  be- 
fore the  Religious  Societies,  at  one  of  their 
General  Quarterly-Meetings  in  Bow-Church, 
London,  in  the  Year  1737. 


(33) 
TO    THE 

MEMBERS 

OF    rf  V  E  R  Y 

RELIGIOUS  SOCIETY 

In  and  about  the 

Cities  of  London^  Weftminfter^ 
and  ErifloL 

GENTLEMEN, 

AS  this  SERMON  was  preached  with 
an  Intent  to  promote  and  encourage  your 
SOCIETIES,   /  hope  you  will  accept 
it,  as  a  Teftimmy  of  my  Gratitude  for  thofe 
many  Benefits  I  have  received,  under  GOD,  by 
officiating  fome  Time  with  you. 

It's  true  indeed  I  had  not  the  haft  Thought 

if  letting  any  other  of  my  Difcourfes  fee  the 

Light:   But  fuch  was  the  Zeal  of  fome  of  my 

Briftol  Friends   (though   certainly  in    this  In- 

D  Jlance 


(34) 

jlance  of  it,  as  the  Difcourfe  itfelf  will  Jhew, 
mifguided)  that  having  gotten  a  very  incorrect 
Copy,  they  ordered  it  to  be  publifoed,  and  near 
four  Hundred  of  the  firft  Impreffion  'were  fold 
off  in  Briftol,  before  I  was  apprized  of  any 
fuch  Defign  being  carrying  on,  at  leaft  before  a 
Letter,  'which  I  Jent  abfolufely  to  forbid  the 
Profecution  of  it,  could  reach  that  City.  But 
•when  1  came  to  peruje  one  of  them,  I  found  fo 
many  'Things  left  out,  fo  many  Pages  infertedy 
'which  (though  written  by  Me  on  &  particular  Oc- 
cafion)  had  little  or  no  Reference  to  the  main 
Defign  of  the  Difcourfe,  that  I  was  obliged  in 
my  own  Defence  to  let  a  Second,  lefs  incorrect, 
JLdition  (tho  very  unworthy  of  any  Publication 
at  all)  be  printed  off. 

AND  now  if  GOD  (as  he  often  works  by 
the  meanejl  Injlruments)  fiould  vouchfafe  to  blefs 
it  to  any  of  your  Members,  I  Jhall  not  repent 
(though  I  did  repent)  of  its  being  publiflied 
without  the  Confent  or  Knowledge  of, 

.GENTLEMEN, 
Your  hearty  Well-w'fher 

And  unworthy  Servant  in  CHRIST, 


G.W. 


(35) 


SERMON    II. 

On    Religious   Society. 


Ecc  L  E  s.  iv.  9,  10.  IT,  ii. 

are  better  than  One,  becaufe  they  have  & 

good  Reward  for  their  Labour. 
For  if  they  f ally  the  One  will  lift  up  his  Fellow: 

But  woe  be  to  him  that  is  alone  when  he  fal- 

leth  j  for  he  hath  not -another  to  help  him  up. 
Again ,  if 'Two  lye  together •,  then  they  have  Heat-, 

but  how  can  One  be  warm  alone  ? 
jlnd  if  One  prevail  againfl  him,  Two  Jh all  with- 
jland  him  ;  and  a  threefold  Cord  is  not  quickly 

broken. 

AMONG   the  many  Reafons  afiignable 
for  the  fad  Decay  of  True  Chrijiianity, 
perhaps  the  neglecting  to  ajjemble  our- 
Jehes  together ,    in  Religious  Societies,    may  not 
be  one  of  the  lead.     That  I  may  therefore  do 
my  endeavour  towards  promoting  fa  excellent 
D  2  a  Means 


36  The  Neceffity  and  Benefit 

a  Means  of  Piety,  I  have  fele&ed  a  Paflage  of 
Scripture  drawn  from  the  Experience  of  the 
Wifeft  of  Men,  which  being  a  little  enlarged 
on  and  illuftrated,  will  fully  anfwer  my  pre- 
fent  Defign  j  that  being  to  fhew,  in  the  beft 
Manner  I  can,  the  Neceffity  and  Benefits  of  So- 
defy  in  general,  and  of  Religious  Society  in 
particular. 

Two  are  better  than  One,  &c. 

FROM  which  Words  I  {hall  take  Occalion  to 
prove, 

Firft,  The  Truth  of  the  Wife  Man's  Af- 
fertion,  vtz.  'Two  are  better  than  Onf, 
and  that  in  Reference  to  Society  in  gene- 
ral, and  Religious  Society  in  particular. 

Secondly,  To  affign  fome  Reafons  why  Two 
are  better  than  One,  efpecially  as  to  the 
laft  Particular,  i.  BecaufeMen  can  raife 
up  one  another  when  they  chance  to  flip: 
For  if  they  fall,  the  One  'will  lift  up  his 
Fellow.  2.  Becaufe  they  can  impart 
Heat  to  each  other :  Again,  if  Two  lye 
together,  then  they  have  Heat  j  but  how 
can  One  be  warm  alone  ?  3.  Becaufe 
they  can  fecure  each  other  from  thofe 
that  do  oppofe  them  :  And  if  One  pre- 
vail againji  him>  Two  fi  all  withjland  him . 

and 


of  RELIGIOUS  SOCIETY.  3? 
and  a  Three-fold  Cord  is  not  quickly  broken. 
From  hence, 

Thirdly,  I  (hall  take  Occafion  to  {hew  the 

Duty  incumbent  on  every  Member  of  a 

Religious  Society. 
Fourthly  and  laftly,  I  fhall  draw  an  Inference 

or  two  from  what  {hall  have  been  faid ; 

and  then  conclude  with  a  Word  or  two  of 

Exhortation  from  the  whale. 

Firft  then,  I  am  to  prove  the  Truth  of  the 
Wife  Man's  Aflertion,  viz.  that  Two  are  better 
than  One,  and  that  in  reference  to  Society  in 
general,  and  Religious  Societies  in  particular. 

AND  how  can  this  be  done  better  than  by 
{hewing  that  it  is  abfolutely  necefTary  for  the 
Welfare  both  of  the  Bodies  and  Souls  of  Men  ? 
Indeed  if  we  look  upon  Man  as  he  came  out  of 
the  Hands  of  his  Maker,  we  imagine  him  to 
be  perfect,  entire,  lacking  nothing.  But  GOD, 
whofe  Thoughts  are  not  as  our  Thoughts,  faw 
fomething  ftill  wanting  to  make  Adam  happy. 
And  what  was  that  ?  Why,  an  Help  meet  for 
him.  For  thus  fpeaketh  the  Scripture :  And 
the  LORD  GOD  faid,  It  is  not  good  that  the 
Manjhould  be  alone,  I  will  make  an  Help  meet 
for  him. 

OBSERVE,  GOD  faid,  It  is  not  gwd,  there- 
by implying  that  the  Creation  would  have  been. 
D  3  imper- 


3  3  T&e  Nece/ity  and  Benefits 

imperfect,  in  fome  fort,  unlefs  an  Help  was 
found  out  meet  for  Adam.  And  if  this  was  the 
Cafe  of  Man  before  the  Fall ;  if  an  Help  was 
meet  for  him  in  a  State  of  PeWftion  j  furely 
fince  the  Fal^  when  we  come  naked  and  help- 
lefs  out  of  our  Mother's  Womb,  when  our 
Wants  increafe  with  our  Years,  and  we  can 
fcarcfly  fubfifl  a  Day  without  the  mutual  Af- 
fiftance  of  each  other,  well  may  we  fay,  It  is 
not  good  for  Man  to  be  alone. 

SOCIETY,  then,  we  fee  is  abfoliitely  ne- 
cefiary  in  refpect  to  our  bodily  and  perfonal 
Wants.  If  we  carry  our  View  farther,  and  con- 
fider  Mankind  as  divided  into  different  Cities, 
Countries,  and  Nations,  the  Neceffity  of  it 
will  appear  yet  more  evident.  For  how  can 
Communities  be  kept  up,  or  Commerce  car- 
ried on,  without  Society?  Certainly  not  at  all, 
lince  Providence  feems  wifely  to  have  afTigned 
a  particular  Product  to  almoft  each  particular 
Country,  on  Purpofe,  as  it  were,  to  oblige  us 
to  be  focial ;  and  hath  fo  admirably  mingled 
the  Parts  of  the  whole  Body  of  Mankind  to- 
gether, that  the  Eye  cannot  fay  to  the  Hand,  I 
no  need  of  rfhee ;  nor  again,  the  Hand  to 
the  Foot,  I  have  no  Need  of  T^hee. 

MANY  other  Inftances  might  be  given  of 
the  Neceffity  of  Society,  in  reference  to  our  bo- 
dily, perfonal,  and  national  Wants.  But  what 

are 


p/*  RELIGIOUS   SOCIETY.       39 

are  all  thefe  when  weighed  in  the  Balance  of 
the  SancJuary,  in  comparison  of  the  infinite 
greater  Need  of  it,  with  refpe&  to  the  Soul? 
It  was  chiefly  in  regard  to  this  better  Part,  no 
doubt,  that  GOD  faid,  It  is  not  good  for  the 
Man  to  be  alone.  For  let  us  fuppofe  Adam  to 
be  as  happy  as  may  be,  placed  as  the  Lord  of 
the  Creation  in  the  Paradife  of  GOD,  and 
fpending  all  his  Hours  in  adoring  and  praifmg 
the  BlefTed  Author  of  his  Being;  yet  as  his 
Soul  was  the  very  Copy  of  the  Divine  Nature, 
whofe  peculiar  Property  it  is  to  be  communica- 
tive, without  the  Divine  All'Siifficiency\\fcou\& 
not  be  compleatly  happy,  becaufe  he  was  alone 
and  incommunicative,  nor  even  Content  in 
Paradije  for  want  of  a  Partner  in  his  Joys. 
GOD  knew  this,  and  therefore  faid,  //  is  not 
good  that  the  Manjhall  be  alone  ^  I  will  make  a 
Help  meet  for  him.  And  tho'  this  proved  a  fa- 
tal Means  of  his  falling  ;  yet  that  was  not 
owing  to  any  natural  Confequence  of  Society ; 
but  partly  to  that  curfed  Apoftate,  who  craftily 
lyes  in  wait  to  deceive,  partly  to  Adam's  own 
Folly,  in  rather  chufing  to  be  miferable  with 
one  he  loved,  than  truft  in  GOD  to  raile  him 
up  another  Spoufe. 

IF  we  reflec~l  indeed  on  that  familiar  Inter- 

courfe  our  firft  Parents  could  carry  on  with 

Heaven,  in  a  State  of  Innocence,  we  {hall  be 

D  4  -          apt 


40  The  Nece/ity  and  Benefits 

apt  to  think  he  had  as  little  Need  of  Society, 
as  to  his  Sou/,  as  before  we  fuppofed  him  to 
have,  in  refpeffc  to  his  Body.  But  yer,  as  GOD 
and  the  Holy  Angels  were  fo  far  above  him  on 
the  one  hand,  and  the  Beafts  fo  far  beneath 
him  on  the  other,  there  was  nothing  like  having 
one  to  converfe  with,  who  was  Bone  of  his 
Bone,  andFleJh  of  his  Flejh. 

MAN,  then,  could  not  be  fully  happy,   we 
fee  even  in  Paradife,  without  a  Companion  of 
his  own  Species,  much  lefs  now  he  is  driven 
out.     For,  let  us  view  him  a  little  in  his  natu- 
ral Eftate  now,  fince  the  Fall,  as  having  his 
Under  ft  anding   darkened,     his   Mind  alienated 
from  the  Life  of  G  Q  D ;   as  no  more  able  to 
fee  his  Way  wherein  he   mould  go,    than  a 
Blind  Man  to  defcribe  the  Sun  :  That  notwith- 
ftanding  this,   he  muft  receive  his  Sight  ere 
he  can  fee  GOD:  And  that  if  he  never  fees  him, 
he  never  can  be  happy.     Let  us  view  him,  I 
fay,  in  this  Light  (or  rather  this  Darknefs)  and 
deny  the  Necejpty  of  Society  if  we  can.     A  Di- 
vine Revelation  we  find  is  abfolutely  neceflary, 
we  being  by  Nature  as  unable  to  know,  as  we 
are  to  do  our  Duty.     And  how  mail  we  learn 
except  one  teach  us  ?    But  was  GOD  to  do  this 
immediately  by  Himfelf,  how  mould  we,  with 
Mofes  exceedingly  quake  and  fear  ?  Nor  would 
the  Miniflry  of  Angels  in  this  Affair  be  with- 
out 


(/RELIGIOUS  SOCIETY.  41 
out  too  much  Terror.  It  is  necefTary,  there- 
fore (at  leaft  GOD'S  Dealing  with  us  hath 
(hewed  it  to  be  fo)  that  we  mould  be  drawn 
with  the  Cords  of  a  Man.  And  that  a  Divine 
Revelation  being  granted,  we  mould  ufe  one 
another's  Afliftanee,  under  GOD,  to  inftruct 
each  other  jn  the  Knowledge,  and  to  exhort 
one  another  to  the  Practice  of  thofe  Things 
which  belong  to  our  everlafting  Peace.  This 
is  undoubtedly  the  great  End  of  Society  in- 
tended by  GOD  fince  the  Fall,  and  a  ftrong 
Argument  it  is,  why  Two  are  better  than  Oney 
and  why  we  ihould  not  forfake  the  Affembling 
ourfelves  together. 

BUT  farther,  let  us  confider  ourfelves  as 
Chriftians,  as  having  this  natural  Veil,  in  fome 
meafure  taken  off  from  our  Eyes,  by  the  Af- 
iiftance  of  GOD'S  Holy  Spirit,  and  fo  enabled 
to  fee  what  he  requires  of  us.  Let  us  fuppofe 
ourfelves  in  fome  Degree  to  have  tajled  the  good 
Word  of 'Life ',  and  to  have  felt  the  Powers  of 
the  World  to  come,  influencing  and  moulding- 
pur  Souls  into  a  religious  Frame :  To  be  fully 
and  heartily  convinced  that  we  are  Soldiers 
lifted  under  the  Banner  of  CHRIST,  and  have 
proclaimed  open  War  at  our  Baptifm,  againjl 
the  World,  the  FleJJ^  and  the  Devil ;  and  have, 
perhaps,  frequently  renewed  our  Obligations 
fo  to  do,  by  partaking  of  the  Lord's  Supper  : 

That 


42  The  Nece/fity  and  Benefits 

That  we  are  furrounded  with  Millions  of  Foes 
Without,  and  infefted  with  a  Legion  of  Ene- 
mies Within  :  That  we  are  commanded  to 
fhine  as  Lights  in  the  World,  in  the  midft  of 
a  crooked  and  perverfe  Generation  :  That  we 
are  travelling  to  a  long  Eternity,  and  need  all 
imaginable  Helps  to  {hew  us,  and  encourage 
us  in  our  Way  thither.  Let  us,  I  fay,  reflect 
on  all  this,  and  then  how  fhall  each  of  us  cry 
out,  Brethren,  what  a  neceflary  Thing  it  is  to 
meet  together  in  Religious  Societies  ? 

THE  Primitive  Chrijiiam  were  fully  fenfible 
of  this,  and  therefore  we  find  them  continually 
keeping  up  Communion  with  each  other  :  For 
what  fays  the  Scripture  ?  They  continued  Jied- 
fajlly  in  the  dpoftks  Dotfrine  and  Fellow/hip^ 
Ads  ii.  42.  Peter  and  John  were  no  foo'ner 
difmifled  by  the  Great  Council,  than  they  hafte 
away  to  their  Companions.  And  being  fet  at 
Liberty ',  fays  the  Text,  they  came  to  their  own, 
and  told  them  all  tbefe  Things  which  the  High 
Prieft  hadfaid  unto  them.  Acts  iv.  23.  Pau/9 
as  foon  as  converted,  tarried  three  Days  with 
the  Difciples  that  were  at  Damafcus,  Acts  ix. 
19.  And  Peter  afterwards,  when  releafed 
from  Prifon,  immediately  goes  to  the  Houfe  of 
Maryy  where  there  were  great  Multitudes  af- 
fembled,  praying,  Acts  xii.  12.  And  it  is  re- 
ported  of  Cbriftiam  in  After-Ages,  that  they 

ufed 


cf  RELIGIOUS  SOCIETY.'  43 
tifed  to  aflemble  together  before  Day-light,  to 
fing  a  Pfalm  to  CHRIST  as  GOD.  So  precious 
was  the  Communion  of  Saints  in  thole  Days. 

If  it  be  afked,  what  Advantage  we  (hall  reap 
from  fuch  a  Procedure  now  ?  I  anfwer,  much 
every  Way.  Two  are  better  than  one,  becaufe 
they  have  a  good  Reward  for  their  Labour :  For 
if  they  fall,  the  One  will  lift  up  his  Fellow ;  but 
woe  be  to  him  that  is  alone  when  he  falleth,  for 
he  hath  not  another  to  help  him  up.  Again,  if 
two  lye  together,  then  they  have  Heat  j  but  bow 
can  one  be  warm  alone  ?  And  if  one  prevail  #- 
gainfl  him,  Two  Jhall  withfland  him  ;  and  a. 
threefold  Cord  is  not  quickly  broken. 

WHICH  diredlly  leads  me  to  my  Second  ge- 
neral Head,  under  which  I  was  to  affign  fomc 
Reafons  why  Two  are  better  than  one,  efpecially 
i  i  Religious  Society. 

i.  As  Man  in  his  prefent  Condition  cannot 
alwaysftand  upright,  butbyreafonofthe  Frailty 
of  his  Nature  cannot  but  fall;  one  eminent 
Reafcn  why  Two  are  better  than  One,  or  in 
other  Words,  one  great  Advantage  of  Religious 
Society  is,  That  when  they  fall,  the  One  will 
lift  up  his  Fellow. 

AND  an  excellent  Reafon  this,  indeed  !  For 
alas !  when  we  refledt  how  prone  we  are  to  be 
drawn  into  Error  in  our  Judgments,  and  into 

Vice 


44  The  Neceffity  and  Benefits 

Vice  in  our  Practice  j  and  how  unable,  at  leaft 
bow  very  unwilling,  to  efpy  or  corredt  our  own 
Mifcarriages ;  when  we  confider  how  apt  the 
World  is  to  flatter  us  in  our  Faults,  and  how 
few  there  are  fo  kind  as  to  tell  us  the  Truth ; 
what  an  ineftimable  Privilege  muft  it  be  to 
have  a  Set  of  true,  judicious,  hearty  Friends 
about  us,  continually  watching  over  our  Souls, 
to  inform  us  where  we  have  fallen,  and  warn 
us  that  we  fall  not  again  for  the  future.  Surely 
it  is  fuch  a  Privilege  that  (to  ufe  the  Words  of 
an  eminent  Chrijlian)  we  fhall  never  know  the 
Value  of,  till  we  come  to  Glory. 

BUT  this  is  not  all  ;  for  fuppofing  that  we 
could  always  ftand  up  ight,  yet  whofoever 
reflects  on  the  Difficulties  of  Religion  in  ge- 
neral, and  his  ownPropenfitytoLukewarmnefs 
and  Indifference  in  particular,  will  find  that  he 
muft  be  zealous  as  well  as  fttady,  if  e'er  he. 
expedts  to  enter  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven.  Here, 
then,  the  Wife  Man  points  out  to  us  another 
excellent  Reafon  why  T'wo  are  better  thvn  One. 
Again,  fays  he,  if  Two  lye  together,  then  they 
have  Heat ;  but  how  can  One  be  warm  alone  ? 

WHICH  was  the  next  Thing  to  be  confiderec} 
under  the  Second  genepal  Head,  viz.  to  affign 
a  fecond  Reafon  why  Two  are  better  than  One, 
becaufe  they  can  impart  Heat  to  each  other, 


IT 


^RELIGIOUS  SOCIETY.  45 
IT  is  an  Obfervation  no  lefs  true  than  com- 
mon, That  kindled  Coals,  if  placed  afunder, 
foon  go  out,  but  if  heaped  together,  quicken 
and  enliven  each  other,  and  afford  a  lafting 
Heat.  The  fame  will  hold  good  in  the  Cafe 
now  before  us.  If  Chriftians  kindled  by  the 
Grace  of  GOD  unite,  they  will  quicken  and 
enliven  each  other  ;  but  if  they  feparate  and 
keep  afunder,  no  marvel  if  they  foon  grow  cool 
or  tepid.  If  Two  or  *fbree  meet  together  in 
CHRIST'S  Name,  they  'will  have  Heat:  but  how 
can  One  be  warm  alone  ? 

OBSERVE,  How  can  One  be  warm  alone  ?  The 
Wife  Man's  expreffing  himfelf  by  way  of  Que- 
flion,  implies  an  Impoflibility,  at  leaft  a  very 
great  Difficulty,  to  be^varm  in  Religion  with- 
out Company,  where  it  may  be  had.  Behold 
here,  then,  another  excellent  Benefit  flowing 
from  Religious  Society ;  it  will  keep  us  zealous 
as  well  as  Jleady,  in  the  Ways  of  Godlinefs. 

BUT  to  illuftrate  this  a  little  farther  by  a  Com- 
parifon  or  two.  Let  us  look  upon  ourfelves 
(as  was  above  hinted)  as  Soldiers  lifted  under 
CHRIST'S  Banner;  as  going  out  with  TenThou- 
fand  to  meet  One  that  cometh  againjl  us  with 
Twenty  Tboufand:  as  Perfons  that  are  to  wrejlle 
not  only  'with  Flefh  and  Blood,  but  again/1  Prin- 
cipalities, again/I  Powers,  and fpiritualWicked- 
neffes  in  high  Places.  And  then  tell  me,  all  ye 

that 


46  Tbe  Nece/ity  and  Benefits 

that  fear  GOD,  if  it  be  not  an  invaluable  Pri- 
vilege to  have  a  Company  of  Fellow  Soldiers 
continually  about  us,  animating  and  exhorting 
each  other  to  ftand  our  Ground,  to  keep  our 
Ranks,  and  manfully  to  follow  the  Captain  of 
our  Salvation,  though  it  be  through  a  Sea  of 
Blood? 

Laftly,  LET  us  confider  ourfelves  in  another 
View  before  mentioned,  viz.  as  Perlbns  travel- 
ling to  a  long  Eternity  ;  as  refcued  by  the  free 
Grace  of  GOD  in  fome  meafure  from  our  natu- 
ral Egyptian  Bondage,  and  marching  under  the 
Conduct  of  our  Spiritual  Jojkua,  through  the 
Wildernefs  of  this  World,  to  the  Land  of  our 
Heavenly  Canaan.  Let  us  farther  reflect  how 
apt  we  are  to  ftartle  at  «frery  Difficulty;  to  cry, 
¥here  are  Liom  !  T^bere  are  Lions  in  the  Way  I 
^here  are  the  Sons  of  Anak  to  be  grappled  with, 
ere  we  can  poiTefs  the  promifed  Land:  How 
prone  we  are,  with  Lot's  Wife,  to  look  wifh- 
fully  back  on  our  Spiritual  Sodom,  or,  with 
the  foolifh  Ifraelites,  to  long  again  for  the 
Flefli-Pots  of  Egypt,  and  to  return  to  our  for- 
mer natural  State  of  Bondage  and  Slavery. 
Confider  this,  my  Brethren,  and  fee  what  a 
bleffed  Privilege  it  will  be  to  have  a  Set  of 
Ifraelites  indeed  about  us,  always  reminding  us 
of  the  Folly  of  any  fuch  cowardly  Defign,  and 
of  the  intolerable  Mifery  we  fhall  run  into,  if 

we 


of  RELIGIOUS  SOCIETY.         47 
we  fall  in  theleaft  more  of  the  promifed  Land. 

MORE  might  be  faid  on  this  Particular,  did 
not  the  Limits  of  a  Difcourfe  of  this  Nature, 
oblige  me  to  haften, 

3.  To  give  a  Third  Reafon,  mentioned  by 
the  Wife  Man  in  the  Text,  why  Two  are  better 
than  One;  namely,  becaufe  they  can  fecure 
each  other  from  Enemies  without.  And  if 
One  prevail  againjl  him,  yet  Two  Jhall  with/land 
him  ;  and  a  Threefold  Cord  is  not  quickly  broken. 

HITHERTO  we  have  confidered  the  Advan- 
tages of  Religious  Societies,  as  a  great  Preferva- 
tive  againft  falling  (at  leaft  dangeroufly  falling) 
into  Sin  and  Lukewarmnefs,  and  that  too  from 
our  own  Corruptions.  But  what  fays  the  Wife 
Son  of  Siracb  ?  My  Son,  when  thou  goeft  toferve 
the  Lord,  prepare  thy  Soul  for  Temptation  :  And 
that  not  only  from  inward,  but  outward  Foes; 
particularly  from  thofe  two  grand  Adverfaries, 
the  World  and  the  Devil:  For  no  fooner  will 
thine  Eye  be  bent  Heaven-ward,  but  the  former 
will  be  immediately  diverting  it  another  Way, 
telling  thee  thou  needed  not  bzjingular  in  order 
to  be  religious ;  that  one  may  be  a  Chrijlian 
without  going  fo  much  out  of  the  Common 
Road. 

NOR  will  the  Devil  be  wanting  in  his  artful 
Infinuations,  or  impious  Suggeftions  to  divert 
or  terrify  thee  from  preffing  forwards,  that  thou 

mayeft 


48  The  Neceffity  and  Benefits 

may  eft  Jay  hold  on  the  Crown  of  Life  :  And  if 
he  cannot  prevail  this  Way,  he  will  try  another ; 
and,  in  order  to  make  his  Temptation  the  more 
undifcerned,  but  withal  more  fuccefsful,  he  will 
remploy,  perhaps,  fome  of  thy  neareft  Relatives, 
or  moft  powerful  Friends,  (as  he  fet  Peter  on 
our  bleffed  Majler)  who  will  always  be  bidding 
thee  fpare  thyfelf  •,  telling  thee  thou  needeft 
not  take  fo  much  Pains ;  that  it  is  not  fo  difficult 
a  Matter  to  get  to  Heaven  as  fome  People  would 
make  of  it,  nor  the  Way  fo  narrow  as  others 
imagine  it  to  be. 

BUT  fee  here  the  Advantage  of  Religious 
Company  ;  for  fuppofing  thou  findeft  thyfelf 
thus  furrounded  on  every  Side,  and  unable  to 
withftand  fuch  horrid  (though  {ecminglyfrienJ- 
ly)  Counfels,    hafte  away  to  thy  Companions, 
and  they  will  teach  thee  a  truer  and  better  Lef- 
fon ;   they  will  tell  thee,    that  thou  muft  be 
fmgular  if  thou  wilt  be  religious ;  and  that  it  is 
as  impoflible  for  a  Cbriflian,   as  for  a  City  fet 
upon  a  Hill  to  be  hid  :  That  if  thou  wilt  be  an 
almoft  Chriftian  (and  as  good  be  none  at  all) 
thou  mayeft  live  in  the  fame  idle,  indifferent 
Manner  as  thou  feeft  moft  other  People  do : 
But  if  thou  wilt  be  not  only  almofty  but  altoge- 
ther a  Cbriftian,    they  will  inform  thee  thou 
muft  go  a  great  deal  further :  That  thou  muft 
not  only  faintly 'feek,  but  earnejlly  Jirhs  to  ente  r 

in 


C/*RELI£IOUS  SOCIETY.'          49 
in  at  the  ftralt  Gate:  That  there  is  but  One 
Way  now  to  Heaven  as  formerly,  viz.  through 
the  narrow  PafTage  of  a  found  Converfion:  And 
that  in  order  to  bring  about  this  mighty  Work 
thou  mud  undergo  a  conftant,    but  neceflary 
Difcipline  of  Failing,  Watching,  and  Prayer. 
And  that,  therefore,  the  only  Reafon  why  thefe 
Friends  give  thee  fuch  Advice  is,  becaufe  they 
are  not  willing  to  take  fo  much  Pains  themfelves ; 
or,  as  our  Saviour  told  Peter  on  a  likeOccafion, 
becaufe  they  favour  not  the  Things  that  be  of 
GOD,  but  the  Things  that  be  of  Men. 

THIS,  then,   is  another  excellent  Bleffing  a- 
rifing  from  Religious  Society,  ihat  Friends  can 
hereby  fecure  each  other  from  thofe  that  op- 
pofe  them.     The  Devil  is  fully  fenfible  of  this  \ 
and  therefore  he  has  always  done  his  utmoft 
to  fupprefs,  and  put  a  Stop  to  the  Communion 
of  Saints.     This  was  his  grand  Artifice  at  the 
firft  planting  of  the  Gofpel;    to  perfecute  the 
Profeflbrs  of   it,    in  order  to  feparate  them. 
Which,  tho'Goo,    as   he  always  will,  over- 
ruled for  the  better;  yet  it  fhews  what  an  En- 
mity he  has  againft  Chrijliam  affembling  them- 
fehes  together ;  nor  has  he  yet  left  off  his  old 
Stratagem  ;    it  being  his  ufual  Way  to  entice  ' 
us  by  ourfefoes,  in  order  to  tempt  us ;  where, 
by  being  deftitute  of  one  another's  Helps,  he 
hopes  to  lead  us  captive  at  his  Will. 

E  JBvr 


£0  The  Neceffity  and  Benefits 

BUT,  on  the  contrary,  knowing  how  hfc 
own  Intereft  is  ftrengchened  by  Society^  he 
would  firft  perfuade  us  to  neglect  the  Communion 
of  Saints,  and  then  bid  us  ftand  in  the  Way  of 
Sinners,  hoping  thereby  to  put  us  into  the  Seat 
of  the  Scornful  Judas  and  Peter  are  melan- 
choly Inftances  of  this.  The  former  had  no 
fooner  left  his  Company  at  Supper,  but  he  went 
out  and  betrayed  his  Mafter :  And  the  difmal 
Downfal  of  the  latter,  when  he  would  venture 
himfelf  amongft  a  Company  of  Enemies,  plain- 
ly fhews  us  what  the  Devil  will  endeavour  to 
do,  when  he  gets  us  by  ourfelves.  Had  Peter 
kept  his  own  Company,  he  might  have  kept 
his  Integrity  j  but  a  Jingle  Cord,  alas  !  how 
quickly  was  it  broken  ?  Our  BleJJed  Saviour 
knew  this  full  well,  and  therefore  it  is  very 
obfervable,  that  he  always  fent  out  his  Dijci- 
pies  TLIVO  by  Two. 

AND  now,  after  fo  many  Advantages  to  be 
reaped  from  Religious  Society,  may  we  not  very 
juftly  cry  out  with  the  Wife  Man  in  my  Text, 
Woe  be  to  him  that  is  alone ;  for  when  he  falletb, 
he  hath  not  another  to  lift  him  up  ?  When  he  is 
c old,  he  hath  not  a  Friend  to  warm  him  j  when 
he  is  a/aulted,  he  hath  not  a  Second  to  help 
him  to  wkhftand  his  Enemy. 

m.  i 


tf  RELIGIOUS  SOCIETY,'         ci 

III.  I  NOW  come  to  my  tfbird  general  Head, 
under  which  was  to  be  (hewn  the  feveral  Duties 
incumbent  on  every  Member  of  a  Religion5 
Society,  as  fuch,  which  are  three,  i.  Mutual 
Reproof;  2.  Mutual  Exhort atiw,  3.  Mutual 
affijling  and  defending  each  other. 

i.  Mutual  -Reproof.  'Two  are  better  than, 
One ;  for  'when  they  fall,  the  One  will  lift  up. 
his  Fellow. 

Now,  Reproof  may  be  taken  either  in  a' 
more  extenfive  Senfe,  and  then  it  fignifies  our 
railing  a  Brother  by  the  gentleft  Means,  when 
he  falls  into  Sin  Or  Error  j  or,  in  a  more  re- 
flrained  Signification,  as  reaching  no  farther 
than  thofe  little  Mifcarriages,  which  unavoid- 
ably happen  in  the  mod  holy  Men  living. 

THE  Wife  Man  in  the  Text,  fuppofes  all  of 
us  fubjecl  to  both :  For  when  they  fall,  (fays  he, 
thereby  implying  that  each  of  us  may  fall)  the 
One  will  lift  up  his  fellow.  From  whence  we 
may  infer,  that  when  any  Brother  is  overtaken 
with  a  Fault,  he  that  is  fpiritual  (that  is,  re- 
generate, and  knows  the  Corruption  and  Weak- 
nefs  of  Human  Nature)  ought  to  rejiore  fuch  a 
one  in  the  Spirit  of  Meeknefs.  And  why  he 
mould  do  fo,  the  Apoftle  fubjoins  a  Reafon 
confidering  thyfelf,  left  then  alfo  be  tetnpted:  i.  e. 
E  i  con- 


5  a  ^he  Neceffity  and  Benefits 

confidering  thy  own  Frailty,  left  thou  alfo  fall 
by  the  like  Temptation. 

WE  are  all  frail  unftable  Creatures  ;  and  it  is 
merely  owing  to  the  Free  Grace  and  good  Pro- 
vidence of  GOD  that  we  rim  not  into  the  fame 
Excefs  of  Riot  Vfith  other  Men.  Every  offend- 
ing Brother,  therefore,  claims  our  Pity  rather 
than  our  Refentment  -,  and  each  Member  fhould 
ftrive  who  mould  be  moft  forward,  as  well  as 
moft  gentle,  in  reftoring  him  to  his  former 
State. 

BUT  fuppofing  a  Perfon  not  to  be  overfa&et?, 
but  to  fall  wilfully  into  a  Crime  j  yet  who  art 
thou  that  denieft  Forgivenefs  to  thy  offending 
Brother  ?  Let  him  that  ftandetb  take  heed  left 
he  fall.  Take  ye,  Brethren,  the  holy  Apoftles 
as  eminent  Examples  for  you  to  learn  by,  how 
you  ought  to  behave  in  this  Matter.  Confider 
how  quickly  they  joined  the  Right  Hand  of 
Fellowship  with  Peter,  who  had  fo  wilfully 
denied  his  Matter :  For  we  find  John  and  him 
together  but  two  Days  after,  John  xx.  2.  And 
ver.  19,  we  find  him  aflembled  with  the  reft. 
So  foon  did  they  forgive,  fo  foon  afibciate  with 

their  finful,  yet  relenting  Brother Let  us 

go  and  do  likewife. 

BUT  there  is  another  kind  of  Reproof  in- 
cumbent on  every  Member  of  a  Religious  So- 
ciety j  namely,  a  gentle  Rebuke  for  fome  Mif- 

carriage 


0/*  RELIGIOUS  SOCIETY.        £? 

carnage  or  of  her,  which,  though  not  actually 
finful,  yet  may  become  the  Occafion  of  Sin.  This 
indeed  feems  a  more  eafy,  but  perhaps  will 
be  found  a  more  difficult  Point  than  the  former: 
For  when  aPerfon  has  really  finned,  he  cannot 
but  own  his  Brethren's  Reproof  to  be  juft  ; 
whereas,  when  it  was  only  for  fome  little  Mif- 
conduct,  the  Pride  that  is  in  our  Natures  will 
fcarce  fuffer  us  to  brook  it.  But  however  un- 
grateful this  Pill  may  be  to  our  Brother,  yet  if 
we  have  any  Concern  for  his  Welfare,  it  muft 
be  adminiftered  by  fome  friendly  Hand  or  other. 
By  all  means  then  let  it  be  applied  j  only,  like 
a  fkilful  Phyfician,  gild  over  the  ungratefnl 
Medicine,  and  endeavour,  if  poffible,  to  de- 
ceive thy  Brother  into  Health  and  Soundnefs, 
LetallBitternefs,  and  Wrath,  and  Malice,  and 
Evil-jpeaking  be  put  away  from  it.  Let  the 
Patient  know  his  Recovery  is  the  only  Thing 
aimed  at,  that  thou  delighted  not  caufelejly  to 
grieve  thy  Brother  ;  and  then  thou  can'ft  not 
wantSuccefs. 

2.  Mutual  Exhortation  is  the  fecond  Duty 
refulting  from  the  Words  of  the  Text. — Again, 
if  Two  lye  together,  then  they  have  Heat. 

OBSERVE  here  again,    the  Wife  Man  fup- 

pofes  it  as  impoffible  for  religious  Perfons  to 

meet  together  and  not  to  be  the  warmer  for 

each  other's  Company,   as  for  two  Perfons  to 

E  3  lye 


^4  *?he  Neceffity  and  Benefits 

lye  in  the  fame  Bed,  and  yet  freeze  with  Cold. 
But  now,  how  is  it  poffible  to  communicate 
Heat  to  each  other,  without  mutually  ftirring 
up  the  Gift  of  God  which  is  in  us,  by  Brotherly 
Exhortation  ?  Let  every  Member  then  of  a 
'Religious  Society  write  that  zealous  Apoftle's 
Advice  on  the  Tables  of  his  Heart ;  See  that 
ye  exhort,  and  provoke  one  another  to  Love,  and 
to  good  Works  j  and  fo  much  the  more  as  you  fee 
the  Day  of  the  LORD  approaching.  Believe 
me,  Brethren,  we  have  need  of  Exhortation 
to  rouze  up  our  fleepy  Souls,  to  fet  us  upon  our 
Watch  againft  the  Temptations  of  the  World, 
the  Flejb,  and  the  Devil;  to  excite  us  to  re- 
nounce ourfelves,  to  take  up  our  Croffes,  and 
follow  our  bleffed  Mafter,  and  the  glorious 
Company  of  Saints  and  Martyrs,  who  through 
Faith  have  fought  the  good  Fight,  and  are  gone 
before  us  to  inherit  the  Promifes.  A  third  Part, 
therefore,  of  the  Time  wherein  a  Religious  So- 
ciety  meets,  feems  neceflary  to  be  fpent  in  this 
important  Duty :  For  what  avails  it  to  have  our 
Underftandings  enlightened  by  pious  Reading, 
unlefs  our  Wills  are  at  the  fame  Time  inclined, 
and  inflamed  by  mutual  Exhortation,  to  put  ic 
in  Practice  ?  Add  to  this,  that  this  is  the  bcfl 
Way  both  to  receive  and  impart  Light,  and  the 
only  Means  topreferveand  increafe  that  Warmth 
and  Heat  which  each  Perfon  firfl  brought  with 

him; 


e/1  RELIGIOUS  SOCIETY.       $5 

him ;  GOD  fo  ordering  this,  as  all  other  fpiri- 
toal  Gifts,  that  to  him  that  hathy  i.  e,  improves 
and  communicates  what  he  hath,y7W/  be  given ; 
but  from  him  that  hath  noty  i.  e.  does  not  im- 
prove the  Heat  he  hath,  flail  be  taken  away 
even  that  which  hefeemed  to  have.  So  needful, 
fo  effentially  neceflary,  is  Exhortation  to  the 
Good  of  a  Society. 

3.  Thirdly  and  laftly,  THE  Text  points -out 
another  Duty  incumbent  on  every  Member  of 
a  Religious  Society,  viz.  to  defend  each  other 
from  thofe  that  do  oppofe  them.  And  if  One 
prevail  againfl  himy  yet  Two  Jhall  withjland 
him ;  and  a  'Threefold  Cord  is  not  quickly  broken* 

HERE  the  Wife  Man  takes  it  for  granted, 
that  Offences  'will  comey  nay,  and  that  they  may 
prevail  too.  And  this  is  no  more  than  our 
BleJJed  Mafter  has  long  fmce  told  us.  Not,  in- 
deed, that  there  is  any  Thing  in  Chriftianily 
jtje/ftbtt.  has  the  leaft  Tendency  to  give  rife 
to,  or  promote  fuch  Offences :  No,  on  the 
contrary,  it  breathes  nothing  but  Unity  and 
Love. 

BUT  fo  it  is,  that  ever  fince  the  fatal  Sen- 
tence pronounced  by  GOD,  after  our  firft  Pa- 
rents Fall,  viz.  I  will  put  Enmity  between  thy 
Seed  and  her  Seed  j  He  that  is  born  after  the 
Flefo,  that  is,  the  unregenerate  unconverted 
Sinner,  has  in  all  Ages  perfccuted  him  that  is 
E  4  born, 


.56  The  Nece/ity  and  Benefits 

born  after  the  Spirit:  And  fo  it  always  will  be^ 
Accordingly  we  find  an  early  Proof  given  of  this 
in  the  Inftance  of  Cain  and  Abel ;  and  of  Ifo- 
tnaelzn&  Ifaac;  of  Jacob  and  Efau  afterwards. 
And,  indeed,  the  whole  Bible  contains  little 
elfe  but  an  Hiftory  of  the  great  and  continued 
Oppofition  between  the  Children  of  this  World 
and  the  Children  of  GOD.  The  firft  Chrifliam 
were  remarkable  Examples  of  this;  and  though 
thofe  troublefome  Times,  blefled  be  GOD,  are 
now  over,  yet  the  Apoftle  has  laid  it  down  as 
a  general  Rule,  and  all  that  are  fincere  can 
experimentally  prove  the  Truth  of  it,  That 
they  that  will  live  godly  in  CHRIS?  JESUS 
muft  (to  the  End  of  the  World,  in  fome  Degree 
or  other)  fuffer  Perfecution.  That  therefore 
this  may  not  make  us  defert  our  BlefTed  Matter's. 
Catife,  every  Member  {hould  unite  their  Forces^ 
in  order  to  iland  againft  it.  And  for  the  better 
effecting  this,  each  would  do  well  from  Time 
to  Time  to  communicate  his  Experiences,  Grie- 
vances, and  Temptations,  and  beg  his  Com- 
panions (firft  asking  GOD'S  Affiftance,  without 
which  all  is  nothing)  to  adminifter  Reproof, 
Exhortation,  or  Comfort,  as  his  Cafe  requires : 
So  \hziif  One  cannot  prevail  againft  if,  yet  Two 
foall  ivitbjland  it  -,  and  a  Threefold  (much  lefs 
a  many-fold")  Cord  will  not  be  quickly  broken. 

IV.  BUT 


ff  RELIGIOUS  SOCIETV.        .-57 

IV.  BUT  it  is  time  for  me  to  proceed  to  the 
Fourth  general  Thing  propofed,  viz.  to  draw 
an  Inference  or  two  from  what  has  been  faid. 

I,  AND  firft  then,  if  Two  are  better  than 
One,  and  the  Advantages  of  Religious  Society 
are  fo  many  and  fo  great,  then  it  is  the  Duty  of 
every  true  Cbriftian  to  fet  on  foot,  eftablifli  and 
promote,  as  much  as  in  him  lyes,  Societies  of 
this  Nature.  And  I  believe  we  may  venture 
to  affirm  that  if  ever  a  Spirit  of  true  Chriftianity 
is  revived  in  the  World,  it  muft  be  brought 
about  by  fome  fuch  Means  as  this.  MotiveSj 
furely,  cannot  be  wanting,  to  ftir  us  up  to  this 
commendable  and  neceffary  Undertaking:  For, 
granting  all  hitherto  advanced  to  be  of  no  Force, 
yet  methinks  the  fingle  Confideration  that  great 
Part  of  our  Happinefs  in  Heaven  will  confift 
in  the  Communion  of  Saints  ;  or  that  the  In- 
tereft  as  well  as  Piety  of  thofe  Seclarifts  that 
differ  from  us,  is  flrengthened  and  fupported 
by  nothing  more  than  their  frequent  Meetings; 
either  of  thefe  Confiderations,  I  fay,  one  would 
think,  fhould  induce  us  to  do  our  utmoft  to 
copy  after  their  good  Example,  and  fettle  a 
lafling  and  pious  Communion  of  the  Saints  on 
Earth.  Add  to  this,  that  we  find  the  Kingdom 
of  Darknefs  eftablifhed  daily  by  fuch  like  Means; 
and  fhail  not  the  Kingdom  of  CHRIST  be  fet 

in 


£8  The  Necefllty  and  Benefits 

in  Opposition  againfl  it?  Shall  the  Children  of 
Belial  aflemble  and  flrengthen  each  other  in 
Wickednefs  ;  and  fhall  not  the  Children  of 
GOD  unite,  and  flrengthen  themfelves  in  Piety  ? 
Shall  Societies  on  Societies  be  countenanced  for 
midnight  Revellings,  and  the  promoting  of 
Vice,  and  fcarcely  one  be  found  intended  for 
the  Propagation  of  Virtue  ?  Be  aftonilhed, 
O  Heavens,  at  this! 

2.  BUT  this  leads  me  to  a  fecond  Inference, 
namely,  to  warn  Perfons  of  the  great  Danger 
thofe  are  in,  who  either  by  their  Subfcriptions, 
Prefence,  or  Approbation,  promote  Societies  of 
a  quite  oppofite  Nature  to  Religion. 

AND  here  I  would  not  be  underftood  to  mean 
only  thofe  publick  Meetings  which  are  defigned 
manifeftly  for  nothing  elfe  but  Revellings  and 
Banquetings,  for  Chambering  and  V/antonnefs, 
and  at  which  a  modeft  Heathen  would  blum 
to  be  prefent ;  but  alfo  thofe  feemingly  innocent 
Entertainments  and  Meetings  which  thepo/iter 
Part  of  the  World  are  fo  very  fond  of,  and  fpend 
fo  muchTime  in  :  But  which,  notwithstanding, 
keep  as  many  Perfons  out  of  a  Senfe  of  TfrueRe- 
ligion,  as  Intemperance,  Debauchery,  or  any 
other  Crime  whatever.  Indeed,  whilft  we 
are  in  this  World,  we  mufl  have  proper  Re- 
laxations, to  fit  us  both  for  the  Bufinefs  of  our 
Profeffion  and  Religion.  But  then,  for  Perfons 

who 


e/*  RELIGIOUS  SOCIETY.  59 
Nvho  call  themfelves  Chriftians>  that  have  for- 
lemnly  vowed  at  their  Baptifm,  to  renounce  the 
Vanities  of  this  fmful  World  $  that  are  com- 
manded in  Scripture  to  abjlain  from  all  Ap^ 
fearance  of  Evil,  and  to  have  their  Conversation 
in  Heaven.  For  fuch  Pe.rfons  as  thefe  to  fupport 
Meetings,  that  (to  fay  no  worfe  pf  them)  are 
vain  and  trifling,  and  have  a  natural  Tendency 
to  draw  off  our  Minds  from  Gop,  is  abfurd, 
ridiculous,  and  fmful.  Surely  <Tewo  are  not 
better  than  One  in  this  Cafe  :  No ;  it  is  to  be 
wiflied  there  was  not  one  to  be  found  concerned 
in  it.  The  fooner  we  forfake  the  affembling 
curfelves  together  in  fuch  a  manner,  the  better ; 
and  no  matter  how  quickly  the  Cord  that  holds 
fuch  Societies  (was  it  a  thoufand  Fold)  is  broken. 
BUT  you,Brethren,  have  not  fo  learntCnRisT : 
But  on  the  contrary,  like  true  Difciples  of  your 
LORD  and  Matter,  have  by  the  Blefiing  of  GOB 
(as  this  Evening's  Solemnity  abundantly  teftifies) 
happily  formed  yourfelves  into  fuch  Societies^ 
which  if  duly  attended  on,  and  improved,  can- 
not but  ftrengthen  you  in  your  Chriftian  Warr 
fare,  and  make  you  fruitful  in  every  good  Word 
and  Work. 

WHAT  remains  for  me  to  do,  but  as  was 
propofed,  in  the  laft  Place,  to  clofe  up  what 
has  been  faid?  in  a  Word  or  two,  by  way  of 

Exhortation 
3 


6o  The  Neceffity  and  Benefits 

Exhortation  from  the  whole,  and  to  befeech 
yon,  in  the  Name  of  our  Lord  JESUS  CHRIST, 
to  go  on  in  the  Way  you  have  begun  ;  and  by 
a  conftant  confcientious  Attendance  on  your 
refpeftive  Societies,  to  difcountenanceVice,  en- 
courage Virtue,  and  build  each  ether  up  in  the 
Juiowledge  and  Fear  of  GOD. 

ONLY  permit  me  tojtir  up  your  pure  Minds •> 
by  way  of  Remembrance,  and  to  exhort  you* 
if  tlere  be  any  Conjblation  in  CHRIST*,  any 
Fellwafiip  cf  the  Spirit,  again  and  again  to 
consider,  that  as  d\Gbriftiam  in  genera],  fo  all 
Members  of  Religious  Societies  in  particular, 
are  in  an  efpecial  Manner,  as  Houfes  built  upon 
an  Hill ;  and  that  therefore  it  highly  concerns 
you  to  walk  circumfpeftly  towards  thofe  that  are 
without,  and  to  take  heed  to  your/elves,  that  your 
Confer  fat  ion,  in  common  Life,  be  as  become  th 
fuch  an  open  and  peculiar  Profeffion  of  the 
G&fpel  of  CHRIST:  Knowing  that  the  Eyes 
of  all  Men  are  upon  you,  narrowly  to  infpecl: 
every  Circumflance  of  your  Behaviour ;  and 
that  every  notorious  wilful  Mifcarriage  of  any 
fingle  Member  will,  in  fome  meafure,  redound 
to  the  Scandal  and  Difhonour  of  your  whole 
Fraternity. 

LABOUR,  therefore,  my  beloved  Brethren,  to. 
let  your  PraSfice correfpond  to  your  ProfeJ/ion:. 
And  think  not  that  it  will  be  fufikient  for  you 

to 


0/*RELiGious  SOCIETY.  6 1 . 
to  plead  at  the  lad  Day,  LORD,  have  we  not 
flembled  ourfelves  together  in  thy  Name,  and 
enlivened  each  other,  by  Jwgtng  Pfalms  and 
Hymns  and  Spiritual  Songs  ?  For,  verily,  I  fay 
unto  you,  notwithstanding  this,  our  BlefTed 
LORD  will  bid  you  depart  from  him-,  nay,  that 
pou  mall  receive  a  greater  Damnation,  if,  in 
he  midft  of  thefe  great  Pretenfions,  you  are 
ound  to  be  Workers  of  Iniquity. 

BUT  GOD  forbid  that  any  fuch  Evil  mould 
>efal  you  ;  that  there  fhould  be  ever  a  Judas, 
ever  a  Traitor  amongft  fuch  diftinguimed  Fol- 
lowers'of  our  Common  Mafter.  No,  on  the 
contrary,  the  Excellency  of  your  Rules,  the 
Regularity  of  your  Meetings,  and  more  efpe- 
cially  your  pious  Zeal  in  aflembling  in  fuch  a 
publick  and  folemn  Manner  fo  frequently  in 
the  Year,  perfuade  me  to  think,  that  you  are 
willing,  not  barely  tofeem,  but  to  be  in  Reality, 
Chrijlians ;  and  hope  to  be  found  at  the  Loft 
Day,  what  you  would  be  efteemed  now,  viz. 
holy,  fincere  Difciples  of  a  Crucified  Redeemer* 

OH,  may  you  always  continue  thus  minded  I 
and  make  it  your  daily,  confbnt  Endeavour, 
both  by  Precept  and  Example,  to  turn  all  your 
converfe  with,  more  efpecially  thofe  of  your 
own  Societies,  into  the  fame  moft  bleffed  Spirit 
and  Temper.  Thus  will  you  adorn  the  Gofpel 
of  our  Lord  JESUS  CHRIST  in  all  Things :  Thus 

will 


62  Tfe  Neceffity  and  Benefits,  &c. 
will  you  anticipate  the  Happinefs  of  a  future 
State,  and  by  attending  on,  and  improving  the 
Communion  of  Saints  on  Earth,  make  yourfelves 
meet  to  join  the  Communion  and  Fellowfhip 
of  the  Spirits  of  Juft  Men  made  perfect,  of 
the  Holy  Angels,  nay,  of  the  Ever  Blefled  and 
Eternal  GOD  in  Heaven. 

Which  GOD  of  his  infinite  Mercy  grant,  thro1 
JESUS  CHRIST  our  Lord;  to  whom 
•with  the  Father,  and  the  Holy  Ghoft,  Three 
Perfons,  and  One  Eternal  GOD,  be  afcribedy 
as  is  mofl  due,  all  Honour  and  Praife,  Might , 
Majejly  and  Dominion,  now  and  for  ever. 


THE 


THE 

BENEFITS 

O  F    A  N 

EARLY  PIETY. 

A  S  E  R  M  O  N  preach'd  at  Bow-Cburch,  Lon~ 
don,  before  the  Religious  Societies,  at  one 
of  their  General  Quarterly-Meetings,  &c. 
on  Wednefday  Sept.  2&,  1737. 


SERMON    III. 

Of  the  Benefits  of  an  EARLY 
PIETY. 


E  c  c  L  E  s.  xii.    i. 

Remember  now  thy  Creator  m  the  Days 

of  thy  Youth. 

TH  E  Amiablenefs  of  Religion  in  itfelf, 
the  innumeral  Advantages   that  flow 
from  it  to  Society  in  general,    as  well 
as  each  fincere  Profeflbr   of  ic  in  particular, 
cannot  but  recommend  it  to  the  Choice  of  every 
confiderate  Perfon,    and    make    even    wicked 
Men,  as  they  wifti  to  dye  the  Death,  fo,   in 
their  more  fober  Intervals,    envy  the  Life  of 
the  Righteous.     And  indeed  we  muft  do  the 
World  fo  much  Juftice,  as  to  confefs,  that  the 
Queflion  about  Religion  does  not  ufually  arife 
from  a  Difpute  whether  it  be  neceffary  or  not 
(for  moft  Men  fee  the  Neceffity  of  doing  fome- 
F  thing 


66  Of  the  B  E  N  E  F  i  T  s  of 

thing  for  the  Salvation  of  their  Souls;)    but 
when  is  the  beft  Time  to  fet  about  it.    Per- 
fbns  are  convinced   by  univerfal  Experience, 
that  the  firft  Effays  or  Endeavours  towards  the 
Attainment  of  Religion  are  attended  with  fome 
Difficulty  and  Trouble,    and   therefore  they 
would   willingly  defer  the  Beginning  fuch  a 
feemingly  ungrateful  Work  as  long  as  they  can. 
The  wanton  Prodigal,  that  is  fpending  his  Sub- 
fiance  in  riotous  Living,  cries,   a  little  more 
Pleafure,  a  little  more  Senfuality,  and  then  I'll 
be  fober  in  Earneft.     The  covetous  Worlding, 
that  employs  all  his  Care  and  Pains  in  heaping 
tip  Richesy  though  he  cannot  tell  who  Jh all  ga- 
ther them,  does  nor  flatter  himfelf  this  will  do 
always ;  but  hopes,  with  the  rich  Fool  in  the 
Gofpel,  to  lay  up  Goods  for  a  few  more  Years 
on  Earth,  and  then  he  will  begin  to  lay  «f>- 
Treafures  in  Heaven,     And,   in  mort,  thus  it 
is    that   moft    People  are    convinc'd  of    the 
Neceffity  of  being  religious  fome  time  or  ano- 
ther ;    but  then,   like  Felix,  they  put  off  the 
acting  fuitably  to  their  Convictions,  'till  (what 
they  imagine)  a  more  convenient  Seafon :  Where- 
as, would  we  be  fo  humble  as  to  be  guided  by 
the  Experience  and  Counfel  of  the  Wifeft  of 
Men,  we  mould  learn  that  Youth  is  the  fitteft 
Seafon  for  Religion -,  Remember  now  thy  Creator? 
fays  Solomon,  in  the  Days  of  thy  Touth.    By 

which 


an  EARLY  PIETY.  67 

which  Word  Remember,  we  are  not  to  under- 
ftand  a  bare  fpeculative  Remembrance,  or  cal- 
ling to  Mind,  (for  that,  like  a  dead  Faith,  will 
profit  us  nothing)  but  fuch  a  Remembrance 
as  will  conftrain  us  to  Obedience,  and  oblige 
us,  out  of  Gratitude,  to  perform  all  that  the 
LORD  our  GOD  (hall  require  of  us.  For  as 
forgetting  GOD  in  Scripture  Language,  implies 
a  total  Neglect  of  our  Duty,  in  like  Manner 
remejnbring  him  fignifies  a  perfect  Performance 
of  it :  So  that,  when  Solomon  lays,  Remember 
thy  Creator  in  the  Days  of  thy  Touth>  it  is  the 
fame  as  if  he  had  faid,  Keep  GOD'S  Command- 
ments ;  or  in  other  Words,  be  religious  in  the 
Days  of  thy  Tonth ;  thereby  implying  that  Touth 
is  the  moft  proper  Seafon  for  it. 

I  mall  in  the  following  Difcourfe,  Firfty  en- 
deavour to  make  good  the  Wife  Man's 
Propofition  imply 'd  in  the  Words  of  the 
Text,  and  to  mew  that  Youth  is  the  fit- 
teft  Seafon  of  Religion. 

Secondly^  by  Way  of  Motive,  I  fhall  confider 
the  many  unfpeakable  Advantages  that 
will  arife  from  Remembering  our  Creator 
in  the  Days  of  our  Touth. 

thirdly  and  lajlly\  I  fhall  conclude  whh  a 
Word  or  two  of  Exhortation  to  the 
younger  Part,  of  this  Audience. 

F  2  I.  And 


68  Of  the  B  E  N  E  F  i  T  s  of 

I.  And  Firft  then,  I  am  to  make  good  the 
Wife  Man's  Propofition  implied  in  the 
Words  of  the  Text,  and  to  mew  that  Toutb 
is  the  fitted  Seafon  for  Religion :  "Remem- 
ber now  thy  Creator  in  the  Days  of  thy  Touth. 

But  in  order  to  proceed  more  clearly  in  this 
Argument,  it  may  not  be  improper,  firft,  to 
explain  what  I  mean  by  the  Word  Religion. 
By  this  Term  then  I  would  not  be  underflood 
to  mean  a  bare  outward  Profeffion  or  naming 
the  Name  of  CHRIST  ;  for  we  are  told,  that 
many  that  have  even  prophefied  in  his  Namet 
and  in  bis  Name  caft  out  Devils,  fhall  notwith- 
ftanding  be  rejected  by  him  at  the  laft  Day : 
Nor  would  I  underftand  by  it  barely  being  ad- 
mitted into  CHRIST'S  Church  by  Baptifm  -, 
for  then  Simon  Magusy  Arius,  and  the  Herefi- 
archs  of  old  might  pafs  for  Religious  Perfons ; 
for  thefe  were  baptized :  Nor  yet  the  Receiving 
the  other  Seal  of  the  Covenant  j  for  then  Judas 
himfelf  might  be  canoniz'd  for  a  Saint :  Nor 
indeed  do  I  mean  any  or  all  of  thefe  together, 
confidered  by  themfelves ;  but  a  thorough,  real, 
inward  Change  of  Nature,  wrought  in  us  by 
the  powerful  Operations  of  the  HOLY  GHOST 
convey'd  to  and  nourifh'd  in  our  Hearts,  by  a 
conflant  Ufe  of  all  the  Means  of  Grace,  evi- 

denc'd 


an  EARLY   PIETY.  6f 

denc'd  by  a  good  Life,   and  bringing  forth  the 
Fruits  of  the  Spirit. 

THE  attaining  this  real  inward  Religion,  is 
a  Work  of  fo  great  Difficulty,  that  Nicode- 
mus,  a  learned  Doctor  and  Teacher  in  Ifrae/, 
thought  it  altogether  impoffible,  and  therefore 
ignorantly  afked  our  Blefled  LORD,  How  this 
Thing  could  be  ?  And  truly  ttfreclify  a  difor- 
der'd  Nature,  to  mortify  our  corrupt  Paffions, 
to  turn  Darknefs  to  Light,  to  put  off  the  old 
Man,  and  put  on  the  new,  and  thereby  to  have 
the  Image  of  GOD  reinftamp'd  upon  the  Soul; 
or  in  one  Word,  to  be  born  again,  however 
light  fome  may  make  of  it,  muft,  after  all  our 
Endeavours,  be  own'd  by  Man  impoffible. 
'Tis  true  indeed  CHRIST'S  Yoke  is  faid  to  be 
an  eafy  or  a  gracious  Yoke,  and  his  Burthen 
light ;  but  then  it  is  to  thofe  only  who  have 
been  accuftomed  to  bear  and  draw  in  it.  For, 
as  the  wife  Son  of  Sirach  obferves,  At  firft 
Wifdom  walketh  with  her  Children  in  crooked, 
Ways,  and  brings  them  into  Fear  •,  and  torments 
them  'with  her  Difcipline,  and  does  not  turn  to 
comfort  ar¥d  rejoyce  them,  tilljhe  has  fry' d  them 
andpro'D'd  their  judgment. — No;  we  muft  not 
flatter  ourfelves,  that  our  deprav'd  Natures  can 
be  renewed,  unlefs  we  fubmit  to  a  great  many 
Difficulties.  The  fpiritual  Birth  is  attended 
with  its  Pangs,  as  well  as  the  natural :  For 
F  3  they 


7^  Of  tJce  BENEFITS   of 

they  that  have  experisnc'd  it,  (and  they  only 
are  the  proper  Judges)  can  acquaint  you,  that 
frequent  Ads  of  Self-Denial  muft  be  exercifed, 
a  conftant  regular  Difcipline  kept  up,  left, 
after  all,  when  we  come  to  the  Birth,  we 
fhould  want  Strength  to  bring  forth. 

B  u  T  if  thefe  Things  are  fo  ;  if  there  are 
Difficulties  and  Pangs  attending  our  being  born 
(igain^  and  Difcipline  muft  be  called  in,  What 
Seafon  more  proper  than  that  of  Touth  j  when, 
if  ever,  our  Bodies  are  robuft  and  vigorous, 
and  our  Minds  active  and  courageous;  and 
confequently  we  are  then  beft  qualified  to  en- 
dure Hardnefs  as  good  Soldiers  of  JESUS 
CHRIST  ? 

WE  find  in  fecular  Matters  People  com- 
monly obferve  this  Method,  and  fend  their 
Children  abroad  among  the  Toils  and  Fatigues 
of  Bufinefs,  in  their  younger  Years,  as  well 
knowing  they  are  then  fitteft  to  undergo  them. 
And  why  do  they  not  act  with  the  fame  Con- 
fiftency  in  the  grand  Affair  of  Religion  ?  Be- 
caufe,  as  our  Saviour  has  told  us,  the  Children 
of  this  World  are  wifer  in  their  Generation, 
than  the  Children  of  Light. 

BUT,  Secondly,  if  pure  Religion  and  un- 
defiled,  confifts  in  the  total  Renewal  of  our 
corrupted  Natures,  then  'tis  not  only  a  Work 
qf  Difficulty,  but  of  Tipie :  For,  as  the  old 

was 


«/2    E  A  R  L  Y    P  I  E  T  Y.  Jl 

was  not,  fo  neither  is  the  new  Creation  com- 
pleated  in  a  Day.  No,  good  Men  know  by 
certain  Experience,  that  it  is  a  long  while  ere 
old  Things  can  pajs  away,  and  all  Things  be- 
come new  in  them.  The  Strong  Man  armed 
has  gotten  too  great  PofTeffion  of  their  Hearts 
to  be  quickly  driven  out,  and  they  are  obliged 
to  combat  many  a  weary  Hour,  ere  their  Cor- 
ruptions, which  is  the  Armour  in  which  the 
Strong  Man  trufted,  be  wholly  taken  from 
him.  Nay,  they  find  their  whole  Lives  fhort 
enough  to  perfect  the  Work  of  Regeneration, 
which  they  were  fent  into  the  World  to  da, 
and  never  expect  to  fay,  it  isjmjh9^  'till  with 
their  blefied  Matter  they  bow  down  their 
Heads,  and  give  up  the  Ghoft. 

AND  if  this  be  the  Cafe,  if  the  Renovation 
of  our  Nature  be  not  only  difficult,  but  re- 
quires fo  long  a  Space  to  compleat  it  in  ;  then  it 
highly  concerns  every  one  to  fet  about  it  betimes, 
and  to  work  their  Work  'while  it  is  Day,  before 
the  Night  cometh,  when  no  Man  can  work. 

Could  we  indeed  live  to  the  Age  of  Me- 
thufelah,  and  had  but  little  Bufmefs  to  employ 
ourfelves  in,  we  might  then  be  more  excufable, 
if  we  made  no  other  Ufe  of  this  World  than 
what  too  many  do,  take  our  Pajlime  therein : 
But  fince  our  Lives  are  fo  very  fhort,  and  the 
working  out  our  Salvation  requires  fo  much 
F  4  Time, 


jz  Of  the  BENEFITS  o/" 

Time,  we  have  no  Room  left  for  Trifling,  left 
we  mould  be  fnatch'd  away  while  our  Lamps 
are  untrimmed,  and  we  are  entirely  unprepared 
to  meet  the  Bridegroom. 

DID  we  know  a  Friend  or  Neighbour, 
who  had  a  long  Journey  of  the  utmoft  Impor- 
tance to  make,  and  yet  mould  ftand  all  the 
Day  idle,  negle&ing  to  fet  out  till  the  Sun  was 
about  to  go  down,  we  could  not  but  pity  and 
condemn  his  egregious  Folly  :  And  yet  it  is  to 
be  feared  moft  Men  are  juft  fuch  Fools ;  they 
have  a  long  Journey  to  take,  nay,  a  Journey 
to  Eternity,  a  Journey  of  infinite  Importance, 
and  which  they  are  obliged  to  difpatch  before 
the  Sun  of  their  natural  Life  be  gone  down  -, 
and  yet  they  loiter  away  their  Time  allotted 
them  to  perform  their  Journey  in,  'till  Sick- 
nefs  or  Death  furprizes  them ;  and  then  they 
cry  our,  What  flail  we  do  to  inherit  eternal 
Life  ?  But  alas !  Is  this  a  proper  Seafon  to  afk 
fuch  a  Queftion  ?  Is  this  a  Time  to  begin  their 
Journey,  when  they  mould  be  at  the  End  of 
it ;  or  to  inquire  what  they  muft  do,  when 
perhaps  they  have  hardly  any  Strength  or  Abi- 
lity left  to  do  any  thing  to  purpofe,  and  when 
they  mould  be  waiting  with  humble  Patience, 
in  Hopes  of  fpeedily  receiving  their  Wages  for 
Work  already  done  ?  O  foolifo  People  and  un- 
•wife !  If  ye  offer  the  Blind  for  Sacrifice,  h  it 

not 


an  EARLY  PIETY.'  73 

not  evil  ?  And  if  ye  offer  the  Lame  and  Sick,  h 
it  not  evil?  Offer  it  now  unto  tby  Governor, 
will  he  be  pleaj'ed  with  tbee,  or  accept  thy  Per- 
fon?  faith  the  LORD  of  Hojls.  But  leaving 
fuch  to  the  Mercies  of  GOD,  I  pafs  on  to 

II.  The  Second  general  Thing  propofed,  viz. 
To  Ihew  the  Advantages,  that  will  arife 
from  remembering  our  Creator  in  the  Days 
of  our  Touth  ;  which  may  ferve  as  fo  many 
Motives  to  excite  and  quicken  all  Perfons 
immediately  to  fet  about  it, 

I.  And  the  Firft  Benefit  refulting  from 
thence  is,  that  it  will  bring  moft  Honour  and 
Glory  to  GOD.  This,  I  fuppofe,  every  ferious 
Perfon  will  grant,  ought  to  be  the  Point  in 
which  all  our  Actions  mould  center :  For  to 
this  End  were  we  born ;  to  this  End  were  we 
redeemed  by  the  precious  Blood  of  JESUS 
CHRIST,  that  we  mould  promote  GOD'S  eter- 
nal Glory.  And  as  the  Glory  of  GOD  is  moft 
advanced  by  paying  Obedience  to  his  Precepts, 
they  that  begin  fooneft  to  walk  in  his  Ways, 
act  moft  to  his  Glory :  For  the  common  Ob- 
jection againft  the  Divine  Laws  in  general,  and 
the  Doctrines  of  the  Gofpel  in  particular,  is, 
that  they  are  not  practicable,  that  they  are 
contrary  to  Flem  and  Blood,  and  that  all  thofe 
Precepts  concerning  Self-Denial,  Renunciation 

of, 


74  Of  the  B  E  N  E  F  i  T  s  of 

of,  and  Deadnefs  to  the  World,  are  but  fo 
many  arbitrary  Reftraints  impofedupon  human 
Nature.  But  when  we  fee  mere  Striplings  not 
only  pradlifing,  but  delighting  in  fuch  religious 
Duties,  and  in  the  Days  of  their  Youth,  when, 
if  ever,  they  have  a  Relifh  for  fenfual  Plea- 
fures,  fubduing  and  defpifing  the  Luft  of  the 
Flefi>  the  Luji  of  the  Eye,  and  the  Pride  of 

Life This,   this  is  acceptable  with  GOD; 

this  vindicates  his  injured  Honour  ;  this  {hews 
that  his  Service  is  perfect  Freedom,  that  his 
Toke  is  eafy,  and  his  Burden  light. 

2.  But,  Secondly,  as  an  early  Piety  redounds 
moft  to  the  Honour  of  GOD,   fo  it  will  bring 
moft   Honour   to   ourfelves:    For  thofe  that 
honour  GOD,  GOD  will  honour.     We  find  it 
therefore  remarked  to  the  Praife  of  Obadiah, 
that  he  fer<ued  the  L  O RD  from  his  Youth :  Of 
Samuel,    that  be  flood,    when   young,    before 
GOD  in  a  Linen  Ephod:-    Of  Timothy,  that 

from  a  Child  he  had  known  the  Holy  Scriptures : 
Of  St.  John,,  that  be  was  the  youngeft  and  moft 
beloved  Difciple  ;  and  of  our  bleffed  LORD, 
himfelf,  that  at 'Twelve  Tears  old  he  went  up  to 
the  Temple,  and  fat  among  the,  D.o^lors^  both 
bearing  and  ajking  them  Quejlions. 

3.  Nor,  Thirdly,   will  an  early  Piety  afford 
us  lefs  Comfort  than  Honour,  not  only  becaufe 
it   renders  Religion  habitual   to  us,   but  alfo 

becaufe 


an  EARLY  PIETY.  75 

becaufe  it  gives  us  a  well-grounded  Afturance 
of  the  Sincerity  of  our  Profeffions.  Was  there 
no  other  Argument  againft  a  Death-bed  Re- 
pentance but  the  Unfatisfactorinefs  and  Anxiety 
of  fuch  a  State,  that  would  be  fufficient  to  de- 
ter all  thinking  Perfons  from  defering  the  moft 
important  Bufinefs  of  their  Life  to  fuch  a 
dreadful  Period  of  it.  For  fuppoling  a  Man 
be  fincere  in  his  Profeffions  of  Repentance 
on  a  Death-bed  (which  is  very  much  to  be 
doubted)  yet  he  can  take  no  great  Comfort  in 
them,  becaufe  he  is  uncertain  whether  his 
Convictions  and  Remorfe  proceed  from  a  true 
Sorrow  for  Sin,  or  a  fervile  Fear  of  Punifh- 
ment. —  But  a  young  Saint  need  fear  no  fuch 
Perplexity  ;  he  knows  that  he  loves  GOD  for  his 
own  Sake,  and  is  not  driven  to  him  by  a  Dread 
of  impending  Evil :  He  does  not  decline  the 
Gratifications  of  Senfe,  becaufe  he  can  no 
longer  hear  the  Voice  of  Sivging~Men  and  Sing- 
ing Women ;  but  willingly  takes  up  his  Crofs, 
and  follows  his  BlefTed  Mafter  in  his  Youth, 
and  therefore  muft  have  great  Confidence  of 
his  Sincerity  towards  GOD.  But  farther,  as  an 
early  Piety  affures  the  Hearts  of  its  Sincerity, 
fo-likewife  it  brings  its  prefent  Reward  with  it, 
as  it  renders  Religion,  and  all  its  Duties,  habi- 
tual and  eafy.  A  young  Saint,  was  you  to  afk 

him. 


j6  Of  the  B  E  N  E  F  i  T  s  cf 

him,  would  joyfully  tell  you  the  unfpeakable 
Comfort  of  beginning  to  be  good  betimes:  As 
for  his  Part,  he  knows  not  what  Men  mean  by 
talking  of  Mortification,  Self-denial,  and  Re- 
tirement, as  hard  and  rigorous  Duties  j  for  he 
has  fo  accuftomed  himfelf  to  them,  that  they 
are  now  become  even  natural,  and  he  takes  in- 
finitely more  pleafure  in  pra&iling  the  fevered 
Precepts  of  the  Gofpel,  than  a  luxurious  Dives 
jn  a  Bed  of  State,  or  an  ambitious  Hainan  at  a 
Royal  Banquet.  And,  oh !  how  happy  muft 
that  Youth  be,  whofe  Duty  is  become  a  fe- 
cond  Nature,  and  to  whom  thofe  Things, 
which  feem  terrible  to  others,  are  grown  both 
eafy  and  delightful. 

4.  Bu  T  the  greateft  Advantage  of  an  early 
Piety  is  ftill  behind,  viz.  That  it  lays  in  the 
beft  Provifion  of  Comfort  and  Support  againft 
fuch  Times  as  we  mall  ftand  moft  in  need  there- 
of, viz.  in  all  Times  of  our  Tribulation,  and 
in  particular  againft  the  Time  of  old  Age,  the 
Hour  of  Death,  and  the  Day  of  Judgment. 

This  is  the  Argument  the  Wife  Man  makes 
ufe  of  in  the  Words  immediately  following  the 
Text.  Remember  now,  fays  he,  thy  Creator  in 
the  Days  of  thy  Touth ;  while  the  evil  Days  come 
noty  nor  the  Tears  draw  nigbt  wherein  thoujhalt 
fay,  I  have  no  Pleafure  in  them.  Obferve,  the 
Time  of  old  Age  is  an  evil  'time,  Years 

wherein 


an  EARLY  PIETY.  77 

wherein  there  is  no  Pleafure;  and  afk  thofe 
that  are  grown  old,  and  they  will  inform  you 
fo.  Cordials  furely  then  muft  be  exceeding 
proper  to  fupport  our  drooping  Spirits :  And, 
oh  !  What  Cordial  comparable  to  the  grateful 
Review  of  a  well-fpent  Life  ?  When  the  Eyes, 
like  Ifaac's,  are  grown  dim  with  Age ;  when 
the  Keepers  of  the  Houfe,  i.  e.  the  Hands  {hall 
tremble  j  as  the  Wife  Mangoes  on  to  defcribe 
the  Infirmities  of  old  Age,  when  the  Jlrong 
Men  bow  themfefoes,  i.e.  when  the  Legs  grow 
feeble;  and  the  Grinders,  i.e.  the  Teeth,  fhall 
ceafe  to  do  their  proper  Office,  becaufe  they  are 
few  j  for  a  Perfon  then  to  hear  the  Precepts  of 
the  Gofpel  read  over  to  him,  and  to  be  able  to 
lay  his  Hand  on  his  Heart,  and  to  fay  fincerely, 
All  thefe  have  I  kept  from  my  Touth  :  This  muft 
fill  him  with  fuch  unfpeakable  Comfort,  that 
I  want  Words  to  exprefs,  and  Thoughts  to 
conceive  it.  Bur,  fuppofing  it  was  pomble  for 
us  to  efcape  the  Inconveniencies  of  old  Age, 
yet  ftill  Death  is  a  Debt  we  all  muft  pay  ;  and, 
what  is  worfe,  it  generally  comes  attended  with 
fuch  dreadful  Circumftances,  that  it  will  make 
even  a  Felix  tremble.  But  as  fonthe  Godly, 
that  have  ferved  the  LORD  from  their  Youth, 
it  is  not  fo  with  them  ;  no,  they  look  upon 
Death,  not  as  a  King  of  Terrors,  but  as  a  wel- 
come Meflenger  that  is  come  to  conduct  them  to 

their 


78  Of   the  B  E  N  E  F  I  T  3    tf 

their  wifli'd-for  Home.  All  the  Days  of  their 
appointed  Time  have  they  waited,  and  it  hasj 
been  the  Bufinefs  of  their  whole  Lives  to  pre- 
pare themfelves  for  the  coming  of  their  great 
Change;  and  therefore  they  rejoice  to  hear 
that  they  are  called  to  meet  the  heavenly 
Bridegroom.  Thus  dies  the  early,  (I  mean 
the  early,  if  perfevering)  Pious ;  whofe  Path 
has  been  as  the  foining  Light,  that  fiineth 
more  and  more  unto  the  P  erf  eft  Day.  But  fol- 
low him  beyond  the  Grave,  and  fee  with 
what  an  holy  Triumph  he  enters  into  his 
Matter's  Joy ;  with  what  an  humble  Bold- 
nefs  he  ftands  at  the  dreadful  Tribunal  of 
JESUS  CHRIST  ;  and  can  you  then  forbear  to 
cry  out,  Let  me  die  the  Death  of  the  Righteous, 
and  let  my  latter  End,  and  future  State,  be  like 
his. 

Need  I  then,  after  having  fhewn  fo  many 
Advantages  to  arife  from  an  early  Piety,  ufe 
any  more  Arguments  to  perfuade  the  younger 
Part  of  this  Audience,  to  whom, 

III.  In  the  Third  and  loft  place,  1  addrefs 
myfelf*  to  remember  their  Creator  in  the 
Days  of  their  Tout h? 

WHAT!    will  not  a  Defire  of    bringing 
Glory  to  GOD,  Honour  and  Comfort  to  them- 
felves 5 


an  E  A  R  L  Y  P  i  E  T  Y.  7£ 

felves ;  will  not  the  Pleafure  of  an  habitual  Pie- 
ty, and  the  comfortable  AfTurance  of  being 
fincerej  above  all,  will  not  the  hopes  of  an 
honourable  old  Age,  a  peaceful  Death,  and  a 
glorious  Appearance  at  the  tremendous  Day  of 
Judgment;  will  not  thefe,  I  fay,  prevail  with 
them  to  leave  their  Hufks,  and  return  home 
to  eat  of  the  fatted  Calf?  What,  will  they 
thus  requite  our  Saviour's  Love?  That  be  far 
from  them  !  Did  he  come  down  and  fhed  his 
precious  Blood  to  deliver  them  from  the  Power 
of  Sin ;  and  will  they  fpend  their  youthful 
Strength  and  Vigour  in  the  Service  of  it,  and 
then  think  to  ferve  CHRIST,  when  they  can  fol- 
low their  Luft  no  longer?  Is  it  fit,  that  many 
who  are  endowed  with  excellent  Gifts,  and  are 
thereby  qualified  to  be  Supports  and  Ornaments 
of  our  finking  Church,  mould  notwithfland- 
ing  forget  the  GOD  that  gave  them,  and  em- 
ploy them  in  Things  that  will  not  profit?  O 
why  will  they  not  arife,  and,  like  fo  many 
Pbineas\  be  zealous  for  the  LORD  of  Hofts? 
Doubtlefs,  when  Death  overtakes  them,  they 
will  wim  they  had :  And  what  hinders  them, 
but  that  they  may  live  as  well  now,  as  they 
will  wim  they  had,  when  they  leave  the  World  ? 
Think  you  that  any  one  yet  ever  repented  that 
he  began  to  be  good  too  foon  ?  But  how  many, 
on  the  contrary,  have  repented  that  they  began 

to 


Be  r  Of  /^BENEFITS  of 

to  be  good  too  late?  May  we  not  well  imagine, 
that  young  Samuel  now  rejoices  that  he  waited 
fo  foon  at  the  Tabernacle  of  the  LORD?  Or 
young  Timothy,  that  from  a  Child  he  knew  the 
Holy  Scriptures  ?  And  if  you  wifli  to  be  Par- 
takers of  their  Joy,  let  me  perfuade  you  to  be 
Partakers  of  their  Piety. 

I  could  ftill  go  on  to  fill  my  Mouth  with 
Arguments ;  but  the  Circumftances  and  Piety 
of  thofe  amongft  whom  /  am  now  preaching 
the  Kingdom  of  GO  D,  remind  me  to  change 
my  Style;  and  inftead  of  urging  any  more 
DirTuafives  from  Sin,  to  fill  up  what  is  behind 
of  this  Difcourfe,  with  Encouragements  to  per- 
fevere  in  Holinefs. 

Ble/ed,  for  ever bleffed,  be  GOD  and  the 
Father  of  our  Lord  JESUS  CHRIST! 
I  am  not  fpeaking  to  Perfons  inflamed  with 
youthful  Lufts,  but  to  a  Multitude  of  young 
Profeflbrs,  who,  by  frequently  afTemhling  to- 
gether and  forming  themfelves  into  Religious 
Societies,  are  in  a  ready  Way  to  be  of  the  Num- 
ber of  thofe  young  Men  who  have  overcome  the 
Wicked  One. 

BELIEVE  me,  it  gladdens  my  very  Soul  to 
fee  fo  many  of  your  Faces  fet  Heavenwards ; 
and  the  vifible  happy  Effects  of  your  uniting 
together,  cannot  but  rejoice  the  Hearts  of  all 
fincere  Chriftiam>  and  oblige  them  to  wifi  you 

good 


an  EARLY  PIETY*  81 

good  Luck  in  the  Name  of  the  LORD.  The 
many  Souls  that  are  nouriflied  weekly  by  the 
fpirituat  Body  and  Blood  of  JESUS  CHRIST  by 
your  Means  5  the  Weekly  and  Monthly  Lectures 
that  are  preached  by  your  Contributions;  the 
daily Incenfe  of  Thankfgiving  and  Prayer  which 
is  publickly  fent  up  to  the  Throne  of  Grace 
by  your  Subfcriptions ;  the  many  Children 
which  are  trained  up  in  the  Nurture  and  Admo- 
nition of  the  L  0  R  D  by  your  Charities ;  and 
laftly,  the  commendable  and  pious  Zeal  you 
exert  in  promoting  and  encouraging  Divine 
Pfalmody>  are  fuch  plain  and  apparent  Proofs 
of  the  Benefit  of  your  Religious  Societies,  and 
they  call  for  a  publick  Acknowledgment  of 
Praife  and  Thankfgiving  to  our  BlefTed  Mafter, 
who  has  not  only  put  into  your  Etearts  fuch 
good  Defigns,  but  enable  you  alfo  to  bring  the 
fame  to  good  Effect. 

It  is  true,  it  has  been  objected,  "  that  young 
"  Men  forming  themfelves  into  Religious  So- 
"  defies  has  a  Tendency  to  make  them  fpiritu- 
"  ally  proud,  and  think  more  highly  of  them- 
"  fehes  than  they  ought  to  think"  And  per- 
haps the  imprudent  imperious  Behaviour  of 
fome  Novices  in  Religion,  who,  though  they 
went  out  from  you ,  were  not  of  you ,  may  have 
given  too  much  Occafion  for  fuch  an  Afper- 
iion, 

G  But 


$2  Of  tie  BENEFITS  of 

But  you,  Brethren,  have  not  fo  learned 
CHRIS?.  Far  be  it  from  you  to  look  upon 
yourfelves  as  righteous,  and  defpife  others,  be- 
caufe  you  often  afTemble  yourfelves  together. 
No,  this,  inftead  of  creating  Pride,  ought  to 
beget  an  holy  Fear  in  your  Hearts,  left  your 
Practice  fhould  not  correfpond  with  your  Pro- 
feffion,  and  that,  after  you  have  benefited  and 
edified  others,  you  yourfelves  fhould  become 
Caft-aways. 

WORLDLY- MINDEDNESS,  my  Brethren,  is 
another  Rock  againft  which  we  are  in  Danger 
of  fplitting.  For,  if  other  Sins  have  flam 
their  Thoufands  of  profeffing  Chriftians,  this 
has  flain  its  Ten  Thoufands.  I  need  not  ap- 
•peal  to  paft  Ages;  your  own  Experience,  no 
doubt,  has  furnifhed  you  with  many  unhappy 
Inftances  of  young  Men,  who,  after,  (as  one 
would  have  imagined)  they  had  ejcaped  the  Pol- 
lutions 'which  are  in  tbe  World  through  Luft,  and 
'had  tafted  tbe  good  Word  of  Life,  and  endured 
for  a  Seafon,  whilft  under  the  Tuition  and  In- 
fpection  of  others,  yet  when  they  have  come 
to  be  their  own  Matters,  through  a  Want  of 
Faith,  and  through  a  too  great  an  Earneftnefs 
in  labouring  for  the  Meat  which  perffieth,  have 
caft  off  their  firft  Love,  been  again  entangled 
with  the  World,  and  returned  like  the  Dog  fo 
bh  Vomit,  and  like  tbe  Sow  that  was  wajhed  t& 

her 


an  EARLY  PIETV.  £3 

her  wallowing  in  the  Mire.  You  would  there- 
fore do  well,  my  Brethren,  frequendy  to  re- 
mind each  other  of  this  dangerous  Snare,  and 
to  exhort  one  another  to  begin,  purfue,  and 
end  your  ChrHlian  Warfare,  in  a  thorough 
Renunciation  of  the  World,  and  worldly  Tem- 
pers ;  fo  that,  when  you  are  obliged  by  Pro- 
vidence to  provide  for  yourfelves,  and  thofe  of 
your  refpective  Houfliolds,  you  may  continue 
to  walk  by  Faith,  zndijlillfeekjirft  the  Kingdom 
if  God,  and  his  Rigbteoufnefs  -,  not  doubting 
but  all  other  Things,  upon  your  honeft  In- 
duftry  and  Endeavours,  frail  be  added  unto  you. 
And  now  what  jhall  I  fay  more?  To  fpeak 
tinto  you  Fathers,  who  have  been  in  CHRIST 
fo  many  Years  before  me,  and  know  the  Malig- 
nity of  Worldly-minded  nefs,  and  Pride  in  the 
Spiritual  Life,  would  be  altogether  needlefs.1 
To  you  therefore,  O  young  Men  (for  whom  I 
am  diftrefTed,  for  whom  I  fear  as  well  as  for 
myfelf)  do  I  once  more  addrefs  myfelf,  in 
the  Words  of  the  beloved  Difciple,  Look  to 
youffelveSy  that  we  lofe  not  thofe  Things  which 
we  have  wrought^  but  receive  a  full  Reward* 
Be  ever  mindful  then,  of  the  Words  that  have 
been  fpoken  to  us  by  the  Apoftles  of  the  Lord 
and  Saviour:  Give  Diligence  to  make  your  Cal- 
ling and  Election  fur  e.  Beware,  left  ye  alfo  be- 
ing  led  away  by  the  Error  of  the  Wicked,  fall 
G  2-  from 


84  Of  the  BENEFITS  of 

from  your  own  Stedfaftnefs.  Let  him  that  think" 
etb  he  Jlandeth  take  Heed  left  he  fall.  Be  not 
high-minded  but  fear.  But  we  are  perfuaded 
better  Things  of  you,  and  Things  that  accompany 
Salvation,  tho*  we  thus  fpeak.  For  God  is 
not  unrighteous,  to  forget  your  Work  and  La- 
bours and  Love.  And  we  defire  that  every  one* 
of  you  do  flew  the  fame  Diligence,  to  the  full 
jlffurance  of  Hope  unto  the  End:  That  ye  be 
not  flothful  but  Followers  of  them  who  thro* 
Faith  and  Patience  inherit  the  Promifes.  'Tis 
true  we  have  many  Difficulties  to  encounter, 
many  powerful  Enemies  to  overcome,  ere  we 
can  get  Pofleffion  of  the  promis'd  Land.  We 
have  an  artful  Devil,  an  enfnaring  World,  and 
above  all,  the  Treachery  of  our  own  Hearts 
to  withstand  and  ftrive  againft.  For  ftraigbt 
is  the  Gate,  and  narrow  h  the  Way  that  leadetb 
unto  eternal  Life.  But  wherefore  mould  we 
fear  ?  fmce  he  that  is  with  us  is  far  more  power- 
ful, than  all  who  are  againft  us.  Have  we 
not  already  experienced  his  Almighty  Power, 
in  enabling  us  to  conquer  fome  Difficulties 
which  feemed  as  infurmountable  then,  as  thofe 
we  ftruggle  with  now?  And  cannot  he  who 
delivered  us  out  of  the  Paws  of  thofe  Bears  and 
Lions,  preferve  us  alfo  from  being  hurt  by  the 


Be 


an  EARLY  PIETY.  85 

Be  ftedfaft  therefore,  my  Brethren,  be  im- 
mvueable.  Conlider  the  infinite  future  Rewards 
as  well  as  prefent  Comforts  that  attend  an 
Early  Piety.  Be  not  ajhamed  of  the  Go/pel  of 
CHRIST:  For  it  is  the  Power  of  GOD 
unto  Salvation.  Fear  not  Man  j  fear  not  the 
Contempt  and  Revilings  which  you  muft 
meet  with  in  the  Way  of  Duty;  For  one  of 
you  foall  chafe  a  Tboujand,  and  two  of  you  put 
Ten  Thoufand  of  your  Enemies  to  Flight. 
And  if  you  will  be  content  to  be  abus'd  for  a 
fliort  Time  here,  Ifpeak  the  Truth  in  CHRIST, 
I  lye  not ;  then  fhall  ye  be  exalted  to  fit  down 
with  the  Son  of  Man,  when  he  (hall  come  in 
the  Glory  of  his  Father  with  his  holy  Angels  to 
Judgment  hereafter. 

May  Almighty  GOD  give  every  one  of  us 
fuch  a  Meafure  of  Grace,  that  we  may  not  be 
of  the  Number  of  thofe  that  draw  back  unto 
Perdition,  but  of  them  that  believe  and  en- 
dure unto  the  End,  to  the  Saving  of  our  Souls, 

Which  God,  &c. 


THE 


THE 
EXTENT  and  REASONABLENESS 

O  F 

SELF-DENIAL. 

A  SERMON  preached  at  the  Parifli 
Church  of  St.  Andrew,  Holborny 
on  Sunday  October  9,  1737. 


G4 


(89) 


SERMON   IV. 

The  Extent  and  Reafonabknefs 
of  SELF-DENIAL. 


LUKE  ix.  2  3 . 

And  He  fatd  unto  them  all,  If  any 
Man  wtll  come  after  mey  let  htm 
.deny  himfelf. 

WHOEVER  reads  the  GOSPEL  with 
a  fingle  Eye,  and  fincere  Intention, 
will  find  that  our  Bleffed  LORD  took 
all  Opportunities   of  reminding  his  Difciples 
that  his  Kingdom  was  not  of  this  World ;  that 
his  Do&rine  was  a  Dodtrine  of  the  Crofs ;  and 
that  their  profeffing  themfelves  to  be  his  FoU 
lowers  would  call  them  to  a  conftant  State  of 
voluntary  or  Setf-fufering  and  Self-denial. 


90          'The  Extent  and  Reafonablenefs 

THE  Words  of  the  Text  afford  us  one  In- 
ftance,  among  many,  of  our  Saviour's  Beha- 
viour in  this  Matter:  For  having  in  the  pre- 
ceding Verfes  revealed  himfelf  to  Peter,  and 
the  other  Apoftles,  to  be  The  CHRIS?  of 
GOD;  left  they  mould  be  too  much  elated 
with  fuch  a  peculiar  Difcovery  of  his  Deity, 
or  think  that  their  Relation  to  fo  great  a  Per- 
fonage  would  be  attended  with  nothing  but 
Pomp  and  Grandeur,  He  tells  them,  in  the 
22d  Verfe,  that  the  Son  of  Man  was  to  fuffer 
many  things  in  this  World,  though  He  was  to 
be  crowned  with  Eternal  Glory  and  Honour  in 
the  next:  And  that  if  any  of  them  or  their 
Pofterity  would  (hare  in  the  fame  Honour,  they 
muft  bear  a  Part  with  }iim  in  his  Self-denial 
and  Sufferings.  For  He  faid  unto  them  allt 
Jf  any  Man  'will  come  after  me^  let  him  deny 
bimfelf. 

FROM  which  Words  I  {hall  conilder  thefe 
three  Things : 

I.  Firft,  THE  Nature  of  the  Self-denial  re- 
commended in  the  Text  ;    and  in  how 
many  Refpecls  we  muft  deny  ourfelves,  in 
order  to  come  after  JESUS  CHKIST. 

II.  Secondly,  I  SHALL  endeavour    to  prove 
the  Univerfality  and  Reafonablenels   of 
this  Duty  of  Self-denial* 

IH.  Thirdly 


of  SELF-DENIAL.  91 

III.  Thirdly  and  lafly,  I  SHALL  offer  fome 
Confideradons,  which  may  ferve  as  fo 
many  Motives  to  reconcile  us  to,  and 
quicken  us  in  the  Practice  of  this  Doctrine 
of  Self-denial 


I.  Anvjirji  then,  I  am  to  mew  the  Nature 
of  the  Self-  denial  recommended  in  the  Text; 
or  in  how  many  Refpects  we  muft  deny  our- 
I  elves,  in  order  to  follow  JESUS  CHJUST. 

Now  as  tfie  Faculties  of  the  Soul  are  di- 
ftinguimed  by  the  Underftanding,  Will,  and 
Affections  5  fo  in  all  thefe  muft  each  of  us  deny 
bimfelf.  We  mufl  not  lean  to  our  ownUnder- 
anding,  being  wife  In  our  own  Eyes,  and  pru- 
dent in  our  own  Sight-,  but  we  muft  fubmit  our 
fhort-fighted  Reafon  to  the  Light  of  Divine 
Revelation  :  For  there  are  Myfteries  in  Re- 
ligion, which  are  above,  though  not  contrary 
to,  our  natural  Reafon  :  And  therefore  we  fhall 
never  become  Chriftians  unlefs  we  caft  down 
Imaginations,  and  every  high  Thing  that  exalt- 
eth  itfelf  againji  the  Knowledge  of  GOD,  and 
bring  into  Captivity  every  Thought  to  the  Obe- 
dience of  CHRIST.  It  is  in  this  refpedt,  as 
well  as  others,  that  we  muft  become  Tools  for 
CHRIST'S  fake,  and  acknowledge  we  know 
nothing  without  Revelation,  as  we  ought  to 
know.  We  muft  then,  with  ajl  Humility  and 

Reverence, 


92,  Th*  Extent  and  Reafonabknefs 

Reverence,  embrace  the  myfterious  Truths 
revealed  to  us  in  the  Holy  Scriptures ;  for  thus 
only  can  we  become  truly  Wife,  even  Wife  unto 
Salvation.  It  was  Matter  of  our  Blefled  LORD'S 
Thankfgiving  to  his  Heavenly  Father,  that  he 
bad  hid  thefe  Things  from  the  Wife  and  Prudent, 
and  had  revealed  them  unto  Babes.  And  in  this 
refpect  alfo  we  muft  be  converted  and  become 
as  little  Children,  teachable,  and  willing  to 
follow  the  Lamb  into  whatfoever  Myfteries  he 
{hall  be  pleafed  to  lead  us  j  and  believe  and 
pra&ife  all  divine  Truths,  not  becaufe  we  can 
demonftrate  them,  but  becaufe  Gop,  'who  can- 
not lie,  has  revealed  them  to  us, 

HENCE  then  we  may  trace  Infidelity  to  its 
Fountain  Head :  For  it  is  nothing  elfe  but  a 
Pride  of  the  Underflanding,  an  Unwillingnefs 
to  fubmit  to  the  Truth  of  GOD,  that  makes  fo 
many,  profefiing  themfelves  Wife,  to  become 
fuch  Fools  as  to  deny  the  LORD  'who  has  fa 
dearly  bought  them  ;  and  difpute  the  Divinity 
of  that  Eternal  Word,  in  'whom  they  live,  and 
move,  and  have  their  Being  ;  Whereby,  'tis 
juilly  to  be  feared,  they  will  bring  upon  them- 
felves fuae,  if  not  fwift,  Deftrudtion. 

BUT  to  return  :  As  we  muft  deny  ourfelves 
in  our  Underftandings,  fo  muft  we  deny,  or, 
as  it  might  be  more  properly  rendered,  renounce 
owr  Wills :  That  is,  we  muft  make  our  own 

Wills 


C/*SELF-DENIAL.  93 

Wills  no  Principle  of  Action,  but  whether  we 
eat  or  drink,  or  whatfoever  we  do,  we  muft  do 
all,  not  merely  to  pleafe  ourfelves,  but  to  the 
Glory  of  GO  D.  Not  that  we  are  therefore  to 
imagine  we  are  to  have  no  Pleafure  in  any 
Thing  we  do,  (Wifdom's  Ways  are  Ways  of 
Pleafantnefs)  but  plealing  ourfelves  muft  not 
be  the  principal,  but  only  the  fubordinate  End 
of  our  Actions. 

AND  I  cannot  but  particularly  prefs  this  Doc- 
trine upon  you,  becaufe  it  is  the  Grand  Secret 
of  our  Holy  Religion.  It  is  this,  my  Brethren, 
that  diftinguifhes  the  true  Chriftian  from  the 
mere  Moralift  and  formal  ProfefTor ;  and  which 
alone  can  render  any  of  our  Actions  acceptable 
in  GOD'S  Sight:  For  if  thine  Eye  be  Jingle,  fays 
our  Blefled  LORD,  Maft.v\.22.  that  is,  ifthou 
aimeft  (imply  to  pleafe  GOD,  without  any  re- 
gard to  thy  own  Will,  thy  whole  Body,  that  is 
all  thy  Actions,  will  be  full  of  Light ;  agree- 
able to  the  Gofpel,  which  is  called  Light :  But 
if  thine  Eye  be  evil,  if  thine  Intention  be  di- 
verted any  other  Way,  thy  whole  Body,  all  thy 
Actions,  will  be  full  of  Darknefs,  unprofitable 
and  capable  of  no  Reward.  For  we  muft  not 
only  do  the  Will  of  GOD,  but  do  it  becaufe  it  is 
his  Will  j  fince  we  pray  that  GOD'S  Will  may 
be  done  on  Earth  as  it  is  in  Heaven.  And,  no 
doubt,  the  bleiTed  Angels  not  only  do  every 

Thing 


94          The  Extent  and  Re&fonablenefs 
that  GOD  wiUeth,  but  do  it  chearfully,  out  of 
this  Principle,   becaufe  GOD  willeth  it:    And 
if  we  would  live  as  we  pray,  we  muft  go  and 
do  likewife. 

BUT  farther;  as  we  muft  renounce  our  own 
Wills  in  doing,  fo  likewife  muft  we  renounce 
them  mfuffe-ring  the  Will  of  GOD.  Whatfo- 
ever  befalls  us,  we  muft  fay  with  good  old 
Eli,  It  is  the  LORD,  let  him  do  'what  feemetb 
him  gcod;  or  with  one  that  was  infinitely  greater 
than  Eli,  Father,  not  my  Will,  but  thine  he 
done. —  O  JESU,  thine  was  an  innocent  Will, 
and  yet  thou  renouncedft  it :  Teach  us,  even 
us  alfo,  O  our  Saviour !  to  fubmit  our  Wills 
to  thine,  in  all  the  Evils  which  (hall  be  brought 
upon  w,  and  in  every  thing  enable  us  to  give 
'Thanks,  fince  it  is  thy  bleiTed  Will  concerning 

TfS  ! 

THIRDLY  and  laftly,  we  muft  deny  ouf- 
felves,  as  in  our  Under/landings  and  Wills,  fo 
likewife  in  our  Affections.  More  particularly 
we  muft  deny  ourfelves  the  pleafurable  Indul- 
gence and  Self- enjoyment  of  Riches  :  If  any 
Man  'will  come  after  me,  fays  ourBlefled  Lo£i>, 
he  muft  forfake  all  and  follow  me.  And  again 
(to  (hew  the  utter  Inconfiftency  of  the  Love  of 
the  Things  of  this  World  with  the  Love  of 
the  Father)  he  tells  us,  that  unlefs  a  Man  forjake 
all  that  be  hath^  he  canmt  be  my  Dijciple. 

FAR 


^SELF-DENIAL.  95 

FAR  be  it  from  me  to  think  that  thefe  Texts 
are  to  be  taken  in  a  literal  Senfe,  as  though 
they  obliged  rich  Perfons  to  go  fell  all  that  they 
have,  and  give  to  the  Poor,  (for  that  would 
put  it  out  of  therr  Power  to  be  ferviceable  to 
the  Poor  for  the  future)  buc  however  they  cer- 
tainly imply  thus  much,  That  we  are  to  fit 
loofe  to,  fell,  and  forfake  all  in  Affection,  and 
be  willing  to  part  with  every  thing,  when 
GOD  (hall  require  it  at  our  Hands:  That  is, 
as  the  Apoftle  obferves,  we  muft  ufe  the  World 
as  though  we  ufed  it  not ;  and  though  we  arfe 
in  the  World,  we  muft  not  be  of  if.  We  muft 
look  upon  ourfelves  as  Stewards  and  not  Pro- 
prietors of  the  manifold  Gifts  ofGoD;  provide 
firft  what  is  neceflary  for  ourfelves  and  for  our 
Houfholds,  and  expend  the  reft,  not  in  In- 
dulgences and  fuperfluous  Ornaments,  forbidden 
by  the  Apoftle,  but  in  cloathing,  feeding,  and 
relieving  the  naked,  hungry,  diftrefTed  Difciples 
of  JESUS  CHRIST.  This  is  what  our  BlefTed 
LORD  would  have  us  underftand  by  forjaking 
all,  and  in  this  Senfe  mult  each  of  us  deny 
himfelf. 

I  AM  fenfible  that  this  will  feem  an  hard 
Saying  to  many,  who  will  be  offended  becaufe 
they  are  covetous,  and  Lovers  ofpkafure  more 
than  Lovers  of  GOD:  But  if  I  yet  plea  fed  fuch 
Men,  I  Jhoitld  not  be  the  Servant  y  CHRIST. 

No, 


96  T^he  Extent  and  Reafonablenefs 

No,  we  muft  not,  like  Ahab's  falfe  Prophets* 
have  a  lying  Spirit  in  our  Mouths,  nor  fail  to 
declare  (with  St.  Paul)  the  whole  Will  of  GOD  -, 
and,  like  honeft  Micaiah,  out  of  Pity  and  Com- 
paffion,  tell  Men  the  Truth,  though  they  may 
faliely  think  ive  prophecy  not  Good,  but  Evil 
concerning  them. 

BUT  to  proceed :  As  we  muft  renounce  our 
Affection  for  Riches,  fo  likewife  our  Affections 
for  our  Relations,  when  they  (land  in  Oppofi- 
tion  to  our  Love  of,  and  Duty  to  GOD  :  For 
thus  faith  the  Saviour  of  the  World:  If  any 
Man  will  come  after  me,  and  hateth  not  his  Father 
and  Mother,  his  Children  and  Brethren  and  Sif- 
ters, yea  and  bis  own  Life  alfo,  he  cannot  be  my 

Difciple Strange  Doctrine  this!    What, 

hate  our  own  Flem?  What,  hate  the  Father 
that  begat  us,  the  Mother  that  bare  us !  How 
can  theje  T-hing  be  ?  Can  GOD  contradict  him- 
felf  ?  Has  he  not  bid  us  Honour  our  Father 
and  Mother  ?  And  yet  we  are  here  commanded 
to  hate  them.  How  muft  thefe  Truths  be  re- 
conciled ?  Why,  by  interpreting  the  Word 
hate,  not  in  a  rigorous  and  abfolute  Senfe,  but 
comparatively :  Not  as  implying  a  total  Aliena^ 
tion,  but  a  lefs  Degree  of  Affection.  For  thus 
our  Bleffed  Saviour  himfelf,  (the  beft  and  fureft 
Expofitor  of  his  own  Meaning)  explains  it  in 
a  parallel  Text,  Mattk.  x.  37.  He  that  loveth 

Father 


of  SELF-DENIAL.  97 

father  or  Mother  more  than  me,  is  not  'worthy 
of  me :  He  that  loveth  Son  or  Daughter  more 
than  me,  is  not  'worthy  of  me.  So  that  when 
the  Perfuafions  of  fuch  our  Friends  (as  for  our 
Trial  they  may  be  permitted  to  be)  are  con- 
trary to  the  Will  of  GOD,  we  muft  fay  with 
Lew,  we  have  not  known  them;  or,  agreeably 
to  our  BlefTed  LORD'S  Rebuke  to  Peter,  Get  you 
behind  me,  my  Adverfaries ;  for  you  favour  not 
the  Things  that  Is  of  GOD,  but  the  Things  that 
be  of  Men. 

To  conclude  this  Head  :  We  muft  deny  our- 
fehes  in  Things  indifferent:  For  it  might  eafily 
be  fhevvn  that  as  many,  if  not  more,  perifh  by 
an  immoderate  Ufe  of  Things  in  themfelves 
indifferent  as  by  any  grofs  Sin  whatever.  A 
prudent  Cbrijlian  therefore  will  confider  not 
only  what  is  lawful,  but  what  is  expedient  alfo : 
Not  fo  much  what  Degrees  of  Self-denial  beft 
fuit  his  Inclinations  here,  as  what  will  mcft 
cffedtually  break  his  Will,  and  fit  him  for  greater 
Degrees  of  Glory  hereafter. 

BUT  is  this  the  Doctrine  of  Cbriftianity  ? 
and  is  not  the  Chriftian  World  then  aileep  ?  If 
not,  whence  the  Self-indulgence,  whence  the 
reigning  Love  of  Riches  which  we  every  where 
raecc  with  ?  Above  all,  whence  that  predomi- 
nant Greedinefs  of  fenfual  Pleafure,  that  has 
fo  over-run  this  finful  Nation,  that,  was  a 
H  pious 


98  'The  Extent  and  Reafonabknefs 
pious  Stranger  to  come  amongft  us,  he  would 
be  tempted  to  think  fome  Heathen  Venus  was 
worfhipped  here,  and  that  Temples  were  dedi- 
cated to  her  Service.  But  we  have  the  Autho- 
rity of  an  infpired  Apoftle  to  affirm  that  they  who 
live  in  fuc h  a  Round  of  Pleafure  are  dead  'while 
they  live:  Wherefore,  as  the  Holy  GHOST  faith, 
Awake  thou  that  jleepefl,  and  CHRIST  flail 
give  thee  Light.  But  the  Power  of  railing  the 
fpiritually  Dead  belongeth  only  unto  GOD. — . — 
Do  Thou  therefore,  O  Holy  JESUS,  who  by 
thy  almighty  Word  comraandedft  Lazarus  to 
come  forth,  though  he  had  lain  in  the  Grave 
fo  many  Days,  fpeak  alfo  as  effectually  to  thefe 
fpiritually  dead  Souls,  whom  Satan  for  thefe 
many  Years  has  fo  faft  bound  by  fenfual  Plea- 
fures,  that  they  are  not  fo  much  as  able  to  life 
up  their  Eyes  or  Hearts  to  Heaven. 

II.  BUT  I  pafs  on  to  the  Second  general  Thing 

propofed,    viz.  to  confider  the  univerfal 

Obligation,    and  Reafonablenefs   of  this 

Doctrine  of  Self-denial. 

WHEN  our  BleiTed  Matter  had  been  difcour- 

fing  publickly  concerning  the  Watchfulnefs  of 

the  faithful  and  'wife  Steward,    his  Difciples 

afked  him,   Speakejl  thou  this  Parable  to  all, 

cr  only  to  us?     The  fame  Queftion  I  am  aware 

has   been,   and  will  be   put  concerning  the 

foregoing 


Of  S  E  L  F  -  D  E  N  I  A  L.  99 

foregoing  Doctrine :  For  too  many,  unwilling 
to  take  CHRIST'S  eafy  Yoke  upon  them,  in  order 
to  evade  the  Force  of  the  Gofpel  Precepts, 
would  pretend  that  all  thole  Commands  con- 
cerning Self 'denial,  renouncing  ourfelves  and 
the  Worldj  helonged  only  to  our  LORD'S  firft 
and  immediate  Followers,  and  not  to  us  or  to 
our  Children.  But  fuch  Perfons  greatly  err, 
not  knowing  the  Scriptures,  nor  the  Power  of 
Godlinefs  in  their  Hearts.  For  the  Doctrine  of 
JESUS  CHRIST,  like  his  blefTed  Self,  is  the  fame 
Tefterday,  To-day,  and  for  ever.  What  he 
faid  unto  one,  he  faid  unto  all,  even  unto  the 
Ends  of  the  World ;  If  any  Manwillcome  after 
me,  let  him  deny  himfelf:  And  in  the  Text  it 
.is  particularly  mentioned  that  He  faid  unto  them 
.all.  And  left  we  fhould  ftill  abfurdly  imagine, 
.that  this  Word  all  was  to  be  confined  to  his 
Apoftles,  with  whom  he  was  then  difcourfing, 
it  is  faid  in  another  Place,  that  JESUS  turned 
unto  the  Multitude  and  faid,  If  any  Man  will 
come  after  me,  and  hateth  not  his  Father  and 
Mother,  yea  and  his  own  Life  alfo,  he  cannot  be 
my  Difciple.  "  When  our  bleffed  LORD  had 
"  fpoken  a  certain  Parable,  it  is  faid,  the  Scribes 
<c  and  Pharifees  were  offended,  for  they  knew 
"  the  Parable  was  fpoken  again/I  them :  And 
"  ifChriftians  can  now  read  thefe  plain,  and 
c*  pofitive  Texts  of  Scripture,  and  at  the  fame 
H  2  "  time 


J  oo  'The  Extent  and  Reafonablenejl 

"  time  not  think  they  are  fpoken  of  them,  they 
c<  are  more  hardened  than  yews,  and  more  in- 
"  fincere  than  Phariiees.  *  " 

IN  the  former  Part  of  this  Difcourfe  I  ob- 
ferved  that  the  Precepts  concerning  forfaking 
and  Jelling  all  did  not  oblige  us  in  a  literal  Senfe, 
becaufe  the  State  of  the  Church  does  not  de- 
mand it  of  us,  as  it  did  of  the  Primitive  Chri- 
jliam  ;  but  ftill  the  fame  Deadnefs  to  the  Worlcf^ 
the  fame  abftemious  Ufe  of,  and  Readinefs  to 
part  with  our  Goods  for  CHRIST'S  fake,  is  as 
abfojutely  necefTary  for,  and  as  obligatory  on  us, 
as  it  was  on  them.  For  though  the  Church 
may  differ  as  to  the  outward  State  of  it,  in  dif- 
ferent Ages,  yet  as  to  the  Purity  of  its  inward 
State,  it  was,  is,  and  always  will  be  invariably 
the  fame.  And  all  the  Commands  which  we 
meet  with  in  the  Epiftles,  about  mortifying  our 
Members  which  are  upon  the  Earth,  of  fet- 
ing our  Affections  on  Things  above,  and  of 
not  being  conformed  to  this  World  ;  are  but 
fo  many  inconteftable  Proofs  that  the  fame 
Holinefs,  Heavenly- mindednefc,  and  Deadnefs 
to  the  World,  is  as  necefTary  for  us  as  for  our 
LORD'S  immediate  Followers. 

BUT  farther,  as  fuch  an  Objection  argues  an 
Ignorance  of  the  Scriptures,  fo  it  is  a  manifeft 
Proof  that  fuch  as  make  it  are  Strangers  to  the 
Power  of  Godlmefs  in  tbeir  Hearts.  For  fince 

*  Law'>  Citr'f.'un  T erf e Run.  *"£ 


of  S  ELF-DEN  i  AL.  101 

the  Sum  and  Subftance  of  Religion  confifts  in 
our  Recovery  from  our  fallen  Eftate  in  Adam> 
by  a  New  Birth  in  CHRIST  JESUS,  there  is  an 
abfolute  Neceffity  for  us  to  embrace  and  prac- 
tife  the  Self-denial  before  recommended.  Be- 
caufe  we  have  not  only  a  new  Houfe  to  build, 
but  an  old  one  fir  ft  to  pull  down  ;  we  muft 
necefTarily  therefore  be  dead  to  the  World,  be- 
fore we  can  live  unto  GOD.  In  fhort,  all 
Things  belonging  to  the  Old  Man  muft  die  in 
us,  before  the  Things  belonging  to  the  Spirit 
can  live  and  grow  in  us. 

When  JESUS  CHRIST  was  about  to  make  his 
publick  Appearance,  and  to  preach  the  glad 
Tidings  of  Salvation  to  a  benighted  World,  his 
Harbinger  John  Baptifl  was  fent  to  prepare  his 
Way  before  him.  In  like  manner,  when  this 
fame  JESUS  is  about  to  take  pofTeflion  of  a  con- 
verted Sinner's  Heart,  Self-denial,  like  John 
the  Baptifl)  muft  prepare  the  Wa £  before  him  : 
For  we  muft  mourn  before  we  are  capable  of 
being  comforted  ;  we  muft  undergo  the  Spirit 
of  Bondage^  in  order  to  be  made  meet  to  receive 
the  Spirit  of  Adoption. 

WERE  we  indeed  in  a  State  of  Innocence, 
and  had  we,  like  Adam  before  his  Fall,  the 
Divine  Image  fully  ftamped  upon  our  Souls, 
we  then  mould  have  no  need  of  Self -denial; 
but  fmce  we  are  fallen,  fickly,  difordered  Crea- 
H  3  Hires, 


102         The  Extent  and  Reafonabknefs 

tures,  and  this  Self-juffering,  this  Self-renun- 
ciation, is  the  indifpenfable  Means  of  recovering 
our  primitive  Glory  ;  methinks,  in  that  Cafe, 
to  endeavour  to  fhake  off  and  rejeft  fuch  a 
falutary  Practice,  on  account  of  the  Difficulty 
attending  it  at  firft,  is  but  too  like  theObftinacy 
of  a  perverfe  fkk  Child,  who  naufeates  and 
refufes  the  Potion  reached  out  to  it  by  a  fkilful 
Phyfician  or  tender  Parent,  becaufe  it  is  a  little 
ungrateful  to  the  Tafte. 

HAD  any  of  us  feen  Lazarus  when  he  lay 
full  of  Sores  at  the  Rich  Man's  Gate ;  or  Job, 
when  / e  w  as f mitt  en  with  Ulcers,  from  the  Crown 
of  his  Head  to  the  Sole  of  his  Foot :  And  had  we 
at  the  fame  Time  prefcribed  to  them  fome 
healing  Medicines,  which  becaufe  they  would 
put  them  to  Pain,  they  would  not  apply  to  their 
Wounds,  Ihouid  we  not  moft  juftly  think,  that 
they  were  either  fond  of  a  diftempered  Body, 
or  were  not  fenfible  of  their  Diftempers  ?  But 
our  Souls,  by  Nature,  are  in  an  infinitely  more 
deplorable  Condition  than  the  Bodies  of  Job 
or  Lazarus,  when  full  of  Ulcers  and -Boils: 
For,  alas!  our  whole  Head  is  Jick,  and  our  whole 
Heart  faint ;  from  the  Crown  of  the  Head  to 
the  Sole  of  the  Foot,  we  are  full  of  Wounds  and 
Bruifes  and  putrifyingSores,  and  there  is  noHenlth. 
in  us.  And  JESUS  CHRIST,  like  a  good  Phy- 
fician, in  the  Gofpel  Doclrine  of  Self-denial, 

prefents 


of  SELF-DENIAL.  103 

prefents  us  with  a  fpiritual  Medicine  to  heal  our 
Sicknefs :  But  if  we  will  neither  receive  nor 
apply  it,  'tis  a  Sign  we  are  not  fenfible  of  the 
Wretchednefs  of  our  State,  or  elfe  that  we  are 
unwilling  to  be  made  whole. 

EVEN  Naaman's  Servants  could  fay,  when 
he  refufed,  purfuant  to  Elijah's  Orders,  to  warn 
in  the  River  Jordan,  that  he  might  cure  his 
Leprofy,  Father,  if  the  Prophet  had  bid  tbee 
do  jome  great  Thi?ig,  would' ft  thou  not  have  done 
it  ?  How  much  rather  then,  when  he  faith  to 
thee,  Wajh  and  be  clean  ?  And  may  not  I  very 
properly  addrefs  myfelf  to  you  in  the  fame 

manner,  my  Brethren  : If  JESUS  CHRIST, 

our  great  Prophet,  had  bid  you  do  fome  great 
and  very  difficult  Thing,  would  you  not  have 
done  it  ?  much  more  then  mould  you  do  it, 
when  he  only  bids  you  den%  yourfehes  what 
would  certainly  hurt  you  if  enjoyed,  and  be- 
hold  you  (hall  be  made  perfectly  whole. 

BUT  to  illuftrare  this  by  another  Compari- 
Jbn:  In  the  12th  Chapter  of  the  Afis,  we  read 
that  Saint  Peter  was  kept  in  Prifon,  and  was, 
Jleeping  between  two  Soldiers,  bound  with  two 
Chains :  And  behold  an  Angel  of  the  Lord  came 
upon  himt  and  fmote  Peter  on  the  Side,  faying, 
Arijeup  quickly  :  And  his  Chains  fell  off  from 
his  Hands.  But  had  this  great  Apoftle,  inftead 
of  rifing  up  quickly,  and  doing  as  the  bleffed 
H  4 


104        The  Extent  and  Reafonablenefs 

Angel  commanded  him,  hugg'd  his  Chains 
and  beg'd  that  they  might  not  be  let  fall  from 
his  Hands,  would  not  any  one  think  that  he 
was  in  love  with  Slavery,  and  deferved  to  be 
executed  next  Morning  ?  And  does  not  the 
Perfon  who  refufes  to  deny  himfelf,  act  as  in- 
confiftently  as  this  Apoftle  would  have  done 
if  he  had  nrglecled  the  Means  of  his  Deliverance  ? 
For  our  Souls,  by  Nature,  are  in  a  fpiritual 
Dungeon,  fleeping  and  fail  bound  between  the 
World,  theFlefh,  and  the  Devil,  not  with  Two 
but  Ten  Thoufand  Chains  of  Lufts  and  Cor- 
ruptions. Now  JESUS  CHRIST,  like  St.  Peter's 
good  Angel,  by  his  Gofpel  comes  and  opens 
the  Prifon  Door,  prefcribes  Self-denial,  Morti- 
fication, and  Renunciation  of  ourfehes  and  tie 
World)  as  fo  many  fpiritual  Keys  which  will 
unlock  our  Shackles,  make  them  fall  off  from 
our  Hearts,  and  fo  reftore  us  to  the  glorious 
'•Liberty  of  the  Sons  of  GOD.  But  if  we  will 
not  arife  quickly,  gird  up  the  Loins  of  our 
'  Mind,  and  deny  ourfehesy  as  he  has  commanded, 
Are  we  not  in  love  with  Bondage,  and  deferve 
never  to  be  delivered  from  it? 

INDEED  I  will  not  affirm  that  this  Dcdrine 

of  Setf-demal appears  in  this  juft  Light  to  every 

one.     No,  I  am  fenfible  that   to  the  Natural 

Man  it  is  Foolijhnefs ;  and  to  the  Toung  Convert 

-  GJI  hard  Saying.     But  what  fays  our  Saviour  ? 

tf 


of  SELF-DENIAL.  io£ 

Jf  any  Man  will  do  my  Witt,  he  fiall  know  of 
the  Do^rine  whether  it  be  of  GOD,  or  whether 
1  Jpeak  of  myfelf.  This,  my  dear  Friends,  is 
the  beft,  the  only  Way  of  Conviction :  Let  us 
up  and  be  doing  j  let  us  arife  quickly  and  deny 
ourfefaes,  and  the  Lord  JESUS  will  remove  thofe 
Scales  from  the  Eyes  of  our  Minds,  which  now 
like  fo  many  Veils  hinder  us  from  feeing  clearly 
the  Reafonablenefs,  Neceffity,  and  inexpreffible 
Advantage  of  the  Doctrine  that  has  been  now- 
delivered.  Let  us  but  once  thus  Jhew  ciirfefaes 
Men,  and  then  the  Spirit  of  GOD  will  move 
on  the  Face  of  our  Souls,  as  he  did  once  upon 
the  Face  of  the  great  Deep ;  and  caufe  them  to 
emerge  out  of  that  confufed  Chaos,  in  which 
they  are  moil  certainly  now  involved,  if  we  are 
Strangers  and  Enemies  to  Self-denial  and  the 
Crofs  of  CHRIST. 

BUT  notwithftanding  this  Doctrine  of  Self- 
denial  is,  when  rightly  underflood,  fo  reafon- 
able  and  beneficial ;  yet  many,  it  is  to  be  feared, 
like  the  young  Man  in  the  Gofpel,  are  ready  to 
go  away  forrowful. 

III.  PROCEED  we  therefore  now  to  the  'Third 
and  laft  general  Thing  propofed  ;  viz.  To 
offer  fome  Confiderations  which  mayferve 
as  fo  many  Motives  to  reconcile  us  to,  and 
quicken  us  in  the  Practice  of  this  Duty  of 
Self-denial.  i.  And 


io6         *fhe  Extent  and  Reafonablenefs 

i.  AND  the  firft  Means  I  {hall  recommend 
to  you,  in  order  to  reconcile  you  to  this  Doc- 
trine is,  to  meditate  frequently  on  the  Life  of 
our  Blefled  Lord  and  Matter  JESUS  CHRIST. 
Oh  !  may  we  often  think  on  Him  our  grand 
Exemplar !  follow  him  from  his  Cradle  to  his 
Crofs,  and  fee  what  a  felf -denying  Life  He  lead  •' 
And  {hall  not  we  drink  of  the  Cup  that  He 
drank  of,  and  be  baptized  with  the  Baptifrn  that 
He  was  baptized  with  ?  Or  think  we  that 
JESUS  CHRIST  did  and  fuffered  every  Thing  in 
order  to  have  us  excufed,  and  exempted  from 
Sufferings  ?  No,  far  be  it  from  any  fmcere 
Chriftian  to  judge  after  this  manner  :  For  St. 
Peter  tells  us,  He  fuffered  for  us,  leaving  us 
an  Example,  that  we  Jhould  follow  his  Steps. 
Had  CHRIST,  indeed,  like  thofe  that  fat  in 
Mqfes's  Chair,  laid  heavy  Burthens  of  Self-denial 
upon  us,  (fuppofing  they  were  heavy,  which 
they  are  not)  and  refufed  to  touch  them  himfelf 
with  one  of  his  Fingers  ;  we  might  have  had 
fome  Pretence  to  complain :  But  fince  He  has 
enjoined  us  nothing  but  what  he  has  firft  put 
in  praftife  himfelf,  Thou  art  inexcufable,  O 
Difciple,  whoever  thou  art,  who  would'ft  be 
above  thy  perfecuted  felf-denying  Matter  :  And 
thou  art  no  good  and  faithful  Servant,  who  art 
unwilling  to  fuffer  and  fympathize  with  thy 
mortified,  heavenly-minded  LORD. 

e.  NEXT 


of  SELF-DENIAL.  107 

2.  NEXT  to  the  Pattern  of  our  Blefled  Ma- 
fler,  think  often  on  the  Lives  of  the  glorious 
Company  of  the  Apoftles,  the  goodly  Fellow- 
fhip  of  the  Prophets,  and  the  noble  Army  of 
Martyrs  j  who  by  a  conftant  looking  to  the  Au- 
thor and  Finijher  of  our  Faith,  have  fought  the 
good  Fight y  find  are  gone  before  us  to  inherit  the 
Promifes.  View,  again  and  again,  how  holily, 
how  felf-denyingly,how  unblameably  they  lived ; 
And  if  Self-denial  was  neceffary  for  them,  why 
not  for  us  alfo  ?  Are  we  not  Men  of  like  Paf- 
iions  with  them  ?  Do  we  not  live  in  the  fame 
wicked  World  as  they  did  ?  Have  we  not  the 
fame  good  Spirit  to  affift,  fupport,  and  purify 
us,  as  they  had  ?  And  is  not  the  fame  Eternal 
Inheritance  reached  out,  as  a  Reward  of  our 
Self- denial  and  Renunciation  of  the  World,  as 
was  offered  to  them  ?  And  if  we  have  the 
fame  Nature  to  change,  the  fame  wicked  World 
to  withftand,  the  fame  good  Spirit  to  help,  ancj 
the  fame  Eternal  Crown  to  reward  our  Obe- 
clience ;  why  mould  not  we  lead  the  fame  Lives 
as  they  did  ?  Do  we  think  They  did  Works 
of  Supererogation  ?  If  not,  why  don't  we  do 
as  they  did  ?  Or  why  does  the  Church  fet  apart 
Feftivals  to  commemorate  the  Deaths  and  Suf- 
ferings of  the  Saints,  but  in  order  to  excite  uo 
to  follow  Them  as  they  did  CHRIST? 

3.  THIRDLY, 


lo8         The  Extent  and Reafonablenefs 

3.  THIRDLY,  Think  often  on  the  Pains  of 
Hell :  confider  whether  it  is  not  better  to  cut  off 
a  Right  Hand  or  Foot,  and  pluck  out  a  Right 
Eye,  if  they  offend  us  (or  caufe  us  to  fin)  rather 
than  to  be  caft  into  Hell,  into  the  Fire  that  never 
jkallbe  quenched  \  where  the  Worm  dieth  not,  and 
the  Fire  is  not  quenched.  Think  how  many  thou- 
fands  there  are  now  referred with  damned  Spirits 
in  Chains  ofDarknefs  unto  the  Judgment  of  the 
Great  Day,  for  not  complying  with  the  Precept 
in  the  Text.  And  think  withal  that  This,  this 
muft  be  our  own  Cafe  mortly,  unlefs  we  are  wife 
in  time,  and  fubmit  to  thofe  eafy  Conditions  our 
Saviour  has  prefcribed  us,  in  order  to  avoid  it. 
Think  you  they  now  imagine  JESUS  CHRIST  to 
be  an  hard  Matter ;  or  rather  think  you  not  they 
would  give  Ten  thoufand  times  ten  thoufand 
Worlds,  could  they  but  return  to  Life  again,  and 
take  CHRIST'S  eafy  Yoke  upon  them  ?  And  can 
ifte  dwell  with  everlafting  Burnings  more  than 
they  ?  No  ;  if  we  cannot  bear  this  Precept, 
Come,  deny  yourf elves,  take  up  your  Croffes.  How 
(hall  we  bear  that  irrevocable  Sentence,  Depart 
from  me,  ye  Curfed,  into  everlafting  Fire  pre- 
pared for  the  Devil  and  his  Angeh  ?  But  I  hope 
thofe,  amongft  whom  I  am  now  preaching  the 
Kingdom  of  GOD,  are  not  fo  difingenuous  as  to 
need  to  be  driven  to  their  Duty  by  the  Terrors 
of  the  LORD,  but  rather  defire  to  be  drawn  by 
the  Cords  qf  Love.  LASTLY 


of   S  E  L  F  -  D  E  N  I  A  L.  169 

LASTLY  therefore,   and  to  conclude, 

often  meditate  on  the  Joys  of  Heaven:  Think, 
chink  with  what  unfpeakable  Glory  thofe  hap- 
py Souls  are  now  incircled,  who  when  on  Earth 
were  called  to  deny  themfehes  as  well  as  we, 
and  were  not  difobedient  to  that  Call :  Lift  up 
your  Hearts  frequently  toward  the  Manfions  of 
eternal  Blifs,  and  wich  an  Eye  of  Faith,  like 
the  great  St.  Stephen,  fee  the  Heavens  opened, 
and  the  Son  of  Man  with  his  glorious  Retinue 
of  departed  Saints  fitting  and  folacing  themfelves 
in  eternal  Joys,  and  with  unfpeakabie  Comfort 
looking  back  on  their  paft  Sufferings  and  Self- 
denials,  as  fo  many  glorious  Means  which  ex- 
alted them  to  fuch  a  Crown.  Hark!  methinks 
I  hear  them  chanting  forth  their  everlafting 
Hallelujahs,  and  fpending  an  eternal  Day  in 
echoing  forth  triumphant  Songs  of  Joy.  And 
do  you  not  long,  my  Brethren,  to  join  this 
heavenly  Choir  ?  Do  not  your  Hearts  burn 
within  you  ?  As  the  Hart  panteth  after  the 
Water  Brooks,  do  not  your  Souls  fo  long  after 
the  bleffed  Company  of  thefe  Sons  of  GOD  ? 
Behold  then  a  heavenly  Ladder  reached  down 
to  you,  by  which  you  may  climb  to  this  Holy 
Hill.  If  any  Man  will  come  after  them,  let 
him  deny  himfelf  and  follow  them.  It  was  this, 
my  Brethren,  exalted  the  Holy  JESUS  himfelf, 
as  Man,  to  fit  at  the  Right  Hand  of  his  adorable 

Father. 


i  10  fbe  Extent  and  Reafonablenefs,  &c. 
Father.  By  this  alone  every  Saint  that  ever 
lived,  afcended  into  the  Joy  of  their  LORD : 
And  by  this  we,  even  we  alfo  may  be  lifted  up 
into  the  fame  moft  blifsful  Regions,  there  to 
enjoy  an  eternal  Reft  with  the  People  of  GOD, 
and  join  with  them  in  finging  Doxologies  and 
Songs  of  Praife,  to  the  Everlafting,  Blefied, 
All-glorious,  moft  Adorable  Trinity,  for  ever 
and  ever. 

Which  GOD  of  bis  infinite  Mercy  grant, 
&c. 


INTERCESSION 

Every  Chrijtiatfs  DUTY. 

A  SERMON  preach'd  at  the  Parifh 
Church  of  Great  St.  Helen,  on 
Tuefday  December  27,  1737. 


SERMON    V. 

INTERCESSION  every  Chri- 
fliarfs  Duty. 


i   THESS.  v.  2j. 
Brethren,  Pray  for  us. 

IF  we  enquire,  why  there  is  fo  little  Love 
to  be  found  amongft  Chriftians,  why  the 
very  Characteriftick,  by  which  every  one 
fhould  know  that  we  are  Difciples  of  the  Holy 
JESUS,  is  almoft  banimed  out  of  the  Chrillian 
World, — We  mall  find  it,  in  a  great  meafure, 
owing  to  a  Neglect  or  fuperficial  Performance 
of  that  moft  God-like  Part  of  fecret  Prayer  In- 
terceflion,  or  imploring  the  Grace  or  Mercy  in 
behalf  of  others. 

SOME  forget  this  Duty  of  Praying  for  Others, 

becaufe   they   feldom  remember    to  Pray  for 

Themfelves :  And  even  good  People,  who  are 

conftant  in  Praying  to  their  Father  which  is  in 

I  Heaven, 


ii4  INTERCESSION 

Heaven,  are  often  fo  conftrained  and  felfifh  in. 
their  AddrefTes  to  the  Throne  of  Grace,  that 
they  do  not  enlarge  their  Petitions  for  the  Wel- 
fare of  their  Fellow  Chriftians  as  they  ought  ; 
and  thereby  fall  fhort  of  attaining  that  Chriftian 
Charity,  that  unfeigned  Love  of  their  Brethren, 
which  their  facred  Profeffion  obliges  them  to 
afpire  after,  and  without  which,  though  they 
would  bejlow  all  their  Goods  fo  feed  the  Poor, 
and  even  give  their  Bodies  to  be  burned,  yet  it 
would  profit  them  Nothing. 

SINCE  then  thefe  Things  are  fo,  Ifhall  from 
the  Words  of  the  Text  (though  originally  in- 
tended to  be  more  confined)  endeavour  to  (hew, 

I.  Firft,  THAT  it  is  every  Chrijlians  Duty 
to  Pray  for  Others,  as  well  as  for  Himfelf. 

II.  Secondly,  WHO  are  Thofe  that  we  ought 
to  Pray  for,    and   in  what   Manner  we 
fhould  do  it.     And, 

III.  Thirdly,  I  SHALL  offer  fome  Motives  to 
excite  all  Chrijlians  to  abound  in  this  great 
Duty  of  Inter  ceffion. 


I.  Firft  then,   I  (hall   endeavour  to 

That  it  is  every  Chrijliaris  Duty  to  Pray 
for  Others,  as  well  as.  for  Himfelf. 

Now 


Every  Cbrifii  tin's  D  u  T  Y.  1 i-c 

Now  Prayer  is  a  Duty  founded  on  Natu- 
ral Religion ;    the  very  Heathens   never  neg- 
lected it,    though   many    Chriitian   Heathens 
amongft  us  do :  —  And  it  is  fo  effential  to  Chri- 
ftanity,    that  you  might  as  reafonably  expert 
to  find  a  living  Man  without  Breath,  as  a  True 
Chriftian  without  the  Spirit  of  Prayer  and  Sup- 
plication. —  Thus,    no    fooner  was   St.    Paul 
fconverted,    but   behold  he  Prayeth,   faith  the 
LORD   Almighty.     And  thus  will  it  be  with 
every  Child  of  GOD,  as  foon  as  He  becomes 
fuch:    Prayer  being  truly  called,   T'he  natural 
Cry  of  the  New- born  Soul. 

FOR  in  the  Heart  of  every  True  Believer 
there  is  a  Heavenly  Tendency,  a  Divine  At- 
traction, which  as  fenfibly  draws  him  to  con- 
verfe  with  GOD,  as  the  Loadftone  attracts  the 
Needle. 

A  DEEP  Senfe  of  Their  own  Weaknefs, 
and  of  CHRIST'S  Fullnefs ;  a  ftrongConvic: .on 
of  their  Natural  Corruption,  and  of  the  Ne- 
ceffity  of  Renewing  Grace;  will  not  let  them 
reft  from  Crying  Day  and  Night  to  the>r  Al- 
mighty Redeemer,  that  the  Divine  Image* 
which  they  loft  in  Adant,  may  through  His 
All-powerful  Mediation,  and  the  Sanctifying 
Operations  of  His  blefled  Spirit,  be  begun,  car- 
ried on,  and  fully  perfected  both  in  their  Souls 
and  Bodies. 

I  2  THUS 


n6  INTERCESSION 

THUS  earneft,  thus  importunate,  are  al 
fincere  Chriftians  in  Praying  for  Themfelves 
But  then,  not  having  fo  lively,  lafting,  ai 
deep  a  Senfe  of  the  Wants  of  their  Chriftiai 
Brethren,  They  are  for  the  moft  part  too  remifs 
and  defective  in  their  Prayers  for  them.  — • 
Whereas,  was  the  Love  of  GOD  fried  abroad 
in  our  Hearts,  and  did  we  Love  our  Neigh- 
bour in  that  Manner  in  which  the  Son  of  GOD 
our  Saviour  loveth  m>  and  according  to  his 
Command  and  Example,  We  could  not  but  be 
as  importunate  for  their  Spiritual  and  Tem- 
poral Welfare,  as  for  Our  own;  and  as  ear- 
neflly  defire  and  endeavour  that  Others  ihould 
ihare  in  the  Benefits  and  Bleffings  of  the 
Death  and  Paffion  of  JESUS  CHRIST  as  We 
ourfelves. 

LET  not  any  one  think,  that  This  is  an 
uncommon  Degree  of  Charity ;  an  High  Pitch 
of  Perfection,  which  every  one  cannot  attain 
unto; —  fince  it  is  no  fuch Thing:  —  For  if 
we  are  all  commanded  to  Love  our  Neighbour 
(that  is,  every  Man)  even  as  ourfehes,  nay 
to  Lay  down  our  Lives  for  the  Brethren ;  Then, 
it  is  the  Duty  of  alt  to  Pray  for  their  Neigh- 
bours as  much  as  for  Themfelves,  and  by  pof- 
fible  Acts  and  Expreffions  of  Love  and  Affection 
towards  Them,  at  all  Times,  to  mew  their 
Keadinefs  even  to  lay  down  their  Lives  for  them, 

if 


Every  Chriftian's  DUTY.  117 

if  ever  it  fhould  pleafe  GOD  to  call  Them  to 
it. 

OUR  Bleffed  Saviour  as  He  hath  fet  us  an 
Example  that  we  mould  follow  his  Steps  in 
every  Thing  elfe,  fo  hath  He  mort  efpecially 
in  This :  —  For  in  that  moft  Divine,  that  moft 
Perfect  and  Inimitable  Prayer  (recorded  in  the 
I7'h  of  St.  John)  which  He  put  up  juft  before 
His  Paffion,  We  find  but  few  Petitions  for  His 
Own,  though  many  for  His  Difciples  Welfare : 
And  in  that  moft  Perfect  Form  which  He  has 
been  pleafed  to  prefcribe  us,  We  are  taught  to 
fay,  —  not  My,  but  Our  Father,  —  Thereby  to 
put  us  in  mind,  that,  whenever  we  approach 
the  Throne  of  Grace,  We  ought  to  Pray,  — 
not  in  Our  own  Name  alone,  but  in  the  Name 
of  all  our  Brethren  in  CHRIST. 

INTERCESSION  then  is  certainly  a  Duty  in- 
cumbent upon  all  Chriftiam. 

II.  WHOM  we  are  to  intercede  for,  and 
How  this  Duty  is  to  be  performed,  comes 
next  to  be  confidered,  —  under  my  Second 
General  Head. 

i.  AND  Firft,  our  Interceffion  muft  be  uni- 

verfal.  — I  •will  (fays  theApoftle)  that  Prayers, 

Supplications,    and  Interceffj&ns,   be   made  for 

All  Men,—  For  as  GOD's  Mercy  is  over  AH 

I  3  His 


n3  INTERCESSION 

His  Works,  as  JESUS  CHRIST  Died  to 
Redeem  a  People  out  of  All  Nat  lorn  and  Lan- 
guages ;  fo,  We  fhould  Pray,  that  All  Men  may 
come  to  the  Knowledge  of  the  Truth  ^  and  be 
failed.  Many  precious  Promifes  are  made  in 
Holy  Writ,  that  the  Go/pel  flail  be  publifled 
through  the  ^hole.  World,  that  the  Earth  fl 
be  covered  with  the  Knowledge  of  the  Lord,  as 
the  Waters  cover  the  Sea  :  And  therefore  it  is 
our  Duty  not  to  confine  our  Petitions  to  our 
pwn  Nation,  but  to  Pray  that  All  thofe  Na- 
tions, izbo  note  fain  Darknefs  and  in  the  Sha- 
dow of  Death,  may  have  the  Glorious  Gofpel 
fline  out  upon  Them,  as  well  as  upon  Us.  But 
Tou  need  not  flat  any  Man  jhould  teach  you 
THr,  face  Te  yoitrfehes  are  Taught  of  GOD, 
even  of  JESUS  CHRIST  himfelf,  to  Pray  that 
His  Kingdom  may  come  i  Part  of  the  Meaning 
of  which  Petition  is,  That  GOD's  Ways  may 
be  known  upon  Earth,  and  His  Saving  Health 
among  All  Nations. 

2.  NEXT  to  the  Praying  for  All  Men,  we 
fhould,  according  to  St.  Paul's  Rule,  Pray  for 
Kings-,  particularly,  for  our  prefect  Sovereign 
King  GEORGE,  and  all  that  are  put  in  Autho- 
rity under  Him  :  that  we  may  lead  quiet  Lives, 
in  all  GodlineJ's  and  Honefty.  —  For,  if  we  con- 
fider  how  heavy  the  Burden  of  Government  is, 
and  how  much  the  Welfare  of  any  People  de- 
pends 


±Lvery  Lhnjtian *  D  u  T  Y.  119 

pends  on  the  Zeal  and  godly  Converfation  of 
Thofe  that  have  the  Rule  over  them :  If  we 
fet  before  us  the  many  Dangers  and  Difficul- 
ties, to  which  Governours  by  their  Station  are 
expofed,  and  the  continual  Temptations  they 
lye  under  to  Luxury  and  Self-Indulgence ;  We 
fhall  not  only  Pity,  but  Pray  for  Them,—  That 
He  who  preferved  Efther,  David,  and  Joftah, 
unjpottedfrom  the  World \  amidil  the  Grandeur 
of  a  Court,  and  gave  Succefs  to  their  Defigns, 
would  alfo  preferve  Them  Holy  and  Unblame- 
able,  and  profperall  the  Works  of  their  Hands 
upon  Them. 

3.  BUT,  Thirdly,  You  ought  in  a  more 
efpecial  Manner,  to  Pray  for  thofe  whom  the 
Holy  Ghoft  hath  made  Overfeers  ever  Tou.  This 
is  what  St.  Paul  begs,  again  and  again,  of  the 
Churches  to  whom  He  writes:  —  Brethren, 
fays  He  in  the  Text,  Pray  for  Us;  and  again, 
in  his  Epiftle  to  the  Ephefians,  —  Praying  al- 
ways, fays  He,  with  all  manner  of  Supplication, 
and  for  Me  alfo,  that  I  may  open  my  Mouth 
boldly  to  declare  the  Myjlery  of  the  Go/pel  And 
in  another  Place,  to  exprefs  his  Earneftnefs  in 
this  Requeft,  and  the  Great  Importance  of 

Their   Prayers  for  Him,  He   bids    the 

Church  Strive,  (or,  as  the  original  Word  fig- 

nifies,   Be  in  an  Agony)   together  with  Him  in 

Their  Prayers.  And  iurely  if  the  Great  St.  Paul, 

I  4  that 


I2O  INTERCESSION 

that  Chofen  Veffel,  that  Favourite  of  Heaven, 
needed  the  moft  importunate  Prayers  of  His 
Chnitian  Converts;  —  much  more  do  the  or- 
dinary Minifters  of  the  Gofpel  ftand  in  need 
of  the  Incerceffion  of  their  refpective  Flocks. 

AND  L  cannot  but  in  a  more  efpecial  Man- 
ner infift  upon  This  Branch  of  Your  Duty, 
becaufe  it  is  a  Matter  of  fuch  Importance  :  For 
no  doubt,  much  Good  is  frequently  withheld 
from  many,  by  reafon  of  their  neglecting  to 
Pray  for  their  Minifters,  which  they  would 
have  received,  had  they  Prayed  for  Them  as 
they  ought.  Not  to  mention,  that  People  of- 
ten complain  of  the  Want  of  Diligent  and 
Faithful  Paftors.  —  But  how  do  They  defer ve 
Good  Paftors,  who  will  not  earneftly  Pray  to 
GOD  forjucb  ?- 

THE  Church  has  fet  apart  Four  Seafons  in 
the  Year  for  this  Purpofe,  and  to  call  down 
a  ElefTing  on  thofe  who  are  to  be  Ordained  to 
any  Holy  Function:  But  by  how  very  few  are 
the  Ember  Days  obferved !  And  if  we  will 
not  Pray  to  the  Lord  of  the  Harveft,  can  it  be 
expected  —  He  will  fend  forth  Labourers  into 
hisHarveft? 

BESIDES,  What  Ingratitude  is  it  —  not  to 
Pray  for  your  Minifters !  For  (hall  They  Watch 
and  Labour  in  the  Word  and  Doctrine  for 
You,  and  for  your  Salvation,  and  mall  not 

You 


Every  Cbriftiarfs  DUTY.  121 

You  Pray  for  Them  in  Return  ?  If  any  beftow 
Favours  on  your  Bodies,  You  think  it  right, 
meet,  and  your  bounden  Duty,  to  Pray  for 
Them  ;  and  (hall  not  They  be  remembered  in 
Your  Prayers,  who  daily  feed  and  nourifli  your 
Souls  ?  Add  to  all  this,  that  Praying  for  your 
Minifters,  will  be  a  manifeft  Proof  of  your  be- 
lieving —  That  though  Paul  plant,  and  Apol- 
los  water,  yet  it  is  GOD  alone  who  giveth  the 
Increafe.  And  you  will  alfo  find  it  the  bed 
Means  you  can  ufe,  to  promote  your  own 
Welfare:  Becaufe  GOD,  in  anfwer  to  your 
Prayers,  may  impart  a  double  Portion  of  his 
Holy  Spirit  to  Them,  whereby  they  will  be 
qualified  to  deal  out  to  you  larger  Meafures  of 
Knowledge  in  Spiritual  Things,  and  be  enabled 
more  fkilfully  to  divide  the  Word  of  'Truth. 

WOULD  Men  but  conftantly  obferve  this 
Direction,  and  when  their  Minifters  are  Pray- 
ing in  Their  Name  to  GOD, — humbly  befeech 
Him  to  Perform  all  their  Petitions :  Or,  when 
They  are  fpeaking  in  GOD'S  Name  to  Them, 
—  Pray  that  the  .Holy  Ghoji  •  may  fall  on  all 
them  that  Hear  the  Word;  we  mould  then  find 
a  more  vifible  Good  EfFeft  of  their  Do&rine, 
and  a  greater  Mutual  Love  between  Minifters 
and  their  People,  For  Minifters  Hands  would 
then  be  held  up  by  the  People's  Interceffions, 
and  the  People  will  never  dare  to  vilify  or  tra- 
duce 


- 


122  INTERCESSION 

duce  Thofe  who  are  the  conftant  Subject 
their  Prayers. 

4.  NEXT  to  our  Mi  rafters,  our  Friends  claim 
a  Place  in  our  Interceffiow  ;  but  ih^n  we 
fhould  not  content  ourielves  with  Praying  in 
general  Terms  for  Them,  but  fuit  our  Prayers 
to  Their  particular  Circumftances.  When 
Miriam  was  afflicted  with  a  Leprofy  from 
GOD,  Mofes  cried  and  faid,  LORD  Heal  Her  : 
And  when  the  Nobleman  came  to  apply  to 
JESUS  CHRIST  in  behalf  of  his  Child,  He 
laid,  LORD,  my  little  Daughter  lyetb  at  the 
Point  of  Death^  I  pray  T^hee  come,  and  Heal 
Her.  In  like  manner,  when  any  of  our  Friends 
are  under  any  afflicting  Circumftances,  We 
fhould  endeavour  to  Pray  for  Them,  with  a 
particular  regard  to  thofe  Circumftances.  For 
Inftance,  Is  a  Friend  fick  ?  We  fhould  Pray, 
That  if  it  be  GOD'S  good  Pleafure,  it  may  not 
be  unto  Death  ;  but  if  otherwife,  That  He 
would  give  Him  Grace  fo  to  take  his  Viflta- 
tion,  that,  after  this  painful  Life  ended,  He 
may  dwell  with  him  in  Life  Everlafting?  Is 
a  Friend  in  Doubt  in  a  Matter?  We  mould 
lay  His  Cafe  before  GOD,  as  Mofes  did  that  of 
the  Daughter  of  Zelopbehad,  and  Pray,  That 
GOD'S  Holy  Spirit  may  lead  Him  into  all  Truth. 
Is  He  in  Want  ?  We  fhould  Pray,  That  his 
Faith  may  never  fail,  and  that  in  GOD'S  due 

Time 


Every  Cbrijliaris  DUTY.  123 

Time  He  may  be  relieved.  And  in  all  other 
Cafes,  we  fliould  not  Pray  for  our  Friends  only 
in  Generals,  but  fuic  our  Petitions  to  Their 
particular  Sufferings  and  AffiifttGm  j  for  other- 
wife,  we  may  never  afk  perhaps  for  the  Things 
our  Friends  moft  want. 

IT  muftbe  confefled,  that  fuch  a  Procedure 
will  oblige  us  fometimes  to  break  from  the 
Forms  we  ufe;  but  if  we  accuftom  ourfelves 
to  ir,  and  have  a  deep  Senfe  what  we  aik  for, 
the  moft  illiterate  ChriJUam  will  not  want 
Words  to  exprefs  themfelves. 

WE  have  many  noble  Inftances  in  Holy  Scrip- 
ture of  the  Succefs  of  this  Kind  of  particular 
InterceJJion  j  buc  none  more  remarkable  than 
That  of  Abraham's  Servant,  in  the  Book  of 
Genefis —  who  being  fent  to  feek  a  Wife  for  his 
Son  Ifaac,  Prays  in  a  moft  particular  Manner 
in  His  Behalf.  —  And  the  Sequel  of  the  Story 
informs  us  how  remarkably  his  Prayer  was 
anfwered.  And  did  Chrijlians  now  Pray  for 
their  Friends  in  the  fame  particular  manner, 
and  with  the  fame  Faith  as  Abrahams  Servant 
did  for  his  Mafter;  They  would,  no  doubt,  in 
many  Inftances,  receive  as  vifible  Anfwers, 
and  have  as  much  Reafon  to  blefs  GOD  for 
Them  as  He  had. 

5.  BUT  farther,  as  we  ought  thus  to  inter- 
cede for  our  Friends,  jfo  in  like  manner  muft 

we 


124  INTERCESSION 

we  alfo  Pray  for  our  Enemies.  Blefs  them  that 
Curfe  you,  fays  JESUS  CHRIST,  and  Pray  for 
them  that  defpitefully  ufe  you,  and  perfecute 
you:  Which  Commands  He  inforced  in  the 
ilrongeft  Manner  by  His  own  Example,  when 
in  the  very  Agonies  and  Pangs  of  Death,  He 
Prayed  even  for  his  Murderers,  —  Father ,  For- 
give Them,  for  they  know  not  what  they  do !  — 
This,  it  muft  needs  be  confeiTed,  is  a  difficult 
Duty,  yet  not  impracticable  to  thofe,  who 
have  renounced  the  Things  of  this  prefent 
Life,  (from  ah  inordinate  Love  of  which  alone, 
all  Enmities  arife)  and  who  knowing  the  ter- 
rible Woes  denounced  againft  Thofe  'who  offend 
Chrijl's  Little  Ones,  can,  out  of  real  Pity  and 
a  Senfe  of  their  Danger,  Pray  for  tbofe  by 
•whom  fuch  Offences  come. 

6.  LASTLY,  and  to  conclude  this  Head,  — 
We  fhould  Intercede  for  All  that  are  any 
Ways  afflicted,  in  Mind,  Body,  or  Eftate ;  — 
for  All  who  defire,  and  ftand  in  need  of  our 
Prayers :  —  And  for  All  who  do  not  Pray  for 
Themfelves. 

AND  Oh!  that  All  who  hear  me,  would 
fet  apart  fome  Time  every  Day  for  the  due 
Performance  of  This  moft  neceflary  Duty!  — 
In  Order  to  which, 

I  SHALL  now  proceed  to  the  *Tbird  General 
Ti6/tf£propofedj  namely, 

III.  To 


Every  Chrijliaris  DUTY.  125 

III.  To  (hew  the  Advantages,  and  offer  feme 
Confiderations  to  excite  you  to  the  Practice 
of  Daily  Inter  ceffio?i. 

i.  AND  Firft,  it  will  fill  your  Hearts  with 
Love  to  one  another. —  He  that  every  Day  in- 
tercedes at  the  Throne  of  Grace  for  all  Man- 
kind, cannot  but  in    a  fhort  Time  be  filled 
with  Love  and  Charity  to  all:    And  the   fre- 
quent Exercife  of  his  Love  in  this  Manner,  will 
infenfibly  enlarge  his  Heart,   and  make  Him 
Partaker  of  that  exceeding  Abundance  of  it 
which  is  in  CHRIST  JESUS  our  Lord!   Envy, 
Malice,  Revenge,  and  fuch  like  hellim  Tem- 
pers,   can   never  long  harbour  in  a  Gracious 
Interceffor's   Breaft  ;  — •  But  He  will  be  filled 
with  Joy,    Peace,  Meeknefs,    Long-Suffering, 
and  all  other  Gifts  and  Graces  of  the  Holy 
Spirit.     By  frequently  laying  his  Neighbour's 
Wants  before  GOD,  He  will  be  touched  with 
a  Fellow- Feeling  of  them  j  —  He  will  rejoice 
with  thofe  that  do  rejoice,  and  weep  with  thofe 
that   weep.  —  Every   Bleffing    bellowed    on 
Others,  inftead  of  exciting  Envy  in  Him,  will 
be  looked  on  as  an  Anfwer  to  his  particular 
Interceffion,  and  fill  his  Soul  rftthjfyunjpeak* 
able  and  full  of  Glory. 

INDEED 


126  INTERCESSION 

INDEED  I  will  not  affirm,  that  this  Blef- 
fed  Temper  of  Mind  can  be  acquired  all  at 
once :  No,  —  as  other  Graces,  ib  muft  this 
Chriftian  Love  be  obtained  by  Degrees.  But 
Do  you  abound  in  Acts  of  general  and  parti- 
cular Interceffions ;  and  when  you  hear  of 
your  Neighbours  Faults,  inftead  of  relating 
them  to,  and  expofing  them  before  Others, 
—  Lay  them  in  fecret  before  GOD,  and  beg  of 
Him  to  correct  and  amend  them.  When  you 
hear  of  a  notorious  Sinner,  inftead  of  Think- 
ing, Tou  do  well  to  be  angry;  beg  of  JESUS 
CHRIST  to  convert  and  make  Him  a  Monu- 
ment of  His  Free  Grace  :  And  you  cannot  ima- 
gine what  a  BlefTed  Alteration  this  Practice 
will  make  in  your  Heart,  and  how  much  you 
will  increafe  Day  by  Day  in  the  Spirit  of  Love 
and  Meeknefs  towards  all  Mankind ! 

BUT  farther  to  excite  you  to  the  conftant 
Practice  of  this  Duty  of  Interceffion ;  confi- 
der  the  many  Inftances  given  us  in  Holy 
Scripture,  of  the  Power  and  Efficacy  of  it. 
Great  and  Excellent  Things  are  there  recorded 
as  the  Effects  of  this  Divine  Employ.  It  has 
{topped  Plagues,  it  has  opened  and  fhut  Hea- 
ven ;  and  has  frequently  turned  away  GOD'S 
Fury  from  his  People.  How  was  Abimelecb's 
Houfe  freed  from  the  Difeafe  GOD  fent  amongft 
them,  at  the  Interceffion  of  Abraham ;  When 

Phinees 


Every  Chriftians  DUTY.  127 

Phinees  flood  up  and  prayed,  how  foon  did  the 
Plague  ceafe !  When  Daniel  humbled  and  af- 
fiidted.his  Soul,  and  Interceded  for  the  LORD'S 
Inheritance,  How  quickly  was  an  Angel  dif- 
patched  to  tell  him,  His  Prayer  was  heard-, 
And,  to  mention  but  one  Inftance  more,  How 
does  GOD  own  Himfelf  as  it  were  quite  over* 
come  with  the  Importunity  of  Mofes,  when  he 
was  Interceding  for  his  Idolatrous  People,  — 
Let  me  alone,  fays  GOD! 

THIS  fufficiendy  mews,  I  could  almoft  fay 
the  Omnipotency  of  Inter cejjion,  and  how  we 
may,  like  Jacob,  wreftle  with  GOD,  and  by  an 
holy  Violence  prevail  both  for  Ourfelves  and 
Others.  And  no  doubt  'tis  owing  to  the  fe- 
cret  and  prevailing  Intercejjiom  of  the  few 
Righteous  Souls  who  ftill  remain  among  us, 
that  GOD  has  yet  fpared  this  miferable  finful 
Nation :  For  were  there  not  fome  fuch  Faith- 
ful ones,  like  Mofes,  left  to  fland  in  the  Gap, 
— We  mould  foon  be  deftroyed  even  as  was 
Sodom,  and  reduced  to  Ames  like  unto  Go- 
morrah. 

BUT,  to  ftir  you  up  yet  farther  to  this  God- 
like Exercife  of  Intercejfion,  confider  that,  in 
all  probability,  it  is  the  frequent  Employment 
even  of  the  Glorified  SAINTS  :  For  though  they 
are  delivered  from  the  Burden  of  the  Flefh, 
and  reftored  to  tta  glorious  Liberty  of  the 

Sons 


ia8  INTERCESSION 

Sons  of  GOD,  yet,  as  their  Happinefs  cannot 
be  perfectly  confummated  'till  the  Refurrectioii 
of  the  Laft  Day,  when  all  their  Brethren 
will  be  glorified  with  them,  —  We  cannot  but 
think  They  are  often  importunate  in  befeech- 
ing  our  Heavenly  Father,  fhortly  to  accomplish 
the  Number  of  His  Elect,  and  to  hafr.cn  His 
Kingdom.  And  mall  not  We,  who  are  on 
Earth,  be  often  exercifed  in  this  Divine  Em- 
ploy with  the  Glorious  Company  of  the  Spirits 
of  Juft  Men  made  P  erf  eft  ?  Since  our  Happi- 
nefs is  fo  much  to  confift  in  the  Communion  of 
SAINTS  in  the  Church  Triumphant  abovet 
mall  we  not  frequently  intercede  for  the  Church 
Militant  here  below  j  and  ear-neftly  beg,  that 
We  may  all  be  One,  even  as  the  Holy  JESUS 
and  His  Father  are  One,  that  we  may  alfo  be 
made  Perfect  in  One! 

To  provoke  you  to  this  Great  Work  and 
Labour  of  Love,  —  Remember,  that  it  is  the 
never-ceaiing  Employment  of  the  Holy  and 
Highly-exalted  JESUS  Himfelf,  who  fits  at 
the  Right  Hand  of  G  OD  to  hear  all  our  Prayers, 
and  to  make  continual  Intercejflon  for  us !  So 
that  He  who  is  conftantly  employed  in  inter- 
ceding for  Others,  is  doing  that  on  Earth, 
which  the  Eternal  Son  of  GOD  is  always  do- 
ing in  Heaven. 

IMAGINE 


Every  Chriftiaris  DUTY. 

IMAGINE  therefore,  when  you  are  lifting 
tip  Holy  Hands  in  Prayer  for  one  another,  — 
That  you  fee  the  Heavens  opened,  and  the 
Son  of  G  o  D  in  all  His  Glory  ;  as  the  Great 
High  Prieft  of  your  Salvation,  offering  up  and 
pleading  for  you,  the  All-fufficient  Merit  of 
His  Sacrifice  before  the  Throne  of  His  Hea- 
venly Father !  —  Join  then  Your  Intercejfions 
with  His,  and  befeech  Him  that  tfyey  may 
through  Him  come  up  as  Incenfe,  and  be  re- 
ceived as  a  Sweet-fmelling  Savour,  acceptable 
in  the  Sight  of  GOD!  This  Imagination  will 
ftrengthen  your  Faith,  excite  a  holy  Earneft- 
nefs  in  your  Prayers,  and  make  you  wreftle 
with  GOD,  as  Jacob  did,  when  he  faw  Him 
Face  to  Face  and  his  Life  was  preferved ;  as 
Abraham,  when  he  pleaded  for  Sodom  ;  and  as 
JESUS  CHRIST  himfelf,  when  Fie  prayed, 
being  in  an  Agony,  fo  much  the  more  earneft- 
ly  the  Night  before  his  bitter  Paffion  ! 

AND  now,  Brethren,  What  mall  I  fay  more, 
fince  Ton  are  taught  of  JESUS  CHRIS? 
Himfelf  to  abound  in  Love,  and  in  this  Good 
Work  of  praying  one   for  another  ?  —  How- 
ever, I  cannot  but  recommend  to  you  one  ge- 
neral Means  in  order  to  make  your  Intercef- 
fan  more  effectual,    that  is,  —  To  lead  fuch 
Lives  as  may  make  your  Prayers  accepted  in 
tbe  Beloved.     The  effectual  fervent  Prayer  of 
K  a 


130  INTERCESSION 

a  Righteous  Man  availeth  much,  faith  St.  James. 
Tou  jhall  go  to  my  Servant  Job,  fays  GOD,  and 
He  Jh  all  Pray  for  You.  It  is  This,  It  is  This,  my 
Brethren,  muft  make  your  Interceffiom  pierce  the 
Clouds !  For  the  Prayers  of  the  Wicked  are  an 
Abomination  to  the  LOR  D.  Would  you  there- 
fore prevail  with  GOD  for  Others,  Be  Holy  even 
as  GOD  is  Holy  yourfelves :  Labour  daily  after 
frefh  Degrees  of  Grace,  and  your  Interceffiom  will 
acquire  frefh  Degrees  of  Acceptance  and  Efficacy 
in  Heaven.  Do  but  walk  as  becometh  the  Gofpel 
of  JESUS  CHRIST-,  be  but  in  Earneft 
about  Working  out  your  own  eternal  Salvation  5 
and  your  Intercejfiontvj\\\  Then  come  forth  as  In- 
cenfe  before  GOD,  and  the  lifting  up  of  your 
Hands  be  as  an  Evening  Sacrifice. —  Though 
ever  fo  mean,  though  as  poor  as  Lazarus^  you 
will  then  become  Benefactors  to  all  Mankind  ; 
Thoufands,  and  Twenty  times  Ten  Thoufands, 
will  then  be  Ble/ed  for  your  fakes !  and  after 
you  have  employed  a  few  Years  in  this  Divine 
Exercife  bere9  you  will  be  tranilated  to  that 
Happy  Place,  where  you  have  fo  often  wimed 
others  might  be  advanced ;  and  be  exalted  to  fit 
at  the  Right  Hand  of  our  All-powerful,  All- 
prevailing  INTERCESSOR,  in  the  Kingdom 
of  His  Heavenly  Father  hereafter  ! 

However,    I   cannot   but  in    an    efpecial 
manner  prefs  This  upon  you  now,  becaufe  all 


Every  Chriftian's  D  u  T^Y.  f  3  f 

ye,  amongft  whom  I  have  now  been  Preach- 
ing, in  all  Probability  will  fee  me  no  more  : — 
For  I  am  now  going  (I  truft  under  the  Con- 
duct of  GOD'S  moft  Holy  Spirit)  from  you, 
knowing  not  what  mall  befall  me :  I  need 
therefore  your  moft  importunate  Inter cejfions^ 
that  nothing  may  move  me  from  my  Duty, 
and  that  I  may  not  count  even  my  Life  dear 
unto  myfelf,  fo  that  I  may  finifh  my  Courfe 
with  Joy,  and  the  Miniftry  I  have  received  of 
the  Lord  JESUS,  to  teftify  the  Gofpel  of  the 
Grace  of  GOD! 

Whilft  I  have  been  here,  to  the  beft  of 
my  Knowledge  I  have  not  failed  to  declare 
unto  you  the  whole  Will  of  GOD  :  —  And 
though  my  Preaching  may  have  been  a  Sa- 
i)9ur  of  Death  unto  Death  to  fome  ;  yet  I  truft 
it  has  been  alfo  a  Savour  of  Life  unto  Life  to 
others :  And  therefore  I  earneftly  hope  that 
thofe  will  not  fail  to  remember  me  in  their 
Prayers.  As  for  my  own  Part,  the  many  un- 
merited KindnefTes  I  have  received  from  you, 
will  not  fufFer  me  to  forget  you :  Out  of  the 
Deep  therefore  I  truft  mall  my  Cry  come  unto 
GOD  j  and  whilft  the  Winds  and  Storms  are 
blowing  over  me,  unto  the  LORD  will  I  make 
my  Supplication  for  you.  For  it  is  but  a  little 
while,  and  We  mufl  All  appear  before  the 
Judgment-Seat  of  CHRIST;  where  I  mu ft 
K  2  give 


132  INTERCESSION 

give  a  ftricl:  Account  of  the  Doctrine  I  have 
preached,  and  You  of  your  Improvement  under 
it.  And  Oh !  that  I  may  never  be  called  out  as  ; 
a  fvvift  Witnefs,  againft  any  of  thole  my  dear 
Brethren  in  CHRIST,  for  vvhofe  Salvation  I 
have  fincerely,  though  too  faintly,  longed  and 
laboured !  — 

IT  rs  true,  I  have  been  cenfured  by  fome  as 
adiing  out  of  finifter  and  felfifh  Views:  But  it 
is  a J mall  Matter  with  me  to  be  judged  by  Man's 
Judgment  3  —  I  hope  my  Eye  is  fingle,  but  I 
befeech  you,  Brethren,  by  the  Mercies  of  GOD 
in  CHRIST  JESUS,  pray  that  it  may  be  morefo ! 
—  and  that  I  may.increafe  with  the  Increafe  of 
Grace  in  the  Knowledge  and  Love  of  GOD 
through  JESUS  CHRIST  our  Lord. 

AND  now,  Brethren,  What  fhall  I  fay 
more  ?  —  I  could  wifh  to  continue  my  Dif- 
courfe  much  longer  :  For  I  can  never  fully  ex- 
prefs  the  Defire.of  my  Soul  towards  you!  — 
Finally  therefore,  Brethren,  Wbatfower  Things 
are  Holy,  ivbatjbever  things  are  Pure,  ivhat- 
Jcever  Things  are  Hone/I,  ivbatfoever  Things  are 
of  Good  Report ;  if  there  be  any  Confolation  in 
CHRIST,  if  any  Fellowjhip  of  the  Spirit, 
if  any  Hopes  of  our  appearing  to  the  Com- 
fort of  each  other  at  the  awful  Tribunal  of 
JESUS  CHRIST, —  Think  of  the  Things  that  you 
have  heard,  and  of  thofe  which  your  Paftors 

have 


Every  Chriftian's  DUTY.  133 

have  declared  and' will  yet  declare  unto  you; 
and  continue  under  their  Miniftry  to  work  out 
your  own  Salvation  with  Fear  andT'rembling : — 
So  that  whether  I  mould  never  fee  you  any 
more,  or  whether  it  fhall  pleafe  GOD  to  bring  me 
back  again  at  any  time,  I  may  always  have  the 
Satisfaction  of  knowing  \hat  your  Converfa- 
tion  isfuch  as  becometh  the  Go/pel  of  CHRIST. 

I  almoft  perfuade  myfelf,  that  I  could  wil- 
lingly fuffer  all  Things  fo  that  it  might  any 
ways  promote  the  Salvation  of  your  precious 
and  immortal  Souls;  —  And  I  befeech  you,  as 
my  laft  Requeft,  Obey  them  that  have  the  Rule 
over  you  in  the  LORD  ;  and  be  always  ready 
to  attend  on  their Miniftry,  as  it  is  yourbound- 
en  Duty.  Think  not  that  I  defire  to  have  my- 
felf exalted  at  the  Expence  of  another's  Cha- 
racter, but  rather  think  this  —  Not  to  have 
any  Man's  Per/on  too  much  in  Admiration ;  but 
ejleem  all  your  Minifters  highly  in  Love,  as  they 
juftly  deferve/or  their  Work's  fake. 

And  now,  Brethren,  I  commend  you  ro 
GOD,  and  to  the  Word  of  His  Grace,  which  is 
able  to  build  you  up,  and  give  you  an  Inheri- 
tance amongft  all  them  that  are  fanctified. 
May  GOD  reward  you  for  all  your  Works  of 
'Fait by  and  Labours  of  Love ;  and  make  you  to 
abound  more  and  more  in  every  good  Word  and 
Work  towards  all  Men.  May  he  truly  convert 
K  3  all 


134  INTERCESSION,^, 

all  that  have  been  convinced,  and  awaken  all 
that  are  Dead  in  Trejpaj/es  and  Sins!  May  He 
confirm  all  that  are  wavering  !  —  And  may  you 
all  go  on  from  one  Degree  of  Grace  unto  ano- 
ther, 'till  you  arrive  unto  the  Meafure  of  the 
Stature  of  the  Fullnefs  of  CHRIST  j  and  there- 
by be  made  meet  to  ftand  before  that  GOD,  in 
whofe  Prejence  is  the  Fulnefs  of  Jo\\  at  whofe 
Right  Hand  there  are  Pleafuresfor  evermore  ! 

Amen!  Amen! 


THE 


THE 

Almoft  CHRISTIAN. 

A  SERMON  preach'd  at  the  Parifh 
Church   of     St.   John^ 
&c. 


(  '37  ) 


SERMON   VI. 

The  ALMOST-CHRISTIAN. 

ACTS   xxvi.  28. 

Almofi   thou    ferfnadeft    me    to   be  a 
Chrtftian. 

THESE  Words  contain  the  ingenuous 
Confeflion  of  King  Agrippa-,  which 
having  fome  reference  to  what  went 
before,  it  may  not  be  improper  to  relate  to  you 
the  Subftance  of  the  preceding  Verfes,  to  which 
thefe  Words  are  fo  clofely  connected. 

THE  Chapter  then,  out  of  which  the  Text 
is  taken,  contains  an  admirable  Account  the 
great  St.  Paul  gave  of  his  wonderful  Conver- 
fion  from  Judaifm  to  Christianity,  when  he 
was  called  to  make  his  Defence  before  Fejlm  and 
another  Gentile  Governor.  Our  Blefled  LORD 
had  long  lince  foretold,  that  Wben  the  Son  of 
Manjhould  be  lifted  up,  his  Difciples  jhould  be 

brought 


138          The  ALMOST  CHRISTIAN. 

brought  before  Kings,  for  his  Name's  fake,  for 
a  Teftimony  unto  them.     And  very  good  was  the 
Defign  of  Infinite  Wifdom   in  thus  ordaining 
it :  For  Cbriftianity  being  from  the  very  Be- 
ginning a  Doctrine  of  the  Crofs,    the  Princes 
and  Rulers  of  the  Earth  thought  themfelves  too 
high  to  be  inftrucled  by  fuch  mean  Teachers* 
or  too  happy  to  be  diflurbed  by  fuch  unwelcome 
Truths ;  and  therefore  would  have  always  con- 
tinued Strangers  to  JESUS  CHRIST  and  him 
Crucified,   had  not  the  Apoftles,  by  being  ar- 
raigned as  Criminals  before  them,  gained  Op- 
portunities of  Preaching  to  them  JESUS  and 
the  Refurretfion.     St.  Paul  knew  full  well  that 
this  was  the  main  Reafon,  why  his  Blefled  Ma- 
iler permitted  his  Enemies  at  this  time  to  arraign 
him  at  a  publick  Bar :    And  therefore,  in  com- 
pliance with  the  Divine  Will,  thinks  it  norfuf- 
ficient  barely  to  make  his  Defence,  but  endea- 
vours at  the  fame  Time  to  convert  his  Judges, 
And  this  He  did  with  fuch  Demonilration  of 
the  Spirit,  and  of  Power,  that.FV/?fcJ,  unwilling 
to  be  convinced  by  the  ftrongeft  Evidence,  cries 
out  with  a  loud  Voice,  "  Paul,  much  Learning 
"  doth  make  thee  mad?      To  which  the  brave 
Apoftle  (like  a  true  Follower  of  the  Holy  JESUS) 
meekly  replies,  /  am  not  madt  moft  noble  Feftus> 
but  fpeak  forth  tbe  Words  of  Truth  and  Sober- 

nefs. 


The  ALMOST  CHRISTIAN.  139 

nefs.     But  in  all  Probability  feeing  King  Agrippa 
rnore  affeded  with  his  Difcourfe,  and  obferv- 
ing  in  him  an  Inclination  to  know  the  Truth, 
he  applies  himfelf  more  particularly  to  Him : 
The  King,  fays  he,  knoweth  of  thefe  Things-,  be- 
fore  whom  aljb  I fpeak  freely ;  for  I  amperfuaded 
that  none  of  thefe  Things  are  hidden  from  him- 
And  then,  that  if  pofiible  he  might  compleat 
his  wimed-for  Converfion,  he,  with  an  inimi- 
table Strain  of  Oratory,  addreffes  himfelf  ftill 
more  clofely,— King  Agrippa,  Belie<veft  thou  the 
Prophets  ?  I  know  that  thou  believe/I  them.     At 
which  the  Pafiions  of  the  King  began  to  work 
ib  ftrongly,  that  he  was  obliged  in  open  Court, 
to  own  himfelf  affe&ed  by  the  Prifoner's  Preach- 
ing, and  ingenuoufly  to  cry  out,-     •  'Pauly  al- 
moft  thouperfuadejl  me  to  be  a  Cbrijlian. 

WHICH  Words,  taken  with  the  Context, 
afford  us  a  lively  Reprefentation  of  the  different 
Reception  the  Doclrine  of  CHRIST'S  Minifters, 
who  come  in  the  Power  and  Spirit  of  Saint 
Paul,  meets  with  now-a-days  in  the  Minds  of 
Men.  For  notwithflanding  they,  like  this  great 
Apoftle,  fpeak  forth  the  Words  of  Truth  and 
Sobernefe ;  and  with  fuch  Energy  and  Power, 
chat  all  their  Adverfaries  cannot  gainfay  or  re- 
fift  ;  yet  too  many,  with  the  moft  noble  Fejlus 
before  mentioned,  being,  like  him,  either  too 
proud  to  be  taught,  or  too  fenfual,  too  carelefs, 

or 


140  'The  ALMOST  CHRISTIAN." 
or  too  worldly-minded  to  live  up  to  their  Doo 
trine,— in  order  to  excule  themfelves  cry  out, 
that  much  Learning^  much  Study,  or,  what 
is  more  unaccountable,  much  Piety,  hath  made 
them  mad.  And  though,  bleffed  be  GOD  !  all 
do  not  thus  diibelieve  our  Report ;  yet  amongft 
thole  many  others,  who  gladly  receive  the  Word, 
and  confefs  that  we  fpeak  the  Words  of  Truth 
and  Sobernefs,  there  are  fo  few,  who  arrive  at 
any  higher  Degree  of  Piety  than  that  of  Agrippay 
or  are  any  farther  perfuaded  than  to  be  almoji 
Cbriftianst-—\.\\zt  I  cannot  but  think  it  highly 
neceflary  to  warn  my  dear  Hearers  of  the  Danger 
of  fuch  a  State.  And  therefore  from  the  Words 
of  the  Text  mall  endeavour  to  confider  thefe 
three  Things : 

JFVV/?,  WHAT  is  meant  by  an  almoji  Chrlftian. 

Secondly  >  WHAT  are  the  chief  Reafons  why 
fo  many  are  no  more  than  almoji  Cbriftians. 

Thirdly,  I  SHALL  confider  the  Ineffectual- 
nefs,  Danger,  Abfurdity,  and  Uneafinefs 
that  attends  thofe  that  are  but  almoji  Cbri- 
Jlians. 

"Fourthly ',  I  SHALL  conclude  with  a  general 
Exhortation,  to  fet  all  upon  ftriving  not 
only  to  be  almoji  but  altogether  Cbriftians. 

I.  AND 


ALMOST  CHRISTIAN.  141 

I.  ANDnrft,  lamtoconfider,  What  is  meant 

by  an  almofl  Chriftian. 

AN  almoft  Chrijlian  then,  if  we  confider  him 
in  refpe<Tt  to  his  Duty  to  GOD,  is  one  that  halts 
between  two  Opinions,  that  wavers  between 
CHRIST  and  the  World  ;  that  would  reconcile 
GOD  and  Mammon,  that  is,  Light  and  Dark- 
nefs,  CHRIST  and  Belial  It  is  true,  He  has 
an  Inclination  to  Religion,  but  then  he  is  very 
cautious  how  he  goes  too  far  in  it :  His  falfe 
Heart  is  always  crying  out,  Spare  thyfelf,  do 
thyfehr  no  Harm.  He  prays  indeed,  that  GOD's 
Will  may  be  done  on  Earth,  as  it  is  in  Heaven  : 
but  then,  notwithftanding  he  is  very  partial  in 
his  Obedience,  and  fondly  hopes  that  GOD  will  . 
not  be  extreme  to  mark  every  Tubing  that  be  wil- 
fully does  amifs ;  though  an  infpired  Apoftle  has 
told  him,  that  he  that  wilfully  offends  in  one 
Point  is  guilty  of  all.  Above  all  he  is  one  that 
depends  much  on  outward  Ordinances,  and 
upon  that  account  looks  upon  himfelf  as  Righte- 
ous, and  dejpifes  Others,  though  at  the  fame 
Time  he  may  be  as  great  a  Stranger  to  the  Divine 
Life  as  any  other  Perfon  whatfoever.  In  more, 
he  is'fond  of  the  Form,  but  never  experiences 
the  Power  of  Godlinefs  in  his  Heart :  He  goes 
on  Year  after  Year,  feeding  and  attending  on 
the  Means  of  Grace  j  but  then,  like  Pharoatis 
Lean  Kine,  is  never  the  better,  but  rather  the 
worfe  for  them.  IF 


142          ¥be  ALMOST  CHRISTIAN. 

IF  you  confider  him  in  refpecl  to  his  Neigh- 
bour, he  is  one  that  is  ftriclly  juft  to  all ;  but 
then  this  does  not  proceed  from  any  Love  to 
GOD  or  Regard  to  Man,  but  only  out  of  a  Prin- 
ciple of  Self-Love ;  becaufe  he  knows  Dimonefty 
will  fpoil  his  Reputation,  and  confequently  hinder 
his  Thriving  in  the  World. 

HE  is  one  that  depends  much  on  being  Ne- 
gatively Good,  and  contents  himfelf  with  the 
Confcioufnefs  of  having  done  no  one  any  Harm ; 
tho'he  reads  in  theGofpel,  that  tbeUnprofitablt 
Servant  was  cafl  into  outer  Darknefs,  and  the 
Barren  Fig- Tree  curfed  and  dried  up  from  the 
Roots,  not  for  bearing  bad,  but  no  Fruit. 

HE  is  no  Enemy  to  Charitable  Contributions, 
if  not  too  frequently  recommended  :  But  then 
he  is  quite  unacquainted  with  the  kind  Offices 
of  Vijlting  the  Sick  and  Imprifoned,  C loathing 
the  Naked,  and  Relieving  the  Hungry.  He 
thinks  that  thefe  Things  belong  only  to  the 
Clergy,  though  his  own  falfe  Heart  tells  him, 
that  nothing  but  Pride  keeps  him  from  exerci- 
iing  thefe  Ads  of  Humility,-  and  that  JESUS 
CHRIST,  in  the  25th  Chapter  of  St.  Matthew, 
condemns  Perfons  to  everlafting  Punifhment, 
not  for  being  Fornicators,  Drunkards,  or  Ex- 
tortioners, but  merely  for  neglecting  thefe  cha- 
ritable Offices,  When  the  Son  of  'Man ,  fays  our 
Blefled  Lord  himfelf,  fta/l  come  in  his  Glory, 

He 


The  ALMOST  CHRISTIAN.  143 

Hejhailfet  the  Sheep  on  his  Right-Hand,  and 
the  Goats  on  his  Left.  And  then  fiall  He  fay 
unto  them  on  his  Left  Hand,  Depart  from  me, 
ye  Curjed,  into  ever/a/ling  Fire  prepared  for  the 
Devil  and  his  Angels :  For  I  was  an  hungred, 
and  ye  gave  me  no  Meat ;  /  was  thirfly,  and  ye 
gave  me  no  Drink  ;  /  was  a  Stranger,  and  ye 
took  me  not  in  ;  Naked,  and  ye  cloathed  me  not; 
Sick  and  in  Prijon,  and  ye  vijitedme  not.  'Then 
Jhall  they  alfo  fay,  Lord,  when  Jaw  we  'Thee  an 
bungred,  or  a-thirftt  or  a  Stranger,  or  naked, 
or  Jick,  or  in  Prijon,  and  did  not  minifter  unto 
thee  ?  Then  Jhall  He  anjwer  them,  Verily  I  fay 
unto  you,  inafmuch  as  ye  have  not  done  it  unto 
one  of  the  leaji  of  thefe  my  Brethren,  ye  did  it 
not  unto  me:  And  thefe  Jhall  go  away  into  ever- 
laJtingPuni/hment.  I  thought  proper  to  give 
you  this  whole  Paffage  of  Scripture  at  large, 
becaufe  our  Saviour  lays  fuch  a  particular  Strefs 
upon  it ;  and  yet  notwithstanding  it  is  fo  little 
regarded,  that  were  we  to  judge  by  the  Prac- 
tice of  Cbrijiians,  one  fhould  be  tempted  to  think 
there  were  no  fuch  Verfes  in  the  Bible. 

BUT  to  proceed  in  our  Character  of  an  almoft 
Chriftian :  If  we  confider  him  in  refpecl  to  him- 
felf  j  as  before  we  faid  he  was  ft r icily  honeft 
to  his  Neighbour,  fo  he  is  likewife  ftriclly  fober 
in  hirnfelf :  But  then  both  his  Honefty  and 
Sobriety  proceed  from  the  fame  Principle  of  a 

falfc 


1*44  *&  ALMOST  CHRISTIAN. 
falfe  Self-love.  It  is  true,  he  rum  not  into  tlrt 
fame  Excefs  of  Riot  with  other  Men  j  but  then 
it  is  not  out  of  Obedience  to  the  Laws  of  GOD* 
but  either  beeaufe  his  Constitution  will  not  away 
with  Intemperance  ;  or  rather  becaufe  he  is 
cautious  of  forfeiting  his  Reputation,  or  un- 
fitting himfelf  for  temporal  Bufmefs.  But  tho* 
he  is  fo  prudent  as  to  avoid  Intemperance  and 
Excels,  for  the  Reafons  before  mentioned  ;  yec 
he  always  goes  to  the  Extremity  of  what  is 
lawful.  It  is  true,  he  is  no  Drunkard  •,  but 
then  he  has  no  Cbrijlian  Self-denial  to  plead  for 
him.  He  cannot  think  our  Saviour  to  be  fo 
auftere  a  Matter,  as  to  deny  us  to  indulge  our- 
felves  in  fome  Particulars :  And  fo  by  this  Means 
he  is  kept  out  of  a  Senfe  of  true  Religion,  as 
much  as  if  he  lived  in  Debauchery,  or  any  other 
Crime  whatever.  As  to  fettling  his  Principles 
as  well  as  Practice,  he  is  guided  more  by  the 
World  than  by  the  Word  of  GOB.  As  for  his 
Part,  he  cannot  think  the  Way  to  Heaven  fo 
narrow  as  fome  would  make  it:  And  therefore 
confiders  not  fo  much  what  Scripture  requires^ 
as  what  fuch  and  fuch  a  good  Man  does,  or 
what  will  beft  fuit  his  own  corrupt  Inclinations. 
Upon  this  Account,  he  is  not  only  very  cautious 
himfelf,  but  likewife  very  careful  of  young 
Converts,  whofe  Faces  are  fet  Heavenward  ; 
and  therefore  is  always  acting  the  Devil's  Parr, 

and 


The  ALMOST  CHRISTIAN. 

d  bidding  \hzmfpare  themfehes,  though  they 
are  doing  no  more  than  what  the  Scripture 
flrictly  requires  of  them  to  do  : ,  The  Confe- 
quence  of  which  is,  that  be  jitjjcrs  not  himfelf 
'to  enter  into  the  Kingdom  of  GOD,  and  they 
that  are  entering  in  he  hinders. 

THUS  lives  the  a hriojl  Chriftian :  Not  that  j 
tan  fay,  I  have  fully  defcribed  him  to  you  $  but 
from  thefe  Out- lines  and  Sketches  of  his  Cha- 
racter, if  your  Confciences  have  done  their 
proper  Offices,  and  made  a  particular  Applica- 
tion of  what  has  been  faid  to  your  own  Hearts, 
I  cannot  but  fear  that  fome  of  you  may  obferve 
fome  Features  inhisPidure,  odious  as  it  is,  too 
near  refembling  your  own ;  and  therefore  can- 
not but  hope,  at  the  fame  time,  that  you  join 
with  the  Apoftle  in  the  Words  immediately 
following  the  Text,  and  wi(h  yourfelves  not 
only  almofti  but  altogether  Chriftians. 

II.  BUT  it  is  time  for  me  to  proceed  to  the 

Second  general  tfhing  propofed  ;   namely, 

to  confider  the  Reafons  why  fo  many  arc 

no  more  than  almoft  Chrijliam. 

i.  AND  the  firft  Reafon  I  mail  mention  is, 

becaufe  fo  many  fet  out  with  falfe  Notions  of 

Religion  j  and  though  they  live  in  a  Chriftian 

Country,    yet  know  not  what  Chrijlianity  is. 

This  perhaps  may  be  efteemed  a  hard  Saying, 

L  but 


146  The  ALMOST  CHRISTIAN. 
but  Experience  fadly  evinces  the  Truth  of  it : 
For  fome  place  Religion  in  being  of  this  or  that 
Communion  j  more  in  Morality  ;  moft  in  a 
Round  of  Duties  and  a  Model  of  Performances ; 
and  few,  very  few  acknowledge  it  to  be,  what 
it  really  is,  a  thorough,  inward  Change  of  Na- 
ture, a  Divine  Life,  a  Vital  Participation  of 
JESUS  CHRIST,  an  Union  of  the  Soul  with  GOD  -, 
which  the  Apoftle  expreffes  by  faying,  He  thct 
is  joined  ta  the  LORDt  is  one  Spirit.  Hence 
it  happens  that  fo  many,  even  of  the  moft 
knowing  Profeflbrs,  when  you  come  to  converfe 
with  them  concerning  the  Effence,  the  Life, 
the  Soul  of  Religion,  I  mean  our  New  Birth 
in  JESUS  CHRIST,  confefs  themfelves  quite 
ignorant  of  the  Matter,  and  cry  out  with  Nic o- 
demuSy  Haw  can  this  Tubing  be  I  And  no  wonder 
then,  that  fo  many  are  only  almofi  Chriftians, 
when  fo  many  know  not  what  Cbriftianity  is : 
No  Marvel  fo  many  take  up  with  the  Form^ 
when  they  are  quite  Strangers  to  the  Power  of 
Godlinefi ;  or  content  themfelves  with  the  Sha- 
dow, when  they  know  fo  little  about  the  Sub- 
fiance  of  it.  And  this  is  one  Caufe  why  fo 
inany  are  almoftt  why  fo  few  are  altogether 
Chriftians. 

2.  A  SECOND  Reafon  that  may  be  affigned 
why  fo  many  are  no  more  than  almofl  Chri~ 
(liam>  is  a  fervile  Fear  of  Man :  Multitudes 

there 


ALMOST  CHRISTIAN.  147 

:here  are,  and  have  been,  who  though  awaken- 
ed to  a  Senfe  of  the  Divine  Life,  and  have  tafted 
and  felt  the  Powers  of  the  World  to  come ;  yet 
out  of  a  bafe  finful  Fear  of  being  counted  ftngu- 
ar,  or  contemned   by  Men,    have  fuffered  all 
hofe  good  Impreflions  to  wear  off  again.     It  is 
rue  they  have  fome  Efteem  for  JESUS  CHRIST  « 
>ut  then*   like  Nicodemus^  they  would  come  fo 
him  only  by  Night :   They  are  willing  to  ferve 
lim  ;   but  then  they  would  do  \t  fecretly,  for 
ear  of  the  Jews  :    They  have  a  mind  to  fee 
JESUS,   but  then  they  cannot  come  to  him  be* 
caufe  of  the  Prefs,  for  fear  of  being  laughed  at, 
and  ridiculed  by  thofe  with  whom  they  ufed  to 
fit  at  Meat.     But  well  did  our  Saviour  pro- 
phefy  of  fuch  Perfons,  How  can  ye  love  me  which 
receive  Honour  one  of  another  ?     Alas !  have 
they  never  read,  that  the  Friendjhip  of  this  World 
is  Enmity  with  GOD ;  and  that  our  LORD  him. 
felf  has  threatened,  Whofoe ver  jhall  be  aflamed 
of  me  or  of  my  Words,  in  this  wicked  and  adulte- 
rous Generation,  of  himfoall  the  Son  of  Man  be 
ajhamed,  when  he  eometh  in  the  Glory  of  his  Fa- 
ther and  of  his  Holy  Angeh  ?     Buc  no  wonder 
that  fo  many  are  no  more  than  almoft  Chriftians, 
fince  fo  many  love  the  Praife  of  Men  more  than 
the  Honour  which  comet h  of  GOD. 

3.  A  THIRD  Realbn  why  fo  many  are  no 

more  than  almoft  Chriftians,  is  a  reigning  Love 

Lz  of 


148  ^he  ALMOST  CHRISTIAN. 
of  Money.  This  was  the  pitiable  Cafe  of  that 
forward  young  Man  in  the  Gofpel,  who  came 
running  to  our  Bleffed  LORD,  and  kneeling 
before  him,  enquired  what  HP  muftdo  to  Inherit 
Eternal  Life ;  to  which  our  Bleffed  Matter 
replied,  Thou  knoweft  the  Commandments,  Do 
not  Kill,  Do  not  commit  Adultery,  Do  not  Steah 
To  which  the  young  Man  replied  (Oh  that 
every  young  Man  here  prefent  could  do  fo  too) 
All  thefe  have  I  kept  from  myTouth.  But  when 
our  LORD  proceeded  to  tell  him,  Tet  lackejl 
thou  one  Thing,  Go  fell  all  that  thou  haft  and  give 
to  the  Poor, —  he  was  grieved  at  that  Saying^ 
and  went  away  forrcwful,  for  he  had  great  Pof- 
ffffions !  Poor  Youth  !  He  had  a  good  Mind  tc 
be  a  Chriftian,  and  to  inherit  Eternal  Life,  bui 
thought  it  too  dear,  if  it  could  be  purchafec 
at  no  lefs  an  Expence  than  of  his  whole  Eftate 
And  thus  many,  both  Young  and  Old,  now- a- 
days  come  running  to  worship  our  BlefTedLoRi 
in  publick,  and  kneel  before  him  in  private 
and  enquire  at  his  Gofpel,  what  they  muft  dc 
to  inherit  Eternal  Life  :  But  when  they  fine 
they  muft  renounce  the  Self- Enjoyment  o 
Riches,  and  forfake  all  in  Affedion  to  follow 
Him,  they  cry,  The  LORD  pardon  us  in  thi 
Thing  / —  We  pray  Thee,  have  us  excufed.— 

BUT  is  Heaven  fo  frnall  a  Trifle  in  fuch  Men* 
Efteem,  as  not  to  be  worth  a  little  gilded  Earth 

I 


The  ALMOST  CHRISTIAN.  149 

[s  Eternal  Life  fo  mean  a  Purchafe,  as  not  to 
deferve  the  temporary  Renunciation  of  a  few 
janfhory  Riches  ?  Surely  it  is.  But  however 
nconfiftent  fuch  a  Behaviour  may  be,  this 
nordinate  Love  of  Money  is  too  evidently  the 
:ommon  and  fatal  Caufe  why  fo  many  are  no 
nore  than  almofl  Chriftians. 

4.  NOR  is  the  reigning  Love  of  Pleafure  a 
efs  uncommon,  or  a  lefs  fatal  Caufe  why  fo 
nany  are  no  more  than  almoft  Chriftians. 
Thoufands  and  ten  Thoufands  tbere  are,  who 
defpife  Riches,  and  would  willingly  be  true 
Difciples  of  JESUS  CHRIST,  Would  parting  with 
their  Money  make  them  fo ;  but  when  they 
are  told  that  our  BleiTed  LORD  has  laid  it  down 
as  an  indilpenfable  Condition,  that  Wbofoever 
•will  come  after  Him  mujl  deny  himfelf; —  like 
the  pitiable  young  Man  before  mentioned,  they 
go  away  forrowful :  For  they  have  too  great  a 
Love  for  fenfual  Pleafures :  They  will,  like 
Herod,  perhaps  fend  for  theMinifters  of  CHRIST, 
as  he  did  for  John,  and  bear  them  gladly  :  But 
touch  them  in  their  Herodiasy  tell  them  they 
muft  part  with  fuch  or  fuch  a  darling  Pleafure  j 
and  with  wicked  Ahab  they  cry  out,  Haft  tbou 
found  us,  O  our  Enemy  ?  Tell  them  of  the 
Neceffity  of  Mortification,  Fafting,  and  Self- 
Denial,  and  it  is  as  difficult  to  them  to  hear, 
as  if  you  was  to  bid  them  cut  of  a  Right  Hand 

k  3  oy 


i£o  tfbe  ALMOST  CHRISTIAN. 
or  pluck  out  a  Right  Eye  :  They  cannot  think 
our  Blefled  LORD  requires  fo  much  at  their 
Hands,  though  an  infpired  Apoftle  has  com- 
manded us  to  mortify  our  Members  which  are 
upon  the  Earth :  And  he  himfelf,  even  after 
he  had  converted  Millions,*  and  was  very  near 
arrived  to  the  End  of  his  Race,  yet  profeflec} 
that  it  was  his  daily  Practice  to  keep  under  his 
Body,  and  bring  it  into  Subjection,  left  after  he- 
had  preached  to  Others,  be  himj'elf  Jhould  be  a 
Caft-away  ! 

BUT  fome  Men  would  be  wifer  than  this 
great  Apoftle,  and  chalk  out  to  us  what  they 
falfely  imagine  an  eafier  Way  to  Happinefs. 
They  would  flatter  us  we  may  go  to  Heaven 
without  offering  Violence  to  our  fenfual  Ap- 
petites ;  and  enter  into  the  Jirait  Gate  without 
Jhiving  againft  our  carnal  Inclinations.  And 
this  is  another  Reafon  why  fo  many  are  only 
aitnoft,  and  not  altogether  Chriftians. 

5.  THE  fifth  and  laft  Reafon  I  iliall  affign 
why  fo  many  are  only  almo/t  Cbriftians,  is  a 
Ficklenefs  and  Inftability  of  Temper. 

IT  has  been,  no  doubt,  the  Misfortune  that 
many  a  Minifter  and  fincere  Chriftian  has  met 
with,  to  weep  and  wail  over  Numbers  of  pro- 
rqifing  Converts,  who  feemingly  began  in  the 
Spirir,  but  after  a  while  have  fell  away,  and 
bqfely  ended  in  the  Fielh ;  and  this  not  for  want 

of 


*The  ALMOST  CHRISTIAN.  151 

of  right  Notions  in  Religion,  nor  out  of  a 
fervile  Fear  of  Man,  nor  out  of  a  Love  of 
Money  or  fenfual  Pleafure,  but  out  of  an  In- 
ilability  and  Ficklenefs  of  Temper.  They 
looked  upon  Religion  merely  for  Novelty;  as 
fomething  which  pleafed  them  for  a  while,  but 
after  their  Curiofity  was  fatisfied,  they  have 
laid  it  afide  again :  Like  the  young  Man  that 
came  to  fee  JESUS  with  a  Linen  Cloth  about 
his  naked  Body,  they  have  followed  him  for 
a  Seafon,  but  when  Temptations  have  come  to 
take  hold  on  them,  for  want  of  a  little  more 
Refolution,  they  have  been  ftripped  of  all  their 
good  Intentions,  and  fled  away  naked.  They 
at  firft,  like  a  Tree  planted  by  the  Water-fide, 
grew  up  and  flourifhed  for  a  while  j  but  having 
no  Roof  in  themfefaes,  no  inward  Principle  of 
Holinefs  and  Piety,  like  Jonah's  Gourd,  were 
foon  dried  up,  cut  down,  and  withered.  Their 
good  Intentions  are  but  too  like  the  violent 
Motions  of  the  Animal  Spirits  of  a  Body  newly 
beheaded,  which  though  impetuous,  are  not* 
lading.  In  ihort,  they  fet  out  well  in  their 
Journey  to  Heaven,  but  finding  the  Way  either 

narrower  or  longer  than  they  expected, 

through  an  Unfleadinefs  of  Temper,  they  have 
made  an  Eternal  Halt,  and  fo  returned  like  the 
Dog  to  his  Vomit)  or  like  the  Sow  that  was  wafted 
to  her  wallowing  in  the  Mire  ! 

L  4  BUT 


152          The  ALMOST  CHRISTIAN. 

BUT  I  tremble  to  pronounce  the  Fate  of  fuch 
unftable  ProfefTors,  who  having  put  their  Hands 
to  the  Plow,  for  want  of  a  little  more  Refolution, 
ihamefully  look  back.     How  mall  I   repeat  to 
them  that  dreadful  Threatning,    If  any  Man 
draw  back,    my  Soul  fhall  have  no  Pleafure 
in  him!     And  again,  It  is  impojfible,  that  is, 
exceeding  difficult  at  leaft,  for  thoj'e  that  have 
been  once  enlightened,  and  have  tafted  the  good 
Gift  of  GOLD'S  Holy  Spirit,  and  the  Powers  of 
the  World  to  come,  if  they  Jhould  fall  away,  to. 
be  renewed  again  unto  Repentance.     But  not- 
withftanding  the  Gofpel   is  fo  fevere   againft 
Apoftates,  yet  many  that  begun  well,  through 
a  Ficklenefs  of  Temper,  (Oh  that  none  of  us 
here  prefent  may  ever  be  fuch)  have  been  by 
this  means  of  the  Number  of  thoje  that  turn  back 
unto  Perdition.     And  this  is  the  fifth  and  laft 
Reafon  I  mail  give,    why  fo  many  are  only 
almoft,  and  not  altogether  Chrif'ians. 

BuTyou,Bre{hren,havenoty01earnedCHRisT. 
GOD  forbid  that  a  Fear  of  a  little  Contempt,  a 
Love  of  a  little  worldly  Gain,  or  a  Fondnefs  for 
a  little  fenfual  Pleafure,  or  Want  of  a  fteddy 
Refolution,  mould  hinder  you  from  entering 
into  Eternal  Life,  or  make  you  fo  fottim  as  to 
think  you  may  compound  Matters  between  Gop 
and  your  Souls, 

III.  PRO- 


The  ALMOST  CHRISTIAN.  153 


III.  PROCEED  we  therefore  now  to 

General  Thing  propofed,  namely,  to  con- 
fider  the  Folly  of  being  no  more  than  an 
almoft  Chrtflian. 

AND  the  firft  Proof  I  mall  give  of  the  Folly 
of  fuch  a  Proceeding  is,  —  that  it  is  ineffectual 
to  Salvation.  It  is  true,  fuch  Men  are  almoft 
Good,  but  almoft  to  hit  the  Mark  is  really  to 
mifs  it.  GOD  requires  us  to  love  him  'with  all 
our  Hearts,  with  all  our  Souls,  and  'with  all  our 
Strength  :  He  loves  us  too  well  to  admit  any 
Rival  ;  becaufe  fo  far  as  our  Hearts  are  empty 
of  GOD,  fo  far  muft  they  be  unhappy.  The 
Devil,  indeed,  like  the  falfe  Mother  that  came 
before  Solomon,  would  have  our  Hearts  divided, 
as  (he  would  have  had  the  Child  -,  but  GOD, 
like  the  true  Mother,  will  have  all  or  none. 
My  Son  give  me  tby  Heart,  thy  whole  Heart, 
is  the  general  Call  to  all  :  And  if  we  do  noc 
perform  this  Condition,  we  never  can  expect 
the  Divine  Mercy, 

PERSONS  may  indeed  flatter  themfelves,  that 
a  partial  Obedience  will  ferve  their  Turn  5  but 
GOD  at  the  Great  Day  will  ftrike  them  dead, 
as  he  did  Ananias  and  Sapphira  by  the  Mouth 
of  his  Servant  Peter,  for  pretending  to  offer 
him  all  their  Hearts,  when  they  keep  back  from 
him  the  greatelt  Part.  They  may  perhaps 

impofe 


154          *fbe  ALMOST  CHRISTIAN. 

impofe  upon  their  fellow  Creatures  for  a  while, 
but  He  that  enabled  Elijah  to  cry  out,  Come  in, 
tbou  Wife  of 'Jeroboam,  when  {he  came  dif- 
guifed  to  enquire  about  her  fick  Son,  will  alfo 
difcover  them  through  their  moft  artful  Diffimu- 
lations,  and  if  their  Hearts  are  not  whole  with 
him — appoint  them  their  Portion  with  Hypocrites 
end  Unbelievers. 

BUT  Secondly,  What  renders  an  half-way 
Piety  more  inexcufable  is,  that  it  is  not  only 
infufficient  to  our  own  Salvation,  but  alfo  moft 
prejudicial  to  that  of  Others. 

AN  almoft  Chriftianis  one  of  the  moft  hurtful 
Creatures  in  the  World  :  He  is  a  Wolf  in  Sheep's 
Cloathing-y  He  is  one  of  thofe  falfe  Prophets 
our  Blefled  LORD  bids  us  beware  of,  in  his 
Sermon  on  the  Mount,  who  would  perfuade 
Men,  that  the  Way  to  Heaven  is  broader  than 
it  really  is  ;  and  thereby,  as  it  was  obferved 
before,  enter  not  into  the  Kingdom  of  GOD 
tbemfehes,  and  thofe  that  are  entering  in  they 
binder.  Thefe,  thefe  are  the  Men  that  turn  the 
World  into  a  lukewarm  Laodicean  Spirit ;  that 
hang  out  falfe  Lights,  and  fo  fhipwreck  un- 
thinking benighted  Souls  in  their  Voyage  to 
the  Haven  where  they  would  be.  Thefe  are 
they  that  are  greater  Enemies  to  the  Crofs  of 
CHRIST,  than  Infidels  themfelves:  For  of  an 
Unbeliever  every  one  will  be  aware  ;  but  an 

almoft 


'fhe  ALMOST  CHRISTIAN.  155 

almofl  Chriftian,  through  his  fubtle  Hypocrify, 
draws  away  many  ajter  him ;  *and  therefore  muft 
expect  to  receive  the  greater  Damnation. 

BUT  Thirdly,  As  it  is  moft  prejudicial  to  our- 
felves  and  hurtful  to  others,  fo  it  is  the  greateft 
Piece  of  Ingratitude  we  can  exprefs  towards  our 
Lord  and  Mafter  JESUS  CHRIST.  For  did  He 
come  down  from  Heaven,  and  {hed  his  precious 
Blood,  to  purchafe  thefe  Hearts  of  ours,  and 
(hall  we  only  give  him  half  of  them  ?  Oh  how 
can  we  fay  we  love  him,  when  our  Hearts  are 
not  wholly  with  Him  ?  How  can  we  call  Him. 
oyr  Saviour,  when  we  will  not  endeavour  fin- 
cerely  to  approve  ourfelves  to  Him,  and  fo  let 
Him  fee  the  Travail  of  his  Soul,  and  be  fa- 
tisfied  ! 

HAD  any  of  us  purchafed  a  Slave  at  a  moft 
expenn"  ve  Rate,  that  was  before  involved  in  the 
utmoft  Miferies  and  Torments,  and  fo  muft 
have  continued  for  ever, —  had  we  fhut  up  our 
Bowels  of  Compafllon  from  him  j  and  was  this 
SJave  afterwards  to  grow  rebellious,  or  deny 
giving  us  but  half  his  Service  :  How,  how 
fhould  we  exclaim  againft  his  bafe  Ingratitude ! 
And  yet  this  bafe  ungrateful  Slave  thou  art,  O 
Man,  who  acknowledged  thyfelf  to  be  redeemed 
from  infinite  unavoidable  Mifery  and  Punim- 
ment  by  the  Death  of  JESUS  CHRIST,  and  yet 
wilt  not  give  thyfelf  wholly  to  Him.  But  Ihali 

wq 


156  The  ALMOST  CHRISTIAN. 
we  deal  with  GOD  our  Maker  in  a  manner  we 
would  not  be  dealt  with  by  a  Man  like  our- 
felves  ?  Shall  we  mete  out  a  lefs  Meafure  of 
Love  to  our  Saviour,  than  we  would  have 
dealt  to ourfelves  ?  GOD  forbid! 

IV.  No,  (that  I  may  come  to  the  loft  fling 
propofed,  namely,  to  add  a  Word  or  two  of 
Exhortation  to  be  not  only  alfnojl,  but  altoge- 
ther Cbriftians)  let  us  fcorn  all  fuch  bafe  and 
treacherous  Treatment  of  our  King  and  Sa- 
viour, nay  our  GOD.  Let  us  not  take  fome 
Pains  all  our  Lives  to  go  to  Heaven,  and  yec 
plunge  ourfelves  into  Hell  at  lall.  Let  us  give 
GOD  our  whole  Hearts,  and  no  longer  halt 
between  two  Opinions :  If  the  World  be  GOD, 
Jet  us  ferve  That ;  If  Pleajure  be  a  GOD,  let 
usferve  That  ;  but  if  the  LORD  He  be  GOD, 
Jet  us,  Oh  let  usferve  Htm  alone.  Alas !  Why, 
why  ihould  we  ftand  out  any  longer  ?  Why 
fhould  we  be  fo  in  Love  with  Slavery,  as  not 
wholly  to  renounce  the  World,  the  Flefti,  and 
the  Devil,  which,  like  fo  many  fpiritual  Chains, 
bind  down  our  Souls,  and  hinder  them  from 
flying  up  to  GOD.  Alas !  what  are  we  afraid 
of  ?  Is  not  GOD  able  to  reward  our  entire 
Obedience  ?  If  He  is,  as  the  almoft  Cbriftiaris. 

lame  Way  of  ferving  Him  feems  to  grant, 

Why  then  will  we  not  ferve  Him  entirely  ? 

For 


The  ALMOST  CHRISTIAN.  157 

For  the  fame  Reafon  we  do  fo  much,  why 
do  we  not  do  more  ?  Or  do  you  think  that 
being  only  half  Religious  will  make  you  hap- 
py, but  that  going  farther  will  render  you 
miferable  and  uneafy?  Alas!  this,  my  Bre- 
thren, is  Delufion  all  over :  For  what  is  it  but 
this  half  Piety ,  this  wavering  between  GOD 
and  the  World,  that  makes  fo  many  that  are 
feemingly  well-difpofed,  fuch  utter  Strangers 
to  the  Comforts  of  Religion  ?  They  chufe 
juft  fo  much  of  Religion  as  will  difturb  them 
in  their  Lufls,  and  follow  their  Lufts  fo  far  as 
to  deprive  themfelves  of  the  Comforts  of  Re- 
ligion. Whereas,  on  the  contrary,  would  they 
fincerely  leave  all  in  Affection,  and  give  their 
Hearts  wholly  to  GOD,  they  would  then  (and 
they  cannot  'till  then)  experience  the  unfpeak- 
able  Pleafure  of  having  a  Mind  at  Unity  with 
itfelf,  and  enjoy  fuch  a  Peace  of  GOD,  which 
even  in  this  Life  pafles  all  Underfbmding,  and 
jyhich  they  were  entire  Strangers  to  before. 
It  is  true,  if  we  will  devote  ourfelves  entirely 
to  GOD,  we  muft  meet  with  Contempt;  but 
then  it  is  becaufe  Contempt  is  necefiary  to 
heal  our  Pride.  We  muft  renounce  fome 
fenfual  Pleafure  ;  but  then  it  is  becaufe  thofe 
unfit  us  for  Spiritual  ones,  which  are  infinitely 
better.  We  muft  renounce  the  Love  of  the 
World ;  but  then  it  is  that  we  may  be  filled 

with 


158  The  ALMOST  CHRISTIAN. 
with  the  Love  of  GOD  :  And  when  that  has 
once  enlarged  our  Hearts,  we  fhall,  like  ^acob 
when  he  ferved  for  his  beloved  Rachel^  think 
nothing  too  difficult  to  undergo,  no  Hardships 
too  tedious  to  endure,  becaufe  of  the  Love  we 
fliall  then  have  for  our  dear  Redeemer.  Thus 
eafy,  thus  delightful  will  be  the  Ways  of  GOD 
even  in  this  Life :  But  when  once  we  throw 
off  thefe  Bodies,  and  our  Souls  zvzjilled  with 
all  the  Fullnefs  of  GOD>  Oh!  what  Heart  can 
conceive,  what  Tongue  can  exprefs,  with 
what  unfpeakable  Joy  and  Confolation  we  (hall 
then  look  back  on  our  pail  fmcere  and  hearty 
Services,  which  have  procured  us  fo  invaluable 
a  Reward !  Think  you  then,  my  dear  Hearers, 
we  fhall  repent  we  had  done  too  much  ;  or 
rather  think  you  not  we  mall  be  amamed  that 
we  did  no  more  ;  and  blufh  we  were  fo  back- 
ward to  give  up  All  to  GOD:  when  He  intended 
hereafter  to  give  us  Himfelf .? 

LET  me  therefore,  to  conclude,  exhort  you, 
my  Brethren,  to  have  always  the  Unfpeakable 
Reward  of  an  entire  Obedience  fet  before  you  : 
And  think  withal,  that  every  Degree  of  Ho- 
linefs  you  neglect,  every  Inftance  of  Piety  you 
pafs  by,  is  a  Jewel  taken  out  of  your  Grown, 
a  Degree  of  Bleffednefs  loft  in  the  Vifion  of 
GOD  Oh !  do  but  always  think  and  act  thus, 
and  )ou  will  no  longer  be  labouring  to  com-. 

pound 


The  ALMOST  CHRISTIAN.  15-9 
pound  Matters  between  GOD  and  the  World; 
but  on  the  contrary,  be  daily  endeavouring  to 
give  up  yourfelves  more  and  more  unto  Him ; 
you  will  be  always  Watching,  always  Praying, 
always  afpiring  after  farther  Degrees  of  Purity 
and  Love,  and  fo  confequently  always  preparing 
yourfelves  for  a  fuller  Light  and  Enjoyment  of 
that  GOD,  in  whofe  Prefence  there  is  Fullnefs 
of  Joy,  and  at  whofe  Right  Hand  there  are 
Pleafures  for  evermore.  Amen !  Amen  ! 


THE 


O  F 

JUSTIFICATION 

B  Y 

CHRIST. 

A  SERMON  preach'd  at  theParifh 
Church  of  St.  dnttofoi)  Sec. 


M 


SERMON    VIII. 

Of  Juftification  by  CHRIST. 


i  C  o  R.  vi.   ii. 

But  ye  are  Juftified. 

The  whole  Verfe  runs  thus : And 

fuch  were  fome  of  you  -,  but  ye  are 
wafted^  but  ye  are  fanftified)  but  ye 
are  juftifiedin  the  Name  of  our  Lord 
Jefm  Chrift)  and  by  the  Spirit  of 
cur  God. 

IT  has  been  objected  by  fome,  who  are  fo 
unhappy  as  to  diflenc  from,  nay,  I  may 
add,    by  others   alfo,    who   actually  are 
Friends  to  the  prefent  Ecclefiaftical  Eftablifh- 
ment,  That  the   Minifters  of  the  Church  of 
England  preach   themfelves,  and  not  CHRIST 
JESUS   our    Lord ;   that  they   entertain  their 
People  with  Le&ures  of  mere  Morality,  with- 
out declaring  to   them   the   glad  Tidings   of 
M  2  Salvati'OA 


164     Of  Juftificatiqn  ^CHRIST. 
Salvation  by  JESUS   CHRIST.     How  well 
grounded   fuch  an  Obje&ion  may  be,  is   not 
my  Bufmefs   to  enquire:   All  I  {hall  fay  at 
prefent  to   the  Point   is   this;   namely,   that 
whenever  fuch  a  grand  Objection  is  urged  a- 
gainft  the  whole  Body  of  the  Clergy  in  gene- 
ral, every  honeft  Minifter  of  JESUS  CHRIST 
fhould  do  his  utmoft  to  cut  of  all  manner  of 
Occajion  from  thofe  that  defire  an  Occafion  to 
take  offence  at  us  j  that  fo  by  hearing  us  con- 
tinually founding  forth  the  Word  of  Truth, 
and  declaring  with  all  Boldnefs  and  Affurance 
of  Faith,  that  there  is  no  other  Name  given 
under  Heaven  whereby  they  can  be  faved,  but 
•  that  of  JESUS  CHRIS?-,    they  may  be 
aftiamed  of  this  their  fame  confident  Boafting 
againft  us. 

IT  was  an  Eye  to  this  Objection,  joined 
with  the  Agreeablenefs  and  Delightfulnefs  of 
the  Subjecl:  (for  who  can  but  delight  to  talk  of 
that  which  the  BlefTed  Angels  defire  to  look 
into?)  that  induced  me  todifcourfe  a  little  on 
that  great  and  fundamental  Article  of  our 
Faith;  namely,  our  being  freely  juftified  from 
all  our  Sins  by  the  precious  Blood  of  JESUS 
CHRIST.  But  ye  are  wafted,  fays  the  Apoftle, 
but  ye  are  fantfified,  but  ye  are  iuftified>  in  the 
Name  of  our  Lord  JESUS  CHRIST,  and 
by  the  Spirit  of  our  GOD. 

THE 


Of  Juftification  by  C  H  R  I  s  T.      165 

THE  Words  beginning  with  the  Particle 
But,  have  plainly  a  Reference  to  fomething 
that  went  before ;  it  may  not  therefore  be  im- 
proper before  I  defcend  to  Particulars,  to  con- 
fider  the  Words,  as  they  ftand  related  to  the 
Context.  The  Apoftle,  in  the  Verfes  imme- 
diately foregoing,  had  been  reckoning  up  ma- 
ny notorious  Sins,  fuch  as  Drunkennefs,  Adul- 
tery, Fornication,  and  fuch  like,  the  Commif- 
fion  of  which,  without  a  true  and  hearty  Re- 
pentance, He  tells  them  plainly,  would  cer- 
tainly fhut  them  out  of  the  Kingdom  of  GOD. 
But  then,  left  the  fincere  Corinthian  Converts, 
who  we  find  were  once  infamous  for  moft  or 
all  of  thefe  Vices,  mould  either  on  one  hand 
grow  fpiritually  proud  by  feeing  themfelves 
differ  from  their  unconverted  Brethren,  and 
therefore  mould  be  tempted  to  fet  them  at 
nought,  and  to  fay  with  the  felfconceited  Hy- 
pocrite in  the  Prophet,  Come  not  nigh  me,  for 
I  am  holier  than  thou :  or,  on  the  dther  hand, 
by  looking  back  on  the  Multitude  of  their  paft 
Offences,  mould  be  apt  to  think  their  Sins  were 
too  many  and  grievous  to  be  forgiven:  He 
firft,  in  order  to  keep  them  humble,  reminds 
them  of  their  fad  Eftate  before  Cbnverfion, 
telling  them  in  plain  Terms,  Such  (or  as  jt 
might  better  be  read  thefe  things)  were  fome  of 
you ;  that  is,  Not  only  one,  but  all  that  fad 
M  3  Catalogue 


1  66  Of  Juftification  ^CHRIST. 
Catalogue  of  Vices  I  have  been  before  drawing 
up,  fome  of  you  were  once  guilty  of;  but 
then  at  the  lame  time  to  preferve  them  from 
Defpair,  behold  he  brings  them  glad  Tidings  of 
great  Joy:  But  ye  are  •wajhed,  fays  he,  but  ye 
are,  fancJifed,  but  ye  are  jujlified  in  the  Name 
of  our  Lord  JESUS  CHRIS?,  and  by  the  Spirit 
of  our  GOD. 

THE  former  Part  of  which  Text,  namely 
our  being  Sanctified,  I  did,  in  fom'e  meafure, 
treat  of,  when  I  difcourfed  on  the  Nature  and 
Necejjity  of  the  New  Birth  :  I  come  now,  as 
was  before  propofed,  to  enlarge  on  the  latter 
Part  of  it,  namely,  of  our  being  freely  Jujli- 
fed  from  all  our  Sins,  by  the  precious  Blood 
of  JESUS  CH  R  I  ST  :  But  ye  are  Juftijied  in 
.the  Name  of  our  Lord  JESUS  CHRIS?! 

FROM  which  Words  I   (hall  endeavour  to 
coofider  thefe  Three  Things  : 

I.  Firft,    WHAT   is   meant   by  the  Word 


II.  Secondly,    I   fhall  endeavour  to  prove, 
that  all  Mankind  in  general,  and  every 
individual  Perfon  in  particular,  ftands  in 
need  of  being  jujlified. 

III.  Thirdly  and  laftfy,  That    there    is  no 
poflibility  of  obtaining  this  J  unification, 
which  we  fo  much  want,  but  by  the/r^- 
cious  Blood  of  JESUS  CHRIST. 

I.  Firfi 


Of  Justification  by  C  H  k  i  s  T.       i  67 

I.  Firft  then,  I  am  to  confidef  what  is  meant 
by  the  Word  jujlified. 

BUT   ye  are  Jujlified,    fays  the  ApoTflej. 
which  is  all  the  fame  as  though  he  had  faid^ 
You  have  your  Sins  forgiven,  and  are  looked 
upon  by  GOD,  as  though  you  never  had  offend- 
ed him  at  all :  For  that  is  the  Meaning  of  the 
Wordjufttfied,  in  almoft  all  the  other  Paflages 
of  Holy  Scripture  where  this  Word  is  men- 
tioned.    Thus  when  this  fame  Apoftle  writes 
to  the  Romans,  he  tells  them,  that  whom  GOD 
calls,  thofe  he  alfo  juftifies  j   that  is,  forgives 
them  their  Sins  :  And  again,  fpeaking  of  Abra- 
ham's Faith,   he  tells  them,  that  Abraham  be- 
lieved on  Him  that  juftijies  the  Ungodly:  That  is, 
who  forgives  the  ungodly  Man  his  Sins :  Which  _ 
Expreffion  the  Apoftle  himfelf  explains  by  a 
Quotation  out   of  the  Pfalms ;  B/effed  is  the 
Man,  fays  he,  to  whom  the  LORD  imputetb 
no  Sin.     From  all  which  Proofs,   and  many 
others  that  might  be  urged,  it  is  evident  that 
being  jitftified,  or  having  our  Sins  forgiven^are 
the  fame  as  to  Signification :    So  tha|.^hat  the 
Apoftle  here  affirms  of  the  Corinthian  Con- 
verts, namely,  that  they  wejuftified,  amounts 
to  what  all  of  us  profefs  to  hold  when  we  juft 
now  repeated  our  .Creed,  and  each  of  us  de- 
clared in  his  own  Perfon,   /  believe  the  For- 
M  4  giwne/s 


1 6%      Of  juftification  ^CHRIST.' 
givenefs  of  Sins.  Which  teads  me  directly  to  the 
II.  Second  Thing   propofed,    namely,    To 
endeavour  to  prove  that  all  Mankind  in 
general,   and  every  individual  Perfon  in 
particular,  ftands  in  need  of  being  thus 
jtiftified,  or  having  his  Sins  forgiven. 

AND  indeed  the  Apoftle  fuppofes  this  in 
the  Words  of  the  Text :  But  ye  are  juftified, 
fays  he,  thereby  implying  that  the  Corinthians 
(and  confequently  all  Mankind,  there  being  no 
Difference,  as  will  be  fhewn  hereafter)  flood  in 
need  of  being  thus  j 'uftified. 

BUT,  not  to  reft  in  bare  Suppositions,  in  my 
farther  Enlargement  on  this  Second  Head,  I 
fhall  endeavour  to  prove  that  we  all  ftand  in 
need  of  being  y#/?//W,  on  two  Accounts :  Firft, 
as  weftand  chargeable  with  Original,  —Second- 
ly, as  we  have  been  guilty  of  Actual  Sin. 

AND  Firft,  I  affirm  that  we  all  ftand  in 
need  of  being  juftijied^  as  we  are  chargeable 
with  Original  Sin  :  Which,  though  a  Propo- 
iition  that  may  be  denied  by  a  felf -juftifying  In- 
fidel, who  will  not  come  to  C  HR  IS  T  that  he 
may  have  Life,  and  ftoop  to  thofe  Terms  GOD 
has  gracioufly  fettled  for  his  Salvation  ;  yet 
can  never  be  denied  by  any  one  who  believes 
that  St.  Paul's  Epiftles  were  written  by  Divine 
Infpiration  ;  where  we  are  told,  that  in  Adam 
all  die ;  that  is,  Adams  Sin  was  imputed  to 

all: 


Of  Juftification  ^CHRIST.  1 69 
all :  And  left  we  mould  forget  to  make  a  par- 
ticular Application,  it  is  farther  added  in  ano- 
ther Place,  that  there  is  none  that  doth  good 
(that  is  by  Nature)  no,  not  one :  That  we  are  all 
gone  out  of  the  Way ;  namely  of  Original 
Righteoufnefs;  and  are  by  Nature  the  Children 
of  Wrath.  And  even  David,  who  was  the 
Man  after  GOD'S  own  Heart,  and  if  any  one 
could,  might  furely  plead  an  Exemption  from 
this  univerfal  Corruption,  yet  he  confelTes  that 
he  was  Jhapen  in  Wickednefs,  and  that  in  Sin 
did  his  Mother  conceive  him.  And,  to  mention 
but  one  more  Text,  as  immediately  applicable 
to  the  prefent  purpofe,  St.  Paul,  in  his  Epiftle 
to  the  Romans  fays,  that  Death  came  upon  all 
Men,  for  the  Dijbbedience  of  one  Man,  namely, 
of  Adam,  even  upon  thoj'e,  fays  he,  (that  is  little 
Children)  who  had  not  finned  after  the  Simili- 
tude of  Adam's  T'ranfgreJ/ion ;  or,  had  not  been 
guilty  of  actual  Sin,  and  therefore  could  not 
be  punifhedwith  temporal  Death  (which  came 
into  the  World,  as  this  fame  Apoftle  elfewhere 
informs  us,  only  by  Sin)  had  not  the  Difobe- 
dience  of  our  firft  Parents  been  imputed  to 
them.  So  that  what  has  been  faid  on  this 
Point  feems  to  be  excellently  fummed  up  in  that 
Article  of  our  Church,  where  (he  declares, 
"  That  Original  Sin  ftandeth  not  in  the  fol- 
"  lowing  of  Adam,  but  it  is  the  Fault  and  Cor- 

"  ruption 


1 70       Of  Juftification  by  CHRIST. 

"  ruption  of  the  Nature  of  every  Man,  that 
<(  naturally  is  ingendred  of  the  Offspring  of 
"  Adam ;  whereby  Man  is  very  far  gone  from 
"  Original  Righteoufnefs,  and  is  of  his  own 
<c  Nature  inclined  to  Evil,  fo  that  the  Flefh 
"  lufteth  always  contrary  to  the  Spirit  j  and 
"  therefore  in  every  Perfon  born  into  this 
"  World  it  deferveth  GOD'S  Wrath  and  Damna- 
"  tion." 

I  HAVE  been  the  more  particular  in  treating 
of  this  Point,  becaufe  it  is  the  very  Foundation 
of  the  Chriftian  Religion :  For  I  am  verily 
perfuaded,  that  it  is  nothing  but  a  Want  of 
being  well  grounded  in  the  Doctrine  of  Origi- 
nal Sin,  and  of  the  helplefs*  nay  I  may  lay 
damnable,  Condition  each  of  us  comes  into 
the  World  in,  that  makes  fo  many  Infidels  op- 
pofe,  and  fo  many  that  call  themfelves  Chrtftians 
fo  very  Lukewarm  in  their  Love  and  Affections 
to  JESUS  CHRIST,  It  is  this,  and  I  could  al- 
moft  fay  this  only,  that  makes  Infidelity  abound 
amongft  us  fo  much  as  it  does :  For,  alas !  we 
are  miflaken  if  we  imagine  that  Men  now 
commence  or  continue  Infidels,  and  fet  up  cor- 
rupted Reafon  in  Oppofition  to  Revelation, 
merely  for  want  of  Evidence,  (for  I  believe  it 
might  eafily  be  proved,  that  a  modern  Un- 
believer is  the  moft  credulous  Creature  living;) 
No,  it  is  only  for  want  of  an  humble  Mind,  of 

a  Senfe 


Of  Juftification  by  CHRIST.      171 

a  Senfe  of  their  Original  Depravity,  and  an 
Unwillingnefs  to  own  themfelves  fo  depraved, 
that  makes  them  fo  obftinately  mut  their  Eyes 
againft  the  Light  of  the  Glorious  Gofpel  of 
CHRIST.  Whereas  on  the  contrary,  were  they 
but  once  pricked  to  the  Heart  with  a  due  and 
and  lively  Senfe  of  their  natural  Corruption 
and  Liablenefs  to  Condemnation,  we  fhould 
have  them  no  more  fcoffing  at  Divine  Revela- 
tion, and  looking  on  it  as  an  Idle  Tale ;  but 
they  would  cry  out  with  convicted  Paul,  — — 
Lord,  What  wouldejl  tkou  have  me  to  do  ?  or, 
with  the  trembling  Jailor,  on  a  like  Occafion, 
Men  ana7  Brethren,  What  Jhall  we  do  to  be  fayed? 
It  was  an  Error  in  this  Fundamental  Point, 
that  made  fo  many  refift  the  Evidence  the  Son  of 
GOD  himfelf  gave  of  his  Divine  Miffion,  when  he 
tabernacled  amongft  us..  Every  Word  he  fpake, 
every  Action  he  d:d,  every  Miracle  he  wrought, 
proved  that  He  came  from  GOD.  And  why 
then  did  fo  many  harden  their  Hearts,  and 
would  not  believe  his  Report?  Why  He  him- 
felf informs  us,  when  He  tells  us,  they  will 
not  come  to  me  that  they  may  have  Life :  They 
will  obftinately  ftand  out  againft  thofe  Means 
GOD  had  appointed  for  their  Salvation  :  And 
St.  Paul  tells  us,  that  if  the  Gofpel  be  hid,  it 
is  hid  to  them  that  are  hjl :  In  whom  the  God  of 
this  World  hath  blinded  the  Minds  of  them 

which 


172  Of  Juftifkation  ^CHRIST. 
which  believe  not,  left  the  Light  of  the  Glorious  \ 
Cofpel  of  CHRIS?,  who  is  the  Image  of 
GOD,  foouldjhine  upon  them. —  2  Cor.  iv.  3 . 4. 
B  u  T  to  return  from  this  Digreffion,  which 
I  could  not  very  well  avoid  making  ;  If  it  be 
afked,  How  it  fuits  with  the  Divine  Goodnefs 
to  impute  the  Guilt  of  one  Man's  Sin  to  an  in- 
nocent Pofterity  ?  I  mould  think  it  fufficient  to 
make  ufe  of  the  Apoftle's  Words :  Nay  but  O 
Man,  Who  art  thou  that  replieft  againjl  GOD? 
Shall  the  Thing  formed  fay  to  tim  that  formed  it> 
Why  haft  thou  made  me  thus  ?  But,  to  come  to 
a  more  direct  Reply, — Perfons  would  do  well 
to  confider,  that  in  this  firft  Covenant  GOD 
made  with  Man,  Adam  a<fted  as  a  Publick  Per- 
fon,  as  the  common  Reprefentative  of  all 
Mankind,  and  confequently  we  muft  (land  or 
fall  with  Him.  Had  He  continued  in  his  Obe- 
dience, and  not  eaten  the  forbidden  Fruit,  the 
Benefits  of  that  Obedience  would  doubtlefs 
have  been  imputed  to  us :  But  fince  he  did 
not  perfift  in  it,  but  broke  the  Covenant  GOD 
made  with  Him,  and  us  in  Him  ;  Who  dares 
charge  the  Righteous  Judge  of  all  the  Esurth 
with  Injuftice,  for  imputing  that  to  us  alfo; 
But  I  (hall  have  an  Occafion,  by  and  by,  to 
vindicate  the  Divine  Proceeding  in  this  Point 
more  particularly,  and  therefore  I  chufe  to 
wave  all  farther  Confideration  of  it  in  this 

Place, 


Of  Juftification  ^CHRIST.  173 
Place,  and  proceed  to  the  other  Thing  propo- 
fed  under  this  Second  general  Head  j  namely, 

II.  To  endeavour  to  prove,  That  we  all 
ftand  in  need  of  being  juftified^  not  only 
as  we  are  chargeable  with  Original^  but 
as  we  ftand  convicted  of  ABual  Sin. 

THAT  GOD,   as   he  made   Man,  has  a 
Right  alfo  to  demand  his  Obedience,  I  fuppofe> 
is   a  Truth  no  one  will  deny:    That  He  hath 
alfo  given  us  both  a  natural  and  a  written  Law, 
whereby  we  are  to  be  judged,  cannot  be  que- 
ftioned  by  any  one  who    believes   St.  Paul's 
Epiftle  to  the  Romans  to  be  of  Divine  Autho- 
rity :  For  in  this  we  are  told  of  a  Law  written 
in  the  Heart,  and  a  Law  given  by  Mofes;    and, 
that  each  of  us  hath  broken  thefe  Laws,    is 
too  evident  from  our  own   fad  and  frequent 
Experience.     Accordingly  the  Holy  Scriptures 
inform  us  that  there   is  no  Man  which  liveth 
andjinneth  net ;   that  in  many  things  we  offend 
all-,  that  if  we  fay  we  have  no  Sin  we  deceive 
ourfelves,  and  fuch  like.     And  if  we  are  thus 
found  Offenders  againft  GOD,  it  follows  that 
we  ftand  in  need  of  Forgivenefs  for  thus  of- 
fending Himj   unlefs  we  fuppofe  GOD  fhould 
enact  Laws,  and  at  the  fame  Time  not  Jcare 
whether  they  are  obeyed  or  no;   which  is  as 

abfurd 


1 74  Of  Justification  ^CHRIST. 
abfurd  as  to  fuppofe  that  a  Prince  mould  efta- 
blim  Laws  for  the  proper  Government  of  his 
Country,  and  yet  let  every  Violater  of  them 
come  off  with  Impunity.  But  GOD  has  not 
dealt  fo  foolifhly  with  his  Creatures:  No,  as 
he  gave  us  a  Law,  he  demands  our  Obedience 
to  that  Law,  and  has  obliged  us  univerfally  to 
obey  it,  under  no  lefs  a  Penalty  than  incurring 
his  Curfe  and  eternal  Death  for  every  Breach 
of  it.  For  thus  fpeaks  the  Scripture:  Curfed 
is  he  that  continueth  not  in  all  Things  that  are 
written  in  this  Book  to  do  them-,  as  the  Scripture 
alfo  fpeaketh  in  another  Place,  The  Soul  that 
fmneth,  it /hall  die.  Now  it  has  already  been 
proved  that  we  have  all  of  us  finned;  and 
therefore,  unlefs  fome  Means  can  be  found 
out  to  fatisfy  GOD'S  Juftice,  we  muft  perifh 
eternally. 

L  E  T  us  here  then  ftand  a  while,  and  fee  in 
what  a  deplorable  Condition  each  of  us  comes 
into  the  World,  and  ftill  continues,  till  we  are 
put  into  a  State  of  Grace  :  For  furely  nothing 
can  well  be  fuppofed  more  deplorable  than  to 
be  born  under  the  Curfe  of  GOD;  to  be 
charged  with  Original  Guilt  t  and  not  only 
fo,  but  to 'be  convicted  as  adtual  Breakers  of" 
GOD'S  Law,  the  leaft  Breach  of  which  juftly 
deferves  Eternal  Damnation.  Surely  this  can 
be  but  a  melancholy  Profpect  to  view  ourfelves 

in, 


Of  Juftification  ^CHRIST.  175 
in,  and  muft  put  us  upon  contriving  fome  Means 
whereby  we  may  fatisfy  and  appeafe  our  offend- 
ed Judge.  But  what  m  u  ft  thofe  Means  be?  Shall 
we  repent  ?  Alas !  there  is  not  one  Word  men- 
tioned about  Repentance  in  the  Firft  Covenant : 
*fbe  Day  that  thou  eateft  thereof,  fays  GOD, 
thou  jhalt  jurely  die.  So  that  if  GOD  be  true, 
unlefs  there  be  fome  Way  found  out  to  fatisfy 
his  Juftice  we  muft  perifh  j  and  there  is  no 
room  left  for  us  to  expect  a  Change  of  Mind  in 
GOD,  though  we  fhould  feek  it  with  Tears. 
Well  then,  if  Repentance  will  not  do,  mail  we 
plead  the  Law  of  Works  ?  Alas !  By  the  Law 
jhall  no  Man  living  be  juftified:  For  by  the  Law 
comes  the  Knowledge  of  Sin.  It  is  that  which 
convicts  and  condemns,  and  therefore  can  by  no 
means  acquit,  much  lefsjuftify  us.  Wherewith 
then  Jhall  we  come  before  the  LOR  D,  and  bow 
down  before  the Mojl  High  GOD-,  in  order  to  pro- 
cure the  Forgivenefs  of  our  Sins  ?  Shall  we  come 
before  him  with  Calves  of  a  Tear  old,  with 
thoufands  of  Rams,  or  ten  thoufands  of  Rivers  of 
Oil?  Alas !  GOD  basftewed  thee,  O  Man,  that 
this  will  not  avail.  For  he  hath  declared,  I 
will  take  no  Bullock  out  of  thy  Houfe,  nor  He- 
Goat  out  of  thy  Fold:  For  all  the  Beajls  of  tbe 
Forefl  are  mine,  and  Jo  are  the  Cattle  upon  a 
thoufand  Hills.  Will  not  the  LORD  then  be 
f leafed  to  accept  our  Firft -born  for  our  TranJ- 

gre/wn. 


176      Of  Juftification  by  C  H  R  i  s  T. 
greffion,  the  Fruit  of  our  Bodies  for  the  Sin  of* 
our  Souls?   Even  this  will  not   purchafe   ourj 
Pardon :   For  He  has  declared  that  the  Chil- 
dren flail  not  bear  the  Iniquities  of  their  Pa- 
rents.    Befides,  they  are  Sinners,   and  there- 
fore,   being   under  the  fame   Condemnation, 
equally  ftand  in  need  of  Forgivenefs  with  our- 
felves.     They  are  impure,  and  will  the  LORD 
accept  the  Blind  and  Lame  for  Sacrifice?    O 
wretched  Men  that  we  are  !  Who  Jhall  deliver  us 
from  this  Body  of  Death?  why  /  thank  GOD, 
our  Lord  JESUS  CHRIST.    Which  na- 
turally leads  me  to  the  Third  general  Thing  pro- 
pofed,  which  was  to  endeavour  to  prove, 

III.  THAT  [there  is  no  Poflibility  of  our  ob- 
taining this  Juftificationy  which  we  fo 
much  want,  but  by  the  precious  Blood  of 
our  Lord  JESUS  CHRIST:  But  ye  arejufti- 
fed  in  the  Name  of  our  Lord  JESUS 
CHRIST. 

BUT  this  having  been  in  fome  meafurc 
proved  by  what  has  been  faid  under  the  fore- 
going Head,  wherein  I  have  Ihewn  that  nei- 
ther our  Repentance,  Works,  or  Sacrifices 
could  poflibly  take  away,  or  make  Attonement 
for  our  Sins  -,  nothing  remains  for  me  to  do 

under 


Of  Juftification  ^CHRIST.  1 77 
under  this  Head,  but  to  fhew  that  the  Death 
of  JESUS  CHRIST  has  done  it  for  us. 

AND  here  I  mall  flill  have  recourfe  to  the 
Law  and  to  the  Teftimony.  For  after  all  the 
moft  fubtle  Difputations  on  ei« her  fide,  nothing 
but  the  lively  Oracles  of  GOD  can  give  us  any 
Satisfaction  in  this  momentous  Point :  It  being 
fuch  an  inconceivable  Myftery,  that  the  Eter- 
nal, only-begotten  Son  of  GOD  mould  die  for 
finful  Man,  that  we  durft  not  have  prefumed 
fo  much  as  to  have  thought  of  it,  had  not  GOD 
revealed  it  in  his  Holy  Word.  It  is  true,  Rea- 
fon  may  mew  us  the  Wound,  but  Revelation 
only  can  lead  us  to  the  Means  of  our  Cure. 
And  though  the  Method  GOD  has  been  pleafed 
to  take  to  put  us  in  a  Way  of  being  happy,  may 
be  to  the  Infidel  a  Stumbling-block,  and  to  the 
wife  Opiniator  and  Difputer  of  this  World  Fool- 
ijhnefs ;  yet  Wijdom,  that  is,  the  Difpenfation 
of  our  Redemption,  will  be  juftified  or  approv- 
ed of  and  fubmitted  to  by  all  her  truly  wife 
and  holy  Children^  by  every  fmcere  and  honeft 
Chriftian* 

BUT  to  come  more  directly  to  the  Point  be- 
fore us.  Two  Things,  as  was  before  obferved, 
we  wanted  in  order  to  make  our  Peace  with 
GOD. 

i.  To  be  freed  from  the  Guilt  of  Original 
Sin :  And, 

N  2.  FROM 


1 78      Of  Ju  ftification  by  C  H  R  i  s  T. 

2.  FROM  that  Puni foment  we  had  moft 
juftly  deferved  for  our  atfual  Breaches  of  GOD'S 
Law. 

AND  both  thefe  (thanks  be  to  GOD  for  this 
unfpeakable  Gift)  are  abundantly  fecured  to  us 
by  the  Death  and  Paffion  of  JESUS  CHRIST. 
For  what  fays  the  Scripture  ? 

i.  As  to  the  firft,  or  our  being  freed  from 
the  Guilt  of  Original  Sin, — it  informs  us,  that 
as  in  Adam  all  die,  even  fo  in  CHRIST  Jhall 
all  be  made  a/he.  And  again,  As  by  the  Dif- 
cbedience  of  one  Man,  or  by  one  Tranfgrellion, 
namely,  that  of  Adam,  many  were  made  Sin- 
ners, Jo  by  the  Obedience  of  one,  JESUS  CHRIST, 
many  were  made  Righteous.  And  again,  As  by 
the  Dijbbedience  of  one  Man,  Judgment  came 
upon  all  Men  into  Condemnation ;  that  is,  all 
Men  were  condemned,  on  having  Adam's  Sin 
imputed  to  them  :  Jo  by  the  Obedience  of  one, 
that  is,  JESUS  CHRIST,  the  Free  Gift  of  Par- 
don and  Peace  came  upon  all  Men  unto  Jujlifi- 
cation  of  Life.  Which  by  the  way  clears  up 
(as  I  promifed  to  do  before)  that  feeming  Di£ 
agreement  between  GOD'S  Attributes,  in  im- 
puting Adams  Sin  to  us,  (namely,  his  Juftice 
and  Mercy)  and  wholly  takes  off  that  Imputation 
of  Injuflice,  which  wicked  and  ungodly  Men 
would  blafphemoui1y  caft  upon  the  Righteous 
Judge  of  all  tbe  Earth.  Had  GOD  indeed  im- 
puted 


Of  Juftification  ^CHRIST.  179 
to  his  innocent  Poftefity,  and 
left  them  to  perifh  in  it :  Had  he  looked  upon 
and  puniftied  them  all  as  Sinners,  without  pro- 
viding them  a  Saviour,  we  might  perhaps  have 
had  fome  Pretence  to  complain  of  his  Severity, 
though  we  could  not  even  then  but  acknow- 
ledge his  Jufticein  the  Punimmentof  Sin.  But 
lince  He  has  not  dealt  'with  us  after  our  Deferts, 
nor  rewarded  us  according  to  our  Iniquity :  Since 
the  fame  Revelation  acquaints  us,  that  As  in 
Adam  all  die,  even  fo  in  CHRIST  jhall  all  be 
made  alive  :  Since  the  fame  GOD  that  informs 
us  that  Death  came  even  upon  thofe  <wbo  had  not 
finned  after  the  Similitude  of  Adams  Tranf- 
grej/ion,  declares  likewife,,  that  Hethat  believeth 
and  is  baptized  flail  befaved,  or  put  into  a  State 
of  Salvation :  I  fay,  fince  thefe  Things  are  fo, 
What  Reafon  have  fuch  Worms  as  we  to  quarrel 
with  the  Moft  High  GOD?  Doubtlefs  no 
more  than  a  condemned  Criminal  has  to  find 
Fault  with  his  Judge  for  condemning  him  for 
breaking  the  Law,  only  that  he  might  give 
him  the  Pleafure  of  a  Reprieve.  No ;  as  for 
GOD,  his  Ways  are  perfect,  and  his  Dealings 
with  his  Creatures  are  holy,  juft  and  good  ;  arid 
as  in  all  his  Difpenfations,  fo  more  efpecially  in 
our  Recovery  from  our  fallen  Eftate  by  the 
Death  of  JESUS,  we  may  juftly  fay,  Mercy  and 
N  2  Truth 


180      Of  Juftification  by  C  H  R  i  s  T. 
Trufbbave  met  together,  Righteoufnefs  and  Peace  , 
have  kijjed  each  other.     But, 

2.  PARDON  for  our  aftual  rfranfgrejfion  of 
GOD'S  Law  was  another  Thing  which  we  want- 
ed to  have  fecured  to  us,  before  we  could  be 
at  Peace  with  GOD.  And  this  the  Holy  Scrip- 
tures inform  us  is  abundantly  done  by  the  Death 
of  JESUS  CHRIST.  The  Evangelical  Prophet 
foretels  that  the  promifed  Redeemer  mould  be 
Bounded  for  our  Tranfgrejfions,  and  bruifed  for 
our  Iniquities  j  that  the  Chajlifement  of  our 
Peace  Jhould  be  upon  him ;  and  that  by  his  Stripes 
we  foould  be  healed,  Ifaiab  liii.  6.  The  An- 
gel at  His  Birth  fays,  that  he  {hould  fave  his 
People  from  their  Sins :  And  St.  Paul  declares, 
that  this  is  a  faithful  Saying,  and  worthy  of  all 
Acceptation,  that  JESUS  CHRIST  came  into 
the  IVorld  to  fave  Sinners  :  And  here  in  the 
Words  of  the  Text,  Such  (or,  as  I  obferved 
before,  thefe  Things)  were  feme  of  you  ;  but  ye 

are  wafted,  &c. And  St.  Peter,  alluding  to 

the  aforementioned  PaiTage  of  Ifaiah,  teftifies 
of  CHRIST,  that  His  own  Self  bare  our  Sins  in 
his  own  Body  on  the  Tree,  that  we  being  dead  to 
Sin,  foould  /he  unto  Righteoufnefs  ;  by  whofe 
Stripes,  fays  he,  ye  are  healed,  i  Pet.  ii.  24. 
And  in  another  Place  the  fame  Apoftle  fays, 
Neither  is  there  Salvation  in  any  other  j  for 
there  is  none  other  Name  tinder  Heaven  given 

among 


O/Juftification  £y  CHRIST.  181 
among  Men,  whereby  we  muji  befaved,  but  the 
Name  of  JESUS  CHRIST,  Aftsiv.  12, 

How  GOD  will  be  pleafed  to  deal  with  the 
Gentiles,  who  yet  Jit  in  Darknefs  and  in  the 
Shadow  of  Death,  and  on  whom  the  Sun  of 
Right eoufnefs  never  yet  arofe,  is  not  for  us  to 
enquire.  What  have  ive  to  do  to  judge  thofe 
that  are  without  ?  To  GOD'S  Mercy  let  us  re- 
commend them,  and  wait  for  a  Solution  of  this 
Point  till  the  Great  Day  of  Accounts,  when  all 
GOD'S  Difpenfations,  both  of  Providence  and 
Grace,  will  be  fully  cleared  up,  by  Methods  to  us, 
it  may  be,  at  prefent  unknown,  becaufe  unre- 
vealed.  However,  this  we  know  that  the  Judge 
of  all  the  Earth  will,  moft  afluredly,  do  right. 

BUT  it  is  time  for  me  to  draw  towards  a 
Conclufion. 

I  HAVE  now  then,  Brethren,  by  the  Blef- 
fing  of  GOD,  difcourfed  on  the  Words  of  the 
Text  in  the  Method  I  propofed  ;  and  have  in 
as  plain  a  manner  as  I  could,  fhewn  you  what 
is  meant  by  the  Word  Juftified,  /hat  it  fignifies 
our  having  our  Sins  forgiven :  And  have  alfo  in 
fome  meafure  proved  that  we  all  ftand  in  need 
of  being  thus  juftified,  as  we  are  chargeable  with 
Original,  and  have  been  guilty  of  Aflual  Sin  : 
And  laftly,  that  nothing  but  the  precious  Blood 
of  JESUS  CHRIST  has,  or  can  procure  this  in-* 
eftimable  Privilege  for  us. 
N  3 


lo 2      O/Juftirkation£y  CHRIST. 

MANY  ufeful  Inferences  might  be  drawn 
from  what  has  been  delivered  j  but  as  I  have 
detained  you  I  fear  too  long  already,  permit  me 
only  to  make  a  Reflection  or  two  on  what  has 
been  fa  id,  and  I  have  done. 

IF  then  we  are  freely  juftified  by  the  Death 
of  JESUS  CHRIST,  let  us  here  pauie  a  while; 
and  as  before  we  reflected  on  the  Mifery,  let 
us  now  turn  afide  and  admire  the  Happinefs  of 
Man.  Bur  alas !  how  am  I  loft  to  think  that 
GOD  the  Father,  when  we  were  in  a  State  of 
Enmity  by  original^  and  of  Rebellion  by  our 
affual  Sins,  mould  notwithftanding  yearn  in 
his  Bowels  towards  us  his  fallen,  his  apoflate, 
Creatures  :  And  becaufe  nothing  but  an  infinite 
Ranfom  could  fatisfy  an  infinitely  offended  Juf- 
tice,  mould  fend  his  only  and  dear  Son  JESU 
CHRIST  (who  is  GOD  bleffed  for  ever,  and  who 
had  lain  in  his  Bofom  from  all  Eternity)  to  die 
a  curfed,  painful,  ignominious  Death,  for  us 
and  for  our  Salvation  !  O  who  can  avoid  cry- 
ing out,  on  the  Confideration  of  this  great  My- 
ftery  of  Godlinefs,— O  the  Depth  of  the  Riches 
of  GOD's  Love  to  us  his  wretched,  miferabje, 
undone  Creatures !  How  unfearchable  is  his 
Mercy,  and  his  Loving  Kindnefs  paft  finding 
out !  Now  know  we  of  a  Truth,  O  GOD,  that 
thou  haft  loved  us,  fmce  tlou  haft  not  <witb-held 
tbySon,  thy  only  Son  JESUS  CHRIST,  from  thus 
dying  for  us.  BUT 


Of  Justification  by  C  n  R  i  s  T.        183 

BUT  as  we  admire  the  FATHER  fending,  let 
us  likewife  humbly  and  thankfully  adore  the 
SON  coming,  when  fent  to  die  for  Man.  But 
alas !  what  Thoughts  can  conceive,  whatWords 
exprefs  the  infinite  Greatnefs  of  that  unparalleled 
Love,  which  drew  the  Son  of  GOD  down  from 
the  Manfions  of  his  Father's  Glory  to  die  for 
fmful  Man  !  The  Jews,  when  he  only  fhed 
a  Tear  at  poor  Lazarus's  Funeral  faid,  Behold 
how  he  loved  him :  How  much  more  juftly  then 
may  we  cry  out,  Behold  how  he  lowed  us,  when 
he  did  not  fpare  to  fhed  not  only  a  Tear,  but 
his  own  precious  Blood  for  us ! 

AND  can  any  poor  returning  Sinner,  after 
this,  defpair  of  Mercy  ?  What,  can  they  fee 
their  Saviour  hanging  on  a  Tree,  with  Arms 
ftretched  out  to  embrace  them,  and  yet,  upon 
their  true  Repentance,  doubt  of  finding  Ac- 
ceptance with  him  ?  No,  away  with  all  fuch 

dimonourable,  fuch  defpond  ing  Thoughts. • 

Look  on  his  Hands,  bored  with  Pins  of  Iron ; 
look  on  his  Side,  pierced  with  a  cruel  Spear  on 
purpofe  to  unloofe  the  Sluices  of  his  Blood, 
and  open  a  Fountain  for  Siny  and  for  Unclean- 

nefs; -And  then  defpair  of  Mercy  if  you 

can !  No,  do  but  leave  thofe  Sins  he  came 
to  dye  forj  Do  not  crucify  Him  afrejh,  and 
put  him  again  to  open  Shamet  by  leading  wicked, 
lukewarm,  ungodly  Lives :  In  fhort,  do  but 
N  4  labou 


184  Of  Juftification  ^CHRIST. 
labour  to  attain  that  Holinefs,  without  which  no 
Man  Jhall  fee  the  LORD  -,  and  then  though 
your  Sins  be  as  Scarlet,  yet  Jhall  they  be  as  Wool \ 
though  they  be  as  Crimfon,  yet  Jhall  they  be 
whiter  than  Snow. 

WHICH  GOD  of  his  Infinite  Mercy  grant, 


THE 


THE 

HEINOUS     SIN 

O  F 

Profane  Curfing  and  Swearing. 

A  SERMON  preached  at  the  Pa- 
rifli  Church  of  St.  Nicholas  Cole- 
Abbey. 


SERMON    VIII. 

The  Heinous   Sin  of  Profane 
Curfing  and  Swearing. 

MATTH.  v.   34. 
But  I  fay  unto   you,  Swear  not  at  all. 

AMONG  the  many  heinous  Sins  for 
which  this  Nation  is  grown  infamous, 
perhaps  there  is  no  one  more  crying, 
but  withal  more  common,  than  the  abomina- 
ble Cuftom  of  profane  Swearing  and  Curjing- 
Our  Streets  abound  with  Perfons  of  all  Degrees 
and  Qualities,  who  are  continually  provoking 
the  Holy  One  of  Ifrael  to  Anger  by  their  de- 
teftable  Oaths  and  Blafphemies:  And  our  very 
Children,  out  of  whofe  Mouths^  the  Pfalmift 
obferves  in  his  Days,  'was  perfected  Praife,  are 
now  grown  remarkable  for  the  quite  oppofite 
ill  Quality  of  Curjing  and  Swearing.  This  can- 
not but  be  a  melancholy  Profpect  for  every 

iincere 


1 88  The  heinous  Sin  of  profane 
fincere  and  honeft  Minifter  of  JESUS  CHRIST, 
to  view  his  Fellow  Chriftians  in  ;  and  fuch  as 
will  put  him  on  contriving  fome  Means  to 
prevent  the  fpreading  at  leaft  of  fo  growing  an 
Evil  -,  knowing  that  the  LORD  (without  Re- 
pentance) will  afTuredly  vifit  for  thefe  Things. 
But,  alas!  what  can  he  do  ?  Publick  Animad- 
verfionsare  fo  neglected  amongft  us,  that  where 
fhall  we  find  a  common  Swearer  punimed  as 
the  Laws  direct  ?  And  as  for  private  Admoni- 
tion, Men  are  now  fo  hardened  through  the 
Deceitfulnefs  of  Sin,  that  to  give  them  fober 
and  pious  Advice,  and  to  mew  them  the  Evil 
of  their  Doings,  is  but  like  cajling  Pearls  before 
Swine,  they  only  turn  again  and  rent  you.  Since 
Matters  then  are  come  to  this  pafs,  all  that  we 
can  do  is  this,  that  as  we  are  appointed  Watch- 
men and  AmbafTadors  of  the  LORD,  it  is  our 
Duty  from  time  to  time  to  Jhew  the  People  their 
1'ranfgrejfion,  and  warn  them  of  their  Sin ;  fo 
that  'whether  they  'will  hear  or  'whether  they  'will 
forbear,  we  however  may  deliver  our  own  Souls. 
That  I  therefore  may  difcharge  my  Duty  in  this 
Particular,  give  me  leave,  in  the  Name  of  GOD, 
humbly  to  offer  to  your  mofl  ferious  Confide- 
racion  fome  few  Obfervations  on  the  Words  of 
the  Text,  in  order  to  {hew  the  Heinoufnefs  of 
profane  Curjing  and  Swearing. 

BUT 


CURSING  and  SWEARING.  189 
BUT  before  I  proceed  directly  to  the  Pro- 
fecution  of  this  Point,  it  will  be  proper  to  clear 
this  Precept  of  our  LORD  from  a  Mifi interpreta- 
tion that  has  been  put  on  it  by  a  Set  of  Men, 
who  heedlefly  infer  from  hence  that  our  Saviour 
prohibits  Swearing  before  a  Magiftrate  when 
required  on  a  folemn  and  proper  Occafion. 
But  that  all  Swearing  is  not  abfolutely  unlawful 
for  a  Chriftian, —  is  evident  from  the  Writings 
of  St.  Paul,  whom  we  often  find  upon  fome 
folemn  Occalions  ufing  feveral  Forms  of  Im- 
precation and  Swearing,  as,  /  call  GOD  to 
Witnefi, —  GOD  is  my  Judge,—  By  your  Re- 
joicing in  CHRIS?  JESUS,  and  fuch  like. 
And  that  our  Saviour  does  by  no  means  forbid 
Swearing  before  a  Magiftrate,  in  the  Words  now 
before  us,  is  plain,  if  we  confider  the  Scope 
and  Defign  he  had  in  view,  when  he  gave  his 
Difciples  this  Command.  Permit  me  to  ob- 
ferve  to  you  then,  that  our  Blefled  Mafter  had 
fee  himfelf,  from  the  27th  Verfe  of  this  Chap- 
ter, out  of  which  the  Text  is  taken,  to  vindi- 
cate and  clear  the  Moral  Law  from  the  cor- 
rupt Gloffes  and  Mifconftruclion  of  the  Pha- 
rifees,  who  then  fate  in  Mo/es's  Chair,  but  with- 
out were  notorioufly  faulty  in  adhering  too 
clofely  to  the  literal  Exprefiion  of  the  Law, 
without  ever  confidering  the  due  Extent  and 
fpiritual  Meaning  of  it.  Accordingly  they  ima- 
gined, 


igo          The  heinous  Sin  of  profane 
gined,  that  becaufe  GOD  had  faid,  Thou  ft  alt 
not  commit  Adultery^  that  therefore,  fuppofing 
a  Perfon  was  not  guilty  of  the  very  Ad  of  Adul- 
tery',  he  was  not  chargeable  with  the  Breach  of 
the  Seventh  Commandment.     And  likewife  in 
the  Matter  of  Swearing,  becaufe  GOD  had  for- 
bidden his  People  in  the  Books  of  Exodus  and 
Deuteronomy,  to  take  his  Name  in  vain,   or  to 
Swear  falfely  by  his  Name  j    they    therefore 
judged  it  lawful  to  fwear  by  any  Creature  in 
common   Difcouffe,   fuppofing    they  did   not 
directly  mention  the  Name  of    GOD.      Our 
BlefTed  Saviour  therefore,  in  the  Words  now 
before   us,   rectifies   this  their  Miftake   about 
Swearing  as  he  had  done  in  the  Verfes  im- 
mediately foregoing  that  concerning  Adultery^ 
and  tells  the  People,  that  whatever  Allowances 
the  Pharijees  might  give  tojwear  by  any  Crea- 
ture, yet  he  pronounced  it  abfolutely  unlawful 
for  any  of  his  Followers  to  do  fo.     Tou  fjave 
heard,  fays  he,  that  it  has  been  faid  by  them  of 
old  Time,  (namely,  by  the  Pharijees  and  Tea- 
chers of  the  JewiJJ}  Law)  Thou  fhalt  not  for- 
fwear  tbyfelf,  but  perform  unto  the  LORD  thine 
Oaths :  But  I  fay  unto  youy  (I  who  am  appointed 
by  the  FATHER  to  be  the  great  Prophet  and 
true  Law-giver  of  his  Church)  Swear  not  at 
all)  in  your  common  Converfation,  neither  by 
Heaven,  for  it  is  GOD's  Throne ;  and  therefore 

to 


CURSING  and  SWEARING.          191 

to  fwear  by  That,  is  to  fwear  by  Him  that  fits 
thereon  •,  neither  by  the  Earth,  for  it  is  bis  Foot. 
Jfool;  nor  by  Jerufalem,  for  it  is  the  City  of 
the  Great  King-,  neither  Jhalt  thou  fwear  by  thy 
Head,  becanfe  thou  canft  not  make  one  Hair 'white 
or  black  :  But  let  your  Communications  (which 
plainly  {hews  that  CHRIST  is  here  fpeaking  of 
Swearing,  not  before  a  Magiilrate,  but  in  com- 
mon Converfation)  let  your  Communications, 
fays  he,  be  Tea  yea.,  Nay  nay,  a  ftrong  Affirma- 
tion or  Negation  at  the  moft ;  for  whatever  is 
more  than  this  cometh  cf  Evil,  that  is,  cometh 
from  an  evil  Principle,  from  the  Evil  One,  the 
Devil,  the  Author  of  all  Evil. 

WHICH  by  the  way,  methinks,  fhould  be  a 
Caution  to  all  fuch  Perfons  who  though  not 
guilty  of  Swearing  in  the  grofs  Senfe  of  the 
Word,  yet  atteft  the  Truth  of  what  they  are 
fpeaking  of,  though  ever  fo  trifling,  by  faying 
Upon  my  Life,  As  I  live,  By  my  Faith,  By  the 
Heavens,  and  fuch  like  :  which  Exprefiions, 
however  harmlefs  and  innocent  they  may  be 
efteemed  by  fome  forts  of  People,  yet  are  the 
very  Oaths  which  our  Bleffed  LORD  condemns 
in  the  Words  immediately  following  the  Text; 
and  Perfons  who  ufe  fuch  unwarrantable  Forms 
of  fpeaking,  muft  expedt  to  be  convidted  and 
condemned  as  Swearers  at  our  Saviour's  fecond 
Coming  to  judge  the  World. 

BUT 


192          The  heinous  Sin  of  profane 

BUT  to  return :  It  appears  then  from  the 
whole  Tenour  of  our  Saviour's  Difcourfe,  that 
in  the  Words  of  the  Text  he  does  by  no  means 
difannul  or  forbid  Swearing  before  a  Magiftrate 
(which,  as  might  be  eafily  {hewn,  is  both  law- 
ful and  neceflary)  but  only  profane  Swearing 
in  common  Converfation  -,  the  Heinoufnefs  and 
Sinfulnefs  of  which  I  come  now,  as  was  above 
propofed,  more  immediately  to  lay  before  you. 
AND  here,  not  to  mention  that  it  is  a  direct 
Breach  of  our  BlefTed  Matter's  and  great  Law- 
giver's Command  in  the  Words  of  the  Text,  as 
likewife  of  the  third  Commandment,  wherein 
GOD  pofitively  declares,  he  •will  not  hold  him 
guiltlejs  (that  is,  will  afluredly  punifli  him)  that 
taketh  his  Name  in  vain  :  Not  to  mention  that 
it  is  the  greateft  Abufeof  that  noble  Faculty  of 
Speech,  whereby  we  are  diftinguimed  from  the 
Brute  Creation  j  and  the  great  Hazard  the  com- 
mon Swearer  runs  of  being  perjured  fome  time 
or  other :  Not  to  mention  thefe  Reafons  againft 
it  I  fay,  which  of  themfelves  would  abundantly 
prove  the  Folly  and  Sinfulnefs  of  Swearing: — 
I  {hall  at  this  time  content  myfelf  with  inftanc- 
ing  in  four  Particulars,  which  highly  aggravate 
the  Crime  ofprofane  Swearing ;  and  thofe  are 
fuch  as  follow. 


CURSING  and  SWEARING.  193 

Firft,  BECAUSE  there  is  no  Temptation  in 
Nature  to  this  Sin,  nor  does  the  Commif- 
fion  of  ic  afford  the  Offender  the  leaft 
Pleafure  or  Satisfaction. 

Secondly,  BECAUSE  it  is  a  Sin  which  may  be 
fo  often  repeated. 

tfkrdly,  BECAUSE  it  hardens  Infidels  againfl 
the  Chriftian  Religion,  and  muft  give  great 
Offence,  and  occafion  much  Sorrow  and 
Concern  to  every  true  Difciple  of  JESUS 
CHRIST. 

Fourthly ',  BECAUSE  it  is  an  Extremity  of 
Sin  which  can  only  be  matched  in  Hell. 

THE  Firfl  Reafon  then  why  Swearing  in 
common  Converfation  is  fo  heinous  in  GOD'S 
Sight^  and  -why  we  fhould  not  fwear  at  all,  is 
becaufe  it  has  no  Temptation  in  Nature?  nor 
does  the  Commiffion  of  it,  unlefs  a  Man  be  a 
Devil  Incarnate,  afford  the  Offender  the  leaft 
Pleafure  or  Satisfaction. 

Now  here,  I  prefume,  we  may  lay  it  down 
as  a  Maxim  univerfally  agreed  on,  that  the 
Guilt  of  any  Crime  is  increafed  or  leffened  in 
proportion  to  the  Weaknefs  or  Strength  of  the 
Temptation  by  which  a  Perfon  is  carried  out 
to  the  Commiffion  of  it.  It  was  this  Confide- 
ration  that  extenuated  and  diminifhed  the  Guilt 
O 

of 


194  ^be  heinous  Sin  of  profane 
of  Saul's  taking  upon  him  to  offer  Sacrifice 
before  the  Prophet  Samuel  came,  and  of  Uzza's 
touching  the  Ark,  becaufe  it  was  in  danger  of 
falling  :  As  on  the  contrary  what  fo  highly 
aggravated  the  Difobedience  of  our  firft  Parents 
and  Lot's  Wife  was,  becaufe  the  former  had 
fo  little  Reafon  to  eat  the  forbidden  Fruit,  and 
the  latter  fo  fmall  a  Temptation  to  look  back 
on  Sodom. 

AND  now  if  this  be  granted,  furely  the  com- 
mon Swearer  muft  of  all  Sinners  be  the  moft 
without  Excufe,  fince  there  is  no  manner  of 
Temptation  in  Nature  to  the  Commiffion  of 
his  Crime.  In  moft  of  the  other  Commands, 
Perfons  perhaps  may  plead  the  Force  of  Natural 
Inclination  in  Excufe  for  their  Breach  of  them : 
One,  for  Inftance,  may  alledge  his  ftrong  Pro- 
penfity  to  Anger,  to  excufe  his  breaking  of  the 
Sixth:  Another,  his  Pronenefs  to  Luft,  for  his 
Violation  of  the  Seventh.  But  now  furely  the 
common  Swearer  has  nothing  of  this  kind  to 
urge  in  his  Behalf:  For  though  he  may  have 
a  natural  Inclination  to  this  or  that  Crime,  yet 
no  Man,  it  is  to  be  prefumed,  can  fay,  he  is 
born  of  a  fwcaring  Conftitution. 

BUT  farther,  as  there  is  no  Temptation  to 
it,  fo  there  is  no  Pleafurc  or  Profit  to  be  reaped 
from  the  Commiffion  of  it.  Afk  the  Drunkard 
why  he  rifes  up  early  to  follow  ftrong  Drink, 

arid 


CURJSING  and  SWEARING.  195 

and  he  will  tell  you,  becaufe  it  affords  his  fen- 
fual  Appetite  fome  kind  of  Pleafure  and  Grati- 
fication, though  it  be  no  higher  an  one  than 
that  of  a  Brute.  Enquire  of  the  covetous 
Worldling,  why  he  defrauds  and  over-reaches 
his  Neighbour,  and  he  has  an  Anfvver  ready, — 
To  enrich  himfelf,  and  to  lay  up  Goods  for 
many  Years.  But  it  muft  certainly  puzzle  the 
profane  Shearer  himfelf,  to  inform  you  what 
Pleafure  he  reaps  from  Swearing  :  For  alas  ! 
it  is  a  fruitlefs,  tadelefs  Thing,  that  he-  fells  his 
Soul  for,  But  indeed  he  does  not  ieil  it  at  all : 
In  this  Cafe  he  prodigally  gives  it  away  (without 
Repentance)  to  the  Devil  ;  and  parts  with  a 
bleffed  Eternity,  and  runs  into  everlailing  Tor- 
ment, merely  for  nothing  ! 

BUT  Secondly,  what  increafes  the  Heinouf- 
nefs  of  profane  Swearing,  is,  that  it  is  a  Sin, 
which  may  fo  often  be  repeated. 

THIS  is  another  Confederation  which  always 
fcrves  to  leflen  cr  increafe  the  Guilt  and  Ma<- 
dignity  of  any  Sin.  It  was  forne  Excufe  for  the 
Drunkennefs  of  Noah*  and  the  Adultery  of  Da- 
vid, that  they  committed  thefe  Crimes  but  once : 
As  on  the  contrary  of  the  Patriarch  Abraham's 
Diftruft  of  GOD,  that  he  repeated  the  diffem- 
bling  of  Sarah  to  be  his  Wife  two  feveral  times. 
And  if  this  be  admitted  as  an  Aggravation  of 
O  2  other 


196  *fhe  heinous  Sin  of  profane 

other  Perfons  Crimes,  furely  much  more  fo  of 
the  Guilt  of  common  Swearing,  becaufe  it  is  a 
Sin  which  may  be  and  is  for  the  generality  often 
repeated.     In  many  other  grofs  Sins  it  cannot 
be  fo :   If  a  Man  be  overcome  in  Drink,  there 
muft  be  a  confiderableTime  ere  he  can  recover 
his  Debauch  and  return  to  his  Cups  again  :  or 
if  he  be  accuftomed  to  profane  the  Sabbath,  he 
cannot  do  it  every  Day,  but  only  one  in  feven. 
But  alas !.  the  profane  Swearer  is    ready  for 
another  Oath  almoft  before  the  Sound  of  thfe 
firft  is  out  of  our  Ears  :    Yea  fome  double  and 
treble  them  in  one  Sentence,  even  fo  as  to  con- 
found the  Senfe  of  what  they  fay,  by  an  horrid 
Din  of  Blafphemy  !     Now  if  the  great  and 
terrible  JEHOVAH  has  exprefly  declared  that 
he  will  not  hold  him  gui/t/ejs,   that  is,  will  af- 
furedly  punifli  him,  that  taketh  his  Name  but 
once  in  •vain :  What  a  vaft  Heap  of  thefe  hei- 
nous Sins  lyes  at  every  common  Swearers  Door ! 
It  would  be  apt  to  fink  him  into  an  intolerable 
Defpair,  did  he  but  fee  the  whole  Sum  of  them. 
And  Oh  !  what'a  feared  Confcience  muft  that 
Wretch  have,  that  does  not  feel  this  prodigious 
Weight! 

BUT,  thirdly,  what  makes  the  Sin  of  pro- 

fane  Swearing  appear  yet  more  exceeding  finful 

is,  that  it  hardens  Infidels  againft  the  Chriftian 

Religion*  IT 


CURSING  and  SWEARING.  197 

IT  is  the  Apoftle  St.  Peter's  Advice  to  the 
married  Perfons  of  his  Time,  that  they  mould 
walk  as  became  the  Gofpel  of  CHRIST,  that 
thofe  that  were  without  might  be  won  to  em- 
brace the  Chrijlian  Religion,  by  feeing  and  ob- 
ferving  their  pious  Converfation  coupled  toge- 
gether  with  Fear.  And  what  the  Apoftle  prefTes 
on  married  Perfons  we  find  elfewhere  enjoined 
each  particular  Member  of  the  Church.  Ac- 
cordingly we  are  commanded  by  our  BlefTed 
LORD  to  let  our  Light  fo  foine  before  Meny  that 
they  may  fee  our  good  Works,  and  glorify  cur 
Father  which  is  in  Heaven.  And  the  Apoftle 
St.  Paul  bids  us  'walk  circumfyeftly  towards  them 
that  are  without,  redeeming  the  tfime,  that  is, 
err/bracing  all  Opportunities  to  do  them  good, 
bccaufe  the  Days  are  evil.  But  alas !  in  what 
a  dire6fc  Contradiction  does  the  profane  Swearer 
live  to  this  and  fuch  Precepts, — who,  inftead  of 
gaining  Profelytes  to  CHRIST  from  the  unbe- 
lieving Part  of  the  World,  does  all  he  can  to 
oppofe  it !  For  how  can  it  be  expedted  that 
Infidels  fhould  honour  our  GOD,  when  Chri- 
Jliam  themfelves  defpife  him  j  or  that  any  fhould 
embrace  our  Religion,  when  Profeflbrs  of  it 
themfelves  make  fo  light  of  one  of  its  ftridleft 
Commands  ?  No,  to  our  Grief  and  Shame  be 
it  fpoken,  it  is  by  reafon  of  fuch  Impieties  as 
thefe  that  our  holy  Religion  (the  beft  and  pureft 
Q  3  in 


198  The  heinous  Sin  of  profane 

in  itfelf)  i$  become  a  By-word  among  the  Hea- 
then ;  that  the  ftcred  Authority  of  the  holy 
JESUS  and  his  Doctrine  is  defpifed ;  and  GOD's 
Name,  as  it  is  written,  blafphemed  among  the 
Gentiles* 

THESE  cannot  but  be  fad  Blocks  and  Offences 
in  the  way  of  our  Brethren's  Converfion :  But 
ivoe  be  to  thofeMen  by  whom  fuch  Offences  come: 
We  may  fay  of  them,  as  our  bleffed  LORD  did 
of  Judas,  It  had  been  better  forfuch  Men  that 
they  had  never  been  lorn  :  Or,  as  he  threatens 
in  another  Place,  //  flail  be  more  tolerable  for 
Sodom  and  Gomorrah  in  the  Day  of  Judgment 
tl:an  for  fuch  Sinners. 

BUT  this  is  not  all  ;    as  prophane  Swearing 
muft  undoubtedly  harden  thofe   in  their  Infi- 
delity that  are  without,  fo  muft  it  no  lefs  grieve 
and  give  great  Offence  to  thofe  honefl  and  fin- 
cere  Perfons  that  are  within  the  Church.     We 
hear  of  David  s  complaining  and  crying  our, 
Woe  is  me  that  I  am  conjlrained  to  dwell  with 
Mefech,  and  to  have  my  Habitation  amongft  the 
Tents  of  Kedar :  That  is,  that  he  was  obliged 
to  live  and  converfe  with  a  People  exceedingly 
wicked   and  profane.     And  St.  Peter  tells  us, 
\  that  Lot's  righteous  Soul  was  grieved  day  by  day, 
|  wbilft  he  jaw  and  obferved  the  ungodly  Converfa- 
[pVSsf  of  the  Wicked.     And  no  doubt  it  was  one 
great  Part  of  our  J?lefTed  Mailer's  Sufferings 

whilft 


CURSING  find  SWEARING.  199 
whilft  on  Earth,  that  he  was  compelled  to 
converfe  with  a  wicked  and  perverfe  Generation, 
and  to  hear  his  heavenly  Father's  facred  Name 
profaned  and  fcoffed  at  by  unrighteous  and 
wicked  Men.  And  furely  it  cannot  but  pierce 
the  Heart  of  every  true  and  fincere  Chriftiant  of 
every  one  that  does  in  any  meafure  partake  of 
the  Spirit  of  his  Mafter,  to  hear  the  Multitude 
of  Oaths  and  Curfes  which  proceed  daily  and 
hourly  out  of  the  Mouths  of  many  People,  and 
thofe  too  whofe  liberal  Education  and  feeming 
Regard  for  the  Welfare  of  Religion,  one  would 
think,  mould  teach  them  a  more  becoming 
Behaviour.  To  hear  the  great  and  terrible  Name 
of  GOD  polluted  by  Men,  which  is  adored  by 
Angels,  and  to  confider  how  often  that  facred 
Name  is  profaned  in  common  Difcourfe,  which 
we  are  not  worthy  to  mention? in  our  Prayers  ; 
This,  I  fay,  cannot  but  make  each  of  them 
cry  out  with  holy  David,  Woe  is  me  that  lam 
conjlrained  to  dwell  with  Mefech,  and  to  have 
my  Habitation  amongjl  tbc  Tents  ofKedar.  And 
though  the  Blafphemies  and  profane  Difcourfes 
of  others  will  not  be  imputed  to  fincere  Perlbns 
for  Sin,  fo  long  as  they  have  no  Felhwflrip  with 
Jach  bellifo  Fruits  of  Darknefs,  but  rather  re- 
prove  them  j  nay  rather  will  be  imputed  to  them 
for  Righteoufnels,  for  thus  lamenting  the  Wick- 
ednefs  of  Sion:  yet  it  will  greatly  enhance  the 
O  4.  prefent 


20O  The  heinous  Sin  of  profane 

prefent  Guilt,  and  fadly  increafe  the  future 
Punifhment  of  every  profane  Swearer,  by  whom 
fuch  Offences  come.  For  if,  as  our  Saviour 
tells  us,  if  had  been  better  for  a  Man  to  have  a 
Mill-Jlone  tied  about  bis  Neck,  than  that  he  Jkould 
ojj'end  one  of  his  little  Ones,  that  is,  the  weakeft 
of  his  Difciples,  bow  muchforer  Pttniftmentwill 
they  be  thought  worthy  of,  who  not  only  caufe 
GOD'S  Name  to  be  blafphemed  among  the 
GentileSy  and  the  Religion  of  our  dear  Redeemer 
to  be  abhorred ;  but  who  make  his  Saints  to 
weep  and  mourn,  and  vex  their  righteous  Souls 
from  day  to  day,  by  their  ungodly,  profane, 
and  blafphemous  Converfation  ?  Surely  as 
GOD  will  put  the  Tears  of  one  into  his  Bottle, 
and  recompenfe  them  with  eternal  Glory  at 
the  great  Day  of  Retribution,  fo  it  will  be  juft 
in  him  to  punifh  the  other  with  eternal  Sorrow 
for  all  their  ungodly  and  hard  Speeches,  and 
caft  them  into  a  Lake  of  Fire  and  Brimftone, 
where  they  (hall  be  glad  of  a  Drop  of  Water 
to  cool  thofe  Tongues  with  which  they  have  fo 
often  blafphemed  the  LORD  of  Hofts,  and  griev- 
ed the  People  of  our  GOD. 

BUT  it  is  time  for  me  to  proceed  to  give  my 
Fourth  and  laft  Reafon,  why  common  Swearing 
is  fo  exceeding  finful.  And  that  is,  becaufe 
h  is  fuch  an  Extremity  of  Sin  that  can  only  be 

matched 


CURSING  and  SWEARING.  201 

marched  in  .Hell,  where  all  are  defperate  and 
without  Hope  of  Mercy.  The  damned  Devils 
and  damned  Souls  of  Men  in  Hell  may  be  fup- 
pofed  to  rave  and  blafpheme  in  their  Torments, 
becaufe  they  know  that  the  Chains  wherein 
they  are  held  can  never  be  knocked  off:  But 
for  Men  that  fwim  in  the  River  of  GOD'S  Good- 
nefs,  ivhofe  Mercies  are  renewed  to  them  every 
Morning^  and  who  are  vifited  with  frefh  Tokens 
of  his  infinite  unmerited  Loving-kindnefs  every 
Moment :  For  thefe  favourite  Creatures  to  fet 
their  Mouths  agalnjl  Heaven,  and  to  blafpheme 
a  gracious,  patient,  all-bountiful  GOD  ;  is  a 
Height  of  Sin  which  exceeds  the  Blacknefs  and 
Impiety  of  Devils  and  Hell  itfelf. 

AND  now,  after  what  has  been  here  offered, 
to  fhew  the  Heinoufnefs  of  prof ane  Cur/ing  and 
Swearing  in  common  Converfation,  may  I  not 
very  juftly  addrefs  myfelf  to  you  in  the  Words 
of  the  Text,  Therefore  I  fay  unto  you.  Swear 
not  at  all  j  fince  it  is  a  Sin  that  has  no  Temp- 
tation in  Nature,  nor  brings  any  Pleafure  or 
Profit  to  the  Committer  of  it ;  fmce  it  hardens 
Infidels  in  their  Infidelity,  and  affords  fad  Caufes 
of  Grief  and  Lamentation  to  every  honefl  Cv&r/- 
ftian,  fince  it  is  a  Sin  that  generally  grows 
into  a  Habit  j  and  laftly,  fuch  a  Sin  that  can 
only  be  matched  in  Hell. 

i.  AND 


202  rfbe  heinous  Sin  of  profane 

i.  AND  firft  then,  if  thefe  Things  be  fo, 
and  the  Sin  of  profane  Swearing,  as  hath  been 
in  fome  meafure  {hewn,  is  fo  exceeding  finful, 
what  ftiall  we  fay  to  fuch  unhappy  Men,  who 
think  it  not  only  allowable,  but  famionable 
and  polite  to  take  the  Name  of  GOD  in  vain  -, 
who  imagine  that  Siveqring  makes  them  look 
big  amongft  their  Companions,  and  really  think 
it  a  Piece  of  Honour  to  abound  in  it  ?  But 
alas  !  little  do  they  think  that  fuch  a  Behaviour 
argues  the  greateft  Degeneracy  of  Mind  and 
Fool-hardinefs  that  can  pofiibly  be  thought  of: 
For  what  can  be  more  bafe  than  one  Hour  to 
pretend  to  adore  GOD  in  publick  Wormip,  and 
the  very  next  Moment  to  blafpheme  his  Name  ? 
Indeed  fuch  a  Behaviour  fromPerfons  whodeny 
the  Being  of  a  GOD  (if  any  fuch  Fools  there  be) 
is  not  altogether  fo  much  to  be  wondered  at : 
But  for  Men,  who  not  only  fubfcribe  to  the 
Belief  of  a  Deity,  but  likewife  acknowledge 
him  to  be  a  GOD  of  infinite  Majefty  and  Power ; 
for  fuch  Men,  I  fay,  to  blafpheme  his  holy 
Name  by  profane  Curfing  and  Swearing,  and 
at  the  fame  time  confefs  that  this  very  GOD  has 
expreily  declared  he  will  not  bold  him  guiltlefs, 
that  is,  will  certainly  and  eternally  punifh  (with- 
out Repentance)  him  that  taketh  bis  Name  in 
.  vain  j  is  fuch  an  Infknce  of  Fool-hardinefs  as 
well  as  Bafenefs,  that  can  fcarcely  be  parallel'd. 

This 


CURSING  and  SWEDRING.  203 
This  is  what  they  prefume  not  to  do  in  other  ^ 
Cafes  of  lefs  Danger  :  They  dare  not  revile  aj 
General  at  the  Head  of  his  Army,  norToule  a' 
ileepmg  Lion  when  within  reach  of  his  Paw. 
And  is  the  almightyGoD,  the  ^ JEHOVAH, 
the  everlafting  King,  who  can  confume  them 
by  the  Breath  of  his  Noftrils,  and  frown 
them  to  Hell  in  an  In  ft  ant  j  is  he,  I  fay,  the 
only  contemptible  Being  in  their  Account  that 
may  be  provoked  without  Fear,  and  offended 
without  Punifhment?  No,  though  GOD  bear 
long,  he  will  not  bear  always :  Time  will  come, 
and  that  too  perhaps  much  fooner  than  fuch 
Perfons  may  expect,  when  GOD  will  vindicate 
his  injured  Honour,  when  he  will  lay  bare  his 
almighty  Arm,  and  make  thofe  Wretches  feel 
the  eternal  Smart  of  his  Juftice,  whofe  Power 
and  Name  they  have  fo  often  vilified  and  blaf- 
phemed.  Alas!  what  will  become  of  all  their 
Bravery  then  ?  Will  they  then  wantonly  fport 
with  the  Name  of  their  Maker,  and  call  upon 
the  King  of  all  the  Earth  to  damn  them  any 
more  m  Jeft  ?  No,  their  Note  will  then  be  i 
changed  TTndeed  they  (hail  call,  bur,  alas  !  it 
will  be  for  the  Rocks  to  fall  on  them,  and  the 
Hills  to  cover  them  from  the  Wrath  of  him  that 
fitteth  upon  the  T. J krone,  and  from  the  Lamb  for 
ever.  It  is  true,  Time  was  when  they  prayed,  • 
though  without  Thought  perhaps,  for  Damna- 
tion 


204  The  heinous  Sin  of  profane 
tion  both  for  themfelves  and  others:  And  now 
they  will  find  their  Prayers  anfwered,— .  They 
delighted  in  Curfing^  therefore  jhall  it  happen 
unto  them  -,  they  loved  not  Bleffing,  therefore-ftall 
it  be  far  from  them  ,  they  cloathed  themfelves 
with  Cur/ing  like  as  with  a  Garment^  and  it 
flail  come  into  their  Bowels  like  Water t  and  like 
Oil  into  their  Bones. 

-L.  BUT  farther,  if  the  Sin  of  Swearing  is  fo 
exceeding  heinous,  and  withal  fo  common,  then 
it  is  every  particular  Perfon's  Duty,  efpecially 
thofe  that  are  in  Authority,  to  do  their  utmoft 
towards  difcountenancing  and  fuppreffing  fo 
malignant  a  Crime.  The  Duty  we  owe  both 
to  GOD  and  our  Neighbour  requires  this  at  our 
Hands :  By  the  one  we  are  obliged  to  aflert  our 
Maker's  Honour ;  by  the  other  to  prevent  our 
Neighbour's  Ruin  :  Not  to  mention  that  it  is 
the  greateft  Proof  we  can  give  of  our  undifTem- 
bled  Love  to  our  Mailer,  and  is  but  doing  as  we 
would  be  done  byt  and  as  we  ourfelves  act  in  Cafes 
of  lefler  Confequence.  Were  we  to  hear  either 
our  own  or  our  Friend's  good  Name  vilified 
and  traduced,  we  think  it  our  bounden  Duty  to 
vindicate  the  wronged  Reputation  of  each  : 
And  fhall  the  great  terrible  aad  holy  Name  of 
our  beft  and  only  Friend,  our  King,  our  Fa- 
ther, nay  our  GOD  j  {hall  this,  I  fay,  be  daily* 
nay  every  Moment  defied  and  blasphemed ;  and 

will 


CURSING  and  SWEARING.          205 

•will  no  one  dare  to  ftand  up  in  Defence  of  his 
Honour  and  Holinefs  ?     Be  ajlonijhed,  O  Hea- 
vens, at  this  !     No,  let  us  fcorn  all  fuch  bate 
and  treacherous  Treatment :    Let  us,  for  once 
at  leaft,  refolve  to  fupport  the  Caufe  of  Religion, 
and  with  a  becoming  prudent  Courage  mani- 
feft  our  Zeal  for  the  Honour  of  the  LORD  of 
Hofts.     Men   in  Authority  have  double  the 
Advantages  of  ordinary  Chriftians :  Their  very 
Office  fhews  they  are  intended  for  the  PunLm- 
ment  of  Evil-Doers :   And  fuch  is  the  Dege- 
neracy of  Mankind,  that  the  generality  of  them 
will  be  more  influenced  by  the  Power  of  Per- 
fons  in  Authority,  than  by  the  moft  laboured 
Exhortations  from  the  Pulpit.     To  fuch  there- 
fore, if  there  are  any  here  prefent,   I  humbly 
addrefs  myfeif,  befeeching  them  in  the  Name 
of  our  Lord  JESUS  CHRIST,  to  do  their  utmoft 
to  put  a  Stop  to  and  reftrain  profane  Curfin^ 
and  Swearing.      And  though  it  muft  be  con- 
feffed   that  this  is  a  Work  which  requires  a 
great  deal  of  Courage  and  Pains,    yet  they 
tvould  do  well  to  confider  it  is  for  GOD  they 
undertake  it,  .who  certainly  will  fupport  and 
bear  them  up  in  a  due  Execution  of  their  Office 
here,  and  reward  them  with  an  exceeding  and 
eternal  Weight  of  Glory  hereafter.     Buc  ic  is 
time  to  draw  towards  a  Conclufion, 

4.  LET 


206       The  heinous  Sin  of  profane,  &c. 

4.  LET  me  therefore  once  more  addrefsf 
myfelf  to  every  Perfon  here  prefent,  in  the 
Name  of  our  Lord  JESUS  CHRIST  j  and  if  any 
amongft  them  have  been  anyway  guilty. of 
this  notorious  Sin  of  Swearing,  let  me  intreat 
them  by  all  that  is  near  and  dear  to  them,  that 
they  would  neither  give  the  Magiftrate  the 
Trouble  to  punifh,  nor  their  Friends  any  reafon 
for  the  future  to  warn  them  againft  committing 
the  Crime  j  but  keep  a  conftant  and  careful 
Watch  over  the  Door  of  their  Lips,  and  withal 
implore  the  Divine  Affiftance  (without  which 
all  is  nothing)  that  they  offend  no  more  fo 
fcandaloufly  with  their  ^Tongues.  Let  them 
ferioufly  lay  to  Heart  what  with  great  Plainnefs 
and  Simplicity  has  here  been  delivered:  And 
if  they  have  any  Regard  for  themfelves  as  Men, 
or  their  Reputation  as  Chriftiam-,  if  they  would 
not  be  a  publick  Scandal  to  their  Profeffion,  or 
a  Grief  to  all  that  know  or  converfe  with  them : 
In  fhort,  if  they  would  not  be  Devils  Incarnate 
here,  and  provoke  GOD  to  punim  them  eter- 
nally hereafter,  I  fay  unto  them  in  the* 
Name  of  our  Lord  JESUS  CHRIST,  Swear  not 
at  all. 


THE 

GREAT    DUTY 

O  F 

VAMILY  RELIGION. 

A  SERMON  preach'd  at  the  Parifli 
Church  of  St.  Vedaft,  Fofter-Lane. 


(207) 


SERMON   IX. 

The  great  Duty  of  FAMILY 
RELIGION. 


JOSHUA,  xxiv.   15. 

As  for  me  and  my  Hottfe,    ive    will 
ferve  the  Lord. 

THESE  Words  contain  the  holy  Re- 
folution  of  pious  Jojhua^  who  having 
in  a  moft  moving,   affectionate  Dif- 
courfe  recounted  to  the  IJraeltfes  what  great 
Things  GOD  had  done  for  them,  in  the  Verfe 
immediately  going  before  the  Text,  comes  to 
draw  a  proper  Inference  from  what  he  had 
been  delivering  ;  and  acquaints  them,    in  the 
moft  prefling  Terms,  that  fince  GOD  had  been 
fo  exceeding  gracious  unto  them,   they  could 
do  no  lefs  than,  out  of  Gratitude  for  fuch  un- 
common Favours  and  Mercies,  dedicate  both 
themfelves  and  Families  to  hisKService.     Now 
P  therefore, 


208  The  great  Duty  of 

therefore,  fays  he,  Verfe  14.  fear  the  LORD, 
and  ferve  him  in  Sincerity  and  'Truth,  and  put 
away  the  Gods  which  your  Fathers  ferved  on  the 
other  Side  of  the  Flood.  And  by  the  fame  en- 
gaging Motive  does  the  Prophet  Samuel  after- 
wards enforce  their  Obedience  to  the  Com- 
mandments of  GOD,  i  Sam.  xii.  24.  Only 
fear  ihe  LORD,  and  ferine  him  in  Truth,  with 
all  your  Heart :  for  confider  (fays  he)  how  great 
Things  he  hath  done  for  you.  But  then,  that 
they  might  not  excuie  themfelves  (as  too  many 
might  be  apt  to  do)  by  his  giving  them  a  bad 
Example,  or  think  he  was  laying  heavy  Bur- 
dens upon  them,  whilft  he  himfelf  touched 
them  not  with  one  of  his  Fingers,  he  tells  them 
in  the  Verfe  out  of  which  the  Text  is  taken, 
that  whatever  Regard  they  might  pay  to  the 
Doctrine  he  had  been  preaching,  yet  he  (as  all 
Minifters  ought  to  do)  was  refolved  to  live  up 
to  and  pradlife  it  himfelf:  Chufe  you  therefore, 
fays  he,  'whom  you  will  ferve,  whether  the  Gods 
which  your  Fathers  ferved,  or  the  Gods  of  the 
Amor  it  es  in  whofe  Land  ye  dwell:  But  as  for 
me  and  my  Houfe,  we  will  ferve  the  LORD. 

A  Refolution  this  worthy  of  Jo/hua,  and  no 
lefs  becoming,  no  lefs  necelTary  for  every  true 
Son  ofjofiua,  that  is  intrufted  with  the  Care 
and  Government  of  a  Family  in  our  Day : 
And,  if  it  was  ever  feafonable  for  Minifters  to 

preach 


FAMILY-  RELIGION.  20$! 
preach  up,  or  People  to  put  in  practice  Family 
Religion,  it  was  never  more  fo  than  in  the  pre- 
fent  Age  ;  fince  it  is  greatly  to  be  feared,  thac 
out  of  thofe  many  Houfholds  that  call  them- 
felves  Chrijlians,  there  are  hut  few  that  ferve 
GOD  in  their  refpective  Families  as  they  ought. 

IT  is  true  indeed,  vifit  our  Churches,  and 
you  may  perhaps  fee  fomething  of  the  Form 
ofGodlinefs  ftill  fubfifting  amongft  us ;  but  even 
That  is  fcarcely  to  be  met  with  in  private 
Houfes.  So  that  were  the  bleiTed  Angels  to 
come,  as  in  the  patriarchal  Age,  and  obferve 
our  fpiritual  (Economy  at  Home,  would  they 
not  be  tempted  to  fay,  as  Abraham  faid  to  A- 
bimelech,  Surely  the  Fear  of  GOD  is  not  in  this 
Place?  Gen.  xx.  ii. 

How  fuch  a  general  Neglect  of  Family  Rt- 
ligion  firfl  began  to  overfpread  the  Chrijlian 
World,  is  difficult  to  determine.  As  for  the 
primitive  'Chrijlians,  I  am  pofitive  it  was  not 
fo  with  them :  No,  they  had  not  fo  learned 
CHRIST,  as  falfely  to  imagine  Religion  was  to 
be  confined  folely  to  their  Affemblies  for  pub- 
lick  Worm  ip  j  but  on  the  contrary  behaved 
with  fuch  Piety  and  exemplary  Holinefs  in 
their  private  Families,  that  Saint  Paul  often 
ftyles  their  Houfe  a  Church  :  Salute  fuch  a 
cne,  fays  lie,  and  the  Church  'which  is  in  his 
Houfe.  And,  I  believe,  we  mutt  for  ever  de- 
P  2  fpair 


2io  The  great  Duty  of 

fpair  of  feeing  a  primitive  Spirit  of  Piety  re- 
vived in  the  World,  till  we  are  fo  happy  as  to 
fee  a  Revival  of  primitive  Family  Religion  -,  and 
Perfons  unanimoufly  refolving  with  good  old 
Jojhua,  in  the  Words  of  the  Text, — As  for  me 
and  my  Houfe,  we  will  ferve  the  LORD. 

FROM  which  Words  I  {hall  beg  Leave 'to 
infift  on  thefe  three  Things. 

Fir/I,  THAT  it  is  the  Duty  of  every  Ga- 
vernour  of  a  Family  to  take  care,  that  not  only 
he  himfelf,  but  alfo  that  thofe  committed  to 
his  Charge  ferve  the  LORD. 

Secondly,  I  SHALL  endeavour  to  {hew  after 
what  manner  a  Governour  and  his  Houftiold 
ought  to  ferve  the  LORD. 

Thirdly  and  laftly,  I  SHALL  offer  fome  Mo- 
tives in  order  to  excite  all  Governors,  with  their 
fefpedtive  Houfliolds,  to  ferve  the  LORD  in* 
the  Manner  that  {hall  be  recommended. 

AND  Firft,  I  am  to  {hew  that  it  is  the  Duty 
of  every  Governour  of  a  Family  to  take  care, 
that  not  only  he  himfelf,  but  alfo  that  thofe  com. 
mitted  to  his  Charge  fliould  ferve  the  LORD. 

AND  this  will  appear,  if  we  confider  that 
every  Governour  of  a  Family  ought  to  look 
upon  himfelf  as  obliged  to  aft  in  three  Capa- 
cities :  as  a  Prophet,  to  inftruft  i  as  a  Prieft 

* 


FAMILY -RELIGION.          211 
to  pray  for  and  with ;    as  a  King,    to  govern, 
direct,  and  provide  for  them.     It  is  true  in- 
deed the   latter  of   thefe,    viz.    their    kingly 
Office,  they  are  not  fo  frequently  deficient  in, 
(nay  in  this  they  are  generally  too  follicitous  j) 
but  as  for  the  two  former,  viz.  their  prieftly 
and   prophetick  Office,    like  Gal/io,  they  care 
for  no  fuch  Things.     But  however  indifferent 
fome  Governours  may  be  about  it,    yet  they 
may  be  aflured,    that  GOD  will  require  a  due 
Difcharge  of  thefe  Offices  at  their  Hands.     For 
if,  as  the  Apoftle  argues,  He  that  does  not  pro- 
vide for  his  own  Hotife,  in  temporal  Things,  has 
denied  the  Faith ,  and  is  ivorfe  than  an  Infidel*, 
to  what  greater  Degree  of  Apoftafy  muft  he 
have  arrived,   who  takes  no  Thought  to  pro- 
vide for  the  fpiritual  Welfare  of  his  Family  ! 

BUT  farther,   Perfons  are  generally  very  li- 
beral  of  their  Invectives  againft  the  Clergy 
and  think  they  juftly  blame  the  Conduct  of  that 
Minifter  who  does  not  take  heed  to  and  watch 
over  the  Flock,  of  which  the  HOLY  GHOST 
has  made  him  Overfeer  :    But  may  net  every 
Governour  of  a  Family  be  in  a  lower  Degree 
liable  to  the  fameCenfure,  who  takes  no  thought 
for  thofe  Souls  that  are  committed  to  his  Charge  ? 
For  every  Houfe  is  as  it  were  a  little  Parifh, 
every  Governour   (as  was  before  obferved)  a 
P  3  Pried, 


212  The  great  Duty  of 

Prieft,  every  Family  a  Flock :  And  if  any  of 
them  perim  through  the  Governor's  Neglect, 
their  Blood  will  GOD  require  at  their  Hands. 

WAS  a  Minifter  to  difregard  teaching  his 
People  publickly  and  from  Houfe  to  Houfe, 
and  to  excufe  himfelf  by  faying,  that  he  had 
enough  to  do  to  work  out  his  own  Salvation 
with  Fear  and  Trembling,  without  concerning 
himfelf  with  that  of  Others  ;  would  not  any 
one  be  apt  to  think  fuch  a  Minifter  to  be  like 
the  unjuft  Judge,  One  that  neither  feared  GOD 
nor  regarded  Man  ?  And  yet,  odious  as  fuch  a 
Charader  would  be,  it  is  no  worfe  than  that 
Governour  of  a  Family  deferves,  who  thinks 
himfelf  obliged  only  to  fave  his  own  Soul,  with- 
out paying  any  Regard  to  the  Souls  of  his 
Houfhold.  For  (as  was  above  hinted)  every 
Houfe  is  as  it  were  a  Parilh,  and  every  Matter 
is  concerned  to  fecure,  as  much  as  in  him 
lyes,  the  fpiritual  Profperity  of  every  one  under 
his  Roof,  as  any  Minifter  whatever  is  obliged 
to  look  to  the  fpiritual  Welfare  of  every  indivi- 
dual Perfon  under  his  Charge. 

WHAT  Precedents  Men,  who  negledt  their 
Duty  in  this  Particular,  can  plead  for  fuch 
Omiffion,  I  cannot  tell .:  Dpubtlefs  not  the 
Example  of  holy  Job,  who  was  fo  far  from 
imagining  that  he  had  no  Concern,  as  Govern- 
pur  of  a  Family,  with  any  one's  Soul  but  his 

own, 


FAMILY- RELIGION.          213 

own,  that  the  Scripture  acquaints  us,  When 
the  Days  of  his  Children's  Feafling  were  gone 
about ^  that  Job  fent  and  fantfified  them,  and 
offered  Burnt -Offerings  according  to  the  Number 
of  them  all;  for  'Job  faid,  It  may  be  that  my 
Sons  have  famed  and  curjed  GOD  in  their 
Hearts:  Thus  did  Job  continually.  Nor  can 
they«plead  the  Practice  of  good  old  Jojhua, 
whom  in  the  Text  we  find  as  much  concerned 
for  his  Houftiold's  Welfare  as  his  own.  Nor 
laftly,  that  of  Cornelius,  who  feared  GOD,  not 
onlyhimfelf,  but  with  allhisHoufe:  And  were 
ChriJIians  but  of  the  fame  Spirit  of  Job,  Jofiua, 
and  the  Gentile  Centurion,  they  would  ad  as 
Job,  Jojhuay  and  Cornelius  did. 

BUT,  alas!  if  this  be  the  Cafe,  and  all  Go- 
vernors of  Families  ought  not  only  to  ferve 
the  LORD  themfelves,  but  likevvife  to  fee  that 
their  refpective  Houfholds  do  fo  too  ;  what 
will  then  become  of  thofe  who  not  only  neg- 
lect ferving  GOD  themfelves,  but  alfo  make  it 
their  Bufmefs  to  ridicule  and  feoff  at  any  of 
their  Houfe  that  do  ?  Who  are  not  content  with 
not  entering  into  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven  them- 
felves ;  but  thofe  alfo  that  are  'willing  to  enter  in 
they  hinder.  Surely  fuch  Men  are  Factors  for 
the  Devil  indeed.  Surely  their  Damnation 
flumbereth  not :  For  although  GOD,  in  his 
good  Providence,  may  fuffer  fuch  Stumbling- 
,  P  4  block* 


£  1 4  tfbe  great  Duty  of 

blocks  to  be  put  in  his  Children's  Ways,  and 
fuffer  their  greateft  Enemies  to  be  thafe  of  their 
own  Houfholds,  for  a  Trial  of  their  Sincerity, 
and  Improvement  of  their  Faith  ;  yet  we  can- 
not but  pronounce  a  Woe  againfl  thofe  Mailers 
by  worn  fuch  Offences  come.  For  if  thofe  that 
qnly  take  care  of  their  own  Souls  can  fcarcely 
be  faved,  where  will  fuch  monilroufly  prpfane 
and  wicked  Governours  appear  ? 

BUT  hoping  there  are  but  few  of  this  un- 
happy Stamp,  proceed  we  now  to  the 

Second  Thing  propofed,  viz-  to  ihew  after 
what  Manner  a  Governour  and  his  Houfhold 
ought  tojerve  the  LORD. 

-i.  AND  the  firft  Thing  I  {hall  mention  is 
reading  the  Word  of  GOD..  This  is  a  Duty 
incumbent  on  every  private  Perfon.  Search 
the  Scriptures,  for  in  tbcm  ye  think  ye  have 
Eternal  Life,  is  a  Precept  given  by  our  blefled 
LORD  indifferently  to  all :  But  much  more  fo 
ought  every  Governour  of  a  Family  to  think  it 
in  a  peculiar  manner  fpoken  to  himfelf,  becaufe 
(as  hath  been  already  proved)  he  ought  to  look 
upon  himfelf  as  a  Prophet,  and  therefore,  a- 
greeably  to  fuch  a  Character,  as  bound  to  in- 
ftrucl:  thofe  under  his  Charge  in  the  Knowledge 
<pf  the  Word  of  GOD. 

THIS 


FAMILY- RELIGION.         215 
THIS  we  find  was  the  Order  GOD  gave  his 
peculiar  People  of  Ifrael:  For  thus  fpeaks  his 
Reprefentative  MoJ'es,    Deuteronomy  vi.  6,   7. 
*fbt'/e  Words,    that  is,    the  Scripture  Words, 
which  I  command  thee  this  Day,  Jhall  be  in  thy 
Hearty  and  thou  foalt  teach  them  diligently  unto 
thy  Children,  that  is,  as  it  is  generally  explained 
Servants,  as  well  as  Children,   and  Jhalt  talk 
of  them  when  tbou  fitteft  in  thy  Houfe.    From 
whence  we  may  infer,    that  the  only  Reafon 
why  fo  many  neglect  to  read  the  Words  of  Scrip- 
ture diligently  to  their  Children  is,  becaufe  the 
Words  of  Scripture  are  not  in  their  Hearts  : 
For  if  they  were,  out  of  the  Abundance  of  the 
Heart  their  Mouths  would  fpeak. 

BESIDES,  Servants  as  well  as  Children  are, 
for  the  generality,  very  ignorant,  and  mere 
Novices  in  the  Laws  of  GOD:  And  how  lhali 
they  know,  unlefs  fome  one  teach  them  ?  And 
what  more  proper  to  teach  them  by,  than  the 
lively  Oracles  of  GOD,  which  are  able  to  make, 
them  wife  unto  Salvation  ?  And  who  more 
proper  to  inftruct  them  by  thefe  lively  Oracles, 
than  Parents  and  Mafters,  who  (as  hath  been, 
more  than  once  obferved)  are  as  much  concerned 
to  feed  them  withfpiritual  as  with  bodily  Bread, 
Day  by  Day. 

BUT  if  thefe  Things  be  fo,  what  a  miferable 
Condition  are  thofe  unhappy  Governours  in, 

who 


216  The  grsat  "Duty  of 

who  are  fo  far  from  feeding  thofe  committed 
to  their  Care  with  the  fincere  Milk  of  the  Word, 
to  the  intent  they  may  grow  thereby,  that  they 
neither  fearch  the  Scriptures  themfelves,  nor 
are  careful  to  explain  them  to  others  ?  Such 
Families  muft  be  in  a  happy  Way  indeed  to  do 
their  Matter's  Will,  who  take  fuch  prodigious 
Pains  to  know  it !  Would  one  not  imagine 
that  they  had  turned  Converts  to  the  Church  of 
Rome ;  that  they  thought  Ignorance  the  Mother 
of  Devotion ;  that  thofe  were  to  be  condemned 
as  Hereticks  who  read  their  Bibles  ?  And  yet 
how  few  Families  are  there  amongft  us,  who 
do  not  act  after  this  unfeemly  Manner !  But, 
flail  I  praife  them  in  this?  I praife  them  not: 
Brethren,  this  Thing  ought  not  jo  to  be. 

2.  PASS  we  on  now  to  the  fecond  Means 
whereby  every  Governour  and  his  Houfhold 
ought  to  ferve  the  LORD,  viz.  Family  Prayer. 

THIS  is  a  Duty  though  as  much  neglected, 
yet  as  abfolutely  necel&ry  as  the  former.  Read- 
ing is  a  good  Preparative  for  Prayer^  as  Prayer 
is  an  excellent  Means  to  render  Reading  effec- 
tual. And  the  Reafon  why  every  Governour 
of  a  Family  mould  join  both  thefe  Exercifes 
together  is  plain,  becaufe  a  Governour  of  a 
Family  cannot  perform  \us>Prieftly  Office  (which 
we  before  obferved  he  is  in  fome  Degree  in- 
verted with)  without  performing  this  Duty  of 
Family  Prayer.  WE 


FAMILY-RELIGION.  217 
WE  find  ic  therefore  remarked,  when  men- 
tion is  made  of  Cain  and  Abel's  offering  Sacri- 
fices, that  they  brought  them.  But  to  whom 
did  they  bring  them?  Why,  in  all  probability 
to  their  Father  Adam,  who,  as  Prieft  of  the 
Family,  was  to  offer  Sacrifice  in  their  Names. 
And  fo  likewife  ought  every  fpiritual  Son  of 
the  fecond  Adam,  who  is  intrufted  with  the 
Care  of  an  Houfhold,  to  offer  up  the  fpiritual 
Sacrifices  of  Sppplications  and  Thankfgivingg, 
acceptable  to  GOD  through  JESUS  CHRIST,  in 
the  Prefence  and  Name  of  all  who  wait  upon 
or  eat  Meat  at  his  Table. 

THUS  we  read  our  bleffed  LORD  behaved, 
when  he  tabernacled  amongft  us :  For  it  'is  faid 
often,  that  be  was  alone  praying  with  his  twelve 
Difciples,  which  was  then  his  little  Family. 
And  he  himfelf  has  promifed  a  particular  Blef- 
fing  to  joint  Supplications :  For  ivberefoever, 
fays  he,  two  or  three  are  gathered  together  in 
my  Name,  there  am  I  in  the  midft  of  them.  And 
again,  If  two  or  three  are  agreed  touching  any 
'Thing  they  foall  ask,  it  foall  be  given  them. 
Add  to  this,  that  we  are  commanded  by  the 
Apoftle  to  pray  always,  with  all  manner  of 
Supplication,  which  doubtlefs  includes  Family 
Prayer.  And  holy  Jo/hua,  when  he  fet  up 
the  good  Refolution  in  the  Text,  that  he  and 
his  Houfhold  would  feme  the  LORD,  certainly 

refolvcc) 


2 1 8  tfbe  great  Duty  of 

refolved  withal  to  pray  with  his  Family,  which 
is  one  of  the  beft  Teftimonies  they  could  give 
of  their  ferving  him. 

BESIDES,  there  are  no  Families  but  what 
have  fome  common  Bleffings,  of  which  they 
have  been  all  Partakers,  to  give  Thanks  for  ; 
fome  common  Croffes  and  Afflictions,  which 
they  are  to  pray  againft ;  fome  common  Sins, 
which  they  are  all  bound  to  lament  and  bewail : 
But  how  this  can  be  done  without  joining  to- 
gether in  one  common  Adi:  of  Humiliation,  Sup- 
plication, andThankfgiving,  is  difficult  todevife. 

FROM  all  which  Confiderations  put  together, 
it  is  evident,  that  Family  Prayer  is  a  great  and 
neceffary  Duty  ;  and  confequently  thofe  Go- 
vernours  that  neglect  it  are  certainly  without 
Excufe.  And  it  is  much  to  be  feared,  if  they 
live  without  Family  Prayer,  they  live  without 
GOD  in  the  World. 

AND  yet  fuch  an  hateful  Character  as  this 
is,  it  is  to  be  feared,  that,  was  GOD  to  fend  out 
an  Angel  to  deftroy  us,  as  he  did  once  to  de- 
ftroy  \heEgyptians  Firft-born,  and  withal  give 
him  a  Commiffion,  as  theny  to  fpare  no  Houfes 
but  where  they  faw  the  Blood  of  the  Lintel 
fprinkled  on  the  Door- port,  fo  now  to  let  no 
Families  efcape  but  thofe  that  called  upon  him 
in  Morning  and  Evening  Prayer ;  few  would 
remain  unhurt  by  his  avenging  Sword.  Chri- 

flians. 
i 


FAMIL  y  »•  R  EL  IG  i  ON.  219 
Jftans  mall  I  term  fuch  Families,  or  Heathens  ? 
Doubdefs  they  deferve  not  the  Name  of  Chri- 
Jlians  ;  and  Heathens  will  furcly  rife  up  in 
Judgment  againft  fuch  profane  Families  of  this 
Generation  :  For  they  had  always  their  Houf- 
hold  Gods,  whom  they  worfhipped,  and  whole 
Affiftance  they  frequently  invoked.  And  a 
pretty  pafs  thofe  Families  furely  are  arrived  at 
who  muft  be  fent  to  School  to  Paga?js.  But 
will  not  the  LORD  be  avenged  on  fuch  profane 
Houmolds  as  thefe  ?  Will  he  not  pour  out  his 
Fury  upon  thofe  that  call  not  upon  his  Name? 

3.  BUT  it  is  time  for  me  to  haften  to  the 
third  and  laft  Means  I  mail  recommend,  where- 
by every  Governour  ought  with  his  Houfhold 
to  ferve  the  LORD,  viz.  by  catechizing  and 
inftriitfing  their  Children  and  Servants,  and 
bringing  them  up  in  the  Nurture  and  Admo- 
nition of  the  LORD. 

THAT  this,  as  well  as  the  two  former,  is  a 
Duty  incumbent  on  every  Governour  of  an 
Houfe,  appears  from  that  famous  Encomium  or 
Commendation  GOD  gives  of  Abraham.  I 
know,  fays  the  moft  High,  that  he  will  com- 
mand his  Children  and  his  HouJJ:old  after  him 
to  keep  the  Way  of  the  LORD,  to  do  Jujlice 
and  Judgment.  And  indeed  fcarce  any  thing 
is  more  frequently  prefled  upon  us  in  holy 
Writ  than  this  Duty  of  Catechizing.  Thus 

fays 


220  1 Jhe  great  Duty  of 

fays  GOD  in  a  Paflage  before  cited,  ^Tbou  fialt 
teach  theje  Words  diligently  unto  thy  Children. 
And  Parents  are  commanded  in  the  New  Tef- 
tament,  to  breed  up  tbeir  Children  in  the  Nur- 
ture and  Admonition  of  the  LORD.  The  holy 
Pfalmift  acquaints  us,  that  one  great  End  why 
GOD  did  fo  great  Wonders  for  his  People  was, 
to  the  Intent  that  when  they  grew  up  they  fiould 
flew  their  Children,  or  Servants,  the  fame.  And 
~  in  Deuteronomy^  Chap.  vi.  at  the  2Oh  and  fol- 
lowing Verfes,  GOD  flriclly  commands  his 
People  to  inftruct  their  Children  in  the  true 
Nature  of  the  ceremonial  Wormip,  when  they 
ihould  enquire  about  it,  as  he  fuppofed  they 
would  do  in  time  to  come.  And  if  Servants 
and  Children  were  to  be  inflrudted  in  the 
Nature  of  Jewifo  Rites,  much  more  ought 
they  now  to  be  initiated  and  grounded  in  the 
Doctrines  and  nrft  Principles  of  the  Gofpel  of 
CHRIST:  Not  only  becaufe  it  is  a  Revelation, 
which  has  brought  Life  and  Immortality  to  a 
fuller  and  clearer  Light,  but  alfo  becaufe  many 
Seducers  are  gone  abroad  into  the  World,  who 
do  their  utmoft  Endeavour  to  deftroy  not  only 
the  Superftructure,  but  likewife  to  fap  the  very 
Foundation  of  our  moft  holy  Religion. 

WOULD  then  the  prefent  Generation  have 
their  Pofterity  be  true  Lovers  and  Honourers 
of  GOD,  Mailers  and  Parents  mud  take  Solo- 


FAMILY- RELIGIO  N.         221 

/wow's  good  Advice,  and  train  up  and  catechize 
their  refpective  Houfholds  in  the  Way  wherein 
they  mould  go. 

I  AM  aware  but  of  one  Objection  that  can, 
with  any  Shew  of  Reafon,  be  urged  againft 
what  has  been  advanced  ;  which  is,  that  fuch 
a  Procedure  as  this  will  take  up  too  much  Time, 
and  hinder  Families  too  long  from  their  worldly 
Bufinefs.  But  it  is  much  to  be  questioned  whe- 
ther Perfons  that  ftart  fuch  an  Objection  are 
not  of  the  fame  hypocritical  Spirit  as  theTraytor 
Judas,  who  had  Indignation  againft  devout 
Mary,  for  being  fo  profufe  of  her  Ointment, 
in  anointing  our  bleffed  LORD,  and  afked  why 
it  might  not  be  fold  for  two  hundred  Pence,  and 
given  to  the  Poor.  For  has  GOD  given  us  fo 
much  Time  to  work  for  ourfelves,  and  mall 
we  not  allow  fome  fmall  Pittance  of  it,  Morn- 
ing and  Evening,  to  be  devoted  to  his  more 
immediate  Worfhip  and  Service  ?  Have  not 
People  read,  that  it  is  GOD  who  gives  Men 
Power  to  ge't  Wealth,  and  therefore  that  the 
beft  Way  to  profper  in  the  World  is  to  fecure 
his  Favour?  And  has  not  our  bleffed  LORD 
himfelf  promifed,  that  if  we  feek  firft  the 
Kingdom  of  GOD  and  his  Righteoufnefs,  all 
outward  NecefTaries  mall  be  added  unto  us  ? 

ABRAHAM,  no  doubt,  was  a  Man  of  as 
'  great  Bufinefs  as  fuch  Objectors  may  be  ;  but 

yet 


222  The  great  Duty  of 

yet  he  would  find  Time  to  command  his  Houf- 
hold  to  ferve  the  LORD.  Nay,  David  was 
a  King,  and  confequently  had  a  great  deal  of 
Bu/mefs  upon  his  Hands ;  yet  notwithstanding, 
he  profeffes  that  he  would  walk  in  his  Houfe 
with  a  perfect  Heart.  And,  to  inftance  but 
one  more,  holy  Jofiua  was  a  Perfon  certainly 
engaged  very  much  in  temporal  Affairs ;  and 
yet  he  folemnly  declares  before  alllfrael,  that, 
as  for  him  and  his  Houfhold,  they  would  ferve 
the  LORD.  And  did  Perfons  but  redeem  their 
Time,  as  Abraham,  David,  or  yofoua  did, 
they  would  no  longer  complain  that  Family 
Duties  kept  them  too  long  from  the  Bufmefs 
of  the  World. 

BUT  my  Third  and  laft  general  Head,  under 
which  I  was  to  offer  fome  Motives,  in  order  to 
excite  all  Governours,  with  their  refpedlive 
Houfholds,  toferve  tie  LORD  in  the  Manner 
before  recommended,  I  hope,  will  ferve  inftead 
of  a  thoufand  Arguments,  to  prove  the  Weak, 
nefs  and  Folly  of  any  fuch  Objection. 

i.  AND  the  firft  Motive  I  (hall  mention  is 
the  Duty  of  Gratitude,  you  that  are  Governors 
of  Families  owe  to  GOD. — Your  Lot,  every 
one  muft  confefs,  is  caft  into  a  fair  Ground  : 
Providence  hath  given  you  a  goodly  Heritage, 
above  many  of  your  fellow  Creatures,  and 

therefore, 


FAMILY  -  RELIGION.  223 
therefore,  out  of  a  Principle  of  Gratitude,  you 
ought  to  endeavour,  as  much  as  in  you  lyes,  to 
make  every  Perfon  of  your  refpective  Houmolds 
to  call  upon  him  as  long  as  they  live :  (Not  to 
mention  that  the  Authority,  with  which  GOD 
has  inverted  you  as  Parents  and  Governours  of 
Families,  is  a  Talent  committed  to  your  Truft, 
and  which  you  are  bound  to  improve  to  your 
Mafter's  Honour.)  In  other  Things  we  find 
Governours  and  Parents  can  exercife  Lordmip 
over  their  Children  and  Servants  readily,  and 
frequently  enough  can  fay  to  one  Go,  and  he 
goeth  j  and  to  another  Come,  and  he  cometh  5 
to  a  third,  Do  this,  and  he  doeth  it.  And  {hall 
this  Power  be  fo  often  employed  in  your  own 
Affairs,  and  never  exerted  in  the  Things  of 
GOD  ?  Be  aftonifhed,  O  Heavens,  at  this  ! 

THUS  did  not  faithful  Abraham ;  no,  GOD 
fays,  that  he  knew  Abraham  would  command 
his  Servants  and  Children  after  him.  Thus 
did  not  Joflua  :  No,  he  was  refolved  not  only 
to  walk  with  GOD  himfelf,  but  to  improve  his 
Authority  in  making  all  about  him  do  fo  too  : 
As  for  me  and  my  Houjhold,  we  'will  ferve  the 
LORD.  Let  us  go  and  do  likewife. 

2.  BUT  Secondly,  if  Gratitude  to  GOD  will 
not,  methinks  Love  and  Pity  to  your  Children 
(hould  move  you,  with  your  refpedive  Families, 
to  f(rve  the  LORD. 

MOST 


224  The  great  Duty  of 

MOST  People  exprefs  a  great  Fondnefs  for 
their  Children  :  Nay  fo  great,  that  very  often 
their  own  Lives  are  wrapped  up  in  thole  of  their 
Offspring.  Can  a  Woman  forget  her.  fucking 
Child,  that  Jhe  fiould  not  have  Compajfion  on  the 
Son  of  her  Womb  ?  fays  GOD  by  his  Prophet 
Ifaiab.  He  fpeaks  of  it  as  a  monftrous  Thing, 
and  icarce  credible.  But  the  Words  immediate- 
ly following  affirm  it  to  be  poffible,  Tea  they 
may  forget ;  and  Experience  alfo  affures  us  they 
may.  Father  and  Mother  may  both  forfake 
their  Children  :  For  what  greater  Degree  of 
Forgetfulnefs  can  they  exprefs  towards  them, 
than  to  neglect  the  Improvement  of  their  bet- 
ter Parr,  and  not  bring  them  up  in  the  Know- 
ledge and  Fear  of  GOD. 

IT  is  true  indeed  Parents  feldom  forget  to 
provide  for  their  Children's  Bodies,  (though,  it 
is  to  be  feared,  fome  Men  are  fo  far  funk  be- 
neath the  Beafts  that  perifb,  as  to  neglect  even 
that ;)  but  then  how  often  do  they  forget,  or 
rather  when  do  they  remember  to  fecure  the 
Salvation  of  their  immortal  Souls  ?  But  is  this 
their  Way  of  expreffing  their  Fondnefs  for  the 
Fruit  of  their  Bodies  ?  Is  this  the  beft  Tefti- 
mony  they  can  give  of  their  Affection  to  the 
Darling  of  their  Hearts  ?  Then  was  Dalilab 
fond  of  Sampfon,  when  {he  delivered  him  up 
into  the  Hands  of  the  Pbiliftines :  Then  were 

thofc 


FAMILY- RELIGION. 
ithofe  Ruffians  well  affected  to  Daniel,   \vhen 
they  threw  him  into  a  Den  of  Lions. 

3.  BUT  Thirdly,  if  neither  Gratitude  to  Go*, 
nor  Love  and  Pity  to  your  Children,  will  pre- 
vail on  you  ;  yet  let  a  Principle  of  common 
Honejly  and  Juftice  move  you  to  fet  up  the 
holy  Refolution  in  the  Text. 

THIS  is  a  Principle  which  all  Men  would 
be  thought  to  act  upon.  But  certainly,  if  any 
may  be  truly  cenfured  for  their  Injuftice,  none 
can  be  more  liable  to  fuch  Cenfure  thari  thofe 
who  think  themfelves  injured  if  their  Servants 
withdraw  themfelves  from  their  bodily  Work, 
and  yet  they  in  return  take  no  care  of  their 
ineftimable  Souls.  For  is  it  juft  that  Servants 
{hould  fpend  their  Time  and  Strength  in  their 
Mailer's  Service,  and  Mafters  not  at  the  fame 
time  give  them  what  is  juft  and  equal  for 
their  Service  ? 

IT  is  true,  fome  Men  may  think  they  have 
done  enough  when  they  give  unto  their  Ser- 
vants Food  and  Rayment,  and  fay,  Did  not  I 
bargain  with  thee  for  fo  much  a  Year  ?  But  if 
they  give  them  no  other  Reward  than  this,  what 
do  they  lefs  for  their  very  Beafts  ?  But  are  not 
Servants  better  than  they  ?  Doubtlefs  they  are  : 
And  however  Mafters  may  put  off  their  Con- 
victions for  the  prefent,  they  will  find  a  Time 
will  come,  when  they  {hall  know  they  ought 

tO 


226  The  great  Duty  of 

to  have  given  them  fome  fpiritual,  as  well  as 
temporal  Wages  ;  and  the  Cry  of  thofe  that 
have  mowed  down  their  Fields  will  enter  into 
the  Ears  of  the  LORD  of  Sabaoth. 

4,  BUT  Fourthly,  if  neither  Gratitude  to 
GOD,  Pity  to  Children,  nor  a  Principle  of 
common  Juftice  to  Servants,  are  fufficient  to 
ballance  all  Objections  j  yet  let  that  darling, 
that  prevailing  Motive  of  Self-IntereJl  turn  the 
Scale,  and  engage  you  with  your  refpedtive 
Houfholds  to  ferae  the  LORD. 

THIS  weighs  greatly  with  you  in  other  Mat- 
ters :  Be  then  perfuaded  to  let  it  have  a  dua 
and  full  Influence  on  you  in  this  :  And  if  it 
has,  if  you  have  butFaith  as  a  Grain  of  Muftard- 
ieed,  how  can  you  avoid  believing  that  pro- 
moting Family  Religion  would  be  the  beft 
Means  to  promote  your  own  temporal  as  well 
as  eternal  Welfare  ?  For  Godlinefs  has  the 
Promife  of  the  Life  that  now  is,  as  well  as  that 
which  is  to  come. 

BESIDES,  you  all,  doubtlefs,  wim  for  honcft 
Servants  and  pious  Children:  And  to  have  them 
prove  otherwife,  would  be  as  great  a  Grief  to 
you  as  ic  was  to  Elijah  to  have  a  treacherous 
Gehaziy  or  David  to  be  troubled  with  a  re- 
bellious Abfalom.  But  how  can  it  be  expected 
they  mould  learn  their  Duty,  except  thofe  fet 
over  them  take  care  to  teach  it  them  ?  Is  it 

not 


FAMILY -RELIGION.  227 
not  as  reafonable  to  expect  you  (hould  reap 
where  you  had  not  fovvn,  or  gather  where  you 
had  not  ftrawed  ? 

DID  Chriftianuy,    indeed,    give  any  Coun- 
tenance to  Children  and  Servants  to  difregard 
their  Parents  and  Maflcrs  according  to  the  Flejb 
or  reprefent  their  Duty  to  them  as  inconfiftent 
with  their  entire  Obedience  to  their  Father  and 
Mafter  which  is  in  Heaven,  there  might  then 
be  fome  Pretence  to  neglect  inftructing  them 
in  the  Principles  of  fuch  a  Religion.     But  fince 
the  Precepts  of  this  pure  and  undefined  Religion 
are  all  of  them  holy,  juft,  and  good  ;  and  the 
more  they  are  taught  their  Duty  to  GOD,  the 
better  they  will  perform  their  Duties  to  you ; 
methinks  then  to  neglect  the  Improvement  of 
their  Souls,   out  of  a  Dread  of  fpending  too 
much  Time  in  religious  Duties,  is  acting  quite 
contrary  to  your  own  Intereft,  as  well  as  Duty. 
5.  Fifthly  and  laftly,    IF  neither  Gratitude 
to  GOD,  Low  to  your  Children,  common  Juf- 
tice  to  your  Servants,  nor  even  that  moft  pre- 
vailing Motive  Self-  Intereft ,    will  excite  j  yet 
let  a  Confederation  of  the  Terrors  of  the  LORD 
perfuade  you  to  put  in  Practice  the  pious  Re- 
folution   in  the  Text.     Remember  the  Time 
will  come,  and  that  perhaps  very  fhortly,  when 
we  muft  all  appear  before  the  Judgment  Seat 
of  CHRIST  ;  where  we  muft  give  a  folemn  and 


228  The  great  Duty  of 

ftridl  Account  how  we  have  had  our  Convert 
fation,  incur  refpective  Families  in  this  World. 
How  will  you  endure  to  fee  your  Children  and 
Servants  (who  ought  to  be  your  Joy  and  Crown 
of  Pvejojcing  in  the  Day  of  our  Lord  JESUS 
CHRIST)  coming  out  asfo  many  fwift  WitnefTes 
againft  you  ;  curfing  the  Father  that  begat 
them,  the  Womb  that  bare  them,  the  Paps 
which  they  have  fucked,  and  the  Day  they  ever 
entered  into  yourHoufes?  Think  you  not  the 
Damnation  which  Men  muft  endure  for  their 
own  Sins  will  be  fufficient,  that  they  need  load 
themfelves  with  the  additional  Guilt  of  being 
accefTary  to  the  Damnation  of  others  alfo  ?  Oh 
confider  this,  all  ye  that  forget  to  ferve  the 
LORD  with  your  refpeclive  Houfholds,  left  he 
pluck  you  aivay,  and  there  be  none  to  deliver  you  ! 

BUT  Gop  forbid,  Brethren,  that  any  fuch 
Evil  mould  befall  you  :  No,  rather  will  I  hope 
that  you  have  been,  in  fome  meafure,  con- 
vinced by  what  has  been  faid  of  the  great  Im- 
portance of  Family  Religion  ;  and  therefore 
are  ready  to  cry  out,  in  the  Words  immediately 
following  the  Text,  GOD  forbid  that  we  foould 
forfake  the  LORD  ;  and  again,  Verfe  21,  Nay, 
but  <we  wilt,  with  our  feveral  Houfholds,  ferve 
the  LORD. 

AND  that  there  may  be  always  fuch  a  Heart 
in  you,  let  me,  to  conclude,  exhort  all  Go- 

vernours 


FAMILY- RELIGION.          229 

vernours  of  Families,  in  the  Name  of  our  Lord 
JESUS  CHRIST,  often  to  reflect  on  the  inefti- 
mable  Worth  of  their  own  Souls,  and  the 
infinite  Ranfom,  even  the  precious  Blood  of 
JESUS  CHRIST,  which  has  been  paid  down 
for  them.  Remember,  I  befeech  you  remem- 
ber, that  you  are  fallen  Creatures,  that  you 
are  by  Nature  loft  to  and  eftranged  from  GOD  5 
and  that  you  can  never  be  reftored  to  your 
primitive  Happinefs,  till  by  being  born  again 
of  the  Holy  GHOST,  you  arrive  at  your  primi- 
tive State  of  Purity,  have  the  Image  of  GOD 
re-inftamped  upon  your  Souls,  and  are  there- 
by made  meet  to  be  Partakers  of  the  Inheritance 
with  the  Saints  in  Light.  Do,  I  fay,  buc 
ferioufly  and  frequently  reflect  on,  and  act  as 
Perfons  that  believe  fuch  important  Truths, 
and  you  will  no  more  neglect  your  Family's 
fpiritual  Welfare  than  your  own.  No,  the 
Love  of  GOD,  which  will  then  be  Jhed  abroad 
in  your  Hearfs,  will  conftrain  you  to  do  your 
utmoft  to  preferve  them :  And  the  deep  Senfe 
of  GOD'S  free  Grace,  in  CHRIST  JESUS,  (which 
you  will  then  have)  in  calling  you,  will  excite 
you  to  do  your  utmoft  to  fave  others,  efpecially 
thofe  of  your  own  Houftiold.  And  though, 
after  all  your  pious  Endeavours,  fome  may 
continue  unreformed  5  yet  you  will  have  this 
comfortable  Reflection  to  make,  that  you  did 

what: 


230  *Tbe  great  Duty  ofy  &c. 

what  you  could  to  make  your  Families  reli- 
gious :  And  therefore  may  reft  affured  of  fitting 
down  in  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven  with  Abra- 
ham,  Jofhua,  and  Cornelius^  and  all  the  godly 
Houfholders,  who  in  their  feveral  Generations 
(hone  forth  as  fo  many  Lights  in  their  refpe&iye 
Houfholds  upon  Earth. 


THANK. 


THANKFULNESS 

FOR 

MERCIES  RECEIVED 

A 
NECESSARY  DUTY. 

A  Farewel  SERMON  preach'd  on 
Board  the  Wkttaker^  at  Anchor  near 
Savannah  in  Georgia,  on  Sunday 
May  17,  1738. 


(233  ) 


SERMON   X. 

Thankfulnefs   for    Mercies  re-, 
ceived  a  neceffary  Duty. 


PSALM  evil.  30,   31. 

Then  are  they  glad  becaufe  they  are  at 
Reft,  and  fo  he  brmgeth  them  unto  the 
Haven  where  they  would  be. 

0  that  Men  would  therefore  pratfe  the 
Lord  for  his  Goodnefs^  and  declare 
the  Wonders  that  he  doeth  for  the 
Children  of  Men  f 

NUMBERLESS  Marks  does  Man 
bear  in  his  Soul,  that  he  is  fallen  and 
eflranged  from  GOD  ;    but  no  one 
gives  a  greater  Proof  it,  than  that  Backwardnefs, 
which  every  one  finds  within  himfelf,  to  the 
Duty  of  Praife  and  Thankfgiving. 

WHEN  GOD  placed  the  firflMan  in  Paradife, 
his  Soul  no  doubc  was  fo  filled  with  a  Senfe  of 

the 


234  Tbankfulnefs  for  Mercies  received 
the  Riches  of  the  Divine  Love,  that  he  was 
continually  employing  thatBreatb  of  Life  the 
Almighty  had  not  long  before  breathed  into 
him,  in  bleffing  and  magnifying  that  all-boun- 
tiful, all-gracious  GOD,  in  whom  he  lived, 
moved,  and  had  his  Being. 

AND  the  brighteft  Idea  we  can  form  of  the 
Angelical  Hierarchy  above,  and  the  Spirits  of 
juft  Men  made  perfect,  is,  that  they  are  con- 
tinually ftanding  round  the  Throne  of  GOD, 
and  ceafe  not  Day  and  Night,  faying,  Worthy 
art  thou,  O  Lamb,  that  was  Jlain,  to  receive 
Power ,  and  Riches,  andWifdom,  and  Strength \ 
and  Honour,  and  Glory  andBleffing^  Rev.  v.  12. 

THAT  then  which  was  Man's  Perfection 
when  Time  firft  began,  and  will  be  his  Em- 
ployment when  Death  is  fwallowed  up  in  Vic- 
tory, and  Time  fhall  be  no  more,  without 
Controverfy,  is  part  of  our  Perfection,  and 
ought  to  be  our  frequent  Exerciie  on  Earth? 
And  I  doubt  not  but  thofe  blefled  Spirits,  who 
are  fent  forth  to  minifter  to  them  who  {hall 
be  Heirs  of  Salvation,  often  ftand  aftonifhed 
when  they  encamp  around  us,  to  find  our  Hearts 
fo  rarely  enlarged,  and  our  Mouths  fo  feldom 
opened,  to  fhew  forth  the  loving  Kindnefs  of 
the  LOKD,  or  to  fpeak  of  all  his  Praife. 

MATTER  for  Praife  and  Adoration  can  oever 
be  wanting  to  Creatures  redeemed  by  the  Blood 

of 


a  neceffary  Duty.  23  £ 

of  the  SON  of  GOD  j  and  who  have  fuch  con- 
tinual Scenes  of  his  infinite  Goodneft  prefented 
to  their  View,  that  were  their  Souls  duly  af- 
fected with  a  Senfe  of  his  univerfal  Love,  they 
could  not  but  be  continually  calling  on  Heaven 
and  Earth,  Men  and  Angels  ro  join  with  them 
in  praifing  and  bleffing  that  high  and  lofty  One, 
•who  inhabiieth  Eternity,  who  maketh  bis  Sun  to 
fiim  on  the  Evil  and  en  tbc  Good,  and  daily 
pours  down  his  BlefTmgs  on  the  whole  Race 
of  Mankind. 

BUT  few  are  arrived  to  fuch  a  Degree  of 
Charity,  as  to  rejoice  with  thofe  that  do  rejoice, 
and  to  be  as  thankful  for  others  Mercies  as  their 
own.  This  Part  of  Chriftian  Perfection,  though 
begun  on  Earth,  will  be  confummated  only  in 
Heaven  j  where  our  Hearts  will  glow  with  fuch 
fervent  Love  towards  GOD  and  one  another, 
that  every  frefh  Degree  of  Glory  communicated 
to  our  Neighbour,  will  alfo  communicate  to 
us  a  frefh  Degree  of  Thankfulnefs  and  Joy. 

THAT  which  has  a  greater  Tendency  to 
excite  the  Generality  of  us  fallen  Men  to  Praife 
and  Thankfgiving,  is  a  Scnfe  of  GOD'S  private 
Mercies  and  particular  Benefits  beftowed  upon 
ourfelves.  For  as  thefe  come  nearer  our  own 
Hearts,  fo  they  mutt  be  more  affecting ;  and 
as  they  are  peculiar  Proofs,  whereby  we  may 
know  that  GOD  does  in  a  more  efpecial  Manner 

favour 


£  3  6  *?hankfulnefs  for  Mercie*  received 
favour  us  above  others,  fo  they  cannot  but 
fenfibly  touch  us  ;  and  if  our  Hearts  are  not 
quite  frozen,  like  Coals  of  a  Refiner's  Fire, 
muft  melt  us  down  intoThankfulnefs  and  Love. 
It  was  a  Confideration  of  the  diftinguifhing 
Favours  GOD  had  (hewn  to  his  chofen  People 
Ifrael,  and  the  frequent  and  remarkable  De- 
liverances wrought  by  him  in  behalf  of  thofe 
•who  go  down  to  the  Sea  in  Ships,  and  occupy  their 
Bufinefs  in  great  Waters,  that  made  the  holy 
Pfalmill  break  out  fo  frequently  as  he  does  in 
this  Pfalm,  into  this  moving,  pathetical  Ex- 
clamation, Oh  that  Men  'would  therefore  praife 
the  LORD  for  his  Goodnefs,  and  declare  the 
Bonders  that  he  docth  for  the  Children  of  Men  ! 

His  expreffing  himfelf  in  fo  paffionate,  fer- 
vent a  Manner,  implies  both  the  Importance 
and  Neglect  of  the  Duty.  As  when  Mofes 
on  another  Occafion  cries  out,  Oh  that  they 
were  wife,  that  they  underjlood  this,  that  they 
would  practically  confider  their  latter  'End  I 
Deut.  xxxii.  29. 

I  SAY,  importance  and  Neglect  of  the  Duty  ; 
for  out  of  thofe  many  thoufands  that  receive 
Bleffings  from  the  LORD,  how  few  giveThanks 
in  Remembrance  of  his  Holinefs  ?  The  Ac- 
count given  us  of  the  ungrateful  Lepers,  is 
but  too  lively  a  Re  prefentation  of  the  Ingrati- 
tude of  Mankind  in  general  j  who  like  them, 

perhaps, 


a  necejptry  "Duty.  23^ 

perhaps,  when  under  any  humbling  Providence, 
can  cry,  JESUS  Mafter,  have  Mercy  on  us, 
Luke  xvii.  13.  but  when  healed  of  their  Sick- 
nefs,  or  delivered  from  their  Diftrefs,  fcarce 
one  in  ten  can  be  found  returning  to  give  Thanks 
to  GOD. 

AND  yet  as  common  as  this  Sin  of  Ingratitude 
is,  there  is  nothing  we  ought  more  earneftly  to 
pray  againft.  For  what  is  more  abfolutely  con- 
demned in  holy  Scripture  than  Ingratitude  ?  Or 
what  more  peremptorily  required  than  the  con- 
trary Temper  ?  Thus  fays  the  Apoftle,  Rejoice 
evermore,  in  every  Thing  give  Thanks,  i  Thef.  v. 
1 6—  1 8 .  Be  careful  for  nothing :  But  in  everything 
by  Prayer  andSupplication^ithThankfgiving,  let 
yourRequeJls  be  made  known  untoGOD,  Phil,iv;6. 

ON  the  contrary,  the  Apoftle  mentions  it  as 
one  of  the  higheft  Crimes  of  the  Gentiles,  that 
they  were  not  thankful.  Neither  were  they  thank- 
ful, fays  he,  Rom.  i.  2 1.  As  alfo  in  another  Place, 
he  numbers  ^Unthankful,  2  Tim  iii.  ^.  amongft 
thofe  unholy,  profane  Perfons  who  are  to  have 
their  Portion  in  the  Lake  of  Fire  and  Brimftone. 

As  for  our  Sins,  GOD  puts  them  behind  his 
Back ;  but  his  Mercies  he  will  have  acknow- 
ledged. There  is  Virtue  gone  out  of  me,  fays 
JESUS  CHRIST,  Lukeviii.46.  And  the  Wo- 
man who  was  cured  of  her  bloody  Iffue,  muft 
confffs  it :  And  we  generally  find,  when  GOD 

fent 


1 3  8  ^Thankfulnefs  for  Mercies  received 
fent  any  remarkable  Punifhment  upon  any  par- 
ticular Perfon,  he  reminded  him  of  the  Favours 
he  had  received,  as  fo  many  Aggravations  of 
his  Ingratitude.  Thus  when  GOD  was  about  to 
vifit  Eli's  Houfe,  he  thus  expoftulates  with 
him  by  his  Prophet,  Did  I  plainly  appear  unto 
the  Houfe  of  thy  Fathers,  'when  they  'were  in 
Egypt  w  Pharoah's  Houfe  ?  And  did  I  chufe 
him,  out  of  all  the  Tribes  of  Ifrael,  to  be  my 
Prieft,  to  offer  upon  my  Altar,  to  burn  Incenfe, 
and  to  wear  an  Rphod  before  me  ?  Wherefore  kick 
ye  at  my  Sacrifice,  and  at  mine  Offering  ttbicb 
I  have  commanded  in  my  Habitation,  and  ho- 
nour eft  thy  Sons  above  me,  to  make  yourfelves  fat 
with  the  chief  eft  of  all  the  Offerings  of  Ifrael  my 
People?  Wherefore  the  Lord  GOD  of  Ifrael 
faith>  I  faid  indeed,  that  thy  Houfe,  and  the 
Houfe  of  thy  Father  fiould  walk  before  me  for 
ever,  but  now  the  LORD  faith,  Be  it  far  from 
me,  for  them  that  honour  me  will  I  honour,  and 
they  that  defpife  me  pall  be  lightly  ejleemed. 
i  Sam.  ii.  27,  28,  29,  30. 

IT  was  this  and  fuch  like  Inflances  of  GOD'S 
Severity  againft  the  Unthankful,  that  inclined 
me  to  chufe  the  Words  of  the  Text  as  the  moft 
proper  Subject  I  could  difcourfe  on  at  this  Time. 

FOR  thefe  four  Months,  my  good  Friends, 
we'have  now  been  upon  the  Sea  in  this  Ship,  and 
have  occupied  oar  Bufinefs  rn  the  great  Waters. 

At 


a  neceffary  Duty.  239 

At  GOD  Almighty's  Word,  we  have  feen  the 
Jiormy  Wind  arife,  •which  hath  lifted  up  the  Waves 
thereof.  We  have  been  carried  up  to  the  Heaven 
and  down  again  to  the  Deep,  and  fome  of  our 
Souls  melted  away  becaufc  of  the  Trouble  ;  but  I 
truft  we  cryed  earneftly  unto  the  LORD,  and  he 
delivered  us  out  of  our  Diftrefs.  For  he  made 
the  Storm  to  ceafe  j  Jo  that  the  Waves  thereof 
were  Jlill.  And  now  we  are  glad,  becaufe  ue 
are  at  Reft,  for  GOD  hath  brought  us  to  the  Ha- 
ven where  we  would  be.  Oh  that  you  would 
therefore  praife  the  LORD  for  his  Goodnefs,  and 
declare  the  Wonders  that  he  hath  done  for  us,  the 
unworthieft  of  the  Sons  of  Men. 

THUS  Mffes,  thus  Jojhua  behaved.  For 
when  they  were. about  to  take  their  Leaves  of 
the  Children  of  Ifrael,  they  recounted  to  them 
what  great  Things  GOD  had  done  for  them,  as 
the  beft  Arguments  and  Motives  they  could 
urge  to  engage  them  to  Obedience.  And  how 
can  I  copy  after  better  Examples  ?  What  filter, 
what  more  noble  Motives  to  Holinefs  and  Purity 
of  living  can  I  lay  before  you  than  they  did  ? 

INDEED  I  cannot  fay,  that  we  have  feen  a 
Pillar  of  a  Cloud  by  Day,  or  a  Pillar  of  Fire 
by  Nighty  going  vifibly  before  us  to  guide  our 
Courfe  ;  but  this  I  can  fay,  that  the  fame  GOD 
who  was  in  that  Pillar  of  a  Cloud  and  Pillar  of 
Fire,  which  departed  not  from  the  Israelites, 
R  and 


240      Tbankfulnefs  for  Mercies  received 
and  who  has  made  the  Sun  to  rule  the  Day, 
and  the  Moon  to  rule  the  Night,   has  by  his 
good  Providence  directed  us  in  our  right  Way? 
or  elfe  the  Pilot  had  fleered  us  in  vain. 

NEITHER  can  I  fay,  that  we  have  feen  the 
Sun  fland ftill,  as  the  Children  of  Jfrael  did  in 
the  Days  of  Jofiua.  But  furely  GOD,  during 
part  of  our  Voyage,  has  caufed  ic  to  vvith-hold 
fome  of  that  Heat,  which  it  ufually  fends  forth 
in  thefe  warmer  Climates,  or  elfe  it  had  not 
failed  but  fome  of  you  mufl  have  perimed  in 
the  Sicknefs  that  has  been,  and  does  yet  con- 
tinue among  us. 

WE  have  not  feen  the  Waters  ftand  purpofely 
on  an  Heap,  that  we  might  pafs  through,  nei- 
ther have  we  been  purfued  by  Pharaoh  and  his 
Hoft,  and  delivered  out  of  their  Hands  j  but 
we  have  been  led  through  the  Sea  as  through  a 
Wildernefs,  and  were  once  remarkably  pre- 
lerved  from  being  run  down  by  another  Ship  j 
which  had  GOD  permitted,  the  Waters  in  all 
Probability  would  immediately  have  overwhelm- 
ed us,  and  like  Pharaoh  and  his  Hoft,  we  mould 
have  funk  as  Stones  into  the  Sea. 

WE  may  indeed>  Atheift  like,  afcribe  all 
thefe  Things  to  natural  Caufes,  and  fay,  Our 
own  Skill  and  Foreiight  has  brought  us  hither 
in  Safety.  But  as  certainly  as  JESUS  CHRIST, 
that  Angel  of  the  Covenant,  in  the  Days  of 

his 


a  neceffary  Duty.  241 

his  Flefti,  walked  upon  the  Water,  and  fa  id 
to  his  finking  Difciples,  Be  not  afraid,  it  is  L 
fo  furely  has  the  fame  everlafting  /  am,  who 
decketh  himfelf  with  Light  as  with  a  Garment, 
'who  fpreadeth  out  the  Heavens  like  a  Curtain, 
who  clafpeth  the  Winds  in  his  Fift,  who  hold- 
eth  the  Waters  in  the  Hollow  of  his  Hands, 
and  guided  the  wife  Men  by  a  Star  in  the  Eaft ; 
fo  furely,  I  fay,  has  he  fpoken,  and  at  his  Com- 
mand the  Winds  have  blown  us  where  we  are 
now  arrived.  For  his  Providence  ruleth  all 
Things,  Winds  and  Storms  obey  his  Word;  he 
faith  to  it  at  one  Time  go,  and  it  goeth  ;  at 
another,  come,  and  it  cometh,  and  at  a  third 
Time  blow  this  Way,  and  it  bloweth. 

IT  is  he,  my  Brethren,  and  not  we  ourfelves, 
that  has  of  late  fent  us  fuch  profperous  Gales, 
and  made  us  ride,  as  it  were,  on  the  Wir.^s  of 
the  Wind,  into  the  Haven  where  we  would  be. 

Oh  that  you  would  therefore  praife  the  LORD 
for  his  Goodnefs,  and  by  your  Lives  declare, 
that  you  are  truly  thankful  for  the  Wonders 
he  hath  fnewn  to  us,  who  are  lefs  than  the  leaft 
of  the  Sons  of  Men. 

I  SAY,  declare  it  by  your  Lives.  For  to 
give  him  Thanks  barely  with  your  Lips,  while 
your  Hearts  are  far  from  him,  is  but  a  mock 
Sacrifice,  nay,  an  Abomination  unto  the  LORD. 

R  2  THIS 


242     Thankfulncfs  for  Mercies  received 

THIS  was  the  End,  the  royal  Pfalmifl  fays, 
GOD  had  in  view,  when  he  mewed  fuch  Won- 
ders, from  Time  to  Time  to  the  People  of  Ifrael, 
that  they  might  keep  his  Statutes  and  obferve  his 
Laws,  Pfal.  cv.  44.  and  this,  my  good  Friends, 
is  the  End  GOD  would  have  accomplimed  in  us, 
and  the  only  Return  he  deiires  us  to  make  him, 
for  all  the  Benefits  he  hath  conferred  upon  us. 

O  THEN,  letmebefeech  you,  give  GOD  your 
Hearts,  your  whole  Hearts ;  and  fuffer  your- 
felves  to  be  drawn  by  the  Cords  of  infinite  Love 
to  honour  and  obey  him. 

ASSURE  yourfelves  you  never  can  ferve  a 
better  Matter;  for  his  Service  is  per  feel:  Freedom, 
his  Yoak,  when  worn  a  little  while,  exceeding 
eafy,  his  Burden  light ;  and  in  keeping  his  Com- 
mandments there  is  great  Reward,  Love,  Peace, 
Joy  in  the  HOLY  GHOST  here,  and  a  Crown  of 
Glory  that  fadeth  not  away  hereafter. 

You  may  indeed  let  other  Lords  have  Domi- 
nion over  you,  and  Satan  may  promife  to  gire 
you  all  the  Kingdoms  of  the  World,  and  the 
Glory  of  them,  if  you  will  fall  down  and  wor- 
(hip  him ;  but  he  is  a  Liar,  and  was  fo  from 
the  Beginning;  and  has  not  fo  much  to  give 
you,  as  you  may  tread  on  with  the  Sole  of  your 
Foot ;  or  could  he  give  you  the  whole  World7 
yet  that  could  not  make  you  happy  withoutGoo. 
It  is  GOD  alone,  my  Brethren,  whofe  we  are, 

in 


a  neceflary  Duty.  243 

in  whofe  Name  I  now  fpeak,  and  who  has  of 
late  (hewed  us  fuch  Mercies  in  the  Deep,  that 
can  give  folid  lading  Happinefs  to  your  Souls ; 
and  he  for  this  Reafon  only  defires  your  Hearts, 
becaufe  without  him  they  muft  be  miferable. 

SUFFER  me  not  then  to  go  away  without  my 
Errand ;  as  it  is  the  laft  Time  I  {hall  fpeak  to 
you,  let  me  not  fpeak  in  vain ;  but  let  a  Senfe 
of  the  Divine  Goodnefs  lead  you  to  Repentance. 

EVEN  Saul,  that  abandoned  Wretch,  when 
Davi£  mewed  him  his  Skirt,  which  he  had 
cut  off,  when  he  might  have  taken  his  Life, 
was  fo  melted  down  with  hisKindnefs,  that  he 
lifted  up  his  Voice  and  wept.  And  we  muft 
have  Hearts  harder  than  Saul's,  nay  harder 
than  the  nether  Milftone,  if  a  Senfe  of  GOD'S 
late  loving  Kindnefles,  notwithstanding  he  might 
fo  often  have  deftroyed  us,  does  not  even  com- 
pel us  to  lay  down  our  Arms  againft  him,  and 
become  his  faithful  Servants  and  Soldiers  unto 
our  Lives  End. 

IF  they  have  not  this  Effect  upon  us,  we  mall 
of  all  Men  be  moft  miferable  j  for  GOD  is  juft, 
as  well  as  merciful  ;  and  the  more  Bleffings  we 
have  received  here,  the  greater  Damnation,  if  we 
do  not  improve  them,  (hall  we  incur  hereafter. 

BUT  GOD  forbid  that  any  of  thofe  mould  ever 

fuffer  the  Vengeance  of  eternal  Fire,  amongft 

whom  I  have  for   thefe  four  Months   been 

R  3  preach- 


244  fbankfulntfi  for  Mercies  received 
preaching  the  Gafpel  of  CHRIST,  but  yet  thus 
mufl  it  be,  if  you  do  not  improve  the  Divine 
Mercies ;  and  inftead  of  your  being  my  Crown 
of  Rejoicing  in  the  Day  of  our  Lord  JESUS 
CHRIST,  I  rnuli  appear  as  a  fwift  Witnefs 
again  ft  you. 

BUT,  Brethren,  lam  perfuaded betterThings 
of  you,  and  Things  that  accompany  Salvation, 
though  I  thus  fpeak. 

BLESSED  be  GOD,  fome  Marks  of  a  partial 
Reformation  atleaft,  have  been  viiible  amongft 
all  you  that  are  Soldiers.  And  my  weak,  though 
Cncere  Endeavours  to  build  you  up  in  the  Know- 
ledge and  Fear  of  GOD,  have  not  been  altogether 
in  vain  in  the  LORD. 

SWEARING,  I  hope,  is  in  a  great  meafure 
abated  with  you  j  and  GOD  I  truft  has  blefled 
his  late  Viiitations  by  making  them  the  Means 
of  awakening  your  Confciences,  to  a  more 
folicitous  Enquiry  about  the  Things  which  be- 
long to  your  everlafting  Peace. 

FULFIL  you  then  my  Joy,  by  continuing  thus 
minded,  and  labour  to  go  on  to  Perfection, 
For  I  (hall  have  no  greater  Pleafure  than  to  fee> 
or  hear,  that  you  walk  in  the  Truth. 

CONSIDER,  my  good  Friends,  you  are  now 
2s  it  were  entering  on  a  new  World,  where  you 
will  be  furrounded  withMulthudes  of  Heathens ; 
and  if  you.  take  not  heed  to  /cave  your  Coirverja- 

tion 


a  neceffary  Duty.  245 

tlon  honeft  amongjl  them,  and  to  walk  worthy 
the  holy  Vocation  wherewith  you  are  called,  you 
will  a<3  the  hellifh  Part  of  Herod's  Sold'iers 
over  again  ;  and  caufe  CHRIST'S  Religion,  as 
they  did  his  Perfon,  to  be  had  in  Derifion  of 
thofe  that  are  round  about  you 

CONSIDER  further,  what  peculiar  Privileges 
you  have  enjoyed  above  many  others  that  are 
entering  on  the  fame  Land.  They  have  had  as 
it  were  a  Famine  of  the  Word,  but  you  have 
rather  been  in  Danger  of  being  furfeited  wiih 
your  fpiritual  Manna.  And  therefore  as  more 
Inftructions  have  been  given  you,  fo  from  you 
Men  will  molt  juftly  expert  the  greater  Improve- 
ment in  Gcodnefs. 

INDEED  I  cannot  fay  I  have  difcharged  my 
Duty  towards  you  as  I  ought.  No,  I  am  fen- 
(ible  of  many  Faults  which  I  have  been  guilty 
of  in  my  minifterial  Office,  and  for  which  I 
have  not  failed,  nor,  I  hope,  ever  (hall  fail  to 
humble  myfelf  in  fecret  before  GOD.  However 
this  I  can  fay,  that  except  a  few  Days  that  have 
been  fpent  necefiarily  on  other  Perfons,  whom 
GOD  immediately  called  me  to  write  and  rni- 
nifter  unto,  and  the  two  laft  Weeks  wherein  I 
have  been  confined  by  Sicknefs ;  all  the  while 
I  have  been  aboard,  I  have  been  either  actually 
engaged  in,  or  preparing  myfelf  for  inftrucling 
you.  An4  though  you  are  now  to  be  com- 
R  4  mitted 


246  rfhankfulnefi  for  Mercies  received 
mitted  to  the  Care  of  another  (whofe  Labours 
I  heartily  befeech  GOD  to  blefs  amongft  you) 
yet  I  truft  I  fhall  at  all  Seafons,  if  need  be,  wil- 
lingly fpend,  and  be  fpent,  for  the  good  of  your 
Souls,  though  the  more  abundantly  I  love  you 
the  lefs  I  fliould  beloved. 

As  for  your  military  Affairs,  I  have  nothing 
to  do  with  them.  Fear  GOD,  and  you  muft 
honour  the  King.  Nor  am  I  better  acquainted 
with  the  Nature  of  that  Land  which  you  are 
now  come  over  to  protect  ;  only  this  I  may 
venture  to  affirm  in  the  general,  that  you  muft 
neceffarily  expect  upon  your  Arrival  at  a  new 
Colony,  to  meet  with  many  Difficulties.  But 
your  very  Profefiion  teaches  you  to  endure 
Hardmip  ;  be  not  therefore  faint-hearted,  but 
quit  yourfelves  like  Men,  and  be  ftrong,  Numb. 
xiv.  Be  not  like  thofe  cowardly  Perfons,  who 
were  affrighted  at  the  Report  of  the  falfe  Spies, 
that  came  and  faid,  that  there  were  People  tall 
as  the  Anakims  to  be  grappled  with,  but  be  ye 
like  unto  Caleb  and  Jofiua,  all  Heart;  and  fay, 
we  will  act  valiantly,  for  we  fhall  be  more 
than  Conquerors  over  all  Difficulties  through 
jESusdiRisT  that  loved  us. — Above allThings, 
my  Brethren,  take  heed  and  beware  of  mur- 
muring, like  the  perverfe  IJraelite^  againft 
thofe  that  are  fet  over  you ;  and  learn  ivhatfo- 
ever  State  you  ft  all  be  in,  therewith  to  be  content, 
Phil.  iv.  ii.  ^s 


a  nece/fary  Duty.  247 

As  I  have  fpoken  to  you,  I  hope  your  Wives 
^alfo  will  fuffer  the  Word  of  Exhortation. 

YOUR  Behaviour  on  Shipboard,  efpecially  the 
firft  Part  of  the  Voyage,  I  chufe  to  throw  a 
Cloak  over  ;  for  to  ufe  the  mildefl  Terms,  it 
was  not  fuch  as  became  the  Gojpel  of  our  Lord 
JESUS  CHRIST.  However  of  late,  Wetted 
be  GOD,  you  have  taken  more  heed  to  your 
Ways,  and  fome  of  you  have  walked. all  the 
while,  as  became  Women  profeffing  Godlinefs. 
Let  thofe  accept  my  hearty  Thanks,  and  per- 
mit me  to  intreat  you  all  in  general,  as  you  are 
all  now  married,  to  remember  the  folemn  Vow 
you  made  at  your  Entrance  into  the  Marriage 
State  j  and  fee  that  you  be  fubjeff  to  your  own 
Husbands,  in  every  lawful  Thing  :  Beg  of  GOD 
to  keep  the  Door  of  jour  Lips,  that  you  of  end  not 
with  your  Tongues,  and  walk  in  Love,  that^0#r 
Prayers  be  not  hindered.  You  that  have  Chil- 
dren, let  it  be  your  chief  Concern  to  breed  them 
up  in  the  Nurture  and  Monition  of  the  LORD. 
And  live  all  of  you  fo  holy  and  unblameable, 
that  you  may  not  fo  much  as  be  fufpecled  to  be 
unchafte  ;  and  as  fome  of  you  have  imitated 
Mary  Magdalene  in  her  Sin,  ftrive  to  imitate 
her  alfo  in  her  Repentance. 

As  for  you  that  are  Sailors,  what  (hall  I  fay? 
How  fliall  I  addrefs  myfelf  to  you  ?  How  (hall 
I  do  that  which  I  fo  much  long  to  do — touch 


248  Thankfulnefs  for  Mercies  received 
your  Hearts  ?  Gratitude  obliges  me  to  wilh 
thus  well  to  you.  For.  you  have  often  taught 
me  many  inftrudive  LeiTons,  and  reminded  me 
to  put  up  many  Prayers  to  GOD  for  you,  that 
you  might  receive  your  fj  .ritual  Sight. 

WHEN  I  have  feen  you  preparing  for  a  Storm, 
and  riefing  your  Sails  to  guard  againft  it,  how 
have  I  wifhed  that  you  and  I  were  both  as  care- 
ful to  avoid  that  Storm  of  GOD'S  Wrath,  which 
will  certainly,  without  Repentance,  quickly 
overtake  us  ?  When  I  have  obferved  you  catch 
at  every  fair  Gale,  how  have  I  fecredy  cried, 
Oh  that  we  were  as  careful  to  know  the  Things 
that  belong  to  our  Peace,  before  they  are  hid 
from  our  Eyes !  And  when  I  have  taken  notice 
how  fteadily  you  eyed  your  Compafs  in  order 
to  fteer  aright,  how  have  I  wimed,  that  we  as 
fteadily  eyed  the  Word  of  GOD,  which  alone 
can  preferve  us  from  making  Ship-wreck  cf  Faith 
and  a  good  Conference  ?  In  fhort  there  is  fcarce 
any  thing  you  do,  which  has  not  been  a  Lef- 
fon  of  Instruction  to  me  ;  and  therefore  it  would 
be  ungrateful  in  me,  did  I  not  take  this  Op- 
portunity of  exhorting  you  in  the  Name  of  our 
Lord  JESUS  CHRIST,  to  be  as  wiie  in  the  Things 
which  concern  your  Soul,  as  I  have  obferved 
you  to  be  in  the  Affairs  belonging  to  your  Ship. 
I  AM  fenfible  that  the  Sea  is  reckoned  but  an 
ill  School  to  learn  CHRIST  in  :  And  to  fee  a 

devout 


a  nece/ary  Duty.  249 

devout  Sailor  is  efteemed  as  uncommon  a  Thing, 
as  to  fee  a  Saul  amongft  the  Prophets.  But 
whence  this  wondering  ?  Whence  this  looking 
upon  a  godly  Sailor  as  a  Man  to  be  wondered 
at,  as  a  fpeckled  Bird  upon  the  Earth?  I  am 
fure  for  the  little  Time  I  have  come  in  and  out 
amongft  you,  and  as  far  as  I  can  judge  from 
the  little  Experience  I  have  had  of  Things  -, 
I  fcarce  know  any  way  of  Life,  that  is  capable 
of  greater  Improvements  than  yours. 

THE  continual  Danger  you  are  in  of  being 
over-whelmed  by  the  great  Waters  ;  the  many 
Opportunities  you  have  of  beholding  GOD'S 
Wonders  in  the  Deep;  the  happy  Retirement 
you  enjoy  from  worldly  Temptations;  and  the 
daily  Occafions  that  are  offered  you,  to  endure 
Hardfhips,  are  fuch  noble  Means  of  promoting 
the  fpiritual  Life,  that  were  your  Hearts  bent 
towards  GOD,  you  would  account  it  yourHap- 
pinefs,  that  his  Providence  has  called  you,  to 
go  down  to  the  Sea  in  Ships,  and  to  occupy  your 
Bujinefs  in  the  great  Waters. 

THE  royal  Pfalmift  knew  this,  and  there- 
fore in  the  Words  of  the  Texr,  calls  more  e- 
fpecially  on  Men  of  your  Employ,  to  praifc  the 
LORD  for  his  Goodnefs^  and  declare  the  Won- 
ders he  doth  for  the  Children  of  Men. 

AND  oh  that  you  would  be  wife  in  time,  and 
hearken  to  his  Voice  to  Day,  whilft  it  is  called 

to 


250       Thankfulnefs  for  Mercies  received 
to  Day  !  For  ye  yourfelves  know  how  little  is 
to  be  done  on  a  iick  Bed  :   And  how  GOD  has 
in  an  efpecial  Manner  of  late  invited  you  to 
Repentance.     Two  of  your  Crew  he  has  taken 
off  by  Death,  and  rnoft  of  you  he  has  merci- 
fully vifited  with   a  grievous  Sicknefs.      The 
Terrors  of  the  LORD  have  been  upon  you,  and 
when  burnt  with  a  fcorching  Fever,    fome  of 
you  have  cried  out,  whaf  Jhallwe  do  to  befaved? 
Remember   then    the  Refolutions  you  made, 
when  you  thought  GOD  was  about  to  take  away 
your  Souls.     And  fee  that  according  to  your 
Promifes,   you  mew  forth  your  Thankfulnefs 
not  only  with  your  Lips  but  in  your  Lives.     For 
though  GOD  may  bear  long,  he  will  not  forbear 
always  ;  and  if  thefe  fignal  Mercies  and  Judg- 
ments do  not  lead  you  to  Repentance,  allure 
yourfelves  there  will  at  laft  come  a  fiery  Tempeft, 
from  the  Prefence  of  the  LORD,    which  will 
fweep  away  you,  and  all  other  Adverfaries  of  GOD. 
I  AM  pofitive  neither  you  nor  the  Soldiers 
have  wanted,    nor  will  want  any  manner   of 
Encouragement  to  Piety  and  Holinefs  of  living 
from  thofe  .two  Perfons  who  have  here  the 
Government  over  you  ;  for  they  have  been  fuch 
Helps  to  me  in  my  Miniilry,  and  have  fo  rea- 
dily concurred  in  every  thing  for  your  Good, 
that  they  may  juftly  demand  a  publick  Acknow- 
ledgment of  Thanks  both  from  you  and  me. 

PERMIT 


a  nece/ary  Duty.  25  I 

PERMIT  me  then,  my  honoured  Friends,  in 
the  Name  of  both  your  People,  to  return  you 
hearty  Thanks  for  the  Care  and  Tendernefs  you 
have  expreffed  for  the  Welfare  of  their  betterParts 

As  for  the  private  Favours  you  have  fhewn 
my  Perfon,  I  hope  fo  deep  a  Senfe  of  them  is 
imprinted  on  my  Heart,  that  I  {hall  plead  them 
before  GOD  in  Prayer  as  long  as  I  live. 

BUT  I  have  ftill  ftronger  Obligations  to  in- 
tercede in  your  Behalf.  For  GOD,  for  ever 
adored  be  his  free  Grace  in  CHRIST  JESUS,  has 
fet  his  Seal  to  my  Miniftry  in  your  Hearts.  Some 
diftant  Pangs  of  the  new  Birth  I  have  obferved 
to  come  upon  you ;  and  GOD  forbid  that  I 
fhould  fin  againft  the  LORD,  by  ceafing  to  pray, 
that  the  good  Work  begun  in  your  Souls,  maybe 
carried  on  till  theDay  of  ourLord  JESUS  CHRIST. 

THE  Time  of  our  Departure  from  each  other 
is  now  at  hand,  and  you  are  going  out  into  a 
World  of  rferaPtati°ns-  But  though  abfent  in 
Body  let  us  be  prefent  with  each  other  in  Spirit, 
and  GOD,  I  truft,  will  enable  you  to  be  fingu- 
larly  good,  to  be  ready  to  be  accounted  Fools 
for  CHRIST'S  Sake  j  and  then  we  (hall  meec 
never  to  part  again  in  the  Kingdom  of  our  FA- 
THER which  is  in  Heaven. 

To  you  my  Companions  and  familiar  Friend? 
who  came  over  with  me  to  fojourn  in  a  ftrange 
Land,  do  I  in  the  next  Place  add  re  is  my  fell" 

than 


252  'Fhankfulnefs  for  Mercies  received 
For  you  I  efpecially  fear,  as  well  as  for  myfelf ; 
becaufe  as  we  take  fweetCounfel  together  oftner 
than  others,  and  as  you  are  let  into  a  more  in- 
timate Friendfhip  with  me  in  private  Life,  the 
Eyes  of  all  Men  will  be  upon  you  to  note  even 

the  minuted:  Mifcarriage- and  therefore  it 

highly  concerns  you  to  u'rJk  circumfpeftly  to- 
wards thofe  that  are  without, —  I  hope  nothing 
but  a  fingle  Eye  to  GOD'S  Glory  and  the  Salva- 
tion of  your  own  Souls,  brought  you  from  your 
native  Country.  Remember  then  the  End  of 
your  coming  hither,  and  you  can  never  do 
amifs —Be  Patterns  of  Induftry,  as  well  as  Piety, 
to  thofe  who  ihall  be  around  you  ;  and  above 
all  Things  let  us  have  fuch  a  fervent  Charity 
amongfl  ourfelves,  that  it  may  be  faid  of  us, 
as  of  the  primitive  Chriftians,  See  how  the 
Chriftians  love  one  another. 

AND  now  I  have  been  fpeaking  toothers  par- 
ticularly, I  have  one  general  Rtqueft  to  make 
to  all,  and  that  with  Reference  to  myfelf. 

You  hav*  heard,  my  dear  Friends,  how  I 
have  been  exhorting  every  one  of  you  to  mew 
forth  your  Thankfulnefs  for  the  Divine  Good- 
nefs,  not  only  with  your  Lips,  but  in  your 
Lives :  But  Phyfaian  heal  tbyfelfy  may  juftly 
be  retorted  on  me.  For  (without  any  falfe 
Pretences  to  Humility)  I  find  my  own  Heart 
fo  little  inclined  to  this  Duty  of  Thankfgiving 

for 


a  necejjary  Duty. 
for  the  Benefits  I  have  received,  that  I  had  need 
fear  {haring  Hezckiab's  Fate,  who  becaufe  he 
was  lifted  up  by,  and  not  thankful  enough  for 
the  great  Things  GOD  had  done  for  him,  was 
given  up  a  Prey  to  the  Pride  of  his  own  Heart. 

I  NEED  therefore,  and  beg  your  moft  im- 
portunate Petitions  at  the  Throne  of  Grace,  that 
no  fuch  Evil  may  befal  me —  that  the  more 
GOD  exalts  me  the  more  I  may  debafe  myfelf — 
and  that  after  I  have  preached  to  others,  I  my- 
felf may  not  be  a  Caft-away. 

AND  now,  Brethren,  into  GOD'S  Hands  I 
commend  your  Spirits,  who,  I  truft,  through 
his  infinite  Mercies  in  CHRIST  JESUS,  will  pre- 
ferve  you  blamelefs,  till  his  fecond  Coming  to 
judge  the  World. 

EXCUSE  my  detaining  you  fo  long,  it  is  the 
laft  Time  I  (hall  fpeak  to  you  perhaps  j  my 
Heart  is  full,  and  out  of  the  Abundance  of  it, 
I  could  continue  my  Difcourfe  till  Midnight — 

But  I  muft  away  to  your  new  World may 

GOD  give  you  new  Hearts,  and  enable  you  to 
put  in  Practice  what  you  have  heard  fromTime 
to  Time  to  be  your  Duty,  and  I  need  not  wifii 
you  any  thing  better.  For  then  GOD  will  fo 
blefs  you,  that  you  will  build  you  Cities  to  dwell 
in  y  then  will  you  fow  your  Lands  and  plant 
Vineyards^  which  will  yield  you  Fruits  cf  in- 
creaje,  Pfal,  cvii,  36,  37,  Then  war  Oxen  (hall 


Thankfulnefs  for  Mercies  received,  &c. 
be  Jlrong  to  labour •,  there  fliali  be  «0  leading  into 
Captivity r,  #W  »0  complaining  in  your  Streets  ; 
then  {hall  p#r  Sons  grew  up  as  the  young  Plants, 
and  your  Daughters  be  as  the  polified  Corners 
of  the  temple  :  Then  fhall  your  Garners  be  full 
find  plenteous  'with  all  manner  of  Store,  and  your 
Sheep  bring  forth  Thoufands  and  ten  Thoufands 
in  your  Streets,  Pfal.  cxliv.  In  fhort,  then 
{hall  the  LORD  be  your  GOD;  and  as  furelyas 
he  has  now  brought  us  to  this  Haven,  where  we 
would  be,  fofurely  after  we  havepafs'd  through 
the  Storms  and  Tempefts  of  this  troublefome 
World,  will  he  bring  us  to  the  Haven  of  eter- 
nal Reft,  where  we  (hall  have  nothing  to  do, 
but  to  praife  him  for  ever  for  his  Goodnefs, 
and  declare  in  never-ceafing  Songs  of  Praife, 
the  Wonders  he  has  done  for  us,  and  all  the 
other  Sons  of  Men. 

To  which  ble/ed  Rejl,  GOD  of  bis  infinite 
Mercy  bring  us  all  through  JESUS 
CHRIST  our  Lord,  to  whom  with  the 
FATHER  and  the  HOLT  GHOST, 
be  all  Honour  and  Glory ,  Might,  Ma- 
jejly,  and  Dominion  now,  henceforth^ 
and  for  evermore.  Amen,  Amen. 


FINIS. 


» 

UNIVERSITY  £I$££)JfORNIA  LIBRARY 

_»  ?Los  Angeles 

Tkis  book  is  DU£  on  the  list  date  stamped  below. 


?ENEWA«f  1969 


FEB    9 

f|B  18 1976 


Form  L9-Series  444 


.  ••  ••' ,, 


