Google 


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 
We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I 


t3  3  3 


XV.  \.\ 


k 
^  « 


SERMONS 


or 


w  _ 


K   .M' 


REV.   G;  HM^JPITRGEON 

Of  London 


NINTH  SERIES 


NEW  YORK 

ROBERT  CARTER  &  BROTHERS 

530  Broadway 

1883 


\^-'-      •i^'-i^TV 


Works  of  the  Rev.  C.    H.  Spurqeon 

FUKJSHBD  BT 

ROBERT  CARTER  &  BROTHERS. 

— 0 

BERM0N8,  10  voU.  in  a  box $10.00 

Any  VolurM  sold  s^fHiraidy  at 1.00 

MORNING  BT  MORNING 1.00 

EVENING  BT  EVENING 1.00 

TTPES  AND  EMBLEMS 1.00 

THE  8A1NTAND  SAVIOUR 1.00 

LECTURES  TO  STUDENTS 1.00 

COMMENTING  AND  COMMENTARIES 1.00 

JOHN  PLOUGHMAN'S  TALKS 0.76 

GLEANINGS  AMONG  SHEAVES 0.00 

GEMS  FROM  SPURGEON 1.00 


CONTENTS. 


INiRODUCTION • 

SERMON  L 

TRAVAILING  FOR  SOULS      •••..••       18 

SERMON  n. 
-  YOUR  OWN  SALVATION."  .••....       84 

SERMON  m. 
CONTINUANCE  WITH  JESUS  POSSIBLE  ....       54 

SERMON  IV. 
THE  SIN  OP  GADDING  ABOUT    .       .       .       ...       .70 

SERMON  V. 

THE  BROAD  WALL 89 

SERMON  VL 

THE  STAR  OP  JACOB     ......••      104 

SERMON  Vn. 

AN  UNALTERABLE  STATUTE.     ......      IL 

SERMON  Vin. 
FATHOMLESS     .  •       .       .       .  ^       ^       ^     VKV 


2^^^r$-ac^ci 


6  CONTENTa 

SERMON  IX. 
MEAT  INDEED  AND  DRINK  INDEED.       ....      143 

SERMON  X 

THOUGHTS  AND  THEIR  FRUIT  .       ,        ....      157 

SERMON  XL 

THE  COVENANT 173 

SERMON  XIL 

A  SERMON  TO  OPEN  NEQLECTERS  AND  NOMINAL  FOL 

LOWERS  OF  RELIGION 186 

SERMON  Xin. 

EPHRAIM  BEMOANING  HIMSELF 206 

SERMON  XIV. 

JESUS  AT  BETHESDA ;  OR  WAITING  CHANGED  FOR  BE- 
LIEVING   226 

SERMON  XV. 

THE  UNSEARCHABLE  RICHES  OF  CHRIST      ...      246 

SERMON  XVL 
THE  END  OF  THE  RIGHTEOUS  DESIRED       .        .       .265 

SERMON  XVn. 

NUMBER  ONE  THOUSAND ;  OR,  BREAD  ENOUGH  AND 

TO  SPARE." 284 

SEitMON  xvm. 

LOVE'S  LOGIC 804 

SERMON  XIX. 
'^-TOGETHER  LOVELY i»3 


OONTENTa  7 


SERMON 

FISB 

THE  AJjABUM.  .       , 84a 

SERMON  XXL 

THE  WTTHERlNG  WORK  OP  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT  .       .     86d 

SERMON   XXn^ 
MARAH ;  OR,  THE  BITTER  WATERS  SWEETENED       •     882 


M 


SERMON  XXm. 

NEGOTIATIONS  FOR  PEACE 408 

SERMON  xxrsr. 

JESUS  ONLT 419 

SERMON  XXV. 
REST,  REST 486 

SERMON  XXVL 

CARRIED  BT  FOUR 466 

SERMON  XXVn. 
JESUS  NO  PHANTOM      .       .       .       •  ...     476 


SERMON  XXVm 

VERT  SINGULAR     •       •       •       •       . 


SERMON  I. 


TRAVAILING  FOR  SOULS. 

Of  this  sermon,  a  copy  was  sent  to  every  Baptist  and  Congregfr 
Honal  minister  in  Great  Britain,  and  several  letters  lia^e  been  re- 
ceived, acknowledging  tlie  quickening  thereby  received.  May  the 
like  result  be  far  more  abundant  in  the  New  World. 

*^AS  BOON  AB  ZION  TBA VAILED,  8HB  BB0U6HT  FOBTH  HXB    CHILIlBBN.** — 

Isaiah  Izvi.  8. 

IsBABL  had  fallen  into  the  lowest  condition,  but  an  inward 
yearning  of  heart  was  felt  in  the  midst  of  God's  people  for 
the  return  of  the  divine  blessing;  and  no  sooner  had  this 
anxious  desire  become  intense,  than  God  heard  the  voice  of 
its  cry,  and  the  blessing  came.  It  was  so  at  the  time  of 
the  restoration  of  the  captives  from  Babylon,  and  it  was 
most  evidently  so  in  the  days  of  our  Lord.  A  faithful 
company  had  continued  still  to  expect  the  coming  of  the 
Lord's  anointed  messenger  ;  they  waited  till  he  should  sud- 
denly come  in  his  temple ;  the  twelve  tribes,  represented  by 
an  elect  remnant,  cried  day  and  night  unto  the  Most  High, 
and  when  at  last  their  prayers  reached  the  fulness  of  ve- 
hemence, and  their  anxiety  wrought  in  them  the  deepest 
agony  of  spirit,  then  the  Messiah  came  ;  the  light  of  the 
Gentiles,  and  the  glory  of  Israel.  Then  began  the  age  of 
blessedness  in  which  the  barren  woman  did  keep  house  and 
become  the  joyful  mother  of  children.  The  Holy  Ghost 
was  given,  and  multitudes  were  bom  to  the  church  of  God, 
yea,  we  may  say,  a  nation  was  bom  in  a  day.    The  wilder- 


14  TRAVAILING  FOR  S0HL8 

ness  and  the  solitary  place  were  glad  for  tbem,  and  the  des- 
ert rejoiced  and  blossomed  as  the  rose.  We  are  not,  how- 
ever, about  to  enter  into  the  particular  application  of  our 
text  as  Isaiah  uttered  it:  the  great  declarations  of  revela- 
tion are  applicable  to  all  cases,  and,  once  true,  they  stand 
fast  for  ever  and  ever.  Earnestly  desiring  that  God  may 
give  a  large  spiritual  blessing  to  his  church  this  mornings 
through  the  subject  to  which  my  mind  has  been  directed,  I 
sliall  first  ask  you  to  note  that  in  order  to  the  obtaining  of 
an  increase  to  the  churchy  there  must  be  travail^  and  that, 
secondly,  this  travail  isfrequenUj/foUowed  by  surprising  re- 
suits.  I  shall  then  have  to  show  why  both  the  travail  and 
the  result  are  desirable^  and  pronounce  tooe  on  those  who 
stand  back  and  hinder  it,  and  a  blessing  on  such  as  shaXL  b€ 
moved  by  God^s  own  Spirit  to  travail  for  souls. 

L  It  is  clear  from  the  text,  ^' As  soon  as  Zion  travailed, 
she  brought  forth  her  children,"  that  thebb  must  bb  thb 
TBAVAiL  before  there  will  be  the  spiritual  birth. 

Let  me  first  establish  this  fact  from  history.  Before 
there  has  fallen  a  great  benediction  upon  God's  people,  it 
has  been  preceded  by  great  searchings  of  heart  Israel 
was  so  oppressed  in  Egypt,  that  it  would  have  been  very 
easy,  and  ahnost  a  natural  thing,  for  the  people  to  become 
BO  utterly  crushed  in  spirit  as  to  submit  to  be  hereditary 
bond-slaves,  making  the  best  they  could  of  their  miserable 
lot;  but  God  would  not  have  it  so;  he  meant  to  bring  them 
out  '^with  a  high  hand  and  an  outstretched  arm."  Before, 
however,  he  began  to  work,  he  made  them  begin  to  cry. 
Their  sighs  and  cries  came  up  into  the  ears  of  Gk>d,  and  he 
stretched  out  his  hand  to  deliver  tiiem*  Doubtless,  many 
a  heart-rending  appeal  was  made  to  heaven  by  mothera 
when  their  babes  were  torn  from  thdr  breasts  to  be  cast 
Into  the  river.  With  what  bitterness  did  they  ask  Gk>d  to 
look  upon  his  poor  people  Israel,  and  avenge  them  of  their 
oppressors.    The  young  men  bowed  under  the  cfiMl  yokt 


TBAVAlLlNa  FOR  SOULS.  16 

and  groaned^  while  hoary  sires,  smarting  under  igno- 
minious lashes  from  the  taskmaster,  sighed  and  wept  be* 
fore  the  God  of  Israel.  The  whole  nation  cried,  "  O  God 
visit  us ;  God  of  Abraham,  of  Isaac,  and  of  Jacob,  remem- 
ber thy  covenant,  and  deliver  us."  This  travail  brought  its 
result;  for  the  Lord  smote  the  field  of  Zoan  with  mighty 
plagues,  and  forth  from  under  the  bondage  of  the  sons  of 
MIsraim,  the  children  of  Israel  marched  with  joy. 

As  we  shall  not  have  time  to  narrate  many  instances, 
let  us  take  a  long  leap  in  history  to  the  days  of  David. 
The  era  of  the  son  of  Jesse  was  evidently  a  time  of  relig- 
ious revival.  God  was  honored  and  his  service  maintained 
in  the  midst  of  Judea's  land  in  the  days  of  the  royal  bard ; 
but  it  is  clear  to  readers  of  the  Scriptures  that  David  was 
the  subject  of  spiritual  throes  and  pangs  of  the  most  in* 
tense  kind.  His  bosom  throbbed  and  heaved  like  that  of  a 
man  made  fit  to  be  the  leader  of  a  great  revival.  What 
yearnings  he  had  I  He  thirsted  after  God,  after  the  living 
God  I  What  petitions  he  poured  forth  that  God  would 
visit  Zion,  and  make  the  vine  which  he  had  planted  to 
flourish  once  again.  Even  when  his  own  sins  pressed  heavily 
upon  him,  he  could  not  end  his  personal  confession  without 
entreating  the  Lord  to  build  the  walls  of  Jerusalem,  and  to 
do  good  in  his  good  pleasure  unto  Zion.  Now,  David  was 
only  the  mouth  of  hundreds  of  others,  who  with  equal  fer- 
vency cried  unto  God  that  the  blessing  might  rest  upon  his 
people.  There  was  much  soul-travail  in  Israel  and  Judah, 
and  the  result  was  that  the  Lord  was  glorified,  and  true 
religion  fiourished. 

Remember  also  the  days  of  Josiah,  the  king.  You 
know  well  how  the  book  of  the  law  was  found  neglected  in 
the  temple,  and  when  it  was  brought  before  the  king,  lie 
rent  his  clothes,  for  he  saw  that  the  nation  had  revolted, 
and  that  wrath  must  come  upon  it  to  the  uttermost.  The 
young  king's  heart,  which  was  tender,  for  he  feared  God, 
was  ready  to  break  with  anguish  to  think  of  the  misery 


16  TRAVATLma  FOR  SOULS. 

that  would  come  upon  his  people  on  account  of  their  sina. 
Then  there  came  a  glorious  reformation  which  purged  the 
land  of  idols,  and  caused  the  passover  to  be  observed  as 
never  before.  Travails  of  heart  among  the  godly  pro- 
duced the  delightful  change. 

It  was  the  same  with  the  work  of  Nehemiah.  His  book 
begins  with  a  description  of  the  travail  of  his  heart.  He 
was  a /patriot,  a  man  of  nervous,  excitable  temperament, 
and  keen  sensibility  for  God's  honor,  and  when  his  soul 
had  felt  great  bitterness  and  longing,  then  he  arose  ^to 
build,  and  a  blessing  rested  on  his  efforts. 

In  the  early  dawn  of  Christian  history,  there  was  a  prep- 
aration of  the  church  before  it  received  an  increase.  Look 
at  the  obedient  disciples  sitting  in  the  upper  room,  waiting 
with  anxious  hope;  every  heart  there  had  been  ploughed 
with  anguish  by  the  death  of  the  Lord,  each  one  was  intent 
to  receive  the  promised  boon  of  the  Spirit.  There,  with 
one  heart  and  one  mind,  they  tarried,  but  not  without 
wrestling  prayer,  and  so  the  Comforter  was  given,  and 
three  thousand  souls  were  given  also. 

The  like  living  zeal  and  vehement  desire  have  always 
been  perceptible  in  the  Church  of  God  before  any  season 
of  refreshing.  Think  not  that  Luther  was  the  only  man 
that  wrought  the  Reformation.  There  were  hundreds  who 
sighed  and  cried  in  secret  in  the  cottages  of  the  Black  For- 
est, in  the  homes  of  Germany,  and  on  the  hills  of  Switzer- 
land. There  were  hearts  breaking  for  the  Lord's  appearing 
in  strange  places,  they  might  have  been  found  in  the  pal- 
aces of  Spain,  in  the  dungeons  of  the  Inquisition,  among 
the  canals  of  Holland,  and  the  green  lanes  of  England. 
Women,  as  they  hid  their  Bibles,  lest  their  lives  should  be 
forfeited,  cried  out  in  spirit,  "  O  God,  how  long  ?  "  There 
were  pains  as  of  a  woman  in  travail,  in  secret  places  there 
were  tears  and  bitter  lamentations,  on  the  high  places  of 
the  field  there  were  mighty  strivings  of  spirit,  and  so  at 
length  there  came  that  grand  revulsion  which  made  th« 


TRAVAILING  FOR  SOULa  17 

Vatican  to  rock  and  reel  from  its  foundation  to  its  pinnacle. 
There  has  been  evermore  in  the  history  of  the  church,  the 
travail  before  there  has  been  the  result. 

And  this,  dear  friends,  while  it  is  true  on  the  large 
scale,  is  true  also  in  every  individual  case.  A  man  with 
no  sensibility  or  compassion  for  other  men's  souls,  may  ac- 
eidentally  be  the  means  of  a  conversion ;  the  good  word 
which  he  utters  will  not  cease  to  be  good  because  the 
speaker  had  no  right  to  declare  God's  statutes.  The  bread 
and  meat  which  were  brought  to  Elijah  were  not  less  nour- 
ishing, because  the  ravens  brought  them,  but  the  ravens  re- 
mained ravens  still.  A  hard-hearted  man  may  say  a  good 
tiling  which  God  will  bless,  but,  as  a  rule,  those  who  bring 
souls  to  Christ  are  those  who  first  of  all  have  felt  an  agony 
of  desire  that  souls  should  be  saved.  This  is  imaged  to  us 
in  our  Master's  character.  He  is  the  great  Saviour  of  men; 
but  before  he  could  save  others,  he  learned  in  their  flesh  to 
sympathize  with  them.  He  wept  over  Jerusalem,  he  sweat 
great  drops  of  blood  in  Gethsemane;  he  was,  and  is,  a  high 
priest  who  is  touched  with  the  feeling  of  our  infirmities. 
As  the  Captain  of  our  salvation,in  bringing  many  sons  unto 
glory  he  was  made  perfect  by  sufferings.  Even  Christ 
went  not  forth  to  preach  until  he  had  spent  nights  in  inter- 
cessory prayer,  and  uttered  strong  cryings  and  tears  for  the 
salvation  of  his  hearers.  His  ministering  servants  who 
have  been  most  useful,  have  always  been  eagerly  desirous 
to  be  so.  If  any  minister  can  be  satisfied  without  conver- 
sions, he  shall  have  no  conversions.  God  will  not  force  use- 
fulness on  any  man.  It  is  only  when  our  heart  breaks  to 
see  men  saved,  that  we  shall  be  likely  to  see  sinners'  hearts 
broken.  The  secret  of  success  lies  in  all-consuming  zeal, 
all-subduing  travail  for  souls.  Read  the  sermons  of  Wes- 
ley (ind  of  Whitfield,  and  what  is  there  in  them  ?  It  is  no 
■evere  criticism  to  say  that  they  are  scarcely  worthy  to 
have  survived,  and  yet  those  sermons  wrought  marvels,  and 
wdl  they  might,  for  both  preachers  could  truly  say — 


18  TRAVAILING  FOR  SOULS. 

"  The  love  of  Christ  doth  me  oonstrain 
To  seek  the  wandering  sonls  of  men ; 
With  cries,  entreaties,  teais,to  save. 
To  snatch  them  from  the  fiery  wave." 

Id  order  to  understand  such  preaching,  you  need  to  see 
and  hear  the  man,  you  want  his  tearful  eye,  his  glowing 
countenance,  his  pleading  tone,  his  bursting  heart.  I  have 
lieard  of  a  great  preacher  who  objected  to  having  his  ser- 
mons printed,  "  Because,"  said  he,  "  you  cannot  print  me." 
That  observation  is  very  much  to  the  point.  A  soul-winner 
throws  himself  into  what  he  says.  As  I  have  sometimes 
said,  we  must  ram  ourselves  into  our  cannons,  we  must  fire 
ourselves  at  our  hearers,  and  when  we  do  this,  then,  by 
God's  grace,  their  hearts  are  often  carried  by  storm.  Do 
any  of  you  desire  your  children's  conversions  ?  You  shall 
have  them  saved  when  you  agonize  for  them.  Many  a  pa- 
rent who  has  been  privileged  to  see  his  son  walking  in  the 
truth,  will  tell  you  that  before  the  blessing  came  he  had  spent 
many  hours  in  prayer  and  in  earnest  pleading  with  God, 
and  then  it  was  that  the  Lord  visited  his  child  and  renewed 
his  soul.  I  have  heard  of  a  young  man  who  had  grown  up 
and  left  the  parental  roof,  and  through  evil  influences,  had 
been  enticed  into  holding  sceptical  views.  His  father  and 
mother  were  both  earnest  Christians,  and  it  almost  broke 
their  hearts  to  see  their  son  so  opposed  to  the  Redeemer. 
On  one  occasion  they  induced  him  to  go  with  them  to  hear 
a  celebrated  minister.  He  accompanied  them  simply  to 
please  them,  and  for  no  higher  motive.  The  sermon  hap- 
pened to  be  upon  the  glories  of  heaven.  It  was  a  very  ex- 
traordinary  sermon,  and  was  calculated  to  make  every 
Christian  in  the  audience  to  leap  for  joy.  The  young  man 
was  much  gratified  with  the  eloquence  of  the  preacher,  but 
nothing  more ;  he  gave  him  credit  for  superior  oratorical 
ability,  and  was  interested  in  the  sermon,  but  felt  none  of 
its  power.  He  chanced  to  look  at  his  father  and  mother, 
during  the  discourse,  and  was  surprised  to  see  them  weep* 


tRAVAILINa  FOR  SOtTLS.  19 

ing.  He  could  not  imagine  why  they,  being  Christian 
people,  should  sit  and  weep  under  a  sermon  which  was  most 
jubilant  in  its  strain.  When  he  reached  home,  he  said, 
**  Father,  we  have  had  a  capital  sermon,  but  I  could  not  un- 
derstand what  could  make  you  sit  there  and  cry,  and  my 
mother  too  ?"  His  father  said,  "My  dear  son,  I  certainly 
had  no  reason  to  weep  concerning  myself,  nor  your  mother, 
but  I  could  not  help  thinking  all  through  the  sermon  about 
you,  for  alas,  I  have  no  hope  that  you  will  be  a  partaker  in 
the  bright  joys  which  await  the  righteous.  It  breaks  my 
neart  to  think  that  you  will  be  shut  out  of  heaven."  His 
mother  said,  "The  very  same  thoughts  crossed  my  mind, 
and  the  more  the  preacher  spoke  of  the  joys  of  the  saved, 
the  more  I  sorrowed  for  my  dear  boy  that  he  should  never 
know  what  they  were."  That  touched  the  young  man's 
heart,  led  him  to  seek  his  father's  God,  and  before  long  he 
was  at  the  same  communion  table,  rejoicing  in  the  God 
and  Saviour  whom  his  parents  worshipped.  The  travail 
comes  before  the  bringing  forth;  the  earnest  anxiety,  the 
deep  emotion  within,  precede  our  being  made  the  instru- 
ments of  the  salvation  of  others. 

I  think  I  have  established  the  fact ;  now  for  a  minute  or 
two  let  me  show  you  the  reason  for  it.  Why  is  it  that 
there  must  be  this  anxiety  before  desirable  results  are  gain- 
ed ?  For  answer,  it  might  suffice  us  to  say  that  God  has  so 
appointed  it.  It  is  the  order  of  nature.  The  child  is  not 
bom  into  the  world  without  the  sorrows  of  the  mother,  nor 
is  the  bread  which  sustains  life  procured  from  the  earth 
without  toil:  "In  the  sweat  of  thy  face  shalt  thou  eat 
bread,"  was  a  part  of  the  primeval  curse.  Now,  as  it  is  in 
the  natural,  so  is  it  in  the  spiritual ;  there  shall  not  come 
the  blessing  we  seek,  without  first  of  all  the  earnest  yearn- 
ing for  it.  Why,  it  is  so  even  in  ordinary  business.  We 
Bay,  "  No-  sweat  no  sweet,"  "  No  pains  no  gains,"  *'  No  mill 
no  meaL''  If  there  be  no  labor  there  shall  be  no  profit. 
He  that  would  be  rich  must  toil  for  it ;  he  that  would  ac- 
quire fame  must  spend  and  be  spent  to  win  it.    It  la  ^n^t 


20  thaVailikg  90R  sotJia 

to.  There  must  ever  be  the  travail  and  then  the  desirA 
Cometh.  God  has  so  appointed  it :  let  us  accept  the  decree. 
But  better  still,  he  has  ordained  this  for  our  good.  If 
souls  were  given  us  without  any  effort,  anxiety  or  prayer, 
it  would  be  our  loss  to  have  it  so,  because  the  anxieties 
which  throb  within  a  compassionate  spirit  exercise  hit 
graces ;  they  produce  grateful  love  to  God;  they  try  hit 
laith  in  the  power  of  God  to  save  others ;  they  drive  him  to 
the  mercy-seat ;  they  strengthen  his  patience  and  persevere 
ance,  and  every  grace  within  the  man  is  educated  and  in- 
creased by  his  travail  for  souls.  As  labor  is  now  a  bless- 
ing, so  also  is  soul- travail ;  men  are  fashioned  more  fully 
into  the  likeness  of  Christ  thereby,  and  the  whole  church  it 
by  the  same  emotion  quickened  into  energy.  The  fire  of 
our  own  spiritual  life  is  fanned  by  that  same  breath  which  our 
prayers  invite  to  come  from  the  four  winds  to  breath  upon 
the  slain.  Besides,  dear  Mends,  the  zeal  that  God  excites 
within  us  is  often  the  means  of  effecting  the  purpose  which 
we  desire.  After  all,  God  does  not  give  conversions  to  elo- 
quence, but  to  heart.  The  power  in  the  hand  of  Gtod's  Spir- 
it for  conversions  is  heart  coming  in  contact  with  heart. 
Truth  from  the  heart  goes  to  the  heart.  This  is  God's  bat- 
tle-axe and  weapons  of  war  in  his  crusade.  He  is  pleased 
to  use  the  yearnings,  longings,  and  sympathies  of  Christian 
men,  as  the  means  of  compelling  the  careless  to  think,  con- 
straining the  hardened  to  feel,  and  driving  the  unbelieving 
to  consider.  I  have  little  confidence  in  elaborate  speech 
and  polished  sentences,  as  the  means  of  reaching  men's 
hearts  ;  but  I  have  great  faith  in  that  simple-minded  Chris- 
tian woman,  who  must  have  souls  converted  or  she  will 
weep  her  eyes  out  over  them  ;  and  in  that  humble  Christian 
who  prays  day  and  night  in  secret,  and  then  avails  himself 
of  every  opportunity  to  address  a  loving  word  to  sinners. 
The  emotion  we  feel,  and  the  affection  we  bear,  are  the  most 
powerful  implements  of  soul-winning.  Gk)d  the  Holy  Ghost 
usually  breaks  hard  hearts  by  tender  hearts. 


TRAVAILING  FOR  SOtTLS.  21 

Besides,  the  travail  qualifies  for  the  proper  taking  care 
of  the  offspring.  God  does  not  commit  his  new-born  chil- 
dren to  people  who  do  not  care  to  see  conversions.  If  he 
ever  aUows  them  to  fall  into  such  hands,  they  suffer  very 
serioos  loss  thereby.  Who  is  so  fit  to  encourage  a  new-born 
believer  as  the  man  who  first  anguished  before  the  Lord  for 
his  conversion  ?  Those  you  have  wept  over  and  prayed  for 
you  will  be  sure  to  encourage  and  assist.  The  church  that 
never  travailed,  should  God  send  her  a  hundred  converts, 
would  be  unfit  to  train  them ;  she  would  not  know  what  to 
do  with  little  children,  and  would  leave  them  to  much  suf- 
fering. Let  us  thank  God,  brethren,  if  he  has  given  us  any 
degree  of  the  earnest  anxiety  and  sympathy,  which  marked 
tpul-winning  men  and  women,  and  let  us  ask  to  have  more ; 
for,  in  proportion  as  we  have  it,  we  shall  be  qualified  to  be 
the  instruments  in  the  hand  of  the  Spirit,  of  nursing  und 
cherishing  God's  sons  and  daughters. 

Once  more,  there  is  a  great  benefit  in  the  law  which 
makes  travail  necessary  to  spiritual  birth,  becausQ  it  secures 
all  the  glory  to  God.  If  you  want  to  be  lowered  in  your 
own  esteem,  try  to  convert  a  child.  I  would  like  those 
brethren  who  believe  so  much  in  free  will,  and  the  natural 
goodness  of  the  human  heart,  to  try  some  children  that  I 
could  bring  to  them,  and  see  whether  they  could  break  their 
hearts  and  make  them  love  the  Saviour.  Why,  sir,  you 
never  think  yourself  so  great  a  fool  as  after  trying  in  your 
own  strength  to  bring  a  sinner  to  the  Saviour.  Oh !  how 
often  have  I  come  back  defeated  from  arguing  with  an 
awakened  person  whom  I  have  sought  to  comfort :  I  did 
think  I  had  some  measure  of  skill  in  handling  sorrowful 
cases,  but  I  have  been  compelled  to  say  to  myself,  "What  a 
simpleton  I  am  I  God  the  Holy  Ghost  must  take  this  case 
in  hand,  for  I  am  foiled."  When  one  has  tried  in  a  sermon 
to  reach  a  certain  person  who  is  living  in  sin,  you  learn 
afterwards  that  he  enjoyed  the  sermon  which  he  ought  to 
have  smarted  under ;  then,  you  say,  "  Ah,  now  I  see  what  a 


r 


Sa  tRAVAILING  FOB  SOOL& 

weak  worm  I  am,  and  if  good  be  done,  God  shall  have  the 
glory."  Tour  longing,  then,  that  others  should  be  saved, 
and  your  vehemence  of  spirit,  shall  secure  to  God  all  the 
glory  of  his  own  work ;  and  this  is  what  the  Lord  is  aiming 
at,  for  his  glory  he  will  not  give  to  another,  nor  his  praise 
to  an  arm  of  flesh. 

And  now,  having  established  the  fact,  and  shown  the 
reasons  for  it,  let  us  notice  how  this  travail  shows  itself. 

Usually  when  God  intends  greatly  to  bless  a  church,  it 
will  begin  in  this  way  : — ^Two  or  three  persons  in  it  are  dis- 
tressed at  the  low  state  of  aflairs,  and  become  troubled  even  to 
anguish.  Perhaps  they  do  not  speak  to  one  another,  or 
know  of  their  common  grief^  but  they  begin  to  pray  with 
flaming  desire  and  untiring  importunity.  The  passion  to 
see  the  church  revived  rules  them.  They  think  of  it  when 
they  go  to  rest,  they  dream  of  it  on  their  bed,  they  muse  on 
it  in  the  streets.  This  one  thing  eats  them  up.  They  suffer 
great  heaviness  and  continual  sorrow  in  heart  for  perishing 
sinners ;  they  travail  in  birth  for  souls.  I  have  happened  to 
become  the  centre  of  certain  brethren  in  this  church ;  one 
of  them  said  to  me  the  other  day,  "  O  sir,  I  pray  day  and 
night  for  God  to  prosper  our  church  ;  I  long  to  see  greater 
things  ;  God  is  blessing  us,  but  we  want  much  more."  I  saw 
the  deep  earnestness  of  the  man's  soul,  and  I  thanked  him 
and  thanked  God  heartily,  thinking  it  to  be  a  sure  sign  of  a 
coming  blessing.  Sometime  after,  another  friend,  who 
probably  now  hears  me  speak,  but  who  did  not  know  any 
thing  about  the  other,  felt  the  same  yearning,  and  must 
needs  let  me  know  it ;  he  too  is  anxious,  longing,  begging, 
crying,  for  a  revival ;  and  thus  from  three  or  four  quarters 
I  have  had  the  same  message,  and  I  feel  hopeful  because  of 
these  tokens  for  good.  When  the  sun  rises  the  mountain 
tops  first  catch  the  light,  and  those  who  constantly  live 
near  to  God  will  be  the  first  to  feel  the  influence  of  the  com- 
ing refreshing.  The  Lord  give  me  a  dozen  importunate 
pleaders  and  lovers  of  souls,  and  by  his  grace  we  will  shake 


TRAVAILING  FOR  SOULS.  3$ 

all  London  from  end  to  end  yet.  The  work  wculd  go  on 
without  the  mass  of  you,  Christians ;  many  of  you  only 
hinder  the  march  of  the  army;  but  give  us  a  dozen  lion-like, 
Iamb-like  men,  burning  with  intense  love  to  Christ  and  souls, 
snd  nothing  will  be  impossible  to  their  faith.  The  most  of 
us  are  not  worthy  to  unloose  the  shoe-latches  of  ardent  saint& 
I  often  feel  I  am  not  so  myself,  but  I  aspire  and  long  to 
be  reckoned  among  them.  Oh,  may  God  give  \a^  this  first 
sign  of  the  travail  in  the  earnest  ones  and  twos. 

By  degrees  the  individuals  are  drawn  togethe)  by  sacred 
affinity,  and  the  prayer-meetings  become  very  different. 
The  brother  who  talked  twenty  minutes  of  what  he  called 
prayer,  and  yet  never  asked  for  a  single  thing,  gives  up  his 
oration  and  falls  to  pleading  with  many  tears  and  broken 
sentences  :  while  the  friend  who  used  to  relate  his  expe- 
rience and  go  through  the  doctrines  of  grace,  and  call  that 
a  prayer,  forgets  that  rigmarole  and  begins  agoidzing  be- 
fore the  throne.  And  not  only  this,  but  little  knots  here 
and  there  come  together  in  their  cottages,  and  in  their 
little  rooms  cry  mightily  to  God.  The  result  will  be  that 
the  minister,  even  if  he  does  not  know  of  the  feeling  in 
the  hearts  of  his  people,  will  grow  fervent  himselt  He 
will  preach  more  evangelically,  more  tenderly,  more  earn- 
estly. He  will  be  no  longer  formal,  or  cold,  or  stereotyped ; 
he  will  be  all  alive.  Meanwhile,  not  with  the  preacher  only 
will  be  the  blessing,  but  with  his  hearers  who  love  the  Lord. 
One  will  be  trying  a  plan  for  getting  in  the  young  people ; 
another  will  be  looking  after  the  strangers  in  the  aisles, 
who  come  only  now  and  then.  One  brother  will  make  a 
vehement  attempt  to  preach  the  gospel  at  the  corner  of  the 
street ;  another  will  open  a  room  down  a  dark  court ;  another 
will  visit  lodging-houses  and  hospitals ;  all  sorts  of  holy  plans 
will  be  invented,  an^  zeal  will  break  out  in  many  directions. 
All  this  will  be  spontaneous,  nothing  will  be  forced.  K  you 
want  to  get  up  a  revival,  as  the  term  is,  you  can  do  it,  just 

you  can  grow  tasteless  strawberries  in  winter,  by  artificial 


84  TRAVAILING  FOR  SOtJLS. 

heat.  There  are  ways  and  means  of  doing  that  kind  of  thing, 
but  the  genuine  work  of  God  needs  no  such  planning  and 
scheming ;  it  is  altogether  spontaneous.  If  you  see  a  snow- 
drop next  Febnary  in  your  garden,  you  will  feel  persuaded 
that  spring  is  on  the  way;  the  artificial-flower  maker  could  put 
as  many  snow-drops  there  as  you  please,  but  that  would  be 
no  index  of  coming  spring.  So  you  may  get  up  an  apparent 
zeal  which  will  be  no  proof  of  God's  blessing ;  but  when 
fervor  comes  of  itself,  without  human  direction  or  control, 
then  is  it  of  the  Lord.  When  men's  hearts  heave  and  break, 
like  the  mould  of  the  garden  under  the  influence  of  the 
reviving  life  which  lay  buried  there,  then  in  very  deed  a 
benediction  is  on  the  way.  Travail  is  no  mockery,  but  a 
real  agony  of  the  whole  nature.  May  such  be  seen  in  this 
our  church,  and  throughout  the  whole  Israel  of  God. 

n.  Now,  with  great  brevity,  let  us  consider  that  the 
RESULT  IS  OFTEN  VERY  suEPBisiNG.  It  is  frequently  sur- 
prising for  rapidity.  "  As  soon  as  Zion  travailed,  she  brought 
forth  her  children."  God's  works  are  not  tied  by  time. 
The  more  spiritual  a  force  is  the  less  it  lies  within  the  chains 
of  time.  The  electric  current,  which  has  a  greater  nearness 
to  the  spiritual  than  the  grosser  forms  of  materialism,  is 
inconceivably  rapid  from  that  very  reason,  and  by  it  time 
is  all  but  annihilated.  The  influences  of  the  Spirit  of  God 
are  a  force  most  spiritual,  and  more  quick  than  any  thing 
beneath  the  sun.  As  soon  as  we  agonize  in  soul  the  Holy 
Spirit  can,  if  he  pleases,  convert  the  person  for  whom  we 
have  pleaded.  While  we  are  yet  speaking  he  hears,  and 
before  we  call  he  answers.  Some  calculate  the  expected 
progress  of  a  church  by  arithmetic  ;  and  I  think  I  have 
heard  of  arithmetical  sermons  in  which  there  have  been  in- 
genious calculations  as  to  how  many  missionaries  it  would 
take  to  convert  the  world,  and  how  much  cash  would  be 
demanded.  Now,  there  is  no  room  here  for  the  application 
01  mathematics  ;  spiritual  forces  are  not  calculable  by  an 


tftAVAtLTNG  fOti  SOtJLS.  26 

Arithmetic  which  is  most  at  home  in  the  material  universe. 
A  truth  which  is  calculated  to  strike  the  mind  of  one  man 
to-day  may  readily  enough  produce  a  like  effect  upon  a 
million  minds  to-morrow.  The  preaching  which  moves' 
one  heart  needs  not  be  altered  to  tell  upon  ten  thousand. 
W^ith  God's  Spirit  our  present  instrumentalities  will  suffice 
to  win  the  world  to  Jesus  ;  without  him,  ten  thousand  times 
as  much  apparent  force  would  be  only  so  much  weakness. 
The  spread  of  truth,  moreover,  is  not  reckonable  by  time. 
During  the  ten  years  which  ended  in  1870,  such  wondrous 
changes  were  wrought  throughout  the  world  that  no  prophet 
would  have  been  believed  had  he  foretold  them.  Reforms 
have  been  accomplished  in  England,  in  the  United  States, 
in  Germany,  in  Spain,  in  Italy,  which  according  to  ordi- 
nary reckoning,  would  have  occupied  at  least  one  hundred 
years.  Things  which  concern  the  mind  cannot  be  subjected 
to  those  regulations  of  time  which  govern  steamboats  and 
railways  ;  in  such  matters  God's  messengers  are  flames  of 
fire.  The  Spiiit  of  God  is  able  to  operate  upon  the  minds 
of  men  instantaneously  :  witness  the  case  of  Paul.  Between 
jiow  and  to-morrow  morning  he  could  excite  holy  thought 
in  all  the  minds  of  all  the  thousand  millions  of  the  sons 
of  Adam ;  and  if  prayer  were  mighty  enough,  and  strong 
enough,  why  should  it  not  be  done  on  some  bright  day  ? 
We  are  not  straitened  in  him,  we  are  straitened  in  our  own 
bowels.  All  the  fault  lies  there.  Oh  for  the  travail  that 
would  produce  immediate  results. 

But  the  result  is  surprising,  not  only  for  its  rapidity,  but 
for  the  greatness  of  it.  It  is  said,  "  Shall  a  nation  be  born 
at  once  ?  "  As  soon  as  ever  Zion  was  in  distress  concerning 
her  children,  tens  of  thousands  came  and  built  up  Jerusalem, 
and  re-established  her  fallen  state.  So,  in  answer  to  prayer, 
dlod.  not  only  bestows  speedy  blessings,  but  great  blessings. 
There  were  fervent  prayers  in  that  upper  room  ''  before 
the  day  of  Pentecost  had  fully  come,"  and  what  a  great 
answer  it  was  when,  after  Peter's  sermon,  some  three  thou- 


26  TRAVAILma  FOR  SOULS. 

Band  were  ready  to  confess  their  faith  in  Christ,  and  to  be 
baptized.  Shall  we  never  see  such  things  again?  Is  the  Spirit 
straitened  ?  Has  his  arm  waxed  short  ?  Nay,  verily,  but 
we  clog  and  hinder  him.  He  cannot  do  any  mighty  work 
here  because  of  our  unbelief ;  and,  if  our  unbelief  were 
cast  out,  and  if  prayer  went  up  to  God  with  eagerness,  an.i 
vehemence,  and  importunity,  then  would  a  blessing  descend 
BO  copious  as  to  amaze  us  all. 

But  enough  of  this,  for  I  must  needs  pass  on  to  the  next 
point. 

in.  This  travail  and  its  besult  abb  abundantly  dk- 
BiBABLB ;  pre-eminently  desirable  at  this  hour.  The  world 
is  perishing  for  a  lack  of  knowledge.  Did  any  one  among 
us  ever  lay  China  on  his  heart  ?  Your  imagination  cannot 
grapple  with  the  population  of  that  mighty  empire,  without 
God,  without  Christ,  strangers  to  the  commonwealth  of 
Israel.  But  it  is  not  China  alone ;  there  are  other  vast  na« 
ti6ns  lying  in  darkness  ;  the  great  serpent  hath  coiled  him- 
self around  the  globe,  and  who  shall  set  the  world  free  from 
him  ?  Reflect  upon  this  one  city  with  its  three  millions. 
What  sin  the  moon  sees !  What  sin  the  Sabbath  sees  I 
Alas  for  the  transgressions  of  this  wicked  city.  Babylon 
of  old  could  not  have  been  worse  than  London  is,  nor  so 
guilty,  for  she  had  not  the  light  that  London  has  received. 
Brethren,  there  is  no  hope  for  China,  no  hope  for  the  world, 
no  hope  for  our  own  city,  while  the  church  is  sluggish  and 
lethargic.  Through  the  church  the  blessing  is  usually  be- 
stowed. Christ  multiplies  the  bread,  and  gives  it  to  the 
disciples ;  the  multitudes  can  only  get  it  through  the  dis- 
ciples. Oh,  it  is  time,  it  is  high  time  that  the  churches 
W(Te  awakened  to  seek  the  good  of  dying  myriads.  ]!i lore- 
over,  brethren,  the  powers  of  evil  are  ever  active.  We 
may  sleep,  but  Satan  sleepeth  never.  The  church's  plou  fh 
lies  yonder,  rusting  in  the  furrow  ;  do  you  not  see  it  to 
your  shame  ?    But  the  plough  of  Satan  goes  from  enti  ^-p 


TRAVAILING  FOR  SOULS.  87 

end  of  his  great  field,  he  leaves  no  headland,  but  he  ploughs 
deep  while  sluggish  churches  sleep.  May  we  be  stirred  as 
we  see  the  awful  activity  of  evil  spirits  and  persons  who 
are  under  their  sway.  How  industriously  pernicious  litera- 
ture is  spread  abroad,  and  with  what  a  zeal  do  men  seek 
for  fresh  ways  of  sinning.  He  is  eminent  among  men  who 
can  invent  fresh  songs  to  gratify  the  lascivious  tongue,  or 
find  new  spectacles  to  delight  unclean  eyes.  O  God,  are 
thine  enemies  awake,  and  only  thy  friends  asleep  ?  O  Suf- 
ferer, once  bathed  in  bloody  sweat  in  Gethsemane,  Is  there 
not  one  of  the  twelve  awake  but  Judas?  Are  they  all 
asleep  except  the  traitor  ?  May  God  arouse  us  for  his  in- 
finite mercy's  sake. 

Besides  this,  my  brethren,  when  a  church  is  not  serving 
God,  mischief  is  brewing  within  herself.  While  she  is  not 
bringing  others  in,  her  own  heart  is  becoming  weak  in  its 
pulsations,  and  her  entire  constitution  is  a  prey  to  decline. 
The  church  must  either  bring  forth  children  unto  God,  or 
else  die  of  consumption:  she  has  no  alternative  but  that. 
A  church  must  either  be  fruitful  or  rot,  and  of  all  things,  a 
rotting  church  is  the  most  offensive.  Would  God  we 
could  bury  our  dead  churches  out  of  our  sight,  as  Abraham 
buried  Sarah,  for  above  ground  they  breed  a  pestilence  of 
scepticism; for  men  say,  "Is  this  religion?"  and  taking  it 
to  be  so,  they  forego  true  religion  altogether. 

And  then,  worst  of  all  is,  God  is  not  glorified.  If  there 
be  no  yearning  of  heart  in  the  church,  and  no  conversions, 
where  is  the  travail  of  the  Redeemer's  soul  ?  Where,  Im- 
manuel,  where  are  the  trophies  of  thy  terrible  conflict? 
Where  are  the  jewels  for  thy  crown  ?  Thou  shalt  have 
thine  own,  thy  Father's  will  shall  not  be  frustrated;  thou 
shalt  be  adored  ;but  as  yet  we  see  it  not.  HaWl  are  men's 
hearts,  and  they  will  not  love  thee;  unyielding  are  their  wills, 
and  they  will  not  own  thy  sovereignty.  Oh  !  weep  because 
Jesus  is  not  honored.  The  foul  oath  still  curdles  our  blood 
as  we  hear  it,  and  blasphemy  usurps  the  place  of  gratefU 


38  ^AVAILING  FOB  SOULS. 

song.  Oh  I  by  the  wounds  and  bloody  sweat,  by  the  oroM 
and  nails,  and  spear,  I  beseech  you  followers  of  Christ,  be 
in  earnest,  that  Jesus  Christ's  name  may  be  known  and 
loved  through  the  earnest  agonizing  endeavors  of  the 
Christian  church. 

IV    And  now  I  must  come  near  to  a  close,  by,  in  the 
fourth  place,  noticing  the  woe  which  will  surely  comb 

TO  THOSE  WHO  HINDER  THE  TRAVAIL  OF  THE  CHURCH,  and  SO 

prevent  the  bringing  forth  of  her  children.  An  earnest 
spirit  cannot  complete  its  exhortations  to  zeal  without  pro- 
nouncing a  denunciation  upon  the  indifferent.  What  said 
the  heroine  of  old  who  had  gone  forth  against  the  enemies 
of  Israel,  when  she  remembered  coward  spirits  ?  "  Curse 
ye  Meroz,  saith  the  angel  of  the  Lord,  curse  ye  bitterly  the 
inhabitants  thereof;  because  they  came  not  to  the  help  of 
the  Lord  against  the  mighty."  Some  such  curse  will  as- 
suredly come  upon  every  professing  Christian  who  is  back- 
ward in  helping  the  church  in  the  day  of  her  soul's  travail. 
And  who  are  they  that  hinder  her?  I  answer,  every  world- 
ly Christian  hinders  the  progress  of  the  gospel.  Every 
member  of  a  church  who  is  living  in  secret  sin,  who  is  tol- 
erating in  his  heart  any  thing  that  he  knows  to  be  'Nvrong, 
who  is  not  seeking  eagerly  his  own  personal  sanctification, 
is  to  that  extent  hindering  the  work  of  the  Spirit  of  God. 
**Be  ye  clean  that  bear  the  vessels  of  the  Lord,"  for  to  the 
extent  that  we  maintain  known  unholiness,  we  restrain  the 
Spirit.  He  cannot  work  by  us  as  long  as  any  conscious  sin 
is  tolerated.  It  is  not  overt  breaking  of  commandments 
that  I  am  now  speaking  of,  brethren,  but  I  include  worldli- 
ness  also — a  care  for  carnal  things,  and  a  carelessness  about 
spiritual  things,  having  enough  grace  just  to  make  us  hope 
that  you  are  a  Christian, 'but  not  enough  to  prove  you  are  ; 
bearing  a  shrivelled  apple  here  and  there  on  the  topmost 
bough,  but  not  much  fruit;  this  I  mean,  this  paiti'il  bar- 
renness, not  complete  enough  to  condemn,  yet  co/nplete 


TRAVAILING  FOR  SOULS.  29 

enougli  to  restrain  the  blessing,  this  robs  the  treasury  of  tbe 
church,  and  hinders  her  progress.  O  brethren,  if  any  of  you 
are  thus  described,  repent  and  do  your  first  works;  and 
God  help  you  to  be  foremost  in  proportion  as  you  have  been 
behind. 

They  are  aho  guilty  who  distract  the  mind  of  the 
church  from  the  subject  in  hand.  Anybody  who  ca/ls  oflf 
the  thoughts  of  the  church  from  soul-saving  is  a  mischief- 
maker.  I  have  heard  it  said  of  a  minister,  "  He  greatly  in- 
fluences the  politics  of  the  town."  Well,  it  is  a  very  doubt- 
ful good  in  my  mind,  a  very  doubtful  good  indeed.  If  the 
man,  keeping  to  his  own  calling  of  preaching  the  gospel, 
happens  to  influence  these  meaner  things,  it  is  well,  but  any 
Christian  minister  who  thinks  that  he  can  do  two  things 
well,  is  mistaken.  Let  him  mind  soul-winning,  and  not 
turn  a  Christian  church  mto  a  political  club.  Let  us  fight 
out  our  politics  somewhere  else,  but  not  inside  the  church 
ol  God.  There  our  one  business  is  soul-winning,  our  one 
banner  is  the  cross,  our  one  leader  is  the  crucified  King. 
Inside  the  church  there  may  be  minor  things  that  take  off 
the  thoughts  of  men  from  seeking  souls, — little  things  that 
can  be  made  beneath  the  eye  that  is  microscopical,  to  swell 
into  great  offences.  Oh,  my  brethren,  let  us,  while  souls  are 
perishing,  waive  personal  differences.  "  It  must  need  be 
that  offences  come,  but  woe  unto  him  by  whom  the  offence 
cometh;"  but,  after  all,  what  can  there  be  that  is  worth 
taking  notice  of,  compared  with  glorifying  Christ.  If  our 
Lord  und  Master  would  be  honored  by  your  being  a  door- 
mat for  his  saints  to  wipe  their  feet  on,  you  would  be  hon- 
ored to  be  inthe  position;  and  if  there  shall  come  glory  to 
God  by  your  patient  endurance,  even  of  insult  and  con- 
tumely, be  glad  in  your  heart  that  you  are  permitted  to  be 
nothing  that  Christ  may  be  all  in  all.  We  must  by  no 
means  turn  aside  to  this  or  that ;  not  even  golden  apples 
must  tempt  us  in  this  race  I    There  lies  the  mark,  and  xm* 


80  TRAVAILING  FOR  SOULS. 

til  it  is  reached,  we  must  never  pause,  but  onward  press,  for 
Christ's  cause  and  crown. 

Above  all,  my  brethren,  we  shall  be  hindering  the  trav- 
ail of  the  church  if  we  do  not  share  in  it.  Many  church 
members  think  that  if  they  do  nothing  wrong,  and  make  no 
trouble,  then  they  are  all  right.  Not  at  all,  sir ;  not  at  all. 
Here  is  a  chariot,  and  we  are  all  engaged  to  drag  it.  Some 
of  you  do  not  put  out  your  hands  to  pull ;  well,  then,  the 
rest  of  us  have  to  labor  so  much  the  more ;  and  the  worst 
of  it  is  we  have  to  draw  you  also.  While  you  do  not  add  to 
the  strength  which  draws,  you  increase  the  weight  that  is  to 
be  drawn.  It  is  all  very  well  for  you  to  say,  "  But  I  do  not 
hinder" ;  you  do  hinder,  you  cannot  help  hindering.  If  a 
man's  leg  does  not  help  him  in  walking,  it  certainly  hinders 
him.  Oh,  I  cannot  bear  to  think  of  it.  That  I  should  be  a 
hinderance  to  my  own  soul's  growth  is  bad  indeed  ;  but  that 
I  should  stand  in  the  way  of  the  people  of  God  and  cool 
their  courage,  and  damp  their  ardor — ^my  Master,  let  it  nev- 
er be  I  Sooner  let  me  sleep  among  the  clods  of  the  valley, 
than  be  a  hinderance  to  the  meanest  work  that  is  done  for 
thy  nama 

V.  And  now  I  shall  close,  not  with  this  note  of  woe,  but 
with  A  WOBD  OF  BLESSING.  Depend  upon  it  there  shall 
come  a  great  blessing  to  any  of  you  who  feel  the  soul  trav- 
ail that  brings  souls  to  GodL  Tour  own  heart  will  be  wa- 
tered. Ton  know  the  old  illustration,  so  often  used  that  it 
is  now  almost  hackneyed,  of  the  two  travellers,  who  passed 
a  man  frozen  in  the  snow,  and  thought  to  be  dead ;  and  the 
one  said,  "  I  have  enough  to  do  to  keep  myself  alive,  I  will 
hasten  on ;"  but  the  other  said,  "  I  cannot  pass  a  fellow- 
creature  while  there  isHhe  least  breath  in  him."  He  stooped 
down  and  began  to  warm  the  frozen  man  by  rubbing  him 
with  great  vigor ;  and  at  last  the  poor  fellow  opened  his 
eyes,  came  back  to  life  and  animation,  and  walked  along 
with  the  man  who  had  restored  him  to  life ;  and  what  think 


TBATAILma  FOB  SOIJLB.  81 

yoa  was  one  of  the  first  sights  they  saw  ?  it  was  tbo  man 
who  so  selfishly  took  care  of  himself  frozen  to  death.  The 
good  Samaritan  had  preserved  his  own  life  by  rubbing  the 
other  man  ;  the  friction  he  had  given  had  caused  the  action 
of  his  own  blood,  and  kept  him  in  vigor.  You  will  bless  your- 
selves if  you  Ixess  othera. 

Moi'eover,  will  it  not  be  a  joy  to  feel  that  you  have  done 
what  you  could  ?  It  is  always  well  on  a  Sunday  evening 
for  a  preacher  to  feel  when  he  gets  home,  "  Well,  I  may  not 
have  preached  as  I  could  wish,  but  I  have  preached  the 
Lord  Jesus,  and  poured  forth  all  my  heart  and  I  could  do 
no  more."  He  sleeps  soundly  on  that.  After  a  day  spent 
in  doing  all  the  good  you  can,  even  if  you  have  met  with  no 
success,  you  can  lean  your  head  on  Christ's  bosom  and  fall 
asleep,  feeling  that  if  souls  be  not  gathered,  yet  you  have 
your  reward.  K  men  are  lost,  it  is  some  satisfaction  to  us 
that  they  were  not  lost  because  we  failed  to  tell  them  the 
way  of  salvation.  But  what  a  comfort  it  will  be  to  you  sup- 
posing you  should  be  successful  in  bringing  some  to  Christ. 
Why  it  will  set  all  the  bells  of  your  soul  ringing.  There 
is  no  greater  joy  except  the  joy  of  our  own  communion  with 
Christ,  than  this  of  bringing  others  to  trust  the  Saviour.  Oh 
seek  this  joy  and  pant  after  it.  And  what  if  you  should  see 
your  own  children  converted?  You  have  long  hoped  for 
it,  but  your  hopes  have  been  disappointed ;  God  means  to 
give  you  that  choice  blessing  when  you  live  more  nearly  to 
him  yourself.  Yes,  wife,  the  husband's  heart  will  be  won 
when  your  heart  is  perfectly  consecrated.  Yes,  mother,  the 
girl  shall  love  the  Saviour  when  you  love  him  better.  Yes, 
teacher,  God  means  to  bless  your  class,  but  not  until  first 
of  all  he  has  made  you  fit  to  receive  the  blessing.  Why, 
now,  if  your  children  were  to  be  c#nverted  through  youi 
teaching,  you  would  be  mightily  proud  of  it :  God  knowj 
you  could  not  bear  such  success,  and  does  not  mean  to  give 
it  until  he  has  laid  you  low  at  his  feet,  and  emptied  you  of 
yourself,  and  filled  you  with  himsel£ 


82  TRAVAILING  FOR  SOULS. 

And  DOW  I  ask  the  prayers  of  all  this  church,  that  6o<1 
would  send  us  a  time  of  revival.  I  have  not  to  complain 
that  I  have  labored  in  vain,  and  spent  my  strength  for 
nought;  far  from  it.  I  have  not  even  to  think  that  the 
blessing  is  withdrawn  from  the  preaching  of  the  word,  even 
in  a  measure,  for  I  never  had  so  many  cases  of  conversion  in 
my  life  as  I  have  known  since  I  have  been  restored  froni 
sickness  ;  I  have  never  before  received  so  many  letters  in 
so  short  a  time,  telling  me  that  the  sermons  printed  have 
been  blest,  or  the  sermons  preached  here  ;  yet  I  do  not 
think  we  ever  had  so  few  conversions  from  the  regular  con- 
gregation. I  partly  account  for  it  from  the  fact,  that  you 
cannot  fish  in  one  pond  always  and  catch  as  many  fish  as  at 
first.  Perhaps  the  Lord  has  saved  all  of  you  he  means  to 
save  ;  sometimes,  I  am  afraid  he  has ;  and  then  it  will  be  of 
little  use  for  me  to  keep  on  preaching  to  you,  and  I  had  better 
shift  quarters  and  try  somewhere  else.  It  would  be  a  mel- 
aiicholy  thought  if  I  believed  it  : — I  do  not  believe  it,  I 
only  fear  it.  Surely  it  is  not  always  to  be  true  that  stran- 
gers, who  drop  in  here  only  once,  are  converted,  and  you 
who  are  always  hearing  the  gospel  remain  unaffected. 
Strange,  but  may  it  not  be  strangely,  lamentably  true  of 
you  ?  This  very  day  may  the  anxiety  of  your  Christian 
friends  be  excited  for  you,  and  then  may  you  be  led  to  be 
anxious  for  yourselves,  and  give  your  eyes  no  slumber  till 
you  find  the  Saviour.  You  know  the  way  of  salvation  ;  it  is 
simply  to  come  with  your  sins  and  rest  them  on  the  Saviour ; 
it  is  to  rely  upon  or  trust  in  the  atoning  blood.  Oh  that 
you  may  be  made  to  trust  this  morning,  to  the  praise  of  the 
glory  of  his  grace.  The  elders  mean  to  meet  together  to^ 
morrow  evening  to  have  a  special  hour  of  prayer  ;  I  hope, 
also,  the  mothers  win  meet  and  have  a  time  of  wrestling, 
and  that  every  member  of  the  church  will  try  to  set  apart 
a  time  for  supplication  this  week,  that  the  Lord  may  visit 
again  his  church,  and  cause  us  to  rejoice  in  his  name.  We 
cannot  go  back;   we  dare  not  go  back     We  have  put 


TRAVAILING  FOR  SOULS.  33 

our  hand  to  the  plough,  and  the  curse  will  be  upon  us 
if  we  turn  back.  Bemember  Lot's  wife.  It  must  be  on- 
ward with  us  ;  backward  it  cannot  be.  In  the  name  of 
God  the  Eternal,  let  us  gird  up  our  loins  by  the  power  of 
his  Spirit,  and  go  onward  conquering  through  the  blood  oi 
the  Lamb.    We  ask  it  for  Jesus'  sake.    Amen. 


ft!  XOUB  OWN  SALVATION^ 


SERMON  n. 


«TOUB  OWN  SALVATION.'* 

This  sermon  has  been  yeiy  largely  blessed  in  conyendonB.    It  hai 
been  very  widely  scattered  in  its  separate  form. 

**  TOUB  OWH  SALTATION.**— PhilippianB  11.  IS. 

Wb  select  the  words,  ^^your  own  salvation^^  as  our  text 
this  morning,  not  out  of  any  singularity,  or  from  the  slight- 
est wish  that  the  brevity  of  the  text  should  surprise  you ; 
but  because  our  subject  will  be  the  more  clearly  before  you 
if  only  these  three  words  are  pronounced.  If  I  had  nomi- 
nally taken  the  whole  verse  I  could  not  have  attempted  to 
expound  it  without  distracting  your  attention  from  the  topic 
which  now  weighs  upon  ray  heart.  Oh  that  the  divine  Spirit 
may  bring  home  to  each  one  of  your  minds  the  unspeakable 
importance  of  "  your  own  salvation  1 " 

We  have  heard  it  said  by  hearers  that  they  come  to  listen 
to  us,  and  we  talk  to  them  upon  subjects  in  which  they  have 
no  interest.  You  ^vill  not  be  able  to  make  this  complaint 
to-day,  for  we  shall  speak  only  of  "your  own  salvation;" 
and  nothing  can  more  concern  you*  It  has  sometimes  been 
said  that  preachers  frequently  select  very  unpractical  themea 
No  such  objection  can  be  raised  to-day,  for  nothing  can  be 
more  practical  than  this ;  nothing  more  needful  than  to  urge 
you  to  see  to  "  your  own  salvation."  We  have  even  heard 
it  said  that  ministers  delight  in  abstruse  subjects,  paradoxi 
cal  dogmas,  and  mysteries  surpassing  comprehension ;  but 
assuredly,  we  will  keep  to  plain  sailing  this  morning.     No 


YOUR  OWN  SALVATION.  36 

miblime  doctrines,  no  profound  questions  shall  perplex  you ; 
you  shall  only  be  called  on  to  consider  "  your  own  salva- 
tion : "  a  very  homely  theme,  and  a  very  s  mple  one,  but  for 
all  that,  the  most  weighty  that  can  be  brought  before  you, 
I  shall  seek  after  simple  words  also,  and  plain  sentences,  to 
Slit  the  simplicity  and  plainness  of  the  subject,  that  there 
may  be  no  thought  whatever  about  the  speaker's  language, 
but  only  concerning  this  one,  sole,  only  topic,  "  your  own 
salvation,**  I  ask  you  all,  as  reasonable  men  who  would 
not  injure  or  neglect  yourselves,  to  lend  me  your  most  seri- 
ous attention.  Chase  away  the  swarming  vanities  which 
buzz  around  you,  and  let  each  man  think  for  himself  upon 
**  his  own  salvation."  Oh  may  the  Spirit  of  God  set  each  one 
of  you  apart  in  a  mental  solitude,  and  constrain  you  each 
one,  singly,  to  face  the  truth  concerning  bis  own  state  !  Each 
man  apart,  each  woman  apart ;  the  father  apart,  and  the 
child  apart :  may  you  now  come  before  the  Lord  in  solemn 
thought,  and  may  nothing  occupy  your  attention  but  this  : 
**your  own  salration." 

I.  We  will  begin  this  morning's  meditation  by  noting 

THE  MATTER  UNDER  CONSIDERATION — Solvation  I 

Salvation !  a  great  word,  not  always  understood,  often 
narrowed  down,  and  its  very  marrow  overlooked.  Salva- 
tion I  This  concerns  every  one  here  present.  We  all  fell 
in  our  first  parent ;  we  have  all  sinned  personally ;  we  shall 
all  perish  unless  we  find  salvation.  The  word  salvation 
contains  within  it  ddiverwnce  from  the  guiU  of  our  past  sins. 
We  have  broken  God's  law  each  one  of  us,  more  or  less 
flagrantly,  we  have  all  wandered  the  downward  road 
though  each  has  chosen  a  different  way.  Salvation  brings 
to  us  the  blotting  out  of  the  transgressions  of  the  past,  ac- 
quittal Irom  criminality,  purging  from  all  guiltiness,  that  we 
may  stand  accepted  before  the  great  Judge.  Wliat  man  in 
his  sober  senses  will  deny  that  forgiveness  is  an  unspeaka- 
bly desirable  blessing ! 


36  YOUR  OWN  SALVATION. 

But  salvation  means  more  tban  that :  it  includes  deliver^ 
ancefrom  the  power  of  sin.  Naturally  we  are  all  fond  of 
evil,  and  we  run  after  it  greedily  ;  we  are  the  bondslaves  of 
iniquity,  and  we  love  the  bondage.  This  last  is  the  worst 
feature  of  the  case.  But  when  salvation  comes  it  delivers 
the  man  from  the  power  of  sin.  He  learns  that  it  is  evil, 
and  he  regards  it  as  such,  loathes  it,  repents  that  he  has  evei 
been  in  love  with  it,  turns  his  back  upon  it,  becomes,  through 
God's  Spirit,  the  master  of  his  lu^ts,  puts  the  flesh  beneath 
his  feet,  and  rises  into  the  liberty  of  the  children  of  God. 
Alas  !  there  are  many  who  do  not  care  for  this  :  if  this  be 
fialvation  they  would  not  give  a  farthing  for  it.  They  love 
their  sins ;  they  rejoice  to  follow  the  devices  and  imagina- 
tions of  their  own  corrupt  hearts.  Yet  be  assured,  this 
emancipation  from  bad  habits,  unclean  desires,  and  carnal 
passions,  is  the  main  point  in  salvation,  and  if  it  be  not  ours, 
salvation  in  its  other  branches  is  not  and  cannot  be  enjoyed 
by  us.  Dear  hearer,  dost  thou  possess  salvation  from  sin  ? 
hast  thou  escaped  the  corruption  which  is  in  the  world 
through  lust  ?  K  not,  what  hast  thou  to  do  with  salvation  ? 
To  any  right-minded  man  deliverance  from  unholy  princi- 
ples is  regarded  as  the  greatest  of  all  blessings.  What  think- 
est  thou  of  it  ? 

Salvation  includes  ddiverance  from  the  present  vsrath  of 
God  which  abides  upon  the  unsaved  man  every  moment  of 
his  life.  Every  person  who  is  unforgiven  is  the  object  of 
divine  wrath.  "  God  is  angry  with  the  wicked  every  day. 
If  he  turn  not,  he  will  whet  his  sword."  "  He  that  believ- 
eth  not  is  condemned  already,  because  he  hath  not  believed 
in  the  name  of  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God."  I  frequent- 
ly hear  the  statement  that  this  is  a  state  of  probation.  This 
is  a  great  mistake,  for  our  probation  has  long  since  passed. 
Sinners  have  been  proved,  and  found  to  be  unworthy ;  they 
have  been  "weighed  in  the  balances,"  and  "  found  wanting." 
K  you  have  not  believed  in  Jesus,  condemnation  already 
rests  upon  you  :  you  are  reprieved  a  while,  but  your  condem* 


TOUB  OWN  SALVATION.  87 

nation  IB  recorded.  Salvation  takes  a  man  from  under  the 
cloud  of  divine  wrath,  and  reveals  to  him  the  divine  love. 
He  can  then  say,  "  O  God,  I  will  praise  thee :  though  thou 
wast  angry  with  me,  thine  anger  is  turned*  away,  and  thou 
comfortest  me."  Oh,  it  is  not  hell  hereafter  which  is  the 
only  thing  a  sinner  has  to  fear,  it  is  the  wrath  of  God  which 
ests  upon  him  now.  To  be  unreconciled  to  God  now  is  ao 
awful  thing  :  to  have  God's  arrow  pointed  at  you  as  it  is  at 
this  moment,  even  though  it  fly  not  from  the  string  as  yet, 
is  a  terrible  thing.  It  is  enough  to  make  you  tremble  from 
head  to  foot  when  you  learn  that  you  are  the  target  of  Je- 
hovah's wrath  :  "  he  hath  bent  his  bow,  and  made  it  ready." 
Every  soul  that  is  unreconciled  to  God  by  the  blood  of  his 
Son  is  in  tlie  gall  of  bitterness.  Salvation  at  once  sets  us 
free  from  this  state  of  danger  and  alienation.  We  are  no 
longer  the  "  children  of  wrath,  even  as  others,"  but  are  made 
children  of  God  and  joint  heirs  with  Christ  Jesus.  What 
can  be  conceived  more  precious  than  this  ? 

And  then,  we  lastly  receive  that  part  of  salvation  which 
ignorant  persons  put  first,  and  make  to  be  the  whole  of  sal- 
vation. In  consequence  of  our  being  delivered  from  the 
guilt  of  sin,  and  from  the  power  of  sin,  and  from  the  present 
wrath  of  God,  we  are  delivered  from  the  future  wrath  of 
God.  Unto  the  uttermost  will  that  wrath  descend  upon  the 
souls  of  men  when  they  leave  the  body  and  stand  before 
their  Maker's  bar,  if  they  depart  this  life  unsaved.  To  die 
without  salvation  is  to  enter  into  damnation.  Where  death 
leaves  us,  there  judgment  finds  us ;  and  where  judgment 
finds  us, eternity  will  hold  us  for  ever  and  ever.  "  He  which 
is  filthy,  let  him  be  filthy  still,"  and  he  that  is  wretched  as 
a  punishment  for  being  filthy,  shall  be  hopelessly  wretched 
still.  Salvation  delivers  the  soul  from  going  down  into  the 
pit  of  hell.  We  being  justified,  are  no  longer  liable  to  pun^ 
ishment,  because  we  are  no  longer  chargeable  with  guilt. 
Christ  Jesus  bore  the  wrath  of  God  that  we  might  nevei 
bear  it.    He  has  made  a  full  atonement  to  the  justice  of 


88  YOUR  OWN  SALVATION. 

God  for  the  sins  of  all  believers.  Against  him  that, be* 
lieveth  there  remaineth  no  record  of  guilt ;  his  trangressions 
are  blotted  out,  for  Christ  Jesus  hath  finished  transgression, 
made  an  end  of*  sin,  and  brought  in  everlasting  righteous- 
ness. What  a  comprehensive  word  then  is  this — "salva- 
tion !  "  It  is  a  triumphant  deliverance  from  the  guilt  of 
Bin,  from  the  dominion  of  it,  from  the  curse  of  it,  from  the 
punishment  of  it,  and  ultimately  from  the  very  existence  of 
it.  Salvation  is  the  death  of  sin,  its  burial,  its  annihilation, 
yea,  and  the  very  obliteration  of  its  memory  ;  for  thus  saith 
the  Lord:  " their  sins  and  then-  iniquities  will  I  remember 
no  more." 

Beloved  hearers,  I  am  sure  that  this  is  the  weightiest 
theme  I  can  bring  before  you,  and  therefore  I  cannot  be 
content  unless  I  see  that  it  grasps  you  and  holds  you  fast. 
I  pray  you  give  earnest  heed  to  this  most  pressing  of  all 
subjects.  If  my  voice  and  words  cannot  command  your 
fullest  attention,  I  could  wish  to  be  dumb,  that  some  other 

'  pleader  might  with  wiser  speech  draw  you  to  a  close  consid- 
eration of  this  matter.  Salvation  appears  to  me  to  be  of 
the  first  importance,  when  I  think  of  what  it  is  in  itself,  and 
for  this  reason  I  have  at  the  outset  set  it  forth  before  your 
eyes ;  but  you  may  be  helped  to  remember  its  value  if  you 
consider  that  God  the  Father  thinks  highly  of  salvation. 

.  It  was  on  his  mind  or  ever  the  earth  was.  He  thinks  salva- 
tion a  lofty  business,  for  he  gave  his  Son  that  he  might  save 
rebellious  sinners.  Jesus  Christ,  the  only  Begotten,  thinks 
salvation  most  important,  for  he  bled,  he  died  to  accomplish 
it.  Shall  I  trifle  with  that  which  cost  him  his  life  ?  K  he 
came  from  heaven  to  earth,  shall  I  be  slow  to  look  from 
earth  to  heaven  ?  Shall  that  which  cost  the  Saviour  a  life 
of  zeal,  and  a  death  of  agony,  be  of  small  account  with  me  ? 
By  the  bloody  sweat  of  Gethsemane,  by  the  wounds  of  Cal« 
vary,  I  beseech  you,  be  assured  that  salvation  must  be  wor- 
thy of  your  highest  and  most  anxious  thoughts.  It  could 
n^>t  be  that  God  the  Father,  and  God  ihe  Son,  should  thui 


TOUR  OWN  SALVATION  89 

make  a  common  sacrifice;  the  one  giving  Lis  Son  and  tlie 
other  giving  himself  for  salvation,  and  yet  salvation  should 
be  a  light  and  trivial  thing.  The  Holy  Ghost  thinks  it  no 
trifle,  for  he  condescends  to  work  continually  in  the  new 
sreation  that  he  may  bring  about  salvation.  He  is  often 
vexed  and  grieved,  yet  he  continues  still  his  abiding  labors 
that  he  may  bring  many  sons  unto  glory.  Despise  not 
what  the  Holy  Ghost  esteems,  lest  thon  despise  the  Holy 
Ghost  himself  The  sacred  Trinity  think  much  of  salvation ; 
let  us  not  neglect  it.  I  beseech  you  who  have  gone  on  tri- 
fling with  salvation,  to  remember  that  we  who  have  to 
preach  to  you  dare  not  trifle  with  it.  The  longer  I  live  the 
more  I  feel  that  if  God  So  not  make  me  faithful  as  a  minis- 
ter, it  had  been  better  for  me  never  to  have  been  born. 
What  a  thought  that  I  am  set  as  a  watchman  to  warn  your 
souls,  and  if  I  warn  you  not  aright,  your  blood  will  be  laid 
at  my  door  I  My  own  damnation  will  be  terrible  enough, 
but  to  have  your  blood  upon  my  skirts  as  well — !  God  save 
any  one  of  his  ministers  from  being  found  guilty  of  the  souls 
of  men.  Every  preacher  of  the  gospel  may  cry  with  David, 
"  Deliver  me  from  bloodguiltiness,  O  God,  thou  God  of  my 
salvation." 

Bethink  you,  O  careless  hearers,  that  God's  church  does 
not  consider  salvation  to  be  a  little  matter  ?  Earnest  men 
and  women,  by  thousands,  are  praying  day  and  night  for 
the  salvation  of  others,  and  are  laboring,  too,  and  making 
great  sacrifices,  and  are  willing  to  make  many  more,  if  they 
may  by  any  means  bring  some  to  Jesus  and  his  salvation. 
Surely,  if  gracious  men,  and  wise  men,  think  salvation  to  be 
80  important,  you  who  have  hitherto  neglected  it  ought  to 
change  your  minds  upon  the  matter,  and  act  with  greater 
care  1  ^r  your  own  interests. 

The  angels  think  it  a  weighty  business.  Bowing  from 
their  thrones,  they  watch  for  repenting  sinners  ;  and  when 
they  hear  that  a  sinner  has  returned  to  his  God,  they  waken 
anew  their  golden  harps  and  pour  forth  fresh  music  before 


40  l^OUR  OWN  SALVATION. 

the  throne,  for  "  there  is  joy  in  the  presence  of  the  angels 
of  God  over  one  sinner  that  repenteth."  It  is  certain  also 
that  devils  think  salvation  to  be  a  great  matter,  for  their 
arch-leader  goeth  about  seeking  whom  he  may  devour. 
Tliey  never  tire  in  seeking  men's  destruction.  They  know 
how  much  salvation  glorifies  God,  and  how  terrible  the  ruin 
of  souls  is ;  and  therefore  they  compass  sea  and  land,  if  they 
may  destroy  the  sons  of  men.  Oh,  I  pray  you  careless  hear- 
er, be  wise  enough  to  dread  that  fate  which  your  cruel  ene- 
my, the  devil,  would  fain  secure  for  you  !  Remember,  too, 
that  lost  souls  think  salvation  important.  The  rich  man, 
when  he  was  in  this  world,  thought  highly  of  nothing  but 
his  barns,  and  the  housing  of  his'  produce ;  but  when  he 
came  into  the  place  of  torment,  then  he  said  ;  "  Father 
Abraham,  send  Lazarus  to  my  father's  house ;  for  I  have 
five  brethren  ;  that  he  may  testify  unto  them,  lest  they  also 
come  into  this  place  of  torment."  Lost  souls  see  things  in 
another  light  than  that  which  dazzled  them  here  below ; 
they  value  things  at  a  different  rate  from  what  we  do  here, 
where  sinful  pleasures  and  earthly  treasures  dim  the  mental 
eye.  I  pray  you  then,  by  the  blessed  Trinity,  by  the  tears 
and  prayers  of  holy  men,  by  the  joy  of  angels  and  glorified 
spints,  by  the  malice  of  devils  and  the  despair  of  the  lost, 
arouse  yourselves  from  slumber,  and  neglect  not  this  great 
salvation  ! 

I  shall  not  depreciate  any  thing  that  concerns  your  wel 
fare,  but  I  shall  steadfastly  assert  that  nothing  so  much  con- 
cerns any  one  of  you  as  salvation.  Your  health  by  all 
means.  Let  the  physician  be  fetched  if  you  be  sick;  care 
well  for  diet  and  exercise,  and  all  sanitary  laws.  Look 
wisely  to  your  constitution  and  its  peculiarities ;  but  what 
matters  it  after  all,  to  have  possessed  a  healthy  body,  if 
you  have  a  perishing  soul !  Wealth,  yes,  if  you  must 
have  it,  though  you  shall  find  it  an  empty  thing  if  you  set 
your  heart  upon  it.  Prosperity  in  this  world,  earn  it  if 
jQn  can  do  so  fairly,  but  "  what  shall  it  profit  a  man  if  h© 


FOUR  OWN  SALVATION.  41 

shall  gaiQtlie  whole  world,  and  lose  his  own  soul  ?"  A  gold- 
en coffin  will  be  a  poor  compensation  for  a  damned  souL 
To  be  cast  away  from  God's  presence,  can  that  misery  be 
assuaged  by  mountains  of  treasure  ?  Can  the  bitterness  oi 
the  second  death  be  sweetened  by  the  thought  that  tlie 
wretch  was  once  a  millionaire,  and  that  his  wealth  could 
affect  the  policies  of  nations?  No,  there  is  nothing  iu 
health  or  wealth,  comparable  to  salvation.  Nor  can  hon- 
or and  reputation  bear  a  comparison  therewith.  Truly  they 
are  but  baubles,  and  yet  for  all  that  they  have  a  strange 
fascination  for  the  sons  of  men.  Oh,  sirs,  if  every  harp- 
string  in  the  world  should  resound  your  glories,  and  ever} 
trumpet  should  proclaim  your  fame,  what  would  it  matte . 
if  a  louder  voice  should  say,  "  Depart  from  me,  ye  cursed, 
into  everlasting  fire,  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels"? 
Salvation!  salvation!  salvation!  Nothing  on  earth  can 
match  it,  for  the  merchandise  of  it  is  better  than  silver, 
and  the  gain  thereof  than  fine  gold.  The  possession  of  the 
whole  universe  would  be  no  equivalent  to  a  lost  soul  for 
the  awful  damage  it  has  sustained,  and  must  sustain  forever. 
Pile  up  the  worlds,  and  let  them  fill  the  balance;  ay,  bring 
as  many  worlds  as  there  are  stars,  and  heap  up  the  scale  o» 
the  one  side ;  then  in  this  other  scale,  place  a  single  soul  en 
dowed  with  immortality,  and  it  outweighs  the  whole.  Sal- 
vation I  nothing  can  be  likened  unto  it.  May  we  feel  its 
unutterable  value,  and  therefore  seek  it  till  we  possess  it 
in  its  fulness  1 

II.  But  now  we  must  advance  to  a  second  point  of  con- 
sideration, and  I  pray  God  the  Holy  Spirit  to  press  it  upon 
us,  and  that  is,  whose  matter  is  it?  We  have  seen 
what  the  matter  is — salvation;  now,  consider  whose  is  it? 
^Your  cnon  salvation."  At  this  hour  nothing  else  is  to  oc- 
cupy your  thoughts,  but  this  intensely  personal  matter,  qnd 
I  beseech  the  Holy  Spirit  to  hold  your  minds  fast  to  thii 
one  point. 


42  YOUR  OWN  SALVATION. 

If  you  are  saved  it  will  be  "  your  own  salvation,"  and 
you  yourself  will  enjoy  it.  K  you  are  not  saved,  the  sin 
you  now  commit  is  your  own  sin,  the  guilt  your  own  guilt. 
The  condemnation  under  which  you  live,  with  all  its  disqui- 
etude and  fear,  or  with  all  its  callousness  and  neglect,  is  your 
own — all  your  own.  You  may  share  in  other  men's  sins, 
and  other  men  may  become  participators  in  yours,  but  a 
burden  lies  on  your  own  back  which  no  one  besides  can 
touch  with  one  of  his  fingers.  There  is  a  page  in  God's 
Book  where  your  sins  are  recorded  unmingled  with  tlio 
transgressions  of  your  fellows.  Now,  beloved,  you  must 
obtain  for  all  this  sin  a  personal  pardon,  or  you  are  uudone 
forever.  No  other  can  be  washed  in  Christ's  blood  for  you; 
no  one  can  believe  and  let  his  faith  stand  instead  of  your 
faith.  The  very  supposition  of  human  sponsorship  in  re- 
ligion is  monstrous.  You  must  yourself  repent,  yourself 
believe,  yourself  be  washed  in  the  blood,  or  else  for  yon 
there  is  no  forgiveness,  no  acceptance,  no  adoption,  no  re- 
generation. It  is  all  a  personal  matter  through  and 
through  :  "  your  own  salvation  "  it  must  be,  or  it  will  be 
your  own  eternal  ruin. 

Reflect  anxiously  that  you  must  personally  die.  No  one 
imagines  that  another  can  die  for  him.  No  man  can  re- 
deem his  brother,  or  give  to  God  a  ransom.  Through  that 
iron  gate  I  must  pass  alone,  and  so  must  you.  Dying  will 
have  to  be  our  own  personal  business;  and  in  that  dying, 
we  shall  have  either  personal  comfort  or  personal  dismay. 
When  death  is  past,  salvation  is  still  our  ''  own  salvation;" 
for  if  r  am  saved,  miTie  "  eyes  shall  seek  the  King  in  his 
beauty:  they  shall  behold  the  land  that  is  very  far  oH" 
Mine  eyes  shall  see  him,  and  not  another  on  my  behalf.  No 
brother's  head  is  to  wear  your  crown  ;  no  stranger's  1  And 
to  wave  your  palm;  no  sister's  eye  to  gaze  for  you  upon 
the  beatific  vision,  and  no  sponsor's  heart  to  be  filled  as 
your  proxy  with  the  ecstatic  bliss.  There  is  a  pei*sonal 
heaven  for  the  personal  believer  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 


YOUE  OWN  SAL7ATI0K.  48 

It  must  be,  if  you  possess  it,  "  your  own  salvation."  But 
if  you  have  it  not,  reflect  again,  that  it  will  be  your  own 
damnation.  But  no  one  will  be  condemned  for  you ;  no  other 
can  bear  the  hot  thunderbolts  of  Jehovah's  wrath  on  your 
behalf.  When  you  shall  say,  "  Hide  me,  ye  rocks  I  Conceal 
me,  O  mountains  ! "  no  one  will  spring  forward,  and  say, 
"  You  can  cease  to  be  accursed,  and  I  will  become  a  curse 
for  you."  A  substitute  there  is  to-day  for  every  one  that 
believeth — God's  appointed  substitute,  the  Christ  of  God; 
but  if  that  substitution  be  not  accepted  by  you,  there  can 
never  be  another;  but  there  remains  only  for  you  a  person- 
al casting  away  to  suffer  personal  pangs  in  your  own  soul 
and  in  your  own  body  forever.  This,  then,  makes  it  a 
most  solemn  business.  Oh,  be  wise,  and  look  well  to  "  your 
own  salvation." 

You  may  be  tempted  to-day,  and  very  likely  you  are, 
to  forget  your  own  salvation  by  thoughts  of  other  people. 
We  are  all  so  apt  to  look  abroad  in  this  matter,  and  not  to 
look  at  home.  Let  me  pray  you  to  reverse  the  process,  and 
let  every  thing  which  has  made  you  neglect  your  own  vine- 
yard be  turned  to  the  opposite  account,  and  lead  you  to  be- 
gin at  home,  and  see  to  "  your  own  salvation."  Perhaps 
you  dwell  among  the  saints  of  God,  and  you  have  been 
rather  apt  to  find  fault  with  them,  though  for  my  part,  I 
can  say  these  are  the  people  I  desire  to  live  with,  and  desire 
to  die  with:  "thy  people  shall  be  my  people,  and  thy  God 
my  God."  But,  oh, if  you  live  among  the  saints,  ought  it 
not  to  be  your  business  to  see  to  "your  own  salvation"? 
See  that  you  are  truly  one  of  them,  not  written  in  their 
church-book  merely,  but  really  graven  upon  the  palms  of 
Christ's  hands;  not  a  false  professor,  but  a  real  possessor; 
not  a  mere  wearer  of  the  name  of  Christ,  but  a  bearer  of 
the  nature  of  Christ.  If  you  live  in  a  gracious  family,  be 
afraid  lest  you  should  be  divided  from  them  forever.  How 
eould  you  endure  to  go  from  a  Christian  household  to  a 
place  of  torment  ?    Let  the  anxieties  of  saints  lead  you  to 


44  YOtTR  OWN  SALVATION; 

be  anxious.  Let  their  prayers  drive  you  to  prayer.  Let 
their  example  rebuke  your  sin,  and  their  joys  entice  you  to 
their  Saviour.  Oh,  see  to  this  !  But  perhaps  you  live  most 
among  ungodly  men,  and  the  tendency  of  your  converse 
with  the  ungodly  is  to  make  you  think  as  they  do  of  the 
trifles  and  vanities  and  wickednesses  of  this  life.  Do  nol 
Jet  it  be  so ;  but  on  the  contrary,  say,  "  O  God,  though  I 
am  placed  among  these  people,  yet  gather  not  my  soul  with 
sinners,  nor  my  life  with  bloody  men.  Let  me  avoid  the 
sins  im.^  wliich  they  fall,  and  the  impenitence  of  which 
they  are  guilty.  Save  me,  I  pray  thee,  O  my  God,  save  me 
from  the  transgressions  which  they  commit." 

Perhaps  to-day  some  of  your  minds  are  occupied  with 
thoughts  of  the  dead  who  have  lately  fallen  asleep.  There 
is  a  little  one  unburied  at  home,  or  there  is  a  father  not  yet 
laid  in  the  grave.  Oh,  when  you  weep  for  those  who  have 
gone  to  heaven,  think  of  "  your  own  salvation,"  and  weep  for 
yourselves,  for  you  have  parted  with  them  forever  unless 
you  are  saved.  You  have  said,  "  Farewell "  to  those  belov- 
ed ones,  eternally  farewell,  unless  you  yourselves  believe  in 
Jesus.  And  if  any  of  you  have  heard  of  persons  who  have 
lived  in  sin  and  died  in  blasphemy,  and  are  lost,  I  pray  you 
think  not  of  them  carelessly  lest  you  also  suffer  the  same 
doom :  for  what  saith  the  Saviour :  "  Suppose  ye  that  these 
were  sinners  above  all  the  sinners  ?  "  I  tell  you,  Nay :  but, 
except  ye  repent,  ye  shall  all  likewise  perish."  It  seems  to 
me  as  if  every  thing  on  earth  and  every  thing  in  heaven,  and 
every  thing  in  hell,  yea,  and  God  himself,  call  upon  you  to 
seek  "  your  own  salvation,"  first  and  foremost,  and  above 
all  other  things. 

It  may  be  profitable  to  mention  some  persons  upon  whom 
this  theme  needs  much  pressing.  I  will  begin  at  home. 
There  is  great  need  to  urge  this  matter  upon  oflicial  Chris- 
tians, such  as  I  am,  such  as  my  brethren,  the  deacons  and 
elders  are.  K  there  are  any  persons  who  are  likely  to  be 
deceived,  it  is  those  who  are  called  by  their  office  to  act  ai 


tt> 


Totm  owir  SALrATloN.  45 

Aepherds  to  the  souls  of  others.  Oh,  my  brethren  !  it  is  so 
^sy  for  me  to  imagine  because  I  am  a  minister,  and  have  to 
deal  with  holy  things,  that  therefore  I  am  safe.  T  pray  I 
may  never  fall  into  that  delusion,  but  may  always  cling  to 
the  cross,  as  a  poor,  needy  sinner  resting  in  the  blood  of 
Jesus.  Brother  ministers,  co-workers,  and  officials  of  the 
church,  do  not  imagine  that  office  can  save  you.  The  son 
of  perdition  was  an  apostle,  greater  than  we  are  in  office,  and 
yet  at  this  hour  he  is  greater  in  destruction.  See  to  it,  ye 
that  are  numbered  among  the  leaders  of  Israel,  that  you 
yourselves  be  saved. 

Unpractical  doctrinalists  are  another  class  of  persons  who 
need  to  be  warned  to  see  to  their  own  salvation.  When 
they  hear  a  sermon,  they  sit  with  their  mouths  open,  ready 
to  snap  at  half  a  mistake.  They  make  a  man  an  offender 
for  a  word,  for  they  conclude  themselves  to  be  the  standards 
of  orthodoxy,  and  they  weigh  up  the  preacher  as  he  speaks, 
with  as  much  coolness  as  if  they  had  been  appointed  deputy 
judges  for  the  Great  King  himself.  Oh,  sir,  weigh  yourself  I 
It  may  be  a  great  thing  to  be  sound  in  the  head,  in  the  faith, 
but  it  is  a  greater  thing  to  be  sound  in  the  heart.  I  may  be 
able  to  split  a  hair  between  orthodoxy  and  heterodoxy,  and 
yet  may  have  no  part  nor  lot  in  the  matter.  You  may  be  a 
very  sound  Calvimst,  or  you  may  happen  to  think  soundness 
lies  in  another  direction  ;  but,  oh,  it  is  nought,  it  is  less  than 
nought,  except  your  souls  feel  the  power  of  the  truth,  and  ye 
yourselves  are  bom  again.  See  to  "  your  own  salvation,** 
O  ye  wise  men  in  the  letter,  who  have  not  the  Spirit. 

So,  too,  certain  persons  who  are  always  given  to  curious 
speculations  need  warning.  When  they  read  the  Bible  it 
is  not  to  find  whether  they  are  saved  or  no,  but  to  know 
whether  we  are  under  the  third  or  fourth  vial,  when  the 
millenium  is  going  to  be,  or  what  is  the  battle  of  Armaged- 
Jon.  Ah,  sir,  search  out  all  these  things  if  thou  hast  time 
and  skill,  but  look  to  thine  own  salvation  first.  The  book 
of  Revelation,  blessed  is  he  that  understands  it,  but  not  un- 


46  TOUR  OWN  SAIiVATlON. 

less,  first  of  all,  he  understands  this,  '^  He  that  believeth  and 
is  baptized  shall  be  saved."  The  greatest  doctor  in  the  sym- 
bols and  mysteries  of  the  Apocalypsfe  shall  be  as  certainly 
cast  away  as  the  most  ignorant,  unless  he  has  come  to  Christ, 
and  rested  his  soul  in  the  atoning  work  of  our  great  sub* 
stitute. 

I  know  some  who  greatly  need  to  look  to  their  own  sal- 
ratijn.  I  refer  to  those  who  are  always  criticising  othera 
They  can  hardly  go  to  a  place  of  worship  but  what  they  are 
observing  their  neighbor's  dress  or  conduct.  Nobody  is  safe 
from  their  remarks,  they  are  such  keen  judges,  and  make 
such  shrewd  observations.  Ye  faultfinders  and  talebearers, 
look  to  "  your  own  salvation."  You  condemned  a  minister 
the  other  day  for  a  supposed  fault,  and  yet  he  is  a  dear  ser- 
vant of  God,  who  lives  near  his  Master ;  who  are  you,  sir, 
to  use  your  tongue  against  feuch  a  one  as  he  ?  The  other 
day  a  poor  humble  Christian  was  the  object  of  your  gossip 
and  your  slander,  to  the  wounding  of  her  heart.  Oh,  see  to 
yourselves,  see  to  yourselves.  If  those  eyes  which  look  out- 
ward so  piercingly  would  sometimes  look  inward  they  miglit 
see  a  sight  which  would  blind  them  with  horror.  Blessed 
horror  if  it  led  them  to  turn  to  the  Saviour  who  would  open 
those  eyes  afresh,  and  grant  them  to  see  his  salvation. 

I  might  also  say  that  in  this  matter  of  looking  to  person- 
al salvation,  it  is  necessary  to  speak  to  some  who  have  es- 
poused certain  great  public  designs.  I  trust  I  am  as  ardent 
a  Protestant  as  any  man  living,  but  I  know  too  many  red- 
hot  Protestants  who  are  but  little  better  than  Romanists,  for 
though  the  Romanists  of  old  might  have  burnt  them,  they 
would  certainly  withhold  toleration  from  Romanists  to-day, 
if  they  could  ;  and  therein  I  see  not  a  pin  to  choose  between 
the  two  bigots.  Zealous  Protestants,  I  agree  with  you,  but 
yet  I  warn  you  that  your  zeal  in  this  matter  will  not  save 
you,  or  stand  in  the  stead  of  personal  godliness.  Many  an 
orthodox  Protestant  will  be  found  at  the  left  hand  of  the 
Great  Judge.     And  you,  too,  who  are  forever  agitating  xhii 


YOUB  OWN  SALVATION.  47 

And  that  public  question,  I  would  say  to  you,  "Let  politics 
alone  till  your  own  inward  politics  are  settled  on  a  good 
foundation."  You  are  a  Radical  Reformer,  you  could  show 
us  a  system  of  political  economy  which  would  right  all  our 
wrongs  and  give  to  every  man  his  due  ;  then  I  pray  you 
right  your  own  wrongs,  reform  yourself,  yield  yourself  to 
the  love  of  Jesus  Christ,  or  what  will  it  signify  to  you, 
though  you  knew  how  to  balance  the  affairs  of  nations,  and 
to  regulate  the  arrangement  of  all  classes  of  society,  if  you 
yourself  shall  be  blown  away  like  chaff  before  the  winnow- 
ing fan  of  the  Lord.  God  grant  us  grace,  then,  whatever 
else  we  take  up  with,  to  keep  it  in  its  proper  place,  and  make 
our  calling  and  election  sure. 

in.  And  now,  thirdly,  and  oh  for  grace  to  speak  aright, 
I  shall  try  to  akswer  certain  objections.  I  think  I  hear 
somebody  say,  "  Well,  but  don't  you  believe  in  predestinor 
Hon  f  What  have  we  to  do  with  looking  to  our  own  salvation  ? 
Is  it  not  all  fixed  ? "  Thou  fool,  for  I  can  scarce  answer 
thee  till  I  have  given  thee  thy  right  title ;  was  it  not  fixed 
whether  thou  shouldst  get  wet  or  not  in  coming  to  this 
place  ?  Why  then  did  you  bring  your  umbrella  ?  Is  it  not 
fixed  whether  you  shall  be  nourished  with  food  to-day  or 
shall  go  hungry?  Why  then  will  you  go  home  and  eat 
your  dinner  ?  Is  it  not  fixed  whether  you  shall  live  or  not 
to-morrow ;  will  you,  therefore,  cut  your  throat  ?  No,  you 
do  not  reason  so  wickedly,  so  foolishly  from  destiny  in  ref- 
erence to  any  thing  but "  your  own  salvation,"  and  you  know 
it  is  not  reasoning,  it  just  mere  talk.  Here  is  all  the  answer 
I  will  give  you,  and  all  you  deserve. 

Another  says,  "  I  have  a  difficulty  about  this  looking  to 
oui*  own  salvation.  Do  you  not  believe  mfuU  assurance  f 
Are  there  not  some  who  know  that  they  are  saved  beyond 
all  doubt  I "  Yes,  blessed  be  God,  I  hope  there  are  many 
Bttch  now  present.  But  let  me  tell  you  who  these  are  not. 
These  are  not  pei*sons  who  are  afraid  to  examine  them- 


48  TOUB  OWN  SALTATION. 

•elves.  If  Imeetwith  anymaiiwboBay8^''IliJiTenoneedto 
ezamme  myself  any  more,  I  know  I  am  saved,  and  therefore 
have  no  need  to  take  any  farther  care,"  I  wonld  venture  to 
say  to  him,  ^  Sir,  yon  are  lost  already.  This  strong  deluaon 
of  yours  has  led  yon  to  believe  a  lie."  There  are  none  so  can- 
tioos  as  those  who  possess  fall  assarance,  and  there  are  none 
who  have  so  mach  holy  fear  of  sinning  against  God,  nor 
who  walk  so  tenderly  and  carefidly  as  those  who  possess  the 
(all  assurance  of  faith.  Presumption  is  not  assurance,  though, 
alas  !  many  think  so.  No  fully  assured  believer  will  ever 
object  to  being  reminded  of  the  importance  of  his  own  salr 
vation. 

But  a  third  objection  arises.  ^  This  is  very  seffishy^  says 
one.  ^  You  have  been  exhorting  us  to  look  to  ourselves,  and 
that  is  sheer  selfishness."  Yes,  so  you  say ;  but  let  me  tell 
you  it  is  a  kind  of  selfishness  that  is  absolutely  needful  be- 
fore you  can  be  unselfish.  A  part  of  salvation  is  to  be  de- 
livered from  selfishness,  and  I  am  selfish  enough  to  desire  to 
be  delivered  from  selfishness.  How  can  you  be  of  any  ser- 
vice to  others  if  you  are  not  saved  yourself?  A  man  is 
drowning.  I  am  on  London  Bridge.  KI  spring  from  the 
parapet  and  can  swim,  I  can  save  him ;  but  suppose  I  cannot 
swim,  can  I  render  any  service  by  leaping  into  sudden  and 
certain  death  with  the  sinking  man  ?  I  am  disqualified  from* 
helping  him  till  I  have  the  ability  to  do  so.  There  is  a 
school  over  yonder.  Well,  the  first  inquiry  of  him  who  is 
to  be  the  master  must  be,  ^^  Do  I  know  myself  that  which 
I  profess  to  teach?"  Do  you  call  that  inquiry  selfish? 
Surely  it  is  a  most  unselfish  selfishness,  grounded  upon  com 
mon  sense.  Indeed^  the  man  who  is  not  so  selfish  as  to  ask 
himself  "Am  I  qualified  to  act  as  a  teacher?"  would  be 
guilty  of  gross  selfishness  in  putting  himself  into  an  office 
which  he  was  not  qualified  to  fill.  I  will  suppose  an  illiter- 
ate person  going  into  the  school,  and  saying,  "I  will  be 
master  here  and  take  the  pay,"  and  yet  he  cannot  teach  the 
children  to  read  or  write.     Would  he  not  be  very  selfish  in 


tOtJll  0W»  SAiiVATtON.  49 

hot  seeing  to  Ms  own  fitness?  But  surely  it  is  not  sel- 
fishness that  would  make  a  man  stand  back  and  say,  '^  Ko, 
I  must  first  go  to  school  myself,  otherwise  it  is  but  a  mock- 
ery of  the  children  for  me  to  attempt  to  teach  them  any 
thing."  This  is  no  selfishness,  then,  when  looked  at  aright, 
which  makes  us  see  to  our  own  salvation,  for  it  is  the  basis 
from  which  we  operate  for  the  good  of  others. 

IV,  Haying  answered  these  objections,  I  shall  for  a 
minute  attempt  to  render  some  assistance  to  those  who 
would  fain  be  right  in  the  best  thing. 

Has  the  Holy  Spirit  been  pleased  to  make  any  one  here 
earnest  about  his  own  salvation  ?  Friend,  I  will  help  you 
to  answer  two  questions.  Ask  yourself,  first,  "  Am  I  saved  ?  " 
I  would  help  thee  to  reply  to  that  verp  quickly.  If  you  are 
saved  this  morning,  you  are  the  subject  of  a  work  within 
you,  as  saith  the  text,  "  Work  out  your  own  salvation ;  for 
it  is  God  which  worketh  in  you."  You  cannot  work  it  m, 
but  when  God  works  it  in,  you  work  it  out.  Have  you  a 
work  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  your  soul  ?  Do  you  feel  some- 
thing more  than  unaided  human  nature  can  attain  unto  ? 
Have  you  a  change  wrought  in  you  from  above?  If  so, 
you  are  saved.  Again,  does  your  salvation  rest  wholly 
*upon  Christ  ?  He  who  hangs  anywhere  but  upon  the  cross, 
hangs  upon  that  which  will  deceive  him.  If  thou  standest 
upon  Christ,  thou  art  on  a  rock ;  but  if  thou  trustest  in  the 
merits  of  Christ  in  part,  and  thy  own  merits  in  part,  then 
thou  hast  one  foot  on  a  rock  but  another  on  the  quicksand  ; 
and  thou  mightest  as  well  have  both  feet  on  the  quicksand, 
ibr  the  result  will  be  the  same. 

"  None  but  Jesus,  none  but  Jesus 
Can  do  helpless  sinners  good/' 

Thou  art  not  saved  unless  Christ  be  all  in  all  in  thy  soul, 

^  Alpha  and  Omega,  beginning  and  ending,  first  and  last. 

Judge  by  this,  again :  if  you  are  saved,  you  have  turned 

your  back  on  sin.     You  have  not  left  off*  sinning — ^would  to 

8  __ 


< 


go  TOUR  OWK  SALTATION. 

God  we  could  do  so — but  you  have  left  off  loving  sin ;  you 
sin  not  wilfully,  but  from  infirmity ;  and  you  are  earnestly 
seeking  after  God  and  holiness.  You  have  respect  to  God, 
you  desire  to  be  like  him,  you  are  longing  to  be  with  him. 
Your  face  is  towards  heaven.  You  are  as  a  man  who  lour* 
neys  to  the  Equator.  You  are  feeling  more  and  more  th? 
wann  influence  of  the  heavenly  heat  and  light.  Now,  if  such 
be  your  course  of  life,  that  you  walk  not  after  the  flesh,  but 
after  the  Spirit,  and  bring  forth  the  fruits  of  holiness,  then 
you  are  saved.  May  your  answer  to  that  question  be  given 
in  great  honesty  and  candor  to  your  own  souL  Be  not  too 
partial  a  judge.  Conclude  not  that  all  is  right  because  out- 
ward appearances  are  fair.  Deliberate  before  you  return  a 
favorable  verdict.  Judge  yourselves  that  ye  be  not  judged. 
It  were  better  to  coridemn  yourself  and  be  accepted  of  God, 
than  to  acquit  yourself  and  find  your  mistake  at  the  last. 

But  suppose  that  question  should  have  to  be  answered 
by  any  here  in  the  negative  (and  I  am  afraid  it  must  be), 
then  let  those  who  confess  that  they  are  not  saved,  hear  the 
answer  to  another  inquiry :  "  How  can  I  be  saved  ?  "  Ah, 
dear  hearer,  I  have  not  to  bring  a  huge  volume  nor  a  whole 
armful  of  folios  to  you,  and  to  say,  "It  will  take  you  months 
and  years  to  understand  the  plan  of  salvation."  No,  the 
way  is  plain,  the  method  simple.  Thou  shalt  be  saved 
within  the  next  moment  if  thou  believest.  God's  work  of 
salvation  is,  as  far  as  its  conmiencement  and  essence  is  con- 
cerned, instantaneous.  If  thou  believest  that  Jesus  is  the 
Christ  thou  art  bom  of  God  now.  If  thou  dost  now  stand 
In  spirit  at  the  foot  of  the  cross,  and  view  the  incarnate  God 
suffering,  bleeding,  and  dying  there,  and  if  as  thou  dost  look 
at  him,  thy  soul  consents  to  have  him  for  her  Saviour,  and 
casts  herself  wholly  on  him,  thou  art  saved.  How  vividiy 
there  comes  before  my  memory  this  morning  the  moment 
when  I  first  believed  in  Jesus !  It  was  the  simplest  act  my 
mind  ever  performed,  and  yet  the  most  wonderful,  for  the 
Holy  Spirit  vrrought  it  in  me.     Simply  to  have  done  with 


TOUB  OWN  SALVATION.  61 

reliance  upon  myself^  and  have  done  with  confidence  in  all 
but  Jesus,  and  to  rest  alone  my  undivided  oonfidence  in  him, 
and  in  what  he  had  done.  My  sin  was  in  that  moment  for- 
given me,  and  I  was  saved,  and  it  may  all  be  so  with  you, 
my  friend,  even  with  you  if  you  also  trust  the  Lord  Jesus. 
"  Your  own  salvation  "  shall  be  secured  by  that  one  simple 
act  of  faith ;  and  henceforward,  kept  by  the  power  of  God 
through  faith  unto  salvation,  you  shall  tread  the  way  of  ho- 
liness, till  you  come  to  be  where  Jesus  is  in  everlasting  bliss. 
God  grant  that  not  a  soul  may  go  out  of  this  place  unsaved. 
Even  you,  little  children,  who  are  here,  you  youngsters,  you 
young  boys  and  girls,  I  pray  that  you  may  in  early  life  at- 
tend to  "  your  own  salvation."  Faith  is  not  a  grace  for  old 
people  only,  nor  for  your  fathers  and  mothers  only  ;  if  your 
little  hearts  shall  look  to  him  who  was  the  holy  child  Jesus, 
if  you  know  but  little  yet,  if  you  trust  him,  salvation  shall 
be  yours.  I  pray  that  to  you  who  are  young,  "  your  own 
salvation "  may  become,  while  you  are  yet  in  your  youth, 
a  matter  of  joy,  because  you  have  trusted  it  in  the  hands  of 
your  Redeemer. 

Now  I  must  close ;  but  one  or  two  thoughts  press  me.  1 
must  utter  them  ere  I  sit  down.  I  would  anxiously  urge 
each  person  here  to  see  to  this  matter  of  his  own  salvation. 
Do  it,  I  pray  you,  and  in  earnest,  for  no  one  can  do  it  for 
you.  I  have  asked  God  for  your  soul,  my  hearer,  and  1 
pray  I  may  have  an  answer  of  peace  concerning  you.  But 
unless  you  also  pray,  vain  are  my  prayers.  You  remember 
your  mother's  tears.  Ah  !  you  have  crossed  the  ocean 
since  those  days,  and  you  have  gone  into  the  deeps  of  sin, 
but  you  recollect  when  you  used  to  say  your  prayers  at  her 
knee,  and  when  she  would  lovingly  say  "  Amen,"  and  kiss 
her  boy  and  bless  him,  and  pray  that  he  might  know  his 
mother's  God.  Those  prayers  are  ringing  in  the  ears  of 
God  for  you,  but  it  is  impossible  that  you  can  ever  be  saved 
unless  it  is  said  of  you,  "Behold,  he  prayeth."  Your 
mother's  holiness  can  only  rise  up  in  judgment  to  oond^mm 


i%  rOFR  OWS   SALVATIOS. 

T'?3r  w!l^  wickMcess  nnlef^  roa  JTaii^aW  it.  Tour  firtbei^ 
truest  exhortadons  shall  b-t  conSna :  w  iast  sentence  of  the 
Jiis^  ;i:ueas  too  hearken  to  thtsu  asj  joarselTcs  coofflder 
ir.i  pii  TOST  iTTifi  in  Jesos.  Oh!  beiaiTik  yja  eaohoneof 
j:  ~  there  i*  bai  one  hope,  aaj  ■,»!:  one  hor-r  lost,  it  is  gone 
firiver.  Dcfea;ed  in  one  bai;'.e,  a  o.-'ir.scander  attempts 
a::-:-;h.vT,  a^i  hopes  thai  he  may  ve:  wia  :r.e  eainpugiL 
V-.  iT  life  i*  v;::r  o-^e  di;h:.  ac-i  if  :;  K-  loK  ii  i*  U»si  for  aye. 
T^-e  — -■-  wio  *a5  r'av.sr.-.p:  y<-s;ervlay  ivmsioui-es  a^in  in 
■-  ;s5-i**  vi:i.  g»i  bvin,  and  hoK*  sha;  he  rsay  yei  $aoeeed ; 
v. :- :"-e  bu5i=e**  ::::;;*ta,^ni;  life,  iiyo:;  are  fv'<aadbank- 
-^i:  J  :■■:  sTt  r-a::ir::pT  forever  and  ever.  I  do  iher^fora 
f'z^rzr  y:--  by  Tbe  livinf  tlvsi.  K'fore  whora  I  srand,  and  be- 
f:T^  ■=■'•?=:  I  ESy  have  lo  irive  an  aoooar.i  of  this  dsy^ 
I'T^x-^'lLsz  ^^s  aioTbiT  day's  s'.m  sha".  *V.:ie.  I  eharse  yon 
V.  Kt  t-:-  y:^  owr;  salra'.ion,  G^vi  he'p  yo:3.  that  yon  may 
Li«-*r  «sse  :■:  *eek  nr.TO  G\Ni  ti'.I  yo-.i  know  by  the  witness  of 
-he  5:-in;  tiai  yj::  have  indoe^l  j^as^vd  avia  death  nnto  Kfc. 
.>»i6  ;-:■  i:  now,  •-...■•ir,  sow.  sow.  This  very  day  the  vinee  of 
wsrninr  o-:nirf  ;o  oerrain  o;  yoa  frv^ia  iivsi.  with  special 
*=;La5U.  "woj^se  y--.:  greatly  n»»il  it,  for  yonr  time  is 
•■'r.-.n.  How  many  have  pas$«tl  into  ■■temity  diiting  this 
wi*k ;  T-:-3  ^^ay  yourself  be  y<->iio  frvm  the  land  of  the  liv- 
ing ■-.•tfirc  -ii:  Sabbath-ilay.  I  rappiVfe,  aooording  to  the 
'.-al^^tioo  of  pio'.'abiuties.  oat  of  this  audienoe  there  an 
KT^Tal  wiio  will  liie  within  a  month.  [  am  not  coi^ectoring 
BDFW,  bm  accoriin^  to  all  pivibabilitios  (1u<a>  tliv>iisand3  can* 
DOt  all  meet  sg^n,  if  aU  have  a  mind  to  do  si^i.  Who  tlien 
aaaoa^  as  viD  bsmBmonedto  the  nnknova  land?  Will  it 
"he  yuo,  j'^'ong  ■"Jmin.  wlm  ^avc  Itt*;!  Isui^Vnig  at  the 
s  of  God?  Shall  il  ba  ynndor  Eoeivhant,  w)ii>  has  sot 
g  wMwgh far  ffeligiun ?  Shall  it  W}>tu.  my  fomjEntnuid, 
c  «TU«>«)  the  o<¥an  to  takv  a  holiday  f  Will  yoa  b* 
,  bMk  a  omfaeJ  I  di>  eoojurv  you  bethink  yom^ 
"     ""    ~      "a  will  nmon* 


TOUR  OWN  SALVATION.  53 

some  of  us  were  in  the  midst  of  it,  and  saw  many  drop 
around  us,  as  though  smitten  with  an  invisible  but  deadly  ar 
row.  That  disease  is  said  to  be  on  its  way  hither  again  :  it  is 
said  to  be  rapidly  sweeping  from  Poland  across  the  Continent, 
and  if  it  come  and  seize  some  of  you,  are  you  ready  to  de- 
part ?  Even  if  that  form  of  death  do  not  afflict  our  city,  as 
I  pray  it  may  not,  yet  is  death  ever  within  our  gates,  and 
the  pestilence  walketh  in  darkness  every  night,  therefore 
consider  your  ways.  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  and  with  his 
word  I  conclude  this  discourse :  ^^  Prepare  to  meet  thy  God, 
OLraeL" 


w* 


64  CONTINUANCE  WITH  JESUS  POSSEBLB. 


SEEMON  IIL 


CONTINUANCE  WITH  JESUS  POSSIBLE. 

This  and  Number  IV.  are  brief  homilies,  not  printed  in  the  Eog 
lish  Tolumes  of  sermons. 


»» 


BUT  JESUS  SAID  T7KT0  THBM,  THET  NEED  NOT  DEPABT."— HatttieW  XiT.  16. 


Op  course  the  Master  was  right,  but  he  appeared  to 
Apeak  unreasonably.  It  seemed  self-evident  that  the  people 
very  much  needed  to  depart.  They  had  been  all  day  long 
hearing  the  preacher,  the  most  of  them  had  not  broken 
their  fast,  and  they  were  ready  to  faint-  for  hunger.  The 
only  chance  of  their  being  fed  was  to  let  them  break  up  into 
parties  and  forage  for  themselves  among  the  surrounding 
vil}age8.  But  our  Lord  declared  that  there  was  no  necessi- 
ty for  them  to  go  away  from  him,  even  though  they  were 
hungry,  and  famished,  and  "in  a  desert  place.  Now,  if  there 
was  no  necessity  for  hungry  hearers  to  go  away,  much  less 
will  it  ever  be  needful  for  loving  disciples  to  depart  from 
him.  if  these  who  were  hearers  only — and  the  bulk  of  them 
were  nothing  more,  a  congregation  collected  by  curiosity 
and  held  together  by  the  charm  of  his  eloquence  and  by  the 
renown  of  his  miracles — ^if  these  need  not  depart,  much  less 
need  they  depart  who  are  his  own  friends  and  companions, 
his  chosen  and  beloved,  K  the  crowds  needed  not  through 
hunger  to  depart  bodily,  much  less  need  any  of  the  saints 
depart  spiritually  from  their  Lord.  There  is  no  necessity 
that  our  communion  with  Christ  should  ever  be  sus- 
pended. 


OOimNUANCE  WITH  JESUS  POSSIBLBl  65 

To  walk  with  Christ  from  mom  till  eve. 
In  him  to  breathe,  in  him  to  live,* 

ifl  no  mere  wish,  no  visionary's  prayer  ;  it  may  be  realized ; 
we  need  not  decline  from  Jesus.  There  is  no  need  that  the 
spouse  of  Jesus  should  wander  from  beneath  the  banner  of 
his  love,  Mary  may  always  sit  at  Jesus'  feet.  There  is  no 
law  which  says  to  holy  fellowship,  "  Hitherto  shalt  thou  go, 
but  no  further,  here  shalt  thou  cease ! "  There  is  no  set 
Lour  when  the  gate  of  communion  with  Christ  must  inevi- 
tably be  closed.  We  may  continue  to  come  up  froin  the  wil- 
derness, leaning  on  the  Beloved.  We  need  not  depart. 
Yet  is  it  so  commonly  thought  to  be  a  matter  of  course  that 
we  should  wander  from  our  Lord,  that  I  shall  ask  for 
strength  from  heaven  to  combat  the  injurious  opinion, 

L  Brethren,  there  is  not  at  this  hoitb,  to  you  who 
love  the  Lord,  ant  present  necessity  for  your  depart- 
ing FROM  Christ. 

At  this  moment  we  may  truthfully  say  of  all  the  saints 
of  God,  "  They  need  not  depart."  There  is  nothing  in  your 
circumstances  which  compels  you  to  cease  from  following 
hard  after  your  Lord.  You  are  very  poor,  you  say,  but  you 
need  not  depart  from  Christ  because  of  penury,  for  in  the 
depths  of  distress  the  saints  have  enjoyed  the  richest  pres- 
ence of  their  once  houseless  Lord.  Being  poor,  your  pover- 
ty at  this  moment  may  be  pinching  you  :  to  be  relieved 
from  that  pinch  you  need  not  break  away  from  Jesus,  for 
fellowship  with  him  may  be  maintained  under  the  direst  ex- 
tremity of  want ;  indeed,  your  want  increases  your  necessi- 
ty to  walk  closely  with  your  Lord,  so  that  patience  may 
have  its  perfect  work,  and  your  soul  may  be  sustained  by 
the  mighty  consolations  which  flow  out  of  nearness  to  Jesus 
Want  shall  not  separate  the  soul  from  communion  with  him 

*  In  answer  to  inqniries,  the  preacher  begs  to  acknowledge  the 
ftathorship  of  the  verseB  found  in  this  sermon. 


66  CONTINUANCE  WITH  JESUS  POSSIBLB. 

who  hnngered  in  the  wilderness  and  thirsted  on  the  cross. 
You  tell  me  that  in  order  to  relieve  your  necessities  you  are 
compelled  to  exercise  great  xjare  and  anxiety  ;  but  all  the 
cares  which  are  useful  and  allowable  are  such  as  will  allow 
of  a  continuance  of  fellowship  with  Christ.  You  may  care 
as  much  as  you  ought  to  care — and  I  need  not  say  liow  lit- 
tle that  is — and  yet  you  need  not  depart  from  him  who  cai- 
eth  for  you.  But  you  tell  me  that  in  addition  to  deep 
thought  you  have  to  spend  much  labor  to  provide  things 
honest  in- the  sight  of  all  men.  Yes,  but  you  need  not  de- 
part for  that  reason.  The  carpenter's  son  is  not  ashamed 
of  the  sons  of  toil ;  he  who  wore  the  garment  without  seam 
does  not  despise  the  smock  or  the  apron.  Labor  is  no  ene- 
my to  communion  ;  idleness  is  a  far  more  likely  separator 
of  the  soul  from  Christ.  Not  to  the  idlers  in  Herod's  court 
did  Jesus  reveal  himself,  but  to  hard-working  fisheimen  by 
the  lake  of  Galilee.  K  Satan  is  never  far  away  from  the  idle, 
it  is  pretty  plain  that  it  is  no  disadvantage  to  be  busy.  A 
toil  amounting  to  slavery  may  weaken  the  body,  and  pros- 
trate the  spirit ;  but  even  when  heart  and  flesh  fail,  the 
heart  may  call  the  Lord  its  portion.  There  is  no  service  be- 
neath the  sun  so  arduous  that  you  need  depart  from  Christ 
in  it :  but  the  rather,  while  the  limbs  are  weary  the  spirit 
should  find  its  rest  in  drawing  nearer  to  him  who  can 
strengthen  the  weak  and  give  rest  to  the  laboring. 

Do  you  tell  me  that  you  are  rich  ?     Ah,  indeed,  how  of- 
ten has  this  made  men  depart  1 

"  Gold  and  the  gospel  seldom  do  agree ; 
Religion  always  sides  with  poverty." 

So  said  John  Bunyan,  and  his  saying  is  true.  Too  often  the 
glitter  of  wealth  has  dazzled  men's  eyes  so  that  they  could 
not  see  the  beauty  of  Christ  Jesus  ;  but,  oh  ye  few  wealthy 
4iaints,  ye  need  not  depart.  The  camel  can  go  through  the 
ueedle's  eye,  for  with  God  all  things  are  possible.  Men 
bsve  worn  coronets  on  earth  and  inherited  crowns  in  heav- 
en.    He  who  was  the  man  after  God's  own  heart  swayed  a 


CONTINUANCE  WITH  JESUS  POSSIBLE.  ^7 

Bceptre.  To  grow  rich  in  substance  does  not  make  it  inev* 
itable  that  you  should  become  poor  in  grace.  Do  riches 
bring  you  many  responsibilities  and  burdens,  and  are  you 
so  much  occupied  by  them  that  your  fellowship  with  the 
Lord  grows  slack  ?  It  should  not  be  so  ;  you  need  not  de- 
part. You  can  bring  those  responsibilities  and  the  wealth 
itself  to  Jesus,  and  communion  with  him  will  prevent  the 
gold  from  cankering,  and  the  responsibility  from  involving 
you  in  sin.  Very  often  he  servant  of  God,  who  ministers 
for  the  church  of  Christ,  finds  so  much  to  do  in  watching 
for  the  souls  of  others,  and  in  caring  for  the  various  wants 
of  the  flock,  that  he  is  in  danger  of  losing  his  own  personal 
enjoyment  of  his  Lord's  presence ;  but  it  need  not  be  so. 
We  can  make  all  our  many  works  subservient  to  our  per- 
sonal communion  with  our  Lord,  and  as  the  bee  flies  to 
many  flowers  and  gathers  honey  from  each  one,  so  may  we 
out  of  many  forms  of  service  extract  a  sweet  conformity  to 
him  who  was  ever  about  his  Father's  business.  We  need 
not  be  encumbered  with  much  serving  or  much  suffering. 
Our  surroundings  are  not  to  be  our  victors,  but  our  subjects. 
We  are  in  all  these  things  to  be  more  than  conquerors 
through  him  who  hath  loved  us. 

Brethren,  you  need  not  depart  becaitse  of  any  thing  in 
Christ  Je9iu.  Those  whom  we  love  would  not  desire  us  to 
be  always  with  them,  and  never  out  of  their  sight.  A 
guest  is  very  welcome,  but  the  proverb  says  that  after  three 
days  he  is  stale.  A  mother  does  not  always  want  her  child 
in  her  arms ;  its  face  is  the  epitome  of  beauty,  but  at  even- 
tide she  is  glad  that  those  dear  blue  eyes  no  longer  shine 
upon  her;  she  is  happy  to  lay  her  treasure  in  its  cradle 
casket.  We  do  not  always  wish  for  the  company  of  those 
whom  we  compassionate;  if  they  will  condense  their  re- 
quest, and  do  their  errand  rapidly,  we  are  best  content. 
But  Jesus  Christ  says  to  each  one  of  us,  his  poor  depend- 
ants, his  crying  children,  "Ye  need  not  depart."  When 
we  are  weeping,  he  will  lay  us  in  his  bosom  and  give  up 
8* 


68  CONTINUANCE  WITH  JESUS  POSSIBLE. 

rest ;  when  we  are  famishing,  he  will  entertain  us  at  his 
royal  table,  till  we  forget  our  misery.  He  is  a  fiiend  who 
sticketh  closer  than  a  brother  in  this  respect,  for  we  need 
not  in  his  instance  heed  the  wise  man's  caution,  "  Go  not 
into  thy  brother's  house  in  the  day  of  thy  calamity,"  for 
we  may  at  all  times  and  seasons  resort  to  him.  We  may 
ask,  "  Where  dwellest  thou  ? "  and  when  we  receive  an  an- 
swer, we  may  go  forth  and  dwell  with  him,  and  make  his 
house  our  home.  Do  you  not  remember  his  words,  "Abide 
in  me ; "  not  merely  "  with  me,"  but  "  abide  in  me."  The 
closest  contact  may  be  maintained  with  the  utmost  con- 
stancy. 

Ye  need  not  dejmrt,  ye  may  tarry  for  aye. 
Unchanged  in  his  heart,  he  invites  you  to  stay , 
He  does  not  despise  nor  grow  weary  of  you. 
You're  fair  is  his  eyes,  and  most  comely  to  view 
Then  wish  not  to  roam,  but  abide  with  your  Lord 
Since  he  is  your  home,  go  no  longer  abroad 
lie  down  on  his  breast  in  unbroken  repose. 
For  there  you  may  rest,  though  surrounded  with  foes 

IT.  Secondly,  no  future  nbcesstty  bvkb  will  arise 
TO  COMPEL  YOU  TO  DEPART  FROM  Jesus.  It  will  always  be 
true,  "  Ye  need  not  depart." 

You  do  not  know  what  T/our  wants  will  be,  yet  though 
you  be  no  prophet,  your  words  will  be  true  if  you  affirm 
that  no  want  shall  ever  necessarily  divide  you  from  Jesus, 
because  your  wauts  will  rather  bind  you  to  him.  "It 
pleased  the  Father  that  in  him  should  all  fulness  dwell." 
"And  of  his  fulness  have  all  we  received,  and  grace  for 
grace."  We  will  draw  nearer  to  him  in  time  of  need  to 
obtain  the  grace  we  want.  We  shall  never  be  forced  to  go 
elsewhere  to  find  supplies  for  our  spiritual  wants.  There 
ftands  another  trader  over  the  way,  who  fain  would  have 
you_  deal  with  him — his  Infallible  Holiness,  as  he  styles 
himself — ^I)ut,  ah  !  if  you  want  infallibility  you  need  not 
wander  from  him  who  is  "  the  Truth ; "  and  if  you  desire 


OONTINUANCB  WITH  JESUS  POSSIBLE.  69 

holiness,  you  need  not  withdraw  from  him  who  is  the  Holy 
Child  Jesus.  To  gain  all  that  the  superstitious  profess  to 
find  in  Babylon,  you  need  not  depart  from  the  Son  of  David 
who  reigns  in  Zion.  They  tell  us  that  we  must  confess  our 
sins  to  a  priest ;  we  will  stay  at  home,  and  lay  bare  our  hearts 
to  the  High  Priest,  who  sprang  out  of  Judah,  who  is  touch- 
ed with  a  feeling  of  our  infirmities.  They  teach  that  we 
must  receive  absolution  from  one  chosen  from  among  men 
to  forgive  sins  ;  we  go  at  once  to  him  who  is  exalted  on 
high  to  give  repentance  and  remission.  They  tell  us  that 
we  should  continue  in  morning  and  evening  prayers;  we 
do  so,  and  offer  our  matins  and  our  vespers  where  no  bells 
call  us  save  the  bells  upon  our  High  Priest's  garments. 
Our  daily  office  may  not  be  according  to  the  use  of  Sarum, 
but  is  according  to  the  use  of  those  who  worship  God  in 
spirit  and  in  truth.  They  cry  up  their  daily  sacrifice  of 
the  Mass,  but  in  him  who  offered  one  sacrifice  for  sins  for 
ever  we  find  our  all  in  all.  His  flesh  is  meat  indeed,  and 
his  blood  is  drink  indeed.  You  need  not  depart  to  pope, 
priest,  church,  or  altar,  for  you  may  rest  assured  that  there 
dwells  in  the  man  Christ  Jesus,  the  Mediator  of  the  new 
covenant^  all  that  your  spiritual  wants  shall  need  for  their 
supply,  and  on  no  occasion,  for  any  wants  that  shall  by 
possibility  arise,  need  you  go  down  into  Egypt,  or  stay 
yourself  on  Assyria. 

You  will  experience  great  trials  as  well  as  great  wants. 
That  young  man  fresh  from  the  country  has  come  to  town 
to  live  in  a  godless  family,  and  last  night  he  was  laughed 
at  when  he  knelt  down  to  pray.  My  young  friend,  you 
need  not  forsake  the  faith,  for  other  saints  have  endured 
severer  ordeals  than  yours  and  have  still  rejoiced  in  the 
Lord.  Yours  are  only  the  trials  of  cruel  mockings ;  they 
were  stoned  and  sawn  asunder,  yet  neither  persecution, 
nakedness,  nor  sword,  divided  them  from  the  love  of  God 
in  Christ  Jesus  their  Lord.  Many  also  are  those  with  whom 
providence  deals  severely ;  all  God's  waves  and  billowB  go 


60  CONTINUANCE  WITH  JESUS  POSSEBLM. 

over  them,  through  much  tribulation  they  inherit  the  kin^ 
dom,  and  every  thing  in  the  future  forebodes  multiplied  ad- 
versilies,  but  yet  they  need  not  depart  from  Jesus  their 
friend.  If^  like  Paul,  you  should  come  to  a  place  where 
two  seas  meet ;  if  you  should  experience  a  double  trouble, 
and  if  neither  sun  nor  moon  should  give  you  cheer,  yet 
you  need  not  suspend,  but  may  rather  deepen  your  fellow- 
ship with  the  Man  of  Sorrows.  Christ  is  with  you  in  the 
tempest-tossed  vessel,  and  you  and  those  who  sail  with  you, 
shall  yet  come  to  tl;e  desired  haven  ;  therefore  be  of  good 
courage,  and  let  not  your  hearts  be  troubled.  The  Son  of 
God  will  be  with  you  in  the  seven-times  heated  furnace. 
"  When  thou  passest  through  the  rivers  I  will  be  with  thee.*' 
This  proves  to  a  demonstration  that  you  need  not  depart. 

You  will  encounter  many  difficulties  between  here  and 
heaven.  Those  who  paint  the  road  to  glory  in  rose-color 
have  never  trodden  it.  Many  are  the  hills  and  dales  be- 
tween this  Jericho  and  the  city  of  the  Great  King.  Let 
who  will  be  without  trials,  Christians  will  have  their  full 
share  of  them  ;  but  there  shall  come  no  difficulty  of  any 
kind  between  here  and  paradise  which  shall  necessitate  the 
soul's  going  anywhere  but  to  her  gracious  Lord,  for  guid- 
ance, for  consolation,  for  strength,  or  for  aught  besides. 
Little  know  we  of  the  walls  to  be  leaped  or  the  troops  to  be 
overcome,  but  we  know  full  well  that  never  need  we  part 
from  the  Captain  of  our  salvation,  or  call  in  other  helpers. 
Death  will  probably  befall  us,  but  we  need  nor  depart  from 
Jesus  in  the  hour  of  our  departure  out  of  this  world.  On 
the  contrary,  when  the  death-dew  lies  cold  on  our  brow  we 
will  sing,  "  If  ever  I  loved  thee,  my  Jesus,  'tis  now ; "  "  For 
I  am  persuaded,  that  neither  death,  nor  life,  nor  angels,  nor 
principalities,  nor  powers,  nor  things  present,  nor  things  to 
Gome,  nor  height,  nor  depth,  nor  any  other  creature,  shall  be 
able  to  separate  us  from  the  love  of  God,  which  is  In  Christ 
Jesus  our  Lord."  Straight  on  into  eternity,  and  on,  and  on 
for  ever,  that  word  "  Depart "  never  need  cross  our  path.    As 


CONTINUANCB  WITH  JESUS  POSSIBLE.  61 

never  in  eternity  will  the  great  Judge  proDnunce  the  sen- 
tence, "  Depart,  ye  cursed,"  upon  his  saints,  so  never  in  his 
providence,  nor  in  the  severest  trial,  will  he  render  it  neces- 
sary that  the  saints  should  in  any  sense  depart  from  hiuL 

*         Never,  O  time,  in  thy  darkest  liour 

Shall  I  need  depart  from  him, 
Though  round  me  thy  blackest  tempests  lower 

And  both  sun  and  moon  grow  dim. 
Faster  and  faster  each  grief  shall  bind 

My  soul  to  her  Lord  above ; 
And  all  the  woes  that  assail  my  mind 

Shall  drive  me  to  rest  in  his  love. 

TJicro  is  no  necessity,  then,  in  the  present,  and  there  will  be 
none  in  the  future,  for  departing  from  communion  with  the 
T»r(L 

in.  Thirdly,  "They  need  not  depart;"  that  is  to  say^ 

NO    POBCB    CAK    COMPEL    THB    ChBISTIAN    TO    DEPART    FROM 

Jerus.  • 

The  worid  can  tempt  us  to  depart,  and  alas  !  too  success- 
fully does  it  seduce  with  its  fascinating  blandishments.  Its 
frowns  alarm  the  cowardly,  and  its  smiles  delude  the  un- 
wary, but  none  need  depart.  If  we  have  grace  enough  to 
play  the  man.  Madam  Bubble  cannot  lead  us  astray. 
"  Surely  in  vain  is  the  net  spread  in  the  sight  of  any  bird." 
We  need  not  be  taken  in  the  world's  traps,  there  is  one  who 
can  deliver  us  from  the  snares  of  the  fowler.  We  are  not 
ignorant  of  the  devices  of  Satan  and  the  temptations  of  the 
world  ;  we  are  not  compelled  to  fall  from  our  steadfastness ; 
and  if  we  do  so,  it  is  our  wilful  fault.  There  is  no  necessi- 
ty for  it.  Many  live  above  the  world — many  in  as  difficult 
circumstances  as  ours.  There  are  those  in  heaven  who  have 
found  as  hard  hand-to-hand  fighting  in  the  spiritual  life  as 
we  do ;  yet  they  were  not  vanquished,  nor  need  we  be ;  for 
the  same  strength  which  was  given  to  them  is  reserved  for 
as  also.    But  saith  one,  "  You  do  not  know  where  I  live.** 


62  CONTINUANCE  WITH  JESUS  POSSIBLBL 

Perhaps  not  "  You  do  not  know  what  I  have  to  endure^'* 
cries  another.  Most  true ;  but  I  know  where  my  Lord  lived, 
and  I  have  heard  that  he  endured  much  contradiction  of 
sinners  against  himself,  but  he  did  not  depart  from  holiness, 
nor  from  love  to  you.  You  have  not  yet  resisted  unto  blood, 
striving  against  sin.  Perseverance  to  the  end  is  possible  to 
every  believer  nay,  it  is  promised  him,  and  he  may  have 
it  for  the  seeking.  You  need  not  depart,  young  friend,  the 
world  cannot  drag  you  from  Jesus,  though  it  may  entice 
you.  Yield  not,  and  you  shall  stand  ;  for  there  has  no 
temptation  happened  to  you  but  such  as  is  common  to  men. 

Satan  is  a  very  cunning  tempter  of  the  souls  of  men,  but 
though  he  would  fain  constrain  you  to  depart  from  your 
Lord,  you  need  not  follow  his  bidding.  Satan  is  strong, 
but  Christ  is  stronger.  His  temptations  are  insinuating, 
but  you  are  no  longer  in  darkness  that  you  should  be  de- 
ceived by  him.  You  need  not  depart.  Even  though  sur- 
prising temptations  should  assault  you  at  unawares,  it 
ought  not  to  fiiid  you  sleeping.  Has  not  Christ  said, 
"What  I  say  unto  you,  I  say  unto  all.  Watch ?  "  You  will 
not  be  surprised,  if  holy  anxiety  stands  sentinel  to  your  soul. 
Prayer  and  watchfulness  will  warn  you  of  the  enemy's  ap- 
proach, and  therefore  you  need  not  be  driven  to  forsake 
your  Lord. 

Ay,  but,  perhaps,  it  may  be  that  in  addition  to  the  world 
and  to  Satan,  you  are  very  conscious  of  the  terrible  deprav* 
ity  of  your  (yum  hearty  and,  indeed,  that  is  the  chief  ground 
of  fear.  The  heart  is  deceitful,  prone  to  wander,  and  ready 
enough  to  depart  from  the  living  God.  But  you  need  not 
depart  from  the  Master  because  of  that.  The  new-bom  na- 
ture takes  up  arms  against  the  body  of  sin  and  death,  the 
Holy  Spirit  also  dwells  within  to  conquer  indwelling  sin. 
Shall  not  the  life  which  is  from  above  subdue  the  natural 
death  ?  Shall  not  the  Spirit  purge  out  the  whole  leaven  ? 
You  need  not  depart  from  Jesus.  It  is  true  you  have  a  fiery 
temper,  but  it  must  not  prevail ;  there  is  a  cure  for  that 


OONTINITANCB  WITH  JESUS  POSSIBLE.  63 

plague.  Perhaps  we  are  inclined  to  levity,  but  we  need  not 
let  our  frivolous  nature  reign  ;  grace  can  overcome  it,  and 
will  Where  sin  abounded,  grace  doth  yet  more  abound. 
There  is  no  unconquerable  sin;  there  is  no  Dagon  that  shall 
not  be  broken  in  the  presence  of  the  ark  of  God,  there  is  no 
temple  of  the  Philistines  which  shall  not  Tall  beneath  the 
might  of  our  greater  Samson.  We  need  not,  as  the  result 
of  temperament,  or  because  of  any  sin  that  doth  so  easily 
beset  us,  depart  from  Jesus,  for  grace  is  equal  to  all  emer- 
gencies. 

Do  you  call  to  mind  that  there  may  be  another  force 
employed  beside  that  of  the  world,  or  of  Satan,  or  the  cor- 
ruption within,  namely,  the  lamentable  coldness  of  the  Chris- 
tian church  f  Truly  it  is  to  be  feared  that  more  have  de- 
parted from  close  walking  with  Christ  through  the  chilli- 
ness of  professors  than  from  almost  any  other  cause.  New- 
born children  of  God  too  often  feel  the  atmosphere  of  the 
church  to  be  as  freezing  as  that  of  an  ice-well ;  their  holy 
warmth  of  zeal  is  frozen,  and  their  limbs  are  stiffened  into  a 
rigor  of  inactivity,  so  that  it  is  a  marvel  that  they  do  not 
die — die  they  would  were  not  the  spiritual  life  immortal  and 
eternal.  But,  brethren,  even  in  the  midst  of  the  coldest 
church  we  need  not  depart  from  a  near  and  elevated  fellow- 
ship with  the  Lord.  The  church  of  Rome  is  a  church  de- 
filed with  error  and  debased  with  superstition,  but  was  there 
ever  a  nobler  Christian  woman  in  this  world  than  Madame 
de  la  Mothe  Guyon?  She  did  not  depart  from  Christ, 
though  in  the  midst  of  a  pestilent  atmosphere.  Remember, 
too,  the  names  of  Jansenius,  and  Arnold,  and  Pascal,  and 
F6nelon,  which  are  an  honor  to  the  u^iver8al  church  ol 
Christ :  who  walked  in  closer  communion  with  Jesus  than 
those  holy  men  ?  In  the  midst  of  the  darkest  ages  there 
have  shone  forth  fairest  stars.  There  are  a  few  names  even 
in  Sardis  which  have  not  defiled  their  garments.  Often  am 
I  told  by  some  brother  in  a  country  village,  where  the  min- 
ister seems  to  have  gone  to  sleep. twenty  years  ago  and  has 


64  CONTINUANCE  WITH  JESUS  POSSIBLBL 

• 

never  awakened  since,  that  he  finds  it  very  hard  to  rejoioe 
in  the  Lord,  for  his  Sabbaths  are  a  burden  instead  of  a  joy. 
My  dear  brother,  you  want  more  grace,  if  this  is  your  oasa 
You  must  have  more  vitality  within  if  you  see  so  much  death 
without.  You  need  not  depart ;  on  the  contrary,  by  be- 
coming an  example  of  living  near  to  Christ  yourself,  you 
may  quicken  others  ;  for,  thank  God,  grace  is  contagious  as 
well  as  sin.  At  any  rate,  it  is  certain  that  though  many  in- 
fluences may  seduce  us,  no  force  can  compel  us  to  depart 
from  Jesus. 

No  power  in  earth  or  hell 

Can  force  me  to  depart ; 

Christ  is  mj  strength  onconqaerable^ 

He  fortifies  mj  heart. 

Fixed  in  his  love  I  stand,  i 

And  none  shall  drive  me  thenoe ; 
Enclosed  I  am  within  the  hand 
Of  Love's  omnipotence. 

rV.  Regarded  from  another  point,  our  tert  nwiy  toiioh 

ng  that  THERE  IS  NO  IMPOSSIBILITT  IN  KEEPING  CLOHD  TO 
THE  BELOVED. 

Many  believers  think  that  if  they  have  fellowship  aveiy 
now  and  then  with  Jesus,  with  long  intervals  between,  they 
are  quite  as  much  advanced  as  need  be,  and  have  probably 
reached  as  far  as  human  nature  is  ever  likely  to  go.  An  af- 
fectation of  superfine  godliness  is  suspicious,  but,  at  the  same 
time,  a  higher  standard  of  religion  can  be  maintained,  and 
ought  to  be  maintained  than  is  commonly  seen  among  pro- 
fessors at  this  time.  We  ought  to  attain  to  such  a  walk  with 
God,  to  so  calm  and  serene  a  frame,  that  the  light  which 
shines  upon  our  pathway  shall  be  constant  and  clear.  Enoch 
walked  with  God  for  hundreds  of  years,  and  cannot  a  man 
walk  with  God  for  twenty  years  ?  Enoch  lived  in  th«  dark 
mge  of  the  world  comparatively ;  cannot  we  who  live  under 
he  gospel  continuously  walk  with  God  ?    Enoch  begat  aon« 


CJONTINUANCB  WITH  JESUS  POSSIBLE,  65 

• 

and  daughters,  and  so  had  all  the  cares  of  a  household,  and 
yet  he  walked  with  God ;  cannot  we,  who  have  the  like  cares, 
yet  still,  by  divine  grace,  be  enabled  to  maintain  unbroken 
communion  ?  I  know  the  place  is  high  where  they  stand 
who  consciously  abide  with  Christ,  but  will  you  not  strive 
to  climb  there  and  bathe  your  foreheads  in  the  everlasting 
Bunlight  of  J  ehovah's  face  ?  I  know  it  would  require  most 
jealous  walking,  but  you  serve  a  jealous  God,  and  he  db- 
mands  holy  jealousy  from  you.  Oh,  the  joy  of  living  in  the 
embrace  of  Jesus,  and  never  departing  from  it !  Oh,  the 
bliss  of  sitting  always  at  his  feet,  abiding  with  the  Bride- 
groom, and  listening  to  his  voice  !  Surely  the  gain  is  worth 
the  exertion,  and  the  prize  is  worthy  of  the  struggle.  Let 
us  not,  since  the  attainment  is  not  impossible,  murmur  at 
the  difficulty,  but  rather  by  faith  let  us  ask  that  we  may 
begin  to-night  to  achieve  the  result  and  continue  to  achieve 
it,  till  we  come  to  see  the  face  of  Christ  in  heaven.  Others 
have  done  so  ;  why  should  not  we  ? 

Brethren,  the  way  to  maintain  fellowship  with  Christ  is 
simple.  K  you  desire  to  retain  in  your  mouth  all  day  the 
flavor  of  the  wines  on  the  lees  well  refined,  take  care  that 
you  drink  deep  by  morning  devotion.  Do  not  waste  those 
few  moments  which  you  allot  to  morning  prayer.  Lay  a 
text  on  your  tongue,  and  like  a  wafer  made  with  honey,  it 
shall  sweeten  your  soul  till  nightfall.  During  the  day,  when 
you  can  do  so,  think  about  your  Redeemer,  his  person,  his 
work.  Seek  to  him,  pray  to  him,  ask  him  to  speak  to  you. 
All  the  day  long,  lean  on  the  Beloved.  During  the  day 
sei've  him,  say,  "Lord,  how  can  I  serve  thee  in  my  calling?" 
Consecrate  the  kitchen,  consecrate  the  market-room ;  make 
every  place  holy,  by  glorifying  the  Lord  there.  Converse 
much  with  him,  and  it  will  not  be  impossible  for  you  to 
abide  in  him  from  the  yeai's  beginning  to  its  close.  You 
need  not  depart.  There  is  no  mental  or  spiritual  impossi- 
bility in  the  maintenance  of  unbroken  communion,  if  the 
Holy  Spirit  be  your  helper. 


66  CONTINUANCE  WITH   lESUS  POSSIBEB 

'Tis  not  too  high  for  grace. 

Though  nature  fail  to  climb , 
Rise  till  70U  always  view  his  face 

In  fellowship  sablime. 

'Tis  not  too  much  for  grace 

To  hold  a  life-long  stay ; 
You  need  not  leave  the  sacred  place. 

But  rest  therein  for  aye. 

V.  Once  more.  We  need  not  depart;  that  is  to  Bay 
there  is  no  reason  that  can  be  imagined  which  wouij) 
render  it  a  wise,  and  proper,  and  good  thing  fob  a 
Christian  to  depart  prom  Christ. 

Suppose  that  the  search  after  happiness  be  the  great 
drift  of  our  life,  as  the  old  philosophers  assert,  then  we  need 
not  depart  from  Jesus  to  win  it,  for  he  is  heaven  below. 
You  desire  pleasure,  forget  not  that  the  pleasure*  of  God 
which  are  in  Christ,  his  joy,  the  joy  that  fills  his  great  heart, 
these  are  more  than  enough  to  fill  your  heart.  I  sometimes 
hear  people  say,  as  an  excuse  for  professors  going  to  doubt- 
ful places  of  amusement,  "  You  know  they  must  have  some 
recreation."  Yes,  I  know,  but  the  re-creation  which  the 
Christian  experienced  when  he  was  born  again,  has  so  com- 
pletely made  all  things  new  to  him,  that  the  vile  nibbish 
called  recreation  by  the  world  is  so  vapid  to  him,  that  he 
might  as  well  try  to  fill  himself  with  fog  as  to  satisfy  his  soul 
with  such  utter  vanity.  No  ;  the  Christian  finds  happiness 
in  Christ  Jesus,  and  when  he  wants  pleasure,  he  does  not 
depart  from  Jesus. 

Perhaps  it  is  said  that  we  require  a  little  excitement  now 
and  then,  for  excitement  gives  a  little  fillip  to  life,  and  is  as 
useful  to  it  as  stirring  is  to  a  fire.  I  know  it,  and  I  trust 
you  may  have  excitement,  for  the  medicinal  power  of  a 
measure  of  exhilaration  and  excitement  is  great,  but  you 
need  not  depart  from  Christ  to  get  it,  for  there  is  such  a 
thing  as  the  soul's  dancing  at  the  s(mnd  of  his  name,  while 
all  the  sanctified  passions  are  lifted  up  in  the  ways  of  the 


coifVfiJtTANcE  With  j^sus  possible.         67 

Lord.  Holy  mirth  will  sometimes  so  bubble  up,  and  over- 
flow in  the  soul,  that  the  man  will  say,  "  Whether  in  the 
body  or  out  of  the  body,  I  cannot  tell,  God  knoweth."  Joy 
in  Clirist  can  rise  to  ecstasy  and  soar  aloft  to  bliss.  If  you  de- 
eivQ  to  wear  the  highest  crown  of  joy,  you  need  not  depart 
fi-om  Christ. 

But  it  is  said,  "  We  require  food  for  our  intellect ;  a  man 
needs  to  develop  his  intellectual  faculties,  he  must  needs  learn 
that  which  will  enlarge  and  expand  his  mind."  Certainly, 
by  all  manner  of  means.  But,  O  beloved  brother,  you  need 
not  depart  from  Christ  to  get  this,  for  the  science  of  Christ 
crucified  is  the  most  excellent,  comprehensive -and  sublime 
of  all  the  sciences.  It  is  the  only  infallible  science  in  the  circle 
of  knowledge.  Moreover,  by  all  true  science  you  will  find 
Christ  honored,  and  not  dishonored,  and  your  learning, 
if  it  be  true  learning,  will  not  make  you  depart  from  Christ, 
but  lead  you  to  see  more  of  his  creating  and  ruling 
wisdom. 

The  profoundest  astronomer  admires  the  Sun  of  Right- 
eousness; the  best-taught  geologist  has  no  quarrel  with  the 
Rock  of  Ages  ;  the  greatest  adept  in  mathematics  marvela 
at  him  who  is  the  sum  total  of  the  universe ;  he  who  knows 
the  most  of  the  physical,  if  he  knows  aright,  loves  the 
spiritual  and  reverences  God  in  Christ  Jesus.  To  imagine 
that  to  be  wise  one  needs  forsake  the  Incarnate  Wisdom, 
is  insanity.  No,  to  reach  the  highest  degree  of  attainment 
in  true  learning,  there  is  no  reason  for  departing  from 
Christ. 

"We  must  have  friends  and  acquaintances,"  says  one. 
You  need  not  depart  from  Christ  to  get  them.  We 
admit  that  a  young  woman  does  well  to  enter  the  marriage 
state  ;  a  young  man  is  safer  and  better  for  having  a  wife ; 
bat  my  dear  young  friends,  you  need  not  break  Christ's 
luw,  and  depart  from  him  in  order  to  find  a  good  husband 
or  a  good  wife.  His  rule  is  that  you  should  not  be  un- 
equally yoked  together  with  unbelievers  ;  it  is  a  wise  and 


08  COKTINTJANCE  WITH  JEStJS  POSSQUL 

kind  rule,  and  is  an  assistance  rather  than  a  hinderancc  to  a 
fit  marriage.  "  But,"  says  one,  "  I  do  not  intend  to  depart 
from  Christ,  though  I  am  about  to  marry  an  unconverted 
person."  Rest  assured  that  you  are  departing  from  Jesus 
by  that  act.  I  have  never  yet  met  with  a  single  case  in  which 
marriages  of  this  kind  have  been  blessed  of  God.  I  know 
hat  young  women  say,  "  Do  not  be  too  severe,  sir,  I  shall 
bring  him  round."  You  will  certainly  faiL  You  are  sin- 
ning in  marrying  under  that  idea.  If  you  break  Christ's 
Iaw,  you  cannot  expect  Christ's  blessing.  To  be  happy  in 
feture  Hfe  with  a  suitable  partner  you  need  not  depart  from 
Jesus.  There  is  nothing  in  life  you  can  want  that  is  truly 
desirable,  nothing  that  can  promote  your  welfare,  nothing 
that  is  really  good  for  you,  that  can  ever  make  it  necessary 
for  you  to  depart  from  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

No'V,  if  this  be  true,  do  not  some  of  us  feel  very  guilty  ? 
I  could  weep  to  think  that  I  have  so  often  departed  from 
close  fellowship  with  my  Lord  and  Master,  when  I  need 
not  have  done  it.  I  am  cast  down  and  weary  and  cumber- 
ed with  much  serving  occasionally.  I  know  my  faith  is  in 
Christ ;  but  I  have  not  the  calm  unstaggering  faith  I  de- 
sire to  have.  But  I  know  that  with  a  thousand  cares  (and 
I  have  ten  thousand),  I  need  not  for  a  moment  lose  serenity 
and  peace  of  mind,  if  I  can  reach  the  place  which  by  God's 
grace  I  will  reach  yet.  Do  you  not  feel  ashamed  that  your 
family  troubles,  and  perhaps  your  family  joys,  have  taken 
you  off  from  your  Saviour  ?  Some  of  you  have  a  great  deal 
of  leisure,  and  yet  you  slide  away  from  Christ.  Let  us  be 
ashamed  together ;  but  let  us  remember  that  if  we  have  de- 
parted from  Christ  and  the  enjoyment  of  his  fellowship,  we 
can  offer  no  excuse  by  saying  we  could  not  help  it  while  this 
verse  stands  true.  We  do  it  wilfully,  we  do  it  sinfully.  It 
is  not  to  be  thrust  on  the  back  of  circumstances  ;  it  cannot 
be  laid  on  the  devil,  nor  blamed  to  this,  nor  blamed  to  that, 
It  is  our  own  fault.  We  need  not  depart ;  there  never  was 
any  need  for  it,  and  there  never  will  be.     May  God's  grace 


OONTINUANCB  WITH  JUSUS  POSSIBLE.  69 

descend  mightily  upon  us,  so  that  we  may  nenceiorth  abide 
in  our  Lord.  May  those  who  know  him  not  be  led  to  seek 
him  by  faith  even  now  and  find  him,  and  then  even  they 
■hftU  not  need  to  depart  from  him  at  the  last. 


to  THfi  Sm  OF  GADDHfO  ABOtRL 


SEEMON  IV. 


THE  sm  OF  GADDING  ABOUT. 

This  discourse  is  a  natural  sequel  to  Number  IV. 

^  WBT  OADDB8T  THOU  AB0X7T  SO  MUCH  TO  OHAKOB  THT  WAT  f  "—Jeremiah  tf.  81. 

God's  ancient  people  were  very  prone  to  forget  him,  and 
to  worship  the  false  deities  of  the  neighboring  heathen. 
Other  nations  were  faithful  to  their  blocks  of  wood  and  of 
stone,  and  adhered  as  closely  to  their  graven  images  as 
though  they  really  had  helped  them,  or  could  in  future  de- 
liver them.  Only  the  nation  which  avowed  the  true  God 
forsook  its  God,  and  left  the  fountain  of  living  waters  to  hew 
out  for  itself  broken  cisterns  which  could  hold  no  water. 
There  seems  to  have  been,  speaking  after  the  manner  of 
men,  astonishment  in  the  divine  mind  concerning  this,  for 
the  Lord  says,  "Pass  over  the  isles  of  Chittim,  and  see ;  and 
send  unto  Kedar,  and  consider  diligently,  and  see  if  there 
be  such  a  thing.  Hath  a  nation  changed  their  gods,  which 
are  yet  no  gods  ?  but  my  people  have  changed  their  glory 
for  that  which  doth  not  profit.  Be  astonished,  O  ye  heavenSi 
at  this,  and  be  horribly  afraid,  be  ye  very  desolate."  In 
this  same  chapter  the  Lord  addresses  his  people  with  the 
question,  "Can  a  maid  forget  her  ornaments?  or  a  bride 
her  attire  ?  Yet  my  people  have  forgotten  me  days  with- 
out number."  And  here,  in  this  text,  the  same  astonish- 
ment appears,  "  Why  gaddest  thou  about  so  much  to  change 


TfiE  sm  O^  GABDma  ABOtlT.  75 

thy  way?"  It  most  certainly  was  a  most  unreasonable  thing 
that  a  people  with  such  a  God,  who  had  dealt  out  to  them 
BO  graciously  the  riches  of  his  love,  and  had  wrought  siiel. 
wonders  on  their  behalf,  should  turn  from  him  to  the  worshi  p 
of  Baal  or  Ashtaroth,  mimic  gods  which  had  ears  but  hoMnI 
not,  eyes  but  saw  not,  and  did  but  mock  the  worshipper: 
who  were  deluded  by  them. 

As  in  a  glass  I  see  myself  in  these  people.  The  spirit- 
ual people  of  God  are  well  imaged  in  the  typical  na 
tion ;  for,  alas !  waywardness  and  wandering  of  heart  are 
the  diseases  not  only  of  the  Israelites  of  old,  but  also  of  the 
true  Israel  now.  The  same  expostulations  may  be  addressed 
to  us  as  to  that  erring  nation  of  old,  for  we  as  perpetually 
backslide,  and  as  constantly  forget  the  Almighty  One,  to  put 
our  trust  in  an  arm  of  flesh.  He  saith  to  us  also,  "  Why 
gaddest  thou  about  so  much  ?  "  For  we  are,  alas  !  too  often 
false  to  him,  forgetting  him,  and  wandering  hither  and 
thither,  rather  than  abiding  in  close  and  constant  fellowship 
with  God  our  exceeding  joy. 

I  desire  to  put  this  question  to  believers,  and  then  to  the 
unconverted.     May  the  Holy  Spirit  bless  it  to  each  class. 

If  you  read  this  question,  taking  it  in  its  connection, 
you  will  see  in  the  first  place,  that  there  is  a  relationship 
mentioned.  The  question  is  asked, "  Why  gaddest  thou  about 
so  much  ?"  The  inquiry  is  not  made  of  a  traveller,  nor  of 
one  whose  business  it  is  to  journey  from  pole  to  pole,  and  to 
investigate  distant  lands.  It  is  not  asked  of  a  wayfarer 
lodging  for  a  night,  nor  of  a  homeless  vagrant  who  finds  a 
poor  shelter  beneath  every  bush ;  but  it  is  asked  by  God  of 
his  people  Israel,  describing  them  under  the  character  of  a 
married  wife.  He  represents  the  nation  of  Israel  as  being  mar- 
ried unto  himself,  himself  the  husband  of  Israel,  and  Israel  his 
bride.  To  persons  bearing  that  character  the  question 
comes  with  great  fcwce,  "Why  gaddest  thou  about  so 
much?"  Let  others  wander  who  have  no  central  object  of 
attraction,  who  have  no  house,  and  no  "house-band,"  to 


>f2  THE  SIN  OF  GADDma  ABOUT. 

bind  them  to  the  spot ;  but  thou,  a  married  wife,  how  canst 
thou  wander  ?  What  hast  thou  to  do  in  traversing  strange 
ways?  How  canst  thou  excuse  thyself?  If  thou  wertnot 
false  to  thy  relationship  thou  couldst  not  do  so?  No,  be- 
loved, we  strain  no  metaphor  when  we  say  that  there  exists 
between  the  soul  of  every  believer  and  Jesus  Christ,  a  rela- 
tionship admirably  imaged  in  the  conjugal  tie.  We  are 
married  unto  Christ.  He  has  betrothed  our  souls  unto  him- 
self. He  paid  our  dowry  on  the  cross.  He  espoused  him- 
self unto  us  in  righteousness,  in  the  covenant  of  grace. 
We  have  accepted  him  as  our  Lord  and  husband.  We 
have  given  ourselves  up  to  him,  and  under  the  sweet  law  of 
his  love  we  ought  to  dwell  evermore  in  his  house.  He  is 
the  bridegroom  of  our  souls,  and  he  has  arrayed  us  in  the 
wedding  dress  of  his  own  righteousness.  Now  it  is  to  us 
who  own  this  marriage  union,  and  who  are  allied  to  the 
Lord  Jesus  by  ties  so  tender,  that  the  Well  Beloved  says, 
"  Why  gaddest  thou  about  so  much  ?  " 

Observe,  that  the  wife's  place  may  be  described  as  a 
threefold  one.  In  the  first  place,  she  should  abide  in  depen- 
dence upon  her  husband's  care.  It  would  be  looked  upon  as 
a  very  strange  thing  if  a  wife  should  be  overheard  to  speak 
to  another  man,  and  say,  "  Come  and  assist  in  providing  for 
me."  K  she  should  cross  the  street  to  another's  house  and 
say  to  a  stranger,  "  I  have  a  difficulty  and  a  trouble  ;  will 
you  relieve  me  from  it  ?  I  feel  myself  in  great  need,  but  I 
shall  not  ask  my  husband  to  help  me,  though  he  is  rich 
enough  to  give  me  any  thing  I  require,  and  wise  enough  to 
direct  me,  but  I  come  to  you  a  stranger,  in  whom  I  have  no 
right  to  confide,  and  from  whom  I  have  no  right  to  look  for 
love,  and  I  trust  myself  with  you,  and  confide  in  you  rather 
than  in  my  husband."  This  would  be  a  very  wicked  viola- , 
tion  of  the  chastity  of  the  wife's  heart :  her  dependence  as  a 
married  woman  with  a  worthy  husband,  must  be  solely  fixed 
on  him  to  whom  she  is  bound  in  wedlock.  Transfer  the 
figure,  for  it  is  oven  so  with  us  and  the  Lord  Jesus.     It  is  a 


taft  Blli  Ot  aADbiNG  ABOUT.  tS 

tender,  topic ;  let  it  tenderly  touch  your  heart  and  mine. 
What  right  have  I,  when  I  am  in  trouble,  to  seek  an  arm  of 
flesh  to  lean  upon,  or  to  pour  my  grief  into  an  earth-born  ear 
in  preference  to  casting  my  care  on  God,  and  telling  Jesus 
all  ray  sorrows  ?  If  a  human  friend  had  the  best  intentions, 
yet  he  is  not  like  my  Lord,  he  never  died  for  me,  he  never 
shed  his  blood  for  me,  and  if  he  loves  me  he  cannot  love  me 
as  the  husband  of  my  soul  can  love  1  My  Lord's  love  is  an- 
cient as  eternity,  deeper  than  the  sea,  firmer  than  the  hills, 
changeless  as  his  own  Deity  ;  how  can  I  seek  anotlier  friend 
in  preference  to  him  ?  What  a  slight  I  put  upon  the  affec- 
tion of  my  Saviour  !  What  a  slur  upon  his  condescending 
S}Tnpathy  towards  me  !  How  I  impugn  his  generosity  and 
mistrust  his  power  if,  in  my  hour  of  need,  I  cry  out,  "Alas ! 
I  have  no  friend."  No  friend  while  Jesus  lives  !  Dare  I 
gay  I  have  no  helper  ?  No  helper  while  the  Mighty  One 
upon  whom  God  has  laid  help  still  exists  with  arm  unpar- 
alyzed  and  heart  unchanged  ?  Can  I  murmur  and  lament 
that  there  is  no  escape  for  me  from  my  tribulations  ?  No 
escape  while  my  Almighty  Saviour  lives,  and  feels  my 
every  grief?  Do  you  see  my  point  ?  Put  it  in  that  shape, 
and  the  question,  "Why  gaddest  thou  about  so  much  to 
look  after  creatures  as  grounds  of  dependence  ! "  becomes  a 
very  deep  and  searching  one.  Why,  O  believer,  dost  thou 
look  after  things  which  are  seen,  and  heard,  and  handled, 
and  recognized  by  the  sense,  instead  of  trusting  in  thine  un- 
seen but  not  unknown  Redeemer?  Oh  !  why,  why,  thou 
spouse  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  why  gaddest  thou  about  so  much  ? 
Have  we  not  even  fallen  into  this  evil  with  regard  to  our 
own  salvation?  After  a  time  of  enjoyment  it  sometimes 
happens  that  our  graces  decline,  and  we  lose  our  spiritual 
enjoyment,  and  as  we  are  very  apt  to  depend  upon  our  own 
experience,  our  faith  also  droops.  Is  not  this  unfaith 
fulness  to  the  finished  work  and  perfect  merit  of  our 
great  Substitute?  We  knew  at  the  first,  when  we  were 
under  conviction  of  sin,  that  we  could  not  rest  on  any  thing 
4 


74  THE  Sm  OF  GADDma  ABOUT. 

within  oursel.es,  a.d  yet  that  truth  is  always  slipping  away 
from  our  memories,  and  we  try  to  build  upon  past  experi- 
ences, or  to  rely  upon  present  enjoyments,  or  some  form  or 
oilier  of  pei*sonal  attainment.  Do  we  really  wish  to  ex- 
change the  sure  rock  of  our  salvation  for  the  unstable  sand 
of  our  own  feelings  ?  Can  it  be  that  having  once  walked 
by  faith  we  now  choose  to  walk  by  sight  ?  Are  graces,  aud 
frames,  and  enjoyments,  to  be  preferred  to  the  tried  founda- 
tion of  the  Redeemer's  atonement  ?  Be  it  remembered  that 
even  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  if  it  be  depended  upon  as 
a  ground  of  acceptance  with  God,  becomes  as  much  an  anti- 
christ as  though  it  were  not  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  at 
all.  Dare  we  so  blaspheme  the  Holy  Ghost  as  to  make  his 
work  in  us  a  rival  to  the  Saviour's  work  for  us  ?  Shame  on 
us  that  we  should  thus  doubly  sin  !  The  best  things  are  mis- 
chievous when  put  in  the  wrong  place.  Good  works  have 
"  necessary  uses,"  but  they  must  not  be  joined  to  the  work 
of  ^Christ  as  the  groundwork  of  our  hope.  Even  precious 
gold  may  be  made  into  an  idol-calf,  and  that  which  the  Lord 
himself  bestows  may  be  made  to  be  a  polluted  thing,  like 
that  brazen  sei^pent  which  once  availed  to  heal,  but  when  it 
was  idolized  came  to  be  styled  by  no  better  name  than  "a 
piece  of  brass,"  and  was  broken  and  put  away.  Do  not  con- 
tinually hai-p  upon  what  thou  art,  and  what  thou  art  not ; 
thy  salvation  does  not  rest  in  these  things,  but  in  thy  Lord. 
Go  thou  and  stand  at  the  foot  of  the  cross,  still  an  empty- 
handed  sinner  to  be  filled  with  the  riches  of  Christ ;  a  sin- 
ner black  as  the  tents  of  Kedar  in  thyself,  and  comely  only 
through  thy  Lord. 

Again,  the  wife's  position  is  not  only  one  of  sole  depend- 
ence upon  her  husband's  care,  but  it  should  be,  and  is,  a 
position  of  sole  delight  in  Tier  husbaiicTs  love.  To  Ije  sus- 
pected of  desiring  aught  of  man's  affection  beyond  that, 
would  be  the  most  serious  imputation  that  could  be  cast 
upon  a  wife's  character.  We  are  again  upon  very  tender 
ground,  and  I  beseech  each  of  you  who  are  now  thinking  of 


THE  Sm  OF  GADDING  ABOUT.  75 

jronr  Lord,  consider  yourself  to  be  on  very  tender  gronnd 
too,  for  you  know  what  our  God  hiis  said — "  The  Lord  thy 
God  is  a  jealous  God.''  That  is  a  very  wonderful  and  sug- 
gestive expression — "  a  jealous  God."  See  that  it  be  en- 
graven on  your  hearts.  Jesus  >rill  not  endure  it  that  those 
of  us  who  love  him  should  divide  our  hearts  between  him 
and  something  else.  The  love  li^hich  is  strong  as  death  is 
linked  with  a  jealousy  cruel  as  the  grave,  "  the  coals  thereof 
are  coals  of  fire,  which  hath  a  moi*  vehement  flame."  The 
royal  word  to  the  spouse  is,  "  Forge*  *  also  thine  own  kindred, 
and  thy  father's  house  ;  so  shall  the  King  greatly  desire  thy 
beauty :  for  he  is  thy  Lord  ;  and  w  >rship  thou  him."  Of 
course,  beloved,  the  Master  never  condemns  that  proper  nat- 
ural affection  which  we  are  bound  u^  give,  and  which  it  is 
a  part  of  our  sanctification  to  give  in  ^ts  due  and  proper  pro- 
portion to  those  who  are  related  t(  us.  Besides,  we  are 
bound  to  love  all  the  saints,  and  all  m#4nkind  in  their  proper 
place  and  measure.  But  there  is  a  love  which  is  for  the 
Master  alone.  Inside  the  heart  thcTC  must  be  a  sanctum 
sanctorum^  within  the  veil,  where  he  himself  alone  must 
shine  like  the  Shechinah,  and  reign  on  the  mercy-seat. 
There  must  be  a  glorious  high  throne  within  our  spirits, 
where  the  true  Solomon  alone  must  sit ;  the  lions  of  watch- 
ful zeal  must  guard  each  step  of  it.  There  must  he,  the  King 
in  his  beauty,  sit  enthroned,  sole  monarch  of  the  heart's  af- 
fections. But,  alas  !  alas !  how  often  have  we  gone  far  to 
provoke  his  anger !  We  have  set  up  the  altars  of  strange 
gods  hard  by  the  holy  place.  Sometimes  a  favorite  child 
has  been  idolized ;  another  time,  perhaps  our  own  persons 
have  been  admired  and  pampered.  We  have  been  unwilling 
to  suffer  though  we  knew  it  to  be  the  Lord's  will :  we  were 
determined  to  make  provision  for  the  flesh.  We  have  not 
been  willing  to  hazard  our  substance  for  Christ,  thus  mak- 
ing our  worldly  comfort  our  chief  delight,  instead  of  feeling 
that  wealth  to  be  well  lost  which  is  lost  as  the  result  of 
Jehovah's  will,     Oh,  how  soon  we  make  idols  I    Idol-mak- 


76  THE  SIN  OF  GADDING  ABOUT. 

ing  was  not  only  the  trade  of  Ephesus,  but  it  is  a  trade  all 
the  world  over.  Making  shrines  for  Diana,  nay,  shrines  for 
self,  we  are  all  master  craftsmen  at  this  in  some  form  or 
another.  Images  of  jealousy,  which  become  abominations 
of  desolation,  we  have  set  up.  We  may  even  exalt  some 
good  pursuit  into  an  idol,  even  work  for  the  Master  may 
sometimes  take  his  place  ;  as  was  the  ease  with  Martha,  we 
are  cumbered  with  much  serving,  and  often  think  more 
about  the  serving  than  of  him  who  is  to  be  served  ;  the  se- 
cret beingjthat  we  are  too  mindful  of  how  we  may  look  in  the 
serving,  and  not  enough  considerate  of  ^^m,  and  of  how  he 
may  be  honored  by  our  service.  It  is  so  very  easy  for  our 
busy  spirits  to  gad  about,  and  so  very  difficult  to  sit  at  the 
Master's  feet.  Now,  Christian,  if  thou  hast  been  looking 
after  this  and  after  that  secondary  matter  ;  if  thy  mind  has 
been  set  too  much  upon  worldly  business,  or  upon  any  form 
of  earthly  love,  the  Master  says  to  thee,  "  My  spouse,  my 
beloved,  why  gaddest  thou  about  so  much?"  Let  us  con- 
fess our  fault,  and  return  unto  our  rest.  Let  each  one  sing 
plaintively  in  the  chamber  of  his  heart  some  such  song  as 
this — 

"  Why  should  my  foolish  passions  rove  ? 
Where  can  such  sweetness  be 
As  I  have  tasted  in  thy  love. 
As  I  have  found  in  thee  ? 

Wretch  that  I  am,  to  wander  thus  , 

In  chase  of  false  delight ; 
Let  me  be  fastened  to  thy  cross. 

Rather  than  lose  thy  sight." 

But  a  third  position,  which  I  think  will  be  recognized 
by  every  wife  as  being  correct,  is  not  simply  dependence 
upon  her  husband's  care  and  delight  in  her  husband's  love, 
but  also  diligence  in  her  husbmicPs  house.  The  good  house- 
wife,  as  Solomon  tells  us,  "  looketh  well  to  the  ways  of  her 
household,  and  eateth  not  the  bread  of  idleness."  She  is 
not  a  servant,  her  position  is  very  different  from  that,  but 


THE  SIN  OF  GADDING  ABOUT.  ^^ 

for  that  very  reason  she  uses  the  more  diligence.  A  ser- 
vant's work  may  sometimes  be  finished,  but  a  wife's  never. 
"  She  riseth  also  while  it  is  yet  night,  and  giveth  meat  to 
her  household,  and  a  portion  to  her  maidens."  She  rejoices 
^^dllingly  to  labor  as  no  servant  could  be  expected  to  do. 
"  She  seeketh  wool,  and  flax,  and  worketh  willingl}*  with 
her  hands."  "She  girdeth  her  loins  with  strength,  and 
Btrengtheneth  her  arms.  She  perceiveth  that  her  merchan- 
dise is  good :  her  candle  goeth  not  out  by  night.  She  lay- 
eth  her  hands  to  the  spindle,  and  her  hands  hold  the  distaff." 
All  through  the  live-long  night  she  watches  her  sick  child, 
and  then  through  the  weary  day  as  well  the  child  is  still 
tended,  and  the  household  cares  are  still  heavy  upon  her. 
She  relaxes  never.  She  counts  that  her  house  is  her  king- 
dom, and  she  cares  for  it  with  incessant  care.  The  making 
of  her  husband  happy,  and  the  training  up  of  her  children 
in  the  fear  of  God,  that  is  her  business.  The'  good  house- 
wife is  like  Sarah,  of  whom  it  is  written,  that  when  the  an- 
gels asked  Abraham,  "  Where  is  Sarah  thy  wife  ?  "  he  an- 
swered, "  Behold  she  is  in  the  tent."  It  would  have  been 
well  for  some  of  her  descendants  had  they  been  "in  the 
tent,"  too,  for  Dinah's  going  forth  to  see  the  daughters  of 
the  land  cost  her  dear.  Now,  this  is  the  position,  the  exact 
position  of  the  chaste  lover  of  Jesus,  he  dwells  at  home  with 
Jesus,  among  his  own  people.  The  Christian's  place  with 
regard  to  Christ  is  to  be  diligently  engaged  in  Christ's 
house.  Some  of  us  can  say,  I  trust,  that  we  do  naturally 
care  for  the  souls  of  men.  We  were  bom  by  God's  grace, 
to  care  for  them,  and  could  not  be  happy,  any  more  than 
«jome  nurses  can  be  happy  without  the  care  of  children, 
unless  we  have  converts  to  look  after,  and  weaklings  to 
cherish.  It  is  well  for  the  church  when  there  are  many  of 
her  members,  beside  her  pastors  and  deacons,  who  care  for 
the  souls  of  those  who  are  bom  in  the  church.  The  church 
is  Christ's  family  mansion.  It  should  be  the  home  of  new- 
bom  souls,  where  they  are  fed  with  food  convenient  for  them, 


78  THE  Sm  OP  GADDING  ABOLT. 

nourished,  comforted,  and  educated  for  the  better  lani 
Tou  have  all  something  to  do ;  you  who  are  married  to 
Christ  have  all  a  part  assigned  you  in  the  household  of  God. 
He  has  given  you  each  a  happy  task.  It  may  be  that  you 
have  to  suffer  in  secret  for  him,  or  you  have  to  talk  to  two 
or  three,  or  perhaps  in  a  little  village  station,  or  at  the 
comer  of  a  street  you  have  to  preach,  or  possibly  it  is  the 
distribution  of  a  handful  of  tracts,  or  it  is  looking  after  the 
souls  of  a  few  women  in  your  district,  or  teaching  a  class 
of  children.  Whatever  it  is,  if  we  have  been  growing  at 
all  negligent,  if  we  have  not  thrown  our  full  strength  into 
his  work,  and  have  been  expending  our  vigor  somewhere 
else,  may  not  the  question  come  very  pertinently  home  to 
us,  "  Why  gaddest  thou  about  so  much  ?  "  Why  that  party 
of  pleasure,  that  political  meeting,  that  late  rising,  that 
waste  of  time  ?  Hast  thou  nothing  better  to  do  ?  Thou 
hast  enough  to  do  for  thy  husband  and  his  church,  if  thou 
doest  it  well.  Thou  hast  not  a  minute  to  spare,  the  King^s 
business  requireth  haste.  Our  charge  is  too  weighty  and 
too  dear  to  our  hearts  to  admit  of  sloth.  The  Lord  has 
given  us  as  much  to  do  as  we  shall  have  strength  and  time  to 
accomplish  by  his  grace,  and  we  have  no  energies  to  spare, 
no  talents  to  wrap  up  in  napkins,  no  hours  to  idle  in  the 
market-place.  One  thing  we  do :  that  one  thing  should  ab- 
sorb all  our  powers.  To  neglect  our  holy  life-work  is  to 
wrong  our  heavenly  Bridegroom.  Put  this  matter  in  a 
clear  light,  my  brethren,  and  do  not  shut  your  eyes  to  it. 
Have  you  any  right  to  mind  earthly  things?  Can  you 
serve  two  masters  ?  What,  think  you,  would  any  kind  hus- 
band here  think,  if  when  he  came  home  the  children  had 
been  neglected  all  day,  if  there  was  no  meal  for  him  after 
his  day's  work,  and  no  care  taken  of  his  house  whatever  ? 
Might  he  not  well  give  a  gentle  rebuke,  or  turn  away  with 
a  tear  in  his  eye  ?  And  if  it  were  long  continued,  might  he 
not  almost  be  justified  if  he  should  say — "  My  house  yields 
me  no  comfort !    This  woman  acts  not  as  a  wife  to  me  J  " 


THE  SIN  OF  GADDING  ABOUT.  ^9 

And  yet,  bethink  thee,  soul,  is  not  this  what  thou  hast  done 
with  thy  Lord  ?  T^Tien  he  has  come  into  his  house  has  he 
not  found  it  in  sad  disorder,  the  morning  prayer  neglected, 
the  evening  supplication  but  poorly  offered,  those  little  chil- 
dren but  badly  taught,  and  many  other  works  of  love  for- 
gotten. It  is  thy  business  as  well  as  his,  for  thou  art  one 
with  him,  and  yet  thou  hast  failed  in  it.  Might  he  not  justly 
say  to  th(  e,  "  I  have  little  comfort  in  thy  fellowship  ?  I  will 
get  me  gone  until  thou  treatest  me  better,  and  when  thou 
longest  for  me,  and  art  willing  to  treat  me  as  I  should  be 
treated,  then  I  will  return  to  thee,  but  thou  shalt  see  my 
face  no  more  till  thou  hast  a  truer  heart  towards  me?" 
Thus  in  personal  sadness  have  I  put  this  question  ;  the  Lord 
give  us  tender  hearts  while  answering  it. 

Painful  as  the  inquiry  is,  let  us  tuni  to  the  question 
again.  A  reason  is  requested:  what  shall  we  give  ?  "  Why 
gaddest  thou  about  so  much  ?  "  I  am  at  a  loss  to  give  any 
answer.  I  can  suppose  that  without  beating  about  the  bush, 
an  honest  heart  convinced  of  its  ingratitude  to  Christ  would 
say,  **  My  Lord,  all  I  can  say  for  myself  is  to  make  a  confes- 
sion of  the  wrong,  and  if  I  might  make  any  excuse,  which 
after  all  is  no  excuse,  it  is  this,  I  find  myself  so  fickle  at 
heart,  so  frail,  so  changeable ;  I  am  like  Reuben,  unstable 
as  water,  and  therefore  I  do  not  excel."  But  I  can  well 
conceive  that  the  Master,  without  being  severe,  would  not 
allow  even  of  such  an  extenuation  as  that,  because  there  are 
many  of  us  who  could  not  fairly  urge  it.  We  are  not  fickle 
in  other  things.  We  are  not  unstable  in  minor  matters. 
Where  we  love  we  love  most  firmly,  and  a  resolve  once 
taken  by  us  is  determinedly  carried  out.  We  know  what 
it  is,  some  of  us,  to  put  our  foot  down,  and  declare  that 
having  taking  a  right  step  we  will  not  retrace  it ;  and 
then  no  mortal  power  can  move  us.  Now,  if  we  possess  this 
resolute  character  in  other  things,  it  can  never  be  allowable 
for  us  to  use  the  excuse  of  instability.  Resolved  elsewhere, 
how  canst  thou  be  fickle  here?    Firm  everywhere  else,  and 


go  THE  SIN  OP  GADDING  ABOUT. 

yet  frail  here !  O  soul,  what  art  thou  at  ?  This  is  gratuitona 
sin,  wanton  fickleness.  Surely  thou  hast  wrought  folly  in 
Israel  if  thou  givest  the  world  thy  best,  and  Christ  thy 
worst  1  The  world  thy  decision,  and  Christ  thy  wavering ! 
This  is  but  to  make  thv  sin  the  worse.  The  excuse  becomes 
an  aggravation.  It  is  not  true  that  thou  art  thus  unavoida- 
bly fickle.  Thou  art  not  a  feather  blown  with  every  wind, 
but  a  man  of  purpose  and  will;  oh,  why  then  so  soon  re- 
moved from  thy  best  Beloved  One  ? 

I  will  ask  thee  a  few  questions,  not  so  much  by  way  of 
answering  the  inquiry,  as  to  show  how  difficult  it  is  to  an- 
swer it.  "  Why  gaddest  thou  about  so  much  ?  "  Has  thy 
Lord  given  thee  any  offence  ?  Has  he  been  unkind  to  thee  ? 
Has  the  Lord  Jesus  spoken  to  thee  like  a  tyrant,  and  played 
the  despot  over  thee  ?  Must  thou  not  confess  that  in  all  his 
dealings  with  thee  in  the  past,  love,  unmingled  love,  has 
been  his  rule  ?  He  has  borne  patiently  with  thine  ill-man- 
ners ;  when  thou  hast  been  foolish  he  has  given  thee  wis- 
dom, and  he  has  not  upbraided  thee,  though  he  might  have 
availed  himself  of  the  opportunity  of  that  gift,  as  men  so  of- 
ten do,  to  give  a  word  of  upbraiding  at  the  same  time.  He 
has  not  turned  against  thee  or  been  thine  enemy,  why  then 
be  so  cold  to  him  ?  Is  this  the  way  to  deal  with  one  so  ten- 
der and  so  good  ?  Let  me  ask  thee,  has  thy  Saviour  changed  ? 
Wilt  thou  dare  to  think  he  is  untrue  to  thee  ?  Is  he  not 
"  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  forever  ?"  That  cannot, 
then,  be  an  apology  for  thine  unfaithfulness.  Has  he  been 
unmindful  of  his  promise  ?  He  has  told  thee  to  call  upon 
him  in  the  day  of  trouble,  and  he  will  deliver  thee;  has  he 
failed  to  do  so?  It  is  written,  "No  good  thing  will  he 
withhold  from  them  that  walk  uprightly."  Has  Le  with- 
held a  really  good  thing  from  thee  when  thou  hast  walked 
uprightly  ?  If,  indeed,  he  had  played  thee  false,  thine 
excuse  for  deserting  him  might  claim  a  hearing,  but  thou 
darest  not  say  this.  Thou  knowest  that  he  is  faithful  and 
true. 


THE  SIN  OF  GADDING  ABOUT.  81 

"  Why  gaddest  thou  about  so  much  ?  "  Hast  thou  found 
any  happiness  in  gadding  about  ?  I  confess,  sorrowfully, 
to  wandering  often  and  wandering  much,  but  I  am  ready 
enough  to  acknowledge  that  I  get  no  peace,  no  comfort 
by  my  wanderings,  but  like  a  forlorn  spirit  I  traverse  dry 
places,  seeking  rest  and  finding  none.  If  for  a  day,  or  a 
part  of  a  day,  my  thoughts  are  not  upon  my  Lord,  the  hour 
is  dreary,  and  my  time  hangs  heavily ;  and  if  my  thought 
ia  spent  upon  other  topics  even  connected  with  my  work  in 
the  church  of  God,  if  I  do  not  soon  come  back  to  him,  if 
I  have  no  dealings  with  him  in  prayer  and  praise,  I  find 
the  wheels  of  my  chariot  taken  off,  and  I  drag  along  right 
heavily. 

**  The  day  is  dark,  the  night  is  long, 
Unblest  with  thoughts  of  thee. 
And  dall  to  me  the  sweetest  song. 
Unless  its  theme  thou  be." 

The  soul  that  has  once  learned  to  swim  in  the  river  of 
Christ  will,  when  his  presence  is  withdrawn,  be  like  a  fish 
laid  by  the  fisherman  on  the  sandy  shore,  it  begins  to  palpi- 
tate in  dire  distress,  and  ere  long  it  will  die,  if  not  again 
restored  to  its  vital  element.  You  cannot  get  the  flavor  of 
the  bread  of  heaven  in  your  mouth,  and  afterwards  content- 
edly feed  on  ashes.  He  who  has  never  tasted  any  thing  but 
the  brown,  gritty  cakes  of  this  world,  may  be  very  well  sat- 
isfied with  them  ;  but  he  who  has  once  tasted  the  pure 
white  bread  of  heaven  can  never  be  content  with  the  old 
diet.  It  spoils  a  man  for  satisfaction  with  this  world  to 
have  had  heart-ravishing  dealings  with  the  world  to  come. 
I  mean  not  that  it  spoils  him  for  practical  activity  in  it,  for 
the  heavenly  life  is  the  truest  life  even  for  earth,  but  it 
spoils  him  for  the  sinful  pleasures  of  this  world  ;  it  prevents 
hifl  feeding  his  soul  upon  any  thing  save  the  Lord  Jesus. 
Christ's  sweet  love.  Jesus  is  the  chief  ingredient  of  all  his 
joy,  and  he  finds  that  no  other  enjoyment  beneath  the  sky 
Js  worth  a  moment's  comparison  with  the  King's  wines  on 


82  THE  SIN.  OF  GADDING  ABOUT. 

the  lees,  well  refined.  "  Why  then  gaddest  thou  about  so 
much?"  For  what,  oh!  for  what  reason  dost  thou  wan^ 
der  ?  When  a  child  runs  away  from  its  home,  because  it 
has  a  brutal  parent,  it  is  excused;  but  wben  the  child 
leaves  a  tender  mother  and  an  affectionate  father,  what 
shall  we  say  ?  If  the  slieep  quits  a  barren  field  to  seek  after 
needed  pasturage,  who  shall  blame  it  ?  But  if  it  leaves  the 
green  pastures,  and  forsakes  the  still  waters  to  roain  over 
the  arid  sand,  or  to  go  bleating  in  the  forest  among  the 
wolves,  in  the  midst  of  danger,  how  foolish  a  creature  it 
proves  itsnlf !  Such  has  been  our  folly.  We  have  left  gold 
for  dross  I  We  have  forsaken  a  throne  for  a  dunghill  ?  We 
have  quittrjd  scarlet  and  fine  linen  for  rags  and  beggary ! 
We  have  1-ft  a  palace  for  a  hovel  I  We  have  turned  from 
sunlight  into  darkness  I  We  have  forsaken  the  shining  of 
the  Sun  of  Righteousness,  the  sweet  summer  weather  of  com- 
munion, the  singing  of  the  birds  of  promise,  and  the  turtle 
voice  of  the  divine  Spirit,  and  the  blossoming  of  the  roses 
and  the  fair  lilies  of  divine  love,  to  shiver  in  frozen  regions 
among  the  ice  caves  and  snow  of  absence  from  the  Lord's 
presence.  God  forgive  us,  for  we  have  no  excuse  for  this 
foUy. 

"  Why  gaddest  thou  about  so  much  ?  "  Hast  thou  not 
always  had  to  pay  for  thy  gaddings,  aforetime  I  O  pil- 
grim, it  is  hard  getting  back  again  to  the  right  road.  Ev- 
ery believer  knows  how  wise  John  Bunyan  was  when  he  de- 
picted Christian  as  bemoaning  himself  bitterly  when  he  had 
to  go  back  to  tlie  harbor  where  he  had  slept  and  lost  his 
roll.  He  had  to  do  a  triple  journey ;  first  to  go  on,  and 
then  to  go  back,  and  then  to  go  on  again.  The  back  step 
is  weary  marching.  Remember,  also.  Bypath  Meadow,  and 
Doubting  Castle,  and  Giant  Despair.  'Twas  an  ill  day 
when  the  pUgiims  left  the  narrow  way.  No  gain,  but  un- 
told loss  comes  of  forsaking  the  way  of  holiness  and  fellow- 
ship. What  is  there  in  such  a  prospect  to  attract  yon  from 
the  happy  way  of  conimuuiou  with  Clirist.     Perhaps  the 


THE  SIN  OP  GADDING  ABOUT.  83 

last  time  you  wandered,  you  fell  into  sin,  or  you  met  with  a 
grief  which  overwhelmed  you  :  ought  not  these  mishaps  to 
teach  you  ?  Being  burned  will  you  not  dread  the  fire  ? 
Having  aforetime  been  assaulted  when  in  forbidden  paths, 
will  you  not  now  keep  to  the  king's  highway,  wherein  no 
jion  or  any  other  ravenous  beast  shall  be  found  ? 

"  Why  gaddest  thou  about  so  much  ? "  Dost  thou  not 
evon  now  feel  the  drawings  of  his  love  attracting  thee  to 
himself?  This  heavenly  impulse  should  make  the  question 
altogether  unanswerable.  You  feel  sometimes  a  holy  im- 
pulse to  pray,  and  yet  do  not  pray ;  you  feel,  even  now,  as 
if  you  wished  to  behold  the  face  of  your  Beloved,  and  yet 
you  will  go  forth  into  the  world  without  him ;  is  this  as  it 
should  be  ?  The  Holy  Spirit  is  saying  in  your  soul,  "  Arise 
from  the  bed  of  thy  sloth,  and  seek  him  whom  thy  soul  lov- 
eth."  K  your  sloth  prevents  your  rising  how  will  you  ex 
cuse  yourself?  Even  now  I  hear  the  Beloved  knocking  at 
your  door.  Will  you  not  hasten  to  admit  him  ?  Are  you 
too  idle  ?  Dare  you  say  to  him,  "  I  have  put  off  my  coat, 
how  can  I  put  it  on  ?  I  have  washed  my  feet,  how  shall  I 
defile  them  ?  "  If  you  keep  him  without  in  the  cold  and 
darkness  while  his  head  is  wet  with  dew,  and  his  locks  with 
the  drops  of  the  night,  what  cruelty  is  this  ?  Is  this  thy 
kindness  to  thy  friend  ?  Can  you  hear  him  say,  "  Open  to 
me,  my  love,  my  dove,  my  undefiled  ; "  and  can  you  be  deaf 
to  his  appeals  ?  Oh  that  he  may  gently  make  for  himself  an 
entrance.  May  he  put  in  his  hand  by  the  hole  of  the  door, 
and  may  your  bowels  be  moved  for  him  !  May  you  rise  up 
and  open  to  him,  and  then  your  hands  will  drop  with  myrrh, 
and  your  fingers  with  sweet-smelling  rayrrh  upon  the  han- 
dles of  the  lock.  But  remember  if  you  neglect  him  now,  it 
will  cost  you  much  to  find  him  when  you  do  arise,  for  he 
will  make  you  traverse  the  streets  after  him,  and  the  watch- 
men will  smite  you,  and  take  away  your  veil.  Rise  ani  ad« 
mit  hmi  now. 


84  THE  SIN  OP  GADDING  ABOUT. 

"  Behold  I  joTir  Bridegroom's  at  the  door ! 
He  gentlj  knocks,  has  knocked  before : 
Has  waited  long ;  is  waiting  still : 
Yon  treat  no  other  friend  so  ill. 

Oh  lovely  attitnde  I  he  stands 
With  melting  heart  and  laden  hands ; 
Delay  no  more,  lest  he  depart, 
Admit  him  to  your  inmost  heart.* 

Tet  again,  even  now,  he  callb  you.  Run  after  him,  fof 
he  draws  you.  Approach  him,  for  he  invites  you.  God 
grant  it  may  be  so ! 

I  wish  I  had  the  power  to  handle  a  topic  like  this  as  Ruth- 
erford, or  Herbert,  or  Hawker  would  have  done,  so  as  to 
touch  all  your  hearts,  if  you  are  at  this  hour  without  enjoy- 
ment of  fellowship  with  Jesus.  But,  indeed,  I  am  so  much 
one  of  yourselves,  so  much  one  who  has  to  seek  the  Master?s 
face  myself,  that  I  can  scarcely  press  the  question  upon  you, 
but  must  rather  press  it  upon  myself.  "  Why  gaddest  thou 
about  so  much  to  change  thy  way  ?  "  Blessed  shall  be  the 
time  when  our  wanderings  shall  cease,  when  we  shall  see 
him  face  to  face,  and  rest  in  his  bosom!  Till  then,  if  we  are 
to  know  any  thing  of  heaven  here  below,  it  must  be  by  living 
close  to  Jesus,  abiding  at  the  foot  of  his  cross,  depending 
on  his  atonement,  looking  for  his  coming — that  glorious 
hope,  preparing  to  meet  him  with  lamps  well  trimmed, 
watching  for  the  midnight  cry,  "Behold,  the  Bridegroom 
Cometh ; "  standing  even  in  his  presence ;  looking  up  to  him 
as  we  see  him  pleading  before  the  throne,  and  believing  that 
he  is  ever  with  us,  even  unto  the  end  of  the  world.  Oh  may 
we  be  in  future  so  fixed  in  heart  that  the  question  need  not 
again  be  asked  of  us,  "  Why  gaddest  thou  about  so  much  ?  " 

And  now  I  have  to  use  the  text  for  a  few  minutes,  in  ad- 
dressing those  who  are  not  converted. 

I  trust  that  some  of  you  who  are  not  yet  saved,  neverthe- 
less have  a  degree  of  desire  towards  Christ.  It  is  well  when 
like  the  climbing  plant,  the  heart  throws  out  tendrils,  try 


THE  SIN  OF  GADDma  ABOUT.  85 

ing  to  grasp  something  by  the  help  of  which  it  may  mount 
higher.     I  hope  that  desire  of  yours  after  better  things,  and 
after  Jesus,  is  something  more  than  nature  could  have  im- 
parted.     Grace  is  the  source  of  gracious  desires.     But  that 
is  not  the  point.      Your  desires  may  be  right,  and  yet  your 
methods  of  action  mistaken.      You  have  been  .trying  after 
peace,  but  you  have  been  gadding  about  to  find  it.      The 
context  says  that  the  Israelites  would  soon  be  as  weary  of 
Egypt  as  they  had  been  of  Assyria.      Read  the  whole  pas- 
sage :  "  Why  gaddest  thou  about  so  much  to  change  thy 
way?  thou  also  shalt  be  ashamed  of  Egypt,  as  thou  wast 
ashamed  of  Assyria.      Yea,  thou  shalt  go  forth  from  him, 
and  thine  hands  upon  thine  head  :  for  the  Lord  hath  reject- 
ed thy  confidences,  and  thou  shalt  not  prosper  in  them." 
Jeremiah  ii.  36,  37.      Their  gadding  about  would  end  in 
their  being  confounded  at  last  as  they  were  at  first.      Once 
they  trusted  in  Assyria,  and  the  Assyrians  carried  them 
away  captive  ;  that  was  the  end  of  their  former  false  confi- 
dence.    Then  they  trusted  in  Egypt,  and  met  with  equal  dis- 
appointment.     When  a  man  is  at  first  alarmed  about  his 
soul,  he  will  do  any  thing  rather  than  come  to  Christ.  Christ 
is  a  harbor  that  no  ship  ever  enters  except  under  stress  of 
weather.      Mariners  on  the  sea  of  life  steer  for  any  port  ex- 
cept the  fair  haven  of  free  grace.      When  a  man  first  finds 
comfort  in  his  own  good  works,  he  thinks  he  has  done  well. 
"  Why,"  says  he,  "  this  must  be  the  way  of  salvation ;  I  am 
not  a  drunkard  now,  I  have  taken  the  pledge  ;  I  am  not  a 
Sabbath-breaker  now,  I  have  taken  a  seat  at  a  place  of  wor- 
ship.     Go  in,  and  look  at  my  house,  sir ;  you  will  see  it  as 
different  as  possible  from  what  it  was  before  ;  there  is  a  mor- 
al change  in  me  of  a  most  wonderful  kind,  and  surely  this 
will  suffice  ! "      Now,  if  God  be  dealing  with  that  man  in  a 
way  of  grace,  he  will  soon  be  ashamed  of  his  false  confi- 
dence.     He  will  be  thankful,  of  course,  that  he  has  been  led 
to  morality,  but  he  will  find  that  bed  too  short  to  stretch 
himself  on  it.      He  will  discover  that  the  past  still  lives  ; 


86  .  THE  SIN  OP  GADDING  ABOUT. 

that  his  old  sms  are  buried  only  in  imagination — ^the  ghostfl 
of  them  will  haunt  him,  they  will  alarm  his  conscience.     He 
will  be  compelled  to  feel  that  sin  is  a  scarlet  stain,  not  to  be 
so  readily  washed  out  as  he  fondly  dreamed.    His  self-right- 
eous refuge  will  prove  to  be  a  bowing  wall  and  a  tottering 
fence.      Driven  to  extremities  by  the  fall  of  his  tower  of 
Babel,  the  top  of  which  was  to  reach  to  heaven,  he  grows 
weary  of  his  former  hopes.      He  finds  that  all  the  outward 
religion  he  can  muster  will  not  suffice,  that  even  the  purest 
morality  is  not  enough ;  for  over  and  above  the  thunderings 
of  conscience  there  comes  clear  and  shrill  as  the  voice  of  a 
trimipet, "  Ye  must  be  bom  again  ; "  "  Except  a  man  be  borp 
again,  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God ; "  "  Except  ye  be 
converted,  and  become  as  little  children,  ye  can  in  nowise 
enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven."    Well,   then,  what 
does  he  do  ?  He  resolves  to  find  another  shelter,  to  exchange 
Assyria  for  Egypt.     That  is  to  say,  as  work  will  not  do,  he 
will  try  feeling ;  and  the  poor  soul  will  labor  to  pump  up 
repentance  out  of  a  rocky  heart,  and,  failing  to  do  so,  will 
mistake  despair  for  contrition.     He  will  try  as  much  as 
possible  to  feel  legal  convictions.     He  will  sit  down  and 
read  the  books  of  Job  and  Jeremiah,  till  he  half  hopes  that 
by  becoming  a  companion  of  dragons,  and  an  associate  of 
owls,  he  may  find  rest.     He  seeks  the  living  among  the 
dead,  comfort  from  the  law,  healing  from  a  sword.     He  con- 
ceives that  if  he  can  feel  up  to  a  certain  point,  he  can  be 
saved ;  if  he  can  repent  to  a  certain  degree,  if  he  can  be 
alarmed  with  fears  of  hell  up  to  fever  heat,  then  he  may  be 
saved.     But  ere  long,  if  God  is  dealing  with  him,  he  gets  to 
be  as  much  ashamed  of  his  feelings  as  of  his  works.     He  is 
thankful  for  them  as  far  as  they  are  good,  but  he  feels  that 
Le  could  not  depend  upon  them,  and  he  recollects,  that  ii 
feelincf  were  the  way  of  salvation  he  deserves  to  feel  hell  it- 
sell,  and  that  to  feel  any  thing  short  of  eternal  wrath  would 
not  meet  the  law's  demands.     The  question  may  fitly  be  put 
to  one  who  thus  goes  the  round  of  works,  and  feelings,  and 


THE  SIN  OP  GADDINQ  ABOUT.  87 

perhaps  of  ceremonies,  and  mortifications,  "  Why  gaddest 
thou  about  so  much  ? "    It  will  all  end  in  nothing.     You 
may  gad  about  as  long  as  you  will,  but  you  will  never  gain 
peace,  except  by  simple  faith  in  Jesus.     All  the  while  you 
are  roaming  so  far,  the  gospel  is  nigh  you,  where  you  now 
are,  in  your  present  state,  available  to  you  in  your  present 
condition  now,  for  "  now  is  the  accepted  time  ;  now  is  the 
day  of  salvation."     O  sinner,  thou  art  thinking  to  bring 
something  to  the  Most  High  God,  and  yet  he  bids  thee 
come  without  money  and  without  price.     Thy  Father  saith 
to  thee,  "Come  now,  and  let  us  reason  together;  though 
your  sins  be  as  scarlet,  they  shall  be  white  as  snow  ;  though 
they  be  red  like  crimson,  they  shall  be  as  wool."     He  de- 
clares to  you  the  way  of  salvation.     "  Believe  in  the  Lord 
Jesiis  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved."    He  calls  to  you  in 
his  gracious  word,  and  says,  "  Whosoever  will,  let  him  take 
the  water  of  life  freely."    He  bids  you  trust  in  his  Son,  who 
is  the  appointed  Saviour,  for  he  hath  laid  help  upon  one  that 
is  mighty.     He  thus  addresses  you:  "Incline  your  ear  unto 
me,  and  come  unto  me :  hear  and  your  soul  shall  live  ;  and 
I  will  make  an  everlasting  covenant  with  you,  even  the  sure 
mercies  of  David."    You  want  pardon,  and  he  cries  from 
the  cross,  "  Look  unto  me  and  be  ye  saved,  all  ye  ends  of 
the  earth."    You  want  justification ;  the  Father  points  you 
to  his  Son,  and  says, "  By  his  knowledge  shall  my  righteous 
servant  justify  many,  for  he  shall  bear  their  iniquities." 
You  want  salvation; he  directs  you  to  him  who  is  exalted  on 
high  to  give  repentance  and  remission  of  sins.     The  God  of 
heaven  bids  you  look  to  his   dear  Son,  and  trust  him. 
Tliough  I  preach  this  gospel  every  day  of  the  week,  scarcely 
a  day  passes  without  my  telling  the  old,  old  story,  yet  it  is 
ever  new.     If  you  who  hear  me  so  often  grow  weary  of  it, 
it  is  the  fault  of  my  style  of  putting  it,  for  to  myself  it  seems 
fresher  every  day  I     To  think  that  the  tender  Father  should 
Bay  to  the  prodigal  son,  "I  ask  nothing  of  thee  ;  I  am  wil- 
ling to  receive  thee,  sinful,  guilty,  vile  as  thou  art;  though 


gg  THE  SIN  OF  GADDING  ABOUT. 

thou  hast  injured  me,  and  spent  my  substance  with  harlots  5 
though  thou  hast  fed  swine  ;  though  thou  art  fit  to  be  noth 
ing  but  a  swine-feeder  all  thy  days ;  yet  come  thou  as  thou 
art  to  my  loving  bosom ;  I  will  rejoice  over  thee,  and  kiss 
thee,  and  say, '  Bring  forth  the  best  robe  and  put  it  on  him, 
p  it  a  ring  on  his  hands,  and  shoes  on  his  feet ! ' "  Sinner, 
God  grant  thee  grace  to  end  all  thy  roamings  in  thy  Fa- 
ther's bosom.  "  Why  ga,ddest  thou  about  so  much  ?  "  Re- 
nounce all  other  hopes  and  fly  away  to  the  wounds  of  JesfUL 
**  Why  gaddest  thou  about  so  much  to  change  thy  way  f  * 
LiBten  and  obey  these  closing  lines : — 


€t 


Weary  souls  who  wander  wide 
From  the  central  point  of  bliss, 
Turn  to  Jesus  crucified,  ^ 
FI7  to  those  dear  wounds  of  his : 
Sink  into  the  purple  flood. 
Rise  into  the  life  of  God. 

Find  in  Christ,  the  way  of  peace, 
Peace,  unspeakable,  unknown ; 
By  his  pain  he  gives  you  ease. 
Life  by  his  expiring  groan : 
Rise,  exalted  by  his  fall ; 
Find  in  Chrif<t  your  all  in  all'* 


T 


THE  BROAD  WALL.  89 


SERMON  V. 


THE  BROAD  WALL. 

The  six  sennoiis  numbered  from  V.  to  XI.  are  moie  brief  than 
others,  and  were  mainly  delivered  on  week  evening  occasions.    They 
were  not  published  in  our  usual  weekly  series  in  England,  and  will 
therefore,  we  trust,  be  new  to  our  American  friends. 


(I 


THB  BBOAD  WALL.'*  Nehemlah  ill.  8. 


It  seems  that  round  Jenisalem  of  old,  in  the  time  of  her 
splendor,  there  was  a  broad  wall,  which  was  her' defence 
and  her  glory.  Jerusalem  is  a  type  of  the  Church  of  God. 
It  is  always  well  when  we  can  see  clearly,  distinctly,  and 
plainly,  that  around  the  Church  to  which  we  belong  there 
runs  a  broad  wall. 

Without  further  preface,  the  idea  of  a  broad  wall  around 
the  Church  suggests  three  things  :  separation,  security,  and 
enjoyment.    Let  us  take  each  in  its  turn. 

L  First,  the  sepaeation  of  the  people  of  God  from  the 
world  is  like  that  broad  wall  which  surrounded  the  holy 
city  of  Jerusalem. 

When  a  man  becomes  a  Christian  he  is  still  in  the  world, 
but  he  is  no  longer  to  be  of  it.  He  was  an  heir  of  wrath, 
but  he  has  now  become  a  child  of  grace.  Being  of  a  dis- 
tinct nature,  he  is  required  to  separate  himself  from  the  rest 
of  mankind,  as  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  did,  who  was  "  holy, 
harmless,  undeiiled,  and  separate  from  sinners."  The  Lord's 
Church  was  separated  in  his  eternal  purpose.  It  was  8*ipa- 
rated  in  his  covenant  and  decree.    It  was  separated  in  the 


90  THE  BROAD  WALL. 

« 

atonement,  for  even  there  we  find  that  our  Lord  is  called 
"  the  Saviour  of  all  men,  especially  of  them  that  believe.^ 
An  actual  separation  is  made  by  converting  grace,  is  carried 
on  in  sanctification,  and  will  be  completed  in  that  day  when 
the  heavens  shall  be  on  fire,  and  the  saints  shall  be  caught 
VJ-.  together  with  the  Lord  in  the  air — then  shall  he  divide 
the  nations  as  a  shepherd  divideth  the  sheep  from  the  g^ats, 
and  theai  a  great  gulf  shall  be  fixed,  across  which  the  un 
godly  cannot  go  to  the  righteous,  neither  shall  the  righteous 
approach  the  wicked. 

My  business  in  this  address  is  to  say  to  those  of  you  who 
profess  to  be  the  Lord's  people,  take  care  that  you  maintain 
a  broad  wall  of  separation  between  you  and  the  world,  I  do 
not  say  that  you  are  to  adopt  peculiarities  of  dress,  or  prac- 
tise singularities  of  speech.  Such  afiectation  gendereth, 
sooner  or  later,  to  hypocrisy.  A  man  may  be  as  thoroughly 
worldly  in  one  coat  as  another,  he  may  be  quite  as  vain  and 
conceited  with  one  style  of  speech  as  another ;  nay,  he  may 
be  even  more  of  the  world  when  he  pretends  to  be  separate, 
than  if  he  had  left  the  pretence  of  separation  alone.  The 
separation  which  we  plead  for  is  moral  and  spiritual.  Its 
foundation  is  laid  deep  in  the  heart,  and  its  substantial  real- 
ity is  very  palpable  in  the  life. 

Eveiy  Christian,  it  seems  to  me,  should  be  more  scrupu- 
lous than  other  men  in  his  dealings.  He  must  never  swerve 
from  the  path  of  integrity.  He  should  never  say,  "  It  is  the 
custom :  it  is  perfectly  understood  in  the  trade."  Let  the 
Christian  remember  that  custom  cannot  sanction  wrong,  and 
that  its  being  "  understood  "  is  no  apology  for  misrepresen- 
tation. A  lie  "  understood  "  is  not  therefore  true.  While 
the  golden  rule  is  more  admired  than  practised  by  ordinary 
men,  the  Christian  should  always  do  unto  others  what  he 
would  that  they  should  do  unto  him.  He  should  be  one 
whose  word  is  his  bond,  and  who,  having  once  pledged  him 
self,  sweareth  to  his  own  hurt,  but  changeth  not.  The  Chris- 
tian should  be  more  precise  even  than  the  best  moralistSr 


TttB  BROAD  Wall.  91 

The  highest  point  to  which  the  best  unconverted  man  can 
go  sliould  be  looked  upon  as  a  level  below  which  the  con- 
veited  man  will  never  venture  to  descend. 

Moreover,  the  Christian  should  especially  be  distinguish- 
^d  by  his  pleasures,  for  it  is  here,  usually,  that  the  true  man 
comes  out.  We  are  not  quite  ourselves,  perhaps,  in  our 
daily  toil,  where  our  pursuits  are  rather  dictated  by  necessi- 
ty than  by  choice.  We  are  not  alone  ;  the  society  we  are 
thrown  into  imposes  restraints  upon  us  ;  we  have  to  put  the 
bit  and  bridle  upon  ourselves.  The  true  man  does  not  then 
show  himself ;  but  when  the  day's  work  is  done,  then  the 
"  birds  of  a  feather  flock  together."  It  is  with  the  multi- 
tude of  traders  and  commercial  men  as  it  was  with  those 
saints  of  old :  of  whom,  when  they  were  liberated  from  pris- 
on, it  was  said,  "  Being  let  go,  they  went  unto  their  own 
company."  So  will  your  pleasures  and  pastimes  give  evi- 
dence of  what  your  heart  is,  and  where  it  is.  If  you  can 
find  pleasure  in  sin,  then  in  sin  you  live,  and,  unless  grace 
prevent,  in  sin  you  will  perish.  But  if  your*  pleasures  are 
of  a  nobler  kind,  and  your  companions  of  a  devoter  charac- 
ter ;  if  you  seek  spiritual  enjoyments,  if  you  get  your  hap- 
piest moments  in  worship,  in  communion,  in  silent  prayer, 
or  in  the  public  assembling  of  yourselves  with  the  people  of 
God,  then  shall  you  be  distinguished  in  your  pleasure  by  a 
broad  wall  which  effectually  separates  you  from  the  world. 

And  this  should  be  carried,  I  think,  into  every  thing  which 
effects  the  Christian,  "  What  have  they  seen  in  thy  house  ?  " 
was  the  question  asked  of  Hezekiah.  When  a  sti*anger 
oomes  into  our  house  it  should  be  so  ordered  that  he  can 
clearly  perceive  that  the  Lord  is  there.  A  man  ought 
scarcely  to  tarry  a  night  beneath  our  roof  without  gathering 
that  we  have  a  respect  unto  him  that  is  invisible,  and  that 
we  desire  to  live  and  move  in  the  liccht  of  God's  countenance. 
I  have  already  said  that  I  would  have  you  cultiri'e  no  sin- 
gularities for  singularity's  sake;  but  still,  the  most  of  men 
are  satisfied  if  they  do  as  other  people  do  ;  and  you  must 


i? 


93  '  'nm  dROAD  Wall. 

never  be  satisfied  until  you  do  more  and  do  better  tban  othcit 
people,  and  have  found  out  a  mode  and  course  of  life  as 
much  superior  to  the  ordinary  worlding's  life,  as  the  p&th 
of  the  eagle  in  the  air  is  above  that  of  the  mole  which  bur- 
rows under  the  soil. 

This  broad  wall  between  the  godly  and  the  ungodly, 
ehould  be  most  conspicuous  in  the  spirit  of  our  mind.  The 
ungodly  man  has  only  this  world  to  live  for  ;  do  not  wonder 
if  he  lives  very  earnestly  for  it.  He  has  no  other  treasure  ; 
why  should  he  not  get  as  much  as  he  can  of  this  ?  But  you, 
Christian,  profess  to  have  an  immortal  life,  and  therefore 
your  treasure  lies  not  in  this  brief  span  of  existence.  Your 
inheritance  is  in  eternity.  Your  best  hopes  overleap  the 
narrow  bounds  of  time,  and  fly  beyond  the  grave,  and  your 
spirit  must  not,  therefore,  be  earth-bound  and  grovelling, 
but  soaring  and  heavenly.  There  should  be  about  you  al- 
ways the  air  of  one  who  has  his  shoes  on  his  feet,  his  loins 
girded,  and  his  staff  in  his  hand — ready  to  leave  Egypt  for 
Canaan.  Heavenward!  Ho!  is  our  motto.  Away,  away, 
away  to  the  better  land.  You  are  not  to  live  here  as  if  this 
were  all  to  you.  You  are  not  to  talk  of  this  world  as 
though  it  were  to  last  forever.  You  are  not  to  hoard  it  up, 
as  though  you  had  set  your  heart  upon  it,  but  you  are  to  be 
on  the  wing  as  though  you  had  not  a  nest  here,  and  never 
could  have,  but  expected  to  find  your  resting-place  amongst 
the  cedars  of  God  in  the  hill-tops  of  glory. 

Depend  upon  it,  the  more  a  Christian  is  unlike  an  uncon- 
verted man,  the  better  it  is  for  him.  I  think  I  can  show  you 
several  reasons  why  this  wall  should  be  very  broad.  If  you 
are  sincere  in  your  profession^  there  actually  is  a  very  broad 
distinction  between  you  and  unco7iverted  people.  Can  you 
measure  the  difference  between  life  and  death  ?  They  are 
as  opposite  as  the  poles.  Now,  according  to  your  profession 
you  have  received  a  new  life,  whereas  the  children  of  this 
world  are  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins.  How  palpable  the 
difference  between  light  and  darkness !     Yet,  you  profess  to 


THE  BROAD  WALL  ©8 

have  been  "sometimes  darkness,"  but  now  are  made  light 
in  the  Lord,  There  is,  therefore,  a  great  distinction  be- 
tween you  and  the  world  if  you  be  what  you  profess  to  be. 
You  say  when  you  put  on  the  name  of  Christ,  that  you  are 
journeying  to  the  Celestial  City,  to  the  New  Jerusalem ; 
but  the  world  turns  its  face  upon  God,  and  goes  downward 
to  destruction  ;  your  paths  are  different.  If  you  be  what 
you  say  you  are,  your  way  of  life  must  be  diametrically  op- 
posite to  that  of  the  ungodly  man.  You  know  the  difference 
between  their  ends.  ITie  end  of  the  righteous  shall  be  glory 
everlasting,  but  the  end  of  the  wicked  is  eternal  destruc- 
tion. Now,  unless  you  are  a  hypocrite,  there  is  such  a  dif- 
ference between  you  and  others  as  only  God  himself  could 
make — a  distinction  which  will  exist  throughout  eternity, 
and,  when  the  distinction  of  riches  and  poverty,  ignorance 
and  learning,  shall  all  have  passed  away,  the  distinction  be- 
tween the  living  and  the  dead,  between  the  chosen  and  the 
castaway  shall  be  as  clear  as  ever.  I  pray  you,  then,  make, 
a  broad  wall  in  your  conduct,  as  God  has  made  a  broad  wall 
in  your  state  and  in  your  destiny. 

Remember,  again,  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  had  a 
broad  waU  between  him  and  the  ungodly.  Look  at  him  and 
see  how  different  he  is  from  the  men  of  his  time.  All  his 
life  long  you  observe  him  to  be  a  stranger  and  a  foreigner 
in  the  land.  Truly,  he  drew  near  to  sinners,  as  near  as  he 
could  draw,  and  he  received  them  when  they  were  willing 
to  draw  near  to  him  ;  but  he  did  not  draw  near  to  their  sins. 
He  was  "  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  and  separate  from  sin- 
ners." When  he  went  to  his  own  city  of  Nazareth,  he  only 
preached  a  single  sermon,  and  they  would  have  cast  him 
headlong  down  the  hill  if  they  could.  When  he  passed 
through  the  street,  he  became  the  song  of  the  drunkard,  and 
the  wicked  spake  against  him.  At  last,  having  come  to  his 
own,  and  his  own  having  thus  received  him  not,  they  de- 
termined to  thrust  him  altogether  out  of  the  camp,  and  they 
took  him  to  Golgotha,  and  nailed  liim  to  the  tree  there. 


04  THE  BHOAD  WALL. 

He  was  the  despised  Dissenter,  the  great  Nonconformist, 
of  his  age.  The  National  Church  first  excommunicated 
him,  and  then  crucified  him.  He  did  not  seek  diiFerence  in 
things  trivial ;  but  the  purity  of  his  life  and  the  truthfulness 
of  his  testimony,  roused  the  spleen  of  the  rulers  and  chief 
men  of  their  synagogues.  He  seemed  in  all  things  to  wish 
to  serve  them  and  to  bless  them,  but  he  never  would  blend 
with  them.  They  would  have  made  him  a  king.  Ah !  if  he 
would  but  have  joined  the  world,  the  world  would  have  given 
him  the  chief  place,  as  the  world's  master  said  on  the  moun- 
tain :  "  All  these  things  will  I  give  thee,  if  thou  wilt  fall 
down  and  worship  me."  But  he  drove  away  the  fiend,  and 
stood  immaculate  and  separate  even  to  the  close  of  his  life. 
If  you  are  a  Christian,  be  a  Christian.  If  you  follow  Christ, 
go  without  the  camp.  But  if  there  be  no  difference  between 
you  and  your  fellow-men,  what  will  you  say  unto  the  King 
in  the  day  when  he  cometh  and  findeth  that  you  have  on  no 
wedding  garment  by  which  you  can  be  distinguished  from 
the  rest  of  mankind  ?  Because  Christ  made  a  broad  wall 
around  himself^  there  must  be  such  an  one  around  his 
people. 

Moreover,  dear  friends,  you  will  find  that  such  a  broad 
wall  of  separation  is  abundantly  good  for  yourselves.  No 
Christian  will  tell  you  that  when  he  has  given  way  to  the 
world's  customs,  he  has  ever  been  profited  thereby.  K  you 
are  tempted  to  seek  an  evening's  amusement  in  a  suspicious 
place,  and  if  you  are  profited  by  it,  I  am  as  sure  as  you  are 
a  man  that  you  are  not  a  Christian,  for  if  you  were  a  Chris- 
tian it  would  be  no  use  to  you.  Ask  a  fish  to  spend  an  hour 
on  dry  land,  and,  assuredly  it  would  not  enjoy  itself,  for  it 
would  be  out  of  its  element.  And  it  will  be  so  with  ycu  in 
conversation  with  sinners ;  if  you  are  compelled  to  it,  you 
will  feel  much  that  grates  upon  the  ear,  that  afflicts  the 
heart,  that  annoys  the  soul.  You  will  be  like  righteous 
Lot,  wh )  was  vexed  with  the  conversation  of  the  wicked, 
and  you  will  say  with  David, — 


THE  BROAD  WALL.  96 

**  Woe's  me  that  I  in  Mesech  am 
A  sojourner  so  long ; 
That  I  in  tabernacles  stay. 
To  Kedar  that  belong !  ** 

Your  soul  will  pine  and  sigh  to  come  out  of  every  thing  that 
is  impure  and  unclean,  for  you  will  find  no  comfort  there, 
and  you  will  long  to  get  away  to  the  holy  and  the  devout. 
Make  a  broad  wall,  dear  friends,  in  your  daily  life,  for  if 
you  begin  to  give  way  a  little  to  the  world  you  will  soon 
give  way  a  great  deal.  Give  sin  an  inch,  and  it  will  take  an 
ell.  Take  care  of  the  pence-sins,  and  the  pound-sins  will  not 
trouble  you.  Look  after  the  little  approaches  to  worldliness, 
the  little  compromises  with  ungodliness,  and  then  you  will 
not  make  provision  for  the  flesh  to  fulfil  the  lusts  thereof. 

Another  good  reason  for  keeping  up  the  broad  wall  of 
separation  is,  that  you  will  do  most  good  to  the  xcorld  thereby^ 
I  know  Satan  will  tell  you  that  if  you  bend  a  little,  and 
come  near  to  the  ungodly,  then  they  also  will  come  a  little 
way  to  meet  you.  Ay,  but  it  is  not  so.  You  lose  your 
strength.  Christian,  the  moment  you  depart  from  your  integ- 
rity. What  do  you  think  ungodly  people  say  behind  your 
back  if  they  see  you  inconsistent  to  please  them  ?  "  Oh ! " 
say  they,  "  there  is  nothing  in  it ;  the  man  is  not  sincere." 
Although  the  world  may  openly  denounce  the  rigid  Puritan, 
it  secretly  admires  him.  When  the  big  heart  of  the  world 
speaks  out,  it  has  respect  to  the  man  that  is  sternly  honest 
and  will  not  yield  his  principles,  no,  not  a  hair's  breadth. 
In  such  an  age  as  this,  when  there  is  so  little  preciseness, 
when  principle  is  cast  to  the  winds,  and  a  general  latitudi- 
narianism,  both  of  thought  and  of  practice,  rules  the  day,  it 
is  still  the  fact  that  a  man  who  is  decided  and  speaks  his 
mind  commands  the  reverence  of  mankind.  Depend  upon 
it,  woman,  your  husband  and  your  children  will  respect  ycu 
none  the  more  because  you  say,  "  I  will  give  up  some  of  my 
Christian  privileges,"  or  "I  will  go  occasionally  with  you 
into  tliat  which  is  sinful."    You  cannot  lift  them  out  of  the 


THE  BROAD   WALL.  97 

tnc)  social  circle  ;  taking  his  part  in  politics,  like  a  citizen,  as 
he  is  ;  but,  at  the  same  time,  having  a  higher  and  a  nobler 
life,  a  secret  into  which  the  world  cannot  enter,  and  show- 
ing the  world  by  his  superior  holiness,  zeal  for  God,  integ* 
rity,  and  truth,  that  he  is  not  of  the  world,  even  as  Christ 
was  not  of  the  world.  You  cannot  tell  how  concerned  I  am 
for  some  of  youj  that  this  broad  wall  should  be  kept  up,  for 
I  detect  in  you  a  desire  to  make  it  very  thin,  and  perhaps  to 
pull  it  down  altogether.  Brethren,  beloved  in  the  Lord,  you 
may  depend  upon  it  that  nothing  worse  can^  happen  to  a 
church  than  to  be  conformed  to  this  world.  Write  "Icha- 
bod"  upon  her  walls,  for  the  sentence  of  destruction  has 
gone  out  against  her.     But  if  by  the  Holy  Spirit  you  are 

"  Kept  as  a  garden  walled  around, 
Chosen  and  made  peculiar  ground/' 

you  shall  have  your  master's  company  ;  your  graces  shall 
grow  ;  you  shall  be  happy,  and  Christ  shall  be  honored, 

n.  Secondly  ;  the  broad  wall  round  about  Jerusalem  nr- 

DICATBD   SATETY. 

In  the  same  way,  a  broad  wall  round  Christ's  church  in- 
dicates her  safety  too.  I  have  often  tried  to  show  you  who 
they  are  that  belong  to  the  church  of  God,  I  have  explained 
to  you  that  a  man  does  not  become  a  member  of  ^hrist's 
church  by  baptism,  nor  by  birthright,  nor  by  profession, 
nor  by  morality  ;  but  that  Christ  is  the  door  into  the  sheep- 
fold,  and  that  every  one  who  believes  in  Jesus  Christ  is  a 
member  of  the  true  church,  is  a  member  of  Christ,  and  a 
member  consequently  of  the  body  of  Christ,  which  is  the 
church.  Now,  around  the  church  of  God,  the  election  of 
grace,  the  redeemed  by  blood,  the  peculiar  people,  the 
adopted,  the  justified,  the  sanctified  ;  around  these  there  are 
bulwarks  of  stupendous  strength,  munitions  which  caimot 
be  stormed.  When  the  foe  came  to  attack  Jerusalem  he 
counted  the  towers  and  bulwarks,  and  marked  them  well ; 

6 

1 


98  'THE  BROAD  Wall. 

but  after  lie  had  seen  the  strength  of  the  Holy  City  he  fled 
away.  How  could  he  hope  ever  to  scale  such  ramparts  as 
those  ?  Brethren,  Satan  often  counts  the  towers  and  bul- 
warks of  the  New  Jerusalem.  Anxiously  does  he  desire  the 
destruction  of  the  saints,  but  it  shall  never  be.  He  who 
rests  in  Christ  is  saved.  He  who  hath  passed  through  the 
gate  of  faith  into  the  stronghold  of  salvation  may  sing,  as 
we  did  just  now — 

"  I  know  that  safe  with  him  remains. 
Protected  by  his  power, 
What  I've  committed  to  his  hands 
Till  the  decisive  hour." 

"  I  will  be,"  saith  Jehovah,  "  a  wall  of  fire  round  about 
thee."  "  Salvation  will  God  appoint  for  walls  and  bulwarks." 

The  Christian  is  surrounded  by  the  broad  waU  of  OocTs 
power.  If  God  be  omnipotent  Satan  cannot  defeat  him.  If 
God's  power  be  on  my  side,  who,  then,  shall  hurt  me  ?  "  If  God 
be  for  us  who  can  be  against  us  ?  "  The  Christian  is  sur- 
rounded by  the  broad  wall  of  GocPs  love.  Whom  God 
loves  who  shall  curse  ?  I  know  that  he  blesseth,  and  that 
whom  he  blesseth  is  blessed  indeed.  Balak,  the  son  of  Zip- 
per, sought  to  curse  the  beloved  people,  and  he  went  first 
to  one  hill-top  and  then  to  another,  and  looked  down  upon 
the  chosen  camp  ;  but,  aha !  Balaam,  thou  couldst  not 
curse  them,  though  Balak  sought  it !  Thou  couldst  only  say, 
"  They  are  blessed,  yea,  and  they  shall  be  blessed  ! " 

GocPs  law  is  a  broad  wall  around  us,  and  so  is  his  justice 
too.  These  once  threatened  our  destruction,  but  now  they 
demand  our  salvation.  If  Christ  has  died  instead  of  me,  it 
would  not  be  justice  if  I  had  to  die  also  for  my  sin.  If  God 
has  received  the  full  payment  of  the  debt  from  the  hand  of 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  then  how  can  he  demand  the  debt 
again  ?    He  is  satisfied,  and  we  are  secure. 

The  immutability  of  God,  also,  surrounds  his  people  like 
a  broad  wall  •  "  I  am  God,  I  change  not ;  therefore  ye  sons 


THE  BROAD  WALL.  99 

of  Jacob  are  not  consumed."    As  long  as  God  is  the  same, 
the  rock  of  our  salvation  will  be  our  secure  hiding-place. 

Brethren  and  sisters,  this  is  a  very  delightful  truth,  and 
one  upon  which  we  might  linger  long,  for  there  is  much  to 
Bay.  The  people  of  God  are  safe  for  many  reasons.  They 
are  surrounded  by  the  broad  wall  of  electing  love.  Doth  God 
choose  them  and  will  he  lose  them  ?  Did  he  ordain  them 
to  eternal  life,  and  shall  they  perish  ?  Did  he  engrave  their 
names  upon  his  heart,  and  shall  those  names  be  blotted  out? 
Did  he  give  them  to  his  Son  to  be  his  heritage,  and  shall  his 
Son  lose  his  portion  ?  Did  he  say,  "  They  shall  be  mine  in 
the  day  when  I  make  up  my  jewels,"  and  shall  he  lose  them? 
Has  he  who  maketh  all  things  obey  him,  no  power  to  keep 
the  people  whom  he  has  chosen  to  himself  to  be  his  own  pe- 
culiar heritage  ?  God'  forbid  that  we  should  doubt  it. 
Electing  love,  like  a  broad  wall,  surrounds  every  heir  of 
grace. 

Then  comes  the  broad  wall  of  redeeming  love.  Did  Je- 
sus buy  what  he  will  not  have  ?  Did  he  shed  his  blood  in 
vain  ?  Did  he  stand  as  a  substitute  for  those  who  will  have 
to  suffer  themselves  ?  What  substitution,  then,  is  this  ? 
Doth  God  take  payment  at  my  surety's  hands,  and  then  de- 
mand it  a  second  time  at  mine  ?  Where  is  the  justice  if 
such  be  the  case  ?  By  the  blood  of  the  everlasting  covenant 
every  Christian  may  be  sure  that  he  cannot  perish,  neither 
can  any  pluck  him  out  of  Christ's  hand.  Unless  the  cross 
was  all  a  peradventure,  unless  the  atonement  was  a  mere 
speculation,  those  whom  Je^us  died  for  are  saved  through 
his  death,  and  he  shall  see  of  the  travail  of  his  soul  and  be 
satisfied. 

Another  broad  wall  which  surrounds  the  saints  of  God 
will  be  found  in  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Does  the 
Spirit  begin  and  not  finish  ?  Does  he  give  life  which  after- 
wards dies  out  ?  Hath  he  not  told  us  that  the  Word  of 
God  is  the  incorruptible  seed  which  liveth  and  abideth  for- 
ever?   And  shall  the  powers  of  hell  or  the^evil  of  our  own 


100  THE  BROAD  WALL.  "^ 

flesh  kill  what  God  says  is  incorruptible  ?  Is  not  the  spirit 
of  God  given  us  to  abide  with  us  forever,  and  shall  he  be 
expelled  from  that  heart  in  which  he  has  taken  up  his  ever- 
lasting dwelling-place  ?  Brethren,  we  are  not  of  the  mind 
of  those  who  think  so,  but  we  rejoice  to  say  with  Paul,  "  I 
am  persuaded  that  he  who  hath  begun  a  good  work  in  yon 
will  carry  it  on."  •  As  we  sometimes  sing — 


u 


Grace  rjoW,  complete  what  grace  begins. 
To  save  from  sorrow  or  from  sins  ; 
The  work  which  wisdom  undertakes 
Eternal  mercy  ne'er  forsakes.' 


» 


Besides  this,  almost  every  doctrine  of  grace  affords  us  a 
broad  wall,  a  strong  bastion  and  bulwark,  a  munition  of  de- 
fence. Take,  for  instance,  Christ's  suretyship  engagements. 
Be  is  surety  to  his  Father  for  bis  people.  Will  he  bring 
home  merely  a  remnant  of  the  flock  ?  Shall  a  portion  of 
them  be  lost  ?  At  his  hands  will  they  be  required,  and  he 
will  say,  "  ELere  am  I,  and  the  children  whom  thou  hast  giv- 
en me.  Of  all  whom  thou  hast  given  me  I  have  lost  none.** 
He  will  keep  all  his  saints  even  to  the  end.  The  honor  of 
Christy  moreover,  makes  another  broad  wall.  If  Christ 
ioses  one  soul  that  leans  upon  him,  the  integrity  of  his 
crown  is  gone,  for  if  there  should  be  one  believing  soul  in 
hell  the  prince  of  darkness  would  hold  up  that  soul  an^  say 
— ^^  Aha  !  Thou  couldst  not  save  them  all !  Aha  !  thou 
Captain  of  Salvation,  thou  wast  defeated  here  !  Here  is  one 
poor  little  Benjamin,  one  Ready-to-Halt,  that  thou  couldst 
not  bring  to  glory,  and  I  have  him  to  be  my  prey  for- 
ever ! "  But  it  shall  not  be  so.  Every  gem  shall  be  in  Je- 
su's  crown.  Every  sheep  shall  be  in  Jesu's  flock.  He  shall 
not  be  defeated  in  any  way,  or  in  any  measure,  but  He  shall 
divide  the  spoil  with  the  strong,  and  conquer  even  to  the 
end.     Glory  be  unto  his  name ! 

Thus  I  have  tried  to  show  you  the  broad  walls  which 
are  round  abouj;  believers.    They  are  saved,  and  they  may 


THE  BROAD  WALL.  101 

say  to  their  enemies,  "The  virgin  daughter  of  Zion  hath 
shaken  her  head  at  thee  and  lausrhed  thee  to  scorn !  Who 
shall  lay  any  thing  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect  ?  It  is  God 
that  justifieth ;  who  is  he  that  condemneth  ?  It  is  Christ 
that  died,  yea  rather  that  hath  risen  again ;  who  sitteth  at 
the  right  hand  of  God,  who  also  maketh  intercession  for  us  1 
For  I  am  persuaded  that  neither  death,  nor  life,  nor  angels, 
nor  principalities,  nor  powers,  nor  things  present,  nor  things 
to  come,  nor  height,  nor  depth,  nor  any  other  creature  shall 
be  able  to  separate  us  from  the  love  of  God  which  is  in 
Christ  Jesus  our  Lord  ! " 

nL  Lastly  :  The  idea  of  a  broad  wall  suggests  enjoy- 
ment. 

Along  the  broad  walls  of  Nineveh  and  Babylon  there 
was  found  room  for  several  chariots  to  pass  each  other,  and 
here  men  walked  at  sunset,  and  talked  in  quiet.  If  you 
have  ever  been  in  the  city  of  York  you  will  know  how  in- 
teresting it  is  to  walk  around  the  broad  walls  of  the  city. 
But  our  figure  is  drawn  from  the  Orientals.  They  were  ac- 
customed to  come  out  of  their  houses  and  walk  on  the  walls. 
They  used  them /or  rest  from  toil,  and  recreation.  It  was  very 
delightful  when  the  sun  was  going  down,  and  all  was  cool, 
to  walk  on  those  broad  walls;  and  so,  when  a  believer 
comes  to  know  the  deep  things  of  God,  and  to  see  the  de- 
fences of  God's  people,  he  walks  along  them  and  finds  rest. 
"  Now,"  saith  he,  "  I  am  at  peace  ;  he  who  destroy eth  is  put 
from  me ;  I  am  delivered  from  the  noise  of  archers  in  the 
place  of  the  drawing  of  water,  and  here  will  I  praise  the 
Lord  !  Now  that  salvation  is  appointed  for  walls  and  bul- 
warks, I  will  sing  a  song  unto  him  who  hath  done  great 
things  for  me  ;  I  will  take  my  rest  and  be  quiet,  for  he  that 
believeth  hath  entered  into  rest ;  there  is  therefore,  now  no 
condenmation  to  them  which  are  in  Christ  Jesus."  Broad 
walls,  then,  are  for  rest,  and  so  are  our  broad  walls  of  sal- 
vation. 


102  THE  BROAD  WALL. 

Broad  walls  were  also  for  communion.  Men  came  there 
and  conversed  with  one  another.  They  leaned  over  the 
wall  and  whispered  their  loving  words,  talked  of  their  busi- 
ness, comforted  one  another,  and  related  their  troubles  and 
their  joys.  So,  when  believers  come  unto  Christ  Jesus  they 
commune  with  one  another,  with  the  angels,  with  the  spirits 
of  just  men  made  perfect,  and  with  Jesus  Christ  their  Lord, 
whose  fellowship  is  best  of  all.  On  those  broad  walls,  when 
the  banner  of  love  waves  over  them,  they  rejoice  with  a  joy 
unspeakable,  in  fellowship  with  him  who  loved  them  and 
gave  himself  for  them.  It  is  a  blessed  thing  in  the  Church 
when  you  possess  such  a  knowledge  of  the  doctrines  of  the 
gospel  that  you  can  have  by  their  means  the  sweetest  com- 
munion with  all  the  Church  of  the  living  God. 

Then  the  broad  walls  were  also  intended /or  prospects 
cmd  outlooks.  The  citizen  came  up  on  the  wall,  and  looked 
away  from  the  smoke  and  dirt  of  the  city  within,  right  across 
to  the  green  fields,  and  the  gleaming  river,  and  the  far  off 
mountains,  delighted  to  watch  the  mowing  of  hay,  or  the 
reaping  of  com,  or  the  setting  sun  beyond  the  distant  hills. 
It  was  one  of  the  common  enjoyments  of  the  citizen  of  any 
walled  city  to  come  to  the  top  of  the  wall  in  order  to  take 
views  afar.  And  when  a  man  once  gets  into  the  altitudes 
of  gospel  doctrines,  and  has  learned  to  understand  the  love 
of  God  in  Christ  Jesus,  what  views  he  can  take  !  How  he 
looks  down  upon  the  sorrows  of  life !  He  looks  beyond  that 
narrow  stream  of  death  1  When  the  weather  is  bright  and 
his  eye  is  clear  enough  to  let  him  use  the  telescope,  he  can 
«ee  within  the  gates  of  pearl,  and  behold  the  joys  which  no 
mortal  eye  hath  seen,  and  hear  the  songs  which  no  mortal 
ear  hath  heard,  for  these  are  things,  not  for  eyes  and  ears, 
but  for  hearts  and  spirits  !  Blessed  is  the  man  who  dwell- 
eth  in  the  Church  of  God,  for  he  can  find  on  her  broad  walls 
places  from  which  he  can  see  the  King  in  his  beauty,  and 
the  land  which  is  very  far  off! 

Ah !  dear  friends,  I  wish  that  these  things  had  to  do 


THE  BROAD  WALL.  103 

with  yon  all,  but  I  am  afraid  that  for  many  my  discourse  is 
an  idle  tale,  for  many  of  you  are  outside  the  wall,  and  remem- 
ber when  the  destroyer  comes  none  will  be  safe  but  those  who 
are  inside  the  wall  of  Christ's  love  and  mercy.  I  would  to 
God  thai  you  would  hasten  to  the  city  gate  to-night,  for  it 
is  open.  It  will  be  shut — ^it  must  be  shut  one  day,  but  it  is 
open  now.  When  night  comes,  the  night  of  death,  the 
gate  will  be  closed,  and  you  will  come  then  and  say,  "  Lord, 
Lord,  open  to  us  I "    But  the  answer  will  be — 

"  Too  late,  too  late ! 
Ye  cannot  enter  now  1 " 

But  it  is  not  too  late  at  this  moment.  Still  Christ  the  Lord 
crieth,  "  Behold,  I  set  before  thee  an  open  door,  and  no  man 
can  shut  it."  Oh !  that  thou  hadst  the  will  to  come  and 
pufc  thy  trust  in  Jesus,  for  if  thou  dost  so  thou  shalt  be  saved. 
I  cannot  speak  to  some  of  you  about  security,  for  there  are 
no  broad  walls  to  defend  you ;  you  have  run  away  from 
true  security  and  are  patching  up  with  untempered  mortar 
a  righteousness  of  your  own,  which  will  all  be  thrown  down, 
for  at  best  it  is  only  a  bowing  wall  and  as  a  tottering  fence. 
Oh !  that  you  would  trust  in  Jesus !  Then  would  you  have  a 
broad  wallto  shelter  you  which  all  the  battering-rams  of 
hell  shall  never  be  able  to  shake.  When  the  storms  of  eter- 
nity shall  beat  against  that  wall  it  shall  stand  fast  for  aye. 

I  cannot  speak  to  some  of  you  about  rest,  and  enjoyment, 
and  communion,  for  you  are  looking  for  rest  where  there  is 
none ;  you  are  slumbering  in  a  peace  which  is  no  peace  ; 
you  have  found  a  comfort  which  will  be  your  destruction. 
God  make  you  to  be  distressed,  that  you  may  flee  to  the 
Lord  Jesus  and  get  true  peace,  for  "  He  is  our  peace." 

I  would  that  some  of  you  would  close  in  with  Christ  and 
trust  him,  and  then  you  would  rejoice  in  the  present  happi 
ness  which  faith  would  give  you ;  and  in  the  prospect  of  the 
eternal  happiness  which  Christ  has  prepared  for  all  those 
who  put  thcur  trust  in  him. 

May  the  Lord  bless  you  for  Jesu's  sake.     Amen. 


104  THB  STAR  OF  JACOB. 


SEEMON  VL 


THE  STAR  OF  JACOB. 

**TBBBE  SHALL  OOXB  A  STAB  OUT  Or  JaOOB."— ^Nom.  XXlY.  Hi 

This  prophecy  may  have  some  reference  to  David  j 
but  we  feel  persuaded  that  the  true  design  of  the  Holy  Spir- 
it is  to  set  forth  an  emblem  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  All 
nature,  above  as  well  as  around  us,  is  laid  under  contribu- 
tion to  set  forth  our  Lord.  All  the  flowers  of  the  field  and 
many  of  the  beasts  of  the  plain,  and  now  the  very  orbs  of 
heaven,  are  turned  into  metaphors  and  symbols  by  which 
the  glory  of  Jesus  may  be  manifested  to  us.  Where  God 
takes  such  pains  to  teach,  we  ought  to  be  at  pains  to  learn. 
When  he  makes  heaven  and  earth  to  be  the  illustration  of 
his  book,  we  ought  to  be  most  ardent  in  its  study.  Oh, 
you  who  have  neglected  to  learn  of  Christ,  may  that  neglect 
come  to  an  end,  and  may  some  word  be  spoken  at  this  time 
which  shall  be  as  the  beaming  of  a  star  into  the  darkness 
of  your  soul,  that  henceforth  you  may  know  Christ,  and  be 
found  in  him. 

Our  Lord  then  is  compared  to  a  star,  and  we  shall 
have  seven  reasons  to  assign  for  this,  upon  each  of  which 
we  shall  endeavor  to  speak  with  brevity. 

I.  In  the  fii'st  place  ;  he  is  called  a  star  as  this  symbol 

OP  GOVERNMENT. 

You  will  observe  how  evidently  it  is  connected  with  a 
Boeptre  and  with  a  conqueror.  Jacob  was  to  be  blessed 
with  a  valiant  leader  who  should  become  a  triumphant  sov- 
ereign.    Very  frequently  in  Oriental  literature  their  great 


THE  STAB  OF  JACOB.  105 

men  and  especially  their  great  deliverers,  are  called  stars.  The 
star  has  been  constantly  associated  with  monarchy,  and  even 
in  our  own  country  we  look  upon  the  star  as  one  of  the  em- 
blems of  lofty  rank.  Behold,  then,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
as  the  star  of  Jacob.  He  is  the  captain  of  his  people,  the 
leader  of  the  Lord's  hosts,  the  King  in  Jeshurun,  God  over 
all,  glorious  and  blessed  forever  1 

Wo  may  say  of  Jesus,  in  this  respect,  tJiat  he  has  an  W!> 
thority  which  he  has  inheritedby  right.  He  made  all  things, 
and  by  hira  all  things  consist.  It  is  but  just  that  he  should 
rule  over  all  things.  As  there  is  not  a  tongue  that  can 
move,  in  heaven  or  in  earth,  except  by  his  permission,  it  is 
meet  that  every  tongue  should  "  confess  that  he  is  Lord,  to 
the  glory  of  God  the  Father."  Oh !  that  men  were  just  to- 
wards the  Son  of  God !  Would  that  their  rebellious  sou]8 
would  give  way  to  the  force  of  rectitude,  that  they  wouW 
no  longer  say,  "  Let  us  break  his  bands  asunder,  and  cael 
away  his  cords  from  us  ! "  Unconverted  man,  I  would  that 
you  would  yield  to  Jesus.  He  has  a  right  to  you.  It  is 
through  his  intercessions  that  your  forfeited  life  is  still  spared. 
It  is  by  his  Divine  goodness  that  you  are  where  you  are  to- 
night,  and  through  his  mediatorial  sovereignty  it  is  that 
you  are  suffered  to  be  on  praying  grounds  and  pleading 
terms  with  God.  Give  him  his  due,  then.  Rob  him  not  of 
the  allegiance  which  he  so  justly  claims.  Give  not  your 
spirit  over  to  that  exactfng  tyrant  who  seeks  to  compass 
your  destruction.  "  Bow  the  knee  and  kiss  the  Son,"  even 
now,  "  lest  he  be  angry,  and  ye  perish  from  the  way."  Ac- 
knowledge him  to  be  your  Lord. 

Our  Lord  as  a  star  has  an  authority  which  he  has  vol* 
iarUly  won.  Wherever  Christ  is  King  he  has  had  a  great 
and  stem  fight  for  it.  Remember  the  dread  conflict  in 
Gethsemane,  of  which  he  says,  "  I  have  trodden  the  wine 
press  alone."  When,  red  with  his  own  gore,  he  came  from 
Calvary,  he  had  in  fact  there  and  then  put  to  flight  the  hosts 
of  Bozrah  and  of  Edom,  and  stained  his  garments  with  the 


106  THE  STAR  OP  JACOB. 

orimson  of  the  vanquished.  He  travelled  in  the  greatnesn 
of  his  strength  and  he  is  mighty  still  to  save.  In  every  hu- 
man heart  where  Jesus  rules,  he  reigns  through  having  dis- 
lodged by  the  force  of  arms  the  old  tyrant  who  had  fixed 
his  dominion  there.  The  maintenance  of  his  sovereigntv 
within  the  heart  is  the  result  of  his  powerful  sceptre  of  love 
and  grace.  Oh,  that  King  Jesus  would  put  forth  his  pow- 
er and  get  a  throne  in  more  hearts !  Believers,  do  you  not  long 
to  see  him  glorious  ?  I  know  you  do,  if  you  love  him.  .You 
would  live  for  this :  you  would  die  for  this, — ^that  Christ 
might  have  his  own,  and  drive  the  milk-white  steeds  of  tri- 
umph through  the  streets  of  Jerusalem,  all  his  people  bow- 
ing before  him,  and  strewing  his  pathway  with  their  hon- 
ors. Oh  !  sinners,  would  to  God  that  you  would  yield  to 
him ;  I  pray  that  now  he  may  gird  his  sword  upon  his  thigh, 
and  by  the  power  of  grace  constrain  you  to  bow  your  wil- 
ling necks  to  his  silver  sceptre.  Brethren  and  sisters,  it  is  a 
mournful  fact  that  Christ  has  so  small  a  part  of  the  world  as 
yet  in  his  royal  power.  See,  the  gods  of  the  heathen  stand 
fast  upon  their  pedestals.  The  old  harlot  of  Rome  still 
flaunts  her  scarlet.  The  crescent  of  Mahomet  wanes,  but 
still  its  baleful  light  is  cast  athwart  the  nations.  Why  tar- 
ries he !  Perhaps  his  finger  is  on  the  latch ;  it  may  be  that 
he  will  come  ere  long.  Come  quickly,  Lord  1  our  yearning 
hearts  beseech  thee,  come !  But  meanwhile,  it  is  for  you 
and  for  me  to  be  fighting — each  Soldier  in  his  rank,  each 
man  standing  in  his  place,  as  his  Master  has  bidden  him, 
contending  with  heart  and  soul  and  strength  for  the  right 
and  for  the  true,  for  faith,  for  holiness,  for  the  Cross  and  aU 
that  that  Cross  indicates  amongst  the  sons  of  men.  Bless- 
ed star  of  Jacob !  Thou  shinest  with  no  borrowed  rays ; 
thou  shinest  with  a  mysterious  power  which  none  gave  to 
thee,  for  it  is  inherently  thine  own. 

Before  leaving  this  point,  I  will  only  add,  that  this 
kingdom  of  Christ,  wherever  it  is,  is  r)wst  hfmeficent. 
Wherever  this  star  of  governmf^nt  ^hincp  it«  rnvs  scatter 


THE  STAE  OF  JACX)B  107 

blessings.  Jesus  is  no  tyrant.  He  rules  not  by  oppression* 
The  force  he  uses  is  the  force  of  love.  There  was  never  a 
subject  of  Christ's  kingdom  that  complained  of  him.  Those 
who  have  served  him  most  have  longed  to  serve  him  more. 
Why,  even  his  poor  martyrs  in  the  catacombs  of  Rome, 
dying  of  starvation,  or  dragged  up  to  the  Colosseum  to 
be  devoured  by  wild  beasts,  never  said  an  ill  word  of  him. 
Certainly  if  it  was  hard  to  any,  it  was  hard  to  them  ;  but 
the  more  they  were  troubled  the  more  they  rejoiced;  and 
there  never  were  sweeter  songs  than  those  which  came  from 
dying  lips,  when  men  were  crackling  on  the  faggot,  or  be- 
ing torn  limb  from  limb  by  wild  horses,  or  sawn  asunder 
with  cruel  saws.  Just  in  proportion  as  the  bodily  pains  be- 
come acute,  the  spiritual  joy  became  intense  ;  and  while 
the  outward  man  decayed,  the  inner  man  leaped  up  into 
newness  of  life,  anticipating  the  joys  of  the  first-born  before 
the  throne.  He  is  a  good  Master.  Young  people,  I  would 
that  you  would  serve  him  I  Oh  !  that  you  were  enlisted  in 
his  sei*vice.  It  is  now  two-and-twenty  years  since  I  gave 
my  heart  to  him,  but  I  cannot  say  a  word  against  him. 
Nay,  but  I  wish  I  had  always  served  him ;  I  wish  I  had 
served  him  before,  and  I  do  pray  that  he  may  use  me  to  the 
fullest  extent  even  to  old  age.  If  he  will  make  but  a  door 
mat  for  his  temple  of  me  I  shall  be  but  too  glad.  If  he  will 
let  my  name  be  cast  out  as  evil  and  give  my  body  to  the 
dogs,  I  do  not  care  so  long  as  his  truth  does  but  prosper, 
and  his  name  be  great.  But  alas  !  there  is  so  much  self  in 
us,  so  much  pride,  and  I  know  not  what  besides,  that  we  who 
really  know  the  Master  have  reason  to  ask  him  to  bring  in 
his  great  artillery,  and  blow  down  the  castles  of  our  natu 
ral  corruption,  conquer  us  yet  again,  and  rule  in  us  by  main 
force  of  grace,  till  in  every  part  and  corner  of  our  spirit 
there  shall  be  nothing  but  the  love  of  Christ,  and  the  in- 
dwelling of  the  Holy  Ghost. 

By  the  star,  then,  in  the  first  place,  we  imderstand  the 
symbol  of  government. 


108  THE  STAR  OP  JACOB. 

IL   In  the  second  place,  the  star  is  thb  dcage   ov 

BRIGHTNESS. 

When  men  wish  to  speak  of  brightness  they  talk  of  the 
stars.  They  who  are  righteous  are  as  the  stars,  and  "  they 
that  turn  many  to  righteousness  shall  shine  as  the  stars  for 
ver  and  ever."  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  brightness  itseli. 
The  star  is  but  a  poor  setting  forth  of  his  ineffable  splendor. 
Oh  !  let  the  thought  come  home  to  you.  He  is  the  bright- 
ne»i  of  his  Father's  glory — ^unutterably  bright  as  the  Deity, 
He  is  brightness  himself  in  his  human  nature^  for  in  him 
there  is  neither  spot  nor  wrinkle.  As  Mediator,  exalted  on 
high,  enjoying  the  reward  of  his  pains,  he  is  bright  indeed. 
Observe,  that  our  Lord  as  a  star  is  a  bright  particular  star 
in  the  matter  of  holiness,  Li  him  was  no  sin.  Look,  and 
look,  and  look  again  into  his  star-like  character ;  even  the 
lynx  eyes  of  infidels  have  not  been  able  to  discover  a  flaw, 
while  the  attentive  eyes  of  critics,  when  they  have  been  be- 
lievers, have  been  made  to  water  again  and  again,  and  then 
to  glisten  and  sparkle,  as  they  have  seen  the  mingling  of  all 
the  perfections  in  his  adorable  character,  making  up  one  in- 
imitable perfection. 

As  a  star  he  shines  also  with  the  light  of  knowledge, 
Moses  was,  as  it  were,  a  man  of  the  mist,  but  Christ  is  the 
prophet  of  light.  "The  Law  was  given  by  Moses" — a 
thing  of  types  and  shadows — '*  but  grace  and  truth  came  by 
Jesus  Chiist."  If  any  man  be  taught  in  the  things  of  God 
he  must  derive  his  light  from  the  star  of  Bethlehem.  You 
may  go  as  you  will  to  the  universities,  to  the  tomes  of  the 
learned,  to  the  schools  of  the  philosophers,  but  in  spiritual 
things  you  receive  no  light  till  you  look  up  to  Jesus,  and 
then  in  his  light  you  see  light,  for  there  is  transcendent 
brightness  in  him.  He  is  the  wisdom  of  God  as  well  as  the 
power  of  God  ;  he  is  the  way,  the  truth,  i  nd  the  life.  Di- 
vine light  has  found  its  centre  in  him  I 

His  light,  too,  is  that  of  comfort.     Oh  I  how  many  in 
the  darkness  of  their  souls  have  first  found  peace  by  looking 


THE  STAR  OP  JACOB.  109 

ap  to  thiiA  star  of  Jacob,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ !    Well  did 
our  hymn  put  it  :— 


He  is  my  sours  bright  morning  star. 
And  lie  my  rising  sun." 


One  glimpse  of  Christ,  and  the  midnight  of  unbelief  is 
over.  A  clear  sight  of  the  five  wounds,  and  your  sins  are 
covered,  and  your  iniquities  put  away.  Happy  day,  happy 
day,  when  first  the  soul  beholds  a  crucified  Redeemer,  and 
gives  herself  up  to  him,  relying  upon  him  for  eternal  salva- 
tion. Shine,  sweet  star  ;  shine  into  some  benighted  heart 
just  now  I  Give  holiness,  give  light,  give  the  knowledge  of 
God,  give  joy  and  peace  in  believing. 

When  speaking  upon  Christ  as  a  star,  "  the  symbol  of 
government,"  I  said,  submit  to  him  ;  now  speaking  of  him 
88  a  star,  the  image  of^'brightness,  I  say  look  to  him.  Look 
to  him.  It  is  the  gospel's  precept.  "  Look  unto  me,  and 
be  y?  saved,  all  ye  ends  of  the  earth  ; "  and  well  do  we  sing — 

"  There  is  life  for  a  look'  at  the  Crucified  One." 

Poor  sinner,  delay  no  longer.  You  are  not  asked  to  do 
any  thing,  nor  to  be  any  thing,  nor  to  feel  any  thing ;  you 
are  simply  bidden  to  look  away  from  self  to  what  Christ  has 
4one,  and  you  shall  live. 

"  View  him  prostrate  in  the  garden. 
On  the  ground  your  Maker  lies ; 
On  the  bloody  tree  behold  hiip, 
Hear  him  cry  before  he  dies — 
'  It  is  finished/ 
Sinner,  will  not  this  suffice  ?  "  • 

Look  unto  him,  and  be  saved,  all  ye  ends  of  the  earth  I 

in.  Thirdly,  our  Lord  is  compared  to  a  star,  to  bring 
out  the  fact  that  he  is  the  pattbrj^^  op  oonstancy. 

Ten  thousand  things  have  changed  since  the  world  bo* 


110  THE  STAB  OF  JACOB. 

gan,  but  the  stars  have  not.     There  they  remain.    We 
dreamed  at  one  time  that  they  moved.     Untaught  imagina- 
tions said  that  all  those  stars  revolved  around  this  little 
globe  of  ours,  but  we  know  better  now.     There  they  are 
both  day  and  night — always  the  same,  and  we  may  say  they 
have  not  changed  since  the  world  begun,  nor,  probably,  will 
they,  till,  like  a  vesture,  God  shall  roll  creation  up  because 
it  is  outworn.     It  is  very  delightful  to  recollect  that  the 
same  star  which  I  looked  at  last  night  was  viewed  by  Abra- 
ham, perhaps  with  some  of  the  self-same  thoughts.     And 
when  we  have  gone,  and  other  generations  shall  have  fol- 
lowed us,  those  that  come  after  will  look  up  to  the  self-same 
star.    So  with  our  Lord  Jesus,  he  is  the  same  yesterday,  to- 
day, and  forever.     What  the  prophets  and  apostles  saw  in 
him  we  can  see  in  him,  and  what  he  was  to  them  that  he  is 
to  us,  and  shall  be  to  generations  yet  unborn.     Hundreds 
may  be  looking  at  the  same  stars  at  the  same  time  without 
knowing  it,  for  they  are  a  meeting-place  for  many  eyes. 
We  may  be  drifted  to  Australia,  or  to  Canada,  or  to  the 
United  States,  or  we  may  be  sailing  across  the  great  deep, 
but  we  shall  see  the  stars  there.     It  is  true  that  on  the  oth- 
er side  of  the  world  we  shall  see  another  set  of  stars,  but  the 
stars  themselves  are  always  the  same.     As  far  as  we  in  this 
northern  hemi^here  are  concerned,  we  shall  look  upon  the 
same  stars,  so  wherever  we  may  be  we  look  to  the  same 
Christ.      Yonder   brother  has  learning  ;   but  he  looks  to 
Christ,  and  he  sees  the  same  Christ  as  the  poor  unlettered 
woman  in  the  aisles.     And  you,  poor  man,  who  have  not, 
perhaps,  a  sixpence  in  the  world,  you  have  the  same  Christ 
to  trust  i^  as  the  richest  man  in  all  the  world.     And  you 
who  think  you  are  so  obscure  that  no  one  knows  you  but 
your  God,  you  look  to  this  same  star,  and  it  shines  with  the 
same  beams  for  you  as  for  the  Christian  who  leads  the  van 
in  the  Lord's  hosts.   Jesus  Christ  -s  still  the  same,  the  same 
to  all  his  people,  the  same  in  all  places,  the  same  for  ever 
and  ever,  and  may  well  be  compared  to  those  bright  start 
tliat  shine  now  as  they  did  of  old. 


THE  STAR  OP  JACOB.  HI 

IV.  In  the  fourth  place, we  may  trace  this  comparison  of 
iiur  Lord  to  a  star  as  the  fountain  op  influence. 

The  old  astrologers  believed  very  firmly  in  the  influence 
of  the  stars  npon  men's  destinies.     Without  endorsing  their 
exploded  fallacies,  we  meet  in  Scripture  with  expressions 
like  this — "  Canst  thou  bind  the  sweet  influences  of  the  Ple- 
iades, or  loose  the  bands  of  Orion  ?  " — alluding,  no  doubt,  to 
the  fact  that  the  Pleiades  are  in  the  ascendant  in  the  sweet 
months  of  spring,  when  the  sweet  influences  of  the  spring 
are  bringing  forth  the  May  flowers  and  all  the  loveliness  of 
the  season,  and  Orion  is  in  the  ascendant  as  a  wintery  sign, 
when  the  bands  of  frost  are  binding  up  the  former  liberties 
of  nature.     But,  whether  there  be  an  influence  in  the  stars 
or  not,  as  touching  this  world,  I  know  there  is  great  influ- 
ence in  Jesus  Christ.     He  is  the  fountain  of  all  holy  influ- 
Ances  among  the  sons  of  men.    Where  this  star  shines  upon 
the  graves  of  men  who  are  dead  in  sin  they  begin  to  live. 
Where  the  beams  of  this  star  light  upon  captives,  their 
chains  drop  05", "the prisoner  leaps  to  lose  his  chains."  When 
this  star  gleams  upon  S  Christian,  he  begins  to  bud  and 
blossom,  and  precious  fruits  are  brought  forth.     When  this 
star  shines  upon  the  backslider  he  mends  his  ways,  and  fol- 
lows, like  the  eastern  sages,  its  light  till  he  finds  his  Saviour 
once  more.     This  star  has  an  influence  upon  our  nativity  ; 
it  is  through  its  benign  rays  that  we  are  born  again,  and  in 
our  horoscope  it  has  an  influence  upon  our  death,  for  it  is 
in  rifi  light  that  we  fall  asleep,  believing  that  we  shall  wake 
up  in  the  image  of  the  Lord  Jesus.     Oh  !  sweet  star,  shino 
on  me  always  I     Never  let  me  miss  thy  rays  ;  but  may  I 
always  walk  in  thy  light  till  I  be  found  sitting  in  the  full 
noontide  heat  of  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  for  ever  and  ever. 

V.  In  the  fifth  place,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  may  be  com- 
pared to  a  star  as  a  source  of  guidance. 

Certain  stars  are  extremely  usefuito  sailors.  I  scarcely 
know  how  else  the  great  and  wide  sea  would  be  navigated, 


112  THE  STAR  OF  JACOB. 

especially  if  it  were  not  for  the  Pole  Star.  Jesus  is  the  Pole 
Star  to  us.  How  the  poor  runaway  in  the  olden  times,  when 
slavery  had  not  been  abolished,  must  have  blessed*  God  foi 
that  pole  star — so  easy  to  find  out  and  so  sure  a  guide.  Any 
child  with  but  a  moment's  teaching  will  soon  discover  it  ia 
the  midst  of  its  fellows  at  night,  and  when  the  negro  had 
once  learned  to  distinguish  the  star  that  shone  over  the  land 
of  freedom,  he  followed  it  through  the  great  dismal  swamps, 
or  along  the  open  roads,  which  were  more  dreadful  still; 
he  forded  the  streams,  and  climbed  tlie  mountains,  cheered 
by  freedom's  star.  Such  is  Jesus  Christ  to  the  seeker.  He 
leads  to  liberty ;  he  conducts  to  peace.  Oh !  I  wish  you 
would  follow  him,  some  of  you  who  are  going  about  a 
thousand  ways  to  find  peace  where  you  never  will  find  it. 
From  this  pulpit  I  think  there  is  never  a  Sunday  but  wj^at 
I  try  to  speak,  sometimes  in  getitler  tones,  and  at  other  sea- 
sons with  thundering  note5,  the  simple  truth  that  Jesus 
Christ  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners.  I  do  try  to 
make  it  plain  to  you  that  it  is  not  your  prayers  and  tears, 
your  doings,  your  willings,  your  any  thing,  that  can  save 
you,  but  that  all  your  help  is  laid  upon  One  that  is  mighty, 
and  that  you  must  look  alone  to  him.  Yet,  sinners,  yop 
are  still  looking  to  yourselves.  You  rake  the  dung-hills  of 
your  human  nature  to  find  the  pearl  of  great  price  which  is 
not  there.  You  will  look  beneath  the  ice  of  your  natural 
depravity  to  find  the  flame  of  comfort  which  is  not  there. 
You  might  as  well  seek  in  hell  itself  to  find  heaven  as  look 
into  your  own  works  and  merits  to  find  sure  ground  of  trust. 
Down  with  your  solf- reliances  !  Down  with  them,  every 
one  of  them !    Away  with  all  those  confidences  of  yours,  for 

"  None  but  Jesus,  none  but  Jesus, 
Can  do  helpless  sinners  g^ood." 

Just  reverse  that  helm,  and  shift  that  sail,  and  tack  about ! 
Follow  not  the  wrecker's  beacon  on  yonder  shore,  luring 
you  to  the  rocks  of  self-delusion,  but  where  that  pole  star 


THE  STAR  OF  JACOB.  113 

gnided  you,  thither  let  your  vessel  drift,  and  pray  the  favor- 
ing gales  of  the  blessed  Spirit  to  guide  you  rightly  to  the 
port  of  peace. 

VI.  Our  Lord  is  compared  to  a  star,  surely,  as  ^tiib  ob- 
ject OF  WONDER. 

Among  the  first  lines  which  full  many  of  you  ever  learn* 
•d  to  recite,  were  these  simple  ones — 

"  Twinkle,  twinkle, little  star. 
How  I  wonder  what  you  are. " 

That  is  precisely  what  Galileo  might  have  said,  and  exactly 
what  the  greatest  astronomer  that  ever  lived  might  say. 
You  have  sometimes  looked  through  a  telescope  and  have 
seen  the  planets,  but  after  you  have  looked  at  them  you  do 
not  know  much  about  them,  and  those  who  are  busy  all  day 
•and  all  night  long  taking  constant  observations,  will  also 
confess  that  the  result  is  rather  that  of  astonishment  than  of 
intelligence.     Still  it  is 

**  How  I  wonder  what  you  are." 

So  to  those  of  us  who  are  in  Christ  Jesus,  he  is  a  star;  but  oh  I 
brethren,  we  may  well  wonder  what  he  is.  We  used  to 
think  when  we  were  little  ones  that  the  stars  were  holes 
picked  in  the  skies  through  which  the  light  of  heaven  shone, 
or  that  they  were  little  pieces  of  gold-dust  that  God  had 
strewn  about.  We  do  not  think  so  now  ;  we  understand 
that  they  are  much  greater  than  they  look  to  be.  Now, 
when  we  were  carnal,  and  did  not  know  King  Jesus,  we  es- 
teemed him  to  be  very  much  like  anybody  else  ;  but  now  we 
begin  to  know  him,  we  find  out  that  he  is  much  greater,  in- 
finitely greater,  than  we  thought  he  was.  And  as  we  grow 
in  grace  we  find  him  to  be  more  glorious  still.  A  little  star 
to  our  view  at  first,  he  has  grown,  in  our  estimation,  into  a 
Bun  now,  a  blazing  sun  by  whose  beams  our  soul  is  refresh- 
ed. Ah  I  but  when  we  get  to  him  what  will  he  be  ?  Imagine 
you  are  taken  up  now  by  an  angel's  wing  to  take  a  journey 


114  THE  STAR  OP  JAC50B. 

to  a  star.  Travelling  at  an  inconceivable  rate  you  open 
your  eyes  on  a  sudden  and  say — "  How  wonderful !  Why, 
that  which  was  a  star  just  now  has  become  as  large  to  my 
vision  as  the  sun  at  noon-day."  "  Stop,"  says  the  angel ; 
"  you  shall  see  greater  things  than  these,"  and  as  you  speed 
on,  the  disc  of  that  orb  increases  till  it  is  equal  to  a  hundred 
Bims ;  and  now  you  say,  "  But  what  ?  Am  I  not  near  it  now  ?  " 
'*  No,"  says  the  angel ;  "  that  enormous  globe  is  still  far,  far 
away,"  and  when  you  come  to  it  you  will  find  it  to  be  such 
a  wondrous  world  that  arithmetic  could  not  compute  its 
size,  nor  imagination  belt  it  with  the  zone  of  fancy.  Now, 
such  is  Jesus  Christ.  I  said  he  grows  upon  his  people  here, 
but  what  must  it  be  to  see  him  there^  when  the  veil  is  lifted, 
and  we  behold  him  face  to  face?  Sometimes  we  long  to 
find  out  what  that  star  is,  to  know  him,  to  comprehend  with 
all  saints  what  are  the  heights  and  depths,  and  to  know  the 
love  of  Christ  which  passeth  knowledge  ;  but  meanwhile  we 
are  compelled  to  sit  down  and  sing — 

"  God  only  knows  tlie  love  of  God, 
Oil !  that  it  now  were  shed  abroad 
In  this  poor  frozen  heart." 

We  have  to  confess  that 

"  The  first-bom  sons  of  light 
Desire  in  vain  its  depth  to  see, 
They  cannot  reach  the  mystery. 
The  length,  the  breadth,  the  height." 

Vn.  But  to  conclude ;  the  metaphor  used  in  the  text  may 
well  bear  this  seventh  signification.  Our  Lord  is  compared 
to  a  star,  as  he  is  the  herald  op  glory. 

The  bright  and  morning  star  foretells  that  the  sun  is  on 
its  way  to  gladden  the  earth  with  its  light.  Where vei 
Jesus  comes  he  is  the  prophet  of  good.  Let  him  come  int^ 
A  heart,  and  as  soon  as  he  appears  you  may  rett  assured 
that  there  is  a  life  of  eternity  and  joy  to  come.  Let  Jesus 
Christ  come  into  a  family,  and  what  changes  he  makes  thera 


THE  StAR  01*  JACOB.  113 

Let  him  be  preached  with  power  in  any  town  or  city,  and 
what  a  herald  of  good  things  he  is  there.  To  the  whole 
world  Christ  has  proclaimed  glad  tidings.  His  coming  has 
been  fraught  with  benedictions  to  the  sons  of  men.  Yea, 
the  coming  of  Christ  in  the  flesh  is  the  great  prophecy  of 
the  glory  to  be  revealed  in  the  latter  days,  when  all  nations 
shall  bow  before  him,  and  the  age  of  peace,  the  golden  age 
shall  come,  not  because  civilization  has  advanced,  not  be- 
cause education  has  increased,  or  the  world  grown  better, 
but  because  Christ  has  come.  He  is  the  first,  the  fairest  of 
the  stars,  the  prognostic  of  the  dawn. 

Ay,  and  because  Christ  has  come,there  will  be  a  heaven 
for  the  sons  of  men  who  believe  in  him.  Sons  of  toil,  be- 
cause Christ  has  come  there  shall  be  rest  for  the  weary. 
Daughters  of  sorrow,  because  Christ  has  come  there  shall 
be  healing  for  the  weak.  Oh  !  you  whom  chill  penury  is 
bowing  down,  there  shall  be  lifting  up  and  sacred  wealth  for 
you  because  the  star  has  shone.  Hope  on !  hope  ever  I 
Now  that  Jesus  has  come  there  is  no  room  for  despair. 

I  conclude  by  commending  these  thoughts  to  you,  and 
earnestly  asking  you  once  again  if  you  have  never  looked 
to  Christ,  to  trust  in  him  now ;  if  yon  have  never  submitted 
to  Jesus, to  submit  to  him  now;  if  you  have  never  confided 
in  him,to  confide  in  him  now.  It  is  a  very  simple  matter. 
May  God  the  Holy  Spirit  teach  you  what  it  is.  It  is  but  to 
give  up  all  your  own  trust  and  make  him  every  thing. 
Here  it  is  in  one  short  rhyme. 

"  A  guilty,  weak,  and  helpless  worm. 
On  thy  kind  arms  I  fall: 
Be  thou  my  strength,  my  righteousness. 
My  Saviour  and  my  all." 

If  this  be  done  by  you, all  is  done  for  you  by  Christ.     Yon 
are  his,  and  he  is  yours,  and  where  he  is,  shall  be  your  per 
tion,  and  you  shall  be  like  him,  for  you  shall  see  him  as  he 
is.     It  will  be  a  blessed  Sabbath  evening  for  you,  if  you  are 
led  now  to  give  yourselves  to  him.     I  well  recollect  when 


116  THE  STAR  OF  iAOA 

my  heart  yielded  to  his  Divine  grace ;  'when  I  cotdd  no 
longer  look  anywhere  else,  and  was  compelled  to  look  to 
the  Star  of  Bethlehem.  Oh !  come  ye  to  him  I  I  know  not 
what  words  to  employ  or  what  persuasions.  For  your  own 
sake,  that  you  may  be  happy  now  ;  for  eternity's  sake, 
that  you  may  be  happy  hereafter,  that  you  may  es- 
cape from  hell ;  that  you  may  enter  into  heaven,  look  to 
Jesus.  You  may  never  be  bidden  to  do  so  again.  The  bid- 
ding of  this  present  moment  may  be  the  last,  and  its  re- 
jection the  concluding  measure  which  shall  fill  up  the  heap 
of  your  guilt.  Oh !  do  not  do  so.  Let  the  prayer  go  up 
quietly  now  from  your  spirit,  "God  be  merciful  to  me  a 
sinner,"  and  let  your  soul,  though  you  speak  not  with  ycur 
tongue,  say  within  itself — 

"  Pll  to  the  gracious  King  approach. 
Whose  sceptre  pardon  gives ; 
Perhaps  he  may  command  my  touch. 
And  then  the  stippliant  lives.    ^ 

*♦  I  can  but  perish  if  I  go, 
I  am  resolved  to  try ; 
For  if  I  stay  away,  I  know 
I  must  forever  die. 

"  But,  if  I  die  with  mercy  sought. 
When  I  the  Bang  have  tried. 
That  were  to  die,  delightful  thonglit^ 
Mb  aiimer  never  died. " 


AN  UNALTERABLE  STATUTHL  Ht 


SERMON  Vn. 


AN  UNALTERABLE  STATUTE. 

**  WITHOUT  SHEDDING  07  BLOOD  THBRB  IS  NO  BBKI88ION."— HebieWt  iZ.  tt. 

Everywhere  under  the  old  figurative  dispensation, 
blood  was  sure  to  greet  your  eyes.  It  was  the  one  most 
prominent  thing  under  the  Jewish  economy,  scarcely  a  cer- 
emony was  observed  without  it.  You  could  net  enter  into 
any  part  of  the  tabernacle  but  you  saw  traces  of  the  blood- 
sprinkling.  Sometimes  there  were  bowls  of  blood  cast  at 
the  foot  of  the  altar.  The  place  looked  so  like  a  shambles, 
tKat  to  visit  it  must  have  been  far  from  attractive  to  the 
natural  taste ;  and  to  delight  in  it,  a  man  had  need  of  a  spir- 
itual understanding  and  a  lively  faith.  The  slaughter  of 
animals  was  the  manner  of  worship ;  the  effusion  of  blood 
was  the  appointed  rite,  and  the  diffusion  of  that  blood  on  the 
"floor,  on  the  curtains,  and  on  the  vestments  of  the  priests, 
was  the  constant  memorial.  When  Paul  says  that  almost 
all  things  were,  under  the  law,  purged  with  blood,  he  al- 
ludes to  a  few  things  that  were  exempted.  Thus  you  will 
find  in  several  passages  the  people  were  exhorted  to  wash 
their  clothes,  and  certain  persons  who  had  been  unclean 
from  physical  causes,  were  bidden  to  wash  their  clothes 
with  water.  Garments  worn  by  men  were  usually  cleansed 
with  water  After  the  defeat  of  the  Midianites,  of  which 
you  read  in  the  book  of  Numbers,  the  spoil  which  had  been 
polluted  had  to  be  purified  before  it  was  claimed  by  the 
victorious  Israelites.     According  to  the  ordinance  of  the  law 


118  AN  tTNALTERABLH  STATUTEl 

^hich  the  Lord  commanded  Moses,  some  of  the  goods,  snch 
as  raiment  and  articles  made  of  skins  or  goat's  hair,  were 
purified  with  water,  while  other  things  that  were  of  metal 
that  could  abide  the  fire,  were  purified  by  fire.  Still  the 
Apostle  refers  to  a  literal  fact,  when  he  says  that  almost  all 
things,  garments  being  the  only  exception,  were  purged, 
under  the  law,  with  blood.  Then  he  refers  to  it  as  a  gener- 
al truth  under  the  old  legal  dispensation,  that  there  was 
never  any  pardoning  of  sin  except  by  blood.  In  one  case 
only  was  there  an  apparent  exception,  and  even  that  goes  to 
prove  the  universality  of  the  rule,  because  the  reason  for  the 
exception  is  so  fully  given.  The  trespass-offering,  referred 
to  as  an  alternative,  in  Leviticus  v.  11,  might,  in  extreme 
cases  of  excessive  poverty,  be  a  bloodless  offering.  If  a  man 
was  too  poor  to  bring  an  offering  from  the  flock,  he  was  to 
bring  two  turtle  doves  or  young  pigeons  ;  but  if  he  was  too 
poor  even  for  that,  he  might  offer  the  tenth  part  of  an  ephah 
of  fine  flour  for  a  sin-offering,  without  oil  or  frankincense, 
and  it  was  cast  upon  the  fire.  That  is  the  one  solitary  ex- 
ception through  all  the  types.  In  every  place,  at  ev6ry 
time,  in  every  instance  where  sin  had  to  be^  removed,  blood 
must  flow — life  must  be  given.  The  one  exception  we  have 
noticed,  gives  emphasis  to  the  statute  that,  "  without  shed- 
ding of  blood,  there  is  no  remission."  Under  the  Gospel 
there  is  no  exception,  not  such  an  isolated  one  as  there  was 
under  the  law  ;  no,  not  even  for  the  extremely  poor.  Such 
we  all  are  spiritually.  Since  we  have  not  any  of  us  to  bring 
an  offering,  any  more  than  an  offering  to  bring ;  but  we 
have  all  of  us  to  take  the  offering  which  has  already  been 
presented,  and  to  accept  the  sacrifice  which  Christ  has,  of 
himself,  made  in  our  stead,  there  is  now  no  cause  or  ground 
for  exemption  to  any  man  of  woman  born,  nor  ever  shall 
there  be,  either  in  this  world  or  in  that  which  is  to  come, 
— "Without  the  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no  remission." 
With  great  simplicity  then,  as  it  concerns  our  salvation, 
may  I  ask  the  attention  of  each  one  here  present,  to  this 


AN  TJKALtERABLE  STATUTB.  HJf 

great  matter  whicli  intimately  concerns  our  everlasting  in- 
terests. 

I  gather  from  the  text,  first  of  all,  the  encouraging  fact 
ihat  there  is  such  a  thing  as  remission — ^that  is  to  say,  the 
remission  of  sin.  "Without  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no 
remission."  Blood  has  been  shed,  and  there  is  therefore 
hope  concerning  such  a  thing.  Remission,  notwithstanding 
flie  stem  requirenients  of  the  law,  is  not  to  be  abandoned  in 
sheer  despair.  The  word  remission  means  the  putting  away 
of  debts.  Just  as  sin  may  be  regarded  as  a  debt  incurred 
to  God,  so  that  debt  may  be  blotted  out,  cancelled,  and  ob- 
literated. The  sinner,  God's  debtor,  may  cease  to  be  in 
debt  by  compensation,  by  full  acquittance,  and  may  be  set 
free  by  virtue  of  such  remission.  Such  a  thing  is  possible. 
Glory  be  to  God,  the  remission  of  all  sin  of  which  it  is  pos- 
sible to  repent  is  possible  to  be  obtained.  Whatever  the 
transgression  of  any  man  may  be,  pardon  is  possible  to  him 
if  repentance  be  possible  to  him.  Unrepented  sin  is  unfor- 
givable sin.  If  he  confess  his  sin  and  forsake  it,  then  shall 
he  find  mercy.  God  hath  so  declared  it,  and  he  will  not  be 
unfaithful  to  his  word.  "  But  is  there  not,"  saith  one,  "  a 
sin  which  is  unto  death  ?  "  Tea,  verily,  though  I  know  not 
what  it  is  ;  nor  do  we  think  that  any  who  have  inquired 
into  the  subject  have  been  able  to  discover  what  that  sin 
is ;  this  much  seems  clear,  that  practically  the  sin  is  unfor- 
givable because  it  is  never  repented  of  The  man  who 
commits  it  becomes,  to  all  intents  and  purposes,  dead  in  sin 
in  a  more  deep  and  lasting  sense  even*than  the  human  race 
IS  as  a  whole,  and  he  is  given  up  case-hardened — ^his  con- 
science seared,  as  it  were,  with  a  hot  iron,  and  henceforth 
he  will  seek  no  mercy.  But  all  manner  of  sin  and  blasphe- 
my shall  be  forgiven  unto  men.  For  lust,  for  robbeiy,  for 
adultery — ^yea,  for  murder,  there  is  forgiveness  with  God, 
that  he  may  be  feared.  He  is  the  Lord  God,  merciful  and 
gracious,  passing  by  transgression,  iniquity  an  i  sin. 

And  this  forgiveness  which  is  possible  is,  according  to 


112  THE  STAR  OF  JACOB. 

especially  if  it  were  not  for  the  Pole  Star.  J  esus  is  the  Pole 
Star  to  us.  How  the  poor  runaway  in  the  olden  times,  whea 
slavery  had  not  been  abolished,  must  have  blessed'  God  foi 
that  pole  star — so  easy  to  find  out  and  so  sure  a  guide.  Any 
child  with  but  a  moment's  teaching  will  soon  discover  it  in 
the  midst  of  its  fellows  at  night,  and  when  the  negro  had 
once  learned  to  distinguish  the  star  that  shone  over  the  land 
of  freedom,  he  followed  it  through  the  great  dismal  swamps, 
or  along  the  open  roads,  which  were  more  dreadful  still; 
lie  forded  the  streams,  and  climbed  the  mountains,  cheered 
by  freedom's  star.  Such  is  Jesus  Christ  to  the  seeker.  He 
leads  to  liberty;  he  conducts  to  peace.  Oh !  I  wish  you 
would  follow  him,  some  of  you  who  are  going  about  a 
thousand  ways  to  find  peace  where  you  never  will  find  it. 
From  this  pulpit  I  think  there  is  never  a  Sunday  but  wl^at 
I  try  to  speak,  sometimes  in  gentler  tones,  and  at  other  sea- 
sons with  thundering  notes,  the  simple  truth  that  Jesus 
Christ  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners.  I  do  try  to 
make  it  plain  to  you  that  it  is  not  your  prayers  and  tears, 
your  doings,  your  willings,  your  any  thing,  that  can  save 
you,  but  that  all  your  help  is  laid  upon  One  that  is  mighty, 
and  that  you  must  look  alone  to  him.  Yet,  sinners,  yov 
are  still  looking  to  yourselves.  You  rake  the  dung-hills  of 
your  human  nature  to  find  the  pearl  of  great  price  which  is 
not  there.  You  will  look  beneath  the  ice  of  your  natural 
depravity  to  find  the  flame  of  comfort  which  is  not  there. 
You  might  as  well  seek  in  hell  itself  to  find  heaven  as  look 
into  your  own  works  and  merits  to  find  sure  ground  of  trust. 
Down  with  your  self-reliances !  Down  with  them,  eveiy 
one  of  them  !     Away  with  all  those  confidences  of  yours,  for 


None  but  Jesus,  none  but  Jesus, 
Can  do  helpless  sinners  good." 


Just  reverse  that  helm,  and  shift  that  sail,  and  tack  aboat ! 
Follow  not  the  wreckj^r's  beacon  on  yonder  shore,  luiing 
you  to  the  rocks  of  self-delusion,  but  where  that  pole  stwr 


THE  STAR  OF  JACOB.  113 

gnided  you,  thither  let  your  vessel  drift,  and  pray  the  favor- 
ing gales  of  the  blessed  Spirit  to  guide  you  rightly  to  the 
port  of  peace. 

VI.  Our  Lord  is  compared  to  a  star,  surely,  as  ^tiib  ob- 
ject OF  WONDER, 

Among  the  first  lines  which  full  many  of  you  ever  learn* 
•d  to  recite,  were  these  simple  ones — 

"Twinkle,  twinkle, little  star. 
How  I  wonder  what  you  are. " 

That  is  precisely  what  Galileo  might  have  said,  and  exactly 
what  the  greatest  astronomer  that  ever  lived  might  say. 
You  have  sometimes  looked  through  a  telescope  and  have 
seen  the  planets,  but  after  you  have  looked  at  them  you  do 
not  know  much  about  them,  and  those  who  are  busy  all  day 
•and  all  night  long  taking  constant  observations,  will  also 
confess  that  the  result  is  rather  that  of  astonishment  than  of 
intelligence.     Still  it  is 

**  How  I  wonder  what  you  are." 

So  to  those  of  us  who  are  in  Christ  Jesus,  he  is  a  star;  but  oh ! 
brethren,  we  may  well  wonder  what  he  is.  We  used  to 
think  when  we  were  little  ones  that  the  stars  were  holes 
picked  in  the  skies  through  which  the  light  of  heaven  shone, 
or  that  they  were  little  pieces  of  gold-dust  that  God  had 
strewn  about.  We  do  not  think  so  now  ;  we  understand 
that  they  are  much  greater  than  they  look  to  be.  Now, 
when  we  were  carnal,  and  did  not  know  King  Jesus,  we  es- 
teemed him  to  be  very  much  like  anybody  else  ;  but  now  we 
begin  to  know  him,  we  find  out  that  he  is  much  greater,  in- 
finitely greater,  than  we  thought  he  was.  And  as  we  grow 
in  grace  we  find  him  to  be  more  glorious  still.  A  little  star 
to  our  view  at  first,  he  has  grown,  in  our  estimation,  into  a 
Bun  now,  a  blazing  sun  by  whose  beams  our  soul  is  refresh- 
ed. Ah !  but  when  we  get  to  him  what  will  he  be  ?  Imagine 
you  are  taken  up  now  by  an  angel's  wing  to  take  a  journey 


114  THE  STAR  OP  JACOB. 

to  a  star.  Travelling  at  an  inconceivable  rate  yon'  open 
your  eyes  on  a  sudden  and  say — "How  wonderful!  Why, 
that  which  was  a  star  just  now  has  become  as  large  to  my 
vision  as  the  sun  at  noon-day."  "  Stop,"  says  the  angel ; 
**  you  shall  see  greater  things  than  these,"  and  as  you  speed 
on,  the  disc  of  that  orb  increases  till  it  is  equal  to  a  hundred 
«un8 ;  and  now  you  say,  "  But  what  ?  Am  I  not  near  it  now  ?  " 
'*  No,"  says  the  angel ;  "  that  enormous  globe  is  still  far,  far 
away,"  and  when  you  come  to  it  you  will  find  it  to  be  such 
a  wondrous  world  that  arithmetic  could  not  compute  its 
size,  nor  imagination  belt  it  with  the  zone  of  fancy.  Now, 
such  is  Jesus  Christ.  I  said  he  grows  upon  his  people  here, 
but  what  must  it  be  to  see  him  there^  when  the  veil  is  lifted, 
and  we  behold  him  face  to  face?  Sometimes  we  long  to 
find  out  what  that  star  is,  to  know  him,  to  comprehend  with 
all  saints  what  are  the  heights  and  depths,  and  to  know  the 
love  of  Christ  which  passeth  knowledge ;  but  meanwhile  we 
are  compelled  to  sit  down  and  sing — 


fS 


God  only  knows  the  love  of  God, 
Oh  I  that  it  now  were  shed  abroad 
In  this  poor  frozen  heart.* 


it 


We  have  to  confess  that 

"  The  first-bom  sons  of  light 
Desire  in  vain  its  depth  to  see. 
They  cannot  reach  the  mystery. 
The  length,  the  breadth,  the  height." 

Vn.  But  to  conclude ;  the  metaphor  used  in  the  text  may 
well  bear  this  seventh  signification.  Our  Lord  is  comparod 
to  a  star,  as  he  is  the  herald  op  glory. 

The  bright  and  morning  star  foretells  that  the  sun  is  on 
its  way  to  gladden  the  earth  with  its  light.  Where vei 
Jesus  comes  he  is  the  prophet  of  good.  Let  him  come  int^i 
4  heart,  and  as  soon  as  he  appears  you  may  rett  assured 
that  there  is  a  life  of  eternity  and  joy  to  come.  Let  Jesus 
Christ  come  into  a  family,  and  what  changes  he  makes  therot 


THE  StAR  OF  JACOB.  115 

Let  liim  be  preached  with  power  in  any  town  or  city,  and 
what  a  herald  of  good  things  he  is  there.  To  the  whole 
world  Christ  has  proclaimed  glad  tidings.  His  coming  has 
been  fraught  with  benedictions  to  the  sons  of  men.  Yea, 
the  coming  of  Christ  in  the  flesh  is  the  great  prophecy  of 
the  glory  to  be  revealed  in  the  latter  days,  when  all  nations 
shall  bow  before  him,  and  the  age  of  peace,  the  golden  age 
shall  come,  not  because  civilization  has  advanced,  not  be- 
cause education  has  increased,  or  the  world  grown  better, 
but  because  Christ  has  come.  He  is  the  first,  the  fairest  of 
the  staiTS,  the  prognostic  of  the  dawn. 

Ay,  and  because  Christ  has  come,there  will  be  a  heaven 
for  the  sons  of  men  who  believe  in  him.  Sons  of  toil,  be- 
cause Christ  has  come  there  shall  be  rest  for  the  weary. 
Daughters  of  sorrow,  because  Christ  has  come  there  shall 
be  healing  for  the  weak.  Oh  !  you  whom  chill  penury  is 
bowing  down,  there  shall  be  lifting  up  and  sacred  wealth  for 
you  because  the  star  has  shone.  Hope  on !  hope  ever  I 
Now  that  Jesus  has  come  there  is  no  room  for  despair. 

I  conclude  by  commending  these  thoughts  to  you,  and 
earnestly  asking  you  once  again  if  you  have  never  looked 
to  Christ,  to  trust  in  him  now  ;  if  you  have  never  submitted 
to  Jesus, to  submit  to  him  now;  if  you  have  never  confided 
in  him,to  confide  in  him  now.  It  is  a  very  simple  matter. 
May  God  the  Holy  Spirit  teach  you  what  it  is.  It  is  but  to 
give  up  all  your  own  trust  and  make  him  every  thing. 
Here  it  is  in  one  short  rhyme. 

"  A  guilty,  weak,  and  helpless  worm. 
On  thy  kind  arms  I  fall: 
Be  thou  my  strength,  my  righteousness. 
My  Saviour  and  my  all." 

If  this  be  done  by  you, all  is  done  for  you  by  Christ.     Yoii 
are  his,  and  he  is  yours,  and  where  he  is,  shall  be  your  per 
tion,  and  you  shall  be  like  him,  for  you  shall  see  him  as  he 
is.     It  will  be  a  blessed  Sabbath  evening  for  you,  if  you  are 
led  now  to  give  yourselves  to  him.     I  well  recollect  when 


Il6  THE  STAR  OF  iAOOk 

my  heart  yielded  to  his  Divine  grace ;  -when  I  could  no 
longer  look  anywhere  else,  and  was  compelled  to  look  to 
the  Star  of  Bethlehem.  Oh !  come  ye  to  him  !  I  know  not 
what  words  to  employ  or  what  persuasions.  For  your  own 
sake,  that  you  may  be  happy  now  ;  for  eternity's  sake^ 
that  you  may  be  happy  hereafter,  that  you  may  es- 
cape from  hell ;  that  you  may  enter  into  heaven,  look  to 
Jesus.  You  may  never  be  bidden  to  do  so  again.  The  bid- 
ding of  this  present  moment  may  be  the  last,  and  its  re- 
jection the  concluding  measure  which  shall  fill  up  the  heap 
of  your  guilt.  Oh !  do  not  do  so.  Let  the  prayer  go  up 
quietly  now  from  your  spirit,  "God  be  merciful  to  me  a 
sinner,"  and  let  your  soul,  though  you  speak  not  with  ycur 
tongue,  say  within  itself — 

*'  m  to  the  gracious  King  approach. 
Whose  sceptre  pardon  g^ves ; 
Perhaps  he  may  command  mj  touch. 
And  then  the  stlppliant  lives.    ^ 

**  I  can  but  perish  if  I  go, 
I  am  resolved  to  try ; 
For  if  I  stay  away,  I  know 
I  must  forever  die. 

•*  But,  if  I  die  with  mercy  sought. 
When  I  the  Bang  have  tried, 
That  were  to  die,  delightful  thonglit^ 
Ab  fliimer  never  died. " 


AS  UKALTBBABLE  STATITTEL  Hf 


SERMON  Vn. 


AS  UNALTERABLE  STATUTE. 

**  WITHOTJT  SHEDDING  OF  BLOOD  THBBS  IS  NO  REMISSION."— HobieWt  IZ.  9L 

Everywhere  under  the  old  figurative  dispensation, 
blood  was  sure  to  greet  your  eyes.  It  was  the  one  most 
prominent  thing  under  the  Jewish  economy,  scarcely  a  cer- 
emony was  observed  without  it.  You  could  nst  enter  into 
any  part  of  the  tabernacle  but  you  saw  traces  of  the  blood- 
sprinkling.  Sometimes  there  were  bowls  of  blood  cast  at 
the  foot  of  the  altar.  The  place  looked  so  like  a  shambles, 
tKat  to  visit  it  must  have  been  far  from  attractive  to  the 
natural  taste ;  and  to  delight  in  it,  a  man  had  need  of  a  spir- 
itual understanding  and  a  lively  faith.  The  slaughter  of 
animals  was  the  manner  of  worship ;  the  effusion  of  blood 
was  the  appointed  rite,  and  the  diffusion  of  that  blood  on  the 
■floor,  on  the  curtains,  and  on  the  vestments  of  the  priests, 
was  the  constant  memorial.  When  Paul  says  that  almost 
all  things  were,  under  the  law,  purged  with  blood,  he  al- 
ludes to  a  few  things  that  were  exempted.  Thus  you  will 
find  in  several  passages  the  people  were  exhorted  to  wash 
their  clothes,  and  certain  persons  who  had  been  unclean 
from  physical  causes,  were  bidden  to  wash  their  clothes 
with  water.  Garments  worn  by  men  were  usually  cleansed 
with  water  After  the  defeat  of  the  Midianites,  of  which 
you  read  in  the  book  of  Numbers,  the  spoil  which  had  been 
polluted  had  to  be  purified  before  it  was  claimed  by  the 
victorious  Israelites.     According  to  the  ordinance  of  the  law 


110  THE  STAR  OP  JAOOR 

gan,  but  the  stars  have  not.     There  they  remain.    We 
dreamed  at  one  time  that  they  moved.     Untaught  imagina- 
tions said  that  all  those  stars  revolved  around  this  little 
globe  of  ours,  but  we  know  better  now.     There  they  are 
both  day  and  night — always  the  same,  and  we  may  say  they 
have  not  changed  since  the  world  begun,  nor,  probably,  will 
they,  till,  like  a  vesture,  God  shall  roll  creation  up  because 
it  is  outworn.     It  is  very  delightful  to  recollect  that  the 
same  star  which  I  looked  at  last  night  was  viewed  by  Abra- 
ham, perhaps  with  some  of  the  self-same  thoughts.     And 
when  we  have  gone,  and  other  generations  shall  have  fol- 
lowed us,  those  that  come  after  will  look  up  to  the  self-same 
star.    So  with  our  Lord  Jesus,  he  is  the  same  yesterday,  to- 
day, and  forever.     What  the  prophets  and  apostles  saw  in 
him  we  can  see  in  him,  and  what  he  was  to  them  that  he  is 
to  us,  and  shall  be  to  generations  yet  unborn.     Hundreds 
may  be  looking  at  the  same  stars  at  the  same  time  without 
knowing  it,  for  they  are  a  meeting-place  for  many  eyes. 
We  may  be  drifted  to  Australia,  or  to  Canada,  or  to  the 
United  States,  or  we  may  be  sailing  across  the  great  deep, 
but  we  shall  see  the  stars  there.     It  is  true  that  on  the  oth- 
er side  of  the  world  we  shall  see  another  set  of  stars,  but  the 
stars  themselves  are  always  the  same.     As  far  as  we  in  this 
northern  hemi^here  are  concerned,  we  shall  look  upon  the 
same  stars,  so  wherever  we  may  be  we  look  to  the  same 
Christ.      Yonder   brother  has  learning  ;   but  he  looks  to 
Christ,  and  he  sees  the  same  Christ  as  the  poor  unlettered 
woman  in  the  aisles.     And  you,  poor  man,  who  have  not, 
perhaps,  a  sixpence  in  the  world,  you  have  the  same  Christ 
to  trust  iij  as  the  richest  man  in  all  the  world.     And  you 
who  think  you  are  so  obscure  that  no  one  knows  you  but 
your  God,  you  look  to  this  same  star,  and  it  shines  with  the 
game  beams  for  you  as  for  the  Christian  who  leads  the  van 
in  the  Lord's  hosts.    Jesus  Christ  -6  still  the  same,  the  same 
to  all  his  people,  the  same  in  all  places,  the  same  for  ever 
and  ever,  and  may  well  be  compared  to  those  bright  start 
tliat  shine  now  as  they  did  of  old. 


THE  STAR  OF  JAODR  HI 

TV.  In  the  fourth  place,we  may  trace  this  comparison  of 
our  Lord  to  a  star  as  the  fountain  of  influence. 

The  old  astrologers  believed  very  firmly  in  the  influence 
of  the  stars  upon  men's  destinies.     Without  endorsing  their 
exploded  fallacies,  we  meet  in  Scripture  with  expressions 
like  this — "  Canst  thou  bind  the  sweet  influences  of  the  Ple- 
iades, or  loose  the  bands  of  Orion  ?  " — alluding,  no  doubt,  to 
the  fact  that  the  Pleiades  are  in  the  ascendant  in  the  sweet 
months  of  spring,  when  the  sweet  influences  of  the  spring 
are  bringing  forth  the  May  flowers  and  all  the  loveliness  of 
the  season,  and  Orion  is  in  the  ascendant  as  a  wintery  sign, 
when  the  bands  of  frost  are  binding  up  the  former  liberties 
of  nature.     But,  whether  there  be  an  influence  in  the  stars 
or  not,  as  touching  this  world,  I  know  there  is  great  influ- 
ence in  Jesus  Christ.     He  is  the  fountain  of  all  holy  influ- 
ences among  the  sons  of  men.    Where  this  star  shines  upon 
the  graves  of  men  who  are  dead  in  sin  they  begin  to  live. 
Where  the  beams  of  this  star  light  upon  captives,  their 
chains  drop  off, ''the prisoner  leaps  to  lose  his  chains."  When 
this  star  gleams  upon  si  Christian,  he  begins  to  bud  and 
blossom,  and  precious  fruits  are  brought  forth.     When  this 
star  shines  upon  the  backslider  he  mends  his  ways,  and  fol- 
lows, like  the  eastern  sages,  its  light  till  he  finds  his  Saviour 
once  more.     This  star  has  an  influence  upon  our  nativity  ; 
it  is  through  its  benign  rays  that  we  are  born  again,  and  in 
our  horoscope  it  has  an  influence  upon  our  death,  for  it  is 
in  r*  light  that  we  fall  asleep,  believing  that  we  shall  wake 
up  in  the  image  of  the  Lord  Jesus.     Oh  !  sweet  star,  shino 
on  me  always !     Never  let  me  miss  thy  rays  ;  but  may  I 
always  walk  in  thy  light  till  I  be  found  sitting  in  the  full 
noontide  heat  of  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  for  ever  and  ever. 

V.  Li  the  fifth  place,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  may  be  com- 
pared to  a  star  as  a  source  of  guidance. 

Certain  stars  are  extremely  usefui  to  sailors.  I  scarcely 
know  how  else  the  great  and  wide  sea  would  be  navigated, 


112  THE  STAR  OF  JACOB. 

especially  if  it  were  not  for  the  Pole  Star.  J  esus  is  the  Pole 
Star  to  us.  How  the  poor  runaway  in  the  olden  times,  whea 
slavery  had  not  been  abolished,  must  have  blessed*  God  foi 
that  pole  star — so  easy  to  find  out  and  so  sure  a  guide.  Any 
child  with  but  a  moment's  teaching  will  soon  discover  it  in 
the  midst  of  its  fellows  at  night,  and  when  the  negro  had 
once  learned  to  distinguish  the  star  that  shone  over  the  land 
of  freedom,  he  followed  it  through  the  great  dismal  swamps, 
or  along  the  open  roads,  which  were  more  dreadful  still; 
lie  forded  the  streams,  and  climbed  the  mountains,  cheered 
by  freedom's  star.  Such  is  Jesus  Christ  to  the  seeker.  He 
leads  to  liberty ;  he  conducts  to  peace.  Oh !  I  wish  you 
would  follow  him,  some  of  you  who  are  going  about  a 
thousand  ways  to  find  peace  where  you  never  will  find  it. 
From  this  pulpit  I  think  there  is  never  a  Sunday  but  w^at 
I  try  to  speak,  sometimes  in  gentler  tones,  and  at  other  sea- 
sons with  thundering  notes,  the  simple  truth  that  Jesus 
Christ  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners.  I  do  try  to 
make  it  plain  to  you  that  it  is  not  your  prayers  and  tears, 
your  doings,  your  willings,  your  any  thing,  that  can  save 
you,  but  that  all  your  help  is  laid  upon  One  that  is  mighty, 
and  that  you  must  look  alone  to  him.  Yet,  sinners,  yov 
are  still  looking  to  yourselves.  You  rake  the  dung-hills  of 
your  human  nature  to  find  the  pearl  of  great  price  which  is 
not  there.  You  will  look  beneath  the  ice  of  your  natural 
depravity  to  find  the  flame  of  comfort  which  is  not  there. 
You  might  as  well  seek  in  hell  itself  to  find  heaven  as  look 
into  your  own  works  and  merits  to  find  sure  ground  of  trust. 
Down  with  your  self-reliances !  Down  with  them,  eveiy 
one  of  them !     Away  with  all  those  confidences  of  yours,  for 

"  None  but  Jesus,  none  but  Jesus, 
Can  do  helpless  sinners  good." 

Just  reverse  that  helm,  and  shift  that  sail,  and  tack  about  I 
Follow  not  the  wrecker's  beacon  on  yonder  shore,  luring 
fou  to  the  rocks  of  self-delusion,  but  where  that  pole  star 


THE  STAR  OF  JACOB.  113 

guided  you,  thither  let  your  vessel  drift,  and  pray  the  favor- 
ing gales  of  the  blessed  Spirit  to  guide  you  rightly  to  the 
port  of  peaoe. 

VL  Our  Lord  is  compared  to  a  star,  surely,  as  ^tiib  ob- 

JKCT  OF  WONDEE. 

Among  the  first  lines  which  full  many  of  you  ever  learn* 
•d  to  recite,  were  these  simple  ones — 

"  Twinkle,  twinkle, little  star, 
How  I  wonder  what  you  are. " 

That  is  precisely  what  Galileo  might  have  said,  and  exactly 
what  the  greatest  astronomer  that  ever  lived  might  say. 
You  have  sometimes  looked  through  a  telescope  and  have 
seen  the  planets,  but  after  you  have  looked  at  them  you  do 
not  know  much  about  them,  and  those  who  are  busy  all  day 
and  all  night  long  taking  constant  observations,  will  also 
confess  that  the  result  is  rather  that  of  astonishment  than  of 
intelligence.     Still  it  is 

"  How  I  wonder  what  70U  are." 

So  to  those  of  us  who  are  in  Christ  Jesus,  he  is  a  star;  but  oh ! 
brethren,  we  may  well  wonder  what  he  is.  We  used  to 
think  when  we  were  little  ones  that  the  stars  were  holes 
picked  in  the  skies  through  which  the  light  of  heaven  shone, 
or  that  they  were  little  pieces  of  gold-dust  that  God  had 
strewn  about.  We  do  not  think  so  now  ;  we  understand 
that  they  are  much  greater  than  they  look  to  be.  Now, 
when  we  were  carnal,  and  did  not  know  King  Jesus,  we  es- 
teemed him  to  be  very  much  like  anybody  else  ;  but  now  we 
begin  to  know  him,  we  find  out  that  he  is  much  greater,  in- 
finitely greater,  than  we  thought  he  was.  And  as  we  grow 
in  grace  we  find  him  to  be  more  glorious  still.  A  little  star 
to  our  view  at  first,  he  has  grown,  in  our  estimation,  into  a 
Bun  now,  a  blazing  sun  by  whose  beams  our  soul  is  refresh- 
ed. Ah !  but  when  we  get  to  him  what  will  he  be  ?  Imagine 
you  are  taken  up  now  by  an  angel's  wing  to  take  a  journey 


114  THE  STAR  OP  JACOB. 

to  a  star.  Travelling  at  an  inconceivable  rate  you*  open 
your  eyes  on  a  sudden  and  say — "How  wonderful!  Why, 
that  which  was  a  star  just  now  has  become  as  large  to  my 
vision  as  the  sun  at  noon-day."  "  Stop,"  says  the  angel ; 
**  you  shall  see  greater  things  than  these,"  and  as  you  speed 
on,  the  disc  of  that  orb  increases  till  it  is  equal  to  a  hundred 
«iin8 ;  and  now  you  say,  "  But  what  ?  Am  I  not  near  it  now  ?  " 
'*  No,"  says  the  angel ;  "  that  enormous  globe  is  still  far,  far 
away,"  and  when  you  come  to  it  you  will  find  it  to  be  such 
a  wondrous  world  that  arithmetic  could  not  compute  its 
size,  nor  imagination  belt  it  with  the  zone  of  fancy.  Now, 
such  is  Jesus  Christ.  I  said  he  grows  upon  his  people  here, 
but  what  must  it  be  to  see  him  there^  when  the  veil  is  lifted, 
and  we  behold  him  face  to  face?  Sometimes  we  long  to 
find  out  what  that  star  is,  to  know  him,  to  comprehend  with 
all  saints  what  are  the  heights  and  depths,  and  to  know  the 
love  of  Christ  which  passeth  knowledge ;  but  meanwhile  we 
are  compelled  to  sit  down  and  sing — 

"  God  only  knows  the  love  of  God, 
Oh !  that  it  now  were  shed  abroad 
In  this  poor  frozen  heart." 

We  have  to  confess  that 

"  The  first-bom  sons  of  light 
Desire  in  vain  its  depth  to  see. 
They  cannot  reach  the  mystery. 
The  length,  the  breadth,  the  height." 

Vn.  But  to  conclude ;  the  metaphor  used  in  the  text  may 
well  bear  this  seventh  signification.  Our  Lord  is  compai'ed 
to  a  star,  as  he  is  the  herald  op  glory. 

The  bright  and  morning  star  foretells  that  the  sun  is  on 
its  way  to  gladden  the  earth  with  its  light.  Wherevei 
Jesus  comes  he  is  the  prophet  of  good.  Let  him  come  int^i 
A  heart,  and  as  soon  as  he  appears  you  may  rett  assured 
that  there  is  a  life  of  eternity  and  joy  to  come.  Let  Jesus 
Christ  oonie  into  a  family,  and  what  changes  he  makes  therot 


THE  StAR  OF  JACOB.  115 

Let  Inm  be  preached  with  power  in  any  town  or  city,  and 
what  a  herald  of  good  things  he  is  there.  To  the  whole 
world  Christ  has  proclaimed  glad  tidings.  His  coming  has 
been  fraught  with  benedictions  to  the  sons  of  men.  Yea, 
the  coming  of  Christ  in  the  flesh  is  the  great  prophecy  of 
the  glory  to  be  revealed  in  the  latter  days,  when  all  nations 
shall  bow  before  him,  and  the  age  of  peace,  the  golden  age 
shall  come,  not  because  civilization  has  advanced,  not  be- 
cause education  has  increased,  or  the  world  grown  better, 
but  because  Christ  has  come.  He  is  the  first,  the  fairest  of 
the  stars,  the  prognostic  of  the  dawn. 

Ay,  and  because  Christ  has  come,there  will  be  a  heaven 
for  the  sons  of  men  who  believe  in  him.  Sons  of  toil,  be- 
cause Christ  has  come  there  shall  be  rest  for  the  weary. 
Daughters  of  sorrow,  because  Christ  has  come  there  shall 
be  healing  for  the  weak.  Oh  !  you  whom  chill  penury  is 
bowing  down,  there  shall  be  lifting  up  and  sacred  wealth  for 
you  because  the  star  has  shone.  Hope  on !  hope  ever  I 
Now  that  Jesus  has  come  there  is  no  room  for  despair. 

I  conclude  by  commending  these  thoughts  to  you,  and 
earnestly  asking  you  once  again  if  you  have  never  looked 
to  Christ,  to  trust  in  him  now ;  if  you  have  never  submitted 
to  Jesus, to  submit  to  him  now;  if  you  have  never  confided 
in  him,to  confide  in  him  now.  It  is  a  very  simple  matter. 
May  God  the  Holy  Spirit  teach  you  what  it  is.  It  is  but  to 
give  up  all  your  own  trust  and  make  him  every  thing. 
Here  it  is  in  one  short  rhyme. 

"  A  guilty,  weak,  and  helpless  worm. 
On  thy  kind  arms  I  fall: 
Be  thou  my  strength,  my  righteousness. 
My  Saviour  and  my  all." 

If  this  be  done  by  you, all  is  done  for  you  by  Christ.     Yoii 
are  his,  and  he  is  yours,  and  where  he  is,  shall  be  your  per 
tion,  and  you  shall  be  like  him,  for  you  shall  see  him  as  he 
is.     It  will  be  a  blessed  Sabbath  evening  for  you,  if  you  are 
led  now  to  give  yourselves  to  him.     I  well  recollect  when 


114  THE  STAR  OP  JACOB. 

to  a  star.  Travelling  at  an  inconceivable  rate  you  open 
your  eyes  on  a  sudden  and  say — "How  wonderful!  Why, 
that  which  was  a  star  just  now  has  become  as  large  to  my 
vision  as  the  sun  at  noon-day."  "  Stop,"  says  the  angel ; 
"  you  shall  see  greater  things  than  these,"  and  as  you  speed 
on,  the  disc  of  that  orb  increases  till  it  is  equal  to  a  hundred 
«un8 ;  and  now  you  say,  "  But  what  ?  Am  I  not  near  it  now  ?  " 
'*  No,"  says  the  angel ;  "  that  enormous  globe  is  still  far,  far 
away,"  and  when  you  come  to  it  you  will  find  it  to  be  such 
a  wondrous  world  that  arithmetic  could  not  compute  its 
size,  nor  imagination  belt  it  with  the  zone  of  fancy.  Now, 
such  is  Jesus  Christ.  I  said  he  grows  upon  his  people  here, 
but  what  must  it  be  to  see  him  there^  when  the  veil  is  lifted, 
and  we  behold  him  face  to  face?  Sometimes  we  long  to 
find  out  what  that  star  is,  to  know  him,  to  comprehend  with 
all  saints  what  are  the  heights  and  depths,  and  to  know  the 
love  of  Christ  which  passeth  knowledge ;  but  meanwhile  we 
are  compelled  to  sit  down  and  sing — 

"  God  only  knows  the  love  of  God, 
Oh !  that  it  now  were  shed  abroad 
In  this  poor  frozen  heart." 

We  have  to  confess  that 

"  The  first-bom  sons  of  light 
Desire  in  vain  its  depth  to  see. 
They  cannot  reach  the  mystery. 
The  length,  the  breadth,  the  height." 

Vn.  But  to  conclude ;  the  metaphor  used  in  the  text  may 
well  bear  this  seventh  signification.  Our  Lord  is  compared 
to  a  star,  as  he  is  the  herald  op  glory. 

The  bright  and  morning  star  foretells  that  the  sun  is  on 
its  way  to  gladden  the  earth  with  its  light.  Where  vet 
Jesus  comes  he  is  the  prophet  of  good.  Let  him  come  inUi 
A  heart,  and  as  soon  as  he  appears  you  may  rett  assured 
that  there  is  a  life  of  eternity  and  joy  to  come.  Let  Jesus  - 
Christ  come  into  a  family,  and  what  changes  he  makes  there 


THE  StAR  OF  JACOB.  115 

Let  him  be  preached  with  power  in  any  town  or  city,  and 
what  a  herald  of  good  things  he  is  there.  To  tlie  whole 
world  Christ  has  proclaimed  glad  tidings.  His  coming  has 
been  fraught  with  benedictions  to  the  sons  of  men.  Yea, 
the  coming  of  Christ  in  the  flesh  is  the  great  prophecy  of 
the  glory  to  be  revealed  in  the  latter  days,  when  all  nations 
shall  bow  before  him,  and  the  age  of  peace,  the  golden  age 
shall  come,  not  because  civilization  has  advanced,  not  be- 
cause education  has  increased,  or  the  world  grown  better, 
but  because  Christ  has  come.  He  is  the  first,  the  fairest  of 
the  stai*s,  the  prognostic  of  the  dawn. 

Ay,  and  because  Christ  has  come,there  will  be  a  heaven 
for  the  sons  of  men  who  believe  in  him.  Sons  of  toil,  be- 
cause Christ  has  come  there  shall  be  rest  for  the  weary. 
Daughters  of  sorrow,  because  Christ  has  come  there  shall 
be  healing  for  the  weak.  Oh  !  you  whom  chill  penury  is 
bowing  down,  there  shall  be  lifting  up  and  sacred  wealth  for 
you  because  the  star  has  shone.  Hope  on !  hope  ever  I 
Now  that  Jesus  has  come  there  is  no  room  for  despair. 

I  conclude  by  commending  these  thoughts  to  you,  and 
earnestly  asking  you  once  again  if  you  have  never  looked 
to  Christ,  to  trust  in  him  now ;  if  you  have  never  submitted 
to  Jesus,to  submit  to  him  now;  if  you  have  never  confided 
in  him,to  confide  in  him  now.  It  is  a  very  simple  matter. 
May  God  the  Holy  Spirit  teach  you  what  it  is.  It  is  but  to 
give  up  all  your  own  trust  and  make  him  every  thing. 
Here  it  is  in  one  short  rhyme. 

*'  A  guilty,  weak,  and  helpless  worm. 
On  thy  kind  arms  I  fall: 
Be  thou  my  strength,  my  righteousness. 
My  Saviour  and  my  all." 

If  this  be  done  by  you, all  is  done  for  you  by  Christ.     Yoii 
are  his,  and  he  is  yours,  and  where  he  is,  shall  be  your  per 
tion,  and  you  shall  be  like  him,  for  you  shall  see  him  as  he 
is.     It  will  be  a  blessed  Sabbath  evening  for  you,  if  you  are 
led  now  to  give  yourselves  to  him.     I  well  recollect  when 


lie  THE  STAR  OF  iAOOB. 

my  heart  yielded  to  his  Divine  grace ;  -when  I  could  no 
longer  look  anywhere  else,  and  was  compelled  to  look  to 
the  Star  of  Bethlehem.  Oh !  come  ye  to  him  !  I  know  not 
what  words  to  employ  or  what  persuasions.  For  your  own 
sake,  that  you  may  be  happy  now  ;  for  eternity's  sake^ 
that  you  may  be  happy  hereafter,  that  you  may  es- 
cape from  hell ;  that  you  may  enter  into  heaven,  look  to 
Jesus.  You  may  never  be  bidden  to  do  so  again.  The  bid- 
ding of  this  present  moment  may  be  the  last,  and  its  re- 
jection the  concluding  measure  which  shall  fill  up  the  heap 
of  your  guilt.  Oh !  do  not  do  so.  Let  the  prayer  go  up 
quietly  now  from  your  spirit,  "  God  be  merciful  to  me  a 
sinner,"  and  let  your  soul,  though  you  speak  not  with  ycnr 
tongue,  say  within  itself — 

*'  Fll  to  the  gracious  King  approach. 
Whose  sceptre  pardon  gives ; 
Perhaps  he  may  command  mj  touch, 
And  then  the  stlppliant  lives.    ^ 

"  I  can  but  perish  if  I  go, 
I  am  resolved  to  try ; 
For  if  I  stay  away,  I  know 
I  must  forever  die. 

•*  But,  if  I  die  with  mercy  sought. 
When  I  the  Bang  have  tried. 
That  were  to  die,  delightful  thoiiglt> 
Ab  fliimer  never  died. " 


AN  UKALTBRABLE  STATITTBI  H? 


SERMON  Vn. 


AN  UNALTERABLE  STATUTE. 

**  WITHOUT  SHEDDING  OF  BLOOD  THBBB  IS  NO  REMISSION."— HebieWt  IZ.  tt. 

Everywhere  under  the  old  figurative  dispensation, 
blood  was  sure  to  greet  your  eyes.  It  was  the  one  most 
prominent  thing  under  the  Jewish  economy,  scarcely  a  cer- 
emony was  observed  without  it.  You  could  nst  enter  into 
any  part  of  the  tabernacle  but  you  saw  traces  of  the  blood- 
sprinkling.  Sometimes  there  were  bowls  of  blood  cast  at 
the  foot  of  the  altar.  The  place  looked  so  like  a  shambles, 
tKat  to  visit  it  must  have  been  far  from  attractive  to  the 
natural  taste ;  and  to  delight  in  it,  a  man  had  need  of  a  spir- 
itual understanding  and  a  lively  faith.  The  slaughter  of 
animals  was  the  manner  of  worship ;  the  effusion  of  blood 
was  the  appointed  rite,  and  the  diffusion  of  that  blood  on  the 
■floor,  on  the  curtains,  and  on  the  vestments  of  the  priests, 
was  the  constant  memorial.  When  Paul  says  that  almost 
all  things  were,  under  the  law,  purged  with  blood,  he  al- 
ludes to  a  few  things  that  were  exempted.  Thus  you  will 
find  in  several  passages  the  people  were  exhorted  to  wash 
their  clothes,  and  certain  persons  who  had  been  unclean 
from  physical  causes,  were  bidden  to  wash  their  clothes 
with  water.  Garments  worn  by  men  were  usually  cleansed 
with  water  After  the  defeat  of  the  Midianites,  of  which 
you  read  in  the  book  of  Numbers,  the  spoil  which  had  been 
polluted  had  to  be  purified  before  it  was  claimed  by  the 
victorious  Israelites.     According  to  the  ordinance  of  the  law 


118  AN  XTKALTERABUB  STATUTEL 

which  the  D>rd  commanded  Moses,  some  of  the  goods,  such 
as  raiment  and  articles  made  of  skins  or  goat's  hair,  were 
purified  with  water,  while  other  things  that  were  of  metal 
that  could  abide  the  fire,  were  purified  by  fire.  Still  the 
Apostle  refers  to  a  literal  fact,  when  he  says  that  almost  all 
things,  garments  being  the  only  exception,  were  purged, 
under  the  law,  with  blood.  Then  he  refers  to  it  as  a  gener- 
al truth  under  the  old  legal  dispensation,  that  there  was 
never  any  pardoning  of  sin  except  by  blood.  In  one  case 
only  was  there  an  apparent  exception,  and  even  that  goes  to 
prove  the  universality  of  the  rule,  because  the  reason  for  the 
exception  is  so  fully  given.  The  trespass-offering,  referred 
to  as  an  alternative,  in  Leviticus  v.  11,  might,  in  extreme 
cases  of  excessive  poverty,  be  a  bloodless  offering.  If  a  man 
was  too  poor  to  bring  an  offering  from  the  flock,  he  was  to 
bring  two  turtle-doves  or  young  pigeons  ;  but  if  he  was  too 
poor  even  for  that,  he  might  offer  the  tenth  part  of  an  ephah 
of  fine  flour  for  a  sin-offering,  Ti-ithout  oil  or  frankincense, 
and  it  was  cast  upon  the  fire.  That  is  the  one  solitary  ex- 
ception through  all  the  types.  In  every  place,  at  ev6ry 
time,  in  every  instance  where  sin  had  to  be  removed,  blood 
must  flow — life  must  be  given.  Tlie  one  exception  we  have 
noticed,  gives  emphasis  to  the  statute  that,  "  without  shed- 
ding of  blood,  there  is  no  remission.'*  Under  the  Gospel 
ihere  is  no  exception,  not  such  an  isolated  one  as  there  was 
under  the  law  ;  no,  not  even  for  the  extremely  poor.  Such 
we  all  are  spiritually.  Since  we  have  not  any  of  us  to  bring 
an  offering,  any  more  than  an  offering  to  bring ;  but  we 
have  all  of  us  to  take  the  offering  which  has  already  been 
presented,  and  to  accept  the  sacrifice  which  Christ  has,  of 
himself,  made  in  our  stead,  there  is  now  no  cause  or  gnmnd 
for  exemption  to  any  man  of  woman  bom,  nor  ever  shall 
there  be,  either  in  this  world  or  in  that  which  is  to  come, 
— "  Without  the  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no  renussion,** 
With  great  simplicity  then,  as  it  concerns  our  salvation, 
may  I  ask  the  attention  of  each  one  here  present,  to  this 


AN  UKALTERABLfi  STATUTB.  Hi; 

great  matter  wliich  intimately  concerns  our  everlasting  in- 
terests. 

I  gather  from  the  text,  first  of  all,  the  encouraging  fact 
ihat  tJiere  is  such  a  thing  as  remission — ^that  is  to  say,  the 
remission  of  sin.  "Without  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no 
remission."  Blood  has  been  shed,  and  there  is  therefore 
hope  concerning  such  a  thing.  Remission,  notwithstanding 
tiie  stem  requirenients  of  the  law,  is  not  to  be  abandoned  in 
sheer  despair.  The  word  remission  means  the  putting  away 
of  debts.  Just  as  sin  may  be  regarded  as  a  debt  incurred 
to  God,  so  that  debt  may  be  blotted  out,  cancelled,  and  ob- 
literated. The  sinner,  God's  debtor,  may  cease  to  be  in 
debt  by  compensation,  by  full  acquittance,  and  may  be  set 
free  by  virtue  of  such  remission.  Such  a  thing  is  possible. 
Glory  be  to  God,  the  remission  of  all  sin  of  which  it  is  pos- 
sible to  repent  is  possible  to  be  obtained.  Whatever  the 
transgression  of  any  man  may  be,  pardon  is  possible  to  him 
if  repentance  be  possible  to  him.  Unrepented  sin  is  unfor- 
givable sin.  K  he  confess  his  sin  and  forsake  it,  then  shall 
he  find  mercy.  God  hath  so  declared  it,  and  he  will  not  be 
unfaithful  to  his  word.  "  But  is  there  not,"  saith  one,  "  a 
sin  which  is  unto  death  ?  "  Tea,  verily,  though  I  know  not 
what  it  is  ;  nor  do  we  think  that  any  who  have  inquired 
into  the  subject  have  been  able  to  discover  what  that  sin 
is ;  this  much  seems  clear,  that  practically  the  sin  is  unfor- 
givable because  it  is  never  repented  of  The  man  who 
commits  it  becomes,  to  all  intents  and  purposes,  dead  in  sin 
in  a  more  deep  and  lasting  sense  even*than  the  human  race 
IS  as  a  whole,  and  he  is  given  up  case-hardened — his  con- 
science seared,  as  it  were,  with  a  hot  iron,  and  henceforth 
he  will  seek  no  mercy.  But  all  manner  of  sin  and  blasphe- 
my shall  be  forgiven  unto  men.  For  lust,  for  robbery,  for 
adultery — yea,  for  murder,  there  is  forgiveness  with  God, 
that  he  may  be  feared.  He  is  the  Lord  God,  merciful  and 
gracious,  passing  by  transgression,  iniquity  an  i  sin. 

And  this  forgiveness  which  is  possible  is,  according  to 


110  THE  STAR  OP  JAOOE 

gan,  but  the  stars  have  not.     There  they  remain^    We 
dreamed  at  one  time  that  they  moved.     Untaught  imagina- 
tions said  that  all  those  stars  revolved  around  this  little 
globe  of  ours,  but  we  know  better  now.     There  they  are 
both  day  and  night — always  the  same,  and  we  may  say  they 
have  not  changed  since  the  world  begun,  nor,  probably,  will 
they,  till,  like  a  vesture,  God  shall  roll  creation  up  because 
it  is  outworn.     It  is  very  delightful  to  recollect  that  the 
same  star  which  I  looked  at  last  night  was  viewed  by  Abra- 
ham, perhaps  with  some  of  the  self-same  thoughts.     And 
when  we  have  gone,  and  other  generations  shall  have  fol- 
lowed us,  those  that  come  after  will  look  up  to  the  self-same 
star.    So  with  our  Lord  Jesus,  he  is  the  same  yesterday,  to- 
day, and  forever.     What  the  prophets  and  apostles  saw  in 
him  we  can  see  in  him,  and  what  he  was  to  them  that  he  is 
to  us,  and  shall  be  to  generations  yet  unborn.     Hundreds 
may  be  looking  at  the  same  stars  at  the  same  time  without 
knowing  it,  for  they  are  a  meeting-place  for  many  eyes. 
We  may  be  drifted  to  Australia,  or  to  Canada,  or  to  the 
United  States,  or  we  may  be  sailing  across  the  great  deep, 
but  we  shall  see  the  stars  there.     It  is  true  that  on  the  oth- 
er side  of  the  world  we  shall  see  another  set  of  stars,  but  the 
stars  themselves  are  always  the  same.     As  far  as  we  in  this 
northern  hemi^here  are  concerned,  we  shall  look  upon  the 
same  stars,  so  wherever  we  may  be  we  look  to  the  same 
Christ.      Yonder   brother  has  learning  ;  but  he  looks  to 
Christ,  and  he  sees  the  same  Christ  as  the  poor  unlettered 
woman  in  the  aisles.     And  you,  poor  man,  who  have  not, 
perhaps,  a  sixpence  in  the  world,  you  have  the  same  Christ 
to  trust  iij  as  the  richest  man  in  all  the  world.     And  yon 
who  think  you  are  so  obscure  that  no  one  knows  you  but 
your  God,  you  look  to  this  same  star,  and  it  shines  with  the 
same  beams  for  you  as  for  the  Christian  who  leads  the  van 
in  the  Lord's  hosts.   Jesus  Christ  -s  still  the  same,  the  same 
to  all  his  people,  the  same  in  all  places,  the  same  for  ever 
and  ever,  and  may  well  be  compared  to  those  bright  stan 
f  tliat  shine  now  as  they  did  of  old. 


THE  STAR  OP  JACOB.  HI 

IV,  Id  the  fourth  place, we  may  trace  this  comparison  of 
our  Lord  to  a  star  as  thb  fountain  op  inpltjencb. 

The  old  astrologers  believed  very  finnly  in  the  influence 
of  the  stars  upon  men's  destinies.     Without  endorsing  their 
exploded  fallacies,  we  meet  in  Scripture  with  expressions 
like  this — "  Canst  thou  bind  the  sweet  influences  of  the  Ple- 
iades, or  loose  the  bands  of  Orion  ?  " — alluding,  no  doubt,  to 
the  fact  that  the  Pleiades  are  in  the  ascendant  in  the  sweet 
months  of  spring,  when  the  sweet  influences  of  the  spring 
are  bringing  forth  the  May  flowers  and  all  the  loveliness  of 
the  season,  and  Orion  is  in  the  ascendant  as  a  wintery  sign, 
when  the  bands  of  frost  are  binding  up  the  former  liberties 
of  nature.     But,  whether  there  be  an  influence  in  the  stars 
or  not,  as  touching  this  world,  I  know  there  is  great  influ- 
ence in  Jesus  Christ.     He  is  the  fountain  of  all  holy  influ- 
ences among  the  sons  of  men.    Where  this  star  shines  upon 
the  graves  of  men  who  are  dead  in  sin  they  begin  to  live. 
Where  the  beams  of  this  star  light  upon  captives,  their 
chains  drop  off, "the prisoner  leaps  to  lose  his  chains."  When 
this  star  gleams  upon  d;  Christian,  he  begins  to  bud  and 
blossom,  and  precious  fruits  are  brought  forth.     When  this 
star  shines  upon  the  backslider  he  mends  his  ways,  and  fol- 
lows, like  the  eastern  sages,  its  light  till  he  finds  his  Saviour 
once  more.     This  star  has  an  influence  upon  our  nativity  ; 
it  is  through  its  benign  rays  that  we  are  born  again,  and  in 
our  horoscope  it  has  an  influence  upon  our  death,  for  it  is 
in  t*  light  that  we  fall  asleep,  believing  that  we  shall  wake 
up  in  the  image  of  the  Lord  Jesus.     Oh  !  sweet  star,  shine 
on  me  always !     Never  let  me  miss  thy  rays  ;  but  may  I 
always  walk  in  thy  light  till  I  be  found  sitting  in  the  full 
noontide  heat  of  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  for  ever  and  ever, 

V.  Li  the  fifth  place,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  may  be  com- 
pared to  a  star  as  a  source  op  guidance. 

Certain  stars  are  extremely  usefuito  sailors.  I  scarcely 
know  how  else  the  great  and  wide  sea  would  be  navigated, 


112  THE  STAR  OF  JACOB. 

especially  if  it  were  not  for  the  Pole  Star.  J  csub  is  the  Pole 
Star  to  us.  How  the  poor  runaway  in  the  olden  times,  whea 
slavery  had  not  been  abolished,  must  have  blessed'  God  foi 
that  pole  star — so  easy  to  find  out  and  so  sure  a  guide.  Any 
child  with  but  a  moment's  teaching  will  soon  discover  it  in 
the  midst  of  its  fellows  at  night,  and  when  the  negro  had 
once  learned  to  distinguish  the  star  that  shone  over  the  land 
of  freedom,  he  followed  it  through  the  great  dismal  swamp8, 
or  along  the  open  roads,  which  were  more  dreadful  still; 
lie  forded  the  streams,  and  climbed  the  mountains,  cheered 
by  freedom's  star.  Such  is  Jesus  Christ  to  the  seeker.  He 
leads  to  liberty ;  he  conducts  to  peace.  Oh !  I  wish  you 
would  follow  him,  some  of  you  who  are  going  about  a 
thousand  ways  to  find  peace  where  you  never  will  find  it. 
From  this  pulpit  I  think  there  is  never  a  Sunday  but  wfeat 
I  try  to  speak,  sometimes  in  gentler  tones,  and  at  other  sea- 
sons with  thundering  notes,  the  simple  truth  that  Jesus 
Christ  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners.  I  do  try  to 
make  it  plain  to  you  that  it  is  not  your  prayers  and  tears, 
your  doings,  your  willings,  your  any  thing,  that  can  save 
you,  but  that  all  your  help  is  laid  upon  One  that  is  mighty, 
and  that  you  must  look  alone  to  him.  Yet,  sinners,  yoii 
are  still  looking  to  yourselves.  You  rake  the  dung-hills  of 
your  human  nature  to  find  the  pearl  of  great  price  which  is 
not  there.  You  will  look  beneath  the  ice  of  your  natural 
depravity  to  find  the  flame  of  comfort  which  is  not  there. 
You  might  as  well  seek  in  hell  itself  to  find  heaven  as  look 
into  your  own  works  and  merits  to  find  sure  ground  of  trust. 
Down  with  your  self-reliances  !  Down  with  them,  eveiy 
one  of  them !     Away  with  all  those  confidences  of  yours,  for 


None  but  Jesus,  none  but  Jesus, 
Can  do  helpless  sinners  good." 


Just  reverse  that  helm,  and  shift  that  sail,  and  tack  about  I 
Follow  not  the  wreckj^r's  beacon  on  yonder  shore,  luring 
you  to  the  rocks  of  self-delusion,  but  where  that  pole  stwf 


THE  STAR  OF  JACOB.  113 

guided  you,  thither  let  your  vessel  drift,  and  pray  the  favor- 
ing gales  of  the  blessed  Spirit  to  guide  you  rightly  to  the 
port  of  peaoe. 

VI.  Our  Lord  is  compared  to  a  star,  surely,  as  ^tiik  ob- 

JBCT  OF  WONDER. 

Among  the  first  lines  which  full  many  of  you  ever  learn* 
•d  to  recite,  were  these  simple  ones — 

"  Twinkle,  twinkle, little  star. 
How  I  wonder  what  you  are, " 

That  is  precisely  what  Galileo  might  have  said,  and  exactly 
what  the  greatest  astronomer  that  ever  lived  might  say. 
You  have  sometimes  looked  through  a  telescope  and  have 
seen  the  planets,  but  after  you  have  looked  at  them  you  do 
not  know  much  about  them,  and  those  who  are  busy  all  day 
•and  all  night  long  taking  constant  observations,  will  also 
confess  that  the  result  is  rather  that  of  astonishment  than  of 
intelligence.     Still  it  is 

"  How  I  wonder  what  you  are." 

So  to  those  of  us  who  are  in  Christ  Jesus,  he  is  a  star;  but  oh ! 
brethren,  we  may  well  wonder  what  he  is.  We  used  to 
think  when  we  were  little  ones  that  the  stars  were  holes 
picked  in  the  skies  through  which  the  light  of  heaven  shone, 
or  that  they  were  little  pieces  of  gold-dust  that  God  had 
strewn  about.  We  do  not  think  so  now  ;  we  understand 
that  they  are  much  greater  than  they  look  to  be.  Now, 
when  we  were  carnal,  and  did  not  know  King  Jesus,  we  es- 
teemed him  to  be  very  much  like  anybody  else  ;  but  now  we 
begin  to  know  him,  we  find  out  that  he  is  much  greater,  in- 
finitely greater,  than  we  thought  he  was.  And  as  we  grow 
in  grace  we  find  him  to  be  more  glorious  still.  A  little  star 
to  our  view  at  first,  he  has  grown,  in  our  estimation,  into  a 
sun  now,  a  blazing  sun  by  whose  beams  our  soul  is  refresh- 
ed. Ah !  but  when  we  get  to  him  what  will  he  be  ?  Imagine 
you  are  taken  up  now  by  an  angel's  wing  to  take  a  journey 


112  THE  STAR  OF  JACOB. 

especially  if  it  were  not  for  the  Pole  Star.  J  csub  is  the  Pole 
Star  to  us.  How  the  poor  runaway  in  the  olden  times,  whea 
slavery  had  not  been  abolished,  must  have  blessed'  God  foi 
that  pole  star — so  easy  to  find  out  and  so  sure  a  guide.  Any 
child  with  but  a  moment's  teaching  will  soon  discover  it  in 
the  midst  of  its  fellows  at  night,  and  when  the  negro  had 
once  learned  to  distinguish  the  star  that  shone  over  the  land 
of  freedom,  be  followed  it  through  the  great  dismal  swamp8, 
or  along  the  open  roads,  which  were  more  dreadful  still; 
lie  forded  the  streams,  and  climbed  the  mountains,  cheered 
by  freedom's  star.  Such  is  Jesus  Christ  to  the  seeker.  He 
leads  to  liberty ;  he  conducts  to  peace.  Oh !  I  wish  you 
would  follow  him,  some  of  you  who  are  going  about  a 
thousand  ways  to  find  peace  where  you  never  will  find  it. 
From  this  pulpit  I  think  there  is  never  a  Sunday  but  w^at 
I  try  to  speak,  sometimes  in  gentler  tones,  and  at  other  sea- 
sons with  thundering  notes,  the  simple  truth  that  Jesus 
Christ  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners.  I  do  try  to 
make  it  plain  to  you  that  it  is  not  your  prayers  and  tears, 
your  doings,  your  willings,  your  any  thing,  that  can  save 
you,  but  that  all  your  help  is  laid  upon  One  that  is  mighty, 
and  that  you  must  look  alone  to  him.  Yet,  sinners,  yoii 
are  still  looking  to  yourselves.  You  rake  the  dung-hills  of 
your  human  nature  to  find  the  pearl  of  great  price  which  is 
not  there.  You  will  look  beneath  the  ice  of  your  natural 
depravity  to  find  the  flame  of  comfort  which  is  not  there. 
You  might  as  well  seek  in  hell  itself  to  find  heaven  as  look 
into  your  own  works  and  merits  to  find  sure  ground  of  trust. 
Down  with  your  self-reliances  !  Down  with  them,  eveiy 
one  of  them !    Away  with  all  those  confidences  of  yours,  for 


None  but  Jesus,  none  but  Jesus, 
Can  do  helpless  sinners  good." 


Just  reverse  that  helm,  and  shift  that  sail,  and  tack  about  I 
Follow  not  the  wreckj^r's  beacon  on  yonder  shore,  luiing 
you  to  the  rocks  of  self-delusion,  but  where  that  pole  stwf 


I 


THE  STAR  OF  JACOB.  113 

guided  you,  thither  let  your  vessel  drift,  and  pray  the  favor- 
ing gales  of  the  blessed  Spirit  to  guide  you  rightly  to  the 
port  of  peaoe. 

VL  Our  Lord  is  compared  to  a  star,  surely,  as  ^tiik  ob- 

JBCJT  OF  WONDER. 

Among  the  first  lines  wliich  full  many  of  you  ever  learn* 
•d  to  recite,  were  these  simple  ones — 

"  Twinkle,  twinkle,  little  star. 
How  I  wonder  what  you  are. " 

That  is  precisely  what  Galileo  might  have  said,  and  exactly 
what  the  greatest  astronomer  that  ever  lived  might  say. 
You  have  sometimes  looked  through  a  telescope  and  have 
seen  the  planets,  but  after  you  have  looked  at  them  you  do 
not  know  much  about  them,  and  those  who  are  busy  all  day 
and  all  night  long  taking  constant  observations,  will  also 
confess  that  the  result  is  rather  that  of  astonishment  than  of 
intelligence.     Still  it  is 

"  How  I  wonder  what  you  are." 

So  to  those  of  us  who  are  in  Christ  Jesus,  he  is  a  star;  but  oh ! 
brethren,  we  may  well  wonder  what  he  is.  We  used  to 
think  when  we  were  little  ones  that  the  stars  were  holes 
picked  in  the  skies  through  which  the  light  of  heaven  shone, 
or  that  they  were  little  pieces  of  gold-dust  that  God  had 
strewn  about.  We  do  not  think  so  now  ;  we  understand 
that  they  are  much  greater  than  they  look  to  be.  Now, 
when  we  were  carnal,  and  did  not  know  King  Jesus,  we  es- 
teemed him  to  be  very  much  like  anybody  else  ;  but  now  we 
begin  to  know  him,  we  find  out  that  he  is  much  greater,  in- 
finitely greater,  than  we  thought  he  was.  And  as  we  grow 
in  grace  we  find  him  to  be  more  glorious  still.  A  little  star 
to  our  view  at  first,  he  has  grown,  in  our  estimation,  into  a 
sun  now,  a  blazing  sun  by  whose  beams  our  soul  is  refresh- 
ed. Ah !  but  when  we  get  to  him  what  will  he  be  ?  Imagine 
you  are  taken  up  now  by  an  angel's  wing  to  take  a  journey 


114  THE  STAR  OP  JACOB. 

to  a  star.  Travelling  at  an  inconceivable  rate  you'  open 
your  eyes  on  a  sudden  and  say — "How  wonderful!  Why, 
that  which  was  a  star  just  now  has  become  as  large  to  my 
vision  as  the  sun  at  noon-day."  "  Stop,"  says  the  angel ; 
"  you  shall  see  greater  things  than  these,"  and  as  you  speed 
on,  the  disc  of  that  orb  increases  till  it  is  equal  to  a  hundred 
«un8 ;  and  now  you  say,  "  But  what  ?  Am  I  not  near  it  now  ?  ^ 
'*  No,"  says  the  angel ;  "  that  enormous  globe  is  still  far,  far 
away,"  and  when  you  come  to  it  you  will  find  it  to  be  such 
a  wondrous  world  that  arithmetic  could  not  compute  its 
size,  nor  imagination  belt  it  with  the  zone  of  fancy.  Now, 
such  is  Jesus  Christ.  I  said  he  grows  upon  his  people  here, 
but  what  must  it  be  to  see  him  there^  when  the  veil  is  lifted, 
and  we  behold  him  face  to  face?  Sometimes  we  long  to 
find  out  what  that  star  is,  to  know  him,  to  comprehend  with 
all  saints  what  are  the  heights  and  depths,  and  to  know  the 
love  of  Christ  which  passeth  knowledge  ;  but  meanwhile  we 
are  compelled  to  sit  down  and  sing — 


(( 


God  only  knows  the  love  of  God, 
Oh  I  that  it  now  were  shed  abroad 
In  this  poor  frozen  heart.' 


»» 


We  have  to  confess  that 

"  The  first-bom  sons  of  light 
Desire  in  vain  its  depth  to  see. 
They  cannot  reach  the  mystery. 
The  length,  the  breadth,  the  height." 

Vn.  But  to  conclude ;  the  metaphor  used  in  the  text  may 
well  bear  this  seventh  signification.  Our  Lord  is  compared 
to  a  star,  as  he  is  the  heralp  op  glory. 

The  bright  and  morning  star  foretells  that  the  sun  is  on 
its  way  to  gladden  the  earth  with  its  light.  Where ve? 
Jesus  comes  he  is  the  prophet  of  good.  Let  him  come  int^i 
tfi  heart,  and  as  soon  as  he  appears  you  may  rett  assured 
that  there  is  a  life  of  eternity  and  joy  to  come.  Let  Jesus 
Christ  come  into  a  family,  and  what  changes  he  makes  there. 


THE  Sf  AR  01*  JACOB.  115 

Let  him  be  preached  with  power  in  any  town  or  city,  and 
what  a  herald  of  good  things  he  is  there.  To  the  whole 
world  Christ  has  proclaimed  glad  tidings.  His  coming  has 
been  fraught  with  benedictions  to  the  sons  of  men.  Yea, 
the  coming  of  Christ  in  the  flesh  is  the  great  prophecy  of 
the  glory  to  be  revealed  in  the  latter  days,  when  all  nations 
shall  bow  before  him,  and  the  age  of  peace,  the  golden  age 
shall  come,  not  because  civilization  has  advanced,  nOt  be- 
cause education  has  increased,  or  the  world  grown  better, 
but  because  Christ  has  come.  He  is  the  first,  the  fairest  of 
the  stars,  the  prognostic  of  the  dawn. 

Ay,  and  because  Christ  has  come,there  will  be  a  heaven 
for  the  sons  of  men  who  believe  in  him.  Sons  of  toil,  be- 
cause Christ  has  come  there  shall  be  rest  for  the  weary. 
Daughters  of  sorrow,  because  Christ  has  come  there  shall 
be  healing  for  the  weak.  Oh  !  you  whom  chill  penury  is 
bowing  down,  there  shall  be  lifting  up  and  sacred  wealth  for 
you  because  the  star  has  shone.  Hope  on !  hope  ever  I 
Now  that  Jesus  has  come  there  is  no  room  for  despair. 

I  conclude  by  commending  these  thoughts  to  you,  and 
earnestly  asking  you  once  again  if  you  have  never  looked 
to  Christ,  to  trust  in  him  now ;  if  you  have  never  submitted 
to  Jesus, to  submit  to  him  now;  if  you  have  never  confided 
in  him,to  confide  in  him  now.  It  is  a  very  simple  matter. 
May  God  the  Holy  Spirit  teach  you  what  it  is.  It  is  but  to 
give  up  all  your  own  trust  and  make  him  every  thing. 
Here  it  is  in  one  short  rhyme. 

"  A  guilty,  weak,  and  helpless  worm. 
On  thy  kind  arms  I  fall: 
Be  thou  my  strength,  my  righteousness. 
My  Saviour  and  my  all," 

If  this  be  done  by  you, all  is  done  for  you  by  Christ.     Yoii 
are  his,  and  he  is  yours,  and  where  he  is,  shall  be  your  per 
tion,  and  you  shall  be  like  him,  for  you  shall  see  him  as  he 
18.    It  will  be  a  blessed  Sabbath  evening  for  you,  if  you  are 
led  now  to  give  yourselves  to  him.     I  well  recollect  when 


Il6  THE  STAR  OP  ;rAOOB. 

my  heart  yielded  to  liis  Divine  grace;  -when  I  cotdd  no 
longer  look  anywhere  else,  and  was  compelled  to  look  to 
the  Star  of  Bethlehem.  Oh !  come  ye  to  him  !  I  know  not 
what  words  to  employ  or  what  persuasions.  For  your  own 
sake,  that  you  may  be  happy  now  ;  for  eternity's  sake, 
that  you  may  be  happy  hereafter,  that  you  may  es- 
cape from  hell ;  that  you  may  enter  into  heaven,  look  to 
Jesus.  You  may  never  be  bidden  to  do  so  again.  The  bid- 
ding of  this  present  moment  may  be  the  last,  and  its  re- 
jection the  concluding  measure  which  shall  fill  up  the  heap 
of  your  guilt.  Oh !  do  not  do  so.  Let  the  prayer  go  up 
quietly  now  from  your  spirit,  "  God  be  merciful  to  me  a 
sinner,"  and  let  your  soul,  though  you  speak  not  with  ycnr 
tongue,  say  within  itself — 

"  I'll  to  the  gracious  King  approach. 
Whose  sceptre  pardon  g^ves ; 
Perhaps  he  may  command  my  touch. 
And  then  the  stlppliant  lives.    ^ 

"  I  can  but  perish  if  I  go, 
I  am  resolved  to  try ; 
For  if  I  stay  away,  I  know 
I  must  forever  die. 

••  But,  if  I  die  with  mercy  sought. 
When  I  the  King  have  tried. 
That  were  to  die,  delightful  thongl^, 
A0  liiiiier  never  died. " 


< 


AS  VKALTBRABLE  STATUT&  %\t 


SERMON  Vn. 


AN  UNALTERABLE  STATUTE. 

**  WITHOUT  SHEDDING  OF  BLOOD  THBBX  IS  NO  REMISSION."— HebieWS  iZ.  tt. 

EvBRYWHERE  Under  the  old  figurative  dispensation, 
blood  was  sure  to  greet  your  eyes.  It  was  the  one  most 
prominent  thmg  under  the  Jewish  economy,  scarcely  a  cer- 
emony  was  observed  without  it.  You  could  net  enter  into 
any  part  of  the  tabernacle  but  you  saw  traces  of  the  blood- 
sprinkling.  Sometimes  there  were  bowls  of  blood  cast  at 
the  foot  of  the  altar.  The  place  looked  so  like  a  shambles, 
tKat  to  visit  it  must  have  been  far  from  attractive  to  the 
natural  taste ;  and  to  delight  in  it,  a  man  had  need  of  a  spir- 
itual understanding  and  a  lively  faith.  The  slaughter  of 
animals  was  the  manner  of  worship ;  the  effusion  of  blood 
was  the  appointed  rite,  and  the  diffusion  of  that  blood  on  the 
"floor,  on  the  curtains,  and  on  the  vestments  of  the  priests, 
was  the  constant  memorial.  When  Paul  says  that  almost 
all  things  were,  under  the  law,  purged  with  blood,  he  al- 
ludes to  a  few  things  that  were  exempted.  Thus  you  will 
find  in  several  passages  the  people  were  exhorted  to  wash 
their  clothes,  and  certain  persons  who  had  been  unclean 
fi'om  physical  causes,  were  bidden  to  wash  their  clothes 
with  water.  Garments  worn  by  men  were  usually  cleansed 
with  water  After  the  defeat  of  the  Midianites,  of  which 
you  read  in  the  book  of  Numbers,  the  spoil  which  had  been 
polluted  had  to  be  purified  before  it  was  claimed  by  the 
victorious  Israelites.     According  to  the  ordinance  of  the  law 


118  AK  UNALTESRABLfi  STATUTE. 

which  the  Lord  commanded  Moses,  some  of  the  goods,  snch 
as  raiment  and  articles  made  of  skins  or  goat's  hair,  were 
purified  with  water,  while  other  things  that  were  of  metal 
that  could  abide  the  fire,  were  purified  by  fire.  Still  the 
Apostle  refers  to  a  literal  fact,  when  he  says  that  almost  all 
things,  garments  being  the  only  exception,  were  purged, 
under  the  law,  with  blood.  Then  he  refers  to  it  as  a  gener- 
al  truth  under  the  old  legal  dispensation,  that  there  was 
never  any  pardoning  of  sin  except  by  blood.  In  one  case 
only  was  there  an  apparent  exception,  and  even  that  goes  to 
prove  the  universality  of  the  rule,  because  the  reason  for  the 
exception  is  so  fully  given.  The  trespass-offering,  referred 
to  as  an  alternative,  in  Leviticus  v.  11,  might,  in  extreme 
cases  of  excessive  poverty,  be  a  bloodless  offering,  K  a  man 
was  too  poor  to  bring  an  offering  from  the  flock,  he  was  to 
bring  two  turtle  doves  or  young  pigeons  ;  but  if  he  was  too 
poor  even  for  that,  he  might  offer  the  tenth  part  of  an  ephah 
of  fine  flour  for  a  sin-offering,  without  oil  or  frankincense, 
and  it  was  cast  upon  the  fire.  That  is  the  one  solitary  ex- 
ception through  all  the  types.  In  every  place,  at  ev6ry 
time,  in  every  instance  where  sin  had  to  be,  removed,  blood 
must  flow — life  must  be  given.  The  one  exception  we  have 
noticed,  gives  emphasis  to  the  statute  that,  "  without  shed- 
ding of  blood,  there  is  no  remission."  Under  the  Gospel 
there  is  no  exception,  not  such  an  isolated  one  as  there  was 
under  the  law  ;  no,  not  even  for  the  extremely  poor.  Such 
we  all  are  spiritually.  Since  we  have  not  any  of  us  to  bring 
an  offering,  any  more  than  an  offering  to  bring ;  but  we 
have  all  of  us  to  take  the  offering  which  has  already  been 
presented,  and  to  accept  the  sacrifice  which  Christ  has,  of 
himself,  made  in  our  stead,  there  is  now  no  cause  or  ground 
for  exemption  to  any  man  of  woman  born,  nor  ever  shall 
there  be,  either  in  this  world  or  in  that  which  is  to  come, 
— "  Without  the  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no  remission,'* 
With  great  simplicity  then,  as  it  concerns  our  salvation, 
may  I  ask  the  attention  of  each  one  here  present,  to  this 


AN  UKALtERABLfi  STATUTE.  Hi; 

great  matter  wliich  intimately  concerns  our  everlasting  in- 
terests. 

I  gather  from  the  text,  first  of  all,  the  encouraging  fact 
ihat  there  is  such  a  thing  as  remission — that  is  to  say,  the 
remission  of  sin.  "  Without  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no 
remission."  Blood  has  been  shed,  and  there  is  therefore 
hope  concerning  such  a  thing.  Remission,  notwithstanding 
ttie  stem  requirenients  of  the  law,  is  not  to  be  abandoned  in 
sheer  despair.  The  word  remission  means  the  putting  away 
of  debts.  Just  as  sin  may  be  regarded  as  a  debt  incurred 
to  God,  so  that  debt  may  be  blotted  out,  cancelled,  and  ob- 
literated. The  sinner,  God's  debtor,  may  cease  to  be  in 
debt  by  compensation,  by  full  acquittance,  and  may  be  set 
free  by  virtue  of  such  remission.  Such  a  thing  is  possible. 
Glory  be  to  God,  the  remission  of  all  sin  of  which  it  is  pos- 
sible to  repent  is  possible  to  be  obtained.  Whatever  the 
transgression  of  any  man  may  be,  pardon  is  possible  to  him 
if  repentance  be  possible  to  him.  Unrepented  sin  is  unfor- 
givable sin.  K  he  confess  his  sin  and  forsake  it,  then  shall 
he  find  mercy.  God  hath  so  declared  it,  and  he  will  not  be 
unfaithful  to  his  word.  "  But  is  there  not,"  saith  one,  "  a 
sin  which  is  unto  death  ?  "  Tea,  verily,  though  I  know  not 
what  it  is  ;  nor  do  we  think  that  any  who  have  inquired 
into  the  subject  have  been  able  to  discover  what  that  sin 
is ;  this  much  seems  clear,  that  practically  the  sin  is  unfor- 
givable because  it  is  never  repented  of  The  man  who 
commits  it  becomes,  to  all  inten^ts  and  purposes,  dead  in  sin 
in  a  more  deep  and  lasting  sense  even*than  the  human  race 
IS  as  a  whole,  and  he  is  given  up  case-hardened — his  con- 
science seared,  as  it  were,  with  a  hot  iron,  and  henceforth 
he  will  seek  no  mercy.  But  all  manner  of  sin  and  blasphe- 
my shall  be  forgiven  unto  men.  For  lust,  for  rotbeiy,  for 
adultery — yea,  for  murder,  there  is  forgiveness  with  God, 
that  he  may  be  feared.  He  is  the  Lord  God,  merciful  and 
gracious,  passing  by  transgression,  iniquity  an  i  sin. 

And  this  forgiveness  which  is  possible  is,  according  to 


120  AN   UNALTERABLE  STATUfBL 

the  Soriptores,  complete  ;  that  is  to  say,  when  Ood  forgives 
a  man  his  sin  he  does  it  outright.  He  blots  out  the  debt 
without  any  back  reckoning.  He  does  not  put  away  a  part 
of  the  man's  sin  and  leave  him  accountable  for  the  rest,  but 
in  the  moment  in  which  a  sin  is  forgiven,  his  iniquity  is  afr 
though  it  had  never  been  committed ;  he  is  received  in  the 
Father's  house  and  embraced  with  the  Father's  love  as  if  he 
had  never  erred  ;  he  is  made  to  stand  before  God  as  accept- 
ed, and  in  the  same  condition  as  though  he  had  never  trans- 
gressed. Blessed  be  God,  believer,  there  is  no  sin  in  God's 
Book  against  thee.  K  thou  hast  believed  thou  art  forgiven 
— ^forgiven  not  partially,  but  altogether.  The  handwriting 
that  was  against  thee  is  blotted  out,  nailed  to  the  cross  of 
Christ,  and  can  never  be  pleaded  against  thee  any  more  for- 
ever.    The  pardon  is  complete. 

Moreover,  this  is  a  present  pardon.  It  is  an  imagination 
of  some  (very  derogatory  to  the  Gospel)  that  you  cannot 
get  pardon  till  you  come  to  die,  and  perhaps  then  in  some 
mysterious  way;  in  the  last  few  minutes,  you  may  be  absolved ; 
but  we  preach  to  you,  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  immediate  and 
present  pardon  for  all  transgressions — a  pardon  given  in  an 
instant — ^the  moment  that  a  sinner  believes  in  Jesus ;  not  as 
though  a  disease  were  healed  gradually  and  required  months 
and  long  years  of  progress.  True,  the  corruption  of  our  na- 
ture is  such  a  disease,  and  the  sin  that  dwclleth  in  us  must 
be  daily  and  hourly  mortified ;  but  as  for  the  guilt  of  our 
transgressions  before  God  and  the  debt  incurred  to  his  jus- 
tice, the  remission  thereof  is  not  a  thing  of  progress  and  de- 
gree. The  pardon  of  a  sinner  is  granted  at  once ;  it  will  be 
given  to  any  of  you  to-night  who  accept  it — yea,  and  given 
you  in  such  a  way  that  you  shall  never  lose  it.  Once  for- 
given, you  shall  be  forgiven  forever,  and  none  of  the  conse- 
quences of  sin  shall  be  visited  upon  you.  You  shall  be  ab- 
solved unreservedly  and  eternally,  so  that  when  the  heavens 
are  on  a  blaze,  and  the  great  white  throne  is  set  up,  and  the 
last  great  assize  is  held,  you  may  stand  boldly  before  the 


Air  tJNAETERABLE  STATTJTk  121 

judgment-seat  and  fear  no  accusation,  for  the  forgiveness 
wWch  God  himself  vouchsafes  he  will  never  revoke. 

I  will  add  to  this  another  remark.   This  pardon  is  percept- 
ible.   The  man  who  gets  it  may  know  he  has  it.   Did  he  mere- 
ly hope  he  had  it,  that  hope  might  often  stniggle  with  fear. 
Did  he  merely  trust  he  had  it,  many  a  qualm  might  startle 
him ;  but  to  kncyio  that  he  has  it  is  a  sure  ground  of  peaco 
to  the  heart.     Glory  be  to  God,  the  privileges  of  the  coye« 
uant  of  grace  are  not  only  matters  of  hope  and  surmise, 
but  they  are  matters  of  faith,  conviction  and  assurance. 
Count  it  not  presumption  for  a  man  to  believe  God's  Word. 
God's  own  Word  it  is  that  says,  "  Whosoever  believeth  in 
Jesus  Christ  is  not  condemned."     If  I  believe  in  Jesus 
Christ,  then  I  am  not  condemned.      What  right  have  I  to 
think  I  am  ?    If  God  says  I  am  not,  it  would  be  presump- 
tion on  my  part  to  think  I  am  condemned.     It  cannot  be 
presumption  to  take  God's  Word  just  as  He  gives  it  to  me. 
"  Oh,"  saith  one,  "  how  happy  should  I  be  if  this  might  be 
my  case."     Thou  hast  well  spoken,  "  for  blessed  is  he  whose 
trangression  is  forgiven  and  whose  sin  is  covered.     Blessed 
is  the  man  to  whom  the  Lord  doth  not  impute  iniquity." 
**  But,"  saith  another,  "  I  should  hardly  think  such  a  great 
thing  could  be  possible  to  such  a  one  as  I  am."     Thou 
reasonest  after  the  manner  of  the  sons  of  men.     Know 
then  that  as  high  as  the  heavens  are  above  the  earth,  so 
high  are  God's  ways  above  your  ways,  and  his  thoughts 
above  your  thoughts.     It  is  yours  to  err,  it  is  God's  to  for 
give.     You  err  like  a  man,  Imt  God  does  not  pardon  like  a 
man  ;  he  pardons  like  a  God,  so  that  we  burst  forth  with 
wonder  and  sing,  "  Who  is  a  God  like  unto  Thee,  that  pass- 
eth  by  transgression,  iniqmty  and  sin  ?  "     When  you  make 
any  thing  it  is  some  little  work  suitable  to  your  abilities,  but 
our  God  has  made  the  heavens.     When  you  forgive,  it  is 
Bome  forgiveness  suitable  to  your  nature  and  circumstan- 
ces; but  when  he  forgives,  he  displays  the  riches  of   his 
grace  on  a  grander  scale  than  your  finite  mind  can  com- 
6 


13d  Air  tJNALTERABLE  STATtTtB 

prehend.  Ten  thousand  sins  of  blackest  dye,  sins  of  a 
hellish  hue  he  doth  in  a  moment  put  away,  for  he  de- 
lighteth  in  mercy;  and  judgment  is  His  strange  work. 
"  As  I  live,  saith  the  Lord,  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the  death 
of  him  that  dieth,  but  had  rather  that  he  turn  unto  Me  and 
live."  This  is  a  joyful  note  with  which  my  text  furnishes 
me.  There  is  no  remission  except  with  blood  ;  but  there 
is  remission,  for  the  blood  has  been  shed. 

Coming  more  closely  to  the  text,  we  have  now  to  insist 
<m  its  gi'eat  lesson,  that  though  there  he  pardon  of  sin  it  is 
never  without  blood.    That  is  a  sweeping  sentence,  for  there 
•re  some  in  this  world  that  are  trusting  for  the  pardon  of 
sin  to  their  repentance.     It,  beyond  question,  is  your  duty  to 
repent  of  your  sin.     If  you  have  disobeyed  God,  you  should 
be  sorry  for  it.     To  cease  from  sin  is  but  the  duty  of  the 
creature,  else  sin  is  not  the  violation  of  God's  holy  law. 
Bufr  be  it  known  unto  you,  that  all  the  repentance  in  the 
world  cannot  blot  out  the  smallest  sin.     K  you  had  only 
one  sinful  thought  cross  your  mind,  and  you  should  giieve 
over  that  all  the  days  of  your  life,  yet  the  stain  of  that  sin 
could  not  be  removed  even  by  the  anguish  it  cost  you. 
Where  repentance  is  the  work  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  it  is  a 
very  precious  gift,  and  is  a  sign  of  grace,  but  there  is  no 
atoning  power  in  repentance.     In  a  sea-full  of  penitential 
tears  there  is  not  the  power  or  the  virtue  to  wash  out 
one  spot  of  this  hideous  uncleanness.     Without  the  blood- 
shedding  there  is  no  remission.     But  others  suppose,  that 
at  any  rate,  active  reformation  growl  ;g  out  of  repentance 
may  achieve  the  task.     What  if  drunkenness  be  given  up 
and  temperance  become  the  rule?    What  if  licentiousness 
be  abandoned  and  chastity  adorn  the  character  ?    What  if 
dishonest  dealing  be  relinquished  and  integrity  be  scrupu- 
lously maintained  in   every   action?    I  say,  'tis  well;   I 
would  to  God  such  reformations  took  place  everywhere, — 
yet,  for  all  that,  debts  already  incurred  are  not  paid  by  our 
not  getting  into  debt  further,  and  past  delinquencies  are 


AK  UNALTERABLE  STArUTB.        123 

not  condoned  by  future  good  behavior.  So  sin  is  not  re- 
mitted by  reformation.  Though  ye  should  suddenly  be- 
come immaculate  as  angels  (not  that  such  a  thing  is  possi- 
ble to  you,  for  the  Ethiopian  cannot  change  his  skin  nor  the 
.eopard  his  spots),  your  reformations  could  make  no  atone* 
ment  to  God  for  the  sins  that  are  past  in  the  days  that  yon 
have  transgressed  against  him.  "  What  then,"  saith  the 
man,  "  shall  I  do  ?  "  There  are  those  who  think  now  that 
their  prayers  and  their  humbl'ngs  of  soul  may  perhaps 
effect  something  for  them.  Your  prayers,  if  they  be  sin- 
cere, I  would  not  stay ;  rather  do  I  hope  they  may  be  such 
prayers  as  betoken  spiritual  life.  But,  oh,  dear  hearer,  there 
is  no  efficacy  in  prayer  to  blot  out  sin.  I  will  put  it 
strongly.  All  the  prayers  of  all  the  saints  on  earth,  and, 
if  the  saints  in  heaven  could  all  join,  all  their  prayers  could 
not  blot  out  through  their  own  natural  efficacy  the  sin  of  a 
single  evil  word.  No,  there  is  no  detergent  power  in 
prayer.  God  has  never  set  it  to  be  a  cleanser.  It  has  its 
uses  and  its  valuable  uses.  It  is  one  of  the  privileges  of  the 
man  who  prays,  that  he  prays  acceptably,  but  prayer  itself 
can  never  blot  out  the  sin  without  the  blood.  "  Without  the 
shedding  of  blood  there  is  no  remission,"  pray  as  you  may. 
There  are  persons  who  have  thought  that  self-denial  and 
mortifications  of  an  extraordinary  kind  might  rid  them  of 
their  guilt.  We  do  not  often  come  across  such  people  in 
our  circle,  yet  there  be  those  who  in  order  to  purge  them- 
selves of  sin  flagellate  their  bodies,  observe  protracted  fasts, 
wear  sackcloth  and  hair  shirts  next  their  skin,  and  even  some 
have  gone  so  far  as  to  imagine  that  to  refrain  from  ablutions 
and  to  allow  their  body  to  be  filthy  was  the  readiest  mode 
of  purifying  their  soul.  A  strange  infatuation  certainly  i 
Yet  to-day  in  Hindostan  you  shall  find  the  fakir  passing  his 
body  through  marvellous  sufferings  and  distortions,  in  the 
hope  of  getting  rid  of  sin.  To  what  purpose  is  it  all? 
Mcthinks  I  hear  the  Lord  say,  "  What  is  this  to  me  that 
thou  didst  bow  thy  head  like  a  bulrush,  and  wrap  thyself 


124  AN  UNALTERABLE  STATU!  K 

in  sackcloth,  and  eat  ashes  with  thy  bread,  and  mingle 
wormwood  with  thy  drink  ?  Thou  hast  broken  My  law ; 
these  things  cannot  repair  it ;  thou  hast  done  injury  to  My 
honor  by  thy  sin ;  but  where  is  the  righteousness  that  re- 
flects honor  upon  My  name  ? "  The  old  cry  in  the  olden 
days  was,  "  Wherewithal  shall  we  come  before  God  ?  "  and 
they  said,  "  Shall  we  give  our  first-born  for  our  transgres- 
sion, the  fruit  of  our  body  for  the  sin  of  our  soul  ?  "  Alas ! 
it  was  all  in  vain.  Here  stands  the  sentence.  Here  for- 
ever must  it  stand :  "  Without  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no 
remission."  It  is  the  life  God  demands  as  the  penalty  due 
for  sin,  and  nothing  but  the  life  indicated  in  the  blood-shed- 
ing  will  ever  satisfy  him. 

Observe,  again,  how  this  sweeping  text  puts  away  all 
confidence  in  ceremony,  even  the  ceremonies  of  God's  own 
ordinance.  There  are  some  who  suppose  that  sin  can  be 
washed  away  in  baptism.  Ah,  futile  fancy !  The  expres- 
sion where  it  is  once  used  in  Scripture  implies  nothing  of 
the  kind — ^it  has  no  such  meaning  as  some  attach  to  it,  for 
that  very  Apostle,  of  whom  it  was  said,  gloried  that  he  had 
not  baptized  many  persons  lest  they  should  suppose  there 
was  some  efficacy  in  his  administration  of  the  rite.  Bap- 
tism is  an  admirable  ordinance  in  which  the  believer  holds 
fellowship  with  Christ  in  his  death.  It  is  a  symbol ;  it  is 
nothing  more.  Tens  of  thousands  and  millions  have  been 
baptized  and  have  died  in  their  sins.  Or  what  profit  is  there 
in  "  the  unbloody  Sacrifice  of  the  Mass,"  as  Antichrist  putfl 
it  ?  Do  any  say  it  is  "  an  unbloody  sacrifice,"  yet  at  the 
same  time  offer  it  for  a  propitiation  for  sin — we  fling  this 
text  in  their  faces?  "  Without  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no 
remission."  Do  they  reply  that  the  blood  is  there  in  the  body 
of  Christ ;  We  answer  that  even  were  it  so,  that  would  not 
meet  the  case,  for  it  is  without  the  shedding  of  blood — with- 
out the  blood-shedding  ;  the  blood  as  distinct  from  the  flesh ; 
without  the  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no  remission  of  sin. 

And  here  I  must  pass  on  to  make  a  distinction  that  will 


AN  UNALTERABLE  STATUTE.     .  126 

go  deeper  still.  Jesns  Christ  himself  cannot  save  us,  apart 
from  his  blood.  It  is  a  supposition  which  only  folly  has 
ever  made,  but  we  must  refute  even  the  hypothesis  of  folly, 
when  it  ailirms  that  the  example  of  Christ  can  put  away 
human  sin,  that  the  holy  life  of  Jesus  Christ  has  put  the 
race  on  such  a  good  footing  with  God  that  now  he  can  for- 
give its  faults  and  its  transgression.  Not  so ;  not  the  holi- 
ness of  Jesus,  not  the  life  of  Jesus,  not  the  death  of  Jesus, 
but  the  blood  of  Jesus  only;  for  "Without  shedding  of 
blood  there  is  no  remission." 

And  I  have  met  with  some  who  think  so  much  of  tffe 
second  coming  of  Christ,  that  they  seem  to  have  fixed  their 
entire  faith  upon  Christ  in  his  glory.  I  believe  this  to  be 
the  fault  of  Irvingism — ^that  too  much  it  holds  before  the 
sinner's  eye  Christ  on  the  throne,  whereas,  though  Christ 
on  the  throne  is  ever  the  loved  and  adorable,  yet  we  must 
see  Christ  upon  the  Cross,  or  we  never  can  be  saved.  Thy 
faith  must  not  be  placed  merely  in  Christ  glorified,  but  in 
Christ  crucified.  "  God  forbid  that  I  should  glory,  save  is: 
the  Cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  "  We  preach  Christ 
crucified,  to. the  Jews  a  stumbling-block,  and  to  the  Greeks 
foolishness."  I  remember  one  person  who  was  united  with 
this  Church  (the  dear  sister  may  be  present  now),  that  had 
been  for  some  years  a  professor,  and  had  never  enjoyed 
peace  with  God,  nor  produced  any  of  the  fruits  of  the 
Spirit.  She  said,  "  I  have  been  in  a  church  where  I  was 
taught  to  rest  upon  Christ  glorified,  and  I  did  so  fix  my 
confidence,  such  as  it  was,  upon  him,  that  I  neither  had  a 
sense  of  An,  nor  a  sense  of  pardon ;  for  Christ  crucified  I 
did  not  know,  and  until  I  had  seen  him  as  shedding  his 
blood  and  making  a  propitiation,  I  never  entered  into  rest." 
Yes,  we  will  say  it  again,  for  the  text  is  vitally  important: 
"  Without  the  shedding  of  blood,  there  is  no  remission," 
not  even  with  Christ  himself.  It  is  the  sacrifice  that  he 
has  offered  for  us,  that  is,  the  means  of  putting  away  om 
«in, — ^that,  and  nothing  else. 


126        AN  UNALTERABLE  STATUTE. 

Let  US  pass  on  a  little  farther  with  the  same  trath. 
This  remission  of  sin  is  to  be  found  at  the  foot  of  the 
cross.  There  is  remission  to  be  had  through  Jesus  Christ, 
whose  blood  was  shed.  The  hymn  we  sang  at  the  com- 
mencement of  the  service,  gave  you  the  marrow  of  the 
doctrine.*  We  owe  to  God  a  debt  of  punishment  for  sin. 
Was  that  debt  due  or  not  ?  If  the  law  was  right,  the  pen- 
alty ought  to  be  exacted.  K  the  penalty  was  too  severe, 
and  the  law  inaccurate,  then  God  made  a  mistake.  But  it 
is  blasphemy  to  suppose  that.  The  law,  then,  being  a 
righteous  law,  and  the  penalty  just,  shall  God  do  an  unjust 
thing  ?  It  will  be  an  unjust  thing  for  him  not  to  carry  out 
the  penalty.  Would  you  have  him  to  be  unjust  ?  He  had 
declared  that  the  soul  that  sinned  should  die;  would  you 
have  God  to  be  a  liar  ?  Shall  he  eat  his  words  to  save 
his  creatures  ?  "  Let  God  be  true,  and  every  man  a  liar." 
The  law's  sentence  must  be  carried  out.  It  was  inevitable 
that  if  God  maintained  the  prerogative  of  his  holiness,  he 
must  punish  the  sins  that  men  have  committed.  How,  then, 
should  he  save  us  ?  Behold  the  plan  !  His  dear  Son,  the 
Lord  of  glory,  takes  upon  himself  human  nature,  comes 
into  the  place  of  as  many  as  the  Father  gave  him,  stands  in 
their  standing,  and  when  the  sentence  of  justice  had  been 
proclaimed,  and  the  sword  of  vengeance  had  leaped  out  of 
its  scabbard,  behold  the  glorious  substitute  bares  his  arm, 

♦  From  whence  this  fear  and  unbelief  ? 
Hath  not  the  Father  put  to  grief 

His  spotless  Son  for  thee  ? 
And  will  the  righteous  judge  of  men. 
Condemn  me  for  that  debt  of  sin. 

Which.  Lord,  was  charged  on  thee  t 

"  Complete  atonement  thou  hast  made« 
And  to  the  utmost  farthing  paid 

Whatever  thy  people  owed  j 
Kor  can  bis  wrath  on  me  take  place« 
If  sheltered  in  thy  righteousness. 
And  sprinkled  in  thy  blood." 


AN  UNALTERABLE  STATXTrB.  127 

and  he  says,  "  Strike,  O  sword,  but  strike  Jfe,  and  let  My 
people  go."  Into  the  very  soul  of  Jesus,  the  sword  of  the 
law  pierced,  and  his  blood  was  shed,  the  blood,  not  of  one 
who  was  man  only,  but  of  One  who,  by  his  being  an  eter- 
nal spirit,  was  able  to  offer  up  himself  without  spot  unto 
God,  in  a  way  which  gave  infinite  efficacy  to  his  sufferings. 
He,  through  the  eternal  Spirit,  we  are  told,  offered  himself 
without  spot  to  God.  Being  in  his  own  nature  infinitely 
beyond  the  nature  of  man,  comprehending  all  the  natures 
of  man  as  it  were  within  himself,  by  reason  of  the  maj- 
esty of  his  person,  he  was  able  to  offer  an  atonement  to 
God,  of  infinite,  boundless,  inconceivable  sufficiency. 

What  our  Lord  suffered,  none  of  us  can  tell.  I  am  sure 
of  this:  I  would  not  disparage  or  under-estimate  his  phys- 
ical sufferings — the  tortures  he  endured  in  his  body — but 
I  am  equally  sure  that  we  can  none  of  us  exaggerate  or 
over-value  the  sufferings  of  such  a  soul  as  his  ;  they  are  be- 
yond all  conception.  So  pure  and  so  perfect,  so  exquisite- 
ly sensitive,  and  so  immaculately  holy  was  he,  that  to  be 
numbered  with  transgressors,  to  be  smitten  by  his  Father, 
to  die  (shall  I  say  it  ?)  the  death  of  the  uncircumcised  by 
the  hand  of  strangers,  was  the  very  essence  of  bitterness, 
the  consummation  of  anguish.  "  Yet  it  pleased  the  Father 
to  bruise  him;  he  hath  put  him  to  grief."  His  sorrows 
in  themselves  were  what  the  Greek  liturgy  well  calls  them, 
"  unknown  sufferings,  great  griefs."  Hence,  too,  their  effi- 
3acy  is  boundless,  without  limit.  Now,  therefore,  God  is 
able  to  forgive  sin.  He  has  punihsed  the  sin  on  Christ;  it 
becomes  justice  as  well  as  mercy  that  God  should  blot  out 
those  debts  which  had  been  paid.  It  were  unjust — ^I  speak 
with  reverence,  but  yet  with  holy  boldness — it  were  un- 
just on  the  part  of  the  infinite  Majesty,  to  lay  to  my  charge 
a  single  sin  which  was  laid  to  the  charge  of  my  substitute 
If  my  surety  took  my  sin,  he  released  me  and  I  am  clear. 
Who  shall  resuscitate  judgment  against  me  when  I  have 
been  condemned  in  the  person  of  my  Saviour  ?    Who  shall 


128  £R  UNALTERABLE  STATUTBL 

commit  me  to  the  flames  of  Gehenna,  when  Christ,  my  suV- 
stitute,  has  suffered  the  tantamount  of  hell  for  me  ?  Who 
shall  lay  any  thing  to  my  charge,  when  Christ  has  had  all 
my  crimes  laid  to  his  charge,  answered  for  them,  expidted 
them,  and  received  the  token  of  quittance  from  them,  in 
that  he  was  raised  from  the  dead  that  he  might  «penlv 
vindicate  that  justification  in  which  by  grace  I  am  called 
and  privileged  to  share.  This  is  all  very  simple,  it  lies  in  a 
nut-shell,  but  do  we  all  receive  it — have  we  all  accepted  it  ? 
Oh,  my  dear  hearers,  the  text  is  full  of  warning  to  some  of 
you.  You  may  have  an  amiable  disposition,  an  excellent 
character,  a  serious  turn  of  mind,  but  you  scruple  at  ac- 
cepting Christ,  you  stumble  at  this  stumbling-stone,  you 
split  on  this  rock.  How  can  I  meet  your  hapless  case  ?  I 
shall  not  reason  with  you.  I  forbear  to  enter  into  any  ar- 
gument. I  ask  you  one  question.  Do  you  believe  this 
Bible  to  be  inspired  of  God  ?  Look  then  at  that  passage, 
"Without  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no  remission." 
What  say  you  ?  Is  it  not  plain,  absolute,  conclusive  ?  Al- 
low me  to  draw  the  inference.  K  you  have  not  an  interest 
in  the  blood-shedding  which  I  have  briefly  endeavored  to 
describe,  is  there  any  remission  for  you  ?  Can  there  be  ? 
Your  own  sins  are  on  your  head  now.  Of  your  hand  shall 
they  be  demanded  at  the  coming  of  the  Great  Judge.  Yon 
may  labor,  you  may  toil,  you  may  be  sincere  in  your  con- 
victions and  quiet  in  your  conscience,  or  you  may  be  tossed 
about  with  your  scruples,  but  as  the  Lord  liveth  there  is  no 
pardon  for  you,  except  through  this  shedding  of  blood.  Do 
you  reject  it?  On  your  own  head  will  lie  the  peril!  God 
has  spoken.  It  cannot  be  said  that  your  ruin  is  designed  by 
him,  when  your  own  remedy  is  revealed  by  him.  He  bids 
you  take  the  way  which  he  appoints,  and  if  you  reject  it 
you  must  die.  Your  death  is  suicide,  be  it  deliberate,  ac- 
cidental, or  through  error  of  judgment.  Yoor  blood  beon 
your  own  head.     You  are  warned. 

On  the  other  hand,  what  a  far-reaching  consolation  the 


AN  UNALTERABLE  STATUTE.         129 

text  gives  us  !  "  Without  shedding  of  blood,  there  is  no 
remission,"  but  where  there  is  the  blood-shedding,  there  is 
remission.  If  thou  hast  come  to  Christ,  thou  art  saved.  K 
thou  canst  say  from  thy  very  heart, — 

••  My  faith  doth  lay  her  hand 
On  that  dear  head  of  thine. 
While  like  a  penitent  I  stand. 
And  here  confess  my  sin>" 

then  your  sin  is  gona  Where  is  that  young  man  ?  where 
is  that  5'oung  woman  ?  where  are  those  anxious  hearts  that 
have  been  saying :  "  We  would  be  pardoned  now  ?  "  Oh, 
look,  look,  look,  look  to  the  crucified  Saviour,  and  you  are 
pardoned.  Ye  may  go  your  way,  inasmuch  as  you  have  ac- 
cepted God's  atonement.  Daughter,  be  of  good  cheer,  thy 
sins  which  are  many,  are  forgiven  thee.  Son,  rejoice,  for 
thy  transgressions  are  blotted  out. 

My  last  word  shall  be  this.  You  that  are  teachers  of 
others  and  trying  to  do  good,  cleave  fast  to  this  doctrine. 
Let  this  be  the  front,  the  centre,  the  pith,  and  the  marrow 
of  all  you  have  to  testify.  I  often  preach  it,  but  there  ia 
never  a  Sabbath  in  which  I  go  to  my  bed  with  such  inward 
content  as  when  I  have  preached  the  substitutionary  sacri 
fice  of  Christ.  Then  I  feel," K  sinners  are  lost  I  have  none 
of  their  blood  upon  me."  This  is  the  soul-saving  doctrine, 
grip  it  and  you  shall  have  laid  hold  of  eternal  life  :  reject 
it,  and  you  reject  it  to  your  confusion.  Oh,  keep  to 
this.  Martin  Luther  used  to  say  that  every  sermon  ought 
to  liave  the  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith  in  it.  True  ; 
but  let  it  have  the  doctrine  of  atonement  in  it.  He  says 
he  could  not  get  the  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith  into 
the  Wurtemberger's  heads,  and  he  felt  half  inclined  to  take 
the  book  into  the  pulpit  and  fling  it  at  their  heads  in  or- 
der to  get  it  in.  I  am  afraid  he  would  not  have  succeed- 
ed if  he  had.  But  oh  !  how  would  I  try  to  hammer  again 
and  again  and  again  upon  this  one  nail.  "  The  blood  i» 
6* 


130        AN  UNALTERABLE  STATUTE. 

the  life  thereo£"     ^^  When  I  see  the  blood,  I  will  paai 
over  you." 

Christ  giving  up  his  life  in  pouring  out  his  blood — ^it  is 
this  that  gives  pardon  and  peace  to  every  one  of  you  if  you 
will  but  look  to  him — ^pardon  now,  complete  pardon  ;  par- 
don for  ever.  Look  away  from  all  other  confidences,  and 
rely  upon  the  sufferings  and  the  death  of  the  Incarnate  God 
who  has  gone  into  the  heavens,  and  who  lives  to-day  to 
plead  before  his  Father's  throne,  the  merit  of  the  blood 
which  on  Calvary  he  poured  forth  for  sinners.  As  I  shall 
meet  you  all  in  that  great  day  when  the  Crucified  One  shall 
come  as  the  King  and  Lord  of  all,  which  day  is  hastening 
on  apace,  as  I  shall  meet  you  then,  I  pray  you  bear  me  wit- 
ness that  I  have  striven  to  tell  you  in  all  simplicity  what  is 
the  way  of  salvation  ;  and  if  you  reject  it,  do  me  this  fa- 
vor, to  say  that  at  least  I  have  proffered  to  you  in  Jeho- 
vah's name  this  his  Gospel,  and  have  earnestly  urged  you  to 
accept  it  that  you  may  be  saved.  But  the  rather  I  would 
God  that  I  might  meet  you  there,  all  covered  in  the  one 
atonement,  clothed  in  the  one  righteousness,  and  accepted 
in  the  one  Saviour,  and  then  together  will  we  sing,"  Wor- 
thy is  the  Lamb  that  was  slain,  and  hath  redeemed  us  to 
God  by  his  blood,to  receive  honor,  and  power,  and  domin- 
ion for  ever  and  ever."    Amen, 


--\»-'^  "ix^-'c 


"       i  FATHOMLESS  18> 


t 


I 


SERMON  Vm 


\ 


FATHOMLESS, 

**t!Br  JUDCDDENTS  ABB  A  OBBAT  DEEP/^— Psalm  XXXVL     9. 


OoKSiDER  the  word  "judgment "  in  whatever  light  yon 
please,  this  sentence  is  true.  There  is  much  of  mystery  con- 
nected with  the  terrible  calamities  which  afflict  the  earth, 
devastate  nations,  destroy  cities,  and  sweep  away  the  relics 
of  the  past.  There  is  much  of  mystery  about  the  judgments 
of  God  upon  the  wicked  in  this  life — how  they  prosper  for 
awhile  and  are  suddenly  cut  down ;  how.  they  wax  fat  like 
oxen,  and  then  are  taken  away  to  the  shambles.  The  judg- 
ments of  God  regarding  the  wicked  in  the  world  to  come 
are  also  "  a  great  deep,"  not  to  be  spoken  of  with  levity.  A 
solemn  subject  is  that  of  the  future  punishment  of  the  un- 
godly- -"  a  great  deep,"  a  deep  where  some,  I  am  afraid, 
speculate  so  deeply  that  the  risk  they  run  is  imminent — they 
may  drown  themselves  in  perdition. 

But  I  prefer  to-night  to  take  the  text  as  it  may  refer  to 
GocTs  dealings  with  his  own  people.  He  deals- with  them  in 
judgment — not,  I  think,  penally  ;  he  does  not  in  their  per- 
sons vindicate  the  inflexible  justice  of  the  law  by  the  terri- 
ble vengeance  he  inflicts  on  the  transgressor,  as  he  will  deal 
with  the  wicked  at  the  last  dread  assize.  I  mean  not  that 
I  rather  interpret  it  of  the  salutary  discipline  and  painful 
chastisements  of  God's  hand  which  are  called  "judgments," 
in  Scripture.     They  do  not  come  by  chance,  nor  upon  us  ai 


133  FAlSOlfLESS. 

all  as  a  matter  of  sovereignty  merely,  but  they  are  sent  in 
wisdom,  because  God  judges  them  to  be  necessary.  They 
are  weighed  out  to  us  with  discretion ;  awarded  us  by  pru» 
dence.  It  is  a  sweet  name,  I  think,  for  affliction — ^not  that 
I  look  upon  affliction  as  a  judgment  upon  me  for  sin,  which 
I  cannot  do  now  that  I  have  seen  sin  punished  in  Christ ; 
but  I  look  at  my  afflictions  as  being  sent  to  me  according  to 
the  all-wise  judgment  of  a  kind  Father,  not  at  all  without 
consideration,  but  always  according  to  his  infinite  wisdom 
and  prudence,  dealt  out  in  measure  and  at  proper  times,  ac- 
cording to  the  infinite  judgment  and  wisdom  of  God.  In  a 
word,  they  are  called  "judgments,"  not  because  they  are 
judicial,  but  because  they  are  judicious, 

Now,  these  dealings  of  God  with  his  servants,  always 
wise  and  prudent,  are  frequently  like  great  deeps.  I  shall 
simply  this  evening  work  out  three  or  four  thoughts  which 
arise  out  of  that  metaphor. 

L  The  dealings  of  God  with  his  people  abb  optkn 

UNFATHOMABLE. 

We  cannot  discover  the  foundation,  or  cause  and  spring 
of  them.  Some  of  God's  servants  who  are  earnestly  desir- 
ous to  provide  things  honest  in  the  sight  of  all  men,  though 
they  are  industrious  and  energetic,  and  use  proper  prudence, 
do  not  find  themselves  able  to  prosper  in  trade.  They  are 
thwarted  in  alf  their  purposes.  There  seems  to  be  a  kind  of 
fatality  connected  with  all  their  enterprises.  K  tliey  do  but 
touch  a  business  or  a  bargain  which  will  turn  into  gold  with 
the  traffic  of  others,  it  melts  under  their  hand  into  dross. 
Now,  it  is  not  always  that  this  can  be  explained.  "  Thy 
judgments  are  a  great  deep  " — a  matter  to  be  perceived  as 
a  fact,  but  not  to  be  explained  by  reasoning. 

Sometimes  in  a  family  a  dear  child  is  born  and  is  a  great 
comfort  to  its  parents.  It  seems,  indeed,  to  be  sent  in  love, 
to  heal  some  old  wound,  and  to  make  the  house  happy,  and 
then  just  as  suddenly  as  it  came,  it  is  removed.  Why  ? 
Ah  I  here,  again,  is  another  deep  which  a  mother's  anxious 


FATHOMLESS.  188 

heart  would  like  to  fathom,  "bat  which  is  not  for  her  to  ex- 
plore.   It  is  a  great  deep. 

Children  will  be  spared  to  us,  and  just  when  they  are 
ripening  to  manhood  and  womanhood,  and  we  hope  to  see 
them  settled  and  established  in  life,  it  happens — as  it  happen- 
ed to  one  of  our  beloved  friends  in  this  church  this  afternoon — • 
that  we  have  to  stand  at  the  open  grave  and  say,  "  Earth  to 
earth,  dust  to  dust."  Why  God  takes  away  the  holy  and  the 
good,  the  amiable  and  the  lovely,  when  they  appear  to  be 
.most  useful,  we  cannot  understand.     It  is  a  great  deep. 

Oftentimes,  too,  it  happens  that  when  a  man  is  surround- 
ed by  his  family,  and  all  his  household  are  dependent  upon 
his  exertions,  with  a  business  just  beginning  to  prosper, 
while  he  bids  fair  to  live  for  many  years,  he  is  cut  down  as 
in  a  moment ;  his  wife  is  left  a  widow ;  his  children  are  or- 
phans. He  seems  to  be  taken  away  at  the  very  worst  time, 
just  when  he  could  least  he  spared.  The  anxious  wife  may 
say  to  herself,  '*  Why  is  this  ?  "  but  she  can  only  sav  in  re- 
turn, "  I  cannot  comprehend  it ;  it  is  a  great  deep." 

I  might  thus  go  on  recounting  instances,  but  they  have 
transpired  before  us  all  in  our  lifetime,  and  if  they  have  not 
occurred  to  us  yet  they  certainly  will.  Trials  and  troubles 
will  come  upon  us  quite  beyond  our  measuring-line.  We 
shall  have  to  do  business  in  deep  waters  where  no  plummet 
can  by  possibility  find  a  bottom.  "  Thy  judgments  are  a 
great  deep." 

But  why  does  the  Lord  send  us  an  affliction  which  we  can- 
not understand?  I  answer,  Because  he  is  the  Lord,  Your 
child  must  not  expect  to  understand  all  his  father  does,  be- 
cause his  father  is  a  man  of  ripened  intellect  and  understand- 
ing, and  the  child  is  but  a  child.  You,  dear  brother,  how- 
ever experienced  you  may  be,  are  but  a  child,  and  com» 
pared  with  the  Divine  mind,  what  intelligence  have  you  ? 
How  can  you  expect,  therefore,  that  God  shall  always  act 
upon  a  rule  which  y(m  shall  be  able  to  understand  ?  He  is 
God,  and  therefore  it  becometh  us  ofttimes  to  be  dumb,  to 


134  FATHOMLESa 

sit  in  silence  and  to  feel  and  know  it  mast  be  rights  though 
we  equally  know  we  cannot  see  how  it  is  so. 

God  sendeth  us  trials  of  this  sort  jfor  the  exercise  of  our 
graces,  Nqw  is  there  room  for  faith.  When  thou  canst 
trace  him  thou  canst  not  trust  him.  If  thou  canst  under- 
stand all  that  he  does,  there  is  room  then  for  thy  judgment 
rather  than  for  thy  faith  and  for  thy  reliance  on  his  judg- 
ment.    But  when  thou  canst  not  understand  it  submit  thy- 

• 

self  to  him,  say,  "  I  know  that  God  is  good ;  though  he  slay 
me  yet  will  I  trust  in  him :  though  I  walk  in  darkness  and 
see  no  light,  yet  shall  not  an  unbelieving  word  cross  these 
lips,  for  he  is  good,  and  must  be  good,  become  of  me 
what  may."  Oh  !  then  it  is  that  faith  is  faith  indeed,  the 
faith  that  brings  glory  to  God  and  strength  to  thy  soul. 
Here  is  room,  too,  for  humility.  Knowledge  puffeth  up, 
but  the  feeling  that  every  thing  is  beyond  our  knowledge, 
that  we  are  nonplussed,  and  cannot  understand  the  sense 
of  ignorance  and  incapacity  to  understand  the  dealings 
of  God,  brings  to  us  humility,  and  we  sit  down  at  the 
foot  of  Jehovah's  throne.  Beloved,  I  think  there  is  hard- 
ly a  grace  which  the  Christian  has  which  is  not  much  help- 
ed by  the  deeps  of  God's  judgments.  Certainly  love  has 
frequently  been  developed  to  a  high  degree  in  this  way,  for 
the  soul  at  last  comes  to  say,  "No,  I  will  not  ask  the  reason ; 
I  will  not  desire  the  reason  ;  I  do  so  love  him  ;  let  bis  will 
stand  for  a  reason ;  that  shall  be  enough  for  me ;  it  is  the 
Lord ;  let  him  do  what  seemeth  him  good."  We  love  not 
those  whom  we  are  always  bringing  to  book  and  question- 
ing about  all  they  do,  but  'when  love  cometh  to  perfection  it 
aduiireth  all,  it  believeth  all  to  be  right  and  to  be  perfect. 
And  so,  when  love  cometh  to  perfection  with  reference  to 
the  most  perfect  God,  then  it  is  that  every  thing  that  is  done 
IS  endorsed  without  examination ;  every  thing,  even  though 
it  be  shrouded  in  darkness,  is  without  a  question  believed 
in.    It  must  be  right,  for  thou.  Lord,  hast  done  it. 

Many  other  reasons  why  God  calls  his  people  thiis  to 


FATHOMLESS.  135 

feel  his  judgments,  occur  to  me  ;  one  I  may  give,  then  I 
will  leave  this  point.  We  have  sins  which  we  cannot  fathom^ 
deal  brethren,  and  it  is  little  marvel  therefore  if  we  have 
also  chastisements  which  we  cannot  fathom.  There  are 
depths  of  depravity  within  our  hearts  that  call  for  other 
doeps,  as  deep  oalleth  unto  deep,  and  there  are  consequences 
of  sin  within  us  which  we  are  not  able  to  reach,  consequen- 
ces that  are  following  us  in  secret,  and  damaging  us  in  very 
vital  points.  It  needs  that  the  medicine  should  be  of  a 
searching  kind  to  follow  the  disease  into  the  recesses  of  our 
soul,  where  understanding  cannot  pry.  Some  of  those  deep 
judgments  are  like  secret,  potent,  subtle  medicines,  search- 
ing out  certain  secret  devils  that  have  found  their  way  into 
the  caverns  of  our  spirit,  and  hidden  themselves  there. 
Perhaps  an  affliction  which  I  can  understand  is  meant  to 
direct  my  attention  to  some  known  sin ;  but  it  may  be  that 
the  trial  which  I  cannot  understand,  is  dealing  deadly  blows 
against  a  mortal  ill  which,  if  not  thus  destroyed,  might 
have  been  solemnly  prejudicial  to  my  own  spirit. 

I  leave  that  thought  with  you — expect  that  God's  judg- 
ments will  sometimes  be  unfathomable. 

n.  In  the*  next  place — God's  judgments  are  a  great 
deep:  thek  thky  aee  sapk  sailing. 

Ships  never  strike  on  rocks  out  in  the  great  deeps.  Chil- 
dren, perhaps,  may  fancy  that  a  shallow  sea  is  the  safest, 
but  an  old  sailor  knows  better.  While  he  is  off  the 
Irish  coast  the  captain  has  to  keep  a  good  look  out,  but 
while  he  is  crossing  the  Atlantic  he  is  in  far  less  danger. 
There  he  has  plenty  of  sea-room,  and  there  is  no  fear  of 
quicksands  or  of  shoals.  When  the  sailor  enters  the  Thames 
he  encounters  first  one  sand  bank  and  then  another,  and  he  is 
in  danger,  but  out  in  the  deep  water,  where  he  finds  no  bottom, 
he  is  but  little  afraid.  So,  mark  you,  in  the  judgments  of  God. 
When  he  is  dealing  out  affliction  to  us  it  is  the  safest  possi- 
ble sailing  that  a  Christian  can  have.  "  What,"  says  one, 
"  trial  safe  f  "    Tes,  very  safe.    The  safest  part  of  a  Chris- 


136  FATHOMLESS. 

taints  life  is  the  time  of  his  trial.  ^'  What,  when  a  man  is 
down  do  you  say  he  is  safe  ?  "  Tes,  for  then  he  need  fear 
no  fall ;  when  he  is  low  he  need  fear  no  pride  ;  when  he  is 
humbled  under  God's  hand  then  he  is  less  likely  to  be  car- 
ried away  with  every  wind  of  temptation.  Smooth  water 
on  the  way  to  heaven  is  always  a  sign  that  the  soul  should 
keep  wide  awake,  for  danger  is  near.  One  comes  at  last  to 
feel  a  solemn  dread  creeping  over  one  in  times  of  prosperi- 
ty. "  Thou  shalt  fear  and  tremble  because  of  all  the  good 
that  God  shall .  make  to  pass  before  thee,"  fearing  not  so 
much  lest  the  good  should  depart  as  lest  we  should  make  an 
ill  use  of  it,  and  should  have  a  canker  of  sloth,  or  self-confi- 
dence, or  worldliness  growing  up  in  our  spirits.  We  have 
seen  many  professed  Christians  make  shipwreck,  in  some  few 
instances  it  has  been  attributable  to  overwjielming  sorrow, 
but  in  ten  cases  to  the  one  it  has  been  attributable  to  prosperi- 
ty. Men  grow  rich,  and  of  course  they  do  not  attend  the 
little  chapel  they  once  went  to  ;  they  must  go  where  the 
fashionable  world  worships.  Men  grow  rich,  and  straight- 
way they  cannot  keep  to  that  road  of  self-denial  which  once 
they  so  gladly  trod.  The  world  has  made  their  hearts  hun- 
gry AS  the  wolf,  and  they  rage  for  more.  They  have  much, 
and  1ihey  lust  for  more.  An  insatiable  ambition  has  come 
over  them,  and  they  fall,  and  great  is  the  sorrow  which 
theii  fall  brings  to  the  church  ;  great  the  mischief  which  it 
does  to  the  people  of  God.  But  a  man  in  trouble — did  you 
ever  notice  a  real  child  of  God  in  trial  ?  How  he  prays  ! 
He  cannot  live  now  without  prayer  ;  he  has  a  burden  to  car- 
ry to  his  God,  and  he  goes  to  the  mercy-seat  again  and 
again.  Notice  him  under  depression  of  spirits.  How  he 
reads  his  Bible  now.  He  does  not  care  now  for  that  lighter 
literature  which  beguiled  many  an  hour  before.  He  wants 
the  solid  promise,  the  strong  meat  of  the  kingdom  of  God. 
Do  you  notice  now  how  he  hears  ?  That  man  does  not  care 
a  fig  for  your  flowers  and  yonr  fine  bits  of  rhetoric ;  he 
wants  the  Word ;  he  wants  the  naked  doctrine  ;  he  wants 


FATHOMLESS  187 

Clirist ;  he*cannot  be  fed  on  whims  and  fancies  now.  He 
cares  a  great  deal  less  about  theological  speculation  and  ec- 
clesiastical authority  ;  he  wants  to  know  something  about 
eternal  love,  everlasting  faithfulness,  and  the  dealings  of  the 
Lord  of  Hosts  with  the  souls  of  his  people  ;  he  pines  to 
hear  of  the  covenant,  and  of  the  suretyship  engagements  of 
Christ.  Ah  !  this  is  the  man  who  walks  tenderly  in  the 
world.  He  holds  the  world  with  a  very  loose  hand.  He 
expects  to  be  often  in  the  way,  and  hopes  to  be  up  out  of 
the  way,  for  the  world  has  lost  its  attraction  for  him.  I 
say.  again,  God's  judgments  are  a  great  deep,  but  they  are 
safe  sailing,  and  under  the  guidance  and  presence  of  the 
Holy  Spiiit  they  are  not  only  safe  but  they  are  advantage- 
aii8.  I  greatly  question  whether  we  ever  do  grow  in  puri- 
ty much  except  when  wc  are  in  the  furnace.  We  ought  so 
to  do.  ITie  joys  of  this  life  with  which  God  blesses  us 
ought  to  make  us  increase  in  grace  and  gratitude,  ought  to 
be  a  sufficient  motive  for  the  very  highest  form  of  consecra- 
tion, but  as  a  rule  we  are  only  driven  to  Christ  by  a  storm 
— the  most  of  us,  I  mean.  There  are  blessed  and  favored 
exceptions,  but  most  of  us  need  the  rod,  must  have  it,  and 
do  not  seem  to  learn  obedience  except  through  the  chasten* 
ing  of  the  Lord. 

Here  I  leave  that  second  thought. 

HI.  Thirdly,  God's  judgments  are  a  great  deep,  Bin 

THEY  CONCEAL  GREAT  TREASURE. 

Down  in  those  awful  depths  who  knows  what  there  may 
be  ?  Pearls  lie  deep  there — masses  of  precious  things  that 
would  make  the  miser's  eye  gleam  like  a  star.  There  are 
the  wrecks  of  old  Spanish  galleons  lost  these  centuries  ago, 
and  there  they  lie  huge  mines  of  wealth,  far  down  "  where 
sea-monsters  whelp  and  stable."  And  so  with  the  deep  judg- 
ments of  God.  What  wisdom  is  concealed  there,  and  what 
treasures  of  love  and  faithfulness,  and  what  David  calls 
"very  tenderness,"  "for  in  very  tenderness,"  saith  he,  "  hast 
tbou  afflicted  me."     There  is  as  much  wisdom  in  the  deep 


[> 


L38  FATHOMLESS. 

afSictions  of  God  s  saints,  as  in  the  creation  of  the  world. 
God  smites  his  people  artistically.  There  is  never  a  random 
blow.  There  is  a  mai'vellous  degree  of  skill  in  the  chasten- 
ing of  the  Lord.  Hence  we  are  told  not  to  despise  it,  which, 
in  the  strongest  meaning  of  it,  means  that  we  are  to  honor 
it.  We  honor  the  chastisements  of  our  parents,  but  infi- 
nitely more  the  chastisements  of  God.  "For  they  verily 
chastened  us  for  a  few  days  after  their  own  pleasure,  but 
he  for  our  profit,"  and  he  alone  knows  the  way  of  chasten- 
ing  us  for  profit. 

Now,  brethren,  I  said  there  were  treasures  concealed  in 
the  great  deeps  which  we  cannot  yet  i*each,  and  so  in  the 
great  deeps  in  which  God  makes  us  to  do  business  there  are 
great  treasures  that  we  cannot  come  upon  at  present.  We 
do  not,  perhaps,  as  yet,  receive,  or  even  perceive  any  pres- 
ent and  immediate  benefit  from  our  afflictions.  There  may 
be  no  immediate  benefit ;  the  benefit  may  be  far  hence  and 
to  come.  The.  chastening  of  our  youth  may  be  intended  for 
the  ripening  of  our  age.  "  It  is  good  for  a  man  that  he 
bear  the  yoke  in  his  youth."  The  affliction  of  to-day  may 
have  no  reference  to  the  circumstances  of  to-day,  but  to  the 
circumstances  of  fifty  years  ahead.  I  do  not  know  that  yon- 
der blade  required  the  rain  on  such  a  day,  but  God  was 
looking  not  to  February  as  such,  but  to  February  in  its  re- 
lation to  July,  when  the  harvest  should  be  reaped.  He  con- 
sidered the  blade  not  merely  as  a  blade,  and  in  its  present 
necessity,  but  as  it  would  be  in  the  full  corn  in  the  ear. 
There  are  certain  marks  that  an  artist  makes  upon  the  block 
that  you  cannot  see  the  reason  of  as  yet,  and  they  spoil  the 
apparent  likeness  of  the  marble  to  the  image  which  you 
know  he  wishes  to  produce,  but  then  those  lines  are  to  be 
worked  out  by  and  by.  They  are  scratches  now,  but  they 
will  be  lines  of  beauty  soon  when  he  comes  to  conclude 
them.  So,  a  trial  may  even  lame  us  for  present  service, 
damage  us — I  will  even  go  to  the  length  of  saying — ^for 
years  to  come,  and  make  us  go  groaning  and  broken-heart* 


PATHOMESSS.  139 

ed,  so  as  to  be  of  comparatively  little  service  to  the  Cliurch, 
and  of  very  little  joy  to  ourselves.  But  then  afterwards — 
"  afterwards,"  as  Paul  puts  it — it  beareth  the  peaceable  fruits 
of  righteousness,  in  those  that  are  exercised  thereby.  Why 
will  you  not  let  the  Lord  have  time  ?  Why  will  you  be  in 
a  huny  ?  Why  will  you  stand  at  his  elbow  and  perpetu- 
ally say,  "  Explain  this  to-day,  and  show  me  the  motive  and 
reason  of  this  at  the  present  hour  "  ?  A  thousand  years  in 
his  sight  are  but  as  yesterday  when  it  is  past,  and  as  a 
watch  in  the  night.  The  mighty  God  takes  mighty  time  in 
which  to  work  out  his  grand  results  ;  therefore  be  content 
to  let  the  treasures  lie  at  the  bottom  of  the  deep  for  a  while. 
But  then  faith  may  see  them.  Faith  can  make  the  deep 
translucent  till  it  sees  the  treasure  lying  there  ;  and  she  as- 
sures you  it  is  yours,  and  though  you  may  not  at  this  hour 
be  able  to  be  at  it,  yet  you  shall  have  it,  "  for  all  things  are 
yours."  Every  thing  that  is  stored  up  in  the  great  deep  of 
the  eternal  purpose,  or  in  the  deep  of  the  manifest  judg- 
ment, every  thing  belongs  to  you,  O  believer.  Therefore 
rejoice  in  it,  and  let  it  lie  there  till  such  a  time  as  God  may 
choose  to  raise  it  for  your  spiritual  enrichment. 

rV.  God's  judgments  are  a  great  dSep ;  then  they  work 

MUCH  GOOD. 

The  great  deep,  though  ignorance  thinks  it  to  be  all 
waste,  a  salt  and  barren  wilderness,  is  fraught  with  the  great- 
est blessings  to  this  round  world.  If,  to-morrow,  there 
should  be  "no  more  sea,"  although  that  may  one  day  be  a 
blessing,  it  would  not  be  so  to-day,  but  the  greatest  of  all 
curses.  It  is  from  the  sea  that  there  arises  the  perpetual 
mist  which,  floating  by-and  by  in  mid-air,  at  last  descends 
in  plenteous  showers  on  hill  and  vale  to  fertilize  the  land. 
Tlie  sea  is  the  great  heart  of  the  earth — I  might  say  the 
circulating  blood  of  the  world.  We  must  have  it ;  it  must 
be  in  motion  ;  its  tides,  like  a  great  pulse,  must  be  felt,  or 
the  world's  vitality  would  cease.     There  is  no  waste  in  the 


140  FATHOMLBSa 

Bca ;  it  is  all  wanted ;  there  is  not  a  drop  too  mncli  of  it. 
So  with,  our  afflictions  which  are  thy  judgments,  O  God  I 
They  are  necessary  to  our  life,  to  our  soul's  health,  to  our 
spiritual  vigor.  "  By  all  these,"  said  one  of  old,  "  do  men 
live,  and  in  all  these  is  the  life  of  my  spirit."  Uprising 
from  my  trouble  is  the  constant  mist  which  is  afterwards 
transformed  into  sacred  dew,  which  moistens  my  life.  *  It 
is  good  for  me  that  I  have  been  afflicted,"  said  David. 
**  Amen  !"  say  all  the  afflicted  ones.  A  thousand  sick 
beds  shall  bear  witness  to  the  blessedness  of  the  trial.  A 
thousand  losses  and  crosses  borne  by  the  faithful,  now  aid 
the  sweetness  of  the  harmony  of  everlasting  hymns  in  the 
land  of  the  blessed.  "  Oh !  blessed  cross,"  said  one  ;  "  I 
fear  lest  I  should  come  to  love  thee  too  much  ;  'tis  so  good  to 
be  afflicted ! "  May  God  grant  to  us  that  at  all  times  in- 
stead of  trying  to  fathom  the  deep,  we  may  understand  that 
it  is  useful  to  us,  and  be  content. 

V.  Lastly:  if  God's  judgments  are  a  great  deep,  thbn 

THBY  BECOME   A  HIGHWAY   OF   COMMUNION  WITH  HIMSELF. 

We  thought  at  one  time  that  the  deep  separated  differ- 
ent peoples ;  that  nations  were  kept  asunder  by  the  sea  ; 
but  lo  !  the  sea  is  to-day  the  great  highway  of  the  world. 
The  rapid  ships  cross  it  with  their  white  sails,  or  with  their 
palpitating  engines  they  flash  across  the  waves.  The  sea  is 
the  world's  great  canal — a  mighty  channel  of  communica- 
tion. And  so,  brethren,  our  afflictions — which  we  thought 
in  our  ignorance  would  separate  us  from  our  God — are  the 
highway  by  which  we  may  come  nearer  to  God  than  we 
otherwise  could.  *'  They  that  go  down  to  the  sea  in  ships, 
that  do  business  on  the  great  waters,  these  see  the  works  of 
the  Lord,  and  his  wonders  in  the  deep."  You  that  keep  close 
in  shore  and  have  but  small  trials,  you  are  not  likely  to 
know  much  of  his  wr  nders  in  the  deep ;  but  if  you  are 
made  to  put  out  far  to  sea,  where  deep  calleth  unto  deep 
and  the  noise  of  God's  waterspouts  astoimds  the  spu-itual 


FATHOMLESS.  Ul 

mariner,  then  it  is  that  you  shall  see  God's  wonders — won- 
ders of  faithfulness,  wonders  of  power,  wonders  of  wisdom, 
wonders  of  love.  You  shall  see  them,  and  you  shall  rejoice 
to  see  them.  These  troubles  shall  be  as  fiery  chariots  to  bear 
you  up  to  God.  Your  afflictions,  wave  upon  wave,  shall 
wash  your  soul,  like  a  tempest-tossed  bark,  nearer  to  the 
haven.  Oh ! .  but  this  is  a  blessed  thing  when  God's  judg- 
ments bring  us  nearer  to  him  !  Old  Quarles  has  a  quaint  idea 
when  he  represents  God  as  swinging  a  flail  in  judgment,  and 
he  says  if  you  would  get  away  from  it  you  must  get  close 
to  his  hands,  and  then  you  are  out  of  the  reach  of  the  swing 
of  the  blow.  Get  close  up  to  God,  and  he  will  not  smite  ; 
get  near  to  God  and  the  trial  ceases. 

Tiials  are  often  weights  to  keep  men  down,  but  you 
have  seen  many  a  machine  in  which  one  weight  going  down 
lifts  another  weight  up,  and  there  is  a  way  by  faith  of  ad- 
justing the  consecrated  puUies  so  that  the  very  weight  of 
your  affliction  may  lift  you  up  nearer  to  God.  The  bird 
with  a  string  and  a  stone  to  its  feet  cannot  fly,  and  yet  there 
b  a  way  that  God  has  of  making  his  birds  fly  even  when 
they  are  tied  to  the  ground.  They  never  mounted  till  they 
had  something  to  pull  them  down ;  never  ascended  till  they 
were  compelled  to  descend.  They  found  the  gates  of  heav- 
en not  up  there,  but  down  there.  The  lower  they  sank  in 
Belf-estimation,  the  nearer  they  came  to  the  everlasting  God 
who  is  the  foundation  of  all  things. 

Thus,  brethren,  I  have  brought  you  to  the  last  thought , 
may  the  Holy  Spirit  bring  you  to  make  it  your  own.  May 
God's  deep  judgments  lead  you  to  deeper  communion. 

Dear  child  of  God,  thou  that  art  in  trouble  to-night,  tho 
voice  of  that  4,rouble  is  to  thee — get  nearer  to  God ;  get 
nearer  to  God.  God  has  favored  you,  favored  you  with 
an  extraordinary  means  of  growth  in  grace.  To  use  Ruth- 
erford's simile,  he  has  put  you  down  in  the  wine-cellar  in 
the  dark.  Now  begin  to  tap  the  wines  on  the  lees  well-refined. 
Now  get  at  the  choice  treasures  of  darkness.     He  has 


142  FATHOMLliSS. 

brought  yon  on  to  a  sandy  desert ;  now  seek  the  treasares 
that  are  hid  in  the  sand.  Believe  that  the  deepest  afflic- 
tions are  neighbors  always  to  the  highest  joys,  and  that  the 
greatest  possible  privileges  lie  close  by  the  darkest  trials.  If 
the  bitterer  youi  sorrow,  the  louder  your  song  at  the  last, 
there  is  a  reason  for  that,  and  that  reason  Oaith  niay  discov* 
er  and  experience  live  upon. 

May  God  bless  the  tried  ones  among  you.  But  there 
are  some  here  who  are  in  trial  and  have  no  God  to  go  to. 
Poor  souls  I  Poor  souls!  Poverty, and  no  God!  Sick 
ness,  and  no  God !  A  life  of  toil,  and  no  heaven !  A  slav- 
ery of  penury  on  earth,  and  then  driven  for  ever  away  from 
God's  presence  !  Oh  !  how  pitiable  1  how  pitiable  !  Pity 
yourselves,  and  remember  that  it  need  not  always  be  so. 
You  may  have  a  heaven,  you  may  have  present  bliss.  Here 
is  the  Gospel  — "  He  that  believeth  and  is  baptized  shall  be 
saved."  Oh  !  my  hearer,  if  thou  canst  but  trust  him  who 
bled  upon  the  cross,  thou  shalt  have  comfort  for  thy  present 
trouble ;  thou  shalt  have  pardon  for  thy  past,  present,  and 
future  sin.  The  Lord  bless  each  one  of  you,  for  Christ's 
0ake.    Amen. 


It&AT  mi)£m>  AND  DBtKE  INDEM).  143 


SEEMON  IX 


MEAT  INDEED  AND  DRINK  INDEED. 

**PCIB  XT  VLE8H  18   MEAT  INDEED,    AND   MT  BLOOD  IS   DBINK  INDEKD.**— 

John  vi.  K. 

The  crowd  had  followed  Jesus  for  the  loaves  and  fishes. 
He  gently  upbraids  them  for  being  guided  by  so  carnal  an 
appetite,  and  impelled  by  so  coarse  a  motive  to  follow  him. 
Then  he  tells  them  that  there  is  a  spiritual  meat  which  is 
far  better — a  spiiitual  diink  far  richer  than  those  aliments 
which  nourish  the  body  and  gratify  the  animal  tastes. 
After  which,  speaking  of  himself  spiritually,  he  says — "  My 
flesh  is  meat  indeed  " — real  meat,  such  as  supports  the  soul ; 
and  "  My  blood  is  drink  indeed  " — real  drink,  the  best,  the 
truest  beverage,  such  as  invigorates  the  spirit  for  im- 
mortaUty. 

Why^  you  may  ask,  at  the  outset,  does  our  Lord  speak 
of  his  flesh  and  hlood  as  separated?  I  tried  to  explain  that 
a  few  evenings  ago  when  we  gathered  around  this  table. 
There  must  be  in  the  Lord's  Supper  bread  and  wine ;  but 
bread  separated  from  the  wine,  as  our  Lord  speaks  of  his 
flesh  as  separate  from  his  blood,  and  this  was  to  indicate 
tliat  it  is  as  a  dying  Saviour  that  he  is  most  precious  to  us. 
TJie  blood  separated  from  the  flesh  indicates  death.  It  is  to 
tlie  death  of  Jesus  that  the  believer  first  turns  his  eye,  and 
It  is  when  considering  the  living,  reigning  Christ  as  having 
once  been  slain  that  our  richest  comfort  comes  to  us.  Su, 
it  is  not  an  unnecessary  multij)lication  of  words,  or  a  vain 
repetition  of  the  same  idea,  when  our  Lord  says  to  us — "  My 


144  MTCAT  INDEEl)  AND  DRINK  INDfifiD. 

flesh  is  meat  indeed,  and -My  blood*  is  drink  indeed.^    He 
thereby  denotes  himself  as  the  dying  Christ. 

L  Taking  the  words  as  they  stand,  our  first  point  will  be 

that    THE    FLESH    OF    CHEIgrT    IS    MEAT    INDEED— SPIBITUAL 
HEAT. 

Jlie  likeness  is  emphatic;  it  is  "  meat  indeed.'*^  It  is  like 
meat  becaicse  meat,  or  foody  sustains  the  body.  The  body 
cculd  not  be  kept  in  vigor  ordinarily,  or  without  a  miracle, 
except  by  the  use  of  food.  We  pine,  we  languish,  we  sick- 
en, we  die  without  bread.  So  the  soul  without  Jesus,  sup- 
posing it  to  be  alive,  must  soon  sicken,  pine,  be  famished, 
and  decay.  You,  O  believer,  with  all  your  strength,  would 
be  weak  as  water  at  this  moment  if  Jesus  were  not  how  your 
present  support.  All  your  past  experience  would  go  for 
nothing  if  you  had  not  now  a  present  Christ  to  stay  your 
hopes  upon.  It  would  be  only  a  matter  of  time  with  you  ; 
you  would  ere  long  sink  into  the  corruption  of  an  open  apos- 
tasy. Like  a  man  shut  up  in  a  dungeon  and  deprived  of 
food,  who  drags  out  for  a  few  days  a  most  painful  existence, 
and,  at  the  last,  expires,  and  becomes  carrion,  so  must  it  be 
with  you.  Unless  Jesus  Christ  be  your  daily  meat  you  will 
go  back  to  the  carnal  elements  of  the  world,  and  become' 
corrupt  and  depraved  as  others  are.  Christ  is  the  only  true 
sustenance  of  the  quickened  soul.  But,  mark  you,  let  a  man 
eat  what  meat  he  may,  it  does  not  always  so  sustain  him  but 
that  he  is  sometimes  weak  and  stretched  upon  the  bed  of 
languishing ;  and  it  cannot  so  sustain  him  but  that  ere  long 
he  must  be  carried  to  his  grave :  but  if  your  souls  learn  to 
feed  on  Jesus,  they  shall  enjoy  the  blessed  immunity  prom- 
ised to  the  inhabitants  of  Zion  ;  they  shall  not  say,  "  I  am 
sick ; "  they  shall  never  die ;  they  shall  feed  on  immortal 
bread  such  as  angels  eat.  You  shall  be  carried  up  to  the 
seats  of  the  immortals  to  dwell  forever  with  the  Christ  upon 
whom  you  have  fed,  coming  to  him  first  to  appease  your  hun« 
p^er.  and  believing  on  him  continuously  to  sustain  your  life. 


MEAT  INDEED  AND  DRINK  INDEED.  145 

Meat  not  only  provides  sustentation,  but  it  assists  growth. 
The  child  cannot  develop  into  a  man  if  he  be  denied  his 
daily  food  ;  he  must  certainly  die  in  infancy  or  in  childhood 
if  he  is  without  the  nutriment  which  is  requisite  to  the 
building  up  of  his  bodily  frame.  Now,  brethren  and  sisters, 
we  are  babes  in  grace  many  of  us.  We  have  been  brought 
to  Jesus'  feet,  and  as  such,  we  are  of  those  who  make  up  his 
kingdom;  but  we  want  to  grow  into  spiritual  manhood. 
We  are  not  content  with  little  faith,  and  dim  hope,  and  a 
spark  of  love.  We  want  to  become  pei-fectly  developed  men, 
strong  in  the  fulness  of  spiritual  energy,  and  this  can  only 
be  by  Christ.  Only  can  you  grow  as  you  increase  in  the 
knowledge  of  him,  and  in  subjection  to  the  influences  of 
his  indwelling  Spirit.  As  food  makes  our  bodies  grow,  so 
Christ  is  food  to  our  souls,  he  is  "meat  indeed,"  for  he 
makes  us  grow  after  a  Divine  sort.  Let  a  man  feed  upon 
what  other  meat  he  may,  he  shall  not  come  unto  perfection, 
but  let  him  feed  on  Jesus  and  he  shall ;  through  the  grace 
of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  he  shall  yet  come  to  the  fulness  of 
the  stature  of  a  man  in  Christ.  Up  yonder  they  are  all  men 
in  Christ.  Before  the  throne  they  are  all  pei-feet  and  alto- 
gether complete,  and  this  because  they  have  fed  upon  this 
sacred  meat  which  makes  them  grow  until  they  have  come 
unto  the  perfect  image  of  him  they  fed  upon. 

Meat  does  not  only  sustain  and  cause  growth,  hut  it 
makes  upfoi*  the  daily  waste  of  the  body.  Some  people  for- 
get that  every  exertion  of  the  body  wears  it  away  as  truly 
as  the  machine  spends  its  fue?  and  wastes  itself.  A^  even  an 
engine  of  iron  needs  repair,  »o  does  this  body  of  ours,  and 
the  meat  we  feed  upon  goes  to  repair  the  daily  waste  to 
which  bone,  and  muscle,  and  nerve,  are  subjected.  Beloved, 
Jesus  Christ  in  this  sense  is  meat.  "  He  restoreth  my  soul.' 
He  makes  up  for  the  waste  of  temptation,  for  the  wear  and 
tear  of  care,  for  the  fret  of  trouble,  for  the  fume  and  flurry 
of  manifold  anxieties,  for  every  thing  that  would  waste  a 
man  away.     My  soul  once  again  renews  her  strength,  like 

•    7 


149  MEAT  INDEED  AND  DRINK  INDEEIX 

the  eagle, when  she  sips  from  the  brook  that  flows  from  the 
foot  of  the  cross.  Oh !  believer,  you  will  soon  degenerate, 
this  world  of  sin  will  soon  make  you  backslide,  and  lose 
ij^ery  good  thing  you  have,  unless  you  go  to  Christ  contin- 
ually, and  feed  on  him.  But  feeding  on  him  the  world 
shall  not  hurt  you  ;  temptations  shall  not  wound  you ;  your 
trials  shall  not  overwhelm  you,  for  you  shall  find  his  flesh 
to  be  meat  indeed.  The  best  meat  that  man's  body  can 
receive  will  not  always  repair  the  waste.  After  a  certain . 
peiiod  of  life  the  body  must  decay,  and  the  most  nutritious 
diet  cannot  prevent  the  hair,  the  teeth,  the  eyes,  the  legs, 
the  arms,  the  entire  man,  from  discovering  that  the  hour  of 
prime  has  past,  and  that  the  time  of  decay  has  arrived. 
Bend  must  the  man  and  lean  upon  his  staff,  and  eat  or  drink 
what  he  will  according  to  the  strictest  diet  and  regimen  of 
the  physician,  yet  still  the  time  of  waste  has  come.  They 
that  look  out  of  the  windows  shall  be  darkened  ;  the  grinders 
shall  fail  because  they  are  few,  and  the  pillars  of  the  house 
shall  tremble.  But,  beloved,  his  flesh  is  "  meat  indeed,"  and 
they  that  feed  upon  him  "shall  still  bring  forth  fruit  in  old 
age,  they  shall  be  fat  and  flourishing,  to  show  that  the 
Lord  is  upright."  Their  last  days  shall  be  their  best  days, 
instead  of  declining  they  shall  gather  strength  with  multi- 
plying years  till  the  moment  when  heart  and  flesh  shall  fail, 
and  then  shall  the  strength  of  their  souls  and  their  portion 
forever  be  most  fully  revealed  to  them. 

Moreover,  meat  is  a  great  remover  of  pain  and  disease. 
Without  food  of  some  kind,  a  man's  inward  constitution  be- 
comes full  of  gnawing  and  anguish.  Bitter  are  the  gripinga 
of  hunger.  Perhaps  no  pain  can  be  more  severe  when  a  man 
is  long  exposed  to  it,  than  hunger,  with  the  exception  of 
thirst.  No  doubt  want  is  the  root  of  multitudes  of  the  dis- 
eases of  the  poor.  Generous  diet  often  does  more  for  the 
sick  than  the  best  medical  prescriptions.  It  is  certainly  so 
with  believers  in  Christ.  His  flesh  is  meat  indeed  in  thig 
respect.     The  pains  of  conviction,  the  throbbings  of  a  guilty 


MEAT  INDEED  AND  DRINK  INDEED.  147 

conscience,  all  are  stayed  when  a  man  receives  Christ  into 
his  inward  parts.  If  a  man  be  spiritually  sick  with  world- 
liness,  with  doubt,  with  pride,  with  envy,  with  any  thing 
that  is  the  common  sickness  of  the  child  of  God,  let  him  get 
but  a  hearty  feast  upon  the  flesh  of  Jesus,  and  the  disease 
will  fly.  Christ  puts  such  vigor  into  the  spiritual  system  of 
his  own  people  when  they  feed  on  him,  that  they  eject  dis- 
eases as  strong  men  cast  them  off  by  the  force  of  their  con- 
stitution. Blessed  and  happy  is  he  who  eats  this  flesh,  for  it 
is  in  this  sense  meat  indeed. 

Once  more,  meat  is  used  constantly  by  us^or  th^  develop^ 
merU  of  strength.  The  man  ill-fed  cannot  lift  the  weight  that 
another  can  who  enjoys  more  generous  diet.  Lowness  of 
food  brings  littleness  of  strength.  Now  Jesus  Christ  is  l^e 
only  food  that  can  make  his  people  strong  for  service.  Feed 
on  him  and  ye  shall  run  and  not  be  weary,  ye  shall  walk 
and  not  faint.  He  is  meat  indeed; because  he  gives  us  a 
strength  that  is  all  but  boundless.  He,  when  we  feed  on  him, 
clothes  a  mortal  man  with  the  might  of  God.  The  feeblest 
Christian  in  the  Church,  when  he  has  fed  upon  Christ,  be- 
comes a  giant  to  suffer  or  to  do. 

I  cannot  enlarge  upon  all  these  points,  though  there  is 
enough  in  any  one  of  them  for  a  discourse,  but,  dear  child  of 
God,  seek  after  Christ,  and  be  not  satisfied  until  daily  you 
are  fed  and  nourished  upon  him. 

The  word  "  indeed'*^  gives  the  sentence  an  air  of  strong 
protest.  We  must  take  this  into  consideration.  Why  does 
he  say  that  his  flesh  is  T[iQ2i.VHndeed  ?  "^^  It  is  in  opposition 
to  mere  animal  and  corporeal  food^  which  is  meat,  but  not 
meat  'Indeed  "  You  think  that  bread  is  solid  nutriment.  So 
it  is,  speaking  one  way,  but  what  does  it  support  ?  It  sup- 
ports the  body,  and  the  body  you  say,  is  substantial.  So  in- 
deed it  is  to  the  eye  and  to  the  touch  ;  but  what  is  the  body  ? 
**A11  flesh  is  grass,  and  all  the  goodliness  thereof  is  as  the 
flower  of  the  field ;  the  grass  withereth,  and  the  flower  there- 
of fadeth  away ;  surely  the  people  are  grass."  This  body  19 


148     MEAT  INDEED  AND  DRINK  INDEED. 

io  little  a  while  here,  and  so  soon  dissolved,  that  I  may  safe- 
ly call  it  but  a  shadow ;  and  the  food  that  feeds  the  shadow 
cannot  itself  be  more  than  a  shade.  And  what  is  the  soiu 
within  us  ?  Why,  that  you  say  is  unreal.  Truly  so,  sirs, 
to  smell,  to  sight,  to  touch  ;  but  not  in  fact,  and  in  the  judg* 
ment  of  truth.  The  real  thing  about  a  man  is  his  inward 
self,  which  you  cannot  see — his  secret,  impalpable,  unseen, 
immortal  self.  Time's  tooth  does  not  touch  it,  nor  does  the 
scythe  of  Death  cut  it  down.  The  soul  is  the  real  man,  not 
the  body ;  and,  sirs,  the  food  which  feeds  the  soul  is  the  real 
food  after  all,  and  we  know  it  though  the  men  of  the  world 
turn  on  their  heel  and  say, "  Ah !  no,  the  bread  and  cheese,  the 
flesh  and  wine,  these  are  real ;  give  us  plenty  of  these."  Sirs, 
such  feed  the  shadow ;  but  the  truth  you  give  your  souls  to 
feed  upon,  that  it  is  which  in  God's  sight,  in  the  sight  of 
wise  men,  and  in  your  sight  if  you  have  any  spiritual  discern- 
ment, is  meat  indeed. 

It  is  meat  indeed,  in  contrast  with  the  typical  meats  of 
the  Old  Testament,  There  was  the  Paschal  Supper — surely 
that  was  a  glorious  feast,  when  after  it  the  people  went  their 
way  out  of  Egypt  rejoicing.  Yes,  but  'twas  only  a  deliver- 
ance from  a  common  temporal  slavery  ;  but  they  that  eat  the 
Paschal  Lamb  are  delivered  from  the  bondage  of  death  and 
hell,  for  his  flesh  is  meat  indeed.  In  the  wilderness  they  ate  the 
manna.  Yes,  but  every  day  it  seemed  to  tell  them  its  own 
unsubstantial  character,  from  the  fact  that  if  they  kept  it  till 
the  next  morning  it  bred  worms  and  stank.  But  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  is  food  that  never  corrupts.  Feed  on  him,  lay 
him  up  in  your  hearts,  and  you  shall  find  no  corruption  there. 
In  the  old  tabernacle  and  the  temple  there  were  the  loaves 
of  shew-bread,  and  these  were  meat  for  the  priest.  Ah  !  but 
the  shew-bread  was  nothing  but  a  type ;  and  to  the  priest, 
however  devoutly  he  might  receive  it,  the  stew-bread,  in  it- 
self, was  no  food  for  his  real  self,  but  only  for  his  corporeal 
frame.  And  I  may  say  the  same  of  the  bread  which  we  have 
upon  the  table  here  to-nigbt  at  communion ;  there  is  nothing 


MEAT  INDEED  AND  DRINK  INDEED.  I49 

in  it ;  it  is  a  mere  emblem  and  a  sign.  But  Christ's  flesh  is 
meat  indeed.  When  I  have  sometimes  seen  this  text  put 
over  the  table  commonly  used  for  what  is  called  the  "  Sacra- 
ment "  I  have  trembled  lest  people  should  be  led  into  the 
grievous  and  unnatural  error  of  transubstantiation.  When 
our  Lord  said, "  My  flesh  is  meat  indeed,"  he  could  not  mean 
that  bread  on  the  table,  for  the  Lord's  Supper  was  not  then 
instituted.  Li  this  particular  text,  at  any  rate,  there  can  be 
no  allusion  of  any  kind  to  what  is  called  "  the  Mass  "  by 
some,  or  by  others  styled  "the  Sacrament,"  because  the 
Lord's  Supper  was  not  brought  forward  by  our  Lord  until 
within  a  few  hours  of  his  death,  and  he  is  now  speaking  , 
months  before  that  time.  Beloved,  the  bread  is  bread,  and 
nothing  but  bread,  and  so  far  as  it  points  you,  like  a  sign- 
post, to  the  real  flesh  of  Christ,  so  far  so  good.  If  you  stop 
there,  I  can  only  say  of  it  that  this  bread  is  meat,  but  the 
flesh  of  Christ  is  meat  indeed. 

When  our  Lord  says,  "  My  flesh  is  meat  indeed^^  he  clear- 
ly distinguishes  it  from  every  other  hind  of  soul-meat. 
There  are  many  sorts  of  soul-meat.  Some  men  feed  their 
souls  on  their  own  doings.  "  Oh  !  "  say  they,  "  we  have 
prayed  ;  we  have  fasted ;  we  have  given  to  the  poor  ;  we  have 
been  upright ;  we  have  been  righteous ; "  and  their  soul 
feeds  on  that,  though  it  is  all  wind.  But  if  they  trusted 
Christ  it  would  be  meat  indeed.  Some  feed  on  ceremonies. 
They  have  been  baptized,  christened,  confirmed,  and  I  know 
not  what  besides.  Fine  confectionery  this,  but  it  is  all  wind. 
Christ  received  into  the  soul,  and  trusted  in  for  salvation,  is 
meat  indeed.  Some  have  grown  up  upon  false  doctrines,  or 
upon  true  ones  exaggerated,  and  these  bring  them  to  a  very 
fine  development  of  self-conceit  and  bigotry,  but  they  make 
no  solid  food  for  the  mind.  But,  oh !  beloved,  when  a  man 
can  say,  "  My  hope  is  in  the  Crucified  alone  ;  I  look  to  him 
every  day  ;  my  meditations  are  on  him ;  my  reading  is  much 
about  him;  my  prayers  are  all  sent  to  heaven  through  him; 
my  praises  are  for  him  ;  he  is  my  soul's  joy,  comfort,  strength| 


150  MEAT  INDEED  AND  DRINK  INDBBa 

and  help,"  then  he  has  the  meat  indeed  ;  he  will  be  a  strong 
man,  a  holy  man,  a  happy  man,  a  heavenly  man,  and  by 
aiul  by  he  shall  be  caught  up  to  dwell  where  Jesus  is,  on 
whom  he  has  fed. 

I  hope  I  have  made  th^s  clear.  It  is  thinking  upon  Jesus, 
trusting  in  Jesus,  that  is  the  eating,  Jesus  himself  being  the 
food.  Those  who  trust  in  him  and  rest  in  him  have  the  best 
of  soul-meat.    They  have  meat  indeed. 

IL  Christ's  blood  is  drink  indeed. 

Like  drink  to  the  body, the  blood  of  Jesus,  that  is  to  say, 
tie  merits  of  his  atoning  sacrifice,  sustains.  The  body  is 
not  to  be  built  up  without  some  liquid ;  the  system  needs  it. 
The  soul  is  not  to  be  sustained  without  considering  and  rest- 
ing on  the  substitutionary  siifiering  of  Jesus.  That  Jesus 
died  in  my  stead  and  suffered  for  my  sin  stimulates  my  hope, 
my  comfort,  my  joy ;  in  a  word,  my  whole  soul,  just  as  drink 
invigorates  the  physical  system. 

Drink  refreslies  the  body.  The  traveller  is  faint ;  it  is  a 
hot,  burning  day.  That  cool  brook — how  different  the  man 
looks  when  he  laves  his  face  in  it,  and  drinks  a  sweet,  cool- 
ing draught ;  and  so  the  blood  of  Jesus  refreshes  the  man 
who  trusts  in  it.  If  I  trust  that  Jesus  was  punished  for  me, 
and  I  am  clear  that  Jesus  died  for  me,  how  my  soul  seems  to 
have  gained  a  new  lifo,  how  it  revives.  Though  he  were 
dead,  yet  should  he  live  who  could  believe  in  this.  Though 
despair  held  a  man  in  a  fainting-fit  so  that  he  could  not  stir 
hand  or  foot,  yet  if  this  precious  doctrine  of  a  Saviour  dying 
for  him  were  believed  by  him,  his  heart  and  his  spirit  must 
revive  at  once. 

Drink  also  cleanses  the  body,  I  do  not  mean  washing,  but 
that  the  reception  of  the  water  into  the  system  flushes  all  the 
various  departments  of  the  frame,  and  no  doubt  the  liquid 
always  has  upon  the  human  body  a  healthy  influence  unless 
it  be  taken,  whatever  it  may  be,  intemperately.  It  is,  to  a 
great  extent,  made  life-fluid  of  the  system.     Now,  whenever 


MEAT'  INDEED  AND  DRINK  INDEED.      151 

you  get  JesuB  Christ  into  the  soul,  he  purifies  the  spiritual 
veius  right  if  the  blood  be  wrong  !  He  removes  all  impuri- 
ties from  the  spiritual  system ;  and  the  more  really  you  come 
to  rest  upon  a  bleeding  Christ,  the  more  sure  you  are  to  get 
rid  of  your  reigning  and  besetting  sins,  for  we  overcome 
them  through  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.  Christ's  blood  is  thus 
drink  indeed. 

Drink  also  cheers  tTie  man.  How  many  a  faint  heart  has 
been  cheered  when  the  cooling  draught  has  been  brought; 
*he  fainting  one  has  opened  her  eyes,  and  smiled.  And,  oh ! 
how  the  thoughts  of  a  dying  Christ  revive  the  fainting  soul, 
and  make  the  spirit  sing  that  once  was  ready  to  moan  and 
cry :  "  I  am  forgotten  ;  I  am  forsaken  ;  I  am  lost." 

Notice  the  word  "  indeed^^  for  it  occurs  again :  "  My 
blood  is  drink  indeed,"  in  opposition  to  all  carnal  drink,  for 
as  I  said  about  the  food,  that  it  is  but  a  shadow  to  support 
a  shadow,  so  it  is  with  the  drink — it  is  but  a  shade  to  sup. 
port  a  shade.  Christ's  blood  supports  the  spirit,  therefore  it 
is  drink  indeed. 

How  superior  to  aU  typical  drinks  !  There  was  the  water 
which  "flo wed  from  the  rock  when  it  was  smitten ;  there  were 
the  various  drinks  with  the  meat-offerings,  but  Jesus  Christ 
is  the  fulness  of  which  these  were  but  the  shadows. 

Christ  says,  "  My  blood  is  drink  indeed,"  as  though  utter- 
ly ignoring  all  other  soul-drink.  Some  men  drink  until  they 
are  drenched  with  earthly  pleasure.  Others  drink  until  they 
are  inflated  with  their  own  self-righteousness.  The  devil  has 
his  cups,  and  he  knows  how  to  fill  them  to  the  biim,  and 
make  them  sparkle  and  fascinate  the  eye.  But  let  men's 
souls  drink  of  these  draughts  till  they  come  to  the  dregs,  they 
shall  never  be  satisfied,  and  in  the  world  to  come  their  mis- 
ery shall  be  greater  if  they  have  had  any  satisfaction  here.  Bu 
oh  1  if  your  soul  can  get  to  the  precious  blood  of  Christ  and 
rest  there,  and  you  can  rejoice  that  Jesus  died  for  you,  you 
may  drink,  but  you  shall  never  be  inebriated  ;  you  may  drink, 
bnt  you  shall  never  know  satiety  ;  you  may  drink,  and  you 


IBS  HEAT  INDEED  AND  DRINK  INDEED. 

shall  possess  a  satisfaction  which  nothing  can  destroy,  which 
neither  time  nor  habit  can  cause  to  pall  on  your  palate,  and 
of  which  eternity  shall  be  but  a  blessed  prolongation.  Drink, 
thirsty  soul,  drink  at  the  fountain  of  the  Saviour's  blood,  and 
thou  shalt  thirst  no  more,  but  cry,  "  I  have  enough  ;  I  have 
found  in  Jesus'  atoning  blood  all  that  my  soul  can  want.*' 

ni.  Put  these  two  things  together.  It  appears,  according 
to  the  text,  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  both  kbat 

AND   DRINK   TOGETHER. 

So,  I  would  have  you  notice  tJie  suitability  ofJesua  Christ 
to  man's  wants,  Man  wants  meat  and  drink.  Jesus  is  what 
man  wants.  You  need  pardon  :  you  have  it  in  Christ.  You 
want  life,  eternal  life:  you  have  it  in  Christ.  You  want 
peace,  comfort,  happiness :  you  hav.e  all  in  Christ.  No  key 
ever  fitted  a  lock  so  well  as  Christ  fits  a  sinner.  You  are 
empty:  Christ  is  full.  You  cannot  have  a  want  that  he 
cannot  supply.     As  Giles  Fletcher  pithily  says: — 

"  Christ  is  a  path,  if  any  be  misled ; 
He  is  a  robe,  if  any  naked  be ; 
If  any  chance  to  hunger,  he  is  bread. 
If  any  be  a  bondman,  he  is  free  ; 
If  any  be  but  weak,  how  strong  is  he ! 
To  dead  men  life  he  is,  to  sick  men,  health ; 
To  blind  men,  sight ;  and  to  the  needy,  wealth ; 
A  pleasure  without  loss,  a  treasure  without  stealth/' 

There  never  was,  and  there  never  will  be,  a  repenting 
soul  that  was  beyond  the  saving  power  of  Jesus.  What 
a  suitable  Saviour  he  is  to  me !  That  I  can  say,  for  if 
Jesus  Christ  had  been  sent  into  this  world  for  me  only, 
he  could  not  have  suited  me  better  than  he  does  ;  and  if  he 
had  been  sent  for  you  only,  poor  trembling  sinner,  he  could 
not  have  fitted  you  better  than  he  will.  Why,  when  I  think 
of  Jesus  he  seems  to  be  all  mine,  and  I  am  sure  I  cannot  af- 
ford to  do  without  a  bit  of  him.  I  want  him  altogether,  and 
be  just  exactly  fills  my  soul  up  to  the  brim ;  and  you  shall 


MEAT  INDEED  AND  DRINK  INDEED.  153 

each  find  it  is  so  to  yourselfl    He  will  be  your  meat  and 
yonr  drink,  and  if  you  get  him  you  will  say  :— 

•'All  mj  cax)acioiis  powers  can  wish. 
In  thee  doth  richly  meet ; 
Nor  to  my  eyes  is  light  so  dear. 
Nor  friendship  half  so  sweet." 

If  Jesus  Christ  be  thus  meat  and  drink  together,  what 
fulness  there  is  in  him !  He  is  ngt  only  one  out  of  two  good 
things,  but  he  is  both.  A  man  with  meat  would  die,  let  him 
have  as  much  as  he  pleased  of  it,  if  there  were  nothing  to 
drink ;  a  man  with  drink  would  die,  if  there  were  nothing 
solid  for  him  to  eat.  Jesus  does  not  give  us  part  of  salva- 
tion, but  he  gives  us  all  of  it.  You  shall  find  in  Jesus  Christ 
every  thing  that  will  be  wanted  between  hell  and  heaven. 
All  the  way,  from  the  bars  of  Tophet  to  the  pearly  gates  of 
paradise  every  want  of  every  pilgrim  is  met  in  him.  Ten 
thousand  times  ten  thousand  as  his  people  are,  yet  all  of 
them  receive  all  that  they  want  from  him,  for  "  it  hath 
pleased  the  Father  that  in  him  should  all  fulness  dwell." 
"  All  fulness  " — mark  the  word.  "  Fulness  "  is  a  wide  word, 
but  "  all "  fulness  is  wider,  and  all  fulness  dwells  in  him, — 
that  is,  it  is  remaining  in  him,  always  fulness  and  always 
remaining  all  fulness ;  that  is  the  greatest  word  of  all.  He 
is  both  meat  and  drink ;  he  is  all  that  we  want. 

Consider,  too,  that  if  Christ  be  both  meat  and  drink, 
ioJkU  need  we  have  of  him  I  because  there  is  no  need  in  the 
world,  I  suppose,  that  is  greater  than  the  need  of  meat  and 
drink.  You  hear  the  shout  of  "  Fire  I "  in  the  street,  and 
it  startles  you  ;  but  those  who  have  ever  heard  the  cry  of 
**  Bread  ! "  in  a  bread  riot,  say  that  the  alarm  of  "  Fire ! "  is 
nothing  to  it.  There  is  something  so  sharp,  so  awful,  so  de- 
termined, so  ferocious,  so  like  the  yell  of  wild  beasts,  about 
men  and  women  that  scream  for  bread,  that  it  is  the  most 
awful  of  sounds.  And  "  Drink  ! "  What  a  word  that  must 
be  for  a  number  of  poor  wretches  shut  up  as  they  were  in 

7* 


154  MEAT  INDEED  AND  DBINE  INDEED. 

the  Black  Hole  of  Calcutta,  raving  through  those  little  win* 
dows  at  the  guard  outside  for  drink ;  and  stretching  out  their 
hands  and  beseeching  them  to  turn  their  carbines  upon  them, 
and  shoot  them,  rather  than  let  them  die  there  a  lingering 
death  of  suffocation  and  of  thirst !  How  when  a  little  water 
was  passed  in  they  fought  and  straggled  for  it,  if  so  be  a  man 
might  but  get  a  drop,  or  suck  a  handkerchief  that  had  been 
dipped  into  it,  and  linger  on  a  little  longer. '  Now,  nobody 
can  have  a  greater  need  than  an  actual  want  of  bread  and 
want  of  water ;  but  that  is  what  you  want,  my  dear  Mends 
who  are  without  Christ ;  your  soul  wants  bread  and  water. 
Think  not  that  you  are  rich  and  increased  in  goods  if  you 
have  not  Christ,  for  in  truth  you  are  naked,  and  poor,  and 
miserable.  If  you  do  not  trust  him,  love  him,  serve  him, 
your  poor  soul  has  not  even  a  drop  to  drink.  What  can  it 
do  but  die  ?  And  oh  I  what  must  be  its  wretchedness  when 
your  soul  shall  ask  for  a  drop  of  water  to  cool  its  tongue, 
tormented  in  that  flame  ?  While  others  are  feasting  you 
shall  have  the  gnashing  of  your  hungry  teeth  to  be  your  end- 
less portion.  God  grant  you  may  not  be  so  cruel  to  your 
souls  as  to  starve  them  by  going  without  Christ  I 

Ay,  and  if  Christ  be  meat  and  drink,  what  need  there  is  of 
a  real  reception  of  him.  If  you  get  meat  and  drink,  you 
cannot  make  use  of  them  unless  you  eat  and  di-ink  them. 
Take  meat  to  a  hungry  man  ;  hold  it  out  on  your  hand  and 
ask  him, "  Don't  you  feel  better  ?  "  "  No,"  saith  he.  «  Look 
at  it,  man ;  look  at  it."  "  No,  I  feel  more  hungry." 
**  But  cut  it ;  here  is  the  knife."  "  Oh ! "  saith  he,  "  what  is 
the  use  of  that  ?  You  mock  me  ;  I  want  to  get  it  between 
my  teeth  ;  I  want  to  get  it  worked  into  my  system,  or  else 
it  is  of  no  avail."  Hearer,  of  what  service  is  it  to  you  that 
you  come  and  listen,  Sunday  after  Sunday,  but  never  decide 
to  trust  Christ,  and  take  him  into  your  soul  ?  You  hear  me 
pom-  out  the  water,  but  you  do  not  drink.  You  see  it  spar- 
kle as  I  spoak  of  it,  but  you  do  not  receive  it.  What  is  the 
good  of  it  to  you?    Oh  !  you  will  perish,  you  will  perish 


MEAT  INDEED  AND  DRINK  INDEED.  156 

with  the  bread  withm  your  reach ;  with  the  clear  brook  of 
eternal  life  flowing  at  your  feet.  Why  this  folly !  You  act 
not  80  iu  other  things.  Men  are  not  satisfied  a\  ith  seeing 
gold  ;  they  want  to  take  it  home  and  put  it  in  their  pockets, 
and  how  is  it  that  they  are  content  with  hearing  about 
Christ, — with  talkin*^  about  Christ, — ^but  never  ask  for  real 
faith,  and  for  vital  union  with  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ?  See 
to  this,  I  pray  you ;  and  see  to  it  soon,  or  death  will  see 
to  you. 

Moreover,  if  Jesus  Christ  be  both  meat  and  drink,  be- 
loved in  the  Lord— I  speak  to  you  now — what  reason  there 
is  for  giving  thanks  I  I  said  in  the  reading  that  a  man  is 
very  unmannerly,  very  beast-like,  who  sits  down  to  his 
meat  and  his  drink  without  thanks.  Well,  then,  my  soul, 
whenever  thou  comest  to  feed  on  Christ — whenever  thou 
thinkest  on  him — and  that  shouldst  thou  do  always— ^always 
give  thanks.  The  true  spirit  of  a  Christian  is  perpetual 
thankfulness.  I  like  the  remark  of  a  dear  friend  who  is 
present  now,  who,  when  the  November  fogs  began,  said  to 
me  on  a  Sunday  morning,  "  I  tell  all  my  family  to  be  more 
cheerful  than  ever  now  the  dreary  weather  has  come,  so  as 
to  shake  off  the  dulness  around  us  by  keeping  up  cheerful- 
ness within."  Now,  you  are  always  feeding  on  Christ,  and 
BO  every  time  you  feed  you  ought  to  give  thanks ;  "  rejoice 
in  the  Lord  always,  and  again,  I  say,  rejoice."  They  used 
to  call  this  Supper,  in  the  ancient  church,"  the  Eucharist" 
— the  giving  of  thanks.  Well,  let  the  life  of  the  Christian 
be  a  constant  Eucharist,  and  as  he  feeds  on  Jesus  always, 
let  him  always  offer  this  tribute  of  praise — "  Thanks  be  unto 
God  for  his  unspeakable  gift." 

Yea,  and  if  Jesus  Christ  be  meat  and  drink,  then  here  is 
a  reason  vihy  you  Christians  should  he  very  earnest  to  tell  of 
him  to  others — to  hand  him  out.  Oh !  if  we  had  this  house 
full  of  bread  to-night,  and  there  were  a  famine  all  over  Lon- 
don, in  the  East  End,  the  West  End,  and  the  North  and  the 
South,  and  men  were  dropping  down  dead  in  the  streets. 


156      MEAT  INDEED  AND  DRINK  INDEED. 

and  they  were  crowding  outside  there,  out  at  the  Elephant 
and  Castle,  and  down  Newington-causeway,  I  know  what  I 
should  say,  if  the  bread  belonged  to  me :  "  Brethren  and  sis- 
ters, come  and  help  me.  Out  of  the  windows  with  it  I  Let 
the  hungry  creatures  come  in  at  every  door ;  let  them  crowd 
t  every  window ;  and  let  them  eat  to  the  fulL  And  if  they 
were  thirsty,  and  we  had  the  mains  laid  on  here,  and  there 
was  no  water  to  be  had  anywhere  else,  oh  I  I  am  sure  there 
is  not  a  little  child  here  but  would  be  glad  to  take  his  little 
tin  can  and  hand  out  a  draught  of  water  to  the  thirsty  peo- 
ple. Well,  you  then,  with  little  abilities,  who  love  Christ 
— tell  about  him  to  others.  He  is  meat  and  drink  to  the 
famishing  and  thirsty  ones.  K  he  were  merely  a  dainty,  I 
would  not  press  it ;  but  as  he  is  a  necessity  to  the  dying  sons  of 
men,  tell  them  about  him,  and  if  they  despise  him,  well  then 
you  have  done  your  part ;  but  if  they  perish  without  your 
telling  them  of  Christ,  their  blood  may  lie  at  your  door. 
Bethink  you,  while  you  are  going  home  to-night,  walking 
down  the  streets,  whether  there  is  any  house  you  pass  where 
there  is  a  man  living  who  can  charge  you  with  having  neg- 
lected him.  Do  not  let  it  be  so  any  longer,  but  seek  that, 
as  his  flesh  is  meat  indeed,  and  his  blood  is  drink  indeed, 
you  may  hand  out  Jesus  Christ  to  the  famishing  crowdsi 
that  they  may  be  satisfied. 

The  Lord  bless  you  richly,  for  his  name's  sake^ 


t. 


THOUGHTS  AND  THEIB  FRUTT.  IJff 


SERMON  X. 


THOUGHTS  AND  THEIR  FRUIT. 

**  THE  FBUIT  OF  THEIB  THOUGHTS."— JCF.  Vl.  19. 

Do  you  observe  here,  my  brethren,  how  God  declares  that 
he  would  not  only  punish  Israel  for  gross,  overt  acts  of  sin, 
but  that  he  would  also  bring  upon  the  nation  terrible  chas- 
tisements for  her  thoughts  ? — a  solemn  warning,  full  of  in- 
struction to  us. 

It  has  almost  passed  into  a  proverb,  that  "  thought  is 
free."  Whether  this  is  true  or  false,  an  axiom  or  a  solecism, 
must  depend  on  the  sphere  in  which  thought  moves.  It  is 
true  in  the  sense  of  thought  being  free  before  men,  since 
none  of  us  can  judge  our  neighbor's  thoughts,  nor  have  we 
any  right  to  attempt  the  task  Religious  opinion,  for  in- 
stance, is  not  a  thing  of  which  the  law  can  justly  take  cog- 
nizance. As  far  as  the  civil  government  is  concerned, 
whether  a  man's  sentiments  be  those  of  a  Christian  or  an 
idolater,  a  Catholic,  a  Protestant,  or  a  Mormonite,  he  is  en- 
titled to  all  civil  rights.  Be  he  who  he  may,  he  is  oppressed 
if  he  be  deprived  of  his  liberty,  or  of  any  privilege,  be- 
cause of  his  opinions.  Be  he  who  he  may,  he  is  injured  if 
any  one  sect  be  rendered  dominant,  or  be  supported  by  a 
forced  taxation  drawn  from  the  whole.  Thought  must  be 
free,  and  it  shall  be,  by  God's  help,  perfectly  free  as  be- 
tween man  and  man :  we  will  never  cease  to  wage  war  un- 
til it  is  so.  Whatever  tyrants  may  decree,  they  have  never 
yet  been  able  to  stop  the  progress  of  opinion.  Though 
they  have  crowded  all  their  prisons,  and  worn  out  their 


158  THOUGHTS  AND  THEIB  PBUIT. 

racks,  they  have  never  been  able  to  turn  a  graoious  man 
from  a  truth  which  he  has  embraced,  nor,  I  may  add,  have 
they  been  able  to  confirm  a  wavering  man  m  the  falsehood 
which  they  have  tried  to  thrust  upon  him.  Thought,  in 
that  s(jiise,  is  free  by  natural  right. 

Yet  there  is  another  side  to  the  same  question,  by  rea- 
son of  which  we  are  bound  to  make  this  solemn  protest — 
thought  is  not  free  from  before  God.  I  have  no  more  au- 
thority to  think  of  God  as  I  please,  than  I  have  to  act  be- 
fore him  as  I  please  ;  in  either  case  the  charge  of  licen- 
tiousness would  lay  against  me;  for  the  God  who  is  su- 
preme over  the  outward  actions  of  my  body,  is  likewise  the 
only  Lord  and  Governor  of  the  inward  motions  of  my 
spirit.  All  the  provinces  of  the  little  isle  of  Man  belong 
to  God,  the  great  Governor.  Over  body,  soul  and  spirit, 
he  is  Legislator  and  Lord. 

That  thought  in  this  sense  is  not  free  is  to  be  proved 
very  olea,T\j,  for  some  of  the  commandments  of  God  con- 
tained in  the  decalogtce,  particularly  relate  to  thought;  such, 
for  instance,  as,  "Thou  shalt  not  covet  thy  neighbor's 
house,  thou  shalt  not  covet  thy  neighbor's  wife,"  and  so  on. 
That  command  is  clearly,  particularly,  and  peculiarly  one 
relating  to  thought;  God's  law,  therefore,  takes  cognizance 
of  thought.  Moreover,  we  know  that  inspiration  has 
taught  us  in  the  one  hundred  and  thirty-ninth  Psalm,  that 
the  Lord  is  constantly  watching  our  thoughts.  He  knows 
them  before  they  are  known  to  us.  "  Thou  understandest 
my  thought  afar  off."  To  what  end,  think  ye,  does  God 
watch  our  thoughts,  but  with  this  view,  to  bring  us  into 
judgment  at  the  last  great  day,  for  every  idle  word,  and 
for  every  idle  imagination  and  thought  of  our  hearts? 
And,  my  brethren,  we  have  it  upon  record  that  God  not 
only  puts  the  law  to  work  upon  our  thoughts,  and  watcheft 
our  thoughts,  bat  that  Ae  is  also  angry  on  account  of  evil 
tho^xghts.  Need  I  remind  you  of  those  remarkable  words 
in  the  6th  chapter  of  Genesis  :  "  God  saw  that  the  wickednesi 


THOUGHTS  AND  THBIB  FRUIT.  159 

of  mas  was  great  in  the  earth,  and  that  every  imagination 
of  the  thoughts  of  his  heart  was  only  evil  continually. 
And  it  repented  the  Lord  that  he  had  made  man  on  the 
earth,  and  it  grieved  him  at  his  heart."  Do  not,  there- 
fore, make  light  of  evil  thoughts.  If  your  conscience  be 
awakened,  truly  awakened,  you  never  wilL  A  steeled  and 
•eared  conscience  may  look  upon  them  with  indiflference  ; 
those  whose  hearts  are  not  right  towards  God,  may  sneer 
at  the  idea  of  any  evil  consequence  coming  from  what  they 
fiimply  turn  over  in  their  minds;  but  if  you  have  a  tender 
heart,  if  God  has  been  .pleased  to  take  the  horniness  and 
callousness  from  off  your  conscience,  and  to  make  it  sensi- 
tive, you  will  say  at  once,  "  Oh,  save  my  soul  from  base 
and  wicked  thoughts ! "  Then  may  your  emotion  be  like 
that  of  David  when  he  said,  "Behold,  Thou  desirest  truth 
in  the  inward  parts,  and  in  the  hidden  part  thou  shalt  make 
me  to  know  wisdom." 

That  thoughts  are  of  the  utmost  importance,  may  like- 
wise be  inferred  from  the  fact  that  God  makes  them  here  the 
ground  of  punishing  his  people.  He  speaks  of  the  fruit  01 
their  thoughts.  That  which  bears  fruit  must  need  have 
some  ulterior  importance.  The  thought  in  itself  may  not 
be  a  very  great  thing,  but  what  will  it  come  to  ?  It  may 
be  even  a  very  little  thing,  but  what  will  be  the  end  there- 
of? Thoughts  of  evil  are  in  themselves  evil  thoughts.  It  is 
questionable  whether  we  can  even  read  the  report  of  our 
neighbor's  sin  without  producing  some  sinful  thoughts  in 
ourselves.  It  is  debateable  whether  a  person  can  have 
much  to  do  with  speaking  or  hearing  of  the  offences  of 
others,  without  in  some  degree  defiling  himself ;  for  as 
pitch  sticks,  and  soot  and  things  black  and  dirty,  defile  one 
by  the  slightest  contact,  so  doth  sin  in  any  shape  defile  by 
passing  over  the  mind.  Touched  by  the  hand  it  might 
scarcely  leave  any  discernible  mark  behind  ;  but  there  is  a 
distinct  impression  left  upon  the  mind;  so  that  every  pic- 
ture of  evil  which  passes  through  the  soul,  remains  there 


160  THOUGHTS  AND  THEIR  FRUIT. 

to  do  that  soul  injury.    The  thought  of  evil  is  in  itself 
sin. 

And,  what  is  more,  tJie  thofiighX  of  evil  pardlyzes  th6 
Jiner  facilities  of  the  soul  The  more  we  think  of  sin  and 
become  familiar  with  it,  the  less  terrible  does  it  become  to 
our  apprehension.  I  am  sure  this  is  the  result  when  men 
habituate  their  reveries  to  any  form  of  evil.  Could  the 
minds  of  men  who  have*  become  murderers  be  analyzed,  I 
doubt  not  it  would  be  found  that  they  had  been  a  long  time 
in  schooling  themselves  to  the  commission  of  the  horrible 
crime.  They  have  thought  upon  it,  meditated  and  deliberated 
about  it,  until  at  last  it  has  seemed  to  them  but  a  mere  trifle 
and  then  they  have  gone  forth  to  do  it  without  misgiving. 

I  do  not  believe  that  a  man  becomes  a  villain  all  at  onca 
He  puts  his  soul  to  school,  his  thoughts  are  his  teachers,  or 
rather  they  are  the  school-books  in  which  his  soul  reads ; 
and  at  last  he  becomes  capable  of  transacting  the  deeds  of 
a  scoundrel.  If  you  think  long  upon  any  sin,  the  chances 
are  that,  as  soon  as  the  temptation  to  that  sin  comes,  you  will 
commit  it.  I  have  known  persons  produce  a  monomania 
by  constant  brooding  upon  one  object.  I  did  once  know  a 
man  who  was  constantly  apprehensive  that  he  was  being 
poisoned  by  people;  and  I  always  stood  in  trepidation  for 
that  man,  lest  he  should  poison  himself.  If  you  will  har- 
bor the  thought — if  you  will  ruminate  on  any  sin,  turn  it 
over,  and  advise  with  it  on  your  pillow ;  your  affability  will 
disarm  your  fear  ;  and  the  traitor  you  have  harbored  will 
betray  you  before  your  suspicions  are  aroused.  Beware, 
then,  of  all  thoughts  of  sin.  If  you  show  a  thief  all  the 
locks  and  bolts  and  bars  in  your  house,  and  tell  him  how 
the  cellar- window  could  be  opened,  or  the  back-door  lock 
be  made  to  give  war,  do  not  be  surprised  if,  one  of  these 
nights,  you  should  find  all  your  goods  stolen.  If  you  intro- 
duce these  evil  thoughts  into  your  habitation,  you  cannot 
wonder  at  the  consequence,  however  startled  your  friendf 
may  be  at  the  detection, 

) 


THOUGHTS  AND  THEIR  FRUIT.  161 

It  is  certain  that  thoughts  are  the  eggs  of  sin.  These 
are  the  embryos  out  of  which  sins  spring — the  spawn  from 
which  every  form  of  iniquity  is  developed.  We  hear  some- 
times of  fever-lairs  and  pest-dens.  Evil  thoughts  are  just 
these.  They  are  the  jungles  where  the  monsters  of  sin 
nmluply  and  fatten.  Thoughts  of  sin  are  dark  woods  har- 
boring all  kinds  of  evil;  they  are  birds  of  prey  destroying 
all  sorts  of  good. 

Therefore,  as  God  takes  cognizance  of  our  thouglits,  let 
us  be  mindful  of  the  responsibility  they  entail  upon  us.  l^et 
us  no  longer  despise  them,  but  look  into  the  nursery  where 
they  are  reared,  and  begin  to  search  our  hearts,  and  to  judge 
ourselves  as  in  the  sight  of  Him  that  searcheth  the  reins. 

I.  Bad  thoughts  and  their  fruit  exhibit  a  very  large 
^rariety.  I  shall,  however,  but  refer  you  to  the  20th  chap- 
ter of  the  Book  of  Exodus,  where  the  Ten  Commandnienta 
will  help  us  to  a  list  of  thoughts,  all  of  which  are  horribly 
mischievous. 

The  first  command  which  God  gives  to  us  is  : — "  Thou 
shdU  have  no  other  gods  be/ore  Jfe."  That  is,  in  fact, 
"Thou  shalt  have  no  other  God  but  Me,"  since  God  is 
everywhere.  This  precept  is  easily  broken  in  the  thoughts. 
K  1  say  to  myself,  "  This  is  God's  law,  but  the  contrary  ac- 
tion will  be  most  to  my  profit,"  then  I  make  myself,  or  my 
money,  my  God.  If  on  any  occasion  I  say  within  myself^ 
"I  clearly  perceive  that  I  ought  not  to  indulge  in  that  sin, 
but  then  it  will  give  me  great  pleasure  ; "  should  I  still  in- 
<lulge  in  it,  then  I  make  pleasure  my  God — that  is  to  say, 
myself.  I  worship  myself  instead  of  God.  This  is  a  sin 
the  essence  of  which  must  lie  in  the  thoughts,  in  the  judg- 
ment, in  the  aflfections.  You  need  not  make  an  image  of 
gold,  or  of  wood,  and  bow  down  before  it.  You  can  be- 
come a  thorough-paced  idolater  in  the  temple  of  your  heart 
by  offering  homage  to  your  own  self-will. 

The  second  commandment  contains  a  further  prohibir 


162  THOUGHTS  AND  THEIR  FRUIT. 

tion,  "  Th(yu  ahalt  not  make  to  thyself  any  graven  linage^ 
and  so  on.  That  is,  "  Thou  shalt  not  worship  God  under  any 
symbol ;  thou  shalt  not  worship  God  through  any  symbol ;  ** 
or,  in  spirit,  "Thou  shalt  not  worship  God  in  any  way 
wliich  God  has  not  commanded  ;"  "Thou  shalt  not  invent 
to  iLyself  methods  and  modes  of  worehip,  but  thou  shalt  do 
BS  God  commands  thee."  Now,  we  can  very  easily,  in  our 
thoughts,  fabricate  an  image.  This  is  what  we  most  of  us 
flo.  We  say  and  think  that  God  is  altogether  such  a  one^s 
we  are ;  and,  having  formed  to  ourselves  an  idea  of  God,  we 
bow  down  before  it^  and  say, "  These  be  thy  gods,  O  Israel ! " 
Brethren,  you  may  be  as  much  an  idolater  by  worshipping 
a  god  whom  your  fancy  has  made  as  by  worshipping  a 
block  of  stone.  That  incomprehensible  One,  who  has  pro- 
claimed himself  in  Scripture  according  to  the  mysterious 
attributes  of  his  Being,  and  has  further  revealed  himself 
in  the  person  of  the  Lord  Jesus  so  sweetly  and  gloriously — 
this  is  the  God  we  must  worship.  We  must  not  make  a 
god  but  take  the  God  whom  the  Scripture  reveals.  We  are 
not  to  fashion  in  our  thoughts  a  God  such  as  we  should  like 
him  to  be — a  God  who  is  pure  benevolence,  but  who  has 
no  justice  ;  but  we  must  take  the  God  of  Scripture — grandly 
stern,  severely  dreadful  in  his  wrath,  while  he  is  unbound- 
ed in  his  compassion,  and  is  ever  gracious  and  full  of  mercy. 
We  must  acknowledge  the  God  of  the  Bible,  and  not  make 
a  deity  to  ourselves,  or  else  in  our  thoughts  we  have  broken 
the  divine  law,  and  the  fruit  of  that  thought  will  be,  that 
we  shall  be  idolaters,  and  sin  will  be  laid  at  our  door. 

The  third  command,  as  you  will  clearly  perceive,  can  bo 
broken  without  saying  a  word  :; — ^"  Thou  shalt  not  taketJie 
name  of  the  Lord  thy  God  in  vain.'*'*  Light  thoughts  of 
God,  irreverence  of  soul  towards  him,  is  a  violation  of  this 
solemn  interdict.  You  have  but  to  think  lightly  of  hig 
name,  and  you  have  blasphemed  it.  Before  your  mouth 
has  been  opened  to  utter  the  rash  expression,  the  rebellioof 
thought  is  a  profanation  of  the  Most  High. 


tHOTTGHTS  AND  TfiEIR  FRtriT.  163 

As  for  the  law  of  the  Sabbath  in  the  fourth  command, 
which  binds  our  race,  that  is  readily  enough  violated  by  us 
all.  Do  not  suppose  that  you  are  a  keeper  of  the  Sabbath 
"because  you  do  no  work  with  your  hands ;  you  are  just  as 
guilty  if  you  work  with  your  brain.  You  are  to.  rest  on 
that  da/  from  all  your  own  works.  Do  as  much  as  y^\xi 
please  for  God  on  that  day,  but  your  mind  should  lay  aside 
its  care.  You  must  not  bring  your  shop  here  ;  you  migLt 
almost  as  well  stop  at  home  and  carry  on  trade.  You 
must  not  bring  your  secular  burdens  into  the  house  of  God. 
Nay,  my  brethren,  leave  them  at  the  door,  and  ask  God's 
grace  that  you  may  rise  this  day  from  all  these  things,  and 
give  your  heart  and  mind  entirely  to  the  worship  of  him 
who  has  sanctified  the  day  unto  himself.  You  see,  then, 
that  this  command  may  readily  be  broken  without  any  overt 
act,  and  the  breach  destroys  the  validity  of  the  Sabbath  to 
you.  It  yields  you  no  comfortable  rest  while  your  mind  is 
toiling,  and  tugging,  and  straining  about  a  thousand  trou- 
bles and  difficulties ;  but  if  you  kept  the  command  in  your 
spirit  it  would  be  a  sweet  and  blessed  rest  to  you. 

We  turn  now  to  the  second  table,  the  commands  which 
I'elate  to  men.  "  Honor  thy  father  and  thy  mother.'*'*  Ah  ! 
when  we  were  children,  and  since  then,  unkind  and  unhal- 
lowed thoughts  of  our  parents  have  been  ((uite  sufficient  to 
convict  us  of  offence  against  this  law.  Without  a  disobe- 
dient action,  without  a  rebellious  word,  the  child  in  thought 
may  be  a  rebel  to  his  parents. 

"  Thou  shalt  not  kill ;"  but  Christ  tells  us  that  "  he  that 
is  angry  with  his  brother  without  cause  is  a  murderer  al- 
ready ; "  so  that  thought  can  slay  and  kill,  and,  indeed,  it 
is  the  angry  thought  that  lays  the  foundation  of  the  deadly 
stroke.  There  would  be  no  murdering  and  slaying  if  there 
were  no  enmity.  Men  would  not  march  to  slay  each  other, 
surely,  or  waylay  their  hapless  victims,  and  do  desperate 
deeds  of  violence,  unless  first  of  all  their  souls  were  set  on 
fire  of  helL 


104  THOUGHTS  AND  THEIR  FBtTlT. 

"  Thou  shaU  not  commit  adultery ?^  Little  will  I  say  en 
this  ;  but  here  is  the  Lord's  own  exposition  of  it — "  He  that 
looketh  on  a  woman  to  lust  after  her,  hath  committed  adul- 
tery with  her  already  in  his  heart."  Fornication  may  thus 
abound  in  us  to  our  defilement  and  our  souls'  ruin,  even 
though  we  may  still  be  kept  back  by  fear,  mayhap,  from  the 
conmiission  of  the  evil  deed.  Beware,  then,  thou  who  canst 
gloat  upon  evil ;  thou  who  canst  suck  the  forbidden  sweet 
behind  the  door  ;  thou  who  canst  roll  the  sweet  morsel  un- 
der thy  tongue ;  beware  lest  thou  have  thy  portion  with  those 
who  fall  into  the  sin.  I  say  not  that  the  thought  of  the  sin 
is  as  bad  as  the  sin  itself ;  it  cannot  be  so,  certainly,  in  its 
result  to  others,  but  still  it  is  a  sin,  and  a  sin  to  be  answer- 
ed for  in  that  tremendous  day,  when  the  Judge  of  all  the 
earth  shall  allot  their  portions  unto  men. 

"  Thou  shalt  not  stecUJ*^  Every  envious  thought  of  an- 
other man,  every  desire  to  possess  myself  of  what  is  not 
mine  ;  every  thing  of  this  sort  in  which  I  would  grasp  that 
which  does  not  belong  to  me,  is  a  constructive  theft.  The 
thief  does  not  so  much  steal  when  he  puts  out  his  hand  to 
take  his  neighbor's  purse,  as  in  the  thought  which  led  him 
to  do  it,  for  the  hand  may  sometimes  take  the  purse,  without 
offence — it  may  be  to  protect  the  property  of  one  who  is 
disabled  and  incapable  of  guarding  it  himself.  Such  a  thing 
is  supposable  that  one  man  might  take  another's  purse 
legitimately,  and  have  a  right  so  to  do.  It  is  not  the  act, 
but  the  motive  when  he  deliberately  ventures  to  take  that 
which  is  not  his  own,  and  would  possess  himself  of  his 
neighbor's  goods  to  his  neighbor's  injuiy — this  constitutes 
the  very  virus  and  soul  of  the  theft. 

"  T/iou  shalt  not  bear  false  loitness  against  thy  neighbor,''^ 
If  I  think  hardly  of  my  neighbor  without  a  cause  ;  if  I  con- 
ceive an  unjust  prejudice  against  him;  if  I  look  coldly  upon 
him  when  he  really  does  not  deserve  it ;  if  I  make  up  my 
mind  out  of  some  whim  or  fancy  that  he  is  a  bad  fellow, 
and  shrug  my  shoulders,  and  I  know  not  what   besideS| 


tfiOtrcJHtS  A*rD  tHElR  FRUIT.  165 

though  I  have  never  said  a  word,  yet  still  in  thought  I  have 
borne  false  witness  against  my  neighbor.  Above  all  things, 
brethren,  do  avoid  that  shoulder-shrugging.  It  is  an 
abomination  !  We  sometimes  see  it  in  company.  Ah ! 
they  will  not  dare  to  say  what  it  means — the  cowards  I 
You  might  suppose  that  a  man  against  whom  it  is  directed 
hai  killed  his  mother  if  you  liked,  for  you  are  sure  to  sup- 
pose the  worst.  Do  be  brave  enough,  if  the  charge  must  be 
spoken,  to  speak  it ;  and  if  it  must  not  be  spoken,  well  then 
do  not  say  it  in  that  mysterious  language  which  may  effectu- 
ally ruin  a  man  in  the  estimation  of  others.  Avoid  any  false 
witnessing  in  your  thoughts,  and  you  will  not  bear  it  in  your 
words. 

To  the  last  precept  of  the  catalogue  I  have  already  re- 
ferred: a  is  especially  a  thought-command.  "  Thou  shalt  not 
covet,'*''  All  greedy  desires  which  make  us  wish  to  get  our 
neighbors'  goods  to  the  injury  of  others  are  sins,  and  the 
fruits  of  such  thoughts  are  guilt,  punishment,  and  the  wrath 
to  come. 

Let  me  now  conduct  you  a  step  further,  to  another  set  of 
evil  thoughts,  which  could  not  be  very  easily  comprised  in 
my  outline  of  the  decalogue. 

There  are  self-righteous  thoughts — the  supposition  that 
we  are  not  so  sinful  as  God  says  we  are,  the  conceit  that  we 
may,  perhaps,  work  ourselves  out  of  our  difficulties,  and 
force  our  way  to  heaven.  Now,  the  fruit  of  such  a  thought 
as  this  will  be  amazement  in  the  day  when  God  will  strip 
us  of  our  self-righteousness,  and  make  us  stand  naked,  to 
our  eternal  shame.  Beware  of  self-righteous  thoughts,  my 
hearers!  They  are  the  Tarpeian  rock  from  which  Satan 
has  hurled  thousands  of  souls.  It  were  better  for  you  that 
a  mill-stone  were  fastened  about  your  neck,  and  that  you 
were  cast  into  the  midst  of  the  sea,  than  that  you  should 
thank  God  that  you  are  not  as  other  men,  when  after  all 
you  ai;ie  as  corrupt  as  other  men,  and  will  perish  as  they  did. 
Self-righteousness  keeps  you  from  coming  to  Christ,  and 


166  THOtJGHTS  AND  THEIR  FRUTT. 

certainly  it  excludes  you  from  eternal  life,  and  will  close  tloM 
gates  of  heaven  against  you.  God  deliver  us  from  the  fiiiit 
of  such  thoughts  I 

Then,  again,  proud^  boa^tfuly  vain^glorious^  idf-^eeking 
thoughts  are  alike  obnoxious.  How  highly  some  people 
think  of  themselves  I  You  can  see  it  in  their  gait,  and  their 
speech  bewrayeth  them.  Yet  their  wine  is  all  froth,  and 
their  gold  is  counterfeit.  Their  speech,  when  they  begin 
to  tell  of  what  they  have,  and  what  they  can  do,  and  what 
they  did  do  upon  such  and  such  occasions — all  this  is  an 
abomination  to  honest  men  ;  but  their  thoughts  must  be  very 
abominable  to  God.  It  is  one  of  the  things  which  he  says 
he  hates — ^"a  proud  look."  God  grant  us  grace  to  be  rid  of 
every  proud  thought,  for  we  have  nothing  to  be  proud  o£ 
A  proud  man  is  nothing  but  a  wind-bag,  and  when  either 
the  ills  of  life  or  the  crisis  of  death  shall  put  a  pin  into  it, 
what  a  collapse  there  will  be,  how  the  haughty  one  will  dis- 
cover himself  to  be  nothing  but  emptiness  and  vanity !  Get 
rid  of  proud  thoughts,  for,  oh !  what  will  they  not  do  ?  Pride 
dragged  an  angel  from  heaven,  and  made  a  devil  of  him,  and 
pride  would  drag  any  of  us  down  to  the  level  of  the  devil 
if  we  fall  into  its  snare. 

Another  set  of  thoughts,  more  common  still  and  i  ot  much 
decried,  are  murmuring  thoughts.  Ah  me  I  how  full  some 
people  are  of  these  !  They  can  hardly  speak  but  -^  hat  thoy 
have  something  to  grumble  about.  Trade  with  them  is  al- 
ways bad.  Ever  since  I  have  been  io  London  trade  has  been 
bad,  but  it  is  even  worse  now.  It  never  was  so  bad  as  it  is 
now,  except  that  it  was  just  as  bad  last  year ;  and,  as  far  as 
I  know,  has  always  been  at  the  worst.  Farmers  never  have, 
to  the  best  of  my  recollection,  had  more  than  "  an  average 
crop,"  and  most  years  there  has  been  a  failure.  If  the  wheat 
has  been  good,  the  turnips  have  always  gone  ba  1,  or  some- 
thing. I  notice  murmuring  to  be  a  very  commoL  thing  with 
many  people,  and  you  no  sooner  sit  down  in  thjir  cottage 
than,  instead  of  telling  you  that  some  one  has  bfjen  tber^  to 


(THOUGHTS  AND  THEIH  FRUIT.  167 

help  them  a  little  and  give  them  some  assistance,  they  say 
they  have  only  the  parish  allowance — a  miserable  pittance ! 
So  it  is ;  but  they  forget  the  mercies  that  they  have.  Why 
should  I  be  always  telling  how  often  I  have  rheumatic  pains, 
and  how  many  times  I  find  that  there  is  something  wrong 
with  my  constitution  ?  Why  should  I  make  it  my  constant 
habit  to  compel  everybody  to  be  miserable  wherever  1  go  ? 
"Well,"  says  one,  "  but  you  know  w^e  cannot  help  it ! "  My 
dear  friend,  then  if  you  do  not  help  it  I  will  tell  you  what 
will  be  the  fruit  of  it — you  will  make  yourselves  incorrigibly 
miserable.  You  w^ill  bring  yourselves  into  a  desperate  state, 
in  which  nothing  will  comfort  you.  I  do  believe  that  in  this 
respect  we  are- very  much  our  own  masters.  Not  all  the 
boimties  of  Providence  can  make  us  happy,  if  we  have  a 
thankless,ungrateful  heart.  You  may  have  all  that  the  world 
can  give  you,  and  yet  be  wretched ;  or  you  may  be  very, 
very  poor,  and  yet  be  cheerful.  A  thankful  heart  is  essen* 
tial,  and,  oh !  may  God  be  pleased  to  give  us  that  thankful 
heart !  But  what  I  want  you  to  remember  is  that  murmur 
ing  is  a  great  sin.»  They  murmured  against  God  in  the 
wilderness,  and  He  sent  fiery  serpents  among  them.  God 
thinks  much  of  our  complaints  against  his  providential  deal- 
ings with  us ;  let  us  not  think  so  little  of  the  sin  of  provok- 
ing Him  with  our  thoughts. 

How  prone  we  are  likewise  to  cherish  unbelieving  thoughts. 
Oh !  that  we  were  all  rid  of  these,  but. I  suppose  if  I  went 
round  these  galleries  I  should  find  in  every  pew  somebody 
who  has  unbelieving  thoughts.  We  fancy  that  God  will 
forsake  us ;  that  Providence  will  turn  against  us.  We  get 
like  old  Jacob,  when  he  said,  "  Joseph  is  not,  and  Simeon 
is  not.  and  now  ye  will  take  Benjamin  away;  all  these 
thii.gs  are  against  me ;"  whereas  everything  is  working 
for  us,  only  we  cannot  see  it.  Begone,  unbelief,  for  the 
fruit  of  unbelieving  thoughts  is  weakness,  sorrow,  re- 
bellion against  God,  and  I  know  not  what  else^of  rash- 
ness and  presumption.    God  save  us  from  these  thoughts  I 


168  IBOUQHtS  AND  THEIR  FRtJIT 

Procrastinating  thoughts  have  been  the  fimitfiil  souroe 
of  mischief  to  full  many  of  you.  You  have  good  thoughts 
and  good  resolves,  but  you  always  put  these  things  0%  and 
think  that  better  times  will  come  for  leaving  off  your  sins 
and  seeking  to  Christ ;  albeit  you  are  making  a  fearful  waste 
of  time,  and  running  a  perilous  risk,  and  it  is  to  be  dreaded 
that  your  souls  will  be  lost  at  the  last. 

Others  of  us  have  to  complain  of  wandering  thoughts 
when  toe  are  worshipping  God,  and  the  fruit  of  these  is  to 
spoil  the  golden  seasons,  which,  well  used,  might  yield  great 
profit.  Oftentimes  when  the  service  has  been  fitted  enough 
to  minister  refreshment  and  instruction,  and  others  have 
been  nourished  by  the  word,  some  poor  soul  goes  out  and 
says,  "I  have  not  enjoyed  it  at  alL"  Why,  of  course  not,  for 
your  thoughts  have  been  elsewhere.  These  are  the  birds 
that  come  down  upon  the  sacrifice ;  if,  like  Abraham,  we 
drive  them  away,  we  shall  be  able  to  worship  in  peace ;  but 
if  not,  the  fruit  of  wandering  thoughts  in  the  house  of  God 
is  that  the  service  is  spoiled.  So  too  in  the  closet,  whether 
ostensibly  engaged  in  private  devotion,«or  the  reading  of 
Scripture,  unless  the  thoughts  be  centred  upon  the  subject  in 
band,  there  can  be  no  spiritual  gain  in  drawing  near  unto  Gk>d. 

n.  For  a  few  minutes  now  let  us  think  of  brighter  things, 
while  I  mention  a  few  good  thoughts  and  thsib  PRurr, 

"Of  which,"  says  an  apostle,  "we  cannot  now  speak 
particularly,"  when  he  had  a  long  list  and  a  sBort  space :  so 
I  must  say  now.  K  you  would  have  good  fruit  in  your  soul, 
cultivate  humble  thoughts,  No  man  was  ever  injured  by  hav- 
ing too  lowly  a  view  of  himself  The  best  definition  of 
humility  I  ever  heard  was  this — "  To  think  rightly  of  our- 
selves." To  think  of  ourselves  as  below  the  standard  is 
meanness  ;  to  think  of  ourselves  above  the  standard  is  pride ; 
but  to  form  a  right  estimation  of  ourselves  is  true  humility. 
Avoid  the  counterfeit  which  is  in  the  world — ^that  is  mock 
humility.      Be  truly  humble.      Have  low  thoughts  of  youp- 


iraotJGHTS  AI^D  THEIR  FRUIT.         '        l^fr 

selyes,  especially  before  God.  Penitent  thoughts  of  sin, 
bumble  views  with  regard  to  Divine  grace,  and  a  close  ac- 
count of  your  own  responsibility  are  indispensable  ;  so  you 
will  find  that  humility  will  sweep  out  the  chamber  of  your 
floul,  and  prepare  it  for  the  incoming  of  the  Great  Prince. 

Cultivate  very  much  forgiving  thoughts  towards  your 
ftUtyoHfnen,  Never  be  hard  to  be  persuaded  to  pardon  an 
ofience.  He  that  taketh  his  brother  by  the  throat  will  be 
Bure  to  be  taken  by  the  throat  himself.  Evil  for  evil,  it  is 
said,  \h  beast-like ;  good  for  good  is  man-like  \  evil  for  good 
is  devil-like  ;  but  good  for  evil  is  God-like.  Try  to  do  it, 
and  if  any  thing  can  make  the  bells  ring  in  your  heart,  it 
will  be  to  forgive  one  who  has  very  greatly  ard  wantonly 
injured  you.  The  worse  the  offence,  if  you  can  overlook  it, 
the  greater  will  be  your  own  joy,  and  the  better  proof  will 
you  have  that  you  are  a  child  of  God. 

Go  to  bed  each  night,  and  wake  up  each  morning  i\  ith  ad- 
miring  thoughts  of  God's  goodness^  and  with  adoring  thoughts 
towards  God's  greatness.  You  will  find  these  thoughts  to 
be  like  bees,  that  will  come  home  to  you  laden  with  honey. 
Let  your  soul  be  a  hive  of  them.  Worship  the  Lord. 
Think  much  of  him.  Let  every  blessing  you  receive  make 
you  think  of  him.  Do  not  come  to  the  table  and  hurriedly 
offer  what  we  call  "  grace,"  because  it  is  the  custom  to  do 
so,  and  then  have  done  with  thanks,  but  let  your  soul  really 
see  God's  hand  in  every  thing  that  is  on  the  table.  We 
need  not  fear  worldly  thoughts  if  we  were  to  sanctify  these 
worldly  blessings.  Said  one — "  The  road  on  which  I  tread 
makes  me  think  of  Christ — the  way.  The  door  through 
which  I  pass  makes  me  think  of  Christ — the  door.  I  cinnot 
handle  money  but  what  I  think  that  I  am  not  my  own,  but 
bought  with  a  price.  I  do  not  receipt  a  bill  without  recol 
lecting  that  he  has  blotted  out  the  handwriting  of  ordi 
nances  that  was  against  me.  I  cannot  talk  to  my  fellow-man, 
and  receive  my  answer,  without  thinking  how  I  talk  with 
Gk>d,  and  bow  be  answers  me."  Li  such  manner  with  many 
8 


170  THOUGHTS  AKl)  THEIR  PRUlt. 

thoughts  of  God,  you  will  find  the  fruit  of  heayenly-inind* 
edness  in  your  spirit.  Angels  will  go  to  and  fro  between 
you  and  the  courts  of  the  Most  High,  if  you  have  many  of 
these  admiring  and  adoring  thoughts  of  Goi 

Thankful  thoughts  are  well  deserving  your  high  encour- 
agement. Get  a  cage  full  of  these  birds  of  paradise,  and 
let  them  fly  about  in  the  groves  of  your  ^oul,  and  sing  there 
at  all  times.  There  is  no  better  companion  than  cheerful 
gratitude.  If  a  man  can  but  see  the  mercy  of  God  in  every 
thing,  instead  of  looking  always  at  the  black  side  of  the 
picture,  he  will  be  happy  indeed.  The  fruit  of  thankful 
thoughts  will  be  summer  in  his  soul,  even  when  the  winds 
of  winter  rage  outside.  Cultivate  thankful  thoughts  as  you 
cultivate  sweet  flowers  in  your  garden. 

Yet  again  dear  friends,  get  many  and  abundant  belieV' 
ing  thoughts.  When  thou  canst  not  see  thy  way,  still  trust 
in  thy  Lord.  Believe  in  him.  Though  every  thing  should 
give  the  lie  to  the  promise,  still  believe  the  promise  to  be 
true. 

Abound  much  in  thoughts  of  submission  to  God,  Ev- 
ery morning  exercise  such  thoughts.  Put  thy  soul  into 
God's  hand  that  he  may  deal  with  thee  according  to  his 
will  all  the  day ;  and  each  night,  when  thou  reviewest  the 
day,  thank  God  for  it  all,  whatever  it  may  'have  been,  know- 
ing that  it  must  be  good,  nay,  must  be  best  if  God  has  or- 
dered it. 

I  will  finally  say — seek,  believer,  to  have  many  longing 
thoughts  after  Christ,  Have  longing  thoughts  to  be  with  him 
where  he  is.  Let  Christ  have  thy  best  thoughts — the  cream  of 
tliem.  Let  him  have  the  first  growth  of  your  spirit.  Be  with 
? lira  in  waking  and  ask  for  "  a  morning  without  clouds."  Say 
to  him  in  the  evening — "  Abide  with  us,  for  the  day  is  far 
spent."  And  if  you  lie  awake  at  night,  still  seek  to  have 
somi^  precious  thought  of  Christ,  like  a  wafer  made  with 
honey,  to  put  under  your  tongue.  Oh  !  we  can  bring  heav- 
en down  to  earth  if  we  can  take  our  thoughts  up  to  heaven. 


THOUGHTS  AND  THEIR  FRUIT.  171 

If  thouglils  be  the  wings,  and  the  spirit  be  the  wind,  we  will 

fly  away  to  the  celestial  Paradise.    We  cannot  climb  to 

Pisgah's  top  and  stand  on  Kebo,  and  look  to  the  promised 
land  except  in  our  thoughts,  but  our  thoughts  can  take 

as  to 

"  Jerusalem  the  golden. 
With  milk  and  honey  blest." 

Thought  can  introduce  us  to  the  apostles  and  martyrs. 
Thought  can  wrap  us  in  white  robes,  and  put  crowns  upon 
our  brow.  Thought  can  learn  the  music  of  the  spheres,  and 
unite  in  the  everlasting  song.  Thought  can  enter  into  fel- 
lowship with  God,  and  make  us  lie  in  Jesus'  bosom. 

Be  much,  then,  in  such  thoughts  as  these,  and  may  the 
fruit  of  your  thoughts  be  such  as  God  himself  may  delight 
in,  to  Jesus  Christ's  praise.    Amen. 


"1 


171  THE  CX)yENAJfT 


SERMON  XL 


THE  COVENANT. 

"lOBTBIBIBTHBOOTZNAlTTTHATIWILLlCAKS  WITH  THB  HOUSS  OF  ISBABL . 

THOSE  DATS,  SAITH  THX  LOBD ;   I  WILL  PUT  XT  LAWS  INTO  THBIB  UND,  AXD 
WBTTB  THEH  IN  THBIB  HEARTS  ;   AND  I  WILL  BE  TO  THBX  A  flOl},  AND  THET  8KAXA 

BE  TO  XE  A  PEOPLE."— Heb.  viil.  10. 

Thb  doctrine  of  the  covenant  lies  at  the  root  cf  all  true 
theology.  It  has  been  said  that  he  who  well  understands 
the  distinction  between  the  covenant  of  works  and  the  cov- 
enant of  grace,  is  a  master  in  divinity.  I  am  persuaded  that 
most  of  the  mistakes  which  men  make  concerning  the  doc- 
trines of  Scripture,  are  based  upon  fundamental  errors  with 
regard  to  the  covenants  of  law  and  of  grace.  May  Grod 
grant  us  now  the  power  to  instruct,  and  you  the  grace  to 
receive  instruction  on  this  vital  subject. 

The  human  race,  in  the  order  of  history,  as  far  as  tlus 
world  is  concerned,  first  stood  in  subjection  to  God  under 
the  covenant  of  works.  Adam  was  the  representative  man. 
A  certain  law  was  given  hun.  K  he  kept  it,  he  and  all 
his  posterity  would  be  blessed  as  the  result  of  obedience. 
K  he  broke  it,  he  would  incur  the  curse  himself,  and  entail 
it  on  all  represented  by  him.  That  covenant  our  first  fa- 
ther broke.  He  fell ;  he  failed  to  fulfil  his  obligations :  in 
liis  fall  he  involved  us  all,  for  we  were  all  in  his  loins,  and 
he  represented  us  before  God.  Our  ruin, then,  was  complete 
before  we  were  bom ;  we  were  ruined  by  him  who  stood 
as  our  first  representative.    To  be  saved  by  the  works  of 


THE  COVENANT.  178 

the  Isw  is  impossible,  for  nnder  that  covenant  we  are  already 
lost.  If  saved  at  all  it  must  be  on  qnite  a  different  plan, 
not  on  the  plan  of  doing  and  being  rewarded  for  it,  for 
that  has  been  tried,  and  the  representative  man  in  whom  it 
was  tested  has  failed  for  us  all.  We  have  all  failed  in  his 
failure ;  it  is  hopeless,  therefore,  to  expect  to  win  Divine 
favor  by  any  thing  that  we  can  do,  or  to  merit  Divine 
blessing  by  way  of  reward. 

But  Divine  mercy  has  interposed,  and  provided  a  plan 
of  salvation  from  the  fall.  That  plan  is  another  covenant, 
a  covenant  made  with  Christ  Jesus  the  Son  of  God,  who  \a 
fitly  called  by  the  Apostle,  "  the  Second  Adam,"  because  he 
fit  .od  again  as  the  representative  of  men.  Now,  the  second 
covenant,  so  far  as  Christ  was  concerned,  was  a  covenant  of 
works  quite  as  much  as  the  other.  It  was  on  this  wise. 
Christ  shall  come  into  the  world  and  perfectly  obey  the  Di- 
vine law:  he  shall  also,  inasmuch  as  the  first  Adam  has 
broken  the  law,  suffer  the  penalty  of  sin.  If  he  shall  do  both 
of  these,  then  all  whom  he  represents  shall  be  blessed  in  his 
blessedness,  and  saved  because  of  his  merit.  You  see,  then, 
that  until  our  Lord  finished  his  substitutionary  work,  it  was 
a  covenant  of  works  towards  him.  He  had  certain  works 
to  perform,  upon  condition  of  which  certain  blessings  should 
be  given  to  us.  Our  Lord  has  kept  that  covenant.  His 
part  of  it  has  been  fulfilled  to  the  letter.  There  is  no  com- 
mandment which  he  has  not  honored  ;  there  is  no  penalty 
of  the  broken  law  which  he  has  not  endured.  He  became  a 
servant  and  was  obedient,  yea,  obedient  to  death,  even  the 
death  of  the  cross.  He  has  thus  done  what  the  first  Adam 
could  not  accomplish,  and  he  has  retrieved  what  the  first 
Adam  forfeited  by  his  transgressions.  He  has  established 
the  covenant,  and  now  it  ceases  to  be  a  covenant  of  workfl, 
for  the  works  are  all  performed, 

"  Jesus  did  them,  did  tliem  all. 
Long,  long  ago." 

And  now  what  remaineth  of  the  covenant  ?    Gk)4  on  bis  part 


*in 


174  THE  COVENANT. 

has  solemnly  pledged  himself  to  give  undeserved  favor  to 
as  many  as  were  represented  in  Chnst  Jesus.  For  as  many 
as  the  Saviour  died  for,  there  is  stored  up  a  boundless  mass 
of  blessing,  which  shall  be  given  to  them,  not  through  their 
works,  but  as  the  sovereign  gift  of  the  grace  of  God,  accord- 
ing to  his  covenant  promise,  by  which  they  shall  be  saved. 

Behold  my  brethren,  the  hope  of  the  sons  of  men.  The 
hope  of  thtir  saving  themselves  is  crushed,  for  they  are  al- 
ready lost.  The  hope  of  their  being  saved  by  works  is  a 
fallacious  one,  for  they  cannot  keep  the  law ;  they  have  al- 
ready broken  it.  But  there  is  a  way  of  salvation  opened  on 
,  this  wise, — whosoever  believes  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  re- 
ceives and  partakes  of  the  bliss  which  Christ  has  bought. 
All  the  blessings  which  belong  to  the  covenant  of  grace 
through  the  work  of  Christ  shall  belong  to  every  soul  that  be- 
lieveth  in  Jesus.  Unto  him  that  worketh  not,  but  believeth 
on  him  that  justifieth  the  ungodly,  unto  him  shall  the  bless- 
ing of  the  new  covenant  of  grace  be  undoubtedly  given. 

I  hope  that  this  explanation  is  plain  enough.  If  Adam 
had  kept  the  law  we  should  have  been  blessed  by  his  keep- 
ing it.  He  broke  it,  and  we  have  been  cursed  through  him. 
Now  the  Second  Adam,  Christ  Jesus,  has  kept  the  law,  we 
are,  therefore,  if  believers,  represented  in  Christ  and  blessed 
with  the  results  of  the  obedience  of  Jesus  Christ  to  his  Fa- 
ther's will.  He  said  of  old,  "  Lo,  I  come,  to  do  thy  will,  O 
God !  Thy  law  is  my  delight."  He  has  done  that  will,  and  the 
blessings  of  grace  are  now  freely  given  to  the  gons  of 
men. 

I  shall  ask  your  attention  then,  first,  to  the  JPnvilege  of 
tJie  Covenant  of  Ghrace  ;  and  secondly,  to  the  Parties  con- 
cerned  in  it, 

I.  As  to  THB  Privileges  op  the  Covenant  of  gbacic. 

The  first  privilege  is,  that  to  as  many  as  are  interested  in 
it,  there  shall  be  given  an  illumination  of  their  minds  "  Twill 
put  my  laws  into  their  mind,^^    By  nature  we  are  iark  to- 


THE  COVENANT.  176 

wards  God's  will.  Conscience  keeps  up  in  us  a  sort  of  bro- 
ken recollection  of  what  God's  will  was.  It  is  a  monument 
of  God's  will,  but  it  is  often  hardly  legible.  A  man  does 
not  care  to  read  it,  he  is  averse  to  what  he  reads  there. 
"Their  foolish  heart  was  darkened,"  is  the  expression  of 
Scripture  with  regard  to  the  mind  of  man.  But  th  e  Holy 
Spirit  is  promised  to  those  interested  in  the  covenant.  He 
ehall  come  upon  their  minds  and  shed  light  instead  of  dark- 
ness, illuminating  them  as  to  what  the  will  of  God  is.  The 
ungodly  man  has  some  degree  of  light,  but  it  is  little  better 
than  darkness  visible,  and  even  that  light  he  does  not  love. 
lie  loves  darkness  rather  than  light,  because  his  deeds  are  evil. 
But  where  the  Holy  Spirit  comes,  he  floods  the  soul  with  a 
Divine  lustre,  in  which  the  soul  delights,  and  desires  to  par- 
ticipate to  the  fullest  degree.  Brethren,  the  renewed  man 
under  the  covenant  of  grace,  does  not  need  constantly  to 
resort  to  the  law  to  learn  what  he  ought  to  do,  nor  to  some 
fellow-Christian  to  ask  instruction,  be  has  not  the  law  of 
God  written  on  a  table  of  stone,  or  upon  parchment,  or 
upon  paper  ;  it  is  imprinted  upon  his  own  mind.  There  is 
now  a  Divine,  infallible  Spirit  dwelling  within  him,  who 
tells  him  the  right  and  the  wrong,  and  by  this  he  speedily  dis- 
cerns between  the  good  and  the  evil.  He  no  longer  puts 
darkness  for  light,  and  light  for  darkness,  bitter  for  sweet, 
and  sweet  for  bitter,  his  mind  is  enlightened  as  to  the  true 
holiness  which  God  requires. 

Just  mark  the  men  to  whom  this  light  comes.     All  of 
them  are  depraved  by  nature,  but  by  practice  some  of  them 
become  yet  further  blinded.     Is  it  not  marvellous  that  a 
poor  heathen,  who  scarcely  seemed  to  recognize  the  distinc- 
tion between  right  and  wrong,  before  the  Spirit  of  God  en- 
tered his   mind,   has   afterwards,  without  needing  to   b 
taught  all  the  precepts  individually,  received  at  once  th 
light  of  a  tender  conscience,  which  has  led  him  to  know  the 
right  and  love  it,  and  to  see  the  evil  and  eschew  it  ?   If  you 
want  to  civilice  the  world  it  must  be  by  preach  mg  the  Gos- 


166  tHOtJGHTS  AND  THEIR  FRUIT. 

certainly  it  excludes  you  from  eternal  life,  and  will  close  ttn 
gates  of  heaven  against  you.  God  deliver  us  from  the  fimit 
of  such  thoughts ! 

Then,  again,  proud^  boastfuly  vain-glorious^  setf-seeking 
thoughts  are  alike  obnoxious.  How  highly  some  people 
think  of  themselves !  You  can  see  it  in  their  gait,  and  Ibeir 
speech  bewrayeth  them.  Yet  their  wine  is  all  froth,  and 
their  gold  is  counterfeit.  Their  speech,  when  they  begin 
to  tell  of  what  they  have,  and  what  they  can  do,  and  what 
they  did  do  upon  such  and  such  occasions — all  this  is  an 
abomination  to  honest  men  ;  but  their  thoughts  must  be  very 
abominable  to  God.  It  is  one  of  the  things  which  he  saya 
he  hates — ^''a  proud  look."  God  grant  us  grace  to  be  rid  of 
every  proud  thought,  for  we  have  nothing  to  be  proud  o£ 
A  proud  man  is  nothing  but  a  wind-bag,  and  when  either 
the  ills  of  life  or  the  crisis  of  death  shall  put  a  pin  into  it, 
what  a  collapse  there  will  be,  how  the  haughty  one  will  dis- 
cover himself  to  be  nothing  but  emptiness  and  vanity !  Get 
rid  of  proud  thoughts,  for,  oh !  what  will  they  not  do  ?  Pride 
dragged  an  angel  from  heaven,  and  made  a  devil  of  him,  and 
pride  would  drag  any  of  us  down  to  the  level  of  the  devil 
if  we  fall  into  its  snare. 

Another  set  of  thoughts,  more  common  still  and  i  ot  much 
decried,  are  murmuring  thoughts.  Ah  me  I  how  fall  some 
people  are  of  these  !  They  can  hardly  speak  but  Tt  hat  they 
have  something  to  grumble  about.  Trade  with  them  is  al- 
ways bad.  Ever  since  I  have  been  iu  London  trade  has  been 
bad,  but  it  is  even  worse  now.  It  never  was  so  bad  as  it  is 
now,  except  that  it  was  just  as  bad  last  year;  and,  as  far  as 
I  know,  has  always  been  at  the  worst.  Farmers  never  have, 
to  the  best  of  my  recollection,  had  more  than  "  an  average 
crop,"  and  most  years  there  has  been  a  failure.  If  the  wheat 
has  been  good,  the  turnips  have  always  gone  ba  1,  or  some- 
thing. I  notice  murmuring  to  be  a  very  commoL  thing  with 
many  people,  and  you  no  sooner  sit  down  in  thjir  cottage 
than,  instead  of  telling  you  that  some  one  has  bf^en  there  to 


(THOUGHTS  AND  THEIH  FRUIT.  167 

help  them  a  little  and  give  them  some  assistance,  they  say 
lihey  have  only  the  parish  allowance — a  miserable  pittance ! 
So  it  is ;  but  they  forget  the  mercies  that  they  have.  Why 
should  I  be  always  telling  how  often  I  have  rheumatic  pains, 
and  how  many  times  I  find  that  there  is  something  wrong 
with  my  constitution  ?  Why  should  I  make  it  my  constant 
habit  to  compel  everybody  to  be  miserable  wherever  1  go? 
"Well,"  says  one,  "  but  you  know  we  cannot  help  it ! "  My 
dear  friend,  then  if  you  do  not  help  it  I  will  tell  you  what 
will  be  the  fniit  of  it — you  will  make  yourselves  incorrigibly 
miserable.  You  will  bring  yourselves  into  a  desperate  state, 
in  which  nothing  will  comfort  you.  I  do  believe  that  in  this 
respect  we  are- very  much  our  own  masters.  Not  all  the 
boimties  of  Providence  can  make  us  happy,  if  we  have  a 
thankless,ungrateful  heart.  You  may  have  all  that  the  world 
can  give  you,  and  yet  be  wretched ;  or  you  may  be  very, 
very  poor,  and  yet  be  cheerful.  A  thankful  heart  is  essen* 
tial,  and,  oh !  may  God  be  pleased  to  give  us  that  thankful 
heart !  But  what  I  want  you  to  remember  is  that  murmur 
ing  is  a  great  sin.»  They  murmured  against  God  in  the 
wilderness,  and  He  sent  fiery  serpents  among  them.  God 
thinks  much  of  our  complaints  against  his  providential  deal- 
ings with  us ;  let  us  not  think  so  little  of  the  sin  of  provok- 
ing Him  with  our  thoughts. 

How  prone  we  are  likewise  to  cherish  unbelieving  thoughts. 
Oh!  that  we  were  all  rid  of  these,  but  J  suppose  if  I  went 
round  these  galleries  I  should  find  in  every  pew  somebody 
who  has  unbelieving  thoughts.  We  fancy  that  God  will 
forsake  us ;  that  Providence  will  turn  against  us.  We  get 
like  old  Jacob,  when  he  said,  "  Joseph  is  not,  and  Simeon 
is  not.  and  now  ye  will  take  Benjamin  away;  all  these 
thii.gs  are  against  me ;"  whereas  everything  is  working 
for  us,  only  we  cannot  see  it.  Begone,  unbelief,  for  the 
fruit  of  unbelieving  thoughts  is  weakness,  sorrow,  re- 
bellion against  God,  and  I  know  not  what  else^of  rash- 
ness and  presumption.    God  save  us  from  these  thoughts  I 


168  IBOtJQHtfil  AND  THEIR  FRtJIT 

Procrastinating  thoughts  have  been  the  fmitfiil  souroe 
of  mischief  to  full  many  of  you.  You  have  good  thoughts 
and  good  resolves,  but  you  always  put  these  things  o%  and 
think  that  better  times  will  come  for  leaving  off  your  sins 
and  seeking  to  Christ ;  albeit  you  are  making  a  fearful  waste 
of  time,  and  running  a  perilous  risk,  and  it  is  to  be  dreaded 
that  your  souls  will  be  lost  at  the  last. 

Others  of  us  have  to  complain  of  wandering  thougJUa 
nohen  we  are  worshipping  God,  and  the  fruit  of  these  is  to 
spoil  the  golden  seasons,  which,  well  used,  might  yield  great 
profit.  Oftentimes  when  the  service  has  been  fitted  enough 
to  minister  refreshment  and  instruction,  and  others  have 
been  nourished  by  the  word,  some  poor  soul  goes  out  and 
says,  "I  have  not  enjoyed  it  at  all."  Why,  of  course  not,  for 
your  thoughts  have  been  elsewhere.  These  are  the  birds 
that  come  down  upon  the  sacrifice ;  if,  like  Abraham,  we 
drive  them  away,  we  shall  be  able  to  worship  in  peace ;  but 
if  not,  the  fruit  of  wandering  thoughts  in  the  house  of  God 
is  that  the  service  is  spoiled.  So  too  in  the  closet,  whether 
ostensibly  engaged  in  private  devotion,»or  the  reading  of 
Scripture,  unless  the  thoughts  be  centred  upon  the  subject  in 
band,  there  can  be  no  spiritual  gain  in  drawing  near  unto  God. 

n.  For  a  few  minutes  now  let  us  think  of  brighter  things, 
while  I  mention  a  few  good  thoughts  and  theib  pritit. 

"Of  which,"  says  an  apostle,  "we  cannot  now  speak 
particularly,"  when  he  had  a  long  list  and  a  sBort  space  :  so 
I  must  say  now.  K  you  would  have  good  fruit  in  your  soul, 
cultivate  humble  thoughts.  "No  man  was  ever  injured  by  hav- 
ing too  lowly  a  view  of  himself.  The  best  definition  of 
humility  I  ever  heard  was  this — "  To  think  rightly  of  our- 
selves." To  think  of  ourselves  as  below  the  standard  is 
meanness  ;  to  think  of  ourselves  above  the  standard  is  pride ; 
but  to  form  a  right  estimation  of  ourselves  is  true  humility. 
Avoid  the  counterfeit  which  is  in  the  world — ^that  is  mock 
humility.      Be  truly  humble.      Have  low  thoughts  of  youp- 


THOUGHTS  AND  THEIR  FRUIT.         ^        166 

selves,  especially  before  Goi  Penitent  thoughts  of  sin, 
humble  views  with  regard  to  Divine  grace,  and  a  close  ac- 
count of  your  own  responsibility  are  indispensable  ;  so  you 
will  find  that  humility  will  sweep  out  the  chamber  of  your 
floul,  and  prepare  it  for  the  incoming  of  the  Great  Prince. 

Cultivate  very  much  forgiving  thoughts  towards  your 
ftUcm-raen,  Never  be  hard  to  be  persuaded  to  pardon  an 
olTence.  He  that  taketh  his  brother  by  the  throat  will  be 
Biire  to  be  taken  by  the  throat  himself.  Evil  for  evil,  it  is 
said,  is  beast-like ;  good  for  good  is  man-like ;  evil  for  good 
is  devil-like  ;  but  good  for  evil  is  God-like.  Try  to  do  it, 
and  if  any  thing  can  make  the  bells  ring  in  your  heart,  it 
will  be  to  forgive  one  who  has  very  greatly  ard  wantonly 
injured  you.  The  worse  the  offence,  if  you  can  overlook  it, 
the  greater  will  be  your  own  joy,  and  the  better  proof  will 
you  have  that  you  are  a  child  of  God. 

Go  to  bed  each  night,  and  wake  up  each  morning  i\  ith  ad- 
miring  thoughts  of  God*s  goodness^  and  with  adoriiig  thoughts 
towards  God*s  greatness.  You  will  find  these  thoughts  to 
be  like  bees,  that  will  come  home  to  you  laden  with  honey. 
Let  your  soul  be  a  hive  of  them.  Worship  the  Lord. 
Think  much  of  him.  Let  every  blessing  you  receive  make 
you  think  of  him.  Do  not  come  to  the  table  and  hurriedly 
offer  what  we  call  "  grace,"  because  it  is  the  custom  to  do 
so,  and  then  have  done  with  thanks,  but  let  your  soul  really 
see  God's  hand  in  every  thing  that  is  on  the  table.  We 
need  not  fear  worldly  thoughts  if  we  were  to  sanctify  these 
worldly  blessings.  Said  one — "  Tlie  road  on  which  I  tread 
makes  me  think  of  Christ— the  way.  The  door  through 
which  I  pass  makes  me  think  of  Christ — the  door.  I  cStUnot 
handle  money  but  what  I  think  that  I  am  not  my  own,  but 
bought  with  a  price.  I  do  not  receipt  a  bill  without  recol 
lecting  that  he  has  blotted  out  the  handwriting  of  ordi 
nances  that  was  against  me.  I  cannot  talk  to  my  fellow-man, 
and  receive  my  answer,  without  thinking  how  I  talk  with 
Gk>d,  and  how  he  answers  me."  Li  such  manner  with  many 
8 


170  THOUGHTS  AND  THEIR  PRUlt. 

thoughts  of  God,  you  will  find  the  fruit  of  heavenly -mind* 
edness  in  your  spirit.  Angels  will  go  to  and  fro  between 
you  and  the  courts  of  the  Most  High,  if  you  have  many  of 
these  admiring  and  adoring  thoughts  of  God. 

Thankful  thoughts  are  well  deserving  your  high  encour- 
agement. Get  a  cage  full  of  these  birds  of  paradise,  and 
let  them  fly  about  in  the  groves  of  your  ^oul,  and  sing  there 
at  all  times.  There  is  no  better  companion  than  cheerful 
gratitude.  If  a  man  can  but  see  the  mercy  of  God  in  every 
thing,  instead  of  looking  always  at  the  black  side  of  tlie 
picture,  he  will  be  happy  indeed.  The  fruit  of  thankful 
thoughts  will  be  summer  in  his  soul,  even  when  the  winds 
of  winter  rage  outside.  Cultivate  thankful  thoughts  as  you 
cultivate  sweet  flowers  in  your  garden. 

Yet  again  dear  friends,  get  many  and  ahundanJt  believ^ 
ing  thoughts.  When  thou  canst  not  see  thy  way,  still  trust 
in  thy  Lord.  Believe  in  him.  Though  every  thing  should 
give  the  lie  to  the  promise,  still  believe  the  promise  to  be 
true. 

Abound  much  in  thoughts  of  submission  to  God.  Ev- 
ery morning  exercise  such  thoughts.  Put  thy  soul  into 
God's  hand  that  he  may  deal  with  thee  according  to  his 
will  all  the  day ;  and  each  night,  when  thou  reviewest  the 
day,  thank  God  for  it  all,  whatever  it  may 'have  been,  know- 
ing that  it  must  be  good,  nay,  must  be  best  if  God  has  or- 
dered it. 

I  will  finally  say — seek,  believer,  to  have  many  longing 
thoughts  after  Christ.  Have  longing  thoughts  to  be  with  him 
where  he  is.  Let  Christ  have  thy  best  thoughts — the  cream  of 
them.  Let  him  have  the  first  growth  of  your  spirit.  Be  with 
?um  in  waking  and  ask  for  "  a  morning  without  clouds."  Say 
to  him  in  the  evening — "  Abide  with  us,  for  the  day  is  far 
spent."  And  if  you  lie  awake  at  night,  still  seek  to  have 
somo  precious  thought  of  Christ,  like  a  wafer  made  with 
honey,  to  put  under  your  tongue.  Oh  !  we  can  bring  heav« 
en  down  to  earth  if  we  can  take  our  thoughts  up  to  heaven. 


THOUGHTS  AND  THEIR  FRUIT.  171 

If  thouglils  be  the  wings,  and  the  spirit  be  the  wind,  we  will 

fly  away  to  the  celestial  Paradise.    We  cannot  climb  to 

Pisgah's  top  and  stand  on  Nebo,  and  look  to  the  promised 
land  except  in  our  thoughts,  but  our  thoughts  can  take 

as  to 

"  Jerusalem  the  golden. 
With  milk  and  honey  blest." 

Thought  can  introduce  us  to  the  apostles  and  martyrs. 
Thought  can  wrap  us  in  white  robes,  and  put  crowns  upon 
our  brow.  Thought  can  learn  the  music  of  the  spheres,  and 
unite  in  the  everlasting  song.  Thought  can  enter  into  fel- 
lowship with  God,  and  make  us  lie  in  Jesus'  bosom. 

Be  much,  then,  in  such  thoughts  as  these,  and  may  the 
fruit  of  your  thoughts  be  such  as  God  himself  may  delight 
in,  to  Jesus  Christ's  praise.    Amen. 


T 


ITS  THX  OOVENAlfT 


SERMON  XL 


THE  COVENANT. 

'VOBTHIBISTHB0OYX1VA17TTHATIWXLLXAKB  WITH  THB  HOUBB  OV  nSABL , 

TH08X  DATS,  SAtTH  THB  LORD  ;   I  WILL  PUT  MT  LAWS  INTO  THBIB  WND,  AHD 
WBTTE  THBX  IN  THEIB  HEARTS  ;   AND  I  WILL  BX  TO  THXX  A  GOD,  AND  THST  8HAXA 

BN  TO  MX  A  FBOPLX."— Heb.  viii  10. 

Thb  doctrine  of  the  covenant  lies  at  the  root  cf  all  tme 
theology.  It  has  been  said  that  he  who  well  understands 
the  distinction  between  the  covenant  of  works  and  the  cov- 
enant of  grace,  is  a  master  in  divinity.  I  am  persuaded  that 
most  of  the  mistakes  which  men  make  concerning  the  doo- 
trines  of  Scripture,  are  based  upon  fundamental  errors  with 
regard  to  the  covenants  of  law  and  of  grace.  May  God 
grant  us  now  the  power  to  instruct,  and  you  the  grace  to 
receive  instruction  on  this  vital  subject. 

The  human  race,  in  the  order  of  history,  as  far  as  tlus 
world  is  concerned,  first  stood  in  subjection  to  God  under 
the  covenant  of  works.  Adam  was  the  representative  man. 
A  certain  law  was  given  him.  K  he  kept  it,  he  and  all 
his  posterity  would  be  blessed  as  the  result  of  obedience. 
If  he  broke  it,  he  would  incur  the  curse  himself,  and  entail 
it  on  all  represented  by  him.  That  covenant  our  first  fa- 
ther broke.  He  fell ;  he  failed  to  fulfil  his  obligations :  in 
his  fall  he  involved  us  all,  for  we  were  all  in  his  loins,  and 
he  represented  us  before  God.  Our  ruin, then,  was  complete 
before  we  were  bom ;  we  were  ruined  by  him  who  stood 
as  our  first  representative.    To  be  saved  by  the  works  of 


THE  COVENANT.  178 

the  low  is  impossible,  for  under  that  cdvenant  we  are  already 
lost.  If  saved  at  all  it  must  be  on  qnite  a  different  plan, 
not  on  the  plan  of  doing  and  being  rewarded  for  it,  for 
that  has  been  tried,  and  the  representative  man  in  whom  it 
was  tested  has  failed  for  us  all.  We  have  all  failed  in  his 
failure ;  it  is  hopeless,  therefore,  to  expect  to  win  Divine 
favor  by  any  thing  that  we  can  do,  or  to  merit  Divine 
blessing  by  way  of  reward. 

But  Divine  mercy  has  interposed,  and  provided  a  plan 
of  salvation  from  the  fall.  That  plan  is  another  covenant, 
a  covenant  made  with  Christ  Jesus  the  Son  of  God,  who  la 
fitly  called  by  the  Apostle,  "  the  Second  Adam,"  because  he 
si  .od  again  as  the  representative  of  men.  Now,  the  second 
covenant,  so  far  as  Christ  was  concerned,  was  a  covenant  of 
works  quite  as  much  as  the  other.  It  was  on  this  wise. 
Christ  shall  come  into  the  world  and  perfectly  obey  the  Di- 
vine law :  he  shall  also,  inasmuch  as  the  first  Adam  has 
broken  the  law,  suffer  the  penalty  of  sin.  If  he  shall  do  both 
of  these,  then  all  whom  he  represents  shall  be  blessed  in  his 
blessedness,  and  saved  because  of  his  merit.  You  see,  then, 
that  until  our  Lord  finished  his  substitutionary  work,  it  was 
a  covenant  of  works  towards  him.  He  had  certain  works 
to  perform,  upon  condition  of  which  certain  blessings  should 
be  given  to  us.  Our  Lord  has  kept  that  covenant.  His 
part  of  it  has  been  fulfilled  to  the  letter.  There  is  no  com- 
mandment which  he  has  not  honored  ;  there  is  no  penalty 
of  the  broken  law  which  he  has  not  endured.  He  became  a 
servant  and  was  obedient,  yea,  obedient  to  death,  even  the 
death  of  the  cross.  He  has  thus  done  what  the  first  Adam 
could  not  accomplish,  and  he  has  retrieved  what  the  first 
Adam  forfeited  by  his  transgressions.  He  has  established 
the  covenant,  and  now  it  ceases  to  be  a  covenant  of  woika^ 
for  the  works  are  all  performed. 

"  Jesus  did  tliem,  did  them  all. 
Long,  long  ago." 

And  now  what  remaineth  of  the  covenant  ?    Gocl  on  bis  part 


*r\ 


174  THE  COVENANT. 

has  solemnly  pledged  himself  to  give  undeserved  favor  to 
as  many  as  were  represented  in  Chiist  Jesus.  For  as  many 
as  the  Saviour  died  for,  there  is  stored  up  a  boundless  mass 
of  blessing,  which  shall  be  given  to  them,  not  through  their 
works,  but  as  the  sovereign  gift  of  the  grace  of  God,  accord- 
ing to  his  covenant  promise,  by  which  they  shall  be  saved. 

Beholci  my  brethren,  the  hope  of  the  sons  of  men.  The 
hope  of  thtir  saving  themselves  is  crushed,  for  they  are  al- 
ready lost.  The  hope  of  their  being  saved  by  works  is  a 
fallacious  one,  for  they  cannot  keep  the  law ;  they  have  al- 
ready broken  it.  But  there  is  a  way  of  salvation  opened  on 
this  wise, — whosoever  believes  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  re- 
ceives and  partakes  of  the  bliss  which  Christ  has  bought. 
All  the  blessings  which  belong  to  the  covenant  of  grace 
through  the  work  of  Christ  shall  belong  to  every  soul  that  be- 
lieveth  in  Jesus.  Unto  him  that  worketh  not,  but  believeth 
on  him  that  justifieth  the  ungodly,  unto  him  shall  the  bless- 
ing of  the  new  covenant  of  grace  be  undoubtedly  given. 

I  hope  that  this  explanation  is  plain  enough.  K  Adam 
had  kept  the  law  we  should  have  been  blessed  by  his  keep- 
ing it.  He  broke  it,  and  we  have  been  cursed  through  him. 
Now  the  Second  Adam,  Christ  Jesus,  has  kept  the  law,  we 
are,  therefore,  if  believers,  represented  in  Christ  and  blessed 
with  the  results  of  the  obedience  of  Jesus  Christ  to  his  Fa- 
ther's will.  He  said  of  old,  "  Lo,  I  come,  to  do  thy  will,  O 
God  !  Thy  law  is  my  delight."  He  has  done  that  will,  and  the 
blessings  of  grace  are  now  freely  given  to  the  sons  of 
men. 

I  shall  ask  your  attention  then,  first,  to  the  Pfivilege  of 
the  Covenant  of  Ghrace  ;  and  secondly,  to  the  Parties  con- 
cerned  in  it. 

T.  As  to  THE  Petvileges  op  the  Covenant  op  orack. 

The  first  privilege  is,  that  to  as  many  as  are  interested  in 
itf  there  shall  be  given  an  illumination  of  their  minds  "  JtoiH 
put  my  laws  into  their  mind.^'*    By  nature  we  are  iark  to 


THE  COVENANT.  175 

wards  God's  wilL  Conscience  keeps  np  in  us  a  sort  of  bro- 
ken recollection  of  what  God's  will  was.  It  is  a  monument 
of  God's  will,  but  it  is  often  hardly  legible.  A  man  does 
not  care  to  read  it,  he  is  averse  to  what  he  reads  there. 
"  Their  foolish  heart  was  darkened,"  is  the  expression  of 
Scripture  with  regard  to  the  mind  of  man.  But  th  e  Holy 
Spirit  is  promised  to  those  interested  in  the  covenant.  He 
Bhall  come  upon  their  minds  and  shed  light  instead  of  dark- 
ness, illuminating  them  as  to  what  the  will  of  God  is.  The 
ungodly  man  has  some  degree  of  light,  but  it  is  little  better 
than  darkness  visible,  and  even  that  light  he  does  not  love. 
lie  loves  darkness  rather  than  light,  because  his  deeds  are  evil. 
But  where  the  Holy  Spirit  comes,  he  floods  the  soul  with  a 
Divine  lustre,  in  which  the  soul  delights,  and  desires  to  par- 
ticipate to  the  fullest  degree.  Brethren,  the  renewed  man 
under  the  covenant  of  grace,  does  not  need  constantly  to 
resort  to  the  law  to  learn  what  he  ought  to  do,  nor  to  some 
fellow-Christian  to  ask  instruction,  be  has  not  the  law  of 
God  written  on  a  table  of  stone,  or  upon  parchment,  or 
upon  paper  ;  it  is  imprinted  upon  his  own  mind.  There  is 
now  a  Divine,  infallible  Spirit  dwelling  within  him,  who 
tells  him  the  right  and  the  wrong,  and  by  this  he  speedily  dis- 
cerns between  the  good  and  the  evil.  He  no  longer  puts 
darkness  for  light,  and  light  for  darkness,  bitter  for  sweet, 
and  sweet  for  bitter,  his  mind  is  enlightened  as  to  the  true 
holiness  which  God  requires. 

Just  mark  the  men  to  whom  this  light  comes.     All  of 
them  are  depraved  by  nature,  but  by  practice  some  of  them 
become  yet  further  blinded.     Is  it  not  marvellous  that  a 
poor  heathen,  who  scarcely  seemed  to  recognize  the  distinc- 
tion between  right  and  wrong,  before  the  Spirit  of  God  en- 
tered his  mind,   has  afterwards,  without  needing  to   b 
taught  all  the  precepts  individually,  received  at  once  th 
light  of  a  tender  conscience,  which  has  led  him  to  know  the 
right  and  love  it,  and  to  see  the  evil  and  eschew  it  ?   If  you 
want  to  civilize  the  world  it  must  be  by  preach  mg  the  Gos- 


166  THOtJGHTS  AND  THEIR  FRUIT. 

ceilainly  it  excludes  you  from  eternal  life,  and  will  close  tlift 
gates  of  heaven  against  you.  God  deliver  us  from  the  fruit 
of  such  thoughts ! 

Then,  again,  proud^  boastful^  vain-gUmouSy  self-peeking 
thoughts  are  alike  obnoxious.  How  highly  some  people 
think  of  themselves !  You  can  see  it  in  their  gait,  and  their 
speech  bewrayeth  them.  Yet  their  wine  is  all  froth,  and 
their  gold  is  counterfeit.  Their  speech,  when  they  begin 
to  tell  of  what  they  have,  and  what  they  can  do,  and  what 
they  did  do  upon  such  and  such  occasions — all  this  is  ao 
abomination  to  honest  men  ;  but  their  thoughts  must  be  very 
abominable  to  God.  It  is  one  of  the  things  which  he  saya 
he  hates — ^''a  proud  look."  God  grant  us  grace  to  be  rid  of 
every  proud  thought,  for  we  have  nothing  to  be  proud  of. 
A  proud  man  is  nothing  but  a  wind-bag,  and  when  either 
the  ills  of  life  or  the  crisis  of  death  shall  put  a  pin  into  it, 
what  a  collapse  there  will  be,  how  the  haughty  one  will  dis- 
cover himself  to  be  nothing  but  emptiness  and  vanity !  Gtet 
rid  of  proud  thoughts,  for,  oh !  what  will  they  not  do  ?  Pride 
dragged  an  angel  from  heaven,  and  made  a  devil  of  Hm,  and 
pride  would  drag  any  of  us  down  to  the  level  of  the  devil 
if  we  fall  into  its  snare. 

Another  set  of  thoughts,  more  common  still  and  i  ot  much 
decried,  are  murmuring  thoughts.  Ah  me !  how  fill  some 
people  are  of  these  !  They  can  hardly  speak  but  ^  hat  they 
have  something  to  grumble  about.  Trade  with  them  is  al- 
ways bad.  Ever  since  I  have  been  iu  London  trade  has  been 
bad,  but  it  is  even  worse  now.  It  never  was  so  bad  as  it  is 
now,  except  that  it  was  just  as  bad  last  year ;  and,  as  far  as 
I  know,  has  always  been  at  the  worst.  Farmers  never  have, 
to  the  best  of  my  recollection,  had  more  than  "  an  average 
crop,"  and  most  years  there  has  been  a  failure.  If  the  wheat 
has  been  good,  the  turnips  have  always  gone  ba  1,  or  some- 
thing. I  notice  muraiuring  to  be  a  very  common  thing  with 
many  people,  and  you  no  sooner  sit  down  in  thjir  cottage 
than,  instead  of  telling  you  that  some  one  has  bfjen  tber^  to 


THOUGHTS  AND  THEIR  FRUIT.  167 

help  them  a  little  and  give  them  some  assistance,  they  say 
they  have  only  the  parish  allowance — a  miserable  pittance ! 
So  it  is ;  but  they  forget  the  mercies  that  they  have.  Why 
should  I  be  always  telling  how  often  I  have  rheumatic  pains, 
and  how  many  times  I  find  that  there  is  something  wrong 
with  my  constitution?  Why  should  I  make  it  my  constant 
habit  to  compel  everybody  to  be  miserable  wherever  1  go  ? 
"Well,"  says  one,  "  but  you  know  we  cannot  help  it ! "  My 
dear  friend,  then  if  you  do  not  help  it  I  will  tell  you  what 
will  be  the  fi-uit  of  it — you  will  make  yourselves  incorrigibly 
miserable.  You  will  bring  yourselves  into  a  desperate  state, 
in  which  nothing  will  comfort  you.  I  do  believe  that  in  this 
respect  we  are^very  much  our  own  masters.  Not  all  the 
bounties  of  Providence  can  make  us  happy,  if  we  have  a 
thankless,ungrateful  heart.  You  may  have  all  that  the  world 
can  give  you,  and  yet  be  wretched ;  or  you  may  be  very, 
very  poor,  and  yet  be  cheerful.  A  thankful  heart  is  essen- 
tial, and,  oh !  may  God  be  pleased  to  give  us  that  thankful 
heart !  But  what  I  want  you  to  remember  is  that  murmur 
ing  is  a  great  sin.»  They  murmured  against  God  in  the 
wilderness,  and  He  sent  fiery  serpents  among  them.  God 
thinks  much  of  our  complaints  against  his  providential  deal- 
ings with  us ;  let  us  not  think  so  little  of  the  sin  of  provok- 
ing Him  with  our  thoughts. 

How  prone  we  are  likewise  to  cherish  unbelieving  thoughts. 
Oh !  that  we  were  all  rid  of  these,  but  J  suppose  if  I  went 
round  these  galleries  I  should  find  in  every  pew  somebody 
who  has  unbelieving  thoughts.  We  fancy  that  God  will 
forsake  us ;  that  Providence  will  turn  against  us.  We  get 
like  old  Jacob,  when  he  said,  "  Joseph  is  not,  and  Simeon 
is  not.  and  now  ye  will  take  Benjamin  away;  all  these 
thir.gs  are  against  me ;"  whereas  everything  is  working 
for  us,  only  we  cannot  see  it.  Begone,  unbelief,  for  the 
fruit  of  unbelieving  thoughts  is  weakness,  sorrow,  re- 
bellion against  God,  and  I  know  not  what  else^of  rash- 
ness and  presumption.    God  save  us  from  these  thoughts  I 


16S  raouants  and  their  fruit 

R'OcroLstinating  thoughts  have  been  the  froitful  sonica 
of  mischief  to  full  many  of  yon.  Ton  have  good  thoughts 
and  good  resolves,  but  you  always  put  these  things  ofl^  and 
think  that  better  times  will  come  for  leaving  off  your  edns 
and  seeking  to  Christ;  albeit  you  are  making  a  fearful  waste 
of  time,  and  running  a  perilous  risk,  and  it  is  to  be  dreaded 
that  your  souls  will  be  lost  at  the  last. 

Others  of  us  have  to  complain  of  wandering  thoughts 
when  toe  are  worshipping  Gody  and  the  fruit  of  these  is  to 
spoil  the  golden  seasons,  which,  well  used,  might  yield  great 
profit.  Oftentimes  when  the  service  has  been  fitted  enough 
to  minister  refreshment  and  instruction,  and  others  have 
been  nourished  by  the  word,  some  poor  soul  goes  out  and 
says,  "I  have  not  enjoyed  it  at  all."  Why,  of  course  not,  for 
your  thoughts  have  been  elsewhere.  These  are  the  birds 
that  come  down  upon  the  sacrifice ;  if,  like  Abraham,  we 
drive  them  away,  we  shall  be  able  to  worship  in  peace ;  but 
if  not,  the  fruit  of  wandering  thoughts  in  the  house  of  God 
is  that  the  service  is  spoiled.  So  too  in  the  closet,  whether 
ostensibly  engaged  in  private  devotion,«or  the  reading  of 
Scripture,  unless  the  thoughts  be  centred  upon  the  subject  in 
hand,  there  can  be  no  spiritual  gain  in  drawing  near  unto  Ood. 

n.  For  a  few  minutes  now  let  us  think  of  brighter  things, 
while  I  mention  a  few  good  thoughts  and  theib  fruit. 

"  Of  which,"  says  an  apostle,  "  we  cannot  now  speak 
particularly,"  when  he  had  a  long  list  and  a  sBort  space :  so 
I  must  say  now.  If  you  would  have  good  fruit  in  your  soul, 
cultivate  humble  thoughts.  No  man  was  ever  injured  by  hav- 
ing too  lowly  a  view  of  himself  The  best  definition  of 
humility  I  ever  heard  was  this — "  To  think  rightly  of  ouiv 
selves."  To  think  of  ourselves  as  below  the  standard  is 
meanness  ;  to  think  of  ourselves  above  the  standard  is  pride ; 
but  to  form  a  right  estimation  of  ourselves  is  true  humility. 
Avoid  the  counterfeit  which  is  in  the  world — ^that  is  mock 
humility.      Be  truly  humble.      Have  low  thoughts  of  your- 


THOUGHTS  AND  THEIR  FRUIT.         '        166 

selves,  especially  before  God.  Penitent  thoughtft  of  bin, 
humble  views  with  regard  to  Divine  grace,  and  a  close  ac- 
count of  your  own  responsibility  are  indispensable  ;  so  you 
will  find  that  humility  will  sweep  out  the  chamber  of  your 
Boul,  and  prepare  it  for  the  incoming  of  the  Great  Prince. 

Cultivate  very  much  forgiving  thoughts  towards  your 
feUow-men.  Never  be  hard  to  be  persuaded  to  pardon  au 
olfence.  He  that  taketh  his  brother  by  the  throat  will  be 
sure  to  be  taken  by  the  throat  himself.  Evil  for  evil,  it  is 
said,  is  beast-like ;  good  for  good  is  man-like ;  evil  for  good 
is  devil-like  ;  but  good  for  evil  is  God-like.  Try  to  do  it, 
and  if  any  thing  can  make  the  bells  ring  in  your  heart,  it 
will  be  to  forgive  one  who  has  very  greatly  ard  wantonly 
injured  you.  The  worse  the  offence,  if  you  can  overlook  it, 
the  greater  will  be  your  own  joy,  and  the  better  proof  will 
you  have  that  you  are  a  child  of  God. 

Go  to  bed  each  night,  and  wake  up  each  morning  i\  ith  ad- 
miring thoughts  of  God^s  goodness^  and  with  adoring  thoughts 
towards  God's  greatness.  You  will  find  these  thoughts  to 
be  like  bees,  that  will  come  home  to  you  laden  with  honey. 
Let  your  soul  be  a  hive  of  them.  Worship  the  Lord. 
Think  much  of  him.  Let  every  blessing  you  receive  make 
you  think  of  him.  Do  not  come  to  the  table  and  hurriedly 
offer  what  we  call  "  grace,"  because  it  is  the  custom  to  do 
so,  and  then  have  done  with  thanks,  but  let  your  soul  really 
see  God's  hand  in  every  thing  that  is  on  the  table.  We 
need  not  fear  worldly  thoughts  if  we  were  to  sanctify  these 
worldly  blessings.  Said  one — "  The  road  on  which  I  tread 
makes  me  think  of  Christ — the  way.  The  door  through 
which  I  pass  makes  me  think  of  Chiist — the  door.  I  cinnot 
handle  money  but  what  I  think  that  T  am  not  my  own,  but 
bought  with  a  price.  I  do  not  receipt  a  bill  without  recol 
lecting  that  he  has  blotted  out  the  handwriting  of  ordi 
nances  that  was  against  me.  I  cannot  talk  to  my  fellow-man, 
and  receive  my  answer,  without  thinking  how  I  talk  with 
God,  and  how  he  answers  me."  Li  such  manner  with  many 
8 


170  THOUGHTS  AND  THEIR  PRlTlt. 

thoughts  of  God,  you  will  find  the  fruit  of  heavenly -mind* 
edness  in  your  spirit.  Angels  will  go  to  and  fro  between 
you  and  the  courts  of  the  Most  High,  if  you  have  many  of 
these  admiring  and  adoring  thoughts  of  God. 

Thankful  thoughts  are  well  deserving  your  high  encour- 
agement. Get  a  cage  full  of  these  birds  of  paradise,  and 
let  them  fly  about  in  the  groves  of  your  ^oul,  and  sing  there 
at  all  times.  There  is  no  better  companion  than  cheerful 
gratitude.  If  a  man  can  but  see  the  mercy  of  God  in  every 
thing,  instead  of  looking  always  at  the  black  side  of  the 
picture,  he  will  be  happy  indeed.  The  fruit  of  thankful 
thoughts  will  be  summer  in  his  soul,  even  when  the  winds 
of  winter  rage  outside.  Cultivate  thankful  thoughts  as  you 
cultivate  sweet  flowers  in  your  garden. 

Yet  again  dear  friends,  get  many  and  abundant  belieV' 
ing  thoughts.  When  thou  canst  not  see  thy  way,  still  trust 
in  thy  Lord.  Believe  in  him.  Though  every  thing  should 
give  the  lie  to  the  promise,  still  believe  the  promise  to  be 
true. 

Abound  much  in  thoughts  of  submission  to  God.  Ev- 
ery morning  exercise  such  thoughts.  Put  thy  soul  into 
God's  hand  that  he  may  deal  with  thee  according  to  his 
will  all  the  day ;  and  each  night,  when  thou  reviewest  the 
day,  thank  God  for  it  all,  whatever  it  may  »have  been,  know- 
ing that  it  must  be  good,  nay,  must  be  best  if  God  has  or- 
dered it. 

I  will  finally  say — seek,  believer,  to  have  many  longing 
thoughts  after  Christ  Have  longing  thoughts  to  be  with  him 
where  he  is.  Let  Christ  have  thy  best  thoughts — the  cream  of 
them.  Let  him  have  the  first  growth  of  your  spirit.  Be  with 
Kim  in  waking  and  ask  for  "  a  morning  without  clouds."  Say 
to  him  in  the  evening — "  Abide  with  us,  for  the  day  is  far 
spent."  And  if  you  lie  awake  at  night,  still  seek  to  have 
somo  precious  thought  of  Christ,  like  a  wafer  made  with 
honey,  to  put  under  your  tongue.  Oh  !  we  can  bring  heav- 
en down  to  earth  if  we  can  take  our  thoughts  up  to  heaven. 


THOUGHTS  AND  THEIR  FRUIT.  171 

If  thouglits  be  the  wings,  and  the  spirit  be  the  wind,  we  will 

fly  away  to  the  celestial  Paradise.    We  cannot  climb  to 

Pisgah's  top  and  stand  on  Nebo,  and  look  to  the  promised 
land  except  in  our  thoughts,  but  our  thoughts  can  take 

ns  to 

"  Jemsalem  the  golden. 
With  milk  and  honey  blest." 

Thought  can  introduce  us  to  the  apostles  and  martyrs. 
Thought  can  wrap  us  in  white  robes,  and  put  crowns  upon 
our  brow.  Thought  can  learn  the  music  of  the  spheres,  and 
unite  in  the  everlasting  song.  Thought  can  enter  into  fel- 
lowship with  God,  and  make  us  lie  in  Jesus'  bosom. 

Be  much,  then,  in  such  thoughts  as  these,  and  may  the 
fruit  of  your  thoughts  be  such  as  God  himself  may  delight 
in,  to  Jesofi  Christ's  praise.    Amen. 


166  THOtJGHTS  AND  THEIR  FBTJIT. 

certainly  it  excludes  you  from  eternal  life,  and  will  close  tlift 
gates  of  heaven  against  you,  God  deliver  us  from  the  fruit 
of  such  thoughts ! 

Then,  again,  proud^  boastful^  vain-glorious^  self-aeekinff 
thoughts  are  alike  obnoxious.  How  highly  some  people 
think  of  themselves !  You  can  see  it  in  their  gait,  and  their 
speech  bewrayeth  them.  Yet  their  wine  is  all  froth,  and 
their  gold  is  counterfeit.  Their  speech,  when  they  begin 
to  tell  of  what  they  have,  and  what  they  can  do,  and  what 
they  did  do  upon  such  and  such  occasions — all  this  is  ao 
abomination  to  honest  men  ;  but  their  thoughts  must  be  very 
abominable  to  God.  It  is  one  of  the  things  which  he  says 
he  hates — ^''a  proud  look."  God  grant  us  grace  to  be  rid  of 
every  proud  thought,  for  we  have  nothing  to  be  proud  o£ 
A  proud  man  is  nothing  but  a  wind-bag,  and  when  either 
the  ills  of  life  or  the  crisis  of  death  shall  put  a  pin  into  it, 
what  a  collapse  there  will  be,  how  the  haughty  one  will  dis- 
cover himself  to  be  nothing  but  emptiness  and  vanity !  Get 
rid  of  proud  thoughts,  for,  oh !  what  will  they  not  do  ?  Pride 
dragged  an  angel  from  heaven,  and  made  a  devil  of  him,  and 
pride  would  drag  any  of  us  down  to  the  level  of  the  devil 
if  we  fall  into  its  snare. 

Another  set  of  thoughts,  more  common  still  and  i  ot  much 
decried,  are  murmuring  thoughts.  Ah  me !  how  fill  some 
people  are  of  these  !  They  can  hardly  speak  but  ^  hat  they 
have  something  to  grumble  about.  Trade  with  them  is  al- 
ways bad.  Ever  since  I  have  been  iu  London  trade  has  been 
bad,  but  it  is  even  worse  now.  It  never  was  so  bad  as  it  is 
now,  except  that  it  was  just  as  bad  last  year ;  and,  as  far  as 
I  know,  has  always  been  at  the  worst.  Farmers  never  have, 
to  the  best  of  my  recollection,  had  more  than  "  an  average 
crop,"  and  most  years  there  has  been  a  failure.  If  the  wheat 
has  been  good,  the  turnips  have  always  gone  ba  1,  or  some- 
thing. I  notice  mui-muring  to  be  a  very  commoL  thing  with 
many  people,  and  you  no  sooner  sit  down  in  tluir  cottage 
than,  instead  of  telling  you  that  some  one  has  bf^n  tber<?  to 


ftHOtJGHTS  AND  THEIR  FRUIT.  167 

help  them  a  little  and  give  them  some  assistance,  they  say 
they  have  only  the  parish  allowance — a  miserable  pittance ! 
So  it  is ;  but  they  forget  the  mercies  that  they  have.  Why 
should  I  be  always  telling  how  often  I  have  rheumatic  pains, 
and  how  many  times  I  find  that  there  is  something  wrong 
with  my  constitution  ?  Why  should  I  make  it  my  constant 
habit  to  compel  everybody  to  be  miserable  wherever  1  go  ? 
"Well,"  says  one,  "  but  you  know  we  cannot  help  it ! "  My 
dear  friend,  then  if  you  do  not  help  it  I  will  tell  you  what 
will  be  the  fi-uit  of  it — you  will  make  yourselves  incorrigibly 
miserable.  You  will  bring  yourselves  into  a  desperate  state, 
in  which  nothing  will  comfort  you.  I  do  believe  that  in  this 
respect  we  are^very  much  our  own  masters.  Not  all  the 
bounties  of  Providence  can  make  us  happy,  if  we  have  a 
thankless,ungrateful  heart.  You  may  have  all  that  the  world 
can  give  you,  and  yet  be  wretched ;  or  you  may  be  very, 
very  poor,  and  yet  be  cheerful.  A  thankful  heart  is  essen- 
tial,  and,  oh !  may  God  be  pleased  to  give  us  that  thankful 
heart !  But  what  I  want  you  to  remember  is  that  murmur 
ing  is  a  great  sin.»  They  murmured  against  God  in  the 
wilderness,  and  He  sent  fiery  serpents  among  them.  God 
thinks  much  of  our  complaints  against  his  providential  deal- 
ings with  us;  let  us  not  think  so  little  of  the  sin  of  provok- 
ing Him  with  our  thoughts. 

How  prone  we  are  likewise  to  cherish  unbelieving  thoughts. 
Oh !  that  we  were  all  rid  of  these,  but  J  suppose  if  I  went 
round  these  galleries  I  should  find  in  every  pew  somebody 
who  has  unbelieving  thoughts.  We  fancy  that  God  will 
forsake  us ;  that  Providence  will  turn  against  us.  We  get 
like  old  Jacob,  when  he  said,  "  Joseph  is  not,  and  Simeon 
is  not.  and  now  ye  will  take  Benjamin  away;  all  these 
thii.gs  are  against  me ;"  whereas  everything  is  working 
for  us,  only  we  cannot  see  it.  Begone,  unbelief,  for  the 
fruit  of  unbelieving  thoughts  is  weakness,  sorrow,  re- 
bellion against  God,  and  I  know  not  what  else^of  rash- 
ness and  presumption.    God  save  us  from  these  thoughts  I 


168  raoWHtS  AND  tHBIR  FRUIT 

Procrastinating  thoughts  have  been  the  fmitfal  somce 
of  mischief  to  ftill  many  of  yon.  Yon  have  good  thonghts 
and  good  resolves,  but  yon  always  pnt  these  things  off,  and 
think  that  better  times  will  come  for  leaving  off  your  sins 
and  seeking  to  Christ ;  albeit  you  are  making  a  fearful  waste 
of  time,  and  running  a  perilous  risk,  and  it  is  to  be  dreaded 
that  your  souls  will  be  lost  at  the  last. 

Others  of  us  have  to  complain  of  wandering  thoughts 
when  toe  are  worshipping  God,  and  the  fruit  of  these  is  to 
spoil  the  golden  seasons,  which,  well  used,  might  yield  great 
profit.  Oftentimes  when  the  service  has  been  fitted  enough 
to  minister  refreshment  and  instruction,  and  others  have 
been  nourished  by  the  word,  some  poor  soul  goes  out  and 
says,  "  I  have  not  enjoyed  it  at  all."  Why,  of  course  not,  for 
your  thoughts  have  been  elsewhere.  These  are  the  birds 
that  come  down  upon  the  sacrifice ;  if,  like  Abraham,  we 
drive  them  away,  we  shall  be  able  to  worship  in  peace ;  but 
if  not,  the  fruit  of  wandering  thoughts  in  the  house  of  God 
is  that  the  service  is  spoiled.  So  too  in  the  closet,  whether 
ostensibly  engaged  in  private  devotion,«or  the  reading  of 
Scripture,  unless  the  thoughts  be  centred  upon  the  subject  in 
hand,  there  can  be  no  spiritual  gain  in  drawing  near  unto  Ood. 

n.  For  a  few  minutes  now  let  us  think  of  brighter  things, 
while  I  mention  a  few  good  thoughts  and  theib  fbtjit. 

"  Of  which,"  says  an  apostle,  "  we  cannot  now  speak 
particularly,"  when  he  had  a  long  list  and  a  sBort  space :  so 
I  must  say  now.  If  you  would  have  good  fruit  in  your  soul, 
cultivate  humble  thoughts.  No  man  was  ever  injured  by  hav- 
ing too  lowly  a  view  of  himself.  The  best  definition  of 
humility  I  ever  heard  was  this — "  To  think  rightly  of  ouiv 
selves."  To  think  of  ourselves  as  below  the  standard  is 
meanness  ;  to  think  of  ourselves  above  the  standard  is  pride ; 
but  to  form  a  right  estimation  of  ourselves  is  true  humility. 
Avoid  the  counterfeit  which  is  in  the  world — ^that  is  mock 
humility.      Be  trulj/  humble.      Have  low  thoughts  of  your- 


THOUGHTS  AND  THEIR  FRUIT.         '        166 

selves,  especially  before  God.  Penitent  thoughts  of  bin, 
humble  views  with  regard  to  Divine  grace,  and  a  close  ac- 
count of  your  own  responsibility  are  indispensable  ;  so  you 
will  find  that  humility  will  sweep  out  the  chamber  of  your 
soul,  and  prepare  it  for  the  incoming  of  the  Great  Prince. 

Cultivate  very  much  forgiving  thoughts  towards  your 
fdUyuMnen.  Never  be  hard  to  be  persuaded  to  pardon  au 
olfejice.  He  that  taketh  his  brother  by  the  throat  will  be 
sure  to  be  taken  by  the  throat  himself.  Evil  for  evil,  it  is 
said,  is  beast-like ;  good  for  good  is  man-like ;  evil  for  good 
is  devil-like  ;  but  good  for  evil  is  God-like.  Try  to  do  it, 
and  if  any  thing  can  make  the  bells  ring  in  your  heart,  it 
will  be  to  forgive  one  who  has  very  greatly  ard  wantonly 
injured  you.  The  worse  the  offence,  if  you  can  overlook  it, 
the  greater  will  be  your  own  joy,  and  the  better  proof  will 
you  have  that  you  are  a  child  of  God. 

Go  to  bed  each  night,  and  wake  up  each  morning  i\  ith  ad- 
miring thoughts  of  God^s  goodness,  and  with  adoriiig  thoughts 
towards  God^s  greatness.  You  will  find  these  thoughts  to 
be  like  bees,  that  will  come  home  to  you  laden  with  honey. 
Let  your  soul  be  a  hive  of  them.  Worship  the  Lord. 
Think  much  of  him.  Let  every  blessing  you  receive  make 
you  think  of  him.  Do  not  come  to  the  table  and  hurriedly 
offer  what  we  call  "  grace,"  because  it  is  the  custom  to  do 
so,  and  then  have  done  with  thanks,  but  let  your  soul  really 
see  God's  hand  in  every  thing  that  is  on  the  table.  We 
need  not  fear  worldly  thoughts  if  we  were  to  sanctify  these 
worldly  blessings.  Said  one — "  The  road  on  which  I  tread 
makes  me  think  of  Christ — ^the  way.  The  door  through 
which  I  pass  makes  me  think  of  Christ — the  door.  I  c3.nnot 
handle  money  but  what  I  think  that  T  am  not  my  own,  but 
bought  with  a  price.  I  do  not  receipt  a  bill  without  recol 
fecting  that  he  has  blotted  out  the  handwriting  of  ordi 
nances  that  was  against  me.  I  cannot  talk  to  my  fellow-man, 
and  receive  my  answer,  without  thinking  how  I  talk  with 
Gk>d,  and  how  he  answers  me."  Li  such  manner  with  many 
8 


I7«>  TH0OS3TS  ikXD  ITHEIIE  FKrK. 


cilni?si>  in  j^rczr  ^cri^     JLi^ie^  will  ^i  d?  aoid  fro  beiwecm 

a;2i3un;5.     Gee  &  <»^  fill  <x  ^aise^  ^nEr^  oc*  pandise»  and 

lifC  zhuHL  £x  ;ibo«:s  zi  inie  ^:- y«s  *x  jiTtsr  joixL  ;iB»l  sed^  there 

grT^LiofJifc  If  :&  TT.fcr  ^:iji  ba^  ji»  ^2i^  izKr^rj  «?f  G««l  in  ercrj 
thinz.  ^Si^ctfOri  of  j:«:^=^  ;&1'w^ts  sls  ii^«  bia^k  side  of  the 
pictnir^*  be  wlI  be  ^^cj  rziJiMd.  Tba^  fnzEt  of  thaoikfiil 
Hibic^i*  will  c«»  suTiTTTtfr  3l  ^  iooL.  e^rei  w^ien  tke  winds 

iTC  wiiiucr  ra^  o<ickp^.     Cali:iv:ue  ;:aiuxjcixl  tibQ«^[ts  ns  yon 


itijj  ^iM^j/tla^     VTi^a  t;h.?a  cajzsii  n*.^  5«i»  ^v  waj.  stSl  trast 

nL  ukr  Li:c»i.  Belie  vifr  ni  iiai^  TIlcci^  evianr  tMn^  dioiild 
gi^e  n&i*-  lie  uc  t^  pr.^isiitiy  ;$clu  b«eliev«  c&e  pcvouse  to  be 

tame. 

ery  ntrmin^  exen:'»*  saci  tbwoxataL  Pat  tfej  aonl  into 
G*>rs  h;i!i>i  :ih^  be  m^j  de:il  whk  trree  acconlm^  to  his 
will  all  dbe  -Iat:  xad  each.  niarJitL  wfeea  toxya  reriewvst  the 
.LiT,  nn.^rr^  G«jd  5-^r  15  alU  wajkuevec  h  izl3it^t«  Iwen^  know- 
uiiz  ^ihiiC  i^  sLisc  b<  goo«l^  xxd^T«  ni:z:«c  CK  besc  if  G^  has  (h^ 

I  win  fcaTLj  saT — se^  Wiener.  t»v?  h^inM  muoty  i^m^mg 

^A'}Hj/U:it  'jT^fr  OtrwiL  Hi'we  I«:B:ti:tii^  5a<o<fcih.i*  so  b*  with  him 
wfiere  ie  ».  L«»c  Christ  have  ^y  b«ft?t  obuoo^ c:?— che  cream  of 
liijenu  Let  him  ajive  tae  tir<t  ^^r^w^ri  of  yvar  3|»£rtt.  Be  with 
'uth  in.  waking  iad  3s$k  tor  •^  ;&  mortiijac^  wt-hoat  cIo«dsw'^  Say 
^'>  ainL  L3.  uhe  eveniour — **'  Abide  wi:a  ulsv  :or  tbw  dar  k  feur 
9^^uxl7  And  if  yoa  lie  aw:ike  *:  ci^cs^  still  seek  to  hare 
aoiiii»  pretrb^os  tihoo^ai;  o£  C!Lr!sc^  liVe  a  w;ii5er  made  with 
oiTney.  to  jot  iia«ier  voar  soti^ruie^  V.% !  we  cant  bcu^  henr- 
ei  ^WTL  uo  eart&L  if  we  can  uiiike  oar  thioct^t^  ttp  to  henTeiL 


THOUGHTS  AND  THEIR  FRUIT.  171 

If  thoughts  be  the  wings,  and  the  epirit  be  the  wind,  we  will 

fly  away  to  the  celestial  Paradise.    We  cannot  climb  to 

Pisgah's  top  and  stand  on  Kebo,  and  look  to  the  promised 
land  except  in  our  thoughts,  but  our  thoughts  can  take 

us  to 

"  Jerusalem  the  golden. 
With  milk  and  honey  blest." 

Thought  can  introduce  us  to  the  apostles  and  martyrs. 
Thought  can  wrap  us  in  white  robes,  and  put  crowns  upon 
our  brow.  Thought  can  learn  the  music  of  the  spheres,  and 
unite  in  the  everlasting  song.  Thought  can  enter  into  fel- 
lowship with  God,  and  make  us  lie  in  Jesus'  bosom. 

Be  much,  then,  in  such  thoughts  as  these,  and  may  the 
fruit  of  your  thoughts  be  such  as  God  himself  may  delight 
in,  to  Jesus  Christ's  praise.     Amen« 


.Jk 


171  THE  CX>yENAllT 

•4 


SERMON  XL 


THE  COVENANT. 

*10B  TBm  U  THB  0OTENA3tT  THAT  I  WILL  MAKE  WITH  THB  ROUBH  Or  IBBABL . 

THOeS  DATS,  8AITH  THB  LOBD  ;   I  WILL  PUT  ICT  LAWS  INTO  THBIB  MIlfD,  AXD 
WRITB  THBX  IN  THEm  HSABT8  ;   AND  I  WILL  BX  TO  THSX  A  GOD,  AND  THHT  8BAX& 

BS  TO  JEX  A  pxoFLB.''— Heb.  Yiii  la 

The  doctrine  of  the  covenant  lies  at  the  root  of  all  tme 
theology.  It  has  been  said  that  he  who  well  understands 
the  distinction  between  the  covenant  of  works  and  the  cov- 
enant of  grace,  is  a  master  in  divinity.  I  am  persuaded  that 
most  of  the  mistakes  which  men  make  concerning  the  doc- 
trines of  Scripture,  are  based  upon  fundamental  errors  with 
regard  to  the  covenants  of  law  and  of  grace.  May  God 
grant  us  now  the  power  to  instruct,  and  you  the  grace  to 
receive  instruction  on  this  vital  subject. 

The  human  race,  in  the  order  of  history,  as  far  as  this 
world  is  concerned,  first  stood  in  subjection  to  God  under 
the  covenant  of  works.  Adam  was  the  representative  man. 
A  certain  law  was  given  him.  If  he  kept  it,  he  and  all 
his  posterity  would  be  blessed  as  the  result  of  obedience. 
If  he  broke  it,  he  would  incur  the  curse  himself,  and  entail 
it  on  all  represented  by  him.  That  covenant  our  first  fififc- 
ther  broke.  He  fell ;  he  failed  to  fulfil  his  obligations :  in 
Ids  fall  he  involved  us  all,  for  we  were  all  in  his  loins,  and 
he  represented  us  before  God.  Our  ruin,then,  was  complete 
before  we  were  bom ;  we  were  ruined  by  him  who  stood 
ts  our  first  representative.    To  be  saved  by  the  works  of 


THE  COVENANT.  173 

the  law  is  impossible^  for  under  that  covenant  we  are  already 
lost.  If  saved  at  all  it  must  be  on  quite  a  different  plan, 
not  on  the  plan  of  doing  and  being  rewarded  for  it,  for 
that  has  been  tried,  and  the  representative  man  in  whom  it 
was  tested  has  failed  for  us  all.  We  have  all  failed  in  his 
failure ;  it  is  hopeless,  therefore,  to  expect  to  win  Divine 
favor  by  any  thing  that  we  can  do,  or  to  merit  Divine 
blessing  by  way  of  reward. 

But  Divine  mercy  has  interposed,  and  provided  a  plan 
of  salvation  &om  the  fall.  That  plan  is  another  covenant, 
a  covenant  made  with  Christ  Jesus  the  Son  of  God,  who  la 
fitly  called  by  the  Apostle,  "  the  Second  Adam,"  because  he 
8t .  od  again  as  the  representative  of  men.  Now,  the  second 
covenant,  so  far  as  Christ  was  concerned,  was  a  covenant  of 
works  quite  as  much  as  the  other.  It  was  on  this  wise. 
Christ  shall  come  into  the  world  and  perfectly  obey  the  Di- 
vine law:  he  shall  also,  inasmuch  as  the  first  Adam  has 
broken  the  law,  suffer  the  penalty  of  sin.  If  he  shall  do  both 
of  these,  then  all  whom  he  represents  shall  be  blessed  in  his 
blessedness,  and  saved  because  of  his  merit.  You  see,  then, 
that  until  our  Lord  finished  his  substitutionary  work,  it  was 
a  covenant  of  works  towards  him.  He  had  certain  works 
to  perform,  upon  condition  of  which  certain  blessings  should 
be  given  to  us.  Our  Lord  has  kept  that  covenant.  His 
part  of  it  has  been  fulfilled  to  the  letter.  There  is  no  com- 
mandment which  he  has  not  honored ;  there  is  no  penalty 
of  the  broken  law  which  he  has  not  endured.  He  became  a 
servant  and  was  obedient,  yea,  obedient  to  death,  even  the 
death  of  the  cross.  He  has  thus  done  what  the  first  Adam 
could  not  accomplish,  and  he  has  retrieved  what  the  first 
Adam  forfeited  by  his  transgressions.  He  has  established 
the  covenant,  and  now  it  ceases  to  be  a  covenant  of  worka, 
for  the  works  are  all  performed. 

"  Jesus  did  them,  did  them  all. 
Long,  long  ago." 

Aod  now  what  remaineth  of  the  covenant  ?    6o4  0|i  bis  part 


=cn 


166  tHOtJGHTS  AND  THEIR  PBtJIT. 

certainly  it  excludes  you  from  eternal  life,  and  will  close  ttft 
gates  of  heaven  against  you.  God  deliver  us  &om  the  fruit 
of  such  thoughts ! 

Then,  again,  proudy  boastful,  vain-glorious,  self-seeJeinff 
thoughts  are  alike  obnoxious.  How  highly  some  people 
think  of  themselves !  You  can  see  it  in  their  gait,  and  their 
speech  bewrayeth  them.  Yet  their  wine  is  all  froth,  and 
their  gold  is  counterfeit.  Their  speech,  when  they  begin 
to  tell  of  what  they  have,  and  what  they  can  do,  and  what 
they  did  do  upon  such  and  such  occasions — all  this  is  an 
abomination  to  honest  men  ;  but  their  thoughts  must  be  very 
abominable  to  God.  It  is  one  of  the  things  which  he  says 
he  hates — ^''a  proud  look."  God  grant  us  grace  to  be  rid  of 
every  proud  thought,  for  we  have  nothing  to  be  proud  o£ 
A  proud  man  is  nothing  but  a  wind-bag,  and  when  either 
the  ills  of  life  or  the  crisis  of  death  shall  put  a  pin  into  it, 
what  a  collapse  there  will  be,  how  the  haughty  one  will  dis- 
cover himself  to  be  nothing  but  emptiness  and  vanity !  Get 
rid  of  proud  thoughts,  for,  oh !  what  will  they  not  do  ?  Pride 
dragged  an  angel  from  heaven,  and  made  a  devil  of  him,  and 
pride  would  drag  any  of  us  down  to  the  level  of  the  devil 
if  we  fall  into  its  snare. 

Another  set  of  thoughts,  more  common  still  and  i  ot  much 
decried,  are  murmuring  thoughts.  Ah  me !  how  fall  some 
people  are  of  these  !  They  can  hardly  speak  but  Ti  hat  thoy 
have  something  to  grumble  about.  Trade  with  them  is  al- 
ways bad.  Ever  since  I  have  been  iu  London  trade  has  been 
bad,  but  it  is  even  worse  now.  It  never  was  so  bad  as  it  is 
now,  except  that  it  was  just  as  bad  last  year ;  and,  as  far  as 
I  know,  has  always  been  at  tlie  worst.  Farmers  never  have, 
to  the  best  of  my  recollection,  had  more  than  "  an  average 
crop,"  and  most  years  there  has  been  a  failure.  If  the  wheat 
has  been  good,  the  turnips  have  always  gone  ba  1,  or  some- 
thing. I  notice  munnuring  to  be  a  very  common  thing  with 
many  people,  and  you  no  sooner  sit  down  in  thjir  cottage 
than,  instead  of  telling  you  that  some  one  has  b*ien  tber^  to 


fHOUQHTS  AND  THEIIl  FRUIT.  167 

help  tbem  a  little  and  give  them  some  assistance,  tliey  say 
they  have  only  the  parish  allowance — a  miserable  pittance ! 
So  it  is ;  but  they  forget  the  mercies  that  they  have.  Why 
should  I  be  always  telling  how  often  I  have  rheumatic  pains, 
and  how  many  times  I  find  that  there  is  something  wrong 
with  my  constitution  ?  Why  should  I  make  it  my  constant 
habit  to  compel  everybody  to  be  miserable  wherever  1  go? 
"Well,"  says  one,  "  but  you  know  we  cannot  help  it ! "  My 
dear  friend,  then  if  you  do  not  help  it  I  will  tell  you  what 
will  be  the  fruit  of  it — you  will  make  yourselves  incorrigibly 
miserable.  You  will  bring  yourselves  into  a  desperate  state, 
in  which  nothing  will  comfort  you.  I  do  believe  that  in  this 
respect  we  are  very  much  our  own  masters.  Not  all  the 
bounties  of  Providence  can  make  us  happy,  if  we  have  a 
thankless,ungrateful  heart.  You  may  have  all  that  the  world 
can  give  you,  and  yet  be  wretched ;  or  you  may  be  very, 
very  poor,  and  yet  be  cheerful.  A  thankful  heart  is  essen- 
tial, and,  oh  I  may  God  be  pleased  to  give  us  that  thankful 
heart !  But  what  I  want  you  to  remember  is  that  murmur 
ing  is  a  great  sin.«  They  murmured  against  God  in  the 
wilderness,  and  He  sent  fiery  sei'pents  among  them.  God 
thinks  much  of  our  complaints  against  his  providential  deal- 
ings with  us ;  let  us  not  think  so  little  of  the  sin  of  provok- 
ing Him  with  our  thoughts. 

How  prone  we  are  likewise  to  cherish  unbelieving  thoughts. 
Oh !  that  we  were  all  rid  of  these,  but  J  suppose  if  I  went 
round  these  galleries  I  should  find  in  every  pew  somebody 
who  has  unbelieving  thoughts.  We  fancy  that  God  will 
forsake  us ;  that  Providence  will  turn  against  us.  We  get 
like  old  Jacob,  when  he  said,  "  Joseph  is  not,  and  Simeon 
is  not,  and  now  ye  will  take  Benjamin  away;  all  these 
thir.gs  are  against  me ;"  whereas  everything  is  working 
for  us,  only  we  cannot  see  it.  Begone,  unbelief,  for  the 
fruit  of  unbelieving  thoughts  is  weakness,  sorrow,  re- 
bellion against  God,  and  I  know  not  what  else^of  rash- 
ness and  presumption.    God  save  U3  from  these  thoughts  I 


166  tHOtJGHTS  AND  THEIR  PBtJIT. 

certainly  it  excludes  you  from  eternal  life,  and  will  close  ttft 
gates  of  heaven  against  you.  God  deliver  us  from  the  fruit 
of  such  thoughts ! 

Then,  again,  proudy  boastful^  vain-glorious^  aelf^eekinff 
thoughts  are  alike  obnoxious.  How  highly  some  people 
think  of  themselves !  You  can  see  it  in  their  gait,  and  their 
speech  bewrayeth  them.  Yet  their  wine  is  all  froth,  and 
their  gold  is  counterfeit.  Their  speech,  when  they  be^n 
to  tell  of  what  they  have,  and  what  they  can  do,  and  what 
they  did  do  upon  such  and  such  occasions — all  this  is  an 
abomination  to  honest  men  ;  but  their  thoughts  must  be  very 
abominable  to  God.  It  is  one  of  the  things  which  he  says 
he  hates — ^''a  proud  look."  God  grant  us  grace  to  be  rid  of 
every  proud  thought,  for  we  have  nothing  to  be  proud  o£ 
A  proud  man  is  nothing  but  a  wind-bag,  and  when  either 
the  ills  of  life  or  the  crisis  of  death  shall  put  a  pin  into  it, 
what  a  collapse  there  will  be,  how  the  haughty  one  will  dis- 
cover himself  to  be  nothing  but  emptiness  and  vanity !  Get 
rid  of  proud  thoughts,  for,  oh !  what  will  they  not  do  ?  Pride 
dragged  an  angel  from  heaven,  and  made  a  devil  of  1  dm,  and 
pride  would  drag  any  of  us  down  to  the  level  of  the  devil 
if  we  fall  into  its  snare. 

Another  set  of  thoughts,  more  common  still  and  i  ot  much 
decried,  are  murmuring  thoughts.  Ah  me  I  how  fall  some 
people  are  of  these  !  They  can  hardly  speak  but  Ti  hat  thoy 
have  something  to  grumble  about.  Trade  with  them  is  al- 
ways bad.  Ever  since  I  have  been  iu  London  trade  has  been 
bad,  but  it  is  even  worse  now.  It  never  was  so  bad  as  it  is 
now,  except  that  it  was  just  as  bad  last  year ;  and,  as  far  as 
I  know,  has  always  been  at  the  worst.  Farmers  never  have, 
to  the  best  of  my  recollection,  had  more  than  "  an  average 
crop,"  and  most  years  there  has  been  a  failure.  If  the  wheat 
has  been  good,  the  turnips  have  always  gone  ba  1,  or  some- 
thing. I  notice  murmuring  to  be  a  very  commoL  thing  with 
many  people,  and  you  no  sooner  sit  down  in  thjir  cottage 
than,  instead  of  telling  you  that  some  one  has  b*ien  tber^  to 


— t. 


fHOtJQHTS  AND  THEIR  FRUIT.  167 

help  tbem  a  little  and  give  them  some  assistance,  tliey  say 
Ihey  have  only  the  parish  allowance — a  miserable  pittance ! 
So  it  is ;  but  they  forget  the  mercies  that  they  have.  Why 
should  I  be  always  telling  how  often  I  have  rheumatic  pains, 
and  how  many  times  I  find  that  there  is  something  wrong 
with  my  constitution  ?  Why  should  I  make  it  my  constant 
habit  to  compel  everybody  to  be  miserable  wherever  1  go  ? 
"Well,"  says  one,  "  but  you  know  we  cannot  help  it ! "  My 
dear  friend,  then  if  you  do  not  help  it  I  will  tell  you  what 
will  be  the  finiit  of  it — you  will  make  yourselves  incorrigibly 
miserable.  You  w^ill  bring  yourselves  into  a  desperate  state, 
in  which  nothing  will  comfort  you.  I  do  believe  that  in  this 
respect  we  arc  very  much  our  own  masters.  Not  all  the 
bounties  of  Providence  can  make  us  happy,  if  we  have  a 
thankless,ungrateful  heart.  You  may  have  all  that  the  world 
can  give  you,  and  yet  be  wretched ;  or  you  may  be  very, 
very  poor,  and  yet  be  cheerful.  A  thankful  heart  is  essen- 
tial, and,  oh  I  may  God  be  pleased  to  give  us  that  thankful 
heart !  But  what  I  want  you  to  remember  is  that  murmur 
ing  is  a  great  sin.«  They  murmured  against  God  in  the 
wilderness,  and  He  sent  fiery  serpents  among  them.  God 
thinks  much  of  our  complaints  against  his  providential  deal- 
ings with  us ;  let  us  not  think  so  little  of  the  sin  of  provok- 
ing Him  with  our  thoughts. 

How  prone  we  are  likewise  to  cherish  unbelieving  thoughts. 
Oh !  that  we  were  all  rid  of  these,  but  J  suppose  if  I  went 
round  these  galleries  I  should  find  in  every  pew  somebody 
who  has  unbelieving  thoughts.  We  fancy  that  God  will 
forsake  us ;  that  Providence  will  turn  against  us.  We  get 
like  old  Jacob,  when  he  said,  "  Joseph  is  not,  and  Simeon 
is  not,  and  now  ye  will  take  Benjamin  away;  all  these 
thir.gs  are  against  me ;"  whereas  everything  is  workuig 
for  us,  only  we  cannot  see  it.  Begone,  unbelief,  for  the 
fruit  of  unbelieving  thoughts  is  weakness,  sorrow,  re- 
bellion against  God,  and  I  know  not  what  else^of  rash- 
ness and  presumption.    God  save  us  from  these  thoughts  I 


168  IHOtJGHtS  AND  THEIR  FRUPP 

Procrastindting  tJwughts  have  been  the  fndtfiil  sotiioa 
of  mischief  to  full  many  of  you.  You  have  good  thoughts 
and  good  resolves,  but  you  always  put  these  things  o%  and 
think  that  better  times  will  come  for  leaving  off  your  sins 
and  seeking  to  Christ ;  albeit  you  are  making  a  fearful  waste 
of  time,  and  running  a  perilous  risk,  and  it  is  to  be  dreaded 
that  your  souls  will  be  lost  at  the  last. 

Others  of  us  have  to  complain  of  wandering  thoughts 
Mohen  toe  are  worshipping  God,  and  the  fruit  of  these  is  to 
spoil  the  golden  seasons,  which,  well  used,  might  yield  great 
profit.  Oftentimes  when  the  service  has  been  fitted  enough 
to  minister  refreshment  and  instruction,  and  others  have 
been  nourished  by  the  word,  some  poor  soul  goes  out  and 
says,  "  I  have  not  enjoyed  it  at  all."  Why,  of  course  not,  for 
your  thoughts  have  been  elsewhere.  These  are  the  birds 
that  come  down  upon  the  sacrifice ;  if,  like  Abraham,  we 
drive  them  away,  we  shall  be  able  to  worship  in  peace ;  but 
if  not,  the  fruit  of  wandering  thoughts  in  the  house  of  God 
is  that  the  service  is  spoiled.  So  too  in  the  closet,  whether 
ostensibly  engaged  in  private  devotion,»or  the  reading  of 
Scripture,  unless  the  thoughts  be  centred  upon  the  subject  in 
hand,  there  can  be  no  spiritual  gain  in  drawing  near  unto  God. 

n.  For  a  few  minutes  now  let  us  think  of  brighter  things, 
while  I  mention  a  few  good  thoughts  and  theib  fritit. 

"  Of  which,'*  says  an  apostle,  "  we  cannot  now  speak 
particularly,"  when  he  had  a  long  list  and  a  sBort  space  :  so 
I  must  say  now.  K  you  would  have  good  fruit  in  your  soul, 
cultivate  humble  thoughts,  No  man  was  ever  injured  by  hav- 
ing too  lowly  a  view  of  himself  The  best  definition  of 
humility  I  ever  heard  was  this — "  To  think  rightly  of  oup- 
selves."  To  think  of  ourselves  as  below  the  standard  is 
meanness  ;  to  think  of  ourselves  above  the  standard  is  pride ; 
but  to  form  a  right  estimation  of  ourselves  is  true  humility. 
Avoid  the  counterfeit  which  is  in  the  world — that  is  mock 
humility.      Be  truly  humble.      Have  low  thoughts  of  your- 


teOUGHTS  AND  THEIR  FRUIT.         '        166 

selves,  especially  before  God.  Penitent  thoughts  ol'  sin, 
humble  views  with  regard  to  Divine  grace,  and  a  close  ac- 
count of  your  own  responsibility  are  indispensable  ;  so  you 
will  find  that  humility  will  sweep  out  the  chamber  of  your 
Boul,  and  prepare  it  for  the  incoming  of  the  Great  Prince. 

Cultivate  very  much  forgiving  thougJUs  towards  your 
feUiyuHnen.  Never  be  hard  to  be  persuaded  to  pardon  an 
o/Tejice.  He  that  taketh  his  brother  by  the  throat  will  be 
sure  to  be  taken  by  the  throat  himself.  Evil  for  evil,  it  is 
said,  is  beast-like ;  good  for  good  is  man-like ;  evil  for  good 
b  devil-like  ;  but  good  for  evil  is  God-like.  Try  to  do  it, 
and  if  any  thing  can  make  the  bells  ring  in  yoar  heart,  it 
will  be  to  forgive  one  who  has  very  greatly  av^d  wantonly 
injured  you.  The  worse  the  offence,  if  you  can  overlook  it, 
the  greater  will  be  your  own  joy,  and  the  better  proof  will 
you  have  that  you  are  a  child  of  God. 

Go  to  bed  each  night,  and  wake  up  each  morning  'i^  ith  ad- 
miring thoughts  of  God^s  goodness^  and  with  adoriiig  thoughts 
towards  God's  greatness.  You  will  find  these  thoughts  to 
be  like  bees,  that  will  come  home  to  you  laden  with  honey. 
Let  your  soul  be  a  hive  of  them.  Worship  the  Lord. 
Think  much  of  him.  Let  every  blessing  you  receive  make 
you  think  of  him.  Do  not  come  to  the  table  and  hurriedly 
offer  what  we  call  "  grace,"  because  it  is  the  custom  to  do 
so,  and  then  have  done  with  thanks,  but  let  your  soul  really 
see  God's  hand  in  every  thing  that  is  on  the  table.  We 
need  not  fear  worldly  thoughts  if  we  were  to  sanctify  these 
worldly  blessings.  Said  one — "  Tlie  road  on  which  I  tread 
makes  me  think  of  Christ — ^the  way.  The  door  through 
which  I  pass  makes  me  think  of  Christ — the  door.  I  cSiUnot 
handle  money  but  what  I  think  that  T  am  not  my  own,  but 
bought  with  a  price.  I  do  not  receipt  a  bill  without  recol 
lecting  that  he  has  blotted  out  the  handwriting  of  ordi 
nances  that  was  against  me.  I  cannot  talk  to  my  fellow-man, 
and  receive  my  answer,  without  thinking  how  I  talk  with 
God,  and  how  he  answers  me."  In  such  manner  with  many 
8 


170  THOUGHTS  AND  THEIR  FRUIT. 

thoughts  of  God,  you  will  find  the  fruit  of  heavenly -inind- 
edness  in  your  spirit.  Angels  will  go  to  and  fro  between 
you  and  the  courts  of  the  Most  High,  if  you  have  many  of 
these  admiring  and  adoring  thoughts  of  God. 

Thankful  thoughts  are  well  deserving  your  high  encour- 
agement. Get  a  cage  full  of  these  birds  of  paradise,  and 
let  them  fly  about  in  the  groves  of  your  jsoul,  and  sing  there 
at  all  times.  There  is  no  better  companion  than  cheerful 
gratitude.  If  a  man  can  but  see  the  mercy  of  God  in  every 
thing,  instead  of  looking  always  at  the  black  side  of  the 
picture,  he  will  be  happy  indeed.  The  fruit  of  thankful 
thoughts  will  be  summer  in  his  soul,  even  when  the  winds 
of  winter  rage  outside.  Cultivate  thankful  thoughts  as  you 
cultivate  sweet  flowers  in  your  garden. 

Yet  again  dear  friends,  get  many  and  abundant  beiiev' 
ing  thoughts.  When  thou  canst  not  see  thy  way,  still  trust 
in  thy  Lord.  Believe  in  him.  Though  every  thing  should 
give  the  lie  to  the  promise,  still  believe  the  promise  to  be 
true. 

Abound  much  in  thoughts  of  submission  to  God,  Ev- 
ery morning  exercise  such  thoughts.  Put  thy  soul  into 
God's  hand  that  he  may  deal  with  thee  according  to  his 
will  all  the  day ;  and  each  night,  when  thou  reviewest  the 
day,  thank  God  for  it  all,  whatever  it  may 'have  been,  know- 
ing that  it  must  be  good,  nay,  must  be  best  if  God  has  or- 
dered it. 

I  will  finally  say — seek,  believer,  to  h^ve  many  longing 
thoughts  after  Christ.  Have  longing  thoughts  to  be  with  him 
where  he  is.  Let  Christ  have  thy  best  thoughts — the  cream  of 
them.  Let  him  have  the  first  growth  of  your  spirit.  Be  with 
)iim  in  waking  and  ask  for  "  a  morning  without  clouds."  Say 
to  him  in  the  evening — "  Abide  with  us,  for  the  day  is  far 
spent."  And  if  you  lie  awake  at  night,  still  seek  to  have 
some  precious  thought  of  Christ,  like  a  wafer  made  with 
honey,  to  put  under  your  tongue.  Oh  !  we  can  bring  heav* 
en  down  to  earth  if  we  can  take  our  thoughts  up  to  heaven* 


THOUGHTS  AND  THEIR  FRUIT.  171 

If  thoughts  be  the  wings,  and  the  spirit  be  the  wind,  we  will 

fly  away  to  the  celestial  Paradise.    We  cannot  climb  to 

Pisgah's  top  and  stand  on  Kebo,  and  look  to  the  promised 
land  except  in  our  thoughts,  but  our  thoughts  can  take 

us  to 

"  Jerusalem  the  golden. 
With  milk  and  honey  blest." 

Thought  can  introduce  us  to  the  apostles  and  martyrs. 
Thought  can  wrap  us  in  white  robes,  and  put  crowns  upon 
our  brow.  Thought  can  learn  the  music  of  the  spheres,  and 
unite  in  the  everlasting  song.  Thought  can  enter  into  fel- 
lowship with  God,  and  make  us  lie  in  Jesus'  bosom. 

Be  much,  then,  in  such  thoughts  as  these,  and  may  the 
fruit  of  your  thoughts  be  such  as  God  himself  may  delight 
in,  to  Jesus  Christ's  praisa    Amen« 


,jk 


"^ 


171  THE  CX>yENAllT 


SERMON  XL 


THE  COVENANT. 

*10BTBn  IB  THB  OOTmiAJXT  THAT  I  WILL  XAKS  WITH  THB  HOUBS  Or  IBBABL. 

THOeS  DATS,  SAITH  THB  LOBD  ;   I  WILL  PUT  ICT  LAWS  INTO  THBIB  MIlfD,  AMD 
WBTTB  THBH  IN  THEm  HEABT8  ;   AND  I  WILL  BB  TO  THBX  A  eOD,  AND  THHT  flDBAXA 

BB  TO  JEB  A  PBOFLB.^*— Heb.  viii.  la 

Thb  doctrine  of  the  covenant  lies  at  the  root  of  all  tme 
theology.  It  has  been  said  that  he  who  well  understands 
the  distinction  between  the  covenant  of  works  and  the  cov- 
enant of  grace,  is  a  master  in  divinity.  I  am  persuaded  that 
most  of  the  mistakes  which  men  make  concerning  the  doc- 
trines of  Scripture,  are  based  upon  fundamental  errors  with 
regard  to  the  covenants  of  law  and  of  grace.  May  God 
grant  us  now  the  power  to  instruct,  and  you  the  grace  to 
receive  instruction  on  this  vital  subject. 

The  human  race,  in  the  order  of  history,  as  far  as  this 
world  is  concerned,  first  stood  in  subjection  to  God  under 
the  covenant  of  works.  Adam  was  the  representative  man. 
A  certain  law  was  given  him.  If  he  kept  it,  he  and  all 
his  posterity  would  be  blessed  as  the  result  of  obedience. 
If  he  broke  it,  he  would  incur  the  curse  himself,  and  ent^l 
it  on  all  represented  by  him.  That  covenant  our  first  fa- 
ther broke.  He  fell ;  he  failed  to  fulfil  his  obligations :  in 
Ids  fall  he  involved  us  all,  for  we  were  all  in  his  loins,  and 
he  represented  us  before  God.  Our  ruin, then,  was  complete 
before  we  were  bom ;  we  were  ruined  by  him  who  stood 
ts  our  first  representative.    To  be  saved  by  the  works  of 


THE  COVENANT.  173 

the  law  is  impossible,  for  under  that  covenant  we  are  already 
lost.  If  saved  at  all  it  must  be  on  quite  a  different  plan, 
not  on  the  plan  of  doing  and  being  rewarded  for  it,  for 
that  has  been  tried,  and  the  representative  man  in  whom  it 
was  tested  has  failed  for  us  all.  We  have  all  failed  in  his 
failure ;  it  is  hopeless,  therefore,  to  expect  to  win  Divine 
favor  by  any  thing  that  we  can  do,  or  to  merit  Divine 
blessing  by  way  of  reward. 

But  Divine  mercy  has  interposed,  and  provided  a  plan 
of  salvation  &om  the  falL  That  plan  is  another  covenant, 
a  covenant  made  with  Christ  Jesus  the  Son  of  God,  who  is 
fitly  called  by  the  Apostle,  "  the  Second  Adam,"  because  he 
8t  .od  again  as  the  representative  of  men.  Now,  the  second 
covenant,  so  far  as  Christ  was  concerned,  was  a  covenant  of 
works  quite  as  much  as  the  other.  It  was  on  this  wise. 
Christ  shall  come  into  the  world  and  perfectly  obey  the  Di- 
vine law :  he  shall  also,  inasmuch  as  the  first  Adam  has 
broken  the  law,  suffer  the  penalty  of  sin.  If  he  shall  do  both 
of  these,  then  all  whom  he  represents  shall  be  blessed  in  his 
blessedness,  and  saved  because  of  his  merit.  You  see,  then, 
that  until  our  Lord  finished  his  substitutionary  work,  it  was 
a  covenant  of  works  towards  him.  He  had  certain  works 
to  perform,  upon  condition  of  which  certain  blessings  should 
be  given  to  us.  Our  Lord  has  kept  that  covenant.  His 
part  of  it  has  been  fulfilled  to  the  letter.  There  is  no  com- 
mandment which  he  has  not  honored  ;  there  is  no  penalty 
of  the  broken  law  which  he  has  not  endured.  He  became  a 
servant  and  was  obedient,  yea,  obedient  to  death,  even  the 
death  of  the  cross.  He  has  thus  done  what  the  first  Adam 
could  not  accomplish,  and  he  has  retrieved  what  the  first 
Adam  forfeited  by  his  transgressions.  He  has  established 
the  covenant,  and  now  it  ceases  to  be  a  covenant  of  worka, 
for  the  works  are  all  performed. 

"  Jesus  did  them,  did  them  all. 
Long,  long  ago." 

Aod  now  what  remaineth  of  the  coven(^nt  ?    Gk>4  on  bis  part 


Afn 


174r  THE  COVENANT. 

has  solemnly  pledged  himself  to  give  undeserved  favor  to 
as  many  as  were  represented  in  Chiist  Jesus.  For  as  many 
as  the  Saviour  died  for,  there  is  stored  up  a  boundless  mass 
of  blessing,  which  shall  be  given  to  them,  not  through  their 
works,  but  as  the  sovereign  gift  of  the  grace  of  God,  accord- 
ing to  his  covenant  promise,  by  which  they  shall  be  saved. 

Behold  my  brethren,  the  hope  of  the  sons  of  men.  The 
hope  of  thtir  saving  themselves  is  crushed,  for  they  are  al- 
ready lost.  The  hope  of  their  being  saved  by  works  is  a 
fallacious  one,  for  they  cannot  keep  the  law ;  they  have  al- 
ready broken  it.  But  there  is  a  way  of  salvation  opened  on 
this  wise, — whosoever  believes  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  re- 
ceives and  partakes  of  the  bliss  which  Christ  has  bought. 
All  the  blessings  which  belong  to  the  covenant  of  grace 
through  the  work  of  Christ  shall  belong  to  every  soul  that  be- 
lieveth  in  Jesus.  Unto  him  that  worketh  not,  but  believeth 
on  him  that  justifieth  the  ungodly,  unto  him  shall  the  bless- 
ing of  the  new  covenant  of  grace  be  undoubtedly  given. 

I  hope  that  this  explanation  is  plain  enough.  If  Adam 
had  kept  the  law  we  should  have  been  blessed  by  his  keep- 
ing it.  He  broke  it,  and  we  have  been  cursed  through  him. 
Now  the  Second  Adam,  Christ  Jesus,  has  kept  the  law,  we 
are,  therefore,  if  believers,  represented  in  Christ  and  blessed 
with  the  results  of  the  obedience  of  Jesus  Christ  to  his  Fa- 
ther's will.  He  said  of  old,  "  Lo,  I  come,  to  do  thy  will,  O 
God  !  Thy  law  is  my  delight."  He  has  done  that  will,  and  the 
blessings  of  grace  are  now  freely  given  to  the  Bons  of 
men. 

I  shall  ask  your  attention  then,  first,  to  the  PnvUege  of 
tTie  Covenant  of  Grace  ;  and  secondly,  to  the  Parties  con- 
cerned in  it. 

I.  As  to  THE  Privileges  op  the  Covenant  of  gback. 

The  first  privilege  is,  that  to  as  many  as  are  interested  in 
ft,  there  shall  be  given  an  illumination  of  their  minde  "  JtoiU 
put  my  laws  into  their  mind,^^    By  nature  we  are  iark  to- 


THE  COVENANT.  175 

wards  God's  will.  Conscience  keeps  up  in  us  a  sort  of  bro- 
ken recollection  of  what  God's  will  wag.  It  is  a  monument 
of  God's  will,  but  it  is  often  hardly  legible.  A  man  does 
not  care  to  read  it,  he  is  averse  to  what  he  reads  there. 
"  Their  foolish  heart  was  darkened,"  is  the  expression  of 
Scripture  with  regard  to  the  mind  of  man.  But  th  t  Holy 
Spirit  is  promised  to  those  interested  in  the  covenant.  He 
ehall  come  upon  their  minds  and  shed  light  instead  of  dark- 
ness, illuminating  them  as  to  what  the  will  of  God  is.  The 
ungodly  man  has  some  degree  of  light,  but  it  is  little  better 
than  darkness  visible,  and  even  that  light  he  does  not  love. 
lie  loves  darkness  rather  than  light,  because  his  deeds  are  evil. 
But  where  the  Holy  Spirit  comes,  he  floods  the  soul  with  a 
Divine  lustre,  in  which  the  soul  delights,  and  desires  to  par- 
ticipate to  the  fullest  degree.  Brethren,  the  renewed  man 
under  the  covenant  of  grace,  does  not  need  constantly  to 
report  to  the  law  to  learn  what  he  ought  to  do,  nor  to  some 
fellow-Christian  to  ask  instruction,  be  has  not  the  law  of 
God  written  on  a  table  of  stone,  or  upon  parchment,  or 
upon  paper  ;  it  is  imprinted  upon  his  own  mind.  There  is 
now  a  Divine,  infallible  Spirit  dwelling  within  him,  who 
tells  him  the  right  and  the  wrong,  and  by  this  he  speedily  dis- 
cerns between  the  good  and  the  evil.  He  no  longer  puts 
darkness  for  light,  and  light  for  darkness,  bitter  for  sweet, 
and  sweet  for  bitter,  his  mind  is  enlightened  as  to  the  true 
holiness  which  God  requires. 

Just  mark  the  men  to  whom  this  light  comes.     All  of 
them  are  depraved  by  nature,  but  by  practice  some  of  them 
become  yet  further  blinded.     Is  it  not  marvellous  that  a 
poor  heathen,  who  scarcely  seemed  to  recognize  the  distinc- 
tion between  right  and  wrong,  before  the  Spirit  of  God  en- 
tered his   mind,   has   afterwards,  without  needing  to   b 
taught  all  the  precepts  individually,  received  at  once  th 
light  of  a  tender  conscience,  which  has  led  him  to  know  the 
right  and  love  it,  and  to  see  the  evil  and  eschew  it?   If  you 
want  to  civilize  tlu  world  it  must  be  by  preach  mg  the  Gos- 


170  THOUGHTS  AND  THEIR  FRUIT. 

thoughts  of  God,  you  will  find  the  fruit  of  heavenly -mind* 
edness  in  your  spirit.  Angels  will  go  to  and  fro  between 
you  and  the  courts  of  the  Most  High,  if  you  have  many  of 
these  admiring  and  adoring  thoughts  of  God. 

Thankful  thoughts  are  well  deserving  your  high  encour- 
agement. Get  a  cage  full  of  these  birds  of  paradise,  and 
let  them  fly  about  in  the  groves  of  your  £oul,  and  sing  there 
at  all  times.  There  is  no  better  companion  than  cheerful 
gratitude.  If  a  man  can  but  see  the  mercy  of  God  in  every 
thing,  instead  of  looking  always  at  the  black  side  of  the 
picture,  he  will  be  happy  indeed.  The  fruit  of  thankful 
thoughts  will  be  summer  in  his  soul,  even  when  the  winds 
of  winter  rage  outside.  Cultivate  thankful  thoughts  as  you 
cultivate  sweet  flowers  in  your  garden. 

Yet  again  dear  friends,  get  many  and  abundant  belieV' 
ing  thoughts.  When  thou  canst  not  see  thy  way,  still  trust 
in  thy  Lord.  Believe  in  him.  Though  every  thing  should 
give  the  lie  to  the  promise,  still  believe  the  promise  to  be 
true. 

Abound  much  in  thoughts  of  submission  to  God.  Ev- 
ery morning  exercise  such  thoughts.  Put  thy  soul  into 
God's  hand  that  he  may  deal  with  thee  according  to  his 
will  all  the  day ;  and  each  night,  when  thou  reviewest  the 
day,  thank  God  for  it  all,  whatever  it  may  »have  been,  know- 
ing that  it  must  be  good,  nay,  must  be  best  if  God  has  or- 
dered it. 

I  will  finally  say — seek,  believer,  to  Jiave  m.any  longing 
thoughts  after  Christ,  Have  longing  thoughts  to  be  with  him 
where  he  is.  Let  Christ  have  thy  best  thoughts — the  cream  of 
them.  Let  him  have  the  first  growth  of  your  spirit.  Be  with 
}um  in  waking  and  ask  for  "  a  morning  without  clouds."  Say 
to  him  in  the  evening — "  Abide  with  us,  for  the  day  is  far 
spent."  And  if  you  lie  awake  at  night,  still  seek  to  have 
som()  precious  thought  of  Christ,  like  a  wafer  made  with 
honey,  to  put  under  your  tongue.  Oh  I  we  can  bring  heav- 
en down  to  earth  if  we  can  take  our  thoughts  up  to  heaven. 


THOUGHTS  AND  THEIR  PRtnT.  171 

If  thouglits  be  the  wings,  and  the  spirit  be  the  wind,  we  will 

fly  away  to  the  celestial  Paradise.    We  cannot  climb  to 

Pisgah's  top  and  stand  on  Nebo,  and  look  to  the  promised 
land  except  in  our  thoughts,  but  our  thoughts  can  take 

us  to 

"  Jerusalem  the  golden. 
With  milk  and  honey  blest." 

Thought  can  introduce  us  to  the  apostles  and  martyrs. 
Thought  can  wrap  us  in  white  robes,  and  put  crowns  upon 
our  brow.  Thought  can  learn  the  music  of  the  spheres,  and 
unite  in  the  everlasting  song.  Thought  can  enter  into  fel- 
lowship with  God,  and  make  us  lie  in  Jesus'  bosom. 

Be  much,  then,  in  such  thoughts  as  these,  and  may  the 
fruit  of  your  thoughts  be  such  as  God  himself  may  delight 
in,  to  Jesufi  Christ's  praise.    Amen. 


.4 


T 


171  THE  OOVENAirr 


SERMON  XL 


THE  COVENANT. 

*K»THISUTHB  OOVENAITT  THAT  I  WILL  KAXX  WITH  THB  BOUSB  OF  URABL 

TH08B  DAYS,  SAITH  THB  LORD ;  I  WILL  PUT  XT  LAWS  INTO  THEIB  ]ain>,  AKD 
WRITB  THBM  IN  THEIR  HEABTS;  AND  I  WILL  BB  TO  THBX  A  GOD,  AND  THXT  8SA£L 
BB  TO  HE  A  FEOFLB."— Heb.  YUi.  !& 

Thb  doctrine  of  the  covenant  lies  at  the  root  of  all  true 
theology.  It  has  been  said  that  he  who  well  understands 
the  distinction  between  the  covenant  of  works  and  the  cov- 
enant of  grace,  is  a  master  in  divinity.  I  am  persuaded  that 
most  of  the  mistakes  which  men  make  concerning  the  doc- 
trines of  Scripture,  are  based  upon  fundamental  errors  with 
regard  to  the  covenants  of  law  and  of  grace.  May  God 
grant  us  now  the  power  to  instnict,  and  you  the  grace  to 
receive  instruction  on  this  vital  subject. 

The  human  race,  in  the  order  of  history,  as  far  as  this 
world  is  concerned,  first  stood  in  subjection  to  God  under 
the  covenant  of  works.  Adam  was  the  representative  man. 
A  certain  law  was  given  him.  If  he  kept  it,  he  and  all 
his  posterity  would  be  blessed  as  the  result  of  obedience. 
If  he  broke  it,  he  would  incur  the  curse  himself,  and  entail 
it  on  all  represented  by  him.  That  covenant  our  first  fa- 
ther broke.  He  fell ;  he  failed  to  fulfil  his  obligations :  in 
his  fall  he  involved  us  all,  for  we  were  all  in  his  loins,  and 
he  represented  us  before  God.  Our  ruin,then,  was  complete 
before  we  were  bom ;  we  were  ruined  by  him  who  stood 
as  our  first  represeBtative«    To  be  saved  by  the  works  of 


THE  COVENANT.  1Y8 

the  law  is  impossible,  for  under  that  covenant  we  are  already 
lost.  If  saved  at  all  it  must  be  on  quite  a  different  plan, 
not  on  the  plan  of  doing  and  being  rewarded  for  it,  for 
that  has  been  tried,  and  the  representative  man  in  whom  it 
was  tested  has  failed  for  us  all  We  have  all  failed  in  his 
fiulure ;  it  is  hopeless,  therefore,  to  expect  to  win  Divine 
favor  by  any  thing  that  we  can  do,  or  to  merit  Divine 
blessing  by  way  of  reward. 

But  Divine  mercy  has  interposed,  and  provided  a  plan 
of  salvation  from  the  fall.  That  plan  is  another  covenant, 
a  covenant  made  with  Christ  Jesus  the  Son  of  God,  who  ia 
fitly  called  by  the  Apostle,  "  the  Second  Adam,"  because  he 
8t  .od  again  as  the  representative  of  men.  Now,  the  second 
covenant,  so  far  as  Christ  was  concerned,  was  a  covenant  of 
works  quite  as  much  as  the  other.  It  was  on  this  wise. 
Christ  shall  come  into  the  world  and  perfectly  obey  the  Di- 
vine law:  he  shall  also,  inasmuch  as  the  first  Adam  has 
broken  the  law,  suffer  the  penalty  of  sin.  If  he  shall  do  both 
of  these,  then  all  whom  he  represents  shall  be  blessed  in  his 
blessedness,  and  saved  because  of  his  merit.  You  see,  then, 
that  until  our  Lord  finished  his  substitutionary  work,  it  was 
a  covenant  of  works  towards  him.  He  had  certain  works 
to  perform,  upon  condition  of  which  certain  blessings  should 
be  given  to  us.  Our  Lord  has  kept  that  covenant.  His 
part  of  it  has  been  fulfilled  to  the  letter.  There  is  no  com- 
mandment which  he  has  not  honored  ;  there  is  no  penalty 
of  the  broken  law  which  he  has  not  endured.  He  became  a 
servant  and  was  obedient,  yea,  obedient  to  death,  even  the 
death  of  the  cross.  He  has  thus  done  what  the  first  Adam 
could  not  accomplish,  and  he  has  retrieved  what  the  first 
Adam  forfeited  by  his  transgressions.  He  has  established 
the  covenant,  and  now  it  ceases  to  be  a  covenant  of  works, 
for  the  works  are  all  performed. 

"  Jesus  did  them,  did  them  all. 
Long,  long  ago." 

And  HOW  what  remaineth  of  the  covenant  ?    Gtod  on  bis  part 


*n 


IH  THE  COVENANT. 

has  solemnly  pledged  himself  to  give  undeserved  favor  to 
as  many  as  were  represented  in  Chiist  Jesus.  For  as  many 
as  the  Saviour  died  for,  there  is  stored  up  a  boundless  mass 
of  blessing,  which  shall  be  given  to  them,  not  through  their 
works,  but  as  the  sovereign  gift  of  the  grace  of  God,  accord- 
ing to  his  covenant  promise,  by  which  they  shall  be  saved. 

Behold  my  brethren,  the  hope  of  the  sons  of  men.  The 
hope  of  their  waving  themselves  is  crushed,  for  they  are  al- 
ready lost.  The  hope  of  their  being  saved  by  works  is  a 
fallacious  one,  for  they  cannot  keep  the  law ;  they  have  al- 
ready broken  it.  But  there  is  a  way  of  salvation  opened  on 
this  wise, — whosoever  believes  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  re- 
ceives and  partakes  of  the  bliss  which  Christ  has  bought. 
All  the  blessings  which  belong  to  the  covenant  of  grace 
through  the  work  of  Christ  shall  belong  to  every  soul  that  be- 
lie veth  in  Jesus.  Unto  him  that  worketh  not,  but  believeth 
on  him  that  justifieth  the  ungodly,  unto  him  shall  the  bless- 
ing of  the  new  covenant  of  grace  be  undoubtedly  given. 

I  hope  that  this  explanation  is  plain  enough.  If  Adam 
had  kept  the  law  we  should  have  been  blessed  by  his  keep- 
ing it.  He  broke  it,  and  we  have  been  cursed  through  him. 
Now  the  Second  Adam,  Christ  Jesus,  has  kept  the  law,  we 
are,  therefore,  if  believers,  represented  in  Christ  and  blessed 
with  the  results  of  the  obedience  of  Jesus  Christ  to  his  Fa- 
ther's will.  He  said  of  old,  "  Lo,  I  come,  to  do  thy  will,  O 
God  !  Thy  law  is  my  delight."  He  has  done  that  will,  and  the 
blessings  of  grace  are  now  freely  given  to  the  eons  of 
men. 

I  shall  ask  your  attention  then,  first,  to  the  Privilege  of 
the  Covenant  of  Grace  ;  and  secondly,  to  ths  Parties  con- 
cerned in  it, 

I.  As  to  THE  Privileges  of  the  Covenant  op  gbacic 

The  first  privilege  is,  that  to  as  many  as  are  interested  in 

it,  there  shall  be  given  an  illumination  of  their  minds    "  TwiO 

put  my  laws  into  their  mind,^'*    By  nature  we  are  iark  to- 


THE  COVENANT.  175 

wards  God's  wilL  Conscience  keeps  up  in  us  a  sort  of  bro- 
ken recollection  of  what  God's  will  was.  It  is  a  monument 
of  God's  will,  but  it  is  often  hardly  legible.  A  man  does 
not  care  to  read  it,  he  is  averse  to  what  he  reads  there. 
"Their  foolish  heart  was  darkened,"  is  the  expression  of 
Scripture  with  regard  to  the  mind  of  man.  But  th  e  Holy 
Spirit  is  promised  to  those  interested  in  the  covenant.  He 
ghall  come  upon  their  minds  and  shed  light  instead  of  dark- 
ness, illuminating  them  as  to  what  the  will  of  God  is.  The 
ungodly  man  has  some  degree  of  light,  but  it  is  little  better 
than  darkness  visible,  and  even  that  light  he  does  not  love. 
lie  loves  darkness  rather  than  light,  because  his  deeds  are  evil. 
But  where  the  Holy  Spirit  comes,  he  floods  the  soul  with  a 
Divine  lustre,  in  which  the  soul  delights,  and  desires  to  par- 
ticipate to  the  fullest  degree.  Brethren,  the  renewed  man 
under  the  covenant  of  grace,  does  not  need  constantly  to 
report  to  the  law  to  learn  what  he  ought  to  do,  nor  to  some 
fellow-Christian  to  ask  instruction,  he  has  not  the  law  of 
God  written  on  a  table  of  stone,  or  upon  parchment,  or 
upon  paper  ;  it  is  imprinted  upon  his  own  mind.  There  is 
now  a  Divine,  infallible  Spirit  dwelling  within  him,  who 
tells  him  the  right  and  the  wrong,  and  by  this  he  speedily  dis- 
cerns between  the  good  and  the  evil.  He  no  longer  puts 
darkness  for  light,  and  light  for  darkness,  bitter  for  sweet, 
and  sweet  for  bitter,  his  mind  is  enlightened  as  to  the  true 
holiness  which  God  requires. 

Just  mark  the  men  to  whom  this  light  comes.     All  of 
them  are  depraved  by  nature,  but  by  practice  some  of  them 
become  yet  further  blinded.     Is  it  not  marvellous  that  a 
poor  heathen,  who  scarcely  seemed  to  recognize  the  distinc- 
tion between  right  and  wrong,  before  the  Spirit  of  God  en- 
tered his  mind,   has   afterwards,  without  needing  to   b 
taught  all  the  precepts  individually,  received  at  once  th 
light  of  a  tender  conscience,  which  has  led  him  to  know  the 
right  and  love  it,  and  to  see  the  evil  and  eschew;  it  ?   If  you 
want  to  civilize  the  world  it  must  be  by  preach  mg  the  Gos- 


176  THE  COVENANT. 

peL  If  you  want  to  have  men  well  instructed  as  to  tb# 
right  and  the  wrong,  it  must  be  by  the  enlightenment  which 
only  God  himself  can  impart.  He  promises  "  I  will  do  it," 
and  oh  !  how  blessedly  he  doeth  it,  when  he  takes  the  man 
who  loved  evil  and  called  it  good,  and  so  sheds  a  Divine 
beam  into  his  soul,  that  henceforth  he  cannot  be  pt  rverse, 
cannot  be  obstinate,  but  submits  himself  to  the  Divine  will. 
That  is  one  of  the  first  blessings  of  the  covenant — the  illu« 
mination  of  the  understanding. 

The  next  blessing  is,  "  And  I  will  write  my  laws  in 
tJieir  hearts^  This  is  more  than  knowing  the  law — infinite- 
ly more.  "I  will  write  the  law,  not  merely  on  their  under- 
standings, where  it  may  guide  them,  but  in  their  hearts, 
where  it  shall  lead  them."  Brethren,  the  Holy  Spirit  makes 
men  love  the  will  of  God,  makes  them  delight  in  all  which 
God  delights  in,  and  abhor  that  which  God  abhorreth.  It 
is  well  said  in  the  text  that  God  will  do  this,  for  certainly 
it  is  not  what  a  man  can  do  for  himself.  The  Ethiopian 
might  sooner  change  his  skin  or  the  leopard  his  spots.  It 
is  not  what  the  minister  can  do,  for  though  he  may  preach 
to  the  ear,  he  cannot  write  God's  law  on  the  affections.  I 
have  marvelled  at  the  expression  used  in  the  text,  "  I  will 
write  my  law  in  their  hearts."  To  write  on  a  heart  must 
be  difficult  work,  but  to  write  in  a  heart,  in  the  very  centre 
of  the  heart,  who  can  do  this  but  God?  A  man  cuts  his 
name  upon  a  tree  in  the  bark,  and  there  it  stands,  and  the 
letters  grow  with  the  tree  ;  but  to  cut  his  name  in  the  heart 
of  the  tree — how  shall  he  accomplish  this  ?  And  yet  God 
doth  divinely  engrave  his  will  and  his  law  in  the  very  heart 
and  nature  of  man  !  I  know  what  the  vulgar  notion  is  con- 
cerning Christian  people,  that  they  do  not  conform  to  this 
and  that  custom  because  they  are  afraid  ;  they  would  like 
to  revel  in  the  vanities  of  the  world,  but  they  do  not  care  to 
encounter  the  penalties.  Ah  !  ye  sons  of  men,  ye  compre* 
hend  not  the  mysterious  work  of  the  Spirit !  He  doeth 
nothing  of  this  sort.    He  maketh  not  the  child  of  God  to  be 


THE  COVENANT.  177 

a  fier^  a  slave,  in  fear  of  punisliment,  but  he  so  changes 
the  nature  of  men  that  they  turn  away  with  loathing  from 
the  things  they  once  delighted  in,  and  can  no  more  indulge 
in  the  sins  which  were  once  sweet  to  them,  than  an  angel 
could  wallow  in  the  mire  with  the  swine.  Oh!  this  is  a 
gracious  work,  and  this  is  a  blessed  covenant  in  which  it  is 
promised  that  we  shall  be  taught  to  know  and  love  and  do 
the  right  with  a  willing  mind. 

Am  I  addressing  some  to-night  who  have  been  saying— 
**  I  wish  I  could  be  saved  ?  "  What  do  you  mean  by  that  ? 
Do  you  moian  that  you  wish  you  might  escape  hell  ?  Alas  I 
I  would  to  God  you  had  another  wish,  namely — "  Oh  !  that 
I  could  escape  from  sin  !  Oh !  that  I  could  be  made  pure ! 
Oh  !  that  my  passions  could  be  bridled  !  Oh !  that  my  long- 
ings  and  my  likings  could  be  changed ! »  If  that  is  yoM 
wish,  see  what  a  gospel  I  have  to  preach  to  you.  I  have  not 
to  come  and  tell  you — ^Do  this  and  do  not  that.  Moses  tells 
you  that,  and  the  preacher  of  the  law  speaks  to  you  after  that 
fashion  ;  but  I,  the  preacher  of  the  gospel,  unveiling  the 
covenant  of  grace  to  your  sight,  tell  you  that  Jesus  Christ 
has  done  such  a  work  for  sinners  that  God  now  for  Christ's 
sake  comes  to  them,  makes  them  see  the  right,  and  by  a  Di- 
vine work  upon  them  and  in  them,  makes  them  love  holi- 
ness and  follow  after  righteousness.  I  protest,  I  count  this 
one  of  the  greatest  blessings  that  ever  tongue  could  speak 
of.  I  would  sooner  be  holy  than  happy  if  the  two  things 
could  be  divorced.  Were  it  possible  for  a  man  always  to 
sorrow  and  yet  to  be  pure,  I  would  choose  the  sorrow  if  I 
might  win  the  purity ;  for,  beloved,  to  be  free  from  the  pow- 
er of  sin,  to  be  made  to  love  holiness,  though  I  have  spoken 
after  the  manner  of  men  to  you,  is  true  happiness.  A  man 
that  is  holy  is  in  order  with  the  creation ;  he  is  in  harmony 
with  God.  It  is  impossible  for  that  man  long  to  suffer.  lie 
may  for  a  while  endure  for  his  lasting  good,  but  as  sure  as 
God  is  happy  the  holy  must  be  happy.  This  world  is  riot 
fo  cor.stituted  that  in  the  long  run  holiness  shall  go  wM.b 

8* 


178  THE  COVENANT. 

sorrow,  for  in  et-emity  Grod  shall  show  that  to  be  pure  is  to 
be  blessed,  to  be  obedient  to  the  Divine  will  is  to  be  eter- 
nally glorified.  In  proclaiming  to  you  these  two  blessings 
of  the  covenant,  I  have  virtually  preached  to  you  the 
open  kingdom  of  heaven,  open  to  all  such  whom  Gk)d'8 
grace  shall  look  upon  with  an  eye  of  mercy. 

The  next  blessing  of  the  covenant  is — ^"  TwiU  be  to  than 
a  God.^  1£  any  ask  me  what  this  means,  I  must  reply — 
Give  me  a  month  to  con^der  over  it.  And  when  I  had  con- 
sidered the  text  for  a  month,  I  should  ask  another  month  ; 
and  when  I  had  waited  a  year,  I  should  ask  another  year ; 
and  when  I  had  waited  till  I  grew  gray,  I  would  still  ask 
the  postponement  of  any  attempt  to  fully  open  it  up  until 
eternity.  "I  will  be  to  them  a  God."  Now,  mark  you, 
where  the  Spirit  of  Grod  has  come  to  teach  you  the  Divine 
will,  and  make  you  love  the  Divine  will,  God  becomes  to 
you — What!  a  father?  Ay,  a  loving,  tender  father.  A 
shepherd  ?  Ay,  a  watchful  Guardian  of  his  flock.  A  friend  ? 
Ay,  a  Friend  that  sticketh  closer  than  a  brother !  A  rock? 
A  refuge?  A  fortress?  A  high  tower?  A  castle  of  de- 
fence ?  A  home  ?  A  heaven  ?  Ay,  all  that,  but  when  he 
said  "I  will  be  their  God,*^  he  said  more  than  all  these  put 
together,  for  "  I  will  be  to  them  a  God,''  comprehendeth  all 
gracious  titles,  all  blessed  promises,  and  all  Divine  privileges. 
It  comprehendeth — ay,  now  I  halt,  for  this  is  infinite,  and 
the  infinite  comprehendeth  all  blessings.  "  I  will  be  to  them 
a  God."  Do  you  want  provision  ?  The  cattle  on  a  thou- 
sand hills  are  lii£> ;  it  will  not  impoverish  him  to  enrich  you  ; 
he  will  give  to  you  like  a  God.  Do  you  want  comfort? 
He  is  the  God  of  all  consolation ;  he  will  comfort  you  like 
a  Gk)d.  Do  you  want  guidance  ?  There  is  infinite  wisdom 
waiting  at  your  beck.  Do  you  want  support  ?  There  is 
eiemal  power,  the  same  \^'hich  girds  the  everlasting  hills, 
waiting  to  be  your  si^^y.  Do  you  w^nt  grace  ?  He  delight- 
eth  in  mer-^v,  and  all  that  merev  is  vours.  Everv  attribute 
of  God  belongs  to  his  p^H>plc  in  covenant  with  him,     AU 


THE  COVENANT.  179 

tliat  God  is  or  can  be — and  what  is  there  not  in  that  ? — all 
that  you  can  conceive  and  more  ;  all  the  angels  have  and 
more  ;  all  that  heaven  is  and  more ;  all  that  is  in  Christ,  even 
the  boundless  fulness  of  Godhead — all  this  belongs  to  you 
if  you  are  in  covenant  with  God  through  Jesus  Christ. 
How  rich,  how  blessed,  how  august,  how  noble  are  those  iu 
e:.7enant  with  God,  confederate  with  heaven  !  Infinity  be- 
longs to  you.  Lift  up  your  head,  O  child  of  God,  and  re- 
joice in  a  promise  which  I  cannot  expound,  and  you  cannot 
explore.  There  I  must  leave  it ;  it  is  a  deep  which  we  strive 
in  vain  to  fathom. 

Notice  the  next  blessing :  "  And  they  shaU  he  to  me  a 
peopW^  All  flesh  belongs  to  God  in  a  certain  sense.  All 
men  are  his  by  right,  of  creation,  and  he  hath  an  infinite  sov- 
ereignty over  them.  But  he  looks  down  upon  the  sons  of 
men,  and  he  selects  some,  and  he  says,  "  These  shall  be  my 
peculiar  people."  When  the  King  of  Navarre  was  fighting 
for  Ids  throne,  the  writer  who  hymns  the  battle,  says — 

"  He  looked  upon  the  foemen,  and  his  glance  was  stem  and  high ; 
He  looked  upon  his  people,  and  the  tear  was  in  his  eye." 

And  when  he  saw  some  of  the  French  in  arms  against 
him — 

"  Then  out  spoke  gentle  Henry,  No  Frenchman  is  my  foe, 
Down,  down,  with  every  foreigner,  but  let  your  brethren  go." 

The  king  had  an  eye  to  his  people  even  when  they  were 
in  rebellion  against  him,  and  he  had  a  different  thought  to- 
wards them  from  what  he  had  towards  others.  "  Let  them 
go,"  he  seemed  to  say,  "  they  are  my  people."  So,  mark 
you,  in  the  great  battles  and  strifes  of  this  world,  when  God 
lets  loose  the  dread  artillery  of  heaven,  his  glance  is  stem 
upon  his  enemies,  but  the  tear  is  in  his  eye  towards  his  peo- 
ple. He  is  always  tender  towards  them.  "Spare  my  peo- 
ple," saith  he,  and  the  angels  interpose  lest  these  chosen 
ones  should  dash  their  feet  against  a  stone.  Princes  have 
their  treasures,  their  pearls,  their  jewels,  their  rubies,  theii 


180  THB  OOVENANT. 

diamrnds,  and  these  are  the  peculiar  treasures  of  Idngs,  and 
truly  those  chosen  ones  who  are  interested  in  the  covenant 
of  grace  are  the  peculiar  treasure  of  God.  He  values  them 
above  all  things  else  besides.  In  fact,  he  keeps  the  world 
revolving  for  them.  The  world  is  but  a  scaffold  for  the 
church.  He  will  pull  down  creation  when  oncff  it  has  an- 
swered his  end  for  his  saints ;  yea,  sun,  and  moon,  and  stars 
shall  pass  away  like  worn  out  rags  when  once  he  has  gath- 
ered together  his  own  elect,  and  enfolded  them  forever 
within  the  walls  of  heaven.  For  them  time  moves ;  for 
them  worlds  exist.  He  measures  the  nations  according  to 
their  number,  and  he  makes  the  very  stars  of  heaven  to  fight 
against  their  enemies.  "They  shall  be  to  me  a  people.'' 
The  favor  which  is  contained  in  such  love  it  is  not  for  tongue 
to  express.  Perhaps  on  some  of  those  quiet  resting-places 
prepared  for  the  saints  in  heaven,  it  shall  be  a  part .  of  oui 
eternal  enjoyment  to  contemplate  the  heights  and  depths  of 
these  golden  lines, 

n.  And  now,  brethren,  I  wish  I  had  time  to  go  over 
the  other  parts  contained  in  the  eleventh  and  twelfth  vei*se8 
of  the  chapter,  but  I  have  not,  for  I  have  a  practical  busi- 
ness to  do,  and  it  is  to  inquire — ^poe  whom  has  God  mabb 

THIS   COVENANT? 

I  said  he  made  it  with  Christ,  but  he  made  it  with 
Christ  as  the  representative  of  his  people.  The  question 
just  now,  for  you,  and  for  me,  and  for  each  one  is — "  Am 
I  interested  in  Christ  ?  Did  Christ  Jesus  stand  for  me  ?  " 
Now,  if  I  were  to  say  that  Christ  was  the  representative  of  the 
whole  world,  you  would.not  find  any  substantial  advantage  in 
that,  because  the  great  proportion  of  mankind  being  lost, 
whatever  interest  they  may  have  in  Christ,  it  is  certainly  of 
no  beneficial  value  to  them  as  to  their  eternal  salvation.  The 
question  I  ask  is — Have  I  such  a  special  interest  in  Christ,  that 
this  covenant  holds  good  towards  me ;  so  that  I  shall  have, 
or  so  that  I  now  have,  the  enlightened  mind,  and  the  sanctified 


THB  CX)VBNAKT.  181 

affections,  and  the  possession  of  God  to  be  my  God  ?  Be  not 
deceived,  my  brethren  ;  I  cannot,  and  you  cannot  turn  over 
the  leaves  of  the  book  of  destiny.  It  is  impossible  for  us 
to  force  our  way  into  the  cabinet  chamber  of  the  Eternal ; 
I  hope  you  are  not  deluded  by  superstitious  ideas  that  you 
have  had  a  revelation  made  to  you,  or  that  some  especial 
ound  or  dream  has  informed  you  that  you  are  elect  of  God. 
Ybt  on  sounder  premises  I  will  try  to  help  you  a  little. 
Have  you  obtained  already  any  of  these  covenant  bless- 
ings ?  Have  you  the  enlightened  mind  ?  Do  you  find  now 
that  your  spirit  tells  you  which  is  the  right  and  which  ig 
the  wiong  ?  Better  still,  have  you  a  love  for  that  which  is 
good?  Have  you  a  hatred  for  that  which  is  evil?  If  so, 
as  yon  have  one  covenant  blessing,  all  the  rest  go  with  it. 
Now,  dear  friend,  have  you  passed  through  a  great  change? 
Have  you  come  to  hate  that  which  you  once  loved,  and  to 
love  that  which  you  once  hated  ?  If  you  have,  the  cove- 
nant lies  before  you  like  Canaan  before  the  ravished  eyes 
of  Moses  on  the  top  of  the  mountain.  Look  now,  for  it  is 
yours.  It  flows  with  milk  and  honey,  and  it  belongs  to  you 
and  you  shall  inherit  it.  But  if  there  has  been  no  such 
change  wrought  in  you,  f  cannot  offer  you  any  congratula- 
tion, but  I  thank  God  I  can  do  what  may  serve  your  turn. 
I  can  hold  out  to  you  divine  diiection  for  obtaining  an  in- 
terest in  this  covenant,  and  for  clearing  up  your  interest  in 
it,  which  is  simple.  It  is  contained  in  three  words.  Mark 
them  well, — "  Believe  and  live,"  for  whosoever  believeth  in 
Christ  Jesus  hath  everlasting  life,  which  is  the  great  bless- 
ing of  the  covenant.  The  argument  is  obvious.  Having 
the  blessing  of  the  covenant  you  must  needs  be  in  the  cov- 
enant, and  being  in  the  covenant,  Christ  evidently  must 
have  representatively  stood  sponsor  for  you.  But  saith 
one,  **  What  is  it  to  believe  in  Christ  ? "  Another  word  in 
a  synonym  to  it.  It  is — t7'ust  Christ.  "  How  do  I  know 
whether  he  died  for  me  in  particular  ?  "  Trust  him  whether 
thou  knowest  that  or  not.     Jesus  Christ  is  lifted  up  upoii 


182  THE  COVENANT. 

the  cross  of  Calvary  as  the  atonement  for  sin;  and  the 
proclamation  is  given  out,  "Look,  look;  look  and  live,^'  and 
whosoever  will  cast  away  his  self-righteousness,-— cast  away 
every  thing  upon  which  he  now  dependeth,  and  will  come 
and  trust  in  the  finished  work  of  our  exalted  Saviour,  has 
In  that  very  faith  the  token  that  he  is  one  of  those  who 
were  in  Christ  when  he  went  up  to  the  cross  and  wrought 
out  eternal  redemption  for  his  elect.  I  do  not  believe  that 
Christ  died  on  the  tree  to  render  men  salvable,  but  to  save 
I  hem  ;  not  that  some  men  might  be  saved  "  if,"  but  really 
to  redeem  them,  and  he  did  there  and  then  give  himself  a 
ransom ;  he  there  paid  their  debts,  there  cast  their  sins  into 
the  Red  Sea,  and  there  made  a  clean  sweep  of  every  thing 
that  could  be  laid  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect.  Thou  art 
assuredly  one  of  his  elect  if  thou  believest.  Christ  died 
for  thee  if  thou  believest  in  him,  and  thy  sins  are  forgiven 
thee.  "  Well,  but,"  saith  one,  "  how  about  that  change  of 
nature  ?  "  It  always  comes  with  faith ;  it  is  the  next  akin 
to  faith.  Wherever  there  is  genuine  faith  in  Christ,  the 
new  nature  is  present,  and  God's  law  is  in  the  heart.  A 
sense  of  mercy  breeds  affection ;  affection  to  Christ  breeds 
hatred  to  sin ;  hatred  to  sin  pu^'ges  the  soul ;  the  soul  being 
purged,  the  life  is  changed.  You  must  not  begin  with 
mending  yourselves  externally ;  you  must  begin  with  the 
new  internal  life ;  it  is  bestowed  as  the  gift  of  God  through 
simply  believing  in  Jesus.  A  negro  who  had  been  for  some 
time  attending  at  a  place  of  worship,  had  imbibed  the  idea 
that  he  was  saved  because  he  had  been  baptized.  He  had 
been  to  one  of  those  places  where  they  teach  little  children 
to  lie  after  this  fashion — "  In  my  baptism,  wherein  I  was 
made  a  member  of  Christ,  a  child  of  God,  and  an  inheritor  of 
the  kingdom  of  heaven."  "  Now,"  said  he,  very  naturally, 
for  so  the  catechism  teaches,  and  a  gross  falsehood  it  is — 
"  I  am  saved  because  I  have  been  baptized,  that  has  made  me 
a  child  of  God."  Now  the  good  man  who  sought  to  in- 
struct him  in  the  gospel,  cr  aid  ffnd  no  metaphor  to  suit  his 


THE  COVENANT.  183 

intellect  better  than  taking  him  into  the  kitchen,  and  show- 
ing him  a  black  ink-bottle,  "Now,"  said  he,  "  I  will  wash 
it,"  and  he  washed  the  outside  of  the  black  ink-bottle,  and 
invited  the  man  to  drink  out  of  it  because  it  was  clean. 
"  No,"  said  the  man,  "  it  is  all  black ;  it  is  not  clean  be- 
cause you  have  washed  the  outside."  **  Ah  I  "  said  ho, 
*^  and  so  it  is  with  you ;  all  that  drops  of  water  could  do  for 
you,  all  that  baptism  could  do  for  you,  is  to  wash  the  out- 
side, but  that  does  not  make  you  clean,  for  the  filth  is  all 
within."  Now,  the  work  of  the  covenant  of  grace  is  not 
to  wash  the  outside,  not  to  cleanse  the  flesh,  not  to  pass  you 
through  rites  and  ceremonies,  and  Episcopal  hands,  but  to 
wash  the  inside ;  to  clean  the  heart,  to  cleanse  the  vitals, 
to  renew  the  soul,  and  this  is  the  only  salvation  that  will 
ever  bring  a  man  to  enter  heaven.  You  may  go  to-night 
and  renounce  all  your  outward  vices — I  hope  you  will ;  you 
may  go  and  practise  all  church  ceremonies,  and  if  they  are 
Scriptural  I  wish  you  may ;  but  they  will  do  nothing  for 
you,  nothing  whatever  as  to  your  entering  heaven,  if  you 
miss  one  thing  else,  that  is,  getting  the  covenant  blessing 
of  the  renewed  nature,  which  can  only  be  got  as  the  gift 
of  God  through  Jesus  Christ,  and  as  the  result  of  a  simple 
fnith  in  him  who  died  upon  the  tree. 

I  press  the  work  of  self-examination  upon  you  all,  I 
press  it  earnestly  upon  you  church  members.  It  is  of  no 
avail  that  you  have  been  baptized,  or  take  the  sacrament. 
Avail  ?  Indeed  it  shall  bring  a  greater  responsibihty  and  a 
curse  upon  you,  unless  your  hearts  have  been  by  the  Holy 
Spirit  made  anew  according  to  the  covenant  of  promise.  K 
you  have  not  a  new  heart,  oh !  go  to  your  chambers,  fall 
npon  your  knees,  and  cry  to  God  for  it.  May  the  Holy 
Spirit  constrain  you  so  to  do,  and  while  you  are  pleading, 
remember  the  new  heart  comes  from  the  bleeding  heart  of 
Jesus,  and  the  changed  nature  comes  from  the  suffering  n(^ 
ture  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  Look  you  alone  to  Jesus, 
for  there  all  your  help  is  laid. 


184  THE  COVENANT. 

These  blessings  I  have  spoken  of  seem  to  me  to  be  • 
grecU  consolation  and  inspiration.  They  are  a  great  conso* 
lotion  to  believers.  You  are  in  the  covenant,  my  dear  broth- 
er.  You  tell  me  you  are  very  poor ;  but  God  has  said — *'  I 
will  be  your  God."  Why,  you  are  very  rich.  A  man.may 
not  have  a  penny  in  the  world,  bat  if  he  has  a  diamond  he 
is  rich.  So,  if  a  man  has  neither  penny  nor  diamond,  if  he 
has  his  God  he  is  rich.  Ah !  but  your  coat  is  threadbare, 
and  you  do  not  see  where  means  are  to  come  from  to  renew 
your  apparel.  "  Consider  the  lilies  how  they  grow ;  they 
toil  not  neither  do  they  spin,  and  yet  I  say  unto  you  that 
Solomon  in  all  his  glory  was  not  arrayed  like  one  of  these." 
You  have  the  same  God  that  the  lilies  have,  and  "  shall  he 
so  clothe  the  grass  of  the  field  which  to  day  is  and  to  mor- 
row is  cast  into  the  oven,  and  shall  he  not  much  more  clothe 
you,  O  ye  of  little  faith  ?  "  I  said  also,  it  would  be  an  inspi^ 
ration^  and  I  think  it  is.  It  is  an  inspiration  for  us  all  to 
work  for  Christ,  because  we  are  sure  to  have  some  results. 
I  would  that  the  nations  were  converted  to  Christ.  I  would 
that  all  this  city  belonged  to  my  Lord  and  Master,  and  that 
every  street  were  inhabited  by  those  who  loved  his  name ; 
but  when  I  see  sin  abounding  and  the  Gospel  often  put  to 
the  rout,  I  fall  back  upon  this — "  Nevertheless  the  founda- 
tion of  God  standeth  sure  ;  the  Lord  knoweth  them  that  are 
his."  He  shall  have  his  own.  The  infernal  powers  shall 
not  rob  Christ,  he  shall  see  of  the  travail  of  his  soul  and 
shall  be  satisfied.  Calvary  does  not  mean  defeat.  Geth- 
semane  a  defeat?  Lnpossible!  The  Mighty  Man  who 
went  up  to  the  cross  to  bleed  and  die  for  us,  being  also  the 
Son  of  God,  did  not  there  achieve  a  defeat  but  a  victory. 
"  He  shall  see  his  seed,  he  shall  prolong  his  days,  and  the 
pleasure  of  the  Lord  shall  prosper  in  his  hands."  K  some 
will  not  be  saved,  others  shall.  K,  being  bidden,  some  count 
themselves  not  worthy  to  come  to  the  feast,  others  shall  be 
brought  in,  even  the  blind,  and  the  halt,  and  the  lame,  and 
the  supper  shall  be  furnished  with  guests.     If  they  coipe 


THE  CX>VBNANT.  188 

not  from  this  land,  they  shall  come  from  the  east,  and  from 
the  west,  from  the  north,  and  from  the  south.  If  it  should 
come  to  pass  that  Israel  be  not  gathered,  lo,  the  heathen 
ghall  be  gathered  unto  Christ.  Ethiopia  shall  stretch  out 
her  hands,  Sinim  shall  yield  herself  to  the  Redeemer  ;  the 
desert-ringer  shall  bow  the  knee,  and  the  far-ofi'  stranger 
inquire  for  Christ.  Oh !  no,  beloved,  the  purposes  of  God 
are  not  frustrated ;  the  eternal  will  of  God  is  not  defeated. 
Christ  has  died  a  glorious  death,  and  he  shall  have  a  full  re- 
ward for  all  his  pain.  "  Therefore,  be  ye  steadfast,  immov- 
able, always  abounding  in  the  work  of  the  Lord,  forasmuch 
ye  know  that  your  labor  is  not  in  vain  in  the  Lord," 


<4  1 


186      A  BERMON  TO  OPEN  NEGLE0TEB8 


SERMON  XIL 


A  SERMON  TO  OPEN  NEGLECTERS  AND  NOMINAL 

FOLLOWERS  OF  RELIGION. 

The  following  five  sermons,  numbered  from  XII.  to  XVI.,  were 
delivered  in  the  Agricultural  Hall,  Islington,  to  an  audience  never 
numbering  less  than  twenty  thousand  persons.  It  will  be  observed 
that  they  are  very  simple,  and  were  intended  so  to  be. 

**BUT  WHAT  THINK  TE  ?  A  CEBTAIN  VAN  HAD  TWO  BON8  ;  AND  HB  CAXB  TO  THX 
FIB8T,  AND  SAID,  BON,  OO  WORK  TO  DAT  IN  MT  YINBYABD.  HB  AN8WBBXD 
AND  SAID,  I  WILL  NOT  :  BUT  ATTEBWARD  HB  RBFBNTED,  AND  WBNT.  AND  HK 
CAXB  TO  THE  SECOND  AND  BAID  LIKEWI8B.  AND  HB  ANSWERED  AND  SAID,  I  OO, 
sir:  and  went  not.  whether  of  THEX  twain  did  THE  WILL  OF  HIS  FA- 
THER? THEY  SAY  UNTO  HIM,  THE  FIRST.  JESUS  SATTH  UNTO  THEM,  VERILY  I 
SAY  UNTO  YOU,  THAT  THE  PUBLICANS  AND  THE  HARLOTS  OO  INTO  THB  KINGDOM 
OF  OOD  BEFORE  YOU.  FOR  JOHN  CAME  UNTO  YOU  IN  THE  WAY  OF  RIOHTBOUSNES8, 
AND  YE  BELIEVED  HIM  NOT  :  BUT  THE  PUBLICANS  AND  THE  HARLOTS  BELIEVED 
HIX :   AND  YE,  WHEN  YE  HAD   SEEN   IT,  REPENTED  NOT  A1TBBWABD8,  THAT  TB 

MIGHT  BELIEVE  HOf.^^— Matthew  zzl.  2&-^ 

The  sight  of  this  vast  arena,  and  of  this  crowded  as- 
sembly, reminds  me  of  other  spectacles  which,  in  days  hap* 
pily  long  past,  were  seen  in  the  amphitheatres  of  the  old 
Roman  Empire.  Around,  tier  upon  tier,  were  the  assem- 
bled multitudes,  with  their  cruel  eyes  and  iron  hearts ; 
and  in  the  centre  stood  a  solitary,  friendless  man,  waiting 
till  the  doors  of  the  lion's  den  should  be  uplifted,  that  he 
might  yield  himself  up  a  witness  for  Christ  and  a  sacrifice 
to  the  popular  fury.  There  would  have  been  no  diflSculty 
then  to  have  divided  the  precious  from  the  vile  in  that  au- 
ilience.  The  most  thoughtless  wayfarer  who  should  enter 
into  the  amphitheatre,  would  know  at  once  who  was  the 
disciple  of  Christ  and  who  were  the  enemies  of  the  Crucified 


AND  NOMINAL  FOLLOWERS  OF  RELIGION.       187 

One.  There  stood  the  bravely-calm  disciple,  about  to  die, 
out  all  around,  in  those  mighty  tiers  of  the  Colosseum,  or  of 
the  amphitheatre  of  some  provincial  town,  as  the  case 
might  be,  there  sat  matrons  and  nobles,  princes  and  peas- 
ants, plebeians  and  patricians,  senators  and  soldiers,  all 
gazing  downward  with  the  same  fierce,  unpi tying  look  ;  all 
boisterous  for  their  heathen  gods,  and  all  vociferous  In  the 
joy  with  which  they  gazed  upon  the  agonies  of  the  disciple 
of^the  hated  Galilean,  butchered  to  make  a  Roman  holiday. 
Another  sight  is  before  us  to-day,  with  far  more  hajipy 
associations ;  but  alas !  it  is  a  far  more  difticult  task  this 
day  to  separate  the  chaff  from  the  wheat,  the  precious  from 
the  vile,  than  in  the  day  when  the  apostle  fought  with 
beasts  at  Ephesus.  Here,  in  this  arena,  I  hope  there  are 
hundreds,  if  not  thousands,  who  would  be  prepared  to  die 
for  our  Lord  Jesus  ;  and  in  yonder  crowded  seats,  we  may 
count  by  hundreds  those  who  bear  the  name  and  accept  the 
gospel  of  the  Man  of  Nazareth ;  and  yet,  I  fear  me,  that 
both  in  these  living  hills  on  either  side,  and  upon  this  vast 
floor,  there  are  many  enemies  of  the  Son  of  God,  who  are 
forgetful  of  his  righteous  claims — who  have  cast  from  them 
those  cords  of  love  which  should  bind  them  to  his  throne, 
and  have  never  submitted  to  the  mighty  love  which  showed 
itself  in  his  cross  and  in  his  wounds.  I  cannot  attempt  the 
separation.  You  must  grow  together  until  the  harvest.  To 
divide  you  were  a  task  which  at  this  hour  angels  could  not 
perform,  but  which  one  day  they  will  easily  accomplish, 
when  at  their  Master's  bidding,  the  harvest  being  come, 
they  shall  gather  together  first  the  tares  in  bundles  to  burn 
them,  and  afterwards  the  wheat  into  Jehovah's  bari|.  I 
shall  not  attempt  the  division,  but  I  shall  ask  each  man  to 
attempt  it  for  himself  in  his  own  case.  I  say  unto  you, 
young  men  and  maidens,  old  men  and  fathers,  this  day 
examine  yomelves  whet'  er  you  be  in  the  faith.  Let  no 
man  take  it  for  granted  that  he  is  a  Christian  because  he 
has  helped  to  swell  the  numbers  oi  a  Christian  assembly. 


iii  A  SERMON  TO  OPBN  NEGLECTBilEti 

Let  no  man  judge  his  fellow,  but  let  each  man  judge  himsell 
To  each  one  of  you  I  say,  with  deepest  earnestness,  let  a 
division  be  made  by  your  conscience,  and  let  your  under* 
standings  separate  between  him  that  feareth  God  and  Lon 
that  feareth  him  not.  Though  no  man  clothed  in  linen, 
with  a  writer's  inkhom  by  his  side,  shall  go  through  the 
midst  of  you  to  set  a  mark  upon  the  foreheads  of  the  taen 
that  sigh  and  cry  for  all  the  abominations  of  this  city,  let 
conscience  take  the  inkhom  and  honestly  make  the  mark, 
or  leave  the  favoi^ed  sign  unmade,  and  let  each  man  ques- 
tion himself  this  morning,  "  Am  I  on  the  Lord's  side  ?  Am 
I  for  Christ,  or  for  his  enemies  ?  Do  I  gather  with  him,  or 
do  I  scatter  abroad  ?  "  "  Divide  !  divide !  "  they  say  in  the 
House  of  Commons ;  let  us  say  the  same  in  this  great  con- 
gregation this  day.  Political  divisions  are  but  trifles  com- 
pared with  the  all-important  distinction  which  I  would 
have  you  consider.  J)ivide  as  you  will  be  divided  to  the 
right  and  to  the  left  "^in  the  great  day  when  Christ  shall 
judge  the  world  in  righteousness.  Divide  as  you  will  be 
divided  when  the  bliss  of  heaven,  or  the  woes  of  hell,  shall 
be  your  everlasting  portion. 

If  the  whole  of  us  were  thus  divided  into  two  camjps,  and 
we  could  say,  These  have  made  a  covenant  with  God  by  sac- 
rifice, and  those  on  the  other  hand  are  still  enemies  to  God  by 
wicked  works,  looking  at  the  last  class  we  might  still  feel  il 
necessary  by  way  of  personal  application  to  make  a  division 
among  them  ;  for  although  all  unbelievers  are  alike  unpar- 
doned and  unsaved,  yet  they  are  not  alike  in  the  circum- 
stances of  their  case  and  the  outward  forms  of  their  sms. 
Alike  in  being  without  Christ,  they  are  still  very  varied  in 
their  mental  and  moral  condition.  I  trust  I  was  guided  })y 
the  Spirit  of  God  to  my  text  this  morning,  for  it  is  of  such 
a  character,  that  while  it  enables  me  to  address  the  whole 
mass  of  the  unconverted,  it  gives  me  a  hopeful  opportunity  of 
getting  at  the  conscience  of  each  by  dividing  the  great  com- 
pany of  the  unconverted  into  two  distinct  classes.     Oh  that 


AM)  NOMINAL  tX)tiLOWlERS  OF  ftfiLI^ION.       Igft 

for  each  tribe  of  unbeKevers,  there  may  be  a  blessing  in 
store  this  day. 

First,  we  shall  speak  to  those  who  are  avowedly  disohe- 
dierU  to  God ;  and,  secondly,  to  those  who  are  dec&ptwdy 
mAbmissive  to  him. 

L  First,  we  have  a  word  for  those  who  are  avowedly 
DISOBEDIENT  TO  GoD.  There  are  many  such  here.  God 
has  said  to  you  as  he  says  to  all  who  hear  the  gospel,  "  Son, 
go  work  to-day  in  my  vineyard  ; "  and  you  have  replied, 
perhaps  honestly,  but  certainly  very  boldly,  very  unkindly, 
very  unjustly,  "  I  will  not."  You  have  made  no  bones 
about  it,  but  given  a  refusal  point-blank  to  the  claims  of 
your  Creator.  You  have  spoken  your  mind  right  out,  not 
only  in  words,  but  in  a  more  forcible  and  unmistakable 
manner,  for  actions  speak  far  more  loudly  than  words.  You 
have  said,  over  and  over  again,  by  your  actions,  "  I  will  not 
serve  God,  or  believe  in  his  Son  Jesus."  My  dear  friend,  I 
am  glad  to  see  you  here  this  morning,  and  trust  that  mat- 
ters will  change  with  you  ere  you  leave  this  hall ;  but  at 
present  you  have  not  yielded  even  an  outward  obedience  to 
God,  but  in  all  ways  have  said,  "  I  will  not."  Practically 
you  have  said,  "  I  will  not  worship  God,  I  will  not  attend 
a  place  of  worship  on  the  Sunday — it  is  a  weariness  intoler- 
able to  me.  I  shall  not  sing  the  praise  of  my  Maker — ^I 
will  not  pretend  to  bless  the  God  for  whom  I  have  no  love. 
In  public  prayer  I  shall  not  join — I  have  no  heart  for  it.  I 
shall  not  make  a  pretence  of  repeating  morning  and  nightly 
prayer  in  private — ^what  is  the  good  of  it  ?  I  will  not  pray 
at  all ;  I  do  not  believe  in  its  efficacy,  and  I  will  not  be 
such  a  hypocrite  as  to  follow  a  vain  practice  in  which  I 
have  no  belief  whatever.  As  for  what  is  called  sin,  I  love 
it  and  will  not  give  it  up."  You  are  proud  of  being  called 
an  honest  man,  for  you  own  the  claims  of  your  fellow-men 
npon  you,  but  you  scorn  to  be  thought  religious,  for  you 
do  not  admit  the  rights  of  your  Maker.     To  the  righteoui 


190  A  SERMOK  TO  OPEN  NEaLEC*BSBS 

requests  of  others  you  yield  a  cheerful  obedience,  but  to  th« 
just  and  tender  request  of  God  you  give  a  plain  and  evi- 
dent denial.  As  clearly  as  actions  can  speak,  you  lay  by 
your  neglect  of  the  Sabbath,  by  your  disregard  of  prayer, 
by  your  never  reading  the  Bible,  by  your  perseverance  in 
known  sin,  and  by  the  whole  course  of  your  life,  "  I  wil/ 
not."  Like  Pharaoh,  you  have  demanded,  "  Who  is  the 
Lor<l  that  I  should  obey  his  voice  ?  "  You  are  of  the  same 
mind  as  those  of  old,  who  said,  "It  is  vain  to  serve  God,  and 
what  profit  is  there  if  we  keep  his  ordinances  ?  " 

Moreover,  my  friend,  you  have  not  as  yet  given  an  as- 
Bent  to  the  doctrines  of  God's  Word  ;  on  the  contrary,  *n- 
tdkctuaUy  as  well  as  practically,  you  go  not  at  God's  bid- 
ding. You  have  set  up  in  your  mind  the  idea  that  you 
must  understand  every  thing  before  you  will  believe  it — an 
idea,  let  me  tell  you,  which  you  will  never  be  able  to  carry 
out,  for  you  cannot  understand  your  own  existence  ;  and 
there  are  ten  thousand  other  things  around  you  which  you 
never  can  comprehend,  but  which  you  must  believe  or  re- 
main forever  a  gigantia  fool.  Still  you  cavil  at  this  doc- 
trine and  that  doctrine,  railing  at  the  gospel  system  in  gen- 
eral ;  and  if  you  were  asked  at  a  working-man's  conference, 
why  you  did  not  go  to  a  place  of  worship,  you  would  per- 
haps say  that  you  kept  away  from  worship  because  you  did 
not  like  this  doctrine  or  that.  Let  me  say  on  my  own  ac- 
count, that  as  far  as  I  am  personally  concerned,  it  is  a  very 
small  consideration  to  me  whether  you  do  like  my  doctrine 
or  do  not ;  for  your  own  sake  I  am  anxious  above  measure 
that  you  should  believe  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus ;  but 
while  you  live  in  sin,  your  dislike  of  a  doctrine  will  very 
probably  only  make  me  feel  the  more  sure  of  its  truth,  and 
lead  me  to  preach  it  with  more  confidence  and  vehemence. 
Tliiuk  you  that  we  are  to  learn  God's  truth  from  the  likings 
or  dislikings  of  those  who  refuse  to  worship  him,  and  want 
an  excuse  for  their  sins  ? 'Oh  unconverted  men  and  women,  it 
is  very  long  before  we  shall  come  to  you  to  learn  what  you 


A^  NOMINAL  FOLLOWERS  05   RELlaiON.       191 

^  ould  have  us  preacli,  and  when  we  fall  so  low  as  to  do 
that,  you  yourselves  will  despise  us.  What !  shall  the  phy- 
sician ask  his  patient  what  kind  of  medicine  he  would  wish 
to  have  prescribed  ?  Then  the  man  needs  no  physician,  he 
can  prescribe  for  himself.  Show  the  doctor  out  at  the  back 
door  directly.  What  is  the  use  of  such  a  physician  ?  Of 
what  service  is  a  minister  who  will  truckle  to  depraved 
tastes  and  sinful  appetites,  and  say,  "  How  would  you  like 
me  to  preach  to  you  ?  What  smooth  things  shall  I  oiFer 
you  ?  "  Ah  souls  !  we  have  some  higher  end  to  bo  served 
than  merely  pleasing  you.  We  would  save  you  by  distaste- 
fid  trulhs,  for  honeyed  lies  Mill  ruin  you.  That  teaching 
which  the  carnal  mind  most  delights  in,  is  the  most  deadly 
and  delusive.  Witli  many  of  you,  your  beliefs,  and  tastes, 
and  likes,  must  be  changed,  or  else  you  will  never  enter 
heaven.  I  admit  that  in  a  measure  I  like  your  honesty  in 
havhig  said  outright,  "  I  will  not  serve  God ; "  but  it  is  an 
honesty  which  makes  me  shudder,  for  it  betrays  a  heart  hard 
as  the  nether  millstone. 

Again,  you  have  said,  "  I  will  not  serve  God,"  and  up  to 
this  time  it  is  very  possible  that  you  have  never  been  in  tHe 
humor  to  repent  of  having  said  it,  for  the  ways  of  sin  are 
Bwcet  to  you,  and  your  heart  is  fixed  in  its  rebellion.  You 
have  never  felt  that  conviction  of  sin  which  the  Holy  Spirit 
has  wrought  in  some  of  us ;  if  you  had  felt  it,  you  would 
soon  have  been  shaken  out  of  your  "I  will  not."  If  God's 
power  of  grace,  of  which  thousands  of  us  bear  witness  that 
it  is  as  real  a  power  as  that  which  guides  the  stars  or  wings 
the  wind — if  God's  almighty  grace  should  once  get  a  hold 
of  you,  you  would  no  longer  say,  "  I  do  not  believe  this  or 
that ;  "  for,  as  trembling  as  any  of  those  whom  you  now  de- 
spise, you  would  cry  out,  "  What  must  I  do  to  be  saved  ?  " 
Up  till  now  you  have  never  felt  that  power,  and  therefore  I 
cannot  wonder  that  you  do  not  acknowledge  it,  although 
the  testimony  of  honest  witnesses  ought  to  have  some 
weight  with  you.     You  are  practically,  intellectually,  and 


192  A  SERMON  to  OPEN  NEGLEOTEftd 

avowedly  no  Christian  ;  you  have  never  deceived  yourself 
and  others  by  making  a  profession  which  you  do  not  honor, 
but  you  have  gone  on  in  your  own  chosen  path,  saying  with 
more  or  less  resolution,  in  answer  to  every  call  of  the  gos- 
pel, "  I  will  not." 

We  said  just  now  that  the  answer  of  the  son  to  his  fo- 
ther  as  recorded  in  our  text  was  very  plain ;  it  was  not,  how- 
ever, very  genuine,  or  such  as  his  father  might  have  expect- 
ed. His  father  said,  "  Son,  go  work  to-day  in  my  vine- 
yard ;  "  and  the  son  rudely  said,  "  I  will  not,  that  is  flat ; " 
and  without  another  word  of  apology  or  reason  went  his 
way.  This  is  not  quite  as  it  should  be.  Is  it  ?  Even  so, 
my  friend,  you  may  have  been  too  hasty  and  so  have  been 
unjust.  Is  it  not  very  possible  you  have  denied  to  God  and 
his  gospel  the  respect  which  both  really  deserve  ?  You  have 
spoken  very  plainly,  but  at  the  same  time  very  thoughtlessly, 
very  harshly  to  the  God  who  has  deserved  better  things  of 
you.  Have  you  ever  given  the  claims  of  the  Lord  Jesus  a 
fair  consideration  ?  Have  you  not  dismissed  the  gospel  with 
a  sneer  quite  unworthy  of  you  ?  Have  you  not  been  afraid 
to  look  the  matters  between  God  and  your  soul  fairly  in  the 
face  ?  I  believe  it  to  be  the  case  of  hundreds  here  ;  I  know 
■  t  to  be  the  case  of  thousands  and  tens  of  thousands  in  Lon- 
don. They  have  put  their  foot  down,  and  they  have  said, 
"  None  of  your  religion  for  me !  I  have  made  up  my  mind 
and  I  will  never  alter  ;  I  hate  it  and  will  not  listen  to  it." 
Does  no  small  voice  within  ever  tell  them  that  this  is  not 
fair  to  themselves  or  to  God  ?  Is  the  matter  so  easily  to  be 
decided  ?  Suppose  it  should  turn  out  that  the  religion  of 
Jesus  is  true,  what  then  ?  What  will  be  the  lot  of  those 
who  despised  him  ?  My  hearer,  the  religion  of  Jesus  is  true, 
and  I  have  proved  its  truth  in  my  own  case  ;  do,  I  pray 
you,  consider  it,  and  do  not  trifle  away  your  immortal  souL 
Tlius  saith  the  Lord,  "  Consider  your  ways." 

It  is  now  time  for  me  to  tell  the  openly  ungodly  what  is 
his  real  state.     You  have  been  more  than  a  little  proud  of 


A«l>  JSOMINAL  FOLLOWERS  Oi<'  ttELiaiON.      193 

yonr  honesty ;  and  looking  down  upon  certain  professors  of 
religion  you  have  said,  "  Ah  !  I  make  no  such  pretences  as 
they  do,  I  am  honest,  I  am."     Friend,  you  cannot  have  a 
greater  abhorrence  of  hypocrites  than  I  have ;  if  you  can 
find  a  fair  chance  of  laughing  at  them,  pray  do  so.     If  by 
any  means  you  can  stick  pins  into  their  wind-bags,  and  let 
the  gas  of  their  profession  out,  pray  do  so.     I  try  to  do  a 
little  of  it  in  my  way,  do  you  do  the  same !     You  and  I  are 
agreed  in  this,  I  hope,  in  heartily  hating  any  thing  like  sham 
and  falsehood;  but  if  you  begin  to  hold  your  head  up,  and 
think  yourself  so  very  superior  because  you  make  no  pro- 
fession, I  must  take  you  down  a  little  by  reminding  you  that 
it  is  no  credit  to  a  thief  that  he  makes  no  profession  of  be- 
ing honest,  and  it  is  not  thought  to  be  exceedingly  honora- 
ble to  a  man  that  he  makes  no  profession  of  speaking  the 
truth.     For  the  fact  is,  that  a  man  who  does  not  profess  to 
be  honest  is  a  professed  thief,  and  he  who  does  not  claim  to 
speak  the  truth  is  an  acknowledged  liar ;  thus  in  escaping 
one  horn  you  are  thrown  upon  another,  you  miss  the  rock 
but  run  upon  the  quicksand.     You  are  a  confessed  and  avow- 
ed neglecter  of  God,  a  professed  despiser  of  the  great  salva- 
tion, an  acknowledged  disbeliever  in  the  Christ  of  God. 
When  our  Government  at  any  time  arrests  persons  suspected 
of  Fenianism,  they  have  no  difficulty  about  those  gentlemen 
who  glory  in  wearing  the  green  uniform  and  flaunting  the 
big  feather.     "Come  along,"  says  the  constable,  "you  are 
the  man,  for  you  wear  the  regimentals  of  a  rebel."     Even 
80  when  the  angel  of  justice  arrests  the  enemies  of  the  Lord, 
he  will  have  no  difficulty  in  accusing  and  arresting  you,  for, 
laying  his  hand  upon  your  shoulder,  he  will  say,  "  You  weai 
the  regimentals  of  an  enemy  of  God ;  you  plainly,  and  un 
blushingly,  acknowledge  that  you  do  not  fear  God  nor  trust 
Ui  his  salvation."    No  witnesses  need  be  called  concerning 
you  at  the  last  great  day  ;  you  will  stand  up,  not  quite  so 
bravely  as  you  do  to-day,  for,  when  the  heavens  are  on  a 
blaase,  and  the  earth  is  rocking  to  and  fro,  and  the  great 

9 


194  A  SERMON  TO  OPEN  NEGLECttSRS 

white  cloud  fills  the  field  of  vision,  and  the  eyes  of  the  great 
Judge  shall  bum  like  lamps  of  fire,  you  will  put  on  a  differ- 
ent mien  and  a  different  carriage  from  that  which  you  main- 
tain before  a  poor  preacher  of  the  gospel.  Ah  !  my  ungodly 
hearer,  with  such  a  case  as  thine  there  shall  be  no  need  to 
judge,  for  out  of  thine  own  mouth  shalt  thou  be  condemned, 
Yet  I  came  not  here  to  tell  you  of  your  sins  only,  but  to 
help  you  to  escape  from  them.  It  is  necessary  that  this 
much  should  be  said,  but  we  now  turn  to  something  far  more 
pleasant.  I  am  in  hopes  this  day  that  some  of  yoii  will  lis- 
ten to  that  little  word  in  the  text,  "  afterward,^'^  He  said, 
"  I  will  not ;  but  afterward  he  repented,  and  went."  It  is  a 
long  lane  which  has  no  turning,  let  us  trust  that  we  have 
come  to  the  turning  now.  There  is  space  left  you  for  re- 
pentance ;  though  you  may  have  been  a  drunkard,  or  a 
swearer,  or  unchaste,  the  die  is  not  yet  cast,  a  change  is  yet 
possible.  May  God  grant  that  you  may  have  reached  the 
time  when  it  shall  be  said  of  you,  "  Afterward  he  repented 
he  changed  his  mind ;  he  believed  upon  Jesus,  and  obeyed 
the  word  of  the  Lord,  and  went."  Perhaps  the  son  in  the 
parable  thought  a  little  more  calmly  about  it.  He  said  to 
himself, "  I  will  consider  the  matter,  second  thoughts  are  of- 
ten best.  I  growled  at  my  good  father,  and  gave  him  a 
sharp  answer,  and  I  saw  the  tears  standing  in  the  good  man's 
eye.  I  am  sorry  I  grieved  him.  The  thought  of  grieving 
him  makes  me  change  my  mind.  I  said  '  No '  to  him,"  said 
he, "  but  I  did  not  think  about  it.  I  forgot  that  if  I  go' and 
work  in  my  father's  vineyard,  I  shall  be  working  for  myself, 
for  I  am  his  eldest  son,  and  all  that  he  has  will  belong  to  me, 
that  I  am  very  foolish  to  refuse  to  work  to  my  own  advati« 
tage.  Ah  !  now  I  see  my  father  had  my  advantage  at  heart, 
I  will  even  go  as  he  bade  me."  See,  he  shoulders  his  tools, 
and  away  he  marches  to  labor  with  all  his  might.  He  said, 
**  1  will  not,"  but  he  repented  and  went,  and  it  is  admitted  by 
all  that  he  did  the  will  of  his  father.  Oh,  I  hope  that  many 
ft  man  and  woman  now  in  this  Agricultural  Hall  will  this 


AND  NOMINAL  FOLLOWERS  OF  RELIGION.      195 

day  cry,  "  I  do  retract  what  I  have  said,  1  will  go  to  my 
Father,  and  will  say  to  him,  *  I  will  do  thy  bidding.  I  will 
not  grieve  thy  love.  I  will  not  lose  the  opportunity  of  ad- 
vancing my  soul's  best  interest ;  I  obey  the  gospel  command.' " 
I  will  suppose  that  I  see  one  such  before  me,  and  I  will  speak 
to  him.  Perhaps  he  said,  "  I  will  not,"  because  he  really 
did  not  understand  what  religion  was.  How  few  after  all 
know  what  the  way  of  salvation  is ;  though  they  go  to 
church,  and  to  chapel,  they  have  not  yet  learned  God's  plan 
of  pardoning  sinners.  Do  you  know  the  plan  of  salvation  ? 
Hear  it  and  live  by  it.  You  have  offended  God ;  God  must 
punish  sin  ;  it  is  a  fixed  law  that  sin  must  be  punished  ;  how 
then  can  God  have  mercy  upon  you  ?  Why,  only  in  this 
way :  Jesus  Christ  came  from  heaven  and  he  suffered  in  the 
room,  place,  and  stead  of  all  who  trust  him  ;  suffered  what 
they  ought  to  have  suffered,  so  that  God  is  just,  and  yet  at 
the  same  time  he  is  able  to  forgive  the  very  chief  of  sinners  ' 
through  the  merits  of  his  dear  Son.  Your  debts,  if  you  be 
a  believer  in  him,  Christ  has  paid  on  your  behalf.  If  you 
do  but  come  and  rest  upon  Jesus  and  upon  Jesus  only,  God 
cannot  punish  yoU  for  your  sins,  for  he  punished  Jesus  for 
them,  and  it  would  not  be  just  of  him  to  punish  Christ  and 
then  to  punish  you,  to  exact  payment  first  from  the  Surety 
and  afterwards  from  the  debtor.  My  dear  hearer,  whoevei 
thou  mayest  be,  whatever  thy  past  life  may  have  been,  if 
thou  wilt  trust  Christ,  thou  shalt  be  saved  from  all  thy  sin 
in  a  moment,  the  whole  of  thy  past  life  shall  be  blotted  out ; 
there  shall  not  remain  in  God's  book  so  much  as  a  single 
charge  against  thy  soul,  for  Christ  who  died  for  thee,  shall 
take  thy  guilt  away  and  leave  thee  without  a  blot  before 
the  face  of  God.  Read  the  last  verse  of  my  text,  and  you 
will  see  that  it  was  by  believing  that  men  entered  into  the 
kingdom  of  God  of  old,  and  it  is  still  by  believing  that  men 
are  saved.  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God,"  said  John  the  Bap- 
tist, and  if  you  look  to  that  bleeding  Lamb,  you  shall  live. 
Do  yon  understand  this ?    Is  it  not  simple  ?    Is  it  not  suit- 


196      A  BERMON  TO  OPEN  NEGLECTBBS 

able  to  you?  Will  you  still  refuse  to  obey  it?  Does  not 
the  Holy  Spirit  prompt  you  to  relent  ?  Do  yo  i  not  even 
now  say,  " Is  it  so  simple?    I  will  even  trust  in  Jesus: 

*  Guilty,  but  with  heart  relenting. 
To  the  Saviour's  wounds  Til  fly.' 

I  will  come,  by  God's  help,  this  morning,  lest  death  should 
come  before  the  sun  sets.  I  will  trust  Christ  to  save  me. 
Precious  way  of  salvation  !  Why  should  I  not  be  saved?" 
It  is  possible  too,  that  you  may  have  said,  "  I  will  not," 
because  you  really  thought  there  was  no  hope  for  you. 
Ah  !  my  friend,  let  me  assure  you — and  oh  !  how  glad  I  am 
to  be  able  to  do  it — that  there  is  hope  for  the  vilest,  through 
the  precious  blood  of  Jesus.  No  man  can  have  gone  too 
far  for  the  long  arm  of  Christ  to  reach  him.  Christ  de- 
lights to  save  the  biggest  sinners.  He  said  to  his  apostles, 
"  Preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature,  but  begin  " — ^where  ? 
"  begin  at  Jerusalem.  There  live  the  wretches  wlio  spat 
in  my  face.  There  live  the  cruel  ones  who  drove  the  nails 
through  my  hands.  Go  and  preach  the  gospel  to  them  first. 
-Tell  them  that  I  am  able  to  save,  not  little  sinners  merely, 
but  the  very  chief  of  sinners.  Tell  them  to  trust  in  me, 
and  they  shall  live."  Where  are  you,  you  despairing  one? 
I  know  the  devil  will  try  to  keep  the  sound  of  the  gospel 
from  your  ears  if  he  can,  and  therefore,  I  would  "  cry  aloud 
and  spare  not."  Oh,  ye  despairing  sinners,  there  is  no  room 
for  despair  this  side  the  gates  of  hell.  K  you  have  gone 
through  the  foulest  kennels  of  iniquity,  no  stain  can  stand 
out  against  the  power  of  the  cleansing  blood. 

"  There  is  a  fountain  filled  with  blood. 
Drawn  from  Immanuers  veins. 
And  sinners  plunged  beneath  that  flood. 
Lose  ALL  their  guilty  stains." 

Oh,  I  trust,  now  that  you  know  there  is  hope  for  you,  you 
will  say,  "I  will  even  come  at  once,  and  pu:  my  trust  ip 
Jesua,** 


AND  NOMINAL  FOLLOWERS  OF  RELIGION.        197 

While  I  would  thus  encourage  you  to  repent  of  your 
neglect  of  God,  let  me  invite  you  to  come  to  Jesus,  and 
press  it  upon  you  yet  again.  Ah !  my  dear  friend,  you  will 
soon  be  dying,  and  though  some  wicked  men,  in  their  stu- 
pid insensibility,  die  very  calmly,  and  as  David  said, 
"  They  are  not  in  trouble  as  other  men,  neither  are  they 
plagued  like  other  men,  but  their  strength  is  firm,"  yet, 
whether  they  perceive  it  or  not,  it  is  a  dreadful  thing  to 
die  with  unpardoned  sin  hanging  about  you.  What  will 
your  guilty  soul  do  when  it  leaves  the  body  ?  Think  of  it 
a  minute.  It  is  a  matter  worthy  of  your  thought.  Some 
of  you,  in  all  probability,  will  die  this  week.  It  is  not  prob- 
able that  so  many  thousands  of  us  will  march  through  a 
whole  week,  and  be  found  alive  at  the  other  end  of  it.  Well 
then,  as  we  may  some  of  us  go  soon,  and  all  of  us  must  go 
ere  long,. let  us  look  before  us  and  think  a  bit.  Imagine 
your  soul  unclothed  of  the  body.  You  have  left  the  body 
behind  you,  and  your  disembodied  spirit  finds  itself  in  a  new 
world.  Oh,  it  will  be  a  glorious  thing  if  that  separated 
spirit  shall  see  Jesus  whom  it  has  loved,  and  fly  at  once  into 
his  bosom,  and  drink  forever  of  the  crystal  fountain  of  ever- 
flowing  bliss:  but  it  will  be  a  horrible  thing  if,  instead 
Oi  it,  your  naked, shivering  spirit  should  wake  up  to  find  it- 
self friendless,  homeless^  helpless,  hopeless,  tormented  with 
remorse,  afflicted  with  despair.  What  if  it  should  have  to 
cry  out  forever,  "  I  knew  my  duty  but  I  did  it  not,  I  knew 
the  way  of  salvation  but  I  would  not  run  in  it.  I  heard  the 
gospel,  but  I  shut  my  ears  to  it.  I  lived  and  at  length  left 
the  world  without  Christ,  and  here  I  am,  past  hope,  no  re- 
penting now,  no  believing  now,  no  escaping  now,  for  mercy 
and  love  no  longer  rule  the  hour."  Have  pity  on  thyself^ 
my  hearer.  I  have  pity  on  thee.  Oh,  if  my  hand  could 
pluck  thee  from  that  flame,  how  cheerfully  would  I  do  it  I 
Shall  I  pity  thee  and  wilt  thou  not  pity  thyself?  Oh,  if  my 
pleadings  should  by  God's  grace  persuade  you  to  trust  in 
Christ  this  morning,  I  would  plead  with  you  while  voicei 


198  A  SBRMON  TO  OPEN  NEGLECrTEBS 

and  luTigs,  and  heart,  and  life  held  out !  But  oh,  have  pity 
on  thyself  1  Pity  th»it  poor  naked  spirit  which  so  soon  will 
be  quivering  with  utmost  agony,  a  self-caused  agony,  an 
agony  from  which  it  would  not  escape,  an  agony  of  which 
it  was  warned,  but  which  it  chose  to  endure  sooner  than  give 
up  sin  and  yield  to  the  sceptre  of  sovereign  grace. 

I  would  fain  hope  that  you  are  saying,  "  I  do  now  rei>ent, 
and  by  God's  grace  I  will  go."  If  so,  let  me  tell  you  there 
ai^  a  great  many  in  heaven  who  once,  like  you,  said,  "I 
will  not,"  but  they  afterwards  repented  and  are  now  saved. 
I  will  give  you  one  picture.  Yonder,  I  see  a  company  of 
men  on  horseback,  and  there  is  one,  the  proudest  of  them 
all,  to  whom  they  act  as  a  guard;  they  are  going  to 
Damascus,  that  he  may  take  Christians  to  prison  and  com- 
pel them  to  blaspheme.  Saul  of  Tarsus  is  the  name  of  that 
cruel,  murderous  persecutor.  When  Stephen  was  put  to 
death  God  said  to  this  man  Saul,  "  Go,  work  in  my  vine- 
yard," but  Saul  said  plainly,  "  I  will  not,"  and  to  prove  his 
enmity,  he  helped  to  put  Stephen  to  death.  There  he  is 
riding  in  hot  haste,  upon  his  evil  errand,  none  more  set  and 
determined  against  the  Lord.  Yet  my  Lord  Jesus  can  tame 
the  lion,  and  even  make  a  lamb  of  him.  As  he  rides  along, 
a  bright  light  is  seen,  brighter  than  the  sim  at  noonday  ;  he 
falls  from  his  horse,  he  lies  trembling  on  the  ground,  and  he 
hears  a  voice  out  of  heaven,  saying,  "  Saul,  Saul,  why  per- 
secutest  thou  me  ?  "  Lifting  up  his  eyes  with  astonishment, 
he  sees  that  he  had  ignorantly  been  persecuting  the  Son  of 
God.  What  a  change  that  one  discovery  wrought  in  hiuL 
That  voice,  "I  am  Jesus,  whom  thou  persecutest,"  broke 
his  hard  heart,  and  won  him  to  the  cause.  You  know  how 
three  days  after  that,  that  once  proud  and  bigoted  man  was 
oaptized  upon  profession  of  the  faith  of  Christ,  whom  he 
had  just  now  persecuted  !  and  if  you  want  to  see  an  earnest 
preacher,  where  can  you  find  a  better  than  the  apostle  Paul, 
who,  with  heart  on  fire,  writes  again  and  again,  "  God  for- 
bid that  I  should  glory,  save  in  the  cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus 


AND  NOMINAL  FOLLOWERS  OF  RELIGION.      199 

Christ."  I  hope  there  is  a  Saul  here,  who  is  to  be  struck 
down  this  mornmg.  Lord,  strike  him  down!  Eternal 
Spirit  strike  him  down  now  I  You  did  not  know,  perhaps, 
that  you  had  been  fighting  God,  but  you  thought  the  religion 
of  Jesus  to  be  a  foolish  dream.  You  did  not  know  that  you 
had  insulted  the  dying  Saviour ;  now  you  do  know  it,  may 
yoiu*  conscience  be  affected,  and  from  this  day  forth  may 
you  serve  the  Lord. 

I  must  leave  this  second  point  when  I  have  just  said  this. 
K  there  be  one  here  who  after  a  long  refusal,  at  last  1'e- 
lents,  and  is  willing  to  become  a  sei*vant  of  God  by  faith  in 
Jesus  Christ,  let  me  tell  him  for  his  encouragement,  he  shall 
not  be  one  whit  behind  those  who  have  been  so  long  mak- 
ing a  profession  without  being  true  to  it,  for  the  text  says, 
"The  publicans  and  harlots  go  into  the  kingdom  ;"  but 
what  else  ?  "  Go  into  the  kingdom  "  before  those  who  made 
a  profession  of  serving  God,  but  who  were  not  true  to  it. 
You  great  sinners  shall  have  no  back  seats  in  heaven  ! 
There  shall  be  no  outer  court  for  you.  You  great  sinners 
shall  have  as  much  love  as  the  best,  as  much  joy  as  the 
brightest  of  saints.  You  shall  be  near  to  Christ ;  you  shall 
sit  with  him  upon  his  throne ;  you  shall  wear  the  crown ; 
your  fingers  shall  touch  the  golden  harps  ;  you  shall  rejoice 
with  the  joy  which  is  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory.  Will 
ye  not  come?  Christ  forgets  your  past  ill  manners,  and 
bids  ye  come  to-day.  "  Come,"  saith  he,  "  unto  me  all  ye 
that  labor  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest." 
Thirty  years  of  sin  shall  be  forgiven,  and  it  shall  not  take 
thirty  minutes  to  do  it  in.  Fifty,  sixty,  seventy  years  of 
iniquity  shall  all  disappear  as  the  morning's  hoar-frost  disap- 
pears before  the  sun.  Come  and  trust  my  Master,  hiding  in 
his  bleeding  wounds. 

**  Raise  thy  downcast  eyes,  and  see 
What  throngs  his  throne  surround ! 
These,  though  sinners  once  like  thee« 
Have  full  salvation  found. 


flOO  A  SERMON  TO  OPEN  NEGLE0TEB8 

"  Yield  not  then  to  unbelief ; 
He  Bays,  *  There  yet  is  room : 
Thongh  of  sinners  thon  art  chief. 
Since  Jesns  calls  thee,  come." 

XL  Bear  with  me  a  little  time  while  I  speak  to  the  sec- 
ond character,  the  deceptively  submissive,  by  far  the 
most  numerous  everywhere  in  England,  probably  the  most 
numerous  in  this  assembly.     Oh  !   you,  my  own  regular 
hearers,  you  who  have  heard  my  voice  these  thirteen  years, 
many  of  you  are  in  this  class.     You  have  said  to  the  Gi-eat 
Father,  "I  go,  sir  !  "  but  you  have  not  gone.     Let  me  sor- 
rowfully sketch  your  portraits :    you  have  regularly  fre- 
quented a  place  of  worship,  and  you  would  shudder  to  waste 
a  single  Sunday  in  an  excursion,  or  in  any  form  of  Sabbath 
breaking.     Outwardly  you  have  said,  "  I  go,  sir."    When 
the  hymn  is  given  out,  you  stand  up  and  sing,  and  yet  you 
do  not  sing  with  the  heart.     When  I  say,  "  Let  us  pray  !  *' 
you  cover  your  faces,  but  you  do  not  pray  with  real  prayer. 
You  utter  a  polite,  respectful  "  I  go,  sir,"  but  you  do  not  go. 
You  give  a  notional  assent  to  the  gospel.    If  I  were  to  men- 
tion any  doctrine,  you  would  say,  "  Yes,  that  is  true.     I  be 
lieve  that."     But  your  heart  does  not  believe  :  you  do  not 
believe  the  gospel  in  the  core  of  your  nature,  for  if  you  did, 
it  would  have  an  effect  upon  you.     A  man  may  say,  "  I  be- 
lieve my  house  is  on  fire,"  but  if  he  goes  to  bed  and  falls  to 
sleep,  it  does  not  look  as  if  he  believed  it,  for  when  a  man's 
house  is  on  fire  he  tries  to  escape.   If  some  of  you  really  be- 
lieved that  there  is  a  hell,  and  that  there  is  a  heaven,  as  you 
believe  other  things,  you  would  act  very  differently  from 
what  you  now  do.     I  must  add  that  many  of  you  say,  "  I 
go,  sir,"  in  a  very  solemn  sense,  for  when  we  preach  earn- 
estly the  tears  run  down  yonr  cheeks,  and  you  go  home  to 
your  bedrooms,  and  you  pray  a  little,  and  everybody  thinks 
that  your  concern  of  mind  will  end  in  conversion ;  but  your 
goodness  is  *'  like  the  morning  cloud  and  the  early  dew.** 
You  are  like  dunghills  with  snow  upon  them ;  while  the 


AND  NOMINAL  FOLLOWERS  OP  RELIGION.        201 

Bnow  lasts  you  look  white  and  fair,  but  when  the  snow  meltd 
the  dunghill  remains  a  dunghill  still.  Oh,  how  many  very 
impressible  hearts  are  like  that  1  You  sin,  and  yet  you  come 
to  a  place  of  worship,  and  tremble  under  the  word ;  you 
transgress,  and  you  weep  and  transgress  again ;  you  feel  the 
power  of  the  gospel  after  a  fashion,  and  yet  you  revolt 
against  it  more  and  more.  Ah  !  my  friends,  I  can  look  some 
of  you  in  the  face  and  know  that  I  am  describing  some  of 
your  cases  to  the  letter.  You  have  been  telling  lies  to  God 
all  these  yeai*s,  by  saying,  "  I  go,  sir,"  while  you  have  not 
gone.  You  know  that  to  be  saved  you  must  believe  in  Je- 
sus, but  you  have  not  believed.  You  know  that  you  must 
be  bom  again,  but  you  are  still  strangers  to  the  new  birch. 
You  are  as  religious  as  the  seats  you  sit  on,  but  no  more ; 
and  you  are  as  likely  to  get  to  heaven  as  those  seats  are, 
but  not  one  whit  more ;  for  you  are  dead  in  sin,  and  death 
cannot  enter  heaven.  Oh,  my  dear  hearers,  I  lament  that 
ever  I  should  be  called  to  say  such  a  thing  as  this,  and  not 
be  more  affected  by  the  fact ;  and,  wonder  of  wonders,  that 
you,  some  of  you,  know  it  to  be  true,  and  yet  do  not  feel 
alarmed  thereby  1  It  is  the  easiest  thing  in  the  world  to 
impress  some  of  you  by  a  sermon,  but,  I  fear  me,  you  nevei 
will  get  beyond  mere  transient  impressions.  Like  the  wa- 
ter when  lashed,  the  wound  soon  heals.  You  know,  and 
you  know,  and  you  know  ;  and  you  feel,  and  feel,  and  feel 
again,  and  yet  your  sins,  your  self-righteousness,  your  care- 
lessness, or  your  wilful  wickedness,  cause  you,  after  having 
said,  "  I  go,  sir,"  to  forget  the  promise  and  lie  unto  God. 

No\i^,  I  spoke  very  hones'tly  to  the  other  class,  and  must 
be  equally  plain  with  you.  You,  too,  criminate  yoursdvea. 
There  will  be  no  need  of  witnesses  against  you.  You  have 
admitted  that  the  gospel  is  true.  You  did  not  quarrel  with 
the  doctrine  of  future  punishment  or  future  glory.  You  at- 
tended a  place  of  worship,  and  you  said  that  God  was  good 
and  worthy  to  be  served  ;  you  confessed  that  you  owed  al- 
legiance to  him,  and  ought  to  render  it.     You  have  even 

9* 


202  A  SERMON  TO  OPEN  NEGLECTERa 

knelt  do^m  and  in  prayer,  you  have  said,  "  Lord,  I  deserve 
thy  wrath."  The  great  God  has  only  to  turn  to  some  of 
your  former  prayers  to  find  quite  enough  evidence  to  secure 
your  condemnation.  Those  morning  prayers  of  yours,  those 
evening  prayers,  hypocritical  every  one  of  them,  will  be 
more  than  sufficient  to  condemn  you  out  of  your  own  mouth. 
Take  heed  !  take  heed,  I  pray  you,  while  you  are  yet  in  th« 
land  of  hope. 

All  this  while,  as  the  thirty-second  verse  reminds  me, 
while  you  have  remained  unsaved,  you  have  seen  publicans 
and  harlots  saved  by  the  very  gospel  which  has  had  no  pow- 
er upon  you.  Do  not  you  know  it,  young  man  ?  You,  I 
mean,  tlie  son  of  a  godly  mother  ?  You  know  that  you  are 
not  saved,  and  yet  you  had  a  drunken  workman  in  your 
father's  employment,  and  he  has  been  these  last  few  years  a 
sober  Christian  man,  he  is  saved,  and  you  perhaps  have  ta- 
ken to  the  habits  which  he  has  forsaken.  You  know  that 
there  have  been  picked  off  of  the  streets  poor  fallen  women 
who  have  been  brought  to  know  Christ,  who  are  among  the 
sweetest  and  fairest  flowers  in  Christ's  garden  now,  though 
they  were  once  castaways  ;  and  yet  some  of  you  respecta- 
ble people  who  never  committed  any  outward  vice  in  your 
lives,  are  still  unconverted,  and  still  saying  to  Christ,  "  I 
go,  sir,"  but  you  have  not  gone.  You  are  still  without 
God  !  Without  Christ  I  Lost,  lost,  lost !  Yet  fairer  out- 
ward characters  could  scarcely  be  found.  I  could  fain  weep 
for  you  !  Oh !  beware,  beware  of  being  like  the  apples  of  Sod- 
om, which  are  grc  en  to  look  upon,  but  when  crushed,  cnirable 
to  ashes.  Beware  of  being  like  John  Bunyan's  trees  that 
were  green  outside,  but  inwardly  rotten,  and  only  fit  to  be 
tinder  for  the  devil's  tinder-box.  Oh  !  beware  of  saying  as 
some  of  you  do,  "  I  go,  sir,"  while  you  go  not.  I  sometimes 
see  sick  people  who  quite  alarm  and  distress  me.  1  say  to 
them,  "My  dear  friend,  you  a'^e  dying  ;  have  you  a  hope? " 
There  is  no  answer.  "Do  you  know  your  lost  stnte?" 
«  Yes,  sir."   "  Christ  died  for  sinners."   ^^  Yes,  sir."   "Faith 


AND  NOMINAL  FOLLOWERS  OP  RELIGION.      203 

gives  us  of  his  grace.**  "  Yes,  sir.'*  They  say,  "  Yes,  sir  ; 
yes,  sir ;  yes,  sir  ;  yes,  sir  ;  yes,  sir."  I  sometimes  wish  be- 
fore God  they  would  contradict  me,  for  if  they  would  but 
have  honesty  enough  to  say,  "  I  do  not  believe  a  word  of  it 
I  should  know  how  to  deal  with  them.  Stubborn  oaks  ai*e 
levelled  by  the  gale,  but  those  who  bend  like  the  willow  be- 
fore every  wind,  what  wind  shall  break  them  ?  Oh,  dear 
brethi'en,  beware  of  being  gospel-hardened  ;  or,  what  is  the 
same  thing,  softened  but  for  a  season.  Beware  of  being  a 
promising  hearer  of  the  word,  and  nothing  more  ! 

I  do  not  mean  to  close  my  discourse  by  speaking  to  you 
in  this  apparently  harsh  way,  which,  harsh  as  it  seems,  is 
fall  of  love  to  your  soul.  I  have  a  good  word  for  y<m  too. 
I  trust  that  you,  in  this  Agricultural  Ilall,  will  have  a  change 
wrought  in  you  by  the  Holy  Ghost,  for  although  these  many 
years  you  have  made  false  professions  before  God ;  there  is 
yet  room  in  his  gospel  feast  for  you.  Do  you  notice  the 
text  ?  "The  publicans  and  sinners  enter  into  the  kingdom 
of  heaven  before  you.'*'*  Then  it  is  clear  you  may  come  after 
them,  because  it  could  not  be  said  they  entered  before  you, 
if  you  did  not  come  after  them.  If  the  Lord  shall  break 
your  heart,  you  will  be  willing  to  take  the  Lord  Jesus  for 
your  all  in  all  just  the  same  way  as  a  drunkard  must,  though 
you  have  not  been  a  drunkard.  You  will  be  willing  to  rest 
in  the  merit  of  Jesus  just  as  a  harlot  must,  though  yon  have 
never  been  such.  There  is  room  for  you,  young  people,  yet, 
though  you  have  broken  your  vows,  and  quenched  your  con- 
victions. Ay,  and  you  gray-headed  people  may  be  brought 
yet,  though  you  have  lived  so  long  in  the  outward  means, 
but  have  never  given  up  your  hearts  to  Jesus.  Oh,  come! 
This  twenty-fourth  day  of  March,  may  the  Lord  br  ng  you. 
In  this  very  place  may  the  Lord  lead  you  to  say  silently, 
"  By  the  grace  of  God  I  will  not  be  an  open  pretender  any 
longer  ;  I  will  give  myself  up  to  those  dear  hands  that  bled 
for  me,  and  that  dear  heart  that  was  pierced  for  mc ,  and  \ 
will  this  day  submit  to  Jesus'  ways." 


204      A  SEBMON  TO  OPEN  NEGLECTEBS 

The  fact  is,  to  close  the  subject,  there  is,  dean  fiiends, 
the  same  gos^^el  to  be  preached  to  one  class  of  men  a*  to  every 
other  class.    I  pray  God  the  day  may  never  come  when  we 
shall  be  foimd  in  our  preaching  talking  about  working 
classes,  and  middle  classes,  and  upper  classes.     I  know  no 
difference  between  you,  you  are  the  same  to  me  when   1 
preach  the  gospel,  whether  you  are  kings  and  queens,  or 
crossing-sweepers  ;  satin  and  cotton,  broadcloth  and  fustian, 
are  alike  to  the  gospeL     K  you  are  peers  of  the  realm,  we 
trim  not  our  gospel  to  suit  you,  and  if  you  are  the  basest  oJ 
thieves,  we  do  not  exclude  you  from  the  voice  of  mercy. 
The  gospel  comes  to  men  as  sinners,  all  equally  fallen  in 
Adam,  equally  lost  and  ruined  by  sin.     I  have  not  one 
gospel  for  her  Majesty  the  Queen,  and  another  gospel  for 
the  beggar-woman.     No,  there  is  but  one  way  of  salvation, 
but   one  foundation,  but  one  propitiation,  but  one  gospeL 
Look  to  the  cross  of  Christ  and  live.     High  was  the  brazen 
serpent  lifted,  and  all  that  Moses  said  was,  "  Look."    Was 
a  prince  of  the  house  of  Judah  bitten,  he  was  told  to  look  ; 
without  looking  his    lion  standard  of  costly  emblazonry 
could  not  avail  him ;  was  some  poor  wretch  in  the  camp 
bitten,  he  must  look,  and  the  efficacy  was  the  same  for  him 
as  for  the  greatest  of  the  host.     Look !  look !  look  to  Jesus. 
Believe  in  the  Son  of  God  and  live !     One  brazen  serpent 
for  all  the  camp,  one  Christ  for  all  ranks  and  conditions  of 
men.     What  a  blessing  it  would  be  if  we  were  all  enabled 
to  trust  Christ  this  morning  !     My  brethren,  why  not  ?     He 
is  worthy  of  the  confidence  of  all.     The  Spirit  of  God  is 
able  to  work  faith  m  all.     O  poor  sinner,  look  to  him  1 
Dear  hearers,  I  may  never  speak  to  some  of  you  again,  and 
I  would  therefore  be  pressing  with  you  ;  by  the  hour  of 
death,  by  the  solenmities  of  eternity,  1  do  implore  and  be- 
seech you  accept  the  only  remedy  for  sin  which  even  God  him- 
self will  ever  offer  to  the  dying  sons  of  men,  the  remedy  of  a 
bleeding  Substitute,  suffering  in  your  room  and  stead,  be- 
lieved on  and  accepted  in  the  heart.     Cast  yourself  flat 


AND  NOMINAL  FOLLOWERS  OF  RELIGION.       205 

upon  Christ.  The  way  of  salvation  is  just  this — rest  alone 
upon  Christ !  Depend  wholly  upon  him.  The  negro  was 
asked  what  he  did,  and  he  said, "  I  jest  fall  down  on  de  rock, 
and  he  dat  is  down  on  de  rock  cannot  fall  no  lower." 
Down  on  the  rock,  sinner  !  Down  on  the  rock  1  The  ever- 
lasting rock  of  ages  !  You  cannot  fall  lower  than  that,  I 
will  conclude  with  a  well-known  ilhistration.  Your  condi- 
tion is  like  that  of  a  child  in  a  burning  house,  who,  having 
escaped  to  the  edge  of  a  window,  hung  on  by  the  window-sill. 
The  ilames  were  pouring  out  of  the  window  underneath,  and 
the  poor  lad  would  soon  be  burnt,  or  falling  would  be  dashed 
to  piecos  ;  he  therefore  held  on  with  the  clutch  of  death. 
He  did  not  dare  to  relax  his  grasp  till  a  strong  man  stood 
underneath,,  and  said,  "Boy  !  drop  !  drop !  I'll  catch  you." 
Now,  it  was  no  saving  faith  for  the  boy  to  believe  that  the 
man  was  strong — that  was  a  good  help  towards  faith — but 
he  might  have  known  that  and  yet  have  perished ;  it  was 
faith  when  the  boy  let  go  and  dropped  down  into  his  big 
friend's  arms.  There  are  you,  sinner,  clinging  to  your  sins 
or  to  your  good  works.  The  Saviour  cries,  "  Drop  !  drop 
into  my  arms ! "  It  is  not  doing,  it  is  leaving  off  doing.  It 
is  not  working,  it  is  trusting  in  that  work  which  .Jesus  has 
already  done.  Trust !  that  is  the  word,  simple,  solid,  hearty, 
earnest  trust.  Trust  and  it  will  not  take  an  hour  to  save 
you,  the  moment  you  trust  you  are  saved.  You  may  have 
come  in  here  as  black  as  hell,  but  if  you  trust  in  Jesus  you 
are  wholly  forgiven.  In  an  instant,  swifter  than  a  Hash  of 
lightning  the  deed  of  grace  is  done.  Oh  may  God  the  S])ir- 
it  do  it  now,  bringing  you  to  trust,  that  you  may  be  saved. 


S06  EPmtAIH  BEMOAin»Cf  ffTMBBIiT. 


SERMON  Xni 


EPHRAIM  BEMOANING  HIMSELF. 

*  I  HA>'S  BITBELT  HEABD  EFHSADf  BEXOANINO  HDlBBLr  THUS  ;  THOU  HAST  CHAITUBB 
MI',  AND  X  WAS  CHASTISED,  AS  A  BUIXOOX  UNAOOUSTOXED  TO  THE  TOXE  :  TUH 
TI  OU  HE,  A2n>  X  SHALL  BE  TUBNED  ;  rOB  THOU  ABT  THE  LOBD  xj'  aOdX^—Jeie- 

miahxzxL  1& 

The  heathen  described  their  fabled  deity,  Jove,  as  sit- 
ting far  aloft,  regardless  of  the  common  affairs  of  this  lower 
world.  Upon  a  few  kings  and  princes  he  might  turn  an 
observant  eye,  but  the  most  of  men  were  creatures  far  too 
insignificant  to  afFect  the  mind  of  Jove.  Whether  they 
lived  or  died  was  nothing  to  him ;  they  fulfilled  their  des- 
tinies, and  passed  away,  while  Jove  remained  serenely  still, 
or  nodded  as  his  august  will  might  be.  Not  such  is  Jeho- 
vah, the  God  of  Heaven  and  of  earth.  He  compasses  our 
path  and  our  lying  down,  and  is  acquainted  with  all  our 
ways.  "The  ways  of  man  are  before  the  eyes  of  the  Lord, 
and  he  pondereth  all  his  goings."  He  regardeth  the  cries 
of  the  afflicted.  "  He  healeth  the  broken  in  heart,  and  bind- 
eth  up  their  wounds."  "Though  the  Lord  be  high,  yet 
hath  he  respect  unto  the  lowly."  Though  he  is  so  great  a 
God  that  the  heaven  of  heavens  cannot  contain  him,  yet  he 
deigns  to  dwell  with  the  man  who  is  of  a  contrite  and  hum« 
ble  Spirit.  God  has  not  left  us  as  the  ostrich  leaves  lier 
young.  Say  not  that  we  are  left  without  a  friend  to  care 
for  us  :  our  Maker  has  not  gone  away ;  he  has  not  sliut  up 
the  gates  of  heaven;  he  has  not  closed  his  ear  from  hearing, 
neither  has  he  restrained  his  hand  from  helping  us ;  still 


EPHRAIM  BEMOANING  HMSELP.  207 

does  lie  hear  his  Ephrairas  when  they  bemoan  themselveSj 
and  send  them  the  mercy  for  which  they  pine. 

Let  us  conceive,  as  far  as  may  be,  of  the  nearness  of  God 
to  every  mourning  soul,  for  it  is  marvellous  and  worthy  of 
admiration.  When  Her  Majesty,  some  months  ago,  heard 
of  the  desolation  which  had  been  caused  by  an  accident  in 
the  pits,  her  tender  heart  hastened  to  the  relief  of  the  widow 
and  the  fatherless,  but  at  the  moment  of  the  calamity  she 
was  not  on  the  spot  in  person  ;  she  could  not  be  in  the  pit 
to  hear  the  groans  and  sustain  the  faith  of  the  dying,  naj 
she  could  not  be  in  the  cottage  to  mark  the  tear  of  the  wiol  • 
ow  and  to  cheer  her  with  heavenly  promises ;  but  our  God 
Is  on  the  spot  where  calamity  occurs,  for  in  him  we  live  and 
move  and  have  our  being.  He  is  the  greatest  of  comforters, 
and  he  is  also  the  most  approachable.  He  is  "  a  very  pres- 
ent help  in  time  of  trouble."  .He  needs  no  messengera  to 
bear  to  him  the  news  of  our  grief  or  penitence,  for  he  is  not 
far  from  any  of  us.  Mourner,  your  sigh  is  known  to  God 
as  soon  as  you  have  heaved  it,  nay,  before  your  grief  thus 
found  a  vent  he  saw  it  struggling  within.  Ay,  and  the 
grief  which  you  cannot  express  in  words  God  can  see  and 
interpret.  He  knows  the  language  of  our  grief,  the  mean- 
ing of  our  tears.  Blessed  be  the  ever  present  God  that  he 
is  upon  the  spot  where  the  bemoanings  of  penitents  are  heard, 
and  bends  a  gracious  ear  to  the  cry  of  his  children.  This 
morning  my  first  desire  is  that  each  of  us  may  feel  that  God 
is  here,  and  may  be  reached  by  us ;  that  whatever  our  condi- 
tion of  mind  may  be  the  Lord  is  well  aware  of  it,  and  that 
if  there  should  be  caused  by  this  service  even  so  much  as  the 
faintest  ripple  of  a  desire  towards  him,  he  will  note  it  in  his 
book,  and  if  that  desire  should  increase  into  a  wave  of  pray- 
er it  will  not  be  lost  upon  him.  "  He  will  regard  the  pray* 
w  of  the  destitute,  and  not  despise  their  prayer." 

1  shall  now,  as  I  am -strengthened  by  God,  first  ask  your 
kind  attention  to  a  miner  bemoaning  himself;  secondly,  I 
shall  wish  you  to  remember  God  as  hearing  him;  and  thirdly, 


208  BPHRAM  BEMOANINa  HIMSELF 

our  largest  subject  probably  will  be,  Qod  fulfilling  the  desire 
of  that  bemoaning  penitent^  and  turning  him  ^ectnioUy  from 
his  sins. 

I.  First,  observe  carefully,  a  sinneb  bemoaning  him 

SELF. 

Last  Sunday  we  preached  upon  two  sinners,  but  we  hal 
little  or  no  bemoaning.  One  of  them  said,  "  I  will  notgo,** 
and  the  other  who  said,  "I  go,  sir,"  went  not.  We  are  a 
stage  further  this  morning ;  we  introduce  to  you  one  whose 
heart  has  been  affected  by  grace,  whose  conscience  has  been 
awakened,  whose  soul  has  been  quickened,  and  we  find  him, 
according  to  the  expressive  word  of  the  text,  "  bemoaning 
himself"  The  very  word  is  doleful  to  the  ear — it  reminds 
us  of  the  mourning  of  doves ;  we  cannot  pronounce  it  with- 
out feeling  that  it  reveals  a  depth  of  sorrow.  It  is  a  word 
which  tells  of  pain,  anguish,  fear,  restlessness,  sad  remem- 
brances, terrible  forebodings,  and  raging  desires.  Ephraim 
was  heard  ^^  bemoaning  himself. ^^ 

Viewing  the  sorrow  before  us,  we  note  that  he  who  be- 
moaned himself  was  bowed  down  with  a  peculiar  grief  He 
did  not  lament  for  his  children  with  the  bitter  weeping  of 
Rachel ;  he  did  not  mourn  over  friends  and  kinsfolk  wither- 
ed under  the  blast  of  death  ;  he  was  not  as  one  crying  out 
through  pangs  of  bodily  pain,  because  a  limb  was  crushed, 
or  a  bone  was  broken  ;  he  bemoaned  himself,  but  not  because 
he  had  lost  his  goods  ;  not  because  the  ship  had  foundered 
at  sea,  or  the  house  was  wrapped  in  flames,  or  his  riches  had 
taken  to  themselves  wings  and  flown  away.  No  ;  his  sor- 
row was  of  another  kind.  He  bemoaned  himself  with  a 
more  mysterious  and  more  bitter  grief.  The  cause  of  the 
sorrow  lay  within  :  he  was  "bemoaning  himself'*'*  This  is, 
I  say,  a  peculiar  sorrow — one  which  the  most  of  men  look 
down  upon  with  scorn.  I  pray  God,  my  hearers,  that  you 
may  not  bo  strangers  to  it ;  for,  unless  you  bemoan  your- 
Kl&lyes,  ye>u  shall  never  make  the  angels  merry,  for  their  r^ 


KPHRAIM  BEMOANING   HIMSELF.  209 

joicing  is  over  "  one  sinner  that  repenteth,^^  There  is  no 
weight  of  glory  for  those  who  have  never  mourned  the  weight 
of  sin.  If  you  have  never  bemoaned  yourself,  you  have 
never  erjoyed  peace  with  God  through  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  The  sorrow  of  the  text  is  that  of  a  soul  visited  by 
God  the  Holy  Ghost — the  inward  grief  of  a  man  who  has 
been  convinced  of  sin,  of  righteousness,  and  of  judgment. 
It  is  bitter  sorrow,  but  so  blessed  are  its  results,  that  I  will 
call  it  a  bitter  sweet :  it  brings  darkness  with  it,  but  it  is 
the  darkness  of  the  last  hour  of  the  night  which  heralds  the 
dawn  of  the  dav. 

Godly  sorrow  is  well-founded  sorrow,  I  will  try  to  de- 
scribe its  sources.  When  a  sinner  bemoans  himself  in  this 
way,  "Alas!  alas !"  saith  he,  "I  have  found  out  that  all  is 
true  which  I  have  oftentimes  been  told  by  God's  ministers. 
I  have  indeed  offended  my  Maker.  I  have  grieved  the  God 
who  gave  me  my  being  ;  I  have  made  my  best  friend  to  be 
my  enemy  because  of  my  sin  ;  I  have  set  myself  in  opposition 
to  the  King  of  kings.  I  cannot  fight  it  out  with  him,  for 
he  is  too  great  for  me :  what  shall  I  do  ?  Whither  shall  I 
fly?  It  is  surely  true  and  just  that  he  should  punish  me  ; 
and  woe  is  me,  for  I  cannot  bear  his  anger  ;  if  my  ribs  were 
iron  and  my  flesh  were  granite,  I  should  dissolve  in  the  heat 
of  his  wrath.  I  can  no  more  resist  him  than  tow  can  stand 
against  the  fire,  or  stubble  against  the  flame.  Woe  is  me  I 
I  have  roused  Omnipotence  to  be  mine  enemy !  I  have  set 
all  heaven  in  array  against  me  !  I  cannot  resist,  and  I  can- 
not escape — what  then  shall  I  do  ?  Shall  I  promise  that  I  will 
be  better.  Alas !  my  reformation  cannot  blot  out  my  past 
sins,  for  my  old  offences  will  still  demand  a  punishment  even 
if  I  commit  no  more.  But  worse  and  worse,  I  now  discover 
that  my  nature  is  full  of  sin,  and  will  rebel  continually, 
ITiorns  and  thistles  will  grow  in  the  accursed  soil  of  my 
heart,  let  me  do  what  I  will  to  pluck  them  up  by  the  roots. 
I  am  not  only  thus  an  enemy  to  God  by  my  actions,  but  by 
my  very  nature.    Woe  is  me  !   Can  the  Ethiopian  change  hi^ 


210  BPHRAM  BEMOANING  HIMSBLP. 

skin  or  the  leopard  his  spots?  Then  might  I,  who  have 
been  accustomed  to  evil,  learn  to  do  well.  Alas  I  I  am  a 
traitor  to  m/  God,  a  stranger  to  peace  and  happiness,  a  slave 
to  sin,  in  bondage  to  evil."  To  the  mind  in  this  state  it  is 
no  wonder  if  the  thought  occurs,  "  Oh,  that  I  had  never 
been  born !  Would  to  God  I  had  been  created  a  dog  or  a 
toad  sooner  than  have  become  a  sinful  man,  for  I  see  my 
end,  my  dreadful  end  !  I  shall  march  on  from  bad  to  woree, 
and  when  I  shall  die,  the  wrath  of  God  will  come  upon  me 
to  the  uttermost.  Forever  shall  I  be  banished  from  all  hoj>o 
of  happiness.  I  cannot  endure  the  wrath  to  come.  Whither 
shall  I  fly,  or  what  shall  I  do  ?  If  I  try  to  pray,  my  lips  re- 
fuse to  etpress  my  heart's  desires — nay,  I  cannot  tell  what 
t^:)  desire  nor  how  to  pray.  Alas !  alas !  I  am  undone  in- 
deed !  I  am  lost !  lost !  lost !  Would  God  that  there  were 
mercy  for  me."  There  is  good  ground  in  the  sinner's  state 
for  all  his  bemoaning.  The  fears  to  which  I  have  given  ut- 
terance are  all  reasonable  and  well-grounded ;  fears  so  truly 
the  offspring  of  a  sound  judgment  and  an  enlightened  con- 
science that  if,  dear  hearer,  you  have  never  felt  them,  I  pray 
that  you  may  do  so  before  yon  sun  has  set. 

This  sorrow  is  humble  sorrow.  Notice,  it  is  not  written, 
"I  hearEphraim  excusing  himself,"  or  " flattering  himself," 
or  "making  new  resolutions,"  but,  "I  have  heard  him  be- 
moaning himself."  When  God  the  Holy  Spirit  gives  genu- 
ine conviction  of  sin  to  a  man,  how  he  changes  in  his  own 
esteem !  He  finds  that  all  his  righteousnesses  are  ju^t  a 
bundle  of  filthy  rags ;  he  thought  them  to  be  clean,  white 
vestments,  fair  as  the  robes  of  the  redeemed  in  heaven,  and 
he  was  proud  to  think  of  arraying  himself  in  them ;  but 
when  ho  unpacked  them  in  the  daylight  he  saw  them  to  be 
fall  of  holes,  reduced  to  rags  and  tattei-s,  and,  what  wa8 
worse,  polluted  with  horrible  filth  :  so  he  threw  them  all 
away  and  fell  to  bemoaning  himself.  An  awakening  con- 
gcience  does  not  say,  *'  I  could  not  help  it,  it  was  my  nature; 
I  was  led  into  it  by  my  passions ;  I  was  tempted  by  my 


^HRAIM  BEMOAl^mG  HIMSELF.  211 

eircumstaiices ; "  no,  it  gives  up  all  excuses  because  it  sees 
their  hoUowness.  "  I  sinned,"  says  the  maw,  "  I  knew  it  was 
Bin  ;  I  chose  it  wilfully  ;  I  might  have  avoided  it,  but  I  would 
not ;  I  set  darkness  for  light  and  light  for  darkness ;  I  am 
a  wilful  offender."  Instead  of  laying  a  flattering  unction 
to  his  soul,  he  sees  sin  to  be  exceeding  sinful  ^nd  laments 
t.  My  hearers,  am  I  describing  some  of  you  ?  I  trust,  he- 
tore  the  Lord,  some  of  you  can  see  your  own  photograph? 
here,  and  if  so,  I  have  joyful  news  from  the  Lord  for  you, 
for  broken  hearts  shall  be  bound  up  by  the  Lord  Jesus  him- 
self, and  eternal  life  shall  be  given  you  if  you  rest  in  him. 

Please  to  notice  that  this  sorrow  was  thoughtful  sorrow^ 
foi  Ephraim  reviews  his  past  life — "Thou  hast  chastised 
me."  What  came  of  it?  Why,  "I  was  chastised,"  and 
that  was  all.  Are  there  not  some  of  you  in  tliis  Hall  who 
might  say,  "  Great  God,  thou  thyself  must  deal  with  me, 
for  none  but  thyself  can  ever  save  me.  I  have  been  laid 
upon  a  bed  of  sickness,  and  I  have  recovered  from  it,  and 
there  was  an  end  of  the  sickness,  I  was  none  the  better  for 
it.  I  lost  my  wife,  I  buried  my  children,  I  have  suffered 
hard  blows,  but  that  is  all ;  all  my  afflictions  have  produced 
no  good  result.  Lord,  I  have  had  sickness  after  sickness, 
but  I  am  rather  worse  than  better,  "  like  a  bullock  unaccus- 
tomed to  the  yoke,  beaten  but  not  subdued,  smitten  but 
still  obstinate."  The  more  the  untrained  bullock  is  goad- 
ed the  more  it  kicks,  and  it  will  not  wear  the  yoke  with  pa- 
tience. Have  you  not  been  like  it  ?  When  you  have  heard 
a  sermon  you  have  laughed  at  it ;  when  your  mother's  tears 
have  fallen  for  you,  you  have  despised  them  ;  when  your 
wife's  prayers  have  gone  up  to  heaven,  you  have  turned 
them  into  ridicule  ;  you  have  been  chastised  and  chastised, 
but  no  good  has  followed  it.  Some  of  you  have  wearied 
the  Lord  with  your  iniquities,  till  he  asks,  "  What  shall  I 
.io  unto  you?"  Take  heed,  for  patience  endures  not  for- 
ever; the  Lord  will  not  always  plough  upon  a  rock;  he 
will  not  always  sow  upon  the  thankless  sand.     "For  the 


212  SPHRAIM  BEMOAKINQ  HIM81&LP. 

earth  which  drinketh  in  the  rain  that  cometh  oft  upon  lii 
and  bringeth  fdrth  herbs  meet  for  them  by  whom  it  is 
dressed,  receiveth  blessing  from  God  :  but  that  which  bear- 
eth  thorns-  and  briars  is  rejected,  and  is  nigh  unto  cursing ; 
whose  end  is  to  be  burned."  I  trust  that  many  of  you  are 
sensible  that  no  outward  providences,  persuasions,  or  preach* 
ngs,  will  suffice  to  save  you,  you  need  effectual  grace  to 
convert  your  soul,  or  you  will  perish  forever. 

I  bqg  you  to  notice  the  bemoaning  of  the  text  in  ono 
more  respect,  namely,  that  it  was  hopeless  and  yet  hopefuL 
Ephraim  says,  "  Lord,  it  is  of  no  use  to  chastise  me,  for  I 
only  get  worse  ;  but  do  thou  turn  me,  and  I  shall  be  turn- 
ed." I  was  staying  one  day  at  an  inn  in  one  of  the  valleys 
of  Northern  Italy,  where  the  floor  was  dreadfully  dirty.  I 
had  it  in  my  mind  to  advise  the  landlady  to  scrub  it,  but 
when  I  perceived  that  it  was  made  of  mud,  I  reflected  that 
the  more  she  scrubbed  the  worse  it  would  be.  The  man 
who  knows  his  own  heart  soon  perceives  that  his  corrupt 
nature  admits  of  no  improvement ;  there  must  be  a  new  na- 
ture implanted,  or  the  man  will  be  only  "  washed  to  deeper 
stains,"  "Ye  must  be  born  again."  Ours  is  not  a  case  for 
mending,  but  for  making  new.  The  meaning  of  the  prayer 
in  my  text  is,  "  Lord,  do  not  chastise  me,  but  turn  me.  Do 
thou  do  it  thyself,  and  then  it  will  be  done.  '  Turn  me,  and 
I  shall  be  turned,'  but  if  thou  dost  not  do  it  I  am  past  hope." 
O  troubled  soul,  if  the  Lord  shall  put  his  hand  to  the  work 
this  morning,  what  a  wonderful  change  will  he  work  in 
thee  ;  but  only  his  own  right  hand  can  do  it.  Pray,  then, 
this  prayer  :  "  Turn  me,  and  I  shall  be  turned." 


No  outward  forms  can  make  you  clean. 
Tour  leprosy  lies  deep  within." 


No  resolvings  of  yours  can  cleanse  you  any  more  than  the 
Ethiopian  can  make  himself  white  by  resolving  to  be  so ; 
but  the  Holy  Ghost  can  purify  you  with  the  blood  of  Jesus. 
He  who  gives  life  to  the  dead  can  give  spiritual  life  to  yoiu 


BPHRAIM  BEMOANING  HIMSELF.  213 

He  can  take  away  the  heart  of  stone  and  give  you  a  heart 
of  flesh.  I  invite  you,  therefore,  to  pray,  "Turn  me,  O 
God,  and  I  shall  be  turned ;  "  and  I  bid  you  exercise  the  ap 
propriating  grace  of  faith  and  say,  "  for  thou  art  the  Lord 
my  God."  Are  you  made  willing  to  take  Jehovah  to  be 
your  God  to-day,  my  hearer  ?  Are  you  willing  to  give  up 
the  world,  its  pleasures  and  its  gains  ?  Are  you  willing  IQ 
give  up  self,  fashion,  pomp,  self-indulgence,  and  sin  in  every 
shape  ?  K  you  are,  then  I  beseech  you  wait  not  till  you  get 
home,  but,  standing  or  sitting  where  you  now  are,  let 
Ephraim's  bemoaning  prayer  be  yours: "Turn  me,  Lord ; 
convert  me  ;  make  a  new  man  of  me  ;  turn  me,  and  I  shall 
be  turned  ;  for  thou  canst  do  it  so  that  it  will  be  well  done, 
thoroughly  done,  effectually  done,  permanently  done,  unhes- 
itatingly done.  Turn  me,  O  Lord,  and  7"  shall  be  turned, 
even  L  Though  I  have  been  set  on  mischief ;  though  none 
beside  could  ever  move  my  flinty  soul ;  though  I  was  so 
dogged  and  resolved  that  one  might  as  well  have  tried  to 
rule  the  winds  or  command  the  tempest  as  to  curb  my  will ; 
yet.  Lord,  thou  canst  do  it."  I  see  at  this  moment  some  of 
you  dashing  at  full  speed  down  the  hill  like  wild  horses,  and 
none  can  restrain  you.  In  vain  we  may  call  to  you,  in  vain 
we  throw  fences  across  the  road,  you  overleap  every  barrier, 
determined  to  be  lost.  But  let  Almighty  grace  interpose, 
let  the  Lord  himself  appear  ;  he  can  twist  his  hand  in  the 
neck  which  seemed  clothed  with  thunder;  he  can  throw 
back  the  maddened  steed  ;  he  can  thrust  the  bit  of  grace 
into  its  foaming  mouth,  and  constrain  the  once  untamable 
being  to  bear  the  yoke  of  love.  May  such  a  feat  of  grace  be 
performed  in  some  sinner's  heart  this  day. 

n.  I  do  not  know  where  Ephraim  was  when  he  be* 
moaned  himself,  but  I  see  the  Lord  observing  him. 

I  know  not  where  some  of  you  hide  yourselves  now  that 
you  are  pricked  in  your  conscience.  Some  retire  to  their 
bedrooms  ;  some  shut  themselves  in  their  closets.     Many  a 


214  £a>HRAtM  BEMOANING  BmSBUf. 

countryman  has  wept  behind  the  hedge,  or  climbed  into  a 
hay-loft,  or  leaped  into  a  saw-pit  to  pray.  It  little  matters 
where  you  seek  the  Lord.  He  will  be  sure  to  see  yon ;  and 
even  if  it  be  in  the  crowded  street  of  Cheapside  or  Comhill, 
if  your  soul  is  in  prayer,  all  the  din  of  noisy  London  cannot 
stop  the  prayer  from  reaching  the  ear  of  God.  You  know, 
mothers,  how  quick  you  are  of  a  night  to  hear  your  children 
if  they  are  ill.  If  you  had  a  nurse,  she  might  slumber  on  ; 
but  as  for  you,  with  little  Jane  up  stairs  sick,  if  you  do  fall 
asleep,  the  faintest  noise  awakes  you ;  yet  you  are  not  one- 
half  so  wakeful  as  God  is ;  for  he  neither  slumbers  nor 
sleeps.  When  your  heart  begins  to  say,  "My  God,  my 
God,  I  would  be  reconciled ;  my  Lord,  I  would  be  cleansed," 
the  Lord  is  waiting  to  be  gracious.  Before  you  call,  God 
hears  you,  for  he  is  a  God  ready  to  pardon. 

Observe  that  God  heard  all  that  Ephraim  had  to  say. 
I  do  not  know  that  anybody  else  cared  to  do  so  ;  and  so, 
if  you  have  not  a  Christian  friend,  although  I  am  sorry  for 
you,  I  would  say  never  mind,  God  is  enough  for  you  with- 
out a  friend.  No  one  else  might  have  understood  Ephraim 
if  they  had  heard  him,  but  God  knew  all  about  him  and  he 
understood  him  well.  K  you  cannot  utter  your  prayer  in 
good  English,  never  mind,  breathe  it  out  anyhow — God  can 
understand  it.  Broken  prayers  are  best  prayers.  Do  not 
suppose  that  you  require  fine  words  and  elegant  phrases  in 
order  to  affect  the  Lord.  Your  tearful  eye  shall  be  more 
mighty  than  trope  or  metaphor,  and  your  heavy  sigh  shall 
be  more  eloquent  than  the  polished  period  and  lofty  climax  of 
the  orator.  Only  prostrate  your  soul  before  God  with  hum- 
ble heart  and  downcast  eye,  and  your  Father  will  accept 
you.  What  man  among  you  can  stand  against  his  children's 
tears  ?  When  King  Henry  II.,  in  the  ages  gone  by,  was 
provoked  to  take  up  arms  against  his  ungrateful  and  rebel- 
lious son,  he  besieged  him  in  one  of  the  French  towns,  and 
the  son,  being  near  unto  death,  desired  to  see  his  father  and 
confess  his  wrongdoing ;  but  the  stern  old  sire  refused  to 


EPHRAIM  BfiMOANlNG  HIMSELF.  215 

look  the  rebel  in  the  face.  The  young  man,  being  sorely 
troubled  in  his  conscience,  said  to  those  about  him,  "  I  am 
dying  ;  take  me  from  my  bed,  and  let  me  lie  in' sackcloth 
and  ashes,  in  token  of  my  sorrow  for  my  ingratitude  lo  my 
father."  Thus  he  died,  and  when  the  tidings  came  to  tJio 
old  man  outside  the  walls,  that  liis  boy  had  died  in  ashes,  iv 
pentant  for  his  rebellion,  he  threw  himself  upon  the  earth, 
like  another  David,  and  said,  "Would  God  I  had  died  f(»r 
liira."  The  thought  of  his  boy's  broken  heart  touched  the 
heart  of  the  father.  K  ye,  being  evil,  are  overcome  by  yonr 
children's  tears,  how  much  more  shall  your  Father  who  is 
in  heaven  find  in  your  bemoanings  and  confessions  an  argu- 
ment for  the  display  of  his  pardoning  love  through  Christ 
Tesus  our  Lord.  This  is  the  eloquence  which  God  delights 
in,  the  broken  heart,  and  the  contrite  spirit.  He  heard  and 
he'^understood  all  that  Ej)hraim  said,  and  he  was  moved  by 
it.  Did  you  note  that  word,  "  I  have  surely  heard  Ephra- 
im  ?  "  As  if  nothing  were  more  sure.  K  God  should  not 
hear  the  music  of  heaven,  he  would  liear  the  prayers  of  pen- 
itents. If  the  booming  of  the  stonn  and  the  roar  of  the  tem- 
pest, when  the  thunders  roll  like  drums  in  the  march  of  the 
God  of  armies  ;  if  the  clapping  of  the  thousand  hands  of  the 
jroaring  sea  when  it  rejoices  in  its  strength  should  not  be 
heard  by  the  eternal  ear,  yet,  surely^  the  bemoanings  of  a 
sinner  should  be  regarded.  The  crash  of  thunder  is  to  the 
Lord  no  more  than  the  sound  of  the  falling  of  a  sere  leaf  on 
a  still  summer's  eve ;  but  the  cry  of  one  of  his  children  peals 
through  heaven,  and  moves  the  infinite  heart,  so  that  swift 
on  wings  of  love  the  God  of  mercy  flies.  Nor  is  it  mere 
pity,  God  gives  to  us  practical  aid.  He  gave  to  Ephraim 
what  Ephraim  asked  for.  Our  God  is  full  of  compass' on- 
He  is  a  terrible  God  when  he  has  to  deal  with  sin — thundei- 
bolts  are  in  his  hand,  and  the  lightnings  flash  from  his  eyes 
of  fire,  "  for  our  God  is  a  consuming  fire ; "  but  when  he  has 
to  deal  with  penitents,  his  name  is  love.  He  rides  in  a  char- 
iot of  mercy  and  holds  out  a  silver  sceptre  of  grace.     O 


216  EPHRAIM  BEMOANING  HIMSELF. 

seeking  souls,  Jehovah  will  hear  yon,  through  the  merits  of 
his  Son.    Seek  ye  his  face,  and  ye  shall  not  seek  in  vain. 

HL  Let  us  now  turn  to  the  third  point,  and  view  thx 

LOBD  WORKING  IN  HIS  EFFECrCAL  GBACS. 

Beloved  friends,  recollect  that  the  only  turning  in  the 
world  that  is  saving  and  divine  is  the  turning  of  the  heart. 
As  for  a  mere  change  of  notions — the  turning  of  the  head 
—many  mistake  it  for  conversion,  but  it  is  quite  another 
matter.  "  Oh,  yes  !  "  says  a  man,  "  I  used  to  be  an  Armin- 
ipn,  now  I  have  become  a  Calvinist ;"  or,  "I  used  to  be  a 
Churchman,  and  now  I  have  joined  the  Baptists ;"  or,  "I 
ured  to  be  a  Papist,  and  I  have  become  a  Protestant." 
Well,  and  what  difference  will  that  make,  if  you  have  not  a 
new  nature  ?  A  thief  is  a  thief,  whatever  name  he  .may 
boar — ^no  change  of  name  will  make  him  honest.  You  may 
be  quite  as  bad  in  one  denomination  as  in  another,  for  hy- 
pocrisy and  formalism  are  found  among  all  sorts  of  profes- 
sors. If  you  take  a  raven  and  put  it  in  a  brass  cage,  or  a 
silver  cage,  or  a  golden  cage,  it  is  a  raven  still ;  and  so,  if 
you  join  this  church  or  that  church,  unless  your  nature  is 
changed,  you  are  an  unsaved  sinner.  Let  me  add  that, 
though  it  is  a  useful  thing  to  have  the  outward  conversa- 
tion changed,  yet  that  is  not  enough.  It  is  a  great  blessing 
when  a  drunkard  becomes  a  teetotaller ;  it  is  a  great  bless- 
mg  when  the  thief  becomes  honest ;  it  is  a  great  blessing 
when  any  vice  is  given  up,  and  the  opposite  virtue  is  carried 
out ;  but  that  is  not  the  matter.  "  Ye  must  be  bom  again." 
All  the  changes  that  you  can  ever  work  in  yourself  will  not 
avail  for  your  entering  heaven.  Go  to  St,  Paul's  cathedral 
and  see  the  statues  in  white  marble  ;  they  are  not  living  men, 
and  you  cannot  make  them  so.  Wash  them,  clothe  them, 
paint  them,  do  what  you  will  with  them,  still  they  can- 
not join  in  the  songs  or  prayers  of  living  men,  because 
they  are  marble  and  not  alive.  Even  so  is  it  with  you,  un« 
regenerated  ones.     You  have  no  spiritual  life  in  you  ; — w6 


BI^HHAIM  BBIMOANING  HlMSfiLF*  817 

Wonld  have  you  washed,  we  would  have  you  moralized,  for 
that  is  a  good  thing — even  a  corpse  should  be  clean — ^but  all 
the  washing  and  the  cleaning  will  not  make  you  live ;  you 
must  have  the  divine  influence  from  on  high.  No  tuniing 
is  good  for  any  thing  everlastingly,  except  the  renewing  ol 
the  inward  nature  by  a  work  of  grace  in  the  soul.  How  is 
this  done  ?  This  is  the  work,  this  is  the  difficulty  !  I  will 
■how  you  God's  mode  of  working  as  briefly  as  I  can. 

Tlie^  Lord's  way  of  turning  a  man  in  the  main  is  much  as 
follows,  but  the  exact  method  varies  in  each  case.  If  a 
man  be  going  on  in  any  one  road,  and  you  want  to  turn 
him,  the  first  thing  is  to  stop  him.  What  would  one  of  you 
think  if  to-morrow  as  you  were  walking  to  your  labor,  you 
should  suddenly  see  the  earth  open  before  you  as  though  a 
volcano  had  split  open  the  earth  from  its  lowest  depths  ? 
I  warrant  you  you  would  go  no  further  in  that  way  ;  you 
would  stand  with  hair  on  end,  and  gaze  down  into  the 
dread  abyss,  or  fly  back  in  alarm.  This  is  exactly  what 
liappened  to  me  when  God  turned  me.  I  went  on  easy 
enough  in  my  sins;  I  thought  them  pleasant,  and  that  I 
should  continue  in  them — till  by  God's  gi'ace  I  came  to  feel 
that  hell  was  a  real  thing,  and  that  I  was  on  the  brink  of  it. 
I  «aw  clearly  that  if  the  brittle  thread  of  my  life  were  snap- 
ped, infinite  misery  would  be  my  portion,  in  the  place  where 
fiendtf  forever  bite  their  bonds  of  iron,  unable  to  escape  or 
to  endure  I  Oh,  how  a  distinct  sight  of  wrath  to  come  stops 
a  man  !  How  he  pauses  when  he  perceives  in  his  own  soul, 
that  the  wages  of  sin  are  death.  A  sight  of  the  everlasting 
burnings  makes  him  cry  "halt!"  and  though  before  he 
went  on  gayly  dancing  to  destruction,  he  now  waits  awhile, 
puts  his  finger  to  his  brow,  takes  counsel  with  his  cooler 
jiidgment,  and  says  to  himself,  "  How  now  I  What  shall 
I  do  ? "  When  a  man  is  awakened  by  the  Holy  Spirit  to 
feel  that  hell  is  his  just  desert,  it  is  no  wonder  that  his  mind 
is  turned  from  the  love  of  sin  to  a  perfect  horror  of  it. 
"Oh  I^saith  he,  "if  hell  is  kindled  by  my  sin,  how  can  I 

10 


218  EFHRAIM  BEMOANING  HIMSELP. 

lov(;  the  sin  which  prepared  such  wrath  for  me?"  The  olJ 
naturalist,  Ulysses  Androvaldus,  tells  us,  that  a  dove  is  so 
afraid  of  a  hawk,  that  she  will  be  frightened  at  the  sight  of 
one  of  its  feat  hoi's.  Whether  it  be  so  or  not,  I  cannot  tell ; 
but  this  I  know,  that  when  a  man  has  had  a  thorough  sha- 
king over  the  jaws  of  hell,  he  will  be  so  afraid  of  sin,  that 
even  one  of  the  feathers  of  it,  any  one  sin,  will  alarm  and 
send  a  thrill  of  fear  through  his  soul.  This  is  a  part  of 
the  way  by  which  the  Lord  turns  us  when  we  are  tamed 
indeed. 

Furthermore,  the  awakened  consciehce  is  led  to  see  the 
real  nature  of  sin.  We  have  all  seen  bears  in  a  pit,  and 
lions  in  stone,  and  have  seen  them  without  alarm ;  but  I  can 
readily  imagine  that  if  a  lion  were  suddenly  to  leap  from  my 
platform  into  the  midst  of  this  throng,  you  would  regard  it 
with  a  very  different  eye.  A  wild  beast  let  loose  among 
you  would  be  a  very  different  thing  from  what  it  is  in  a 
picture  or  a  statue.  Now,  sin,  as  the  preacher  talks  of  it, 
is  to  most  of  you  like  a  painted  lion ;  but  when  a  man  feels 
it  in  his  own  soul  as  a  living  evil  full  of  mischief,  it  is  a 
very  different  thing.  We  are  like  the  man  in  the  fable,  who 
warmed  a  frozen  viper  in  his  bosom ;  but  when  it  came  to 
life  he  knew  its  poisonous  nature^  for  he  felt  the  venom  in  his 
veins.  Men,  before  God  quickens  them,  nurse  the  viper  of 
sin  in  their  bosom,  and  say,  "  Look  at  its  azure  scales  ;  how 
fair  it  is  to  look  upon  I  Do  you  suppose  so  harmless  a 
creature  could  ever  do  me  injury  ?  "  They  put  it  in  their 
bosoms  with  much  fondness ;  but  when  it  bites  them,  and 
the  hot  poison  runs  through  their  veins,  and  conscience  is 
thoroughly  awakened,  then  they  loathe  it  and  cast  it  from 
them,  or  rather  would  do  so  If  they  could  ;  but  as  Laocoon, 
in  the  old  story,  tried  in  vain  to  tear  the  serpent's  coils  from 
his  limbs,  so  is  it  with  them  until  grace  comes  to  their  aid. 
At  any  rate,  a  true  sight  of  sin  soon  turns  a  man  most  thor- 
oughly from  his  former  love  of  it.  There  once  lived  a  great 
religious  impost«^r,  of  whom  it  is  said — 


EPHRATM  BEMOANING  HIMSELF.  219 

*'  O'er  his  features  liung 
The  veil,  the  silver  veil  wliich  he  had  flung 
In  mercy  there,  to  hide  from  mortal  sight 
His  dazzling  brow,  till  man  could  bear  its  light." 

Wlien  that  veil  was  at  last  uplifted,  the  foulest  leprosy  was 
Been.  So  sin  comes  to  men  covered  with  its  silver  veil,  and 
it  v'h lepers  with  softest  accents  sweet  as  music,  "Trust  me, 
I  cannot  deceive  you ;  I  bring  you  richest  joys ;  see  how  the 
cup  sparkles,  how  the  wine  moveth  itself  aright ;  how  merry 
18  the  dance ;  how  joyous  is  the  chambering  and  the  wanton- 
ness ;"  but  ah  I  when  once  that  silver  veil  comes  off,  and 
sin's  leprous  brow  is  seen,  then  man,  enlightened  by  his  God, 
turns  from  it,  crying,  "  Get  thee  behind  me,  Satan.**  As 
Jehu  said  of  Jezebel,  "  Throw  her  down,"  so  do  men  abhor 
the  accursed  thing  that  by  her  witchcrafts  could  lead  their 
souls  to  destruction.  A  sight  of  hell  and  a  sense  of  sin  are 
great  means  in  the  hands  of  God  to  turn  the  sinner  from  his 
ways. 

The  grand  turning-point  I  have  not  come  to  yet — ^it  is  a 
sight  of  Christ  on  the  cross.  If  you  ever,  by  the  eye  of 
&ith,  see  Jesus  Christ  dying  for  you,  sin  will  never  be  sweet 
to  you  again.    What  was  it  slew  our  blessed  Lord  ?    It  was 

our  sin — 

""'Twas  you,  my  sins,  my  cruel  sins. 
His  chief  tormentors  were ; 
Each  of  my  crimes  became  a  nail. 
And  unbelief  the  spear." 

When  we  discover  that  our  iniquities  put  our  dearest  and 
best  friend  to  death,  we  vow  revenge  against  our  iniquities, 
and  henceforth  hate  them  with  a  perfect  hatred.  Let  me 
illustrate  this  very  simply.  Here  is  a  knife,  with  a  richly- 
carved  ivory  handle,  a  knife  of  excellent  workmanship. 
Yonder  woman,  we  will  suppose,  has  had  a  dear  child  murder- 
ed by  a  cruel  enemy.  This  knife  is  hers,  she  is  pleased  with  it, 
arid  prizes  it  much.  How  can  I  make  her  throw  that  knife 
away  ?  I  can  do  it  easily,  for  that  is  the  knife  with  which 
her  child  was  killed.    Look  at  it ;  there  is  blood  still  upon 


220  EPHRAIM  BEMOANING  BSMSBLF. 

the  handle.  She  drops  it  as  though  it  were  a  scorpion  ;  she 
cannot  bear  it.  "  Put  it  away,"  saith  she,  "  it  killed  my 
child  !  Oh,  hateful  thing  ! "  Now,  sin  is  such  a  thing :  we 
play  with  it  till  we  are  told  it  was  sin  that  killed  the 
Lord  Jesus,  who  died  out  of  love  to  us — pure,  disinterested 
love.  Then  we  say,  "  Hateful  thing,  get  thee  gone  I  How 
can  I  endure  thee?"  Remember  how  Mark  Antony  stirreo 
np  the  Romans  to  a  fury  against  Caesar's  murderers.  Hold- 
ing up  the  mantle  of  dead  Caesar,  he  pointed  to  the  rents 
and  gashes  in  the  garment — 

"  In  this  place  ran  Cassias'  dagger  through ; 
Through  this  the  well-beloved  Brutus  stabbed." 

And  thus  he  inflamed  the  multitude  to  such  a  pitch  of 
fury  that  they  snatched  up  the  seats  aroimd  them,  and 
away  they  went  to  the  houses  of  the  conspirators  to  set  them 
on  a  blaze.  Ah  !  if  my  lips  could  speak  as  my  heart  bids 
them,  I  would  cry,  See  there  the  wounds  of  the  Son  of  God ; 
behold  the  crimson  stains  which  mark  his  blessed  body  : 
mark  the  thorn-crown  ;  gaze  upon  the  pierced  hands  ;  weep 
over  the  nailed  feet;  see  the  deep  gash  which  the  lance 
made  in  his  side!  Sin  did  this  cruel  work,  this  bloody 
deed  !  Down  with  our  sins ;  drag  them  to  the  cross ;  slay 
them  at  Calvary ;  let  not  one  of  them  escape,  for  they  are 
the  murderers  of  Christ!  This  is  the  way  in  which  the 
Lord  turns  the  sinner,  and  he  is  turned  indeed. 

Further,  one  of  the  most  blessed  ways  by  which  God 
makes  the  sinner  turn  is  this :  he  manifests  his  eoerlasthtg 
love  to  him.  You  remember  the  fable  of  the  traveller  going 
along,  wrapped  up  in  his  cloak,  and  the  contest  between  the 
wind  and  the  sun  as  to  which  should  get  his  cloak  from 
him.  The  wind  blustered  and  blew,  with  a  cold,  driving 
rain,  but  the  traveller  wrapped  his  cloak  about  him  the  more 
tightly,  and  went  shivering  on  his  journey ;  the  wind  could 
not  tear  away  the  garment.  Then  the  genial  sun  burst 
foith,  and  shone  full  upon  the  traveller's  face,  it  dried  hii 
garments  and  cheered  him  with  its  warmth;  by  and  by  tha 


EPHRATM  BEMOANING  HIMSELF.  221 

traveller  loosed  his  cloak,  and  at  last  threw  it  off;  the  sun's 
kindness  had  won  the  day.  Now,  when  God's  law  blusters 
about  a  sinner,  it  sometimes  happens  that  he  says,  "  I  will 
go  on  in  my  sins,"  but  when  God's  love  comes,  who  can 
stand  it ?  "I  have  loved  thee  with  an  everlasting  love/* 
says  God  to  the  sinner.  "Is  it  so?"  cries  the  renewed 
heart,  "  then.  Lord,  I  cannot  be  thine  enemy  any  longer." 
Oh  I  if  some  of  you  did  but  know  that  God  has  chosen  you 
from  before  the  foundation  of  the  world,  if  you  did  but 
know  that  you  are  his  darlings,  his  favorites,  that  he  gave 
hi^  own  Son  to  die  for  you ;  oh  !  if  you  did  but  know  that 
your  name,  your  worthless  name,  is  written  upon  the  hands 
of  Christ,  would  you  not  love  him  then  ?  I  pray  that  he 
may  reveal  that  love  to  you  to-day,  and  if  he  does  you  will 
sing— 

**  Thy  mercy  is  more  tlian  a  match  for  my  heart. 
Which  wonders  to  feel  its  own  hardness  depart ; 
Dissolved  by  thy  goodness,  I  fall  to  the  ground. 
And  weep  to  the  praise  of  the  mercy  Fve  found." 

When  this  sense  of  love  has  done  its  work,  new  loves  and 
new  desires  fill  the  soul,  and  the  man  is  a  new  man.  Some 
worldings  cannot  make  out  why  Christians  abstain  from 
certain  pleasures.  "  Why,"  say  they,  "  I  am  not  going  to 
deny  myself  of  every  pleasure ! "  Do  not  you  know,  my  dear 
friends,  that  it  is  no  denial  to  us  to  go  without  sin  ?  It  is  no 
denial  to  the  sheep  to  live  without  licking  blood,  because  the 
sheep  would  dread  the  sight  of  blood;  it  desires  the  sweet 
green  grass,  but  does  not  care  for  garbage.  So  when  God 
gives  us  new  hearts  and  right  spirits,  we  do  not  find  it  a  de- 
nial to  renounce  sin :  our  tastes  are  changed,  our  new  loves 
and  our  new  desires  are  not  those  of  our  former  estate. 
There  may  be  a  gentleman  here  who  has  risen  in  the  world ! 
he  was  once  a  farmer's  boy,  but  now  he  rides  in  his  carriage. 
When  he  was  a  farmer's  boy,  he  used  to  think  what  a  grand 
thing  it  would  be  to  be  a  king,  and  swing  on  a  gate  and  eat 
bacon  all  day  long ;  but  now  I  will  be  bound  to  say  he  doea 


223  EPHRATM  BEMOANING  HIMSELP, 

not  want  to  swing  on  a  gate,  and  has  little  relish  for  the 
rustic  dainty  of  whicli  he  was  once  so  fond ;  he  has  reached 
a  different  rank  of  society,  and  his  tastes  and  habits  are  all  dif- 
ferent. So  it  is  with  the  Christian ;  God  makes  a  king  of 
him,  and  how  can  he  go  back  to  play  with  beggars?  God 
has  put  a  heavenly  nature  into  him,  and  he  abhors  to  grovel 
in  the  dust  of  sin.  Dear  friends,  I  would  to  God  that  yon 
might  know  your  standing  in  Christ,  sons  of  God,  heirs 
with  Christ,  joint  heirs  with  hi  m  ;  and  when  you  do,  it  will 
turn  you  away  from  the  base  tuings  of  sin  and  you  will  be 
turned  indeed. 

Once  more,  and  I  shall  not  detain  you.  There  is  some- 
thing which  binds  the  Christian  very  fast  to  holiness,and  re- 
strains him  from  sin,  and  that  is^the  prospect  of  yon  bright 
world  to  which  he  is  wendiug  his  way.  This  week  I  had  my 
faith  much  strengthened  in  visiting  a  sick  woman.  I  would 
fain  change  places  with  her.  Glad  enough  should  I  be  to 
lie  upon  that  sick  bed  and  die  in  her  room ;  for  though  she 
has  been  long  on  the  borders  of  the  grave,  and  knows  it, — 
knows  that  each  hour  may  probably  be  the.  last,  her  joy  is 
so  great,  her  bliss  is  so  abundant,  that  you  have  only  to 
speak  with  her  and  her  joy  overflows. 

She  said  to  me,  "  I  prayed  .that  if  God  would  spare  me, 
he  would  give  me  one  soul,  and  he  has  given  me  five  converts 
while  I  have  been  on  this  bed ;"  and  I  did  not  wonder  at  it, 
as  I  saw  the  five  dear  friends  sitting  in  the  room  ;  I  did  not 
wonder  at  it — it  was  enough  to  make  one  a  Christian  to  see 
her  joy  and  her  peace,  and  hear  her  talk  so  confidently  about 
the  time  when  she  should  see  her  Lord  and  be  in  his  embrace 
forever.  "  Ah  ! "  says  the  devil  to  the  Christian,  "  I  will 
give  you  so  much  if  you  sin."  Our  reply  is,  "  What  could 
you  give  me  compared  with  my  inheiitance  ?  O  fiend,  thou 
biingest  me  counterfeit  riches,  but  I  can  count  down  ten 
thousand  times  as  much  in  real  solid  gold !  Thou  proffercst 
me  thy  paste  gems,  but  here  are  diamonds  and  pearls  of  the 
first  water  and  of  the  rarest  value  I     Out  on  thee,  thou  tempt* 


EPHBAIM  BEMOAirmG  HIMSBLF.  223 

erl  thou  knowest  not  how  to  tempt  a  Christian!  for  h-^ 
^ins  are  greater  than  any  thing  thou  canst  give  hinr 
Surely,  this  would  turn  your  hearts,  my  hearers,  if  you  coi 
but  know  and  feel  the  glory  of  our  inheritance.     If  you  !• 
a  vision  of  the  land  of  the  hereafter,  where  the  birds  of  p 
disc  forever  sing,  and  the  sun  forever  shines,  and  the  d 
IS  never  ended,  surely  sin  would  no  longer  enchant  yc* 
"We  are  on  our  journey  home,"  say  the  host  of  the  elect? 
The  city  which  hath  foundations  hath  turned  their  steps 
from  sin,  and  they  are  turned  indeed,  so  that  they  never  can 
be  turned  back  again. 

Now  I  have  done,  but  I  do  not  like  to  send  you  away 
without  making  again  the  personal  inquiry.  Are  you  be- 
moaning yourself?  Do  you  desire  to  be  turned?  Would 
you  have  these  gpcious  motives  operating  upon  you  ?  Then 
do  not  put  it  off,  felt  this  moment  breathe  the  silent  prayer, 
"  Turn  me,  O  Lord,  and  I  shall  be  turned."  I  have  a  great 
desire  in  my  heart ;  I  should  like  to  tell  you  of  it :  it  is  that 
there  should  be  more  converted  in  this  place  than  ever  were 
converted  at  one  time  in  any  place  since  the  world  was,  for 
never  before  was  such  an  audience  gathered  to  hear  one  man. 
Whether  that  desire  shall  be  granted  I  do  not  know  ;  but  if 
we  have  faith  enough  for  it,  it  may  come,  and  it  will  come ; 
why  should  it  not  ?  Oh,  that  some  great  sinners  might  be 
saved,  for  they  always  make  the  best  saints  I  Oh,  that  the 
Lord  might  take  some  of  the  ringleaders  in  the  devil's  army 
and  make  them  lieutenants  in  his  service  !  None  so  brave 
for  Christ  as  those  who  were  brave  for  sin.  Ye  great  sin- 
ners,  may  great  mercy  meet  with  you !  Recollect  the  way 
of  salvation  is  this,  Trust  Jesus,  and  you  shall  be  saved: 
look  to  him  whom  I  have  pictured  just  now  bleeding,  groan- 
ing, dying  on  the  tree.  Look,  look !  and  live.  Only  de 
pend  upon  him,  only  give  your  heart  to  him,  and  rest  in  him, 
and  it  is  not  possible  that  one  should  perish  who  comes  to 
Jesus  and  puts  his  trust  in  him. 

Brethren,  pray  for  us.     If  you,  the  members  of  thia 


224  EPHEAIM  BEMOANING  BUMSSUT.t^ 

nobnrch,  do  not  pray  for  me,  I  feel  I  shall  have  much  to  lay 

nist  your  charge.    Never  was  any  one  called  to  so  great  a 

a  diffk  AS  this.     I  have  this  morning  twenty  thousand  claims 

feren^i  your  prayers.     I  beseech  you  by  the  living  Gk)d  pray 

him  Die.     It  were  better  for  me  that  I  never  were  born  to 

lias  pC  this  responsibility  upon  me  if  I  have  not  your  prayers 

in  tl^^  CA"  t®ll — ^^^  service  of  this  morning  may,  when  k  i» 

jx^Uought  over  and  remembered  by  the  hearers,  bring  foi  th 

,^fruit  a  hundredfold,  and  God  shall  have  the  glory.     Do  pray 

for  me  ;  and,  sinner,  unconverted  sinner,  do  pray  for  your* 

lelf^  and  God  hear  you  for  Jesus  Christ's  sake.    Amen. 


JBBOB  AT  BETHESDA,  BTa  225 


SEEMON 


JESUS  AT  BETHESDA;  OR,  WAITING  CHANGED 

FOR  BELIEVING. 

**1VTIB  THIS  THERB  WAS  4  FEAST  OF  THE  JEWS  ;  AKD  JESUS  WENT  UP  TO  JBBU8A- 
LBX.  NOW  THERE  IS  AT  JERUSALEM  BY  THE  SHEEP  MARKET  A  POOL,  WHICH  IS 
CALLED  IK  THE  HEBREW  TONGUE  BETHESDA,  HAYING  FIVE  PORCHES.  IN  THESE 
LAY  A  GREAT  MULTITUDE  OF  IMPOTENT  FOLK,  OF  BLIND,  HALT,  WITHERED,  WAIT- 
ING FOR  THE  MOVING  OF  THE  WATER.  FOR  AN  ANGEL  WENT  DOWN  AT  A  CERTAIN 
SEASON  OTTO  THE  POOL,  AND  TR0X7BLED  THE  WATER :  WHOSOEVER  THEN  FIRST 
AFTER  THE  TROUBLING  OF  THE  WATER  STEPPED  IN  WAS  MADE  WHOLE  OF  WHAT* 
SOEVER  DISEASE  HE  HAD.  AND  A  CERTAIN  MAN  WAS  THERE,  WHICH  HAD  AN  IN- 
FIRMITY  THIRTY*  AND  EIGHT  YEARS.  WHEN  JESUS  SAW  HIM  LIE,  AND  KNEW 
THAT  HE  HAD  BEEN  NOW  A  LONG  TIME  IN  THAT  CASE,  HE  SAITH  UNTO'  HIM,  WILT 
THOU  BE  MADE  WHOLE  ?  THE  IMPOTENT  MAN  ANSWERED  HIM,  SIR,  I  HAVE  NO  MAN, 
WHEN  THE  WATER  IS  TROUBLED,  TO  PUT  ME  INTO  THE  POOL  :  BUT  WHILE  I  JMf 
COMING,  ANOTHER  8TEPPETH  DOWN  BEFORE  ME.  JESUS  SAITH  UNTO  HIM.  RISE, 
TAKE  UP  THY  BED,  AND  WALEL  AND  IMMEDIATELY  THE  MAN  WAS  MADE  WHOLE, 
AND  TOOK  UP  HIS  BED,  AND  WALKED  :  AND  ON  THE  SAME  DAY  WAS  THE  SABBATH.* 
—John  V.  1—9. 

The  scene  of  this  miracle  was  Bethesda,  a  pool,  accord 
ing  to  the  evangelist,  adjoining  the  sheep  market,  or  neai 
to  the  sheep  gate :  the  place  through  which,  I  suppose,  the 
cattle  consumed  by  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  would  be 
driven  ;  and  the  pool  where,  perhaps,  the  sheep  intended 
for  sale  to  the  offerers  in  the  temple  were  washed.  So  com- 
mon was  sickness  in  the  days  of  the  Saviour,  that  the  in- 
firmities of  men  intruded  upon  the  place  which  had  been  al- 
lotted to  cattle,  and  the  place  where  sheep  had  been  washed, 
became  the  spot  where  sick  folk  congregated  in  great  mul- 
titudes, longing  for  a  cure.  We  do  not  hear  that  any  one 
remonstrated  at  the  intrusion,  or  that  public  opinion  was 
shocked.  The  needs  of  mankind  must  override  all  consid- 
erations of  taste.  The  hospital  must  have  the  preference 
over  the  sheep  market,  This  day  you  have  another  case  i** 
10* 


226  JESUS  AT  BETHESDA;   OB, 

point.  If  the  physical  infirmities  of  Jerusalem  intruded 
into  the  sheep  market,  I  fihall  ask  no  excuse  if,  on  these  Sab- 
bath days,  the  spiritual  sickness  of  London  should  demand 
that  this  spacious  place,  which  has  hitherto  been  given  up 
to  the  lowing  of  cattle  and  to  the  bleating  of  sheep,*  should 
be  consecrated  to  the  preaching  of  the  gospel,  to  the  mani* 
Testation  of  the  healing  virtue  of  Christ  Jesus  among  the 
spiritually  sick.  This  day  there  is  by  the  sheep  market  a 
pool,  and  impotent  folk  are  here  m  exceeding  great  midti- 
tudes. 

We  might  never  have  heard  of  Bethesda,  if  an  august 
visitor  had  not  condescended  to  honor  it  with  his  presence 
— Jesus,  the  Son  of  God,  walked  in  the  five  porches  by  the 
pool  It  was  the  place  where  we  might  expect  to  meet  him, 
•  for  where  should  the  physician  be  found  if  not  in  the  place 
where  the  sick  are  gathered  ?  Here  was  woiic  for  Jesus' 
healing  hand  and  restoring  word.  It  was  but  natural  that 
therSon  of  Man,  who  "came  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which 
was  lost,"  should  make  his  way  to  the  lazar-house  by  the 
side  of  the  pool.  That  gracious  visit  is  Bethesda's  glory. 
This  has  lifted  up  the  name  of  this  pool  out  of  the  common 
rank  of  the  springs  and  waters  of  the  earth.  Oh  that  King 
Jesus  might  come  into  this  place  this  morning  I  this  would 
be  the  glory  of  this  Hall,  for  which  it  should  be  famous  in 
eternity.  K  Jesus  would  be  here  to  heal,  the  remarkable 
size  of  the  congregation  wofild  cease  to  be  a  wonder,  the  re- 
nown of  Jesus  and  his  saving  love  would  eclipse  all  else,  as 
the  sun  puts  out  the  stars.  My  brethren,  Jesus  will  be  here, 
for  there  are  those  who  know  him  and  have  power  with  him, 
who  have  been  asking  for  his  presence.  The  Lord's  favor^ 
ed  people,  by  prevailing  cries  and  tears,  have  won  from  him 
his  consent  to  be  in  our  midst  this  day,  and. he  is  walking 
amid  this  throng  as  ready  to  heal  and  as  mighty  to  save  as 
in  the  days  of  his  flesh.     "  Lo,  I  am  with  you  alway,  even? 


In  the  Agricultural  Hall  the  annual  cattle-shows  are  hel^. 


WAITING  CHANGED  FOR  BBLIEVINa.  327 

anto  the  end  of  the  world,"  is  an  assurance  which  comforts 
the  preacher's  heart  this  morning.  A  present  Saviour — 
present  in  the  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost — shall  make  this 
day  to  be  remembered  by  many  who  shall  be  made  whole. 
I  ask  the  earnest  attention  of  all,  and  I  entreat  of  be- 
lieA'ers  their  fervent  assisting  prayers  while  I  first  tid  you 
observe  the  sick  man;  secondly,  direct  your  attentive  eye 
to  the  Grreat  Physician ;  and,  thirdly,  make  an  application 
of  the  whole  narrative  to  the  present  case, 

L  In  order  to  observe  the  patient,  I  shall  ask  you  to 
go  with  mo  to  the  pool  with  the  five  porches,  around  which 
the  sick  are  lying.  Walk  tenderly .  among  the  groups  of 
lame  and  blind  !  Nay,  do  not  close  your  eyes.  It  will  do 
you  good  to  see  the  sorrowful  sight,  to  mark  what  sin  has 
done  and  to  what  sorrows  our  father  Adam  has  made  us 
heirs. 

Why  are  they  all  here  ?  They  are  here  because  some- 
times the  waters  bubble  up  with  a  healing  virtue.  Whether 
visibly  stirred  by  an  angel  or  not  it  is  not  necessary  for  us 
here  to  discuss ;  but  it  was  generally  believed  that  an  angel 
descended  and  touched  the  water — this  rumor  attracted  the 
sick  from  all  quarters.  As  soon  as  the  stir  was  seen  in  the 
waters,  the  whole  mass  probably  leaped  into  the  pool — those 
who  could  not  leap  themselves  were  pushed  in  by  their  at- 
tendants. Alas !  how  small  the  result !  Many  were  disap- 
pointed; only  one  was  rewarded  for  the  leap;  whosoever 
Jlrst  stepped  in  was  healed,  but  only  the  first.  For  the  poor 
and  meagre  chance  of  winning  this  cure  the  sick  folk  lin- 
gered in  Bethesda's  arches  year  after  year.  The  impotent 
man  in  the  narrative  had  most  likely  spent  the  better  part 
of  liis  thirty  eight  years  in  waiting  at  this  famous  pool,  buoy- 
ed up  by  the  slender  hope  that  he  might  one  day  be  first  of 
the  throng.  On  the  Sabbath  mentioned  in  the  text,  the  an- 
gel had  not  come  to  him,  but  something  better  had  come, 
for  Jesus  Christ  the  angel's  Master,  was  there. 


228  JESUS  AT  BETHESDA;   OB, 

Note  concerning  this  man  that  he  wasfMy  aware  ofhU 
sickness.  He  did  not  dispate  the  failure  of  his  health :  he 
was  an  impotent  man ;  he  felt  it  and  he  owned  it.  He  was 
not  like  some  present  this  morning,  who  are  lost  by  nature, 
but  who  do  not  know  it,  or  will  not  confess  it.  He  was  con- 
scious that  he  needed  heavenly  help,  and  his  waiting  at  the 
pool  showed  it.  Are  there  not  many  in  this  assembly  who 
are  equally  convinced  on  this  point  ?  You  have  for  a  long 
time  felt  that  you  are  a  sinner,  and  have  known  that  unless 
grace  shall  save  you,  saved  you  never  can  be.  You  are  no 
atheist,  no  denier  of  the  gospel ;  on  the  contrary,  you  firmly 
believe  the  Bible,  and  heartily  wish  that  you  had  a  saving 
part  in  Christ.  Jesus  ;  but  for  the  present  you  have  advanced 
no  further  than  to  feel  that  you  are  sick,  to  desire  to  be 
healed,  and  to  own  that  the  cure  must  come  from  above. 
So  far  so  good,  but  it  is  not  good  to  stop  here. 

The  impotent  man  thus  desiring  to  be  healed,  waited  by 
thepool^  expecting  some  sign  and  wonder.  He  hoped  that 
an  angel  would  suddenly  burst  open  the  golden  gates  and 
touch  the  waters  which  were  now  calm  and  stagnant,  and 
that  then  he  might  be  healed.  This,  too,  my  dear  hearers, 
is  the  thought  of  many  of  those  who  feel  their  sins  and  who 
desire  salvation.  They  accept  that  unscriptural  and  dan- 
gerous advice  given  to  them  by  a  certain  class  of  ministers ; 
they  wait  at  the  pool  of  Bethesda ;  they  persevere  in  the 
formal  use  of  means  and  ordinances,  and  continue  in  unbe- 
lief, expecting  some  great  thing.  They  abide  in  a  continued 
refusal  to  obey  the  gospel,  and  yet  expect  that  on  a  sud- 
den they  will  experience  some  strange  emotions,  singular 
feelings,  or  remarkable  impressions  ;  they  hope  to  see  a  vis- 
Ion,  or  hear  a  supernatural  voice,  or  be  alarmed  with  deliri- 
ums of  horror.  Now,  dear  friends,  we  shall  not  deny  that  a 
few  persons  have  been  saved  by  very  singular  intei"position8 
of  God's  hand,  in  a  manner  altogether  out  of  the  ordinary 
modes  of  divine  procedure.  We  should  be  very  foolish  if 
we  were  for  instance  to  dispute  the  truth  of  such  a  conver- 


WAITm0  CHANCiED  FOR  BELIEVING.  229 

don  as  that  of  Colonel  Gardiner,  who,  the  very  night  when 
Le  made  an  appointment  to  commit  sin,  was  arrested  and 
converted  by  a  vision  of  Christ  upon  the  cross,  which,  at 
any  rate,  he  thought  he  saw,  and  by  hearing  or  imagining 
that  he  heard  the  voice  of  the  Saviour  tenderly  pleading 
with  him.  It  were  idle  to  dispute  that  such  cases  have  oc- 
cur! ed,  do  occur,  and  may  occur  again.  I  must,  however/ 
beg  unconverted  people  not  to  look  for  such  interposition^ 
in  their  own  cases.  When  the  Lord  bids  you  believe  in 
Jesus,  what  right  have  you  to  demand  signs  and  wonders 
instead  ?  Jesus  himself  is  the  greatest  of  all  wonders.  My 
dear  hearer,  for  you  to  wait  for  remarkable  experiences  is 
as  futile  as  was  the  waiting  of  the  multitude  who  lingered 
at  Bethesda  waiting  for  the  long-expected  angel,  when  he 
who  could  heal  them  stood  already  in  their  midst,  neglected 
and  despised  by  them.  What  a  piteous  spectacle,  to  see 
them  gazing  into  the  clouds  when  the  physician  who  could 
heal  them  was  present,  and  they  offered  him  no  petitions, 
and  sought  no  mercy  at  his  hands. 

In  dealing  with  the  .method  of  waiting  to  see  or  to  feel 
some  great  thing,  we  remark,  that  it  is  not  the  way  which 
Ood  has  hidden  his  servants  preach.  I  challenge  the  whole 
world  to  find  any  gospel  of  God  in  which  an  unconverted 
man  is  told  to  abide  in  unbelief.  Where  is  the  sinner  told 
to  wait  upon  God  in  the  use  of  ordinances,  that  so  he  may 
be  saved  ?  The  gospel  of  our  salvation  is  this — "  Believe  in 
the  Lord  Jtesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved."  When 
our  Lord  gave  his  commission  to  his  disciples,  he  said,  "  Go 
ye  into  all  the  world,  and  preach  the  gospel  to  every  crea- 
ture." And  what  was  that  gospel  ?  Tell  them  to  wait  in 
their  unbelief  in  the  use  of  means  and  ordinances  till  they 
«eo  some  great  thing  ?  Tell  them  to  be  diligent  in  prayer, 
and  read  the  Word  of  God,  until  they  feel  better  ?  Not  an 
atom  of  it.  Thus  saith  the  Lord,  "  he  that  believeth  and  is 
baptized  shall  be  saved  ;  but  he  that  believeth  not  shall  be 
damned."    l^his  was  the  gospel,  and  the  only  gospel  whiob 


230  JESUS  AT  6ETHESDA;   0B» 

Jesus  Christ  ever  bade  his  ministers  preach ;  and  they  whc 
say,  wait  for  feelings  !  wait  for  impressions !  wait  for  won- 
ders !  they  preach  another  gospel  which  is  not  another ;  but 
there  be  some  that  trouble  you.  The  lifting  up  of  Christ 
on  the  cross  is  the  saving  work  of  the  gospel  ministry,  and 
in  the  cross  of  Jesus  lies  the  hope  of  men.  "Look  unto  me 
and  be  ye  saved,  all  the  ends  of  the  earth,"  is  God's  gospel : 
"Wait  at  the  pool,"  is  man's  gospel,  and  has  destroyed  its 
thousands.  o 

This  ungospel-like  gospel  of  waiting  is  immensely  popitr 
lar.  I  should  not  wonder  if  well  nigh  half  of  you  are  satis- 
fied with  it.  O  my  hearers,  you  do  not  refuse  to  fill  the 
seats  in  our  places  of  worship ;  you  are  seldom  absent  when 
the  doors  are  opened,  but  there  you  sit  in  confirmed  unbe- 
lief, waiting  for  windows  to  be  made  in  heaven,  but  neglect- 
ing the  gospel  of  your  salvation.  The  great  command  of 
God,  "  Believe  and  live,"  has  no  response,  from  you  but  a 
deaf  ear,  and  a  stony  heart,  while  you  quiet  your  consciences 
with  outward  religious  observances.  If  God  had  said  "  Sit 
in  those  seats  and  wait,"  I  would  be  .bold  to  urge  it  upon 
you  with  tears  ;  but  God  has  not  said  so ;  he  has  said, 
"  Let  the  wicked  forsake  his  way,  and  the  unrighteous  man 
his  thoughts ;  and  let  him  return  unto  the  Lord,  and  he  will 
have  mercy  upon  him."  He  has  not  said  "  Wait,*'  but  he 
has  said,  "  Seek  ye  the  Lord  while  he  may  be  found,  call 
ye  upon  him  while  he  is  near."  "  To-day  if  ye  will  heai 
his  voice,  harden  not  your  hearts."  I  find  Jes«is  saying 
nothing  to  sinners  about  waiting,  but  very  much  about 
coming.  "  Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  labor  and  are  heavy- 
laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest."  "  If  any  man  thinst,  let 
him  come  unto  me  and  drink."  "The  Spirit  and  the  brid( 
say.  Come.  And  let  him  that  heareth  say,  Come.  And  let 
him  that  is  athii*st  come.  And  whosoever  will,  let  him  take 
the  water  of  life  freely." 

Why  ic  this  way  so  very  popular?  It  is  because  it  ad- 
ministers laudanum  to  the  conscience.    When  the  ministei 


WAITING  CHAl^GED  FOR  BELIEVINa.  231 

preaches  with  power,  and  the  hearer's  heart  is  touched,  the 
devil  says,  "  Wait  for  a  more  convenient  season."  Thus  the 
arch  enemy  pours  this  deadly  drug  into  the  soul,  and  the 
sinner,  instead  of  trusting  in  Jesus  on  the  spot,  or  on  bended 
knee  with  tearful  eye,  crying  for  mercy,  flatters  himself  be- 
cause he  is  in  the  use  of  the  means :  which  use  of  means  is 
well  enough  as  far  as  it  goes,  but  which  is  bad  as  bad  can 
be  when  it  comes  into  the  place  of  Christ  crucified,  A 
child  ought  to  hear  its  parent's  command,  but  what  if  the 
child  puts  hearing  into  the  place  of  obeying  ?  God  forbid 
that  I  should  glory  in  your  listening  to  the  gospel,  if  you 
are  hearers  only — my  glory  is  in  the  cross;  and  unless  you 
look  to  the  cross,  it  were  better  for  you  that  you  had  never 
been  bom. 

I  ask  the  candid  attention  of  every  one  who  has  thus 
been  waiting,  while  I  mention  one  or  two  points.  My  dear 
friend,  is  not  this  waiting  a  very  hopeless  business  after  all  ? 
Out  of  those  who  waited  at  Bethesda,  how  very  few  were 
ever  healed !  He  who  stepped  ^ovm  first  into  the  pool  was 
cured,  but  all  the  rest  came  up  from  the  pool  just  as  they 
went  in.  Ah  !  my  hearers,  I  tremble  for  some  of  you — you 
chapel-goers  and  church-goers,  who  have  for  years  been 
waiting,  how  few  of  you  get  saved!  Thousands  of  you 
die  in  your  sins,  waiting  in  wicked  unbelief.  A  few  are 
snatched  like  brands  from  the  burning,  but  the  most  of  those 
who  are  hardened  waiters,  wait,  and  wait,  till  they  die  in 
their  sins.  I  solemnly  warn  you  that,  pleasing  to  the  flesh 
as  waiting  m  unbelief  may  be,  it  is  not  one  which  any  rea- 
sonable man  would  long  persevere  in.  For,  my  friend,  are 
not  you  in  your  own  person  an  instance  of  its  hopelessness  ? 
Tou  have  been  waiting  for  years ;  you  can  scarcely  remem- 
ber when  you  first  went  to  a  place  of  worship  ;  your  moth- 
er carried  you  thither  in  her  arms,  and  you  have  been  nur- 
tured under  the  shadow  of  the  sanctuary,  like  the  swallows 
that  build  their  nests  under  God's  altars,  and  what  has  your 
anbelieving  waiting  done  for  you?    Has  it  made  you  a 


232  JESUS  AT  BETHESDA;    OB, 

Christian  ?  No,  you  are  still  without  God,  without  Christy 
without  hope.  I  shall  put  it  to  you  in  God's  name,  what 
right  have  you  to  expect  that  if  you  wait  another  thirty 
years,  you  will  be  at  all  different  from  what  you  are  now  ? 
Are  not  the  probabilities  most  strong  that  at  sixty  you  will 
be  as  graceless  as  you  are  at  thirty  ?  For,  let  me  say  it, 
and  I  dare  say  it  without  egotism,  some  of  you  have  listen- 
ed to  the  gospel  preached  to  you  in  no  mincing  manner. 
My  dear  hearers,  I  have  been  as  plain  with  you  as  I  know 
how  to  be ;  I  have  never  shunned  to  declare  the  whole  coun- 
sel of  God,  nor  even  to  pick  out  an  individual  case  and  deal 
with  it  closely.  Short  of  actually  mentioning  people's 
names,  I  have  hardly  stopped,  but  I  have  sought  to  com- 
mend the  gospel  to  the  conscience  of  every  man  as  in  the 
sight  of  God.  Remember  the  warnings  you  had  in  Ex- 
eter Hall — some  of  you  recollect  the  breakings  down  you 
felt  in  the  Surrey  Gardens  ;  remember  the  invitations  which 
have  already  come  to  you  in  this  very  Hall ;  and  if  all  these 
have  failed,  what  more  is  to  be  done  in  the  way  of  hearing 
and  waiting  ?  Many  of  you  have  listened  to  other  preach- 
ers, equally  earnest,  equally  tender,  perhaps  mure  so  :  now, 
if  all  these  have  had  no  effect  upon  you,  if  waiting  at  the  pool 
has  done  nothing  for  you,  is  it  not  a  forlorn  and  hopeless 
mode  of  procedure  ?  Is  it  not  time  that  something  better 
were  tried  than  merely  waiting  for  the  troubling  of  the  wa- 
ter ?  Is  it  not  time  that  you  remembered  that  Jesus  Christ 
is  ready  to  save  you  now,  and  that  if  you  now  trust  in  him, 
you  shall  this  day  have  everlasting  life  ? 

There  lies  our  poor  friend,  still  waiting  at  the  water's 
edge.  I  do  not  blame  hhn  for  waiting,  for  Jesus  had  not 
been  there  before,  and  it  was  right  for  him  to  seize  even  the 
niost  slender  chance  of  a  cure  ;  but  it  was  sad  that  Jesus 
should  have  been  so  slighted  :  there  he  went,  threading  his 
way  among  the  blind,  and  the  halt,  and  the  lame,  and  look- 
ing benignly  upon  them  all,  but  none  looking  up  to  hinou 
Now,  in  other  places,  soon  as  Jesus  made  his  appearance 


WAITING   CHANGED  FOR  BELIBVINa.  233 

they  brought  the  sick  in  their  beds  and  laid  them  at  his 
feet,  and  as  he  went  along  he  healed  them  all,  scattering 
mercies  with  both  his  hands.  A  blindness  had  come  over 
these  people  at  the  pool  ;  there  they  were,  and  there  was 
Christ,  who  could  heal  them,  but  not  a  single  one  of  them 
Bought  him.  Their  eyes  were  fixed  on  the  water,  expecting 
it  to  be  troubled ;  they  were  so  taken  up  with  their  own 
chosen  way  that  the  true  way  was  neglected.  No  mercies 
were  distributed,  for  none  were  sought.  Ah  !  my  friends, 
my  sorrowful  question  is,  shall  it  be  so  this  morning  f  The 
living  Christ  is  still  among  us  in  the  energy  of  his  eternal 
Spirit.  Will  you  be  looking  to  your  good  works  ?  Will 
you  be  trusting  to  your  church-goings  and  your  chapel-go- 
ings ?  Will  you  rely  upon  expected  emotions,  impressions, 
and  fits  of  terror,  and  let  Christ,  who  is  able  to  save  to  the 
uttermost,  have  no  glimpse  of  faith  from  any  eye,  no  gray- 
er of  desire  from  any  heart  ?  K  it  shall  be  so,  it  is  heart- 
breaking to  think  of  it ;  men,  with  an  Almighty  Physician 
in  their  house,  dying  while  they  are  amused  with  a  hopeless 
quackery  of  their  own  inventing.  O  poor  souls,  shall 
Bethesda  be  repeated  here  this  morning,  and  Jesus  Christ, 
the  present  Saviour,  be  again  neglected  ?  If  a  king  should 
give  to  one  of  his  subjects  a  ring,  and  say  to  him,  "When 
you  are  in  distress  or  disgrace,  simply  send  me  that  ring 
and  I  will  do  all  for  you  that  is  needful,"  if  that  man  should 
wilfully  refuse  to  send  it,  but  purchase  presents,  or  go  about 
to  do  some  singular  feats  of  valor  in  order  to  win  his  mon- 
arch's favor,  you  would  say,  "  What  a  fool  he  is  ;  here  is  a 
simple  way,  but  he  will  not  avail  himself  of  it ;  he  wastes  his 
wits  in  inventing  new  devices,  and  toils  away  his  life  in  fol- 
lowing out  plans  that  must  end  in  disappointment."  Is  not 
this  the  oase  with  all  those  who  refuse  to  trust  Christ? 
The  Lord  has  assured  them  that  if  they  trust  Jesus,  they 
shall  be  saved  ;  but  they  go  about  after  ten  thousand  imag- 
inings, and  let  their  God,  their  Saviour,  go. 

Meanwhile  the  sick  man,  so  often  disappointed,  w^ 


234  JESUS  AT  BETHESDA;   OR, 

« 

growing  into  deep  despair.  Moreover  he  was  becoming  oW; 
for  tliirty-eight  years  is  a  long  time  out  of  a  man's  life.  He 
felt  that  he  should  soon  die.  The  brittle  thread  was  nearly 
snapped,  and  so  as  the  days  and  nights  wearily  wore  on, 
though  he  waited,  it  became  heavy  work  to  wait.  My 
friend,  is  not  this  your  case  ?  Life  is  wearing  away  with 
you.  Are  there  not  gray  hairs  here  and  there  ?  You  have 
waited  all  this  while  in  vain,  and  I  warn  you  that  you  have 
sinfully  waited.  You  have  seen  others  saved.  Your  child 
is  saved,  your  wife  is  converted,  but  you  are  not ;  and  you 
are  waiting,  and  will  wait, I  fear,  till  to  the  tune  of  "  Earth 
to  earth,  dust  to  dust,  ashes  to  ashes,"  the  mould  shall  rat- 
tle on  your  coffin-lid,  and  your  soul  shall  be  in  hell.  Do 
not,  I  pray  you,  play  with  time  any  longer.  Say  not 
"  There  is  time  enough  ; "  for  the  wise  man  knows  thajt 
time  enough  is  little  enough.  Be  not  like  the  foolish  drunk- 
ard who,  staggering  home  one  night,  saw  his  candle  lit  for 
him.  "  Two  candles  !  "  said  he,  for  his  drunkenness  made 
him  see  double,  "  I  will  blow  out  one,"  and  as  he  blew  it 
out,  in  a  moment  he  was  in  the  dark.  Many  a  man  sees 
double  through  the  drunkenness  of  sin — he  thinks  that  he 
has  one  life  to  sow  his  wild  oats  in,  and  then  the  last  part 
of  life  in  which  to  turn  to  God ;  so,  like  a  fool,  he  blows  out 
the  only  candle  that  he  has,  and  in  the  dark  he  will  have  to 
lie  down  forever.  Haste  thee,  traveller,  thou  hast  but  one 
Bun,  and  when  that  sets,  thou  wilt  never  reach  thy  home. 
God  help  thee  to  make  haste  now  ! 

II.  Let  us  look  at  the  physician  himsel£ 

As  we  have  already  seen,  our  Lord  on  this  occasion  walked, 
forgotten  and  neglected,  through  that  throng  of  impotent 
folk,  no  one  crying,  "  Thou  Son  of  David,  have  mercy  upon 
me ! "  no  struggling  woman  seeking  to  touch  the  hem  of  his 
garment,  that  she  might  be  made  whole  !  All  were  desir- 
ous of  being  healed,  but,  either  no  one  knew  or  no  one  trust- 
ed him.      What  a  strange,  soul-sickening  sight  it  was,  for 


WAirma  changed  for  believikq.         235 

Jesus  was  quite  able  and  willing  to  heal,  and  to  do  it  all 
without  fee  or  reward,  and  yet  none  sought  to  him.  Is  this 
scene  to  be  repeated  this  morning  ?  Jesus  Christ  is  able  to  save 
you,  my  hearers.  There  is  no  heart  so  hard  that  he,cannoi 
soften  it ;  there  is  no  man  among  you  so  lost  that  Jesus  cannot 
save  him.  Blessed  be  my  dear  Master,  no  case  ever  did  de- 
feat him ;  his  mighty  power  reaches  beyond  the  uttermost 
of  all  the  depths  of  human  sin  and  folly.  If  there  be  a  har- 
lot here,  Christ  can  cleanse  her.  If  there  be  a  drunkard  or 
a  thief  here,  the  blood  of  Jesus  can  make  him  white  as  snow. 
If  you  have  any  desire  towards  him,  you  have  not  gone  be- 
yond the  reach  of  his  pierced  hand.  If  you  are  not  saved, 
it  is  certainly  not  for  want  of  power  in  the  Saviour.  More- 
over, your  poverty  is  no  hindrance,  for  my  Master  asks 
nothing  from  you — the  poorer  the  wretch,  the  more  welcome 
to  Christ.  My  Master  is  no  covetous  priest,  who  demands 
pay  for  what  he  does — ^he  forgives  us  freely ;  he  wants  none 
of  your  merits,  nothing  whatever  from  you ;  come  as  you 
are  to  him,  for  he  is  willing  to  receive  you  as  you  are.  But 
here  is  my  sorrow  and  complaint,  that  this  blessed  Lord 
Jesus^  though  present  to  heal^  receives  no  attention  from  the 
most  of  men.  They  are  looking  another  way,  and  have 
no  eyes  for  him.  Yet  Jesus  was  not  angry.  I  do  not  find 
that  he  upbraided  one  of  those  who  lay  in  the  porches,  or 
that  he  even  thought  a  hard  thought  of  them  ;  but  I  am 
Bure  that  he  pitied  them,  and  said  in  his  heart,  "  Alas  !  poor 
louls,  that  they  should  not  know  when  mercy  is  so  near ! " 
My  Master  is  not  wrathful  with  you  who  forget  him  and 
neglect  him,  but  he  pities  you  from  his  heart.  I  am  but  his 
poor  8ei*vant,  but  1  pity,  from  my  inmost  heart,  those  of  you 
who  live  without  Christ.  I  could  fain  weep  for  you  who 
are  trj'ing  other  ways  of  salvation,  for  they  will  all  end  in 
disappointment,  and  if  continued  in,  will  prove  to  bo  your 
eternal  destruction. 

Observe  very  carefully  what  the  Saviour  did.     Looking 
ftrouud  amongst  the  whole  company,  he  made  an  de^ition* 


236  JBSUS  AT  BETHESDA ;  Olt» 

He  bad  a  right  to  make  what  choice  he  pleased,  and  he  ex- 
ercised that  sovereign  prerogative.  The  Lord  is  not  bound 
to  give  his  mercy  to  every  one,  or  to  any  one.  He  has  free- 
ly proclaimed  it  to  you  all;  but  as  you  reject  it,  he  has  now, 
a  double  right  to  bless  his  chosen  ones  by  making  them  will- 
ing in  the  day  of  his  power.  The  Saviour  selected  that  man 
out  of  the  great  multitude,  we  know  not  why,  but  certainly 
for  a  reason  founded  in  grace.  If  we  might  venture  to  give 
a  reason  for  his  choice,  it  may  be  that  he  selected  him  be- 
cause his  was  the  worst  case,  and  he  had  waited  the  longest 
of  all.  This  man's  case  was  in  everybody's  mouth.  They 
said,  "  This  man  has  been  there  eight-and-thirty  years."  Our 
Lord  acted  according  to  his  own  eternal  purpose,  doing  as 
he  pleased  with  his  own ;  he  fixed  the  eye  of  his  electing  love 
upon  that  one  man,  and,  going  up  to  him,  he  gazed  upon 
him.  He  knew  all  his  history ;  he  knew  that  he  had  been 
a  long  time  in  that  case,  and  therefore  he  pitied  him  much. 
He  thought  of  those  dreary  months  and  years  of  painful  dis- 
appointment which  the  impotent  man  had  suffered,  and  the 
tears  were  in  the  Master's  eyes  ;  he  looked  and  looked  again  at 
that  man,  and  his  bowels  yearned  towards  him.  Now,  I 
know  not  whom  Christ  intends  to  save  this  morning  by  his 
effectual  grace.  I  am  bound  to  give  the  general  call,  it  is 
all  that  I  can  do,  but  I  know  not  where  the  Lord  will  give 
the  effectual  call,  which  alone  can  make  the  word  saving. 
I  should  not  wonder  if  he  should  call  some  of  you  who  have 
been  waiting  long.  I  will  bless  his  name  if  he  does.  I 
should  not  marvel  if  electing  love  should  pitch  upon  the 
chief  of  sinners  this  day  ;  if  Jesus  should  look  on  some  of 
you  who  never  looked  on  him,  until  his  look  shall  make  you 
look,  and  his  pity  shall  make  you  have  pity  upon  yourselves, 
and  his  irresistible  grace  shall  make  you  come  to  him  that 
you  may  be  saved.  Jesus  performed  an  r,ct  of  sovereign, 
distinguishing  grace.  I  pray  you, do  no^.  kick  at  this  doc- 
trine !  If  you  do,  I  cannot  help  it,  for  it  is  true.  I  have 
preached  the  gospel  to  every  one  of  you  as  freely  as  man  can 


WAIHira  CHA.SaED  t'OR  BELIEVING.  237 

Jo  it,  and  surely  you  who  reject  it  ought  not  to  quarrel  with 
God  for  bestowing  on  others  that  which  you  do  not  care  to 
receive.  If  you  desire  his  mercy,  he  will  not  deny  it  to  you  ; 
if  you  seek  him  he  will  be  found  of  you ;  but  if  you  will  not 
seek  mercy,  rail  not  on  the  Lord  if  he  bestows  it  upon 
others. 

Jesus,  having  looked  upon  this  man  with  a  special  eye 
of  regard,  said  to  him,  "  Wilt  thou  be  made  whole  ?  "  I  have 
already  hinted  that  this  was  not  said  because  Christ  wanted 
information,  but  because  he  wished  to  arouse  the  marCs  atr 
tention.  On  account  of  its  being  the  Sabbath,  the  man  was 
not  thinking  of  being  cured,  for  to  the  Jew  it  seemed  a  most 
unlikely  thing  that  cures  should  be  wrought  on  a  Sabbath 
day.  Jesus,  therefore,  brought  his  thoughts  back  to  the 
matter  in  hand ;  for,  mark  you,  the  work  of  grace  is  a  work 
upon  a  conscious  mind,  not  upon  senseless  matter.  Though 
Puseyites  pretend  to  regenerate  unconscious  children,  by 
sprinkling  their  faces  with  water,  Jesus  never  attempted 
such  a  thing — Jesus  saves  men  who  have  the  use  of  their 
senses — and  his  salvation  is  a  work  upon  a  quickened  intel- 
lect and  awakened  affections.  Jesus  brought  back  the  wan- 
dering mind  with  the  question, "  Wilt  thou  be  made  whole  ?  " 
"  Indeed,"  the  man  might  have  said,  "  indeed,  I  desire  it 
above  all  things — I  long  for  it — ^I  pant  for  it."  Now,  my 
dear  hearer,  I  will  ask  the  same  question  of  you.  "  Wilt  thou 
be  made  whole?  Do  you  desire  to  be  saved ?  Do  you  know 
what  being  saved  is  ?  "  "  Oh,"  say  you,  "  it  is  escaping  from 
hell."  No,  no,  no  ;  that  is  the  result  of  being  saved,  but 
being  saved  is  a  different  thing.  Do  you  want  to  be  saved 
from  the  power  of  sin  ?  Do  you  desire  to  be  saved  from 
being  covetous,  worldly-minded,  bad-tempered,  unjust,  un- 
godly, domineering,  drunken,  or  profane  ?  Are  you  will- 
ing to  give  up  the  sin  that  is  dearest  to  you  ?  "  No,"  says 
one,  "  I  cannot  honestly  say  I  desire  all  that."  Then,  you  are 
not  the  man  I  am  seeking  this  morning  :  but  is  there  one  here 
who  says,  "  Yes,  I  long  to  be  rid  of  sin,  root  and  branch  :  1 


238  JESUS  AT  BETHfiSDA;   OA, 

desire,  by  God's  grace,  this  very  day  to  become  a  Christian, 
and  to  be  saved  from  sin  ?  "  Well,  then,  as  you  are  already 
in  a  stale  of  thoughtfulness,  let  us  go  a  step  further,  and 
observe  what  the  Saviour  did.  ITe  gave  the  word  of  CvWn^ 
mandy  saying,  "  Rise  !  take  up  thy  bed  and  walk,*'  Tho 
power  by  which  the  man  arose  was  not  in  himself,  but  in 
Jesus  ;  it  was  not  the  mere  sound  of  the  word  which  made 
him  rise,  but  it  was  the  divine  power  which  went  with  it.  I 
do  believe  that  Jesus  still  speaks  through  his  ministers ;  I 
trust  that  he  speaks  through  me  at  this  moment,  when  in  his 
name  I  say  to  you  who  have  been  waiting  at  the  pool,  wait 
no  longer,  but  this  moment  believe  in  Jesus  Christ !  Trust 
him  now.  I  know  that  my  word  will  not  make  you  do  it ; 
but  if  the  Holy  Ghost  works  through  the  word,  you  will  be- 
lieva  Trust  Christ  now,  poor  sinner.  Believe  that  he  is 
able  to  save  you ;  believe  it  now !  Rely  upon  him  to  save 
you  this  moment ;  repose  upon  him  now  I  If  you  are  ena- 
bled to  believe,  the  power  will  come  from  him,  not  from  you; 
and  your  salvation  will  be  effected,  not  by  the  sound  of  the 
word,  but  by  the  secret  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost  which  goes 
with  that  word. 

I  pray  you  obsers^e,  that  although  nothing  is  said  about 
faith  in  the  text,  yet  the  nian  must  have  ?iad faith.  Suppose 
you  had  been  unable  to  move  hand  or  foot  for  thirty-eight 
years,  and  some  one  said  at  your  bedside,  "Rise!"  you 
would  not  think  of  trying  to  rise,  you  would  know  it  to  be 
impossible  ;  you  must  have  faith  in  the  person  who  uttered 
the  word,  or  else  you  would  not  make  the  attempt.  I  think 
I  see  the  poor  man — there  he  is,  a  heap,  a  writhing  bundle 
of  tortured  nerves  and  powerless  muscles ;  yet  Jesus  says, 
"Rise!"  and  up  he  rises  in  a  moment  "Take  up  thy 
bod,-'  savs  the  ISIaster,  and  the  bed  is  carried.  Here  wag 
the  man's  faith.  The  man  was  a  Jew,  and  he  knew  that, 
according  to  the  Pharisees,  it  would  be  a  very  wicktd  thing 
for  him  to  roll  up  his  mattress  and  carry  it  on  the  Sabbath ; 
but  because  Jesus  told  him,  he  asked  no  questions,  but 


WAITING  CHANGED  FOR  BELIEVING.  239 

douMed  up  his  couch  and  walked.  He  did  what  he  was 
told  to  do,  because  he  believed  in  liini  who  spake.  Have 
you  such  faith  in  Jesus,  poor  sinner?  Do  you  believe  that 
Christ  can  save  you  ?  If  you  do,  then  I  say  to  you  in  his 
name,  trust  him  !  Trust  him  now  1  K  you  trust  Jesus,  you 
shall  be  saved  this  morning — saved  on  the  spot  and  savcvl 
forever. 

Observe,  beloved  friends,  that  the  cure  which  Christ 
im'ought  was  perfect.  The  man  could  carry  his  bed ;  the 
restoration  was  proved  to  a  demonstration,  the  cure  was 
manifest ;  all  could  see  it.  Moreover,  the  cure  was  imme- 
diate,  lie  was  not  told  to  take  a  lump  of  figs,  and  put  it 
on  the  sore  and  wait ;  ho  was  not  carried  home  by  his 
friends,  and  laid  up  for  a  month  or  two,  and  gradually  nursed 
into  vital  energy.  Oh,  no  !  he  was  cured  there  and  then. 
Half  our  professing  Christians  imagine  that  regeneration 
cannot  take  place  in  a  moment ;  and  therefore,  they  say  to 
poor  sinners,  "  Go  and  lie  at  Bethesda's  pool,  wait  in  the  use 
of  ordinances  ;  humble  yourself ;  seek  for  deeper  repent- 
ance." Beloved,  away  with  such  teaching!  The  cross? 
the  cross !  the  cross !  there  hangs  a  sinner's  hope  !  You 
must  not  rely  on  what  you  can  do,  nor  on  what  angels  can 
do,  nor  on  visions  and  dreams,  nor  on  feelings  and  strange 
emotions,  and  horrible  deliriums,  but  you  must  rest  in  the 
blood  of  my  Master  and  my  God,  once  slain  for  sinners. 
There  is  life  in  a  look  at  the  Crucified  One,  but  there  is  life 
nowhere  else.  I  come  to  the  same  point,  then,  upon  the 
second  head  as  upon  the  first.  Tlius  saith  the  Lord,  "  Look 
unto  me  and  be  ye  saved,  all  the  ends  of  the  earth." 

HI.  Thirdly,  we  have  to  apply  tub  instance  in  the 

TEXT  to  the  present  OCCASION. 

I  hope,  believers,  your  hearts  are  going  up  in  prayer  this 
morning.  What  a  scene  is  before  us  1  If  some  one  had 
told  us  that  this  mass  of  people  would  have  gathered  to  listen 
t)  the  gospel,  are  there  not  hundreds  who  would  have  doubt- 


240  JESUS  AT  BETHESDA ;   0% 

ed  it !  Mark  this,  we  have  had  nothing  novel  to  attract  this 
mnltitade ;  nothing  by  way  of  gorgeous  ceremony ;  there 
is  not  even  the  swell  of  the  organ  :  I  declined  its  pealing 
notes,  lest  we  should  seem  to  depend  in  the  slightest  degree 
from  a  thread  even  to  a  shoe  latchet,  upon  any  thing  but 
the  preaching  of  the  gospel.  The  preaching  of  the  cross  is 
enough  to  draw  the  people,  and  enough  to  save  the  people, 
and  if  we  take  to  any  thing  else,  we  lose  our  power  and 
shear  away  the  locks  which  make  us  strong.  The  applica- 
tion of  the  text,  this  morning,  is  just  this  ;  Whr/  should  we 
not  on  this  very  spot  have  instantaneous  cures  of  sick  souls  f 
Why  should  there  not  be  scores,  hundreds,  thousands,  who 
shall  this  morning  hear  the  gracious  word,  "  Arise,  take  up 
thy  bed  and  walk  ? "  I  believe  it  is  possible.  I  hope  it 
will  be  done.  Let  me  talk  with  you  who  doubt  this  mat- 
ter. Tou  still  think  that  you  must  wait — you  have  had  a 
sufficient  spell  of  waiting,  and  you  are  getting  tolerably 
weary,  but  still  you  stick  to  the  old  plan  ;  hopeless  as  it  is, 
you  still  catch  at  it  as  drowning  men  do  at  straws.  But  I 
want  to  show  you  that  this  is  all  wrong.  Regeneration  is  an 
instantaneous  work,  and  justification  an  instantaneous  gift. 
Man  feU  in  a  moment.  When  Eve  plucked  the  fruit,  and 
Adam  ate  it,  it  did  not  require  six  months  to  bring  them  into 
a  state  of  condemnation.  It  did  not  require  several  years  of 
continued  sin  to  cast  them  out  of  paradise.  Their  eyes  were 
opened  by  the  forbidden  fruit;  they  saw  that  they  were  na- 
ked, and  they  hid  themselves  from  God.  Surely,  surely, 
Christ  is  not  to  be  longer  about  his  work  than  the  devil  was 
about  his.  Shall  the  devil  destroy  us  in  a  moment,  and 
Jesus  be  unable  to  save  us  in  a  moment  ?  Ah  !  glory  be  to 
God,  he  has  power  to  deliver  far  more  ample  than  any 
which  Satan  uses  for  man's  destruction. 

Look  at  the  biblical  illustrations  of  what  salvation  is.  I 
will  only  mention  three.  Noah  built  an  ark  ;  that  was  the 
type  of  salvation  ;  now,  when  was  Noah  saved  ?  Christ  has 
bailt  the  ark  for  us,  we  have  nothing  to  do  with  building 


K. 


Waiting  changed  for  believing.         241 

that;  but  when  was  Noah  saved ?    Does  any  one  say,  "He 
was  safe  after  he  had  been  in  the  ark  a  month  and  had  ar- 
ranged all  the  things  and  looked  out  on  the  deluge  and  felt 
his  danger"  ?  No !  the  moment  Noah  went  through  the 
door,  and  the  Lord  shut  him  in,  Noah  was  safe.     When  he 
had  been  in  the  ark  a  second  he  was  as  secure  as  when  he 
had  been  there  a  month.     Take  the  case  of  the  passover, 
when  were  the  Jews  safe  from  the  destroying  angel  who 
went  through  the  land  of  Egypt  ?    Were  they  safe  after  the 
blood  which  was  sprinkled  on  the  door  had  been  looked 
upon  and  considered  for  a  week  or  two  ?    Oh,  no !  beloved, 
the  moment  the  blood  was  sprinkled  the  house  was  secured ; 
and  the  moment  a  sinner  believes  and  trusts  in  the  crucified 
Son  of  God  he  is  pardoned  at  once,  he  receives  salvation  in 
full  through  Christ's  blood.     One  more  instance,  the  brazen 
serpent.     When  the  brazen  serpent  was  lifted  up,  what  were 
the  wounded  to  do  ?    Were  they  told  to  wait  till  the  brazen 
serpent  was  pushed  into  their  faces,  or  until  the  venom  of  the 
serpent  showed  certain  symptoms  in  their  flesh  ?    No,  they 
were  commanded  to  look.    They  did  look.     Were  they 
healed  in  six  months'  time  ?    I  read  not  so,  but  as  soon  as 
their  eye  met  the  serpent  of  brass,  the  cure  was  wrought : 
and  as  soon  as  your  eye  meets  Christ,  poor  trembler,  you 
are  saved.     Though  yesterday  you  were  deep  in  your  cups, 
and  up  to  your  neck  in  sin,  yet  if  this  morning  you  look  to  my 
once  slain  but  now  exalted  Master,  you  shall  find  eternal  life. 
Again  take  biblical  instances.    Did  the  dying  thief  wait 
at  the  pool  of  the  ordinances  ?    You  know  how  soon  his  be- 
lieving prayer  was  heard,  and  Jesus  said,  "To-day  shall 
thou  be  with  me  in  paradise."    The  three  thousand  at  Pen- 
tecost, did  they  wait  for  some  great  thing  ?    Nay,  they  be- 
lieved, and  were  baptized.     Look  at  the  jailer  of  Philippi, 
It  was  the  dead  of  the  night,  the  prison  was  shaken,  and  the 
jailer  was  alarmed,  and  said,  "  Sirs,  what  must  I  do  to  be 
saved  ?  "    Did  Paul  say,  "  Well,  you  must  use  the  means 
and  look  for  a  blessing  upon  the  ordinances"?    No!  he 
11 


849.  JESUS  AT  BETHJiSDA;   Oft, 

iaid,  "Believe  on  the  TiOrd  Jesus  Christ,  and  them  shalt  be 
saved,  and  thy  house,"  and  that  very  night  he  baptized 
him.  Paul  did  not  take  the  time  about  it  that  some  think 
so  exceedingly  necessary.  He  believed  as  I  do,  that  there 
is  life  in  a  look  at  Jesus ;  he  bade  men  look,  and  looking 
they  lived. 

Possibly  you  will  see  this  still  more  clearly  if  I  remind 
you  that  the  work  of  salvation  is  all  done.  There  is  noth- 
ing for  a  sinner  to  do  in  order  to  be  saved,  it  is  all  done 
for  him :  You  want  washing.  The  bath  does  not  need  fill- 
ing. "There  is  a  fountain  filled  with  blood."  You  want 
clothing.  You  have  not  to  make  the  garment,  the  robe  is 
ready.  The  garment  of  Christ's  righteousness  is  woven 
from  the  top  throughout,  all  that  is  wanted  is  to  have  it  put 
on.  If  .some  work  remained  for  you  to  do  it  might  be  a 
lengthened  process,  but  all  the  doing  is  accomplished  by 
Christ.  Salvation  is  not  of  works,  but  of  grace,  and  to  ac- 
cept what  Christ  presents  you  is  not  a  work  of  time. 

Once  more,  let  me  say  to  you  that  regeneration  itself  can^ 
not  be  a  work  of  long  time^  because,  even  where  it  seems  to 
be  most  gradual,  when  looked  at  closely,  it  turns  out  in  its 
essence  to  be  the  work  of  a  moment.  There  is  a  dead  man  : 
now,  if  that  man  be  raised  from  the  dead,  there  must  be 
an  instant  in  which  he  was  dead,  and  another  instant  in 
which  he  was  alive.  The  actual  quickening  must  be  the 
work  of  a  moment.  I  grant  you,  that  at  the  first  the 
life  may  be  very  feeble,  but  there  must  be  a  time  when  it 
begins.  There  nmst  be  a  line — we  cannot  always  see  it  our- 
selves, but  God  must  see  it — there  must  be  a  line  between 
life  and  death.  A  man  cannot  be  somewhere  between  dead 
and  alive ;  he  either  is  alive  or  he  is  dead  ;  and  so  you  are 
cither  dead  in  sin  or  alive  unto  God,  and  quickening  cannot 
involve  a  long  period  of  time. 

Finally,'  my  hearers,  for  God  to  say  "jT  forgive  thee^^ 
takes  not  a  century  nor  a  year.  The  judge  pronounces  the 
sentence,  and  the  criminal  is  aquitted.    If  God  shall  say  to 


WAirma  changed  for  believing.         248 

fchee  this  morning,  "I  absolve  thee,'*  thou  art  absolved,  and 
thou  majst  go  in  peace.  I  must  bear  faithful  witness  as  to 
my  own  case.  I  never  found  mercy  by  waiting.  I  never 
obtained  a  gleam  of  hope  by  depending  upon  ordinances.  ) 
found  salvation  by  believing.  I  heard  a  simple  minister  of 
the  gospel  say,  *'  Look  and  live  !  Look  to  Jesus  Hf 
bleeds  in  the  garden,  he  dies  on  the  tree !  Trust  him  ! 
Trust  to  what  he  suffered  instead  of  you  ;  and  if  you  trust 
him,  you  shall  be  saved."  The  Lord  knows  I  had  heard 
that  gospel  many  times  before,  but  I  had  not  obeyed  it.  It 
came,  however,  with  power  to  my  soul,  and  I  did  look,  and 
tho  moment  I  looked  to  Christ,  I  lost  my  burden.  "  Buti" 
says  one,  "  how  do  you  know  ?  "  Did  you  ever  carry  a  bur- 
den yourself?  "  Oh,  yes,"  say  you.  "Did  you  know  when 
it  was  off?  How  did  you  know?"  "  Oh,"  you  say,  "I 
felt  so  different.  I  knew  when  my  burden  was  on,  and,  con- 
sequently, I  knew  when  it  was  off."  It  was  so  in  my  case. 
I  only  wish  some  of  you  felt  the  burden  of  sin  as  I  felt  it, 
when  I  was  waiting  at  the  pool  of  Bethesda.  I  wonder  that 
such  waiting  had  not  landed  me  in  hell.  But,  when  I 
heard  the  word,  "  Look ! "  I  looked,  and  my  burden  was 
gone,  I  wondered  where  it  was  gone  ;  I  have  never  seen  it 
since,  and  I  never  shall  see  it  again.  It  went  into  the  Mas- 
ter's tomb,  and  it  lies  forever  buried  there.  God  has  said 
it,  "  I  have  blotted  out  like  a  cloud  thine  iniquities,  and  like 
a  thick  cloud  thy  sins."  Oh,  come,  ye  needy,  come  to  my 
Master  !  Ho,  ye  that  have  been  disappointed  with  rites  and 
ceremonies,  and  feelings,  and  impressions,  and  all  the  hopes 
of  the  flesh,  come  at  my  Master's  command,  and  look  up  to 
him  I  He  is  not  here  in  the  flesh,  for  he  has  risen  ;  but  he 
has  risen  to  plead  for  sinners,  and  "  he  is  able  to  save  them 
to  the  uttermost  that  come  unto  God  by  him,  seeing  he  ever 
liveth  to  make  intercession  for  them."  Oh,  if  I  could  know 
how  to  preach  the  gospel  so  that  you  would  feel  it,  I  would 
go  to  any  school  to  learn !  The  Lord  knows  I  would  willingly 
consent  to  lose  these  eyes,  to  get  greater  power  in  my  mini#- 


244  JESUS  AT   BETHESDA,  BTa 

try ;  ay,  and  to  lose  arms,  legs,  and  all  my  members.  I  would 
be  willing  to  die  if  I  could  but  be  honored  by  tne  Holy  Spir- 
it to  win  this  mass  of  souls  to  God.  I  implore  you,  my 
brethren,  you  who  have  power  in  prayer,  pray  the  Lord  to 
bring  sinners  to  Christ.  Let  me  say,  solemnly,  to  you  who 
ha\  e  heard  the  word  this  day,  I  have  told  you  the  plan  of 
salvation  plainly  ;  if  you  do  not  accept  it,  I  am  clear  of 
your  blood,  I  shake  my  skirts  of  the  blood  of  your  souls.  If 
you  come  not  to  my  Lord  and  Master,  I  must  bear  swift 
witness  against  you  at  the  day  of  judgment.  I  have  told 
you  the  way — I  cannot  tell  you  it  more  simply — I  beseech 
you  to  follow  it !  I  entreat  you  to  look  to  Jesus  !  But  if 
you  refuse  it,  at  any  rate,  when  you  shall  rise  from  the 
dead,  and  stand  before  the  great  white  throne,  do  me  the 
justice  to  say  that  I  did  entreat  and  persuade  you  to  escape, 
I  did  impress  upon  you  to  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come.  The 
Lord  save  each  one  of  you,  and  his  shall  be  the  praise  ever 
more.     Amen. 


^:| 


THE  UNSEABCHABLE  RICHES  OF  CHRIST.        245 


SERMON 


THE  UNSEARCHABLE  RICHES  OF  CHRIST. 

mrro  mx,  who  am  less  than  the  ubast  of  all  saints,  is  this  obacv  onmr, 

THAT   I  PBEACa  CPBEAH  AMONG  THB  OSNTILBS  THB    UNBEABCHABLB  BI0HE8  OV 

Chbs  t.  '  *  — Ephesians  iii.  8. 

Tub  apostle  Paul  felt  it  to  be  a  great  privilege  to  be  al- 
lowed to  preach  the  gospel.  He  did  not  look  upon  his  calling 
as  a  drudgery,  or  a  servitude,  but  he  entered  upon  it  with 
intense  delight.     All  God's  truly  sent  servants  have  expe- 
rienced much  delight  in  the  declaration  of  the  gospel  of 
Jesus ;  and  it  is  natural  that  they  should,  for  their  message 
is  one  of  mercy  and  love.     If  a  herald  were  sent  to  a  be- 
sieged city  with  the  tidings  that  no  terms  of  capitulation 
would  be  offered,  but  that  every  rebel  without  exception 
should  be  put  to  death,  methinks  he  would  go  with  linger- 
ing footsteps,  halting  by  the  way  to  let  out  his  heavy  heart 
in  sobs  and  groans  ;  but  if  instead  thereof,  he  were  commis- 
sioned to  go  to  the  gates  with  the  white  flag  to  proclaim  a 
free  pardon,  a  general  act  of  amnesty  and  oblivion,  surely 
he  would  run  as  though  he  had  wings  to  his  heels,  with  a 
joyful  alacrity,  to  tell  to  his  fellow-citizens  the  good  pleas- 
ure of  their  merciful  king.     Heralds  of  salvation,  ye  carry 
the  most  joyful  of  all  messages  to  the  sons  of  men !     When 
the  angels  were  commissioned  for  once  to  become  preachers 
of  the  gos])el,  and  it  was  but  for  once,  they  made  the  welkin 
ring  at  midnight  with  their  choral  songs,  "Glory  to  God  in 
the  highest,  and  on  earth  peace,  good  will  toward  men." 
They  did  not  moan  out  a  dolorous  dirge  as  of  those  proclaim- 
ing death,  but  the  glad  tidings  of  great  joy  were  set  to 


246        THE  UNSEARCHABLE  RICHES  OF  CHRIST. 

music,  and  announced  with  holy  mirth  and  celestial  song. 
"  Peace  on  earth  ;  glory  to  God  in  the  highest "  is  the  joy- 
note  of  the  gospel — and  in  such  a  key  should  it  ever  be  pro- 
claimed. We  find  the  most  eminent  of  God's  servants  fre- 
quently magnifying  their  office  as  preachers  of  the  gospel. 
Wh.. field  was  wont  to  call  his  pulpit  his  throne  ;  and  when 
ho  stood  upon  some  rising  knoll  to  preach  to  the  thousands 
gathered  in  the  open  air,  he  was  more  happy  than  if  he  had 
assumed  the  imperial  purple,  for  he  ruled  the  hearts  of  men 
more  gloriously  than  doth  a  king.  When  Dr.  Carey  ''was 
labonng  in  India,  and  his  son  Felix  had  accepted  the  office 
of  ambassador  to  the  king  of  Burmah,  Carey  said,  "  Felix 
has  drivelled  into  an  ambassador  " — as  though  he  looked 
upon  the  highest  earthly  office  as  an  utter  degradation  if 
for  it  the  minister  of  the  gospel  forsook  his  lofty  vocation, 
Paul  blesses  God  that  this  great  grace  was  given  to  him, 
that  he  might  preach  among  the  Gentiles  the  unsearchable 
riches  of  Christ ;  he  looked  upon  it  not  as  toil,  but  as  a 
grace.  Aspire  to  this  office,  young  men  whose  souls  are 
full  of  love  to  Jesus.  Fired  with  sacred  enthusiasm,  covet 
earnestly  the  best  gifts,  and  out  of  love  to  Jesus  try  whether 
you  cannot  in  your  measure  tell  to  your  fellow-men  the  story 
of  the  cross.  Men  of  zeal  and  ability,  if  you  love  Jesus, 
make  the  ministry  your  aim ;  train  your  minds  to  it ;  exer- 
cise your  soul  towards  it ;  and  may  God  the  Holy  Spirit  call 
you  to  it,  that  you  also  may  preach  the  Word  of  reconciliation 
to  the  dying  thousands.  The  laborers  still  are  few:  may 
the  Lord  of  the  harvest  thrust  you  into  his  work. 

But  while  Paul  was  thus  thankful  for  his  office,  his  suc- 
cess in  it  greatly  humbled  him.  The  fuller  a  vessel  becomes 
the  deeper  it  sinks  in  the  water.  A  plenitude  of  grace  is  a 
cure  for  pride.  Those  who  are  empty,  and  those  especially 
who  have  little  or  nothing  to  do,  may  indulge  a  fond  con- 
ceit of  their  abilities,  because  they  are  untried ;  but  those 
who  are  called  to  the  stern  work  of  ministering  among  the 
Bons  of  men,  will  often  mourn  their  weakness,  and  in  the 


THB  IJNSEABCHABLE  RICHES  OF  CHBI8T.        247 

i^nse  of  that  weakness  and  unworthiness,  they  will  go  be- 
fore God  and  confess  that  they  are  less  than  the  l^ast  of  all 
saints.  I  prescribe  to  any  of  you  who  seek  humility,  try 
hard  work  ;  if  you  would  know  your  nothingness,  attempt 
some  great  thing  for  Jesus.  If  you  would  feel  how  utterly 
powerless  you  are  apart  from  the  living  God,  attempt  espe* 
cially  tne  great  work  of  proclaiming  the  unsearchable  riches 
of  CJrrist.  You  wiL  come  back  from  the  proclamation  thank- 
fa.  that  you  were  permitted  to  attempt  it,  but  crying, 
"  Who  hath  believed  our  report  ?  and  to  whom  is  the  arm 
of  tiie  Lord  revealed  ?  "  and  you  will  know,  as  you  never 
knew  before,  what  a  weak  unworthy  thing  you  are. 

Although  our  apostle  thus  knew  and  confessed  his  weak- 
ness, there  is  one  thing  which  never  troubled  him  :  he  was 
never  perplexed  as  to  the  subject  of  his  ministiy.  I  do  not 
find  the  apostle  in  all  his  writings  proposing  to  himself  the 
question,  "  What  shall  I  preach  ?  "  No,  my  brethren,  he 
had  been  in  the  college  of  Christ,  and  had  thoroughly 
learned  his  one  subject,  so  that  preferring  it  beyond  all  else, 
he  said,  with  solemn  decision,  "  I  determined  not  to  know 
any  thing  among  you,  save  Jesus  Christ  and  him  crucified." 
From  his  first  sermon  to  his  last,  when  he  laid  down  his 
neck  upon  the  block  to  seal  his  testimony  with  his  blood, 
Paul  preached  Christ,  and  nothing  but  Christ.  He  lifted 
up  the  cross,  and  extolled  the  Son  of  God  who  bled  there- 
on. His  one  and  only  calling  here  below  was  to  cry,  "  Be- 
hold the  Lamb !  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God  which  taketh 
away  the  sin  of  the  world." 

I  pause  to  ask,  on  my  own  account,  the  prayers  of  God's 
people  yet  again,  that  the  Holy  Spirit  may  be  my  helper 
this  morning.  Oh  deny  not  my  earnest  request !  I  call  the 
attention  of  you  all  to  this  great  master  subject,  which  en- 
grossed all  the  powers  and  passions  of  such  a  one  as  P^iul, 
and  I  shall  beg  you  to  notice  first,  a  glorious  person  men- 
Honed — the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;  secondly,  unsearchable  riches 
$poken  of  f  and  thirdly,  which  shall  make  our  practical  con 


g^        THB  UKSBARCHABLE  BICHES  OF  GHBIBT. 

elusion — a  royal  intention  impliedy  the  intention  which  Je« 
BUS  had  in  his  heart  when  he  bade  his  servants  preach  his  un- 
searchable riches. 

L  First  then,  may  the  Spint  of  God  strengthen  us  in  our 
weakness  while  we  try  to  speak  upon  this  glorious  pbbsou, 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  was  the  first  promise  of  God 
to  the  sons  of  men  after  the  fall.  When  our  first  pa- 
rents had  been  banished  from  the  garden,  all  was  dark  be- 
fore them.  There  was  not  a  star  to  gild  the  cheerless  mid- 
night of  their  guilty  and  despairing  souls  until  their  God  ap- 
peared to  them,  and  said  in  mercy,  "  The  seed  of  the  woman 
shall  bruise  the  serpent's  head."  That  was  the  first  star 
which  God  set  in  the  sky  of  man's  hope.  Years  rolled  after 
years,  and  the  faithful  looked  up  to  it  with  comfort ;  that 
one  promise  stayed  the  soul  of  many  a  faithful  one,  so  that 
he  died  in  hope,  not  having  received  the  promise,  but  hav- 
ing seen  it  afar  off,  and  having  rejoiced  in  its  beams. 
Whole  centuries  rolled  away,  but  the  seed  of  the  woman  did 
not  come.  Messiah,  the  great  bruiser  of  the  serpent's  head, 
did  not  appear.  Why  tarried  he  ?  The  world  was  foul 
with  sin  and  full  of  woe.  Where  was  the  Shi  I  oh  who  should 
bring  it  peace  ?  Graves  were  digged  by  millions,  hell  was 
filled  with  lost  spirits,  but  where  was  the  promised  One, 
mighty  to  save  ?  He  was  waiting  till  the  fulness  of  time 
should  come ;  he  had  not  forgotten,  for  he  had  God's  will  in 
his  inmost  bowels ;  his  desire  to  save  souls  was  consumii.g 
his  heart ;  he  was  but  waiting  until  the  word  should  be 
given.  And  when  it  was  given,  lo !  he  came,  delighting  to 
do  the  Father's  will.  Seek  ye  him  !  Behold,  in  Bethle- 
hem's manger  Emmanuel  is  bom,  God  is  with  us.  Before 
your  eyes  he  lies  who  was  both  the  Son  of  Mary,  and  the 
Son  of  the  blessed,  an  infant,  and  yet  infinite,  of  a  span  long, 
and  yet  filling  all  eternity,  wrapped  in  swaddling  banded 
and  yet  too  great  for  space  to  hold  him.     Thirty  and  more 


THE  UNSEARCHABLE  RICHES  OF  CHRIST.        249 

years  he  lived  on  earth  :  the  latter  part  of  his  life  was  spent 
in  a  ministry  full  of  suffering  to  himself,  but  fraught  with 
good  to  others.      "  We  beheld  his  glory,  the  glory  as  of  the 
only  begotten  of  the  Father,  full  of  grace  and  truth."  Never 
man  spake  like  that  man.      He  was  a  man  on  fire  with  love ; 
a  man  without  human  imperfections,  but  with  all  human 
sympathies ;  a  man  without  the  sins  of  manhood,  but  with 
sometling  more  than  the  sorrows  of  common  manhood  piled 
upon  him.     There  was  never  such  a  man  as  he,  so  great,  so 
glorious  in  his  life,  and  yet  he  is  the  pattern  and  type  of  man* 
hood.      He  reached  his  greatest  when  he  stooped  the  low- 
est.     He  was  seized  by  his  enemies  one  night  when  wrest- 
ling in  prayer,  betrayed  by  the  man  who  had  eaten  bread 
with  him ;  he  was  dragged  before  tribunal  after  tribunal, 
through  that  long  and  sorrowful  night,  and  wrongfully  ac- 
cused of  blasphemy  and  sedition.      They  scourged  him ; 
though  none  of  his  works  deserved  a  blow,  yet  the  plough- 
ers  made  deep  furrows  on  his  back.      They  mocked  him ; 
though  he  merited  the  homage  of  air  intelligent  beings,  yet 
they  spat  in  his  face,  and  smote  him  with  their  mailed  fists, 
and  said,  "  Prophesy,  Who  is  he  that  smote  thee  ?  "  He  was 
made  lower  than  a  slave ;  even  the  abjects  opened  their 
mouths  with  laughter  at  him,  and  the  slaves  scoffed  at  him. 
To  end  the  scene,  they  took  him  through  the  streets  of  the 
Jerusalem  over  which  he  had  wept ;  they  hounded  him  along 
the  Via  Dolorosa,  out  through  the  gate,  to  the  mount  of 
doom.      Methinks  I  see  him,  as  with  eyes  all  red  with  weep- 
ing, he  turns  to  the  matrons  of  Salem,  and  cries,  "  Daugh- 
ters of  Jerusalem,  weep  not  for  me,  but  for  yourselves  and 
for  your  children."      Can  you  see  him  bearing  that  heavy 
cross,  ready  to  faint  beneath  the  burden  ?    Can  you  endure 
to  see  him,  when,  having  reached  the  little  mound  outside 
the  city,  they  hurl  him  on  his  back,  and  drive  the  cruel  iroa 
thi  ough  his  hands  and  feet  ?    Can  you  bear  to  see  the  spec- 
tacle of  blood  and  anguish  as  they  lift  him  up  between 
heaven  and  earth,  made  a  sacrifice  for  the  sin  of  his  pcopl«^f 


250        THE  UNSEARCHABLE  RICHES  OP  CHRIST. 

My  words  shall  be  few,  for  the  vision  is  too  sad  for  language 
to  depict.  He  bleeds,  ho  thirsts,  he  groans,  he  cries — ^at 
last  he  dies — a  death  whose  unknown  griefs  are  not  to  be 
imagined,  and  were  they  known  would  be  beyond  expres- 
sion by  human  tongue. 

Now,  it  was  the  history  of  the  crucifixion  which  Paul  do- 
lighted  to  preach — Christ  crucified  was  his  theme — this  old, 
old  story,  which  ye  have  heard  from  your  childhood,  the 
story  of  the  Son  of  God,  who  loved  us  and  gave  himself  for 
us.  Ye  all  know  that  our  Lord,  after  he  had  been  taken 
down  from  the  cross  and  laid  in  the  tomb,  lingered  there 
but  a  few  short  hours,  and  then  on  the  third  day  rose  again 
from  the  dead,  the  same,  yet  not  the  same — a  man,  but  no 
more  despised  and  rejected.  He  communed  with  his  ser- 
vants in  a  familiar  and  yet  glorious  manner  for  forty  days, 
and  cheered  and  comforted  their  hearts,  and  then,  from  the 
top  of  Olivet,  in  the  sight  of  the  company,  he  ascended  to 
his  Father's  throne.  Follow  him  with  your  hearts,  if  ye 
cannot  with  your  eyes.  Behold  him  as  the  angels  meet 
him,  and 

"  Bring  his  chariot  from  on  high. 
To  bear  bim  to  his  throne ; 
Clap  tlieir  triumphant  hands,  and  cry, 
*  The  glorious  work  is  done.' " 

There  he  sits — ^faith  sees  him  this  very  day — at  the  right 
hand  of  God,  even  the  Father,  pleading  with  authority  for 
his  people  ;  ruling  heaven,  and  earth,  and  hell,  for  the  keys 
thereof  swing  at  his  girdle ;  waiting  till,  on  the  flying  cloud, 
he  shall  descend  to  judge  the  quick  and  dead,  and  distribute 
the  vengeance  or  the  reward.  It  was  this  glorious  person  of 
whom  Paul  delighted  to  speak.  He  preached  the  doctrines 
of  the  gospel,  but  he  did  not  preach  them  apart  from  the  per- 
Bon  of  Christ.  Do  not  many  preachers  make  a  great  mis- 
t«ie  by  preaching  doctrine  instead  of  preaching  the  Saviour? 
Certainly  the  doctrines  are  to  be  preached,  but  they  ought^ 
to  be  looked  upon  as  the  robes  and  vettmentf  of  the  mau 


THE  JNSEARCHABLE  RICHES  OF  CHRIST.        251 

Christ  Jesus,  and  not  as  complete  in  themselves.  I  love 
jnstiScation  by  faith — I  hope  I  shall  never  have  a  doubt 
about  that  grand  truth  ;  but  the  cleansing  efficacy  of  the 
precious  blood  appears  to  me  to  be  the  best  way  of  putting 
it.  I  delight  in  santification  by  the  Spirit ;  but  to  bo  con- 
formed to  the  image  of  Jesus,  is  a  still  sweeter  and  more 
forcible  way  of  viewing  it.  The  doctrines  of  the  gospel 
are  a  golden  throne  upon  which  Jesus  sits,  as  king — not  a 
hard,  cold  stone  rolled  at  the  door  of  the  sepulchre  in  which 
Christ  is  hidden.  Brethren,  I  believe  this  to  be  the  mark 
of  God's  true  minister,  that  he  preaches  Christ  as  his  one 
choice  and  delightful  theme.  In  the  old  romance,  they  tell 
us  that  at  the  gate  of  a  certain  noble  hall  there  hung  a  horn, 
and  none  could  blow  that  horn  but  the  true  heir  to  the  cas- 
tle and  its  wide  domains.  Many  tried  it.  They  could  make 
sweet  music  on  other  instruments  ;  they  could  wake  the 
echoes  by  other  bugles  ;  but  that  horn  was  mute,  let  them 
blow  as  they  might.  At  last,  the  true  heir  came,  and  when 
he  set  his  lips  to  the  horn,  shrill  was  the  sound  and  indis- 
putable his  claim.  He  who  can  preach  Christ  is  the  true 
minister.  Let  him  preach  any  thing  else  in  the  world,  he 
has  not  proved  his  calling ;  but  if  he  shall  preach  Jesus  and 
the  resurrection,  he  is  in  the  apostolical  succession.  If 
Christ  crucified  be  the  great  delight  of  his  soul,  the  very 
marrow  of  his  teaching,  the  fatness  of  his  ministry,  he  has 
proved  his  calling  as  an  ambassador  of  Christ.  Brethren, 
the  Christian  minister  should  be  like  these  golden  spring 
flowers  which  we  are  so  glad  to  see.  Have  you  observed 
them  when  the  sun  is  shining  ?  How  they  open  their  gold- 
en cups,  and  each  one  whispers  to  the  great  sun,  "  Fill  me 
with  thy  beams  ! "  but  when  the  sun  is  hidden  behind  a  cloud, 
wliere  are  they  ?  They  close  their  cups  and  droop  their 
heads.  So  should  the  Christian  feel  the  sweet  influences  of 
Jesus ;  so  especially  should  the  Christian  minister  be  sub- 
ject to  his  Lord.  Jesus  must  be  his  sun,  and  he  must  be 
the  flower  which  yields  itself  to  the  Son  of  Righteousnesa 


253        I'HE  UNSEABCHABLE  RICHES  OF  CHRIST. 

Happy  would  it  be  for  ns  if  our  hearts  and  our  lips  could 
become  like  Anacreon's  harp,  which  was  wedded  to  one  sub- 
ject, and  would  learn  no  other.  He  wished  to  sing  of  the 
sons  of  Atreus,  and  the  mighty  deeds  of  Hercules,  but  his 
_drp  resounded  love  alone ;  and  when  he  would  have  sung 
of  Cadmus,  his  harp  refused — it  would  sing  of  love  alone. 
Oh  I  to  speak  of  Christ  alone — to  be  tied  and  bound  to  this 
one  theme  forever ;  to  speak  alone  of  Jesus,  and  of  the  amazuig 
love  of  the  glorious  Son  of  God,  "  who  though  he  was  rich, 
yet  for  our  sakes  became  poor."  This  is  the  subject  which  is 
both  "  seed  for  the  sower,  and  bread  for  the  eater."  This  is 
the  live  coal  for  the  lip  of  the  preacher,  and  the  master-key 
to  the  heart  of  the  hearer.  This  is  the  tune  for  the  min- 
strels of  earth,  and  the  song  for  the  harpers  of  heaven.  Lord, 
teach  it  to  us  more  and  more,  and  we  will  tell  it  out  to 
others. 

Before  I  leave  this  subject,  I  feel  bound  to  make  two  or 
three  remarks.  You  will  perceive  that  the  apostle  Paul 
preached  the  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ,  not  the  dignity 
of  manhood,  or  the  grandeur  of  human  nature  ;  he  preached 
not  man,  but  man's  Redeemer.  Let  us  do  the  same.  More- 
over, he  did  not  preach  up  the  clergy  and  the  church,  but 
Christ  alone.  Some  of  the  gentlemen  who  claim  to  be  in 
the  apostolical  succession,  could  hardly  have  the  effrontery 
to  claim  to  be  the  successors  of  Paul.  I  believe  that  our 
modem  priests  are  in  the  apostolical  succession.  I  have  nev 
er  doubted  that  they  are  the  lineal  successors  of  Judas  Iscar- 
iot,  who  betrayed  his  Master  ;  but  no  other  apostle  would 
endure  them  for  so  much  as  an  hour.  Look  ye,  if  Paul  had 
been  their  leader,  would  he  not  have  preached  the  unsearch- 
able riches  of  priestcraft,  as  they  do  ?  Do  not  they  preach 
up  their  own  priestly  power  ?  Did  Paul  do  this  ?  Is  not 
their  one  great  theme  the  unsearchable  riches  of  baptism ; 
the  unsearchable  riches  of  the  Eucharist,  the  blessed  bread 
and  the  blessed  wine  ;  the  unsearchable  riches  of  their  con- 
fession and  absolution ;  the  unsearchable  riches  of  their  alb9| 


THB  UNSEABCHABLE  RICHES  OF  CHRIST.        £53 

and  their  dalmatics,  and  their  chasubles,  and  I  know  not 
what  else  of  the  rags  of  the  whore  of  Babylon  ?   A  fine  day 
IS  this  in  which  we  are  to  go  back  to  the  superstitions  of 
the  dark  ages — so  dark  that  our  forefathers  could  not  bear 
them — an(\  for  the  unsearchable  cunning  of  priests  are  to 
give  up  the  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ !     We  are  told 
that  the  Reformation  was  a  mistake  ;  but  we  tell  these  false 
priests  to  their  faces  that  they  lie,  and  know  not  the  truth. 
Beloved,  Paul  cared  nothing  for  priestcraft ;  and  this  Book 
has  not  a  word  in  it  in  favor  of  priestcraft.     With  Paul 
and  with  this  Book  all  believers  in  Jesus  are  priests,  and 
God's  only  clergy.     Paul  never  posted  bills  upon,  the  walls 
of  Jerusalem,  with  black  crosses  on  them,  warning  men  that 
they  would  not  be  able  to  meet  Christ  at  the  Day  of  Judg- 
ment, if  they  did  not  keep  Good  Friday ;  but  I  will  tell  you 
what  Paul  did,  he  wrote  to  the  Galatians,  "  Ye  observe 
days,  months,  and  times,  and  years.     I  am  afraid  of  you, 
lest  I  have  bestowed  upon  you  labor  in  vain."    This  whole 
abomination  of  ritualism  was  the  utter  abhorrence  of  the 
apostle  :  in  its  first  form  of  Judaism  it  stirred  up  his  wholi 
soul  with  indignation  ;  it  brought  the  blood  into  his  cheek, 
he  never  was  mightier  in  denouncing  any  thing  than  wheu 
dealing  heavy  blows  at  ceremonialism  ;  he  said,  "  Neither 
circumcision  availeth  any  thing,  nor  un circumcision,  but 
faith  that  worketh  by  love."    Paul  preached  up  no  priest, 
whether  he  lived  at  Rome  or  Canterbury ;  he  exalted  no 
class  of  men  arrogantly  pretending  to  have  power  to  save. 
He  would  have  been  out  of  all  patience  with  a  set  of  sim- 
pletons decked  out  as  Guys,  and  dressed  up  as  if  they  were 
meant  to  amuse  children  in  a  nursery.   He  never  taught  the 
worship  of  these  calves,  but  Jesus  alone  was  his  subject,  and 
the  unsearchable  riches  of  his  grace.   Mark  you,  on  the  oth- 
er hand,  Paul  did  not  preach  up  the  unsearchable  riches  of 
philosophy,  as  some  do.     "Yes,"  say  some,    "we    must 
please  this  thinking  age,  this  thoughtful  people  ;  we  must 
educate  a  people  who  will  reject  all  testimony  because  they 


251        THE  UNfiEABCHABLE  RICHES  OF  CHBI8T. 

will  not  be  credulous ;  who  will  believe  nothing  but  what 
they  can  understand,  because,  forsooth,  their  unders^nding 
is  so  amazingly  clear,  so  perfect,  so  all  but  divine  !  "  Not 
so,  the  apostle:  he  would  have  said  to  these  philosophical  gen- 
tlemen, ^'  Stand  away ;  I  have  nothing  at  all  that  can  make 
Die  kindred  with  you,  I  preach  the  unsearchable  riches  of 
( -hiist,  not  the  uncertainties  of  philosophical  speculation ; 
I  give  the  people  something  to  believe,  something  tangible 
to  lay  hold  of,  not  superstitious,  it  is  true,  but  divinely  ac- 
credited ;  not  concocted  by  the  wisdom  of  man,  but  reveal- 
ed by  the  wisdom  of  God."  My  dear  friends,  we  must 
come  back  to  the  gospel  of  Paul,  and  may  God  bring  all 
his  ministering  servants  more  and  more  clearly  back  to  it, 
that  we  may  have  nothing  to  preach  but  that  which  clusters 
around  the  cross  ;  which  glows  and  glistens  like  a  sacred 
halo  of  light  around  the  head  of  the  Crucified  One  ;  that  we 
may  lift  up  nothing  but  Jesus,  and  say,  "  God  forbid  that  we 
should  glory,  save  in  the  cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ." 

11.  Secondly,  Paul  preached  thb  unseabchablk  bich- 
BS  OP  Christ. 

Paul  had  no  stinted  Saviour  to  present  to  a  few,  no  nar- 
row-hearted Christ  to  be  the  head  of  a  clique,  no  weak  Re- 
deemer who  could  pardon  only  those  little  offenders  who 
scarcely  needed  it,  but  he  preached  a  great  Saviour  to  the 
great  masses,  a  great  Saviour  to  great  sinners ;  he  preached 
the  Conqueror  with  dyed  garments,  travelling  in  the  great- 
ness of  his  strength,  whose  name  is  "  mighty  to  save."  Let 
us  inquire  in  what  respects  we  may  ascribe  to  our  Lord  Je- 
sus the  possession  of  unsearchable  riches  ?  Our  answer  is 
first,  he  has  unsearchable  riches  of  love  to  sinners  as  they  are. 
Jesus  so  loved  the  souls  of  men  that  we  fcan  only  use  the 
**  «o,"  but  we  cannot  find  the  word  to  match  with  it.  In 
Ihe  French  Revolution,  there  was  a  young  man  condemned 
to  the  guillotine,  and  shut  up  in  one  of  the  prisons.  He  was 
greatly  loved  by  many,  but  there  was  one  who  loved  him 


THE  UNSEARCHABLE  RICHES  OP  CHRIST.        256 

Vore  than  all  put  together.  How  know  we  this  ?  It  was 
\  .18  own  father  ;  and  the  love  he  bore  his  son  was  proved  in 
tills  way:  when  the  lists  were  called,  the  father,  whose 
i^ame  was  exactly  the  same  as  his  son's,  answered  to  the 
name,  and  the  father  rode  in  the  gloomy  tumbril  out  to  the 
place  of  execution,  and  his  head  rolled  beneath  the  axe  in- 
stead of  his  son's,  a  victim  to  mighty  love.  See  here  an  im- 
age of  the  love  of  Christ  to  sinners ;  for  thus  Jesus  died  for 
the  ungodly,  viewed  as  such.  If  they  had  not  been  un- 
godly, neither  they  nor  he  had  needed  to  have  died  ;  if  they 
had  not  sinned,  there  would  have  been  no  need  for  a  suffering 
Saviour,  but  Jesus  proved  his  boundless  love ''  in  that,  while 
we  vere  yet  sinners,  Christ  died  for  us."  ^  Your  name  was 
in  the  condemned  list,  my  fellow-sinner,  but,  if  you  ^believe 
in  Jesus,  you  shall  find  that  your  name  is  there  no  longer, 
for  Christ's  name  is  put  in  your  stead,  and  you  shall  learn 
that  he  suffered  for  you,  the  just  for  the  unjust,  that  he 
mighc  bring  you  to  God.  Is  not  this  the  greatest  wonder 
of  divine  love,  that  it  should  be  set  upon  us  as  sinners  f  I 
can  understand  God's  loving  reformed  sinners,  and  repent- 
ing sinners ;  but  here  is  the  glory  of  it,  "  God  commendetL 
his  love  toward  us,  in  that,  while  we  were  yet  sinners— ye< 
sinners  1—Qhvvs,%  died  for  us."  O  my  hearers,  from  my  in- 
most heart  I  pray  that  this  boundless  wealth  of  love  on  the 
part  of  Jesus  to  those  who  were  rebels  and  enemies,  may 
win  your  hearts  to  love  the  heavenly  Lover  in  return. 

In  the  next  place,  Jesus  has  riches  of  pardon  for  those 
who  repentof  their  sins.  My  Lord  Jesus,  by  his  death,  has 
become  immensely  rich  in  pardoning  power — so  rich  indeed 
that  no  guiltiness  can  possibly  transcend  the  efficacy  of  his 
precious  blood.  There  is  one  sin  which  he  never  will  for- 
give— there  is  but  one — and  I  am  convinced  that  you  have 
not  committed  that  sin  against  the  Holy  Ghost  if  you  have 
any  feeling  of  repentance  or  desire  towards  God  ;  for  the  sin 
which  is  unto  death,  brings  death  with  it  to  the  conscience, 
so  that  when  once  committed,  the  man  ceases  to  feel.    If  thou 


256        THE  UNSEARCHABLE  RICHES  OF  CHRIST. 

desirest  pardon,  sinner,  there  is  no  reason  why  thou  shouldst 
not  have  it,  and  have  it  now.  The  blood  of  Christ  can  wash 
oat  blasphemy,  adultery,  fornication,  lying,  slander,  perjury, 
theft,  murder.  Though  thou  hast  raked  in  the  very  kennels 
of  hell  till  thou  hast  blackened  thyself  to  the  color  of  a 
devil,  yet,  if  thou  wilt  come  to  Christ  and  ask  mercy,  he 
will  absolve  thee  from  all  sin.  Do  but  wash  in  the  bath 
wliich  he  has  filled  with  blood,  and  "  though  your  sins  be  as 
scarlet,  they  shall  be  as  white  as  snow  ;  though  they  be  red 
ike  crimson,  they  shall  be  as  wool."  Do  not  misunder- 
stand me,  I  mean  just  this,  that  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ 
IS  not  meant  exchisively  for  you  respectable  people,  who 
always  appear  to  be  so  religious,  but  for  you  who  are  irrelig- 
ious, for  you  who  are  not  even  moral,  or  sober,  or  honest.  I  tell 
you  the  gospel  of  Christ  is  meant  for  the  scum  of  the  popu- 
lation ;  it  is  meant  for  the  lowest  of  the  low,  for  the  worst 
of  the  worst.  There  is  no  den  in  London  where  the  Saviour 
cannot  work ;  there  is  no  loathsome  haunt  of  sin  too  foul 
for  him  to  clean  se.  The  heathen  fabled  of  their  Hercul  es  that 
he  cleansed  the  Augean  stables  by  turning  a  river  through 
them,  and  so  washing  away  the  filth  of  ages  ;  if  your  hearl 
be  such  a  stable,  Christ  is  greater  than  the  mightiest  Hercu- 
les— he  can  cause  the  river  of  his  cleansing  blood  to  flovi 
right  through  your  heart,  and  your  iniquities,  though  they 
are  a  heap  of  abominations,  shall  be  put  away  forever. 
Riches  of  love  to  sinners  as  such,  and  riches  of  pardon  to 
sinners  who  repent,  are  stored  up  in  the  Lord  Jesus. 

Again,  Christ  has  riches  0/ comfort  for  all  that  mourn. 
Have  I  the  happiness  of  having  before  me  some  who  mourn 
before  the  Lord  ?  Blessed  are  you,  for  you  shall  be  filled, 
What  is  the  cause  of  your  weeping  ?  Is  it  your  sin  ?  Christ 
has  a  handkerchief  that  can  wipe  away  such  tears.  He  can 
blot  out  your  sins  like  a  cloud,  and  like  a  thick  cloud  youf 
iniquities.  Do  but  come  to  him,  and  your  deepest  sorrow 
ehall  disappear  beneath  the  influence  of  his  sympathetic 
leva     Are  you  sorrowful  because  you  have  lost  a  frienci  f 


THE  UNSEARCHABLE  RICHES  OF  CHRIST.        267 

He  will  be  a  friend  to  you.  Have  you  been  deceived  and 
betrayed  ?  My  Master  can  meet  that  craving  of  your  nature 
after  friendship  and  sympathy.  Confide  in  him  and  he  will 
never  forsake  you.  Oh  !  I  cannot  tell  you  how  rich  he  isiti 
consolation,  but  the  Holy  Ghost  can  tell  you.  If  you  do 
but  get  Jesus,  you  shall  find,  as  Bernard  used  to  say,  that 
he  IS  "  honey  to  the  mouth,  music  to  the  ear,  and  heavtm 
to  the  heart."  Win  Christ,  and  you  shall  want  nothing  be- 
yond him  :  lay  hold  of  him,  and  you  shall  say  with  the  apos- 
tle, "  I  have  learned  in  whatsoever  state  I  ara,  therewith  to 
be  content,"  for  he  hath  said,  "  I  will  never  leave  thee,  nor 
forsake  thee." 

My  Master's  unsearchable  riches  are  also  of  another 
kind.  Do  you  thirst  for  knowledge  ?  Jes^i?  has  riches  of 
wisdom.  The  desire  to  know  has  sent  men  ro^  ing  over  all 
the  world,  but  he  who  finds  Jesus  may  stay  at  home  and  be 
wise.  If  you  sit  at  his  feet,  you  shall  know  what  Platf 
could  not  teach  you,  and  what  Socrates  never  learned- 
When  the  old  schoolmen  could  not  answer  and  defend  a 
proposition,  they  were  wont  to  say,  "  I  will  go  to  Aristotle . 
he  shall  help  me  out."  If  you  do  but  learn  of  Christ,  he 
shall  help  you  out  of  all  difiiculties  ;  and  that  which  is  most 
useful  for  your  soul  to  know,  the  knowledge  which  will  last 
you  in  eternity,  Christ  shall  teach  to  you.  Think  not  that 
the  gospel  of  Christ,  because  it  is  simple,  is  therefore  mere 
child's  play.  Oh,  no  !  it  has  that  in  it  which  an  angel's  in- 
tellect unillumined  of  the  Holy  Spirit  might  fail  to  master  , 
the  highest  ranks  of  seraphim  still  lost  in  wonder  gaze  upon 
it.  Come  to  my  master,  and  you  shall  be  made  wise  unto 
salvation. 

Let  me  not  weary  you  with  so  great  a  message.  Per- 
haps I  tell  it  badly,  but  the  matter  of  it  is  worthy  of  your 
ears,  and  worthy  of  your  hearts.  My  master  has  riches  of 
happiness  to  bestow  upon  you.  After  all,  he  is  the  rich  man 
who  wears  heart's-ease  in  his  button-hole.  The  man  who 
OSD  Bay,  "I  have  enough,"  is  richer  than  the  peer  of  the 


258        ^TS^  UNSEABCHABLE  RICHES  OF  CHBBT. 

realm  who  is  discontented.  Believe  me,  my  Lord  can  make 
you  to  lie  down  in  green  pastures,  and  lead  you  beside  still 
waters.  There  is  no  music  like  the  music  of  his  pipe,  when 
he  is  the  Shepherd  and  you  are  the  sheep,  and  you  lie  down 
at  his  feet.  There  is  no  love  like  his,  neither  earth  nor  heav- 
en can  match  it.  If  you  did  but  know  it,  you  would  prize 
it  beyond  all  mortal  joys,  and  say  with  our  poet — 

"  Such  as  find  thee  find  such  sweetness. 

Deep,  mysterious,  and  unknown ; 
Far  above  all  worldly  pleasures. 
If  they  were  to  meet  in  one. 

My  BelovM, 
O'er  the  mountains  haste  away." 

I  speak  experimentally.  I  have  had  more  joy  in  half  an 
hour's  communion  with  Christ  than  I  have  found  in  months 
of  other  comforts.  I  have  had  much  to  make  me  happy-4 
divers  successes  and  smiles  of  providence  which  have  cheer- 
ed and  comforted  my  heart ;  but  they  are  all  froth  on  the 
cup,  mere  bubbles — the  foam  of  life,  and  not  its  true  depths 
of  bliss.  To  know  Christ  and  to  be  found  in  him — oh  !  this 
is  life,'  this  is  joy,  this  is  marrow  and  fatness,  wine  on  the 
lees  well  refined !  My  Master  does  not  treat  his  serv- 
ants churlishly :  he  gives  to  them  as  a  king  giveth  to  a 
king ;  he  gives  them  two  heavens — a  heaven  below  in  serv- 
ing him  here,  and  a  heaven  above  in  delighting  in  him  for- 
ever. 

And  now  I  shall  close  this  poor  talk  of  mine  about  these 
priceless  riches,  by  saying  that  the  unsearchable  riches  of 
Christ  will  he  best  hnovm  in  eternity.  The  riches  of  Christ 
are  not  so  much  to  be  enjoyed  here  as  there.  He  will  give 
you  by  the  road  and  on  the  way  to  heaven  all  your  needs  ; 
your  place  of  defence  shall  be  the  munitions  of  rocks,  your 
bread  shall  be  given  you,  and  your  water  shall  be  sure  ;  but 
it  is  there,  there^  there,  where  you  shall  hear  the  song  of 
them  that  triumph,  the  shout  of  them  that  feast.  My  dear 
hearer,  if  you  get  Christ,  you  have  obtained  riches  which 


ftiil  th^SfiARCHABLE  RICHES  OF  CHRISt.        259 

you  can  take  with  you  in  the  hour  of  death.  The  rich  man 
clutched  his  bags  of  money,  and  as  he  laid  them  on  his  heart, 
he  murmured,  "  They  will  not  do  ;  they  will  not  do  ;  take 
them  away  I "  If  you  receive  Jesua  into  your  heart,  he  will 
be  death's  best  antidote.  When  your  disembodied  spirit 
quits  this  poor  clay  carcass,  as  it  must,  what  will  your  silver 
and  gold  do  for  you  then  ?  What  will  your  farms  and  youi 
broad  acres  do  for  you  then  ?  You  must  leave  them  all  be- 
hind. Even  if  men  buy  you  a  coffin  of  gold,  or  bury  you  in  a 
sarcophagus  of  marble,  yet  of  what  avail  will  that  be  ?  But 
oh  I  if  you  have  Christ,  you  can  fly  up  to  heaven  to  your 
treasure,  and  there  you  shall  be  rich  to  all  the  intents  of 
bliss,  world  without  end. 

Now,  dear  friends,  if  I  could  have  spoken  as  Paul 
would  have  spoken,  I  would  have  done  so,  but  the  subject 
would  have  been  the  same.  Paul  preached  the  gospel  bet- 
ter than  I  do,  but  even  he  could  not  preach  a  better  gospel. 
Let  me  close  this  point  by  a  few  words.  My  Master  has 
such  riches  that  you  cannot  count  them  ;  you  cannot  guess 
them,  much  less  can  you  convey  their  fulness  in  words. 
They  are  unsearchable!  You  may  look,  and  search,  and 
weigh,  but  Christ  is  a  greater  Christ  than  you  think  him  to 
be  when  your  thoughts  are  at  the  greatest.  My  Master  is 
more  able  to  pardon  than  you  to  sin,  more  able  to  for- 
give than  you  to  transgress.  My  Master  is  more  ready  to 
supply  than  you  are  to  ask,  and  ten  thousand  times  more 
prepared  to  save  than  you  are  to  be  saved.  Never  tolerate 
low  thoughts  of  my  Lord  Jesus.  Your  highest  estimates 
will  dishonor  him ;  when  you  put  the  crown  on  his  head, 
you  will  on.y  crown  him  with  silver  when  he  deserves  gold  ; 
when  you  sing  the  best  of  your  songs,  you  will  only  give 
him  poor,  discordant  music,  compared  with  what  he  de- 
serves, but  oh  1  do  believe  in  him,  that  he  is  a  great  Christ, 
a  mighty  Saviour.  Great  siniHT,  come  and  do  him  houdi- 
by  trusting  in  him  as  a  great  Saviour.  Come  with  your 
great  sins,  and  your  great  cares,  and  your  great  wants  1 


260        '^SB  DNSEARCHABLE  RICHfiS  OF  GfiBlBlf. 

Come,  and  welcome.     Come  to  him  now,  and  the  Lord  will 
accept  you,  and  accept  yon  withoat  upbraiding  yen. 

III.  Lastly,  there  must  have  been  a  royal  intention  in 
the  heart  of  Christ  in  sending  out  Paul  to  preach  of  his  un- 
searchable riches,  because  every  man  must  have  a  motrve 
for  what  he  does,  and  beyond  all  question,  Jesus  Christ  'ii&i 
a  motive. 

Did  you  ever  hear  of  a  man  who  employed  a  number  of 
persons  to  go  about  to  proclaim  his  riches,  and  call  hun- 
dreds of  people  together,  and  thousands,  as  on  this  occa- 
sion, simply  to  tell  them  that  So-and-so  was  very  rich? 
Why,  the  crowds  would  say,  "  What  is  that  to  us  ?  "  But 
if  at  the  conclusion,  the  messenger  could  say,  "  But  all  these 
riches  he  presents  to  you,  and  whoever  among  you  shall  de- 
sire to  be  made  rich,  can  be  enriched  now  by  him."  Ah  I 
then  you  would  say,  "  Now  we  see  the  sense  of  it.  Now  we 
perceive  the  gracious  drift  of  it  all."  Now,  my  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  is  very  strong,  but  all  that  strength  is  pledged  to 
help  a  poor  weak  sinner  to  enter  into  heaven.  My  Lord 
Christ  is  a  great  king,  and  he  reigns  with  irresistible 
power ;  but  all  that  sovereign  power  he  swears  to  give  to 
believers  to  help  them  to  reign  over  their  sins.  My  Lord 
Jesus  is  as  full  of  merit  as  the  sea  is  full  of  salt,  but  every  atom 
of  that  merit  he  vows  to  give  to  sinners  who  will  confess 
that  they  have  no  merits  of  their  own,  and  will  trust  in  him. 
Ay,  and  once  more,  my  Lord  Christ  is  so  glorious  that  the 
very  angels  are  not  bright  in  his  presence,  for  he  is  the  Sun, 
and  they  are  but  as  twinkling  stars  ;  but  all  this  glory  he 
will  give  to  you,  poor  sinner,  and  make  you  to  be  glorious 
in  his  glory,  if  you  will  but  trust  him.  There  is  a  motive, 
then,  on  our  Lord's  part  for  bidding  us  preach  a  full  Christ. 

I  think  I  hear  a  whisper  somewhere  ;  there  is  a  poor 
heart  standing  crowded  in  tlie  aisle,  and  it  is  saying  to  it- 
self^ "  Ah  !  I  am  full  of  sin ;  I  am  weak  ;  I  am  lost ;  I 
have  no  merit."    My  dear  hearer,  thou  dost  not  need  any 


taSl  UNSBAftcaAJSLfi  niches  OP  CHRISt.        261 

merit,  nor  any  strength,  nor  any  goodness  in  thyself,  for 
Jesus  presents  thee  with  an  abundance  of  all  these  in  him- 
sell  I  will  not  care  whether  I  have  money  in  my  own 
purse  or  not,  if  I  have  a  kind  friend  who  says,  "  All  that  I 
have  is  thine  ; "  if  I  may  go  and  draw  upon  him  whenever 
I  please  for  whatever  I  wish,  I  will  not  desire  to  be  inde- 
pendent of  him,  but  I  will  live  upon  his  fulness.  Poor  sin- 
ner,  you  must  do  the  same.  You  do  not  need  merits  or 
strength  apart  from  Christ :  take  my  Master,  and  he  will  be 
enough  for  you,  while  you  shall  joyfully  sing,  "Christ is  my 
all." 

Two  or  three  words,  then.  The  first  is  this :  Sow  rich 
those  must  be  who  have  Christ  for  a  friend!  Will  you  not 
seek  to  be  friends  with  him  ?  If  it  be  true  that  all  Christ 
has  he  gives  to  his  people — and  this  is  asserted  over  and 
over  again  in  this  Book — then,  oh  !  how  unspeakably  blest 
must  those  be  who  can  say,  "  My  beloved  is  mine,  and  I  am 
his  ! "  They  who  get  Christ  to  be  their  own  property,  are 
like  the  man  who,  having  long  eaten  of  fruit  from  a  certain 
tree,  was  no  longer  satisfied  with  having  the  fruit,  but  he 
must  needs  take  up  the  tree  and  plant  it  in  his  own  garden. 
Happy  those  who  have  Christ  planted  as  the  tree  of  life  in 
the  soil  of  their  hearts  !  You  not  only  have  his  grace,  and 
his  love,  and  his  merit,  but  you  have  Himself.  He  is  all 
your  own.  Oh,  that  sweet  word,  Jesus  is  mine !  Jesus  is 
mine  !  All  that  there  is  in  his  humanity,  in  his  deity,  in 
his  living  and  in  his  dying,  in  his  reigning  and  in  his  second 
advent,  all  is  mine,  for  Christ  is  mine. 

JETow  transcendently  foolish^  on  the  other  hand^  must 
those  he  who  will  not  have  Christ  when  lie  is  to  he  had  for  the 
asking  I  who  prefer  the  baubles  and  the  bubbles  of  this 
world,  and  let  the  solid  gold  of  eternity  go  by  !  O  fools, 
to  play  with  shadows  and  miss  the  substance !  to  dig  and 
toil,  and  cover  your  faces  with  sweat,  and  lose  your  nightly 
rest,  to  get  this  world's  fleeting  good,  while  you  neglect 
him  who  is  the  eternal  good  !    O  fools  and  slow  of  heart,  to 


262        ^I^^  tJNSEABCHAdLE  RICHES  09  OHBIST« 

court  this  harlot  world,  with  her  painted  lace,  wnen  the 
beauties  of  ray  Master  are  infinitely  more  rich  and  rare  I 
Oh  I  if  you  did  but  know  him,  if  you  coidd  but  see  his  un- 
speakable riches,  you  would  fling  your  toys  to  the  wind,  and 
follow  after  him  with  all  your  heart  and  soul 

"  But  may  I  have  him  ?  "  says  one.  May  yen,  indeed  I 
Wlio  is  to  say  you  nay  ?  Did  not  you  hear  the  sweet  notes 
of  the  hymn  just  now,  "  Come  and  welcome,  come  and  wel- 
come ''  i  When  heaven's  big  bell  rings,  it  always  sounds 
foith  that  silver  note  for  sinnera — "  Come  and  welcome  ! 
Come  and  welcome  !  "  Leave  your  sins,  leave  your  follies, 
leave  your  self-righteousness.  Jesus  Christ  stands  at  the 
open  door  of  grace,  more  willing  to  receive  you  than  you 
are  to  be  received  by  him,  "  Come  and  welcome,  come  and 
welcome."  At  the  top  of  the  Hospice  of  St.  Bernard,  in  the 
storm,  when  the  snow  is  falling  fast,  the  monks  ring  the 
great  bell,  and  when  the  way  cannot  be  seen,  the  traveller 
can  almost  hear  Ae  way  to  the  house  of  refuge  across  the 
snowy  waste.  So  would  I  ring  that  bell  this  morning.  Poor 
lost  traveller,  with  thy  sins  and  thy  feai^s  blowing  cold  into 
thy  face,  "  Come  and  welcome,  come  and  welcome,"  to  a  Sa- 
viour once  dead  and  buried  for  thee,  but  now  risen  and 
pleading  at  the  right  hand  of  God.  If  thou  canst  not  see 
thy  way,  yet  hear  it.  "  Hear,  and  your  soul  shall  live ;  and 
•he  will  make  an  everlasting  covenant  with  you,  even  the 
sure  mercies  of  David." 

You  need  nothing  but  Christ,  dear  heart ;  you  need 
pump  up  no  tears  of  repentance  to  help  Chiist,  for  he  will 
give  you  repentance  if  you  seek  it  of  him.  You  must  come 
to  him  to  get  repentance  ;  you  must  not  seek  that  gospel 
blessing  anywhere  but  at  the  cross.  You  will  need  no  bap- 
tisms and  Lord's  Suppers  to  rely  upon  ;  it  will  be  your  duty 
as  a  believer  to  profess  your  faith  in  him,  and  to  remember 
him  at  his  table,  but  these  things  will  not  help  your  salva- 
tion, you  will  be  saved  by  Jesus  and  by  him  alone.  You 
need  experience  no  terrors,  you  need  undergo  no  prcpara- 


THl?  UNSEARCHABLE  RICHES  OF  CHRISt.        26.1 

tion,  Christ  is  ready  to  receive  you  now.  Like  the  surgeon 
whose  door  is  open  for  every  accident  that  may  occur ;  like 
the  great  hospitals  on  our  side  the  river,  where,  let  the  case 
be  what  it  may,  the  door  swings  open  the  moment  an  en- 
trance is  demanded — such  is  my  Master,  Unsearchable 
riches  arc  in  him,  though  unsearchable  poverty  may  be  in 
you. 

"Lot  not  conscience  make  you  linger. 
Nor  of  fitness  fondly  dream. 
All  i\\e  fitness  he  requiretli. 
Is  to  feel  your  need  of  him : 

This  he  gives  you  ; 
'Tis  his  Spirit's  rising  beam." 

All  this  week  long  I  have  been  fretting  and  worrying  be- 
cause I  cannot  preach  to  you  as  I  wish,  and  when  each  of 
my  sermons  here  has  been  over,  I  have  wished  that  I  could 
preach  it  again  in  a  more  earnest  and  fervent  manner.  But 
what  can  I  do  ?  O  my  hearers,  I  can  preach  Christ  to  you, 
but  I  cannot  preach  you  to  Christ.  I  can  tell  you  that  if 
you  trust  in  him  you  shall  be  saved ;  I  can  declare  to  you 
that  as  the  Son  of  God  now  risen  he  is  able  to  save  to  the 
uttermost  them  that  come  to  him,  but  I  cannot  make  you 
come.  Yet,  I  thank  God,  since  last  Sunday  I  have  heard  of 
some  who  have  come  ;  I  have  heard  good  news  of  some 
who,  by  the  Holy  Ghost's  power,  have  believed  in  Jesus. 
Ai*e  there  no  more  eyes  that  will  look  at  my  Master's 
wounds  ?  Are  there  no  more  hearts  that  will  fall  in  love 
with  my  Master's  beauties?  Must  I  come  a  wooing  for 
him,  and  get  so  small  a  return  ?  Must  it  be  ones  and  twos 
ou(  of  the  twenty  thousands  of  you  ?  God  forbid  it  I  God 
send  us  a  greater  rate  of  fruit  than  this,  a  hundredfold  har- 
rcst  to  a  hundredfold  congregation.  Pray,  believers,  pray 
for  a  blessing.  Pray  that  God  may  strike  this  lip  dunil)  be- 
fore next  Sunday  if  he  will  do  more  good  by  some  othei 
preacher  than  by  me.  Ask  nothing  for  me,  but  ask  large 
things  for  my  Lord,  for  the  Crucified   One.     Do  pray 


264        THE  UNSEABCHABLE  RICHES  OF  CHBtSf  • 

that  these  great  gatherings  may  not  be  without  a  pemiA* 
nent  result  which  shall  teU  upon  the  impiety  of  this  city ; 
ay,  and  tell  upon  the  piety  of  it  too,  slaying  the  first,  and 
stimulating  the  second.  God  send  forth  the  Spirit  of  hlB 
grace,  and  unto  him  shall  be  the  praise,  world  without  etidL 
Amen. 


s 


»~  ~ 


n. 


%*• 


tHB  EKb  OP  1-HB  HieHTEOtS  DiBSmSD.         26.'> 


SERMON  XVL 


THE  END  OF  THE  RIGHTEOUS  DESIRED. 

^Un   MB  DDB  THB  DEATH  OF  THB   BIOHTBOUB,  AND  LET  XT    LAST  KND  BB     LXKB 

HIS  1  **— Numbers  xziiL  10. 

Carlyle,  in  his  "  History  of  the  French  Revolution," 
tells  us  of  a  Duke  of  Orleans  who  did  not  believe  in  death  ; 
80  that  when  his  secretary  stumbled  on  the  words,  "The 
late  King  of  Spain,"  he  angrily  demanded  what  he  meant  by 
it.  The  obsequious  attendant  replied,  "  My  Lord,  it  is  a 
title  which  some  of  the  kings  of  Spain  have  taken."  In  all 
this  assembly  I  have  not  such  a  lunatic  ;  for  you  unanimous- 
ly believe  that  the  entire  race  of  men  await  alike  the  inevit- 
able hour.  We  know  that  aM  orr  paths,  wind  as  they  may, 
will  lead  to  the  grave.  A  certain  king  of  France  believed 
in  death,  but  forbade  that  it  should  ever  be  mentioned  in 
his  presence.  "  And  if,"  said  he,  "  I  at  any  time  look  pale, 
no  courtier  must  dare,  on  pain  of  my  displeasure,  to  men 
tion  it  in  my  presence  ; "  thus  imitating  the  foolish  ostrich, 
which,  when  pursued  by  the  hunter,  and  utterly  unable  to 
escape,  is  said  to  hide  its  head  in  the  sand,  fancying  that  it 
is  secure  from  the  enemy  which  it  cannot  see.  I  trust  I  do 
not  address  to-day  any  men  so  idiotic  as  to  desire  to  forget 
the  certainty  of  death,  or  to  thrust  the  fact  from  their  re- 
membrance. I  trust  that,  being  sane  men,  you  desire  ta 
look  in  the  face  of  the  whole  of  your  future  history,  both  in 
the  present  world  and  in  worlds  beyond  the  region  of  siglit ; 
and,  foreseeing  that  soul  and  body  must  part  in  the  article 
of  death,  you  are  desirous  to  consider  that  event,  that  you 

12 


366        ^I*n£  END  OF  THK  RIGHTEOUS  DESIRED. 

may  be  prepared  for  it.  You  desire  to  take  death  into  your 
reckoning  that  it  may  not  surprise  you  unawares.  He  who 
should  go  upon  a  long  journey,  and  provide  for  every  difficul- 
ty on  the  road  but  one,  would  probably  find  the  journey 
a  failure.  If,  with  a  rolling  chariot  for  the  solid  ways,  he 
had  forgotten  to  find  the  means  of  crossing  the  last  ri.er 
which  would  divide  hira  from  the  country  which  he  sought, 
he  would  be  disappointed  after  all  his  pains.  If  you  have 
provided  for  life,  but  have  not  also  prepared  for  death,  what 
better  will  you  be,  my  hearer,  than  such  a  foolish  traveller  ? 
We  have  heard  of  one,  who,  going  into  a  tavern,  ordered 
according  to  his  wildest  wishes,  and  feasted  sumptuously  on 
the  best  the  house  afforded,  hour  after  hour  ;  but  when  the 
host  came  with  the  bill,  he  told  him  that  he  had  no  money, 
and  had  quite  forgotten  the  reckoning,  thinking  it  quite 
enough  to  attend  to  the  eating  and  drinking  while  these 
were  the  order  of  the  day,  without  perplexing  himself  about 
the  unknown  future.  Alas  I  my  hearer,  are  you  living  in 
this  inn  of  life,  forgetting  the  reckoning  ?  Do  you  go  from 
cup  to  cup,  from  merriment  to  merriment,  feasting  as  though 
there  were  no  day  of  account  appointed  for  you  ?  If  so,  are 
you  fool  or  knave,  or  bo th  ?  F  or  a  man  who  would  en j  oy  life, 
and  yet  shirk  the  account  of  his  responsibilities  with  which  the 
scone  must  close,  is  either  foolish,  or  knavish,  or  both.  Sure- 
ly>  since  we  must  die,  since  "there  is  no  discharge  in  this 
war,"  since  every  man  must  be  a  conscript  to  the  army  of 
death,  since,  whether  it  be  to-morrow  or  the  next  day,  or  in 
a  few  years'  time,  every  one  of  us  must  pass  through  the  iron 
gate,  it  behoves  us,  knowing  the  fact,  to  take  it  into  our  ac- 
count, to  be  diligent  in  forestalling  its  demands,  and  providing 
for  its  emergencies.  And  yet  I  should  not  wonder  if  many 
here  almost  shudder  at  the  subject  which  I  am  now  intro- 
ducing, so  unaccustomed  are  they  to  it ;  or,  if  they  listen 
to  it,  they  consider  it  to  be  specially  applicable  to  those  by 
whom  they  are  surrounded,  but  they  fail  to  see  its  applica- 
tion to  themselves.     Young's  verse  is  true — "All  men  think 


THE  END  OF  THE  RIGHTEOUS  DESIRBD.        267 

all  men  mortal  but  themselves."  They  regard  others  as 
having  death  written  upon  their  brow,  but  they  imagine 
that  they  at  least  shall  last  for  years  to  come.  They  will 
not  dare  to  say  that  they  are  immortal,  yet  alas !  they  act 
as  if  they  thought  they  were  so  ;  and  trifling  away  year 
after  year,  suffer  life  itself  to  disappear  without  improve- 
ment. I  conjure  all  honest  and  wise  hearts  at  this  hour  to 
reflect  upon  their  latter  end.  Prepare  now  that  you  may 
be  ready  when  the  final  summons  shall  be  sounded,  and  may 
God  grant  you  grace  that  the  words  of  this  morning  may 
be  made  helpful  to  your  preparations. 

Balaam,  though  a  base  man,  was  no  fool.  He  had 
thoughts  of  death.  He  did  not  shut  his  eyes  to  what  he  did 
not  like.  He  believed  that  he  should  die,  and  he  had  de- 
sires  about  it ;  and  though  those  desires  were  never  realized, 
but  the  reverse,  yet  he  had  wit  enough  to  gaze  upon  the 
tents  of  God's  chosen  Israel,  and  to  say  from  his  heart,  "  Let 
me  die  the  death  of  the  righteous,  and  let  my  last  end  be 
like  his." 

I  shall  regard  this  exclamation  as  having  in  it  a  double 
wish:  first,  a  wish  concerning  death,  and  secondly,  a  wish 
concerning  the  after  death.  When  these  have  been  spoken 
upon  as  the  Holy  Spirit  may  help  me,  I  shall  try  to  make 
some  practical  use  of  the  whole. 

L  First,  dear  friends,  Balaam's  wish  concerning  death. 

He  anxiously  desired  that  he  might  die  such  a  death  as 
the  righteous  die.  Truly  we  commend  his  choice,  for,  in 
the  first  place,  it  must^at  the  least,  be  as  well  with  the  righte- 
ous  man  when  he  corner  to  die,  as  with  any  other  man.  By 
the  righteous  man  we  mean  the  man  who  has  believed  in 
Jesus,  and  so  has  been  covered  with  Christ's  righteousness, 
and  washed  in  his  most  precious  blood,  and  moreover  has 
by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit  received  a  new  heart,  a 
righteous  heart,  so  that  his  actions  are  righteous  both  to- 
wards God  and  man.     Such  a  man  being  righteous  by  faitb 


268        ^^H8  END  OF  THE  RIGHTEOUS  DESIBBDl 

in  Jesus  Chiist  unto  perfect  justification  and  righteous  also 
in  act  and  spirit  through  sanctification  of  the  Holy  Ghost, 
is  alone  the  truly  righteous  man.     Such  a  man  inust  he 
right  at  last,  and  this  you  will  see  clearly  by  the  following 
siory.     A  certain  carping  infidel,  after  having  argued  with 
a  poor  countryman  who  knew  the  faith,  but  who  knew  little 
else,  said  to  him,  "  Well,  Hodge,  you  really  are  so  stupid 
that  there  is  no  use  of  arguing  with  you,  I  cannot  get  you 
out  of  this  absurd  religion  of  yours."     "  Ah  !  well,"  said 
Hodge,  "  I  dare  say  I  am  stupid,  master,  but  do  you  know 
we  poor  people  like  to  have  two  strings  to  our  bow?" 
"Well,"  said  the  critic,  "what  do  you  mean  by  that?" 
"  Master,  I'll  show  you.     Suppose  it  should  all  turn  out  as 
you  say  ;  suppose  there  is  no  God,  and  there  is  no  hereafter, 
don't  you  see  I  am  as  well  off  as  you  are  ?    Certainly,  it 
will  not  be  any  worse  for  me  than  it  will  be  for  you,  if  we 
both  of  us  get  annihilated.     But  don't  you  see  if  it  should 
happen  to  be  true  as  I  believe,  what  will  become  of  you  ?  " 
Clearly  in  either  case  it  must  be  right  with  the  righteous  ; 
for  if  he  should  have  ignorantly  received  a  cunningly  devised 
fable,  yet,  seeing  according  to  his  own  experience,  it  makes 
him  abetter  and  a  happier  man,  so  far  so  good — he  is  no  loser 
here  ;  and  he  will  be  certainly  at  the  last  in  no  worse  a  po- 
sition than  the  man  who  rejected  the  holy  and  comfortable 
influences  of  what  he  styled  a  deception.    While,  if  the  relig- 
ion of  Jesus  should  be  tnie — ah !  ghastly  if  for  you  who 
doubt  it  ? — if  it  should  all  be  true,  ah  !  then  your  weeping 
and  your  wailing  at  the  discovery  will  be  a  terrible  contrast 
to  the  joy  and  the  glory  which  God  has  reserved  for  them 
that  love  him.     Upon  the  vc  y  lowest  possible  ground  it 
will  be  well  with  the  righteouti,  as  well  at  any  rate  as  with 
the  best  of  other  men. 

There  is  this  to  be  said  for  the  righteous  man :  he  goes 
to  the  death  chamber  with  a  quiet  conscience.  It  has  been 
clearly  ascertained  that  in  the  event  of  death,  the  mind  is 
fre<juently  quickened  to  a  high  degree  of  activity,  so  that  it 

I 


THE  END  OF  THE  RIGHTEOUS  DESIRED.         269 

thinks  more  perhaps  in  the  coarse  of  five  minutes  than  it 
could  have  done  in  the  course  of  years  at  other  times.  Per- 
sons who  have  been  rescued  from  drowning,  have  said  that 
they  imagined  themselves  to  have  been  weeks  in  the  water, 
for  the  thoughts,  the  many  views  and  visions,  the  long  and 
detailed  retrospect  seemed  to  them  to  have  required  weeks, 
and  yet  the  whole  transpired  in  a  few  seconds.  Frequently 
towards  the  last,  the  soul  travels  at  express  speed,  travers- 
ing its  past  life  as  though  it  rode  upon  the  lightning.  Ah  ! 
then  how  blessed  is  that  man  who,  looking  back  upon  the 
past,  can  see  many  things  of  which  conscience  can  approve  I 
and  how  accursed  must  that  man's  death-bed  be  who  has  to 
look  back  upon  a  youth  spent  in  folly,  a  middle  life  of  sin, 
and  an  old  age  of  iniquity  !  What  will  it  be,  my  hearer, 
if,  when  you  lie  dying,  there  should  rise  up  before  your 
memory  those  whom  you  led  into  sin,  seduced  to  vice,  or 
taught  in  profligacy  !  A  grim  assemblage  must  gather 
around  some  men's  beds, when  guilt,  like  a  grim  chamber- 
lain, shall  usher  them  in  one  by  one,  and  call  out  their 
names  with  horrible  distinctness,  and  tell  out  their  doings 
and  dealings  with  the  wretch  who  shivers  on  the  brink  of 
death  accused  by  so  many,  and  unable  to  answer  one  of  a 
thousand.  I  picture  such  a  man  travelling  over  the  wastes 
of  remorse,  hounded  by  the  wolves  of  his  past  sins,  rushing 
with  desperation  into  a  destruction  still  worse  than  his  pres- 
ent woe,  all  unable  to  endure  the  horrible  baying  of  his  old 
sins,  much  less  to  endure  their  sharper  fangs  when  they 
shall  tear  him  in  pieces,  and  there  shall  be  none  to  deliver. 
But  the  righteous  man  knows  that  though  his  sins  were  as' 
scarlet,  they  have  been  made  white  as  wool  through  the 
precious  blood  of  Christ ;  and  moreover,  by  the  power  of 
the  Holy  Spirit,  his  life  has  been  kept  from  the  vices  of  the 
world,  and  he  has  been  enabled  to  serve  his  Lord  ;  this 
surely  must  help  to  make  soft  his  dying  pillow.  He  remem- 
bers those  holy  days  of  sacred  worship,  those  gatherings 
around  the  family  altar,  that  child  taught  to  pray,  that 


270         THE  END  OF  THE  RIGHTEOUS  DESIRED. 

young  man  won  from  folly  and  led  in  the  paths  of  right^ 
eousness  ;  above  all,  he  remembers  the  love  visits  which  the 
Lord  Jesus  has  paid  to  his  favored  soul ;  and  so,  perfectly 
at  peace,  forgiving  all  men  their  offences  as  he  desires  to  be 
forgiven,  and  conscious  that  his  Father  has  forgiven  hun,  be 
can  sleep  upon  his  dying  bed  as  softly  as  on  the  stillest 
night  of  his  life.  "  Let  me,"  in  this  sense,  "  die  the  death 
ol  the  righteous," 

Again,  the  righteous  man,  when  he  dies,  does  not  lose  his 
all.  With  every  other  man  the  sound  of  "  earth  to  earth, 
dust  to  dust,  and  ashes  to  ashes,"  is  the  end  of  present 
seeming  wealth  and  the  beginning  of  eternal  and  real  want. 
But  the  Christian  is  not  made  a  bankrupt  by  the  grave  : 
death  to  him  is  gain.  "  Go,"  said  the  dying  Saracen  hero, 
Saladin,  "  take  this  winding  sheet,  and  as  soon  as  I  expire, 
bear  it  on  a  lance  through  all  the  streets,  and  let  the  herald 
cry  as  he  holds  aloft  the  ensign  of  death,  *  This  is  all  that  is 
left  of  Saladin,  the  conqueror  of  the  East.' "  He  need  not 
have  so  said  if  he  had  been  a  Christian,  for  the  believer's 
heritage  is  not  rent  from  him,  but  opened  up  to  him  by  the 
rough  hand  of  death.  The  world  to  come  and  all  its  infinite 
riches  and  blessedness  are  ours  in  the  moment  of  departure. 
It  is  written  upon  the  tomb  of  Cyrus,  "  Stranger,  here  lies 
Cynis,  who  gave  the  empire  to  the  Persians ;  grudge  him 
not  tlie  little  eaith  that  covers  him."  But  the  Christian  lies 
not  there  under  the  tombstone  ;  he  is  not  here,  for  he  is  ris- 
en. He  has  left  his  poor  worn  garments  here  to  be  washed, 
and  cleansed,  and  purified ;  and  by-and-by,  when  they  are 
whiter  than  any  fuller  can  make  them,  he  will  come  to  take 
his  garments  again;  but  meanwhile  the  Christian  is  not 
bui*ied  here,  nor  is  the  tomb  his  sole  possession  ;  his  treas- 
ure is  in  heaven,  and  he  is  gone  where  his  wealth  is  stored. 
WTio  would  not  wish  to  die  a  death  which  would  be  a  gain 
to  him  ?  Are  you  not  conscious  some  of  you  that  death 
woidd  be  a  horrible  loss  to  you  ?  It  would  shut  up  forevet 
9II  the  outlets  of  your  present  mirtb,  and  all  the  sources  of 


THE  END  OF  THE  RIGHTEOUS  DESIRED.         271 

your  present  joy.  Alas  for  you  !  for  the  day  of  the  Lord  to 
you  will  be  darkness  and  not  light ! 

"  Let  me  die  the  death  of  the  righteous  "  may  well  be 
our  wish,  because  he  dies  with  a  good  hope.  Peering  into 
otemity,  with  eyes  marvellously  strengthened,  the  believer 
frequently  beholds  even  while  he  is  yet  below,  something 
of  the  glory  which  is  to  be  revealed  in  him.  Have  you  nev- 
er heard  the  songs  of  dying  women,  and  seen  their  glowing 
countenances  as  they  thought  they  could  hear  the  angels, 
and  all  but  see  the  invisible  glory  ?  Have  you  never  seen 
their  beaming  eyes  and  heard  their  memorable  words,  so 
rich,  so  original,  so  quaint,  so  wet  with  the  dew  of  heaven, 
that  they  could  not  have  borrowed  them  ?  Ignorant,  un- 
lettered persons  have  I  heard  say  in  their  dying  moments, 
words  which  were  worthy  of  the  most  refined  poetry.  Have 
you  never  seen  the  gray-headed  man  who,  in  his  weakness, 
had  come  to  talk  as  a  child,  suddenly  clothed  with  patri- 
archal dignity,  as,  stretching  out  his  bony  hand,  he  has  ex- 
claimed, "  Yea,  though  I  walked  through  the  valley  of  the 
shadow  of  death,  I  will  fear  no  evil :  for  thou  art  with  me  ; 
thy  rod  and  thy  staff  they  comfort  me  "  ?  It  is  sweet  to 
die  with  Canaan's  happy  land  in  view — to  melt  into  eternal 
bliss,  as  the  twilight  of  the  morning  melts  into  opening  day. 
It  must  be  a  dreary  thing  to  die  believing  in  annihilation, 
or  expecting  a  doom  still  worse.  My  hearer,  will  this  be 
your  death  ?  Will  you  hear  the  warning  cry  of  the  angel : 
"  One  woe  is  past ;  and,  behold,  there  come  two  woes 
more  "  ?  Death  is  past,  but  the  judgment  and  the  pit  are 
yet  to  come.  God  forbid  that  such  horrors  should  freeze 
the  genial  current  of  my  soul,  but  may  bliss  eternal  be  my 
prospect  from  the  top  of  my  expiring  Pisgah.  Let  me  die 
as  the  Christian  whose  eye  is  resplendent  with  visions  of 
light,  and  whose  heart  is  fired  with  the  confidence  of  seeing 
his  Redeemer  and  being  made  like  to  him,  to  dwell  with 
him  world  without  end  ! 
^  Moreover,  beloved,  the  believer  dies  in  the  arms  of  a 


272        THB  ENP  OF  THE  BIGHTEOUS  DSSIBSD. 

Ftiend.  I  do  not  say  in  the  arms  of  a  mortal  friend,  for  it 
has  fallen  to  the  lot  of  some  Christians  to  be  burnt  at  the 
stake ;  and  some  of  them  have  rotted  to  death  in  dungeons ; 
but  yet  I  will  repeat  it,  every  believer  dies  in  the  arms  of  a 
Friend  ;  the  best  of  friends,  the  Friend  that  sticketh  closer 
than  a  brother.  Precious  is  communion  with  the  Son  of 
God,  and  never  more  so  than  when  it  is  enjoyed  upon  the 
verge  of  heaven. 


**  Jesus  can  make  a  dying  bed 
Feel  soft  as  downy  pillows  are. 
While  on  his  breast  I  lean  my  head, 
And  breathe  my  life  out  sweetly  there." 

Jesus  is  a  friend  who  is  most  practically  friendly,  for  the 
righteous  man,  in  the  most  calm  and  business-like  manner, 
leaves  his  wife  and  his  children  in  the  hands  of  God,  and 
quotes  the  promise,  "  Leave  thy  fatherless  children,  and  let 
thy  widows  trust  in  me."  He  would  fain  live  perhaps  to 
comfort  the  partner  of  his  bosom  a  little  longer,  and  to  see 
the  children  of  their  mutual  love  brought  up  to  riper  man- 
hood, but  since  he  must  go,  how  often  does  God  enable  him 
to  forget  all  care,  to  cast  it  so  completely  into  the  hands  of 
Christ,  that  he  sings,  "  All  is  well !  "  I  have  sometimes 
heard  from  dying  saints  sentences  like  these,  "  My  business 
is  all  settled,  I  never  want  to  hear  again  of  the  stock,  of  the 
farm,  or  of  the  shop,  or  of  the  family,  I  have  put  it  all 
away ;  God  will  provide  for  those  I  have  left  behind,  and  I 
have  nothing  now  to  do  but  just  to  hear  the  summons, 
*  Come  up  higher,'  and  then  to  enter  into  my  Father's 
house."  My  hearers,  I  am  not  giving  you  an  exaggerated  pic- 
ture ;  I  am  not  telling  you  some  wondrous  stories  of  remark- 
able departures,  but  I  am  telling  you  what  is  the  common 
way  of  the  dying  of  the  righteous,  which  I  trust  commends 
itself  to  your  conscience  as  being  naturally  that  which 
righteous  men  might  expect  to  feel  when  returning  to  their 
God.     The  Christian  dies  in  peace^  and  often  in  triumph. 


THE  BND  OF  THE  RIGHTEOUS  DESIRED.         273 

AccordiDg  to  the  state  of  his  body,  or  the  disease  by  which 
he  may  be  taken  off,  his  feelings  will  vary  between  peace 
and  triumph.  Sometimes  the  death  scene  is  still  as  a  sum- 
mer's evening,  and  the  Christian  crosses  the  Jordan  almost 
dryshod ;  or  if  there  be  a  storm,  and  Jordan  overflows  its 
banks,  the  believer  resting  upon  the  everlasting  arm,  feels 
the  bottom  of  the  river  and  finds  it  good.  At  times  how- 
ever, God  has  been  pleased  to  give  to  his  people  grace  to 
mount  to  heaven  in  a  chariot  of  fiery  joy,  so  that  their  dy- 
ing bed  has  been  a  throne,  and  their  chamber  a  palace  of 
glory.  These  instances  are  not  uncommon,  they  are  prob- 
ably the  rule ;  but  in  all  cases  there  is  a  strong,  deep  cur- 
rent of  pure  and  precious  peace,  which  glides  along  the  val- 
ley of  deathshade,  and  makes  glad  the  follower  of  the  Lamb 
— "  Let  me  die  the  death  of  the  righteous,"  for  such  dying 
is  the  dawn  of  bliss,  the  antepast  of  immortal  glory. 

Lastly,  when  the  good  man  dies,  he  dies  with  honor. 
Who  cares  for  the  death  of  the  wicked  ?  A  few  mourning 
friends  lament  for  a  little  time,  but  they  almost  feel  it  a  re- 
lief within  a  day  or  two  that  such  a  one  is  gone.  As  for  the 
righteous,  when  he  dieth  there  is  weeping  and  mourning  for 
him.  Like  Stephen,  devout  men  carry  Mm  to  the  sepul- 
chre, and  make  great  lamentation  over  him.  See  you  the 
funeral  of  the  weeds  ?  They  are  hurried  up  in  heaps,  they 
are  thrown  over  the  garden  wall,  they  are  burned  forth- 
with, and  no  one  regrets  them ;  they  were  no  blessing  in 
living,  they  are  no  lamentation  in  dying.  Did  you  ever  see 
the  funeral  of  the  wheat,  if  such  I  may  call  it  ?  Here  come 
the  golden  sheaves.  The  wain  is  heavy  with  the  precious 
freight  :  on  the  top  stands  one  who  gives  a  cheery  note ; 
and  all  around  the  harvest  men  and  village  maidens  dance 
or' shout  for  joy  as  they  bring  home  the  shocks  of  golden 
corn  to  the  garner.  Let  me  be  gathered  home  with  the  tr  t- 
umphant  funeral  of  the  wheat  which  man  values,  garnen  d 
by  angels,  housed  with  songs  of  saintly  spirits,  and  not  ca-st 
•way  an  a  reprobate  and  worthless  thing,  like  the  weeds  of 
12* 


274        THE  END  OF  THE  RIGHTEOUS  DESIBED, 

which  men  are  thankful  to  be  rid.  May  it  be  yours  and 
mine,  when  we  depart,  to  bo  remembered  by  those  whom  we 
have  succored  in  their  need,  whom  we  instructed  in  their 
ignorance,  whom  we  comforted  in  their  distress  I  May  wo 
not  depart  from  this  world  shaken  off  from  it,  as  Paul  shook 
the  viper  from  his  hand,  but  may  our  ashes  be  gathered  up 
as  sacred  dust,  precious  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord.  Let  me, 
in  tha^  sense  and  every  other,  "  die  the  death  of  the  right- 
eous." 

I  need  not  tarry  long  on  this  point.  Any  one  of  these 
suggestions  might  suffice  to  incite,  even  in  such  a  man  as 
Balaam,  a  desire  to  "  die  the  death  of  the  righteous."  Sui-ely 
it  will  kindle  in  you  the  same  longings. 

n.  Balaam  spoke  concerning  the  godly  man,  of  ms  last 

END. 

I  do  not  know  that  this  wicked  prophet,  whose  eyes  were 
once  opened,  knew  any  thing  about  this  latter  end,  as  I  shall 
interpret  it ;  but  you  and  I  do  know,  and  so  let  us  use  his 
words,  if  not  his  thoughts.  We  do  not  believe  that  death  is 
the  last  end  of  men.  Those  who  do  believe  it  are  welcome 
to  their  belie£  We  ceilainly  shall  not  wish  to  deprive  them 
of  it.  When  a  dog  has  his  bone,  let  him  keep  it ;  we  envy 
not  his  enjoyment.  If  ungodly  men  delight  in  the  thought 
of  dying  like  brutes,  perhaps  they  know  their  own  value 
best,  and  know  what  would  be  best  for  society  if  it  should 
happen  to  them ;  so  they,  having  made  their  choice,  shall 
keep  it  if  they  will.  As  for  us,  we  believe  ourselves  to  be 
immortal ;  that  God  has  endowed  us  with  a  spiritual  nature 
which  shall  outlive  the  sun,  outlast  the  stars,  and  run  on 
coeval  with  eternity.  Like  the  years  of  God's  right  hand, 
like  the  days  of  the  Most  High,  has  God  ordained  the  life 
of  souls  to  be.  Now,  I  can  well  believe  that  the  most  of  us 
wish  that  onr  position  after  deatli  may  be  like  tliat  of  the 
righteous.  The  first  consideration  in  death  is  that  the  spirit 
ia  disembodied.     What  a  spirit  is  like  without  a  body  you 


THE  END  OP  THE  RIGHTEOUS  DESIRED.         275 

and  I  cannot  guess  :  it  is,  of  course,  not  a  thing  to  be  seen, 
or  heard,  or  touched,  or  handled  ;  it  is  quite  out  of  the  realm 
of  materialism,  and  quite  beyond  the  reach  of  the  senses. 
Yet  you  and  I  are  conscious  that  there  is  an  immaterial 
something  within  us  infinitely  more  precious  than  these 
poor  clay  hands,  and  feet,  and  eyes  of  ours.  This  immaterial 
something  will  leave  the  body,  and  it  will  be  naked;  not  a 
thing  to  be  desired,  for  even  Paul  says,  "  Not  that  we  would 
be  unclothed  ; "  he  did  not  desire  the  disembodied  state  for 
its  own  sake,  nor  should  we.  Those  disembodied  saints 
who  are  now  in  heaven  are  happy,  perfectly  happy  as  to 
their  souls,  but  they,  as  to  their  manhood,  are  not  yet  made 
perfect.  "  They  without  us,"  the  apostle  says  "  cannot  be 
made  perfect  ; "  until  we  all  are  gathered  in,  and  the  resur- 
rection day  comes,  they  are  without  bodies  ;  and  are,  as  it 
were,  but  half  men  ;  all  the  powers  they  have  are  full  of  hap- 
piness, but  they  are  "  waiting  for  the  adoption,  to  wit,  the 
redemption  of  the  body,"  which  will  be  at  the  second  coming 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  But  what  is  there  desirable  in  the 
state  of  the  Christian  when  his  spiritis  disembodied  ?  I  should 
desire  to  be  like  a  Christian  in  the  disembodied  state,  because 
he  wiU  not  be  altogether  in  a  new  and  strange  world.  Some 
of  you  have  never  exercised  your  spirits  at  all  about  the 
spirit-world.  You  have  talked  with  thousands  of  people  in 
bodies,  but  you  have  never  spoke  with  spiritual  beings  ;  to 
you  the  realm  of  spirit  is  all  unknown ;  but  let  me  tell  you, 
Christians  are  in  the  daily  habit  of  communing  with  the 
spirit- world,  by  which  P  mean  that  their  souls  converse  witl 
God;  their  spirits  are  affected  by  the  Holy  Spirit;  they 
have  fellowship  with  angels,  who  are  ministering  spirits 
sent  forth  to  minister  to  them  that  are  the  heirs  of  salvation. 
Now,  when  some  of  you  enter  into  the  spirit-world,  you  will 
say,  "  I  never  was  here  before ;  this  is  a  foreign  land  to 
me."  I  can  conceive  that  you  will  call  for  some  compan- 
ion. "  Is  there  any  one  here  with  whom  I  have  had  deal- 
ings ?  "    And  there  will  be  a  voice  heard,  "  Yes,  I  have  often 


276        ^I'HE  END  OF  THE  BIQHTEOU8  DE8IBSD. 

spoken  to  yon,  and  you  to  me.''  ^^Wliois  that?"  It  ia 
Satan  or  some  evil  spirit  with  whom  alone  Out  of  all  spirits 
you  have  ever  had  communion ;  he  will  be  the  only  friend 
to  meet  you — ^and  what  a  friend !  Your  grim  companion^ 
your  fellow-sinner,  and  your  fellow-prisoner  forever !  But 
a  Christian  in  the  disembodied  state,  if  I  may  so  imagine  it^ 
might  cr}-,  "  Where  are  my  friends  ?  I  have  been  here  be- 
fore ?  Where  are  those  with  whom  aforetime  I  had  fellow- 
ship." A.nd  a  response  will  come  from  the  ministering  an- 
gels ;  there,  above  all,  will  be  the  blessed  Spirit  of  God ; 
there  will  be  God  himself^  and  the  Spirit  of  the  ever-living 
Christ,  all  these  will  make  up  sweet  company  for  the  believ- 
er. After  the  soul  has  left  the  body,  we  believe  that  it  at 
once  appears  before  Gody  and  receives^  by  anticipation^  tchat 
tcill  be  iU  final  sentence.  To  the  righteous  soul  there  is  no 
sleeping  in  the  grave,  no  delay  in  purgatory  before  he  en- 
ters into  heaven.  "  To-day  shalt  thou  be  with  me  in  para- 
dise," is  the  portion  of  all  who  trust  in  Jesus.  Now,  think, 
dear  hearer,  your  disembodied  spirit  will  have  to  appear  be- 
fore the  fiery  eyes  of  God,  what  then  is  your  relation  to  God 
this  morning?  Why,  some  of  you  never  think  of  him; 
some  of  you,  I  almost  blush  to  say  it,  have  cursed  him  to  hi? 
face,  and  have  even  asked  him  to  damn  yon.  Ah  I  he  wiU 
do  it,  except  you  repent !  But  how  delightful  must  it  be 
for  a  man  to  say,  "  I  am  going  up  to  God ;  he  is  my  Fa- 
ther ;  it  is  no  more  terror  to  me  tlian  for  a  child  to  go  home 
from  school ;  I  am  going  to  my  God,  vnth  whom  I  am  rec- 
onciled by  the  precious  blood  of  Jesus ;  I  have  known  my 
God,  he  is  no  stranger  to  me ;  I  saw  him  in  Christ  and 
I  trusted  him ;  and  all  my  life  long  I  learned  to  see  him 
in  the  works  of  nature;  I  could  say  of  the  mountains  and 
the  valleys,  *  My  Father  made  them  alL'  I  never  was  so 
happy  as  when  thoughts  of  God  came  flowing  into  my 
^irit.  My  spirit  has  dwelt  vnX\i  God  when  in  the  body  ; 
it  is  not  afraid  to  fly  up  to  God  now  that  it  has  left 
the   body  behind   it."     Surely,  in  the   prospect   of  Micb 


THE  END  OP  THE  RIGHTEOUS  DESIRED.        2Y7 

B  judgment,  each  man  may  say«  '^  Let  my  last  end  be  likf 
his!" 

After  the  judgment  is  pronounced,  the  disembodied 
spirit  dwells  in  hearken.  Some  of  you  could  not  be  happy 
if  you  were  allowed  to  enter  that  he?vyen.  If  you  could  be 
admitted  between  those  pearly  gates  which  forever  exclude 
pollution,  sin,  and  shame,  you  could  not  be  happy  there. 
Shall  I  tell  you  why  ?  It  is  a  land  of  splrifc,  and  you  have 
neglected  your  spirit ;  some  of  you  even  deny  that  you  have 
a  spirit,  and  I  do  not  wonder  that  you  say  so,  because  I  do 
not  suppose  that  you  have  ever  exercised  it ;  but  let  a  man 
who  has  delighted  to  commune  with  the  Holy  Spirit  enter 
into  the  spirit- world,  and  he  will  be  in  his  element !  Besides, 
the  world  to  come  is  a  holy  world;  the  engagements  of  dis- 
embodied spirits  are  all  pure  and  lovely.  What  will  that 
man  do  who  loved  drunkenness,  who  indulged  in  unclean 
habits  ?  He  will  be  out  of  his  element.  If  he  could  be  in 
heaven,  as  Whitfield  used  to  say,  he  would  ask  God  to  let 
him  out,  and  would  run  into  hell  for  shelter,  for  heaven 
would  be  a  dreadful  place  to  an  ungodly  man.  There  is  a 
dream  which  is  told  (I  tell  it  not  for  the  dream,  but  for  the 
moral  of  it)  of  a  young  woman  who  imagined  that  she  was 
in  heaven  unconverted,  and  thought  she  saw  upon  the  pave- 
ment of  transparent  gold  multitudes  of  spirits  dancing  to 
the  sweetest  music.  She  stood  still,  unhappy,  motionless, 
silent,  and  when  the  Bang  said  to  her,  "Why  do  you  not 
partake  in  the  joy  ?  "  she  answered,  "  I  cannot  join  in  the 
dance,  for  I  do  not  know  the  measure ;  I  cannot  join  in  the 
song,  for  I  do  not  know  the  tune;"  then  said  he  in  a  voice 
of  thunder,  "  What  dost  thou  here  ?  "  And  she  thought  her- 
self cast  out  forever.  Ah,  dear  hearer !  heaven  is  a  pre- 
pared place  for  a  prepared  people.  If  you  do  not  learn 
hoaven's  language  on  earth  you  cannot  leani  it  in  the  world 
to  come.  If  you  are  not  holy  you  cannot  be  with  holy 
Baints.  What  a  misery  would  it  be  for  ygj^i  to  be  always 
with  those  who  are  praising  and  serving  God  if  you  know 


278        THE  END  OF  THE  RIGHTEOUS 


ni;i;  1:4:^1 


nothing  of  his  love.  If  you  have  never  praised  bim  on 
earth,  you  will  not  readily  take  to  it  there.  You  would 
be  strangers  in  a  strange  land.  Ah  I  trouble  not  yourselves, 
that  shall  never  be  your  portion.  "  Except  a  man  be  bom 
again,  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God,"  much  less  can  he 
ever  enter  there. 

After  awhile  our  bodies  will  he  raised  again ;  the  soul  will 
re-f  nter  the  body ;  for  Christ  has  not  only  bought  the  souls 
of  his  people,  but  their  bodies  too.  Think  of  that  tremendous 
day,  when  the  trump  shall  be  heard,  shrill  as  a  clarion,  ring- 
ing through  earth,  and  heaven,  and  hell,  "  Awake,  ye  dead  ! 
awake,  ye  dead  !  and  come  to  judgment !  com£  to  judgment, 
come  away ! "  Then  up  will  start  the  bodies  of  the  wicked. 
I  know  not  in  what  shapes  of  dread  thty  will  arise,  nor  how 
they  will  appear.  What  forms  of  ghastliness  they  will  put 
on ;  what  horrors  will  wreathe  their  brows,  I  cannot  tell ; 
but  this  I  know,  that  when  the  righteous  shall  nse  they  will 
be  glorious  like  the  Lord  Jesus  ;  they  shall  have  all  the  love- 
liness which  heaven  itself  can  give  them.  Thein  body  here 
is  but  a  shrivelled  grain  sown  in  the  earth  ;  their  next  body 
will  be  as  much  more  glorious  than  that  as  the  sweetest 
flower  of  spring  is  fairer  than  the  shrivelled  seed  that  was 
cast  into  the  mould.  It  will  be  a  glorious  body,  raised  in 
honor,  raised  in  power,  raised  no  more  to  die.  Oh,  glori- 
ous hour  !  I  know  that  my  Redeemer  liveth,  and  that  he 
shall  stand  at  the  latter  day  upon  the  earth :  and  though 
after  my  skin  worms  destroy  this  body,  yet  in  my  flesh  shall 
I  see  God  :  whom  I  shall  see  for  myself,  and  mine  eyes  shall 
behold,  and  not  another."  Would  you  not  wish  to  rise  in 
the  image  of  Christ  as  the  righteous  will  ?  Remember  you 
juust  rise  from  the  grave  very  much  what  you  are  when  put 
into  it.  I  think  I  see  a  perfect  model  of  a  city  before  me, 
cont<»ining  all  that  is  to  be  built.  Here  I  see  a  temple  of  al- 
abaster, and  there  a  dunghill.  The  architect  is  bidden  to 
produce  on  the  largest  scale,  in  the  purest  marble,  that 
oity  as  modelled  before  him.     Rest  assured  that  he  will 


THE  END  OF  THE  RIGHTEOUS  DESIRED.         279 

produce  the  temple  as  a  temple,  only  far  more  splendid,  and 
the  dunghill  as  a  dunghill,  only  ten  thousand  times  more 
loathsome.  Now,  which  are  you  in  that  model?  For  this 
Ufa  is  a  model  of  the  life  to  come,  and  it  is  written,  "  He 
that  is  filthy,  let  him  be  filthy  still,  and  he  that  is  holy  let 
him  be  holy  still."  Ah  1  mj^hearer,  you  may  well  wish 
to  be  holy  here,  that  you  may  be  holy  there ;  to  be  pure 
here,  that  you  may  be  pure  there;  to  be  godlike  on  cartli, 
that  you  may  be  godlike  in  heaven.  "  Let  my  last  end  be 
like  that  of  the  righteous."  Let  me  wave  the  palm  of  vic- 
tory ;  let  me  wear  the  crown  of  triumph  ;  let  me  be  girt  about 
with  the  fair  white  linen  of  immaculate  perfection  ;  let  me 
cast  my  crown  before  Jehovah's  feet ;  let  me  swell  the  ever- 
lasting song  ;  let  my  voice  make  one  in  that  eternal  chorus, 
"Hallelujah,  Hallelujah,  the  Lord  God  omnipotent  reign- 
eth  ! "  Oh  I  how  will  I  sing  1  how  sweetly  shall  my  voice 
be  attuned  to  notes  of  gratitude !  how  will  my  heart  dance 
with  ecstasy  before  that  throne !  "Let  me  die  the  death  of 
the  righteous,  and  let  my  last  end  be  like  his  I " 

ni.  As  this  is  the  last  occasion  of  my  preaching  in  this 
great  hall,  I  shall  venture  to  trespass  a  little  longer  ;  and  on 
the  third  head  I  shall  most  earnestly  ask  your  solemn  at- 
tention for  a  few  minutes  longer.     We  have  to  make  a 

PBACnCAL  USE  OF  THE  WHOLE. 

Behold  the  vanity  of  mere  desires,  Balaam  desired  to  die 
the  death  of  the  righteous,  and  yet  was  slain  in  battle  fight* 
ing  against  those  righteous  men  whom  he  envied.  There  is 
an  old  proverb  which  says,  "  Wishers  and  woulders  make  bad 
housekeepers  ; "  and  another  which  declares, "  Wishing  never 
filled  a  sack."  I  commend  the  pith  of  those  proverbs  to 
you  now.  Mere  desiring  to  die  the  death  of  the  righteous, 
though  it  may  be  natural,  will  be  exceedingly  unprofitable. 
I  beseech  you  stop  not  there.  Have  you  never  heard  the 
old  classic  story  of  those  ancient  Gauls  who,  having  once 
drank  the  sweet  wines  of  Italy  constantly,  as  they  smacked 


2b0         THE  2ND  OF  THE  RIGHTEOUS  DESIBSD. 

their  lips,  said  one  to  another,  "  Where  is  Italy  ?  "  And 
•whei*  their  leaders  pointed  to  the  gigantic  Alps  crowned 
with  snow,  they  said,  "  Cannot  we  cross  them?"  Every  time 
they  tasted  the  wine  the  question  was  put,  "  Where  is  Italy  ? 
and  cannot  we  reach  it  ?"  This  was  good, plain  sense.  So 
they  put  on  their  war-harn5Ss,  and  marclied  to  old  Rjme 
to  fight  for  the  wines  of  Italy.  So,  my  brother,  every  time 
you  liear  of  heaven,  I  should  like  you  with  Gothic  ardor 
to  say,  "  Where  is  it  ?  for  I  fain  would  go."  And  hi  ppy 
should  I  be  if  men  here  would  put  on  the  harness  ol  the 
Christian,  and  say,  "  Through  floods  and  flames  for  sl  ;h  a 
conquest,  to  drink  of  such  wines  well  refined,  we  would  fain 
go  to  the  battle  that  we  may  win  the  victory."  Oh,  th«  fol- 
ly of  those  who,  knowing  and  desiring  this,  yet  spend  their 
strength  for  naught !  The  Roman  Emperor  fitted  out  a  great 
expedition  and  sent  it  to  conquer  Britain.  The  valiant  le- 
gionaries leaped  ashore,  and  each  man  gathered  a  handful 
of  shells  and  went  back  to  his  bark  again — that  was  alL 
Some  of  you  are  equally  foolish.  You  are  fitted  by  God  for 
great  endeavors  and  lofty  enterprises,  and  you  are  gathering 
shells  :  your  gold  and  your  silver,  your  houses  and  your  lands 
— they  are  mere  empty  shells — and  heaven  and  everlasting 
life  you  let  go.  Like  Nero,  you  send  to  Alexandria  for  sand 
for  your  amusements,  and  send  not  for  wheat  for  your  starving 
souls.  O  fools  and  slow  of  heart,  when  shall  God,  who  gave 
you  souls,  give  those  souls  wisdom  that  you  may  seek  after 
the  true  treasure,  the  real ^  pearl,  the  heavenly  riches? 
"Well,"  cries  one,  "how  is  heaven  to  be  had?"  It  is  to 
be  bad  only  by  a  personal  seeking  after  it.  I  have  read  of 
one  who,  when  drowning,  saw  the  rainbow  in  the  heavens, 
l^icture  him  as  he  sinks  ;  he  looks  up,  and  there  if  he  sees  the 
many-colored  bow,  he  may  think  to  himself,  "  There  is  God's 
covenant  sign  that  the  world  shall  never  be  drowned,  and  yet, 
here  I  am  drowning  in  this  river."  So  it  is  with  you.  There 
is  the  arch  of  God's  promise  over  you,  "  God  so  loved  the 
world,  that  he  gave  his  only  begotten  Son,  that  whosoever 


THE  END  OF  THE  RIGHTEOUS  DESIRED.         281 

bclieveth  in  him  should  not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life," 
yet  because  you  believe  not  in  him,  you  will  be  drowned  in 
your  sins.  "  I  would  fain  enlist  then,"  says  one,  "  in  the 
army  of  Christ,  and  fight  for  heaven."  Come  on,  then,  I 
am  Christ's  enlisting  officer  to  day.  "  What  am  I  to  give  ?  " 
Bays  one.  Give !  give  nothing.  "  But  I  have  many  good 
works."  These  are  not  to  be  brought  as  a  price  for  heav- 
en.  "  1  have  ray  prayers,  and  my  tears  of  repentance."  These 
cannot  avail  meritoriously;  if  you  want  to  be  a  Christian, 
you  must  come  to  Christ  with  an  empty  hand.  7oa  know 
how  the  recruiting  sergeant  makes  a  soldier :  not  by  asking 
the  man  to  give  him  something,  but  by  getting  him  to  take 
the  Queen's  shilling.  Take  Christ — that  is  God's  enlisting 
money — and  you  are  enlisted.  Do  not  bring  any  thing,  but 
take  the  water  of  life  freely.  If  you  will  trust  the  Lord 
Jesus,  and  take* him  to  be  your  salvation,  you  are  then  enlist- 
ed as  a  soldier  of  Jesus.  Oh  !  may  you  have  grace  to  do 
that  !  But  recollect,  all  soldiers  have  to  fight.  One  of  the 
first  things  you  will  have  to  do,  if  you  become  a  Christian, 
is  to  carry  a  cross.  Ah  !  you  do  not  like  it.  "  His  yoke  is 
easy,  and  his  burden  is  light ; "  take  it  upon  you  :  and  yet 
to  carnal  shoulders  the  cross  is  very  galling,  and  nothing 
but  grace  can  make  it  light.  You  will  have  to  give  up 
your  sins  ;  you  will  have  to  give  up  your  empty  pleasures ; 
you  will  have  henceforth  to  bear  witness  for  Christ  before  a 
crooked  and  perverse  generation.  Do  not  think  to  be 
Christ's  soldier,  and  yet  not  wear  his  livery.  No,  you  must 
put  on  his  regimentals  ;  you  must  wear  his  crest — his  crest 
is  the  cross;  you  must  take  his  shield,  the  shield  of  faith  ; 
and  his  sword,  which  is  the  sword  of  the  Spirit,  the  word  of 
God,  and  resting  alone  on  him,  depending  alone  upon  his 
merit,  you  shall  certainly  win  the  victory. 

My  brethren,  what  a  blessing  it  will  be  if  you  and  I 
shall  ever  reach  the  land  of  triumph.  You  remember  Bun- 
yan's  pict  ire.  He  says  he  saw  a  brave  palace,  and  as  he 
looked  up  he  could  hear  happy  spirits  singirg  on  the  top. 


.1 


282        'fHE  END  OF  THE  RIGHTEOUS  DESIRED. 

They  walked  in  white,  clad  in  royal  robes;  and  as  he  hear] 
them  singing,  he  longed  to  be  with  them.  Going  up  to  the 
door,  he  noticed  that  it  was  beset  with  armed  men,  a  great 
host,  with  pikes,  and  halberds,  and  swords,  pushing  back  all 
who  desired  to  come.  Presently  he  saw  a  man  of  bold  coun- 
tenance, covered  with  armor,  go  up  to  a  man  who  sat  at  a 
table  with  a  writer's  ink-horn ;  and  he  heard  him  say,  "  Sot 
down  my  name,  sir : "  and  as  soon  as  the  name  was  set  down 
the  man  drew  his  sword,  and  began  to  hack  and  hew  right 
and  left,  cutting  himself  a  way  right  through  the  midst  of 
his  enemies.  After  being  covered  with  sweat  and  blood 
and  many  wounds,  he  at  length  forced  an  entrance ;  an^ 
Bunyan  says,  "  I  did  hear  them  sweetly  sing  at  the  top, 
*  Come  in  !  come  in !  eternal  glory  thou  shalt  win.' "  I  am 
this  morning  the  man  with  the  writer's  ink-horn.  Is  there 
any  one  here  who  will  say,  "Set  my  name  down, sir?" 
I  trust  it  will  be  so.  I  trust  the  Holy  Spirit  will  win  your 
hearts  for  Jesus,  that  you  will  rest  in  him  alone;  but  the  mo- 
ment your  name  is  down,  remember  then  the  battle  begins  ; 
then,  with  your  sword  drawn,  you  must  begin  to  contend 
with  your  besetting  sins ;  you  must  have  done  with  your  old 
ways,  and  must  fight  against  them.  You  will  have  to  cut 
as  never  soldier  did,  for  you  will  have  to  wound  yourself : 
at  will  be  your  own  arms  and  eyes  that  will  have  to  be  given 
up,  your  own  sins  that  will  have  to  be  slain.  But,  oh,  the 
victory  will  make  amends  for  it  all !  It  was  but  the  other 
day  that  on  this  floor  men  wrestled  for  the  mastery — a 
dangerous  sport  in  which  few  of  us  would  like  to  take  a 
share — ^but  I  do  not  doubt  that  to  those  who  gained  the 
victory,  the  victory  seemed  an  ample  compensation.  Cer- 
tainly to  Rome's  old  legionaries,  when  they  rode  through 
the  stieets,  and  all  the  people  climbed  to  the  very  chimney 
tops  to  see  them  ride  the  streets  of  Rome,  it  was  enough 
reward  for  all  their  hardships  ;  but  the  triumphs  of  heaven, 
the  shouts  of  angels,  the  songs  of  the  redeemed,  the  hallelu- 
jahs, the  bliss  forever,  the  glory  without  end,  oh!  those  will 


THE  END  OF  THE  RIGHTEOUS  DESIRED.        383 

be  ail  abundant  recompense  to  the  hnrable  followers  of  the 
Lamb.  Be  of  good  courage,  ray  brethren.  Follow  the 
Captain  of  your  salvation!  Forward  to  the  fight,  to  the 
victory,  and  to  the  crown !  And  may  the  Lord  80  bleM 
you,  for  Jesus'  sake.    Amen. 


S84  NUMBER  ONB  THOUHAKD     OB. 


SERMON  XVIL 


NTJ3IBER  ONE  THOUSAND ;  OR, "  BREAD  ENOUGU 

AND  TO  SPARE.'' 

[This  was  the  thousandth  sennon  in  the  lefi^olar  weekly  series. 
The  discourses  have  been  published  without  a  break  from  week  to 

week.] 

•*A1ID  WHEN  HS    CAMS  TO  HIMSELF,  HE  SAID,  HOW  XAHT  HIRBD  SBBTA1IT9  OF  «T 
FATHEB*8  HATE  BBBAD  ENOUGH  AKD  TO  8FABS,  AHI>  I  rXBUH  WITH  BUWUEB?  ** 

Lake  xr.  17. 

"  He  came  to  himsell"  The  word  may  be  applied  to 
one  waking  out  of  a  deep  swoon.  He  had  been  onconscions 
of  his  true  condition,  and  he  had  lost  all  power  to  deliver 
himself  from  it ;  but  now  he  was  coming  round  again,  re- 
turning to  consciousness  and  action.  The  voice  which  shall 
awaken  the  dead  aroused  him ;  the  visions  of  his  sinful  trance 
all  disappeared ;  his  foul  but  fascinating  dreams  were  gone; 
he  came  to  himself.  Or  the  word  may  be  applied  to  one 
recovering  from  insanity.  The  prodigal  son  had  played  the 
madman,  for  sin  is  madness  of  the  worst  kind.  He  had  been 
demented,  he  had  put  bitter  for  sweet  and  sweet  for  bitter, 
darkness  for  light  and  light  for  darkness ;  he  had  injured 
■himself,  and  had  done  for  his  soul  what  those  possessed  of 
devils  in  our  Sa\dour's  time  did  for  their  bodies,  when  they 
wounded  themselves  with  stones,  and  cut  themselves  with 
knives.  The  insane  man  does  not  know  himself  to  be  iu- 
sane,  but  as  soon  as  he  comes  to  himself  he  painfully  per- 
ceives the  state  from  which  he  is  escaping..  Returning  tlien 
to  true  reason  and  sound  judgment,  the  prodigal  came  to 
himself.  Another  illustration  of  the  word  may  be  found 
in  the  old  world  fables  of  enchantment :  when  a  man  was 
disenthralled  from  the  magician's  spell  he  "  came  to  him- 
gel£"     Classic  story  has  its  legend  of  Circe,  the  enchant- 


BftEAD  ENOtJaa  AND  TO  Sl>AUB.  285 

ress,  who  transformed  men  into  swine.  Surely  this  young 
man  in  our  parable  had  been  degraded  in  the  same  manner. 
He  had  lowered  his  manhood  to  the  level  of  the  brutes.  It 
should  be  the  property  of  man  to  have  love  to  his  kindred, 
to  have  respect  for  right,  to  have  some  care  for  his  own  in- 
terest ;  this  young  man  had  lost  all  these  proper  attributes 
of  humanity,  and  so  had  become  as  the  beast  that  perish- 
eth.  But  as  the  poet  sings  of  Ulysses,  that  he  compelled 
the  enchantress  to  restore  his  companions  to  their  original 
form,  so  here  we  see  the  prodigal  returning  to  manhood, 
looking  away  from  his  sensual  pleasures,  and  commencing 
a  course  of  conduct  more  consistent  with  his  birth  and  pa- 
rentage. There  are  men  here  to-day  perhaps  who  are  still 
in  this  swoon ;  O  God  of  heaven,  arouse  them  I  Some  here 
who  are  morally  insane  ;  the  Lord  recover  them,  the  divine 
Physician  put  his  cooling  hand  upon  their  fevered  brow, 
and  say  to  them  :  "  I  will ;  be  thou  made  whole."  Perhaps 
there  are  others  here  who  have  allowed  their  animal  nature 
to  reign  supreme  ;  may  he  who  destroys  the  works  of  the 
devil  deliver  them  from  the  power  of  Satan,  and  give  them 
power  to  become  the  sons  of  God.  He  shall  have  all  the 
glory  I 

It  appears  that  when  the  prodigal  came  to  himself  he 
was  shut  up  to  two  thoughts.  Two  facts  were  clear  to  him, 
that  there  was  plenty  in  his  father's  house,  and  that  he  him- 
self was  famishing.  May  the  two  kindred  spiritual  facts 
have  absolute  power  over  all  your  hearts,  if  you  are  yet  un- 
saved ;  for  they  were  most  certainly  all-important  and  press- 
ing truths.  These  are  no  fancies  of  one  in  a  dream ;  no , 
ravings  of  a  maniac  ;  no  imaginations  of  one  under  fascina- 
tion :  it  is  most  true  that  there  is  plenty  of  all  good  things 
in  the  Father's  house,  and  that  the  sinner  needs  them.  Ko- 
where  else  can  grace  be  found  or  pardon  gained ;  but  witL 
Gk)d  there  is  plenitude  of  mercy ;  let  none  venture  to  dis- 
pute this  glorious  truth.  Equally  true  is  it  that  the  sinner 
without  God  is  perishing.     He  is  perishing  now;  he  will 


286  ITUMBER  ONE  THOUSAND;   0B» 

perish  everlastingly.  All  that  is  worth  having  in  his  exist- 
ence will  be  utterly  destroyed,  and  he  himself  shall  only  re- 
main as  a  desolation ;  the  owl  and  the  bittern  of  misery  and 
anguish  shall  haunt  the  ruins  of  his  nature  forever  and  for- 
ever. If  we  could  shut  up  unconvertbd  men  to  thoso  two 
thoughts,  what  hopeful  congregations  we  should  hava 
Alas  I  they  forget  that  there  is  mercy  only  with  God,  and 
fancy  that  it  is  to  be  found  somewhere  else  ;  and  they  try 
to  slip  away  from  the  humbling  fact  of  their  own  lost  es- 
tate, and  imagine  that  perhaps  there  may  be  some  back 
door  of  escape ;  that,  after  all,  they  are  not  so  bad  as  the 
Scrijiture  declares,  or  that  perchance  it  shall  be  right  with 
them  at  the  last,  however  wrong  it  may  be  with  them  now. 
Alas !  my  brethren,  what  shall  we  do  with  those  who  wil- 
fully shut  their  eyes  to  truths  of  which  the  evidence  is  over- 
whelming, and  the  importance  overpowering  ?  I  earnestly 
entreat  those  of  you  who  know  how  to  approach  the  throne 
of  God  in  faith,  to  breathe  the  prayer  that  he  would  now 
bring  into  captivity  the  unconverted  heart,  and  put  these 
two  strong  fetters  upon  every  unregenerate  soul ;  there  fe 
abundant  grace  with  God,  there  is  utter  destitution  with 
themselves.  Bound  with  such  fetters,  and  led  into  the  pres- 
ence of  Jesus,  the  captive  would  soon  receive  the  liberty  of 
the  children  of  God. 

I  intend  only  to  dwell  this  mommg,  or  mainly,  upon  the 
first  thought,  the  master  thought,  as  it  seems  to  me,  which 
was  in  the  prodigal's  mind — that  which  really  constrained 
him  to  say,  "  I  will  arise  and  go  to  my  father."  It  was  not, 
I  think,  the  home-bringing  thought  that  he  was  perishing 
with  hunger,  but  the  impulse  towards  his  father  found  its 
maijaspring  in  the  consideration,  "  How  many  hired  servants 
of  my  father's  have  bread  enough  and  to  spare  I "  The  plen- 
ty,  the  abundance,  the  superabundance  of  the  father's  house, 
was  that  which  attracted  him  to  return  home;  and  many, 
many  a  soul  has  been  led  to  seek  God  when  it  has  fully  be- 
lieved that  there  was  abundant  mercy  with  him.     My  desire 


BREAD  ENOUGH  AND  TO  SPARE  28? 

this  morning  shall  be  to  put  plainly  before  every  sinner  here 
the  exceeding  abundance  of  the  grace  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus, 
hoping  that  the  Lord  will  find  out  those  who  are  his  sons, 
and  that  they  may  catch  at  these  words,  and  as  they  hear 
of  the  abundance  of  the  bread  in  the  Father's  house,  may 
Bay,  "  I  will  arise  and  go  to  my  Father." 

I.  First,  then,  let  us  consider  for  a  short  time  the  mouk 

THAJf  ABUNDANCE    OF    ALL    GOOD   THINGS    IN    THE    FaTHER's 

HOUSE.  What  dost  thou  need  this  morning,  awakened  sin- 
ner? Of  all  that  thou  needest,  there  is  with  God  an  all- 
sufficient,  a  superabounding  supply  ;  "  bread  enough  and  to 
spare."  Let  us  prove  this  to  thee.  First,  cojislder  the  Father 
himself^  and  whosoever  shall  rightly  consider  the  Father, 
will  at  once  perceive  that  there  can  be  no  stint  to  mercy,  no 
bound  to  the  possibilities  of  grace.  What  is  the  nature  and 
character  of  the  Supreme  ?  "  Is  he  harsh  or  loving  ?  "  saith 
one.  The  Scripture  answers  the  question,  not  by  telling 
us  that  God  is  loving,  but  by  assuring  us  that  God  is  love. 
God  himself  is  love  ;  it  is  his  very  essence.  It  is  not  that 
love  is  in  God,  but  that  God  himself  is  love.  Can  there  be 
a  more  concise  and  more  positive  way  of  saying  that  the 
love  of  God  is  infinite?  You  cannot  measure  God  him- 
self ;  your  conceptions  cannot  grasp  the  grandeur  of  his  at- 
tributes, neither  can  you  tell  the  dimensions  of  his  love,  nor 
conceive  the  fulness  of  it.  Only  this  know,  that  high  as  the 
heavens  are  above  the  earth,  so  are  his  ways  higher  than 
your  ways,  and  his  thoughts  than  your  thoughts.  His 
mercy  endureth  forever.  He  pardoneth  iniquity,  and  pass- 
etli  by  the  transgression  of  the  remnant  of  his  heritage.  He 
retaineth  not  his  anger  forever,  because  he  delighteth  iu 
mercy.  "  Thou,  Lord,  art  good,  and  ready  to  forgive :  and 
]^lenteous  in  mercy  unto  all  them  that  call  upon  thee."  "  Thy 
mercy  is  great  above  the  heavens."  "The  Lord  is  very 
pitiful,  and  of  tender  mercy." 

If  divine  love  alone  should  not  seem  sufficient  for  your 


2Sg  NUMBER  ONE  THOtTSANB,    0% 

salvation,  remember  that  with  the  Father  to  whom  the  dii- 
ner  returns,  there  is  as  much  of  wisdom  as  thei'e  is  of  grace. 
Is  thy  case  a  very  difficult  one  ?  He  that  made  thee  can  heal 
thee.  Are  thy  diseases  strange  and  complex  ?  He  that  fashion- 
ed the  ear,  can  he  not  remove  its  deafness  ?  He  that  made 
the  eye,  can  he  not  enlighten  it  if  it  be  blind?  No  mischief 
can  have  happened  to  thee,  but  what  he  who  is  thy  God  can 
recover  thee  from  it.  Matchless  wisdom  cannot  fail  to  meet 
the  intricacies  of  thy  case. 

Neither  can  there  be  any  failure  of  power  with  the  Father. 
Dost  thou  not  know  that  he  who  made  the  earth,  and 
stretched  out  the  heavens  like  a  tent  to  dwell  in,  hath  no 
bound  to  his  strength,  nor  limit  to  his  might  ?  K  thou 
needest  omnipotence  to  lift  thee  up  from  the  slough  into 
which  thou  hast  fallen,  omnipotence  is  ready  to  deliver 
thee,  if  thou  cry  to  the  strong  for  strength.  Though  thou 
shouldest  need  all  the  force  with  which  the  Creator  made  the 
worlds,  and  all  the  strength  with  which  he  bears  up  the  pil- 
lars of  the  universe,  all  that  strength  and  force  should  be 
laid  out  for  thy  good,  if  thou  wouldst  believingly  seek  mercy 
at  the  hand  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus.  None  of  his  power 
shall  be  against  thee,  none  of  his  wisdom  shall  plan  thy  over- 
throw ;  but  love  shall  reign  in  all,  and  every  attribute  of 
God  shall  become  subservient,  to  thy  salvation.  Oh,  when 
I  think  of  sin  I  cannot  understand  how  a  sinner  can  be  saved  ; 
but  when  I  think  of  God,  and  look  into  his  heart,  I  under- 
stand how  readily  he  can  forgive.  "  Look  into  his  heart," 
saith  one ;  "  how  can  we  do  that  ?  "  Hath  he  not  laid  bare 
his  heart  to  you  ?  Do  you  inquire  where  he  has  done  this  ? 
I  answer,  yonder,  upon  Calvary's  cross.  What  was  in  the 
very  centre  of  the  divine  heart  ?  What,  but  the  person  of 
the  Well-beloved,  his  only  begotten  Son  ?  And  he  liath 
taken  his  only  begotten  and  nailed  him  to  the  cross,  because, 
if  I  may  venture  so  to  speak,  he  loved  sinners  better  than 
his  Son.  He  spared  not  his  Son,  but  he  spares  the  sinner ; 
he  poured  out  his  wrath  upon  his  Son  and  made  him  the  sub- 


BREAD  fiNOtaft  Ai*D  TO  SPARE.  28& 

stitute  for  sinners,  that  he  might  lavish  love  upon  the  guilty 
who  deserved  his  anger.  O  soul,  if  thou  ait  lost,  it  is  not 
from  any  want  of  grace,  or  wisdom,  or  power  in  the  Father ; 
if  thou  perish,  it  is  not  because  God  is  hard  to  move  or  una- 
ble to  save.  If  thou  be  a  castaway,  it  is  not  because  the 
Eternal  refused  to  hear  thy  cries  for  pardon  or  rejected  thy 
faith  in  him.  On  tliine  own  head  be  thy  blood,  if  thy  soul 
1)6  lost.  If  thou  starve,  thou  starvest  because  thou  wilt 
starve  ;  for  in  the  Father's  house  there  is  "  bread  enough  and 
to  8X)are." 

But,  now,  consider  a  second  matter  which  may  set  this 
more  clearly  before  us.  Think  of  the  Son  of  God,  who  is 
indeed  the  true  bread  of  life  for  sinners.  Sinner,  I  return 
to  my  personal  address.  Thou  needest  a  Sayiour ;  and  thou 
mayst  well  be  encouraged  when  thou  seest  that  a  Saviour 
is  provided — provided  by  God,  since  it  is  certain  he  would 
not  make  a  mistake  in  the  provision.  But  consider  who  the 
Saviour  is.  He  is  himself  God.  Jesus  who  came  from 
heaven  for  our  redemption  was  not  an  angel,  else  might  we 
tremble  to  trust  the  weight  of  our  sin  upon  him.  He  was 
not  mere  man,  or  he  could  but  have  suffered  as  a  substitute 
for  many,  if  indeed  for  one ;  but  he  was  very  God  of  very  God, 
in  the  beginning  with  the  Father.  And  does  such  a  one 
come  to  redeem  ?  Is  there  room  to  doubt  as  to  his  ability, 
if  that  be  the  fact  ?  I  do  confess  this  day,  that  if  my  sins 
were  ten  thousand  times  heavier  than  they  are,  yea,  and  if 
I  had  all  the  sins  of  this  crowd  in  addition  piled  upon  me,  I 
could  trust  Jesus  with  them  all  at  this  moment  now  that  I 
know  him  to  be  the  Christ  of  God.  He  is  the  mighty  God, 
and  by  his  pierced  hand  the  burden  of  our  sins  is  easily  re- 
moved ;  he  blotteth  out  our  sins,  he  casts  them  into  the 
depths  of  the  sea. 

But  think  of  what  Jesus  the  Son  of  God  has  done.      He 

who  was  God,  and  thus  blessed  forever,  left  the  throne  and 

royalties  of  heaven,  and  stooped  to  yonder  manger.     There 

he  lies ;  his  mother  wraps  him  in  swaddling  clothes,  he  hangs 

13 


2dO  i^UMBEft  ONE  THOUSA^I);    Ofi, 

upon  her  breast ;  the  Infinite  is  clothed  as  an  infant,  the  th 
visible  is  made  manifest  in  tiesh,  the  Almighty  is  linktid  with 
weakness,  for  our  sakes.  Oh,  matchless  stoop  of  condescen- 
iuoii !  If  the  Redeemer  God  does  this  in  order  to  save  as,  shall 
it  be  thought  a  thing  impossible  for  him  to  save  tbe  vilest 
of  the  vile?  Can  anv  thing  be  too  hard  for  him  who  comes 
from  heaven  to  earth  to  redeem  ? 

Pause  not  because  of  astonishment,  but  press  onward. 
Do  you  see  him  who  was  God  over  all,  blessed  forever,  liv- 
ing more  than  thirty  years  in  the  midst  of  the  sons  of  men, 
bearing  the  infirmities  of  manhood,  taking  upon  himself  our 
sicknesses,  and  sharing  our  sorrows ;  his  feet  weary  with 
treading  the  acres  of  Palestine  ;  his  body  faint  oftentim^ 
with  hunger  and  thirst,  and  labor ;  his  knees  knit  to  the 
eaith  with  midnight  prayer;  his  eyes  red  with  weeping  (for 
ofttimes  Jesus  wept),  tempted  in  all  points  like  as  we  are  ? 
Matchless  spectacle !  An  incarnate  God  dwells  among  sin- 
ners, and  endures  their  contradiction !  What  glory  flashed 
forth  ever  and  anon  from  the  midst  of  his  lowliness  !  a  glory 
which  should  render  faith  in  him  inevitable.  Thou  who 
didst  walk  the  sea :  thou  who  didst  raise  the  dead,  it  is  not 
rational  to  doubt  thy  power  to  forgive  sins  I  Didst  tliou 
not  thyself  put  it  so  when  thou  badest  the  man  take  up  his 
bed  and  walk  ?  "  Whether  is  easier,  to  say.  Thy  sins  be  for- 
given thee  ;  or  to  say.  Rise  up  and  walk?"  Assuredly  he 
is  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost  them  that  come  unto  God 
by  him  :  he  was  able  even  here  on  earth  in  weakness  to  for- 
give sins,  much  more  now  that  he  is  seated  in  his  glory, 
lie  is  exalted  on  high  to  be  a  Prince  and  a  Saviour,  to  give 
repentance  and  remission  of  sins. 

But,  ah  !  the  master  proof  that  in  Christ  Jesus  there  is 
"bread  enough  and  to.  spare,''  is  the  cross.  Will  you  fol- 
low me  a  moment,  will  you  follow  him,  rather,  to  Gelhse* 
mane  ?  Can  you  see  the  bloody  sweat  as  it  falls  upon  the 
ground  in  his  agony  ?  Can  you  think  of  his  scourging  be- 
fore Herod  and  Pilate  ?     Can  you  trace  him  along  the  Via 


BRE^  ENOUGH  AND  TO  SPARE.  291 

Dol(yrosa  of  Jerusalem  ?  Will  your  tender  hearts  endure  tc 
Bee  him  nailed  to  the  tree,  and  lifted  up  to  bleed  and  die 
This  is  but  the  shell ;  as  for  the  inward  kernel  of  his  suffer 
ings  no  language  can  describe  it,  neither  can  conception 
peer  into  it.  The  everlasting  God  laid  sin  or.  Christ,  and 
where  the  sin  was  laid  there  fell  the  wrath.  "It  pleased 
the  Lord  to  bruise  him ;  he  hath  put  him  to  grief."  Now  he 
that  died  upon  the  cross  was  God's  only  begotten  Son.  Can 
you  conceive  a  limit  to  the  merit  of  such  a  Saviour's  death  ? 
I  know  there  are  some  who  think  it  necessary  to  their  sys« 
tem  of  theology  to  limit  the  merit  of  the  blood  of  Jesus  :  if 
my  system  of  theology  needed  such  a  limitation,  I  would  cast 
it  to  the  winds.  I  cannot,  dare  not,  allow  the  thought  to 
find  a  lodging  in  my  mind  ;  it  seems  so  near  akin  to  blasphe- 
my. In  Christ's  finished  work  I  see  an  ocean  of  merit ;  my 
plummet  finds  no  bottom,  my  eye  discovers  no  shore.  There 
must  be  sufficient  efficacy  in  the  blood  of  Christ,  if  God  had 
go  willed  it,  to  have  saved  not  only  all  this  world,  but  ten 
thousand  worlds,  had  they  transgressed  the  Maker's  law. 
Once  admit  infinity  into  the  matter,  and  limit  Is  out  of  the 
question.  Having  a  divine  person  for  an  offering,  it  is  not 
consistent  to  conceive  of  limited  value  ;  bound  and  measure 
are  terms  inapplicable  to  the  divine  sacrifice.  The  Intent  of 
the  divine  purpose  fixes  the  application  of  the  infinite  offer- 
ing, but  does  not  change  it  into  a  finite  work.  In  the  atone* 
ment  of  Christ  Jesus  there  is  "  bread  enough  and  to  spare ; " 
even  as  Paul  wrote  to  Timothy,  "  He  is  the  Saviour  of  all 
men,  specially  of  those  that  believe." 

But  now  let  me  lead  you  to  another  point  of  solemnly 
joyful  consideration,  and  that  is  the  Holy  Spirit.  To  be- 
lieve and  love  the  Trinity  is  to  possess  the  key  of  theology. 
We  spoke  of  the  Father,  we  spoke  of  the  Son ;  let  us  now 
speak  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  We  do  him  all  too  little  honor, 
for  the  Holy  Spirit  condescends  to  come  to  earth  and  dwell 
in  our  hearts ;  and  notAvithstanding  all  our  provocations  he 
Btyi  abides  within  his  people.     Kow,  sinner,  thou  needest  a 


:»g2  NUMBER  ONE  TfiOFSAND;    OB. 

new  life  and  tbon  needest  holiness,  for  both  of  these  are  ne^ 
cessary  to  make  thee  fit  for  heaven.  Is  there  a  provision  for 
this  ?  The  Holy  Spirit  is  provided  and  given  in  the  cove- 
nant of  grace ;  and  surely  in  him  there  is  ^'  enough  and  to 
spare."  What  cannot  the  Holy  Spirit  do  ?  Being  divine, 
nothing  can  be  beyond  his  power.  Look  at  what  he  has  al- 
niady  done.  He  moved  upon  the  face  of  chaos,  and  brought 
i(  into  order ;  all  the  beauty  of  creation  arose  beneath  his 
moulding  breath.  We  ourselves  must  confess  with  Elihn, 
"  The  Spirit  of  God  hath  made  me,  and  the  breath  of  the 
Almighty  hath  given  me  life."  Think  of  the  great  deeds  of 
the  Holy  Spirit  at  Pentecost,  when  men  unlearned  spake  with 
tongues  of  which  they  knew  not  a  syllable  aforetime,  and 
the  flames  of  fire  upon  them  were  also  within  them,  so  that 
their  hearts  burned  with  zeal  and  courage  to  which  they 
hitherto  had  been  strangers.  Think  of  the  Holy  Spirit's 
work  on  such  a  one  as  Saul  of  Tarsus.  That  persecutor 
foams  blood,  he  is  a  very  wolf,  he  would  devour  the  saints 
of  God  at  Damascus,  and  yet,  within  a  few  moments,  you 
hear  him  say,  "  Who  art  thou,- Lord  ?  "  and  yet  again, "  Lord, 
what  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do  ?  "  His  heart  is  changed ;  the 
Spirit  of  God  has  new  created  it ;  the  adamant  is  mel^d  in 
a  moment  into  wax.  Many  of  us  stand  before  you  as  the 
living  monuments  of  what  the  Holy  Ghost  can  do,  and  we 
can  assure  you  from  our  own  experience,  that  there  is  no  in- 
ward evil  which  he  cannot  overcome,  no  lustful  desire  of  the 
flesh  which  he  cannot  subdue,  no  obduracy  of  the  aflections 
which  he  cannot  melt.  Is  any  thing  too  hard  for  the  Lord? 
Is  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  straitened  ?  Surely  no  sinner  can 
be  beyond  the  possibilities  of  mercy  when  the  Holy  Spirit 
condescends  to  be  the  agent  of  human  conversion.  O  sin- 
ner, if  thou  perish,  it  is  not  because  the  Holy  Spirit  wants 
power,  or  the  blood  of  Jesus  lacks  efficacy,  or  the  Father 
foils  in  love  ;  it  is  because  thou  bellevest  not  in  Christ,  but 
dost  abide  in  wilful  rebellion,  refusing  the  abundant  bread 
of  life  which  is  placed  before  thee. 


BREAD  ENOUGH  AND  TO  SPARE.  293 

A  few  rapid  sentences  upon  other  things,  which  will  go 
to  show  still  further  the  gi'eatness  of  the  provision  of  divine 
mercy.  Observe  well  that  throughout  all  the  ages  God  has 
been  sending  one  prophet  after  another^  and  these  prophets 
have  been  succeeded  by  apostles,  and  these  by  martyrs  and 
confessors,  and  pastors  and  evangelists,  and  teachers ;  all 
these  have  been  commissioned  by  the  Lord  in  regular  succes- 
sion ;  and  "^  hat  has  been  the  message  they  have  had  to  de- 
liver? They  have  all  pointed  to  Christ,  the  great  deliverer, 
Moses  and  the  prophets  all  spoke  of  him,  and  so  have  all 
truly  God-sent  ambassadors.  Dost  thou  think,  sinner,  that 
God  has  made  all  this  fuss  about  a  trifle  ?  Has  he  sent  all 
these  ser\'ants  to  call  thee  to  a  table  insufficiently  furnished? 
Has  he  multiplied  his  invitations  through  so  long  a  time  to 
bid  thee  and  others  come  to  a  provision  which  is  not,  after 
all,  sufficient  for  them?  Oh,  it  cannot  be!  God  is  not 
mocked,  neither  does  he  mock  poor  needy  souls.  The  stores 
of  his  mercy  are  sufficient  for  the  utmost  emergencies. 

"  Rivers  of  love  and  mercy  here 
In  a  rich  ocean  join  ; 
Salvation  in  abundance  flows. 
Like  floods  of  milk  and  wine. 

Great  God,  the  treasures  of  thy  love 

Are  everlasting  mines. 
Deep  as  our  helpless  miseries  are. 
And  boundless  as  our  sins." 

Recollect,  again,  that  God  has  been  pleased  to  stake  his 
honor  vpon  the  gospel.  Men  desire  a  name,  and  God  also  is 
jealous  of  his  glory.  Now,  what  has  God  been  pleased  to 
select  for  his  name?  Is  it  not  the  conversion  and  salvation 
of  men  ?  When  instead  of  the  brier  shall  come  up  the 
myrtle-tree,  and  instead  of  the  thorn  shall  come  up  the  fir- 
tree,  it  shall  be  to  the  Lord  for  a  name,  for  an  everlasting 
sigc  that  shall  not  be  cut  off.  And  dost  thou  think  God 
will  get  a  name  by  saving  little  sinners  by  a  little  Saviour^ 


294  KUMBEB  ONE  THOUSAXD;    0B» 

Ah  !  his  great  name  comes  from  washing  oat  stains  as  black 
as  hv^II,  and  pardoning  sinners  who  were  foulest  of  the  fouL 
Is  there  one  monstrous  rebel  here  who  is  qualified  to  glorify 
God  greatly,  because  Lis  salvation  will  be  the  wonder  of 
angels  and  the  amazercect  of  devils?  I  hope  there  is.  O 
thou  most  degrade*!,  b'ack,  loathsome  sinner,  nearest  to 
being  a  damned  sinner!  if  this  voice  can  reach  thee,  I  chal- 
lenge thee  to  come  and  prove  whether  God's  mercy  is  not  a* 
match  for  thy  sin.  Tiiou  Goliath  sinner,  come  thou  hither ; 
thou  shalt  find  that  God  can  slav  thine  enmitv,  and  make 
thee  yet  his  friend,  and  the  more  his  loving  and  adoring  ser- 
vant, because  great  forgiveness  shall  secure  great  love. 
Such  is  the  greatness  of  dione  mercy,  that  "where  sin 
abounded,  grace  doth  much  more  abound." 

Dost  thou  think,  again,  O  sinner,  that  Jesus  Christ  came 
out  of  heaven  to  do  a  little  deed,  and  to  provide  a  slender 
store  of  mercy  ?  Dost  thou  think  he  went  up  to  Calvary, 
and  down  to  the  grave,  and  all,  that  he  might  do  a  common- 
place thing,  and  provide  a  stinted,  narrow,  limited  salvation, 
such  as  thine  unbelief  would  imagine  his  redemption  to 
be  ?  No.  We  speak  of  the  labors  of  Hercules,  but  these 
were  child's  play  compared  with  the  labors  of  Christ  who 
slew  the  lion  of  hell,  tunied  a  purifying  stream  through  the 
Augean  stables  of  man's  sin,  and  cleansed  them,  and  per- 
formed ten  thousand  miracles  besides  :  and  will  vou  so  de- 
preciate  Christ  as  to  imagine  that  what  he  has  accomplished 
is,  after  all,  little,  so  little  that  it  is  not  enough  to  save  you  ? 
If  it  were  in  my  power  to  single  out  the  man  who  has  been 
the  most  dishonest,  most  licentious,  most  drunken,  most  pro- 
iane — in  three  words,  most  earthly,  sensual,  devilish — ^I 
would  repeat  the  challenge  which  I  gave  just  now,  and  bid 
liini  draw  near  to  Jesus,  and  see  whether  the  fountain  filled 
with  Christ's  atoning  blood  cannot  wash  him  white.  I  clial- 
lenge  him  at  this  instant  to  come  and  cast  himself  at  the 
dear  Redeemer's  feet,  and  see  if  he  will  say,  "  I  cannot  Bave 
thee,  thou  hast  sinned  beyond  my  power."    It  shall  never, 


BREAD  ENOUGH  AND  TO  SPARE.  295 

never,  never  be,  for  he  is  able  to  the  uttermost  to  save.  He 
is  A  Saviour,  and  a  great  one.  Christ  will  be  honored  by  the 
grandeur  of  the  grace  which  he  bestows  upon  the  greatest 
of  offenders.  There  is  in  him  pardon  "enough  and  to 
spare." 

I  must  leave  tliis  point,  but  I  cannot  do  so  without  ad- 
ding that  I  think  "  bread  enough  and  to  spare  "  might  be 
taken  for  the  motto  of  the  gospel.  I  believe  in  particular 
redemption,  and  that  Christ  laid  down  his  life  for  his  sheep  ; 
but,  as  I  have  already  said,  I  do  not  believe  in  the  limited 
value  of  that  redemption  ;  how  else  could  I  dare  to  read  the 
words  of  John,  "  He  is  the  propitiation  for  our  sins  :  and 
not  for  ours  only,  but  also  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world." 
There  is  a  sure  portion  for  his  own  elect,  but  there,  is  also 
over  and  above  "  to  spare."  I  believe  in  the  electing  love 
which  will  save  all  its  objects — "  bread  enough ; "  but  I  be- 
lieve in  boundless  benevolence,  "Bread  enough  and  to 
spare,  "  We,  when  we  have  a  purpose  to  accomplish,  put 
forth  the  requisite  quantity  of  strength  and  no  more,  for  we 
must  be  economical,  we  must  not  waste  our  limited  store ; 
even  charity  gives  the  poor  man  no  more  than  he  absolutely 
needs ;  but  when  God  feeds  the  multitude,  he  spreads  the 
board  with  imperial  bounty.  Our  water-cart  runs  up  and 
down  the  favored  road,  but  when  heaven's  clouds  would  fa- 
vor the  good  man's  fields,  they  deluge  whole  nations,  and 
even  pour  themselves  upon  the  sea.  There  is  no  real  waste 
with  God  ;  but  at  the  same  time  there  is  no  stint.  "Bread 
ENOUGH  AND  TO  SPARE;"  writc  that  inscription  over  the 
house  of  mercy,  and  let  every  hungry  passer-by  be  encour- 
aged thereby  to  enter  in  and  eat. 

n.  We  must  now  pass  on  to  a  second  consideration, 
and  dwell  very  briefly  on  it.  According  to  the  text,  there 
was  not  only  bread  enough  in  the  house,  but  the  lowest 
IN  the  Father's  house  enjoyed  enough  and  to  spajik. 

We  can  never  make  a  parable  run  on  all-fours,  therefore 


296  NtTMBEil  ONE  THOUSAND;    OB, 

we  cannot  find  the  exact  counterpart  of  the  "hired  ser- 
vants." I  understand  the  prodigal  to  have  meant  tliis,  that 
the  very  lowest  menial  sei^vant  employed  by  his  father  had 
bread  to  eat,  and  had  "  bread  enough  and  to  spare.  "  Now, 
how  should  we  translate  this  ?  Why,  sinner,  the  very  low- 
est creature  that  God  has  made,  that  has  not  sinned  against 
him,  is  well  supplied  and  has  abounding  happiness.  Tliere 
are  adaptations  for  pleasure  in  the  organizations  of  the  low- 
est animals.  See  how  the  gnats  dance  in  the  summer's  sun- 
beam ;  hear  the  swallows  as  they  scream  with  delight  when 
on  the  wing.  He  who  cares  for  birds  and  insects  will  sure- 
ly care  for  men.  God  who  hears  the  ravens  when  they  cry, 
will  he  not  hear  the  returning  penitent?  He  gives  these  in- 
sects happiness  ;  did  he  mean  me  to  be  wretched  ?  Surely 
he  who  opens  his  hand  and  supplies  the  lack  of  every  living 
thing,  will  not  refuse  to  open  his  hand  and  supply  my  needs 
if  I  seek  his  face. 

Yet  I  must  not  make  these  lowest  creatures  to  be  the  hired 
servants.  Whom  shall  I  then  select  among  men  ?  I  will 
put  it  thus.  The  very  worst  of  sinners  that  have  come  to 
Christ  have  found  grace  "  enough  and  to  spare,"  and  the  very 
least  of  saints  who  dwell  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  find  love 
"enough  and  to  spare."  Take  then  the  most  guilty  ofshv 
Tiers,  and  see  how  bountifully  the  Lord  treats  them  when 
they  turn  unto  him.  Did  not  some  of  you,  who  are  your- 
selves unconverted,  once  know  persons  who  were  at  least  as 
bad,  perhaps  more  outwardly  immoral  than  yourselves  ? 
Well,  they  have  been  converted,  though  you  have  not  bv  en  ; 
and  when  they  were  com^erted,  what  was  their  testimony  ? 
Did  the  blood  of  Christ  avail  to  cleanse  them  ?  Oh,  yes  ; 
and  more  than  cleanse  them,  for  it  added  to  beauty  not  their 
ovm.  They  were  naked  once ;  was  Jesus  able  to  clothe 
them  ?  Was  there  a  sufiicient  covering  in  his  righteous- 
ness ?  Ah,  yes !  and  adornment  was  superadded ;  they  re- 
ceived not  a  bare  apparel,  but  a  royal  raiment.  You  have 
«eeu  others  thus  liberally  treated,  does  not  this  induce  yoo 


BREAD  ENOUGH  AND  TO  SPARE.  397 

also  to  come  ?  Some  of  us  need  not  confine  our  remarks  to 
others,  for  we  can  speak  personally  of  ourselves.  We  came 
to  Jesus  as  full  of  sin  as  ever  you  can  be,  and  felt  ourselves 
beyond  measure  lost  and  ruined ;  but,  oh,  his  tender  love ! 
I  could  sooner  stand  here  and  weep  than  speak  to  you  of  it. 
ily  soul  melts  in  gratitude  when  I  think  of  the  infinite 
mercy  of  God  to  me  in  that  hour  when  I  came  seeking 
mercy  at  his  hands.  Oh  I  why  will  not  you  also  come  ? 
May  his  Holy  Spirit  sweetly  draw  you!  I  proved  that 
there  was  bread  enough,  mercy  enough,  forgiveness  enough, 
and  to  spare.  Come  along,  come  along,  poor  guilty  one ; 
come  along,  there  is  room  enough  for  thee. 

Now,  if  the  chief  of  sinners  bear  this  witness,  so  do  tlis 
most  obscure  of  saints.  If  we  could  call  forth  from  his  seat 
a  weak  believer  in  God,  who  is  almost  unknown  in  the  church, 
one  who  sometimes  questions  whether  he  is  indeed  a  child 
of  God,  and  would  be  willing  to  be  a  hired  servant  so  long 
as  he  might  belong  to  God,  and  if  I  were  to  ask  him,  "Now 
after  all  how  has  the  Lord  dealt  with  you  ?  "  what  would 
be  his  reply  ?  You  have  many  afflictions,  doubts  and  fears, 
but  have  you  any  complaints  against  your  Lord  ?  When 
you  have  waited  upon  him  for  daily  grace,  has  he  denied 
you?  When  youjiaye  been  full  of  troubles,  has  he  refused 
you  comfort  ?  When  you  have  been  plunged  in  distress, 
has  he  declined  to  deliver  you?  The  Lord  himself  asks, 
"  Have  I  been  a  wilderness  unto  Israel  ?  "  Testify  against 
the  Lord,  ye  his  people,  if  ye  have  aught  against  him.  Hear, 
O  heavens,  and  give  ear,  O  earth,  whosoever  there  be  in  God's 
service  who  has  found  him  a  hard  task-master,  let  him  speak. 
Among  the  angels  before  Jehovah's  throne,  and  among  men 
redeemed  on  earth,  if  there  be  any  one  that  can  say  he  hath 
been  dealt  with  unjustly  or  treated  with  ungenerous  churl- 
ishness, let  him  lift  up  his  voice  I  But  there  is  not  one. 
Even  the  devil  himself,  when  he  spoke  of  God  and  of  his 
servant  Job,  said  "Doth  Job  serve  God  for  nought  ?"  Of 
course  he  did  not :  God  will  not  let  his  servants  serve  him 
13* 


298  NUMBER  ONE  THOUSAND;   OB, 

for  nought ;  he  will  pay  them  superabundant  wages,  and 
they  shall  all  bear  witness  that  at  his  table  there  is  "  bread 
enough  and  to  spare."  Now,  if  these  still  enjoy  the  bread 
of  the  Father's  house,  these  who  Avere  once  great  sinners, 
these  who  are  now  only  very  commonplace  saints,  surely, 
sinner  it  should  encourage  you  to  say,  "  I  will  arise  and  go 
to  my  Father,"  for  his  hired  servants  "  have  bread  enough 
and  to  spare." 

IIT.  Notice  in  the  third  place,  that  the  text  dwells  upon 

THE  MULTTTUDE   OF  THOSE  WHO  HAVE  "  BREAD   ENOUGH  AND 

TO  SPARE."  The  prodigal  lays  an  emphasis  upon  that  word, 
"  How  many  hired  servants  of  my  father's  I "  He  was  think- 
ing of  their  great  number,  and  counting  them  over.  He 
thought  of  those  that  tended  the  cattle,  of  those  that  went 
out  with  the  camels,  of  those  that  watched  the  sheep,  and 
those  that  minded  the  corn,  and  those  that  waited  in  the 
house  ;  he  ran  them  over  in  his  mind  :  his  father  was  great 
in  the  land,  and  had  many  servants ;  yet  he  knew  that  they 
all  had  of  the  best  food  "  enough  and  to  spare."  "  Why 
should  I  perish  with  hunger?  I  am  only  one  at  any  rate; 
though  my  hunger  seem  insatiable,  it  is  but  one  belly  that 
has  to  be  filled,  and,  lo,  my  father  fills-  hundreds,  thousands 
every  day ;  why  should  I  perish  with  hunger  ? "  Now,  O 
thou  awakened  sinner,  thou  who  dost  feel  this  morning  thy 
sin  and  misery,  think  of  the  numbers  upon  whom  God  has 
bestowed  his  grace  already.  Think  of  the  countless  hosts 
in  heaven  :  if  thou  wert  introduced  there  to-day,  thou  wouldst 
find  it  as  easy  to  tell  the  stars,  or  the  sands  of  the  sea,  as 
to  count  the  multitudes  that  are  before  the  throne  even  now. 
They  have  come  from  the  east  and  from  the  west,  and 
they  are  sitting  down  with  Abraham,  with  Isaac,  and  with 
Jacob,  and  there  is  room  enough  for  thee.  And  beside  those 
in  heaven,  think  of  those  on  earth.  Blessed  be  God,  his 
elect  on  earth  are  to  be  counted  by  millions,  I  believe,  and 
the  days  are  coming,  brighter  days  than  these,  when  there 


BREAD  ENOUGH  AND  TO  SPARE.  299 

shall  be  multitudes  upon  multitudes  brought  to  know  the 
Saviour,  and  to  rejoice  in  him.  The  Father's  love  is  not 
for  a  few  only,  but  for  an  exceeding  great  company.  A 
number  that  no  man  can  number  will  be  found  in  heaven, 
Now,  a  man  can  number  a  very  great  amount.  Set  to  work 
your  Newtons,  your  calculators,  they  can  count  great  num- 
bers, but  God  and  God  alone  can  tell  the  multitude  of  his 
redeemed.  Now,  sinner,  thou  art  but  one  at  any  rate,  great 
sinner  as  thou  art,  and  the  mercy  of  God  which  embraces 
millions  must  have  room  enough  in  it  for  thee.  The  sea 
which  holds  the  whales  and  creeping  things  innumerable, 
dost  thou  say,  "  It  will  overflow  its  banks  if  I  bathe  therein  ?  " 
The  sun  which  floods  the  universe  with  light,  canst  thou  say, 
"  I  should  exhaust  his  beams  if  I  should  ask  him  to  enlighten 
my  darkness  ?  "  Say  not  so.  If  thou  comest  to  thyself  thou 
wilt  not  tolerate  such  a  thought,  but  thou  wilt  remember 
with  hope  the  richness  of  the  Father's  grace,  even  though 
thine  own  poverty  stare  thee  in  the  face. 

Let  us  add  a  few  words  to  close  with,  close  grappling 
words  to  some  of  you  to  whom  God  has  sent  his  message  this 
morning,  and  whom  he  intends  to  save.     Oh  you  who  have 
been  long  hearers  of  the  gospel,  and  who  know  it  well  in  the- 
ory, but  have  felt  none  of  the  power  of  it  in  your  hearts,  let 
me  now  remind  you  where  and  what  you  are  !    You  are  per- 
ishing.    As  the  Lord  liveth,  there  is  but  a  step  between 
you  and  death ;  but  a  step,  nay,  but  a  breath  between  you 
and  hell.     Sinner,  if  at  this  momei  t  thy  heart  should  cease 
its  beating,  and  there  are  a  thousand  causes  that  might  pro- 
duce that  result  ere  the  clock  ticks  again,  thou  wouldst  be 
in  the  flames  of  divine  wrath.    Canst  thou  bear  to  be  in  such 
peril  ?    If  you  were  hanging  over  a  rock  by  a  slender  thread 
which  must  soon  break,  and  if  you  would  then  fall  headlong 
down  a  terrible  precipice,  you  would  not  sleep,  but  be  full 
of  alarm.     May  you  have  sense  enough,  wit  enough,  grace 
enough,  to  be  alarmed  until  you  escape  from  the  wrath  to 
como. 


800  NUMBER  ONE  THOUSAND;  OB, 

Recollect,  however,  that  while  you  are  perishing,  yon 
are  perishing  in  sight  of  plenty  ;  you  are  famishing  where 
a  table  is  abundantly  spread ;  what  is  more,  there  are  those 
whom  you  know  now  sitting  at  that  table  and  feasting. 
What  sad  perversity  for  a  man  to  pereist  in  bebg  starved 
in  the  midst  of  a  banquet,  where  others  are  being  satisfied 
with  good  things ! 

But  I  think  I  hear  you  say,  "  I  fear  I  have  no  right  to 
come  to  Jesus."  I  will  ask  you  this  :  have  you  any  right 
to  say  that  till  you  have  been  denied  ?  Did  you  ever  try 
to  go  to  Christ  ?  Has  he  ever  rejected  you  ?  If  then  you 
have  never  received  a  repulse,  why  do  you  wickedly  imag- 
ine that  he  would  repel  you  ?  Wickedly,  I  say,  for  it  is  an 
offence  against  the  Christ  who  opened  his  heart  upon  the 
cross,  to  imagine  that  he  could  repel  a  penitent.  Have 
you  any  right  to  say,  "  But  I  am  not  one  of  those  for  whom 
mercy  is  provided  "  ?  Who  told  you  so  ?  Have  you  climb- 
ed to  heaven  and  read  the  secret  records  of  God's  election  ? 
Has  the  Lord  revealed  a  strange  decree  to  you,  and  said, 
"  Go  and  despair,  I  will  have  no  pity  on  you  "  ?  If  you 
say  that  God  has  so  spoken,  I  do  not  believe  you.  In  this 
sacred  book  is  recorded  what  God  has  said,  here  is  the  sure 
word  of  testimony,  and  in  it  I  find  it  said  of  no  humble 
seeker, that  God  hath  shut  him  out  from  his  grace.  Why 
hast  thou  a  right  to  invent  such  a  fiction  in  order  to  secure 
thine  own  damnation  ?  Instead  thereof,  there  is  much  in 
the  word  of  God  and  elsewhere  to  encourage  thee  in  com- 
mg  to  Christ.  He  has  not  repelled  one  sinner  yet ;  that  is 
good  to  begin  with  :  it  is  not  likely  that  he  would,  for  since 
he  died  to  save  sinners,  why  should  he  reject  them  when 
they  seek  to  be  saved  ?  You  bay,  "  I  am  afraid  to  come  to 
Christ."  Is  that  wise  ?  I  have  heard  of  a  poor  navigator 
who  had  been  converted,  who  had  but  little  education,  but 
who  knew  the  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesu^  Christ,  and  when 
dying,  very  cheerfully  and  joyfully  longed  to  depart.  His 
wife  said  to  him,  "  But,  mon,  ain't  ye  afeared  to  stand  be- 


BREAD  ENOUGH  AND  TO  SPARE.  801 

fore  the  Judge?"  "Woman,"  said  he,  "  why  should  I  be 
afeared  of  a  man  as  died  for  me  ? "  Oh,  why  should  you 
be  afraid  of  Christ  who  died  for  sinners  ?  The  idea  of  be- 
ing afraid  of  him  should  be  banished  by  the  fact  that  he 
Bhe(]  his  blood  for  the  guilty.  You  have  much  reason  to 
believe  from  the  very  fact  that  he  died,  that  he  will  receive 
you.  Besides,  you  have  his  word  for  it,  for  he  saith,  "  Hira 
that  Cometh  to  me  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out" — for  no  rea- 
son, and  in  no  way,  and  on  no  occasion,  and  under  no  pre- 
tence, and  for  no  motive.  "I  will  not  cast  him  out," 
says  the  original.  "  Him  that  cometh  to  me  I  will  in  no 
wise  cast  out."  You  say  it  is  too  good  to  be  true  that  there 
can  be  pardon  for  you  :  this  is  a  foolish  measuring  of  God's 
com  with  your  bushel,  and  because  it  seems  too  good  a  thing 
for  you  to  receive,  you  fancy  it  is  too  good  for  God  to  be- 
stow. Let  the  greatness  of  the  good  news  be  one  reason 
for  believing  that  the  news  is  true,  for  it  is  so  like  God. 

"  Who  is  a  pardoning  God  like  thee  ? 
Or  who  hath  grace  so  rich  and  free?  *' 

Because  the  gospel  assures  us  that  he  forgives  great  sins 
through  a  great  Saviour,  it  looks  as  if  it  were  true,  since  he 
is  so  great  a  God. 

What"  should  be  the  result  of  all  this  with  every  sinner 
here  at  this  time  ?  I  think  this  good  news  should  arouse 
those  who  have  almost  gone  to  sleep  through  despair.  The 
sailors  have  been  pumping  the  vessel,  the  leaks  are  gaining, 
she  is  going  down,  the  captain  is  persuaded  she  must  be  a 
wreck.  Depressed  by  such  evil  tidings,  the  men  refuse  to 
work  ;  and  since  the  boats  are  all  stove  in  and  they  cannot 
make  a  raft,  thoy  sit  down  in  despair.  Presently  the  captain 
has  better  news  for  them.  "  She  will  float,"  he  says ;  "  the 
wind  is  abating  too,  the  pumps  tell  upon  the  water,  the 
leak  can  be  reached  yet."  See  how  they  work ;  with  what 
cheery  courage  they  toil  on,  because  there  is  hope  I  Soul, 
there  is  hope !  There  is  hope  !  There  is  hope  !  To  the 
harlot,  to  the  thief,  to  the  drunkard. 


802  NUMBER  ONE  THOUSAND;    OB, 

^  There  is  no  hope,''  says  Satan.  Liar  tliat  thorn  art| 
get  thee  back  to  thy  den  ;  for  thee  there  is  no  hope ;  bnt  for 
fallen  man,  though  he  be  in  the  mire  of  sin  up  to  his  very 
neck,  though  he  be  at  the  gates  of  death,  while  he  lives  there 
is  hope.     There  is  hope  for  hopeless  souls  in  the  Saviour. 

In  addition  to  arousing  us, this  ought  to  elevate  the  sin- 
ner's  thoughts.  Some  years  ago,  there  was  a  crossing-sweej>- 
er  in  Dublin,  with  his  broom,  at  the  corner,  and  in  all  proba- 
bility his  highest  thoughts  were  to  keep  the  crossing  clean, 
and  look  for  the  pence.  One  day,  a  lawyer  put  his  hand 
upon  his  shoulder,  and  said  to  him,  "  My  good  fellow,  do 
you  know  that  you  are  heir  to  a  fortune  of  ten  thousand 
pounds  a  year?"  "Do  you  mean  it? "said  he.  "I  do," 
he  said.  "  I  have  just  received  the  information ;  I  am  sure 
you  are  the  man."  He  walked  away,  and  he  forgot  his 
broom.  Are  you  astonished  ?  Why,  who  would  not  have 
forgotten  a  broom  when  suddenly  made  possessor  of  ten 
thousand  a  year  ?  So,  I  pray  that  some  poor  sinners,  who 
have  been  thinking  of  the  pleasures  of  the  world,  when  they 
hear  that  there  is  hope,  and  that  there  is  heaven  to  be  had, 
will  forget  the  deceitful  pleasures  of  sin,  and  follow  after 
higher  and  better  things. 

Should  it  not  also  purify  the  mind  ?  The  prodigal,  when 
he  said,  "  I  will  arise  and  go  to  my  father,"  became  in  a 
measure  refonned  from  that  very  moment.  How  ?  say  you. 
Why,  he  left  the  swine-trough  :  more,  he  left  the  wine  cup, 
and  he  left  the  harlots.  He  did  not  go  with  the  harlot  on 
his  arm,  and  the  wine  cup  in  his  hand,  and  say,  "  I  will  take 
these  with  me,  and  go  to  my  father."  It  could  not  be. 
These  were  all  left,  and  though  he  had  no  goodness  to  biing, 
yet  he  did  not  try  to  keep  his  sins  and  come  to  Christ.  1 
shall  close  with  this  remark,  because  it  will  act  as  a  sort  of 
eaveaty  and  be  a  fit  word  to  season  the  wide  invitations  of 
the  free  gospe..  Some  of  you,  I  fear,  will  make  mischief 
even  out  of  the  gospel,  and  v;iU  dare  to  take  the  cross  and 
\\B^.  it  for  a  gibbet  for  your  souls.     If  God  is  so  meixsiful,  you 


BREAD  ENOUGH  AND  TO  SPARE.  303 

irill  go  therefore  and  sin  the  more ;  and  because  grace  is 
freiiv  given,  therefore  you  will  continue  in  sin  that  grace 
ma}  abound.  If  you  do  this,  I  would  solemnly  remind  you 
I  have  no  grace  to  preach  to  such  as  you.  "  Your  damna- 
tion u  just ; "  it  is  the  word  of  inspiration,  and  the  only  one 
I  know  that  is  applicable  to  such  as  you  are  ;  but  every 
needy,  guilty  soul  that  desires  a  Saviour  is  told  to-day  to  be- 
lieve in  Jesus,  that  is,  trust  in  the  substitution^ and  sacrifice 
of  Christ,  trust  him  to  take  your  sin  and  blot  it  out ;  trust 
him  to  take  your  soul  and  save  it.  Trust  Christ  entirely, 
and  you  are  forgiven  this  very  moment ;  you  are  saved  this 
very  instant,  and  you  may  rejoice  now  in  the  fact  that  being 
justified  by  faith  you  have  peace  with  God  through  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord.  O  come  ye,  come  ye,  come  ye  ;  come  and 
welcome ;  come  ye  now  to  the  Redeemer's  blood.  Holy 
Spirrt,  compel  them  to  come  in,  tlxat  the  house  of  mercy 
niAf  Vie  filled.    Amen,  and  Amen. 


aM  LOVE'S  LOGIC. 


SERMON  XVin. 


LOVE'S  LOGIC. 

**ini  LOYB  wot  BECAUSE  HE  ITBST  XX>yED  VS.**— 1  John  !▼.  Ifi. 

This  is  a  great  doctrinal  truth,  and  I  might  with  mncb 
propriety  preach  a  doctrinal  sermon  from  it,  of  which  the 
sum  and  substance  would  be  the  sovereign  grace  of  God. 
God's  love  is  evidently  prior  to  ours  :     "He  first  loved  us." 
It  is  also  clear  enough  from  the  text  that  God's  love  is  the 
cause  of  ours,  for  "  We  love  him  because  he  first  loved  us." 
Therefore,  going  back  to  old  time,  or  rather  before  all  time, 
when  we  find  God  loving  us  with  an  everlasting  love,  we 
gather  that  the  reason  of  his  choice  is  not  because  we  lovei' 
him,  but  because  he  willed  to  love  us.     His  reasons,  ano 
he  had  reasons  (for  we  read  of  "the  counsel  of  his  will"),  are 
know^  to  himself,  but  they  are  not  to  be  found  in  any  in- 
herent goodness  in  us,  or  which  was  foreseen  to  be  in  us. 
We  were  chosen  simply  because  he  will  have  mercy   on 
whom  he  will  have  mere  v.     He  loved  us  because  he  would 
love  us.     The  gift  of  his  dear  Son,  which  was  a  close  con- 
sequent upon  his  choice  of  his  people,  was  too  great  a  sac- 
rifice on  God's  part  to  have  been  drawn  from  him  by  any 
goodness  in   the   creature.      It  was  not   possible  for  the 
highest  piety  to  have  desei-ved  so  vast  a  boon  as  the  gift 
of  tJie  Only-begotten ;   it  was  not  possible  for  any  thing 
in  man  to    have   merited  the  incarnation   and  the  pas- 
fiion    of  the  Redeemer.     Our  redemption,  like  our    ehc- 
tLcn,  springs  from   the  spontaneous,  self-originating  love 
of  God.    And  our  regeneration.  In  which  we  are  made  ao- 
nal  partakers  of  the  divine  blassings  in  J^sus  Christ|  was 


LOVE'S   LOGIC.  306 

not  of  us,  nor  by  us.     We  were  not  converted  because  we 
were  already  inclined  that  way,  neither  were  we  regener- 
ated because  some  good  thing  was  in  us  by  nature  ;  but  we 
owe  our  new  birth  entirely  to  his  potent  love,  which  dealt 
with  us  effectually,  turning  us  from  death  to  life,  from  dark- 
ness to  light,  and  from  the  alienation  of  our  mind  and  the 
enmity  of  our  spirit  into  that  delightful  path  of  love,  in 
which  we  are  now  travelling  to  the  skies.     As  believers  on 
Christ's  name,  we  "  were  born,  not  of  blood,  nor  of  the  will 
of  the  flesh,  nor  of  the  will  of  man,  but  of  God."     The  sum 
and  substance  of  the  text  is,  that   God's  uncaused  love, 
springing  up  within  himself,  has  been  the  sole  means  of 
bringing  us  into  the  condition  of  loving  him.     Our  love  to 
him  is  like  a  trickling  rill,  speeding  its  way  to  the  ocean 
because  it  first  came  from  the  ocean.     All  the  rivers  run 
into  the  sea,  but  their  floods  first  arose  from  it :  the  clouds 
that  were  exhaled  from  the  mighty  main  distilled  in  show- 
ers and  filled  the  water-brooks.     Here  was  their  first  cause 
and  pnme  origin ;  and,  as  if  they  recognized  the  obligation, 
they  pay  tribute  in  return  to  the  parent  source.     The  ocean 
love  of  God,  so  broad  that  even  the  wing  of  imagination 
could  not  traverse  it,  sends  forth  its.  treasures  of  the  rain 
of  grace,  which  drop  upon  our  hearts,  which  are  as  the  pas- 
tures of  the  wilderness  ;  they  make  our  hearts  to  overflow, 
and  in  streams  of  gratitude  the  life  imparted  flows  back 
again  to  God.     All  good  things  are  of  thee,  Gi-eat  God ; 
thy  goodness  creates  our  good;  thine  infinite  love  to  us 
draws  forth  our  love  to  thee. 

But,  dear  friends,  I  trust  after  many  years  of  instruction 
in  the  doctrines  of  our  holy  faith,  I  need  not  keep  to  the 
beaten  doctrinal  track,  but  may  lead  you  in  a  parallel  path, 
in  which  the  same  truth  may  be  seen  from  another  point. 
I  purpose  to  preach  an  experimental  sermon,  and  possibly 
this  will  be  even  more  in  accordance  with  the  run  of  the 
passage  and  the  mind  of  its  y^^nter,  than  a  doctrinal  dig 
cotirse.  We  shall  view  the  text  as  a  fact  which  we  have 
tested  and  proved  in  our  own  conibciousuess.    Under  this 


806  LOVE'S   LOGIC. 

aspect  the  statement  of  the  text  is  this : — a  sense  of  the  Itms 
of  God  to  us  is  the  inaifi  cause  of  our  love  to  him.  When 
we  helieve,  know,  and  feel  that  God  loves  us,  we,  as  a  nat- 
ural result,  love  him  in  return  ;  and  in  proportion  as  our 
knowledge  increases,  our  faith  strengthens,  and  our  convic- 
tion deepens  thav  we  are  really  beloved  of  God ;  we,  from 
the  very  constitution  of  our  being,  are  constrained  to  yield 
our  hearts  to  God  in  return.  The  discourse  of  this  morn- 
ing, therefore,  will  nin  in  that  channel.  God  grant  it  may 
be  blessed  to  each  of  us  by  his  Holy  Spirit. 

L  At  the  outset  we  will  consider  the  iia>i8PBNSABLB 

NECESSITY  OF  LOVE  TO  GoD  IS  THE  HEABT. 

There  are  some  graces  which  in  their  vigor  are  not  ab- 
solutely essential  to  the  bare  existence  of  spiritual  life, 
though  very  important  for  its  healthy  growth  ;  but  love  to 
God  must  be  in  the  heart,  or  else  there  is  no  grace  there 
whatever.  K  any  man  love  not  God,  he  is  not  a  renewed 
man.  Love  to  God  is  a  mark  which  is  always  set  upon 
Christ's  sheep,  and  never  set  upon  any  others.  In  enlarg- 
ing upon  this  most  important  truth,  I  would  call  your  at- 
tention to  the  connection  of  the  text.  You  will  find  in  the 
seventh  verse  of  this  chapter,  that  love  to  God  is  set  down 
as  being  a  necessary  mark  of  the  new  birth,  "  Every  one 
that  loveth  is  born  of  God,  and  knoweth  God." ,  I  have  no 
right,  therefore,  to  believe  that  I  am  a  regenerated  person 
unless  my  heart  truly  and  sincerely  loves  God.  It  is  vain 
for  me,  if  I  love  not  God,  to  quote  the  register  which  records 
an  ecclesiastical  ceremony,  and  say  that  this  regenerated 
me ;  it  certainly  did  no  such  thing,  or  the  sure  result  would 
have  followed.  If  I  hare  been  regenerated  I  may  not  be 
pei*fcct,  but  this  one  thing  I  can  say,  "  Lord  thou  knowest 
all  things,  thou  knowest  that  I  love  thee."  When  by  believ- 
ing we  receive  the  privilege  to  become  the  sons  of  God,  we 
receive  also  the  nature  of  sons,  and  with  filial  love  we  cry, 
**  Abba,  Father."  There  is  no  exception  to  this  rule ;  if  a 
man  k  vea  not  God^  neitber  \a  \ie  \)oni  oi  Qeo^    €ih.o^  me  a 


LovE*s  toetd.  30t 

fire  without  heat,  then  show  me  regeneration  that  does  not 
prodaoe  love  to  God ;  for  as  the  sun  muH  give  forth  its 
light,  so  must  a  soul  that  has  been  created  anew  by  divine 
grace  display  its  nature  by  sincere  affection  towards  God, 
*'  Ye  must  be  born  again,"  but  ye  are  not  born  again  unless 
ye  love  God.     How  indispensable,  then,  is  love  to  God, 

In  the  eighth  verse  we  are  told  also  that  love  to  God  is  a 
mark  of  our  knowmg  God,  True  knowledge  is  essential  to 
Ealvation.  God  does  not  save  us  in  the  dark.  He  is  our 
**  light  and  our  salvation."  We  are  renewed  in  knowledge 
after  the  image  of  him  that  created  us.  Now,  *'  he  that  lov- 
eth  not  knoweth  not  God,  for  God  is  love."  All  you  have 
ever  been  taught  from  the  pulpit,  all  you  have  ever  studied 
from  the  Scriptures,  all  you  have  ever  gathered  from  the 
learned,  aJl  you  have  collected  from  the  libraries,  ail  this  is 
no  knowl'/dge  of  God  at  all  unless  you  love  God  ;  for  in  true 
religion,  <  o  love  and  to  know  God  are  synonymous  terms. 
Without  ^ove  you  remain  in  ignorance  still,  ignorance  of 
the  most  unhappy  and  ruinous  kind.  All  attainments  are 
transitory',  if  love  be  not  as  a  salt  to  preserve  them  ;  tongues 
must  cease  and  knowledge  must  vanish  away ;  love  alone 
abides  fcrever.  This  love  you  must  have  or  be  a  fool  forever. 
All  the  «jhildren  of  the  true  Zion  are  taught  of  the  Lord,  but 
you  are  not  taught  of  God  unless  you  love  God,  See,  them, 
that  to  be  devoid  of  love  to  God  is  to  be  devoid  of  all  true 
knowlcilge  of  God,  and  so  of  all  salvation. 

Further,  the  chapter  teaches  us  that  love  to  God  is  the 
root  of  love  to  others.  The  eleventh  verse  says,  '*  Beloved,  if 
God  so  loved  us,  we  ought  also  to  love  one  another.  If  we 
love  one  another,  God  dwelleth  in  us,  and  his  love  is  ])ei'fect- 
ed  in  us."  Now  no  man  is  a  Christian  who  do(^  not  love 
Christians.  He,  who,  being  in  the  church,  is  yet  not  of  it 
heart  and  soul,  is  but  an  intruder  in  the  family.  But  .sinoe 
love  to  our  brethren  springs  out  of  love  to  our  one  common 
Father,  it  is  plain  that  we  must  have  love  to  that  Father,  or 
else  we  shall  fail  in  one  oi  the  ina!spensa\>\e  Ytv^\V's»  oi  \Xv^ 


808  LOVE'S  tx)Gta 

cbildren  of  God.  "We  know  that  we  have  passed  froni 
death  unto  life,  because  we  love  the  brethren  ;  '*  but  we  can- 
tiot  truly  love  the  brethren  unless  we  love  the  Father ;  there- 
fore, lacking  love  to  God,  we  lack  love  to  the  church,  which 
is  an  essential  mark  of  grace. 

Again,  keeping  to  the  run  of  the  passage,  you  will  find 
by  the  eighteenth  verse,  that  love  to  God  is  a  chief  means 
of  that  holy  peace  which  is  an  essential  mark  of  a  Chnstian* 
"  Being  justified  by  faith,  we  have  peace  with  God  through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Lord ;"  but  where  there  is  no  love  there  is 
no  such  peace; for  fear,  which  hath  torment,  distresses  the 
soul ;  hence  love  is  the  indispensable  companion  of  faith,  and 
when  they  come  together,  peace  is  the  result.  Where  there 
is  fei*vent  love  to  God  there  is  set  up  a  holy  familiarity  with 
God,  and  from  this  fiow  satisfaction,  delight,  and  rest.  Love 
must  co-operate  with  faith  and  cast  out  fear,  so  that  the  soul 
may  have  boldness  before  God.  Oh  !  Christian,  thou  canst 
not  have  the  nature  of  God  implanted  within  thee  by  regen- 
eration, it  cannot  reveal  itself  in  love  to  the  brotherhood,  it 
cannot  blossom  with  the  fair  fiowers  of  peace  and  joy,  except 
thine  affection  be  set  upon  God.  Let  him, then, be  thine  ex- 
ceeding joy.  Delight  thyself  also  in  the  Lord.  "O  love  the 
Lord  ye  his  saints. " 

We  also  see,  if  we  turn  again  to  John's  epistle  and 
pursue  his  observations  to  the  next  chapter  and  the  third 
verse,  that  love  is  the  spring  of  true  obedience.  "  This  is 
the  love  of  God,  that  we  keep  his  commandments."  Now 
a  man  who  is  not  obedient  to  God's  commandments  is  evi- 
dently not  a  true  believer ;  for,  although  good  works  do 
not  save  us,  yet,  being  saved,  believers  are  sure  to  produce 
good  works.  Though  the  fruit  be  not  the  root  of  the  tree, 
yet  a  well — rooted  tree  will,  in  its  season,  bring  forth  its 
firuits.  So,  though  the  keeping  of  the  commandments  does 
not  make  me  a  child  of  God,  yet,  being  a  child  of  God,  I 
shall  be  obedient  to  my  heaven!  y  Father.  But  this  I  cannot 
be  unless  I  love  God.    A  mere  external  obedience,  a  decent 


LOVE'S  LOGIC.  309 

formal  recognition  of  the  laws  of  God,  is  not  obedience  in 
God's  sight.  He  abhors  the  sacrifice  where  not  the  heart  is 
found.  I  must  obey  because  I  love,  or  else  I  have  not  in 
spirit  and  in  :ruth  obeyed  at  all  See  then,  that  to  produce 
the  indispensable  fruits  of  saving  faith,  there  must  be  love 
to  God ;  for  without  it,  they  would  b^  unreal  and  indeed  im- 
possible. 

I  hope  it  is  not  necessary  for  me  to  pursue  this  argument 
any  further.  Love  to  God  is  as  natural  to  the  renewed 
heart  as  love  to  its  mother  is  to  a  babe.  Who  needs  to 
reason  a  child  into  love  ?  As  certainly  as  you  have  the  life 
and  nature  of  God  in  you,  you  will  seek  after  the  Lord.  As 
the  spark,  because  it  has  in  it  the  nature  of  fire,  ascends 
aloft  to  seek  the  sun,  so  will  your  new-born  spirit  seek  her 
God,  from  whom  she  has  derived  her  life.  Search  your- 
selves, then,  and  see  whether  you  love  God  or  no.  Put 
your  hands  on  your  hearts,  and  as  in  the  sight  of  him  whose 
eyes  are  as  a  flame  of  fire,  answer  to  him ;  make  him  your 
confessor  at  this  hour ;  answer  this  one  question :  "  Lovest 
thou  me  ?  "    I  trust  very  many  of  you  will  be  able  to  say — 

**  Yes,  we  love  thee  and  adore ; 
Oh,  for  grace  to  love  thee  more." 

This  much  was  necessary  to  bring  us  to  the  second  step 
of  our  discourse.     May  the  Holy  Spirit  lead  us  onward.    • 

n.  You  see  the  indispensable  importance  of  love  to  God : 
let  us  now  learn  the  soubce  and  spring  op  true  love  to 
God.  "  We  love  him  because  he  first  loved  us."  Love  to 
God,  wherever  it  really  exists,  has  been  created  in  the  bo- 
som by  a  belief  of  God's  love  to  us.  No  man  loves  God  till 
he  knows  that  God  loves  him  ;  and  every  believer  loves  God 
for  this  reason  first  and  chiefly,  that  God  loves  him.  He 
has  seen  himself  to  be  unworthy  of  divine  favor,  yet  he  has 
believed  God*8  love  in  the  gift  of  his  dear  Son,  and  he  has 
accepted  the  atonement  that  Christ  has  made  as  a  proof  of 
God's  love,  and  now  being  satisfied  of  the  divine  affection 
towards  him,  he  of  necessity  loves  his  God. 


810  LOVE'S   LOGIC. 

Observe,  then,  that  love  to  God  does  not  begin  in  thft 
heart  from  any  disinterested  admiration  of  the  nature  of 
God.  I  believe  that,  after  we  have  loved  God  because  he  first 
loved  us,  we  may  so  grow  in  grace  as  to  love  God  for  what 
he  is.  I  suppose  it  is  possible  for  us  to  be  the  subjects  of  a 
stale  of  heart  in  which  our  love  spends  itself  upon  the  love- 
liness of  God  in  his  own  person :  we  may  come  to  love  him 
because  he  is  so  wise,  so  powerful,  so  good,  so  patient,  so 
every  thing  that  is  lovable.  This  may  be  produced  within 
us  as  the  ripe  fruit  of  maturity  in  the  divine  life,  but  it  is 
never  the  first  spring  and  fountain  of  the  grace  of  love  in 
any  man's  heart.  Even  the  apostle  John,  the  man  who  had 
looked  within  the  veil  and  seen  the  excellent  glory  beyond 
any  other  man,  and  who  had  leaned  his  head  upon  the  bosom 
of  the  Lord,  and  had  seen  the  Lord's  holiness,  and  marked 
the  inimitable  beauty  of  the  character  of  the  incarnate  God, 
even  John  does  not  say,  "  We  love  him  because  we  admire 
him,"  but  "  We  love  him  because  he  first  loved  us."  For  see, 
brethren,  if  this  kind  of  love  which  I  have  mentioned,  which 
is  called  the  love  of  disinterested  admiration,  were  required 
of  a  sinner,  I  do  not  see  how  he  could  readily  render  it. 
There  are  two  gentlemen  of  equal  rank  in  society,  and  the 
one  is  not  at  all  obliged  to  the  other  ;  now,  they,  standing 
on  an  equality,  can  easily  feel  a  disinterested  admiration 
of  each  other's  characters,  and  a  consequent  disinterested 
affection ;  but  I,  a  poor  sinner,  by  nature  sunk  in  the  mire, 
full  of  every  thing  that  is  evil,  condemned,  guilty  of  death,so 
that  my  only  desert  is  to  be  cast  into  hell,  am  under  such 
ebligations  to  my  Saviour  and  my  God,  that  it  would  be  idle 
for  me  to  talk  about  a  disinterested  affection  for  him,  since 
I  owe  to  him  my  life,  my  all.  Besides,  until  I  catch  the 
gleams  of  his  mercy  and  his  loving-kindness  to  the  guilty, 
kis  holy,  just,  and  righteous  character  are  not  lovable  to 
me,  I  dread  the  purity  which  condemns  my  defilement,  and 
shudder  at  tlie  justice  which  v  ill  consume  me  for  my  sin. 
Do  not,  O  seeker,  trouble  your  heait  with  nice  dlstinctionf 


LOVE»S  LOGIC.  Sit 

At)otit  disinterested  love,  but  be  you  content  with  the  belov- 
ed disciple,  to  love  Christ  because  he  first  loved  you. 

Again,  our  love  to  God  does  not  spring  from  the  self-de- 
termining power  of  the  will.  I  greatly  question  whether 
any  thing  does  in  the  world,  good  or  bad.  There  are  some 
who  set  up  the  w^ill  as  a  kind  of  deity, — it  doeth  as  it  wills 
with  earth  and  heaven  ;  but  in  truth  the  will  is  not  a  ma<» 
ter  but  a  servant.  To  the  sinner  his  will  is  a  slave  ;  and  in 
the  saint,  although  the  will  is  set  free,  it  is  still  blessedly  un- 
der bonds  to  God.  Men  do  not  will  a  thing  because  they 
will  it,  but  because  their  affections,  their  passions,  or  their 
judgments  influence  their  wills  in  that  direction.  No  man 
can  stand  up  and  truly  say,  "  I,  unbiassed  and  unaided,  will 
to  love  God  and  I  will  not  to  love  Satan."  Such  proud  self- 
assuming  language  would  prove  him  a  liar  ;  the  man  would 
be  clearly  a  worshipper  of  himself.  A  man  can  only  love 
God  when  he  has  perceived  some  reasons  for  so  doing ;  and 
the  first  argument  for  loving  God,  which  influences  the  in 
tellect  so  as  to  turn  the  affections,  is  the  reason  mentioned 
in  the  text :  "  We  love  him  because  he  first  loved  us." 

Now,  having  thus  set  the  text  in  a  negative  light,  let  us 
look  at  it  in  a  more  positive  manner. 

It  is  certain,  beloved  brethren,  that  faith  in  the  heart  al- 
ways precedes  love.  We  first  believe  the  love  of  God  to 
us  before  we  love  God  in  return.  And,  Oh, what  an  encour- 
aging truth  this  is.  I,  a  sinner,  do  not  believe  that  God 
loves  me  because  I  feel  I  love  him :  but  I  first  believe  that 
he  loves  me,  sinner  as  I  am,  and  then  having  believed  that 
gracious  fact,  I  come  to  love  my  Benefactor  in  return.  Per- 
haps some  of  you  seekers  are  saying  to  yourselves,  "  Oh,  that 
we  could  love  God,  for  then  we  could  hope  for  mercy." 
That  is  not  the  first  step.  Your  first  step  is  to  believe  that 
God  loves  you,  and  when  that  truth  is  fully  fixed  in  your 
soul  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  a  ferv^ent  love  to  God  will  spontane- 
ously issue  from  your  soul,  e^  en  as  flowers  willingly  pour 
forth  their  fragrance  under  the  influence  of  the  dew  and  the 


812  Lotrfi's  LOGia 

sun.  Every  man  that  ever  was  saved  had  to  come  to  God 
Dot  as  a  lover  of  God,  but  as  a  sinner,  and  to  believe  in 
God's  love  to  him  as  a  sinner.  We  all  wish  to  take  money 
in  our  sacks  when  we  go  down  hungry  to  this  Egypt  to  buy 
the  bread  of  life ;  but  it  must  not  be;  heaven's  bread  is  given 
to  us  freely,  and  we  must  accept  it  freely,  without  money  and 
without  price.  Do  you  say,  "I  do  not  feel  in  my  heart 
one  good  emotion ;  I  do  not  appear  to  possess  one  good 
thought ;  I  fear  I  have  no  love  to  God  at  all."  Do  not  re- 
main in  unbelief  until  you  feel  this  love,  for  if  you  do,  you 
will  never  believe  at  all.  You  ought  to  love  God,  it  is  true, 
but  you  never  will  till  you  believe  him,  and  especially  be- 
lieve in  his  love  as  revealed  in  his  only  begotten  Son.  If 
you  come  to  God  in  Christ,  and  believe  this  simple  message ; 
"  God  was  in  Christ  reconciling  the  world  uuto  himself,  not 
imputing  their  trespasses  unto  them,"  you  shall  find  your 
heart  going  out  after  God.  "Whosoever  believeth  in  Je- 
sus Christ  shall  not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life ; "  be- 
lievest  thou  this  ?  Canst  thou  now  believe  in  Jesus  ;  that  is, 
trust  him  ?  Then,  Christ  died  for  thee ;  Christ  the  Son  of 
God,  in  thy  stead,  suffered  for  thy  guilt.  God  gave  his  only 
Son  to  die  for  thee.  "  Oh,"  saith  one,  "  If  I  believed  that, 
how  I  would  love  God ! "  Yes,  indeed,  thou  wouldst,  and 
that  is  the  only  consideration  which  can  make  thee  do  so. 
Thou,  a  sinner,  must  take  Christ  to  be  thy  Saviour,  and 
then  love  to  God  shall  spring  up  spontaneously  in  thy  soul, 
as  the  grass  after  showers.  Love  believed  is  the  mother  of 
love  returned.  The  planet  reflects  light,  but  first  of  all  it 
receives  it  from  the  sun  ;  the  heliotrope  turns  its  face  to  the 
orb  of  day,  but  first  the  sunbeams  warm  and  woo  it.  You 
shall  turn  to  God,  and  delight  in  God,  and  rejoice  in  God ; 
but  it  must  be  because  you  first  of  all  believe,  and  know, 
and  confide  in  the  love  of  God  tc  you.  *'  Oh,"  saith  one, 
"it  cannot  be  that  God  should  love  an  unloving  sinner,  that 
the  pure  One  should  love  the  impure,  that  the  Ruler  of  all 
should  love  his  enemy."  Hear  what  the  Lord  saith ;  "  For 
my  thoughts  are  not  your  thoughts,  neither  are  your  ways 


LOVE'S  Loalc.  813 

ftiy  ways,  saith  the  Lord.  For  as  the  heavens  are  higher 
than  the  earth,  so  are  my  ways  higher  than  your  ways, 
and  my  thoughts  than  your  thoughts."  You  think  that 
God  loves  men  because  they  are  godly,  but  listen  to  this : 
"  God  commendeth  his  love  towards  us,  in  that  while  we 
were  yet  sinners  Christ  died  for  us."  "He  came  not 
to  call  the  righteous,  but  sinners  to  repentance."  "While 
we  were  yet  without  strength,  in  due  time  Christ  died 
for  the  ungodly."  Think  of  his  "great  love  wherewith 
he  loved  us,  even  when  we  were  dead  in  trespasses  and 
sins."  God  has  love  in  his  heart  towards  those  who  have 
nothing  in  them  to  love.  He  loves  you,  poor  soul,  who  feel 
that  you  are  most  unlovable ;  loves  you  who  mourn  over 
a  stony  heart,  which  will  not  warm  or  melt  with  love  to 
him.  Thus  saith  the  Lord :  "  I  have  blotted  out,  as  a  thick 
cloud,  thy  transgressions,  and,  as  a  cloud,  thy  sins  ;  return 
unto  me  ;  for  I  have  redeemed  thee."  O  that  God's  gra- 
cious voice  this  morning  might  so  call  some  of  his  poor  wan- 
dering ones  that  they  may  come  and  believe  his  love  to 
thevi,  and  then  cast  themselves  at  his  feet  to  be  his  servants 
forever. 

Brethren,  rest  assured  that  in  proportion  as  we  are  fully 
persuaded  of  God's  love  to  us,  we  shall  be  affected  with  love 
to  him.  Do  not  let  the  devil  tempt  you  to  believe  that  God 
does  not  love  you  because  your  love  is  feeble  ;  for  if  he  can 
weaken  your  belief  in  God's  love  to  you,  he  cuts  off  or  di- 
minishes the  flow  of  the  streams  wldch  feed  the  sacred  grace 
of  love  to  God.  If  I  lament  that  I  do  not  love  God  as  I 
ought,  that  is  a  holy  regret;  but  if  I,  therefore,  conclude 
that  God's  love  to  me  is  the  less  because  of  this,  I  deny  the 
light  because  my  eye  is  dim,  and  I  deprive  myself  also  of 
the  power  to  increase  in  love.  Let  me  rather  think  more 
and  more  of  the  greatness  of  God's  love  to  me,  as  I  see  more 
and  more  my  unworthiness  of  it ;  the  more  a  sinner  I  am, 
lot  me  the  more  fully  see  how  great  must  be  that  love  which 
embraces  such  a  sinner  as  I  am  ;  and  then,  as  I  receive  a 
deeper  sense  of  the  divine  mercy,  I  shall  feel  the  more  bound 
14 


8i4  LOVE'S  Loato. 

to  gratitude  and  constrained  to  affection.  Oh  for  a  great 
wave  of  love,  to  carry  us  right  out  into  the  ocean  of  love. 

Observe,  beloved  brethren,  day  by  day  the  deeds  of 
God's  love  to  you  in  the  gift  of  food  and  raiment,  a/\d  lu 
the  mercies  of  this  life,  and  especially  in  the  covenant  bless- 
ings which  God  gives  you,  the  peace  which  he  sheds  abroad 
in  your  hearts,  the  communion  which  he  vouchsafes  t')  you 
with  himself  and  his  blessed  Son,  and  the  answers  to  prayer 
which  he  grants  you.  Note  well  these  things,  and  if  you 
consider  them  carefully,  and  weigh  their  value,  you  will  be 
accumulating  the  fuel  on  which  love  feeds  its  consecratad 
flame.  In  proportion  as  you  see  in  every  good  gift  a  vmW 
token  of  your  Father's  love,  in  that  proportion  will  >ou 
make  progress  in  the  sweet  school  of  love.  Oh,  it  is  b*  ev- 
enly living  to  taste  God's  love  in  every  morsel  of  bread  we 
eat ;  it  is  blessed  living  to  know  that  we  breathe  an  atmos- 
phere purified  and  made  fragrant  with  divine  love,  that 
love  protects  us  while  we  sleep,  hanging  like  a  silken  cur- 
tain all  around  our  bed,  and  love  o  ens  the  eyelids  of  the 
morning  to  smile  upon  us  when  we  wake.  Ah,  even  wJien 
we  are  sick,  it  is  love  that  chastens  us ;  when  we  are  in  pov- 
erished,  love  relieves  us  of  a  burden  ;  love  gives  and  love 
takes ;  love  cheers  and  love  smites.  We  are  compj^ssed 
about  with  love,  above,  beneath,  around,  within,  witliout. 
If  we  could  but  recognize  this,  we  should  become  as  fi  imes 
of  fire,  ardent  and  fervent  towards  our  God.  Knowledge 
and  observation  are  admirable  nurses  of  our  infant  love. 

And,  ah,  the  soul  grows  rich  in  love  to  God  when  she 
rests  on  the  bosom  of  divine  lovhig-kindness.  You,  who 
are  tossed  about  with  doubts  and  fears  as  to  whether  yon 
are  now  accepted  or  shall  persevere  to  the  end,  you  can 
8(^an;ely  guess  the  ardors  of  heart  which  inflame  those 
t»aint«  who  have  learned  to  cast  themselves  wholly  upon 
Je^^us,  and  i  now  beyond  a  doubt  h  s  l"ve  immutable. 
Whether  I  sink  or  swim,  I  have  no  hope  but  in  Christ,  my 
life,  my  all. 


LOVE'S  Loaic.  816 

"  I  know  that  safe  with  him  remaiiui* 
Protected  by  his  power, 
What  IVe  committed  to  his  hands 
Till  the  decisive  hour : " 

And  in  proportion  as  I  am  thus  scripturally  confident,  and 
rest  in  my  Lord,  will  my  love  to  him  engross  all  my  heart, 
and  consecrate  my  life  to  the  Redeemer's  glory. 

]3eloved,  I  desire  to  make  this  very  clear,  that  to  feel 
love  to  God  we  must  tread  along  the  road  of  faith  Truly, 
this  is  not  a  hard  or  perilous  way,  but  one  prepared  by  in- 
finite wisdom.  It  is  a  road  suitable  for  sinners,  and  indeed 
saints  must  come  that  way  too.  If  thou  wouldst  love  God, 
do  not  look  within  thee  to  see  whether  this  grace  or  that 
be  as  it  ought  to  be,  but  look  to  thy  God,  and  read  his  eter- 
nal love,  his  boundless  love,  his  costly  love,  which  gave 
Christ  for  thee ;  then  shall  thy  love  drink  in  fresh  life  and 
vigor. 

Remember  wherever  there-is  love  to  God  in  the  soul  it 
is  an  argument  that  God  loves  that  soul.  I  recollect  meet- 
ing once  with  a  Christian  woman  who  said  she  knew  she 
loved  God,  but  she  was  afraid  God  did  not  love  her.  That 
is  a  fear  so  preposterous  that  it  ought  never  to  occur  to  any- 
body. You  would  not  love  God  in  deed  and  in  truth  unless 
he  had  shed  abroad  his  love  in  your  heart  in  a  measura 
But  on  the  other  hand,  our  not  loving  God  is  not  a  conclu- 
sive argument  that  God  does  not  love  us ;  else  might  the 
sinner  be  afrai  1  to  come  to  God.  O  loveless  sinner  with 
heart  unquickened  and  chill,  the  voice  of  God  calls  even 
thee  to  Christ.  Even  to  the  dead  in  sin,  his  voice  saith 
**Live,"  Whilst  thou  art  yet  polluted  in  thy  blood,  cast 
out  in  the  open  field,  to  the  loathing  of  thy  person,  the 
Lord  of  mercy  passes  by,  and  says  "  live."  His  mighty  sov- 
ereignty comes  forth  dressed  in  robes  of  love,  and  he  touch- 
es thee  the  unlovable,  the  loveless,  the  depraved,  degraded 
sinner,  at  enmity  with  God, — ^he  touches  thee  in  all  thine 
fdienation  and  he  lifts  thee  out  of  it  and  makes  thee  to  lovo 


816  LOVE'S  Loaic. 

him,  not  for  thine  own  sake,  but  for  his  name's  sake  and  for 
his  mercy's  sake.  Thou  hadst  no  love  at  all  to  him,  but  all 
the  love  lay  in  him  alone ;  and  therefore  he  began  to  bless 
thee,  and  will  continue  to  bless  thee  world  without  end,  it 
thou  art  a  believer  in  Jesus.  In  the  bosom  of  the  Eternal 
fire  the  deep  springs  of  all  love. 

in.  This  leads  us,  in  the  third  place,  to  consider  for  a 
moment  the  bevival  op  our  love.  It  is  sadly  probable 
that  there  are  in  this  house  some  who  once  loved  God  very 
earnestly,  but  now  they  have  declined  and  become  grievous- 
ly indifferent ;  God's  love  to  us  never  changes,  but  ours  too 
often  sinks  to  a  low  ebb.  Perhaps  some  of  you  have  be- 
come so  cold  in  your  affections,  that  it  is  difficult  to  be  sure 
that  you  ever  did  love  God  at  all.  It  may  be  that  your 
life  has  become  lax,  so  as  to  deserve  the  censure  of  the 
Church.  You  are  a  backslider  and  you  are  in  a  dangerous 
condition;  yet,  if  there  be  indeed  spiritual  life  in  you,  you 
will  wish  to  return.  You  have  gone  astray  like  a  lost  sheep, 
but  your  prayer  is,  "  seek  thy  servant,  for  I  do  not  forget 
thy  commandments."  Now,  note  well,  that  the  caase  which 
originated  your  love  is  the  same  which  must  restore  it. 
You  went  to  Christ  as  a  sinner  at  first,  and  your  first  act 
was  to  believe  the  love  of  God  to  you  when  there  was  noth- 
mg  in  you  that  evidenced  it.  Go  the  same  way  again.  Do 
not  stop,  my  dear  brother,  to  pump  up  love  out  of  the  dry 
well  within  yourself !  Do  not  think  it  possible  that  love 
will  come  at  your  bidding.  If  a  man  would  give  all  the 
substance  of  his  house  for  love,  it  would  utterly  be  contemn- 
ed. Tliink  of  the  Lord's  unchanging  grace,  and  you  will 
feel  the  spiing-time  of  love  returning  to  your  soul.  Still 
doth  the  Lord  reserve  mercy  for  the  sinful,  still  he  waiteth 
to  be  gracious  ;  he  is  as  willing  to  receive  you  now  that  you 
have  played  the  prodigal,  as  he  was  to  have  retained  you  at 
home  in  the  bosom  of  his  love.  Many  considerations  ought 
to  ipd  you,  a  backslider,  to  believe  more  in  the  love  of  God 


LOVE'S   LOGIC.  317 

tban  over  you  did.  For  think  what  love  it  must  be  that  can 
invite  you  still  to  return,  you,  who  after  knowing  so  much 
have  sinned  against  light  and  knowledge  ;  you,  who  after 
having  experienced  so  much,  have  given  the  lie  to  your  pro* 
fession.  He  might  justly  have  cut  you  down,  for  you  have 
cumbered  the  ground  long  enough.  Surely,  when  Israel 
went  astray  from  God,  it  was  a  clear  proof  to  her  of  Jeho- 
vah's love  when  he  graciously  said,  "  They  say  if  a  man  put 
away  his  wife,  or  she  go  from  him,  and  become  another  man's, 
shall  he  return  to  her  again  ?  "  Why,  the  answer  in  every 
bosom  is  "  No  !  "  Who  would  love  a  wife  who  had  so  pol- 
luted herself?  But  thus  saith  the  Lord,  "  Thou  hast  played 
the  harlot  with  many  lovers,  yet  return  unto  me."  What 
matchless  love  is  this.  Hear  yet  more  of  these  gracious 
words,  which  you  will  find  in  the  third  chapter  of  Jeremiah's 
prophecy.  "  Go  and  proclaim  these  words  toward  the  north, 
and  say.  Return,  thou  backsliding  Israel,  saith  the  Lord ;  and 
I  will  not  cause  mine  anger  to  fall  upon  you :  for  I  am 
merciful,  saith  the  Lord,  and  I  will  not  keep  anger  forever.'* 
"Turn,  O  backsliding  children,  saith  the  Lprd  ;  for  I  am 
married  unto  you :  and  I  will  take  you  one  of  a  city,  and 
two  of  a  family,  and  I  will  bring  you  to  Zion."  "Return, 
ye  backsliding  children,  and  I  will  heal  your  backsli dings." 
Can  you  hear  these  words  without  emotion  ?  Backslider ! 
I  i)ray  thee  take  the  wings  of  God's  love  to  fly  back  to  him 
with.  But  I  hear  you  inquiring.  Will  he  still  receive  me  ? 
Shall  I  be  once  more — 

"  To  the  Father's  bosom  pressed, 
Onco  again  a  child  confessed?" 

It  shall  be  so.  Does  he  not  declare  that  he  is  God  and 
changes  not,  and  therefore  you  are  not  consumed?  Re- 
kindled are  the  flames  of  love  in  the  backslider's  bosom  when 
he  feels  all  this  to  be  true ;  he  cries,  "  Behold,  we  come  to 
thee,  for  thou  art  the  Lord  our  God."  I  pray  you,  then, 
any  of  you  who  are  conscious  of  gross  derelictions  of  duty, 
and  wanderings  of  heart,  do  not  ask  Moses  to  lead  you  back 


318  LOVE'S    LOGia 

to  Christ,  he  knows  the  way  to  Sinai's  flames,  bat  not  to 
Calvaiy's  pardoning  blood.  Go  to  Christ  himself  at  once. 
If  you  go  to  the  law  and  begin  to  judge  yourself,  if  you  get 
the  notion  that  you  are  to  xmdergo  a  sort  of  spiritual  quar- 
antine, that  you  must  pass  through  a  mental  purgatory  be- 
fore you  may  renew  your  faith  in  the  Saviour,  you  are  mis- 
taken. Come  just  as  you  are,  bad  as  you  are,  hardened, 
cold,  dead  as  you  feel  yourselves  to  be,  come  even  so,  and 
believe  in  the  boimdless  love  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus.  Then 
shall  come  the  deep  repentance  ;  then  shall  come  the  broken- 
ness  of  heart ;  then  shall  come  the  holy  jealousy,  the  sacred 
hatred  of  sin,  and  the  refining  of  the  soul  from  all  her  dross  ; 
then,  indeed,  all  good  things  shall  come  to  restore  your  soul, 
and  lead  you  in  the  paths  of  righteousness.  Do  not  look 
for  these  first ;  that  would  be  looking  for  the  effects  before 
the  cause.  The  great  cause  of  love  in  the  restored  backslider 
must  still  be  the  love  of  God  to  him,  to  whom  he  clings  with 
a  faith  that  dares  not  let  go  its  hold. 

"  But,"  saith  one,  "  I  think  it  is  very  dangerous  to  tell 
the  backslider  to  believe  in  God's  love,  surely  it  will  be  gross 
presumption  for  him  so  to  believe."  It  is  never  presumptu- 
ous for  a  man  to  believe  the  truth  ;  whether  a  statement  be 
comfortable  or  uncomfortable,  the  presumption  does  not  lie 
in  the  matter  itself,  but  in  its  untruthfulness.  I  say  again,  it 
is  never  presumptuous  to  believe  the  truth.  And  this  is  the 
truth,  that  the  Lord  loves  his  prodigal  sons  still,  and  his  stray 
sheep  still,  and  he  will  devise  means  to  bring  his  banished 
back  again,  that  they  perish  not.  '*  If  any  man  sin,  we  have 
an  advocate  with  the  Father,  Jesus  Christ  the  righteous." 

Remember  here,  that  the  motive  power  which  draws  back 
the  backslider  again  is  the  cord  of  love,  the  band  of  a  man, 
which  makes  him  feel  he  must  go  back  to  God  with  weeping 
and  repentance,  because  God  loves  him  still.  What  man 
among  you  this  morning  hath  a  son  who  has  disobeyed  him 
and  gone  from  him,  and  is  living  in  drunkenness,  and  in  all 
manner  of  lust  ?    If  you  liave  in  anger  told  him,  so  that  he 


LOVE'S   LOGIC.  819 

doubts  it  not,  that  you  have  struck  his  name  out  of  your  fam- 
ily, and  will  not  regard  him  as  a  child  any  longer,  do  you 
think  that  your  severity  will  induce  him  to  return  to  you  in 
love  ?  Far  from  it.  But  suppose  instead  thereof,  you  still 
assure  him  that  you  love  him ;  that  there  is  always  a  place 
at  your  table  for  him,  and  a  bed  in  your  house  for  him,  ay, 
and  better  still,  a  warm  place  in  your  heart  for  him  ;  sup- 
pose he  sees  your  tears  and  hears  your  prayers  for  him,  will 
not  this  draw  him  ?  Yes,  indeed,  if  he  be  a  son.  It  is  even 
thus  between  thy  God  and  thee,  O  backslider.  Hear  ye  the 
Lord  as  he  argues  thy  case  within  his  own  heart.  "  My  peo^ 
pie  are  bent  to  backsliding  from  me  ;  though  they  called 
them  to  the  most  High,  none  at  all  would  exalt  him.  How 
shall  I  give  thee  up,  Ephraim  ?  how  shall  I  deliver  thee,  Is- 
rael ?  how  shall  I  make  thee  as  Admah  ?  how  shall  I  set  thee 
as  Zeboim  ?  mine  heart  is  turned  within  me,  my  repentings 
are  kindled  together.  I  will  not  execute  the  fierceness  of  mine 
anger,  I  will  not  return  to  destroy  Ephraim :  for  I  am  God, 
and  not  man."  Surely,  if  any  thing  will  draw  you  back,  this 
will.  "Ah!"  saith  the  wandering  son,  "my  dear  father 
loves  me  still.  I  will  arise  and  go  to  him.  I  will  not  vex 
80  tender  a  heart.  I  will  be  his  loving  son  again."  God 
does  not  say  to  you  prodigals,  who  once  professed  his  name, 
**  I  have  unchilded  you,  I  have  cast  you  away,"  but  he  says, 
"I  love  you  still ;  and  for  my  name's  sake  will  I  restrain  my 
wrath  that  I  cut  you  not  off."  Come  to  your  offended  Fa- 
ther, and  you  shall  find  thaft  he  has  not  repented  of  his  love, 
but  will  embrace  you  still. 

IV.  Time  fails,  but  I  must  speak  for  a  little,  time  or  no 
time,  upon  the  fourth  point — the  pbbpecting  op  oub  lovb 
TO  God. 

Beloved,  there  are  few  of  us  who  know  much  of  the  deeps 
of  the  love  of  God  ;  our  love  is  shallow  ;  ah,  how  shallow  I 
Love  to  God  is  like  a  great  mountain.  The  majority  of  trav- 
ellers view  it  from  afar,  or  traverse  the  \a\\^^  «A»  \\.%\i^%^% 


320  LOVE'S  LOGia 

a  few  climb  to  a  halling-placo  on  one  of  its  elevated  sparer, 
wlicnce  they  see  a  portion  of  its  sublimities ;  here  and  there  aL 
adventurous  traveller  climbs  a  minor  peak,  and  views  glaciei 
and  alp  at  closer  range ;  fewest  of  all  are  those  who  scale 
the  topmost  pinnacle  and  tread  the  ▼irgin  snow.  So  in  the 
Church  of  God.  Every  Christian  abides  under  the  shadow 
of  divine  love :  a  few  enjoy  and  return  that  love  to  a  re- 
markable degree;  but  there  are  few,  in  this  age  sadly  few, 
who  reach  to  sera})hic  love,  who  ascend  into  the  hill  of  the 
Lord,  to  stand  where  the  eagle's  eye  hath  not  seen,  and  walk 
the  path  which  the  lion's  whelp  hath  never  trodden,  the  high 
places  of  complete  consecration  and  ardent  self-consuming 
love.  Now,  mark  you,  it  may  be  difficult  to  ascend  so  high, 
but  there  is  one  sure  route,  and  only  one,  which  the  man 
must  follow  who  would  gain  the  sacred  elevation.  It  is  not 
the  track  of  his  works,  nor  the  path  of  his  own  actions,  but 
this,  "  We  love  him  because  he  first  loved  us."  John  and 
the  apostles  confessed  that  thus  they  attained  their  love. 
For  the  highest  love  that  ever  glowed  in  human  bosom  there 
was  no  source  but  this — God  first  loved  that  man.  Do  you 
not  see  how  this  is?  The  knowledge  that  God  loves  me 
casts  out  my  tormenting  dread  of  God :  and  when  this  is  ex- 
pelled, there  is  room  for  abounding  love  to  God.  As  fear 
goes  out,  love  comes  in  at  the  other  door.  So  the  more  faith 
in  God  the  more  room  there  is  for  soul-filling  love. 

Again,  strong  faith  in  God's  love  brings  great  enjoy- 
ment ;  our  heart  is  glad,  our  s(5ul  is  satisfied  with  marrow 
and  fatness  when  we  know  that  the  whole  heart  of  God 
beats  towards  us  as  forcibly  as  ifwe  were  the  only  creatures 
he  had  ever  made,  and  his  whole  heart  were  wrapt  up  in 
us.  This  deep  enjoyment  creates  the  flaming  love  of  which 
I  liave  just  now  spoken. 

If  the  ardent  love  of  some  saints  often  takes  the  shape 
of  admiration  of  God,  this  arises  from  their  familiarity  with 
God,  and  this  familiarity  they  never  would  have  indulged  in, 
unless  they  had  known  that  he  was  their  friend.     A  man 


LOVE'S  LOGIC.  321 

oould  not  speak  to  God  as  to  a  friend,  unless  lie  knew  the  love 
God  hath  toward  him.  The  more  true  his  knowledge  and 
the  more  sure,  the  more  close  his  fellowship. 

Brethren  beloved,  if  you  know  that  God  has  loved  jO'\ 
then  you  will  feel  grateful  ;  every  doubt  will  diminish  your 
gratitude,  but  every  grain  of  faith  will  increase  it.  Then 
as  we  advance  in  grace,  love  to  God  in  our  soul  will  excite 
desire  after  him.  Those  we  love  we  long  to  be  with  we 
count  the  hours  that  separate  us  ;  no  place  so  happy  as  that 
in  which  we  enjoy  their  society.  Hence  love  to  God  pro- 
duces a  desire  to  be  with  him ;  a  desire  to  be  like  him,  a  long- 
ing to  be  with  him  eternally  in  heaven,  and  this  breaks  us 
away  from  worldliness.  This  keeps  us  from  idolatry,  and 
thus  has  a  most  blessedly  sanctifying  effect  upon  us,  produc- 
ing that  elevated  character  which  is  now  so  rare,  but  which 
wherever  it  exists  is  powerful  for  the  good  of  the  church 
and  for  the  glory  of  God.  Oh  that  we  had  many  in  this  church 
who  had  reached  the  highest  platform  of  piety.  Would  God 
we  had  a  band  of  men  full  of  faith  and  of  the  Holy  Glost ; 
strong  in  the  Lord  and  in  the  power  of  his  might.  It  may  help 
those  who  aspire  to  mount  high  in  grace,  if  they  kec  p  in 
mind  that  every  step  they  climb  they  must  use  the  ladder 
which  Jacob  saw.  The  love  of  God  to  us  is  the  only  way 
to  climb  to  the  love  of  God. 

And  now  I  must  spend  a  minute  in  putting  the  truth  of 
my  text  to  the  test.  I  want  you  not  to  listen  to  me  so 
much  as  to  listen  to  your  own  hearts,  and  to  God's  word, 
a  minute,  if  you  are  believers.  What  is  it  we  have  been 
talking  about  ?  It  is  God's  love  to  us.  Get  the  thought 
into  your  head  a  minute :  "  God  loves  me — not  merely  bears 
with  me,  thinks  of  me,  feeds  me,  but  loves  me.'*  Oh,  it  is  a 
very  sweet  thing  to  feel  that  we  have  the  love  of  a  dear  wife, 
or  a  kind  husband ;  and  there  is  much  sweetness  in  thti  love 
of  a  fond  child,  or  a  tender  mother;  but  to  think  ths  ,  God 
loves  me,  this  is  infinitely  better!  Who  is  it  thai  loves 
you?  God,  the  Maker  of  heaven  and  earth,  the  Almighi  f,  4U 


822  LOVE'S  LOGIC. 

in  all,  does  lie  love  me  ?  Even  he !  If  all  men,  and  all  angels, 
and  all  the 'living  creatures  that  are  before  the  throne  loved 
me,  it  were  nothing  to  this — ^the  Infinite  loves  me !  And  who 
is  it  that  he  loves  ?  Me.  The  text  saith,"  us."  "  We  love 
him  because  he  first  loved  us.''  But  this  is  the  personal  point 
— he  loves  me,  an  insignificant  nobody,  full  of  sin — who  de- 
served to  be  in  hell ;  who  loves  him  so  little  in  return — God 
loves  »iE.  Beloved  believer,  does  not  this  melt  you  ?  Does 
not  this  fire  your  soul  ?  I  know  it  does  if  it  is  really  be- 
lieved It  must.  And  how  did  he  love  me  ?  He  loved 
me  so  that  he  gave  up  his  only  begotten  Son  for  me,  to  be 
nailed  to  a  tree,  and  made  to  bleed  and  die.  And  what 
will  come  of  it  ?  Why,  because  he  loved  me  and  forgave 
me?  I  am  on  the  way  to  heaven,  and  within  a  few  months, 
perhaps  days,  I  shall  see  his  face  and  sing  his  praises.  He 
loved  me  before  I  was  bom  ;  before  a  star  beg^n  to  shine  he 
loved  me,  and  he  has  never  ceased  to  do  so  all  these  years. 
When  I  have  sinned  he  has  loved  me  ;  when  I  have  forgot- 
ten him  he  has  loved  me  ;  and  when  in  the  days  of  my  sin  I 
cursed  him,  yet  still  he  loved  me ;  and  he  will  love  me 
when  my  knees  tremble,  and  my  hair  is  gray  with  age,  "  even 
to  hoar  hairs"  he  will  bear  and  carry  his  servant ;  and  he 
will  love  mo  when  the  world  is  on  a  blaze,  and  love  me  for- 
ever, and  forever.  Oh,  chew  the  cud  of  this  blessed  thought ; 
roll  it  under  your  tongue  as  a  dainty  morsel ;  sit  down  this 
afternoon,  if  you  have  leisure,  and  think  of  nothing  but  this — 
his  great  love  wherewith  he  loves  you  ;  and  if  you  do  not 
feel  your  heart  bubbling  up  with  a  good  matter;  if  you  do 
not  feel  your  soul  yearning  towards  God,  and  heaving  big- 
with  strong  emotions  of  love  to  God,  then  I  am  much  mis- 
taken. This  is  so  powerful  a  truth,  and  you  are  so  constitu- 
ted as  a  Christian  as  to  be  wrought  upon  by  this  truth,  that 
ii  it  be  believed  and  felt,  the  consequence  must  be  that  you 
will  love  him  because  he  first  loved  you.  God  bless  you, 
brethren  and  sisters,  for  Christ's  sake.     Amen. 


ALTOGETHEB  LOVELT.  323 


SEEMON  XIX. 


M 


AliTOGETHER   LOVELY: 


TBI,  HE  IB  ALTOGETHEB  LOTELT."— CanticleB  Y.  16. 


When  the  old  Puritan  minister  had  delivered  his  dis* 
coarse,  and  dwelt  upon  firstly,  and  secondly,  and  thirdly 
and  perhaps  upon  twenty-fifthly,  before  he  sat  down  he  usu- 
ally gave  a  comprehensive  summary  of  all  that  he  had  spo- 
ken. Every  one  who  carefully  noted  the  summary  would 
caiTy  away  the  essence  of  the  sermon.  The  summary  was 
always  looked  upon  by  the  Puritan  hearer  as  one  of  the 
most  valuable  helps  to  memory,  and  consequently  a  most 
important  part  of  the  discourse.  In  these  five  words,  the 
spouse  here  gives  you  her  summary.  She  had  delivered  a 
tenfold  discourse  concerning  her  Lord  ;  she  had  described 
in  detail  all  his  various  beauties,  and  when  she  had  survey- 
ed him  from  head  to  foot,  she  gathered  up  all  her  commen- 
dations in  this  sentence  :  "  Yea,  he  is  altogether  lovely." 
Remember  these  words,  and  know  their  meaning,  and  you 
possess  the  quintessence  of  the  spouse's  portion  of  the  Song 
of  Songs.  Now,  as  in  this  allegorical  song  the  bride  sums 
up  her  witness  in  these  words,  so  may  I  say  that  all  the  pa- 
triarchs, all  the  prophets,  all  the  apostles,  all  the  confes- 
sors, yea,  and  the  entire  body  of  the  church  have  left  us  no 
other  testimony.  They  all  spake  of  Christ,  and  they  all 
commended  him.  Whatever  the  type,  or  synibol,  or  ob- 
scure oracle,  or  open  word  in  which  they  bore  witness,  that 
witness  all  amounted  to  this  :  "  Yea,  he  is  altogether  love 


S24  ALTOGETHER  LOVELY. 

ly."  Yes,  and  I  will  add,  that  since  the  canon  of  inspi- 
ration has  closed,  the  testimony  of  all  saints,  on  earth  and  in 
heaven,  has  continued  to  contirm  the  declaration  made  of 
old.  The  verdict  of  each  particular  saint  and  of  the  whole 
elect  host  as  a  body,  still  is  this,  "Yea,  he  is  altogether 
lovely."  From  the  sighs  and  the  songs  which  mingle  on 
the  dying  beds  of  saints,  I  hear  this  note  supreme  above  all 
others,  "  He  is  altogether  lovely  ;  "  and  from  the  songs  im- 
mingled  with  groans,  which  pei-petually  peal  forth  from  im- 
mortal tongues  before  the  presence  of  the  Most  High,  I  hear 
this  one  master  note,  "Yea,  he  is  altogether  lovely."  If  the 
whole  church  desired  to  say  with  the  apostle,  "  Now  of  the 
things  which  we  have  spoken  this  is  the  sum,"  she  need  not 
wait  for  a  brief  and  comprehensive  summary,  for  it  lies  be  • 
fore  her  in  this  golden  sentence,  "  Yea,  he  is  altogether 
lovely." 

Looking  at  my  text  in  this  light, I  felt  much  humbling 
of  spirit,  and  I  hesitated  to  preach  upon  it,  for  I  said  in  my 
heart, "  It  is  high,  I  cannot  attain  unto  it."  These  deep  texts 
show  us  the  shortness  of  our  plumb-line  ;  these  ocean  verses 
are  so  exceeding  broad  that  our  skiffs  are  apt  to  be  driven 
far  out  of  sight  of  land  where  our  timid  spirits  tremble  to 
spread  the  sail.  Then  I  comforted  myself  by  the  thought 
that  though  I  could  not  comprehend  this  text  in  a  measure, 
nor  weigh  its  mountains  in  scales,  or  its  hills  in  a  balance, 
yet  it  was  all  mine  own,  by  the  gift  of  divine  grace,  and 
therefore  I  need  not  fear  to  enter  upon  the  meditation  of  it. 
If  I  cannot  grasp  the  ocean  in  my  span,  yet  may  I  bathe 
therein  with  sweet  content ;  if  I  cannot  describe  the  king  in 
his  beauty,  yet  may  I  gaze  upon  him,  since  the  old  proverb 
saith,  "A  beggar  may  look  at  a  prince."  Though  I  pretend 
not  so  to  preach  from  such  a  heavenly  word  as  that  before 
us,  as  to  spread  before  you  all  its  marrow  and  fatness,  yet 
may  I  gather  up  a  few  crumbs  which  fall  from  its  table. 
Poor  men  are  glad  of  crumbs,  and  crumbs  from  such  a  feast 
Are  better  than  loaves  from  the  tables  of  the  world.     Better 


ALTOGETHER  LOVELY.  328 

to  have  a  glimpse  of  Jesus,  than  to  see  all  the  glory  of  the 
earth  all  the  days  of  our  life.  K  we  fail  on  this  subject  we 
may  do  better  than  if  we  succeeded  upon  another ;  so  we 
will  pluck  up  courage,  seek  divine  help,  and  draw  near  to 
"this  wondrous  text,  with  our  shoes  from  off  our  feet  like 
Moses  when  he  saw  the  bush  aglow  with  God. 

Tins  verse  has  been  translated  in  another  way :  "Ho  is 
all  desires  ; "  and  so  indeed  Jesus  is.  He  was  the  desire  of 
the  ancients,  he  is  the  desire  of  all  nations  still.  To  his 
own  people  he  is  their  all  in  all ;  they  are  complete  in  him ; 
they  are  filled  out\)f  his  fulness. 


All  our  capacious  powers  can  wish, 
In  him  doth  riclily  meet." 


He  is  the  delight  of  his  servants,  and  fills  their  expectations 
to  the  full.  But  we  will  not  dispute  about  translations,  for, 
after  all,  with  such  a  text,  so  full  of  unutterable  spiritual 
sweetness,  every  man  must  be  his  own  translator,  and  into 
his  own  soul  must  the  power  of  the  message  come,  by  the 
enforcement  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Such  a  text  as  this  is  very 
like  the  manna  which  fell  in  the  wilderness,  of  which  the 
rabbis  say  it  tasted  after  each  man's  liking.  If  the  flavor 
in  a  man's  mouth  was  very  sweetness,  the  angel's  food  which 
fell  around  the  camp  was  luscious  as  any  dainty  he  had  con- 
ceived ;  whatever  he  might  be,  the  manna  was  to  him  as  he 
was.  So  shall  this  text  be.  To  you  with  low  ideas  of 
Christ, the  words  shall  but  glide  over  your  ears,  and  be  mean- 
ingless ;  but  if  your  spirit  be  ravished  with  the  precious  love 
of  Jesus*  there  shall  be  songs  of  angels,  and  more  than  that, 
the  voice  of  God's  own  Spirit  to  your  soul  in  this  short  sen- 
tence, "  Yea,  he  is  altogether  lovely." 

I  am  an  engraver  this  morning,  and  I  seek  somewhat 
whereon  I  may  engrave  this  heavenly  line.  Shall  I  take 
unto  me  ivory  or  silver  ?  Shall  I  borrow  crystal  or  gold  ? 
JThese  are  too  common  to  bear  this  unique  inscription  :  1  put 
them  all  aside.     Shall  I  spell  my  text  m  gemu^  V\\Xi  ^sa.  wsa? 


826  ALTOGETHER  LOVELY. 

erald,  a  sapphire,  a  raby,  a  diamond,  or  a  pearl  for  each 
single  letter?  Nay,  these  are  poor  perishable  tbingft :  we 
put  them  all  away.  I  want  an  immortal  spirit  to  be  the 
tablet  for  my  writing  :  nay,  I  must  lay  aside  my  graving 
tool,  and  ask  the  Spirit  of  God*  to  take  it :  I  want  a  heart 
prepared  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  upon  whose  fleshy  tablets  there 
%hall  be  written  this  morning  no  other  sentence  than  this, 
and  this  shall  suffice  for  a  right  royal  motto  to  adorn  it  well : 
"  Yea,  he  is  alogether  lovely."  Spirit  of  God,  find  out  the 
prepared  heart,  and  with  thy  sacred  hand  write  in  eternal 
characters  the  love  of  Christ,  and  all  his  inimitable  "jerfec- 
tions. 

In  handling  our  text  this  morning  we  shall  note  three 
points  of  character,  and  then  we  shall  show  three  uses  to 
which  we  may  profitably  turn  it. 

L  We  shall  consider  three  points  of  chabacteb  which 
are  very  noticeable  in  these  words,  and  the  first  which  sug- 
gests itself  is  this:  the  words  are  evidently  uttered  by  one 
who  is  under  the  influence  of  overwhelming  emotion.  The 
words  are  rather  a  veil  to  the  heart  than  a  glass  through 
which  we  see  its  emotions.  The  sentence  labors  to  express 
the  inexpressible ;  it  pants  to  utter  the  unutterable.  The  per- 
son writing  these  words  evidently  feels  a  great  deal  more 
than  any  language  can  possibly  convey  to  us.  The  spouse 
begins  somewhat  calmly  in  her  description  :  "  My  beloved 
is  white  and  ruddy."  She  proceeds  with  due  order,  com- 
mencing at  the  head,  and  proceeding  with  the  divers  parts 
of  the  person  of  the  Beloved ;  bnt  she  warms,  she  glows,  she 
flames,  and  at  last  the  heat  which  had  for  a  while  been  re- 
pressed, is  like  fire  within  her  bones,  and  she  bursts  forth  in 
flaming  words.  Here  is  the  live  coal  from  off" the  altar  of 
her  heart :  "  Yea,  he  is  altogether  lovely."  It  is  the  utter- 
ance of  a  soul  that  is  altogether  overcome  with  admiration, 
and  therefore  feels  that  in  attempting  to  describe  the  Well- 
ibeloved,  it  has  undertaken  a  task  beyond  its  power.     Lc  si 


ALTOGETHER  LOVELY,  327 

In  adoring  wonder,  the  gracious  mind  desists  from  descrip- 
tion, and  cries  with  rapture,  "  Yea,  he  is  altogether  lovely." 
It  has  often  been  thus  with  true  saints  ;  they  have  felt  the 
love  of  Jesus  to  be  overpowering  and  inebriating.     Believ- 
ers are  not  always  cool  and  calm  in  their  thoughts  towards 
their  Lord:  there  are  seasons  with  them  when  they  pass 
into  a  state  of  rapture,  their  hearts  bum  within  them,  they 
are  in  ecstasy,  they  mount  up  with  wings  as  eagles,  their 
souls  become  like  the  chariots  of  Amminadib,  they  feel  what 
they  could  not  tell,  they  experience  what  they  could  not  ex- 
press, though  the  tongues  of  men  and  of  angels  were  per- 
fectly at  their  command.     Favored  believers  are  altogether 
enraptured  with  the  sight  they  have  of  their  all-beauteous 
Lord.   It  is  to  be  feared  that  such  raptures  are  not  frequent 
with  all  Christians,  though  I  should  gravely  question  his 
saintship,  who  has  never  experienced  any  degree  of  holy  rap- 
ture :  but  there  are  some  saints  to  whom  a  state  of  over- 
whelming adoration  of  their  Lord  has  been  by  no  means  an  un- 
usual thing.    Communion  with  Jesus  has  not  only  entranced 
them  now  and   then,  but   it    has   perfumed  all  their  life 
with  holiness ;  and  if  it  has  not  caused  their  faces  literally 
to  shine  like  the  face  of  Moses,  it  has  made  the  spiritual  glo- 
ry to  flash  from  their  countenances,  and  elevated   them 
among  their  fellow  Christians  to  be  leaders  of  the  host  of 
God,  whereat  others  have  admired  and  wondered.     Perad- 
venture,  I  speak  to  children  of  God  who  know  very  little  of 
what  I  mean  by  the  overwhelming  emotions  created  by  a 
sight  of  our  Lord ;  they  have  not  so  seen  the  Lord  as  to 
have  felt  their  souls  melting  within  them  while  the  Beloved 
spake  with  them ;  to  such  I  shall  speak  with  sorrowful  sym- 
pathy, being,  alas  !  too  much  like  unto  them,  but  my  pray- 
er shill  go  up  all  the  while,  "L3rd,  reveal  thyself  to  us, 
that  we  also  may  be  compelled  to  say,  *  Yea,  he  is  altogeth- 
er lovely.'    Show  us  thy  hands  and  thy  side  till  we  exclaim 
with  Thomas,  *  My  Lord  and  my  God.' " 

Shall  I  tell  you  why  it  is,  my  brethren,  that  many  of  you 


328  ALTOGETHER  LOVELY. 

but  seldom  enjoy  the" exceeding  bliss  of  Jesus'  presence! 
The  cause  may  lie  partly  in  what  is,  alas!  too  common 
among  Christians,  a  great  degree  of  ignorance  of  the  person 
of  the  Lord  Jesus,  Every  soul  that  sees  Jesus  by  faith  i«i 
saved  thereby.  If  I  look  to  Christ  with  a  bleared  eye,  that 
is  ever  so  weak  and  clouded  with  teai*s,  and  if  I  only  catch 
a  glimpse  of  him  through  clouds  and  mists,  yet  the  sight 
saves  me.  But  who  will  remain  content  with  such  a  poor 
gleam  of  his  glory  as  that  ?  Who  wishes  to  see  only 
**  through  a  glass,  darkly  !  "  No,  let  my  eyes  be  cleansed 
till  they  become  as  the  eyes  of  doves  by  the  rivers  of  waters, 
and  lean  see  my  Lord  as  he  is  seen  by  his  bosom  friends,  and 
can  sing  of  those  beauties  which  are  the  lis^ht  and  the  crown 
of  heaven  itself.  If  you  do  but  touch  the  hem  of  Jesus'  gar- 
ment, you  shall  be  made  whole  ;  but  will  this  always  satisfy 
you  ?  Will  you  not  desire  to  get  beyond  the  hem  and  beyond 
the  garment,  to  himself,  and  to  his  heart,  and  there  forever 
take  up  your  abode  ?  Who  desires  to  be  forever  a  babe  in 
grace,  with  a  half-awakened,  dreamy,  twilight  consciousness 
of  the  Redeemer  ?  Brethren,  be  diligent  in  the  school  of 
the  cross;  therein  is  enduring  wisdom.  Study  your  Saviour 
much.  The  science  of  Christ  crucified  is  the  most  excellent 
of  sciences ;  and  to  know  him  and  the  power  of  his  resur- 
rection, is  to  know  that  which  is  best  worth  knowing.  Ig- 
norance of  Jesus  deprives  many  saints  of  those  divine  rap- 
tures which  carry  others  out  of  themselves,  therefore  let  us 
be  among  those  children  of  Zion  who  are  taught  of  the  Lord. 
Next  to  this,  you  shall  find  the  want  of  meditation  to  be 
a  very  serious  robber  of  the  wealth  of  renewed  hearts.  To  be- 
lieve a  thing,is,  as  it  w^ere,  to  see  the  cool  crystal  water  spark- 
ling in  the  cup  ;  but  to  meditate  upon  it  is  to  drink  there- 
o£  Reading  gathers  the  clusters,  contemplation  squeezes 
Ibrtl:  their  generous  juice.  Meditation  is  of  all  things  the 
most  soul-fattening  when  combined  with  prayer.  The  spouse 
had  meditated  much  in  this  chapter,  for  otherwise  she  had 
not  been  able  to  speak  in  detail  concerning  her  Lord*    0 


ALTOGETHER  LOVELY.  329 

saintly  hearts,  imitate  ye  her  example  !  Think,  my  breth- 
ren, of  our  Lord,  Jesus:  he  is  God,  the  Eternal,  the  Infinite, 
the  ever— blessed;  yet  he  became  man  for  us — man  of  the 
substance  of  his  mother,  like  ourselves.  Meditate  upon  his 
spotless  character ;  review  the  sufierings  which  he  endured 
on  Calvary;  follow  him  into  the  grave,  and  from  the  grave 
to  the  resurrection,  and  from  the  resurrection  up  the  starry 
way  to  his  triumphant  throne.  Let  your  souls  dwell  up'^n 
each  of  his  offices,  as  prophet,  priest,  and  king;  pore  over 
each  one  of  his  characters,  and  every  scriptural  title;  pause 
and  consider  every  phase  of  him,  and  when  you  have  done 
this,  begin  again, and  yet  again.  It  is  good  to  chew  the  cud 
by  meditation,  then  shall  the  sweetness  and  fatness  of  di- 
^^ne  truth  come  to  your  soul,  and  you  shall  burst  forth  with 
such  rapturous  expressions  as  that  of  the  text,  "Yea,  he  is  al- 
together lovely."  The  most  of  you  are  too  busy,  you  have 
too  much  to  do  in  the  world ;  but  what  is  it  all  about  ? 
Scraping  together  dust,  loading  yourselves  with  thick  clay. 
Oh  that  you  were  busy  after  the  true  riches,  and  could  step 
aside  awhile  to  enrich  yourselves  in  solitude,  and  make 
your  hearts  vigorous  by  feeding  upon  the  person  and  work 
of  your  ever — blessed  Lord  !  You  miss  a  heaven  below  by  a 
too  eager  pursuit  of  earth.  You  cannot  know  these  joyful 
raptures  if  meditation  be  pushed  into  a  corner. 

Another  reason  why  little  of  the  Lord's  beauty  is  dis- 
cerned, is  tht  low  state  of  the  spiHtual  life  in  many  a  OhriS" 
iian.  Many  a  believer  is  just  alive  and  no  more.  Do  you 
not  know  such  starveling  souls  ?  May  you  not  be  one  your- 
self! His  eyes  are  not  delighted  with  the  beauties  of 
Christ,  he  is  purblind,  and  cannot  see  afar  off;  he  walks 
not  with  Jesus  in  the  garden  of  pomegranates,  he  is  too  fee- 
ble to  rise  from  the  couch  of  weakness  ;  he  cannot  feed  upon 
Christ,  his  appetite  is  gone — sure  sign  of  terrible  decline. 
For  him  there  are  no  climbings  to  the  top  of  Amana,  no 
leaping  for  joy  in  the  temple,  no  dancing  before  the  ark  with 
Pavid ;  uo,  if  be  be  but  carried  to  the  feet  of  Jesus  iu  an  am- 


830  ALTOGETHER  LOVELY, 

bulance  as  a  sick  man  borne  of  four,  it  is  as  mach  as  he  hem 
yet  rec'uved.  To  be  strong  in  the  Lord,  and  in  the  power 
of  his  might,  to  have  the  wings  of  eagles  with  which  to 
mount  above  the  clouds  of  earth,  to  this  many  are  strangers. 
But  beloved,  there  are  noble  spirits  and  better  taught,  who 
know  something  of  the  life  of  heaven  even  while  here  below. 
Tlie  Lord  strengthen  us  with  grace  in  our  inner  man,  and 
then  shall  we  drink  deeper  draughts  of  the  wines  on  the  lees 
well  refined,  and  then  also  our  eyes  being  open,  we  shall 
see  Jesus  more  clearly,  and  bear  fuller  witness  that  he  is 
"fairer  than  the  children  of  men." 

I  am  afraid  that  the  visits  of  Christ  to  our  souls  have  been 
disesteemed,  and  the  loss  of  those  visits  has  not  caused  ks 
corresponding  sorrow.  We  did  not  sufficiently  delight. in 
the  beauty  of  the  Bridegroom  when  he  did  come  to  us; 
when  our  hearts  were  somewhat  lifted  up  with  his  love  we 
grew  cold  and  idle,  and  then  he  withdrew  his  conscious 
presence  ;  but,  alas !  we  were  not  grieved,  but  we  wickedly 
tried  to  live  without  him.  It  is  wretched  work  for  a  be- 
liever to  try  and  live  without  his  Saviour,  Perhaps,  dear 
brethren,  some  of  you  have  tried  it  until  at  last  vou  have 
almost  succeeded.  You  were  wont  to  mourn  like  doves  if 
you  had  no  word  from  your  Master  in  the  morning !  and, 
without  a  love-token  before  you  went  to  rest,  you  tossed  un- 
easily upon  your  bed  ;  but  now  you  are  carnal, and  worldly, 
and  careless,  and  quite  content  to  have  it  so.  Jesus  hides 
his  face,  the  sun  is  set,  and  yet  it  is  not  night  with  you.  Oh, 
may  God  be  pleased  to  arouse  you  from  this  lethargy,  and 
make  you  moijrn  your  sad  estate!  Even  if  an  affiiction 
should  be  needed  to  bring  you  back  from  your  backsliding 
it  would  be  %  cheap  price  to  pay.  Awake,  O  north  wind, 
with  all  thy  cutting  forcp,  if  thy  bleak  breath  may  but  stir 
lh%  lethargic  heart !  May  the  Lord  grant  us  grace  so  to 
lo\  e  Christ  that  if  we  have  not  our  fill  of  him,  we  may  lie 
reatly  to  die  with  hungering  and  thirsting  after  him.  May 
we  never  be  able  to  find  a  place  to  build  our  neit  upon 


ALTOGETHER  LOVELY.  331 

while  our  wing  wanders  away  from  the  tree  of  life.  Like 
the  dove  of  Noah,  may  we  drop  into  the  water  and  be 
drowned' sooner  than  find  rest  for  the  sole  of  our  foot  except 
upon  the  ark,  Christ  Jesus,  our  Saviour. 

Beloved,  if  none  of  these  suggestions  should  hit  the  mark, 
and  reveal  the  cause  why  so  little  is  known  of  rapturcu* 
love  t^  Christ,  let  me  suggest  another.  Vei*y  often, ///vA**- 
Bora^  hearts  are  vain  and  frioolous ;  they  are  taken  up  <luriiig 
the  week  with  their  business.  This  might  plead  some  ex- 
cuse ;  but  when  they  have  little  spaces  and  intervals,  these 
are  tilled  up  with  very  vanity.  Now,  if  the  soul  has  come 
to  look  at  the  mere  tiities  of  this  world  as  all-important,  is 
it  any  marvel  that  it  should  be  unable  to  perceive  the  ex- 
ceeding preciousness  of  Christ  Jesus?  Who  will  care  for 
the  wheat  when  he  dotes  on  the  chaff?  And  with  this  it 
will  often  happen  that  the  professor's  mind  has  grown  proud 
as  well  as  vain  ;  he  does  not  remember  his  natural  poverty 
and  meanness,  and  consequently  does  not  value  the  riches 
of  Christ  Jesus.  He  has  come  to  think  himself  an  establish- 
ed, experienced  Christian;  he  fancies  that  he  is  not  like 
those  foolish  beginners  who  are  so  volatile  and  so  readily 
led  astray;  he  has  acquired  the  wisdom  of  years  and  tlie  sta- 
bility of  experience.  O  soul,  if  thou  art  great,  Christ  will 
be  little;  thou  canst  never  see  him  on  the  throne  until  thou 
hast  been  on  the  dunghill  thyself.  K  thou  be  any  thing,  so 
much  the  less  is  Christ ;  for  if  he  be  all  in  all,  then  there  is 
no  room  for  any  thing  else ;  and  if  thou  be  something,  thou 
hast  stolen  just  so  much  from  the  glory  of  thy  Lord  Jesus. 
Lie  low  in  the  dust,  it  is  the  place  for  thee. 

**  Tlie  more  thy  glories  strike  my  eyes. 
The  humbler  I  shall  lie." 

ITie  humbler  I  am  in  myself,  the  more  shall  I  be  capable  of 
Boeing  the  enchanting  beauties  of  Christ. 

Li^t  me  just  say  these  two  or  three  words.  I  believe 
diose  are  the  happiest  saints  who  are  most  overwhelmed 
with  a  sense  of  the  greatne«s,  goodness,  and  preciousness  of 


582  ALTOa£THi!E  LOVELT. 

Christ.  I  believe  these  to  be  the  most  aseful  saints,  also^ 
and  to  be  in  the  Christian  church  as  a  tower  of  strength. 
I  pray  that  you  and  I,  walking  with  God  by  faith,  may 
nevertheless  often  have  our  festival  days,  our  notablb  sea- 
sons, when  he  shall  specially  kiss  us  with  the  kisses  of  hig 
love,  and  we  shall  drink  larger  draughts  of  his  love,  which 
is  better  vhan  wine.  Oh  !  to  be  carried  right  away  with  the 
divine  manifestation  of  the  chief  among  ten  thousand,  so 
that  our  souls  shall  cry  out  in  rapture,  "  Yea,  he  is  alto- 
gether lovely."  This  is  one  characteristic  of  the  text :  may 
it  be  transferred  to  us. 

2.  A  second  is  this,  and  very  manifest  it  is  upon  the  sur- 
face of  the  verse — here  is  undivided  affection.  "  He  is  alto« 
gether  lovely."  Note  that  these  words  have  a  world  of 
meaning  in  them,  but  chiefly  they  tell  us  this,  that  Jesus  is 
to  the  true  saint  the  only  lovely  one  in  the  world.  "  He  is 
altogether  lovely  ; "  then  there  is  no  loveliness  anywhere 
else.  It  is  as  though  the  spouse  felt  that  Christ  had  en- 
grossed all  the  beauty  and  all  the  lovewoithiness  in  the  en- 
tire universe.  Who  among  us  will  say  that  she  eiTed  ?  Is 
not  Jesus  worthy  of  all  the  admiration  and  love  of  all  in- 
telligent beings  ?  But  may  we  not  love  our  friends  and 
kinsfolk  ?  Ay,  but  in  him,  and  in  subservience  to  him  ;  so, 
and  so  only,  is  it  safe  to  love  them.  Did  not  our  Lord  him- 
self say,  "  If  any  man  love  father  or  mother  more  than  me, 
he  is  not  worthy  of  me"  ?  Yea,  and  in  another  place  he 
put  it  more  strongly  still,  for  he  said,  "  Except  a  man  hate 
father  and  mother,"  or  love  them  not  at  all  in  comparison 
with  me,  "he  is  not  worthy  of  me."  Except  these  are  put 
on  a  lower  stage  than  Jesus  is  we  cannot  be  his  disciples. 
Christ  must  be  monarch  in  the  breast ;  our  dear  ones  may 
sit  at  his  Ibotstool,  and  we  may  love  them  for  his  sake,  but 
he  alone  must  fill  the  throne  of  our  hearts.  I  may  see  ex- 
^llences  in  my  Christian  brethren,  but  I  must  not  forget 
tibat  there  would  be  none  in  them  if  they  were  not  derive*! 
xnn  him ;  their  loveliness  is  only  a  part  of  his  loveliness, 


ALTOOETHfiR  LOV^Y.  833 

for  he  wrote  it  in  them  by  his  own  Spirit.    I  am  to  acknowl 
edge  that  Jesus  is  the  monopolizer  of  all  loveliness,  the  en* 
grosser  of  all  that  is  admirable  in  the  entire  universe ;  and 
I  am,  therefore,  to  give  him  all  my  love,  for  "  he  is  alto- 
gether lovely." 

Our  text  means,  again,  that  in  Jesus  loveliness  of  all  kinds 
is  to  be  found.  If  there  be  any  thing  that  is  worthy  of  the 
lo\'e  of  an  immortal  spirit,  it  is  to  be  seen  in  abundance  in 
the  ]jord  Jesus.  "  Whatsoever  things  are  true,  whatsoever 
things  are  honest,  whatsover  things  are  just,  whatsoever 
things  are  pure,  whatsoever  things  are  lovely,  whatsoever 
things  are  of  a  good  report ;  if  there  be  any  virtue,  and  if 
there  be  any  praise,"  all  can  be  found  without  measure  in 
Christ  Jesus.  As  all  the  rivers  meet  in  the  sea,  so  all  beau- 
ties unite  in  the  Redeemer.  Take  the  character  of  any  gra- 
cious man,  and  you  shall  find  a  measure  of  loveliness,  but  it 
has  its  bounds  and  its  mixtures.  Peter  has  many  virtues, 
but  he  has  not  a  few  failings.  John,  too,  excels,  but  in  cer- 
tain points  he  is  deficient ;  but  herein  our  Lord  transcends 
all  his  saints!  for  all  human  virtues,  all  divine,  are  harmo- 
niously blended  in  him.  He  is  not  this  flower  or  that,  but 
he  is  the  Paradise  of  perfection.  He  is  not  a  star  here  or  a 
constellation  there,  he  is  the  whole  heaven  of  stars,  nay,  he 
is  the  heaven  of  heavens ;  he  is  all  that  is  fair  and  lovely 
condensed  in  one. 

When  the  text  says  again  that  Jesus  "  is  altogether  love- 
Ij ,"  it  declares  that  he  is  lovely  in  all  views  of  him.  It 
generally  happens  that  to  the  noblest  building  there  is  an 
unhappy  point  of  view  from  which  the  architecture  appears 
at  a  disadvantage ;  the  choicest  piece  of  workmanship  may 
not  be  equally  complete  in  all  directions ;  the  best  human 
character  is  deformed  by  one  flaw,  if  not  with  more ;  but 
with  our  Lord  all  is  lovely,  regard  him  as  you  will.  You 
shaU  contemplate  him  from  all  points,  and  only  find  new 
confirmation  of  the  statement  that  "  he  is  altogether  lovely." 
As  the  everlasting  God  before  the  world  was  made,  angels 


834  ALTOGETHER  LOVELt. 

loved  him  and  adored ;  as  the  babe  at  Bethlehem  ^r  as  the  mati 
at  Bethany  ;  as  walking  the  sea  or  as  nailed  to  the  cross ; 
in  his  grave,  dead,  and  buried,  or  on  his  throne  triumphant ; 
rising  as  forerunner,  or  descending  a  second  time  to  judge 
the  world  in  righteousness;  in  his  shame,  despised  and  spit 
upon,  or  in  his  glory,  adored  and  beloved  ;  with  thv.  thorns 
about  his  brow  and  the  nails  piercing  his  hands,  or  with 
the  keys  of  death  and  hell  swinging  at  his  girdle ;  view  him 
as  you  will,  and  where  you  will,  and  when  you  will,  "  he  is 
altogether  lovely."  Under  all  aspects,  and  in  all  offices  and 
in  relations,  at  all  times  and  all  seasons,  under  all  circum- 
stances and  conditions,  anywhere,  everywhere,  "  he  is  alto« 
gether  lovely." 

Nor  is  he  in  any  degree  unlovely ;  the  commendation 
forbids  the  idea  ;  if  he  be  "  altogether  lovely,"  where  could 
you  find  room  for  defomiity  ?  When  Apelles  painted  Alex- 
ander, he  laid  the  monarch's  finger  on  an  unsightly  scar; 
but  there  are  no  scars  to  conceal  when  you  portray  the 
countenance  of  Immanuel.  We  say  of  our  country — and 
who  among  us  will  not  say  it  ? — "  With  all  her  faults  we 
love  her  still ;  "  but  we  love  Jesus,  and  find  no  strain  put  upon 
our  heart,  for  trace  of  fault  he  has  none.  There  is  no  need 
of  apologies  for  Jesus,  no  excuses  are  required  for  him.  But 
what  is  that  I  see  upon  his  shoulder  ?  It  is  a  hard,  lough 
cross  ;  and  if  I  follow  him  I  must  carry  that  cross  for  his 
sake.  Is  not  that  cross  unsightly  ?  Oh,  no  !  he  is  altogeth- 
er lovely,  cross  and  all.  Whatever  it  may  involve  tr  be  a 
Cliristian,  we  count  even  the  reproach  of  Christ  to  h?  great- 
er riches  than  the  treasures  of  Egypt.  The  world  vi''  honor 
a  half  Christ,  but  a  whole  Christ  it  will  not  acLnowledge. 
The  bat's-eyed  Soeinian  saith,  "  I  admire  the  m^.n  Christ, 
but  I  will  not  adore  Jesus  the  God."  To  him  the  eternal 
Word  is  but  half  lovely,  if  lovely  at  all.  Some  will  have 
Chnst  the  exemplar,  but  they  will  not  accept  him  as  the 
vicarious  sacrifice  for  sin,  the  substitute  for  sinners.  Many 
Will  have  Christ  in  silver  slippers — my  lord  arclioishop's 


ALToaETHEH  LOVELY.  ^  836 

teligion — ^but  they  would  not  listen  to  the  gospel  from  a 
poor  gracious  Methodist,  or  tliink  it  worth  their  while  to 
join  the  unlettered  throng  whose  devout  songs  rise  from  I  lie 
village  green.  Alas  !  how  much  we  see  of  crosses  of  gold 
and  ivory,  but  how  little  do  men  love  the  lowly  cross  of 
Jesus  !  Brethren,  we  think  Jesus  "  altogether  lovely  "  even 
m  poverty,  or  when  hanging  naked  on  the  cross,  deserted 
and  condemned.  We  see  unspeakable  beauty  in  Jesus  in 
the  grave,  all  fair  with  the  pallor  of  death.  Jesus  bruised 
as  to  his  heel  by  the  old  serpent  is  yet  comely.  His  love 
to  us  makes  him  evermore  "  white  and  ruddy  "  to  our  eye. 
We  adore  him  anywhere  and  everywhere,  and  in  any  place, 
for  we  know  that  this  same  Christ  whose  heel  is  bruised 
breaks  also  the  serpent's  head,  and  he  who  was  naked  for 
our  sakes,  is  now  arrayed  in  glory.  We  know  that  the  de- 
spised and  rejected  is  also  Kings  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords, 
the  "  Wonderful,  Counsellor,  The  Mighty  God,  The  Ever- 
lasting  Father,  The  Prince  of  Peace."  "  Yea,  he  is  alto- 
gether lovely."    There  are  no  flaws  in  him. 

The  text  intends  us  to  know  that  Jesus  is  lovely  in  the  high- 
est degree  :  not  lovely  positively  and  then  failing  compara- 
tively, but  lovely  superlatively,  in  the  highest  possible  sense. 
But  I  leave  this  for  your  hearts  to  enlarge  upon.  I  will 
close  this  point  by  saying,  every  child  of  God  acknowledges 
that  Christ  Jesus  is  lovely  altogether  to  the  whole  of  himself. 
He  is  lovely  to  my  judgment ;  but  many  things  are  so,  and 
yet  are  not  lovely  to  my  affections  ;  I  know  them  to  be 
right,  and  yet  they  are  not  pleasant :  but  Jesus  is  as  lovely 
to  my  heart  as  to  my  head,  as  dear  as  he  is  good.  He  is 
lovely  to  my  hopes :  are  they  not  all  in  him  ?  Is  not  this 
my  expectation — to  see  him  as  he  is  ?  But  he  is  lovely  to 
my  memory  too :  did  he  not  pluck  me  out  of  the  net  ? 
liOvely  to  all  my  powers  and  all  my  passions,  my  faculties 
and  feelings.  As  David  puts  it,  "My  heart  and  my  flesh 
orieth  out  for  the  living  God  " — the  whole  of  the  man  seeking 
after  the  whole  of  the  Saviour;  the  whole  Saviour  sweet 


3S6  ALTOGETHER  LOVELt. 

and  inexpressibly  precious  to  the  man's  entire  being.  May 
it  be  80  with  you  and  with  me.  But  is  it  so  ?  Do  you  not 
set  up  idols  in  your  hearts  ?  Men  of  God,  do  you  not  need 
to  take  the  scourge  of  small  cords,  and  purge  the  temple  of 
your  souls  this  morning  ?  Are  there  not  buyers  and  sellers 
where  Christ  alone  ought  to  be  ?  Oh,  to  love  him  wholly, 
and  to  love  him  only,  so  that  we  have  no  eyes  for  other 
beauty,  no  heart  for  other  loveliness,  since  he  fills  our  souU, 
and  is  to  us  "  altogether  lovely." 

3.  The  third  characteristic  of  the  text  is  that  to  which  I 
desire  to  draw  the  most  attention,  and  that  isy  ardent  devo- 
tion, I  called  the  text  a  live  coal  from  off  the  altar,  and 
surely  it  is  so.  If  it  should  drop  into  our  hearts  to  set  them 
on  a  blaze,  it  would  be  an  unspeakable  mercy.  Ardent  de- 
votion flames  from  this  sentence.  It  is  the  language  of  one 
who  feels  that  no  emotion  is  too  deep  when  Jesus  moves  the 
heart.  Do  any  chide  you  and  say  you  think  too  much  of 
your  religion  ?  It  cannot  be,  it  cannot  be.  If  the  zeal  of 
God's  house  should  eat  us  up  until  we  had  no  existence  ex- 
cept for  the  Lord's  glory,  we  should  not  have  gone  too  far, 
If  there  be  corresponding  knowledge  to  balance  it,  there  can- 
not be  too  much  of  zeal  for  God.  The  utterance  is  that  of 
one  whose  heart  is  like  a  furnace,  of  which  love  is  the  fire. 
"  He  is  altogether  lovely  " — it  is  the  exclamation  of  one  who 
feels  that  no  language  is  too  strong  to  commend  the  Lord. 
The  spouse  looked  through  the  Hebrew  tongue  to  find  an 
intense  expression,  and  our  translators  ransacked  the  En- 
glish language  for  a  forcible  word,  and  they  have  put  it  in 
the  most  weighty  way — "He  is  altogether  lovely."  There 
is  no  fear  of  exaggeration  when  you  speak  of  Christ ;  hyper- 
boles are  only  sober  truth  when  we  depict  his  excellences. 
"We  have  heard  of  a  portrait-painter  who  owed  his  popular- 
ity to  the  fact  that  he  never  painted  truthfully,  but  always 
gave  a  flattering  touch  or  two  ;  here  is  one  who  would  defy 
bis  art,  for  it  is  impossible  to  flatter  Jesus.  Lay  on,  ye  men 
of  eloquence,  spare  no  colors,  ye  shall  never  depict  him  too 


ALtOGETHBlR  LOVELt.  SSl 

bravely.  Bring  forth  your  harps,  ye  seraphs ;  sing  aloud, 
ye  blood- washed  ones ;  all  your  praises  fall  short  of  the  glory 
which  is  due  to  him. 

It  is  the  language  of  one  who  feels  that  no  service  would 
be  too  great  to  render  to  the  Lord.  I  wish  we  felt  as  the 
apostles  and  martyrs  and  holy  men  of  old  did,  that  Jesus 
Christ  ought  to  be  served  at  the  highest  and  richest  rate. 
We  do  little,  very  little  :  what  if  I  had  said  we  do  next  to 
nothing  for  our  dear  Lord  and  Master  nowadays?  The  love 
of  Christ  doth  not  constrain  us  as  it  should.  But  those  of 
old  bore  poverty  and  dared  reproach,  marched  weary  leagues, 
passed  tempestuous  seas,  bore  perils  of  robbers  and  of 
cruel  men,  to  plant  the  cross  in  lands  where  as  yet  Jesus 
was  not  known ;  labors  that  nowadays  could  not  be  expect- 
ed of  men,  were  performed  as  daily  matters  of  common- 
place by  the  Christians  of  the  earliest  times.  Is  Christ  less 
lovely,  or  is  his  church  less  loyal?  Would  God  she  estima- 
ted him  at  his  right  rate,  for  then  she  would  return  to  her 
former  mode  of  service.  Brethren,  we  want  to  feel,  and  we 
shall  feel  if  this  text  is  deeply  engraven  on  our  hearts,  that 
no  gift  is  too  great  for  Christ,  though  we  give  him  all  we 
have  and  consecrate  to  him  all  our  time  and  ability,  and  sac- 
rifice our  very  lives  to  him.  No  suffeiing  is  too  great  to 
bear  for  the  sake  of  the  Crucified,  and  it  is  a  great  joy  to  be 
reproached  for  Christ's  sake.  "  He  is  altogether  lovely." 
Then,  my  soul,  I  charge  thee  think  nothing  hard  to  which 
he  calls  thee,  nothing  sharp  which  he  bids  thee  endure.  As 
the  knight  of  the  olden  time  consecrated  himself  to  the  Cru- 
sade, and  wore  the  red  cross  on  his  arm,  fearing  not  t(»  meet 
death  at  the  hands  of  the  Infidel,  if  he  might  be  thought  a 
soldier  of  the  Lord,  so  we  too  would  face  all  foes  for  Jesus' 
sake.  We  want,  only  refined  and  purified,  and  delivered 
from  its  earthly  grossness,  we  want  the  chivalrous  spirit 
once  again  in  the  church  of  God.  A  new  crusade  fain 
would  I  preach  :  had  I  the  tongue  of  such  a  one  as  the  old 
hermit  to  move  all  Christendom,  I  would  say,  "  This  day 
16 


33g  ALTOGETHER  LOI^ELlT. 

Christ,  the  altogether — lovely  One,  is  dishonored :  can  ye  en- 
dure it  ?  This  day  idols  stand  where  he  should  be,  and  men 
adore  them ;  lovers  of  Jesus,  can  ye  brook  it  ?  This  day  Jug- 
gernaut rides  through  the  streets  on  his  bloody  way,  this  day 
God's  Christ  is  still  unknown  to  millions,  and  the  precious 
blood  cleanses  not  the  nations,  how  long  will  ye  have  it  so? 
We,  in  England,  with  ten  thousand  Christian  hearts,  anda0 
many  tongues  endowed  with  eloquence,  and  purses  weight- 
ed with  gold,  shall  we  refuse  our  gifts,  withhold  our  wit- 
ness, and  suffer  the  Lord  to  be  dishonored  ?  The  church  is 
doing  next  to  nothing  for  her  great  Lord,  she  falls  short 
both  of  her  duty  and  of  the  grim  need  of  a  perishmg  world. 
Oh  for  a  flash  of  the  celestial  fire !  Oh,  when  shall  the  Spirit's 
energy  visit  us  again  !  When  shall  men  put  down  their  sel- 
fishness and  seek  only  Christ  ?  When  shall  they  leave  their 
strifes  about  trifles  to  rally  round  his  cross?  When  shall 
we  end  the  glorification  of  oureelves,  and  begin  to  make  him 
glorious,  even  to  the  world's  end  ?  God  help  us  in  this  mat- 
ter, and  kindle  in  our  hearts  the  old  consuming,  heart-inflam- 
ing fire,  which  shall  make  men  see  that  Jesus  is  all  in  all 
to  us. 

IL  Thus  I  have  shown  you  the  characteristics  of  the  text, 
and  now  I  desire  to  use  it  in  three  ways  for  practical 
PURPOSES.     As  time  flies,  we  must  use  it  briefly. 

The  first  word  is  to  you.  Christians.  Here  is  very  sweet 
instruction.  The  Lord  Jesus  "  is  altogether  lovely.^'  Then 
if  I  want  to  be  lovely,  I  must  be  like  him,  and  the  model  for 
me  as  a  Christian  is  Christ.  Have  you  ever  noticed  how 
badly  boys  write  at  the  bottom  of  the  pages  in  their  copy- 
books ?  There  is  the  copy  at  the  top  ;  and  in  the  fii-st  line 
Ihey  look  at  that ;  in  the  second  line,  they  copy  their  own 
imitation  ;  hi  the  third  line,  they  copy  their  imitation  of 
flieir  imitation,  and  so  the  writing  grows  worse  and.  ii'orse 
OS  it  descends  the  page.  Now,  the  apostles  followed  Christ; 
the  first  fathers  imitated  the  apostles  ;  the  next  fathers  cop 


ALTOGETHEK  LOVELY.  389 

ied  the  first  fathers,  and  so  the  standard  of  holiness  fell  dread- 
fully ;  and  now  we  are  too  apt  to  follow  the  very  lees  and 
dregs  of  Chiistianity,  and  we  think  if  we  are  about  as  good 
as  our  poor,  imperfect  ministers  or  leaders  in  the  church, 
that  we  shall  do  well  and  deserve  praise.      But  now,  my 
brethren,  cover  up  the  mere  copies  and  imitations,  and  live 
by  the  first  line.     Copy  Jesus ;  "  he  is  altogether  lovely ;  " 
and  if  you  can  write  by  the  first  line,  you  will  write  by  the 
truest  and  best  model  in  the  world.      We  want  to  have 
Christ's  zeal,  but  we  must  balance  it  with  his  prudence  and 
discretion  ;  we  must  seek  to  have  Christ's  love  to  God,  and 
we  must  feel  his  love  to  men,  his  forgiveness  of  injury,  his 
gentleness  of  speech,  his  incorruptible  truthfulness,  his  meek- 
ness and  lowlmess,  his  utter  unselfishness,  his  entire  conse- 
cration to  his  Father's  business.    Oh  that  we  had  all  this,  for 
depend  upon  it  whatever  other  pattern  we  select,  we  have 
made  a  mistake ;  we  are  not  following  the  true  classic  model 
of  the  Christian  artist.     Our  master  model  is  the  "  altogeth- 
er lovely  "  one.    How  sweet  it  is  to  think  of  our  Lord  in  the 
double  aspect  as  our  exemplar  and  our  Saviour !    The  laver 
which  stood  in  the  temple  was  made  of  brass :  in  this  the 
priests  washed  their  feet  whenever  they  offered  sacrifices  ; 
BO  does  Christ  purify  us  from  sin ;  but  the  tradition  is  that 
this  laver  was  made  of  very  bright  brass,  and  acted  as  a 
mirror,  so  that  as  often  as  the  priests  came  to  it  they  could 
see  their  own  spots  in  it.      Oh,  when  I  come  to  my  Lord 
Jesus,  not  only  do  I  get  rid  of  ray  sins  as  to  their  guilt,  but 
I  see  my  spots  in  the  light  of  his  perfect  character,  and  I  am 
humbled  and  taught  to  follow  after  holiness. 

The  second  use  to  which  we  would  put  the  verse  is  this, 
here  is  a  very  gentle  rebuke  to  some  of  you.  Though  very 
gentle,  I  beseech  you  to  let  it  sink  deep  into  your  hearts. 
Yon  do  not  see  the  loveliness  of  Chnst,  yet "  he  is  altogether 
Jovely."  Now,  I  will  not  say  one  hard  word,  but  I  will  tell  • 
you  sorrowfully  what  pitiable  creatures  you  are.  I  hear 
enchanting  music,  which  seems  more  a  thing  of  heaven  than 


840  ALTOGETHEB  LOVBLT. 

of  earth :  it  i9  one  of  Handel's  half-inspired  oratorios.  Ton* 
der  sits  a  man,  who  says,  "  I  hear  nothing  to  commend." 
He  has  not  the  power  to  perceive  the  linked  sweetnesses,  the 
delicious  harmonies  of  sounds.  Do  you  blame  him  ?  No, 
but  you  who  have  an  ear  for  music,  say, "  How  I  pity  him :  he 
misses  half  the  joy  of  life ! "  Here,  again,  is  a  glorious 
landscape,  hills  and  valleys,  and  flowing  rivers,  expansive 
lakes  and  undulating  meadows.  I  bring  to  the  point  of 
vi<iw  a  friend,  whom  I  would  gratify,  and  I  say  to  him,  "  is 
not  that  a  charming  scene  ?  "  Turning  his  head  to  me,  he 
says,  "  I  see  nothing."  I  perceive  that  he  cannot  enjoy  what 
is  so  delightful  to  me :  he  has  some  little  sight,  but  he  sees 
only  what  is  veiy  near,  and  he  is  blind  to  all  beyond.  Now, 
do  I  blame  him  ?  Or  if  he  proceed  to  argue  with  me,  and 
say,  "  You  are  very  foolish  to  be  so  enthusiastic  about  a  non- 
existent landscape,  it  is  merely  your  excitement,"  shall  I  ar- 
gue with  him  ?  Shall  I  be  angry  with  him  ?  No,  but  I 
shall  shed  a  tear,  and  whisper  to  myself,  "Great  are  the 
\ossos  of  the  blind."  Now,  you  who  have  never  heard  mu- 
ijic  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  you  are  to  be  greatly  pitied,  for 
your  loss  is  heavy.  You  who  never  saw  beauty  in  Jesus, 
and  who  never  will  forever,  you  need  all  our  tears.  It  is 
hell  enough  not  to  love  Christ !  It  is  the  lowest  abyss  of 
Tartarus,  and  its  fiercest  flame,  not  to  be  enamored  of  the 
Christ  of  God.  There  is  no  heaven  that  is  more  heaven  than 
to  love  Christ  and  to  be  like  him,  and  there  is  no  hell  that 
is  more  hell  than  to  be  unlike  Christ  and  not  to  want  to  be 
like  him,  but  even  to  be  averse  to  the  infinite  perfections  of 
the  "  altogether  lovely."  The  Lord  open  those  blind  eyes 
of  yours,  and  unstop  those  deaf  ears,  and  give  you  the  new 
and  spiritual  life,  and  then  you  will  join  in  saying,  "  Yea,  he 
is  altogether  lovely." 

The  last  use  of  the  text  is,  that  of  tender  attractiveness. 
••  Yea,  he  is  altogether  lovely."  Where  are  you  this  morn- 
ing, you  who  are  convinced  of  sin  and  want  a  Saviour,  where 
bave  you  crept  to  ?    Are  you  hidden  J^way  where  my  eyep 


ALTOGETHER  LOVELY.  34:J 

cannot  reach  you  ?  At  any  rate,  let  this  sweet  th<nig]it  reach 
von.  You  need  not  be  afraid  to  come  to  Jesus,  for  'he  is 
altogetlier  lovely."  It  does  not  say  he  is  altogether  terrible 
— that  is  your  misconception  of  him  ;  it  does  not  say  he  is 
somewliat  lovely,  and  sometiices  willing  to  receive  a  ceitain 
sort  of  a  sinner  ;  but  "he  is  altogether  lovely,"  and  there- 
fore he  is  always  ready  to  welcome  to  himself  the  vilest  of 
the  vile.  Think  of  his  name.  It  is  Jesus,  the  Saviour.  Is 
not  that  lovely?  Think  of  his  work.  He  is  come  to  seek 
and  to  save  that  which  was  lost.  This  is  his  occupation. 
I3  not  that  lovely  ?  Think  of  what  he  has  done.  He  hath 
redeemed  our  souls  with  blood.  Is  not  that  lovely  ?  Think 
of  what  he  is  doing.  He  is  pleading  before  the  throne  of 
God  for  sinners.  Think  of  what  he  is  giving  at  this  mo- 
ment— ^he  is  exalted  on  high  to  give  repentance  and  remis- 
sion of  sins.  Is  not  this  lovely  ?  Under  every  aspect  Christ 
Jesus  is  attractive  to  sinners  who  need  him.  Come,  then, 
come  and  welcome,  there  is  nothing  to  keep  you  away,  there 
is  every  thing  to  bid  you  come.  May  this  very  Sabbath 
day  in  which  I  have  preached  Christ,  and  lifted  him  up,  be 
the  day  in  wliich  you  shall  be  drawn  to  him,  never  again  to 
leave  him,  but  to  be  his  forever  and  forever.    Amen. 


842  "THE  ALABUU. 


SERMON  XX. 


THE  ALARUM. 

**  1  XTBELF  WILL  AWAKB  SABLT.**— PsalOI  IviL  8. 

The  proper  subject  to  treat  upon  with  such  a  text  as 
this  would  be  the  propriety  and  excellence  of  parly  rising, 
especially  when  we  are  desirous  of  praising  or  serving  God. 
The  dew  of  dawn  should  be  consecrated  to  devotion.  The 
text  is  a  very  remarkable  expression,  and  might  fitly  be 
made  the  early-riser's  motto.  It  is,  in  the  original,  a  high- 
ly poetical  phrase,  and  Milton  and  others  have  borrowed  or 
imitated  it.  "I  will  awaken  the  morning.'*  So  early 
would  the  psalmist  arise  for  the  praise  ofGod,  that  he  would 
call  up  the  day,  and  bid  the  sun  arise  from  the  chambers  of 
the  east,  and  proceed  upon  his  journey.  "I  will  awaken  the 
morning."  Early  rising  has  the  example  of  Old  Testament 
saints  to  recommend  it,  and  many  modem  saints  having 
conscientiously  practised  it,  have  been  loud  in  its  praise. 
It  is  an  economy  of  time,  and  an  assistance  to  health,  and 
thus  it  doubly  lengthens  life.  Late  rising  is  too  often  the 
token  of  indolence,  and  the  cause  of  disorder  throughout  the 
whole  day.  Be  assured  that  the  best  hours  are  the  first. 
Our  city  habits  are  to  be  deplored,  because  by  late  hours 
of  retirement  at  night  we  find  early  rising  difficult  if  not 
impossible.  If  we  are  able  to  escape  the  shackles  of  custom, 
and  secure  for  devotion  and  contemplation  the  hour  when 
the  dew  is  on  the  grass,  we  may  count  ourselves  thrice  hap- 
py. If  we  cannot  do  all  we  would  in  this  matter,  at  least 
let  us  do  all  we  can. 

That  is  not,  however,  the  topic  upon  which  I  now  desire 
(o  speak  to  you.     I  come  at  this  time,  not  so  much  to  plead 


THE  ALABUH  843 

for  the  early  as  for  the  awakening.  The  hour  we  may  speak 
of  at  another  time — the  fact  is  our  subject  now.  It  is  bad 
to  awake  late,  but  what  shall  be  said  of  those  who  never 
awake  at  all  ?  Better  late  than  never  :  but  with  many  it  is 
to  l»e  feared  it  will  be  never.  I  would  take  down  the  trum- 
pet and  give  a  blast,  or  ring  the  alarm-bell  till  all  the  facul- 
ties of  the  sluggard's  manhood  are  made  to  bestir  themselves, 
and  he  cries  with  new-bom  determination,  "  J.  myself  will 
awake." 

"  Will  awake.'*'*  This  is  a  world  in  which  most  men  now 
adays  are  alive  to  their  temporal  interests.  If  in  these 
pushing  times  any  man  goes  to  his  business  in  a  sleepy, 
listless  fashion,  he  very  soon  finds  himself  on  an  ebb-tide,  and 
all  his  affairs  aground.  The  wide-awake  man  seizes  oppor- 
tunities or  makes  them,  and  thus  those  who  are  widest  awake 
usually  come  to  the  front.  Years  ago  affairs  moved  like  the 
broad-wheel  wagon,  very  sleepily,  with  sober  pause  and  lei- 
surely progression,  and  then  the  son  of  the  snail  had  a  chance ; 
but  now,  when  we  almost  fly,  if  a  man  would  succeed  in 
trade  he  must  be  all  alive,  and  all  awake.  If  it  be  so  in  tem- 
porals, it  is  equally  so  in  spirituals,  for  the  world,  the  flesh, 
and  the  devil  are  all  awake  to  compete  with  us  ;  and  there 
is  no  resolution  that  I  would  more  earnestly  commend  to 
each  one  of  the  people  of  God  than  this  one ;  "  I  will  awake ; 
I  will  awake  at  once  ;  I  will  awake  early,  and  I  will  pray  to 
God  that  I  may  be  kept  awake,  that  my  Christian  existence 
may  not  be  dreamy,  but  that  I  may  be  to  the  fullest  degree 
useful  in  my  Master's  service."  If  this  were  the  resolve  of 
each,  what  a  change  would  come  over  the  Christian  church ! 
I  long  to  see  the  diligence  of  the  shop  exceeded  by  the  clos- 
et, and  the  zeal  of  the  market  excelled  by  the  church.  Each 
Christian  is  alive  :  but  is  he  also  awake?  He  has  eyes,  buti 
are  they  open?  He  has  lofty  possibilities  of  blessing  liii 
fellow  men,  but  does  he  exercise  them  ?  My  heart's  desire 
is  that  none  of  us  may  feel  the  dreamy  influence  of  this  age, 
which  is  comparable  to  the  enchanted  ground ;  but  that 


844  THE  ALABUM. 

each  of  us  may  be  watchful,  wakeful,  vigorous,  intense,  fe^ 
vent.  Trusting  that  the  Holy  Spirit  may  bless  our  medi- 
tations to  our  spintual  quickening,  we  shall  briefly  turn 
our  thoughts  to  the  consideration  of  two  or  three  things. 

L  Our  text  is  connected  with  the  duty  of  praise,  and 
therefore  our  first  point  shall  be — rr  is  most  necessakt 

THAT  OUR  MINDS   SHOULD  BE  IN   A  STATE   OP  WAKEFULNESS 

WHEN  WE  ARE  PRAISING  GoD.  Therefore,  as  we  ought  to  be 
always  praising  him  our  mind  ought  always  to  be  wa-keful. 
It  is  a  shame  to  pray  with  the  mind  half  asleep  :  it  is  an 
equal  shame  to  attempt  to  praise  God  till  all  the  powers  of 
the  mind  are  thoroughly  aroused.  David  is  herein  a  most  fit 
example,  for  he  sings,  "  My  heart  is  fixed,  O  God,  my  heart 
is  fixed  :  I  will  sing  and  give  praise.  Awake  up,  my  glory ; 
awake,  psaltery  and  harp  ;  I  myself  will  awake  early." 

We  should  be  fully  awake  when  engaged  in  private  thanks- 
giving ;  the  song  of  our  solitude  should  be  full  of  living  joy. 
I  am  afraid  there  is  very  little  private  singing  nowadays. 
We  often  hear  discourses  concerning  private  prayer,  but  very 
seldom  of  private  praise  ;  and  yet  ought  there  not  to  be  as 
much  private  praise  as  private  prayer?  I  fear  from  the 
seldomness  of  its  being  mentioned,  that  private  thanksgiv- 
ing has  grown  to  be  a  sleepy  affair.  Then  as  to  public  wor- 
ship, how  earnest  ought  it  to  be  !  Yet  how  seldom  is  it 
hearty  and  real !  How  often  do  we  hear  half-awake  sing- 
ing !  Sometimes  a  sort  of  musical-box,  consisting  of  pipes, 
keys,  and  bellows,  is  set  to  do  all  the  adoration.  The  hea- 
then of  Thibet  turn  the  wind  to  account  religiously,  by 
making  it  turn  their  windmills  and  pray  for  them ;  and  our 
brethren  in  England,  by  an  ingenious  adjustment  of  pipes, 
make  the  same  motive  power  perform  their  praise.  Where 
this  machinery  is  not  adopted,  still  the  Lord  is  robbed  of 
his  praise  by  other  methods.  Sometimes  half  a  dozen  skilled 
voices  of  persons  who  would  be  equally  as  much  at  home  ni 
th^  opera  or  the  theatre  as  in  the  house  of  God,  are  form 


THE  ALARUM.  845 

cd  into  a  choir  to  perform  the  psaljnody ;  and  it  is  supposed 
tliat  God  accepts  their  formal  notes  as  the  praise  of  the  en- 
tire assembly.  How  far  different  is  the  genuine  song  of 
gracious  men  who  lift  up  their  voices  to  the  Lord  becaase 
their  hearts  adore  him  !  Oh,  I  love  to  hear  every  voice  pour 
ing  out  its  note,  especially  if  I  can  but  hope  that  with  every 
voice  there  is  going  forth  a  fervent  heart.  This  warm- 
hearted, joyful  singing — why,  it  makes  the  congregation  on 
earth  to  be  like  the  assembly  of  the  skies  ;  and  causes  the 
meeting-place  of  the  saints  to  be  a  faint  type  of  the  gather- 
ing of  the  angels  and  glorified  spirits  before  the  throne  of 
God.  To  drone  or  to  whisper  in  such  a  delightful  exercise 
is  crimi jal.  If  ever  we  should  exhibit  the  angel's  wakeful- 
ness, it  should  be  when  we  are  emulating  their  employment. 
Our  praise  ought  to  be  performed  with  a  fully-awakened 
mind :  first,  that  we  may  recollect  what  we  are  praisdng  God 
for.  We  should  have  a  vivid  sense  of  the  mercies  we  have 
received,  or  we  cannot  bless  God  aright  for  them.  You 
who  have  not  yet  received  spiritual  blessings,  should  not  be 
forgetful  of  his  temporal  mercies  :  it  is  surely  sufficient  cause 
for  lively  thanksgiving  that  you  are  not  upon  a  bed  of  sick- 
ness ;  that  you  are  not  in  the  lunatic  asylum ;  that  you  are 
not  in  the  workhouse  ;  that  you  are  not  on  the  borders  of 
the  grave  ;  that  you  are  not  in  hell ;  that  you  still  have  food 
and  raiment,  and  that  you  are  where  the  gospel  is  gracious- 
ly presented  to  you.  Should  not  all  this  be  thought  of? 
Should  not  this  be  fuel  for  the  flame  of  gratitude?  As  for 
us  who  have  tasted  spiritual  blessings,  if  our  minds  were 
awake,  we  should  think  of  eternal  love  and  its  goings  forth 
from  eternity  ;  of  redeeming  love,  and  the  streams  that  flow 
from  the  fount  of  Calvary ;  of  God's  immutable  love,  aiid 
his  patience  with  our  ill-manners  in  the  wilderness ;  of  cov- 
enant mercy,  of  mercies  yet  to  come,  of  heaven,  and  the 
bliss  hereafter.  Such  recollections  should  call  up  our  wliole 
man  to  praise  the  Lord.  If  the  innumerable  benefits  which 
we  receive  were  thought  of  and  dwelt  upon,  the  contempla- 

1.1* 


846  TUE  ALABUM. 

tion  would  put  a  force,  a  volume,  a  body  into  our  song,  and 
make  it  far  more  the  flaming,  ethereal  thing  which  it  ought 
to  be. 

We  want  our  souls  awakened,  next,  so  that  toe  may  re* 
member  to  tohom  our  praise  is  offered,  Before  no  mean 
king  do  we  bow  the  knee  of  homage.  To  praise  God  is  to 
stand  in  the  immediate  presence  of  the  blessed  and  only 
Potentate.  Do  not  even  seraphs  veil  their  faces  in  that 
august  presence  ?  With  what  lowliness  ought  we  to  bow ! 
With  what  earnestness  of  spirit  should  we  praise  I  "  Put 
off  thy  shoes  from  off  thy  feet,  for  the  place  whereon  thou 
standest  is  holy  ground."  Courtiers  are  not  expected  to 
nod  with  drowsiness  in  the  presence  of  their  king  :  and  if 
they  came  to  present  thanksgiving,  it  would  seem  strange 
if  they  were  to  yawn  as  men  half  asleep.  Surely,  it  would 
be  hypocritical  congratulation  and  insulting  behaviour  if 
they  should  be  detected  in  a  sleepy  condition  I  If  we  come 
together  to  praise  God,  let  us  really  do  it.  If  we  cannot 
praise  him,  let  us  know  and  mourn  that  we  cannot  do  it, 
and  let  us  be  sure  that  the  spirit  is  willing,  even  if  the  flesh 
be  weak.  Let  all  sleepiness  be  put  away  in  the  presence  of 
the  ever- wakeful  Jehovah,  before  whose  eyes  all  things  are 
naked  and  open.  He  never  slumbereth  nor  sleepeth,  so  as 
to  make  a  pause  in  his  mercy  to  us  :  let  not  our  slumbering 
spirits  cause  an  omission  of  our  grateful  song. 

We  need  that  we  should  be  awake  in  praise,  that  our 
whole  hearts  may  he  thoroughly  warm  in  the  exercise.  Under 
Christ  and  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  acceptableness 
of  our  praise  depends  very  much  upon  the  warmth  of  it. 
As  cold  prayers  virtually  ask  God  to  deny  them,  so  cold 
praises  ask  God  to  reject  them.  Cold  praises  are  a  sort  of 
semi-blasphemy:  they  do,  as  it  were,  say,  "Thou  art  not 
%ottliy  to  be  ardently  praised.  O  God,  we  bring  thee  these 
poor  thanksgivings :  they  are  good  enougli  for  thee.^'  Sure* 
ly  if  we  treated  our  heavenly  Father  as  we  should,  evei'y 
iaored  passion  would  glow  in  our  hearts  like  a  furnace  :  our 


THE  ALARUM.  347 

whole  heart  would  catch  fire,  and  as  Elijah  went  up  to 
heaven  with  horses  of  fire  and  chariots  of  fire,  so,  too,  our 
soul,  as  we  thought  upon  the  goodness  and  the  graciousness 
oi  God,  would  ascend  to  heaven  in  vehement  joy  of  adora- 
ti  m.  Our  praises  would  not  be  like  the  incense  in  the  cen- 
sor, sweet  but  cold  ;  but  coals  of  fire  would  be  put  in  with 
the  incense,  and  then,  like  a  holy  cloud  of  smoke,  our  grat- 
itude would  ascend  to  heaven.  Mark  with  what  exhilara- 
tion the  psalmist  rendered  praise  unto  God,  and  imitate  him 
therein.  See  him  dancing  before  the  ark,  and  hear  .him  cry 
aloud,  "Sing  praises  to  God,  sing  praises  :  sing  praises  unto 
our  King,  sing  praises." 

Brethren,  we  have  need  to  wake  up  our  souls  in  praise, 
or  else  we  shaU  at  times  fail  altogether  in  the  duty.  Only  the 
wakeful  are  praiseful.  Sleeping  birds  sing  not.  The  very 
best  praises  God  receives  from  earth  are  from  his  troubled 
saints  ;  but  then  they  are  awake ;  the  strokes  of  the  rod  have 
aroused  them.  When  the  three  holy  children  sung  in  the 
fire,  their  song  was  sweet  indeed ;  yet  had  they  not  been 
thoroughly  in  earnest,  they  had  poured  forth  no  holy  hymn. 
When  martyrs  have  magnified  God  standing  on  the  burn- 
ing fagot,  they  have  given  God  better  praise  than  even  the 
angels  can.  It  was  the  old  fable,  that  the  nightingale  was 
made  to  sing  by  the  thorn  that  pricked  her  breast:  and 
many  a  child  of  God  has  poured  forth  his  sweetest  music 
when  the  thorn  of  affliction  has  pierced  his  heart.  Wake  up 
your  souls — you  that  are  desponding,  you  that  are  depressed, 
you  that  have  a  dead  child  at  home,  you  that  are  expecting 
soon  to  go  to  the  grave  with  those  you  love,  you  that  have 
been  losing  your  property,  you  that  are  pinched  with  pov- 
erty— wake  up  your  souls  to  praise  God  still,  for  unless  well 
awake  you  will  forget  to  extol  him.  Remember  what  Job 
did.  When  he  sat  on  the  dunghill,  scraping  himself  with 
a  bit  of  broken  pot,  yet  he  praised  God,  and  said,  "  The 
Tx)rd  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken  away,  blessed  bo  the 
name  of  the  Lord."    It  was  grand  of  thee,  O  patriarch  of 


848  ^I*HE  ALABUM. 

Uz,  !•>  6e  able  thus  to  extol  thy  Lord :  then  was  thy  soul 
fully  awake.  Beloved  friends,  may  our  inmost  souls  be  sc 
energetic  with  the  power  of  grace  that  we  may  spontane 
ously  and  earnestly  bless  the  Lord  at  all  times  and  under 
all  circumstances. 

Do  you  belies  e.  my  brethren,  that  amongst  all  the  throng 
of  those  who  see  Jehovah  face  to  face,  there  is  one  dull,  cold, 
careless  worshipper?  Look  through  the  seraphim  and  cher- 
ubim :  they  are  all  flaming  ones,  burning  with  intense  de- 
sire and  fervent  adoration.  Look  through  the  hosts  of  angels : 
they  are  all  his  ministers  that  do  his  pleasure,  and  bless 
him  while  they  do  it.  Search  through  all  those  sanctified 
and  glorified  bands  of  spiiits,  and  you  shall  not  find  one  with 
half-closed  eye  wearily  praising  his  Maker.  Heaven  con- 
sists \xi  joyful  praise.  Look  at  the  very  birds  on  earth,  how 
they  shame  us !  Dear  little  creatures,  if  you  watch  them 
when  they  are  singing,  you  will  sometimes  wonder  how  so 
much  sound  can  come  out  of  such  diminutive  bodies.  How 
they  throw  their  whole  selves  into  the  music,  and  seem  to 
melt  themselves  away  in  song !  How  the  wing  vibrates, 
the  throat  pulsates,  and  every  part  of  their  body  rejoices  to 
assist  the  strain  !  This  is  the  way  in  which  we  ought  to 
praise  God.  If  birds  that  are  sold  at  three  for  two  farthingg 
yet  render  God  such  praise,  how  much  more  heartily  ought 
we  to  sing  before  him  ?  Let  it  be  a  resolution  with  us  at 
this  hour  that  we  will  praise  God  more;  that  Tve  will  sing 
to  him  more  at  home,  about  our  business,  and  in  all  proper 
places  ;  and  that  whenever  we  do  sing  we  will  do  it  heartily, 
waking  up  our  tongue  and  all  the  powers  of  our  mind  and 
bod  7  to  bless  and  praise  the  name  of  God. 

n.  Now,  secondly,  we  si) all  notice  that  wakefulness  ts 

iw  OUEAT  NEED   IN  THE    ENTIRE    SPIRITUAL  LIFE.      I   belie  TO 

It  to  be  one  of  the  great  wants  of  the  church  now.     I  quos- 

ion  whether  most  of  us  are  awake  spiritually.     I  question 

iiether  I  am.     I  wish  to  be  awakened  far  more  to  a  sensi* 


THE  ALARUM.  849 

bility  of  the  power  of  the  world  to  come,  and  a  tenderness 
in  regard  to  spiritual  truth.  Slumber  is  so  natural  to  us. 
"  Well,"  says  one,  "  but  we  talk  about  the  things  of  God." 
Yes,  but  people  talk  when  they  are  asleep,  and  a  good  deal 
of  Christian  conversation  is  very  much  like  the  talk  of 
sleepers.  There  is  not  the  force  in  it — the  life  in  it, that 
th«?re  would  be  in  conversation  if  we  were  really  awakened 
to  feel  the  power  of  eternal  verities.  "  Yet,"  says  one,  "  I 
hope  we  act  consistently."  I  trust  you  do,  but  there  are 
many  people  who  walk  in  their  sleep,  and,  alas  !  I  know  some 
Christian  professors  who  appear  to  be  trying  very  hazard- 
ous feats  of  sleep-walking  just  now.  Some  somnambulists 
have  been  able  to  walk  on  places  where,  had  they  been 
awake,  they  never  would  have  been  able  to  endure  the 
dizzy  height ;  and  I  see  some  Christians,  if  indeed  they  be 
Christians,  running  awful  risks  which  I  think  they  would 
never  venture  upon  unless  they  had  fallen  into  the  deep 
sleep  of  carnal  security.  Speak  of  a  man  slumbering  at 
the  mast-head,  it  is  nothing  to  a  professor  of  religion  at 
ease  while  covetousness  is  his  master,  or  worldly  company 
his  delight.  If  professors  were  awake,  they  would  see  their 
danger,  and  avoid  sinful  amusements  and  ungodly  associa- 
tions, as  men  fly  from  fierce  tigers  or  deadly  cobras. 
"Well,  but  we  are  doing  much  good  and  useful  work," 
says  one ;  "  teaching  in  Sabbath-schools,  distributing  re- 
ligious tracts,  or  laboring  in  some  other  form  of  service ; 
we  are  spending  our  time  in  commendable  engagements." 
I  am  glad  to  hear  it  ;  but  people  can  do  a  great  deal  in 
their  sleep.  We  have  heard  many  strange  instances  of 
how  habit  at  last  has  enabled  persons  to  pursue  their  call- 
ings, to  answer  signals,  and  keep  up  all  the  appearance 
of  industry,  and  yet  they  have  been  at  the  time  asleep. 
Oh,  it  is  a  very  shocking  thing  that  so  many  of  our  churches 
in  England  are  in  a  deep  sleep!  Dissenting  churches  I 
know  best  about,  and  there  are  many  where  the  minister 
preaches  in  his  sleep,  where  the  people  sing  in  their  sleeps 


842  THE  ALABUM. 


SERMON 


THE  ALARUM. 

**  X  imxLr  WILL  AWAXX  KABLT.**— Psalm  lylL  8. 

The  proper  subject  to  treat  upon  with  such  a  text  as 
this  would  be  the  propriety  and  excellence  of  parly  rising, 
especially  when  we  are  desirous  of  praising  or  serving  God. 
The  dew  of  dawn  should  be  consecrated  to  devotion.  The 
text  is  a  very  remarkable  expression,  and  might  fitly  be 
made  the  early-riser's  motto.  It  is,  in  the  original,  a  high- 
ly poetical  phrase,  and  Milton  and  others  have  borrowed  or 
imitated  it.  "I  will  awaken  the  morning."  So  early 
would  the  psalmist  arise  for  the  praise  ofGod,  that  he  would 
call  up  the  day,  and  bid  the  sun  arise  from  the  chambers  of 
the  east,  and  proceed  upon  his  journey.  "I  will  awaken  the 
morning."  Early  rising  has  the  example  of  Old  Testament 
saints  to  recommend  it,  and  many  modem  saints  having 
conscientiously  practised  it,  have  been  loud  in  its  praisa 
It  is  an  economy  of  time,  and  an  assistance  to  health,  and 
thus  it  doubly  lengthens  life.  Late  rising  is  too  often  the 
token  of  indolence,  and  the  cause  of  disorder  throughout  the 
whole  day.  Be  assured  that  the  best  hours  are  the  first. 
Our  city  habits  are  to  be  deplored,  because  by  late  hours 
of  retirement  at  night  we  find  early  rising  difficult  if  not 
impossible.  If  we  are  able  to  escape  the  shackles  of  custom, 
and  secure  for  devotion  and  contemplation  the  hour  when 
the  dew  is  on  the  grass,  we  may  count  ourselves  thrice  hap- 
py. If  we  cannot  do  all  we  would  in  this  matter,  at  least 
let  us  do  all  we  can. 

That  is  not,  however,  the  topic  upon  which  I  now  desire 
to  speak  to  you.    I  come  at  this  time,  not  so  much  to  plead 


THE  ALABIJM.  843 

for  the  early  as  for  the  awakening.  The  hour  we  may  speak 
of  at  another  time — the  fact  is  our  subject  now.  It  is  bad 
to  awake  late,  but  what  shall  be  said  of  those  who  never 
awake  at  all  ?  Better  late  than  never  :  but  with  many  it  is 
to  be  feared  it  will  be  never.  I  would  take  down  the  trum- 
pet and  give  a  blast,  or  ring  the  alarm-bell  till  all  the  facul- 
ties of  the  sluggard's  manhood  are  made  to  bestir  themselves, 
and  he  cries  with  new-bom  determination,  "  J.  mvself  will 
awake.*' 

"  Will  awaked  This  is  a  world  in  which  most  men  now 
adays  are  alive  to  their  temporal  interests.  If  in  these 
pushing  times  any  man  goes  to  his  business  in  a  sleepy, 
listless  fashion,  he  very  soon  finds  himself  on  an  ebb-tide,  and 
all  his  affairs  aground.  The  wide-awake  man  seizes  oppor- 
tunities or  makes  them,  and  thus  those  who  are  widest  awake 
usually  come  to  the  front.  Years  ago  affairs  moved  like  the 
broad-wheel  wagon,  very  sleepily,  with  sober  pause  and  lei- 
surely progression,  and  then  the  son  of  the  snail  had  a  chance ; 
but  now,  when  we  almost  fly,  if  a  man  would  succeed  in 
trade  he  must  be  all  alive,  and  all  awake.  If  it  be  so  in  tem- 
porals, it  is  equally  so  in  spirituals,  for  the  world,  the  flesh, 
and  the  devil  are  all  awake  to  compete  with  us  ;  and  there 
is  no  resolution  that  1  would  more  earnestly  commend  to 
each  one  of  the  people  of  God  than  this  one ;  "  I  will  awake ; 
I  will  awake  at  once ;  I  will  awake  early,  and  I  will  pray  to 
God  that  I  may  be  kept  awake,  that  my  Christian  existence 
may  not  be  dreamy,  but  that  I  may  be  to  the  fullest  degree 
useful  in  my  Master's  service."  If  this  were  the  resolve  of 
each,  what  a  change  would  come  over  the  Christian  church  I 
I  long  to  see  the  diligence  of  the  shop  exceeded  by  the  clos- 
et, and  the  zeal  of  the  market  excelled  by  the  church.  Each 
Christian  is  alive  :  but  is  he  also  awake?  He  has  eyes,  but; 
are  they  open?  He  has  lofty  possibilities  of  blessing  liii 
fellow  men,  but  does  he  exercise  them  ?  My  heart's  desire 
is  that  none  of  us  may  feel  the  dreamy  influence  of  this  age, 
which  is  comparable  to  the  enchanted  ground ;  but  tliat 


844  THE  ALARUM. 

each  of  us  may  be  watchful,  wakeful,  vigorous,  intense,  fe^ 
vent.  Trusting  that  the  Holy  Spirit  may  bless  our  rnedi* 
tations  to  our  spiritual  quickening,  we  shall  briefly  turn 
our  thoughts  to  the  consideration  of  two  or  three  tilings. 

L  Our  text  is  connected  with  the  duty  of  praise,  and 
therefore  our  first  point  shall  be — rr  is  most  necessary 

THAT   OUR  MINDS   SHOULD  BE   IN   A   STATE    OF   WAKEFULNESS 

WHEN  WE  ARE  PRAISING  GoD.  Therefore,  as  we  ought  to  be 
always  praising  him  our  mind  ought  always  to  be  w&keful. 
It  is  a  shame  to  pray  with  the  mind  half  asleep  :  it  is  an 
equal  shame  to  attempt  to  praise  God  till  all  the  powers  of 
the  mind  are  thoroughly  aroused.  David  is  herein  a  most  fit 
example,  for  he  sings,  "  My  heart  is  fixed,  O  God,  my  heart 
is  fixed  :  I  will  sing  and  give  praise.  Awake  up,  my  glory ; 
awake,  psaltery  and  harp  ;  I  myself  will  awake  early." 

We  should  be  fully  awake  when  engaged  in/)n«afe  thanks- 
giving ;  the  song  of  our  solitude  should  be  full  of  living  joy. 
I  am  afraid  there  is  very  little  private  singing  nowadays. 
We  often  hear  discoui*ses  concerning  private  prayer,  but  very 
seldom  of  private  praise  ;  and  yet  ought  there  not  to  be  as 
much  private  praise  as  private  prayer?  I  fear  from  the 
seldomness  of  its  being  mentioned,  that  private  thanksgiv- 
ing has  grown  to  be  a  sleepy  affair.  Then  as  to  public  wor- 
ship, how  earnest  ought  it  to  be  !  Yet  how  seldom  is  it 
hearty  and  real !  How  often  do  we  hear  half-awake  sing- 
ing! Sometimes  a  sort  of  musical-box,  consisting  of  pipes, 
keys,  and  bellows,  is  set  to  do  all  the  adoration.  The  hea- 
then of  Thibet  turn  the  wind  to  account  religiously,  by 
making  it  turn  their  windmills  and  pray  for  them ;  and  our 
brethren  in  England,  by  an  ingenious  adjustment  of  pipes, 
make  the  same  motive  power  perform  their  praise.  Where 
this  machinery  is  not  adopted,  still  the  Lord  is  robbed  of 
his  praise  by  other  methods.  Sometimes  half  a  dozen  skilled 
voices  of  persons  who  would  be  equally  as  much  at  home  at 
tb^  opera  or  the  theatre  as  in  the  house  of  Go<i,  are  form 


THE  ALARUM.  345 

ed  into  a  choir  to  perform  the  psalpiody ;  and  it  is  supposed 
that  God  accepts  their  formal  notes  as  the  praise  of  the  en« 
tire  assembly.  How  far  different  is  the  genuine  song  of 
gracious  men  who  lift  up  their  voices  to  the  Lord  becaase 
their  hearts  adore  him  !  Oh,  I  love  to  hear  every  voice  pour 
ing  out  its  note,  especially  if  I  can  but  hope  that  with  every 
voice  there  is  going  forth  a  fervent  heart.  This  warm- 
hearted, joyful  singing — why,  it  makes  the  congregation  on 
earth  to  be  like  the  assembly  of  the  skies  ;  and  causes  the 
meeting-place  of  the  saints  to  be  a  faint  type  of  the  gather- 
ing of  the  angels  and  glorified  spirits  before  the  throne  of 
God.  To  drone  or  to  whisper  in  such  a  delightful  exercise 
is  crimijal.  If  ever  we  should  exhibit  the  angel's  wakeful- 
ness, it  should  be  when  we  are  emulating  their  employment. 
Our  praise  ought  to  be  performed  with  a  fully-awakened 
mind:  first,  that  we  may  recollect  what  we  are  praising  God 
for.  We  should  have  a  vivid  sense  of  the  mercies  we  have 
received,  or  we  cannot  bless  God  aright  for  them.  You 
who  have  not  yet  received  spiritual  blessings,  should  not  be 
forgetful  of  his  temporal  mercies  :  it  is  surely  sufficient  cause 
for  lively  thanksgiving  that  you  are  not  upon  a  bed  of  sick- 
ness ;  that  you  are  not  in  the  lunatic  asylum ;  that  you  are 
not  in  the  workhouse  ;  that  you  are  not  on  the  borders  of 
the  grave  ;  that  you  are  not  in  hell ;  that  you  still  have  food 
and  raiment,  and  that  you  are  where  the  gospel  is  gracious- 
ly presented  to  you.  Should  not  all  this  be  thought  of? 
Should  not  this  be  fuel  for  the  flame  of  gratitude  ?  As  for 
us  who  have  tasted  spiritual  blessings,  if  our  minds  were 
awake,  we  should  think  of  eternal  love  and  its  goings  forth 
from  eternity  ;  of  redeeming  love,  and  the  streams  that  flow 
from  the  fount  of  Calvary ;  of  God's  immutable  love,  aiid 
his  patience  with  our  ill-manners  in  the  wilderness ;  of  cov- 
enant mercy,  of  mercies  yet  to  come,  of  heaven,  and  the 
bliss  hereafter.  Such  recollections  should  call  up  our  whole 
man  to  praise  the  Lord.  If  the  innumerable  benefits  which 
we  receive  were  thought  of  and  dwelt  upon,  the  contempla- 

J5* 


846  THE  ALARUM. 

tion  would  put  a  force,  a  yolame,  a  body  into  onr  songy  and 
make  it  far  more  the  flaming,  ethereal  thing  which  it  ought 
to  be. 

We  want  our  souls  awakened,  next,  so  that  toe  may  re- 
member to  whom  our  praise  is  offered,  Before  no  mean 
king  do  we  bow  the  knee  of  homage.  To  praise  God  is  to 
etand  in  the  immediate  presence  of  the  blessed  and  only 
Potentate.  Do  not  even  seraphs  veil  their  faces  in  that 
august  presence  ?  With  what  lowliness  ought  we  to  bow  I 
With  what  earnestness  of  spirit  should  we  praise  I  "Put 
off  thy  shoes  from  off  thy  feet,  for  the  place  whereon  thou 
standest  is  holy  ground."  Courtiers  are  not  expected  to 
nod  with  drowsiness  in  the  presence  of  their  king  :  and  if 
they  came  to  present  thanksgiving,  it  would  seem  strange 
if  they  were  to  yawn  as  men  half  asleep.  Surely,  it  would 
be  hypocritical  congratulation  and  insulting  behaviour  if 
they  should  be  detected  in  a  sleepy  condition !  If  we  come 
together  to  praise  God,  let  us  really  do  it.  If  we  cannot 
praise  him,  let  us  know  and  mourn  that  we  cannot  do  it, 
and  let  us  be  sure  that  the  spirit  is  willing,  even  if  the  flesh 
be  weak.  Let  all  sleepiness  be  put  away  in  the  presence  of 
the  ever-wakeful  Jehovah,  before  whose  eyes  all  things  are 
naked  and  open.  He  never  slumbereth  nor  sleepeth,  so  as 
to  make  a  pause  in  his  mercy  to  us  :  let  not  our  slumbering 
spirits  cause  an  omission  of  our  grateful  song. 

We  need  that  we  should  be  awake  in  praise,  that  our 
whole  hearts  may  be  thoroughly  warm  in  the  exercise.  Under 
Christ  and  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  acceptableness 
of  our  praise  depends  very  much  upon  the  warmth  of  it. 
As  cold  prayers  virtually  ask  God  to  deny  them,  so  cold 
praises  ask  God  to  reject  them.  Cold  praises  are  a  sort  of 
semi-blasphemy :  they  do,  as  it  were,  say,  "  Thou  art  not 
^ottliy  to  be  ardently  praised.  O  God,  we  bring  thee  these 
poor  thanksgivings :  they  are  good  enougli  for  thee.^'  Sure- 
ly if  we  treated  our  heavenly  Father  as  we  should,  evei^y 
sacred  passion  would  glow  in  our  hearts  like  a  furnace  :  our 


THE  ALAKUM.  347 

vrhole  heart  would  catch  fire,  and  as  Elijah  went  ap  to 
heaven  with  horses  of  fire  and  chariots  of  fire,  so,  too,  our 
soul,  as  we  thought  upon  the  goodness  and  the  graciousness 
oi  God,  would  ascend  to  heaven  in  vehement  joy  of  adora- 
ti  3n.  Our  praises  would  not  be  like  the  incense  in  the  cen- 
sor, sweet  but  cold  ;  but  coals  of  fire  would  be  put  in  with 
the  incense,  and  then,  like  a  holy  cloud  of  smoke,  our  grat- 
itude would  ascend  to  heaven.  Mark  with  what  exhilara- 
tion the  psalmist  rendered  praise  unto  God,  and  imitate  him 
therein.  See  him  dancing  before  the  ark,  and  hear  .him  cry 
aloud,  "Sing  praises  to  God,  sing  praises  :  sing  praises  unto 
our  King,  sing  praises." 

Brethren,  we  have  need  to  wake  up  our  souls  in  praise, 
CT  else  toe  shaU  at  times  fail  altogether  in  the  duty.  Only  the 
wakeful  are  praiseful.  Sleeping  birds  sing  not.  The  very 
best  praises  God  receives  from  earth  are  from  his  troubled 
saints  ;  but  then  they  are  awake ;  the  strokes  of  the  rod  have 
aroused  them.  When  the  three  holy  children  sung  in  the 
fire,  their  song  was  sweet  indeed ;  yet  had  they  not  been 
thoroughly  in  earnest,  they  had  poured  forth  no  holy  hymn. 
When  martyrs  have  magnified  God  standing  on  the  burn- 
ing fagot,  they  have  given  God  better  praise  than  even  the 
angels  can.  It  was  the  old  fable,  that  the  nightingale  was 
made  to  sing  by  the  thorn  that  pricked  her  breast:  and 
many  a  child  of  God  has  poured  forth  his  sweetest  music 
when  the  thorn  of  affliction  has  pierced  his  heait.  Wake  up 
your  souls — you  that  are  desponding,  you  that  are  depressed, 
you  that  have  a  dead  child  at  home,  you  that  are  expecting 
soon  to  go  to  the  grave  with  those  you  love,  you  that  have 
been  losing  your  property,  you  that  are  pinched  with  pov- 
erty— wake  up  your  souls  to  praise  God  still,  for  unless  well 
awake  you  will  forget  to  extol  him.  Remember  what  Job 
did.  When  he  sat  on  the  dunghill,  scraping  himself  with 
a  bit  of  broken  pot,  yet  he  praised  God,  and  said,  "  The 
Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken  away,  blessed  be  the 
name  of  the  Lord."    It  was  grand  of  thee,  O  patriarch  of 


848  ^I'HE  ALABI3M. 

Uz,  t.>  be  able  thus  to  extol  thy  Lord :  then  was  thy  soul 
fully  awake.  Beloved  friends,  may  our  inmost  souls  be  sc 
energetic  with  the  power  of  grace  that  we  may  spontane^ 
ously  and  earnestly  bless  the  Lord  at  all  times  and  under 
ali  circumstances. 

Do  you  belie'v  e,  my  brethren,  that  amongst  all  the  throng 
of  those  who  see  Jehovah  face  to  face,  there  is  one  dull,  cold, 
oareless  worshipper  ?    Look  through  the  seraphim  and  cher- 
ubim :  they  are  all  flaming  ones,  burning  with  intense  de- 
sire and  fervent  adoration.   Look  through  the  hosts  of  angels : 
they  are  all  his  ministers  that  do  his  pleasure,  and  bless 
him  while  they  do  it.     Search  through  all  those  sanctified 
and  glorified  bands  of  spiiits,  and  you  shall  not  find  one  with 
half-closed  eye  wearily  praising  his  Maker.     Heaven  con- 
sists m  joyful  praise.     Look  at  the  very  birds  on  earth,  how 
they  shame  us !     Dear  little  creatures,  if  you  watch  them 
when  they  are  singing,  you  will  sometimes  wonder  how  so 
much  sound  can  come  out  of  such  diminutive  bodies.     How 
they  throw  their  whole  selves  into  the  music,  and  seem  to 
melt  themselves  away  in  song !     How  the  wing  vibrates, 
the  throat  pulsates,  and  every  part  of  their  body  rejoices  to 
assist  the  strain  !     This  is  the  way  in  which  we  ought  to 
praise  God.    If  birds  that  are  sold  at  three  for  two  farthingg 
yet  render  God  such  praise,  how  much  more  heartily  ought 
we  to  sing  before  him  ?    Let  it  be  a  resolution  with  us  at 
this  hour  that  we  will  praise  God  more;  that  we  will  sing 
to  him  more  at  home,  about  our  business,  and  in  all  proper 
places  ;  and  that  whenever  we  do  sing  we  will  do  it  heartily, 
waking  up  our  tongue  and  all  the  powers  of  our  mind  and 
bod 7  to  bless  and  praise  the  name  of  God. 

IL  Now,  secondly,  we  sl)all  notice  that  wakefut.ness  ts 

iw  OKEAT  NEED   IN   THE    ENTIRE    SPIRITUAL   LIFE.      I    belie  re 

it  to  be  one  of  the  great  wants  of  the  church  novi,  I  ques- 
tion whether  most  of  us  are  awake  spiritually.  I  question 
whether  I  am.     I  wish  to  be  awakened  far  more  to  a  sensi* 


THE  ALABUM.  849 

bility  of  the  power  of  the  world  to  come,  and  a  tenderness 
in  regard  to  spiritual  truth.  Slumber  is  so  natural  to  us. 
"  Well,"  says  one,  "  but  we  tcdk  about  the  things  of  God." 
Yes,  but  people  talk  when  they  are  asleep,  and  a  good  deal 
of  Christian  conversation  is  very  much  like  the  talk  of 
sloi^pers.  There  is  not  the  force  in  it — the  life  in  it, that 
there  would  be  in  conversation  if  we  were  really  awakened 
to  feel  the  power  of  eternal  verities.  "  Yet,"  says  one,  "  I 
hope  we  act  consistently."  I  trust  you  do,  but  there  are 
many  people  who  walk  in  their  sleep,  and,  alas  !  I  know  some 
Christian  professors  who  appear  to  be  trying  very  hazard- 
ous feats  of  sleep-walking  just  now.  Some  somnambulists 
have  been  able  to  walk  on  places  where,  had  they  been 
awake,  they  never  would  have  been  able  to  endure  the 
dizzy  height ;  and  I  see  some  Christians,  if  indeed  they  be 
Christians,  running  awful  risks  which  I  think  they  would 
never  venture  upon  unless  they  had  fallen  into  the  deep 
sleep  of  carnal  security.  Speak  of  a  man  slumbering  at 
the  mast-head,  it  is  nothing  to  a  professor  of  religion  at 
ease  while  covetousness  is  his  master,  or  worldly  company 
his  delight.  If  professors  were  awake,  they  would  see  their 
danger,  and  avoid  sinful  amusements  and  ungodly  associa- 
tions, as  men  fly  from  fiirce  tigers  or  deadly  cobras. 
"Well,  but  we  are  doing  much  good  and  useful  work," 
says  one;  *' teaching  in  Sabbath-schools,  distributing  re- 
ligious tracts,  or  laboring  in  some  other  form  of  service ; 
we  are  spending  our  time  in  commendable  engagements." 
I  am  glad  to  hear  it ;  but  people  can  do  a  great  deal  in 
their  sleep.  We  have  heard  many  strange  instances  of 
how  habit  at  last  has  enabled  persons  to  pursue  their  call- 
ings, to  answer  signals,  and  keep  up  all  the  appearance 
of  industry,  and  yet  they  have  been  at  the  time  asleep. 
Oh,  it  is  a  very  shocking  thing  that  so  many  of  our  churches 
in  England  are  in  a  deep  sleep !  Dissenting  churclies  I 
know  best  about,  and  there  are  many  where  the  minister 
preaches  in  his  sleep,  where  the  people  sing  Y\i  xVi^vc  '^'fe^^ 


H2  THE  ALABUM. 


SERMON 


THE  ALARUM. 

**  X  XTBELr  WILL  AWAXX  KABLT.**— PsalOl  ItIL  8. 

The  proper  subject  to  treat  upon  with  such  a  text  as 
this  would  be  the  propriety  and  excellence  of  parly  rising, 
especially  when  we  are  desirous  of  praising  or  serving  God. 
The  dew  of  dawn  should  be  consecrated  to  devotion.  The 
text  is  a  very  remarkable  expression,  and  might  fitly  be 
made  the  early-riser's  motto.  It  is,  in  the  original,  a  high- 
ly poetical  phrase,  and  Milton  and  others  have  borrowed  or 
imitated  it.  "I  will  awaken  the  morning."  So  early 
would  the  psalmist  arise  for  the  praise  ofGod,  that  he  would 
call  up  the  day,  and  bid  the  sun  arise  from  the  chambers  of 
the  east,  and  proceed  upon  his  journey.  "  I  will  awaken  the 
morning."  Early  rising  has  the  example  of  Old  Testament 
saints  to  recommend  it,  and  many  modem  saints  having 
conscientiously  practised  it,  have  been  loud  in  its  praisa 
It  is  an  economy  of  time,  and  an  assistance  to  health,  and 
thus  it  doubly  lengthens  life.  Late  rising  is  too  often  the 
token  of  indolence,  and  the  cause  of  disorder  throughout  the 
whole  day.  Be  assured  that  the  best  hours  are  the  first. 
Our  city  habits  are  to  be  deplored,  because  by  late  hours 
of  retirement  at  night  we  find  early  rising  difficult  if  not 
impossible.  If  we  are  able  to  escape  the  shackles  of  custom, 
and  secure  for  devotion  and  contemplation  the  hour  when 
the  dew  is  on  the  grass,  we  may  count  ourselves  thrice  hap- 
py. If  we  cannot  do  all  we  would  in  this  matter,  at  least 
let  us  do  all  we  can. 

That  is  not,  however,  the  topic  upon  which  I  now  desire 
to  speak  to  you.    I  come  at  this  time,  not  so  much  to  plead 


THE  ALABIJM.  843 

for  the  early  as  for  the  awakening.  The  hour  we  may  speak 
of  at  another  time — ^the  fact  is  our  subject  now.  It  is  bad 
to  awake  late,  but  what  shall  be  said  of  those  who  never 
awake  at  all  ?  Better  late  than  never  :  but  with  many  it  is 
to  I'O  feared  it  will  be  never.  I  would  take  down  the  trum- 
pet and  give  a  blast,  or  ring  the  alarm-bell  till  all  the  facul- 
ties of  the  sluggard's  manhood  are  made  to  bestir  themselves, 
and  he  cries  with  new-bom  determination,  "  I  myself  will 
awake.*' 

"  Will  awake.^^  This  is  a  world  in  which  most  men  now 
adays  are  alive  to  their  temporal  interests.  If  in  these 
pushing  times  any  man  goes  to  his  business  in  a  sleepy, 
listless  fashion,  he  very  soon  finds  himself  on  an  ebb-tide,  and 
all  his  affairs  aground.  The  wide-awake  man  seizes  oppor- 
tunities or  makes  them,  and  thus  those  who  are  widest  awake 
usually  come  to  the  front.  Years  ago  affairs  moved  like  the 
broad-wheel  wagon,  very  sleepily,  with  sober  pause  and  lei- 
surely progression,  and  then  the  son  of  the  snail  had  a  chance ; 
but  now,  when  we  almost  fly,  if  a  man  would  succeed  in 
trade  he  must  be  all  alive,  and  all  awake.  If  it  be  so  in  tem- 
porals, it  is  equally  so  in  spirituals,  for  the  world,  the  flesh, 
and  the  devil  are  all  awake  to  compete  with  us  ;  and  there 
is  no  resolution  that  I  would  more  earnestly  commend  to 
each  one  of  the  people  of  God  than  this  one ;  "  I  will  awake ; 
I  will  awake  at  once ;  I  will  awake  early,  and  I  will  pray  to 
God  that  I  may  be  kept  awake,  that  my  Christian  existence 
may  not  be  dreamy,  but  that  I  may  be  to  the  fullest  degree 
useful  in  my  Master's  service."  If  this  were  the  resolve  of 
each,  what  a  change  would  come  over  the  Christian  church  I 
I  long  to  see  the  diligence  of  the  shop  exceeded  by  the  clos- 
et, and  the  zeal  of  the  market  excelled  by  the  church.  Each 
Christian  is  alive  :  but  is  he  also  awake?  He  has  eyes,  buft 
are  they  open?  He  has  lofty  possibilities  of  blessing  liii 
fellow  men,  but  does  he  exercise  them  ?  My  heart's  desire 
is  that  none  of  us  may  feel  the  dreamy  influence  of  this  age, 
which  is  comparable  to  the  enchanted  ground ;  but  tliat 


I 


842  THE  ALABUM. 


SERMON 


THE  ALARUM. 

**  X  XTBELr  WILL  AWAXX  EABLT.**— Psalm  lylL  8. 

The  proper  subject  to  treat  upon  with  such  a  text  as 
this  would  be  the  propriety  and  excellence  of  parly  rising, 
especially  when  we  are  desirous  of  praising  or  serving  God. 
The  dew  of  dawn  should  be  consecrated  to  devotion.  The 
text  is  a  very  remarkable  expression,  and  might  fitly  be 
made  the  early-riser's  motto.  It  is,  in  the  original,  a  high- 
ly poetical  phrase,  and  Milton  and  others  have  borrowed  or 
imitated  it.  "I  will  awaken  the  morning."  So  early 
would  the  psalmist  arise  for  the  praise  of  God,  that  he  would 
call  up  the  day,  and  bid  the  sun  arise  from  the  chambers  of 
the  east,  and  proceed  upon  his  journey.  "I  will  awaken  the 
morning."  Early  rising  has  the  example  of  Old  Testament 
saints  to  recommend  it,  and  many  modem  saints  having 
conscientiously  practised  it,  have  been  loud  in  its  praisa 
It  is  an  economy  of  time,  and  an  assistance  to  health,  and 
thus  it  doubly  lengthens  life.  Late  rising  is  too  often  the 
token  of  indolence,  and  the  cause  of  disorder  throughout  the 
whole  day.  Be  assured  that  the  best  hours  are  the  first. 
Our  city  habits  are  to  be  deplored,  because  by  late  hours 
of  retirement  at  night  we  find  early  rising  difficult  if  not 
impossible.  If  we  are  able  to  escape  the  shackles  of  custom, 
and  secure  for  devotion  and  contemplation  the  hour  when 
the  dew  is  on  the  grass,  we  may  count  ourselves  thrice  hap- 
py. If  we  cannot  do  all  we  would  in  this  matter,  at  least 
let  us  do  all  we  can. 

That  is  not,  however,  the  topic  upon  which  I  now  desire 
to  speak  to  you.    I  come  at  this  time,  not  so  much  to  plead 


THE  ALABIJM.  843 

for  the  early  as  for  the  awakening.  The  hour  we  may  speak 
of  at  another  time — the  fact  is  our  subject  now.  It  is  bad 
to  awake  late,  but  what  shall  be  said  of  those  who  never 
awake  at  all  ?  Better  late  than  never  :  but  with  many  it  is 
to  be  feared  it  will  be  never.  I  would  take  down  the  trum- 
pet and  give  a  blast,  or  ring  the  alarm-bell  till  all  the  facul- 
ties of  the  sluggard's  manhood  are  made  to  bestir  themselves, 
and  he  cries  with  new-bom  determination,  "  I  myself  will 
awake." 

"  Will  awake,'*'*  This  is  a  world  in  which  most  men  now 
adays  are  alive  to  their  temporal  interests.  If  in  these 
pushing  times  any  man  goes  to  his  business  in  a  sleepy, 
listless  fashion,  he  very  soon  finds  himself  on  an  ebb-tide,  and 
all  his  affairs  aground.  The  wide-awake  man  seizes  oppor- 
tunities or  makes  them,  and  thus  those  who  are  widest  awake 
usually  come  to  the  front.  Years  ago  affairs  moved  like  the 
broad-wheel  wagon,  very  sleepily,  with  sober  pause  and  lei- 
surely progression,  and  then  the  son  of  the  snail  had  a  chance ; 
but  now,  when  we  almost  fly,  if  a  man  would  succeed  in 
trade  he  must  be  all  alive,  and  all  awake.  If  it  be  so  in  tem- 
porals, it  is  equally  so  in  spirituals,  for  the  world,  the  flesh, 
and  the  devil  are  all  awake  to  compete  with  us  ;  and  there 
is  no  resolution  that  I  would  more  earnestly  commend  to 
each  one  of  the  people  of  God  than  this  one ;  "  I  will  awake ; 
I  will  awake  at  once  ;  I  will  awake  early,  and  I  will  pray  to 
God  that  I  may  be  kept  awake,  that  my  Christian  existence 
may  not  be  dreamy,  but  that  I  may  be  to  the  fullest  degree 
useful  in  my  Master's  service."  If  this  were  the  resolve  of 
each,  what  a  change  would  come  over  the  Christian  church  I 
I  long  to  see  the  diligence  of  the  shop  exceeded  by  the  clos- 
et, and  the  zeal  of  the  market  excelled  by  the  church.  Each 
Christian  is  alive  :  but  is  he  also  awake?  He  has  eyes,  but; 
are  they  open?  He  has  lofty  possibilities  of  blessing  liii 
fellow  men,  but  does  he  exercise  them  ?  My  heart's  desire 
is  that  none  of  us  may  feel  the  dreamy  influence  of  this  age, 
which  is  comparable  to  the  enchanted  ground ;  but  tliat 


844  THE  ALARUM. 

each  of  us  may  be  watchful,  wakeful,  vigorous,  intense,  fe^ 
vent.  Trusting  that  the  Holy  Spirit  may  bless  our  medi- 
tations to  our  spiritual  quickening,  we  shall  briefly  turn 
our  thoughts  to  the  consideration  of  two  or  three  things. 

L  Our  text  is  connected  with  the  duty  of  praise,  and 
therefore  our  first  point  shall  be — it  is  most  necessaiit 
THAT  our  minds  should  be  in  a  state  of  wakefulness 
WHEN  WE  ARE  PRAISING  GoD.  Therefore,  as  we  ought  to  be 
always  praising  him  our  mind  ought  always  to  be  w&keful. 
It  is  a  shame  to  pray  with  the  mind  half  asleep  :  it  is  an 
equal  shame  to  attempt  to  praise  God  till  all  the  powers  of 
the  mind  are  thoroughly  aroused.  David  is  herein  a  most  fit 
example,  for  he  sings,  "  My  heart  is  fixed,  O  God,  my  heart 
is  fixed  :  I  will  sing  and  give  praise.  Awake  up,  my  glory; 
awake,  psaltery  and  harp  ;  I  myself  will  awake  early." 

We  should  be  fully  awake  when  engaged  in  private  thanks- 
giving ;  the  song  of  our  solitude  should  be  full  of  living  joy. 
I  am  afraid  there  is  very  little  private  singing  nowadays. 
We  often  hear  discourses  concerning  private  prayer,  but  very 
seldom  of  private  praise  ;  and  yet  ought  there  not  to  be  as 
much  private  praise  as  private  prayer?  I  fear  from  the 
seldomness  of  its  being  mentioned,  that  private  thanksgiv- 
ing has  grown  to  be  a  sleepy  affair.  Then  as  to  public  wor- 
ship, how  earnest  ought  it  to  be  !  Yet  how  seldom  is  it 
hearty  and  real !  How  often  do  we  hear  half-awake  sing- 
ing! Sometimes  a  sort  of  musical -box,  consisting  of  pipes, 
keys,  and  bellows,  is  set  to  do  all  the  adoration.  The  hea- 
then of  Thibet  turn  the  wind  to  account  religiously,  by 
making  it  turn  their  windmills  and  pray  for  them ;  and  our 
brethren  in  England,  by  an  ingenious  adjustment  of  pipes, 
make  the  same  motive  power  perform  their  praise.  Where 
this  machinery  is  not  adopted,  still  the  Lord  is  robbed  of 
his  praise  by  other  methods.  Sometimes  half  a  dozen  skilled 
voices  of  persons  who  would  be  equally  as  much  at  home  ni 
tj)«)  opera  or  the  theatre  as  in  the  house  of  Go<i,  are  form 


THE  ALARUM.  345 

ed  into  a  choir  to  perform  the  psalpiody ;  and  it  is  supposed 
that  God  accepts  their  formal  notes  as  the  praise  of  the  en« 
tire  assembly.  How  far  different  is  the  genuine  song  of 
gracious  men  who  lift  up  their  voices  to  the  Lord  because 
their  hearts  adore  him  !  Oh,  I  love  to  hear  every  voice  pour 
ing  out  its  note,  especially  if  I  can  but  hope  that  with  every 
voice  there  is  going  forth  a  fervent  heart.  This  warm- 
hearted, joyful  singing — why,  it  makes  the  congregation  on 
earth  to  be  like  the  assembly  of  the  skies  ;  and  causes  the 
meeting-place  of  the  saints  to  be  a  faint  type  of  the  gather- 
ing of  the  angels  and  glorified  spirits  before  the  throne  of 
God.  To  drone  or  to  whisper  in  such  a  delightful  exercise 
is  crimijal.  If  ever  we  should  exhibit  the  angel's  wakeful- 
ness, it  should  be  when  we  are  emulating  their  employment. 
Our  praise  ought  to  be  performed  with  a  fully-awakened 
mind :  first,  that  we  may  recollect  what  we  are  praising  God 
for.  We  should  have  a  vivid  sense  of  the  mercies  we  have 
received,  or  we  cannot  bless  God  aright  for  them.  You 
who  have  not  yet  received  spiritual  blessings,  should  not  be 
forgetful  of  his  temporal  mercies  :  it  is  surely  sufficient  cause 
for  lively  thanksgiving  that  you  are  not  upon  a  bed  of  sick- 
ness ;  that  you  are  not  in  the  lunatic  asylum ;  that  you  are 
not  in  the  workhouse  ;  that  you  are  not  on  the  borders  of 
the  grave  ;  that  you  are  not  in  hell ;  that  you  still  have  food 
and  raiment,  and  that  you  are  where  the  gospel  is  gracious- 
ly presented  to  you.  Should  not  all  this  be  thought  of? 
Should  not  this  be  fuel  for  the  fiame  of  gratitude  ?  As  for 
us  who  have  tasted  spiritual  blessings,  if  our  minds  were 
awake,  we  should  think  of  eternal  love  and  its  goings  forth 
from  eternity  ;  of  redeeming  love,  and  the  streams  that  flow 
from  the  fount  of  Calvary ;  of  God's  immutable  love,  aiid 
his  patience  with  our  ill-manners  in  the  wilderness ;  of  cov- 
enant mercy,  of  mercies  yet  to  come,  of  heaven,  and  the 
bliss  hereafter.  Such  recollections  should  call  up  our  whole 
man  to  praise  the  Lord.  If  the  innumerable  benefits  which 
we  receive  were  thought  of  and  dwelt  upon^  the  coia\,<ivciYW 


846  TUE  ALARUM, 

tion  would  put  a  force,  a  volame,  a  body  into  onr  song,  and 
make  it  far  more  the  flaming,  ethereal  thing  which  it  ought 
to  be. 

We  want  our  souls  awakened,  next,  so  that  toe  may  re* 
member  to  tohom  our  praise  is  offered.  Before  no  mean 
king  do  we  bow  the  knee  of  homage.  To  praise  God  is  to 
etaud  in  the  immediate  presence  of  the  blessed  and  only 
Potentate.  Do  not  even  seraphs  veil  their  faces  in  that 
august  presence  ?  With  what  lowliness  ought  we  to  bow  I 
With  what  earnestness  of  spirit  should  we  praise  I  "  Put 
off  thy  shoes  from  off  thy  feet,  for  the  place  whereon  thou 
standest  is  holy  ground."  Courtiers  are  not  expected  to 
nod  with  drowsiness  in  the  presence  of  their  king  :  and  if 
they  came  to  present  thanksgiving,  it  would  seem  strange 
if  they  were  to  yawn  as  men  half  asleep.  Surely,  it  would 
be  hypocritical  congratulation  and  insulting  behaviour  if 
they  should  be  detected  in  a  sleepy  condition !  If  we  come 
together  to  praise  God,  let  us  really  do  it.  If  we  cannot 
praise  him,  let  us  know  and  mourn  that  we  cannot  do  it, 
and  let  us  be  sure  that  the  spirit  is  willing,  even  if  the  flesh 
be  weak.  Let  all  sleepiness  be  put  away  in  the  presence  of 
the  ever-wakeful  Jehovah,  before  whose  eyes  all  things  are 
naked  and  open.  He  never  slumbereth  nor  sleepeth,  so  as 
to  make  a  pause  in  his  mercy  to  us  :  let  not  our  slumbering 
spirits  cause  an  omission  of  our  grateful  song. 

We  need  that  we  should  be  awake  in  praise,  that  our 
whole  hearts  may  he  thoroughly  warm  in  the  exercise.  Under 
Christ  and  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  acceptableness 
of  our  praise  depends  very  much  upon  the  warmth  of  it. 
As  cold  prayers  virtually  ask  God  to  deny  them,  so  cold 
praises  ask  God  to  reject  them.  Cold  praises  are  a  sort  of 
semi-blasphemy :  they  do,  as  it  were,  say,  "  Thou  art  not 
^ottby  to  be  ardently  praised.  O  God,  we  bring  thee  these 
poor  thanksgivings ;  they  are  good  enougli  for  thee.^'  Sure- 
ly if  we  treated  our  heavenly  Father  as  we  should,  eveiy 
sacred  passion  would  glow  in  our  hearts  like  a  furnace  :  our 


THE  ALARUM.  347 

whole  heart  would  catch  fire,  and  as  Elijah  went  np  to 
heaven  with  horses  of  fire  and  chariots  of  fire,  so,  too,  our 
soul,  as  we  thought  upon  the  goodness  and  the  graciousness 
oi  God,  would  ascend  to  heaven  in  vehement  joy  of  adoi'a* 
ti  )n.  Our  praises  would  not  be  like  the  incense  in  the  cen- 
sor, sweet  but  cold  ;  but  coals  of  fire  would  be  put  in  with 
the  incense,  and  then,  like  a  holy  cloud  of  smoke,  our  grat- 
itude would  ascend  to  heaven.  Mark  with  what  exhilara- 
tion the  psalmist  rendered  praise  unto  God,  and  imitate  him 
therein.  See  him  dancing  before  the  ark,  and  hear  .him  cry 
aloud,  "  Sing  praises  to  God,  sing  praises  :  sing  praises  unto 
our  King,  sing  praises." 

Brethren,  we  have  need  to  wake  up  our  souls  in  praise, 
or  else  we  shaU  at  times  fail  altogether  in  the  duty.  Only  the 
wakeful  are  praisefuL  Sleeping  birds  sing  not.  The  very 
best  praises  God  receives  from  earth  are  from  his  troubled 
saints  ;  but  then  they  are  awake ;  the  strokes  of  the  rod  have 
aroused  them.  When  the  three  holy  children  sung  in  the 
fire,  their  song  was  sweet  indeed ;  yet  had  they  not  been 
thoroughly  in  earnest,  they  had  poured  forth  no  holy  hymn. 
When  martyrs  have  magnified  God  standing  on  the  burn- 
ing fagot,  they  have  given  God  better  praise  than  even  the 
angels  can.  It  was  the  old  fable,  that  the  nightingale  was 
made  to  sing  by  the  thorn  that  pricked  her  breast:  and 
many  a  child  of  God  has  poured  forth  his  sweetest  music 
when  the  thorn  of  affliction  has  pierced  his  heart.  Wake  up 
your  souls — you  that  are  desponding,  you  that  are  depressed, 
you  that  have  a  dead  child  at  home,  you  that  are  expecting 
soon  to  go  to  the  grave  with  those  you  love,  you  that  have 
been  losing  your  property,  you  that  are  pinched  with  pov- 
erty— wake  up  your  souls  to  praise  God  still,  for  unless  well 
awake  you  will  forget  to  extol  him.  Remember  what  Job 
did.  When  he  sat  on  the  dunghill,  scraping  himself  with 
a  bit  of  broken  pot,  yet  he  praised  God,  and  said,  "  The 
Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken  away,  blessed  be  the 
name  of  the  Lord."    It  was  grand  of  thee,  O  patriarch  oi 


848  THE  ALABUM. 

Cz,  U>  be  able  thus  to  extol  thy  Lord  :  then  was  thy  soul 
fully  awake.  Beloved  friends,  may  our  inmost  souls  be  sc 
energetic  with  the  power  of  grace  that  we  may  spontane 
ously  and  earnestly  bless  the  Lord  at  all  times  and  under 
ah  circumstances. 

Do  you  belie'v  e,  my  brethren,  that  amongst  all  the  throng 
of  those  who  see  Jehovah  face  to  face,  there  is  one  dull,  cold, 
careless  worshipper?  Look  through  the  seraphim  and  cher- 
ubim :  they  are  all  flaming  ones,  burning  with  intense  de- 
gire  and  fervent  adoration.  Look  through  the  hosts  of  angels : 
they  are  all  his  ministers  that  do  his  pleasure,  and  bless 
him  while  they  do  it.  Search  through  all  those  sanctified 
and  glorified  bands  of  spirits,  and  you  shall  not  find  one  with 
half-closed  eye  wearily  praising  his  Maker.  Heaven  con- 
sists in  joyful  praise.  Look  at  the  very  birds  on  earth,  how 
they  shame  us !  Dear  little  creatures,  if  you  watch  them 
when  they  are  singing,  you  will  sometimes  wonder  how  so 
much  sound  can  come  out  of  such  diminutive  bodies.  How 
they  throw  their  whole  selves  into  the  music,  and  seem  to 
melt  themselves  away  in  song  !  How  the  wing  vibrates, 
the  throat  pulsates,  and  every  part  of  their  body  rejoices  to 
assist  the  strain  !  This  is  the  way  in  which  we  ought  to 
praise  God.  If  birds  that  are  sold  at  three  for  two  farthings 
yet  render  God  such  praise,  how  much  more  heartily  ought 
we  to  sing  before  him  ?  Let  it  be  a  resolution  with  us  at 
this  hour  that  we  will  praise  God  more;  that  we  will  sing 
to  him  more  at  home,  about  our  business,  and  in  all  proper 
places  ;  and  that  whenever  we  do  sing  we  will  do  it  heartily, 
waking  up  our  tongue  and  all  the  powers  of  our  mind  and 
bod 7  to  bless  and  praise  the  name  of  God. 

IL  N'ow,  secondly,  we  8l)all  notice  that  wakepul-ntess  ts 

A  QKEAT  NEED   IN   THE    ENTIRE   SPIRITUAL   LIFE.      I   belie/e 

it  to  be  one  of  the  great  wants  of  the  church  now.  I  ques- 
tion whether  most  of  us  are  awake  spiritually.  I  question 
wliether  I  am.     I  wish  to  be  awakened  far  more  to  a  sensi* 


THE  ALARUM.  849 

bility  of  the  power  of  the  world  to  come,  and  a  tenderness 
in  regard  to  spiritual  truth.  Slumber  is  so  natural  to  us. 
"  Well,"  says  one,  "  but  we  talk  about  the  things  of  God." 
Yes,  but  people  talk  when  they  are  asleep,  and  a  good  deal 
of  Christian  conversation  is  very  much  like  the  talk  of 
slcH^pers.  There  is  not  the  force  in  it — the  life  in  it, that 
thore  would  be  in  conversation  if  we  were  really  awakened 
10  feel  the  power  of  eternal  verities.  "  Yet,"  says  one,  "  I 
hope  we  act  consistently."  I  trust  you  do,  but  there  are 
many  people  who  walk  in  their  sleep,  and,  alas  !  I  know  some 
Christian  professors  who  appear  to  be  trying  very  hazard- 
ous feats  of  sleep-walking  just  now.  Some  somnambulists 
have  been  able  to  walk  on  places  where,  had  they  been 
awake,  they  never  would  have  been  able  to  endure  the 
dizzy  height ;  and  I  see  some  Christians,  if  indeed  they  be 
Christians,  running  awful  risks  which  I  think  they  would 
never  venture  upon  unless  they  had  fallen  into  the  deep 
sleep  of  carnal  security.  Speak  of  a  man  slumbering  at 
the  mast-head,  it  is  nothing  to  a  professor  of  religion  at 
ease  while  covetousness  is  his  master,  or  worldly  company 
his  delight.  If  professors  were  awake,  they  would  see  their 
danger,  and  avoid  sinful  amusements  and  ungodly  associa- 
tions, as  men  fly  from  fierce  tigers  or  deadly  cobras. 
"Well,  but  we  are  doing  much  good  and  useful  work," 
says  one ;  "  teaching  in  Sabbath-schools,  distributing  re- 
ligious tracts,  or  laboring  in  some  other  form  of  service ; 
we  are  spending  our  time  in  commendable  engagements." 
I  am  glad  to  hear  it ;  but  people  can  do  a  great  deal  in 
their  sleep.  We  have  heard  many  strange  instances  of 
how  habit  at  last  has  enabled  persons  to  pursue  their  call- 
ings, to  answer  signals,  and  keep  up  all  the  appearance 
of  industry,  and  yet  they  have  been  at  the  time  asleep. 
Oh,  it  is  a  very  shocking  thing  that  so  many  of  our  churches 
in  England  are  in  a  deep  sleep!  Dissenting  churches  I 
know  best  about,  and  there  are  many  where  the  minister 
preaches  in  his  sleep,  where  the  people  sing  m  \\ievx  ^^«^ 


842  "("HE  ALABTJM. 


SERMON  XX 


THE  ALARUM. 

**  1 XTBELF  WILL  AWAKS  KABLT."— Psalm  IyU.  & 

The  proper  subject  to  treat  npon  with  snch  a  text  as 
this  would  be  the  propriety  and  excellence  of  parly  rising, 
especially  when  we  are  desirous  of  praising  or  serving  God. 
The  dew  of  dawn  should  be  consecrated  to  devotion.  The 
text  is  a  very  remarkable  expression,  and  might  fitly  be 
made  the  early-riser's  motto.  It  is,  in  the  original,  a  high- 
ly poetical  phrase,  and  Milton  and  others  have  borrowed  or 
imitated  it.  "I  will  awaken  the  morning."  So  early 
would  the  psalmist  arise  for  the  praise  of  God,  that  he  would 
call  up  the  day,  and  bid  the  sun  arise  from  the  chambers  of 
the  east,  and  proceed  upon  his  journey.  "  I  will  awaken  the 
morning."  Early  rising  has  the  example  of  Old  Testament 
saints  to  recommend  it,  and  many  modem  saints  having 
conscientiously  practised  it,  have  been  loud  in  its  praise. 
It  is  an  economy  of  time,  and  an  assistance  to  health,  and 
thus  it  doubly  lengthens  life.  Late  rising  is  too  often  the 
token  of  indolence,  and  the  cause  of  disorder  throughout  the 
whole  day.  Be  assured  that  the  best  hours  are  the  first. 
Our  city  habits  are  to  be  deplored,  because  by  late  hours 
of  retirement  at  night  we  find  early  rising  difficult  if  not 
impossible.  If  we  are  able  to  escape  the  shackles  of  custom, 
and  secure  for  devotion  and  contemplation  the  hour  when 
the  dew  is  on  the  grass,  we  may  count  ourselves  thrice  hap- 
py. If  we  cannot  do  all  we  would  in  this  matter,  at  least 
let  us  do  all  we  can. 

That  is  not,  however,  the  topic  upon  which  I  now  desire 
to  speak  to  you.    I  come  at  this  time,  not  so  much  to  plead 


THE  ALABUH.  843 

for  the  early  as  for  the  awakening.  The  hour  we  may  speak 
of  at  another  time — the  fact  is  our  subject  now.  It  is  bad 
to  awake  late,  but  what  shall  be  said  of  those  who  never 
awake  at  all  ?  Better  late  than  never  :  but  with  many  it  is 
to  be  feared  it  will  be  never.  I  would  take  dc»wn  the  trum- 
pet and  give  a  blast,  or  ring  the  alarm-bell  till  all  the  facul- 
ties of  the  sluggard's  manhood  are  made  to  bestir  themselves, 
and  he  cries  with  new-bom  determination,  "  I  myself  will 
awake." 

"  Will  awaked  This  is  a  world  in  which  most  men  now 
adays  are  alive  to  their  temporal  interests.  If  in  these 
pushing  times  any  man  goes  to  his  business  in  a  sleepy, 
listless  fashion,  he  very  soon  finds  himself  on  an  ebb-tide,  and 
all  his  affairs  aground.  The  wide-awake  man  seizes  oppor- 
tunities or  makes  them,  and  thus  those  who  are  widest  awake 
usually  come  to  the  front.  Years  ago  affairs  moved  like  the 
broad- wheel  wagon,  very  sleepily,  with  sober  pause  and  lei- 
surely progression,  and  then  the  son  of  the  snail  had  a  chance ; 
but  now,  when  we  almost  fly,  if  a  man  would  succeed  in 
trade  he  must  be  all  alive,  and  all  awake.  If  it  be  so  in  tem- 
porals, it  is  equally  so  in  spirituals,  for  the  world,  the  flesh, 
and  the  devil  are  all  awake  to  compete  with  us  ;  and  there 
is  no  resolution  that  1  would  more  earnestly  commend  to 
each  one  of  the  people  of  God  than  this  one ;  "  I  will  awake ; 
I  will  awake  at  once ;  I  will  awake  early,  and  I  will  pray  to 
God  that  I  may  be  kept  awake,  that  my  Christian  existence 
may  not  be  dreamy,  but  that  1  may  be  to  the  fullest  degree 
useful  in  my  Master's  service."  If  this  were  the  resolve  of 
each,  what  a  change  would  come  over  the  Christian  church ! 
I  long  to  see  the  diligence  of  the  shop  exceeded  by  the  clos- 
et, and  the  zeal  of  the  market  excelled  by  the  church.  Each 
Christian  is  alive  :  but  is  he  also  awake?  He  has  eyes,  buti 
are  they  open?  He  has  lofty  possibilities  of  blessing  hii 
fellow  men,  but  does  he  exercise  them  ?  My  heart's  desire 
is  that  none  of  us  may  feel  the  dreamy  influence  of  this  age, 
which  is  comparable  to  the  enchanted  ground ;  but  that 


844  THE  ALARUM. 

each  of  us  may  be  watchftil,  wakeful,  vigorous,  intense,  fe^ 
vent.  Trusting  that  the  Holy  Spirit  may  bless  our  medi- 
tations to  our  spiritual  quickening,  we  shall  briefly  turn 
our  thoughts  to  the  consideration  of  two  or  three  tilings. 

I.  Our  text  is  connected  with  the  duty  of  praise,  and 
therefore  our  first  point  shall  be — rr  is  most  necessaut 

THAT   OUR  MIXDS   SHOULD  BE   IN   A   STATE    OF   WAKEFULNESS 

WHEN  WE  ARE  PRAISING  GoD.  Therefore,  as  we  ought  to  be 
always  praising  hira  our  mind  ought  always  to  be  w&keful. 
It  is  a  shame  to  pray  with  the  mind  half  asleep  :  it  is  an 
equal  shame  to  attempt  to  praise  God  till  all  the  powers  of 
the  mind  are  thoroughly  aroused.  David  is  herein  a  most  fit 
example,  for  he  sings,  "  My  heart  is  fixed,  O  God,  my  heart 
is  fixed  :  I  will  sing  and  give  praise.  Awake  up,  my  glory ; 
awake,  psaltery  and  harp  ;  I  myself  will  awake  early.** 

We  should  be  fully  awake  when  engaged  in  private  thanks- 
giving ;  the  song  of  our  solitude  should  be  full  of  living  joy. 
I  am  afraid  there  is  very  little  private  singing  nowadays. 
We  often  hear  discourses  concerning  private  prayer,  but  very 
seldom  of  private  praise  ;  and  yet  ought  there  not  to  be  as 
much  private  pniise  as  private  prayer?  I  fear  from  the 
seldomness  of  its  being  mentioned,  that  private  thanksgiv- 
ing has  grown  to  be  a  sleepy  affair.  Then  as  to  public  wor- 
ship, how  earnest  ought  it  to  be  !  Yet  how  seldom  is  it 
heart V  and  real !  How  often  do  we  hear  half-awake  sinar- 
ing!  Sometimes  a  sort  of  musical-box,  consisting  of  pipes, 
keys,  and  bellows,  is  set  to  do  all  the  adoration.  The  hea- 
then of  Thibet  turn  the  wind  to  account  religiously,  by 
making  it  turn  their  windmills  and  pray  for  them ;  and  our 
brethren  in  England,  by  an  ingenious  adjustment  of  pipes, 
make  the  same  motive  power  perform  their  praise.  Where 
this  machinery  is  not  adopted,  still  the  Lord  is  robbed  of 
his  praise  by  other  methodsw  Sometimes  half  a  dozen  skilled 
Yoiees  of  jiersons  who  would  be  equally  as  much  at  home  st 
tb^  opera  or  the  theatre  as  in  the  house  of  God,  are  form 


THE  ALARUM.  345 

cd  into  a  choir  to  perform  the  psalpody ;  and  it  is  supposed 
that  God  accepts  their  formal  notes  as  the  praise  of  the  en« 
tire  assembly.  How  far  different  is  the  genuine  song  of 
gracious  men  who  lift  up  their  voices  to  the  Lord  becaase 
their  hearts  adore  him  !  Oh,  I  love  to  hear  every  voice  pour 
ing  out  its  note,  especially  if  I  can  but  hope  that  with  every 
voice  there  is  going  forth  a  fervent  heart.  This  warm- 
hearted, joyful  singing — why,  it  makes  the  congregation  on 
earth  to  be  like  the  assembly  of  the  skies  ;  and  causes  the 
meeting-place  of  the  saints  to  be  a  faint  type  of  the  gather- 
ing of  the  angels  and  glorified  spirits  before  the  throne  of 
God.  To  drone  or  to  whisper  in  such  a  delightful  exercise 
is  criminal.  If  ever  we  should  exhibit  the  angel's  wakeful- 
ness, it  should  be  when  we  are  emulating  their  employment. 
Our  praise  ought  to  be  performed  with  a  fully-awakened 
mind :  first,  that  we  may  recollect  what  we  are  praising  God 
for.  We  should  have  a  vivid  sense  of  the  mercies  we  have 
received,  or  we  cannot  bless  God  aright  for  them.  You 
who  have  not  yet  received  spiritual  blessings,  should  not  be 
forgetful  of  his  temporal  mercies  :  it  is  surely  sufficient  cause 
for  lively  thanksgiving  that  you  are  not  upon  a  bed  of  sick- 
ness ;  that  you  are  not  in  the  lunatic  asylum ;  that  you  are 
not  in  the  workhouse  ;  that  you  are  not  on  the  borders  of 
the  grave  ;  that  you  are  not  in  hell ;  that  you  still  have  food 
and  raiment,  and  that  you  are  where  the  gospel  is  gracious- 
ly presented  to  you.  Should  not  all  this  be  thought  of? 
Should  not  this  be  fuel  for  the  flame  of  gratitude?  As  for 
as  who  have  tasted  spiritual  blessings,  if  our  minds  were 
awake,  we  should  think  of  eternal  love  and  its  goings  forth 
from  eternity  ;  of  redeeming  love,  and  the  streams  that  flow 
from  the  fount  of  Calvary ;  of  God's  immutable  love,  aiid 
his  patience  with  our  ill-manners  in  the  wilderness ;  of  cov- 
enant mercy,  of  mercies  yet  to  come,  of  heaven,  and  the 
bliss  hereafter.  Such  recollections  should  call  up  our  whole 
man  to  praise  the  Lord.  If  the  innumerable  benefits  which 
we  receive  were  thought  of  and  dwelt  upon,  the  contempla- 

15* 


846  TUE  ALARUM. 

tion  would  put  a  force,  a  volume,  a  body  into  our  song,  and 
make  it  far  more  the  flaming,  ethereal  thing  which  it  ought 
to  be. 

We  want  our  souls  awakened,  next,  so  that  toe  may  re* 
member  to  toJiom  our  praise  is  offered.  Before  no  mean 
king  do  we  bow  the  knee  of  homage.  To  praise  God  is  to 
stand  in  the  immediate  presence  of  the  blessed  and  only 
Potentate.  Do  not  even  seraphs  veil  their  faces  in  that 
august  presence  ?  With  what  lowliness  ought  we  to  bow  I 
With  what  earnestness  of  spirit  should  we  praise  I  "  Put 
off  thy  shoes  from  off  thy  feet,  for  the  place  whereon  thou 
standest  is  holy  ground."  Courtiers  are  not  expected  to 
nod  with  drowsiness  in  the  presence  of  their  king  :  and  if 
they  came  to  present  thanksgiving,  it  would  seem  strange 
if  they  were  to  yawn  as  men  half  asleep.  Surely,  it  would 
be  hypocritical  congratulation  and  insulting  behaviour  if 
they  should  be  detected  in  a  sleepy  condition !  If  we  come 
together  to  praise  God,  let  us  really  do  it.  If  we  cannot 
praise  him,  let  us  know  and  mourn  that  we  cannot  do  it, 
and  let  us  be  sure  that  the  spirit  is  willing,  even  if  the  flesh 
be  weak.  Let  all  sleepiness  be  put  away  in  the  presence  of 
the  ever-wakeful  Jehovah,  before  whose  eyes  all  things  are 
naked  and  open.  He  never  slumbereth  nor  sleepeth,  so  as 
to  make  a  pause  in  his  mercy  to  us  :  let  not  our  slumbering 
spirits  cause  an  omission  of  our  grateful  song. 

We  need  that  we  should  be  awake  in  praise,  that  our 
whole  hearts  may  he  thoroughly  warm  in  the  exercise.  Under 
Christ  and  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  acceptableness 
of  our  praise  depends  very  much  upon  the  warmth  of  it. 
As  cold  prayers  virtually  ask  God  to  deny  them,  so  cold 
praises  ask  God  to  reject  them.  Cold  praises  are  a  sort  of 
semi-blasphemy:  they  do,  as  it  were,  say,  "Thou  art  not 
^ottliy  to  be  ardently  praised.  O  God,  we  bring  thee  these 
poor  thanksgivings :  they  are  good  enougli  for  thee.^'  Sure- 
ly if  we  treated  our  heavenly  Father  as  we  should,  eveiy 
sacred  passion  would  glow  in  our  hearts  like  a  furnace  :  our 


THE  ALARUM.  347 

whole  heart  would  catch  fire,  and  as  Elijah  went  np  to 
heaven  with  horses  of  fire  and  chariots  of  fire,  so,  too,  our 
soul,  as  we  thought  upon  the  goodness  and  the  graciousness 
oi  God,  would  ascend  to  heaven  in  vehement  joy  of  adora- 
ti  3n.  Our  praises  would  not  be  like  the  incense  in  the  cen- 
sor, sweet  but  cold  ;  but  coals  of  fire  would  be  put  in  with 
the  incense,  and  then,  like  a  holy  cloud  of  smoke,  our  grat- 
itude would  ascend  to  heaven.  Mark  with  what  exhilara- 
tion the  psalmist  rendered  praise  unto  God,  and  imitate  him 
therein.  See  him  dancing  before  the  ark,  and  hear  .him  cry 
aloud,  "Sing  praises  to  God,  sing  praises  :  sing  praises  unto 
our  King,  sing  praises." 

Brethren,  we  have  need  to  wake  up  our  souls  in  praise, 
or  else  we  shall  at  times  fail  altogether  in  the  duty.  Only  the 
wakeful  are  praiseful.  Sleeping  birds  sing  not.  The  very 
best  praises  God  receives  from  earth  are  from  his  troubled 
saints  ;  but  then  they  are  awake ;  the  strokes  of  the  rod  have 
aroused  them.  When  the  three  holy  children  sung  in  the 
fire,  their  song  was  sweet  indeed ;  yet  had  they  not  been 
thoroughly  in  earnest,  they  had  poured  forth  no  holy  hymn. 
When  martyrs  have  magnified  God  standing  on  the  burn- 
ing fagot,  they  have  given  God  better  praise  than  even  the 
angels  can.  It  was  the  old  fable,  that  the  nightingale  was 
made  to  sing  by  the  thorn  that  pricked  her  breast:  and 
many  a  child  of  God  has  poured  forth  his  sweetest  music 
when  the  thorn  of  affliction  has  pierced  his  heart.  Wake  up 
your  souls — you  that  are  desponding,  you  that  are  depressed, 
you  that  have  a  dead  child  at  home,  you  that  are  expecting 
soon  to  go  to  the  grave  with  those  you  love,  you  that  have 
been  losing  your  property,  you  that  are  pinched  with  pov- 
erty— ^wake  up  your  souls  to  praise  God  still,  for  unless  well 
awake  you  will  forget  to  extol  him.  Remember  what  Job 
did.  When  he  sat  on  the  dunghill,  scraping  himself  with 
a  bit  of  broken  pot,  yet  he  praised  God,  and  said,  "  The 
Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken  away,  blessed  bo  the 
name  of  the  Lord."    It  was  grand  of  thee,  O  patriarch  of 


844  THE  ALARUM. 

each  of  us  may  be  watchful,  wakeful,  vigorous,  intense,  fe^ 
vent.  Trusting  that  the  Holy  Spirit  may  bless  our  medi- 
tations to  our  spiritual  quickening,  we  shall  briefly  turn 
our  thoughts  to  the  consideration  of  two  or  three  things. 

L  Our  text  is  connected  with  the  duty  of  praise,  and 
therefore  our  first  point  shall  be — rr  is  most  necessaut 

THAT   OUR  MINDS   SHOULD  BE   IN   A   STATE    OF   WAKEFULNESS 

WHEN  WE  ARE  PRAISING  GoD.  Therefore,  as  we  ought  to  be 
always  praising  him  our  mind  ought  always  to  be  w&keful. 
It  is  a  shame  to  pray  with  the  mind  half  asleep  :  it  is  an 
equal  shame  to  attempt  to  praise  God  till  all  the  powers  of 
the  mind  are  thoroughly  aroused.  David  is  herein  a  most  fit 
example,  for  he  sings,  "  My  heart  is  fixed,  O  God,  my  heart 
is  fixed  :  I  will  sing  and  give  praise.  Awake  up,  my  glory; 
awake,  psaltery  and  harp  ;  I  myself  will  awake  early." 

We  should  be  fully  awake  when  engaged  in  private  th&nk&' 
giving  ;  the  song  of  our  solitude  should  be  full  of  living  joy. 
I  am  afraid  there  is  very  little  private  singing  nowadays. 
We  often  hear  discourses  concerning  private  prayer,  but  very 
seldom  of  private  praise  ;  and  yet  ought  there  not  to  be  as 
much  private  praise  as  private  prayer?  I  fear  from  the 
seldomness  of  its  being  mentioned,  that  private  thanksgiv- 
ing has  grown  to  be  a  sleepy  affair.  Then  as  to  public  wor- 
ship, how  earnest  ought  it  to  be  !  Yet  how  seldom  is  it 
hearty  and  real !  How  often  do  we  hear  half-awake  sing- 
ing !  Sometimes  a  sort  of  musical-box,  consisting  of  pipes, 
keys,  and  bellows,  is  set  to  do  all  the  adoration.  The  hea- 
then of  Thibet  turn  the  wind  to  account  religiously,  by 
making  it  turn  their  windmills  and  pray  for  them ;  and  our 
brethren  in  England,  by  an  ingenious  adjustment  of  pipes, 
make  the  same  motive  power  perform  their  praise.  Where 
this  machinery  is  not  adopted,  still  the  Lord  is  robbed  of 
his  praise  by  other  methods.  Sometimes  half  a  dozen  skilled 
voices  of  persons  who  would  be  equally  as  much  at  home  at 
tb-*^  opera  or  the  theatre  as  in  the  house  of  Goii,  are  form 


THE  ALARUM.  345 

cd  into  a  choir  to  perform  the  psalpody ;  and  it  is  supposed 
that  God  accepts  their  formal  notes  as  the  praise  of  the  en- 
tire assembly.  How  far  different  is  the  genuine  song  of 
gracious  men  who  lift  up  their  voices  to  the  Lord  becaase 
their  hearts  adore  him  !  Oh,  I  love  to  hear  every  voice  pour 
ing  out  its  note,  especially  if  I  can  but  hope  that  with  every 
voice  there  is  going  forth  a  fervent  heart.  Tliis  warm- 
hearted, joyful  singing — why,  it  makes  the  congregation  on 
earth  to  be  like  the  assembly  of  the  skies  ;  and  causes  the 
meeting-place  of  the  saints  to  be  a  faint  type  of  the  gather- 
ing of  the  angels  and  glorified  spirits  before  the  throne  of 
God.  To  drone  or  to  whisper  in  such  a  delightful  exercise 
is  criminal.  If  ever  we  should  exhibit  the  angel's  wakeful- 
ness, it  should  be  when  we  are  emulating  their  employment. 
Our  praise  ought  to  be  performed  with  a  fully-awakened 
mind:  first,  that  we  may  recollect  what  we  are  praising  God 
for.  We  should  have  a  vivid  sense  of  the  mercies  we  have 
received,  or  we  cannot  bless  God  aright  for  them.  You 
who  have  not  yet  received  spiritual  blessings,  should  not  be 
forgetful  of  his  temporal  mercies  :  it  is  surely  sufficient  cause 
for  lively  thanksgiving  that  you  are  not  upon  a  bed  of  sick- 
ness ;  that  you  are  not  in  the  lunatic  asylum ;  that  you  are 
not  in  the  workhouse  ;  that  you  are  not  on  the  borders  of 
the  grave  ;  that  you  are  not  in  hell ;  that  you  still  have  food 
and  raiment,  and  that  you  are  where  the  gospel  is  gracious- 
ly presented  to  you.  Should  not  all  this  be  thought  of? 
Should  not  this  be  fuel  for  the  flame  of  gratitude?  As  for 
us  who  have  tasted  spiritual  blessings,  if  our  minds  were 
awake,  we  should  think  of  eternal  love  and  its  goings  forth 
from  eternity  ;  of  redeeming  love,  and  the  streams  that  flow 
from  the  fount  of  Calvary ;  of  God's  immutable  love,  aiid 
his  patience  with  our  ill-manners  in  the  wilderness ;  of  cov- 
enant mercy,  of  mercies  yet  to  come,  of  heaven,  and  the 
bliss  hereafter.  Such  recollections  should  call  up  our  whole 
man  to  praise  the  Lord.  If  the  innumerable  benefits  which 
we  receive  were  thought  of  and  dwelt  upon,  the  contempla- 

15* 


846  TUE  ALARUM. 

tion  would  put  a  force,  a  volume,  a  body  into  our  song,  and 
make  it  far  more  the  flaming,  ethereal  thing  which  it  ought 
to  be. 

We  want  our  souls  awakened,  next,  so  that  toe  may  re* 
member  to  whom  our  praise  is  offered.  Before  no  mean 
kiug  do  we  bow  the  knee  of  homage.  To  praise  God  is  to 
Btaiid  in  the  immediate  presence  of  the  blessed  and  only 
Potentate.  Do  not  even  seraphs  veil  their  faces  in  that 
august  presence  ?  With  what  lowliness  ought  we  to  bow  I 
With  wliat  earnestness  of  spirit  should  we  praise  1  "Put 
off  thy  shoes  from  off  thy  feet,  for  the  place  whereon  thou 
standest  is  holy  ground."  Courtiers  are  not  expected  to 
nod  with  drowsiness  in  the  presence  of  their  king  :  and  if 
they  came  to  present  thanksgiving,  it  would  seem  strange 
if  they  were  to  yawn  as  men  half  asleep.  Surely,  it  would 
be  hypocritical  congratulation  and  insulting  behaviour  if 
they  should  be  detected  in  a  sleepy  condition !  If  we  come 
together  to  praise  God,  let  us  really  do  it.  If  we  cannot 
praise  him,  let  us  know  and  mourn  that  we  cannot  do  it, 
and  let  us  be  sure  that  the  spirit  is  willing,  even  if  the  flesh 
be  weak.  Let  all  sleepiness  be  put  away  in  the  presence  of 
the  ever-wakeful  Jehovah,  before  whose  eyes  all  thmgs  are 
naked  and  open.  He  never  slumbereth  nor  sleepeth,  so  as 
to  make  a  pause  in  his  mercy  to  us  :  let  not  our  slumbering 
spirits  cnuse  an  omission  of  our  grateful  song. 

We  need  that  we  should  be  awake  in  praise,  that  our 
whole  hearts  may  he  thoroughly  warm,  in  the  exercise.  Under 
Christ  and  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  acceptableness 
of  our  praise  depends  very  much  upon  the  warmth  of  it. 
As  cold  prayers  virtually  ask  God  to  deny  them,  so  cold 
praises  ask  God  to  reject  them.  Cold  praises  are  a  sort  of 
semi-blasphemy :  they  do,  as  it  were,  say,  "  Thou  art  not 
^oTtby  to  be  ardently  praised.  O  God,  we  bring  thee  these 
poor  thanksgivings :  they  are  good  enougli  for  thee.^'  Sure- 
ly if  we  treated  our  heavenly  Father  ais  we  should,  every 
sacred  passion  would  glow  in  our  hearts  like  a  furnace  :  our 


THE  ALARUM.  347 

whole  heart  would  catch  fire,  and  as  Elijah  went  np  to 
heaven  with  horses  of  fire  and  chariots  of  fire,  so,  too,  our 
soul,  as  we  thought  upon  the  goodness  and  the  graciousness 
oi  God,  would  ascend  to  heaven  in  vehement  joy  of  adora* 
ti  3n.  Our  praises  would  not  be  like  the  incense  in  the  cen- 
sor, sweet  but  cold  ;  but  coals  of  fire  would  be  put  in  with 
the  incense,  and  then,  like  a  holy  cloud  of  smoke,  our  grat- 
itude would  ascend  to  heaven.  Mark  with  what  exhilara- 
tion the  psalmist  rendered  praise  unto  God,  and  imitate  him 
therein.  See  him  dancing  before  the  ark,  and  hear  .him  cry 
aloud,  "  Sing  praises  to  God,  sing  praises  :  sing  praises  unto 
our  King,  sing  praises." 

Brethren,  we  have  need  to  wake  up  our  souls  in  praise, 
or  else  we  shaU  at  times  fail  altogether  in  the  duty.  Only  the 
wakeful  are  praiseful.  Sleeping  birds  sing  not.  The  very 
best  praises  God  receives  from  earth  are  from  his  troubled 
saints  ;  but  then  they  are  awake ;  the  strokes  of  the  rod  have 
aroused  them.  When  the  three  holy  children  sung  in  the 
fire,  their  song  was  sweet  indeed ;  yet  had  they  not  been 
thoroughly  in  earnest,  they  had  poured  forth  no  holy  hymn. 
When  martyrs  have  magnified  God  standing  on  the  burn- 
ing fagot,  they  have  given  God  better  praise  than  even  the 
angels  can.  It  was  the  old  fable,  that  the  nightingale  was 
made  to  sing  by  the  thorn  that  pricked  her  breast:  and 
many  a  child  of  God  has  poured  forth  his  sweetest  music 
when  the  thorn  of  affliction  has  pierced  his  heart.  Wake  up 
your  souls — you  that  are  desponding,  you  that  are  depressed, 
you  that  have  a  dead  child  at  home,  you  that  are  expecting 
soon  to  go  to  the  grave  with  those  you  love,  you  that  have 
been  losing  your  property,  you  that  are  pinched  with  pov- 
erty— wake  up  your  souls  to  praise  God  still,  for  unless  well 
awake  you  will  forget  to  extol  him.  Remember  what  Job 
did.  When  he  sat  on  the  dunghill,  scraping  himself  with 
a  bit  of  broken  pot,  yet  he  praised  God,  and  said,  "  The 
Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken  away,  blessed  be  the 
name  of  the  Lord."    It  was  grand  of  thee,  O  patriarch  oi 


846  TUE  ALARUM. 

tion  would  put  a  force,  a  volume,  a  body  into  our  song,  and 
make  it  far  more  the  flaming,  ethereal  thing  which  it  ought 
to  be. 

We  want  our  souls  awakened,  next,  so  that  toe  may  re- 
member  to  toJiom  our  praise  is  offered.  Before  no  mean 
king  do  we  bow  the  knee  of  homage.  To  praise  God  is  to 
Btaud  in  the  immediate  presence  of  the  blessed  and  only 
Potentate.  Do  not  even  seraphs  veil  their  faces  in  that 
august  presence  ?  With  what  lowliness  ought  we  to  bow  I 
With  what  earnestness  of  spirit  should  we  praise  I  "  Put 
off  thy  shoes  from  off  thy  feet,  for  the  place  whereon  thou 
standest  is  holy  ground."  Courtiers  are  not  expected  to 
nod  with  drowsiness  in  the  presence  of  their  king  :  and  if 
they  came  to  present  thanksgiving,  it  would  seem  strange 
if  they  were  to  yawn  as  men  half  asleep.  Surely,  it  would 
be  hypocritical  congratulation  and  insulting  behaviour  if 
they  should  be  detected  in  a  sleepy  condition !  If  we  come 
together  to  praise  God,  let  us  really  do  it.  K  we  cannot 
praise  him,  let  us  know  and  mourn  that  we  cannot  do  it, 
and  let  us  be  sure  that  the  spirit  is  willing,  even  if  the  flesh 
be  weak.  Let  all  sleepiness  be  put  away  in  the  presence  of 
the  ever-wakeful  Jehovah,  before  whose  eyes  all  things  are 
naked  and  open.  He  never  slumbereth  nor  sleepeth,  so  as 
to  make  a  pause  in  his  mercy  to  us  :  let  not  our  slumbering 
spirits  cnuse  an  omission  of  our  grateful  song. 

We  need  that  we  should  be  awake  in  praise,  that  our 
whole  hearts  may  he  thoroughly  warm  in  the  exercise.  Under 
Christ  and  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  acceptableness 
of  our  praise  depends  very  much  upon  the  warmth  of  it. 
As  cold  prayers  virtually  ask  God  to  deny  them,  so  cold 
praises  ask  God  to  reject  them.  Cold  praises  are  a  sort  of 
semi-blasphemy:  they  do,  as  it  were,  say,  "Thou  art  not 
^oTtLy  to  be  ardently  praised.  O  God,  we  bring  thee  these 
poor  thanksgivings :  they  are  good  enougli  for  thee.^'  Sure- 
ly if  we  treated  our  heavenly  Father  as  we  should,  eveiy 
sacred  passion  would  glow  in  our  hearts  like  a  furnace  :  our 


THE  ALARUM.  347 

whole  heart  would  catch  fire,  and  as  Elijah  went  np  to 
heaven  with  horses  of  fire  and  chariots  of  fire,  so,  too,  our 
soul,  as  we  thought  upon  the  goodness  and  the  graciousness 
oi  God,  would  ascend  to  heaven  in  vehement  joy  of  adora- 
ti  3n.  Our  praises  would  not  be  like  the  incense  in  the  cen- 
sor, sweet  but  cold  ;  but  coals  of  fire  would  be  put  in  with 
the  incense,  and  then,  like  a  holy  cloud  of  smoke,  our  grat- 
itude would  ascend  to  heaven.  Mark  with  what  exhilara- 
tion the  psalmist  rendered  praise  unto  God,  and  imitate  him 
therein.  See  him  dancing  before  the  ark,  and  hear  .him  cry 
aloud,  "  Sing  praises  to  God,  sing  praises  :  sing  praises  unto 
our  King,  sing  praises." 

Brethren,  we  have  need  to  wake  up  our  souls  in  praise, 
or  else  we  shall  at  times  fail  altogether  in  the  duty.  Only  the 
wakeful  are  praiseful.  Sleeping  birds  sing  not.  The  very 
best  praises  God  receives  from  earth  are  from  his  troubled 
saints  ;  but  then  they  are  awake ;  the  strokes  of  the  rod  have 
aroused  them.  When  the  three  holy  children  sung  in  the 
fire,  their  song  was  sweet  indeed ;  yet  had  they  not  been 
thoroughly  in  earnest,  they  had  poured  forth  no  holy  hymn. 
When  martyrs  have  magnified  God  standing  on  the  burn- 
ing fagot,  they  have  given  God  better  praise  than  even  the 
angels  can.  It  was  the  old  fable,  that  the  nightingale  was 
made  to  sing  by  the  thorn  that  pricked  her  breast:  and 
many  a  child  of  God  has  poured  forth  his  sweetest  music 
when  the  thorn  of  affliction  has  pierced  his  heart.  Wake  up 
your  souls — you  that  are  desponding,  you  that  are  depressed, 
you  that  have  a  dead  child  at  home,  you  that  are  expecting 
soon  to  go  to  the  grave  with  those  you  love,  you  that  have 
been  losing  your  property,  you  that  are  pinched  with  pov- 
erty— ^wake  up  your  souls  to  praise  God  still,  for  unless  well 
awake  you  will  forget  to  extol  him.  Remember  what  Job 
did.  When  he  sat  on  the  dunghill,  scraping  himself  with 
a  bit  of  broken  pot,  yet  he  praised  God,  and  said,  "  The 
Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken  away,  blessed  be  the 
name  of  the  Lord."    It  was  grand  of  thee,  O  patriarch  of 


848  THE  ALABT3M. 

Uzy  U>  be  able  thus  to  extol  thy  Lord  :  then  was  thy  soul 
fully  awake.  Beloved  friends,  may  our  inmost  souls  be  sc 
energetic  with  the  power  of  grace  that  we  may  spontane- 
ously and  earnestly  bless  the  Lord  at  all  times  and  under 
all  circumstances. 

Do  you  belies  e,  my  brethren,  that  amongst  all  the  throng 
of  those  who  see  Jehovah  face  to  face,  there  is  one  dull,  cold, 
careless  worshipper?  Look  through  the  seraphim  and  cher- 
ubim :  they  are  all  flaming  ones,  burning  with  intense  de- 
sire and  fervent  adoration.  Look  through  the  hosts  of  angels : 
they  are  all  his  ministers  that  do  his  pleasure,  and  bless 
him  while  they  do  it.  Search  through  all  those  sanctified 
and  glorified  bands  of  spiiits,  and  you  shall  not  find  one  with 
half-closed  eye  wearily  praising  his  Maker.  Heaven  con- 
sists in  joyful  praise.  Look  at  the  very  birds  on  earth,  how 
they  shame  us !  Dear  little  creatures,  if  you  watch  them 
when  they  are  singing,  you  will  sometimes  wonder  how  so 
much  sound  can  come  out  of  such  diminutive  bodies.  How 
they  throw  their  whole  selves  into  the  music,  and  seem  to 
melt  themselves  away  in  song  !  How  the  wing  vibrates, 
the  throat  pulsates,  and  every  part  of  their  body  rejoices  to 
assist  the  strain  !  This  is  the  way  in  which  we  ought  to 
praise  God.  If  birds  that  are  sold  at  three  for  two  farthingg 
yet  render  God  such  praise,  how  much  more  heartily  ough< 
we  to  sing  before  him  ?  Let  it  be  a  resolution  with  us  at 
this  hour  that  we  will  praise  God  more;  that  we  will  sing 
to  him  more  at  home,  about  our  business,  and  in  all  proper 
places  ;  and  that  whenever  we  do  sing  we  will  do  it  heartily, 
waking  up  our  tongue  and  all  the  powers  of  our  mind  and 
bod 7  to  bless  and  praise  the  name  of  God. 

IL  Now,  secondly,  we  sl)all  notice  that  wakeput.t^ess  ts 

iw  GKEAT  NEED   IN   THE    ENTIRE   SPIRITUAL  LIFE.      I   belie TB 

it  to  be  one  of  the  great  wants  of  the  church  now.  I  quos- 
iion  w^hether  most  of  us  are  awake  spiritually.  I  question 
whether  I  am.     I  wish  to  be  awakened  far  more  to  a  sensi* 


THE  ALARUM.  849 

bility  of  the  power  of  the  world  to  come,  and  a  tenderue^ 
in  regard  to  spiritual  truth.  Slumber  is  so  natural  to  us. 
"  Well,"  says  one,  "  but  we  talk  about  the  things  of  God." 
Yes,  but  people  talk  when  they  are  asleej),  and  a  good  deal 
of  Christian  conversation  is  very  much  like  the  talk  of 
slcH^pers.  There  is  not  the  force  in  it — the  life  in  itjthat 
there  would  be  in  conversation  if  we  were  really  awakened 
to  feel  the  power  of  eternal  verities.  "  Yet,"  says  one,  "  I 
hope  we  act  consistently."  I  trust  you  do,  but  there  are 
many  people  who  walk  in  their  sleep,  and,  alas  !  I  know  some 
Christian  professors  who  appear  to  be  trying  very  hazard- 
ous feats  of  sleep-walking  just  now.  Some  somnambulists 
have  been  able  to  walk  on  places  where,  had  they  been 
awake,  they  never  would  have  been  able  to  endure  the 
dizzy  height ;  and  I  see  some  Christians,  if  indeed  they  be 
Christians,  running  awful  risks  which  I  think  they  would 
never  venture  upon  unless  they  had  fallen  into  the  deep 
sleep  of  carnal  security.  Speak  of  a  man  slumbering  at 
the  mast-head,  it  is  nothing  to  a  professor  of  religion  at 
ease  while  covetousness  is  his  master,  or  worldly  company 
his  delight.  If  professors  were  awake,  they  would  see  their 
danger,  and  avoid  sinful  amusements  and  ungodly  associa- 
tions, as  men  fly  from  fierce  tigers  or  deadly  cobras. 
"Well,  but  we  are  doing  much  good  and  useful  work," 
Bays  one;  *' teaching  in  Sabbath-schools,  distributing  re- 
ligious tracts,  or  laboring  in  some  other  form  of  service ; 
we  are  spending  our  time  in  commendable  engagements." 
I  am  glad  to  hear  it  ;  but  people  can  do  a  great  deal  in 
their  sleep.  We  have  heard  many  strange  instances  of 
how  habit  at  last  has  enabled  persons  to  pursue  their  call- 
ings, to  answer  signals,  and  keep  up  all  the  appearance 
of  industry,  and  yet  they  have  been  at  the  time  asleep. 
Oh,  it  is  a  very  shocking  thing  that  so  many  of  our  churches 
in  England  are  in  a  deep  sleep!  Dissenting  churches  I 
know  best  about,  and  there  are  many  where  the  minister 
preaches  in  his  sleep,  where  the  people  sing  in  their  sleeps 


850  THE  ALABUM. 

where  prayer  is  offered  in  sleep,  and  even  the  commpnion  k 
celebrated  aniid  a  profound  spiritual  slumber.     Have  yon 
never  been  at  a  prayer-meeting  where  half,  if  not  all,  both 
of  those  who  prayed  vocally  and  those  who  listened,  were 
in  a  lethargy  as  rigid  as  death  ?    Talk  of  sleeping  women 
who  have  been  in  a  swoon  by  the  month  together,  the  won- 
der may  be  a  lying  one  in  the  natural  world,  but  in  the 
spiritual  world  it  is  as  common  as  daisies  in  the  meadows. 
Adam  slept  soundly  when  the  taking  away  of  his  rib  did 
not  wake  him,  but  what  shall  we  say  of  those  who  startle 
not  though  they  are  losing  all  the  strength  and  glory  of 
their  souls  ?     Alas !   for  some  congregations,  it  is  long 
since  they  had  a  revival,  they  have  lost  the  very  idea  of 
vigorous  piety  and  vital  energy.     All  the  week  round  they 
are  all  asleep,  and  if  a  real,  earnest,  living,  stirring  sermon 
were  preached  among  them,  it  would  be  almost  as  if  the 
King  of  Prussia's  Krupp  guns  had  dropped  a  live  shell  into 
their  midst.     I  wish  a  spiritual  live  shell  could  fall   into 
some  congregations,  and  burst  among  them,  killing  their 
conventionality,  and  wounding  their  self-satisfaction  with 
a  deadly  wound.      Men  may  attend  to  outward  worship 
with  unimpeachable  decorum  and  correctness,  and  yet  there 
may  be  no  wakefulness  in  it,  and  consequently  no  accept- 
ableness  with  God  Most  High. 

Come,  brethren  and  sisters,  we  must  wake  up,  even  if 
we  have  been  asleep  ourselves,  and  we  must  do  so  because 
we  are  in  an  enemy^s  country  /  it  will  not  do  to  sleep  here. 
This  side  of'  heaven  we  are  in  every  place  and  at  all  hours 
surrounded  by  foes.  What  did  the  Master  say  ?  "  What 
I  say  unto  you  I  say  unto  all.  Watch  !  "  Be  like  sentries 
at  your  post,  for  otherwise  the  enemy  will  soon  betray  yon. 
Will  you  not  grieve  the  Iloly  Spirit  if  you  are  lethargic? 
Will  you  not  dishonor  your  Master  if  you  fall  asleep? 
Remember,  also,  that  the  devil  seeks  your  destruction,  and 
can  never  do  you  so  much  mischief  awake  as  he  can  if  he 
finds  you  sleeping.     Let  the  growling  of  the  old  lion  aroasa 


THE  ALARUM.  351 

fOiL  If  nothing  else  will  bestir  you,  remember  the  fiery 
darts  of  the  wicked  one.  Saul  would  not  have  lain  so 
quiet  if  he  had  known  that  Abishai  was  holding  the  spear 
over  him,  and  longing  to  pin  him  to  the  earth  :  yet  this  is  the 
condition  of  professors  who  are  given  to  slumber.  Samson 
would  have  scarcely  slept  on  Delilah's  lap  if  he  had, fore- 
seen that  his  hair  would  be  cut,  and  his  eyes  put  out  by 
the  Philistines,  Up,  then,  ye  drowsy  professors,  for  the 
Philistines  are  upon  you  ! 

Moreover,  brethren,  slumber  impoverishes  us.  The  slug- 
gard, and  the  thistle  and  thorn,  always  go  together,  and 
rags  and  poverty  follow  close  behind.  You  may  miss  by 
your  sleep  great  spiritual  profit.  You  cannot  expect  sleepy 
Christians  to  grow  in  grace.  They  will  miss  many  in- 
structive things  in  God's  word,  many  precious  promises  meant 
only  for  the  wakeful.  They  will  lose  high  enjoyments  and 
spiritual  banquetings,  for  the  king's  entertainments  are  not 
for  those  who  fold  their  arms,  and  toss  upon  the  bed  of 
indolence.  Wealth  lies  in  the  field  of  the  wakeful,  but  the 
lover  of  ease  shall  have  want  come  upon  him  as  an  armed 
man.  I  blow  the  trumpet  in  Zion,  and  sound  an  alarm  in 
God's  holy  mountain,  for  it  is  high  time  to  awake  out  of 
sleep. 

Awaken  too,  my  brother,  for  you  are  losing  opportvr 
nities  for  usefulness.  While  you  sleep  men  are  dying. 
See  how  the  cemeteries  are  becoming  crowded,  how  the 
area  of  them  has  to  be  enlarged.  Day  by  day  you  see 
wending  through  the  streets  the  funeral  procession  :  men 
gone  beyond  the  reach  of  your  instructions  and  your  warn- 
ings are  carried  to  their  long  homes.  Awake  then,  awake, 
for  death  is  busy  everywhere.  Meanwhile,  those  who  ilc 
not  die  before  you,  may  be  removed  beyond  the  sphere  of 
your  usefulness ;  they  go  at  least  where  you  cannot  read*, 
them,  where,  perhaps,  no  one  ever  will,  and  their  blood 
may  lie  upon  your  head,  and  that  forever.  Awake,  for 
perhaps  while  you  are  asleep  another  1:  eart  that  is  now  ao- 


852  THE  ALARUM. 

cessiblc  to  the  gospel  may  become  finally  hardened.  Con- 
science will  soon  become  seared,  and  then  there  is  nothing 
for  zeal  and  earnestness  to  work  upon.  It  will  be  too  late 
for  you  to  put  the  seal  upon  the  wax  when  once  it  is  cool. 
Quick,  sir  ;  while  the  wax  is  soft  put  the  seal  down  I  How 
many  opportunities  for  good  we  all  miss  !  But  those  who 
are  asleej)  lose  all  their  opportunities,  and  they  will  be  sure- 
ly required  of  them  when  the  Master  comes. 

Aw^ake  !  I  pray  you,  because  you  loiU  insensibly  lose 
the  power  ^  the  joy  of  your  spiritual  life.  Communion  with 
God  will  become  more  and  more  scarce  with  you  as  you  be- 
come more  sleepy.  Awake,  lest  you  backslide,  lest  you  fall 
by  little  and  little  ;  lest  after  all  you  become  apostate,  and 
prove  yourself  not  to  be  a  child  of  God.  Awake,  for  your 
power  with  others  will  certainly  depart  from  you  as  your 
wakefulness  dej)arts.  A  sleepy  preacher  never  wins  the 
souls  of  men.  A  dull,  formal  servant  of  God  is  of  little  or 
no  use  in  the  church  of  God.  I  think  I  said  years  ago, "  Give 
me  half  a  dozen  thorough  red-hot  Christians,  and  I  will  do 
more,  by  God's  grace,  with  them,  than  with  half  a  dozen 
hundred  of  ordinary  professors."  I  am  sure  it  is  so.  Crowds 
ol  professors  are  past  all  cure.  I  would  as  soon  hunt  with 
dead  dogs,  as  try  to  work  with  them.  They  cannot  be  train- 
ed into  heroes :  they  are  dolts  both  by  nature  and  by  prac- 
tice :  much  slothfulness  has  drained  out  their  soul's  life. 
The  most  you  can  hope  for  them  is  that  they  will  remain  de- 
cently Christianized,  so  as  not  altogether  to  disgrace  us. 
But,  oh, for  thoroughly  wide-awake  men,  men  who  feel  the 
life  of  God  in  their  souls,  and  are,  therefore,  more  than  or- 
dinarily earnest.  Band  together  half  a  dozen  such,  and  the 
Holy  Spirit  being  with  them,  they  will  make  all  London  feel 
their  presence  before  long.  Oh, may  God  awaken  all  of  aSj 
for  our  spiritual  life  absolutely  requires  it. 

in.  Thirdly,  I  am  going  to  mention  cebtain  ways  OF 
KBJJPING  youBSBLVES  AWAKE.   "  How  cau  I  be  kept  awake  ?  ^ 


THE  ALARUM.  35g 

Bay&  one.  Answer,  first,  make  it  a  matter  ofpray^jr  with  the 
Lord  to  awaken  you.  No  one  can  give  you  spiritual  power 
and  watchfulness  but  the  Spirit  of  God.  "  All  my  fresh 
springs  are  in  thee."  Where  life  first  comes  from,  there 
more  life  must  be  obtained.  Christ  has  come  that  we  mny 
have  life,  and  that  we  may  have  it  more  abundantly.  lie 
"whc  first  called  us  from  the  dead  must  also  arouse  us  from 
among  the  slumbering.  He  who  bi ought  us  from  the  grave 
of  o  ir  depi'avity  must  bring  us  from  the  couch  of  our  indo- 
lence. Pray  about  the  matter ;  make  it  a  point  with  God : 
a«»k  him  to  arouse  you.  On  your  knees  is  the  posture  in  which 
to  conquer  sloth. 

Next,  m^eans  are  to  he  used.  We  are  not  to  leave  the 
matter  with  God,  and  think  there  is  nothing  to  be  done  by 
ourselves.  Act  towards  yourselves  about  your  spiritual 
wakefulness  as  vou  would  with  natural  wakefulness.  Set 
your  inventive  faculties  to  work,  and  devise  means  for  chas- 
ing away  the  sleep  dragon.  What  would  you  do  if  you  re- 
quired to  be  awakened  early  ?  Perhaps  you  would  set  an 
alarum ;  a  good  thing,  no  doubt.  Take  care  you  set  a  spirit- 
ual alarum.  Every  Christian  ought  to  keep  one,  and  it 
should  be  so  well  set  as  to  keep  exact  time,  and  so  power- 
ful as  to  arouse  the  most  slumbering.  A  tender  conscience, 
quick  as  the  apple  of  the  eye,  is  a  precious  preservative 
against  sinful  sleep  ;  but  it  must  never  be  tampered  with, 
or  its  usefulness  will  soon  end.  When  once  the  hour  has 
'•ome,  down  runs  the  alarum,  the  man  starts  up  all  at  once, 
and  says,  "It  is  time  to  rise" ;  so  should  my  conscience  be 
BO  well  regulated,  that  when  a  temptation  is  near,  or  a  sin- 
ner is  near  me  whom  I  ought  to  warn,  my  soul  should  at 
once  take  the  alarm,  and  say, "  Here  is  work  to  do — a  sin  to 
be  conquered,  or  a  soul  to  be  instructed  :  now,  therefore, 
perform  the  doing  of  it  with  all  thy  might !  I  hear  the  alarum, 
and  I  must  bestir  myself!"  May  we  always  maintain 
and  retain  such  a  special  wakefulness  that  we  may  be  at  our 
post  of  duty  or  in  our  place  of  conflict  with  a  punctuality 


t. 


854  THE  ALARUM. 

which  none  can  gainsay.    Oh  for  the  alamm  of  a  tender  ooo- 

science ! 

Many  of  our  friends  who  have  to  be  up  early  in  the 
Dooming  ask  the  policeman  to  call  them  at  the  appoint^ 
hoar.     I  may  not  compare  the  Christian  minister  with  a  po- 
J  iceman  in  some  respects ;  but  yet  he  is  one  of  God'b  officerB, 
and  it  is  part  of  his  business  to  stir  up  drowsy  professors. 
It  is  well  to  attend  an  earnest  gospel  ministry,  where  the 
minister's  voice,  under  God's  blessing,  will  be  likely  to  wake 
you  up.     Faithful  preachers  are  among  God's  best  gifts. 
Cherish  them,  and  be  obedient  to  their  admonitions.     I  have 
known  persons  become  offended  when  a  minister  is  "  too  per- 
sonal ; "  but  wise  men  always  prize  a  ministry  in  proportion 
as  it  is  personal  to  themselves.     He  who  never  tells  me  of 
my  faults,  nor  makes  me  feel  uneasy,  is  not  likely  to  be  the 
means  of  good  to  my  soul.     What  is  the  use  of  a  dog  t^t 
never  barks  ?   Why  have  a  doctor,  and  grow  angry  with  him 
.if  he  points  out  the  source  of  your  disease  ?    Did  God  send 
us,  as  his  messengers,  to  pander  to  your  taste  or  flatter  your 
vanity  ?    We  seek  not  your  approval  if  it  be  not  founded 
on  right.     I  have  often  felt  pleased  when  I  have  heard  ipeo- 
ple  confess,  after  their  conversion,  "I  came  to  the  Taberna- 
cle, and  at  the  first  I  could  not  endure  the  preaching.    I  hated 
the  preacher,  and  raged  at  his  doctrine ;  but  I  could  not 
help  coming  again."     Just  so.     Conscience  makes  men  re- 
spect the  gospel,  even  when  their  depravity  makes  t^om 
loathe  it.     They  are  held  fast  by  the  cords  which  they  fain 
would  cast  from  them.     May  it  often  be  so,  O  my  unregen- 
erate    hearers;  that  while  my  plain  dealing  excites  your 
anger,  it  may  nevertheless  have  a  power  over  you  ;  and  may 
every  raan  and  woman  here,  whether  saved  or  unsaved,  feel 
tliat  tlie  preaching  is  the  truth  of  God  to  his  or  her  soul*, 
anrl,  whether  liked  or  not  liked,  may  it  become  the  porma« 
nent  means  of  arousing  from  sleep,  and  ultimately  bringing 
to  Christ  every  one  of  you  to  whom  these  words  shall  come. 
Be  sure  and  attend  an  arousing  ministry,  and  pray  God  to 


tfifi  ALAHttM;  355 

fiiake  the  ministry  which  you  now  listen  to  more  and  more 
an  arousing  ministry  to  your  own  soul.  Pray  lor  the  preach 
er,  for  he  is  in  the  same  danger  as  yourselves,  for  he  too  is 
compassed  with  infirmity.  The  minister  soon  goes  to  sleep 
unless  God  wakens  him  ;  and  what  is  more  sad  than  to  see 
the  professed  messenger  of  God  become  a  traitor  both  to 
his  Master  and  to  men's  souls  by  a  lack  of  zealous  affec- 
tion ?  It  is  ill  for  the  sheep  if  the  shepherd  himself  be 
asleep.  Woe  to  the  camp  where  the  sentry  is  gi  v  en  to 
slumber!  May  .God  deliver  our  country  from  being  over- 
run with  preachers  whose  souls  are  insensible  concern- 
ing their  grand  work,  and  who  love  the  bread  of  their 
office  better  than  the  glory  of  God  or  the  good  of  their 
hearers. 

I  have  known  some  persons  adopt  a  plan  for  awaking 
in  the  morning  which  I  can  recommend  spiritually  at  any 
rate.  They  have  drawn  up  the  blinds  in  the  direction  of 
the  morning  sun,  that  the  sun  might  shine  on  their  face 
and  wake  them.  I  know  of  no  better  way  of  waking  for 
your  soul) than  letting  the  light,  and  the  life,  and  the  love 
of  God  shine  full  into  your  face.  When  the  Sun  of  Right- 
eousness arises  he  brings  healing  beneath  his  wings,  and  he 
brings  awakening  too.  A  man  cannot  think  much  of  Christ, 
and  love  Christ  much,  and  walk  much  in  Christ's  fellowship, 
and  yet  be  asleep.  The  two  who  went  to  Emmaus  in  Ira- 
manutd's  company,  were  their  hearts  cold  ?  Nay,  do  not. 
think  so.  "Did  not  our  heart  burn  within  us  ?"  Yes,  and 
your  hearts  will  burn  too,  and  your  whole  spiritual  system 
will  flame  and  glow  if  you  walk  in  the  company  of  Jesus. 
I  can  recommend  constant  fellowship  with  God  as  one  of 
the  best  remedies  for  spiritual  sloth,  the  surest  provocative 
of  holy  zeal. 

Many  times  people  are  awakened  in  the  morning  by  tht 
noise  of  the  street  in  which  they  live.  **1  cannot  sleep  af- 
ter such  an  hour,"  says  one,  "for  I  hear  the  tramp  of  tliose 
who  arc  going  into  the  city,  and  the  grind  of  the  street 


856  'THE  ALARUM. 

traffic."  At  a  certain  time  you  hear  the  hammer  of  ili6 
blacksmith,  the  scream  of  an  engine,  or  the  heaving  of  ma- 
chinery, and  after  that  sleep  is  gone.  The  activities  of  the 
world  ought  to  awaken  Christians.  Are  worldlings  so  act- 
ive ?  How  active  ought  we  to  be !  Do  they  labor  and 
spend  theii  sweat  for  earthly  wages  ?  How  much  more  ought 
I  to  put  forth  my  entire  strength  to  serve  so  good  a  Master, 
whose  reward  of  grace  is  everlasting  bliss  ?  The  world  is 
all  astir  to-day ;  let  the  church  be  all  awake  too. 

We  ought  to  be  stimulated  to  supreme  efforts  by  the  ac- 
tivity of  our  fellow  Christians.  I  find  it  does  me  much  ser- 
vice to  read  the  biographies  of  eminent  servants  of  Christ, 
such  as  martyrs,  missionaries,  and  reformers.  I  rise  from 
reading  their  memorials  feeling  ashamed  to  be  of  so  dwarf- 
ish a  stature  compared  vnth  these  spiritual  giants.  What 
a  humbling  effect  such  a  reflection  ought  to  have  on  the  do- 
nothings  who  swarm  in  the  churches  !  but  alas  !  these  are 
not  soon  mov^d  to  judge  themselves.  With  this  one  word 
we  leave  them :  think  of  what  some  are  doing,  and  be  ashamed 
that  you  are  doing  so  little  in  proportion  to  what  they  ac- 
complish. 

There  are  many  ways  of  waking,  but  here  is  one,  with 
which  I  will  close  my  observations  on  this  point.  Hear  the 
trumpet  of  the  second  coming.  "  Behold,  the  bridegroom 
Cometh  ;  go  ye  out  to  meet  him,"  was  the  cry  that  awaken- 
ed the  virgins  when  they  all  slumbered  and  slept :  may  it 
have  the  like  arousing  power  at  this  moment.  We  know 
not  when  Christ  will  come,  nor  is  it  for  us  to  utter  prophe- 
cies about  it :  the  times  and  seasons  are  hidden  from  us. 
"Of  that  day  and  that  hour  knoweth  no  man."  Whether 
it  will  be  before  tlie  Millennium,  or  after  the  Millennium,  let 
those  ju  Jge  who  can.  I  have  no  judgment  upon  it.  I  think, 
as  you  carefully  read  the  Scriptures,  you  will  feel  more  and 
more  convinced  that  only  this  is  clearly  and  certainly  re- 
vealed— that  the  Lord  will  personally  come  in  such  an  hour 
as  we  look  not  for  him.     Let  that  awaken  us ;  let  it  keep  us 


THE  At. AHUM.  857 

ri-ways  watchful,  with  loins^irt  and  lamps  trimmed,  proving 
our  faithful  love  to  our  blessed  Master. 

There  are,  it  is  clear,  very  many  ways  by  which  Chris- 
tians may  be  awakened.  God  grant  they  may  be  effective 
to  each  and  all.  I  think  it  was  Sydney  Smith  who  was  once 
preaching  a  sermon  about  sleeping  in  church,  and  when  ho 
lad  done,  he  said,  "Now,  what  good  have  I  done?  All 
those  who  sleep  have  been  asleep  through  my  sermon,  and 
only  those  who  are  wakeful  have  heard  me,  and  they  did  not 
need  my  rebukes  and  advice."  I  often  feel  that  this  is  very 
much  the  preacher's  case.  Earnest  people,  when  the  congre- 
gation is  exhorted  to  earnestness,  take  it  home  to  themselves  ; 
but  those  persons  who  do  nothing,  and  are  most  indolent, 
are  the  very  ones  who  say,  "  I  do  not  see  the  need  of  it ;  I 
do  not  want  to  be  disturbed."  Of  course  not  I  It  is  not 
only  the  mark  of  the  sluggard  to  sleep,  but  it  is  another 
characteristic  of  him  that  he  is  wroth  with  those  who  would 
compel  him  to  rise.  "  A  little  more  sleep,"  says  he,  "  a  lit- 
tle more  slumber ; "  he  turns  his  heavy  head  upon  the  pil- 
low once  again,  and  wishes  no  blessings  upon  those  who 
knock  at  his  door  so  heavily.  You  sleepy  professors  are  like- 
ly to  do  the  same,  but  I  will  not  refrain  from  knocking  till 
you  refrain  from  dozing.  I  pray  God  that  there  may  be 
very  few  in  this  church  of  the  incorrigible  order,  whose  life 
is  one  long  dream,  a  dream  of  self-aggrandizement,  mean- 
ness, and  littleness.  May  you  and  I,  and  all  of  us,  be  thor- 
oughly earnest  in  the  service  of  our  Master,  and  if  we  can- 
not arouse  others  by  our  precept,  at  least  let  us  not  fail  to 
try  the  force  of  our  example. 

rV*.  I  must  close  with  a  word  upon  the  fourth  point| 
which  is  this — ^the  great  and  urgent  need  that  the  un- 
converted SINNER  SHOULD  AWAKE.      HithcitO   I  liaVC   SpO« 

ken  to  the  converted  man  :  now  let  me  address  myself  to  the 
ungodly,  and  may  the  voice  which  shall  call  the  dead  to 
ja^ment  now  awaken  him.     You,  you  unconverted  manif 


358  THE  ALAHUM. 

are  asleep ;  a  Jeep  and  horrible  sleep  holds  yoU  fast.  If  it 
were  not  so,  you  would  perceive  your  danger,  and  you  would 
be  alarmed.  You  have  broken  God's  law ;  the  fact  is  cer- 
tain and  solemn,  though  you  treat  it  lightly.  Punishment 
must  follow  every  breach  of  that  law,  for  God  will  not  be 
mocked,  nor  suffei  his  government  to  be  treated  with  con- 
tempt.  For  every  transgression  there  is  an  appointed  rec- 
ompense of  reward.  The  retribution  which  is  your  lawful 
due  will  not  long  be  withheld  :  it  is  on  its  road  towards  you. 
The  feet  of  justice  are  shod  with  wool :  you  hear  not  its  com- 
ing, but  it  is  as  sure  as  it  is  silent.  Its  steps  are  swift,  and 
its  stroke  overwhelming.  Awaken,  O  man,  and  listen  to 
this  text :  "  God  is  angry  with  the  wicked  every  day.  If 
he  turn  not,  he  will  whet  his  sword ;  he  hath  bent  his  bow, 
and  made  it  ready."  No  peril  of  plague,  battle,  shipwreck, 
or  poison,  can  equal  the  hazard  of  an  unpardoned  soul.  Be- 
ware, ye  that  forget  God,  for  his  terrors  are  past  conception, 
end  his  wrath  burneth  as  an  oven. 

If  you  were  awakened,  O  sin-stricken  transgressor,  yon 
would  also  perceive  that  there  is  a  remedy  for  your  disease, 
a  rescue  from  your  present  danger.  "God  was  in  Christ, 
reconciling  the  world  unto  himself,  not  imputing  their  tres- 
passes unto  them ; "  and,  "  Whosoever  believeth  in  Jesus 
Christ  hath  everlasting  life."  Forgiveness  of  sin  is  guaran- 
teed to  every  one  that  rests  in  the  work  of  Jesus,  and  all 
other  necessary  blessings  are  secured  to  him.  If  thou  wert 
awake,  thou  wouldst  not  remain  an  unconverted  sinner 
another  hour,  but  thou  wouldst  turn  unto  God  with  full  pur- 
pose of  heart.  If  God  would  awaken  thee,  thou  wouldst 
tremble  at  the  jaws  of  hell  which  are  open  to  receive  thee; 
thou  wouldst  turn  to  Christ,  and  say,  "Jesus,  save  me! 
Save  me  now  !"  You  are  asleep,  sinner — you  are  asleep,  or 
you  would  not  take  matters  so  coolly.  I  am  afraid  for  you, 
and  bowed  down  with  amazement  and  dread.  The  mercy  is 
that  you  may  be  awakened:  you  are  not  yet  among  the 
slain  that  go  down  into  the  pit.    Oh  that  that  almighty  grace 


THEl  ALABITM.  359 

would  awaken  you  at  this  present  moment,  ere  your  doom  is 
sealed  and  your  damnation  executed  !  Here  offer  I  my  fer- 
vent prayers  for  you,  believing  that  he  to  whom  I  pray  is 
able  to  bring  to  holy  sensil)ility  the  most  stolid  of  maukind. 
Strange  ways  God  has  of  awakening  his  elect  ones  frcin 
tlieir  deadly  slumbers:  Awake  them  he  will,  and  lie  \\\\l 
shake  heaven  and  earth  sooner  than  let  any  one  of  them  perish 
in  unfeeling  security.  He  will  strike  them  down  as  he  did 
Paul,  or  send  an  earthquake  to  shake  them,  as  he  did  to  the 
gaoler  at  Philippi ;  in  his  own  way  and  time  he  will  make 
them  come  to  themselves  and  then  to  Christ.  Remember  the 
story  of  Augustine.  To  the  grief  of  his  dear  mother,  Moni- 
ca, he  had  been  leading  a  wicked  life ;  but  God's  time  had 
come,  and  as  Augustine  walked  in  the  garden  he  heard  a  little 
child  say,  "  Take  !  Read  !  Take !  Read  I "  This  induced 
him  to  take  the  Bible  and  read  it.  He  no  sooner  read, 
than  a  passage  came  before  his  eyes  which  awakened  him, 
and  he  sought  a  Saviour,  and  found  him.  Perhaps  it  will  be 
a  death  in  your  house  that  will  wake  you — sad  means,  but 
often  most  effectual.  A  mother's  death-bed  has  been  a  soul- 
saving  sermon  to  many  a  family.  Some  sleepers  need  a 
thunderclap  to  arouse  them.  Pray,  you  dear  people  of  God 
that  are  awake,  that  the  sinner  may  be  awakened,  for  there 
is  this  awful  danger — that  he  may  sleep  himself  into  hell. 
Spiritual  sleep  deepens,  the  slumberer  becomes  more  heavy 
still,  the  stupor  more  dense,  till  the  conscience  grows  seared, 
and  the  soul  is  unimpressible  ;  the  flesh  is  turned  into  stone, 
the  heart  is  harder  than  steel.  It  may  be  that  some  of  those 
who  hear  these  words  of  warning  may  never  wake  to  think 
about  their  souls  till  in  hell  they  lift  up  their  eyes.  What 
an  awful  lifting  up  of  the  eyes  will  that  be  !  O  you  who  are 
now  peaceful  and  secure,  what  a  change  awaits  you  !  Hurled 
from  vainglorious  security  to  blank  despair  in  a  moment  I 
You  took  it  all  so  easily :  you  said,  "  Let  me  alone ;  do  not 
worry  me ;  there's  time  enough.  The  preacher  ought  not 
to  frighten  us  with  these  bugbears;  we  have  a  great  deal  else 


$60  THE  ALARUM. 

to  do  besides  listening  to  horrible  stories  of  hell  and  damnft> 
tion ; "  and  so  you  wrapped  it  up,  and  so  you  smoothed  it 
over,  but  the  end  thereof  who  shall  describe  ?  Have  you 
never  heard  of  the  Indian  in  his  boat  upon  one  of  the 
great  rivers  of  America  ?  Somehow  his  mooiings  had  broken 
and  his  canoe  was  in  the  power  of  the  current.  He  was  asleep, 
while  his  canoe  was  being  borne  rapidly  along  by  the  stream. 
He  was  sound  asleep,  and  yet  had  good  need  to  haVe  been 
awake,  for  there  was  a  tremendous  cataract  not  far  ahead. 
Persons  on  shore  saw  the  canoe — saw  that  there  was  a  man 
in  it  asleep ;  but  their  vigilance  was  of  no  use  to  the  sleeper  : 
it  needed  that  he  himself  should  be  aware  of  his  periL  The 
canoe  quickened  its  pace,  for  the  waters  of  the  river  grew 
more  rapid  as  they  approached  the  cataract ;  persons  on  shore 
began  to  cry  out,  and  raise  alarm  on  all  sides,  and  at  last 
the  Indian  was  aroused.  He  started  up,  and  began  to  use 
his  paddle,  but  his  strength  was  altogether  insufficient  for 
the  struggle  with  the  gigantic  force  of  the  waters  around  him. 
He  was  seen  to  spring  upright  in  the  boat  and  disappear — 
himself  and  the  boat — in  the  fall.  He  had  perished,  for  he 
woke  too  late  !  Some  persons  on  their  dying  beds  just  wake 
up  in  time  to  see  their  danger,  but  not  escape  from  it :  they 
are  carried  right  over  the  cataract  of  judgment  and  wrath. 
They  are  gone,  forever  gone,  where  mercy  is  succeeded  by 
justice,  and  hopeforbidden  to  enter.  Let  much  prayer  go  up 
from  believing  hearts  that  God  would  awaken  sinners  now, 
and  begin  with  those  who  come  to  the  place  of  worship,  and 
remain  at  ease  in  Zion.  Ask  for  the  arm  of  God  to  be  reveal- 
ed while  the  heavenly  message  is  delivered  ;  for  this  is  our 
message  :  "Awake  thou  that  sleepest,  and  arise  from  the  dead, 
and  Christ  shall  give  thee  light."  There  is  a  man  before  me 
now  asleep  in  his  sins,  whom  God  means  to  make  a  minister 
of  Christ :  he  knows  not  the  divine  purpose,  but  there  are 
lines  of  love  in  it  for  him.  Arise,  Q  slumberer,  for  Jesus  calls 
thee !  Awake,  thou  Saul  of  Tarsus,  thou  art  a  chosen  vessel 
unto  the  Lord !     Turn  thou  from  thy  sin:  seek  thou  thy  Sa« 


viour.  There  is  one  here  who  has  been  a  great  sinner  ;  but 
the  Lord  intends  to  wash  him  in  the  cleansing  fount,  and 
clothe  him  in  the  righteousness  of  Christ.  Come,  thou  guilty 
one,  awake !  for  mercy  waits  for  thee.  Tliere  is  a  poor 
weeping  woman  here  who  has  gone  far  into  sin  ;  but  Jesus 
Kays,  "  Neither  do  I  condemn  thee  :  go,  and  sin  no  more." 
Sister,  awake !  Come  and  receive  the  mercy  which  Jesus 
Christ  is  ready  to  bestow  upon  thee  1  God  give  thee  waking 
grace,  and  saving  grace. 

May  you  and  I,  beloved  brethren  in  Christ,  awake  to  the 
most  earnest  and  intense  fonn  of  life  in  Christ  and  life  for 
Christ.  At  once  let  us  bestir  cyirselves :  we  may  think  it 
early,  but  it  will  be  none  too  early ;  may  we  awake  now,  for 
Jefltis'  sake.  Amen. 
16 


86S  ^^B  WTTBEBIKO  WOfiK  OF 


SERMON  XXL 


TItE  WITHERING  WORK  OF  THE  HOLT  SPIRIT. 

^*  THE  VOICE  SAID,  CBT.  AND  HE  SAID.  WHAT  SHALL  I  CRT  f  ALL  FLESH  IS  6ftAS0, 
AKD  ALL  THE  GOODLINE88  THEREOF  18  A8  THE  FLOWER  OF  THE  FIELD  I  THE  OBASt 
WITHERETH,  THE  FLOWER  FADETH  :  BECAUSE  THE  SPIRIT  OF  THE  LORD  BLOWBTH 
ITPON  IT  :  SURELY  THE  PEOPLE  18  GRASS.  THE  GRASS  WITHERETH,  THE  FLOWEB 
FADETH  :  BUT  THE  WORD  OF  OUR  OOD  SHALL  STAND  FORBYER.''— Isaiah  xL  6-8. 

**  BEING  BORN  AGAIN,  NOT  OF  CORRUFTIBLB  SEED,  BUT  OF  INCORRUPTIBLE,  BT  THB 
WORD  OF  OOD,  WHICH  LIVETH  AND  ABIDETH  FORBYER.  FOR  ALL  FLESH  IS  At 
GRASS,  AND  ALL  THE  GLORT  OF  MAN  AS  THE  FLOWER  OF  THE  GRASS.  THE  GRASS 
WITHERETH,  AND  THE  FLOWER  THEREOF  FALLETH  AWAT  ;  BUT  THE  WORD  OF  TBI 

^  LORD  ENDURETH  FOREYER.  AND  THIS  IS  THB  WORD  WHICH  BT  THE  GOSPBL  U 
PREACHED  UNTO  TOU."— 1.  PetCT  1.  S3-25. 

The  passage  in  Isaiah  which  I  have  just  read  in  your 
hearini^  may  be  used  as  a  very  eloquent  description  of  our 
mortality,  and  if  a  sermon  should  be  preached  from  it  upon 
the  frailty  of  human  nature,  the  brevity  of  life,  and  the  cer- 
tainty of  death,  no  one  could  dispute  the  appropriateness  of 
the  text.  Yet  I  venture  to  question  whether  such  a  dis- 
.  course  would  strike  the  central  teaching  of  the  prophet. 
Something  more  than  the  decay  of  our  material  flesh  is  in- 
tended here ;  the  carnal  mind,  the  flesh  in  another  sense, 
was  intended  by  the  Holy  Ghost  when  he  bade  his  messen- 
ger proclaim  those  words.  It  does  not  seem  to  me  that  a 
mere  expression  of  the  mortality  of  our  race  was  need<id  in 
this  i)lace  by  the  context ;  it  would  hardly  keep  pace  with 
the  sublime  revelations  which  surround  it,  and  would  in 
gome  measure  be  a  digression  from  the  subject  in  hand.  The 
notion  that  we  are  simply  and  alone  reminded  of  our  mor* 
tality  does  not  square  wit\\  t\\c  Nev  Testament  exppsition 


THE  HOLY  SPmiT.  863 

6f  it  in  Peter,  which  I  have  also  placed  before  you  as  a 
text.  There  is  another  and  more  spiritual  meaning  here  be- 
sides and  beyond  that  which  would  be  contained  in  the 
great  and  very  obvious  truth,  that  all  of  us  must  die. 

Lo^k  at  the  chapter  in  Isaiah  with  care.  What  is  the 
subject  of  it  ?  It  is  the  divine  consolation  of  Zion.  Zion 
had  been  tossed  to  and  fro  with  conflicts ;  she  had  been 
smarting  under  the  result  of  sin.  The  Lord,  to  remove  her 
sorrow,  bids  his  prophets  announce  the  coming  of  the  long- 
expected  Deliverer,  the  end  and  accomplishment  of  all  her 
warfare  and  the  pardon  of  all  her  iniquity.  There  is  no 
doubt  that  this  is  the  theme  of  the  prophecy  ;  and  further, 
there  is  no  sort  of  question  about  the  next  point,  that  the 
prophet  goes  on  to  foretell  the  coming  of  John  the  Baptist 
as  the  harbinger  of  the  Messiah.  We  have  no  difficulty  in 
the  explanation  of  the  passage,  "  Prepare  ye  the  way  of  the 
Lord,  make  straight  in  the  desert  a  highway  for  our  God ; " 
for  the  New  Testament  again  and  again  refers  this  to  the 
Baptist  and  his  ministry.  The  object  of  the  coming  of  the 
Baptist  and  the  mission  of  the  Messiah,  whom  he  heralded, 
was  the  manifestation  of  divine  glory.  Observe  the  fifth 
verse :  **  The  glory  of  the  Lord  shall  be  revealed,  and  all 
flesh  shall  see  it  together :  for  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  hath 
,spoken  it."  Well,  what  next  ?  Was  it  needful  to  mention 
man's  mortality  in  this  connection  ?  We  think  not.  But 
there  is  much  more  appropriateness  in  the  succeeding  verses, 
if  we  see  their  deeper  meaning.  Do  they  not  mean  this  ? 
In  order  to  make  room  for  the  display  of  the  divine  glory 
in  Christ  Jesus  and  his  salvation,  there  would  come  a  with- 
ering of  all  the  glory  wherein  man  boasts  himself :  the  flesh 
should  be  seen  in  its  true  nature  as  corrupt  and  dying,  and 
the  grace  of  God  alone  should  be  exalted.  This  would  be 
seen  under  the  ministiy  of  John  the  Baptist  first,  and  should 
be  the  preparatory  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost  in  men's  hearts, 
in  all  time,  in  order  that  the  glory  of  the  Lord  should  be t^ 
vealed  and  human  pride  be  forever  conioxxudeOu 


S64  THE  WTTHERINa  WOBK  OF 

The  Spirit  blows  upon  the  flesh,  and  that  which  seemed 
vigorous  becomes  weak,  that  which  was  fair  to  look  upon  is 
smitten  with  decay ;  the  true  natore  of  the  flesh  is  thus  discov- 
ered, its  deceit  is  laid  bare,  its  power  is  destroyed,  and  there 
is  space  for  the  dispensation  of  the  ever-abiding  word,  and  for 
the  rule  of  the  Great  Shepherd,  whose  words  are  spirit  and 
life  Tliere  is  a  withering  wrought  by  the  Spirit  which  is 
Ihe  preparation  for  the  sowing  and  implanting  by  which  sal- 
vation  is  wrought. 

The  withering  before  the  sowing  was  very  marvellously 
fulfilled  in  the  preaching  of  John  the  Baptist.  Most  appro- 
priately he  carried  on  his  ministry  in  the  desert,  for  a  spir- 
itual desert  was  all  around  him ;  he  was  the  voice  of  one 
crying  in  the  wilderness.  It  was  not  his  work  to  plant,  but 
to  hew  down.  The  fleshy  religion  of  the  Jews  was  then  in 
its  prime.  Phariseeism  stalked  through  the  streets  in  allits 
pomp  ;  men  complacently  rested  in  outward  ceremonies 
only,  and  spiritual  religion  was  at  the  lowest  conceivable 
ebb.  Here  and  there  might  be  found  a  Simeon  and  an  Anna, 
but  for  the  most  part  men  knew  nothing  of  spiritual  religion, 
but  said  in  their  hearts  :  "  We  have  Abraham  to  our  father, 
and  this  is  enough. "  What  a  stir  he  made  when  he  called 
the  lordly  Pharisees  a  generation  of  vipers  I  How  he  shook 
the  nation  with  the  declaration,  "  Now  also  the  axe  is  laid 
unto  the  root  of  the  trees  I "  Stem  as  Elias,  his  work  was 
to  level  the  mountains,  and  lay  low  every  lofty  imagination. 
That  word,  "  Repent,"  was  as  a  scorching  wind  to  the  ver- 
dure of  self-righteousness,  a  killing  blast  for  the  confidence 
of  ceremonialism.  His  food  and  his  dress  called  for  fasting 
and  mourning.  The  outward  token  of  his  ministry  declared 
the  death  amid  which  he  preached,  as  he  buried  in  the  Wa- 
ters of  Jordan  those  who  came  to  him.  "  Ye  must  die  and 
be  buried,  even  as  he  who  is  to  come  will  save  by  death  and 
burial."  This  was  the  meaning  of  the  emblem  which  he  set 
before  the  crowd.  His  typical  act  was  as  thorough  in  its 
teaebiog  as  were  his  words ;  and  a&\i  \i\vdX^exe  not  enough,  ht 

\  —  -^^^ 


THE  HOLY  SPIRIT.  365 

warned  them  of  a  yet  more  searching  and  trying  baptism 
with  the  Holy  Ghost  and  with  lire,  and  of  the  coming  of  one 
whose  fan  was  in  his  hand,  thoroughly  to  purge  his  floor. 
The  Spirit  in  John  blew  as  the  rougli  north  wind,  searching 
and  witliering,  and  made  him  to  be  a  destroyer  of  the  "a  in 
gloryings  of  a  fleshly  religion,  that  the  spiritual  faith  might 
be  established. 

When  our  Lord  himself  actually  appeared,  he  came  into 
a  "w  ithered  land,  whose  glories  had  all  departed.  Old  Jesse's 
stem  was  bare,  and  our  Lord  was  the  branch  which  grew 
out  of  his  root.  The  sceptre  had  departed  from  Judah,  and 
the  lawgiver  from  between  his  feet,  when  Shiloh  came.  An 
alien  sat  on  David's  throne,  and  the  Roman  called  the  cov- 
enant-land his  own.  The  lamp  of  prophecy  burned  but  dimly, 
even  if  it  had  not  utterly  gone  out.  No  Isaiah  had  arisen 
of  late  to  console  them,  nor  even  a  Jeremiah  to  lament  their 
apostacy.  The  whole  economy  of  Judaism  was  as  a  worn- 
out  vesture ;  it  had  waxed  old,  and  was  ready  to  vanish  away. 
The  priesthood  was  disarranged.  Luke  tells  us  that  Annas 
and  Caiaphas  were  high  priests  that  year — two  in  a  year  or 
at  once,  a  strange  setting  aside  of  the  laws  of  Moses.  All 
the  dispensation  which  gathered  around  the  visible,  or  as 
Paul  calls  it,  the  "  worldly  "  sanctuary,  was  coming  to  a 
close ;  and  when  our  Lord  had  finished  his  work,  the  veil  of 
the  temple  was  rent  in  twain,  the  sacrifices  were  abolished, 
the  priesthood  of  Aaron  was  set  aside,  and  carnal  ordinances 
were  abrogated,  for  the  Spirit  revealed  spiritual  things. 
When  he  came  who  was  made  a  priest,  "  not  after  the  law  of 
a  carnal  commandment,  but  after  the  power  of  an  endless 
life,"  there  was  "  a  disannulling  of  the  commandment  going 
before  for  the  weakness  and  unprofitableness  thereofl" 

Such  are  the  facts  of  history ;  but  I  am  not  about  to 
dilate  upon  them  :  I  am  coming  to  voir  own  personal  his- 
tories— to  the  experience  of  every  child  of  God.  In  every 
one  of  us  it  must  be  fulfilled  that  all  that  is  of  the  flesh  in 
^s,  seeing  it  is  but  as  grass,  must  be  wxllaeTei^  axv^  \Xi^  ^i«TOft» 


866  THE  WITHERING  WOEK  OF 

liness  thereof  must  be  destroyed.  The  Spirit  of  God,  like 
the  wind,  must  pass  over  the  field  of  our  souls,  and  cause 
our  beauty  to  be  as  a  fading  flower.  He  must  so  convince 
us  of  sin,  and  so  reveal  ourselves  to  ourselves,  that  we  shall 
see  that  the  flesh  profiteth  nothing  ;  that  our  fallen  nature 
is  corruption  itself,  and  that  "they  who  are  in  the  flesh  can- 
not please  God."  There  must  be  brought  home  to  us  the 
sentence  of  death  upon  our  foimer  legal  and  carnal  life,  that 
the  incorruptible  seed  of  the  word  of  God,  implanted  by  the 
Holy  Ghost,  may  be  in  us,  and  abide  in  us  forever. 

The  subject  of  this  morning  is  the  withering  work  of  the 
Spirit  upon  the  souls  of  men,  and  when  we  have  spoken  upon 
it,  we  shall  conclude  with  a  few  words  upon  the  implanting 
work,  which  always  follows  where  this  withering  work  has 
been  performed. 

L  Turning  then  to  the  work  op  the  Sperit  in  cavsisq 

THE  GOODLINESS  OF  THE  FLESH  TO  FADE,  let  US,  first,  obssrve 

that  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  upon  the  soul  of  man  in  with- 
ering up  that  which  is  oi  the  ^eshj  is  veri/ unexpected.  You 
will  observe  in  our  text,  that  even  the  speaker  himself,  though 
doubtless  one  taught  of  God,  when  he  was  bidden  to  cry, 
said,  "  What  shall  I  cry  ?  "  Even  he  did  not  know  that  in 
order  to  the  comforting  of  God's  people,  there  must  first  be 
experienced  a  preliminary  visitation.  Many  preachers  of 
God's  gospel  have  forgotten  that  tlie  law  is  the  schoolmaster 
to  bring  men  to  Christ.  They  have  sown  on  the  unbroken 
fallow  ground,  and  forgotten  that  the  plough  must  break 
the  clods.  We  have  seen  too  much  of  trying  to  sew  without 
the  sharp  needle  of  the  Spirit's  convincing  power.  Preach 
ers  have  labored  to  make  Christ  precious  to  those  who 
think  themselves  rich  and  increased  in  goods ;  and  it  has 
been  labor  in  vain.  It  is  our  duty  to  preach  Jesus  Christ 
even  to  self-righteous  sinners,  but  it  is  certain  that  Jesus 
Christ  will  never  be  accepted  by  them  while  they  hold  them- 
selves  in  high  esteem.    Only  the  sick  will  welcome  the  phy- 


V 


THE  HOLY  6PIEIT.  367 

sician.  It  is  the  work  of  the  Spirit  of  God  to  convince  men 
of  sin,  and  until  they  are  convinced  of  sin,  they  will  Lever 
Le  led  to  seek  the  righteousness  which  is  of  God  by  J  esus 
Christ.  I  am  persuaded,  that  wherever  there  is  a  real  work 
of  grace  in  any  soul,  it  begins  with  a  pulling  down :  the 
Iloiy  Ghost  does  not  build  on  the  old  foundation.  Wool, 
>*ay,  and  stubble  will  not  do  for  him  to  build  upon.  He  will 
come  as  the  fire,  and  cause  a  conflagration  of  all  proud 
nature's  Babels.  He  will  break  our  bow  and  cut  our  spear 
in  sunder,  and  burn  our  chariot  in  the  fire.  When  every 
«andy  foundation  is  gone,  then,  but  not  till  then,  behold  he 
will  lay  in  our  souls  the  great  foundation-stone,  chosen  of 
God,  and  precious.  The  awakened  sinner,  when  he  asks 
that  God  would  have  mercy  upon  him,  is  much  astonished 
to  find  that,  instead  of  enjoying  a  speedy  peace,  his  soul  is 
bowed  down  within  him  under  a  sense  of  divine  wrath. 
Naturally  enough  he  inquires  :  "  Is  this  the  answer  to  my 
prayer  ?  I  prayed  the  Lord  to  deliver  me  from  sin  and  self, 
and  is  this  the  way  in  which  he  deals  with  me  ?  I  said, 
*  Hear  me,'  and  behold  he  wounds  rae  with  the  wounds  of  a 
cruel  one.  I  said,  *  Clothe  me,'  and  lo !  he  has  torn  off  from 
me  the  few  rags  which  covered  me  before,  and  my  nakedness 
stares  me  in  the  face.  I  said,  *  Wash  me,'  and  behold  he 
has  plunged  me  in  the  ditch  till  mine  own  clothes  do  abhor 
me.  Is  this  the  way  of  grace  ?  "  Sinner,  be  not  surprised : 
it  is  even  so.  Perceivest  thou  not  the  cause  of  it?  How 
canst  thou  be  healed  while  the  proud  flesh  is  in  thy  wound? 
It  must  come  out.  It  is  the  only  way  to  heal  thee  perma- 
nently :  it  would  be  folly  to  film  over  tny  sore,  or  heal  thy 
flesh,  and  leave  the  leprosy  within  thy  bones.  The  great 
Physi(uan  will  cut  with  his  sharp  knife  till  the  corrupt  flesh 
bo  removed,  for  only  thus  can  a  sure  healing  work  be  wrought 
in  thee.  Dost  thou  not  see  that  it  is  divinely  wise  that  be- 
fore thou  art  clothed  thou  shouldst  be  stripped  !  What, 
wouldst  thou  have  Christ's  lustrous  righteousness  outside 
whiter  than  any  fuller  can  make  it,  and  tYv\xv^  cmn  ^XXc^ 


868  THE  WITHERING  WORK  OP 

rags  concealed  within  ?  Nay,  man ;  they  must  be  put  away ; 
not  a  single  thread  of  thine  own  must  be  left  npon  thee. 
It  cannot  be  that  God  should  cleanse  thee  until  Jie  has  made 
thee  see  somewhat  of  thy  defilement ;  for  thou  wouldst  never 
value  the  precious  blood  which  cleanses  us  from  all  sin  if 
thou  hadst  not  first  of  all  been  made  to  mourn  that  thou  art 
altogether  an  unclean  thing. 

The  convincing  work  of  the  Spirit,  wherever  it  comes,  is 
unexpected,  and  even  to  the  child  of  God  in  whom  this  pro- 
cess has  still  to  go  on,  it  is  often  startling.  We  begin  again 
to  build  that  which  the  Spirit  of  God  had  destroyed.  Hav- 
ing begun  in  the  spirit,  we  act  as  if  we  would  be  inade  per- 
fect in  the  flesh ;  and  then  when  our  mil^taken  up-building 
has  to  be  levelled  with  the  earth,  we  are  almost  as  astonished 
as  we  were  when  first  the  scales  fell  from  our  eyes.  In  somd 
such  condition  as  this  was  Newton  when  he  wrote : — 

"  I  asked  the  Lord  that  1  might  grow 
In  faith  and  love  and  every  grace. 
Might  more  of  his  salvation  know. 
And  seek  more  earnestly  his  face. 

*Twas  he  who  taught  me  thus  to  pray. 
And  he,  I  trust,  has  answered  prayer ; 

But  it  has  been  in  such  a  way 
As  almost  drove  me  to  despair. 

I  hoped  that  in  some  favor'd  hoar. 

At  once  he'd  answer  my  request. 
And  by  his  love's  constraining  power 

Subdue  my  sins,  and  give  me  rest. 

Instead  of  this,  he  made  me  feel 

The  hidden  evils  of  my  heart ; 
And  let  the  angry  powers  of  hell 

Assault  my  soul  in  ev*ry  part." 

Ah,  marvel  not,  for  thus  the  Lord  is  wont  to  answer  his  peo- 
ple. The  voice  which  saith,  "  Comfort  ye,  comfort  ye  my 
people,"  achieves  its  purpose  by  first  making  them  hear  the 
cry,  "  All  flesh  is  grass,  and  all  the  goodliness  thereof  is  as 
the  flower  of  the  field." 


THE  HOLY  SPIRIT.  S69 

2.  Furthermore,  this  withering  is  after  the  usual  order 
oftht  dimne  operation.  If  we  consider  well  the  way  of  God, 
we  shall  not  be  astonished  that  he  beginneth  with  his  people 
by  terrible  things  in  righteousness.  Observe  the  method  of 
creation.  I  will  not  venture  upon  any  dogmatic  theory  of 
g(  ology,  but  there  seems  to  be  every  probability  that  thia 
world  has  been  fitted  up  and  destroyed,  refitted  and  then  de- 
stroyed again,  many  times  before  the  last  arranging  of  it 
for  the  habitation  of  men.  "In  the  beginning  God  created 
the  heaven  and  the  earth  "  ?  then  came  a  long  interval,  and 
at  length,  at  the  appointed  time,  during  seven  days,  the 
Lord  prepared  the  earth  for  the  human  race.  Consider  then 
the  state  of  matters  when  the  great  architect  began  his  work. 
What  was  there  in  the  beginning?  Originally,  nothing. 
When  he  commanded  the  ordering  of  the  earth  how  was  it? 
"  The  earth  was  without  form  and  void  ;  and  darkness  was 
upon  the  face  of  the  deep."  There  was  no  trace  of  another's 
plan  to  interfere  with  the  great  architect.  "  With  whom 
took  he  counsel,  and  who  instructed  him,  and  taught  bin,  in 
the  path  of  judgment,  and  taught  him  knowledge,  and  sh';w^ 
ed  to  him  the  way  of  understanding"?  He  received  no  con- 
tribution of  column  or  pillar  towards  the  temple  which  he 
intended  to  build.  The  earth  wasj  as  the  Hebrew  puts  it, 
Tohu  and  Bohu,  disorder  and  confusion — ^in  a  word,  chaos. 
So  it  is  in  the  new  creation.  When  the  Lord  new — creates 
us,  he  borrows  nothing  from  the  old  man,  but  makes  all 
things  new.  He  does  not  repair  and  add  a  new  wing  to  the 
old  house  of  our  depraved  nature,  but  he  builds  a  new  tem- 
ple for  his  own  praise.  We  are  spiritually  without  fo/m 
and  empty,  and  darkness  is  upon  the  face  of  our  heart,  and 
his  word  comes  tons,  saying,  "Light  be,"  and  there  is  light, 
and,  ere  long,  life  and  every  precious  thing. 

To  take  another  instance  from  the  wavs  of  God.     WLen 

man  had  fallen,  when  did  the  Lord  bring  him  the  gosps^l  ? 

The  first  whisper  of  the  gospel,  as  you  know,  was,  "  I  '^\\\ 

put  enmity  between  thee  and  the  woman,  between  thy  see^ 

16* 


870  THE  WITHERING  WORK  OF 

and  her  seed.  He  shall  braise  thy  head."  That  w^hispef 
came  to  man  Bhivering  in  the  presence  of  his  Maker,  having 
nothing  more  to  say  by  way  of  excuse  ;  but  standing  guilt  j 
before  the  Lord.  When  did  the  Lord  God  clothe  our  pa- 
rents ?  Not  until  first  of  all  he  had  put  the  question,  "  Who 
told  thee  that  thou  wast  naked?"  Not  until  the  fig-leaves 
had  utterly  failed  did  the  Lord  bring  in  the  covering  skin 
of  the  sacrifice,  and  wrap  them  in  it.  If  you  will  pursue 
*he  meditation  upon  the  acts  of  God  with  men,  you  will  cjon- 
Btantly  see  the  same  thing.  God  has  given  us  a  wondeiful 
type  of  salvation  in  Noah's  ark ;  but  Noah  was  saved  in  that 
ark  in  connection  with  death ;  he  himself,  as  it  were,  im- 
mured alive  in  a  tomb,  and  all  the  world  besides  left  to  de- 
struction. All  other  hope  for  Noah  was  gone,  and  then  the 
ark  rose  upon  the  waters.  Remember  the  redemption  of  the 
children  of  Israel  out  of  Egypt :  it  occurred  when  they  were 
in  the  saddest  plight,  and  their  cry  went  up  to  heaven  by 
reason  of  their  bondage.  When  no  arm  brought  salvation, 
then  with  a  high  hand  and  an  outstretched  arm  the  Lord 
brought  forth  his  people.  Everywhere  before  the  salvation 
there  comes  the  humbling  of  the  creature,  the  overthrow  of 
human  hope.  As  in  the  back — woods  of  Amenca,before  there 
can  be  tillage,  the  planting  of  cities,  the  arts  of  civilization, 
and  the  transactions  of  commerce,  the  woodman's  axe  must 
hack  and  hew :  the  stately  trees  of  centuries  must  fall :  the 
roots  must  be  burned,  the  old  reign  of  nature  disturbed. 
The  old  must  go  before  the  new  can  come.  Even  thus  the 
Lord  takes  away  the  first,  that  he  may  establish  the  second. 
The  first  heaven  and  the  first  earth  must  pass  away,  or  there 
cannot  be  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth.  Now,  as  it  has 
been  outwardly,  we  ought  to  expect  that  it  would  be  the 
same  within  us ;  and  when  these  witherings  and  fadings  oc- 
cur in  our  souls,  we  should  only  say,  "  It  is  the  Lord,  let 
him  do  as  seemeth  him  good." 

3.  I  would  have  you  notice,  thirdly,  that  we  are  tanght 
in  our  text  how  imivenal  this  process  is  in  its  range  over  the 


THE  HOLY  SPmiT.  871 

hearts  of  all  those  upon  whom  the  Spirit  works.  The  with- 
ering is  a  withering  of  what  ?  Of  part  of  the  flesh  and  some 
portion  of  its  tendencies  ?  Nay,  observe,  "  AU  flesh  is  grass ; 
and  aiZthe  goodliness  thereof" — ^the  very  choice  and  pick 
of  it — "is  as  the  flower  of  the  field: "and  what  happens  to 
the  grass  ?  Does  any  of  it  live  ?  "  The  grass  wi  thereth,"  all 
of  it.  "^rhe  flower,  will  not  that  abide  ?  So  fair  a  thing,  has 
not  that  an  immortality  ?  No,  it  fades ;  it  utterly  falls  away. 
So,  wherever  the  Spirit  of  God  breathes  on  the  soul  of  man, 
there  is  a  withering  of  every  thing  that  is  of  the  flesh,  and  it 
is  seen  that  tp  be  carnally  minded  is  death.  Of  course,  we 
all  know  and  confess  that  where  there  is  a  work  of  grace, 
there  must  be  a  destruction  of  our  delight  in  the  pleasures 
of  the  flesh.  When  the  Spirit  of  God  breathes  on  us,  that 
which  was  sweet  becomes  bitter  ;  that  which  was  bright  be- 
comes dim.  A  man  cannot  love  sin  and  yet  possess  the  life 
of  God.  If  he  takes  pleasure  in  fleshly  joys  wherein  he  once 
delighted,  he  is  still  what  he  was :  he  minds  the  things  of 
the  flesh,  and  therefore  he  is  after  the  flesh,  and  he  shall  die. 
The  world  and  the  lusts  thereof  are  to  the  unregenerate  as 
beautiful  as  the  meadows  in  spring,  when  they  are  bedecked 
with  flowers,  but  to  the  regenerate  soul  they  are  a  wilder- 
ness, a  salt  land,  and  not  inhabited.  Of  those  very  things 
wherein  we  once  took  delight  we  say,  "  Vanity  of  vanities  ; 
all  is  vanity."  We  cry  to  be  delivered  from  the  poisonous 
joys  of  earth,  we  loathe  them,  and  wonder  that  we  could 
once  riot  in  them.  Beloved  hearers,  do  you  know  what 
this  kind  of  withering  means  ?  Have  you  seen  the  lusts  of 
the  flesh,  and  the  pomps  and  the  pleasures  thereof,  all  fade 
away  before  your  eyes  ?  It  must  be  so,  or  the  Spirit  of 
God  has  not  visited  your  soul. 

But  mark,  wherever  the  Spirit  of  God  comes,  he  destroys 
the  g godliness  and  flower  of  the  flesh;  that  is  to  say  our 
righteousness  withers  as  our  sinfulness.  Before  the  Spirit 
comes,  we  think  ourselves  as  good  as  the  best.  We  say, 
"  All  these  commandments  have  I  kept  from  my  youth  up," 


872  THE  WITHERINa  WORK  OP 

and  we  superciliously  ask,  "What  lack  I  yet?"  Have  we 
not  been  moral?  Nay,  have  we  not  even  been  religious? 
We  confess  that  we  may  have  committed  faults,  but  we 
think  them  very  venial,  and  we  venture,  in  our  wicked 
pride,  to  imagine  that,  after  all,  we  are  not  so  vile  as  the 
word  )f  God  would  lead  us  to  think.  Ah,  my  dear  hearer, 
Mhei.  the  Spirit  of  God  blows  on  the  comeliness  of  thy 
flesh,  its  beauty  will  fade  as  a  leaf^  and  thou  wilt  have 
quite  another  idea  of  thyself;  thou  wilt  then  find  no  lan- 
guage too  severe  in  which  to  describe  thy  past  character. 
Searching  deep  into  thy  motives,  and  investigating  that 
which  moved  thee  to  thine  actions,  thou  wilt  see  so  much 
of  evil,  that  thou  wilt  cry  with  the  publican,  "  God  be  mer-' 
ciful  to  me,  a  sinner." 

Where  the  Holy  Ghost  has  withered  up  in  us  our  self- 
righteousness,  he  has  not  half  completed  his  work ;  there 
is  much  more  to  be  destroyed  yet,  and  among  the  rest, 
away  must  go  our  boasted  power  of  resolution.  Most 
people  conceive  that  they  can  turn  to  God  whenever  they 
resolve  to  do  so.  "  I  am  a  man  of  such  strength  of  mind," 
says  one,  "  that  if  I  made  up  my  mind  to  be  religious,  I 
should  be  without  difficulty."  "Ah,"  saith  another  vola- 
tile spirit,  "  I  believe  that  one  of  these  days  I  can  correct 
the  errors  of  the  past,  and  commence  a  new  life."  Ah, 
dear  hearers,  the  resolutions  of  the  flesh  are  goodly  flowers, 
but  they  must  all  fade.  When  visited  by  the  Spirit  of  God, 
we  find  that  even  when  the  will  is  present  with  us,  how  to 
perform  that  which  we  would,  we  find  not ;  yea,  and  we 
discover  that  our  will  is  averse  to  all  that  is  good,  and  tbat 
naturally  we  will  not  come  unto  Christ  that  we  may  have 
life.  What  poor,  frail  things  resolutions  are  when  seen  in 
the  light  of  God's  Spirit  I 

Still  the  man  will  say,  "I  believe  I  have,  after  all, 
within  myself  an  enlightened  conscience  and  an  intelligence 
that  will  guide  me  aright.  The  light  of  nature  I  will  use, 
and  I  do  not  doubt  that  if  I  wander  somewhat,  I  shall  find 


THE  HOLY  SPIRIT.  873 

my  way  back  again."  Ah,  man !  thy  wisdom,  which  is  the 
very  flower  of  thy  nature,  what  is  it  but  folly,  thougli  thou 
knowest  it  not  ?  Unconverted  and  unrenewed,  thou  art  in 
God's  sight  no  wiser  than  the  wild  ass's  colt.  I  wish  thou 
wert  in  thine  own  esteem  humbled  as  a  little  child  at  Je- 
Hus'  feet,  and  made  to  cry,  "Teach  thou  me." 

When  the  withering  wind  of  the  Spirit  moves  over  the 
carnal  mind,  it  reveals  the  death  of  the  flesh  in  all  respects, 
especially  in  the  matter  of  power  towards  that  which  is 
good.  We  then  learn  that  word  of  our  Lord :  "  Without 
me  ye  can  do  nothing."  When  I  was  seeking  the  Lord,  I 
not  only  believed  that  I  could  not  pray  without  divine 
help,  but  I  felt  in*my  very  soul  that  I  could  not.  Then  I 
could  not  even  feel  aright,  or  mourn  as  I  would,  or  groan 
as  I  would.  I  longed  to  long  more  after  Christ ;  but,  alas ! 
I  could  not  even  feel  that  I  needed  him  as  I  ought  to  feel 
it.  This  heart  was  then  as  hard  as  adamant,  as  dead  as 
those  that  rot  in  their  graves.  Oh,  what  would  I  at  times 
have  given  for  a  tear!  I  wanted  to  repent,  but  could  not; 
longed  to  believe,  but  could  not ;  I  felt  bound,  hampered 
and  paralyzed.  This  is  a  humbling  revelation  of  God's 
Holy  Spirit,  but  a  needful  one ;  for  the  faith  of  the  flesh  is 
not  the  faith  of  God's  elect.  The  faith  which  justifies  the 
soul  is  the  gift  of  God  and  not  of  ourselves.  That  repent- 
ance which  is  the  work  of  the  flesh  will  need  to  be  repented 
o£  The  flower  of  the  flesh  must  wither ;  only  the  seed  of 
the  Spirit  will  produce  fruit  unto  perfection.  The  heirs 
of  heaven  are  born  not  of  blood,  nor  of  the  will  of  the 
flesh,  nor  of  man,  but  of  God.  If  the  work  in  us  be  not 
the  Spirit's  working,  but  our  own,  it  will  droop  and  die 
when  most  we  require  its  protection ;  and  its  end  will  be  as 
the  grass  which  to-day  is,  and  to-morrow  is  cast  into  the 

OVCJi. 

4.  You  see,  then,  the  universality  of  this  wiJiering 
work  within  ns,  but  I  beg  you  also  to  notice  the  complete- 
ness of  it    The  grass,  what   does  it  do  ?    Droop  ?  nay, 


374  THE  WITHERING  WORK  OP 

wither.  "  The  flower  of  the  field :  "  what  of  that  ?  Does  :t 
hang  its  head  a  little  ?  No,  according  to  Isaiah  it  "  fades  ; " 
and  according  to  Peter  it "  falleth  away."  There  is  no  reviv- 
ing it  with  showers,  it  has  come  to  its  end.  Even  thus  are 
the  awakened  led  to  see  that  in  their  flesh  there  dwelleth 
no  good  thing.  What  dying  and  withering  work  some  of 
God's  servants  have  had  in  their  souls !  Look  at  John  Ban- 
yan, as  he  describes  himself  in  his  "  Grace  Abounding  !  " 
For  how  many  months  and  even  years  was  the  Spirit  en- 
gaged in  writing  death  upon  all  that  was  the  old  Bunyan, 
in  order  that  he  might  become  by  grace  a  new  man  fitted 
to  track  the  pilgrims  along  their  heavenly  way.  We  have 
not  all  endured  the  ordeal  so  long,  buj  in  every  child  of 
God  there  must  be  a  death  to  sin,  to  the  law,  and  to  self, 
which  must  be  fully  accomplished  ere  he  is  perfected  in 
Chnst  and  taken  to  heaven.  Corruption  cannot  inherit  in- 
corruption ;  it  is  through  the  Spirit  that  we  mortify  the 
deeds  of  the  body,  and  therefore  live.  But  cannot  the 
fleshly  mind  be  improved  ?  By  no  means  ;  for  "  the  car- 
nal mind  is  enmity  against  God :  for  it  is  not  subject  to  the 
law  of  God,  neither  indeed  can  be."  Cannot  you  improve 
the  old  nature  ?  No ;  "  ye  must  be  bom  again."  Can  it 
not  be  taught  heavenly  things  ?  No.  "  The  natural  man 
receiveth  not  the  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  for  they  are 
foolishness  unto  him  :  neither  can  he  know  them,  because 
they  are  spiritually  discerned."  There  is  nothing  to  be  done 
with  the  old  nature  but  to  let  it  be  laid  in  the  grave ;  it 
must  be  dead,  and  buried,  and  when  it  is  so,  then  the  in- 
corruptible seed  that  liveth  and  abideth  forever,  will  de- 
velop gloriously,  the  fruit  of  the  new  birth  will  come  to 
maturity,  and  grace  shall  be  exalted  in  glory.  The  old 
nature  never  does  improve,  it  is  earthly,  and  sensual,  an  1 
devilish  in  the  saint  oi  eighty  years  of  age  as  it  was  when 
first  he  came  to  Christ;  it  is  unimproved  and  unimprov- 
able ;  towards  God  it  is  enmity  itself ;  every  imagination  of 
the  IhDughts  of  the  heart  is  evil,  and  that  continually.  The 


THE  HOLY  SPIRIT.  375 

old  natnre  called  "  the  flesh  lusteth  against  the  Spirit,  and 
the  Spirit  against  the  flesh  :  and  these  are  contrary  the  one 
to  the  other,'*  neither  can  there  be  peace  between  them. 

5.  Let  us  further  notice  that  all  this  withering  work  in 
the  soul  is  very  painful.  As  you  read  these  verses  do  they 
not  strike  you  as  having  a  very  funereal  tone  ?  "All  flesh 
is  grass,  and  all  the  goodliness  thereof  is  as  the  flower  of 
the  field:  the  grass  withereth,  the  flower  fadetb."  Thic 
is  mournful  work  ;  but  it  must  be  done.  I  think  tliose  who 
experience  much  of  it  when  they  first  come  to  Christ  have 
great  reason  to  be  thankful.  Their  course  in  life  will,  in 
all  probability,  be  much  brighter  and  happier,  for  I  have 
noticed  that  persons  who  are  converted  very  easily,  and 
come  to  Christ  with  but  comparatively  little  knowledge  of 
their  own  depravity,  have  to  learn  it  afterwards,  and  they 
remain  for  a  long  time  babes  in  Christ,  and  are  perplexed 
with  matters  that  would  not  have  troubled  them  if  they  had 
experienced  a  deeper  work  at  first.  No,  sir  ;  if  grace  has 
begun  to  build  in  your  soul  and  left  any  of  the  old  walls  of 
self-tmst  standing,  they  will  have  to  come  down  sooner  or 
later.  You  may  congratulate  yourself  upon  their  remain- 
ing, but  it  is  a  false  congratulation,  your  glorying  is  not 
good.  I  am  sure  of  this,  that  Christ  will  never  put  a  new 
piece  upon  an  old  garment,  or  new  wine  in  old  bottles :  he 
knows  the  rent  would  be  worse  in  the  long  run,  and  the 
bottles  would  burst.  All  that  is  of  nature's  spinning  must 
be  unravelled.  The  natural  building  must  come  down, 
lath  and  plaster,  roof  and  foundation,  and  wc  must  have  a 
house  not  made  with  hands.  It  was  a  great  mercy  for  o'.ir 
city  of  London  that  the  great  fire  cleared  away  all  the  eld 
buildings  which  were  the  lair  of  the  plague,  a  far  healthier 
city  was  then  built ;  and  it  is  a  great  mercy  for  a  man 
when  God  sweeps  right  away  ali  his  own  righteoasness 
and  strength,  when  he  makes  him  feel  that  he  is  nothing 
and  can  be  nothing,  and  drives  him  to  confess  that  Christ 
must  be  in  all,  and  that  his  only  strength  lies  in  the  eternal 


376  THE  WITHERING  WORK  OP 

miirlit  of  the  ever-blessed  Spirit.  Sometimes  in  a  house  of 
business  an  old  system  has  been  going  on  for  years,  and  it 
has  caused  much  confusion,  and  allowed  much  dishonesty 
You  come  in  as  a  new  manager,  and  you  adopt  an  entirely 
new  plan.  Now,  try  if  you  can,  and  graft  your  method  on 
to  the  old  system.  How  it  will  worry  you !  Year  after 
year  you  say  to  yourself,  "  I  cannot  work  it :  if  I  had  swept 
the  whole  away  and  started  afresh,  clear  from  the  begin- 
ning, it  would  not  have  given  me  one-tenth  of  the  trouble." 
God  does  not  intend  to  graft  the  system  of  grace  upon  cor- 
rupt nature,  nor  to  make  the  new  Adam  grow  out  of  the 
old  Adam,  but  he  intends  to  teach  us  this :  "  Ye  are  dead, 
and  vour  life  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God."  Salvation  is  not 
of  the  flesh,  but  of  the  Lord  alone ;  that  which  is  bom  of 
the  flesh  is  only  flesh  at  the  best ;  and  only  that  which  is 
born  of  the  Spirit  is  spirit.  It  must  be  the  Spirit's  work  al- 
together, or  it  is  not  what  God  will  accept. 

6.  Observe,  brethren,  that  although  this  is  painful  it  is 
inevitable.  I  have  already  entrenched  upon  this,  and  shown 
you  how  necessary  it  is  that  all  of  the  old  should  be  taken 
away  ;  but  let  me  further  remark  that  it  is  inevitable  that 
the  old  should  go,  because  it  is  in  itself  corruptible.  Why 
does  the  grass  wither?  Because  it  is  a  withering  thing. 
"  Its  root  is  ever  in  its  grave,  and  it  must  die."  How 
could  it  spring  out  of  the  earth,  and  be  immortal  ?  It  is 
no  amaranth :  it  blooms  not  in  Paradise :  it  grows  in  a 
soil  on  which  the  curse  has  fallen.  Every  supposed  good 
thing  that  grows  out  of  your  own  self,  is  like  yourself,  mor- 
tal, and  it  must  die.  The  seeds  of  corruption  are  in  all  the 
fruits  of  manhood's  tree  ;  let  them  be  acS  fair  to  look  upon 
as  Eden's  clusters,  they  must  decay. 

Moreover,  it  would  never  do,  my  brother,  that  tliero 
should  be  something  of  the  flesh  in  our  salvation  and  some- 
thing of  the  Spiiit ;  for  if  it  were  so  there  would  be  a  divis- 
ion of  the  honor.  Hitherto  the  praises  of  God ;  beyond 
this  my   own  praises.     If  I  were  to  win  heaven  paitlf 


THE  HOLY  SPIRIT.  877 

through  wliat  I  had  done,  and  partly  through  what  Christ 
had  done,  and  if  the  energy  which  sanctified  me  was  in  a 
measure  ray  own,  and  in  a  measure  divine,  they  that  divide 
the  work  shall  divide  the  reward,  and  the  songs  of  heaven 
while  they  would  be  partly  to  Jehovah  must  also  be  partly 
to  the  creature.  But  it  shall  not  be.  Down,  proud  liesli ! 
D^wn  !  I  say.  Though  thou  purge  and  cleanse  thyself  as 
thou  mayst,  thou  art  to  the  core  corrupt ;  though  thou  labor 
unto  weariness,  thou  buildest  wood  that  will  be  burned,  and 
stubble  that  will  be  turned  to  ashes.  Give  up  thine  own 
self-confidence,  and  let  the  work  be,  and  the  merit  be  where 
the  honor  shall  be,  nankely,  with  God  alone.  It  is  inevi- 
table, then,  that  there  should  be  all  this  withering. 

1,  This  last  word  by  way  of  comfort  to  any  that  are 
passing  through  the  process  we  are  describing,  and  I  hope 
some  of  you  are.  It  gives  me  great  joy  when  I  hear  that  you 
unconverted  onos  are  very  miserable,  for  the  miseries  which 
the  Holy  Spirit  works  are  always  the  prelude  to  happiness. 
It  is  the  SpirWs  work  to  wither.  I  rejoice  in  our  transla- 
tion : "  Because  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  bloweth  upon  it."  It 
is  true  the  passage  may  be  translated,  "  The  wind  of  the 
Lord  bloweth  upon  it."  One  w^ord,  as  you  know,  is  used  in 
Hebrew  both  for  "  wind "  and  "  Spirit,"  and  the  same  is 
true  of  the  Greek  ;  but  let  us  retain  the  old  translation 
here,  for  I  conceive  it  to  be  the  real  meaning  of  the  text. 
The  Spirit  of  God  it  is  that  withers  the  flesh.  It  is  not  the 
devil  that  killed  my  self-righteousncss.  I  might  be  afraid 
if  it  were :  nor  was  it  myself  that  humbled  myself  by  a 
voluntary  and  needless  self-degradation,  but  it  was  the 
Spirit  of  God.  Better  to  be  broken  in  pieces  by  the  Sj  irit 
of  God,  than  to  be  made  whole  by  the  flesh  !  Wliat  doth 
th€  Lord  say  ?  "I  kill."  But  what  next  ?  "  I  make  alive." 
He  never  makes  any  alive  but  those  he  kills.  Blessed  be 
the  Holy  Ghost  when  he  kills  me,  when  he  drives  the  sword 
through  the  veiy  bowels  of  my  own  merits  and  my  self-confi* 
dence,  for  theu  he  will  make  mo  alive,     "I  w«>und,  an4  I 


378  THE  WlTHERma  WORK  (>P 

heal.''  He  never  heals  those  whom  he  haa  not  woundecL 
Then  blessed  be  the  hand  that  wounds;  let  it  go  on  wounding; 
let  it  cut  and  tear ;  let  it  lay  bare  to  me  myself  at  my  very 
worst,  that  I  may  be  driven  to  self-despair,  and  may  fiall 
back  upon  the  free  mercy  of  God,  and  receive  it  as  a  poor, 
guilty,  lost,  helpless,  undone  sinner,  who  casts  himself  Into 
the  arms  of  sovereign  grace,  knowing  that  God  must  give 
a  1,  and  Christ  must  be  all,  and  the  Spirit  must  work  all, 
and  man  must  be  as  clay  in  the  potter's  hands,  that  the 
Lord  may  do  with  him  as  seemeth  him  good.  Rejoice,  dear 
brother,  however  low  you  are  brought,  for  if  the  Spirit 
humbles  you  he  mean?  no  evil,  bat  he  intends  infinite^  good 
to  your  soul. 

II.  Now,  let  us  close  with  a  few  sentences  concerning 

THE   IMPLANTATION. 

According  to  Peter,  although  the  flesh  withers,  arfd  the 
flower  thereof  falls  away,  yet  in  the  children  of  God  there 
is  an  unwithering  something  of  another  kind.  "Being  bom 
again,  not  of  corruptible  seed,  but  of  incorruptible,  by  the 
word  of  God,  which  liveth  and  abideth  forever."  "The 
word  of  the  Lord  endureth  forever.  And  this  is  the  word 
which  by  the  gospel  is  preached  unto  you."  Now,  the 
gospel  is  of  use  to  us  because  it  is  not  of  human  ^origin. 
If  it  were  of  the  flesh,  all  it  could  do  for  us  would  not  land 
us  beyond  the  flesh;  but  the  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ  is  super- 
human, divine  and  spiritual.  In  its  conception  it  was  of 
God ;  its  great  gift,  even  the  Saviour,  is  a  divine  gift ;  and 
all  its  teachings  are  full  of  deity.  If  you,  my  hearer,  be- 
lieve a  gospel  which  you  have  thought  out  for  yourself,  or 
a  philosophical  gospel  which  comes  from  the  brain  of  man, 
it  is  of  the  flesh  and  will  wither,  and  you  will  die  and  be 
lr«i*-;  through  trusting  in  it.  The  only  word  that  can  bless 
you  and  be  a  seed  in  your  soul  must  be  the  living  and  in- 
corruptible word  of  the  eternal  Spirit.  Now  this  is  the  in- 
corruptible word,  that  "God  was  made  flesh  and  dwelt 


ainong  us;"  that  "God  was  in  Christ,  Reconciling  the 
World  unto  himself,  not  imputing  theit  trespasses  unto 
them."  This  is  the  incorttiptible  word,  that  "  whosoevet  be- 
lieveth  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  is  born  of  God."  "  He  that 
believeth  on  him  is  not  condemned:  but  he  that  believetb 
not  is  condemned  already,  because  he  hath  not  believed  in 
the  name  of  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God."  "  God  hath 
given  to  us  eternal  life,  and  this  life  is  in  his  Son."  Now, 
brethren,  this  is  the  seed  ;  but  before  it  can  grow  in  your 
sou,,  it  must  be  planted  there  by  the  Spirit.  Do  you  re- 
ceive it  this  morning  ?  Then  the  Holy  Spirit  implants  it  in 
your  soul.  Do  you  leap  up  to  it,  and  say,  "  I  believe  it ! 
I  grasp  it !  On  the  incarnate  God  I'fix  my  hope ;  the  sub- 
stitutionary sacrifice,  the  complete  atonement  of  Christ  is 
aU  my  confidence ;  I  am  reconciled  to  God  by  the  blood  of 
Jesus"?  Then  you  possess  the  living  seed  within  your 
souL 

And  what  is  the  result  of  it  ?  Why,  then  there  conies, 
according  to  the  text,  a  new  life  into  us,  as  the  result  of 
the  indwelling  of  the  living  word,  and  our  being  born 
again  by  it.  A  new  life  it  is  ;  it  is  not  the  old  nature  put- 
ting out  its  better  parts ;  not  the  old  Adam  refining  and 
purifying  itself,  and  rising  to  something  better.  No  ; 
have  we  not  said  aforetime  that  the  flesh  withers,  and  the 
flower  thereof  fades  ?  It  is  an  entirely  new  life.  Ye  are 
as  much  new  creatures  at  your  regeneration,  as  if  you  had 
never  existed,  and  had  been  for  the  first  time  created. 
**  Old  things  are  passed  away ;  behold  all  things  are  be- 
come new."  The  child  of  God  is  beyond  and  above  other 
men.  Other  men  do  not  possess  the  life  which  he  has  re- 
ceived. They  are  but  duplex — body  and  soul  have  th<»y, 
Ue  is  of  triple  nature — ^he  is  spirit,  soul  and  hotly.  A  IVcsli 
prinMple,  a  spark  of  divine  life  lias  dropped  into  his  soul: 
be  itf  no  longer  a  natural  or  carnal  man,  but  he  has  become 
a  spiritual  man,  understanding  spiritual  things,  and  possess- 
ing a  life  far  superior  to  any  thing  that  belongs  to  the  rest 


380  THE  WITHEHINO  \^ORft  OJ* 

of  mankind.  Oh  that  God,  who  has  withered  in  the  souls  of 
any  of  you  that  wliieh  is  of  the  flesh,  may  speedily  grant 
you  the  new  birth  through  the  Word. 

Now  observe,  to  close,  wherever  this  new  life  comei 
through  the  word,  it  is  incorruptible,  it  lives  and  abides  for- 
ever. To  get  the  good  seed  out  of  a  true  believer's  heart 
and  to  destroy  the  new  nature  in  him,  is  a  thing  attempted 
by  earth  and  hell,  but  never  yet  achieved.  Pluck  the  sun 
out  of  the  firmament,  and  you  shall  not  even  then  be  able 
to  pluck  grace  out  of  a  regenerate  heart.  It  "  liveth  and 
abideth  forever,"  saith  the  text ;  it  can  neither  corrupt  of 
itself  nor  be  corrupted.  *'  It  sinneth  not,  because  it  is  bom 
of  God."  "  I  give  unto  them  eternal  life,  and  they  shall 
never  perish,  neither  shall  any  man  pluck  them  out  of  my 
hand."  *'  The  water  that  I  shall  give  him  shall  be  in  him 
a  well  of  water  springing  up  into  everlasting  life."  You 
have  a  natural  life — that  will  die,  it  is  of  the  flesh.  You 
have  a  spiritual  life — of  that  \t  is  written  :  "  Whosoever 
liveth  and  believeth  in  me  shall  never  die."  You  have 
now  within  you  the  noblest  and  wruest  immortality :  you 
must  live  as  God  liveth,  in  peace  and  joy,  and  happiness. 
But  oh,  remember,  dear  hearer,  if  you  have  not  this  you 
"  shall  not  see  life."  What  then — shall  you  be  annihilated  ? 
Ah  !  no,  but  "  the  wrath  of  the  Lord  is  upon  you."  You 
shall  exist,  though  you  shall  not  lire.  Of  life  you  shall 
know  nothing,  for  that  is  the  gift  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  : 
but  of  an  everlasting  death,  full  of  torment  and  anguish, 
you  shall  be  the  wretched  heritor  —  "  the  wrath  of  God 
abideth  on  him."  You  shall  be  cast  into  "  the  lake  of 
fire,  which  is  the  second  death."  You  shall  be  one  of  those 
whose  "wonn  dieth  not,  and  whose  fire  is  not  quenchfed." 
May  God,  the  ever-blessed  Spirit,  visit  you  !  If  he  be  now 
Btiiving  with  you,  Oh  quench  not  his  divine  flame  !  Trifle 
not  with  any  holy  thought  you  have.  If  this  morning  you 
must  confess  that  you  are  not  born  again,  be  humbled  by  it. 
Go  and  seek  mercy  of  the  Lord,  entreat  hun  to  deal  gra- 


-y 


tHE  flOLt  SPIRIT.  881 

dously  with  you  and  save  you.  Many  who  have  had  noth- 
ing but  moonlight  prized  it,  and  ere' long  they  have  sun- 
light. Above  all,  remember  what  the  quickening  seed  is, 
and  reverence  it  when  you  hear  it  preached,  "  for  this  is 
the  word  by  which  the  gospel  is  preached  unto  you."  Re- 
spect it  and  receive  it.  Remember  that  the  quickening 
teed  is  all  wrapped  up  in  this  sentence  :  "Believe in  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved."  "  He  that  be- 
lieveth  and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved ;  but  he  that  believeth 
not  shall  be  damned." 

The  Lord  bless  700,  for  Jesus'  sake.    Amen. 


T 


|g2  MaSAH;  OB, 


SERMON  XXn. 


MAR  AH;  OR,  THE  BITTER  WATERS  SWEETENED. 

*  AND  VBICN  THET  CAUB  TO  XABAH,  THET  C0X7U>  HOT  DBINK  OF  THE  WATEB8  Of 
XA  HAH,  FOB  THKT  WERE  BITTER :  THEBEFOBE  THE  NAME  OF  IT  WAS  CALLED 
XARAH.  AND  THE  PEOPLE  MURXUBED  AGAINST  X0SE8,  SATING,  WHAT  SHALL 
WE  DBINK  t  AND  BE  CBIED  UNTO  THE  LOBD ;  AND  THE  LORD  SHOWED  HIX  A 
TREE,  WHICH  WHEN  HE  HAD  CAST  INTO  THE  WATERS,  THE  WATERS  WERE  XADE 

SWEET.''— Exodaa  xv.  23,  24,  25. 

What  a  sudden  change  from  the  sound  of  the  timbrel  to 
the  voice  of  murmuring !  You  saw  the  maidens  dancing  three 
days  ago,  and  you  little  dreamed  that  they  would  make  part 
of  yonder  clamorous  throng  who  surround  the  servant  of 
God,  and  cry, "  What  shall  we  drink  ?  "  Such  are  the  changes 
of  our  outward  conditions  and  of  our  inward  feelings ;  so 
fickle  and  so  mutable  is  man.  What  is  there  that  can  be  rest- 
ed upon  in  this  mortal  life?  We  say  to-day,  "My  moun- 
taiu  standeth  firm,  I  shall  never  be  moved;"  to-morrow  terra 
firma  there  is  none,  and  we  are  tossed  upon  a  stormy  sea. 
Oar  life  is  like  an  April  day,  the  sunjliine  alternates  with 
the  shower;  or  like  each  day  of  all  the  year,  the  morning  and 
the  evening  are  needful  to  complete  it.  Quick  on  the  heels  of 
light  treads  the  darkness,  followed  with  equal  haste  by  light 
again.  ,  The  sun's  rule,  at  this  golden  hour,  is  but  temporaiy ; 
he  mast  abdicate  in  favor  of  the  usurping  stars,  but  th'y,  in 
their  turn,  must  give  way  before  his  lordly  presence  yet 
again.  Tliis  world,  which  is  our  inn,  owns  to  the  sign  of 
the  "Checkers" — the  blacks  and  whites  are  everywhere. 
We  can  be  sure  of  nothing  between  here  and  heaven  of  tho 
tilings  which  are  seen ;  but  of  this  we  may  bo  ceitain,  that 


THE  BITTER  WaTeHS  SWEETENED.  383 

nndemeath  aJ  the  outward  change  there  is  the  immutable 
love  of  God  towards  his  people,  and  that,  after  all,  the  change 
lies  only  in  the  seeming  things,  not  in  the  things  which 
truly  are ;  for  the  things  which  are  not  seen  are  etemalj 
and  changes  come  not  there  ;  it  is  but  in  the  things  which 
are  seen  that  the  change  occurs.  Let  us  set  the  less  store 
by  earth,  because  its  fashion  abides  not.  Let  us  prize  heaven 
more,  because  it  cannot  fade. 

L  The  text  directs  your  attention,  first  of  all,  to  thb 
EVILS  OP  THE  wiLDBBNBSS.  We  uccd  uot  spcud  much  time 
in  thinking  of  these  evils,  because  they  throw  themselves  in 
our  way  often  enough ;  and  the  tendency  of  our  niind  is  un- 
duly to  exaggerate  them.  Notice  that  the  perils  and  trials 
of  the  wilderness  occur  very  early  in  the  pilgrim  life.  It  is 
a  notion,  I  have  no  doubt,  of  very  young  Christians  who 
still  have  the  shell  upon  their  heads  and  are  scarce  hatched, 
that  their  trials  are  over  now  that  they  have  become  winged 
with  faith;  they  had  far  better  have  reckoned  that  their 
trials  have  begun  with  tenfold  force,  now  that  they  are  num- 
bered with  the  servants  of  the  Most  High.  Whatever  else 
comes  not  to  thee,  O  servant  of  God,  this  will  surely  be  ful- 
filled, "  In  the  world  ye  shall  have  tribulation."  "  What 
son  is  he  whom  the  Father  chasteneth  not  ?  "  Some  priv- 
ileges are  not  common  to  all  the  adopted,  but  the  privilege 
of  chastisement  is  universal  to  all  true  sons.  It  is  the  token 
of  bastardy  if  the  rod  be  escaped,  but  scourging  is  the  sure 
pledge  of  paternal  love.  I  say,  however,  that  these  trials 
come  very  soon.  Israel  was  no  sooner  across  the  Red  Sea 
than  they  went  three  days  into  the  wilderness  of  Shur,  but 
found  no  water  ;  and  on  the  third  day/When  they  did  arrive 
at  a  fountain,  they  found  worse  than  no  water,  for  it  was  so 
brackish,  so  altogether  unfit  for  drinking,  that  though  they 
thought  they  would  have  drunk  any  thing,  they  could  not 
possibly  drink  this.  What,  in  three  days,  must  they  that 
sang  unto  the  Lord  because  he  triumphed  gloriously,  nauseate 


384  MAHAH;  on, 

the  water  for  which  their  thirst  makes  them  pant  f    In  threu 
days  shall  they  be  reduced  to  such  straits  that  they  must 
drink  or  die,  and  yet  feel  that  they  should  die  if  they  were 
to  drink  of  such  nauseous  streams  ?    Ah  yes,  with  some  of 
US  our  delight  at  conversion  was  very  great,  our  exhilaration 
at  finding  the  Saviour  was  something  never  to  be  forgotten, 
and  yet  only  a  day  or  so  after  we  were  stumbled  with  great 
temptation,  amazed  at  the  discovery  of  the  evilof  our  hearts, 
or  tried  by  the  coldness  of  our  fellow  Christians,  or  the  cru- 
elty of  the  outside  world,  so  that  we  found  we  had  come  to 
Marah.     And  this  was  all  the  severer  trial,  because  some  of 
OS  had  found  a  degree  of  pleasure  in  the  ways  of  sin,  and 
now  it  stumbled  us  to  find  sorrow  in  the  ways  of  God.     When 
Israel  was  in  Egypt,  they  drank  of  the  river  Nile.     No  or- 
dinary water  that.    To  this  day  the  dwellers  on  the  banks  of 
the  Nile  assert  that  the  water  has  a  peculiar  taste  not  to  be 
discovered  in  any  other  stream,  and  they  prefer  the  waters  of 
the  Nile  to  all  the  waters  in  the  world  besides.   What  a  change 
from  the  sweetness  of  the  Nile  to  the  bitterness  of  Marah  ? 
Did  not  the  suggestion  rise  in  their  hearts,  "  It  was  better 
with  us  in  the  bondage  of  Egypt,  with  water  in  abundance, 
than  it  is  now  in  the  liberty  of  the  wilderness  with  the  bit- 
terness of  Marah  ?  "    The  devil  tempted  some  of  us  at  the 
very  first  by  saying:  "See  what  you  have  got  by  being  a 
Christian.     While  you  were  as  others  are,  your  mind  had 
mirth  ;  now  you  have  come  out  and  followed  the  Crucified, 
you  have  lost  the  liveliness  of  your  spirits,  the  brightness  of 
your  wit— ^that  which  made  life  worth  having  is  taken  away 
from  you."     Young  Christian,  is  that   your  case  to-day? 
Be  not  stumbled,  neither  believe  the  enemy.     Man,  it  were 
better  to  die  at  Marah  free,  than  live  a  slave  by  the  sweet  Nile. 
Even  men  that  know  not  the  Spirit  of  God  have  felt  it  were 
better  to  die  free  than  live  slaves;  and, truly, to  be  a  slave  of 
Satan  is  so  degrading  a  thing,  that  if  this  mouth  were    for 
e/er  filled  with  Marah's  bitterness,  yet  were  it  better  to  be 
so  than  to  be  enchanted  with  the  pleasures  of  sin.     Y"et  there 


THE  BITTEH  WAtERS  SWEETEKEl>.  3RR 

early  trials  are  very  severe,  and  need  much  grace  lest  they 
cause  us  great  mischief 

Secondly,  these  evils  assume  varied  shapes.     You  noticed 
that  for  the  first  three  days  in  the  wilderness  they  found  no 
water  ;  that  is  one  trial.     But  the  next  day,  or  at  the  end 
of  the  third  day,  they  found  water.     Now  they  thought 
their  trial  was  over:  alas  !  it  had  only  changed  its  shape. 
1'hey  found  water,  but  it  was  too  bitter  to  drink.     Do  not 
bo  in  a  hurry  to  change  your  trials,  dear  friends.     We  have 
hoard  of  some  who  have  repined  that  they  had  no  children, 
and,  like  Rachel,  their  cr}'  was,  "  Give  me  children,  or  else 
I  die."     Ere  long  they  have  had  children  who  proved  to  be 
far  worse  than  none.     Better  no  son  than  an  Absalom.     We 
have  known  those  who  were  in  good  health,  but  discontent- 
ed because  they  had  no  wealth  ;  they  have  gained  wealth  at 
last,  but  with  an  injured  constitution,  they  have  had  no  pow- 
er to  enjoy  it.     If  we  could  choose  our  trials,  we  might  weil 
remember  the  wisdom  of  the  old  philosopher,  who  told  the 
people  oppressed  by  a  tyrant  to  be  content  VQih  his  tyran- 
ny, "for,"  said  he,  "it  is  with  oppressors  as  with  mosqui- 
toes, let  those  suck  which  are  now  upon  you,  for  if  you  drive 
those  off,  the  fresh  ones  which  will  succeed  them  will  be 
hungner  than  those  that  are  there  now  :  better  be  content 
with  the  tyranny  you  have,  than  seek  a  new  one."    It  is 
much  the  same  with  the  trials  we  now  feel ;  you  will  get 
used  to  them  by  degrees :  they  will  spend  their  force.     De- 
sire for  a  change  of  trials  may  only  be  a  wish  for  a  worse 
affliction,  for  whether  was  the  worse,  to  have  no  water,  or 
to  have  the  water  and  to  find  it  so  bitter  that  you  could  not 
drink  it  ? 

Yet  when  God  changes  the  trial  be  well  satisfied  that  it 
should  be  changed.  You  may  anticipate,  Christian,  that  you 
will  have  your  trial  changed  :  indeed,  you  must  reckon  that 
it  is  so.  I  mean,  that  if  to-day  it  is  smooth  sailing  with  you, 
though  yesterday  waves  rolled  mountains  high,  it  is  only  a 
change  of  trial ;  you  are  now  tried  by  prosperity,  which  may 
17 


^86  MARAH ;  OR, 

prove  to  be  a  more  severe  test  for  you  than  adversity.  Ii 
the  wind  balmy,  blows  it  from  the  south  ?  It  is  but  another 
trial  for  thee,  be  sure  of  that,  for  they  who  have  withstood 
the  northern  blast  and  grown  the  ruddier  and  stronger  for 
its  influence,  have  often  grown  faint  and  weary  under  soft- 
er airs.  Watch  thou  in  all  things,  thy  trials  are  with  thee 
constantly  ;  the  crucible  is  changed,  the  fire  still  bums. 

Note  again,  that  as  the  trials  of  the  wilderness  came  soon, 
and  assumed  various  shapes,  so  often  do  the  trials  of  tho 
Christian  touch  very  vital  matters.  They  found  no  water, 
or  finding  it,  it  was  bitter.  It  is  not  said  they  found  no 
wine — a  small  trial  indeed ;  it  is  not  said  they  found  no  milk, 
yet  might  the  infant  children  have  been  sorely  troubled  by 
such  a  want ;  but  they  found  no  drinkable  water.  Here  was 
a  denial  of  an  essential  of  life.  They  must  have  water,  it  was 
no  luxury,  it  was  a  necessity  ;  with  the  hot,  burning  sand 
beneath  them  reflecting  the  fierce  heat  of  a  cruel  sun,  not  to 
have  water  in  the  wilderness  is  to  feel  an  urgent  necessity 
producing  a  terrible  pain.  God  may  touch  us,  and  proba- 
bly has  done  so  or  will,  in  points  most  vital.  To  be  tried  in 
the  loss  of  some  of  your  superfluities,  my  brethren,  is  but 
little  ;  but  to  lose  even  the  little  that  you  had  to  live  upon, 
to  be  brought  to  straitness  of  bread,  this  is  real  tribulation. 
To  have  the  hand  put  forth  to  touch  your  bone  and  your 
flesh,  this  is  affliction.  Believe  me,  our  virtues  and  graces 
look  very  fine,  and  we  think  much  of  them  until  they  undergo 
that  ordeal,  but  that  test  often  takes  from  them  their  gloss 
and  beauty ;  we  find  how  great  our  weakness  is  when  the 
very  marrow  of  our  bones  seems  to  be  a  den  in  which  pains, 
like  roMnrs,  hide  themselves.  God  may  touch  you  in  the 
most  beloved  object  of  your  heart.  It  is  not  one  child  that 
is  taken  out  of  many,  but  the  only  one  ;  it  is  not  a  friend, 
or  distant  relative,  but  the  partner  of  your  bosom  is  laid  low. 
Do  not  wonder  if  the  trial  affects  you  greatly,  and  comes 
home  to  your  soul  and  heart.  It  is  one  of  God's  determina- 
tions that  trials  shall  not  be  mock  trials  with  his  servant^ 


THE  BITTER  WATERS  SWEETENED.  387 

sud  the  grace  given  shall  not  be  imagmary,  but  true.  God 
never  plays  at  chastening  his  children.  No  trial  for  the  pres- 
ent seemeth  to  be  joyous,  but  grievous.  By  the  blueness  of 
the  wound  the  heart  is  made  better ;  if  it  do  not  bruise,  it 
doth  not  benefit.  Very  much  in  proportion  to  the  bitter- 
ness felt  will  be  the  benefit  that  will  come  of  it.  They  found 
no  water.  O  my  God,  to  what  straits  dost  thou  reduce  thine 
own  people ;  thine  own  people  who  carry  with  them  the 
title-deeds  of  a  land  that  flows  with  milk  and  honey !  Jor- 
dan and  Kishon  are  theirs,  and  yet  they  find  only  Marah  to 
drink  while  they  are  here ;  thine  own  people  for  whom  thou 
hast  appointed  that  they  shall  dwell  in  a  land  of  brooks  and 
rivers  of  water,  where  they  shall  sit  every  man  under  his 
vine  and  fig-tree;  these,  thy  darlings,  whom  thou  hast 
brought  out  with  a  high  hand  and  an  outstretched  arm,  are 
brought  to  the  extreme  of  poverty,  and  the  little  that  they 
have  has  often  a  bitter  taste  infused  into  it. 

Notice  once  again,  there  is  a  reason  why  the  earthly  rrwr* 
des  which  supply  our  iiecessities  must  he  more  or  less  hitter. 
When  Israel  received  water  out  of  the  rock  it  was  not  bitter, 
but  this  water  came  out  of  the  sand.  To  this  day  in  the 
desert  water  is  found  in  different  places,  but  where  it  oozes 
up  from  a  sandy  bed  it  is  almost  without  exception  so  brack- 
ish and  bitter,  by  reason  of  the  sand,  that  it  is  not  fit  for  hu- 
man drinking ;  and  even  the  camels,  unless  they  are  sore 
pressed,  turn  away  from  it  with  great  aversion.  The  sand 
has  tainted  it,  the  flavor  of  earth  has  got  into  the  blessing. 
So  it  is  with  most  of  our  blessings  ;  by  reason  of  our  sin  and 
infirmity  too  much  of  the  flavor  of  earth  enters  into  the  gift 
of  heaven.  Our  common  mercies,  when  we  receive  them  di- 
rect from  heaven  as  God  gives  them,  are  mercies  indeed — 
cool,  flowing  streams  that  gush  from  the  rock  of  his  favor; 
but  we  are  so  apt  to  trace  them  to  the  creature,  so  ready  to 
look  upon  them  as  derived  from  earth  instead  of  coming  from 
heaven ;  and  just  in  that  proportion  may  we  expect  to  find 
bittemesd  in  them.    What  can  you  hope  for  in  a  wildernesa. 


388  MARAH;  OR, 

but  productions  congruous  to  it  ?  Canaan  !  who  looks  fof 
bitterness  there?  Is  it  not  the  land  that  flows  with  milk 
and  honey?  Sweet  land,  when  shall  we  reach  thee  ?  Thy 
sweetness  is  but  congruous  to  thyself.  But  here,  in  this  wil- 
derness, where  we  have  no  continuing  city,  who  looks  for 
the  streams  of  Lebanon  ?  who  hopes  to  find  Canaan's  fruits 
in  the  wilderness  of  Sin  ?  As  well  seek  to  gather  from  the 
briny  sea  the  sweet  fruits  of  the  palm  or  the  luscious  clus- 
ters of  the  vine,  as  hope  to  find,  amidst  these  changing  scenes, 
cjmforts  that  shall  be  all  Comfortable,  and  joys  that  shall 
bo  all  joyous.  No,  they  will  be  comforts,  but  they  will  be 
often  embittered  ;  they  will  be  joyous  somewhat,  but  the 
earthly  flavor  in  them  will  make  us  remember  that  this  is 
not  our  rest. 

1  know  not  that  I  ought  to  detain  you  longer  with  these 
evils  of  the  wilderness.  I  do  not  feel  it  is  wrong  to  speak 
of  them,  for  we  do  not  mention  them  with  any  view  of  dis- 
couraging those  who  have  set  out  on  pilgrimage  ;  we  are 
not  like  those  who  hold  up  their  hands  and  say,  "  The  lions, 
the  giants,  the  dragons ;  young  pilgrim,  you  will  never  reach 
the  land  of  promise ; "  but  yet  we  would  imitate  the  Saviour, 
who  said  to  the  follower  who  thought  he  could  follow  him 
whithersoever  he  might  go,  *'  Sit  down,  and  count  the  cost." 
There  are  trials  for  you,  ye  followers  of  Christ,  if  there  are 
none  for  others — peculiar  trials  for  you,  peculiar  joys  ten 
thousand  times  outweighing  them,  but  yet  peculiar  griefs, 
new  griefs  of  a  new  life  of  which  it  will  be  a  blessed  thing 
to  have  been  a  participant ;  but  there  they  are,  and  we  will 
not  deceive  you.  For  you  there  will  be  Marahs  that  others 
may  not  know^  and  for  you  there  will  be  long  thirsts  where 
others  drink  to  the  full ;  nevertheless,  we  will  take  Christ 
and  his  reproach,  Christ  and  his  Marah,  rather  than  the 
world  with  its  sweetness,  for  with  every  drawback  that 
is  supposable  to  Christ  Jesus,  he  is  better  than  the  world 
with  all  the  additions  that  can  be  invented  by  the  sons  of 
mirth. 


THE  BITTER  WATERS  SWEETENED.  389 

n.  Thus  much  on  the  first  point,  the  evils  of  the  wilder- 
ness. Now,  secondly,  the  tendency  of  human  nature. 
The  people  murmured  against  Moses,  saying,  "  What  shall 
we  drink  ?  "  Do  not  say  "  human  nature,"  says  one,  say, 
"  the  tendency  of  Jewish  nature."  Ah,  but  if  any  thing,  I 
would  prefer  the  people  in  the  wilderness  to  any  other  ;  lest 
assured  that  they  were  no  worse  than  we  are.  They  are  an 
example  to  us  of  what  our  heart  is ;  and  whatever  we  see 
in  them  we  have  but  to  watch  a  little,  and  we  shall  see  it  all  in 
ourselves.  It  was  not  Jewish  nature  that  God  proved  in 
the  wilderness  so  much  as  human  nature  at  its  very  best  es- 
tate. Assuredly,  the  tendency  of  human  nature  is  to  mur- 
mur. They  murmured,  complained,  found  fault.  A  very 
easy  thing,  for  the  very  word  "  murmur,"  how  simple  it  is, 
made  up  of  two  infantile  sounds — mur  mur,  No  sense  in 
it,  no  wit  in  it,  no  thought  in  it  ;  it  is  the  Cry  rather  of  a 
brute  than  of  a  man — murmur^  just  a  double  groan.  Easy 
is  it  for  us  to  kick  against  the  dispensations  of  God,  to  give 
utterance  to  our  griefs,  and,  what  is  worse,  to  the  inference 
we  drew  from  them  that  God  has  forgotten  to  be  gracious. 
To  murmur  is  our  tendency,  but,  jny  dear  brethren  and  sis- 
ters in  Christ,  do  we  mean  to  let  the  tendencies  of  the  old 
nature  rule  us  ?  Will  we  murmur  ?  Oh  that  we  might  have 
grace  rather  to  say  with  Job,  **  Though  he  slay  me,  yet  will  I 
trust  in  him  ! "  Shall  a  living  man  complain  ?  Have  we 
not  received  so  much  good  from  the  hands  of  the  Lord 
that  we  may  well  receive  evil  without  rebellion  ?  Will  we 
not  disappoint  Satan,  and  overrule  the  tendency  of  the 
flesh,  by  saying  in  the  might  of  God's  Spirit,  "  The  Lord 
gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken  away  ;  blessed  be  the  name 
of  the  Lord"  ?  I  know  we  are  apt  to  say,  "  Well,  that  is 
human  nature;  "and  when  we  have  said  it  is  human  nature, 
we  suppose  we  have  given  a  very  excellent  excuse  for  doing 
it.  But  is  human  nature  to  rule  the  divine  nature  ?  You, 
believer,  profess  to  be  a  partaker  of  the  divine  nature.  Let 
the  superior  force  govern,  let  that  which  cometh  from  above 


390  MARAH;  OB, 

be  nppermost,  and  put  the  lower  nature  down  ;  let  us  e^ 
chew  murmurings  and  complainings,  and  magnify  and 
adore  the  God  who  lays  our  comforts  low. 

Observe — and  this  is  worthy  of  note — ^that  the  murmur, 
ing  was  not  ostensibly  against  God.  They  murmured 
against  Moses.  And  have  you  ever  noticed  how  the  most 
of  us,  when  we  are  in  a  murmuring  vein,  are  not  honest 
enough  to  murmur  distinctly  against  God.  No  ;  the  child 
is  dead,  and  we  form  a  conjecture  that  there  was  some 
wrong  treatment  on  the  part  of  nurse,  or  surgeon,  or  our- 
selves ;  we  lay  our  hold  on  that  for  which  there  may  not  be 
a  shadow  of  proof,  and  the  murmuring  is  upon  that  point. 
Or  we  have  lost  money,  and  have  been  brought  down  from 
opulence  to  almost  poverty ;  then  some  one  person  was  dis- 
honest, a  certain  party  betrayed  us  in  a  transaction,  by  fail- 
ing to  fulfil  his  part ;  all  the  murmuring  is  heaped  upon  that 
person.  We  deny,  perhaps  indignantly,  that  we  munnur 
against  God;  and  to  prove  it  we  double  the  zeal  with 
which  we  murmur  against  Moses.  To  complain  of  the  sec- 
ond cause  is  about  as  sensible  as  the  conduct  of  the  dog, 
which  bites  the  stick  with  which  it  is  beaten.  It  owes  no 
anger  to  the  stick,  but  to  the  person  who  uses  it.  "  Is  there 
evU  in  the  city  and  the  Lord  hath  not  done  it?"  Whoever 
is  the  instrument,  the  Lord  overrules.  In  our  heart  of 
hearts  our  rebellion  is  against  the  Lord  himself.  We  have 
not  quite  honesty  enough  to  rail  against  God  openly  and 
avowedly,  and  so  we  •  hypocritically  cover  up  our  repining 
against  him,  by  murmuring  against  some  person,  occasion, 
or  event.  "HI  had  not  happened  to  go  out  on  such  an  oc- 
casion I  might  not  have  had  that  cold  and  been  laid  aside." 
Thus  we  blame  an  accidental  circumstance,  as  if  it  were  not 
part  of  the  divine  arrangement.  Is  this  complaining  of  the 
second  cause,  better  than  railing  against  God  ?  I  trow  not, 
for  in  very  deed,  it  is  railing  against  God,  and  it  is,  in  ad- 
dition, an  injustice  to  the  second  cause,  so  made  a  butt  o£ 
When  Pharaoh  bade  the  Israelites  make  bricks,  and  gave 


THE  BITTER  WATERS  SWEETENED.  391 

them  no  straw,  there  was  injustice ;  but  when  the  Israelites 
gathered  around  Moses  and  virtually  told  liini  that  he 
ought  to  supply  them  with  water,  it  was  much  the  same 
thing.  Whence  should  this  man  have  water  to  give  them 
to  drink  ?  How  could  h«  sweeten  Marah?  They  knew 
right  well  that  it  was  not  possible  for  him  to  open  a  well 
for  them  in  the  wilderness;  they  complained,  I  say, in  their 
aearts,  really  against  God,  but  they  added  to  this  the  hypoc- 
risy and  the  injustice  of  veiling  their  murmuring  against 
the  Most  High  by  an  unjust  and  clamorous  complaint 
against  his  servant  Moses.  Stop  thy  tongue,  my  brother ; 
cease  thy  cavilling  against  this  and  that,  against  him  or 
her;  for  be  sure  that  thou  art  doing  injustice  to  thy  fellow- 
man  as  well  as  a  wrong  to  thy  God. 

Once  more,  while  we  speak  of  this  tendency  in  human 
nature,  I  want  you  to  observe  how  they  betrayed  an  utter 
unbelief  of  God.  They  said  unto  Moses,  "What  shall  we 
drink?"  They  meant  by  it,  "By  what  means  can  God 
supply  our  want  of  water?"  What  a  question  !  They 
were  at  the  Red  Sea,  and  God  cleft  the  intervening  gulf  in 
twain,  through  the  depths  thereof  they  marched  dryshod  ; 
there  is  Marah's  water — shall  it  be  more  difficult  for  God  to 
purify  than  to  divide  ?  To  sweeten  a  fountain,  is  that  more 
difficult  than  to  cleave  a  sea?  Is  anything  too  hard  for 
the  Lord  !  A  great  miracle  had  been  wrought ;  had  they 
but  considered  it,  and  exercised  even  the  lowest  degree  of 
faith,  they  must  have  seen  that  he  who  could  work  such  a 
miracle  as  they  had  seen,  could  work  yet  another ;  and  they 
might  joyously  have  stood  at  Marah's  brink,  and  have  sung, 
*'  He  who  cast  Pharaoh  and  his  chosen  captains  into  the  Red 
Sea,  and  delivered  his  people,  can  give  his  chosen  drink ; 
therefore  sing  we,  Spring  up,  O  well,  and  let  thy  waters  be 
sweet  and  clean."  Oh  that  they  had  faith  in  God  but  as  u 
grain  of  mustard  seed,  and  they  would  have  seen  great 
things  and  glorified  his  name.  Do  you  blame  them  ?  Do 
BO ;  blame  them  much,  but  include  yourselves  in  the  censure. 


89d  MAR  AH;  OB, 

\ 

How  often  has  it  been  so  with  us  ?  We  have  said,  "  I  wHl 
never  distrust  my  God  after  this  memorable  deliverance, 
this  singular  display  of  his  rower  has  slain  my  unbelief;" 
yet  a  new  trial  has  occurred,  and  our  faith,  where  was  it? 
Had  the  Son  of  Man  himself  been  on  the  earth  with  those 
quick  eyes  to  discern  the  faith  which  he  himself  creates, 
could  he  find  faith  in  us  in  the  hour  of  tribulation?  Bo 
humbled  as  ye  see  yourselves  in  this  mirror.  Bohold  your 
instability,  which  is  as  water.  How  like  to  reeds  shaken 
with  the  wind  are  we ;  or  like  to  meteors  which  flash  across 
the  brow  of  night,  to  leave  the  darkness  denser  than  befora 
How  soon  is  the  glory  of  our  confidence  spent,  and  the  ex- 
cellence of  our  faith  withered.  Hold  thou  our  feet  in  life 
great  God,  or  we  shall  soon  be  silent  in  darkness. 

,  in.  Now,  thirdly — and  may  divine  help,  the  help  of  the 
Holy  Ghost  be  given  me — I  will  speak  upon  thb  remedy 
OF  GRACE.  I  have  shown  you  the  evils  of  the  wilderness 
and  the  tendency  of  nature:  it  is  delightful  to  behold  the 
remedy  of  grace.  First,  if  thou  wouldst  have  Marah's  bit- 
terness healed,  take  the  case  in  prayer  to  God,  God  begins 
by  making  us  begin.  The  people  complained  to  Moses; 
Moses  took  the  complaint  to  his  Master.  In  all  trials,  the 
surest  way  to  a  remedy  is  prayer.  In  heavenly  pharmacy, 
prayer  is  a  catholicon ;  it  healeth  all  things.  Prayer, 
which  overcomes  heaven,  will  certainly  never  be  over- 
matched on  earth.  Neither  men  nor  devils  can  stand  against 
prayer :  it  smites  them  hip  and  thigh,  like  another  Samson. 
The  bow  of  prayer  returns  not  empty ;  it  is  swifter  than  an 
eagle,  it  is  stronger  than  a  lion.  Take  thy  case  to  God,  0 
heir  of  trouble;  unroll  Rabshakeh's  letter  before  the  Most 
High,  and  the  Lord  will  silence  his  revilings.  Half  the 
work  is  done  when  it  is  brought  before  God  in  supplica- 
tion. 

Note,  next,  that  as  soon  as  we  have  a  prayer^  God  has  a 
remedy.    The  remedy  is  near  at  hand ;  but  we  do  not  per- 


THE  BITTER  WATERS  SWEETENED.  393 

ceive  it  Jll  it  is  shown  us.  "  The  Lord  showed  him  a  tree." 
The  t/v'.e  h?.d  been  growing  for  years  on  purpose  to  be 
used.  G.ol  has  a  remedy  for  all  our  troubles,  before  they 
happen  to  ViB.  A  delightful  employment  it  is  to  notice  how 
Gad  fjre^^jili'J  himself;  how  long  before  we  reach  the  en- 
campmorb,  U  there  be  the  bitter  well,  there  is  also  the  heal- 
ing treo.  All  is  ready  between  here  and  heaven.  He  that 
has  f^ono  to  prepare  a  place  for  us  by  his  presence,  has  pre- 
pared the  v/ay  to  that  place  for  us  by  his  providence. 
But,  brethrf  n,  though  for  every  trouble  in  this  mortal  life 
there  is  a  /-smedy,  you  and  I  do  not  always  discern  it. 
"  The  Lor)  showed  him  a  tree."  I  am  persuaded  that  for 
every  look  in  Doubting  Castle  there  is  a  key,  but  the  prom- 
ises are  often  in  great  confusion  to  our  minds,  so  that  we 
are  perplexed.  K  a  blacksmith  should  bring  you  his  great 
bunch  of  picklocks,  you  would  have  to  turn  them  over, 
over,  and  over,  and  try  half  of  them,  perhaps  two-thirds, 
before  you  would  find  the  right  one ;  ay,  and  perhaps  the 
right  one  would  be  left  to  the  last.  It  is  always  a  blessing 
to  remember  that  for  every  affliction  there  is  a  promise  in 
the  word  of  God ;  a  promise  which  meets  the  case,  and  was 
made  on  purpose  for  it.  But  you  may  not  be  always  able 
to  find  it — no,  you  may  go  fumbling  over  the  Scriptures 
long  before  you  get  the  true  word;  but  when  the  Lord 
shows  it  to  you,  when  it  comes  with  power  to  the  soul, 
when  the  heart  can  grasp  it,  and  cry,  "Ay,  that  is  the 
wofid,  my  Master ;  indeed  and  of  a  truth  that  is  the  pre- 
cious truth  which  can  sweeten  my  sad  discomforts,''  oh, 
what  a  bliss  it  is  I  All  glory  be  unto  the  Holy  Ghost,  who 
to  this  day  is  ever  ready  to  show  unto  his  praying  servants 
the  sweetening  tree  when  they  come  to  the  bitter  streams 

Now  that  remedy  for  the  healing  of  Marah's  water  was 
a  very  strange  one.  Why  should  a  tree  sweeten  the  waters  ? 
1  do  not  suppose  there  was  any  natural  efficacy  in  the  tree, 
although  that  would  not  be  altogether  impossible,  since 
there  are  trees,  so  travellers  tell  us,  which  have  been  used 

n* 

-   -  •,  -* 


394  MARAH;  OR, 

in  :he  sweetening  of  waters.  There  is  in  South  Africa  a  cer- 
tain river,  the  water  of  which  cannot  be  drunk  until  branch- 
es of  a  certain  tree  are  placed  in  it,  and  then  the  bitternesa 
which  is  in  the  stream  is  deposited  at  the  bottom,  and  the 
water  becomes  drinkable.  The  thing  is  not  unnatural,  nor 
altogether  necessarily  supernatural,  though  I  think  in  this 
case  it  was  supernatural,  for  there  are  no  trees  found  now 
in  the  wilderness  of  Shur  that  would  have  the  effect  of 
sweetening  brackish  waters.  This  was  no  doubt  a  miracu- 
lous incident,  and  it  was  also  meant  to  teach  us  something. 
The  fiuit  of  the  tree  of  knowledge  of  good  and  evil  was 
eaten  by  our  first  parents  and  embittered  all;  there  is  a 
tree  of  life,  the  leaves  of  which  are  for  the  healing  of  the 
nations.  Blessed  is  he  that  eats  of  this  tree  of  life ;  it  shall 
take  awav  from  him  the  bitterness  which  the  first  forbidden 
fruit  brought  into  the  world.  A  tree  is  a  living  thing : 
may  we  not  learn  that  there  are  living  principles  in  true 
religion,  which  will  sweeten  our  adversities?  Mere  doc- 
trines may  not,  but  living  principles  will ;  these  cast  into 
our  troubles  will  assuage  our  grief 

Best  of  all,  may  not  this  tree  cut  down  be  an  emblem 
of  the  Saviour?  A  glorious  tree  indeed  was  he,  with 
spreading  branches,  and  top  reaching  to  heaven — ^but  he 
must  suffer  the  axe  for  our  sakes  :  and  now,  to — day,  con- 
tempi  ating  his  atoning  sacrifice,  and  by  faith  resting  in 
him,  the  troubles  of  life  and  the  troubles  of  death  are  sweet- 
ened by  his  dear  cross,  which,  though  it  be  a  bitter  tree  in 
itself,  is  the  antidote  for  all  the  bitterness  that  comes  upon 
us  here  and  hereafter. 

TTiat  remedy  was  most  effective.  When  they  cut  down 
tue  tree,  and  put  it  into  the  water,  it  turned  the  water 
sweet — ^they  could  drink  of  it ;  and  let  me  assure  you,  that  in 
the  case  of  our  trouble,  the  cross  is  a  most  effective  sweet- 
ener. Shall  I  put  the  tree  into  the  water  for  a  minute,  and 
then  ask  you  to  drink?  Have  you  been  suffcnng  pain,  or 
any  other  form  of  tribulation?     I  will  lay  the  cross  a— soak 


THE  BITTER  WATERS  SWEETENED.  395 

in  it  for  a  minute,  and  your  first  reflection  will  be — ^^  In  all 
this  that  I  am  called  to  suffer,  there  is  not  even  a  single 
particle  of  punishment  for  my  sin;  God  has  punished 
Christ,  consequently  he  cannot  punish  me :  to  punish  two 
for  one  offence  would  be  unjust,  therefore  there  is  nothing 
penal  in  all  that  I  am  suffering."  I  do  not  know  of  any 
reflection  more  consoling  than  this,— that  my  sorrow  is  not 
laid  on  me  by  a  judge,  nor  inflicted  on  me  as  the  result  of 
divine  anger.  There  is  not  a  drop  of  wrath  in  a  riverful 
of  a  believer's  grief.  Does  not  that  take  the  bitterness  out 
of  affliction  and  make  it  sweet  ?  And  then  the  reflection 
goes  further.  Since  Christ  has  died  for  me,  I  am  God's 
dear  child ;  and  now  if  I  suffer,  all  my  suffering  comes  from 
my  Father's  hand — nay,  more,  from  my  Father's  heart.  He 
loves  me,  and  therefore  makes  me  suffer ;  not  because  ho 
does  not  love,  but  because  he  does  love,  does  he  thus  afflict 
me.  In  every  stripe  I  see  another  token  of  paternal  love. 
This  it  is  to  sweeten  Marah's  waters  indeed. 

Then  will  come  the  next  reflection — that  a  Father's  love 
is  joined  with  infinite  wisdom,  and  that,  therefore,  every 
ingredient  in  the  bitter  cup  is  measured  out  drop  by  drop, 
and  grain  by  grain,  and  there  is  not  one  pang  too  many 
ever  suffered  by  an  heir  of  heaven.  The  cross  is  not  only 
weighed  to  the  pound,  but  to  the  ounce,  ay,  to  the  lowest 
conceivable  grain.  You  shall  not  have  one  half  a  drop 
of  grief  more  than  is  absolutely  needful  for  your  good 
and  God's  glory.  And  does  not  this  also  sweeten  the  cross, 
that  it  is  laid  on  us  by  infinite  wisdom,  and  by  a  Father's 
hand  ? 

Ravishing,  indeed,  is  the  reflection  in  the  midst  of  all  our 
^rief  and  suffering,  that  Jesus  Christ  suffers  with  us.  In 
all  thine  affliction,  O  member  of  the  body,  the  Head  is 
still  a  sharer.  Deep  are  the  sympathies  of  the  Redeemer, 
acute,  certain,  quick,  infallible ;  he  never  forgets  his  saints. 

All  the  while  the  Lord  lays  his  chastening  hand  upo  • 
his  servants,  they  may  be  cheered  l?y  this  reflectioi^-that 


896  MABAH;  OR, 

in  this  he  is  making  them  conformable  imto  Christ.  What 
should  they  know  of  Grethsemane  if  they  had  no  sweat  of 
pain  ?  What  should  they  know  of  the  passion,  if  they  nev- 
er had  to  cry,  "  I  thirst,"  or  "  My  God,  my  God,  why  hast 
thou  forsaken  me  ?  "  They  were  poor  scholars  in  the  school 
of  Christ's  sufferings,  if  they  endured  no  sufferings  them- 
selves ;  and  it  is  a  blessed  thing,  a  sweet  thing  to  drink 
of  his  cup,  and  to  be  baptized  with  his  baptism. 

Moreover,  when  the  child  of  God  is  in  his  right  state, 
it  is  always  enough  for  him  that  his  condition  is  the  result 
of  his  Father's  will.  Is  it  God's  will  ?  Is  it  Christ's  will  ? 
Then  it  is  my  will.  How  could  I  dare  to  wish  any  thing  to 
be  otherwise  than  divine  love  appoints  ? 

I  do  not  know  but  what  it  will  become  sometimes  to 
the  Christian  a  subject  of  joy  that  Marah  is  bitter.  For 
suppose  Marah  had  been  sweet,  then  Moses  had  not  prayed 
to  God,  and  then  the  tree  had  not  been  cut  down,  and  they 
had  never  known  the  power  of  God  to  sweeten  bitter  waters. 
It  must  be  an  awful  thing  to  live  an  unafflicted  life  on 
earth.  You  say  it  must  be  a  very  delightful  thing.  I  have 
no  doubt  it  may  be  from  some  aspects ;  but  a  person  who 
has  had  no  sickness,  how  can  he  have  a  sympathetic  heart  ? 
What  service  can  he  render  in  cheering  the  people  of  God  ? 
If  you  never  had  any  trials,  I  should  suppose,  unless  some- 
thing very  extraordinary  happened,  that  you  would  become 
harsh  and  untender  ;  I  am  afraid  some  would  grow  brutal, 
coarse,  hard  of  heart,  Who  wishes,  where  others  have  to 
suffer,  to  claim  an  immunity  from  a  blessing  which  brings 
rich  consolations  with  it,  and  works  eternal  benefits  ?  Be- 
loved, this  is  ever  one  thing  that  sweetens  Marah  that  it  af- 
terwards bringeth  forth  the  comfortable  fruits  of  righteous- 
ness. Our  trials  are  not  sent  to  us  alone  and  by  themselves; 
there  is  a  quantum  suff.  of  grace  sent  with  them,  by  which 
they  are  made  available  as  means  to  sanctify  us,  and  make 
us  meet  to  be  partakers  of  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in 
light. 


THE  BITTER  WATERS  SWEETENED.  397 

I  will  not  keep  you  muoli  longer  upon  this  point,  but  I 
must  notice,  that  while  I  have  shown  you  that  the  remedy 
is  very  efficacious,  it  is  something  more  than  efficacious  : 
U  is  transcendant.  The  water  was  bitter,  but  it  became 
absolutely  sweet.  The  same  water  that  was  bitter  became 
sweet,  and  the  grace  of  God  by  leading  us  into  contem- 
plations that  spring  out  of  the  cross  of  Christ,  can  make 
our  trials  themselves  to  become  pleasant  to  us.  It  is  a 
triumph  of  grace  in  the  heart  when  we  not  only  acquiesce 
in  trouble,  but  even  rejoice  in  it.  "  We  glory  in  tribula- 
tions also,  knowing  that  tribulation  worketh  patience."  It 
is  a  grand  thing  when  we  can  truly  say  that  as  to  jbhe  rod 
of  the  covenant,  we  would  not  escape  it  if  we  might.  It 
becomes  in  the  judgment  of  wisdom  so  good  a  thing  to 
be  tried,  that  though  we  "would  not  seek  it,  yet  we  accept 
it  with  somethi»ng  more  than  readiness,  and  the  bitter  thing 
becomes  sweet  to  us. 

Let  me  say,  and  have  done  with  this  part  of  the  sub- 
ject, that  the  remedy  which  is  suggested  to  us  by  a  spiritu- 
alizing of  text,  is  efficacious  for  all  trials,  and  will  be  found 
especially  so  for  the  bitter  waters  of  death  at  the  last. 
With  all  that  can  be  said  about  death,  it  is  not  a  pleasant 
subject  for  contemplation,  and  needs  to  be  viewed  in  con. 
nection  with  covenant  consolations.  Certain  brethren  buoj' 
themselves  up  with  the  hope  of  escaping  death  by  the  seo 
ond  Advent.  I  am  not  certain  that  they  are  wiser  than 
David,  who  did  not  hope  to  omit  the  valley  of  the  shadow 
of  death,  but  trusted  that  he  should  fear  no  evil  therein, 
because  the  rod  and  staff  would  be  his  stay.  The  death  of 
Christ  robs  death  of  its  terrors.  The  prospect  of  the  resur- 
rection and  the  certainty  of  immortality  make  us  say, "  Sure- 
ly the  bitterness  of  death  is  past  I" 

Be  it  remembered,  that  if  the  cross  avails  to  sweeten 
all  the  bitterness  of  our  mortal  life,  and  even  the  last  bit- 
terness of  death,  it  is  assuredly  available  this  morning  to 
sweeten  the  bitterness  of  our  present  sorrow.    Did  you 


898  MARAH;  OR. 

drink  the  quassia-cup  this  morning  before  you  came  here  ? 
Do  you  feel  desponding  at  this  moment,  my  brother,  my 
sister?  Go  to  your  Saviour  at  once,  view  him  suffering 
on  your  behalf,  behold  the  completion  of  your  reconcilia- 
tion to  God,  mark  the  security  of  your  soul  through  the 
finished  work  of  your  glorious  Surety,  take  down  your 
harps  from  the  willows,  put  away  your  ashes,  ask  the  Lord 
to  anoint  you  with  the  oil  of  joy  instead  of  mourning,  and 
even  at  the  waters  of  Marah  lift  up  your  song  again,  and 
let  the  timbrel  still  be  heard.  "Sing  unto  the  Lord,  for 
he  hath  triumphed  gloriously :  Marah's  bitterness  hath  he 
turned  to  sweetness,  he  hath  cut  down  the  mighty  tree 
which  he  gave  for  us,  and  which  yielded  itself  to  the  axe 
for  us,  and  into  the  bitter  stream  the  tree  is  cast  and  now 
henceforth,  O  Marah,  thou  art  •  sweet  indeed."  Did  you 
come  here  this  morning  as  Naomi  when  she  returned  to  her 
city  and  said,  "  Call  me  not  Naomi,  call  me  Mara :  for  the 
Almighty  hath  dealt  very  bitterly  with  me"?  Ah,  when 
she  dandled  on  her  knee  and  held  in  her  fond  bosom  the 
child  of  Ruth  and  Boaz,  the  joy  of  her  old  age,  she  was 
glad  to  think  the  neighbors  had  not  changed  her  name, 
and  she  was  willing  enough  to  be  called  Naomi  still.  Call 
not  yourself  Marah,  but  remember  the  new  name  which 
the  Lord  hath  named  upon  you.  The  letter  pool  itself,  call 
it  not  Marah  ;  be  not  so  ready  to  affix  names  of  sad  me- 
morials :  your  griefs  are  apt  enough  to  gall  your  memory ; 
do  not  aid  them  to  sting  you.  Call  the  well  by  another 
name;  forget, Marah,  and  remember  Jehovah  Rophi,  "the 
Lord  that  healeth,"  both  "  thee  "  and  the  waters.  Record 
the  mercy  rather  than  the  son'ow,  and  give  thanks  to  the 
Most  High. 

Now,  in  closing,  somebody  will  say,  "  This  is  a  very  cu- 
rious missionary  sermon."  Yes,  but  you  see  I  did  not  ap- 
point the  missionary  sermon  for  to-day  :  my  brethren  did 
that,  and  certainly  I  did  not  arrange  my  own  sickness,  so  as 
to  make  it  fall  on  this  day.     How  can  I  dance  to  the  sound 


i0 


THE  BITTER  WATERS  SWEETENED.  399 

of  the  timbrel  when  I  am  feeble  and  sad  ?  If  I  had  the 
choosing  of  my  own  state  of  health  and  mind,  I  would  have 
the  choosing  of  my  own  texts,  and  make  them  always  suit- 
able to  the  occasions  as  they  arise ;  but  I  am  obliged  to 
preach  what  I  can  preach,  and  as  I  know  pretty  well  the 
flavor  of  Marah,  and  a  little  about  the  sweetness  which  the 
healing  tree  can  give  it,  I  can  only  tell  you  what  I  know  by 
experience. 

But  it  is  a  good  missionary  sermon  for  all  that.  Let  us 
show  you  how.    Here  is  a  suggestion  op  compassion. 

Brethren,  all  the  world  over,  the  heathen  have  trials, 
bitternesses,  woes.  I  said  that  Christians  have  peculiar 
woes,  but  the  dark  places  of  the  earth  have  direr  sorrows. 
Some  nations  are  devastated  with  war;  others  are  tormented 
with  diabolical  customs  and  rites :  their  actions  even  towards 
themselves  through  their  superstition  are  brutal.  I  may 
well  liken  the  world  that  lietji  in  darkness  to  a  thirsty  car- 
avan gathered  around  Marah's  well  where  the  water  is  too 
bitter  to  drink.  Oh,  the  woes,  the  woes  of  mankind  !  High 
are  the  Andes,  lofty  the  Himalayas,  but  the  woes  of  the  sons 
of  Adam  are  higher,  huger  still.  The  Ganges  and  the  Indus, 
and  other  mighty  streams,  pour  their  floods  into  the  ocean  ; 
but  what  mighty  deep  could  contain  the  torrents  of  human 
grief?  A  very  deluge  is  the  sorrow  as  well  as  the  sin  of 
man.  And,  my  brethren,  the  heathen  know  nothing  of  the 
healing  tree,  the  tree  cut  down  of  old,  which  still  hath  power 
to  sweeten  mortal  misery.  You  know  it,  you  have  your 
trials,  and  you  surmount  them  by  the  appeals  you  make  to 
your  Lord,  and  by  the  power  of  his  consolations ;  but  alas  ! 
these  sons  of  darkness  have  your  griefs,  and  more,  but  they 
have  not  your  Comforter.  For  them  the  deluge,  but  not 
the  ark ;  for  them  the  tempest,  but  not  the  refuge.  And 
you  are  so  sure  that  you  have  that  which  would  cheer  them  : 
no  doubt  passes  across  your  mind  as  to  the  gospel.  These 
are  wavering  times  in  which  some  professors,  and  even  some 
teachers,  almost  believe  that  the  gospel  is  but  one  theory 


400  MARAH;  OR, 

of  many,  and  will  have  to  stand  its  test,  and,  in  all  probabiV 
ity,  will  fail, as  many  human  systems  of  thought  have  done. 
You  think  not  so  ;  you  believe  that  God's  gospel  is  a  verity, 
a  revelation  of  Jehovah.  Heaven  and  earth  may  pass  away, 
but  not  his  word,  his  Christ,  his  decree,  his  covenant.  You 
know  that  you  have  a  tree  that  can  heal  the  bitter  fountains. 
No  doubt  comes  across  your  mind  as  to  that :  what  then  ? 
By  orvmmon  humanity,  much  more  by  the  tender  movements 
of  the  grace  of  God  upon  your  souls,  I  conjure  you  present 
this  remedy  to  those  who  need  it,  and  who  need  it  so  much. 
Will  any  thing  suffice  as  a  substitute  for  it  ?  Is  there  any- 
where on  earth  another  healing  tree  beside  that  which  fell 
beneath  the  axe  at  Calvary  ?  Are  there  other  leaves  for  the 
healing  of  the  nations  ?  On  the  seven-hilled  city  of  Rome, 
grows  there  a  tree  that  can  heal  man's  diseases  ?  No ;  it  is 
a  deadly  upas.  Cut  it  down,  and  bum  the  very  roots  there- 
of. Amongst  the  fancies  of  idolatry  are  there  any  inven- 
tions of  man  that  can  cool  his  fevered  brow  and  soothe  his 
griefs  ?  Does  Mohammedanism  offer  hopes  for  eternity  that 
can  light  up  the  grave  to  an  awakened  sinner  ?  Are  there 
thoughts  of  bliss  in  idolatry  calculated  to  cheer  the  sepul- 
chre ?  All  religions  answer,  "  Comforts  are  not  in  us."  It 
is  only  at  the  cross,  it  is  only  by  Jesus  crucified  that  the 
world  can  be  healed.  Hitherto  little  has  been  accomplished 
compared  with  our  desires  ;  and  in  contrast  to  our  ambitions, 
next  to  nothing ;  but  faith,  darting  beyond  the  things  that 
are  seen,  flying  into  the  presence-chamber  of  God,  can  be- 
hold him  writing  with  the  eternal  pen,  "All  flesh  shall  see 
the  salvation  of  God ; "  and  she  is  sure  that  the  tree  will 
sweeten  the  waters  yet.  Come,  brethren,  let  your  faith 
prove  itself  by  your  works.  Help  to-day — to-tlay,  by  your 
gifts ;  help  to-morrow, — ^to-morrow  by  your  prayers.  Help, 
some  of  you,  by  consecrating  yourselves  to  mission  labor. 
There  is  a  prayer  I  mean  to  continue  to  offer  until  it  is  an- 
swered, that  God  would  pour  out  on  this  church  a  missionary 
spirit.     I  want  to  see  our  young  men  devoting  themselves  to 


THE  BITTER  WATERS  SWEETENED  401 

the  ^orkj  some  that  will  not  be  afraid  to  venture  and  preach 
Jesus  Christ  in  the  regions  beyond.  I  have  not  much  faith 
in  missionary  societies ;  it  gets  less,  I  must  protest,  each  year ; 
yet  we  must  never  put  aside  one  instrumentality  until  w*» 
have  a  better  ready.  If  the  Lord  would  send  the  living  fire 
through  the  churches  of  England,  if  he  would  send  from  on 
high  a  divine  impulse,  we  should  see  starting  up  here  and 
there  men  who  would  say :  "  Here  are  we :  send  us."  The 
Spirit  of  God  will  say,  "  Separate  me  Paul  and  Barnabas 
for  the  work,"  and  when  this  is  done  I  look  to  see  far  hap- 
pier days. 

We  have  sweetened  the  waters  a  little  ;  no  more  the 
suttee  bums ;  the  African  is  free ;  the  slave-ship  crosses  no 
more  the  deep.  In  some  regions  exterminating  wars  have 
ceased ;  the  white  dove  of  peace  flies  where  the  raven  of  war 
was  seen.  Glory  be  to  God !  A  few  leaves  cast  into  the 
waters  have  done  this.  Let  us  bear  a  whole  Christ  and  a 
whole  gospel  amongst  the  nations,  and  lay  the  tree  in  this 
Marah,  until  at  last  the  whole  world  shall  drink  of  the  sweet 
waters  of  divine  love,  and  God  shall  be  all  in  all.  €k)d 
bless  you,  beloved,  for  Jesus'  sake.    Amen. 


NEGOTIATIONS  FOB  PEACE 


SERMON  XXIIL 


^  EGOTIATIONS  FOR  PEACE. 

This  senuon  was  delivered  in  connection  with  the  Annual  Afisem- 
h\f  of  the  Baptist  Union  of  Great  Britain,  at  Cambridge,  in  1870.  It 
was  an  open  air  sermon  suggested  by  the  siege  of  Paris,  and  the  at* 
tempts  to  obtain  terms  of  peace. 

^*FBXACHINO  PEACS  BT  JSSU8  0HBI8T:  (HV  U  LORD  OF  ALL  V*— ActS  X.  88. 

These  words  were  addressed  to  an  admirable  congre- 
gation, all  met  with  an  earnest  purpose,  all  conscious  that 
they  were  in  the  presence  of  God,  all  like  soil  that  had  been 
ploughed  and  prepared  for  the  good  seed.  Happy  preacher 
to  have  such  a  congregation.  God  make  this  congregation 
to  be  of  the  same  sort.  The  preacher  also  was  a  right  faith- 
ful messenger  from  heaven.  No  sooner  did  Peter  know  that 
he  was  commissioned  to  the  Gentile  centurion  and  his  house- 
hold, than  he  came  to  his  house  ;  and  when  he  found  him- 
self surrounded  by  the  family  and  their  friends,  he  girt  up 
his  loins  for  his  work,  and  gave  his  whole  soul  to  his  sub- 
ject. Peter  goes  straight  to  his  business  ;  there  is  no  beat- 
ing about  the  bush,  no  prefatoiy  apology,  but  he  begins  to 
preach  Jesus  Christ,  spoken  of  by  prophets,  seen  by  apostles, 
hanged  on  a  tree,  and  risen  again  on  the  third  day.  It  is 
well  when  the  preacher  feels  that  preaching  is  no  mere  dis- 
play, and  is  not  intended  to  be  an  opportunity  for  him  to 
show  how  excellent  an  orator  he  can  be.  The  true  ambas- 
sador for  Christ  feels  that  he  himself  stands  before  God,  and 
has  to  deal  with  souls  in  God's  stead  as  God's  servant,  and 
therefore  has  no  time  for  considering  the  graces  of  oratory 
and  the  tricks  of  rhetoric,  but  must  speak  from  his  inmost 
soul  the  word  of  the  Lord,    Every  preacher  stands  in  a  sol- 


NECiOTlATIONS  FOR  PEACJfe.  403 

emn  place — a  place  in  which  unfaithfulness  is  inhumanity  to 
man  as  well  as  treason  to  God.  To  be  false  to  our  charge 
will  cast  us  into  the  deepest  condemnation ;  to  be  hurled 
from  a  pulpit  into  hell  will  be  to  perish  indeed.  See  ye, 
then,  that  both  the  congregation  and  the  preacher  are  pecu- 
liarly in  God's  presence  in  their  solemn  assemblies,  and 
should  feel  and  act  accordingly.  Pray  ye  for  us  and  for 
yourselves  that  we  both  may  so  behave  before  the  Lord, 
that  our  assembling  together  may  not  increase  our  sin,  but 
may  prove  to  be  a  rich  and  lasting  blessing. 

We  have  in  the  text  before  us  the  subject  upon  which 
Peter  treated  in  his  sermon  to  Cornelius  and  his  friends.  He 
seems  to  have  taken  it  for  granted  that  men  are  at  war  with 
God,  that  even  the  attentive  congregation  before  him, 
though  consisting  of  the  best  of  men,  were  by  nature  at  en- 
mity with  their  Maker.  He  speaks  therefore  as  an  ambaa* 
sador  desirous  of  establishing  a  better  state  of  things,  and 
tells  them  that  he  has  come  to  preach  peace  by  Jesus 
Christ,  who  is  Lord  of  all.  I  shall  at  this  time  tiy  to  follow 
his  example,  and  though  I  cannot  do  so  with  equal  steps, 
yet  have  I  in  my  bosom  the  same  earnest  desire  for  the 
souls  of  my  hearers  as  the  apostle  had.  I  pray  that  all  ^f 
you  may  be  brought  to  peace  with  God  through  Jesus  Christ. 

First,  this  evening,  I  shall  give  some  reasons  why  those 
of  you  who  are  not  reconciled  to  God  should  desire  peace 
with  him.  When  we  have  weighed  these  I  shall,  secondly, 
endeavor  to  negotiate  the  terms  of  peace^  and  then,  thirdly, 
we  shall  lay  before  you  a  claim  or  proclamation^  which  is 
publicly  asserted,  and  to  be  universally  maintained,  namely, 
that  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord  of  all. 

L  To  begin,  then,  I  shall  endeavor  to  offer  to  the  uncon- 
verted SEASONS  WHY  THEY  SHOULD  DESIRE  TO  BE  AT  PEACE. 

May  I  not  urge, as  the  first  reason,  that  it  is  not  com* 
mendable  to  be  at  enmity  with  any  of  the  wise  and  good.  It 
is  best  to  be  at  peace  with  all  men,  but  it  is  incumbent  upon 


iOi  NBGOTIATIONS  FOE  PBAG8. 

us  to  be  in  friendship  with  holy  men.  I  should  deeply  re- 
gret to  have  any  one  for  my  enemy,  but  if  he  were  a  godly 
person  I  should  consider  it  a  calamity.  If  the  angels  of 
heaven  were  opposed  to  us  it  would  Lave  an  ill  look,  those 
holy  beings  would  not  needlessly  take  umbrage  ;  but  when 
it  comes  to  opposition  to  the  infinitely  good,  just  and  holier 
God,  who  in  his  right  mind  can  dc  other  than  bewail  it»  '».uJ 
desire  to  see  it  ended  by  a  gracious  peace  ?  Strife  agsunst 
evil,  injustice,  and  tyranny  is  honorable,  but  to  contend 
with  nprightuess,  goodness,  and  holiness  is  deplorable.  No 
possible  benefit  can  arise  from  a  conflict  in  which  we  are 
on  the  wrong  side.  If  God  be  for  us,*  none  can  successful- 
ly fight  against  us,  but  to  have  God  opposed  to  us  is  in 
itself  the  chief  of  evils.  My  hearer,  "  Acquaint  thyself  with 
God  and  be  at  peace,  for  thereby  good  shall  come  unto 
thee.'' 

The  second  reason  ought  to  have  weight  with  every  hon- 
est man,  it  is  this,  that  the  war  in  which  you  are  engaged  is 
an  unjust  one.  It  never  ought  to  have  been  begun,  there 
was  never  any  justifiable  cause  for  its  outbreak  ;  God  was 
unjustly  and  wickedly  assailed  by  his  ungrateful  creature. 
What  ought  never  to  have  been  begun  had  better  be  drop- 
ped as  soon  as  possible.  Sin  is  war  against  right,  against 
love,  against  happiness.  Transgression  of  God's  law  is  a 
transgression  of  commands  most  equitable  and  beneficent. 
To  love  evil  is  dishonorable,  wrong,  unfair,  unjust,  and  the 
conscience  of  man  tells  him  it  is  so.  To  be  at  war  with 
God  is  to  fight  against  truth  and  justice,  and  to  contend 
for  falsehood,  unholiness,  injustice,  unrighteousness.  When 
men  love  that  which  is  right,  and  good,  and  true,  and  yield 
themselves  up  to  God's-  will,  then  the  war  is  over  ;  but  inas- 
much as  the  war  against  God  consists  in  our  doing  the 
wrong,  and  loving  the  wrong,  and  thinking  the  wrong,  and 
clinging  to  the  wrong,  such  a  war,  in  the  very  nature  of 
things,  ought  to  come  to  a  close.  May  the  Holy  Spirit  set 
this  in  its  true  colors,  and  convince  every  one  of  you  that 


NEGOTIATIONS  FOtl  l^EACE.  403 

not  to  love  God  is  the  most  shameful  of  evils,  the  most  de 
testable  of  enormities.     How  can  it  ever  be  justifiable  for 
the  creature  to  contend  against  the  Creator  ?  Shall  the  clay 
rise  against  the  potter  ?    Will  it  ever  become  a  right  thing 
for  children  to  rebel  against  their  parents  ?    The  ox  fed  at 
the  stall  will  serve  its  owner ;  shall  it  be  right  that  we,  be- 
ing fed  by  God,  should  yet  refuse  him  our  service  ?    The 
natural  order  of  the  relationship  between  us  and  our  Crea- 
tor involves  in  all  justice  that  we  should  be  confoimed  to 
his  will.     O  men,  will  ye  choose  the  ways  and  wages  of  un- 
righteousness, and  cover  yourselves  with  confusion  ?  Would 
God   there   were  in  you  an  honest  judgment  to  judge 
uprightly.     Besides,  what  evil  hath  our  Creator  done  us 
that  we  should  go  to  war  against  him  ?    What  quality  is 
there  in  him  that  we  ought  to  hate  ?    What  is  there  that 
we  can  justly  challenge  in  the  character  of  God  which 
might  righteously  provoke  our  antagonism?     Is  he  not 
kindness  itself?    Doth  he  not  overflow  with  lovin or— kind- 
ness  ?  Sends  he  not  his  rain  upon  the  just  and  upon  the  un- 
just ?    Doth  he  not  command  his  sun  to  rise  upon  the  evil 
as  well  as  the  good  ?    Hath  he  not  sent  us  fruitful  seasons, 
and  kept  his  covenant,  that  day  and  night,  seed  time  and 
harvest,  summer  and  winter,  should  not  cease  ?   For  which 
of  these  things  should  we  rebel  against  him  ?    Some  of  you 
are  possessed  of  riches;  should  you  for  that  cause  forget  the 
God  that  gave  them  to  you  ?    Others  of  you  are  in  sound, 
robust  health ;  should  you  violate  the  commands  of  him 
who  gives  you  this  choicest  of  blessings  ?    We  appeal  to 
you,  men  and  brethren,  wherefore  are  you  at  war  with  your 
God  ?    If  he  were  a  cruel  tyrant,  if  he  were  unjust,  if  he 
trod  you  beneath  his  feet,  if  his  government  were  malicious 
and  degrading,  I  could  understand  your  warfare,  but  it  is 
an  evil,  an  unjust,  a  villainous  war,  because  the  Lord  is  full 
of  mercy  and  his  name  is  love.   Oh  that  men  would  end  their 
rebellion  at  this  hour,  while  we  summon  them  to  do  so  in 
the  name  of  God  I    Eternal  Spirit,  convince  them  of  sin,  of 


406  KfiGOTlAtlOi^S  FOR  PfiACftL 

righteousness,  and  of  judgment  to  oome,  and  lead  them  to 
the  peace-speaking  blood. 

A  third  argument  for  ending  the  war  may  be  drawn 
from  the  fact  that  he  who  began  it  has  been  terribly  defeated^ 
and  is  at  this  moment  a  prisoner.  He  who  began  the  war 
is  Satan,  the  arch — enemy.  Our  first  parents  did  not  first  le- 
bel ;  man  was  the  dupe  of  an  older  rebel  Apollyon,  once 
an  angel,  conceived  ambitious  thoughts,  and  would  fain  have 
become  equal  with  his  Maker,  but  he  was  banished  from 
heaven  by  just  decree,  and  then  resorting  to  this  lower  re- 
gion, sought  out  our  mother  Eve,  and  seduced  our  race,  hoping 
to  maintain  the  war  against  the  Lord  of  Hosts  by  inciting 
us  to  cast  off  our  allegiance.  Little  has  he  gained  by  this 
stratagem,  overwhelming  has  been  his  defeat.  Hurled  from 
the  battlements  of  heaven  at  first,  he  has  worn  his  chain 
wearily  these  many  years,  seeking  rest  and  finding  none, 
dreading  that  day  of  wrath  when  he  shall  be  dragged  at  the 
chariot  wheels  of  our  divine  Redeemer,  and  then  consigned 
to  the  hell  of  old  prepared  for  him.  Jesus  who  once  was 
slain,  has  led  captivity  captive.  He  whose  heel  was  bitten 
by  the  old  dragon  has  broken  the  serpent's  head.  Revolt, 
O  man,  against  the  prince  of  the  power  of  the  air  ;  follow 
him  no  longer  ;  take  up  arms  against  the  demon  monarch  ; 
refuse  henceforth  to  follow  his  beck  and  call.  What  right 
has  the  devil  to  reign  over  you  ?  He  neither  made  you,  pre- 
served you,  or  blessed  you  ;  evil  only,  and  that  continually, 
will  he  do  unto  you.  Strike  for  your  freedom,  strike  at  once, 
and  shake  off  his  galling  yoke.  For  him  the  everlasting 
fire  has  been  prepared:  why  must  you  needs  share  it  ?  The 
wages  of  sm  will  be  death  ;  why  continue  in  so  unprofitable 
a  service  ?  May  God  grant  that  you  may  escape  the  wrath  to 
come  that  knows  no  end,  by  turning  against  your  old  master 
and  enlisting  beneath  the  banner  of  your  Saviour.  Down 
with  the  black,  sin-stained,  sulphureous  colors,  and  run  up 
the  red  cross.  Exchange  the  black  Diabolus  for  the  fair 
Immanuel,  and  peace  shall  come  unto  you. 


NEGOTIATIONS  T^U  PEACE.  407 

These  are  three  good  reasons,  but  there  are  many  others, 
and  among  them  is  this  one — the  force  which  is  brought 
against  you  it  is  utterly  impossible  for  you  effectually  to 
resist  It  is  well  when  we  contemplate  warfare  to  sit  down 
and  see  whether  we  are  equal  to  the  combat.  What  man  is 
he  that  with  one  thousand  can  meet  him  that  cometh  against 
him  with  twenty  thousand  ?  Now,  consider  ye  this,  ye  that 
forget  God.  If  ye  oppose  God,  with  whom  is  it  that  ye  set 
yourselves  in  battle  array  ?  Can  your  puny  arm  hope  to 
rival  the  right  hapd  of  Jehovah  ?  Canst  thou  thunder  with 
a  voice  like  his  ?  Were  he  a  creature  like  yourselves,  you 
might  hope  for  victory.  Were  he  limited  in  any  degree, 
you  might  summon  all  your  strength  and  hold  out  in  the 
day  of  conflict ;  but  who  can  contend  against  Omnipotence  ? 
Who  shall  stand  against  the  Almighty  God  ?  As  well  might 
the  fly  hope  to  quench  the  sun  when  he  has  already  burned 
up  his  wings  in  a  candle  !  As  well  might  you  seek  to  dry 
up  the  Atlantic,  or  bid  Niagara  leap  up  the  rock  instead  of 
down !  As  well  might  you  hope  to  stay  the  moon  in  its 
course,  or  to  pluck  the  stars  from  their  places,  as  think  to 
stand  against  God  !  Nay,  if  you  had  all  heaven  and  earth 
and  hell  beneath  your  feet,  yet  could  God  overcome  you,  for 
he  hath  made  all  these  things,  and  can  overthrow  both  them 
and  you  with  his  mere  will.  Let  not  the  wax  contend  with 
the  fire,  nor  the  stubble  with  the  flame.  Let  not  man,  who 
is  but  nothingness,  think  that  he  can  contend  with  his  Maker. 
You  know  already  how  foolish  it  is  to  strive  against  the 
natural  laws  of  God,  and  you  will  find  it  equally  so  to  con- 
tend against  his  moral  government.  A  man  stands  in  the 
way  of  a  steam  engine  rushing  on  at  express  speed  ;  he  knows 
that  according  to  the  laws  of  nature  its  weight  and  velocity 
effectually  prevent  his  staying  its  course ;  do.  y'>u  call  it 
courage  on  his  part  that  he  stands  on  the  track  and  defies 
the  iron  horse  ?  It  is  not  courage,  it  is  foolhardiness,  it  is 
madness,  it  is  suicide.  Yet  this  is  nothing  in  comparison 
to  what  you  are  doing  in  placing  yourself  in  opposition  to 


408  NEOOTIATJONS  FOR  PEACB. 

the  Lord.  God  will  not  alter  his  laws  for  yon.  Why 
should  he  ?  They  are  just  and  right,  wherefore  should  he 
change  them  ?  Fire  will  bum,  and  if  a  drunken  madcap 
persists  in  thrusting  his  arm  between  the  bars  of  a  furnace, 
shall  fire  cease  from  its  nature  to  secure  him  immunity  from 
his  folly  ?  K  a  man  expose  himself  to  the  rush  of  an  aval- 
anche,can  he  expect  the  rolling  mass  to  suspend  itself  in  mid 
air  for  him  ?  If  a  mariner  will  go  to  sea  in  a  vessel  worm- 
eaten  and  unseaworthy,  will  the  waves  pity  the  bark  and 
cease  from  their  rough  play  and  rougher  warfare  ?  No,  they 
roll  around  the  leaking  craft  as  they  would  have  done  around 
a  better  vessel  ;  they  toss  it,  they  sink  it ;  the  careless  mar- 
iner perishes.  K  a  man  will  act  contrary  to  natural  laws,  he 
must  suffer  for  it.  K  you  dash  your  head  against  a  granite 
rock  it  will  not  for  your  sake  soften  into  down  ;  and  it  is  just 
go  with  the  moral  laws  of  God's  government;  certain  results 
follow  from  sinful  courses  of  action,  inevitably  and  as  a 
matter  of  course.  Yield,  then,  to  the  divine  wisdom  which 
has  rightly  ordained  the  consequences  of  sin.  Do  not  neces- 
sitate your  own  destruction.  Submit  freely  where  rebellion 
is  absurd.  Against  Onnipotence  it  were  folly  to  strive ;  be 
wise,  then,  and  submit  to  the  power  of  the  omnipotent  God. 
Further,  remember  that  any  resistance  which  you  may  he 
able  to  offer  to  the  Lord  your  God  will  be  carried  on  at  a  very 
fearfulprice.  You  will  have  to  bear  the  expenses  of  the  war 
which  you  foolishly  prolong.  All  the  time  that  you  resist 
the  Almighty  you  are  doing  it  at  your  own  risk  and  hazard. 
And  what  is  that  risk  and  hazard?  Why  this,  that  even  if 
you  should  yield  to  him  ultimately,  so  as  to  be  saved,  you 
will  regret  these  sins  and  these  rebellions  as  long  as  you  live. 
Even  when  they  are  forgiven,  your  iniquities  will  be  a  source 
of  perpetual  regret  to  you,  they  will  be  a  source  of  danger 
antl  weakness  to  you  as  long  as  you  live,  for  though  God 
heals  the  wounds  of  our  sin,  we  shall  carry  the  scars  even 
to  our  graves.  Moreover,  if  you  should  never  receive  the 
saving  mercy  of  God,  remember,  these  rebellions  of  yours  are 


NEaoTlATlONS  5*011  I^EACIS.  409 

noted  against  you,  and  when  the  Great  Judge  comes  to  deal 
with  you  and  lay  his  justice  to  the  line,  and  righteousness 
to  the  plummet,  for  all  this  you  will  have  to  give  an  account, 
for  all  this  God  will  levy  his  distraints  upon  you,  and  you 
shall  be  made  to  feel  the  weight  of  his  terrible  hand  of  ven- 
geance. 

Furthermore,  let  me  remind  you  of  one  thing  else,  namely, 
that  ycmr  total  defeat  is  absolutely  certain  sooner  or  later. 
No  man  ever  did  set  himself  against  God  and  prosper  for 
long.  His  patience  sulfereth  long  and  is  kind,  but  there  is 
an  end  to  it.  Look  at  Pharaoh.  If  ever  a  man  defied  God 
thoroughly,  it  was  that  king  of  Egypt.  "  Who  is  the  Lord," 
said  he,  "  that  I  should  obey  him  ?  "  He  born  up  against 
warnings  and  actual  plagues  ;  each  time  when  he  was  bro- 
ken down  he  defied  the  Lord  again  as  soon  as  the  pressure 
of  trouble  was  removed  ;  but  when  he  fancied  that  the  infi- 
nite God  had  emptied  out  his  quiver,  he  found  to  his  cost 
that  there  was  yet  another  arrow  left,  and  that  a  deadly 
shaft  which  would  lodge  in  his  heart  and  lay  him  prostrate. 
He  said  in  his  heart,  "  I  have  outlived  the  plague  of  the  lo- 
custs, I  have  outlived  the  lightnings,  and  the  darkness,  and 
the  murrain  that  fell  upon  men  and  beasts,  who  is  Jehovah 
that  I  should  care  for  any  further  plagues  ?  I  will  defy 
him  to  do  his  worst,  and  fight  on  to  the  bitter  end."  As  he 
dashes  along  in  his  war  chariots,  with  his  mighty  hosts  at 
his  side,  hastening  to  pursue  the  captives  who  are  fleeing 
from  him,  he  fancies  himself  to  be  omnipotent,  but  when  he 
finds  his  wheels  dragging  heavily  in  the  depths  of  the  sea, 
he  turns  to  flee  from  the  face  of  the  Lord.  All  too  late  was 
his  flight,  for  God  gave  the  word,and  the  liquid  walls  which 
erst  had  stood  like  solid  masonry,  leaped  down  upon  him, 
and  then  the  haughty  king  knew  that  Jehovah  could  van- 
quish the  proud,  and  put  down  the  stout-hearted.  For  this 
cause  was  he  raised  up,  that  he  might  be  a  standing  testi- 
mony to  all  generations  that  whosoever  rebelleth  against 
the  Lord  shall  meet  with  a  final  and  irretrievable  overthrow, 
18 


408  NEGOTIATIONS  FOR  PEACB. 

the  Lord.  God  will  not  alter  his  laws  for  yon.  Why 
should  he  ?  They  are  just  and  right,  wherefore  should  he 
change  them  ?  Fire  will  bum,  and  if  a  drunken  madcap 
persists  in  thrusting  his  arm  between  the  bars  of  a  furnace, 
shall  fire  cease  from  its  nature  to  secure  him  immunity  from 
his  folly  ?  K  a  man  expose  himself  to  the  rush  of  an  aval- 
anche,can  he  expect  the  rolling  mass  to  suspend  itself  in  mid 
air  for  him  ?  If  a  mariner  will  go  to  sea  in  a  vessel  worm- 
eaten  and  unseaworthy,  will  the  waves  pity  the  bark  and 
cease  from  their  rough  play  and  rougher  warfare  ?  No,  they 
roll  around  the  leaking  craft  as  they  would  have  done  around 
a  better  vessel  ;  they  toss  it,  they  sink  it ;  the  careless  mar- 
iner perishes.  K  a  man  will  act  contrary  to  natural  laws,  he 
must  suffer  for  it.  K  you  dash  your  head  against  a  granite 
rock  it  will  not  for  your  sake  soften  into  down  ;  and  it  is  just 
so  with  the  moral  laws  of  God's  government ;  certain  results 
follow  from  sinful  courses  of  action,  inevitably  and  as  a 
matter  of  course.  Yield,  then,  to  the  divine  wisdom  which 
has  rightly  ordained  the  consequences  of  sin.  Do  not  neces- 
sitate your  own  destruction.  Submit  freely  where  rebellion 
is  absurd.  Against  Onnipotence  it  were  folly  to  strive ;  be 
wise,  then,  and  submit  to  the  power  of  the  omnipotent  God. 
Further,  remember  that  any  resistance  which  you  may  he 
able  to  offer  to  the  Lord  your  God  will  be  carried  on  at  a  very 
fearful  price.  You  will  have  to  bear  the  expenses  of  the  war 
which  you  foolishly  prolong.  All  the  time  that  you  resist 
the  Almighty  you  are  doing  it  at  your  own  risk  and  hazard. 
And  what  is  that  risk  and  hazard?  Why  this,  that  even  if 
you  should  yield  to  him  ultimately,  so  as  to  be  saved,  you 
will  regret  these  sins  and  these  rebellions  as  long  as  you  live. 
Even  when  they  are  forgiven,  your  iniquities  will  be  a  source 
of  perpetual  regret  to  you,  they  will  be  a  source  of  danger 
antl  weakness  to  you  as  long  as  you  live,  for  though  God 
heals  the  wounds  of  our  sin,  we  shall  carry  the  scars  even 
to  our  graves.  Moreover,  if  you  should  never  receive  the 
saving  mercy  of  God,  remember,  these  rebellions  of  yours  are 


NEaoTlATlONS  I^OU  I^EACIS.  409 

noted  against  you,  and  when  the  Great  Judge  comes  to  deal 
with  you  and  lay  his  justice  to  the  line,  and  righteousness 
to  the  plummet,  for  all  this  you  will  have  to  give  an  account, 
for  all  this  God  will  levy  his  distraints  upon  yoUj  and  you 
shall  be  made  to  feel  the  weight  of  his  terrible  hand  of  ven- 
geance. 

Furthermore,  let  me  remind  you  of  one  thing  else,  namely, 
that  your  total  defeat  is  absolutely  certain  sootier  or  later. 
No  man  ever  did  set  himself  against  God  and  prosper  for 
long.  His  patience  suiferetb  long  and  is  kind,  but  there  is 
an  end  to  it.  Look  at  Pharaoh.  If  ever  a  man  defied  God 
thoroughly,  it  was  that  king  of  Egypt.  "  Who  is  the  Lord," 
said  he,  "  that  I  should  obey  him  ?  "  He  born  up  against 
warnings  and  actual  plagues  ;  each  time  when  he  was  bro- 
ken down  he  defied  the  Lord  again  as  soon  as  the  pressure 
of  trouble  was  removed  ;  but  when  he  fancied  that  the  infi- 
nite God  had  emptied  out  his  quiver,  he  found  to  his  cost 
that  there  was  yet  another  arrow  left,  and  that  a  deadly 
shaft  which  would  lodge  in  his  heart  and  lay  him  prostrate. 
He  said  in  his  heart,  "  I  have  outlived  the  plague  of  the  lo- 
custs, I  have  outlived  the  lightnings,  and  the  darkness,  and 
the  murrain  that  fell  upon  men  and  beasts,  who  is  Jehovah 
that  I  should  care  for  any  further  plagues  ?  I  will  defy 
him  to  do  his  worst,  and  fight  on  to  the  bitter  end."  As  he 
dashes  along  in  his  war  chariots,  with  his  mighty  hosts  at 
his  side,  hastening  to  pursue  the  captives  who  are  fleeing 
from  him,  he  fancies  himself  to  be  omnipotent,  but  when  he 
finds  his  wheels  dragging  heavily  in  the  depths  of  the  sea, 
he  turns  to  flee  from  the  face  of  the  Lord.  All  too  late  was 
his  flight,  for  God  gave  the  word, and  the  liquid  walls  which 
erst  had  stood  like  solid  masonry,  leaped  down  upon  him, 
and  then  the  haughty  king  knew  that  Jehovah  could  van- 
quish the  proud,  and  put  down  the  stout-hearted.  For  this 
cause  was  he  raised  up,  that  he  might  be  a  standing  testi- 
mony to  all  generations  that  whosoever  rebelleth  against 
the  Lord  shall  meet  with  a  final  and  irretrievable  overthrow, 
18 


410  NEGOTIATIONS  FOR  PEACB. 

O  sinner,  thy  fate  may  not  be  to  be  drowned  in  the  Red  Sea, 
but  worse  than  that,  thou  wilt  be  shut  in  forever  where 
hope  is  shut  out,  and  where  misery  abounds.  The  punish 
ment  of  lost  souls  will  prove  to  them,  beyond  all  controver- 
sy, that  it  is  a  futile,  a  bitter,  a  horrible  thing,  to  be  at  war 
with  the  Lord  of  hosts.  None  can  endure  the  terror  of  J©. 
hovah's  wrath ;  wherefore  is  it  that  they  so  lightly  dare  to 
provoke  it?  Yield  thee,  man:  it  were  folly  to  stand  out 
against  God;  thou  canst  not  hope  to  win.  Sue  thou  for 
peace  to-night,  and  may  God  send  it  thee.  Without  such 
peace  your  future  is  darkened  with  thick  clouds,  and  the 
presages  of  an  horrible  tempest.  The  Lord  most  surely 
Cometh,  and  at  his  coming  woe  will  be  the  portion  of  his 
enemies. 

"  At  his  presence  nature  shakes. 
Earth  affrighted  hastes  to  flee. 
Solid  mountains  melt  like  wax. 
What  will  then  become  of  thee  ? 
Who  his  advent  may  abide  ? 
You  that  glory  in  your  shame, 
Will  you  find  a  place  to  hide 
When  the  world  is  wrapt  in  flame  ?  " 

Let  me  tell  thee  (and  this  is  the  gladdest  note  that  is  in 
my  heart  at  this  hour),  let  me  tell  thee  it  will  be  altogether 
to  thine  advantage  to  he  at  peace  with  God,  It  will  be  for 
thy  present  happiness,  it  will  be  for  thy  eternal  welfare.  A 
soul  at  war  with  God  is  also  opposed  to  its  own  best  inter- 
ests, but  a  heart  that  has  yielded  to  divine  love,  that  has 
cast  down  its  weapons,  that  has  closed  in  with  divine  mercy, 
IS  a  soul  at  peace,  at  rest,  a  soul  that  is  ready  for  joy  on  earth, 
and  for  bliss  unspeakable  above.  Were  there  no  hereafter, 
it  is  profitable  even  for  this  present  life  to  have  God  for  ouf 
lncnd;but  when  we  think  of  the  eternal  future,even  '^he  most 
superficial  consideration  suffices  to  convince  us  of  the  urgent 
necessity  of  being  reconciled  to  God.  Be  wise  and  consider 
then,  take  advice  and  do  that  which  will  be  most  gainful  to 


NEGOTIATIONS  FOR  PEACE.  411 

thee— namely,  seek  peace,  and  yield  to  Christ  who  is  Lord 
of  all.  Meanwhile,  my  heart's  desire  and  prayer  for  thee  ia 
that  thou  mayest  be  saved,  and  to  that  end  may  the  Holy 
Ghost  visit  thee,  soften  thy  heart,  guide  thy  judgment,  and 
direct  thy  will,  so  that  Jesus  may  henceforth  be  thine,  and 
be  thy  peace. 

IL  Now  I  shall  turn,  in  the  second  place,  to  deolabb 

THB  TERMS   ON  WHICH  PEACE  MAY   BE   NEGOTIATED.      I  COme 

with  a  white  flag  to-night.  I  ask  for  a  parley,  an  armistice, 
a  truce.  God,  meanwhile,  holds  back  his  thunderbolts,  and 
bids  the  sinner  live  while  mercy  is  proclaimed  to  him. 
Wouldst  thou  have  peace,  then  ?  Art  thou  in  earnest  foi* 
friendship  with  thy  God  ?  Then  learn  that  first  of  all  the 
great  sine  qua  non  is,  that  peace  be  made  through  an  ambas- 
sador nominated  of  God,  namely,  his  only-begotten  Son,  Je- 
sus Christ.  Here,  in  the  text,  it  says,  "  Preaching  peace  by 
Jesus  Christ."  There  will  be  no  peace  between  God  and 
any  man  who  despises  the  person,  name  and  work  of  Jesus 
Christ.  Reject  that  name,  and  there  is  no  other  whereby 
you  can  be  saved.  This  is  the  foundation  for  peace  which 
was  laid  of  old,  and  other  foundation  can  no  man  lay.  Hear 
'ihou,  then,  and  let  all  difficulty  vanish  from  thy  mind,  while 
we  speak  of  that  excellent,  that  all-glorious  Person  whom  the 
Lord  has  set  forth  as  heaven's  Plenipotentiary,  the  Ambas- 
ador  of  the  Eternal.  This  Jesus  Christ  is  God  himself — God 
over  alljblessed  forever ;  knowing  the  mind  of  God,  and  able 
to  negotiate  with  Divine  authority.  But  he  is  also  man — 
man  such  as  thou  art — man  of  the  substance  of  his  mother, 
most  truly  and  really  man,  and,  therefore,  he  is  fitted  to  deal 
graciously  with  man.  Oh,  then,  because  he  is  thy  brother, 
accept  him  as  ambassador.  He  is  fit  to  be  a  daysman,  and 
an  arbitrator,  and  a  mediator,  since  he  has  sympathy  with 
thee,  and  yet  has  equality  with  God.  If  you  yourself  had 
the  choice  of  an  umpire  you  could  not  select  one  so  every 
way  fitted  for  the  office.     His  love  to  you,  his  good-will  to 


413  NEGOTIATIONS  FOR  PEACB. 

our  poor  fallen  race,  bis  assumption  of  our  nature,  his  death 
in  mortal  form,  all  should  lead  you  to  commit  your  case 
into  his  faithful  hands.  God  lead  thee  to  do  so  at  onoe,  for 
the  matter  is  urgent. 

Now  further,  concerning  the  negotiation,  I  would  say  to 
thee,  O  enemy  of  God,  that  the  great  difficulty  is  put  away 
which  might  have  prevented  peace  between  thee  and  God  ; 
for  the  justice  of  God  which  thou  hast  provoked  has  been 
satisfied  by  Jesus  Christ.  The  sacrifice  of  Jesus  has  made 
recompense  for  the  injury  done  by  human  sin.  There  is  no 
difficulty  now  on  God's  part ;  no  difficulty  in  forgiving  any 
dinner  that  believes  in  Jesus  Christ.  Thy  sin  was  a  great 
stone  which  lay  at  the  door,  but  it  is  rolled  away  because 
Jesus  died  ;  let  that  comfort  thee.  If  thou  art  anxious  to 
have  peace,  God's  terms  are  these  (I  call  them  terms  for  want 
of  a  better  word,  but  I  mean  no  legality  thereby)  ;  he  asks 
no  price  of  thee,  he  demands  no  millions  of  money,  nay,  he 
demands  no  pounds  at  thine  hands.  If  thou  hadst  the  wealth 
of  the  Indies,  the  Lord  would  despise  such  a  bribe.  If  he 
were  hungry,  he  would  not  tell  thee  ;  if  he  were  thirsty  he 
would  not  come  to  thee  for  drink; for  Lebanon  would  not 
be  sufficient  to  burn,  nor  the  beasts  thereof  for  a  burnt  sac- 
rifice. He  asks  no  gold  from  thee,  he  asks  no  suffering  from 
thee,  no  passing  through  dreary  penance,  or  horrible  despair- 
ing. It  would  be  no  satisfaction  to  him  to  see  thee  suffer. 
He  delights  in  happiness,  he  is  pleased  to  see  us  happy 
when  it  is  safe  for  others  that  we  should  be  so.  Neither  does 
he  ask  thee  to  achieve  merits  to  bring  to  him.  Thou  couldst 
not  if  he  should  demand  it.  Thou  hast  sinned  before  and 
will  sin  again  All  hope  for  thee  to  make  up  the  faultiness 
of  the  past  by  the  perfection  of  the  future  is  gone.  Thou 
hast  broken  the  law — thou  canst  not  keep  it.  If  thou  wilt 
labor  after  life  under  the  covenant  of  works,  thou  must  per- 
ish. God,  therefore,  does  not  ask  thee  to  save  thyself  by 
thine  own  works,  but  he  graciously  tells  thee  that  he  is  full 
of  mercy,  full  of  compassion,  delighting  to  forgive,  ready  to 


NEGOTIATIONS  FOR  PEACR  413 

pass  by  thy  sins,  and  that  at  once.  Here  is  all  that  the  Lord 
asks  of  thee,  and  this  he  will  enable  thee  to  do — trust  unfeign- 
edly  in  his  only-begotten  Son.  On  the  cross  Jesus  suffered: 
turn  thine  eyes  to  that  cross.  He  rose  again,  he  as3ended 
to  heaven :  trust  him  to  save  thy  soul,  because  he  ever  liveth 
to  make  intercession  for  thee. 

"  All  the  doing  is  completed. 

Now  'tis  *  look,  believe,  and  live ; ' 
None  can  purchase  his  salvation. 

Life's  a  gift  that  God  must  give; 
Grace,  through  righteousness,  is  reigning. 

Not  of  works,  lest  man  should  boast ; 
Man  must  take  the  mercy  freely. 

Or  eternally  be  lost." 

Then  down  with  thy  weapons  of  rebellion  ;  surrender  them, 
confess  that  thou  hast  erred,  confess  it  in  thy  Father's  own 
bosom.  Conscious  of  his  lo  ve,  be  conscious  of  thy  sin.  Con- 
fess that  thou  hast  done  wrong.  "Cease  to  do  evil,  learn  to 
do  well."  "Let  the  wicked  forsake  his  way,  and  the  unright- 
eous man  his  thoughts,  and  let  him  return  unto  the  Lord." 
Nurture  not  within  thy  bosom  the  viper  that  will  be  thy  de- 
struction. Pluck  it  out  and  hurl  it  from  thee  in  the  strength 
of  him  that  died  to  save  thee. 

Now,  is  this  hard  ?  Are  these  severe  demands  ?  Is  it  a 
hardship  to  confess  the  wrong  which  thou  hast  done  ?  Is 
that  too  much  ?  Is  it  not  reasonable  that  thou  shouldst  do 
it  ?  Thou  canst  not  be  healed,  and  continue  to  wound  thy- 
self. How  canst  thou  hope  that  the  poison  will  be  extract- 
ed from  thy  veins  while  thou  dost  continue  to  drink  it? 
Nay,  man,  look  to  the  cross,  and  hate  thy  sin,  for  sin  nailed 
the  Well-beloved  to  the  tree.  Look  up  to  the  cross,  and 
thou  wilt  kill  sin; for  the  strength  of  Jesus'  love  will  make 
thee  strong  to  put  down  thy  tendencies  to  sin.  Well,  but, 
sayest  thou,  "  Is  there  nothing  for  me  to  bring,  nothing  for 
me  to  do  ?  "  Answer,  "  There  is  nothing  for  thee  to  bring, 
there  is  nothing  for  thee  to  do,  but  there  is  much  for  thee  to 
take — ^for  thou  hast  to  receive  Jesus  as  thine  all  in  alL** 


414  NEGOTIATIONS  FOR  PEACE. 

It  is  thy  duty  to  throw  down  thy  weapons  of  rebellion,  and 
to  say  this  afternoon,  "  Great  God  I  yield ;  my  wanderings 
now  are  at  an  end.  I  yield  my  soul  to  thee,  Jesus ;  come 
and  save  me.  And  when  thou  hast  saved  me,  help  me  to 
obey  thee.  Behold,  I  give  myself  up  to  thee.  Infinite 
mercy  of  God,  receive  me ;  precious  blood  of  Jesus,  cleanse 
me  ;  Holy  Spirit,  sanctify  me ;  God  my  creator,  new  create 
me  ;  Jesus,  lover  of  my  soul,  teach  my  soul  to  love  thee." 
In  this  way  peace  is  found,  even  peace  through  Jesus 
Christ. 

HL  And  now,  thirdly,  and  to  conclude.  I  have  to  make 
public  A  CLAIM  which  Peter  made  on  this  occasion,  when 
he  spoke  to  Cornelius  and  his  kinsfolk. 

I  have  a  claim  which  ought  to  be  urged  wherever  the 
gospel  is  preached.  "  He  is  the  Lord  of  all."  This  means, 
first,  that  Jesus  Christ  who  died  on  Calvary,  is  in  the  medi- 
atorial kingdom,  which  his  Father  has  given  him,  Lord  of 
all  mankind.  He  is  Lord  not  of  the  Jew  only,  but  also  of 
the  Gentile  ;  not  of  one  race  and  nation,  but  of  all  the  tribes 
of  Adam  born.  "He  is  Lord  of  all."  Remember  that  text: 
"  As  thou  hast  given  him  power  over  all  flesh,  that  he  may 
give  eternal  life  to  as  many  as  thou  hast  given  him."  The 
great  object  of  Christ's  mediatorial  kingdom  is  the  salvation 
of  the  elect ;  but  in  order  to  compass  that  grand  result,  power 
is  given  to  Christ  over  all  flesh,  that  is,  over  all  mankind  ; 
and  this  last  truth  is  the  reason  why  we  are  enabled  honestly 
to  preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature  under  heaven.  Because 
Christ  has  power  over  all  flesh,  we  preach  the  gospel  to  all 
flesh.  Because  be  is  Lord  of  all,  we  are  permitted  to  preach 
the  gospel  to  all,  and  say  to  all  who  come  within  its  hear- 
ing, "  Whosoever  will,  let  him  come  and  take  the  water  of 
life  freely."  Sons  of  men,  the  Son  of  God  is  King  over  yoU: 
You  are  not  ruled  to-day  so  much  by  the  iron  sceptre  of  an 
absolute  God  as  by  the  silver  sceptre  of  the  Mediator,  Jesus 
Christ.    Tou  are  under  his  government  to-day.     You  may 


NEGOTIATIONS  FOR  PEACE.  415 

hate  him,  you  may  rail  against  him,  but,"  I  will  declare  the 
decree,"  says  the  psalmist,  "  Yet  have  I  set  my  King  upon 
my  holy  hill  of  Zion."  The  heathen  rage,  the  princes  take 
counsel  together,  but  the  Lord  hath  made  Jesus  Christ  the 
King  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords,  and  under  his  reign  we 
dwell.  This  is  a  most  gladsome  truth,  for  thus  we  live 
und(  r  the  reign  of  sovereign  mercy,  under  the  reign  of  the 
incarnate  God,  Immanuel,  God  with  us.  Look,  O  sinner  ! 
You  needed  a  Mediator  between  you  and  God,  and  Jesus 
stands  in  that  place.  You  want  no  Mediator  between  you 
and  Christ;  approach  him  as  you  are,  and  his  gracious  heart 
will  gladly  receive  you.  You  cannot  come  to  God  as  King 
except  through  a  Mediator,  but  you  have  to  deal  with 
Christ,  and  may  deal  with  him  now.  Come  to  him.  You 
want  no  one  to  introduce  you.  Come  just  as  you  are.  Oh, 
may  his  blessed  Spirit  sweetly  incline  you  to  come  and 
"  kiss  the  Son  lest  he  be  angry,  and  ye  perish  from  the  way, 
when  his  wrath  is  kindled  but  a  little." 

The  text,  by  declaring  the  reigning  power  of  the  Lord 
Jesus,  shows  us  most  encouragingly  the  most  solid  of  rea- 
sons for  yielding  to  him  our  trust  and  obedience.  If  he  be 
Lord  of  all,  if  all  things  be  put  under  him,  then  1  may  with 
safety  rely  upon  him.  This  is  the  Man,  the  exalted  Man, 
whom  we  unseen  adore,  of  whom  it  is  written,  "  Thou  mad- 
est  him  to  have  dominion  over  all  the  works  of  thy  hands  : 
thou  hast  put  all  things  under  his  feet.  All  sheep  and  oxen, 
yea,  and  the  fowl  of  the  air,  and  the  fish  of  the  sea,  and 
whatsoever  passeth  through  the  paths  of  the  sea."  Now, 
the  apostle  rightly  enough  says,  "  But  now  we  see  not  yet 
all  things  put  under  him.  But  we  see  Jesus,  who  was  made 
a  little  lower  than  the  angels  for  the  sujQTering  of  death, 
crowned  with  glory  and  honor."  He  is  reigning  on  high 
in  heaven,  audit  is  ordained  that  "at  the  name  of  Jesus  every 
imee  shall  bow  and  every  tongue  confess  that  Jesus  Christ 
is  Lord  to  the  .glory  of  God  the  Father. "  Oh,  then  ti-ust  him, 
for  all  power  is  his.    He  is  exalted  on  high  to  give  repent- 


416  NEGOTIATIONS  FOR  PEACB. 

ance  and  remission  of  sins.  All  his  power  is  linked  with 
mercy.     Grace  perfames  all  his  attributes. 

Because  Jesus  is  Lord,  I  pray  you  my  fellow-men  to  yield 
him  reverence  and  serve  him.  Obey  him,  for  he  is  your 
liege  Lorl  and  Sovereign.  It  ought  to  be  the  easier  to  obey 
him  because  he  is  numbered  with  the  human  race.  Tlie  old 
history  which  we  learned  when  we  were  children  told  us 
that  the  Welsh  could  not  bear  the  yoke  of  an  English  king. 
Tney  wantea  to  have  a  prince  born  in  their  own  country  ; 
and,  therefore,  their  English  conqueror  brought  before  them 
his  own  son,  born  in  their  own  Principality,  and  they  accept- 
ed him  as  Prince  of  Wales.  God  reigneth  over  us,  but 
that  we  may  love  his  reign  he  has  anointed  his  own  Son  our 
own  Elder  Brother,  Jesus  Christ,  Kiri^  of  kings  and  Lord 
of  lords.  Jesus  the  infinite  deigned  to  be  an  infant ;  he  who 
sustains  all  things  was  laid  upon  a  woman's  breast.  There 
is  no  man  more  a  man  than  Jesus,  and  yet  in  no  respect  is 
he  other  than  equal  with  God.  Let  us  then  accept  the  rule 
of  Jesus.  This  is  the  ladder  that  Jacob  saw,  the  bottom  of 
which  rests  on  the  earth,  near  to  you — your  feeble  feet  may 
reach  it  ;  but  the  top  doth  reach  to  heaven,  and  now  be- 
tween earth  and  heaven,  between  man  and  God,  there  is  a 
ladder  that  never  can  be  broken,  by  which  sinners  may  as- 
cend to  the  glory  of  God.  Oh,  love  him,  then  ;  wftb  all  your 
hearts  cherish  the  name  and  honor  of  the  incarnate  God,  Im- 
nianuel.  Because  he  is  so  unspeakably  glorious  and  gra* 
cious,  serve  him  with  joy  and  gladness. 

Be  it  also  known  that  Jesus  the  Saviour  must  bv  '•e- 
oeived  as  Lord  in  the  souls  of  those  whom  he  redeems. 
You  must  obey  him  if  you  trust  him,  or  else  your  trust  will 
be  mere  hypocrisy.  If  we  trust  a  phypi^ian,  we  follow 
his  prescriptions ;  if  we  trust  a  guide,  we  follow  his  di- 
rections, and  if  we  fully  rely  on  Jesus,  we  obey  his  gracious 
commands.  The  faith  which  saves  is  a  faith  which  pro- 
duces a  change  of  life,  and  subdues  the  soul  to  obedience 
to  the  Lord.     Be  not  deceived :   where  JesuB  comes  he 


NEGOTIATIONS  FOR  PBACR  417 

eomes  to  reign.  Without  submission  to  his  will  and  word, 
you  are  without  the  safety  of  his  atonement.  The  ship  is 
saved  from  the  rock  because  it  obeys  the  pilot's  hand  as  he 
moves  the  helm  ;  if  it  were  untrue  to  the  steerage  it  would 
perish  with  the  best  of  helmsmen  on  board.  It  is  most  just 
that  he  who  bought  us,  sought  us,  found  us,  saved  us,  and 
preserves  us  should  have  our  loving  allegiance,  and  so 
assuredly  it  must  be,  or  no  peace  can  be  established  be- 
tween us,  and  God.  Let  us  welcome  his  sway  and  pray 
him  to  exert  his  power.     Be  this  our  daily  prayer : 

"  Almighty  King  of  saints. 
These  tyrant  lusts  subdne : 
Drive  the  old  serpent  from  his  seat^ 
And  all  my  powers  renew. 

This  done,  my  cheerful  voice 

Shall  loud  hosannas  raise ; 
My  soul  shall  glow  with  gratitude. 

My  lips  proclaim  thy  praise." 

And  lastly,  let  me  say,  I  do  not  put  this  to  you  as  a 
matter  of  choice  as  to  whether  you  will  or  will  not  sub- 
mit to.  the  will  of  God  and  seek  reconciliation  with  him; 
neither  do  I  speak  with  bated  breath  when,  as  a  herald,  I 
hereby  proclaim  Jesus  to  be  both  Lord  and  God  ;  but  in  the 
name  of  him  that  liveth  and  was  dead  and  is  alive  for  ever- 
more, and  hath  the  keys  of  hell  and  of  death — I  say,  in  his 
name,  I  demand  of  you  that  you  obey  him,  and  receive  him 
as  the  Christ  of  God.  Yield  yourselves  to  him  who  is  Lord 
of  all.  Do  you  refuse  the  summons  that  I  give  you  now  as 
his  officer  this  day  ?  Then  take  heed  what  you  do,  for  as  the 
Lord  liveth  you  shall  answer  for  this  in  the  great  day  of  his 
appearing.  Behold  he  cometh  with  clouds,  and  every  eye 
shall  see  him,  and  they  also  which  crucified  him,  and  you 
who  despise  him  must  be  judged  by  him.  If  you  reject  him 
you  shall  nevertheless  see  the  Son  of  Man  sitting  at  the  right 
hand  of  God,  and  coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven  to  judge 
the  quick  and  dead.  I  say,  again,  then,  I  come  not  to  you 
18* 


418  NEGOTIATIONS  FOB  PEAGB. 

to  flatter  and  deceive  yon,  I  oome  not  to  plead  with  yon  as 
though  my  Lord  and  Master  were  on  equal  terms  with  you. 
He  summons  you  to  surrender,  he  bids  you  throw  down  your 
arms  and  accept  his  mercy.  He  is  not  afraid  of  your  oppo- 
sition, neither  does  he  need  your  friendship.  It  is  his  grace 
which  leads  him  to  invite  you  to  peace.  He  condescends  to 
treat  thus  with  you  whom  he  might  have  sent  into  hell  with 
one  word  of  his  lips  years  ago.  If  you  refuse  him  you  shall 
answer  for  it.  On  your  heads  shall  be  your  own  blood ;  and 
in  that  day  when  heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away  like  a 
scroll,  you  without  a  shelter,  you  without  an  advocate,  you 
without  an  excuse,  shall  be  banished  from  his  presence  to  en- 
dure the  wrath  of  God.  The  Lord  grant  of  his  mercy  that 
not  one  of  you  may  stand  out  against  him; but  this  night, 
ere  another  sun  rises,  may  there  be  peace  established  on  a 
sure  footing  between  you  and  God,  for  Christ  is  our  peace. 
May  you  take  him  and  trust  him,  and  be  reconciled  to  God ; 
and  to  Otoi  shall  be  the  glory  forever  and  forever.  Amen 
and  Amen. 


»»»,. 


JSBUS  ONLT    '  419 


SERMON  XXIV. 


JESUS  ONLY. 

"^iSD  WHEN  THXT  HAS  LIFTED  T7F  THEIB  BYES,  THET  SAW  NO  MAN,  SAYB  JiaVf 

ONLT."— Matthew  xvil.  8. 

The  last  words  will  suffice  us  for  a  text,  "  Jesus  only.'* 
When  Peter  saw  our  Lord  with  Moses  and  Elias,  he  exclaim- 
ed, "Master,  it  is  good  to  be  here,"  as  if  he  implied  that  it 
was  better  to  be  with  Jesus,  and  Moses,  and  Elias,  than  to 
be  with  Jesus  only.  Now  it  was  certainly  good  that  for 
once  in  his  life  he  should  see  Christ  transfigured  with  the  rep- 
resentatives of  the  law  and  the  prophets  ;  it  might  be  for 
that  particular  occasion  the  best  sight  that  he  could  see, 
but  as  an  ordinary  thing  an  ecstasy  so  sublime  would  not 
have  been  good  for  the  disciples ;  and  Peter  himself  very 
soon  found  this  out,  for  when  the  luminous  cloud  overshad- 
owed him,  and  the  voice  was  heard  out  of  heaven,  we  find 
that  he  with  the  rest  became  sore  afraid.  The  best  thing 
after  all  for  Peter,  was  not  the  excessive  strain  of  the  trans- 
figuration, nor  the  delectable  company  of  the  two  great 
spirits  who  appeared  with  Jesus,  but  the  equally  glorious, 
but  less  exciting  society  of  "Jesus  only."  Depend  on  it, 
brethren,  that  ravishing  and  exciting  experiences  and  trans 
porting  enjoyments,  though  they  may  be  useful  as  occasion- 
al refreshments,  would  not  be  so  good  for  every  day  as  that 
quiet  but  delightful  ordinary  fellowship  with  "  Jesus  only," 
which  ought  to  be  the  distinguishing  mark  of  all  Christian 
life.  As  the  disciples  ascended  the  mountain  side  with  Jesua 
on.y,  and  as  they  went  back  again  to  the  multitude  with  Je» 


4S0  JESUS  ONLT. 

SOS  only,  they  were  in  as  good  company  as  when  they  were 
on  the  mountain  summit,  Moses  and  Elias  being  there  also ; 
and  although  Jesus  Christ  in  his  common  habiliments  and  in 
his  ordinary  attire  might  not  so  dazzle  their  eyes  as  when  they 
saw  his  raiment  bright  as  the  light,  and  his  face  shining  as 
the  sun,  yet  he  really  was  quite  as  glorious,  and  his  com- 
pany quite  as  beneficiaL  When  they  saw  him  in  his  every- 
day attire,  his  presence  was  quite  as  useful  to  them  as  when 
he  robed  himself  in  splendor.  "Jesus  only,"  is  after  all 
upon  the  whole  a  better  thing  than  Jesus,  Moses,  and  Elias. 
"Jesus  only,"  as  the  common  Jesus,  the  Christ  of  every  day, 
the  man  walking  among  men,  communing  in  secret  with 
his  disciples,  is  a  better  thing  for  a  continuance  while  we 
are  in  this  body,  than  the  sight  even  of  Jesus  himself  in  the 
excellence  of  his  majesty. 

Tliis  morning,  in  trying  to  dwell  upon  the  simple  sight 
of  "  Jesus  only,"  we  shall  hold  it  up  as  beyond  measure  im- 
portant and  delightful,  and  shall  bear  our  witness  that  as 
it  was  said  of  Goliath's  sword,  "  there  is  none  like  it,"  so 
may  it  be  said  of  fellowship  with  "  Jesus  only."  We  shall 
first  notice  what  mighJb  have  happened  to  the  disciples  after 
the  transfiguration  /  we  shall  then  dwell  on  wh^t  did  hap- 
pen; and  then,  thirdly,  we  shall  speak  on  what  we  anxiousfy 
desire  may  happen  to  those  who  hear  its  this  day. 

I.  First,  then,  what  might  have  happened  to  the  three 
disciples  after  they  had  seen  the  transfiguration. 

There  were  four  things,  either  of  which  might  have  c<5- 
curred.  As  a  first  supposition,  they  might  have  seen  nobody 
with  them  on  the  holy  mount ;  they  might  have  found  all 
gone  but  themselves.  When  the  cloud  had  overshadowed 
them,  and  they  were  sore  afraid,  they  might  have  lifted  up 
their  eyes  and  found  the  entire  vision  melted  into  thin  lir ; 
no  Moses,  no  Elias,  and  no  Jesus.  In  such  a  case  they  would 
have  been  in  a  sorry  plight,  like  those  who  having  begun  to 
taste  of  a  banquet,  suddenly  find  all  the  viands  swept  awar  ; 


JESUS  ONLY  42] 

like  thirsty  men  who  have  tasted  the  cooling  crystal  drops, 
and  then  seen  the  fountain  dried  up  before  their  eyes. 
They  would  not  have  gone  down  the  mountain  side  that  day 
asking  questions  and  receiving  instruction,  for  they  would 
have  had  no  teacher  left  them.  They  would  have  descend- 
ed to  face  a  multitude  and  to  contend  with  a  demon  ;  not  to 
conquer  Satan,  but  to  stand  defeated  by  him  before  the 
crowd ;  for  they  would  have  had  no  champion  to  espouse 
their  cause  and  drive  out  the  evil  spirit.  They  would  have 
gone  down  among  Scribes  and  Pharisees  to  be  baffled  with 
their  knotty  questions,  and  to  be  defeated  by  their  sophis- 
tries, for  they  would  have  had  no  wise  man,  who  spake  as 
never  man  spake,  to  untie  the  knots  and  disentangle  the 
snarls  of  controversy.  They  would  have  been  like  sheep 
without  a  shepherd,  like  orphan  children  left  alone  in  the 
world.  They  would  henceforth  have  reckoned  it  an  unhap- 
py day  on  which  they  saw  the  transfiguration  ;  because  hav- 
ing seen  it,  having  been  led  to  high  thoughts  by  it,  and  ex- 
cited to  great  expectations,  all  had  disappeared  like  the 
foam  upon  the  waters,  and  left  no  solid  residuum  behind. 
Alas !  for  those  who  have  seen  the  image  of  the  spirits  of 
just  men  made  perfect,  and  beheld  the  great  Lord  of  all  such 
spirits,  and  then  have  found  themselves  alone,  and  all  the 
high  companionship  forever  gone. 

My  dear  brethren  and  sisters,  there  are  some  in  this  world 
and  we  ourselves  have  been  among  them,  to  whom  something 
like  this  has  actually  occurred.  You  have  been  under  a  ser- 
mon, or  at  a  gospel  ordinance,  or  in  reading  the  word  of  God, 
for  a  while  delighted,  exhilarated,  lifted  up  to  the  sublimer 
regions,  and  then  afterwards  when  it  has  all  been  over,  there 
has  been  nothing  left  of  joy  or  benefit,  nothing  left  of  all 
that  was  preached  and  for  the  moment  enjoyed,  nothing,  at 
any  rate,  that  you  could  take  with  you  into  the  conflicts  of 
every-day  life.  The  whole  has  been  a  splendid  vision  and 
nothing  more.  There  has  been  neither  Moses,  nor  Eliaa, 
nor  Jesus  left.    You  did  remember  what  you  saw,  but  only 


422  JESUS  ONLT 

with  regret,  because  nothing  remained  with  yon.  And,  in« 
deed,  this  whioh  happens  sometimes  to  as,  is  a  general  habit 
of  that  portion  of  this  ungodly  world  which  hears  the  gos- 
pel and  perceives  not  its  reality  ;  it  listens  with  respect  to 
gospel  histories  as  to  legends  of  ancient  times ;  it  hears  with 
reverence  the  stories  of  the  days  of  miracles ;  it  venerates 
the  far-off  ages  and  their  heroic  deeds,  but  it  does  not  believe 
that  anything  is  loft  of  all  the  vision,  any  thing  for  to-day, 
for  common  life,  and  for  common  men.  Moses  it  knows,  and 
Elias  it  knows,  and  Christ  it  knows,  as  shadows  that  have 
passed  across  the  scene  and  have  disappeared,  but  it  knows 
nothing  of  any  one  of  these  as  abiding  in  permanent  influence 
over  the  mind  and  the  spirit  of  the  present.  All  come  and 
all  gone,  all  to  be  reverenced,  all  to  be  respected,  but  nothing 
more  ;  there  is  nothing  left, so  far  as  they  are  concerned, to 
influence  or  bless  the  present  hour.  Jesus  and  his  gospel 
have  come  and  gone,  and  we  may  very  properly  recollect  the 
fact,  but  according  to  certain  sages  there  is  nothing  in  the 
New  Testament  to  affect  this  advanced  age,  this  enlightened 
nineteenth  century  ;  we  have  got  beyond  all  that.  Ah ! 
brethren,  let  those  who  can  be  content  to  do  so,  put  up  with 
this  worship  of  moral  relics  and  spiritual  phantoms ;  to  us 
it  would  be  wretchedness  itself.  We,  on  the  other  hand, 
say,  blessing  the  name  of  the  Lord  that  we  can  say  it,  that 
there  abides  with  us  our  Lord  Jesus.  At  this  day  he  is  with 
us,  and  will  be  with  us  even  to  the  end  of  the  world.  Christ's 
existence  is  not  a  fact  confined  to  antiquity  or -to  remote 
distance.  By  his  Spirit  he  is  actually  in  his  church  ;  we 
have  seen  him,  though  not  with  eyes  ;  we  have  heard  him, 
though  not  with  ears  ;  we  have  grasped  him,  though  not  with 
hands ;  and  we  feed  upon  his  flesh,  which  is  meat  indeed, 
and  his  blood,  which  is  drink  indeed.  We  have  with  us  at 
this  very  day  Jesus  our  friend,  to  whom  we  make  known 
our  secrets,  and  who  beareth  all  our  sorrows.  We  have 
Jesus  our  interpreting  instructor,  who  still  reveals  his  secrets 
to  us,  and  leads  us  into  the  mind  and  name  of  God      We 


•JESUS  ONLY.  423 

have  Jesus  still  with  us  to  supply  us  with  strength,  and  in 
his  power  we  still  are  mighty.  We  confess  his  reigning 
sovereignty  in  the  church,  and  we  receive  his  all-sufficient 
succors.  The  church  is  not  decapitated,  her  Head  abides  in 
vital  union  with  her ;  Jesus  is  no  myth  to  us,  whatever  he 
may  be  to  others ;  he  is  no  departed  shade,  he  is  no  heroic  per- 
sonification :  in  very  deed  there  is  a  Christ,  and  though 
others  see  him  not,  and  even  we  with  these  eyes  see  him  not, 
yet  in  him  believing  we  rejoice  with  joy  unspeakable  and  full 
of  glory.  Oh,  I  trust  it  will  never  be  so  with  us,  that  as 
we  go  about  our  life  work  our  religion  shall  melt  into  fiction 
and  become  nothing  but  mere  sentiment,  nothing  but 
thought,  and  dream,  and  vision  ;  but  may  our  religion  be  a 
matter  of  fact,  a  walking  with  the  living  and  abiding  Saviour. 
Though  Moses  may  be  gone,  and  Elias  may  be  gone,  yet 
Jesus  Christ  abideth  with  us  and  in  us,  and  we  in  him,  and 
80  shall  it  be  evermore. 

Now,  there  was  a  second  thing  that  might  have  happen- 
ed to  the  disciples.     When  they  lifted  up  their  eyes  they 
might  have  seen  Moses  only.    It  would  certainly  have  been 
a  very  sad  exchange  for  what  they  did  see,  to  have  seen  Mo- 
ses only.    The  face  of  Moses  would  have  shone,  his  person 
would  have  awed  them,  and  it  would  have  been  no  mean 
thing  for  men  of  humble  origin  like  themselves  to  walk  down 
the  mountain  with  that  mighty  king  in  Jeshurun,  who  had 
spoken  with  God  face  to  face,  and  rested  with  him  in  solenm 
conclave  by  the  space  of  forty  days  at  a  time.     But  yet  who 
would  exchange  the  sun  for  the  moon  ?    Who  would  ex- 
change the  cold  moonbeams  of  Moses  and  the  law  for  the 
sunny  rays  of  the  Saviour's  divine  affection  ?    It  would  have 
been  an  xmhappy  exchange  for  them  to  have  lost  their  Mas* 
ter  whose  name  is  love,  and  to  have  found  a  leader  in  the 
man  whose  name  is  synonymous  with  law.     Moses,  the  man 
of  God  cannot  be  compared  with  Jesus,  the  Son  of  God. 
Tet,  dear  brethren,  there  are  some  who  see  Moses  only.    Af- 
ter all  the  gospel  preaching  that  there  has  been  in  the  world. 


424  JESUS  ONLY. 

and  the  declaration  of  the  precious  doctrines  cf  grace  every 
Sabbath  day; after  the  clear  revelations  of  Scripture,  and 
the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  men's  hearts ;  yet  we  have 
among  us  some  who  persist  in  seeing  nothing  but  Moses 
only.  I  mean  this,  there  are  some  who  will  see  nothing  but 
shadows  still,  mere  shadows  still.  As  I  read  my  Bible  I  see 
there  that  the  age  of  the  symbolical,  the  typical,  the  picto* 
rial,  has  paseed  away.  I  am  glad  of  the  symbols,  and  types, 
and  pictures,  for  they  remain  instructive  to  me ;  but  the  age 
in  which  tbey  were  in  the  foreground  has  given  way  to  a 
clearer  light,  and  they  are  gone  forever.  There  are,  how- 
ever, certain  persons  who  profess  to  read  the  Bible  and  to 
see  very  differently,  and  they  set  up  a  new  system  of  types 
and  shadows — a  system,  let  me  say,  ridiculous  to  men  of 
sense,  and  obnoxious  to  men  of  spiritual  taste.  There  are 
some  who  delight  in  outward  ordinances ;  they  must  have 
rubric  and  ritual,  vestments  and  ceremonial,  and  this  super- 
abundantly, morning,  noon  and  night.  They  regard  days, 
and  seasons,  and  forms  of  words  and  postures.  They  consider 
one  place  holy  above  another.  They  regard  a  certain  caste 
of  men  as  being  priestly  above  other  believers,  and  their 
love  of  symbols  is  seen  in  season  and  out  of  season.  One 
would  think,  from  their  teachings,  that  the  one  thing  need- 
ful was  not  "Jesus  only,"  but  custom,  antiquity,  outward 
performance,  and  coiTect  observance !  Alas !  for  those  who 
talk  of  Jesus,  but  virtually  see  Moses,  and  Moses  only.  Ah ! 
unhappy  change  for  the  heart  if  it  could  exchange  spiritual 
fellowship  with  Jesus  for  outward  acts  and  symbolical  rep- 
resentations. It  would  be  an  unhappy  thing  for  the  Chris- 
tian church  if  she  could  ever  be  duped  out  of  the  priceless 
boons  which  faith  wins  from  her  living  Lord  in  his  fulness  of 
grace  and  truth,  to  return  to  the  beggarly  elements  of  carnal 
ordinances.  Unhappy  day,  indeed,  if  Popish  counterfeits 
of  legal  shadows  should  supplant  gospel  fact  and  substance. 
Blessed  be  God,  we  have  not  so  learned  Christ.  We  Be9 
fometbing  better  than  Moses  only. 


JESUS  ONLY.  425 


\ 


There  are  too  many  who  see  Moses  only,  inasmuch  as  they 
see  nothing  but  law,  nothing  but  duty  and  precept  in  the 
Bible.  I  know  that  some  here,  though  we  have  tried  to 
preach  Christ  crucified  as  their  only  hope,  yet  whenever  Ihey 
read  the  Bible,  or  hear  the  gospel,  feel  nothing  except  a  sense 
of  their  own  sinfulness,  and,  arising  out  of  that  sei.se  of  sin* 
fulness,  a  desire  to  work  out  a  righteousness  of  their  o  ien. 
They  are  continually  measuring  themselves  by  the  law  of 
God,  they  feel  their  shortcomings,  they  mourn  over  their 
transgressions,  but  they  go  no  further.  I  am  glad  that  they 
see  Moses,  may  the  stern  voice  of  the  lawgiver  drive  them 
to  the  lawfulfiller  ;  but  I  grieve  that  they  tarry  so  long  in 
legal  servitude,  which  can  only  bring  them  sorrow  and  dis- 
may. The  sight  of  Sinai,  what  is  it  but  despair?  God  re- 
vealed in  flaming  fire,  and  proclaiming  with  thunder  his 
fiery  law,  what  is  there  here  to  save  the  soul  ?  To  see  the 
Lord  who  will  by  no  means  spare  the  guilty,  but  will 
surely  visit  transgression  with  eternal  vengeance,  is  a  sight 
which  never  should  eclipse  Calvary,  where  love  makes  rec- 
ompense to  justice.  O  that  you  may  get  beyond  the  mount 
that  might  be  touched,  and  come  to  Calvary,  where  God  in 
vengeance  is  clearly  seen,  but  where  God  in  mercy  fills  the 
throne.  Oh,  how  blessed  is  it  to  escape  from  the  voice  of 
command  and  threatening  and  come  to  the  blood  of  sprink- 
ling, where  "Jesus  only  "  speaketh  better  things  ! 

Moses  only,  however,  has  become  a  sight  very  common 
with  some  of  you  who  write  bitter  things  against  yourselves. 
You  never  read  the  Scriptures  or  hear  the  gospel  without 
feeling  condemned.  You  know  your  duty,  and  confess  how 
short  you  have  fallen  of  it,  and  therefore  you  abide  undor 
conscious  condemnation,  and  will  not  come  to  him  who  is 
the  propitiation  for  your  sins.  Alas,  that  there  should  be 
so  many  who  with  strange  perversity  of  unbelief  twist  every 
promise  into  a  threatening,  and  out  of  every  gracious  word 
that  drips  with  honey  manage  to  extract  gall  and  worm- 
ifoo4*    They  see  the  dark  shadow  of  Moses  only  5  the  brok^Q 


426  JESUS  ONLY. 

tablets  of  the  law,  the  smoking  mount,  and  the  terrible  trum- 
pet are  ever  with  them,  and  over  all  an  angry  God.  They 
had  a  better  vision  once,  they  have  it  sometimes  now ;  for 
now  and  then  under  the  preaching  of  the  gospel  they  have 
glimpses  of  hope  and  mercy,  but  they  relapse  into  darkness, 
they  fall  again  into  despair,  because  they  have  chosen  to  se^ 
Moses  only.  I  pray  that  a  change  may  come  over  the  spirit 
of  their  dream,  and  that  yet  like  the  apostles  they  may  see 
"  Jesus  only." 

But,  my  brethren,  there  was  a  third  alternative  that  might 
have  happened  to  the  disciples,  they  might  have  seen  Elijah 
only.     Instead  of  the  gentle  Saviour,  they  might  have  been 
standing  at  the  side  of  the  rough-clad  and  the  stern-spirited 
Elias.     Instead  of  the  Lamb  of  God,  there  might  have  re- 
mained to  them  only  the  lion  who  roared  like  the  voice  of 
God's  own  majesty  in  the  midst  of  sinful  Israel.     In  such  a 
case,  with  such  a  leader,  they  would  have  gone  down  from 
the  mount,  and  I  wot  that  if  John  had  said,  "  Command  fire 
from  heaven,"  Elias  would  have  consumed  his  foes;  the  Phar- 
isees, like  the  priests  of  Baal, would  have  found  a  speedy  end; 
Herod's  blood,  like  Ahab's,  would  have  been  licked  up  by 
dogs;  and  Herodias,  like  another  Jezebel,  would  have  been 
devoured  of  the  same.     But  all  this  power  for  vengeance 
would  have  been  a  poor  exchange  for  the  gracious  omnipo- 
tence of  the  Friend  of  sinners.    Who  would  prefer  the  slayer 
of  the  priests  to  the  Saviour  of  men?    The  top  of  Carmel 
was  glorious  when  its  intercession  brought  the  rain  for  Is- 
rael, but  how  poor  it  is  compared  with  Gethsemane,  whose 
pleadings  bring  eternal  life  to  millions  !     In  company  with 
Jesus  we  are  at  Elim  beneath  the  palm  tree,  but  with  Elias 
we  are  in  the  wilderness  beneath  the  stunted  juniper.     Who 
would  exchange  the  excellency  of  Olivet  for  the  terrors  of 
Horeb?     Yet  I  fear  there  are  many  who   see  Elias  only. 
Prophecies  of  future  woe  fascinate  them  rather  than  though th 
of  present  salvation.     Elias  may  be  taken  representatively 
as  the  preparer  of  Christ,  for  our  Lord  interpreted  th« 


prophecy  of  the  coming  of  Elias  as  referring  to  John  the 
Baptist.  There  are  not  a  few  who  abide  in  the  seeking,  re- 
penting, and  preparing  state,  and  come  not  to  "  Jesus  only." 
.  am  not  myself  fond  of  even  using  the  term  "  preparing  for 
Christ,"  for  it  seems  to  me  that  those  are  best  prepared  for 
Christ  who  most  feel  themselves  unprepared ;  but  there  \b 
no  doubt  a  state  of  heart  which  prepares  for  faith — a  sense 
of  need,  a  consciousness  of  sin,  a  hatred  of  sin,  all  these  are 
preparations  for  actual  peace  and  comfort  in  Christ  Jesus, 
alid  oh  I  how  many  there  are  who  continue  year  after  year 
merely  in  that  preliminary  condition,  choosing  the  candle 
and  refusing  the  sun.  They  do  not  become  believers,  but 
are  always  complaining  that  they  do  not  feel  as  yet  fit  to 
come  to  Christ.  They  want  Christ,  they  desire  Christ,  they 
would  fain  have  Christ,  but  they  stay  in  desire  and  longing, 
and  go  no  further.  They  never  get  so  far  as  t6  behold  "  the 
Lamb  of  God  that  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world."  The 
voice  from  heaven  to  them  they  always  interpret  as  crying, 
"  The  axe  is  laid  unto  the  root  of  the  trees  ;  bring  forth  there- 
fore fruits  meet  for  repentance."  Their  conscience  is  thrill- 
ed, and  thrilled  again,  by  the  voice  that  crieth  in  the  wil- 
derness, "  Prepare  ye  the  way  of  the  Lord."  Their  souls  are 
rent  and  torn  by  Elijah's  challenge,  "  If  the  Lord  be  God, 
follow  him  :  but  if  Baal,  then  follow  him  ; "  but  they  remain 
Btill  halting  between  two  opinions,  trembling  before  Elias 
and  not  rejoicing  before  the  Saviour.  Unhappy  men  and 
women,  so  near  the  kingdom,  and  yet  out  of  it ;  so  near  the 
feast,  and  yet  perishing  for  want  of  the  living  bread.  The 
word  is  near  you  (ah,  how  near  !),  and  yet  you  receive  it  not. 
Remember,  I  pray  you,  that  merely  to  prepare  for  a  Saviour 
is  lot  to  be  saved  ;  that  to  have  a  sense  of  sin  is  not  the  same 
thing  as  being  pardoned.  Your  repentance,  unless  you  also 
believe  in  Jesus,  is  a  repentance  that  needs  to  be  repented 
of.  At  the  girdle  of  John  the  Baptist  the  keys  of  heaven 
did  never  hang  ;  Elias  is  not  the  door  of  salvation  ;  prepara- 
tion for  Christ  is  not  Christ,  despair  is  not  regeneration. 


iid  ;es0s  only. 

doubt  is  not  repentance.  Only  by  faith  in  Jesus  can  you  h^ 
saved,  but  complaining  of  yourselves  is  not  faith.  "Jesus 
only"  is  the  way,  the  truth,  and  the  life.  "Jesus  only"  is 
the  sinner's  Saviour.  O  that  your  eyes  may  be  opened,  not 
to  see  Elias,  not  to  see  Moses,  but  to  see  "  Jesus  only." 

You  see,  then,  these  three  al  jernatives,  but  there  wa» 
also  another  :  a  fourth  thing  might  have  happened  when  the 
disciples  opened  their  eyes — they  might  luive  seen  Moses  and 
Elids  loith  Jesus,  even  as  in  the  transfiguration.  At  first 
sight  it  seems  as  if  this  would  have  been  superior  to  that 
which  they  did  enjoy.  To  walk  down  the  mountain  with 
that  blessed  trio,  how  great  a  privilege  !  How  strong  might 
they  have  been  for  the  accomplishment  of  the  divine  pur- 
poses !  Moses  could  preach  the  law  and  make  men  tremble, 
and  then  Jesus  could  follow  with  his  gospel  of  grace  and 
truth.  Elias  could  flash  the  thunderbolt  in  their  faces,  and 
then  Christ  could  have  uplifted  the  humble  spirits.  Would 
not  the  contrast  liave  been  delightful,  and  the  connection  in- 
spiriting ?  Would  not  the  assemblage  of  such  divers  kinds 
of  forces  have  contributed  to  the  greatest  success  ?  I  think 
not.  It  is  a  vastly  better  thing  to  see  "  Jesus  only,"  as  a 
matter  of  perpetuity,  than  to  see  Moses  and  Elias  with  Je- 
sus. It  is  night,  T  know  it,  for  I  see  the  moon  and  stars. 
The  morning  cometh,  I  know  it  cometh,  for  I  see  no  longer 
many  stars,  only  one  remains,  and  that  the  morning  star. 
But  the  full  day  has  arrived,  I  know  it  has,  for  I  cannot  even 
see  the  morning  star  ;  all  those  guardians  and  comforters  of 
the  night  have  disappeared  ;  I  see  the  sun  only.  Now,  inas- 
much  as  every  man  prefers  the  moon  to  midnight  and  to  the 
twilight  of  dawn,  the  disappearance  of  Moses  and  Elias,  in- 
dicating the  full  noontide  of  light,  was  the  best  thing  that 
could  happen.  Why  should  we  wish  to  see  Moses?  The 
ceremonials  are  all  fulfilled  in  Jeaus;  the  law  is  honored 
and  fulfilled  in  him.  Let  Moses  go,  his  light  is  already  in 
"Jesus  only."  And  why  should  I  wish  to  retain  Elias? 
The  prophecies  are  all  fulfilled  in  Jesus,  and  the  prepara* 


JBStTS  ONLY,  439 

tion  of  which  Elias  preached  Jesus  brings  with  himself.  Let, 
then,  Elias  go,  his  light  also  is  in  "  Jesus  only."  It  is  better 
to  see  Moses  and  Elias  in  Christ,  than  to  see  Moses  and  Elias 
with  Christ.  The  absence  of  some  things  betokens  a  higher 
stafe  of  things  than  their  presence.  In  all  my  library  I  do 
not  know  that  I  have  a  Lennie's  English  Grammar,  or  a  Ma- 
yor's Spelling  Book,  or  a  Henry's  First  Latin  Exercises,  nor 
do  I  regret  the  absence  of  those  valuable  works,  because  I 
have  got  beyond  the  need  of  them.  So  the  Christian  wants 
not  the  symbols  of  Moses,  or  the  preparations  of  Elias,  for 
Christ  is  all,  and  we  are  complete  in  him.  He  who  is  con- 
versant with  the  higher  walks  of  sacred  literature  and  reads 
in  the  golden  book  of  Christ's  heart,  may  safely  lay  the  le- 
gal school-book  by  ;  this  was  good  enough  for  the  church's 
infancy,  but  we  have  now  put  away  childish  things.  "  We, 
when  we  were  children,  were  in  bondage  under  the  elements 
of  the  world :  but  when  the  fulness  of  the  time  was  come, 
God  sent  forth  his  Son,  made  of  a  woman,  made  under  the 
law  to  redeem  them  that  Were  under  the  law,  that  we  might 
receive  the  adoption  of  sons.  And  because  ye  are  sons,  God 
hath  sent  forth  the  Spirit  of  his  Son  into  your  hearts,  crying, 
Abba,  Father.  Wherefore  thou  art  no  more  a  servant,  but 
a  son;  and  if  %8on,  then  an  heir  of  God  through  Christ." 
My  brethr^  the  principle  may  be  carried  still  further,  for 
even  the  iijiost  precious  things  we  treasure  here  below  will 
disappear  when  fully  realized  in  heaven.  Beautiful  for 
situation  was  the  temple  on  Mount  Zion,  and  though  we  be- 
lieve not  in  the  sanctity  of  buildings  under  the  gospel, we 
love  the  place  of  solemn  meeting  where  we  are  accustomed 
to  offer  prayer  and  praise ;  but  when  we  enter  into  i)erffeo- 
t  on  we  shall  find  no  temple  in  heaven.  We  delight  in  our 
Sabbaths,  and  we  would  not  give  them  up.  O  may  England 
never  lose  her  Sabbaths  I  but  when  we  reach  the  Jerusalem 
above,  we  shaL  net  observe  the  first  day  of  the  week  above 
the  rest,  for  we  shall  enjoy  one  everlasting  Sabbath.  No 
temple,  because  all  temple ;  and  no  Sabbath-day,  because  aU 


4t0  JKStTS  ONLY. 

Sabbath  in  heaven.  Thns,yon  see, the  losing  of  some  tilings 
is  gain  :  it  proves  that  we  have  got  beyond  their  help. 
Just  as  we  get  beyond  the  nursery  and  all  its  appurtenances, 
and  never  regret  it  because  we  have  become  men,  so  do  Moses 
and  Ellas  pass  away,  but  we  do  not  miss  them,  for  ^'  Jesus 
only "  indicates  our  manhood.  It  is  a  sign  of  a  higher 
growth  when  we  can  see  Jesus  only.  My  brethren,  much 
of  this  sort  of  thing 'takes  place  with  all  Christians  in  their 
spiritual  life.  Do  you  remember  when  you  were  first  of  all 
convinced  and  awakened,  what  a  great  deal  you  thought  of 
the  preacher,  and  how  much  of  the  very  style  in  which  he 
spoke  the  gospel  I  But  now,^ though  you  delight  to  listen  to 
his  voice,  and  find  that  God  blesses  you  through  him,  yet 
you  have  sunk  the  thought  of  the  preacher  in  the  glory  of 
the  Master,  you  see  no  man  save  "  Jesus  only."  And  as  you 
grow  in  grace  you  will  find  that  many  doctrines  and  points 
of  church  government  which  once  appeared  to  you  to  be  all 
important,  though  you  will  still  value  them,  will  seem  but 
of  small  consequence  compared  with  Christ  himself.  Like 
the  traveller  ascending  the  Alps  to  reach  the  summit  of 
Mont  Blanc  ;  at  first  he  observes  that  lord  of  the  hills  as 
one  horn  among  many,  and  often  in  the  twistings  of  his  up- 
ward path  he  sees  other  peaks  which  appear  more  elevated 
than  that  monarch  of  mountains ;  but  when  at  last  he  is  near 
the  summit,  he  sees  all  the  rest  of  the  hills  beneath  his  feet, 
and  like  a  mighty  wedge  of  alabaster  Mount  Blanc  pierces  the 
very  clouds.  So,  as  we  grow  in  grace,  other  things  sink 
and  Jesus  rises.  They  must  decrease,  but  Christ  must  in- 
crease ;  until  he  alone  fills  the  full  horizon  of  your  soul, 
and  rises  clear  and  bright  and  glorious  up  into  the  very  heav- 
en of  God.     O  that  we  may  thus  see  "  Jesus  only  !  " 

IL  Time  hastens  so  rapidly,  this  morning,  that  I  know 
not  how  I  shall  be  able  to  compress  the  rest  of  my  discourse 
into  the  allotted  space.  We  must  in  the  most  rapid  manner 
speak  upon  what  really  happened. 


JESUS  ONLY.  431 

"  They  saw  no  man,  save  Jesus  only."  This  was  all  they 
wanted  to  see  for  their  comfort.  They  were  sore  afraid : 
Moses  was  gone,  and  he  could  give  them  no  comfort ;  Elias 
was  gone,  he  could  speak  no  consolatory  word;  yet  when 
Jesus  said,  "Be  not  afraid,"  their  fears  vanished.  All  the 
comfort,  then,  that  any  troubled  heart  wants,  it  can  find  in 
Christ.  Go  not  to  Moses,  nor  Elias,  neither  to  the  old  cov- 
enant, nor  to  prophecy :  go  straight  away  to  Jesus  only.  He 
was  all  the  Saviour  they  wanted.  Those  three  men  all  need- 
ed washing  from  sin ;  all  needed  to  be  kept  and  held  on 
their  way,  but  neither  Moses  nor  Elias  could  have  washed 
them  from  sin,  nor  have  kept  them  from  returning  to  it.  But 
Jesus  only  could  cleanse  them,  and  did ;  Christ  could  lead 
them  on,  and  did.  Ah  !  brethren,  all  the  Saviour  we  want, 
we  find  in  Jesus  only.  The  priests  of  Rome  and  their  An- 
glican mimics  officiously  offer  us  their  services.  How  glad 
they  would  be  if  we  would  bend  our  necks  once  again  to  their 
yoke !  But  we  thank  God  we  have  seen  "  Jesus  only,"  and 
if  Moses  has  gone,  and  if  Elias  has  gone,  we  are  not  likely 
to  let  the  shavelings  of  Rome  come  in  and  fill  up  the  vacancy. 
"  Jesus  only,"  is  enough  for  our  comfort,  without  either  An- 
glican, Mosaic,  or  Roman  priestcraft. 

He,  again,  was  to  them,  as  they  went  afterwards  into  the 
world,  enough  for  a  Master,  "  No  man  can  serve  two  mas- 
ters," and  albeit,  Moses  and  Elias  might  sink  into  the  second 
rank,  yet  might  there  have  been  some  difficulty  in  the  fol- 
lower's mind  if  the  leadership  were  divided.  But  when  they 
had  no  leader  but  Jesus,  his  guidance,  lus  direction  and  com- 
mand were  quite  sufficient.  He,  in  the  day  of  battle,  was 
enough  for  their  captain  ;  in  the  day  of  difficulty,  enough 
for  their  direction.  They  wanted  none  but  Jesus.  At  this 
day,  my  brethren,  we  have  no  Master  but  Christ ;  we  sub- 
mit ourselves  to  no  vicar  of  God  ;  we  bow  down  ourselves 
l)efore  no  great  leader  of  a  sect,  neither  to  Calvin,  nor  to  At- 
mini  us,  to  Wesley,  or  Whitfield,  "  One  is  our  Master,"  and 
that  one  is  enough,  for  we  have  learned  to  see  the  wisdom 
of  Gk)d  and  the  power  of  God  in  Jesus  only. 


483  JESUS  ONLY. 

He  was  enough  as  their  power  for  future  life,  as  well  ai 
their  Master.  They  needed  not  ask  Moses  to  lend  them 
official  dignity,  nor  to  ask  Elias  to  bring  them  fire  from 
heaven :  Jesus  would  give  them  of  his  Holy  Spirit,  and  they 
should  be  strong  enough  for  every  enterprise.  And,  breth- 
ren, all  the  power  you  and  I  want  to  preach  the  gospel,  and 
to  conquer  souls  to  the  truth,  we  can  find  in  Jesus  only. 
You  want  no  sacred  State  prestige,  no  pretended  apostolical 
succession,  no  prelatical  unction;  Jesus  will  anoint  you 
with  his  Holy  Spirit,  and  you  shall  be  plenteously  endowed 
with  power  from  on  high,  so  that  you  shall  do  great  things 
and  prevail.  "  Jesus  only."  Why,  they  wanted  no  other 
motive  to  constrain  them  to  use  their  power  aright.  It  is 
enough  incentive  to  a  man  to  be  allowed  to  live  for  such  a 
one  as  Christ.  Only  let  the  thought  of  Christ  fill  the  en- 
lightened intellect,  and  it  must  conquer  the  sanctified  affec- 
tions. Let  but  Jesus  be  well  understood  as  the  everlasting 
God  who  bowed  the  heavens,  and  came  down  and  suffered 
shame  and  ignominy,  that  he  might  redeem  us  from  the 
wrath  to  come  ;  let  us  get  but  a  sight  of  the  thorn-crowned 
head,  and  those  dear  eyes  all  red  with  weeping,  and  those 
sweet  cheeks  bruised  and  battered  by  the  scoffer's  fists ;  let 
us  but  look  into  the  tender  heart  that  was  broken  with 
griefs  unutterable  for  our  sakes,  and  the  love  of  Christ  must 
constrain  us,  and  we  shall  thus  "judge,  that  if  one  died 
for  all,  then  were  all  dead  :  and  that  he  died  for  all,  that 
they  which  live  shguld  not  henceforth  live  unto  themselves, 
but  unto  him  which  died  for  them  and  rose  again."  In  the 
point  of  motive,  believers  do  not  need  the  aid  of  Moses. 
That  you  ought  to  do  such  a  thing  because  otherwise  you 
will  be  punished,  will  but  little  strengthen  you,  nor  will 
you  be  much  aided  by  the  spirit  of  prophecy  which  leads 
you  to  hope  that  in  the  millennial  period  you  will  be  made  a 
ruler  over  many  cities.  It  will  be  enough  to  you  that  you 
serve  the  Lord  Christ;  it  suffices  you  if  you  may  be  enabled 
to  honor  him,  to  deck  his  crown,  to  magnify  his  name. 


JfiStJS  OitLY. 

Here  is  a  Btimulus  sufficient  for  martyrs  and  confessors, 
"Jesus  only."  Brethren,  it  is  all  the  gospel  we  have  to 
preach — ^it  is  all  the  gospel  we  want  to  preach — it  is  the 
only  ground  of  confidence  which  we  have  for  ourselves  ;  it 
IB  all  the  hope  we  have  to  set  before  others.  I  know  that 
in  this  age  there  is  an  overweening  desire  for  that  which 
has  the  aspect  of  being  intellectual,  deep,  and  novel;  and 
we  are  often  informed  that  there  are  to  be  developments  in 
religion,  even  as  in  science;  and  we  are  despised  as  being 
hardly  men,  certainly  not  thinking  men,  if  we  preach  to- 
day what  was  preached  two  hundred  years  ago.  Brethren, 
we  preach  to-day  what  was  preached  eighteen  hundred 
years  ago,  and  wherein  others  make  alterations,  they  create 
deformities,  and  not  improvements.  We  are  not  ashamed 
to  avow  that  the  old  truth  of  Christ  alone  is  everlasting ; 
all  else  has  gone  or  shall  go,  but  the  gospel  towers  above 
the  wrecks  of  time:  to  us  "Jesus  only"  remains  as  the 
sole  topic  of  our  ministry,  and  we  want  iiothing  else. 

For  "  Jesus  only  "  shall  be  our  reward,  to  be  with  him 
where  he  is,  to  behold  his  glory,  to  be  like  him  when  we 
shall  see  him  as  he-  is,  we  ask  no  other  heaven.  No  other 
bliss  can  our  soul  conceive  of.  The  Lord  grant  that  we 
may  have  a  fulness  of  this,  and  "Jesus  only"  shall  be 
throughout  eternity  our  delight. 

There  was  here  space  to  have  dilated  at  great  length, 
but  we  have  rather  given  you  the  heads  of  thought,  than 
the  thoughts  themselves.  Though  the  apostles  saw  "  Jesus 
only,"  they  saw  quite  sufficient,  for  Jesus  is  enough  for  time 
and  eternity,  enough  to  live  by  and  enough  to  die  by. 

in.  I  must  close,  though  I  fain  would  linger.  Breth- 
ren, let  us  think  of  what  we  desibb  may  happen  to  all  now 
present 

I  do  desire  for  my  fellow  Christians  and  for  myself  that 
more  and  more  the  great  object  of  our  thoughts,  motives, 
and  acts  may  be  "  Jesus  only."    I  believe  that  whenever 


434  ^SttS  OKtt. 

our  religion  is  most  vital,  it  is  most  full  of  Christ.  More- 
over, when  it  is  most  practical,  downright,  and  common 
sense,  it  always  gets  nearest  to  Jesus.  I  can  bear  witness 
that  whenever  I  am  in  deeps  of  sorrow,  nothing  will  do  for 
me  but  "  Jesus  only."  I  can  rest  in  some  degree  in  the  ex- 
ternals of  religion,  its  outward  escarpments  and  bulwarks^ 
when  I  am  in  health ;  but  I  retreat  to  the  innermost  citadel 
of  our  holy  faith,  namely,  to  the  very  heart  of  Christ,  when 
my  spirit  is  assailed  by  temptation,  or  besieged  with  sorrow 
and  anguish.  What  is  more,  my  witness  is  that  whenever 
T  have  high  spiritual  enjoyments,  enjoyments  rich,  rare,  ce- 
lestial, they  are  always  connected  with  Jesus  only,  other  re- 
ligious things  may  give  some  kind  of  joy,  and  joy  that  is 
healthy  too,  but  the  sublimest,  the  most  inebriating,  the 
most  divine  of  all  joys,  must  be  found  in  Jesus  only.  In 
fine,  I  find  if  I  want  to  labor  much,  I  must  live  on  Jesus 
only  ;  if  I  desire  to  suffer  patiently,  I  must  feed  on  Jesus 
only;  if  I  wish  to  wrestle  with  God  successfully,  I  must 
plead  Jesus  only ;  if  I  aspire  to  conquer  sin,  I  must  use  the 
blood  of  Jesus  only ;  if  I  pant  to  learn  the  mysteries  of 
heaven,  I  must  seek  the  teachings  of  Jesus  only.  I  believe 
that  any  thing  which  we  add  to  Christ  lowers  our  position, 
and  that  the  more  elevated  our  soul  becomes,  the  more 
nearly  like  what  it  is  to  be  when  it  shall  enter  into  the  re- 
gion of  the  perfect,  the  more  completely  every  thing  else 
will  sink,  die  out,  and  Jesus,  Jesus,  Jesus  only,  will  be  first 
and  last,  and  midst  and  without  end,  the  Alpha  and  Omega 
i.f  every  thought  of  head  and  pulse  of  heart.  May  it  be 
80  with  every  Christian. 

There  are  others  here  who  are  not  yet  believers  in  Jesus, 
and  our  desire  is  that  this  may  happen  to  them,  that  they 
may  see  "  Jesus  only."  "  Oh,"  saith  one,  "  Sir,  I  want  to 
see  my  sins.  My  heart  is  very  hard,  and  very  proud  j  I 
want  to  see  my  sins."  Friend,  I  also  desire  that  you  should, 
but  I  desire  that  you  may  see  them  not  on  yourself,  but  on 
Jesus  only.     No  sight  of  sin  ever  brings  such  true  humilia' 


JESUS  ONLY.  485 

tion  of  spirit  as  when  the  soul  sees  its  sins  laid  on  the  Sa- 
viour. Sinner,  I  know  you  have  thought  of  sins  as  lying  on 
yourself  and  you  have  been  trying  to  feel  their  weight,  but 
there  is  a  happier  and  better  view  still.  Sin  was  laid  on  Je- 
sus, and  it  made  him  to  be  covered  with  a  bloody  sweat ;  it 
nailed  him  to  the  cross  ;  it  made  him  cry,  "  Lama  Sabach« 
thani ; "  it  bowed  him  into  the  dust  of  death.  Why,  friend, 
if  you  see  sin  on  Jesus  you  will  hate  it,  you  will  bemoan  it. 
you  will  abhor  it.  You  need  not  look  evermore  to  sin  as 
burdening  yourself,  see  Jesus  only,  and  the  best  kind  of  re- 
pentance will  follow.  "  Ah,  but,"  saith  another,  "  I  want  to 
feel  my  need  of  Christ  more."  You  will  see  your  need  all 
the  better  if  you  look  at  Jesus  only.  Many  a  time  an  appe- 
tite for  a  thing  is  created  by  the  sight  of  it.  Why,  there 
are  some  of  us  who  can  hardly  be  trusted  in  a  bookseller's 
shop,  because  though  we  might  have  done  very  well  at  home 
without  a  certain  volume,  we  no  sooner  see  it  than  we  are 
in  urgent  need  of  it.  So  often  is  it  with  some  of  you  about 
other  matters,  so  that  it  becomes  most  dangerous  to  let  you 
see,  because  you  want  as  soon  as  you  see.  A  sight  of  Jesus, 
of  what  he  is  to  sinners,  of  what  he  makes  sinners,  of  what 
he  is  in  himself,  will  more  tend  to  make  you  feel  your  need 
of  him  than  all  your  poring  over  your  poor  miserable 
self.  You  will  get  no  farther  there,  look  to  "Jesus 
only."  "Ay,"  saith  another,  *'but  I  want  to  read  my 
title  clear,  I  want  to  know  that  I  have  an  interest  in 
Jesus."  You  will  best  read  your  interest  in  Christ,  by 
looking  at  him.  If  I  want  to  know  whether  a  certain  es- 
tate is  mine,  do  I  look  into  my  own  heart  to  see  if  I  have  a 
right  to  it  ?  but  I  look  into  the  archives  of  the  estate,  I  search 
testaments  and  covenants.  Now,  Christ  Jesus  is  God's  cov- 
enant with  the  people,  a  leader  and  commander  to  the  peo- 
ple. To-day,  I  personally  can  read  my  title  clear  to  heaven, 
and  shall  I  tell  you  how  I  read  it  ?  Not  because  I  feel  all  I 
wish  to  feel,  nor  because  I  am  what  I  hope  I  yet  shall  be, 
but  I  read  in  the  word  that  "  Jesus  Christ  oaos^  into  the 


436  JESUS  ONLY. 

world  to  save  sinners,"  I  am  a  sinner,  even  tlie  devil  cannd 
tell  me  I  am  not.  O  precious  Saviour,  then  thou  hast  come 
to  save  such  as  I  am.  Then  I  see  it  written  again,  ^  He  that 
believeth  and  is  baptized,  shall  be  saved."  I  have  believed, 
and  have  been  baptzied  ;  I  know  I  trust  alone  in  Jesus,  and 
that  IS  bulieving.  As  surely  then  as  there  is  a  God  in  heav- 
en I  shall  be  in  heaven  one  day.  It  must  be  so,  because  un- 
lobs  God  be  a  liar,  he  that  believeth  must  be  saved.  You 
see  it  is  not  by  looking  within,  it  is  by  looking  to  Jesus 
only  that  you  perceive  at  last  your  name  graven  on  his  hands. 
I  wish  to  have  Christ's  name  written  on  my  heart,  but  if 
I  want  assurance,  I  have  to  look  at  his  heart  till  I  see  my 
name  written  there.  O  turn  your  eye  away  from  your  sin 
and  your  emptiness  to  his  righteousness  and  his  fulness. 
See  the  sweat  drops  bloody  as  they  fall  in  Gethsemane,  see 
his  heart  pierced  and  pouring  out  blood  and  water  for  the 
sins  of  men  upon  Calvary  I  There  is  life  in  a  look  at  him  ! 
O  look  to  him,  and  though  it  be  Jesus  only,  though  Moses 
should  condemn  you,  and  Elias  should  alarm  you,  yet  "  Je- 
sus only  "  shall  be  enough  to  comfort  and  enough  to  save 
you.  May  God  grant  us  grace  every  one  of  us  to  take  for 
our  motto  in  life,  for  our  hope  in  death,  and  for  our  joy  is 
eternity,  ^^  J  esus  only."  May  God  bless  yon  for  the  sake  of 
**  Jesus  only."    Amen. 


REST,  REST.  487 


SERMON  XXV. 


REST,  REST. 

**ooaa  UNTO  me,  all  te  that  labor  and  abb  hbayt  ladbn,  and  i  wiu 

fflYB  TOU  RBST.  TAKB  MT  TOKB  UPON  TOU,  AND  LEARN  OF  KB  ;  FOB  I  AM 
VBBK  AND  LOWLT  IN  HEABT  ;  AND  TB  BHALL  FIND  BEST  UNTO  TOUB  SOULS. 
FOB  KT  TOKB  IB   EAST,  AND  MT  BUBDEN  IS   LIGHT.—- MattheW  ZL  28-80. 

We  have  oft  repeated  those  memorable  words,  and  they 
have  brought  us  much  comfort ;  but  it  is  possible  that  we 
may  never  have  looked  deeply  into  them,  so  as  to  have 
seen  the  fulness  of  their  meaning.  The  works  of  man  will 
seldom  bear  close  inspection.  You  shall  take  a  needle 
which  is  highly  polished,  which  appears  to  be  without  the 
slightest  inequality  upon  its  surface,  and  you  shall  put  it 
under  a  microscope,  and  it  will  look  like  a  rough  bar  of 
iron;  but  you  shall  select  what  you  will  from  nature, 
the  bark  or  the  leaf  of  a  tree,  or  the  wing  or  the  foot  of 
an  insect,  and  you  shall  discover  no  flaw,  magnify  it  as 
much  as  you  will,  and  gaze  upon  it  as  long  as  you  please. 
So  take  the  words  of  man.  The  first  time  you  hear  them 
they  will  strike  you ;  you  may  hear  them  again  and  still 
admire  their  sentiment,  but  you  shall  soon  weary  of  their 
repetition,  and  call  them  hackneyed  and  over-estimated. 
The  words  of  Jesus  are  not  so,  they  never  lose  their  dew, 
they  never  become  threadbare.  You  may  ring  the  changes 
upon  his  words,  and  never  exhaust  their  music  :  you  may 
consider  them  by  day  and  by  night,  but  familiarity  shall 
not  breed  contempt.  You  shall  beat  them  in  the  mortar 
of  contemplation,  with  the  pestle  of  criticism,  and  their 


4:38  REST,  REST. 

perfdme  shall  but  become  the  more  apparent  Dissect,  in< 
vestigate,  and  weigh  the  Master's  teaching  word  by  word, 
and  each  syllable  will  repay  you.  When  loitering  upon 
the  Island  of  Liddo,  off  Venice,  and  listening  to  the  sound 
of  the  city's  bells,  I  thought  the  music  charming  as  it  float- 
ed across  the  lagune ;  but  when  I  returned  to  the  city,  and 
sat  down  in  the  centre  of  the  music,  in  the  very  midst  of 
all  the  bells,  the  sweetness  changed  to  a  horrible  clash, 
the  charming  sounds  were  transformed  into  a  maddening 
din ;  not  the  sliglitest  melody  could  I  detect  in  any  one 
bell,  while  harmony  in  the  whole  company  of  noisemakers 
was  out  of  the  question.  Distance  had  lent  enchantment 
to  the  sound.  The  words  of  poets  and  eloquent  writers 
may,  as  a  whole,  and  heard  from  afar,  sound  charmingly 
enough ;  but  how  few  of  them  bear  a  near  and  minute  in 
vestigation !  Their  belfry  rings  passably,  but  one  would  soon 
weary  of  each  separate  bell.  It  is  never  so  with  the  divine 
words  of  Jesus,  You  liear  them  ringing  from  afar  and 
they  are  sweetness  itselt  When  as  a  sinner,  you  roamed  at 
midnight  like  a  traveller  lost  on  the  wilds,  how  sweetly  did 
they  call  you  home !  But  now  you  have  reached  the  honse 
of  mercy,  you  sit  and  listen  to  each  distinct  note  of  love's 
perfect  peal,  and  wonderingly  feel  that  even  angelic  harps 
cannot  excel  it. 

We  will,  this  morning,  if  we  can,  conduct  you  into  the 
inner  chambers  of  our  text,  place  its  words  under  the  mi- 
croscope, and  p^er  into  tlie  recesses  of  each  sentence.  We 
only  wish  our  microscope  were  of  a  greater  magnifying 
power,  and  our  ability  to  expound  the  text  more  complete  ; 
for  there  are  mines  of  instruction  here.  Superficially  read, 
this  royal  promise  has  cheered  and  encouraged  tens  of 
thousands,  but  there  is  a  wealth  in  it  which  the  diligent 
digger  and  miner  shall  alone  discover.  Its  shallows  are 
cool  and  refreshing  for  the  lambs,  but  in  its  depths  are 
pearls  for  which  we  hope  to  dive. 

Our  first  bead,  this  morning,  is  rest:  "  Come  unto  me^ 


REST,  REST.  439 

all  y^  that  labor  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  yon 
rest."  The  second  head  is  rest :  "  Take  my  yoke  upon  you, 
and  learn  of  me,  for  I  am  meek. and  lowly  in  heart:  and  ye 
shaU  find  rest  unto  your  souls," 

I.  Let  us  begin  at  the  beginning  with  the  first  rest,  aiiti 
here  we  will  make  divisions  only  for  the  sake  of  bringing 
out  the  sense  more  clearly. 

1.  Ohserye  the  person  invited  to  receive  this  first  rest: 
"  Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  labor  and  are  heavy  laden." 
The  word  "  all "  first  demands  attention :  ^^All  ve  that  la- 
bor."  There  was  need  for  the  insertion  of  that  wide  word. 
Had  not  the  Saviour  said  a  little  before,  "  I  thank  thee,  O 
Father,  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth,  because  thou  hast  hid 
these  things  from  the  wise  and  prudent,  and  hast  revealed 
them  to  bfibes  ? "  Some  one  who  had  been  listening  to  the 
Saviour,  might  have  said,  "The  Father,  then,  has  deter- 
mined to  whom  he  will  reveal  the  Christ ;  there  is  a  num- 
ber chosen,  according  to  the  Father's  good  pleasure,  to 
whom  the  gospel  is  revealed;  while  from  another  company 
it  is  hidden ! "  The  too  hasty  inference,  which  it  seems  nat- 
ural for  man  to  draw  from  the  doctrine  is,  "  Then  there  is 
no  invitation  for  me;  there  is  no  hope  for  me;  I  need  not 
listen  to  the  gospel's  warnings  and  invitations."  So  the 
Saviour,  as  if  to  answer  that  discouraging  notion,  words 
his  invitation  thus,  "  Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  labor  and 
are  heavy  laden."  Let  it  not  be  supposed  that  election  ex- 
cludes any  of  you  from  the  invitation  of  mercy;  all  of  you 
who  labor,  are  bidden  to  come.  Whatever  the  great  doc- 
trine of  predestination  may  involve,  rest  assured  that  it  by 
no  means  narrows  or  diminishes  the  extent  of  gospel  invita* 
tions.  The  good  news  is  to  be  preached  to  "  every  creature ' 
under  heaven,  and  in  this  particular  passage  it  is  addressed 
to  all  the  laboring  and  heavy  laden. 

The  description  of  the  person  invited  is  very  full:  it  de- 
•cribes  him  both  actively  and  passively.      "  All  ye  that,  to 


440  R^^ST,  REST. 

lor  ** — ^there  is  the  activity  of  men  beanng  the  yoke,  and 
ready  to  labor  afker  salvation ;  "  heavy  laden'*'* — there  is  the 
passive  form  of  their  religious  condition,  they  sustain  a  bur- 
den, and  are  pressed  down,  and  sorely  wearied  by  the  load 
they  bear.  There  are  to  be  found  many  who  are  actively 
engaged  in  seeking  salvation;  they  believe  that  if  they 
obey  the. precepts  of  the  law  they  will  be  saved,  and  they 
are  endeavoring  to  the  utmost  to  do  them  ;  they  have 
been  told  that  the  performance  of  certain  rites  and  cer- 
emonies will  also  save  them,  they  are  performing  those 
with  great  care;  the  yoke  is  on  their  shoulders,  and  they 
are  laboring  diligently.  Some  are  laboring  in  prayer, 
some  are  laboring  in  sacraments,  others  in  self-denials  and 
mortifications,  but  as  a  class  they  are  awakened  to  feel  the 
need  of  salvation,  and  they  are  intensely  laborious  to  save 
themselves.  It  is  to  these  the  Saviour  addresses  his  loving 
admonition :  in  effect  he  tells  them,  "  This  is  not  the  way 
to  rest,  your  self-imposed  labors  will  end  in  disappoint- 
ment ;  cease  your  wearisome  exertions,  and  believe  in  me, 
for  I  will  at  once  give  you  rest — ^the  rest  which  my  labors 
have  earned  for  believers."  Very  speedily  those  who  are  ac- 
tive in  self-righteously  working  for  salvation  fall  into  the 
passive  state,  and  become  burdened;  their  labor  of  itself  be- 
comes a  burden  to  them.  Besides  the  burden  of  their  self- 
rigliteous  labor,  there  comes  upon  them  the  awful,  tremen- 
dous, crushing  burden  of  past  sin,  and  a  sense  of  the  wrath  of 
God  which  is  due  to  that  sin.  A  soul  which  has  to  bear 
the  load  of  its  own  sin,  and  the  load  of  divine  wrath,  is 
indeed  heavily  laden.  Atlas  with  the  world  upon  his  back 
had  a  light  load  compared  with  a  sinner  upon  whom 
mountains  of  sin  and  wrath  are  piled.  Such  persons  fre- 
quently are  burdened,  in  addition,  by  fears  and  apprehen- 
sions ;  some  of  them  correct,  others  of  them  baseless,  but 
anyhow  the  burden  daily  grows.  Their  active  labors  do 
not  diminish  their  passive  sufferings.  The  acute  anguish 
of  their  souls  will  often  be  increased  in  proportion  as  theil 


REST,  REST  441 

endeavors  are  increased;  and  while  they  hope  at  first  that 
if  they  labor  industriously  they  will  gradually  diminish 
the  mass  of  their  sin,  it  happens  that  their  labor  adds  to 
their  weariness  beneath  its  pressure;  they  feel  a  weight  of 
disappointment,  because  their  labor  has  not  brought  them 
rest;  and  a  burden  of  despair,  because  they  fear  that  de- 
liverance will  never  come.  Now  these  are  the  persons 
wliom  the  Saviour  calls  to  himself — those  who  are  actively 
Bcelang  salvation,  those  who  are  passively  bearing  the 
weight  of  sin  and  of  divine  wrath. 

It  is  implied,  too,  that  these  are  undeserving  of  rest,  for 
it  is  said,  "  Come  unto  me,  and  I  will  give  you  rest."  A 
gift  is  not  of  merit  but  of  grace ;  wages  and  reward  are  for 
those  who  earn,  but  a  gift  is  a  matter  of  charity..  0  you 
who  feel  your  un worthiness  this  morning,  who  have  been 
seeking  salvation  earnestly,  and  suffering  the  weight  of  sin, 
Jesus  will  freely  give  to  you  what  you  cannot  earn  or  pur- 
chase, he  will  give  it  as  an  act  of  his  own  free,  rich,  sover- 
eign mercy ;  and  he  is  prepared,  if  you  come  to  him,  to  give 
it  to  you  now,  for  so  has  he  promised,  "  Come  unto  me,  all 
ye  that  labor  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you 
rest." 

2,  "Notioe  next  yf?ieprec^t  here  laid  dovm:  "Come."  It 
is  not  " Learn,"  it  is  not  "Take  my  yoke  " — that  is  in  the 
next  verse,  and  is  intended  for  the  next  stage  of  experience 
— ^but  in  the  beginning  the  word  of  the  Lord  is,  "  Come  unto 
me,"  "  Come."  A  simple  word,  but  very  full  of  meaning. 
To  come  is  to  leave  one  thing  and  to  advance  to  another. 
Come,  then,  ye  laboring  and  heavy  'aden,  leave  your  legal 
labors,  leave  your  self-reliant  efforts,  leave  your  sins,  leave 
your  presumptions,  leave  all  in  which  you  hitherto  have 
tnisted,  and  come  to  Jesus,  that  is,  think  of,  advance  towards, 
fely  upon  the  Saviour.  Let  your  contemplations  think  of 
him  who  bore  the  load  of  human  sin  upon  the  cross  of  Cal* 
vary,  where  he  was  made  sin  for  us.  Let  your  minds  con* 
aider  him  who  from  his  cross  hurled  the  enormous  mass  of 
19* 


442  REST,  REST. 

his  people's  transgressions  into  a  bottomless  sepulchre,  where 
it  was  buried  forever.  Think  of  Jesus,  the  divinely-appoint- 
ed substitute  and  sacrifice  for  guilty  man.  Then,  seeing 
that  he  is  God's  own  Son,  let  faith  follow  your  contempla- 
tion ;  rely  upon  him,  trust  in  him  as  having  suffered  in  your 
stead,  look  to  him  for  the  payment  of  the  debt  which  is  due 
from  you  to  the  wrath  of  God.  This  is  to  come  to  Jesus. 
Repentance  and  faith  make  up  this  "  Come  " — ^the  repentance 
which  leaves  the  place  where  you  now  stand,  the  fiEuth 
which  comes  into  reliance  upon  Jesus. 

Observe,  that  the  command  to  "  Come "  is  put  in  the 
present  tense,  and  in  the  Greek  it  is  intensely  present.  It 
might  bo  rendered  something  like  this  :  "  Hither  to  me  all 
ye  that  labor  and  are  heavy  laden  ! "  It  is  a  "  Come  "  which 
means  not  "  Come  to-morrow  or  next  year,"  but  "  Now,  at 
onca"  Advance,  ye  slaves,  flee  from  your  task-master 
now  I  Weary  ones,  recline  on  the  promise  now,  and  take 
your  rest !  Come  now !  By  an  act  of  instantaneous  faith 
which  will  bring  instantaneous  peace,  come  and  rely  upon 
Jesus,  and  he  will  now  give  you  rest.  Rest  shall  at  once 
follow  the  exercise  of  your  faith.  Perform  the  act  of  faith 
now.  O  may  the  eternal  Spirit  lead  some  laboring  heavy  la- 
den soul  to  come  to  Jesus,  and  to  come  at  this  precise  mo- 
ment! 

It  is  "  Come  unto  me."  Notice  that.  The  Christ  in  his 
personality  is  to  be  trusted  in.  Not  "  Come  to  John,  and 
hear  tim  say,  *  Repent,  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at 
hand,' "  for  no  rest  is  there.  John  commands  a  preparation 
for  the  rest,  but  he  has  no  rest  to  give  to  the  soul.  Come  not 
to  the  Pharisees,  who  will  instruct  you  in  tradition,  and  in 
the  jots  and  tittles  of  the  law  ;  but  go  past  these  to  Jesus, 
the  man,  the  God,  the  Mediator,  the  Redeemer,  the  propitia- 
tion for  human  guilt.  If  you  want  rest  come  to  Christ  in 
Getlisoraane,  to  Christ  on  Calvary,  to  Christ  risen,  to  Christ 
ascended.  If  you  want  rest,  O  weary  souls,  ye  can  find  it 
nowhere  until  ye  come  and  lay  your  burdens  down  at  his 


REST,  BEST.  443 

dear  pierced  feet,  and  find  life  in  looking  alone  to  him. 
There  is  the  precept  then.  Observe  it  is  nothing  but  that 
one  word,  "  Come."  It  is  not "  Do ; "  it  is  not  even  "  Leani." 
It  is  not,  "Take  up  my  yoke,"  that  will  follow  after,  but  must 
never  be  forced  out  of  its  proper  place.  To  obtain  the  first 
rest,  the  rest  which  is  a  matter  of  gift — all  that  is  asked  of 
you  is  that  you  come  to  have  it.  Now,  the  least  thing  that 
charity  itself  can  ask  when  it  gives  away  its  alms,  is  that 
men  come  for  it.  Come  ye  needy,  come  and  welcome ;  come 
and  take  the  rest  ye  need.  Jesus  saith  to  you,  "  Come  and 
take  what  I  freely  give."  Without  money  come,  without 
merit  come,  without  preparation  come.  It  is  just,  come,  come 
now ;  come  as  you  are,  come  with  your  burden,  come  with 
your  yoke,  though  the  yoke  be  the  yoke  of  the  devil,  and  the 
burden  be  the  burden  of  sin,  yet  come  as  you  are,  and  the 
promise  shall  be  fulfilled  to  you,  "  I  will  give  you  rest." 

3.  Notice  next  the  promise  spohen^ "  I  will  give  you  rest." 
"I  will  gwe?'^  It  is  a  rest  that  is  a  gift ;  not  a  rest  found 
in  our  experience  by  degrees,  but  given  at  once.  As  I  shall 
have  to  show  you,  the  next  verse  speaks  of  the  rest  that  is 
found,  wrought  out,  and  discovered  ;•  but  this  is  a  rest  given. 
We  come  to  Jesus ;  we  put  out  the  empty  hand  of  faith,  and 
rest  is  given  us  at  once  most  freely.  We  possess  it  at  once, 
and  it  is  ours  forever.  It  is  2k  present  rest,  rest  now  ;  not  rest 
after  death  ;  not  rest  after  a  time  of  probation  and  growth 
and  advancement ;  but  it  is  rest  given  when  we  come  to  Je- 
sus, given  there  and  then.  And  it  imperfect  rest  too;  for  it 
is  not  said,  nor  is  it  implied,  that  the  rest  is  incomplete. 
We  do  not  read,  "  I  will  give  you  partial  rest,"  but  "  rest," 
as  much  as  if  there  were  no  other  form  of  it.  It  is  perfect 
and  complete  in  itself.  In  the  blood  and  righteousness  of 
Jesus  our  peace  is  perfect. 

I  shall  not  stay  except  to  ask  you  now,  brethren  and  sis- 
ters, whether  you  know  the  meaning  of  this  given  rest. 
Have  you  come  to  Jesus  and  has  he  given  you  perfect  and 
present  rest?    If  so,  I  know  your  oye  will  catch  joyously 


4M  REST,  BEST. 

those  two  little  words,  ^^And  ip  and  I  would  bid  you  lov 
ingly  remember  thepromiser  who  speaks.  Jesus  promises 
and  Jesus  performs.  Did  not  all  your  rest,  when  first 
your  sin  was  forgiven,  come  from  him  ?  The  load  was 
gone,  but  who  took  it  ?  The  yoke  was  removed,  but  who  lift- 
ed it  from  off  the  shoulder  ?  Do  you  not  give  to  Jesus,  Ihie 
day,  the  glory  of  aL  your  rest  from  the  burden  of  guilt  ?  Do 
you  not  praise  his  name  with  all  your  souls  ?  Yes,  I  krow 
you  do.  And  you  know  how  that  rest  came  to  you.  It  wag 
by  his  substitution  and  your  faith  in  that  substitution.  Your 
sin  was  not  pardoned  by  a  violation  of  divine  justice ;  jus- 
tice was  satisfied  in  Jesus  ;  he  gave  you  rest.  The  fact  that 
he  has  made  full  atonement  is  the  rest  of  your  spirit  this 
morning.  I  know  that  deep  down  in  your  consciences,  the 
calm  which  blesses  you  springs  from  a  belief  in  your  Lord's 
vicarious  sacrifice.  He  bore  the  unrest  that  you  might  have 
the  rest,  and  you  receive  rest  this  day  as  a  free  gift  from 
him.  You  have  done  now  with  servile  toils  and  hopeless  bup« 
dens,  you  have  entered  into  rest  through  believing ;  but  all  the 
rest  and  deliverance  still  comes  to  you  as  a  gift  from  his  dear 
hands,  who  purchased  with  a  price  this  blessing  for  your 
souls.  I  earnestly  wish  that  many  who  have  never  felt  that 
rest,  would  come  and  have  it ;  it  is  all  they  have  to  do  to 
obtain  it — to  come  for  it ;  just  where  they  now  are,  if  God 
enables  them  to  exercise  a  simple  act  of  faith  in  Jesus,  he 
will  give  them  rest  from  all  their  past  sins,  from  all  their 
efforts  to  save  themselves,  a  rest  which  shall  be  to  his  glory 
and  to  their  joy. 

n.  We  must  now  advance  to  our  second  head — best. 

It  looks  rather  strange  that  after  having  received  rest, 
the  next  verse  should  begin  :  "  Take  my  yoke  upon  you.** 
**  Ah  I  I  had  been  set  free  from  laboring,  am  I  to  be  a  la- 
borer again  ?"  Yes,  yes,  take  my  yoke  and  begin.  "  And 
my  burden  is  light."  "  Burden  ?  why,  I  was  heavy  laden 
just  now,  am  I  to  carry  another  burden  ?  "  Yes.  A  yoke- 
actively  and  a  burden — passively,  I  am  to  bear  both  of  thesa 


>  REST,  REST.  445 

**  But  I  found  rest  by  getting  rid  of  my  yoke  and  my  bur- 
den ! "  And  you  are  to  find  a  further  rest  by  wearing  a  new 
yoke,  and  bearing  a  new  burden.  Your  yoke  galled,  but 
Christ's  yoke  is  easy  ;  your  burden  was  heavy,  but  Christ's 
burden  is  light.  Before  we  enter  into  this  matter  more 
fully,  let  us  illustrate  it.  How  certain  it  is  that  a  yoke  is 
essential  to  produce  rest,  and  without  it  rest  is  unknown  ! 
Spain  found  rest  by  getting  rid  of  that  wretched  monarch 
Isabella ;  an  iron  yoke  was  her  dominion  upon  the  nation^s 
neck,  crushing  every  aspiration  after  progress  by  an  intoler- 
able tyranny.  Up  rose  the  nation,  shook  off  its  yoke,  and 
threw  aside  its  burden,  and  it  had  rest  in  a  certain  sense,  rest 
from  an  evil.  But  Spain  has  not  fully  rested  yet,  and  it 
seems  that  she  will  never  find  permanent  rest  till  she  has  vol- 
untarily taken  up  another  yoke,  and  found  for  herself  anoth- 
er burden.  In  a  word,  she  must  have  a  strong,  settled,  rec- 
ognized government,  and  then  only  will  her  distractions 
cease.  This  is  just  a  picture  of  the  human  soul.  It  is  under 
the  dominion  of  Satan,  it  wears  his  awful  yoke,  and  works 
for  him;  it  bears  his  accursed  burden,  and  groans  under 
it ;  Jesus  sets  it  free — but  has  it,  therefore,  a  perfect  rest  ? 
Yes,  a  rest/rom,  but  not  a  rest  in.  What  is  wanted  now  is 
a  new  government ;  the  soul  must  have  a  sovereign,  a  rul- 
ing principle,  a  master-motive  ;  and  when  Jesus  has  taken 
that  position,  rest  is  come.  This  further  rest  is  what  is  spo 
ken  of  in  the  second  verse.  Let  me  give  you  another  sym 
bol.  A  little  stream  flowed  through  a  manufacturing  town  ; 
an  unhappy  little  stream  it  was,  for  it  was  forced  to  turn 
huge  wheels  and  heavy  machinery,  and  it  wound  its  miser- 
able way  through  factories  where  it  was  dyed  black  and 
blue,  until  it  became  a  foul  and  filthy  ditch,  and  loathed  it- 
Bel£  It  felt  the  tyranny  which  polluted  its  very  existence. 
Now,  there  came  a  deliverer  who  looked  upon  the  streamlet 
and  said,  "I  will  set  thee  free  and  give  thee  rest."  So  he 
stopped  up  the  water-course,  and  said,  "  Abide  in  thy  place, 
then  shalt  no  more  flow  where  thou  art  enslaved  and  de 


446  R^T,  BEST 

filed."  In  a  very  few  days  the  brooklet  found  that  it  had  bnt 
exchanged  one  evil  for  another.  Its  waters  were  stagna* 
ting,  they  were  gathering  into  a  great  pool,  ahd  desiring  to 
find  a  channel.  It  was  in  its  very  nature  f;o  flow  on,  and 
it  foamed  and  swelled,  and  pressed  against  the  dam  which 
stayed  it.  Every  hour  it  grew  more  inwardly  reetless,  it 
threatened  to  break  the  barrier,  and  it  made  all  who  saw  its 
angry  looks  tremble  for  the  mischief  it  would  do  ere  long.  It 
never  found  rest  until  it  was  permitted  to  pursue  an  active 
course  along  a  channel  which  had  been  prepared  for  it  among 
the  meadows  and  the  com  fields.  Then,  when  it  watered  the 
plains  and  made  glad  the  villages,  it  was  a  happy  streamlet, 
perfectly  at  rest.  So  our  souls  are  made  for  activity,  and 
when  we  are  set  free  from  the  activities  of  our  self-righteous- 
ness and  the  slavery  of  our  sin,  we  must  do  something,  and  we 
shall  never  rest  until  we  find  that  something  to  do.  Hence 
in  the  text  you  will  be  pleased  to  see  that  there  is  something 
said  about  a  yoke,  which  is  the  ensign  of  working,  and^some- 
thing  about  a  burden,  which  is  the  emblem  of  enduring.  It 
is  in  man's  mortal  nature  that  he  must  do  or  endure,  or  else 
his  spirit  will  stagnate  and  be  far  from  rest. 

L  We  will  consider  this  second  rest,  and  notice  that  it  is 
rest  after  rest,  "  I  will  give  you  rest "  comes  before  **  Ye  shall 
find  rest."  It  is  the  re  t  of  a  man  who  is  already  at  rest, 
the  repose  of  a  man  who  has  received  a  given  rest,  and  now 
discovers  the  found  rest.  It  is  the  rest  of  a  learner — "  Learn 
of  me,  and  ye  shall  find  rest."  It  is  not  so  much  the  rest  of 
one  who  was  aforetime  laboring  and  heavy  laden,  as  of 
one  who  is  to-day  learning  at  the  Saviour's  feet.  It  is  the 
rest  of  a  seeker  evidently,  for  finding  usually  implies  a  search. 
Having  been  pardoned  and  saved,  the  saved  man  in  the 
course  of  his  experience  discovers  more  and  more  reason  for 
f>ea^ro ;  he  is  learning,  and  seeking,  and  he  finds.  The  rest 
is  evidently  lighted  upon,  however,  as  a  thing  unknown, 
which  becomes  the  subject  of  discovery.   The  man  had  a  rest 


REST.  REST.  /  447 

from  his  burden ;  now  he  finds  a  rest,  in  Christ,  which  ex 
eeeds  what  he  asked  or  even  thought. 

I  have  looked  at  this  rest  after  rest  as  being  a  treasure 
concealed  in  a  precious  box.  The  Lord  Jesus  gives  to  his 
people  a  priceless  casket,  called  the  gift  of  rest ;  it  is  set  with 
brilliants  and  inlaid  with  gems,  and  the  substance  thereof  is 
of  wrought  gold ;  whosoever  possesses  it  feels  and  knows 
that  his  warfare  is  accomplished  and  his  sin  is  pardoned. 
After  awhile  the  happy  owner  begins  to  examine  his  treasure. 
It  is  all  his  own,  but  he  has  not  yet  seen  it  all,  for  one  day 
he  detects  a  secret  drawer,  he  touches  a  hidden  spring,  and  lo! 
before  him  lies  a  priceless  Koh-i-noor  surpassing  all  the  rest. 
It  had  been  given  him  it  is  certain,  but  he  had  not  seen  it  at 
first,  and  therefore  \i.%  finds  it.  Jesus  Christ  gives  us  in  the 
gift  of  himself  all  the  rest  we  can  ever  enjoy,  even  heaven's 
rest  lies  in  him  ;  but  after  we  have  received  him  we  have  to 
learn  his  value,  and  find  out  by  the  teaching  of  his  Spirit 
the  fulness  of  the  rest  which  he  bestows. 

Now,  I  say  to  you  who  are  saved,  you  who  have  looked 
to  Jesus  Christ,  whether  you  looked  this  morning  or  twenty 
years  ago,  have  you  found  out  all  that  there  is  in  the  gift 
which  Christ  has  given  you  ?  Have  you  found  out  the  se- 
cret drawer  yet  ?  He  has  given  you  rest,  but  have  you  found 
the  innermost  rest  which  he  works  in  your  hearts  ?  It  is 
yours,  for  it  is  included  in  the  one  gift ;  but  it  is  not  yours 
enjoyed,  understood,  and  triumphed  in  as  yet  unless  you 
have  found  it,  for  the  rest  here  meant  is  a  rest  after  rest,  a 
spiritual,  experienced  rest,  which  comes  only  to  those  who 
find  it  by  experience, 

2.  Further  observe  that  the  rest  in  this  second  part  of 
our  text  is  a  rest  in  service.  It  is  coupled  with  a  yoke,  foi 
activity — "  Take  my  yoke ; "  it  is  connected  with  a  burden, 
for  endurance — ^^  My  burden  is  light."  He  who  is  a  Chris- 
tian will  not  find  rest  in  being  idle.  There  is  no  unrest 
greater  than  that  of  the  sluggard.  If  you  would  rest  take 
Christ's  yoke,  be  actively  engaged  in  his  service.    As  the 


4A8  RBST,  REST. 

bullock  has  the  yoke  put  upon  its  neck  and  then  be^ns  to 
draw,  so  have  the  yoke  of  Christ  put  on  your  neck  and  com« 
mence  to  obey  him.  The  rest  of  heaven  is  not  the  rest  of 
sleep  ;  they  serve  him  day  and  night  in  his  temple.  They 
are  always  resting,  and  yet,  in  another  sense,  they  rest  not 
day  nor  night.  Holy  activity  in  heaven  is  perfect  rest. 
True  rest  to  the  mind  of  the  child  of  God  is  rest  on  the  wing, 
rest  in  motion,  rest  in  service,  not  rest  with  the  yoke  off^ 
but  with  the  yoke  on.  We  are  to  enter  upon  this  service 
voluntarily;  we  are  to  take  his  yoke  upon  us  voluntarily. 
You  observe,  it  docs  not  say,  "  Bear  my  yoke  when  it  is  laid 
upon  you,  but  take  it."  Do  not  need  to  be  told  by  the  min- 
ister, "  My  dear  brother,  such-and-such  a  work  you  are  bound 
to  do,"  but  take  up  the  yoke  of  your  own  accord.  Do  not 
merely  submit  to  be  the  Lord's  servant,  but  seek  his  service. 
Ask,  "  What  can  I  do  ?  "  Be  desirous  to  do  it ;  voluntarily, 
cheerfully,  do  all  that  lieth  in  you  for  the  extension  of  his 
kingdom  who  has  given  you  rest,  and  you  shall  find  that 
the  rest  of  your  soul  shall  lie  in  your  doing  all  you  can 
for  Jesus.  Every  active  Christian  will  tell  you  he  is  never 
happier  than  when  he  has  much  to  do ;  and,  on  the  whole, 
if  he  communes  with  Jesus,  never  more  at  rest  than  when 
he  has  least  leisure.  Look  not  for  your  rest  in  the  mere  en- 
joyments'and  excitements  of  religion,  but  find  your  rest  in 
wearing  a  yoke  which  you  love,  and  which,  for  that  reason, 
is  easy  to  your  neck. 

But,  my  dear  brother,  you  must  also  be  willing  to  bear 
Christ's  burden.  Now  the  burden  of  Christ  is  his  cross, 
which  every  Christian  must  take  up.  Expect  to  be  re- 
proached, expect  to  meet  with  some  degree  of  the  scandal 
of  the  cross,  for  the  offence  of  it  never  ceases.  Persecution 
and  reproach  are  a  blessed  burden  ;  when  your  soul  loves 
Jesus  it  is  a  light  thing  to  suffer  for  him,  and,  therefore, 
never  by  any  cowardly  retirement  or  refusal  to  profess  your 
faith,  evade  your  share  of  this  honorable  load.  Woe  unto 
those  who  say,  "  I  will  never  be  a  martyr.",    No  rest  is  sweet- 


REST,  REST.  449 

er  than  the  martyr's  rest.  Woe  unto  those  who  say,  "  We 
wUl  go  to  heaven  by  night  along  a  secret  road,  and  so  avoid 
the  shame  of  the  cross."  The  rest  of  the  Christian  is  found 
not  in  cowardice  but  in  courage ;  it  lies  not  in  providing 
for  ease  but  in  the  brave  endurance  of  suffering  for  the  truth. 
The  restful  spirit  counts  the  reproach  of  Christ  to  be  greatei 
riches  than  all  the  treasures  of  Egypt ;  he  falls  in  love  witl 
the  cross,  and  counts  the  burden  light,  and  so  finds  rest  in 
service,  and  rest  in  suffering.     Note  that  well, 

3.  The  rest  before  us  is  rest  through  learning.  Does  a 
friend  say,  "  I  do  not  see  how  I  am  ever  to  get  rest  in  work- 
ing, and  rest  in  suffering  ?  "  My  dear  brother,  you  never  will 
except  you  go  to  school,  and  you  must  go  to  school  to 
Christ.  "  Learn  of  me,"  saith  he,  "  for  I  am  meek  and  lowly 
in  heart."  Now,  in  order  to  learn  of  Christ  it  is  implied  that 
we  lay  aside  all  prejudices  of  the  past.  These  things  much 
prevent  our  finding  peace.  Have  you  any  preconceived  no- 
tions of  what  religion  should  be  ?  Have  you  fashioned  on 
your  own  anvil  ideas  of  what  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel 
ought  to  be  ?  Throw  them  all  away ;  learn  of  Jesus,  and 
unlearn  your  own  thoughts. 

Then,  when  you  are  willing  to  learn,  please  to  note  what 
is  to  be  learned.  In  order  to  get  perfect  rest  of  mind  you 
have  to  learn  of  Jesus  not  only  the  doctrines  which  he  teaches, 
but  a  great  deal  more  than  that.  To  go  to  school  to  be 
orthodox  is  a  good  enough  thing,  but  the  orthodoxy  which 
brings  rest  is  an  orthodoxy  of  the  spirit.  Observe  the  text, 
"Take  my  yoke  upon  you,  and  learn  of  me."  What?  For 
I  am  wise  and  learned,  and  can  teach  you  ?  No  ;  you  are 
to  learn  from  his  example  to  be  "  meek  and  lowly  in  heart, " 
and  in  learning  that  you  will  "  find  rest  unto  your  souls." 
To  catch  the  spirit  of  Jesus  is  the  road  to  rest.  To  believe 
what  he  teaches  me  is  something,  to  acknowledge  him  as 
my  religious  leader  and  as  my  Lord  is  much,  but  to  strive 
to  be  conformed  to  his  character,  not  merely  in  its  external 
developments,  but  in  its  interior  spirit  this  is  the  grammat 


450  REST,  REST. 

of  rest.     Learn  to  be  like  the  meek  and  lowly-hearted 
One,  and  ye  shall  find  rest. 

He  tells  us  the  two  points  in  which  we  are  to  learn  oi 
him.  First,  he  is  meek^  then  he  says  he  is  lowly  in  heart. 
Take  the  word  "  meek  "  firet.  I  think  that  efers  to  the 
yoke-bearing,  the  active  labor.  If  I  actively  labor  for 
Christ  I  can  only  find  rest  in  the  labor  by  possessing  the 
raeok  spirit  of  my  Lord  ;  for  if  I  go  forth  to  labor  for  Christ 
without  a  meek  spirit,  I  shall  very  soon  find  that  there  is 
no  rest  in  it,  for  the  yoke  will  gall  my  shoulder.  Somebody 
will  begin  objecting  that  I  do  not  perform  my  work  accord- 
ing to  his  liking.  If  I  am  not  meek  I  shall  find  my  proud 
spirit  rising  at  once,  and  shall  be  for  defending  myself ;  I 
shall  be  irritated,  or  I  shall  be  discouraged  and  inclined  to  do 
no  more,  because  I  am  not  appreciated  as  I  should  be.  A 
meek  spirit  is  not  apt  to  be  angry,  and  does  not  soon  take 
offence,  therefore  if  others  find  fault,  the  meek  spirit  goes 
working  on,  and  is  not  offended;  it  will  not  hear  the  sharp 
word,  nor  reply  to  the  severe  criticism.  If  the  meek  spirit 
be  grieved  by  some  cutting  censure  and  suffers  for  a  moment, 
it  is  always  ready  to  forgive  and  blot  out  the  past,  and  go  on 
again.  The  meek  spirit  in  working  only  seeks  to  do  good 
to  others  ;  it  denies  itself;  it  never  expected  to  be  well 
treated ;  it  did  not  aim  at  being  honored  ;  it  never  sought  it- 
self, but  purposed  only  to  do  good  to  others.  The  meek  spirit 
bowed  its  shoulder  to  the  yoke,  and  expected  to  have  to  con- 
tinue bowing  in  order  to  keep  the  yoke  in  the  right  place 
for  labor.  It  did  not  look  to  be  exalted  by  yoke-bearing  ; 
it  is  fully  contented  if  it  can  exalt  Christ  and  do  good  to 
his  chosen  ones.  Remember  how  meek  and  lowly  Jesus 
was  in  all  his  service,  and  how  calmly,  therefore,  he  bore 
with  those  who  opposed  him  ?  The  Samaritans  would  not 
receive  him,  and  therefore  John,  who  felt  the  yoke  a  little 
galling  to  his  unaccustomed  shoulder,  cried,  "  Master,  call 
fire  from  heaven. "  Poor  John !  But  Christ  bore  the  yoke 
of  service  so  well  because  of  his  meek  spirit  that  be  would  do 


ttfisf,  m^a  4:51 

nothing  of  the  kind.  If  one  village  would  not  receive  him 
he  passed  on  to  another,  and  so  labored  on.  Your  labor 
will  become  very  easy  if  your  spirits  are  very  meek.  It  is 
the  proud  spirit  that  gets  tired  of  doing  good  if  it  finds  its 
labors  not  appreciated ;  but  the  brave,  meek  spirit,  finds 
the  yoke  to  be  easy.  "  Consider  him  who  endured  such  con 
tradiction  of  sinners  against  himself  lest  ye  De  weary  and 
faint  in  your  minds."  If  ye  learn  his  meekness  his  yoke 
will  be  pleasant  to  your  shoulder,  and  you  will  never  wish 
to  have  it  removed. 

Then,  as  to  the  passive  part  of  our  rest-lesson,  note  the 
text,  "  I  am  lowly  in  hearV*  We  shall  all  have  to  bear  some- 
thing for  tha  truth's  sake  so  long  as  we  are  here.  The  re- 
proach is  a  part  of  the  gospel.  The  rod  is  a  blessing  of  the 
covenant.  The  lowly  heart  finds  the  burden  very  light  be- 
cause it  acquiesces  in  the  divine  will.  The  lowly  heart  says, 
*'Not  my  will  but  thine  be  done;  let  God  be  glorified  in 
me,  it  shall  be  all  I  ask.  Rich,  poor,  sick,  or  in  health,  it  is 
all  the  same  to  me.  If  God  the  great  One  has  the  glory, 
what  matters  where  such  a  little  one  as  I  am  may  be 
placed  ?  "  The  lowly  spirit  does  not  seek  after  great  things 
for  itself^  it  learns  in  whatsoever  state  it  is  therewith  to  be 
content.  If  it  be  poor,  "  Never  mind,"  says  the  lowly  one, 
"  I  never  aspired  to  be  rich ;  among  the  great  ones  of 
this  earth  I  never  desired  to  sh5ie."  K  it  be  denied  honor, 
the  humble  spirit  says,  "  I  never  asked  for  earthly  glory,  I 
seek  n(»t  mine  own  honor  but  his  that  sent  me.  Why  should 
[  be  honored,  a  poor  worm  like  me  ?  If  nobody  speaks  a 
good  word  of  me,  if  I  get  Christ  to  say,  "  Well  done,  good 
jmd  faithful  servant,"  that  is  enough.  And  if  the  lowly- 
hearted  have  little  wordly  pleasure,  he  says,  ^'  This  is  not 
my  place  for  pleasure,  I  deserve  eternal  pain,  and  if  I  do  not 
have  pleasures  here  I  shall  have  them  hereafter.  I  am  well 
content  to  bide  my  time."  Our  blessed  Lord  was  always  of 
that  lowly  spirit.  He  did  not  strive,  nor  cry,  nor  cause  his 
voice  to  be  heard  in  the  streets.     The  baubles  of  empire 


452  BS!St,  RfeSt. 

had  no  charm  for  him.  Had  fame  offered  to  sound  het 
trumpet  for  none  but  him  he  would  have  cared  not  one  whit 
for  the* offer.  The  kingdoms  of  this  world  and  the  glory 
thereof  were  offered  him,  and  he  repelled  the  tempter.  He 
was  gentle,  unobtrusive,  self-denying  ;  hence  he  treated  bin 
"burden  of  poverty  and  shame  as  a  light  thing.  "  He  wii- 
lured  the  cross,  despising  the  shame."  If  we  once  learn 
Christ's  spirit  we  shall  find  rest  unto  our  souls. 

4.  But  we  must  pass  on  to  notice,  that  it  is  very  evident 
that  the  rest  which  we  are  to  find  is  a  rest  which  grows  en- 
tirely out  of  our  spirits  being  conformed  to  the  spirit  of 
Christ,  "  Learn  of  me,  and  ye  shall  find  rest."  It  is  then 
a  spiritual  rest  altogether  independent  of  circumstances.  It 
is  a  vain  idea  of  ours,  to  suppose  that  if  our  circumstances 
were  altered  we  should  be  more  at  rest.  My  brother,  if  you 
cannot  rest  in  poverty,  neither  would  you  in  riches  ;  if  you 
cannot  rest  in  the  midst  of  persecution,  neither  would  you  in 
the  midst  of  honor.  It  is  the  spirit  within  that  gives  the 
rest,  that  rest  has  little  to  do  with  any  thing  without.  Men 
have  sat  on  thrones  and  have  found  them  uneasy  places, 
while  others  on  the  rack  have  declared  that  they  were  at 
rest.  The  spirit  is  the  spring  of  rest,  as  for  the  outward  sur- 
roundings they  are  of  small  account.  Let  but  your  mind  be 
like  the  mind  of  Christ,  and  you  shall  find  rest  unto  your 
souls  :  a  deep  rest,  a  growing  rest,  a  rest  found  out  more 
and  more,  an  abiding  rest,  not  only  which  you  have  found, 
but  which  you  shall  go  on  to  find.  Justification  gave  you 
rest  from  the  burden  of  sin,  sanctification  will  give  you  rest 
from  molesting  cares  ;  and  in  proportion  as  it  .becomes  per- 
fect, and  you  are  like  your  Saviour,  your  rest  shall  become 
more  like  that  of  heaven. 

I  desire  "one  other  thing  to  be  called  to  your  mind  before 
I  turn  to  the  practical  use  of  the  text,  and  that  is,  that  here, 
as  in  the  former  rest,  we  are  led  to  adore  and  admire  the 
blessed  person  of  our  Lord.  Observe  the  words,  "  For  Z" 
Oh  !  it  all  comes  from  him  still,  the  second  rest  as  much  as 


RESt,  BfiST.  453 

the  first,  the  casket  and  the  treasure  in  the  secret  drawer. 
It  all  hinges  there,  "  For  I  am,^'*  In  describing  the  second 
rest  there  is  more  said  concerning  him  than  in  the  first.  In 
the  first  part  of  our  text  it  only  says,  "I  will  give  you  rest ; " 
bat  in  the  second  part  his  character  is  more  fully  explained 
— "  For  I  am  meek  and  lowly  in  heart ; "  as  if  to  show  that 
as  believers  grow  in  grace,  and  enjoy  more  rest,  they  see 
Dipre  of  Jesus  and  know  more  of  him.  All  they  know  when 
sin  is  pardoned  is  that  he  gives  it,  perhaps  they  hardly  know 
how ;  but  afterwards  when  they  come  to  rest  in  him  in  sweet 
fellowship,  they  know  more  of  his  personal  attributes,  and 
their  rest  for  that  very  reason  becomes  more  deep  and  per- 
fect. 

Come  we  now  to  the  practical  use  of  all  this.  Read  the 
chapter  before  us  and  find  the  clue.  First,  my  dear  brethren, 
if  you  find  rest  to  your  souls  you  will  not  be  moved  by  the 
judgment  of  men.  The  children  in  the  market-place  were 
the  type  of  our  Lord's  generation,  who  railed  both  at  John 
the  Baptist  and  at  our  Lord.  The  generation  which  now 
is  follows  the  same  course,  men  are  sure  to  cavil  at  our  ser- 
vice. Never  mind ;  take  Christ's  yoke  on  you,  live  to  serve 
him  ;  take  Christ's  burden,  make  it  a  point  to  bear  all  things 
for  his  sake,  and  you  will  not  be  affected  either  by  praise  or 
censure,  for  you  will  find  rest  to  your  souls  in  surrendering 
yourself  to  the  Father's  will.  If  you  learn  of  Jesus  you  will 
have  rest  from  the  fear  of  men.  I  recollect,  before  I  came 
to  London,  being  at  a  prayer-meeting  where  a  very  quaint 
brother  prayed  for  me  that  I  might  be  delivered  from  the 
**  bleating  of  the  sheep."  I  understood  it  after  awhile,  he 
meant  that  I  might  live  above  the  fear  of  man,  that  when 
Buch  a  person  said  "  How  much  we  have  been  edified  to- 
day," I  might  not  be  puffed  up  ;  or  if  another  said,  "  How 
dull  the  discourse  was  to-day,"  I  might  not  be  depressed. 
You  will  be  delivered  from  "  the  bleating  of  the  sheep  '* 
when  you  have  the  spirit  of  the  Good  Shepherd. 

Next  you  will  be  delivered  from  fretfulness  at  want  of 


454  REST,  REST. 

sncccss.  "Then  began  he  to  upbraid  the  cities  wherein 
most  of  his  mighty  works  were  done,  because  they  repented 
not.**  He  had  wrought  his  mighty  works,  and  preached 
the  gospel,  and  they  did  not  repent.  Was  Jesus  discour- 
aged ?  Was  he,  as  we  sometimes  are,  ready  to  quit  the  work  ? 
No  ;  his  heart  rested  even  then.  If  we  come  to  Jesus,  and 
take  his  yoke  and  burden,  we  too  shall  find  rest,  though  Is- 
rael be  not  gathered. 

Then,  too,  our  Lord  denounced  judgments  upon  those 
who  repented  not.  He  told  them  that  those  who  had  heard 
the  gospel  and  rejected  it  would  find  it  more  tolerable  for 
Sodom  and  Gomorrah  in  the  day  of  judgment  than  for  them. 
There  are  some  who  quarrel  with  the  judgments  of  God, 
and  declare  that  they  cannot  bear  to  think  of  the  condem- 
nation of  the  impenitent.  Is  not  this  because  they  do  not 
bear  the  burden  of  the  Lord,  but  are  self-willed  ?  The  saints 
are  described  in  the  book  of  Revelation  as  singing  "  Hallelu- 
jah" while  the  smoke  of  Babylon  goeth  up  for  ever  and 
ever.  We  shall  never  receive  with  humble  faith  the  judg- 
ment of  God  in  its  terror  until  we  take  Christ's  yoke,  and  are 
lowly  in  heart.  When  we  are  like  Jesus  we  shall  not  feel  that 
the  punishment  is  too  much  for  the  sin,  but  we  shall  sympa- 
thize with  the  justice  of  God,  and  say  "  Amen  "  to  it.  When 
the  mind  is  lowly  it  never  ventures  to  sit  in  judgment  upon 
God,  but  rests  in  the  conviction  that  the  Judge  of  all  must 
do  right.  It  is  not  even  anxious  to  make  apologies  and 
smoothe  down  the  fact,  for  it  feels,  it  is  not  mine  to  justify 
him,  he  can  justify  himself. 

So,  again,  with  regard  to  the  divine  sovereignty.  Notice 
the  rest  of  the  Saviour's  mind  upon  that  matter :  "I  thank 
thee,  O  Father,  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth,  that  thou  hast 
hid  these  things  from  the  wise  and  prudent."  Learning  of 
Jesus  we  too  shall  rest  in  reference  to  divine  decrees ;  we 
shall  rejoice  in  whatever  the  Lord  determines  ;  predestina- 
tion will  not  cast  a  gloom  over  us,  but  we  shall  thank  God 
for  all  he  ordains. 


REST,  REST.  455 

What  a  blessed  rest !  As  we  open  it  up,  does  not  its 
compass  and  depth  surprise  you  ?  How  sweet  to  lie  passive 
in  his  hands,  reconciled  to  every  mystery,  content  with 
every  dispensation,  honored  by  every  service  satisfied  in 
Godl 

Now,  I  do  not  know  whether  I  am  right,  but  it  struck 
me,  when  considering  this  text  from  various  points,  that 
probably  our  Saviour  meant  to  convey  an  idea  of  deeper  fel- 
lowship than  we  have  yet  considered.  Did  not  he  mean  this 
— ^that  he  carried  a  yoke  on  his  shoulder,  which  he  calls, 
^*  my  yoke  ? '*'*  When  bullocks  are  yoked,  there  are  gener- 
ally two.  I  have  watched  them  in  Northern  Italy,  and  no- 
ticed that  when  two  are  yoked  together,  and  they  are  per- 
fectly agreed,  the  yoke  is  always  easy  to  both  of  them.  K 
one  were  determined  to  lie  down  and  the  other  to  stand  up, 
the  yoke  would  be  very  uncomfortable ;  but  when  they  are 
both  of  one  mind  you  will  see  them  look  at  each  other  with 
those  large,  lustrous,  brown  eyes  of  theirs  so  lovingly,  and 
with  a  look  they  read  each  other's  minds,  so  that  when  one 
wants  to  lie  down,  down  they  go,  or  when  one  wishes  to  go 
forward,  forward  they  both  go,  keeping  step.  In  this  way 
the  yoke  is  easy.  Now  I  think  the  Saviour  says  to  us,  "  I 
am  bearing  one  end  of  the  yoke  on  my  shoulder  ;  come,  my 
disciple,  place  your  neck  under  the  other  side  of  it,  and  then 
learn  of  me.  Keep  step  with  me,  be  as  I  am,  do  as  I  do. 
I  am  meek  and  lowly  in  heart ;  your  heart  must  be  like  mine, 
and  then  we  will  work  together  iu  blessed  fellowship,  and 
you  will  find  that  working  with  me  is  a  happy  thing  ;  for 
my  yoke  is  easy  to  me,  and  will  be  to  you.  Come,  then,  true 
yoke-fellow,  come  and  be  yoked  with  me,  take  my  yoke  upon 
you,  and  learn  of  me."  If  that  be  the  meaning  of  the  text, 
and  perhaps  it  is,  it  invites  us  to  a  fellowship  most  near  and 
honorable.  If  it  be  not  the  meaning  of  the  text,  it  is  at  any 
rate  a  position  to  be  sought  after,  to  be  laborers  together 
with  Christ,  bearing  the  same  yoke.  Suoh  be  oar  lot, 
Amen. 


45^  OABRIED  BT  FOtS. 


SEEMONXXVL 


CARRIED    BT   FOUR. 

**An>  HB  WITHDltXW  HDfSBLF  INTO  THB  WILDBBNBSH,  AND  FRAYED.  AHD  IT  Clim 
TO  PASS  OK  A  OBBTAIN  DAT,  AS  EX  WAS  TEAOHINO,  THAT  THBBB  WEBB  rHARIBEXi 
AND  D0CT0B8  OF  THB  LAW  SITTING  BT,  WHICH  WEBB  COMB  OUT  OF  BYBBT  TOWN  OV 
6ALILBB,  AND  JJTDMA,  AND  JEBUSALBM :  AND  THB  FOWBB  OF  THE  LORD  WAS  PRES- 
ENT TO  HEAL  THEM.  AND,  BEHOLD,  BGBN  BROUGHT  IN  A  BED  A  ICAN  WHICH  WAS 
TAKEN  WITH  A  PALSY  *.  AND  THEY  SOUGHT  MEANS  TO  BRING  HIM  IN,  AND  TO  LAY  HIM 
BEFORE  HIM.  AND  WHEN  THEY  COULD  NOT  FIND  BY  WHAT  WAY  THEY  MIGHT  BRING 
HIM  IN  BECAUSE  OF  THE  MULTITUDE,  THEY  WENT  UPON  THE  HOUSE-TOP,  AND  JJBT 
HIM  DOWN  THROUGH  THE  TILING  WITH  HIS  COUCH  INTO  THE  MIDST  BEFORE  JESUS. 
AND  WHEN  HE  SAW  THEIR  FAITH,  HE  SAID  UNTO  HIM,  MAN,  THY  SINS  ARE  FORGIT' 
EN  THEE.  AND  THE  SCRIBES  AND  THE  PHARISEES  BEGAN  TO  REASON,  SAYING,  WHO 
IS  THIS  WHICH  SPEAKETH  BLASPHEMIES  ?  WHO  CAN  FORGIVE  SINS,  BUT  GOD 
ALONE  f  BUT  WHEN  JESUS  PERCEIVED  THEIR  TH0U6IITS,  HE  ANSWERING  SAID 
UNTO  THEM,  WHAT  REASON  YE  IN  YOUR  HEARTS  ?  WHETHER  IS  EASIER,  TO  SAY, 
THY  SmS  BE  FORGIVEN  THEE  ;  OR  TO  SAY,  RISE  UP  AND  WALK  ?  BUT  THAT  YE  MAY 
KNOW  THAT  THE  SON  OF  MAN  HATH  POWER  UPON  EARTH  TO  FORGIVE  SINS  (HE 
SAID  UNTO  THE  SICK  OF  THE  PALSY),  I  SAY  UNTO  THEE,  ARISE,  AND  TAKE  UP  THY 
COUCH.  AND  GO  INTO  THINE  HOUSE.  AND  IMMEDIATELY  HE  ROSE  UP  BEFORE  THEM, 
AND  TOOK  UP  THAT  WHEREON  HB  LAY,  AND  DEPARTED  TO  HIS  OWN  HOUSE,  GLORI< 
FYING  GOD.  AND  THEY  WERE  ALL  AMAZED,  AND  THEY  GLORIFIED  GOD,  AND  WERE 
FILLED  WITH  FEAR,  SAYING,  WE  HAVE  SEEN  STRANGE  THINGS  TO-DAY.'^— LukS 
T.  1&-26. 

You  have  this  same  narrative  in  the  ninth  chapter  of 
Matthew,  and  in  the  second  chapter  of  Mark.  What  is  three 
times  recorded  by  inspired  pens  must  be  regarded  as  trebly 
important,  and  well  worthy  of  our  earnest  consideration^ 
Observe  the  instructive  fact  that  our  Saviour  retired 
and  spent  a  special  time  in  prayer  when  he  saw  unusual 
crowds  assembling.  He  withdrew  into  the  wilderness  to  hold 
communion  with  his  father,  and,  as  a  consequence,  to  come 
forth  clothed  with  an  abundance  of  healing  and  saving  power. 
Not  but  that  in  himself  as  God  he  always  had  that  power 


CARRIED  Bf  FOtTH.  45^ 

without  measure ;  but  for  our  sakes  he  did  it,  that  we  might 
learn  that  the  power  of  God  will  only  rest  upon  us  in  pro- 
portion as  we  draw  near  to  God.  Neglect  of  private  prayer 
is  the  locust  which  devours  the  strength  of  the  church. 

When  our  Lord  left  his  retirement  he  found  the  crowd 
around  him  exceeding  great,  and  it  was  as  motley  as  it  was 
great;  for  while  here  were  many  sincere  believers,  there 
were  still  more  sceptical  observers  ;  some  were  anxious  to 
receive  his  healing  power,  others  equally  desirious  to  find 
occasion  against  him.  So  in  all  congregations,  however  the 
preacher  may  be  clothed  with  his  Master's  spirit  and  his 
Master's  might,  there  will  be  a  mixed  gathering ;  there  will 
come  together  your  Pharisees  and  doctors  of  the  law,  your 
sharp  critics  ready  to  pick  holes,  your  cold-blooded  cavillers 
searching  for  faults ;  at  the  same  time,  chosen  of  God  and 
drawn  by  his  grace,  there  will  be  present  some  devout  be- 
lievers who  rejoice  in  the  power  that  is  revealed  among  men, 
and  earnest  seekers  who  wish  to  feel  in  themselves  the  heal- 
ing energy.  It  seems  to  have  been  a  rule  with  our  Saviour 
to  supply  each  hearer  with  food  after  his  kind.  The  Phar- 
isees soon  found  the  matters  to  cavil  at  for  which  they  were 
looking ;  the  Saviour  so  worded  his  expressions  that  they 
caught  at  them  eagerly,  and  charged  him  with  blasphemy  ; 
the  enmity  of  their  hearts  was  thus  thrown  out  upon  the 
surface  that  the  Lord  might  have  an  opportunity  of  rebuk- 
ing it ;  and  had  they  been  but  willing,  the  power  of  the 
Lord  was  present  to  heal  even  them.  Meanwhile,  those  poor 
tremblers  who  were  praying  for  healing  were  not  disappoint- 
ed ;  the  Good  Physician  passed  not  by  a  single  case, 
and  at  the  same  time  his  disciples  who  were  looking  for  op«- 
portunities  of  praising  him  anew,  were  also  fully  gratified, 
for  with  glad  eyes  they  saw  the  paralytic  restored,  and  heard 
8ins  forgiven. 

-  The  case  which  the  narrative  brings  before  us,  is  that  of 
a  man  stricken  down  with  paralysis.     This  sad  disease  may 
have  been  of  long  continuance.     There  is  a  paralysis  which 
20 


488  CARftffiD  BY  Btottft. 

gradually  kills  the  body,  binding  it  more  and  mc  re  surely 
in  utter  helplessness.  The  nerve  power  is  almost  destroyed ; 
the  power  of  motion  is  entirely  suspended ;  and  yet  the  fac- 
ulties of  the  mind  remain,  though  greatly  weakened,  and 
some  of  them  almost  extinguished.  Some  have  thought  that 
tliis  man  may  have  been  stricken  with  what  is  called  the  mii' 
versal  paralysis,  which  very  speedily  brings  on  death,  which 
may  account  for  the  extreme  haste  of  the  four  bearers  to 
bring  him  near  the  Saviour.  We  do  not  know  the  details 
of  his  case,  but  certain  is  it  that  he  was  paralyzed ;  and,  as 
1  look  at  the  case,  and  study  the  three  records,  I  think  I  per- 
ceive with  equal  clearness  that  this  paralysis  was  in  some 
way  or  other,  at  least  in  the  man's  own  judgment,  connect- 
ed with  his  sin.  He  was  evidently  penitent,  as  well  as  par- 
alytic. His  mind  was  as  much  oppressed  as  his  bodily 
frame.  I  do  not  know  that  he  could  be  altogether  called  a 
believer,  but  it  is  most  probable  that  being  burdened  with 
a  sense  of  sin  he  had  a  feeble  hope  in  divine  mercy,  which, 
like  a  spark  in  smoking  flax,  had  hard  work  to  exist,  but 
yet  was  truly  there.  The  affliction  for  which  his  friends  pit- 
ied him  was  in  his  body,  but  he  himself  felt  a  far  severer 
trouble  in  his  soul,  and  probably  it  was  not  so  much  with 
the  view  of  being  healed  bodily,  as  in  the  hope  of  spiritual 
blessing,  that  he  was  willing  to  be  subjected  to  any  process 
by  which  he  might  come  under  the  Saviour's  eye.  I  gath- 
er that  from  the  fact  that  our  Saviour  addressed  him  in  these 
words,  "  Be  of  good  cheer ; "  intimating  that  he  was  despond- 
ing, that  his  spirit  sunk  within  him,  and  therefore,  instead 
of  saying  to  him  at  once,  "  Rise,  take  up  thy  bed,"  our  ten- 
der-hearted Lord  said,  "  Son,  thy  sins  be  forgiven  thee."  He 
gave  him  at  the  outset  a  blessing  for  which  the  patient's 
friends  had  not  asked,  but  which  the  man,  though  speech- 
less, was  seeking  for  in  the  silence  of  his  soul.  He  was  a 
**  son,"  though  an  afflicted  one ;  he  was  ready  to  obey  the 
Lord's  bidding  when  power  was  given,  though  as  yet  he 
could  neither  lift  hand  nor  foot.      He  was  longing  for  the 


CARRIED  BY  FOUR.  469 

pardon  of  sin,  yet  could  not  stretch  out  his  hand  to  lay  hold 
upon  the  Saviour. 

I  intend  to  use  this  narrative  for  practical  purposes ; 
may  the  Holy  Spirit  make  it  really  usefaL  Our  first  re- 
mark will  be  this : 

L  There  abe  cases  which  will  need  the  aid  of  a 

UTTLE  BAND   OF  WOBKEBS    BBFOBE  THET    WILL    BE    FULLY 
SAVED. 

This  man  must  needs  be  borne  of  four,  so  the  evangelist 
Mark,  tells  us  ;  there  must  be  a  bearer  at  each  comer  of  the 
couch  whereon  he  lay.  The  great  mass  of  persons  who  are 
brought  into  the  kingdom  of  Christ  are  converted  through 
the  general  prayers  of  the  church  by  the  means  of  her  min- 
istry. Probably  three  out  of  four  of  the  members  of  any 
church  will  owe  their  conversion  to  the  church's  regular 
teaching  in  some  form  or  other ;  her  school,  her  pulpit,  her 
press  have  been  the  nets  in  which  they  were  taken.  Private 
personal  prayer  has.  of  course,  in  many  instances  been  min- 
gled  with  all  this ;  but  the  most  of  cases  could  not  be  so 
distinctly  traced  out  as  to  be  attributable  mainly  to  indi- 
vidual prayers  or  exertions.  This  is  the  rule,  I  think,  that 
the  Lord  will  have  the  many  brought  to  himself  by  the 
sounding  of  the  great  trumpet  of  jubilee  in  the  dispensation 
of  the  gospel  by  his  ministers.  There  are  some,  again,  who 
are  led  to  Jesus  by  the  individual  efforts  of  one  peraon ;  just 
as  Andrew  found  his  own  brother  Simon,  so  one  believer  by 
his  private  communication  of  the  truth  to  another  person 
becomes  instrumental,  by  the  power  of  God's  Spirit,  in  his 
conversion.  One  convert  will  bring  another,  and  that  other 
a  third.  But  this  narrative  seems  to  show  that  there  are 
cases  which  will  neither  be  brought  by  the  general  preach- 
ing of  the  word,  nor  yet  by  the  instrumentality  of  one ; 
tfiey  require  that  there  should  be  two,  or  three,  or  four  in 
holy  combination,  who,  with  one  consent,  feeling  one  com- 
mon agony  of  soul,  shall  resolve  to  band  themselves  togeth; 


460  CARRIED  BT  FOUR. 

er  as  a  company  for  this  one  object,  and  never  to  cease  from 
their  holy  confederation  until  this  object  is  gained  and  their 
friend  is  saved.  This  man  could  not  be  brought  to  Christ 
by  one,  he  must  have  four  to  lend  their  strength  for  his 
carrying,  or  he  cannot  reach  the  place  of  healing.  Let  us 
apply  the  principle.  Yonder  is  a  householder  as  yet  un- 
saved :  his  wife  has  prayed  for  him  long  ;  her  prayers  are 
yet  unanswered.  Good  wife,  God  has  blessed  thee  with  a 
son  ^\o  with  thee  rejoices  in  the  fear  of  God.  Hast  thou 
not  two  Christian  daughters  also  ?  O  ye  four,  take  each  a 
corner  of  this  sick  man's  couch  and  bring  your  husband, 
bring  your  father,  to  the  Saviour.  A  husband  and  a  wife 
are  here,  both  happily  brought  to  Christ ;  you  are  praying 
for  your  children  ;  never  cease  from  that  supplication :  pray 
on.  Perhaps  one  of  your  beloved  family  is  unusually  stub- 
bom.  Extra  help  is  needed.  Well,  to  you  the  Sabbath- 
school  teacher  will  make  a  third ;  he  will  take  one  comer 
of  the  bed  ;  and  happy  shall  I  be  if  I  may  join  the  blessed 
quaternion,  and  make  the  fourth.  Perhaps,  when  home  dis- 
cipline, the  school's  teaching,  and  the  minister's  preaching 
shall  go  together,  the  Lord  will  look  down  in  love  and  save 
your  child.  Dear  brother,  you  are  thinking  of  one  whom 
you  have  long  prayed  for;  you  have  spoken  to  him  also, 
and  used  all  proper  means,  but  as  yet  without  effect.  Per- 
haps you  speak  too  comfortingly  to  him :  it  may  be  you 
have  not  brought  that  precise  truth  to  bear  upon  him  which 
his  conscience  requires.  Seek  yet  more  help.  It  may  pos- 
sibly be  that  a  second  brother  will  speak  instructively,  where 
you  have  only  spoken  consolingly ;  perhaps  the  instruction 
may  be  the  means  of  grace.  Yet  may  it  possibly  happen 
that  even  instruction  will  not  suffice  any  more  than  consola- 
tion, and  it  may  be  needful  for  you  to  call  in  a  third,  who 
perhaps  will  speak  impressively  with  exhortation,  and  with 
warning,  which  may  be  the  great  requisite.  '  You  two,  al- 
ready in  the  field,  may  balance  his  exhortation,  which  might 
b^ve  been  too  pungent  by  itself,  and  might  have  raised  prej* 


CARRIED  BY  FOUR.  461 

ndice  in  the  person's  mind  if  it  had  come  alone.  All  three 
of  you  together  may  prove  the  fit  instruments  in  the  Lord's 
hand.  Yet  when  you  three  have  happily  combined,  it  m^.y 
be  the  poor  paralyzed  one  is  pot  yet  affected  savingly ;  a 
fourth  may  be  needed,  who,  with  deeper  affection  than  all 
three  of  you,  and  perhaps  with  an  experience  more  suited  to 
the  case  than  yours,  may  come  in,  and  working  with  you, 
the  result  may  be  secured.  The  four  fellow-helpers  together 
may  accomplish,  by  the  power  of  the  Spirit,  what  neither 
one,  nor  two,  nor  three  were  competent  to  have  done.  It 
may  sometimes  happen  that  a  man  has  heard  Paul  preach, 
but  his  clear  doctrine,  though  it  has  enlightened  his  intel- 
lect, has  not  yet  convinced  his  conscience.  He  has  heard 
ApoUos,  and  the  glow  of  the  orator's  eloquent  appeals  has 
warmed  his  heart,  but  not  humbled  his  pride.  He  has  later 
still  listened  to  Cephas,  whose  rough  cutting  sentences  havie 
hewn  him  down,  and  convinced  him  of  sin  ;  but  ere  he  can 
find  joy  and  peace  in  believing,  he  will  require  to  hear  the 
sweet  affectionate  words  of  John.  Only  when  the  fourth 
shall  grasp  the  bed  and  give  a  hearty  lift  will  the  paralyzed 
person  be  laid  in  mercy's  path.  I  anxiously  desire  to  see 
in  this  church  little  bands  of  men  and  women  bound  to  each 
other  by  zealous  love  to  souls.  I  would  have  you  say  to 
one  another,  "  This  is  a  case  in  which  we  feel  a  common  in- 
terest :  we  will  pledge  each  other  to  pray  for  this  person  ; 
we  will  unitedly  seek  his  salvation."  It  may  be  that  one  of 
our  seat-holders,  after  listening  to  my  voice  these  ten  or  fif- 
teen years,  is  not  impressed ;  it  may  be  that  another  has 
left  the  Sabbath-school  unsaved.  Let  brotherly  quaternions 
look  after  these  by  God's  help.  Moved  by  one  impulse, 
form  a  square  about  these  persons,  beset  them  behind  and 
befbre,  and  let  them  not  say,  "  No  man  careth  for  my  souL* 
Me<^t  together  in  prayer  with  the  definite  object  before  you, 
and  then  seek  that  object  by  the  most  likely  ways.  I  do 
not  know,  my  brethren,  how  much  of  blessing  might  come 
to  us  through  this,  but  I  feel  certain  that  until  we  have  tried 


462  CARRIED  BY  FOUR. 

it  we  cannot  pronounoe  a  verdict  upon  it ;  nor  can  we  be 
quite  sure  that  we  are  free  from  all  responfiibility  to  men's 
souls  until  we  have  tested  every  possible  and  probable 
method  for  doing  them  good. 

I  am  afi-aid  that  there  are  not  many,  even  in  a  large 
church,  who  will  become  sick  bearers.  Many  will  say  the 
plan  is  admirable,  but  they  will  leave  it  to  others  to  carry 
it  out.  Remember  that  the  four  persons  who  join  in  such  a 
labor  of  love  ought  all  of  them  to  be  filled  with  intense  af- 
fection to  the  persons  whose  salvation  they  seek.  They  must 
be  men  who  will  not  shrink  because  of  difficulty ;  who  will 
put  forth  their  whole  strength  to  shoulder  the  beloved  bur- 
den, and  will  persevere  until  they  succeed.  They  need  be 
strong,  for  the  burden  is  heavy ;  they  need  be  resolute,  for 
the  work  will  try  their  faith  ;  they  need  be  prayerful,  for 
otherwise  they  labor  in  vain;  they  must  be  believing,  or 
they  will  be  utterly  useless, — Jesus  saw  their  faith,  and 
therefore  accepted  their  service  ;  but  without  faith  it  is  im- 
possible to  please  him.  Where  shall  we  find  quartettes  such 
as  these  ?  May  the  Lord  find  them,  and  may  he  send  them 
to  some  of  you  poor  dying  sinners  who  lie  paralyzed  here  to- 
day. 

n.  We  now  pass  on  to  the  second  observation,  that  some 

OASBS  THUS  TASJSN  UP  WILL  NEED  MUCH  THOUGHT  BEFORE 
THE  DEHI6X  IS  ACCOMPLISHED. 

The  essential  means  by  which  a  soul  is  saved  is  clear 
enough.  The  four  bearers  had  no  question  with  each  other 
as  to  what  was  the  way  to  affect  this  man's  cure :  they  were 
unanimous  in  this — ^that  they  must  bring*  him  to  Jesus  :  by 
some  means  or  other,  by  hook  or  by  crook,  they  must  place 
him  in  the  Saviour's  way.  That  was  undoubted  fact.  Tho 
question  was,  how  to  do  this  ?  There  is  an  old  worldly  prov- 
erb, that  "  where  there's  a  will  there's  a  way ; "  and  that 
proverb,  I  believe,  may  be  safely  imported  into  spiritual 
♦Wugs,  almost  without  a  caution  or  grain  of  salt.     *'  Wliere 


CARRIED  BY  FOUR.  463 

there's  a  will  there's  a  way ; "  and  if  men  Le  called  of  God's 
grace  to  a  deep  anxiety  for  any  particular  soul,  there  is  a 
way  by  which  that  soul  may  be  brought  to  Jesus ;  but  that 
way  may  not  suggest  itself  till  after  much  consideration. 
In  some  cases  the  way  to  impress  the  heart  may  be  an  out- 
of-the-way  way,  an  extraordinary  way — a  way  which  ordi- 
narily should  not  be  used  and  would  not  be  successful,  I 
dare  say  the  four  bearers  in  the  narrative  thought  early  in 
the  morning,  "  We  will  carry  this  poor  paralytic  to  the  Sa- 
viour, passing  into  the  house  by  the  ordinary  door  ;  "  but 
when  they  attempted  to  do  so  the  multitudes  so  blocked  up 
the  road  that  they  could  not  even  reach  the  threshold. 
"  Make  way ;  make  way  for  the  sick !  Stand  aside  there, 
and  give  room  for  a  poor  paralyzed  men.  For  mercy's  sake, 
give  a  little  space,  and  let  the  sick  man  reach  the  healing 
prophet ! "  In  vain  their  entreaties  and  commands.  Here 
and  there  a  few  compassionate  persons  back  out  of  the 
crowd,  but  the  many  neither  can  nor  will  remove ;  besides, 
many  of  them  are  engaged  upon  a  similar  business,  and 
have  equal  reasons  for  pressing  in.  "  See,"  cries  one  of  the 
four,  "  I  will  make  way ; "  and  he  pushes  and  elbows  himself 
a  little  distance  into  the  passage.  "  Come  on  you  three  ! " 
he  cries  :  "  follow  up,  and  fight  for  it,  inch  by  inch."  But 
they  cannot  do  it ;  it  is  impossible;  the  poor  patient  is  ready 
to  die  for  fear ;  the  bed  is  tossed  about  by  the  throng  like 
a  cockle-shell  boat  on  the  sea-waves,  the  patient's  alarm  in- 
creases, the  bearers  are  distressed,  and  they  are  quite  glad 
to  get  outside  again  and  consider.  It  is  evidently  quite  im- 
possible by  ordinary  means  to  get  him  in.  What  then? 
**  We  cannot  burrow  under  the  ground  :  can  we  not  go  over 
the  heads  of  the  people,  and  let  the  man  down  from  above  ? 
Where  is  the  staircase  ?  "  Frequently  there  is  an  externa 
Btaircase  to  the  top  of  an  eastern  house ;  we  cannot  be  sur 
that  there  was  one  in  this  case ;  but  if  not,  the  next  door 
house  may  have  had  such  a  convenience,  and  so  the  resolute 
bearers  reached  the  top  and  passed  from  one  roof  to  another. 


464  CARRIED  BY  POUR. 

Where  we  have  no  definite  information  much  may  be  left 
to  conjecture ;  but  this  much  is  clear  :  by  some  means  they 
elevated  their  unhappy  burden  to  the  house-top,  and  provid 
ed  themselves  with  the  necessary  tackle  with  which  to  let 
him  down.  The  Saviour  was  probably  preaching  in  one  of 
the  upper  rooms,  unless  the  house  was  a  poor  one  without 
an  upper  story.  Perhaps  the  room  was  open  to  the  court- 
yard, which  was  crowded.  At  any  rate,  the  Lord  Jesus  wag 
under  cover  of  a  roof,  and  a  substantial  roof  too.  No  one 
who  carefully  reads  the  original  will  fail  to  see  that  there 
was  real  rooffing  to  be  broken  through.  It  htis  been  suggest- 
ed as  a  difficulty,  that  the  breaking  up  of  a  roof  might  in- 
volve danger  to  those  below,  and  would  probably  make  a 
great  smother  of  dust  ;  and  to  avoid  this,  there  have  been 
various  suppositions — such  as  that  the  Saviour  was  standing 
under  an  awning,  and  the  men  rolled  up  the  canvas  ;  or  that 
our  Lord  stood  under  a  verandah  with  a  very  light  cover- 
ing, which  the  men  could  readily  uncover ;  others  have  even 
invented  a  trap-door  for  the  occasion.  But  with  all  due  def- 
erence to  eminent  travellers,  the  words  of  the  evangelists 
cannot  be  so  readily  disposed  of.  According  to  our  text, 
the  man  was  let  down  through  "  tiling,"  not  canvas,  or  any 
light  material  ;  whatever  sort  of  tiling  it  was,  it  was  cer- 
tainly made  of  burnt  clay,  for  that  entei*8  into  the  essence 
of  the  word.  Moreover,  according  to  Mark,  after  they  had 
uncovered  the  roof,  which,  I  suppose,  means-the  removal  of 
the  "  tiling,"  they  broke  it  up^  which  looks  exceedingly  like 
breaking  through  a  ceiling.  The  Greek  word  used  by  Mark, 
which  is  interpreted  "  breaking  up,"  is  a  very  emphatic 
word,  and  signifies  digging  through,  or  scooping  up,  which 
evidently  conveys  the  idea  of  considerable  labor  for  the  re- 
moval of  material.  We  are  told  that  the  roofs  of  Oriental 
houses  are  often  made  of  big  stones  ;  that  may  be  true  as  a 
general  rule,  but  not  in  this  case,  for  the  house  was  covered 
with  tiles  ;  and  as  to  the  dust  and  falling  rubbish,  that  may 
or  may  not  be  a  necessary  conclusion  :  but  as  clear  as  noon* 


CABRIEB  BT  FOUR.  465 

day  is  it  that  a  substantial  house-top,  which  required  until 
ing  and  digging  through,  had  a  hole  made  in  it,  and  through 
the  aperture  the  man  in  his  bed  was  let  down.  Perhaps 
there  was  dust,  and  possibly  there  was  danger  too,  but  the 
bearers  were  prepared  to  accomplish  their  purpose  at  all 
risks.  They  must  get  the  sick  man  in  somehow.  There  is 
no  need,  however,  to  suppose  either,  for  no  doubt  the  four 
men  would  be  careful  not  to  incommode  the  Saviour  or  hig 
hearers.  The  tiles  or  plaster  might  be  removed  to  another 
part  of  the  flat  roof,  and  the  boards  likewise,  as  they  were 
broken  up :  and  as  for  the  spars,  they  might  be  sufficiently 
wide  to  admit  the  narrow  couch  of  the  sick  man  without 
moving  any  of  them  from  their  places.  Mr.  Hartley,  in  his 
Travels,  says,  "  When  I  lived  at  JEgina  I  used  to  look  up 
not  unfrequently  at  the  roof  above  my  head,  and  contemplate 
how  easily  the  whole  transaction  of  the  paralytic  might  take 
place.  The  roof  was  made  in  the  following  manner; — ^A 
layer  of  reeds,  of  a  large  species,  was  placed  upon  the  raft- 
ers ;  on  these  a  quantity  of  heather  was  strewed ;  on  the 
heather  earth  was  deposited,  and  beaten  down  into  a  solid 
mass.  Now,  what  difficulty  would  there  be  in  removing 
first  the  earth,  next  the  heather,  and  then  the  reeds  ?  Nor 
would  the  difficulty  be  increased,  if  the  earth  had  a  pave- 
ment of  tiling  laid  upon  it.  No  inconvenience  could  result 
to  the  persons  in  the  house,  from  the  removal  of  the  tiles 
and  earth  ;  for  the  heather  and  reeds  would  stop  any  thing 
that  might  otherwise  fall  down,  and  would  be  removed  last 
of  all."  To  let  a  man  down  through  the  roof  was  a  device 
most  strange  and  striking,  but  it  only  gives  point  to  the  re- 
mark which  we  have  now  to  make  here.  K  we  want  to 
have  souls  saved,  we  must  not  be  too  squeamish  and  delicate 
about  conventionalities,  rules,  and  proprieties,  for  the  king- 
dom of  heaven  suffisreth  violence.  W^  must  make  up  our 
minds  to  this  :  "  Smash  or  crash,  every  thing  shall  go  to 
pieces  which  stands  between  the  soul  and  its  God  ;  it  mat- 
ters not  what  tiles  are  to  be  taken  of^  what  plaster  is  to 

20* 


466  CARRIED  BY  FOUR. 

be  digged  up,  or  wliat  boards  are  to  be  torn  away,  or  what 
labor,  or  trouble,  or  expense  we  may  be  at:  the  soul 
is  too  precious  for  us  to  stand  upon  nice  questions.  If  by 
any  means  we  may  save  some  is  our  policy.  Skin  for  skin, 
yea,  all  that  we  have  is  nothing  comparable  to  a  man's 
soul."  When  four  true  hearts  are  set  upon  the  Spiritual 
good  of  a  sinner,  their  holy  hunger  will  break  through  stone 
walls  or  house  roofs. 

I  have  no  doubt  it  was  a  difficult  task  to  carry  the  paral- 
yzed man  up  stairs  ;  the  breaking  up  of  the  roof^  the  remov- 
ing the  tiling  with  all  due  care,  must  have  been  a  laborious 
task,  and  have  required  much  skill,  but  the  work  was  done, 
and  the  end  was  gained.  We  must  never  stop  at  difficul- 
ties ;  however  stem  the  task,  it  must  always  be  more  diffi- 
cult to  us  to  let  a  soul  perish  than  to  labor  in  the  most  self- 
denying  form  for  its  deliverance. 

It  was  a  very  singular  action  which  the  bearers  perform- 
ed.    Who  would  have  thought  of  breaking  up   a  roof? 
Nobody  but  those  who  love  much,  and  much  desired  to  ben- 
efit the  sick.     O  that  God  would  make  us  attempt  singular 
things  to  save  souls.     May  a  holy  ingenuity  be  excited  in 
the  cliurch :  a  sacred  inventiveness  set  at  work  for  winning 
men's  hearts.     It  appeared  to  his  generation  a  singular 
thing  when  John  Wesley  stood  on  his  father's  tombstone 
and  preached  at  Epworth.     Glory  be  to  God  that  he  had 
the  courage  to  preach  in  the  open  air.     It  seemed  an  extra- 
ordinary thing  when  certain  ministers  delivered  sermons  in 
the  theatres ;  but  it  is  matter  of  joy  that  sinners  have  been 
reached  by  such  irregularities  who  might  have  escaped  all 
other  means.     Let  us  but  feel  our  hearts  full  of  zeal  for  God, 
and  love  for  souls,  and  we  shall  soon  be  led  to  adopt  means 
which  others  may  criticise,  but  which  Jesus  Christ  will  ac- 
cept. 

After  all,  the  method  which  the  four  friends  followed 
was  one  most  suitable  to  their  abilities.  They  were,  I  sup- 
pose, four  strong  fellows,  to  whom  the  load  was  no  great 


CARRIED  BY  FOUR  467 

weight,  and  the  work  of  diggmg  was  comparatively  easy. 
The  method  suited  their  capacity  exactly.  And  what  did  they 
do  when  they  had  let  the  sick  man  down  ?  Look  at  the  scene 
and  admire  ?  I  do  not  read  that  they  said  a  single  word, 
yet  what  they  did  was  enough  :  abilities  for  lifting  and 
carrying  did  the  needful  work.  Some  of  you  say,  "  Ah,  we 
cannot  be  of  any  use  ;  we  wish  we  could  preach."  These 
men  could  not  preach :  they  did  not  need  to  preach.  They 
lowered  the  paralytic,  and  their  work  was  done.  They 
could  not  preach,  but  they  could  hold  a  rope.  We  want  in 
the  Christian  church  not  only  preachers,  but  soul-winners, 
who  can  bear  souls  on  their  hearts,  and  feel  the  Solemn 
burden;  men  who,  it  may  be,  cannot  talk,  but  who  can 
weep ;  men  who  cannot  break  other  men's  hearts  with  their 
language,  but  who  break  their  own  hearts  with  their  com- 
passion. In  the  case  before  us  there  was  no  need  to  plead 
"Jesus,  thou  son  of  David,  look  up,  for  a  man  is  com- 
ing down  who  needs  thee."  There  was  no  need  to  urge 
that  the  patient  had  been  so  many  years  sick.  We  do  not 
know  that  the  man  himself  uttered  a  word.  Helpless  and 
paralyzed,  he  had  not  the  vigor  to  become  a  suppliant. 
They  placed  his  almost  lifeless  form  before  the  Saviour's 
eye,  and  that  was  appeal  enough ;  his  sad  condition  was 
more  eloquent  than  words.  O  hearts  that  love  sinners  lay 
their  lost  estate  before  Jesus  ;  bring  their  cases  as  they  are 
before  the  Saviour ;  if  your  tongues  stammer,  your  hearts 
will  prevail ;  If  you  cannot  speak  even  to  Christ  himself,  as 
you  would  desire,  because  you  have  not  the  gift  of  prayer, 
yet  If  your  strong  desires  spring  from  the  spirit  of  prayer 
you  cannot  fail.  God  help  us  to  make  use  of  such  means  as 
are  withhi  our  power,  and  not  to  sit  down  idly  to  regret 
the  powers  we  do  not  possess.  ,  Perhaps  it  would  be  danger- 
ous for  us  to  possess  the  abilities  we  covet ;  it  is  al  ways 
safe  to  consecrate  those  we  have. 

in.  Now  we  must  pass  on  to  an  important  truth.     We 


i68  CARRIED  BY  F0X7R. 

may  safely  gather  from  the  narrative  that  the  boot  or 

BPIBirUAL  PARALYSIS  GENERALLY  LIES  IN  UNPARDONED  SIN. 

Jesus  intended  to  heal  the  paralyzed  man,  but  he  did  so 
by  first  of  all  saying,  "  Thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee."  There 
are  some  in  this  house  of  prayer  this  morning  who  are  spir- 
itually paralyzed ;  they  have  eyes  and  they  see  the  gospel; 
they  have  ears  and  they  have  heard  it,  and  heard  it  atten- 
tively too  ;  but  they  are  so  paralyzed  that  they  will  tell  you, 
and  honestly  tell  you,  that  they  cannot  lay  hold  upon  the 
promise  of  God ;  they  cannot  believe  in  Jesus  to  the  saving 
of  their  souls.  If  you  urge  them  to  pray,  they  say  ;  "  We 
try  to  pray,  but  it  is  not  acceptable  prayer."  If  you  bid 
them  have  confidence,  they  will  tell  you,  though  not  in  so 
many  words  perhaps,  that  they  are  given  up  to  despair. 
Their  mournful  ditty  is  : — 

"  I  would,  bnt  cannot  sing ; 
I  would,  bnt  cannot  pray ; 
For  Satan  meets  me  when  I  try. 
And  frights  my  soul  away. 

"  I  would,  but  can't  repeat. 
Though  I  endeavor  oft ; 
This  stony  heart  can  ne'er  relent 
Till  Jesus  makes  it  soft. 

I  would,  but  cannot  love, 

Thuogh  woo'd  by  love  divine ; 
Ko  arguments  have  power  to  move 

A  toul  so  base  as  mine. 

0  could  I  but  believe ! 
Then  all  would  easy  be ; 

1  would,  but  cannot — Lord,  relieve : 
My  help  must  come  from  thee." 

The  bottom  of  this  paralysis  is  sin  upon  the  conscience, 
working  death  in  them.  They  are  sensible  of  their  guilt, 
but  powerless  to  believe  that  the  crimson  fountain  can  re- 
move it :  they  are  alive  only  to  sorrow,  despondency,  and 
agony.  Sin  paralyzes  them  with  despair.  I  grant  you  that 
Into  this  despair  there  enters  largely  the  element  of  unbelief 


CARRIED  BY  POUR.  469 

which  is  sinful ;  but  I  hope  there  is  also  in  it  a  measure  of 
sincere  repentance,  which  bears  in  it  the  hope  of  something 
better.  Our  poor,  awakened  paralytics  sometimes  hope  that 
they  may  be  forgiven,  but  they  cannot  believe  it ;  they  cannot 
rejoice  ;  they  cannot  cast  themselves  on  Jesus ;  they  are 
utterly  without  strength.  Now,  the  bottom  of  it,  I  say  again, 
lies  in  unpardoned  sin,  and  I  earnestly  entreat  you  who  love 
the  Saviour  to  be  earnest  in  seeking  the  pardon  of  these  par- 
alyzed persons.  You  tell  me  that  /should  be  earnest ;  so 
I  should  ;  and  so  I  desire  to  be  :  but,  brethren,  their  cases 
appear  to  be  beyond  the  minister's  sphere  of  action ;  the 
Holy  Spirit  determines  to  use  other  agencies  in  their  salva- 
tion. They  have  heard  the  public  word  ^  they  now  need 
private  consolation  and  aid,  an^  that  from  three  or  four. 
Lend  us  your  help,  ye  earnest  brethren  ;  form  your  parties 
of  four ;  grasp  the  couches  of  these  who  wish  to  be  saved, 
but  who  feel  they  cannot  believe.  The  Lord,  the  Holy 
Spirit,  make  you  the  means  of  leading  them  into  forgive- 
ness and  eternal  salvation.  They  have  been  lying  a  long 
time  waiting ;  their  sin,  however,  still  keeps  them  where 
they  are  ;  their  guilt  prevents  their  laying  hold  on  Christ ; 
there  is  the  point,  and  it  is  for  such  cases  that  I  earnestly 
invoke  my  brethren's  aid. 

IV.  Let  us  proceed  to  notice,  fourthly,  that  Jesus  can 

BBMOVB  BOTH    THE    SIN    AND  THE  PARALYSIS   IN   A    SINGLE 

MOMENT.  It  was  the  business  of  the  four  bearers  to  bring 
the  man  to  Christ ;  but  there  their  power  ended.  It  is  our 
part  to  bring  the  guilty  sinner  to  the  Saviour  :  there  our  pow- 
er ends.  Thank  God,  when  we  end,  Christ  begins,  and  works 
right  gloriously.  Observe  that  he  began  by  saying  :  "  Thy 
sins  be  forgiven  thee. "  He  laid  the  axe  at  the  rcci ;  he 
did  not  desire  that  the  man's  sins  might  be  forgiven,  or  ex- 
prass  a  good  wish  in  that  direction,  but  he  pronounced  an 
absolution  by  virtue  of  that  authority  with  which  he  was 
clothed  as  the  Saviour,     The  poor  man's  sins  there  and  then 


470  CARRIED  BY  FOUR. 

« 

ceased  to  be,  and  he  was  justified  in  the  sight  of  Glod. 
Believest  thou  this,  my  hearer,  that  Christ  did  thus  for  the 
paralytic  man?  Then  I  charge  you  believe  something 
more,  that  if  on  earth  Christ  had  power  to  forgive  sin  be- 
fore he  had  offered  an  atonement,  much  more  hath  he  power 
to  do  this,  now  that  he  hath  poured  out  his  blood,  and 
hath  said,  '^  It  is  finished, "  and  hath  gone  into  his  glory, 
and  is  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Father.  He  is  exalted  on 
h  igh,  to  give  repentance  and  remission  of  sin.  Should  he  s€  nd 
his  Spirit  into  thy  soul  to  reveal  himself  in  thee,  thou  wouldtt 
in  an  instant  be  entirely  absolved.  Does  blasphemy  blacken 
thee?  Does  a  long  life  of  infidelity  pollute  thee?  Hast 
thou  been  licentious  ?  Hast  thou  been  abominably  wicked  ? 
A  word  can  absolve  thee — a  word  from  those  dear  lips 
which  said,  "  Father  forgive  them,  for  they  know  not  what 
they  do."  I  charge  thee  ask  for  that  absolving  word.  No 
earthly  priest  can  give  it  thee  ;  but  the  great  High  P.riest, 
the  Lord  Jesus,  can  utter  it  at  once.  Ye  twos  and  fours 
who  are  seeking  the  salvation  of  men,  here  is  encouragement 
for  you.  Pray  for  them  now,  while  the  gospel  is  being  preach- 
ed in  their  hearing  ;  pray  for  them  day  and  night,  and  bring 
the  glad  tidings  constantly  before  them,  for  Jesus  is  still 
able  "  to  save  to  the  uttermost  them  that  come  unto  God 
by  him. " 

After  our  blessed  Lord  had  taken  away  the  root  of  the 
evil,  you  observe  he  then  took  away  the  paralysis  itself. 
It  was  gone  in  a  single  moment.  Every  I'mb  in  the  man's 
body  was  restored  to  a  healthy  state;  he  oould  stand,  could 
walk,  could  lift  his  bed,  both  nerve  and  muscle  were  restored 
to  vigor.  One  moment  will  suffice,  if  Jesus  speaks,  to 
make  the  despairing  happy,  and  the  unbelieving  full  of 
confidence.  What  we  cannot  do  with  our  reasonings,  per- 
suadiiigs,  and  entreaties,  nor  even  with  the  letter  of  God's 
promise,  Christ  can  do  in  a  single  instant  by  his  Holy 
Spirit,  and  it  has  been  our  joy  to  see  it  done.  This  is  the 
standing  miracle  of  the  church,  performed  by  Christ  to-day 


CABRIBD  BY  FOUR.  471 

even  as  aforetime.  Paralyzed  souls  who  could  neither  do 
nor  will,  have  been  able  to  do  valiantly,  and  to  will  with 
Bolemn  resolution.  The  Lord  Las  poured  power  into  the 
faint,  and  to  them  that  had  no  might  he  hath  increased 
strength.  He  can  do  it  still.  I  say  again  to  loving  spirits 
who  are  seeking  the  good  of  others,  let  this  encourage  you. 
You  may  not  have  to  wait  long  for  the  conversions  you  aim 
at ;  it  may  be  ere  another  Sabbath  ends,  the  person  you  pray 
for  may  be  brought  to  Jesus  ;  or  if  you  have  to  wait  a  little, 
the  waiting  shall  well  repay  you,  and  meanwhile  remember 
he  has  never  spoken  in  secret  in  the  dark  places  of  the  earth  ; 
he  has  not  said  to  the  seed  of  Jacob,"  Seek  ye  my  face  in 
vain." 

V.  Passing  on,  and  drawing  to  a  conclusion :  Where* 
^YER  oiTE  Lord  works  the  double  miracle,  it  will  be 
APPARENT.  He  forgave  the  man's  sin  and  took  away  his 
disease  at  the  same  time.  How  was  this  apparent  ?  I  have 
no  doubt  the  pardon  of  the  man's  sin  was  best  known  to 
nimself ;  but  possibly  those  who  saw  that  gleaming  coun- 
tenance which  had  been  so  sad  before,  might  have  noticed 
that  the  word  of  absolution  sunk  into  his  soul  as  the  rain 
into  the  thirsty  earth.  "  Thy  sins  be  forgiven  thee,"  fell 
on  him  as  a  dew  from  heaven  ;  he  believed  the  second  dec- 
laration, and  his  eyes  sparkled.  He  might  almost  have 
felt  indifferent  whether  he  remained  paralyzed  or  not,  it  was 
such  joy  to  be  forgiven,  forgiven  by  the  Lord  himself.  That 
was  enough,  quite  enough  for  him  ;  but  it  was  not  enough 
for  the  Saviour,  and  therefore  he  bade  him  take  up  his  couch 
and  walk,  for  he  had  given  him  strength  to  do  so.  The 
man's  healing  was  proved  by  his  obedience.  Openly  to  all 
on-lookers  an  active  obedience  became  indisputable  proof  of 
the  poor  creature's  restoration.  Notice,  our  Lord  bade  him 
rise — ^he  rose ;  he  had  no  power  to  do  so  except  that  power 
which  comes  with  divine  commands.  He  rose,  for  Christ 
said  ^^  Rise."    Then  be  folded  up  that  miserable  palliasse 


472  CARRIED  BY  FOUR. 

— the  Greek  word  used  shows  us  that  it  was  a  very  poori 
mean,  miserable  affair — ^he  rolled  it  up  as  the  Saviour  bade 
him,  he  shouldered  it,  and  went  to  his  home.  His  first  im- 
pulse must  have  been  to  throw  himself  down  at  the  Saviour's 
feet,  and  say,  "  Blessed  be  thy  name  ; "  but  the  Master  said, 
"  Go  to  thy  house  ; "  and  I  do  not  find  that  he  staid  to  make 
one  grateful  obeisance,  but  elbowing  the  crowd,  jostling  the 
throng  with  his  load  on  his  back,  he  proceeded  to  his  house 
just  as  he  was  told,  and  that  without  deliberation,  or  ques- 
tioning. He  did  his  Lord's  bidding,  and  he  did  it  accurately, 
in  detail,  at  once,  and  most  cheerfully.  Oh !  how  cheer- 
fully ;  none  can  tell  but  those  in  like  case  restored.  So,  the 
true  sign  of  pardoned  sin,  and  of  paralysis  removed  from  the 
heart,  is  obedience.  If  thou  art  really  saved  thou  ^It  do 
what  Jesus  bids  thee;  thy  request  will  be,  "Lord,  what 
wilt  thou  have  me  to  do  ?  "  and  that  once  ascertained,  thou 
wilt  be  sure  to  do  it.  You  tell  me  Christ  has  forgiven  you,  and 
yet  you  live  in  rebellion  to  his  commands ;  how  can  I  be- 
lieve you  ?  You  say  you  are  a  saved  man,  and  yet  you  wil 
fully  set  up  your  own  will  against  Christ's  will  ;  what  evi* 
dence  have  I  of  what  you  say  ?  Have  I  not,  rather,  clear 
evidence  that  you  speak  not  the  truth?  Open,  careful, 
prompt,  cheerful  obedience  to  Christ,  becomes  the  test  of 
the  wonderful  work  which  Jesus  works  in  the  soul. 

VL  Lastly,  all  this  tends  to  glorify  God. 

Those  four  men  had  been  the  indirect  means  of  bringing 
much  honor  to  God  and  much  glory  to  Jesus,  and  they,  I 
doubt  not,  glorified  God  in  their  very  hearts  on  the  house- 
top. Happy  men  to  have  been  of  so  much  service  to  their 
bediidden  friend  I  Who  else  united  in  glorifying  God? 
Why,  first  the  man  who  was  restored.  Did  not  every  part 
of  his  body  glorify  God  ?  I  think  I  see  him  I  He  sets  one 
foot  down  to  God's  glory,  he  plants  the  other  to  the  same 
note,  he  walks  to  God's  glory,  he  carries  his  bed  to  God's 
glory,  h9  moves  his  whole  body  to  the  glory  of  God,  be 


CARRIED  BY  FOUR.  473 

speaks,  lie  shouts,  he  sings,  lie  leaps  to  the  glory  of  God. 
When  a  man  is  saved  his  whole  manhood  glorifies  God  ;  he 
becomes  instinct  with  a  new-bom  life  which  glows  in  every 
part  of  him',  spirit,  soul  and  body.  As  an  heir  of  heaven,  he 
brings  glory  to  the  Great  Father  who  has  adopted  him  into 
the  family,  he  breathes  and  eats  and  drinks  to  God's  praise. 
When  a  sinner  is  brought  into  the  church  of  God  we  are  all 
glad,  but  we  are  none  of  us  so  joyous  and  thankful  as  he ; 
we  would  all  praise  God,  but  he  must  praise  him  the  loud- 
est, and  he  will. 

But  who  next  glorified  God  ?  The  text  does  not  say  so, 
but  we  feel  sure  that  his  family  did,  for  he  went  to  his  own 
house.  We  will  suppose  that  he  had  a  wife.  *  That  morn- 
ing when  the  four  friends  came  and  put  him  on  the  bed, 
and  carried  him  out,  it  may  be  she  shook  her  head  in  loving 
anxiety,  and  I  dare  say  she  said,  "  I  am  half  afraid  to  trust 
him  with  you.  Poor,  poor  creature,  I  dread  his  encounter- 
ing the  throng.  I  am  afraid  it  is  madness  to  hope  for  suc- 
cess. I  wish  you  Godspeed  in  it,  but  I  tremble.  Hold  well 
the  bed  ;  be  sure  you  do  not  let  him  fall.  If  you  do  let  him 
down  through  the  roof  hold  fast  the  ropes,  be  careful  that 
no  accident  occurs  to  my  poor  bedridden  husband ;  he  is 
bad  enough  as  he  is,  do  not  cause  him  more  misery."  But 
when  she  saw  him  coming  home,  walking  with  the  bed  on 
his  back,  can  you  picture  her  delight  ?  How  she  would  be- 
gin to  sing,  and  praise  and  bless  the  Lord  Jehovah  Rophi, 
who  had  healed  her  beloved  one.  If  there  were  little  chil- 
dren about,  playing  before  the  house,  how  they  would  shout 
for  glee,  *^  Here's  father ;  here's  father  walking  again,  and 
come  home  with  the  bed  on  his  back ;  he  is  made  whole 
again,  as  he  used  to  be  when  we  were  very  little."  What 
a  glad  house  !  They  would  gather  round  bim,  all  of  them, 
wife  and  children,  and  friends  and  neighbors,  and  they  would 
begin  to  sing,  "Bless  the  Lord,  O  my  soul :  and  all  that  is 
within  me,  bless  his  holy  name.  Bless  the  Lord,  O  my  soul, 
IIQd  forget  not  all  bis  benefits  :  who  forgiveth  all  thine  ip- 


474  CARRIED  BY  FOUR. 

iquities  :  who  healeth  all  thy  diseases.''  How  the  man  would 
sing  those  verses,  rejoicing  in  the  forgiveness  first,  and  the 
healing  next,  and  wondering  how  it  was  that  David  .knew 
so  much  about  it,  and  had  put  his  case  into  such  fit  words. 

Well,  but  it  did  not  end  there.  A  wife  and  family  utter 
but  a  part  of  the  glad  chorus  of  praise,  though  a  very  me- 
lodious part.  There  are  other  adoring  hearts  who  unite  in 
glorifying  1  he  healing  Lord.  The  disciples  who  were  around 
the  Saviour,  they  glorified  God,  too.  They  rejoiced,  and 
said  one  to  another,  "  We  have  seen  strange  things  to-day.*' 
The  whole  Christian  church  is  full  of  sacred  praise  when  a 
sinner  is  saved ;  even  heaven  itself  is  glad. 

But  there  was  glory  brought  to  God,  even  by  the  com- 
mon people  who  stood  around.  They  had  not  yet  entered 
into  that  sympathy  with  Christ  which  the  disciples  felt,  but 
they  were  struck  by  the  sight  of  this  great  wonder,  and 
they,  too,  could  not  help  saying  that  God  had  wrought  great 
marvels.  I  pray  that  on-lookers,  strangers  from  the  com- 
monwealth of  Israel,  when  they  see  the  desponding  comfort- 
ed, and  lost  ones  brought  in,  may  be  compelled  to  bear  their 
witness  to  the  power  of  divine  grace,  and  be  led  themselves 
to  be  partakers  in  it.  There  is  "  Glory  to  God  in  the  high- 
est, and  on  earth  peace,  good-will  towards  men,"  when  a 
paralyzed  soul  is  filled  with  gracious  strength. 

Now,  shall  I  need  to  stand  here,  and  entreat  for  the  four 
to  carry  poor  souls  to  Jesus  ?  Shall  I  need  to  appeal  to  my 
brethren  who  love  their  Lord,  and  say,  band  yourselves  to- 
gether to  win  souls  ?  Your  humanity  to  the  paralytic  soul 
claims  it,  but  your  desire  to  bring  glory  to  God  compels  it. 
If  you  are  indeed  what  you  profess  to  be,  to  glorify  God 
must  be  the  fondest  wish  and  the  loftiest  ambition  of  your 
souls.  Unless  ye  be  traitors  to  my  Lord  as  well  as  inhuman 
to  your  fellow-men,  you  will  catch  the  practical  thought 
which  I  have  striven  to  bring  before  you,  and  you  will  seek 
out  some  fellow  Christians,  and  say,  "  Come,  let  us  pray  to- 
gether, for  such  an  one,"  and  if  you  know  a  desperate  case 


(JAtifelSt)  BY  ^tJR.  4t5 

you  will  make  up  a  sacred  quaternion,  to  resolve  upon  its 
salvation.  May  the  power  of  the  Highest  abide  upon  you, 
and  who  knoweth  what  glory  the  Lord  may  gain  through 
you?  Never  forget  this  strange  story  of  the  bed  which 
carried  the  man,  and  the  man  who  carried  his  bed. 


476  JBSUB  MO  PHANTOM. 


SERMOM  XXVn. 


JESUS  NO  PHANTOM 

**  ASB  WHBN  THE  DX80XPLB8  SAW  HIM  WALKDfa  OK  THE  SEA,  THXT  WSBB  TBOUB- 
UBD,  BATINe,  IT  IB  ▲  BPIBIT  ;  AXD  THST  OBIED  OUT  FOB  TSUL**— liatttMUr 
XlY.M. 

Some  of  the  richest  comforts  are  lost  to  us  for  want  of 
clear  perception.  What  consolation  could  be  greater  to  the 
tempest-tossed  disciples  than  to  know  their  Master  was  pres- 
ent, and  to  see  him  manifestly  revealed  as  Lord  of  sea  as 
well  as  land  ?  Yet  because  they  did  not  discern  him  clearly, 
they  missed  the  incomparable  consolation.  What  is  worse, 
at  times  the  dimness  of  our  perception  will  even  turn  the 
rarest  consolation  into  the  source  of  fear.  Jesus  is  come, 
and  in  his  coming  the  sun  of  their  joy  has  risen,  but  they  do 
not  perceive  it  to  be  Jesus,  and  therefore  thinking  it  to  be  a 
phantom,  they  are  filled  with  alarm,  and  cry  out  in  dread. 
He  who  was  their  best  friend,  they  were  as  much  afraid  of 
as  though  he  had  been  the  arch  enemy.  Christ  walking  on 
the  wave  should  have  put  all  fear  to  rest,  but  instead  there- 
of they  mistake  him  for  a  phantom  appearing  amidst  the 
storm,  foreboding  darker  ill.  They  were  filled  with  dismay 
by  that  which  ought  to  have  lifted  them  up  with  exultation. 
Oh,  the  benefit  of  the  heavenly  eye-salve  by  which  the  eye 
is  cleared  I  May  the  Holy  Spirit  anoint  our  eyes  therewith. 
Oh,  the  excellence  of  faith  which,  like  the  telescope,  brings 
Christ  near  to  us,  and  lets  us  see  him  as  he  is  I  Oh,  the 
sweetness  of  walking  near  to  Christ,  and  knowing  him  with 
an  assured,  confident,  clear  knowledge,  for  this  would  give 
US  comforts  which  now  we  miss,  and  at  once  remove  from 
us  distresses  which  to-day  unnecessarily  afflict  us. 


JESUS  NO  PHANTOM.  477 

The  subject  upon  which  I  wish  to  speak,  will  be  indica- 
ted to  you  if  I  supply  you  with  the  outline  of  it  first  of  alL 
The  first  head  will  be  this  : — it  is  too  common  an  error  to 
make  a  phantom  of  Christ;  and  secondly,  we  are  most  apt 
to  do  this  when  Jesus  is  most  evidently  revealed ;  and  there- 
fore, thirdly,  from  this  spring  our  greatest  sorrows ;  and, 
lourthly,  if  we  could  be  cured  of  this  evil^  Jesus  would  rise 
very  much  in  our  esteem^  and  many  other  blessed  results  would 
be  sure  to  follow. 

L   It  IS  TOO   COMMON  AN  BBSOB  TO  MAKB  A  PHANTOM   OF 

Ohsist. 

There  are  some  who  make  a  Christ  of  a  phantom,  I  mean 
they  take  that  to  be  their  Saviour  which  is  but  a  delusion  ; 
they  have  dreamed  so,  they  have  excited  themselves  up  to 
a  high  pitch  of  presumptuous  credulity,  they  have  persuaded 
themselves  into  delusive  comfort,  and  they  make  their  exci- 
ted feeling  or  fancy  their  Christ.  They  are  not  saved,  but 
they  think  they  are ;  Jesus  is  not  known  to  them,  they  are  un- 
spiritual,  they  are  not  his  sheep,  they  are  not  his  disciples,  yet 
they  have  put  something  up  before  their  mind's  eye  which 
they  think  to  be  Christ,  and  their  ideal  of  Christ,  which  is  but 
a  phantom,  is  Christ  to  them.  A  terrible  error  I  May  God  save 
us  from  it  and  bring  us  to  know  the  Lord  in  deed  and  in  truth 
by  the  teaching  of  his  Holy  Spirit ;  for  to  know  him  is  life  eter- 
nal. But  an  equally  and  probably  a  more  common  error  is  to 
make  a  phantom  of  Christ.  More  or  less  we  have  all  erred 
in  this  direction.  Let  me  show  you  this  for  reproof  and  di- 
rection. 

First,  how  often  we  have  done  this  in  the  matter  of  sin 
and  the  cleansing  of  it  /  Our  sin  seems  to  us,  when  we  are 
convinced  of  it,  very  real.  Real  indeed  it  is,  our  oflTences 
against  God  are  no  imaginary  ones,  we  have  really  provoked 
him  to  wrath,  and  he  is  angry  with  us  every  day.  The 
stain  of  sin  is  not  on  the  surface  merely,  the  leprosy  lies 
deep  witliin,      Sin«is  a  horrible  evil,  and  when  our  Spirits 


4t8  JfiSUS  NO  PHANTOM. 

have  been  able  to  see  the  reality  and  the  heinoosness  of  it| 
they  sink  withm  us.  Bat  oh,  what  a  glorious  thing  it  is 
when  we  can  with  equal  vividness  see  the  actual  cleansing 
from  sin  which  Christ  confers  on  all  believers  by  his  pre- 
cious blood  I  To  see  the  scarlet  and  to  weep  over  it  is  well, 
but  then  to  see  that  same  scarlet  vanish  in  the  pure  white 
of  the  atoning  sacrifice,  this  is  better.  Did  you  ever  get  as 
clear  a  perception  of  the  second  as  you  have  done  of  the 
first  ?  It  is  a  great  blessing  when  God  makes  sin  to  be  ex- 
perimentally heavy  to  you  so  that  you  feel  it,  but  it  is  a 
greater  blessing  still  when  the  atoning  blood  is  quite  as  viv- 
idly realized,  and  you  see  the  sweat  drops  bloody  of  Geth- 
semane,  and  the  pouring  out  of  the  life  of  the  Redeemer  upon 
Calvary,  and  the  agonies  unknown  by  which  guilt  was  fully 
expiated  before  the  eternal  throne.  My  brethren,  when  we 
are  under  concern  of  soul,  or  even  after  our  first  conviction, 
when  sin  returns  heavily  upon  our  spirits,  our  fears,  and  ter- 
rors, and  alarms,  are  real  enough ;  no  one  dares  to  say  to  us 
then  that  we  are  in  a  state  of  nervous  excitement  about  a 
fiction ;  our  danger  then  is  right  before  us,  as  clearly  as  the 
flames  are  before  some  poor  person  immured  in  a  burning 
house  :  we  are  sure  of  the  danger,  we  see  it,  we  perceive  it, 
we  feel  it  in  the  very  core  of  our  nature.  But  there  is  sal- 
vation provided  by  the  Redeemer ;  he  took  our  sin  upon 
himself,  he  suffered  the  punishment  of  it,  he  has  put  the  sin 
away  ;  believing  in  him  our  sin  has  gone,  we  have  a  right 
to  peace,  we  are  fully  warranted  in  standing  before  God 
and  saying,  "  Who  shall  lay  anything  to  the  charge  of  God's 
elect  ? " 

What  we  want  is  not  to  think  of  this  as  a  dreamy  thing, 
which  may  or  may  not  be,  but  to  realize  it  as  a  fact  quite  as 
sure,  quite  as  certain  as  our  distress  and  the  sin  which  caused 
it.  We  are  not  to  look  through  the  storm  upon  the  Sa- 
viour and  view  him  as  though  he  were  a  will-o'-the-wisp,  a 
ghostly  thing,  while  the  storm  that  surrounds  us  is  real,  but 
to  see  a  real  Saviour  for  real  sin,  and  to  rejoice  in  real  par- 


JESUS  NO  PHAKTOM.  479 

don,  a  pardon  which  has  buried  all  our  sins ;  a  real  salva- 
tion, a  salvation  which  has  set  our  feet  upon  a  rock  beyond 
the  reach  of  harm.  Brethren,  if  we  came  to  this  point  about 
gin  we  should  have  less  of  the  groaning,  or  if  as  much  of  the 
groaning,  we  should  still  have  more  of  the  rejoicing.  We 
lament  for  sin,  and  we  do  well.  I  hope  we  shall  till  we 
reach  the  gates  of  heaven.  Sin  can  never  be  too  much  la- 
mented  or  repented  of ;  but  at  the  same  time  we  are  not  so  to 
mouni  over  sin  as  to  forget  that  Jesus  died,  and  thereby  can- 
celled all  our  guilt.  No,  with  every  note  of  lamentation 
lift  up  the  joyful  strain  of  triumph,  for  iniquity  is  gone, 
Christ  has  finished  transgression,  made  an  end  of  sin,  and 
he  that  believeth  in  him  is  not  condemned,  neither  can  he 
be,  world  without  end. 

The  same  remarks  apply  to  tJie  matter  of  our  acceptance 
with  God  after  our  pardon.  Dear  brethren  and  sisters,  if" 
I  may  speak  for  the  rest  of  you,  our  shortcomings  in  Christian 
duty  are  often  very  painfully  real  to  our  souls  ;  we  cannot 
preach  a  sermon,  or  offer  prayer,  or  give  an  alms,  or  do  any 
service  for  our  Lord  but  what  we  feel,  when  all  is  done,  that 
we  are  unprofitable  servants.  The  faults  and  imperfections 
of  our  service  stare  us  in  the  face,  and  there  is  not  a  day  we 
live  but  what  we  are  compelled  to  say  that  we  come  very 
far  short  of  what  Christians  should  be ;  in  fact,  we  are  led 
sometimes  to  question  whether  we  can  be  Christians  at  all, 
and  very  rightly  are  we  anxious  as  to  the  truthfulness  of  our 
professions.  When  we  come  to  the  Lord's  table  and  exam- 
ine ourselves,  we  find  many  causes  of  disquietude,  and  much 
reason  for  trembling  of  spirit.  Looking  through  the  whole 
course  of  our  Christian  career,  shame  must  cover  our  face ; 
we  have  good  need  to  say,  "  Not  unto  us,  not  unto  us  be 
glory  ;"  we  cannot  suppose  ourselves  able  to  take  any  glory, 
our  life  has  been  so  inglorious,  so  undeserving,  so  hell-deserv- 
ing. And  there  are  some  Christians  to  whom  this  state  of 
things  is  very,  very,  very,  very  painfully  conspicuous.  They 
are  of  a  desponding  turn  of  mind,  much  given  to  looking  with 


480  JfiSUS  NO  PHANTOM. 

in,  and  their  inward  corruptions  and  the  outward  displayii 
thereof  cause  them  continued  disquietude  and  alarm.     My 
brethren,  there  is  so  much  that  is  good  about  all  this,  that 
who  shall  condemn  it  ?    But  at  the  same  time  the  sacred  bal- 
ance of  the  soul  must  be  maintained.     Are  my  short-com- 
ings real  ?    Equally  real  is  the  perfect  righteousness  of  Je- 
sus Christ,  in  which  all  believers  always  stand.     Are  my 
prayers  imperfect  ?    Ay ;  but  equally  perfect  and  prevalent 
are  the  prayers  and  intercessions  of  my  great  Advocate  be- 
fore the  throne.     Am  I  defiled  with  sin,  and  therefore  worthy 
to  be  rejected  ?    Equally  true  is  it  that  in  him  is  no  sin,  and 
his  eternal  merits  have  weight  with  the  ever-blessed  Father, 
and  stand  me  in  good  stead  as  he,  my  representative  and 
surety,  stands  before  the  throne.   Yes ;  I  am  in  myself  unwor- 
thy but  I  am  accepted  in  the  Beloved.   "  I  am  black  ; "  "  Yes," 
says  the  believer,  "  it  is  so  ; "  add,  however,  the  next  clause, 
"  but  comely ; "  equally  sure  it  is  that  we  are  comely,  yea, 
in  God's  sight,  we  are  "  without  spot  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such 
thing."     As  Jehovah  sees  us  in  Christ  Jesus,  he  beholdeth 
no  iniquity  in  us  ;  Christ  has  put  our  blemishes  away,  and 
made  us  comely  in  his  comeliness ;  he  sees  every  thing  that 
is  lovely  in  us  ;  Christ  has  bestowed  his  own  beauty  upon 
us,  for  he  is  made  this  day  of  God  unto  us  wisdom,  right- 
eousness, sanctification,  and  redemption.  .  All  we  want  is  in 
Christ.     Our  standing  is  safe  in  him,  and  the  love  of  the 
Father  towards  us  comes  to  us  without  diminution  at  any 
time,  despite  our  flaws  and  failures  through  the  perfection 
of  the  beloved  One's  acceptance.     Now  do  not  overcloud 
this  fact.  .  Do  not  look  at  the  Lord  your  righteousness  as  a 
phantom ;  do  not  cry  out  as  if  you  thought  his  work  to  be 
an  impalpable  something  that  comforts  others,  but  cannot 
comfort  you.     The  work  of  Jesus  is  the  grandest  of  all  facts. 
O  for  faith  to  grasp  it  and  rely  upon  it  as  such  ! 

The  principle  applies  next  in  the  matter  of  sanctification. 
Very  real  and  close  to  our  souls,  my  brethren,  is  the  flesh ; 
it  makes  us  groan  daily,  being  burdened  ;  very^  close  home 


to  us  are  our  corruptions — ^these  foes  of  our  own  househoM 
worry  us  too  much  to  allow  us  to  forget  them.  Very  plain 
to  us  also  are  our  temptations,  they  await  us  on  all  sides. 
And  the  inward  conflict  which  comes  of  our  fallen  nature, 
and  the  temptations  of  Satan  and  the  world — this  too  is  very 
clear.  We  can  no  more  doubt  our  conflicts  than  the  wound- 
ed soldier  doubts  the  bloodiness  of  the  battle.  All  these 
things  are  evermore  before  our  eyes  to  our  grief.  But  I  am 
afraid  that  here,  too,  Christ  Jesus  is  often  to  us  as  an  appari- 
tion merely,  and  not  as  a  real  sharer  in  our  spiritual  conflicts. 
Know  ye  not,  beloved,  that  Jesus  Christ  is  touched  with 
tender  sympathy  for  you  in  all  your  temptations  ?  Under- 
stand you  not  that  he  has  prepared  provision  for  you  in  all 
your  conflicts  that  you  may  surely  win  the  day  ?  Expect 
you  not  even  yet  to  say,  I  have  overcome  through  the  blood 
of  the  Lamb  ?  Will  you  not  at  this  hour  shout  the  antici- 
patory note  of  triumph,  "  Thanks  be  to  God,  which  giveth 
us  the  victory  though  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ?  "  You  have 
corruptions  within — this  is  a  fact  ;  but  Christ  is  formed  in 
you  the  hope  of  glory — this  is  an  equal  fact.  There  is  that 
in  you  which  would  destroy  you,  but  there  is  also  that  im- 
planted in  you  which  cannot  be  destroyed — this  is  equally 
true.  You  are  in  the  first  Adam  made  in  the  image  of  the 
earthy,  over  this  you  lament,  but  in  the  second  Adam  you 
already  begin/  to  bear  the  image  of  the  heavenly,  and  you 
shall  perfectly  bear  it  ere  long.  Can  you  not  grasp  this  ? 
Alas  !  we  do  not  lay  hold  of  these  things,  do  not  get  to  say, 
as  the  apostle  John  did,  "  which  we  have  seen,  with  our 
eyes,  which  we  have  looked  upon,  and  our  hands  have  han- 
dled, of  the  Word  of  life."  Too  much  is  this  with  us  a 
doctrine  to  be  accepted  because  we  are  taught  it,  a  matter 
to  be  received  because  some  other  persons  have  experienced 
It,  but  too  little  is  it  a  subject  of  inward  living  experience. 
For  you  and  me  to  know  by  blessed  realization  that  it  is  so, 
that  the  Holy  Spirit  sent  forth  from  the  Father  is  in  us,  and 
with  us,  and  that  Christ  will  overcome  our  sin  within  us 
21 


48S  JEStfS  »0  t^tiiNTOit 

by  the  power  of  the  cleansing  water  which  flowed  with  the 
blood  from  his  side,  and  will  as  much  deliver  ns  from  the 
power  of  sin,  as  he  has  already  saved  us  from  the  guilt  of 
fin — this  is  heavenly  experience  indeed. 

We  must  not  forget  to  illustrate  this  state  of  mind  also 
by  the  condition  of  many  saints  when  under  trial.  How 
often  when  the  storms  are  out,  and  our  poor  bark  is  filling, 
do  we  realize  every  thing  but  what  we  should !  We  are 
like  the  disciples  on  the  Galilean  lake.  The  ship  is  real — 
ah,  how  the  timbers  creak  !  the  sea  is  real — ^how  the  hungry 
waves  leap  up  to  destroy  them  I  the  winds  are  real — see  how 
the  canvas  is  rent  to  ribbons,  how  the  mast  bends  like  a  bow  ! 
their  own  discomforts  are  real — wet  to  the  skin  with  the 
spray,  and  drenched,  and  cold  are  they  all !  their  dangers 
are  real — the  ship  must  certainly  go  down  with  all  on  board  ! 
every  thing  is  real  but  the  Master  walking  on  the  waves ; 
and  yet  beloved,  there  was  nothing  so  real  in  all  that  storm 
as  the  Master.  All  else  might  be  a  matter  of  deception  to 
them,  but  he  was  real  and  true.  All  else  did  change,  and 
pass  away,  and  subside  into  calm,  but  he  remained  still  the 
same.  Now,  observe  how  often  we  are  in  a  similar  condi- 
tion. Our  wretched  circumstances,  the  bare  c  \\  board,  our 
bodily  weakness,  the  loss  of  that  dear  child  or  parent,  all 
the  distresses  that  await  us,  the  dread  of  bankruptcy,  or 
penury,  all  these  seem  real ;  but  that  word,  "  I  am  with  thee,'* 
appears  often  in  such  circumstances  to  be  a  matter  of  belief 
certainly,  but  not  a  matter  of  realization  ;  and  that  promise, 
"  All  things  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love  God^ 
to  them  who  are  the  called  according  to  his  purpose — "  we 
dare  not  deny  it,  but  we  are  not  comforted  by  it  to  the  de- 
gree we  should  be,  because  we  do  not  grip  it,  grasp  it,  know 
it.  The  holy  children  in  the  fire  knew  they  were  in  the  fire, 
but  they  were  safe  because  they  knew  to  an  equal  certainty, 
that  the  Son  of  man  was  there  with  them.  And  so  in  the 
furnace  you  know  that  "  no  trial  for  the  present  seemeth  to 
be  joyous,  but  grievous ; "  know  equally  well  that  wher^ 


TBSUS  NO  PHANTUM.  488 

JjOSUflis,  the  trial  is  blessed,  and  the  affliction  hath  a  sweetnefli 
m  it  unknown  to  aught  beside. 

I  shall  only  illustrate  this  in  two  other  points.  My  dear 
brethren,  in  the  matter  of  deaths  I  do  not  know  whether  you 
can  all  think  of  death  without  a  shudder.  I  am  afraid  there 
are  not  many  of  us  who  can.  It  is  very  easy  to  sing,  when 
wo  are  here  on  Sundays  rejoicing  with  all  our  brethren — 

'  On  Jordan's  stormy  banks  I  stand. 
And  cast  a  wisM ol  eje." 

I  am  afraid,  I  am  afraid,  I  am  afraid  we  would  rather  live 
than  die  after  all.  A  missionary  told  me  the  story  of  an  old 
negro  woman  in  Jamaica  who  used  to  be  continually  sing- 
ing, "  Angel  Gabriel,  come  and  take  Aunty  Betsy  home  to 
glory,"  but  when  some  wicked  wag  knocked  at  the  door  at 
the  dead  of  night,  and  told  her  the  angel  Gabriel  was  come 
for  Axinty  Betsy^  she  said, "  She  lives  next  door."  I  am 
afraid  it  may  possibly  be  so  with  us,  that  though  we  think 
we  wish  the  waves  of  Jordan  to  divide  that  we  may  be  land- 
ed on  the  other  shore,  we  linger  on  the  bank  shivering  still. 
It  is  so.  We  dread  to  leave  the  warm  precincts  of  this 
house  of  clay  ;  we  cast  many  '*  a  longing,  lingering  look  be- 
hind." But  why  is  it  ?  It  is  all  because  we  realize  the  dying 
bed,  the  death  sweat,  the  pangs,  the  glazing  eye — we  often 
realize  what  never  turns  out  to  be  reality,  but  do  not  real- 
ize what  are  sure  to  be  realities,  namely,  the  angelic  watch- 
ers at  the  bedside,  waiting  to  act  as  a  convoy  to  bear  our 
spirits  up  through  tracts  unknown  of  purest  ether.  We  do 
not  realize  the  presence  of  the  Saviour  receiving  saints  into 
his  bosom  that  they  may  rest  there  until  the  trumpet  of 
the  archangel  sounds.  We  do  not  really  grasp  the  rising 
again — 

"  From  beds  of  dost  and  silent  clay,  • 
To  realms  of  everlasting  day." 

If  we  did,  then  our  songs  about  dying  would  be  more  true, 

and  our  readiness  to  depart  more  abiding.    For  what  is 

"•ddittdK?    It  is  a  pin's  prick  at  the  worst,  often  scaroe  that^ 


484  JESUS  NO  PHANTOM. 

the  shutting  of  our  eyes  on  earth  and  the  opening  of  them 
in  heaven.  So  rapid  is  the  departure  of  the  saint,  the  move- 
ment of  the  soul  from  the  body  here  to  the  presence  of  the 
Lord  yonder,  that  death  is  scarcely  any  thing,  it  is  sw^al- 
lowed  up  in  victory.  O  for  the  realization,  then,  of  Jesus, 
and  death  would  lose  all  its  sting. 

And  once  again,  and  this  is  the  last  illustration  I  will 
give  on  this  point,  I  am  afraid  that  in  Christian  work  we 
very  often  fall  into  the  same  style  of  doubt.  Here  is  an  en- 
terprise, and  straightway  if  we  are  wise  we  realize  the  diffi- 
culties, if  we  are  something  more  than  wise  we  exaggerate 
these  difficulties  and  conclude  that  with  our  slender  means 
we  shall  never  be  able  to  grapple  with  them  ;  but  ah  !  why 
is  it  that  we  so  seldom  think  of  the  living  present  Saviour, 
who  is  the  church's  Head?  Calculate  the  forces  of  the 
church  if  you  will,  but  do  not  forget  the  most  important 
item  of  all,  the  omnipotence  of  the  Lord  her  King.  Reckon 
up  if  you  will  all  the  weakness  of  her  pastors,  and  teachers, 
and  evangelists  and  members,  but  when  you  have  done  that, 
fancy  not  you  have  calculated  all  her  resources,  you  have 
only  considered  the  very  fringe  thereof;  the  main  body  and 
the  strength  of  the  church  lies  in  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead 
bodily,  which  dwells  in  the  person  of  Jesus  Christ.  Shall 
heathendom  be  real  ?  shall  priestcraft  be  real  ?  shall  Roman- 
ism be  real  ?  shall  the  corruption  of  the  human  heart  and 
the  alienation  of  the  human  will  be  real  ?  and  .shall  I  not 
equally  realize  the  omnipotence  of  Christ  in  the  realm  of 
spirit,  and  the  irresistible  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  who 
can  turn  men  from  darkness  into  light,  and  from  the  power 
of  Satan  unto  God  ?  Let  not  Christ  be  a  phantom  to  his 
church.  In  her  worst  hours,  though  tossed  like  a  ship  in 
the  storm,  let  her  Lord,  as  he  walks  the  waves,  be  real  to 
her  and  she  will  do  and  dare  right  valiantly,  and  the  re- 
•ults  will  be  glorious.     Thus  much  on  the  first  po'nt. 

n.  Secondly,  the  worst  of  it  is  that  ws  hakb  Cbbist  h 


JESUS  NO  PHANTOM.  4-85 

PHiLNTOM  MOST  WHEN  HE   IS  MOST  REALLY   ChRIST,  mOSt  re- 
ally revealed  as  the  Son  of  the  Highest. 

Observe,  my  dear  brethren,  when  our  Lord  Jesus  Ohrist 
walked  on  the  land  by  the  seashore,  none  of  his  disciples 
ever  said,  "  It  is  a  spirit :  "  none  of  them  said,  "  It  is  an  ap- 
parition ;  "  yet  they  did  not  see  Christ  when  he  \^  alked  on 
the  shore,  on  terra  Jirma  /  they  saw  his  manhood,  that  was 
all ;  there  was  no  more  to  be  seen  of  Christ  as  he  walked 
there  than  there  is  to  be  seen  of  any  other — simply  a  mar^ 
no  Godhead  is  there  revealed  ;  but  when  Christ  walked  on 
the  waves,  there  was  more  of  Christ  visible  than  there  was 
on  the  land  ;  then  they  saw  his  manhood,  but  they  also  saw 
his  Godhead,  who  could  make  the  liquid  weaves  upbear  him. 
There  was  most  of  Christ  to  be  seen,  and  yet  then  they  saw 
the  least.  Is  it  not  strange  where  he  uncovers  most,  we  see 
least,  where  he  reveals  himself  most  clearly,  our  unbeliev- 
ing eye  is  least  able  to  see  !  Yet,  mark  you,  Christ  is  never 
so  truly  Christ  anywhere  as  when  he  works  beyond  the  or- 
dinary course  of  nature.  He  is  Christ  if  he  takes  a  little 
child  upon  his  knee  and  blesses  it,  but  more  of  the  Christ  is 
seen  when  he  puts  his  hand  upon  the  damsel,  and  raises  her 
from  the  dead,  or  calls  Lazarus  out  of  the  tomb.  He  is  the 
Christ  when  he  speaks  a  gentle  word  to  a  sorrowing  heart, 
but  oh,  what  a  Christ  he  is  when  he  says,  "  Winds  be  hush- 
ed, and  waves  be  still ! "  Then  is  his  glory  laid  open  to 
faith's  strengtlffened  eye.  Truly  he  is  most  himself  when  he 
is  most  above  all  others ;  when,  as  high  as  the  heavens  are  above 
the  earth,  so  high  are  his  thoughts  above  our  thoughts,  and 
his  ways  above  our  ways.  And,  brethren,  we  have  never 
Been  Christ  unless  we  have  seen  him  far  above  all  others, 
and  acting  beyond  the  bounds  of  expectation  and  reason- 
ing. The  Christ  is  half  hidden  when  he  acts  as  another 
man.  The  whole  Christ  does  not  appear  in  the  ordinary  run  of 
our  affairs  ;  it  is  in  the  extraordinary,  the  unusual,  the  unex- 
pected, that  we  view  the  gloiy  of  Christ,  and  see  him  fully. 
So  it  is  that  we  refuse  most  to  discern  and  glorify  him  when 


486  JESUS  N(r  PHANTOM. 

he  is  most  openly  displayed.  Let  me  show  my  poinL 
Christ,  I  say,  walking  on  the  sea,  is  most  of  all  Christ  there, 
and  yet  his  disciples  do  not  perceive  him ;  so  in  the  pardon 
of  very  great  sin  you  see  the  most  of  Christ ;  yet  when- 
ever a  man  has  fallen  into  a  great  sin,  that  is,  a  vile  sin  in 
the  esteem  of  others,  then  he  says,  "  Ah  I  now  I  cannot  be 
foi given  this."  Why,  man,  Jesus  is  most  truly  Jesus  when 
he  pardons  grievous  iniquity.  The  putting  away  of  your 
little  transgressions  as  you  have  thought  them  to  be,  do  you 
think  this  is  all  he  came  for — to  redeem  such  as  have  a  little 
fallen  and  a  little  transgressed  ?  I?  he  a  little  Saviour  for 
little  sinners  to  be  little  worshipped  ?  Oh  I  but  herein  he  comes 
to  be  Christ  in  deed  and  in  truth,  when  bloody  mur- 
ders, black  adulteries,  scarlet  blasphemies,  and  crimson  filthi- 
nesses,  are  all  washed  away  by  his  blood.  Then  see  we  him 
as  "  a  Saviour  and  a  great  one,"  as  one  who  is  "  mighty  to 
save."  Why  is  it  that  we  will  not  discern  him  when  he 
abundantly  pardons  ?  Why,  my  brethren,  do  we  honor  him 
as  he  should  be  honored,  if  we  only  think  that  the  sentimen- 
talism  of  sin  is  put  away  by  him  ?  K  we  own  that  the  re- 
ality, the  filthiness,  the  damnableness  of  sin  is  put  away  by 
Jesus,  and  trust  him  when  our  sins  seem  blackest,  foulest, 
most  abhorrent,  then  we  do  him  honor  and  see  him  to  be 
the  Christ  he  is. 

So  again  in  great  distresses  of  the  soul.  It  pleases  God 
often  after  conversion  to  allow  the  fountaiiis  of  the  great 
deeps  of  our  corruption  to  be  broken  up,  and  we  never  felt  be- 
fore as  we  do  then  ;  we  had  not  expected  this,  and  are  over- 
whelmed with  surprise  to  find  ourselves  such  corrupt,  such 
deceitful,  such  foul  things.  Then  at  the  same  time  Satan 
will  invade  the  heart  with  fierce  temptations  and  diabolical 
insinuations,  and,  alas !  our  suspicious  spirits  will  imagine 
that  Jesus  himself  cannot  help  us  in  such  a  condition.  Oh 
but  man,  now  is  the  time  for  the  divine  manifestation ! 
Now  shall  you  see  the  Christ.  Do  you  suppose  that  the 
Lord  Jesus  comes  only  to  speak  peace  to  those  who  have 


JESUS  NO  PHANTOM.  487 

.  peace  already,  or  to  give  peace  to  those  enduring  &  trifling 
disturbance  of  mind  ?  Man,  do  you  think  Jesus  a  superflu< 
ity  ?  Or  do  you  imagine  that  he  is  only  suited  for  little  oc- 
casions ?  Be  ashamed  of  such  insinuations ;  for  he  reigns 
on  high  above  tremendous  storms ;  he  rules  the  hugest 
waves  and  the  most  roaring  floods :  when  all  our  nature 
is  vexed,  when  our  hopes  are  gone,  and  our  despair  is  upper- 
most, it  is  amid  the  tumult  of  such  a  tempest  that  be  says, 
"  Peace,  be  still, "  and  creates  a  calm.  Believe  in  the  Christ 
who  can  save  you  when  most  your  temptations  threaten  to 
swallow  you  up.  Do  not  think  him  to  be  only  able  to  save 
when  you  are  not  in  extremities,  but  believe  him  to  be  best 
seen  when  your  uttermost  calamities  are  near. 

I  might  select  many  other  cases  as  illustrating  this, 
but  I  will  run  over  one  or  two  in  rapid  review.  We  are 
perhaps  enduring  an  unusually  severe  trials  and  need  more 
than  usual  support ;  but  we  fearfully  say,  "  I  cannot  expect 
to  be  suported  under  this  affliction."  Ah!  your  Christ 
is  a  phantom,  then.  If  you  saw  him  you  would  know  that 
there  is  nothing  too  hard  for  him,  that  the  sustenance  of 
a  soul,  when  it  is  at  its  lowest  famine  point,  is  easy  enough 
work  for  the  divine  Consolator,  and  you  would  cast  your- 
self on  him  believingly,  and  not  act  towards  him  as  now 
you  do.  Yes,  but  you  need  great  supplies  for  the  present 
time  of  distress  ;  your  circumstances  are  trying  to  the  last 
degree.  Do  not,  now  that  you  need  great  supplies,  make 
Christ  to  be  poor  and  stinting  in  your  esteem  ;  but  rather 
like  Abraham,  say, "  The  Lord  will  provide. "  Abraham,  in 
extremity,  when  about  to  slay  his  son  by  God's  command, 
finds  that  God  interposes,  and  the  ram  is  found  for  a  burnt- 
offering.  In  your  worst  poverty  Christ  will  interpose ; 
Jesus  will  prove  himself  to  be  the  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth 
You  shall  see  that  in  him  all  fulness  dwells.  Can  you  only 
rely  upon  Jesus  in  little  and  ordinary  troubles?  I  know  it 
18  sweet  to  run  to  him  in  such  times,  but  is  he  to  be  only  an 
ordinary,  fair- weather  friend  to  cover  you  from  little  showers. 


488  JESUS  NO  PHANTOM. 

and  walk  with  you  when  a  little  gale  is  blowing  ;  will  he  refuse 
to  be  with  you  in  stormy  weather,  or  to  traverse  with  you 
the  boisterous  sea  ?  O  do  not  so  miserably  spirit  away  the 
Saviour !  Do  not  phantoraize  the  Redeemer  when  you  want 
him  in  very  deed.  You  have  real  poverty,  and  a  real  cross, 
and  real  difficulties ;  now  in  the  mount  of  the  Lord  shall  it 
be  seen  that  he  is  ti-ue  to  his  word,  and  his  name  Jehovah- 
Jii-oh,  across  the  darkness  of  your  want  shall  be  written  as 
with  letters  of  fire; 

In  times  of  great  danger,  again,  we  sometimes  gloomily 
mutter,  "  Now  we  shall  not  be  preserved  ;  Christ  has  kept 
lis  up  till  now,  and  we  quite  believe  that  he  would  do  so  if 
the-  circumstances  of  to-day  were  no  worse  than  those  of 
times  gone  by,  but  now  we  are  extremely  tempted,  now  we 
are  violently  assailed,  now  our  sorrows  multiply,  will  he  help 
us  now  ?  "  Dare  you  say,  "  TV  ill  he  ?  "  when  you  know  that 
he  cannot  change  ?  Dare  you  say,  "  Can  he  ?  "  Is  any  thing 
too  hard  for  the  Lord  ?  Are  you  going  to  make  your  Saviour 
into  a  mere  appearance?  He  is  a  real  Saviour,  lean  on  him ; 
he  will  bring  you  safely  through,  cover  you  with  his  shield 
and  keep  off  the  fiery  darts  from  you.  He  will  not  leave  you 
or  forsake  you.  Great  deliverances !  alas  !  we  fancy  that 
these  will  never  occur ;  Jesus  will  not  work  these  as  afore- 
time, so  we  wickedly  imagine ;  and  if  they  are  wrought,  we 
are  like  Peter,  who  could  not  realize  his  escape  from  prison. 
He  knew  the  saints  had  prayed  for  him,  but  when  he  was 
delivered  from  the  prison,  and  found  himself  in  the  street  of 
the  city,  he  could  not  think  it  was  a  fact,  he  "  wist  not  that 
il  was  true  which  was  done  by  the  angel,  but  thought  he  saw 
a  vision.  Often  before  God  has  delivered  us,  we  have  said, 
"  It  cannot  be  "^-our  Christ  was  only  a  spirit ;  and  when 
he  has  delivered  us  we  have  said,  "  I  do  not  understand  it, 
I  am  overwhelmed  with  amazement ;  "  the  fact  being,  that 
we  do  not  get  such  a  grip  of  Christ  as  to  be  assured  that 
he  is  real,  present,  mighty,  gracious ;  or  if  we  did,  we  should 
receive  even  his  greatest  deliverances  as  natural  proofs  of 


JESUS  NO  PHANTOM.  489 

his  goodness  and  greatness  sucli  as  faith  is  warranted  to  ex- 
pect. '*  Is  it  not  surpiising,"  said  one,  "  that  God  should 
have  heard  my  prayers,  and  have  been  so  gracious  to  me  in 
providence  ?  "  "  No,"  said  an  old  saint,  whose  long  ex- 
perience had  taught  her  more  of  the  Lord,  "  it  does  not  sur- 
prise me,  it  is  just  like  him,  it  is  his  way  with  his  people. 
Oh,  to  feel  that  great  mercy  is  like  him ;  that  it  is  what  we 
should  expect  of  God,  that  he  should  give  great  deli\er' 
ances,  should  walk  the  waters  of  our  griefs,  and  bid  them 
cease  their  raging  !  It  is  a  blessed  faith  which  enables  us 
to  recognize  Jesus  on  the  waters,  and  to  say,  "  1  know  it  is 
Jesus,  nobody  but  Jesus  could  act  so  wondrously ;  I  might 
not  have  known  him  if  I  had  seen  him  working  in  an  ordi- 
nary way,  or  travelling  like  a  common  wayfarer,  but  here 
amidst  extraordinary  seasons  I  expected  his  hel ;  ;  if  I  never 
had  seen  him  before,  I  expected  to  see  him  now ;  and  now  I 
do  see  him  I  am  not  amazed,  though  I  am  delighted.  I 
looked  for  him,  and  knew  that  when  the  need  of  him  was 
greatest,  his  coming  would  be  sure."  When  faith  bright- 
ens the  eye  of  hope  with  the  flash  of  expectation,  joy  is  not 
far  away. 

I  will  only  add  that  if  we  will  but  realize  Christ,  our 
grv<it  successes  which  will  be  sure  to  come,  over  spiritual 
foes  within  and  over  difficulties  without,  will  again  infallibly 
prove  to  us  his  reality;  but  the  probabilities  are  that  we 
shall  think  him  not  capable  of  giving  us  such  great  success- 
es and  shall  toil  on  despondingly  where  we  ought  to  have 
rejoiced  in  the  Lord. 

As  to  our  ultimate  future  we  have  too  often  thought  it 
will  be  hard  to  die^  we  have  trembled  at  standing  before  the 
judgment-seat,  we  have  read  of  the  day  of  judgment,  and 
thought,  "  How  shall  I  bear  it  ? "  forgetting  that  we  shall 
know  our  Redeemer  better  in  death  than  before,  and  in  the 
resurrection  and  in  the  glory  that  shall  follow  we  shall  see 
him  more  clearly  revealed  than  now ;  and  therefore  we  ought 
to  think  more  of  him  and  lean  upon  him  in  all  the  great  con* 
21* 


490  JESUS  NO  PHANTOM 

oems  of  eternity  with  a  great,  a  confident^  and  nliilfililr^ 
faith. 

HL  But  I  must  pass  on  to  the  third  head.    Oub  obbaiv 

VST  SOBBO WS  ABISE  FBOM  OUB  TBEATING  OUB  LOBD  AS  UNBEAU 

It  is  because  of  our  attenuating,  vaporizing,  and  spirit- 
ing, our  Lord  awaj  and  making  him  into  a  myth  so  often, 
instead  of  gripping  him  with  a  oommonnsense,  practical, 
firm,  realizing  faith,  that  we  suffer  so  much  from  our  troub- 
les. For,  brethren,  it  is  a  sad  cause  of  trouble  to  have  a 
phantom  Redeemer,  a  Saviour  who  cannot  actually  pardcn 
sin  when  it  comes  to  be  great  sin,  a  Saviour  who  gives  us 
only  a  little  indefinite  hope  about  our  guilt,  but  does  not 
literally  put  it  away.  This  is  the  seed-bed  of  all  manner 
of  evil  weeds.  I  do  not  wonder  if  you  are  vexed  with  doubts 
and  fears  if  you  have  not  realized  Christ.  O  that  you  would 
all  learn  to  sing  with  Hart  these  precious  lines — 

^  A  Man  there  is,  a  real  Man, 

With  wounds  still  gaping  wide. 
From  which  rich  streams  of  blood  once  lan^ 
In  hands,  aud  feet,  and  side. 

(Tis  no  wild  faucj  of  our  brains. 

No  metaphor  we  speak ; 
The  same  dear  Man  in  heaven  now  reigns. 
That  suffered  for  our  sake.) 

This  wondrous  man,  of  whom  we  tell, 

la  true  Almighty  God; 
He  bought  our  souls  from  death  and  hell, 

The  price,  his  own  heart's  blood." 

Beware,  my  brethren,  of  resting  content  with  any  thing 
short  of  faith  in  an  actual,  literal,  living  Mediator,  for  noth- 
ing but  roality  will  be  of  any  use  to  you  in  the  matter.  Of 
fH)ur6e,  \vith  a  phantom  Saviour  for  real  sins,  an  apparition 
of  a  lledeemer  for  real  bondage,  you  cannot  find  comfort. 
Of  what  use  is  the  appearance  of  bread  and  the  resemT>lance 
of  water  to  famishing  p'Jgiims  in  the  desert?     li  yon  h?^v:e 


JESUS  NO  PHANTOM.  491 

a  phantom  helper  for  real  woes  you  are  the  worse  for  such 
help.  If  your  Saviour  does  not  actually  and  practically 
support  you  in  times  of  need,  and  supply  your  wants  and 
console  you  under  depression,  then  in  what  respects  are  you 
better  cff  than  those  who  have  no  helper  at  all  ?  Jesus  is  a 
friend  indeed.  His  grace,  love,  and  presence,  are  no  fictions 
of  all  facts  they  are  most  sure.  If  I  have  to  carry  a  real 
load,  and  then  have  a  ghost  to  assist  me,  I  am  in  truth  un- 
assisted. We  want  true  power,  force,  and  energy,  in  our 
helper,  and  all  that  faith  sees  in  Jesus  her  Lord :  but  you 
will  readily  see  how  sorrows  multiply  where  Jesus  is  light- 
ly esteemed. 

Besides,  to  some  Christ  is  not  only,  as  it  were,  an  im- 
palpable spirit,  but  he  is  really  an  mdifferent,  unfeeling  spir- 
it. Jesus  to  his  disciples  on  the  sea  seemed  as  though  he 
would  have  gone  by  them  and  left  them  to  their  fate,  and 
we  often  dream  that  our  gracious  Lord  is  unmindful  of  us  j 
at  any  rate,  we  forget  that  he  is  tenderly  mindful  of  our 
case.  It  did  not  strike  you  when  you  were  so  poor  last  week 
that  Jesus  knew  it,  and  was  grieved  for  your  affliction.  You 
forget,  dear  brother,  when  you  were  trembling  as  you  went 
into  the  pulpit,  that  Jesus  knew  you  trembled,  and  would 
uphold  you  while  bearing  your  testimony.  Too  seldom  do 
we  remember  that — 

"  In  every  pang  that  lends  the  heart 
The  Man  of  Sorrows  bears  a  part." 

Ah !  good  husband,  you  knew  your  wife  pitied  you,  you 
noted  well  the  tear-drop  when  she  saw  your  grief.  Ah  I 
dear  cliild,  you  knew  your  mother  sorrowed  for  you.  Ah, 
but  if  you  did  but  know  Christ,  you  would  know  this  too, 
that  he  never  puts  you  to  an  unnecessary  pain,  nor  ever 
tries  you  with  an  unneeded  trial.  There  is  a  needs  be  for 
£..1,  and  he  has  sympathy  for  yon  in  all. 

Many  a  poor  sinner  even  imagines  Jesus  to  be  an  angry 
spirit,  and  he  cries  out  for  fear.  He  imagines  that  Jesus 
is  wrathful  and  will  reject  him  with  hidignation.     Ah  !  thoo 


492  JBSUS  NO  PHANTOM. 

dobt  not  truly  realize  my  Saviour  if  thou  tliiiikest  he  would 
ever  reject  any  one  who  came  to  him.  When  on  earth  what 
a  real  Physician  of  souls  he  was !  he  mingled  with  publi- 
cans and  sinners  ;  he  did  not  talk  about  them  as  people  who 
ought  to  be  looked  after,  but  he  actually  went  after  them 
himself  and  suffered  one  of  them  to  wash  his  feet  with  her 
tears^  and  wipe  them  with  the  nairs  of  her  head.  He  was 
wont  to  touch  diseased  sinners  with  his  finger  as  he  healed 
them.  He  was  not  a  dilettante  Saviour,  he  did  not  come 
into  this  world  to  save  us  from  suppositious  sin  and  imag- 
inary trouble.  There  is  nothing  which  is  more  overlooked, 
but  which  ought  to  be  better  remarked  about  our  Lord,  than 
his  common-sense  practicalness.  He  is  utterly  devoid  of 
sham  and  pretence.  He  is  always  in  the  gospel  history  as 
real  as  the  scenes  of  life  around  him ;  he  never  strikes  you 
as  theatrical  and  pretentious.  May  we  all  feel  that  he  is 
really  a  loving  Saviour,  a  tender  Saviour,  and  a  practical 
Saviour  to  us.  May  you  know  him,  may  you  realize  him, 
and  then  your  sorrows  will  either  come  to  an  end,  or  be  ac- 
cepted with  thanksgiving. 

rV.   Lastly,  if  wb  could  but  be  cuebd  op  this  dbs- 

PBEATB  MISCHIEF,  OUE  LoRD  JeSUS  ChRIST  WOULD  HAVE  A 
HIGHER  PLACE  IN  OUR  ESTEEM,  AND  MANY  OTHER  BENEFICIAL 
RESULTS  WOULD  FOLLOW. 

For,  first,  did  you  notice  that  after  the  disciples  knew  it 
to  be  Christ,  and  he  came  into  the  ship  with  them,  they 
said,  "  Of  a  truth  thou  art  the  Son  of  God  ?  "  K  you  once 
realize  Christ,  you  will  know  him  in  his  person  as  you  never 
will  know  him  by  all  I  can  tell  you,  or  you  can  read  about 
him.  You  once  read  about  a  man,  you  saw  his  likeness  in 
the  "  Illustrated  News,"  you  heard  people  talk  about  him, 
but  at  last  you  were  in  his  company,  and  sat  do"\vn  with  him, 
and  then  you  say,  "  Now  I  know  the  man  ;  I  did  not  before." 
Oh,  if  you  can  realize  Christ  so  as  to  draw  near  to  him  by 
faith,  you  will  feel  that  you  now  begin  to  know  him  in  truth. 


JESUS  NO  PHANTOM.  493 

and,  what  is  best,  you  will  know  him  then  witt  assurance. 
They  said,  "  Of  a  truth  thou  art  the  Son  of  God.  You  were 
persuaded  that  he  is'  God  by  what  you  found  in  Scripture, 
but  when  you  came  to  see  him,  when  he  became  real  to  you, 
the  doctrine  of  his  Deity  needed  no  arguments  to  support 
it,  the  truth  that  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord,  is  woven  into  your 
very  being.  He  is  the  Son  of  God  to  you,  if  to  no  one  else. 
What  did  those  mariner  disciples  when  they  saw  that  it  was 
indeed  Jesus  who  trod  the  wave  ?  It  is  added,  "  They  wor- 
shipped him."  You  will  never  worship  a  phantom,  an  image, 
an  apparition.  Know  Jesus  to  be  real,  and  straightway  you 
prostrate  yourself  before  him.  Blessed  God,  blessed  Son  of 
Man,  coming  from  heaven  for  me,  bleeding  for  me,  standing 
in  glory,  pleading  for  me,  I  had  thought  of  thee  and  heard 
of  thee,  but  now  I  see  thee,  what  can  I  do  but  worship  thee? 
It  is  the  gasping  of  Christ  that  produces  devotion  ;  it  is  the 
mistiness  of  our  thoughts  about  him  that  is  the  root  of  our 
undevout  frames  of  mind.  God  gave  us  a  firm  hold  of  Christ, 
and  we  shall  instinctively  adore  him. 

They  not  only  worshipped  Christ,  but  they  served  him. 
Their  worship  was  such  that  whatever  he  bade  them  do  they 
did  it,  and  the  vessel  was  steered  whither  he  would  until  it 
brought  him  to  the  other  side  where  he  wished  to  go.  They 
who  realize  Christ  are  sure  to  obey  him.  I  cannot  obey  that 
which  floats  before  me  like  a  cloud  ;  but  when  I  see  the  man, 
the  God,  and  know  him  to  be  as  real  a  person  as  myself,  as 
much  a  matter-of-fact  existence  as  my  brother,  then  what  he 
bids  me  do  I  do :  my  obedience  becomes  real  just  in  pro- 
j)ortion  as  the  Master  who  commands  it  becomes  real  to 
my  soul  Then  it  is,  dear  friends,  that  we  become  humbled 
in  spirit.  No  man  realizes  Christ  without  also  realizing  him- 
self, and  being  bowed  down  in  self-humiliation.  "I  have 
heard  of  thee  by  the  hearing  of  the  ear,  but  now  mine  eye 
seeth  thee  :  wherefore  I  abhor  myself,  and  repent  in  dust  and 
ashes."  But  with  the  humility  comes  a  deep  and  pro- 
found joy  and  peace.     With  Christ  in  the  vessel,  known  to 


494  JESUS  NO  PHANTOM. 

be  there,  we  smile  at  the  storm ;  whether  it  continue  or  bqV 
side  we  are  equally  peaceful  now  that  we  have  realized  that 
Christ  is  with  us.  I  do  believe  that  the  actualizing  of  their 
Lord  is  the  main  thing  that  Christians  wan4 .;  they  require, 
firat  and  foremost,  a  real  Leader,  they  want  to  grasp  his  real- 
ity, and  feel  his  actual  power.  And  is  it  needful  for  this 
that  he  should  come  here  in  person  ?  I  trust  not.  If  he 
were  to  appear  this  morning  on  this  platform,  and  his  ser- 
vant should  h'de  his  head,  you  would  say,  "Behold  the  glo- 
rious sight,  yonder  is  our  Lord."  I  know  your  heads  would 
bow  to  worship,  and  then  you  would  open  your  eyes  and 
gaze  on  him,  and  feast  your  souls  with  the  sight,  and  then 
each  one  would  say,  "  What  can  I  do  for  him  ?  "  And  if 
the  condescending  Master  gave  you  each  leave  to  come  and 
spread  oiFerings  at  the  feet  of  the  Crucified,  oh,  what  heaps 
of  treasure  would  be  brought !  Each  one  would  feel,  "I 
have  not  with  me  what  I  wish,"  but  you  would  say,  "Take 
all  I  have,  my  blessed  Lord,  for  thou  hast  redeemed  me  with 
thy  blocd."  Is  not  he  just  as  dear  to  you  now,  though  un- 
seen ?  Is  not  faith  as  mighty  a  faculty  as  sight  ?  Is  it 
not  "the  evidence  of  things  not  seen?".  Is  not  Wesley's 
vei^se  ti  ue  ? — 

'*  The  things  unknown  to  feeble  sense. 
Unseen  by  reason's  glimmering  ray ; 
With  strong,  commanding  evidence. 
Their  heavenly  origin  display. 

Faith  lends  its  realizing  light. 
The  clouds  disperse,  the  shadows  fly ; 

The  invisible  appears  in  sight. 
And  God  is  seen  by  mortal  eye." 

Does  not  faith  make  Jesus  as  real  to  us  as  our  sight 
would  do  ?  It  should  do  so  ;  I  pray  it  may.  And  then 
see  how  true  will  be  your  consecration,  how  abundant 
will  be  your  service,  how  ready  your  thanksgiving,  how 
abounding  your  offerings  1     May  God  grant  you  grace  tc 


JBBUS  NO  PHANTOM.  49^ 

get  into  this  true  position,  both  yon  who  are  saints  and  you 
who  still  are  sinners,  for  in  haying  a  real  Christ  you  will 
have  the  reality  of  every  good.  God  give  it  you  for  Jesus' 
iftke.    Amen  and  Amen. 


496  ySBY  SmaOLAB. 


SERMON  XXVm. 


VERY  SINGULAR 

■I  PITT  HIS  HOUBXHOLD  IN  ORDXB  AND  HANGED  HDCSBLF."— S  Samuel  XVU.  fU, 

AniTHOPnEL  was  a  man  of  keen  perception,  and  thosb 
who  consulted  him  followed  his  advice  with  as  much  confi- 
dence as  if  he  had  been  an  oracle  from  heaven.  He  was  a 
great  master  of  diplomacy,  versed  in  the  arts  of  cunning,  far- 
seeing,  cautious,  deep.  He  was  for  years  the  friend  and  coun- 
sellor of  David,  but  thinking  it  politic  to  be  on  the  popular 
side  he  left  his  old  master  that  he  might,  like  many  other 
courtiers,  worship  the  rising  sun,  and  hold  an  eminent  posi- 
tion under  Absalom.  This,  to  use  diplomatic  language,  was 
not  only  a  crime  but  a  mistake ;  Absalom  was  not  the  man 
to  follow  the  warnings  of  sagacity,  and  Ahithophel  found 
himself  supplanted  by  another  councillor;  whereat  he  was 
so  incensed  that  he  left  Absalom,  hurried  home,  arranged  hie 
personal  affairs,  and  hanged  himself  in  sheer  vexation. 

His  case  teaches  us  that  the  greatest  wordly  wisdom  wiH 
not  preserve  a  man  from  the  utmost  folly.  Here  was  a  man 
worthy  to  be  called  the  Nestor  of  debate,  who  yet  had  not 
wit  enough  to  keep  his  neck  from  the  fatal  noose.  Many 
a  man  supremely  wise  for  a  time  fails  in  the  long  run.  The 
renowned  monarch,  sagacious  for  the  hour,  has  ere  long 
proved  his  whole  system  to  be  a  fatal  mistake.  Instances 
there  are  near  to  hand  where  a  brilliant  career  has  ended  in 
shame,  a  life  of  wealth  closed  in  poverty,  an  empire  cpI- 


VERY  SINGULAR.  497 

lapsed  in  ruin.  The  wisdom  which  contemplates  only  this 
life  fails  even  in  its  own  sphere.  Its  tricks  are  too  shallow, 
its  devices  too  temporary,  and  the  whole  comes  down  with 
a  crash  when  least  expected  to  fall.  What  sad  cases  have 
we  seen  from  men  who  have  been  wise  'n  policy  who  have 
utterly  failed  from  lack  of  principle  I  For  want  of  the  spirit 
of  honor  and  truth  to  establish  them  they  have  built  pal- 
aces of  ice  which  have  melted  before  they  were  complete. 
"  The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  beginning  of  wisdom."  The 
wisdom  which  cometh  from  above  is  the  only  wisdom ;  the 
secular  is  folly  until  the  sacred  blends  its  golden  stream 
therewith. 

I  desire  to  call  your  attention  to  the  text  on  account  of 
its  very  remarkable  character.  "  He  put  his  hottse  in  order 
and  hanged  himself ^  To  put  his  house  in  order  showed 
that  he  was  a  prudent  man :  to  hang  himself  proved  that  he 
was  a  fool.  Herein  is  a  strange  mixture  of  discretion  and 
desperation,  mind  and  madness.  Shall  a  man  have  wisdom 
enough  to  arrange  his  worldly  affairs  with  care,  and  yet 
shall  he  be  so  sapless  as  to  take  his  own  life  afterwards?  As 
Bishop  Hall  pithily  says,  "  Could  it  be  possible  that  he 
should  be  careful  to  order  his  house  who  regarded  not  to 
order  his  impetuous  passions  ?  That  he  should  care  for  his 
house  who  cared  not  for  either  body  or  soul  ?  "  Strange  in- 
congruity, he  makes  his  will,  and  then  because  he  cannot 
have  his  will,  he  wills  to  die.  'Tis  another  proof  that  mad- 
ness is  in  the  heart  of  the  sons  of  men.  Marvel  not  at  this 
one  display  of  folly,  for  I  shall  have  to  show  you  that  the 
case  of  Ahithophel  is  in  the  spiiit  of  it  almost  universal ; 
and  as  I  shall  describe  sundry  similar  individuals,  many  of 
you  will  perceive  that  I  speak  of  you.  Thousands  set  their 
houses  in  order  but  destroy  their  souls,  they  look  well  to 
their  flocks  and  their  herds,  but  not  to  their  hearts'  best  in 
terests.  They  gather  broken  shells  with  continuous  indns- 
try,  but  they  throw  away  priceless  diamonds.  They  exer- 
cise forethought,  prudence,  care,  everywhere  but  where  they 


498  VERY  smauLAB. 

are  most  required.  They  save  their  money  but  squander 
their  happiness  ;  they  are  guardians  of  their  estate  but  sui< 
cides  of  their  souls.  Many  forms  this  folly  takes,  but  it  is 
seen  on  all  hands,  and  the  sight  should  make  the  Christian 
weep  over  the  madness  of  his  fellow  naen.  May  the  series 
of  portraits  which  will  now  pass  before  us,  while  they  hold 
the  mirror  up  to  nature,  also  point  us  in  the  way  of  grace. 

See  before  you,  then,  the  portrait  of  an  attentivb  ser- 
vant. He  is  faithful  to  his  employers,  and  fulfils  well 
the  ofiice  to  which  he  is  appointed.  He  is  up  with  the  lark, 
he  toils  all  day,  he  rests  not  till  his  task  is  done ;  he  neg- 
lects nothing  which  he  undertakes.  I  see  him  among  the 
throng,  I  will  single  him  out,  and  talk  with  him.  Yon  have 
been  engaged  for  years  in  farming.  You  have  ploughed, 
and  sown,  and  reaped,  and  gathered  into  the  barn,  and  no 
one  has  done  the  work  better  that  you,  and  yet,  though  you 
have  been  so  careful  in  your  labor,  you  have  never  sown 
to  the  Spirit,  nor  cared  to  reap  life  everlasting.  You  have 
never  asked  to  have  your  heart  ploughed  with  the  gospel 
plough,  nor  sown  with  the  living  seed,  and  the  consequence 
will  be  that  at  the  last  you  will  have  no  harvest  but  weeds 
and  thistles,  and  you  will  be  given  over  to  eternal  destrac- 
tion.  What  ails  you  to  care  for  the  clover  and  the  turnips, 
the  cows  and  the  sheep,  but  never  for  yourself,  your  truest 
self,  your  ever-existing  soul  ?  What !  all -this  care  about 
the  field  and  no  care  about  your  heart  ?  All  this  toil  for  a 
harvest  which  the  hungry  shall  eat  up,  and  no  care  what- 
ever about  the  harvest  that  shall  last  eternally  ! 

Or  you  have  been  occupied  all  your  life  in  a  garden,  and 
there  what  diligence  you  have  shown,  what  taste  in  the 
training  of  the  plants  and  flowers,  what  diligence  in  digging, 
planting,  weeding,  and  watering  ?  Often  has  your  employer 
congratulated  himself  that  he  has  so  careful  a  servant.  You 
take  a  delight  in  your  work,  and  well  you  may  for  some  relics 
of  Eden's  memories  linger  around  a  garden  still  ^  but  bowii 


fSfe*   SiMGtTLAR.  49ft 

it  that  you  are  so  choice  with  yonder  tulip  and  so  indifferent 
ftbout  your  own  spirit  ?  What,  care  for  a  poor  rose,  which 
BO  soon  is  withered,  and  have  no  thought  about  your  immor- 
tal nature  ?  Is  this  like  a  reasonable  man  ?  You  were  very 
ciareful  in  the  winter  to  keep  up  the  heat  of  the  greenhouse 
est  those  feeble  plants  should  suffer  Trom  the  Trost,  have 
you,  then,  no  care  to  be  protected  from  temptation,  and  from 
the  dread  storms  of  almighty  wrath  which  are  so  soon  to 
Dome  ?  Can  it  be  that  you  are  diligent  in  ordering  the 
walks,  and  beds,  and  shrubberies  of  your  master's  grounds, 
and  yet  are  utterly  careless  about  the  garden  of  your  heart 
in  which  fairer  flowers  would  bloom,  and  yield  you  a  far  richer 
reward  ?  I  marvel  at  you.  It  seems  so  strange  that  you 
should  be  so  good  a  worker  for  others  and  so  bad  a  carer 
about  yourself.  I  fear  your  lament  will  have  to  be  "They 
made  me  keeper  of  the  vineyard,  but  my  own  vineyard  have 
I  not  kept." 

It  would  be  too  long  a  task  to  dwell  particularly  on  each 
of  your  employments,  but  I  will  hope  that  in  each  case  you 
are  anxious  to  do  your  work  thoroughly,  so  as  to  secure  ap- 
proval. The  horse  is  not  badly  fed,  nor  the  caniage  reckless- 
ly  driven,  nor  the  wall  carelessly  built,  nor  the  wood  ill  planed 
— you  would  be  ashamed  to  be  called  a  negligent  workman. 
Put  it  then  to  yourself,  will  you  watch  over  anothr  man's 
goods  and  be  unmindful  of  your  own  highest  good  ?  What, 
do  you  mind  t^e  horse  and  the  wagon,  the  parcels,  and  the 
eiTands,  and  all  sorts  of  little  matters,  and  shall  that  soul  of 
yours,  which  will  outlast  the  sun  and  live  when  stars  grow 
dim,  shall  that  be  left  without  a  thought  ?  What,  do  you 
love  others  so  much  and  yourself  so  little  ?  Are  minor  matters 
to  absorb  all  your  thoughts  while  your  own  eternal  concerns 
are  left  in  ntter  neglect  ? 

Some  of  you  act  as  domestic  servants,  and  endeavor  to 
discharge  your  duties  well ;  you  have  much  to  do  from 
morning  till  night,  and  you  would  be  ashamed  for  any  one 
lo  say,  ^  The  room  is  unswept,  cobwebs  are  on  the  walla, 


600  VmT\  BmetJLAB. 

the  floors  are  filthy,  the  meals  are  badly  cooked,  because  yoti 
are  a  bad  servant."  No,  you  feel  rather  proud  that  when 
you  have  a  situation  you  can  keep  it,  and  that  the  mistress 
is  content  with  you.  Suffer  me,  then,  to  ask  you  in  the 
gentlest  manner.  Is  your  heart  never  to  be  cleansed  ?  Are 
your  sins  always  to  defile  it  ?  Have  you  no  thought  about 
**the  house  not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens  ?** 
Do  you  think  God  made  you  to  be  a  mere  sweeper  and  cleaner 
of  rooms,  a  cooker  of  meat,  and  so  on,  and  that  this  is  all  you 
were  designed  for  ?  There  must  be  a  higher  and  a  better 
life  for  you,  and  do  you  altogether  disregard  it  ?  Will  you 
weary  yourself,  day  by  day,  about  another  person's  house, 
and  have  you  no  interest  in  your  own  soul  ?  Have  you  so 
much  care  to  please  (as  you  should  do)  your  master  and 
mistress,  and  no  care  about  being  reconciled  to  God  ?  I 
will  not  think  that  you  are  so  bereft  of  reason. 

I  address  a  still  larger  class  probably,  if  I  say  there  are 
many  here  who  will  go  off  to  the  city  m  the  morning  to  fulfil 
the  duties  of  confidential  accountants.  You  never  suffer  the 
books  to  be  inaccurate,  they  balance  to  a  farthing  ;  it  would 
distress  you  if,  through  your  inadvertence,  the  firm  lost  even 
a  sixpence.  You  have  perhaps  been  many  years  with  the 
same  employers,  and  have  their  unbounded  respect ;  from 
your  boyhood  to  this  day  you  have  been  connected  with 
the  house.  I  have  known  several  admirable  men,  of  high 
integrity  and  thorough  faithfulness,  whom  their  employers 
could  never  sufficiently  value,  for  they  laid  themselves  out 
with  intense  zeal  to  promote  their  commercial  interests,  and 
worked  far  harder  than  the  heads  of  the  house  ever  did. 
Had  the  whole  concern  been  their  own  they  could  not  have 
been  more  assiduous,  and  yet  these  very  men  gave  no  heed 
to  their  own  personal  interest  for  another  world  ;  it  wa* 
grievous  to  observe  that  God  was  not  in  all  their  thoughts^ 
nor  heaven,  nor  hell,  nor  their  own  precious  souls.  You 
good  and  faithful  servant  of  men,  will  you  perish  as  unfaith- 
fill  servants  of  God  V     What,  will  you  never  look  onwari 


VERY  smart^AR:  501 

to  the  last  great  reckoning  ?  Is  it  nothing  to  you  that  the 
debts  due  to  divine  justice  are  undischarged  ?  Are  you 
willing  to  be  called  before  the  Lord  of  all,  and  to  hear  him 
say,  "Thou  wicked  and  slothful  servant,  I  gave  thee  ^  talent, 
but  thou  hast  wrapped  it  in  a  napkin  ?  "  God  forbid  I  should 
diminish  one  grain  of  your  diligence  from  your  secular  avoca- 
tions, but  from  the  very  zeal  you  throw  into  these,  I  charge 
you  if  ye  be  reasonable  men  see  to  it,  that  ye  destroy  not 
your  own  souls.  Be  not  like  Ahithophel,  who  set  his  house 
in  order  and  hanged  himdelf.  Set  not  your  master's  con- 
cerns in  order  and  then  destroy  your  souls,  for  how  shall 
you  escape  if  you  neglect  the  great  salvation  ? 

Look  ye  now  to  another  picture — the  prudent  mer- 
chant. I  must  briefly  sketch  him.  He  knows  the  ways  of 
trade,  studies  the  state  of  the  market,  is  quick  to  perceive 
the  opportunity  of  gain,  has  been  cautious  in  his  speculations, 
has  secured  what  he  has  obtained,  and  is  now  in  posses- 
sion of  a  competency,  or  on  the  road  to  it.  He  prides  him- 
self in  a  quiet  way  upon  the  prudence  with  which  he  con- 
ducts all  his  worldly  transactions — and  my  dear  friend,  I 
am  sure  I  am  glad  to  see  you  prudent  in  business,  for  such 
misery  would  be  caused  to  others  as  well  as  to  yourself  by 
recklessness  and  folly.  But  I  want  to  ask  you  if  you  are 
thoughtless  about  religion  how  is  it  that  you  can  be  so  in- 
consistent ?  Do  you  study  how  to  buy,  and  buy  well,  but 
will  you  never  buy  the  truth  ?  Do  you  put  all  that  you  get 
into  a  safe  bank,  but  will  you  never  lay  up  treasure  in  heaven, 
where  neither  moth  nor  rust  doth  corrupt  ?  You  are  wary 
in  your  speculations,  but  will  you  play  so  deep  at  hazard  as 
to  jeopardize  your  soul?  You  have  been  for  years  accus- 
tomed to  rise  up  early  and  sit  up  late,  and  eat  the  bread  of 
carefulness,  will  you  never  rise  early  to  seek  the  Lord? 
Will  you  never  prevent  the  night  watches  to  find  a  Saviour  ? 
I8  the  body  every  thing  ?  Is  gold  your  god  ?  Why,  you 
area  man  of  intelligence  and  reading,  and  you  know  that 
there  are  higher  considerations  than  those  of  business  and 


509  VEttt   SmGOLAlL 

the  state  of  trade.  Ton  do  not  believe  yourself  to  be  of  the 
same  generation  as  the  brute  that  perisheth ;  you  expect 
to  live  in  another  state  ;  you  have  a  book  here  which  tells 
you  what  that  life  will  be,  and  how  it  may  be  shaped  for 
joy,  or  left  to  be  drifted  into  endless  sorrow.  Am  I  a  fa- 
natic, my  dear  sir,  if  I  respectfully  put  my  hand  on  yours  and 
say,  "I  beseech  you  think  not  all  of  the  less  and  nothing 
of  tlie  greater,  lest  haply  when  you  come  to  die,  the  same 
may  be  said  of  you  as  of  a  rich  man  of  old,  who  had  been 
as  cautious  and  as  careful  as  you:  *thou  fool,  this  night  thy 
soul  shall  be  required  of  thee ;  then  whose  will  these  things 
be  which  thou  hast  prepared  ? '  I  charge  you,  if  you  be 
prudent,  prove  it  by  being  prudent  about  the  weightiest  of 
all  concerns.  If  you  be  not  after  all  a  mere  bragger  as  to 
prudence,  a  mere  child  enraptured  with  silly  toys,  then  show 
your  wisdom  by  following  the  wisest  course."  I  have  heard 
of  one,  the  stewardess  of  an  American  vessel,  who  when  the 
ship  was  sinking,  saw  heaps  of  gold  coin  scattered  upon  ^ihe 
cabin  floor  by  those  who  had  thrown  it  there  in  the  confusion 
of  their  escape :  she  gathered  up  large  quantities  of  it,  wiap- 
ped  it  round  her  waist,  and  leaped  into  the  water ;  she  sank 
like  a  millstone,  as  though  she  had  studiously  prepared  ber-^ 
self  for  destruction.  I  fear  that  many  of  you  traders  are 
diligently  collecting  guarantees  for  your  surer  ruin,  plan- 
ning to  bury  yourselves  beneath  your  glittering  hoards.  Be 
wise  in  time.  My  voice,  nay,  my  heart  pleads  with  you  for 
your  souFs  sake  and  for  Christ's  sake,  be  not  like  Ahithophel, 
who  set  his  house  in  order  and  hanged  himself  Take  sure 
bond  for  enduring  happiness,  invest  in  indisputable  secu- 
rities, have  done  with  infinite  risks,  and  be  assured  for  life 
everlasting. 

A  third  photograph  shall  now  be  exhibited.  This  will 
describe  a  smaller,  but  a  very  valuable  class  of  men,  and  if 
they  were  blessed  of  God  how  glad  should  I  be — the  dili- 
gent STUDENT.  He  seeks  out  the  best  of  books  to  assist  him 
in  the  pursuit  of  his  branch  of  knowledge  ;  he  bums  the 


VERY   SINGULAB.  603 

midnight  oil,  lie  is  not  afraid  of  toil,  he  cares  not  for  throb* 
bing  brain  and  weary  ey3,  but  he  presses  on,  he  trains  his 
memory,  he  schools  his  judgment,  and  all  with  the  hope 
that  he  may  be  numbered  with  the  learned.  The  examina* 
tions  of  his  university  are  to  him  the  most  important  peri- 
ods in  the  calendar ;  his  degree  is  the  pirize  of  his  high  call- 
ing. Knowledge  is  sweet,  and  the  honor  of  being  asso- 
ciated with  the  learned  is  coveted.  My  y^ung  friend,  I  would 
not  for  a  moment  abate  your  zeal,  but  I  would  beg  space 
for  one  consideration  worthy  of  immediate  attention.  Ought 
the  best  of  sciences  to  be  left  to  the  last  ?  Should  self-knowl- 
edge and  acquaintance  with  God  be  treated  as  of  secondary 
importance  ?  Should  not  the  word  of  God  be  the  chief  vol- 
ume in  the  wise  man's  library  ?  Should  you  not  burn  the 
midnight  oil  to  peruse  the  page  infallible,  written  by  the 
divine  finger  ?  With  all  your  gettings,  should  you  not  get 
the  understanding  which  cometh  from  above,  and  the  knowl- 
edge which  is  the  gift  of  God,  and  which  will  introduce  you, 
if  not  among  the  learned,  yet  among  the  gracious  ;  if  not 
into  the  academy  of  savans,  yet  into  the  general  assembly 
and  church  of  the  firstborn,  whose  names  are  written  in 
heaven?  Should  there  not  be  with  you  the  wish  to  train 
your  complete  manhood,  and  to  educate  yourself  to  the  ful- 
ness of  the  stature  of  what  a  man  should  be  ?  Should  not 
the  nqblest  part  have  the  chief  care  ?  I  speak  to  a  wise 
man  ;  I  would  have  him  be  truly  wise  ;  I  would  not  have 
him  set  his  study  in  order,  and  tutor  himself  and  then  for- 
get the  eternal  life,  and  the  destiny  that  awaits  him.  O  stu- 
dent, seek  thou  first  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  his  righteous- 
ness, and  then  shall  thy  temple  of  wisdom  be  built  upon  a 
roi^k. 

I  will  take  another  character,  a  character  which  is  very 
common  in  great  cities — ^I  am  not  sure  but  what  it  is  com- 
mon enough — the  befobming  poLmciAN.  I  value  our  poli- 
ticians highly,  but  we  ^carc^ly  need  to  be  overstocked  w'ih 


504  YERY  BmaULAR. 

those  wbo  brawl  in  public  booses  and  discnssion  rooms  while 
their  families  are  starving  at  home.    Some  men  who  spend 
a  great  deal  of  time  in  considering  politics,  are  hardly  ben- 
efiting the  commonwealth  to  the  extent  they  imagine.      I 
will  suppose  I  am  addressing  a  man  who  feels  the  home  and 
foreign  affairs  of  the  nation  to  be  his  particular  department. 
Well,  my  respected  friend,  I  trust  you  occupy  a  useful  place 
in  the  general  economy,  but  I  want  to  ask  you  one  or  two 
questions  well  worthy  of  a  ref ormer*s  or  a  conservatiye's  con- 
sideration.    You  have  been  looking  up  abuses,  hai^e  you  no 
abuses  in  your  own  life  which  need  correcting?     There  is 
no  doubt  about  the  Reform  Bill  having  been  needed,  but 
do  you  not  tliink  a  Reform  Bill  is  needed  by  some  of  us,  at 
home,  in  reference  to  our  own  characters,  and  especially  in 
reference  to  our  relation  towards  our  Gk)d  and  our  Saviour  ? 
I  think  only  he  who  is  ignorant  of  himself  will  deny  that ; 
and  would  it  not  be  a  fine  thing  to  begin  at  home,  and  let 
the  politics  of  our  house  and  our  heart  be  set  quite  right, 
and  that  immediately  I    You  have  in  your  brain  a  complete 
scheme  for  paying  off  the  National  Debt,  elevating  the  nation, 
remodelling  the  navy,  improving  the  army,  managing  the 
colonies,  delivering  France,  and  establishing  the  licst  form 
of  government  in  Europe ;  I  am  afraid  your  schemes  may 
not  be  carried.out  so  soon  as  you  desire ;  but  may  I  not  sug- 
gest to  you  that  your  own  heart  needs  renewing  .by  the 
Spirit  of  God,  your  many  sins  need  removing  by  the  atone- 
ment of  Jesus,  and  your  whole  life  requires  a  deep  and  rad- 
ical change,  and  this  is  a  practical  measure  which  no  aristoc- 
racy will  oppose,  which  no  vested  interests  will  defeat,  and 
which  need  not  be  delayed  for  another  election  or  a  new 
premier.      I  dare  say  you  have  faced  much  opposition,  and 
expect  to  face  much  more  in  agitating  the  important  ques- 
tion which  you  have  taken  up ;  but  ah  I  my  friend,  will  you 
not  sometimes  agitate  questions  with  your  conscience  ?  Will 
you  not  discuss  with  your  inner  nature  the  great  truths 
which  God  has  revealed  ?      Would  it  not  be  worth  your 


^% 


I 

I 

I 


while  Bt  least  to  spend  some  time  ia  your  prit  ftte  coancil 
chamber  with  yourself  thiuking  of  the  now,  and  of  the  past, 

and  of  the  to  come — considering  God,  Christ,  heaven,  hell, 
and  yonreolf  as  connected  with  all  these  ?  I  press  it  on  you, 
it  seems  to  me  to  be  the  greatest  of  all  inconsistencicB  thai 
a  man  should  think  himself  able  to  guide  a  nation  and  yet 
should  lose  his  own  soul;  that  he  should  have  schemes  bj 
which  to  turn  this  world  into  a  paradise,  and  yet  lose  para- 
dise for  himself;  that  he  should  declaim  violently  against 
war,  and  all  sorts  of  evils,  and  yet  himself  should  be  at  war 
with  God,  himself  a  slave  to  sin.  Shal]  he  talk  of  freedom 
while  he  is  manacled  by  his  lusts  and  appetites  ?  Shall  he  ' 
be  enslaved  by  drink,  and  yet  be  the  champion  of  liberty  ? 
He  that  teaches  freedom  should  himself  be  free.  It  is  ill  to 
see  a  man  contending  for  others,  and  a  captive  himselt  To 
arrange  tbe  nation's  affairs,  and  to  destroy  yourself  is  as 
foolish  as  Ahithopbel,  who  ordered  his  house  and  hanged 
himself. 

We  will  pass  to  another  character,  and  how  much  of 
what  I  am  now  to  utter  may  concern  myself  I  pray  God  to 
teacb  me — thk  zkaious  fkbachkk.  The  character  is  no 
imaginary  one,  it  is  not  suggested  by  bitterness,  or  colored 
by  fanaticism,  there  have  been  such  and  will  be  such  to  the 
end  ;  men  who  study  the  Scriptures,  and  are  masters  of  the- 
ology, versed  in  doctrine,  conversant  with  law  ;  men  who 
teauh  the  lessons  they  have  gathered,  and  teach  them,  el- 
oquently and  forcibly,  warning  their  bearers  of  their  sins, 
pointing  out  their  danger,  and  pleading  with  thum  to  lay 
hold  on  Christ,  and  life  eternal,  and  yet — for  all  this  tbey 
are  themselves  unconverted  I  Tbey  preach  what  tbey  never 
felt,  they  teach  what  they  never  knew  by  experience.  Broth- 
er ministers,  I  allude  not  to  you  any  more  than  to  myself, 
but  of  all  men  that  live  we  are  most  called  upon  to  watch 
lest  onr  very  office  help  us  to  be  hypocrites  ;  leet  our  posi- 
itioii  M  teachers  should  bring  upon  us  a  doable  curse.     Do 


B06  TBBT  fiONGULAR. 

not  let  us  aeek  the  salvation  of  otnerf  and  loee  ownelyttL 
To  preach  Christ  and  not  to  have  him ;  to  tell  o/  the  foon* 
tain  and  not  to  be  washed  in  it ;  to  speak  of  hell,  and  warn 
men  to  escape  it,  and  yet  go  there  ourselves !  Gk>d  grant 
it  may  never  be  so  with  any  of  as !  Bat  ihark  yon,  the  point 
of  this  warning  comes  to  many  here  who  are  not  altogeth* 
er  ministers.  Yon  are  not  preachers,  but  yon  are  Sonday- 
school  teachers,  tract  distributors,  Bible  women,  or  city 
missionaries.  Then  hear  ye  the  same  warning.  Will  you 
go  round  with  those  tracts  from  house  to  house,  and  yet 
have  no  religion  m  your  own  houses  ?  Oh,  miserable  souls ! 
who  hath  required  it  at  your  hands  to  teach  others  of  God 
when  you  are  not  reconciled  to  God  yourselves?  What 
can  you  teach  those  children  in  the  Sabbath-school  ?  I  say, 
what  can  you  teach  those  children,  when  you  yourselves 
are  in  the  gall  of  bitterness  and  in  the  bond  of  iniquity  ? 
May  not  the  very  words  you  spoke  to  your  classes  to-day 
rise  up  against  you  in  the  day  of  judgment  and  condemn 
you  ?  Do  not  be  content  to  have  it  so.  Do  not  point  the 
way  to  others  aod  run  in  another  road  yourselfl  Do  not 
set  others  in  order  and  slay  your  own^selves. 

I  have  another  picture  to  look  upon — it  represents  a  cars« 
FUL  PARENT.  Many  who  may  not  have  been  included  under 
other  descriptions  will  be  mentioned  here.  You  love  your 
children  well  and  wisely ;  so  far  as  this  world  is  concerned, 
yoa  are  careful  and  prudent  parents.  You  were  very  watch- 
ful over  them  in  their  childhood/*  you  were  afraid  that  those 
infant  sicknesses  would  take  them  to  the  grave.  How  glad 
you  were,  dear  mother,  when  once  again  you  could  lift  the 
little  one  from  the  bed  and  press  it  to  your  bosom,  and  thank 
God  that  it  was  recovering  its  health  and  strength.  You 
have  denied  yourself  a  great  deal  for  your  children.  When 
you  were  out  of  work,  and  struggling  with  poverty,  you 
did  not  so  much  grieve  for  yourselves  as  for  them,  it  was 
so  hard  to  see  your  children  wanting  bread.  You  have 
been  so  pleased  to  clothe  them,  so  glad  to  notice  their  open- 


VERY   BINGULAB.  507 

ing  intellect,  and  yon  have  many  of  you  selected  with  great 
care  places  where  they  will  receive  a  good  education,  and 
if  you  thought  that  any  bad  influence  would  come  across 
their  path,  you  would  be  on  your  guard  at  once.  You  wish 
your  children  to  grow  up  patterns  of  virtue  and  good  citi- 
zens, and  you  are  right  in  all  this.  I  wish  that  all  felt  as 
you  do  about  their  families,  and  that  none  were  allowed  to 
run  loose  in  the  streets,  which  are  the  devil's  school.  Now 
as  you  have  been  so  careful  about  your  children,  may  I  ask 
you  ought  not  your  own  soul  to  have  some  thought  bestow- 
ed on  it,  some  anxiety  exercised  about  it  ?  It  is  a  child  too, 
to  be  educated  for  the  skies,  to  be  nurtured  for  the  Father's 
house  above.  Look  in  the  babe's  face  and  think  of  the  care 
you  give  to  it,  and  then  turn  your  eyes  inwardly  upon  your 
soul  and  say,  "  What  care  have  I  given  to  thee,  my  soul  ? 
I  have  left  thee  unwashed,  unclothed,  unhoused.  No  blood 
of  Christ  hatl\^  fallen  on  thee,  my  soul ;  no  righteousness  of 
Christ  hath  wrapped  thee.  For  thee,  my  soul,  my  poor,  poor 
soul,  there  is  no  heaven  when  thou  must  leave  this  body, 
for  thee  there  is  no  hope  but  a  fearful  looking  for  of  judg- 
ment and  of  fiery  indignation.  My  soul  forgive  me  that  I 
have  treated  thee  so  ill,  I  will  now  think  of  thee  and  bow 
my  knee  and  ask  the  Lord  to  be  gracious  to  thee.  I  wish  I 
could  call  upon  you  personally  and  press  this  matter  upon 
you.  Think  that  I  am  doing  so;  when  you  reach  home 
think  that  I  am  following  you  there  and  saying  to  you,  "  If 
you  care  for  your  children  care  for  your  souls."  Look  at 
the  boys  and  girls  sleeping  in  their  cots  to-night,  and  it 
you  are  unconverted,  say  to  yourself,  "  There  they  lie,  the 
dear  ones,  they  are  little  sermons  to  me ;  I  will  remember 
what  the  preacher  said  when  I  look  at  them.  My  God,  My 
Father,  I  will  turn  to  thee,  do  thou  turn  me  and  I  shall  be 
turned." 

The  last  of  my  crayon  sketches  is  one  which  may  concent 
many,  it  is  that  of  the  outwabd  bsligionist  who  yet  is  re- 
gardless of  his  own  soul :  it  is  oddest  and  strangest  of  all 


B08  ^nsBT  BIKanLAR. 

that  there  should  be  such  people.  I  have  met  with  Pruteit* 
ants,  flaming  Protestants,  I  might  add,  raving  Protestants, 
who  nevertheless  know  no  more  about  Protestantism  than 
about  the  Tbeogony  of  Hesiod,  and  were  they  questioned  as 
to  what  it  is  that  was  protested  against  by  the  Reformers, 
they  would  guess  wide  of  the  mark.  Yet  are  they  very  con- 
eerned  that  our  glorious  constitution  in  church  and  state 
should  be  "  thoroughly  Protestant " — ^though  I  cannot  for 
the  life  of  me  see  what  difference  it  would  make  to  them.  If 
they  have  no  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  what  mattors 
it  to  them  how  a  man  is  justified  ?  There  are  others,  again, 
who  are  ''  Dissenters  to  the  backbone,"  but  yet  sinners  to 
their  marrow.  To  ungodly  men  I  say  solemnly.  What 
matters  it  what  you  are  in  these  mattera?  The  side  which 
has  the  honor  of  your  patronage  is  a  loser  by  it  in  all  proba- 
bility. If  you  are  leading  bad  lives,  I  am  very  sorry  that 
you  are  Dissenters,  you  injure  a  good  cause.  What  fools 
you  must  be  to  be  so  earnest  about  religions  in  which  you 
have  no  concern  I  Many,  again,  are  very  orthodox,  even 
to  being  strait-laced,  and  yet  are  unbelievers.  If  the  preach- 
er does  not  ^ome  up  to  their  weight  and  measure,  they 
denounce-  him  at  once,  and  have  no  word  bad  enough  /or 
him.  But  now,  my  friend,  though  I  cannot  say  that  I  am 
altogether  sorry  that  you  think  about  doctrines  and  church- 
es, let  me  ask  you  is  it  wise  that  you  <«hould  set  up  for  a 
judge  upon  a  matter  in  which  you  have  no  share  ?  You 
are  vociferous  for  setting  the  church  in  order,  but  you  are 
destroying  your  soul !  If  these  things  belonged  to  you,  I 
could  understand  your  zeal  about  them,  but  since  you  have 
nothing  to  do  with  them  (and  you  have  not  if  you  have  no 
faith),  why  do  you  look  after  other  people,  and  let  your  own 
salvation  go  by  default  ?  It  may  be  a  very  important  thing 
to  somebody  how  the  Duke  of  Devonshire  may  lay  out  his 
estate  at  Chatsworth,  but  I  am  sure  it  is  not  to  me,  for  I  am 
in  no  degree  a  part  proprietor  with  His  Grace.  So  it  may 
be  very  important  to  some  people  how  such-aad-such  a  doc* 


B 


