'CO 


Donated  to 

THE  LIBRARIES  of 

THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO 

In  Memory  of 

The  Reverend  Hjortur  B*  Leo 

and 
Byron  J.  Leo 


SERMONS 


REV.   O.  H.   SPURQEON 

Of  London 


Volume  VI. 


NEW   YORK 

FUNK  &  WAGNALLS  COMPANY 
LONDON  AND  TORONTO 


CONTENTS. 


SERMON   I. 

THE  STORY  OF  GOD'S  MIGHTY  ACTS 


SERMON   II. 

THE  OUTPOURING  OF  TOE  HOLY  SPIP-T 


SERMON   111. 

THE  SYMPATHY  OF  THE  TWO  WORLDS 


SERMON   FV. 
THK  CONVERSION  OF  SAUL  OF  TARSUS 


SERMON   V. 

DISTINGUISHING  GRACE  ..........................................     78 

I 

SERMON   VI. 

FHE  MISSION  OF  THE  SON  OF  MAN  ...........................  ....     99 

SERMON  VH 

Ax  EARNEST  INVITATION  .............................  ...........  lOf 


CONTEXT 


SERMON   VIII. 

MM 

How  SAINTS  MAY  HELP  THE  DEVIL 125 


SERMON   IX. 

His  NAME— THJC  MIGHTY  3ou  .  .  .142 


SERMON   X. 

THK  BELIEVER'S  CHALLENGE 156 

SERMON    XI. 
A  PSALM  OK  REMEMBRANCE 171 

SERMON   XII. 

THE  NECESSITY  OF  THK  SPIRIT'S  WORK..  .   186 


SERMON   XIII. 

LITTLE  SINS .  202 


SERMON   XIV. 
A  VISION  OK  THK  LATTER  DAY  G  LORIES  . . 


SERMON  XV. 

Cevir, ANT  BLESSINGS  ...  , .   280 


CONTENTS.  II 


SERMON  XVI. 

rioi 
TUE  DEW  OF  CHRIST'S  YOUTH 249 


SERMON  XVII. 
THE  HIGH  ROCK.  .  26f 


SERMON  XVIII. 

SPIRITUAL  RELIGION 


SERMON  XIX. 

THE  SAVIOUR  BESTING  IN  IILS  T-^VK  . .  297 


SERMON  XX. 

SUFFERIXG    \*  1THOUT   THE    CAMP S09 


SERMON   XXI. 

GROWTH  IN  GRACE.... 819 

SERMON  XXII 

HYPOCRISY 834 

SERMON  XXIII 

CHRIST  PRECIOUS  TO  BELIEVERS ....     SflO 


CONTENTS. 


SERMON   XXIV. 

MM 

THE  MEEK  AND  LOWLY  ONE  ................   ,  ..................  366 


SERMON   XXV. 

HANDS  AND  FEEBLE  KNEES  ...............................  88 


SERMON  XXVI. 

THE  BLIND  BEGGAR  ..........................................  899 


SERMON  XXVII. 

CHRIST'S  MANIFESTATION  TO  MARY  MAGDALENE  ..................    ,  .  418 


SERMON   XXVIII. 

but  SIGHT  or  INIQUITY  ......  , .  422 


SERMON   XXIX, 
THE  TABERNACLE  OF  THE  MOST  HIGH 


SERMON    I. 

THE  ST)RY  OF  GOD'S  MIGHTY  ACTS. 

"  We  have  heard  with  our  ears,  0  God,  our  fathers  have  told  us, 
work  thou  didst  iu  their  days  in  the  times  of  old." — PSALM  xliv.  1. 

PERHAPS  there  are  no  stories  that  stick  by  us  so  long  as  those 
which  we  hear  in  our  childhood,  those  tales  which  are  told  us  by 
our  fathers,  and  in  our  nurseries.  It  is  a  sad  reflection  that  too 
many  of  these  stories  are  idle  and  vain,  so  that  our  minds  in 
early  infancy  are  tinctured  with  fables,  and  inoculated  with 
strange  and  lying  narratives.  Now,  among  the  early  Christians 
and  the  old  believers  in  the  far-off  times  nursery  tales  were  far 
different  from  what  they  are  now,  and  the  stories  with  which 
their  children  were  amused  were  of  a  far  different  class  from 
those  which  fascinated  us  in  the  days  of  our  babyhood.  No 
doubt  Abraham  would  talk  to  young  children  about  the  flood, 
and  tell  them  how  the  waters  overspread  the  earth,  and  how 
Noah  alone  was  saved  in  the  ark.  The  ancient  Israelites,  when 
they  dwelt  in  their  own  land,  would  all  of  them  tell  their  children  , 
about  the  Red  Sea,  and  the  plagues  which  God  wrought  in 
Egypt  when  he  brought  his  people  out  of  the  house  of  bondage. 
Among  the  early  Christians  we  know  that  it  was  the  custom  of 
parents  to  recount  to  their  children  every  thing  concerning  the 
life  of  Christ,  the  acts  of  the  Apostles,  and  the  like  interesting 
narratives.  Nay,  among  our  puritanic  ancestors,  such  were  the 
stories  that  regaled  their  childhood.  Sitting  down  by  the  fire 
side,  before  those  old  Dutch  tiles  with  the  quaint  eccentric  draw 
ings  upon  them  of  the  history  of  Christ,  mothers  would  teach 
their  children  about  Jesus  walking  on  the  water,  or  of  his  multi 
plying  the  loaves  of  bread,  or  of  his  marvellous  transfiguration, 


14  THE    STORY     OF    GOD^S    MIGHTY     ACTS. 

or  of  the  crucifixion  of  Jesus.  Oh,  how  I  would  that  the  like 
were  the  tales  of  the  present  age,  that  the  stories  of  our  childhood 
would  be  again  the  stories  of  Christ,  and  that  we  would  each  of 
us  believe  that,  after  all,  there  can  be  nothing  so  interesting  as 
that  which  is  true,  and  nothing  more  striking  than  those  stories 
which  are  written  in  sacred  writ;  nothing  that  can  more  truly 
move  the  heart  of  a  child  than  the  marvellous  works  of  Gud 
which  he  did  in  the  olden  times.  Now,  it  seems  that  the 
psalmist  who  wrote  this  most  musical  ode  had  heard  from  his 
father,  handed  to  him  by  tradition,  the  stories  of  the  wondrous 
things,  which  God  had  done  in  his  day  ;  and  afterwards,  this 
sweet  singer  in  Israel  taught  it  to  his  children,  and  so  was  one 
generation  after  another  led  to  call  God  blessed,  remembering 
his  mighty  acts. 

Now,  my  dear  friends,  this  morning  I  intend  to  recall  to  your 
minds  some  of  the  wondrous  things  which  God  has  done  in  the 
olden  time.  My  aim  and  object  will  be  to  excite  your  minds  to 
seek  after  the  like,  that,  looking  back  upon  what  God  has  done, 
you  may  be  induced  to  look  forward  with  the  eye  of  expectation, 
hoping  that  he  will  again  stretch  forth  his  potent  hand  and  his 
holy  arm,  and  repeat  those  mighty  acts  he  performed  in  ancient 
days. 

First,  I  shall  speak  of  the  marvellous  stories  which  our  fathers 
have  told  MS,  and  which  we  have  heard  of  the  olden  time  ;  secondly, 
I  shall  mention  some  disadvantages  under  which  these  old  stories, 
labor  with  regard  to  the  effect  upon  our  minds  ;  and,  then,  I  shall 
draw  the  proper  inferences  from  those  marvellous  things  which 
we  have  heard  that  the  Lord  did  in  days  of  yore. 

\,  To  begin,  then,  with  THE  WONDERFUL  STORIES  WE   HAVE 

IlE^FD  OF  THE  LORD'S  ANCIENT  DOINGS. 

We  have  heard  that  God  has  at  times  done  very  mighty  acts. 
The  plain  every-day  course  of  the  world  hath  been  disturbed  with 
•flrcndeis  at  which  men  have  been  exceedingly  amazed.  God 
hath  not  always  permitted  his  church  to  go  on  climbing  by  slow 
degrees  to  victory,  but  he  hath  been  pleased  at  times  to  smite 
one  terrible  blow,  and  lay  his  enemies  down  upon  the  earth,  and 
bid  his  children  march  over  their  prostrate  bodies.  Turn  ye 
back,  then,  to  ancient  records,  and  remember  what  God  hatb 


THE    STORY    OB'    GOI/S    MIGHTY     ACTB.  15 

done.  Will  ye  not  remember  what  he  did  at  the  lied  Sea,  hovr 
he  smote  Egypt  and  all  its  chivalry,  and  covered  Pharaoh's 
chariot  and  horse  in  the  Red  Sea?  Have  ye  not  heard  tell  hov 
God  smote  Og,  king  of  Bashan,  and  Sihon,  king  of  the  Amorites, 
because  they  withstood  the  progress  of  his  people  1  Have  ye 
not  learned  how  he  proved  that  his  mercy  endureth  for  ever 
wluTi  he  slew  those  great  kings  and  cast  the  mighty  ones  down 
from  their  thrones  1  Have  you  not  read,  too,  how  God  smoti 
the  children  of  Canaan,  and  drove  out  the  inhabitants  thereof,  and 
gave  the  land  to  his  people,  to  be  a  possession  by  lot  for  ever  ? 
Have  you  not  heard  how  when  the  hosts  of  Jabin  came  against 
them,  the  stars  in  their  courses  fought  against  Siscra?  The 
river  of  Kishon  swept  them  away,  "  that  ancient  river,  the  river 
Kishon,"  and  there  was  none  of  them  left?  Hath  it  not  been 
told  you,  too,  how  by  the  hand  of  David,  God  smote  the  Philis 
tines,  and  how  by  his  right  hand  he  smote  the  children  of 
Am mon  1  Have  you  not  heard  how  Midian  was  put  to  confusion, 
and  the  myriads  of  Arabia  were  scattered  by  Asa  in  the  day  of 
his  faith]  And  have  ye  not  heard,  too,  how  the  Lord  sent  a 
blast  upon  the  hosts  of  Sennacherib,  so  that  in  the  morning  they 
were  all  dead  men  ?  Tell — tell  ye  these,  his  wonders  !  Speak 
of  them  in  your  streets.  Teach  them  to  your  children.  Let 
them  not  be  forgotten,  for  the  right  hand  of  the  Lord  hath  done 
marvellous  things,  his  name  is-  known  in  all  the  earth. 

The  wonders,  however,  which  most  concern  us,  are  those  of 
the  Christian  era ;  and  surely  these  are  not  second  to  those  under 
the  Old  Testament.  Have  you  never  read  how  God  won  to 
himself  great  renown  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost  ?  Turn  ye  to  this 
book  of  the  record  of  the  wonders  of  the  Lord  and  read.  Peter 
the  fisherman  stood  up  and  preached  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  his 
God.  A  multitude  assembled,  and  the  Spirit  of  God  fell  upon 
them ;  and  it  came  to  pass  that  three  thousand  in  one  day  were 
pricked  in  their  hearts  by  the  hand  of  God,  and  believed  on  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ.  And  know  you  not  how  the  twelve  apostles 
with  the  disciples  went  everywhere  preaching  the  Word,  and  the 
idols  fell  from  their  thrones'?  The  cities  opened  wide  their  gates, 
and  the  messenger  of  Christ  walked  through  the  street  and 
preached.  It  is  true  that  at  first  they  were  driven  hither  and 


16  TUB    STORY    OF    GOl/S    MIGHTY    ACTS. 

thither,  and  hunted  like  partridges  upon  the  mountains :  but  do 
ye  not  remember  how  the  Lord  did  get  unto  himself  a  victory, 
so  that  in  a  hundred  years  after  the  nailing  of  Christ  to  the  cross 
the  gospel  had  been  preached  in  every  nation,  and  the  isles  of 
the  sea  had  heard  the  sound  thereof?  And  have  ye  yet  forgotten 
how  the  heathen  were  baptized,  thousands  at  a  time,  in  every 
•iver  1  What  stream  is  there  in  Europe  that  cannot  testify  to 
he  majesty  of  the  gospel  ?  What  city  is  there  in  the  land  that 
iannot  tell  how  God's  truth  has  triumphed,  and  how  the  heathen 
has  forsaken  his  false  god,  and  bowed  his  knee  to  Jesus  the 
crucified  1  The  first  spread  of  the  gospel  is  a  miracle  never  to 
be  eclipsed.  Whatever  God  may  have  done  at  the  Red  Sea,  he 
hath  done  still  more  within  a  hundred  years  after  the  time  when 
Christ  first  came  into  the  world.  It  seemed  as  if  a  fire  from 
heaven  ran  along  the  ground.  Nothing  could  resist  its  force. 
The  lightning  shaft  of  truth  shivered  every  pinnacle  of  the  idol 
temple,  and  Jesus  was  worshipped  from  the  rising  of  the  sun  to 
the  going  down  of  the  same. 

This  is  one  of  the  things  we  have  heard  of  the  olden  times. 

And  have  ye  never  heard  of  the  mighty  things  which  God  did 
by  preachers  some  hundreds  of  years  from  that  date?  Hath  it 
not  been  told  you  concerning  Chrysostom,  the  golden-mouthed, 
how,  whenever  he  preached,  the  church  was  thronged  with  atten 
tive  hearers ;  and  there,  standing  and  lifting  up  holy  hands,  he 
spake  with  a  majesty  unparalleled,  the  Word  of  God  in  truth 
and  righteousness ;  the  people  listening,  hanging  forward  to 
catch  every  word,  and  anon  breaking  the  silence  with  the  clapping 
of  their  hands  and  the  stamping  of  their  feet ;  then  silent  again 
for  awhile,  spell-bound  by  the  mighty  orator;  and  anon  carried 
away  with  enthusiasm,  springing  to  their  feet,  clapping  theii 
'lands,  and  shouting  for  joy  again  ?  Numberless  were  the  con 
versions  in  his  day  :  God  was  exceedingly  magnified,  for  sirmeis 
were  abundantly  saved.  And  have  your  fathers  never  told  you 
of  the  wondrous  things  that  were  done  afterwards  when  the 
black  darkness  of  superstition  covered  the  earth,  when  Popery 
sat  upon  her  ebon  throne  and  stretched  her  iron  rod  across  the 
nations  and  shut  the  windows  of  heaven,  and  quenched  the  very 
•tars  of  God  and  made  thick  darkness  cover  the  people  ]  Hava 


THE    STORY    OF    OOD^S    MIGHTY    ACTS.  17 

ye  never  heard  how  Martin  Luther  arose  and  preached  the 
gospel  of  the  grace  of  God,  and  how  the  nations  trembled,  and 
the  world  heard  the  voice  of  God  and  lived  ?  Have  ye  not 
heard  of  Zwingle  among  the  Swiss,  and  of  Calvin  in  the  holy  city 
of  Geneva,  and  qf  the  mighty  works  that  God  did  by  them] 
Nay,  as  Britons,  hj^-e  ye  forgotten  the  mighty  preacher  of  the 
truth — have  your  ears  ceased  to  tingle  with  the  wondrous  tale  of 
the  preachers  that  WicklifFe  sent  forth  into  every  market  town 
and  every  hamlet  of  England,  preaching  the  gospel  of  God  ]  Oh, 
doth  not  history  tell  us  that  these  men  were  like  firebrands  in 
the  midst  of  the  dry  stubble;  that  their  voice  was  as  the  roaring 
of  a  lion,  and  their  going  forth  like  the  springing  of  a  young  lion  ] 
Their  glory  was  as  the  firstling  of  a  bullock ;  they  did  push  the 
nation  before  them,  and  as  for  the  enemies,  they  said,  "  Destroy 
them."  None  could  stand  before  them,  for  the  Lord  their  God 
had  girded  them  with  might. 

To  come  down  a  little  nearer  to  our  own  times,  truly  our 
fathers  have  told  us  the  wondrous  things  which  God  did  in  the 
days  of  Wesley  and  of  Whitfield.  The  churches  were  all  asleep. 
Irreligion  was  the  rule  of  the  day.  The  very  streets  seemed  to 
run  with  iniquity,  and  the  gutters  were  filled  full  with  the  ini 
quity  of  sin.  Up  rose  Whitfield  and  Wesley,  men  whose  hearts 
the  Lord  had  touched,  and  they  dared  to  preach  the  gospel  of  the 
grace  of  God.  Suddenly,  as  in  a  moment,  there  was  heard  the 
rush  as  of  wings,  and  the  church  said,  "  Who  are  these  that  fly  as 
a  cloud,  and  as  the  doves  to  their  windows'?"  They  come  !  they 
come!  numberless  as  the  birds  of  heaven,  with  a  rushing,  like 
mighty  winds  that  are  not  to  be  withstood.  Within  a  few  years, 
from  the  preaching  of  these  two  men,  England  was  permeated, 
with  evangelical  truth.  The  Word  of  God  wsw  known  in  every 
town,  and  there  was  scarcely  a  hamlet  into  which  the  Methodists 
had  not  penetrated.  In  those  days  of  the  slow-coach,  when  Chris 
tianity  seemed  to  have  bought  up  the  old  wagons  in  which  our 
Cithers  once  travelled, — where  business  runs  with  steam,  there 
oftentimes  religion  creeps  along  with  its  belly  on  the  earth :  we 
are  astonished  at  these  tales,  and  we  think  them  wonders.  Yet 
let  us  believe  them ;  they  come  to  us  as  substantial  matters  of 
history.  And  the  wondrous  things  which  God  did  in  the,  oklen 


18  TDK    STORY    OF    GOD'S    MIGHTY    ACTS. 

times,  by  his  grace  he  will  yet  do  again.     He  that  is  miglry  hath 
done  great  things  and  holy  is  his  name. 

There  is  a  special  feature  to  which  1  would  call  your  attention 
with  regard  to  the  works  of  God  in  the  olden  time;  they  derive 
increasing  interest  and  wonder  from  the  fact  that  they  were  all 
sudden  things.  The  old  stagers  in  our  churches  belie\e  that 
things  must  grow,  gently,  by  degrees ;  we  must  go  step  by  step 
onward.  Concentrated  action  and  continued  labor,  they  say,  will 
ultimately  bring  success.  But  the  marvel  is,  all  God's  woiks 
have  been  sudden.  When  Peter  stood  up  to  preach,  it  did  not 
take  s\x  weeks  to  convert  the  three  thousand.  They  were  con 
verted  at  once,  and  baptized  that  very  day ;  they  were  that  hour 
turned  to  God,  and  became  as  truly  disciples  of  Christ  as  they 
could  have  been  if  their  conversion  had  taken  seventy  years.  So 
was  it  in  the  day  of  Martin  Luther :  it  did  not  take  Luther  cen 
turies  to  break  through  the  thick  darkness  of  Rome.  God  lit  the 
candle,  and  the  candle  burned,  and  there  was  light  in  an  instant. 
God  works  suddenly.  If  any  one  could  have  stood  in  Wurtem- 
burg,  and  have  said,  "  Can  Popery  be  made  to  quail,  can  the 
Vatican  be  made  to  shake  1"  The  answer  would  have  been  : — 
'l  No  ;  it  will  take  at  least  a  thousand  years  to  do  it.  Popery, 
the  great  serpent,  hath  so  twisted  itself  about  the  nations,  and 
bound  them  so  fast  in  its  coil,  that  they  cannot  be  delivered  ex 
cept  by  a  long  process."  "  Not  so,"  however,  did  God  say.  He 
smote  the  dragon  sorely,  and  the  nations  went  free ;  he  cut  the 
gates  of  brass,  and  broke  in  sunder  the  bars  of  iron,  and  the  peo 
ple  were  delivered  in  an  hour.  Freedom  came  not  in  the  course 
of  years,  but  in  an  instant.  The  people  that  walked  in  darkness 
saw  a  great  light,  and  upon  them  that  dwelt  in  the  land  of  the 
shadow  of  death,  did  the  light  shine.  So  was  it  in  Whitfield's 
day.  The  rebuking  of  a  slumbering  church  was  not  the  work  of 
c,es ;  it  was  done  at  once.  Have  ye  never  heard  of  the  great 
evival  under  Whitfield  ]  Take  as  an  instance  that  at  Camslang. 
He  was  preaching  in  the  churchyard  to  a  great  congregation, 
fchat  could  not  get  into  any  edifice;  and  while  preaching,  the 
power  of  Gci  came  upon  the  people,  and  one  after  another  fell 
down  as  if  they  were  smitten ;  and  at  least  it  was  estimated  that 
not  less  than  threo  thousand  persons  were  crying  out  at  on« 


THE  8TORT  OF  GOD^  MIGHTY  ACTS.  19 

time  under  the  conviction  of  sin.  He  preached  on,  now  thunder 
ing  like  Boanerges,  and  then  comforting  like  Barnabas,  and  tho 
work  spread,  and  no  tongue  can  tell  the  great  things  that  God 
dlJ  under  that  one  sermon  of  Whitfield.  Not  even  the  senron 
of  Peter  on  the  <Day  of  Pentecost  was  equal  to  it. 

So  has  it  been  in  all  revivals ;  God's  work  has  been  done  sud 
denly.  As  with  a  clap  of  thunder  has  God  descended  from  on 
nigh,  not  slowly,  but  on  cherubim  right  royally  doth  he  ride ;  on 
(he  wings  of  the  mighty  wind  does  he  fly.  Sudden  has  been  the 
work  ;  men  could  scarce  believe  it  true,  it  was  done  in  so  short  a 
space  of  time.  Witness  the  great  revival  which  is  going  on  in 
and  around  Belfast.  After  carefully  looking  at  the  matter,  and 
after  seeing  some  trusty  and  well-beloved  brother  who  lived  in 
that  neighborhood,  I  am  convinced,  notwithstanding  what  ene 
mies  may  say,  that  it  is  a  genuine  work  of  grace,  and  that  God  is 
doing  wonders  there.  A  friend,  who  called  to  see  me  yesterday, 
tells  me,  that  the  lowest  and  vilest  men,  the  most  depraved  fe 
males  in  Belfast  have  been  visited  with  this  extraordinary  epi 
lepsy,  as  the  world  calls  it ;  but  with  this  strange  rushing  of  the 
Spirit,  as  we  have  it.  Men  who  have  been  drunkards  hav«  sud 
denly  felt  an  impulse  compelling  them  to  pray.  They  have 
resisted ;  they  have  sought  to  their  cups  in  order  to  put  it  out ; 
but  when  they  have  been  swearing,  seeking  to  quench  the  Spirit 
by  their  blasphemy,  God  has  at  last  brought  them  on  their  knees, 
and  they  have  been  compelled  to  cry  for  mercy  with  piercing 
shrieks,  and  to  agonize  in  prayer ;  and  then,  after  a  time,  the  Evil 
cne  seems  to  have  been  cast  out  of  them,  and  in  a  quiet,  holv, 
happy  frame  of  mind,  they  have  made  a  profession  of  their  faith 
in  Christ,  and  have  walked  in  his  fear  and  love.  Roman  Catho 
lics  have  been  converted.  I  thought  that  an  extraordinary  thing; 
but  they  have  been  converted  very  frequently  indeed  in  Bally- 
mena  and  in  Belfast.  In  fact,  1  am  told  the  priests  are  now  sell 
nig  small  bottles  of  holy  water  for  people  to  take,  in  order  that 
they  may  be  preserved  from  this  desperate  contagion  of  the 
Holy  Spirit.  This  holy  water  is  said  to  have  such  efficacy,  that 
those  who  do  not  attend  any  of  the  meetings  are  not  likely  to  be 
meddled  with  by  the  Holy  Spirit — so  the  priests  tell  them.  But 
if  they  go  to  the  meetings,  even  this  holy  water  cannot  preserve 


20  THE    STORY    OF    GOD's    MIGHTF    ACTS. 

them — they  are  as  liable  to  fall  a  prey  to  the  Divine  influence. 
I  think  they  are  just  as  likely  to  do  so  without  as  with  it.  All 
this  has  been  brought  about  suddenly,  and  although  we  may  ex 
pect  to  find  some  portion  of  natural  excitement,  yet,  I  am  per 
suaded,  it  is  in  the  main  a  real,  spiritual,  and  an  abiding  work. 
There  is  a  little  froth  on  the  surface,  but  there  is  a  deep  running 
current  that  is  not  to  be  resisted,  sweeping  underneath,  and  car- 
rying  every  thing  before  it.  At  least,  there  is  something  to 
waken  our  interest,  when  we  understand  that  in  the  small  town 
of  Ballymena  on  market  day,  the  publicans  have  always  taken 
one  hundred  pounds  for  whiskey,  and  now  they  cannot  take  a 
sovereign  all  day  long  in  all  the  public  houses.  Men  who  were 
once  drunkards  now  meet  for  prayer,  and  people  after  hearing 
one  sermon  will  not  go  until  the  minister  has  preached  another, 
and  sometimes  a  third ;  and  at  last  he  is  obliged  to  say,  "  You 
must  go,  I  am  exhausted."  Then  they  will  break  up  into  groups 
in  their  streets  and  in  their  houses,  crying  out  to  God  to  let  this 
mighty  work  spread,  that  sinners  may  be  converted  unto  him. 
"Well,"  says  one,  "we  cannot  believe  it."  Very  likely  you 
cannot,  but  some  of  us  can,  for  we  have  heard  it  with  our  ears., 
and  our  fathers  have  told  us  the  mighty  works  that  God  did  ir. 
their  days,  and  we  are  prepared  to  believe  that  God  can  do  the 
like  works  now. 

I  must  here  remark  again,  in  all  these  old  stories  there  is  one 
very  plain  feature.  Whenever  God  has  done  a  mighty  work  it 
has  been  by  some  very  insignificant  instrument.  When  he  slew 
Goliath  it  was  by  little  David,  who  was  but  a  ruddy  youth.  Lay 
not  up  the  sword  of  Goliath — I  always  thought  that  a  mistake  of 
David — lay  up  not  Goliath's  sword,  but  lay  up  the  stone  and 
treasure  up  the  sling  in  God's  armory  for  ever.  When  God 
would  slay  Sisera,  it  was  a  woman  that  must  do  it  with  a  ham 
mer  and  a  nail.  God  has  done  his  mightiest  works  by  the  mean 
esi  instruments :  that  is  a  fact  most  true  of  all  God's  works. 
Peter  the  fisherman  at  Pentecost,  Luther  the  humble  monk  at 
the  Reformation,  Whitfield  the  potboy  of  the  Old  Bell  Inn  at 
Gloucester  in  the  time  of  the  last  century's  revival ;  and  so  it. 
must  be  to  the  end.  God  works  not  by  Pharaoh's  horses  or 
Jririot,  but  he  works  by  Moses'  rod ;  he  doth  not  his  wonders 


THE    STORY    OF    GOD'S    MIGHTF    ACTS.  21 

with  the  whirlwind  and  the  storm ;  he  doth  them  by  the  still 
small  voice,  that  the  glory  may  be  his  and  the  honor  all  his  own. 
Doth  not  this  open  a  field  of  encouragement  to  you  and  to  me  ] 
Why  may  not  we  be  employed  in  doing  some  mighty  work  for 
God  here  1  Moreover,  we  have  noticed  in  all  these  stories  of 
God's  mighty  works  in  the  olden  time,  that  wherever  he  has  done 
any  great  thing  it  has  been  by  some  one  who  has  had  very  grea 
faith.  I  do  verily  believe  at  this  moment  that,  if  God  willed  it, 
every  soul  in  this  hall  would  be  converted  now.  If  God  chose  to 
put  out  the  operations  of  his  own  mighty  Spirit,  not  the  mort  ob 
durate  heart  would  be  able  to  stand  against  it.  "  He  will  have 
mercy  upon  whom  he  will  have  mercy."  He  will  do  as  he 
pleases ;  none  can  stay  his  hand.  "  Well,"  says  one,  "  but  I  dc 
not  expect  to  see  any  great  things."  Then,  my  dear  friend,  you 
will  not  be  disappointed,  for  you  will  not  see  them ;  but  those 
that  expect  them  shall  see  them.  Men  of  great  faith  do  great 
things.  It  was  Elijah's  faith  that  slew  the  priests  of  Baal.  If  he 
had  had  the  little  heart  that  some  of  you  have,  Baal's  prie&ts  had 
still  ruled  over  the  people,  and  would  never  have  been  smitten 
with  the  sword.  It  was  Elijah's  faith  that  bade  him  say,  "  If  the 
Lord  be  God,  follow  him ;  but  if  Baal,  then  follow  him."  And 
again,  "  Choose  one  bullock  for  yourselves,  cut  it  in  pieces,  lay  it 
on  wood  and  put  no  fire  under,  call  ye  on  the  name  of  your  gods, 
and  I  will  call  on  the  name  of  Jehovah."  It  was  his  noble  faith 
that  bade  him  say,  "  Take  the  prophets  of  Baal ;  let  not  one  of 
them  escape ;"  and  he  brought  them  down  to  the  brook  Kishon, 
and  slew  them  the-re — a  holocaust  to  God.  The  reason  why 
God's  name  was  so  magnified  was  because  Elijah's  faith  in  God 
was  so  mighty  and  heroic.  When  the  Pope  sent  his  bull  to 
Luther,  Luther  burned  it.  Standing  up  in  the  midst  of  the  crowd, 
vnth  the  blazing  paper  in  his  hand,  he  said,  "See  here,  this  is  tlu 
Pope's  bull."  What  cared  he  for  all  the  Popes  that  were  eve. 
n  or  out  of  hell  ?  And  when  he  went  to  Worms  to  meet  th( 
'rand  Diet,  his  followers  said,  "You  are  in  danger,  stand  back.' 
4 No,"  said  Luther,  "if  there  were  as  many  devils  in  Worms  as 
there  are  tiles  on  the  roofs  of  the  houses,  I  would  not  fear ;  I  will 
go;"  and  into  Worms  he  went,  confident  in  the  Lord  his  God. 
It  was  the  same  with.  Whitfteld ;  he  believed  and  ho  expected 


22  THE  8TORT  OF  GOD'S  MIGHTY  ACTS. 

that  God  wcuid  do  great  tnings.  When  he  went  into  his  pulpit 
he  believed  that  God  would  bless  the  people,  and  God  did  so. 
Little  faith  may  do  little  things,  but  great  faith  shall  be  greatly 
honored.  O  God  !  our  fathers  have  told  us  this,  that  whenever 
they  had  great  faith  thou  hast  always  honored  it  by  doing  mighty 
works. 

I  will  detain  you  no  longer  on  this  point,  except  to  make  one 
observation.  All  the  mighty  works  of  God  have  been  attended 
with  great  prayer,  as  well  as  with  great  faith.  Have  ye  ever 
heard  of  the  commencement  of  the  great  American  revival  ?  A 
man,  unknown  and  obscure,  laid  it  up  in  his  heart  to  pray  that 
God  would  bless  his  country.  After  praying  and  wrestling  and 
making  the  soul-stirring  inquiry,  "  Lord,  what  wilt  thou  have  me 
to  do  ]  Lord,  what  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do  ?  "  he  hired  a  room, 
and  put  up  an  announcement  that  there  would  be  a  prayer-meet 
ing  held  there  at  such-and-such  an  hour  of  the  day.  He  went  at 
the  proper  hour,  and  there  was  not  a  single  person  there ;  he  be 
gan  to  pray,  and  prayed  for  half  an  hour  alone.  One  came  in  at 
the  end  of  the  half  hour,  and  then  two  more,  and  I  think  he  closed 
with  six.  The  next  week  ^iiine  round,  and  there  might  have  been 
fifty  dropped  in  at  different  times.  At  last  the  prayer-meeting 
grew  to  a  hundred  ;  then  others  began  to  start  prayer-meetings ; 
at  last  there  was  scarcely  a  street  in  New  York  that  was  without 
a  prayer-meeting.  Merchants  found  time  to  run  in,  in  the  middle 
of  the  day,  to  pray.  The  prayer-meetings  became  daily  ones, 
lasting  for  about  an  hour;  petitions  and  requests  were  sent  up: 
these  were  simply  asked  and  ottered  before  God,  and  the  answers 
came ;  and  many  were  the  happy  hearts  that  stood  up  and  testi 
fied  that  the  prayer  offered  last  week  had  been  already  fulfilled. 
Then  it  was  when  they  were  all  earnest  in  prayer,  suddenly  the 
Spirit  of  God  fell  upon  the  people,  and  it  was  rumored  that  in 

certain  village  a  preacher  had  been  preaching  in  thorough  ear- 
lest,  and  there  had  been  hundreds  converted  in  a  week.  The 
matter  spread  into  and  through  the  Northern  States.  These  revi 
vals  of  religion  became  universal,  and  it  has  been  spmetimes 
said,  that  a  quarter  of  a  million  of  people  were  converted  to  God 
through  the  short  space  of  two  or  three  months.  Nc  w  the  sarie 
pro'iwaed  in  Ifallyiattta  and  Belfast  by  the  same  itieana 


THE  STORY  OF  GOD'S  MIGHTY  ACTS.  23 

The  brother  thought  that  it  lay  at  his  heart  to  pray,  and  he  did 
pray  ;  then  he  held  a  regular  prayer-meeting;  day  after  day  they 
met  together  to  entreat  the  blessing,  and  the  fire  descended  and 
the  work  was  done.  Sinners  were  converted,  not  by  ones  01 
twos,  but  by  hundreds  and  thousands,  and  the  Lord's  name  wai 
greatly  magnified  by  the  progress  of  his  gospel.  Beloved,  I  am 
only  telling  you  facts.  Make  each  of  you  your  own  estimate  o* 
them  if  you  please. 

11.  Agreeably  to  my  division,  I  have  now  to  make  a  few  ob 
servations    Upon    THE    DISADVANTAGES    UNDER    WHICH     THESE    OLD 

STORIES  FREQUENTLY  LABOR.  When  people  hear  about  what  God 
used  to  do,  one  of  the  things  they  say  is,  "  Oh,  that  was  a  very 
long  while  ago."  They  imagine  that  times  have  altered  since 
then.  Says  one,  "  I  can  believe  any  thing  about  the  Reformation — 
the  largest  accounts  that  can  possibly  be  given  I  can  take  in.'1 
"And  so  could  1  concerning  Whitfield  and  Wesley,"  says  an 
other  ;  "  all  that  is  quite  true ;  they  did  labor  vigorously  and  suc 
cessfully — but  that  was  many  years  ago.  Things  were  in  a 
different  state  then  from  what  they  are  now."  Granted  ;  but  I 
want  to  know  what  the  things  have  to  do  with  it.  1  thought  it 
was  God  that  did  it.  Has  God  changed?  Is  he  not  an  immuta 
ble  God,  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever  1  Does  not 
that  furnish  an  argument  to  prove  that  what  God  has  done  at  one 
time  he  can  do  at  another  ?  Nay,  I  think  I  may  push  it  a  little 
further,  and  say  what  he  has  done  once  is  a  prophecy  of  what  he 
intends  to  do  again — that  the  mighty  works  which  have  been  ac 
complished  in  the  olden  time  shall  all  be  repeated,  and  the  Lordxs 
song  shall  be  sung  again  in  Zion,  and  he  shall  again  be  greatly 
glorified.  Others  among  you  say,  "  Oh,  well,  I  look  upon  these 
things  as  great  prodigies — miracles.  We  are  not  to  expect  them 
every  day."  That  is  the  very  reason  why  we  do  not  get  them. 
f  we  had  learnt  to  expect  them,  we  should  no  doubt  obtain  them 
but  we  put  them  up  on  the  shelf,  as  being  out  of  the  common 
>rder  of  our  moderate  religion,  as  being  mere  curiosities  of  Scrip 
ture  history.  We  imagine  such  things,  however  true,  to  be  pro 
digies  of  providence ;  we  cannot  imagine  them  to  be  according  to 
the  ordinary  working  of  his  mighty  power.  I  beseech  you,  my 
friends,  abjure  that  idear— jiut  it  out  of  your  mind.  Whatevci 


24  THE    STORY    OF    GOD'S    MIGHTY    ACTS. 

God  has  done  in  the  way  of  converting  sinners  is  to  be  looked 
upon  as  a  precedent,  for  "his  arm  is  not  shortened  that  he  cannot 
save,  nor  is  his  ear  heavy  that  he  cannot  hear."  If  we  are 
straitened  at  all,  we  are  not  straitened  in  him,  we  are  straitened 
in  our  own  bowels.  Let  us  take  the  blame  of  it  ourselves, 
and  with  earnestness  seek  that  God  would  restore  to  us  the  faith 
of  the  men  of  old,  that  we  may  richly  enjoy  his  grace  as  in  the 
Jays  of  old.  Yet  there  is  another  disadvantage  under  whicF 
*these  old  stones  labor.  The  fact  is,  we  have  not  seen  them. 
Wh^,  I  may  talk  to  you  ever  so  long  about  revivals,  but  you 
wont  believe  them  half  so  much,  nor  half  so  truly,  as  if  one 
were  to  occur  in  your  very  midst.  If  you  saw  it  with  your  own 
eyes,  then  you  would  see  the  power  of  it.  If  you  had  lived  in 
Whitfield's  day,  or  had  heard  Grimshaw  preach,  you  would  be 
lieve  arj,r  thing.  Grimshaw  would  preach  twenty-four  times  a 
week  ;  lis  would  preach  many  times  in  the  course  of  a  sultry 
day,  gomg  from  place  to  place  on  horseback.  That  man  did 
preach.  It  seemed  as  if  heaven  would  come  down  to  earth  to 
listen  to  him.  He  spoke  with  a  real  earnestness,  with  all  the  fire 
of  zeal  that  ever  burned  in  mortal  breast,  and  the  people  trem 
bled  while  they  listened  to  him,  and  said,  "  Certainly  this  is  the 
voice  of  God."  It  was  the  same  with  Whitfield.  The  people 
would  seem  to  move  to  and  fro  while  he  spoke,  even  as  the  har 
vest  field  is  moved  with  the  wind.  So  mighty  was  the  energy 
of  God  that,  after  hearing  such  a  sermon,  the  hardest-hearted  men 
A-ould  go  away  and  say,  "  There  must  be  something  in  it ;  I  never 
heard  the  like."  Can  you  not  realize  these  as  literal  facts'?  Do 
they  stand  up  in  all  their  brightness  before  your  eyes  ?  Then  I 
think  the  stories  you  have  heard  with  your  ears  should  have  a 
true  and  proper  effect  upon  your  own  lives. 

III.  This  brings  me,  in  the  third  place,  to  the  PROPER  INFER- 

NOES    THAT    ARE    TO    BE    DRAWN    FROM    THE  OLD    STORIES  OF  GOD?g 
1IGHTY  DEEDS. 

I  would  that  I  could  speak  with  the  hre  of  some  of  those  men 
whose  names  I  have  mentioned.  Pray  tor  me,  that  the  Spirit  of 
God  may  rest  upon  me,  that  I  may  plead  with  you  for  a  little 
time  with  all  my  might,  seeking  to  exhort  and  stir  you  up,  that 
you  ma}  get  a  like  revival  ir  vour  midst  My  dear  friends,  the 


THE    STORY     OF    GODS    MIGHTY    ACTS. 

5rst  effect  which  the  reading  of  the  history  of  God's 
works  should  have  upon  us,  is  that  of  gratitude  and  praise 
[lave  we  nothing  to  sing  about  to-day  1 — then  let  us  sing  con 
terning  days  of  yore,  if  we  cannot  sing  to  our  well-beloved  a 
aong  concerning  <w hat  he  is  doing  in  our  midst,  let  us,  neverthe- 
ess,  take  down  our  harps  fr.m  the  willows,  and  sing  an  old  song 
and  bless  and  praise  his  holy  name  for  the  things  which  he  did  to 
his  ancient  church,  for  the  wonders  which  he  wrought  in  Egypt,  and 
in  all  the  lands  wherein  he  led  his  people,  and  brought  them  out 
with  a  high  hand  and  with  an  outstretched  arm.  When  we  have 
thus  begun  to  praise  God  for  what  he  has  done,  I  think  I  may 
venture  to  impress  upon  you  one  other  great  duty.  Let  what 
God  has  done  suggest  to  you  the  prayer  that  he  would  repeat  the 
like  signs  and  wonders  among  us.  Oh  !  men  and  brethren,  what 
would  this  heart  feel  if  I  could  but  believe  that  there  were  some 
among  you  who  would  go  home  and  pray  for  a  revival  of  reli 
gion — men  whose  faith  is  large  enough,  and  their  love  fiery 
enough  to  lead  them  from  this  moment  to  exercise  unceasing  in 
tercessions  that  God  would  appear  among  us  and  do  wondrous 
things  here,  as  in  the  times  of  former  generations.  Why,  look 
you  here  in  this  present  assembly  what  objects  there  are  for  our 
compassion.  Glancing  round,  1  observe  one  and  another  whose 
history  I  may  happen  to  know  ;  but  how  many  are  there  still  un 
converted — men  who  have  trembled  and  who  know  they  have, 
but  have  shaken  off  their  fears,  and  once  more  are  daring  their 
destiny,  determined  to  be  suicides  to  their  own  souls  and  put 
away  from  them  that  grace  which  once  seemed  as  if  it  were 
striving  in  their  hearts'?  They  are  turning  away  from  the  gates 
of  heaven,  and  running  post-haste  to  the  doors  of  hell ;  and  will 
not  you  stretch  out  your  hands  to  God  to  stop  them  in  this  des 
perate  resolve?  If  out  of  this  congregation  there  were  but  one 
unconverted  man,  and  I  could  point  him  out  and  say,  "  There  he 
8its,  one  soul  that  has  never  felt  the  love  of  God,  and  never  has 
been  moved  to  repentance,"  with  what  anxious  curiosity  would 
every  eye  regard  him.  I  think  out  of  the  thousands  of  Christiana 
here  there  is  not  one  who  would  refuse  to  go  home  and  pray  for 
that  solitary  unconverted  individual.  But,  oh  !  my  brethren,  it 


2<>  THE  STORY  OF  GOD'S  MIGHTY  ACTS. 

..>  not  one  that  is  in  danger  of  hell  fire;  here  are  hur.dreds  &r,d 
thousand?  of  our  fellow-creatures. 

o;,ai^  i  give  you  yet  another  reason  why  you  should  pray  j 
Biuieito  all  other  means  have  been  used  without  effect.  Goc 
is  my  witness  how  often  1  have  striven  in  this  pulpit  to  be 
the  means  of  the  conversion  of  men.  I  have  preached  my  very 
heart  out.  I  could  say  no  more  than  I  have  said,  and  I  hope  the 
Becrecy  of  my  chamber  is  a  witness  to  the  fact  that  I  do  not 
cease  to  feel  what  I  cease  to  speak  ;  but  I  have  a  heart  to  pray 
for  those  of  you  who  are  never  affected,  or  who,  if  affected,  still 
quench  the  Spirit  of  God.  My  hearers,  I  have  done  my  utmost. 
Will  not  you  come  to  the  help  of  the  Lord  against  the  mighty  1 
Will  not  your  prayers  accomplish  that  which  my  preaching  fails 
to  do?  Here  they  are;  I  commend  them  to  you.  Men  and 
women  whose  hearts  refuse  to  melt,  whose  stubborn  kneas  will 
not  bend,  I  give  them  up  to  you,  and  ask  you  to  pray  for  them. 
Carry  their  cases  on  your  knees  before  God.  Wife  !  never  cease 
to  pray  for  your  unconverted  husband.  Husband  !  never  stay 
your  supplication  till  you  see  your  wife  converted.  And,  O 
fathers  and  mothers  !  have  you  no  unconverted  children  1  have 
you  not  brought  them  here  many  and  many  a  Sunday,  and  they 
remain  just  as  they  have  been  1  You  have  sent  them  first  to  one 
chapel  and  then  to  another,  and  they  are  just  what  they  were. 
The  wrath  of  God  abideth  on  them.  Die  they  must ;  and  should 
they  die  now,  to  a  certainty  you  are  aware  that  the  flames  of  hell 
must  engulph  them.  And  do  you  refuse  to  pray  for  them  1 
Hard  hearts,  brutish  souls  if,  knowing  Christ  yourself,  ye  will 
not  pray  for  those  who  come  of  your  own  loins — your  children 
according  to  the  flesh. 

Dear  friends,  we  do  not  know  what  God  may  do  for  us  if  w. 
do  but  pray  for  a  blessing.  Look  at  the  movement  we  have 
already  seen.  We  have  witnessed  Exeter  Hall,  St.  Paul's 
Cathedral,  and  Westminster  Abbey  crammed  to  the  doors,  but 
we  have  seen  no  effect  as  yet  of  all  these  mighty  gatherings. 
Have  we  not  tried  to  preach  without  trying  to  pray  1  Is  it  not 
likely  that  the  church  has  been  .putting  forth  its  preaching  hand 
but  not  its  praying  hand?  O  dear  friends!  let  us  agonize  it 
prayer,  and  it  shall  come  to  pass  that  this  Music  Hall  shall  wit 


THE    STOIIY    OF    GOD'S    MIGHTY    ACTS.  27 

ness  the  sighs  and  groans  of  the  penitent  and  the  songs  of  the 
converted.  It  shall  yet  happen  that  this  vast  host  shall  not  corae 
and  go,  as  now  it  does,  but  little  the  better ;  but  men  shall  go 
out  of  this  hall,  praising  God  and  saying  : — "  It  was  good  to  be 
there ;  it  was  none  other  than  the  house  of  God,  and  the  very 
gate  of  heaven.  Thus  much  to  stir  you  up  to  prayer. 

Another  inference  we  should  draw  is,  that  all  the  stories  we 
Aave  heard  should  correct  any  self-dependence  which  may  have' 
crept  into  our  treacherous  hearts.  Perhaps  we  as  a  congregation 
have  begun  to  depend  upon  our  numbers,  and  so  forth.  We  may 
have  thought,  "  Surely  God  must  bless  us  through  the  ministry." 
Now  let  the  stories  which  our  fathers  have  told  us  remind  }ou, 
and  remind  me,  that  God  saved  not  by  many  nor  by  few  ;  that 
it  is  not  in  us  to  do  this,  but  God  must  do  it  all ;  it  may  be  that 
some  hidden  preacher,  whose  name  has  never  been  known,  some 
obscure  denizen  of  St.  Giles  will  yet  start  up  in  this  city  of 
London,  and  preach  the  Word  with  greater  power  than  bishops 
or  ministers  have  ever  known  before.  1  will  welcome  him  ;  God 
bti  with  him  ;  let  him  come  from  where  he  may  ;  only  let  God 
speed  him,  and  let  the  work  be  done.  Mayhap,  however,  God 
intends  to  bless  the  agency  used  in  this  place  for  your  good  and 
for  your  conversion.  If  so,  I  am  thrice  happy  to  think  such 
should  be  the  case.  But  place  no  dependence  upon  the  instru 
ment.  No ;  when  men  laughed  at  us  and  mocked  us  most,  God 
blessed  us  most;  and  now  it  is  not  a  disreputable  thing  to  attend 
the  Music  Hall.  We  are  not  so  much  despised  as  we  once  were ; 
but  I  question  whether  we  have  so  great  a  blessing  as  once  we 
had.  We  would  be  willing  to  endure  another  pelting  in  the  pil 
lory,  to  go  through  another  ordeal  with  every  newspaper  against 
us,  and  with  every  man  hissing  and  abusing  us.  if  God  so  pleases, 
if  he  will  but  give  us  a  blessing.  Only  let  him  cast  out  of  us 
any  idea  that  our  own  bow  and  our  own  sword  will  get  us  the 
victory.  We  shall  never  get  a  revival  here  unless  we  believe 
that  it  is  the  Lord,  and  the  Lord  alone,  that  can  do  it. 

Having  made  this  statement,  I  will  endeavor  to  stir  you  up 
with  confidence  that  the  result  may  be  obtained  that  I  have 
pictured,  and  that  the  stories  we  have  heard  of  the  olden  tune 
may  become  true  in  our  day.  Why  should  not  every  one  of 


28  THE  PTORT  OF  GOD's  MIGHTY  ACTS. 

my  hearers  be  converted  ?  Is  there  any  limitation  in  the  Spiri 
of  God  1  Why  should  not  the  feeblest  minister  become  th* 
means  of  salvation  to  thousands'?  Is  God's  arm  shortened  1 
My  brethren,  when  I  bid  you  pray  that  God  would  make  the 
ministry  quick  and  powerful,  like  a  two-edged  sword,  for  th 
salvation  of  sinners,  I  am  not  setting  you  a  hard,  much  less  aa 
impossible  task.  We  have  but  to  ask  and  to  get.  Before  w 
call,  God  will  answer ;  and  while  we  are  yet  speaking  he  wil 
hear.  God  alone  can  know  what  may  come  of  this  morning's 
sermon  if  he  chooses  to  bless  it.  From  this  moment  you  may 
pray  more ;  from  this  moment  God  may  bless  the  ministry  more. 
From  this  hour  other  pulpits  may  become  more  full  of  life  and 
vigor  than  before.  From  this  same  moment  the  Word  of  God 
may  flow,  and  run,  and  rush,  and  get  to  itself  an  amazing  and 
boundless  victory.  Only  wrestle  in  prayer,  meet  together  in 
your  houses,  go  to  your  closets,  be  instant,  be  earnest  in  season 
and  out  of  season,  agonize  for  souls,  and  all  that  you  have  heard 
shall  be  forgotten  in  what  ye  shall  see ;  and  all  that  others  have 
told  you  shall  be  as  nothing  compared  with  what  ye  shall  hear 
with  your  ears,  and  behold  with  your  eyes  in  your  own  midst. 
Oh  ye,  to  whom  all  this  is  as  an  idle  tale,  who  love  not  God, 
neither  serve  him,  I  beseech  you  to  stop  and  think  for  a  moment. 
Oh,  Spirit  of  God,  rest  on  thy  servant  while  a  few  sentences  are 
uttered,  and  make  them  mighty.  God  has  striven  with  some  of 
you.  You  have  had  your  times  of  conviction.  You  are  trying 
now,  perhaps,  to  be  infidels.  You  are  trying  to  say  now 
"  There  is  no  hell — there  is  no  hereafter."  It  will  not  do.  You 
know  there  is  a  hell,  and  all  the  laughter  of  those  who  seek  to 
ruin  your  souls  cannot  make  you  believe  that  there  is  not. 
You  sometimes  try  to  think  so,  but  you  know  that  God  is  true. 
i  do  not  argue  with  you  now.  Conscience  tells  you  that  God 
will  punish  you  for  sin.  Depend  upon  it  you  will  find  no  happi 
ness  in  trying  to  stifle  God's  Spirit.  This  is  not  the  path  to 
bl  ss,  to  quench  those  thoughts  which  would  lead  you  to  Christ. 
I  beseech  you,  take  off  your  hands  from  God's  arm  ;  resist  not 
still  his  Spirit.  Bow  the  knee  and  lay  hold  of  Christ,  and  believe 
on  him.  It  will  come  to  this  yet.  God  the  Holy  Spirit  will  have 
you.  I  do  trust  that  in  answer  to  many  prayers  he  intends  to  save 


THE    STORY    OF    GOD^S    MIGHTY    ACTS.  *29 

you  yet.  Give  way  now ;  but  oh,  remember  if  you  are  successful 
in  quenching  the  Spirit,  your  success  will  be  the  most  awful  disaster 
than  can  ever  occur  to  you ;  for  if  the  Spirit  forsake  you,  you  are 
lost.  It  may  be  that  this  is  the  last  warning  you  will  ever  have, 
The  conviction  y£u  are  now  trying  to  put  down  and  stifle  may  b 
the  last  you  will  ever  have,  and  the  angel  standing  with  the 
black  seal  and  the  wax  may  be  now  about  to  drop  it  upon  youj 
destiny,  and  say,  "  Let  him  alone.  He  chooses  drunkenness- 
he  chooses  lust — let  him  have  them  ;  and  let  him  reap  the  wage, 
in  the  everlasting  fires  of  hell."  Sinners,  believe  on  the  Lord 
Jesus  :  repent,  and  be  converted  every  one  of  you.  I  am  bold 
to  say  what  Peter  did.  Breaking  through  every  bond  of  every 
kind  that  could  bind  my  lip,  I  exhort  you,  in  God's  name, 
repent  and  escape  from  damnation.  A  few  more  months  and 
years,  and  ye  shall  know  what  damnation  means,  except  ye 
repent.  Oh  !  fly  to  Christ  while  yet  the  lamp  holds  out  and 
burns,  and  mercy  is  still  preached  to  you.  Grace  is  still  pre 
sented  ;  accept  Christ,  resist  him  no  longer ;  come  to  him  now. 
The  gates  of  mercy  are  wide  open  to-day ;  come  now,  poor 
sinner,  and  have  thy  sins  forgiven. 

When  the  old  Romans  used  to  attack  a  city,  it  was  sometimes 
their  custom  to  set  up  at  the  gate  a  white  flag,  and  if  the  garrison 
surrendered  while  that  white  flag  was  there,  their  lives  were 
spared.  After  that  the  black  flag  was  put  up,  and  then  every 
man  was  put  to  the  sword.  The  white  flag  is  up  to-day  ;  perhaps 
to-rnorrow  the  black  flag  will  be  elevated  upon  the  pole  of  the 
law ;  and  then  there  is  no  repentance  or  salvation  either  in  this 
world  or  in  that  which  is  to  come. 

An  old  eastern  conqueror  when  he  came  to  a  city  used  to  light 
a  brazier  of  coals,  and,  setting  it  high  upon  a  pole,  he  would, 
*vith  sound  of  trumpet,  proclaim,  that  if  they  surrendered  while 
the  lamp  held  out  and  burned  he  would  have  mercy  upon  them, 
3iit  that  when  the  coals  were  out  he  would  storm  the  city,  pull 
t  stone  from  stone,  sow  it  with  salt,  and  put  men,  and  women 
and  children  to  a  bloody  death.  To-day  the  thunders  of  God  bid 
you  to  take  the  like  warning.  There  is  your  light,  the  lamp,  the 
brazier  of  "hot  coals.  Year  after  year  the  fire  is  dying  out, 
nevertheless  there  is  coal  left.  Even  now  the  wind  of  death  ii 


g()  THE    STORY    OF    OOD'S    MIGHTY     ACTS. 

trying  to  blow  out  the  last  live  coal.  Oh  !  sinner,  turn  while 
the  lamp  continues  to  blaze.  Turn  now,  for  when  the  last  coal 
is  dead  thy  repentance  cannot  avail  thee.  Thy  everlasting  yell- 
ing  in  torment  cannot  move  the  heart  of  God ;  thy  groans  and 
briny  tears  cannot  move  him  to  pity  thee.  To-day  if  ye  will 
hear'  his  voice,  harden  not  your  hearts  as  in  the  provocation. 
Oh,  to-day  lay  hold  on  Christ,  "  Kiss  the  Son,  lest  he  be  angry 
and  ye  perish  from  the  way,  when  his  wrath  is  kindled  but  i 
little.  Blessed  are  all  they  that  put  their  trust  in  him." 


SERMON   II. 

THE  OUTPOURING  OF  THE  HOLY  SPiW'l 

"  Wliile  Peti-r  yet  spake  these  words,  the  Holy  Ghost  fell  on  all  tneoi 
which  hoard  the  Word." — Acrs,  x.  44. 

THE  Bible  is  a  book  of  the  Revelation  of  God.  The  God  after 
whom  the  heathen  blindly  searched,  and  for  whom  reason  gropes 
in  darkness,  is  here  plainly  revealed  to  us  in  the  pages  of  divine 
authorship,  so  that  he  who  is  willing  to  understand  as  much  of 
Godhead  as  man  can  know,  may  here  learn  it  if  he  be  not  will 
ingly  ignorant  and  wilfully  obstinate.  The  doctrine  of  the  Trinity 
is  specially  taught  in  Holy  Scripture.  The  word  certainly  does 
not  occur,  but  the  three  divine  persons  of  the  One  God  are 
frequently  and  constantly  mentioned,  and  Holy  Scripture  is 
exceedingly  careful  that  we  should  all  receive  and  believe  that 
great  truth  of  the  Christian  religion,  that  the  Father  is  God,  that 
the  Son  is  God,  that  the  Spirit  is  God,  and  yet  there  are  not  three 
Gods  but  one  God :  though  they  be  each  of  them  very  God  of 
/ery  God,  yet  three  in  one  and  one  in  three  is  the  Jehovah  whom 
»ve  worship.  You  will  notice  in  the  works  of  Creation  how  care- 
cully  the  Scriptures  assure  us  that  all  the  three  divine  persons 
took  their  share.  "  in  the  beginning  Jehovah  created  the  heavens 
and  the  earth ;"  and  in  another  place  we  are  told  that  God  said 
**  Let  us  make  man" — not  one  person,  but  all  three  taking  coun 
sel  with  each  other  with  regard  to  the  making  of  mankind.  We 
know  that  the  Father  hath  laid  the  foundations  and  fixed  those 
solid  beams  of  light  on  which  the  blue  arches  of  the  sky  are  sus 
tained  ;  but  we  know  with  equal  certainty  that  Jesus  Christ,  the 
eternal  Logos,  was  with  the  Father  in  the  beginning,  and  "  with 
out  him  was  not  any  thing  made  that  was  made :"  moreover  WH 


THE    OUTPOURING    OF    THE    HOLY    SPIRIT. 

have  equal  certainty  that  the  Holy  Spirit  had  a  hand  in  Creation, 
for  we  are  told  that  u  the  earth  was  without  form  and  void,  and 
darkness  was  upon  the  face  of  the  earth ;  and  the  Spirit  of  the 
Lord  moved  upon  the  face  of  the  waters ;"  and  brooding  with  his 
dove-like  wing,  he  brought  out  of  the  egg  of  chaos  this  mighty 
thing,  the  fair  round  world.  We  have  the  like  proof  of  the  three 
persons  in  the  Godhead  in  the  matter  of  Salvation.  We  know 
that  God  the  Father  gave  his  Son;  we  have  abundant  proof  that 
God  the  Father  chose  his  people  from  before  the  foundations  of 
the  v  ;rM.  that  he  did  invent  the  plan  of  salvation,  and  hath 
always  given  his  free,  willing,  and  joyous  consent  to  the  salvation 
of  his  people.  Writh  regard  to  the  share  that  the  Son  had  in  salva 
tion,  that  is  apparent  enough  to  all.  For  us  men  and  for  our 
salvation  he  came  down  from  heaven ;  he  was  incarnate  in  a  mor 
tal  body ;  he  was  crucified,  dead,  and  buried ;  he  descended  into 
hades ;  the  third  day  he  rose  again  from  the  dead ;  he  ascended 
into  heaven ;  he  sitteth  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  where  also  he 
maketh  intercession  for  us.  As  to  the  Holy  Spirit,  we  have 
equally  sure  proof  that  the  Spirit  of  God  worketh  in  conversion  ; 
for  svery where  we  are  said  to  be  begotten  of  the  Holy  Spirit; 
continually  it  is  declared,  that  unless  a  man  be  born  again  from 
above,  he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God ;  while  all  the  virtues 
and  the  graces  of  Christianity  are  described  as  being  the  fruits  of 
the  Spirit,  because  the  Holy  Spirit  doth  from  first  to  last  work 
in  us  and  carry  out  that  which  Jesus  Christ  hath  beforehand 
worked  for  us  in  his  great  redemption,  which  al  so  God  the  Father 
hath  designed  for  us  in  his  great  predestinating  scheme  of  salva 
tion. 

Now,  it  is  to  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spir  t  that  I  shall  this 
morning  specially  direct  your  attention;  and  I  may  as.well  men 
tion  the  reason  why  I  do  so.  It  is  this.  W<.  have  received  con- 
inually  fresh  confirmations  of  the  good  news  from  a  for  country, 
which  had  already  made  glad  the  hearts  of  m  my  of  God's  people. 
In  the  United  States  of  America  there  is  certainly  a  great  awaken 
vng.  No  sane  man  living  there  could  think  of  denying  it.  There 
may  be  something  of  spurious  excitement  mixed  up  with  it,  but 
that  good,  lasting  good,  has  been  accomplished,  no  rational  man 
«an  deny.  Two  hundred  and  fifty  thousand  persons — that  is,  a 


THE    OUTPOURING    OF    THE    HOLT    SPIRIT.  43 

quarter  of  a  million — profess  to  have  been  regenerated  since  De 
cember  last,  have  made  a  profession  of  their  faith,  and  have  united 
themselves  with  different  sections  of  God's  church.  The  work 
still  progresses,  if  any  thing,  at  a  more  rapid  rate  than  before,  and 
that  which  makes  me  believe  the  work  to  be  genuine  is  just  this 
— that  the  enemies  of  Christ's  holy  gospel  are  exceedingly  wroth 
at  it.  When  the  devil  roars  at  any  thing,  you  may  rest  assured 
there  is  some  good  in  it.  The  devil  is  not  like  some  dogs  we 
know  of;  he  never  barks  unless  there  is  something  to  bark  at 
When  Satan  howls,  we  may  rest  assured  he  is  afraid  his  kingdom 
is  in  danger.  Now  this  great  work  in  America  has  been  mani 
festly  caused  by  the  outpouring  of  the  Spirit,  for  no  one  minister 
has  been  a  leader  in  it.  All  the  ministers  of  the  gospel  have  co 
operated  in  it,  but  none  of  them  have  stood  in  the  van.  God 
himself  has  been  the  leader  of  his  own  hosts.  It  began  with  a 
desire  for  prayer.  God's  people  began  to  pray  :  the  prayer- 
meetings  were  better  attended  than  before  ;  it  was  then  proposed 
to  hold  meetings  at  times  that  have  never  been  set  apart  for 
prayer ;  these  also  were  well  attended  ;  and  now,  in  the  city  of 
Philadelphia,  at  the  hour  of  noon,  every  day  in  the  week,  three 
thousand  persons  can  always  be  seen  assembled  together  for 
prayer  in  one  place.  Men  of  business,  in  the  midst  of  their  toil 
and  labor,  find  an  opportunity  of  running  in  there  and  offering  a 
word  of  prayer,  arid  then  return  to  their  occupations.  And  so, 
throughout  all  the  States,  prayer-meetings,  larger  or  smaller  in 
number,  have  been  convened.  And  there  has  been  real  prayer. 
Sinners,  beyond  all  count,  have  risen  up  in  the  prayer-meeting, 
and  have  requested  the  people  of  God  to  pray  for  them  ;  thus 
making  public  to  the  world  that  they  had  a  desire  after  Christ : 
they  have  been  prayed  for,  and  the  church  has  seen  that  God 
verily  doth  hear  and  answer  prayer.  I  find  that  the  Unitarian 
ministers  for  a  little  while  took  no  notice  of  it.  Theodore  Parker 
snarls  and  raves  tremendously  at  it,  but  he  is  evidently  in  ? 
maze ;  he  does  not  understand  the  mystery,  and  acts  with  regard 
to  it  as  swine  are  said  to  do  with  pearls.  While  the  church  was 
found  asleep,  and  doing  very  little,  the  Socinian  could  afford  to 
stand  in  his  pulpit  and  sneer  at  any  thing  like  evangelical  religion ; 
but  .now  that  there  has.  been  an  awakening,,  he  looks  like  a  .map 

a* 


84  THE    OUTPOURING    OF    THE    HOLY     SPIRIT. 

that  has  just  awakened  out  of  bleep.  lie  sees  something;  he 
does  not  know  what  it  is.  The  power  of  religion  is  just  that 
which  will  always  puzzle  the  Unitarian,  for  he  knows  but  little 
about  that.  At  the  form  of  religion  he  is  not  much  amazed,  for 
he  can  to  an  extent  endorse  that  himself;  but  thesupernaturalism 
of  the  gospel — the  mystery — the  miracle — the  power — the  de 
monstration  of  the  Spirit  that  comes  with  the  preaching,  is  wha 
such  men  cannot  comprehend,  and  they  gaze  and  wonder,  an* 
then  become  filled  with  wrath  ;  but  still  they  have  to  confess 
there  is  something  there  they  cannot  understand,  a  mental  pheno 
menon  that  is  far  beyond  their  philosophy — a  thing  which  they 
cannot  reach  by  all  their  science,  nor  understand  by  all  their 
reason. 

Now,  if  we  have  the  like  effect  produced  in  this  land,  the  one 
thing  we  must  seek  is  the  outpouring  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  I 
thought,  perhaps,  this  morning  in  preaching  upon  the  work  of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  that  next  might  be  fulfilled — "  Him  that  honoreth 
me  I  will  honor."  My  sincere  desire  is  to  honor  the  Holy  Spirit 
this  morning,  and  if  he  will  be  pleased  to  honor  his  church  in 
return,  unto  him  shall  be  the  glory  for  ever. 

"  While  Peter  yet  spake  these  words,  the  Holy  Ghost  fell  on 
all  them  which  heard  the  Word." 

In  the  first  place,  I  shall  endeavor  to  describe  the  method  of  the 
Spirit's  operation ;  secondly,  the  absolute  necessity  of  the  Holy 
Spirit's  influence,  if  we  could  see  men  converted ;  and  then,  in 
the  third  place,  I  shall  suggest  the  ways  and  means  by  which, 
under  divine  grace,  we  may  obtain  a  like  falling  down  of  the 
Spirit  upon  our  churches. 

I.  In  the  first  place,  then,  I  will  endeavor  to  explain  THE  METHOD 
OF  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT'S  OPERATIONS.  But  let  me  guard  myself 
igainst  being  misunderstood.  We  can  explain  what  the  Spirit 
Iocs,  but  how  he  does  it  no  man  must  pretend  to  know.  The 
work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  the  peculiar  mystery  of  the  Chi  istiau 
•eligion.  Almost  any  other  thing  is  plain,  but  this  must  remain 
in  inscrutable  secret  into  which  it  were  wrong  for  us  to  attempt 
to  pry.  Who  knoweth  where  the  winds  are  begotten  ?  Who 
knoweth,  therefore,  how  the  Spirit  worketh,  for  he  is  like  the 
wind  2  "  The  wind  blo'^-eth  where  it  listeth,  and  then  hearest 


THE    OUTPOURING    OF    TH  •:    HOLY    SPIRIT.  35 

the  sound  thereof,  but  canst  not  tell  whence  it  cometh,  and 
whither  it  goeth  :  so  is  every  one  that  is  born  of  the  Spirit."  In 
Holy  Scripture  certain  great  secrets  of  nature  are  mentioned  aa 
being  parallel  withjthe  secret  working  of  the  Spirit.  The  pro 
creation  of  children  is  instanced  as  a  parallel  wonder,  for  we  know 
net  the  mystery  thereof;  how  much  less,  therefore,  shall  we 
expect  to  know  that  more  secret  and  hidden  mystery  of  the  nev 
birth  and  new  creation  of  man  in  Christ  Jesus.  But  let  no  mai 
be  staggered  at  this,  for  they  are  mysteries  in  nature :  the  wisest 
man  will  tell  you  there  are  depths  in  nature  into  which  he  cannot 
dive,  and  heights  into  which  he  cannot  soar.  He  who  pretends 
to  have  unravelled  the  knot  of  creation  hath  made  a  mistake ;  he 
may  have  cut  the  knot  by  his  rough  ignorance,  and  by  his 
foolish  conjectures,  but  the  knot  itself  must  remain  beyond  the 
power  of  man's  unravelling,  until  God  himself  shall  explain  the 
secret.  There  are  marvellous  things,  that,  as  yet,  men  have 
sought  to  know  in  vain.  They  may,  perhaps,  discover  many  of 
them,  but  how  the  Spirit  works  no  man  can  know.  But  now  1 
wish  to  explain  what  the  Holy  Spirit  does,  although  we  cannot: 
tell  how  he  does  it.  I  take  it  that  the  Holy  Spirit's  work  in 
conversion  is  two-fold.  First,  it  is  an  awakening  of  the  powers 
that  man  already  has,  and  secondly,  it  is  an  implantation  of 
powers  which  he  never  had  at  all. 

In  the  great  work  of  the  new  birth,  the  Holy  Spirit  first  of  all 
awakens  the  mental  powers  ;  for  be  it  remembered,  that  the  Holy 
Spirit  never  gives  any  man  new  menial  powers.  Take,  for 
instance,  reason — the  Holy  Spirit  does  not  give  men  reason,  for 
they  have  reason  prior  to  their  conversion.  What  the  Holy 
Spirit  does  is  to  teach  our  reason  right  reason — to  set  our  reason 
in  the  right  track,  so  that  we  can  use  it  for  the  high  purpose  of 
discerning  between  good  and  evil ;  between  the  precious  and 
vile.  The  Holy  Spirit  does  not  give  man  a  will,  for  man  has  a 
will  before ;  but  he  makes  the  will  that  was  in  bondage  to  Satan 
free  to  the  service  of  God.  The  Holy  Spirit  gives  no  man  the 
puwer  to  think,  or  the  organ  of  belief — for  man  has  power  to 
believe  or  think  as  far  as  the  mental  act  is  concerned ;  but  he 
gives  that  belief  which  is  already  there  a  tendency  to  believe  the 
right  "tiling,  and  he  give*  to  the  pcwei  of  thought  the  propoositf 


THE    OUTPOURING    OF    THE    HOLT    SPIRIT. 

to  think  in  the  right  way  ;  so  that  instead  of  thinking  irregularly, 
we  begin  to  think  as  God  would  have  us  think,  and  our  mind 
desireth  to  walk  in  the  steps  of  God's  revealed  truth.  There 
may  be  here,  this  morning,  a  man  of  enlarged  understanding  in 
things  political — but  his  understanding  is  darkened  with  regard 
to  spiritual  things  ;  he  sees  no  beauty  in  the  person  of  Christ — 
ht  sees  nothing  desirable  in  the  way  of  holiness — he  chooses  th*- 
evil  and  forsakes  the  good.  Now  the  Holy  Spirit  will  not  give 
him  a  new  understanding,  but  he  will  cleanse  his  old  understand 
ing  so  that  he  will  discern  between  things  that  differ,  and  shall 
discover  that  it  is  but  a  poor  thing  to  enjoy  "  the  pleasures  of 
sin  for  a  season,"  and  let  go  an  "  eternal  weight  of  glory."  There 
shall  be  a  man  here,  too,  who  is  desperately  set  against  religion, 
and  willeth  not  to  come  to  God,  and,  do  what  we  will,  we  are  not 
able  to  persuade  him  to  change  his  mind  and  turn  to  God.  The 
Holy  Spirit  will  not  make  a  new  will  in  that  man,  but  he  will 
turn  his  old  will,  and  instead  of  willing  to  do  evil  he  will  make 
him  will  to  do  right — he  will  make  him  will  to  be  saved  by 
Christ — he  will  make  him  "  willing  in  the  day  of  his  power." 
Remember,  there  is  no  power  in  man  so  fallen  but  that  the  Holy 
Spirit  can  raise  it  up.  However  debased  a  man  may  be,  in  one 
instant,  by  the  miraculous  power  of  the  Spirit,  all  his  faculties 
may  be  cleansed  and  purged.  Ill-judging  reason  may  be  made 
to  judge  rightly ;  stout,  obstinate  wills  may  be  made  to  run 
willingly  in  the  ways  of  God's  commandments  ;  evil  and  depraved 
affections  may  in  an  instant  be  turned  to  Christ,  and  old  desires, 
that  are  tainted  with  vice,  may  be  replaced  by  heavenly  aspira 
tions.  The  work  of  the  Spirit  on  the  mind  is  the  re-modelling  of 
it — the  new  forming  of  it.  He  doth  not  bring  new  materials  to 
the  mind — it  is  in  another  part  of  the  man  that  he  puts  up  a  new 
structure — but  he  puts  the  mind  that  had  fallen  out  of  order  into 
its  proper  shape.  He  builds  up  pillars  that  had  fallen  down,  and 
erects  the  palaces  that  had  crumbled  to  the  earth.  This  is  tlu 
first  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  upon  the  mind  of  man. 

Besides  this,  the  Holy  Spirit  gives  to  men  powers  which  they 
never  had  before.  According  to  Scripture,  I  believe  man  is 
constituted  in  a  three-fold  manner.  He  has  a  body  ;  by  the 
Holy  Spirit  that  body  is  made  the  temple  cf  the  Lord.  He-  haa 


THE    OUTPOURING    OF    THE    HOLT    SPIRIT.  3*1 

a  mind;  by  the  Holy  Spirit  that  mind  is  made  like  an  altar  in 
the  temple.  But  man  by  nature  is  nothing  higher  than  that ;  he 
is  mere  body  and  soul.  When  the  Spirit  comes,  he  breathes 
into  him  a  third  higher  principle,  which  we  call  the  Spirit.  The 
Apostle  describes  *man  as  man,  "  body,  soul  and  spirit."  Now 
if  you  search  all  the  mental  writers  through,  you  will  find  they 
11  declare  there  are  only  two  parts — body  and  mind ;  and  they 
re  quite  right,  for  they  deal  with  unregenerate  man;  but  hi 
egenerate  man  there  is  a  third  principle  as  much  superior  to 
mere  mind  as  mind  is  superior  to  dead  animal  matter — that  third 
principle  is  that  with  which  a  man  prays ;  it  is  that  with  which 
he  savingly  believes ;  or  rather  it  is  that  which  compels  the  mind 
to  perform  their  acts.  It  is  that  which,  operating  upon  the  mind, 
makes  the  same  use  of  the  mind  as  the  mind  does  of  the  body. 
When,  after  desiring  to  walk,  I  make  my  legs  move,  it  is  my 
mind  that  compels  them  ;  and  so  my  Spirit,  when  I  desire  tc 
pray,  compels  my  mind  to  think  the  thought  of  prayer,  and 
compels  my  soul  also,  if  I  desire  to  praise,  to  think  the  thought 
of  praise,  and  lift  itself  upward  towards  God.  As  the  body 
without  the  soul  is  dead,  so  the  soul  without  the  Spirit  is  dead, 
and  one  work  of  the  Spirit  is  to  quicken  the  dead  soul  by  breath 
ing  into  it  the  living  Spirit;  as  it  is  written,  "The  first  man, 
Adam,  was  made  a  living  sow/,  but  the  second  Adam  was  made  a 
quickening  Spirit" — and,  "  as  we  have  borne  the  image  of  the 
earthy,  so  must  we  bear  the  image  of  the  heavenly ;"  that  is, 
we  must  have  in  us,  if  we  would  be  converted,  the  quickening 
Spirit,  which  is  put  into  us  by  God  the  Holy  Ghost.  I  say 
again,  the  spirit  has  powers  which  the  mind  never  has.  It  has 
the  power  of  communion  with  Christ,  which,  to  a  degree,  is  a 
mental  act ;  but  it  can  no  more  be  performed  by  man  without 
the  Spirit,  than  the  act  of  walking  could  be  performed  by  man 
if  he  were  destitute  of  a  soul  to  suggest  the  idea  of  walking. 
The  Spirit  suggests  the  thoughts  of  communion,  which  the  mind 
obeys  and  carries  out.  Nay,  there  are  times,  I  think,  when  tms 
Spirit  leaves  the  mind  altogether ;  times  when  we  forget  every 
thing  of  earth,  and  one  almost  ceases  to  think,  to  reason,  to 
judge,  to  weigh,  or  to  will.  Our  souls  are  like  the  chariots  of 
Arnminadib,  drawn  swiftly  onwards  without  any  powers  of 


33  THE    OUTPOURING    OF    THE    HOLY    SPIRIT. 

volition.  Wo  taan  upon  the  breast  of  Jesus,  and  in  rhapsod  v 
divine,  and  in  ecstasy  celestial,  we  enjoy  the  fruits  of  the  land  of 
the  blessed,  and  pluck  the  clusters  of  Eschol  before  entering  into 
the  land  of  promise. 

I  think  I  have  clearly  put  these  two  points  before  you.  The- 
work  of  the  Spirit  consists,  first,  in  awakening  powers  already 
possessed  by  man,  but  which  were  asleep  and  out  of  order ;  and 
in  the  next  place,  in  putting  into  man  powers  which  he  had  no* 
before.  And  to  make  this  simple  to  the  humblest  mind,  let  me 
suppose  man  to  be  something  like  a  machine;  all  the  wheels  are 
out  of  order,  the  cogs  do  not  strike  upon  each  other,  the  wheels 
do  not  turn  regularly,  the  rods  will  not  act,  the  order  is  gone. 
Now,  the  first  work  of  the  Spirit  is  to  put  these  wheels  in  the 
right  place,  to  fit  the  wheels  upon  the  axles,  to  put  the  right  axle 
to  the  right  wheel,  then  to  put  wheel  to  wheel,  so  that  they  may 
act  upon  each  other.  But  that  is  not  all  his  work.  The  next 
thing  is  to  put  fire  and  steam  so  that  these  things  shall  go  to 
work.  He  does  not  put  fresh  wheels,  he  puts  old  wheels  into 
order,  and  then  he  puts  the  motive  power  which  is  to  move  the 
whole.  First  he  puts  our  mental  powers  into  their  proper  order 
and  condition,  and  then  he  puts  a  living,  quickening  Spirit,  so 
that  all  these  shall  move  according  to  the  holy  will  and  law  of 
God. 

But,  mark  you,  this  is  not  all  the  Holy  Spirit  does.  For  if 
he  were  to  do  this,  and  then  leave  us,  none  of  us  would  get  to 
heaven.  If  any  of  you  should  be  so  near  to  heaven  that  you 
could  hear  the  angels  singing  over  the  walls — if  you  could 
almost  see  within  the  pearly  gates — still,  if  the  Holy  Spirit  did 
not  help  you  the  last  step,  you  would  never  enter  there.  All 
the  work  is  through  his  divine  operation.  Hence  it  is  the  Spirit 
who  keeps  the  wheels  in  motion,  and  who  takes  away  that  defile 
ment  which,  naturally  engendered  by  our  original  sin,  falls  upoi 
ihe  machine  and  puts  it  out  of  order.  He  takes  this  away,  and 
keeps  tho  machine  constantly  going  without  injury,  until  at  last 
he  removes  man  from  the  place  of  defilement  to  the  land  of  the 
blessed,  a  perfect  creature,  as  perfect  as  he  was  when  he  came 
from  the  mould  of  his  Maker. 

And  I  must  say,  before  I  leave  this  point,  that  all  the  former 


THE    OUTPOURING    OF    THE    HOLY    SPIRIT.  39 

part  of  what  I  have  mentioned  is  done  instantaneously.  When 
a  man  is  converted  to  God,  it  is  done  in  a  moment.  Regenera 
tbn  is  an  instantaneous  work.  Conversion  to  God.  the  fruit  of 
regeneration,  occupies  all  our  life,  but  regeneration  itself  is  effected 
in  an  instant.  A  man  hates  God  ;  the  Holy  Spirit  makes  him 
love  God.  A  man  is  opposed  to  Christ,  he  hates  his  Gospel,  does 
not  understand  it.  and  will  not  receive  it  ;  the  Holy  Spirit  comes 
puts  light  into  his  darkened  understanding,  takes  the  chain  from 
his  bondaged  will,  gives  liberty  to  his  conscience,  gives  life  to  his 
dead  soul,  so  that  the  voice  of  conscience  is  heard,  and  the  man 
becomes  a  new  creature  in  Christ  Jesus.  And  all  this  is  done, 
mark  you.  by  the  instantaneous  supernatural  influence  of  God  the 
Holy  Ghost  working  as  he  willeth  among  the  sons  of  men. 

II.  Having  thus  dwelt  upon  the  method  of  the  Holy  Spirit's 
work,  I  shall  now  turn  to  the  second  point,  THE  ABSOLUTE  NECES 

SITY  OF  THE  SPIRIT'S  WORK  IN  ORDER  TO  CONVERSION.       Ill  OUF  text 

we  are  told  that  "  while  Peter  spake  these  words,  the  Holy  Ghost 
fell  on  all  them  which  heard  the  Word."  Beloved,  the  Holy 
Ghost  fell  on  Peter  first,  or  else  it  would  not  have  fallen  on  his 
hearers.  There  is  a  necessity  that  the  preacher  himself,  if  we 
are  to  have  souls  saved,  should  be  under  the  influence  of  the 
Spirit.  I  have  constantly  made  it  my  prayer  that  I  might  be 
guided  by  the  Spirit  even  in  the  smallest  and  least  important 
parts  of  the  service  ;  for  you  cannot  tell  but  that  the  salvation 
of  a  soul  may  depend  upon  the  reading  of  a  hymn,  or  upon  the 
selection  of  a  chapter.  Two  persons  have  joined  our  church  and 
made  a  profession  of  being  converted  simply  through  my  read 
ing  a  hymn  — 

"  Jesus,  lover  of  my  soul." 


They  did  not  remember  any  thing  else  in  the  hymn  ;  but 
words  made  such  a  deep  impression  upon  their  minds,  that  th  •,•} 
could  not  help  repeating  them  for  days  afterwards,  and  then  the 
thought  arose,  "  Do  I  love  Jesus  ?"  And  then  they  considered 
what  strange  ingratitude  it  was  that  he  should  be  the  lover  of 
their  souls,  and  yet  they  should  not  love  him.  N  >w  I  believe 
the  Holy  Spirit  led  me  to  read  that  hymn.  Aud  many  personi 
have  been  converted  by  soro^  -diking  saying  of  ihe  preacher. 


40  THE    OUTPOURING    OF    THE    HOL\     SPIRIT. 

But  why  was  it  the  preacher  uttered  that  saying?  Simply  be- 
cause  he  was  led  thereunto  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  Rest  assured, 
beloved,  that  when  any  part  of  the  sermon  is  blessed  to  youi 
heart,  the  minister  said  it  because  he  was  ordered  to  say  it  by 
his  Master.  1  might  preach  to-day  a  sermon  which  I  preached 
on  Friday,  and  which  was  useful  then,  and  there  might  be  nu 
ood  whatever  come  from  it  now,  because  it  might  not  be  th 
ernion  which  the  Holy  Ghost  would  have  delivered  to-day.  Bu  * 
f  with  sincerity  of  heart  I  have  sought  God's  guidance  in  select 
ing  the  topic,  and  he  rests  upon  me  in  the  preaching  of  the  Word, 
there  is  no  fear  but  that  it  shall  be  found  adapted  to  your  imme 
diate  wants.  The  Holy  Spirit  must  rest  upon  your  preachers. 
Let  them  have  all  the  learning  of  the  wisest  men,  and  all  the  do. 
quence  of  such  men  as  Demosthenes  and  Cicero,  still  the  Word 
cannot  be  blessed  to  you,  unless  first  of  all  the  Spirit  of  God 
hath  guided  the  minister's  mind  in  the  selection  of  his  subject, 
and  in  the  discussion  of  it. 

But  if  Peter  himself  were  under  the  hand  of  the  Spirit,  that 
would  fail  unless  the  Spirit  of  God,  then,  did  fall  upon  our  hear 
ers;  and  I  shall  endeavor  now  to  show  the  absolute  necessity 
of  the  Spirit's  work  in  the  conversion  of  men. 

Let  us  remember  what  kind  of  thing  the  work  is,  and  w°  shall 
see  that  other  means  are  altogether  out  of  the  question.  It  is 
quite  certain  that  men  cannot  be  converted  by  physical  means. 
The  Church  of  Rome  thought  that  she  could  convert  men  by 
means  of  armies;  so  she  invaded  countries,  and  threatened  them 
with  war  and  bloodshed  unless  they  would  repent  and  embrac« 
her  religion.  However,  it  availed  but  little,  and  men  were  prt, 
pared  to  die  rather  than  leave  their  faith  ;  she  therefore  trieo 
those  beautiful  things — stakes,  racks,  dungeons,  axes,  swords. 
Ire  ;  and  by  these  things  she  hoped  to  convert  men.  You  have 
card  of  the  man  who  tried  to  wind  up  his  watch  with  a  pickaxe. 
That  man  was  extremely  wise  compared  with  the  man  who 
thought  to  touch  mind  through  matter.  All  the  machines  you 
ike  to  invent  cannot  touch  the  mind.  Talk  about  tying  angel's 
Viiigs  with  green  withes,  or  manacling  the  cherubim  with  iron 
chains,  and  then  talk  about  meddling  with  the  minds  of  me& 
through  physical  means.  Why,  the  things  don't  act;  they  can 


THE    OUTPOURING    OF    THE    HOLY    SPIRIT.  41 

not  act  All  the  king's  armies  that  ever  were,  and  all  the  war 
nors  clothed  with  mail,  with  all  their  ammunition,  eould  never 
touch  the  mind  of  man.  That  is  an  impregnable  castle  which  i« 
not  to  be  reached <by  physical  agency. 

Nor,  again,  can  man  be  converted  by  moral  argument.  "  Well," 
says  one,  "  I  think  he  may.  Let  a  minister  preach  earnestly,  and 
he  may  persuade  men  to  be  converted."  Ah  !  beloved,  it  is  for 
want  of  knowing  better  that  you  say  so.  Melancthon  thought  so ; 
but  you  know  what  he  said  after  he  tried  it — "  Old  Adam  is  too 
strong  for  young  Melancthon."  So  will  every  preacher  find  it,  it 
he  thinks  his  arguments  can  ever  convert  man.  Let  me  give 
you  a  parallel  case.  Where  is  the  logic  that  can  persuade  an 
Ethiopian  to  change  his  skin  1  By  what  argument  can  you  in 
duce  a  leopard  to  renounce  his  spots  1  Even  so  may  he  that  is 
accustomed  to  do  evil  learn  to  do  well.  But  if  the  Ethiopian's 
skin  be  changed  it  must  be  by  a  supernatural  process ;  and  if  the 
leopard's  spots  be  removed,  he  that  made  the  leopard  must  do  it. 
Even  so  is  it  with  the  heart  of  man.  If  sin  were  a  thing  ab  extra, 
and  external,  we  could  induce  man  to  change  it.  For  instance, 
you  may  induce  a  man  to  leave  off  drunkenness  or  swearing,  be 
cause  those  things  are  not  a  part  of  his  nature — he  has  added  that 
vice  to  his  original  depravity.  But  the  hidden  evil  of  the  heart 
is  beyond  all  moral  suasion.  I  dare  say  a  man  might  have  enough 
argument  to  induce  h\m  to  hang  himself,  but  I  am  certain  no  ar 
gument  will  ever  induce  him  to  hang  his  sins,  to  hang  his  self- 
righteousness,  and  to  coirxe  and  humble  himself  at  the  foot  of  the 
cross ;  for  the  religion  of  Christ  is  so  contrary  to  all  the  propen- 
sities  of  man,  that  it  is  like  swimming  against  the  stream  to  ap 
proach  it ;  for  the  stream  of  lean's  will  and  man's  desire  is  exactly 
the  opposite  of  the  religion  of  Jesus  Christ.  If  you  wanted  a 
'proof  of  that,  at  the  lifting  of  my  finger  there  are  thousands  in 
this  hall  who  would  rise  to  prove  ft  \  for  they  would  say,  "  I  have 
found  it  so,  sir,  in  my  experience ;  I  hated  religion  as  much  as 
any  man ;  I  despised  Christ  and  his  people,  and  I  know  not  to 
this  day  how  it  is  that  I  am  what  I  am,  unless  it  be  the  work  of 
God."  1  have  seen  the  tears  run  down  a  roan's  cheeks  when  he 
has  come  to  me  in  order  to  be  united  to  the  church  of  Christ,  nn<3 
•**^  has  said,  "  Sir,  I  wonder  how  it  is  I  am  here  to  <tey ;  *f  w*  ->*v» 


12  fflfc    OUTPOl'ltlKG    OF    THE    HOLY     SP1K1T. 

bad  told  me  a  year  ago  that  I  should  think  as  I  nov*  think,  and 
feel  as  1  now  feel,  I  snould  have  called  him  a  born  fool  for  his 
pains ;  I  used  to  say  I  never  would  be  one  of  those  canting  Metho 
dists;  1  liked  to  spend  my  Sunday  in  pleasure,  and  I  did  not  see 
why  I  was  to  be  cooping  myself  up  in  the  house  of  God  listening 
to  a  man  talk,  /pray,  sir?  No,  not  I.  I  said  the  best  provi 
dcnce  in  all  the  world  was  a  good  strong  pair  of  hands,  and  tc  ^ 
take  care  of  what  you  got.  If  ary  man  talked  to  me  about  reli 
gion,  why  I  would  slam  the  door  in  his  face,  and  pretty  soon  put 
him  out ;  but  the  things  that  I  loved  then  I  now  hate,  and  the 
things  that  then  I  hated  now  I  love,  1  cannot  do  or  say  enough  to 
show  how  total  is  the  change  that  has  been  wrought  in  me.  It 
must  have  been  the  work  of  God  ;  it  could  not  have  been  wrought 
by  me,  I  feel  assured ;  it  must  be  some  one  greater  than  myself, 
who  could  thus  turn  my  heart."  I  think  these  two  things  are 
proofs  that  we  want  something  more  than  nature,  and  since  phy 
sical  agency  will  not  do,  and  mere  moral  suasion  will  never  ac 
complish  it,  that  there  must  be  an  absolute  necessity  for  the  Holy 
Spirit. 

But  again,  if  you  will  just  think  a  minute  what  the  work  is, 
you  will  soon  see  that  none  but  God  can  accomplish  it.  In  the 
Holy  Scripture,  conversion  is  often  spoken  of  as  being  a  new 
creation.  If  you  talk  about  creating  yourselves,  I  should  feel 
obliged  if  you  would  create  a  fly  first.  Create  a  gnat,  create  a 
grain  of  sand,  and  when  you  have  created  that,  you  may  talk 
about  creating  a  new  heart.  Both  are  alike,  impossible,  for  crea 
tion  is  the  work  of  God.  But  still,  if  you  could  create  a  grain 
of  dust,  or  create  even  a  world,  it  would  not  be  half  the  miracle, 
for  you  must  first  find  a  thing  which  has  created  itself.  Could 
that  be  1  Suppose  you  had  no  existence,  how  could  you  creare 
yourself]  Nothing  cannot  produce  any  thing.  Now,  how  ca 
man  re-create  himself.  A  man  cannot  create  himself  into  a  ne\ 
condition,  when  he  has  no  being  in  that  condition,  but  is,  as  yet, 
a  thing  that  is  not. 

Then,  again,  the  work  of  creation  is  said  to  be  like  the  resur 
rection.  "  We  are  alive  from  the  dead."  Now,  can  the  dead  in 
the  grave  raise  themselves '{  Let  any  minister  who  thinks  he  can 
convert  souls  go  and  raise  a  corpse ;  let  him  go  and  stand  in  one 


THE    OUTPOURING    OF    THE    HOLY    SPIRIT.  43 

)f  tre  cemeteries,  and  bids  the  tombs  open  wide  their  mouths, 
and  nake  room  for  those  once  buried  there  to  awaken,  and  he 
will  have  to  preach  in  vain.  But  if  he  could  do  it,  that  is  not  the 
mirnde :  it  is  forfthe  dead  to  raise  themselves,  for  an  inanimate 
corpse  to  kindle  in  its  own  breast  the  spark  of  life  anew.  If  the 
work  be  a  resurrection,  a  creation,  does  it  not  strike  you  that  it 
must  be  beyond  the  power  of  man]  It  must  be  wrought  in  bin 
by  no  one  less  than  God  himself. 

And  there  is  yet  one  more  consideration,  and  I  shall  have  con 
clud(4  this  point.  Beloved,  even  if  man  could  save  himself,  I 
wouM  have  you  recollect  how  averse  he  is  to  it?  If  we  could 
mah*  our  hearers  all  willing,  the  battle  would  be  accomplished. 
"  Will,"  says  one,  "  If  I  am  willing  to  be  saved,  can  I  not  be 
saved1?"  Assuredly  you  can,  but  the  difficulty  is,  we  cannot 
biirg  men  to  be  willing.  That  shows,  therefore,  that  there  must 
bo  ,'i  constraint  put  upon  their  will.  There  must  be  an  influence 
cx/.Tted  upon  them,  which  they  have  not  in  themselves,  in  order 
to  make  them  willing  in  the  day  of  God's  power.  And  this  is 
the  glory  of  the  Christian  religion.  The  Christian  religion  has 
within  its  own  bowels  power  to  spread  itself.  We  do  not  ask 
you  to  be  willing  first.  We  come  and  tell  you  the  news,  and  wo 
believe  that  the  Spirit  of  God  working  with  us  will  make  you 
willing.  If  the  progress  of  the  Christian  religion  depended  upon 
the  voluntary  assent  of  mankind,  it  would  never  go  an  inch  fur 
ther,  but  because  the  Christian  religion  has  with  it  an  omnipotent 
influence,  constraining  men  to  believe  it,  it  is  therefore  that  it  is 
and  must  be  triumphant,  "  till  like  a  sea  of  glory  it  spreads  from 
shore  to  shore." 

III.  Now  I  snail  conclude  by  bringing  one  or  two  tnoughtg 
forward,  with  regard  to  WHAT  MUST  BE  DONE  AT  THIS  TIME  JN 
ORDER  TO  BRING  DOWN  THE  HOLY  SPIRIT.  It  is  quite  pertain,  l)e 
Joved,  if  the  Holy  Spirit  willed  to  do  it,  that  every  man,  wornup 
and  child  in  this  place  might  be  converted  now.  If  Qod,  tins  * 
sovereign  Judge  of  all,  would  be  pleased  n.Q\y  to  send  out  his 
Spirit,  every  inhabitant  of  this  millipn-peopjed  city  migfrt  be 
brought  at  once  to  turn  unto  the  living  Gpd.  Without  instrij- 
mentality,  without  the  preacher,  without  bpoks.,  wjthput  any  thing, 
God  has  it  in  his  power  to  convert  men.  We  have  known  per 


44  THE    OUTPOURING    OF    THE    HOLY    SPIRIT. 

sons  about  their  business,  not  thinking  about  religion  at  all,  who 
have  had  a  thought  injected  into  their  hearts,  and  that  thought 
has  been  the  prolific  mother  of  a  thousand  meditations;  and 
through  these  meditations  they  have  been  brought  to  Christ. 
Without  the  aid  of  the  minister,  the  Holy  Spirit  has  thus 
worked,  and  to-day  he  is  not  restrained.  There  may  be  some 
pen.  great  in  infidelity,  staunch  in  opposition  to  the  cross  of 
Christ,  but,  without  asking  their  consent,  the  Holy  Spirit  can  pull 
down  the  strong  man,  and  make  the  mighty  man  bow  himself. 
For  when  we  talk  of  the  Omnipotent  God,  there  is  nothing  too 
great  for  him  to  do.  But,  beloved,  God  has  been  pleased  to 
put  great  honor  upon  instrumentality  ;  he  could  work  without  it 
if  he  pleased,  but  he  does  not  do  so.  However,  this  is  the  first 
thought  I  want  to  give  you;  if  you  would  have  the  Holy  Sphit 
exert  himself  in  our  midst,  you  must  first  of  all  look  to  him  and 
not  to  instrumentality.  When  Jesus  Christ  preached,  there 
were  very  few  converted  under  him,  and  the  reason  was,  because 
the  Holy  Spirit  was  not  abundantly  poured  forth.  He  had  the 
Holy  Spirit  without  measure  himself,  but  on  others  the  Holy 
Spirit  was  not  as  yet  poured  out.  Jesus  Christ  said,  "  Greater 
works  than  these  shall  ye  do  because  I  go  to  my  Father,  in  order 
to  send  the  Holy  Spirit;"  and  recollect  that  those  few  who  were 
Converted  under  Christ's  ministry,  were  not  converted  by  him, 
but  by  the  Holy  Spirit  that  rested  upon  him  at  that  time.  Jesus 
of  Nazareth  was  anointed  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Now,  then,  if 
Je»us  Christ,  the  great  founder  of  our  religion,  needed  to  be 
anointed  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  how  much  more  our  ministers  1  And 
if  God  would  always  make  the  distinction  even  between  his  own 
Son  as  an  instrument,  and  the  Holy  Spirit  as  the  agent,  how  much 
more  ought  we  to  be  careful  to  do  that  between  poor  puny  men 
ind  the  Holy  Spirit?  Never  let  us  hear  you  say  again,  '"'So 
tinny  persons  were  converted  by  So-and-so."  They  were  not 
.{'  converted,  they  were  not  converted  by  man.  Instrumentality 
i*  to  be  used,  but  the  Spirit  is  to  tave  the  honor  of  it.  Pay  no 
more  a  superstitious  reverence  to  man;  think  no  more  that  God 
i«  tied  to  your  plans  and  to  your  agencies.  Do  not  imagine  that 
so  many  city  missionaries,  so  much  go*xl  will  be  done.  Do  not 
•ay,  "  So  many  preachers ;  PO  man}  s^inons ;  so  many  souls 


T11K    OUTPOURING    OF    THE    HOLY     SPIRIT.  40 

saved.'  .  Do  not  say,  "So  many  Bibles;  so  many  tracts;  so 
much  good  done."  Not  so;  use  these,  bat  remember  it  is  not  in 
that  proportion  the  blessing  comes  ;  it  is,  so  much  Holy  Spirit,  so 
many  souls  ingatfiered. 

And  now  another  thought.  If  we  would  have  the  Spirit,  U> 
loved,  we  must  each  of  us  try  to  honor  him.  There  are  some 
chapels  into  which  if  you  wire  to  enter,  you  would  never  know 
there  was  a  Holy  Spirit.  Mary  Magdalen  said  of  old,  "  They 
have  taken  away  my  Lord,  and  1  know  not  where  they  have  laid 
him,"  and  the  Christian  might  often  say  so,  for  there  is  nothing 
said  about  the  Lord  until  they  come  to  the  end,  and  then  there  is 
just  the  benediction,  or  else  you  would  not  know  that  there  were 
three  persons  in  one  God  at  all.  Until  our  churches  honor  the 
Holy  Spirit  we  shall  never  see  it  abundantly  manifested  in  our 
midst.  Let  the  preacher  always  confess  before  he  preaches  that 
he  relies  upon  the  Holy  Spirit.  Let  him  burn  his  manuscript 
and  depend  upon  the  Holy  Spirit.  If  the  Spirit  does  not  come 
to  help  him,  let  him  be  still,  and  let  the  people  go  home  and  pray 
that  the  Spirit  will  help  him  next  Sunday. 

And  do  you,  also,  in  the  use  of  all  your  agencies,  always  honor 
the  Spirit?  We  often  begin  our  religious  meetings  without 
prayer:  it  is  all  wrong.  We  must  honor  the  Spirit;  unless  we 
put  him  first,  he  will  never  make  crowns  for  us  to  wear.  He 
A  ill  get  victories,  but  he  will  have  the  honor  of  them ;  and  if  we 
do  not  gi/e  to  him  the  honor,  he  will  never  give  to  us  the  privi 
lege  and  success.  And,  best  of  all,  if  you  would  have  the  Holy 
Spirit,  let  us  meet  together  earnestly  to  pray  for  him.  Remem 
ber,  the  Holy  Spirit  will  not  come  to  us  as  a  church  unless 
we  seek  him.  '"  For  this  thing  will  I  be  inquired  of  all  the 
house  of  Israel  to  do  it  for  their)."  We  purpose  during  the 
coming  week  to  hold  meetings  of  special  prayer,  to  supplicate 
or  a  revival  of  religion.  "  Prove  me  now  here,  saith  the  Lord 
af  Hosts,  and  see  if  I  do  not  pour  you  out  a  blessing  so  that 
there  shall  not  be  room  enough  to  receive  it."  Let  us  meet  and 
pray,  and  if  God  doth  not  hear  us,  it  will  be  the  first  time  he  has 
broken  his  promise.  Come,  let  us  go  up  to  the  sanctuary  ;  let  us 
meet  together  in  the  house  of  the  Lord,  and  offer  solemn  suppli 
cation  ;  and  I  say  again,  if  the  Lord  doth  not  make  bare  his  arm 


4(1  THE    OUTPOURING    OF    THE    HOLY     SPIRIT. 

in  the  sight  of  all  the  people,  it  will  be  the  reverse  of  all.  his  pre 
vious  actions,  it  will  be  the  contrary  of  all  his  promises,  and  con- 
tradictory  to  himself.  We  have  only  to  try  him,  and  the  result 
is  certain.  In  dependence  on  his  Spirit,  if  we  only  meet  for 
prayer,  the  Lord  shall  bless  us,  and  all  the  ends  of  the  earth  shall 
fear  him.  O  Lord,  lift  up  thyself  because  of  thine  enemies; 
'uck  thy  right  hand  out  of  thy  bosom,  O  Lord  our  God,  for 
sake.  Amen. 


SEKMON   III. 

THE  SYMPATHY  OF  THE  TWO  WORLDS 

"  There  is  joy  in  the  presence  of  the  angels  of  God  over  one  sinner  thai 
repenteth." — LUKE,  xv.  10. 

MAN'S  heart  is  never  big  enough  to  hold  either  its  joys  or  its 
sorrows.  You  never  heard  of  a  man  whose  heart  was  exactly 
full  of  sorrow ;  for  no  sooner  is  it  full  than  it  overflows.  The 
first  prompting  of  the  soul  is  to  tell  its  sorrow  to  another.  The 
reason  is,  that  our  heart  is  not  large  enough  to  hold  our  grief, 
and  we  need  to  have  another  heart  to  receive  a  portion  thereof 
It  is  even  so  with  our  joy.  When  the  heart  is  full  of  joy,  it 
always  allows  its  joy  to  escape.  It  is  like  the  fountain  in  the 
market-place;  whenever  it  is  full  it  runs  away  in  streams,  and  GO 
soon  as  it  ceases  to  overflow,  you  may  be  quite  sure  that  it  has 
ceased  to  be  full.  The  only  full  heart  is  the  overflowing  heart. 
You  know  this,  beloved,  you  have  proved  it  to  be  true ;  for  when 
your  soui  has  been  full  of  joy,  you  have  first  called  together  your 
own  kindred  and  friends,  and  you  have  communicated  to  them  the 
cause  of  your  gladness ;  and  when  those  vessels  have  been  full 
even  to  the  brim,  you  are  like  the  woman  who  borrowed  empty 
vessels  of  her  neighbors,  for  you  asked  each  of  them  to  become 
partakers  in  your  joy,  and  when  the  hearts  of  all  your  neigh 
oors  have  been  full,  you  have  felt  as  if  they  were  not  large 
enough,  and  the  whole  world  has  been  called  upon  to  join  in  your 
praise.  You  bade  the  fathomless  ocean  drink  in  your  joy ;  you 
spoke  to  the  trees  and  bade  them  clap  their  hands,  while  the 
mountains  and  hills  were  invoked  by  you  to  break  forth  into 
singing;  the  very  stars  of  heaven  seemed  to  look  down  upon 
you,  and  you  bade  them  sing  for  vou,  and  all  the  world  was  full 


48  THE    SYMPATHY    OF    THE    TWO     tVOKl.DS 

of  music  through  the  music  that  was  in  your  heart.  And,  n 
all,  what  is  man  but  the  great  musician  of  the  world  ?  The  inn 
verse  is  a  great  organ  with  mighty  pipes.  Space,  time,  eternity, 
are  like  the  throats  of  this  great  organ  ;  aud  man,  a  little  crea 
ture,  puts  his  fingers  on  the  keys,  and  wakes  the  universe  to 
thunders  of  harmony,  stirring  up  the  whole  creation  to  mightiest 
Reclamations  of  praise.  Know  ye  not  that  man  is  God's  high 
priest  in  the  universe?  All  things  else  are  but  the  sacrifice- 
but  he  is  the  priest, — carrying  in  his  heart  the  fire,  and  in  his 
hand  the  wood,  and  in  his  mouth  the  two-edged  sword  of  dedica 
fion,  with  which  he  offers  up  all  things  to  God. 

But  I  have  no  doubt,  beloved,  the  thought  has  sometimes 
struck  us  that  our  praise  does  not  go  far  enough.  We  seem  as 
if  we  lived  in  an  isle  cut  off  from  the  main  land.  This  world,  like 
a  fair  planet,  sAvims  in  a  sea  of  ether  unnavigated  by  mortal 
ship.  We  have  sometimes  thought  that  surely  our  praise  was 
confined  to  the  shores  of  this  poor  narrow  world,  that  it  was 
impossible  for  us  to  pull  the  ropes  which  might  ring  the  bells  of 
heaven,  that  we  could  by  no  means  whatever  reach  our  hands  »o 
high  as  to  sweep  the  celestial  chords  of  angelic  harps.  We  have 
said  to  ourselves  there  is  no  connection  between  earth  and 
eaven.  A  huge  black  wall  divides  us-  A  strait  of  unnavigabie 
v»,ners  shuts  us  out.  Uur  prayers  cannot  reach  to  heaven, 
neither  can  our  praises  affect  the  celestials.  Let  us  learn  from 
our  text  how  mistaken  we  are.  We  are,  after  all,  however  much 
we  seem  to  be  shut  out  from  heaven,  and  from  the  great  uni 
verse,  but  a  province  of  God's  vast  united  empire,  and  what  is 
done  on  earth  is  known  in  heaven ;  what  is  sur.g  on  earth  is  sun» 
in  heaven ;  and  there  is  a  sense  in  which  it  is  true  that  the  tears 
uf  earth  are  wept  again  in  paradise,  and  the  sorrows  of  mankind 
are  felt  again,  even  on  the  throne  of  the  Most  High. 

My  text  tells  us,  "  There  is  joy  in  the  presence  of  the  angel 
of  God  over  one  sinner  that  repenteth."  It  seems  as  if  it 
showed  me  a  bridge  by  which  I  might  cross  over  into  eternity. 
It  doth,  as  it  were,  exhibit  to  me,  certain  magnetic  wires  which 
convey  the  intelligence  of  what  is  done  here  to  spirits  in  another 
world.  It  teaches  me  that  there  is  a  real  and  wonderful  coo 


THE    SYMPATHY    OF    THE    TWO    WORLDS.  49 

nection  between  this  lower  world,  and  that  which  is  beyond  the 
skies,  where  God  dwelleth,  in  the  land  of  the  happy. 

We  shall  talk  about  that  subject  a  little  this  morning.  My 
first  head  will  be  the  sympathy  of  the  world  above  with  the  world 
below  ;  the  secona,  the  judgment  of  the  angels, — they  rejoice  over 
repenting  sinners  ;  we  shall  see  what  is  their  ground  for  so  domj'. 
The  third,  will  be  a  lesson  for  the  saints  ;  if  the  angels  Li  heaven 
rejoice  over  repenting  sinners,  so  should  we. 

I.  In  the  first  place  our  text  teaches  us  THE  SYMPATHY  OF  THE 
TWO  WORLDS.  Imagine  not,  O  son  of  man,  that  thou  art  cut  off 
from  heaven  ;  for  there  is  a  ladder,  the  top  whereof  doth  rest  at 
the  foot  of  the  throne  of  the  Almighty,  the  base  whereof  is  fixed 
in  the  lowest  place  of  man's  misery.  Conceive  not  that  there  is 
a  great  gulph  fixed  between  thee  and  the  Father,  across  which 
his  mercy  cannot  come,  and  over  which  thy  prayers  and  faith 
can  never  leap.  Oh,  think  not,  son  of  man,  that  thou  dwellest 
in  a  storm-girt  island,  cut  off  from  the  continent  of  e'ernity.  I 
beseech  thee,  believe  that  there  is  a  bridge  across  that  chasm,  a 
road  along  which  feet  may  travel.  This  world  is  not  separated, 
for  all  creation  is  but  one  body.  And  know  thou,  O  son  of  man, 
though  thou  in  this  world  doth  but  dwell,  as  it  were  on  the  foot, 
yet  from  the  feet  even  to  the  head,  there  are  nerves  and  veins  that 
do  unite  the  whole.  The  same  great  heart  which  beats  in  heaveo 
beats  on  earth.  The  love  of  the  Eternal  Father  which  cheers 
the  celestial  makes  glad  the  terrestrial  too.  Rest  assured  that 
though  the  glory  of  the  celestial  be  one  and  the  glory  of  the 
terrestrial  be  another,  yet  are  they  but  another  in  appearance, 
for,  after  all,  they  are  the  same.  Oh !  list  thee,  son  of  man,  and 
thou  wilt  soon  learn  that  thou  art  no  stranger  in  a  strange  land — 
a  houseless  Joseph  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  shut  out  from  hia 
Father,  and  his  children,  who  still  remain  in  the  happy  paradise 
of  Canaan.  No,  thy  Father  loves  thee  still.  There  is  a  con 
nection  between  thee  and  him.  Strange  that  though  leagues  of 
distance  lie  between  the  finite  creature  and  the  infinite  Creator, 
yet  there  are  links  that  unite  us  both !  When  a  tear  is  wept  by 
thee,  think  not  thy  Father  doth  not  behold ;  for,  "  Like  as  a 
father  pitieth  his  children  so  the  Lord  pitieth  them  that  fear  him." 
Thy  sigh  is  able  to  move  the  heart  of  Jehovah ;  thy  whisper  can 
3 


50  THE    SYMPATHY    OF    THE    TWO    WORLDS. 

incline  nis  ear  unto  thee ;  thy  prayer  can  stay  his  hands ;  thy 
faith  can  move  his  arm.  Oh  !  think  not  that  God  sits  on  high 
in  an  eternal  slumber,  taking  no  note  of  thee.  "  Shall  a  mother 
forget  her  suckling  child,  that  she  should  not  have  compassion  on 
the  son  of  her  womb1?  Yea,  she  may  forget,  yet  will  I  not  for 
get  thee.  Engraven  upon  the  Father's  hand  thy  name  remains; 
and  on  his  heart  recorded  there  thy  person  stands,  lie  thought, 
of  thee  before  the  worlds  were  made ;  before  the  channels  of  the 
sea  were  scooped,  or  the  gigantic  mountains  lifted  their  heads  in 
the  white  clouds,  he  thought  of  thee.  lie  thinketh  on  thee  still. 
"  I,  the  Lord,  do  keep  it ;  I  will  water  it  every  moment :  lest 
any  hurt  it,  I  will  keep  it  night  and  day."  For  the  eyes  of  the 
Lord  run  to  and  fro  in  every  place  to  show  himself  strong  on 
the  behalf  of  all  them  that  fear  him.  Thou  art  not  cut  off  from 
him,  Thou  dost  move  in  him;  in  him  thou  dost  live  and  have 
thy  being.  "  He  is  a  very  present  help  in  time  of  trouble." 

Remember,  again,  O  heir  of  immortality,  that  thou  art  not 
only  linked  to  the  Godhead,  but  there  is  another  one  in  heaven 
with  vhom  thou  hast  a  strange,  yet  near  connection.  In  the 
centre  of  the  throne  sits  one  who  is  thy  brother,  allied  to  thee  by 
blood.  The  Son  of  God,  eternal,  equal  with  his  Father,  became 
in  the  fulness  of  time  the  Son  of  Mary,  an  infant  of  a  span  long 
He  was,  yea  is,  bone  of  thy  bone  and  flesh  of  thy  flesh.  Think 
not  that  thou  art  cut  off  from  the  celestial  world,  while  he  is 
there;  for  is  he  not  thy  head,  and  hath  he  not  himself  declared 
that  thou  art  a  member  of  his  body,  of  his  flesh,  and  of  his  bones  1 
Oh.  man,  thou  art  not  separated  from  heaven  whilst  Jesus  tells 
thee — 

"  I  feel  at  my  heart  all  thy  sighs  and  thy  groans, 
For  thou  art  most  near  me,  my  flesh  and  my  bones  ; 
In  all  thy  distresses,  thy  Head  feels  the  pain, 
They  all  are  most  needful,  not  one  is  in  vain." 

Oh,  poor,  disconsolate  mourner,  Christ  remembers  thee  everj 
hour.  Thy  sighs  are  his  sighs ;  thy  groans  are  his  groans ;  thy 
prayers  are  his  prayers : — 

"  He  in  his  measure  feels  afresh, 
What  every  member  beam" 


THE  SYMPATHY  OF  THE  TWO  WORLDS.  51 

Cmcified  he  is  when  thou  art  crucified  ;  he  dies  when  thou  dies  ; 
thou  livest  in  him,  and  he  livest  in  thee,  and  because  he  lives 
fihalt  thou  live  also :  thou  shalt  rise  in  him,  and  thou  shalt  sit 
together  in  the  heavenly  places  with  him.  Oh,  never  was  husband 
nearer  to  his  wife',  and  never  head  nearer  to  the  members,  and 
never  soul  nearer  to  the  body  of  this  flesh,  than  Christ  is  unto 
thee  ;  and  while  it  is  so,  think  not  that  heaven  and  earth  are 
divided.  They  are  but  kindred  worlds;  two  ships  moored  close 
to  one  another,  and  one  short  plank  of  death  will  enable  you  to 
step  from  one  into  the  other :  this  ship,  all  black  and  coaly,  hav 
ing  done  the  coasting  trade,  the  dusty  business  of  to-day,  and 
being  full  of  the  blackness  of  so-row ;  and  that  ship  all  golden, 
with  its  painted  pennon  flying,  and  its  sail  all  spread,  white  as  the 
down  of  the  sea-bird,  fair  as  the  angel's  wing — I  tell  thee,  man, 
the  ship  of  heaven  is  moored  side  by  side  with  the  ship  of  earth, 
and  rock  though  this  ship  may,  and  career  though  she  will  on 
stormy  winds  and  tempests,  yet  the  invisible  and  golden  ship  of 
neaven  sails  by  her  side  never  sundered,  never  divided,  always 
ready,  in  order  that  when  the  hour  shall  come,  thou  mayest  leap 
from  the  black,  dark  ship,  and  step  upon  the  golden  deck  of  that 
thrice  happy  one  in  which  thou  shalt  sail  for  ever. 

But,  O  man  of  God,  there  are  other  golden  links  besides  these 
which  bind  the  present  to  the  future,  and  time  unto  eternity. 
And  what  are  time  and  eternity,  after  all,  to  the  believer,  but, 
like  the  Siamese  twins,  never  to  be  separated  ?  This  earth  is 
heaven  below,  the  next  world  is  but  a  heaven  above ;  it  is  the 
same  house — this  is  the  lower  room,  and  that  the  upper,  but  the 
same  roof  cover,  both,  and  the  same  dew  falls  upon  each.  Re 
member,  beloved,  that  the  spirits  of  the  just  made  perfect  are 
never  far  from  you  and  me  if  we  are  lovers  of  Jesus.  All  those 
w  ho  have  passed  the  flood  have  still  communion  w:'h  us.  Do 
*  •;  not  sing — 

"  The  saints  on  earth,  and  all  the  deai. 

But  one  communion  make  ; 
All  join  in  Christ,  the  living  Head, 

And  of  his  grace  partake  ?" 

We  have  but  one  Head  for  the  ohurch  triumphant  and  for  trie 
churrh  militant : 


t>2  THE    SYMPATHY    OF    THE    TWO    WOKL1>8. 

"One  army  of  the  living  Goj. 
To  his  command  we  bow; 
Part  of  the  host  have  crops' d  the  flood, 
And  part  are  crossing  now." 

Doth  not  the  apostle  tell  us  that  the  saints  above  are  a  cloud  of 
witnesses'?  After  he  had  mentioned  Abraham,  and  Isaac  am 
Jacob,  and  Gideon,  and  Barak,  and  Jephthah,  did  he  not  sa\. 
"  Wherefore  seeing  we  also  are  compassed  about  with  so  gi  eat  a 
cloud  of  witnesses,  let  us  lay  aside  every  weight."  Lo  we  are 
running  in  the  plains,  and  the  glorified  ones  are  lookir.g  down 
upon  us.  Thy  mother's  eyes  follow  thee,  young  man  ;  a  father's 
eyes  are  looking  down  upon  thee,  young  woman.  The  eyes  of 
my  godly  grandmother,  long  since  glorified.  I  doubt  not.  rest  on 
me  perpetually.  No  doubt,  in  heaven  they  often  talk  of  us. 
Methinks  they  sometimes  visit  this  poor  earth — they  never  go 
out  of  heaven,  it  is  true,  for  heaven  is  everywhere  to  them.  This 
world  is  to  them  but  just  one  corner  of  God's  heaven,  one  shady 
bower  of  paradise. 

The  saints  of  the  living  God,  are,  I  doubt  not,  very  near  unto 
us,  when  we  think  them  very  far  away.  At  any  rate,  they  still 
remember  us,  still  look  for  us ;  for  this  is  ever  upon  their  hearts 
— the  truth  that  they  without  us  cannot  be  made  perfect.  They 
cannot  be  a  perfect  church  till  we  are  gathered  in,  and  therefore 
do  they  long  for  our  appearing. 

But,  to  come  to  our  text  a  little  more  minutely.  It  assures  us 
that  the  angels  have  communion  with  us.  Bright  spirits,  first-born 
sons  of  God,  do  ye  think  of  me  ?  Oh,  cherubim,  great  and  mighty ; 
seraphim,  burning,  winged  with  lightning,  do  ye  think  of  us  1 
Gigantic  is  your  stature.  Our  poet  tells  us  that  the  wand  of  an 
angel  might  make  a  mast  for  some  tall  admiral ;  and,  doubtless, 
he  was  right  when  he  said  so.  Those  angels  of  God  are  creatures 
mighty  and  strong,  doing  his  commandments,  hearkening  to  his 
word — and  do  they  take  notice  of  us  ?  Let  the  Scripture  answer, 
u  Are  they  not  all  ministering  spirits,  sent  forth  to  minister  unto 
those  that  shall  be  heirs  of  salvation  ?"  "The  angel  of  the  Lord 
encampeth  round  about  them  that  fear  him."  "  For  he  shall  give 
bis  angels  charge  over  thee ;  to  keep  thee  in  all  thy  ways ;  they 
shall  bear  thee  up  in  their  hands,  lest  thou  dash  thy  foot  against 


THE  SYMPATHY  OF  THE  TWO  WORLDS.  53 

a  stone."  Yes,  the  brightest  angels  are  but  the  serving  men  of 
the  saints  ;  they  are  our  lacqueys  and  our  footmen.  They  wait 
upon  us ;  they  are  the  troops  of  our  body  guard ;  and  we  might, 
if  our  eyes  were  opened,  see  what  Elisha  saw,  horses  of  fire  and 
chariots  of  fire  round  about  us ;  so  that  we  should  joyously  say, 
*  More  are  they  that  are  with  us  than  they  that  are  against  us.' 

Our  text  tells  us  that  the  angels  of  God  rejoice  over  repentiu 
sinners.  How  is  that?  They  are  always  as  happy  as  they  can 
be ;  how  can  they  be  any  happier  ?  The  text  does  not  say  that 
they  are  any  happier ;  but  perhaps  that  they  show  their  happi 
ness  more.  A  man  may  have  a  Sabbath  every  day,  as  he  ought 
to  have  if  he  be  a  Christian ;  and  yet  on  the  first  day  of  the  week 
he  will  let  this  Sabbatism  come  out  plainly  ;  for  then  the  world 
shall  see  that  he  doth  rest.  "  A  merry  heart  hath  a  continual 
feast ;"  but  then  even  the  merry  heart  hath  some  special  days  on 
which  it  feasteth  well.  To  the  glorified  every  day  is  a  Sabbath ; 
but  of  some  it  can  be  said,  "and  that  Sabbath  was  an  high  day.'' 
There  are  days  when  the  angels  sing  more  loudly  than  usual ; 
they  are  always  harping  well  God's  praise,  but  sometimes  the 
gathering  hosts,  who  have  been  Hitting  far  through  the  universe, 
come  home  to  their  centre ;  and  round  the  throne  of  God,  stand 
ing  in  serried  ranks,  marshalled  not  for  battle  but  for  music,  on 
certain  set  and  appointed  days  they  chant  the  praises  of  the  Son 
of  God,  "  who  loved  us  and  gave  himself  for  us."  And  do  you 
ask  me  when  those  days  occur  ?  I  tell  you,  the  birthday  of  every 
Christian  is  a  sonnet  day  in  heaven.  There  are  Christmas-days 
in  paradise,  where  Christ's  high  mass  is  kept,  and  Christ  is  glori 
fied,  not  because  he  was  born  in  a  manger,  but  because  he  is  born 
in  a  broken  heart.  There  are  days — good -days  in  heaven;  days 
of  sonnet,  red-letter  days,  of  overflowing  adoration.  And  these 
.re  days  when  the  shepherd  brings  home  the  lost  sheep  upon  his 
boulder,  when  the  church  has  swept  her  house  and  found  the  lost 
piece  of  money  ;  for  then  are  these  friend's  and  neighbors  called 
together,  and  they  rejoice  with  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory 
over  one  sinner  that  repcnteth. 

I  have  thus,  1  hope,  shown  you  that  there  is  a  greater  connection 
between  earth  and  heaven  than  any  of  us  dreamed.  And  now 
'et  none  of  us  think,  when  we  Itfok  upward  to  tho  blue  sky,  that 


54  THE    SYMPATHY     OF    THE    TWO    WORLDS 

we  are  far  from  heaven  ;  it  is  a  very  little  distance  from  ui 
W*en  the  day  comes  we  shall  go  post-haste  there,  even  without 
ho-^s  and  chariots  of  fire.  Balaam  called  it  a  land  that  is  very 
far  jft";  we  know  better — it  is  a  land  that  is  very  near.  Ever 

10* 

"  By  faith  we  join  our  bands 

With  those  that  went  before, 
And  greet  the  blood-besprinkled  bands 
Upon  the  eternal  shore." 

AM  hail,  bright  spirits  !  I  see  yov  now.  All  hail,  angels  !  Ali 
ha»l,  ye  brethren  redeemed!  A  few  more  hours,  or  days,  or 
months,  and  we  shall  join  your  happy  throng  ;  till  then  your  joy 
ous  fellowship,  your  sweet  compassion  shall  ever  be  our  comfort 
and  our  consolation — and,  having  weathered  all  storms  of  life,  we 
shill  at  last  anchor  with  you  within  the  port  of  everlasting  peace. 

II.  But  tne  angels  are  said  to  sing  whenever  a  sinner  repents. 
Let  us  see  if  there  is  any  JUDGMENT  IN  THEIR  SONG,  or  whether 
they  make  a  mistake.  Why  do  angels  sing  over  penitent  sinners  ' 

In  the  first  place,  I  think  it  is  because  they  remember  the  days 
of  creation.  You  know,  when  God  made  this  world,  and  fixed 
the  beams  of  the  heavens  in  sockets  of  light,  the  morning  stars 
sang  together,  and  the  sons  of  God  shouted  for  joy  ;  as  they  saw- 
star  after  star  flying  abroad,  like  sparks  from  the  great  anvil  of 
Omnipotence,  they  began  to  sing;  and  every  time  they  saw  a 
new  creature  made  upon  this  little  earth,  they  praised  afresh. 
When  first  they  saw  Ugh*  they  clapped  their  hands,  and  said 
"  Great  is  Jehovah  ;  for  he  said  *  Light  be !'  and  light  was.' 
And  when  they  saw  sun,  and  moon,  and  stars,  again  they  clapped 
their  hands,  and  they  said,  "  He  hath  made  great  lights  ;  for  hiu 
mercy  endureth  for  ever.  The  sun  to  rule  the. day  ;  for  his 
mercy  endureth  for  ever.  The  moon  to  rule  the  night ;  for  his 
mercy  endureth  for  ever."  And  over  every  thing  he  made,  they 
chanted  evermore  that  sweet  song,  "  Creator,  thou  art  to  be  mag 
nified  ;  for  thy  mercy  endureth  for  ever."  Now,  when  they  see 
a  sinner  returning,  they  see  the  creation  over  again  ;  for  repent 
ance  is  a  new  creation.  No  man  ever  repents  until  God  makes 
in  him  a  new  heart  and  right  spirit.  I  do  not  know  that  ever 
since  the  day  when  God  made  the  world,  with  the  exception  of 


THE    SYMPATHY    OF    THE    TWO    WORLDS.  6?» 

new  hearts,  the  angels  have  seen  God  make  any  thing  else.  Tie 
may,  if  he  hath  so  pleased,  have  made  fresh  worlds  since  that 
time.  But  perhaps  the  only  instance  of  new  creation  they  have 
ever  seen  since  the<first  day,  is  the  creation  of  a  new  heart  and  a 
right  spirit  within  the  breast  of  a  poor  penitent  sinner.  Theio 
fore  do  they  sing,  because  creation  cometh  over  again. 

I  doubt  not,  too,  that  they  sing  because  they  behold  God' 
works  afresh  shining  in  excellence.  When  God  first  made  fh 
world,  he  said  of  it,  "  It  is  very  good" — he  could  not  say  sc 
now.  There  are  many  of  you  that  God  could  not  say  that  of. 
Jle  would  have  to  say  the  very  reverse.  He  would  have  to 
say.  "No,  that  is  very  bad,  for  the  trail  of  the  serpent  hath 
swept  away  thy  beauty,  that  moral  excellence  which  once 
dwelt  in  manhood  has  passed  away  ;"  but  when  the  sweet 
influences  of  the  Spirit  bring  men  to  repentance  and  faith  again, 
God  looks  upon  man,  and  he  saith,  "  It  is  very  good."  For 
what  his  Spirit  makes  is  like  himself — good,  and  holy,  and  pre 
cious  ;  and  God  smiles  again  over  his  twice-made  creation,  and 
saith  once  more,  "  It  is  very  good."  Then  the  angels  begin 
again,  and  praise  his  name,  whose  works  are  always  good  and 
full  of  beauty. 

But,  beloved,  the  angels  sing  over  sinners  that  repent,  because 
they  know  what  that  poor  sinner  has  escaped.  You  and  I  can 
never  imagine  all  the  depths  of  hell.  Shut  out  from  us  by  a 
black  veil  of  darkness,  we  cannot  tell  the  horrors  of  that  dismal 
dungeon  of  lost  souls.  Happily,  the  wailings  of  the  damned 
have  never  startled  us,  for  a  thousand  tempests  were  but  a  maid 
en's  whisper,  compared  with  one  wail  of  a  damned  spirit.  It  is 
not  possible  for  us  to  see  the  tortures  of  those  souls  who  dwell 
eternally  within  an  anguish  that  knows  no  alleviation.  These 
eyes  would  become  sightless  balls  of  darkness,  if  they  were  per 
mitted  for  an  instant  to  look  into  that  ghastly  shrine  of  torment. 
Hell  is  horrible,  for  we  may  say  of  it,  eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear 
heard,  neither  hath  it  entered  into  the  heart  of  man  to  conceive 
the  horrors  which  God  hath  prepared  for  them  that  hate  him. 
But  the  angels  know  better  than  you  or  I  could  guess.  They 
know  it;  not  that  they  have  felt  it,  but  they  remember  that  day 
wtam  Satati  aird  his  angels  rebelled  against  God.  They  remember 


bl)  THE    SYMPATHY    OF    THE    TWO    WORLDS. 

feho  day  when  the  third  part  of  the  stars  of  heaven  revolted 
against  their  liege  Lord  ;  and  they  have  not  forgotten  now  the 
red  right  hand  of  Jehovah  Jesus  was  wrapt  in  thunder  ;  they  do 
not  forget  that  breach  in  the  battlements  of  heaven  when,  down 
from  the  greatest  heights  to  the  lowest  depths,  Lucifer  and  hii 
osts  were  hurled  ;  they  have  never  forgotten  how,  with  sonm1 
f  trumpet,  they  pursued  the  flying  foe  down  to  the  gnlphs  of 
olack  despair;  and,  as  they  neared  that  place  where  the  gi eat 
erpent  is  to  be  bound  in  chains,  they  remember  how  they 
saw  Tophet,  which  was  prepared  of  old,  the  pile  whereof  is  wood 
and  much  smoke ;  and  they  recollect  how,  when  they  winged 
back  their  flight,  every  tongue  was  silent,  although  they  might 
have  shouted  the  praise  of  him  who  conquered  Lucifer  ;  but  on 
them  all  there  did  sit  a  solemn  awe  of  one  who  could  smite  a 
cherubim,  and  cast  him  in  hopeless  bonds  of  everlasting  despair. 
They  knew  what  hell  was,  for  they  had  looked  within  its  jaws,  and 
seen  their  own  brothers  fast  enclosed  within  them  ;  and,  there 
fore,  when  they  see  a  sinner  saved,  they  rejoice,  because  there  is 
one  less  to  be  food  for  the  never-dying  worm — one  more  soul 
escaped  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  lion. 

There  is  yet  a  better  reason.  The  angels  know  what  the  joys 
of  heaven  are,  and  therefore  they  rejoice  over  one  sinner  that 
repenteth.  We  talk  about  pearly  gates  and  golden  streets,  and 
white  robes,  and  harps  of  gold,  and  crowns  of  amaranth,  and  all 
that ;  but  if  an  angel  could  speak  to  us  of  heaven,  he  would 
smile  and  say,  "All  these  fine  things  are  but  child's  talk,  and  ye 
are  little  children,  and  ye  cannot  understand  the  greatness  of 
eternal  bliss,  and  therefore  God  has  given  you  a  child's  horn 
book,  and  an  alphabet,  in  which  you  may  learn  the  first  rough 
letters  of  what  heaven  is,  but  what  it  is  thou  dost  not  knosv. 
O  mortal,  thine  eye  hath  never  yet  beheld  its  splendors ;  thine 
ear  hath  never  yet  been  ravished  with  its  melodies ;  thy  heart 
has  never  been  transported  with  its  peerless  joys."  Thou  may 
est  talk,  and  think,  and  guess,  and  dream,  but  th^u  canst  never 
measure  the  infinite  heaven  which  God  has  provided  for  his 
children :  and  therefore  it  is,  when  they  see  a  soul  saved  and  a 
sinner  repenting,  that  they  clap  their  hands  ;  for  they  know  that 
all  those  blesgod  mansions  arc  theirs,  since  all  th<*se  *wcet  places 


THE    SYMPATHY    OF    THE    TWO    WORLDS.  57 

of   everlasting    happiness"  are  the   entail    of  every  sinner   that 
repenteth. 

But  I  want  you  just  to  read  the  text  again,  while  I  dwell  upon 
another  thought.  *"  There  is  joy  in  the  presence  of  the  angels 
of  God  over  one  sinner  that  repenteth"  Now,  why  do  they  not 
r  i-ive  their  joy  till  that  sinner  dies  and  goes  to  heaven  ?  Why 
do  they  rejoice  over  him  when  he  repents"?  My  Arminiar. 
friend,  1  think,  ought  to  go  to  heaven  to  set  them  right  upon 
this  matter.  According  to  his  theory,  it  must  be  very  wrong  of 
them,  because  they  rejoice  prematurely.  According  to  the  Ar- 
ininian  doctrine  a  man  may  repent,  and  yet  he  may  be  lost;  he 
may  have  grace  to  repent  and  believe,  and  yet  he  may  fall  from 
grace  and  be  a  cast-away.  Now,  angels,  don't  be  too  fast.  Per 
haps  you  may  have  to  repent  of  this  one  day,  if  the  Arminian 
doctrine  be  true ;  I  would  advise  you  to  save  your  song  for 
greater  joys.  Why,  angels,  perhaps  the  men  that  you  are  sing 
ing  over  to-day,  you  will  have  to  mourn  over  to-morrow.  I  arn 
quite  sure  that  Arminius  never  taught  his  doctrine  in  heaven. 
1  do  not  know  whether  he  is  there — I  hope  he  is,  but  he  is  no 
longer  an  Arminian  ;  but  if  he  ever  taught  his  doctrine  there, 
he  would  be  put  out.  The  reason  why  angels  rejoice  is  because 
they  know  that  when  a  sinner  repents,  he  is  absolutely  saved; 
or  else  they  would  rejoice  prematurely,  and  would  have  good 
cause  for  retracting  their  merriment  on  some  future  occasion. 
But  the  angels  know  what  Christ  meant  when  he  said,  "  I  give 
unto  my  sheep  eternal  life,  and  they  shall  never  perish,  neither 
shall  any  pluck  them  out  of  my  hand  ;"  and  therefore  they  re 
joice  over  repenting  sinners,  because  they  know  they  are  saved. 
There  is  yet  one  more  fact  I  will  mention,  before  I  leave  this 
point.  It  is  said  that  the  angels  "rejoice  over  one  sinner  that  ro- 
penteth."  Now,  this  evening  it  shall  be  my  happy  privilege  to 
give  the  right  hand  of  fellowship  to  no  less  than  forty-eight  sin 
ners  that  have  repented,  and  there  will  be  great  joy  and  rejoicing 
in  our  churches  to-night,  because  these  forty -eight  have  been  im 
mersed  on  a  profession  of  their  faith.  But  how  loving  are  the 
angels  to  men ;  for  they  rejoice  over  one  sinner  that  repenteth. 
There  she  is,  in  that  garret  where  the  stars  look  between  the  tiles, 
There  is  a  miserable  bed  in  that  rooifc,  with  but  one  bit  of  cover 
3* 


58  THK    SYMPATHY    OF    THE    TWO    WORLDS. 

ing,  and  she  lieth  there  to  die !     Poor  creature !  many  a  night 
she  has  walked  the  streets  in  the  time  of  her  merriment ;  but 
now  her  joys  are  over ;  a  foul  disease,  like  a  demon,  is  devouring 
her  heart!     She  is  dying  fast,  and  no  one  careth  for  her  soul! 
But  there,  in  that  chamber,  she  turns  her  face  to  the  wall,  and 
*he  cries.  "  O  thou  that  savedst  Magdalene,  save  me ;  Lord,  I  r<i 
pent;    have  mercy  upon   me,  I  beseech  thee."      Did  the  bull?, 
vvng  in  the  street1?     Was  the  trumpet  blown  \     Ah  !  no.     Did* 
men  rejoice  1     Was  there  a  sound  of  thanksgiving  in  the  midst 
of  the  great  congregation  1     No  ;  no  one  heard  it ;  for  she  died 
unseen.     But  stay  !     There  was  one  standing  at  her  bedside  who 
noted  well  that  tear  ;  an  angel,  who  had  come  down  from  heaven 
to  watch  over  this  stray  sheep,  and   mark  its  return  ;  and  no 
sooner  was  her  prayer  uttered  than  he  clapped  his  wings,  and 
there  was  seen  flying  up  to  the  pearly  gates  a  spirit  like  a  star. 
The  heavenly  guards  came  crowding  to  the  gate,  crying,  "  What 
news,  O  son  of  fire  F     He  said,  "  'Tis  done."     "  And  what  is 
done  F    they  said.     "  Why,  she  has  repented."     "  What !    she 
who  was  once  a  chief  of  sinners?  has  she  turned  to  Christ  F 
"'Tis  even   so,"   said   he.     And   then   they  told  it  through  the 
streets,  and  the  bells  of  heaven  rang  marriage  peals,  for  Mag 
dalene  was  saved,  and  she  who  had  been  the  chief  of  sinners  was 
turned  unto  the  living  God. 

It  was  in  another  place.  A  poor  neglected  little  boy  in  ragged 
clothing  had  run  about  the  streets  for  many  a  day.  Tutored  in 
crime,  he  was  paving  his  path  to  the  gallows  ;  but  one  morning 
he  passed  by  a  humble  room,  where  some  men  and  women  were 
sitting  together  teaching  poor  ragged  children.  He  stepped  in 
there,  a  wild  Bedouin  of  the  streets ;  they  talked  to  him ;  they 
told  him  about  a  soul  and  about  an  eternity — things  he  had  never 
heard  before ;  they  spoke  of  Jesus,  and  of  good  tidings  of  great 
joy  to  this  poor  friendless  lad.  He  went  another  Sabbath,  and 
another ;  his  wild  habits  hanging  about  him,  for  he  could  not  get 
rid  of  them.  At  last  it  happened  that  his  teacher  said  to  him  one 
day,  "  Jesus  Christ  receiveth  sinners."  That  little  boy  ran.  but 
not  home,  for  it  was  but  a  mockery  to  call  it  so — where  a  drunken 
father  and  a  lascivious  mother  kept  a  hellish  riot  together.  He 
ran,  and  under  some  dry  arch,  or  in  some  wild  unfrequented  cor- 


TlIE    SYMPATHY    OF    THE    TWO    WORLDS.  5D 

ner,  he  Lent  his  little  knees,  and  there  he  cried,  that  poor  creature 
in  his  rags,  "  Lord,  save  me,  or  I  perish ;"  and  the  little  Arab  wa§ 

on  his  knees — the  little  thief  was  saved  !     He  said — 
I 

"Jesus,  lover  of  my  soul,  let  me  to  thy  bosom  fly;" 

And  up  from  that  old  arch,  from  that  forsaken  hovel,  there  fle 
u.  spirit,  glad  to  bear  the  news  to  heaven,  that  another  heir  of 
glory  was  born  to  God.  I  might  picture  many  such  scenes;  bu 
will  each  of  you  try  to  picture  your  own  ?  You  remember  the 
occasion  when  the  Lord  met  with  you.  Ah  !  little  did  you  think 
what  a  commotion  there  was  in  heaven.  If  the  Queen  had  or- 
dered  out  all  her  soldiers,  the  angels  of  heaven  would  not  have 
slopped  to  notice  them ;  if  all  the  princes  of  earth  had  marched 
in  pageant  through  the  streets,  with  all  their  robes,  and  jewellery, 
and  crowns,  and  all  their  regalia,  their  chariots,  and  their  horse 
men — if  the  pomps  of  ancient  monarchies  had  risen  from  the 
tomb — if  all  the  might  of  Babylon,  and  Tyre,  and  Greece  had 
been  concentrated  into  one  great  parade,  yet  not  an  angel  would 
have  stopped  in  his  course  to  smile  at  those  poor  tawdry  things ; 
but  over  you,  the  vilest  of  the  vile,  the  poorest  of  the  poor,  the 
most  obscure  and  unknown — over  you  angelic  wings  were  hover 
ing,  and  concerning  you  it  was  said  on  earth  and  sung  in  heaven, 
u  Hallelujah,  for  a  child  is  born  to  God  to-day." 

III.  And  now  I  must  conclude  with  this  LESSON  TO  THE  SAINTS. 
1  think,  beloved,  it  will  not  be  hard  for  you  to  learn.  The  angels 
of  heaven  rejoice  over  sinners  that  repent :  saints  of  God,  will 
not  you  and  1  do  the  same1?  I  do  not  think  the  church  rejoices 
enough.  We  all  grumble  enough  and  groan  enough ;  but  very 
few  of  us  rejoice  enough.  When  we  take  a  large  number  into 
the  church  it  is  spoken  of  as  a  great  mercy ;  but  is  the  greatness 
of  «ihtit  mercy  appreciated  1  I  will  tell  you  who  they  are  that 
cai.  most  appreciate  the  conversion  of  sinners.  They  are  those 
that  are  just  converted  themselves,  or  those  that  have  been  great 
sinners  themselves.  Those  who  have  been  saved  themselves 
from  bondage,  when  they  see  others  coming  who  have  so  lately 
worn  the  chains,  are  so  glad  that  they  can  well  take  the  tabret, 
aiid  the  harp,  and  the  pipe,  and  the  psaltery,  and  praise  God  thai 


00  THE    SYMPATHY    OF    THE    TWO    WOKLD3. 

there  are  other  prisoners  who  have  been  emancipated  by  grace. 
But  there  are  others  who  can  do  this  better  still,  and  they  are  the 
parents  and  relations  of  those  who  are  saved.  You  have  thanked 
God  many  times  when  you  have  seen  a  sinner  saved  ;  but,  mother, 
did  not  you  thank  him  most  when  you  saw  your  son  converted  ? 
'Oh!  those  holy  tears;  they  are  not  tears — they  are  God's  dia 
jnonds — the  tears  of  a  mother's  joy,  when  her  son  confesses  hit 
faith  in  Jesus.  Oh !  that  glad  countenance  of  the  wife,  when  she 
sees  her  husband,  long  bestial  and  drunken,  at  last  made  into  a 
man  and  a  Christian !  Oh  !  that  look  of  joy  which  a  young 
Christian  gives,  when  he  sees  his  father  converted,  who  had  long 
oppressed  and  persecuted  him.  I  was  preaching  this  week  for  ;* 
young  minister,  and  being  anxious  to  know  his  character,  1  spoke 
of  him  with  apparent  coolness  to  an  estimable  lady  of  his  congre 
gation.  In  a  very  few  moments  she  began  to  warm  in  his  favor. 
She  said,  "  You  must  not  say  any  thing  against  him,  sir;  if  you 
do.  it  is  because  you  do  not  know  him."  "  Oh,"  I  said,  "  I  knew 
him  long  before  you  did  ;  he  is  not  much,  is  hef  "  Well,"  she 
said.  "  1  must  speak  well  of  him,  for  he  has  been  a  blessing  to  my 
servants  and  family."  I  went  out  into  the  street,  and  saw  some 
men  and  women  standing  about;  so  I  said  to  them,  "I  must  take 
your  minister  away."  "If  you  do,"  they  said,  "  we  will  follow 
you  all  over  the  world,  if  you  take  away  a  man  who  has  done  so 
much  good  to  our  souls."  After  collecting  the  testimony  oi 
fifteen  or  sixteen  witnesses,  I  said,  "  If  the  man  gets  such  wit 
nesses  as  these  let  him  go  on  ;  the  Lord  has  opened  his  mouth, 
and  the  devil  will  never  be  able  to  shut  it."  These  are  the  wit 
nesses  we  want — men  who  can  sing  with  the  angels  because  then- 
own  households  are  converted  to  God.  I  hope  it  may  be  so  with 
all  of  you ;  and  if  any  of  you  are  yourselves  brought  to  Chris 
to-day — for  he  is  willing  to  receive  you — you  will  go  out  of  this 
place  singing,  and  the  angels  will  sing  -with  you.  There  shall  bo 
joy  in  earth,  and  joy  in  heaven ;  on  earth  peace,  and  glory  to 
God  ill  the  highest.  The  Lord  bless  you,  one  and  all,  for 
sake. 


SERMON    IV. 

THE  CONVERSION  OF  SAUL  OF  TARSUS. 

*  Ana  when  we  were  all  fallen  to  tJi*  earth,  I  heard  a  voice  speaking 
nnto  me,  and  saying,  in  the  Hebrew  tongue,  Saul,  Saul,  why  persecutest 
.hou  me?  it  is  hard  for  thee  to  kick  againat  the  pricks." — ACTS,  xxvi.  14. 

How  marvellous  the  condescension  which  induced  the  Saviour 
to  take  notice  of  such  a  wretch  as  Saul !  Enthroned  in  the 
highest  heavens,  amidst  the  eternal  melodies  of  the  redeemed, 
and  the  seraphic  sonnets  of  the  cherubim  and  all  the  angelic 
nosts,  it  was  strange  that  the  Saviour  should  stoop  himself  from 
his  dignity  to  speak  to  a  persecutor.  Engaged  as  he  is  both  day 
and  night  in  pleading  the  cause  of  his  own  church  before  his 
Father's  throne,  it  is  condescension  indeed  which  could  induce 
lim,  as  it  were,  to  susnend  his  intercessions,  in  order  that  he 
might  speak  personally  to  one  who  had  sworn  himself  his 
enemy.  And  what  grace  was  it  that  could  lead  the  Saviour's 
heart  to  speak  to  such  a  man  as  Saul,  who  had  breathed  out 
threatenings  against  his  church  ?  Had  he  not  haled  men  and 
women  to  prison  ?  had  he  not  compelled  them  in  every  syna 
gogue  to  blaspheme  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  1  and  now  Jesus 
himself  must  interpose  to  bring  him  to  his  senses !  Ah,  had  it 
oeen  a  thunderbolt  which  quivered  in  its  haste  to  reach  the  heart 
of  man,  we  should  not  have  marvelled,  or  had  the  lips  of  the 
Saviour  been  heaving  with  a  curse  we  should  not  have  been 
astonished.  Had  he  not  himself  in  his  own  lifetime  cursed  the 
persecutor  ?  Did  he  not  say,  whosoever  shall  offend  one  of  tho 
least  cf  these  my  little  ones,  it  were  better  for  him  that  a  mill 
•tone  were  hanged  about  his  neck,  and  that  he  were  cast  in  the 


62  THE  CONVERSION  OF  SAUL  OF  TARSUS. 

sen?  But  now  the  man  that  is  cursed  by  that  language  is  yet  to 
be  blessed  by  him  whom  he  had  persecuted ;  who  though  he  had 
stained  his  hand  in  blood,  and  had  now  the  commission  in  his 
hands  to  drag  others  to  prison,  though  he  had  kept  the  clothes  of 
those  who  had  stoned  Stephen,  yet  the  Master,  the  King  of 
heaven,  must  himself  speak  from  the  upper  skies  to  bring  him 
to  feel  the  need  of  a  Saviour,  and  to  make  him  partaker  of  pre 
cious  faith.  I  say  this  is  marvellous  condescension  and  match 
less  grace.  But,  beloved,  when  we  come  to  recollect  the 
Saviour's  character,  it  is  but  little  wonde  rful  that  he  should  do 
this  for  he  has  done  far  more  than  this.  Did  he  not  in  person 
leave  the  starry  thrones  of  heaven,  and  come  down  to  earth  to 
suffer,  and  bleed,  and  die  1  But  when  I  think  of  Bethlehem's 
manger,  of  the  cruel  garden  of  Gethsemane.  and  the  yet  more 
ihameful  Calvary,  I  do  not  wonder  that  the  Saviour  should  do 
any  act  of  grace  or  condescension.  That  being  done,  what  can 
be  greater  1  If  he  hath  stooped  from  heaven  into  hades,  what 
greater  stoop  can  he  accomplish  ?  If  his  own  throne  must  be 
left  empty,  if  his  own  crown  must  be  relinquished,  if  his  God 
head  must  be  veiled  in  flesh,  and  the  splendors  of  his  deity 
clothed  in  the  rags  of  manhood,  what  wonder,  I  say,  that  he 
should  stoop  to  speak  even  to  Saul  of  Tarsus,  to  bring  his  heart 
to  himself]  Beloved,  some  of  us  do  not  wonder  either,  for 
although  we  have  not  had  greater  grace  than  the  apostle  himself 
we  have  had  no  less.  The  Saviour  did  not  speak  out  of  heaven 
to  us  with  a  voice  that  others  might  hear,  but  he  spoke  with  a 
voice  that  our  conscience  heard.  We  were  not  blood-thirsty,  it 
may  be,  against  his  children,  but  we  had  sins  both  black  and 
heinous ;  yet  he  stopped  us.  Not  content  with  wooing  us  or  with 
threatening  us,  not  content  with  sending  his  ministers  to  us  and 
giving  us  his  word  to  warn  us  of  duty,  he  would  come  himselt 
And  you  and  I,  beloved,  who  have  tasted  of  this  grace,  can  say  i 
was  matchless  love  that  saved  Paul,  but  not  love  unexampled ;  for 
he  hath  saved  us  also,  and  made  us  partakers  of  the  same  grace. 
I  intend,  this  morning,  to  address  myself  more  particularly  to 
those  who  fear  not  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  but,  on  the  contrary, 
oppose  him.  I  think  I  may  be  quite  certain  that  I  have  non* 
bere  who  go  the  length  of  desiring  to  see  the  old  persecution  of 


THE  CONVERSION  OF  SAUL  OF  TARSUS.  C3 

the  church  revived.     I  do  not  think  there  is  an  Englishman,  how 
ever  much  he  may  hate  religion,  who  would  wish  to  see  the  stake 
again  in  Smithfield,  and  the  burning  pile  consuming  the  saints. 
There  may  be  sdme  who  hate  them  as  much,  but  still  not  in  that 
fashion  ;  the  common  sense  of  the  age  reviles  against  the  gibbet, 
the  sword,  and  the  dungeon.     The  children  of  God,  in  this  coun- 
1  ry  at  least,  are  quite  safe  from  any  political  persecution  of  that 
kind ;  but  it  is  highly  probable  that  I  have  here  this  morning ' 
•ome  who  go  to  the  full  length  of  their  tether,  and  who  endeav 
or,  as  much  as  lieth  in  them,  to  provoke  the  Lord  to  anger  by 
opposing  his  cause.     You  will  perhaps  recognize  yourselves  if  I 
try  to  paint  a  picture.     It  is  seldom  that  you  ever  go  into  the 
house  of  God ;  in  fact,  you  have  a  contempt  for  all  the  gatherings 
of  the  righteous ;  you  have  a  notion  that  all  saints  are  hypocrites, 
that  all  professors  are  cants,  and  you  do  not  at  times  blush  to 
say  so.     However,  yau  have  a  wife,  and  that  wife  of  yours  has 
been  impressed  under  the  sound  of  the  ministry ;   she  loves  to  go 
to  the  house  of  God,  and  heaven  and  her  heart  alone  know  what 
grief  and  agony  of  mind  you  have  caused  her.     How  often  have 
you  taunted  and  jeered  her  on  account  of  her  profession  !     You 
cannot  deny   but  that   she  is  a  better  woman  for  it ;   you  are 
obliged  to  confess,  that  although  she  cannot  go  with  you  in  all 
your  sports  and  merriments,  yet  as  far  as  she  can  go  she  is  a 
loving  and  affectionate  wife  to  you.     If  any  one  should  find  fault 
with  her,  you  would  right  manfully  defend  her  character ;  but  it 
is  her  religion  that  you  hate;   and  it  is  but  lately  that  you 
threatened  to  lock  her  up  on  Sunday.     You  say  it  is  impossible 
for  you  to  live  in  the  house  with  her  if  she  will  go  up  to  the 
house  of  God.     Moreover,  there  is  a  little  child  of  yours  ;  you 
had   no   objection  to   that  child   going  to    the   Sunday-school, 
because  she  was  out  of  your  way  on  the  Sunday  when  you  were 
smoking  your  pipe  in  your  shirt  sleeves ;  you  did  not  want  to  be 
bothered  with  your  children,  you  said,  and  therefore  you  were 
elad  to  pack  them  off  to  the  Sunday-school ;  but  that  child  has 
aad  her  heart  touched  ;  and  you  cannot  nelp  seeing  that  the 
religion  of  Christ  is  in  her  heart,  therefore  you  do  not  like  it ; 
^ou  love  the  child,  but  you  would  give  any  thing  if  she  were  riot 
what  she  is  ;  you  would  give  any  thing  if  you  could  crush  the 


*H  THL    CONVBKBION    OF    SiALi.    OF    TAKBU8. 

last  spark  of  religion  out  of  her.  But  perhaps  I  can  put  your 
ease  yet.  Yon  are  a  master ;  you  occupy  a  respectable  position, 
yon  have  many  men  under  you,  you  cannot  bear  a  man  to  makt 
a  profession  of  religion.  Other  masters  you  know  have  said  tc 
(heir  men,  "  Do  as  you  like,  so  long  as  you  are  a  good  servant, 
I  do  not  care  about  your  religious  views."  But  mayhap  you  are 
little  the  reverse  ;  although  you  would  not  turn  a  man  awa) 
because  of  his  religion,  you  give  him  a  jeer  every  now  and  then 
and  if  you  trip  him  up  in  a  little  fault,  you  say,  "  Ah !  that  i 
your  religion  ;  I  suppose  you  learned  that  at  the  chapel ; "  griev- 
ing  the  poor  man's  soul,  while  he  endeavors  as  far  as  he  can  to 
discharge  his  duty  to  you.  Or,  you  are  a  young  man,  employed 
in  a  warehouse  or  a  shop,  and  there  is  one  of  your  shopmates  who 
has  lately  taken  to  religion ;  he  is  to  be  found  on  his  knees  in 
prayer — whai  fine  fun  you  have  made  of  him  lately,  haven't  you  ? 
You  and  others  have  joined  in  like  a  pack  of  hounds  after  a  poor 
hare,  and  he  being  of  rather  a  timid  turn  of  mind,  perhaps  is 
silent  before  you.  or  if  he  speaks,  the  tear  is  in  his  eye,  because 
you  have  wounded  his  spirit.  Now  this  is  the  selfsame  spirit  that 
kindled  the  firebrand  of  old :  that  stretched  the  saint  upon  the 
rack ;  that  cut  his  body  in  pieces,  and  sent  him  to  wander  about 
in  sheep-skins  and  in  goat-skins.  If  I  have  not  exactly  hit  your 
character  yet,  I  may  do  it  before  I  have  done.  I  wish  to  address 
myself  especially  to  those  of  you,  who  in  word  or  deed,  or  in 
any  other  manner,  persecute  the  children  of  God  ;  or  if  you  do 
not  like  so  hard  a  word  as  "  persecute,"  laugh  at  them,  opposing 
them,  and  endeavor  to  put  an  end  to  the  good  work  in  their 
hearts. 

I  shall,  in  the  name  of  Christ,  first  put  the  question  to  you. 
"Saul,  Saul  why.  persecutest  thou  me?"  In  the  second  place,  I 
shall  in  Christ's  name  expostulate  with  you,  "It  is  hard  for  thee 
o  kick  against  the  pricks  ;  "  and  then  if  God  shall  bless  what  is 
said  to  the  teaching  of  your  heart,  it  may  be  that  the  Master 
shall  give  you  a  feu  words  of  comfort,  as  he  did  the  apostle 
Paul,  when  he  said,  "Rise,  and  stand  upon  thy  feet;  for  I  have 
appeared  unto  thee  for  this  purpose,  to  make  thee  a  minister  and 
a  witness  both  of  these  things  which  thou  hast  seen,  and  of  those 
things  in  the  which  I  will  appear  unto  thee." 


THE    CONVERSION    OF    SAUL    OF    TARSUS.  65 

I.  In  the  first  place,  then,  we  will  consider  THE  QUESTION,, 
WHICH  JESUS  CHRIST  PUT  OUT  OF  HEAVEN  TO  PAUL,  has  been 
put  to  you  this  morning. 

First,  notice  H'hat  a  personal  question  it  was,  "Saul,  Saul,  why 
pcrsecutest  thou  me  V'  When  I  preach  to  you,  I  am  obliged  to 
address  you  all  as  an  assembly  ;  it  is  not  possible  for  me,  except 
•n  rare  occasions,  to  single  out  an  individual,  and  describe  his 
•liaracter,  although  under  the  hand  of  the  Spirit  it  is  sometimes 
done ;  but  in  the  main  I  am  obliged  to  describe  the  character  as 
a  whole,  and  deal  with  it  in  the  mass.  But  not  so  our  Master  ; 
he  did  not  say  out  of  heaven,  "  Saul,  why  does  the  synagogue 
persecute  me  1  Why  do  the  Jews  hate  rny  religion  T'  No  ;  it 
was  put  more  pertinently  than  that — "  Saul,  Saul,  why  persecutes! 
thou  me?"  If  it  had  been  put  in  general  terms,  it  would  have 
glanced  off  from  the  heart  of  the  apostle  ;  it  would  have  been 
like  an  arrow  which  had  missed  the  mark,  and  barely  grazed  the 
skin  of  the  man  in  whose  heart  it  was  intended  to  find  a  homo ; 
but  when  it  came  personally — "  Why  persecutest  thou  me  V — 
there  was  no  getting  off  it.  I  pray  the  Lord  to  make  the  ques 
tion  personal  to  some  of  you.  There  be  many  of  us  here  pres 
ent  who  have  had  personal  preaching  to  our  souls.  Do  you  not 
remember,  dear  brother  in  Christ,  when  you  were  first  pricked  in 
the  heart,  how  personal  the  preacher  was  ?  I  remember  it  well. 
It  seemed  to  me  that  I  was  the  only  person  in  the  whole  place, 
as  if  a  black  wall  were  round  about  me,  and  I  were  shut  in  with 
the  preacher,  something  like  the  prisoners  at  the  Penitentiary, 
who  each  sit  in  their  box  and  can  see  no  one  but  the  chaplain.  I 
thought  all  he  said  was  meant  for  me ;  I  felt  persuaded  that  some 
one  knew  my  character,  and  had  written  to  him  and  told  him  ail, 
and  that  he  had  personally  picked  me  out  Why,  I  thought  he 
fixed  his  eyes  on  me ;  and  I  have  reason  to  believe  he  did,  but 
still  he  said  he  knew  nothing  about  my  case.  Oh,  that  men 
woulo.  hear  the  word  preached,  and  that  God  would  so  bless  them 
vi  their  hearing,  that  they  might  feel  it  to  have  a  personal  appli- 
Cation  to  their  own  hearts. 

But  note  again — the  Apostle  received  some  information  as  to 
the  persecuted  one.  If  you  had  asked  Saul  who  it  was  he  per* 
Becuteti,  he  would  have  said,  "  Some  poor  fisherman,  that  had 


0(5  THK    CONVERSION    OF    SAUL    OF    TARSUS. 

been  setting  up  an  impostor ;  I  am  determined  to  put  them  down. 
Why,  who  are  they  ?  They  are  the  poorest  of  the  world  ;  the 
very  scum  and  draff  of  society ;  if  they  were  princes  and  kings 
we  perhaps  might  let  them  have  their  opinion :  but  these  pool 
miserable,  ignorant  fellows,  I  do  not  see  why  they  are  to  be  al 
lowed  to  carry  out  their  infatuation,  and  I  shall  persecute  them. 
Moreover,  most  of  them  are  women  I  have  been  persecuting — 
poor  ignorant  creatures.  What  right  have  they  to  set  theii 
judgment  up  above  the  priests'?  They  have  no  right  to  have  an 
opinion  of  their  own,  and  therefore  it  is  quite  right  for  me  tc 
make  them  turn  away  from  their  foolish  errors."  But  see  in 
what  a  different  light  Jesus  Christ  puts  it.  He  does  not  say, 
"  Saul,  Saul,  why  didst  thou  persecute  Stephen  ?"  or  "  Why  art 
thou  about  to  drag  the  people  of  Damascus  to  prison  ?"  No — 
"  Saul,  Saul,  why  persecutest  thou  me  ?"  Did  you  ever  think  of 
it  in  that  light  1  You  have  got  a  poor  man  who  works  for  you, 
who  wears  a  fustian  jacket.  He  is  nobody.  You  may  laugh  at 
him.  He  will  not  tell  anybody,  or  even  if  he  does,  you  will  not 
be  called  to  book  about  it,  because  he  is  nobody.  You  dare  not 
laugh  so  at  a  duke  or  an  earl.  You  would  mind  your  behavior 
if  you  were  in  such  company  as  that ;  but  because  this  is  a  poor 
man,  you  think  you  have  a  license  given  you  to  laugh  at  his  re 
ligion.  But  remember,  that  beneath  the  fustian  jacket  there  is 
Jesus  Christ  himself.  Inasmuch  as  you  have  done  this  unto  one 
of  the  least  of  his  brethren,  you  have  done  it  unto  him.  Has 
the  thought  ever  struck  you,  that  when  you  laughed,  you  were 
laughing,  not  at  him,  but  at  his  Master  1  Whether  it  struck  you 
or  not,  it  is  a  great  truth,  that  Jesus  Christ  takes  all  the  injuries 
which  are  done  to  his  people  as  if  they  had  been  done  to  him. 
You  locked  your  wife  out  the  other  night,  did  you,  because  she 
would  frequent  the  house  of  God]  When  she  stood  there  shiv 
ering  in.  the  midnight  air,  or  entreating  you  to  let  her  in,  if  you. 
eyes  had  been  wide  open,  you  would  have  seen  the  Lord  of  life 
ind  glory  shivering  there,  and  he  might  have  said  to  you,  "Saul, 
Saul,  why  persecutest  thou  me  ?r  And  then  you  would  have  seen 
it  to  have  been  a  very  much  greater. sin  than  you  imagine  it  now 
to  be.  You  laughed  at  a  little  child  the  other  day,  because  the 
child  sanp  its  simple  1$  ~^n,  and  evidently  s'ang  it  from  its  htart, 


THE    CONVERSION    OF    SAUL    OF    TARSUS.  <V/ 

Did  y>ou  know, — or  if  you  did  not  know  it  then,  know  it  now, — 
did  you  know  that  you  were  laughing  at  Christ ;  that  when  yob 
mocked  her,  you  were  mocking  her  Master,  and  that  Jesus  Christ 
ha*  set  down  thai  laugh  in  his  great  book,  as  an  indignation  done 
to  his  own  real  person.  "  Why  persecutest  thou  me  ?"  If  ye 
could  see  Christ  enthroned  in  heaven,  reignir.g  there  in  the  splen 
dors  of  his  majesty,  would  ye  laugh  at  him  ?  If  ye  could  see 
him  sitting  on  his  great  throne,  coming  to  judge  the  world,  would 
ye  laugh  at  him  1  Oh  !  as  all  the  rivers  run  into  the  sea,  so  all 
the  streams  of  the  churches  suffering  run  into  Christ.  If  the 
clouds  be  full  of  rain,  they  empty  themselves  upon  the  earth ; 
and  if  the  Christian's  heart  be  full  of  woes,  it  empties  itself  into 
the  breast  of  Jesus.  Jesus  is  the  great  reservoir  of  all  his  peo 
ple's  woes,  and  by  laughing  at  his  people,  you  help  to  fill  that 
reservoir  to  its  brim ;  and  one  day  will  it  burst  in  the  fury  of  its 
might,  and  the  floods  shall  sweep  you  away,  and  the  sand  founda 
tion  upon  which  your  house  is  builded  shall  give  way,  and  then 
what  shall  ye  do  when  ye  shall  stand  before  the  face  of  him 
whose  person  ye  have  mocked,  and  whose  name  ye  have  de 
spised  1 

We  will  put  the  question  in  another  way ;  it  is  a  very  reason 
able  one,  and  seems  to  demand  an  answer.  "  Saul,  Saul,  why 
persecutest  thou  me  V  "  Saul,"  the  Master  might  have  said 
"  what  have  I  done  to  hurt  thee  ?  When  I  was  on  earth  did  I  say 
a  word  against  thy  character  1 — did  I  damage  thy  reputation  1 — did 
I  injure  thy  person  ? — did  I  ever  grieve  thee '] — did  I  ever  say  a  hard 
word  against  thee  ?  What  hurt  have  I  ever  done  thee  ?  Why 
art  thou  so  provoked  against  me1?  If  I  had  been  thy  bitterest 
enemy,  and  had  spit  in  thy  face,  thou  couldst  not  have  been 
more  wroth  with  me  than  now.  But  why,  man,  wilt  thou  be  an- 
vgry  against  one  who  has  never  hurt  thee — who  has  never  done 
thee  a  displeasure?  Oh!  why  persecutest  thou  me?  Is -there 
any  thing  in  ray  character  that  deserves  it  ?  Was  I  not  pure, 
and  holy,  and  separate  from  sinners  ?  Did  I  not  go  about  doing 
good  ?  1  raised  the  dead  ;  I  healed  the  lepers ;  I  fed  the  hungry ; 
I  clothed  the  naked ;  for  which  of  these  works  dost  thou  hate  me ? 
Why  persecutest  thou  me  ?"  The  question  comes  home  to  you 
In  tbc  same  manner  this  morning.  Ah !  man,  why  dost  thou  per 


68  THE  CONVERSION  OF  SAUL  OF  TARSUS. 

secute  Christ  1  He  puts  it  to  thee.  What  hurt  has  he  ever  dcr> 
thee  1  Has  Christ  ever  despoiled  you,  robbed  you,  injured  you 
in  any  way  whatever?  Has  his  gospel  in  any  way  whatever 
taken  away  the  comforts  of  life  from  you,  or  done  you  any  dam 
age  ]  You  dare  not  say  that.  If  it  were  the  Mormonism  of  Joe 
Smith,  I  wonder  not  that  you  should  persecute  it,  though,  even 
tlnn,  you  would  have  no  right  to  do  so,  for  that  might  take  tho 
wife  of  your  bosom  from  you.  If  it  were  a  filthy  and  lustful 
system  that  would  undermine  the  foundations  of  society,  you 
might  think  yourself  right  in  persecuting  it.  But  has  Christ 
ever  taught  his  disciples  to  rob  you,  to  cheat  you,  to  curse  you  ] 
Does  not  his  doctrine  teach  the  very  reverse,  and  are  not  his  fol 
lowers,  when  they  are  true  to  their  Master  and  themselves,  the 
very  reverse  of  this  1  Why  hate  a  man  who  has  done  you  no 
injury  1  Why  hate  a  religion  that  does  not  interfere  with  you  ? 
If  you  will  not  follow  Christ  yourself,  how  does  it  injure  you  to 
let  others  do  so  ?  You  say  it  injures  your  family ;  prove  it,  sir. 
Has  it  injured  your  wife  1  Does  she  love  you  less  than  before 
Is  she  less  obedient  ?  You  dare  not  say  that.  Has  it  hurt  your 
child  ?  Is  your  child  less  reverent  to  his  father  because  he  fears 
God  ?  Is  he  less  fond  of  you  because  he  loves  his  Redeemer 
best  of  all  ]  In  what  respect  has  Christ  ever  hurt  any  of  you  ] 
He  has  fed  you  with  the  bounties  of  his  providence.  The  clothes 
you  wear  to-day  are  the  gifts  of  his  bounty.  The  breath  in  your 
nostrils  he  has  preserved  to  you,  and  will  you  curse  him  for  this  1 
It  was  but  the  other  day  that  an  avenging  angel  seized  the  axe, 
and  the  Master  said,  "  Cut  it  down,  why  cumbereth  it  the 
ground  ?"  And  Jesus  came  and  put  his  hand  upon  the  angel's 
arm,  and  said,  "  Stay,  stay  yet  another  year,  until  I  have  digged 
about  it  and  dunged  it."  Your  life  was  spared  by  him,  and  you 
curse  him  for  this;  you  blaspheme  him  because  he  has  spared 
V)ur  life,  and.  spend  the  breath  which  his -own  grace  has  given 
you,, in  cursing  the  God  that  allows  you  to  breathe.  You  little 
know  from  how  many  dangers  Christ,  in  bis  providence,  protects 
you.  You  can  little  guess  how  numerous  the  mercies  which,  un 
seen  by  you,  are  poured  into  your  lap  every  hour.  And  yet,  for 
mercies  innumerable,  for  grace  that  cannot  be  stopped  by  your 
iniquity,  for  lovu  that  cannot  be  overpowered  by  ytmr  inj 


THE  CONVERSION  OF  SAUL  OF  TARSUS.  69 

do  you  curse  the  Saviour  for  all  this  ?  Base  ingratitude !  Truly 
ye  have  hated  him  without  a  cause;  ye  have  persecuted  him, 
though  be  has  loved  you,  and  has  done  nought  to  injure  you. 

But  let  me  picture  the.  Master  to  you  once  more,  arid  methinks 
you  will  never,  never  pers<xjute  him  again,  if  you  do  but  see 
him,  Oh,  if  you  could  but  see  the  Lord  Jesus,  you  must  love 
hiir  ;  if  you  did  but  know  his  worth,  you  could  not  hate  him  f 
He  was  more  beautiful  than  all  the  sons  of  men.  Persuasion 
sat  upon  his  lips,  as  if  all  the  bees  of  eloquence  had  brought 
their  honey  there,  and  made  his  mouth  the  hive.  He  spake — 
and  so  did  he  speak,  that  if  a  lion  had  heard  him,  it  would  have 
crouched  and  licked  his  feet.  Oh,  how  loving  was  he  in  his  ten 
derness  !  Remember  that  prayer  of  his  when  the  iron  was 
piercing  his  hand — "  Father,  forgive  them."  You  never  heard 
him,  all  his  life  long,  once  saying  an  angry  word  to  those  who 
persecuted  him.  He  was  reviled,  but  he  reviled  not  again. 
Even  when  he  was  led  like  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter,  he  was  dumb 
before  his  shearers,  and  he  opened  not  his  mouth.  But  though 
fairer  than  the  sons  of  men,  both  in  person  and  in  character,  yet 
he  was  the  Man  of  Sorrows.  Grief  had  ploughed  his  brow  with 
her  deepest  furrows.  His  cheeks  were  sunken  and  hollow  with 
agony.  He  had  fasted  many  a  day,  and  often  had  he  thirsted. 
He  toiled  from  morning  to  night;  then  spent  all  night  in  prayer; 
then  rose  again  to  labor — and  all  this  without  reward — with  no 
hope  of  getting  any  thing  from  any  man.  He  had  no  house,  no 
home,  no  gold,  no  silver.  Foxes  had  holes,  and  the  birds  of  the 
air  had  nests,  but  he,  the  Son  of  Man,  had  not  where  to  lay  his 
head.  He  was  the  persecuted  man,  hunted  by  his  enemies  from 
place  to  place,  with  scarce  a  friend  to  help  him.  Oh,  had  ye  seen 
him  ;  had  ye  seen  his  loveliness  and  his  misery  united ;  had  ye 
^seen  his  kindness,  and  yet  the  cruelty  of  his  enemies,  your 
.hearts  must  have  melted — you  would  have  said,  "  No,  Jesus, 
can  not  persecute  thee !  No,  I  will  stand  between  thee  and  the 
burning  sunshine.  If  I  cannot  be  thy  disciple,  yet  at  any  rate  I 
will  not  be  thy  opposer.  If  this  cloak  can  shelter  thee  in  thy 
midnight  wrestlings,  there  it  is ;  and  if  this  waterpot  can  draw 
thee  water  from  the  well,  I  will  let  it  down,  and  thou  shalt  have 
enough ;  for  if  I  love  thee  nut,  since  thou  art  so  poor,  so  sad,  and 


70  TUB    CONVERSION    OF    SAUL    OF    TARSUS. 

jo  &ood,  I  cannot  hate  tliee.  No,  I  \vill  not  persecute  thee !" 
But  though  I  feel  certain,  if  you  could  see  Christ,  you  must  say 
this,  yet  have  you  really  persecuted  him  in  his  disciplej,  in  the 
members  of  his  spiritual  body,  and  I  therefore  put  to  you  the 
question,  "  Saul,  Saul,  why  persecutest  thou  me  f '  God  help 
you  to  answer  that  question,  and  the  answer  must  be  shame  and 
confusion  of  face. 

II.  This  shall  bring  me  to  the  second  point — EXPOSTULATION. 
'  It  is  hard  for  thee  to  kick  against  the  pricks."  There  is  a  figure 
here ;  there  is  an  allusion  to  the  ox  goad.  When  the  ox  was 
yoked  for  ploughing,  if  he  did  not  move  on  in  as  sprightly  a 
manner  as  was  desired,  the  husbandman  pricked  him  with  a  long 
rod  that  ended  with  an  iron  point.  Very  likely,  as  soon  as  the 
ox  felt  the  goad,  instead  of  going  on,  he  struck  out  as  hard  as  he 
could  behind  him.  He  kicked  against  the  goad,  sending  the  iron 
deep  into  his  own  flesh.  Of  course,  the  husbandman,  who  was 
guiding  him,  kept  his  goad  there  still,  and  the  more  frequently 
the  ox  kicked,  the  more  he  was  hurt.  13ut  go  he  must.  lie  was 
in  the  hand  of  man,  who  must  and  will  rule  the  beast.  It  w;»s 
just  his  own  option  to  kick  as  long  as  he  pleased,  for  he  did  no 
harm  to  his  driver,  but  only  to  himself.  You  will  ^ee  that  there 
i.s  a  beauty  in  this  figure,  if  1  pull  it  to  pieces,  a;ul  ask  you  a 
question  or  two. 

It  is  hard  for  you  to  kick  against  the  goad  ;  for,  in  the  first 
place,  you  do  not  really  accomplish  your  purpose.  When  the 
ox  kicks  against  the  goad,  it  is  to  spite  the  husbandt/.an  for  hav 
ing  goaded  him  onward  ;  but  instead  of  hurting  the  husbandman, 
it  hurts  itself.  And  when  you  have  persecuted  Christ,  in  order 
to  stop  the  progress  of  his  gospel,  let  me  ask  you,  have  you  ever 
stopped  it  at  all?  No;  and  ten  thousand  like  you  would  not  be 
able  to  stop  the  mighty  onward  rush  of  the  host  of  God'.?  elect. 
If  thou  thinkest,  O  man,  that  thou  canst  step  the  progress  of 
Christ's  church,  go  thou  and  first  bind  the  sweet  influences  of  ,iio 
Pleiades,  arid  bid  the  universe  stand  still  instead  of  cive.Hh^ 
pound  those  fair  stars !  Go,  stand  by  the  winds,  and  bid  tho.n; 
oease  their  wailing,  or  take  thy  station  upon  a  hoary  chilj  and  bid 
the  roaring  sea  roll  back  when  its  tide  is  marching  on  Ui3  beach; 
and  wher  thou  hast  stopped  tho  universe,  when  sun,  moon,  *uvd 


THE    CONVERSION    OF    BALL    OF    TARSUS.  71 

stars  have  been  obedient  to  thy  mandate,  when  the  sea  hath 
heard  thee  and  obeyed  thee,  then  come  forth  and  stop  the  om 
nipotent  progress  of  the  church  of  Christ.  But  thou  canst  not 
do  it.  "The  kir/gs  of  the  earth  set  themselves,  and  the  rukrs 
take  counsel  together,  against  the  Lord,  and  against  his  anointed, 
saying,  Let  us  break  their  bands  asunder,  and  cast  away  their 
curds  from  us."  But  what  said  the  Almighty  ?  He  did  not  even 
get  up  to  combat  with  them.  "  He  that  sitteth  in  the  heavens 
shall  laugh  ;  the  Lord  shall  have  them  in  derision.  Then  shall 
he  speak  unto  them  in  his  wrath,  and  vex  them  in  his  r  n*e  dis 
pleasure.  Yet  have  I  set  my  king  upon  my, holy  hill  of  Zion." 
The  church  cares  not  for  all  the  noise  of  the  world.  '  God  i; 
our  reiiige  and  strength,  a  very  present  help  in  trouble.  There 
fore,  will'not  we  fear,  though  the  earth  be  removed,  and  though 
the  mountains  be  carried  into  the  midst  of  the  sea;  tho"gh  the 
waters  thereof  roar,  and  be  troubled,  and  though  the  mountains 
shake  with  the  swelling  thereof."  Ah,  in  your  hosts  yo  h-n-e  not 
prevailed,  and  tthink  ye,  O  puny  man,  that,  one  by  one,  ye  shall 
be  able  to  conquer  1  Your  wish  may  be  strong  enough,  but  your 
wish  can  never  be  accomplished.  You  may  desirr  it  anxiously, 
but  you  shall  never  attain  thereto. 

But  put  it  as  a  personal  matter,  have  you  ever  succeeded  in 
stopping  the  work  of  grace  in  the  heart  of  any  one  1  You  tried 
to  laugh  it  out  of  your  wife,  but  if  she  really  was  converted, 
you  never  would  laugh  it  out  of  her.  You  may  have  tried  to 
vex  your  little  child  ;  but,  if  grace  be  in  that  child,  I  defy  you 
and  your  master,  the  devil,  to  get  it  out.  Ay,  young  man,  you 
may  laugh  at  your  shopmate,  but  he  will  beat  you  in  the  long  run. 
lie  may  sometimes  be  abashed,  but  you  never  will  turn  him.  If 
he  is  a  hypocrite  you  will,  and,  perhaps,  there  will  be  no  grout 
loss  ;  nut.  if  he  be  a  true  soldier  of  Christ,  he  can  bear  a  great  deal 
more  than  the  laugh  of  an  empty-headed  being  like  yourse  f. 
You  need  not  for  a  moment  Hatter  yourself  that  he  will  be  afraid 
of  you.  He  will  have  to  endure  a  greater  baptism  of  suffering 
khan  that,  and  he  will  not  be  cowed  by  the  first  shower  of  vour 
poor,  pitiful,  malicious  folly.  And  as  for  you,  sir  merchant,  you 
may  persecute  yo-ir  man,  but  see  if  you  will  get  him  to  yield. 
»  I  know  a  man  whose  master  had  tried  very  Hard  to  mak« 


72  THE  CONVERSION  OF  SAUL  OF  TARSUS. 

him  go  against  his  conscience  ;  but  he  said,  "  No,  sir."  And  tho 
master  thought,  "  Well,  he  is  a  very  valuable  servant ;  but  1 
will  beat  him,  it'  I  can."  So  he  threatened  that  if  he  did  not  do  as 
he  wished  he  would  turn  him  away.  The  man  was  dependent  on 
his  master,  and  he  knew  not  what  he  should  do  for  his  daily  bread. 
So  he  said  to  his  master  honestly  at  once,  "  Sir,  1  don't  know  of 
any  other  situation  ;  I  should  be  very  sorry  to  leave  you,  for  1 
have  been  very  comfortable,  but  if  it  comes  to  that,  Sir,  I  would 
sooner  starve  than  submit  my  conscience  to  any  one."  The  man 
left,  and  the  master  had  to  go  after  him  to  bring  him  back  again. 
And  so  it  will  be  in  every  case.  If  Christians  are  but  faithful, 
they  must  win  the  day.  It  is  no  use  your  kicking  against  them  ; 
you  cannot  hurt  them.  Th«y  must,  they  shall  be  conquerors 
through  him  that  hath  loved  them. 

But  there  is  another  way  of  putting  it.  When  the  ox  kicked 
against  the  goad,  he  got  no  good  by  it.  Kick  as  he  might,  he  was 
never  benefited  by  it.  If  the  ox  had  stopped  and  nibbled  a  blade 
of  grass  or  a  piece  of  hay,  why,  then  he  would  have  been  wise, 
perhaps,  in  standing  still ;  but  to  stand  still  simply  to  be  goaded 
and  to  kick,  simply  to  have  iron  stuck  into  your  flesh,  is  a  rather 
foolish  thing.  Now,  I  ask  you,  what  have  you  ever  got  by 
opposing  Christ  ]  Suppose  you  say  you  don't  like  religion,  what 
have  you  ever  got  by  hating  it]  I  will  tell  you  what  you  have 
pot.  You  have  got  those  red  eyes  sometimes  on  the  Monday 
morning,  after  the  drunkenness  of  the  Sunday  night.  I  will  tell 
you  what  you  have  got,  young  man.  You  have  got  that  shattered 
constitution,  which,  even  if  you  had  now  turned  it  to  the  paths 
of  virtue,  must  hang  about  you  till  you  leave  it  in  your  grave. 
What  have  you  got],  VVhy.  there  are  some  of  you  who  might 
have  been  respectable  members  of  society,  who  have  got  that 
old  broken  hat,  that  old  ragged  coat,  that  drunken,  slouched  man 
ner  about  you,  and  that  character  that  you  would  like  to  let  down 
and  run  away  from,  for  it  is  no  good  to  you.  That  is  what  you 
have  got  by  opposing  Christ.  What  have  you  got  by  opposing 
him  ?  Why,  a  house  without  furniture — for  through  your 
drunkenness  you  have  had  to  sell  every  thing  of  value  you  had. 
You  have  got  your  children  in  rags,  and  your  wife  in  misery, 
and  your  eldest  daughter,  perhaps,  running  u\t£  aJj^ine%  and  you/ 


THE    CONVERSION    OF    SAUL    OF    TARSUS.  73 

son  rising  up  to  curse  the  Saviour,  as  yourself  have  done. 
What  have  you  got  by  opposing  Christ?  What  man  in  all  the 
world  ever  got  any  thing  by  it  ?  There  is  a  serious  loss  sustained, 
but  its  for  gain,  there  is  nothing  of  the  sort. 

But  you  say,  though  you  have  opposed  Christ,  still  you  are 
moral.  Again  I  will  put  it  to  you.  Have  you  ever  got  any 
thing  even  then  by  opposing  Christ?  Has  it  made  your  family 
any  the  happier,  do  you  think  ?  Has  it  made  you  any  the  hap 
pier  yourself?  Do  you  feel  after  you  have  been  laughing  at 
your  wife,  or  your  child,  or  your  man,  that  you  can  sleep  any 
the  sounder  ?  Do  you  feel  that  to  be  a  thing  which  will  quiet 
your  conscience  when  you  come  to  die  ?  Remember,  you  must 
die ;  and  do  you  think  that  when  you  are  dying,  it  will  afford 
you  any  consolation  to  think  that  you  did  your  best  to  destroy 
the  souls  of  other  people  ?  No  ;  you  must  confess  it  is  a  poor 
game.  You  are  getting  no  good  by  it,  but  you  are  doing  your 
self  a  positive  injury.  Ah,  drunkard,  go  on  with  your  drunken 
ness,  remember  that  every  drunken  fit  leaves  a  plague  behind 
*t  that  you  will  have  to  feel  one  day.  It  is  pleasant  to  sin 
to-day,  but  it  will  not  be  pleasant  to  reap  the  harvest  of  it 
to-morrow ;  the  seeds  of  sin  are  sweet  when  we  sow  them,  but 
the  fruit  is  frightfully  bitter  when  we  come  to  house  it  at  last. 
The  wine  of  sin  tasteth  sweet  when  it  goeth  down,  but  it  is  as  gall 
and  vinegar  in  the  bowels.  Take  heed,  ye  that  hate  Christ  and 
oppose  his  gospel,  for  as  certainly  as  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is 
the  Son  of  God,  and  his  religion  is  true,  you  are  heaping  on  your 
head  a  load  of  injury,  instead  of  deriving  good.  "  Saul,  Saul, 
why  persecutest  thou  me  ?  it  is  hard  for  thee  to  kick  against  the 
pricks." 

But  kick  as  the  ox  might,  it  had  to  go  forward  at  last.  We 
have  seen  a  horse  stand  still  in  the  street,  and  the  driver,  who 
had  not  very  much  patience  with  him,  has  so  belabored  him. 
that  we  wondered  how  the  poor  horse  could  stand  still  under  such 
a  torrent  of  blows ;  but  we  have  observed  at  last  that  the  horse 
is  obliged  to  go  on,  and  we  wondered  what  he  got  by  standing 
Htill.  It  is  just  the  same  with  you.  If  the  Lord  means  to  make 
a  Christian  out  of  you,  you  may  kick  against  Christianity,  but  he 
will  have  you  at  last.  If  Jesus  Christ  intends  your  salvation  you 
4 


T4  THE    CONVERSION    OF    S.U'L    OF    TARSI'S. 

may  ciir.se  him,  but  he  will  make  you  preach  his  gospel  one  day 
ii'  he  likes  to  do  so.  Ah,  if  Christ  had  willed  it,  Voltaire,  wh< 
cursed  him,  might  have  made  a  second  apostle  Paul.  He  could 
not  have  resisted  sovereign  grace,  it'  Christ  had  so  determined 
If  any  one  had  told  the  apostle  Paul  when  he  was  going  to  Da 
mascus,  that  he  would  one  day  become  a  preacher  of  Christianity, 
he  would,  no  doubt,  have  laughed  at  it  as  ridiculous  nonsense; 
but  the  Lord  had  the  key  of  his  will,  and  he  wound  it  up  as  he 
pleased.  And  so  it  will  be  with  you — if  he  has  determined  to 
have  you  as  one  of  his  followers — 

"  If,  as  the  eternal  mandate  ran,          • 
Almighty  grace  arrest  that  man." — 

Almighty  grace  will  arrest  you,  and  the  bloodiest  of  persecutors 
will  be  made  the  boldest  of  saints.  Then  why  persecutest  thou 
me?  Perhaps  you  are  despising  the  very  Saviour  you  will  one 
day  love ;  trying  to  knock  down  the  very  thing  that  you  will  one 
day  try  to  build  up.  Mayhap  you  are  persecuting  the  men  you 
will  call  your  brothers  and  sisters.  It  is  always  well  for  a  man 
not  to  go  so  far  that  he  cannot  go  back  respectably.  Now  do  not 
go  too  far  in  opposing  Christ,  for  one  of  these  times  it  may  be 
you  will  be  very  glad  to  come  crouching  at  his  feet.  But  there 
is  this  sad  reflection,  if  Christ  does  not  save  you,  still  you  must 
go  on.  You  may  kick  against  the  pricks,  but  you  cannot  get 
away  from  his  dominion;  you  may  kick  against  Christ,  but  you 
cannot  cast  him  from  his  throne  ;  you  cannot  drag  him  out  of 
heaven.  You  may  kick  against  him,  but  you  cannot  prevent  his 
condemning  you  at  last.  You  may  laugh  at  him,  but  you  can  not 
laugh  away  the  day  of  judgment.  You  may  scoff  at  religion,  but 
all  your  scoffs  cannot  put  it  out.  You  may  jeer  at  heaven,  but 
•ill  your  jeers  will  not  take  one  single  note  from  the  harps  of  the 
edeomed.  No,  the  thing  is  just  the  same  as  if  you  did  not  kick  ; 
.t  makes  no  difference  except  to  yourself.  Oh,  now  foolish  must 
you  be,  to  persevere  in  a  rebellion  which  is  harmful  to  none 
but  your  own  soul ;  which  is  not  injurious  to  him  whom  you  hate^ 
but  which,  if  he  pleases,  h«  can  stop,  or  if  he  doth  not  stop,  he- 
con  and  will  revenge. 

III.  And  now  I  close  up  by  addressing  myself  to  some  her<= 


.THE    CONVERSION*    OF    SAUL    OF    T  VRST'S.  75 

^v*hose  hearts  are  already  touched.  Do  you  this  morning  feel 
your  need  of  a  Saviour  ?  Are  you  conscious  of  your  guilt  in 
having  opposed  him,  and  has  the  Holy  Spirit  made  you  willing 
now  to  confess  your  sins  ?  Are  you  saying,  u  Lord,  have  mercy 
upon  me  a  sinner  ?"  Then  1  have  GOOD  NEWS  for  you.  Paul, 
uho  persecuted  Christ,  was  forgiven.  He  says  he  was  the  very 
chief  of  sinners,  but  he  obtained  mercy.  So  shall  you.  Nay, 
more;  Paul  not  only  obtained  mercy,  he  obtained  honor.  Ik 
was  made  an  honored  minister  to  preach  the  gospel  of  Christ, 
and  so  may  you.  Yes,  if  thou  repentest,  Christ  may  make  u»o 
of  you  to  bring  others  to  him.  It  strikes  me  with  wonder  when 
I  see  how  many  of  the  very  greatest  of  sinners  have  become  the 
most  useful  of  men.  Do  you  see  John  Bunyan  yonder?  He  is 
cursing  God.  He  goes  into  the  belfry  and  pulls  the  bell  on  Sun 
day,  because  he  likes  the  bell-ringing;  but  when  the  church  door 
is  open,  he  is  playing  bowls  upon  the  village  green.  There  is 
the  village  tap,  and  there  is  no  one  that  laughs  so  loud  there  as 
John  Bunyan.  There  are  some  people  going  to  the  meeting, 
house;  there  is  no  one  curses  them  so  much  as  John.  He  is  a 
ringleader  in  all  vice.  If  there  is  a  hen-roost  to  be  robbed,  Jack's 
your  man.  If  there  is  any  iniquity  to  be  done,  if  there  is  any 
evil  in  the  parish,  you  need  not  guess  cwice,  John  Bunyan  is  at 
the  bottom  of  it.  But  who  is  it  stands  there  in  the  dock  before 
the  magistrate?  Who  is  it  1  heard  just  now — "If. you  will  let 
me  out  of  prison  to-day,  I  will  preach  the  gospel  to-morrow,  by 
the  help  of  God?"  Who  was  it  that  lay  twelve  years  in  prison, 
and  when  they  said  he  might  go  out  if  he  would  promise  not  to 
preach,  replied,  "  No,  I  will  be  here  till  the  moss  grows  on  mine 
eyelids,  but  I  must  and  will  preach  God's  gospel  as  soon  as  I  have 
lioerty?"  Why,  that  is  John  Bunyan,  the  very  man  who  cursed 
Christ  the  other  day.  A  ringleader  in  vice  has  become  the  glo- 
rious  dreamer,  the  very  leader  of  God's  hosts.  See,  what  God 
did  for  him,  and  what  God  did  for  him  he  will  do  for  you,  if  now 
you  repent  and  seek  the  mercy  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus. 
"  He  is  able,  he  is  willing,  doubt  no  more  " 

Oh !  I  trust  I  have  some  nere  who  have  hated  God,  but  who  are 
nevertheless  God's  elect;  some  that  have  despised  him,  but  who 


76  THE  CONVERSION  OF  SAUL  OK  TARsUS. 

are  bought  with  blood ;  some  that  have  kicked  against  the  pricks, 
but  yet  almighty  grace  will  bring  them  onward.  There  are  some 
here,  I  doubt  not,  who  have  cursed  God  to  his  face,  who  shall  one 
day  sing  hallelujahs  before  his  throne;  some  that  have  indulged 
in  lusts  all  but  bestial,  who  shall  one  day  wear  the  white  robe, 
and  move  their  fingers  along  the  golden  harps  of  the  glorified 
spirits  in  heaven.  Happy  is  it  to  have  such  a  gospel  to  preach  to 
rfuch  sinners !  To  the  persecutor  Christ  is  preached.  Come  to 
Jesus  whom  thou  hast  persecuted. 

"  Come,  and  welcome,  sinner,  come." 

And  now  bear  with  me  one  moment  if  I  address  you  yet  again. 
The  probability  stares  me  in  the  face  that  I  may  have  but  very 
few  more  opportunities  of  addressing  you  upon  subjects  that  con- 
cern  your  soul.  My  hearers,  I  shall  arrogate  nothing  to  myself 
but  this  one  thing — "  I  have  not  shunned  to  declare  the  whole 
counsel  of  God,"  and  God  is  my  witness  with  how  many  sighs, 
and  tears,  and  prayers,  I  have  labored  for  your  good.  Out  of  this 
place  I  believe  thousands  have  been  called ;  among  you  whom  1 
now  see  there  is  a  large  number  of  converted  persons ;  according 
to  your  own  testimony  you  have  had  a  thorough  change,  and  you 
are  not  now  what  you  were.  But  I  am  conscious  of  this  fact,  that 
there  are  many  of  you  who  have  attended  here  now  almost,  these 
two  years,  .who  are  just  what  you  were  when  you  first  came. 
There  are  some  of  you  whose  hearts  are  not  touched.  You  some 
times  weep,  but  still  your  lives  have  never  been  changed ;  you 
tire  yet  "  in  the  gall  of  bitterness,  and  in  the  bond  of  iniquity." 
Well,  sirs,  if  1  never  address  you  again,  there  is  one  favor  that 
1  would  crave  of  you.  If  you  will  not  turn  to  God,  if  you  are 
determined  to  be  lost,  if  you  will  not  hear  my  rebuke,  nor  turn  at 
in y  exhortation,  I  ask  this  one  favor ;  at  least  let  me  know,  and 
let  me  have  this  confidence,  that  I  am  clear  of  your  blood.  I 
think  YOU  must  confess  this.  I  have  not  shunned  to  preach  of 
hell  with  all  its  horrors,  until  I  have  been  laughed  at,  as  if  I  al 
way**  preached  upon  it.  I  have  not  shunned  to  preach  upon  the 
most  sweet  and  pleasing  themes  of  the  gospel,  till  I  have  feared 
lest  1  should  make  my  preaching  effeminate,  instead  of  retaining 
the  masculine  vigor  >f  a  Boanprgrog.  I  have  not  shunned  to  preach 


THE    CONVERSION    OF    SAUL    OF    TAKSU8.  77 

the  law;  that  great  commandment  has  wrung  in  your  ears, 
"Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God,  and  thou  shalt  love  thy 
neighbor  as  thyself-"  I  have  never  feared  the  great,  nor  have  I 
courted  their  smilje ;  I  have  rebuked  nobility  as  I  would  rebuke 
the  peasantry,  and  to  every  one  of  you  I  have  dealt  a  pcrtion  of 
meat  in  due  season.  1  know  that  this  much  can  be  said  of  me — 
**  Here  stands  one  that  never  feared  the  face  of  man  yet ;"  and  I 
hope  never  will.  Amidst  contumely,  and  rebuke,  and  reproach, 
1  have  sought  to  be  faithful  to  you  and  to  my  God.  If,  then,  you 
will  be  damned,  let  me  have  this  one  thing  as  a  consolation  for 
your  misery,  when  I  shall  think  of  so  frightful  a  thought — that 
you  are  not  damned  for  the  want  of  calling  after ;  you  are  not 
lost  for  the  want  of  weeping  after,  and  not  lost,  let  me  add,  for 
the  want  of  praying  after.  In  the  name  of  him  who  shall  judge 
the  quick  and  dead  according  to  my  Gospel,  and  of  him  that  shall 
come  in  the  clouds  of  heaven,  and  by  that  fearful  day  when  the 
pillars  of  this  earth  shall  totter,  and  the  heavens  shall  fall  about 
your  ears — by  that  day  when  "  Depart,  ve  cursed,"  or  "  Come, 
ye  blessed,"  must  be  the  dread  alternative,  I  charge  you,  lay  these 
things  to  heart,  and  as  I  shall  face  my  God  to  account  for  my 
honesty  to  you,  and  my  faithfulness  to  him,  so  remember,  you 
must  stand  before  his  bar,  to  give  an  account  of  how  you  heard, 
and  how  you  acted  after  hearing ;  and  woe  unto  you  if,  having 
been  lifted  up  like  Capernaum  with  privileges,  you  should  be  cast 
down  like  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  or  lower  still  than  they,  because 
you  repented  not. 

Oh  Master!  turn  sinners  to  thyself;  foi  Jesus'  sake  !    Amen. 


SERMON    V. 

DISTINGUISHING    GRACE. 

"For  *ho  maketh  thee  to  differ  from  another?" — 1  CORINTHIANS,  iv.  7. 

OR,  as  it  is  in  the  Greek  :  "  For  who  distinguisheth  thee  ]" 
"  Who  giveth  thee  distinguishing  and  discriminating  mercy  ?" 
"Who  maketh  thee  to  differ  from  another?"  Pride  is  the 
inherent  sin  of  man,  and  yet  it  is  of  all  sins  the  most  foolish.  A 
thousand  arguments  might  be  used  to  show  its  absurdity  ;  but 
none  of  these  would  be  sufficient  to  quench  its  vitality.  Alive 
it  is  in  the  heart,  and  there  it  will  be,  till  we  die  to  this  world 
and  rise  again  without  spot  or  blemish.  Yet  many  are  the 
arrows  which  may  be  shot  at  the  heart  of  our  boasting.  Take, 
for  instance,  the  argument  of  creation ;  how  strongly  that  thrusts 
ai  our  pride.  There  is  a  vessel  upon  the  potter's  wheel,  wuild 
it  not  be  preposterous  for  that  clay  which  the  potter  fashioneth 
to  boast  itself  and  say,  "  How  well  am  I  fashioned !  how  beauti 
fully  am  I  proportioned;  I  deserve  much  praise!"  Why,  O 
lump  of  clay,  whatever  thou  art,  the  potter  made  thee ;  however 
elegant  thy  proportions,  however  matchless  thy  symmetry,  the 
glory  is  due  to  him  that  made  thee,  not  to  thyself;  thou  art  but 
the  work  of  his  hands.  And  so  let  us  speak  unto  ourselves.  We 
are  the  thing  formed ;  shall  we  say  of  ourselves  that  we  deserve 
honor  because  God  hath  formed  us  excellently  and  wondrously  ? 
No,  the  fact  of  our  creation  should  extinguish  the  sparks  of  our 
pride.  What  are  we,  after  all,  but  as  grasshoppers  in  his  sight, 
as  drops  of  the  bucket,  as  lumps  of  animated  dust;  we  are  but 
the  infants  of  a  day  when  we  are  most  old ;  we  are  but  the 
insects  of  an  hour  when  we  are  most  strong ;  we  are  but  the 
wild  ass's  colt  when  we  are  most  wise;  we  are  but  as  folly  and 


DISTINGUISHING    GKACK.  79 

vanity  when  we  are  most  excellent — let  that  tend  {•)  humble  us 
But  surely  if  those  prevail  not  to  clip  the  pinions  of  our  high 
soaring  pride,  the  Christian  man  may  at  least.bind  its  wings  with 
arguments  derived  from  the  distinguishing  love  and  peculiar 
mercies  of  God.  "  Who  maketh  thee  to  difftf  from  another?"— 
3'his  question  should  be  like  a  dagger  put  to  the  throat  of  oui 
boasting; — "and  what  hatt  tlio><  th<it  thon  didst  not  receive?" — i* 
would  be  like  a  sword  thrust  through  the  heart  of  our  self-exalt 
at  ion  and  pride. 

We  shall  now  for  a  moment  or  two  endeavor  to  put  down  oui 
pride  by  observing  wherein  God  hath  distinguished  us  and  made 
us  to  differ,  and  then  by  noticing  that  all  this  cometh  of  Iffiii, 
and  should  be  a  reason  for  humiliation,  and  not  for  boasting. 

1.  Many  of  us  differ  from  others  in  God's  providential  dealings 
towards  us.  Let  us  think  a  moment  how  many  there  are  of 
God's  precious  and  dearly  beloved  children,  who  at  this  moment 
ore  in  the  depths  of  poverty.  They  are  not  walking  about  in 
sheep-skins  and  in  goat-skins,  persecuted,  afflicted,  and  tormented  ; 
but  still  they  are  hungry,  and  no  man  gives  them  to  eat ;  they 
are  thirsty,  and  no  man  furnishes  them  with  drink,  their  lives 
are  wasted  in  poverty,  and  their  years  in  distress.  Some  there 
are  of  God's  children  who  were  once  in  affluence  but  have  been 
suddenly  plunged  into  the  lowest  depths  of  penury ;  they  knew 
what  it  was  to  be  respected  among  the  sons  of  men,  but  now  they 
are  among  the  dogs  of  the  flock,  and  no  man  careth  for  them.  There 
are  some  of  us  who  are  here  present  who  have  all  that  heart  can 
wish:  God  hath  given  us  food  and  raiment,  the  lines  have  fallen 
unto  us  in  pleasant  places,  and  we  have  a  goodly  heritage.  Let 
us  gratefully  ask — "  Who  maketh  us  to  differ  ]"  Let  us  recol 
lect  that  all  we  have  is  the  gift  of  his  providence.  Not  to  you, 
O  my  hands,  do  I  sacrifice,  because  ye  have  toiled  for  bread  ; 
not  to  you,  O  ye  brains,  will  I  offer  incense,  because  ye  have 
thought  for  my  daily  livelihood  ;  not  to  you,  O  my  lips,  will  1 
offer  my  adulation,  because  ye  have  been  the  means  of  furnishing 
me  with  words.  No;  unto  God,  who  giveth  power  to  get,  and 
to  have,  and  to  enjoy  ;  unto  him  be  all  the  praise  for  what  he 
hath  done  for  us.  Never  let  our  songs  cease,  for  his  goodness  is 
an  ever-flowing  stream.  Perhaps  none  of  us  can  ever  know,  until 


80  DISTINGUISHING    GRACE 

the  great  day  shall  reveal  it,  how  much  some  of  God's  serva.it* 
are  tried.  To  this  day  they  have  "  perils  by  land,  and  perils  by 
sea,  and  perils  by«fhlse  brethren  ;"  to  this  hour  they  are  pinched 
by  want,  they  are  deserted  by  friends,  they  know  what  despon 
dency  means,  and  all  the  ill  which  dejection  and  disappointment 
can  bring  to  them;  they  have  dived  into  the  lowest  depths  of 
the  sea  of  trouble,  and  have  walked  for  many  a  league  over  the 
hot  sand  of  the  desert  of  affliction.  And  if  God  hath  delivered 
us  from  these  things,  and  hath  made  our  path  more  pleasant,  and 
hath  led  us  beside  the  still  waters,  and  into  the  green  pastures, 
if  he  hath  distinguished  us  by  the  common  gifts  of  his  providence 
above  many  others  of  his  children  who  are  far  better  and  far 
more  holy  than  we  what  shall  we  say?  It  is  owing  only  to  his 
grace  towards  us,  and  we  wrill  not  exalt  ourselves  above  our 
fellows,  wre  will  not  be  high-minded,  but  condescend  to  men  of 
low  estate ;  we  will  not  lift  our  necks  with  the  proud,  but  we 
will  bow  down  our  brows  with  the  humble ;  every  man  shall  be 
called  our  brother,  not  merely  those  who  are  arrayed  in  goodly 
raiment,  but  those  who  are  clothed  in  the  habiliments  of  toil, 
they  shall  be  confessed  to  be  our  kindred,  sprung  from  the  same 
stock;  for  what  have  we  that  we  have  not  received,  and  what 
rnaketh  us  to  differ  from  another  ?  I  wish  that  some  of  the  stiff- 
necked  gentry  of  our  churches  would  at  times  recollect  this. 
Their  condition  is  smooth  as  oil,  and  as  soft  as  young  down,  but 
their  hearts  are  as  high  as  poplars,  and  their  manners  as  stiff  as 
hedge-stakes.  There  have  been  many  who  would  do  well  if  they 
would  learn  that  they  have  nothing  beyond  what  God  has  given 
them.  And  the  more  God  has  given  them,  the  more  they  are  in 
debt.  Why  should  a  man  boast  because  he  is  deeper  in  debt 
than  another?  Do  the  debtors  in  the  Queen's  Bench  say  to  one 
[  another,  "  You  are  only  a  hundred  pounds  in  debt,  and  I  a 
thousand,  therefore  I  am  a  greater  gentleman  than  you?"  1 
think  not.  "But,  nevertheless,  if  they  did  so,  they  would  be  as 
wise  as  men  who  boast  beyond  their  fellow-creatures,  because 
they  happen  to  have  more  of  rank,  wealth,  honor,  and  position 
in  this  world.  "  Who  maketh  thee  to  differ  from  another?  and 
what  hast  thou  that  thou  didst  not  receive  ?" 

But  the  best  way  for  you  to  feel  this  part  of  the  discourse  is, 


DISTINGUISHING    GRACE.  81 

to  go  to-morrow  into  the  hospital,  and  walk  along  the  wards,  and 
pee  how  poor  men's  bodies  suffer,  and  then  go  into  the  operating, 
room  and  see  what  flesh  and  blood  may  have  to  endure.  Then 
when  you  have  ddne,  go  round  the  neighborhood  to  see  the  sick 
who  have  lain  for  ten,  or  twelve,  or  fifteen  years  upon  the  same 
bed,  and  after  that  go  and  visit  some  of  God's  poverty-stricken 
children  who  just  exist  in  this  world,  and  it  is  but  a  bare  exist 
ence,  maintained  on  bread  and  butter  and  a  little  tea,  and  but  too 
little  of  even  such  things  as  those.  Go  and  see  their  poor, 
miserable,  unfurnished  rooms,  their  cellars  and  their  attics,  and 
that  will  be  a  better  sermon  to  you  than  any  thing  I  can  utter. 
You  will  come  home  and  say,  "  Oh,  my  God,  I  bless  thee  for  thy 
kindness  towards  me.  These  temporal  mercies  which  I  once 
thought  so  little  of,  I  must  heartily  bless  thee  for.  I  must  thank 
thee  for  what  thou  hast  given  to  me,  and  I  will  ascribe  it  all  tc 
thy  love,  for  thou  makest  me  to  differ.  I  have  nothing  that  I 
have  not  received." 

2.  But  this  is  not  the  most  important  point  for  us  to  observe. 
We  are  now  going  to  look  at,  not  matters  of  providence,  but  the 
things  of  God's  grace.  Here  it  is  that  we  who  are  now  assem 
bled  as  a  church  have  most  reason  to  bless  God,  and  to  say. 
44  Who  maketh  us  to  differ  from  others  ?"  Take,  my  dear  friends, 
in  your  mind's  eye  the  cases  of  the  wireless,  the  hardened,  and 
the  thoughtless,  of  even  this  present  congregation.  Side  by  side 
with  you,  my  brother,  there  may  sit  a  man,  a  woman,  who  is 
dead  in  trespasses  and  sins.  To  such  the  music  of  the  gospel  is 
like  singing  to  a  dead  ear,  and  the  dropping  of  the  word  is  as 
dew  upon  a  rock.  There  are  many  in  this  congregation  whose 
position  in  society,  and  whose  moral  character  are  extremely  ex 
cellent,  and  yet  before  God  their  state  is  awful.'  They  attend  the 
house  of  God  as  regularly  as  we  do.  They  sing  as  we  sing,  sit 
as  we  sit,  and  come  and  go  as  we  do,  and  yet  are  they  without 
God  and  without  hope  in  the  world — strangers  from  the  com 
monwealth  of  Israel,  and  aliens  from  the  covenant  of  promise. 
Yet  what  maketh  us  to  differ?  Why  is  it  that  I  this  day  am  not 
sitting  down  a  callous  hearer,  hardened  under  the  gospel  1  Why 
am  I  n)t  at  this  very  hour  hearing  the  Word  with  my  outward 
ear  but  rejecting  it  in  my  inward  heart?  -Why  is  it  that  I  hay* 
4* 


82  DISTINGUISHING    GHACE. 

not  been  suffered  to  reject  the  invitation  of  Christ,  to  despise  hii 
grace — to  go  on,  Sunday  after  Sunday,  hearing  the  Word  and  yet 
being  like  the  deaf  adder  to  it.  Oh,  have  I  made  myself  to  differ  * 
God  forbid  that  such  a  proud,  blaspheming  thought  should  defile 
our  hearts.  No,  beloved  : 

44  Twa*  the  r-ame  love  which  spread  the  feast. 

That  sweetly  forced  us  in  , 
Else  we  had  etill  refused  to  taste, 
And  perished  in  our  sin." 

The  only  reason,  my  brother,  why  thou  art  at  this  tir.ie  an  heir 
of  God,  a  joint  heir  with  Christ,  a  partaker  of  sweet  fellowship 
\\ith  Jesus,  an  inheritor  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  is  because  HB 
hath  made  thee  to  differ.  Thou  wast  an  heir  of  wrath  even  as 
others,  born  in  sin  and  shapen  in  iniquity.  Therefore  must  thou 
give  all  the  glory  to  his  holy  name,  and  cry — "Not  unto  us,  not 
unto  us,  but  unto  thy  name  be  all  the  praise.'*  Even  this  one 
thought,  when  fully  masticated  and  digested,  might  feed  up  our 
gratitude  and  make  us  humbly  bow  before  the  footstool  of  God's 
throne  with  joyful  thanksgiving. 

3.  Will  you  please,  however,  to  think  of  other  eases  ?  Who 
niaketh  thee  to  differ  from  others  of  this  assembly  who  are  more 
hardened  than  those  to  whom  we  have  alluded?  There  are  some 
men  and  women  of  whose  salvation,  if  it  were  to  be  wrought  by 
man,  we  must  indeed  utterly  despair,  for  their  hearts  are  harder 
than  the  most  stubborn  steel.  The  hammer  of  the  Word  makes 
no  impression  on  such  souls.  The  thunders  of  the  law  roll  over 
rheir  heads,  but  they  can  sleep  in  the  midst  of  the  tumult — th« 
•'ightnings  of  Sinai  Hash  against  their  hearts,  but  even  those  mighty 
Hames  seem  as  ft'  they  recoiled  from  the  attack.  Do  \  ou  not 
kuov*  such.-  they  are  vour  own  children,  \  our  husband,  your  wife, 
•joinu  jf  vour  own  familv  ;  and  as  you  look  upon  them,  though 
you  have  longed,  praved.  and  wept,  and  sighed  for  their  soul*, 
you  are  compelled  to  say  in  your  heart,  UI  half  fear  that  1  shall 
never  see  them  converted."  You  say  with  sorrow,  "Oh,  if  they 
are  saved  it  will  be  a  wonder  of  divine  grace  indeed.  Surely  they 
will  never  yield  their  souls  l.o  God.  Thoy  seem  as?  callous  as  if 
Iheir  conscience  were  seared  with  a  hut  iron  ,  they  appear  tohavw 


DISTINGUISHING    GRACE.  83 

the  stamp  of  condemnation  upon  their  brow,  as  if  ihzy  were 
marked  and  sealed,  and  had  the  earnest  of  the  pit  upon  their 
hearts  before  they  came  there."  Ay,  but  stop — "  Who  maketh 
thee  to  differ?"  Why  am  1  not  at  this  day  among  the  most  har 
dened  of  men  1  How  is  it  that  my  heart  is  melted  so  that  I  can 
weep  at  the  recollection  of  the  Redeemer's  suffering1?  Why  is  ic 
that  my  conscience  is  tender,  and  that  I  am  led  to  a  self-examina 
tion  by  a  searching  sermon  ?  How  is  it  that  I  know  how  to  pray 
and  to  groan  before  God  on  account  of  sin  1  What  has  brought 
the  water  from  these  eyes  but  the  self-same  power  which  brought 
the  water  from  the  rock?  And  what  hath  put  life  into  my  heart 
but  the  self-same  Omnipotence  which  scattered  manna  in  a  hungry 
desert?  Our  hearts  had  still  been  like  the  wild  beasts  of  the 
forest  if  it  had  not  been  for  Divine  grace.  Oh  !  I  beseech  you, 
my  dear  friend,  every  time  you  see  a  hardened  sinner,  just  say 
within  yourself,  "  There  is  the  picture  of  what  I  should  have  been, 
what  I  must  have  been,  if  all-subduing,  all-conquering  love  had 
not  melted  and  sanctified  my  heart."  Take  these  two  cases,  then, 
and  you  have,  heaven  knows,  reason  enough  to  sing  to  the  praise 
of  sovereign  grace. 

4.  But  now  another.  The  lowest  class  of  sinners  do  not  mingle 
with  our  congregations,  but  are  to  be  seen  in  our  back  streets  and 
lanes,  and  sometimes  in  our  highways.  How  frightful  is  the  sin 
of  drunkenness,  which  degrades  a  man  into  a  beast,  which  sinks 
him  lower  than  the  brutes  themselves?  How  shameful  is  the 
iniquity  of  blasphemy,  which,  without  any  object  or  any  chance 
of  profit,  brings  a  curse  upon  its  own  head !  How  awful  are  the 
ways  of  the  lascivious  wretch  who  ruins  both  body  and  soul  at 
once,  and  not  content  with  his  own  destruction  ruins  others  with 
him.  Cases  that  come  under  our  observation  in  the  daily  news 
papers,  and  that  assail  us  in  our  daily  observation  and  hearing, 
are  too  vile  to  be  told,  llow  often  is  our  blood  chilled  with  the 
sound  of  an  imprecation,  and  how  frequently  our  heart  is  made 
to  palpitate  with  the  daring  impieties  of  the  blasphemous.  Now 
let  us  stop:  "Who  maketh  thee  to  differ?"  Let  us  recollect 
that  if  we  live  very  near  to  Christ,  we  should  have  lived  quite  as 
near  to  hell  if  it  had  not  been  for  saving  grace.  Some  of  you 
here  present  are  special  witnesses  of  thi*  jyrace,  for  you  havs 


84  DISTINGUISHING    GRACE 

youiself  experienced  redemption  from  these  iniquities.  Look 
hack  some  four  years  with  some  of  you,  and  recollect  how  dif 
fercnt  were  your  surroundings  then  to  what  they  are  now.  May 
hap  four  years  ago  you  were  in  the  tap-room  singing  the  song  of 
(he  drunkard  as  readily  as  any  ;  but  a  little  while  ago  youcur»ej 
that  Saviour  whom  now  you  love.  Only  a  few  months  hove 
flitted  over  your  head  since  you  ran  with  the  multitude  to  do  evil 
but  now,  "Who  maketh  thee  to  differ?"  Who  hath  wrought 
this  miracle  of  grace?  Who  has  led  you  to  the  stool  of  the 
penitent  and  the  table  of  communion — who  hath  done  it?  Be 
loved,  you  are  not  slow  to  answer,  for  the  verdict  of  your  heart  \s 
undivided  ;  you  do  not  give  the  glory  in  part  to  man  and  in  part  to 
God.  No,  you  cry  loudly  in  your  hearts,  "  Blessed  be  the  God  and 
Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  which  according  to  his  abundant 
mercy  hath  begotten  us  again  unto  a  lively  hope  by  the  resurrec 
tion  of  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead."  Ye  are  washed,  ye  are  sanc 
tified,  and  ye  have  been  washed  in  the  Redeemer's  blood,  and  sane- 
sanctified  with  the  Spirit.  Ye  have  been  made  to  differ,  and  ye 
will  confess  it;  ye  have  been  made  to  differ  by  distinguishing 
grace,  and  distinguishing  grace  alone.  And  what  upholds  the  rest 
of  us  from  being  what  these  my  reclaimed  brethren  once  were, 
and  what  they  will  become  again  unless  saving  grace  keeps  them  ? 
What  preserves  the  preacher  this  day  from  being  a  lecturer  to 
infidels,  dishonoring  the  grace  of  God  which  now  he  glories  to 
magnify  ?  What  prevents  the  deacon  from  being  an  assistant  in 
the  courts  of  Satan  ?  What  forbids  those  who  open  the  doors  at 
the  house  of  our  God,  and  who  serve  him  on  the  Sabbath-day, 
from  being  door-keepers  in  the  tents  of  the  sons  of  Belial  ?  Why 
nothing ;  they  had  been  there  unless  grace  had  prevented  them. 
Grace  hath  done  it,  and  nothing  else.  When  we  pass  a  prostitute 
in  the  street,  we  say,  "  O  poor  creature !  I  can  pity  you.  I  have 
«.iot  a  harsh  word  for  you,  for  I  had  been  as  you  are  had  not  God 
preserved  me."  And  when  you  see  the  reeling  drunkard,  be  no 
too  hasty  to  condemn,  recollect  you  had  been  as  a  beast  bo  fort 
God  unless  the  Lord  had  kept  you ;  and  when  ye  hear  I  ho  oath 
and  shudder  at  it,  imagine  not  that  you  are  superior  in  yourself 
to  the  man  who  curses  God,  for  perhaps  you  once  cursed  him  too 
and  certainly  you  would  have  done. had  not  the  Holy  Spirit  sano 


DISTINGUISHING    GRACK.  85 

tified  you  and  in.plantcd  in  you  a  hatred  of  that  which  the  \*  icked 
so  greedily  follow.  Have  you  seen  a  man  hanged  for  murder? 
Have  you  seen  another  transported  for  the  most  infamous  of 
crimes?  If  you  hear  of  one  who  sins  against  society  so  foully 
that  mankind  excommunicate  him,  pause  and  say,  "Oh!  but  ! 
should  have  gone  as  low  as  that,  I  should  have  been  as  black  A 
ne,  unless  restraining  grace  had  kept  me  back  in  my  unregeneracy 
and  unless  constraining  grace  had  pushed  me  forward  in  \h* 
heavenly  race  ever  since  1  have  known  the  will  of  Jesus." 

5.  And  now  we  will  pause  again,  and  think  over  another  evil 
which  stares  us  in  the  face  in  connection  with  every  church.  There 
are  most  melancholy  cases  of  backsliding  in  so  large  a  church  as 
this.  We  are  compelled  often  to  discover  the  character  of  men 
and  women  who  once  seemed  fair  for  heaven,  but  who  manifested 
that  they  never  had  the  root  of  the  matter  in  them.  Oh  !  well 
did  the  poet  say, — 

"  When  any  turn  from  Zion's  way, 
Alus  1   what  numbers  do  1" 

No  trial  is  greater  to  the  true  minister  than  the  apostacy  of  his 
nock.  All  the  rage  of  men  is  quite  unable  to  bring  tears  to  our 
eyes,  but  this  has  done  it.  Alas  !  when  those  whom  I  have  loved 
have  turned  aside  from  the  way  of  God,  when  those  who  have  sat 
with  us  at  the  same  table,  and  have  joined  with  us  in  church  com 
munion,  have  gone  out  from  us,  and  have  brought  dishonor  upon 
the  Church,  and  upon  the  name  of  Christ,  there  has  been  woe  in 
my  inmost  spirit.  Sometimes  there  are  cases  as  glaring  as  they 
are  painful,  and  as  vile  as  they  are  grievous.  Some  of  those,  who 
were  once  in  the  midst  of  God's  sanctuary,  have  become  drunkards 
and  whoremongers — and  God  in  heaven  only  knows  what.  They 
have  sinned  against  every  thing  that  is  seemly,  as  well  as  every 
thing  that  is  holy.  At  the  recollection  of  these  our  eyes  are  filled 
with  tears.  "Oh  that  our  head  were  waters,  and  our  eyes  foun 
tains  of  tears,  that  we  might  weep  day  and  night  for  the  slain  of 
the  daughter  of  our  people."  No  mischief-makers  are  so  power 
ful  as  deserters.  None  cause  so  much  agony  as  those  who  liiiv« 
nestled  beneath  our  wings,  and  then  have  flown  away  to  feed  with 
carrion  vultures  on  the  putrid  carcasses  of  lust  and  sin. 


86  DISTINGUISHING     GKACE. 

But  now  let  us  pause.  How  is  it  that  the  minister  has  not  for 
saken  his  profession,  and  gone  back  like  a  dog  to  his  vomit,  and 
like  the  sow  that  was  washed  to  her  wallowing  in  the  mire '?  I  low 
is  it  that  the  deacons  of  this  church  have  not  turned  aside  unto 
crooked  ways,  and  denied  the  faith,  and  become  worse  than  infi 
dels'?  How  is  it  that  so  many  members  of  this  church  haye  beer 
kept  so  that  the  wicked  one  toucheth  them  not  ?  O  beloved  I 
can  say  for  myself,  I  am  a  continual  miracle  of  divine  grace.  If 
ihou  leave  me,  Lord,  for  a  moment,  I  am  utterly  undone. 

"  Leave,  0  leave  n.e  not  alone! 
Still  support  and  comfort  me." 

Let  Abraham  be  deserted  by  his  God,  he  equivocates  and  denies 
his  wife.  Let  Noah  be  deserted,  he  becomes  a  drunkard,  and  is 
naked  to  his  shame.  Let  Lot  be  left  awhile,  and,  filled  with  wine, 
he  revels  in  incestuous  embraces,  and  the  fruit  of  his  body  becomes 
a  testimony  to  his  disgrace.  Nay,  let  David,  the  man  after  God's 
own  heart,  be  left,  and  Uriah's  wife  shall  soon  show  the  world 
that  the  man  after  God's  own  heart  hath  still  an  evil  heart  of  un 
belief  in  departing  from  the  living  God.  Oh !  well  doth  the  poet 

put  it — 

"  Methinks  I  hear  the  Saviour  say, 
'  Wilt  thou  forsake  me  too  ?'" 

And  now  let  our  conscience  answer : — 

''Ah,  Lord  !   with  siu-h  a  neart  as  miue. 

Unless  thou  hold  me  fast, 
I  feel  I  must,  1  shall  decline, 
And  prove  like  them  at  last." 

Oh  be  not  rashly  self-confident,  Christian  man.  Be  as  confident 
ns  you  can  in  your  God,  but  be  distrustful  of  yourself.  Ye  ma) 
yet  become  all  that  is  vile  and  vicious,  unless  sovereign  grac 
prevent  and  keep  you  to  the  end.  But  remember,  if  you  have 
been  preserved,  the  crown  of  your  keeping  belongs  to  the  She}>- 
herd  of  Israel,  and  ye  know  who  that  is.  For  he  hath  said  "1 
the  Lord  do  keep  it.  I  will  water  it  every  moment :  lest  any 
hurt  it,  I  will  keep  it  night  and  day."  "  Ye  know  who  is  able  to 
keep  you  from  falling,  and  to  present  you  faultless  before  his  pros 


DISTINGUISHING    GRACE.  87 

ence  with  exceeding  great  joy."  Then  give  all  glory  to  the  King 
immortal,  invisible,  the  only  wise  God  your  Suviour,  who  has 
kept  you  thus. 

6.  Allow  me  one  more  contrast;  once  again  let  your  gratitude 
g  >  with  me.  Since  you  and  I  have  joined  the  church  how  many 
who  were  once  our  companions  have  been  damned  whilst  we  have 
been  saved !  how  many  who  were  no  worse  than  we  were  by  na 
ture  have  sunk  into  the  lowest  pit  of  hell !  Conceive  their  un 
utterable  torments ;  imagine  their  inconceivable  woes ;  depict 
before  the  eye  of  your  fancy  their  indescribable,  agonies !  Descend 
in  spirit  for  a  moment  to  the  gates  of  fire;  enter  into  the  abode 
of  despair  where  justice  reigns  supreme  on  her  iron  throne;  pass 
by  the  dreary  cell  of  those  who  are  everlastingly  damned.  Be 
hold  the  twisting  of  that  worm  that  never  dies,  and  the  bleeding 
hearts  that  are  crushed  within  its  coils !  Look  ye  at  that  flame 
unquenchable,  and  behold  the  souls  that  are  sweltering  there  ir. 
torments  to  us  unknown,  and  look,  if  ye  can  look,  but  ye  cannot 
look,  for  your  eyes  would  be  stricken  with  blindness  if  ye  could 
see  their  torments.  Your  hair  should  be  blanched  With  but  a 
moment  of  that  horrible  exhibition.  Ah!  while  you  stand,  then, 
and  think  on  that  region  of  death,  despair,  and  damnation,  recol 
lect  that  you  would  have  been  there  if  it  had  not  been  for  sove 
reign  grace.  You  have  a  harp  prepared  for  you  in  heaven,  a 
crown  laid  up  for  you  when  you  have  finished  your  course.  You 
have  a  mansion,  a  house  not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in  the 
heavens.  Oh,  why  is  it  you  are  not  already  a  fiend?  who  is  it 
that  has  given  you  a  good  hope  through  grace  that  you  shall 
never  come  into  that  place  of  torment1?  Oh!  tell  it  the  (vide 
world  over.  Tell  it  in  time  and  eternity,  free  grace  hath  done 
it.  Free  grace  hath  done  it  from  the  first  to  the  last.  I  was  a 
brand  in  the  fire,  but  he  plucked  me  from  the  burning,  quenched 
me  in  his  blood,  and  now  he  declares  I  shall  be  with  him  for  ever 
:n  heaven.  But,  oh  !  pause,  brethren,  and  think  that  some  of  your 
'wmer  pot-companions,  some  of  the  companions  of  your  revels 
and  debaucheries  are  now  in  heil,  and  you  are  not  there,  and,  by 
the  grace  of  God,  never  will  be  there.  Oh  !  why  this,  why  this  ] 
Blessed  be  the  Lord  my  God  from  this  time  for".h  and  for  ever. 
Praise  ye  his  name.  Grace  has  done  it.  Grace  has  done  Vi  all. 


88  DISTINGUISHING     GIIACK 

No,  I  ne'er  shall  wear  the  ehain,  I  ne'er  shall  be  Wretched  upon 
that  rack,  nor  feel  that  fire — 

"  But  I  shall  see  his  face, 
And  never,  never  sin. 
But  from  the  rivers  of  his  grace 
Drink  endless  pleasures  in." 

But  I  most  confidently  proclaim  that  the  reason  v.-hy  I  shal 
escape  and  shall  be  glorified,  is  not  to  be  found  in  me,  but  in 
him.  He  hath  made  me  to  differ.  I  have  nothing  but  what  I 
have  received. 

Now  what  shall  we  say  to  these  things'?  If  God  has  made  you 
to  differ,  the  first  prayer  we  should  now  utter  should  be,  "  Lord, 
humble  us.  Take  away  pride  out  of  us.  O  God  forgive  us, 
that  such  beasts  as  we  are  should  ever  be  proud."  We  might 
have  been  with  our  father  the  devil  at  this  very  hour,  if  it  had 
not  been  for  Divine  love.  And  if  we  are  now  in  the  house  of 
our  Father  which  is  in  heaven  shall  we  be  proud  1  A  vaunt,  thou 
monster  !  Go  and  dwell  with  the  Pharisee.  Pride  agreeth  well 
enough  with  the  man  who  has  in  his  own  esteem  been  always 
virtuous.  Go  thou  away  and  live  with  him  who  has  had  good 
works  from  the  first  day  until  now ;  but  away  from  me. 

"  I  the  chief  of  sinners  am," 

and,  saved  by  sovereign  grace,  shall  I  be  proud  ?  It  is  not  fit  that 
thou  shouldest  live  in  my  heart,  thou  monster!  Begone!  begone! 
Find  a  fitter  habitation  than  my  soul.  Should  I  be  proud  after 
such  mercy,  after  such  ill-deserving,  but  such  God-receiving] 
Begone,  pride !  Begone! 

Another  lesson  :  if  God  alone  hath  made  us  to  differ,  why  may 
e  not  make  others  to  differ  too  ?  "  After  the  Lord  saved  me." 
said  one,  "  I  never  despaired  of  anybody  ;"  and  let  us  each  say 
so  too.  If  you  were  brought  in  why  not  another "?  Will  you 
ever  give  up  praying  for  anybody  now  that  you  are  saved]  1 
once  heard  one  say  concerning  his  child,  ';  I  think  I  must  give  her 
up,  I  can  scarcely  think  she  ever  will  be  converted."  Why,  you 
save  been  pardoned  yourself;  and  if  the  Lord  can  do  that,  he 


DISTIN'OriSIIING     GRACE.  89 

can  do  any  thing.  J  am  sure  if  the  Lord  has  brought  me  to  his 
feet  there  does  not  remain  in  the  world  a  case  that  can  equal 
mine ;  if  he  has  brought  rne  to  receive  his  free  grace*,  his 
sovereign  love,  m's  precious  blood,  and  hath  made  me  to  love 
him,  then  there  can  be  nothing  too  hard  for  him.  O  Lord,  if 
thou  hast  melted  this  metal  heart,  and  dissolved  this  stony  soul, 
hou  canst  break  any  thing.  If  thou  hast  broken  the  northern 
ron  and  steel,  then  what  remains  beyond  thy  power  1  Go  back, 
uhcn,  Christian,  armed  with  this  fact,  that  God  who  hath  made 
thee  to  differ  can  make  anybody  to  differ.  There  can  be  no  case 
beyond  his  strength  ;  if  he  brought  you  in  he  can  bring  all  in. 
If  he  doth  but  stretch  out  his  hand,  no  man  need  despair. 
Therefore,  "  In  the  morning  sow  thy  seed,  and  in  the  evening 
withhold  not  thine  hand:  for  thou  knowest  not  whither  shall 
prosper,  either  this  or  that,  or  whether  they  both  shall  be  alike 
good." 

Again,  whq  hath  made  me  to  differ?  ITath  my  Lord  done 
it? — then  let  me  serve  him  more  than  others.  There  was  a  ques 
tion  asked  once  by  our  Saviour,  "  What  do  ye  more  than  others  ?" 
That  question  might  well  be  put  to  each  child  of  God  here  present. 
My  dear  friends,  we  must  not  be  content  with  doing  as  much  as 
other  people  do  ;  in  fact,  we  must  never  be  contented  with  our 
doings  at  all,  but  always  be  trying  to  do  more  for  him  who  hath 
done  so  much  for  us.  Should  I  give  my  body  to  be  burned,  my 
flesh  piecemeal  to  the  knife,  my  nerves  to  the  rack,  and  my  heart 
to  the  spear,  yet  should  I  not  give  him  all  that  he  deserveth. 
No,  if  I  should  pass  through  the  horrors  of  martyrdom,  it  were 
but  a  poor  tribute  to  love  so  amazing,  so  divine.  What  are  you 
doing,  my  friends;  what  are  you  doing,  my  brothers  and  sisters, 
fur  Christ?  But  I  will  not  blame  you,  I  censure  myself  if  I 
censure  you ;  but  I  will  confess  my  own  iniquities,  and  leave  you 
to  confess  yours.  I  do  try  to  serve  my  Master,  but  I  do  not 
serve  him  as  I  would.  Each  act  that  I  perform  is  marred,  either 
by  want  of  prayer  for  a  blessing  upon  it,  by  want  of  faith  in  my 
Lord,  or  by  pride  in  looking  back  upon  it.  I  find  too  continually 
a  tendency  to  serve  myself  instead  of  serving  Christ,  a  constan 
ionging  rather  to  get  through  the  work  than  to  do  it  acceptably 


00  mSTIXCUlSIIIXCJ    OK  ACE. 

And  oh !  when  I  think  upon  all,  I  must  say  1  am  an  unprofitable 

servant.     Have  mercy,  O  gracious  Lord,  on  my  good  works  as 

vvell  as  on  my  bad  ones,  for  my  good  works  are  but  bad  in  the 

best,  and  cannot  be  acceptable  in  themselves.     I  am  certain  some 

of  you  have  a  little  more  need  to  say  that  than  I  have.     Let  us 

cease  boasting  any  more,     I  know  there  are  some  here  who  aie 

not  serving  Christ ;   some  members   in   this  Church   are  doing 

no'f.hing.     You  have  not  thought  of  doing  any  thing  for  Christ, 

have  you1?     You  pay  your  regular  subscriptions,  you  do  what 

you  are  told  to  do,  but  do  you  give  to  Christ  secretly  1  do  you 

devote  your  substance  unto  him  when  no  one  knows  it?  do  you 

spend  your  time  for  him  ?  have  you  chosen  a  sphere,  and  have 

you  said,  "  This  is  my  work,  and,  by  the  grace  of  God,  I  will  do 

it."     Oh !  ye  cannot  tell  how  much  there  is  to  do,  and  how  few 

there  are  to  do  it.     I  would  I  could  have  a  church  all  alive,  all 

active,  so  that  there  never  could  be  a  want  but  those  who  have 

would  be  ready  to  supply,  and  never  a  work  but  those  who  are 

qualified  would  be  ready  to  fulfil.     Never  fear   but  we  should 

find  too  many  rather  than  too  few  to  aid  its  accomplishment.    Oh 

that  we  had  the  good  spirit  of  the  ancient  church,  the  spirit  to 

propagate  our  Christianity  everywhere.     There  needs  to  be  in 

many  of  the  suburbs  of  London  fresh  gospel  churches  springing 

up.     I  can  point  to  many  places  in  my  own  vicinity,  seven  or 

eight,  nine  or  ten   in  a  row,  where  there  is  a  chapel  needed.     In 

each  place  there  are  believers  living,  who  do  not  think  about 

uniting  to  establish  a  fresh  cause;  but  as  long  as  their  peculiar 

wants  are  satisfied,  by  journeying  a  long  way  off  perhaps,  they 

forget  the  hundreds  and  thousands  who  are  pressing  around  them. 

Oh !  there  is  much   to  be  done,  and  very  little  time  to  do  '1  in. 

A  very  few  weeks,  and  those  of  us  who  have  been   loved   more 

than  others,  those  of  us  who  have  thought  we  could  wash  Christ' 

feet  with  our  tears,  and  wipe  them  with  the  hair  of  our  heads,  will 

have  no  more  opportunities  for  spreading  the  name  and  fame  of 

OUT  fflorhus   Redeemer.     Let  us  give  of  our  substance  to  his 

cause,  give  of  our  time  to  his  service,  and  have  our  hearts  in  his 

love,  and  so  shall  we  be  blessed,  for,  in  returning  Christ's  love. 

we  shall  feel  that  his  love  is  shed  abroad  more  fully  in  our  hearts 

and  more  fully  in  our  understandings. 


IHSTl.VC  L'ISlII.VO     (SHACK.  91 

May    the    Holy  Spirit  add   his    blessing   upon   these  broken 

iv-ords they  have  been  broken  because  they  have  broken  my 

heart,  and  therefore  I  could  not  help  their  coming  out  in  a  broken 
way.  God  accept  them ;  and,  dear  brothers  and  sisters,  may  he 
bless  them  to  you  by  helping  you  to  love  him  more,  who  in  my 
hope,  ray  joy,  my  consolation,  and  i»y  aU. 


SERMON   VI. 

THE  MISSION  OK  THE  SON  OF  MAN 

"  For  the  Son  of  man  is  come  to  seek  ami  to  save  that  whict  -vas  lest"— 
LUKK,  xix.   10. 

How  fond  our  Master  was  of  the  sweet,  title,  the  "Son  of 
Man  !''  If  he  had  chosen,  he  might  always  have  spoken  of  him 
self  as  the  Son  of  God,  the  Everlasting  Father,  the  Wonderful. 
the  Counsellor,  the  Prince  of  Peace.  He  hath  a  thousand  gorge 
ous  titles,  resplendent  as  the  throne  of  heaven  ;  but  he  eareth  not 
to  use  them — to  express  his  humility  and  let  us  see  the  lowliness 
of  him  whose  yoke  is  easy  and  whose  burden  is  light.  He  calls 
not  himself  the  Son  of  God,  but  he  speaks  of  himself  evermore  as 
the  Son  of  Man  who  came  down  from  heaven.  Let  us  learn  a 
lesson  of  humility  from  our  Saviour;  let  us  never  court  great 
titles  nor  proud  degrees.  What  are  they,  after  all.  but  beggarly 
distinctions  whereby  one  worm  is  known  from  another?  He 
that  hath  the  most  of  them  is  a  worm  still,  and  is  in  nature  in: 
greater  than  his  fellows.  If  Jesus  called  himself  the,  Son  of  Man. 
when  he  had  far  greater  names,  let  us  learn  to  humble  ourselves 
unto  meu  of  low  estate,  knowing  that  he  that  humbleth  himself 
shall  in  due  time  be  exalted.  Methinks,  however,  there  is  a 
weeter  thought  than  this  in  that  name,  Son  of  Man.  It  seems 
o  me  that  Christ  loved  manhood  so  much,  that  he  always  desired 
./>  honor  it;  and  since  it  is  a  high  honor,  and  indeed  the  greatest 
dignity  of  manhood,  that  Jesus  Christ  was  the  Son  of  Man,  he  is 
wont  to  display  this  name,  that  he  may  as  it  were  put  rich  stars 
upon  the  breast  of  manhood,  and  put  a  crown  upon  its  head. 
Son  of  Man — whenever  he  said  that  word  he  seemed  to  put  a 
halo  round  the  head  of  Adam's  children.  Yet  there  is  perhaps  a 


THE    MISSK   N     OK    THE    SON     OF    MAS'.  '.*•') 

more  lovely  thought  still.  Jesus  Christ  called  himself  the  Son 
of  Man,  because  he  loved  to  be  a  man.  It  was  a  great  stoop  for 
him  to  come  from  heaven  and  to  be  incarnate.  It  was  a  mighty 
stoop  of  condescension  when  he  left  the  harps  of  angels  and  tho 
songs  of  cherubiins  to  mingle  with  the  vulgar  herd  of  his  own 
t-reatures.  But  condescension  though  it  was,  he  loved  it.  Yoi 
,  M  :ll  remember  that  when  he  became  incarnate  he  did  not  become 
.so  in  the  dark.  When  he  bringeth  forth  the  only  begotten  into 
the  world,  he  saith,  "  Let  all  the  angels  of  God  worship  him." 
It  was  told  in  heaven;  it  was  not  done  as  a  dark  secret  which 
Jesus  Christ  would  do  in  the  night  that  none  might  know  it;  but 
all  the  angels  of  God  were  brought  to  witness  the  advent  of  a 
Saviour  a  span  long,  sleeping  upon  a  Virgin's  breast,  and  lying  in 
u  manger.  And  ever  afterwards,  and  even  now,  he  never  blushed 
to  confess  that  he  was  man  ;  never  looked  back  upon  his  incarna 
tion  with  the  slightest  regret;  but  always  regarded  it  with  a  joy 
mis  recollection,  thinking  himself  thrice  happy  that  he  had  ever 
become  the  Son  of  Man.  All  hail,  thou  blessed  Jesus!  we  know 
how  much  thou  lovest  our  race;  we  can  well  understand  the 
greatness  of  thy  mercy  towards  thy  chosen  ones,  inasinvjh  as 
thou  art  evermore  using  the  sweet  name  which  acknowledges 
that  they  are  bone  of  thy  bone  and  flesh  of  thy  flesh,  and  thou 
art  one  of  them,  a  brother  and  a  near  kinsman. 

Our  text  announces  as  a  declaration  of  our  Saviour,  that  he,  the 
Son  of  Man,  is  come  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was  lost.  In 
addressing  you  this  morning,  I  shall  simply  divide  my  discourse 
thus  : — First,  I  shall  lay  it  down  as  a  self-evident  truth,  that 
whatever  was  the  intention  of  Christ  in  his  coming  into  the  world, 
that  intention  wost  certainly  shall  never  bt  frustrated.  We  shall 
then,  in  the  second  place,  look  into  the  intention  of  Christ,  as  an- 
nounced  in  the  text,  viz.,  "to  seek  avid  to  save  that  which  was 
l^st."  Then,  in  concluding,  we  shall  derive  a  word  of  comfort, 
and  perhaps  one  of  learning^  from  the  intention  of  our  Saviour  in 
coming  into  the  world  "to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was 
lost." 

I.  You  arc  aware  that  there  has  been  a  very  great  discussion 
amongst  all  Christians  about  the  redemption  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  Then1  is  one  class  oi  men  who  believe  in  what  is  called 


94  TIIK    MISSION    OF    THE    SONT    OF    MAN 

general  redemption,  affirming  it  to  be  an  undoubted  truth  (hat  ' 
Jesus  Christ  hath  shed  his  blood  for  every  man,  and  that  the  ii.. 
tcntion  of  Christ  in  his  death  was  the  salvation  of  men  considered 
as  a  whole;  they  have,  however,  to  overlook  the  fact  that  in  this 
case  Christ's  intention  would  be  frustrated  in  a  measure.  Thero 
are  others  of  us  who  hold  what  is  called  the  doctrine  of  purticuhn 
redemption.  We  conceive  that  the  blood  of  Christ  was  of  an  ii  - 
mite  value,  but  that  the  intention  of  the  death  of  Christ  never 
was  the  salvation  of  all  men;  for  if  Christ  had  designed  the  sal 
vation  of  all  men,  we  hold  that  all  men  would  have  been  saved. 
We  believe  that  the  intention  of  Christ's  death  is  just  equal  to  its 
effects;  and  therefore  1  start  this  morning  by  announcing  what  i 
regard  to  be  a  self-evident  truth,  that  whatever  was  the  intention 
i >f  Jesus  Christ  in  coming  into  the  world,  that  intention  most  cer 
tainly  shall  be  fulfilled. 

But  I  shall  make  use  of  a  few  arguments  to  strengthen  this 
doctrine,  although  I  believe  that  on  the  very  first  announcement 
it  commends  itself  to  every  thinking  mind. 

In  the  first  place,  it  segms  to  be  inconsistent  with  the  very  idea 
of  God  that  he  should  ever  intend  any  thing  which  should  not  bf 
accomplished.  When  I  look  at  man  I  see  him  to  be  a  creature 
so  distracted  with  folly  and  so  devoid  of  power,  that  I  do  not 
wonder  that  he  often  begins  to  build  and  is  not  able  to  finish ;  J 
do  not  marvel  that  full  often  he  stops  short  because  he  hath  not 
counted  the  cost :  I  wonder  not,  when  I  think  how  much  there  is 
that  is  above  man's  control,  that  he  should  sometimes  propose 
hut  that  God  should  dispose  far  differently  from  his  propositu  n 
f  see  man  to  be  the  insect  of  a  day,  a  mere  ephemera  upon  th« 
bay-leaf  of  existence;  and  when  I  see  him  as  a  mere  drop  in  the 
great  sea  of  creation,  I  do  not  wonder  that  when  he  is  ambition? 
ho  sometimes  fashions  in  himself  great  designs  which  he  is  un- 
ble  to  accomplish,  because  the  wheels  of  providence  and  destiny 
vill  often  run  quite  contrary  to  all  the  frolic  of  his  will.  B"t 
when  I  think  of  God  whose  name  is,  "  1  am  that  I  am,"  the  sejf- 
existent  one,  in  whom  we  live  and  move  and  have  our  being,  who 
is  from  everlasting  to  everlasting,  tho  Almighty  God;  when  I 
think  of  him  as  filling  immensity,  having  all  power  and  strength, 
knowing  all  things,  having  a  fulness  of  wisdom,  I  cannot  associ 


THK    MISSION     OF    THE    SON    OF    MAN.  05 

atr  with  sucl  an  idea  of  God  the  supposition  of  his  ever  fiu.ing 
in  any  of  his  intentions.  It  would  seem  to  me  that  a  God  who 
could  intend  a  thing  and  fail  in  his  intention  wouKJ  be  no  God. 
but  be  a  thing  like  ourselves,  perhaps  superior  in  strength,  but 
certainly  not  entitled  to  worship.  I  cannot  anyhow  think  of  God, 
ol  -i  true  and  real  God  like  Jehovah,  except  as  a  being  who  wills 
*i id  it  is  accomplished,  who  speaks  and  it  is  done,  who  commands 
and  it  stands  fast,  for  ever,  settled  in  heaven.  I  cannot  therefore 
magine,  since  Jesus  Christ  was  the  Son  of  God,  that  in  his  atone 
ment  and  redemption,  his  real  intention  and  desire  can  in  any 
way  be  frustrated.  If  I  were  a  Socinian  and  believed  Jesus 
Christ  to  be  a  mere  man,  I  could  of  course  imagine,  that  the  re 
sult  of  his  redemption  would  be  uncertain ;  but  believing  that 
Jesus  Christ  was  very  God  of  very  God,  equal  and  co-eternal 
with  the  Father,  I  dare  not,  lest  I  should  be  guilty  of  presump 
tion  and  blasphemy,  associate  with  that  name  of  Jehovah  Jesus 
any  suspicion  that  the  design  of  his  death  shall  remain  unaccom- 
p'ished. 

But  again,  we  have  before  us  the  fact,  that  hitherto  all  the 
works  of  God  have  accomplished  their  purpose.  Whenever  God 
has  uttered,  by  the  lips  of  his  servants,  a  prophecy,  it  has  purely 
come  to  pass.  The  instruments  of  accomplishing  that  purpose 
have  often  been  the  most  factious  and  rebellious  of  men:  they 
had  no  intention  whatever  of  serving  God  ;  they  have  run  con 
trary  to  hi  laws;  but  you  will  observe  that  when  they  have 
dashed  wildly  along,  his  bit  has  been  still  in  their  mouth  and  his 
bridle  in  their  jaws.  A  great  monarch  has  acted  like  a  leviathan 
in  the  sea;  he  hath  moved  himself  wherever  he  pleased  ;  he  haib 
seemed  mighty  among  the  sons  of  men  ;  all  the  rest  of  mankind 
were  as  minnows,  while  he  was  a  huge  leviathan  :  but  we;  dis 
cover  that  God  has  been  overruling  his  thought,  that  he  has  beoi 
Hi  his  council  chamber,  that  the  wildest  speculations  of  his  air 
bition  have,  after  all,  been  but  the  fulfilling  of  Jehovah's  sten 
decrees.  Look  ye  abroad  through  all  the  nations  of  the  eaith 
and  tell  me  i*  there  one  prophecy  of  God  that  hath  failed  ?  Ma> 
he  not  still  say,  "  Not  one  of  them  hath  lost  her  mate  f  Ever) 
word  of  God  hath  certainly  been  accomplished.  The  kings  of 
tbo  earth  stood  up  and  took  counsel  together  against  the  Lord 


THE    MISSION    OF    THE    SON    OF    MAN. 

and  agairst  his  anointed,  saying,  "  Let  us  break  his  bands  asundei 
and  cast,  his  cords  from  us."  But  he  that  sitteth  in  the  heavena 
did  laugh  at  them  ;  tlie  Lord  did  have  them  in  derision.  Still  he 
worked  his  own  sovereign  will ;  let  them  do  as  they  pleased,  God 
was  over  them  all,  reigning  and  ruling  evermore.  If,  then,  God's 
purpose  in  providence  certainly  never  has  been  frustrated,  am  I 
to  imagine  that  Uod's  purpose  in  the  glorious  sacrifice  of  Jesus 
Christ  shall  be  null  and  void  1  If  there  be  any  of  you  who  have 
arrived  at  such  a  contortion  of  intellect  as  to  conceive  that  a  less 
work  being  accomplished,  a  greater  one  shall  fail,  I  must  leave 
you  to  yourselves;  with  you  I  could  not  argue;  I  should  think 
you  incapable  of  an  argument.  Surely,  if  God  the  Master,  the 
Judge,  the  King,  hath  in  all  things  done  according  to  his  own 
pleasure  in  this  lower  world,  in  the  mere  creation  and  preserva 
tion  of  men,  it  is  not  to  be  dreamed  of  for  a  moment,  that  when 
he  stoops  himself  from  the  highest  heaven,  to  give  his  own  heart's 
blood  for  our  redemption,  he  shall  in  that  be  foiled.  No; 
though  earth  and  hell  be  against  him,  every  purpose  of  Jesus  on 
the  cross  shall  be  consummated,  and  as  the  price  was  "  finished," 
so  shall  the  purchase  be ;  as  the  means  were  fully  provided,  so 
shall  the  end  be  accomplished  to  its  utmost  jot  and  tittle. 

But  again,  I  invite  you  to  stand  at  the  foot  of  the  cross,  and 
take  a  view  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  then  I  will  put  it  to  you  whether 
you  can  imagine  that  Jesus  Christ  could  in  any  measure  have 
died  in  vain.  Come,  believer,  place  thyself  in  the  garden  of 
Gethsemane ;  hide  thyself  among  those  dark  olives,  and  listen  to 
yonder  man  who  is  in  agony.  Dost  hear  those  groans?  They 
are  the  groans  of  an  incarnate  God.  Dost  hear  those  sighs  ? 
They  are  the  sighs  of  the  Son  of  Man.  God  over  all,  blessed  foi 
over.  Hearest  thou  those  strong  cries,  and  dost  thou  see  those 
tears  ?  They  are  the  crying  and  the  tears  of  him  who  is  equal 
with  his  Father,  but  who  condescended  to  be  a  man.  Rise,  for 
ho  has  risen  ;  Judas  has  betrayed  him  and  taken  him  away. 
Look  on  that  ground.  Seest  thou  those  gouts  of  gore  ?  It  is  the 
bloody  sweat  of  the  man  Christ  Jesus.  I  conjure  thee,  answer 
this  question.  Standing  in  the  garden  of  Gethsemane,  with  those 
blood  gouts  staining  the  white  frost  of  that  cold  midnight,  canst 
fchou  believe  that  one  of  thos*  nlots  of  blood  shall  full  to  the 


THE    MISSION    OF    THE    SON    OF    MAN. 

ground  and  not  effect  its  purpose  ?  1  challenge  thee,  O  Christian, 
whatever  thy  doctrinal  opinions,  to  say  me  "Yes  "to  such  a 
question  as  that.  Canst  thou  imagine  that  a  sweat  of  blood  from 
the  veins  of  incarnate  Deity  shall  ever  fall  to  the  ground  and 
fail  ?  Why,  beloved,  the  word  of  God  which  cometh  forth  out 
of  his  mouth  shall  not  return  unto  him  void,  but  it  shall  accom 
plish  that  which  he  pleases ;  how  much  more  shall  the  Grea 
WORD  of  God,  which  came  forth  from  the  loins  of  Deity,  accom 
plish  the  purpose  whereunto  God  hath  sent  him,  and  prosper  in 
the  thing  for  which  it  pleased  God  to  ordain  him  ! 

But  now  come  with  me  to  the  hall  of  judgment.  See  there 
your  Master  placed  in  mock  state  in  the  midst  of  a  ribald  band 
of  soldiery.  Do  you  see  how  they  spit  on  those  blessed  cheeks, 
how  they  pluck  his  hair,  how  they  buffet  him]  Do  you  see  the 
crown  of  thorns  with  its  ruby  drops  of  gore?  Hark  !  Can  you 
hear  the  cry  of  the  multitude,  as  they  say,  "  Crucify  him,  crucify 
him  1 "  And  will  you  now  stand  there  and  look  at  this  man 
whom  Pilate  has  just  brought  forth,  still  bleeding  from  the  lash 
of  the  scourge,  covered  with  shame,  and  spitting  and  mockery ; 
and  as  this  "  JScce  Homo  "  is  presented  to  you,  will  you  believe 
that  this,  the  incarnate  Son  of  God,  shall  be  made  such  a  spec 
t.acle  to  men,  to  angels,  and  to  devils,  and  yet  fail  of  his  design  ] 
Can  you  imagine  that  one  lash  of  that  whip  shall  have  a  fruitless 
aim  ?  Shall  Jesus  Christ  suffer  this  shame  and  spitting,  and  yet 
endure  what  were  far  worse — a  disappointment  in  the  fulfilment 
of  his  intentions  ?  No  ;  God  forbid  !  By  Gethsemane  and  Gab- 
batha,  we  are  pledged  to  the  strong  belief  that  what  Christ 
designed  by  his  death  must  certainly  be  accomplished. 

Then  again,  see  him  hanging  on  his  cross.  The  nails  have 
pierced  his  hands  and  feet,  and  there  in.  the  broiling  sun  he  hangs, 
— he  hangs  to  die.  The  mockery  has  not  ceased  ;  still  they  pu 
out  the  tongue  and  wag  the  head  at  him  ;  still  they  taunt  him 
with  "If  thou  be  the  Son  of  God  come  down  from  the  cross." 
And  now  his  bodily  pains  increase,  while  his  soul's  anguish  is 
terrible,  even  unto  death.  Christian,  canst  thou  believe  that  che 
blood  of  Christ  was  shed  in  vain  ]  Canst  thou  look  at  one  of 
those  precious  drops  as  it  trickles  from  his  head  or  his  hands,  or 
his  feet,  and  canst  thou  imagine  that  it  shall  fall  1o  the  ground 
5 


08  THE     MISSION     OF    THE    SON     Oi-     MAN. 

and  perish  there?  True,  the  waters  may  fail  from  the  sea,  tne 
sun  may  grow  dim  with  age,  but  I  never  can  imagine  that  the 
value,  the  merit,  the  power  of  the  blood  of  Jesus  ever  shall  die 
out,  or  that  its  purpose  shall  be  unaccomplished.  It  seems  to  mo 
as  clear  as  noonday,  that  the  design  of  the  Saviour's  death  must 
certainly  be  fulfilled,  be  it  what  it  may. 

I  might  use  a  hundred  other  arguments.  I  might  show  that 
every  attribute  of  Christ  declares  that  his  purpose  must  be  accom 
plished.  He  certainly  has  love  enough  to  accomplish  his  design 
of  saving  ths  lost;  for  he  has  a  love  that  is  bottomless  and  fath 
omless,  even  as  the  abyss  itself.  lie  certainly  has  no  objection 
to  the  accomplishment  of  his  own  design,  for  "  As  I  live,  saith 
the  Lord,  I  have  no  pleasure  in  the  death  of  him  that  dieth,  but 
had  rather  that  he  should  turn  unto  me  and  live."  And  certainly 
the  Lord  cannot  fail  for  want  of  power,  for  where  we  have  omnipo 
tence  there  can  be  no  deficiency  of  strength.  Nor  again,  can  the 
design  be  unaccomplished  because  it  was  unwise,  for  God's  de 
signs  cannot  be  urrvise,  simply  because  they  are  of  God — that  is 
to  say — they  are  of  infinite  wisdom.  I  cannot  see  any  thing  in 
the  character  of  Christ,  nor  any  thing  the  wide  world  over,  that 
can  for  one  moment  make  me  imagine  that  Christ  should  die, 
and  yet  it  should  be  said  afterwards,  ';  This  man  died  for  a  pur 
pose  which  he  never  lived  to  see  accomplished ;  the  object  of  his 
death  was  only  partially  fulfilled  ;  he  saw  of  the  travail  of  his  soul, 
but  he  was  not  satisfied,  for  he  did  not  redeem  all  whom  he  in 
tended  to  redeem." 

Now,  some  persons  love  the  doctrine  of  universal  atonement 
because  they  say  it  is  so  beautiful.  It  is  a  lovely  idea  that  Christ 
should  have  died  for  all  men  ;  it  commends  itself,  they  say,  to 
the  instincts  of  humanity  ;  there  is  something  in  it  full  of  joy  and 
oeauty.  I  admit  there  is ;  but  beauty  may  be  often  associated 
Aith  falsehood.  There  is  much  which  I  might  well  admire  in  the 
heory  of  universal  redemption,  but  let  me  just  tell  you  what  the 
supposition  necessarily  involves.  If  Christ  on  his  cross  intended 
to  save  every  man,  then  he  intended  to  save  those  who  were 
damned  before  he  died ;  because,  if  the  doctrine  be  true,  that  he 
died  for  all  men,  he  died  for  some  that  were  in  holl  before  he 
came  into  this  world,  for  doubtless  there  were  myriads  there  that 


TliK     MISSION     OK    THE    SOX     OF    MAX.  JJO 

had  been  cast  away.  Once  again;  if  it  were  Christ's  intention 
to  save  all  men,  how  deplorably  has  he  be<^n  disappointed  !  tor 
we  have  his  own  evidence  that  there  is  a  lake  that  burneth  with 
fire  and  brimstone,  and  into  that  pit  must  be  cast  some  of  the 
very  persons,  who,  according  to  that  theory,  were  bought  with  his 
hbod.  That  seems  to  me  a  thousand  times  more  frightful  than 
any  of  those  horrors  which  are  said  to  be  associated  with  the 
Calvinistic  and  Christian  doctrine  of  particular  redemption.  To 
think  that  my  Saviour  died  for  men  in  hell,  seems  a  supposition 
too  horrible  for  me  to  imagine ;  that  he  was  the  substitute  for  the 
sons  of  men,  and  that  God  having  first  punished  the  substitute, 
punished  me-n  again,  seems  to  me  to  conflict  with  any  idea  of 
justice.  That  Christ  should  offer  an  atonement  and  satisfaction 
for  the  sins  of  men,  and  that  afterwards  those  very  men  should 
be  punished  for  the  sins  which  Christ  had  already  atoned  for, 
seems  to  me,  to  be  the  most  marvellous  monstrosity  that  ever 
could  have  been  imputed  to  Saturn,  to  Janus,  ay,  to  the  God  of 
the  Thugs,  or  the  most  diabolical  heathen  demons.  God  forbid/ 
that  we  should  ever  think  thus  of  Jehovah,  the  just  and  wise. 
If  Christ  has  suffered  in  man's  stead,  God  is  faithful  and  just  to 
forgive  us  our  sins,  and  save  us  from  all  unrighteousness. 

II.   I  have  thus  started  the  first  thought  that  the   intention  of 

o 

Christ's  death  cannot  be  frustrated.  And  now  methinks  every 
one  will  anxiously  listen,  and  every  ear  will  be  attentive,  and  the 
question  will  arise  from  every  heart,  "  WHAT  THEN  WAS  THE  IN 

TENTION  OF    THE    SAVIOUR'S    DEATH?       AN!>    IS    IT    POSSIBLE    THAT 

I  CAN  HAVE  A  PORTION  IN  IT?"  For  whom,  then,  did  the 
Saviour  die — and  is  there  the  slightest  possibility  that  I  have 
some  lot  or  portion  in  that  great  atonement  which  he  has  offered  1 
Beloved,  my  text  is  the  answer  to  the  question — ';The  Son  of 
man  is  come  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was  lost."  Now, 
our  text  tells  us  of  two  things — first,  the  subjects  of  the  Saviour's 
atonement,  the  lost;  and,  secondly,  the  objects  of  it  he  came  to 
seek  and  save. 

I  must  now  endeavor  to  pick  out  the  objects  of  the  Saviour's 
atonement,  He  came  "  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was  /<>.?/." 
Some  of  you  may  turn  your  heads  away  at  once,  and  conclude 
chat  hitherto  you  have  given  no  evidence  that  you  have  any  por 


100  THE    MISSION    OF    THE    BON     OF    MAN. 

tion  in  the  death  of  Christ.  You  are  very  good  sort  of  people ; 
you  never  did  much  that  was  wrong — perhaps  a  little  now  and 
then ;  but  nothing  particular  ever  troubles  your  conscience.  You 
have  a  notion  that  you  shall  certainly  enter  into  the  kingdom  of 
heaven,  for  you  are  no  worse  than  your  neighbors,  and  if  you 
are  not  saved,  God  help  other  people !  for  if  you  do  not  go  to 
Heaven,  who  will?  You  are  trusting  in  your  own  good  works, 
and  believing  you  are  righteous.  Now  let  us  decide  your  case 
at  once.  Since  you  are  ashamed  to  put  yourselves  among  those 
who  are  lost,  I  have  no  Christ  to  preach  to  you  till  you  are 
ready  to  come  and  confess  that  you  are  lost ;  for  Christ  him 
self  tells  us,  that  he  came  "  not  to  call  the  righteous,  but  sin 
ners  to  repentance ; "  and  inasmuch  as  you  belong  to  the  righte 
ous,  and  trust  in  yourselves  that  you  are  good  and  excellent,  you 
may  turn  upon  your  heel  and  go,  for  in  the  blood  of  Christ  there 
is  no  portion  for  men  who  live  and  die  trusting  in  their  own 
self-righteousness. 

But  1  may  dismiss  another  part  of  you.  Some  of  you  are 
saying,  "  Well,  sir,  I  know  I  am  guilty,  but  still  I  am  persuaded 
that  by  attention  to  the  law  of  God  in  future,  I  shall  certainly  be 
able  to  take  away  the  demerit  of  my  guilt.  I  intend  hencefor 
ward  to  reform,  and  I  believe  that  by  a  consistent  course  of  atten 
tion  to  religious  ordinances,  and  by  carefully  regarding  that  which 
is  right  and  wrong  between  God  and  man,  and  man  and  man,  1 
shall,  without  doubt,  make  an  atonement  for  the  sins  of  the  past." 
Ah,  my  friend,  hitherto  thou  givest  me  no  hope  that  thou  had 
any  portion  in  the  death  of  Christ  Christ  came  not  to  die  for 
men  who  can  save  themselves  without  him.  If  thou  thinkest 
thou  canst  save  thyself,  remember  the  door  of  mercy  is  shut  in 
thy  face.  Christ  came  to  bring  robes  from  heaven,  but  not  for 
you  who  can  spin  for  yourselves.  He  came  to  bring  bread  for 
the  hungry,  but  he  will  give  none  of  it  to  you  who  can  sow  and 
reap,  and  make  bread  for  yourselves.  Christ  helps  the  helpless, 
but  they  who  can  help  themselves  and  have  sufficient  of  their  own 
strength  and  merit  to  carry  them  to  heaven,  may  fight  their  way 
there  alone,  if  they  can — they  shall  have  no  help  from  him. 
Whom  then  did  Christ  die  to  save  1  It  is  said,  be  came  to  save 
"tnat  which  was  lost." 


THE    MISSION    OF    THE    SON    OF    MAN.  101 

Now,  you  must  bear  with  me  while  1  run  over  the  different 
urays  in  which  a  man  may  be  lost;  and  then  I  will  conclude  by 
noticing  the  term  as  it  is  used  in  the  proper  sense,  when  we  may 
atfirm  that  Christ  {lied  for  such.  We  know  that  all  men  are  lost 
in  Adam ;  as  soon  as  we  are  born  into  this  world,  we  are  lost ; 
•when  the  tiny  bark  of  the  infant  is  launched  upofi  the  river  of 
life  it  is  lost ;  unless  Sovereign  grace  shall  stretch  forth  its  hand 
and  save  it  in  infancy,  and  carry  it  to  heaven,  or  save  it  after 
wards,  when  it  shall  have  grown  up — that  infant  is  lost.  "  Be 
hold,"  saith  David,  "  I  was  born  in  sin  and  shapen  in  iniquity  ; 
in  sin  did  my  mother  conceive  me."  "In  Adam  all  die."  The 
fall  of  Adam  was  the  fall  of  the  human  race;  then,  you  and  I, 
and  all  of  us,  fell  down. 

Again,  we  are  all  lost  by  practice.  No  sooner  does  the  child 
become  capable  of  knowing  right  and  wrong,  than  you  discover 
that  he  chooses  the  evil  and  abhors  the  good.  Early  passions 
soon  break  out,  like  weeds  immediately  after  the  shower  of  rain, 
speedily  the  hidden  depravity  of  the  heart  makes  itself  manifest, 
and  we  grow  up  to  sin,  and  so  we  become  lost  by  practice.  Bui 
mark,  a  man  may  be  lost  in  Adam,  and  lost  by  practice,  and  yet 
not  be  saved  by  Christ ;  but  Christ  is  able  to  save  you  ;  though 
you  be  twice  lost,  his  salvation  is  able  to  redeem  you  from  death. 

Then  there  be  some  who  go  further  still.  The  deadly  tree  of 
sin  grows  taller  and  taller ;  some  become  lost  to  the  church. 
After  having  been  trained  up  religiously  in  our  midst,  they  turn 
aside,  they  give  up  all  outward  regard  to  the  worship  of  God, 
the  ministry  of  the  gospel  is  neglected,  the  house  of  prayer  is 
forsaken,  and  the  church  tolls  its  bell  and  says  of  such  an  one, 
"  He  is  lost  to  the  church."  Some  go  further  still ;  they  are  lost 
to  society.  I  have  seen  many  who  are  dead  while  they  live.  We 
have  in  the  midst  of  us  the  harlot  and  the.  drunkard,  who,  like 
the  leper  in  the  camp  of  Israel,  have  to  be  put  away  lest  the 
vil  should  spread ;  and  those  who  seek  after  right  are  obliged  to 
urn  away  from  them,  lest  the  evil  should  spread  in  the  midst  of 
the  flock.  Now  there  are  many  who  are  lost  to  society  whom 
Jesus  Christ  came  to  save,  and  whom  he  will  save.  But  a  man 
may  be  lost  to  society,  and  may  be  lost  everlastingly  ;  it  is  no 
proof  that  Christ  will  save  him,  because  he  is  thus  lost,  while  at 


102  THE    MISSION    OF    THE    SON    OF    MAN. 

the  same  tine  it  is  no  proof  that  he  will  not  save  him,  foi  Christ 
came  to  save  even  men  who  are  lost  like  this.  Again,  the  man 
may  go  further,  and  be  lost  to  the  family.  We  have  known 
those  who  have  become  so  vile,  that  even  after  society  has  shut 
thorn  out,  a  parent  has  been  obliged  to  shut  them  out  too.  That 
must  be  a  hell  of  sin.  indeed  which  can  make  a  father  say  to  his 
son,  "  My  son,  you  shall  not  want  bread  while  I  have  any,  but  I 
must  forbid  you  my  house,  for  your  brothers  and  sisters  can  ir.»t- 
endure  your  society  ;  I  feel  you  would  destroy  their  souls  if  I 
should  allow  you  to  associate  with  them."  Now,  a  man  may  be 
lost  thus  to  his  own  family,  and  yet  sovereign  grace  will  save 
him.  But,  mark,  a  man  may  be  lost  to  his  family  and  yet  not 
be  saved ;  yea,  that  may  be  the  increase  of  his  condemnation, 
that  he  sinned  against  a  mother's  prayers  and  against  a  father's 
exhortations. 

Now  I  will  tell  you  the  people  whom  Christ  will  save — they 
are  those  who  are  lost  to  themselves.  Just  imagine  a  ship  at  sea 
passing  through  a  storm  :  the  ship  leaks,  and  the  captain  tells 
the  passengers  he  fears  they  aro,  lost.  If  they  are  far  away  from 
shore,  and  have  sprung  a  leak,  they  pump  with  all  their  might  as 
long  as  they  have  any  strength  remaining  ;  they  seek  to  keep 
down  the  devouring  element ;  they  still  think  that  they  are  not 
quite  lost  while  they  have  the  power  to  use  the  pumps.  At  last 
they  see  the  ship  cannot  be  saved;  they  give  it  up  for  lost,  and 
leap  into  the  boats.  The  boats  are  floating  for  many  a  day,  full 
of  men  who  have  but  little  food  to  eat.  "  They  are  lost,"  we 
say,  "lost  out  at  sea."  But  they  do  not  think  so;  they  still 
cherish  a  hope  that  perhaps  some  stray  ship  may  pass  that  way 
and  pick  them  up.  There  is  a  ship  in  the  horizon  ;  they  strain 
their  eyes  to  look  at  her  ;  they  lift  each  other  up  ;  they  wave  a 
flag  ;  they  rend  their  garments  to  make  something  which  shall 
attract  attention  ;  but  she  passes  away  ;  black  night  comes,  and 
they  are  forgotten.  At  length  the  very  last  mouthful  of  food 
has  been  consumed  ;  strength  fails  them,  and  they  lay  down 
their  oars  in  the  boat,  and  lay  themselves  down  to  die.  You  can 
imagine  then  how  well  they  understand  the  awful  meaning  of 
the  term — "lost,"  As  long  as  they  had  any  strength  left  they 
felt  they  were  not  lost ;  as  long  as  they  could  see  a  sail  they  felt 


THE    MISSION    OF    THE    SON     OK    MAN.  103 

there  was  yet  hope ;  while  there  was  yet  a  mouldy  biscuit  left, 
or  a  drop  of  water,  they  did  not  give  up  all  for  lost.  Now  the 
biscuit  is  gone,  and  the  water  is  gone ;  now  strength  is  departed, 
and  the  oar  lies  still :  they  lie  down  to  die  by  each  other's  side, 
mere  skeletons  ;  things  that  should  have  been  dead  days  ago,  if 
they  had  died  when  all  enjoyment  of  life  had  ceased.  Now  they 
know,  I  say,  what  it  is  to  be  lost,  and  across  the  shoreless  waters 
they  seem  to  hear  their  death-knell  pealing  forth  that  awful  word, 
Lost !  lost !  lost !  Now,  in  a  spiritual  sense,  these  are  the  people 
Christ  came  to  save.  Sinner,  thou  too  art  condemned.  Our 
Father  Adam  steered  the  ship  awry  and  she  split  upon  a  rock, 
and  she  is  filling  even  to  her  bulwarks  now;  and  pump  as  phi 
losophy  may,  it  can  never  keep  the  waters  of  her  depravity  so 
low  as  to  prevent  the  ship  from  sinking.  Seeing  that  human  na 
ture  is  of  itself  lost,  it  hath  taken  to  the  boat.  She  is  a  fair 
boat,  called  the  boat  of  Good  Endeavor,  and  in  her  you  are  striv 
ing  to  row  with  all  your  might,  to  reach  the  shore ;  but  your 
strength  fails  you.  You  say,  "  Oh,  I  cannot  keep  God's  law. 
The  more  I  strive  to  keep  it,  the  more  I  find  it  to  be  impossible 
for  me  to  do  so.  I  climb  ;  but  the  higher  I  climb  the  higher  is 
the  top  above  me.  When  I  was  in  the  plains,  I  thought  th« 
mountain  was  but  a  moderate  hill ;  but  now  1  seem  to  have  as 
cended  half-way  up  its  steps, — there  it  is,  higher  than  the  clouds, 
and  1  cannot  discern  the  summit."  However,  you  gathei  up 
your  strength,  you  try  again,  you  row  once  more,  and  at  last  un 
able  to  do  any  thing,  you  lay  down  your  oars,  feeling  that  if  you 
are  saved,  it  cannot  be  by  your  own  works.  Still  you  have  a 
little  hope  left.  There  are  a  few  small  pieces  of  mouldy  biscuit 
remaining.  You  have  heard  that  by  attention  to  certain  ceremo 
nies  you  may  be  saved,  and  you  munch  your  dry  biscuit ;  but  at 
last  that  fails  you,  and  you  find  that  neither  baptism,  nor  the 
Lord's  supper,  nor  any  other  outward  rites,  can  make  you  clean, 
for  the  leprosy  lies  deep  within.  That  done,  you  still  look  out. 
You  are  in  hopes  that  there  may  be  a  sail  coming,  and  while  float- 
flig  upon  that  deep  of  despair,  you  think  you  detect  in  the  distance 
some  new  dogma,  some  fresh  doctrine  that  may  comfort  you.  It 
passes,  however,  like  the  wild  phantom  ship — it  is  gone,  and  there 
you  are  left  at  last,  with  the  burning  sky  of  God's  vengeance 


104  THE    MISSION    OF    THE    SON    OF    MAN. 

above  you,  with  the  deep  waters  of  a  bottomless  he.l  ooneath 
you,  fire  in  your  heart  and  emptiness  in  that  ship  which  once  was 
so  full  of  hope,  you  lie  down  despairing,  and  you  cry, — "Lord 
save  me,  or  I  perish  !"  Is  that  your  condition  this  morning,  my 
fjiend,  or  has  that  ever  been  your  condition?  If  so,  Christ  came 
into  the  world  to  seek  and  to  save  you  ;  and  you  he  will  save 
and  no  one  else.  He  will  save  only  those  who  can  claim  this  for 
iheir  title, — "Lost;"  who  have  understood  in  their  own  souls' 
what  it  is  to  be  lost,  as  to  all  self-trust,  all  self-reliance,  and  all 
self-hope.  1  can  look  back  to  the  time  when  I  knew  myself  to 
be  lost.  I  thought  that  God  meant  to  destroy  me.  I  imagined 
that  because  1  felt  myself  to  be  lost,  I  was  the  special  victim  of 
Almighty  vengeance;  for  I  said  unto  the  Lord,  "Hast  thou  set 
me  as  the  target  of  all  thine  arrows?  Am  1  a  sea  or  a  whale, 
that  thou  hast  set  a  mark  upon  me?  Hast  thou  sewed  up  mine 
iniquties  in  a  bag,  and  sealed  my  transgressions  with  a  seal. 
Wilt  thou  never  be  gracious?  Hast  thou  made  me  to  be  the 
centre  of  all  sorrow,  the  chosen  one  of  heaven  to  be  cursed  for 
ever  ?"  Ah  !  fool  that  I  was  !  I  little  knew  then,  that  those  who 
have  the  curse  in  themselves  are  the  men  whom  God  will  bless 
— that  we  have  the  sentence  of  death  in  ourselves,  that  we  should 
not  trust  in  ourselves,  but  in  him  who  died  for  us  and  rose  again. 
Gjme,  1  will  put  the  question  once  again — can  you  say  that  you 
are  lost?  Was  there  a  time  when  you  travelled  with  the  cara 
van  through  this  wild  wilderness  world  ?  Have  you  left  the  car 
avan  with  your  companions,  and  are  you  left  in  the  midst  of  a 
sea  of  sand — a  hopeless,  arid  waste?  And  do  you  look  around 
you,  and  see  no  helper ;  and  do  you  cast  your  eyes  around  and 
see  no  trust?  Is  the  death-bird  wheeling  in  the  sky,  screaming 
with  delight  because  he  hopes  soon  to  feed  upon  your  flesh  and 
bones?  Is  the  water-bottle  dry,  and  doth  the  bread  fail  you? 
Have  you  consumed  the  last  of  your  dry  dates,  and  drunk  the 
.ast  of  that  brackish  water  from  the  bottle ;  and  are  you  now 
without  h  >pe,  without  trust  in  yourself;  ready  to  lie  down  ir. 
despair?  Hark  thee  !  The  Lord  thy  God  loveth  thee  ;  Jesus 
Christ  has  bought  thee  with  his  blood  ;  thou  art,  thou  shalt  be  his. 
He  has  been  seeking  thee  all  this  time,  and  he  has  found  thee  at 
last,  in  the  vast  howling  wilderness,  and  now  he  will  take  thee 


THE    MISSION'    OK    T1IK    SON    OF    MAX.  105 

his  shoulders,  and  carry  thee  to  his  house  rejoicing,  and  the 
angels  shall  be  glad  over  thy  salvation.  Now,  such  people  must 
and  shall  be  saved  ;  and  this  is  the  description  of  those  whom 
Jesus  Chris4;  came  to  save.  Whom  he  came  to  save  he  will 
save  ;  you,  ye  lost  ones — lost  to  all  hope  and  self  confidence, 
shall  be  saved.  Though  death  and  hell  should  stand  in  the  way, 
Jhrist  will  perform  his  vow,  and  accomplish  his  design. 

1  shall  be  very  brief  in  concluding  my  discourse  ;  but  we  have 
now  to  notice  THE  OBJECTS  OF  THE  DEATH  OF  CHRIST — he  came 
"  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which  was  lost."  I  am  so  glad  that 
these  two  words  are  both  there,  for  if  they  were  not,  what  hope 
would  there  be  for  any  of  us  ?  The  Arminian  says  Christ  came  to 
save  those  that  seek  him.  Beloved,  there  is  a  sense  in  which  that  is 
true ;  but  it  is  a  lie.  Christ  did  come  to  save  those  that  seek  him, 
but  no  one  ever  sought  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  unless  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  first  sought  them.  Christ  does  not  leave  it  to  our 
selves  to  seek  him,  or  else  it  would  be  left  indeed,  for  so  vile  is 
human  nature  that  although  heaven  be  offered,  and  though  hell 
thunder  in  our  ears,  yet  there  never  was,  and  there  never  will  be, 
any  man  who,  unconstrained  by  sovereign  grace,  will  run  in  the 
way  of  salvation,  and  so  escape  from  hell  and  flee  to  heaven. 
It  is  all  in  vain  for  me  to  preach  to  you,  and  all  in  vain  for  the  most 
earnest  exhortations  to  be  addressed  to  any  of  you,  unless  the 
Holy  Spirit  shall  be  pleased  to  back  them  up  ;  for  man  is  so 
infatuated,  his  disease  is  one  which  causes  such  a  madness  of  the 
brain,  that  he  refuses  the  remedy,  and  puts  away  from  him  the 
healing  draught  which  alone  can  give  him  life  from  the  dead. 
"Ye  will  not  come  unto  me  that  ye  might  have  life."  Let  man 
alone,  and  with  the  cross  of  Christ  before  him  and  all  hell  behind 
him,  he  will  shut  his  eyes  and  prefer  to  be  damned  rather  than 
'enter  into  eternal  life  by  the  blood  of  Christ  the  Lord.  Hence 
Uhrist  came  first  to  seek  men,  and  then  to  save  them.  Ah ! 
what  a  task  that  is  of  seeking  men  !  There  are  some  of  you 
to-day  on  the  tops  of  the  mountains  of  pride,  and  others  of  you 
in  the  deep  glens  of  despair.  Methinks  I  see  the  Saviour  coming 
forth  to  seek  you ;  he  finds  you  to-day  in  the  green  pastures  of 
the  sanctuary,  he  comes  near  to  you,  and  by  these  hands  of  mine 
he  seeks  to  lay  hold  of  you,  but  no  sooner  do  you  discern  his 
5* 


10G  THE    MISSION'     OF    THK    SON     OK    MAN*. 

approach  then  you  run  far  away  into  the  wild  desert  of  sin. 
Perhaps  this  evening  you  will  be  spending  the  remnant  of  the 
Sabbath  in  profaning  God's  day.  One  of  you,  at  least,  I  ki:ow 
who  will  be  in  the  public  house  as  soon  as  the  evening  sermon  is 
over,  and  most  probably  will  go  home  very  late.  If  Christ 
intends  to  save  you  lie  will  go  to  you  there :  and  while  you  are 
In  4,hat  wild  waste  of  sin,  he  will  send  some  providence  after  you 
and  save  you  there.  Away  you  fly  then  to  the  marshes  of 
reformation,  and  you  say,  "  The  shepherd  cannot  overtake  me, 
I  shall  be  beyond  his  reach  now,  I  have  left  off  my  drunkei.ness,  I 
have  given  up  my  cursing."  But  he  will  come  to  you  there,  and 
wade  for  you  ankle  deep  in  your  own  self-righteousness.  And 
then  you  will  run  away  again  and  jump  into  the  deep  pit  of 
despair,  and  there  you  will  say  to  yourself,  "  He  can  never  find 
me  here."  But  I  see  him  coming  with  that  crook  of  his :  he 
enters  the  pit,  takes  you  by  the  feet,  and  casts  you  round  his 
neck  and  carries  you  home  rejoicing,  saying,  "  1  have  found  him, 
at  last!  Wherever  he  wrandered,  1  sought  him,  and  now  I  have 
found  him."  It  is  strange  what  queer  places  Christ  finds  some 
of  his  people  in  !  I  knew  one  of  Christ's  sheep  who  was  found 
out  by  his  Master  while  committing  robbery.  I  knew  another 
who  was  found  out  by  Christ,  while  he  was  spiting  his  old  mother 
by  reading  the  Sunday  newspaper  and  making  fun  of  her. 
Many  have  been  found  by  Jesus  Christ,  even  in  the  midst  of  sin 
and  vanity.  1  knew  a  preacher  of  the  Gospel  who  was  converted 
in  a  theatre.  He  was  listening  to  a  play,  an  old-fashioned  piece, 
that  endM  with  a  sailor's  drinking  a  glass  of  gin  before  he  was 
hung,  an 3  he  said,  "  Here's  to  the  prosperty  of  the  British 
nation,  an  I  the  salvation  of  my  immortal  soul ;  "  and  down  went 
the  curtain ;  and  down  went  my  friend  too,  for  he  ran  home  with 
all  his  might.  Those  words,  "The  salvation  of  my  immortal 
iotil,  had  struck  him  to  the  quick  ;  and  he  sought  the  Lord 
Jesus  in  his  chamber.  Many  a  day  he  sought  him,  a:  d  at  las 
he  found  him,  to  his  joy  and  confidence. 

But  fcr  the  most  part  Christ  finds  his  people  in  his  own  Iruse; 
but  he  finds  them  often  in  the  worst  of  tempers,  in  the  most 
hardened  conditions;  and  he  softens  their  hearts,  awakens  their 
cons'.-ien?es,  subdues  their  pride,  and  takes  them  to  himself ;  but 


THE    MISSION    OF    THE    SON    OF    MAN.  101 

never  would  they  come  to  him  unless  he  came  to  them.  Sheep 
go  astray,  but  they  do  not  come  back  again  of  themselves.  Ask 
the  shepherd  whether  his  sheep  come  back,  and  he  will  tell  you, 
"  No,  sir ;  they  will  wander,  but  they  never  return."  When 
you  find  a  sheep  that  ever  came  back  of  himself,  then  you 
may  hope  to  find  a  sinner  that  will  come  to  Christ  of  himself. 
No ;  it  must  be  sovereign  grace  that  must  seek  the  sinner  and 
bring  him  home. 

And  when  Christ  seeks  him  he  SAVES  him.  Having  caugh 
him  at  last,  like  the  rarn  of  old,  in  the  thorns  of  conviction,  he 
does  not  take  a  knife  and  slay  him,  as  the  sinner  expects,  but  he 
takes  him  by  the  hand  of  mercy,  and  begins  to  comfort  and  to 
save.  Oh,  ye  lost  sinners,  the  Christ  who  seeks  you  to-day  in 
the  ministry,  and  who  has  sought  you  many  a  day  by  his  provi 
dence,  will  save  you.  He  will  first  find  you  when  you  are 
emptied  of  self,  and  then  he  will  save  you.  When  you  are 
stripped  he  will  bring  forth  the  best  robe  and  put  it  on  you. 
When  you  are  dying,  he  will  breathe  life  into  your  nostrils. 
When  you  feel  yourselves  condemned  he  will  come  and  blot  out 
your  iniquities  like  a  cloud,  and  your  transgressions  like  a  thick 
cloud.  Fear  not,  ye  hopeless  and  helpless  souls,  Christ  seeks 
you  to-day,  and  seeking,  he  will  save  you — save  you  here,  save 
you  living,  save  you  dying,  save  you  in  time,  save  you  in  eternity, 
and  give  you,  even  you,  the  lost  ones,  a  portion  among  them 
that  are  sanctified.  May  the  Lord  now  bless  these  words  to 
your  consolation ! 

III.  I  shall  not  stop  to  say  more,  as  I  intended  to  have  done, 
lest  I  should  weary  you.  Let  me  only  remind  you,  that  the 
time  is  coming  when  that  word  "  lost "  will  have  a  more  fright 
ful  meaning  to  you  than  it  has  to-day.  In  a  few  more  months, 
*/rne  of  you,  my  hearers,  will  hear  the  great  bell  of  eternity  tolling 
forth  that  awful  word — lost,  lost,  lost !  The  great  sepulchres  of 
hell  will  toll  out  your  doom — lost,  lost,  lost !  and  through  the 
shades  of  eternal  misery  this  shall  for  ever  assail  your  ear,  that 
you  are  lost  for  ever.  But  if  that  bell  is  ringing  in  your  ear 
to-day,  that  you  are  lost,  oh,  be  of  good  cheer  ;  it  is  a  good  thing 
to  be  so  lost :  it  is  a  happy  thing  to  be  Ipst  to  self,  and  lost  to 
pride,  and  lost  to  carnal  hope.  Christ  will  save  you.  Believo 


108  THE    MISSION    OF    THE    SON    OF 

that.  Look  to  him  as  he  hangs  upon  his  cross.  One  look  shall 
give  you  comfort.  Turn  your  weeping  eyes  to  him  as  he  bleeds 
there  in  misery.  He  can,  he  will  save  you.  Believe  on  him,  for 
he  that  ^elieveth  and  is  baptized,  shall  be  saved.  He  that 
believeth  not  must  be  damned ;  but  whosoever  among  the  lost 
ones  will  now  cast  himself  on  Christ  Jesus,  shall  find  everlasting 
life  through  his  death  and  righteousness.  May  the  Lord  new 
gather  in  his  lost  sheep,  for  Jesus  Christ's  sake !  Amen* 


SERMON   VII. 
AN    EARNEST    INVITATION. 

"Kiss  the  Son,  lest  he  be  angry,  ami  ye  perish  from  the  way,  when  bU 
wrath  is  kindled  but  a  little.  Blessed  are  all  they  that  put  their  trust  ia 
him." — PSALM  ii.  12. 

IT  will  not  be  needful  for  me  this  morning  to  be  controversial 
ia  my  discourse ;  for  but  two  Sabbaths  ago  I  addressed  you  from 
that  text,  "The  mighty  God,"  and  endeavored  with  the  utmost 
of  my  ability  to  prove  that  Christ  must  be  "very  God  of  very 
God," — co-equal  and  co-eternal  with  his  Father.  Without,  then, 
attempting  to  prove  that,  let  us  drive  onward  towards  the  practi 
cal  issue ;  for,  after  all,  practice  is  the  end  of  preaching  ;  or,  if  ye 
will  have  it,  1  will  put  it  into  Herbert's  words — 

"  Attend  st-rmons,  but  prayers  most, 
Praying's  the  end  of  preaching." 

And  that  too  is  in  the  text,  for  what  lip  can  give  the  kiss  of  sin- 
oerity  to  the  Son  of  God,  save  the  lip  of  prayer.  We  drive  on- 
ward,  then,  towards  the  practical  conclusion.  May  God  the  Holy 
Spirit  assist  us. 

Now  it  has  sometimes  been  disputed  among  most  earnest  and 
zealous  ministers,  which  is  the  most  likely  means  of  bringing 
souls  to  Christ ;  whether  it  is  the  thunder  of  the  threatening,  or 
the  still  small  whisper  of  the  promise.  I  have  heard  some 
ministers  who  preferred  the  first ;  they  have  constantly  dwelt 
upon  the  terrors  of  the  law ;  and  they  have  certainly,  many  of 
them,  been  eminently  useful ;  they  have  had  Scripture  for  their 
warrant — "  Knowing  therefore  the  terror  of  the  Lord,  we  persuade 
men."  With  "  terrible  things  in  righteousness"  declaring  the  just 


110  AN    EARNEST    INVITATION. 

anger  and  judgment  of  God  against  sin,  they  have  alarmed  those 
who  were  sitting  at  ease  in  a  graceless  state,  and  have  thus  been 
the  means  in  the  hands  of  God,  of  inducing  them  to  flee  tioin  the 
wrath  to  come.  Some,  on  the  other  hand,  have  rather  decried 
the  threatenings ;  and  have  dwelt  almost  entirely  upon  the  pro- 
mises.  Like  John,  their  ministry  has  been  full  of  love;  they 
have  constantly  preached  from  such  texts  as  this — "  Come  now 
and  let  us  reason  together,  saith  the  Lord :  though  your  sins  IK 
as  scarlet,  they  shall  be  as  white  as  snow ;  though  they  be  red 
like  crimson,  they  r.hall  be  as  wool."  "  Come  unto  me,  all  ye 
that  labor  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest," — and 
such  like.  Now,  these  also  have  been  eminently  useful ;  and 
they  too  have  had  Scriptural  warrant  in  abundance,  for  thus  spake 
Christ's  apostles  full  often,  and  thus  spake  Jesus  Christ  himself, 
wooing  with  notes  of  mercy,  and  melting  with  tones  of  love  those 
ivhom  the  law's  terrors  would  but  have  hardened  in  their  sins. 
My  text,  however,  seems  to  be  a  happy  combination  of  the  two, 
and  I  take  it,  thr.t  the  most  successful  ministry  will  combine  both 
n\3ans  of  bringing  men  to  Christ.  The  text  thunders  with  all  the 
bolts  of  God — "  Lest  he  be  angry,  and  ye  perish  from  the  way, 
when  his  wrath  is  kindled  but  a  little."  But  it  does  not  end  in 
thunder;  there  comes  a  sweet,  soft,  reviving  shower  after  the 
storm  ;  "  Bless  3d  are  all  they  that  put  their  trust  in  him." 

This  morni'  g  I  shall  endeavor  to  use  both  arguments,  ar.d 
shall  dwide  m/  text  thus  : — First,  the  command,  "  Kiss  the  Son ;" 
secondly,  the  tryument  used,  "  lest  he  be  angry,  and  ye  perish 
from  the  way  ;"  fjnd  thirdly,  the  benediction  with  which  the  text 
clones — "  Bier  »ed  are  all  they  that  put  their  trust  in  him  ;"  this 
benediction  hsing  a  second  reason  why  we  should  obey  the  com 
m  an  dm  en  t. 

I.  First,  ihcn,  THE   COMMAND — "  Kiss  the  Son."     This   beai 
our  interpr3tatjons.     A  kiss  has  divers  meanings  in  it — progres 
sive  meanings.     I  pray  that  we  may  be  led  by  grace  from  step 
to  step,  so  that  we  may  understand  the  command  in  all  its  ful 
ness,  by  putting  it  in  practice. 

1.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  a  kiss  of  reconciliation.  The  kiss  is 
a  token  of  enmity  removed,  of  strife  ended,  and  of  peace  estab 
lished.  You  will  lemember  that  when  Jacob  met  Esau,  although 


AW    EARNEST    INVITATION.  Ill 

the  hearts  of  the  brothers  had  been  long  estranged,  and  fear  had 
dwelt  in  the  breast  of  one,  and  revenge  had  kindled  its  fires  in 
the  heart  of  the  other ;  when  they  met  they  were  pacified  towards 
each  other,  and  they  fell  upon  each  other's  neck,  and  they  kissed ; 
it  was  the  kiss  of  reconciliation.  Now,  the  very  first  work  of 
grace  in  the  heart  is,  for  Christ  to  give  the  sinner  the  kiss  of  hi? 
affection,  to  prove  his  reconciliation  to  the  sinner.  Thus  the 
father  kissed  his  prodigal  son  when  he  returned.  Before  the  feast 
was  spread,  before  the  music  and  the  dance  began,  the  father  fell 
upon  his  son's  neck,  and  kissed  him.  On  our  part,  however,  it  ia 
our  business  to  return  that  kiss ;  and  as  Jesus  gives  the  recon 
ciling  kiss  on  God's  behalf,  it  is  ours  to  kiss  the  lip  of  Jesus,  and 
to  prove  by  that  deed  that  we  are  "  reconciled  to  God  by  the 
death  of  his  Son."  Sinner,  thou  hast  hitherto  been  an  enemy  of 
Christ's  gospel.  Thou  hast  hated  his  Sabbaths ;  thou  hast  ne 
glected  his  Word ;  thou  hast  abhorred  his  commandments  and 
cast  his  laws  behind  thy  back  j  thou  hast,  as  much  as  lieth  in 
thee,  opposed  his  kingdom  ;  thou  hast  loved  the  wages  of  sin,  and 
the  ways  of  iniquity  better  than  the  ways  of  Christ.  What  say- 
est  thou  1  Does  the  Spirit  now  strive  in  thy  heart  1  Then,  J 
beseech  thee,  yield  to  his  gracious  influence,  and  now  let  thy 
qnairel  be  at  an  end.  Cast  down  the  weapons  of  thy  rebellion ; 
pull  out  the  plumes  of  pride  from  thy  helmet,  and  cast  away  tho 
sword  of  thy  rebellion.  Be  his  enemy  no  longer ;  for,  rest  as 
sured,  he  wills  to  be  thy  friend.  With  arms  outstretched,  ready 
to  receive  thee,  with  eyes  full  of  tears,  weeping  over  thine  ob 
stinacy,  and  with  bowels  moved  with  compassion  for  thee,  he 
speaks  through  iny  lips  this  morning,  and  he  says,  "  Kiss  the 
Son  ;"  be  reconciled.  This  is  the  very  message  of  the  gospel— 
'*  The  ministry  of  reconciliation."  Thus  speak  we,  as  God  hath 
command  us.  "  We  pray  you  in  Christ's  stead,  be  ye  reconciled 
t'j  God."  And  is  this  a  hard  thing  we  ask  of  you,  that  you  should 
be  at  friendship  with  him  who  is  your  best  friend  1  Is  this  a 
rigorous  law,  like  the  commands  of  Pharoah  to  the  children  of 
Israel  in  Egypt,  when  he  bids  you  simply  strike  hands  with  him 
who  shed  his  blood  for  sinners'?  We  ask  you  not  to  be  friends 
of  death  or  hell ;  we  beg  you  rather  to  dissolve  your  league  with 
them  ;  we  pray  that  grace  may  lead  you  to  forswear  their  con'.- 


112  AN    EARNEST    INVITATION. 

pany  for  ever,  and  be  at  peace  with  him  who  is  incarnate  Ursa 
and  infinite  mercy.  Sinners,  why  will  ye  resist  him  who  only 
longs  to  save  you?  Why  scorn  him  who  loves  you1?  Why 
trample  on  the  blood  that  bought  you,  and  reject  the  cross  which 
t*  the  only  hope  of  your  salvation  ?  "  Kiss  the  Son." 

"  Bow  the  knee,  and  kiss  the  Son, 
Come  and  welcome,  sinner,  come." 

That  is  the  first  meaning  of  the  text — the  kiss  of  reconciliation. 
The  Spirit  of  God  must  work  a  change  in  man's  heart  before  ha 
will  be  willing  to  give  this  kiss,  and  it  is  my  heart's  desire,  that 
by  the  words  which  shall  be  uttered  this  morning,  the  Spirit  may 
bow  the  obdurate  heart,  and  lead  you  to  give  Christ  the  kiss  of 
reconciliation  this  very  day. 

2.  Again,  the  kiss  of  my  text  is  a  kiss  of  allegiance  and  homage. 
It  is  an  Eastern  custom  for  the  subjects  to  kiss  the  feet  of  the 
king  ;  nay,  in  some  instances  their  homage  is  so  abject  that  they 
kiss  the  dust  beneath  his  feet,  and  the  very  steps  of  his  throne. 
Now,  Christ  requires  of  every  man  who  would  be  saved,  that  he 
shall  yield  to  his  government  and  his  rule.  There  are  some  who 
are  willing  enough  to  be  saved  and  take  Christ  to  be  their  priest, 
but  they  are  not  willing  to  give  up  their  sins,  not  willing  to  obey 
his  precepts,  to  walk  in  his  ordinances,  and  keep  his  command 
ments.  Now,  salvation  cannot  be  cut  in  twain.  If  you  would 
have  justification  you  must  have  sanctification  too.  If  your  sins 
are  pardoned  they  must  be  abhorred  ;  if  ye  are  washed  in  the 
blood  to  take  away  the  guilt  of  sin,  you  must  be  washed  in  the 
water  to  take  away  the  power  of  sin  over  your  affections  and  life. 
Oh,  sinners,  the  command  is,  "  Kiss  the  Son,"  bow  your  knee,  and 
con^e  and  own  him  to  be  a  monarch,  and  say,  "  Other  lords  have 
;ad  dominion  over  us ;  we  have  worshipped  our  lusts,  our  pleas- 
t  es.  our  pride,  our  selfishness,  but  now  will  ire  submit  ourselve* 
fo  thine  easy  yoke.  Take  us  and  make  us  thine,  for  we  are  aril) 
big  t<~  DC  tny  subjects — 

1  Oh,  sovereign  grace  our  hearts  subdue, 
We  would  be  led  in  triumph  too, 
As  willing  captives  to  our  Lord, 
To  bing  the  triumphs  of  his  Word."* 


AN    EARNEST    INN' IT  ATI  ON.  113 

You  must  give  him  the  kiss  of  fealty,  of  homage,  and  loyalty, 
mid  take  him  to  be  your  king.  And  is  this  a  hard  thh  rf  Is 
this  a  rigorous  commandment  ?  Why  look  at  Englishm-  a,  ho* 
they  spring  to  their  feet,  and  sing  with  enthusiasm — 

"  God  save  our  gracious  Queen. 

Long  live  our  noble  Queen, 

God  save  the  Queen!" 

And  is  it  a  hard  thing  for  you  and  me  to  be  bidden  to  cry,  "  God 
save  King  Jesus !  Spread  his  kingdom!  Let  him  reign,  King 
of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords  !  Let  him  reign  in  our  hearts  1"  Is 
it  a  hard  thing  to  bow  before  his  gentle  sceptre?  Is  there  any 
cruelty  in  the  demand,  that  we  should  submit  ourselves  to  the 
law  of  right,  and  rectitude,  and  justice,  and  love1?  "His  ways 
are  ways  of  pleasantness,  and  all  his  paths  are  peace  "  "  His 
commandments  are  not  grievous."  "Come  unto  me/' saith  the 
Lord,  "  and  I  will  give  you  rest ;  take  my  yoke  upon  you  ;"  it  is 
not  heavy ;  "  take  my  yoke  upon  you,  and  learn  of  me,  for  I  am 
meek  and  lowly  of  heart,  and  ye  shall  find  rest  unto  your  souls." 
O  sinner,  leave  that  black  monarch ;  turn  your  back  upon  the 
king  of  hell.  May  grace  enable  you  now  to  flee  away  from  him 
who  deludes  you  to-day,  and  shall  destroy  you  for  ever ;  and 
come  ye  to  the  Prince  Immanuel,  the  Son  of  God,  and  now 
declare  yourselves  to  be  the  willing  subjects  of  his  blessed  king 
dom.  "  Kiss  the  Son."  It  is  the  kiss  of  reconciliation  and  the 
kiss  of  homage. 

3.  Again,  it  is  the  kiss  of  worship.  They  that  worshipped 
Baal  kissed  the  calves.  It  was  the  custom  in  the  east  for  idol 
aters  to  kiss  the  god  which  they  foolishly  adored.  Now  the 
commandment  is  that  we  should  give  to  Christ  divine  worship. 
The  Unitarian  will  not  do  this :  he  says,  "  Christ  is  but  a  mere 
man ;"  he  will  not  kiss  the  eternal  Son  of  God.  Then  let  him 
know  that  God  will  not  alter  his  gospel  to  suit  his  heresy.  If 
he  rebel iiously  denies  the  Godhead  of  Christ,  he  need  not  marvel 
if  in  the  last  day  Christ  shall  say — "  But  those  mine  enemies, 
which  would  not  that  I  should  reign  over  them,  bring  hither  and 
slay  them  before  me."  It  is  no  marvel  if  he  who  rejects  the 
Godhead  of  Christ,  should  find  that  he  has  b-uilt  his  house  upon 


114  AN    EARNEST    INVITATION. 

the  sand,  and  when  the  rain  descends,  and  the  flood  comes,  nia 
hope  shall  totter,  and  great  shall  be  the  fall  thereof.  We  are 
bidden  to  worship  Christ,  and  O  how  pleasant  is  this  command, 
to  kiss  him  in  adoration !  It  is  the  highest  j<,y  of  the  Christian 
to  worship  Jesus.  I  know  of  no  thrill  of  pleasure  that  can  more 
rejoice  the  Christian's  breast,  and  thrill  his  soul  to  music,  than 
the  song  of — 

"  Worth}'  is  he  that  once  was  slain, 

The  Prince  of  Peace  that  groan'd  and  died, 
Worthy  to  rise,  and  live,  and  reign 
At  his  Almighty  Father's  side." 

Surely  that  shall  be  the  very  song  of  heaven,  to  sing  "  Worthy 
the  Lamb,"  and  yet  again  to  shout  louder  still,  "  Worthy  the 
Lamb  !  worthy  the  Lamb !"  Well,  sinner,  thou  art  bidden  to 
do  this — to  acknowledge  Christ  thy  God.  "  Kiss  the  Son ;"  go 
to  him  in  prayer  this  very  day ;  cast  thyself  on  thy  knees  and 
worship  him ;  confess  thy  sin  committed  against  him  ;  lay  hold 
3f  his  righteousness;  touch  the  hem  of  his  garment;  adore  him 
by  thy  faith,  trusting  in  him ;  adore  him  by  thy  service,  living 
for  him  ;  adore  him  with  thy  lip,  praising  him ;  adore  him  with 
thy  heart,  loving  him,  and  surrendering  thy  whole  being  to  him. 
God  help  thee  in  this  way  to  "  kiss  the  Son." 

4.  There  is  yet  a  fourth  meaning,  and  I  think  this  is  the  sweet 
est  of  all.  "  Kiss  the  Son."  Ah,  Mary  Magdalene,  I  need  thee 
this  morning !  Come  hither,  Mary,  thou  shalt  explain  my  text. 
There  was  a  woman  who  had  much  forgiven  and  she  loved  much, 
and  as  a  consequence,  loving  much  she  desired  much  the  com 
pany  and  the  presence  of  the  object  of  her  affection.  She  came 
to  the  Pharisee's  house  where  he  was  feasting,  but  she  was  afraid 
to  enter,  for  she  was  a  sinner ;  the  Pharisee  would  repulse  hep 
and  tell  her  to  go  away.  What  did  a  harlot  there,  in  the  hous 
<jf  a  holy  Pharisee1?  So  she  came  to  the  door,  as  if  she  wouL» 
peep  in  and  just  get  a  glimpse  of  him  whom  her  soul  loved. 
But  there  he  lay  upon  the  table,  and  happily  for  her,  the  Pharisee 
had  slighted  Christ,  he  had  not  put  him  at  the  head  of  the  table, 
but  at  the  end,  and  therefore  his  feet — lying  backward  as  he 
reclined — were  close  against  the  door.  She  came,  and  oh .'  she 


AN    EARNEST    INVITATION.  115 

oould  not  dare  to  look  upon  his  head ;  she  stood  at  his  feet, 
behind  him,  weeping.  And  as  she  wept,  the  tears  flowed  so  plen- 
teously  that  she  washed  his  feet — which  the  Pharisee  had  for 
gotten  ;o  wash — with  her  tears.  And  then  unbraiding  hei 
luxurious  tresses,  which  had  been  the  nets  into  which  she  lad 
3 entangled  her  lovers,  she  began  to  wipe  his  feet  with  the  hairs  of 
:ier  head,  and  stooping  duwn  she  kissed  his  feet,  and  kissed  then 
yet  again.  Poor  sinner,  thou  that  art  full  of  guilt,  if  thou  has 
played  the  harlot,  or  if  thou  hast  been  a  sinner  in  other  ways, 
come,  I  beseech  thee,  to  Jesus  now.  Look  to  him,  believe  in 
him, 

"  Trust  in  his  blood,  for  it  alone 
llnth  power  sufficient  to  atone." 

And  this  done,  come  thou  and  "kiss  the  Son" — kiss  his  feet  with 
love.  Oh,  if  he  were  here  this  morning,  methinks  I  would  kiss 
those  feet  again  and  again.  And  if  any  should  enquire  the  reason, 
I  would  answer, 

"  Love  I  much?     I've  much  forgiven, 
I'm  a  miracle  of  grace." 

Jesus,  dost  thou  permit  me  to  kiss  thy  feet  with  the  kisses  of 
affection  1  And  may  I  pray  like  the  spouse  in  the  Canticles : 
"  Let  him  kiss  me  with  the  kisses  of  his  mouth,  for  thy  love  is 
better  than  wine."  May  I  so  pray  ?  Then,  glory  be  to  thy 
name,  I  will  not  be  slow  in  praying  it.  If  I  may  be  so  highly 
favored,  I  will  not  lose  the  favor  through  negligence  and  coldness 
of  heart.  Even  now  my  soul  gives  the  kiss  of  deep  and 
sincere  affection. 

"  Yes,  I  love  thee  and  adore, 
0  for  grace  to  love  thee  more." 

Kiss  the  Son."     Do  you  see  then  the  meaning  of  it?     It  is  a 

•w  of  reconciliation,  a  kiss  of  homage,  a  kiss  of  worship,  and  a 

>s  of  affectionate  gratitude.     "  Kiss  the  Son." 

And  \\  hat  if  in  this  great  assembly  there  should  be  some  soul 
chat  saith,  "  I  will  not  kiss  fche  Son,  I  owe  him  nothing,  I  will  not 
serve  him,  I  will  not  be  reconciled  to  him  ?"  Ah !  soul,  there 
are  tears  for  thee.  Would  God  that  all  the  people  of  Christ 
would  weep  for  thee  unti  thy  heart  were  changed ;  for  the  terribli 


110  AN    EARNEST    INVITATION. 

part  of  the  text  which  we  are  to  read  belongs  to  thet,  and  ere 
long  thou  shalt  know  its  fearful  meaning.  But  may  «ve  riot  hope 
better  things  7  Have  we  not  somewhere  in  this  great  hall  some 
poor  trembling  penitent,  who  with  the  tear  in  his  eye  is  saying, 
''Kiss  him  and  be  reconciled  to  him'! — Oh  that  I  might !  My 
fear  is,  sir,  if  I  should  try  to  draw  near  to  Christ,  he  would  say, 
Get  thee  gone,  I  will  have  nought  to  do  with  thee ;  thou  art  too 
rile,  too  hardened ;  thou  hast  too  long  resisted  the  Word,  too 
ong  despised  my  grace — get  thee  gone.'"  No,  soul,  Jesus 
never  said  that  yet,  and  he  never  will.  Whatever  are  thy  sins 
as  long  as  thou  art  in  the  body  there  is  hope.  However  great 
:hy  guilt,  however  enormous  th)'  transgressions,  if  thou  art  now 
willing  to  be  reconciled,  God  has  made  thee  willing,  and  he  would 
not  have  put  the  will  if  he  did  not  intend  to  gratify  it.  There 
is  nothing  that  can  keep  thee  from  Christ  if  thou  art  willing  to 
come.  Christ  casts  out  none  that  desire  to  be  saved.  There  is 
in  his  heart  enough  for  all  that  seek  him,  enough  for  each, 
enough  for  evermore.  Oh !  think  not  that  Christ  is  ever  slower 
than  we  are.  We  never  love  him  before  he  loves  us.  If  our 
heart  loves  him,  his  soul  loved  us  long  ago,  and  if  we  are  now 
willing  to  be  reconciled  to  him,  let  us  rest  assured  that  Jehovah's 
melting  bowels  yearn  to  clasp  his  Ephraims  to  his  breast.  May 
God  bless  this  exhortation  to  every  heart  now  present,  and  to 
him  be  the  glory. 

II.  This  brings  us  to  the  second  part  of  the  text.  "  Kiss  the 
Son" — and  THE  ARGUMENT  is,  "  Lest  he  be  angry,  and  ye  perish 
from  the  way,  when  his  wrath  is  kindled  but  a  little.;"  read  it — 
*  Lest  he  be  angry."  And  can  he  be  angry  7  Is  he  not  the 
Lamb  of  God 7  Can  a  lamb  be  angry  ?  Did  not  he  weep  over 
sinners 7  Can  he  be  angry?  Did  not  he  die  for  sinners'? — can 
he  be  angry.  Yes,  and  when  he  is  angry,  it  is  anger  indeed. 
When  he  is  angry  it  is  anger  that  none  can  match.  The  most 
\\ful  word  I  sometimes  think  in  the  whole  Bible  is  that  shriek 
of  the  lost.  "  Rocks,  hide  us !  mountains,  fall  upon  us,  and  hide 
us  from  the  face  of  him  that  sitteth  upon  the  throne,  and  from 
the  wrath  of  the  Lamb."  What  a  fearful  conjunction  of  terms — 
14  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb  7"  Can  you  picture  that  dear  face  of 
his,  those  eyes  that  wept,  those  hands  that  bled,  those  lips  tha* 


AN    EARNEST    INVITATION.  JIT 

spoke  such  notes  of  love,  such  words  of  pity,  and  can  you  believe 
that  one  day  those  eyes  shall  know  no  tears,  but  shall  flash  with 
lightning ;  that  those  hands  shall  know  no  mercy,  but  shall  grasp 
a  rod  of  iron  ana  break  the  wicked  into  pieces  like  potter's 
vessels ;  and  those  feet  shall  know  no  errands  of  love,  but  he 
shall  tread  upon  his  enemies,  and  crush  them,  even  as  grapes  are 
trodden  by  the  winc-pressers,  and  the  blood  thereof  shall  stain 
his  garments,  and  as  he  comes  up  from  their  destruction,  they 
shall  ask  him,  "  Who  is  this  that  cometh  ?" — not  from  Calvary, 
Lot  from  Gethsemane,  but  "  Who  is  this  that  cometh  from 
Edorri" — the  land  of  his  enemies — "  with  dyed  garments  from 
Bozrah  ?" — the  land  of  his  stoutest  foes — "  this  that  is  glorious  ir 
his  apparel,  travelling  in  the  greatness  of  his  strength?"  And 
what  shall  be  the  answer  ?  It  is  most  terrible.  Who  is  this 
that  has  trodden  his  enemies  and  crushed  them  ? — "  1  that  speak 
in  righteousness,  mighty  to  save."  Why,  Jesus,  if  thou  had&'; 
said,  "  Mighty  to  destroy,"  we  might  have  understood  thee ;  bui 
"  mighty  to  save !" — and  so  he  is — this  gives  the  edge  to  the 
whole  sentence,  that  when  he  shall  destroy  his  enemies,  he  that 
is  mighty  to  save  will  be  mighty  to  crush,  mighty  to  damn, 
mighty  to  devour,  and  rend  his  prey  in  pieces. 

I  know  nothing,  I  repeat,  more  fearful  than  the  thought  that 
Christ  will  be  angry,  and  that  if  we  live  and  die  finally  impeni 
tent,  rejecting  his  mercy  and  despising  his  sacrifice,  we  have  good 
need  to  tremble  at  this  sentence,  "  Kiss  the  Son,  lest  he  be  angry.'1 
And  now  do  you  see  again  that  if  Christ  once  be  angry,  it  must 
be  all  over  with  our  hopes  or  our  rest  ]  We  will  suppose  now 
some  poor  girl  who  has  stepped  aside  from  the  paths  of  right. 
She  has  persevered  in  her  iniquity  despite  many  warnings, 
Friends  rise  up  to  help  her,  but  they  drop  off  one  by  one,  for 
*he  becomes  incorrigibly  wicked.  Others  come  to  help  her,  but 
Us  often  as  they  rise  they  fall  again,  for  she  sins,  and  sins,  and 
«ns  again.  There  is,  however,  one  who  has  oftentimes  received 
^er  to  his  bosom,  erring  though  she  be — her  father.  He  says, 
l<  Shall  I  forget  the  child  I  have  begotten1?  Sinner  she  is.  but  she 
is  still  my  child ;"  and  often  as  she  sins  and  goes  away,  he  wfll 
not  reject  her ;  he  receives  her  to  his  house  again ;  tainted  and 
defiled,  again  he  gives  her  the  kiss  of  fond  affection.  At  last  she 


118  AN    EARNEST    INVITATION. 

perseveres  in  her  iniquity,  and  goes  to  such  a  leng'h,  that  one  day, 
in  her  desperate  despair,  some  one  says  to  her,  why  not  seek  * 
friend  to  deliver  you  in  this  your  awful  hour  of  distress  and  an 
guish  on  account  of  sin  1  "  Oh,"  says  she,  "  I  have  none  left.'* 
"  But  there  is  your  father ;  have  you  not  a  father  or  a  mother  ln 
"  Yes,"  says  she,  "  but  he  is  angry,  and  he  will  do  nothing  for 
ne."  Then  her  last  door  is  shut,  and  her  hope  is  over.  What 

vonder  that — 

"  Mad  from  life's  history, 
Glad  to  death's  mystery, 
Swift  to  be  hurled— 
Anywhere,  anywhere, 
Out  of  the  world," 

she  ends  her  life  because  her  only  helper  is  angry,  and  her  hope 
is  gone  1  Despair  must  seize  her  then,  when  her  best,  her  only 
helper  is  angry  with  her.  Let  me  give  you  another  picture, — a 
simpler  one.  There  is  a  dove  long  gone  out  of  Noah's  ark  :  sup 
pose  that  dove  to  have  been  flying  many  hours  till  its  wing  is 
weary.  Poor,  poor  dove !  Across  the  shoreless  sea  it  flies,  and 
finds  never  a  spot  whereon  its  weary  feet  may  rest.  At  last,  it 
bethinks  itself  of  the  ark ;  it  flies  there,  hoping  there  to  find  a 
shelter ;  but  suppose  it  should  see  Noah  standing  looking  through 
the  window  with  crossbow  to  destroy  it, — then  where  were  its 
hope  1  Its  only  hope  hath  proved  the  gate  of  death.  Now  let  it 
fold  its  wings  and  sink  into  the  black  stream,  and  die  with  all  the 
rest.  Ah !  sinner,  these  two  are  but  faint  pictures  of  the  des- 
perateness  of  your  despair  when  once  he  is  angry, — he  who  is  the 
sinner's  friend,  the  sinner's  wooer,  he  of  whom  we  sometimes 
say,— 

"  Jesus,  lover  of  my  soul." 

When  he  is  angry,  where,  where,  oil  where  can  sinners  hide] 
When  he  is  angry,  when  he  takes  a  bow  and  fits  an  arrow  to  the 
wiring,  where  is  your  shelter  then  ? — where  your  defence  and  ref 
uge  ?  Sinners,  "  Kiss  the  Son,"  bow  before  him  now,  and  re- 
ceive  his  grace;  acknowledge  his  sway,  lest  he  be  angry  with 
you,  and  for  ever  shut  you  up  in  black  despair,  for  none  can  give 
you  hope  or  joy  when  once  he  is  angry. 

And  now  mark  the  effects  of  Christ's  anger,  "And  ye  perfsh 


AN    EARNEST    INVITATION.  119 

from  the  way,  when  his  wrath  is  kindled  but  a  Jittle."  Let  me 
give  you  a  picture.  Ye  have  seen  the  maid  light  the  fire.  At 
first  it  is  the  mateji,  the  spark,  and  there  is  a  little  kindling ;  a 
kindling  but  a  little.  What  is  that  compared  \\ith  the  fire  that 
is  to  succeed?  Ye  have  heard  of  the  prairie  burning.  The 
traveller  hath  lit  his  fire  and  dropped  a  spark — the  fire  is  kir.dling 
but  a  little,  and  a  small  circle  of  flame  is  forming.  Ye  cannot 
iudge  what  will  be  the  mighty  catastrophe  when  the  sheet  of 
flame  shall  seem  to  cover  half  the  continent.  And  yet,  mark 
you,  our  text  says  that  "  when  God's  wrath  is  kindled  but  a  little'* 
it  is  even  then  enough  to  utterly  destroy  the  wicked,  so  that  they 
"  perish  from  the  way."  What  a  fearful  thought  it  presents  to  us 
if  we  have  but  eyes  to  see  it !  It  is  like  one  of  Martin's  great 
pictures  :  it  has  more  cloud  in  it  than  plain  outline ;  it  has  in  it 
great  masses  of  blackness ;  there  is  only  this  little  kindling,  and 
there  is  the  sinner  destroyed.  But  what  is  that  1  Black,  thick 
darkness  forever.  What  must  become  of  the  sinner  then,  when 
the  breath  of  the  Lord,  like  a  stream  of  brimstone  shall  blow  up 
Tophet  till  its  flames  reach  above  all  thought,  and  till  the  fire 
burns,  beneath,  even  to  the  lowest  hell "?  His  wrath  is  kindled 
but  a  little  then.  I  find,  however,  Calvin,  together  with  several 
other  excellent  commentators,  gives  another  interpretation  to 
this  : — "  In  but  a  little,"  and  ye  perish  from  the  way  when  his 
wrath  is  kindled  very  soon,  or,  "  in  but  a  little  time."  So  it 
may  be  well  translated  without  any  violence  whatever  to  the 
original.  God's  anger  kindles  very  speedily  when  once  men  have 
rejected  him  :  when  the  period  of  their  mercy  is  passed  away, 
then  comes  the  hour  of  their  black  despair,  and  his  wrath  is 
kindled  in  a  little  time.  This  should  make  each  one  of  us  think 
about  our  souls — the  fact  that  God  may  take  us  away  with  a 
'stroke,  and  a  great  ransom  cannot  deliver  us.  We  had,  last  Sab- 
oath-day,  a  terrible  picture  of  how  soon  God  can  take  away  a 
man  with  a  stroke.  On  our  common,  you  will  remember,  at 
Clapham,  a  man  sought  shelter  beneath  a  poplar  tree,  and  in  a 
moment  a  bolt  fell  from  heaven  and  rent  his  body  in  pieces,  and 
he  died.  I  should  not  have  marvelled  if  last  night,  when  I  was 
reading  my  text  by  the  glare  of  the  lightning,  thinking  it  over 
amidst  the  roarings  of  the  thunder,  if  many  -such  deaths  Md  <x> 


120  AN    EARNEST    INVITATION. 

curred.  God  can  soon  take  us  away.  But  tnis  is  the  wonder, 
that  men  will  visit  that  tree  by  which  their  fellow  died,  and  gc 
away  and  be  just  as  careless  as  they  were  before.  You  and  I 
hear  of  sudden  deaths,  and  yet  we  imagine  we  shall  not  die  sud 
denly.  We  cannot  think  God's  wrath  will  be  kindled  in  a  little 
time,  find  that  he  will  take  us  away  with  a  stroke.  We  get  the 
dca  that  we  shall  die  in  our  nests,  with  a  slow  and  gradual  death, 
and  have  abundance  of  time  for  preparation.  Oh,  I  beseech  you, 
let  no  such  delusion  destroy  your  soul.  4<  Kiss  the  Son  now,  lest 
he  be  angry  in  a  little  while,  and  ye  perish  from  the  way."  Now 
bow  before  him  and  receive  his  grace. 

However,  I  return  to  the  old  reading  of  the  text,  "  Kiss  the 
Son,  lest  he  be  angry,  and  ye  perish  from  the  way,  when  his 
wrath  is  kindled  but  a  little."  How  terrible  is  the  doom  of  the 
wicked !  The  little  kindling  of  God's  wrath  kills  them  ;  what 
shall  the  eternal  burnings  be]  Who  among  us  shall  dwell  with 
the  devouring  fire  1  who  among  us  shall  abide  with  everlasting 
burnings  1  There  is  a  land  of  thick  darkness  and  despair  where 
dwelleth  the  undying  worm,  which  in  its  ceaseless  folds  doth 
crush  the  spirits  of  the  damned.  There  is  a  fire  quick  burning, 
that  drieth  up  the  very  marrow  of  body  and  soul,  and  yet  de 
stroy  eth  them  not.  There  also  is  the  pit  that  knoweth  no  bot 
tom,  the  hopeless  falling  without  a  thought  of  ever  coming  to  an 
end.  There  is  a  land  where  souls  linger  in  eternal  death,  and 
yet  they  never  die ;  crushed,  but  not  annihilated ;  broken,  but 
not  destroyed ;  for  ever,  for  ever,  for  ever,  is  the  ceaseless  wave 
which  rolls  its  fresh  tide  of  fire  upon  a  shore  of  agony,  whose 
years  are  as  countless  as  the  sands  of  the  sea.  And  shall  it  be 
your  lot  and  mine  to  dwell  for  ever  with  the  howling  spirits  of  the 
damned  ?  Must  these  eyes  weep  the  briny  tear  that  cannot  as 
suage  thirst  ?  Must  these  lips  be  parched  with  the  infinite  heat  ? 
Must  this  body  be  everlastingly  tormented,  and  this  soul,  with 
all  its  powers,  become  a  lake  of  grief  into  which  torrents  of  Al 
mighty  wrath  shall  roll  ceaselessly  with  black  and  fiery  streams  ? 
Oh,  my  God,  and  can  the  thought  be  uttered — there  may  be  some 
in  this  hall  this  morning,  who,  ere  long,  shall  be  in  hell  ?  If  you 
should  see  an  arrow  fitted  to  a  string  pointed  in  yon  direction, 
would  you  think  it  a  hard  prophecy  if  I  should  fi?-y,  that  ere  long 


AN    EARNEST    INVITATION.  12] 

the  arrow  Axuld  find  its  mark  over  yonder?  "No,"  you  would 
say,  "  it  k  lmt  nature  that  it  should  go  in  the  way  in  which  it  74 
directed."  But,  signers,  some  of  you  are  this  day  fitted  on  the 
^ow  of  silt.  Sin  is  the  string  that  impels  you  forward.  Nay, 
more  than  this.  Some  of  you  are  whistling  onward  towards 
death,  despair,  and  hell.  Sin  is  the  path  to  hell,  and  you  are 
travelling  in  it  with  lightning  speed.  Why  need  you  think  me 
harsh  if  1  prophecy  that  you  will  get  to  the  end  ere  long,  and 
reap  the  harvest  to  your  soul  1  Oh,  "  kiss  the  Son,"  I  beseech 
you ;  for  if  ye  kiss  him  not,  if  ye  receive  not  his  grace  and 
mercy,  perish  ye  must;  there  is  no  hope  for  you;  desperate 
without  remedy,  your  end  must  be,  if  ye  will  not  yield  your 
pride  and  submit  to  Jesus.  Oh  !  what  language  shall  I  use  ? 
Here  were  a  task  for  Demosthenes,  if  he  could  rise  from  the 
dead,  and  be  converted,  and  preach  with  all  his  mighty  eloquence, 
and  exhort  you  to  flee  from  the  wrath  tc  come.  Here  is  a  text 
that  might  exhaust  the  eloquence  of  the  apostle  Paul,  while  with 
tears  running  down  his  cheeks,  he  would  plead  with  you  to  flee 
to  Christ,  and  lay  hold  upon  his  mercy.  As  for  me,  I  cannot 
speak  my  soul  out.  Would  that  my  heart  could  speak  without 
rny  lips,  to  tell  out  the  agony  I  feel  just  now  concerning  your 
souls.  Oh,  why  will  ye  die  ?  "  Why  will  ye  die,  O  house  of 
Tsrael  ?"  Will  you  make  your  beds  in  hell  ?  Will  you  wrap 
yourselves  about  with  flame  forever?  Will  you  have  the  mer 
riment  of  sin  in  this  life,  and  then  reap  the  harvest  of  destruction 
in  the  world  to  come  1  Oh,  men  and  brethren,  I  beseech  you  by 
the  living  God,  by  death,  by  eternity,  by  heaven,  and  by  hell ;  I 
implore  you,  stop!  stop!  and  "kiss  the  Son,  lest  he  be  angry, 
and  ye  perish  from  the  way."  Oh !  the  terrors  of  the  Lord  ! 
who  shall  speak  them  ?  Last  night,  we  saw,  as  it  were,  the  back 
parts  of  the  terrible  God,  when  his  skirts  of  light  swept  through 
the  sky.  He  made  clouds  his  chariot,  and  he  did  ride  upon  the 
wings  of  the  wind.  Sinners,  can  ye  stand  before  the  God  of 
thunder  ?  Can  ye  war  against  the  God  of  lightning  ?  Will  ye 
resist  him,  and  despise  his  Son,  and  reject  the  offer  of  mercy, 
and  dash  yourselves  upon  his  spear,  and  rush  upon  his  sword  1 
Oh,  turn  ye  ]  turn  ye  now !  Thus  saith  the  Lord  :  "  Consider 
your  ways." 

a 


12V£  AN    EARNEST    INVITATION. 

"  Bow  the  knee  and  kiss  the  Son; 
Come,  and  welcome,  sinner,  cornel" 

III.  And  now  give  me  your  attention  just  a  moment  o*  U/tf 
longer  while  with  all  earnestness  I  endeavor  to  preach  for  a  Iktlo 
while  upon  THE  BENEDICTION  WITH  WHICH  THE  TEXT  CLOSES: 
"  Blessed  are  all  they  that  put  their  trust  in  him."  I  have  been 
beating  the  big  drum  of  threatening,  and  now  let  us  have  thej 
soft,  sweet  harp  of  David,  of  sweet,  wooing  benedictions. 
"  Blessed  are  all  they  that  put  their  trust  in  him."  Dost  thou 
put  thy  trust  in  him,  my  hearer  1  Beneath  the  wings  of  God 
we  nestle,  and  we  know  of  no  security  elsewhere.  This  is  enough 
for  us.  Now  tho  text  says  that  those  that  trust  in  him  are 
blessed ;  and  I  would  observe,  first,  that  they  are  really  blessed. 
It  is  no  fiction,  no  imaginary  blessing ;  it  is  a  real  blessedness 
which  belongs  to  those  that  trust  in  God  ;  a  blessedness  that  will 
ctand  the  test  of  consideration,  the  test  of  life,  arid  the  trial  of 
death  ;  a  blessedness  into  which  we  cannot  plunge  too  deeply,  for 
it  is  none  of  it  a  dream,  but  all  a  reality. 

Again,  fchose  that  trust  in  him  have  not  only  a  reai  blessed 
^ess,  but  they  oftentimes  have  a  conscious  blessedness.  They 
know  what  it  is  to  be  blessed  in  their  troubles,  for  they  are  in 
^heir  trials  comforted,  and  they  are  blessed  in  their  jo}  s,  for  their 
joys  are  sanctified.  They  are  blest  and  they  know  it,  they  sing 
about  it  and  they  rejoice  in  it.  It  is  their  joy  to  Knou  that  God's 
blessing  is  come  to  them  not  in  words  only  out  ir  very  deed. 
They  are  blessed  men  and  blessed  women. 

"  They  woul<l  not  change  their  blest  estate 
For  all  the  world  culls  good  and  g,cnt." 

Then,  further,  they  are  not  only  really  blessed,  and  consciously 
olessed,  but  they  are  increasingly  blessed.  Their  blessedness 
grows.  They  do  not  go  down  hill  as  the  wicked  do,  from  bright 
hope  to  black  despair  They  do  not  diminish  in  their  delights, 
the  river  deepens  as  they  wade  into  it.  They  are  blessed  when 
Ve  first  ray  of  heavenly  light  streams  on  their  eye-balls ;  they 
are  blessed  when  their  eyes  are  opened  wider  still,  to  see  more 
of  the  lo^e  of  Christ ;  they  are  blessed  the  more  their  experience 


AN    EARNEST    INVITATION.  123 

widens  and  their  knowledge  deepens,  and  their  love  increases. 
They  are  blessed  in  the  hour  of  death,  and,  best  of  all,  their 
blessedness  increases  to  eternal  blessedness, — the  perfection  of 
the  saints  at  the  right  hand  of  God.  "  Blessed  are  all  they  that 
put  their  trust  in  him."  Time  fails  me  to  enter  into  this  blessed 
benediction,  and  therefore  I  pause  and  come  back  to  my  old 
work  again  of  endeavoring  to  reach  you  by  earnest  entreaty, 
«vhile  I  urge  you  to  "  kiss  the  Son." 

Sinner,  you  are  bidden  to  trust  in  Christ  this  morning.  Come, 
this  is  your  only  hope.  Remember,  you  may  do  a  hundred 
things,  but  you  will  be  none  the  better.  You  will  be  like  the 
woman  mentioned  in  Scripture,  who  spent  all  her  mA?;ey  on  phy 
sicians  and  was  none  the  better,  but  rather  grew  worse.  There 
is  ao  hope  for  you  but  in  Christ.  Rest  assured,  that  all  the  mercy 
of  God  is  concentrated  in  the  cross.  I  hear  some  talk  about  the 
uncovenanted  mercies  of  God :  there  are  no  such  things.  The 
mercies  of  God  are  all  emptied  out  into  the  covenant;  God  hath 
put  all  his  grace  into  the  person  of  Christ,  and  you  shall  have 
none  elsewhere.  Trust,  then,  in  Christ, — so  you  shall  be  blessed, 
but  you  shall  be  blessed  nohow  else.  Again,  I  urge  you  to  "  kiss 
the  Son,"  and  trust  Christ,  because  this  is  the  sure  way.  None 
have  perished  trusting  in  Christ.  It  shall  not  be  said  on  earth, 
nor  even  in  hell  shall  the  blasphemy  be  uttered,  that  ever  a  soul 
perished  that  trusted  in  Christ.  "  But  suppose  I  am  not  one  of 
God's  elect,"  says  one.  But  if  you  trust  in  Christ  you  are ;  and 
there  is  no  supposing  about  it.  "  But  suppose  Christ  did  not  die 
for  me."  But,  if  you  trust  him,  he  did  die  for  you.  That  fact 
is  proved,  and  you  are  saved.  Cast  yourself  simply  on  him ; 
dare  it;  run  the  risk  of  it;  venture  on  him,  venture  on  him, 
(and  there  is  no  risk.)  You  shall  not  find  that  you  have  been  mis 
taken.  Sometimes  I  feel  anxiety  and  doubt  about  my  own  sal 
vation,  and  the  only  way  I  can  get  comfort  is  this  :  I  go  back  to 
where  I  began,  and  say, — 

"  I  the  chief  of  sinners  am  ;" 

1  go  to  my  chamber,  and  once  more  confess  that  I  am  a  wretch 
undone  without  his  sovereign  grace,  and  1  pray  him  to  have 
mercy  on  me  yet  again.  Depend  on  it,  it  is  the  only  way  t« 


124  AN    KAKNEST    INVITATION. 

heaven,  and  it  is  a  sure  one.     If  you  perish  trusting  in  Christ 
you  will  be  the  first  of  the  kind.     Do  you  think  God  would 
allow  any  to  say,  "  I  trusted  in  Christ,  and  yet  he  deceived  me 
I  cast  my  soul  on  him,  and  he  was  not  strong  enough  to  bear  to 
me  ?"     Oh,  do  not  be  afraid,  I  beseech  you. 

And  I  conclude  now  by  noticing  that  this  is  an  open  salvation 
Every  soul  in  the  world  that  feels  its  need  of  a  Saviour,  and 
that  longs  to  be  saved,  may  come  to  Christ.  If  God  hath  con 
vinced  thee  of  sin,  and  brought  thee  to  know  thy  need — come, 
come  away  !  come,  come  away  !  come  now ;  trust  now  in  Christ, 
and  thou  shaltnow  find  that  blessed  are  all  they  that  trust  in  him. 
The  door  of  mercy  does  not  stand  on  the  jar,  it  is  wide  open. 
The  gates  of  heaven  are  not  merely  hanging  on  the  latch,  but  thev 
are  wide  open  both  night  and  day.  Come,  let  us  go  together  to 
that  blessed  house  of  mercy,  and  drive  oui  wants  away.  The 
grace  of  Christ  is  like  our  street  drinking  fountains,  open  to 
every  thirsty  wanderer.  There  is  the  cup,  the  cup  of  faith.  Como 
and  hold  it  here,  while  the  water  freely  flows,  and  drink.  There 
is  no  one  can  come  up  and  say  it  is  not  made  for  you  ;  for  you 
can  say,  "Oh.  yes  it  is,  I  am  a  thirsty  soul ;  it  is  meant  for  me." 
"  Nay,"  say>  the  devil,  "  you  are  too  wicked."  No,  but  this  is  a 
free-drinking  fountain.  It  does  not  say  over  the  top  of  the  foun 
tain,  "  No  thieves  to  drink  here."  All  that  is  wanted  at  the 
drinking  fountain  is  simply  that  you  should  be  willing  to  drink, 
that  you  should  be  thirsty  and  desire.  Come,  then. 

"  Lot  not  conscience  make  you  linger, 

Nor  of  fitness  fondly  dream; 
All  the  fitness  lie  require! h, 
Is  to  feel  your  need  of  him." 

He  nas  given  you  this  ;  come  and  drink  ;  drink  freely.  '  The 
Spirit  and  the  bride  say  come  ;  and  let  him  that  heareth  say 
•ome;  and  whosoever  is  athirst  let  him  coma  and  take  the 
water  of  life  freely." 


SERMON   VIII. 

HOW  SAINTS  MAY  HELP  THE  DEVIL 

*That  thou  ma  vest  bear  thine  own  shame,  and  mayest  be  confounded  in 
all  that  Uiou  hast  done,  in  that  thou  art  a  comfort  unto  them." — EZEKIAI 
xrt.  54. 

IT  is  not  a  comfortable  state  to  be  at  enmity  with  God,  aiid 
the  sinner  knows  this.  Although  he  perseveres  in  his  rebellion 
against  the  Most  High,  and  turns  not  at  the  rebuke  of  the  Al 
mighty,  but  still  goeth  on  in  his  iniquity,  desperately  seeking  his 
own  destruction,  yet  is  he  aware  in  his  own  conscience  that  he  is 
not  in  a  secure  position.  Hence,  it  is,  that  all  wicked  men  are 
constantly  on  the  look  out  for  excuses.  They  find  these  either  in 
pretended  resolutions  to  reform  at  some  future  period,  or  else  in 
the  declaration  that  reformation  is  out  of  their  power,  and  that, 
acting  according  to  their  own  nature,  they  must  continue  to  go 
on  in  their  iniquities.  When  a  man  in  willing  to  find  an  excuse 
for  being  God's  enemy,  he  need  never  be  at  a  loss.  He  who 
hath  to  find  a  fact  may  find  some  difficulty ;  but  he  who  would 
/'urge  a  lie  may  sit  at  his  own  fireside  and  do  it.  Now,  the  ex 
cuses  of  sinners  are  all  of  them  false;  they  are  refugee?  of  lies; 
and,  therefore,  we  need  not  wonder  that  they  are  exceedingly  nu 
merous,  and  very  easy  to  come  at. 

One  way  in  which  sinners  frequently  excuse  themselves  is  by 
endeavoring  to  get  some  apology  for  their  own  iniquities  from 
the  inconsistencies  of  God's  people.  This  is  the  reason  why  there 
is  so  much  slander  in  the  world.  A  true  Christian  is  a  rebuke  to 
the  sinner;  wherever  he  goes  he  is  a  living  protest  against  the 
evil  of  sin.  Hence,  it  is,  that  the  worldling  makes  a  dead  set 


126  HOW    BAINTS    MAY    HELP    THE    DEVIL. 

apon  a  pious  man.  His  language  in  his  heart  is,  "  He  accuses 
me  to  my  face;  I  cannot  bear  the  sight  of  his  holy  character;  it 
makes  the  blackness  of  my  own  life  appear  the  more  terrible, 
when  I  see  the  whiteness  of  his  innocence  contrasting  with  it.'1 
And  then  the  worldling  opens  all  his  eyes,  and  labors  to  find  a 
fault  with  the  virtuous.  If,  however,  he  fails  to  do  so,  he  will 
next  try  to  invent  a  fault ;  he  will  slander  the  man ;  and,  if  even 
(here  he  fails,  and  the  man  is  like  Job,  "perfect  and  upright,  and 
one  that  feared  God  and  eschewed  evil,"  then  the  sinner  will,  like 
the  devil  of  old,  begin  to  impute  some  wrong  motive  to  the 
Christian's  innocency.  "  Doth  Job  serve  God  for  naught?"  said 
the  devil.  He  could  find  no  fault  with  Job  whatever;  his  char 
acter  was  untainted  and  unblemished ;  but,  says  he,  "  he  keeps  to 
his  religion  for  what  he  gets  by  it."  I  reckon  it  to  be  a  glorious 
accusation  when  we  are  falsely  charged  with  being  religious  for 
the  sake  of  gain.  It  shows  that  our  enemies  have  no  other  charge 
that  they  can  bring  against  us.  They  have  ransacked  all  the  files 
of  their  calumny,  and  they  can  find  nothing  tangible,  and  this  is 
the  last  they  can  bring — an  imputation  upon  the  motive  of  the 
man  who  has  no  other  motive  in  all  the  world  than  to  glorify  his 
God  and  win  sinners  from  destruction.  In  this,  then,  let  us  glory. 
If  sinners  dander  us,  it  is  because  we  make  them  uneasy.  They 
see  that  our  lives  are  a  protest  against  them  :  and  what  can  they 
do  ?  They  must  sotnehow  or  other  answer  the  Bill  which  we  have 
filed  against  them  in  Heaven's  Chancery,  and  they  do  it  by  issu 
ing  (*  Rejoinder  against  us,  and  bringing  us  in  as  defendants  in 
the  case.  We  glory  in  this,  that  we  are  defendants  who  can 
prove  our  innocence,  and  we  are  not  ashamed  to  stand  before  the 
bar  of  God  to  have  our  motives  tried.  There  is  much,  I  say,  to 
cheer  us  in  the  fact  of  such  a  libel.  We  know  the  work  is  done. 
We  are  sure  our  shots  have  told  on  their  armor,  when  they  a  re 
driven  to  return  on  us  their  calumnies  and  the  venom  of  their 
wrath.  Now  we  know  that  they  feel  the  might  of  our  arm  ;  now 
we  know  we  are  not  like  them,  mere  drivelings  and  dwarfs. 
They  have  felt  our  might,  and  against  it  they  kick,  they  foam, 
they  vomit  forth  their  wrath.  In  this,  I  say,  we  gory.  We 
have  smitten  them  hard,  or  else  they  would  not  rise  against  u» 
in  this  fashion. 


HOW    SAINTS    MAY    HELP    THE    DEVIL.  127 

Alas!  alas !  however,  sinners  have  not  always  to  use  calumny 
and  lies.  It  is  too  true  that  the  church  has  given  a  real  bonafidt 
cause  to  the  wicked  for  excusing  themselves  in  their  sin :  the 
inconsistencies  of  professors,  the  want  of  heart  in  piety,  the  ab 
sence  ot  devout  earnestness,  have  given  sad  grounds  to  the  un 
godly  to  justify  themselves  in  their  sin.  It  is  upon  this  melan 
choly  subject  that  I  am  about  to  enter  this  morning ;  and  may 
God  grant  unto  all  his  people  who  shall  feel  convicted  in  theii 
consciences,  the  spirit  of  mourning  and  contrition,  that  they  may 
vex  themselves  before  God,  and  confess  this  great  iniquity  that 
they  have  done,  namely,  that  they  have  comforted  sinners  in  their 
sin  by  their  own  inconsistency,  and  have  justified  the  wicked  in 
their  rebellion  by  their  own  rebellings  and  revoltings. 

This  morning  I  shall  deal  thus  with  the  subject.  First,  I  shall 
point  out  the  fact — the  different  acts  of  Christians  which  have 
helped  to  comfort  sinners  in  their  sin  ;  and  then,  secondly,  I  shall 
observe  the  consequences  of  this  evil — how  much  the  world  at 
large  has  been  injured  ly  the  deeds  of  professed  followers  of 
Christ;  and  then,  1  shall  come  with  a  solemn  warning,  bringing 
out  the  great  battering  ram,  to  dash  against  these  refugees  of  lies, 
and  moreover,  crying  with  a  loud  voice  to  those  who  are  the 
faithful  servants  of  Christ,  to  withdraw  their  hands,  and  no  longer 
to  assist  in  keeping  up  the  Jericho  in  which  the  wicked  have  en 
trenched  themselves. 

I.  First,  then,  it  shall  be  my  sad  and  melancholy  business  this 
morning  to  show  certain  facts  which  it  were  dishonest  to  deny, 
namely,  that  THE  ACTS  OF  MANY  OF  CHRIST'S  FOLLOWERS  HAVE 

BEEN    THE    CAUSE     OF     JUSTIFYING     AND     COMFORTING     SINNERS     IN 
THEIR    EVIL    WAYS. 

I .  And  first  I  would  observe,  that  the  daily  inconsistencies  of 
the  people  of  God  have  much  to  do  in  this  matter.  By  incon 
sistencies  I  do  not  exactly  mean  those  grosser  crimes  into  which, 
at  sad  and  mournful  periods,  many  professors  fall ;  but  I  mean 
those  frequent  inconsistencies  which  become  so  common  indeed 
that  they  are  scarcely  condemned  by  society 

The  covetousness  of  too  many  Christians  has  had  this  effect. 
44  Look,"  says  the  \yorldling,  "  this  man  professes  that  his  inherit 
Mice  is  above,  and  that  his  affection  is  set  not  on  things  on  earth. 


1  HOW    SAINTS    MAV     HK1.P    THE    UKVIL. 

but  on  the  things  of  heaven ;  but  look  at  him ;  he  is  just  as 
earnest  as  I  ani  about  the  things  of  this  world ;  he  can  drive  the 
screw  home  as  tightly  with  his  debtor  as  I  can ;  he  can  scrape 
and  cut  with  those  that  deal  with  him  quite  as  keenly  as  ever  I 
have  done."  Nay,  beloved,  this  is  not  a  mere  tale ;  alas !  I  have 
seen  persons  held  up  to  commendation  as  successful  merchants, 
\A  hose  lives  will  not  bear  the  test  of  Scripture,  whose  business 
dansactions  were  as  hard,  as  griping,  as  grasping,  as  the  transac 
ts  of  the  most  worldly.  How  often  has  it  happened  that 
some  of  you  have  bent  you  knee  in  the  sanctuary,  and  have  said, 
"  Forgive  us  our  debts,  as  we  forgive  our  debtors,"  and  one  hour 
afterwards  your  finger  has  been  almost  meeting  your  thumb 
through  the  jugular  vein  of  some  debtor  whom  you  had  seized  by 
the  throat !  The  Church  of  Christ  appears  to  be  as  worldly  as 
the  world  itself,  and  professors  of  religion  have  become  as  sharp 
in  trade  and  as  ungenerous  in  their  dealings  as  those  that  have 
never  been  baptized  into  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  have  never  professed 
to  serve  him.  And  now  what  does  the  world  say  ?  It  throws 
this  in  our  teeth.  If  it  be  accused  of  loving  the  things  of  time 
and  sense,  it  answers,  *'  And  so  do  you."  If  we  tell  the  world 
that  it  has  set  its  hopes  upon  a  shadow,  it  replies,  "  But  we  have 
set  our  hope  upon  the  self  same  thing  in  which  you  are  trusting ; 
you  are  as  worldly,  as  grasping,  as  covetous  as  we  are ;  youi 
protest  has  lost  its  force  ;  you  are  no  longer  witnesses  against  us 
— we  are  accusers  of  you." 

Another  point  in  which  the  sinner  often  excuses  himself  is  the 
manifest  worldliness  of  many  Christians.  You  will  see  Christian 
men  and  women  as  fond  of  dress,  and  as  pleased  with  the  frivoli 
ties  of  the  age,  as  any  other  persons  possibly  could  be ;  just  as 
amious  to  adorn  their  outward  person,  so  as  to  be  seen  of  mer  , 
inst  as  ambitious  to  win  the  praise  which  fools  accord  to  fine 
diessing,  as  the  most  silly  fop  or  the  most  gaudy  among  worldlj 
women.  What  saith  the  world,  when  we  turn  round  to  it,  and 
a.xjuse  it  of  being  a  mere  butterfly,  and  finding  all  its  pleasures 
l!  gaudy  toys'?  "Oh!  yes,"  it  says,  "we  know  your  cant,  but 
it  Is  just  the  same  with  you.  Do  you  not  stand  up  and  sing, 

"Jewels  to  me  fire  gaudy  toys, 
And  gold  but  sordid  dust  P 


HOW    SAINTS    MAY    HELP    THE    DEVIL.  129 

And  yet  you  are  just  as  fond  of  glittering  as  we  are;  your  doc 
tors  of  divinity  pride  themselves  just  as  much  in  their  D.  D.  as 
any  of  us  in  other  titles.  You  are  just  as  punctilious  about 
terms  of  honor  as  any  of  us  can  be.  You  talk  about  carrying 
the  cross;  but  we  do  not  see  it  anywhere,  except  it  be  a  golden 
cross  sometimes  hanging  on  your  bosom.  You  say  you  are  cru 
Gifted  to  the  world,  and  the  world  to  you :  it  is  a  very  merry 
sort  of  crucifixion.  You  say  that  you  mortify  your  members 
and  deny  yourselves :  your  mortification  must  be  suffered  in 
secret,  for  it  is  but  very  little  that  we  can  sec  of  it !  Thus  the 
worldling  casts  back  to  us  our  challenge,  declaring  that  we  are 
not  sincere,  and  thus  he  comforts  himself  in  his  sin,  and  justifies 
himself  in  his  iniquity. 

Look,  too,  at  the  manifest  pride  of  many  professors  of  religion. 
You  see  members  of  Christian  churches  as  proud  as  they  possibly 
can  be.  Their  backs  are  as  stiff  as  if  an  iron  rod  were  in  the 
centre,  they  come  up  to  the  house  of  God,  and  it  is  a  Christian 
doctrine  that  God  has  made  of  one  flesh  all  nations  that  dwell 
upon  the  face  of  the  earth,  but  the  Christian  is  as  aristocratic  as 
anybody  else — just  as  proud  and  just  as  stiff.  Is  the  Christian 
clothed  in  broadcloth  ?  How  often  does  he  feel  it  a  condescension 
to  own  a  smock-frock  1  and  how  often  do  you  see  a  sister  of  Chris: 
in  satin,  who  thinks  it  something  wonderful  if  she  owns  a  fellow- 
member  in  an  un washable  print  1  It  is  of  no  use  denying  it.  I 
do  not  think  that  the  evil  is  so  common  amongst  us  as  it  is  in 
some  churches ;  but  this  I  know,  that  there  are  respectable  churches 
and  chapels  in  which  a  poor  man  scarcely  dares  to  show  his  face. 
The  pride  of  the  church  surely  has  become  almost  as  great  as  the 
pride  of  Sodom  of  old.  Her  fulness  of  bread  and  her  stiffness 
of  neck  hath  brought  her  to  exalt  herself;  and  whereas  it  is  tho 
real  glory  of  the  church  that  "  the  poor  have  the  gospel  preached 
unto  them,"  and  that  the  poor  have  received  the  Word  with  glad 
ness,  it  becomes  now  the  honor  of  the  church  to  talk  of  her  re 
spectability,  of  the  dignity  and  station  of  her  members,  and  of 
the  greatness  of  her  wealth.  What,  then,  do  worldlings  say  ? 
"  You  accuse  us  of  pride,  you  are  as  proud  as  we  are.  You^  the 
humble  followers  of  Jesus,  who  washed  his  saints*  feet  ?  Not 
you ;  no,  you  would  have  no  objection,  we  doubt  not,  to  tw 
C* 


1  ^0  HOW    SAINTS    MAY    HELP    THE    DEVIL. 

washed  by  others,  but  we  do  not  think  it  likely  that  you  rould 
ever  wash  ours.  You,  the  disciples  of  the  fishermen  of  Galilee  7 
Not  you  ;  you  are  too  fine  and  great  for  that.  Accuse  us  not  of 
pride:  why,  you  are  as  stiff-necked  a  generation  as  we  ourselves 
are." 

Now,  these  are  only  mentioned  amongst  us  as  inconsistencies— 
not  as  sins.  Sins  they  verily  are;  and  they  are  such  srns  that 
they  restrain  the  Spirit  of  God  from  blessing  the  church.  Sins, 
too,  they  are  that  render  the  wicked  callous  in  their  sins,  blunt 
the  edge  of  our  rebukes,  and  prevents  the  Word  of  God  from 
working  in  the  hearts  of  men. 

I  might  mention  another  sad  fact  with  regard  to  the  church, 
which  often  stings  us  sorely — the  various  enmities,  and  strifes,' 
and  divisions,  that  arise.  You  tell  the  worldly  man  that  Chris 
tians  love  each  other.  "  Ah  !  "  says  he,  "  you  should  go  over  to 
Ebenezer  or  to  Kehoboth,  and  see  how  they  love  each  other. 
Don't  talk  of  leading  a  cat  and  dog  life  !  Look  at  many  of  your 
churches ;  see  how  the  minister  is  treated,  and  how  the  deacons 
are  in  arms,  and  how  the  members  hate  one  another.  They  can 
scarcely  hold  a  church  meeting  without  abusing  each  other !  " 
How  often  is  this  proved  to  be  true  in  many  churches !  And 
then  the  worldling  says,  "  You  tell  us  that  we  bite  and  devour 
each  other,  and  that  our  wars  and  fightings  come  from  our  lusts. 
Where  do  your  wars  and  fightings  come  from  1  You  tell  us  that 
our  anger  and  wrath  are  the  effect  of  sin  that  dwelleth  in  us : 
what  causes  your  divisions  and  your  strifes  1  "  In  this  way,  you 
see,  the  testimony  of  the  children  of  God  is  rendered  invalid, 
and  we  help  to  contort  sinners  in  their  sins. 

2.  Now  it  is  my  mournful  duty  to  go  a  step  further.  It  is  not 
merely  these  inconsistencies,  but  the  glaring  crimes  of  some  pro 
fessed  disciples,  that  have  greatly  assisted  sinners  in  sheltering 
themselves  from  the  attacks  of  the  Word  of  God.  Every  now 
and  then,  the  cedar  falls  in  the  midst  of  the  forest.  Some  one 
who  stood  prominent  in  the  church  of  God,  as  a  professed  fol 
lower  of  Jesus,  turns  aside.  "  They  go  out  frcm  us  because  they 
were  not  of  us ;  for  if  they  had  been  of  us,  doubtless,  they  would 
have  continued  with  us ;  but  they  went  out  from  us,  that  it  might 
b«  manifest  that  they  were  act  of  us."  We.  have  w?pt  over  high 


HOW    SAINTS    MAY    HELP    THE    DEVIL.  131 

professors  becoming  drunkards;  we  have  seen  mighty  men  ai 
religious  public  meetings  becoming  scoundrel  bankrupts.  We 
have  had  it  dashed4 in  our  faces,  dozens  of  times,  that  religion  has 
oilen  become  a  cloak  for  fraud,  and  that  when  the  world  haa 
trusted  a  religious  man  with  its  wealth,  that  religious  man  has 
carried  it  off  with  him,  and  has  not  been  found  at  the  proper  time, 
Oh !  this  is  the  great  curse  of  the  church.  I  was  thinking  only 
yesterday,  with  much  sorrow  in  my  heart,  of  the  present  age 
and  I  could  not  but  come  to  the  conclusion,  that  all  the  burnings 
of  Pagan  tyrants,  that  all  the  tortures  of  Popish  executioners, 
that  all  the  bloody  deaths  to  which  God's  people  were  ever  put 
in  any  one  age  of  the  world,  have  never  done  so  much  hurt  to  the 
cause  of  Christ  as  the  inconsistencies  of  professors  of  the  present 
time.  It  was  about  three  years  ago,  I  think,  that  failures  among 
religious  men  seemed  to  be  the  order  of  the  day,  and  our  papers 
literally  teemed  with  accusations  against  the  church  of  God.  O 
my  brethren,  let  us  not  talk  of  these  things  except  with  mourning 
and  tears.  Wrap  thyself  in  sackcloth,  O  church  of  God ;  put 
away  thy  laughter,  and  cast  ashes  on  thine  head,  for  the  crown  of 
thy  glory  is  departed,  thy  garments  are  stained,  and  the  filthiness 
of  thy  skirts  witnesses  against  thee.  O  church  of  Christ,  thy 
Nazarites  were  purer  than  snow,  they  were  whiter  than  milk,  but 
now  their  visage  is  blacker  than  a  coal,  and  their  hands  are  de 
filed  with  iniquity.  Remember  thou  the  time  of  thy  purity, 
when  thy  priests  were  glorious,  and  thy  sons  and  daughters  were 
clothed  in  royal  apparel.  How  art  thou  fallen !  how  art  thou 
cast  down  from  thy  high  mountains  !  Thy  princes  are  clothed  in 
rags ;  the  veils  are  plucked  from  the  face  of  thy  daughters,  and 
thou  thyself  art  become  disconsolate  and  a  widow,  by  reason  of 
the  iniquity  of  thy  sons  and  of  thy  daughters.  Woe  unto  us,  for 
'thy  glory  is  departed,  thy  sun  is  covered  with  thick  darkness,  and 
thy  stars  withhold  their  light.  The  crown  is  fallen  from  out 
head :  woe  unto  us  that  we  have  sinned. 

My  hearers,  my  soul  has  carried  me  away ;  breathless  and 
panting  I  return  to  my  humbler  but  not  less  earnest  style.  Re 
member  how  vast  your  powers  for  mischief!  Your  ministers 
may  preach  as  long  as  they  will ;  but  yDu  undo  their  preaching 
if  you  are  unholy.  If  you  are  inconsistent  in  your  lives,  Paul, 


1S2  HOW    SAINTS    MAY    HELP    THK    DEVIL. 

A  polios,  and  Cephas  might  preach  with  power;  hut  thty  have  not 
half  the  power  to  build  up  that  you  have  to  pull  down.  You  aro 
the  mightiest  workmen,  ye  professors  of  religion;  you  can  undo 
infinitely  more  than  we  can  accomplish. 

i  And  now  I  pause  and  relieve  the  shadow  of  this  subject  with 
'something  which,  I  fear,  is  in  the  sight  of  God  equally  vile.  II .MI 
often  do  the  people  of  God  comfort  sinners  in  their  sins  by  thei> 
i  murmurings  and  their  complaints  ?  Oh  beloved,  we  are  too  much 
in  the  habit  of  covering  our  faces  with  sadness,  on  account  of  our 
temporal  trials,  and  too  little  in  the  habit  of  woeping  on  account 
of  the  failings  of  the  church  of  God  '  [low  frequently  do  you 
meet  with  a  true  Christian  full  of  unbelieving  cares!  Ah!  he 
says,  "  All  these  things  are  against  me."  He  has  food  and  rai 
ment,  but  he  is  not  content  with  it ;  he  has  more  than  that,  but 
his  store  is  a  little  diminished,  and  he  is  very  cast  down,  and  he 
has  no  faith,  and  cannot  trust  the  Lord.  "  Oh  !  "  says  the  world 
ling,  "  see  these  Christians ;  they  talk  about  faith,  but  their  faith 
is  not  of  half  so  much  service  to  them  as  my  desperation  is  to 
me.  That  hardens  my  heart,  and  makes  me  stand  up  against 
affliction  a  great  deal  better  than  their  faith  in  God's  providence 
can  do.  Why,  just  look  at  these  saints  :  a  drivelling  set  of  cry 
ing  creatures ;  they  never  have  either  peace  or  joy ;  they  are 
everlastingly  pulling  long  faces,  and  talking  through  their  noses 
about  their  sad  trials  and  troubles  ;  they  never  have  an  hour  of 
happiness.  Who  would  be  a  Christian  ]  /don't  want  to  be  con 
verted,"  says  the  worldling.  "  Why  should  I  pluck  out  the  sun- 
beam  from  my  eye,  and  take  the  smile  from  my  brow  ?  Why 
should  I  profess  to  follow  a  God  whose  servants  only  worship 
him  by  weeping,  and  never  offer  any  sacrifice  but  that  of  groans, 
and  sighs,  and  murmurs  1 "  Might  not  a  wicked  man  come  in 
often,  when  Christians  are  grumbling  together  about  the  badness 
of  the  times,  about  the  high  price  of  commodities,  and  the  low 
rate  of  wages,  and  so  forth ;  and  might  he  not  say,  "  Yes,  I  can 
see  your  God  treats  you  very  badly  ;  if  I  were  you  I'd  strike, 
and  have  nothing  to  do  with  him  ? "  And  he  would  go  away 
laughing,  and  saying,  "  Ah !  Baal  treats  me  better ;  I  get  more 
pleasure  in  this  world  than  these  Christian  people  do.  Let  them 
have  their  brave  heaven  to  themselves,  if  they  like ;  I'm  not  going 


HOW    SAINTS    MAY    HELP    THE    DEVIL.  138 

snivelling  through  this  world  with  them;  let  me  have  joy  and 
rejoicing  while  I  may."  Don't  you  think  that  in  this  way  you 
and  1  have  done  a  Svorld  of  damage  to  the  cause  of  Christ,  and 
may  have  helped  to  comfort  sinners  in  their  iniquities  ? 

One  other  point,  and  I  will  have  done  with  this.  Perhaps  the 
greatest  evil  has  been  done  by  the  cold-heartedness  and  inditTer- 
%nce  of  religious  professors.  1  charge  thee  not,  O  church  of  God, 
vith  inconsistency  ;  1  lay  no  crime  at  thy  door  now  ;  it  is  with 
nother  fault  I  charge  thee — one  as  grievous  as  these.  I  pray 
thee,  plead  guilty  to  it,  for  thou  wilt  but  speak  the  truth,  and 
then  I  pray  God  that  this  thy  guilt  may  be  cleansed,  and  that  thou 
mayest  offend  him  no  longer  with  this  thine  evil.  The  church  of 
God,  at  the  present  age,  is  cold  and  lukewarm,  and  lifeless,  com- 
pared  with  what  it  used  to  be.  When  I  was  preaching  in  Wales 
this  week,  I  could  not  but  observe  the  power  which  attended  the 
ministry,  when  there  was  a  living  congregation  and  an  earnest 
company  gathered  together  to  hear  the  Word  of  God.  W^,  have 
become  accustomed  to  sit  in  a  kind  of  solemn  silence  to  hjar  the 
gospel.  Not  so  in  Wales.  There  is  to  be  heard  the  voico  of  ac 
clamation  ;  every  person  expresses  the  feelings  of  his  som  in  au 
dible  prayers  and  cries  to  God ;  and,  at  last,  when  the  Spirit  has 
descended,  you  hear  the  loud  cries  of  "  Gogoniant," — "  Glory  to 
God."  As  each  precious  sentence  drops  from  the  lips  of  Che 
preacher,  it  seems  to  be  taken  up  and  fed  upon  by  the  people, 
while  they  shout  aloud  for  joy.  1  believe  it  is  a  great  improve 
ment  on  our  English  congregations,  and  some  of  our  English 
preachers  could  not  go  on  in  their  dull  style  if  sometimes  the 
people  had  a  chance  of  either  hissing  them  or  cheering  them  on. 
That,  however,  is  but  an  index  of  the  cold  state  of  the  churches. 
We  are  a  phlegmatic,  cold  nation  ;  even  Scotch  divines  are  more 
live  than  we  are ;  they  speak  the  Word  of  God  with  more  ear- 
estness  than  many  of  our  ministers  do  in  England.  Cold  as  we 
Jiink  the  north  is,  yet  hath  even  it  become  warmer  than  we  are. 
And  now,  what  says  the  world  to  all  our  coldness?  Why,  it 
says — "  Ah,  this  is  the  kind  of  religion  we  like,"  says  the  world 
ling  ;  "  we  don't  like  those  raving  Methodists ;  we  can't  sumd 
them ;  we  don't  like  those  earnest  indefatigable  Christians  c/  the 
days  of  Whitfield;  oh!  no,  they  are  a  raving  set  of  folks;  w« 


134  HOW    SAINTS    MAY    HELP    THE    DEVIL. 

don't  like  them;  but  we  like  these  quiet  folks."  "Yes,'  says 
the  \vorldling,  "I  think  it  is  quite  right  that  every  man  should  go 
to  his  church  and  his  chapel  on  a  Sunday  ;  but  1  never  could  go 
and  hear  such  raving  as  Mr.  So-and-so  gives."  Of  course  you 
could  not;  you  are  an  enemy  to  God,  and  that  is  why  you  like  a 
Lituiicean  church.  That  very  church  which  the  world  likes  best 
is  s,ire  to  be  that  which  God  abhors.  The  world  says,  "  We  like 
every  thing  to  go  on  smoothly ;  we  like  a  man  to  go  to  his  own 
parish  church,  and  hear  a  good,  solid,  substantial  sermon  read ; 
we  like  to  go  up  to  the  meeting-house,  and  hear  a  sober,  eloquent 
divine;  we  don't  like  any  of  this  furious  preaching — any  of  these 
earnest  exhortations."  No,  of  course  you  like  that  of  which  God 
nas  said,  '*  Thou  art  neither  cold  nor  hot ;"  God  hates  such,  and 
that  is  why  sinners  love  it.  But  what  effect  does  all  this  have 
upon  the  worldling?  Why,  just  this.  lie  says,  "  I  like  you,  be 
cause  you  don't  rebuke  me;  I  like  that  kind  of  religion,  because 
it  is  no  accusation  against  me.  When  I  see  a  Christian  hot  and 
in  earnest  about  being  saved,"  he  says,  "  it  rebukes  my  own  in- 
difference  ;  but  when  I  see  a  professed  Christian  just  as  indifferent 
about  the  salvation  of  men  as  I  am,  why,  then  J  say,  it  is  all  a 
farce — nonsense!  they  don't  mean  it;  the  minister  does  not  care 
a  bit  about  whether  souls  are  saved  or  not ;  and  as  for  the  church, 
they  make  a  great  deal  of  noise  every  now  and  then  at  Exeter 
Hall,  about  saving  some  poor  blacks  far  away,  but  they  don't  care 
about  saving  us."  And  so  a  worldling  wraps  himself  up,  and 
goes  away  in  his  sin  and  his  iniquity,  and  perseveres,  even  to  the 
last,  declaring  all  the  while  that  religion  is  but  a  sham,  because 
he  sees  us  careless  in  solemn  matters,  and  cold  concerning  ever 
lasting  realities. 

Thus  I  have,  mournfully  in  my  own  soul,  set  forth  the  plan 
whereby  Satan  comforts  sinners  in  their  sins,  even  by  means  ot 
those  who  ought  most  sternly  to  rebuke  them. 

II.  And  now  for  the  second  point — THE  CONSEQUENCES  OF  Tina 
RVIL.  And  here  I  wish  to  speak  very  pointedly  and  personally 
to  all  of  you  who  are  professors  of  religion,  and  I  do  hope  that 
you  will  take  every  point  to  yourself,  in  which  you  must  feel 
that  you  have  been  and  are  guilty. 

Friends,  how  often  have  you  and  I,  i.u  the  first  place,  helped  to 


HOW    .SAINTS    MAY     HELP    THE    DEVIL.  135 

keep  sinners  easy  in  their  sin,  by  our  inconsistency!  Had  we 
been  true  Christians,  the  wicked  man  would  often  have  been 
pricked  to  the  heart,  and  his  conscience  would  have  convicted 
him  ;  but  having  been  unfaithful  and  untrue,  he  has  been  able  to 
sleep  on  quietly,  without  any  disturbance  from  us.  Do  you  not 
think,  my  dear  brother!  and  sisters,  that  you  have  each  been 
guilty  here  ? — that  you  have  often  helped  to  pacify  the  wicked  ir. 
their  rebellion  against  God  ?  I  must  confess  myself  that  I  arr. 
guilty.  I  have  labored  to  escape  from  the  sin,  but  I  am  no- 
clean  delivered  from  it.  I  pray  each  one  of  you,  make  a  full 
confession  before  God,  if  by  your  silence  when  sin  has  been  com 
mitted  before  your  eyes,  or  by  a  smile  when  a  lascivious  joke 
has  been  told  in  your  hearing,  or  if  by  a  constant  indifference  to 
the  cause  of  Christ  you  have  led  sinners  to  sleep  more  securely 
in  the  bed  of  their  iniquities. 

But  to  go  further  still.  Do  you  not  think  that  very  often, 
when  a  sinner's  conscience  has  been  roused,  you  and  1  have 
helped  to  give  it  a  soporific  draught  by  our  coldness  of  heart, 
"  Hush  !  Master  Conscience,"  says  the  sinner  ;  but  he  will  not  be 
still,  but  cries  ,aloud,  "  Repent,  repent."  And  then  you,  a  pro 
fessing  Christian  pass  by,  and  you  administer  the  laudanum 
draught  of  your  indifference,  and  the  sinner's  conscience  falls 
back  again  into  its  slumber,  and  the  reproof  that  might  have 
been  useful  is  entirely  lost  upon  him.  I  am  sure  that  this  is  one 
of  the  great  crying  sins  of  the  church,  that  we  are  not  now  the 
witnesses  of  God,  as  we  should  be,  but  often  quiet  the  witness 
of  conscience  in  the  souls  of  men.  Look  now  to  your  lives — I 
am  speaking  personally  to  each  one — look  at  yesterday,  and  the 
days  that  went  before,  and  I  ask  you,  and  I  solemnly  charge  you 
to  answer  that  question,  "  Have  you  not  often  assisted,  in  the 
first  place,  to  keep  men's  consciences  quiet,  and  afterwards  to 
Bend  them  to  sleep  when  they  have  been  aroused  ?" 

Further :  is  it  not  possible  that  often  sinners  have  been 
»trengthened  in  their  sin  by  you  ?  They  were  but  beginning  in 
niquity,  and  had  you  rebuked  with  honesty  and  sincerity,  by 
your  own  holy  life,  they  might  have  been  led  to  see  their  folly, 
and  might  have  ceased  from  sin  ;  but  you  have  strengthened  theii 
hands.  They  have  gone  forward  confidently,  because  they  hav« 


136  HOW    SAINTS    MAY    HELP    THE    DEVI!,. 

said,  "See,  a  church  member  leads  the  way."  "&<>-<ui'J-so  is  not 
more  scrupulous  than  I,"  says  such  an  one;  "1  rnyy  do  what  he 
does."  And  so  you  have  helped  to  strengthen  sinners  in  their 
sins. 

Naj,  is  it  not  possible  that  some  of  you  Christians  have  helped 
fa  confirm  men  in  their  sins  and  to  destroy  their  souls "?  It  is  a 
naster-piece  of  the  devil,  when  he  can  use  Christ's  own  soldiers 
gainst  Christ.  But  this  he  has  often  done.  I  have  known  many 
a  case.  Let  me  tell  a  story  of  a  minister — one  which  I  believe 
to  be  true  and  which  convicts  myself,  and  therefore  J  tell  it  with 
the  hope  that  it  may  also  waken  your  consciences  and  convict  you 
too.  There  was  a  young  minister  once  preaching  very  earnestly 
in  a  certain  chapel,  and  he  had  to  walk  some  for.r  01  five  miles 
to  his  home  along  a  country  road  after  service.  A  young  man, 
who  had  beeii  deeply  impressed  under  the  sermon,  requested  the 
privilege  of  walking  with  the  minister,  with  an  earnest  hope  that 
he  might  get  an  opportunity  of  telling  out  his  feelings  to  him, 
and  obtaining  some  word  of  guidance  or  comfort.  Instead  of 
that,  the  young  minister  all  the  way  along  told  the  most  singular 
tales  to  th'jse  who  were  with  him,  causing  loud  roars  of  laughter, 
and  even  relating  tales  which  bordered  upon  the  indecorous.  He 
stopped  at  a  certain  house,  and  this  young  man  with  him,  and 
the  whole  evening  was  spent  in  frivolity  and  foolish  talking. 
Sonu  years  after,  when  the  minister  had  grown  old,  he  was  sent 
for  to  the  bedside  of  a  dying  man.  He  hastened  thither  with  a 
heart  desirous  to  do  good.  He  was  requested  to  sit  down  at  the 
bedside;  and  the  dying  man,  looking  at  him,  and  regarding  him 
most  closely,  said  to  him,  "  Do  you  remember  preaching  in  such 
end-such  a  village  on  such  an  occasion  T'  "1  do,"  said  the  min 
ister.  "I  was  one  of  your  hearers,"  said  the  man,  "and  I  was 
'eeply  impressed  by  the  sermon."  "Thank  God  tor  that,"  said 
he  minister.  "  Stop  !"  said  the  man,  "  ion't  thank  God  till  you 
nave  h-jard  the  whole  story  ;  you  will  have  reason  to  alter  your 
tone  before  I  have  done."  The  minister  changed  countenance, 
but  he  little  guessed  what  would  be  the  full  extent  of  that  man's 
testimony.  Said  he,  "  Sir,  do  you  remember,  after  you  had  fin- 
ished  that  earnest  sermon,  I  with  some  others  walked  home  whh 
you  1  I  was  sincerely  desirous  of  being  led  in  the  right  patb 


HOW    SAINTS    MAY     HELP    THE    DEVIL.  137 

that  night ;  but  I  heard  you  speak  in  such  a  strain  of  levity,  and 
with  so  much  coarseness  too,  that  I  went  outside  the  house,  while 
you  were  sitting  down  to  your  evening  meal ;  I  stamped  my  foot 
upon  the  ground  ;  1  said  that  you  were  a  liar,  that  Christianity 
was  a  falsehood  ;  that  if  you  could  pretend  to  be  so  in  earnest 
about  it  in  the  pulpit,  and  then  come  down  and  talk  like  that, 
ho  whole  thing  must  be  a  sham  ;  and  1  have  been  an  infidel," 
aid  lie,  "  a  confirmed  infidel,  from  that  day  to  this.  But  1  am 
not  an  infidel  at  this  moment;  i  know  better;  I  am  dying,  and 
J  am  about  to  be  damned  ;  and  at  the  bar  of  God  1  will  lay  my 
damnation  to  your  charge  ;  my  blood  is  on  your  head  ;" — and 
with  a  dreadful  shriek,  and  one  demoniacal  glance  at  the  trem 
bling  minister,  he  shut  his  eyes  and  died.  Is  it  not  possible  that 
we  may  have  been  guilty  thus  ?  The  bare  idea  would  make  the 
flesh  creep  on  our  bones;  and  yet  I  think  there  are  few  among 
us  who  must  not  say,  "  That  has  been  my  fault,  after  all."  But 
are  there  not  enough  traps,  in  which  to  catch  souls,  without  your 
being  made  Satan's  fowlers  to  do  mischief?  Ilath  not  Satan 
legions  enough  of  devils  to  murder  men,  without  employing  you1? 
Are  there  no  hands  that  may  be  red  with  the  blood  of  souls  be 
sides  yours  ]  O  followers  of  Christ !  O  believers  in  Jesus  ! 
Will  ye  serve  under  the  black  prince'?  Will  ye  fight  against 
your  Master1?  Will  ye  drag  sinners  down  to  hell  ?  Shall  we — 
(I  take  myself  in  here,  more  truly  than  any  of  you) — shall  we, 
who  profess  to  preach  the  gospel  of  Christ,  by  our  conversation 
injure  and  destroy  men's  souls  1 

III.  Thus,  I  think,  I  have  expounded  the  solemn  consequences 
of  this  fearful  evil.  And  now  I  come,  in  conclusion,  and  I  pray 
God  to  help  me,  while  I  deal  earnestly  and  solemnly  with  you, 

AND    BRING    OUT    THE    GREAT    BATTERING    RAM,     TO    BEAR     AGAINST 
Tills    VAIN    EXCUSE    OF  THE  WICKED. 

Among  this  great  congregation,  I  have  doubtless  a  very  large 
number  of  persons  who  are  not  converted  to  God,  and  who  have 
continually  made  this  their  excuse,  "  I  see  so  much  of  the  incon 
sistency  of  professors,  that  I  do  not  intend  to  think  about  religion 
myself."  My  hearer,  I  conjure  thee  by  the  living  God,  give  me 
thine  ear  a  moment,  while  I  pull  this  vain  excuse  of  thine  to 
pieces.  What  hast  thou  to  do  with  the  inconsistencies  of  ar» 


138  HOW    "AINTS    MAY    HELP    THE    DEVIL. 

other?  uTo  his  own  master  he  shall  stand  or  fall."  What 
will  it  better  thee,  if  one  half  of  all  the  professors  of  religion  be 
sent  to  hell  ?  What  comfort  will  that  be  to  thee,  when  thou 
shalt  come  there  thyself?  Man,  will  God  require  the  sins  of 
other  people  at  thine  hands  ?  Where  is  it  said  that  God  will  pun 
ish  thee  for  what  another  does  ?  Or  dost  thou  imagine  that  God 
will  reward  thee  because  another  is  guilty  ?  Thou  art  surely  not 
foolish  enough  for  that.  1  ask  thee,  what  canst  thou  have  to  do 
with  another's  servant  ?  That  man  is  a  servant  of  God,  or  at 
least  professes  to  be ;  if  he  be  not  so,  what  business  can  it  possi 
bly  be  of  thine  ?  If  thou  shouldst  see  twenty  men  drinking  poi 
son,  would  that  be  a  reason  why  thou  shouldst  drink  it  ?  If, 
passing  over  London  Bridge,  thou  shouldst  see  a  dozen  miserable 
creatures  leaping  off  the  parapet,  there  would  be  a  good  argu 
ment  why  thou  thyself  shouldst  seek  to  stop  them,  but  no  argu 
ment  why  thou  shouldst  leap  too.  What  if  there  be  hundreds 
of  suicides  ?  will  that  excuse  thee,  if  thou  shalt  shed  thine  own 
blood  ?  Do  men  plead  thus  in  courts  of  law  ?  Does  a  man  say, 
"  O  Judge,  excuse  me  for  having  been  a  thief;  there  are  so  many 
hundreds  of  men  that  profess  to  be  honest,  that  are  as  big  thieves 
as  I?"  Thou  wilt  be  punished  for  thine  own  offences,  remem 
ber,  not  for  the  offences  of  another.  Man  !  I  conjure  thee,  look 
this  in  the  face.  How  can  this  help  to  assuage  thy  misery  ? 
HMW  can  this  help  to  make  thee  happier  in  hell,  because  thou 
sayest  there  are  so  many  hypocrites  in  this  world  ? 

)5ut,  besides,  thou  knowest  well  enough  that  the  church  is  not 
so  bad  as  thou  sayest  it  is.  Thou  seest  some  that  are  incon 
sistent  ;  but  are  there  not  many  that  are  holy  ?  Dost  thou  dare 
to  *ay  there  are  none  ?  I  tell  thee,  man,  thou  art  a  fool.  There 
nre  man}*  bad  coins  in  the  world,  many  counterfeits  ;  do  you, 
therefore,  say  there  are  no  good  ones  ?  If  you  say  so,  you  ar 
mad  ;  for  the  very  fact  that  there  are  counterfeits  is  a  proof  tha 
there  must  be  realities.  Would  any  man  think  it  worth  his 
while  to  make  bad  sovereigns  if  there  were  no  good  ones  ?  It 
is  just  the  quantity  of  good  ones  that  passes  off  the  few  false 
coins.  And  so  no  man  would  pretend  to  be  a  Christian  unless 
there  were  some  good  Christians,  There  would  be  no  hypocrite* 


HOW    SAINTS    MAY    HELP     THE    DEVIL.  159 

if  there  were  not  some  true  men.     It  is  the  quantity  of  true 
men  that  helps  to  pass  off  the  hypocrite  in  the  crowd. 

And  then  again,'  1  say,  when  thou  comest  before  the  bar  of 
God,  dost  thou  think  that  this  will  serve  thee  as  an  excuse,  tc 
begin  to  find  fault  with  God's  own  children  ?  Suppose  you  were 
brought  before  a  king,  an  absolute  monarch,  and  you  should 
begin  to  say,  by  way  of  appeal,  "  0  king,  1  have  been  guilty,  i 
is  true,  but  your  own  sons  and  daughters  1  do  not  like ;  ther 
are  a  great  many  faults  in  the  princes  of  the  blood."  Would 
he  not  say,  "  Wretch  !  thou  art  adding  insult  to  wickedness  ;  thou 
art  guilty  thyself,  and  now  thou  dost  malign  mine  own  children, 
the  princes  of  the  blood."  The  Lord  will  not  have  thee  say 
that  at  last.  He  has  pardoned  his  children;  he  is  ready  to  par 
don  thee.  He  sends  mercy  to  thee  this  day ;  but  if  thou  reject 
it,  imagine  not  that  thou  shalt  escape  by  recounting  the  sins  of 
the  pardoned  ones.  The  rather  this  shall  be  an  addition  to  thy 
sin,  and  thou  shalt  perish  the  more  fearfully. 

But  come,  man,  once  again ;  I  would  entreat  of  thee  with  all 
my  might.  What!  canst  thou  be  so  foolish  as  to  imagine,  that 
because  another  man  is  destroying  his  own  soul  by  hypocrisy, 
that  this  is  a  reason  why  thou  shouldst  destroy  thine  by  indiffer 
ence  ?  If  there  be  thousands  of  untrue  Christians,  so  much  the 
more  reason  why  I  should  be  a  true  one  ;  if  there  are  hundreds 
of  hypocrites,  this  should  make  me  more  earnest  to  search  my 
self,  and  should  not  make  me  indifferent  about  the  matter.  O 
sinner !  thou  wilt  soon  be  on  thy  dying  bed,  and  will  it  comfort 
thee  there  to  think,  "  I  have  rejected  Christ,  I  have  despised 
salvation,  I  am  perishing  in  my  sins,''  and  to  add.  "  But  there 
are  many  Christians  who  are  hypocrites  !  "  No  ;  death  will  tear 
away  that  excuse.  That  will  not  serve  you.  And  when  the 
heavens  are  in  a  blaze,  when  the  pillars  of  the  earth  shall  reel 
when  God  shall  come  on  flying  clouds  to  judge  the  children  of 
men,  when  the  eternal  eyes  are  fixed  upon  you,  and,  like  burning 
lamps,  are  enlightening  the  secret  parts  of  your  belly,  will  you 
then  be  able  to  make  this  an  excuse — "  Good  God  !  it  is  true  I 
have  damned  myself;  it  is  true  I  have  wilfully  transgressed ; 
but  there  were  many  hypocrites?"  Then  shall  the  Judge  say. 
"  What  hast  thou  to  do  with  that  1  Thou  hadst  nought  to  dc 


140  HOW    SAINTS    MAY    HELP    THE    DEVIL. 

to  interfere  with  my  kingdom  and  with  my  judgeship  ;  for  thint, 
own  offences  thou  art  lost ;  for  thine  own  rejection  of  Christ  thou 
ghalt  perish  everlastingly." 

And  now  I  conclude,  by-  addressing  the  pec  pie  of  God  with 
equal  solemnity  and  earnestness. 

My  dear  hearers,  if  I  could  weep  tears  of  blood  this  morning, 
could  not  show  too  much  emotion  concerning  this  most  solemn 
point.  I  do  not  know  that  this  text  ever  struck  me  before  yes 
terday  ;  but  I  no  sooner  noticed  it,  than  it  came  home  to  me  as 
an  accusation.  I  plead  guilty  to  it,  and  I  pray  for  forgiveness. 
I  only  wish  that  a  like  power  may  attend  it  to  you,  that  you  may 
feel  that  you  have  been  guilty  too.  O  friends,  can  you  bear  the 
thought  that  you  may  have  helped  to  drag  others  down  to  hell  1 
Christ  has  loved  you  and  pardoned  your  sins  ;  and  will  you  push 
others  downward  ?  And  yet,  if  you  are  inconsistent,  and  espe 
cially  if  you  are  cold  and  lukewarm  in  your  religion,  you  are 
doing  it.  "  Well,"  says  one,  "  I  don't  do  much  good,  but  I  do  no 
hurt."  That  is  an  impossibility.  You  must  be  either  doing  good 
or  evil.  There  is  no  border  land  between  truth  and  sin  ;  a  man 
must  be  either  on  land  or  in  the  water ;  and  you  are  either  serv 
ing  God  or  serving  Satan ;  each  day  you  are  increasing  your 
Master's  kingdom,  or  else  diminishing  it.  I  cannot  bear  the 
thought  that  any  of  you  should  be  employed  in  Satan's  camp. 

Suppose  there  ever  should  be  an  invasion  of  this  country  by 
!F  ranee.  The  tocsin  rings  from  every  church-steeple ;  the  drum 
is  sounding  in  every  street,  and  men  are  gathering  at  every  mar 
ket-cross.  Peaceful  men  spring  up  into  soldiers  in  an  instant ; 
and  multitudes  are  marching  away  to  the  coast.  When  we  come 
near  it,  we  behold  a  troop  of  soldiers  who  have  climbed  our 
white  cliOs,  and  with  bayonets  fixed  they  are  marching  against  us. 
We,  with  a  tremendous  cheer,  rush  on  against  them,  to  drive 
hem  back  into  the  sea  which  girds  our  beloved  country.  Sud 
denly,  as  we  rush  forward,  we  detect  scores  of  Englishmen 
marching  in  the  same  ranks  with  our  foes,  and  seeking  to  ravage 
their  own  country.  What  should  we  say  1  "  Seize  those  traitors ; 
let  not  one  of  them  escape  ;  put  them  all  to  death.  Can  Eng 
lishmen  take  the  side  of  England's  enemies  ?  Can  they  march 
;  gainst  our  hearths  and  homes,  betray  their  fathered,  and  take 


HOW    SAINTS    MAY    HELP    THE    DEVIL.  141 

the  side  of  the  tyrant  Emperor?     Can  this  be?     Then  let  them 
die  the  death  !  " 

And  yet  this  day  I  behold  a  more  mournful  spectacle  yet. 
There  is  King  Jesus  marching  at  the  head  of  his  troops ;  and 
can  it  be  that  some  of  you,  who  profess  to  be  his  followers,  ara 
on  the  other  side  ;  that,  professing  to  be  Christ's,  you  are  fight 
ing  in  the  ranks  of  the  enemy — carrying  the  baggage  of  Satan 
and  wearing  the  uniform  of  hell,  when  you  profess  to  be  soldiers 
of  Christ?  I  know  there  are  such  here;  God  forgive  them! 
God  spare  them  ;  and  may  the  deserters  yet  come  back,  even 
though  they  come  back  in  the  chains  of  conviction  ;  May  they 
come  back  and  be  saved !  O  brethren  and  sisters,  there  are 
enough  to  destroy  souls  without  us — enough  to  extend  the  king 
dom  of  Satan  without  our  helping  him.  "  Come  out  from  among 
them ;  touch  not  the  unclean  thing ;  be  ye  separate."  Church 
of  God  !  awake,  awake,  awake  to  the  salvation  of  men  !  Sleep 
no  longer ;  begin  to  pray,  to  wrestle,  to  travail  in  birth  ;  be 
more  holy,  more  consistent,  more  strict,  more  solemn  in  thy  de 
portment  !  Begin,  O  soldiers  of  Christ,  to  be  more  true  to 
your  colors ;  and  a«  surely  as  the  time  shall  come  when  the 
church  shall  thus  be  reformed  and  revived,  so  surely  shall  the 
King  come  into  our  midst,  and  we  shall  march  on  to  certain 
victory,  trampling  down  our  enemies,  and  getting  to  our  King 
mauy  crowns,  through  many  victories  achieved. 


SERMON    IX. 

HIS  NAME-TUB  MIGHTY  GOD. 

"The  mighty  God." — ISAIAH,  ix.  6. 

OTHER  translations  of  this  divine  title  have  been  propo  #d  by 
several  very  eminent  and  able  scholars.  Not  that  they  hf  re  any 
of  them  been  prepared  to  deny  that  this  translation  is,  a  "tor  all, 
most  accurate;  but  rather  that  whilst  there  are  various  v  jrds  in 
the  original,  which  we  render  by  the  common  appell?  Aon  of 
"  GOD,"  it  might  be  possible  so  to  interpret  this  as  to  sh  w  more 
exactly  its  definite  meaning.  One  writer,  for  example,  tl  inks  the 
term  might  be  translated  "The  Irradiutor," — he  who  gi /<>s  light 
to  men.  Some  think  it  bears  the  meaning  of 4i  The  Illustrious," — 
the  bright  and  the  shining  one.  Still  there  are  very  few,  if  any. 
who  are  prepared  to  dispute  the  fact  that  our  translation  is  the 
most  faithful  that  could  possibly  be  given — "  the  mighty  God." 

The  term  here  used  for  God,  El,  is  taken  from  a  Hebrew  root, 
which,  as  I  take  it,  signifies  strength ;  and  perhaps  a  literal  trans 
lation  even  of  that  title  might  be,  "The  Strong  one,"  the* strong 
God.  But  there  is  added  to  this  an  adjective  in  the  Hebrew,  ex 
pressive  of  mightiness,  and  the  two  taken  together  express  the 
omnipotence  of  Christ,  his  real  deity  and  his  omnipotence,  a? 
landing  first  and  foremost  among  the  attributes  which  the  pro- 
het  behe1-].  "The  mighty  God."  I  do  not  propose  this  morn 
ing  to  enter  into  any  argument  in  proof  of  the  divinity  of  Christ, 
because  my  text  does  not  seem  to  demand  it  of  me.  It  does  not 
say  that  Christ  shall  be  "the  mighty  God," — that  is  affirmed  in 
many  other  places  of  Sacred  Writ;  but  here  it  says,  "lie  shall 
be  called  Wonderful,"  called  "Counsellor,"  called  "The  might J 
God ;"  and  I  think  that  therefore  1  may  be  excused  from  enter 


HIS    NAME — THE    MIGHTY    GOD.  143 

ing  into  any  proof  of  the  fact,  if  I  am  at  least  able  to  establish  tnc 
truth  of  that  which  is  here  foretold,  inasmuch  as  Christ  is  indeed 
called  at  this  day,  and  shall  be  called  to  the  end  of  the  wDiid, 
"  the  mighty  God." 

First,  this  morning,  I  shall  speak  for  a  moment  on  the  folly  of 
thoie  who  prof  ess  to  be  his  followers,  but  who  do  not  call  him  "  tin 
mighty  God"  In  the  second  place  1  shall  try  to  show  how  th*. 
true  believer  practically  calls  Christ  "  the  mighty  God"  ->n  man<f 
f  the  acts  which  concern  his  salvation  ;  and  then  1  shall  close  by 
noticing  how  Jesus  Christ  has  proved  himself  to  be  indeed  u  the 
mighty  God"  to  us,  and  in  the  experience  of  his  church. 

I.  First  let  me  point  out  THE  FOLLY  OF  THOSE  WHO  PROFESS 

TO  BE  THE  DISCIPLES  OF  CHRIST,  YET    DO    NOT,   AND  WILL    NOT,  CALL 

HIM  GOD.  The  question  has  sometimes  been  proposed  to  me, 
how  it  is  that  some  of  us  who  hold  the  divinity  of  Christ  manifest 
what  is  called  uncharitableness  towards  those  who  deny  him. 
We  do  continually  affirm  that  an  error,  with  regard  to  the  divinity 
of  Christ,  is  absolutely  fatal,  and  that  a  man  cannot  be  right  in 
his  judgment  upon  any  part  of  the  gospel  unless  he  think  rightly 
of  him  who  is  personally  the  very  centre  of  all  the  purposes  of 
heaven,  and  the  foundation  of  all  the  hopes  of  earth.  Nor  can  we 
admit  of  any  latitudinarianism  here.  We  extend  the  right  hand 
of  fellowship  to  all  those  who  love  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  sin 
cerity  and  truth  ;  but  we  cannot  exchange  our  Christian  greetings 
with  those  who  deny  him  to  be  "  very  God  of  very  God."  And 
the  reason  is  sometimes  asked  ;  for,  say  our  opponents,  "  We  are 
ready  to  give  the  right  hand  of  fellowship  to  you,  why  don't  you 
do  so  to  us?"  Our  reply  shall  be  given  thus  briefly  :  "  You  have 
no  right  to  complain  of  us,  seeing  that  in  this  matter  we  stand  or 
the  defensive.  When  you  declare  yourselves  to  believe  that 
Christ  is  not  the  Son  of  God,  you  may  not  be  conscious  of  it,  but 
you  have  charged  us  with  one  of  the  blackest  sins  in  the  entire 
catalogue  of  crime."  The  Unitarians  must,  to  be  consistent, 
charge  the  whole  of  us,  who  worship  Christ,  with  being  idolators. 
Now  idolatry  is  a  sin  of  the  most  heinous  character ;  it  is  not  an 
offence  against  men,  it  is  true,  but  it  is  an  intolerable  offence 
against  the  majesty  of  God.  We.  are  ranked  by  Unitarians,  if 
they  be  consistent,  with  the  Hottentots.  "  No,"  say  theVj  '  we 


144  HIS    NAME THE    MIGHTY    GOD. 

nelieve  that  you  are  sincere  in  your  worship."  So  is  the  Hottcu 
tot;  he  bows  down  before  his  Fetich,  his  block  of  wood  or  stone, 
ard  he  is  an  idolator;  and  although  you  charge  us  with  bowing 
Before  a  man,  yet  we  do  hold  that  you  have  laid  at  our  door  a  sin 
insuflorably  gross,  and  we  are  obliged  to  repel  your  accusation 
'vith  some  severity.  You  have  so  insulted  us  by  denying  the 
Godhead  of  Christ,  you  have  charged  us  with  so  great  a  crime, 
that  you  can  not  expect  us  to  sit  coolly  down  and  blandly  smile 
at  the  imputation.  It  matters  not  what  a  man  worships;  if  it  be 
not  God,  he  is  an  idolator.  There  is  no  distinction  in  principle 
between  worship  to  a  god  of  mud  and  a  god  of  gold  ;  nay,  further, 
there  is  no  distinction  between  the  worship  of  an  onion  and  the 
worship  of  the  sun,  moon,  and  stars.  These  are  alike  idolatries. 
And  ihough  Christ  be  confessed  by  the  Socinian  to  be  the  best  of 
men,  perfection's  own  self;  yet  if  he  be  nothing  more,  the  vast 
mass  of  the  Christian  world  is  deliberately  assailed  with  the  im 
pudent  accusation  of  being  idolators.  Yet  those  who  charge  us 
with  idolatry,  expect  us  to  receive  them  with  cordial  kindness.  It 
is  not  in  flesh  and  blood  for  us  to  do  so,  if  we  take  the  low  ground 
of  reason ;  it  is  not  in  grace  or  truth  to  do  so,  if  we  take  the  high 
groiiii'l  of  revelation.  As  men,  we  are  willing  to  show  them  re 
spect,  we  regard  them,  we  pray  for  them,  we  have  no  anger  or 
enmity  against  them.  But  when  we  come  to  the  point  of  theology, 
we  can  not,  as  we  profess  to  be  followers  of  Christ,  tamely  see 
ourselves  charged  with  an  offence  so  dreadful  and  so  heinous  as 
that  of  idol  worship. 

I  confess  I  would  almost  rather  be  charged  with  a  religion  that 
extenuated  murder,  than  with  one  that  justified  idolatry.  Mur 
der,  great  as  the  offence  is,  is  but  the  slaying  of  man  ;  but  idol 
livy  is,  in  its  essence,  the  killing  of  God  ;  it  is  the  attempt  to  thrust 
the  Eternal  Jehovah  out  of  his  seat,  and  to  foist  into  his  place  the 
woik  of  his  own  hand,  or  the  creature  of  my  own  conceit.  Shall 
a  man  charge  me  with  being  so  besotted  as  to  worship  a  mere 
nan'?  Shall  he  tell  me  I  am  so  low  and  grovelling  in  my  intel 
lect,  that  I  should  stoop  down  to  worship  my  own  fellow-creature? 
and  yet  does  he  expect  me  after  that  to  receive  him  as  a  brother 
professing  the  same  faith?  1  cannot  understand  his  presumption. 
The  charge  against  our  sanctity  of  heart  is  so  tremendous,  *,he 


HIS    NAME THE    MIGHTY    GOD.  145 

accusation  is  so  frightful,  that  if  there  have  been  some  severity  and 
bitterness  of  temper  in  the  controversy,  the  sin  lies  upon  our  op 
ponent,  and  not  on  'us.  For  he  has  charged  us  with  a  crime  so 
dreadful,  that  an  upright  man  must  repel  it  as  an  insult.  But  to 
go  further ;  if  Jesus  Christ  be  not  a  Divine  person  ;  if  I  could  oiice 
imagine  that  he  was  no  more  than  a  mere  man,  I  should  prefer 
Mahomet  to  Christ;  and  if  you  ask  me  why,  I  think  I  could 
clearly  prove  to  demonstration,  that  Mahomet  was  a  greater  pro 
phet  than  Christ.  If  Jesus  Christ  be  not  the  Son  of  God,  co-equal, 
co-eternal  with  the  Father,  he  so  spake  as  to  induce  that  belief  in 
the  minds  of  his  own  disciples,  and  of  his  adversaries  likewise. 
Mahomet,  with  regard  to  the  unity  of  the  Godhead,  is  so  clear 
wid  so  distinct,  that  there  is  no  Mahometan  to  this  day  that  has 
ever  fallen  into  idolatry.  You  will  find  that  throughout  the  whole 
jf  the  Mahometan  world  the  cry  is  still  sternly  uttered  and  faith 
dilly  believed,  "There  is  but  one  God,  and  Mahomet  is  his  pro 
phet."  Now,  if  Christ  were  but  a  good  man  and  a  prophet,  vvhj 
did  he  not  speak  more  decisively  ?  Why  has  he  not  left  on  re 
cord  a  war  cry  for  the  Christian,  which  would  be  as  explicit  and 
decisive  as  that  of  Mahomet?  If  Christ  did  not  mean  to  teach 
that  he  himsnf  is  God,  at  least  he  was  not  very  clear  and  definite 
in  his  denial,  and  he  has  left  his  disci  pies  extremely  in  the  dark, 
the  proof  whereof  is  to  be  found  in  the  fact,  that  at  the  present 
day,  nine  hundred  and  ninety-nine  out  of  every  thousand  of  the 
whole  of  the  professed  followers  of  Christ,  do  receive  him,  and 
bow  down  before  him,  as  being  the  very  God.  And  if  he  is  not 
G  K!,  I  deny  his  right  to  be  esteemed  as  a  prophet.  If  he  is  not 
G  *d,  he  was  an  imposter,  the  grandest,  the  greatest  of  deceive  rs 
t)  at  ever  existed.  This,  of  course,  is  no  argument  to  the  man  who 
d  -nies  the  faith,  and  does  not  avow  himself  to  be  a  follower  of 
f  jirist.  But  to  the  man  that  is  Christ's  follower,  I  do  hold  tha 
l.»e  argument  is  irresistible,  that  Christ  could  not  have  been  ,' 
^ood  and  great  prophet,  if  he  were  not  what  he  certainly  led  uv. 
no  believe  hirr^elf  to  be,  the  Son  of  God,  who  thought  it  not  rob- 
uery  to  be  equal  with  God, — the  very  God,  by  whom  all  things 
-<?cre  made,  and  without  whom  was  not  any  thing  made  that  is 
onde. 

f  v  •*!  say  yet  another  thing,  which  may  startle  the  believer,  but 
7 


146  niS    NAME THE    MIGHTY    GOD 

which  is  intended  rather  to  reduce  the  heterodox  doctrine  of  Christ 
not  being  God  to  an  absurdity.  If  Christ  were  not  the  Son  of 
God,  his  death,  so  far  from  being  a  satisfaction  for  sin,  was  a  death 
most  richly  and  righteously  deserved.  The  Sanhedrim  before 
which  He  was  tried  was  the  recognized  and  authorized  legislature 
of  the  country.  He  was  brought  before  that  Sanhedrim,  charged 
with  blasphemy,  and  it  was  upon  that  charge  that  they  condemned 
him  to  die,  because  he  made  himself  the  Son  of  God.  Now,  I  do 
not  hesitate  honestly  to  aver,  that  if  I  had  been  called  on  to  plead 
in  that  case,  I  should  have  pleaded  an  avowal,  and  that,  moreover, 
I  should  have  stood  up,  and  said  and  felt,  that  I  had  a  clear  case 
before  me,  which  nothing  but  lying  and  perjury  could  ever  have 
put  on  one  side,  if  Jesus  of  Nazareth  had  been  charged  with  hav 
ing  declared  himself  to  be  the  Son  of  God.  Why,  his  whole 
preaching  seemed  to  derive  from  thence  its  unrivalled  authority, 
There  was  continually  in  his  actions  and  in  his  words,  a  claim  to 
be  something  more  than  man  ever  could  lay  claim  to.  And  when 
he  was  brought  before  the  Sanhedrim,  witnesses  enough  might 
have  been  found,  to  prove  that  he  had  made  himself  the  Son  of 
God ;  if  he  were  not  so,  his  condemnation  for  blasphemy  was  the 
justest  sentence  that  ever  was  pronounced,  and  his  crucifixion  on 
Calvary  was  absolutely  the  most  righteous  execution  that  ever 
was  performed  by  the  hand  of  the  government.  It  is  his  being 
verily  God,  that  frees  him  from  the  charge  of  blasphemy.  It  is 
the  fact  that  he  is  God,  and  that  his  Godhead  is  not  to  be  denied, 
that  makes  his  death  an  unrighteous  deicide  at  the  hand  of  apostate 
man,  and  renders  it,  as  before  God,  an  acceptable  sacrifice  for  the 
sins  of  all  the  people  whom  he  redeemed  with  his  most  precious 
blood.  But  if  he  be  not  God,  I  do  repeat,  that  there  is  no  reason 
whatever  why  we  should  have  had  a  New  Testament  written ; 
*»T  there  would  be  then  nothing  in  the  sublime  central  fact  of  that 
New  Testament  but  the  righteous  execution  of  one  who  certainly 
deserved  to  die 

Do  you  remember,  my  dear  friends,  when  the  apostle  Baul  was 
preaching  on  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  in  his  letter  to  the  Corin 
thians,  how  he  uses  an  ex  pest  facto  argument,  to  show  the  natural 
consequences,  if  it  were  possible  to  overturn  the  truth  ?  He  says, 
M  If  Christ  be  not  risen,  then  IB  mir  creaching  vain,  and  your  faith  is 


HIS    NAME THE    MIGHTY    GOD.  147 

also  vain,  and  ye  are  yet  in  your  sins."  Now,  I  may  fairly  use  the 
apostle's  line  of  argument  in  reference  to  the  Godhead  and  Sonship 
of  Christ,  of  which  nis  resurrection  gave  such  a  palpable  demon- 
stratum  :  "If  Christ  be  not  the  Son  of  God,  then  is  our  preaching 
vain,  and  your  faith  is  also  vain,  and  ye  are  yet  in  your  sins :" 
all  our  visions  of  heaven  arc  blasted  and  withered  •  the  bright 
ness  of  pur  hope  is  quenched  for  ever ;  that  rock  on  which  our 
rust  is  built,  turns  out  to  be  nothing  better  than  mere  sand  if 
the  divinity  of  Christ  be  not  proved.  All  the  joy  and  consola 
tion  we  ever  had  in  this  world,  in  our  belief  that  his  blood  was 
sufficient  to  atone  for  sin,  has  been  but  a  dream  of  fency  and  a 
"  figment  of  idle  brains ;"  all  the  communion  we  have  ever  had 
with  him  has  been  but  an  illusion  and  a  trance,  and  all  the  hopes 
we  have  of  beholding  his  face  in  glory,  and  of  being  satisfied 
when  we  awake  in  his  likeness,  are  but  the  foulest  delusions  that 
ever  cheated  the  hopes  of  man.  Oh,  my  brethren,  and  can  any 
of  you  believe  that  the  blood  of  all  the  martyrs  has  been  shed  as 
a  witness  to  a  lie?  Have  all  those  who  have  rotted  in  Roman 
dungeons,  or  have  been  burned  at  the  stake  because  they  wit 
nessed  that  Christ  was  God,  died  in  vain  1  Verily,  if  Christ  be 
not  God,  we  are  of  all  men  the  most  miserable.  To  what  pur 
pose  is  the  calumny  and  abuse  that  we  have  had  to  endure  day 
after  day  ?  to  what  purpose  are  our  repentance,  our  sighs,  our 
tears  ?  to  what  purpose  is  our  faith  ?  to  what  purpose  have  our 
fears  and  bodings  been  supplanted  by  our  hope  arid  confidence? 
to  what  purpose  our  joy  and  our  rejoicing,  if  Christ  be  not  the 
Son  of  God?  Will  you  put  yourselves  all  down  for  fools?  can 
you  imagine  that  God's  Word  has  misguided  you — that  prophets 
.«md  apostles,  and  martyrs  and  saints,  have  all  leagued  together 
to  lead  you  into  a  trap  and  to  delude  your  souls?  God  forbid 
that  we  should  think  such  a  thing.  There  is  no  folly  in  the  world 
that  has  in  it  so  much  as  a  doit  of  madness,  compared  with  the 
tolly  of  den)  ing  the  divinity  of  Christ,  and  then  professing  to  ba 
bis  followers.  No,  beloved  : — 

"  jjet  all  the  forms  that  men  devise, 

Assault  our  faith  with  treacherous  art; 
We'll  call  them  vanity  and  lies, 

Aod  kind  the  gospel  to  our  heart!"— 


148  HIS    NAME THE    MIGHTY    GOD. 

We  will  write  this  on  the  forefront  of  our  banner, — *  Christ  is 
God ;  co-equal  and  co-eternal  with  his  Father ;  very  God  of  very 
Go«l,  who  counted  it  not  robbery  to  be  equal  with  God." 

II.  This  brings  me  to  the  second  part  of  the  subject :  How  DO 
WE  CALL  CHRIST  "  THE  MIGHTY  GOD  ?"  Here  there  is  no  dis 
pute  whatever ;  I  am  now  about  to  speak  of  matters  of  pure  fact 
Whether  Christ  be  mighty  God  or  not,  it  is  quite  certain  that  we 
are  in  the  constant  habit  of  calling  him  so.  Not,  I  mean,  by  the 
mere  utterance  of  the  term,  but  we  do  so  in  a  stronger  way,  in 
fact ;  and  actions  speak  louder  than  words. 

Now,  beloved,  I  will  soon  prove  that  you  and  I  are  in  the  habit 
of  calling  Christ  God.  And  I  will  prove  it  first,  because  it  is  our 
delight,  and  our  joy  and  our  privilege  to  attribute  to  him  the 
attributes  of  Deity. 

In  hours  of  devout  contemplation,  how  often  do  we  look  up  to 
him  as  being  the  Eternal  Son.  You  arid  I  sit  down  in  our  chain 
bers,  and  in  our  house  of  prayer,  and  as  we  muse  upon  the  grea 
covenant  of  grace,  we  are  in  the  habit  of  speaking  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ's  everlasting  love  to  his  people.  This  is  one  of  the 
jewels  of  our  life,  one  of  the  ornaments  with  which  we  array  our 
selves  as  a  bride  doth.  This  is  a  part  of  the  manna  that  tasteth 
like  wafers  made  with  honey,  upon  which  our  souls  are  wont  to 
feed.  We  speak  of  God's  eternal  love,  of  our  names  having  been 
inscribed  in  his  eternal  book,  and  of  Christ's  having  borne  them 
from  before  the  foundation  of  the  world  upon  his  breast,  as  our 
great  high-priest,  our  remembrancer  before  the  throne  of  heaven. 
In  so  doing,  we  have  virtually  called  him  the  mighty  God ;  be 
cause  none  but  God  could  have  been  from  everlasting  to  everlast 
ing.  As  often  as  we  profess  the  doctrine  of  election,  we  call 
Christ  the  mighty  God  ;  as  often  as  we  talk  of  the  eternal  covenant, 
ordered  in  all  things  and  sure,  so  often  do  we  proclaim  him  to  be 
God  •  because  we  speak  of  him  as  an  everlasting  one,  and  none 
could  be  from  everlasting  but  one  who  is  self-existent,  who  is  God. 

Again  :  how  frequently  do  we  repeat  over  to  ourselves  that 
precious  verse,  "  Jesus  Christ  the  same  yesterday,  and  to-day,  and 
for  ever."  We  are  always  in  the  habit  of  ascribing  to  him  im 
mutability.  Some  of  our  choicest  hymns  are  founded  on  that 
circumstance,  and  our  richest  hopes  flow  from  that  attribute, 


HIS    NAME THK    MIGHTY    GOD. 

We  know  that  all  things  will  change.  We  are  convinced  that 
we  ourselves  arc  mutable  as  the  winds,  and  as  easily  moved  as 
the  sand  by  the  waves  of  the  sea ;  but  we  know  that  our  Re 
deemer  liveth,  and  we  cannot  entertain  a  suspicion  of  any  change 
in  his  love,  his  purpose,  or  his  power.  How  often  do  we  sing : 

"Immutable  his  will, 

Though  dark  may  be  my  frame, 
His  loving  heart  is  still 

Unchangeably  the  same. 
My  soul  through  many  changes  goes : 
His  love  no  variation  knows  1" 

Do  you  not  see  that  you  have  in  fact  called  him  God,  because 
none  but  God  is  immutable1?  The  creature  changes.  This  is 
written  on  the  forefront  of  creation — "  Change  !"  The  mighty 
ocean,  that  knows  no  furrows  on  its  brow,  changeth  at  times,  and 
at  times  shifteth  its  level.  It  moveth  hither  and  thither,  and  we 
know  that  it  is  to  be  licked  up  with  forked  tongues  of  flame,  and 
yet  we  ascribe  to  Christ  immutability.  We  do,  then,  in  fact, 
ascribe  to  him  divinity,  for  none  but  the  divine  can  be  immu 
table. 

Is  it  not  also  our  joy  to  believe  that  wherever  two  or  three  are 
gathered  together  in  Christ's  name,  there  is  he  in  the  midst  of 
them  ?  Do  we  not  repeat  it  in  all  our  prayer-meetings  ?  Per 
haps  some  minister  in  Australia  began  the  solemnities  of  public 
worship  this  day  with  the  reflection  that  Jesus  Christ  was  with 
him,  according  to  his  promise,  and  I  know  that  as  I  came  here  the 
same  reflection  comforted  me,  "  Yea,  I  am  with  you  alway  even 
to  the  end  of  the  world," — that  wherever  a  Christian  is  found, 
there  God  is.  And  though  there  be  but  two  or  three  met  in  a 
barn,  or  on  the  greensward  under  the  canopy  of  God's  blue  sky, 
yet  there  Christ  vouchsafes  his  presence.  Now  I  ask  you,  have 
we  not  ascrTbed  to  Christ  Omnipresence  1  and  who  can  be  omni 
potent  but  God  ]  Have  we  not  thus  ii;  fact.  then,  though  not  in 
words,  called  Christ  "  God  *?"  How  is  it  possible  for  us  to  dream 
of  Him  as  being  here,  and  there,  and  every  where ;  in  the  bosom 
of  his  Father,  with  the  angels,  and  in  the  hearts  of  the  contrite 
all  at  the  same  time,  if  he  be  not  God  1  Grant  me  that  he  la 


150  III8    NAME THE    MIGHTY    GOD. 

omnipresent,  and  you  have  said  that  he  is  God.  for  none  but  God 
can  be  present  every  where.  Again,  are  we  not  also  wont  to 
ascribe  to  Christ  omniscience  ?  You  believe  when  your  heart 
is  aching  that  Christ  knows  your  pains,  and  that  he  reckons  every 
groan  ;  or,  at  least,  if  you  do  not  believe  it,  it  is  always  my  satis 
faction  to  know  that — 

"  He  feels  at  his  heart 
All  my  sighs  and  my  groans." 

And  so  he  does  yours.  Wherever  you  are,  you  believe  that  he  hears 
your  prayers,  that  he  sees  your  tears,  that  he  knows  your  wants, 
that  he  is  ready  to  pardon  your  sins  ;  that  you  are  better  known 
to  him  than  you  are  to  yourself.  You  believe  that  he  searches 
your  hearts,  and  tries  your  reins,  and  that  you  never  can  come  to 
him  without  finding  him  full  of  sympathy,  and  full  of  love.  Now 
do  you  not  see  that  you  have  ascribed  omniscience  to  him  ?  ard 
therefore,  though  not  in  words,  you  have  in  accents  louder  than 
words,  called  him  the  mighty  God  ;  for  you  have  assumed  that 
he  is  omniscient,  and  who  can  be  omniscient  but  the  very  God  of 
very  God  1 

I  shall  not  stop  to  descant  upon  the  other  attributes,  but  I  think 
we  might  prove  that  we  have  each  of  us  ascribed  to  Christ  all  the 
attributes  of  the  Godhead  in  our  daily  life  and  in  our  constant 
trust  and  intercession.  1  am  sure  that  it  is  true  of  many  loving 
hearts  of  God's  own  children  here.  We  have  called  him  the 
mighty  God,  and  if  others  have  not  called  him  so,  nevertheless! 
the  text  is  verified  by  our  faith.  "  He  shall  be  called  wonderful, 
counsellor,  the  mighty  God."  So  he  is,  and  so  he  shall  be,  world 
without  end. 

And  now  I  have  another  proof  to  offer,  thai  Christ  is  called 
"the  mighty  God."  We  call  him  so  in  many  of  his  offices.  We 
believe  this  morning  that  Christ  is  the  mediator  between  God 
and  man.  If  we  would  understand  the  term  mediator  or  days 
man,  we  must  interpret  it  as  Job  did,  one  "that  might  lay  his 
hand  upon  us  both,"  We  aru  accustomed  to  say  that  Jesus 
Christ  is  the  mediator  of  the  new  covenant,  and  we  offer  our 
prayers  to  God  through  him,  because  we  believe  that  he  medi 
ates  between  us  and  the  Father.  Lot  it  once  be  granted,  then, 


HIS    NAME THE    MIGHTY    GOU.  151 

rhat  Christ  is  the  mediator,  and  you  have  asserted  his  divinity. 
You  have  virtually  palled  him  the  Son  of  God ;  and  you  have 
granted  his  humanity,  for  he  must  put  his  hand  upon  both ;  there 
fore  he  must  put  his  hand  upon  man  in  our  nature  ;  he  must  be 
touched  with  a  feeling  of  our  infirmities,  and  be  in  all  points  like 
as  we  are.  But  he  is  not  a  mediator  unless  he  can  put  his  hand 
upon  God,  unless,  as  fellow  of  the  Eternal  One,  he  shall  be  able 
without  blasphemy  to  place  his  hand  upon  the  divine  Being, 
There  is  no  mediatorship  unless  the  hand  is  put  on  both,  and  who 
could  put  his  hand  on  God  but  God  1  Car  cherubim  or  sera 
phim  talk  of  laying  their  hands  on  the  Divine]  Shall  they  touch 
the  Infinite  ?  "  Dark  with  insufferable  light  his  skirts  appear" — • 
then  what  is  He  Himself  in  the  glorious  Essence  of  Deity  1 — an 
all-devouring  and  consuming  fire.  Only  God  can  put  his  hand 
on  God ;  and  yet  Christ  hath  this  high  prerogative;  for  mark, 
there  is  no  mediatorship  established,  there  cannot  be,  unless  the 
two  are  linked.  If  you  wished  to  build  a  bridge  you  might  com 
mence  on  this  side  of  the  river,  but  if  you  have  not  connected  it 
with  the  other  side,  you  have  not  built  the  bridge.  There  can 
be  no  mediatorship  unless  the  parties  are  fully  linked.  The  lad 
der  must  have  its  feet  on  earth  but  it  must  reach  to  heaven,  for 
if  there  were  a  single  breach  we  should  fall  from  its  summit  and 
perish.  There  must  be  entire  communication  between  the  two. 
Do  you  not  see,  therefore,  that  in  calling  Christ  mediator  we  have 
in  fact  called  him  the  mighty  God  1 

But  again  :  we  call  Christ  our  Saviour.  Now,  have  any  of  you 
that  foolish  credulity  which  would  lead  you  to  trust  in  a  man  for 
the  everlasting  salvation  of  your  soul  1  If  you  have,  I  pity  you  : 
yrur  proper  place  is  not  in  a  Protestant  assembly,  but  among  the 
deluded  votaries  of  Rome.  If  you  can  commit  the  keeping  of 
31  our  soul  to  one  like  yourself,  I  must  indeed  mourn  over  you 
and  pray  that  you  may  be  taught  better.  But  you  do  trust  youi 
salvation  to  him  whom  God  hath  set  forth  for  a  propitiation,  do 
you  not,  O  follower  of  Jesus]  Can  you  not  say  all  your  hope 
is  fixed  on  him,  for  he  is  all  your  salvation  and  all  your  desire  ? 
Does  not  your  spirit  rest  on  that  un buttressed  pillar  of  his  en 
tire  satisfaction,  his  precious  death  and  burial,  his  glorious  resur 
-ection  and  ascension  1  Now,  observe,  you  are  either  resting  OE 


152  HIS    NAME THE    MIGHTY    QOD. 

man,  or  else  you  have  declared  Christ  to  be  "the  mighty  God." 
When  I  say  I  put  my  faith  in  him,  1  do  most  honestly  declare 
that  I  dare  not  trust  even  to  him,  if  I  did  not  believe  him  to  be 
God.  I  could  not  put  my  trust  in  any  being  that  was  merely 
created.  God  forbid  that  my  folly  should  ever  go  to  such  a>i 

xlent  as  that.     I  would  sooner  trust  myself  than  trust  any  otke  • 
7nan,  and  yet  I  dare  not  trust  myself,  for  I  should  be  accursed 

'  Cursed  is  he  that  trusteth  in  man,  and  maketh  flesh  his  arm.1 
And  would  the  Soeinian  have  me  to  believe  that  I  am  to  preacl 
faith  in  Christ,  and  that  yet,  if  my  hearers  trust  Crist,  they  will 
be  accursed,  as  they  assuredly  must  be,  if  he  is  nothing  but  man, 
for,  again  I  repeat  it,  "  cursed  is  he  that  trusteth  in  man,  and 
maketh  flesh  his  arm."  You  get  a  blessing  by  faith  in  Jesus, 
out  how  ?  Is  it  not  because — "  Blessed  is  he  that  trusteth  in  the 
Lord,  and  whose  hope  the  Lord  is  ?"  Christ  is  very  Jeho 
vah,  and  therefore  the  blessing  comes  to  those  who  trust  in 
him.  So,  then,  as  often  as  ye  put  your  trust  in  Jesus,  for  time 
and  eternity,  ye  have  called  him  "  the  mighty  God." 

This  subject  is  capable  of  the  greatest  expansion,  and  I  do 
believe  there  is  sufficient  interest  attached  to  it  to  warrant  me 
in  keeping  you  to  a  late  hour  this  day,  but  I  shall  not  do  so. 
There  has  been  enough  said.  I  think,  to  prove,  at  least,  that  we 
are  in  the  habit  continually  of  calling  Christ  "  the  mighty 
God." 

III.  My  third  proposition  is  to  explain  to  you  HOW  CHRIST 

HAS    PROVED    HIMSELF    TO    US    TO    BE     "  THE    MIGHTY  GOD."       And 

here,  beloved,  without  controversy,  great  is  the  mystery  of 
Godliness,  for  the  passage  from  which  the  text  is  taken  says, 
"  Unto  us  a  child  is  born."  A  child  !  what  can  that  do  ?  A 
child  !  it  totters  in  its  walk,  it  trembles  in  its  steps — and  it  is  a 
?hild  newly  born.  Born  !  what,  an  infant  hanging  on  its  mother's 
oreast — an  infant  deriving  its  nourishment  from  a  woman  1  That ! 
can  that  work  wonders  ?  Yea,  saith  the  prophet,  "  Unto  us  a 
child  is  born."  But  then  it  is  added,  "  Unto  us  a  Son  is  given." 
Clirist  wras  not  only  born,  but  given.  As  man  he  is  a  child  born, 
as  God  he  is  the  Son  given.  He  comes  down  from  on  high  ;  he 
is  given  by  God  to  become  our  Redeemer.  But  here  behold  the 
Bonder !  *'  His  name,"  this  child's  name,  "  shall  be  called 


018    NAME THE    MIGFITY    GOD.  lf>3 

Wonderful,  Counsellor,  the  mighty  God."  Is  this  child,  then,  to 
us  the  mighty  Go^d "?  If  so,  O  brethren,  without  controversy, 
great  is  the  mystery  of  Godliness  indeed  !  And  yet,  just  let  ui 
look  through  the  history  of  the  church,  and  discover  whether  we 
have  not  ample  evidence  to  substantiate  it.  This  child  born,  this 
Son  given,  came  into  the  world  to  enter  into  the  lists  against  sin. 
For  thirty  years,  and  upwards,  he  had  to  struggle  and  wrestle 
against  temptations  more  numerous  and  more  terrible  than  man 
had  ever  known  before.  Adam  fell  when  but  a  woman  tempted 
him  ;  Eve  fell  when  but  a  serpent  offered  fruit  to  her  ;  but  Christ, 
the  second  Adam,  stood  invulnerable  against  all  the  shafts  of 
Satan,  though  tempted  he  was  in  all  points,  like  as  we  are.  Not 
one  arrow  out  of  the  quiver  of  hell  was  spared ;  the  whole  were 
shot  against  him.  Every  arrow  was  aimed  against  him  with  all 
the  might  of  Satan's  archers,  and  that  is  no  little !  And  yet, 
without  sin,  or  taint  of  sin,  more  than  conqueror  he  stood.  Foot 
to  ^oot  with  Satan,  in  the  solitude  of  the  wilderness ;  hand  to 
hand  with  him  on  the  top  of  the  pinnacle  of  the  temple;  side  by 
side  with  him  in  the  midst  of  a  busy  crowd — yet  ever  more  than 
conqueror.  He  gave  him  battle  wherever  the  adversary  willed 
to  meet  him,  and  at  last,  when  Satan  gathered  up  all  his  might, 
and  seized  the  Saviour  in  the  garden  of  Gethsemane,  and  crushed 
him  till  he  sweat  as  it  were  great  drops  of  blood,  then,  when  the 
Saviour  said,  "  Nevertheless,  not  as  I  will  but  as  thou  wilt,"  the 
tempter  was  repulsed.  "  Hence !  hence ! "  Christ  seemed  to 
say  ;  and  away  the  tempter  fled,  nor  dare  return  again.  Christ, 
in  all  his  conquests  over  sin,  does  seem  to  me  to  have  established 
his  Godhead.  I  never  heard  of  any  other  creature  that  could 
endure  such  temptation  as  this.  Look  at  the  angels  in  heaven  ; 
how  temptation  entered  there,  I  know  not ;  but  this  I  know,  that 
Satan,  the  great  archangel,  sinned,  and  I  know  that  he  became 
the  tempter  to  the  rest  of  his  companions,  and  drew  with  him  a 
third  part  of  the  stars  of  heaven.  Angels  were  but  little 
tempted  ;  some  of  them  not  tempted  at  all,  and  yet  they  felL 
And  then  look  at  man ;  slight  was  his  temptation,  yet  he  fell. 
It  is  not  in  a  creature  to  stand  against  temptation  ;  he  will  yield 
if  the  temptation  be  strong  enough.  But  Chi  ist  stood,  and,  it 
•eems  to  me,  that  in  his  standing  he  proved  Himself  to  have  the 
7* 


154  HIS    NAME THE    MIGHTY    GOD. 

omni-radiant  purity,  the  immaculate  holiness  of  Him  befor« 
whom  angels  veil  their  faces,  and  cry,  "  Holy,  holy,  holy,  Lord 
God  of  Sabaoth." 

But  these  proofs  might  appear  insufficient,  if  he  did  not 
accomplish  more  than  this.  We  know  also  that  Christ  proved 
himself  to  be  the  "  mighty  God  "  from  the  fact  that  at  last  all 
the  sins  of  all  his  people  were  gathered  upon  his  shoulders,  and 
4  he  bare  them  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree."  The  heart  of 
Christ  became  like  a  reservoir  in  the  midst  of  mountains.  All 
the  tributary  streams  of  iniquity,  and  every  drop  of  the  sins  of 
his  people,  ran  down  and  gathered  into  one  vast  lake,  deep  us 
hell  and  shoreless  as  eternity..  All  these  met,  as  it  were,  in 
Christ's  heart,  and  yet  he  endured  them  all.  With  many  a  sign 
of  human  weakness,  but  with  convincing  signs  of  divine  omnipo 
tence,  he  took  all  our  grids  and  carried  all  our  sorrows.  The 
divinity  within  strengthened  his  manhood,  and  though  wave  after 
wave  rolled  over  his  head,  till  he  sank  in  deep  mire  where  there 
was  no  standing,  and  all  God's  waves  and  his  billows  had  gone 
over  him,  yet  did  he  lift  up  his  head,  and  more  than  a  conqueror, 
at  length,  he  put  the  sins  of  his  people  to  a  public  execution. 
They  are  dead.  They  have  ceased  to  be  ;  and,  if  they  be  sought 
for,  they  shall  not  be  found  any  more  for  ever.  Certainly,  if 
this  be  true,  he  ifi  "  the  mighty  God  "  indeed. 

But  he  did  mo:e  than  this,  he  descended  into  the  grave,  and 
there  he  slept,  fa  jt  fettered  with  the  cold  chains  of  death.  But 
the  appointed  hour  arrives — the  sunlight  of  the  third  day  gave 
the  warning,  and  he  snapped  the  bands  of  death  as  if  they  were 
but  tow,  and  came  forth  to  life  as  "  the  Lord  of  life  and  glory." 
His  flesh  did  not  see  corruption,  for  he  was  not  able  to  be  holden 
by  the  bands  of  death.  And  who  shall  be  the  death  of  death, 
the  plague  of  the  grave,  the  destroyer  of  destruction,  but  God  1 
Who  but  immortal  life,  who  but  the  Self-existent,  shall  trample 
)ut  the  fires  of  hell  7  who,  but  he  whose  Being  is  eternal,  withou* 
oeginning,  and  without  end,  shall  burst  the  shackles  of  the  grave 
He  proved  hiaiself  then,  when  he  led  captivity  captive,  and 
crushed  death  and  ground  his  iron  liinbfe  to  powder— -he  pioved 
himself  then  t<>  be  the  mighty  God. 

Oh,  my  soul,  thou  canst  say  that  he  has  proved  himself  iu 


HIS    NAME — THE    MIGHTY    GOD.  155 

lh  •  heart  to  be  a  mighty  God.  Sins,  many  hath  he  forgiven 
thee,  and  relieved  thy  conscience  of  the  keen  sense  of  guilt;  griefs 
innumerable  hath  h'e  assuaged,  temptations  insurmountable  hath 
he  overcome ;  virtues  once  impossible  hath  he  implanted  ;  grace 
in  its  fulness  hath  he  promised,  and  in  its  measure  hath  he  given. 
My'  soul  bears  record  that  what  has  been  done  for  me  could 
Dover  have  been  done  by  a  mere  man  ;  and  you  would  rise  from 
your  seats.  I  am  sure,  if  it  were  needful,  and  say,  "  Yes,  he  that 
hath  loved  me,  washed  me  from  my  sins,  and  made  me  what  1 
am,  must  be  God;  none  but  God  could  do  what  he  has  done, 
could  bear  so  patiently,  could  bless  so  lavishly,  forgive  so  freely, 
enrich  so  infinitely.  He  is,  he  must  be,  we  will  crown  him  such 
— *  The  mighty  God.'  " 

And,  in  conclusion,  lest  I  weary  you,  permit  me  now  to  say,  I 
beg  and  beseech  of  you  all  present,  as  God  the  Spirit  shall  help 
you,  come  and  put  your  trust  in  Jesus  Christ ;  he  is  "  the 
mighty  God."  Oh,  Christians,  believe  him  more  than  ever; 
cast  your  troubles  constantly  on  him ;  he  is  "  the  mighty  God  ;  " 
go  to  him  in  all  your  dilemmas  ;  when  the  enemy  cometh  in  like 
a  flood,  this  mighty  God  shall  make  a  way  for  your  deliverance ; 
take  to  him  your  griefs,  this  mighty  God  can  alleviate  them  all ; 
tell  him  your  backslidings  and  sins,  this  mighty  God  shall  blot 
them  out.  And,  O  sinners,  ye  that  feel  your  need  of  a  Saviour, 
come  to  Christ  and  trust  him,  for  he  is  "  the  mighty  God."  Go 
to  your  houses,  and  fall  on  your  knees  and  confess  your  sins,  and 
then  cast  your  poor,  guilty,  helpless,  naked,  defenceless  souls 
before  his  omnipotence,  for  he  is  able  to  save  unto  the  uttermost 
them  that  come  unto  God  by  him,  because  when  he  died  he  was 
not  manhood,  without  divinity,  but  he  was  "  the  mighty  God." 
This,  I  say,  we  will  write  on  our  banners,  from  this  day  forth 
and  for  ever  ;  this  shall  be  our  joy  and  our  song — the  child  bom 
nl  the  Son  given  is  to  us  "  the  mighty  God." 


SERMON   X. 

THE    BELIEVER'S    CHALLENGE. 

"  Who  is  hf  thai  eondemneth  ?  It  is  Christ  that  died,  yea  rather,  that 
IB  risen  again,  who  is  even  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  who  also  maketh  in- 
lei  cession  for  us." — ROMANS,  viii.  34. 

THE  protest  of  an  innocent  man  against  the  charge  of  an  ac 
cuser  may  well  be  strong  and  vehement.  But  here  we  have  a 
more  uncommon  and  a  sublimer  theme.  It  is  the  challenge  of  a 
justified  sinner  protesting  with  holy  and  inspired  fervor  that  his 
character  is  clear  and  his  conscience  clean,  even  in  the  sight  of 
heaven.  Yet  it  is  not  the  natural  innocence  of  his  heart,  but  the 
perfect  mediation  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  which  gives  him  this 
amazing  confidence.  May  the  Spirit  of  God  enable  me  to  ex- 
pound  to  you  this  most  blessed  portion  of  God's  Word. 

We  have  before  us,  in  the  text,  the  four  marvellous  pillars 
upon  which  the  Christian  rests  his  hope.  Any  one  of  them  were 
all-sufficient.  Though  the  sins  ot  the  whole  world  should  press 
on  any  one  of  these  sacred  columns,  it  would  never  break  nor 
bend.  Yet  for  our  strong  consolation,  that  \ve  may  never  tremble 
or  fear.  God  hath  been  pleased  to  give  to  us  these  four  eternal 
rocks,  these  four  immovable  foundations,  upon  which  our  faith 
may  rest  and  stand  secure.  But  why  is  this  1  why  needeth  the 
Christian  to  have  such  firm,  such  massive  foundations'?  For  thi 
simple  reason  :  he  is  himself  so  doubtful,  so  ready  to  mistrust 
so  difficult  to  be  persuaded  of  his  own  security.  Therefore,  hat! 
God,  as  it  were,  enlarged  his  arguments.  One  blow  might,  wt 
should  have  imagined,  have  been  enough  to  have  smitten  to  death 
our  unbelief  for  ever  ;  the  cross  ought  to  have  been  enough  for 
the  crucifixion  of  our  infidelity  ;  yet  God,  foreseeing  the  strength 


THE  RELIKVER'S  CHALLENGE.  lf>7 

of  our  unbelief,  hath  been  pleased  to  smite  it  four  times  that  it 
might  be  razed  to  rise  no  more.  Moreover,  he  well  knew  that 
our  faith  would  b*e  sternly  attacked.  The  world,  our  own  sin, 
and  the  devil,  he  foresaw  would  be  continually  molesting  us; 
therefore,  hath  he  entrenched  us  within  these  four  walls,  he  hath 
enga prisoned  us  in  four  strong  lines  of  circumvallation.  Wo 
I  Cannot  be  destroyed.  We  have  bulwarks,  none  of  which  car 
possibly  be  stormed,  but  when  combined  they  are  so  irresistible, 
they  could  not  be  carried,  though  earth  and  hell  should  combine 
to  storm  them.  It  is,  1  say,  first,  because  of  our  unbelief;  and 
secondly,  because  of  the  tremendous  attacks  our  faith  has  to  en. 
dure,  that  God  has  been  pleased  to  lay  down  four  strong  con 
solations,  with  which  we  may  fortify  our  hearts  whenever  the  sky 
is  overcast,  or  the  hurricane  is  coming  forth  from  its  place. 

Let  us  now  notice  these  four  stupendous  doctrines.  I  repeat  it 
•igain,  any  one  of  them  is  all-sufficient.  It  reminds  me  of  what 
1  have  sometimes  neard  of  the  ropes  that  are  used  in  mining.  It 
s  said  that  every  strand  of  them  would  bear  the  entire  tonnage, 
and  consequently,  if  each  strand  bears  the  full  weight  that  will 
ever  be  put  upon  the  whole,  there  is  an  absolute  certainty  of 
safety  given  to  the  whole  when  twisted  together.  Now  each  of 
these  four  articles  of  our  faith  is  sufficient  to  bear  the  weight  of 
the  sins  of  the  whole  world.  What  must  be  the  strength  whet 
the  whole  four  are  interlaced  and  intertwisted,  and  become  the 
support  of  the  believer  1  The  apostle  challenges  the  whole 
world,  and  heaven  and  hell,  too,  in  the  question,  "  Who  is  he  that 
condemneth  T'  and  in  order  to  excuse  his  boldness,  he  gives  us 
four  reasons  why  he  can  never  be  condemned.  "  Christ  has 
died,  yea,  rather,  is  risen  again,  who  is  even  a/  the  right  hand  of 
God,  who  also  maketh  intercession  for  us"  We  shall  first  look 
over  these  four  pillars  of  the  believer's  faith,  and  then,  after 
wards,  we  shall  ourselves  take  up  the  apostle's  challenge,  and 
cry,  **  Who  is  he  that  condemneth  ?" 

I.  The  first  reason  why  the  Christian  never  can  be  condemned, 
is  because  CHRIST  HATH  DIED.  We  believe  that  in  the  death  of 
Christ,  there  was  a  full  penalty  paid  to  the  divine  justice  for  all 
the  sins  which  the  believer  can  possibly  commit.  We  teach 
every  Sabbath  day,  that  the  whole  shower  of  divine  wrath  wai 


158  THE  BELIEVER'S  CHALLENGE. 

ponied  upon  Christ's  head,  that  the  black  cloud  of  vei  geance 
emptied  out  itself  upon  the  cross,  and  that  there  is  not  left  in  the 
book  of  God  a  single  sin  against  the  believer,  i..or  can  there  pos 
sibly  be  even  a  particle  of  punishment  ever  exacted  at  the  hand 
of  the  man  that  believeth  in  Jesus,  for  this  reason — that  Jc&us 
has  been  punished  to  the  full.  In  full  tale  hath  every  sin  received 
sentence  in  his  death.  He  hath  suffered,  the  just  for  the  unjust, 
to  bring  us  to  God.  And  now,  if  you  and  1  are  enabled  this 
morning  to  go  beneath  the  bloody  tree  of  Calvary,  and  shelter 
ourselves  there,  how  safe  we  are  !  Ah !  we  may  look  around 
and  defy  all  our  sins  to  destroy  us.  This  shall  be  an  all-sufficient 
argument  to  shut  their  clamorous  mouths,  "  Christ  hath  died." 
Here  cometh  one,  and  he  cries,  "Thou  hast  been  a  blasphemer.' 
Yes,  but  Christ  died  a  blasphemer's  death,  and  he  died  for  blasphe 
mers.  "  But  thou  hast  stained  thyself  with  lust."  -  Yes,  but  Christ 
died  for  the  lascivious.  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  God's  own  Son, 
cleanseth  us  from  all  sin  ;  so  away,  foul  fiend,  that  also  has  re 
ceived  its  due.  "  But  thou  hast  long  resisted  grace,  and  long 
stood  out  against  the  warnings  of  God."  Yes,  but  "  Jesus  died  ;" 
and  say  what  thou  wilt,  O  conscience,  remind  me  of  what  thou 
wilt;  lo,  this  shall  be  my  sure  reply — "Jesus  died."  Standing 
at  the  foot  of  the  cross,  and  beholding  the  Redeemer  in  his  ex 
piring  agony,  the  Christian  may  indeed  gather  courage.  When  I 
think  of  my  sin,  it  seems  impossible  that  any  atonement  should 
ever  be  adequate  ;  but  when  I  think  of  Christ's  death  it  seems 
impossible  that  any  sin  should  ever  be  great  enough  to  need  such 
an  atonement  as  that.  There  is  in  the  death  of  Christ  enough, 
and  more  than  enough.  There  is  not  only  a  sea  in  which  to 
drown  our  sins,  but  the  very  tops  of  the  mountains  of  our  guilt 
are  covered.  Forty  cubits  upwards  hath  this  red  sea  prevailed. 
There  is  not  only  enough  to  put  our  sins  to  death,  but  enough  t< 
bury  them  and  hide  them  out  of  sight.  I  say  it  boldly  and  with 
out  a  figure, — the  eternal  arm  of  God  now  nerved  with  strength, 
now  released  from  the  bondage  in  which  justice  held  it,  is  able  to 
save  to  the  uttermost  them  that  come  unto  God  by  Christ. 

This  was  my  subject  last  Sabbath-day,  therefore  I  take  it  I  shall 
be  fully  justified  in  leaving  the  first  point — that  Christ  hath  died, 
while  J  pass  on  to  the  other  three.  You  will  bear  in  mind  that  I 


THE  BELIEVER'S  CHALLENGE.  15& 

discussed  t^.e  doctrine  of  the  satisfaction  or'  Christ's  atonement 
by  his  dea'.h,  in  the  sermon  of  last  Sunday  morning.  I  come, 
therefore,  to  notice  the  second  argument.  Our  first  reason  for 
knowing  that  we  cannot  be  condemned  IG,  because  Christ  has  died 
for  us. 

JI.  The  second  reason  a  believer  hath,   is — that  CHRIST  HA? 

RISEN    AO  \IN. 

You  will  observe  that  the  apostle  has  here  prefixed  the  words 
'yea  rather!"  Do  you  see  the  force  of  this  expression?  As 
much  a?  to  say,  it  is  a  powerful  argument  for  our  salvation  that 
Christ-  died  ;  but  it  is  a  still  more  cogent  proof  that  every  believer 
shall  be  saved,  that  Christ  rose  again  from  the  dead.  This  does,  not 
often  strike  us.  We  generally  receive  more  comfort  at  the  cross 
than  we  do  at  the  empty  sepulchre.  And  yet  this  is  just  through 
our  ignorance  and  through  the  blindness  of  our  eyes ;  for  verily  to 
the  enlightened  believer  there  is  more  consolation  in  Jesus  aris 
ing  from  the  tomb  than  there  is  in  Jesus  nailed  to  the  cross 
"  Yea  rather,"  said  the  apostle,  as  if  he  would  have  it  that  this  is 
a  still  more  powerful  argument.  Now  what  had  the  resurrection 
of  Christ  from  the  dead  to  do  with  the  justification  of  a  believer  ? 
I  take  it  thus :  Christ  by  his  death  paid  to  his  Father  the  full 
price  of  what  we  owed  him.  God  did,  as  it  were,  hold  a  bond 
against  us  which  we  could  not  pay.  The  alternative  of  this  bond, 
if  not  paid,  was  that  we  should  be  sold  for  ever  under  siri,  and 
should  endure  the  penalty  of  our  transgressions  in  unquenchable 
Sro.  Now,  Jesus  by  his  death  paid  all  the  debt ;  to  the  utmost 
Vthing  that  was  due  from  us  to  God  Christ  did  pay  by  his 
death.  Still  the  bond  was  not  cancelled  until  the  day  when 
Christ  rose  from  the  dead ;  then  did  his  Father,  as  it  were,  rend 
the  bond  in  halves,  and  blot  it  out,  so  that  thenceforward  it  ceases 
to  have  effect.  It  is  true  that  death  w^as  the  payment  of  the  debt 
but  the  resurrection  was  the  public  acknowledgment  that  th 
debt  was  paid.  "  Now,"  says  Paul,  "  yea  rather,  he  has  risen 
from  the  dead."  O  Christian,  thou  canst  not  be  condemned,  for 
Christ  has  paid  the  debt.  Look  at  his  gore,  as  it  distills  from  his 
body  in  Gethsamene  and  from  the  accursed  tree.  But  rather,  lest 
there  should  be  a  shadow  of  a  doubt  that  thou  canst  not  be  con. 
demned,  thy  debts  are  cancelled.  Here  is  the  full  receipt ;  the 


160  THE  BELIEVER'S  CHALLENGB. 

resurrection  hath  rent  the  bond  in  twain.  And  now  at  God's 
right  hand  there  is  not  left  a  record  of  thy  sin ;  for  when  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  quitted  the  tomb  he  left  thy  sin  buried  in  it — 
once  for  all  cast  away — never  to  be  recovered.  To  use  another 
figure, — Christ's  death  was  as  it  were  the  digging  out  of  the  gold 
of  grace  out  of  the  deep  mines  of  Jesus'  sufferings.  Chris* 
?oined,  so  to  speak,  the  gold  which  should  be  the  redemption  of 
iris  children,  but  the  resurrection  was  the  minting  of  that  gold 
it  stamped  it  with  the  Father's  impress,  as  the  current  coin  of 
the  realm  of  heaven.  The  gold  itself  was  fused  in  the  atoning 
sacrifice,  but  the  minting  of  it,  making  it  into  that  which  should 
be  the  current  coin  of  the  merchant,  was  the  resurrection  of 
Christ.  Then  did  his  father  stamp  the  atonement  with  his  own 
image  and  his  own  superscription.  On  the  cross  I  see  Jesus 
dying  for  my  sins  as  an  expiating  sacrifice ;  but  in  the  resurrec 
tion  I  see  God  acknowledging  the  death  of  Christ,  and  accepting 
what  he  has  done  for  my  indisputable  justification.  I  see  him 
putting  his  own  imprimatur  thereupon,  stamping  it  with  his  own 
signet,  dignifying  it  with  his  own  seal,  and  again  I  cry,  "  Yea 
rather,  who  is  risen  from  the  dead," — who  then  can  condemn  the 
believer  ]  To  put  Christ's  resurrection  yet  in  another  aspect. 
His  death  was  the  digging  of  the  well  of  salvation.  Stern  was 
the  labor,  toilsome  was  the  work ;  he  dug  on,  and  on.  and  on. 
through  rocks  of  suffering,  into  the  deepest  caverns  of  misery  ; 
but  the  resurrection  was  the  springing  up  of  the  water.  Christ 
iigged  the  well  to  its  very  bottom,  but  not  a  drop  did  spiing 
up  ;  still  was  the  world  dry  and  thirsty,  till,  on  the  morning  of 
the  resurrection,  a  voice  was  heard,"  Spring  up,  O  well,"  and  forth 
came  Christ  himself  from  the  grave,  and  with  him  came  the 
resurrection  and  the  life ;  pardon  and  peace  for  all  souls  sprang 
ip  from  the  deep  well  of  his  misery.  Oh !  when  I  can  find 
nongh  for  my  faith  to  be  satisfied  with  even  in  the  digging  of 
the  well,  what  shall  be  my  satisfaction  when  I  see  it  overflowing 
its  brim,  and  springing  up  with  life  everlasting  ?  Surely  the 
apostle  was  right  when  he  said,  "  Yea  rather,  who  hath  risen 
from  tht  dead."  And  yet  another  picture.  Christ  was  in  his 
death  the  hostage  of  the  people  of  God.  He  was  the  representa 
tive  of  all  the  elect.  When  Christ  was  bound  to  the  tree  I  see 


THE  BELIEVER'S  CHALLENGE.  161 

my  own  sin  bound  there ;  when  he  died  every  believei  virtually 
died  in  him  ;  when  he  was  buried  we  were  buried  in  him,  and 
when  he  was  in  the* tomb,  he  was,  as  it  were,  God's  hostage  for 
all  his  church,  for  all  that  ever  should  believe  on  him.  Now,  aa 
long  as  he  was  in  prison,  although  there  might  be  ground  of  hope, 
it  was  but  as  light  sown  for  the  righteous  ;  but  when  the  hostage 
«,me  out,  behold  the  first  fruit  of  the  harvest !  When  God  said, 
'  Let  my  Anointed  go  free,  I  am  satisfied  and  content  in  him," 
then  every  elect  vessel  went  free  in  him;  then  every  child  of 
God  was  released  from  durance  vile  no  more  to  die,  not  to  know 
bondage  or  fetter  for  ever.  I  do  see  ground  for  hope  when  Christ 
is  bound,  for  he  is  bound  for  me  ;  I  do  see  reason  for  rejoicing 
when  he  dies,  for  he  dies  for  me,  and  in  my  room  and  stead ;  I 
do  see  a  theme  for  solid  satisfaction  in  his  burial,  for  he  is  buried 
for  me;  but  when  he  comes  out  of  the  grave,  having  swallowed 
up  death  in  victory,  my  hope  bursts  into  joyous  song.  He  lives, 
and  because  he  lives  I  shall  live  also.  He  is  delivered,  and  I  am 
delivered  too.  Death  hath  no  more  dominion  over  him  and  no 
more  dominion  over  me ;  his  deliverance  is  mine,  his  freedom 
mine  for  ever.  Again,  I  repeat  it,  the  believer  should  take 
strong  draughts  of  consolation  here.  Christ  is  risen  from  the 
dead,  how  can  we  be  condemned  ?  There  are  e'en  stronger  argu 
ments  for  the  non-condemnation  of  the  believer  in  the  resurrec 
tion  of  Christ  than  in  his  precious  death  and  burial.  I  think  I 
have  shown  this ;  only  may  God  give  us  grace  to  rest  upon  this 
precious — "  yea  rather,  who  is  risen  from  the  dead." 

III.  Tne  next  clause  of  the  sentence  reads  thus  :  "  WHO  is 
EVEN  AT  THE  RIGHT  HAND  OF  GOD."  Is  there  not  any  word 
of  special  commendation  to  this  ?  You  will  remember  the  last 
one  had,  "  Yea  rather."  Is  there  nothing  to  commend  this  I 
Well,  if  not  in  this  text,  there  is  in  another.  If,  at  your  leisure,  you 
ead  through  the  fifth  chapter  of  the  epistle  to  the  Romans,  you 
will  there  very  readily  discover  that  the  apostle  proves  that  if 
Christ's  death  be  an  argument  for  our  salvation,  his  life  is  a  still 
greater  one.  He  says  in  the  tenth  verse  of  that  chapter,  "If, 
when  we  were  enemies,  we  were  reconciled  to  God  by  the  death 
of  his  Son,  muck  more" — that's  the  word  I  wanted — "  much  mare 
we  shall  be  saved  by  his  life."  We  may  look,  then,  at  this  third 


102  THE  BELIEVER'S  CHALLENGE. 

clause  as  having  a  "  much  more"  before  it,  comparing  Scripture 
with  Scripture.  We  cannot  be  condemned,  for  "Christ  hath 
died.  Yea  rather,  is  risen  again ;  (much  more)  is  even  at  the 
right  hand  of  God."  Here  is  an  argument  which  hath  much 
more  power,  much  more  strength,  much  more  force  than  even 
Christ's  death.  Sometimes  I  have  thought  that  impossible.  Last 
Lord's  day  I  thought,  by  God's  good  help,  I  was  enabled  to  per 
suade  some  of  you  that  the  death  of  Christ  was  an  argument  too 
potent  to  be  ever  denied — an  argument  for  the  salvation  of  all  for 
whom  he  died.  Much  more,  let  me  now  tell  you,  is  his  life, 
much  more  the  fact  that  he  lives,  and  is  at  the  right  hand  of  the 
Father.  Now  1  must  call  your  attention  to  this  clause,  remark 
ing  that  in  other  passages  of  God's  Word  Christ  is  said  to  have 
sat  down  for  ever  at  the  right  hand  of  God.  Do  observe  with 
care  the  fact,  that  he  is  always  described  in  heaven  as  sitting 
down.  This  seems  to  me  to  be  one  material  argument  for  the 
salvation  of  the  believer — Christ  sits  in  heaven.  Now,  he  never 
would  sit  if  the  work  were  not  fully  done.  Jesus,  when  he  was 
on  earth,  had  a  baptism  to  be  baptized  with,  and  how  was  he 
straitened  until  it  was  accomplished !  lie  had  not  time  so  much 
as  to  eat  bread,  full  often,  so  eager  was  he  to  accomplish  all  his 
work.  And  I  do  not,  I  cannot  imagine  that  he  would  be  sitting 
down  in  heaven  in  the  posture  of  ease  unless  he  had  accom 
plished  all — unless  "  It  is  finished !"  were  to  be  understood  in  its 
broadest  and  most  unlimited  sense.  There  is  one  thing  I  have 
noticed,  in  looking  over  the  old  Levitical  law,  under  the  descrip 
tion  of  the  tabernacle.  There  were  no  seats  whatever  provided 
for  the  priests.  Every  priest  stands  daily  ministering  and  offer 
ing  sacrifice  for  sin.  They  never  had  any  seats  to  sit  on.  There 
was  a  table  for  the  show-bread,  an  altar,  and  a  brazen  laver  ;  yet 
there  was  no  seat.  No  priest  sat  down  ;  he  must  always  stand; 
for  there  was  always  work  to  be  accomplished,  always  something 
to  be  done.  For  the  great  high-priest  of  our  profession,  Jesus, 
*he  Son  of  God,  hath  taken  his  seat  at  the  right  hand  of  the 
majesty  on  high.  Why  is  this  ?  Because  now  the  sacrifice  is 
complete  for  ever,  and  the  priest  hath  made  a  full  end  of  his 
solemn  service.  Whut  would  the  Jew  have  thought  if  it  had 
been  possible  for  a  seat  to  have  been  introduced  into  the  sanctu 


BELIEVER'S  CHALLENGE.  163 

ary,  and  for  the  high-priest  to  sit  down  ?  Why,  the  Jew  would 
then  have  been  compelled  to  believe  that  it  was  all  over,  the  dis 
pensation  was  ended  ;  for  a  sitting  priest  would  be  the  end  of  all. 
And  now  we  may  rest  assured,  since  we  can  see  a  sitting  Christ 
in  heaven,  that  the  whole  atonement  is  finished,  the  work  is  over, 
he  hath  made  an  end  of  sin.  I  do  consider  that  in  this  there  i& 
an  argument  why  no  believer  ever  can  perish.  If  he  could,  i 
there  was  yet  a  chance  of  risk,  Christ  would  not  be  sittin^ 
down  ;  if  the  work  were  not  so  fully  done  that  every  redeemec 
one  should  at  last  be  received  into  heaven,  he  would  never  rest 
nor  hold  his  peace. 

Turning,  however,  more  strictly  to  the  words  of  the  text, 
"  Who  i8  even  at  the  right  hand  of  Godr — what  meaneth  this  ] 
It  means,  first  of  all,  that  Christ  is  now  in  the  honorable  position 
of  an  accepted  one.  The  right  hand  of  God  is  the  place  of 
majesty,  and  the  place  of  favor  too.  Now,  Christ  is  his  people's 
representative.  When  he  died  for  them  they  had  rest ;  when  he 
rose  again  for  them,  they  had  liberty  ;  when  he  was  received  into 
his  Father's  favor,  yet  again,  and  sat  at  his  own  right  hand,  then 
had  they  favor,  and  honor,  and  dignity.  Do  you  not  remember, 
that  the  two  sons  of  Zebedee  asked  to  sit,  one  on  the  right  hand 
and  the  other  on  the  left  1  Little  did  they  kno-w  that  they  had 
already  what  they  asked  for — for  all  the  church  is  now  at  the 
right  hand  of  the  Father  ;  all  the  church  is  now  raised  up  together, 
and  made  to  sit  together  in  heavenly  places  in  Christ  Jesus.  The 
raising  and  elevation  of  Christ  to  that  throne  of  dignity  and 
favor,  is  the  elevation,  the  acceptance,  the  enshrinement,  the 
glorifying  of  all  his  people,  for  he  is  their  common  head,  and 
stands  as  their  representative.  This  sitting  at  the  right  hand  of 
God,  then,  is  to  be  viewed  as  the  acceptance  of  the  person  of  the 
surety,  the  reception  of  the  representative,  and,  therefore,  the  ac 
ceptance  of  our  souls.  Who  is  he  that  condemneth,  then? 
Condemn  a  man  that  is  at  the  right  hand  of  God !  Absurd ! 
Impossible !  Yet  am  I  there  in  Christ.  Condemn  a  man  who 
sits  next  to  his  Father,  the  King  of  kings !  Yet  there  is  the 
church,  and  how  can  she  in  the  slightest  degree  incur  condemna 
tion,  when  she  is  already  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Father  with  her 
covenant  head.  And  let  me  further  remark,  that  the  right  hand  is 


104  .  THE    BELIEVER'S    CHALLENGE. 

the  place  of  power.  Christ  at  the  right-hand  of  God  signifies  that 
all  power  is  given  unto  him  in  heaven  and  in  earth.  Now,  who  is 
he  that  condemns  the  people  that  have  such  a  head  as  this  ?  O 
my  soul !  what  can  destroy  thee  if  omnipotence  is  thy  helper ! 
If  the  oegis  of  the  Almighty  covers  thee,  what  sword  can  smite 
thee  ?  If  the  wings  of  the  Eternal  are  thy  shelter,  what  plague 
».an  attack  thee  ?  Rest  thou  secure.  If  Jesus  is  thine  all-prevail- 
ng  king,  and  hath  trodden  thine  enemies  beneath  his  feet;  if  sin, 
death,  and  hell,  are  now  only  parts  of  his  empire,  for  he  is  Lord 
of  all,  and  if  thou  art  represented  in  him,  and  he  is  thy  guaran 
tee,  thy  sworn  surety,  it  cannot  be  by  any  possibility  that  thou 
canst  be  condemned.  While  we  have  an  Almighty  Saviour,  the 
redeemed  must  be  saved ;  until  omnipotence  can  fail,  and  the  Al 
mighty  can  be  overcome,  every  blood-bought  redeemed  child  of 
God  is  safe  and  secure  for  ever.  Well  did  the  apostle  say  of  this 
— "  much  more — much  more  than  dying  and  rising  again  from  the 
dead,  he  lives  at  the  right  hand  of  God." 

IV.  And  now  I  come  to  the  fourth ;  and  this  also  hath  an  en 
comium  passed  upon  it — :i  WHO  ALSO  MAKETH  INTERCESSION  FOR 
us."  Our  apostle,  in  the  epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  puts  a  very 
strong  encomium  upon  this  tjentence.  What  does  he  say  upon  it  ] 
A  little  more  than  he  said  about  the  others.  The  first  one  is, 
"  Yea  rather ;"  the  second  one  is,  "  Much  more"  And  what  is 
the  third  1  Remember  the  passage — "  He  is  able  also  to  save 
them  unto  the  uttermost  that  come  unto  God  by  him,  seeing  he 
ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  them."  Lo !  this  is — "  to 
the  uttermost ;"  what  we  thought,  perhaps,  to  be  the  very  smallest 
matter  in  the  recital,  is  just  the  greatest.  "  To  the  very  uttermost" 
he  is  able  to  save,  seeing  he  ever  lives  to  intercede — the  strongest 
argument  of  the  whole  four.  Let  us  try  to  meet  this  question, 
"  Why  does  Christ  intercede  to-day  in  heaven  ]"'  A  quaint  old 
divine  says,  that  "  When  God,  in  his  justice,  rose  from  his  throne 
to  smite  the  surety,  he  would  make  no  concession  whatever.  The 
surety  paid  the  debt."  "  Yet,"  said  the  Judge,  "  I  will  not  come 
down  to  earth  to  receive  the  payment ;  bring  it  to  me."  And 
therefore  the  surety  first  groped  through  death  to  fight  his  way 
up  to  the  eternal  throne,  and  then  mounting  aloft  by  a  glorious 
ascension,  dragged  his  conquered  foes  behind  him,  and  scattering 


BELIEVER'S  CHALLENGE.  105 

mercies  with  both  his  hands,  like  Roman  conquerors  who  scatte-r. 
ed  gold  and  silver  coins  in  their  triumph,  entered  heaven.  And 
he  came  before  his  Father's  throne  and  said,  "  There  it  is ;  the 
full  price  :  I  have  brought  it  all."  God  would  not  go  down  to  the 
earth  for  payment ;  it  must  be  brought  to  him.  This  was  pictured 
by  the  high-priest  of  old.  The  high-priest  first  took  the  blood, 
but  that  was  not  accepted.  He  did  not  bring  the  mercy-seat  out 
side  the  veil,  to  carry  the  mercy -seat  to  the  blood.  No ;  the 
blood  must  be  taken  to  the  mercy-seat.  God  will  not  stoop  when 
he  is  just ;  it  must  be  brought  to  him.  So  the  high-priest  take? 
off  his  royal  robes,  and  puts  on  the  garments  of  the  minor  priest, 
and  goes  within  the  veil,  and  sprinkles  the  blood  upon  the  mercy- 
seat.  Even  so  did  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  He  took  the  payment 
and  bore  it  to  God, — took  his  wounds,  his  rent  body,  his  flowing 
blood,  up  to  his  Father's  very  eyes,  and  there  he  spread  his 
wounded  hands  and  pleaded  for  his  people.  Now  here  is  a  proof 
that  the  Christian  cannot  be  condemned,  because  the  blood  is  on 
the  mercy-seat.  It  is  not  poured  out  on  the  ground  ;  it  is  on  the 
mercy -seat,  it  is  on  the  throne ;  it  speaks  in  the  very  ears  of  God, 
and  it  must  of  a  surety  prevail. 

But,  perhaps,  the  sweetest  proof  that  the  Christian  cannot  be 
condemned,  is  derived  from  the  intercession  of  Christ,  if  we  view 
it  thus.  Who  is  Christ,  and  who  is  it  with  whom  he  intercedes  ? 
My  soul  was  in  raptures  when  I  mused  yesterday  upon  two  sweet 
thoughts ;  they  are  but  simple  and  plain,  but  they  were  very  in 
teresting  to  me.  I  thought  that  had  I  to  intercede  for  anybody, 
and  do  a  mediating  part,  if  I  had  to  intercede  for  my  brother 
with  my  father,  I  should  feel  I  had  got  a  safe  case  in  hand.  This  is 
just  what  Jesus  has  to  do.  He  has  to  intercede  with  his  Father, 
and  mark,  with  our  Father,  too.  There  is  a  double  precedent  to 
strengthen  our  confidence  that  he  must  prevail.  When  Christ 
pleads,  ho  does  not  plead  with  one  who  is  stronger  than  him,  or  t 
inimical  to  him,  but  with  his  own  Father.  "My  Father,"  saith 
he,  "it  is  my  delight  to  do  thy  will,  and  it  is  thy  delight  to  do 
my  will ;  '  will  then  that  they,  whom  thou  hast  given  me,  be  with 
me  where  I  am."  And  then  he  adds  this  blessed  argument, 
"  Father,  those  for  whom  I  plead  are  thine  own  children,  and 
thou  lovest  them  as  much  as  I  do,"  yea,  <l  thou  hast  loved  them  a§ 


106  THE  IJELIEVER'S  CHALLENGE. 

thou  hast  loved  me."  Oh,  it  is  no  hard  task  to  plead,  when  you 
are  pleading  with  a  Father  for  a  brother,  and  when  the  advocate 
can  say,  Ci  I  go  to  my  Father  and  to  your  Father,  to  my  God  and 
to  yoin-  God."  Suppose,  my  dear  friends,  that  any  of  you  were 
aboiir.  to  be  tried  for  your  life,  do  you  think  you  could  trust  your 
«l«fo«aoy  with  any  man  you  know?  I  do  really  think  I  should 

Ks  :.mpatient  to  speak  for  myself.  But  my  counsel  would  sa}, 
Now  just  be  quiet,  my  dear  sir,  you  perhaps  may  plead  moie:' 

>arnestly  than  I  can,  because  it  is  for  your  own  life,  but  then  you 
do  not  understand  the  law,  you  will  make  some  blunder  or  other, 
and  commit  yourself  and  spoil  your  own  cause."  But  still  I 
think  if  my  life  were  in  hazard,  and  I  stood  in  the  dock,  and  my 
counsel  were  pleading  for  me,  my  tongue  would  be  itching  to 
plead  for  myself,  and  1  should  want  to  get  up  and  just  say,  "  My 
lord,  I  am  innocent,  innocent  as  the  babe  newly  born,  of  the 
crime  laid  to  my  charge.  My  hands  have  never  been  stained 
with  the  blood  of  any  man."  Oh !  I  think  I  could  indeed  plead 
if  I  were  pleading  for  myself.  But,  do  you  know,  I  have  never 
felt  that  with  regard  to  Christ.  I  can  sit  down  and  let  him  plead, 
and  I  do  not  want  to  get  up  and  conduct  the  pleading  myself.  I 
do  feel  that  he  Toves  me  better  than  I  love  myself.  My  cause  is 
quite  safe  in  his  hands,  especially  when  I  remember  again  that  he 
pleads  with  my  Father,  and  that  he  is  his  own  Father's  beloved  Son, 
and  that  he  is  my  brother — and  such  a  brother ! — a  brother  born  for 

adversity. 

"  Give  him,  my  soul,  thy  cause  to  plead, 
JS:or  doubt  the  Father's  grace." 

It  is  enough ;  he  has  the  cause,  nor  would  we  take  it  from  his 
hand  even  if  we  could — 

"  I  know  that  safe  with  him  remains, 

Protected  by  his  power — 
What  I've  committed  to  his  hands 
Till  the  decisive  hour." 

Well  did  the  apostle  say,  "  To  the  very  uttermost  he  is  Jibl* 
to  save  them  that  come  unto  God  by  him,  because  he  ever  lives 
to  make  intercession  for  them." 

1  have  thus  given  you  the  four  props  and  pillars  of  the  be 


BELIEVER'S  CHALLENGE.  HV7 

liever's  faith.  And  now,  my  hearers,  let  me  just  utter  this  per 
sonal  appeal  to  you.  What  would  you  give,  some  of  you,  if  you 
could  have  such  a  hope  as  this  1  Here  are  four  pillars.  Oh,  un 
happy  souls,  that  cannot  call  one  of  these  your  own !  The  mass 
of  men  are  all  in  uncertainty ;  they  do  not  know  what  will  become 
of  them  at  last.  They  are  discontented  enough  with  life,  and  yet 
they  are  afraid  to  die.  God  is  angry  with  them,  and  they  know 
t.  Death  is  terrible  to  them  ;  the  tomb  affrights  them,  they  can 
carcely  understand  the  possibility  of  having  any  confidence  this 
side  the  grave.  Ah,  my  hearers,  what  would  you  give  if  you 
could  obtain  this  confidence  1  And  yet  it  is  within  reach  of  every 
truly  penitent  sinner.  If  you  are  now  led  to  repent  of  sin ;  if  you 
will  now  cast  yourself  on  the  blood  and  righteousness  of  Christ, 
your  eternal  salvation  shall  be  as  sure  as  your  present  existence. 
He  cannot  perish  who  relies  on  Christ,  and  he  who  hath  faith  in 
Jesus  may  see  the  heavens  pass  away,  but  not  God's  Word.  H«» 
may  see  the  earth  burned,  but  into  the  fire  of  hell  he  can  never  go. 
He  is  safe,  and  he  must  be  saved,  though  all  things  pass  away. 

And  now  this  brings  me  to  the  challenge.  Fain  would  I  pic 
ture  the  apostle  as  he  appeared  when  he  was  uttering  it.  Hark  ' 
I  hear  a  brave,  strong  voice,  crying,  "  Who  shall  lay  any  thing  to 
my  charge  ?"  "  Who  is  that  1  Paul.  What !  Paul  a  Christian  ! 
I  thought  Christians  were  a  humble,  timid  people."  "  They  are 
so;  but  not  when  they  are  arrayed  in  the  robes  and  invested 
with  the  credentials  of  their  Sovereign.  They  are  lambs  in  the 
harmlessness  of  their  dispositions,  but  they  have  the  courage  of 
lions  when  they  defend  the  honor  of  their  King.  Again  I  hear 
him  cry,  "  Who  shall  lay  any  thing  to  my  charge  V — and  he  casts 
his  eyes  to  heaven.  Is  not  the  wretch  smitten  dead  ?  Will  not 
such  presumption  as  this  be  avenged  1  Does  he  challenge  purity 
'to  convict  him  of  guilt1?  O  Paul,  the  thunderbolt  of  God  will 
mite  thee !  "  No,"  says  he,  "  it  is  God  that  justifieth,  I  am  not 
dfraid  to  face  the  highest  heaven,  since  God  has  said  that  I  am 
just.  I  can  look  upward  without  distressing  fear."  "  But  hush  f 
repeat  not  that  challenge."  "  Yes,"  saith  he,  "  I  will.  Whc  is 
he  that  condemneth  ?"  And  I  see  him  look  downwards ;  there 
lies  the  old  dragon,  bound  in  chains,  the  accuser  of  the  brethren ; 
and  the  apostle  stares  him  in  th«?  face,  and  says,  "  Who  shall  lay 


168 

any  thing  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect?"  Why,  Paul,  Satan  will 
bring  thundering  accusations  against  thee ;  art  thou  not  afraid  1 
"  No,"  says  he,  "  I  can  stop  his  mouth  with  this  cry,  '  It  is  Christ 
that  died ;' — that  will  make  him  tremble,  for  he  crushed  the  ser 
pent's  head  in  that  victorious  hour.  And  I  can  shut  his  mouth 
again — 'yea  rather,  that  is  risen  again,'  for  he  took  him  captive 
on  that  day  ; — I  will  add,  '  who  sitteth  at  the  right  hand  of  God. 
I  can  foil  him  with  that,  for  he  sits  there  to  judge  him  and  to  con  * 
demn  him  for  ever.  Once  more  I  will  appeal  to  his  advocacy 
*  Who  maketh  intercession  for  us.'  I  can  stop  his  accusation 
with  this  perpetual  care  of  Jesus  for  his  people."  Again,  cries 
Paul,  "  Who  shall  lay  any  thing  to  my  charge  ?"  There  lie  the 
bodies  of  the  saints  he  has  martyred,  and  they  cry  from  under 
the  altar — "  O  Lord !  how  long  wilt  thou  not  avenge  thine  own 
elect  ?"  Paul  says, — "  Who  can  lay  any  thing  to  my  charge  T' 
^ind  they  speak  not ;  "  because,"  says  Paul,  "  I  have  obtained 
mercy — who  was  before  a  blasphemer,  a  persecutor,  and  inju 
rious,  that  in  me  first  he  might  show  forth  all  long-suffering." 
"  Christ  hath  died,  yea  rather,  hath  risen  again."  And  now, 
stand  Ing  in  the  midst  of  men  who  mock,  and  boast,  and  joer,  he 
cries — "  Who  can  lay  any  thing  to  my  charge  ?"  and  no  one  dares 
to  speak,  for  man  himself  cannot  accuse ;  with  all  his  malevo 
lence,  and  acrimony,  and  malice,  he  can  bring  nothing  against 
him  ;  no  charge  can  stand  at  the  bar  of  God  against  the  man 
whom  he  hath  absolved  through  the  merits  of  the  death  of  Christ, 
and  the  power  of  his  resurrection. 

Is  it  not  a  noble  thing  for  a  Christian  to  be  able  to  go  where 
he  may,  and  foel  that  he  cannot  meet  his  accuser ;  that  wherever 
he  may  be,  whether  he  walketh  within  himself  in  the  chambers 
of  conscience,  or  out  of  himself  amongst  his  fellow  men,  or  above 
himself  into  heaven,  or  beneath  himself  into  hell,  yet  is  he  a  jus 
tified  ono,  and  nothing  can  be  laid  to  his  charge.  Who  can  con 
dernn  1  Who  can  condemn  1  Yea,  echo  O  ye  skies  ;  reverber 
ate,  ye  cavern?  of  the  deep.  Who  can  condemn  when  Christ 
hath  died,  hath  risen  from  the  dead,  is  enthroned  on  high,  and  in 
tercedes  2 

But  all  things  pass  away.  I  see  the  heavens  on  fire,  rolling  up 
like  a  scroll — 1  see  sun,  moon,  and  stars  pale  now  their  feeble 


THE  BELIEVER'S  CHALLENGE.  1(>(J 

f 

light — the  earth  is  tottering ;  the  pillars  of  heaven  are  rocking ; 
the  grand  assize  is  commenced — the  herald  angels  descend,  not  to 
sing  this  time,  but  with  thundering  trumpets  to  proclaim,  "  He 
comes,  he  comes  to  judge  the  earth  in  righteousness,  and  the 
people  in  equity."  What  says  the  believer  now  1  He  says,  "  I 
fear  not  that  assize,  for  who  can  condemn  T'  The  great  white 
throne  is  set,  the  books  are  opened,  men  are  trembling,  fiends  are 
yelling,  sinners  are  shrieking — "  Rocks  hide  us,  mountains  on  us 
fall ;"  these  make  up  an  awful  chorus  of  dismay.  There  stands 
the  believer,  and,  looking  round  on  the  assembled  universe  of 
men  and  angels,  he  cries,  "  Who  shall  lay  any  thing  to  my  charge  ?" 
and  silence  reigns  through  earth  and  heaven.  Again  he  speaks, 
and  fixing  his  eyes  full  on  the  Judge  himself,  he  cries,  "  Who  is 
he  that  condemneth  ?"  And  lo,  there  upon  the  throne  of  judg 
ment  sits  the  only  one  who  can  condemn  ;  and  who  is  that  ?  It 
is  Christ  that  died,  yea  rather,  that  is  risen  again,  who  sitteth  on 
the  right  hand  of  God,  who  maketh  intercession  for  him.  Can 
those  lips  say,  "  Depart,  ye  cursed,"  to  the  man  for  whom  they 
once  did  intercede'?  Can  those  eyes  flash  lightnings  on  the  man 
whom  once  they  saw  in  sin,  and  thence  with  rays  of  love  they 
did  lift  him  up  to  joy,  and  peace,  and  purity  ?  No!  Christ  will 
not  belie  himself.  He  cannot  reverse  his  grace ;  it  cannot  be 
that  the  throne  of  condemnation  shall  be  exalted  on  the  ruins  of 
the  cross.  It  cannot  be  that  Christ  should  transform  himself  at 
last ;  but  till  he  can  do  so,  none  can  condemn.  None  but  he  hath 
a  right  to  condemn,  for  he  is  the  sole  judge  of  right  and  wrong, 
and  if  he  hath  died  shall  he  put  us  to  death,  and  if  he  hath  risen 
for  us,  shall  he  thrust  us  downwards  to  the  pit,  and  if  he  hath 
reigned  for  us  and  hath  been  accepted  for  us,  shall  he  cast  us 
away,  and  if  he  hath  pleaded  for  us,  shall  he  curse  us  at  the  last  ? 
No !  Come  life,  come  death,  my  soul  can  rest  on  this.  He  died 
for  me.  I  cannot  be  punished  for  my  sin.  He  rose  again,  1  must 
rise,  and  though  I  die  yet  shall  I  live  again.  He  sits  at  the  right 
hand  of  God,  and  so  must  I.  I  must  be  crowned  and  reign  with 
him  for  ever.  He  intercedes,  and  he  must  be  heard.  He  beckons 
me,  and  I  must  be  brought  at  length  to  see  his  face,  and  to  be 
with  him  where  he  is. 


170  THE  BELIEVER'S  CHALLENGE. 

I  will  saj  no  more ;  only  may  God  give  us  all  an  interest  in 
these  four  precious  things.  An  angel's  tongue  might  fail  to  sing 
their  sweetness,  or  tell  their  brightness  and  their  majesty  ;  mine 
has  failed — but  this  is  well.  The  exooUenay  of  the  power  is  in 
the  doctrine,  and  no*  ic  my  preaching.  A  ram. 


SERMON    XI. 

A  PSALM  OF  REMEMBRANCE. 

"We  have  known  and  believed  the  love  that  God  hath  to  us." — 1  John, 
ir.  16. 

IT  is  very  pleasant  to  read  descriptions  of  the  Holy  Land  from 
observant  travellers,  who,  in  glowing  language,  have  depicted  its 
interesting  scenes.  I  must  confess,  that  all  books  which  speak  of 
the  land  where  Jesus  lived  and  died  have  an  attraction  for  me : 
but  how  much  more  delightful  must  it  be,  to  journey  there  one's- 
self,  to  stand  on  the  very  spot  where  Jesus  preached  and  prayed, 
and  to  kneel  upon  that  blood-stained  garden  of  Gethsemane,  ir. 
which  he  sweat  that  sacred  sweat  of  blood.  I  can  scarcely  im 
agine  what  must  be  the  sensation  of  a  true  Christian,  when  he 
stands  on  Calvary,  that  spot  of  all  others  most  dear  to  the  be 
liever's  soul.  All  the  descriptions  that  the  traveller  can  possibly 
give,  can  never  awaken  the  emotions  which  would  be  felt  if  we 
were  really  there  ourselves.  Now,  this  law  of  nature  I  would 
transfer  to  matters  of  grace.  Let  me  tell  you  this  day  what  I 
may  concerning  the  acts  of  God's  goodness  in  the  souls  of  his  peo 
ple,  my  description  will  be  dullness  itself  compared  with  the 
glorious  reality.  If  God  should  lend  me  help,  &o  that  I  could,  in 
glowing  pictures,  portray  the  amazing  love  of  Christ  Jesus  to 
those  who  believe  in  him ;  if  I  could  tell  you  of  their  matchless 
experience,  their  divine  drinkings  at  the  fountain  of  life  and  bliss, 
their  heavenly  feastings  in  the  banqueting-house,  all  this  would 
be  nothing,  compared  with  what  you  would  feel,  if  you  yourself 
could  taste,  and  handle,  and  see.  and  know,  and  believe. 

Let  me  add  another  figure  to  render  this  truth  yet  more  ap 


172  A    PSALM    OF    REMEMBRANCE. 

parent.  Suppose  an  eloquent  foreigner,  from  a  sunny  clime 
should  endeavor  to  make  you  appreciate  the  fruits  of  his  nation, 
He  depicts  them  to  you.  He  describes  their  luscious  flavor,  theii 
cooling  juice,  their  delicious  sweetness;  but  how  powerless  will 
be  his  oration,  compared  with  your  vivid  remembrance,  if  you 
have  yourself  partaken  of  the  dainties  of  his  land.  It  is  even  so 
with  the  good  things  of  God  ;  describe  them  as  we  may,  we  can 
not  awaken  in  }ou  the  joy  and  delight  that  is  felt  by  the  man  who 
lives  upon  them,  who  makes  them  his  daily  food,  his  manna  from 
heaven,  and  his  water  from  the  rock.  'Tis  feeling,  'tis  tasting,  'tis 
actually  receiving  and  enjoying,  which  is,  after  all,  the  highest 
oratory  with  which  we  can  possibly  explain  to  you  the  sweet  and 
precious  things  of  God. 

Now,  do  you  not  see  that  John  could  specially  speak  with 
power,  for  he  spake  from  his  own  experience.  And  do  you  not 
perceive  that  his  language  cannot  be  understood,  except  we  put 
ourselves  in  his  position,  and  are  able  to  echo  his  words,  when  he 
said,  "  We  have  known  and  believed  the  love  that  God  hath  to 
us  ?"  There  are  many  here,  I  doubt  not,  who  can  join  in  this  de 
claration  of  the  apostle.  And  may  the  Holy  Spirit  help  me, 
while  I  endeavor  to  draw  out  an  expression  of  grateful  thanks 
from  those  who  have  believed  and  known  the  love  which  God 
hath  to  them. 

First,  then,  I  shall  look  upon  my  text  as  being  an  abstract  of 
Christian  experience ;  secondly,  I  shall  view  it  as  the  summary  of 
Christian  testimony  ;  and  after  that,  I  shall  regard  it  as  the  ground 
work  of  Christian  encouragement. 

I.  First  of  all,  we  have  before  us  here,  THE  ABSTRACT  OP 
CHRISTIAN  EXPERIENCE  :  Some  will  demur  to  this.  If  you  should 
bring  some  Christians  up  and  say,  "  Come,  now,  just  tell  us  in  a 
''ew  words  what  you  think  of  the  Christian  life;"  they  woul 
Degin  with  a  deep-fetched  groan,  and  then  with  the  slightest  pos 
sible  allusion  to  mercy  they  would  pass  on  to  describe  their  con 
tinual  exercises  of  soul,  their  deep  afflictions,  their  desperate 
adversities,  and  their  tremendous  corruptions,  and  then  they 
w  ould  end  with  another  groan.  But  I  think  the  healthy  Christian, 
if  he  is  asked  this  question, — "  Now,  can  you  possibly  give  in  one 
short  sentence  a  statement  of  your  Christian  experience  T  would 


A    PSALM    OF    REMEMBRANCE.  173 

come  forward  joyously,  and  say,  "I  will  say  nothing  about  my- 
self,  but  1  will  speak  to  the  honor  of  my  God,  and  I  am  sweetly 
constrained  to  affirm,  that  '  /  have  known  and  have  believed  the  lo"t 
that  God  hath  to  m^  "  That  would  be  his  abstract  of  experience, 
and  the  very  best  I  am  sure  that  any  child  of  God  can  present. 
It  is  true  that  we  have  our  trials,  but  it  is  just  as  true  that  we  are 
delivered  out  of  them.  It  is  true  that  we  have  our  corruptions, 
and  mournfully  do  we  know  this  to  be  the  fact ;  but  it  is  just  as 
true  that  we  have  an  all-sufficient  Saviour,  who  overcomes  these 
corruptions,  and  enables  us  to  tread  the  dragon  beneath  our  feet. 
In  looking  back  we  dare  not  say  that  we  have  not  passed  the  den 
of  leopards.  It  would  be  wrong  if  we  were  to  deny  that  we  have 
floundered  through  the  slough  of  despond,  and  have  crept  along 
the  valley  of  humiliation,  but  we  can  say  we  have  been  through 
them  ;  we  have  not  remained  in  them  ;  we  have  not  left  our  bones 
bleaching  in  the  burning  sun,  nor  our  bodies  to  be  the  prey  of  the 
lion.  Our  sorrows  have  been  the  heralds  of  mercies.  Our  griefs 
cannot  mar  the  melody  of  our  praise,  for  we  reckon  them  to  be 
the  deep  bass  notes  of  our  song.  The  deeper  our  troubles  the 
louder  our  thanks  to  God,  who  has  assuredly  led  his  servants 
through  all  and  hath  preserved  us  until  now.  Our  past  troubles 
are  no  disturbers  of  our  happy  worship  :  they  do  but  swell  the 
stream  of  our  grateful  affection.  We  put  down  all  our  trials  into 
the  account,  but  still  we  declare  our  one  uncontradicted  avowal, 
that  "  we  have  known  and  believed  the  love  that  God  hath  to  us." 

You  will  observe  the  distinction  which  the  apostle  makes.  I 
may  not  be  able  clearly  to  bring  it  out,  but  it  struck  my  mind  as 
being  a  very  beautiful  description  of  the  Christian's  two-fold 
experience.  Sometimes  he  knows  the  love  that  God  has  to  him, 
and  at  other  times  he  believes  it.  There  is  a  difference  here :  I 
hope  I  shall  be  able  to  make  it  plain. 

1.  Sometimes  the  Christian  knows  the  love  of  God  to  him.  1 
A'ill  mention  two  or  three  particular  ways  in  which  he  knows  it. 

Sometimes  he  knows  it  by  seeing  it.  He  goes  to  his  house  and 
ne  finds  it  stored  with  plenty — "  his  bread  is  given  him,  and  his 
water  is  sure."  The  secret  of  God  is  upon  his  tabernacle,  the 
Almighty  is  with  him,  and  his  children  are  about  him.  He  washes 
his  steps  with  butter,  and  the  rocks  pour  him  out  rivers  of  oil 


174  A    PSALM    OF    REMEMBRANCE. 

His  root  is  spread  out  by  the  river,  and  the  dew  lieth  all  night 
upon  his  branch ;  his  glory  is  fresh  in  him,  and  his  bow  is  renewed 
in  his  hand.  He  is  blessed  in  his  going  out  and  in  his  coming  in  ; 
he  hath  the  blessings  of  heaven  above,  and  of  "  the  deep  which 
lieth  under."  He  is  like  Job ;  the  Lord  hath  set  a  hedge  about 
him,  and  all  that  he  possesseth.  Now,  truly,  he  can  say,  "  I  know 
the  love  of  God  to  me,  for  I  can  see  it.  I  can  see  a  gracious  pro 
vidence  pouring  forth  out  of  the  cornucopia  of  providence  an 
abundance  of  all  that  my  soul  can  desire."  This,  however,  might 
not  completely  convince  him  of  God's  love  if  it  were  not  that  he 
has  also  a  consciousness  that  these  things  are  not  given  him  as 
husks  are  cast  to  swine,  but  they  are  bestowed  on  him  as  love- 
tokens  from  a  tender  God.  His  ways  please  the  Lord,  and  there 
fore  he  maketh  even  his  enemies  to  be  at  peace  with  him.  The 
man  at  such  a  time  has  a  joyous  spirit ;  when  he  reads  the  Scrip 
ture  it  is  one  great  transparency  from  beginning  to  end ;  when 
he  meditates  upon  its  pages  it  is  like  a  bracelet  set  about  with 
the  rarest  jewels.  He  goes  about  his  Master's  service,  and  the 
Lord  makes  him  successful.  He  sows  and  he  reaps,  he  ploughs, 
and  the  furrows  team  with  plenty  ;  the  sower  overtakes  the 
reaper,  and  the  reaper  overtakes  the  sower.  God  gives  him 
many  harvests  in  a  year.  The  work  of  his  hands  is  established, 
and  his  labor  of  love  is  accepted.  The  Lord  hath  made  him  ex 
ceeding  rich,  he  hath  blessed  him,  and  his  cup  runs  over ;  he  hath 
all  that  heart  can  desire.  "  Now,"  he  says,  "  I  know  the  good 
ness  of  God."  This,  truly,  is  very  easy  work,  and  yet,  easy 
though  it  be,  we  ought  not  to  forget  that  we  have  had  such  sea 
sons,  we  have  had  many  trials,  but,  in  the  desert  of  our  trial,  we 
have  had  sometimes  an  oasis  like  this ;  we  can  look  back  to  some 
sunny  spot  when  we  could  say,  "  Surely  the  arms  of  love  arc 
ound  about  me  both  temporally  and  spiritually."  "  He  hath  set 
ne  upon  a  rock,  and  established  my  goings."  Then  the  Christian 
knows  the  love  of  God. 

Another  time  in  which  he  knows  his  Father's  love  is,  when  he 
gfes  it  after  coming  out  of  affliction.  He  hath  been  sore  sick,  and 
while  he  has  been  on  his  bed  he  has  been  vexed  with  anxious 
thoughts  concerning  those  he  might  leave  behind,  or  even  about 
himself.  In  the  hour  of  languishing  he  cried  to  the  Lord  foi 


A    PSALM    OF    REMEMBRANCE.  175 


delivers  :icej  and,  at  last,  he  felt  the  young  blood  leaping  through 
his  veins  anew.  New  health  was  restored  to  him,  and  he  trod 
the  green  sward  again  with  light,  elastic  steps,  singing,  "The 
Lord  hath  heard  my  cry,  like  Hezekiah,  and  has  lengthened  my 
days.  Now  I  know  the  love  which  God  hath  to  me."  Or  else 
he  has  incurred  great  losses  in  business.  One  after  another 
the  curtains  of  his  habitation  were  rent,  the  cords  were  cut  in 
twain,  and  all  the  tent  pins  pulled  up  by  the  invading  enemy ; 
he  thought  at  last  that  nothing  would  be  left  him,  "  Surely  I 
shall  die  in  poverty,"  says  he,  for  bankruptcy  stares  him  in  the 
face.  But  anon  the  tide  is  changed,  the  keel  of  his  ship  almost 
grated  on  the  gravel,  but  now  it  begins  to  float,  aud  boldly  he 
spreads  his  sails,  and  gallantly  he  rides  the  billows;  now  can 
he  exclaim,  "  I  know  the  love  that  God  hath  to  me."  He  has 
brought  his  servant  out  of  the  horrible  pit,  and  out  of  the  miry 
clay,  and  hath  again  appeared  to  me  in  mercy  and  chased  away 
my  doubts  and  fears. 

So  also  has  it  been  with  many  a  man  when  he  has  for  years 
been  laboring  under  a  heavy  trial  and  at  last  escapes  from  it. 
Look  at  old  Jacob.  I  believe  that  all  his  life  long  he  would 
would  have  put  in  a  demurrer  against  what  I  have  just  de 
clared,  viz.,  that  this  is  a  summary  of  Christian  experience. 
He  would  have  said,  "  No,  young  man,  I  tell  you  it  is  not ;  my 
experience  has  been  one  of  trouble  and  trial  ever  since  I  left 
my  Father's  house."  And  we  could  tell  him  the  reason  of  it 
too,  if  he  particularly  wished  to  know.  But  surely,  when  at 
last  he  put  his  aged  arms  around  the  neck  of  his  son  Joseph, 
when  at  last  he  saw  him  ruler  over  all  Egypt,  and  when  his  two 
grandchildren  were  brought  to  kneel  before  him  to  receive  his 
blessing,  the  old  man  might  have  reversed  what  he  said,  and  no 
more  have  exclaimed,  "  Few  and  evil,"  but  "  Now  I  know  the 
ovc  tnat  God  hath  towards  me."  As  it  was,  he  did  end  his  life 
u  ith  a  song,  and  finished  by  praising  the  angel  who  had  blessed 
him  and  kept  him  from  all  evil.  Even  Jacob  is  no  exception  to 
the  great  rule — that  the  life  of  God's  people  is  a  proof  of  the 
text.  "  We  know  and  believe  the  love  that  God  hath  to  us." 

There  are  other  waj  s  in  which  God's  children  know  their 
Father's  love.  Besides  what  they  see,  there  is  something  which 


I7G  A    PSALM    OF    REMEMBRANCE. 

they  feel.  There  are  times  when  the  father  takes  his  child  into 
his  arms,  presses  him  to  his  bosom,  and  kisses  him  with  the 
kisses  of  his  lips.  These  are  the  fond  expressions  to  set  forth 
the  tender  communings  which  God  hath  with  his  children.  John 
could  say,  "  We  have  known,"  for  he  had  laid  his  head  on  Jesus' 
oosom.  He  had  been  with  him  in  the  garden  of  Gcthsemane, 
ic  had  been  with  him  on  the  mount  of  transfiguration,  he  had 
neen  with  him,  too,  when  he  worked  his  special  miracles,  and 
therefore,  from  the  fact  that  he  had  communion  with  Christ  at 
the  supper,  and  in  his  sufferings  and  his  miracles,  John  might 
say,  "  We  know  the  love  that  he  hath  to  us."  And  have  not 
you  and  I — let  us  now  speak  from  personal  experience — have 
not  we  had  fellowship  with  Christ?  There  have  been  times 
when  we  were  not  nearer  to  ourselves  than  we  were  to  God, 
\i  hen  we  were  as  assured  that  we  were  having  fellowship  with 
him  as  a  man  talketh  with  his  friend ;  as  sure,  I  say,  as  we  were 
of  our  own  existence.  Bitter  though  we  sometimes  think  that 
our  lives  have  been,  yet  have  there  been  periods  in  them  akin  to 
heaven,  when  we  could  say,  "  If  this  is  not  glory  it  is  next  door 
to  it.  If  I  am  not  on  the  other  side  Jordan,  at  least  my  Master 
is  on  this  side  of  it.  If  I  have  not  yet  been  permitted  to  walk 
the  golden  streets,  yet  these  very  streets  on  earth  have  been  trod 
den  by  heavenly  footsteps  while  I  have  walked  with  God." 
Times  there  have  been  when  a  Christian  would  not  have  changed 
his  best  estate  for  an  angel's  wing  of  fire.  lie  has  felt  that  he 
was  with  Christ,  and  was  as  certain  of  it  as  if  he  had  seen  his 
pierced  hands  and  his  feet.  Then  could  he  say,  "  Now  I  know 
the  love  that  God  hath  towards  me." 

And  at  times,  too,  there  has  been  another  knowledge,  not  so 
high,  perhaps,  as  communion,  bringing  with  it  less  of  rapture 
and  ecstacy,  but  not  less  of  solid  consolation:  I  mean  the  infa! 
lible  testimony  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  Spirit  of  God  witnessing 
with  our  spirit  that  we  are  born  of  God.  I  am  no  believer  in 
those  dreams  and  visions  with  which  many  persons  mar  their 
experience.  I  do  not  believe  in  those  tales  I  hear  people  tell 
about  hearing  a  voice,  cr  seeing  an  angel.  Such  things  happen 
now  and  then — now  and  then  ;  but  when  we  are  overdone  with 
them,  we  begin  to  suspect  them  to  be  utterly  false.  But  I  speak 


A    PSA'LM    OF    REMEMBRANCE.  17* 

not  as  a  fanatic  or  enthusiast,  when  I  testify  that  there  is  such  a 
thing  as  ar  express  revelation  made  by  the  Holy  Spiiit  to  the 
individual  man.  Besides,  this  written  Word  of  God,  which  is 
that  on  which  we  rely,  as  a  sure  word  of  testimony,  whereunto 
ye  do  well  to  take  heed,  as  unto  a  light  that  shineth  in  a  dark 
place.  There  is,  besides  this,  I  say,  another,  a  distinct,  decided, 
'nfhllible  utterance  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  soul  of  man,  when 
Ac  beareth  witness  with  our  spirit  that  we  are  born  of  God,  and 
at  such  times — and  I  will  not  stop  to  explain  how  it  is  ;  for  tht 
natural  man  would  not  understand  me,  and  the  spiritual  man 
knoweth  already — at  such  times  the  believer  says,  '*  Now  I  know 
the  love  that  God  hath  to  me."  If  the  devil  himself  in  person 
should  meet  the  believer  when  he  hath  this  witness,  and  tell  him 
that  God  did  not  love  him,  he  would  call  him  a  liar  to  his  face, 
and  say,  "  The  Spirit  of  God  has  told  me  so,  and  I  will  believe 
the  Spirit  of  God,  and  I  will  not  believe  thee,  thou  liar  from  the 
beginning,  thou  father  of  lies."  Now,  this  is  a  very  joyous  part 
of  the  believer's  experience,  that  both  by  sight  and  by  feeling, 
and  by  distinct  inward  witnessing,  he  can  often  say,  "  I  know  the 
love  that  God  hath  towards  me." 

2.  But  times  there  are  of  thick  darkness,  when  neither  sun  nor 
moon  appear  for  many  days ;  when  the  tempest  rages  exceed 
ingly,  and  two  seas  meet  in  dread  collision.  There  are  seasons 
when  the  Christian,  dismasted  and  dismantled,  drifts  before  the 
storm  a  miserable  hulk,  unable  to  grasp  the  rudder  or  to  man  the 
yards.  All  strength  and  hope  are  gone.  He  looks  upward,  but 
he  sees  no  helper ;  downward,  and  he  beholds  nothing  but  the 
uttermost  depths  of  despair  ;  around  him  there  is  nought  but 
terror,  and  all  about  him  every  thing  frowneth  dismay.  At  such 
a  time,  noble  is  the  Christian  who  can  say,  "  Now  it  may  be  I 
do  not  know  the  love  that  God  hath  to  me.  but  I  believe  it.  Now 
I  believe  it,"  saith  he :  "  Yes,  roll  on,  ye  waves ;  tell  me  that 
ye  shall  engulph  me,  but  I  believe  not  you.  He  who  hath  prom 
ised  to  preserve  me — him  I  believe,  and  on  his  love  will  I  rely, 
even  though  now  I  see  no  proof  of  it.  Now,  poor  vessel,  drift 
before  the  storm ;  and  you,  ye  rocks,  roar  yonder  with  your 
sounding  breakers;  bit  I  fear  not  you,  for  I  believe  the  love  of 
God  towards  me.  I  cannot  be  wrecked  completely.  ])riveu 
8* 


i78  A    PSALM    OF    REMEMBRANCE. 

before  the  storm  I  may  be;  half  a  wreck  and  tempest  tossed  I 
am,  but  wholly  lost  1  never  can  be ;  and  now  this  day,  in  the 
teeth  of  evidence,  in  opposition  to  every  thing  which  goes  against 
it,  now  I  believe  the  love  which  God  hath  for  me." 

The  first  position,  that  of  knowing  God's  love  is  the  sweetest, 
out  that  of  believing  God's  love  is  the  grandest.  To  feel  God's 
ove  is  very  precious,  but  to  believe  it  when  you  do  not  feel  it 
s  the  noblest.  He  may  be  but  a  little  Christian  who  knowa 
jrod's  love,  but  he  is  a  great  Christian  who  believes  it,  when  the 
visible  contradicts  it,  and  the  invisible  withholds  its  witness. 
No  one  so  grand  as  that  prophet,  who  sees  the  olive  wither, 
the  fig-tree  blasted,  the  vines  devoured  by  the  caterpillar,  the 
stalls  emptied,  and  the  flocks  destroyed,  who  sees  famine  star 
ing  him  in  the  face,  and  yet  rejoices  in  the  Lord.  Oh,  that  is 
honoring  God.  Ye  that  believe  him  in  the  sunshine,  ye  offer 
him  pence ;  but  ye  that  believe  him  in  the  storm  ye  pay  him 
pounds.  No  revenue  so  ri<  h  as  that  which  comes  from  the  fat  yet 
seemingly  barren  land  of  affliction ;  God  gets  no  honor  greater 
than  that  which  he  receives  from  the  trustful  faith,  of  a  cast 
down  but  not  destroyed  believer.  Blessed  is  he  who  is  perplexed 
but  not  in  despair,  persecuted  but  not  forsaken,  who  is  poor,  yet, 
by  his  faith,  maketh  many  rich  ;  who  hath  nothing,  yet  possesseth 
all  things  ;  who  cries,  "  I  can  do  nothing,"  and  yet  can  add,  "  I 
can  do  all  things  through  Christ  that  strengtheneth  me." 

And  now,  do  not  these  two  states  make  np  a  summary  of 
Christian  experience  ?  "  We  know  and  believe  the  love  that  God 
hath  to  us."  "  Ah,"  says  one,  "  we  have  sometimes  doubted  it." 
No,  I  will  leave  that.  You  may  insert  it  in  your  confession,  but 
I  will  not  put  it  into  my  song.  Confess  your  doubts,  but  write 
them  not  in  this  our  psalm  of  praise.  I  am  sure,  in  looking 
oack,  you  will  say,  ;'  Oh  how  foolish  I  was  ever  to  doubt  a  faith 
ful  and  unchanging  God."  Bring  all  your  doubts  and  fears  this 
day  ;  hew  them  in  pieces  like  Agag  before  the  Lord ;  let  not  one 
escape  ;  take  them  and  hang  them  up  upon  a  tree  till  evening, 
and  then  take  a  great  stone  and  set  it  at  the  mouth  of  their  sepul 
chre,  that  they  may  rise  no  more.  Oh  for  grace  from  this  day 
forward  to  say,  "  When  I  know  not  my  Father's  love,  I  will  be 
lieve  it,  and  when  I  have  his  presence,  then  will  I  sing  aloud  '  ] 


^A    PSALM    OF    REMEMBRANCE.  17(J 

know  that  love  which  he  hath  towards  me.'"  This,  then,  is  my 
first  head. 

II.  The  "econd  is, — this  text  is  A  SUMMARY  OF  THE  BELIEVER'S 
TESTIMONY.  Every  Christian  is  to  be  a  testifier.  Every  thing 
that  God  has  made  speaks  of  him.  One  speaks  of  his  power,  arv 
other  of  hi.<=  majesty.  The  rolling  sea  and  the  bespangled  sky 
both  tell  of  his  power  and  of  his  strength.  Others  tell  of  his  wis 
dom ;  some  of  his  goodness.  But  the  saint  has  a  peculiar  testi 
mony.  lie  is  to  be  a  witness  with  heart  and  lips.  All  the  other 
creatures  speak  not  with  words.  They  may  sing  as  they  shine, 
but  they  cannot  sing  vocally.  It  is  the  believer's  part  in  the  great 
eternal  chorus  to  lift  up  voice  and  heart  at  once,  and  as  an  intel 
ligent,  living,  loving,  learning  witness,  to  testify  to  God.  Now  I 
think  I  i-.au  say,  or  rather,  I  will  speak  for  the  thousands  of  Israel 
gathered  here  this  morning, — we  can  say  our  testimony  to  an  un 
believing  world,  and  to  poor  despairing  sinners,  is  just  this, — "  we 
know  and  have  believed  the  love  that  God  hath  towards  us"  This 
is  our  testimony,  and  we  desire  to  tell  it  every  where  as  long  as 
we  live;  and,  dying,  we  hope  we  shall  be  enabled  to  repeat  it 
with  our  last  laboring  breath.  We  will  say,  when  life  is  finished, 
and  eternity  begins,  "  We  have  known  and  have  believed  the  love 
that  God  hath  towards  us." 

Let  me  enlarge,  however,  upon  this  testimony  ;  and  in  the  pres 
ence  of  many  who  know  nothing  of  God,  let  me  give  an  outline 
cf  the  full  testimony  of  every  believer. 

In  the  first  p'ace,  we  have  known  that  God's  love  to  us  is  un 
deserved.  This  we  can  tell  you  with  the  tears  in  our  eyes. 

"There  was  nothing  in  us  that  could  merit  esteem, 

Or  give  the  Creator  delight. 
"Twas  even  so.  Father,  \ve  ever  must  sing, 
For  so  it  seemed  good  in  thy  sight." 

Our  astonishment  increases  every  hour  when  we  think  of  his  lov 
to  us,  for  there  was  nothing  in  us  that  could  have  caused  it.  Often 
have  we  asked  ourselves  the  question : — 

0  Why  was  I  made  to  hear  thy  voice, 

And  enter  while  there's  room  ; 
When  thousands  make  a  wretched  choice, 
Ami  rather  starve  than  come?" 


180  A    PSALM    OF    REMEMBRANCE. 

and  our  only  answer  is — 

"  Twas  the  same  love  that  spread  the  feast, 

That  sweetly  forced  us  in ; 
Else  we  had  still  refused  to  taste, 
And  perished  in  our  sin." 

Ye  poor  sinners,  ye  think  that  there  must  be  something  in  you 
before  God  can  love  you.  Our  testimony  is,  that  God  hath  loved 
us ;  we  are  sure  of  this,  and  we  do  not  speak  half-heartedly,  when 
we  declare  that  we  are  equally  sure  that  there  never  was  any  thing 
in  us  by  nature  that  he  could  love.  We  may  doubt  a  great  many 
doctrines,  but  we  cannot  doubt  this.  This  is  a  matter  of  fact, 
that  in  us,  that  is,  in  our  flesh  there  dwelleth  no  good  thing.  We 
have  known  and  have  believed  that  the  love  of  God  towards  us  is 
free,  sovereign,  undeserved,  and  springs  entirely  from  the  over- 
flowing  love  of  his  own  heart,  and  is  not  caused  by  any  thing 
in  us. 

Another  thing  we  can  bear  testimony  to,  is  this — that  the  love 
of  God  is  unconquerable.  This  is  my  witness,  and  the  witness  of 
all  the  thousands  here  to-day.  We  strove  against  God's  love  at 
first ;  Jesus  knocked  at  the  door,  but  we  would  not  open  to  him  ; 
he  invited,  but  we  would  not  come;  he  called,  but  we  would  not 
hearken.  We  can  say  with  deepest  grief  we  treated  our  best 
friend  most  shamefully.  He  knocked  at  our  door  in  the  night, 
with  his  hair  wet  with  dew  and  his  locks  filled  with  the  drops  of 
the  night,  but  we  regarded  him  not.  In  sloth  and  pride  we  still 
kept  the  bed  of  indolence  and  self-confidence,  and  we  would  not 
rise  to  let  him  in.  And  we  can  testify,  that  if  his  love  could  have 
been  conquered,  we  should  have  conquered  it ;  for  we  sUot  out 
the  envenomed  shafts  of  ingratitude,  we  held  up  against  him  per 
petually  the  shield  of  our  hard-heartedness,  and  if  he  could  have- 
been  overcome,  if  he  were  not  an  Almighty  Saviour,  we  should 
nave  defeated  him,  and  have  been  still  his  enemies.  Ye  sinners 
we  can  affirm  that  love  divine  is  a  love  which  many  waters  can 
not  quench,  and  which  the  floods  can  not  drown. 

We  can  yet  again  bear  another  testimony  to  God's  love.  We 
can  say  concerning  his  love  that  it  has  never  been  diminished  by 
all  the  sins  we  have  ever  committed  since  we  believed.  We  hav« 


(A    PSALM    OF    REMEMBRANCE.  l&l 

been  verily  guilty,  and  we  blush  to  say  it.  We  have  often  re 
volted,  but  we  have  never  found  him  unwilling  to  forgive.  We 
have  gone  to  him  laden  with  guilt,  but  we  have  come  away  with 
our  burden  removed.  Oh  !  if  God  could  ever  cast  away  his  peo 
ple,  he  would  have  cast  away  me.  I  am  sure  God  never  turns 
his  children  out  of  doors,  or  this  had  been  my  lot  long  ago.  I  am 
certain  of  the  doctrine  of  final  perseverance,  because  I  have  perse 
vered  as  long  as  I  have.  If  God  meant  to  take  my  name  out  of 
he  covenant,  he  has  had  mighty  reasons  enough  long  ere  this. 

'•  If  ever  it  should  come  to  pass, 

That  sheep  of  Christ  should  full  away, 
My  fickle,  feeble  soul,  alas! 

Would  fall  a  thousand  times  a  day ; 
Were  not  thy  love  as  firm  as  free, 
Thou  soon  wouldst  take  it,  Lord,  from  me." 

No,  we  have  known,  we  have  believed  the  love  of  God  to  us  is 
not  to  be  cut  asunder  by  our  sins,  nor  diminished  by  our  un- 
worthiness. 

And  yet  another  thing  we  may  say.  We  have  known  and  we 
have  believed  the  love  of  God  to  us  to  be  perfectly  immutable. 
We  have  changed,  but  he  has  changed  never.  We  have  doubted 
him,  but  when  we  believed  not  he  has  remained  faithful.  We 
have  sometimes  been  in  the  greatest  depths,  but  never  too  low  for 
his  long  arm  to  reach.  We  have  sometimes,  it  is  true,  run  so  far 
from  him  Jiat  we  could  not  see  him  but  he  could  always  see  us, 
We  have  never  found  an  end  to  his  all-sufficiency,  or  a  limit  to  hi« 
omnipotence.  We  have  never  found  a  change  in  his  love, 

"  Immutable  his  will, 

Though  dark  may  be  my  grave; 
His  loving  heart  is  still 

Unchangeably  the  same. 
My  soul  through  many  changes  goes ; 
His  love  no  variation  knows." 

We  have  known  this.  We  have  tasted  and  handled  this.  We 
are  not  to  be  argued  out  of  it.  We  are  sure  it  is  true.  God  is 
immutable.  Because  he  has  been  immutable  to  us,  so  far,  "w* 
have  kncrvn  and  believed  the  love-  that  God  hath  to  us." 


182  A    PSALM    OF    REMEMBRANCE. 

I  will  make  but  one  other  remark  here,  and  that  is,  WP.  can  beai 
our  willing  witness  that  the  love  of  God  to  us  has  been  an  unfail 
ing  support  in  all  our  trials.  I  cannot  speak  as  a  gray -headed 
man  of  the  storms  and  troubles  which  many  of  you  have  endured ; 
but  I  have  had  more  joys  and  more  sorrow's  in  the  last  few  years 
than  any  man  in  this  place,  for  my  life  has  been  compressed  as 
with  a  Brainah  press — a  vast  mass  of  emotion  into  one  year.  1 
have  gone  to  the  very  bottoms  of  the  mountains,  as  some  of  yoi 
know,  in  a  night  that  never  can  be  erased  from  my  memory,  a 
night  connected  with  this  place.  I  have  had  to  pass  also  through 
severe  suffering  and  trial  from  the  calumny  and  scorn  of  man, 
with  abuse  hailed  pitilessly  on  my  head.  And  I  have  had  to  pass 
through  severe  personal  bodily  pain.  But  as  far  as  my  witness 
goes,  I  can  say  that  he  is  able  to  save  unto  the  uttermost  and  in  the 
last  extremity,  and  he  has  been  a  good  God  to  me.  Unfaithful  I 
have  been ;  he  has  forgiven  that,  and  will  forgive ;  but  unfaithful 
to  me  he  never  has  been ;  and  if  I  had  the  choosing  of  the  rest  ol 
my  life,  I  would  not  choose,  but  let  him  map  my  way  to  the  end, 
as  he  has  done  until  now,  for  "  surely  goodness  and  mercy  shall 
follow  me  all  the  days  of  my  life,  and  I  will  dwell  in  the  house  of 
the  Lord  for  ever."  As  for  you,  gray-headed  men  now  present, 
what  tales  you  could  tell !  You  remember  the  many  deliverances 
you  have  had  under  your  sharp  afflictions.  You  have  seen  a  wife 
buried,  but  you  have  seen  your  God  living.  You  have  seen  your 
children  carried,  one  after  another,  to  the  tomb,  but  you  have 
been  able  to  say  "  The  Lord  gave  and  the  Lord  hath  taken  away, 
and  blessed  be  his  name."  You  have  had  your  dearest  friends 
sundered  from  you,  but  still  have  said : 

"  ITow  can  I  bereaved  be, 
Since  I  cannot  part  with  thee  T 

You  have  had  attacks  of  Satan,  you  have  had  doubts  and  fea?  s— 
you  have  been  assailed  by  men,  by  earth  and  by  hell,  but  you 
can  "wy — 

"  When  trouble  like  a  gloomy  cloud 

Hath  gathered  thick  and  thundered  loud  ; 

He  near  my  soul  has  always  stood, 

His  loving  kindness,  0  how  good," 


*A    PSALM    OF    REMEMBRANCE.  183 

Your  testimony  is  without  a  flaw.  Not  one  good  filing  hath 
failo,d  of  all  that  the  Lord  God  has  promised,  he  has  never  left 
yo»»,  never  forsaken  you.  But  to  this  day  you  can  say,  glory  be 
un^o  the  name  of  an  unchanging  God,  the  same  yesterday,  to-day, 
and  for  ever. 

'II.  And  now  the  last  point  is — the  practical  use  of  this  great 

tr    th.       It    is     THE     GROUNDWORK     OF     CHRISTIAN     ENCOURAGEMENT 

V*'  ill  you  just  think  that  I  am  coming  down  out  of  the  pulpit  no\* 
to  you  ]  I  cannot  perform  much  pastoral  visitation  in  going  from 
house  to  house,  and  so  let  us  do  it  wholesale  this  morning,  and 
may  the  Spirit  of  God  make  it  a  reality. 

Dear  brothers  and  sisters,  there  are  some  of  you  here  to-day 
who  have  been  very  much  and  very  sorely  tried,  for  your  path 
has  been  through  fire  and  through  water.  You  are  servants  of 
God,  and  in  looking  back  you  can  say  that  you  have  been  helped 
hitherto.  Just  now  your  health  and  your  spirits  are  failing  you  ; 
you  are  brought  very  low  indeed.  Permit  your  minister  to  take 
hold  of  your  hand,  and  look  you  in  the  face.  My  dear  brother, 
will  you  dishonor  your  God  now  ?  You  say,  "  No,  God  forbid 
that  I  should  dishonor  him."  My  dear  friend,  you  have  now  be 
fore  you  a  noble  opportunity — an  opportunity  which  an  angel 
might  well  envy  you;  you  have  a  noble  opportunity  of  honoring 
God  in  the  fire.  I  will  not  speak  lightly  of  your  troubles  ;  I  will 
suppose  them  to  be  just  as  great  as  you  say  they  are.  But  will 
you  glorify  him  in  them  all  1  Come,  you  have  trusted  him  many 
times,  will  you  trust  him  now  1  Perhaps  Satan  has  a  commis 
sion  from  on  high  to  try  you,  and  sift  you  in  his  sieve.  He  has 
been  before  God,  and  your  Lord  has  said  to  him,  ft  Hast  thou 
considered  my  servant  Job  ?"  "  Ah,"  says  Satan,  "  he  serves 
thee  now,  but  thou  hast  set  a  hedge  about  him  and  blessed  him, 
let  me  but  touch  him  ;"  and  he  has  come  down  to  you,  and  h 
has  afflicted  you  in  your  estate,  afflicted  you  in  your  family,  an 
it  last  he  has  afflicted  you  in  your  body.  Shall  Satan  be  the 
jonqueror  ?  shall  grace  give  way  ?  O  my  dear  brother,  stand  up 
now  and  say  once  more,  once  for  all,  "  I  tell  thee,  Satan,  the  grace 
of  God  is  more  than  a  match  for  thee ;  he  is  with  me,  and  in  all 
this  I  will  not  utter  one  word  against  the  Lord  my  God.  He 
doe*.h  all  things  well— well,  even  now,  and  I  do  rejoice  in*  him." 


184  A    PSALM    OF    REMEMBRANCE. 

The  Lord  is  always  pleased  with  his  children  when  they  can 
stand  up  for  him  when  circumstances  seem  to  belie  him.  Here 
come  the  witnesses  into  court.  The  devil  says,  "  Soul,  God  has 
forgotten  thee,  I  will  bring  in  my  witness."  First  he  summons 
your  debts — a  long  bill  of  losses.  "  There,"  says  he,  "  would 
God  suffer  you  to  fall  thus,  if  he  loved  you  ?"  Then  he  brings 
*n  your  children — either  their  death,  or  their  disobedience,  or 
omething  worse,  and  says,  "  Would  the  Lord  suffer  these  things 
to  come  upon  you,  if  he  loved  you  ?"  At  last  he  brings  in  your 
poor  tottering  body,  and  all  your  doubts  and  fears,  and  the 
hidings  of  Jehovah's  face.  "  Ah,"  says  the  devil,  "  do  you  be- 
lieve  that  God  loves  you  now  ?"  Oh,  it  is  noble,  if  you  are  able 
to  stand  forth  and  say  to  all  these  witnesses,  "  I  hear  what  you 
have  to  say,  let  God  be  true,  and  every  man  and  every  thing  bo 
a  liar  ;  I  believe  none  of  you.  You  all  say,  God  does  not  love 
me ;  but  he  does,  and  if  the  witnesses  against  his  love  were  mul 
tiplied  a  hundredfold,  yet  still  would  I  say,  '  I  know  whom  I  have 

believed.' " 

"  I  know  that  safe  with  him  remains, 

Protected  by  his  power, 
What  I've  committed  to  his  hands, 
Till  the  decisive  hour  ;" 

He  will  bring  me  safe  to  heaven  at  last,  unhurt  by  the  way. 

1  have  but  one  other  use  to  make  of  my  text.  In  this  large 
assembly,  composed  of  so  great  a  multitude  of  men,  there  are 
doubtless  some  who  are  saying,  "  I  cannot  think  that  God  would 
have  mercy  on  such  a  sinner  as  I  am."  "  I  cannot  conceive," 
says  another  one,  "  though  I  know  my  guilt,  I  cannot  conceive 
that  the  love  of  God  can  blot  out  such  iniquity  as  mine."  Per- 
mit  me  to  take  your  hand,  and  if  mine  is  not  enough  I  could  take 
fou  round  these  galleries,  and  down  here,  and  I  could  give  you 
undreds  of  hands,  and  hundreds  of  lips  should  speak  and  say 
*  Sinner,  never  think  that  the  love  of  God  can  be  exceeded  or 
destroyed  by  your  sin,  for  /obtained  mercy,"  and  round  the  gal 
lei  y  the  sound  would  go  if  this  were  a  gospel  chorus — "  and  I," 
"  and  I,"  "  and  I,"  and  you  might  go  np  to  the  brother,  and  say, 
"  What  were  you  1"  "  I.  was  a  drunkard,"  says  one.  "  I  was  a 
swearer,  I  cursed  God,"  says  another.  "I  loved  the  pugilistic 


.A    PSALM    OF    REMEMBRANCE.  18& 

ring,  and  the  skittle  ground,"  says  another.  "  I  was  a  whore 
monger,  an  adulterer,  and  yet  God  has  forgiven  me,"  and  O  how 
sweetly  would  we  all  sing  in  chorus,  concerning  the  power  of 
Christ  to  save,  for  we  have  all  in  our  measure  felt  its  might. 

Now,  my  dear  friend,  I  take  your  hand,  and  I  say,  "  We  have 
known  and  have  believed  the  love  that  God  hath  to  us,"  and  we 
re  the  very  chief  of  sinners  ourselves.  Will  you  honor  God  by 
•elieving  that  he  is  able  to  save  you  through  the  blood  of  Christ, 
for  if  the  Lord  now  enables  you  to  honor  him  in  believing,  de 
pend  upon  it,  he  has  begun  a  good  work  in  you  and  has  set  his 
heart  upon  you.  Sinners,  believe  that  God  is  love.  O  trust 
him  who  gave  his  Son  to  die.  He  will  deny  you  nothing.  If 
you  ask  with  humble  faith,  you  shall  assuredly  receive.  Our 
witness  is  given  ;  reject  it  not.  "  We  have  known,  we  have  be 
lieved  the  love  that  God  hath  to  us." 


SERMON   XII. 

THE  NECESSITY  OF  THE  SPIRIT'S  WORK. 

"And  I  will  put  my  Spirit  within  you." — EZEKIKL,  xxxn.  2* 

THE  miracles  of  Christ  are  remarkable  for  one  fact,  namely, 
that  they  are  none  of  them  unnecessary.  The  pretended  miraclea 
of  Mahomet,  and  of  the  church  of  Rome,  even  if  they  had  been 
miracles,  would  have  been  pieces  of  folly.  Suppose  that  Saint 
Denis  had  walked  with  his  head  in  his  hand  after  it  had  been  cut 
off,  wha*t  practical  purpose  would  have  been  subserved  thereby  1 
He  would  certainly  have  been  quite  as  \*ell  in  his  grave,  for  any 
practical  good  he  would  have  conferred  on  men.  The  miracles 
of  Christ  were  never  unnecessary.  They  are  not  freaks  of 
power;  they  are  displays  of  power  it  is  true,  but  they  all  of 
them  have  a  practical  end.  The  same  thing  may  be  said  of  the 
promises  of  God.  We  have  not  one  promise  in  the  Scripture 
which  may  be  regard^/i  as  a  mere  freak  of  grace.  As  every 
miracle  was  necessaiy,  absolutely  necessary,  so  is  every  promise 
that  is  given  in  the  Word  of  God.  And  hence  from  the  text 
chat  is  before  us,  may  I  draw,  and  I  think  very  conclusively,  the 
argument,  that  if  God  in  his  covenant  made  with  his  people  has 
promised  to  put  his  Spirit  within  them,  it  must  be  absolute! 
lecessary  that  this  promise  should  have  been  made,  and  it  mus 
ue  absolutely  necessary  also  to  our  salvation  that  every  one  of 
us  should  receive  the  Spirit  of  God.  This  shall  be  the  subject 
(>*"  this  morning's  discourse.  I  shall  not  hope  to  make  it  very 
interesting,  except  to  those  who  are  anxiously  longing  to  know 
the  way  of  salvation. 

We  start,  then,  by  laying  down  this  proposition — that  the 


THE  NECESSITY    oF    THE    SPIRIT^    WORK.  187 

work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  absolutely  necessary  to  us,  if  we 
would  be  saved. 

1.  In  endeavoring  to  prove  this,  I  would  first  of  all  make  the 
remark  that  this  is  very  manifest  if  we  remember  what  man  is  by 
nature.  Some  say  that  man  may  of  himself  attain  unto  salva 
tion — that  if  he  hear  the  Word,  it  is  in  his  power  to  receive  it, 
to  believe  it,  and  to  have  a  saving  change  worked  in  him  by  i 
To  this  we  reply,  you  do  not  know  what  man  is  by  nature,  other  ' 
wise  you  would  never  have  ventured  upon  such  an  assertion. 
Holy  Scripture  tells  us  that  man  by  nature  is  dead  in  trespasses 
and  sins.  It  does  not  say  that  he  is  sick,  that  he  is  faint,  that  he 
has  grown  callous,  and  hardened,  and  seared,  but  it  saj  s  he  ia 
absolutely  dead.  Whatever  that  term  "  death"  means  in  con 
nection  with  the  body,  that  it  means  in  connection  with  man's 
soul,  viewing  it  in  its  relation  to  spiritual  things.  When  the 
body  is  dead  it  is  powerless ;  it  is  unable  to  do  any  thing  for 
itself;  and  when  the  soul  of  man  is  dead,  in  a  spiritual  sense,  it 
must  be,  if  there  is  any  meaning  in  the  figure,  utterly  and  entirely 
powerless,  and  unable  to  do  any  thing  of  itself  or  for  itself. 
When  ye  shall  see  dead  men  raising  themselves  from  their  graves, 
when  ye  shall  see  them  unwinding  their  own  sheets,  opening  their 
own  coffin-lids,  and  walking  down  our  streets  alive  and  animate, 
as  the  result  of  their  own  power,  then  perhaps  ye  may  believe 
that  souls  that  are  dead  in  sin  may  turn  to  God,  may  recreate 
their  own  natures,  and  may  make  themselves  heirs  of  heaven, 
though  before  they  were  heirs  of  wrath.  But  mark,  not  till  then. 
The  drift  of  the  gospel  is,  that  man  is  dead  in  sin,  and  that  divine 
life  is  God's  gift ;  and  you  must  go  contrary  to  the  whole  of  that 
drift,  before  you  can  supp  >se  a  man  brought  to  know  and  love 
Christ,  apart  from  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  Spirit  finds 
men  as  destitute  of  spiritual  life  as  Ezekiel's  dry  bones;  he 
Drings  bone  to  bone,  and  fits  the  skeleton  together,  and  then  h 
comes  from  the  four  winds  and  breathes  into  the  slain,  and  they 
live,  and  stand  upon  their  feet,  an  exceeding  great  army,  an</ 
worship  God.  But  apart  from  that,  apart  from  the  vivifying  in 
fiuence  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  men's  souls  must  lie  in  the  valley  of 
dry  bones,  dead,  and  dead  for  ever. 

But  Scripture  does  not  only  tel"  us  that  man  is  dead  in  sin ;  if 


188  THE    NECESSITY    OF    THE    SPIRITS    WORK. 

tells  us  something  worse  than  this,  namely,  that  he  is  utterly  and 
entirely  averse  to  every  thing  that  is  good  and  right.  "  The 
carnal  mind  is  enmity  against  God ;  for  it  is  not  subject  to  the 
law  of  God,  neither  indeed  can  be." — Romans,  viii.  7.  Turn  you 
all  Scripture  through,  and  you  find  continually  the  will  of  man 
described  as  being  contrary  to  the  things  of  God.  What  said 
Christ  in  that  text  so  often  quoted  by  the  Arminian  to  disprove 
he  very  doctrine  which  it  clearly  states  ?  What  did  Christ  say 
-o  those  who  imagined  that  men  would  come  without  divine  in 
fluence?  He  said,  first,  "No  man  can  come  unto  me  except  the 
Father  which  hath  sent  me  draw  him ;"  but  he  said  something 
more  strong — "  Ye  will  not  come  unto  me  that  ye  might  have 
life."  No  man  will  come.  Here  lies  the  deadly  mischief;  not 
only  that  he  is  powerless  to  do  good,  but  that  he  is  powerful 
enough  to  do  that  which  is  wrong,  and  that  his  will  is  desperately 
set  against  every  thing  that  is  right.  Go,  Arminian,  and  tell 
you  hearers  that  they  will  come  if  they  please,  but  know  that 
your  Redeemer  looks  you  in  the  face,  and  tells  you  that  you  are 
uttering  a  lie.  Men  will  not  come.  They  never  will  come  of 
themselves.  You  cannot  induce  them  to  come ;  you  cannot  force 
them  to  come  by  all  your  thunders,  nor  can  you  entice  them  to 
come  by  all  your  invitations.  They  will  not  come  unto  Christ, 
that  they  may  have  life.  Until  the  Spirit  draw  them,  come  they 
neither  will,  nor  can. 

Hence,  then,  from  the  fact  that  man's  nature  is  hostile  to  tho 
divine  Spirit,  that  he  hates  grace,  that  he  despises  the  way  in 
which  grace  is  brought  to  him,  that  it  is  contrary  to  his  own  proud 
nature  to  stoop  to  receive  salvation  by  the  deeds  of  another— 
hence  it  is  necessary  that  the  Spirit  of  God  should  operate  to 
change  the  will,  to  correct  the  bias  of  the  heart,  to  set  man  in  a 
ight  track,  and  then  give  him  strength  to  run  in  it.  Oh !  if  ye 
ead  man  and  understand  him,  ye  cannot  help  being  sound  on  the 
point  of  the  necessity  of  the  Holy  Spirit's  work.  It  has  been 
.veil  remarked  by  a  great  writer,  that  he  never  knew  a  man  who 
neld  any  great  theological  error,  who  did  not  also  hold  a  doctrine 
which  diminished  the  depravity  of  man.  The  Arminian  say* 
man  is  fallen,  it  is  true,  but  then  he  has  power  of  will  left,  and 
that  will  is  free;  he  can  raise  himself  He  diminishes  the  des 


I 

THE    NECESSITY    OF    THE    SPIRITS    WORK.  189 

Derate  character  of  the  fall  of  man.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
Antinomian  says,  man  cannot  do  any  thing,  but  that  he  is  not 
at  all  responsible,  and  is  not  bound  to  do  it,  it  is  not  his  duty  to 
believe,  it  is  not  his  duty  to  repent.  Thus,  you  see,  he  also 
diminishes  the  sinfulness  of  man ;  and  has  not  right  views  of 
the  fall.  But  once  get  the  correct  view,  that  man  is  utterl^ 
fallen,  powerless,  guilty,  defiled,  lost,  condemned,  and  you  mus 
be  sound  on  all  points  of  the  great  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ.  Once 
believe  man  to  be  what  the  Scripture  says  he  is — once  believe 
his  heart  to  be  depraved,  his  affections  perverted,  his  understand 
ing  darkened,  his  will  perverse,  and  you  must  hold  that  if  such  a 
wretch  as  that  be  saved,  it  must  be  the  work  of  the  Spirit  of  God, 
and  of  the  Spirit  of  God  alone. 

2.  I  have  another  proof  ready  to  hand.  Salvation  must  be  the 
work  of  the  Spirit  in  us,  because  the  means  used  in  salvation  are 
of  themselves  inadequate  for  the  accomplishment  of  the  work. 
And  what  are  the  means  of  salvation  ?  Why,  first  and  foremost 
stands  the  preaching  of  the  Word  of  God.  More  men  are  brought 
to  Christ  by  preaching  than  by  any  thing  else;  for  it  is  God's 
chief  and  first  instrument.  This  is  the  sword  of  the  Spirit,  quick 
and  powerful,  to  the  dividing  asunder  of  the  joints  and  marrow. 
"  It  pleaseth  God  by  the  foolishness  of  preaching  to  save  them 
that  believe."  But  what  is  there  in  preaching,  by  which  souls  are 
saved,  that  looks  as  if  it  would  be  the  means  of  saving  souls?  I 
could  point  you  to  divers  churches  and  chapels  into  which  you 
might  step,  and  say,  "  Here  is  a  learned  minister,  indeed,  a  man 
who  would  instruct  and  enlighten  the  intellect ;"  you  sit  down, 
and  you  say,  "  Well,  if  God  means  to  work  a  great  work,  he  will 
use  a  learned  man  like  this."  But  do  you  know  any  learned  men 
that  are  made  the  means  of  bringing  souls  to  Christ,  to  any  great 
degree?  Go  round  your  churches,  if  you  please,  and  look  at 
them,  and  then  answer  the  question.  Do  you  know  any  great 
men — men  great  in  learning  and  wisdom — who  have  become 
spiritual  fathers  in  our  Israel  ?  Is  it  not  a  fact  that  stares  us  in 
tlu>  face,  that  our  fashionable  preachers,  our  eloquent  preachers, 
our  learned  preachers,  are  just  the  most  useless  men  in  creation 
for  the  winning  of  souls  to  Christ.  And  where  are  souls  born  to 
God  ?  Why,  in  the  house  around  which  the  jeer  and  the  scoil 


190  THE    NECESSITY    OF    TlIK    SPIRll's    WORK. 

and  the  sneer  of  the  world  have  long  gathered.  Sinners  ara 
converted  under  the  man  whose  eloquence  is  rough  and  homely, 
and  who  has  nothing  to  commend  him  to  his  fellows,  who  has 
daily  to  fall  on  his  knees  and  confess  his  own  folly,  and  when 
the  world  speaks  worst  of  him,  feels  that  he  deserves  it  all,  since 
he  is  nothing  but  an  earthen  vessel,  in  which  God  is  pleased  tc 

Mit  his  heavenly  treasure. 

I  will  dare  to  say  it,  that  in  every  age  of  the  world  the  most 
JHSpised  ministry  has  been  the  most  useful ;  and  I  could  find  vou 
at  this  day  poor  Primitive  Methodist  preachers  who  can  scarce 
speak  correct  English,  who  have  been  the  fathers  of  more  souls, 
and  have  brought  to  Christ  more  than  any  one  bishop  on  the 
brnch.  Why,  the  Lord  hath  been  pleased  always  to  make  it  so, 
that  he  will  cloth«  with  power  the  weak  and  the  foolish,  but  he 
will  not  clothe  with  power  those  who,  if  good  were  done,  might 
be  led  to  ascribe  the  excellence  of  the  power  to  their  learning, 
their  eloquence,  or  their  position.  Like  the  apostle  Paul,  it  is 
every  minister's  business  to  glory  in  his  infirmities.  The  world 
sa}  s,  "  Pshaw  !  upon  your  oratory  ;  it  is  rough,  and  rude,  and  ec 
centric."  Yes,  'tis  even  so,  but  we  are  content,  for  God  blesses  it. 
Then  so  much  the  better  that  it  has  infirmities  in  it ;  for  now  shall 
it  be  plainly  seen  that  it  is  not  of  man  or  by  man,  but  the  work 
of  God,  and  of  God  alone.  It  is  said  that  once  upon  a  time  a 
man  exceedingly  curious  desired  to  see  the  sword  with  which  a 
mighty  hero  had  fought  some  desperate  battles;  casting  his  eye 
along  the  blade,  he  said,  "  Well,  I  don't  see  much  in  this  sword." 
"  Nay,"  said  the  hero,  "  but  you  have  not  examined  the  arm  that 
wields  it."  And  so  when  men  come  to  hear  a  successful  minister, 
they  are  apt  to  say,  "  I  do  nut  see  any  thing  in  him."  No,  but 
)  on  have  not  examined  the  eternal  arm  that  reaps  its  harvest  with 
this  sword  of  the  Spirit.  If  ye  had  looked  at  the  jaw-bone  of 
the  ass  in  Samson's  hand,  you  would  have  said,  "  What !  heaps  ou 
neaps  with  this !"  No;  bring  out  some  polished  blade;  bring 
forth  the  Damascus  steel !  No ;  but  God  would  have  all  the 
glory,  and,  therefore,  not  with  the  polished  steel,  but  with  the  jaw 
bone  must  Samson  get  the  victory.  So  with  ministers  ;  God  has 
usually  blessed  the  weakest  to  do  the  most  good.  Well,  now, 
does  it  uot  follow  from  this,  that  it  must  be  the  work  of  thu 


f 

THI    NECESSITY    OF    THE    SPIRIT'S    WORK.  191 

Spirit?  Because,  if  there  be  nothing  in  the  instrument  thai  am 
lead  thereunto,  is  it  not  the  work  of  the  Spirit  when  tho  thing  is 
accomplished1?  Let  me  just  put  it  to  you.  Under  the  ministry 
dead  souls  are  quickened,  sinners  are  made  to  repent,  the  vilest 
of  sinners  are  made  holy,  men  who  came  determined  not  to  believe 
are  compelled  to  believe.  Now,  who  does  this  1  If  you  say  the 
ministry  does  it,  then  I  say  farewell  to  your  reason,  because  ther 
s  nothing  in  the  successful  ministry  which  would  tend  thereuntc  * 

t  must  be  that  the  Spirit  worketh  in  man  through  the  ministry 
or  else  such  deeds  would  never  be  accomplished.  You  might  as 
well  expect  to  raise  the  dead  by  whispering  in  their  ears,  as  hope 
to  save  souls  by  preaching  to  them,  if  it  were  not  for  the  agency 
of  the  Spirit.  Melancthon  went  out  to  preach,  you  know,  with- 
out  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord,  and  he  thought  he  should  convert  all 
the  people,  but  he  found  out  at  last  that  old  Adam  was  too  strong 
for  young  Melancthon,  and  he  had  to  go  back  and  ask  for  the  help 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  or  ever  he  saw  a  soul  saved.  I  say,  that  the 
fact  that  the  ministry  is  blessed  proves,  since  there  is  nothing  in 
the  ministry,  that  salvation  must  be  the  work  of  a  higher  power. 
Other  means,  however,  are  made  use  of  to  bless  men's  souls. 
For  instance,  the  two  ordinances  of  Baptism  and  the  Lord's  Sup 
per.  They  are  both  made  a  rich  means  of  grace.  But  let  me 
ask  ym,  is  there  any  thing  in  baptism  that  can  possibly  bless  any 
body  *?  Can  immersion  in  water  have  the  slightest  tendency  to  bo 
blessed  to  the  soul  1  And  then  with  regard  to  the  eating  of 
bread  aud  the  drinking  of  wine  at  the  Lord's  Supper,  can  it  by 
any  me;  .ns  be  conceived  by  any  rational  man  that  there  is  any 
thing  in  the  mere  piece  of  bread  that  we  eat,  or  in  the  wine  that 
we  drin  t  ?  And  yet,  doubtless,  the  grace  of  God  does  go  with 
both  or  linances  for  the  confirming  of  the  faith  of  those  who  re- 
reive  tVem,  and  even  for  the  conversion  of  those  who  look  upon 

he  jeremony.  There  must  be  something,  then,  beyond  the  out 
ward  ceremony  \  there  must,  in  fact,  be  the  Spirit  of  God,  wit 
nessing  tluough  the  water,  witnessing  through  the  wine,  witnessing 
through  the  bread,  or  otherwise  none  of  these  things  could  be 
means  of  grace  to  our  souls.  They  could  not  edify  ;  they  could 
not  help  us  to  commune  with  Christ ;  they  cc  old  not  tend  to  the 
conviction  of  sinners,  or  to  the  establishment  of  saints.  There 


192  THE    NECESSITY    OF    THE    SPlKI'f's    WORK. 

must,  then,  from  these  facts,  be  a  higher,  unseen,  mysterious  in. 
fluenco — the  influence  of  the  divine  Spirit  of  God. 

3.  Let  me  again  remind  you,  in  the  third  place,  that  the  abso 
lute  necessity  of  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  in  the  heart  may  be 
clearly  seen  flrom  this  fact,  that  all  which  has  been  done  by  God 
the  Father,  and  all  that  has  been  done  by  God  the  Son  must  be  in 
effectual  to  us,  unless  the  Spirit  shall  reveal  these  things  to  out 
souls.  We  believe,  in  the  first  place,  that  God  the  Father  elect 
his  people ,  from  before  all  worlds  he  chooses  them  to  himself 
but  let  me  ask  you — what  effect  does  the  doctrine  of  election  have 
upon  any  man  until  the  Spirit  of  God  enters  into  him1?  How 
do  I  know  whether  God  has  chosen  me  from  before  the  foun 
dation  of  the  world  1  How  can  I  possibly  know  ?  Can  I  climb 
to  heaven  and  read  the  roll  ?  Is  it  possible  for  me  to  force  my 
way  through  the  thick  mists  which  hide  eternity,  and  open  the 
seven  seals  of  the  book,  and  read  my  name  recorded  there  1  Ab  ! 
no ;  election  is  a  dead  letter  both  in  my  consciousness  and  in  any 
effect  which  it  can  produce  upon  me,  until  the  Spirit  of  God  calls 
me  out  of  darkness  into  marvellous  light.  And  then,  through  my 
calling,  I  see  my  election,  and,  knowing  myself  to  be  called  of 
God,  1  know  myself  to  have  been  chosen  of  God  from  before  the 
foundation  of  the  world.  It  is  a  precious  thing — that  doctrine  of 
election — to  a  child  of  God.  But  what  makes  it  precious  ?  Noth 
ing  but  the  influence  of  the  Spirit.  Until  the  Spirit  opens  the 
eye  to  read,  until  the  Spirit  imparts  the  mystic  secret,  no  heart 
can  know  its  election.  No  angel  ever  revealed  to  any  man  that 
he  was  chosen  of  God  ;  but  the  Spirit  doth  it.  He,  by  his  divine 
workings,  bears  an  infallible  witness  with  our  spirits  that  we  are 
born  of  God  ;  and  then  we  are  enabled  to  "  read  our  title  clear  to 
mansions  in  the  skies." 

i  Look,  again,  at  the  covenant  of  grace.  We  know  that  ther 
,ris  a  covenant  made  with  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  by  his  Father 
from  before  all  worlds,  and  that  in  this  covenant  the  persons  of 
all  his  people  were  given  to  him,  and  were  secured  ;  but  of  what 
use,  or  of  what  avail  is  the  covenant  to  us,  until  the  Holy  Spirit 
brings  the  blessings  of  the  covenant  to  us "?  The  covenant  is,  as 
it  were,  a  holy  tree  laden  with  fruit;  if  the  Spirit  doth  not  shake 
that  tree,  and  make  the  fvuit  fall  therefrom,  until  it  comes  to  the 


I 

THE    NECESSITi     OF    THE    SPIRIT^    WORK.  103 

level  of  our  standing,  how  can  we  receive  it?  Bring  hither  any 
sinner  and  tell  him  there  is  a  covenant  of  grace,  what  is  he  advan 
taged  thereby  ?  "  Ah,"  says  he,  "  I  may  not  be  included  in  it ; 
my  name  may  not  be  recorded  there ;  I  may  not  be  chosen  in 
Christ ;"  but  let  the  Spirit  of  God  dwell  in  his  heart,  richly  by 
faith  and  love  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  that  man  sees  the 
covenant,  ordered  in  all  things  and  sure,  and  he  cries  with  David, 
'4  It  is  all  my  salvation  and  all  my  desire." 

Take,  again,  the  redemption  of  Christ.  We  know  that  Christ 
did  stand  in  the  room,  place,  and  stead  of  all  his  people,  and  that 
all  those  who  shall  appear  in  heaven  will  appear  there  as  an  act 
of  justice  as  well  as  of  grace,  seeing  that  Christ  was  punished  in 
their  room  and  stead,  and  that  it  would  have  been  unjust  if  God 
punished  them,  seeing  that  he  had  punished  Christ  for  them.  We 
believe  that  Christ,  having  paid  all  their  debts,  they  have  a  right 
to  their  freedom  in  Christ — that  Christ  having  covered  them  with 
his  righteousness,  they  are  entitled  to  eternal  life  as  much  as  if 
they  had  themselves  been  perfectly  holy.  But  of  what  avail  is 
this  to  me,  until  the  Spirit  takes  of  the  things  of  Christ  and  shows 
them  to  me  1  What  is  Christ's  blood  to  any  of  you  until  you 
have  received  the  Spirit  of  grace"?  You  have  heard  the  minister 
preach  about  the  blood  of  Christ  a  thousand  times,  but  you  passed 
by  ;  it  was  nothing  to  you  that  Jesus  should  die.  You  know  that 
he  did  atone  for  sins  that  were  not  his  own ;  but  you  only  re 
garded  it  as  a  tale,  perhaps,  even  an  idle  tale.  But  when  the 
Spirit  of  God  led  you  to  the  cross,  and  opened  your  eyes,  and  en 
abled  you  to  see  Christ  crucified,  ah,  then  there  was  something  in 
the  blood  indeed.  When  his  hand  dipped  the  hyssop  in  the  blood, 
and  when  it  applied  that  blood  to  your  spirit,  then  there  was  a 
joy  and  peace  in  believing,  such  as  you  had  never  known  before. 
But  ah,  my  hearer,  Christ's  dying  is  nothing  to  thee  unless  thou 
nast  a  living  Spirit  within  thee.  Christ  brings  thee  no  advantage, 
saving,  personal,  and  lasting,  unless  the  Spirit  of  God  hath  bap 
tized  thee  in  the  fountain  filled  with  his  blood,  and  washed  thee 
from  head  to  foot  therein. 

I  only  mention  these  tew  out  ot  the  many  blessings  of  the 
covenant,  just  to  prove  that  they  are,  none  of  them,  of  any  use  to 
us,  unless  the  Holy  Spirit  gives  them  to  us.  There  hang  the 
9' 


194  THE    NECESSITY    OF    THE    SPIRITS    WORK. 

blessings  on  the  nail — on  the  nail,  Christ  Jesus  ;  but  we  ai'e  shorl 
of  stature ;  we  cannot  reach  them ;  the  Spirit  of  God  takes 
them  down  and  gives  them  to  us,  and  there  they  are ;  they  aie 
ours.  It  is  like  the  manna  in  the  skies,  far  out  of  mortal  reach ; 
but  the  Spirit  of  God  opens  the  windows  of  heaven,  brings  down 
the  bread,  and  puts  it  to  our  lips,  and  enables  us  to  eat.  Christ's 
blood  and  righteousness  are  like  wine  stored  in  the  wine-vat ;  but 
*ve  cannot  get  thereat.  The  Holy  Spirit  dips  our  vessel  into  this 
precious  wine,  and  then  we  drink  ;  but  without  the  Spirit  we 
must  die  and  perish  just  as  much,  though  the  Father  elect  and 
the  Son  redeem,  as  though  the  Father  never  had  elected,  and 
though  the  Son  had  never  bought  us  with  his  blood.  The  Spirit 
is  absolutely  necessary.  Without  him  neither  the  works  of  the 
Father,  nor  of  the  Son,  are  of  any  avail  to  us. 

4.  This  brings  us  to  another  point.  The  experience  of  the 
true  Christian  is  a  reality  ;  but  it  never  can  be  known  and  felt 
without  the  Spirit  of  God.  For  what  is  the  experience  of  the 
Christian  1  Let  me  just  give  a  brief  picture  of  some  of  its 
scenes.  There  is  a  person  come  into  this  hall  this  morning — 
one  of  the  most  reputable  men  in  London.  He  has  never  com 
mitted  himself  in  any  outward  vice;  he  has  never  been  dis 
honest  ;  but  he  is  known  as  a  staunch,  upright  tradesman. 
Now,  to  his  astonishment,  he  is  informed  that  he  is  a  condemned, 
lost  sinner,  and  just  as  surely  lost  as  the  thief  who  died  for  hia 
crimes  upon  the  cross.  Do  you  think  that  man  will  believe  it? 
Suppose,  however,  that  he  does  believe  it,  simply  because  he 
reads  it  in  the  Bible,  do  you  think  that  man  will  ever  be  made  to 
feel  it "?  I  know  you  say,  "  Impossible !  "  Some  of  you,  even 
now,  perhaps,  are  saying,  "  Well,  I  never  should  !  "  Can  you 
imagine  that  honorable,  upright  tradesman,  saying,  "God  be 
merciful  to  me,  a  sinner  ?  " — standing  side  by  side  with  the  harlot 
nd  the  swearer,  and  feeling  in  his  own  heart  as  if  he  had  been 
as  guilty  as  they  were,  and  using  just  the  same  prayer,  and  say 
ing,  "  Lord,  save,  or  I  perish."  You  cannot  conceive  it,  can 
you  1  It  is  contrary  to  nature  that  a  man  who  has  been  so  good 
as  he  should  put  himself  down  among  the  chief  of  sinners.  Ah  ! 
but  that  will  be  done  before  he  will  be  saved ;  he  must  feel  that 
butbre  he  can  enter  heaven.  Now,  I  ask,  who  can  bring  him  to 


^ 

TITfi    NECESSITY    OF    THE    SPIRlT^S    "WORK.  195 

such  a  levelling  experience  as  that,  but  the  Spirit  of  God  ?  : 
know  very  well  proud  nature  will  not  stoop  to  it.  We  are  al] 
aristocrats  in  our  own  righteousness ;  we  do  not  like  to  bend 
down  and  come  among  common  sinners.  If  we  are  brought 
there,  it  must  be  the  Spirit  of  God  who  casts  us  to  the  ground. 
Why,  I  know  if  any  one  had  told  me  that  I  should  ever  cry  to 
God  for  mercy,  and  confess  that  I  had  been  the  vilest  of  the  vile 
should  have  laughed  in  their  face ;  I  should  have  said,  "  Why 
have  not  done  any  thing  particularly  wrong;  I  have  not  hurt 
anybody."  And  yet  I  know  this  very  day  I  can  take  my  place 
upon  the  lowest  form,  and  if  I  can  get  inside  heaven  I  shall  feel 
happy  to  sit  among  the  chief  of  sinners,  and  praise  that  Almighty 
love  which  has  saved  even  me  from  my  sins.  Now,  what  works 
this  humiliation  of  heart  1  Grace.  It  is  contrary  to  nature  for 
an  honest  and  an  upright  man  in  the  eye  of  the  world  to  feel 
himself  a  lost  sinner.  It  must  be  the  Holy  Spirit's  work,  or  else 
it  never  will  be  done.  Well,  after  a  man  has  been  brought 
here,  can  you  conceive  that  man  at  last  conscience-stricken,  and 
led  to  believe  that  his  past  life  deserves  the  wrath  of  God  ?  His 
first  thought  would  be,  "  Well,  now,  I  will  live  better  than  I 
ever  have  lived."  He  would  say,  "  Now,  I  will  try  and  play  tho 
hermit,  and  pinch  myself  here  and  there,  and  deny  myself,  and 
do  penance ;  and  in  that  way,  by  paying  attention  to  the  out 
ward  ceremonies  of  religion,  together  with  a  high  moral  character, 
I  doubt  not  I  shall  blot  out  whatever  slurs  and  stains  there  have 
been."  Can  you  suppose  that  man  brought  at  last  to  feel  that, 
if  ever  he  gets  to  heaven,  he  will  have  to  get  there  through 
the  righteousness  of  another  1  "  Through  the  righteousness  of 
•another  ? "  says  he,  "  I  don't  want  to  be  rewarded  for  what 
another  man  does, — not  I.  If  I  go  there,  I  will  go  there  and 
take  my  chance  ;  I  will  go  there  through  what  I  do  myself.  Tell 
me  something  to  do,  and  I  will  do  it ;  I  will  be  proud  to  do  it, 
however  humiliating  it  may  be.  so  that  I  may  at  last  win  the 
love  and  esteem  of  God  !  "  Now,  can  you  conceive  such  a  man 
as  that  brought  to  feel  that  he  can  do  nothing  1 — that,  good  man 
as  he  thinks  himself,  he  cannot  do  any  thing  whatever  to  merit 
God's  love  and  favor;  and  that,  if  he  goes  to  heaven,  he  must  go 
through  what  Christ  did  ?  Just  the  same  as  the  drunkard  n,  ust 


196  THE    NECESSITY    OF    THE    SPIRITS    WORK, 

go  there  through  the  merits  of  Christ,  so  this  moral  man  must 

enter  into  life,  having  nothing  about  him  but  Christ's   perfect 

righteousness,  and  being  washed  in  the  blood  of   Jesus.     We 

say  that  this   is  so  contrary  to  human  nature,  so  diametrically 

.opposed  to  all  the  instincts  of  our  poor  fallen  humanity,  that 

'nothing  but  the  Spirit  of  God  can  ever  bring  a  man  to  strip 

himself  of  all  self-righteousness,  and  of  all  creature   strength, 

|  ind  compel  him  to  rest  and  lean  simply  and  wholly  upon  Jesus 

Christ  the  Saviour. 

These  two  experiences  would  be  sufficient  to  prove  the  neces 
sity  of  the  Holy  Spirit  to  make  a  man  a  Christian.  But  let  me 
now  describe  a  Christian  as  he  is  after  his  conversion.  Trouble 
comes,  storms  of  trouble,  and  he  looks  the  tempest  in  the  face 
and  says,  "  1  know  that  all  things  work  together  for  my  good.' 
His  children  die,  the  partner  of  his  bosom  is  carried  to  the 
grave ;  he  says,  "  The  Lord  gave  and  the  Lord  hath  taken  away, 
blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord."  His  farm  fails,  his  crop  is 
blighted  ;  his  business  prospects  are  clouded,  all  seem  to  go,  and 
ho  is  left  in  poverty :  he  says,  "Although  the  fig  tree  shall  not 
blossom,  neither  shall  fruit  be  in  the  vines ;  the  labor  of  the 
olive  shall  fail,  and  the  fields  shall  yield  no  meat;  the  flocks 
shall  be  cut  off  from  the  fold,  and  there  shall  be  no  herd  in  the 
stalls  :  yet  I  will  rejoice  in  the  Lord,  I  will  joy  in  the  God  of 
my  salvation."  You  see  him  next  laid  upon  a  sick  bed  himself, 
and  when  he  is  there,  he  says,  "  It  is  good  for  me  that  I  have 
been  afflicted,  for  before  I  was  afflicted  I  went  astray,  but  now 
have  I  kept  thy  Word."  You  see  him  approaching  at  last  the 
dark  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death,  and  you  hear  him  cry, 
"  Yea,  though  I  walk  through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death, 
I  will  fear  no  evil  ;  thy  rod  and  thy  staff  they  comfort  me,  and 
thou  thyself  art  with  me."  Now,  I  ask  you,  what  makes  this 
man  calm  in  the  midst  of  all  these  varied  trials,  and  personal 
troubles,  if  it  be  not  the  Spirit  of  God  ?  O,  ye  that  doubt  the 
influence  of  the  Spirit,  produce  the  like  without  him.  go  ye  and 
die  as  Christians  die,  and  live  as  they  live,  and  if  you  can  show 
the  same  calm  resignation,  the  same  quiet  joy,  and  the  same 
firm  belief  that  adverse  things  shall,  nevertheless,  work  togethei 
for  good,  then  we  may  be,  perhaps,  at  liberty  to  resign  the  pointy 


I 

THE    NECESSITY    OF    THE    SPIRITS    WORK.  197 

and  not  till  then.  The  high  and  noble  experience  of  a  Christian 
in  times  of  trial  and  suffering,  proves  that  there  must  be  the 
operation  of  the  Spirit  of  God. 

But  look  at  the  Christian,  too,  in  his  joyous  moments.  He  is 
rich.  God  has  given  him  all  his  heart's  desire  on  earth.  Look 
at  him :  he  says,  "  I  do  not  value  these  things  at  all,  except  at 
they  are  the  gift  of  God ;  I  sit  loose  by  them  all  ana,  not  with 
standing  this  house  and  home,  and  all  these  comforts,  'I  am 
willing  to  depart  and  be  with  Christ,  which  is  far  better.'  It  is 
true,  I  want  nothing  here  on  earth ;  but  still  I  feel  that  to  die 
would  be  gain  to  me,  even  though  I  left  all  these."  Ho  holds 
earth  loosely ;  he  does  not  grasp  it  with  a  tight  hand,  bu'u  looks 
upon  it  all  as  dust, — a  thing  which  is  to  pass  away.  He  takes 
but  little  pleasure  therein,  saying, — 

"  I've  no  abiding  city  here, 
I  seek  a  city  out  of  sight." 

Mark  that  man ;  he  has  plenty  of  room  for  pleasures  in  this 
world,  but  he  drinks  out  of  a  higher  cistern.  His  pleasure 
springs  from  things  unseen  ;  his  happiest  moments  are  when  he 
can  shut  all  these  good  things  out,  and  when  he  can  come  to  God 
as  a  poor  guilty  sinner,  and  come  to  Christ  and  enter  into  fellow 
ship  with  him,  and  rise  into  nearness  of  access  and  confidence, 
and  boldly  approach  to  the  throne  of  the  heavenly  grace.  Now, 
what  is  it  that  keeps  a  man  who  has  all  these  mercies  from 
setting  his  heart  upon  the  earth  1  This  is  a  wonder,  indeed,  that 
a  man  who  has  gold  and  silver,  and  flocks  and  herds,  should  not 
make  these  his  god,  but  that  he  should  still  say, — 

"There's  nothing  round  this  spacious  earth 

That  suits  my  large  desire  ; 
To  boundless  joy  and  solid  mirth 
My  nobler  thoughts  aspire." 

.These  are  not  my  treasure ;  my  treasure  is  in  heaven,  ana  in 
heaven  only.  What  can  do  this  ?  No  mere  moral  virtue.  No 
doctrine  of  the  Stoic  ever  brought  a  man  to  such  a  pass  as  that. 
No,  it  must  be  the  work  of  the  Spirit,  and  the  work  of  the  Spirit 
alone,  that  can  lead  a  man  to  live  in  heaven,  while  there  is  a  temp 


MS  THE    NECESSITY    OF    THE    SPIRITS    WOHK. 

tation  to  him  to  live  on  earth.  I  do  not  wonder  that  a  poor  man 
looks  forward  to  heaven  ;  he  has  nothing  to  look  upon  on  earth, 
When  there  is  a  thorn  in  the  nest,  I  do  not  wcnder  that  the  lark 
flies  up,  for  there  is  no  rest  for  him  below.  When  you  are  beater. 
Mid  chafed  by  trouble,  no  wonder  you  say,— 

"Jerusalem  !    my  happy  home! 

Name  ever  dear  to  mo; 
When  shall  my  labors  have  an  end, 
In  joy,  and  peace,  and  thee?" 

Cut  the  greatest  wonder  is,  if  you  line  the  Christian's  nest  nevei 
so  softly,  if  you  give  him  all  the  mercies  of  this  life,  you  still 
cannot  keep  him  from  saying, — 

"To  Jesu?,  the  crown  of  my  hope, 
My  soul  is  in  haste  to  be  gone ; 
Oh  bear  me,  ye  cherubim,  up, 

And  waft  me  away  to  his  throne." 

5.  And  now,  last  of  all,  the  acts,  the  acceptable  acts,  of  the  Chris 
tia-n's  life,  cannot  be  performed  without  the  Spirit ;  and  hence, 
again,  the  necessity  for  the  Spirit  of  God.  The  first  act  of  the 
Christian's  life  is  repentance.  Have  you  ever  tried  to  repent? 
If  so,  if  you  tried  without  the  Spirit  of  God,  you  know  that  to 
urge  a  man  to  repent  without  the  promise  of  the  Spirit  to  help 
him,  is  to  urge  him  to  do  an  impossibility.  A  rock  might  as 
soon  weep,  and  a  desert  might  as  soon  blossom,  as  a  sinner  re 
pent  of  his  own  accord.  If  God  should  offer  heaven  to  man, 
simply  upon  the  terms  of  repentance  of  sin,  heaven  would  be  as 
impossible  as  it  is  by  good  works ;  for  a  man  can  no  more  re 
pent  of  himself,  than  he  can  perfectly  keep  God's  law  ;  for  re 
pentance  involves  the  very  principle  of  perfect  obedience  to  tlu 
h\v  of  God.  It  seems  to  me  that  in  repentance  there  is  tho 
*•  hole  law  solidified  and  condensed  ;  and  if  a  man  can  repent  of 
himself  then  there  is  no  need  of  a  Saviour,  he  may  as  well  go  to 
leaven  up  the  steep  sides  of  Sinai  at  once. 

Faith  is  the  next  act  in  the  divine  life.  Perhaps  you  think 
faith  very  easy  ;  but  if  you  are  ever  brought  to  feel  ihe  burden 
)f  sin  ,-uu  would  not  find  it  quite  so  light  a  labor.  If  you  are 


THE    NECESSITY    OF    THE    SPIRIT^    WORK.  199 

brought  into  deep  mire,  where  there  is  no  standing,  it  is  not 
so  easy  to  put  your  feet  on  a  rock,  when  the  rock  does  not  seem 
to  be  there.  I  find  faith  just  the  easiest  thing  in  the  world  when 
there  is  nothing  to  believe  ;  but  when  I  have  room  and  exorcise 
for  my  faith,  then  1  do  not  find  I  have  so  much  strength  to  accom 
plish  it.  Talking  one  day  with  a  countryman,  he  used  this  fig 
ure :  "  In  the  middle  of  winter  I  sometimes  think  how  well  J 
iould  mow ;  and  in  early  spring  1  think,  oh !  how  I  would  like 
to  reap  ;  I  feel  just  ready  for  it ;  but  when  mowing  time  comes, 
and  when  reaping  time  comes,  I  find  I  have  not  strength  to  spare." 
So  when  you  have  no  troubles,  couldn't  you  mow  them  down  at 
once  1  When  you  have  no  work  to  do,  couldn't  you  do  it  ?  But 
when  work  and  trouble  come  you  find  how  difficult  it  is.  Many 
Christians  are  like  the  stag,  who  talked  to  itself,  and  said,  "  Why 
should  I  run  away  from  the  dogs  1  Look  what  a  fine  pair  of 
horns  I've  got,  and  look  what  heels  I've  got  too ;  I  might  do  these 
hounds  some  mischief.  Why  not  let  me  stand  and  show  them 
what  I  can  do  with  my  antlers  ?  I  can  keep  off  any  quantity  of 
dogs."  No  sooner  did  the  dogs  bark,  than  off  the  stag  went. 
So  with  us.  "  Let  sin  arise,"  we  say,  "  we  will  soon  rip  it  up, 
and  destroy  it;  let  trouble  come,  we  will  soon  get  over  it;  but 
when  sin  and  trouble  come,  we  then  find  what  our  weakness 
is.  Then  we  have  to  cry  for  the  help  of  the  Spirit ;  and  through 
him  we  can  do  all  things,  though  without  him  we  can  do  nothing 
at  all. 

In  all  the  acts  of  the  Christian's  life,  whether  it  be  the  act  of 
consecrating  one's  self  to  Christ,  or  the  act  of  daily  prayer,  or  the 
act  of  constant  submission,  or  preaching  the  gospel,  or  minister 
ing  to  the  necessities  of  the  poor,  or  comforting  the  desponding, 
in  all  these  the  Christian  finds  his  weakness  and  his  powerless- 
'ness,  unless  he  is  clothed  about  with  the  Spirit  of  God.  Why,  J 
have  been  to  see  the  sick  at  times,  and  I  have  the  ught  how  I  would 
like  to  comfort  them;  and  I  could  not  get  a  word  out  that  waa 
worth  their  hearing,  or  worth  my  saying  ;  and  my  soul  has  been 
in  agony  to  be  the  means  of  comforting  the  poor,  sick,  desponding 
brother ;  but  I  could  do  nothing,  and  I  came  out  of  the  chamber, 
and  half  wished  I  had  never  been  to  see  a  sick  person  in  my  life: 
I  had  so  learned  my  own  folly.  So  has  it  been  full  often  in 


200  THE    NECESSITY    OF    THE    SPIRIT*S    WORK. 

preaching.  You  get  a  sermon  up,  study  it,  and  come  and  make 
the  greatest  mess  of  it  that  can  possibly  be.  Then  you  say,  "  I 
wish  I  had  never  preached  at  all."  But  all  this  is  ;o  show  us, 
that  neither  in  comforting  nor  in  preaching  can  one  do  any  thing 
right,  unless  the  Spirit  work  in  us  to  will  and  to  do  of  his  own 
good  pleasure.  Every  thing,  moreover,  that  we  do  without 
the  Spirit  is  unacceptable  to  God  ;  and  whatever  we  do  under 
his  influence,  however  we  may  despise  it,  is  not  despised  of  God, 
for  he  never  despises  his  own  work,  and  the  Spirit  never  can  look 
upon  what  he  works  in  us  with  any  other  view  than  that  of  com 
placency  and  delight.  If  the  Spirit  helps  me  to  groan,  then  God 
must  accept  the  groaner.  If  thou  couldst  pray  the  best  prayer 
in  the  world,  without  the  Spirit,  God  would  have  nothing  to  do 
with  it;  but  if  thy  prayer  be  broken,  and  lame,  and  limping,  if 
the  Spirit  made  it,  God  will  look  upon  it,  and  say,  as  he  did  upon 
the  works  of  creation,  "  It  is  very  good  ;"  and  he  will  accept  it. 
And  now  let  me  conclude  by  asking  this  question.  My  hearer, 
then  have  you  the  Spirit  of  God  in  you  ]  You  have  some  reli 
gion,  most  of  you,  I  dare  say.  Well,  of  what  kind  is  it?  Is  it 
a  home-made  article  1  Did  you  make  yourself  what  you  are  1 
Then,  if  so,  you  are  a  lost  man  up  this  to  moment.  If,  my  hearer, 
you  have  gone  no  further  than  you  have  walked  yourself,  you  are 
not  on  the  road  to  heaven  yet ;  you  have  got  your  face  turned 
the  wrong  way ;  but  if  you  have  received  something  which 
neither  flesh  nor  blood  could  reveal  to  you,  if  you  have  been  led 
to  do  the  very  thing  which  you  once  hated,  and  to  love  that  thing 
which  you  once  despised,  and  to  despise  that  on  which  your  heart 
and  your  pride  were  once  set,  then,  soul,  if  this  be  the  Spirit's 
work,  rejoice ;  for  where  he  hath  begun  the  good  work  he  will 
carry  it  on.  And  you  may  know  whether  it  is  the  Spirit's  work 
by  this.  Have  you  been  led  to  Christ,  and  away  from  self  I 
Have  you  been  led  away  from  all  feelings,  from  all  doings,  from 
all  willings,  from  all  prayings,  as  the  ground  of  your  trust  and 
your  hope,  and  have  you  been  brought  nakedly  to  rely  upon  the 
finished  work  of  Christ  1  If  so,  this  is  more  than  human  nature 
ever  taught  any  man ;  this  is  a  height  to  which  human  nature 
never  climbed.  The  Spirit  of  God  has  done  that,  and  he  will 
never  leave  what  he  has  once  begun,  but  thou  shalt  go  fn>ni 


THE    NECESSITY    OF    THE    SPIRIT?S    WORK.  201 

strength  to  strength,  and  thou  shalt  stand  among  the.  blood- 
washed  throng,  at  last  complete  in  Christ,  and  accepted  in  the  bo 
loved.  But  if  you  have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  you  are  none 
of  his.  May  the  Spirit  lead  you  to  your  chamber  now  to  weep, 
now  to  repent,  and  now  to  look  to  Christ,  and  may  you  now  have 
a  divine  life  implanted,  which  neither  time  nor  eternity  shall  be 
able  to  destroy.  God,  hear  this  prayer,  and  send  us  away  with  t 
olessing,  for  Jesus'  sake,  Affieo. 
9* 


SERMON    XIII. 

LITTLE  SINS. 

0  Is  it  not  a  little  one  ?"— GENESIS,  xix  20. 

THESE  words  we  shall  take  for  a  motto,  rather  than  a  text,  in 
the  ordinary  acceptation  of  that  term.  I  shall  not  this  morning 
attempt  to  explain  the  connection.  It  was  the  utterance  of  Lot, 
when  he  pleaded  for  the  salvation  of  Zoar ;  but  I  shall  take  it 
altogether  away  from  the  connection  in  which  it  stands,  and  make 
use  of  it  in  another  fashion.  The  great  Father  of  Lies  hath  mul 
titudes  of  devices  by  which  he  seeks  to  ruin  the  souls  of  men. 
He  uses  false  weights  and  false  balances  in  order  to  deceive  them. 
Sometimes  he  uses  false  times,  declaring  at  one  hour  that  it  is  too 
early  to  seek  the  Lord,  and  at  another  that  it  is  now  too  late. 
And  he  uses  false  quantities,  for  he  will  declare  that  great  sins  are 
but  little,  and  as  for  what  lie  confesses  to  be  little  sins,  he  makes 
them  afterwards  to  be  nothing  at  all — mere  peccadilloes,  almost 
worthy  of  forgiveness  in  themselves.  Many  souls,  I  doubt  not, 
have  been  caught  in  this  trap,  and,  being  snared  thereby,  have  been 
destroyed.  They  have  ventured  into  sin,  where  they  thought  the 
stream  was  shallow,  and,  fatally  deceived  by  its  depth,  they  have 
been  swept  away  by  the  strength  of  the  current,  to  that  cataract 
which  is  the  ruin  of  such  vast  multitudes  of  the  souls  of  men. 

It  shall  be  my  business  this  morning  to  answer  this  temptation, 
and  try  to  put  a  sword  in  your  hands,  wherewith  to  resist  the 
enemy  when  he  shall  come  upon  you  with  this  cry  : — "  Is  it  not 
a  little  one1?"  and  tempt  you  into  sin  because  he  leads  you  to  im 
agine  that  there  is  but  very  little  harm  in  it.  "  Is  it  not  a  little 
one?" 


LITTLE    SINS. 


203 


With. regard,  then,  to  this  temptation  of  Satan  concerning  the 
littleness  of  sin,  I  would  make  this  first  answer,  the  best  of  men 
have  always  been  afraid  of  little  sins.     The  holy  maityrs  of  God 
have  been  ready  to  endure  the  most  terrible  torments,  rather  than 
step  so  much  as  one  inch  aside  from  the  road  of  truth  and  right 
eousness.     Witness  Daniel :  when  the  king's  decree  went  forth 
that  no  man  should  worship  God  for  such  and  such  a  time,  never 
theless  he  prayed  three  times  a  day  as  aforetime,  with  his  window 
open  towards  Jerusalem,  not  fearing   the  king's  commandment. 
Why  could  he  not  have  retired  into  an  inner  chamber  1  Why  might 
he  not  have  ceased  from  vocal  prayer,  and  have  kept  his  petitions 
in  his  thought  and  in  his  heart  ?     Would  he  not  have  been  as  well 
accepted  as  when  he  kneeled  as  usual,  with  the  window  open,  so 
that  all  the  world  might  see  him  1      Ah  !  but  Daniel  judged  that 
little  as  the  offence  might  seem,  he  would   rather  suffer  death  at 
the  jaws  of  the  lion,  than  he  would  by  that  little  offence  provoko 
the  anger  of  his  God,  or  lead  men  to  blaspheme  his  holy  name, 
because  his  servant   had  been  afraid  to  obey.     Mark,  too,  the 
three  holy  children.     They  were  asked  by  king  Nebuchadnezzar, 
simply  to  bend  the  knee,  and  worship  the  golden  image  which  he 
had  set  up.     How  slight  the  homage !     One  bend  of  the  knee, 
and  all  is  done.     One  prostration,  and  they  may  go  their  way 
safely.     Not  so.     They  will  not  worship  the  golden  image  which 
the  king  has  set  up.     They  can  burn  for  God,  but  they  cannot 
turn   from  God.     They  can  suffer,  but  they  will  not  sin ;  and 
though  all  the  world  might  have  excused  them  with  the  plea  of 
expediency,  if  they  had  performed  that  one  little  act  of  idol  wor 
ship,  yet  they  will  not  do  it,  but  would  rather  be  exposed  to  the 
fury  of  a  furnace,  seven   times   heated,  than  commit  an  offence 
against  the  Most  High.     So  also  among  the  early  Christians.     You 
may  have  read  of  that  noble  warrior  for  Christ,  Martin  Arethusa, 
the  bishop.     He  had  led  the  people  to  pull  down  the  idol  temple 
in  the  city  over  which  he  presided  ;  and  when  the  apostate  empe 
ror  Julian  came  to  power,  he  commanded  the  people  to  rebuild 
the  temple.      They  were  bound  to  obey  on  pain  of  death.       But 
Arethusa  all  the  while  lifted  up  his  voice  against  the  e\  il  they 
were  doinjj,  until  the  wrath  of  the  king  fell  upon  him  of  a  sud 
den.     He  was,  however,  offered  his  life  on  condition  that  he  would 


204  LITTLE    SINS. 

subscribe  so  much  as  a  single  halfpenny  towards  the  building  of 
the  temple ;  nay,  less  than  that,  if  he  would  cast  one  grain  of  in- 
cense  into  the  censer  of  the  false  god,  he  might  escape.  But  be 
would  not  do  it.  He  feared  God,  and  he  would  not  do  the  most 
tiny  little  sin  to  save  his  life.  They  therefore  exposed  his  bojy, 
and  gave  him  up  to  the  children  to  prick  him  with  knives ;  ther 
they  smeared  him  with  honey,  and  he  was  exposed  to  wasps,  anc 
stung  to  death.  But  all  the  while  the  grain  of  incense  he  would 
not  give.  He  could  give  his  body  to  wasps,  and  die  in  the  most 
terrible  pains,  but  he  could  not,  he  would  not,  he  dared  not  siu 
against  God.  A  noble  example  ! 

Now,  brethren,  if  men  have  been  able  to  perceive  so  much  of 
sin  in  little  transgressions,  that  they  would  bear  inconceivable  tor- 
tures  rather  than  commit  them,  must  there  not  be  something 
dreadful  after  all  in  the  thing  of  which  Satan  says,  "  Is  it  not  a 
little  one?"  Men,  with  their  eyes  well  opened  by  divine  grace, 
have  seen  a  whole  hell  slumbering  in  the  most  minute  sin. 
Gifted  with  a  microscopic  power,  their  eyes  have  seen  a  world  of 
iniquity  hidden  in  a  single  act,  or  thought,  or  imagination  of  sin  ; 
and.  hence  they  have  avoided  it  with  horror, — have  passed  by  and 
would  have  nought  to  do  with  it.  But  if  the  straight  road  to 
heaven  be  through  flames,  through  floods,  through  death  itself, 
they  had  sooner  go  through  all  these  torments  than  turn  one  inch 
aside  to  tread  an  easy  and  an  erroneous  path.  I  say  this  should 
help  us  when  Satan  tempts  us  to  commit  little  sins, — this  should 
he.lp  us  to  the  answer,  "  No,  Satan,  if  God's  people  think  it  great, 
they  know  better  than  thou  dost.  Thou  art  a  deceiver  ;  they  are 
true.  I  must  shun  all  sin,  even  though  thou  sayest  it  is  but  little." 
It  may  be  further  answered,  in  reply  to  this  temptation  of  Satan 
with  regard  to  little  sins,  thus  : — "  Little  sins  lead  to  great  ones. 
Satan  !  thou  biddest  me  commit  a  small  iniquity.  I  know  thee 
<vhom  thou  art,  thou  unholy  one !  Thou  desirest  me  to  put  in 
the  thin  end  of  the  wedge.  Thou  knowest  when  that  is  once  in 
serted  thou  canst  drive  it  home,  and  split  my  soul  in  twain 
Nay,  stand  back  !  Little  though  the  temptation  be,  I  dread  thee 
for  thy  little  temptation  leads  to  something  greater,  and  thy  sir  all 
•in  makes  way  for  something  worse." 

We  all  see  in  nature  how  easily  we  may  prove  this, — t 


LITTLE    SINS.  205 

things  lead  to  greater  things  If  it  be  desired  to  bridge  a  gulf,  it 
is  often  the  custom  to  shojt  an  arrow,  and  cross  it  w.'th  a  line 
almost  as  thin  as  a  film.  That  line  passes  over,  and  a  string  is 
drawn  after  it,  and  after  that  some  small  rope,  and  after  that  a 
cable,  and  after  that  the  swinging  suspension  bridge,  that  makes 
a  way  for  thousands.  So  it  is  oft-times  with  Satan.  It  is  but  a 
nought  that  he  would  shoot  across  the  mind.  That  thought  shall 
•arry  a  desire  ;  that  desire  a  look  ;  that  look  a  touch ;  that  touch 
deed  ;  that  deed  a  habit ;  and  that  habit  something  worse,  until 
the  man,  from  little  beginnings,  shall  be  swamped  and  drowned  in 
iniquity.  Little  things,  we  say,  lead  on  to  something  worse. 
And  thus  it  has  always  been.  A  spark  is  dropped  by  some  un 
wary  traveller  amidst  the  dry  grass  of  the  prairie.  It  is  but  a 
spark;  "Is  it  not  a  little  one"?"  A  child's  foot  may  tread  it 
out;  one  drop  from  the  rain-cloud  may  quench  it.  But,  ah! 
what  sets  the  prairie  in  a  bl-ize  1  what  bids  the  rolling  waves  of 
Ha  me  drive  before  them  all  the  beasts  of  the  field1?  what  is  it 
that  consumes  the  forest,  locking  it  in  its  fiery  arms  ?  what  is  it 
that  burns  down  the  habitation  of  man,  or  robs  the  reaper  of  his 
harvest]  It  is  this  solitary  spark, — the  one  spark — the  breeder 
of  the  flames.  So  it  is  with  little  sins.  Keep  them  back,  oh 
Satan  !  They  be  sparks,  but  the  very  fire  of  hell  is  only  a 
growth  from  them.  The  spark  is  the  mother  of  conflagration, 
and,  though  it  be  a  little  one,  I  can  have  nought  to  do  with  it. 
Satan  always  begins  with  us  as  he  did  with  Achan.  He  showed 
Achan,  first  of  all,  a  goodly  Babylonish  garment,  and  a  wedge  of  t 
ipld.  Achan  looked  at  it:  was  it  not  a  little  thing  to  do, — to 
toOit  ?  Achan  touched  it :  was  not  that  a  little  thing  ]  How 
slight  a  sin — to  touch  the  forbidden  thing  :  He  takes  it,  and  car 
ries  it  away  to  his  tent,  and — here  is  worse4- — he  hides  it.  And 
at  length  he  must  die  for  the  awful  crime.  Oh!  take  heed  of 
those  small  beginnings  of  sin.  Beginnings  of  sin  are  like  the 
flatting  out  of  water:  first,  there  is  an  ooze  ;  then  a  drip;  then  a 
slender  stream  ;  then  a  vein  of  water ;  and  then,  at  last,  a  flood ; 
and  a  rampart  is  swept  before  it,  a  continent  is  drowned.  Take 
heed  of  small  beginnings,  tor  they  lead  to  worse.  There  was 
never  a  rn^n  yet  that  came  to  the  gallows  but  confessed  that  ha 
begau  with  small  thefts; — the  stealing  of  a  book  at  school— the 


206  LITTLE    SINS. 

pilfering,  after waids,  from  his  master's  till,  leading  to  the  joining 
of  the  gang  of  robbers ; — the  joining  of  the  gang  of  robbers 
leading  to  worse  crimes,  and,  at  last,  the  deed  was  done,  th«i 
murder  was  committed,  which  brought  him  to  an  ignominious 
death.  Little  sins  often  act  as  burglars  do ; — burglars  sometime 
take  with  them  a  little  child  ;  they  put  the  little  child  into  a  win 
low  that  is  too  small  for  them  to  enter,  and  then  he  goes  and 
)pens  the  door  to  let  in  the  thieves.  So  do  little  sins  act. 
rhi-y  are  but  little  ones,  but  they  creep  in,  and  they  open  the 
door  for  great  ones.  A  traitor  inside  the  camp  may  be  but  a 
dwarf,  and  may  go  and  open  the  gates  of  the  city  and  let  in  a 
whole  army.  Dread  sin  ;  though  it  be  never  so  small,  dread  it. 
You  cannot  see  all  that  is  in  it.  It  is  the  mother  of  ten  thousand 
mischiefs.  The  mother  of  mischief,  they  say,  is  as  small  as  a 
midge's  egg ;  and  certainly,  the  smallest  sin  has  ten  thousand 
mischiefs  sleeping  within  its  bowels. 

St.  Augustine  gives  a  picture  of  how  far  men  will  go  when 
they  once  begin  to  sin.  There  was  a  man  who  in  argument  de 
clared  that  the  devil  made  flies ;  "  Well,"  said  the  man  with 
whom  he  was  arguing,  "  if  the  devil  made  flies,  then  it  is  but  lit 
tle  more  to  say  the  devil  made  worms  !"  "  Well,"  said  the 
other,  "  I  believe  it."  "  Well,"  said  the  man,  "  If  the  devil 
made  worms,  how  do  you  know  but  what  he  made  small  birds  ?" 
"  Well,"  said  the  other,  « it  is  likely  he  did  !"  "  Well,"  re 
sumed  the  man  with  whom  he  was  arguing,  "  but  if  he  made 
small  birds,  why  may  he  not  have  made  big  ones  1  And  if  he 
made  big  birds,  why  may  he  not  have  made  man  7  And  if  he 
ii  ade  man,  why  may  he  have  not  made  the  world  ?"  "  You  see," 
says  St.  Augustine,  "by  one  admission,  by  once  permitting  the 
devil  to  be  thought  the  creator  of  a  fly,  the  man  came  to  believe 
that  the  devil  was  the  Creator."  Just  get  one  small  error  into 
)  our  minds,  get  one  small  evil  into  your  thoughts,  commit  on 
small  act  of  sin  in  your  life,  permit  these  things  to  be  dandled, 
and  fondled,  favored,  petted,  and  treated  with  respect,  and  you 
cannot  tell  whereunto  they  may  grow.  They  are  small  in  their 
infancy  :  they  will  be  giants  when  they  corne  to  their  full  growth* 
Thou  little  knowest  how  near  thy  soul  may  be  to  destructiou. 
when  thou  wantonly  indulgc-st  in  the  smallest  act  of  siu  ' 


LITTLE    SINS.  207 

Another  argument  may  be  used  to  respond  to  this  temptation 
of'  the  devil.  He  says,  "  Is  it  not  a  little  one  ?"  "  Yes, '  we  re 
ply,  "  But  little  sins  multiply  very  fast"  Like  all  other  little 
tilings,  there  is  a  marvellous  power  of  multiplication  in  little  sins. 
As  for  murder,  it  is  a  masterly  sin  ;  but  we  do  not  often  hear  of  it 
xrnpared  with  the  multitude  of  minor  sins.  The  smaller  thi 
guilt,  the  more  frequent  it  becomes.  The  elephant  hath  but  a 
small  progeny,  and  multiplieth  slowly.  But  the  aphis  hath  thous 
ands  springing  from  it  within  an  hour.  It  is  even  so  with  little 
sins :  they  multiply  rapidly,  beyond  all  thought — one  becomes 
the  mother  of  multitudes.  And,  mark  this,  little  sins  are  03 
mighty  for  mischief  in  their  multitude  as  if  they  were  greater 
sins.  Have  you  ever  read  the  story  of  the  locusts  whea  they 
sweep  through  a  land  ?  I  was  reading  but  yesterday  of  a  mis 
sionary  who  called  all  the  people  together  when  he  heard  that 
the  locusts  were  coming  up  the  valley  ;  and.  kindling  huge  fires, 
they  hoped  to  drive  off  the  living  stream.  The  locusts  were  but 
small ;  but  it  seemed  as  if  the  whole  of  the  blazing  fires  were 
ouenched — they  marched  over  the  dead  and  burning  bodies  of 
their  comrades,  and  on  they  went,  one  living  stream.  Before 
them  every  thing  was  green,  like  the  garden  of  Eden  ;  behind 
them  every  thing  was  dry  and  desert.  The  vines  were  barked, 
the  trees  had  lost  every  leaf,  and  stretched  their  naked  arms  to 
the  sky,  as  if  winter  had  rent  away  their  foliage.  There  was  not:, 
then  so  much  as  a  single  blade  of  grass,  or  sprig  upon  the  tree, 
that  even  a  goat  might  have  eaten.  The  locusts  had  done  all  ihis, 
and  left  utter  devastation  in  their  track.  Why  this  1  The  locust 
is  but  a  little  thing !  Ay,  but  h  their  number  how  mighty  they 
become  !  Dread,  then,  a  little  sin,  for  it  will  be  sure  to  multiply. 
It  is  not  one,  it  is  many  of  these  little  sins.  The  plague  of  lice, 
»r  the  plague  of  flies  in  Egypt,  was  perhaps  the  most  terrible 
;hat  the  Egyptians  ever  felt.  Take  care  of  those  little  insect  sins 
•vhirh  may  be  your  destruction.  Surely  if  you  are  led  to  feel 
them,  and  to  groan  under  them,  and  to  pray  to  God  for  deliver 
ance  from  them,  it  may  be  said  that  in  your  conversation  is  the 
finger  of  God.  But  let  these  sins  alone,  let  them  inciease  and 
multiply,  and  your  misery  is  near  at  hand.  Listen  no*,  then,  tc 
the  evil  "oice  of  Satan  when  he  cries,  "  Is  it  not  a  little  one  ?" 


208  LITTLE    SINS. 

Years  ago  there  v^s  not  a  single  thistle  in  the  \vl  ule  of  A\  » 
tralia.  Some  Scotchman  who  very  much  admired  thistles-- 
rather  more  thp-n  1  do — thought  it  was  a  pity  that  a  great  island 
Jike  Australia  should  be  without  that  marvellous  and  gloriou 
symbol  of  his  great  nation.  He,  therefore,  collected  a  packet  of 
ihistle-seeds,  and  sent  it  over  to  one  of  his  friends  in  Austia'ia. 
Well,  when  it  was  landed,  the  officers  might  have  said,  "  Oh,  let 
t  in  ;  '  is  it  not  a  little  one  ?'  Here  is  but  a  handful  of  thistle 
down,  oh,  let  it  come  in  ;  it  will  be  but  sown  in  a  garden — the 
Scotch  wil1  grow  it  in  their  gardens ;  they  think  it  a  fine  flower, 
no  doubt, — let  them  have  it,  it  is  but  meant  for  their  amuse 
ment."  Ah,  yes,  it  was  but  a  little  one ;  but  now  whole  districts 
of  country  are  covered  with  it,  and  it  has  become  the  farmer'* 
pest  and  plague.  It  was  a  little  one  ;  but,  all  the  worse  for  thai, 
it  multiplied  and  grew,  if  it  had  been  a  great  evil,  all  men 
would  have  set  to  work  to  crush  it.  This  little  evil  is  not  to  be 
eradicated,  and  of  that  country  it  may  be  said  till  doomsday, — 
''  Thorns  and  thistles  shall  it  bring  forth."  Happy  would  it  have 
been  if  the  ship  that  brought  that  seed  had  been  wrecked.  No 
boon  is  it  to  those  of  our  countrymen  there  on  the  other  side  of 
the  earth,  but  a  vast  curse.  Take  heed  of  the  thistle-seed  ;  littlt 
sins  are  like  it.  Take  care  they  are  not  admitted  into  your 
heart.  Endeavor  to  shun  them  as  soon  as  Satan  presents  them 
Go,  seek  by  the  grace  of  God  and  his  Holy  Spirit  to  keep  them 
away ;  for  if  not,  these  little  sins  will  multiply  so  fast,  that  the* 
will  be  your  ruin  and  destruction. 

Once  again;  little  sins,  after  all,  if  you  look  at  them  ia  an 

other  aspect,  are  great.     A  little  sin  involves  a  great  principle. 

Suppose  that  to-morrow  the  Austrians  should  send  a  body  of 

men  into  Sardinia.     If  they  only  send  a  dozen  it  would  be  equa) 

o  &  declaration  of  war.     It  may  be  said,  "  Is  it  not  a  little  one  ] 

very  small  band  of  soldiers  that  we  have  sent?"  "Yes,"  it 
<vould  be  replied,  "  but  it  is  the  principle  of  the  thing.  You  can. 
no*  be  allowed  with  impunity  to  send  your  soldiers  across  the 
border.  War  must  be  proclaimed,  because  you  have  violated 
the  frontier,  and  invaded  the  land."  It  is  not  necessary  to  send 
a  hundred  thousand  troops  into  a  country  to  break  a  trenty.  It 
is  true  the  breaJi  of  the  treaty  may  appear  to  be  small  ;  bjt  if 


LITTLE    SINS.  209 

the  slightest  breach  be  allowed,  the  principle  is  gone.  There  is 
very  much  more  in  principle  than  men  imagine. 

In  a  sin  against  God,  it  is  not  so  much  the  thing  itself  as  the 
principle  of  the  thing  at  whidi  God  looks ;  and  the  principle  of 
obedience  is  as  much  broken,  as  much  dishonored  by  a  little  sin 
as  by  a  great  sin.  O  man  !  the  Creator  hath  made  thee  to  obej 

im.  Thou  break est  his  law  ;  thou  sayest  it  is  but  a  little  breach. 
Still  it  is  a  breach.  The  law  is  broken.  Thou  art  disobedient. 
His  wrath  abideth  on  thee.  The  principle  of  obedience  is  compro 
mised  in  thy  smallest  transgression,  and,  therefore,  is  it  great. 
Besides,  I  don't  know  whether  the  things  Christian  men  call  little 
sins  are  not,  after  all,  greater  than  what  they  call  great  sins,  in 
some  respects.  If  you  have  a  friend,  and  he  does  you  a  displeas^ 
ure  for  the  sake  of  ten  thousand  pounds,  you  say,  "  Well,  he  had 
a  very  great  temptation.  It  is  true  he  has  committed  a  great 
fault,  but  still  he  has  wronged  me  to  some  purpose."  But  sup 
pose  your  friend  should  vex  and  grieve  your  mind  for  the  sake 
of  a  farthing ;  what  would  you  think  of  that  1  "  This  is  wanton," 
you  would  say,  "  This  man  has  done  it  out  of  sheer  malevolence 
toward  me."  Now,  if  Adam  had  been  denied  by  his  Maker  the 
whole  of  Paradise,  and  had  been  put  into  a  stony  desert,  I  do  not 
think  that,  had  he  taken  all  Paradise  to  himself,  there  would  have 
been  more  sin  in  that  act,  than  when  placed  in  the  midst  of  the 
garden,  he  simply  stole  one  fruit  from  the  forbidden  tree.  The 
transgression  involved  a  great  principle,  because  he  did  it  want- 
only.  He  had  so  little  to  gain,  he  had  so  much  to  lose  when  he 
dishonored  God.  It  has  been  said,  that  to  sin  without  temptation 
is  to  sin  like  the  devil,  for  the  devil  was  not  tempted  when  he 
sinned ;  and  to  sin  with  but  little  temptation  is  to  sin  like  the 
devil.  When  there  is  great  temptation  offered,  1  do  not  say  there 

s  any  excuse,  but  when  there  is  none,  where  the  deed  is  but  little, 
DTinging  but  little  pleasure,  and  involving  but  a  small  consequence, 
there  is  a  wantonness  about  the  sin  which  makes  it  greater  in 
•moral  obliquity,  than  many  other  iniquities  that  men  commit. 
Ay,  you  cry  out  against  a  great  felon,  when  he  is  discovered ;  see 
of  how  much  he  robbed  men  ;  see  how  he  wronged  the  widow  and 
robbed  the  fatherless  !  I  know  it.  God  forbid  that  I  should  make 
any  excuse  for  him  ;  but  that  man  had  a  name  to  maintain.  lie 


210 


LITTLE    SINS. 


had  thousands  of  temptations  before  him  to  get  immensely  rich 
He  thought  he  never  should  be  discovered.  He  had  a  family  to 
keep.  He  had  got  involved  in  expensive  habits,  and  there  are 
many  things  to  be  said  for  his  extenuation.  But  jou,  if  you  in 
dulge  in  some  slight  sin  which  brings  you  no  pleasure,  which  in- 
volves  no  important  interests,  by  which  you  have  nothing  to  get, 
1  say  you  sin  wantonly,  You  have  committed  an  act  which  has 
in  it  the  very  virus  and  bitterness  of  wilful,  obstinate,  designing 
disobedience,  because  there  is  not  even  the  extenuation,  or  excuse, 
or  apology,  that  you  should  gain  something  thereby.  Little  sins 
are,  after  all,  tremendous  sins,  viewed  in  the  light  of  God's  law. 
Looked  upon  as  involving  a  breach  of  that  inviolable  standard  of 
right,  and  considered  as  having  been  committed  wantonly,  I  say 
they  are  great,  and  1  know  not  that  those  sins  men  conceive  to 
be  gross  and  great,  are  greater  and  grosser  in  reality  than  these. 

Thus  I  have  given  you  several  arguments  with  which  to  answer 
t;hat  temptation,  "  Is  it  not  a  little  one  ?" 

Now  I  am  about  to  speak  to  the  child  of  God  only,  and  I  say 
to  him,  "  Brother,  if  Satan  tempts  thee  to  say,  '  Is  it  not  a  little 
one  V  "  reply  to  him,  "  Ah,  Satan,  but  little  though  it  be,  it  may 
mar  my  fellowship  with  Christ.  Sin  cannot  destroy,  but  it  will 
annoy  ;  it  cannot  ruin  my  soul,  but  it  will  soon  ruin  my  peace,, 
Thou  sayest  it  is  a  little  one,  Satan,  but  my  Saviour  had  to  die 
for  it,  or  otherwise  I  should  have  been  shut  out  from  heaven. 
'That  little  one'  may  be  like  a  little  thorn  in  my  flesh,  to  prick 
my  heart,  and  wound  my  soul.  I  cannot,  I  dare  not  indulge  in 
this  little  sin,  for  I  have  been  greatly  forgiven,  and  I  must  greatly 
love.  A  little  sin  in  others  would  be  a  great  sin  for  me — '  How 
can  1  do  this  great  wickedness  and  sin  against  God.' " 

Is  it  a  little  one,  Satan?  But  a  little  stone  in  the  shoe  will 
make  a  traveller  limp.  A  little  thorn  may  breed  a  fester.  A 
little  cloud  may  hide  the  sun.  A  cloud  of  the  size  of  a  man' 
band  may  bring  a  deluge  of  rain.  Avaunt  Satan  !  I  can  have 
nought  to  do  with  thee  ;  for  since  I  know  that  Jesus  bled  for  little 
sins,  I  cannot  wound  his  heart  by  indulging  in  them  afresh.  A 
little  sin,  Satan !  Hath  not  my  Master  said,  "  Take  us  the  foxes, 
the  little  foxes  that  spoil  the  vines,  for  our  vines  have  tender 
grapes."  Lo !  these  little  things  do  mischief  to  my  tender  heart 


LITTLE    SINS.  211 

These  lictle  sins  burrow  in  my  soul,  and  sotn  make  it  to  become 
a  very  den  and  hole  of  the  wild  beasts  that  Jesus  hates,  soon 
diive  him  away  from  my  spirit  so  that  he  Mrill  hold  no  comfort 
able  fellowship  and  communion  with  me.  A  great  sin  cannot 
destroy  a  Christian,  but  a  little  sin  can  make  him  miserable 
Jesus  will  not  walk  with  his  people  unless  they  drive  out  every 
Known  sin.  He  says,  "  If  ye  keep  my  commandments  ye  shal 
abide  in  my  love,  even  as  I  have  kept  my  Father's  command 
ments  and  abide  in  his  love."  There  are  very  many  Christians' 
in  the  world  that  do  not  see  their  Saviour's  face  by  the  month 
together,  and  seem  to  be  quite  content  without  his  company.  1 
understand  you  not,  nor  do  I  wish  to  know  how  it  is,  that  you 
can  reconcile  your  souls  to  the  absence  of  your  Lord.  A  loving 
wife,  without  her  husband  for  months  and  years,  seems  to  me  to 
be  sorely  tried.  Surely  it  must  be  an  affliction  for  a  tender  child 
to  be  separated  from  his  father.  We  know  that  in  our  childhood 
it  was  always  so,  and  we  looked  forward  to  our  return  home 
with  joy.  And  art  thou  a  child  of  God,  yet  happy  without  see 
ing  thy  Father's  face?  What!  thou  the  spouse  of  Christ,  and 
yet  content  without  his  company  !  Surely,  surely,  surely,  thou 
hast  fallen  into  a  sad  state.  Thou  must  have  gone  astray,  if  such 
be  thy  experience,  for  the  true  chaste  spouse  of  Christ  mourns 
like  a  dove  without  her  mate,  when  he  has  left  her.  Ask,  then, 
the  question,  what  has  driven  Christ  from  you  ?  He  hides  his 
face  behind  the  wall  of  your  sins.  That  wall  may  be  built  up 
of  little  pebbles,  as  easily  as  of  great  stones.  The  sea  is  made  of 
drops,  the  rocks  are  made  of  grains ;  and,  ah !  surely  the  sea 
w  lich  divides  thee  from  Christ  may  be  filled  with  the  drops  of 
1}  y  little  sins ;  and  the  rock  which  is  to  wreck  thy  barque,  may 
^ave  been  made  by  daily  working  of  the  coral  insects  of  thy  little 
sins.  Therefore,  take  heed  thereunto ;  for  if  thou  wouldst  live 
'\  i tli  Christ,  and  walk  with  Christ,  and  see  Christ,  and  have  fellow 
ihip  A'ith  Christ,  take  heed,  1  pray  thee,  of  the  little  foxes  that 
spoil  the  vines,  for  our  vines  have  tender  grapes. 

And  now.  leaving  the  child  of  God  thus  awhile,  I  turn  myself 
to  address  others  of  you  who  have  some  thought  with  regard  to 
your  souls,  but  who  could  not  yet  be  ranked  among  those  that 
fear  God  with  a  true  hear  To  you,  I  know,  Satan  often  offerf 


LITTLE    SIXS. 

this  temptation — "  is  it  not  a  little  one?"  May  G:d  help  you  to 
answer  him  whenever  he  thus  attacks  you.  "  Is  it  not  a  little 
one  ?"  And  so,  young  man,  the  devil  has  tempted  thee  to  com 
mit  th"  first  petty  theft.  "  Is  it  not  a  little  one  ?"  And  so  he 
has  bidden  thee,  young  man,  for  the  first  time  in  thy  life  to  spend 
th«j  day  of  rest  in  foolish  pleasure.  It  was  but  a  little  one,  In 
said,  and  thou  hast  taken  him  at  his  word,  and  thou  hast  com 
rm'tted  it.  It  was  but  a  little  one,  and  so  you  have  told  a  lie.  It 
A-as  but  a  little  one,  -md  you  have  gone  into  the  assembly  of  the 
frivolous  and  mixed  in  the  society  of  scorners.  It  was  but  a  little 
one,  there  could  not  be  much  hurt  in  it,  it  could  not  do  much 
mischief  to  your  soul.  Ah  !  stop  awhile.  Dost  thou  know  that 
a  little  sin,  if  wantonly  indulged,  will  prevent  thy  salvation  1 
"  The  foundation  of  God  standeth  sure ;  having  this  seal,  the  Lord 
knoweth  them  that  are  his,  and  let  every  one  that  namcth  the 
name  of  Christ  depart  from  iniquity."  Christ  will  reveal  salva 
tion  from  all  his  sins  to  the  man  who  hates  all  his  sins ;  but  if 
thou  keepest  one  sin  to  thyself,  thou  shalt  never  have  mercy  at 
his  hands.  If  thou  wilt  forsake  all  thy  ways,  and  turn  with  full 
purpose  of  heart  to  Christ,  the  biggest  sin  thou  hast  ever  com 
mitted  shall  not  destroy  thy  soul ;  but  if  a  little  sin  be  harbored, 
thy  prayers  will  be  unheard,  thy  sighs  disregarded,  and  thy  earnest 
cries  shall  return  into  thy  bosom  without  a  blessing.  You  have 
been  in  prayer  lately,  you  have  been  seeking  Christ,  you  have 
been  praying  with  all  your  might  that  God  would  meet  with  you. 
Now  months  have  rolled  over  your  head,  you  are  not  yet  saved, 
not  yet  have  you  received  the  comfortable  assurance  of  your  par- 
don.  Young  man,  is  it  not  likely  that  some  little  known  sin  is 
still  harbored  in  your  heart?  Mark,  then,  God  will  never  be  at 
one  with  thee  till  thou  and  thy  sins  are  twain.  Part  with  thy 
sins,  or  else  part  with  all  hope,  though  thou  hide  but  so  much  a* 
a  grain  of  sin  back  from  God.  He  will  not,  he  cannot  have  any 
mercy  on  thee.  Come  to  him  just  as  thou  art,  but  renounce  thy 
sins.  Ask  him  to  set  thee  free  from  every  lust,  from  every  false 
way,  from  every  evil  thing,  or  else,  mark  thee,  thou  shalt  never 
find  grace  and  favor  at  his  hands.  The  greatest  sin  in  the  world, 
repented  of,  shall  be  forgiven,  but  the  least  unrepented  sin  shall 
sink  thy  soul  lower  than  the  lowest  hell.  Mark  then,  again,  sin 


LITTLE    SINS.  213 

nor,  thou  who  indulges!  in  little  sins  sometimes.  These  little  sina 
show  that  thou  art  yet  in  the  gall  of  bitterness,  and  in  the  bond 
of  iniquity.  Rowland  Hill  tells  a  curious  tale  of  one  of  his 
hearers  who  sometimes  visited  the  theatre.  Tie  was  a  member 
of  the  church.  So  going  to  see  him,  he  said,  I  understand  Mr 
So  and  so,  you  are  very  fond  of  frequenting  the  theatre.  No,  sir 
lie  said,  that's  false.  I  go  now  and  then  just  for  a  great  treat 
still  I  duii't  go  because  I  like  it ;  it  is  not  a  habit  of  mine.  Well, 
said  Rowland  Hill,  suppose  some  one  should  say  to  me,  Mr.  Hill, 
I  understand  you  eat  carrion,  and  I  should  say,  No,  no,  J  dor'^  eat 
carrion.  It  is  true,  I  now  and  then  have  a  piece  of  carrion  for 
a  great  treat.  Why,  he  would  say,  you  have  convicted  your 
self,  it  shows  that  you  like  it  better  than  most  people,  because 
you  save  it  up  for  a  special  treat.  Other  men  only  take  it  /is 
common  daily  food,  but  you  keep  it  by  way  of  a  treat.  It  shows 
the  deceitfulness  of  your  heart,  and  manifests  that  you  still  love 
the  ways  and  wages  of  sin. 

Ah,  my  friends,  those  men  that  say  little  sins  have  no  vice  in 
them  whatever,  they  do  but  give  indications  of  their  own  char 
acter  ;  they  show  which  way  the  stream  runs.  A  straw  may  let 
you  know  which  way  the  wind  blows,  or  even  a  floating  feather ; 
and  so  may  some  little  sin  be  an  indication  of  the  prevailing  ten 
dency  of  the  heart.  My  hearer,  if  thou  lovest  sin,  though  it  be 
but  a  little  one,  thy  heart  is  not  right  in  the  sight  of  God.  Thou 
art  still  a  stranger  to  divine  grace.  The  wrath  of  God  abidetb 
on  theo.  Thou  art  a  lost  soul  unless  God  change  thy  heart. 

And  yet,  another  remark  here.  Sinner,  thou  sayest  it  is  but  a 
little  one.  But  dost  thou  know  that  God  will  damn  thee  for  thy 
little  sins?  Look  angry  now,  and  say  the  minister  is  harsh.  But 
wilt  thou  look  angry  at  thy  God  in  the  day  when  he  shalt  con 
demn  thee  for  ever  ?  If  there  wrere  a  good  man  in  a  prison  to 
day  and  you  did  not  go  to  see  him,  would  you  think  that  a  great 
sin?  Certainly  not,  you  say,  J  should  not  think  of  doing  such  a 
thing.  If  you  saw  a  man  hungry  and  you  did  not  feed  hinij  would 
you  think  that  a  great  sin  1  No,  you  say,  I  should  not.  Never 
theless,  these  are  the  very  things  for  which  men  are  sent  to  hell. 
What  said  the  Judge  ?  "I  was  hungry  and  ye  gave  me  no  meat ; 
thirsty,  and  ye  gave  me  no  drink  ;  I  was  sick,  and  in  prison,  and  ye 


214  LITTLE    SINS. 

visited  me  not.  Forasmuch  as  ye  have  not  done  this  .nto  the 
least  of  these,  my  brethren,  ye  have  not  done  it  unto  me."  Now, 
if  these  things,  which  we  only  consider  to  be  little  sins,  actually 
send  myriads  to  hell,  ought  we  not  to  stop  and  tremble  ere  we 
talk  lightly  of  sin,  since  little  sins  may  be  our  eternal  destroyers. 
Ah,  man,  the  pit  of  hell  is  digged  for  little  sins.  An  eternity  of 
A  oe  is  prepared  for  what  men  call  little  si  is.  It  is  not  alone  tho 
nurderer,  the  drunkard,  the  whoremonger,  that  shall  be  sent  to 
ell.  The  wicked,  it  is  true,  shall  be  sent  there,  but  the  little  sin 
ner,  with  all  the  nations  that  forget  God,  shall  have  his  portion 
there  also.  Tremble,  therefore,  on  account  of  little  sins. 

When  I  was  a  little  lad,  I  one  day  read  at  family  prayer  the 
chapter  in  the  Revelations  concerning  the  "  bottomless  pit."  Stop 
ping  in  the  midst  of  it,  I  said  to  my  grandfather,  "  Grandfather, 
what  does  this  mean — '  the  bottomless  pit  ?  "  He  said,  "  Go  on, 
child,  go  on."  So  I  read  that  chapter,  but  I  took  great  care  to 
read  it  the  next  morning  also.  Stopping  again,  I  said,  "  Bottom 
less  pit,  what  does  this  mean  1 "  "  Go  on,"  he  said,  "  Go  on." 
Well  it  came  the  next  morning,  and  so  on  for  a  fortnight ;  there 
was  nothing  to  be  read  by  me  of  a  morning  but  this  same  chap 
ter,  for  explained  it  should  be  if  I  read  it  a-  month.  And  I  can 
remember  the  horror  of  my  mind  when  he  told  me  what  the  idea 
was.  There  is  a  deep  pit,  and  the  soul  is  falling  down, — oh  how 
fast  it  is  falling  !  There  !  the  last  ray  of  light  at  the  top  has  dis 
appeared,  and  it  falls  on — on — on,  and  so  it  goes  on  falling — on — • 
on— on — for  a  thousand  years  !  "  Is  it  not  getting  near  the  bot 
tom  yet1?  won't  it  stop?"  No,  no;  the  cry  is,  on — on — on,  "I 
have  been  falling  a  million  years ;  is  it  not  near  the  bottom  yet  ?  " 
No,  you  are  no  nearer  the  bottom  yet :  it  is  the  "  bottomless  pit ;': 
it  is  on — on — on,  and  so  the  soul  goes  on  falling,  perpetually, 
;  into  a  deeper  depth  still,  falling  for  ever  into  the  "  bottomless 
•it" — on — on — on,  into  the  pit  that  has  no  bottom  !  Woe  with- 
ut  termination,  without  hope  of  its  coming  to  a  conclusion.  The 
same  dreadful  idea  is  contained  in  these  words,  "The  wrath  to 
come."  Mark,  hell  is  always  "  the  wrath  to  come."  If  a  man 
has  been  in  hell  a  thousand  years,  it  is  stil1  "  to  come."  As  tc 
what  you  have  suffered  in  ttie  past  it  is  as  nothing,  in  the  dread 
account,  for  still  the  wrath  is  "  to  come."  And  when  the  world 


LITTLE    SINS.  '215 

has  grown  gray  with  age,  and  the  fires  of  the  sun  are  quehched 
in  darkness,  it  is  still  "  the  wrath  to  come."  And  when  other 
worlds  have  sprung  up,  and  have  turned  into  their  palsied  age,  it 
is  still  "  the  wrath  to  come."  And  when  your  soul,  burnt  through 
and  through  with  anguish,  sighs  at  last  to  be  annihilated,  even 
then  this  awful  thunder  shall  be  heard,  "the  wrath  to  come— to 
ome — to  come."  Oh,  what  an  idea  !  I  know  not  how  to  utter 
t !  And  yet  for  little  sins,  remember,  you  incur  "  the  wrath  to 
-ome,"  Oh,  if  I  am  to  be  damned,  I  would  be  damned  for  some 
thing  ;  but  to  be  delivered  up  to  the  executioner  and  sent  into 
"  the  wrath  to  come  "  for  little  sins  which  do  not  even  make  me 
famous  as  a  rebel,  this  is  to  be  damned  indeed.  Oh  that  ye  would 
arise,  that  ye  would  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come,  that  ye  would 
forsake  the  little  sins,  and  fly  to  the  great  cross  of  Christ  to  have 

little  sins  blotted  out,  and  little  offences  washed  away.     For  oh 

again  I  warn  you — if  ye  die  with  little  sins  unforgiven,  with  little 
sins  unrepented  of,  there  shall  be  no  little  hell ;  the  great  wrath 
of  the  great  king  is  ever  to  come,  in  a  pit  without  a  bottom,  in  a 
hell  the  fire  of  which  never  shall  be  quenched,  and  the  worm  of 
whbh  never  shall  die.  Oh,  "  the  wrath  to  come !  the  wrath  to 
ouine  i  "  ii  is  enough  to  make  one's  heart  ache  to  think  of  it 
God  help  you  to  flee  from  it.  May  you  escape  from  it  new 
t\*rough  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord.  Amen. 


SERMON    XIV. 

A  VISION  OF  THE  LATTER-DAY  GLORIES. 

".And  it  shall  come  to  pass  in  the  last  days,  that  the  mountain  of  tl  « 
Lord's  house  shall  be  established  in  the  top  of  the  mountains,  and  sha.l  t« 
exalted  above  the  hills  ;  and  all  nations  shall  flow  unto  it." — ISAIAH,  il  2, 
and  MICAH,  iv.  1. 

THE  prophets  of  God  were  anciently  called  seers,  for  they  had 
a  supernatural  sight,  which  could  pierce  through  the  gloom  of  the 
future  and  behold  things  which  are  not  seen  as  yet,  but  which 
God  hath  ordained  for  the  last  times.  They  frequently  described 
what  they  saw  with  spiritual  eyes  after  the  form  or  fashion  of 
something  which  could  be  seen  by  the  eye  of  nature.  The 
vision  was  so  substantial  that  they  could  picture  it  in  words,  so 
that  we  also  may  behold  in  open  vision  the  glorious  things 
which  they  beheld  after  a  supernatural  sort.  Let  us  imagine 
Isaiah  as  he  stood  upon  Mount  Zion.  He  looked  about  him,  ard 
there  were  "  the  mountains  that  are  round  about  Jerusalem,"  for 
outvying  it  in  height,  but  yielding  to  Zion  in  glory.  Dearer  to 
his  soul  than  even  the  snow-capped  glories  of  Lebanon,  which 
glittered  afar  off,  was  that  little  hill  of  Zion,  for  there  upon  its 
summit  stood  the  temple,  the  shrine  of  the  living  God,  the  place 
of  his  delight,  the  home  of  song,  the  house  of  sacrifice,  the  great 
gathering-place  whither  the  tribes  went  up — the  tribes  of  the  Lord, 
to  serve  Jehovah,  the  God  of  Abraham.  Standing  at  the  gate 
of  that  glorious  temple,  which  had  been  piled  by  the  matchless 
art  of  Solomon,  he  looked  into  the  future  and  he  saw,  with  tear- 
ful  eye,  the  structure  burned  with  fire ;  he  beheld  it  cast  down 
and  the  plough  driven  over  its  foundations.  He  sa  v  ,he  people 
carried  away  into  Babylon,  and  the  nation  cast  off  for  a 


I 

A    VISION    OF    THE    LATTER-DAY    GLORIES.  217 

Looking  once  more  through  the  glass  he  beheld  the  temple  rising 
from  its  ashes,  with  glory  outwardly  diminished,  but  really 
increased.  He  saw  on  till  he  beheld  Messiah  himself  in  tho 
form  of  a  little  babe  carried  into  the  second  temple ;  he  saw  him 
there,  and  he  rejoiced ;  but  ere  he  had  time  for  gladness  his  eye 
glanced  onward  to  the  cross ;  ho  saw  Messiah  nailed  to  the  tree  • 
he  beheld  his  back  ploughed  and  mangled  with  the  whip 
"  Surely  he  hath  borne  our  grief3  and  carried  our  sorrows,"  said 
the  prophet,  and  he  paused  awhile  to  bemoan  the  bleeding  Prince 
of  the  House  of  David.  His  eye  was  now  doomed  to  a  long 
and  bitter  weeping,  for  he  saw  the  invading  hosts  of  the  Romans 
setting  up  the  standard  of  desolation  in  the  city.  He  saw  the 
holy  city  burned  with  fire  and  utterly  destroyed.  His  spirit  was 
Almost  melted  in  him.  But  once  more  he  flew  through  time 
with  eagle  wing,  and  scanned  futurity  with  eagle  eye ;  he  soared 
aloft  in  imagination,  and  began  to  sing  of  the  last  days — the  end 
of  dispensations  and  of  time.  He  saw  Messiah  once  again  on 
earth.  He  saw  that  little  hill  of  Zion  rising  to  the  clouds — 
reaching  to  heaven  itself.  He  beheld  the  new  Jerusalem 
descending  from  above,  God  dwelling  among  men,  and  all  the 
nations  flowing  to  the  tabernacle  of  the  Most  High  God,  where 
they  paid  him  holy  worship. 

We  shall  not,  to-day,  look  through  all  the  dim  vista  of  Zion's 
tribulations.  We  will  leave  the  avenue  of  troubles  and  trials 
through  which  the  church  has  passed  and  is  to  pass,  and  we  will 
come,  by  faith,  to  the  last  days ;  and  may  God  help  us  while  we 
indulge  in  a  glorious  vision  of  that  which  is  to  be  ere  long,  when 
"  the  mountain  of  the  Lord's  house  shall  be  established  in  the 
top  of  the  mountains,  and  shall  be  exalted  above  the  hills ;  and 
all  nations  shall  flow  unto  it."  The  prophet  saw  two  things  in 
the  vision.  He  saw  the  mountain  exalted,  and  he  beheld  the 
nations  flowing  to  it.  Now  will  you  use  your  imagination  for  a 
moment ;  for  there  is  a  picture  here  which  I  can  scarcely  com 
pare  to  any  thing,  except  one  of  Martin's  magnificent  paintings, 
in  which  he  throws  together  such  masses  of  light  and  shade 
that  the  imagination  is  left  at  liberty  to  stretch  her  winga 
and  fly  to  the  utmost  height.  In  the  present  instance,  you  will 
not  be  able  to  outstrip  the  reality,  however  high  you  may 
10- 


A    VISION    OF    THE    LATTER-DAV    QLOKIKS. 

endeavor  to  soar ;  for  that  which  is  in  our  text  will  certainly  be 
greater  than  that  which  the  preacher  can  utter,  or  that  which 
you  may  be  able  to  conceive. 

Transport  yourselves  for  a  moment  to  the  foot  of  Mount  ZioiL 
As  you  stand  there  you  observe  that  it  is  but  a  very  little  hill, 
llashan  is  far  loftier,  and  Carmel  and  Sharon  outvie  it.  As  for 
Lebanon,  Zion  is  but  a  little  hillock  compared  with  it.  If  you 
think  for  a  moment  of  the  Alps,  or  of  the  loftier  Andes,  or  of 
the  yet  mightier  Himalayas,  this  Mount  Zion  seems  to  be  a 
very  little  hill,  a  mere  mole-hill,  insignificant,  despicable,  and 
obscure.  Stand  there  for  a  moment,  until  the  Spirit  of  God 
touches  your  eye,  and  you  shall  see  this  hill  begin  to  grow.  Up 
it  mounts,  with  the  temple  on  its  summit,  till  it  outreaches  Tabor. 
Onward  it  grows,  till  Carmel,  with  its  perpetual  green,  is  left 
behind,  and  Salmon,  with  its  everlasting  snow,  sinks  before  it. 
Onward  still  it  grows,  till  the  snowy  peaks  of  Lebanon  are 
eclipsed.  Still  onward  mounts  the  hill,  drawing  with  its  mighty 
roots  other  mountains  and  hills  into  its  fabric ;  and  onward  it 
rises,  till,  piercing  the  clouds,  it  reaches  above  the  Alps ;  and 
onwards  .still,  till  the  Himalayas  seem  to  be  sucked  into  its 
bowels,  and  the  greatest  mountains  of  \,*\Q  earth  appear  to  be 
but  as  the  roots  that  strike  out  from  the  ride  of  the  eternal  hill ; 
and  there  it  rises  till  you  can  scarcely  s^e  the  top,  as  infinitely 
above  all  the  higher  mountains  of  the  \\  orld  as  they  are  above 
the  valleys.  Have  you  caught  the  idea,  \nd  do  you  see  there 
alar  off  upon  the  lofty  top,  not  everlastii  g  snows,  but  a  pure 
crystal  table-tend  crowned  with  a  gorgeous  city,  the  metropolis 
A'  God,  the  royal  palace  of  Jesus  the  King.  The  sun  is  eclipsed 
oy  the  light  which  shines  from  the  top  of  this  mountain ;  the 
moon  ceases  from  her  brightness,  for  there  is  now  no  night ;  but 
his  one  hill,  lifted  up  on  high,  illuminates  the  atmnsDhere,  and 
lie  nations  of  them  that  are  saved  are  walking  in  t;ie  light 
.hereof.  The  hill  of  Zion  hath  now  oulsoared  all  others,  and  sAl 
the  mountains  and  hills  of  the  earth  are  become  as  nothing 
before  her.  This  is  the  magnificent  picture  of  the  text.  I  do 
not  know  that  in  all  the  compass  of  poetry  there  is  an  idea  so 
massive  and  stupendous  as  this — a  mountain  heaving,  expanding, 
swelling,  growing,  till  all  the  high  hills  become  absorbed,  and 


f 

A    VISION    OF    THE    LATTER-DAY    GLORIES. 

that  which  was  but  a  little  rising  ground  before  becomes  a  hill 
the  top  whereof  reacheth  to  the  seventh  heaven.  Now  we  hava 
here  a  picture  of  what  the  church  is  to  be. 

Of  old,  the  church  was  like  Mount  Zion,  a  very  little  hill 
\V  hat  saw  the  nations  of  the  earth  when  they  looked  upon  it  ?— 
a  humble  man  with  twelve  disciples.  But  that  little  hill  grew 
and  some  thousands  were  baptized  in  the  name  of  Christ ;  it  grei 

gain  and  became  mighty.  The  stone  cut  out  of  the  mountain 
without  hands  began  to  break  in  pieces  kingdoms,  and  now,  at  thij 
day,  the  hill  of  Zion  stands  a  lofty  hill.  But  still,  compared  witn 
the  colossal  systems  of  idolatry,  she  is  but  small.  The  Hindoo, 
and  the  Chinese  turn  to  olu%  religion  and  say,  "  It  is  an  infant  of 
yesterday  ;  ours  is  the  *eligion  of  ages."  The  Easterns  compare 
Christianity  to  some  miasma  that  creeps  along  the  fenny  low 
lands,  but  their  systems  they  imagine  to  be  like  the  Alps,  out- 
soaring  the  heavens  in  height.  Ah,  but  we  reply  to  this,  "  Your 
mountain  crumbles  and  your  hill  dissolves,  but  our  hill  of  Zion 
has  been  growing,  and,  strange  to  say,  it  has  life  within  its  bowels, 
and  grow  on  it  shall,  grow  on  it  must,  till  all  the  systems  of  idol 
atry  shall  become  less  than  nothing  before  it,  till  false  gods 
being  cast  down,  mighty  systems  of  idolatry  being  overthrown, 
this  mountain  shall  rise  above  them  all,  and  on,  and  on,  and  on, 
shall  this  Christian  religion  grow,  until,  converting  into  its  mass 
all  the  deluded  followers  of  the  heresies  and  idolatries  of  man, 
the  hill  shall  reach  to  heaven,  and  God  in  Christ  shall  be  all  in 
all."  Such  is  the  destiny  of  our  church,  she  is  to  be  an  all-con 
quering  church,  rising  above  every  competitor. 

We  may  more  fully  explain  this  in  two  or  three  ways.  The 
church  will  be  like  a  high  mountain,  for  she  will  be  pre-eminently 
conspicuous.  I  believe  that  at  this  period  the  thoughts  of  men 

re  more  engaged  upon  the  religion  of  Christ  than  upon  any 
other.  It  is  true,  and  there  be  few  that  will  deny  it,  that  ever} 
other  system  is  growing  old  :  gray  hairs  are  scattered  here  and 
(here,  although  the  followers  of  these  religions  know  it.  As  for 
Mahomet,  has  he  not  become  now  effete  with  gray  old  age  1  And 
the  sabre,  once  so  sharp  to  slay  the  unbeliever,  hath  it  not  been 
blunted  with  time  and  rusted  into  its  scabbard1?  As  for  the  old 
idolatries,  thi  religion  of  Confucius,  or  of  Budha,  where  arc 


220  A    VISION    OF    THE    LATTER-DAY    GLORIES. 

their  missionaries,  where  the  old  activity  that  made  minor  idolau 
tries  bow  before  them  1  They  are  now  content  to  be  confined 
within  their  own  limit,  they  feel  that  their  hour  is  come,  that  they 
can  grow  no  further,  for  their  strong  man  is  declining  into  old 
age.  But  the  Christian  religion  has  become  more  conspicuous 
now  than  ever  it  was.  In  every  part  of  the  world,  all  people  are 
thinking  of  it ;  the  very  gates  of  Japan — once  fast  closed — are 
now  open  to  it,  and  soon  shall  the  trumpet  voice  of  the  gospel  be 
heard  there,  and  the  name  of  Jesus  the  Son  of  the  Highest  shall 
there  be  proclaimed  by  the  lips  of  his  chosen  servants.  The  hill 
is  already  growing,  and,  mark  you,  it  is  to  grow  higher  yet ;  it  is 
to  be  so  conspicuous,  that  in  every  hamlet  of  the  world  the  name 
of  Christ  shall  be  known  and  feared.  There  shall  not  be  a  Be 
douin  in  his  tent,  there  shall  not  be  a  Hottentot  in  his  kraal,  there 
shall  not  be  a  Laplander  in  the  midst  of  his  eternal  snow,  or  an 
African  in  that  great  continent  of  thirst,  that  shall  not  have  heard 
of  Christ.  Rising  higher,  and  higher,  and  higher,  from  north  to* 
south,  from  east  to  west,  this  mountain  shall  be  beheld  ;  not  like 
the  star  of  the  north  which  cannot  be  seen  in  the  south,  nor  like 
the  "  cross"  of  the  south,  which  must  Five  way  before  the  "  bear" 
of  the  north — this  mountain,  strange  to  say  it,  contrary  to  nature, 
shall  be  visible  from  every  land.  Far-off  islands  of  the  sea  shall 
behold  it,  and  they  that  are  near  shall  worship  at  the  foot  there 
of.  It  shall  be  pre-eminently  conspicuous  in  clear,  cloudless 
radiance,  gladdening  the  people  of  the  earth.  This  I  think  is  one 
meaning  of  the  text,  when  the  prophet  declares  "  that  the  moun 
tain 'of  the  Lord's  house  shall  be  established  in  the  top  of  the 
mountains,  and  shall  be  exalted  above  the  hills." 

This,  however,  is  but  a  small  part  of  the  meaning.  He  means 
that  the  church  of  Christ  shall  become  awful  and  -venerable  in  her 
qrandewr.  It  has  never  been  my  privilege  to  be  able  to  icava 
this  country  for  any  time,  to  stand  at  the  foot  of  the  loftier 
mountains  of  Europe,  but  even  the  little  hills  of  Scotland,  where 
half  way  up  the  mist  is  slumbering,  struck  me  with  some  degree 
of  awe.  These  are  some  of  God's  old  works,  high  and  lofty, 
talking  to  tne  stars,  lifting  up  their  heads  above  the  clouds  as 
though  they  were  ambassadors  from  earth  ordained  to  speak  to 
God  i:i  silence  far  aloft.  But  poets  tell  us — and  travellers;  whc 


A    VISION    OF    THE    LATTER-DAY    GLORIES.  * 

have  but  little  poetry,  say  the  same — that,  standing  at  the  foot  of 
some  of  the  stupendous  mountains  of  Europe,  and  of  Asia,  the 
soul  is  subdued  with  the  grandeur  of  the  scene.  There,  upon  the 
father  of  mountains,  lie  the  eternal  snows  glittering  in  the  sun 
light,  and  the  spirit  wonders  to  see  such  mighty  things  as  these 
such  massive  ramparts  garrisoned  with  storms.  We  seem  to  bfl 
but  as  insects  crawling  at  their  base,  while  they  appear  to  stand 
like  cherubims  before  the  throne  of  God,  sometimes  coveiing 
their  face  with  clouds  of  mist,  or  at  other  times  lifting  up  their 
white  heads,  and  singing  their  silent  and  eternal  hymn  before  the 
throne  of  the  Most  High.  There  is  something  awfully  grand  in 
a  mountain,  but  how  much  more  so  in  such  a  mountain  as  is  de 
scribed  in  our  text,  which  is  to  be  exalted  above  all  hills,  and 
above  all  the  highest  mountains  of  the  earth. 

The  church  is  to  be  awful  in  her  grandeur.  Ah !  now  she  is 
despised;  the  infidel  barketh  at  her,  it  is  all  he  can  do;  the  fol 
lowers  of  old  superstitions  as  yet  pay  her  but  little  veneration. 
The  religion  of  Christ,  albeit  that  it  has  to  us  all  the  veneration 
of  eternity  about  it — "  For  his  goings  forth  were  of  old,  even 
from  everlasting" — yet  to  men  who  know  him  not,  Christianity 
seems  to  be  but  a  young  upstart,  audaciously  contending  with 
hoary-headed  systems  of  religion.  Ay,  but  the  day  shall  come 
when  men  shall  bow  before  the  name  of  Christ,  when  the  cross 
shall  command  universal  homage,  when  the  name  of  Jesus  shall 
stay  the  wandering  Arab  and  make  him  prostrate  his  knee  at  the 
hour  of  prayer,  when  the  voice  of  the  minister  of  Christ  shall 
he  as  mighty  as  that  of  a  king,  when  the  bishops  of  Christ's 
church  shall  be  as  princes  in  our  midst,  and  \vhen  the  sons  and 
daughters  of  Zion  shall  be  every  man  of  them  a  prince,  and  every 
daughter  a  queen.  The  hour  cometh,  yea,  and  now  draweth  nigh, 
M'hen  the  mountain  of  the  Lord's  house  in  her  awful  grandeur 
hall  be  established  on  the  top  of  the  mountains. 

There  is  yet,  however,  a  deeper  and  larger  meaning.  It  is  just 
this  : — that  the  day  is  coming  when  the  church  of  God  shall  have 
absolute  supremacy.  The  church  of  Christ  now  has  to  fight  for 
her  existence.  She  hath  many  foes,  and  mighty  ones  too,  who 
would  snatch  the  chaplet  from  her  brow,  blunt  her  sword,  and 
stain  her  banners  in  the  Just ;  but  the  day  shall  come  when  alJ 


A    VISION    OF    THE    LATTKI.'-DAY    GLORIES. 

her  enemies  shall  die ;  there  shall  not  be  a  dog  to  move  his  tongue 
against  her ;  she  shall  be  so  mighty  that  there  shall  be  nought 
left  to  compete  with  her.  As  for  Rome,  you  shall  seek  but  find 
it  not.  It  shall  be  hurled  like  a  millstone  in  the  flood.  As  for 
Mahomet's  lustful  superstition,  they  shall  ask  for  it,  but  the  im 
postor  shall  not  be  found.  As  for  false  gods,  talk  to  the  bittern 
and  the  owl,  to  the  mole,  and  to  the  bat,  and  they  shall  tell  you 
where  they  shall  be  discovered.  The  church  of  Christ  at  that 
time  shall  not  have  kings  of  the  earth  to  bind  her,  and  to  control 
her,  as  if  she  were  but  a  puny  thing,  nor  shall  she  have  them  to 
persecute  her  and  lift  up  their  iron  arm  to  crush  her ;  but  she, 
then,  shall  be  the  queen  and  empress  of  all  nations ;  she  shall 
reign  over  all  kings ;  they  shall  bow  down  and  lick  the  dust  of 
her  feet ;  her  golden  sandals  shall  tread  upon  their  necks ;  she, 
with  her  sceptre,  with  her  rod  of  iron,  shall  break  empires  in 
pieces  like  earthen  vessels.  She  shall  say,  "  Overturn  !  overturn ! 
overturn!  until  he  come,  whose  right  it  is;  and  I  will  give  it 
HIM."  The  destiny  of  the  church  is  universal  monarchy.  What 
Alexander  fought  for,  what  Cajsar  died  to  obtain,  what  Napoleon 
wasted  all  his  life  to  achieve,  that  Christ  shall  have : — the  univer 
sal  monarchy  of  the  broad  acres  of  the  earth.  "  The  sea  is  his, 
and  he  made  it,  and  his  hands  formed  the  dry  land."  The  whole 
earth  shall  come,  and  worship,  and  bow  down,  and  kneel  before 
the  Lord  our  Maker ;  for  every  knee  shall  bow,  and  every  tongue 
shall  confess  that  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord  to  the  glory  of  God  the 
Father. 

You  have  now,  I  think,  the  meaning  of  the  text,— the  church 
growing  and  rising  up  till  she  becomes  conspicuous,  venerable, 
and  supreme.  And  now  let  me  pause  here  a  moment,  to  USK 
how  this  is  to  be  done. 

How  is  this  to  be  done  ?  I  reply,  there  are  three  things  which 
will  ensure  the  growth  of  the  church.  The  first  is  the  individual 
exertion  of  every  Christian.  I  do  not  think  that  all  the  exertions 
i.f  the  church  of  Christ  will  ever  be  able  to  reach  the  climax  of 
cuv  text.  I  think  we  shall  see  something  more  than  natural 
agency,  even  though  employed  by  the  Spirit  before  the  church 
of  Christ  shall  be  exalted  to  that  supremacy  of  which  I  have 
spoken;  but,  nevertheless,  this  is  to  contribute  to  it.  In  the 


A    VISION    OF    THE    LATTER-DAY    GLORIES.  223 

*>Iden  times,  when  men  raised  cairns  to  the  memory  of  departed 
kings,  it  was  usual  to  put  a  heap  of  stones  over  the  tomb,  and 
every  passer-by  threw  another  stone.  In  course  of  ages 
th  jse  mounds  grew  into  small  hills.  Now  the  church  of  Christ 
in  the  present  day  is  growing  something  in  that  way.  Each 
Christian  convert  to  Christ  throws  his  stone ;  we  each  do  our 
measure.  By  the  grace  of  God  let  us  each  make  sure  of  one 
stot.e  being  deposited,  and  strive  to  add  another  by  laboring  to 
be  the  instruments  of  bringing  some  one  else  to  Christ ;  in  this 
way  the  church  will  grow ;  and  as  year  after  year  rolls  on,  each 
Christian  serving  his  Master,  the  church  will  increase  ;  and  it 
shall  come  to  pass  in  the  last  times,  that  even  by  the  efforts  of 
Christ's  people,  owned  by  God  the  Holy  Spirit,  this  mountain 
shall  be  highly  exalted  in  the  midst  of  the  hills. 

This,  however,  although  all  that  we  can  do,  is  not,  1  think,  all 
that  we  have  to  expect.  We  can  do  no  more,  but  we  may  expect 
more.  Ber/ides,  the  church  of  Christ  differs  from  all  other  moiui' 
tains  in  this  : — that  she  has  within  her  a  living  influence.  The 
ancients  fabled  that  under  Mount  Etna  Vulcan  was  buried. 
Some  great  giant,  they  thought,  lay  there  entombed ;  and  when 
he  rolled  over  and  over,  the  earth  began  to  tremble,  and  the 
mountains  shook,  and  fire  poured  forth.  We  believe  not  the 
fable  ;  but  the  church  of  God,  verily,  is  like  this  living  mountain. 
Christ  seems  to  be  buried  within  her ;  and  when  he  moves  him 
self  his  church  rises  with  him.  Once  he  was  prostrate  in  the 
garden ;  then  Zion  was  but  a  little  hill ;  then  he  rose,  and  day 
by  day  as  he  is  lifted  up  his  church  rises  with  him  ;  and  in  the 
da}  when  he  shall  stand  on  Mount  Zion,  then  shall  his  church  be 
elevated  to  her  utmost  height.  The  fact  is,  that  the  church, 
though  a  mountain,  is  a  volcano — not  one  that  spouts  fire,  but  that 
hath  fire  within  her  ;  and  this  inward  fire  of  living  truth,  and  living 
grace,  makes  her  bulge  out,  expands  her  side,  and  lifts  her  crest, 
and  onwards  she  must  tower,  for  truth  is  mighty,  and  it  must 
prevail — grace  is  mighty,  and  must  conquer- —Christ  is  mighty, 
and  he  must  be  King  of  kings.  Thus  you  see  that  there  is  some 
thing  more  than  tha  individual  exertions  of  the  church  ;  there  Is 
ft  something  within  her  that  must  make  her  expand  and  grow, 
till  she  ?vertops  the  highest  mountains. 


224  A    VISION    OF    THE    LATTER-DAY    GLOKIKS. 

But  mark  you,  the  great  hope  of  the  church,  although  it  is 
reckoned  madness  by  some  to  say  it,  is  the  second  advent  of 
Christ.  When  he  shall  come,  then  shall  the  mountain  of  the 
Lord's  house  be  exalted  above  the  hills.  We  know  not  when  Jesus 
may  come.  All  the  prophets  of  modern  times  have  only  been 
prophets  from  the  fact  that  they  have  made  profit  by  their  specu 
lations  ;  but,  with  the  solitary  exception  of  that  pun  upon  the 
word,  I  believe  they  have  not  the  slightest  claim  upon  your  credit ; 
no4  even  men  who  are  doctors  of  divinity,  who  can  spoil  an  abun 
dance  of  paper  with  their  prophecies  of  second  adventism  ;  "  Of 
that  day  and  that  hour  knoweth  no  man,  no,  not  the  angels  of  God." 
Christ  may  come  this  morning  ;  while  I  am  addressing  you  Christ 
may  suddenly  appear  in  the  clouds  of  heaven  ;  he  may  not  come 
for  many  a  weary  age;  but  come  he  must;  in  the  last  days  he 
must  appear ;  and  when  Christ  shall  come  he  will  make  short 
work  of  that  which  is  so  long  a  labor  to  his  church.  His  ap 
pearance  will  immediately  convert  the  Jews.  They  have 
looked  for  Messias  a  king ;  there  he  is,  in  more  than  regal 
splendor.  They  shall  see  him ;  they  shall  believe  on  him ; 
he  will  then  tell  them  that  he  is  the  Messiah  whom  their 
fathers  crucified.  Then  will  they  look  on  him  whom  they 
have  pierced,  and  they  will  mourn  for  their  sin,  and  gathering 
round  their  great  Messiah,  in  glorious  march,  they  shall  enter 
and  be  settled  in  their  own  land.  They  shall  once  more  become 
a  great  and  mighty  nation,  nay,  a  Jew  shall  become  a  very 
prince  among  men,  first  born  in  the  church  of  God.  Then  shall 
the  fulness  of  the  Gentiles  be  converted,  and  all  kindreds  and 
people  shall  serve  the  Son  of  David.  Mark,  the  church  is  to 
rise  first,  and  when  the  church  has  risen  to  eminei  ce  and  great 
ness,  the  nations  will  flow  unto  her.  Her  rising  will  not  be 
>wing  to  the  nations,  but  to  the  advent  of  Christ,  and  after  she 
as  become  great,  conspicuous,  and  supreme,  then  will  the  nations 
flow  to  her.  I  am  looking  for  the  advent  of  Christ ;  it  is  this 
that  cheers  me  in  the  battle  of  life — the  battle  and  cause  of 
Christ.  I  look  for  Christ  to  come,  somewhat  as  John  Bunyan 
described  the  battle  of  Captain  Credence  with  Diabolus.  The 
inhabitants  of  the  town  of  Mansoul  fought  hard  to  protect  tlieir 
city  from  the  prince  of  darkness,  and  at  last  a  pitoh  battle  waa 


A*  VISION    OF    THE    LATTER-DAY    GLORIES.  225 


fought  outside  the  Xalls.  The  captains  and  the  brave  men  of 
arms  fought  all  day  till  their  swords  were  knitted  to  their  hands 
with  blood  ;  many  ar/d  many  a  weary  hour  did  they  seek  to  drive 
back  the  Diabolians.  The  battle  seemed  to  waver  in  the  bal 
ance  ;  sometimes  victory  was  on  the  side  of  faith,  and  anon, 
triumph  seemed  to  hover  over  the  crest  of  the  prince  of  hell  ; 
but,  just  as  the  sun  was  setting,  trumpets  were  heard  in  the  dis 
tance;  Prince  Emanuel  was  coming,  with  trumpets  sounding, 
and  with  banners  flying  ;  and  while  the  men  of  Mansoul  passed 
onwards,  sword  in  hand,  Emanuel  attacked  their  foes  in  the  rear> 
and,  getting  the  enemy  between  them  twain,  they  went  on,  driving 
their  enemies  at  the  sword's  point,  till  at  last,  trampling  over 
their  dead  bodies,  they  met,  and  hand  to  hand  the  victorious 
church  saluted  its  victorious  Lord.  Even  so  must  it  be.  We 
must  fight  on  day  by  day  and  hour  by  hour  ;  and  when  we  think 
the  battle  is  almost  decided  against  us,  we  shall  hear  the  trump 
of  the  archangel,  and  the  voice  of  God,  and  he  shall  come,  the 
Prince  of  the  kings  of  the  earth  :  at  his  name  with  terror  they 
shall  melt,  and  like  snow  driven  before  the  wind  from  the  bare 
side  of  Salmon  shall  they  fly  away  ;  and  we,  the  church  militant, 
trampling  over  them,  shall  salute  our  Lord,  shouting,  "  Hallelujah, 
hallelujah,  hallelujah,  the  Lord  God  Omnipotent  reigneth."  Thus 
then,  have  I  explained  the  first  part  of  the  text. 

II.  The  second  part  of  the  text  we  have  to  consider  is  this 
sentence  —  "  AND  ALL  NATIONS  SHALL  FLOW  UNTO  IT."  Here  is  a 
figure,  perhaps  not  so  sublime,  but  quite  as  beautiful  as  the  first. 
Still  endeavor  to  retain  in  your  minds  the  picture  of  this  stu 
pendous  mountain,  reaching  above  the  clouds,  seen  by  all  man 
kind,  in  either  hemisphere,  a  wonder  of  nature  which  could  not 
be  accomplished  by  the  ordinary  rules  of  art,  but  which  divine 
•wisdom  will  be  able  to  perform.  Well,  wonder  of  -venders,  you 
ee  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  converging  to  this  great  mountain 
as  to  a  common  centre.  Once  in  the  year  all  the  people  of  Israel 
were  wont  to  go  to  the  little  hill  of  Zion  ;  and  now,  once  for  all, 
you  see,  not  Israel,  but  all  the  nations  of  the  earth  coming  to 
this  great  hill  of  Zion,  to  worship  the  Most  High  God.  The 
white  sails  are  on  the  Atlaptic,  and  the  ships  are  flying  before 
the  wind,  even  as  the  bird  flitteth  through  the  sky.  .What  beai 
10* 


226  A    VISION    OF    THE    LATTER-DAY    GLORIES. 

they  1  What  is  their  noble  cargo  1  Lo  !  they  come  from  far. 
bringing  the  sons  and  daughters  of  Zion  from  the  ends  of  tht 
earth.  See  you  there  the  camel  and  the  dromedary,  the  great 
caravan  passing  over  the  pathless  desert  1  What  are  these,  and 
what  is  their  costly  freight  1  Lo  !  they  are  bringing  the  duugh- 
ters  of  God,  and  the  sons  of  Zion  up  to  the  Most  High  God.  to 
worship  him.  From  all  parts  of  the  earth  you  see  them  coming 
—from  the  freezing  cold  and  from  the  burning  heat,  from  the  fai 
off  islands  of  the  sea,  and  from  the  barren  sands  they  come 
they  come,  all  converging  towards  the  great  centre  of  their  high 
and  holy  worship.  This  we  are  not  to  understand,  of  course, 
literally,  but  as  a  figure  of  the  great  spiritual  fact  that  all  the 
souls  of  men  shall  tend  to  Christ,  and  to  union  with  his  church. 

Again,  I  beg  you  carefully  to  observe  the  figure.  It  does  not 
say  they  shall  come  to  it,  but  they  shall  "flow  unto  it."  Under 
stand  this  metaphor.  It  implies  first  their  number.  Now,  when 
our  churches  are  increased,  converts  drop  into  the  churches; 
drop  after  drop  the  pool  is  filled.  But  in  those  days  they  shall 
flow  into  it ;  now  it  is  but  the  pouring  out  of  water  from  tho 
bucket ;  then  it  shall  be  as  the  rolling  of  the  cataract  from  the 
hillside,  it  shall  flow  into  it.  Now  our  converts,  howevel 
numerous,  are  comparatively  few,  but  then  a  nation  shall  be  born 
in  a  day.  The  people  shall  renounce  their  gods  at  once.  Whole 
nations  shall  of  a  sudden,  by  an  irresistible  impulse,  flow  into 
the  church,  not  one  by  one,  but  in  one  vast  mass.  The  power 
of  God  shall  be  seen  in  bringing  wrhole  nations  into  the  church 
of  God.  You  have  seen  the  river  flowing  onward  to  the  sea, 
with  its  banks  all  swollen,  bearing  its  enormous  contribution  to 
the  boundless  ocean.  So  shall  it  be  in  the  last  days ;  each 
nation  shall  be  like  a  river,  rolling  towards  the  foot  of  this 
great  mountain  the  church  of  the  living  God.  Happy,  happy, 
happy  day,  when  India  and  China,  with  their  teeming  myriads, 
and  all  the  nations  of  the  earth,  with  their  multitude  of  tongues, 
shall  flow  into  the  mountain  of  God ! 

But  the  text  conveys  the  idea  not  only  of  numbers,  but  of— (I 
kuow  the  exact  word,  but  then  I  do  not  like  to  use  it,  for  fear 
some  should  not  know  the  meaning  of  it,  it  means  that  the  na 
tions  of  the  earth  shall  come  willingly  to  it) — spontanittyt  That 


A    ViSION    OF    THE    LATTER-DAY    GLORIES.  227 

was  the  word  I  wanted  to  use ;  but  wherefore  should  we  use  big 
words,  when  we  might  find  little  ones.  They  are  to  come  will 
ingly  to  Christ;  not  to  be  driven,  not  to  be  pumped  up,  not  to 
be  forced  to  it,  but  to  be  brought  up  by  the  word  of  the  Lord, 
to  pay  him  willing  homage  ;  they  are  to  flow  to  it.  Just  as  the 
river  naturally  flows  down  hill  by  no  other  force  than  that  which 
is  its  nature,  so  shall  the  grace  of  God  be  so  mightily  given  tr 
the  sons  of  men,  that  no  acts  of  parliament,  no  state  churches 
no  armies  will  be  used  to  make  a  forced  conversion.  "  The  na 
tions  shall  flow  unto  it."  Of  themselves,  made  willing  in  the 
day  of  God's  power,  they  shall  flow  to  it.  Whenever  the  church 
of  God  is  increased  by  unwilling  converts  it  loses  strength ; 
whenever  men  join  the  church  because  of  oppression,  which  would 
drive  them  to  make  a  profession  of  religion,  they  do  not  flow, 
the  church  is  weakened,  and  not  strengthened  ;  but  in  those  days 
the  converts  shall  be  voluntarily  won — shall  come  in  willingly 
by  divine  grace  ;  they  shall  flow  unto  it. 

But  yet  again,  this  represents  the  power  of  the  work  of  con* 
version.  They  "  shall  flow  to  it."  Imagine  an  idiot  endeavor 
ing  to  stop  the  river  Thames.  He  gets  for  himself  a  boat,  and 
there  he  stands,  endeavoring  to  push  back  the  stream.  He  ob 
jects  to  it  flowing  towards  the  sea,  and  with  his  hands  he  tries  to 
put  it  back.  Would  you  not  soon  hear  laughter  along  the  banks  1 
Ah.  fool,  tc  attempt  to  stop  the  stream  !  Now,  the  word  "  flow," 
here  conveys  just  the  idea.  "  The  nations  shall  flow  unto  it." 
The  Secularist  may  rise  up  and  say,  "  Oh,  why  be  converted  to 
this  fanatical  religion  ?  Look  to  the  things  of  time."  The 
false  priests  may  rouse  themselves  with  all  their  anger  to  defy 
Christ,  and  endeavor  to  keep  their  slaves ;  but  all  their  attempts 
to  stop  conversion  will  be  like  an  idiot  seeking  to  drive  back  a 
*a  mighty  stream  with  his  puny  hands.  "  All  nations  shall  flow 
unto  it."  What  an  idea  it  is  !  Oh,  take  your  stand  to-day,  like 
prophets  of  the  Lord,  and  look  into  the  future.  To-day  the 
church  appears  like  the  dry  bed  of  a  torrent ;  here  I  stand,  and 
I  see  a  little  water  flowing  in  a  secret  and  thread-like  stream, 
amongst  the  stones.  So  little  is  it  that  I  can  scarcely  detect  it ; 
but  I  take  the  glass  of  prophecy,  I  look  far  onward,  and  1  see  a 
rolling  mass  of  H'ater,  such  as  is  sometimes  seen  in  the  rapid 


228  A    VISION    OF    THE    LATTER-DAY    GLORIES. 

rivers  of  Africa ;  and  there  it  is,  coming  with  thundering  sound 

Wait   for   a    few   more   years,  and  that  torrent,  like   Kishoivs 

mighty  river,  sweeping  all  before  it,  shall  fill  this  dry  bed,  and 

swell  on,  and  on,  and  on,  with  tumultuous  waves  of  joy,  till  i» 

,  meets  the  ocean  of  Christ's  universal  reign,  and  loses  itself  in 

'  God.     Here  you  see,  then,  you  have  more  than  your  imagination 

can  grasp.     This  stupendous  mountain,  and  all  the  nations  of  th« 

earth — vast  numbers  with  immense  force — spontaneously  coming 

up  to  the  house  of  the  living  God. 

Now,  I  shall  close  by  a  practical  address,  very  brief,  and,  I 
trust,  very  earnest.  Is  it  not  a  great  subject  for  praise  that  the 
nations  of  the  earth  may  flow  to  the  hill  of  God  and  to  his  house? 
If  I  were  to  tell  you  that  all  the  nations  of  Europe  were  climb 
ing  the  sides  of  the  Alps,  you  would  ask  me,  "  And  what  benefit 
do  they  gain  thereby  1  They  must  pass  over  the  slippery  fields 
of  ice  and  they  may  lose  their  lives  in  the  midst  of  the  bottom 
less  chasms  that  are  overhung  by  the  mighty  precipices ;  they 
may  suddenly  be  overwhelmed  and  buried  in  the  all-destroying 
avalanche,  and  should  they  reach  the  summit  they  must  fall 
down  exhausted.  What  is  there  there  that  men  should  covet  in  those 
barren  heights ;  rarefied  air  and  cold  would  soon  destroy  them 
should  they  attempt  to  exist  there."  Ah,  but  it  is  not  so  with 
God's  hill.  There  shall  be  no  snow  upon  its  summit,  but  the 
warmth  and  light  of  Jehovah's  love  ;  there  shall  be  no  chasms 
in  its  side  wherein  souls  may  be  destroyed,  for  there  shall  be  a 
way,  and  a  highway,  (the  unclean  shall  not  pass  over  it,)  a  way 
so  easy  that  the  wayfaring  man  shall  not  err  therein. 

The  mountains  of  which  we  read  in  Scripture  were  some  of 
them  such,  that  if  they  were  accessible  no  one  would  desire  to 
climb  them.  There  were  bounds  set  round  about  Sinai,  uut,  had 
there  been  no  bounds,  who  would  have  wished  to  ascend  if?  A 
mountain  that  burned  with  fire,  and  upon  which  there  was  a 
sound  as  of  a  trumpet  waxing  exceeding  loud  and  long.  No 
brethren,  we  are  not  come  to  a  mountain  like  Sinai  with  its  su 
pernatural  thunders  ;  we  are  not  come  to  a  hill  bare,  and  barren, 
and  bleak,  and  difficult  to  climb,  like  the  mountains  of  earth-, 
but  the  hill  of  God,  though  it  is  a  high  hill,  is  a  hill  up  which,  on 
hands  aud  knees,  the  humble  penitent  may  readily  ascend  Ye 


A    VISION    OF    THE    LATTER-DAY    GLORIES.  229 

ttfc  come  to  &  mountain  which  is  not  forbidden  to  you  ;  there  are 
tio  bounds  set  about  it  to  keep  you  off,  but  you  are  freely  bidden 
and  freely  invited  to  come  to  it.  And  the  God  who  invited  you 
will  give  you  grace  to  come.  If  he  has  given  you  the  will  to 
come,  he  will  give  you  grace  to  climb  the  sides  of  the  hill,  till 
you  shall  reach  its  upper  glories,  and  stand  on  its  summit  trail 
ported  with  delight.  While  I  am  talking  about  the  nations  thai 
rt'ill  flow  to  Christ,  might  we  not  weep  to  think  that  there  are  so 
*nany  in  this  congregation  that  are  not  flowing  to  Christ  but  are 
going  from  him  1  Ah  !  soul ;  what  are  the  splendors  of  the 
Millennium  to  thce,  if  thou  art  his  enemy  1  For  when  he  tramples 
liis  foes  in  his  hot  displeasure,  thy  blood  shall  stain  his  garments, 
even  as  the  garments  of  the  wine-pressers  are  stained  with  the 
olood  of  the  grape.  Tremble,  sinner,  for  the  advent  of  Christ 
must  be  thy  destruction  though  it  shall  be  the  church's  joy  and 
comfort.  Ye  say,  "  Come  quickly"  Know  ye  not  that  to  you 
the  day  of  the  Lord  is  darkness  and  not  light,  for  that  day  burneth 
as  an  oven,  and  they  that  are  proud  and  do  wickedly  shall  be  as 
stubble,  and  the  fire  shall  consume  them  with  burning  heat.  Oh  ! 
ye  people  that  to-day  hear  the  words  of  Jesus !  ye  are  now  this 
day  invited  to  come  to  the  mountain  of  his  church,  on  which 
stands  his  cross  and  his  throne.  Ye  weary,  heavy  laden,  sin-de 
stroyed,  sin-ruined  souls,  ye  that  know  and  feel  your  need  of 
Jesus,  ye  that  weep  because  of  sin,  ye  are  bidden  to  come  now 
to  Christ's  cross,  to  look  to  him  who  shed  his  blood  for  the  un 
godly,  and,  looking  to  him,  you  shall  find  peace  and  rest ;  so  that 
when  he  coineth  with  rainbow  wreath,  and  robes  of  storm,  you 
shall  be  able  to  see  him,  not  with  alarm  and  terror,  but  with  joy 
and  gladness ;  for  you  shall  say.  "  Here  he  is,  the  man  who  died 
for  me  has  come  to  claim  me;  he  who  bought  me  has  come  to 
receive  me ;  my  judge  is  my  Redeemer,  and  I  v/ill  rejoice  in 
him.*'  Oh  !  turn  ye,  turn  ye  unto  God  !  some  of  you  as  vile  as 
the  inhabitants  of  Sodom  ;  turn  ye,  turn  ye  U>  ^od  !  O  Lord 
Jesus  !  by  thy  grace  turn  every  one  of  us  to  thy.olf !  Bring  in 
thine  elect ;  let  thy  redeemed  rejoice  in  thee ;  ar.d  ohi»n  let  the 
fulness  of  tho  nations  flow  unto  thce,  and  thine  shal1  ir  •  'Jj,  glory 
for  ever  and  ever. 


SERMON   XV. 

COVENANT   BLESSINGS. 

"  H^  hath  g  sren  moat  unto  them  that  fear  him  :  he  will  ei  er  be  mindful 
•f  his  covenant." — PSALM  cxi.  5. 

THIS  verse  occurs  in  one  of  the  Psalms,  the  Hallelujah,  com 
mencing  with  "  Praise  ye  the  Lord."  We  often  find  the  Psalmist 
praising  and  extolling  God.  Let  us  imitate  his  example.  Let 
us  do  so,  because  we  shall  find  it  very  pleasant  and  profitable, 
and  because,  also,  it  is  our  bounden  duty.  One  of  the  highest 
exercises  of  the  new  life  is  praising  God.  Our  doubts  and  fears 
may  sometimes  be  indications  of  life ;  and  doubtless  they  are,  for 
the  dead  man  neither  doubteth  nor  feareth.  But  our  songs  of 
praise  are  far  higher  demonstrations  of  the  life  within,  and  are 
more  worthy  fruits  of  a  soil  which  has  been  the  subject  of  God's 
husbandry,  which  has  been  ploughed  by  the  agonies  of  the 
Saviour,  and  made  fertile  through  his  precious  blood.  My 
brethren,  our  life  should  be  one  continued  psalm,  with  here  and 
there  a  note  which  descends  deep.  Yet,  for  the  most  part,  we 
should  always  seek  to  sing  as  we  live.  The  stars  sing  as  they 
shine,  and  they  sing  by  shining.  Let  us  sing  whilst  we  live,  and 
live  by  singing  ;  and  let  our  life  be  singing  one  great  psalm  ot 
life  perpetually.  There  are  many  ways  of  praising  God.  W 
should  do  it  with  the  lip  ;  and  grateful  is  the  voice  of  song  in  tho 
cars  of  the  Lord  God  of  Sabaoth.  We  should  do  it  by  our 
iaily  conversation  ;  let  our  acts  be  acts  of  praise,  as  well  as  our 
words  words  of  praise.  We  should  do  it  even  by  the  very  look 
of  our  eyes,  and  by  the  appearance  of  our  countenance ;  let  not 
thy  face  be  sad,  let  thy  countenance  be  joyous.  Sing  where  thou 


COVENANT    BLESSINGS.  231 

goest ;  yea,  when  thou  art  laden  with  trouble,  let  not  man  see  it. 
Thou,  when  thou  fastest,  appear  not  unto  man  to  fast ;  anoint 
thy  head  and  wash  thy  face  that  man  may  not  perceive  *hy 
sorrows.  Be  thou  ever  glad,  for  it  is  God's  commandment — 
"  Rejoice  in  the  Lord  alway,  and  again  I  say,  Rejoice."  And 
yet  once  more,  he  saith,  "  Rejoice  evermore."  That  we  may 
have  themes  of  song,  David  has  in  this  psalm  afforded  us  many 
subjects.  Let  us  attend  to  the  subjects  of  the  text — the  subject, 
I  might  have  said,  for  it  is  all  one.  This  verse  is  the  voice  of 
experience.  It  is  not  the  voice  of  hope,  saying,  "  He  will  give ;" 
but  the  voice  of  experience,  "  He  hath  given  meat  unto  them  that 
fear  him ;"  and  the  voice  of  faith,  "  He  will  ever  be  mindful  of 
his  covenant." 

We  shall  notice,  first  of  all,  the  gift — "  He  hath  given  meat 
unto  them  that  fear  him ;"  then  we  shall  notice  the  covenant ; 
then  the  character  here  spoken  of — "He  hath  given  meat  unto 
them  that  fear  him." 

I.  Let  us  consider  THE  GIFT — "  He  hath  given  meat."  We. 
are  to  understand  this,  of  course,  in  a  twofold  sense  of  our  neces 
sities ;  the  first,  temporal,  the  other,  spiritual. 

1.  We  are  to  understand  this  gift  in  a  temporal  sense.  Our 
bodies  need  meat;  we  cannot  keep  this  fabric  in  repair  without 
continually  providing  it  with  food.  God's  children  are  not,  by 
their  being  spiritual  men,  prevented  from  feeling  natural  wants; 
they  hunger  and  they  thirst  even  as  do  others.  Sometimes,  too, 
they  are  even  called  to  suffer  poverty,  and  know  not  where  their 
next  mcrsel  of  meat  shall  come  from.  Blessed  be  God, 

"  He  who  has  made  our  heaven  secure 
Will  here  all  good  provide." 

And  the  covenant  is  not  merely  the  covenant  of  the  great  and 
marvellous  things  that  we  need  spiritually,  but  it  is  a  covenant 
which  promises  in  the  catalogue  of  its  gifts  mercies  that  are  food 
for  the  body,  mercies  for  our  immediate  and  pressing  wants — 
u  He  hath  given  meat  unto  them  that  fear  him."  God  has  never 
suffered  his  people  to  starve,  "The  young  lions  do  lack  and  suf 
£»*•  hunger,  but  they  that  wait  upon  the  Lord  shall  not  want  any 


232  COVENANT    ELESSINGS. 

good  tiling."  The  promise  is  as  true  under  the  new  covenant  a§ 
under  the  old — "  Bread  shall  be  given  you,  and  your  water  shall 
be  sure."  The  Lord  who  feeds  the  ravens  will  not  be  less  care 
ful  of  his  people  ;  he  who  supplies  every  insect  with  its  food,  and 
feeds  the  prowling  lion  in  his  majesty,  will  not  suffer  his  own 
home-borne  ones,  those  who  are  nearest  his  heart,  to  perish  for 
'itck  of  nutriment.  "  The  cattle  on  a  thousand  hills  are  his;"  \w 
vill  not  suffer  his  children  to  lack  for  their  meat.  "  He  it  is  to 
whom  the  earth  belongeth,  and  the  fulness  thereof;"  he  will  not, 
then,  suffer  his  children  to  go  without  necessary  supplies.  "  lie 
hath  given  meat  unto  them  that  fear  him."  Some  of  us  are  not 
qualified  to  speak  from  experience  upon  this  point.  We  may 
sav,  indeed,  that  God  has  ever  given  us  our  meat ;  we  have  not 
lacked  any  thing.  Hitherto,  the  road  has  been  to  us  like  that  of 
Israel  when  they  came  to  the  camp  of  the  Syrians,  strewn  with 
gold,  and  silver,  and  garments.  God  has  provided  for  our  wants 
even  before  they  have  come ;  he  has  anticipated  our  necessities. 
But  there  are  others  of  you  that  have  been  brought  so  low  by 
poverty  and  affliction  that  you  are  qualified  to  speak.  You  have 
sometimes  been  to  an  empty  cupboard  with  an  empty  stomach; 
you  have  sometimes  wondered  where  your  supplies,  should  come 
from  ;  you  have  been  even  houseless  and  homeless.  But,  ah, 
children  of  the  living  God,  has  he  ever  failed  you  utterly  1  Has 
he  not,  after  all,  though  he  has  reduced  you  very  low,  so  that  the 
last  morsel  was  eaten  from  the  wallet,  has  he  not  ultimately  sup 
plied  you,  and  that,  too,  by  means  not  miraculous,  but  almost  so] 
Has  he  not  in  providence  sent  you  things  which  you  needed,  and 
which  you  scarcely  expected  to  receive  ?  In  answer  to  prayer 
has  he  not  heard  you  in  your  deepest  tribulations  ?  And  when 
vou  were  well  nigh  famished,  has  he  not  spread  your  board  with 
lent)  when  you  have  bent  your  knees  before  him  1  Yes,  ye 
ried  ones,  ye  have  tried  this  promise  and  have  proved  it  true. 
Ye  sons  of  poverty  and  toil,  ye  have  had  to  rest  the  whole  weight 
of  your  daily  maintenance  on  the  promise,  without  any  thing  to 
look  to  save  that ;  and  have  you  ever  found  him  fail "?  No  ;  you 
will  unanimously  bear  witness  that  this  is  a  great  truth — "  He 
hath  given  meat  unto  them  that  fear  him." 

But  it  is  surprising,  sometimes,  how  God  has  done  it.     Many 


COVENANT    liLESSINGS.  233 

a  story  have  I  heard  from  the  poor  amongst  my  own  flock  of 
how  God  has  delivered  them — strange  stories,  which  you  would 
laugh  tit.  There  are  some  of  them  that  could  write  "  Banks  of 
Faith  "  that  would  be  as  wonderful  as  that  of  William  Hunting 
ton.  Some  of  you  laugh  at  that,  and  do  not  believe  it ;  but  it  is 
only  because  there  are  so  many  things  of  the  same  sort  all  put 
ogether  that  they  seem  to  be  incredible  through  their  number. 
But  there  are  many  of  the  Lord's  servants  who  could  easily  com 
pose  a  "  Bank  of  Faith  "  like  his,  for  they  have  had  their  neces 
sities  most  deep  and  their  sorrows  most  poignant,  and  they  have 
had  their  reliefs  well  nigh  miraculous,  so  that  if  God  had  thrust 
nis  hand  out  of  the  clouds  and  handed  down  bread  for  them  and 
clothing,  their  deliverance  would  not  have  been  more  apparently 
from  his  hand  than  it  has  been  in  the  way  whereby  his  provi 
dence  has  supplied  their  wants.  They  can  say  He  hath  done  it, 
and  hath  done  it  marvellously,  and  constantly  too — "  He  hath 
given  meat  to  them  that  fear  him."  Why,  if  the  child  of  God 
were  in  such  a  position  that  the  earth  could  not  yield  him  bread, 
God  would  open  the  windows  of  heaven  and  rain  manna  from 
thence  again.  If  he  could  be  placed  in  such  a  position  that  the 
common  course  of  providence  could  not  serve  his  end,  God  would 
change  the  nature  of  every  thing  rather  than  change  the  standing 
of  a  promise ;  he  would  break  all  the  seasons,  and  unloose  the 
very  bonds  of  nature  itself,  and  let  the  laws  of  nature  run  riot, 
rather  than  suffer  one  of  his  promises  to  fail,  and  his  children  to 
lack.  "He  hath  given  meat,"  and  he  will  ever  do  so,  "unto 
them  that  fear  him." 

2.  But  we  are  to  understand  this  chiefly  in  a  spiritual  sense. 
God's  people  are  a  people  to  need  spiritual  meat.  I  was  talking 
to  a  minister  the  other  day,  who  certainly  was  not  noted  for  his 
'grr-at  soundness.  He  was  making  a  joke  to  me  about  certain 
people  in  his  congregation,  who  said  they  could  not  feed  under 
him.  "There  is  Mrs.  So-and-so,"  says  he,  "who  tells  me  that 
she  cannot  get  a  bit  of  food  out  of  my  ministry.  I  do  not  know 
ow  it  is,"  continued  he,  jocularly,  "  for  I  do  not  think  you  say 
half  as  many  good  things  as  I  do ;  but  yet  the  old  woman  can 
not  feed  well  enough."  He  laughed  at  the  idea  of  feeding  under 
*  ministry.  But  there  is  a  good  deal  more  in  the  expression  tha» 


234  COVENANT    BLESSINGS. 

many  think  ;  there  is  a  good  deal  meant  by  it  that  cannot  be  ex 
pressed  by  any  other  word.  It  is  only  the  Christian  that  can 
understand  it.  He  hears  a  very  eloquent  discourse  delivered; 
"  but,"  says  he,  "  I  have  got  no  food  out  of  it — I  like  the  elo 
quence."  Or  he  hears  a  very  learned  discourse ;  "  but,"  he  says, 
** 1  do  not  feed  under  that."  There  is  a  peculiar  style  of  preach- 
ng,  and  a  peculiar  style  of  hearing,  which  can  only  be  described 
as  a  "  feeding  preaching,"  and  a  "  feeding  hearing  ;  "  for  the  child 
of  God  feels  that  though  he  may  have  learned  little  that  is  fresh, 
yet  still  his  soul  has  been  receiving  spiritual  food,  and  he  goes 
on  his  way  rejoicing.  And,  my  brethren,  the  ministry  is  or.e  of 
the  places  where  God  feeds  his  people  ;  and  those  to  whom  God 
has  committed  the  solemn  work  of  the  ministry  should  be  very 
careful  that  there  is  something  in  what  they  say  that  the  child  of 
God  can  feed  on.  What  on  earth  is  the  use  of  a  man  going  into 
a  pulpit  and  firing  away  for  an  hour  and  a  half  with  thundering 
eloquence,  but  with  nothing  to  feed  upon  1  I  have  read  sermons 
lately — can  get  them  by  hundreds — that  are,  from  beginning  to 
end,  the  unmitigated  and  undiluted  essence  of  nothing  ;  grand  de- 
descriptions  of  nonentity,  flowery  and  beautiful  delineations  of 
things  that  cannot  exist.  You  read  of  comets  of  which  it  is  said 

O 

that  a  thousand  square  miles  of  their  tails  might  be  compressed 
into  one  solid  inch.  Many  of  these  sermons  are  of  the  same  sort, 
consisting  of  a  long  display  of  words  ;  but  as  for  any  thing  tan 
gible  to  lay  hold  of  and  to  remember,  there  is  nothing  of  the  sort 
in  them.  They  are  a  finely,  gloriously  polished  nothing.  You 
can  discover  no  matter  in  them ;  very  finely  dished  up,  but  con 
taining  nothing  whereon  my  soul  could  feed.  The  child  of  God 
can  never  feed  under  a  ministry  unless  he  hears  the  doctrines  of 
grace,  and  listens  to  the  things  of  the  kingdom.  "  Our  minis 
ter  preached  a  fine  metaphysical  sermon  the  other  day,"  say 
;me- ;  "  I  never  heard  such  a  clear  distinction  as  he  made  betweei 
that  point  and  the  other  point."  But  the  child  of  God  goes  out 
and  says,  "  Well,  I  don't  want  any  of  his  metaphysics  ;  there 
was  no  food  for  my  soul.  1  went  there  to  hear  about  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ ;  I  went  to  hear  something  about  my  soul's  welfare; 
something  about  the  heaven  that  is  to  come,  or  the  hell  that  ia 
to  he  shunned;  I  wanted  to  hear  something  about  communion 


COVENANT    BLESSINGS. 


with  Christ,  something  al>out  the  eternal  covenant."     Sermons 
need  to  be  instructive ;  there  should  be  a  teaching  in  them  of 
the  things  of  the  kingdom.     "  Why,"  said   a  good  writer  once, 
"  if  you  were  to  hear  six  lectures  by  a  geologist,  he  would  be  the 
poorest  geologist  in  the  world  who  would  not  give  you  some 
opinions  of  geology.     But  you   may  hear  sixty  sermons  from 
many  preachers  without  getting  any  notion  of  their  system  o 
divinity."     It  is  the  glory  of  the  men  of  the  age  that  they  hav 
not  systems  of  divinity  ;  they  have  cast  creeds  to  the  wind  j  they 
have  no  forms  of  stating  their  truths  systematically.     The  reason 
is  because  they  have  nothing  to  state.     No  man  will  avoid  having 
a  system  when  he  has  got  principles.     It  is  impossible  for  a  man 
to  believe  the  things  in  God's  Word  without  insensibly  to  him- 
self  forming  a  creed  of  some  sort  or  other.     It  is  the  fashion  to 
talk  about  giving  up  creeds.     Creeds  are  only  the  orderly  way 
of  laying  out  things.     If  \ve  have  the  things  we  shall  always  have 
the  way  of  laying  them  out  in  some  fashion,  and  communicating 
our  knowledge  to  others.     So  that  in  a  given  number  of  dis 
courses  our  hearers  will  be  pretty  tolerably  acquainted  with  our 
ideas  of  the  truth  of  God.     "  He  giveth  meat  to  them  that  fear 
him"  under  the  ministry.     Sometimes  God  gives  your  minister 
a  gift  of  such  utterance  that  if  he  were  to  preach  for  a  week  you 
would  listen  to  him.     There  are  periods  when  your  own  minister 
gives  no  food  to  you,  though  he  does  to  others,  because  he  has 
tood  for  different  members  of  God's  family.     But  there  are  other 
periods  when  God  seems  to  have  given  him  such  gifts,  when  he 
has  let  fall  hand fu Is  to  be  gathered,  as  did  the  man  Boaz,  scat 
tering  sheaves  of  corn  from  both  his  hands,  and  you  pick  them 
up  and  feast  thereon  and  are  satisfied. 

There  is  another  way  in  which  God  gives  food  unto  his  chil 
dren — that  is,  in  the  Bible.  This  precious  volume  is  the  grand 
granary  of  spiritual  food  for  God's  people.  Would  to  God  y 
read  it  more!  With  your  magazines,  and  newspapers,  and 
tracts  in  this,  that,  and  the  other,  ye  have  too  much  covered  up 
this  ancient  Bible,  this  old  Book,  this  emporium  of  all  wisdom, 
this  sum  of  all  knowledge.  Aye,  Christians,  if  you  want  meat, 
study  a  chapter  of  God's  Word.  If  yqu  want  to  have  food  for 
your  souls,  give  up  for  a  little  while  reading  the  worko  of  even 


230  COVENANT    BLESSINGS. 

the  best  of  men,  and  take  a  psalm  for  your  study — or  if  not  a 
whole  psalm,  take  one  verse  of  it;  take  it  for  your  daily  medita 
tion  ;  masticate  and  digest  it  all  day  long,  and  so  you  will  find 
meat  for  "  them  that  fear  him."  Let  me  just  say  a  word  to  you 
on  this  point.  When  you  read  the  Bible,  do  not  think  you  wUl 
get  meat  simply  by  reading.  I  know  some  people  who  make  a 
point  of  reading  two  chapters  of  the  Bible  in  a  day.  They  do 
BO  as  a  manual  exercise ;  they  simply  run  their  eyes  down  tho 
page,  and,  after  all,  do  not  know  a  word  they  have  been  reading. 
I  have  heard  many  a  time  in  our  churches  and  chapels,  a  minister 
read  a  very  long  chapter,  that  none  of  his  hearers  knew  an} 
thing  about,  nor  himself  either ;  and  if  he  had  read  a  chapter  in 
double  Dutch  the  people  would  have  been  just  as  much  fed. 
That  is  not  the  way  to  feed  upon  God's  Word.  We  cannot  feed 
except  we  understand  and  know  the  thing  we  read  about.  In 
reading  the  Scripture  do  as  Luther  advised.  He  says,  "  Wrhcn 
I  get  a  promise  1  treat  it  as  a  tree  in  my  garden.  I  know  there 
is  rich  fruit  on  it.  If  I  cannot  get  it,  I  shake  it  backwards  and 
'brwards  by  prayer  and  meditation,  until  at  last  the  fruit  drops 
into  my  hand."  Do  you  the  same.  Read  a  short  portion  of 
Scripture ;  turn  it  over  and  over  again  in  your  meditation  all 
day  long.  And  then,  if  you  cannot  get  any  thing  out  of  it,  I  will 
tell  you  a  way  whereby  you  will  effectually  get  something.  Go 
down  on  your  knees  before  the  passage  and  say,  "  O  Lord,  open 
this  passage  to  me;  give  me  something  out  of  it ;  teach  me  to 
understand  it" — and  you  will  not  be  long  before  God  refreshes 
you  with  dainty  bits  from  the  tables  of  paradise,  and  make  your 
soul  glad  with  choice  morsels  of  royal  dainties,  wherewith  he 
feeds  his  own  chosen  ones.  "  He  giveth  meat  to  them  that  fear 
rim," 

But  there  is  another  way  of  getting  meat,  even  when  we  havB 
ot  got  the  Bible  with  us.  He  sometimes  gives  meat  "unto 
Jicm  that  fear  him,"  by  bringing  Jesus  Christ  home  to  the  man ; 
without  the  use  of  the  Word ;  simply  in  meditation  and  com- 
munion.  You  know,  beloved,  after  all,  that  what  a  child  of  God 
feeds  upon  is  Jesus  Christ.  When  the  Jews  went  to  the  ttmple 
they  did  not  eat  the  tongs  and  fire-shovels  ;  they  did  not  eat  the 
garments  of  the  priests,  and  the  bells  and  the  pomegranates ;  they 


COVENANT    BLESSINGS.  2JH 

valued  all  these  things,  for  they  were  made  of  gold,  and  they 
thought  them  precious.  But  what  they  ate  was  the  pascal  lamb. 
So  the  Christian  does  not  eat  the  doctrine ;  he  feeds  on  Christ. 
He  lov-js  the  truth,  he  loves  the  ordinance,  he  loves  every  thing 
in  the  temple  for  Christ's  sake ;  but  his  food  is  the  Lamb  himself." 
J esus,  Jesus,  Jesus — that  is  the  real  food  for  all  the  Lord's  chosen. 
And  are  these  not  most  sweet  and  happy  moments,  when  the  spirit 
is  carried  aloft  in  blessed  communion,  when  Jesus  Christ  seems 
very  pleasant  and  very  precious,  when  we  place  our  head  on  his 
bosom,  when  we  seem  to  feel  his  heart  and  know  his  love  for  us, 
when  we  lose  ourselves  in  him  and  almost  forget  that  wo  have  a 
separate  existence,  being — 

"  Plunged  in  his  Godhead's  deepest  sea, 
And  lost  in  his  immensity  ?  " 

Yes,  there  are  some  such  precious  seasons ;  and  these  are  like  days 
of  heaven  upon  earth — the  seasons  of  refreshing  from  the  pres 
ence  of  the  Lord.  I  was  much  struck  the  other  evening  at  a 
prayer-meeting,  by  the  prayer  of  one  of  our  brethren,  which  came 
home  to  my  heart.  When  he  prayed,  he  said,  "  0  Lord,  give 
me  Mary's  place — 

'  Oh  !  that  I  might,  with  Mary  sit 
For  ever  at  my  Master's  feet, 
And  learn  of  him.'  " 

ffc  prayed  that  lie  might  have  her  part,  and  always  sit  at  the  feet 
cf  Jesus.  But,  by  and  by,  the  good  man  kindled  up  in  his  prayer, 
and  s;»«d,  "No,  my  Master,  I  have  not  asked  enough  of  thee. 
AluiVr:  place  is  too  low  for  me,  if  I  may  have  a  better.  Lift  me 
uj  higher,  Lord  ;  give  me  John's  place. 

'Oh  !  that  I  might,  with  favored  John, 
For  ever  lean  my  head  upon 
The  bosom  of  my  Lord. '  " 

Then  again  he  pleaded  for  that  higher  degree  of  communion  be 
tween  the  soul  and  Christ.  "Surely,"  thought  I,  "now  you  have 
asked  enough."  But,  suddenly  rising  up  to  another  flight  on  the 
wings  of  ccmir.  anion,  like  the  eagle  taking  its  last  soar  into  the 


238  COVENANT    BLESSINGS. 

skies,  he  said.  "  No,  Lord,  John's  place  doth  not  s  iffice  me.  Thou 
hast  lifted  me  from  thy  feet  to  thy  bosom — now  from  thy  bosom 
to  thy  lips."  Then,  quoting  the  words  of  the  spouse — "  Let  him 
kiss  me  with  the  kisses  of  his  mouth,  for  thy  love  is  better  than 
wine  w — he  sweetly  paraphrased  it  thus,  "  Let  the  lip  of  my  peti 
tioning  meet  the  lip  of  thy  benediction  ;  let  the  lip  of  my  praise 
neet  the  lip  of  thy  acceptance  ;  so  shall  the  kiss  be  consummated 
11  id  my  joy  be  complete."  Aye,  and  when  we  are  favored  to  go 
through  these  stages  of  fellowship ;  to  go  from  the  foot  to  the 
bosom,  from  the  bosom  to  the  lip ;  to  go  from  the  mere  learner 
and  to  be  a  friend  and  companion ;  and  then  to  go  higher  still — 
to  be  lifted  up  and  to  feel  our  fellowship  with  Christ,  by  standing 
as  high  as  he  does,  and  being  on  his  lip  ;  it  is  there  the  child  of 
God,  insensibly  almost,  receives  strength,  and,  like  Elijah  smitten 
by  the  angel,  he  rises  up  and  finds  his  meat  baked  upon  the  coals, 
and  eats  thereof,  and  lives  upon  it  for  forty  days  to  come.  Pre 
cious  mode  of  feeding  this ! 

But,  somehow  or  other,  God  doth  give  meat  unto  his  children, 
and  will  never  leave  them  to  be  famished.  You  have  noticed,  I 
dare  say,  when  one  means  of  feeding  fails  for  God's  children,  the 
other  become  better.  You  are  sick,  and  cannot  be  fed  by  a  min 
istry  ;  you  cannot  go  out  to  hear  the  Word  ;  then,  generally, 
God's  Word  becomes  more  precious.  Or,  you  have  nobody  to 
read  to  you,  and  your  sight  has  failed ;  generally,  then,  com 
munion  becomes  more  precious.  One  way  or  other  God  will 
have  his  children  fed. 

II.  We  will  now  consider  THE  COVENANT.  "  lie  will  be  evei 
mindful  of  his  covenant." 

God  has  made  many  covenants  at  divers  times,  and  none  of 
these  covenants  has  he  ever  broken.  For  one  moment  let  me 
briefly  mention  the  covenants.  There  was  the  covenant  with 
4dam,  the  covenant  of  works — "  Obey  me,  and  thou  shalt  live  ; 
iisobey  me.  and  thou  shalt  die/'  That  covenant  he  did  not  break. 
He  did  not  subject  A.dam  to  pain  or  miserv  until  he  had  first 
broken  the  condition  of  his  covenant,  and  so  became  the  inevitable 
heir  of  suffering.  He  made  a  covenant  with  Noah  that  the  waters 
should  no  more  go  over  the  earth ;  and  the  rainbow,  the  sign  of 
that  covenant,  has  lit  up  the  sky  ever  since  at  various  intervals 


COVENANT    BLESSINGS.  230 

and  the  earth  has  not  been  drowned  with  a  flood  a  second  time. 
He  made  a  covenant  with  David,  that  his  seed  should  sit  upon 
bis  throne;  and  that  covenant  he  kept.  He  made  a  covenant 
with  Abraham,  that  he  would  give  the  land  of  Canaan  to  be  the 
heritage  of  his  seed  for  ever ;  and  that  covenant  hath  he  kept. 
Neither  hath  he  altered  the  thing  that  went  out  of  his  lips. 

But  the  covenant  here  referred  to  is  a  better  covenant  than  all 
hese.  It  is  the  covenant  of  grace.  It  is  a  sweet  subject  to  preafb 
ipon.  Suffer  me  to  go  back  to  the  time  when  this  covenant  was 
laiade.  It  is  older  than  the  oldest  things  that  man  has  ever  seen  ; 
,he  covenant  of  grace  is  coeval  with  the  everlasting  hills.  J* 
was  made  by  God  with  Christ  for  us  from  before  all  world? 
Man  was  a  sinner,  God  had  foreseen  that  he  would  sin.  Jesus 
Christ  and  his  Father  were  determined  to  save  him,  a  covenant 
was  made  between  them.  God  the  Son,  on  his  part,  stipulated 
that  he  would  suffer  all  the  punishment  of  all  the  elect,  that  he 
would  offer  perfect  righteousness  on  their  behalf,  and  pay  all  tho 
demands  of  God's  justice.  God  the  Father,  on  his  part,  coven 
anted  that  all  the  elect,  beinj/  redeemed  by  the  blood  of  Christ, 
should  most  certainly  be  accepted  and  saved.  That  is  the  covenant 
of  which  God  is  ever  mindful.  Some  people  believe  in  a  rickety 
kind  of  covenant,  which  [  never  could  find  in  the  Bible,  a  covenant 
that  has  conditions  in  it  which  you  and  I  are  to  fulfil.  If  there 
was  such  a  covenant  P,.*:  that,  it  would  not  be  a  covenant  of  grace 
but  of  works,  if  the  covenant  of  grace  were  made  with  men, 
those  that  shoV.d  be  s&ved,  on  condition  of  believing,  it  would  be 
as  impossible  for  any  man  to  be  saved  on  that  condition,  as  it 
would  be  on  the  condition  of  obeying,  since  faith  is  no  more  pos 
sible  to  unaided  ir.an  than  is  perfect  obedience.  Faith  in  Christ 
is  as  difficult  a  thing,  to  a  man  dead  in  trespasses  and  sin,  as  is 
perfect  obedience  to  every  command  of  God.  The  covenant  of 
grace  is  a  covenant  without  any  conditions  on  our  part  whatever, 
of  any  sort,  in  any  shape,  in  any  form,  or  any  fashion.  The 
fjovennnt,  in  fact,  is  not  made  between  us  and  G>d;  it  is  maoe 
oetwcen  God  and  Christ,  our  representative.  All  the  conditions 
rf  that  covenant  are  answered,  so  that  there  are  none  left,  for  us. 
The  conditions  were  that  Christ  should  suffer — he  has  suffered  ; 
that  Christ  should  <  bey — he  has  obeyed.  All  that  is  done;  and 


2-10  COVENANT    BLESSINQ8. 

all  that  is  now  slanding  is  the  unconditional  covenant,  that  God 
will  give  to  all  his  elect,  though  dead  in  sin,  power  to  live;  that 
he  will  give  to  them,  though  black,  a  washing  in  the  fountain  ;  that 
he  ryill  give  to  thorn,  though  naked,  a  clothing  of  perfect  right 
eousness ;  that  he  will  ultimately  accept  them  to  dwell  with  him 
for  ever  in  glory  everlasting.  This  covenant,  on  which  our  hopes 
are  built,  this  glorious  covenant, 

"  Signed,  and  sealed,  and  ratified, 
In  all  things  ordered  well," 

^ViU  God  ever  forget?  No,  "he  will  be  ever  mindful  of  hid 
covenant."  He  will  be  ever  mindful  of  it,  in  every  thing  and 
towards  every  person.  Christ  will  be  mindful  of  his  covenant 
in  every  thing.  God  will  not  suffer  one  single  promise  to  be  un 
fulfilled,  nor  one  single  blessing  of  the  covenant  to  be  kept  back. 
Every  iota,  and  jot,  and  tittle  of  the  covenanted  purpose  of  God 
shall  be  fulfilled,  and  every  thing  which  he  has  promised  to  his 
people  in  the  covenant,  and  which  Christ  hath  bought  for  his  peo 
ple  through  the  covenant,  shall  most  infallibly  be  received  by  his 
people.  As  for  the  persons  interested  therein  not  one  of  them 
shnll  be  forgotten.  If  in  the  covenant  they  shall  most  assuredly 
be  saved,  despite  every  attack  of  the  devil,  and  of  theii  own 
wickedness,  and  any  casualty,  so  called,  of  providence,  or  what 
soever  may  happen,  all  that  are  in  the  covenant  must  and  shall 
be  gathered  in.  The  Arminian  says  there  are  some  in  the  cove 
nant  who  tumble  out  of  it;  that  God  has  chosen  some  men — that 
he  justifies,  that  he  accepts  them,  then  turns  them  out  of  his 
family.  The  Arminian  holds  the  unnatural,  cruel,  barbarous 
idea,  that  a  man  may  be  God's  child,  and  then  God  may  unchild 
him  because  he  does  not  behave  himself.  The  idea  is  revolting 
'even  to  human  sensibility.  If  our  children  sin,  they  are  our 
children  still ;  though  chastened  and  vexed  sore,  yet  never  do 
they  cease  to  be  remembered  amongst  our  family.  There  are 
many  of  God's  children  that  have  gone  astray  and  been  chastened 
for  it ;  but  it  were  an  idea  too  barbarous  to  suppose  that  God 
would  unchild  his  child  for  any  sin  he  doth  commit.  He  keepetb 
fast  his  covenant ;  he  loveth  them,  sinners  though  they  be.  lie 
keepeth  them  from  runnin^  into  the  riot  of  sin;  and  when,  som* 


COVENANT    HLESSINGS.  241 

times,  they  go  astray,  as  the  best  of  them  will,  still  his  loving 
heart  towards  them  is  unchangeably  the  same.  I  do  not  servo 
che  God  of  the  Arminians  at  all ;  I  have  nothing  to  do  w.'th  him, 
and  I  do  not  bow  down  before  the  Baal  they  have  set  up ;  he  is 
not  my  God,  nor  shall  he  ever  be ;  I  fear  him  not,  nor  tremble  at 
his  presence.  A  mutable  God  may  be  the  God  for  them ;  he  is 
n«t  the  God  for  me.  My  Jehovah  changcth  not.  The  God  tha 
saith  to-day  and  denieth  to-morrow,  that  justifieth  to-day  and  con 
deinns  the  next,  the  God  that  hath  children  of  his  own  one  day 
and  lets  them  be  the  children  of  the  devil  the  next,  is  no  relation 
to  my  God  in  the  least  degree.  lie  may  be  the  relation  of  Ash- 
taroth  or  Baal,  but  Jehovah  never  was  or  can  be  his  name. 
Jehovah  changeth  not;  he  knoweth  no  shadow  of  turning.  If  he 
hath  set  his  heart  upon  a  man,  he  will  love  him  to  the  end.  If  he 
hath  chosen  him,  he  hath  not  chosen  him  for  any  merit  of  his  own  ; 
therefore  he  will  never  cast  him  away  for  any  demerit  of  his  own. 
If  he  hath  begotten  him  unto  a  lively  hope,  he  will  not  suffer  him 
to  fall  away  and  perish.  That  were  a  breaking  of  every  promise, 
and  abrogation  of  the  covenant.  If  one  dear  child  might  fall 
away,  then  might  all.  If  one  of  them  for  whom  the  Saviour  died 
might  be  damned,  then  might  the  Saviour's  blood  be  utterly  void 
and  vain.  If  one  of  those  whom  he  hath  called  according  to  his 
purpose  might  perish,  then  were  his  purpose  null  and  void.  But, 
child  of  God,  lay  your  head  upon  the  covenant — 

"  Let  the  earth's  old  pillar  shake, 
And  all  the  wheels  of  nature  break, 
Thy  steadfast  soul  need  fear  no  more 
Than  solid  rocks  when  billows  roar." 

Let  the  covenant  be  thy  song  in  the  house  of  thy  pilgrimage.  Let 
the  covenant  be  thy  refuge  in  distress.  Let  the  covenant  be  thy 
watchword  at  the  gates  of  death.  Keep  the  covenant  in  mind. 
Remember  again  that  it  is  "  signed,  and  sealed,  and  ratified  ;" 
that  oaths  and  blood  have  made  it  all  secure.  When  thou  doubt- 
est,  think  not  the  covenant  is  shaken.  When  thou  tremblest,  think 
not  the  covenant  is  removed.  It  abideth  still,  fast  and  firm.  And 
though  thou  hast  backslidden,  go  thou  back  to  Jesus — His  heart 
is  still  the  same, 
11 


242  COVENANT    BLESSINGS. 

"  Thy  soul  through  many  changes  goes: 
His  love  no  variation  knows." 

He  abideth  still,  fast  and  firm ;  nor  will  he  finally  leave  one  of 
his  own  people  whom  he  hath  foreknown  and  fore- ordained.  And 
now  we  close  np  by  noticing — 

III.  THE  CHARACTER  REFERRED  TO. — "Them  that  fear  him/ 
Them  that  fear  him  are  in  the  covenant.  Saith  the  young  con 
vert  oftentimes  to  the  minister,  "Sir,  how  can  I  know  that  I  arc 
elect?"  And  the  usual  answer  is,  "You  have  nothing  to  do  witb 
that;  you  may  think  of  that  by-and-bye."  Begging  the  gentle 
man's  pardon,  that  is  not  true.  A  sinner  has  every  thing  to  do 
with  it.  Instead  of  having  nothing  to  do  with  election,  he  has 
every  thing  in  the  world  to  do  with  it.  But  it  is  said  he  need 
not  trouble  his  mind  about  it.  Perhaps  he  should  not;  but  he 
will,  and  it  is  no  way  of  comfort  to  tell  him  that  he  ought  not. 
If  I  have  a  toothache,  it  is  poor  comfort  for  a  physician  to  tell  me 
that  1  ought  not  to  have  it.  So,  when  a  sinner  is  troubled  about 
election,  it  is  poor  comfort  to  tell  him  he  ought  not  to  be  troubled. 
The  best  way  is  to  go  fairly  through  with  it.  Do  you  fear  the 
Lord  1  Then  so  sure  as  you  are  a  living  man  you  are  elect.  You 
have  the  fear  of  the  Lord  before  your  eyes  ?  Then  you  need  have 
no  doubt  but  that  your  names  are  in  the  covenant.  None  have 
feared  the  Lord  who  were  not  first  loved  by  the  Lord.  Never 
one  did  come  and  cast  himself  at  the  feet  of  Jesus  because  he 
feared  the  penalty  of  sin ;  and  none  ever  came  to  embrace  the 
loving  skirts  of  the  Redeemer  because  he  feared  lest  he  should  go 
astray,  without  having  been  first  called  and  chosen  and  made 
faithful.  No,  the  fear  of  God  in  the  heart  is  the  proof  of  being 
God's  elect  one.  If  we  fear  him  we  may  believe  that  he  will  ever 
give  meat  unto  us ;  that  he  will  always  keep  his  covenant  towards 
is  which  he  has  made  for  us  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord.  "  But," 
ays  one,  "how  am  I  to  know  whether  I  am  elect?"  Beloved, 
thou  canst  not  know  it  by  any  outward  professions.  Thcu  mayest 
be  of  any  church  in  the  world,  or  of  no  church,  and  yet  be  one  of 
God's  elect.  Nor  canst  thou  know  it  even  by  the  ser.tiincnts 
which  thou  receivest  as  being  true,  for  thou  mayest  know  truth 
and  yet  not  have  truth  in  thy  soul ;  thou  mayest  be  orthodox  in 


COVENANT    BLESSINGS.  243 

fehy  head  and  heterodox  in  thy  heart;  thou  mayest  believe  every 
thing,  and  yet  be  cast  away  at  last.     The  only  way  whereby  thou 
eanst  judge  thyself  is  this :     Dost  thou  fear  the  Lord  ]     Dost 
thou  reverence  his  name  and  his  Sabbath  ?     Hast  thou  trembled 
at  his  feet  ?     Hast  thou  cast  away  thy  self-righteousness  at  hi 
•command?     And  hast  thou  come  to  him  and  taken  Christ  to  b 
ihy  all  in  all "?     I  do  not  ask  thee  whether  thou  fearest  hell — 
uany  fear  nell  that  fear  not  God.     Dost  thou  fear  to  offend  a 
»oving  Father.     Dost  thou  fear  lest  thou  shouldst  go  astray  .rom 
God's  commandments  ?     Dost  thou  cry  to  him, 

"Saviour,  keep  me  lest  I  wander?" 

Dost  thou  ask  him  to  preserve  thee1?  And  canst  thou  honestly 
say  that  if  thou  couldst  be  perfect  thou  wouldst  be;  that  thou 
desirest  to  be  free  from  sin  ;  that  thou  hatest  every  false  way  1 
And  is  it  thy  daily  groaning  to  be  set  free  from  a;uilt,  and  to  be 
surrendered  to  the  Crucified  ? 

Lastly,  canst  thou  say  this  after  me, 

"  A  guilty,  weak,  and  helpless  worm 

On  Christ's  kind  arms  ]  fall; 
He  is  my  strength  and  righteousness, 
My  Jesus  and  my  all  ?" 

Then  you   are  elect;  then   you  are  justified;  then  you   are  ac 
cepted  ;  and  you  have  no  more  reason  to  doubt  your  acceptance  and 
your  election,  than  you  will  have  when  you  stand  before  the  throne 
of    God  amid  the  blazing   lustres  of  eternal   glory.     You    are 
elect;  you  always  were.     God  hath  chosen  you;  your  fearing 
him  is  the  evidence  of  it;  and  your  believing  in  Christ,  without 
ny  righteousness  of  your  own,  is  a  proof  positive  that  you  wei%<3 
lu.sen  of  God  before  the  foundation  of  the  word. 

Now,  what  shall  I  say  in  conclusion  ?  There  are  some  of  you 
that  fear  not  God.  Alas  !  for  you,  my  brethren,  that  you  should  be 
in  a  state  so  utterly  miserable  and  pitiable,  without  the  fear  of 
God  before  your  eyes.  Oh  that  God  would  help  you  to  frar 
him  !  Oh  that  he  would  break  your  hearts  !  and  so  would  make 
you  feel  your  ruined  state,  as  to  bring  you  to  his  feet  to  receive 


244  COVENANT    BLESSINGS. 

the  perfect  righteousness  of  Christ;  then  would  you  fear  Him 
and  then  might  you  rejoice  that  he  would  give  you  meat  and  keep 
you  in  his  covenant.  Methinks  I  hear  one  say,  "  I  arn  a  sinner, 
I  am  in  the  front  rank  of  the  army  of  guilt.  1  have  vefily  trans- 
gressed,  and  gone  astray  from  the  Most  High.  Tell  me,  did  Jesus 
die  for  me?  Did  he  die — not  as  some  say  he  died,  for  all  meu 
—but,  in  that  special  sense  which  ensures  salvation]"  I  will  an 
swer  thee.  Canst  thou  say,  "  1  am  a  sinner,"  not  as  a  kind  of  idle 
compliment  that  most  men  pass  when  they  say  they  are  sinners, 
and  do  not  mean  what  the  word  implies,  for  they  no  more  mean 
tha,t  they  are  sinners  than  that  they  are  horses.  But  do  you 
really  believe  that  you  are  sinners  deserving  God's  wrath,  and 
the  fire  of  hell  for  ever  ?  Then  the  Lord  Jesus  died  for  you ;  and 
"  this  is  a  faithful  saying,  and  worthy  of  all  acceptation,  that 
Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners."  If  the  word 
is  to  be  understood  in  the  sense  in  which  Hart  uses  it,  when  he 
says, — "A  sinner  is  a  sacred  thing;  the  Holy  Ghost  hath  made 
him  so" — if  you  feel  you  are  a  sinner  in  that  sense,  Christ  died 
for  you.  But  you  say,  "I  wish  he  had  set  my  name  down  in  the 
book,  that  I  might  read  it."  Why,  my  friend,  if  he  had  done  so, 
you  would  believe  it  was  intended  for  somebody  else.  If  the 
book  contained  the  name  of  Smith,  in  such  a  street,  Smith  would 
declare  that  there  were  so  many  Smiths  that  it  could  not  be  him  ; 
and  if  you  could  read  your  name,  you  would  still  doubt  that  it 
could  by  any  possibility,  be  a  description  of  you,  since  another 
person  might  bear  the  same  title.  But  since  it  says,  "  sinners," 
Satan  himself  cannot  beat  you  out  of  that.  God  has  taught  you 
-what  "sinner"  means,  and  Satan  cannot  un teach  you  that.  Are 
you,  then,  a  sinner,  fully  ,wholiy,  in  all  the  black  sense  of  the  word  ? 
Then  Christ  died  for  you.  Cast  yourself  upon  that — Christ  died 
for  sinners.  But,  say  you,  "  Sir,  if  I  were  a  little  better,  I  might 
b^Ueve  that  he  died  for  me."  I  should  not;  he  died  for  sinners. 
Or  you  say,  "If  I  were  a  saint,  I  might  believe  that  he  died  for 
me."  I  should  not;  he  died  for  sinners.  Only  prove  thyself  a 
sinner,  and  thou  hast  proved  that  Christ  died  for  thee  ;  only  be 
thou  sure  that  thou  art  a  sinner,  that  thou  hast  revolted,  and  thai 
thou  knowevc  it,  only  confess  with  thine  heart  thy  transgi  easions, 


COVENANT    BLESSINGS.  2-45 

%nd  take  .this  title  to  thyself,  and  thou  mayest  believe  that  Jesus 
died  for  thee. 

Let  me  give  you  a  lesson  in   logic — not  from  Whately  nor 
Watts,  but   from   the  logic  of  faith.     It  is   extraordinary  how 
different  are  the  conclusions  of  faith  from  those  of  reason.    Once 
Reason  came  along,  and  heard  a  man  cry,  "  1  arn  guilty,  guilty." 
She  stopped,  and  said,  "The  man  is  guilty  ;  God  condemns  the 
guilty,  therefore  this  man  will  be  condemned."     She  went  away 
— left  the  man  condemned  and   ruined,  and   quivering  with  fear. 
Faith  came  and  heard  the  self-same  cry,  rendered  more  bitter  by 
the  cruel  syllogism  of  Reason.     Faith  stopped :  she  said,  "  The 
man  is  guilty  ;    Christ  died    for  the  guilty  ;  the  man   will  be 
saved  ;"  and  her  logic  was  right ;  the  man  lifted  up  his  head,  and 
rejoiced.     Reason  came  one  day,  and  saw  a  man  naked,  and  she 
said,  "  He  hath  not  on  a  wedding  garment ;  can  naked  souls  ap 
pear  before  the  bar  of  God  ?     Should  they  have  a  place  at  the 
supper  of  the  Lamb  ]     The  man  is  naked  ;  he  must  be  cast  out, 
for  naked  ones  cannot  enter  heaven  !"     Then  Faith  came  by,  and 
said,  "The  man  is  naked;  Christ  wrought  a  robe  of  righteous 
ness  ;  he  must  have  made  it  for  the  naked  ;  he  would  not  have 
made  it  for  those  who  have  a  robe  of  their  own.     That  robe  id 
for  the  naked  man,  and  he  shall  stand  in  it  before  God."     And 
her  logic  was  right  and  just.     The  other  might  seem  strictly  ac 
cording  to  rule,  but  this  was  better  still.     Reason  one  day  heard 
a  man  say  that  he  was  very  good  and  righteous.      She  saw  him 
go  up  to  the  temple,  and  heard  him  pray,  "  Lord,  I  thank  theo 
that  I  am  not  as  other  men."     Said  Reason,  "  That  man  is  better 
than  others,  and  he  will  be  accepted."     But  she  argued  wrongly ; 
for,  lo  !  he  went  out,  and  a  poor  sinner  by  his  side,  who  could  only 
say,  "  God  be  merciful  to  me,  a  sinner,"  went  down  to  his  house 
justified,  while  the  proud  Pharisee  went  on  his  way  disregarded. 
The  logic  of  faith  is  to  argue  white  from  black,  whereas  the  Icg'i3 
){  reason  argues  white  from  white.     Luthur  says,  "  Once  upon  a 
time  the  devil  came  to  me,  and  said,  '  Martin  Luther,  you  are  a 
great  sinner,  and  you  will  be  damned.      '  Stop,  stop,'  said  I,  *  one 
thing  at  a  time  ;  I  am  a  great  sinner,  it  is  true,  though  you  have 
no  right  to  tell  me  of  it.     I  confess  it ;  what  next  V    A  Therefore 
you  wii)  be  damned.'    '  That  is  not  good  reasoning.     It  is  tnw 


246  COVENANT    BLESSINGS. 

I  am  a  great  sinner,  but  it  is  written  *  Jesus  Christ  uirne  to  save 
sinners ;'  therefore  I  shall  be  saved.  Now  go  your  way.'  So  I 
cut  the  devil  off  with  his  own  sword,  and  he  went  away  ir.ourning, 
because  he  could  not  cast  me  down. by  calling  me  a  sinner."  J 
have  a  right  to  believe  Jesus  Christ  died  for  me,  and  I  cast  my 
self  wholly  upon  him.  Dothou  the  same,  poor  disconsolate  one, 
for  thou  hast  nothing  of  thine  own  to  depend  upon  :  but  thou,  O 
great,  and  good,  and  rich  man,  I  have  naught  to  say  to  thee. 

"  Not  the  righteous, 
Sinners  Jesus  came  to  save." 

Though  thou  hast  a  rag  of  thine  own,  thou  shalt  never  have 
Christ's  robe.  Go  thy  way,  thy  righteousness  shall  prove  like 
the  shirt  of  Hercules,  when  it  burnt  him,  and  did  eat  his  flesh 
away ;  though  thou  gloriest  in  it,  it  shall  be  the  winding-sheet  of 
thy  soul  for  ever.  But  if  thou  hast  nothing,  and  art  poor  and 
penniless,  and  miserable,  reduced  to  utter  spiritual  destitution 
and  poverty,  in  God's  name  I  preach  to  thee  the  Gospel ;  Christ 
died  for  thee,  and  thou  shalt  not  perish.  God  will  not  punish 
Christ  for  us,  and  then  punish  us  afterwards.  He  will  not  demand 
the  payment  at  his  hands  and  then  at  ours.  He  is  not  unjust — • 
to  punish  first  the  scapegoat,  the  surety,  the  substitute,  and  then 
to  punish  you.  Christ  was  your  substitute,  he  bore  your  guilt, 
he  carried  your  iniquities  upon  his  head  ;  your  sins  were  num 
bered  upon  him,  and  your  punishment  laid  upon  him.  Go  your 
way  ;  you  can  never  be  punished.  Your  sins  that  are  many,  are 
all  forgiven.  Rejoice  in  pardon  bought  with  blood  ;  be  glad,  bo 
satisfied,  be  happy,  even  till  thou  diest,  and  then  thou  shalt  be 
happy  for  ever. 

Just  one  sentence  more  to  Christians  desirous  of  following  the 
way  of  God's  Word,  and  ever  growing  in  grace.  I  met  the  other 
day  with  a  piece  of  one  of  Christmas  Evans's  sermons — it  struck 
me  forcibly,  and  I  determined  to  repeat  it — "  The  enemy  is  ever 
after  our  souls  ;  let  us  keep  our  hearts  with  all  diligence ;  let  us 
store  our  hearts  with  texts  of  Scripture,  in  the  things  given,  that 
we  may  be  kept  out  of  the  way."  Then  he  gives  this  parable— 
"  Once  upon  a  time  the  devil  determined  to  do  a  mighty  busi 
ness.  Seeki  ig  whom  he  may  devour,  he  went  through  the  land, 


COVE^ANT    BLESSINGS.  *24 

fetei-mined  to  devour  some  souls.  He  came  upon  a  ploughboy 
standing  there,  and  he  said  within  himself,  '  I  will  tempt  the  boy 
to  rob  his  master  ;  then  he  will  get  into  prison ;  t'will  bring  him 
into  bad  company,  so  that  he  will  get  worse,  and  be  transported, 
and  ultimately  get  to  the  gallows,  and  I  shall  have  his  soul  fo» 
ever.'  The  devil  strode  across  the  T.IOOF,  and,  as  he  approach^ 
the  ploughboy,  he  heard  him  singing — 

1  My  God,  the  spring  of  all  my  joya, 

The  life  of  my  delights, 
The  glory  of  my  brightest  days, 
And  comfort  of  my  nights.' 

'  Ah !'  said  the  devil,  '  he  won't  answer  my  purpose,'  and  ofT  n* 
went.  There  was  no  room  for  him  there ;  it  was  a  dry  place. 
So,  flying  over  hill  and  dale,  he  came  to  a  quiet  nook  in  a  valley 
between  two  high  mountains,  where  there  was  a  sweet  little  cot 
tage  overgrown  with  ivy,  with  its  porch  covered  with  eglantine. 
There  sat  beneath  the  porch  a  maiden  knitting.  1 1  will  entico 
her,'  said  he,  '  away  to  the  big  town,  and  lead  her  into  ways  of 
folly,  and  sin,  and  shame.  She  shall  perish  in  an  infirmary,  and 
her  soul  will  be  mine  for  ever.'  He  stooped  to  whisper  in  her 
ear  some  temptation,  but  he  heard  her  singing— 

'Jesus,  I  love  thy  charming  name, 

'  Tis  music  to  mine  ear ; 
Fain  would  I  sound  it  out  so  loud 
That  earth  and  heaven  should  hear.' 

{  That  won't  answer,'  said  he ;  and  he  went  his  way,  saying,  *  I 
shculd  have  done  better  to  have  been  with  old  Williams  all  day ; 
I  could  have  tormented  the  old  fellow  :  I  will  be  off  to  him  now.' 
So  he  flew  away,  and  at  nightfall  alighted  in  a  village.  All  tho 
l-imps  were  out  save  one,  in  a  cottage,  where  he  saw  the  light 
glimmering  in  an  upper  room.  It  seemed  to  be  a  rushlight  dv- 
ing  in  the  socket.  '  Here,'  said  he,  *  old  Williams  lives.  He 
has  served  God  these  fifty  years,  and  if  I  could  get  him  now, 
what  a  trophy  he  would  be !  it  would  pay  me  for  all  my  disap 
pointments  if  I  could  get  old  Williams  after  all  his  professions. 
Ho  stopped  up  stairs,  and  there  Williams  lay  dying.  'Now,' 


248  COVENANT    BLE8B1NGB. 

said  he,  *  I  will  make  him  doubt,  and  die  in  despair,  and  perish  !' 
The  crisis  was  jast  come;  his  friends  were  gathering  round  hii 
bed,  expecting  his  departure.  Satan  stepped  lightly  across  the 
room,  to  get  at  the  dying  man's  ear ;  and  as  he  came  close  to 
him,  Williams  stretched  out  his  hand,  and  said,  '  Yea,  though  I 
pass  through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death  I  will  fear  no 
'evil;  for  thou  art  with  me,  thy  rod  and  thy  staff  they  comfort 
me  !'  '  Thou  hast  prepared  a  table  before  me  in  the  presence  of 
mine  enemies.'  Satan  shrank  back  abashed,  and  went  away 
howling.  He  did  no  more  that  day,  and  never  had  he  done  such 
a  sorry  day's  work  before.  He  was  wholly  beaten,  entirely 
overcome,  because  the  minds  of  the  people  whom  he  wished  to 
attack  had  been  pre-occupied,  and  they  were  feeding  on  God's 
Word." 

And  now,  my  brother,  go  thy  way  ;  plead  this  promise  at  the 
throne,  and  he  will  give  meat  to  them  that  fear  him.  Get  your 
meat,  feed  upon  it  all  day  long,  and  you  may  defy  all  jour  ene 
mies  to  lead  you  astray. 


SERMON   XVI. 

THE  DEW  OF  CHRIST'S  YOUTH. 

"  Thou  hast  the  dew  of  thy  youth." — PSALM  ex.  8. 

You  have  walked  in  the  garden  early  in  the  morning,  and  j  d 
mist  have  remarked  the  singular  freshness  and  beauty  whici ,  a 
summer's  morning  always  seems  to  give  to  the  earth ;  the  d^w- 
drops  glisten  like  tears,  standing  in  the  eyes  of  the  flowers,  a*  if 
they  wept  for  joy  to  see  the  sun  again  after  the  long  nigbr  of 
darkness ;  the  greenness  of  vegetation  has  about  it  a  more  than 
emerald  hue ;  and  every  "  thing  of  beauty"  looks  more  beautiful 
thin  at  any  other  season.  You  have  gone  out,  perhaps,  at  n  3on, 
and  you  have  noticed  how  dry  and  dusty  every  thing  appears; 
for  the  sun  has  risen,  and  by  his  burning  heat  hp  has  exhaled  the 
dew,  and  the  freshness  of  ihe  morning  has  died  into  the  drought 
of  noon.  Now,  this  is  just  a  picture  of  all  things  here  below  ! 
Ay,  and  a  portrait  of  ourselves.  When  we  begin  with  things, 
they  have  dew  upon  them,  and  they  sparkle ;  wait  a  little  while, 
and  all  their  brightness  is  gone,  and  their  brilliance  scattered. 
Ye  have  entered  into  pleasure,  and  ye  have  found  it  a  delusion ; 
ye  have  intermeddled  with  all  kinds  of  knowledge,  and  ye  have 
found  that  in  the  making  and  reading  of  books  there  was  much 
pleasure ,  but  ere  long  ye  have  discovered,  that  in  reading  many 
books  and  in  making  them  there  was  no  end,  and  much  study  was 
a  weariness  of  the  flesh.  Every  thing  terrestrial  has  its  dew  in 
the  morning,  but  its  burning  heat  at  noon ;  and  we  too,  beloved 
— I  mean  those  of  us  who  have  received  the  anointing  of  the  Holy 
Spirit — is  not  this  too  much  the  case  with  us  1  When  we  were 
first  converted,  what  a  sparkling  dew  there  was  upon  our  leaf! 
We  could  not  sing  God's  praises  loud  enough;  we  could  not 
11* 


250  THE  DEW  OF  CHRISl's  YOUTH. 

sufficiently  leap  for  joy  before  the  ark.  All  the  exultations  of 
those  that  went  before  seemed  utterly  insufficient  for  us.  There 
was  such  unction  and  savor  in  the  Word  to  us,  that  we  could  feast 
upon  it  every  day — yea,  and  all  night  long,  and  yet  never  be 
weary.  We  ran  in  the  way  of  our  Lord's  commandments  with 
out  weariness,  and  we  mounted  aloft  as  on  the  wings  of  eagles, 
and  never  thought  that  we  could  mount  too  high.  But,  alas !  be 
loved,  is  it  not  the  case  with  many  of  us,  that  the  early  freshness 
of  the  morning  of  our  youth  is  exhausted,  and  some,  at  least,  of 
our  excellence  hath  proved  to  be  like  the  early  cloud  and  the 
morning  dew  ?  Though  in  some  things  we  trust  we  have  grown, 
yet  we  are  compelled  to  confess,  that  in  many  others  we  have 
diminished;  while  in  depths  of  self-knowledge  we  feel  we  have 
made  progress,  yet  in  the  height  of  joy  in  Christ,  in  the  sublimi 
ties  of  a  full  devotion  to  him,  we  sometimes  feai  *hat  we  have 
gone  backward,  and  that  we  have  not  the  joy  of  oui  vouth,  the 
dew  of  the  morning.  But  you  will  observe,  that  the  text  here 
speaks  of  Jesus  Christ :  he  has  the  dew  of  his  youth.  We  are 
certain  it  is  Christ,  for  we  have  the  infallible  witness  of  the  New 
Testament,  that  Jesus  Christ  is  spoken  of  in  this  Psalm.  See 
Matt.  xxii.  44;  Heb.  i.  13,  and  many  -)ther  places.  "The  Lord 
said  unto  my  Lord,  sit  thou  on  my  righo  hand,  until  I  make  thine 
enemies  thy  footstool.  Thy  people  shall  be  willing  in  the  day  of 
thy  power,  in  the  beauties  of  holiness  from  the  womb  of  the 
morning."  And  then,  there  is  added  this,  which  evidently  alludes 
to  Jesus  Christ:  *•  Thou  hast  the  dew  of  thy  youth." 

Having,  therefore,  set  ourselves  and  all  terrestrial  matters  in 
r-ontrast,  it  only  remains  for  me  now  to  enter,  as  fully  as  God 
may  help  me,  into  the  sweet  doctrine  of  this  text — that  Jesus 
Christ  ever  has,  and  ever  will  have,  the  early  dew,  freshness,  and 
brilliance  of  his  youth.  First,  permit  me  to  state  the  fact ; 
secondly,  to  show  the  reasons  for  it ;  and,  thirdly,  to  deduce  the 
essons  from  it. 

I.  First  of  aH,  let  me  show  THE  FACT — CHRIST  HAS  THE  DEW 
or  ins  YOUTH. 

Speak  we  of  Christ  personally  ;  has  he  not  all  the  freshness,  all 
the  vigor,  all  the  strength  of  ancient  times  ]  His  goings  forth 
were  of  old,  even  from  eternity  ;  and  behold  he  goeth  forth  erery 


f 

THE    DEW    OF    CHRIST'S    YOUTH.  251 

day  in  the  preaching  of  his  Word,  and  in  the  ministrations  of  his 
Spirit,  in  the  chariots  of  salvation  still  he  rideth  forth,  he  walk 
eth  still  among  the  golden  candlesticks.  And  have  we  ever  im 
agined  that  he  has  lost  the  strength  of  his  youth  ?  do  his  stepa 
falter?  has  his  arm  begun  to  feel  the  palsying  influence  of  old 
age?  Is  there  a  scar  of  decrepitude  and  wasting  upon  his  sub- 
°ime  brow  1  His  head  and  his  hair  are  white  like  wool,  as  whit 
as  snow,  for  he  is  the  Eternal  of  Ages ;  yet,  saith  the  spouse,  hi 
locks  are  bushy  and  black  as  a  raven,  for  he  has  the  strength  of 
youth,  while  he  has  the  age  of  an  eternity  upon  him.  Well 
might  he  LOW  rise  up  before  us  and  say  of  himself  personally, 
"  Is  mine  ear  heavy  that  I  cannot  hear  1  Is  mine  arm  shortened 
that  I  cannot  save  ?  Am  I  not  to-day  what  I  was  yesterday  *? 
Was  I  the  Creator  of  the  world  ?  did  I  speak  it  out  of  nothing 
ness  ? — and  am  I  not  still  its  Sustainer  ?  Was  I  the  Redeemer 
of  the  Church  ?  did  I  purchase  her  with  mine  own  blood  ? — and 
do  I  not  still  preserve  with  power  those  whom  I  redeemed  with 
blood  ?  Did  I  not  on  earth,  with  cries  and  groans,  offer  up  my 
prayer  before  my  Father  ?  and  do  I  not  now  plead,  not  with  les§ 
vigor  but  with  greater  strength,  when  with  authority  I  advocate 
my  people's  cause  before  his  throne  T 

Brethren,  you  can  enlarge  in  your  private  meditations  upon 
this  most  blessed  and  excellent  truth,  that  the  person  of  Jesus  is 
an  ever  young  person ;  he  is  the  holy  child  Jesus,  he  is  never  the 
old  man  Jesus ;  he  never  was  an  old  man  on  earth,  and  he  never 
can  be  old  in  the  sense  of  becoming  senile  or  full  of  decrepitude ; 
he  has  the  dew  of  his  youth  upon  him ;  Christ's  person  is  in 
every  thing  to-day  what  it  was  before  the  foundation  of  the 
world.  Nor  is  this  freshness  confined  to  Christ  in  his  person;  it 
is  just  the  same  if  you  take  him  in  his  doctrine.  We  have  Christ 
among  us  not  incarnate  in  flesh,  but  incarnate  in  doctrine.  The 
doctrines  cf  grace  are  in  a  certain  sense  the  body  of  Christ.  We 
speak  sometimes  of  a  body  of  Divinity  ;  but  if  any  man  would 
know  what  the  body  of  Divinity  is,  it  is  neither  Calvin's  u  Insti 
tutes,"  nor  Dwight's  "  Theology,"  nor  Gill's  "  Buiy  of  Divinity/1 
— it  is  Christ  that  is  the  body  of  Divinity.  It  was  the  only  body 
Divinity  ever  did  take  when  it  became  incarnate;  but,  taking 
Divinity  in  another  sense  to  mean  Divine  doctrine,  Christ, 


THE    DKW    OF    CHKISl's    YOUTH. 

Christ  said,  and  what  he  did,  is  the  only  body  which  Divinity  — 
that  is,  the  Gospel — ever  will  take.  Now,  the  Gospel  is  always 
fresh.  There  are  many  subjects,  beloved,  that  are  worn  thread 
bare ;  but  who  ever  heard  of  the  Gospel  being  exhausted  ]  You 
have  come  up  to  the  house  of  God,  some  of  you,  these  thirty  or 
'  forty  years.  Did  you  ever  feel  that  you  wanted  any  thing  flesh 
Did  you  ever  say  as  you  went  out.  when  you  had  heard  a  Gospei 
sermon,  "  I  should  like  to  have  some  improvements  made  upon 
it  ?"  If  you  have  gathered  the  goodly  bread-corn  or  tne  Kingdom, 
have  you  not  said,  "That  was  the  food  of  rny  childhood  in  grace, 
it  is  my  food  now  that  by  reason  of  years  1  am  able  to  discern, 
and  it  shall  be  my  food  all  through  the  wilderness,  until  I  eat  of 
the  corn  of  the  kingdom  on  the  other  side  the  Jordan." 

It  is  a  wonderful  thing,  that  any  man  should  be  able,  day  after 
day,  and  week  after  week,  to  attract  thousands  to  hear  him  talk. 
I  do  not  believe  any  man  could  do  it  with  any  other  subject  ex 
cept  the  Gospel.  1  have  the  most  intense  respect  for  that  great 
man  and  mighty  orator,  Mr.  Gough  ;  but  with  all  his  ability,  if 
he  were  to  deliver  a  teetotal  lecture  twice  every  Sabbath-day,  if 
he  were  in  any  puJpit  in  England,  he  could  not  command  a  con 
grcgation  for  twenty-one  years  at  a  stretch;  but  the  Christian 
minister,  with  only  one  subject — Christ  crucified — may  not  only 
keep  on  twenty-one  years,  but  if  he  should  live  as  long  as  Methu 
selah,  he  may  still  keep  on  preaching  none  other  Gospel  than  Je 
sus  Christ,  and  him  crucified,  and  lie  would  still  find  that  the  peo 
ple  of  God  would  come  around  to  hear  him,  and  never  crave  for 
a  fresh  subject.  Let  any  great  historian  open,  if  he  please,  a 
lecture  room,  and  attempt  to  deliver  two  lectures  upon  history 
every  week,  and  let  him  see  whether  he  docs  not  find  the  congre 
gation  which  would  at  first  gather  around  him,  fearfully  diminish- 
f-d.  We  have  had  an  instance  in  London  of  one  who  has  delivered 
an  amusing  lecture  a  thousand  times,  always  to  great  multitudes ; 
but  then  they  were  different  persons  every  time.  No  one  thought 
of  going  to  hear  him  lecture  upon  the  same  subject  the  whole 
thousand  times.  It  would  have  become  a  most  intolerable  pen 
ance  even  to  have  heard  Albert  Smith  delivering  hit  lecture  upon 
Mont  Blanc,  however  interesting  it  might  seem,  once  or  twice  to 
some  people ;  it  would  certainly  pall  upon  the  mind  if  we  heard 


THE    DKW    OF    C11K1ST  8    YOUTH. 

it  many  times  repeated  ;  but  the  Christian  minister  may  keep  on 
and  on,  and  on  the  same  good  theme — Christ  Jesus,  Christ  Jesus  ; 
the  same  cross,  the  same  crown  of  thorns,  the  same  bleeding 
wounds- — from  the  first  time  that  he  enters  his  pulpit  to  the 
time  when  he  lays  down  his  charge.  He  may  keep  on,  and  the 
ueople  may  always  say,  and  he  shall  always  feel,  that  the  Gospel 
las  the  dew  of  its  youtfi  upon  it,  and  is  always  fresh  and  always 
ew. 

But  I  can  say  yet  another  thing.  This  is  specially  true  of  this 
old  book,  the  Bible.  Many  other  valuable  books  have  been  writ 
ten,  but,  however  interesting  they  may  be,  read  them  over  half- 
a-dozen  times  and  you  may  be  quite  satisfied  you  need  not  read 
them  any  more.  Next  to  the  Bible,  the  book  that  I  value  most 
Ls  John  Bunyan's  "  Pilgrim's  Progress,"  and  I  imagine  that  I  may 
have  read  that  through  perhaps  a  hundred  times.  It  is  a  book 
of  which  I  never  seem  to  tire.  But  then  the  secret  of  that  is, 
that  John  Bunyan's  "  Pilgrim's  Progress''  is  the  Bible  in  anothei 
shape.  It  is  taken  out  of  this  same  well  of  the  Gospel — it  is  a 
book  full  of  the  same  heavenly  water ;  but  even  of  that  wondrous 
allegory  you  would  tire  at  last.  You  would  say,  "  Well,  now  I 
know  all  this,  I  want  something  more.  Here  is  the  experience 
cf  a  Christian  ;  I  know  this  to  be  true,  and  I  delight  in  it,  but  I 
want  to  go  somewhat  further."  And  the  mind  would  crave  for 
something  else.  But  read  the  Bible,  and,  strange  to  say,  the 
more  you  read  it  the  more  satisfied  you  will  be  with  it.  When 
you  begin  to  read  the  Bible,  perhaps  you  want  fifty  other  book? 
to  become  a  thorough  Bible  student;  but  your  library  will 
diminish  gradually,  until  at  last,  the  more  you  understand  the 
Bible  the  fewer  books  you  will  want,  and  you  will  come  to  say, 
44  If  I  might  have  all  my  days  over  again  this  should  be  the  only 
book  that  I  would  study,  and  I  would  concentrate  all  my  powers 
upon  the  understanding  of  this  one  volume."  Other  books  you 
can  get  to  the  bottom  of.  You  dive  into  them,  and  at  first  they 
»eem  to  be  very  deep ;  but  every  time  you  dive  they  appear  to 
grow  shallower  and  shallower,  until  at  last  you  can  see  the  bot 
tom  at  a  glance.  But  in  God's  Word,  every  time  you  divn 
the  depths  grow  deeper.  The  first  time  you  read,  in  your  ignor- 
ant  conceit,  you  fancy  you  have  got  the  full  meaning  of  a  text ; 


254  THE    DEW    OF    CHRIST'S    YOUTH. 

but  yon  look  at  it  again,  and  you  find  that  though  yo  had  the 
meaning  in  one  sense,  yet  you  had  not  the  full  meaning ;  and 
you  meditate  again  and  again  and  again,  and  you  find  each  time 
you  dive  the  meaning  is  still  far  beyond  your  reach,  and  that 
the  Bible  is  far  above  your  comprehension.  It  expands,  it 
grows,  it  increases  in  interest.  There  is  such  a  charm  about  the 
JVible,  that  he  who  reads  it  little  may  never  perhaps  feel  the 
whole  of  it.  It  is  something  like  the  Maelstrom  you  have  heard 
of,  only  in  a  different  and  more  excellent  sense.  The  Maelstrom 
is  a  great  whirlpool  on  the  coast  of  Norway.  A  ship  at  a  long 
distance  from  it  will  feel  a  little  of  its  attracting  influence,  a 
very  little,  yet  enough  to  make  it  veer  from  its  course ;  but  the 
nearer  it  floats  to  the  centre  the  stronger  becomes  the  current, 
and  the  more  forcibly  is  the  vessel  carried  along  by  it,  until  at 
last,  if  the  ship  should  be  so  unhappy  as  to  near  it,  it  would 
whirl  round  at  a  tremendous  rate  until  it  was  thoroughly 
engulphed  in  its  depths.  In  a  higher  and  better  sense  the 
like  is  true  of  the  Bible.  The  nearer  you  go  to  it,  and  the  more 
closely  you  study  it,  the  more  rapidly  do  you  revolve  in  its  cir 
cles,  the  more  voraciously  do  you  devour  its  contents,  until  at 
last  you  are  swallowed  up  in  its  glory,  and  long  for  nothing  else 
than  to  prove  the  heights  and  depths  of  this  bliss  unfathomable — 
the  love  of  God  revealed  to  us  in  Christ,  in  his  sacred  Word. 
Truly,  of  this  book  we  may  say,  "  Thou  hast  the  dew  of  thy 
youth." 

Again,  I  may  add,  every  thing  that  has  to  do  with  Christ  is 
always  young.  The  beds  of  spices  where  he  lieth  is  always  green  ; 
the  trees  planted  by  him,  who  is  the  river  of  water,  have  their 
leaves  of  such  a  sort  that  they  never  wither,  and  their  fruits 
always  comes  to  perfection.  Every  thing  lives  where  he  is,  for 
he  is  life,  and  in  him  there  is  no  death  at  all ;  and  because  he  i 
i:fo,  therefore  is  he  always  full  of  freshness,  and  therefore  dotl 
he  beget  living  verdure  wheresoever  he  goeth ;  and  this  shall  we 
know  best  whe».  *e  shall  follow  him  to  the  living  fountains  of 
waters,  and  God  shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from  our  eyes. 

II.  Thus  have  we  done  with  the  first  point,  and  now  we  take 
notice  of  the  second.     What  is  the  reason  for  this  ?     WHAT  IB 

ME     REASON     WHY      CHRIST     JESUS,    AND     HIS     GOSPEL,    AND    HI3 


THE    DEW    OF    CHRIST  S    YOU1B. 
WuRD,    AND    ALL     THINGS     ABOUT     HIM     ARE    ALWAYS    80    FRESH? 

Why  have  we  always  an  abiding  dew  upon  these  holy  things  ? 
I  answer,  first,  no  man  that  understands  what  it  is  to  have 
Christ  in  his  heart  will  ever  gei  tired  of  him  from  want  of  variety. 
The  reason  why  we  are  weary  of  a  thing  is  because  there  is  a 
sameness  about  it.  There  are  many  men  that  have  a  very 
weighty  speech  to  deliver — very  good  matter — but  it  is  a  pair 
to  sit  and  hear  them,  because  they  deliver  their  words  in  a  mon  • 
otone,  as  if  they  were  touching  a  bell.  Word  follows  word  with 
no  difference  of  tone.  Now,  the  human  ear  loves  variety ;  it 
cannot  bear  monotony.  And  so  it  is  with  the  whole  of  man 
hood.  Nothing  monotonous  will  ever  long  retain  its  freshness. 
However  sweet  the  music  may  be,  if  we  always  heard  the  samy 
notes  we  should,  most  assuredly,  be  as  disgusted  with  even  the 
sweet  music  of  an  archangel  if  we  were  compelled  to  hear  it  all 
day  and  all  night  long,  as  we  are  with  the  cackling  of  a  goose. 
Every  thing  is  apt  to  lose  its  interest  when  it  is  repeated  over 
and  over  again.  But  there  is  no  fear  of  any  tautologies  in  Christ ; 
you  may  look  at  Christ  a  thousand  times,  and  you  shall  have,  if 
you  please,  a  thousand  different  aspects.  If  you  choose  to  turn 
to  one  book  of  the  Old  Testament  you  shall  see  him  in  a  vast 
variety  of  aspects.  You  shall  see  him  as  a  Paschal  Lamb ;  you 
shall  see  him  as  the  scapegoat ;  you  shall  see  him  at  one  time  as 
the  bullock,  strong  to  labor,  and  then  you  shall  see  him  as  the 
lamb,  patient  to  endure ;  you  shall  behold  him  as  the  dove,  full 
of  innocence ;  you  shall  see  him  in  the  blood  sprinkled,  in  the 
incense  burning,  in  the  laver  filled  with  water  ;  you  shall  see  him 
in  Aaron's  rod  that  budded,  and  in  the  golden  pot  that  was  full 
of  manna ;  you  shall  see  him  in  the  ark  ;  you  shall  see  him 
over  the  ark  :  in  the  ark  you  shall  see  him  having  the  law  within 
his  heart,  and  over  the  ark  you  shall  see  the  golden  light  and 
the  mercy-scat,  and  say,  "  Christ  is  here."  In  every  type  you 
shall  see  Christ — in  so  many  different  shapes,  too,  that  you  shall 
nay,  u  Turn  this  whichever  way  I  like,  there  is  something  fresh." 
Christ  Jesus,  if  I  might  compare  so  glorious  a  person  to  so  hum- 
t^e  a  thing,  is  like  the  kaleidoscope.  As  often  as  you  look 
through  the  kaleidoscope  you  see  a  fresh  arrangement  of  colors 
ftud  a  fresh  appearance,  so  as  often  as  you  look  at  the  Lord 


2f)G  THE    DEW    O?    CHRIST'S    YOUTH. 

Jesus  Christ  you  always  discover  some  new  beauty  in  his  posi 
tion  Look  at  him  typically,  and  when  you  have  done  with  look 
ing  at  him  typically  look  at  him  officially ;  you  have  not  time 
t  »  consider  all  his  glories  as  a  priest — you  have  hardly  passed 
your  eyes  over  his  flowing  vesture,  and  his  glittering  breastplate, 
and  listened  to  the  ringing  of  the  bells,  and  marked  the  beauty 
•>f  the  pomegranates,  before  you  see  him  come  forth  as  a  Kii_g 
n  1  you  can  scarcely  stop  to  look  at  the  many  crowns  on  hi 
head  before  he  comes  forth  as  a  Prophet ;  and  you  have  hardly 
time  to  admire  him  as  a  Prophet  before  he  comes  forth  as  Medi 
ator,  as  Shepherd,  as  Captain  of  our  salvation,  as  Head  of  the 
Church,  as  the  everlasting  Father,  the  Prince  of  Peace.  And  if 
you  go  further  and  look  at  his  person,  his  person  is  wonderful. 
You  see  him  as  the  child  born,  the  Son  given.  He  comes  into 
this  world,  and  you  mark  him  to  be  God,  and  there  you  are  lost 
in  divinity ;  you  mark  him  to  be  man,  you  have  not  lost 
your  wonder  yet,  and  you  still  stand  astonished  when  you  regard 
him  in  that  aspect  as  bone  of  <yar  bone  and  flesh  of  our  flesh. 
The  reason  why  every  thing  else  loses  its  freshness  to  us  is 
because  of  its  want  of  variety.  You  may  go  to  any  exhibition 
that  has  ever  been  opened  to  attract  attention  and  awaken  inter 
est,  but  you  will  find  that  after  a  certain  time  there  is  a  want  of 
variety  in  it ;  but  with  Christ  there  never  is  such  a  want,  and 
therefore  to  the  mind's  eye  he  always  has  the  dew  of  his  youth. 
There  is  yet  another  reason  :  Christ  has  the  dew  of  his  youth 
because  of  his  excellence.  To-day,  stepping  in  to  see  a  gentle- 
jnan,  I  observed  a  table  which  had  upon  it  a  great  variety  of 
objects.  I  wondered  what  they  were,  and  took  the  liberty  of 
asking  him.  He  told  me  that  he  had  some  beautiful  stereoscopic 
^iews  there  which  had  been  taken  at  an  immense  expense  in 
Sgypt,  in  the  Holy  Land,  and  in  all  parts  of  the  world;  and  he 
bowed  me  one  or  two  Scriptural  subjects  which  very  much 
mterested  me.  They  were  certainly  pre-eminently  excellent  as 
•vorks  of  art.  lie  said,  "  There,  sir,  I  never  get  tired  of  looking 
at  those  things.  1  could  look  at  them  constantly,  and  never  get 
tired  of  them."  "  Well,"  I  said,  "  I  quite  understand  that ;  they 
are  excellent;  for  really  there  is  the  study  of  half  an  hour  in 
this  one  picture ;  and  then  one  might  begin  again,  it  is  so  fuJl  of 


THE    DEW    UF    CHRISl's    YOUTH.  257 


beauty,  and  it  seems  so  true  to  the  original."  But  I  thought 
to  myself,  "  Excellent  as  they  are,  I  think,  if  I  call  to  see  my 
friend  in  a  year's  time  he  will  tell  me  that  he  has  had  to  buy  a 
fresh  lot  of  views,  for  he  has  been  looking  at  these  so  often,  that 
he  has  become  altogether  tired  of  them.  They  would  have  no 
freshness  to  him,  because  he  had  seen  them  so  many  times.  But 
nark ;  the  reason  why  he  could  look  at  them  so  often  was 
Because  they  were  so  excellent  If  they  had  been  bad  views,  if 
there  had  not  been  great  skill  and  great  art  bestowed  upon  them, 
he  would  soon  have  become  tired  of  looking  at  them.  There  are 
some  views  in  nature  which  a  man  might  look  at  a  hundred  times, 
and  yet  always  wonder  at  them  ;  but  the  reason  is,  because  they 
are  so  beautiful.  There  are  other  things  which  might  strike  one's 
eye  at  first,  but  which  when  they  are  looked  into  would  lose  their 
freshness,  because  there  would  be  no  real  ground  for  admiration, 
because  there  was  no  excellency.  But  Christ  Jesus  will  always 
have  the  dew  of  his  youth,  because  he  is  always  so  excellent. 
Ah,  brethren,  you  thought  Christ  was  sweet  when  first  you  tasted 
him  ;  but  you  shall  know  him  to  be  sweeter  still  when  you  shall 
know  more  of  him,  and  taste  and  see  that  he  is  good  ;  but  you 
shall  never  know  all  his  sweetness,  for  you  shall  eat,  and  eat,  and 
oat  to  the  full ;  and  perhaps  scarcely  in  heaven  itself  shall  you 
know  all  the  sweetness  of  Christ.  You  imagine,  perhaps,  that 
you  know  all  the  excellency  of  his  love  to  you  ;  but  remember, 
it  passeth  knowledge.  You  imagine  that  you  have  proved  his 
faithfulness ;  but  you  have  not  proved  it  as  you  will  prove  it- 
All  the  tests  to  which  you  have  ever  put  the  Saviour  are  but 
little  compared  with  those  that  are  to  come  after.  You  have 
proved  him  with  the  footmen,  you  will  soon  prove  him  with  the 
horsemen ;  you  have  proved  him  in  the  land  of  peace,  and  you 
shall  soon  know  him  in  the  swellings  of  Jordan.  But  the  /noie 
you  prove  him  the  more  shall  you  discover  that  he  is  excellent, 
and  worth  the  proving,  and  because  his  excellence  shall  become 
«Jie  more  and  the  more  manifest,  the  more  you  shall  look  at  him  ; 
jou  shall  say  of  him  continually,  "Thou  hast  the  dew  of  thy 
youth.  1  find  thee  better  and  better.  Fairest  of  the  SOLS  of  men, 
thou  growest  fairer.  Bread  of  heaven,  thou  growest  sweeter  * 
Tiou  wast  once  like  wafers  made  with  honey,  thou  art  sweo.tei 


258  THE  DEW  OF  CHRIST'S  YOUTH. 

tha"  ingels'  food  now.  Water  of  life,  thou  growest  more  cool 
in/* '.  •  my  taste  and  more  refreshing  to  my  mouth.  I  loved  thee 
once.  I  love  thee  more  now;  I  delighted  in  thee  once,  but  I 
d<ili£ ht  in  thee  more  fully  still."  He  has  the  dew  of  his  youth 
because  he  has  real  excellence. 

But  still,  I  do  not  know  but  that  the  most  excellent  thing  you 
and  I  have  ever  seen  would  still  lose  its  freshness  to  us,  becausw 
we  should  discover  all  its  excellence ;  but  Christ  will  never  lose 
his  freshness  to  us,  because  he  is  divine.  Whatever  is  not  divine, 
in  due  time  must  lose  its  freshness.  Suppose,  now,  the  Lord 
should  give  to  us,  to  engross  our  attention  and  to  interest  us,  the 
whole  fields  of  space.  Suppose  in  a  future  eternity  the  Lord 
should  say,  "Now  I  will  give  to  you  the  works  of  my  creation  to 
be  for  ever  objects  of  your  attention."  My  dear  friends,  there 
is  enough  in  a  single  flower,  the  botanist  tells  us,  to  occupy  a 
man's  wonder  and  admiration  for  a  number  of  years.  There  is 
so  much  skill  and  wisdom  in  but  a  single  flower  of  the  field,  that 
a  man  might  look  and  wonder  as  long  as  that.  Well,  just  put 
together  all  the  flowers  and  all  the  creatures  of  this  world,  and 
all  the  mighty  rocks  that  are  full  of  ancient  secrets — and  imagine 
that  these  are  to  be  the  objects  of  our  eternal  study  and  interest. 
I  can  suppose  that  a  man  should  exhaust  all  the  knowledge  of 
this  world  in  due  time.  It  might  take  him  thousands  upon  thous 
ands  of  years,  yet  I  can  imagine  that  he  should  so  exhaust  every 
thing  that  was  noble  about  this  world,  that  at  last  he  should  sit 
down  and  say,  "  I  know  every  secret,  I  have  made  every  rock  tell 
out  its  story  ;  1  have  ripped  open  every  vein  of  truth,  and  I  have 
ransacked  all  its  secret  treasures.  But  there  are  the  stars  yet  to 
look  at" — and  imagine  the  man  going  from  star  to  star,  and  dis 
covering  all  the  wonders  of  God  in  the  seemingly  boundless  uni 
verse.  Here  is  a  great  conception  for  you.  Imagine  that  a)l 
th'ise  stars  were  inhabited,  and  all  ftill  of  fresh  wonders ;  yet  I 
can  imagine  that  in  myriads  of  myriads  of  years  all  these  might 
be  exhausted.  Some  stupendous  mind,  growing  by  that  upon 
which  it  fed,  might  at  last  say,  of  all  the  secrete  of  God's  works, 
"  1  kn  >w  them  all.  1  have  found  out  every  wonder,  and  all  the 
storehouses  of  God's  wisdom  have  I  ransacked ;"  but,  beloved, 
Jesus  Christ  is  such  a  boundless  field  of  knowledge,  and  Clirist 


*  THE  D£W  OF  CHKISl's  YOUTH.  259 

has  such  a  miracle  of  wonders,  such  a  gathering  up  of  all  the 
secrets  of  God,  that  a  whole  eternity  must  run  dry  before  we  can 
exhaust  them.  He  will  have,  he  must  have,  the  dew  of  hia 
youth,  because  he  is  divine.  The  wing  of  knowledge,  though  if 
h  id  the  fields  of  space  to  fly  in,  must  at  last  reach  a  boundary 
The  ship  of  wisdom,  though  it  sail  across  the  sea  that  seems  with 
out  a  shore — the  as  yet  unnavigated  sea  pf  ether — must  at  las 
reach  a  haven  ;  but  give  a  man  Christ  to  be  the  subject  of  study 
the  object  to  awaken  his  interest  and  excite  his  wonder,  and  then 
you  have  indeed  shot  an  arrow,  but  it  shall  never  reach  its  mark. 
It  shall  fly  on,  on,  on,  and  shall  never  stay.  You  have  bidden 
the  man  plunge  into  a  sea  without  a  bottom.  You  have  launched 
him,  like  Noah's  ark,  upon  a  sea  without  a  shore.  He  may  gc 
on,  and  on,  and  on,  climbing  up  the  steps,  but  he  can  never  reach 
the  summit.  Christ  must  be  full  of  interest  to  him,  because  he 
is  divine,  and,  therefore,  inexhaustible. 

Another  reason  why  Christ  will  always  have  the  dew  of  his 
youth,  is.  because  he  meets  all  the  cravings  of  our  nature.  I  am 
introduced  into  a  place  full  of  the  wonderful  works  of  man.  1 
look,  and  I  look  on ;  but  why  is  it  that  I  shall  get  tired  of  them, 
however  interesting  they  may  be  ?  Because  it  is  all  for  my  eye. 
But  suppose  that  there  is  the  sweetest  music  at  the  same  time, 
then  1  have  something  for  my  ear.  Why  is  it  that  even  then  I 
shall  get  tired  1  Because  I  have  another  craving — I  hunger  and  I 
thirst.  But  suppose  I  have  the  richest  dainties  afforded  me  ;  and 
I  sit  and  feast,  and  look  and  hear  sweet  sounds  all  the  time,  why 
is  it  that,  even  then,  I  should,  for  a  time,  however  excellent  might 
be  the  entertainment,  grow  tired  1  Why,  because  I  have  other  pro 
pensities  that  are  not  brought  into  play — other  animal  desires, 
even,  which  have  not  their  fair  room  for  exercise.  But  suppose 
me  to  become  a  Solomon,  so  that  I  have  all  which  the  eye,  or  the 
ear,  zi  the  passions  can  delight  in.  Should  1,  after  all,  be  tired  I 
Yes,  Solomon  tried  it,  and  he  said,  "  Vanity  of  vanities,  all  i3 
rauity  Why  1  Because  there  were  other  cravings  in  Solo 
mon's  mind  which  all  these  things  did  not  satisfy.  The  mind  was 
graving  after  knowledge,  and  Solomon  satisfied  that,  for  he  wrote 
of  all  things,  from  the  hyssop  on  the  wall  up  to  the  cedar  of  Le 
banon.  But  there  was  one  thing  that  was  not  satisfied,  that  was 


200 


THE    DEW    OF    CHRIST  8    YOUTH. 


his  spirit.  His  spirit  was  craving  for  communion.  There  was  a 
hunger  and  thirst  that  went  alter  something  higher  than  mere 
mental  food,  and  his  mind  could  not  be  contented  with  mere  wine 
to  drink  and  meat  to  eat,  but  wanted  knowledge.  His  spirit 
oould  not  be  contented  with  mere  knowledge,  and  he  was  wanting 
something  higher  than  that — the  ethereal  and  celestial  ambrosia 
of  the  glorified.  II is*  spirit  was  panting  for  communion,  and 
therefore  Solomon  felt  that  all  here  was  vanity,  because  it  could 
not  satisfy  that  craving.  But  give  me  Christ,  and  I  have  no  othe. 
craving  beyond  that — Christ  is  all.  Whatever  we  may  wish  for 
it  is  all  in  Christ ;  it  is  impossible  for  the  rnind  that  is  filled  with 
Christ  to  imagine  any  thing  else ;  and  in  the  day  when  we  shall 
get  to  heaven — we  talk  a  great  deal  about  golden  harps,  and 
golden  crowns,  and  golden  streets — I  imagine  we  shall  find  that 
all  those  golden  harps  and  crowns  and  streets  are  contained  in 
that  word  "  Christ ;"  and  when  we  shall  get  Christ,  and  shall  en 
joy  him,  \re  shall  feel  that  we  have  nothing  else  that  we  can  wish 
for.  He  that  drinketh  desireth  to  eat ;  but  he  that  drinketh  Christ 
drink eth  food.  He  that  eats  desires  to  be  clothed  ;  but  he  that 
feedeth  on  Christ  is  clothed  at  the  same  time.  He  that  is  clothed 
needeth  something  wherewithal  to  adorn  himself;  but  he  that  is 
clothed  in  the  righteousness  of  Christ  is  clothed  in  the  court  dress 
of  heaven,  and  hath  all  the  jewels  of  divinity  upon  him.  He 
that  is  adorned  yet  needeth  something  wherewithal  to  wash  him- 
self  and  keep  himself  beauteous ;  but  he  that  is  clothed  in  the 
righteousness  of  Christ  and  adorned  with  God's  grace,  is  washed 
and  is  clean  every  whit.  And  he  that  is  clean  needs  to  be  kept 
clean  ;  he  that  has  Christ  shall  be  kept  clean.  Dear  friends,  there 
is  nothing  that  a  sinner  can  want — there  is  nothing  that  a  saint 
can  want,  that  is  not  in  Christ.  There  are  many  things  that  wa 
think  we  want  that  are  not  in  him,  but  nothing  we  really  want 
an  be  absent  from  him,  for  "  in  him  dwelleth  all  the  fulness  of 
the  Godhead  bodily,"  and  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  must  b« 
more  than  fulness  for  manhood.  "  It  pleased  the  Father  that  in 
him  should  all  fulness  dwell ;"  and  if  all  fulness  cannot  meet  our 
wants,  what  can  ?  Therefore,  shall  we  never  be  weary  of  Christ, 
because  every  craving  of  the  heart  is  satisfied  in  him. 
I  will  mention  only  one  other  causok.  We  shall  never  bo  tired 


THE  DSW  OF  CHRIST'S  FOUTH.  261 

*T  Christ,  because  the  want  that  w(  have  after  Christ  can  never 
cerise.  While  I  am  on  earth  I  shall  never  cease  sinning ;  there 
fore  I  shall  never  cease  wanting  a  fountain  filled  with  blood  to 
me  in.  While  I  am  here  my  conscience  will  never  stay 
me ;  therefore  I  shall  never  cease  seeking  an  advocate. 
Wtiut  I  am  here  I  shall  never  cease  from  trouble;  therefore  I 
hah  u  wer  cease  from  wanting  him  who  is  the  consolation  of 
Israel.  While  I  am  here  I  thall  never  get  rid  of  weakness,  there 
fore  I  teUi  iiever  weary  of  him  who  is  my  strength  and  consola 
tion.  SV  -lile  1  am  here  I  shall  never,  I  fear,  cease  from  backslid 
ing  ;  thei  b/lve  car.  I  never  cease  from  love  to  him  who  restoreth 
my  soul,  a,  u  leadeth  me  in  the  paths  of  righteousness  for  his 
name's  saks.  You  have  heard  the  story  of  the  company  \\ho 
crossed  the  u  cert ;  they  had  exhausted  all  their  water,  and  they 
knew  not  whei  «>  Jiey  should  find  any ;  but  at  last,  after  some 
days'  march,  u.c/  came  near  a  turbid  stream  of  the  most  filthy 
water,  and  in  aacuiui  the  camels  and  defiled  it  worse,  by  moving 
all  the  mud  at  d.b  bottom,  and  mixing  it  with  the  water.  But 
the  poor  thirsty  Civatuies  who  had  come  across  the  arid  desert 
were  so  thirsty  that,  -ii^y  drank  what  was  more  earth  than  water, 
and  thought  it  sweeter  tu.an  any  wine  they  had  ever  tasted.  But 
after  they  had  satisfied  eheir  thirst  did  they  think  so  ?  did  they 
then  think  the  water  sweet?  No,  then  they  understood  what  it 
was  that  they  had  been  drinking ;  and  after  their  thirst  was  re- 
moved,  you  could  not  have  compelled  them  to  drink  it  again  un 
til  their  thirst  again  returned  in  all  its  force.  And  so  long  as  the 
Christian  is  here  he  will  always  have  the  pangs  of  hunger,  he  will 
always  have  all  the  sufferings  of  a  spiritual  thirst  if  Christ  be  re 
moved  from  him,  and,  therefore,  that  will  always  make  even  the 
bitter  thing  sweet.  How  much  more  shall  the  inward  and  ever- 
fisting  hunger  of  the  saint  make  a  sweet  thing  of  Christ  yet  more 
iweet !  He  must  have  the  dew  of  his  youth  upon  him,  because 
we  shall  always  have  an  appetite  for  him  as  long  as  we  are  here, 
ai  if  we  lose  it  for  a  little  while — for  fools  will  abhor  all  manner 
of  meat  sometimes — yet  that  appetite  must  and  shall  return  again, 
and  we  shall  again  fly  to  those  living  waters  with  the  wings  of  a 
dove — hasten  again  to  these  cooling  streams,  with  all  the  speed 
of  the  panting  hart  that  longs  after  the  water-brook,  for  it  must 


262  THE    DEW    OF    CHRlS'f's    YOUTH. 

irink  or  die.  Therefore,  beloved,  you  see,  yet  again,  that  be 
cause  we  shall  always  want  Christ,  therefore  will  he  always  be 
fresh  to  us. 

"  But,"  says  one,  "we  shall  not  want  him  in  heaven."  Who 
told  you  that?  Whoever  told  you  has  misled  you.  Not  want 
Christ  in  heaven  !  Why.  beloved,  if  you  could  take  Christ  away 
rom  heaven  you  would  talye  heaven  away  altogether,  and  leave 
very  saint  in  hell.  They  do  not  want  Christ  in  heaven  in  one 
^ense  of  the  word,  because  they  have  got  him.  Therefore  they 
do  not  want  him  as  the  Scotch  use  the  word  "  want."  But  they 
still  need  to  have  Christ  with  them  every  hour,  for  he  is  the  sum 
and  substance  of  heaven.  If  I  shall  not  want  Christ  to  cleanse 
me  in  heaven,  yet  I  shall  want  Christ  to  commune  with  him.  If 
I  shall  not  need  the  blood  to  wash  me,  yet  I  shall  need  the  burnt- 
ottering  wherewithal  to  bless  and  praise  God.  If  I  shall  not 
want  him  to  pray  to  him,  I  shall  need  him  to  praise  him.  If  I 
shall  not  require  him  to  forgive  me,  yet  I  shall  want  him  to  em 
brace  me.  If  I  shall  not  need  him  as  a  Shepherd,  I  shall  need 
him  as  a  Husband.  If  I  shall  not  want  him  as  a  Priest,  I  shall 
want  him  as  a  King,  that  I  may  for  ever  serve  him  with  joy  and 
gladness.  He  shall  have  in  eternity  the  dew  of  his  youth. 

III.  WHAT  ARK  THE  LESSONS  WE  SHOULD  LEARN  FROM  THIS  ? 
The  first  is  a  lesson  for  tJie  pulpit,  a  lesson  of  admonition.  Dear 
brethren,  we  who  occupy  the  pulpit  must  lake  care  we  never  en- 
tertain  the  idea  for  a  moment  that  the  Gospel  is  worn  out.  There 
is  a  good  deal  of  nonsense  talked  about  a  Gospel  adapted  to  the 
times.  People  say  that  the  way  Whitfield  preached,  and  the 
way  that  John  Berridge  and  Rowland  Hill  preached,  was  all 
wrong.  True,  many  sinners  were  converted  under  their  ministry, 
but  you  know  sinners  then  were  a  different  sort  of  sinners  to  the 
sinners  of  these  days,  different  shaped  sinners,  and  they  do  not 
want  the  same  sort  of  preaching.  They  do  say  the  devil  is  im 
proved.  I  don't  know,  I  find  him  worse  if  any  thing — improved 
the  wrong  way.  They  say  that  sinners  are  improved,  and  do  not 
require  to  be  addressed  with  the  same  fiery,  burning  words  as  of 
old.  The  nineteenth  century  has  become  so  learned  that  it  has 
got  beyond  the  simple  knowledgo  of  Christ  crucified  ;  it  has 
become  so  erudite  that  the  simnKcity  of  the  Gospel  is  far  behiuJ 


THE    DEW    OF    CHRISTS    YOUTH.  J 

it,  it  has  marched  on  so  far  ahead  that  it  has  left  the  cross  milea 
in  the  distance.  Well,  do  not  believe  them  for  a  moment,  my 
dear  brethren.  If  you  want  to  wake  up  the  people  of  England, 
preach  an  old-fashioned  Gospel ;  if  you  want  to  crowd  your  halls, 
and  gather  thousands  round  you,  it  is  the  truth  as  it  is  in  Jesus 
Christ,  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever,  that  you  must 
preach.  And  as  for  the  matter  of  your  style,  you  may  leave  that 
vC  the  occasion,  and  never  study  that.  Only  stick  to  your  sub 
ject.  Stick  to  the  simple  Gospel  in  all  its  freshness  and  glory. 
Pentecostal  youth  shall  return  to  the  Gospel  again  wrhen  it  is 
preached  in  all  its  fulness  and  purity.  1  know  why  it  is  that 
some  preachers  like  to  be  obscure ;  it  is  because  it  gives  a  man 
a  peculiar  kind  of  popularity.  I  believe  some  people  like  to  hear 
a  man  whom  they  cannot  understand ;  and  some,  when  they  hear 
a  man  they  can  only  just  understand  themselves,  are  very  flattered 
by  it,  because  the  minister  seems  to  say  to  them,  "  Now,  you 
know  you  are  all  very  clever  people,  I  must  therefore  preach  you 
a  very  clever  sermon  ;"  and  then  they  feel  pleased  to  think  that 
the  minister  should  have  such  a  good  opinion  of  them,  and  should 
think  them  so  enlightened.  But  when  you  go  to  hear  some  plait 
blunt  fellow  that  just  blurts  out  the  Gospel  and  believes  that  to 
tiy  to  be  eloquent  when  he  is  preaching  would  be  just  as  stupid 
as  to  paint  the  rose  or  to  whitewash  the  lily,  then  you  say,  "  Well, 
now,  he  did  not  compliment  me;  why  he  talked  to  me  and  all  of 
us  as  if  we  had  been  a  common  lot  of  clod-hoppers  and  crossing- 
sweepers,  lie  told  us  just  the  simple  story  of  the  cross,  and 
there  is  nothing  flattering  in  it."  Ay  !  and  by  the  grace  of  God 
I  trust  that  from  our  pulpits  there  will  never  be  any  thing  that  is 
flattering  to  you.  "  We  preach  Christ  and  him  crucified,  not  with 
enticing  words  of  man's  wisdom,  but  with  the  demonstration  of 
the  Spirit  and  with  power."  And  rest  assured  that  there  will  be 
nore  unction  and  more  dew  resting  upon  the  enunciation  of  the 
simple  truths  of  the  Gospel,  there  vill  be  more  freshness  to  the 
hearers,  than  there  will  be  upon  the  most  polished  oratory  gar 
nished  with  almost  seraphic  eloquence,  and  elaborated  until  it 
grows  far  beyond  the  comprehension  of  ordinary  intellects. 

The  second  lesson  is  a  caution,  a  homily  of  self-examination  to 
each  one  here  present.     Do  you  take  less  interest  in  the  Gospel  \ 


264  THE  DEW  OF  CHRIST'S  YOUTH. 

do  you  find  it  grows  dull  to  you,  that  Christ  has  lost  his  fresh 
ness  ?  Let  me  tell  you  that  Christ  never  has  lost  his  freshness. 
You  may  have  lost  yours.  What  you  should  ask  yourselves  is 
— "Have  I  found  the  right  Christ?  If  the  Christ  I  have  found 
has  lost  his  freshness  to  me,  is  it  not  very  likely  I  have  found  a 
wrong  Christ,  one  of  my  own  making,  one  of  my  own  conception  ? 
for  the  real  Christ  is  always  fresh,  always  interesting,  always  new. 
Have  not  I  either  got  the  wrong  truth;  or  got  it  the  wrong  way  ?" 
I  said  the  wrong  truth;  have  I  contradicted  myself1?  And  yet 
that  is  the  palpable  contradiction  of  this  age.  One  man  says, 
"  Yes,"  and  another  man  says,  "  No."  I  am  told  it  is  uncharitable 
to  say  he  is  wrong  if  I  am  right ;  but  I  cannot  make  it  out  how 
both  are  to  be  right,  or  how  yea  and  nay  are  to  be  made  to  run 
together.  He  will  be  a  clever  man  that  is  able  to  tie  the  tails  of 
yes  and  no  together,  and  make  them  run  in  the  same  row.  But 
so  it  is.  If  you  have  lost  your  interest  in  the  Gospel,  it  is  not  a 
right  one  that  you  have  received ;  if  you  have  lost  your  interest 
in  Christ,  it  is  because  it  is  not  the  Christ  of  God.  It  is  very 
probable  that  if  your  former  zeal  and  your  former  delight  in 
Christ  have  departed,  that  you  have  made  a  mistake,  and  it  is  well 
that  you  question  yourselves  very  solemnly,  lest  you  should  be 
found  building  upon  the  sand  when  you  thought  you  were  build 
ing  upon  a  rock. 

I  have  just  another  word  to  add,  and  that  is  a  word  of  aapira- 
ti<m.  \i  Christ  has  the  dew  of  his  youth  upon  him,  let  us,  my 
Jear  friends  who  serve  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  aspire  to  show  the 
world  that  we  do  so.  In  the  olden  time,  such  was  the  dew  of 
Christ's  youth,  he  made  his  people  love  him  so  much  that  they 
were  ready  to  die  for  him ;  they  gave  all  their  substance  to  him ; 
they  lived  a  life  of  shame,  and  they  were  prepared  to  die  a  death 
of  pain.  Now  let  us  prove  to  the  world  that  Christianity  has  not 
lost  its  ancient  vigor,  that  there  is  blood  yet  left  in  the  earth,  that 
the  arm  of  the  Church  is  not  yet  withered.  Let  us  prove  to  the 
world  that  if  Christ  made  his  people  holy  in  olden  time  he  makes 
his  people  holy  now ;  that  if  the  religion  of  Christ  made  men  dis 
interested,  and  devoted  to  him,  zealous  for  his  cause,  prepared 
them  to  live  and  helped  them  to  die,  it  can  do  so  now.  It  is  for 
you  and  for  me  to  prove  to  the  world  that  our  religion  has  not 


THE    DEW    OF    CHRIST'S    YOUTH.  265 

lost  its  force  by  letting  them  see  its  force  in  our  daily  life. 
Emulate  the  noble  army  of  martyrs,  the  glorious  host  of  confes 
sors  ;  seek  to  live  like  the  goodly  fellowship  of  the  prophets,  and 
like  that  noble  company  of  the  apostles ;  and  when  you  shall  live 
the  holy  and  devoted  lives  they  did,  then  shall  all  the  world  say, 
"  These  men  have  been  with  Christ,  for  they  have  got  the  dew  of 
the  youth  of  Christianity  upon  them.  Thev  are  like  the  old 
Christians,  and  therefore  the  old  religion  haa  not  grown  oJd,  so 
as  to  be  likely  to  depart  and  pass  away." 


SERMON    XVII. 

THE  HIGH  ROCK. 

*  Frcm  the  end  of  the  earth  will  I  cry  unto  thee,  when  my  heait  is  ore* 
whelmed :  lead  me  to  the  rock  that  is  higher  than  I." — PSALM  Ixi.  2. 

IT  is  supposed  by  many  that  David  wrote  this  psalm  at  the 
time  when  he  fled  from  his  son  Absalom.  That  trial  was  one 
of  the  most  grievous  of  all  the  afflictions  of  David's  greatly- 
chequered  life.  It  was  but  a  little  thing  to  be  hunted  like  a  par 
tridge  upon  the  mountain-top  by  Saul ;  it  was  but  a  little  thing 
to  be  entrapped  by  Achish,  and  to  sojourn  among  the  Philistines 
an  alien  from  his  mother's  children  ;  nay,  all  the  afflictions  of  his 
preceding  life  are  but  little  things  compared  with  this.  This  was 
his  favorite  son,  one  in  whom  his  soul  delighted,  for  he  was  an 
excellent  and  comely  personage  in  his  outward  appearance,  and 
had  a  lordly  and  kingly  carriage  about  him ;  he  was  David's 
iarling,  although,  in  his  moral  character,  utterly  unworthy  of 
this  distinction.  This  child  of  his,  who  was  the  nearest  to  his 
heart,  had  the  greatest  opportunity  to  cut  him  to  the  quick  ; 
those  things  we  allow  to  take  the  chief  place  in  our  bosoms  have 
the  greatest  power  to  give  us  grief.  Absalom,  first  of  all,  kills 
his  brother,  and  then,  by  dint  of  courtesy  and  such  Deeming  and 
pretended  generosity,  which  demagogues  always  know  how  to 
use,  won  the  affections  of  David's  people  from  their  rightful 
monarch,  and  then  blew  the  trumpet  and  made  himself  king 
against  his  father.  Nay,  more  than  this,  he  sought  his  father's 
life  ;  it  was  not  sufficient  to  take  the  crown,  but  he  longed  to 
smite  the  head  that  should  have  worn  it.  His  father  was  driven 
from  his  house,  was  made  to  cross,  with  a  few  attendants,  over 
the  brook  Kedron,  on  a  dark  and  doleful  night,  far  away  from 


THE    HIGH    ROCK.  207 

the  sanctuary  of  God  and  from  the  house  of  the  Lord  ;  he  had  to 
dwell  in  the  midst  of  a  wood  and  sleep  among  his  armed  men, 
and,  at  other  times,  upon  the  open  plain.  Who  can  tell  the 
griefs  of  this  monarch?  Wave  after  wave  rolled  over  him.  He 
had  often  said  he  desired  only  to  be  like  the  sparrow  to  build  his 
nest,  and  like  the  swallow,  always  to  dwell  beneath  the  eaves  of 
God's  sanctuary;  and  now  his  great  trouble  is  that  he  is  driveu 
far  away  from  God's  house  to  what  he  calls  "  the  enda  of  the 
earth."  Then,  if  he  thought  of  the  cause  of  this  his  exJe,  how 
must  he  have  been  grieved!  For  his  son,  his  darling  son,  the 
son  of  his  heart,  the  son  whom  he  had  pardoned,  the  s^n  whom 
he  had  honored,  the  son  whom  he  had  recalled  from  a  banishment 
he  richly  deserved — this  son  had  smitten  him.  And  we  know 
that  eld  quotation  which  is  repeated  many  and  many  a  time,  and 
is  always  true — 

"  How  sharper  than  a  serpent's  tooth  it  is 
To  have  a  thankless  child." 

And  here  was  one  who  was  not  only  unthankful  but  who  drove 
his  father  into  exile  and  sought  his  life,  added  to  this  the  fact 
that  David  always  clung  to  this  child  even  in  the  time  of  his 
greatest  iniquity.  When  at  last  he  was  compelled  to  send  out 
his  armies  against  the  rebel,  you  remember  he  charged  all  hia 
soldiers  to  "  take  care  of  the  young  man  Absalom  ;  slay  his  fol 
lowers  if  you  please,  but  take  him  alive  if  you  must  take  him, 
and  bring  him  gently ;  bring  him  not  to  me  as  he  deserves  to  be 
brought,  in  an  iron  cage,  like  something  wilder  than  the  wildest 
beast ;  bring  not  his  head  to  me,  thrust  him  not  through  with 
spears,  dig  not  a  pit  and  cast  in  his  body  and  cover  it  up  witb 
stones :  but  bring  him  back  to  me,  I  will  again  press  him  to  my 
bosom,  for  I  love  him  still — he  is  still  Absalom  my  son,  my 
son  !"  Now,  from  the  very  fact  that  he  loved  this  young  mai 
his  sorrows  must  have  been  peculiarly  poignant.  If  a  man  can 
bring  his  mind  to  thrust  out  from  his  bosom  one  that  has  proved 
ungrateful,  then  half  the  battle  is  over.  If  love  can  cut  the  link 
— can  say,  I  have  done  with  thee,  I  will  reckon  thee  now  no 
more  my  friend  or  my  child — then  the  heart  steels  itself  against 
its  deepest  sorrow,  and  the  arrow  rattleth  against  the  harness. 


268  THE    HIGH    ROCK. 

But  not  so.  David  still  opened  wide  his  breast  to  his  umvorthj 
eon.  Ah,  let  us  remember,  we  who  stand  in  the  relation  of  chil 
dren  to  our  parents,  that  it  is  in  our  power  to  give  our  parents 
the  greatest  possible  grief;  and  yet  would  we  not,  each  of  us, 
sooner  die  than  that  those  who  brought  us  forth  should  have  to 
sorrow  on  account  of  us  1  Yet  haply  there  are  some  of  you  \\  ho 
arc  bringing  your  parents'  gray  hairs  with  sorrow  to  the  grave. 
O,  ye  that  are  cursing  your  father's  God — that  are  breaking  the 
day  that  your  father  reckons  to  be  holy — ye  who  would  despise 
the  Gospel  which  your  fathers  would  maintain — if  ye  care  not  to 
grieve  God,  at  least  pause  ere  you  grieve  your  parents.  Push 
them  not  into  the  tomb  before  their  time,  lest  their  ashes  testify 
against  you,  and  lest  in  the  hour  of  your  trouble,  when  your  chil 
dren  treat  you  in  like  manner,  you  should  have  to  learn  the  bit 
terness  of  rearing  in  your  own  bosom  the  serpent  that  shall  sting 
you  with  the  deadliest  venom.  Let  each  of  us  take  heed  that  we 
deal  gently  and  tenderly  with  the  age  of  our  parents,  and  always 
seek  to  foster  those  who  have  tenderly  fostered  us. 

With  this  preface  we  now  turn  at  once  to  our  text,  and  I  think 
we  shall  understand  it  all  the  better  from  this  little  sketch  of 
history.  *  "  From  the  end  of  the  earth  will  I  cry  unto  thee,  when 
my  heart  is  overwhelmed  :  lead  me  to  the  rock  that  is  higher 
lhan  I." 

There  are  three  truths  here.  The  first  truth  is,  that  prayer  is 
always  available  :  "  From  the  ends  of  the  earth,  when  my  spirit 
is  overwhelmed,  I  will  cry."  The  second  truth  is,  that  some- 
Vnriex  even  thc  believer  cannot  get  to  Christ  as  he  could  wish, 
out  that  then  there  is  something  provided  to  lead  him  to  Christ : 
"  Lead  me  to  the  rock  that  is  higher  than  I."  Then,  in  the  third 
place,  we  shall  consider  Christ  under  the  aspect  of  a  rock  that  is 
higher  than  we  are. 

I.  In  the  first  place  let  us  recollect  that  PRAYER  is  ALWAYS 
AVAILABLE — in  every  place  and  in  every  condition  of  our  spirit 
"  From  the  ends  of  the  earth  will  I  cry  unto  thee."  Suppose  it 
possible  for  us  to  be  banished  to  the  uttermost  verge  of  the  green 
earth,  to  "  rivers  unknown  to  song ;"  suppose  us  to  be  hastened 
far  away,  where  dwindling  daylight  dieth  out,  and  where  the 
*un's  bleak  ray  scarce  scattereth  light  on  the  world — where 


THE    HIGH    ROCK. 


vegetation,  dwarfing  and  declining,  at  last  dies  out;  suppose  us 
banished  into  exile  without  a  friend  and  without  a  helper  —  even 
there,  from  the  ends  of  the  earth,  we  should  find  that  prayer  was 
available.  It  would  still  appear  a  delightful  privilege  to  cry 
unto  God.  In  fact,  if  there  be  a  place  nearer  than  another  to 
God's  throne,  it  is  just  the  end  of  the  earth,  for  the  end  of  the 
1  earth  is  the  beginning  of  heaven.  Where  our  strength  ends 
there  God's  omnipotence  begins.  Nature's  extremity  is  God's 
opportunity.  Again  we  repeat  it,  the  end  of  the  earth  is  the  be 
ginning  of  heaven.  If  the  day  should  come  when  monarchs 
should  banish  God's  people,  their  banishment  would  be  an  object 
of  contempt,  for  can  they  banish  the  men  that  are  strangers 
wherever  they  may  be  ?  Is  not  my  Father's  house  a  large  one  ? 
Yon  dome,  the  blue  sky,  its  roof;  the  rolling  seas,  the  swelling 
floods,  the  green  meads,  the  huge  mountains  —  are  not  these  the 
floors  of  his  house  ?  And  where  can  I  be  driven  from  the  domin 
ions  of  rny  God,  and  away  from  the  voice  of  his  love  ?  Banish 
ment  to  the  Christian  may  seem  a  trouble,  but  if  he  looketh  up 
and  seeth  his  Father's  house  and  beholdeth  the  smile  of  his  God, 
he  will  know  that  banishment  is  to  him  an  impossibility.  But 
supposing  us  to  be  banished  from  every  thing  good  and  dear  to 
us,  even  then  we  should  not  be  banished  from  God's  throne. 
"  From  the  ends  of  the  earth  will  I  cry  unto  thee." 

I  think  David  meant  by  "  the  ends  of  the  earth,"  in  this  case, 
a  place  where  he  should  be  far  away  from  his  friends,  far  away 
fiom  human  help,  and  far  away  from  God's  sanctuary. 

God's  people  are  sometimes  brought  into  such  a  condition  that 
they  sire  far  away  from  friends.  They  walk  the  streets  of  Lon 
don,  and  they  think,  "  Oh,  if  I  could  tell  my  sorrow  to  a  friend, 
then  I  might  find  relief;  but  amidst  all  the  myriad  faces  that 
hurry  like  a  stream  along  the  road,  I  see  not  one  that  tempts  me 
to  tell  my  tale.  I  look  and  find  myself,  a  stranger  amidst  mul 
titudes  of  countrymen.  If  you  know  what  it  is  to  have  a  trouble 
which  you  are  compelled  to  bear  yourself,  which  you  could  not 
tell  even  to  those  of  your  own  house,  though  your  friends  would 
have  been  ready  to  help  you  if  they  had  known,  yet  it  was  such, 
that  with  all  their  readiness  they  would  not  have  had  ability  to 
assist  you  in,  and  such  that  the  biggest  words  could  not  have 


270  THE    HIGH    ROCK. 

told,  and  the  bitterest  tears  could  not  have  spelled  out.  Yoa 
were  far  away  from  friends  in  reality,  though  they  were  near  and 
scattered  round  about  you.  Now  this  is  what  David  meant  by 
**  the  ends  of  the  earth  " — far  away  from  friends — yet  even  then, 
when  friend,  and  helper,  and  lover  failed,  even  then  did  he  cry 
unto  his  God. 

Again,  he  meant  by  the  ends  of  the  earth,  far  away  from 
human  help.  There  are  difficulties  into  which  the  true  believer 
is  brought  that  no  human  hand  can  possibly  touch.  His  spiritual 
affairs  are  weights  too  heavy  for  human  strength  to  lift ;  though 
all  the  giants  of  earth  should  come  and  strain  their  backs  until 
their  shoulders  should  give  way,  and  their  limbs  should  totter 
beneath  the  enormous  load,  yet  the  spiritual  necessities  of  the 
Christian  could  not  be  carried — they  are  a  burden  intolerable 
for  human  shoulder ;  none  but  God  can  sustain  the  necessities 
of  the  Christian.  There  are  times  when  we  are  sighing  after 
spiritual  mercies,  when  we  are  groaning  under  the  desertion  of 
God's  countenance,  when  our  sins  are  hunting  us  like  packs  of 
wolves,  when  afflictions  are  rolling  over  us — spiritual  afflictions, 
when  faith  is  little  and  fear  is  great,  when  hope  is  dim  and  doubt 
becomes  terrible  and  dark— then  we  are  far  away  from  human 
help ;  but,  blessed  be  God,  e^en  then  we  may  cry  unto  him. 
Nay,  more,  even  in  temporal  plfairs  there  are  times  vh*n  the 
Christian  gets  into  such  a  place  t*nt  no  one  can  help  him.  He 
has  made  some  mistake,  perhaps  ;  ixi  the  ardency  of  his  zeal  to 
do  right  he  has  done  wrong ;  in  tho  attempt  to  run  in  the  ways 
of  God,  he  overshot  the  road  and  got  into  another  place,  and 
finds  himself  in  evil  when  he  hoped  to  be  in  the  way  of  right. 
Such  things  have  happened;  business  men,  with  all  their  calcu 
lations,  have  made  mistakes,  and  have  found  themselves  plungec 
into  difficulties  from  which  they  see  no  way  of  escape.  In  vair 
do  others  offer  help;  wealth  would  not  avail;  character  is  a? 
stake :  even  then  they  have  cried  from  the  cr<is  of  the  earth, 
when  human  help  failed  them,  and  they  have  cried  unto  God, 
and  if  they  have  cried  in  faith,  they  have  never  found  that  God 
has  ceased  to  hear  as  long  as  they  have  continued  to  cry. 

By  "  the  ends  of  the  earth,"  I  think,  too,  David  means  at  a 
distance  from  the  means  of  grace.  Sometimes  bv  sicknss»»r  *« 


THE    HIGH    ROCK.  271 

personal  o«  the  sickness  of  our  relatives,  we  are  detained  from 
the  house  of  God;  at  other  times,  in  journeying  or  travelling, 
or  upon  the  sea,  we  are  unable  to  obtain  the  use  of  God's  sanctuary 
and  the  use  of  the  means  of  grace.  It  is  a  great  deprivation  to 
God's  people.  You  will  find  that  a  true  Christian  had  rather  go 
without  a  meal  than  go  without  a  sermon.  He  would  sooner  that 
ic  should  miss  a  meal  than  that  he  should  lose  his  daily  portion 
>f  Scripture,  cr  his  daily  resort  to  the  house  of  prayer.  That 
man  is  no  child  of  God  who  does  not  value  the  means  of  grace. 
I  tremble  for  that  man's  piety  who  professes  himself  able  tc 
maintain  the  vital  spark  of  grace  within  him  when  the  means  of 
grace  are  at  hand,  and  he  lives  in  neglect  of  them.  Some  people, 
if  they  go  to  a  watering-place,  or  a  little  way  out  of  town,  say 
"  Well,  there  is  nobody  here  that  preaches  my  sentiments,  1 
shall  not  go  anywhere."  So  they  get  the  sermon  of  some  par 
ticular  pope  of  a  certain  denomination  and  gloat  over  that,  and 
that  is  their  Sabbath  meal.  To  such  as  these  I  would  just  give 
that  passage  of  the  Apostle  Paul,  "  Not  forsaking  the  assembling 
of  yourselves  together,  as  the  manner  of  some  is."  If  there  be 
no  place  of  worship  specially  dedicated  to  God,  we  bless  him 

that — 

"  Where'er  we  seek  him  he  is  found, 
Aud  every  place  is  hallowed  ground." 

But  if  there  be  a  place  that  is  open  for  the  worship  of  God,  if 
even  I  could  not  enjoy  the  preaching  of  the  minister,  I  would 
go  there  to  enjoy  the  singing  of  Christ's  praises,  I  would  go  there 
to  offer  my  prayer  with  the  multitude  that  keep  holy-day.  But 
still  there  must  be  in  our  lives  different  times  when  we  are  away 
from  the  sanctuary  of  God,  and  to  the  Christian  that  will  be  like 
being  at  the  ends  of  the  earth ;  but  then,  thanks  be  to  God,  we 
may  still  cry  unto  him  when  no  Sabbath  bell  shall  ring  us  to 
the  house  of  prayer,  when  no  servant  of  the  Lord  shall  proclaim 
with  happy  voice  the  promise  of  pardoning  mercy,  when  there  shall 
not  be  seen  the  multitude  on  bended  knee,  and  when  me  shouting 
of  praise  is  unheard  and  we  are  far  away  from  the  sacred  gather 
ings  of  God's  house — yet  we  are  not  far  away  from  him :  we 
may  still  continue  to  pray — "  frcm  the  ends  of  the  earth  will 
I  cry  unto  thee." 


272  THE    HIGH    ROCK. 

It  seems,  however,  that  the  Psalmist  was  in  a  worse  plight 
than  this,  for  a  man  might  be  at  the  end  of  the  earth  and  still 
be  happy  ;  for  it  is  not  the  place  that  makes  the  man.  but  the 
man  that  makes  the  place.  A  man  might  be  in  paradise,  in  hell 
itself,  if  his  heart  were  right.  Let  a  man  have  his  heart  full  of 
peace  and  joy  and  happiness,  and  it  is  impossible  to  make  that 
innn  miserable.  I  have  often  thought  that  when  people  find  fault 
with  their  station  they  are  making  a  great  mistake  ;  they  should 
find  fault  with  themselves.  Many  a  man  is  miserable  whose  head 
wears  a  crown,  and  many  are  happy  whose  heads  have  no  placo 
of  repose.  Some  who  are  clothed  in  rags  have  rich  hearts,  and 
many  that  are  clothed  in  purple  and  fine  linen,  and  fare  sumptu 
ously  every  day,  have  starving  spirits  ;  for,  after  all,  it  is  the 
mind  that  is  the  standard  of  the  man,  and  if  the  mind  be  happy 
the  place  does  not  signify  at  all.  But,  alas,  for  poor  David  !  he 
had  been  wrong  without  and  wrong  within  too.  "  When  my 
heart  is  overwhelmed."  I  was  turning  to  Calvin's  notes  upon 
this  text  lately,  and  I  found  that  the  translation  which  Calvin 
uses  puts  it  thus,  "  When  my  spirit  is  tumbled."  A  most 
extraordinary  translation,  and,  as  he  says,  a  very  rough 
one.  I  can  only  interpret  it  by  a  saying  of  like  character  in 
John  Bunyan's  "  Pilgrim's  Progress,"  where  he  says  he  was 
exceedingly  tumbled  up  and  down  in  his  mind.  And  I  have 
thought  of  that,  too,  as  being  a  very  extraordinary  but  expres 
sive  idea — tumbled  up  and  down.  And  so  it  does  seem  that  one 
meaning  of  this  text  may  be,  "When  my  spirit  is  tumbled" — 
when  it  is  out  of  order,  when  it  is  brought  into  a  kind  of  chaos 
and  confusion,  when,  to  use  another  word  which  expresses  closely 
the  idea  of  the  Hebrew,  "  When  my  spirit  is  wrapped  over  and 
over  " — when  my  spirit  is  covered  just  as  a  man  covers  his  face 
in  the  day  of  grief,  because  his  sorrow  is  so  great  that  he  shuns 
the  sun,  and  would  not  have  his  fellow-creature's  eye  behold  the 
anguish  of  his  soul.  Then,  even  then,  says  he,  when  my  spirit 
is  overwhelmed,  even  then  will  I  cry  unto  thee.  Turn  the  heart 
upside  down,  and  then  you  will  get  the  idea  of  its  being  over 
whelmed.  Even  then  what  saith  the  Psalmist  ?  "  Ye  people, 
pour  out  your  heart  before  him."  If  your  heart  is  turned  over, 
let  it  be  turned  over  before  him.  David  tells  us  in  one  of  his 


THE    HIGH    ROCK. 


psalms,  "I  poured  out  my  heart  within  me."  How  foolish  that 
was !  It  did  him  no  good.  !t  was  just  the  wrong  place  for  his 
heart  to  be  poured  out.  Afterwards  he  says,  "  I  have  poured 
out  my  heart  before  him."  Oh,  it  is  a  happy  way  to  pray, 
when  the  heart  is  turned  upside  down,  arid  out  of  order,  to  spill 
all  the  contents  at  the  foot  of  the  throne.  Perhaps  sometimes 
the  overwhelming  of  our  heart  is  only  meant  to  draw  all  its 
dregs  out  of  it,  that  the  very  least  particle  of  self-righteousness 
and  self-trust  and  self-confidence  may  be  drained  out  at  the  foot 
of  the  mercy-seat,  that  there  may  be  more  room  for  an  overflowing 
abundance  of  divine  grace. 

Imagine  again  a  vessel  at  sea,  and  you  get  an  idea  of  the  text 

once  more.      It  has  been   laboring  in  the   storm.      Sometimes 

lifted  up  to  heaven,  as  though  its  masts  would  sweep  the  stars ; 

then  again  descending  until  its  keel  seemed  dragging  on  the 

ocean's  bottom  ;    then  shaking   this  way,  and  then  that  way, 

reeling  to  and  fro  and    staggering;    now  starting  back — now 

rushing  forwards  like  a  drunken  man,  or  like  a  madman  who  has 

lost  his  way.     At  last  a  huge  sea  comes  rolling  on,  its  white 

wave  of  foam  can  be  seen  in  the  distance,  and  the  sailors  give 

up  all   for  lost.     Here  comes  a  sea  that  will  overwhelm  this 

cockle-shell  of  a  boat.     And  on  comes  the  wave,  gathering  its 

strength  till  it  dashes  against  the  ship,  and — down  it  goes.     It 

is  overwhelmed.     The  decks  are  swept,  the  masts  are  gone,  the 

timbers  are  cracking,  the  ship  descends,  and  is  sucked  as  in  a 

whirlpool.     All  is  lost.     "  Now,"  says  David,  "  that  is  the  case 

with  my  heart:  it  is  overwhelmed,  sucked  into  a  whirlpool  of 

trouble,  borne  down  by  a  tremendous  sea  of  difficulty,  crushed 

and  broken ;    the  ribs  of  my  soul  seem   to  have  given  way  ; 

every  timber  is  cracked  and  gone  out  of  its  place.     My  heart  is 

overwhelmed    within   me."     Can   ye   now  get  an   idea  of   the 

extreme   sorrow    of   the   Psalmist's   spirit1?      "Yet,"  says  he, 

t;  even  then  will  I  cry  unto  thee."     Oh.  noble  faith,  that  can  cry 

amidst  the  shrieking  of   the   tempest,  and  the  howling  of  the 

st^rm  !     Oh.  glorious  faith,  that  from  the  bottom  of  the  sea  can 

send  its  arrows  to  the  heights  of  heaven !     Oh,  masterpiece  of 

faith,  that  from  a  broken  spirit  can  send  up  a  sound  prayei  ! 

Oh,  glorious  triumph,  that  from  the  ends  of  the  earth  can  send 


274  THE    HIGH    KOCK. 

the  arrow  ,>f  prayer  all  the  way  to  heaven !     "  From  the  en  da 
of  the  earth  will  I  cry  unto  thee." 

And  now,  Christian  man,  may  God  help  thee  to  make  up  thj 
mind  to  this,  that  where'er  thou  art  thou  wilt  never  leave  off 
prayer,  whatever  the  devil  says  to  thee.  If  he  urge  thee  to  for 
sake  the  mercy -seat,  say,  "Get  thee  behind  me,  Satan."  If  he 
says  you  have  sinned  too  much  to  pray,  tell  him  his  argunien 
proves  the  reverse:  the  more  you  have  sinned  the  more  yoi 
should  pray.  If  he  tells  you  that  your  difficulties  are  tremendous, 
tell  him  that  the  very  greatness  of  the  difficulties  in  which  you 
are  involved,  should  bear  you  nearer  to  God.  Never  cease  to  cry 
whilst  thou  hast  breath  ;  and  when  thou  hast  no  breath,  still  cry. 
Long  as  thou  canst  speak,  cry  unto  him  ;  and  when  thou  canst  not 
speak,  let  groanings  that  cannot  be  uttered  still  go  up  before  God's 
.nrtne.  Cease  not  to  pray  in  every  difficulty,  and  in  every  strait 
etake  thyself  to  thy  closet,  for  there  thou  shalt  find  God,  if  thou 
canst  not  find  him  any  where  else.  And  let  me  also  say  this 
word  to  any  one  who  has  begun  to  pray,  but  who  has  not  yet 
•'bund  peace  with  God,  although  he  is  overwhelmed  by  a  sense  of 
his  guilt.  My  dear  friend,  if  God  has  overwhelmed  you  with  a 
sense  of  sin,  and  if  you  feel  as  if  you  were  far  away  from  mercy 
— at  the  very  ends  of  the  earth — yet  I  beseech  you  cry  unto  him. 
Mark,  our  text  says,  "  Cry."  Oh,  what  power  there  is  in  that  simple 
act  of  crying  !  As  I  rode  here  this  evening,  I  saw  a  boy  sitting 
down  upon  the  pavement,  crying  with  all  his  might  about  some 
thing  or  other  he  had  broken ;  and  I  observed  some  lady,  who 
was  going  by,  stop  in  a  moment,  for  the  poor  fellow's  face  was 
jso  much  awry,  and  the  tears  were  flowing  so  plentifully  that  she 
seemed  as  if  she  must  stop  and  give  him  something.  And.  in- 
•"Jt'ed,  I  felt  inclined,  if  I  had  not  been  in  a  hurry  to  come  here,  to 
stop  and  ask  him  what  he  was  crying  for ;  for  one  cannot  bear  to 
see  a  fellow-creature  crying.  All  beggars  that  want  to  take  you 
in,  take  to  crying,  for  they  know  that  has  an  effect  upon  suscep 
tible  ladies  who  are  passing  by.  And  there  is  a  power  in  tears, 
and  these  people  know  it.  The  best  style  of  prater  is  that  which 
cannot  be  called  any  thing  else  but  a  cry.  Now,  if  you  cannot 
pray  as  many  do — if  you  cannot  stand  up  in  a  prayer-meeting,  arid 
pray  fluently  and  eloquently  like  others — so  long  as  the  Lord  eu- 


THK    HIGH    ROCK. 


ables  you  to  cry,  I  beseech  you  do  not  leave  off  crying.  Cry 
4  Lord,  have  mercy  on  me;"  "  Lord,  save  or  1  perish;"  "Lord, 
appear  unto  me;"  "  I  the  chief  of  sinners  am  ;"  "  Lord,  manifest 
thyself  to  me."  Cry,  cry,  cry,  poor  sinner,  and  he  that  heareth 
the  young  ravens  when  they  cry  will  hear  thee.  Do  not  think 
that  the  voice  of  thy  crying  shall  be  lost.  The  voice  of  boasting 
3ii  s  away  unheard,  but  the  voice  of  crying  penetrates  the  ear  of 
crcd,  reaches  his  heart,  and  moves  his  hand  to  give  a  plenitude  of 
blessings.  Above  all  things,  simcs*1,  if  thou  feelest  thy  need  of  a 
Saviour,  keep  on  crying  ;  Satan  can  never  harm  thee  while  Gui 
helps  thee  to  cry.  So  long  as  thou  hast  got  a  word  of  prayer  on 
thy  lip,  the  law  has  not  a  word  of  condemnation  against  thee.  If 
thou  canst  cry  at  God's  mercy  -seat,  then  Christ  is  crying  on  thy 
behalf  at  hij  Father's  glory-seat.  Be  thou  instant  in  prayer,  and 
thou  shalt  be  successful  in  it.  When  thy  heart  is  overwhelmed, 
from  the  ends  of  the  earth  cry  unto  God.  Thus  we  have  dis 
posed  of  the  first  point. 

II.  Now    the  second   very  briefly.     THERE  ARE  TIMES  WHEN 

THE    SOUL    CANNOT    GET    TO    CllRIST    AS     IT    DESIRES.       Then     thailk 

God  there  is  the  text  —  "  Lead  me  to  the  rock  that  is  higher  than 
I."  Some  people  make  out  faith  to  be  a  marvellously  easy  thing, 
and  so  it  is  in  theory,  but  it  is  the  hardest  thing  in  the  world  in 
practice.  If  men  are  to  be  saved  on  the  condition  of  their  re 
penting  and  believing,  they  can  be  no  more  saved  than  on  the 
condition  of  their  being  perfect,  unless  there  is  added  to  this  con 
dition  the  promise  that  the  God  who  requires  faith  will  give  faith, 
and  work  repentance  in  them.  I  have  been  astonished  to  find  in 
this  age  that  there  are  great  preachers,  and  men  who,  I  have  no 
doubt,  gather  many  around  them,  who  tell  the  people  that  the 
condition  and  the  ground  of  the  sinner's  justification  are  his  faith, 
his  repentance,  and  his  obedience.  Why,  the  ground  of  our  jus 
tification  is  the  righteousness  of  Christ  ;  and  as  to  the  condition 
there  is  no  condition  at  all,  for  God  gives  justification  freely,  and 
he  gives  faith,  and  he  gives  repentance  too  ;  it  is  all  his  gift. 
There  never  was  a  man  saved  by  faith  or  repentance  which  he 
performed  as  a  matter  of  duty.  Albeit  that  the  Word  of  God 
demands  of  every  man  that  he  submit  himself  to  God  by  re* 
pentance,  and  lay  hold  of  Christ  by  faith,  yet  no  man  ever  will 


276  THE    HIGH    ROCK. 

do  this,  or  ever  can  do  it ;  it  is  only  the  sovereign  will  of  God, 
and  vhe  sovereign  grace  of  God  that  give  repentance  and  fa i tit 
Sometimes  God,  in  his  sovereignty,  is  pleased  to  show  a  man  his 
sin,  and  not  to  show  him  his  Saviour,  for  a  season  ;  he  strips  the 
sinner,  perhaps  he  leaves  him  to  shiver  in  the  cold  befoie  h 
clothes  him,  just  to  let  him  know  what  a  boon  a  garment  is.  11 
kills  him,  pierces  him  through  and  through  with  the  law.  and  tht.r 
lets  him  lie  to  know  his  own  inability  for  a  season  before  h« 
quickens  him  again,  and  makes  him  alive  unto  God.  The  fact  is 
God  acts  as  he  chooses  with  those  whom  he  saves.  He  sometimes 
gives  repentance  and  faith  at  the  same  time,  just  as  the  thunder 
sometimes  follows  the  lightning  speedily  ;  at  other  times  he  gives 
repentance,  and  then  he  makes  us  tarry  for  many  a  day  before  he 
gives  us  full  assurance  of  our  interest  in  Christ;  but  they  are 
sure  to  follow  one  another,  they  must  come.  God  never  gave 
conviction  without  giving  faith  at  last,  he  never  led  a  man  out  of 
himself,  without  at  last  leading  him  to  Christ ;  if  he  led  him  to 
despair,  he  afterwards  led  him  to  hope ;  but  still  there  may  be  a 
gap  between  the  two,  and  during  such  a  period  it  is  our  business 
to  use  this  blessed  prayer,  "  Lead  me  to  the  rock  that  is  higher 
than  I.  Oh !  help  me  to  believe.  Lord,  increase  my  faith,  en 
able  me  to  see  the  need  of  thy  Son,  give  me  eyes  to  look  to  him 
who  was  pierced,  and,  as  thou  hast  given  me  eyes  to  weep,  so 
give  me  eyes  to  look  on  him,  and  to  rejoice."  So  you  see  if  we 
cannot  believe,  if  doubts  so  overwhelm  us  that  we  cannot  get  to 
Christ  to  our  own  satisfaction,  remember  it  is  the  Holy  Spirit's 
business  to  draw  us  to  Christ,  and  we  may  therefore  pray, 
•*  Lead  me  to  the  Rock  that  is  higher  than  I." 

III.  We  are  now  coming  to  that  part  of  the  text  which  most 
of  all  delights  my  soul,  the  thought  of  JESUS  CHRIST,  WHO  is  THB 
ROCK  THAT  is  HIGHER  THAN  WE  ARE.  We  have  all  got  variou* 
standards  for  measuring  things;  after  all.  men  must  treasure  by 
themselves.  If  you  hear  a  man  praising  another,  you  will  gene 
rally  find  that  the  reason  he  praises  that  other  is,  because  he  sees 
in  that  other  something  very  much  like  what  he  possesses  him 
self.  "There,"  says  he,  "  I  love  a  man  that  is  honest  and  out 
spoken."  The  man  means  all  the  while  that  he  thinks  himself  a 
remarkably  honest  and  outspoken  man,  therefore  h«  loves  to  aue 


THE    HIGH    BOCK.  277 

himself  in  another.  After  all,  we  generally  measure  with  our 
own  measuring-rods,  we  take  ourselves  to  be  the  test  of  other 
people.  A  few  nights  ago  1  proved  that  in  my  own  case :  going 
ilong  Bermondsey,  1  looked  in  at  the  windows  to  see  what  time 
it  was ;  one  clock  said  ten  minutes  to  seven,  another  said  seven 
o'clock,  and  another  said  ten  minutes  past.  Then  I  began  to  think 
what  a  pity  it  was  I  had  not  my  own  watch  with  me — what  was 
Jhat  but  a  belief  that  my  own  watch  was  infallible,  and  that  all 
the  other  clocks  might  be  wrong  ]  Rest  assured  there  is  a  great 
deal  of  trying  ourselves  on  the  touchstones  of  our  own  infallible 
selves.  And  even  the  Christian  is  not  altogether  quite  quit  of 
this,  and  does  not  leave  it  behind  him  till  he  gets  to  heaven.  So 
the  Lord  graciously  adapts  his  Word  to  our  poor  littleness,  and 
speaks  of  Jesus  as  the  rock  higher  than  we  are. 

Come  hither  and  let  us  measure  the  Rock  Christ  Jesus.  Here 
is  a  man  who  is  a  great  sinner.  "  Ah,"  he  says,  "  I  am  a  great 
sinner,  indeed ;  my  iniquities  reach  so  high  that  they  smite  the 
very  stars ;  they  have  gone  before  me  to  the  judgment-seat  of 
God,  and  they  are  clamoring  for  my  destruction."  Well,  sinner, 
come  thou  here  and  measure  this  rock.  Thou  art  very  high,  it  is 
true,  but  this  is  a  rock  that  is  higher  than  thou  art ;  a  great  sinner 
thou  mayest  be,  and  estimate  thyself  at  the  greatest  thou  possibly 
canst ;  there,  set  thy  sins  down  at  some  inconceivable  height ;  if 
thou  hast  thought  thyself  to  be  a  very  Goliath  in  sin ;  if  thou 
sayest.  "I  am  as  big  a  sinner  as  Saul  of  Tarsus,"  put  thy  sin  pile 
on  pile,  tier  on  tier,  nay,  borrow  thy  neighbor's  sins ;  take  them 
all,  arid  recollect  that — 

"  If  all  the  sins  that  men  have  done 

In  will,  in  word,  in  thought,  and  deed, 
Since  worlds  were  made,  and  time  began, 
Were  laid  on  cue  poor  sinner's  head  "— 

"  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  alone 
Could  for  this  mass  of  sin  atone, 
And  sweep  it  all  away." 

However  high  thy  sin  may  be,  there  is  the  covert  of  a  rock  in  a 
weary  land  higher  thar.  thou  art,  and  under  this  thou  mayest 
shelter  thyself! 


278  THE    HIGH    ROCK. 

Here  comes  another  forward ;  he  is  not  a  man  full  of  doubts 
and  fears,  but  he  is  a  man  of  hopeful  spirit.  "  Oh  !  "  says  he, 
"  I  hava  many  sins,  but  I  hope  that  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  will 
take  them  aJl  away.  I  have  many  wants,  but  I  hope  that  he  will 
supply  them.  1  shall  have  many  temptations,  but  I  hope  that  he 
will  ward  them  off.  I  shall  have  many  difficulties,  but  I  hope  he 
will  carry  me  through  them."  Ah  !  man,  I  like  to  see  thee  have 
a  good  measuring-rod,  a  long  one,  when  it  is  made  of  hope. 
Hope  is  a  toll  companion ;  he  wades  right  through  the  sea  and  is 
not  drowned  ;  you  cannot  kill  him,  do  what  you  may.  Hope  is 
one  of  the  last  blessings  God  gives  us,  and  one  that  abiJes  last 
with  us.  If  a  man  is  foodless,  and  without  covering,  still  he  hopes 
to  see  better  days  by  and  bye.  Now,  sinner,  thy  hopes,  I  would 
have  thee  to  see,  are  very  tall,  and  very  high;  but  remember, 
this  rock  is  higher  than  thou  art.  Hope  whatever  thou  pleasest ; 
let  thy  hope  expand  itself;  let  it  climb  the  highest  mountain,  and 
stand  on  it ;  let  it  make  itself  higher  and  higher,  but  this  rock  is 
higher  than  thou  art.  Christ  is  a  better  Christ  than  thou  canst 
hope ;  he  has  more  mercy  than  thou  hopest  for ;  he  has  more 
power  to  save  than  thou  hopest  to  receive,  more  love  than  thou 
canst  hope  to  have;  he  has  a  better  heaven  for  thee  than  thou 
couldst  hope  to  enjoy.  lie  is  higher  than  thou  art. 

But  here  comes  another,  and  he  says,  "  Ah !  my  hope  has  grown 
strong,  I  know  whom  I  have  believed,  and  am  persuade  1  that  he 
is  a  precious  Christ.  I  can  speak  well  of  him,  he  has  been  my 
sure  defence  in  every  time  of  war,  and  my  rock  arid  refuge  in 
every  time  of  distress,  my  granary  in  every  hour  of  famine,  my 
light  in  every  night  of  darkness.  I  can  speak  well  of  him,  and 
in  consequence  of  what  I  know  of  him  I  can  believe  that  he  is 
able  to  save  unto  the  uttermost  them  that  come  unto  God  by  him 
1  believe  him  to  be  all  that  he  says  he  is,  I  believe  in  his  Word, 
rejoice  in  him,  my  faith  scarce  knows  a  bound  when  1  begin  U> 
think  what  he  is,  and  what  he  has  done  for  me."  Ay,  but  he  is  a 
rock  higher  than  thy  faith.  I  love  to  see  thy  faith  mounting  up 
very  high,  but  remember  Christ  is  better  than  thy  faith,  and 
higher  than  thy  faith.  Why,  man,  if  thy  faith  were  twice  as  big 
as  it  is  Christ  would  be  a  warrant  for  it  all.  Nay,  if  thy  faith 
could  be  multiplied  a  thousandfold,  so  that  thou  couldit  believe 


THE    HIGH    ROCK.  279 

more  of  him,  and  better  things  of  him,  and  higher  things  of  him, 
still  he  would  be  higher  than  thy  faith  could  ever  climb.  I  do 
hope  to  grow  in  faith,  and  get  higher  and  higher  in  that  celestial 
virtue.  I  think  I  believe  my  Master  better  now  than  I  did  once, 
though  sometimes  I  think  my  faith  faileth  me.  Yet  sure  I  am  I 
do  enjoy  a  sweeter  conscience  than  I  did,  and  a  more  quiet  peace- 
ftil  calm  than  at  one  time  I  experienced ;  and  I  hope  to  believ 
him  more  surely  still ;  I  pray  that  my  faith  may  continually 
grow,  that,  being  rooted  and  grounded  in  faith,  I  may  grow  up  a 
strong  man  in  Christ  Jesus ;  but  this  I  know,  though  you  or  I 
should  grow  till  our  faith  should  be  greater  than  that  of  Paul,  till 
it  should  be  such  a  faith  that  it  could  remove  mountains,  while  it 
should  say  to  the  fig-tree,  "Be  plucked  up  by  the  roots,"  or  to 
the  mountain,  "Be  cast  into  the  sea,"  and  it  should  be  done,  still 
even  then  Christ  would  be  higher  than  our  faith.  Oh,  we  might 
believe  a  great  deal  about  him,  but  would  faith  grasp  all  then1? 
ft  has  long  arms,  but  not  long  enough  to  encompass  Christ;  he  is 
greater  than  faith  itself  could  conceive  him  to  be. 

Here  comes  another :  he  says,  "  Ah !  blessed  be  God,  I  have 
a  golden  measuring-rod  here — not  that  of  hope,  or  fear,  or  faith, 
but,  better  still,  the  measuring-rod  of  enjoyment."  "  Ah  !  "  says 
one,  "  how  high  have  I  been  in  enjoyment !  He  hath  taken  me  to 
Calvary,  and  there  I  have  seen  the  flowing  of  his  own  precious 
blood— 

"  'With  divine  assurance  knowing 
He  hath  made  my  peace  with  God.' 

Not  content  with  that,  he  has  taken  me  to  Tabor;  there  I  have 
seen  my  Lord  transfigured,  and  have  beheld  his  glories,  as  of  the 
only  begotten  of  the  Father,  full  of  grace  and  truth.  Nay,  more, 
he  has  taken  me  to  the  top  of  Pisgah,  and  he  has  bidden  me  '  view 
(he  landscape  o'er.'  I  have  seen  the  joys  which  he  has  reserved 
for  them  that  love  him."  "  But,"  says  the  believer,  "  Christ  has 
said  to  me,  '  Friend,  come  up  higher.'  When  I  first  went  to  the 
feast,  I  sat  in  the  lower  room  of  repentance :  he  came  in,  and 
said,  '  Friend,  come  up  higher ;'  and  he  took  me  into  another 
char.iber  called  faith.  And  then  he  came  in  again  and  said, 
4  Fi  iend  c'jiue  up  higher ;'  aud  he  took  me  to  the  upper  room  of 


280  THE    HIGH    ROCK. 

assurance.  Then  he  saw  me  again  and  he  said,  '  Friend,  con.e  np 
higher  ;'  and  he  took  me  to  the  upper  room  of  communion.  And 
sometimes  he  seemed  to  me  to  say,  '  Friend,  come  up  higher,  into 
the  ecstatic  bliss  which  the  highest  degrees  of  constant  fellowship 
can  give;'  and  I  am  now  waiting  only  till  he  should  say,  '  Coiue 
up  higher,'  und  take  me  to  his  own  bosom,  to  tarry  with  him  for 
2ver." 

Ah,  well,  I  am  glad  to  hear  thee  talk  thus  ;  I  would  I  had  many 
of  those  whose  pastures  are  in  these  high  places,  many  who  coulo 
say  that  they  had  grown  tall  in  these  delightful  things ;  but  re 
member  this  rock  is  higher  than  thou  art.  All  thou  hast  eve* 
enjoyed  of  him  is  but  as  the  first  beginning  of  a  topless  mountain 
When  1  have  been  in  Scotland,  1  have  gone  up  some  mountain 
there ;  I  have  thought,  this  is  a  very  high  place  indeed,  and  what 
a  fine  view  there  is,  what  a  height  I  have  reached  !  "  Ah,"  some 
one  has  said,  "  but  if  you  were  to  see  the  Alps,  why  this  would 
only  seem  like  the  beginning,  }ou  would  only  have  got  to  the 
foot,  when  you  had  got  as  high  as  this;"  and  so  it  is  with  you  : 
by  your  experience,  your  sweet  enjoyment,  you  think  you  get  to 
the  top  of  the  mountain,  but  Christ  comes  and  whispers  to  you, 
"  Look  yonder  far  above  those  clouds ;  you  have  only  begun  to 
go  up  high;  this  hill  of  communion  is  only  one  step  yet;  as  yet 
you  have  only  advanced  a  babe's  leap ;  you  have  farther  to  go, 
far  higher  than  you  could  imagine  or  conceive."  Ah!  this  is  a 
rock  that  is  higher  than  thou  art,  the  highest  in  communion,  and 
the  next  to  the  throne  of  God. 

"  Well,"  cries  another,  "  from  what  I  have  heard  and  what  I 
have  read  in  God's  Word,  I  am  expecting  very  great  things  of 
Christ  when  I  shall  see  him  as  he  is.  Oh,  sir,  if  he  be  better 
than  the  communion  of  his  saints  can  make  him,  if  he  be  sweeter 
ban  all  his  most  eloquent  preachers  can  »peak  of  him,  if  he  be  so 
delightful  that  those  who  know  him  best  cannot  tell  his  beauties, 
what  a  precious — what  a  glorious — what  an  inconceivable  Christ 
he  must  be  ! "  Ah,  friend,  I  am  glad  thou  art  measuring  Christ 
by  thine  expectation.  But  let  me  tell  thee,  high  as  thy  expecta 
tions  are,  he  is  higher  than  thou  art.  Expect  what  thou  mayest, 
but  when  thou  seest  him  thou  wilt  say  with  the  Queen  of  Sheba, 
"The  half  has  not  been  told  me  ;"  and  then  you  will  add,  "  Ncr 


THE    HIGH    ROCK.  281 

did  I  expect  the  half  of  this."  You  may  sit  down  and  think  of 
Christ's  glories  and  splendors,  of  the  happiness  that  he  has  pro- 
vided  for  his  people,  till  you  lose  yourself  in  a  very  sea  of 
thought.  The  promise  dropped  into  the  sea  of  your  heart  may 
go  on  widening  in  circles  till  you  have  grasped  a  whole  universe 
of  pleasure  and  delight  in  contemplating  the  name  of  Christ; 
hut  remember,  when  thou  hast  conceived  the  most,  the  rock  is 
still  higher  than  thou  art,  still  above  thee,  still  far  above  thine 
head  when  thou  hast  conceived  and  imagined  the  most. 

Ah  !  let  us  pause  here  and  think,  then  what  shall  we  do  with 
a  hill  that  is  higher  than  we  are — shall  we  lie  for  ever  at  the 
base  thereof,  or  not  attempt  to  climb  it  1  God  forbid.  Shall  we 
pretend  we  have  climbed  if?  That  were  presumption.  God 
forbid.  Let  us  press  forward,  evermore  ascending  it,  ever  cry 
ing  when  we  get  at  the  greatest  height,  "  Lord,  still  lead  me  up, 
still  lead  me  to  the  rock  that  is  higher  than  I  am ;  lead  me  on, 
O  Lord,  till  I  come  to  heaven,  and  even  then  lead  me ;  lead  me 
beside  the  living  fountains  of  water,  still  lead  me  to  the  rock  that 
is  higher  than  I  am  ;  ever  help  me  to  be  climbing,  pressing  for 
ward,  looking  not  on  that  which  is  behind  but  on  that  which  is 
before,  pressing  forward  to  the  mark  of  the  prize  of  our  high 
calling  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus.  Thus  have  we  tried  to  open  the 
view  of  tf  e  Psalmist,  when  he  said,  "  Lead  me  to  the  rock  that 
is  higher  *;han  I." 

Now,  ac  some  of  you  will  be  exercised  with  troubles,  remem 
ber  that  the  rock  is  higher  than  you  are.  And  when  your 
troubles  reach  you,  if  you  are  not  high  enough  to  escape  them, 
climb  up  to  the  rock  of  Christ,  and  there  is  no  arrow  of  trouble 
that  can  reach  you  when  you  get  there.  Satan  will  be  howling 
at  you,  and  perhaps  he  will  be  nibbling  at  your  heel,  barking  and 
biting  at  you — climb  into  the  rock  of  Christ,  and  he  will  not  be 
able  to  reach  you,  and 'you  will  scarce  hear  his  howling  ;  he  will 
be  low  down  in  the  valley  when  you  are  in  the  rock  higher  than 
you  are.  Fears  will  arise  and  doubts  will  come  in  like  a  flood — 
there  is  no  place  so  safe  in  the  time  of  a  flood  as  a  high  rock, — 
climb  to  the  rock  Christ,  and  then  though  the  waves  of  the  sea 
roar  and  the  mountains  shake  with  the  swelling  thereof,  you  will 
be  secure  if  you  are  on  a  rock  higher  than  you  are.  And,  oh ! 


282  Th£    HIGH    ROCK. 

for  ever  he  seeking,  while  th .>  world  is  dragging  you  down,  to  be 
climbing  up.  If  the  devil  savs,  "  Come  down  again,  come  down, 
and  be  worldly  ;  come  down,  and  be  selfish,"  always  cry,  "  Lord, 
lead  me  up,  lead  me  to  the  rock  that  is  higher  than  I  am.  My 
country  is  in  the  skies,  help  me  to  be  climbing  upwards,  never 
permit  me  to  descend,  lead  me  to  the  rock  that  is  higher  than 
I  am." 

And  as  for  you  who  are  still  under  a  sense  of  sin,  who  have 
not  yet  found  the  Saviour,  let  this  be  your  prayer,  "  Lead  me  to 
the  rock  that  is  higher  than  I  am."  Do  not  get  measuring  Christ 
by  yourselves.  "  As  high  as  heaven  is  above  the  earth,  so  high 
are  his  thoughts  above  your  thoughts,  and  his  ways  above  your 
ways."  Oh,  beloved,  ye  should  measure  God's  grace  by  the  im 
measurable  ;  not  by  your  nothingness,  but  by  his  infinity.  Re 
member,  God's  mercy  is  beyond  all  bounds,  for  it  swelleth  above 
the  flood  of  our  sins.  If  our  sins  be  as  mountains,  Christ's  mercy 
like  stars,  shines  as  much  above  the  mountains  as  above  the  val 
leys.  Cry  out,  sinner,  cry  out  when  Satan  is  dragging  thce  down 
to  the  pit ;  cry  out,  "  Lord,  save  me  from  the  devouring  flames, 
and  lead  me  to  the  rock  that  is  higher  than  I."  And  then,  thank 
God,  it  is  a  rock  ;  it  is  not  a  mound  that  is  raised,  it  is  a  rock 
that  shall  stand,  and  if  I  get  high  on  it  there  is  no  fear  that  the 
rock  will  shake ;  I  may  shake  on  it,  but  it  will  never  shake  un 
der  me.  It  is  a  rock,  and  if  my  enemies  attack  me  I  can  hide 
myself  in  the  clefts  of  it,  and  they  cannot  reach  me,  for  it  is  a 
rock  ;  and  though  ten  thousand  ages  roll  away,  and  many  a  stone 
if  mc^  ed  from  its  place,  this  shall  abide 

"  When  rolling  years  shall  cease  to  move." 


SERMON   XVIII. 

SPIRITUAL  RELIGION. 

*  It  is  'he  spiiit  that  quickeneth  :  the  flesh  profiteth  nothing.'*  Jonx  vi.  68 

To  a  casual  reader  it  looks  as  if  the  meaning  of  this  passagfl 
lay  upon  the  very  surface  ;  but  he  that  has  studied  the  chapter 
will  find  that  it  is  a  sentence  replete  with  many  difficulties  as  to 
the  exact  interpretation  of  it.  I  shall  not,  however,  waste  your 
time  by  entering  into  any  critical  discussion  of  it ;  but  shall  only 
and  simply  try  to  give  you  what  I  believe  to  be  the  mind  of  the 
Spirit,  as  uttered  by  the  lips  of  Jesus  in  this  passage,  and,  after 
1  have  done  that,  I  shall  then  revert  to  what  I  shall  call  the  mean 
ing  which  any  person  would  give  to  it  who  is  not  a  usual  student 
of  Scripture.  That  being  true,  although  not  the  truth  taught  in 
the  passage,  I  shall  briefly  enlarge  upon  it.  "It  is  the  spirit  that 
quickeneth  ;  the  flesh  profiteth  nothing."  I  suppose  there  is  not 
a  man  in  the  world  who  could  form  any  intelligent  idea  of  what 
a  spirit  is.  It  is  very  easy  for  persons  to  define  a  spirit  by  say 
ing  what  it  is  not ;  but  I  query  whether  there  is,  or  ever  could 
be,  any  man  who  could  form  any  idea  of  what  it  is.  We  some 
times  talk  about  seeing  a  spirit ;  ignorant  persons  in  ages  gone 
by,  and  some  now,  in  benighted  villages,  talk  about  seeing  spirits 
by  night.  They  must  know  that  they  talk  contradictions.  Mat 
ter  can  be  seen  ;  but  a  spirit,  if  it  clothed  itself  in  any  light 
substance,  could  not  even  then  be  seen  ;  it  would  only  be  the 
substance  that  would  be  seen.  The  spirit  itself  is  a  thing  which 
can  neither  be  tasted,  handled,  seen,  nor  discerned  in  any  way 
whatever  by  our  senses,  for  if  it  could  be  it  would  then  be  proof 
positive  that  it  was  not  a  spirit  at  all,  but  belonged  to  the  realm 


284  SPIRITUAL    RELIGION. 

of  matter.  We  divide  all  things  into  matter  and  spirit,  and 
whatsoever  can  bo  recognised  by  the  senses  in  any  way  is  matter, 
depend  on  it.  Spirit  is  itself  a  thing  too  subtile  to  be  either 
seen  or  in  any  other  way  recognised  by  the  senses.  I  say,  then, 
I  suppose  there  is  no  man  living,  and  never  will  be  any  man  in 
this  mortal  state,  who  will  be  able  to  define  a  spirit  as  to  wha 
t  is,  though  he  may  say  what  it  is  not. 

Now,  there  is  a  region  where  there  are  spirits  dwelling  with 
out  body.  It  is  certain  that  in  the  world  to  come,  in  that  state 
which  now  intervenes  between  the  death  of  the  saints  and  the  day 
of  the  resurrection,  they  are  dwelling  before  the  throne  of  God 
in  a  disembodied  state — pure  spirits,  without  any  embodiment 
whatever.  It  may  be  that  angels  have  some  form  of  bodies ;  we 
could  not  imagine  what  angels  were,  if  they  had  not  some  kind 
of  semblance  of  appearance ;  but  it  is  quite  certain  that  the 
saints  before  the  throne  have  no  semblance  of  shapes  whatever. 
They  are  pure  spirits ;  beings  whose  substance  we  cannot  ima 
gine  ;  purely  immaterial,  as  they  are  also  immaculate.  But  on 
earth  you  will  find  no  such  a  thing  as  a  pure  spirit.  We  are  all 
spirits  in  bodies,  and,  somehow,  from  the  fact  that  wherever  we 
find  souls  and  spirits,  they  are  always  found  in  bodies,  we  are 
very  apt  to  confound  bodies  and  spirits  together.  But  let  us  al 
ways  understand  that  bodies  and  spirits  are  distinct  things ;  and 
though  it  hath  pleased  God  in  this  world  never  to  make  a  spirit 
without  making  a  house  for  it  to  dwell  in,  called  the  body,  yet 
the  body  is  not  the  spirit.  "  It  is  the  spirit  that  qirickeneth  ;  the 
flesh  profiteth  nothing." 

Now,  you  will  easily  learn  this,  for  in  man's  body  no  one  can 
tell  where  the  life  is.  In  vain  the  surgeon  lays  the  body  on  the 
table  and  dissects  it ;  he  will  find  life  neither  in  the  brain  nor  in 
the  heart ;  he  may  cut  the  body  in  pieces  as  he  pleases — he  will 
not  find  any  thing  that  he  can  lay  hold  upon  tangibly  and  really, 
and  say,  "  That  is  life."  He  can  see  all  the  effects — he  can  see 
the  part*  moving,  he  can  see  all  the  appearances  of  life  caused 
by  a  supernatural  something  ;  but  life  he  cannot  see.  It  is  alto 
gether  beyond  his  ken ;  and  after  all  his  searching  he  would  lay 
down  his  scalpel  and  say  at  once,  "  There  now,  the  task  is  all 
over;  there  is  a  spirit  that  quickeneth  this  body,  but  in  my 


SPIRITUAL    RELIGION.  285 

lire  «,hh  fituh  profiteth  me  nothing.  I  might  as  well 
ser.iv h  fcr  \  soul  within  a  stone  or  within  one  of  the  pillars  that 
Buppoxt  t\i:»  Uou.se  as  search  for  a  soul  within  mere  flesh  and 
blood  if  I  kok  for  Rr-mething  which  I  can  see,  which  I  can  lay 
hold  cf,  or  \»hieh,  by  either  taste,  sight,  smelling  or  any  thing 
else  1  caa -disfcluguish  and  designate  as  being  a  spirit." 

Now,  then,  brethren,  this  illustration  just  brings  me  to  a  truth. 
We  are  here  atuembled  at  this  moment  spirits,  souls.  Here  we 
are,  bodies ;  but  these  bodies  are  not  ourselves ;  they  are  the 
houses  in  which  we  live.  I  question  whether  there  is  any  man 
who  can  define  himself;  the  most  any  man  can  say  is,  "  I  am  ;  I 
know  I  have  an  existence  ;  but  what  kind  of  thing  my  spirit  is  I 
do  not  know ;  I  cannot  tell ;  I  have  no  knowledge  of  what  it  is. 
I  feel  it ;  I  know  it  moves  rny  body ;  I  feel  its  outward  mani 
festations  ;  I  am  certain  of  my  existence  ;  but  what  I  am  I  know 
not :  God  alone  can  say."  "  I  AM  that  I  am,"  is  comprehensible 
to  himself;  but  man  is  a  being  himself  incomprehensible ;  and 
though  God  may  allow  him  to  say,  '•  By  God's  grace  I  am  what 
I  am,"  he  cannot  tell  what  he  is ;  he  understandeth  not  his  own 
existence.  Understand,  then,  that  as  in  our  being  there  is  a 
mystery  in  our  flesh,  so  religion,  the  true  religion  of  the  blessed 
God,  in  order  to  be  made  like  unto  us  and  to-be  a  something 

55 

which  would  suit  us,  must  be  a  religion  of  spirit ;  but  because 
we  have  a  body  it  must  have  a  body  in  which  to  clothe  itself. 
Allow  me,  if  I  can,  to  try  to  make  this  plain  ;  for  if  you  do  not 
understand  it  now  you  will  before  I  have  done,  I  am  certain. 
We  are  spirits  in  bodies.  Well,  then,  in  order  to  meet  our  cases, 
the  great  work  of  God  in  us  must  bo  a  spiritual  thing ;  but  in 
order  that  I  may  be  able  to  talk  about  it  to  you,  and  that  you 
may  be  able  to  hear  it  with  your  ears,  that  spiritual  thing  must 
be  encased  in  a  body  ;  or  else,  if  it  were  a  pure  spiritual  thing, 
I  could  not  talk  to  you  about  it,  any  more  than  I  could  talk  to 
you  about  a  spirit,  if  there  were  no  body  in  which  a  spirit  could 
be  found,  and  no  body  in  which  I  should  be  able  to  live  to  talk 
about  it  in.  I  want  to  show  you  this,  because  there  are  some 
persons  that  are  so  busy  about  the  body  of  religion  that  they 
forget  that  religion  has  got  a  spirit  at  all. 

Now,  what  Jesus  meant  in  this  passage  was,  "  The  mere  enx 


286  SPIRITUAL    RELIGION. 

bodiment  of  religion  profiteth  nothing  ;  it  is  the  spirit  that  quick 
eneth."  Just  as,  to  use  my  figure  over  again,  in  order  to  per. 
form  an  act,  the  mere  flesh  and  blood  and  arms  and  legs  profit 
nothing,  it  is  the  spirit  that  quickens  all  the  bones  and  makes  the 
nerves  ply  as  they  ought  to  do,  and  the  sinews  work  as  they 
should,  so  religion  has  its  outward  form,  it  has  its  ceremonies,  it 
Y-ts  its  outward  developments,  its  body,  but  the  mere  outward 

>ody  of  religion  is  of  no  use  whatever,  except  the  spirit  quick 
eneth  it. 

I.  To  begin,  then,  I  will  first  show  you  this  order  as  our  Sa 
viour,  I  think,  meant  it  when  he  first  of  all  stated  it.  There 
were  some  people  in  our  Saviour's  day  who  admired  Christ. 
They  admired  him  as  a  man,  and  they  thought  there  was  some 
marvellous  efficacy  in  his  flesh  and  blood.  Now,  Jesus  Christ 
said  to  them  in  the  words  of  our  text,  "  Even  my  flesh  will  pro- 
fit  you  nothing  :  it  is  the  spirit  that  quickens."  We  would  state 
this  truth  very  cautiously,  but  very  plainly.  When  our  Saviour 
was  upon  earth  there  were  some,  we  say,  who  admired  his  per 
son.  You  remember  those  who  said,  "  Blessed  is  the  womb  that 
ban?  thee  and  the  paps  that  gave  thee  suck  ;"  and  you  remember 
our  Saviour  rebuked  them.  He  would  not  have  people  admire 
his  flesh  and  think  so  much  of  his  mere  humanity.  "  No,"  said 
he,  "  blessed  are  they  that  hear  the  Word  of  God  and  do  it." 
There  were  some  again  who  wanted  to  take  the  Lord  Jesus  and 
make  him  a  king.  Said  he  to  them,  "  My  flesh,  if  you  exalt  it 
to  a  throne,  will  profit  you  nothing.  I  did  not  come  here  that 
you  might  bow  down  and  venerate  my  mere  flesh,  that  you 
might  think  the  mere  admiration  of  myself  is  religion.  It  is 
the  spirit,  the  Gospel  that  I  came  to  preach,  that  will  benefit  you. 
It  is  not  these  outward  acts  ;  it  is  the  thoughts  and  words,  of 
which  they  are  the  exponents."  Hear  what  the  Saviour  says  in 
the  next  sentence.  "It  is  not  your  admiration  of  my  flesh  tha 
is  of  any  use  to  you,  for  my  flesh  profits  nothing  ;  it  is  the  spirit 
that  quickens,  and  if  you  want  to  know  what  is  the  spirit  of  my 
incarnation,  I  tell  you  that  the  words  that  I  speak  unto  you,  they 
are  spirit  and  they  are  life.  It  is  not  your  venerating  my  flesh 
and  blood ;  it  is  your  venerating  my  doctrines  that  will  be  the 
and  heart  of  the  religion  that  I  desire  you  to  feel." 


SPIRITUAL    RELIGION.  '287 

Our  Saviour,  however,  was  led  to  make  these  ren  arks  from 
the  tact  that  the  poor  Jews,  when  he  talked  about  eating  His  flesh 
and  blood,  thought  that  He  meant  they  were  to  turn  cannibals, 
and  eat  Jesus  Christ  up.  Now,  any  man  may  smile  at  so  ridicu 
Ions  ar.  idea ;  but  we  know  that  the  idea  is  still  rife  in  the  Church 
of  Rome.  The  Romanist  priest  solemnly  assures  us  that  the 
people  who  eat  the  bread  and  wine,  or  stuff  he  calls  bread  an 
wine,  which  he  hands  round,  do  actually  act  the  part  of  cannibals 
and  eat  the  body  of  Christ,  and  drink  His  blood.  You  ask  him 
seriously  ;  you  say  to  him,  "  You  mean  they  do  it  in  a  figure,  my 
dear  sir,  spiritually  ?"  "  No,"  says  he,  "  1  don't ;  I  mean  to  say 
that  after  I  have  pronounced  certain  words  over  that  bread,  it 
becomes  Christ's  flesh,  and  after  1  have  said  a  certain  hocus  pocus 
over  that  wine,  it  becomes  actual  blood."  "  Well,"  we  reply  to 
him,  "  it  is  very  singular,  certainly,  and  I  should  say  that  you  do 
not  expect  us  to  believe  you,  whilst  God  allows  our  heads  to  be 
occupied  by  brains  ;  but  even  it  we  do  believe  you,  my  dear  sir, 
we  refer  you  to  this  passage  here  that  says.  '  The  flesh  profiteth 
nothing,  it  is  the  spirit  that  quickeneth,'  and  you  tell  the  people 
that  they  do  actually  and  really  receive  body  and  blood.  Sup 
pose  they  do,  it  is  no  earthly  use  to  them,  the  mere  body  and 
blood  of  Christ ;  and  even  if  they  could  carnally  press  k  witL 
their  teeth,  and  drink  it  with  their  throats,  would  be  of  no  mor« 
use  to  them  than  the  eating  of  the  flesh  and  blood  of  any  other 
man,  could  be  of  no  service  whatever  to  them,  for  lie  himself 
denounces  the  error  of  transubstantiation,  and  He  declares  that 
even  His  flesh  profiteth  nothing.  It  is  only  the  spirit,  the  spirit 
ual  receiving  of  that  flesh  and  blood  that  can  be  of  any  avail 
whatever." 

While  I  am  here  just  allow  me  to  say  one  word ;  for  Popery 
prevails  in  this  day,  and  that  happens  to  be  the  bulwark  of 
Popery,  the  doctrine  that  the  bread  and  wine  are  turned  into  the 
body  and  blood  of  Christ.  Dr.  Carson,  of  Coleraine,  son  of  Dr. 
Carson,  the  eminent  baptist,  has  settled  off  Dr.  Cahill  in  a  re 
markable  way.  He  has  challenged  Dr.  Cahill  to  prove  that  he 
can  turn  the  bread  and  wine  used  in  the  sacrament  into  Christ's 
body  and  blood.  He  offers  to  give  Dr.  Cahill  a  hundred  pounds 
if  he  will  let  him  make  a  wafer  for  him,  and  if  Dr.  Cahill  will 


288  SPIRITUAL    RELIGION. 

then  put  it  on  his  own  tongue  and  swallow  it  in  Mr.  Carson'?  own 
presence.  "  If  the  Doctor  is  not  dead  in  an  hour,"  says  Dr.  Cf.r- 
son,  "  I'll  give  him  a  hundred  pound?."  "  No,"  says  one,  **  that 
is  not  fair."  "  Oh  !  but  if  he  can  turn  it  into  the  body  and  blood 
of  Christ,  it  cannot  hurt  him,  whatever  I  make  it  of,"  4i  What ! 
would  you  make  it  of  poison,  then  T'  "  Yes,  the  deadliest  I  could 
find."  "  Would  you  give  him  poison  ?"  "  I  should  not  give  i 
to  him ;  he  would  swallow  it  himself;  he  would  do  it  of  his  owr 
voluntary  choice."  And  Dr.  Cahill  backs  out  of  that ;  he  canno 
turn  it  into  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ ;  if  he  could,  Dr.  Car- 
son  says  it  could  not  hurt  him,  for  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ 
would  poison  no  one.  But  some  wise  Romanist  says,  "  That  is 
not  fair ;  the  Doctor  does  not  pretend  to  turn  poison  into  the 
body  and  blood  of  Christ ;  it  is  only  clean  bread."  "  Very  well," 
says  Dr.  Carson,  "I'll  try  him  another  way.  I  will  let  him 
choose  a  youth  from  seven  or  eight  Catholic  boys ;  he  shall  take 
a  quart  of  wine,  and  turn  this  wine  in  his  own  peculiar  way  into 
the  blood  of  Christ.  The  boy  shall  drink  the  quart,  and  if  he  is 
not  drunk  in  six  hours,  I'll  pay  the  hundred  pounds."  "  Now," 
says  Dr.  Carson,  "  if  that  is  the  blood  of  Christ,  it  will  not  make 
him  drunk  ;  he  might  drink  a  hogshead  of  it,  and  it  would  not 
make  him  intoxicated."  But  Dr.  Cahill  dare  not  come  to  such 
a  trial  as  that ;  for  1  think  it  would  very  soon  be  found  that  the 
wine  would  make  the  boy  intoxicated  as  much  as  any  other  wine ; 
therefore,  ii  uouid  not  have  been  turned,  even  by  the  great  Doc 
tor  himself,  into  any  thing  like  the  blood  of  Christ.  The  fact  is, 
the  lie  is  so  palpable,  the  delusion  is  so  absurd,  that  any  child  of 
any  age  would  as  soon  think  of  believing  the  cock  and  bull  story 
we  used  to  read  in  our  childish  days,  about  what  the  bull  said, 
and  what  the  cock  said,  to  be  actual  truth,  as  to  imagine  it  to  be 
{  a  literal  fact  that  any  priest,  or  any  man  in  the  world,  could  ever 
turn  bread  and  wine  into  flesh  and  blood.  But  even  if  they  could, 
hear  the  words  of  the  text :  "  The  flesh  profiteth  nothing ;  it  is 
the  spirit  that  quickeneth."  So,  then,  after  all,  the  Roman  Catho 
lic  Sacrament,  if  it  be  actually  a  cannibal's  feast  upon  the  bod) 
and  Uood  of  Christ,  is  of  no  earthly  use;  but  that  Sacrament 
wherein  we  do  sp  ritually  receive  the  flesh  and  blood  of  Jesus, 


SPIRITUAL    RELIGION.  289 

and  in  a  spiritual   way  hold  communion  with  Him,  is  that  which 
quickeneth,  and  that  only. 

Now,  this  brings  me  to  the  truth  that  I  want  specially  to  be 
arrived  at.  As  Christ  Jesus  in  his  flesh  was  the  embodiment  of 
his  own  doctrine,  and  yet  not  His  flesh,  but  the  spirit  of  His  doc 
trine  quickeneth  souls,  so  the  outward  forms  and  ceremonies 
which  Christ  has  made  to  be  the  body  to  contain  the  spirit,  are 
of  no  earthly  use  at  all,  unless  the  Spirit  of  God  be  in  them. 
We  come  to  baptism  ;  there  are  the  pool  and  the  water ;  that 
pool  and  that  water  are,  so  10  speak,  the  flesh  and  blood  of  dedi 
cation  ;  that  holy  ordinance  signifies  that  we  do  devote  ourselves 
to  the  Lord  Jesus.  Suppose,  however,  our  hearts  are  in  a  wrong 
condition,  or  that  we  are  net  converted  persons — suppose  there 
is  no  influence  of  the  Spirit  resting  upon  us  during  the  act  of  bap 
tism,  then  the  act  of  baptism  is  like  the  flesh  to  the  body,  it  is  a 
dead  thing,  it  profiteth  nothing,  because  it  is  without  the  soul. 
We  come  the  next  Sabbath  to  the  Lord's  table :  there  is  the 
bread  broken  by  God's  servant,  there  is  the  wine  decently  handed 
rojind  by  the  deacons  of  the  church,  and  it  is  sipped  ;  but,  mark 
you,  however  reverently  it  is  performed,  except  the  Spirit  of  the 
living  God  breathes  through  the  whole  divine  ordinance,  "  the 
flesh,"  that  is,  the  mere  embodiment  of  communion,  will  profit 
you  nothing.  You  might  sit  at  a  thousand  Sacraments,  and  you 
might  be  baptized  in  a  myriad  of  pools,  but  all  this  would  not 
avail  one  jot  or  tittle  for  your  salvation,  unless  you  had  the  spirit 
that  quickened  you.  Nay,  to  go  farther,  it  is  not  just  these  two 
outward  ordinances  only  that  need  in  them  the  Spirit  ;  it  is  so  in 
every  thing  else.  You  have  sometimes  read,  dear  friends,  of 
some  great  Christians  that  grew  to  have  much  fellowship  with 
Christ  by  prayer.  Perhaps  you  imbibed  the  idea  that  if  you 
were  to  go  home  and  spend  as  many  hours  in  your  closet  as  they 
did,  you  would  get  as  much  profit  by  it;  and,  not  thinking  about 
the  Holy  Spirit,  you  simply  devote  yourself  to  your  closet  as 
you  would  to  any  manual  exercise,  with  a  hope  of  profiting  by 
tha  closet  alone.  1  tell  you,  you  might  be  on  your  knees  till 
your  knees  were  bare,  and  you  might  be  in  your  closet  till  the 
steam  of  your  devotion  ran  down  the  walls ;  but  unless  the  Spirit 
of  the  Lord  wa?  in  that  closet  with  you,  the  mere  firstly  exercise 
IS 


8PIBITUAI     RELIGION. 

of  praying  would  no  more  avail  you  and  profit  you  than  if  vou 
had  been  chaunting  songs  to  the  moon,  or  standing  in  the  street 
to  sell  your  goods.  Another  hears  that  a  certain  person  has  been 
very  much  blessed  by  reading  a  text  of  Scripture.  "  Oh  !"  says 
he,  "has  that  text  been  blessed  to  such  a  one?  I'll  go  and  read 
the  same  passage  too."  You  think  that  if  you  do  the  same  act  aa 
he  does  you  will  be  equally  blessed  ;  and  you  are  marvellously 
surprised  that  when  you  read  the  passage,  it  does  no  good  to  you. 
It  made  his  spirit  leap  for  joy,  it  filled  his  soul  with  the  wine  of 
the  kingdom,  but  to  you  it  is  like  a  dry  well,  or  an  empty  bot 
tle.  Why  is  this  1  The  mere  letter  in  which  the  promise  is  put 
profiteth  you  nothing  ;  it  is  the  spirit  of  the  promise ;  it  is  the 
life  of  the  Spirit  running  through  the  veins  of  the  promise  that 
alone  can  profit  you.  You  hear  that  another  man  meditates  on 
God's  law  day  and  night,  and  becomes  like  a  tree  planted  by  the 
rivers  of  water.  You  say,  "  I  will  take  care  that  every  morning 
I  will  read  a  chapter,  and  that  every  night  1  will  read  two  chap 
ters."  There  are  certain  people  who  think  if  they  read  a  good 
long  bit  of  Bible  they've  done  a  great  deal.  In  that  spirit  thcjy 
might  just  as  well  read  a  bit  of  Iludibras;  for  they  just  read  it 
straight  through,  without  thinking  of  understanding  it.  Many 
of  our  ministers  think  they  must  read  a  certain  quantity  of  the 
Scriptures,  and  they  take  perhaps  three  long  chapters  out  of 
Ezekiel,  and  not  a  soul  knows  what  they  are  at.  If  they  were  to 
read  a  Dutch  sermon  in  an  English  church  it  would  do  about  as 
much  good.  There  is  a  lot  about  ephahs,  and  wheels  within 
wheels,  but  no  one  understands  much  about  them.  Instead  of 
reading  as  Ezra  did,  and  expounding  to  the  people,  they  must  go 
on  reading, — hedge,  hedge,  ditch,  ditch — one  continual  steeple 
chase  !  Instead  of  stopping  to  break  the  shells  and  give  the  ker 
nels  of  truth  to  the  people,  they  must  read  right  on.  To  such 
persons  we  would  simply  say,  "  Your  Bible  reading  is  but  the 
flesh ;  it  is  no  use  to  you  ;  it  is  the  spirit  that  quickeneth ;  the 
mere  flesh,  the  mere  outward  fashion  and  form  of  Bible  reading 
will  not  profit  anybody.  One  bit  of  Bible  prayed  over,  and  be 
dewed  with  the  Spirit,  and  made  alive,  though  it  be  only  a  short 
•entence  of  six  words,  will  profit  you  more  than  a  hundred  chap 
ters  without  the  Spirit,  because  the  hundred  chapters  without  the 


SPIRITUAL    RELIGION.  291 

Sp'.rit  arc  flesh' — dead  ;  but  the  one  verse  with  the  Spirit  is  the 
thing  lhat  quickeneth." 

I  do  not  know  whether  I  have  as  yet  brought  my  lull  meaning 
out ;  but  I  want  to  let  every  one  understand  that  it  is  not  tho 
mere  outward  embodiment  of  our  religion  that  saves  the  soul  and 
that  profits  us ;  it  is  the  inner  spirit  of  the  thing  that  does  it. 
Mark,  I  would  not  find  fault  with  any  of  these  forms,  any  more 
than  I  would  find  fault  with  our  bodies,  because  they  are  not 
spirits ;  our  bodies  are  good  things  for  the  spirits  to  live  in ;  and 
the  forms  are  good  things  for  the  spirit  to  live  in ;  but  the  form 
without  the  spirit,  though  it  be  the  most  decorous,  and  apparently 
the  most  devout  that  can  be  performed  can  be  of  no  use  for  our 
soul's  eternal  profit  and  ultimate  salvation.  "  It  is  the  Spirit  that 
quickeneth  ;  the  flesh  profiteth  nothing." 

Now,  my  dear  friend,  Mr.  So-and-so,  if  you  will  just  take  your 
pencil  out  and  cast  up  your  accounts  for  all  the  years  of  your  life, 
they  will  come  to  very  little,  if  what  I  say  be  true.  "  I  think," 
say  you,  "  I  am  a  tolerably  good  sort  of  man  ;  I  have  a  few  faults, 
out  look  now  what  I  have  done.  I  have  been  to  chapel  twice 
every  Sunday  almost  since  I  was  a  boy — I  don't  know  that  I 
missed  once,  except  when  I  was  ill ;  that  has  been  very  good  of 
me,  and  no  mistake.  I  always  read  the  Bible  every  morning ;  I 
always  have  family  prayer ;  that  is  very  good  of  me ;  another 
down  to  my  account.  I  say  my  prayers  when  I  go  to  bed  at 
night,  and  when  I  get  up  in  the  morning ;  I  very  frequently  go  to 
prayer-meetings ;  I  don't  think  any  one  can  find  fault  with  me ; 
really  I  think  1  do  every  thing  to  make  me  a  truly  religious  man." 
Ah !  and  did  you  put  at  the  end  of  it,  "  Lord,  1  thank  thee  that  I 
am  not  as  other  men  are,  unjust,  extortioners,"  and  so  on,  or  even 
like  that  poor  fellow,  a  Sabbath-breaker,  that  you  saw  going  the 
opposite  way,  and  not  going  to  your  place  of  worship.  Pity  you 
didn't  finish  it  up ;  but,  however,  if  you  did  not  in  words,  you 
finished  it  up  in  your  heart.  But  I  pray  God  to  show  you  that 
all  these  beautiful  things  of  yours  are  good  for  nothing.  There 
you  are — there  are  your  chapel-goings — all  flesh ;  there  are  your 
Bible  readings — flesh;  there  are  your  family  prayers — all  flesh; 
there  are  your  good  works  and  excellences — all  flesh.  You  have 
never  received  the  Spirited  the  living  God :  you  dare  not  say  yu 


292  SPIRITUAL    RELIGION. 

have.  Well,  then,  all  these  things  will  profit  yi>u  nothing  what 
ever.  It  is  the  spirit  alone  can  quicken  ;  for  you  know,  my  dear 
sir,  and  let  me  speak  very  pointedly — you  know  you  never  enter 
into  the  spirit  of  the  thing ;  though  you  go  to  your  church  or 
chapel  regularly,  yet  you  know  you  might  very  often  as  well  ba 
at  home ;  for  when  they  sing,  you  do  not  sing  with  all  your  heart* 
and  when  the  minister  preaches,  it  is  seldom  there  is  much  that 
touches  you,  unless  it  is  a  good  intellectual  discourse,  and  happens 
to  fit  you,  and  you  believe  it,  and  it  meets  your  views,  and  so  on. 
You  know  that  into  the  inward  soul,  and  marrow,  and  bowels  of 
devotion  you  have  never  yet  learned  to  plunge.  You  know  your 
devotion  is  like  that  ox  which  was  slain  once  in  the  time  of  siege 
in  Rome,  and  was  said  to  portend  ill,  because  when  the  augur 
slew  it  he  declared  he  could  not  find  a  heart  anywhere.  He 
looked  through  all  the  entrails,  and  no  heart  could  he  discover ; 
and  hence,  the  Romans  said  their  city  must  be  destroyed.  It 
was  a  solemn  augury,  they  said,  when  the  sacrifice  had  no  heart 
in  it.  It  is  just  the  same  with  you.  You  have  done  all  these 
things ;  oh  !  yes,  and  there  has  been  as  much  reality  in  what  you 
have  done  as  there  was  devotion  in  the  poor  Kalmuck's  windmill, 
when  he  tied  the  prayer  to  it,  and  put  it  up  in  the  garden,  and 
every  time  it  blew  round,  that  was  just  one  more  prayer.  There 
was  as  much  heart  in  your  prayer  as  there  was  in  his  windmill ; 
that  is  to  say,  none  at  all.  There  it  is  !  How  fai  have  you  got  1 
Go  on  no  longer  with  this  useless  round  of  performances.  I  would 
not  have  you  give  the  performances  up.  Stop  awhile,  and  ask 
God  to  give  you  that  inward  spirit  that  quickeneth,  for  that  is 
what  is  needed  ;  "  The  flesh  profiteth  nothing." 

But  I  must  speak  to  you  that  are  the  children  of  God,  and  I 
must  say  to  you,  How  often  do  you  forget  this  1  I  know  it  is  not 
often  of  a  morning  that  I  would  leave  my  chamber  without 
prayer :  but  oh,  brethren,  I  have  often  left  my  chamber  without 
having  the  spiiit  of  prayer;  I  should  not  like  to  pass  a  day  with 
out  reading  the  Scriptures,  but  I  am  afraid  it  is  very  often  the 
mere  "  flesh"  of  Scripture  reading,  and  not  the  spirit  breathing  in 
the  Word  that  I  get.  And  how  often  is  our  conscience  satisfied 
with  the  mere  form  without  the  spirit !  Now,  if  we  were  what 
we  ought  to  be,  we  should  never  be  content  with  the  form,  unJew 


SPIRITUAL    RELIGION.  293 

we  could  see  the  spirit  in  it.  Mother,  would  you  be  content  to 
have  a  child  at  home  that  was  dead  1  Suppose  some  one  should 
say  to  you,  "  Why,  this  child  is  just  as  good  a  child  as  ever  it 
was !  Look  at  it !  It  has  not  lost  a  leg,  or  arm,  or  any  thing !" 
44  Ah.  but,"  you  say,  "  it  is  dead."  "Oh!"  says  one,  "there  is 
no  difference.  It  looks  as  beautiful  now  as  ever  it  did."  "  Ah !"' 
she  says,  "  but  there  is  a  vast  deal  of  difference  between  what  it 
•was  when  it  was  alive,  and  what  it  is  now  it  is  dead."  And  now 
just  transfer  that  to  your  poor  dead  prayers,  and  your  poor  dead 
Bible  reading,  and  your  poor  dead  Sacraments,  and  your  poor 
dead  goings  to  chapel,  and  all  that !  Ah !  how  many  of  our 
sacrifices  are  just  poor  dead  things,  when  we  bring  them,  they 
have  died  in  the  night,  and  then  we  come  and  offer  them  before 
God!  How  frequently  do  we  satisfy  ourselves  with  having  the 
"flesh,"  the  embodiment  of  the  sacrifice,  and  forget  the  spirit! 
But  let  us  remember,  God  only  looks  for  the  life :  He  does  not 
look  for  the  body ;  so  we  ought,  in  all  we  do  for  Him,  to  take 
care,  first  of  all,  for  the  spirit,  and  then  we  may  rest  quite  sure 
the  flesh  and  blood  of  the  devotion  will  take  care  of  themselves. 
II.  This,  I  believe,  is  the  meaning  of  the  passage.  But  tiu 
common  rendering  of  it,  if  any  one  read  it  without  noticing  the 
context,  would  be,  "  Why,  that  means,  it  is  the  Spirit  that  quick- 
eneth ;  that  is  to  say,  it  is  the  Holy  Spirit  that  quickeneth  ;  the 
flesh  profiteth  nothing."  Our  friends  will  excuse  me  when  I  say, 
it  cannot  mean  that ;  you  notice  the  "  s"  in  the  text  has  got  no 
capital  to  it.  If  it  meant  the  Holy  Spirit,  it  would  always  be 
noted  so,  to  separate  it  from  the  spirit  to  which  I  have  just  re 
ferred — the  inward  spirit,  the  life  of  a  thing.  This  word  "spirit" 
here  does  not  mean  the  Holy  Spirit ;  still,  almost  every  ordinary 
reader  would  make  that  mistake,  and  say,  "  It  is  the  spirit  that 
quickeneth ;  the  flesh  profiteth  nothing."  Weil,  it  is  a  mistake 
that  will  not  do  him  any  hurt  because  if  it  does  not  say  so  there., 
*t  does  say  so  somewhere  else ;  and  if  it  is  not  true  in  this  owe 
particular  text,  it  is  true  all  over  the  Bible,  and  it  is  true  in  a 
Christian's  experience,  so  that  a  man  may  make  a  great  many 
worse  mistakes  than  that.  Well,  then,  let  us  take  and  make 
that  mistake,  and  then  let  us  get  at  the  truth  of  it :  "  It  is  the 
spirit  that  quickeneth  ;  the  flesh  profiteth  nothing.' 


V'M  SPIRITUAL    RELIGION. 

Ilow  often  have  I  thought,  "There  is  a  young  woman  in  th« 
gallery,  or  a  young  man  :  how  interested  they  look  during  the 
sermon!"  I  have  met  with  them,  I  have  admired  their  charac 
ters',  they  have  had  an  amiable  carriage  and  deportment;  there 
has  been  'Yiuch  in  them  that  everybody  would  tell  others  to  imi 
tate  and  emulate.  I  have  said,  "  Ah  !  I  shall  soon  have  them 
'added  to  the  Church;  there  is  so  much  good  about  them,  it  will 
he  such  an  easy  transition  for  them  ;  they  are  so  moral  and 
excellent,  it  will  be  very  easy  for  them  surely  to  take  a  step 
into  the  kingdom  of  heaven."  I  don't  say  I  have  said  so  in 
words  to  my  heart  \  but  that  has  been  about  what  I  have  thought. 
Well,  there  has  been  a  follow  who  came  into  chapel  one  even 
ing,  a  queer-looking  object  certainly  ;  he  came  running  in  one 
Thursday  evening,  towards  the  end  of  the  service,  not  washed  or 
any  thing ;  he  only  just  came  to  hear  something  that  would 
make  him  laugh,  as  he  thought.  I  did  not  expect  to  see  him 
converted.  The  next  time  I  sat  to  hear  inquiries,  in  he  came, 
cleaned  and  washed  a  bit ;  but  I  recognized  him  for  all  that,  and 
1  said  to  him,  "  Didn't  you  come  in  one  Thursday  night,  after  you 
had  been  hammering  and  tinkering  somewhere  1  I  thought  you 
looked  a  strange  one,  certainly."  "  Yes,"  said  he,  "and  the  Lord 
met  with  me."  Now,  I  sat.  many  and  many  a  night,  and  I  did 
not  see  the  young  man  or  the  young  woman  come.  Why  was 
this  ?  The  Lord  meant  to  teach  his  servant  that  "  the  flesh  prof 
iteth  nothing."  "  No,"  said  he,  "that  man  seemed  far  from  God, 
that  young  man  and  that  young  woman  seemed  very  near  to 
me  :  I  will  just  let  you  see  that  all  their  morality  and  all  their 
goodness  did  not  put  them  near  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  or  help 
me  a  bit ,  I  could  save  one  as  well  as  the  other,  and  if  I  chose 
to  show  my  sovereignty,  I  might  even  let  publicans  and  harlots 
enter  the  kingdom  of  heaven  before  those  who,  becoming  proud 
of  their  morality,  "--nild  not  stoop  before  me."  Have  you  not 
sometimes  met  witwi  a  person  of  such  a  peculiar  character  that 
you  have  said,  "  Is  it  not  a  pity  some  one  cannot  talk  with  that 
man  ?"  I  often  have  notes :  a  father  writes,  "  I  wish  you  could 
get  hold  of  my  son  ;  he  is  a  very  interesting  young  man ;  if 
you  were  to  put  the  truth  before  him  to  suit  his  turn  of  mind,  he 
would  be  sure  to  lay  hold  of  it,  for  if  you  knew  how  his  mind 


SPIRITUAL    RELIGION.  2Uj 

Was  constituted,  you  would  say  at  once  there  was  n  peculiar 
adaptation  in  his  mind  for  the  reception  of  the  gospel."  Well,  1 
have  been  told  that  a  dozen  times;  but  I  never  found  it  truo  once — • 
never.  "  The  flesh  profiteth  nothing."  No  peculiar  adaptation 
of  mind  is  any  more  susceptible  of  gospel  influences  than  another. 
Dead  sinners  are  all  dead,  and  all  dead  alike.  Some  may  be 
black,  and  some  may  be  white ;  some  may  be  well  washed  and 
dressed,  and  some  may  have  all  the  mire  and  filth  of  sensuality 
about  them.  They  are  all  dead  alike,  and  when  converting  grace 
comes  to  deal  with  them,  it  finds  as  much  for  its  exercise  in  the 
one  case  as  in  the  other ;  it  finds  as  much  to  help  it  in  the  one 
heart  as  in  the  other — that  is  to  say,  it  finds  nothing  to  help  it 
at  all.  It  brings  it  all  within  itself:  it  kindles  its  own  fire  with 
its  own  torch,  it  blows  the  fire  with  its  own  breath,  and  asks  for 
nothing  in  the  sinner,  be  he  who  he  may. 

Then,  again,  we  have  sometimes  said,  "  If  such  a  one  wore 
converted,  dear  me,  what  a  shining  Christian  he  would  make ! 
He  is  a  man  of  brilliant  talent,  of  great  intellectual  power,  and 
of  extensive  fortune.  Oh  if  he  were  converted,  what  a  jubilee 
it  would  be  to  the  Church  of  God  !  How  much  would  he  do  !" 
Well,  do  you  know,  I  have  always  found  that  these  fine  people, 
who,  when  they  were  converted  were  to  be  somebody,  if  they 
have  been  converted,  and  we  have  got  them,  have  not  turned 
out  to  be  quite  so  great  after  all !  I  knew  a  minister  once,  who 
with  great  joy  and  gladness  baptized  a  man.  It  was  on  a 
New-Year's  Day,  and  I  remember  with  what  self-congratulation 
he  said,  "  The  Lord  has  sent  me  one  of  the  best  New-Year's  gifts 
I  ever  had ;"  and  he  looked  upon  that  man  and  said,  "  Ah  !  this 
is  a  brother  ;  he  is  a  great  gain  to  the  church  ;  he  is  a  man  of 
such  active  spirit,  of  such  excellent  turn  of  mind — he  is  every 
thing  that  could  be  desired."  Well,  I  have  just  happened  to 
ive  long  enough  to  see  that  man  rend  the  church  in  sunder,  and 
Urive  the  minister  out  of  his  pulpit,  and  he  is  alive  still,  a  thorn 
n  the  side  of  that  church,  and  a  huge  prickly  bramble  that  they 
would  be  glad  enough  to  eradicate,  but  that  they  scarcely  have 
power  enough  to  do.  No  ;  the  Lord  will  show  us  that  '  the  flesh 
profiteth  nothing."  "  You  may  have  him,"  says  the  Lord.  "  if 
he  is  such  a  fine  fellow ;  take  him,  take  him  ;  you  will  find  he 


206  SPIRITUAL    RELIGION. 

will  not  be  so  much  after  all.  1  will  let  you  know  that  '  the 
flesh  prufiteth  nothing;'  it  h»  the  spirit  alone  '  that  quickeneth.'  " 
On  the  other  hand,  we  have  seen  some  come  whose  flesh  could  not 
help  thorn.  They  were  the  poor,  the  mean,  the  illiterate,  the  de 
spised  ;  and  we  have  seen  the  grace  of  God  blaze  up  in  thair 
hearts  to  an  eminence  of  fervor,  and  we  have  seen  them  stand 
confident  and  strong,  notwithstanding  the  nothingness  of  the 
flesh";  and  then  we  have  said,  "Verily,  0  God,  it  is  marvellous 
how.  when  the  flesh  is  weak,  thy  grace  is  strong  ;"  and  we  have 
heard  an  answer  from  "  the  excellent  Glory,"  which  said,  "  Ah! 
the  flesh  proh'teth  nothing ;  it  is  the  spirit  that  quickeneth." 

Now,  1  do  not  believe  that  there  is  any  form  of  our  flesh,  nor 
any  act  of  our  flesh,  nor  any  thing  that  our  flesh  can  do,  or  attempt 
to  do,  or  think  of,  or  suggest,  that  can  in  any  way  assist  in  the 
great  spiritual  work  of  our  salvation.  It  is  the  spirit  alone  that 
quickeneth  ;  and  you  will  find  till  you  die  that  "  the  flesh  prof- 
iteth  nothing,"  except  the  devil,  and  it  often  profits  him  ;  but  in 
God's  ways  and  in  God's  holy  Gospel  you  will  always  find  the 
flesh  lusting  against  the  spirit  and  the  spirit  against  the  flesh. 
You  will  have  to  feel  this  truth,  that  the  flesh  at  its  best  estate 
proriteth  nothing.  "  It  is  the  spirit  that  quickeneth." 

Now,  my  brethren,  in  com-lusion,  1  will  ask  thee  the  question— 
Mast  thou  received  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit1?  and  have 
ta^se  influences  led  thee  to  worship  God,  who  is  a  spirit,  "  in 
bp.ritand  in  truth  ]"  For  if  not,  though  some  may  put  thee  in  the 
cradle  of  ceremonies,  and  riw.k  thee  to  sleep,  I  will  not  be  one  of 
them.  Although  men  may  tell  thee  thou  art  right  enough,  be 
cause  thou  art  so  outwardly  religious,  because  thou  art.  no  sab 
bath-breaker,  no  swearer,  ro  drunkard,  1  warn  thee  that  unless 
Ihou  art  born  again  from  pbove  thou  canst  not  see  the  kingdom 
of  God  ;  and  when  drunkards  and  harlots,  and  all  manner  of  im 
godly  persons,  shall  be  driven  from  the  presence  of  God,  you 
ilso  shall  share  their  fate,  for  you  are  dead  in  sin  and  must  be 
quickened  by  the  spirit.  No  more  shall  I  say,  but  solemnly 
entreat  the  Spirit  of  the  blessed  God  to  touch  your  hearts  with 
Jiis  solemn  thought,  and  lead  you  to  renounce  the  works  of  the 
flesh,  and  put  your  trust  in  Him  who  is  "  the  Saviour  of  all  men, 
especially  of  them  that  believe."  The  Lord's  mercy  rest  '>n  you 
for  Jesus'  sake  !  Amen. 


SERMON   XIX. 

THE  SAVIOUR  RESTING  IN  HIS  LOVE. 

"  He  will  rest  in  his  love." — ZEPHANIAH,  iii.  17. 
of  our  sweetest  hymns  commences — 

"  How  firm  a  foundation,  ye  saints  of  the  Lord, 
Is  laid  for  your  faith  in  his  excellent  word : 
What  more  can  he  say  than  to  you  he  hath  said  ? 
You,  who  unto  Jesus  for  refuge  have  fled." 

Well  might  the  poet  put  the  question,  if  he  had  risen  up  from 
reading  this  third  chapter  of  the  prophecies  of  Zephaniah.  Oh ! 
people  of  God,  open  your  ears  and  your  hearts  while  Jehovah 
speaks  to  you  by  his  prophet's  lips,  and  thus  addresses  you — • 
"  Sing,  O  daughter  of  Zion  ;  shout,  O  Israel ;  be  glad  and  rejoice 
with  all  the  heart,  O  daughter  of  Jerusalem.  The  Lord  hath 
taken  away  thy  judgments,  he  hath  cast  out  thine  enemy  :  the 
King  of  Israel,  even  the  Lord,  is  in  the  midst  of  thee :  thou 
shalt  not  see  evil  any  more.  In  that  day  it  shall  be  said  to 
Jerusalem,  Fear  thou  not :  and  to  Zion.  Let  not  thine  hands  be 
slack.  The  Lord  thy  God  in  the  midst  of  thee  is  mighty  ;  he 
will  save,  he  will  rejoice  over  thee  with  joy ;  he  will  rest  in  his 
love,  he  will  joy  over  thee  with  singing."  The  words  are  very 
'  simple,  but  the  promises  are  so  weighty  that  the  verses  roll 
along  like  the  periods  of  a  poem.  Simple  truth,  if  it  be  of  a 
most  solemn  character,  when  told  in  the  simplest  words,  is  very 
much  akin  to  the  loftiest  poetry  ;  and  I  repeat  it,  that  there  was 
never  poem  composed  by  human  intellect  which  could  match  for 
a  moment,  in  the  sweetness  of  its  notes,  with  this  succession  of 
promises  \vhich  God  here  proclaims  in  the  ears  of  his  chosen 
one*. 

13* 


THE    SAVIOUR    RESTING    IN    HIS    LOVE. 

We  cannot,  on  the,  present  occasion,  enter  for  a  moment  int< 
the  wondrous  depths  of  the  promises  herein  contained.  Wo 
should  need,  indeed,  a  long  period  of  time  before  \ve  should  be 
able  so  much  as  to  explain  them ;  and  possibly  the  whole  of  life 
will  scarcely  be  sufficient  for  us  to  realize  the  full  of  these  things 
in  our  own  experience.  We  will  turn,  therefore,  at  once  to 
the  few  words  of  our  text,  "  He  will  rest  in  his  love ''  W 
shall  consider  these  words  as  referring  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
and  as  relating  to  his  divine  and  matchless  love,  which  he  hath 
manifested  towards  his  people  in  the  wondrous  works  of  grace 
which  he  has  done  for  them  and  in  them. 

"  He  will  rest  in  his  love."  This  is  capable  of  several  inter 
pretations,  and  each  view  we  take  of  it  has  in  it  something 
extremely  delightful.  "  He  will  rf>st  in  his  love." 

I.  Here  is.  first  of  all,  THE  DOCTRINE,  THAT  CHRIST  WILL  KEEP 

EVER    FAITHFUL  TO  THOSE    UPON  WHOM    HE   HAS    SET    HIS    HEART 

"he  will  rest  in  his  love."  The  love  of  man  is  a  nickering 
flame ;  it  may  be  set  for  a  season  with  apparent  constancy  upon 
an  object,  but  you  cannot  tell  how  long  it  shall  abide.  However 
firm,  however  true,  and  however  fervent  it  may  seem,  and  even 
really  be,  yet  trust  it  not,  for  cursed  is  he  that  trusteth  in  man, 
even  a  man's  love,  and  he  that  maketh  flesh  his  arm.  Trust  ye 
not  in  a  friend,  put  not  all  your  confidence  in  any  man,  for  the 
best  of  men  are  but  men  at  the  best,  and  the  firmest  of  men 
have  the  frailty  of  their  kind.  But  God's  love  is  no  flickering 
flame  ;  it  does  not  burn  for  a  little. like  the  crackling  of  thorns 
under  a  pot;  it  is  not  to  be  imaged  forth  by  the  fool's  mirth, 
which  lasteth  but  for  the  season.  It  beginneth,  it  waxeth  vehem 
ent,  it  diminisheth  not,  but  it  groweth  from  strength  to  strength, 
till  what  seemed  at  first  but  sparks  becomes  a  flame,  and  what 
was  a  flame  becomes  like  the  beacon-lights  of  war,  and  what  was 
but  as  a  beacon  becomes  as  the  sun  itself,  in  the  fierceness  of  its 
heat  and  in  the  strength  of  its  goings. 

There  be  some  who  teach  that  Christ's  love  may  be  set  upon  a 
man  and  afterwards  may  be  removed.  Where  then  remains  the 
comfort  of  God's  people  if  this  statement  be  true  ?  But  Jesus 
"  rests  in  his  love."  Where  is  the  value  of  his  affection  at  all  ?  In 
what  respect  can  he  bo  said  to  stick  closer  than  a  brother]  H<  vr 


SAVIOUR    RESTING    IN    HIS    LOVE.  209 

"an  it  be. true  that  many  waters  cannot  quench  his  love,  neither 
can  floods  drown  it  1  If  these  men  be  right,  must  not  the  Apcstle 
Paul  have  been  wrong  when  he  was  persuaded  that  neither  height 
nor  depth,  nor  things  present,  nor  things  to  come,  nor  any  creature 
whatsoever,  should  ever  be  able  to  separate  him  from  the  love 
of  God  which  was  in  Christ  Jesus  his  Lord  1  Shall  we  imagine 
that  the  Apostle  was  incorrect  in  order  that  this  heresy  may  be 
thought  to  be  right?  Shall  we  turn  away  from  the  positive  tes 
timony  of  Holy  Scripture,  when  that  Scripture  is  in  itself  so  full 
of  consolation  to  God's  people  that  if  once  proved  to  be  untrue 
they  may  put  their  hands  upon  their  loins  and  go  to  their  grave 
full  of  misery  and  despair.  But  ye  know  right  well  that  Jesus 
Christ's  love,  when  once  it  has  engraved  his  name  upon  the  hand 
of  Christ,  never  can  suffer  that  name  to  be  erased.  Ye  believe, 
and  ye  believe  right  well,  that  he  who  has  a  portion  in  the  heart 
of  God  has  an  eternal  portion.  He  who  can  claim  for  himself  a 
share  of  the  Father's  love,  of  the  Son's  redt*nption,  and  of  the 
Spirit's  care,  need  never  be  afraid  that  all  the  thievish  hosts  of 
hell  shall  rob  him  of  his  divine  inheritance.  For  look  ye  here, 
brethren, — what  is  there  that  can  separate  you  and  me  from 
*  tsus  Christ's  love  which  has  not  been  tried  already  1  Can  sin 
ever  make  Jesus  cease  to  love  me  1  If  so,  he  would  have  ceased 
to  love  me  long  ago.  If  there  be  any  iniquity  that  I  can  commit 
that  would  divide  me  from  Christ's  love,  methinks  I  should  have 
been  separated  long  ere  this,  for  in  looking  back  upon  my  own 
life,  I  am  compelled,  with  shame  and  confusion  of  face,  upon  rny 
knees  to  confess,  that  ho  has  had  a  thousand  reasons  for  thrusting 
me  out  of  doors  if  he  had  chosen  to  do  so,  and  millions  of  ex 
cuses  might  he  have  framed,  if  he  had  blotted  my  name  out  of 
the  book  of  life.  He  might  have  said,  "  Thou  art  unworthy  of 
me,  and  therefore  I  will  be  unmindful  of  thee."  And  more,  if 
Christ  had  intended  to  cast  us  away  for  our  sins,  why  did  he 
ever  take  us  on  ?  Did  he  not  know  beforehand  that  we  should 
be  rebellious,  and  did  not  his  omniscient  eye  see  all  our  sins,  and 
detect  all  our  follies?  Are  we  ungrateful?  yet  he  knew  we 
should  be.  Are  our  sins  extremely  heinous  ?  yet  he  knew  how 
heinous  they  would  be.  He  could  foresee  all  in  his  mind's  eye. 
Every  spot  that  was  to  be  upon  us,  was  upon  us  when  he  chose 


300  THE    SAVIOUR    RESTING    IN    HIS    LOVK. 

us.  Before  his  omniscient  eye,  .every  fault  that  we  might  com 
mil  was  already  committed  in  his  estimation.  He  foreknew 
foresaw  all ;  and  yet  he  took  us  just  as  we  were.  If  he  had 
intended  to  abandon  us  and  cast  us  away,  would  he  ever  have 
taken  us  at  all  1  If  Jesus  meant  to  divorce  his  bride,  foreknow 
ing  all  her  faults,  would  he  ever  have  espoused  her  ?  If  h< 
meant  to  cast  away  his  adopted  child,  since  he  knew  that  child's 
unfaithfulness,  would  he  ever  have  adopted  him  1  Oh,  think  not, 
beloved,  that  Christ  would  have  done  all  that  for  noth.ng — would 
have  come  from  heaven  to  earth,  and  have  gone  from  earth  to 
the  grave,  and  allowed  his  spirit  to  descend  into  the  shades  of 
Hades — would  have  come  all  this  way,  and  suffered  all  that 
awful  amount  of  torture  which  is  comprehended  in  the  curse,  on 
a  bootless  errand.  Would  he  not  have  started  back  and  said, 
1  know  my  bride  to  be  unworthy,  therefore  I  will  not  redeem 
he» — I  will  not  espouse  her]  But  since  he  has  done  it,  has 
espoused  her,  has  put  the  red  ring  of  his  own  atonement  on  her 
finger,  and  has  hitherto  been  faithful  to  her,  what  shall  divorce 
her]  What  shall  cast  her  from  his  bosom  whom  he  died  to 
save  1  Oh !  beloved,  it  must  be  true  that  he  will  rest  in  his 
love,  if  he  has  rested  in  it,  though  he  has  had  much  to  distract 
him  therein. 

Our  sin,  then,  has  not  divided,  and,  we  believe,  never  shall 
divide  us  from  the  Saviour's  love.  What  remains  ?  Can  per 
secution,  or  famine,  or  nakedness,  or  peril,  or  sword  ]  Nay,  all 
these  do  but  make  the  Saviour  manifest  his  love  to  us  the  more. 
If  Christ  loves  his  people  well  in  prosperity,  he  never  loves  them 
less  in  their  adversities.  Do  you  believe  that  Christ  loves  his 
children  when  they  are  arrayed  in  purple,  and  will  forsake  them 
ivhcn  they  wander  about  in  sheep-skins  and  goat-skins,  destitute, 
afflicted,  tormented  ]  If  so,  ye  know  not  Jesus'  heart.  He  loves 
his  people  well  enough  every  day,  but  if  he  sees  them  stretched 
upon  the  rack  and  about  to  die  for  his  sake,  if  it  be  possible,  the 
infinity  of  his  love  must  even  overflow  itself  when  he  sees  them 
thus  doing  these  things  for  his  sake.  Well,  said  the  Apostle, 
^hen  he  had  mentioned  all  these  sufferings  and  pains,  "Nay,  in 
all  these  things  we  are  n>ore  than  conquerors  through  him  that 
loved  us." 


THE    SAVIOUK    RESTING    IS    HIS    LOVK.  oOl 

^M  and  sorrow,  therefore,  are  perfectly  incapable  of  rending 
>.j  fioia  the  heart  of  Christ — he  will,  he  must,  rest  in  his  love 
And  thib  seems  very  plain  if  we  just  pause  a  moment,  and  think  of 
what  we  ure  to  God  the  Father,  and  to  God  the  Son.  Is  not  every 
Christian  God's  child  1  And  did  you  ever  know  a  father  whc 
did  hate  his  own  child  1  Have  ye  known  a  father — ye  may 
have  known  such,  but  mark,  it  was  an  unfatherly  act  after  all — 
nave  ye,  1  say,  known  a  father  who  has  cursed  his  son,  and 
has  driven  him  forth,  and  declared  that  he  was  not  his  son  1  Ye 
may  have  known  something  of  that  kind,  ye  may  have  heard  of 
such  fallen  creatures  ;  but  mark  you,  the  father's  curse  could  not 
nnchild  his  child — he  was  still  his  child,  even  when  he  was  cursed. 
Not  the  blackest  words  that  ever  came  from  the  most  embittered 
heart,  could  ever  take  away  that  child's  right  to  call  that  man  his 
father — that  child  is  a  child  for  ever  if  once  a  child,  and  that  father 
is  a  father  for  aye  if  once  a  father. 

Now,  beloved,  in  the  usual  course  of  nature,  we  find  men  will 
do  any  thing  for  tfieir  children.  There  is  a  poor  creature  born 
into  the  world  that  is  nearly  an  idiot — that  has  not  one  of  its 
senses  right — that  is  nearly  blind  and  deaf — and  its  parents  know 
that  if  they  can  br'mg  it  up,  it  will  alw.ays  be  a  trouble  to  theni  j 
and  yet  you  see  the  father  and  mother,  with  what  studious  care 
they  endeavor  to  save  this  poor  child's  life.  While  others  bay, 
"  If  it  were  to  die  it  would  be  a  happy  release,"  both  father  and 
mother  feel  that  they  should  be  losers  by  its  death.  "  Ah,"  said 
one  good  old  divine,  "  if  a  father  could  have  a  child  that  had 
1  -st  eyes  and  ears,  and  feet  and  hands,  though  he  could  not 
breathe  without  an  engine,  though  he  could  not  feed  without 
y,>Mie  extraordinary  means  for  the  digestion  of  his  food,  even  then 
his  father  would  do  his  best  to  keep  him  alive  ;  and  so  surely  shall 
it  be  with  that  great  Father,  who,  when  he  speaks  of  himself 
and  of  us,  always  puts  his  Fatherhood  far  higher  than  ours,  who 
says,  '  If  ye,  being  evil,  know  how  to  give  good  gifts  unto  your 
children,  how  much  more  shall  your  heavenly  Father  give  to  them 
that  ask  him  V  And  truly  I  may  say,  if  an  earthly  father  does 
not  wish  to  lose  his  child,  if  he  can  forgive  a  thousand  faults,  if 
he  would  endeavor  to  save  a  child's  life,  though  loaded  with  teu 
thousand  diseases,  how  much  rather  shall  our  Father  who  is  in 


302  THE    SAVIOUE    RESTING    IN    HIS    LOVK. 

heaven  stand  to  it  that  none  of  his  little  ones  shall  perisJ),  but  that 
every  one  of  them  shall  be  preserved.  Do  you  not  see  that  be 
cause  we  are  God's  sons,  we  are,  therefore,  Jesus  Christ's  brothers, 
and  he  will  rest  in  his  love  ?" 

But  there  is  yet  another  thought.  We  have  a  relationship  to 
Christ,  and  he  will  rest  in  his  love.  We  have  never  heard  of  a 
man  yet  who  hated  his  own  flesh.  Strangely  wicked  is  it,  w 
have  heard  of  men  who  have  hated  their  flesh  in  the  mystic  sens 
of  the  marriage  tie,  and  have  driven  out  the  wife  by  brutality  and 
cruelty  ;  she  whom  he  pledged  to  cherish  and  to  nurture,  has  been 
driven  forth  by  his  cruelty  ;  but  not  his  own  flesh.  The  man  may 
become  bad  towards  her  who  is  his  own  flesh  by  marriage,  but 
not  his  own  literal  flesh.  Now,  Jesus  Christ  has  taken  his  people 
into  such  a  connection  with  himself,  that  they  are  nearer  to  him 
than  even  the  wife  is  to  the  husband.  They  are  as  near  to  him 
as  our  own  flesh  and  blood  are  to  our  own  head.  What  will  not 
a  man  do  to  save  his  hand,  or  the  least  member  of  his  body  ? 
Would  he  take  away  his  care  from  even  the  feeblest  portion  of 
his  frame  1  Men  are  generally  tender  enough  of  their  own  flesh 
and  blood  ;  much  more,  therefore,  will  not  Jesus  Christ  lose  the 
members  of  his  body,  for  we  are  his  fulness,  the  fulness  of  him 
that  filleth  all  in  all.  And  will  Christ  lose  his  own  fulness] 
Shall  his  body  be  dismembered  ]  Shall  the  head  become  a  bleed 
ing  head,  and  the  trunk  a  dead  corpse  ?  Shall  any  one  member 
be  left  to  die,  to  burn,  to  be  destroyed  1  Oh,  no  !  As  surely  as 
we  are  brought  into  this  relationship  with  Christ,  so  surely  are 
we  saved  beyond  a  hazard.  He  must,  he  shall  rest  in  his  love. 

\\  This  is  one  meaning  of  the  text,  and  abundantly  consolatoiy 
to  the  tried,  tempest-tossed  child  of  God.  I  have  thought,  however, 
that  there  is  a  very  sweet  meaning.  CHRIST  HAS  LABOUED  IN 
ins  LOVE,  HE  NOW  RESTS  IN  IT.  I  will  give  you  pictures.  There 
is  a  man,  who  loves  his  hearth,  and  his  home,  and  his  country,  and 
his  Queen.  The  sound  of  battle  is  heard  in  the  land,  he  girds 
his  sword  upon  his  thigh,  and  he  marches  forth  to  defend  all  that 
is  dear  to  him.  He  fights,  he  struggles,  his  garments  are  stained 
with  blood,  and  he  himself  is  wounded.  It  is  love — love  of  his 
own  safety,  and  that  of  his  family,  and  love  to  the  glory  of  his 
country,  that  has  made  him  fight  and  wrestle.  The  deed  is  done. 


TIIK    SAVIOUK    RESTING    IN    HIS    LOV«. 

and  he  comes  home.  The  foe  is  swept  from  the  white  cliffs  of 
Albion,  and  the  land  of  liberty  still  is  free;  Britons  are  not 
slaves.  lie  retires  to  his  house,  and  you  see  how  quietly  he 
sleeps ;  how  joyously  he  sits  down  under  his  own  vine  and  fig- 
tree,  none  daring  to  make  him  afraid.  With  what  jcy  does  he 
now  look  upon  the  faces  that  he  has  preserved,  upon  the  hearth 
for  which  he  has  fought !  What  satisfaction  does  it  give  him  to 
know  that  the  honor  of  his  country  is  still  unstained,  and  his  land 
i is  still  the  home  of  the  free  !  Now  he  rests  in  his  love ;  that 
which  made  him  fight,  now  gives  him  joy ;  that  which  impelled 
him  in  the  day  of  battle  to  do  great  deeds  of  neroism,  is  its  own 
eweet  reward.  Now  he  rests  because  the  battle  is  fought,  the 
victory  is  won,  and  he,  therefore,  rejoices  in  the  very  love  which 
smce  caused  him  to  labor. 

Now  you  see  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  laboring  in  his  love.  Love 
fetched  him  from  his  home  in  heaven ;  love  disrobed  him  of  his 
glories;  love  laid  him  in  Bethlehem's  manger;  love  led  him 
through  this  weary  world  three-and-thirty  years  ;  love  took  him 
to  Gethsemane  ;  love  oppressed  him  till  he  sweat  great  drops  of 
blood  ;  love  made  him  the  great  standard-bearer  in  the  fight ;  love 
made  him  stand  erect,  the  focus  of  the  war,  when  the  storm 
gathered  round  his  brow,  and  every  arrow  of  the  foeman  found  a 
target  in  his  heart ;  love  made  him  stand  calm  amid  the  bewilder 
ing  cry,  confident  of  victory ;  love  made  him  bow  his  head,  arid 
give  up  the  ghost,  that  he  might  redeem  his  people.  Now,  now 
that  he  is  more  than  conqueror,  he  rises  to  heaven,  and  he  rests  in 
his  love.  Oh,  what  rest  that  is  !  If  rest  be  sweet  to  the  labor 
ing  man,  how  much  sweeter  to  the  bleeding  man,  the  dying  man, 
thu  crucified  man  ]  If  rest  be  sweet  after  toil,  how  sweet  the 
n-st  of  Jesus  after  all  the  toils  of  life  and  death,  the  grave  and 
ln-il  If  victory  made  the  soldier's  return  joyous,  how  joyous 
the  return  of  that  conquering  Hero  who  has  led  captivity  cap- 
live,  and  received  gifts  for  men!  He  "doth  rest  in  his  love!'" 
Do  you  not  see  that  the  very  same  thing  that  drove  him  to  labor 
now  makes  a  couch  for  his  head  ?  That  which  made  him  strong 
in  the  day  of  battle,  makes  him  joyous  in  the  .hour  of  victory — 
the  very  love  which  he  bears  to  his  people  !  For,  lo  !  he  sits 
4o\vn  in  heaven,  and  thus  he  thinks  within  himself:  "I  have  dun« 


304  THE    SAVIOUR    RESTING    IN     HIS    LOVE. 

it,  1  have  done  it ;  not  one  of  them  shall  perish  ;  no  drop  of  me 
hail  of  God's  vengeance  can  fall  on  them,  it  has  all  fallen  on  <ne ; 
I  have  been  smitten,  I  have  borne  the  curse;  they  are  not  cursed, 
they  cannot  be  cursed,  they  are  delivered."  And  then  his  holy 
mind  roves  on  in  meditation — "  I  have  taken  away  the  curse,  and  1 
have  given  them  the  blessing ;  I  have  brought  many  of  them  to  know 
nd  love  me ;  I  will  bring  all  the  rest ;  they  shall  come  that  a/a 
early  to  perish  ;  I  will  fetch  them  all  in  due  season;  I  shall  hav-e 
every  one  of  my  blood-bought  sheep ;  they  shall  be  blessed  on 
earth,  and  by-and-by  I  shall  have  them  where  I  am,  and  they  shall 
feed  in  these  rich  pastures;  they  shall  lie  down  where  the  wolf 
is  not,  and  where  desolation  cannot  waste  their  pastures ;  the 
time  shall  come  when  I  shall  have  their  very  bones  resuscitated, 
when  their  flesh  that  has  lain  in  the  -lust  shall  live  again  to  be  with 
me;  so  shall  every  one  of  them,  body,  soul,  and  spirit,  with  all 
the  inheritance  that  they  have  lost,  and  with  all  that  double  portion 
which  I  have  gotten  for  them,  share  the  spoil,  and  wave  the  palm, 
ind  be  more  than  conquerors,  through  what  I  have  done  for 
^hem.  This  gives  rest :  "  lie  rests  in  his  love."  The  loved  ones 
ire  secure  in  the  labors  he  has  wrought. 

III.  Again.  Dr.  Gill  gives  this  meaning  to  the  text— one  of 
the  meanings,  for  he  is  always  noted  for  giving  a  great  variety 
of  meanings  to  a  text,  so  that  nobody  knows  which  is  the  best. 
When  he  is  going  to  explain  a  text,  he  always  says  t«>  us,  "It 
does  not  mean  this  thing,  it  does  not  mean  that,  and  it  does  not 
mean  that."  Nobody  ever  thought  it  did.  And  after  he  has 
mentioned  seven  or  eight  things  which  it  does  not  mean,  he  men- 
Lions  four  or  five  things  that  it  may  mean,  and  then  he  tells  us 
what  it  does  mean.  He  says  the  text  means,  "  HE  SHALL  SOLACE 
HIMSELF  IN  HIS  LOVE."  There  is  something  very  sweet  in  love  ; 
whether  it  is  sweetest  to  be  loved  or  to  love,  I  know  not;  but 
jertainly  when  the  two  meet  together,  they  are  like  two  rivers 
which  have  flowed  through  a  rich  and  fertile  country,  and  com 
bine  to  make  sor^e  master  lake,  some  inland  sea ;  then  are  they 
oroad  waters  indeed.  Now  Christ  sees  our  love ;  the  love  which 
he  has  put  into  us  meets  the  love  which  he  has  poured  out  toward? 
us ;  in  both  of  these  he  takes  sweet  solace.  He  solaces  himself 
in  love ;  this  it  is  that  ch&ers  and  comforts  him.  Some  men,  whet 


f 

THE    SAVIOUR    RESTING    IN    HIS    LC  VK.  305 

they  would  be  cheered  on  earth,  drink  the  wine  which  stirs  their 
hlood ;  some  men  find  comfort  in  company,  and  the  noisy,  giddy, 
thoughtless  talker  makes  them  glad ;  others  if  they  would  be 
solaced  turn  to  books,  those  are  their  joys — "  My  library  a  duke, 
dom  large  enough."  Others,  if  they  would  be  satisfied,  chink 
their  gold,  look  over  their  mortgages,  their  estates,  their  bonds, 
nd  suchlike  things;  and  some  men  there  are,  who  in  this  world 
lave  nothing  sweeter  for  solace  than  the  love  of  those  who  are 
near  and  dear  to  them.  The  man  who  loves  his  home  and  his 
family,  and  finds  his  little  earthly  heaven  around  his  hearth,  is 
one  of  the  happiest  men  I  know  of.  Can  you  treasure  that  thought 
for  a  moment,  and  think  of  Christ  as  taking  all  his  delight  in  his 
family  ?  I  never  heard  yet  that  it  is  ever  said  he  rests  in  his 
power.  He  has  great  power ;  see  what  he  has  done.  He  has 
built  the  heavens  ;  he  has  gtretched  out  the  earth,  and  walks 
through  the  world,  and  upholds  the  clouds  with  his  might;  but 
he  never  rests  there.  I  know,  too,  he  has  great  wisdom  :  he 
knows  all  things ;  he  walks  the  ages  past,  and  the  centuries  to 
come,  unravels  mysteries,  foretelling  all  things,  and  remembering 
all  that  is  past ;  but  I  never  heard  that  he  rested  there.  There 
is  a  great  world  of  angelic  spirits  waiting  in  his  courts,  and  he,  as 
King,  sits  in  the  very  centre  of  their  praise,  and  before  him  prin 
cipalities  and  powers  cast  their  crowns ;  but  I  never  heard  that 
he  rested  there.  But  he  is  like  the  man  who  loves  his  family  ; 
he  rests  in  the  midst  of  his  own  beloved  ones — his  spouse's  bosom, 
the  place  where  he  hears  his  children  cry,  where  he  listens  to  theii 
prayers,  the  door  at  which  he  receives  their  thanksgiving  and  be 
tttows  his  blessing,  the  house  where  they  wait  on  him  and  he  waits 
on  them,  where  they  commune  with  him,  and  he  communes  with 
them — that  is  the  house  where  he  rests.  He  rests  in  his  love,  in 
the  midst  of  the  objects  of  his  love ;  there  it  is  he  finds  his  own 
eternal  satisfaction,  the  solace  of  his  heart.  Is  not  that  a  sweet 
thought1?  It  has  ravished  my  soul  in  turning  it  over,  that  Jesus 
Christ  should  ever  find  his  rest  among  the  poor  sons  of  men.  He 
said,  "  His  delight  was  with  the  sons  of  men,"  and  he  now  says 
that  is  his  rest,  too. 

Oh,  how  pleasant!     He  will  not  sleep  anywhere  but  in  the 
house  of  his  beloved  and  'neAth  no  other  tree  will  he  recline  but 


30(5  THE    SAVIOUR    RESTING    IN    HIS    LOVE. 

beneath  the  tree  of  his  own  right-hand  planting.  "  The  trees  of 
the  Lord  are  full  of  sap ;  the  cedars  of  Lebanon,  that  he  hath 
planted."  Oh,  it  is  very  easy  to  understand  how  he  should  be  to 
nie — "  As  the  apple-tree  which  is  among  the  trees  of  the  wood,  sc 
is  my  beloved  among  the  sons  of  men."  But  that  he  should  say 
the  same  of  me !  I  can  say  of  him,  "  I  sit  under  his  shadow  with 
delight,  and  his  fruit  is  sweet  unto  my  taste."  But  for  him  to 
say  the  same  of  me ! — and  turn  round  to  the  poor  saint  and  say 
to  him,  "  O  soul !  thou  art  wf  ary ;  but  thou  art  my  rest,  and  1 
am  thy  rest :  thou  art  sick  ;  but  thou  art  my  health,  and  I  am 
thy  health  :  thou  art  sad  ;  but  thou  art  myjoy,  and  I  am  thy  joy : 
thou  art  poor ;  but  thou  art  my  treasure,  and  I  am  thy  treasure  ; 
thou  art  nothing ;  and  yet  thou  art  my  fulness,  and  I  am  thy  ful 
ness."  Oh,  what  a  host  of  precious  thoughts  rise  up  here !  we 
have  started  a  whole  covey  of  sweet  things,  if  we  can  but  stand 
still  and  calmly  meditate.  It  is  not  one,  but  many  thoughts  in 
one — this  precious  truth,  "  He  will  rest  in  his  love.  He  never 
rested  till  he  found  that  all  his  love  was  given  to  us,  and  he  never 
will  rest  completely  till  all  our  love  is  given  to  him. 

IV.  The  Hebrew  has  yet  another  idea.  In  the  margin  we  read, 
"  HE  WILL  BE  SILENT  IN  ins  LOVE."  Why  is  this  ?  What  can 
silence  have  to  do  with  love  ?  "  He  shall  be  silent  in  his  love." 
One  old  divine  thinks  that  Christ  means  by  that,  to  say,  his  love 
is  so  big  it  is  better  to  be  heard  by  his  saying  nothing,  than  by 
his  attempting  to  express  it.  "  He  shall  be  silent  in  his  love." 
What  a  deal  Christ  has  said  in  the  Scriptures  about  his  love,  and 
yet  hearken,  O  spouse  of  Christ,  the  love  that  he  hath  not  spoken 
is  ten  times  more  than  he  has  said.  Oh,  yes,  there  is  much  love 
which  he  has  brought  out  of  the  treasure-house  and  given  to  you  ; 
he  has  a  great  deal  more  like  it  in  that  strong  closet  of  his  heart. 
Some  tributes  of  his  love  you  have  received,  but  those  brigh 
clouds  on  high  01  nis  silent  love,  those  are  the  massive  storehouse 
of  his  grace.  When  you  read  the  promise  you  say,  "Ah,  this  is 
precious."  Recollect  that  is  not  a  tenth  of  what  he  has  not  said. 
lie  has  said  rich  things,  but  there  are  richer  things  still.  He  has 
no.  said  them,  he  cannot  say  them,  because  they  are  unsayablc, 
they  are  unutterable,  they  cannot  be  declared.  When  you  get 
to  heaven  you  will  hear  them,  you  cannot  hear  them  here.  You 


THE    SAVIOUR    RESTING    IN    HIS    LOVE.  W) 

Know  tne  Apostle  said  when  he  was  caught  up  to  the  third  heaven 
he  heard  words  which  it  was  not  lawful  for  men  to  utter.  Per 
haps  he  heard  a  little  more  of  the  Saviour's  love,  as  though  the 
Saviour  said,  "I  tell  you  this,  but  you  must  not  tell  any  one  else, 
it  is  not  lawful  to  utter  it  down  below ;  I  have  made  you  a  great 
•  vessel,  you  can  hold  all  this,  but  as  for  the  rest  they  are  onlw 
little  vessels.  Do  not  tell  them  any  more,  it  would  burst  them 
do  not  expose  them  to  too  great  a  heat  of  love,  it  would  consum 
them  —they  would  die  if  they  knew  more — they  cannot  under 
stand  more.  I  have  told  them  so  much  love,  that  if  they  only 
understood  all  I  have  told  them  they  would  not  be  able  to  live 
on  earth,  their  hearts  would  burst  for  joy,  and  they  would  be 
obliged  to  flee  to  me  above.  Therefore  I  tell  them  no  more,  they 
cannot  hear  it."  So  that  you  see  there  is  a  preciousness  here, 
"  He  shall  be  silent  in  his  love,"  as  if  he  could  not  say  it,  there 
fore  he  would  not  try  to  say  it,  he  would  just  leave  it  alone.  One 
poet,  after  praising  God  with  all  his  might,  finds  that  he  can  go 
no  further,  and  winds  up  his  words — "  Come,  then,  expressive 
silence,  tune  his  praise."  That  is  just  the  text,  as  if  Christ  should 
say,  "  I  have  said  a  great  deal,  but  my  people  cannot  understand ; 
I  will  say  no  more ;  I  shall  only  now  say,  '  Come,  then,  expres- 
t5i ve  silence,  tell  my  love.' " 

There  is,  however,  a  meaning  that  is,  perhaps,  more  correct. 
He  shall  be  silent  in  his  love.  "  Shall  be  silent"  may  mean  that 
he  shall  be  silent  about  his  people's  faults,  for  from  the  connec 
tion  it  looks  like  this.  "  The  Lord  hath  taken  away  thy  judg 
ments,  he  hath  cast  out  thine  enemy  ;  the  King  of  Israel,  even  the 
Loid,  is  in  the  midst  of  thee;  thou  shalt  not  see  evil  any  more.'* 
It  looks  as  if  he  meant  to  say  he  would  be  silent  about  his  sins. 
There  stands  Christ  in  heaven  to-day,  pleading  for  his  people. 
Listen  !  he  says  nothing  to  accuse  them.  Satan  may  excuse,  but 
1  'lii'is*  never  will.  The  good  that  his  people  do  is  magnified,  and 
multiplied,  and  perfected,  and  then  presented  before  the  throne 
I >u I  as  for  the  sins  of  his  people,  he  casts  them  behind  his  back 
and  all  he  says  concerning  those  sins  is  this — "  I  behold  no  sin  in 
J  acob,  neither  iniquity  in  Israel ;  my  anger  is  cast  from  me ;  I 
hive  blotted  out  like  a  cloud  his  iniquities,  and  like  a  thick  cloud 
his  sins."  "  He  will  be  silent  in  his  love."  Sometimes  love 


308  THE    SAVIOUR    RESTING    IN    IUS    LOVE. 

makes  a  man  silent.  If  you  hear  any  thing  said  against  one  you 
love,  and  you  are  asked,  "Is  it  not  so?"  you  say,  "Well,  I  am 
not  compelled  to  bear  witness  against  one  that  I  love,  and  I  will 
not."  You  know  our  law  does  not  demand  of  a  wife  that  she 
shall  give  evidence  against  her  husband ;  and  certainly  tne  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  will  never  give  any  evidence  against  his  spouse 
Never — "he  will  be  silent  in  his  love."  If  he  were  called  upon 
to  say,  "  Has  thy  spouse  sinned  ?"  his  declaration  would  be,  "  I 
am  the  sin-offering."  "  Has  she  sinned  ?  I  am  her  security.  I 
have  been  punished  in  her  stead.  I  can  say,  thou  art  all  fair,  my 
love,  there  is  not  a  spot  in  thee."  There  will  not  be  a  word  of 
accusation  from  him.  She  says,  "  I  am  all  black."  He  will  not 
deny  it,  but  he  will  not  own  it.  He  says,  there  is  no  spot,  and 
he  goes  on  to  say,  she  is  all  fair  in  his  sight.  Oh,  glorious  silence 
— he  will  be  silent  in  his  love.  So  am  I  inclined  to  believe  it 
will  be  at  the  last  great  day,  when  the  books  shall  be  unfolded : 
he  will  read  the  sins  of  the  wicked  against  them,  but  as  for  the 
sins  of  his  people,  he  will  be  silent  in  his  love.  I  sometimes 
think  it  will  be  so,  though  I  cannot  speak  with  authority.  "  No," 
he  will  say,  "  upon  you  be  the  curse  who  lived  and  died  without 
repairing  to  my  blood  as  the  fountain  opened  for  sin  and  for  tin- 
cleanness  ;  but  these  my  people,  they  had  their  sins  blotted  out ; 
and  I  will  not  read  what  is  blotted  out;  I  will  be  silent  in  mj 
love," 


SERMON    XX. 
SUFFERING  WITHOUT  THE  CAMP. 

"Wherefore  Jesus  also,  that  he  might  sanctify  the  people  with  his  ow» 
blood,  suffered  without  the  gate." — HEBREWS,  xiii.  12. 

IN  one  sense  sanctifi cation  is  wholly  the  work  of  Jesus  Christ, 
but  there  is  another  meaning  which  is  more  usually  affixed  to  the 
term,  in  \vhHi  sanctification  is  the  work  of  God  the  Holy  Spirit. 
Many  disputes  have  arisen  concerning  this  doctrine,  because  all 
men  do  not  distinguish  between  the  two  meanings  of  the  same 
word.  Tb/re  is  one  kind  of  sanctification  which  signifies  setting 
apart,  and  in  that  sense  God's  people  were  sanctified  from  all 
eternity.  They  were  sanctified  in  election,  before  they  had  a 
being,  foi  they  were  even  then  set  apart  from  the  impure  mass, 
to  be  vessels  of  honor  fit  for  the  Master's  use.  Again,  as  re 
demption  hath  in  it  much  of  particularity  and  specialty,  God's 
people  were  sanctified  or  set  apart  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  when 
on  Mount  Calvary  he  offered  up  himself,  an  offering  without  spot 
or  blemish,  for  the  sins  of  his  people.  So  that  it  is  true  that 
Jesus  is  not  only  made  unto  us  wisdom  and  righteousness,  but 
also  sanctification.  Yon  will  remember,  in  one  of  my  sermons, 
the  text  cf  which  was  "  Jesus  only,"  I  made  that  remark — that  it 
was  "Jesus  only"  for  sanctification.  And  I  have  not  had  any 
reason  to  retract  the  expression  ;  for  there  is  a  sense  in  which 
saik'tification,  as  far  as  it  means  setting  apart,  is  an  eternal  work, 
and  is  a  work  wholly  completed  for  us  by  the  blood  of  Jesus 
Christ  and  the  election  of  the  Father;  but  still  sanctification 
sometimes,  and  most  generally  too  amongst  certain  people,  signi 
fies  another  thing.  It  means  the  work"  of  the  Spirit  in  us.  There 


310  SUFFERING  WITHOUT  THE  CAMP. 

is  a  work  which  God  the  Holy  Spirit  carries  on  from  the  first 
moment  of  our  Spiritual  birth  to  the  last  moment,  when  we  are 
complete  and  taken  to  Heaven — a  work  by  which  corruptions  are 
overcome,  lusts  restrained,  faith  increased,  love  inflamed,  hope 
Brightened,  and  the  spirit  made  fit  to  dwell  with  the  glorified  above. 
That  work  is  the  work  of  God's  Holy  Spirit;  and  we  must  re- 
nember,  that  even  though  it  be  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  still 
leans  Christ  even  in  this  sanctifies  his  people.  For  what  does  th« 
Holy  Spirit  sanctify  them  with  ?  Beloved,  he  sanctifies  them  with 
blood.  We  know  that  when  our  Saviour  died,  his  sacrifice  had  a 
double  object :  one  object  was  pardon,  the  other  object  was  cleans 
ing  ;  and  the  blood  and  the  water  flowed  from  the  same  source,  to 
show  us  that  justification  and  sanetification  both  spring  from  the 
same  Divine  fountain;  and,  though  sanetification  is  the  work  of 
the  Spirit  in  us,  yet  the.  instrument  that  the  Holy  Spirit  uses  is 
the  Holy  blood  of  Jesus,  and  the  sacred  water  of  his  atonement 
applied  to  our  heart,  sprinkling  us  from  dead  works,  and  purging 
us  from  an  evil  conscience,  that  we  may  serve  God  without  let 
or  hindrance.  So.  then,  Christian,  in  thy  sanetification  look  to 
Jesus.  Remember  that  the  Spirit  sanctifies  thee  ;  but  he  sancti 
fies  thee  through  Jesus,  lie  doth  not  sanctify  thee  through  the 
works  of  the  law,  but  through  the  atonement  of  Christ.  And 
wilt  thou  remember,  that  the  nearer  thou  livest  to  the  cross  of 
Jesus,  thou  wilt  under  his  Heavenly  Spirit  have  more  of  sailed 
fication,  and  growth,  and  increase  therein  ?  So,  then,  we  see  that 
the  text,  whatever  sanetification  may  mean,  is  still  true — "Jesus, 
ilso,  that  he  might  sanctify  the  people  with  his  own  blood,  suffered 
without  the  gate." 

Let  us  pause  here  a  minute,  and  let  each  of  us  ask  this  quos- 
don — Uow  far  has  Christ's  purpose  of  sanctifying  me  been  an 
swered  in  me?  1  know  that  in  one  sense  1  am  sanctified  com 
pletely  ;  in  another  sense  1  feel  my  imperfections  and  infirmities. 
HOW  far  have  1  progressed  in  sanetification  during  this  year? 
How  much  has  my  faith  increased  during  this  year  ?  How  many 
of  my  corruptions  have  I  overcome]  How  much  nearer  am  I 
living  to  Christ  now,  than  on  the  first  Sabbath  of  the  last  ye«r  I 
How  much  more  do  I  know  of  the  Saviour  ?  How  much  closer 
do  I  approach  to  him  1  Have  I  more  porter  in  prayer  ?  \u  1 


I 

BUFFERING  WITHOUT  HIE  CAMP.  311 

more  lareful  in  my  life?  Is  my  spirit  more  loving  than  it  used 
to  be  1  Am  1  more  decisive  for  right  ?  At  the  same  time,  ^m  I 
more  meek  in  standing  up  for  it?  Am  I  more  like  my  Master? 
Or,  am  I  going  backward  ?  Stand  still  I  cannot ;  I  must  either  go 
forward  in  grace  or  go  back.  Which  have  I  been  doing  this 
year?  And  I  charge  thee,  0  my  heart,  whatever  answer  thou 
hast  to  give  to  that,  still  to  remember,  that  if  thou  art  never  so 
much  sanctified  thou  hast  not  yet  attained.  I  beseech  thee  forget 
that  which  is  behind,  and  press  forward  toward  that  which  is  be 
fore,  looking  still  unto  this  Jesus,  who  is  the  Author  and  the 
Finisher  of  faith.  The  Lord  give  you  grace  that  yw  may  be 
sanctified  wholly — the  body,  soul,  and  spirit ;  I  pray  God  to  pre 
serve  you  all  unto  his  coming  and  glory. 

But  now  the  principal  subject  upon  which  I  wish  to  discourse  is 
the  fact,  that  Jesus  Christ  suffered  without  the  gate.  You  know 
that  when  the  High  Priest  offered  the  sin-offering,  because  it  typi- 
tied  sin,  it  was  so  obnoxious  to  God  that  it  might  not  be  burned 
upon  the  great  altar,  but  it  was  always  burned  without  the  camp, 
to  show  God's  detestation  of  sin,  and  his  deter rnm-°.ci on  not  only 
to  put  it  away  from  himself,  but  also  to  put  it  j>>vay  from  his 
church.  Now,  when  Jesus  Christ  came  into  this  vorld  to  be  our 
sin-offering,  it  behoved  that  he  should  be  put  ou'side  the  carnp 
too,  and  it  is  remarkable  that  Providence  provided  for  the  fulfil 
ment  of  the  type.  Had  our  Lord  been  killed  in  a  tumult  he 
would  most  likely  have  been  slain  in  the  city  ;  unless  he  had  been 
put  *.o  death  judicially,  he  would  not  have  been  taken  to  the  usual 
Mount  of  Doom.  And  it  is  remarkable  yet  again,  that  the  Ro 
mans  should  have  chosen  a  hill  on  the  outside  of  the  city  to  be 
the  common  Mount  for  Crucifixion  and  for  death  punishments. 
We  might  imagine  that  they  would  have  selected  some  Mount  in 
The  centre  of  the  city,  and  that  they  would  have  placed  their  gib- 
oet  ii_  as  conspicuous  a  place  as  our  Newgate,  that  &o  'a  might 
strike  the  multitude  with  the  greater  awe.  But  through  che  prov 
idence  of  God  it  was  otherwise ;  and  Christ  must  not  die  in  a 
tumult,  so  that  he  might  not  die  in  the  city;  and  when  he  gets 
into  the  Romans'  hands  they  are  not  to  have  a  place  of  execution 
within  the  city,  but  one  outside  the  camp,  that  he  might  be  proven 
U>  be  the  sin-offering  by  dying  without  the  gate. 


312  SUFFERING    WITHOUT    THE    CAMP. 

I  have  just  one  or  two  thoughts  to  offer  to  you  ver^  briefly 
I.)o  you  know  who  the  people  were  that  lived  outside  the  gate! 
If  you  could  have  gone  to  the  great  Gimp  of  Israel,  y:u  would 
have  seen  the  tents  all  placed  in  order — the  standard  of  Daniel 
there,  of  Judah  there,  of  Ephraim  there — surrounding  the  Ark  of 
(he  Covenant;  but  you  would  have  seen  a  few  wretched  huts  far 
away  in  the  rear,  outsiue  the  camp  ;  and  if  you  had  asked,  "  Who 
lives  there?     Who  are  the  wretched  people  that  are  put  away 
kfrom  kith  and   kin,  who  cannot  go  up  to  the  Sanctuary  of  the 
Lord,  who  cannot  join  in  the  songs  of  holy  praise?  "     The  answer 
would  have  been,  "  The  people  out  there  are  lepers  and  unclean 
people,"  and  if  you  had  walked  alone  through  some  of  the  shady 
glens  around  the  City  of  Jerusalem,  you  might  have  heard  in  the 
distance  the  cry,  "  Unclean  !  unclean  !  unclean  !  " — a  bitter  wail 
that  sounded  like  the  sighing  of  despair,  as  if  it  came  from  some 
poor  ghost  that  had  been   commanded   to  walk  this   earth  with 
restless   step  for  ever.     Had  you  come  nearer  to  the  unhappy 
being  who  had   uttered   so   mournful   a   sound,  you  would  have 
seen  him  cover  his  upper  lip,  and  again  cry,  "  Unclean  !  unclean  ! 
unclean  !  " — to  warn  you  not  to  come  too  near  him,  lest  even  the 
wind    should    blow   contagion    from   his    leprous  skin.     If  for  a 
minute,  he  had  moved  his  hand  from  his  mouth,  you  would  have 
seen,  instead  of  those  rows  of  scarlet  that  God  had  put  there, 
those  ruddy  lips  of  health,  a  hot  white  mark  not  to  be  distin 
guished   from  his  teeth.     His  lips  were  unclean,  for  there  the 
leprosy  had  discovered  itself;  and  in  a  minute  he  would  have 
covered  up  that  lip  again  that  had  the  white  mark  of  disease  upon 
it,  and  again  he  would  have  cried  "  Unclean  !  unclean  !  unclean  !  " 
Who  was  that  leper  a  type  of?     He  was  a  picture  of  you  and  of 
me,  my  brethren,  in  our  natural  state;  and  if  the   Holy  Spirit 
has  quickened  us  to  know  our  ruined  condition,  we  shall  feel  tha* 
the  leper's  cry  doth  well  become  our  unholy  lips.     Mayhap 
Aavc  a  hearer  within  the  walls  of  this  house  of  prayer,  who  is  to 
day  separate  from  all  mankind.     With  worldlings  he  dares  not 
go";  the  harlots  and  others  with  whom  he  spent  his  living  riotously 
are  not  now  his  companions ;  he  cannot  bear  their  pleasures,  for 
they  are  dashed  with  bitterness.     With  the  children  of  God  he 
dares  not  go ,  he  feels  that  they  would  put  him  outiide  the  camp, 


SUFFERING  WITHOUT  THE  CAMP.  313 

for  he  hath  no  hope,  no  Christ,  no  faith  ;  he  cannot  say  that  Christ 
hath  died  for  him;  he  hath  no  trust  in  Jesus  himself;  not  so 
much  as  one  pale  ray  of  hope  hath  stolen  into  his  poor  bedark- 
ened  heart;  and  to-night  the  inward  wail  of  his  now  aroused 
spirit  is,  "  Unclean,  unclean,  unclean,  unclean,  and  full  of  sinr 
from  first  to  last,  O  Lord,  I've  been  ;  deceitful  is  my  heart" 

Leper,  leper!  be  of  good  cheer;  Christ  died  without  the  camp, 
that  thou  mightest  be  sanctified  through  His  blood.  1  see  the 
ieper  now  stealing  through  the  desert  places,  not  daring  to  sip 
of  the  pool  that  lies  in  his  track,  lest  he  should  communicate 
contagion  to  the  next  that  drinks,  but  seeking  out  some  filthy 
puddle,  that  there  he  might  satisfy  his  throat,  where  none  others 
should  drink,  lest  they  should  die.  I  see  him  covering  up  his 
lip.  If  his  father  saw  him  he  must  run  away  ;  if  the  wife  of  his 
own  bosom  saw  him  she  must  shun  his  presence,  for  a  loathsome 
disease  is  in  his  skin,  and  in  his  garments,  and  in  the  very  air 
that  comes  from  him  there  is  death.  Well,  suddenly,  as  he  steals 
along,  he  sees  a  Cross,  and  on  it  lifted  up  one  that  dies.  He 
standeth  there  astonished  ;  he  thinketh,  surely  he  may  come  near 
to  a  dying  man,  leper  though  he  be  ;  to  the  living  he  must  not 
come,  but  to  the  dying  he  cannot  bring  a  new  death.  So  he 
draweth  nigh  to  him,  and  the  lips  of  the  dying  man  are  opened, 
and  he  says,  "  Verily,  I  say  unto  thee,  This  day  shalt  thou  be 
with  me  in  paradise."  Oh!  what  joy  and  rapture  rush  through 
his  lepered  spirit !  How  his  heart,  that  had  long  been  heavy, 
and  baked  like  a  black  coal  within  him,  begins  again  to  burn  with 
lambent  light!  He  smiles  :  he  feels  that  that  man,  that  marvel 
lous  man,  has  forgiven  him,  and  ere  he  has  begun  to  feel  it  the 
blood  falls  on  him,  and  the  leprosy  is  cleansed,  and  he  goes  his 
way,  for  his  flesh  has  come  unto  him  even  like  unto  the  flesh  of 
a  little  child,  and  he  is  clean.  O  leprous  sinner  !  hear  it  to-night ! 
Look  to  him  that  died  without  the  camp,  that  poor  unclean  sin 
ners  might  find  a  Saviour  there.  That  is  my  first  lesson  :  if  the 
J^ord  the  Spirit  apply  it,  it  will  be  a  precious  one  to  many  a  sin- 
distracted  heart. 

But,  believer,  didst  thou  never  feel  as  if  thou,  too,  wast  un 
clean  and  without  the  camp'?  Brethren,  let  me  tell  you  a  little 
of  my  own  heart's  feelings,  and  let  me  see  whether  you  have  ever 
U 


314  SUFFERING    WITHOUT    THE    CAMP. 

felt  the  like.  You  have  often  known  yourselves  to  be  children  of 
God  ;  I  have  felt  myself  with  much  joy  to  be  certainly  assured  of 
my  interest  in  Christ ;  suddenly  sin  has  surprised  me,  some  un 
happy  propensity  has  developed  itself,  and  1  have  felt  as  if  I 
could  not  meet  my  God.  When  1  was  on  my  knees  in  prayer  1 
seemed  as  if  I  could  not  pray ;  I  felt  like  the  unclean  one  tha" 
must  be  put  outside  the  camp — like  Miriam,  who  though  the  lep 

osy  was  but  for  a  little  time,  would  still  be  unclean  for  seven 
days.  And  when  I  have  come  to  the  Church  of  God,  I  have  felt 
as  if  the  meanest  Christians  there  were  so  much  superior  to  my 
self  that  1  would  have  been  glad  to  have  been  a  footstool  at  their 
feet.  I  would  have  crept  into  any  part  of  the  Church,  if  I  might 
but  have  known  myself  to  be  the  meanest  lamb  in  Jesus'  fold.  J 
have  seen  the  deacon,  and  1  have  seen  the  church  member,  and  oh ! 
I  have  thought,  "  Brethren,  ye  are  happy  ;  but  my  heart  is  sad, 
for  I  am  not  worthy  to  be  called  God's  Son.  Father,  I  have  sin 
ned  ;  I  have  done  grievously,  and  have  transgressed  ;"  and  for  a 
little  while  faith  hath  seemed  sluggish,  and  hope  hath  been  dull, 
and  the  sense  of  sin  hath  rested  on  us,  and  we  have  seemed  to  be 
quite  put  away.  We  read  the  Bible  ;  we  could  get  no  comfort 
there.  The  Heavens  seemed  like  brass  above  our  heads  ;  no 
shower  of  Grace  fell  upon  our  thirsty  souls :  both  God  and  man 
seemed  to  put  us  outside  the  camp.  I  believe  that  many  times 
in  a  Christian's  experience  he  will  have  to  feel  the  same.  I  do 
not  mean  mere  Christians — little  Christians — but  I  mean  the 
greatest  Christians,  those  that  live  nearest  to  their  God — God's 
Aarons  and  Miriams,  who  sometimes  have  to  be  put  without  the 
camp.  Who,  then,  is  there  amongst  us  that  will  not  sometimes 
be  unclean  ?  Surely  not  any  of  the  great  ones  of  Israel  could 
always  live  without  contracting  some  ceremonial  defilement;  for 
vou  know  that  under  the  Jewish  law  the  sitting  upon  the  bed  of 
leper  made  a  man  unclean,  you  know  also  there  were  many 
things  that  naturally  happened  unto  men  that  rendered  them  un 
clean  for  seven  days.  And  who  shall  wonder  if,  through  the  in-. 
firmities  of  our  bodies,  through  the  companionships  into  which 

we  are  called,  through  the  evil  thoughts  of  our  flesh,  we  are 
as  often  unclean  as  the  Jews  were?  And  who  wonders  that 
sometimes  the  Lord  should  put  us,  as  it  were,  out  of  the  camp 


S/JFFElUNd     WITHOUT    THE    CAMP.  315 

for  a  little  season,  till  we  have  been  purged  with  hyssop  and  have 
been  made  clean — till  we  have  again  been  washed  with  water,  and 
have  been  thoroughly  purifie'  by  the  washing  of  water  through 
the  Word! 

Ah !  but,  brethren,  what  a  mercy  it  is  that  when  we  are  out 
of  the  girte,  Christ  is  ouwide  the  gate  too !  Oh !  poor  back 
slider!,  doth  thy  conscience  shut  thee  out  of  the  Church  to  da^  I 
Remember,  Christ  shut  himself  out,  too.  He  was  "despised 
and  rejected  of  men."  Dost  thou  feel  to-night  as  if  thou  couldst 
not  come  to  the  table — as  if  thy  Master  would  spurn  thee  from 
it  ?  Remember,  if  thou  be  Ilis  thou  art  welcome  ;  for  His  table 
is  where  his  Cross  is,  and  his  Cross  is  outside  the  gate.  Come, 
sinner  !  Come,  backsliding  saint !  Come,  and  welcome  !  God 
may  seem  to  have  put  thee  away  ;  but  it  is  only  seeming ;  for 
we  know  he  has  written  that  he  hates  to  put  away.  Come,  thou, 
and  though  thou  be  without  the  gate,  behold  thy  Lord,  who,  that 
he  might  cleanse  the  people  by  his  own  blood,  suffered  without 
the  gate. 

1  have  only  one  more  thought.  The  Apostle  says,  in  the  next 
verse  to  our  text,  "  Let  us  go  forth,  therefore,  without  the  camp, 
bearing  his  reproach."  Now,  then,  if  Christ  suffered  without 
the  camp,  let  us  not  be  ashamed  to  suffer  there  too.  I  do  not 
think  much  of  the  religion  of  that  man  who  is  not  put  without 
the  camp.  If  thou  canst  dwell  with  the  wicked,  if  thou  canst 
live  as  they  live,  and  be  "hail-fellow  well  met"  with  the  ungodly, 
if  their  practices  are  thy  practices,  if  their  pleasures  are  thy 
pleasures,  then  their  God  is  thy  God,  and  thou  art  one  of  them. 
There  is  no  being  a  Christian  without  being  shut  out  of  the  camp 
of  the  world,  lean  scarce  conceive  it  possible  for  any  man  to 
be  sound,  at  least  without  being  reproached  whilst  on  earth  for 
being  too  strict,  too  puritanical,  sometimes,  mayhap,  too  melau 
choly.  There  must  be  a  grave  distinction  between  a  Christiac 
and  a  man  of  the  world  ;  and  where  there  is  no  such  distinction 
or  but  a  slight  one,  there  is  most  solemn  cause  for  suspicion 
When  I  see  a  man  dress  like  worldlings,  when  1  hear  him  talk 
like  worldlings,  when  I  know  that  all  his  outward  carriage  is  just 
like  a  worldly  man's,  when  I  can  detect  no  difference,  when  I  see 
uo  mark,  no  shibboleth  in  his  speech,  whereby  he  is  to  be  detected 


S16  SUFFERING  WITHOUT  THE  CAMP. 

from  a  shibboleth  speaking  world,  when  I  discover  no  distinction 
between  him  and  others,  then  this  I  know,  "  God  is  not  mocked  ;" 
that  man  is  in  the  flesh,  and  he  shall  "  of  the  flesh  reap  corrup- 
tion."  Nay,  I  will  go  further  still.  I  can  in  this  age  scarcely 
imagine  it  possible  for  a  man  to -serve  his  Master  well,  unless  he 
s  sometimes  shut  out  of  the  camp,  even  of  the  Church  itself. 
3o  not  mean  excommunicated — 1  mean  something  far  different 
from  that :  I  mean,  that  the  man  who  serves  his  God  aright  will 
sometimes  find  himself  left  in  the  minority,  even  in  the  Church. 
It  is  never  his  business  so  to  act,  and  so  to  think  that  others  are 
obliged  to  differ  from  him  ;  it  is  folly  to  be  singular,  except 
where  to  be  singular  is  to  be  right;  but  so  lax  hath  the  Church 
become,  so  low  in  its  doctrine,  so  light  in  its  experience,  and  some 
times  so  unholy  in  its  life,  that  to  be  a  Christian  now  we  must  be 
elect  out  of  the  elect — elect  out  of  a  Church  as  well  as  elect  out 
of  the  world.  What  pride,  on  the  one  hand  ;  what  sloth,  on  the 
other  ;  what  anger,  what  distrust,  what  covetousness,  what  worldly- 
imndedness !  The  mass  of  us  are  too  much  mingled  with  the 
world,  too  much  joined  unto  Egypt  ;  and  the  man  that  is  firm 
and  loves  his  Master  well  is  a  rare  man.  The  man  of  a  lovinor 

c5 

spirit,  the  man  of  a  large  heart,  and  yet  the  man  of  a  determined 
zeal,  and  of  a  steadfast  mind — such  a  man  will  have  to  go  with 
out  the  camp,  and  he  will  have  to  suffer  now,  even  as  all  have 
had  to  suffer  who  have  dared  to  go  into  the  front  of  the  Sacra 
mental  host  of  God's  elect,  and  precede  the  more  tardy  followers 
of  the  Lamb.  If  any  minister  dares  to  be  too  bold,  too  plain 
too  honest,  he  muii  expect  to  be  traduced.  Let  him  reckon  on 
that,  and  let  him  go  forth  without  the  camp,  for  that  is  where  his 
Master  was. 

If  I  turn  to  the  page  of  history  to  find  out  the  best  men  that 
ever  lived,  do  you  know  where  I  find  them  ?  I  never  find  them 
among  those  who  were  called  respectable  in  their  time.  There 
in  the  page  of  history,  I  see  great  names,  Erasmus  and  others, 
mighty  and  learned  men.  On  one  dirty-thumbed  page  I  see  the 
name  of  Luther  associated  with  such  epithets  as  these  :  dog, 
adulterer,  beast,  and  every  thing  that  Rome's  malice  could  sug 
gest ;  and  1  say,  "Ah!  this  is  the  right  name,  this  black  name 
here.  This  is  the  man  ;  this  is  tho  man  that  God  chose,  for  ho 


BUFFERING  WITHOUT  THE  CAMP.  317 

went  without  the  camp."  That  list  of  great  divines,  and  of 
schoolmen,  and  of  theologians  there,  wipe  them  all  out !  This 
man  without  the  camp,  he  is  somebody,  depend  upon  it ;  he  is  the 
man  that  God  has  blest.  Turn  to  another.  There  is  a  respectable 
list  of  Bishops,  and  Archbishops,  and  Deans,  and  Rural  Deans,  an 
Rectors,  and  Curates,  and  no  end  of  odd  things  ;  and  there  they  are, 
all  as  respectable  as  possible.  Great  volumesof  sermons  published, 
fourteen  to  the  dozen — found  on  all  the  bookshelves  now-a-days 
with  the  dust  of  years  upon  them.  I  read  their  names,  there  is 
one,  the  other,  the  other ;  at  last  I  find  a  picture  by  Hogarth — a 
caricature  of  a  man  preaching,  with  devils  coming  out  of  his 
mouth,  and  underneath  it  written,  "  Fire  and  brimstone !"  I  look 
at  the  portrait,  and  I  say,  "See,  that  is  Mr.  Whitfield."  Ah! 
there  is  the  mar.  of  the  age,  depend  on  it ;  that  man,  all  black, 
charged  with  crimes  that  Sodom  never  knew  :  that  is  the  man  ! 
Not  the  Curate  in  the  other  picture,  who  is  preaching  to  a  con 
gregation  all  asleep,  to  the  text,  "  Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  are 
weary  and  heavy-laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest."  Not  that  one  ; 
but  this  man  here  that  is  abused,  that  is  laughed  at,  that  is 
mocked;  this  is  the  man  that  is  somebody.  So  ye  shall  go  on. 
Ye  shall  always  find  that  those  intruders,  those  that  the  Parlia 
ment  of  parsons  don't  like,  those  that  the  great  mass  reject,  laugh, 
and  scoff  at — those  are  the  very  men  that  God  blesses.  So  you 
will  be  in  very  good  company,  if  you  will  go  outside  the  camp. 
The  great  and  holy  men  of  years  gone  by,  have  all  been  put 
away.  If  an  ungodly  throng  have  thrust  out  our  fathers,  and 
have  said,  "  Get  ye  gone,  we  want  you  not,"  it  is  true,  their 
children  build  their  sepulchres,  and  then  they  thrust  us  out. 
What  if  it  be  so  ?  We  are  content  to  sleep  with  so  goodly  a 
parentage.  We  think  it  a  high  honor  to  be  thrust  out  of  those 
gates  whose  only  glory  is,  that  good  men  once  passed  through 
them,  and  whose  great  disgrace  is,  that  good  men  pass  through 
them  the  wrong  way — not  into  them,  but  out  of  them.  Be  ye 
content  to  be  cast  without  the.  camp. 

But  mark,  going  without  the  camp  is  nothing  ;  it  is  suffering 
without  the  camp  that  is  the  thing.  Making  myself  different 
from  anybody  else  is  nothing ;  it  is  suffering  for  truth's  sake  that 
u  something.  It  is  being  crucified  with  Christ  that  is  honorable. 


BUH-'EKINC;     WITH  Of 'I     THK     CAMP. 

It  is  not  my  being  a  Sectarian  or  a  Separatist.  No,  Plymouth 
brethren,  it  is  not  your  going  outside  the  camp  that  is  any  good ; 
it  is  your  suffering  without  the  camp  that  proves  you  to  be  a.  be 
liever.  O  Christians,  if  ye  have  to  do  the  same,  rejoice !  And 
now,  when  you  eome  to  the  table,  I  shall  bid  vou  onlv  recollect 
that  word  suffered — "suffered  without  the  camp;"  and  1  shall  ask 
you  as  you  sit  there  to  meditate  upon  that  word.  Turn  it  ovi-i 
again  and  again,  and  think  how  body  and  soul  all  suffered  Tor 
you.  Then  when  ye  have  meditated,  will  ye  be  in  a  fit  frame  of 
mind  to  commune  with  him  who  has  sanctified  you  by  his  own 
blood,  by  suffering  without  the  camp.  May  the  Gcd  of  Mercies 
give  to  sinners  grace,  that,  like  lepers  without  the  camp,  they  ;nay 
look  to  Jesus  crucified  for  them. 


SERMON    XXI. 

GROWTH  IX  GRACE. 

"But  grow  in  grace,  and  in  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord  and  Savlooi 
Jesus  Christ."— 2  PETER,  iii.  18. 

IF  you  will  remark,  this  passage  follows  immediately  the  seven 
teenth  verse,  where  the  Apostle  says,  "  Beloved,  seeing  ye  know 
these  things  before,  beware  lest  ye  also,  being  led  away  with  the 
error  of  the  wicked,  fall  from  your  own  steadfastness;  but  grow  t 
in  grace."  He  puts  the  one  after  the  other,  as  if  the  one  must 
be  the  means  of  the  other.  There  had  been  some  in  the  Apostle's 
days  who  had  wrested  certain  hard  expressions  in  the  Epistles  of 
the  Apostle  Paul,  and  had  wrested  them  to  their  own  destruc 
tion  ;  and,  therefore,  the  Apostle  warns  Christian  men — he  warns 
the  beloved  sons  and  daughters  of  God — to  take  heed,  lest  they 
41  be  led  away  by  the  error  of  the  wicked,"  and  so  "fall  from'* 
their  "steadfastness."  And  in  order  that  they  may  know  how  to 
stand,  and  to  be  preserved  from  falling,  he  gives  them  this  direc 
tion  :  "Grow  in  grace;"  fur  the  way  to  stand  is  to  grow;  the 
way  to  be  steadfast  is  to  go  forward.  There  is  no  standing  except 
by  progression.  If  you  see  a  simple  thing  rolling  along  your 
floor  at  home,  it  will  always  stand  upright  as  long  as  it  rolls; 
but  when  it  stops,  down  it  goes.  So  with  the  Christian,  As 
ong  as  he  is  hi  motion,  so  long  he  stands  ;  but  if  it  were  pus- 
ilile  for  the  heavenly  motion  to  cease,  then  the  Christian  would 
fall  from  his  steadfastness.  Glory  be  to  God  ;  he  will  be  kept, 
and  shall  be  presented  faultless  before  the  throne  of  God.  The 
way  to  stand,  then,  is  to  go  forward  ;  the  way  to  be  steadfast  is  to 
progress ;  the  way  still  to  be  alive,  according  to  the  Apostle,  is 
to  "  grow  in  grace,  and  in  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour 
Jesus  Christ." 


320  GROWTH    IN    GRACE. 

We  will  offer,  first  of  all,  two  or  three  remarks  upon  growth 
in  "grace  "  in  general ;  and,  secondly,  a  few  remarks  upon  growth 
in  grace  being  intimately  connected  with  the  growth  "in  the 
knowledge  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ." 

I.  First,  then,  we  shall  offer  some  remarks  upon  GKOWTII  "  IN 
GKACE"  IN  GENERAL.  What  shall  we  say  about  it? 

The  first  remark  we  make  is,  that  there  is  a  sense  in  which 
here  is  no  such  thing  at  all  as  growth  in  grace.  If  you  under 
stand  the  word  grace  as  signifying  free  favor,  and  the  love  of 
God  towards  his  people,  there  is  not,  and  there  cannot  be,  any 
growth  in  that  at  all.  The  moment  a  sinner  believes,  and  trusts 
in  his  crucified  God,  he  is,  in  the  grace  of  God,  then  justified  and 
complete  in  Jesus.  And  if  he  lives  till  his  hair  is  gray,  he  will 
never  be  more  justified,  and  never  be  more  beloved,  than  he  is 
the  very  first  moment  in  which  he  believes  in  God.  As  soon  as 
ever  1  have  a  vital  communion  with  the  Lamb,  I  am  in  grace. 
Let  me  live  on,  let  my  grace  grow,  let  my  faith  increase,  let  my 
zeal  become  warmer,  let  my  love  be  more  ardent,  yet  I  shall  not 
be  more  in  grace  than  I  was  before.  God  will  not  love  me  more*, 
he  will  not  have  a  deeper  and  purer  affection  in  his  heart  to  me 
then  than  he  has  the  very  first  moment  when  1  turn  to  him  ;  nor 
\\  ill  his  grace  the  less  justify  me,  or  less  accept  me,  the  first  mo 
ment  when  I  come  to  him  with  all  my  sins  about  me,  then  it  shall 
do  when  I  stand  before  the  throne.  We  never  grow  in  the  grace  of 
election.  We  are  always  elect  according  to  the  foreknowledge 
of  God  the  Father  ;  and  in  that  sense  of  grace  there  is  neither 
growth  nor  retrograde.  So  also  in  the  matter  of  justification. 

"In  union  with  the  Lamb, 

From  condemnation  free, 
The  saints  for  ever  were, 
And  shall  for  ever  be." 

And  they  are  at  all  times  as  much  justified  as  they  are  at  any 
other  time.  Give  me  to-day  to  be  justified — to-morrow  I  shall 
be  justified  ;  yesterday  I  was.  As  soon  as  I  put  my  trust  in  the 
Saviour,  I  became  complete  in  grace,  so  far  as  that  was  con 
cerned  ;  perfect  in  Christ  Jesus.  I  cannot  be  more  than  perfect, 
and,  therefore,  I  cannot  grow  in  grace  in  that  respect ;  I  cannot 


GROWTH    IN    GKACE.  321 

receive  more  justifying  mercy  ;  I  cannot  receive  more  pardoning 
grace  ;  for  I  have  had  it  all  at  once,  and  have  so  b^ome  perfect 
in  Christ. 

But  you  will  remark  our  text  does  not  say  any  thing  about 
grace  growing;  it  does  not  say  that  grace  grows.  It  tells  us  to 
**  grow  in  grace."  There  is  a  vast  difference  between  grace  grow 
ing  and  our  growing  in  grace.  God's  grace  never  grows  ;  it  is 
always  infinite,  it  cannot  be  more, — it  is  always  everlasting  ;  it 
is  always  bottomless  ;  it  is  always  shoreless.  It  cannot  be  more; 
it  could  not  in  the  nature  of  God  be  less.  The  text  tells  us  to 
grow  in  grace.  We  are  in  the  sea  of  God's  grace.  We  cannot 
be  in  a  deeper  sea  ;  but  let  us  grow  now  we  are  in  it.  We  can 
not  be  more  in  it  than  we  are,  than  we  always  have  been.  We 
are  in  God's  grace  ;  we  are  in  the  covenant ;  we  are  in  the 
scheme  of  redemption ;  we  are  in  union  with  Jesus  ;  we  cannot 
be  more  or  less  so,  for  we  are  secure  through  the  blood  of  our 
Saviour.  But  while  we  cannot  grow  more  in  it,  and  it  cannot 
grow  more,  we  can  "  grow  in  grace." 

I  must  make  another  remark.  It  ix  certain  that  while  the  grace 
of  God  toward  us  does  not  grow,  yet  there  is  such  a  thing  as  the  de 
velopment  of  grace.  There  are  some  persons  who  object  much  to 
progressive  sanctification,  and  to  any  thing  like  growth  in  grace. 
My  brethren  are  welcome  to  object  if  they  like,  but  I  am  sure  if 
they  read  the  Scriptures  (they  will  not  object  surely  to  Scriptural 
terms),  they  will  find  growth  in  grace  very  frequently  mentioned  ; 
if  that  does  not  mean  something  of  progressive  sanctification, 
then  1  do  not  understand  the  term  "growth  in  grace"  at  all.  It 
is  quite  certain  there  are  degrees  of  the  development  of  grace. 
You  will  not  say  the  young  man  who  has  been  converted  but  the 
last  few  months  knows  as  much  of  grace,  understands  as  nr.tch, 
has  as  much  faith  and  as  much  love,  as  the  man  who  has  for  the 
ast  twenty  or  thirty  years  stood  in  his  Master's  service.  You 
will  not  tell  me  that  one  man  who  is  scarcely  ever  seen  coming 
up  Lo  the  house  of  God,  who  is  in  a  daily  state  of  religious  star 
vation,  stands  on  a  par  in  grace  with  a  man  who  is  laboring  for 
his  Master,  whose  love  is  evident  to  all,  and  whose  faith  is  testi 
fied  before  the  whole  congregation.  You  will  not,  tell  me  there 
IB  a  dead  level  in  Christianity.  If  you  tell  aie  so,  I  tell  you  thai 
14* 


322 


GROWTH    IN    GRACE. 


you  have  no  eyes,  or  that  you  do  not  look  about  you.      Fv>?  it  ia 
certain  there  are  some  further  advanced  than  others  ;  some  with 
greater  faith  than  others  have.     There  are  "great  faiths  "  as  well 
as  "little  faiths,"  great  loves  as  well  as  little  loves;  there  are 
men  of  ardent  spirits  who  have  grace  more  developed  in  them 
than   others.     It  is  true,  they  are  not   more  loved  of  God   than 
;  others,  not  more  justified,  nor  more  accepted,  for  in  that  we  al 
stand  on  a   level,  and  there  is  no  difference;   but  as  to  the  deve 
opment  of  grace  and  the  display  of  grace  in  our  souls,  every  o-  a 
must  admit  that  there  is  a  difference  between  different  saints.     I 
ainnot  understand  the  difference  existing  between  different  n  Bl 
isters  of  God,  if  it  is  not  because  of  the  difference  in  the  degrees 
of  grace.     Some  have   just  started  and  have  preached  a   little 
about  Redemption,  but  they  have  not  got  fiir  enough  to  preach 
alout  Election,  or  at  least  not  about  the  vital  union  of  every 
blood-bought  child  of  God  with  the  person   of  Emanuel  ;  or  if 
they  should  now  and   then   preach   upon   that   they  cannot  talk 
about  the  eternal  security  of  the  saints   in   the   breast  of  Jesus, 
and   how  against   wind   and    tide  they  shall  all  sail   to  heaven. 
They  have  not  grown  enough  in  grace  for  that.      Will  not  everv 
one  admit  there  are  such  things  as  degrees  of  development  of 
grace  ?  while  it  is  true  that  there  are  none  of  us  more  justified, 
more  elect,  more  chosen  of  God,  and  loved  of  Him  than  any 
others  arc. 

Bwl  now  for  a  third  remark,  and  that  is,  that  growth  in  grace 
is  wi  to  be  measured  by  weeks,  and  months,  and  years.  There  are 
persons  who  look  upon  the  age  of  a  man  to  tell  how  much  he 
knows  about  divine  things.  "  Oh  !"  say  some,  "  such  and  such 
a  young  man,  what  should  he  know  about  divine  grace  ?  There 
is  a  hoary -headed  father  there;  he  must  know  a  great  deal  more." 
You  will  very  often  find  out  your  mistake.  God  delights  to 
show  how  he  scorns  and  scoffs  all  the  distinctions  of  man.  He 
delights  to  show  how  he  makes  the  young  men  prudent,  and 
that  he  gives  to  the  children  knowledge  and  discretion.  Jt  has 
ever  been  one  of  His  boasts,  that  "  out  of  the  mouths  of  babes 
and  sucklings  he  ordains  strength,  because  of  his  enemies."  It  is 
true,  we  do  believe,  and  we  should  believe  that  there  is  moro 
knowledge  beneath  the  gray  head.  Generally  speaking,  there 


GROWTH    IN    GRACE.  323 

will  be.     Yet  God,  in  order  to  display  his  sovereignty,  has  so 

arranged  that  he  will  sometimes  put  his  treasures  in  an  earthen 
vessel  that  has  not  been  fashioned  but  a  few  years.  Do  not  sup 
pose  persons  grow  in  grace  according  to  their  years.  Some 
grow  faster  in  grace  in  five  minutes  than  others-  in  fifty  years, 
I  believe  some  saints  progress  further  in  grace  in  one  singly 
month  than  others  do  in  twelve  months  or  twelve  years, 
am  sure  I  may  speak  concerning  myself.  I  have  grown  mor 
in  grace  sometimes  in  one  hour  than  I  have  at  other  seasons  in 
a  week,  a  month,  or  a  year,  when  God  in  his  infinite  wisdom 
has  been  pleased  to  give  me  a  vision  of  the  Saviour,  or  t°  open 
up  my  depravity,  or  break  up  the  fountains  of  wickedness  that 
lav  beneath  in  the  soul.  1  have  learnt  more  in  one  hour,  when 
the  Holy  Spirit's  hand  has  been  upon  me,  than  I  have  in  weeks 
and  months  simply  with  my  own  study.  The  growth  in  graeo 
has  not  any  thing  to  do  with  time.  God's  people  do  not  grow 
like  trees  grow.  Sometimes  they  take  a  start  and  grow  up\\ard  ; 
at  another  time  they  are  growing  downward.  Sometimes,  ap 
parently,  the  sap  sleeps  within  the  branch — a  winter  time  comes 
over  it,  and  it  is  asleep.  Do  not  imagine,  my  dear  friends,  that 
because  you  are  getting  old  you  are  growing  in  grace.  People 
are  continually  warning  young  men  of  their  danger.  So  we  are 
in  danger.  But  let  me  remind  you  that  there  is  not  an  instance 
in  Sacred  Scripture  of  a  young  man's  disgracing  his  profession  ; 
but  there  are  instances  in  Scripture  of  men  of  middle  age  and  of 
gray  hairs  doing  so.  It  is  thus :  we,  who  are  young,  are  in  the 
greatest  danger,  and  therefore  God  keeps  us  to  show  his  honor ; 
but  you  conceive  you  are  not,  and  therefore  God  suffers  you  to 
fall,  that  he  may  stain  the  pride  of  your  glory,  and  let  you  see 
that  it  is  not  any  thing  in  flesh,  neither  age,  nor  standing,  nor 
rank,  nor  condition  ;  but  that  he  holdeth  up  the  humble  and  cast- 
eth  down  the  proud.  David  did  not  fall  into  sin  until  he  had 
'come  certainly  to  maturity  and  into  the  very  prime  of  life,  and 
then  he  sinned  with  Bathsheba.  Lot  did  not  transgress  before 
he  came  an  old  man.  If  you  turn  to  the  pages  of  Scripture, 
wherever  there  has  been  a  lamentable  fall — a  Peter  or  any 
other — it  has  be-en  a  man  who  has  grown  up  and  become  strong 
in  years,  because  Goc  would  show  us  that  it  is  uot  mere  years 


324  GROWTH    IN    GRACE. 

that  can  teach  us  grace — in  fact,  that  years,  and  age,  and  learn- 
ing,  and  talent  have  nothing  to  do  with  grace;  that  he  could, 
if  he  liked,  take  a  child  of  six  years  old,  and  pour  wisdom  and 
knowledge  into  the  lips  of  that  child  that  could  puzzle  the  seers 
of  this  world.  So  He  will  do.  He  always  takes  the  most  un 
likely  beings,  and  because  men  have  said  experimental  preachers 
must  have  gray  heads,  He  says,  "Nay  ;  it  shall  be  a  youth  that 
shall  lead  the  multitude;  it  shall  be  a  child  out  of  whose  moutn  I 
\\ill  pour  words  of  wisdom,  for  I  will  stain  all  human  glory  and 
show  mankind  that  he  is  not  the  preacher  but  God  ;  that  it  is  no* 
him  that  willeth,  but  God  that  showeth  mercy  ;  that  it  is  not  the 
man,  but  the  God  in  the  man.  He  could  dispense  with  the  man 
altogether ;  at  any  rate,  he  will  have  the  man  he  pleases,  and  at 
what  age  he  pleases,  and  qualify  him  as  he  pleases. 

Now,  once  more,  growth  in  grace  is  not  to  be  estimated  by  our 
feelings.  There  are  some  of  you,  beloved,  who  think  you  are 
not  growing  in  grace  because  you  do  not  feel  as  lively  as  you  used 
to  do.  "  Ah !"  say  you,  "  when  I  was  young  every  thing  was 
good  then.  What  peaceful  hours  I  then  enjoyed.  I  would  go 
over  hedge  and  ditch  to  hear  the  Gospel  preached  ;  it  mattered 
not,  I  had  such  an  intense  desire  to  he.'ir  about  God  and  Jesus 
Christ,  such  love  to  the  Gospel,  that  when  I  once  got  to  hear  a 
minister  preach,  it  mattered  not  who  ever  he  might  be,  it  all 
seemed  sweet.  But  now  I  am  so  depressed,  I  cannot  enjoy 
the  words  I  used  to  do."  Do  not  think  because  your  wild  heat 
is  gone  you  have  not  grown.  When  we  light  a  fire,  we  always 
put  the  straw  and  such  like  at  the  bottom  ;  and  when  we  first 
light  it  there  is  a  great  deal  of  flame  and  a  great  deal  of  smoke 
that  rises.  But  afterwards,  when  the  flame  gets  hold  of  tho 
coals,  there  is  not  so  much  blaze,  but  there  is  really  more  heat. 
You  may  have  some  of  your  flame  and  smoke  departed,  but  then 
it  gets  to  be  more  solid  fire  ;  we  would  rather  warm  our  hands 
by  the  coals  than  by  the  straw,  for  that  must  soon  go.  So  with 
grace.  It  begins  with  flame,  catches  the  lighter  substances,  lays 
hold  on  the  imagination  and  the  passions ;  but,  in  after  life,  it 
appeals  to  the  judgment,  and  makes  the  man  one  solid  lump  of 
burning  fire.  He  is  not  a  little  flame  rising  towards  heaven  that 
the  wind  might  blow  out  with  a  puff;  but  he  becomes  BO  strong 


UKOWTH    IN    GRACE.  325 

a  fire  that  the  wind  shall  but  increase  the  flame,  and  shall  make 
the  heat  the  greater.  So  with  you.  Perhaps  you  are  become 
more  solid  though  you  are  less  fiery.  Do  not  suppose  when  you 
are  depressed,  therefore,  you  are  not  growing.  Many  of  God'a 
plants  grow  best  in  the  dark,  and  He  often  puts  them  in  the  dark 
to  make  them  grow.  When  you  are  growing  upwards,  recollect 
here  is  such  a  thing  as  growing  downward.  You  might  have 
lad  yesterday  a  divine  manifestation  that  took  you  up  to  the  top 
of  the  delectable  mountains.  You  must  not  think  you  are  big 
because  you  are  high,  for  pigmies  perched  on  Alps  are  pigmies 
still ;  and  if  you  were  ever  so  little,  it  would  not  make  you  any 
bigger  if  you  were  taken  to  the  top  of  St.  Paul's — you  would  be 
little  still.  If  you  are  in  a  mine  deep  down,  do  not  think  you 
are  smaller  for  that.  I  tell  you  you  will  grow  faster  in  the  dun 
geon  often  than  on  the  top  of  a  mountain ;  but  it  is  no  pleasant 
spot.  When  our  depravity  is  revealed  to  us,  when  our  desolation 
of  spirit,  when  our  utter  hopelessness  and  powerlcssness  are  un 
covered  and  made  manifest  by  God's  Holy  Spirit,  we  grow,  I  be 
lieve,  even  faster  than  we  do  when,  on  the  wings  of  seraphs,  we 
are  privileged  to  mount  on  high.  Do  not  measure  your  growth 
in  grace  by  your  feelings.  Some  of  you  make  a  kind  of  barom 
eter  of  your  feelings.  Do  not  do  so.  If  we  are  in  Christ,  we 
arc  in  Christ  by  faith,  and  not  by  feelings ;  and  recollect,  whether 
your  feelings  are  good  or  bad,  you  are  no  more  or  less  a  child 
of  God.  Your  faith,  sinner,  unites  you  with  the  Lamb — not  your 
feelings.  Trust  Him  in  darkness,  trust  Him  in  distress,  lean  on 
Him  when  you  cannot  see  Him,  and  when  there  seems  nothing 
to  walk  on,  still  tread,  for  the  ground  is  firm  beneath  the  foot  of 
faith. 

Then  do  not  think  you  are  growing  in  grace  because  you  hap 
ven  to  be  doing  a  little  more  for  the  Church  externally.  "  Oh  !  " 
we  often  think,  "  now  I  am  progressing,  am  I  not  1  I  am  busy 
Ji  the  Sunday-school,  laboring  hard  there  ;  I  am  preaching ;  I 
am  doing  this,  I  am  doing  the  other  :  now  I  am  progressing." 
Ah !  it  is  a  good  thing  to  be  very  diligent  in  good  works,  and  t* 
oe  abounding  in  acts  of  righteousness;  but  if  you  begin  to  say, 
u  Now  I  am  growing,"  because  of  this  or  because  of  that,  you 
have  made  a  grea'  mistake.  It  often  happens  when  we  are  very 


£26  GROWTH    IN    GRACK. 

full  of  public  labors  that  we  are  very  short  in  private  de*  lions. 
I  must  confess  that  myself — and  that  is  a  very  lamentable  thing 
— for  then  I  am  not  really  growing.  A  man  may  have  his  hands 
ever  so  full  before  the  world,  and  think  he  is  doing  much  ;  but  he 
is  not  growing  after  all.  Do  not  think  that  is  any  excuse  for 
anybody  who  is  not  doing  much,  you  Issachar-like  people,  like 
u  a  strong  ass  between  two  burdens,  and  too  lazy  to  lift  either,  I 
nill  not  give  you  a  word  of  comfort."  You  are  not  growing,  foi 
you  are  doing  nothing.  And  those  that  are  doing  something 
must  not  boast  of  their  growth.  It  hath  more  to  do  with  pri 
vate  devotion  than  public  exercise ;  it  hath  more  to  do  with 
meditation  than  explanation  ;  it  hath  more  to  do  with  contem 
plation  and  adoration  than  with  public  service.  We  must  look 
more  to  the  state  of  the  internal  matters,  keeping  a  good  look 
out  on  the  closet.  We  must  well  attend  to  the  reading  of  the 
Scriptures,  and  see  that  that  is  constantly  kept  up.  If  not,  how 
ever  much  we  may  seem  to  progress  outwardly,  we  are  not  any 
richer ;  we  are  only  beating  out  the  little  gold  we  had  into  a 
thinner  plate,  and  spreading  it  over  the  surface.  The  more  we 
do  for  Christ  the  more  He  will  do  for  us ;  but  let  us  take  heed 
whilst  we  water  other  people's  vineyards  that  our  own  is  not 
neglected,  and  that  the  stones  of  the  hedges  thereof  are  not  cast 
down.  May  God  grant  you,  brethren,  to  grow  in  grace. 

II.  Now  we  come  to  the  second  thought — THAT  GROWTH  IN 

GRACE  IS  INTIMATELY  CONNECTED  WITH  THE  GROWTH  "  IN  KNOWL 
EDGE  OF  OUR  LORD  AND  SAVIOUR  JESUS  CHRIST."  In  fact,  there 
cannot  be  any  grace  at  all  except  as  we  know  Christ,  and  theie 
can  be  no  growth  in  grace  except  as  we  grow  in 'our  knowledge 
of  Christ.  We  may  always  test  ourselves  whether  u  e  are  grow 
ing  bj  this :  Do  I  know  more  of  Christ  to-day  than  I  did  yester 
day  ?  Do  I  live  nearer  Christ  to-day  than  I  did  a  little  whila 
ago  ]  for  increase  in  the  knowledge  of  Christ  is  the  very  test  as 
well  as  the  cause  of  an  increased  growth  in  grace.  In  order  to 
prove  this  I  will  pass  over  one  or  two  Christian  virtues,  ond  you 
will  see  they  must  increase  as  we  know  more  of  grace. 

With  regard  to  love,  some  of  us  say,  how  little  we  iove  Christ  f 
How  many  of  you  sing — 


GROWTH    IN    GRACE.  327 

"  It  is  a  point  I  long  to  know, 

Oft  it  causes  anxious  thought — 
Do  I  love  the  Lord  or  no? 
Am  I  his,  or  am  I  not  ?  " 

'Jhat  is  a  very  good  hymn — I  find  no  fault  with  it — but  let  it  be 
short  metre,  please.  Don't  sing  the  hymn  long.  Now  and  then 
you  are  very  welcome  to  it,  but  get  through  it  as  quickly  as  you 
'an.  I  would  rather  hear  you  sing  that  hymn — 

"A  debtor  to  mercy  alone, 

Of  covenant  mercy  I  sing, 
Nor  fear  with  thy  righteousness  on, 
My  person  and  offering  to  bring." 

•'  Oh  !  "  say  you,  "  that  I  might  grow  in  love.  I  want  to  know 
that  1  love  Jesus.  I  want  to  feel  my  heart  going  after  Him.' 
Well,  the  way  to  grow  in  love  is  to  know  more  of  Christ.  The 
more  you  know  of  the  Saviour,  the  better  you  must  love  him ; 
the  more  you  discover  of  his  beauties,  of  his  excellences,  of  his 
virtues,  of  his  perfections,  and  of  his  glories,  the  more  your  soul 
will  be  in  him.  I  tell  you  who  do  not  love  Christ  at  all.  it  is 
because  you  do  not  know  him  ;  for  if  you  knew  any  thing  of 
him;  you  would  love  him  in  proportion  to  your  knowledge.  The 
more  you  know  of  my  Master,  the  more  you  will  love  him.  You 
have  only  lifted  one  corner  of  the  veil  that  shrouds  his  forehead  ; 
you  have  ?eon  but  one  portion  of  his  visage,  and  now  you  love 
him.  O\i,  if  you  had  faith  to  lift  the  veil  entirely,  to  see  his 
coun^oj-j'j^  to  mark  the  majestic  sweetness  which  sits  enthroned 
upon  JAM  lofty  brow;  if  ye  could  descant  on  his  eyes,  which  are 
"  \\\'$  thr.  iiahpools  iu  Heshbou,  by  the  gate  of  Bath-rabbim  " — if 
yo  ro-iM  describe  him  as  being  "altogether  lovely,"  ah!  ye 
»vo-j'd  love  him  more.  Blessed  are  the  men  that  improve  in 
v^quaintance  !  Jesus  Christ  is  one  of  those  blessed  ones  ;  the 
nore  you  know  of  him  the  more  you  love  him.  Sweet  Jesus! 
*hen  I  saw  thee  first  I  loved  thee  !  When  first  thy  wounded 
land  and  bleeding  side  were  uncovered  to  me,  then  I  loved  thee. 
Ah  !  but  that  love  is  nothing  compared  with  what  I  have  now. 
And,  oh  !  when  I  shall  see  thee  as  thoi>  ar*— -when  my  soul  be- 
tomes  changed  into  love,  the  love  1  have  now  sha^"  seem  to  have 


GROWTH    IN    GRACE 

been  nought  but  a  spark;  ay,  very  hatred  itself  compared  with 
that  love  which  I  shall  have  to  thee  then  !     Know  more  of  Christ ; 
read  more  of  him;  think  more  of  him;  ask  about  him  more 
because  you  will  be  sure  to  grow  in  the  grace  of  love  in  proportion 
as  you  know  more  of  Christ. 

So  with   regard  to  faith.     What  is  the  reason  why  so  many 
of  us  groan  because  our  faith  is  so  little  1     It  is  because  we  do  not 

now  enough  of  Christ.  There  are  many  people  who  want  to 
Know  a  great  deal  about  Jesus.  They  think  if  they  knew  moie 
about  Jesus  they  would  have  more  faith.  "  Oh !  "  suys  one, 
"  when  I  look  at  myself,  I  think,  '  Oh,  what  is  to  become  of 
me  1 J  Then  I  want  to  see  if  there  are  not  some  evidences.  T 
think,  'Well,  there  is  so  and  so,  and  that  looks  good.'"  All 
\vi  ong — all  wrong  !  You  have  no  business  to  look  there — no 
.siness  at  all.  You  won't  grow  in  faith  by  looking  at  yourself. 

)ne  look  at  Jesus  is  worth  fifty  at  yourself.  If  you  would  have 
more  faith,  keep  your  eye  on  Jesus.  The  sweet  wounds  of 
Christ  on  Calvary  are  the  mothers  of  faith ;  and  these  are  the 
breasts  from  which  faith  must  draw  its  nourishment.  If  you 
grow  in  faith  you  must  live  near  to  the  cross.  The  sweet  flower 
of  faith  was  first  sown  by  a  drop  of  blood,  and  it  m^st  be 
watered  by  it  every  day.  Know  more  of  Christ ;  think  more 
of  him,  and  your  faith  will  increase.  Your  little  faitl-  would 
soon  get  strong  if  you  lived  more  on  Jesus.  If  you  would 
become  Greathearts  by-and-bye,  and  knock  those  grea<  giants 
about  as  terribly  as  old  Greatheart  did  of  old,  live  near  to  Jesus  ; 
live  with  Jesus;  feast  at  his  banqueting  table ;  for  there  is  no 
food  so  strengthening  as  the  flesh  of  my  Lord,  and  no  wine  can 
so  invigorate  you  as  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour. 
So  with  regard  to  our  courage  ;  for  that  is  a  Christian  grace, 

nd  one  in  which  many  are  very  terribly  deficient.  OUT  Christian 
•ourage  will  always  increase  in  proportion  as  we  kn:-w  Christ. 
We  have  sometimes  little  Christians  that  have  not  Christian 
courage  enough,  I  was  about  to  say,  to  speak  to  a  oheese-nute ; 
they  would  not  be  able  to  profess  the  name  of  Christ  befo\«  the 
smallest  creature  in  the  world ;  they  would  be  ashamed  to  tell 
they  loved  the  Saviour  almost  before  the  bare  walls,  far  fear 
some  bird  of  the  air  would  hear  them  and  tell  ihe  tale. 


GROWTH    IN    GRACE.  329 

They  arc  so  ashamed  of  their  own  faith  (and  yet  it  is  a  real 
faith)  that  they  scarcely  dare  to  speak.  The  smallest  stone  in 
the  road  would  make  them  stumble;  a  straw  would  be  almost  as 
great  as  a  range  of  mountains  like  the  Himalayas;  they  would 
be  entirely  cast  out  of  the  road  if  they  had  the  least  prospect 
that  there  could  be  a  shadow  in  it  for  them  to  pass  by.  This  is 
because  we  do  not  know  Christ  that  we  are  afraid  of  any  thing. 
1  believe,  when  we  come  to  know  Christ,  we  shall  be  afraid  of 
nothing  at  all.  Shall  we  be  afraid  of  man?  Nay;  we  shall 
say,  "  Whether  it  is  right  to  obey  God  rather  than  man,  judge 
ye."  Shall  we  be  afraid  of  the  devil  when  we  know  Christ  ] 
Nay ;  we  shall  say,  u  Christ  hath  got  the  devil  chained,  and  he 
can  always  pull  the  dog  in  when  he  attempts  to  bite  ;  Christ 
hath  hold  of  the  dragon,  and  he  cannot  inflict  deeper  wounds 
than  Christ  willeth."  Ah  !  we  shall  not  be  afraid  of  death,  for 
we  shall  regard  him  as  an  angel  of  the  covenant  sent  to  fetch 
God's  people  up  to  heaven.  Courage  will  always  be  increased 
in  proportion  as  we  know  more  of  Jesus ;  and  if  we  could  have 
Christ  for  our  daily  and  hourly  companion,  I  believe  all  the  hosts 
of  hell,  marshalled  in  battle,  would  no  more  affright  us  than 
would  a  flock  of  small  birds  that  might  settle  down  on  our  path, 
but  we  should  say,  "  Arise,  thresh  the  mountains,  and  beat  them 
small ;  fan  them,  and  the  wind  shall  carry  them  away."  If  you 
would  have  more  of  courage,  get  more  of  the  knowledge  of 
Jesus  Christ. 

So  with  regard  to  our  zeal,  which  is  a  grace  awfully  wanting  >n 
these  times.  If  we  would  be  more  zealous,  we  must  live  more 
near  to  Christ.  If  the  Son  of  Man  were  to  come  upon  earth, 
would  he  find  zeal  upon  earth?  It  was  said,  "would  he  find 
faith  ?"  once;  but  would  he  find  zeal  ?  It  would  cost  him  a  great 
deal  before  he  discovered  much  of  it,  amongst  Christians.  There 
would  be  sound  good  orthodoxy,  but  no  zeal ;  there  is  heterodoxy 
still  no  zeal.  Where  do  you  find  it  ?  Just  here  and  there.  There 
is  a  remnant,  according  to  the  election  of  grace,  who  are  zealous 
for  God ;  but  in  these  times,  we  are  sorry  to  say  it,  religion  has 
degenerated  into  a  kind  of  formality.  It  is  a  fashionable  thing  to 
be  pious.  We  have  been  going  on  in  the  same  track  as  other 
people;  there  was  an  old  cart  rut.  and  we  all  drive  along  it. 


830  GROWTH    IN    ORACK. 

We  have  kept  on  at  the  same  pace  as  our  fathers;  but,  oh!  if 
we  knew  more  of  Christ,  we  should  have  more  zeal.  I  cannot 
think  it  possible  for  men  to  lack  zeal  when  they  know  Christ. 
They  would  then  nay,  "  Did  my  Saviour  shed  his  blood  for  me  1 
and  shall  I  fear  to  die  for  him  1  Did  he  come  all  the  way  from 
earth  and  heaven  to  win  a  soul,  and  shall  I  stop  proclaiming  it  T 
Should  we  have  so  many  lazy  preachers  if  they  had  got  more  of 
Christ  in  their  hearts?  If  they  understood  more  of  Jesus 
would  they  think  so  much  of  their  constitution,  and  be  afraid  tc 
preach  continually  to  the  people  I  Oh  !  if  people  knew  more  of 
Jesus,  should  we  have  so  many  slothful,  sluggish,  members  in 
our  churches,  with  so  many  that  can  make  any  excuse  rather  than 
labor  for  Christ,  who  can  patch  up  any  empty  apology  for  idle 
ness'?  No;  brethren,  if  we  knew  more  of  the  Saviour,  if  we 
had  more  frequent  visions  of  him,  if  we  saw  him  oftener  on  his 
cross,  and  viewed  him  more  frequently  sitting  with  the  crown 
upon  his  head,  we  should  say,  "  I  vow  revenge  against  my  sloth ; 
I  will  think  all  I  can  do  will  be  too  little  for  so  good  a  Lord  ;  if 
I  might  make  some  reserve,  and  duty  did  not  call,  I  will  love  my 
(iod  with  zeal  so  great  that  I  should  give  him  all."  It  is  no  use 
to  try  to  get  more  zeal  except  by  the  right  way — knowing  more 
of  Christ.  And  if  we  seek  to  grow  up  in  zeal  by  certain  ideas 
of  our  own,  certain  "  revivals"  as  they  arc  called,  and  all  that 
nonsense,  we  shall  have  a  zeal  like  a  house  on  fire ;  it  will  do 
more  mischief  than  it  will  do  good.  There  may  be  some  heat 
and  a  deal  of  illumination  :  it  will  die  away  by-and-bye  into  black 
ashes,  poisoning  the  churches  every  where.  I  have  seen  revivals 
in  England — and  I  can  always  tell  where  "  revivals"  have  been 
by  the  scarred  state  of  the  places  after  them — what  have  been 
called  "  revivals,"  got  up  by  certain  extraordinary  meetings,  and 
fanned  by  sundry  preachers,  who  have  invented  strange  doctrines 
preached  hell-fire  apparently,  calling  on  men  unceasingly  to  re 
pel .1,  repent,  and  said  nothing  of  the  grace  of  God.  They  have 
for  a  time  stirred  up  the  people  to  a  kind  of  religious  furor,  and 
they  have  left  behind  a  very  desert.  Before  them  it  was  like  a 
garden  of  the  Lord,  but  behind  a  desert.  The  church  has  been 
divided ;  there  has  been  a  reaction  ;  they  have  sunk  into  the  most 
^amentable  condition.  If  we  would  have  true  zeal,  a  true  "  love- 


GROWTH    IN    ({RACK. 

feast,"  it  must  be  by  the  preaching  of  the  good  old  doctrine,  the 
,;ood  old  truth,  and  the  preaching  of  Christ ;  not  any  thing  else : 
for  whatever  comes  from  any  thing  else  comes  of  the  devil ;  to 
hell  it  shall  tend ;  its  issue  shall  be  destruction,  and  not  salva 
tion.  But  if  we  get  to  the  truth  of  God,  there  will  be  "  revival*1 
enough.  We  want  nothing  but  Gospel,  good  old-fashioned  Gos 
pel,  to  stir  the  world  again.  Though  men  have  tried  new  scheme? 
God  will  put  a  stain  upon  their  glories  yet.  All  these  heresie 
must  be  swept  away,  and  the  true  Gospel — distinguishing  gracu 
of  God  in  all  the  sovereignty  of  election — must  yet  again  bo 
preached.  And  when  it  is  preached  in  all  its  fulness,  then  shall 
the  church  be  zealous,  and  then  shall  Zion  arise,  shake  herself 
from  the  dust,  and  put  on  her  beautiful  garments. 

One  thought  more.  If  we  would  grow  also  in  the  grace  oj 
brotherly  kindness,  we  must  know  more  of  Christ.  Oh,  beloved  f 
we  must  lament  again.  There  is  too  little  brotherly  kindness 
There  is  a  great  deal  of  that  mawkish  kind  of  brotherly  kindness 
which  consist  in  this — "  we  must  never  say  any  thing  contrary  to 
anybody  else's  opinion.  If  we  know  a  doctrinal  error,  we  must 
not  expose  it,  because  love  of  our  brethren  implies  if  they  aro 
wrong  we  would  not  tell  of  it."  But  I  ttynk  true  brotherly 
kindness  is  always  to  preach  the  truth,  and  tell  our  brethren 
where  they  are"  wrong,  and  give  them  the  right  hand  of  fellow 
ship  :  to  preach  whatever  we  believe  to  be  true,  and  try  to  main 
tain  what  God  has  taught  us ;  and  then,  after  all,  to  say,  "  Well 
brother,  you  differ  from  me.  I  am  not  infallible  ;  I  still  love 
you,"  But  that  is  no  love  which  makes  us  hide  the  truth.  True 
love  will  make  us  honest,  zealous,  and  affectionate.  Why  don't 
we  love  one  another  as  much  as  we  ought  ]  It  is  because  we  do 
not  love  the  Saviour  enough,  and  we  have  not  seen  enough  of 
him.  If  we  had  seen  more  of  the  Saviour  I  am  sure  we  should 
love  him  better.  I  met  a  strange  idea  in  old  Burrough's  when 
reading  him  the  other  day.  He  says,  "  If  Jesus  Christ  were  to 
come  down  to  his  church  now,  he  would  see  some  of  his  children 
with  black  eyes;  some  others  would  be  seen  scratched  in  the 
face,  and  some  bruised  all  over.  He  would  say,  4Ha!  where 
have  you  been  V  Lord,  I  have  been  fighting  my  brother,  and  he 
did  thi§.  He  would  then  say,  *  Children  fight !  the  birds  of  one 


332  GROWTH    IN    GRACE. 

nest  disagree !  how  sad  it  is !' "  It  is  a  queer  thought,  but  it  is 
not  a  bad  one.  We  might  think  of  that  a  little,  for  when  Jesus 
Christ  comes  and  finds  his  people  controverting  and  quarrel 
ling,  what  will  he  say  ?  You  remember  the  story  I  told  you 
before.  An  old  Scotch  elder  had  been  disputing  with  his  minis- 
ter  at  an  elders'  meeting.  He  said  some  hard  things,  and  almost 
oroke  the  minister's  heart.  Afterwards  he  went  home,  and  the 
minister  went  home  too.  Next  morning  the  elder  came  down, 
and  his  wife  said  to  him,  "  Eh,  Jan !  ye  look  very  sad  this  morn 
ing.  What's  the  matter  wi'  ye  ]"  "  Ah  !"  said  he,  "  you  would 
be  sad,  too,  if  you  had  had  such  a  dream  as  I've  had."  "  Weel, 
and  what  did  ye  dream  about  1"  "  Och !  I  dreamed  I  had  been 
at  an  elders'  meeting,  and  I  said  some  hard  things  and  grieved 
the  minister ;  and  as  he  went  hame  I  thought  he  died  and  went 
to  heaven.  A  fortnight  after,  I  thought  I  died,  and  that  I  went 
to  heaven  too.  And  when  I  got  to  the  gates  of  heaven,  out  came 
the  minister  and  put  out  his  hand  to  take  me,  saying,  '  Come 
alang,  Jan,  there's  nae  strife  up  here,  and  I'm  happy  to  see  ye.' " 
The  elder  went  to  the  minister  to  beg  his  pardon  directly,  but  he 
found  he  was  dead  ;  and  he  laid  it  so  to  heart  that  within  a  fort 
night  the  elder  himself  departed.  And  I  should  not  wonder  if 
he  did  meet  the  minister  at  heaven's  gates,  and  hear  him  say, 
"  Come  alang,  Jan !  there's  nae  strife  up  here."  It  would  be 
good  for  us  to  recollect  that  there  is  no  strife  up  there.  Glorified 
saints  have  not  strife  among  themselves;  and  we  should  love  one 
another  more  in  brotherly  kindness  if  we  thought  more  of  heaven 
arid  more  of  our  blessed  Jesus. 

Lastly,  there  is  another  grace  in  which  we  need  to  grow ;  that 
»s  the  grace  of  hitmility.  I  am  sure  we  should  increase  in  that 
if  we  lived  nearer  to  Christ.  Oh,  humility !  most  precious 
hing,  thou  art  most  rare !  He  who  talks  of  it  most  hath 
east  of  it.  He  who  preaches  of  it  best  full  often  is  least 
the  subject  of  its  power.  Oh,  humility  !  I  have  sometimes 
thought  thou  wert  a  phantom,  and  that  pride  was  the  reality. 
Humility,  where  art  thou  1  The  depths  of  poverty  say  "  thou 
art  not  in  me,"  for  the  poor  are  often  proud.  The  heights  of 
riches  say,  "  thou  art  not  here,"  for  the  rich  are  often  proud  too 
Oh,  hurpiljty  !  thou  art  no£  fa  be  found  in  science,  for  philoso 


GROWTH    IN    GRACE.  333 

phy  puflTeth  up.  Thou  art  not  to  be  found  in  ignorance,  the  very 
mother  of  pride.  Oh,  humility  !  where  can  !  iind  thee1?  Where 
art  thou1?  Nowhere  can  I  see  thee,  or  know  what  thou  art,  ex 
cept  I  sit  at  the  feet  of  Jesus,  and  behold  myself  a  lost,  ruined 
sinner  purchased  by  divine  love.  Oh!  if  you  would  be  humble, 
j  ou  must  look  at  your  Saviour,  for  then  you  would  say  : — 

"Alas!  and  did  my  Saviour  bleed 7 

And  did  my  Sovereign  die  V 
Would  he  devote  that  sacred  head 
For  such  a  worm  as  1  ?" 

You  will  never  feel  such  a  worm  as  when  you  seeyuur  Saviour 
die;  you  will  never  know  your  own  nothingness  so  well  as  when 
you  see  your  Saviour's  greatness.  When  you  grow  in  the  gra^e 
of  God  you  will  be  sure  to  grow  in  humility.  Growing  Chris 
tians  think  themselves  nothing,  but  full-grown  Christians  always 
think  themselves  less  than  nothing,  and  the  more  we  get  near  to 
Jesus  the  smaller  self  will  appear  to  be.  Self  and  Christ  can 
never  come  together.  When  I  stand  near  self  Christ  is  small ; 
when  I  stand  near  Christ,  self  is  small.  May  God  grant 
you  to  grow  in  the  knowledge  of  Christ.  Read  the  Scrip 
tures  more.  Seek  more  the  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
upon  them ;  spend  more  time  in  devotion  ;  ask  God  the  Holy 
Spirit  to  give  you  a  fresher  gale  from  Calvary ;  be  often er 
or.  the'mount  of  transfiguration,  in  the  garden  of  suffering,  in  the 
hall  of  agony,  under  the  cross  of  crucifixion  ;  live  with  Jesus 
and  near  to  him  ;  and  so,  changed  from  glory  to  glory  as  by  the 
presence  of  the  Lord,  you  shall  each  of  you  grow  into  the  stature 
of  perfect  men  in  Christ  Jesus, 


SERMON   XXII. 

HYPOCRISY. 

"Beware  ye  of  the  leaven  of  the  Pharisees,  which  is  hypocrisy.1' — LUKB, 
xii.  1. 

THIS  age  is  full  of  shams.  Pretence  never  stood  in  so  eminent 
a  position  as  it  does  at  the  present  hour.  There  be  few,  I  fear, 
who  love  the  naked  truth  ;  we  can  scarce  endure  it  in  oui  houses ; 
you  would  scarcely  trade  with  a  man  who  absolutely  stated  it. 
If  you  walked  through  the  streets  of  London,  you  might  imagine 
thai  all  the  shops  were  built  of  marble,  and  that  all  the  doors 
wero.  made  of  mahogany  and  woods  of  the  rarest  kinds ;  and  yet 
you  soon  discover  that  there  is  scarce  a  piece  of  any  of  tliese  pre 
cious  fabrics  to  be  found  any  where,  but  that  every  thing  is 
grained,  and  painted,  and  varnished.  I  find  no  fault  with  this, 
except  as  it  is  an  outward  type  of  an  inward  evil  that  vxists.  As 
it  is  in  our  streets,  so  is  it  everywhere;  graining,  painting,  and 
gilding,  are  at  an  enormous  premium.  Counterfeit  has  at  length 
attained  to  such  an  eminence  that  it  is  with  the  utmost  difficulty 
that  you  can  detect  it.  The  counterfeit  so  near  approacheth  to 
the  genuine,  that  the  eye  of  wisdom  itself  needs  to  be  enlightened 
befoie  she  can  discern  the  difference.  Specially  is  this  the  case 
n  religious  matters.  There  was  once  an  age  of  intolerant  bigotry, 
then  every  man  was  weighed  in  the  balance,  and  if  he  vas  not 
precisely  up  to  the  orthodox  standard  of  the  day,  Uv  nVe  de 
voured  him ;  but  in  this  age  of  charity,  and  of  r*or>t  proper 
charity,  we  are  very  apt  to  allow  the  counterfeit  to  pass  current, 
and  to  imagine  that  outward  show  is  really  as  beneficial  as  inward 
reality.  If  ever  there  was  a  time  when  it  was  needful  to  say, 
"Beware  ye  of  the  leaven  of  the  Pharisees,  whk-h  is  hypocrisy," 


BVPOCBJ87.  335 

it  is  now.  The  minister  may  cease  to  preach  this  doctrine  in  the 
days  of  persecution  :  when  the  faggots  are  blazing,  and  when  the 
rack  is  in  full  operation,  few  men  will  be  hypocrites.  These  are 
the  keen  detectors  of  impostures;  suffering,  and  pain,  and  death, 
for  Christ's  sake,  are  not  to  be  endured  by  mere  pretenders.  But 
in  this  silken  age,  when  to  be  religious  is  to  be  respectable,  when 
to  follow  Christ  is  to  be  honored,  and  when  godliness  itself  has  bo  ! 
tome  gain,  it  is  doubly  necessary  that  the  minister  ihould  cry 
i  loud,  and  lift  up  his  voice  like  a  trumpet  against  thia  prevailing 
sin,  "The  leaven  of  the  Pharisees,  which  is  hypocrisy." 

I  am  sure  that  every  true  child  of  God  will  stand  at  times  In 
doubt  of  himself,  and  his  fear  will  probably  take  the  shape  of  a 
suspicion  concerning  his  own  state. 

He  that  never  doubted  of  Ms  state, 
He  may — perhaps  he  may — too  late. 

The  Christian,  however,  does  not  belong  to  that  class.  He  will 
at  times  begin  to  be  terribly  alarmed,  lest,  after  all,  his  godliness 
should  be  but  seeming,  and  his  profession  an  empty  vanity.  He 
who  is  true  will  sometimes  suspect  himself  of  falsehood,  while 
he  who  is  false  will  wrap  himself  up  in  a  constant  confidence  of 
his  own  sincerity.  My  dear  Christian  brethren,  if  you  are  at  this 
time  in  doubt  concerning  yourselves,  the  truths  I  am  about  to 
utter  will,  perhaps,  help  you  in  searching  your  own  heart  and  try 
ing  your  own  reins,  and  sure  I  am  you  will  not  blame  me  if  I 
should  seem  to  be  severe,  but  you  will  rather  say,  "Sir,  I  desire 
to  make  sure  work  concerning  my  own  soul,  tell  me  faithfully 
and  tell  me  honestly  what  are  the  signs  of  a  hypocrite,  and  I  will 
sit  down  and  try  to  read  my  own  heart,  to  discover  whether  these 
things  have  a  bearing  upon  me,  and  happy  shall  I  be  if  I  shall 
corne  out  of  the  tire  like  pure  gold." 

We  shall  note,  then,  this  morning,  first,  the  character  of  a 
hypocrite;  then  we  shall  try  to  cast  up  his  accounts  for  him,  wita 
regard  to  his  loss  or  gain  ;  and  then  we  shall  offer  a  cure  for 
hypocrisy,  which,  if  constantly  carried  about  with  us,  will  cer 
tainly  prevent  us  from  attempting  to  deceive.  The  cure  is  con 
tained  in  these  words  which  follow  the  text — "For  there  is 
nothing  covered,  that  shall  not  be  revealed  ;  neither  hid,  Jut  shall 


336  HYPOCRI8T. 

not  be  known.  Therefore,  whatsoever  ye  have  spoken  in  darkness 
shall  be  heard  in  the  light ;  and  that  which  ye  have  spoken  in  the 
car  in  closets  shall  be  proclaimed  upon  the  housetops." 

I-  First,  THE  HYPOCRITE'S  CHARACTER.  We  have  an  elaborate 
description  of  the  hypocrite  in  the  chapter  we  have  just  read,  the 
twenty-third  of  Matthew,  and  I  do  not  know  that  I  can  better 
pnrtray  him  than  by  turning  again  to  the  words  of  Christ. 

A  hypocrite  may  be  known  by  the  fact  that  his  speech  and  kit 
actions  are  contrary  to  one  another.  As  Jesus  says,  "They  say 
and  they  do  not."  The  hypocrite  can  speak  like  an  angel ;  he 
can  quote  texts  with  the  greatest  rapidity  ;  he  can  talk  concerning 
all  matters  of  religion,  whether  they  be  theological  doctrines, 
metaphysical  questions,  or  experimental  difficulties.  In  his  own 
esteem  he  knoweth  much,  and  when  he  rises  to  speak,  you  will 
often  feel  abashed  at  your  own  ignorance  in  the  presence  of  his 
superior  knowledge.  But  see  him  when  he  comes  to  actions. 
What  behold  you  there?  The  fullest  contradiction  of  every 
thing  that  he  has  uttered.  He  tells  to  others  that  they  must  obey 
the  law;  doth  he  obey  it?  Ah!  no.  He  declares  that  others 
must  experience  this,  that,  and  the  other,  and  he  sets  up  a  fine 
scale  of  experience,  far  above  even  that  of  the  Christian  himself; 
'>ut  does  he  touch  it  ?  No,  not  with  so  much  as  one  of  his  fingers. 
He  will  tell  others  what  they  should  do;  but  will  he  remember 
his  own  teaching?  Not  he.  Follow  him  to  his  house;  traco 
him  to  the  market;  see  him  in  the  shop,  and  if  you  want  to  re 
fute  his  preaching  you  may  easily  do  it  from  his  own  life.  My 
hearer,  is  this  thy  case?  Thou  art  a  member  of  a  church,  a 
deacon,  a  minister.  Is  this  thy  case?  Is  thy  life  a  contradiction 
lo  thy  words?  Do  thy  hands  witness  against  thy  lips?  How- 
stands  it  with  thee?  With  a  blush,  each  one  of  us  must  confess 
that,  to  some  extent,  our  life  is  contradictory  to  our  profession. 
We  blush  and  we  mourn  over  this.  But  I  hope  there  are  some 
here  who  can  say,  "Notwithstanding  many  infirmities,  with  rny 
\*  hole  heart  have  I  striven  to  run  in  the  ways  of  thy  command- 
ments,  O  my  God,  and  I  have  not  intentionally  spoken  that  with 
my  lip  which  I  did  not  intend  to  carry  out  in  my  life."  Ah !  be 
lieve  me,  my  hearers,  talk  is  easy,  but  walk  is  hard :  speech  any 
iiiau  may  attain  unto,  but  act  is  difficult.  We  must  have  grace 


HYPOCRI8T.  337 

within  to  make  our  life  holy  ;  but  lip-piety  needs  no  grace.  The 
first  mark  of  a  hypocrite,  then,  is,  that  he  contradicts  by  his  acts 
what  he  utters  by  his  words.  Do  any  of  you  do  so  1  If  so, 
stand  convicted,  of  hypocrisy,  and  bow  your  heads,  and  confess 
the  sin. 

The  next  mark  of  a  hypocrite  is,  that  whenever  he  does  right 
*/  is  that  he  may  be  seen  of  men.  The  hypocrite  sounds  a  trumpt  t 
before  his  alms,  and  chooses  the  corner  of  the  streets  for  his 
prayers.  To  him  virtue  in  the  dark  is  almost  a  vice;  he  can 
never  detect  any  beauty  in  virtue,  unless  she  has  a  thousand  eyes 
to  look  upon  her,  and  then  she  is  something  indeed.  The  true 
Christian,  like  the  nightingale,  sings  in  the  night ;  but  the  hypo 
crite  has  all  his  songs  in  the  day,  when  he  can  be  seen  and  heard 
of  men.  To  be  well  spoken  of  is  the  very  elixir  of  his  life ;  if 
he  be  praised,  it  is  like  sweet  wine  to  him.  The  censure  of  man 
upon  a  virtue  would  make  him  change  his  opinion  concerning  it 
in  a  moment;  for  his  standard  is  the  opinion  of  his  fellow-crea 
tures,  his  law  is  the  law  of  sell-seeking,  and  of  self-honoring  :  he 
is  virtuous,  because  to  be  virtuous  is  to  be  praised;  but  if  to 
morrow  vice  were  at  a  premium  he  would  be  as  vicious  as  the 
rest.  Applause  is  what  too  many  are  seeking  after.  They  eschew 
all  secret  religion,  and  only  live  where  men  may  behold  them.  Now, 
is  this  our  case  1  Let  us  deal  honestly  with  ourselves  ;  if  we  dis 
tribute  to  the  poor,  do  we  desire  to  do  it  in  secret,  when  no  tongue 
shall  tell  1  Are  our  prayers  offered  in  our  closets,  where  God 
who  heareth  the  cry  of  the  secret  ones,  listeneth  unto  our  suppli 
cation  1  Can  we  say,  that  if  every  man  were  struck  stone  blind,  and 
deaf,  and  dumb,  we  would  not  alter  our  conduct  the  least?  Can 
we  declare  that  the  opinion  of  our  fellows  is  not  our  guiding  law, 
but  that  we  stand  servants  to  our  God  and  to  our  conscience,  and 
AI  _  not  to  be  made  do  a  wrong  thing  from  flattery,  nor  are  we 
urged  to  do  a  right  thing  from  fear  of  censure  1  Mark,  the  man 
whD  does  not  act  rightly  from  a  higher  motive  than  that  of  being 
praised,  gives  sore  suspicion  that  he  is  a  hypocrite;  but  he  who 
will  do  a  right  thing  against  the  opinion  of  every  man,  and  simply 
because  he  believes  it  to  be  right,  and  sees  the  stamp  of  God's 
approval  upon  it,  that  man  need  not  be  afraid  that  he  is  a  hypo- 
crite ;  he  would  be  a  kind  of  hvoocrite  that  one  has  never  dia- 
15 


338 

covered  as  yet.  Hypocrites  do  their  good  works  for  ap[,l:iuse. 
Is  it  so  with  you  ?  If  so,  be  honest,  and  as  you  would  convict 
another,  convict  yourself. 

Again  :  hypocrites  love  titles,  and  honors,  attd  respect  from 
men.  The  pharisee  was  never  so  happy  as  when  he  was  e.Jled 
Rabbi,  he  never  felt  himself  so  really  great  as  when  he  was 
tuck  up  in  the  highest  seat  in  the  synagogue.  Then  he  must  be 
ood  indeed.  But  the  true  Christian  cares  not  for  titles.  It  is 
one  of  the  marks  of  Christians  that  they  have  generally  taken 
names  of  abuse  to  be  their  distinctive  appellations.  There  was 
a  time  when  the  term  methodiat  was  abusive.  What  did  those 
good  men  say  who  had  it  so  applied  to  them  ?  "  You  call  us 
methodists  by  way  of  abuse,  do  you  ?  It  shall  be  our  title." 
Tho.  name  "  Puritan  "  was  the  lowest  of  all ;  it  was  the  symbol 
•vvhieh  was  always  employed  by  the  drunkard  and  swearer  to  ex 
press  a  godly  man.  "Well,"  says  the  godly  man,  "I  *M!!  be 
called  a  puritan;  if  that  is  a  name  of  reproach  I  will  ijkc  it." 
It  has  been  so  with  the  Christian  all  the  world  over.  He  has 
chosen  for  himse-lf  the  name  which  his  enemy  has  gnen  him  in 
malice.  Not  so  the  hypocrite.  He  takes  that  which  is  the  most 
honorable ;  he  wishes  always  to  be  thought  to  belong  to  the  most 
respectable  sect,  and  to  hold  an  office  in  that  sect  which  will  con 
fer  upon  him  the  most  honorable  title.  Now,  can  you  say  from 
your  inmost  soul,  that  in  religion  you  are  not  seeking  for  honors 
or  titles,  but  that  you  can  tread  these  beneath  your  feet,  and  want 
no  higher  degree  than  that  of  a  sinner  saved  by  grace,  and  no 
greater  honor  than  to  sit  at  the  feet  of  Jesus  and  to  learn  of  him  ? 
Are  you  willing  to  be  the  despised  followers  of  the  carpenter's 
son,  as  were  the  fishermen  upon  the  lake  ?  If  so,  methinks  you 
have  but  little  hjpj;r*<y  in  you  ;  but  if  you  only  follow  him  be 
cause  you  are  honored  b)  men,  farewell  to  the  sincerity  of  your 
eiigion  ;  you  are  unmasked,  and  stand  before  the  face  of  this  con 
gregation  an  acknowledged  hypocrite. 

There  was  another  evidence  of  a  hypocrite  which  was  equally 
good,  namely,  that  he  strained  at  a  gnat  and  swallowed  a  camel. 
Hypocrites  in  these  days  do  not  find  fault  with  us  for  eating  with 
unwashed  hands,  but  they  still  fix  upon  some  ceremonial  omis 
sion,  Sabbatarianism  has  furnished  hypocrisy  with  an  extremely 


HYPOCRISY".  33t> 

convenient  refuge.  Acts  of  necessity  done  by  the  Christian  are 
the  objects  of  the  sanctimonious  norror  of  Pharisees,  and  labors 
of  mercy  and  smiles  of  joy  are  damning  sins,  in  the  esteem  of 
hypocrites,  if  done  upon  a  Sunday.  Though  our  Father  worked 
hitherto,  and  Christ  worked,  and  though  works  of  kindness,  and 
mercy,  and  charity,  are  the  duty  of  the  Sabbath ;  yet  if  the  Chris 
tian  be  employed  in  these,  he  is  thought  to  be  offending  against 
jod's  holy  law.  The  slightest  infringement  of  that  which  is  a 
eremonial  observance  becomes  a  great  sin  in  the  eye  of  the  hy 
pocrite.  But  he,  poor  man,  who  will  find  fault  with  you  for  some 
little  thing  in  this  respect,  straining  at  a  gnat,  is  the  man  you  will 
find  cheating,  adulterating  his  goods,  lying,  puffing,  and  grinding 
the  poor.  I  have  always  noticed  that  those  very  particular  souls 
who  look  out  for  little  things,  who  are  always  searching  out  little 
points  of  difference,  are  just  the  men  who  omit  the  weightier  mat 
ters  of  the  law,  and,  while  they  are  so  particular  about  the  tithe 
of  mint,  and  annis,  and  cummin,  whole  loads  of  tithe-wheat  are 
smuggled  into  their  own  barns.  Always  suspect  yourself  when 
you  are  more  careful  about  little  than  about  great  things.  If  you 
find  it  hurts  your  conscience  more  to  be  absent  from  the  com 
munion  than  to  cheat  a  widow,  rest  quite  assured  that  you  are 
wrong.  The  Thug,  you  know,  thinks  it  a  very  proper  thing  to 
murder  all  he  can  ;  but  if  a  little  of  the  blood  of  his  victims  should 
stain  his  lips,  then  he  goes  off  to  the  priest,  and  says  he  has  com 
mitted  a  great  sin  ;  the  blood  has  been  on  his  lips — what  must 
he  do  to  get  the  sin  forgiven  ?  And  there  are  many  people  of 
the  same  class  in  England.  If  they  should  do  any  thing  on  a 
Good  Friday,  or  on  Christmas-day,  poor  souls,  it  is  awfully 
wicked  ;  but  if  they  should  be  lazy  all  the  six  days  of  the  week, 
it  is  no  sin  at  all.  Rest  ye  assured,  that  the  man  who  strains  at 
t  gnat,  but  yet  swallows  the  camel,  is  a  deceiver.  Mark  you, 
my  dear  friends,  I  like  you  to  strain  at  the  gnats  ;  I  have  no  ob 
jection  to  that  at  all — only  do  not  swallow  the  camel  afterwards. 
Be  as  particular  as  you  like  about  right  and  wrong.  If  you  think 
a  thing  is  a  little  wrong,  it  is  wrong  to  you.  "  Whatsoever  is 
not  of  faith  is  sin."  If  you  cannot  do  it,  believing  yourself  to  be 
right  in  not  doing  it,  though  another  man  could  do  it  and  do 
right,  yet  tf  you  it  would  not  be  right.  Strain  the  gnats ;  they 


340  HYPOCHIRV. 

are  not  good  things  in  your  wines ;  stiain  then  out ;  it  U  well  to 
get  rid  of  them  ;  but  then  do  not  open  your  mouth  and  swallow 
a  camel  afterwards,  for  if  you  do  that,  you  will  give  no  evidence 
that  you  are  a  child  of  God,  but  prove  that  you  are  a  damnable 
hypocrite. 

But  read  on  in  this  chapter,  and  you  will  find  that  these  peo 
pie  neglected  all  the  inward  part  of  religion,  and  only  observed  th* 
outward.  As  our  Saviour  said,  they  ;'  made  clean  the  outside  of 
the  cup  and  platter,  but  within  they  were  full  of  extortion  and 
excess."  There  are  many  books  which  are  excellently  bound, 
but  there  is  nothing  within  them  ;  and  there  are  many  persons 
that  have  a  very  fine  spiritual  exterior,  but  there  is  nothing  what 
ever  in  the  heart.  Do  you  not  know  some  of  them  1  Perhaps 
if  you  know  yourself  you  may  discover  one.  Do  you  not  know 
some  who  are  precisely  religious,  who  would  scarce  omit  attend 
ing  to  a  single  means  of  grace,  who  practice  the  ritual  in  all  its 
forms  and  all  its  ceremonies,  who  would  not  turn  aside  as  much 
as  a  hair's  breadth  from  any  outward  command  1  Before  the 
world  they  stand  as  eminently  pious,  because  they  are  minutely 
attentive  to  the  externals  of  the  sanctuary  ;  but  yet  they  are  care 
less  of  the  inward  matter.  So  long  as  they  take  the  bread  and 
wine  they  are  not  careful  about  whether  they  have  eaten  the  flesh 
and  drunk  the  blood  of  Christ ;  so  long  as  they  have  been  bap- 
tized  with  water  they  are  not  careful  whether  they  have  been 
buried  with  Christ  in  baptism  unto  death.  So  long  as  they  have 
been  up  to  the  house  of  God  they  are  satisfied.  It  is  nothing  to 
them  whether  they  have  had  communion  with  Christ  or  not.  No, 
they  are  perfectly  content,  so  long  as  they  have  the  shell,  without 
looking  for  the  kernel ;  the  wheat  may  go  where  it  pleases — the 
husk,  and  the  chaff,  and  the  straw,  are  quite  sufficient  and  enough 
for  them.  Some  people  I  know  of  are  like  inns,  which  have  an 
angel  hanging  outside  for  a  sign,  but  they  have  a  devil  within  for 
a  landlord.  There  are  many  men  of  that  kind  ;  they  take  good 
care  to  have  an  excellent  sign  hanging  out ;  they  must  be  known 
by  all  men  to  be  strictly  religious  ;  but  within,  which  is  the  all- 
important  matter,  they  are  full  of  wickedness.  But  I  have  some 
times  heard  persons  mistake  this  matter.  They  say,  "  Ah ! 
well,  poor  man,  he  is  a  sad  drunkard  certainly,  but  he  is  a  verj 


HYPOCRISY.  341 

good-hearted  man  at  bottom."  Now,  as  Rowland  Hill  used  to 
iay,  that  is  a  most  astonishing  thing  for  any  man  to  say  of  an 
other,  that  he  was  bad  at  top  and  good  at  bottom.  When  men 
take  their  fruit  to  market  they  cannot  make  their  customers  be 
lieve.  if  they  see  rotten  apples  at  the  top,  that  there  are  good 
ones  at  the  bottom.  A  man's  outward  conduct  is  generally  a  lit- 
tie  better  than  his  heart.  Very  few  men  sell  better  goods  than 
they  pui  in  the  window.  Therefore,  do  not  misunderstand  me. 
When  I  say  we  must  attend  more  to  the  inward  than  the  out 
ward,  I  would  not  have  you  leave  the  outward  to  itself.  "  Make 
clean  the  outside  of  the  cup  and  platter" — make  it  as  clean  as 
you  can,  but  take  care  also  that  the  inward  is  made  clean.  Look 
to  that  first.  Ask  thyself  such  questions  as  thesa — "  Have  I 
beon  born  again  ?  Am  I  passed  from  darkness  to  1'ght?  Have 
I  been  brought  out  of  the  realms  of  Satan  into  the  kingdom  of 
God's  dear  Son  ]  Do  I  live  by  private  communion  near  to  the 
side  of  Jesus?  Can  1  say  that  my  heart  panteth  alter  the  Lord, 
even  as  the  hart  does  after  the  water-brooks  ?  For  if  I  cannot 
say  this,  whatever  my  outward  life  may  be,  I  am  self  deceived 
and  deceive  others,  and  the  woe  of  the  hypocrite  falls  upon  me. 
1  have  made  clean  the  outside  of  the  cup  and  platter,  but  the  in 
ward  part  is  very  wickedness.  Does  that  come  home  to  an)  of 
you  1  Is  this  personal  preaching  ?  Then  God  be  blessed  foi  it. 
May  the  truth  be  the  death  of  your  delusions." 

You  may  know  a  hypocrite  by  another  sign.  His  religion  de 
pends  upon  the  place,  or  upon  the  time  of  day.  He  rises  at  seven 
o'clock  perhaps,  and  you  will  find  him  religious  for  a  quarter  of 
an  hour  ;  for  he  is,  as  the  boy  said,  "  saying  his  prayers  to  him- 
self,"  in  the  first  part  of  the  morning.  Well,  then  you  find  him 
pretty  pious  for  another  half-hour,  for  there  is  family  prayers ; 
but  when  the  business  begins,  and  he  is  talking  to  his  nuii,  1 
won't  guarantee  that  you  will  be  able  to  admire  him.  If  one  of 
his  servants  has  been  doing  something  a  little  amiss,  you  •*  ill 
find  him  perhaps  using  angry  and  unworthy  language.  You  will 
find  him  too,  if  he  gets  a  customer  whom  he  thinks  to  be  rather 
green,  not  quite  pious,  for  he  will  be  taking  him  in.  You  will 
find,  too,  that  if  he  sees  a  good  chance  at  any  hour  of  the  day,  he 
will  be  very  ro,ady  to  do  a  dirty  trick.  He  was  a  saint  in  th« 


842  HYPOCRISY. 

morning,  for  there  was  nothing  to  be  lost  by  it ;  but  he  has  a  re 
ligion  that  is  not  too  strict ;  business  is  business,  he  says,  and  he 
puts  religion  aside  by  stretching  his  conscience,  which  is  made  of 
very  elastic  material.  Well,  some  time  in  the  evening  you  will 
find  him  very  pious  again,  unless  he  is  out  on  a  journey,  whero 
neither  wife,  nor  family,  nor  church  can  see  him,  and  you  will 
find  him  at  a  theatre.  He  would  not  go  if  there  was  a  chance  o! 
the  minister  hearing  of  it,  for  then  he  would  be  excommunicated, 
but  he  does  not  mind  going  when  the  eye  of  the  church  or  of  any 
of  his  friends  is  not  upon  him.  Fine  clothes  make  fine  gentle- 
men,  and  fine  places  make  fine  hypocrites  ;  but  the  man  who  is 
true  to  his  God  and  to  his  conscience,  is  a  Christian  all  day.  and 
all  night  long,  and  a  Christian  every  where.  "  Though  you  were 
to  fill  my  house  full  of  silver  and  gold,"  he  says,  "  I  would  not 
do  a  dirty  action  ;  though  you  should  give  me  the  stars  and  the 
countless  wealth  of  empires,  yet  I  would  not  do  that  which  would 
dishonor  God,  or  disgrace  my  profession."  Put  the  true  Chris 
tian  where  he  might  sin,  and  be  praised  for  it,  and  he  will  not  dc 
it.  He  does  not  hate  sin,  for  the  sake  of  the  company,  but  he 
hates  it  for  its  own  sake.  He  says,  "  How  can  I  do  this  great 
wickedness  and  sin  against  God  ?"  You  shall  find  him  a  fallible 
man,  but  not  a  false  man  ;  you  shall  find  him  full  of  infirmities, 
but  not  of  intentional  lust  and  of  designed  iniquity.  As  a  Chris 
tian,  you  must  follow  Christ  in  the  mire  as  well  as  in  the  meads  ; 
you  must  walk  with  him  in  the  rain  as  well  as  in  the  sunshine; 
you  must  go  with  him  in  the  storm  as  well  as  in  fair  weather. 
He  is  no  Christian  who  cannot  walk  with  Christ,  come  rags,  come 
poverty,  come  contumely  or  shame.  lie  is  the  hypocrite  who 
can  walk  with  Christ  in  silver  slippers,  and  leave  him  when  it  be 
comes  necessary  for  him  to  go  barefoot.  The  hypocrite's  relig 
ion  is  like  a  chamelion,  it  takes  its  color  from  the  light  which 
falls  upon  it1?  but  the  Christian's  religion  is  evermore  the  same. 
Is  this  true,  then,  of  any  of  us  ?  Can  we  say  we  desire  to  be  ever 
more  the  same?  Or  do  we  change  with  our  company  and  with 
the  times  ]  If  so,  we  are  hypocrites  confessed,  and  let  us  own  it 
before  God,  and  may  God  make  us  sincere. 

There  is  another  sign  of  the  hypocrite,  aad  now  the  lash  will 
&il  on  my  <F*TI  back,  and  on  most  of  us  tot>.     Hypocrites,  antf 


HYPOCRISY.  343 

other  people  besides  hypocrites,  ore  generally  severe  with  others^ 
and  very  lenient  with  themselves.  Have  you  ever  heard  a  hypo 
crite  describe  himself?  I  describe  him  thus: — you  are  a  mean, 
beggarly  fellow.  "  No,"  says  he,  "  I  am  not ;  I  am  economical." 

I  say  to  him,  "  You  are  dishonest,  you  are  a  thief."     "No,"  says 
he,  "I  am  only  cute  and  sharp  for  the  times."     "Well,  but,"  I 
say  to  him,  "  You  are  proud  and  conceited."     "  Oh !"  says  he, 

I 1  have  only  a  proper  and  manly  respect."     "  Ay,  but  you  are  a 
fawning,  cringing  fellow."     "  No,"  says  he,  "  I  am  all  things  to 
all  men."     Somehow  or  other  he  will  make  vice  look  like  a  virtue 
in  himself,  but  he  will  deal   by  the  reverse  rule  with  others. 
Show  him  a  Christian  who  is  really  humble,  and  he  says,  "  I  hatn 
his  fawning  ways."     Tell  him  there  is  one  who  is  very  courageous 
for  Christ ;  "  Oh !  he  is  impudent,"  says  he.    Show  him  one  who 
is  liberal,  doing  what  he  can  for  his  Master's  service,  spending, 
and  being  spent  for  him  ;  "  Rash  and  imprudent,"  says  he,  "  ex- 
travagant ;  the  man  does  not  know  what  he  is  about."     You  may 
point  out  a  virtue,  and  the  hypocrite  shall  at  once  say  it  is  a  vice. 
Have  you  ever  seen  a  hypocrite  turn  doctor1?     He  has  a  fine 
beam  in  his  eye,  large  enough  to  shut  out  the  light  of  heaven 
from  his  soul,  but  nevertheless  he  is  a  very  skilful  oculist.     He 
waits  upon  some  poor  brother,  whose  eye  is  a  little  affected  with 
a  mote  so  tiny  that  the  full  blaze  of  the  sun  can  scarce  reveal  it. 
Look  at  our  beam-eyed  friend,  he  puts  on  a  knowing  look,  and 
cries,  "Allow  me  to  extract  this  rnote  for  you?"     "Thou  hypo 
crite  i  first  cast  out  the  beam  out  of  thine  own  eye,  and  then  shall 
thou  see  clearly  to  cast  out  the  mote  out  of  thy  brother's  eye." 
There  are  people  of  that  sort  who  make  virtues  in  others  into 
vices,  and  vices  in  themselves  they  transform  into  virtues.    Now, 
if  thou  be  a  Christian,  I  will  tell  thee  what  will  be  thy  spirit,  it 
will  be  the  very  reverse  ;  thou  wilt  be  always  making  excuses  for 
others,  but  thou  wilt  never  be  making  excuses  for  thyself.     The 
true  Christian,  if  he  sees  himself  sin,  mourns  over  it,  and  makes 
much  ado  concerning  it.     lie  says  to  another,  "  Oh !  I  feel  so  sin- 
ful ;"  and  the  other  one  cries,  "  I  cannot  really  set  it ;  I  can  see 
no  sin  in  you ;  I  could  wish  I  were  as  holy  as  you."     "  No,"  says 
the  other,  "  but  I  am  full  of  infirmity."     John  Bunyan  described 
Mercy,  and  Christiana.,  and  the  children,  &for  having  becc  washed 


344  HVPOCRI8Y. 

in  the  bath,  and  sealed  with  the  seal,  as  coming  up  cut  of  the 
water,  and  being  all  fair  and  lovely  to  look  upon ;  and  one  began 
to  say  to  the  other,  "  You  arc  fairer  than  I !"  and  "  You  are  mor* 
comely  than  I !"  said  another.  And  then  each  began  to  bemoan 
their  own  spots,  and  to  praise  the  beauty  of  the  others.  That  ia 
the  spirit  of  a  Christian;  but  the  spirit  of  the  hypoc/ite  is  the 
very  reverse;  he  will  judge,  and  condemn,  and  punish  with  lynch- 
law  every  other  man ;  and  as  for  himself,  he  is  exempt,  he  is  a 
'king,  he  knows  no  law,  and  his  conscience  slumbers  and  allows 
him  to  go  on  easily  in  the  very  sins  which  he  condemns  in  others. 
This  is  a  very  prominent  mark  of  the  hypocrite,  and  I  question 
whether  all  of  us  must  not  blame  ourselves  a  little  here. 

II.  And  now  we  are  going  to  CAST  UP  THE  HYPOCRITE'S  ACCOUNT 
FOR  HIM.  Now,  sir,  bring  us  your  ledger,  and  let  us  have  a  look 
at  it.  You  are  a  hypocrite.  Well,  what  is  on  the  profit  side  3 
A  good  deal,  I  must  confess.  Here  is,  first  of  all,  credit  and 
honor.  If  you  were  to  say  outright,  u  You  are  a  thief,  you  are  a 
private  drunkard,  you  can  curse  God  as  well  as  any  man ;"  or  if 
the  world  should  hear  as  much,  you  would  have  no  honor;  but 
as  it  is  you  have  joined  the  church,  and  the  minister  is  very  fond 
of  you  ;  the  deacons  and  elders  think  a  great  deal  of  you,  and  you 
are  a  very  honorable,  respectable  man.  You  go  walking  up  to 
your  pew  with  your  Bible  and  your  hymn  book,  and  every  body 
says,  "  There  is  an  exemplary  character ;"  and  they  pat  their  little 
boys  on  the  head,  and  say,  "  May  you  grow  up  to  be  a  very  good 
man  like  Mr.  So-and-so."  The  next  advantage  is  the  ease  which 
you  enjoy.  The  minister  often  preaches  a  solemn,  thundering 
sermon  against  sin.  You  get  oft'  all  that ;  you  are  not  a  sinner, 
are  you  1  not  at  all ;  who  would  suspect  you  ?  You  are  one  of 
the  brightest  of  the  saints ;  it  is  almost  a  pity  you  were  not  one 
)f  the  twelve;  there  was  one  amongst  them  almost  as  good  as 
yourself,  and  his  end  will  probably  be  yours.  You  escape  every 
thunder  of  the  law  ;  your  conscience  rests  easy,  and  the  very  thing 
which  makes  the  child  of  God  tremble  pulls  you  up ;  and  the 
very  marks  and  evidences  which  cast  him  down  help  to  exalt  you. 
The  sun  of  the  gospel  which  melts  wax,  hardens  the  poor  clay  of 
your  heart,  and  you  get  the  more  exalted  in  your  self-conceit 
through  every  thiug  you  hear.  And  that  ie  good  too,  is  it  notl 


HYPOCRIST. 


345 


very  much  in  your  favo  ,  certainly.  And  then  there  is  another 
thing.  How  nicely  your  shop  has  prospered  through  it ;  that, 
perhaps,  is  the  part  of  the  bargain  which  you  like  the  best.  Ever 
since  you  have  made  a  profession  of  religion,  have  not  those  who 
go  to  your  church  and  chapel  traded  with  you  1  You  would  not 
have  got  on  half  so  well  if  you  had  been  suspected  to  be  what 
you  really  are,  but  because  of  that  fine  cloak  of  yours,  that  fine 
garment  of  hypocrisy,  how  nicely  you  have  prospered  !  What  a 
nice  little  round  sum  you  have  been  able  to  lay  by,  have  you  not  { 
All  that  is  the  bright  side  again.  And  besides  that,  what  honors 
have  you  not  received  in  the  church.  Are  not  you  made  a  dea 
con,  or  an  elder;  ay,  perhaps  a  minister  too:  how  pleasant  that 
is  !  And  you  puff  yourself  up,  and  you  feel  satisfied.  "  Oh,  what 
a  good  man  am  I ;  other  people  think  I  am,  therefore  I  must  be. 
It  is  true  I  devour  the  widow's  house ;  it  is  true  I  am  not  very 
particular  about  what  1  do  ;  nevertheless,  the  minister,  the  elders, 
the  deacons  think  me  good,  the  whole  church  applauds  me ;  they 
cannot  all  be  mistaken  ;  surely  1  must  be  a  special  saint."  That 
is  your  profit  side  of  the  account ;  what  about  the  other  side  1  I 
think  we  shall  be  able  to  strike  a  balance  that  will  not  be  much 
in  your  favor,  sir. 

In  the  first  place,  I  see  a  black  item  down  here.  Some  of  the 
people  of  the  world  do  not  think  quite  as  much  of  you,  as  you 
imagine.  The  poor  widow  does  not  give  you  much  of  a  character. 
You  will  have  to  be  very  careful,  sir,  or  your  base  deeds  will 
come  out.  The  very  first  item  1  see  down  here,  is  a  fear  that 
your  hypocrisy  will  be  discovered.  It  would  take  you  only  half 
as  much  trouble  to  be  an  honest  man  as  it  does  to  be  a  deceiver. 
A  man  who  is  in  the  habit  of  speaking  truth  need  not  mind  how 
he  opens  his  mouth,  nor  where ;  but  a  man  who  lies,  should  be 
very  careful,  and  have  a  very  good  memory,  and  recollect  all  he 
Has  ever  said  before,  lest  he  should  trip  himself.  So  it  is  with 
you,  my  friend  ;  your  religion  is  a  Sunday  religion,  and  you  have 
to  be  very  careful,  so  as  to  make  Monday  dealings  hold  th(  ir 
tongues  and  Sunday  doings  crow  as  loud  as  they  can.  Hard 
work  !  I  would  not  stand  in  your  place  to  have  all  the  trepidation 
and  fear  of  discovery  which  so  often  comes  upon  you.  No,  I 
would  sooner  be  a  worldling,  than  I  would  have  the  fear  that  coiv 
15* 


340  HYPOCRISY. 

stantly  haunts  you,  lest  you  should  stand  ashamed  before  the 
Church  by  your  base  iniquity  being  discovered.  But  I  see  some 
thing  worse  than  this,  hero  is  constant  disquietude  of  conscience ; 
hypocrites  may  seem  as  if  the\  were  at  ease,  but  they  cannot 
really  be.  The  Christian  who  is  true  to  God,  and  is  really  his 
child,  can  sometimes  say,  u  I  know  that  Jesus  has  taken  away  my 
gin."  Assurance,  vouchsafed  to  him  by  the  Spirit,  calms  his  fears 
and  he  can  rest  in  Christ.  But  the  highest  presumption  to  whicb 
the  hypocrite  can  attain,  brings  no  such  calm  as  that  which  is 
breathed  upon  the  Christian  by  the  lips  of  assurance.  He  can  go 
to  his  bed,  nay,  he  can  go  to  his  tomb  in  peace,  but  the  hypocrite 
is  afraid  of  a  shadow,  and  fleeth  when  no  man  pursueth. 

And  last  of  all,  Mr.  Hypocrite,  I  see  an  item  here  -which  you 
usually  forget ;  it  is  this — that  despite  of  your  profession  God 
abhors  you,  and  if  there  is  one  man  more  than  another  who 
stinks  in  the  nostrils  of  Jehovah,  it  is  such  as  thou  art — thou 
miserable  pretender.  There  shall  be  a  special  place  reserved  for 
thee  amongst  the  damned.  Think,  man,  what  shall  be  thy  misery 
when  thy  secret  deeds  of  iniquity  are  read  before  an  assembled 
universe,  and  men  and  angels  utter  one  unanimous  hiss  against 
thee.  What  shall  it  be  when  the  mask  is  torn  off  thee,  when  the 
masquerade  of  thy  hypocrisy  is  done  and  thou  art  stripped 
naked  to  thy  shame,  to  be  observed  of  all  and  to  be  despised  of 
all  1  What  sayest  thou  to  this  ?  Shalt  thou  go  from  thy  deacon- 
ship,  or  from  thy  ministry,  to  be  among  the  devils  in  hell  1 
Shalt  thou  go  from  the  sacramental  table  to  drink  the  sulphurous 
cup  of  torment1?  Shalt  thou  descend  from  the  song  of  the 
sanctuary  and  from  the  house  of  God  to  the  abode  of  fiends  and 
to  the  wailing  of  the  damned  ?  Yes,  thou  shalt  as  sure  as  this 
word  is  true,  if  thou  goest  on  in  thy  hypocrisy.  Death  shall  find 
thee  out,  and  hell  shall  be  thy  doom,  for  the  hope  of  the  hypo- 
jrite  is  as  the  spider's  web,  soon  swept  away  ;  and  where  is  he 
when  God  taketh  away  his  hope  1 

This,  then,  is  the  casting  up  of  the  hypocrite's  account,  and 
there  is  a  deficit  of  an  infinite  amount. 

III.  Now  for  the  matter  of  the  CURE  OF  THE  HYPOCRITE. 
What  shall  we  say  to  it  ?  Oh  !  my  friends,  I  feel  that  in  thus 
speaking  of  the  hypocrite,  I  have  tried  to  speak  severely,  but  J 


HYPOCRISY.  84*7 

have  not  been  able  to  reach  the  heart  as  I  could  wish,  because  it 
is  a  mark  of  human  nature  that  this  is  the  last  sin  of  which  we 
really  suspect  ourselves,  and  yet  one  into  which  it  is  most  easy 
to  fall.  Often  do  1  fall  on  my  knees  in  an  agony  of  doubt,  and 
cry,  "  Lord,  make  me  sincere ;  if  I  be  deceived,  undeceive  me." 
1  do  not  think  that  any  Christian  will  live  long  without  some 
such  seasons  of  anguishing  self-examination.  Let  me  put  it  t< 
you  to-day,  let  no  one  exempt  himself.  You  may  have  beei 
professing  Christians  for  many  years,  and  yet  you  may  have  been 
hypocrites.  Remember  there  was  a  hypocrite  among  the  apos 
tles,  so  may  there  be  among  the  ministers  of  Christ.  There  have 
been  deceivers  among  the  apostolic  churches,  how  much  more 
may  we  expect  them  among  us !  Do  not  look  around  to  find 
them  out,  it  is  God's  business,  not  yours,  to  find  out  hypocrites ; 
but  look  at  yourselves  to  see  whether  you  are  not  one.  Driving 
along  the  other  day  in  the  wind  I  observed  a  great  branch  fall 
just  in  front  of  me.  1  remarked  that  it  was  rotten,  and  wondered 
A'ithin  myself  how  long  that  might  have  been  upon  the  tree,  and 
)Tet  have  been  rotten  after  all.  Then  I  thought,  "  Oh  !  if  the 
wind  of  persecution  were  to  sweep  through  the  church,  should  1 
fall  off  like  a  rotten  branch  ]  Would  not  many  of  my  hearers 
fall  off]  They  have  been  united  to  Christ  professedly  for  a  long 
time,  and  have  spoken  for  him,  perhaps  preached  for  him,  but  if 
the  time  of  trial,  which  shall  try  the  earth,  should  come  upon  us 
again,  how  many  of  us  would  stand  ?  Oh !  my  hearers,  do  not 
be  content  to  take  your  religion  at  second-hand  ;  let  it  not  be  a 
superficial  work.  Do  not  think  that  because  you  have  seen  me 
and  have  seen  my  elders,  and  we  have  admitted  you  into  the 
church,  you  are  therefore  all  right.  We  have  been  deceived 
many  times ;  it  is  not  hard  work  to  deceive  a  kind  heart.  I  have 
looked  into  the  eyes  of  some,  and  have  tried  to  read  their  very 
soul,  and  yet  I  have  misjudged  ;  I  have  seen  tears  in  their  eyes 
while  they  have  made  a  profession  of  Christ,  and  yet  they  have 
been  deceivers  after  all,  and  I  have  been  very  grossly  taken  in. 
In  fact,  the  more  kind-hearted  a  man  is  the  more  will  human  na- 
tui'e  endeavor  to  impose  upon  him.  1  am  certain  I  have  used  the 
utmost  diligence  to  weed  out  of  my  church  those  whom  I  have 
suspected  of  hypocrisy,  and  greater  diligence  shall  yet  be  used- 


348  HYPOCRISY. 

But,  oh,  do  deal  with  yourselves,  I  beseech  you.  I  will  not  ser< 
you  to  hell  blind-folded  if  1  can  help  it ;  I  do  not  wish  to  be  in 
error  myself,  and  God  forbid  that  1  should  suffer  you  to  be  de 
ceived.  Oh  !  if  you  be  not  true  Christians,  away  with  your  pro 
fession  altogether.  If  it  be  not  sound  work,  down  with  it.  Better 
see  the  house  tumble  now,  than  let  it  stand  till  the  rain  descends 
and  the  floods  come,  and  the  winds  beat  upon  it  in  the  dread 
eternity  of  the  future.  Oh,  no,  I  would  rather  send  every  heart 
home  uncomfortable  than  let  the  hypocrite  sit  down  at  ease ;  I 
would  rather  wound  the  child  of  God  than  allow  the  hypocrite 
to  escape. 

But  now  for  the  cure  of  the  hypocrite.  What  shall  we  do  to 
cure  ourselves  of  any  hypocrisy  that  may  exist  among  us?  Let 
us  recollect  that  we  cannot  do  any  thing  in  secret  even  if  we 
try.  The  all-seeing  God,  apprehended  in  the  conscience,  must  be 
the  death  of  hypocrisy.  I  cannot  try  to  deceive  when  I  know 
that  God  is  looking  at  me.  It  is  impossible  for  me  to  play  double 
and  false  when  I  believe  that  I  am  in  the  presence  of  the  Most 
High,  and  that  he  is  reading  my  thoughts  and  the  secret  purposes 
of  my  heart.  The  only  way  in  which  the  hypocrite  can  play  the 
hypocrite  at  all  is  by  forgetting  the  existence  of  God.  Let  us, 
therefore,  recollect  it — wherever  I  am,  upon  my  bed  or  in  my 
secret  chamber,  God  is  there.  There  is  not  a  secret  word  I  speak 
in  the  ear  of  a  friend  but  God  hears  it.  Do  I  seek  out  the  most 
private  part  of  the  city  for  the  commission  of  sin — God  is  there. 
Do  I  choose  fche  shadow  of  night  to  cover  my  iniquity  ? — He  is 
there  looking  upon  me.  The  thought  of  a  present  Deity,  if  il 
were  fully  realized,  would  preserve  us  from  sin  ;  always  looking 
on  me,  ever  regarding  me.  We  think  we  are  doing  many  things 
in  secret,  but  there  is  nothing  concealed  from  him  with  whom  we 
have  to  do.  And  the  day  is  coming,  when  all  the  sins  that  we 
have  committed  shall  be  read  and  published.  Oh  !  what  a  blush 
shall  crimson  the  cheek  of  the  hypocrite  when  God  shall  read  the 
secret  diary  of  his  iniquity  !  O  my  fellow-professors,  let  us  al 
ways  look  upon  our  actions  in  the  light  of  the  great  outreading 
of  them  in  the  day  of  judgment.  Pause  over  every  thing  you 
do,  and  say,  "  Can  I  bear  to  have  this  sounded  with  a  trumpet  in 
the  ear  of  all  men  T'  Nay,  take  a  higher  motive,  and  say,  "  Can 


HYPOCRISY. 

I  endure  to  do  this  and  yet  to  repeat  .<&  vvords,  '  Thou,  God,  scest 
me.' "  Ye  may  deceive  men,  aT  ~  deceive  yourselves,  but  God 
ye  cannot,  God  ye  shall  not.  Y  .nay  die  with  the  name  of  Chris 
upon  your  lips,  and  men  ma  x  aury  you  in  sure  and  certain  hope 
of  a  glorious  resurrection  t  out  God  shall  not  be  deceived  neither 
by  your  profession  nor  by  men's  opinion.  He  shall  put  you  in 
the  scales,  and  if  you  be  found  wanting,  he  shall  cry,  "  Away 
with  him."  He  shall  ring  you,  and  if  you  have  not  the  ring  of 
the  pure  coin  of  grace,  he  shall  nail  you  down  for  ever  as  a  coun 
terfeit.  He  shall  strip  the  mask  off  you.  Virtue  is  most  adorn 
ed,  when  unadorned  the  most.  To  detect  you,  you  shall  be 
stripped  naked,  and  every  cloak  shall  be  torn  to  tatters.  How 
will  you  endure  this?  Will  ye  dig  into  the  depths  to  hide  your 
selves'?  Will  ye  plunge  into  the  sea  to  find  a  way  of  escape] 
Will  ye  cry  for  the  rocks  to  hide  you,  and  the  mountains  to  fall 
upon  you  ?  In  vain  shall  you  cry.  The  all-seeing  God  shall 
read  your  soul,  shall  discover  your  secret,  shall  reveal  your  hid 
den  things,  and  tell  the  world  that,  though  you  did  eat  and  drink 
in  his  streets,  though  you  preached  his  name,  yet  he  never  knew 
you,  you  were  still  a  worker  of  iniquity,  and  must  be  driven 
away  for  ever. 

Come,  let  us  just  for  one  second  reflect,  that  we  shall  soon  lie 
upon  our  death-bed.  A  few  more  months,  and  you  and  I  shall 
face  the  cruel  tyrant,  death.  It  will  be  hard  work  to  play  the 
hypocrite  then ;  when  the  pulse  is  faint  and  few,  when  the  eye- 
strings  break,  when  the  tongue  is  cleaving  to  the  roof  of  your 
mouth,  it  will  be  in  vain  to  try  hypocrisy  then.  O  may  God 
make  you  sincere ,  for  if  you  die  with  an  empty  profession,  you 
3ie  indeed.  Of  all  deaths,  methinks  the  most  awful  is  that  of 
the  hypocrite,  and  after  death,  for  him  to  lift  up  his  eyes  and  find 
himself  lost — and  for  ever  !  O  make  sure  work  of  it.  May  God 
give  you  true  grace  and  true  faith,  and  may  we  all  meet  in  heaven. 
This  is  our  earnest  prayer,  through  Jesus  Christ  JUT  Lord, 
Ainen. 


SERMON    XXIII. 

CHRIST  PRECIOUS  TO  BELIEVERS. 

"  Unto  you  therefore  which  believe  he  id  precious." — 1  Pefei ,  ii.  7. 

THIS  text  calls  to  my  recollection  the  opening  of  my  ministiy. 
It  is  about  eight  years  since,  as  a  lad  of  sixteen,  I  stood  up  ioi 
the  first  time  in  my  life  to  preach  the  gospel  in  a  cottage  to  a 
handfi'l  of  poor  people  who  had  come  together  for  worship.  I 
tell  my  own  inability  to  preach,  but  I  ventured  to  take  this  text. 
u  Unto  you  therefore  which  believe  he  is  precious."  I  do  not 
think  I  could  have  said  any  thing  upon  any  other  text,  but  Christ 
was  precious  to  my  soul,  and  I  was  in  the  flush  of  my  youthful 
love,  and  I  could  not  be  silent  when  a  precious  Jesus  was  trw 
subject.  I  had  but  just  escaped  from  the  bondage  of  Egypt,  I 
had  not  forgotten  the  broken  fetter ;  still  did  1  recollect  those 
flames  which  seemed  to  burn  about  my  path,  and  that  devouring 
gulf  which  opened  its  mouth  as  if  ready  to  devour  me.  With 
all  these  things  fresh  in  my  youthful  heart,  I  could  speak  of 
his  preciousness  who  had  been  my  Saviour,  and  had  plucked  me 
as  a  brand  from  the  burning,  and  set  me  upon  a  rock,  and  put 
a  new  song  in  my  mouth,  and  established  my  goings.  And  now, 
at  this  time,  what  shall  I  say  ?  "  What  hath  God  wrought  ?" 
How  hath  the  little  one  become  a  thousand,  and  the  small  one  a 
great  people  1  And  what  shall  I  say  concerning  this  text,  bu 
that  if  the  Lord  Jesus  was  precious  then,  he  is  as  precious  now  ] 
And  if  I  could  declare  then  that  Jesus  was  the  object  of  my 
•cul's  desire,  that  for  him  I  hoped  to  live,  and  for  him  I  would 
be  prepared  to  die,  cannot  I  say,  God  being  my  witness,  that  he 
is  more  precious  to  me  this  day  than  ever  he  was  ?  In  the  recollec 
tion  of  his  unparalleled  mercy  towards  the  chief  of  sinners,  I 


I 

CHRIST    PRECIOUS    TO    BELIEVERS. 


must  anew  devote  myself  to  him,  and  afresh  surrender  myself 
co  him  who  is  Lord  and  King. 

This  remark  is  uttered  by  way  of  introduction  ;  it  may  scene 
egotistical,  but  that  I  cannot  help.  1  must  give  glory  to  God  iD 
the  midst  of  the  great  congregation,  and  pay  my  vows  to  the 
Lord  now  in  the  midst  of  all  his  saints,  in  the  midst  of  thee,  O 
Jerusalem. 

My  text  states  a  positive  fact,  namely,  that  Christ  is  predou 
to  believers.  This  shall  be  the  first  part  of  our  discourse  ;  then 
in  the  second  we  will  try  to  answer  the  question,  why  is  Jems 
Christ  so  precious  to  his  believing  people?  And  conclude  by  de 
claring  the  test  whereby  you  may  try  yourselves  whether  you 
are  believers  or  not;  for  if  you  be  believers  in  Christ,  then 
Christ  is  precious  to  you,  and  if  you  think  little  of  him,  then 
lest  assured  you  have  not  a  true  and  saving  faith  in  him. 

I.  First,  this  is  a  positive  fact,  that  UNTO  BELIEVERS  JESUS 
CHRIST  is  PRECIOUS.  In  himself  he  is  of  inestimable  precious- 
ness,  for  he  is  very  God  of  very  God.  He  is,  moreover,  per 
fect  man  without  sin.  The  precious  gopher  wood  of  his  humanity 
is  overlaid  with  the  pure  gold  of  his  divinity.  He  is  a  mine 
of  jewels  and  a  mountain  of  gems.  He  is  altogether  lovely,  but, 
alas  !  this  blind  world  seeth  not  his  beauty.  The  painted  har 
lotries  of  that  witch,  Madame  Bubble,  the  world  can  see,  and  all 
men  wonder  after  her.  This  life,  its  joy,  its  lust,  its  gains,  its 
honors,  —  these  have  beauty  in  the  eye  of  unrcgenerate  man,  but 
in  Christ  he  sees  nothing  which  he  can  admire.  He  hears  his 
r.ame  as  a  common  word,  and  looks  upon  his  cross  as  a  tiring  in 
which  he  has  no  interest,  neglects  his  gospel,  despises  his  Word, 
and,  perhaps,  vents  fierce  spite  upon  his  people.  But  not  so  the 
believer.  The  man  who  has  been  brought  to  know  that  Christ  is 
the  only  foundation  upon  which  the  soul  can  build  its*  eternal 
home,  he  who  has  been  taught  that  Jesus  Christ  is  the  first  and 
the  last,  the  Alpha  and  the  Omega,  the  author  ai.d  the  finisher  of 
faitn,  thinks  not  lightly  of  Christ.  He  calls  him  all  his  salva 
tion  and  all  his  desire  ;  the  only  glorious  and  lovely  one. 

Now,  this  is  a  fact  which  has  been  proved  in  all  ages  of  the 
world.  Look  at  the  beginning  of  Christ's  appearance  upon  earth. 
Nay,  we  might  go  farther  back,  and  mark  how  Christ  was  pro 


352  CHRIST    PRECIOUS    TO    BELIEVERS. 

clous  in  prospect  to  those  who  lived  before  his  incarnation  ;  but 
I  say,  since  he  has  come  into  the  world,  what  abundant  proofs 
have  we  that  he  is  precious  to  his  people  !  There  were  men 
found  who  were  not  unwilling  to  part  with  houses,  and  lands,  and 
wife,  and  children,  and  country,  and  reputation,  and  honor,  and 
wealth,  nay,  with  life  itself,  for  Christ's  sake.  Such  was  the 
?harm  that  Christ  had  for  ancient  Christians,  that  if  they  must 
renounce  their  patrimony  and  their  earthly  wealth  for  his  sake, 
they  did  it  cheerfully  and  without  a  murmur.  Nay,  they  could 
say,  that  what  things  were  gain  they  counted  but  loss  for  Christ's 
sake,  and  did  esteem  them  but  as  dross  and  dung  if  they  could 
•win  Christ  and  be  found  in  him. 

We  talk  lightly  of  these  things,  but  these  were  no  mean  sacri 
fices.  For  a  man  to  leave  the  partner  of  his  bosom,  to  be  de 
spised  by  her  who  ought  to  honor  him,  to  be  spit  upon  by  his 
own  children,  to  be  driven  out  by  his  countrymen,  and  have  his 
name  mentioned  as  a  hissing,  and  a  reproach,  and  a  bye-word ; 
this  is  no  easy  matter  to  bear ;  and  yet  the  Christians  in  the  first 
ages  took  up  this  cross,  and  not  only  carried  it  patiently,  but  car 
ried  it  joyfully  ;  rejoicing  in  tribulations,  if  those  tribulations 
fell  upon  them  for  Christ's  sake  and  the  gospel.  Nay,  more  than 
this,  Satan  has  been  permitted  to  put  forth  his  hand  and  touch 
Christ's  people,  not  only  in  their  goods  and  in  their  families,  but 
in  their  bone  and  in  their  flesh.  And  mark  how  Christ's  disci 
ples  have  reckoned  nothing  to  be  a  loss,  so  that  they  might  win 
Christ.  Stretched  upon  the  rack,  their  strained  nerves  only  made 
them  sing  the  louder,  as  though  they  were  harp  strings,  only  put 
in  tune  when  they  were  drawn  out  to  their  extreme  length.  They 
have  been  tortured  with  hot  irons  and  with  the  pincers ;  their 
backs  have  been  ploughed  with  scourges,  but  when  have  you 
found  any  of  the  true  followers  of  Christ  flinch  in  the  hour  of 
pain  1  They  have  borne  all  this,  and  challenged  their  persecutors 
to  do  more,  and  invent  fresh  arts  and  devices,  fresh  cruelties, 
and  try  them.  Christ  was  so  precu>us,  that  all  the  pain  of  the 
body  could  not  make  them  deny  him  ;  and  when  at  last  they  have 
been  taken  forth  to  a  shameful  death — let  the  axe  and  the  block, 
let  the  cross  of  crucifixion,  let  the  spear,  let  the  fire  and  the  stake, 
let  the  wild  horse  and  the  desert  testify  that  the  believer  has 


I 

CHRIST    PRECIOUS    TO    BELIEVERS.  353 

always  been  a  man  who  would  suffer  all  this  and  vastly  more, 
but  who  would  never  renounce,  his  confidence  in  Christ.  Look 
at  Polycarp  before  the  lions,  when  he  is  brought  into  the  mida 
of  the  assembly,  and  it  is  demanded  of  him  that  he  will  deny  hi? 
God.  Thousands  of  savage  eyes  look  down  upon  him,  and  thci  e 
he  stands,  a  feeble  man,  alone  in  the  arena,  but  he  tells  them 
that  "  he  has  known  his  Lord  these  many  years,  and  he  never  did 
nim  a  displeasure,  and  he  will  not  deny  him  at  the  last."  "  To  the 
lions  !"  they  cry,  "  To  the  lions  !"  and  the  lions  rush  upon  hirn 
and  he  is  speedily  devoured ;  but  all  this  he  would  have  borne 
at  the  mouths  of  a  thousand  lions,  if  he  had  a  thousand  lives, 
rather  than  he  would  have  thought  any  thing  amiss  against  the 
Majesty  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth.  The  whole  history  of  the  ancient 
church  of  Christ  proves  that  Jesus  has  been  an  object  of  his 
peoples'  highest  veneration  ;  that  they  set  nothing  in  rivalry 
with  him,  but  cheerfully  and  readily,  without  a  murmur  ->r  a 
thought,  gave  up  all  for  Jesus  Christ,  and  rejoiced  to  do  so. 

And  this  is  just  as  true  to-day  as  it  was  then.  If  to-morrow 
the  stake  could  be  set  in  Smithfield,  Christian  people  are  pre 
pared  to  be  fuel  for  the  flame.  If  once  more  the  block  were 
fixed  on  Tower  hill,  and  the  axe  were  brought  forth  from  its  hid 
ing  place,  the  heads  of  Christ's  people  would  be  cheerfully 
given,  if  they  might  but  crown  the  head  of  Jesus  and  vindicate 
his  cause.  Those  who  declare  that  the  ancient  valor  of  the  church 
is  departed,  know  not  what  they  say.  The  professing  church 
may  have  lost  its  masculine  vigor ;  the  professors  of  this  day 
may  be  but  effeminate  dwarfs,  the  offspring  of  glorious  fathers ; 
but  the  true  church,  the  elect  out  of  the  professing  church,  the 
remnant  whom  God  hath  chosen,  are  as  much  in  love  with  Jesus 
as  his  saints  of  yore,  and  are  as  ready  to  suffer  and  to  die.  We 
challenge  hell  and  its  incarnate  representative,  old  Rome  herself; 
let  her  build  her  dungeons,  let  her  revive  her  inquisitions,  let 
her  once  more  get  power  in  the  state  to  cut,  and  mangle,  and 
burn ;  we  are  still  able  to  possess  our  souls  in  patience.  We 
sometimes  feel  it  were  a  good  thing  if  persecuting  days  should 
come  agawi,  to  try  the  church  once  more,  and  drive  away  her  chaS) 
and  make  her  like  a  goodly  heap  of  wheat,  all  pure  and  clean. 
The  rotten  branches  of  the  forest  may  tremble  at  the  hurricane. 


354  CHRIST    PRECIOUS    TO    BELIEVERS. 

for  they  shall  be  swept  away,  but  those  that  have  sap  wit  lifi 
them  tremble  not.  Our  roots  are  intertwisted  with  the  Rock  of 
Ages,  and  the  sap  of  Christ  flows  within  us,  and  we  are  branches 
of  the  living  vine,  and  nothing  shall  sever  us  from  him.  We 
know  that  not  persecution,  nor  famine,  nor  nakedness,  nor  peril, 
nor  the  sword,  shall  divide  us  from  the  love  of  Christ,  for  in  all 
Vhese  things  we  shall  be  as  the  church  has  been,  more  than  con 
querors  through  Him  that  loved  us. 

Does  any  one  think  that  I  exaggerate  \  Mark,  then,  if  what 
I  have  said  be  not  true,  then  Christ  has  no  church  at  all ;  for  the 
church  that  is  not  prepared  to  suffer,  and  bleed,  and  die  for 
Christ,  is  not  Christ's  church.  For  what  does  he  say,  "  He  that 
loveth  father  and  mother  more  than  me,  is  not  worthy  of  me ; 
and  he  that  taketh  not  his  cross,  and  followeth  after  me,  is 
not  worthy  of  me." — St.  Matthew,  x.  37,  38.  Albeit  that 
Christ  may  not  put  us  fully  to  the  test,  yet,  if  we  be  true,  we 
must  be  ready  for  the  ordeal  ;  and  if  we  be  sincere,  though  we 
may  tremble  at  the  thought  of  it,  we  shall  not  tremble  in  the  en 
durance  of  it.  Many  a  man  who  says  in  his  heart "  I  have  not  a 
martyr's  faith,"  has  really  that  noble  virtue ;  and  let  him  but 
once  come  to  the  push,  and  the  world  shall  see  the  grace  that 
has  been  hidden,  rising  like  a  giant  from  his  slumbers.  The  faith 
which  endures  the  relaxing  of  the  world's  sunshine,  would  endure 
the  cutting  frost  of  the  world's  persecution.  We  need  not  fear ; 
if  we  be  true  to-day,  we  shall  be  true  always. 

This  is  not  mere  fiction,  many  are  the  proofs  that  Christ  is  still 
precious.  Shall  I  tell  you  of  the  silent  sufferers  for  Christ,  who  at 
this  day  suffer  a  martyrdom  of  which  we  hear  not,  but  which  is 
true  and  real  1  How  ma'iy  a  young  girl  there  is  who  follows 
Christ  in  the  midst  of  an  ungodly  family  ;  her  father  upbraids 
her,  laughs  at  her,  makes  a  scoff  of  her  holiness,  and  pierces  her 
though  the  heart  with  his  sarcasm  !  Her  brothers  and  her 
sisters  call  her  "  Puritan,"  "  Methodist,"  and  the  like,  and  she  is 
annoyed  day  by  day  with  what  the  apostle  calls,  "  Trial  of  cruel 
mockings."  But  she  bears  all  this,  and  though  the  tear  is  som&- 
times  forced  by  it  from  her  eye,  yet  though  she  should  weep 
blood,  she  would  "  resist  unto  blood,  striving  against  sin."  These 
arc  unrecorded,  they  are  not  put  into  a  Book  of  Martyrs, 


f 

CHRIST    PRECIOUS    TO    BELIEVERS.  355 

We  have  no  Fox  to  write  their  martyrology,  they  have  not  the 
flesh-contenting  knowledge  that  they  shall  be  publicly  honoied; 
but  they  suffer  alone  and  unheard  of,  still  praying  for  those  who 
'augh  at  them  ;  bowing  themselves  before  God  on  their  knees  in 
agony,  not  on  account  of  the  persecution,  but  in  agony  of  suiil 
for  the  persecutors  themselves,  that  they  may  be  saved.  Ho\v 
many  there  are  of  such  young  men  in  workshops,  employed  i 
arge  establishments,  who  bend  their  knee  at  night  by  the  bed 
side,  in  a  large  room,  where  there  are  many  scoffers.  Some  Oi 
us  have  known  this  in  our  youthful  days,  and  have  had  to  endure 
it;  but  Christ  is  precious  to  the  silent  sufferings  of  his  people; 
these  unhonorcd  martyrdoms  prove  that  his  church  has  not  ceased 
to  love  him,  nor  to  esteem  him  precious. 

How  many  there  are,  too — how  many  thousands  of  unseen  and 
unknown  laborers  for  Christ,  whose  names  cannot  be  here  de 
clared.  They  toil  from  morning  till  night  all  through  the  week, 
and  the  Sabbath  day  should  be  a  day  of  rest  to  them  ;  but  they 
work  more  on  the  £>abbath  day  than  on  any  other  day.  They  are 
visiting  the  beds  of  the  sick  ;  their  feet  are  weary,  and  nature 
says  rest,  but  they  go  into  the  lowest  dens  and  haunts  of  the  city 
to  speak  to  the  ignorant,  and  endeavor  to  spread  the  name  and 
honor  of  Jesus  where  it  has  not  been  known.  There  are  many 
such  who  are  working  hard  for  Christ  though  the  church  scarce 
knows  of  it.  And  how  many,  too,  there  are  who  prove  that  they 
love  Christ,  by  the  continual  liberality  of  their  offerings.  Many 
are  the  poor  people  I  have  discovered  who  have  denied  themselves 
of  this  and  that,  because  they  would  serve  Christ's  cause.  And 
many  there  are,  too — every  now  and  then  we  find  them  out — in 
the  middle  ranks  of  society,  who  give  a  hundred  times  as  much 
to  the  cause  of  Christ  as  many  of  the  rich  and  wealthy  ;  and  if 
you  knew  to  what  little  trials  they  are  put,  to  what  shifts  they 
are  driven  in  order  to  serve  Christ,  you  would  say,  "The  mau 
that  can  do  this  proves  clearly  that  Christ  is  precious  to  him." 
And  mark  this,  the  reason  why  the  church  is  not  more  laborious, 
no*  more  generous  in  its  gifts  to  the  offertory  of  the  Saviour,  ia 
just  tni&.  because  the  church  of  the  day  is  not  the  church  of  Christ 
in  its  mass  and  bulls  There  is  a  church  of  Christ  within  it,  but 
tfee  viable  church,  u*  i"  «taods  befbr?  you,  ie  nci;  to  be 


356  CHRIST    PRECIOUS    TO    BELIEVERS. 

the  church  of  Christ,  \ve  must  pass  it  through  the  ire,  and 
bring  the  third  part  through  the  flame;  for  this  is  the  day  when 
the  dross  is  mingled  with  gold.  How  hath  the  much  fine  gol<7 
become  dim ;  how  hath  the  glory  departed.  Zion  is  under  a  cloud 
But  mark,  though  you  see  it  not,  there  is  a  church,  a  hiddeK 
ihurch ;  an  unmoving  centre  amidst  the  growing  of  profession, 
there  is  a  life  within  this  outward  fungus  of  a  growing  Christian 
ity  ;  there  is  a  life  that  is  within,  and  to  that  hidden  host,  that 
chosen  company,  Christ  is  precious — they  are  proving  it  every 
day  by  their  patient  sufferings,  by  their  laborious  efforts,  by  their 
constant  offerings  to  the  church  of  Christ.  "  Unto  you,  therefore, 
which  believe  he  is  precious." 

1  will  tell  you  one  thing  that  proves — proves  to  a  demonstra- 
tion — that  Christ  is  still  precious  to  his  people,  and  it  is  this: 
send  one  of  Christ's  people  to  hear  the  most  noted  preacher  of 
the  age,  whoever  that  may  be ;  he  preaches  a  very  learned  ser 
mon,  very  fine  and  magnificent,  but  there  is  not  a  word  about 
Christ  in  that  sermon.  Suppose  that  to  be  the  case,  and  the 
Christian  man  will  go  out  and  say,  "  J  did  not  care  a  farthing  for 
that  man's  discourse."  Why  ?  "  Because  they  have  taken  away 
my  Lord,  and  1  know  not  where  they  have  laid  him.  1  hoard 
nothing  about  Christ."  Send  that  man  on  the  Sabbath  morning 
to  hear  some  hedge  and  ditch  preacher,  some  one  who  cuts  the 
king's  English  about  never  so  badly,  but  who  preaches  Jesus  Christ 
— you  will  see  the  tears  rolling  down  that  man's  face,  and  whei 
he  comes  out  he  will  say,  "  I  do  not  like  that  man's  bad  grammar, 
I  do  not  like  the  many  mistakes  he  has  made,  but,  oh  !  it  has  done 
my  heart  good,  for  he  spoke  about  Christ."  That,  after  all,  is  the 
main  thing  for  the  Christian  ;  he  wants  to  hear  about  his  Lord, 
and  if  he  hears  him  magnified  he  will  overlook  a  hundred  faults. 
In  fact,  you  will  find  that  Christians  are  all  agreed,  that  the  best 
sermon  is  that  which  is  fullest  of  Christ.  They  never  like  to 
hear  a  sermon  unless  there  is  something  of  Christ  in  it.  A  Welsh 
minister  who  was  preaching  last  Sabbath  at  the  chapel  of  my 
dear  brother,  Jonathan  George,  was  saying,  that  Christ  was  the 
sum  and  substance  of  the  gospel,  and  he  broke  out  into  this 
story  : — A  young  man  had  been  preaching  in  the  presence  of  a 
venerable  divine,  and  after  he  had  done  he  went  to  the  old  minis- 


CHRIST    PRECIOUS    TO    BELIEVERS.  357 

ter,  and  said,  "  What  do  you  think  of  my  sermon  T  "  A  very 
poor  sermon,  indeed,"  said  he,  •'  A  poor  sermon  ?"  said  the  young 
man,  **  it  took  me  a  long  time  to  study  it."  "  Ay,  no  doubt  of 
it."  "  Why,  did  you  not  think  my  explanation  of  the  text  a  very 
good  one?"  "  Oh,  yes,"  said  the  old  preacher,  u  veiy  good,  in 
deed."  "  Well,  then,  why  do  you  say  it  is  a  poor  sermon  • 
Did'nt  you  think  the  metaphors  were  appropriate,  and  the  argu 
ments  conclusive'?"  "Yes,  they  were  very  good  as  far  as  that 
goes,  but  still  it  was  a  very  poor  sermon."  "  Will  you  tell  me 
why  you  think  it  a  poor  sermon '?"  "  Because,"  said  he,  "  there 
vi as  no  Christ  in  it."  "  Well,"  said  the  young  man,  "  Christ  was 
not  in  the  text ;  we  are  not  to  be  preaching  Christ  always,  wo 
must  preach  what  is  in  the  text."  So  the  old  man  said,  "  Don't 
you  know,  young  man,  that  from  every  town,  and  every  village, 
and  every  little  hamlet  in  England,  wherever  it  may  be,  there  is 
a  road  to  London  ?"  "  Yes,"  said  the  young  man.  "  All !"  said 
the  old  divine,  "  and  so  from  every  text  of  Scripture,  there  is  a  road 
to  the  metropolis  of  the  Scriptures,  that  is,  Christ.  And,  my  dear 
brother,  your  business  is,  when  you  get  to  a  text,  to  say,  '  Now 
what  is  the  road  to  Christ?'  and  then  preach  a  sermon,  running 
along  the  road  towards  the  great  metropolis — Christ.  And," 
said  he,  "  I  have  never  yet  found  a  text  that  had  not  got  a  road 
to  Christ  in  it,  and  if  ever  I  do  find  one  that  has  not  got  a  road 
to  Christ  in  it,  I  will  make  one  ;  I  will  go  over  hedge  and  ditch  but 
I  would  get  at  my  Master,  for  the  sermon  cannot  do  any  good  un 
less  there  is  a  savor  of  Christ  in  it."  Now,  since  you  say  amen 
to  that,  and  declare  that  what  you  want  to  hear  is  Jesus  Christ, 
the  text  is  proved—"  Unto  you,  therefore,  which  believe  he  is 
precious." 

But  if  you  want  to  try  this  again  and  prove  it,  go  and  see  some 
of  our  sick  and  dying  friends;  go  and  talk  to  them  about  the 
Reform  Bill,  and  they  will  look  you  in  the  face  and  say,  "Oh,  I 
am  going  from  this  time-state  ;  it  is  a  very  small  matter  to  me 
whether  the  Reform  Bill  will  be  carried  or  not."  You  will  not 
find  them  much  interested  in  that  matter.  Well,  then,  sit  down 
and  »alk  to  them  about  the  weather,  and  how  the  crops  are  ge^ 
ting  on — "  Well,  it  is  a  good  prospect  for  wheat  this  year/1 
They  Mill  say,  "  Ah  !  my  harvest  is  ripening  in  glory."  Intro- 


358  CHRIST    PRECIOUS    TO    BELIEVERS. 

duce  the  most  interesting  topic  you  can,  and  a  Iclu'ver,  \\ho  is 
lying  on  the  verge  of  eternity,  will  find  nothing  precious  in  it ; 
but  sit  down  by  the  bed-side  of  this  man,  and  he  may  be  very 
near  gone,  almost  unconscious,  and  begin  to  talk  about  Jesus-  - 
mention  that  precious  soul-reviving,  soul-strengthening  name 
Jesus,  and  you  will  see  his  eye  glisten,  and  the  blanched  cheek 
'will  be  flushed  once  more—"  Ah,"  he  will  say,  "  Precious  Jesus, 
that  is  the  name  which  calms  my  fears,  and  bids  rny  sorrows 
cease."  You  will  see  that  you  have  given  the  man  a  strong  tonic, 
and  that  his  whole  frame  is  braced  up  for  the  moment.  Even 
when  he  dies,  the  thought  of  Jesus  Christ  and  the  prospect  of 
seeing  him  shall  make  him  living  in  the  midst  of  death,  strong  in 
the  midst  of  weakness^  and  fearless  in  the  midst  of  trembling. 
And  this  proves,  by  the  experience  of  God's  people,  that  with 
those  who  believe  in  him,  Christ  is  and  ever  must  be  a  precious 
Christ. 

II.  The  second  thing  is,  WHY  is  CHRIST  PRECIOUS  TO  THE  BE 
LIEVER  ]  I  observe — and  I  shall  run  over  those  particulars  very 
briefly,  though  they  would  be  worthy  of  a  long,  long  sermon — 
Jesus  Christ  is  precious  to  the  believer  because  he  is  intrinsically 
precious.  But  here  let  me  take  you  through  an  exercise  in  gram 
mar  ;  here  is  an  adjective,  let  us  go  through  it.  He  is  precious 
positively  ;  he  is  more  precious  than  any  thing  comparatively  ;  he 
is  most  precious  of  all  things,  and  most  precious  even  if  all 
things  were  rolled  into  one  and  put  into  competition  with  him  ; 
he  is  thus  precious  superlatively.  Now,  there  are  few  things  you 
can  thus  deal  with.  You  say,  a  man  is  a  good  man,  he  is  good 
positively,  and  you  say  he  is  a  great  deal  better  than  mar.y  other 
people ;  he  is  good  comparatively  ;  but  you  can  never  truly  say 
to  any  man  that  he  is  good  superlatively,  because  there  he  would 
still  be  found  short  of  perfection.  But  Christ  is  good  positively, 
Comparatively,  and  superlatively. 

Is  he  no-t  good  positively  ?  Election  is  a  good  thing — to  be 
chosen  of  God,  and  precious ;  but  we  are  elect  in  Christ  Jesus. 
Adoption  is  a  good  thing  ;  to  be  adopted  into  the  family  of  God 
is  a  good  thing — ah,  but  we  are  adopted  in  Christ  Jesus  and  made 
joint-heirs  with  him.  Pardon  is  a  good  thing — who  will  m.t  say 
»oi  ay,  but  we  are  pardoned  through  the  precious  blood  of 


CHRIST    PRECIOUS    TO    BELIEVERS. 

Jesus.  Justification — is  not  that  a  noble  thing,  to  be  robed  about 
with  a  perfect  righteousness'?  ay,  but  we  are  justified  in  Jesus. 
To  be  preserved — is  not  that  a  precious  thing  1  ay,  but  we  are 
preserved  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  kept  by  his  power  even  to  the  end. 
Perfection — who  shall  say  that  this  is  not  precious  ?  Well,  but 
we  are  perfect  in  Christ  Jesus.  Resurrection — is  not  that  glori 
ous  ?  We  are  risen  with  him.  To  ascend  up  on  high — is  not  that 
precious  ?  But  he  hath  raised  us  up  and  made  us  sit  together 
with  him  in  heavenly  places  in  Jesus  Christ — so  that  Christ  must 
be  good  positively,  for  he  is  all  the  best  things  in  one.  And  if 
all  these  be  good,  surely  lie  must  be  good  in  whom,  and  by  whom, 
and  to  whom,  and  through  whom  are  all  these  precious  things. 

But  Christ  is  good  comparatively.  Bring  any  thing  here  and 
compare  with  him.  One  of  the  brightest  jewels  we  can  have  is 
Liberty.  If  I  be  not  free,  let  me  die.  Put  the  halter  to  my  neck 
but  put  not  the  fetter  to  my  wrist — a  free  man  I  must  be  while 
I  live.  Will  not  the  patriot  say  that  he  would  give  his  blood  to 
buy  liberty,  and  think  it  a  cheap  price1?  Ay,  but  put  liberty 
side  by  side  with  Christ,  and  I  would  wear  the  fetter  for  Christ 
and  rejoice  in  the  chain.  The  Apostle  Paul  himself  could  say, 
"  I  would  that  ye  were  altogether  such  as  I  am," — and  he  might 
add,  "  except  these  bonds ;"  but  though  he  accepted  bonds  for 
others,  he  did  not  accept  them  for  himself,  for  he  rejoiced  in  the 
chain,  and  counted  it  a  mark  of  honor.  Besides  liberty,  what  a 
precious  thing  is  life  !  "  Skin  for  skin,  yea,  all  that  a  man  hath, 
will  he  give  for  his  life."  But  let  a  Christian — a  true  Christian, 
once  have  the  choice  between  life  and  Christ, — "  No,"  says  he, 
"  I  can  die,  but  I  cannot  deny  ;  I  can  burn,  but  I  cannot  turn.  I 
confess  Christ  and  perish  in  the  flame ;  but  1  cannot  deny  Christ, 
even  though  you  exalt  me  to  a  throne."  There  would  be  no 
choice  between  the  two.  And  then  whatever  earthly  good  there 
may  be  in  comparison  with  Christ,  the  believer's  testimony  goes 
to  prove  that  Christ  is  precious  comparatively,  for  there  is  no 
thing  that  can  be  matched  with  him. 

And  then  to  go  higher  still — Christ  is  good  superlatively. 
The  superlative  of  all  things  is  heaven,  and  if  it  could  be  possi 
ble  to  put  Christ  in  competition  with  heaven,  the  Christian  would 
uot  stop  a  moment  in  his  choice ;  he  would  sooner  be  on  earth 


300  CHRIST    PRECIOUS    TO    BELIEVERS. 

with  Chr.st  than  be  in  heaven  without  him.  Nay,  I  do  not  know 
whether  he  would  not  go  almost  as  far  as  Rutherford,  who  said, 
"  Lord,  I  would  sooner  be  in  hell  with  thee  than  in  heaven  without 
thee ;  for  if  I  were  in  heaven  without  thee  it  would  be  a  hell  to 
me.  and  if  I  were  in  hell  with  thee  it  would  be  a  heaven  to  me." 
We  may  put  it  so,  and  every  Christian  will  subscribe  to  it. 
Now  come,  ye  messengers  of  the  world,  and  take  on  your 
shoulders  all  its  treasures.  Crcsar,  pour  out  thy  gold  in  one* 
glittering  pile ;  Caesar,  lay  down  thine  honors  here  in  one  gaudy 
heap  ;  here,  Tiberius,  bring  all  the  joys  of  Capii's  lust  and 
vice ;  Solomon,  bring  here  all  the  treasures  of  wisdom ;  Alex 
ander,  bring  all  thy  triumphs  ;  Napoleon,  bring  thy  wide-spread 
empire  and  thy  fame,  put  them  all  here,  all  that  earth  calls  good  ; 
and  now  come,  thou  bleeding  Lamb  of  God,  thou  marred  and 
matchless  Saviour,  come  here  and  tread  these  beneath  thy  feet, 
for  what  are  all  these  compared  with  thee  1  I  pour  contempt  on 
them  all.  Now  am  I  dead  to  all  the  world,  and  all  the  world  is 
dead  to  me.  The  whole  realm  of  nature  is  small  in  comparison 
with  thee,  as  a  drop  in  the  bucket  when  compared  with  a  bound 
less  ocean.  Jesus  Christ,  then,  is  precious  superlatively. 

2.  What  more  can  we  say?  Still  to  answer  this  question 
again:  Why  is  Chnst  precious  to  the  believer  more  than  to  any 
other  man?  Wh}>,  it  is  the  believer's  wont  that  makes  Christ 
precious  to  him.  That  is  one  answer.  We  have  been  having  a 
small  shower  of  rain  lately,  and  I  dare  say  there  are  very  few 
of  you  who  felt  grateful  for  it,  since  it  gave  you  a  little  wetting 
coming  here.  But  suppose  that  shower  of  rai'n  could  have  fallen 
on  the  desert  of  Arabia,  what  a  precious  thing  it  would  have 
been.  Yea,  every  rain-drop  would  have  been  worth  a  pearl ; 
and  as  for  the  shower,  though  it  had  rained  gold  dust,  the  rich 
deposit  would  not  have  been  comparable  to  the  flood  when  it  de 
scended  from  on  high.  But  what  is  the  reason  that  water  is 
so  precious  there?  Simply  because  it  is  so  rare.  Suppose  ' 
am  in  England  ;  there  is  abundance  of  water,  and  I  cannot  seJ< 
it ;  water  is  so  common,  and  therefore  so  cheap.  But  put  a 
man  in  the  desert  and  let  the  water-skin  be  dried  up,  let  him  come 
to  the  well  wherein  he  expected  to  find  water,  and  it  has  failed 
him ;  can  you  not  conceive  that  that  small  drop  of  water  inighl 


cAlUIST    PRECIOUS    TO    BELIEVERS  361 

oe  worth  a  king's  ransom  ?  Nay,  that  a  man  might  hoard  it  up, 
and  conceal  it  from  all  his  comrades,  because  on  that  small 
drop  of  water  depended  his  life  ?  The  way  to  prize  water  is  to 
value  it  with  a  tongue  like  a  firebrand,  and  with  a  mouth  like  an 
oven.  Then  can  I  estimate  its  value  when  I  know  its  want.  So 
\\  ith  Christ.  The  worldling  does  not  care  for  Christ,  because 
he  has  never  hungered  and  thirsted  after  him  ;  but  the  Christian 
is  athirst  for  Christ ;  he  is  in  a  dry  and  thirsty  land,  where  no 
water  is,  and  his  heart  and  his  flesh  pant  after  God,  yea  for  the 
living  God ;  and  as  the  thirsty  soul  dying,  cries  out  water,  water, 
water,  so  the  Christian  cries  out  Christ,  Christ,  Christ !  This  is 
the  one  thing  needful  for  me,  and  if  I  have  it  not,  this  thirst 
must  destroy  me. 

Mark,  too,  that  the  believer  may  be  found  in  many  aspects, 
ind  you  will  always  find  that  his  needs  will  endear  Christ  to 
nim.  Here  is  a  man  about  to  be  tried  for  his  life.  Before  he 
had  committed  the  wrong,  he  used  to  say,  "  Lawyers,  attorneys, 
pleaders,  away  with  them,  what  is  the  good  of  them  ?"  Now  he 
has  got  into  prison  he  thinks  very  differently.  He  says,  "  I  wish 
I  could  get  a  good  special  pleader  to  plead  my  cause ;"  and  he 
runs  over  the  roll  to  see  the  best  man  to  plead  for  him.  At  last 
he  says,  "  Here  is  a  man,  if  he  could  plead  my  cause  I  might 
hope  to  escape,  but  I  have  no  money  with  which  to  engage  him ;" 
and  he  says  to  his  wife — "  Wife,  we  must  sell  our  house  ;"  or, 
"  We  must  get  money  somehow,  for  I  am  on  trial  for  my  life, 
and  I  must  have  an  advocate."  And  what  will  not  a  woman  do 
to  get  an  advocate  for  her  husband  ]  Why,  she  will  pledge  the 
last  rag  she  has  to  get  one.  Now,  does  not  the  believer  feel 
himself  to  be  in  just  such  a  position  ?  He  is  a  poor  sinner  on 
trial  for  his  life,  and  he  wants  an  advocate  ;  and  every  time  he 
looks  on  Christ  pleading  his  cause  before  the  Father's  throne,  ho 
says,  "  O  what  a  precious  Christ  he  is  to  a  poor,  sin-destroyed 
inner,  for  he  pleads  his  cause  before  the  throne." 

But  suppose  another  case  ;  that  of  a  man  drawn  for  a  soldier 

a  such  times  men  always  look  out  for  substitutes.     I  remember 

Then  the  ballot  was  coming  for  the  militia,  how  every  man  joined 

substitute  club  in  order  that  if  he  were  drawn  he  might  not  go 

himself.     Now  suppose  a  man  hau  been  drawn,  how   valuabla 

16 


302  CHRIST    PRECIOUS    TO    BELIEVERS. 

would  a  substitute  have  been — for  no  man  in  his  senses  likes  tc 
be  food  for  powder — he  would  rather  a  man  without  brains  gc 
and  do  such  work  as  that,  but  as  for  him  he  estimates  himself  a 
too  high  a  price.  But  suppose  he  is  not  only  drawn  for  a  soldier, 
but  condemned  to  die.  See  yon  pour  wretch  coming  up  the  gal 
lows  stairs ;  some  one  whispers  to  aim,  "  What  would  you  give 
for  a  substitute  now  1  What  would  you  give  for  some  one  to 
c«»me  and  bear  this  punishment  ?"  See  his  eye  rolls  madness  at 
the  thought.  "  A  substitute,"  says  he,  "  1  could  not  buy  one 
for  the  whole  world.  Who  would  be  a  substitute  for  me,  to 
swing  into  eternity  amidst  the  yellings  of  a  crowd  T'  But  sup 
pose — and  we  are  only  supposing  what  has  actually  occurred — 
suppose  this  man  saw  not  only  the  gallows  and  the  drop,  but 
hell  fire  before  him,  and  it  were  said  to  him,  "  You  must  burn 
in  that  for  ever  unless  you  find  a  substitute,"  would  not  that  be 
a  precious  one?  Now, 'mark,  that  is  just  our  position.  The 
Christian  feels  that  hell  is  before  him,  if  it  were  not  that  he  has 
a  glorious  substitute.  Jesus  came  forward,  and  said,  "I  will 
bear  thai  punishment ;  pour  hell  on  me,  my  Father,  let  me  drink 
damnation  dry ;"  and  he  did  it ;  he  endured  all  those  pains,  or 
an  equivalent  for  them ;  he  suffered  in  the  rebel's  stead ;  and 
now,  through  him  the  substitute,  we  are  absolved  and  free.  Oh, 
must  not  he  be  a  precious  Christ  1 

But  think  of  Christ  again,  and  then  think  of  the  believer's 
wants.  I  will  try  and  run  over  a  number  of  them.  The  be 
liever  is  a  silly  sheep.  What  a  precious  thing  is  a  shepherd, 
and  how  precious  are  green  pastures  and  still  waters.  The  be 
liever  is  like  a  desolate  woman.  What  a  precious  thing  is  a 
husband  who  shall  provide  for  her,  and  shall  console  and  cherish 
her.  The  believer  is  a  pilgrim,  and  the  hot  sun  beats  on  him. 
What  a  precious  thing  is  the  shadow  of  a  great  rock  in  a  weary 
and.  The  believer  is  a  bond-slave  by  nature.  What  a  precious 
.hing  is  the  trump  of  jubilee,  and  the  ransom-price  that  sets  him 
free.  The  believer,  by  nature,  is  a  sinking,  drowning  'man. 
flow  precious  to  him  is  that  plank  of  free-grace,  the  cross  of 
Christ,  on  which  he  puts  his  poor  trembling  hand  and  secures 
p:lory.  But  what  more  shall  I  say  ?  Time  would  fail  me  to  tell 
of  ail  the  wants  of  the  believer,  and  of  the  all-abounding  aii3 


CHRIST    PBRCIOUS    TO    BKLIE<£R8.  3%? 

ever-flowing  streams  of  love  that  flow  from  Chi  st,  the  fountain 
that  Tills  the  believer  to  the  brim.  O  say,  ye  children  of  God,  is 
he  not,  while  ye  are  in  these  lowlands  of  want  and  suffering, 
inconceivably,  unutterably,  superlatively  precious  to  you  ?. 

3.  But  once  more.  Look  at  the  believer  not  only  in  his  wants, 
hut  in  his  highest  earthly  state.  The  believer  is  a  man  that  was 
once  blind  and  now  sees.  And  what  a  precious  thing  is  light  to 
a  man  that  sees.  If  I,  as  a  believer,  have  an  eye,  how  much  I 
need  the  sun  to  shine.  If  I  have  no  light  my  eye  becomes  a 
torture,  and  I  might  as  well  have  been  blind.  And  when  Christ 
gives  sight  to  the  blind  he  makes  his  people  a  seeing  people.  It 
is  then  that  they  find  what  a  precious  thing  is  the  sight,  and  how 
pleasant  a  thing  it  is  for  a  man  to  behold  the  sun.  The  believer 
is  a  man  that  is  quickened.  A  dead  corpse  wants  no  clothing, 
for  it  feels  no  cold.  Let  a  man  once  be  quickened  and  he  finds 
himself  naked,  and  wants  clothing.  From  the  very  fact  that  the 
Christian  is  a  quickened  man,  he  values  the  robe  of  righteous 
ness  that  is  put  about  him.  Christ  touches  his  people's  ears  and 
opens  them  ;  but  it  were  better  for  man  to  be  deaf  than  to  hear 
for  ever  doleful  groans  and  hissings.  But  such  must  he  have 
been,  ever  hearing  it  if  it  were  not  for  Christ  playing  s\\eeS 
music  to  him  every  day,  and  pouring  streams  of  melody  into  his 
ears  through  his  promises.  Yes,  I  say,  the  very  new-born  powers 
of  the  Christian  would  be  very  channels  for  misery  if  it  were  not 
for  Christ.  Even  in  his  highest  estate  the  Christian  must  feel 
that  Christ  is  necessary  unto  him,  and  then  he  must  conclude 
that  Christ  is  precious  to  him. 

But,  believer,  how  precious  is  Christ  to  thee  in  the  hour  of 
conviction  of  sin,  when  he  says,  "Thy  sins,  which  are  many,  are 
all  forgiven  thee."  How  precious  to  thee  in  the  hour  of  sick- 
ness,  when  he  comes  to  thee  and  says,  "  I  will  make  all  thy  bed 
n  thy  sickness."  How  precious  to  thee  in  the  day  of  trial,  when 
he  says,  u  All  things  work  together  for  thy  good."  How  pre 
cious  when  friends  are  buried,  for  he  says,  "  I  am  the  resurrec 
tion  and  the  life."  How  precious  in  thy  gray  old  age,  '*  even  in 
old  age  I  am  with  thee,  and  to  hoary  hairs  will  I  carry  you." 
How  precious  in  the  lone  chamber  of  death,  for  "  I  will  fear  no 
evil,  thou  art  with  me,  thy  rod  and  thy  staff  comfort  me."  But, 


804  CHKIST    PRECIOUS    TO    BELIEVERS. 

last  of  all,  how  precious  will  Christ  be  when  we  see  him  as  he  is. 
All  we  know  of  Christ  here  is  as  nothing  compared  with  what 
we  shall  know  hereafter.  Believer,  when  thou  seest  Christ's  face, 
now,  thou  only  seest  it  through  a  vail — Christ  is  so  glorious,  that, 
like  Moses,  he  is  compelled  to  put  a  veil  upon  his  face,  for  his 
poor  people,  while  they  are  here,  are  so  feeble  that  they  could 
not  behold  him  face  to  face.  And  if  he  be  lovely  here,  when  he 
is  marred  and  spit  upon,  how  lovely  must  he  be  when  he  is 
adored  and  worshipped.  If  he  is  precious  on  his  cross,  how  much 
more  precious  when  he  sits  on  his  throne.  If  I  can  weep  before 
him  and  love  him,  and  live  to  him,  when  I  see  him  as  the 
despised  man  of  Nazareth,  oh,  how  shall  my  spirit  be  knit  to 
him,  how  shall  my  heart  be  absorbed  with  love  to  him.  A\hen  1 
see  his  face  and  behold  his  crown  of  glory,  when  I  mark  the 
harpings  of  the  never-ceasing  harpers  who  harp  his  praise.  Wait 
awhile,  Christian.  If  he  is  precious  to  the  believer  now,  when 
faith  is  turned  to  sight  he  will  be  more  precious  still.  Go  out 
of  this  hall,  and  cry,  "  O  Lord  Jesus,  I  must  love  thee,  I  must 
serve  thee  better,  I  must  live  for  thee ;  I  must  be  ready  to  die 
for  thee — for 

'  Thou  art  precious  to  ray  soul, 
My  transport  and  my  trust.'" 

This  brings  me  to  conclude — and  here  I  want  your  solemn  and 
earnest  attention  while  each  one  for  himself  shall  answer  this 
question — my  hearer,  is  Christ  precious  to  you?  My  young 
brother,  you  of  the  same  age  as  myself,  is  Jesus  precious  to  you 
in  your  youth  1  Wherewithal  shall  a  young  man  cleanse  his 
way  ?  only  by  taking  heed  thereto  according  to  Christ's  word, 
and  by  walking  in  his  footsteps.  Ye  men  and  women  of  middle 
age,  is  Christ  precious  to  you  ?  Remember  that  this  world  is 
but  a  dream,  and  if  you  have  not  something  more  satisfactory 
than  that,  you  will  die  disappointed,  even  though  you  succeed 
beyond  your  highest  wishes.  And  ye  gray-headed  men,  who  are 
going  tottering  to  your  graves,  whose  life  is  like  a  candle-snuff, 
almost  expiring,  like  a  lamp  whose  oil  is  spent.  Is  Christ  pre 
cious  to  you,  ye  with  the  bald  head,  and  with  the  hoary  lock,  is 
Jesus  precious  to  your  soul  ]  Remember,  on  your  answer  tc 
this  education  depends  your  condition.  You  believe,  if  ho  is  pre- 


CllKIST    PRECIOUS    TO    BELIEVERS.  j6£ 

clous  to  you,  but  if  he  is  not  precious,  then  you  are  not  believers, 
and  you  are  condemned  already  because  you  believe  not  ou  the 
Son  of  God.  Now,  which  is  it?  Oh,  methinks  some  of  you 
feel  as  if  you  could  spring  from  your  seats,  and  say,  "  Yes,  he  is 
precious  to  me,  1  cannot  deny  it."  Once  there  was  a  good 
minister  who  was  catechizing  his  class,  and  he  said  to  the  young 
people,  "  The  question  which  1  am  about  to  ask  is  such  that  I 
want  none  of  you  to  answer  but  those  who  can  answf  r  from 
your  heart."  The  congregation  was  gathered  together  and  he 
put  this  question  to  them  concerning  Christ — "  Suppc.se  Christ 
was  here,  and  should  say,  '  Lovcst  thou  me  1 '  what  would  be 
your  reply  ? "  lie  looked  around,  and  glanced  upon  all  the 
young  men  and  the  young  women,  and  said,  "Jesus  speaks  to 
you  the  first  time,  and  says,  '  Lovest  thou  me  ? ' '  He  speaks  a 
second  time,  and  he  says,  '  Lovest  thou  me  ?  ' '  There  was  a 
solemn  pause,  and  no  one  answered  ;  and  the  congregation  looked 
at  the  class,  and  at  last  the  minister  said  once  more,  "  Jesus 
speaks  by  me  a  third  time,  and  says,  *  Lovest  thou  me  ?  "  Up 
rose  a  young  woman,  who  could  keep  her  seat  no  longer,  and, 
bursting  into  tears,  said,  "Yea,  Lord,  thou  knowest  all  things, 
thou  knowest  that  I  love  thee."  Now,  how  many  are  there  here 
who  could  say  that?  Could  not  you  now,  if  this  were  the  time 
— ultlmigh  you  might  be  bashful  in  the  midst  of  so  many — 
could  you  not,  if  Christ  asked  you  the  question,  bold]v  say, 
though  in  the  midst  of  enemies — "Yea,  Lord,  thou  knuwest  all 
things,  thou  knowest  that  1  love  thee."  Well,  if  you  can  give 
such  an  answer  as  that,  go  home  and  pray  that  others  may  be 
brought  to  love  him,  for  you  yourselves  are  saved  ;  but  if  you 
are  compelled  to  be  silent  to  such  a  question  as  that,  O  may  God 
lead  you  to  seek  Christ,  may  you,  too,  be  driven  to  the  cross, 
may  you  there  see  his  dear  bleeding  wounds,  may  you  behold 
his  open  side,  and,  falling  at  his  feet,  may  you  say  "  I  trust  thee, 
I  rely  upon  thee,  I  depend  upon  thee,"  and  he  will  say,  "  I  have 
saved  thee;"  and  then  will  you  spring  to  your  feet,  and  say, 
"  Lord,  I  love  thee,  because  thou  hast  first  loved  me."  May 
§uch  be  the  end  of  this  sermon,  and  to  God  be  all  the  glory. 


SERMON    XXIV. 

THE  MEEK  AND  LOWLY  ONE. 

"  Ccme  unto  me,  all  ye  that  labor  and  are  heavy  laden,  and  I  will  giv« 
yon  r«jst.  Take  my  yoke  upon  you,  and  learn  of  me ;  for  I  am  metk  and 
lowly  in  heart:  and  ye  shall  find  rest  unto  your  souls.  For  my  yoke  ia 
easy,  and  my  burden  is  light," — MATTHEW,  xi.  28-30. 

THE  single  sentence  which  I  have  selected  for  my  text  consists 
of  these  words  :— "  I  am  meek  and  lowly  in  heart."  These  words 
might  be  taken  to  have  three  distinct  bearings  upon  the  context 
They  may  be  regarded  as  being  the  lesson  to  be  taught :  "  Learn  of 
me ;  for  I  am  meek  and  lowly  in  heart."  One  great  lesson  of 
the  gospel  is  to  teach  us  to  be  meek — to  put  away  our  high  and 
angry  spirits,  and  to  make  us  lowly  in  heart.  Peradventure,  this 
is  the  meaning  of  the  passage — that  if  we  will  but  come  to  Christ's 
school,  he  will  teach  us  the  hardest  of  all  lessons, — how  to  b& 
meek  and  lowly  in  heart.  Again ;  other  expositors  might  con 
sider  this  sentence  to  signify,  that  is  the  only  Spirit  in  which  a 
man  can  learn  of  Jesus, — the  Spirit  which  is  necessary  if  we 
would  become  Christ's  scholars.  We  can  learn  nothing,  even  of 
Christ  himself,  while  we  hold  our  heads  up  with  pride,  or  exalt 
ourselves  with  self-confidence.  We  must  be  meek  and  lowly  ir, 
heart,  otherwise  we  are  totally  unfit  to  be  taught  by  Christ 
Empty  vessels  may  be  filled  ;  but  vessels  that  are  full  already 
can  receive  no  more.  The  man  who  knows  his  own  emptiness 
can  receive  abundance  of  knowledge,  and  wisdom,  and  grace,  from 
Christ ;  but  he  who  glories  in  himself,  is  not  in  a  fit  condition  to 
receive  any  thing  from  God.  1  have  no  doubt  that  both  of  these 
mteipretations  are  true,  and  might  be  borne  out  by  the  connec 
tion.  It  is  the  lesson  of  Christ's  school — it  is  the  spirit  of  Christ's 


lIlE    MEEK    AND    LOWLY    ONE. 

disciples.  But  I  choose,  rather,  this  morning,  to  regard  these 
words  as  being  a  commendation  of  the  Teacher  himself.  "Come 
unto  me  and  learn  ;  for  I  am  meek  and  lowly  in  heart."  A. 3  much 
as  to  say,  "  I  can  teach,  and  you  will  not  find  it  hard  to  karn  of 
me."  In  fact,  the  subject  of  this  morning's  discourse  is  briefly 
this  :  the  gentle,  lovely  character  of  Christ  should  be  a  high  and 
powerful  inducement  to  sinners  to  co:ne  to  Christ.  J  intend  so  to 
use  it :  first  of  all,  noticing  the  two  qualities  which  Christ  here 
claims  for  himself.  He  is  "  m^eJc ;"  and  then  he  is  "  lowly  in 
heart ;"  and  after  we  have  ob.'.en/ed  these  two  thhgs, 1  shall  come 
to  push  the  conclusion  home.  Cone  unto  him,  all  ye  that  are 
laboring  and  are  heavy  la^ea  ;  come  unto  him,  and  take  his  yoke 
upon  you ;  for  he  is  meek  anl  lowly  in  heart. 

I.  First,  then,  I  aTn  lc  consider  THE  FIRST  QUALITV  WHICH 
JESUS  CHRIST  CLAIMS.  He  declares  that  he  is  "  MEEK." 

Christ  is  no  egotiffc,  ho  takes  no  praise  to  himself.  If  ev*r  he 
utters  a  word  in  Lelf  Ovr.imendation,  it  is  not  with  that  object ;  it 
is  with  another  d'^pn,  namely,  that  he  may  entice  souls  to  come 
to  him.  Here,  in  order  to  exhibit  this  meekness,  I  shall  have  to 
speak  of  him  if.  several  ways. 

1.  First.  Ciwdt  is  meek,  as  opposed  to  the  ferocity  of  spirit 
manifested  by  zealots  and  bigots.  Take,  for  a  prominent  ex- 
Ample  of  the  opposite  of  meekness,  the  false  prophet  Mahomet. 
The  strength  of  his  cause  lies  in  the  fact,  that  he  is  not  meek. 
He  presents  himself  before  those  whom  he  claims  as  disciples, 
and  says,  "  Take  my  yoke  upon  you,  and  learn  of  me,  for  I  am 
neither  meek,  nor  lowly  in  heart;  I  will  have  no  patience  with 
you ;  there  is  creed,  or  there  is  the  scimitar — death  or  conversion, 
whichever  you  please."  The  moment  tne  Mahometan  religion 
withdrew  that  very  forcible  argument  of  decapitation  or  impale- 
ment,  it  stayed  in  its  work  of  conversion,  and  never  progressed  ; 
for  the  very  strength  of  the  false  prophet  lies  in  the  absence  of 
<my  meekness.  How  opposite  this  is  to  Christ !  Although  he 
hath  a  right  to  demand  man's  love  and  man's  faith,  yet  he  comes 
not  into  the  world  to  demand  it  with  fire  and  sword.  His  might 
is  under  persuasion ;  his  strength  is  quiet  forbearance,  and  patient 
endurance ;  his  mightiest  force  is  the  sweet  attraction  of  compas 
sion  and  love.  lie  knoweth  nothing  of  the  ferocious  hosts  of 


368  THE    MKEK     AND    LOWLV    ONE. 

Mahomet,  he  bids  none  of  us  draw  our  sword  to  propagate  the 
faith,  but  saith,  "  Put  up  thy  sword  into  its  scabbard ;  thev  that 
take  the  sword  shall  perish  by  the  sword."  "My  kingdom  is 
not  of  this  world,  else  might  my  servants  fight."  Nay,  Mahomet 
is  not  the  only  instance  we  can  bring  ;  but  even  good  men  are 
subject  to  the  like  mistakes.  They  imagine  that  religion  is  to  be 
spread  by  terror  and  thunder.  Look  at  John  himself,  the  most 
lovely  of  all  the  disciples :  he  would  call  fire  from  heaven  on  a 
village  of  Samaritans,  because  they  rejected  Christ.  Hark  to  his 
hot  inquiry, — "  Wilt  thou  that  we  command  fire  to  come  down 
from  heaven  and  consume  them  ?"  Christ's  disciples  were  to 
him  something  like  the  sons  of  Zeruiah  to  David;  for  when 
Shiinei  mocked  David,  the  sons  of  Zeruiah  said,  "  Why  should 
this  dead  dog  curse  my  lord  the  king1?  let  me  go  over,  I  pray 
thee,  and  take  off  his  head."  But  David  meekly  said,  "  What 
have  1  to  do  with  you,  ye  sons  of  Zeruiah  ?" — and  put  them  aside. 
He  had  something  of  the  spirit  of  his  Master ;  he  knew  that  his 
honor  was  not  then  to  be  defended  by  sword  or  spear.  0  blessed 
Jesus !  thou  hast  no  fury  in  thy  spirit ;  when  men  rejected  thee 
thou  didst  not  draw  the  sword  to  smite,  but,  on  the  contrary, 
thou  didst  yield  thine  eyes  to  weeping.  Behold  your  Saviour, 
disciples,  and  -see  whether  he  was  not  meek.  He  had  long 
preached  in  Jerusalem  without  effect,  and  at  last  he  knew  that 
they  were  ready  to  put  him  to  death  :  but  what  said  he,  as 
standing  on  the  top  of  the  hill,  he  beheld  the  city  that  had  re- 
jected  his  gospel?  Did  he  invoke  a  curse  upon  it?  Did  he 
suffer  one  word  of  anger  to  leap  from  his  burning  heart  ?  Ah  ! 
no;  there  were  flames,  but  they  were  those  of  love;  there  were 
scalding  drops,  but  they  were  those  of  grief.  He  beheld  the 
city,  and  wept  over  it,  and  said,  "O  Jerusalem,  Jerusalem,  how 
:>ftei  would  I  have  gathered  thy  children  together,  as  a  hen 
gathereth  her  chickens  under  her  wings,  and  ye  would  not." 
And  for  a  further  proof  of  the  absence  of  all  uneharitableness, 
observe  that,  even  when  they  drove  the  nails  into  his  blessed 
hands,  yet  he  had  no  curse  to  breathe  upon  them,  but  his  dying 
exclamation  was,  '  Father,  forgive  them,  for  they  know  not 
what  they  do."  O  sinners !  see  what  a  Christ  it  is  that  we  bid 
you  serve.  No  angr\  bigot,  no  fierce  warrior,  claiming 


THE    MEEK    AND    LOWLY    ONK.  309 

unwilling  faith  :  ho  is  a  tender  Jesus.  Your  rejection  of  him  has 
made  his  bowels  yearn  over  you  ;  and  though  you  abhor  his  gos 
pel,  he  has  pleaded  for  you,  saying.  "  Let  him  alone  yet  another 
year,  till  1  dig  about  him ;  peradventure  he  may  ypf,  bring  forth 
fruit."  What  a  patient  master  is  he  !  Oh  !  will  you  not  servo 
him  ! 

2.  But  the  idea  is  not  brought  out  fully,  unless  we  take  another 
sense.  There  is  a  sternness  which  cannot  be  condemned.  A 
Christian  man  will  often  feel  himself  called  to  bear  most  solemn 
and  stern  witness  against  the  error  of  his  times,  but  Christ's  mis 
sion,  although  it  certainly  did  testify  against  the  sin  of  his  times, 
yet  had  a  far  greater  reference  to  the  salvation  of  the  souls  of 
men.  To  show  the  idea  that  I  have  in  my  own  mind,  which  I 
have  not  yet  brought  out,  I  must  picture  Elijah.  What  a  man  was 
he !  His  mission  was  to  be  the  bold  unflinching  advocate  of  the 
right,  and  to  bear  a  constant  testimony  against  the  wickedness  of 
his  age.  And  how  boldly  did  he  speak !  Look  at  him :  how 
grand  the  picture !  Can  you  not  conceive  him  on  that  memora 
ble  day,  when  he  met  Ahab,  and  Ahab  said,  "  Hast  thou  found  me, 
O  mine  enemy  ?"  Do  you  mark  that  mighty  answer  which  Elijah 
gave  him,  while  the  king  trembles  at  his  words.  Or,  better  still, 
can  you  picture  the  scene  when  Elijah  said,  "Take  you  two  bul 
locks,  ye  priests,  and  build  an  altar,  and  see  this  day,  whether 
God  be  God  or  Baal  be  God.1'  Do  you  see  him  as  he  mocks  the 
worshippers  of  Baal,  and  with  a  biting  irony,  says  to  them,  "  Cry 
aloud,  for  he  is  a  god."  And  do  you  see  him  in  the  last  grand 
scene,  when  the  fire  has  come  down  from  heaven,  and  consumed 
the  sacrifice,  and  licked  up  the  water,  and  burned  the  altar]  Do 
you  hear  him  cry,  "  Take  the  prophets  of  Baal ;  let  not  one  es 
cape1?"  Can  you  see  him  in  his  might  hewing  them  in  pieces  by 
the  brook,  and  making  their  flesh  a  feast  for  the  fowls  of  heaven'? 
Now,  you  cannot  picture  Christ  in  the  same  position.  He  had 
the  stern  qualities  of  Elijah,  but  he  kept  them,  as  it  were,  behind, 
like  sleeping  thunder,  that  must  not  as  yet  waken  and  lift  up  its 
voice.  There  were  some  rumblings  of  the  tempest,  it  is  true, 
when  he  spoke  so  sternly  to  the  Sadclucees,  arid  Scribes,  and 
Pharisees;  those  woes  were  like  murmurings  of  a  distant  storm, 
but  it  was  a  distant,  storm  ;  whereas,  Elijah  lived  in  the  midst  of 
1ft* 


370  THE    ME2K    AND    LOWLY     ONE. 

the  whirlwind  itself,  and  was  no  still  small  voice,  but  was  as  the 
very  fire  of  God,  and  like  the  chariot  in  which  he  mounted  to 
heaven — fit  chariot  for  such  a  fiery  man  !  Christ  here  stands  in 
marked  contrast.  Picture  him  in  somewhat  a  like  position  to 
Elijah  with  Ahab.  There  is  Jesus  left  alone  with  an  adulterous 
woman.  She  has  been  taken  in  the  very  fact  Her  accusers  are 
present,  ready  to  bear  witness  against  her.  By  a  simple  sentenct 
he  empties  the  room  of  every  witness ;  convicted  by  their  con 
science  they  all  retire.  And  now  what  does  Christ  say  ?  The 
woman  might  have  lifted  her  eyes,  and  have  looked  at  him,  and 
said,  "  Hast  thou  found  me,  O  mine  enemy  V — for  she  might 
have  regarded  Christ  as  the  enemy  of  so  base  a  sin  as  that  which 
she  had  committed  against  her  marriage  bed.  But  instead  there 
of,  Jesus  said,  "Doth  no  man  condemn  thee?  Neither  do  I 
condemn  thee ;  go  and  sin  no  more."  Oh,  how  different  from  the 
sternness  of  Elijah  !  Sinners  !  if  I  had  to  preach  Elijah  as  youi 
Saviour,  I  should  feel  that  I  had  a  hard  task,  for  you  might  throw 
it  in  my  teeth — "Shall  we  come  to  Elijah1?  He  will  call  fire 
from  heaven  on  us,  as  he  did  upon  the  captains  and  their  fifties. 
Shall  we  come  to  Elijah1?  Surely  he  will  slay  us,  for  we  have 
been  like  the  prophets  of  Baal  V  Nay,  sinners;  but  I  bid  you 
come  to  Christ.  Come  to  him,  who,  although  he  hated  sin  more 
than  Elijah  could  do,  yet,  nevertheless,  loved  the  sinner — who, 
though  he  would  not  spare  iniquity,  yet  spares  the  transgressors, 
and  has  no  words  but  those  of  love  and  mercy,  and  peace  and 
comfort,  for  those  of  you  who  will  now  come  and  put  your  trus* 
in  him. 

I  must  put  in  a  word  here  by  way  of  caveat.  I  am  very  far 
from  imputing,  for  a  single  moment,  any  blame  to  Elijah.  Ho 
was  quite  right.  None  but  Elijah  could  have  fulfilled  the  mis 
sion  which  his  Master  gave  him.  He  needed  to  be  all  he  was, 
and  certainly  not  less  stern  ;  but  Elijah  was  not  sent  to  be  a 
Savirur ;  he  was  quite  unfit  for  that.  He  was  sent  to  administer  a 
stern  rebuke.  He  was  God's  iron  tongue  of  threatening,  not 
God's  silver  tongue  of  mercy.  Now,  Jesus  is  the  silver  tongue 
of  grace.  Sinners !  hear  the  sweet  bells  ringing,  as  Jesus  now 
invites  you  to  come  unto  him.  "  Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  are 
weary  and  heavy  laden;  for  I  am  not  stern,  I  am  not  harsh,  I 


I  __ 

THE    MEEK    AND    LOWLT    ONE.  Oil 

am  no  fire-killing  Elijah;  I  am  the  meek,  tender,  lowly-heartea 
Josus." 

3.  Christ  is  meek  in  heart.  To  exhibit  this  quality  in  another 
light,  call  to  your  minds  Moses.  Moses  was  the  meekest  of  men  ; 
and  yet  Christ  far  excels  Moses  in  his  meekness.  Around  Moses 
there  seems  to  be  a  hedge,  a  ring  of  fire.  The  character  of 
Moses  is  like  Mount  Sinai ;  it  hath  bounds  set  about  it,  so  tha 
one  cannot  draw  near  unto  him.  Moses  was  not  an  approachabl 
person,  he  was  quiet  and  meek,  and  tender,  but  there  was  a  secret 
majesty  about  the  King  in  Jeshurun  that  hedged  his  path,  so  that 
we  cannot  imagine  the  people  making  themselves  familiar  with 
him.  Whoever  read  of  Moses  sitting  down  upon  a  well,  and 
talking  to  a  harlot  like  the  woman  of  Samaria1?  Whoever  heard 
a  story  of  a  Magdalene  washing  the  feet  of  Moses]  Can  ye  con 
ceive  Moses  eating  bread  with  a  sinner,  or  passing  under  a  syca 
more  tree,  and  calling  Zaccheus,  the  thievish  publican,  and  bidding 
him  come  down  1  There  is  a  kind  of  stately  majesty  in  Moses, 
no  mere  affectation  of  standing  alone,  but  a  loneliness  of  superior 
worth.  Men  looked  up  to  him  as  to  some  cloud-capped  monn 
tain,  and  despaired  of  being  able  to  enter  into  the  lofty  circle, 
within  which  they  might  have  communed  with  him.  Moses 
always  had  in  spirit  what  he  once  had  in  visible  token  ;  he  had  a 
glory  about  his  brow,  and  before  he  could  converse  with  men  he 
must  wear  a  veil,  for  they  could  not  bear  to  look  upon  the  face 
of  Moses.  But  how  different  is  Jesus !  He  is  a  man  among 
men ;  wherever  he  goes  no  one  is  afraid  to  speak  to  him.  You 
scarcely  meet  with  any  one  who  dares  not  approach  him.  There 
is  a  poor  woman,  it  is  true,  who  hath  the  flux,  and  she  fears  to 
come  near  him,  because  she  is  ceremonially  unclean ;  but  even 
she  can  come  behind  him  in  the  press,  and  touch  the  hem  of  his 
garment,  and  virtue  goeth  out  of  him.  Nobody  was  afraid  of 
Jesus.  The  mothers  brought  their  little  babes  to  him :  whoever 
heard  of  their  doing  that  to  Moses  ]  Did  ever  babe  get  a  blessing 
of  Moses1?  But  Jesus  was  all  meekness — the  approachable  man, 
feasting  with  the  wedding  guests,  sitting  down  with  sinners,  con 
versing  with  the  unholy  and  the  unclean,  touching  the  leper,  and 
making  himself  at  home  with  all  men.  Sinners  !  this  is  the  one 
we  invite  3'ou  to — this  homely  man,  Christ.  Not  to  Movses,  foi 


372  THE    MEEK    AND    LOWLY    ONE. 

you  might  say,  "  lie  hath  horns  of  light,  and  h.  w  shall  I  draw 
near  to  his  majesty  !  he  is  bright  perfection — the  very  lightning! 
of  Sinai  rest  upon  his  brow."  But  sinners,  ye  cannot  say  that  of 
Christ.  He  is  as  holy  as  Moses — as  great,  and  far  greater;  but 
he  is  still  so  homely  that  ye  may  come  to  him.  Little  children, 
ye  may  put  your  trust  in  him.  Ye  may  say  your  little  pra^  ^r- 

"  Gentle  Jesus,  met'k  and  mild, 
Look  on  me,  a  little  child: 
Pity  my  simplicity, 
Suffer  me  to  come  to  thee." 

fie  will  not  cast  you  away,  or  think  you  have  intruded  on  him. 
Ye  harlots,  ye  drunkards,  ye  feasters,  ye  wedding  guests,  ye  may 
all  come;  "This  man  receiveth  sinners,  and  eateth  with  them." 
He  is  "  meek  and  lowly  in  heart."  That  gives,  I  think,  a  still 
fuller  and  broader  sense  to  the  term,  "  meek." 

4.  But  yet,  to  push  the  term  a  little  further.  Christ  on  earth 
was  a  king;  but  there  was  nothing  about  him  of  the  exclusive 
pomp  of  kings,  which  excludes  the  common  people  from  their 
society.  Look  at  the  Eastern  king  Ahasuerus,  -sitting  on  his 
thione.  He  is  considered  by  his  people  as  a  superior  being. 
None  may  come  in  unto  the  king,  unless  he  is  called  for.  Should 
he  ventui<?,  to  pass  the  circle,  the  guards  will  slay  him,  unless  the 
king  stretches  out  the  golden  sceptre.  Even  Esther,  his  beloved 
wife,  is  afraid  to  draw  near,  and  must  put  her  life  in  her  hand,  if 
she  comes  into  the  presence  of  the  king  uncalled.  Christ  is  a 
king;  but  where  his  pomp]  Where  the  Janitor  that  keeps  his 
door,  and  thrusts  away  the  poor]  Where  the  soldiers  that  ride 
on  either  side  of  his  chariot  to  screen  the  monarch  from  the  gaze 
of  poverty?  See  thy  King,  O  Sion  !  He  comes,  he  conies  in 
royal  pomp !  Behold,  Judah,  behold  thy  King  cometh !  But 
how  cometh  he]  "  Meek  and  lowly,  riding  upon  an  ass,  and  upon 
c.  colt,  the  foal  of  an  ass."  And  who  are  his  attendants?  S^e, 
the  young  children,  boys  and  girls  !  They  cry,  "  Hosannah ! 
Ilosannah  !  Hosannah  !  "  And  who  are  they  that  wait  upon  him  ? 
Ilis  poor  disciples.  They  pull  the  branches  from  the  trees;  they 
cast  •'heir  garments  in  the  street,  and  there  he  rideth  on — Judah's 
royal  King.  His  courtiers  are  the  poor;  his  pompisthnt  tribute 


I 

THE    MEEK    AND    LOWLY    ONE.  373 

which  grateful  hearts  delight  to  offer.  O  sinners,  will  you  not 
come  to  Christ?  There  is  nothing  in  him  to  keep  you  back. 
You  need  not  say,  like  Esther  did  of  old,  "I  will  go  in  unto  the 
King;  if  I  perish  I  perish."  Come,  and  welcome!  Come,  and 
welcome !  Christ  is  more  ready  to  receive  you  than  you  are  to 
come  to  him.  Come  to  the  King  !  "  What  is  thy  petition,  and 
tfhat  is  thy  request1?  It  shall  be  done  unto  thee."  If  thou  stayest 
way,  it  is  not  because  he  shuts  the  door,  it  is  because  thou  wilt 
jot  come.  Come,  filthy,  naked,  ragged,  poor,  lost,  ruined,  come, 
jus':  as  thou  art.  Here  he  stands,  like  a  fountain  freely  opened 
for  all  comers.  "  Whosoever  will,  let  him  come  and  take  of  the 
waters  of  life  freely." 

5.  I  will  give  you  but  one  more  picture  to  set  forth  the  meek 
ness  of  Christ,  and  I  think  I  shall  not  have  completed  the  story 
without  it.  The  absence  of  all  selfishness  from  the  character  of 
Christ,  makes  one  ingredient  of  this  precious  quality  of  his  meek 
ness.  You  remember  the  history  of  Jonah.  Jonah  is  sent  to 
prophecy  against  Nineveh;  but  he  is  selfish.  He  will  not  go  for 
he  shall  get  no  honor  by  it.  He  does  not  want  to  go  so  long  a 
journey  for  so  small  a  price.  He  will  not  go.  He  will  take  a 
ship  and  go  to  Tarshish.  He  is  thrown  out  into  the  sea,  swal 
lowed  by  a  fish,  and  vomited  by  it  upon  dry  land.  He  goes 
away  to  Nineveh,  and  not  wanting  courage,  he  goes  through  its 
streets,  crying,  "Yet  forty  days,  and  Nineveh  shall  be  over 
thrown."  That  one  man's  earnest  cry  moves  the  city  from  ono 
end  to  the  other.  The  king  proclaims  a  fast ;  the  people  mourn 
in  sackcloth  and  confess  their  sins.  God  sends  them  tidings  of 
mercy,  and  they  are  spared.  But  what  will  Jonah  do  ?  Oh,  tell 
it  not,  ye  heavens ;  let  none  hear  it — that  ever  a  prophet  of  God 
could  do  the  like  !  He  sits  himself  down,  and  he  is  angry  with 
God.  And  why  his  anger1?  Because,  says  he,  "God  has  not 
destroyed  that  city."  It'  God  had  destroyed  the  city  he  would 
have  shouted  over  the  ruins,  because  his  reputation  would  have 
been  safe  ;  but  now  that  the  city  is  saved,  and  his  own  reputation 
for  a  prophet  tarnished,  he  must  needs  sit  down  in  anger.  But 
Christ  is  the  very  reverse  of  this.  Sinners !  Christ  does  thundei 
at  you  sometimes,  but  it  is  always  that  he  may  bring  you  to  re 
pentance.  He  does  take  Jonah's  cry,  and  utter  it  for  more 


374  THE    MEEK    AND    LOWLY    ONE. 

mightily  than  Jonah  could  ;  he  does  warn  you  that  there  is  a  fire 
that  never  can  be  quenched,  and  a  worm  that  dieth  not;  but  if 
you  turn  to  him,  will  he  sit  down  and  be  angry  ?  Oh  !  no  ;  me- 
thinks  I  see  him.  There  you  come,  poor  prodigals;  your  father 
falls  upon  your  neck  and  kisses  you,  and  you  are  accepted,  and  a 
feast  is  made.  Here  comes  the  elder  brother,  Jesus.  What  docs 
he  say  ?  Is  he  angry  because  you  are  saved  ?  Ah  !  no  !  "  My 
Father,"  saith  he,  "  my  younger  brothers  have  all  come  home, 
dnd  I  love  them  ;  they  shall  share  my  honors  ;  they  shall  sit  upon 
my  throve  ,  they  shall  share  my  heaven."  "Where  I  am,  there 
they  shall  be  also."  I  will  take  them  ,nto  union  with  myself,  and 
as  they  have  wasted  their  inheritance,  all  that  I  have  fhall  be 
theirs  for  ever.  Oh !  come  home,  prodigal,  there  is  no  anjry 
brother  and  no  angry  father.  Come  back,  come  back,  my  bio- 
ther,  my  wandering  brother,  I  invite  thee  ;  for  Jesus  is  rejoice \ 
to  receive  thee.  Do  you  not  see,  then,  that  the  meeknesr  o( 
Christ  is  a  sweet  and  blessed  reason  why  we  should  come  V 
him? 

II.  The  second  virtue  which  Christ  claims  for  himself  is  LO*V 

LINESS  OF  HEART. 

When  I  looked  this  passage  out  in  the  original,  I  half  war 
dered  how  it  \vas  that  Christ  found  such  a  sweet  word  for  the 
expression  of  his  meaning ;  for  the  Greeks  do  not  know  much 
about  humility,  and  they  have  not  a  very  good  word  to  set  forth 
this  idea  of  lowliness  of  heart.  I  find  that  if  this  passage  stood 
in  another  connection,  the  word  might  even  be  interpreted  "  d^ 
graded,  debased,"  for  the  Greeks  thought  that  if  a  man  was  hum 
ble  he  degraded  himself — that  if  he  stooped,  he  debased  himself 
right  out.  "  Well,"  says  Christ,  "  if  you  think  so,  so  be  it,"  ar?d 
he  takes  the  word.  The  word  means,  "  near  the  ground."  So  is 
Christ's  heart.  We  cannot  be  so  low  that  he  will  not  stoop  to 
reach  us.  I  would  just  set  out  the  lowliness  of  Christ's  heart 
hi  this  way.  Christ  is  "lowly  in  heart;"  that  is  he  is  will 
ing  to  receive  the  poorest  sinner  in  the  world;  The  pharise* 
thought  that  the  keeper  of  the  gate  of  heaven  would  admit  only 
the  rich,  and  not  the  poor.  Mark  Christ's  teaching.  There 
were  two  came  to  the  gate  once  upon  a  time;  one  was  clothed  in 
pirple  and  fine  linen,  and  fared  sumptuously  every  day ;  ha 


I 

THE    MEEK    AND    LOWLY    ONE.  375 

knocked  and  thought  that  full  sure  he  must  enter ;  but  "  in 
hell  he  lift  up  his  eyes  being  in  torments."  There  came 
another,  borne  on  angels'  wings.  It  was  a  beggar,  whose  many 
sores  the  dogs  had  licked  ;  and  he  had  not  so  much  as  to  knock 
at  the  gate,  for  the  angels  carried  him  straight  away  into  the  very 
v  centre  of  paradise,  and  laid  him  in  Abraham's  bosom.  Jesus 
Christ  is  willing  to  receive  beggars  into  his  bosom.  King^ 
you  know,  condescend  when  they  permit  even  the  rich  to  be  pre 
sented  to  them,  and  the  kissing  of  a  monarch's  hand  is  something 
very  wonderful  indeed ;  but  to  have  the  kisses  of  his  lips,  who  is 
the  King  of  kings,  is  no  uncommon  thing  for  men  that  are  shiv 
ering  in  rags,  or  that  are  sick  upon  miserable  beds  in  dingy  attics, 
Christ  is  "  lowly  in  heart ;  "  he  goes  with  what  men  call  the 
vulgar  herd ;  he  hath  nothing  of  affected  royalty  about  him — he 
hath  a  nobler  royalty  than  that,  the  royalty  that  is  too  proud  to 
think  any  thing  of  a  stoop,  that  can  only  measure  itself  by  its 
own  intrinsic  excellence,  and  not  by  its  official  standing.  He 
receiveth  the  lowest,  the  meanest,  the  vilest,  for  he  is  "  lowly  in 
heart."  If  I  have  among  my  congregation  some  of  the  poorest 
of  the  poor,  let  them  come  away  to  Christ,  and  let  them  not 
imagine  that  their  poverty  need  keep  them  back.  I  am  always 
delighted  when  I  see  a  number  of  women  here  from  the  neighbor 
ing  workhouse.  I  bless  God  that  there  are  some  in  the  work 
house  that  are  willing  to  come ;  and,  though  they  have  sometimes 
been  put  to  a  little  inconvenience  by  so  doing,  yet  I  have  known 
them  sooner  give  up  their  dinner  than  give  up  coming  to  hear  the 
Word.  God  bless  the  workhouse  women,  and  may  they  be  led 
to  Christ,  for  he  is  meek  and  lowly  in  heart,  and  will  not  reject 
them.  I  must  confess,  also,  I  like  to  see  a  smock  frock  here  and 
there  in  the  midst  of  the  congregation.  Oh  !  what  a  mercy,  that 
in  the  palace  of  the  Great  King  there  shall  be  found  these  work- 
men,  these  blouses.  They  shall  be  made  partakers  of  the  king 
dom  of  God.  He  makes  no  difference  between  prince  arid  pauper  ; 
f&  takes  men  to  heaven  just  as  readily  from  the  workhouse  as 
from  the  palace. 

.Further,  this  lowliness  of  heart  in  Christ  leads  him  to  receive 
the  most  ignorant  as  well  as  the  learned  to  himself.  I  know  that 
sometimes  poor  ignorant  people  got  a  notion  in  their  heads  thai 


376  THE    MEEK    AND    LOWLY    ONE. 

they  cannot  be  saved,  because  they  cannot  read  and  do  not  know 
much.  I  have  sometimes,  especially  in  country  villages,  received 
this  answer,  when  I  have  been  asking  any  thing  about  personal 
religion  :  "  Well,  you  know,  sir,  I  never  had  any  learning." 
Oh  !  but,  ye  unlearned,  is  this  a  reason  why  ye  should  stay 
away  from  him  who  is  lowly  in  heart  ?  It  was  said  of  an  old 
Greek  philosopher,  that  he  wrote  over  his  door,  "  None  but  the 

earned  may  enter  here."  But  Christ,  on  the  contrary,  writes 
over  his  door,  "  He  that  is  simple  let  him  turn  in  hither."  There 
are  many  great  men  with  long  handles  to  their  names  who  know 
little  of  the  gospel,  while  some  of  the  poor  unlettered  ones  spell 
out  the  whole  secret,  and  become  perfect  masters  in  divinity. 
If  they  had  degrees  who  deserve  them,  diplomas  should  often  be 
transferred,  and  given  to  those  who  hold  the  plough  handle  or 
work  at  the  carpenter's  bench;  for  there  is  often  more  divinity 
in  the  little  finger  of  a  ploughman  than  there  is  in  the  whole 
body  of  some  of  our  modern  divines.  "  Don't  they  understand 
divinity  ? "  you  say.  Yes,  in  the  letter  of  it ;  but,  as  to  the 
spirit  and  life  of  it,  D.  D.  often  means  DOUBLY  DESTITUTE. 

The  lowliness  of  Christ  may  be  clearly  seen  in  yet  another 
point  of  view.  He  is  not  only  willing  to  receive  the  poor,  and 
to  receive  the  ignorant,  but  he  is  also  ever  ready  to  receive  men, 
despite  the  vileness  of  their  characters.  Some  teachers  can 
stoop,  and  freely  too,  to  both  poor  and  ignorant ;  but  they  can- 
not  stoop  to  the  wicked.  I  think  we  have  all  felt  a  difficulty 
here.  "  However  poor  a  man  may  be,  or  however  little  he 
knows,"  you  say,  "  I  don't  mind  talking  with  him,  and  trying  to 
do  him  good ;  but  I  cannot  talk  with  a  man  who  is  a  rogue  or  a 
vagabond,  or  with  a  woman  who  has  lost  her  character/'  1 
know  you  cannot;  there  are  a  great  many  things  Christ  did 
Tvhich  we  cannot  do.  We,  who  are  the  servants  of  Christ,  have 

ttcmpted  to  draw  a  line  where  duty  has  its  bound.  Like  the 
domestic  servant  in  some  lordly  mansion  who  stoops  not  to 
menial  employment.  We  are  above  our  work.  We  are  so 
fastidious,  that  we  cannot  go  after  the  chief  of  sinners,  and  the 
r:lest  of  the  vile.  Not  so,  Christ.  "  He  receiveth  sinners  and 
eateth  with  them."  He  in  the  days  of  his  flesh,  became  familiar 
With '  the  outcasts.  He  sought  them  out  that  he  might  save  them ; 


I 

TLJK    MEEK    AND    J.OWLY    ONE.  V. 

he  entered  their  homes ;  he  found  his  way  into  the  slums,  lik  .. 
some  diligent  officer  of  the  police ;  he  was  willing  to  lodge  wherw 
they  lodged,  eat  at  their  table,  and  associate  with  their  class  to 
find  them  out.  His  mission  was  to  seek  as  well  as  to  save.  Oh, 
see  him  stand,  with  arms  wide  open  !  Will  that  thief,  who  ia 
justly  executed  for  his  crimes,  be  recognized  by  him  ?  Yes.  he 
vill.  There,  with  his  arms  outstretched,  he  hangs;  the  thief; 
lies  as  it  were  to  his  bosom,  and  Jesus  gives  him  a  most  blessed] 
embrace.  "  To-day  shalt  thou  be  with  me  in  Paradise."  Christ 
has  received  the  thief  with  open  heart  and  open  arms  too.  And 
*hore  is  Mary.  Do  you  see  her  1  She  is  washing  the  feet  of 
Jesus.  Why,  she  is  a  bad  character,  one  of  the  worst  women  on 
the  town.  What  will  Christ  say  1  Say  !  Why,  hear  how  he 
speaks  to  Simon,  the  pious,  reputable  Pharisee.  Saith  he,  after 
putting  the  parable  concerning  the  two  debtors,  "  which  of  them 
shall  love  him  most  ?" — and  then  he  explains  that  this  woman  hath 
had  much  forgiven,  and  therefore  she  loves  him  much.  "Thy 
sins,  which  are  many,  are  all  forgiven,"  saith  he,  and  she  goes  her 
way  in  peace.  There  are  many  men  you  and  1  would  not  demean 
ourselves  to  notice,  that  Christ  will  take  to  heaven  at  last ;  for  he 
is  "  lowly  in  heart."  He  takes  the  base,  the  vilest,  the  scum,  the 
offscouring,  the  filth,  the  garbage  of  the  world,  and  out  of  such 
stuff  and  matter  as  that,  he  buildeth  up  a  holy  temple,  and 
gathereth  to  himself  trophies  for  his  honor  and  praise. 

And  further,  while  I  speak  of  the  lowliness  of  Christ's  heart,  ) 
must  remark  another  thing.  Perhaps  one  is  saying  here,  "  Oh  ! 
sir,  it  is  riot  what  I  have  been,  as  to  my  conduct,  that  keeps  me 
back  from  Christ ;  but  I  feel  that  what  I  am  as  to  my  nature  re 
strains  me ;  I  am  such  a  dolt,  I  shall  never  learn  in  his  school.  I 
am  such  a  hard-hearted  one,  he  will  never  melt  me,  and  if  he  does 
save  me,  I  shall  never  be  worth  his  having.  Yes,  but  Christ  is 
*  lowly  in  heart."  There  are  some  great  goldsmiths  that  of  course 
can  only  think  of  preparing  and  polishing  the  choicest  diamonds ; 
but  Jesus  Christ  polishes  a  common  pebble,  and  makes  a  jewel 
of  it.  Goldsmiths  make  their  precious  treasures  out  of  precious 
materials ;  Christ  makes  his  precious  things  out  of  dross.  He 
begins  always  with  bad  material.  The  palace  of  our  king  is  not 
made  of  cedar  wood,  as  Solomon's,  or  if  it  be  of  wood,  certain]  7 


V7S  THE    MEEK    AND    LOWL1     ONE. 

he  has  eriusen  the  knottiest  trees  and  the  knottiest  planks  w Here 
with  to  build  his  habitation.  He  has  taken  those  to  be  his  scholars 
who  were  the  greatest  dunces ;  so  amazing  is  the  lowliness  of 
Christ's  heart.  He  sits  down  on  the  form  with  us  to  teach  us  the 
A  B  C  of  repentance,  and  if  we  are  slow  to  learn  it  he  begins 
again,  and  takes  us  through  our  alphabet,  and  if  we  forget  it  he 
will  often  teach  us  our  letters  over  again ;  for  though  he  is  able 
to  teach  the  angels,  yet  he  condescends  to  instruct  babes,  and  as 
we  go  step  by  step  in  heavenly  literature,  Christ  is  not  above 
teaching  the  elements.  He  teaches  not  only  in  the  university, 
and  the  grammar-school,  where  high  attainments  are  valued,  but 
he  teaches  in  the  day-school,  where  the  elements  and  first  prin 
ciples  are  to  be  instilled.  It  is  he  who  teaches  the  sinner  what 
sinner  means  in  deep  conviction,  and  what  faith  means  in  holy 
assurance.  It  is  not  only  he  who  takes  us  to  Pisgah,  and  bids  us 
view  the  promised  land,  but  it  is  he  also  who  takes  us  to  Calvary, 
and  makes  us  learn  that  simplest  of  all  things,  the  sacred  writing 
of  the  cross.  He,  if  I  may  use  such  a  phrase,  will  not  only  teach 
us  how  to  write  the  highly  ornamental  writing  of  the  Eden  Para 
dise,  the  richly  gilded,  illuminated  letters  of  communion  and 
fellowship,  but  he  teaches  us  how  to  make  the  pot-hooks  and 
hangers  of  repentance  and  faith.  He  begins  at  the  beginning ; 
for  he  is  "  meek  and  lowly  in  heart."  Come,  then,  ye  dolts,  ye 
fools;  come,  ye  sinners,  ye  vile  ones;  come,  ye  dullest  of  all 
scholars,  ye  poor,  ye  illiterate,  ye  who  are  rejected  and  despised 
of  men ;  come  to  him  who  was  rejected  and  despised  as  well  as 
you.  Come  and  welcome !  Christ  bids  you  come ! 

"  Let  not  conscience  make  you  linger ; 

Nor  of  fitness  fondly  dreain; 
All  thejitnex*  he  requireth, 

Is  to  feel  your  need  of  him  : 
This  he  gives  you  ; 
11s  his  Spirit's  rising  beam." 

Come,  poor  sinners !  come  to  a  gentle  Saviour  !  and  you  shall 
ftever  regret  that  you  came  to  him. 

III.  Having  thus  spoken  on  the  two  marks  of  our  Lord's 
character,  I  propose  to  conclude,  if  God  shall  help  me,  by  knock 


I 

THE    MEEK    AND    LOWLY    ONE. 

:ng  horn*  the  nail,  by  driving  in  the  wedge,  and  pressing  upon 
you  a  conclusion  from  these  arguments.  The  conclusion  of  the 
whole  matter  is  this,  since  Christ  is  "  meek  and  lowly  in  heart," 
sinners  come  to  him. 

Come  to  him,  then,  first,  whoever  you  may  be,  for  he  is  "  meek 
«wid  lowly  in  heart."  When  a  man  has  done  any  thing  wrong, 
and  wants  a  help  through  his  difficulty,  if  about  to  employ  some 
counsel  to  plead  for  him  in  a  court  of  law,  he  might  say,  "  Oh 
don't  engage  Mr.  So-and-so  for  me ;  I  hear  he  is  a  very  hard- 
hearted  man ;  I  should  not  like  to  tell  him  what  I  have  done,  and 
entrust  my  case  in  his  hands.  S^nd  for  Mr.  So-and-so ;  I  have 
heard  that  he  is  very  kind  and  g3»tle;  let  him  come  and  hear 
my  case,  and  let  him  conduct  the  pleadings  for  me."  Sinner ! 
you  are  sinful,  but  Christ  is  tender-hearted.  Speed  thy  way  to 
Christ's  private  chamber, — your  own  closet  of  prayer.  Tell 
him  all  you  have  done ;  he  will  not  upbraid  you  :  confess  all 
your  sins  ;  he  will  not  chide  you.  Tell  him  all  your  follies  ;  he 
will  not  be  angry  with  you.  Commit  your  case  to  him,  and 
with  a  sweet  smile  he  will  say,  "  I  have  cast  thy  sins  behind  my 
back  ;  thou  hast  come  to  reason  with  me  ;  I  will  discover  to  thee 
a  matter  of  faith  which  excels  all  reason, — l  Though  thy  sins  be 
as  scarlet,  they  shall  be  as  wool ;  though  they  be  red  like  crim 
son,  they  shall  be  whiter  than  snow.' ?!  Come  to  Christ,  thea, 
sinful  ones,  because  he  is  "  meek  and  lowly  in  heart,"  and  he  can 
bear  with  the  narrative  of  your  offences.  "  But,  sir,  I  am  very 
timid,  and  I  dare  not  go."  Ah,  but  however  timid  you  may  be, 
you  need  not  be  afraid  of  him.  He  knows  your  timidity,  and 
%e  will  meet  you  with  a  smile,  and  say,  "  Fear  not.  Be  of  good 
cheer.  Tell  me  thy  sin,  put  thy  trust  in  me,  and  thou  shalt  even 
yet  rejoice  to  know  my  power  to  save.  Come  now,"  saith  he, 
"  come  to  me  at  once.  Linger  no  longer.  1  do  not  strive  nor 
cr} ,  nor  cause  my  voice  to  be  heard  in  the  streets.  A  bruised 
reed  I  will  not  break,  the  smoking  flax  I  will  not  quench ;  but  1 
will  bring  forth  judgment  unto  victory."  Come  then,  ye  timid 
ones  to  Christ,  for  he  is  meek  and  lowly  in  heart.  "  Oh,"  says 
one,  "  but  I  am  despairing ;  I  have  been  so  long  under  a  sense 
of  sin  1  cannot  go  to  Christ."  Poor  soul !  he  is  so  meek  and 
lowly,  tnat,  despairing  though  thou  mayest  be,  take  courage 


380  TH«    MEEK    AND    LOWLY    ONE. 

ftow  ;  though  it  be  like  a  forlorn  hope  to  thee,  yet  go  U 
Say,  ir  the  words  of  the  hymn  —  - 

"I'll  to  the  gracious  King  approach, 

Whose  sceptre  pardon  gives; 
Perhaps  he  may  command  my  touch, 
And  then  the  suppliant  lives. 

I  can  but  perish  if  I  go  ; 

I  am  resolved  to  try  ; 
For  if  I  stay  away,  I  know 

I  must  for  ever  die." 

.ltd  you  may  add  this  comfortable  reflection  — 

"  But  if  I  die  with  merejj  sought, 

When  I  the  king  have  tried, 
This  were  to  die  (delightful  thought  !) 
As  sinner  never  died,'* 

Ccme  to  him,  then,  timid  and  despairing;  for  he  is  "  meek  and 
l.vvvly  in  heart."  First,  he  bids  thee  confess.  What  a  sweet 
confessor  !  Put  thy  lip  to  his  ear,  and  tell  him  all.  He  is 
"neek  and  lowly  in  heart."  Fear  not.  None  of  thy  sins  car. 
move  him  to  anger,  if  thou  dost  but  confess  them.  If  thou  keep- 
esl  fchem  in  thy  heart,  they  shall  be  like  a  slumbering  volcano  ; 
and  a  furnace  of  destruction  thou  shalt  find  even  to  the  uttermost 
by-i.Tid-bye.  But  confess  thy  sins;  tell  them  all  ;  he  is  "meek 
and  lowly  in  heart."  Happy  confession  !  when  we  have  such  a 


Aga'vr;,  he  bids  thee  trust  him  ;  and  canst  thou  not  trust  him  ? 
He  is  "  meek  and  lowly  in  heart."  Sinner  !  put  confidence  in 
Christ.  There  never  was  such  a  tender  heart  as  his,  never  such 
a  compassionate  face.  Lo«»k  him  in  the  face,  poor  soul,  as  thoi; 
•eest  him  dying  on  the  tree,  and  say,  is  not  that  a  face  that  any  man. 
might  trust  !  Look  at  him  !  Canst  thou  doubt  him  ?  Wilt  thou 
withhold  thy  cause  from  such  a  Redeemer  as  this  1  No,  Jesus  ! 
thou  art  so  generous,  so  good,  so  kind.  Take  thou  my  cause  in 
hand.  Just  as  I  am,  1  come  to  thee.  Save  me,  I  beseech  thee, 
for  I  put  my  trust  in  thee. 

And  ther.  Jesus  not  only  bids  you  confess  and  believe,  but  ha 


I 

THE    MEEK     A.NL)    LOWLY     ONE.  38 1 

bids  you  afterwards  serve  him.  And  sure,  sinners,  this  should 
be  a  reason  why  you  should  do  it,  that  he  is  so  "meek  and  lowly 
in  heart."  It  is  said,  "Good  masters  make  good  servants." 
What  good  servants  you  and  I  ought  to  be,  for  what  a  good  Mas 
ter  we  have'  Never  an  ill  word  doth  he  say  to  us.  If  some 
times  he  pointeth  out  any  thing  we  have  done  amiss,  it  is  only 
for  our  good.  Not  for  his  profit  doth  he  chasten,  but  for  ours 
Sinner  !  I  ask  thee  not  to  serve  the  god  of  this  world — that  foul 
tiend  who  shall  destroy  thee  after  all  thy  service.  The  devil  is 
thy  master  now,  and  ye  have  heard  the  wages  he  bestows.  But 
come  and  serve  Christ,  the  meek  and  lowly  one,  who  will  give 
thee  good  cheer  while  thou  art  serving  him,  and  give  thee  a 
blessed  reward  when  thy  work  is  done. 

And  now,  best  of  all,  sinners  !  come  to  Christ.  Come  to  him 
in  all  his  offices,  for  he  is  "meek  and  lowly  in  heart."  Sinner! 
thou  art  sick — Christ  is  a  physician.  If  men  have  broken  a  bone, 
and  they  are  about  to  have  a  surgeon  fetched,  they  say,  "  Oh  ! 

he  a  feeling,  tender-hearted  man  T*  For  there  is  many  an 
army  surgeon  that  takes  off  a  leg,  and  never  thinks  of  the  pain 
tie  is  giving.  "  Is  he  a  kind  man  ?"  says  the  poor  sufferer,  when 
ne  is  about  to  be  strapped  down  upon  the  table.  Ah  !  poor  suf 
ferer,  Christ  will  heal  thy  broken  bones,  and  he  will  do  it  with 
downy  fingers.  Never  was  there  so  light  a  touch  as  this  heaven 
ly  surgeon  has.  'Tis  pleasure  even  to  be  wounded  by  him.  much 
more  to  be  healed.  Oh,  what  balm  is  that  he  gives  to  the  poor 
bleeding  heart !  Fear  not ;  there  was  never  such  a  physician  irs 
.his.  If  he  give  thee  now  and  then  a  bitter  pill  and  a  sour  draught, 
yet  he  will  give  thee  such  honied  words  and  such  sweet  promises 
therewith,  that  thou  shalt  swallow  it  all  up  without  murmuring. 
Nay,  If  he  be  with  thee,  thou  canst  even  swallow  up  death  in 
victory  ;  and  never  know  that  thou  hast  died  because  victory  hath 
taken  the  bitter  taste  away. 

Sinner  !  thou  art  not  only  sick,  and  therefore  bidden  to  come 
to  him,  but  thou  art  moreover  in  debt,  and  he  offers  now  to  pa) 
thy  debts,  and  to  discharge  them  in  full.  Come,  come  to  him, 
for  he  is  not  harsh.  Some  men,  when  they  do  mean  to  let  a  debtor 
off,  first  have  him  in  their  office,  and  give  him  as  much  as  they  can 
uf  the  most  seveie  rebukes; — "You  rogue,  you !  how  oare  you 


THE    MEEK    AND    LOWLY     ONE. 

get  in  my  debt,  when  you  knew  you  could  not  pay  ?  You  have 
brought  a  deal  of  trouble  on  yourself;  you  have  ruined  your 
family,"  and  so  forth ;  and  the  good  man  gives  him  some  very 
Bound  admonition,  and  very  right  too  ;  till  at  length  he  says. 
"  I'll  let  you  off  this  time ;  come,  now,  I  forgive  you,  and  I  hope 
you  will  never  do  so  again."  But  Christ  is  even  better  than 
.his.  "  There  is  all  your  debt."  he  says,  "  I  have  nailed  it  to  the 
>i  oss  ;  sinner,  I  forgive  thee  all,"  and  not  one  accusing  word 
cornes  from  his  lips.  Come,  then,  to  him. 

I  fear  I  have  spoilt  my  master  in  the  painting,  something  like 
the  artist  who  had  to  depict  some  fair  damsel,  and  he  so  misre 
presented  her  features  that  she  lost  her  reputation  for  beauty.  I 
have  sometimes  feared  lest  I  should  do  the  same,  and  so  distort 
the  face  of  Christ,  and  so  fail  of  giving  the  true  likeness  of  his 
character  that  you  would  not  love  him.  Oh,  could  you  see  him  ! 
If  he  could  stand  here  for  one  moment,  and  tell  you  that  he  was 
meok  and  lowly  in  heart.  Oh,  methinks  you  would  run  to  him 
and  say,  "Jesus,  we  come.  Thou  meek  and  lowly  Messiah,  be 
thou  our  all !"  Nay,  you  would  not  come  ;  I  am  mistaken.  If 
sovereign  grace  draw  you  not  under  the  sound  of  the  gospel, 
neither  would  you  be  converted  though  Christ  should  appear  be 
fore  you.  But  hear  now  the  message  of  that  gospel — "  Believe 
on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  you  shall  be  saved ;  fo«§  he  thut 
believeth  on  him  and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved  j  he  th'.t  believ- 
elh  not,  muHt  be  damned." 


SERMON    XXV. 

WEAK  HANDS  AND  FEEBLE  KNEES. 

"  Strengthen  ye  the  weak  hands  and  confirm  the  feeble  knees." — ISAIAH, 
ra.  3. 

IT  ia  the  duty  of  all  men  to  be  careful  of  the  sons  of  soirow. 
There  be  some  who  from  their  very  birth  are  marked  by  melan- 
choly  as  her  own.  The  silent  shades  of  sorrow  are  their  conge 
nial  haunts ;  the  glades  of  the  forest  of  grief  are  the  only  places 
where  their  leaf  can  flourish.  Others  there  are  who  through 
some  crushing  misfortune  are  brought  so  low  that  they  never 
hold  up  their  heads  again,  but  go  from  that  time  forth  mourning 
to  their  graves.  Some  there  be,  again,  who,  disappointed  in  their 
early  youth,  either  in  some  fond  object  of  their  affections,  or  else 
in  some  project  of  their  young  ambition,  never  can  dare  to  face 
the  world,  but  shrink  from  contact  with  their  fellows,  even  as  the 
sensitive  plant  curls  up  its  tendrils  at  the  touch.  In  all  flocks 
there  must  be  lambs,  and  weak  and  wounded  sheep  ;  and  among 
the  flock  of  men,  it  seems  that  there  must  necessarily  be  some 
who  should  more  than  others  prove  the  truth  of  Job's  declara 
tion,  "'Man  is  born  to  trouble  even  as  the  sparks  fly  upwards." 
It  is  the  duty  then  of  those  of  us  who  are  more  free  than  others 
from  despondency  of  spirit,  to  be  very  tender  to  these  weak 
jiies.  Far  be  it  from  the  man  of  courageous  disposition,  of  sterr 
resolve,  and  of  unbending  purpose,  to  be  hard  towards  those  wlu 
aie  timid  and  despairing.  If  we  have  a  lion-like  spirit,  let  u; 
not  imitate  the  king  of  beasts  in  his  cruelty  to  those  timid  fallow 
deer  that  fly  before  him,  but  let  us  place  our  strength  at  their 
service  for  their  help  and  protection.  Let  us  with  downy  fingers 
bind  up  the  wounded  heart  •  with  oil  and  wine  let  us  nourish 


384  WEAK  HANDS  AND  FEEBLE  KNEES. 

their  fainting  spirits.  In  this  battle  of  life,  let  the  unwounded 
warriors  bear  their  injured  comrades  to  the  rear,  bathe  their 
wounds,  and  cover  them  from  the  storm  of  war.  Be  gentle  with 
those  that  are  desponding.  Alas,  it  is  not  every  man  that  has 
learned  this  lesson.  There  are  some  who  deal  with  others  with 
rough-handed  thoughtlessness.  "  Ah,"  they  say,  "  if  such  a  one 
bo  so  foolish  as  to  be  sensitive  let  him  be."  O  speak  not  thus ; 
to  be  sensitive,  timid,  and  desponding,  is  ill  enough  in  itself, 
without  our  being  hard  and  untender  towards  those  who  are  so 
afflicted.  Go  ye  forth,  and  do  to  others  as  ye  would  that  they 
should  do  to  you  ;  and  as  ye  would  that  others  should  in  your 
hours  of  despondency  deal  with  you  tenderly  and  comfortably, 
so  deal  ye  tenderly  and  comfortably  with  them. 

But  my  text,  especially  commands  the  minister  to  deal  ten- 
derly  with  those  of  Christ's  people  who  are  in  such  a  condition, 
and  these  are  not  a  few,  for  although  religion  changes  the  moral 
temperament  of  men,  it  does  not  change  the  physical.  A  man 
A'ho  is  weak  in  health  before  conversion  will  probably  be  as 
weak  afterwards,  and  many  a  spirit  that  has  a  tendency  to  des. 
pondency,  has  exhibited  that  tendency  after  conversion.  We  do 
not  profess  that  the  religion  of  Christ  will  so  thoroughly  change 
a  man  as  to  take  away  from  him  all  his  natural  tendencies  ;  it 
will  give  the  despairing  something  that  will  alleviate  that  despon 
dency,  but  as  long  as  that  is  caused  by  a  low  state  of  body,  or 
a  diseased  mind,  we  do  not  profess  that  the  religion  of  Christ 
will  totally  remove  it.  N<>  rather,  we  do  see  every  day  that 
amongst  the  best  of  God's  servants,  there  are  those  who  are  al 
ways  doubting,  always  looking  to  the  dark  side  of  every  provi 
dence,  who  look  at  the  threatening  more  than  at  the  promise,  are 
ready  to  write  bitter  things  against  themselves,  and  often  put  the 
bitter  for  sweet,  and  the  sweet  for  bitter,  erring  against  their 
own  spirits  and  robbing  themselves  of  comforts  which  they 
Might  enjoy.  To  those  then,  I  shall  have  to  speak  this  morning 
in  the  words  of  our  text,  "  Strengthen  ye  the  weak  hands,  and 
confirm  the  feeble  knees." 

There  is  a  figure  used  in  the  text,  and  I  shall  keep  to  it.  First,  I 
sli-ill  attempt  to  show  the  importance  of  hands  and  knees  in  goinit 
tt>  heaven.  In  the  second  place.  I  shall  observe  the  ill  effect  &/ 


WEAK  HANDS  AND  FEEBLB  KNEES.  3«S5 

kaviny  weak  hands  and  feelh  knees ;  then  note  the  rauses  of 
those  weak  hands  and  feeble  knees  ;  for  in  so  doing  I  hope  I  shall 
be  able  to  apply  a  cure. 

I.  And,  now,  first,  we  find  in  our  text  hands  and  knees  men 
tioned.  We  may  be  quite  sure  that  THEY  ARE  VERY  IMPORTANT 
IN  GETTING  TO  HEAVEN.  The  hands  and  knees,  we  must  remem 
ber,  are  those  parts-  of  the  body  in  which  the  effects  of  fear  are 
the  most  easily  seen.  Of  course  the  root  of  despondency  and 
fear  must  lie  in  the  heart ;  it  is  that  which  is  first  moved  with 
terror.  But  afterwards  these  extremities,  these  limbs  of  action, 
these  modes  of  expressing  the  will  of  the  heart  begin  to  feel  the 
weakness  also.  The  hands  hang  down  in  terror,  and  the  knees 
begin  tc  tremble.  We  are  always  accustomed  to  describe  a  man 
when  he  is  in  a  great  fright,  when  some  overwhelming  danger 
appals  him,  as  hanging  down  his  hands  or  wringing  them  in  des 
pair,  and  as  feeling  his  knees  knocking  together  in  the  moment  of 
his  terror.  Just  so  the  prophet  means,  that  wherever  the  Christian 
displays  most  his  timidity  and  his  dismay  there  we  must  be  care 
ful  to  apply  the  remedy  of  comfort.  Now,  it  is  the  fact  that 
when  the  Christian's  heart  begins  to  tremble,  his  hands  of  action 
grow  weak,  and  his  knees  of  prayer  begin  to  tremble  also ;  he 
becomes  unable  to  do  and  unable  to  pray.  He  is  weak  in  active 
service,  and  he  becomes  weak  also  in  wrestling  with  his  God. 
Hands  and  knees  are  the  exhibitors  of  inward  powt«.  Now, 
there  are  some  men  whose  fears  are  so  great  that  they  have  be 
come  visible,  and  can  no  longer  be  concealed.  There  was  a  time 
when  these  sons  of  mourning  were  able  to  mask  their  sorrow 
with  an  outward  cheerfulness,  but  now  they  cannot.  The  fear  of 
the  heart  has  glided  into  their  hands  and  descended  into  their 
knees ;  and  we  see  them  hiding  from  us,  as  the  hind,  when  smitten 
by  the  arrow,  retires  from  the  herd  to  bleed  alone.  To  such  a? 
these,  ye  sons  of  consolation,  are  ye  sent  with  words  of  pity  and 
deeds  of  love. 

But,  note,  the  hands  and  knees  are  of  the  first  importance  be 
cause  they  represent  active  duty  and  supplication.  The  way  to 
heaven  is  through  faith  in  Christ;  but  after  we  have  believed  in 
Christ  the  legitimate  tendency  of  faith  is  active  service.  Although 
the  Christian  shall  go  to  heaven  through  the  blood  of  Christ,  yet 
17 


386  WEAK  HANDS  AND  FEEBLE  KNEES. 

as  a  pilgrim  he  must  walk  there;  and  although  he  overcomes 
through  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  yet  as  a  warrior  he  must  fight  if 
he  would  reign.  Active  service  is  expected  of  every  Christian. 
Christ  does  not  put  his  children  on  a  bed,  and  then  carry  them  to 
heaven  along  a  lazy  road  ;  but  he  gives  them  life,  and  bids  th;it 
life  develope  itself;  he  gives  them  strength,  and  commands  them 
to  use  the  strength  in  working  out  their  own  salvation.  While 
he  works  in  them,  they  are  passive ;  but  he  then  bids  them  be 
active  and  work  out  what  he  has  beforehand  wrought  in.  He  is 
no  Christian  who  does  not  seek  to  serve  his  God.  The  very 
motto  of  the  Christian  should  be  "  I  serve."  Christ's  people  are 
Christ's  servants,  and  as  the  angels  in  heaven  delight  to  fly  at 
God's  behests,  so  do  the  children  of  God  delight  to  run  in  the 
way  of  his  commands.  Hence,  then,  if  the  knees  be  weak  and 
the  hands  be  weak,  it  is  little  that  we  can  do.  We  cannot  run 
with  the  weak  knee  ;  we  cannot  labor  with  the  weak  hand.  How 
can  ye,  the  servants  of  Christ,  how  can  ye  lift  the  heavy  burdens 
which  ye  have  to  carry,  if  your  hands  be  weak  and  your  kncos 
totter?  How  can  ye  pull  down  the  walls  of  your  enemies  if 
your  hands  tremble]  How  can  ye  smite  your  foemen  with  the 
sword  of  faith  if  your  arm  be  weak  1  Look  well,  then,  to  this, 
for  herein  ye  suffer  exceeding  loss,  if  in  active  service  ye  lose 
power  and  strength. 

Again,  the  knees  may  signify  prayer.  When  a  man  becomes 
timid  and  desponding,  his  closet  very  soon  becomes  the  chamber 
of  woe.  Our  closets  are  either  Bethels  or  Bochirns, — the  house 
of  God  or  else  the  house  of  weeping.  Let  a  man  become  timid, 
distrustful,  doubting,  fearing,  trembling — what  little  power  has 
he  when  he  comes  before  the  mercy-seat !  He  would  believe 
in  God  but  he  cannot  appropriate  the  promise.  He  would  lay 
hold  of  the  angel,  but  all  his  sinews  shrink,  and  he  cannot  wrestle. 
lie  would  plead  the  promise,  but  his  hand  refuses  to  clutch  it 
with  an  iron  grasp.  And  he  goes  away  crying,  "  Oh  that  I  could 
pray  !  oh  that  I  could  believe  in  God !  oh  that  I  could  succeed 
with  God  in  prayer,  and  become  as  a  prevailing  prince.  Alas !  1 
am  as  weak  as  water,  and  I  can  do  nothing."  Herein  lies  the  5m 
portance  of  having  a  strong  hand  that  we  may  serve  God,  and  o1 


I 
WEAK  HANDS  AND  FEEBLE  KNEES.  38*5 

having  a  strong  knee  that  we  may  wrestle  with  him  in  prayer, 
and  get  the  blessing  from  him. 

Note,  again,  that  we  may  readily  see  what  the  prophet  means 
by  hands  and  knees,  if  we  observe  that  a  Christian,  although  his 
hopes  are  in  heaven,  stands  upon  the  earth.  It  is  with  the  hand 
of  faith  that  the  Christian  lays  hold  upon  that  which  is  not  seen, 
and  endeavors  to  climb  upwards  to  the  skies ;  it  is  with  his  foot 
thai,  he  spurns  the  earth  and  all  that  it  calls  good  or  great.  Lo 
the  Christian's  foot  be  weak,  and  he  cannot  then  despise  the  things 
that  are  seen  :  but  he  will  be  fixing  his  affection  on  things  on  earth 
and  not  on  things  above.  Let  his  hand  of  faith,  on  the  other 
hand,  grow  weak,  and  he  cannot  lay  hold  of  the  things  that  are  in 
heave-n.  He  will  find  it  difficult  to  fix  his  hold  above  the  stars, 
and  fuel  that  he  is  surely  anchored ;  and  very  hard  to  climb  the 
ladder  Jacob  saw.  The  foot  represents  the  manner  in  which  wo 
deal  wjth  earth,  we  tread  upon  it  boldly  and  courageously,  de 
spising  its  threats,  contemning  its  riches,  contemning  its  honors. 
The  weak  knee  cannot  do  this ;  we  are  then  apt  to  bend,  and 
cringe,  and  fawn  before  a  wicked  world  to  be  slaves,  \vhere  we 
ought  to  be  freemen,  and  vile  where  wre  ought  to  be  noble.  Here 
again  we  see  the  importance  of  the  hands  and  the  knees. 

But  you  will  remember  also  that  there  are  certain  parts  of  the 
spiritual  pilgrimage  where  hands  and  knees  are  absolutely  re 
quired.  John  Bunyan  represents  Christian  as  coming  to  the  foot 
of  the  hill  Difficulty,  and  he  says,  "  I  looked  then  after  Christian, 
to  see  him  go  up  the  hill,  where  I  perceived  he  fell  from  running 
to  going,  and  from  going  to  clambering  upon  his  hands  and  knees, 
because  of  the  steepness  of  the  place."  Many  such  a  place  you 
and  I  have  had  to  pass,  brother  Christians.  Once  we  could  run 
along  the  walls  of  salvation  with  triumphant  faith ;  at  other  times 
'we  could  walk  even  through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death 
with  quiet  confidence :  but  we  have  come  to  a  place  of  trial  and 
of  extraordinary  difficulty,  where  all  speed  failed  us.  and  strength 
did  not  suffice.  Then,  always  on  our  knees  in  agony  of  prayer 
and  always  on  our  hands  in  simpliiity  of  faith,  we  climbed  0111 
weary  way,  often  fearing  lest  we  should  fall  backward  to  our  de 
Btruction,  but  crying  out,  "  Lord,  let  my  knee  find  a  resting-place, 
let  my  hand  lay  hold  on  some  projecting  cra^  of  promise,  that 


888  WEAK  HANDS  AND  FEEBLE  KNEEb. 

there  1  may  get  a  fast  hold,  lest  I  totter  and  fall.  I  can  but 
ascend  slowly.  My  heart  followeth  hard  after  thee,  my  spirit 
crieth  after  thee ;  Lord,  help  me !  help  me  to  climb  this  weary 
way,  for  back  I  cannot  go."  Every  Christian  who  knows  much 
about  divine  experience  will  understand  what  this  means.  He 
*ill  often  be  brought  into  such  a  position  that  he  can  make  but 
ittle  progress ;  and  he  must  think  it  quite  enough  if  he  can  hold 
lis  ground  against  the  desperate  difficulties  of  his  path.  Hands 
ind  knees,  then,  in  many  ways,  are  essential  for  a  Christian's  com 
fort,  his  help,  and  his  advance  in  the  road  to  heaven. 

II.  Now,  I  shall  have,  in  the  second  place,  to  show  THE  ILL 

EFFECT    OF    WEAK    HANDS    AND    KNEES. 

And,  first,  we  have  already  hinted  that  one  ill  fruit  of  a  Chris 
tian  having  weak  hands  and  knees  is  this,  that  he  will  not  himself 
be  able  to  make  much  progress  in  the  divine  life.  Christian  men 
have  never  attained  to  what  they  are  to  be.  They  have  only 
started  on  their  pilgrimage,  and  after  they  have  gone  their  furthest, 
there  is  a  yet-beyond  towards  which  they  must  press  with  earnest 
heart,  though  with  weary  footsteps.  How  is  it  that  some  of  you 
have  made  but  little  progress  on  the  road  to  heaven  1  In  looking 
back  on  your  lives,  some  of  you  must  acknowledge  that  you  do 
not  know  much  more  about  Christ  now  than  you  did  six  years 
ago.  You  do  not  enjoy  greater  nearness  of  access  to  him  now 
than  you  did  then.  You  are  not  more  diligent  in  his  service,  or 
more  fearless  in  his  defence,  than  you  were  at  a  period  which  has 
long  since  elapsed.  Perhaps  you  are  compelled  to  feel  that  you 
have  made  no  advance,  or  even  have  gone  backward.  Why  ia 
this  ?  Is  it  not  because  your  hands  have  become  weak,  your  knees 
have  become  feeble  ?  You  have  neglected  prayer ;  you  have  for* 
saken  your  closets,  you  have  not  poured  out  your  hearts  before 
God  with  that  frequency  which  once  distinguished  you,  and  you 
have  not  the  faith  you  once  possessed.  You  have^  not  believed 
the  promise  as  you  ought  to  have  done.  You  have  not  taken  God 
at  his  naked  word,  and  trusted  to  him  as  he  deserved.  And  do 
you  expect  ever  to  make  any  progress  in  the  road  to  heaven  if 
you  doubt  your  God?  Do  you  imagine  that  you  shall  ever  go 
far  along  in  the  heavenly  pilgrimage  if  you  neglect  prayer  1  As 
well  could  you  expect  a  plait  to  TOW  without  air  and  water  as 


A'&AK    HANDS    AND    FEEBLE    KNEES.  389 

to  expect  .your  heart  to  grow  without  prayer  and  faith.  A.  poor 
blanched  thing  may  be  produced  in  a  dark  cellar ;  and  so  may 
you  maintain  a  poor,  blanched  miserable  existence,  if  you  live  ab 
sent  from  your  God,  and  apart  from  that  strength  which  faith  car. 
give  you,  but  you  can  never  attain  the  healthy  verdure  of  grace. 
Oh,  man,  if  thou  wouldst  grow  in  grace,  if  thou  wouldst  compre 
hend  with  all  saints  what  are  the  heights  and  depths,  and  know  the 
love  of  Christ  which  passeth  knowledge,  look  well  to  thy  knees  that 
they  be  strong,  look  well  to  thy  hands  that  they  hang  not  down. 
The  Christians  of  this  age  seem  to  me  to  be  content  with  them 
selves,  though  there  is  infinite  reason  for  the  reverse.  When  I 
sit  down  and  read  the  biographies  of  saints  who  have  gone  to 
heaven,  I  am  astonished  at  myself,  and  I  can  only  weep  to  think 
how  far  I  am  behind  these  men,  and  then  how  much  further  I 
must  be  behind  my  divine  Master.  Surely  the  examples  of 
eminent  saints  should  spur  us  onward.  If  Henry  Martin  could 
unreservedly  devote  his  life  and  energies  to  Christ's  service,  why 
may  not  we  1  If  Martin  Luther,  with  holy  boldness,  could  face 
danger,  why  should  not  we?  If  Calvin,  with  clear  and  eagle  eye, 
could  read  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel  amid  the  mists  of  error, 
why  should  not  we  ?  If  men  of  more  modern  times  have  been 
able  to  endure  opprobrium  and  disgrace  for  Christ's  sake,  or  If 
they  in  private  have  been  able  to  reach  to  the  seventh  heaven  of 
communion  with  God,  and  have  lived  on  earth  as  if  they  were  in 
paradise,  why  should  not  we "?  There  is  no  reason  why  the  least 
saint  in  God's  family  should  not  outrun  the  greatest.  Why  look 
upon  the  saints  of  olden  time  as  if  they  were  so  far  above  us  that 
we  can  never  equal  them1?  Oh,  dream  not  so!  What  Abraham 
was,  you  may  be.  What  the  mightiest  saint  of  that  former  life  was, 
that  ought  you  to  be.  You  should  never  rest  satisfied  until  you 
labor  to  surpass  them  all ;  yea,  not  even  then,  for  you  have  not 
yet  attained  to  the  perfection  which  is  in  Christ.  I  know  this  age  is 
one  which  is  always  satisfied  if  it  gets  barely  enough  to  carry  it 
to  heaven.  Where  is  that  holy  ambition  which  ought  to  stir  the 
Christian  soul  to  noble  deeds  ]  But  few  of  us  have  felt  it.  We 
are  drivelling  dwarfs,  content  with  the  small  height  to  which  we 
have  attained,  forgetful  of  the  steeps  which  tower  above  our 
heads.  Up  !  Christian,  up !  The  mount  of  holiness  may  be  steep 


390  WEAK    HANDS    AND    FEEBLE    KNEKrf. 

to  climb,  but,  man,  the  hill  of  God  is  a  high  hill,  even  as  the  nill 
of  Bashan.  Up  !  up  !  for  it  is  only  on  its  summit  that  the  calm 
air  of  heaven  can  be  breathed,  and  the  mists  of  earth  entirely  swept 
away.  But  weaV  b.vrl  a^d  feeble  knees,  I  know,  in  this  age,  art. 
the  reasons  why  so  few  Christians  attain  to  any  eminence  in  the 
ways  and  works  of  God. 

Vot,  again,  weak  hands  and  feeble  knees  have  another  ill  effect. 
Tnev  prevent  our  doing  any  great  wonder  for  the  good  of  the 
world.  Oh  !  what  work  there  is  to  do  in  this  poor  world  of  ours. 
Imagine  the  first  colonist  landing  in  Australia.  If  it  had  been 
revealed  to  him  in  a  vision  that,  in  process  of  time,  the  whole  of 
that  huge  island  should  be  ploughed,  and  sown,  and  built  upon, 
and  inhabited,  he  would  have  said,  "How  is  this  to  be  done] 
how  can  it  ever  be  effected '?"  And,  even  now,  great  as  has  been 
the  progress  in  that  country,  if  we  were  assured  that  in  a  few 
short  years  the  whole  of  it  would  be  brought  under  tillage,  we 
should  be  apt  to  ask,  but  how  shall  it  be  done]  We  should, 
however,  very  readily  perceive  that  there  must  be  strong  knees 
to  dig,  and  strong  hands  to  delve  and  plough,  or  else  the  work 
never  could  be  accomplished.  Many  there  must  be,  and  the  many 
must  be  strong,  else  the  work  cannot  be  done.  And  now,  lift  up 
your  eyes,  this  day  !  behold,  the  whole  world  lies  before  you  like 
one  huge  untilled  country.  Who  is  to  drive  the  ploughshare  of 
divine  grace  through  all  the  continents  of  this  world  ]  Who  is  to 
make  this  desert  blossom  like  the  rose  ]  Who  shall  sow  it  with 
the  good  seed-corn  of  the  kingdom  of  God]  Where  are  the 
laborers  who  shall  afterwards  reap  the  whitening  fields'?  Not 
\veak  hands  and  feeble  knees;  they  cannot  do  it.  Our  knees 
must  be  strong  and  our  sinews  must  be  well  braced,  or  else  so 
great  a  work  can  never  be  accomplished.  I  believe  one  reason 
why  the  religion  of  Christ  makes  such  little  progress  at  this  time, 
*?  because  most  of  us  are  so  weak.  We  find,  a  few  centuries  after 
Christ's  death,  his  name  was  preached  in  every  land  ;  there  was 
not  one  region  of  the  known  globe  which  had  not  heard  the  mar 
vellous  story  of  the  cross.  But,  then,  the  followers  of  Christ  were 
men  who  knew  not  what  it  was  to  tremble.  They  counted  not 
their  lives  dear  unto  them ;  but  leaving  houses,  and  land,  and 
families,  for  his  name's  sake,  they  went  everywhere  preaching  the 


WEAK    HANDS    AND    FEEBLE    KNEES.  391 

Woid.  But  at  this  day  we  are  not  strong.  We  must  all  be  as 
sured  of  a  livelihood  before  we  will  go  forth  to  preach  the  Word  ; 
and,  even  then,  if  no  one  shall  smile  on  us,  how  soon  we  cease 
the  work.  We  commence  an  enterprise,  but  little  difficulties  ap 
pal  us.  How  many  does  the  pastor  have  to  see,  of  little  men  and 
little  women  who  come  creeping  to  him,  and  whining  because  tlu>y 
jFnd  difficulties  in  serving  Christ.  Is  riot  this  because  ye  have 
weak  hands  and  feeble  knees  ?  If  ye  had  the  strong  knees  of  the 
apostles,  and  the  mighty  hands  of  the  ancient  martyrs,  nothing 
could  stand  against  you.  Let  God's  children  once  become  strong, 
and  woe  unto  thee,  Babylon,  woe  unto  thee,  O  Rome ;  down  must 
ye  fall,  ye  castles  of  the  enemy.  The  weakness  of  God's  children 
is  your  hope,  but  their  strength  is  your  despair.  Let  them  once 
believe  firmly,  let  them  pray  earnestly,  and  behold  Victory  waits 
upon  their  banners,  and  dismay  will  seize  your  hearts,  ye  enemies) 
of  Christ.  We  are  at  this  time  blessing  God  that  great  doors 
have  been  opened  for  the  spread  of  the  gospel.  Hindustan,  China, 
Japan,  many  lands  we  hope  shall  soon  be  visited  by  the  Christian 
missionary.  But  are  we  not  conscious  that  our  opportunities  are 
greater  than  our  strength  1  Must  not  the  Christian  church  con 
fess  that  she  has  now  a  greater  field,  but  she  has,  perhaps,  fewer 
laborers  than  ever  ?  The  harvest  is  greater,  but  the  laborers  are 
fewer.  Whence  comes  it?  It  comes  from  this  fact,  that  through 
the  church  of  Christ  the  weak  hand  and  the  feeble  knee  have  be 
come  the  general  rule.  "  Oh,"  says  one,  "  but  surely  there  might 
be  found  some  men  to  go  out."  And  so  say  others  as  well  as 
you,  why  are  you  not  the  man  to  go  1  You  say  others  should  be 
thrust  into  the  vineyard,  and  why  stand  back  yourself?  That 
torpor  which  seizes  upon  us  has  seized  upon  others  too.  Let  us 
not  be  hasty  in  condemning  the  rest  of  the  church,  till  we  have 
^rst  tested  ourselves.  Do  we  not  owe  our  all  to  Christ  ?  Are 
we  not  personally  his  debtors  ?  If  we  felt  this  debt,  if  we  felt  the 
value  of  souls,  should  not  each  of  us  give  more  towards  the  spread 
of  this  gospel  1  should  we  not  pray  more  agonizingly  ?  and  would 
there  not  be  found  many  of  us  who  would  be  ready  to  labor  more 
indefatigably.  If  the  minister  of  Christ  bo.  weak,  rest  assured  it 
is  because  the  church  itself  is  not  strong.  The  ir.inistry  is  but 
the  index  of  the  church.  If  we  often  fail  in  our  pulpits,  because 


392  WEAK  HANDS  AND  FEEBLE  KNEES. 

they  are  not  filled  with  fervent  men,  we  may  reply  to  you,  if  the 
pews  were  fervent,  the  puipit  would  eatch  the  flame.  I  am  nor 
speaking  of  water ;  I  know  that  water  runs  down  hill ;  but  1  sun 
now  speaking  of  fire,  and  fire  ascends.  Let  the  fore  begin  with 
you,  be  you  in  earnest,  supplicating,  striving,  and  wrestling  with 
God  in  prayer,  and  the  fire  shall  ascend  to  the  pulpit,  and  we,  too, 
shall  become  as  earnest  as  yourselves.  Let  us  use  no  mutual  re 
criminations.  The  whole  church  is  alike  at  this  present  moment  • 
t  is  all  weak.  There  are  but  few  and  noble  exceptions ;  but  few 
who  are  strong  in  prayer,  who  are  mighty  in  serving  their  God. 
And  hence  it  is  that  Satan  still  retains  his  throne,  still  darkness 
broods  over  the  nations,  and  still  men  are  not  saved.  May  God 
strengthen  us,  or  what  shall  become  of  the  world  wo  wot  not. 

Again,  weak  hands  and  feeble  knees  very  much  dishonor  Christ. 
I  would  say  nothing  to  grieve  the  heart  of  any  weak  believer  here 
present  this  morning,  but  still  we  must  speak  the  truth.  Want 
of  faith  and  weakness  in  prayer  dishonor  Christ.  Suppose  you 
have  a  friend,  and  you  say  to  him,  "  My  friend,  I  have  such  con 
fidence  in  you,  that  I  will  trust  you  with  the  title-deeds  of  my 
estate,  and  with  all  I  have.  Nay,  more;  I  will  trust  you  with 
my  health,  I  will  trust  you  with  my  life.  Do  what  you  will  with 
me ;  I  have  such  faith  in  your  goodness  and  your  wisdom  that  I 
am  sure  you  will  not  be  unkind,  and  will  not  err.  I  trust  you." 
There  is  something  honorable  in  faith  to  the  object  in  whom  it  is 
reposed.  Now,  if  you  are  able,  with  the  strong  hand  of  faith,  to 
bring  all  you  have  and  give  it  entire  unto  God,  and  say,  "  There, 
Lord.  I  surrender  al!  to  thee;  do  with  me  as  thou  wilt,  and  with 
mine  too ;  ta*e  what  thou  wilt  away  ;  give  me  what  thou  pleasest, 
or  withhold  what  thou  choosest ;  I  leave  all  in  thy  hands ;  I  can 
trust  thee  entirely ;  I  know  thou  wilt  make  no  mistake ;  I  know 
thou  wilt  not  treat  me  harshly  ;  I  leave  all  to  thee ;  without 
word,  or  thought,  or  wish,  I  surrender  all."  If  you  can  do  this, 
then  Christ  is  glorified ;  but  if  your  hand  is  weak,  and  you  are 
hiding  away  some  choice  thing  that  you  cannot  give  up  to  him, 
if  you  do  not  stand  fully  to  the  surrender,  but  keep  back  some 
thing  from  him,  then  that  weak  hand  brings  dishonor  upon  God. 
So  also  does  the  feeble  knee.  Some  one  has  given  you  a  promise, 
that  if  you  are  in  need  and  go  to  him,  he  will  give  whatever  yoa 


WEAK  HANDS  AND  FEEBLE  KNEES.  393 

want.  You  go  up  to  his  door,  you  knock  timidly  ;  and  when  he 
comes  to  meet  you,  you  rush  into  the  street  and  hide  yourself 
for  you  are  ashamed  that  he  should  see  you.  Driven  by  ner.es 
sity,  however,  you  knock  again ;  at  last  he  comes,  and  you  stand 
trembling  before  him.  "  Well,"  says  he,  "what  do  you  want?" 
*'  You  have  given  me  a  promise,  sir,  that  when  I  am  in  need  you 
will  do  so-and-so  for  me,  and  I  really  do  not  believe  it.  I  have 
uo  confidence  in  you,  and  I  do  not  like  to  ask."  There  would  be 
nothing  honorable  in  that  to  any  man.  How  far  different  wag 
the  example  of  Alexander's  courtier.  The  king  said  to  him,  "I 
will  give  to  thee  whatever  thou  requesteth ;"  and  the  man  asked 
such  a  gift  as  almost  emptied  Alexander's  coffers.  "Ay,"  says 
the  monarch,  "  it  was  a  great  thing  for  him  to  ask,  but  it  is  only 
a  little  thing  for  Alexander  to  give.  I  like  the  man's  confidence 
in  me,  in  using  my  word  to  its  fullest  extent."  Now  when  the 
believer  goes  to  his  closet  and  bows  there  with  his  feeble  knee, 
and  asks  God  to  bless  him,  and  docs  not  half  believe  that  he  will, 
he  dishonors  God.  But  when  a  man  goes  up  to  his  chamber, 
saying  in  his  heart,  "  There  is  something  that  I  want,  and  I  am 
going  to  get  it ;"  and  he  falls  on  his  knees,  and  cries,  "  Lord, 
thou  knowest  all  things  :  thou  knowest  that  such  a  thing  is  neces 
sary  to  me;  there  is  thy  promise;  'do  as  thou  hast  said,'  Lord; 
I  know  thou  wilt  give  it  me."  And  when  he  rises  from  his  knees, 
and  goes  down  and  says  to  his  friend,  "  The  blessing  will  come ; 
I  have  asked  for  it ;  I  have  prayed  the  prayer  of  faith,  and  God 
will  hear  me ;"  why,  such  a  man  honors  God.  I  would  remind 
you  again  of  a  great  proof  of  all  this.  Look  at  Mr.  Miiller,  at 
Ashley  down,  near  Bristol.  Could  he  have  built  that  house  for 
orphans  if  he  had  a  weak  hand  and  a  feeble  knee  ?  No.  But 
he  had  a  strong  hand ;  he  meant  to  serve  his  God  by  feeding  and 
clothing  orphans.  On  the  other  hand  he  had  a  strong  knee. 
*  Lord,"  he  said,  "  I  will  do  this  enterprise — give  me  the  means 
to  do  it."  And  he  went  to  God,  and  did  not  doubt  that  he  would 
do  it.  And,  lo !  thousands  have  rolled  into  his  treasury,  and  ha 
has  never  known  lack ;  and  now,  seven  hundred  children  Iiv3 
under  his  care,  and  are  fed  and  clothed  to  the  honor  of  God.  Let 
us  also  seek  to  have  strong  hands  and  mighty  knees,  and  so  shall 
we  honor  God.  If  we  do  not  build  an  orphan  house  to  hi* 
17* 


394  WEAK  HANDS  AND  FEEBLE  KNEES. 

name,  yet  shall  we  raise  our  Ebenezer,  and  leave  some  trophy  to 
the  honor  of  his  grace.  These  are  some  reasons  why  we  should 
Vook  well  to  hands  and  knees. 

III.  And,  now,  the  last  point  was  this :  THERE  ARE  CERTAIN 
CAUSES  OF  WEAK  HANDS  AND  FEEBLE  KNEES,  and  in  mentioning 
them,  I  shall  endeavor  to  correct  them. 

Some  Christians  have  weak  hands  and  feeble  knees  becaus 
they  are  only  infants.  They  are  young  Christians,  they  have  no 
been  converted  long.  God's  family  is  like  every  other  family  ; 
we  do  not  expect  the  new-born  convert  to  run  alone  at  first. 
Perhaps  it  will  be  months,  say  sometimes  years,  before  he  will 
be  able  to  feel  his  feet.  We  thank  God  that  there  is  a  very 
comfortable  promise  for  those  who  are  babes  in  Christ,  and  can 
not  run  alone  : — "  lie  shall  carry  the  lambs  in  his  bosom."  "  I 
taught  Ephraim  also  to  go,  taking  them  by  their  arms,"  says 
God,  by  the  prophet  Hosea,  So  ye,  just  born  to  God,  must  not 
despair  because  ye  can  not  as  yet  play  the  man  with  the  promise; 
if  ye  can  not  now  wrestle  with  the  angel,  remember,  God  does 
not  require  wrestling  from  infants.  He  will  not  overdrive  his 
lambs.  He  does  not  expect  long  marches  from  feeble  feet.  As 
you  are  but  weak,  you  shall  have  lighter  duties.  As  you  are  at 
present  but  tender,  and  young,  you  shall  not  have  heavy  labors 
to  perform.  But  seek  to  grow  in  grace.  Feed  upon  the  unadul 
terated  milk  of  the  Word  of  God,  and  pray  that  he  would  bring 
you  up  from  babes  into  young  men,  and  from  young  men  into 
perfect  men  in  Christ  Jesus. 

A  more  frequent  cause,  however,  of  weak  hands  and  feeble 
knees,  is  starvation,  absolute  starvation.  Is  there  such  a  thing 
known  in  England  as  starvation  ]  Yes,  there  is  of  a  spiritual 
kind.  There  are  many  houses  which  are  dedicated  to  the  wor 
ship  of  God,  that  certainly  never  were  dedicated  to  the  profit  of 
man.  There  are  places  into  which  a  Christian  might  enter  all 
the  year  round,  without  ever  getting  any  understanding  of  the 
doctrines  of  God  at  all.  Many  a  minister,  in  these  days,  of  fine 
language,  and  of  polished,  rounded  periods,  resembles  Nero,  who, 
when  the  city  of  Rome  was  starving,  sent  his  galleys  to  Alexandria 
to  bring  back  sand  for  the  wrestlers,  but  not  corn  for  the  hungry 
mouths.  We  have  heard  many  a  discourse  that  has  been  verj 


WEAK  HANDS  AND  FEEBLE  KNEES  395 

fine  indeed,  as  a  moral  essay,  but  it  has  had  no  food  in  it  for  the 
poor  hungry  mouths  of  God's  people.  One  has  but  very  little 
opinion  of  the  present  race  of  professing  Christians  when  you  see 
their  frequent  changes.  I  know  men  at  this  day  who  hear  an 
Arniinian  with  the  greatest  possible  delight — "Such  a  dear,  good, 
earnest  man  !"  And  if  a  Calvinist  preaches  the  next  Sunday 
who  contradicts  every  word  the  other  man  said — "  Oh,  he  is  sue! 
a  precious  creature  !"  because  he  happens  to  have  a  great  How  of 
words.  And  then  comes  another  who  happens  to  be  a  hyper 
Calvinist,  and  who  says  most  extraordinary  things — "  He  is  a 
precious  child  of  God,  he  preaches  admirably  !"  And  then  there 
comes  afterwards  a  Pelagian,  or  almost  an  Arian,  and  it  is  just 
the  same — they  take  it  all  in,  and  delight  in  it.  The  reason  is, 
because  these  people  never  taste  the  Word  of  God  at  all.  They 
look  at  it,  but  so  long  as  they  do  not  taste  it  and  feed  on  it  they 
know  nothing  of  it.  If  they  fed  on  the  Word,  they  would  have 
their  senses  exercised  by  reason  of  the  use,  and  they  would  be 
able  to  discern  between  the  good  and  the  evil,  the  precious  and 
the  vile.  Many  of  our  Calvinistic  preachers  do  not  feed  God's 
people.  They  believe  in  election,  but  they  do  not  preach  it. 
They  think  particular  redemption  true,  but  they  lock  it  up  in  the 
chest  of  their  creed,  and  never  bring  it  out  in  their  ministry. 
They  hold  final  perseverance,  but  they  persevere  in  keeping  quiel 
about  it.  They  think  there  is  such  a  thing  as  effectual  calling, 
but  they  do  not  think  they  are  called  effectually  to  preach  it. 
The  great  fault  we  find  with  many  is,  that  they  do  not  speak 
right  out  what  they  do  believe.  You  could  not  know  if  you 
h'Uird  them  fifty  times  what  were  the  doctrines  of  the  gospel,  or 
what  was  their  system  of  salvation.  And  hence  God's  people 
get  starved.  And  all  the  ^vhile  the  only  remedy  they  have  for 
the  poor,  weak,  starving  child  of  GoJ  is  a  long  whip.  They  are 
always  cracking  this  whip  with  the  loud  sound  of  "do  this!  do 
that !  and  do  the  other  !"  If  they  would  put  the  whip  in  the 
manger  and  feed  God's  people,  then  they  would  be  able  to  run 
the  heavenly  race.  But  now  it  is  all  whip  and  no  corn,  and  no 
creature  can  subsist  upon  that.  No  child  of  God  can  ever  grow 
strong  in  grace  with  mere  exhortation,  if  it  be  not  associated  with 
good  old-fashioned  doctrine.  I  should  like  to  hear  all  our  pulpits 


396  WEAK  HANDS  AND  FEEBLE  ENEE8. 

sounding  with  the  old-fashioned  doctrine  of  John  Owen,  and  of 
such  men  as  Bunyan,  and  Charnock,  and  Goodwin,  and  those  men 
of  olden  time  who  knew  *he  truth  and  dared  to  preach  it  fully. 
There  were  giants  in  those  days.  In  every  parish  church  in  the 
city  of  London,  and  in  this  borough,  too,  you  might  have  found 
men  who  were  no  children  in  divinity,  but  masterly  men,  each 
of  them  able  to  declare  the  Word  of  God  with  the  authority  of  ft 
master  in  Israel.  Now  where  find  we  such  1  We  labor  and  we 
strive,  we  dig,  we  toil,  we  seek  to  be  something,  and  we  end  in 
being  nothing.  And  so  it  must  be  as  long  as  hands  are  weak 
and  knees  are  feeble  ;  and  so  also  must  this  be  as  long  as  good 
doctrine  is  denied  us,  and  truth  is  kept  back  in  the  ministry. 
Feed  God's  children  well ;  give  them  comfort ;  give  them  much 
to  feed  upon  of  the  sweet  things  of  the  kingdom  of  God  ;  and 
then  they  will  grow  strong,  then  they  will  begin  to  work. 

But,  again,  fear  is  the  great  weakness  of  men's  knees ;  doubt 
and  distrust  are  the  great  relaxers  of  the  strength  of  men's  hands. 
He  that  hath  faith  in  God  is  almost  omnipotent ;  he  that  hath 
might  in  prayer  (through  the  Holy  Spirit)  is  quite  so.  He  that 
belicveth  God  with  all  his  heart,  there  is  none  in  the  world  that 
can  match  with  him  ;  and  he  that  prayeth  to  God  with  all  fer 
vency  of  soul  may  overcome  the  divine  omnipotence  itself,  and 
move  the  arm  that  moves  tho  world.  Give  a  man  faith,  and  he 
is  in  the  midst  of  his  enemies  like  a  lion  amid  a  herd  of  dogs,  he 
sweeps  them  away.  With  what  an  easy  motion  of  his  gigantic 
strength  he  rips  them  open  and  lays  them  dead.  Nothing  can 
stand  against  the  man  who  believes.  He  plants  his  standard  in 
the  midst  of  rocks  :  he  stands  up  to  it  and  draws  his  sword,  and 
cries,  "  Come  one,  come  all ;  this  rock  shall  fly  from  its  firm  base 
as  soon  as  I ;  I  am  a  match  for  you  ;  I  believe,  and  therefore  have 
L  spoken  ;  I  believe  still,  and  therefore  do  I  speak  again  ;  and  I 
a'ill  not  move  though  hell  and  earth  come  against  me."  Bu 
when  a  man  becomes  doubting  and  timid,  where  is  his  strength 
The  moment  you  doubt  away  goes  your  might.  Strong  fee 
make  a  man  mighty,  but  a  strong  knee  makes  him  mightier  still 
Christ's  soldiers  always  win  their  battles  on  their  knees.  On 
their  feet  they  may  be  conquered,  but  on  their  knees  they  are  in 
vincible.  The  praying  legion  is  the  thundering  legion.  Napo- 


WEAK    HANDS    AND    FEEBLE    KNEES.  397 

leon  sent  out  his  old  guard  in  the  last  extremity  of  the  battle  of 
Waterloo.  They  had  always  carried  victory  with  them,  but  they 
were  at  last  defeated.  But  the  old  guard  of  the  church  of  Christ 
is  the  legion  of  prayer.  The  men  that  are  mighty  on  their  knees, 
these  never  have  been  defeated.  When  they  march  on  in  steady 
phalanx,  they  are  mightier  than  the  push  of  bayonet,  through 
British  arms  and  British  hearts  should  drive  the  bayonet  home. 
Nothing  can  stand  against  the  men  that  pray.  Let  the  church 
out  once  fall  on  its  knees,  and  it  shall  have  might  to  make  the 
enemy  fall  on  ITS  knees — not  in  prayer,  but  in  terror  and  dismay. 
Other  warriors  cry,  "  Up,  guards,  and  at  them  !"  Our  cry  is, 
"  Do.vn,  guards,  on  your  knees,  and  at  them  !"  There,  on  your 
knees  you  become  mighty  ;  you  draw  near  to  the  great  seat  of 
God,  and  then  you  draw  near  to  the  fountain  of  your  strength 
and  of  your  triumph.  Fear,  then,  must  be  got  rid  of.  We  must 
labor  with  God,  that  he  would  be  pleased  to  give  us  strong  faith ; 
that  we  may  not  doubt  the  Word  of  God,  nor  doubt  our  interest, 
nor  doubt  his  love,  nor  doubt  our  perseverance,  but  may  believe 
and  become  mighty,  having  no  longer  weak  hands  and  feeble 
knees. 

Let  me  add  one  more  thought  only ;  namely  this,  that  sloth 
may  make  a  man  weak  in  his  hands  and  in  his  feet.  Arms  be 
come  strong  by  using  them.  The  blacksmith  gets  a  brawny 
hand  by  constantly  using  his  hammer.  He  who  climbs  the 
mountain,  or  walks  many  a  mile  a  day,  becomes  strong  in  his 
feet.  Those  who  sit  still  and  walk  but  a  little  while  are  wearied 
with  a  few  miles  ;  but  those  who  have  tramped  through  conti 
nents  are  not  speedily  to  be  wearied.  Use  makes  us  strong,  but 
sloth  enfeebles  us.  There  are  many  of  you  who  might  be  stronger 
i/  you  labored  more.  What  a  lazy  corporation  the  church  of 
Ch"ist  is  !  Taking  it  all  round  there  must  be,  I  think,  more  lazy 
peop,.  in  the  church  of  Christ  than  there  is  to  be  found  in  any 
other  body  of  men.  There  are  some  that  do  valiantly  and  serve 
God,  but  how  many  of  you  there  are  who  are  quite  content  to 
occupy  your  seats  and  hear  sermons  without  doing  any  thing  for 
God's  cause.  I  do  not  hesitate  to  say  that  I  believe  there  are 
many  of  you  here  who  never  won  a  soul  to  Christ  in  your  lives, 
wid  scarcely  ever  tried  to  do  so.  You  never  lay  poor  souls  to 


WEAK    HANDS    AND    FEEBLE    KNEES. 

heart :  you  never  go  to  God  in  heart  and  prayer  for  your  pool 
perishing  neighbors.  Now  and  then,  if  you  see  a  drunken  man, 
you  say,  "  it  is  a  great  pity ;"  and  if  you  hear  of  a  murder,  you 
say,  "  it  is  a  dreadful  thing."  But  very  little  you  care  about  it. 
You  do  not  agonize  and  cry  for  the  iniquity  of  this  land.  What 
do  you  do  ?  You  put  a  sixpence  in  the  plate  now  and  then,  and 
that  is  your  gift  to  God's  cause  ;  you  sing  a  hymn  or  join  5u 
prayer,  and  that  is  your  service  to  God.  The  custom  with  om 
religious  people  is,  they  pay  their  seat-rent,  they  attend  the 
chapel,  and  then  they  have  done  their  duty.  And  even  in  the 
ministry  itself,  you  hear  of  a  clergyman  speaking  of  doing  his 
duty,  when  he  reads  his  prayer  and  when  he  has  done  his  preach 
ing.  But  we  want  to  have  warmer  hearts,  and  more  active  lives, 
or  else,  surely,  the  church  must  die  of  sloth.  Oh,  that  every  one 
of  you  would  think  you  had  something  to  do  for  Christ  in  this 
life,  and  that  you  must  do  it.  If  your  knees  are  feeble,  serve 
God  the  best  you  can  with  them  ;  if  your  hands  hang  down,  then 
do  the  best  you  can  with  the  hands  hanging  down,  and  pray  God 
to  strengthen  them,  until  you  become  mighty,  and  then  you  will 
be  able  to  do  more.  But  do  something  every  one  of  you.  If 
England  expects  every  one  to  do  his  duty,  how  much  more  may 
the  church  demand  of  every  professor  that  he  should  be  doing 
something  for  his  Master.  Do  not  think  it  is  enough  to  get 
good  ;  do  good.  The  candle  must  soon  be  extinguished  that  is 
shut  up  without  fresh  air.  Give  your  light  plenty  of  air,  and  it 
will  burn  all  the  brighter ;  and  others  seeing  your  light  will  be 
able  to  rejoice  in  it.  You  are  not  to  eat  your  morsel  alone ;  :f 
you  do  you  will  become  weak,  for  God  hath  so  ordained  it ;  thai 
if  we  keep  our  religion  to  ourselves  it  will  become  feeble.  The 
man  who  hoards  his  gold  grows  no  richer,  but  he  who  puts  it  out 
to  usury  will  grow  richer  himself  and  help  to  enrich  other  men 
Do  so  with  your  religion  ;  put  it  out  to  usury,  and  you  will  giow 
richer,  water  men's  souls,  and  you  shall  be  watered.  The  most 
practical  way  for  religious  people  is  to  do  something ;  visit  the  sick, 
help  the  poor,  teach  the  ignorant,  succor  the  distressed  ;  and  in 
all  these  ways  you  will  find  that  God  will  bless  you,  and  your  hands 
shall  become  strong,  and  your  knoes  shall  not  totter.  Above  all,  cry 
foi  the  H  >ly  Spirit  to  strengthen  you,  for  without  him  all  is  \ahi. 


SERMON    XXVI. 

THE  BLIND  BEGGAR. 

Snd  shey  came  to  Jericho:  ana  as  he  went  out  of  Jericho  with  hii 
uaa  a  great  number  of  people,  blind  Bartimeus,  tie  son  of  Timeus, 
*at  by  tl'b  Highway  side  begging.  And  when  he  heard  that  it  was  Jesue 
of  Naz,artA,h,  he  began  to  cry  out,  and  say,  Jesus,  thou  son  of  David,  have 
mercy  on  me.  And  many  charged  him  that  he  should  hold  his  peace;  but 
he  cried  the  more,  A  great  deal,  Thou  son  of  David,  have  mercy  on  me. 
And  JesiM  stood  still,  and  commanded  him  to  be  called.  And  they  cal. 
the  blind  man,  saying  unto  him,  Be  of  good  comfort,  rise;  he  ealleth  thee. 
And  he,  casting  away  his  garment,  rose,  and  came  to  Jesus.  And  Jesud 
answered  and  said  unto  him,  What  wilt  thou  that  I  should  do  unto  thee? 
The  blind  man  said  unto  him,  Lord,  that  1  might  receive  my  sight.  And 
Jesus  said  unto  him,  Go  thy  way  ;  thy  faith  hath  made  thee  whole.  And 
immediately  he  received  his  sight,  and  followed  Jesus  in  the  way." — MAKK, 
x.  46-52.  * 

THIS  poor  man  was  beset  with  two  great  evils — blindness  and 
poverty.  It  is  sad  enough  to  be  blind,  but  if  a  man  that  is  blind 
is  in  possession  of  riches,  there  are  ten  thousand  comforts  which 
may  help  to  cheer  the  darkness  of  his  eye,  and  alleviate  the  sad 
ness  of  his  heart.  But  to  be  both  blind  and  poor,  these  were  a 
combination  of  the  sternest  evils.  One  thinks  it  scarcely  possible 
to  rc-sist  the  cry  of  a  beggar  whom  we  meet  in  the  street  if  he  is 
blind.  We  pity  the  blind  man  when  he  is  surrounded  with  luxury, 
but  when  we  see  a  blind  man  in  want,  and  following  the  beggar's 
trade  in  the  frequented  streets,  we  can  hardly  forbear  stopping 
to  assist  him.  This  case  of  Bartimeus,  however,  is  but  a  picture 
>f  our  own.  We  are  by  nature  blind  and  poor.  It  is  true  we 
account  ourselves  able  enough  to  see;  but  this  is  but  one  phase  of 
our  blindness.  Our  blindness  is  of  such  a  kind  that  it  makes  us 
think  our  vision  perfect ;  whereas,  when  we  are  enlightened  by 
ibo  Holy  Spirit,  we  discover  our  previous  sight  tu  have  been 


400  TIiE    BLIND    BEGGAR. 

blindness  indeed.  Spiritually,  we  are  blind ;  we  arc,  unable  to 
discern  our  lost  estate ;  unable  to  behold  the  blackness  of  sin» 
or  the  terrors  of  the  wrath  to  come.  The  unrenewed  mind  is  so 
blind,  that  it  perceives  not  the  all-attractive  beauty  of  Christ;  the 
Sun  of  Righteousness  may  arise  with  healing  beneath  his  wings, 
out  'twe:  3  all  in  vain  for  those  who  cannot  see  his  shining.  Christ 
•nay  do  many  mighty  works  in  their  presence,  but  they  do  no 
ecognize  his  glory ;  we  are  blind  until  he  has  opened  our  eyes 
But  besides  being  blind,  we  are  also  by  nature  poor.  Our  fathci 
Adam  spent  our  birthright,  lost  our  estates.  Paradise,  the  home 
stead  of  our  race,  has  become  delapidated,  and  we  are  left  in  the 
depths  of  beggary  without  any  thing  with  which  we  may  buy 
bread  for  our  hungry  souls,  or  raiment  for  our  naked  spirits; 
blindness  and  beggary  are  the  lot  of  all  men  after  a  spiritual 
fashion,  till  Jesus  visits  them  in  love.  Look  around  then, 
ye  children  of  God ;  look  around  you  this  morning,  and  ye  shall 
see  in  this  hall  many  a  counterpart  of  poor  blind  Bartimeus  sit 
ting  by  the  wayside  begging.  I  hope  there  be  many  such  come 
here,  who  though  they  be  blind,  and  naked,  and  poor,  neverthe 
less  are  begging — longing  to  get  something  more  than  they  have 
— not  content  with  their  position.  With  just  enough  spiritual 
life  and  sensitiveness  to  know  their  misery,  they  have  come  up  to 
this  place  begging.  Oh  that  while  Jesus  passes  by  this  day  they 
may  have  faith  to  cry  aloud  to  him  for  mercy  !  Oh  may  his 
gracious  heart  be  moved  by  their  thrilling  cry,  "  Jesus,  thou  Son 
of  David,  have  mercy  on  me!"  Oh  may  he  turn  and  give  sight 
unto  such  that,  they  may  follow  him  and  go  on  their  way  re 
joicing. 

This  morning  1  shall  address  myself  most  particularly  to  the 
poor  and  blind  souls  here  to-day.  The  poor  blind  man's  faith 
described  in  this  passage  of  Scripture,  is  a  fit  picture  of  the  faith 
which  I  pray  God  you  may  be  enabled  to  exert  to  the  saving  of 
your  souls.  We  shall  notice  the  origin  of  his  faitn,  how  his 
faith  perceived  its  opportunity  when  Jesus  passed  by  ;  we  shall 
listen,  to  his  faith  while  it  cries  and  begs  ;  we  shall  look  tipon  his 
faith  while  it  leaps  in  joyous  obedience  to  the  divine  call ;  and  then 
we  shall  hear  his  faith  describing  his  case:  "  Lord,  that  I  might 
receive  my  sight ;"  and  I  trust  we  shall  be  enabled  to  rejoice  to 


THE    BLIND    BEGGAR.  40! 

gcthcr  with  this  poor  believing  man,  when  his  sight  is  restored, 
as  we  see  him  in  the  beauty  of  thankfulness  and  gratitude  follow 
Jesus  in  the  way. 

1.  First,  then,  we  shall  note  THE  ORIGIN  OF  THIS  POOR  BUND 
MAN'S  FAITH.  He  had  faith,  for  it  was  his  faith  which  obtained 
for  him  his  sight.  Now.  where  did  he  get  it  ?  We  are  not  tcld  in 
this  passage  how  Bartimeus  came  to  believe  Jesus  to  be  the  Mes 
siah  ;  but  I  think  we  may  very  fairly  risk  a  conjecture.  It  ia 
quite  certain  that  Bartimeus  did  not  come  to  believe  in  Christ 
from  what  he  saw.  Jesus  had  worked  many  miracles  ;  many 
eyes  had  seen,  and  many  hearts  had  believed,  because  of  what 
they  saw.  Bartimeus  also  believed,  but  certainly  not  as  the  result 
of  his  eye-sight,  for  he  was  stone-blind.  No  ray  of  light  had 
ever  burst  into  his  soul ;  he  was  shut  up  in  thick  darkness,  and 
could  see  nothing.  How  then  was  it  that  he  came  to  believe? 
It  certainly  could  not  have  been  because  he  had  travelled  much 
through  the  country,  for  blind  men  stay  at  home ;  they  care  not 
to  journey  for.  There  is  nothing  they  can  see.  However  fair  the 
landscape,  they  cannot  drink  it  in  with  their  eyes  ;  whatever 
lovely  spots  others  may  behold,  there  are  no  attractions  for  their 
blank  survey.  They  therefore  stay  at  home.  And  especially  a 
mendicant  like  this;  how  should  he  travel?  He  would  be  per 
haps  unknown  out  of  the  city  in  which  his  father  Timeus  had 
Jived — even  Jericho.  He  could  not  move  the  heart  of  strangers 
to  charity,  nor  would  he  be  likely  to  find  a  guide  to  conduct  him 
throughout  the  dreary  miles  of  that  land.  He  would  be  almost 
necessarily  a  poor  blind  stay-at-home.  Then  how  did  he  acquire 
his  faith  1  Methinks  it  might  be  in  this  fashion.  On  the  nearest 
bank  he  could  find  outside  Jericho,  he  sat  begging  in  the  sunlight ; 
for  blind  men  always  love  to  bask  in  the  sun.  Though  they  see 
nothing,  there  is  a  kind  of  glimmering  that  penetrates  the  visual 
organ,  and  they  rejoice  in  it.  At  least  they  feel  the  heat  of  the 
great  orb  of  day,  if  they  see  not  his  light.  Well,  as  he  sat  there, 
ho  would  hear  the  passers  by  talking  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  and 
as  blind  men  are  usually  inquisitive,  he  would  ask  them  to  stay 
and  tell  him  the  story — some  tale  of  what  Jesus  had  done  ;  and 
they  would  tell  him  how  he  raised  the  dead,  and  healed  the  leper; 
and  he  would  say,  "  I  wonder  if  he  can  give  sight  to  the  blind.* 


402  THE    BLIND    BEGGAR. 

And  one  day  it  came  to  pass,  that  he  was  told  Jesus  had  restored 
to  sight  a  man  who  had  been  born  blind.  This  indeed  was  tho 
great  master-story  that  the  world  has  to  tell,  for  it  had  never  been 
so  known  before  in  Israel,  that  a  man  who  had  been  born  blind 
should  have  his  eyes  opened.  I  think  1  see  the  poor  man  as  ha 
hears  the  story,  he  drinks  it  in,  clasps  his  hands,  and  cries,  "  Then 
there  is  yet  hope  for  me.  Mayhap  the  Prophet  will  pass  this  way 
and  if  he  doth,  oh,  I  will  cry  to  him,  1  will  beg  him  to  open 
my  eyes  too  ;  for  if  the  worst  case  has  been  cured,  then  surely 
mine  may  be."  Many  and  many  a  day  as  he  sat  there,  he  would 
call  to  the  passer-by  again,  and  would  say,  "  Come,  tell  me  the 
story  of  the  man  that  was  born  blind,  and  of  Jesus  of  Nazareth 
that  opened  his  eyes,"  and  perhaps  he  would  even  get  tiresome, 
as  blind  men  are  wont.  He  must  hear  the  story  told  him  a  hun 
dred  times  over,  and  always  would  there  be  a  smile  on  the  poor 
fellow's  face  when  he  heard  the  refreshing  narrative.  It  never 
could  be  told  too  often,  for  he  loved  to  hear  it.  To  him  it  was 
like  a  cool  refreshing  breeze  in  the  heat  of  a  burning  sun.  u  Tell 
it  me,  tell  it  me,  tell  it  me  again,"  says  he — "  the  sweet  story  of 
the  man  that  opened  the  eyes  of  the  blind."  And  methinks 
as  he  sat  all  alone,  and  unable  to  divert  his  mind  with  many 
things,  he  would  always  keep  his  heart  fixed  on  that  one  narra 
tive,  and  turn  it  over,  and  over,  and  over  again,  till  in  his  day 
dreams  he  would  half  think  he  could  see,  and  sometimes  almost 
imagine  that  his  own  eyes  were  going  to  be  opened  too.  Per 
haps  on  one  of  those  occasions,  as  he  was  turning  over  this  in  his 
mind,  some  text  of  Scripture  he  had  heard  in  the  synagogue,  oc 
curred  to  him  ;  he  heard  that  Messiah  should  come  to  open  the 
eyes  of  the  blind,  and,  quick  in  thought,  having  better  eyes  within 
than  he  had  without,  he  came  at  once  to  the  conclusion  that  the 
man  who  could  open  the  eyes  of  the  blind  was  none  other  than  tha 
Messiah;  and  from  that  day  he  was  a  secret  disciple  of  Jesus. 
He  might  have  heard  him  scoffed  at,  but  he  did  not  snoff  How 
could  he  scoff  at  one  who  had  opened  the  eyes  of  the  blind  ? 
lie  might  iia^e  Iieard  many  a  passer-by  reviling  Christ,  and  call 
ing  him  au  iaii^ostor,  but  he  could  not  join  in  the  reviling.  Hew 
could  he  ,/e  a  deceiver  who  gave  sight  to  poor  blind  men  1  I 
fancy  tlu*  would  be  the  cherished  dream  of  his  life.  And  per 


THE    BLIND    BEGGAH.  403 

haps  for  the  two  or  three  years  of  the  Saviour's  ministr),  the  one 
thought  of  the  poor  blind  man  would  be  *  Jesus  of  Nazareth 
opened  the  eyes  of  one  that  was  blind."  That  story  which  he 
had  heard  led  him  to  believe  Jesus  must  be  the  predicted  Mes 
siah. 

Now,  O  ye  spiritually  blind,  ye  spiritually  poor,  how  is  it  ve 
have  not  believed  in  Christ?  Ye  have  heard  the  wondrous  deed 
which  he  has  done ;  "Faith  cometh  by  hearing."  Ye  have  uu 
derstood  how  one  after  another  has  been  pardoned  and  forgiven , 
you  have  stood  in  the  house  of  God,  and  listened  to  the  confession 
of  the  penitent  and  the  joyous  shout  of  the  believer,  aud  yet  you 
believe  not.  You  have  journeyed  up  year  after  year  to  the 
sanctuary  of  God,  and  ye  have  heard  many  stories — many  a 
glorious  narrative  of  the  pardoning  power  of  Christ ;  and  how  is 
it,  O  ye  spiritually  blind,  that  ye  have  never  thought  on  him  ? 
Why  is  it  you  have  not  turned  this  over  and  over  in  your  minds. 
44 This  man  receiveth  sinners,  and  will  he  not  receive  me?" 
How  is  it  that  ye  have  not  recollected  that  he  who  put  away 
the  sin  of  Paul  and  Magdalene  can  put  away  yours  also.  Surely, 
if  but  one  story  told  into  the  ear  of  the  poor  blind  man  could 
give  him  faith,  if  his  faith  came  but  by  one  hearing,  how  is  it 
that  though  ye  have  heard  many  times  that  there  was  no  salva 
tion  without  faith  in  Christ,  and  listened  to  many  an  earnest 
appeal,  yet  ye  have  not  believed  ?  Yet,  it  may  be,  I  have  among 
these  poor  blind  men,  some  here  to-day  that  are  simply  believing. 
You  have  never  yet  laid  hold  of  faith,  but  still  in  the  depths  of 
your  soul  there  is  a  something  which  says,  "  Yes,  he  is  able  to 
save  me ;  I  know  he  hath  power  to  forgive,"  and  sometimes  the 
voice  speaks  a  little  louder,  and  it  cheers  your  heart  with  a 
thought  like  this,  "  Go  to  him,  he  will  not  cast  you  away,  he  has 
nover  cast  out  one  yet  who  did  venture  upon  his  power  and 
goi-dness."  Well,  my  dear  hearer,  if  thou  art  in  this  plight^ 
thou  art  happy,  and  I  am  a  happy  man  to  have  the  privilege  of 
addressing  thee — it  shall  not  be  long  ere  the  faith  within  thee, 
which  has  been  born  by  hearing,  shall  acquire  strength  enough  to 
exercise  itself  to  gain  the  blessing.  That  is  the  first  thing — the 
origin  of  .he  faith  of  poor  blind  Burtimc  Js,  it  dc  ubtless  came  bj 
hearing. 


404  THE    IJLINI)    BEGGAR. 

II.  Now,  in  the  next  place,  we  shall  notice  his  faith  in  ITS  QUICK 

NESS  AT  GRASPING  THE  GRACIOUS  OPPORTUNITY. 

Jesus  had  been  through  Jericho,  and  as  he  went  into  the  city 
there  was  a  blind  man  standing  by  the  way,  and  Jesus  healed 
him.  Bartirneus  however  seems  to  have  resided  at  the  other 
ide  of  Jericho,  therefore  he  did  not  get  a  blessing  till  Christ  was 
bout  to  leave  it.  He  is  sitting  down  upon  his  customary  spot 
oy  the  wayside  where  some  friend  has  left  him,  that  he  might 
remain  there  all  day  and  beg,  and  he  hears  a  great  noise  and 
trampling  of  feet,  he  wonders  what  it  is.  and  he  asks  a  passer-by 
what  is  that  noise?  "  Why  all  this  tumult?"  And  the  answer 
is,  "Jesus  of  Nazareth  passeth  by."  That  is  but  small  encourage 
ment,  yet  his  faith  had  now  arrived  at  such  a  strength  that  this 
was  quite  enough  for  him,  that  Jesus  of  Nazareth  passeth  by. 
Unbelief  would  have  said,  "  He  passes  by,  there  is  no  healing  for 
you ;  he  passes  by,  there  is  no  hope  of  mercy ;  he  is  about  to 
leave,  and  he  takes  no  notice  of  you."  Why,  if  you  and  I 
needed  encouragement,  we  should  want  Christ  to  stand  still ;  \ve 
should  need  that  some  one  should  say,  "Jesus  of  Nazareth  is 
standing  still  and  looking  for  you  ;"  ay,  but  this  poor  man's  faith 
was  of  such  a  character  that  it  could  feed  on  any  dry  crust  on 
which  our  puny  little  faith  would  have  starved.  He  was  like 
that  poor  woman,  who  when  she  was  repulsed,  said,  "Truth, 
Lord,  I  am  but  a  dog,  yet  the  dogs  eat  the  crumbs  which  fall 
from  the  master's  table."  He  only  heard  "Jesus  of  Nazareth 
passeth  by ;"  but  that  was  enough  for  him.  It  was  a  slender 
opportunity.  He  might  have  reasoned  thus  with  himself, 
"  Jesus  is  passing  by,  he  is  just  going  out  of  Jericho ;  surely  he 
cannot  stay  now  he  is  on  a  journey."  No,  rather  did  he  argue 
thus  with  himself,  "  if  he  is  going  out  of  Jericho,  so  much  the 
more  reason  that  I  should  stop  him,  for  this  may  be  my  last 
ha  nor*,"  And,  therefore,  what  unbelief  would  argue  as  a  reason 
for  stopping  his  mouth  did  but  open  it  the  wider.  Unbelief 
might  have  said,  "  He  is  surrounded  by  a  great  multitude  of 
people,  he  cannot  get  at  you.  His  disciples  are  round  about  him 
too,  he  will  be  so  busy  in  addressing  them  that  he  will  never 
regaid  your  feeble  cry."  "  Ay,"  said  he,  "so  much  the  greater 
reason  then  that  I  should  cry  with  all  my  might ;"  and  he  makes 


THE    BLIND    BEGGAR.  405 

the  very  multitude  of  people  become  a  fresh  argument  why  he 
should  shout  aloud,  "  Jesus  of  Nazareth  have  mercy  upon  me." 
So,  however  slender  the  opportunity,  yet  it  encouraged  him. 

And  now,  my  dear  hearers,  we  turn  to  you  again.  Faith  has 
been  in  your  heart  perhaps  for  many  a  day,  but  how  foolish  have 
you  been  ;  you  have  not  availed  youself  of  encouraging  opportu 
nities  as  you  might  have  done.  How  many  times  has  Christ  not 
only  passed  by,  but  stopped  and  knocked  at  your  door,  and  stood 
in  your  house.  He  has  wooed  and  invited  you,  and  yet  you 
would  not  come,  still  trembling  and  wavering,  you  durst  not 
exercise  the  faith  you  have,  and  risk  the  results  and  come  boldly 
to  him.  He  has  stood  in  your  streets, — "  Lo,  these  many  years," 
till  the  poor  blind  man's  hair  would  have  turned  gray  with  ago. 
He  is  standing  in  the  street  to-day — to-day  he  addresses  you  and 
says,  "  Sinner,  come  to  me  and  live."  To-day  is  mercy  freely 
presented  to  you  ;  to-day  is  the  declaration  made — "  Whosoever 
will,  let  him  come  and  take  of  the  water  of  life  freely."  You, 
poor  unbelieving  heart,  will  you  not,  dare  you  not  take  advantage 
of  the  encouragement  to  come  to  him  1  Your  encouragements 
are  infinitely  greater  than  those  of  this  poor  blind  man,  let  them 
not  be  lost  upon  you.  Come  now,  this  very  moment,  cry  aloud 
to  him  now,  ask  him  to  have  mercy  upon  you,  for  now  he  not 
only  passes  by,  but  he  presents  himself  with  outstretched  arms, 
and  cries,  "  Come  unto  me,  and  I  will  give  you  rest,  and  life,  and 
salvation." 

Such  was  the  encouragement  of  this  man's  faith,  and  I  would 
that  something  in  the  service  of  this  morning,  might  give  encour- 
agement  to  some  poor  Bartimeus,  who  is  sitting  or  standing 
here. 

III.  In  the  third  place,  having  noticed  how  the  faith  of  the  blind 
man  discovered  and  seized  upon  this  opportunity,  the  passing  by 
of  the  gracious  Saviour,  we  have  TO  LISTEN  TO  THE  CRY  OF  FAIT.JI. 
The  poor  blind  man  sitting  there,  is  informed  that  it  is  Jesus  of 
Nazareth.  Without  a  moment's  pause  or  ado,  he  is  up,  and 
begins  to  cry — "  Thou  Son  of  David,  have  mercy  upon  me — thou 
Son  of  David,  have  mercy  on  me."  But  he  is  in  the  middle 
of  a  fair  discourse,  and  his  hearers  like  not  that  he  should  be 
inten  upted — "  Hold  thy  tongue,  blind  man.  Begone !  he  can 


406  THE    BLIND    BEGGAR. 

not  attend  to  thec."  Yet  what  does  the  nanative  say  about 
him  ?  "  He  cried  the  more  a  great  deal ;"  not  only  cried  he 
more,  but  he  cries  a  great  deal  more,  "Thou  son  of  David,  have 
mercy  on  me."  "  Oh,"  says  Peter,  "  do  not  interrupt  the  Master, 
what  are  you  so  noisy  for  ?"  k'  Thou  Son  of  David,  have  mercy 
on  me :"  he  repeats  it  again.  "  Remove  him,"  says  one,  "  hs 
nterrupts  the  whole  service,  ta*e  him  away,"  and  so  they  tried 
to  move  him  ;  yet  he  cries  the  more  vigorously  and  vehemently, 
'  Thou  Son  of  David,  have  mercy  on  me — thou  Son  of  David, 
have  mercy  on  me."  Methinks  we  hear  his  shout.  It  is  not  to 
be  imitated ;  no  artiste  could  throw  into  an  utterance  such 
vehemence  or  such  emotion  as  this  man  would  cast  into  it — 
"  Thou  Son  of  David,  have  mercy  on  me."  Every  word  would 
tell,  every  syllable  would  suggest  an  argument,  there  would  be 
the  very  strength,  and  might,  and  blood,  and  sinew  of  that  man's 
life  cast  into  it;  he  would  be  like  Jacob  wrestling  with  the  angel, 
and  every  word  would  be  a  hand  to  grasp  him  that  he  might  not 
go.  "  Thou  Son  of  David,  have  mercy  on  me."  We  have  here 
a  picture  of  the  power  of  faith.  In  every  case,  sinner,  if  thou 
wouldst  be  saved,  thy  faith  must  exercise  itself  in  crying.  The 
gate  of  heaven  is  to  be  opened  only  in  one  way,  by  the  very 
earnest  use  of  the  knocker  of  prayer.  Thou  canst  not  have  thine 
eyes  opened  until  thy  mouth  is  opened.  Open  thy  mouth  in 
prayer,  and  he  shall  open  thine  eyes  to  see ;  so  shalt  thou  find 
joy  and  gladness.  Mark  you,  when  a  man  hath  faith  in  the  soul 
and  earnestness  combined  with  it,  he  will  pray  indeed.  Call  ye 
not  those  things  prayers  that  ye  hear  read  in  the  churches 
Imagine  not  that  those  orations  are  prayers  that  you  hear  in  oui 
prayer-meetings.  Prayer  is  something  nobler  than  all  these. 
That  is  prayer,  \vhen  the  poor  soul  in  some  weighty  trouble, 
tainting  and  athirst,  lifts  up  its  streaming  eyes,  and  wrings  its 
hands,  and  beats  its  bosom,  and  then  cries,  "  Thou  Son  of  David, 
nave  mercy  on  me."  Your  cold  orations  will  ne'er  reach  the 
throne  of  God.  It  is  the  burning  lava  of  the  soul  that  hath  a 
furnace  within — a  very  volcano  of  grief  and  sorrow — it  is  that 
burning  lava  of  prayer  that  finds  its  way  to  God.  No  prayer 
ever  reaches  God's  heart  which  does  not  come  from  our  hearts. 
Nine  out  of  ten  of  the  prayers  which  ye  listen  to  in  our  publir 


THE    BLIND    BEGGAR.  407 

services  have  so  little  zeal  in  them,  that  if  they  obtained  a  bless 
ing  it  would  be  a  miracle  of  miracles  indeed. 

My  dear  hearers,  are  you  now  seeking  Christ  in  earnest  prayer? 
Be  not  afraid  of  being  too  earnest  or  too  persevering.  Go  to 
Christ  this  day,  agonize  and  wrestle  with  him;  beg  him  to  have 
mercy  on  you,  and  if  he  hear  you  not,  go  to  him  again,  and 
•tgain,  and  again.  Seven  times  a  day  call  upon  him,  and  re- 
olve  in  your  heart  that  you  will  never  cease  from  prayer  till  the 
Holy  Ghost  hath  revealed  to  your  soul  the  pardon  of  your  sin. 
When  once  the  Lord  brings  a  man  to  this  resolve,  "  I  will  be 
saved.  If  I  perish,  I  will  still  go  to  the  throne  of  grace  and  per 
ish  only  there,"  that  man  cannot  perish.  He  is  a  saved  man, 
and  shall  see  God's  face  with  joy.  The  worst  of  us  is,  we  pray 
with  a  little  spasmodic  earnestness  and  then  we  cease.  We  be 
gin  again,  and  then  once  more  the  fervor  ceases  and  we  leave  off 
our  prayers.  If  we  would  get  heaven,  we  must  carry  it  not  by 
one  desperate  assault,  but  by  a  continuous  blockade.  We  must 
take  it  with  the  red-hot  shot  of  fervent  prayer.  But  this  must 
be  fired  day  and  night,  until  at  least  the  city  of  heaven  yields  to 
us.  The  kingdom  of  heaven  suffereth  violence,  and  the  violent 
must  take  it  by  force.  Behold  the  courage  of  this  man.  He  is 
hindered  by  many,  but  he  will  not  cease  to  pray.  So  if  the  flesh, 
Che  devil,  and  your  own  hearts  should  bid  you  cease  your" sup 
plication,  never  do  so,  but  so  much  the  more  a  great  deal  cry 
aloud,  "  Thou  Son  of  David  have  mercy  on  me." 

I  must  observe  here  the  simplicity  of  this  man's  prayer.  He 
did  not  want  a  liturgy  or  a  prayer-book  on  this  occasion.  There 
was  something  he  needed,  and  he  asked  for  that.  When  we  have 
our  needs  at  hand  they  will  usually  suggest  the  proper  language. 
I  remember  a  remark  of  quaint  old  Bunyan,  speaking  of 
those  who  make  prayers  for  others,  "  The  Apostle  Paul  said 
he  knew  not  what  to  pray  for,  and  yet,"  says  he,  "  there 
are  many  infinitely  inferior  to  the  Apostle  Paul,  who  can  write 
prayers;  who  do  not  only  know  what  to  pray  for,  and  how  to 
pray,  bu*  who  know  how  other  people  should  pray,  and  not  only 
that,  but  ,vho  know  how  they  ought  to  pray  from  the  first  day 
of  January  to  the  last  of  December."  We  cannot  dispense  with 
the  fresh  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit  suggesting  words  in  which 


408  THE    BUND    BEGGAR. 

our  needs  may  be  couched ;  and  as  to  the  idea  that  any  form  o 
prayer  will  ever  suit  an  awakened  and  enlightened  believer,  or 
will  ever  be  fit  and  proper  for  the  lip  of  a  penitent  sinner — 1 
cannot  imagine  it.  This  man  cried  from  his  heart,  the  words 
that  came  first — the  simplest  which  could  possibly  express  his 
desire — "  Thou  Son  of  David,  have  mercy  on  me."  Go  and  do 
them  likewise  thou  poor,  blind  sinner,  and  the  Lord  will  hear  thee, 
as  he  did  Bartimeus. 

High  over  the  buzz  and  noise  of  the  multitude  and  the  sound 
of  the  trampling  of  feet  is  heard  a  sweet  voice,  which  tells  of 
mercy,  find  of  love,  and  of  grace.  But  louder  than  that  voice  is 
heard  a  oiercing  cry — a  cry  repeated  many  and  many  a  time — 
which  gr-thers  strength  in  repetition  ;  and  though  the  throat  that 
utters  it  be  hoarse,  yet  does  the  cry  wax  louder  and  louder,  and 
stronger  still, — "Jesus,  thou  Son  of  David,  have  mercy  on  me." 
The  Mrster  stops.  The  sound  of  misery  in  earnest  to  be  relieved 
can  ne^er  be  neglected  by  him.  He  looks  around:  there  sits 
Bartimeus.  The  Saviour  can  see  him,  though  he  cannot  see  the 
Saviour  :  "  Bring  him  hither  to  me,"  saith  he  ;  "  let  him  come 
to  me  that  I  may  have  mercy  on  him."  And  now,  they  who 
had  bi  iden  him  hold  his  clamor  change  the  note,  and  gathering 
around  him  they  say,  "Be  of  good  cheer ;  rise,  he  calleth  thee." 
Ah,  p<x>r  comforters !  they  would  not  soothe  him  when  he  needed 
it.  What  cared  he  now  for  all  they  had  to  say  ?  The  Master 
had  spoken  ;  that  was  enough,  without  their  officious  assistance 
Nevertheless  they  cry,  "  Arise,  he  calleth  thee ;"  and  they  lead 
him,  <;r  are  about  to  lead  him,  to  Christ,  but  he  needs  no  leading  ; 
pustrng  them  aside  he  hurls  back  the  garment  in  which  he  wrap 
ped  fiimself  by  night — no  doubt  a  ragged  one — and  casting  that 
away,  the  blind  man  seems  as  if  he  really  saw  at  once.  The 
sound  guides  him,  and  with  a  leap,  leaving  his  cloak  behind  him 
waving  his  hands  for  very  gladness,  there  he  stands  in  the  pres 
ence  of  him  who  shall  give  him  sight. 

IV.  We  pause  here  to  observe  HOW  EAGERLY  HE  OBEYED  THB 
CALL.  The  Master  had  but  to  speak,  but  to  stand  still,  and  com 
mand  him  to  be  called,  and  he  comes.  No  pressure  is  needed. 
Peter  need  not  pull  him  by  one  arm,  and  John  by  the  other. 


THE    BLIND    BEGGAR.  409 

No ;  he  leaps  forward,  and  is  glad  to  come.  "  He  calleth  me, 
and  shall  I  stand  back  ?" 

And  now,  my  dear  hearers,  how  many  of  you  have  been  called 
under  the  sound  of  the  ministry,  and  yet  you  have  not  come  ? 
Why  is  it  ?  Did  you  think  that  Christ  did  not  mean  it  when 
he  said — "  Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  labor  and  are  heavy 
laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest  *?"  Why  is  it  that  you  still 
keep  on  at  your  labors  and  are  still  heavy  laden?  Why  do 
you  not  come  ?  Oh,  come!  Leap  to  him  that  calleth  thee  !  I 
pray  you  cast  away  the  raiment  of  your  worldliness,  the  garment 
of  your  sin.  Cast  away  the  robe  of  your  self-righteousness,  and 
come,  come  away.  Why  is  it  that  I  bid  you  1  Surely  if  you 
will  not  come  at  the  Saviour's  bidding,  you  will  not  come  at 
mine.  If  your  own  stern  necessities  do  not  make  you  attend  to 
his  gracious  call,  surely  nothing  I  can  say  can  ever  move  you. 
O  my  poor  blind  brothers  and  sisters !  you  who  cannot  see 
Christ  to  be  your  Saviour,  you  that  are  full  of  guilt  and  fear,  he 
calleth  you. 

"  Come,  ye  weary,  heavy  laden, 
Lost  and  ruined  by  the  fall." 

Come,  ye  that  have  no  hope,  no  righteousness ;  ye  outcast,  ye 
desponding,  ye  distressed,  ye  lost,  ye  ruined,  come!  come,  to 
day  !  Whoever  will,  in  your  ears  to-day  doth  mercy  cry, 
'•'  Arise,  he  calleth  theef"  O,  Saviour  !  call  ye  them  effectually. 
Call  now  :  let  the  Spirit  speak.  O  Spirit  of  the  living  God,  bid 
the  poor  prisoner  come,  and  let  him  leap  to  lose  his  chains.  1 
know  that  which  kept  me  a  long  time  from  the  Savioui 
was  the  idea  that  he  had  never  called  me  ;  and  yet  when  1 
came  to  him,  I  discovered  that  long  ere  that  he  had  invited  me, 
but  I  had  closed  my  ear  ;  I  thought  surely  he  had  invited  every 
one  else  to  him,  but  I  must  be  left  out,  the  poorest  and  the  vilest 
of  them  all.  O  sinner !  if  such  be  thy  consciousness,  then  you 
are  one  to  whom  the  invitation  is  specially  addressed.  Trust 
him  now,  just  as  thoa  art,  with  all  thy  sins  about  thee ;  come  to 
him  and  ask  him  to  forgive  thee  ;  plead  his  blood  and  merits, 
and  thou  canst  not,  shalt  not  plead  in  vain. 

V.  We  proceed  towards  the  conclusion.     The  man  has  come 
18 


410  THE    BLIND    BEGGAR. 

to  Christ,  let  us  LISTEN  TO  HIS  SUIT.  Jesus,  with  loving  conde 
scension,  takes  him  by  the  hand  and  in  order  to  test  him,  and  that 
all  the  crowd  might  see  that  he  really  knew  what  he  wanted,  Je 
sus  said  to  him — "  What  wilt  thou  that  I  should  do  unto  thee  ?" 
How  plain  the  man's  confession,  not  one  word  too  many,  he  could 
not  have  said  it  in  a  word  less — "  Lord  that  I  might  receive  my 
sight."  There  was  no  stammering  here,  no  stuttering,  and  saying, 
*  Lord,  I  hardly  know  what  to  say."  He  just  told  it  at  once — 
"  Lord,  that  I  might  receive  my  sight." 

Now  if  there  be  a  hearer  in  this  house  who  has  a  secret  faith 
in  Christ,  and  who  has  heard  the  invitation  this  morning,  let  m« 
beseech  you  go  home  to  your  chamber,  and  there,  kneeling  by 
your  bedside,  by  faith  picture  the  Saviour  saying  to  you — 
"  What  wilt  thou  that  I  should  do  unto  thee?"  "  Fall  on  your 
knees,  and  without  hesitation  tell  him  all,  tell  him  you  are  guilty, 
and  you  desire  that  he  would  pardon  you.  Confess  your  sins; 
keep  none  of  them  back.  Say,  "  Lord,  I  implore  thee  pardon 
my  drunkenness,  my  profanity,  or  whatever  it  may  be  that  I  have 
been  guilty  of;"  and  then  still  imagine  thou  nearest  him  saying 
— "  What  wilt  thou  that  I  should  do  unto  thee  f  Tell  him, 
4  Lord,  I  would  be  kept  from  all  these  sins  in  the  future.  I  shall 
not  be  content  with  being  pardoned,  I  want  to  be  renewed ;"  tell 
him  thou  hast  a  hard  heart,  ask  him  to  soften  it;  tell  him  thou 
hast  a  blind  eye,  and  thou  canst  not  see  thine  interest  in  Christ. 
Ask  him  to  open  it ;  confess  before  him  thou  art  full  of  iniquity 
and  prone  to  wander ;  ask  him  to  take  thine  heart  and  wash  it, 
and  then  to  set  it  upon  things  above,  and  suffer  it  no  longer  to  be 
fond  of  the  things  of  earth.  Tell  it  out  plainly,  make  a  frank 
and  full  confession  in  his  presence ;  and  what  if  it  should  happen, 
my  dear  hearer,  that  this  very  day,  while  thou  art  in  thy  cham 
ber,  Christ  should  give  thee  the  touch  of  grace,  put  thy  sins  away, 
ave  thy  soul,  and  give  thee  the  joy  to  know  that  thou  art  now  a 
child  of  God,  and  now  an  heir  of  heaven.  Imitate  the  blind  man 
in  the  explicitness  and  straightforwardness  of  his  confession  and 
his  request, — "  Lord,  that  I  might  receive  my  sight." 

Once  again,  how  cheering  the  fact,  the  blind  man  had  no  sooner 
stated  his  desire,  than  immediately  he  received  his  sight.  Oh  ! 
bow  he  must  have  leaped  in  that  moment!  What  joys  must 


THE    BLIND    BEGGAR.  411 

have  rushed  in  upon  his  spirit !  He  saw  not  the  men  as  treei 
walking,  but  he  received  his  sight  at  once ;  not  a  glimmer,  but  a 
bright  full  burst  of  sunlight  fell  upon  his  benighted  eyeballs. 
Some  persons  do  not  believe  in  instantaneous  conversions,  never 
theless  they  are  facts.  Many  a  man  has  come  into  this  hall  with 
all  his  sins  about  him,  and  ere  he  has  left  it  has  felt  his  sins  for 
given.  He  has  come  here  a  hardened  reprobate,  but  he  has  gone 
way  from  that  day  forth  to  lead  a  new  life,  and  walk  in  the  feai 
of  God.  The  fact  is,  there  are  many  conversions  that  are  gradual ; 
but  regeneration  after  all,  at  least  in  the  part  of  it  called  "  quick 
ening,"  must  be  instantaneous,  and  justification  ;s  given  to  a  man 
as  swiftly  as  the  flash  of  lightning.  We  are  full  of  sin  one  hour, 
but  it  is  forgiven  in  an  instant ;  and  sins,  past,  present,  and  tc 
come,  are  cast  to  the  four  winds  of  heaven  in  less  time  than  the 
clock  takes  to  beat  the  death  of  a  second.  The  blind  man  sa\* 
immediately. 

And  now  what  would  you  imagine  this  man  would  do  as  soon 
as  his  eyes  were  opened.  Has  he  a  father,  will  he  not  go  to  see 
him'?  Has  he  a  sister,  or  a  brother,  will  he  not  long  to  get  to  his 
household  1  Above  all,  has  he  a  partner  of  his  poor  blind  existence, 
will  he  not  seek  her  out  to  go  and  tell  her  that  now  he  can  be 
hold  the  face  of  one  who  has  so  long  loved  and  wept  over  him  ? 
Will  he  not  now  want  to  go  and  see  the  temple,  and  the  glories 
of  it  ?  Does  he  not  now  desire  to  look  upon  the  hills  and  all 
their  beauties,  and  behold  the  sea  and  its  storms  and  all  its  won 
ders  1  No,  there  is  but  one  thing  that  poor  blind  man  now  longs 
for — it  is  that  he  may  always  see  the  man  who  has  opened  his 
eyes.  "  He  followed  Jesus  in  the  way."  What  a  beautiful  pic- 
ture  this  is  of  a  true  convert.  The  moment  his  sins  are  forgiven, 
the  one  thing  he  wants  to  do  is  to  serve  Christ.  His  tongue  be 
gins  to  itch  to  tell  somebody  else  of  the  mercy  he  has  found. 
He  longs  to  go  off  to  the  next  shop  and  tell  some  workfellow 
that  his  sins  are  all  pardoned.  He  cannot  be  content.  He  thinks 
he  could  preach  now.  Put  him  in  the  pulpit,  and  though  there 
were  ten  thousand  before  him,  he  would  not  blush  to  say,  "  II 
hath  taken  me  out  of  the  miry  clay,  and  out  of  the  horrible  pit, 
and  set  my  feet  upon  a  rock,  and  put  a  new  song  into  my  mouth 
tnd  established  my  goings."  All  ho  now  asks  is,  "  Lord,  I  would 


412  THE    BLIND    BEGGAR. 

follow  thee  whithersoever  thou  goest.  Let  me  never  lose  thy 
company.  Make  my  communion  with  thee  everlasting.  Cause 
my  love  to  increase.  May  my  service  be  continual,  and  in  this 
life  may  I  walk  with  Jesus,  and  in  the  world  to  come  all  I  ask  is, 
that  I  may  live  with  him." 

You  see  the  crowd  going  along  now.  Who  is  that  man  in  the 
midst  with  face  so  joyous  1  Who  is  that  man  who  has  lost  hU 
upper  garment?  See  he  wears  the  dress  of  a  beggar.  Who  is 
he  ?  You  would  not  think  there  is  any  beggary  about  him  ;  for 
his  step  is  firm  and  his  eye  glistens  and  sparkles,  and  hearken  to 
him ;  as  he  goes  along,  sometimes  he  is  uttering  a  little  hymn  or 
song;  at  other  times  when  others  are  singing,  hearken  to  his 
notes,  the  loudest  of  them  all.  Who  is  this  man,  always  so 
happy  and  so  full  of  thankfulness  ?  It  is  the  poor  blind  Barti- 
meus,  who  once  sat  by  the  wayside  begging.  And  do  you  see 
yonder  man,  his  brother,  and  his  prototype  ?  Who  is  it  that  sings 
so  heartily  in  the  house  of  God,  and  who,  when  he  is  sitting  in 
that  house,  or  walking  by  the  way,  is  continually  humming  to 
himself  some  strain  of  praise  1  Oh  !  it  is  that  drunkard  who  has 
had  his  sins  forgiven,  it  is  that  swearer  who  has  had  his  profanity 
cleansed  out,  it  is  she  who  was  once  a  harlot,  but  is  now  one  of 
the  daughters  of  Jerusalem, — 'tis  she  who  once  led  others  to 
hell,  who  now  washes  her  Redeemer's  feet  and  wipes  them  with 
the  hairs  of  her  head.  Oh,  may  God  grant  that  this  story  of  Bar- 
timeus  may  be  written  over  again  in  your  experience,  and  may 
you  all  at  last  meet  where  the  eternal  light  of  God  shall  have 
chased  away  all  blindness,  and  who»*e  the  inhabitants  shall  never 
say,  "  I  am  sick." 


SERMON    XXVII. 

CHRIST  S  MANIFESTATION  TO  MARY  MAGDALENE. 

"Jesus  saitli  unto  her,  Touch  me  not;  for  I  am  not  yet  ascended  to  my 
Father:  but  go  to  my  brethren,  and  say  unto  them,  I  ascend  unto  rny 
Father  and  your  Father;  and  to  my  God,  and  your  God." — JOIIN,  xx.  17. 

Tins  was  the  first  appearance  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  after 
his  resurrection.  In  sundry  places  and  at  divers  times  during  the 
ensuing  forty  days  he  appeared  to  the  different  disciples,  showed 
himself  openly  to  them  when  they  were  assembled  for  worship, 
and  at  other  times  ;  but  this  was  the  first  occasion  of  his  being 
seen  by  any  of  his  followers.  The  whole  occurrence  is  very  full 
of  comfort,  and  we,  who  are  poor  weary  pilgrims  through  this 
wilderness,  need  some  words  of  comfort  every  now  and  then,  to 
cheer  us  on  our  way.  May  the  Holy  Spirit  sweetly  assist  us  in 
addressing  you  now  on  the  things  of  Christ,  and  may  your  hearts 
burn  within  you  by  the  way. 

I.  First,  IT  IS  PECULIARLY  ENCOURAGING  TO  REMEMBER  THAT 
THE  FIRST  PERSON  TO  WHOM  JESUS  ClIRIST  APPEARED  AFTER  HIS 
RESURRECTION  WAS  MARY  MAGDALENE.  Romanists  will  have  it 

that  Jesus  Christ  first,  of  all  appeared  to  the  Virgin  Mary,  his 
mother,  and  they  have  invented  some  curious  stories  \n  order  to 
give  her  this  peculiar  nonor.  Now  this  shows  that  in  their  opinion 
there  was  a  peculiar  honor  conferred  upon  the  person  who  first 
beheld  the  risen  S-iviour,  and  I  need  not  say  that  their  wishing 
tc  say  it  was  the  Virgin  Mary  is  only  just  another  instance  of  their 
perverting  the  truth.  Mary  Magdalene  was  the  first  who  saw  the 
Saviour  after  his  resurrection  ;  at  least,  if  the  guards  saw  him  when 
they  fled  far  away,  they  were  not  his  disciples,  and  I  mean  to  say 
that  she  was  the  first  of  the  disciples  who  had  the  honor  of  seeing 


414 

him  when  he  rose  from  the  dead.  It  was  a  woman,  then,  that  first 
saw  the  risen  Saviour.  It  was  a  woman  that  was  first  in  the 
transgression  ;  it  must  be  a  woman  who  shall  first  behold  Jesus 
Christ  when  he  rose  from  the  dead.  If  there  be — and  there  cer 
tainly  is — some  degree  of  opprobrium  connected  with  woman 
hood,  because  Eve  first  of  all  touched  the  fruit,  there  is  a  far 
greater  degree  of  glory  now  connected  with  it,  because  Mary 
Magdalene  first  of  all  beheld  the  Saviour  at  the  tomb.  Not  only 
was  it  a  woman,  but  it  was  a  sinner — a  woman  out  of  whom  had 
been  cast  seven  devils.  Beside  all  that  is  said,  I  am  inclined  to 
think  that  there  were  other  devils  in  Mary  Magdalene  besides 
those  that  made  her  a  demoniac.  Luther  used  to  say  of  her,  "  So 
many  devils,  so  many  sins."  She  had  been  a  sinner  once,  and 
then  she  became  a  demoniac,  and  afterwards  became  a  saint.  How 
strange  it  was  that  Jesus  should  appear  to  her  !  What,  give  the 
most  honor  to  her  who  had  the  most  of  sin  !  Sweet  thought !  Then 
if  "  I  the  chief  of  sinners  am,"  if  I  have  an  interest  in  the  blood 
of  Christ,  there  is  no  reason  why  I  should  not  climb  to  the  great- 
est  heights  of  fellowship,  and  enjoy  the  best  of  the  good  things 
which  the  Lord  has  prepared  for  them  that  love  him.  When  Je 
sus  takes  a  sinner  to  himself,  his  pardon  is  so  complete — so  totally 
does  he  overlook  all  previous  sin — that  th:it  chief  of  sinners, 
although  he  may  not  be  as  great  a  saint  as  the  very  chief  of  the 
apostles,  who  did  most  grievously  rebel,  so  that  he  only  obtained 
mercy  because  he  did  it  ignorantly  in  unbelief,  may  yet  be  the 
most  highly-favored  of  the  servants  of  the  Lord,  and  may  have 
revelations  made  to  him  above  measure.  Mary  Magdalene  should 
comfort  you  who,  after  years  of  sin,  have  lately  found  a  Saviour. 
Oh  !  think  not  that  those  years  that  you  have  spent  in  folly, 
though  they  must  ever  make  you  weep,  will  be  the  means  of 
robbing  you  of  his  friendship.  Oh  !  no,  he  will  restoie  to  you 
tne  hours  the  locusts  have  eaten,  and  he  will  not  take  away  fro:a 
you  the  pleasure  of  enjoying  the  bliss  of  God  on  earth,  and  cer 
tainly  he  will  not  diminish  your  glorious  happiness  when  you 
shall  stand  before  the  throne. 

Methinks,  however,  that  Mary  was  selected  to  see  Christ  first, 
because  she  loved  Jesus  most.  John  loved  Jesus  much,  but  Mary 
loved  him  better ;  John  went  away  when  he  saw  an  empty  sep\il 


CHRIST'S  MANIFESTATION  TO  MARY  MAGDALENE.         4i5 

chre,  but  Mary  stood  without  and  wept.  Love,  you  know,  is  a 
keen-eyed  thing.  They  say  love  is  blind.  In  one  sense  it  is  true; 
but  there  never  were  such  good  eyes  as  those  which  Love  can 
carry  in  its  head.  Love  will  look  after  Jesus,  and  discover  him 
where  none  else  can.  If  I  set  the  unloving  heart  to  read  a  chapter, 
it  finds  no  Jesus  there;  but  if  I  set  a  Hawker  to  read  that  same 
portion  of  Scripture,  he  finds  the  name  of  Jesus  from  beginning 
lo  end.  If  I  set  a  critical  scholar  to  read  a  Psalm,  he  sees  no 
Messiah  there  ;  but  if  I  set  an  enthusiastic  lover  of  the  Saviour 
to  read  it,  he  sees  him,  if  not  in  every  verse,  still  here  and  there 
glimpses  of  his  glory.  Oh  !  if  you  want  to  see  Jesus,  and  have 
sweet  revelations  of  his  glory,  you  must  love  him :  methinks  you 
must  add  to  that — you  must  weep  for  him  much,  you  must  seek 
him  diligently,  seek  him  in  the  darkness  and  the  twilight,  seek 
him  when  the  sun  is  risen,  seek  him  at  the  tomb  before  the  stone 
is  rolled  away ;  you  must  seek  him  when  you  behold  that  the 
stone  is  gone  ;  you  must  seek  him  in  the  hollow  tomb  ;  you  must 
seek  him  in  the  garden  ;  you  must  seek  him  in  life ;  you  must 
s^ek  him  in  death;  and  then,  the  more  diligent  you  are  in  seek 
ing,  the  more  probability  that  Christ  will  manifest  himself  to  you, 
and  you  shall  rejoice  on  finding  him.  Mary  was  one  of  those 
who  went  forth  bearing  precious  seed  ;  she  went  forth  weeping, 
but  she  returned  to  the  disciples  rejoicing,  bringing  her  sheaves 
with  her,  for  she  had  a  good  message  for  them.  She  had  sown  in 
tears  when  she  went  to  seek  her  Lord,  but  she  wept  with  joy 
when  she  found  him  in  the  garden.  Happy  was  that  woman  who 
found  Jesus  and  believed ;  truly  she  might  rejoice  in  him,  for  she 
was  highly  favored  among  woman.  You  see,  then,  that  there  is 
much  sweetness,  more  than  I  can  tell  you,  in  the  thought  that 
Mary  Magdalene  was  the  first  person  who  was  chosen  to  see  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ. 

II.  We  will  notice,  secondly,  SOME  REASONS  FOR  THE  PROIII 
BITION  GIVEN  IN  THE  TEXT.  Why  was  it  that  Jesus  said,  "  Touch 
me  not  T'  And  why  was  it  that  he  gave  this  very  strange  mi- 
»>n  — "  For  I  am  not  yet  ascended  to  my  Father  T'  There  seem.* 
to  me  to  be  very  great  comfort  in  this  ;  I  know  it  has  comforted 
me  if  I  understand  it  aright.  When  Mary  Magdalene  saw  her 
Master,  and  had  called  him  Rabboni,  her  next  impulse  was  to  cast 


416 

herself  upon  him  and  embrace  him.  But  Jesus  Christ  said,  "No , 
embrace  me  not" — for  that  is  the  fuller  meaning  of  the  word — 
"  I  have  got  something  for  you  to  do,  I  cannot  allow  you  to  stop 
to  do  that ;  there  will  be  plenty  of  time  to  do  that  another  day. 
I  must  send  you  to  my  disciples  with  a  message ;  therefore,  cling 
not  to  me.  The  strengthening  of  my  disciples  is  preferable  even 
to  the  embracing  of  your  Lord.  Cling  not  to  me,  for  I  am  not 
yet  ascended."  It  strikes  me  that  Mary  was  half  afraid  that  her 
Master  would  go  directly  ;  and  she  thought,  "  That  is  him — I  know 
his  voice.  But  he  will  go  ;  I  know  he  will  vanish  ;  the  Spirit  of  God 
vill  take  him  away."  She  thought  just  as  Obadiah  did  of  Elijah. 
a  And  when  Obadiah  saw  him,  he  said,  Go  tell  the  king,  behold, 
Elijah  is  here.  And  he  said,  Not  so,  my  lord  ;  what,  have  I  sin 
ned  that  thou  wouldst  deliver  thy  servant  into  the  hand  of  Ahab  ?" 
So  Mary  thought,  "  Oh  !  he  will  be  gone."  And  she  thought, 
"  But  J  will  hold  him  fast.  This  may  be  my  only  opportunity  ; 
I  will  hold  him  fast."  But  he  said,  "  I  am  not  going  ;  I  shall  be 
here  a  little  time  longer ;  there  will  be  time  enough  for  embraces 
• — time  enough  for  touching  me.  The  first  thing  I  want  you  to  do 
is  to  go  to  my  disciples,  and  tell  them  that  I  am  about  to  ascend 
to  heaven."  If  you  ask  me,  "  Why  should  Jesus  tell  her  that]" 
Let  me  suppose  some  of  you  have  said,  "I  will  have  an  hour  of 
contemplation ;  I  will  cast  myself  upon  my  knees ;  I  \vill  open 
the  Word  of  God  ;  I  will  seek  the  Spirit  to  rest  upon  me ;  and 
I  will  hope  that  I  shall  be  able  to  see  Jesus,  and  to  clasp  him  in 
my  arms."  A  friend  has  called  the  day  before,  and  says  that  he 
nas  an  engagement  for  you.  Perhaps  you  are  called  to  attend  a 
prayer-meeting,  or  to  visit  the  sick,  or  to  see  some  inquirer,  or 
to  do  something  for  the  Lord's  cause,  and  you  say,  "  There  now ; 
1  expected  to  have  had  that  evening  for  contemplation.  Oh,  I 
wish  I  had  not  so  much  to  do  with  the  church,  I  see  that  it  robs 
ine  of  my  quiet  hours.  I  love  those  sweet  seasons  of  retirement 
when  I  can  touch  the  Saviour,  and  embrace  him  to  my  heart. 
Why  is  it  that  I  am  to  go  out  and  feed  the  flock,  and  not  find 
time  for  fellowship  and  comnmnion  so  long  and  frequent  as  I  de 
sire?"  Oh!  when  you  think  that,  think  you  hear  your  Master 
saying,  •*  Embrace  me  not,  for  there  is  time  in  heaven  fcr  that 
Go  thou  to  my  brethren,  and  tell  them  some  sweet  words  of  con 


CHRIST'S  MANIFESTATION  TO  MARY  MAGDALENE.         41T 

•olation ;  for  while  it  is  sweet  for  you  to  embrace  me,  it  \e 
sweeter  to  me  for  thee  to  go  and  embrace  my  poor  brother,  and 
show  him  the  way  to  the  kingdom."  God  forbid  that  we  should 
say  one  word  against  the  high  joy  of  contemplation ;  it  is  a  sweet 
thing.  But  sometimes  work  is  better  than  worship,  or  rather, 
work  is  worship  in  its  best  form.  Sometimes  it  is  a  better  ser 
vice  to  go  to  see  the  sick  than  to  be  at  home  on  your  knees. 
Sometimes  it  is  a  more  devout  serving  of  God  to  be  busy  for  the 
church,  even  in  what  seem  to  be  temporal  matters,  than  to  be 
seated  at  home,  like  Mary  of  old,  at  the  feet  of  the  Saviour,  lis 
tening  to  his  words,  and  doing  nothing.  I  believe  Martha  is 
sometimes  a  great  deal  better  than  Mary.  If  Mary  had  always 
sat  at  the  Saviour's  feet,  she  would  have  deserved  no  commenda 
tion.  It  was  well  for  Mary  that  she  sat  there  then,  for  it  was 
a  proper  occasion  ;  but  if  she  had  sat  there  always,  and  left  Mar 
tha  to  attend  to  the  serving,  then  it  would  have  been  an  abuse 
of  her  privilege.  There  are  times  when  the  Master  must  say, 
'Embrace  me  not,  but  go  to  my  brethren,  and  tell  them  that  1 
ascend  to  my  Father  and  your  Father,  to  my  God  and  your 
God." 

And  now,  having  just  noticed  these  incidents  on  the  surface  of 
our  text,  which  I  think  after  all  are  full  of  comfort — if  not  to 
you  they  certainly  have  been  to  me — I  will  now  endeavor  to  di 
late  upon  some  of  the  leading  heads  of  the  subject. 

1.  Jesus  says,  "Go  and  tell  my  brethren."  Now  it  is  a  re 
markable  fact  that  the  higher  Jesus  Christ  gets  in  glory,  the  more 
sweet  are  his  expressions  of  love.  You  know  when  he  was  on 
earth  he  said,  "  Henceforth,  I  call  you  not  servants,  but  friends." 
But  he  never  called  them  "  brethren  "  until  after  he  had  risen 
from  the  dead.  "  Friends"  h-o  called  them  when  he  was  a  suf 
fering  man  ;  and  I  dare  say  some  of  them  thought,  "  If  he  should 
rise  from  the  dead  he  will  be  ashamed  of  us  poor  fishermen. 
He  called  us  friends  when  he  was  in  his  poverty,  will  he  not  return 
to  that  word  '  servants'  when  he  rises  in  majesty  from  the  tomb  ?" 
No  ;  when  we  should  have  expected  Christ  to  relax  his  love,  \vhen 
he  had  risen  in  dignity,  it  was  just  the  reverse.  The  higher  his 
dignity,  the  lower  his  condescension.  "  Go  and  tell  my  brethren." 
And  there  is  another  thing  about  that  sweet  word  "  brethren." 


418          CHRIST'S  MANIFESTATION  TO  MARY   MAGDALENE. 

The  disciples  were  never  in  a  more  sinful  condition  than  they 
were  at  this  very  time ;  or  rather  they  had  never  so  grossly  sin 
ned  as  just  before  the  Saviour's  resurrection.  Before  the  Sa 
viour  died  they  were  with  him  every  day  ;  they  were,  all  of 
them,  in  a  measure  faithful,  never  forsook  their  Master,  never 
denied  him,  that  I  hear  of,  till  he  came  to  die.  And  yet  all  the 
time  they  were  true  and  faithful  he  never  called  them  any  thing 
better  than  friends  ;  he  never  called  th'mi  "  brethren."  You 
would  have  thought  that  when  they  ran  away  from  him,  that 
when  three  of  them  slept  in  the  garden  during  his  agony,  when 
all  forsook  him  and  fled,  and  when  Peter  especially  denied  him, 
the  Saviour  would  have  said,  "  No,  I  called  you  friends  when  you 
were  faithful,  I  will  now  see  whether  I  can  stretch  a  point,  even 
to  call  you  servants."  But  we  see  the  blacker  their  sin,  the 
stronger  his  love ;  the  more  defiled  they  were,  the  more  sweetly 
did  he  talk  to  them.  He  said  to  them,  in  deeds  though  not  in 
ivords,  "  Henceforth,  I  call  you  not  friends,  for  a  friend  hath  nc 
relation  to  his  friend  ;  but  I  call  you  brethren,  for  my  Father  is 
your  Father,  and  my  God  is  your  God."  Now  carry  those  two 
sweet  thoughts  away  with  you,  for  sweet  they  are  if  the  Spirit 
leads  you  into  them — that  the  higher  the  Saviour  gets  the  more 
free  is  he  in  the  expression  of  his  love ;  and  that  other  thought, 
that  the  farther  the  disciples  ran  away  from  their  Master,  the 
more  lovingly  did  he  call  them  back  again.  Marvellous  and 
strange,  but  nevertheless  true.  Who  cannot  derive  comfort  from 
such  a  thought  as  this?  I  know,  ye  feeble  followers  of  Jesus,  ye 
have  sometimes  thought  that  he  loved  his  people  when  he  was 
on  earth,  but  that  now  he  reigns  exalted  on  high,  he  has  forgot 
ten  such  of  them  as  you.  Oh,  be  assured,  inasmuch  as  he  reached 
the  summit  of  his  glory  he  doth  now  manifest  the  summit  of 
his  love.  The  more  he  is  exalted  the  more  doth  he  manifest 
himself. 

2.  Arid  I  know  again,  you  are  saying  that  you  have  so  greatly 
sinned  that  you  cannot  expect  him  to  love  you.  Do  again  appro 
priate  this  thought,  that  the  sweetest  promises  in  the  Bible  are  for 
the  very  people  that  deserve  them  the  least.  There  are  promises 
for  those  who  follow  close  to  their  Saviour,  and  very  sweet  ones 
too  -9  but  some  of  the  teuderest  promises  in  the  Word  of  God  ar« 


CHRIST'S  MANIFESTATION  TO  MART  MAGDALENE.         419 

for  those  who  have  wandered  away  the  most.  Take,  for  instance, 
thkt  sweet  word,  "  He  will  not  quench  the  smoking  flax,  nor 
break  the  bruised  reed."  A  Christian  is  nothing  better  than  a 
smoking  flax.  It  is  very  likely,  through  simple  neglect,  that  the 
believer  does  not  burn  brightly  ;  and  if  he  is  a  bruised  reed,  the 
bruise  is  the  effect  of  some  great  backsliding.  There  is  the  sweet 
word  in  the  promise,  "  He  will  not  quench  the  smoking  flax,  noi 
break  the  bruised  reed."  Blessed  Jesus,  when  we  should  hav 
thought  that  our  sins  would  cause  thee  to  speak  harshly,  we  find 
that  thou  hast  the  softest  words  for  those  who  have  most  erred  ; 
and  that  our  sins,  that  would  seem  to  make  thee  angry,  seem  to 
make  thee  only  to  invite  us  back  again  with  sweeter  words  than 
to  thost  who  have  not  erred  so  much  as  ourselves. 

3  Now  note  here  again — every  time  Jesus  Christ  says  any 
thing  to  his  brethren,  it  is  always  something  that  requires  faith 
on  their  part.  Why  did  he  not  say,  "  Go  and  tell  my  brethren 
I  am  risen  ]"  Because  they  did  not  want  any  faith  for  that. 
He  was  risen ;  that  was  a  fact  that  they  could  discover  by  their 
eye-sight,  and  some  of  them  by  their  touch.  "  No,"  says  he, 
"I  will  only  make  large  drafts  upon  my  peoples'  faith.  Go  and 
tell  them  that  I  am  about  to  ascend.  Do  not  tell  them  I  am 
risen ;  there  will  be  nothing  for  their  faith  to  lay  hold  of.  Tell 
them  that  I  ascend  ;  that  is  something  for  them  to  believe." 
Now  do  you  know  this,  Christian  ?  The  more  thou  hast  of  the 
manifest  presence  of  Christ  the  more  faith  do  you  require 
Have  you  not  often  asked  to  have  a  promise  brought  hume  to 
your  heart  by  the  special  influences  of  the  Spirit  ?  Now,  recol 
lect,  the  more  promises  you  have,  the  more  faith  you  will 
require.  The  words  of  Christ  demand  faith  at  our  hands.  A 
manifestation  from  Christ  is  as  truly  a  demand  upon  our  faith 
as  when  he  hides  his  face  from  us.  When  he  hides  his  face  he 
requires  us  to  believe,  even  when  he  says  nothing  ;  but  when  he 
speaks,  he  requires  us  to  believe  something  that  he  says.  The 
more  manifestations,  the  more  your  need  of  faith.  "  I  ascend 
unto  my  Father  and  your  Father,  and  to  my  God  and  your  God." 
Oh,  Luther  was  right  when  he  said  that  all  the  pith  of  divinity 
lay  in  the  pronouns — "  my  Father  and  your  Father."  "  He  is 
*iny  Father'  by  eternal  generation.  'I  was  begotteu  of  my 


420  CHRIST'S    MANIFESTATION    TO    MARY    MAGDALENE. 

Father  from  before  all  worlds.'  He  is  *  our  Father '  by  regene 
ration.  He  hath  begotten  us  again  to  a  lively  hope  by  the  re 
surrection  of  Jesus  Christ  from  the  dead.  He  is  4  my  Father,' 
as  I  am  the  Head  of  the  Church, — man  and  God,  Christ — I  call 
him  Father  in  my  Christhood,  and  I  stand  as  your  represent 
ative  and  say  it ;  and  inasmuch  as  you  are  all  gathered  up  ;n 
me,  he  is  your  Father  too — my  Father  and  your  Father."  Mow 
sweet  the  word  Father !  He  is  your  Father  because  he  has  the 
deepest  love  to  protect  you  ;  and  if  you  doubt  whether  his 
power  is  equal  to  his  love  hear  what  Jesus  says — "  I  am  going  to 
my  God  and  to  your  God."  And  inasmuch  as  God  is  omnipo 
tent,  and  the  Father  is  love,  you  have  all  the  love  you  want,  and 
all  the  power  equal  to  that  love.  It  seems  sweet  to  hear  Christ 
calling  his  Father  God.  As  he  was  a  man  the  Father  was  his 
God ;  as  he  was  Christ  he  calls  the  Father  God  over  him — "  My 
Father  is  greater  than  I,"  speaking  as  a  man  ;  God  being  greater 
than  a  Mediator.  "  As  man  I  worship  him  as  you  worship  him ; 
as  man  I  look  up  to  him  as  my  Father  the  same  as  you  do. 
He  is  my  Father  as  he  is  your  Father." 

4.  This  leads  us  to  make  only  one  other  remark — How  beauti 
fully  the  Saviour  refers  to  the  believer's  union  with  himself.  The 
whole  Bible,  when  it  is  rightly  understood,  points  to  union  with 
Christ,  and  this  sweet  verse  is  just  full  of  it.  Christ  and  his  peo 
ple  havQftimited  interests.  When  Christ  calls  God  his  Father,  we 
may  call  God  "  our  Father,"  too.  In  his  property  we  have  a 
joint  interest;  he  is  heir  of  all  things,  and  we  are  joint-heirs  with 
him.  In  relationship  Christ  and  his  people  are  united.  His 
brethren  are  our  brethren ;  his  Father  is  our  Fatfcer.  Even  in 
service,  as  Christ  was  man,  as  he  was  the  servant  of  God  for  our 
sakes,  so  the  Master  whom  he  served  is  the  Master  whom  we 
serve,  and  we  together  take  the  same  service  upon  ourselves,  be 
lieving  that  we  together  shall  have  the  same  kingdom  conferred 
upon  us,  and  shall  reign  with  him — "  Tell  my  brethren  that  1  as 
ccnd  to  my  Father  and  your  Father,  and  to  my  God  and  youi 
God." 

An  old  divine  calls  Mary  Magdalene  apostolorum  apostola,  tha 
is,  the  greatest  apostle  of  the  apostles ;  for  she  was  sent  to  be  the 
apostle  to  the  apostles.  An  apostle  is  one  sent,  and  Mary  Mag* 


CHRIST'S  MANIFESTATION  TO  MARY  MAGDALENE.         421 

dalene  was  sent  to  those  whom  afterwards  Christ  sent  to  the  ends 
of  the  earth.  So  may  a  poor  humble  woman  be  an  apostle  to 
one  who  shall  afterwards  be  a  great  divine.  Let  us  hear  what 
this  great  apostle  says  to  us.  Once  more,  she  does  not  tell  us 
that  Jesus  Christ  is  about  to  ascend;  she  tells  us  that  he  has  as 
cended  ;  and  whenever  we  draw  around  the  table  of  our  Lord,  let 
s  derive  sweet  influence  from  the  fact  that  Jesus  Christ  has  as- 
icnded.  He  has  ascended — then  he.  ascended  as  a  Conqueror, 
.eading  captivity  captive.  Now  he  has  ascended — then  he  as 
cended  as  a  Forerunner  for  us,  entering  within  the  veil.  He  has 
ascended — then  he  has  ascended  as  one  to  make  preparation — "  I 
go  to  prepare  a  place  for  you,  and  if  (  go  away  I  will  come  again 
to  receive  you  to  myself."  He  has  gone  as  an  Intercessor,  there 
he  sits  and  there  he  stands  for  ever  interceding  before  the  throne 
of  God  for  us,  his  children,  his  friends,  his  brethren.  Oh  that  we 
may  now  put  our  unfeigned  and  constant  trust  in  him  who  died, 
putting  equal  trust  in  him  that  rose  again,  making  this  our  glory, 
both  in  his  dying  and  in  his  rising,  that  he  hath  ascended  up  on 
high,  and  sitteth  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  who  also  maketh  inter 
cession  for  us. 

Oh  that  those  who  are  dead  in  sin  were  quickened  by  God  that 
they  might  know  something  of  the  preciousnessof  having  a  Father 
in  heaven,  the  same  Father  that  Jesus  Christ  had !  Sinner,  I  pray 
the  Lord  to  make  thee  believe  in  Jesus  Christ ;  and  if  thou  hast 
sinned  with  Mary  Magdalene,  may  he  help  thee  to  believe  with 
her,  that  thou  mayest  share  in  her  sweet  manifestations,  and  have 
some  sweet  message  some  day  to  tell  to  the  re«t  of  the  bretnren. 


SERMON    XXVIII. 

THE   SIGHT   OF    INIQUITY'. 

"Why  dost  thou  show  me*  iniquity,  and  cause  me  to  bebold  giierance? 
-HAB.  i.  3. 

IN  this  discourse  it  will  be  my  endeavor  to  assign  some  rea 
sons  why  God  causes  his  people  to  see  iniquity  in  themselves  and 
others. 

I.  Aad  we  will  begin  with  the  first.  WHY  DOES  GOD  CAUSB 
us  TO  SEE  INIQUITY  IN  OURSELVES  ?  What  is  the  reason  of  the 
Holy  Sp.rit's  discoveries,  which  he  sometimes  makes  to  us,  of 
the  evil  of  our  hearts  ?  It  is  well  known  to  all  who  love  the 
Lord,  that  there  are  seasons  when  the  Holy  Spirit  takes  us  into 
the  chambers  of  imagery.  "  Son  of  man,"  saith  he,  "  1  will 
show  thee  greater  abominations  than  these."  He  lays  bare  the 
loathsome  keniiel  of  the  human  heart,  and  lets  us  look  at  all  our 
deformity  and  depravity ;  he  takes  us  to  the  "  rock  whence  we 
were  hewn,  and  10  the  hole  of  the  pit  whence  we  were  digged." 
He  bids  us  look  with  horror  upon  our  natural  state,  and  see  that 
awful  and  hideous  corruption  that  still  remaineth  in  our  hearts, 
even  though  we  be  regenerate.  Why  doth  he  do  this]  We  will 
nswer  the  question  ».n  several  ways. 

Sometimes  he  does  it  to  confirm  us  in  the  doctrines  of  grace 
My  brethren,  Arminianism  is  the  natural  religion  of  us  all.  1 
think  one  of  the  surest  ways  in  the  world  to  put  down  all  our 
self-sufficiency,  and  all  our  erroneous  views  of  the  Gospel,  is  for 
God  the  Holy  Spirit  to  show  us  our  own  depravity.  A  man  may 
talk  about  free  will,  while  he  knows  nothing  about  himself;  but 
when  the  Lord  has  shown  him  what  he  is  by  nature,  he  will  suv 


THE    SIGHT    OF    INIQUITY.  423 

no  more  about  it ;  or  if  he  says  something  about  it  in  mere  thb- 
cry,  he  cannot  believe  it  in  his  inmost  spirit.  A  man  says  that 
sinners  of  their  own  will  turn  to  God  ;  he  says  that  they  do 
of  their  own  strength,  at  least  to  a  great  degree,  though  assisted 
by  the  Holy  Spirit,  keep  themselves,  and  that  to  some  extent 
their  final  perseverance  is  dependent  on  their  own  diligence,  and 
s  not  left  entirely  in  the  hands  of  God.  This  I  am  sure  of,  that 
f  the  Spirit  takes  him  into  the  chambers  of  imagery,  and  lets  him 
see  his  own  iniquity,  he  may  go  in  talking  about  his  own  will, 
but  he  will  come  out  singing  of  free  grace ;  for  he  will  say,  "  O 
Lord,  if  thou  hadst  not  begun  the  good  work  in  me,  it  never  could 
have  originated  in  such  a  filthy  pool  as  my  heart ;  and  if  thou 
dost  not  carry  on  the  work  from  first  to  last,  it  will  soon  come  to 
a  stand-still.  If  I  am  to  stand  in  any  righteousness  except  the 
righteousness  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  I  must  stand  naked  before 
the  bar  of  God ;  and  if  the  work  be  not  entirely  thine  own,  or  if 
thou  art  to  be  turned  away  by  any  sin  or  sinfulness  in  the  crea 
ture,  then,  O  Lord,  I  know  I  must  perish."  And  this,  when  he 
has  got  right  views  upon  the  subject,  will  drive  him  to  believe  in 
discriminating  grace,  in  irresistible  vocation,  in  omnipotent  keep 
ing,  and  in  the  infallible  perseverance  of  all  the  children  of  God. 

It  is  very  extraordinary  how  the  belief  of  one  of  the  doctrines 
of  grace  naturally  leads  to  the  belief  of  all  the  rest.  The  system 
o*'  the  Gospel  is  so  logical,  its  truths  fit  so  well  into  one  another, 
that  you  cannot  get  a  right  knowledge  of  one,  without  at  once,  or 
in  a  very  short  time,  discovering  the  others.  The  Lord  begins 
by  teaching  us  this  foundation  truth,  our  utter  depravity,  one  that 
is  burned  into  our  conscience  by  bitter  experience,  and  by  terrible 
discoveries  of  our  sinfulness ;  he  knows  right  well  that  the  other 
doctrines  will  follow,  and  that  when  this  is  really  urderstood,  \ve 
shall  not  be  long  before  we  have  orthodox  views  of  the  whole 
covenant  of  grace,  and  the  great  system  of  the  Gospel  of  Jesus. 
This,  I  think,  is  one  reason  why  the  Lord  gives  his  people  dis 
coveries  of  their  iniquity  and  grievance,  that  they  may  be  sound 
in  the  faith,  and  that  they  may  hold  nothing  but  the  doctrines  of 
grace. 

Moreover,  it  is  to  keep  them  humble.  If  our  Master  did  not 
sometimes  let  us  have  a  look  at  ourselves,  we  should  be  fearfull} 


424  THE    SIGHT    OF    INIQUITY. 

proud.  The  old  Puritans  used  to  say,  that  God  had  given  the 
peacock  black  feet,  that  he  might  not  be  proud  of  his  bright 
feathers.  So,  said  they,  God  has  allowed  his  people  to  have  black 
feet  still,  that  they  may  not  glory  in  any  of  the  graces  which  God 
the  Spirit  has  given  them  ;  but  that  while  they  have  those  graces, 
so  bright  and  beautiful,  they  may  still  look  down  on  their  black 
natural  depravity,  and  humble  themselves  before  God.  We  art* 
11,  by  nature,  as  proud  as  Lucifer.  If  any  man  thinks  himself  to 
be  incapable  of  pride,  he  is  very  proud  indeed.  "  Ah !"  says  one, 
"  I  know  I  never  can  be  flattered."  But,  sir,  you  natter  yourself 
to  an  extraordinary  degree,  when  you  say  that.  Pride  is  natural 
to  us ;  it  is  woven  into  the  warp  and  woof  of  our  being ;  we  shall 
never  get  rid  of  it,  till  the  worm  has  eaten  up  our  flesh ;  nothing 
will  ever  cover  up  our  pride  except  our  winding  sheets ;  and  when 
our  bodies  are  in  them,  and  our  souls  are  caught  up  to  dwell  with 
God,  then  pride  shall  be  thoroughly  cast  out.  Our  high  commu 
nion,  our  progress  towards  heaven,  our  increased  knowledge,  our 
good  works,  all  these  things  have,  through  the  evil  heart  of  our 
unbelief,  a  tendency  to  puff  us  up,  though,  in  truth,  being  all  bor 
rowed,  and  all  given  us  by  the  Spirit,  there  is  no  legitimate  cause 
of  pride  in  any  of  us ;  and  therefore,  God,  to  keep  his  people  in 
the  right  place,  humbles  them  with  discoveries  of  their  sinfulness. 
If  they  had  all  sail,  and  no  ballast,  they  would  soon  be  wrecked  ; 
so  that  when  he  fills  his  people  with  abundant  revelations,  he  sends 
this  thorn  in  the  flesh ;  and  this  messenger  of  Satan  is  sent  to 
buffet  them,  that  they  may  walk  humbly  with  God,  and  bow  their 
heads  in  submission  before  him,  knowing  themselves  to  be  still 
unclean,  apart  from  the  work  of  Christ  Jesus,  which  he  has  wrought 
out  for  them. 

Beloved,  you  can  beai  me  witness,  that  when  you  have  had  sad 
discoveries  of  youi  owr  heinous  guilt,  you  have  been  humbled 
Sometimes  your  good  works  have  been  a  great  evil  to  you,  be 
cause  you  have  prided  yourself  upon  them,  and  brought  yourself 
to  the  precipice  of  ruin.  But  manifestations  of  your  guilt,  ty 
God's  Spirit,  brought  home  to  your  conscience,  have  been  of 
essential  service  to  you,  by  teaching  you  not  to  be  high-minded, 
but  rather  to  fear  and  to  remember  that  your  standir.g  in  grace 
is  not  of  yourself,  and  therefore  you  must  not  boast.  That  is  an 


THE    SIGHT    OF    IXIQL'ITl.  42i) 

| 

othei  good  reason  why  we  may  bless  God  for  showing  us  iniquity, 
if  there  were  no  other. 

But  a  third  reason  is,  that  God  sometimes  shows  his  people 
their  own  wickedness,  to  make  them  submissive  in  the  hour  of 
trouble.  A  Pharisee,  of  all  people,  would  be  the  worst  man  to 
be  in  Job's  position.  If  I  must  be  in  a  hospital,  I  would  rather 
)e  there  as  a  publican,  than  as  a  Pharisee.  For  a  Pharisee  noth- 
ng  would  be  good  enough ;  he  would  think  his  pangs  and  miseries 
great  indeed  for  so  righteous  a  man  as  he ;  he  would  think  he  had 
no  right  to  suffer.  But  the  poor  publican  would  say,  "  I  am  a 
sinner,  and  these  miseries  are  not  a  millionth  part  of  what  I 
deserve  to  suffer ;  these  aches  and  pains  are  nothing,  compared 
with  what  I  merit  at  the  hand  of  God ;  therefore  I  will  bear  all 
these  things  with  submission.  Why  should  a  living  man  com 
plain  1  I  am  out  of  hell  yet,  and  therefore  I  must  not  murmur." 
Ah !  brethren,  we  can  never  keep  murmuring  down.  There  is 
very  much  in  the  old  English  word  murmur.  Just  sound  it — it 
is  mur-mur.  Any  child  can  say  that.  It  is  one  of  the  easiest 
words  to  speak  ;  and  that  is  why,  1  think,  we  have  got  it  for  mur 
muring.  Because  murmuring  is  such  a  very  easy  thing ;  any  one 
can  murmur,  any  one  can  grumble,  any  one  can  complain.  Mur 
muring  seems  to  have  been  bred  in  the  bone  of  Israel ;  for  Israel 
in  the  wilderness  were  always  murmuring ;  murmuring  for  water 
when  they  were  thirsty,  then  murmuring  for  bread,  then  mur 
muring  for  meat,  then  murmuring  because  the  Anakims  were  tall, 
then  murmuring  because  they  were  to  go  and  fight  them,  and  then 
murmuring  because  they  were  not  to  go  and  fight  them ;  mur 
muring  first  for  one  thing,  and  then  for  another  thing  ;  they  were 
always  at  it ;  they  were  continually  murmuring  for  forty  years 
long  in  the  wilderness.  Ay,  but  the  surest  way  to  cure  us  of 
murmuring  is  to  let  us  know  our  own  ill-deserving.  A  man  that 
has  been  taught  his  own  wickedness  and  his  own  ill-deserving, 
will  be  less  likely  to  murmur  than  any  one  else.  The  poor  wretch 
that  has  had  the  rope  round  his  neck,  and  been  ready  to  be  turned 
off,  when  he  gets  his  pardon,  and  goes  his  way,  you  will  not  find 
him  murmuring  at  the  fare  that  is  provided  for  him.  Bat  he  will 
say,  "  Oh !  it  is  such  a  wonder  to  be-alive  at  all,  such  an  act  of 
mercy  that  I  have  had  my  life  spared,  that  this  dry  bread  be 


TUK    RIGHT    OF    IN1QUITT. 


comes  like  royal  dainties,  and  this  cup  of  cold  water  become.'  to 
me  like  the  richest  wine."  The  Lord  does  thus  take  his  children 
into  the  stripping-room.  and  into  the  starving-room,  and  let  them 
see  that  all  their  afflictions  are  less  than  they  deserve ;  that  their 
troubles  are  but  as  the  small  dust  of  the  balance,  compared  with 
the  mountains  of  tribulation  and  anguish  which  they  deserve  to 
have  received  in  hell. 

Again.  It  is  to  put  us  on  our  watch-tower.  When  the  Lord 
shows  us  the  sin  in  our  heart,  it  is  like  a  captain  pointing  to  a 
few  skirmishers  that  have  just  come  before  an  army  that  is  ad- 
vancing.  "  There,  my  men,"  says  the  captain,  "  you  see  those. 
They  are  the  outposts,  the  men  that  are  the  advanced  guard  of 
the  enemy ;  look  sharp  after  them ;  there  is  a  great  army  be 
hind  ;  be  on  your  watch."  So  the  Holy  Spirit  discovers  to  us 
our  evil  desires  and  corruptions  for  a  moment ;  he  wakes  us  up 
to  see  them ;  and  when  we  have  seen  them,  he  says  to  us,  "  Take 
care ;  this  little  that  I  have  shown  thee  is  to  warn  thee  of  a 
greater  thing  that  is  behind.  These  few  evil  ones  that  have  just 
appeared  to  thy  vision  are  but  the  outriders  of  a  host  of  black 
things  that  are  ready  to  attack  thee.  Be  upon  thy  watch-tower 
always ;  be  constantly  looking  out  for  foes.  I  think  that  soldiers 
Heed  to  have  a  few  skirmishes  on  their  march ;  if  they  had  not 
they  might  become  careless  and  relax  discipline,  and  then  they 
might  be  enticed  into  a  defile,  and  so  be  surprised  and  cut  off. 
But  when  they  have  a  few  enemies  to  harass  them  on  the  flank 
and  rear,  they  are  very  likely  to  be  watchful  and  to  keep  a  sharp 
look-out,  so  that  in  case  of  a  sudden  charge  they  would  be  ready 
to  repel  the  foe.  So  the  temptations  of  our  flesh  are  often  use 
ful  to  wake  us  up.  God  often  makes  use  of  our  sins,  our  inbred 
sins,  to  act  like  watchdogs  in  a  house  to  wake  us  up,  to  let  us 
know  there  are  thieves  trying  to  get  in.  Our  few  sins  bark  and 
bite,  and  then  we  start  up  to  skirmish.  But,  ah  !  if  we  had  not 
been  awakened,  if  these  had  not  been  developed,  there  might 
have  been  hideous  open  sins,  that  would  have  surprised  us  in 
some  moment  when  we  were  not  upon  our  guard ;  and  so  we 
might  have  been  slain  by  the  hand  of  the  enemy.  Old  Ralph 
Erskine  said  a  very  true  thing,  and  a  very  right  thing,  when  ho 
said,  "  I  would  rather  a  roaring  devil  than  a  sleepirg  one  at  me ;" 


THE    SIGHT    OF    INIQUITY.  i'27 

| 

by  which  lie  meant,  I  would  rather  be  tempted,  I  would  rather  be 
tried,  1  would  rather  be  persecuted,  I  would  rather  be  perplexed, 
than  lead  an  easy  life  of  it,  and  so  go  sailing  along  in  self-confi 
dence  till  I  struck  upon  a  rock, — 

"  For  more  the  treacherous  calm  I  dread, 
Than  tempests  rulling  o'er  my  head." 

Because  the  calm  is  agt  to  breed  a  slothfulness  which  disables 
and  times  of  ease  seldom  suit  God's  soldiers.  Holidays  ruinea 
the  army  of  Hannibal ;  and  many  an  easy  hour  and  day,  when 
we  have  been  free  from  our  inbred  sins,  has  been  the  means  of 
throwing  us  off  our  guard,  and  leading  us  into  worse  sins  on  the 
morrow.  God  stirs  up  the  Amalekites  to  make  us  ready  for  the 
battle,  lest  we  should  be  surprised. 

But  one  more  answer  to  this  question,  then  I  will  pass  to  the 
other  point.  The  Lord  shows  us  often  our  iniquity  and  our 
grievance,  to  make  us  value  salvation  more.  You  know,  the  man 
that  thinks  the  most  of  a  doctor,  is  generally  the  man  who  wants 
him  mos-t.  When  we  are  well,  we  often  make  jokes  of  doctors  ; 
we  talk  about  their  killing  the  people,  and  so  on;  but  when  we 
get  ill,  we  always  send  for  them.  We  laugh  at  the  men ;  but  we 
use  them  when  we  are  sick  ourselves.  Ah !  and  so  it  is  with  the 
Lord's  people ;  they,  perhaps,  may  think  lightly  of  Christ,  when 
they  do  not  see  any  present  need  for  him ;  but  when  they  dis 
cover  their  own  leprosy,  then  it  is  they  value  the  Physician. 
When  they  see  their  own  ruin,  then  it  is  they  prize  the  remedy. 
It  is  a  great  service  to  us,  sometimes,  to  show  us  our  bankrupt's 
schedule.  Every  man  has  had  a  bankrupt's  schedule,  because  we 
are  bankrupts  by  nature.  We  set  up  in  trade  for  ourselves,  and  we 
soon  turned  bankrupts ;  we  never  paid  a  farthing  in  the  pound, 
Jesus  Christ  stepped  in  and  paid  it  all.  But  we  should  not  know 
bow  great  was  his  grace  in  so  doing,  did  he  not  show  us  again 
our  debt,  and  how  very  poor  were  our  own  hopes  of  meeting 
d'^bts  so  immense,  so  infinitely  beyond  all  our  comprehension. 
God  says  to  his  children,  "  I  brought  you  out  of  prison,  and  you 
do  not  think  much  of  my  deliverance  to-day ;  I  will  take  you 
back  to  prison,  and  let  you  see  what  kind  of  place  it  is,  and  then 
you  will  think  more  of  the  Breaker  that  broke  y.jur  chains  and 


428  THE    S:«IIT    OF    INIQUITY. 

set  you  free.  I  have  opened  a  fountain  that  sparkles  with 
water;  you  have  been  drinking  of  it  day  by  day,  till  you  are 
full,  and  you  do  not  know  its  value.  Come,  I  will  put  you  in  the 
waste,  howling  wilderness,  and  you  shall  suffer  hunger,  have  your 
water  spent  in  your  bottle,  and  then  you  will  know  the  precious- 
ness  of  the  rippling  fountain  which  Christ  hath  opened  for  thirsty 
sinners.  You  have  been  eating  at  my  table,  every  day  feasting  - 
you  have  scarce  known  what  hunger  is;  J  will  just  put  you  again 
in  the  furnace  of  conviction,  and  make  you  hunger  after  righte 
ousness,  and  then  you  will  prize  the  bread  that  came  down  from 
heaven,  and  think  more  of  Jesus  than  you  would  have  done,  had 
it  not  been  for  this  showing  of  iniquity  and  grievance." 

All  these  things  I  have  now  spoken  of,  are  matters  of  heart  ev 
perience.  Many  persons  do  not  know  the  plague  of  their  heart. 
But  you  that  love  the  Lord  will  own  that,  however  quaintly  I 
have  put  these  things,  there  is  great  truth  in  them. 

It  is  even  so :  we  have  had  very  solemn  times,  all  of  us,  since 
we  first  knew  the  Lord ;  when  we  could  not  tell  the  right  hand 
from  the  left  in  matters  of  Christianity  ;  when,  if  any  one  had 
asked,  "  Are  you  the  Lord's  or  no  ?"  we  dared  not  have  stumbled 
out,  "  I  am  the  Lord's."  For  our  corruptions  were  so  strong, 
and  unbelief  had  become  so  rampant,  and  poor  faith  seemed  to 
be  so  slumbering,  like  the  fire  in  the  ashes,  that  we  could  not  tell 
whether  there  was  any  fire  or  not.  Oh !  brethren,  do  we  not  re 
member  when  we  have  sometimes  knelt  down  in  anguish,  and 
said,  "  O  Lord,  I  long  to  have  this  point  decided — am  I  thine  or 
am  I  not  ?  If  it  be  so,  why  am  I  thus  1  Why  this  wrestling  of 
two  armies  in  the  Shulamite  ?  Why  is  it  that  these  confusions 
and  these  warrings  are  carried  on  in  my  spirit1?  Show  me 
wherefore  thou  contendest  with  me,  and  why  my  sin  contends 
with  me.  O  Lord,  do  show  me  where  I  am  vile !"  And  have 
we  not  found  that  these  times  have  been  of  essential  benefit  to 
as  ?  We  ftaye  grown  strong  by  these  griefs ;  the  sight  of  ini- 
quity  has  made  us  wiser,  more  cautious,  more  prudent,  more 
humble,  more  affectionate,  and  made  us  more  firm  in  our  belief 
in  our  Saviour  afterwards,  £fyan  we  had  ever  been  before. 

II.  Now  I  come  to  answer  the  question  in  another  sense. 
Sometimes  the  iniquity  and  grievance  are  not  in  ourselves,  Hit 


THE    SIGHT    OF    INIQUITY.  4"^) 

IN  OTHERS.  Some  of  you  may  not  have  much  of  this  world's 
goods ;  you,  perhaps,  live  in  a  house  where  there  are  very  un 
godly  people ;  down  in  your  court  the  Sabbath  is  always  broken ; 
in  the  street  where  you  reside,  you  seldom  hear  any  thing  on  the 
Sabbath-day  except  oaths,  and  curses,  and  profanity,  and  a  breach 
of  the  day  of  rest;  and  others  of  you,  by  your  very  connections, 
are  called  to  mix  with  bad  companions,  whose  speech,  instead  of 
being  seasoned  with  salt,  seems  seasoned  with  brimstone,  flavored 
only  with  blasphemy,  and  having  perpetually  in  it  the  very 
brogue  of  hell.  There  are  some  of  you  called  to  labor  with 
workmen,  who,  instead  of  endeavoring  to  help  you  to  heaven, 
seem  trying,  like  Christian's  neighbors  and  wife,  of  whom  you 
read  in  the  "  Pilgrim's  Progress,"  to  pull  you  back  to  the  City 
of  Destruction.  You  are,  perhaps,  asking  this  question,  "  O 
Lord,  why  am  I  in  such  a  condition1?  Why  has  thy  providence 
put  me  where  I  am  thrown  into  contact  with  evil  men1?  Why 
dost  thou  show  me  iniquity  and  cause  me  to  behold  grievance  ?" 
1  \\ill  tell  you  two  or  three  reasons. 

The  first  is,  to  let  you  see  what  you  might  have  been  yourselves. 
John  Bradford — you  have  heard  the  story  of  John  Bradford  a 
hundred  times — when  he  used  to  see  people  taken  by  his  window 
to  Tyburn,  to  be  hanged,  said,  "  There  goes  John  Bradford ;  if  it 
had  not  been  for  the  grace  of  God,  John  Bradford  would  have 
been  hanged  too."  When  you  hear  men  swearing,  you  say, 
"  That  is  what  I  would  have  been,  if  the  Lord  had  not  kept  the 
door  of  my  lips."  When  you  see  men  taken  up  for  robbery, 
you  say,  "That  is  what  1  might  have  been,  if  God  had  not  kept 
me  from  sin."  When  you  hear  of  the  drunken  brawl,  or  the 
murderous  affray,  you  put  your  hand  on  your  heart,  and  say, 
"  Ah !  the  same  thing  might  have  come  out  of  this ;  for  hearts 
we  very  much  alike.  '  As  face  answereth  to  face  in  water,  so  the 
heart  of  man  to  man.'  There  is  not  much  difference  between 
one  heart  and  another  by  nature ;  that  man  is  a  picture  of  what  I 
might  have  been,  if  the  restraining  hand  of  God  had  not  kept  me 
back  from  sin."  You  know  sometimes  drunkards  make  men 
sober,  good  apostles  of  temperance  drunkards  are.  For  when 
they  come  reeling  through  the  streets,  in  all  their  bestial  stupid- 
ity,  a  man  very  naturally  says,  "  What  a  fool  that  fellow  inakef 


430  THE    SIGHT    OF    INIQUITY 

himself!"  and  it  leads  him  to  say,  "  I  must  avoid  that  thing,  bo- 
cause  I  would  not  make  myself  so  foolish."  I  think  it  was  the 
old  Greek  lords  used  to  make  their  slaves  drunk,  in  order  to 
keep  their  children  from  the  vice,  by  seeing  how  absurd  it 
looked. 

Thus,  perhaps,  God  allows  wicked  men  to  come  in  our  way,  to 
make  us  see  the  evil  of  sin,  that  we  may  turn  from  it,  pass  by  it% 
ibhor  it,  and  not  indulge  in  it.  I  have  no  doubt  that  the  wicked 
ness  of  men  may  be  employed  under  the  divine  wisdom,  and  the 
overruling  hand  of  God,  for  the  ranctincation  of  his  own  people. 
Just  as,  sometimes,  a  book  that  is  full  of  bad  orthography  is  one 
of  the  best  things  for  teaching  a  child  how  to  spell  well,  by  leading 
him  to  set  about  correcting  the  bad  spelling :  so  the  Lord  gives 
us  bad  spelling  in  order  to  teach  us  how  to  spell  right.  We  have 
to  correct  ourselves  by  the  evil  of  others,  and  learn  from  them 
to  avoid  the  sins  into  which  they  have  fallen.  Wrecks  may  some 
times  be  made  beacons ;  the  ruin  of  one  man  may  sometimes  be 
a  warning  to  another.  And  it  is  so  with  the  Christian  •,  for  ho 
knows  how  to  use  his  sight  of  iniquity,  and  of  grievances  beheld 
in  others,  by  avoiding  the  same  iniquity  himself. 

In  the  second  place,  God  sometimes  allows  us  to  see  the  sins 
of  others,  to  teach  us  to  admire  his  sovereignty,  which  plucked  us 
as  brands  fiom  the  burning.  We  look  at  our  neighbors  that  live 
in  our  street,  and  see  them  drinking  down  sin  as  a  greedy  ox 
drinketh  down  water,  and  we  say,  "Who  hath  made  me  to  dif 
fer  ?"  Grace — free  grace.  And  then  we  ask,  "  Why  has  grace 
come  to  me  more  than  to  them  ?  Why  these  favors  to  me  above 
the  rest?"  And  we  are  obliged  to  say,  with  Christ,  "Even  so, 
Father,  for  so  it  seemed  good  in  thy  sight."  When  one  of  a  family 
is  converted,  what  a  specimen  that  is  of  divine  sovereignty ! 
When  there  is  a  holy  mother,  with  an  ungodly  husband,  and 
nicked  children,  what  an  illustration  that  is  of  the  sovereignty 
of  God,  in  that  one  is  taken  and  the  others  left !  And  when  in 
a  house  two  women  have  been  grinding  at  the  mill,  and  one  has 
accompanied  her  grinding  with  the  song  of  Sion,  and  the  other 
with  the  voice  of  cursing,  what  a  proof  there  has  been  of  the 
sovereignty  of  God,  in  that  "  he  will  have  mercy  on  whom  he 
will  have  mercy  :"  that  "  it  is  not  or  him  that  willeth,  nor  of 


THE    SIGHT    OF    INIQUITY.  431 


him  that  runneth,  but  of  God  that  showeth  mercy."  Ay,  Chris 
tian,  God  hath  put  thee  in  the  very  midst  of  sin,  to  make  grace 
the  more  conspicuous.  If  you  ride  in  the  country,  sometimes, 
you  see  a  field  of  wheat ;  you  will  very  likely  not  notice  one  of 
the  ears  at  all ;  but  as  you  are  going  along  you  will  see  a  hedge, 
and  by  some  chance  or  other  there  has  been  an  ear  dropped  into 
the  ground  under  the  hedge,  and  this  one  ear  of  corn  has  grown 
jp  through  the  brambles,  and  there  it  stands  alone.  Very  likely 
you  nudge  your  friend  who  is  riding  with  you,  and  say,  "  There 
is  an  ear  of  wheat  growing  up  among  the  brambles."  It  seems 
the  more  astonishing  and  notable  thing  from  the  place  where  it 
is.  So,  I  think,  a  Christian  in  the  Church  is  not  a  thing  to  be 
wondered  at  so*  much.  The  sovereignty  of  God  is  not  so  much 
seen  amongst  the  righteous,  as  it  is  when  we  find  the  Christian 
growing  up  amongst  the  bushes  and  brambles  of  an  ungodly 
world,  showing  forth  his  light  in  the  midst  of  "  a  wicked  and 
perverse  generation."  Who  ever  noticed  glow-worms  in  the  day 
time  1  But  in  the  night  time  you  will  see  them  under  the  leaves. 
They  were  there  by  day,  I  dare  say,  but  nobody  saw  them  ;  but 
in  the  night,  with  their  little  lamps  on  their  back,  they  glisten, 
and  every  one  admires  them.  So  the  Christian,  when  he  is  in 
good  company,  is  a  blessed  thing,  and  a  great  instance  of  divine 
'love ;  but  when  in  providence  he  is  put  into  a  dark  place,  where 
;here  is  little  of  Gospel  light  and  truth,  then  it  is  that  his  little 
lamp  begins  to  glimmer,  and  he  is  mere  noticed  than  he  ever 
was  before.  Thfs  is  why  the  Lord  sometimes  puts  his  people 
there,  to  make  his  sovereignty,  his  power,  his  might,  and  his  grace 
the  more  apparent.  Even  as  men  sometimes  set  jewels  in  foils 
to  show  their  brightness,  and  put  dark  spots  in  their  picture  to 
make  the  lights  become  more  apparent,  so  the  Lord  in  his  provi 
dence  permits  his  people  sometimes  to  sojourn  in  evrl  places ; 
like  Lot,  to  dwell  in  Sodom,  and  like  Abraham,  to  go  down  amoug 
the  Egyptians,  or  with  the  Philistines,  in  order  that  grace  may 
be  displayed,  and  the  Lord's  name  may  be  called. 

And  now,  I  think  I  have  another  reason,  and  a  better  one, 
perhaps.  "  Why  dost  thou  show  me  iniquity,  and  cause  me  to 
behold  grievance  1"  Why,  my  brethren,  God  shows  us  the  sin 
of  our  fellow-men,  that  we  may  set  more  earnestly  to  work,  and 


432  THK    SIGHT    OF    INIQUITY. 

that  we  ~nay  be  the  means  of  saving  souls  and  extending  the  king 
dom  of  righteousness.  When  a  captain  takes  his  soldiers  out  to 
look  at  the  enemy,  it  is  like  what  I  heard  of  a  celebrated  Scotch- 
man,  whose  words  I  am  scarcely  able  to  pronounce :  "  Now, 
lads,"  said  he,  "  there  they  are  ;  if  you  dinna  kill  them  they'll 
kill  you."  That  was  their  choice.  So  it  is  with  us.  God  brings 
us  to  walk  in  this  city,  where  harlotry  and  vice  on  every  side 
are  to  be  seen,  almost  in  noonday.  Now  then,  soldiers  of  the 
cross,  if  ye  dinna  kill  them  they'll  kill  you.  If  you  do  not  stand 
up  for  your  Master,  to  keep  them  down,  and  keep  the  banner  of 
the  cross  in  the  air,  the  enemy  will  be  more  than  a  match  for 
you.  -I  have  been  struck  sometimes,  when  I  have  looked  in  a 
print  window,  and  seen  there  pamphlets  full  of  all  manner  of 
obscenity  and  infidelity  and  wickedness,  and  they  have  had  the 
most  blessed  effect  on  my  mind  ;  for  I  have  thought,  "  Well,  if 
th'jre  b  so  much  wickedness,  so  much  the  more  reason  why  every 
minister  should  be  in  earnest,  and  why  every  Christian  should 
pc-ek  with  all  his  might  to  do  good."  You  may  live  in  very  nice 
villas  in  the  country  ;  you  do  not  go  among  the  poor  people,  and 
you  do  not  know  what  they  are  at.  If  you  were  to  walk  through 
some  of  the  back  slums  and  narrow  alleys  of  London,  you  would 
say,  "  Oh,  I  never  thought  there  could  have  been  such  places 
upon  earth !"  and  if  you  could  go  where  I  have  sometimes  gone, 
up  an  old  creaking  staircase,  where  you  have  to  stoop  your  head 
for  fear  of  hitting  it  against  a  beam,  and  go  into  a  room,  and  see 
a  whole  family  there ;  go  into  another  room,  and  see  a  whole 
family  there;  a  little  further,  and  see  another  family,  all  crowded 
and  packed  together,  arid  then  hear  their  language,  and  see  their 
utter  ignorance  of  every  thing  concerning.  Christ,  almost  as  unen 
lightened  as  the  Hottentots  in  their  kraals  in  Africa — you  would 
go  away  after  seeing  them,  and  say,  "  There  is  great  reason  t-hn 
we  should  be  up  and  in  earnest.  We  ought  to  be  doing,  sirs  ; 
we  ought  to  be  working  well  for  our  Master,  after  such  a  sight 
as  this  !"  Oh  !  but  we  cover  up  our  iniquity  in  this  land  a  great 
deal ;  we  fringe  all  London  with  glorious  streets,  so  that  when  a 
foreigner  rides  through  them  he  says,  *•  What  a  grand  city  it  is  !" 
A  varnished  hypocrisy  !  What  is  tnere  behind  those  streets  ? 
will  you  find  behind  those  palaces  -;f  t>e  West-end  ?  The 


THK    SIGHT    OF    INIQUITY.  433 

| 

very  lowest  of  places  upon  earth,  where  the  poor  are  stowed 
away  together  by  hundreds.  We  fringe  the  city  just  with  a 
gauze  and  coating — with  something  that  looks  respectable  and 
excellent.  But,  alas  !  for  the  internals  of  this  city,  how  much 
of  wickedness  and  sin  dwell  there  !  I  bless  God  that  there  are 
some  of  you  obliged  to  live  where  you  see  the  wickedness  of 
this  city  ;  I  thank  God  that  some  of  you  cannot  go  to  your 
houses  at  night,  without  seeing  wickedness  on  the  road.  "  Why," 
you  say,  "  do  you  bless  God  that  there  is  the  wickedness  ]"  No, 
I  do  not ;  but  I  bless  God  that  you  have  to  see  it,  because  you 
will  be  the  people  who  will  go  to  others  and  say,  "  Strive  for 
the  salvation  of  men.  Work,  I  beseech  you,  to  do  good,  because 
the  world  is  still  full  of  wickedness,  and  the  dark  places  even  of 
this  city  are  full  of  the  habitations  of  cruelty."  It  is  a  long 
time  since  I  have  made  a  good  speech  at  a  public  meeting ;  but 
I  do  remember  doing  it  once.  I  stepped  out,  as  one  of  the  speak 
ers  was  delivering  a  very,  very  pretty  oration,  and  I  went  into  a 
neighboring  house  to  speak  writh  a  woman  who  wished  to  join 
the  church.  It  was  not  in  London.  When  I  stepped  into  the 
house,  there  was  the  husband  beastly  drunk  ;  he  had  got  his  wife 
up  in  a  corner,  and  was  with  all  his  might  trying  to  bruise  her 
face,  and  tear  her  arms  with  his  nails,  till  the  blood  flowed  from 
her  arms  and  face.  Two  or  three  rushed  in,  and  dragged  him 
away.  She  said  she  had  endeavored  with  all  her  meekness  to 
persuade  him  to  allow  her  to  go  to  the  house  of  God  that  night  ; 
and  the  only  reason  why  he  ill-treated  her  was,  because  he  said 
she  would  always  be  going  to  that  place  of  worship.  And  when 
I  had  seen  this  sight,  and  looked  on  the  poor  woman,  with  tears 
in  her  eyes,  I  went  into  the  place,  and  spoke  like  a  man  who  had 
got  his  face  and  heart,  and  whole  body,  full  of  fire.  I  could  not 
help  it :  I  was  all.  on  flame  against  the  sin  of  drunkenness,  and 
eought  with  all  my  might  to  urge  the  members  of  the  church  to 
d  )  all  they  could  to  scatter  the  light  of  the  Gospel  into  a  neigh 
borhood  which  was  so  dark  and  black  and  filthy  ard  abandoned. 
And  I  think  it  would  do  all  of  us  good,  when  we  preach,  if  we  were 
sometimes  to  be  dragged  through  some  of  the  worst  parts  of  Lon 
don,  to  let  us  see  the  wickedness  of  it.  It  would  do  our  Sunday- 
school  teachers  good,  many  of  them,  for  they  would  then  be  more  in 
19 


434  THE    SIGHT    OF    ISIQCITY. 

earnest  with  their  children  ;  and  i  think  it  would  do  good  tc 
some  of  our  old  friends,  who  sit  and  sleep  almost  all  the  service 
through,  and  are  never  much  more  than  sleeping  partners  in  the' 
concern.  If  they  did  but  know  ho\v  the  battle  was  going  on, 
how  tough  the  struggle  and  how  stern  the  conflict,  they  would 
wake  up  from  their  slumbers,  and  go  forth  to  the  battle,  and 
stand  shoulder  to  shoulder,  and  deal  blow  after  blow  against  the 
common  enemy  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  of  the  welfare  of 
man.  Ah,  my  brethren,  we  want  to  know  more  of  the  evil  of 
men,  to  make  us  more  earnest ;  for  if  there  be  any  thing  in  which 
the  Church  is  lacking  more  than  in  any  other  matter,  it  is  in  the 
matter  of  earnestness. 

Whitfield  said,  in  one  of  his  sermons,  "  O  my  God,  when  I 
think  how  this  wicked  city  is  perishing,  and  how  many  are  dying 
for  lack  of  knowledge,  I  feel  I  could  stand  on  the  top  of  every 
hackney  coach  in  the  streets  of  London  to  preach  the  Gospel." 
Why  should  he  say  that?  Why  was  his  zeal  so  burning?  Be 
cause  he  had  seen  the  sinfulness  of  men,  and  marked  their  follies. 
We  shall  never  be  thoroughly  in  earnest,  till  we  are  thoroughly 
aware  of  the  evil  that  is  before  us.  When  the  horse  sees  the  pre 
cipice,  he  throws  himself  back,  and  will  not  madly  dash  himself 
down.  So  with  the  Church :  if  she  could  see  the  evil  that  is  be 
fore  her,  she  wrould  surely  draw  herself  back  with  energy,  to  save 
her  own  children  from  plunging  into  the  yawning  gulf.  Ay, 
sirs,  ye  have  iniquity  in  your  very  teeth,  and  at  your  doors ;  ye 
have  iniquity  every  where  round  about  you, — and  yet  how  few 
of  you  are  striving  to  do  any  thing  for  Christ!  Ye  are  asked  to 
help  in  this  great  battle :  ye  have  so  many  calls  ye  cannot  afford 
it.  Ye  are  asked  to  do  something  in  this  cause,  to  give  it  a  little 
time ;  ye  cannot  manage  it.  Ye  are  asked  to  speak ;  ye  have  so 
little  ability,  ye  cannot  do  it.  One  half  of  the  people  that  call 
themselves  Christians  want  to  be  pressed  fifty  times  to  do  a  thing  ; 
and  then,  when  they  are  got  to  do  it,  they  are  not  worth  having, 
because  they  are  only  pressed  men — they  are  not  one-half  so  good 
as  volunteers.  I  would  that  all  knew  the  evil  this  world  is  sub 
ject  to,  and  the  wickedness  of  men  ;  and  I  think  all  of  us  who  love 
the  Saviour  would  start  up  from  our  seats  to-night,  and  say, 
"  Here  am  1 ;  let  me  be  a  volunteer  against  the  enemy ;  let  me. 


THE    SIGHT    OF    INIQUITY 


In  my  measure,  whatever  little  measure  that  may  be,  go  forth  to 
serve  my  God,  to  practise  virtue,  and,  by  a  holy  example,  and  by 
every  other  means,  seek  to  stem  the  raging  torrent  of  the  iniquity 
of  the  age." 

And  now,  my  dear  friends,  in  closing,  allow  me  just  this  one 
•  remark  to  another  class  of  hearers.  There  is  one  who,  but  a  little 
while  ago,  was  an  abandoned  sinner  ;  he  could  drink,  he  could 
swear,  he  could  break  the  Sabbath,  and  curse  God.  One  day  ho 
stepped  into  the  house  of  God,  and  the  Lord  met  with  him,  and 
now  he  is  in  misery,  such  as  he  cannot  describe  ;  his  heart  is  all 
broken,  his  conscience  is  as  if  it  had  been  lashed  with  the  tenfold 
whip  of  the  law,  and  as  if  brine  had  then  been  rubbed  into  his 
wounds  ;  he  is  smarting  all  over  with  the  wounds  of  his  conscience, 
inflicted  by  the  angry  and  fiery  law  of  God.  He  is  saying  to  him 
self,  "O  Lord,  I  must  perish,  1  know  I  must;  I  see  such  wicked 
ness  in  me,  that  I  must  perish  and  be  cast  away."  Nay,  poor 
soul,  nay,  that  is  not  the  right  answer  to  the  question.  The  ques 
tion  is,  Why  doth  the  Lord  show  thee  iniquity  1  I  will  give  thee 
the  right  answer.  It  is  to  deliver  thee  from  it.  If  God  has  broken 
thine  heart,  he  has  broken  it  on  purpose  to  give  thee  a  new  one. 
If  he  has  killed  thee  by  the  law,  he  has  killed  thee  on  purpose  to 
make  thee  alive  by  the  Gospel  ;  if  he  has  wounded  thee  in  thy  con 
science,  he  has  done  it  that  he  may  have  room  to  pour  in  the  oil 
and  the  balm  of  Christ  Jesus.  If  he  has  stripped  thee,  he  has 
only  pulled  thy  rags  off,  that  he  may  put  on  thee  a  perfect  robe 
of  spotless  righteousness  ;  and  if  he  has  cast  thee  into  the  ditch, 
so  that  thine  own  clothes  abhor  thee,  as  Job  words  it,  it  is  that 
he  may  take  thee  to  the  fountain  filled  with  blood,  and  give  theo 
a  perfect  washing.  And  when  the  Lord  pulls  a  man  down,  he 
does  not  do  it  to  burn  the  old  materials  ;  he  does  it  to  build  him 
up  again.  When  he  breaks  a  man's  heart,  it  is  not  for  the  mere 
breaking's  sake,  it  is  that  he  may  make  it  anew.  If  you  have 
misery  in  your  conscience  on  account  of  sin,  God  has  dealings  of 
love  for  you,  and  purposes  of  love  for  you.  "  Believe  in  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ."  If  you  are  a  convinced  sinner,  he  died  for  you  ; 
for  he  died  for  sinners.  If  you  can  truly  say  you  are  a  sinner, 
Christ  Jesus  hung  upon  the  cross  for  you.  Look  at  him  there, 
bleeding  ;  every  drop  of  blood  says  to  you,  "  I  drop,  poor  sinner, 


48(5  THE    BIGHT    OF    INIQUITI, 

for  thee."  Look  to  that  gash  in  his  side,  whence  flows  the  double 
stream  of  water  and  blood ;  it  says,  "  Sinner,  this  stream  runs  for 
thee."  Art  thou  a  sinner  ?  If  so,  Christ  died  for  thee.  He  hath 
not  died  in  vain :  thou  shall  be  saved.  If  thou  dost  but  know 
thyself  to  be  a  bona  fide  sinner,  a  real  one,  no  complimentary 
sham  sinner,  but  a  real,  actual  one,  who  means  what  he  says,  when 
he  declares  himself  to  be  guilty  and  vile ;  then,  as  the  Lord  liveth. 
Jesus  Christ  died  for  you  on  Calvary  ;  you  shall  behold  his  face 
with  joy ;  you  shall  be  numbered  with  the  Church  of  the  first 
born,  whose  names  are  written  in  heaven,  and  you  shall  sing 
eternal  hallelujahs  round  the  throne  of  God  and  the  Lamb. 


SERMON   XXIX. 
THE  TABERNACLE  OF  THE  MOST  HIGH. 

"  In  whom  ye  also  are  builded  together  for  an  habitation  of  God  through 
(the  Spirit."— EPHESIANS.  ii.  22. 

UNDER  the  old  Mosaic  dispensation  God  had  a  visible  dwelling 
place  among  men.  The  bright  shekinah  was  seen  between  the 
wings  of  the  cherubim  which  overshadowed  the  mercy-seat ;  and 
in  the  tabernacle  while  Israel  journeyed  in  the  wilderness,  and  in 
the  temple  afterwards,  when  they  were  established  in  their  own 
land,  there  was  a  visible  manifestation  of  the  presence  of  Jehovah 
in  the  place  which  was  dedicated  to  his  service.  Now,  every 
thing  under  the  Mosaic  dispensation  was  but  a  type,  a  picture, 
a  symbol  of  something  higher  and  nobler.  That  form  of  wor 
ship  was,  as  it  were,  a  series  of  shadow-pictures,  of  which  the 
gospel  is  the  substance.  It  is  a  sad  fact,  however,  that  there  is 
so  much  Judaism  in  all  our  hearts,  that  we  frequently  go  back  to 
the  old  beggarly  elements  of  the  law,  instead  of  going  forward 
and  seeing  in  them  a  type  of  something  spiritual  and  heavenly, 
to  which  we  ought  to  aspire.  It  is  disgraceful  to  the  present 
century  to  hear  some  men  talk  as  they  do.  They  had  better  at 
once  espouse  the  Jewish  creed.  I  mean  it  is  disgraceful  to  hear 
some  men  speak  as  they  do  with  regard  to  religious  edifices.  I 
-emomber  to  have  heard  a  sermon  once  upon  this  text — "  If  any 
nan  defile  the  temple  of  God,  him  will  God  destroy."  And  the 
first  part  of  the  sermon  was  occupied  with  a  childish  anathema 
against  all  who  should  dare  to  perform  any  unhallowed  act  in  the 
churchyard,  or  who  should  lean  the  pole  of  a  tent  during  the 
fair  of  the  coming  week,  against  any  part  of  that  edifice,  which, 
it  seemed  to  me,  was  the  god  of  tha  man  who  occupied  the 


438          THE  TABERNACLE  OF  THE  MOST  HIGH. 

pulpit.  Is  there  such  a  thing  as  a  holy  place  any  where  ?  Is 
there  any  spot  \vherein  God  now  particularly  dwells]  I  trow 
not.  Hear  ye  the  words  of  Jesus,  "  Believe  me,  the  hour  cometh 
when  ye  shall  neither  in  this  mountain,  nor  yet  at  Jerusalem; 
worship  the  Father.  But  the  hour  cometh,  and  now  is,  when  the 
true  worshippers  shall  worship  the  Father  in  spirit  and  in  truth : 
for  the  Father  seeketh  such  to  worship  him."  Remember,  again 
the  saying  of  the  apostle  at  Athens,  "  God  that  made  the  world 
and  all  things  therein,  seeing  that  he  is  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth, 
dwelleth  not  in  temples  made  with  hands." 

When  men  talk  of  holy  places  they  seem  to  be  ignorant  of  the 
use-  of  language.  Can  holiness  dwell  in  bricks  and  mortar? 
Can  there  be  such  a  thing  as  a  sanctified  steeple  1  Can  it  possibly 
happen  that  there  can  be  such  a  thing  in  the  world  as  a  moral 
window,  or  a  godly  door  post  ?  I  am  lost  in  amazement,  utterly 
lost,  when  I  think  how  addled  men's  brains  must  be  when  they 
impute  moral  virtues  to  bricks  and  mortar,  and  stones,  and 
stained  glass.  Pray,  how  deep  doth  this  consecration  go,  and  how 
high  ]  Is  every  crow  that  flies  over  the  edifice  at  that  time  in 
solemn  air  ?  Certainly  it  is  as  rational  to  believe  that,  as  to  con 
ceive  that  every  worm  that  is  eating  the  body  of  an  Episcopalian 
i&  a  consecrated  worm,  and  therefore  there  must  necessarily  be  a 
brick  wall,  or  a  wide  gravel  path  to  protect  the  bodies  of  the 
sanctified  from  any  unhallowed  worms  that  might  creep  across 
from  the  Dissenters'  side  of  the  cemetery.  I  say  again,  such 
child's  play,  such  Popery,  such  Judaism,  is  a  disgrace  to  th* 
century.  And  yet,  notwithstanding,  we  all  find  ourselves  at 
divers  times  and  seasons  indulging  in  it.  That  at  which  you  have 
just  now  smiled  is  but  pushing  the  matter  a  little  further,  an 
error  into  which  we  may  very  readily  descend ;  it  is  but  an 
extravaganza  of  an  error  into  which  we  all  of  us  are  likely  to 
foil.  We  have  a  reverence  for  our  plain  chapels ;  we  feel  a  kind 
of  comfort  when  we  are'  sitting  down  in  the  place  which,  somehow 
or  other,  we  have  got  to  think  must  be  holy. 

Now  let  us  if  we  can — and  perhaps  it  takes  a  great  sturdiness 
and  independence  of  mind  to  do  it — let  us  drive  away  once  and 
for  ever,  all  idea  of  holiness  being  connected  with  any  thing  but 
vith  a  conscious  active  age'tft ;  let  us  get  rid  tnxce  and  for  ever  of 


THE    TABERNACLE    OF    THE    MOST    HIGH.  4£W 

f 

aTl  superstitions  with  regard  to  place.  Depend  upon  it.  one 
place  is  as  much  consecrated  as  another,  and  wherever  ,ve  meet 
with  true  hearts  reverently  to  worship  God,  that  place  becomes 
for  the  time  being  God's  house.  Though  it  be  regarded  with  the 
most  religious  awe,  that  place  which  has  no  devout  heart  within 
<  it,  is  no  house  of  God ;  it  may  be  a  house  of  superstition,  but  a 
house  of  God  it  cannot  be.  "  But,  still,"  says  one,  "  God  hath  a 
habitation ;  doth  not  your  text  say  so  1"  Yes,  and  of  that  house 
of  God  I  am  about  to  speak  this  morning.  There  is  such  A 
thing  as  a  house  of  God ;  but  that  is  not  an  inanimate  structure, 
but  a  living  and  a  spiritual  temple.  "  In  whom,"  that  is  Christ, 
t;ye  also  are  builded  together  for  a  habitation  of  God  through 
the  Spirit."  The  house  of  God  is  built  with  the  living  stones  of 
converted  men  and  women,  and  the  church  of  God,  which  Christ 
hath  purchased  with  his  blood — this  is  the  divine  edifice,  and  the 
structure  wherein  God  dwelleth  even  to  this  day.  I  would,  how 
ever,  make  one  remark  with  regard  to  places  in  which  we 
worship.  I  do  not  think,  albeit,  that  there  can  be  no  sanctity  of 
superstition  connected  with  them,  there  is  at  the  same  time,  a 
kind  of  sacredness  of  association.  In  any  place  where  God  has 
blessed  my  soul,  I  feel  that  it  is  none  other  than  the  house  of 
God,  and  the  very  gate  of  heaven.  It  is  not  because  the  stones 
are  hallowed,  but  because  there  I  have  met  with  God,  and  the 
recollections  that  I  have  of  the  place  consecrate  it  to  me.  That 
place  where  Jacob  laid  him  down  to  sleep,  what  was  it  but  his 
sleeping  chamber  for  the  time  being,  but  his  sleeping  chamber 
was  none  other  than  the  house  of  God.  Ye  have  rooms  in  your 
houses,  I  hope,  and  closets  there  more  sacred  in  truth  than  any 
gorgeous  cathedral  that  ever  lifted  its  spire  to  heaven.  Where 
we  meet  with  God  there  is  a  sacredness,  not  in  the  place  but  in 
the  associations  connected  with  it.  Where  we  hold  fellowship 
with  God  and  where  God  makes  bare  his  arm,  though  it  be  in  a 
barn  or  a  hedgerow,  or  on  a  rroor,  or  on  a  mountain  side,  there 
is  God's  house  to  us,  and  the  place  is  consecrated  at  once,  but 
yet  not  so  consecrated  as  that  we  may  regard  it  with  superstitious 
awe,  but  only  consecrated  by  our  own  recollections  of  blessed 
hours  which  wo  have  sp«tat  there  in  hallowed  fellowship  with 


440          THE  TABERNACLE  OF  THE  MOST  HIGH. 

God.  Leaving  that  out  of  the  question,  I  oome  to  introduce  you 
to  the  house  which  God  has  builded  for  his  habitation. 

We  shall  regard  the  church  this  morning  thus — first,  as  a 
building  ;  secondly,  as  a  habitation  ;  and  thirdly,  as  what  she  is 
soon  to  become,  namely — a  glorious  temple. 

I.  First,  then,  we  shall  regard  the  church  as  A  BUILDING.  And 
here  let  us  pause  to  ask  the  question  first  of  all  what  is  a  church 
— what  is  the  church  of  God?  One  sect  claims  the  title  for 
itself  of  the  church,  while  other  denominations  hotly  contend  for 
't.  It  belongs  to  none  of  us.  The  church  of  God  consisteth  not 
of  any  one  peculiar  denomination  of  men ;  the  church  of  God 
consisteth  of  those  whose  names  are  written  in  the  book  of  God's 
eternal  choice ;  the  men  who  were  purchased  by  Christ  upon  the 
tree,  the  men  who  are  called  of  God  by  his  Holy  Spirit  and  who, 
being  quickened  by  that  same  Spirit,  partake  of  the  life  of  Christ, 
and  become  members  of  his  body,  of  his  flesh,  and  of  his  bones. 
These  are  to  be  found  in  every  denomination  among  all  sorts  of 
Christians ;  some  stray  ones  where  we  little  dreamed  of  them ; 
here  and  there  a  member  of  the  church  of  God  hidden  in  the 
midst  of  the  darkness  of  accursed  Rome ;  now  and  then,  as  if  by 
chance,  a  member  of  the  church  of  Christ,  connected  with  no  sect 
whatever,  far  away  from  all  connection  with  his  brethren,  having 
scarcely  heard  of  their  existence,  yet  still  knowing  Christ,  because 
the  life  of  Christ  is  in  him.  Now  this  church  of  Christ,  the 
people  of  God  throughout  the  world,  by  whatever  name  they 
may  be  known,  are  in  my  text  compared  to  a  building  in  which 
God  dwells. 

I  must  now  indulge  in  a  little  allegory  with  regard  to  this 
building.  The  church  is  not  a  heap  of  stones  shot  together ;  she 
is  a  building.  Of  old  her  architect  devised  her.  Methinks  I  see 
Kim,  as  I  look  back  into  old  eternity,  making  the  first  outline  of 
his  church.  "  Here,"  saith  he,  in  his  eternal  wisdom,  "  shall  be 
the  corner-stone,  and  there  shall  be  the  pinnacle."  I  see  him  or. 
daining  her  length,  and  her  breadth,  appointing  her  gates  and  her 
doors  with  matchless  skill,  devising  every  part  of  her,  and  leav- 
ing  no  single  portion  of  the  structure  unmapped.  I  see  him,  that 
mighty  architect,  also  choosing  to  himself  every  stone  of  tha 
building,  ordaining  its  size  and  its  shape ;  settling  upon  his  mighty 


TABERNACLE  OF  THE  MOST  HIGH  441 

plan  the  position  each  stone  shall  occupy,  whether  it  shall  glitter 
in  front,  or  be  hl'dden  in  the  back,  or  buried  in  the  very  centre 
of  the  wall.  I  see  him  marking  not  merely  the  bare  outline,  but 
all  the  fillings  up ;  all  being  ordained,  decreed,  and  settled,  in  the 
eternal  covenant,  which  was  the  divine  plan  of  the  mighty  archi 
tect  upon  which  the  church  is  to  be  built.  Looking  on,  I  see  the 
architect  choosing  a  corner  stone.  He  looks  to  heaven,  and  there 
are  the  angels,  those  glittering  stones,  he  looks  at  each  of  them 
from  Gabriel  down ;  but,  saith  he,  "  None  of  you  will  suffice,  I 
must  have  a  corner  stone  that  will  support  all  the  weight  of  th« 
building,  for  on  that  stone  every  other  one  must  lean.  O  Gabrio), 
thou  wilt  not  suffice  !  Raphael  them  must  lay  by  ;  1  cannot  build 
with  thee."  Yet  was  it  necessary  that  a  stone  should  be  found, 
and  one  too  that  should  be  taken  out  of  the  same  quarry  as  the 
rest.  "W  here  was  he  to  be  discovered  ?  Was  there  a  man  who 
would  suffice  to  be  the  corner  stone  of  this  mighty  building  1 
Ah,  no  !  neither  apostles,  prophets,  nor  teachers  would.  Put 
them  altogether,  and  they  would  be  as  a  foundation  of  quicksand, 
and  the  house  would  totter  to  its  fall.  Mark  how  the  divine 
mind  solved  the  difficulty — "  God  shall  become  man,  very  man, 
and  so  he  shall  be  of  the  same  substance  as  the  other  stones  of 
the  temple,  yet  shall  he  be  God,  and  therefore  strong  enough  to 
bear  all  the  weight  of  this  mighty  structure,  the  top  whereof 
shall  reach  to  heaven."  I  see  that  foundation  stone  laid.  la 
there  singing  at  the  laying  of  it  ?  No.  There  is  weeping  there. 
The  angels  gathered  round  at  the  laying  of  this  first  stone  ;  and 
look,  ye  men,  and  wonder,  the  angels  weep ;  the  harps  of  heaven 
are  clothed  in  sackcloth,  and  no  song  is  heard.  They  sang  together 
and  shouted  for  joy  when  the  world  was  made,  why  shout  they 
not  now  ?  Look  ye  here  and  see  the  reason.  That  stone  is  im 
bedded  in  blood,  that  corner  stone  must  lie  nowhere  else  but  in 
its  own  gore.  The  vermillion  cement  drawn  from  his  cwn  sacred 
veins  must  imbed  it.  And  there  he  lies,  the  first  stone  of  the 
divine  edifice.  Oh,  begin  your  songs  afresh,  ye  angels,  it  is  over 
uow.  The  foundation  stone  is  laid;  the  terrible  ceremony  ia 
complete,  and  now,  whence  shall  we  gather  the  stones  to  build 
this  temple  1  The  first  is  laid,  where  are  the  rest  ?  Shall  we  go 
and  dig  into  the  sides  of  Lebanon  ]  Shall  we  find  these  preciout 
19* 


442  THE    TABERJsACLE    OF    THE    MOST    HIGH. 

stones  HI  the  marble  quarries  of  kings?  No.  Whither  are  ye 
flying,  ye  laborers  of  God  1  Whither  are  ye  going  1  Where  are 
the  quarries  ?  And  they  reply — "  We  go  to  dig  in  the  quarries 
of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  in  the  depths  of  sinful  Jerusalem,  and 
in  the  midst  of  erring  Samaria."  I  see  them  clear  away  the  rub 
bish.  I  mark  them  as  they  dig  deep  into  the  earth,  and  at-  la*t 
they  come  to  these  stones.  But  how  rough,  how  hard,  how  ui, 
hewn.  Yes,  but  these  are  the  stones  ordained  of  old  in  the  de 
cree,  and  these  must  be  the  stones,  and  none  other.  There  must 
be  a  change  effected.  These  must  be  brought  in  and  shaped  and 
cut  and  polished,  and  put  into  their  places.  I  see  the  workmen 
at  their  labor.  The  great  saw  of  the  law  cuts  through  the  stone, 
and  then  comes  the  polishing  chisel  of  the  gospel.  I  see  the 
stones  lying  in  their  places,  and  the  church  is  rising.  The  min 
isters,  like  wise  master-builders,  are  there  running  along  the  wall, 
putting  each  spiritual  stone  in  its  place ;  each  stone  is  leaning  on 
that  massive  corner  stone,  and  every  stone  depending  on  the 
blood,  and  finding  its  security  and  its  strength  in  Jesus  Christ, 
the  corner  stone,  elect,  and  precious.  Do  you  see  the  building 
rise  as  each  one  of  God's  chosen  is  brought  in,  called  by  grace 
and  quickened  ?  Do  you  mark  the  living  stones  as  in  sacred  love 
and  holy  brotherhood  they  are  knit  together  1  Have  j  ou  ever 
entered  the  building,  and  seen  how  these  stones  lean  one  upon  an 
other,  bearing  each  other's  burden,  and  so  fulfilling  the  law  of 
Christ  *?  Do  you  mark  how  the  church  loveth  Christ,  '*nd  how 
the  members  love  each  other  ?  How  first  the  church  ij  joined  to 
the  corner  stone,  and  then  each  stone  bound  to  the  next,  and  the 
next  to  the  next,  till  the  whole  building  becometh  one  ?  Lo !  the 
structure  rises,  and  it  is  complete,  and  at  last  it  is  built.  And 
now,  open  wide  your  eyes,  and  see  what  a  glorious  building  this 
is — the  church  of  God.  Men  talk  of  the  splendor  of  their  ar 
chitecture — this  is  architecture  indeed  ;  neither  after  Grecian  nor 
Gothic  models,  but  after  the  model  of  the  sanctuary  which  Moses 
saw  in  the  holy  mountain.  Do  you  see  it  ?  Was  there  ever  a 
structure  so  comely  as  this — instinct  with  life  in  every  part  ? 
Upon  one  stone  shall  be  seven  eyes,  and  each  stone  full  of  eyes 
and  full  of  hearts.  Was  ever  a  thought  so  massive  as  this — a 
building  built  of  souls — a  structure  made  of  hearts  1  There  in  uo 


THE    TABERNACLE    OF    THE    MOST    HIGH.  143 

House  like  a  heart  for  one  to  repose  in.  There  a  man  maj  find 
peace  in  his  fellow-man ;  but  here  is  the  house  where  God  de- 
lighteth  to  dwell — built  of  living  hearts,  all  beating  with  holy  love 
— built  of  redeemed  souls,  chosen  of  the  Father,  bought  with  the 
blood  of  Christ.  The  top  of  it  is  in  heaven.  Part  of  them  are 
above  the  clouds.  Many  of  the  living  stones  are  now  in  the 
pinnacle  of  paradise.  We  are  here  below,  the  building  rises,  the 
sacred  masonry  is  heaving,  and,  as  the  corner  stone  rises,  so  all 
of  us  must  rise  until  at  last  the  entire  structure  from  its  founda 
tion  to  its  pinnacle  shall  be  heaved  up  to  heaven,  and  there  shall 
it  stand  for  ever — the  new  Jerusalem — the  temple  of  the  majesty 
of  God. 

With  regard  to  this  building,  I  have  just  a  remark  or  two  to 
make  before  I  come  to  the  next  point.  Whenever  architects  de 
vise  a  building,  they  make  mistakes  in  forming  the  plan.  The 
most  careful  will  omit  something ;  the  most  clever  find  in  some 
things  he  has  been  mistaken.  But  mark  the  church  of  God  ;  it 
is  built  according  to  rule,  and  compass,  and  square,  and  it  shall  be 
found  at  last  that  there  has  not  been  one  mistake.  You,  perhaps, 
my  dear  brother,  are  a  little  stone  in  the  temple,  and  you  are  apt 
to  think  you  ought  to  have  been  a  great  one.  There  is  no  mistake 
about  that.  You  have  but  one  talent ;  that  is  enough  for  you. 
If  you  had  two,  you  would  spoil  the  building.  You  are  placed 
perhaps  in  a  position  of  obscurity,  and  you  are  saying,  "  Oh  that 
I  were  prominent  in  the  church !"  If  you  were  prominent  you 
wight  be  in  a  wrong  place ;  and  but  one  stone  out  of  its  place  in 
architecture  so  delicate  as  that  of  God,  would  mar  the  whole, 
i'ou  are  where  you  ought  to  be;  keep  there.  Depend  on  it 
nhore  is  no  mistake.  When  at  last  we  shall  go  round  about  her, 
mark  her  walls,  and  tell  her  bulwarks,  we  shall  each  of  us  be  com- 
veiled  to  say,  "  How  glorious  is  this  Zion  !"  When  our  eyes  shall 
have  been  enlightened,  and  our  hearts  instructed,  each  part  of  the 
building  will  command  our  admiration.  The  topstone  is  not  the 
foundation,  nor  does  the  foundation  stand  at  the  top.  Every 
stone  is  of  the  right  shape ;  the  whole,  material  is  as  it  should  be, 
and  the  structure  is  adapted  for  the  great  end,  the  glory  of  God, 
the  temple  of  the  Most  High.  Infinite  wisdom  then  may  be  re 
marked  in  this  building  of  God. 


4*14          THE  TABERNACLE  OF  THE  MOST  HlOH. 

Another  thing  may  be  noticed,  namely,  her  impregnable  strength. 
This  habitation  of  God,  this  house  which  is  not  made  with  hands, 
but  is  of  God's  building,  has  often  been  attacked,  but  it  has  never 
been  taken.  What  multitudes  of  enemies  have  battered  against 
her  old  ramparts !  but  they  have  battered  in  vain.  "  The  kings 
of  the  earth  stood  up.  and  the  rulers  took  counsel  together,"  bu 
what  happened  1  They  came  against  her,  every  one  of  them  witc 
mighty  men,  each  man  with  his  sword  drawn,  but  what  became 
of  them  ]  The  Almighty  scattered  kings  in  Hermon  like  snow 
in  Salmon.  As  the  snow  is  driven  from  the  mountain  side  before 
the  stormy  blast,  even  so  didst  thou  drive  them  away,  O  God, 
and  they  melted  before  the  breath  of  thy  nostrils. 

"  Then  should  our  souls  in  Zion  dwell, 
Nor  fear  the  rage  of  Rome  or  hell." 

The  church  is  not  in  danger,  and  she  never  can  be.  Let  her  ene 
mies  come  on,  she  can  resist.  Her  passive  majesty,  her  silent 
rocky  strength,  bids  them  defiance  now.  Let  them  come  on  and 
break  themselves  in  pieces,  let  them  dash  themselves  against  her, 
and  learn  the  ready  road  to  their  own  destruction.  She  is  safe, 
and  she  must  be  safe  even  unto  the  end.  Thus  much,  then,  we  can 
say  of  the  structure :  it  is  built  by  infinite  wisdom,  and  it  is  im- 
pregnably  secure. 

And  we  may  add,  it  is  glorious  for  beauty.  There  was  never 
structure  like  this.  One  might  feast  his  eyes  upon  it  from  dawn 
to  eve,  and  then  begin  again.  Jesus  himself  takes  delight  in  it. 
So  pleased  is  God  in  the  architecture  of  his  church,  that  he  has 
rejoiced  with  his  church  as  he  never  did  with  the  world.  When 
God  made  the  world  he  heaved  the  mountains,  and  digged  the 
seas,  and  covered  its  valleys  with  grass ;  he  made  all  the  fowls 
of  the  air,  and  all  the  beasts  of  the  field ;  yea,  and  he  made  man 
in  his  own  image,  and  when  the  angels  saw  it  they  sang  together 
and  they  shouted  for  joy.  God  did  not  sing ;  there  was  no  suffi 
cient  theme  of  song  for  him  that  was  "  Holy,  holy,  holy."  lie 
might  say  it  was  very  good ;  there  was  a  goodness  of  fitness 
about  it,  but  not  moral  goodness  of  holiness.  But  when  God 
built  his  church  he  did  sing;  and  that  is  the  most  extraordinary 
passage,  I  sometimes  think,  in  the  whole  Word  of  God,  where  he 


TH£  TAUEKNACLK  OF  THE  MO3T  HIOH.          445 

IB  represented  as  singing  : — "  Thy  Redeemer  in  the  midst  of  thee 
is  mighty,  he  will  save,  he  will  rest  in  his  love,  he  will  rejoice 
over  thee  with  singing."  Think,  my  brethren,  of  God  himself 
looking  at  his  church :  and  so  fair  and  beautiful  is  the  structure, 
that  he  sings  over  his  work,  and  as  each  stone  is  put  in  its  place, 
Divinity  itself  sings.  Was  ever  song  like  that  ]  Oh,  come,  let 
is  sing,  let  us  exalt  the  name  of  God  together ;  praise  him  who 
praiseth  his  church — who  hath  made  her  to  be  his  peculiar  dwell 
ing-place. 

Thus,  then,  have  we  in  the  first  place  regarded  the  church  as  a 
building. 

II.  But  the  true  glory  of  the  church  of  God  consists  in  the  fact 
that  she  is  not  only  a  building,  but  that  she  is  A  HABITATION. 
There  may  be  great  beauty  in  an  uninhabited  structure,  but  there 
is  always  a  melancholy  thought  connected  with  it.  In  riding 
ihrough  our  country,  we  often  come  upon  a  dismantled  cower,  or 
castle ;  it  is  beautiful,  but  it  is  not  a  thing  of  joy  ;  th^ro  is  a  sor 
rowful  reflection  connected  with  it.  Who  loves  to  sec  desolate 
palaces "?  Who  desireth  that  the  land  should  cast  out  her  sons, 
and  that  her  houses  should  fail  of  tenants  1  But  thcra  is  joy  in  a 
house  lit  up  and  furnished,  where  there  is  the  sound  of  men.  Be 
loved,  the  church  of  God  hath  this  for  her  peculiar  glory,  that  she 
is  a  tenanted  house,  that  she  is  a  habitation  of  God  through  the 
Spirit.  How  many  churches  there  are  that  are  houses,  yet  not 
habitations !  I  might  picture  to  you  a  professed  church  of  God  ; 
it  is  built  according  to  square  and  compass,  but  its  model  \ii>s 
been  formed  in  some  ancient  creed,  and  not  in  the  Word  of  God. 
It  is  precise  in  its  discipline  according  to  its  own  standaH,  and 
accurate  in  its  observances  according  to  its  own  model.  lrou 
enter  that  church,  the  ceremony  is  imposing ;  the  whole  M  rvice 
perhaps  attracts  you  for  a  while ;  but  you  go  out  of  thai  place 
conscious  that  you  have  not  met  with  the  life  of  God  there — that 
it  is  a  house,  but  a  house  without  a  tenant.  It  may  be  profess 
edly  a  church,  but  it  is  not  a  church  possessing  the  indwelling 
of  the  Holy  One ;  it  is  an  empty  house  that  must  soon  be  dila 
pidated  and  fall.  I  do  fear  that  this  is  true  of  many  of  rur 
churches,  Established  and  Dissenting,  as  well  as  Romanist. 
There  are  too  many  churches  that  are  nothing  but  a  mass  of  dull, 


446  THE    TABERNACLE    OF    THE    MOST    HIGH. 

dead  formality  ;  there  is  no  life  of  God  there.  You  might  go  to 
worship  with  such  a  people,  day  after  day,  and  your  heart  would 
never  beat  more  quickly,  your  blood  would  never  leap  in  its  veins, 
your  soul  would  never  be  refreshed,  for  it  is  an  empty  house. 
.Fair  may  be  the  architecture  of  the  structure,  but  empty  is  its 
storehouse;  there  is  no  table  spread,  there  is  no  rejoicing,  no 
killing  of  the  fatted  calf,  no  dancing,  no  singing  for  joy.  Beloved, 
et  us  take  heed,  lest  our  churches  become  the  same,  lest  we  bt 
combinations  of  men  without  spiritual  life,  and  consequently 
houses  uninhabited,  because  God  is  not  there.  But  a  true  church, 
that  is  visited  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  where  conversion,  instruction, 
devotion,  and  the  like,  are  carried  on  by  the  Spirit's  own  living 
influences — such  a  church  has  God  for  its  inhabitant. 

And  now  we  will  just  turn  over  this  sweet  thought.  A  church 
built  of  living  souls  is  God's  own  house.  What  is  meant  by  this  1 
I  reply,  a  house  is  a  place  where  a  man  solaces  and  comforts  him 
self.  Abroad  we  do  battle  with  the  world  :  there  we  strain  every 
nerve  and  sinew  that  we  may  stem  a  sea  of  troubles,  and  may 
not  be  carried  away  by  the  stream.  Abroad,  among  men,  we 
meet  those  of  strange  language  to  us,  who  often  cut  us  to  the 
heart  and  wound  us  to  the  quick.  We  feel  that  there  we  must  be 
up  on  our  guard.  We  could  often  say,  "  My  soul  is  among  lions. 
1  lie  even  among  those  that  are  set  on  fire  of  hell."  Going  abroad 
in  the  world  we  find  but  little  rest,  but  the  day's  work  done,  we 
go  h  ;me,  and  there  we  solace  ourselves.  Our  weary  bodies  are 
refreshed.  We  throw  away  the  armor  that  we  have  been  wear 
ing,  and  we  fight  no  more.  We  see  no  longer  the  3trange  face, 
but  loving  eyes  beam  upon  us.  We  hear  no  language  now  which 
\s  discordant  in  our  ears.  Love  speaks,  and  we  reply.  Our  home 
is  the  place  of  our  solace,  our  comfort,  and  our  rest.  Now,  God 
•alls  the  church  his  habitation — his  home.  See  him  abroad  ;  h 
s  hurling  the  thunderbolt  and  lifting  up  his  voice  upon  the  waters 
Hearken  to  him ;  his  voice  breaks  the  cedars  of  Lebanon  and 
makes  the  hinds  to  calve.  See  him  when  he  makes  war,  riding 
the  chariot  of  his  might,  he  drives  the  rebellious  angels  over  the 
battlements  of  heaven  down  to  the  depth  of  hell.  Behold  him  as 
he  lifteth  himself  in  the  majesty  of  his  strength  !  Who  is  this 
that  is  glorious  1  It  is  God.  most  high  and  terrible.  But  see,  he 


Tiffi    TABERNACLE    OF    THE    MOST    HIGH.  447 

5sys  aside  his  glittering  sword  ;  his  spear  he  bears  no  longer.  He 
cometh  back  to  his  home.  His  children  are  about  him.  He 
tak^th  his  solace  and  his  rest.  Yes,  think  not  I  venture  too  far 
— he  shall  rest  in  his  love !  and  he  doth  do  it.  He  resteth  in  his 
church.  He  is  no  longer  a  consuming  fire,  a  terror,  and  a  flame. 
Now  is  he  love,  and  kindness,  and  sweetness,  ready  to  hear  the 
prattle  of  his  children's  prayer,  and  the  disjointed  notes  of  his 
ihildren's  song.  Oh  how  beautiful  is  the  picture  of  the  church  as 
God's  house,  the  place  in  which  he  takes  his  solace !  "  For  the 
Lord  hath  chosen  Zion ;  he  hath  desired  it  for  his  habitation. 
This  is  my  rest  for  ever ;  here  will  I  dwell ;  for  I  have  desired 
it." 

Furthermore,  a  man's  home  is  the  place  where  he  shows  his 
inner  self.  You  meet  a  man  at  the  market,  he  deals  sharply  with 
you ;  he  knows  with  whom  he  has  to  deal,  and  he  acts  with  you 
as  a  man  of  the  world.  You  see  him  again  at  home,  talking  with 
his  children,  and  you  say,  "  What  a  different  man !  I  could  not 
have  believed  it  was  the  same  being."  Mark,  again,  the  professor 
in  his  chair;  he  is  instructing  students  in  science.  Mark  his 
sternness  as  he  speaks  upon  recondite  themes.  Would  you  be 
lieve  that  that  same  man  will  in  the  evening  have  his  little  one 
upon  his  knee,  and  will  tell  it  childish  tales,  and  repeat  the  ballads 
of  the  nursery  1  And  yet  it  is  even  so.  See  the  king  as  he  rides 
through  the  street  in  his  pornp;  thousands  gather  round  him; 
acclamation  rends  the  sky.  With  what  majestic  port  he  beai** 
himself!  He  is  all  a  king,  every  inch  a  monarch,  as  he  towers 
in  the  midst  of  the  multitude.  Have  you  seen  the  king  at  home  ? 
He  is  then  just  like  other  men ;  his  little  ones  are  about  him  ;  he 
is  on  the  floor  with  them  in  their  games.  Is  this  the  king  1  Yes, 
it  :s  even  he.  But  why  did  he  not  do  this  in  his  palace  ? — in  the 
streets  1  Oh,  no,  that  was  not  his  home.  It  is  in  his  home  that 
a  man  unbends  himself.  Even  so  with  regard  to  our  glorious 
God  •  it  is  in  his  church  that  he  manifests  himself  as  he  does  not 
unto  the  world.  The  mere  worldling  turns  his  telescope  to  the 
sky,  and  he  sees  the  pomp  of  God  in  the  stars,  and  he  sa^s,  "  O 
God,  how  infinite  art  thou?"  Devoutly  he  looks  acioss  the  sea, 
and  beholds  it  lashed  with  tempest,  and  he  says.  '*  Behold  the 
might  and  majesty  of  the  Deity !"  The  anatomist  dissecte  ao 


448  THE    TABERNACLE    OF    THE    MOST    IIIQH. 

nsect,  an<?  discovers  in  every  part  of  it  divine  wisdom,  and  ha 
says,  "  How  vise  is  God  !"  Ay  ;  but  it  is  only  the  believer  who 
as  he  kneels  in  his  chamber  can  say,  "  My  father  made  all  these," 
and  then  can  say,  "  Our  Father,  which  art  in  heaven,  hallowed  be 
thy  name."  There  are  sweet  revelations  which  God  makes  in  his 
church,  which  he  never  makes  anywhere  else.  It  is  there  he  takes 
the  children  to  his  bosom  ;  it  is  there  he  opens  his  heart,  and  lete 
his  people  know  the  fountains  of  his  great  soul,  and  the  might  of 
nis  infinite  affection.  And  is  it  not  a  sweet  thing  to  think  of  God 
at  home  with  his  family,  happy  in  the  house  of  his  church  ? 

But  yet,  furthermore,  another  thought  strikes  me  now.  A 
man's  home  is  the  centre  of  all  he  doth.  Yonder  is  a  large  farm.. 
Well,  there  are  outhouses  and  hay  ricks,  and  barns,  and  the  like ; 
but  just  in  the  middle  of  these  there  is  the  house,  the  centre  of  all 
husbandry.  No  matter  how  much  wheat  there  may  be,  it  is  to 
tho  house  the  produce  goes.  It  is  for  the  maintenance  of  the 
household  that  the  husband  carries  on  his  husbandry.  You  may 
hoar  the  cattle  lowing  yonder,  you  may  mark  the  sheep  upon  the 
hills,  but  the  fleece  cometh  home,  and  the  full  udders  must  yield 
the  milk  for  the  children  of  the  house,  for  the  house  is  the  centre 
of  all.  Every  river  of  industry  cometh  down  towards  the  sweet, 
soft  inland  lake  of  home.  Now,  God's  Church  is  God's  centre ! 
He  is  abroad  in  the  world,  he  is  busy  here  and  there  and  every 
where  ;  but  to  what  does  all  his  business  tend  ?  To  his  Church. 
Why  doth  God  clothe  the  hills  with  plenty  ?  For  the  feeding  oj 
his  people?  Why  is  providence  revolving?  Why  those  wars 
and  tempests,  and  then  again  this  stillness  and  calm?  It  is  for 
his  church.  Not  an  angel  divides  the  ether  who  hath  not  a  mis- 
sion  for  the  church.  It  may  be  indirectly,  but  neverthe  ess  t.'uly 
30.  There  is  not  an  archangel  that  fulfils  the  behests  of  the  M>sl 
High  but  really  carries  the  church  upon  his  broad  wings,  and 
Dears  up  her  childrer  Uwt  they  dash  their  feet  against  a  stone. 
The  storehouses  of  God  are  for  his  church.  The  depths  beneath 
of  hidden  treasure,  of  God's  unutterable  riches — all  these  are  for 
his  people.  There  is  nothing  which  he  hath,  from  his  blazing 
crown  to  the  darkness  that  is  beneath  his  throne,  that  is  not  for 
his  redeemed.  All  things  must  minister  and  work  together  for 
good  for  the  chosen  church  of  God  which  is  his  house — his  daily 


THE  TABERNACLE  OF  THE  MOST  HIGH.          440 
f 

habitation.  I  think  if  you  will  turn  that  over  and  over  again, 
when  you  are  away,  you  will  see  there  is  much  in  the  beautiful 
fact,  that  as  the  house  is  the  centre,  so  is  the  church  the  centre  ol 
every  thing  with  God. 

One  other  thought  and  I  will  have  done.  We  have  heard  much 
talk  of  late  about  the  French  invasion.  1  shall  begin  to  be  alarmed 
bout  it  when  I  see  it,  but  certainly  not  till  then.  However,  there 
s  one  thing  we  may  say  pretty  safely.  We  are  many  of  us  peace 
men  and  would  not  like  to  wield  the  sword ;  the  first  sight  of 
blood  would  sicken  us ;  we  are  peaceful  beings,  we  are  not  for 
fighting  and  war.  But  let  the  most  peaceful  man  imagine  that 
the  invader  has  landed  on  our  shore,  that  our  houses  be  in  dan 
ger,  and  our  homes  about  to  be  sacked  by  the  foe,  our  conscien 
tiousness  I  fear  would  give  way ;  notwithstanding  all  we  might 
say  about  the  wrongness  of  war,  I  query  whether  there  be  a  man 
among  us  who  would  not  take  such  weapon  as  he  could  find  next 
to  hand  to  repel  the  enemy.  With  this  for  our  war-cry,  "  Our 
hearths  and  our  homes,"  we  would  lush  upon  the  invader,  be  he 
who  he  may  or  what  he  may.  There  is  no  might  so  tremendous 
that  it  could  paralyze  our  arm ;  until  we  were  frozen  in  death  we 
would  fight  for  our  home ;  there  would  be  no  command  so  stern 
that  it  could  quiet  us ;  we  should  break  through  every  band  and 
bond,  and  the  weakest  of  us  would  be  a  giant,  and  our  women 
would  become  heroines  in  the  day  of  difficulty.  Every  hand 
would  find  its  weapon  to  hurl  at  the  invader.  We  love  our  homes, 
and  we  must  and  will  defend  them.  Ay,  and  now  lift  up  your 
thoughts — the  church  is  God's  home,  will  he  not  defend  it  1  will 
he  suffer  his  own  house  to  be  sacked  and  stormed  ?  shall  the  hearth 
of  divinity  be  stained  with  the  blood  of  his  children  ?  Shall  it  be 
that  the  church  is  overthrown,  and  her  battlements  stormed,  her 
peaceful  habitations  given  up  to  fire  and  sword  ?  No,  never,  not 
while  God  hath  a  heart  of  love,  and  while  he  calleth  his  people 
his  own  house  and  his  habitation.  Come,  let  us  rejoice  in  this 
<rjt  security  ;  let  earth  be  all  in  arms  abroad,  we  dwell  in  perfect 
peace  for  our  Father  is  in  the  house  and  he  is  God  Almighty. 
Let  them  come  on  against  us,  we  need  not  fear,  his  arm  shall  fell 
them,  the  breath  of  his  nostrils  shall  blast  them,  a  word  shall  de 
stroy  them,  they  shall  melt  away  like  the  fat  of  rams,  as  fat  of 


450          THE  TABERNACLE  OF  THE  MOST  HIGH. 

lambs  shall  they  be  consumed,  ir.io  smoke  shall  they  consume 
away.  All  these  thoughts  seem  to  me  naturally  to  arise  from 
the  fact  that  the  church  is  God's  habitation. 

III.  I  was  about  to  show  you  in  the  third  place,  that  the  church 
is,  bye-and-bye,  to  be  GOD'S  GLORIOUS  TEMPLE.  It  doth  not  yet 
appear  what  she  shall  be.  I  have,  however,  already  mentioned 
this  precious  fact.  The  church  is  rising  to-day,  and  she  shall  con 
tinue  to  rise  until  the  mountain  of  the  Lord's  house  shall  b 
established  upon  the  top  of  the  mountains,  and  then  when  all  na 
tions  shall  call  her  blessed,  and  him  blessed  too — when  they  shall 
all  say,  "  Come,  and  let  us  go  up  to  the  house  of  our  God  that  we 
may  worship  him,"  then  shall  the  church's  glory  begin.  When 
this  earth  shall  pass  away,  when  all  the  monuments  of  empires 
shall  be  dissolved  and  run  down  in  the  common  lava  of  the  last 
burning,  then  shall  the  church  be  caught  up  in  the  clouds  and 
afterwards  be  exalted  to  heaven  itself,  to  become  a  temple  such 
as  eye  hath  not  seen. 

And  now,  brethren  and  sisters,  in  conclusion  I  make  these  re? 
marks.  If  the  church  of  God  is  God's  house,  what  should  you  and 
I  do  ?  Why,  we  should  earnestly  seek,  as  being  a  part  of  that 
temple,  always  to  retain  the  great  inhabitant.  Let  us  not  grieve 
his  Spirit,  lest  he  leave  his  church  for  awhile ;  above  all,  let  us  not 
be  hypocrites,  lest  he  never  come  into  our  hearts  at  all.  And  if 
the  church  be  God's  temple  and  God's  house,  let  us  not  defile  it. 
If  you  defile  yourself  you  defile  the  church,  for  your  sin,  if  you  be 
a  church  member,  is  the  church's  sin.  The  defilement  of  one  stone 
in  a  building  virtually  mars  its  perfection.  Take  care  that  thou 
be  holy  even  as  he  is  holy.  Let  not  thine  heart  become  a  house 
for  Belial.  Think  not  that  God  and  the  devil  can  dwell  in  the 
same  habitation.  Give  thyself  wholly  to  God.  Seek  for  more 
of  his  Spirit,  that  as  a  living  stone  thou  mayest  be  wholly  conse 
crated  ;  and  never  be  content  unless  thou  feelest  in  thyself  the 
perpetual  presence  of  the  divine  inhabitant  who  dwelleth  in  his 
church.  May  God  now  bless  every  living  stone  of  the  temple. 
And  as  for  you  that  as  yet  are  not  hewn  out  of  the  quarries  of 
sin,  I  pray  that  divine  grace  may  meet  with  you,  that  you  may 
be  renewed  and  converted,  aud  at  last  be  partakers  of  the  irherit 
anee  of  the  saints  of  light. 


I 


