^\- 


SPURGEON'S  SEMONS. 


THIRD    SERIES. 


SERMONS 


OP     TH 


REV.  C.  H.  SPURGEON, 


OF     T.  ONDON. 


i|iri    Suits 


NEW    YORK: 
SHlill^DON       &       COMPANY. 

BOSTON:    GOULD    &    LINCOLN. 
Chicago:    s.  c.  guiggs  Sl  co. 


1859. 


I 


THENEV/  YORK! 

PUBLIC  LIBRARY  i 


O^^^^^JJ 


>/ 


A8T0R, LENOX  AHv 

TM-D€N  FCMJKDATJOJW.      { 

1904  1 


By  special  arrangement,  Sheldon,  Blakemax  &  Co.  will  publish  the 
Se7i7ions  of  trie  Rev,  C.  H.  Spurgeon",  and  it  is  the  author's  wish  that  no 
parties  shall  infringe  thi^  contrart. 


BTEEEOTTPED     BT 

THOMAS    B.    SMITH, 
S2  &  S4  Beekman-eL,  N.  Y. 


FEINTED     BT 

PUDNEY    &    RUSSELL, 
79  John  Street 


PREFACE. 


I  PEAYERPULLY  commit  tliis  volume  to  tlie  blessiog  of 
Almighty  God,  with  the  earnest  hope  that  its  reception  by 
the  American  public  may  be  as  hearty  as  that  obtained 
by  its  predecessors,  and  that  the  good  resulting  from  its 
circulation  may  be  far  more  abundant.  The  sermons 
herein  contained  are  not  essays  laboriously  written  and 
laboriously  heard,  they  are  the  verbatim  reports  of  the 
extemporaneous  utterances  of  a  very  busy  man.  A  few 
minutes  of  revision  is  all  that  I  can  afford  them,  and  hence 
the  reader  must  be  lenient  toward  the  errors  of  the  book. 
Week  by  week  the  sermons  are  issued  in  haste,  almost  as 
soon  as  they  are  delivered,  while  I  am  continually  running 
hither  and  thither  preaching  the  Word,  and  am  therefore 
frequently  unable  so  much  as  to  glance  at  the  proof-sheets. 
The  eighteen  Sermons  at  the  close  of  the  volume  were  de- 
livered to  immense  audiences  in  the  Eoyal  Surrey  Music 
Hall,  and  are  purposely  made  as  simple  and  elementary  as 
possible.  Without  eloquence  or  learning,  these  discourses 
have  riveted  the  attention  of  ten  thousand  at  once,  and 
have  attracted  princes  of  every  nation  and  nobles  of  every 
rank,  some  of  whom  have  not  been  unprofitable  hearers, 
but  have  brought  forth  fraits  meet  for  repentance.  It  is 
the  Lord's  doing,  and  it  is  marvelous  in  oar  eyes. 


n  PREFACE. 

Brethren  in  tlie  land  of  the  West,  I  am  linked  to  your 
great  republic  by  ties  which  daily  multiply ;  fellowships 
with  the  great  and  holy  are  the  silken  bands  which  bind 
me  to  your  nation.  May  the  old  faith  of  the  men  from 
whose  loins  ye  sprang  be  ever  nourished  among  you.  Ye 
are  unfettered ;  no  State  Church  spreads  its  upas  shade 
over  your  churches,  and  no  reverence  for  antiquated  errors 
checks  your  progress.  Let  a  brother  beseech  you  to  main- 
tain the  faith,  once  delivered  to  the  saints,  whole  and  in- 
violable. In  our  land  we  have  been  favored  with  some 
blessed  gleams  of  sunshine ;  but  those  who  know  the  signs 
of  the  times  are  led  very  frequently  to  tremble  for  the  ark 
of  the  Lord.  Arminianism  secretly  lurks  among  us.  Our 
ministers  prune  the  truth,  and  conceal  the  great  distin- 
guishing doctrines  of  grace,  in  a  manner  much  to  be  la- 
mented. Antinomianism,  through  its  perversions  of  the 
truth,  has  done  much  to  check  the  advance  of  sound 
opinions,  and  has  made  many  good  men  so  cautious  of 
being  too  high,  that  they  have  run  into  the  opposite  ex- 
tremes of  error.  May  the  Lord  restore  unto  us  all  a  pure 
language,  and  may  the  time  come  when  the  Gospel  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  shall  universally  prevail. 

May  the  perusal  of  these  Sermons  confirm  the  wavering, 
and,  by  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  guide  the  anxious 
to  joy  and  peace. 

To  the  sacred  name  of  the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the 
Holy  Spirit,  be  glory  for  ever,  so  prays 

THE  AUTHOK. 


CONTENTS 


-«-•-♦- 


SERMON  I. 

PAGa 

A  Faithful  Friend 11 


SERMON  n. 
The  Leafless  Tree 2*1 

'    SERMON  III. 
The  Snare  op  the  Fowler 42 

SERMON  IV. 
The  Fruitless  Tine 58 

SERMON  V. 
Spiritual  Revival  the  "Want  op  the  Church ^ t4 

SERMON  VI. 
The  Anxious  Inquirer 90 

SERMON  VII. 
The  Sinner's  Refuse 106 


viii  coNTENis.         .-'/i'/V;.: 

SERMON  VUI.     ;    li'-'^^V 

.'•■.     .■•''^••'.  -  :.  PA6B 

The  Dumb  Singinq J.",.. ', .;' 119 


SERMON  IX. 
Foretastes  of  the  Heaveitly  Life 138 


SERMON  X. 
Peeaching  foe  the  Poor 149 


SERMON  XI. 
Secret  Sins 164 


SERMON  Xn. 
Elijah's  Appeal  to  tele  Undecided ;.;..•..  1T9 


SERMON  Xin. 
Salvation  of  the  Lord 194 


SERMON  XIV. 
Regeneration 210 


SERMON  XV. 
Spiritual  Resurrection ; 225 


CONTENTS.  ix 


SERMON  XVI. 

PAOB 

OoNPESSiON  OF  Sin 241 


SERMON  XVII. 
Faith 256 


SERMON  XVm. 
Rahab's  Faith 269 


SERMON  XIX. 
The  Blood-Shedding 283 


SERMON  XX. 

JUSTinOATION  BY  GraCB 295 


SERMON  XXI. 
Manasseh 311 


SERMON  XXII. 
"Why  are  Men  Saved 328 


SERMON  XXIII. 

Particular  Election 343 

1* 


X  CONTENTS. 

SERMON  XXIV. 
Mercy,  OiOfiPOTENCE,  and  Justice 359 


SERMON  XXV. 
Christ — The  Power  and  Wisdom  of  God 375 


SERMON  XXVI. 
Going  Home — A  Christmas  Sermon 389 


SERMON  XXVII. 
A  Mighty  Saviour v 404 


SERMON  XXVIIL 
Israel  in  Egypt 419 


SERMON  XXIX. 
Presumptuous  Sins    432 


SERMON  I. 

A  FAITHFUL   FRIEND. 

"  There  is  a  friend  that  sticketh  closer  than  a  brother." — Proverbs,  xviii.  24, 

Cicero  has  well  said,  "  Friendship  is  the  only  thing  in  the 
world  concerning  the  usefulness  of  which  all  mankind  are 
agreed."  Friendship  seems  as  necessary  an  element  of^a  com- 
fortable existence  in  this  world  as  fire  or  water,  or  even  air 
itself.  A  man  may  drag  along  a  miserable  existence  in  proud 
solitary  dignity,  but  his  life  is  scarce  life,  it  is  nothing  but  an 
existence,  the  tree  of  life  being  stripped  of  the  leaves  of  hope 
and  the  fruits  of  joy.  He  who  would  be  happy  here  must  have 
friends ;  and  he  who  would  be  happy  hereafter,  must,  above 
all  things,  find  a  friend  in  the  world  to  come,  in  the  person  of 
God,  the  Father  of  his  people. 

Friendship,  however,  though  very  pleasing  and  exceedingly 
blessed,  has  been  the  cause  of  the  greatest  misery  to  men 
when  it  has  been  unworthy  and  .unfaithful ;  for  just  in  propor- 
tion as  a  good  friend  is  sweet,  a  false  friend  is  full  of  bitter- 
ness. "  A  faithless  friend  is  sharper  than  an  adder's  tooth." 
It  is  sweet  to  repose  in  some  one ;  but  O !  how  bitter  to  have 
that  support  snapped,  and  to  receive  a  grievous  fall  as  the 
effect  of  your  confidence.  Fidelity  is  an  absolute  necessary  in 
a  true  friend ;  we  can  not  rejoice  in  men  unless  they  will  stand 
faithful  to  us.  Solomon  declares  that  "  there  is  a  friend  that 
sticketh  closer  than  a  brother-."  That  friend,  I  suppose,  he 
never  found  in  the  pomps  and  vanities  of  the  world.  He  had 
tried  them  all,  but  he  found  them  empty  ;  he  passed  through 
all  their  joys,  but  he  found  them  "  vanity  of  vanities."  Poor 
Savage  spoke  from  sad  experience  when  he  said. 


12  A    FAITHFUL    FltlEND. 

"  You'll  find  the  friendship  of  the  world  a  show  I 
Mere  outward  show  I     'Tis  like  the  harlot's  tears, 
The  statesman's  promise,  or  false  patriot's  zeal, 
Full  of  fair  seeming,  but  delusion  all." 

And  so  for  the  most  part  they  are.  The  world's  friendship  is 
ever  brittle.  Trust  to  it,  and  you  have  trusted  a  robber ;  rely 
upon  it,  and  you  have  leaned  upon  a  thorn ;  ay,  worse  than 
that,  upon  a  spear  which  shall  pierce  you  to  the  soul  with 
agony.  Yet  Solomon  says  he  had  found  "  a  friend  that  stick- 
eth  closer  than  a  brother."  N"ot  in  the  haunts  of  his  unbridled 
pleasures,  nor  in  the  wanderings  of  his  unlimited  resources, 
but  in  the  pavilion  of  the  Most  High,  the  secret  dwelling-place 
of  God,  in  the  person  of  Jesus,  the  Son  of  God,  the  Friend  of 
sinners. 

It  is  saying  a  great  thing  to  affirm  that  "  there  is  a  friend 
that  sticketh  closer  than  a  brother ;"  for  the  love  of  brother 
hood  has  produced  most  valiant  deeds.  We  have  read  stories 
of  what  brotherhood  could  do,  which,  we  think,  could  hardly 
be  excelled  in  the  annals  of  friendship.  Timoleon,  with  his 
shield,  stood  over  the  body  of  his  slain  brother,  to  defend  him 
from  the  insults  of  the  foe.  It  was  reckoned  a  brave  deed  of 
brotherhood  that  he  should  dare  the  spears  of  an  army  in 
defense  of  his  brother's  corpse.  And  many  such  instances 
have  there  been,  in  ancient  and  modern  warfare,  of  the  attach- 
ment of  brethren.  There  is  a  story  told  of  a  Highland  regi- 
ment, who,  while  marching  through  the  Highlands,  lost  their^ 
way  ;  they  were  overtaken  by  one  of  the  terrible  storms  which 
will  sometimes  come  upon  travelers  unawares,  and  blinded  by 
the  snow,  they  lost  their  way  upon  the  mountains.  Well  nigh 
frozen  to  death,  it  was  with  difficulty  they  could  continue  their 
march.  One  man  after  another  dropped  into  the  snow  and 
disappeared.  There  were  two  brothers,  however,  of  the  name 
of  Forsythe ;  one  of  them  fell  prostrate  on  the  earth,  and 
would  have  lain  there  to  die,  but  his  brother,  though  barely 
able  to  drag  his  own  limbs  across  the  white  desert,  took  him 
on  his  back,  and  carried  him  along,  and  as  others  fell  one  by 
one,  this  brave,  true-hearted  brother  carried  his  loved  one  on 
his  back,  until  at  last  he  himself  fell  down  overcome  with 
fatiguv,  and  died.     His  brother,  liowever,  had  received  such 


A    FAITHFUL    FKIEND.  13 

warmth  from  his  body  tliat  he  was  enabled  to  reach  the  end 
of  his  journey  in  safety,  and  so  lived.  Here  we  have  an  in- 
stance of  one  brother  sacrificing  his  life  for  another.  I  hope 
there  are  some  brothers  here  who  Avould  be  prepared  to  do 
the  same  if  they  should  e^  er  be  brought  into  the  same  diffi- 
culty. It  is  saying  a  great  thing,  to  declare  that  "  there  is  a 
fi-iend  that  sticketh  closer  than  a  brother."  It  is  putting  that 
friend  first  of  all  in  the  list  of  loving  ones ;  for,  surely,  next  to 
a  mother's  love,  there  is,  and  there  ought  to  be,  no  higher  af- 
fection in  the  world  than  the  love  of  a  brother  to  one  begotten 
of  the  same  father,  and  dandled  on  the  same  knee.  Those 
who  have  "  grown  in  beauty  side  by  side,  and  filled  one  house 
with  glee,"  ought  to  love  one  another.  And  we  think  there 
have  been  many  glorious  instances  and  mighty  proofs  of  the 
love  of  brethren.  Yet,  says  Solomon,  "  there  is  a  friend  that 
sticketh  closer  than  a  brother." 

To  repeat  our  assertion,  we  believe  that  this  friend  is  the 
blessed  Redeemer,  Jesus  Christ.  It  shall  be  ours,  first,  to 
prove^  this  morning,  the  fact  that  he  sticks  closer  than  a 
brother ;  then,  as  briefly  as  we  can,  to  show  you  xchy  lie  sticks 
closer  than  a  brother;  and  then  to  finish  up  by  giving  you 
some  lesso7is  lohich  inay  he  drawn  from  the  doctrine^  that 
Jesus  Christ  is  a  faithful  Friend. 

I.  First,  then,  beloved,  we  assert  that  Christ  is  "  a  feii:nd 

THAT   STICKETH    CLOSER   THAN    A   BROTHER."       And   in  Order  tO 

prove  this  from  facts,  we  appeal  to  such  of  you  as  have  had 
him  for  a  friend.  Will  you  not,  each  of  you,  at  once  give 
your  verdict,  that  this  is  neither  more  nor  less  than  an  unex- 
aggerated  truth  ?  He  loved  you  before  all  worlds ;  long  ere 
the  day  star  flung  his  ray  across  the  darkness,  before  the  wing 
of  angel  had  fla2)ped  the  unnavigated  ether,  before  aught  of 
creation  had-  struggled  from  the  womb  of  nothingness,  God, 
even  our  God,  had  set  his  heart  upon  all  his  children.  Since 
that  time,  has  he  once  swerved,  has  he  once  turned  aside,  once 
changed  ?  No  ;  ye  who  have  tasted  of  his  love  and  know  his 
grace,  will  bear  me  witness,  that  he  has  been  a  certain  friend 
in  uncertain  circumstances. 

"  He,  near  your  side  hath  always  stood, 
His  loving-kinduoss,  0  !  liow  goodl" 


14  A    FAITHFUL    FRIEND. 

You  fell  in  Adam ;  did  he  cease  to  love  you  ?  No ;  he  became 
the  second  Adam  to  redeem  you.  You  sinned  in  practice, 
and  brought  upon  your  head  the  condemnation  of  God ;  you 
deserved  his  wrath  and  his  utter  anger ;  did  he  then  forsake 
you  ?     No ! 

"  He  saw  you  ruined  in  the  fall, 
Yet  loved  you  notwithstanding  aU." 

He  sent  his  mmister  after  you :  you  despised  him ;  he  preached 
the  gospel  in  your  ears :  you  laughed  at  him ;  you  broke 
God's  Sabbath,  you  despised  his  Word.     Did  he  then  forsake 

you  ?     No  ! 

*'  Determined  to  save,  he  watched  o'er  your  path, 
Whilst,  Satan's  blind  slave,  you  sported  with  death." 

And  at  last  he  arrested  you  by  his  grace,  he  humbled  you,  he 
made  you  penitent,  he  brought  you  to  his  feet,  and  he  forgave 
all  your  sins.  Since  then,  has  he  left  you  ?  You  have  often 
left  him ;  has  he  ever  left  you  ?  You  have  had  many  trials 
and  troubles ;  has  he  ever  deserted  you  ?  Has  he  ever  turned 
away  his  heart,  and  shut  up  his  bowels  of  compassion  ?  No, 
children  of  God,  it  is  your  solemn  duty  to  say  "  No,"  and 
bear  witness  to  his  faithfulness.  You  have  been  in  severe  af- 
flictions and  in  dangerous  circumstances ;  did  your  friend  de- 
sert you  then  ?  Others  have  been  faithless  to  you  ;  he  that 
eat  bread  with  you  has  lifted  up  his  heel  against  you  ;  but 
has  Christ  ever  forsaken  you  ?  Has  there  ever  been  a  moment 
when  you  could  go  to  him,  and  say,  "  Master,  thou  hast  be- 
trayed me  ?"  Could  you  once,  in  the  blackest  hour  of  your 
grief,  dare  to  impugn  his  fidelity  ?  Could  you  dare  to  say  of 
him,  "  Lord,  thou  hast  promised  what  thou  didst  not  per- 
form ?"  Will  you  not  bear  witness  now,  "Not  one  good 
thing  hath  failed  of  all  that  the  Lord  God  hath  promised  ;  all 
hath  come  to  pass  ?"  And  do  you  fear  he  will  yet  forsake 
you  ?  Ask,  then,  the  bright  ones  before  the  throne — "  Ye 
glorified  spirits!  did  Christ  forsake  you?  Ye  have  passed 
through  Jordan's  stream  ;  did  he  leave  you  there  ?  Ye 
have  been  baptized  in  the  black  flood  of  death  ;  did  he  there 
forsake  you  ?  Ye  have  stood  before  the  thron*e  of  God  ;  did 
he  then  deny  you  ?"     And  they  answered,  "  No  ;  through  all 


f  A    FAITHFUL    FRIEND.  15 

jbhe  troubles  of  our  life,  in  all  the  bitterness  of  death,  in  all  the 
agonies  of  our  expiring  moments,  and  in  all  the  terrors  of 
God's  judgment,  he  hath  been  with  us,  'a  friend  that  sticketh 
closer  than  a  brother.'  "  Out  of  all  the  millions  of  God's  re- 
deemed, there  is  not  one  he  hath  forsaken.  Poor  they  have 
been,  mean  and  distressed,  but  he  hath  never  abhorred  their 
prayer,  never  turned  aside  from  doing  them  good.  He  hath 
been  ever  \\A\X\  them. 

"  For  his  mercy  sha.ll  endure, 
Ever  faithful,  ever  sure." 

But  I  shall  not  longer  stay,  since  I  can  not  prove  this  to  the 
ungodly,  and  to  the  godly  it  is  already  proven,  for  they  know 
it  by  experience;  therefore  it  is  but  little  necessary  that  I 
should  do  more  than  just  certify  the  fact  that  Christ  is  a  faith- 
ful friend — a  friend  in  every  hour  of  need  and  every  time  of 
distress. 

II.  And  now  I  have  to  tell  you  the  reasons  why  we  may 
DEPEND  UPON  Christ  as  being  a  faithful  friend. 

There  are  some  things  in  himself  which  render  it  certain 
that  he  will  stick  close  to  his  people. 

1.  True  friendship  can  only  be  made  between  true  men.^ 
Hearts  are  the  soul  of  honor.  There  can  be  no  lasting  friend- 
ship between  bad  men.  Bad  men  may  pretend  to  love  each 
other,  but  their  friendship  is  a  rope  of  sand,  which  shall  be 
broken  at  any  convenient  season  ;  but  if  a  man  have  a  sincere 
lieart  within  him,  and  be  true  and  noble,  then  we  may  confide 
in  him.     Spenser  sings  in  fine  old  English  verse — 

"  Ne,  certes  can  that  friendship  long  endure, 
However  gay  and  goodly  bo  the  style, 
That  doth  ill  cause  or  evil  end  enure, 
Por  Yertue  is  the  band  that  bindeth  Harts  most  sure." 

But  who  can  find  a  stain  in  the  character  of  Jesus,  or  who  can 
tarnish  his  honor  ?  Has  there  ever  been  a  spot  on  his  escut- 
cheon ?  Has  his  flag  ever  been  trampled  in  the  dust?  Does 
he  not  stand  the  true  witness  in  heaven,  the  faithful  and  just  ? 
Is  it  not  declared  of  him  that  he  is  God  who  can  not  lie  ? 
Have  we  not  found  him  so  up  to  this  moment ;  and  may  we 
not,  knowing  that  he  is  "  Holy,  holy,  holy  Lord,"  confide  in 


16  A    FAITHFUL    FRIEND. 

him,  that  he  will  stick  closer  to  us  than  a  brothev  ?     His  good- 
ness is  the  guaranty  of  his  fidelity  ;  he  can  not  fail  us. 

2.  Faithfulness  to  lis  in  our  faults  is  a  certain  sign  of  fidelity 
in  a  friend.  You  may  depend  upon  that  man  who  will  tell 
you  of  your  faults  in  a  kind  and  considerate  manner.  Fawn- 
ing hypocrites,  insidious  fiatterers,  are  the  sweepings  and  ofial 
of  friendship.  They  are  but  the  parasites  upon  that  noble  tree. 
But  true  friends  put  enough  trust  in  you  to  tell  you  openly  of 
your  faults.  Give  me  for  a  friend  the  man  who  will  speak 
honestly  of  me  before  my  face ;  who  will  not  tell  first  one 
neighbor,  and  then  another,  but  who  will  come  straight  to  my 
house,  and  say,  "  Sir,  I  feel  there  is  such-and-such  a  thing  in 
you,  which,  as  my  brother,  I  must  tell  you  of."  That  man  is  a 
true  friend  ;  he  has  proved  himself  to  be  so  ;  for  we  never  ge 
any  praise  for  telling  people  of  their  faults  ;  we  rather  hazard 
their  dishke ;  a  man  Avill  sometimes  thank  you  for  it,  but  he 
does  not  often  like  you  any  the  better.  Praise  is  a  thing  we 
all  love.  I  met  with  a  man  the  other  day  who  said  he  was 
impervious  to  flattery ;  I  was  walking  with  him  at  the  time, 
and  turning  round  rather  sharply,  I  said,  "At  any  rate,  sir,  you 
seem  to  have  a  high  gift  in  flattering  yourself,  for  you  are 
really  doing  so,  in  saying  you  are  impervious  to  flattery." 
"  You  can  not  flatter  me,"  he  said.  I  replied,  "  I  can,  if  I 
like  to  try  ;  and  perhaps  may  do  so  before  the  day  is  out."  I 
found  I  could  not  flatter  him  directly,  so  I  began  by  saying 
what  a  fine  child  that  was  of  his ;  and  he  drank  it  in  as  a 
precious  draught ;  and  when  I  praised  this  thing  and  that 
thing  belonging  to  him,  I  could  see  that  he  was  very  easily 
flattered ;  not  directly,  but  indirectly.  We  are  all  pervious 
to  flattery  ;  we  like  the  soothing  cordial,  only  it  must  not  be 
labeled  flattery  ;  for  we  have  a  religious  abhorrence  of  flattery 
if  it  be  so  called;  call  it  by  any  other  name,  and  we  drink  it 
in,  even  as  the  ox  drinketh  in  water.  Now,  child  of  God,  has 
Christ  ever  flattered  you  ?  Has  he  not  told  you  of  your  faults 
i-ight  truly  ?  Has  he  not  pricked  your  conscience  even  upon 
what  you  thought  to  gloss  over — your  little  secret  sins  ?  Has 
he  not  provoked  conscience  to  thunder  in  your  ears  notes  of 
terror,  because  of  your  misdeeds?  Well,  then,  you  may  trust 
him,  for  he  «ihows  that  taithfulness  which  renders  a  man  right 


A    FAITHFUL    FRIEND.  17 

trustworthy.  Thus  I  have  pointed  out  to  you  that  there  are 
reasons  in  himself  for  which  we  may  trust  him. 

3.  In  the  next  place,  there  are  some  things  in  his  friend" 
ship  which  render  us  sure  of  not  being  deceived^  when  we 
put  our  confidence  in  him.  True  friendship  must  not  be  of 
hasty  growth.  As  quaint  old  Master  Fuller  says.  "  Let  friend- 
ship creep  gently  to  a  height ;  if  it  rush  to  it,  it  may  soon  run 
itself  out  of  breath."  It  is  even  so.  I  think  it  was  Joanna 
Baillie  said, 

"  Friendship  is  no  plant  of  hasty  growth. 
Though  planted  in  esteem's  deep  fixed  soil, 
The  gradual  culture  of  kind  intercourse 
Must  bring  it  to  perfection." 

In  vain  thou  trustest  the  gourd  over  thy  head,  O  Jonah ;  it 
will  not  be  of  much  use  to  thee  ;  it  came  up  in  a  night,  it  may 
wither  in  a  night.  It  is  the  strong  stiff  oak,  of  ages'  growtli, 
which  shall  abide  the  tempest  ;  which  shall  alike  put  out  its 
wings  to  shield  thee  from  the  sun,  and  shall  afterward  find 
thee  a  hovel  in  its  heart,  if  necessary,  in  its  grey  old  age,  when 
its  branches  tremble  in  the  blast.  Friendship  is  true  ^\\\^\^.  it 
begins  ;  but  we  must  have  a  man's  friendship  long  before  we 
can  say  of  him,  that  he  will  stick  closer  than  a  brother.  And 
how  long  has  Christ  loved  you?  That  you  can  not  tell. 
When  the  ages  were  not  born  he  loved  you ;  when  this  world 
was  an  infant,  wrapped  in  the  swaddling  clothes  of  mist,  he 
loved  you ;  when  the  old  pyramids  had  not  begun  to  be 
builded,  his  heart  was  set  upon  you  ;  and  ever  since  you  have 
been  born  he  has  had  a  strong  affection  for  you.  Ho  looked 
on  you  in  your  cradle,  and  he  loved  you  then ;  he  was  afiianced 
to  you  when  you  were  an  infant  of  a  span  long,  and  he  has 
loved  you  ever  since.  Some  of  you  I  see  with  gray  hairs, 
some  with  heads  all  bald  with  age ;  he  has  loved  you  up  till 
now,  and  will  he  now  forsake  you^  O  !  no,  his  friendship  is 
so  old  that  it  must  last;  it  has  been  matured  by  so  many  tem- 
pests, it  has  been  rooted  by  so  many  winds  of  trouble,  tliat  it 
can  not  but  endure  ;  it  must  stand.  Even  as  the  granite  peak 
of  the  mountain  shall  not  be  melted,  because,  unlike  the  snow, 
it  has  braved  the  blast,  and  borne  the  heat  of  the  burning  sun  ; 


18  A   FAITHFUL   FRIEND. 

it  has  stood  out  always,  catching  in  its  face  every  blow  from 
the  face  of  nature,  and  yet  been  unmoved  and  uninjured.  It 
shall  last,  for  it  has  lasted.  But  when  the  elements  shall  melt, 
and  in  a  stream  of  dissolving  fire  shall  run  away,  then  shall 
Christ's  friendship  still  exist,  for  it  is  of  older  growth  than 
they.  He  must  be  "a  friend  that  sticketh  closer  than  a 
brother ;"  for  his  friendship  is  a  hoary  friendshi}3 — ^lioary  as 
his  own  head,  of  which  it  is  said,  "  His  head  and  his  hair  are 
white  like  snow,  as  white  as  wool." 

4.  But  note,  further,  the  friendship  lohich  lasts  does  not 
take  its  rise  i?i  the  chambers  of  mirth^  nor  is  it  fed  and  fat- 
tened there.  Young  lady,  you  speak  of  a  dear  friend  whom 
you  acquired  last  night  in  a  ball-room.  Do  not,  I  beseech 
you,  misuse  the  word ;  he  is  not  a  friend  if  he  was  acquired 
merely  there ;  friends  are  better  things  than  those  which  grow 
in  the  hot-house  of  pleasure.  Friendship  is  a  more  lasting 
plant  than  those.  You  have  a  friend,  have  you  ?  Yes  ;  and 
he  keeps  a  pair  of  horses,  and  has  a  good  establishment.  Ah ! 
but  your  best  way  to  prove  your  friend  is  to  know  that  he  will 
be  your  friend  when  you  have  not  so  much  as  a  mean  cottage  ; 
and  when,  houseless  and  without  clothmg,  you  are  driven  to 
beg  your  bread.  Thus  you  would  make  true  proof  of  a  friend. 
Give  me  a  friend  who  was  born  in  the  Avinter  time,  whose 
cradle  was  rocked  in  the  storm;  he  will  last.  Our  fair 
weather  friends  shall  flee  away  from  us.  I  had  rather  have  a 
robin  for  a  friend  than  a  swallow ;  for  a  swallow  abides  Avith 
us  only  in  the  summer  time,  but  a  robin  cometh  to  us  in  the 
winter.  Those  are  tight  friends  that  will  come  the  nearest  to 
us  when  we  are  in  the  most  distress ;  but  those  are  not  fiiends 
who  speed  themselves  away  when  ill  times  come.  Believer, 
hast  thou  reason  to  fear  that  Christ  will  leave  you  now  ?  Has 
he  not  been  with  you  in  the  house  of  mourning  ?  You  found 
your  friend  where  men  find  pearls,  "  in  caverns  deep,  where 
darkness  dwells ;"  you  found  Jesus  in  your  hour  of  trouble. 
It  was  on  the  bed  of  sickness  that  you  first  learned  the  value 
of  his  name ;  it  was  in  the  hour  of  mental  anguish  that  you 
first  did  lay  hold  of  the  hem  of  his  garment ;  and  since  then, 
your  nearest  and  sweetest  intercourse  has  been  held  with  him 
in  the  hours  of  darkness.     Well,  then,  such  a  friend,  proved  in 


A    FAITHFUL    FRIEND.  19 

the  house  of  sorrow — a  friend  who  gave  his  heart's  blood  for 
you,  and  let  his  soul  run  out  in  one  great  river  of  gore — such 
a  friend  never  can  and  never  will  forsake  you ;  he  sticketh 
closer  than  a  brother. 

5.  Again,  a  friend  ^cho  is  acqitired  by  folly  is  never  a  last- 
ing friend.  Do  a  foolish  thing,  and  make  a  man  your  friend; 
'tis  but  a  confederacy  in  vice,  and  you  will  soon  discover  that 
his  friendship  is  worthless  ;  the  friendships  you  acquire  by 
doing  wrong,  you  had  better  be  without.  O  !  how  many 
silly  friendshii^s  there  are  springing  up,  the  mere  fruit  of  a 
sentimentalisra,  having  no  root  whatever,  but  like  the  plant 
of  which  our  Saviour  tells  us,  "  It  sprang  up  because  it  had  no 
depth  of  earth."  Jesus  Christ's  friendship  is  not  like  that; 
there  is  no  ingredient  of  folly  in  it ;  he  loves  us  discreetly,  not 
winking  or  conniving  at  our  follies,  but  instilling  into  us  his 
wisdom.  His  love  is  wise ;  he  hath  chosen  us  according  to  the 
counsel  of  his  wisdom ;  not  blindly  and  rashly,  but  with  all 
judgment  and  prudence. 

Under  this  head  I  may  likewise  observe,  that  the  friendship 
of  ignorance  is  not  a  very  desirable  one.  I  desire  no  man  to 
call  himself  my  friend,  if  he  doth  not  know  me.  Let  him 
love  me  in  ^^roportion  to  his  knowledge  of  me.  If  he  loves 
me  for  the  little  he  knows,  when  he  knoweth  more  he  may 
cast  me  aside.  "  That  man,"  says  one,  "  seems  to  be  a  very 
amiable  man."  "  I  am  sure  I  can  loYe  him,"  says  another,  as 
he  scans  his  features.  Ay,  but  do  not  write  "  friend"  yet ; 
wait  a  wee  bit,  until  you  know  more  of  him ;  just  see  him, 
examine  him,  try  him,  test  him,  and  not  till  then  enter  him  on 
the  sacred  list  of  friends.  Be  friendly  to  all,  but  make  none 
your  friends  until  they  know  you,  and  you  know  them.  Many 
a  friendship  born  in  the  darkness  of  ignorance,  hath  died  sud- 
denly in  the  light  of  a  better  acquaintance  with  each  other. 
You  supposed  men  to  be  different  from  what  they  were,  and 
when  you  discovered  their  real  character  you  disregarded 
them.  I  remember  one  saying  to  me,  "  I  have  great  affection 
for  you,  sir,"  and  he  mentioned  a  certain  reason.  I  replied, 
''My  dear  fellow,  your  reason  is  absolutely  false;  the  very 
thing  you  love  me  for,  I  am  not,  and  hope  I  never  shall  be." 
And  so  I  said,  "  T  really  can  not  accept  your  friendship,  if  it 


20  A    FAITHFUL   FRIEND. 

be  founded  upon  a  misunderstanding  of  what  I  may  have 
said."  But  our  Lord  Jesus  never  can  forsake  those  whom 
once  he  loves,  because  he  can  discover  nothing  in  us  worse 
tlian  lie  knew,  for  he  knew  all  about  us  beforehand.  He  saw 
our  leprosy,  and  yet  he  loved  us ;  he  knew  our  deceitfulness 
and  unbelief,  and  yet  he  did  press  us  to  his  bosom ;  he  knew 
what  poor  fools  we  were,  and  yet  he  said  he  would  never 
leave  us  nor  forsake  us.  He  knew  that,  we  should  rebel 
against  him  and  despise  his  counsel  often  times;  he  knew  that 
even  when  we  loved  him  our  love  would  be  cold  and  languid  ; 
but  he  loved  for  his  own  sake.  Surely,  then,  he  will  stick 
closer  than  a  brother. 

6.  Yet  again,  frieiidshi}:)  and  love,  to  he  real,  7nust  not  lie 
171  words,  hut  ifi  deeds.  The  friendship  of  bare  compliment 
is  the  fashion  of  this  age,  because  this  age  is  the  age  of  deceit. 
The  world  is  the  great  house  of  sham.  Go  where  you  may  in 
London,  sham  is  staring  you  in  the  face;  there  are  very  few 
real  things  to  be  discovered.  I  allude  not  merely  to  tricks  in 
business,  adulterations  in  food,  and  such  like.  Deception  is 
not  confined  to  the  tradesman's  shop.  It  prevails  throughout 
society  ;  the  sanctuary  is  not  exempt.  The  preacher  adopts  a 
sham  voice.  You  hardly  ever  hear  a  man  speak  in  the  pulpit 
hi  the  same  way  he  would  speak  in  the  parlor.  Why,  I  hear 
my  brethren,  sometimes,  when  they  are  at  tea  or  dinner,  speak 
in  a  very  comfortable  decent  sort  of  English  voice,  but  when 
they  get  into  their  pulpits  they  adopt  a  sanctimonious  tone, 
and  till  their  mouths  with  inflated  utterance,  or  else  whine 
most  pitifully.  They  degrade  the  pulpit  by  pretending  to 
honor  it ;  speaking  in  a  voice  which  God  never  intended  any 
mortal  to  have.  This  is  the  great  house  of  sham ;  and  such 
little  things  show  which  way  the  wind  blows.  You  leave  your 
card  at  a  friend's  house ;  that  is  an  act  of  iViendshi]:) — the 
card  !  I  wonder  whether,  if  he  were  hard  up  for  cash,  you 
Avould  leave  your  banker's  book !  You  write  "  My  dear  sir," 
"Yours  very  truly;"  it  is  a  sham;  you  do  not  mean  it. 
"  Dear  !"  that  is  a  sacred  word  ;  it  ought  to  be  used  to  none 
but  those  you  regard  with  affection ;  but  we  tolerate  false- 
hoods now,  as  if  they  were  truths ;  and  we  call  them  courte- 
sies.    Courtesies  they  may  be  ;  but  untruths  they  are  in  many 


J    FAITHFUL    FRIEND.  21 

cases.  IsoW)  Christ's  love  lieth  not  in  words,  but  in  deeds. 
He  saith  not,  "My  dear  people;"  but  he  let  his  heart  out,  and 
we  could  see  what  that  was.  He  doth  not  come  to  us,  and 
say,  "  Dearly  beloved"  simply ;  but  he  hangs  upon  the  cross, 
and  there  we  read  "  Dearly  beloved"  in  red  letters.  He  does 
not  come  to  us  with  the  kisses  of  his  lij^s  first — he  giveth  us 
blessings  with  both  his  hands  :  he  giveth  himself  for  us,  and 
then  he  giveth  himself  to  us.  Trust  no  complimentary  friend  ; 
rely  upon  the  man  who  giveth  you  real  tokens  worth  your 
having,  wlio  does  for  you  deeds  to  show  the  truthfulness  of 
his  heart.  Such  a  friend — and  such  is  Jesus — "  sticketh  closer 
than  a  brother." 

7.  Once  more,  and  I  shall  not  weary  you,  I  trust.  A  pur- 
chased friend  loill  never  last  long.  Give  to  a  man  nineteen 
times,  and  deny  him  the  twentieth,  and  he  shall  hate  you ;  for 
his  love  sprang  only  from  your  gifts.  The  love  which  I  could 
buy  for  gold  I  would  sell  for  dross ;  the  friendship  that  I  could 
buy  for  pearls  I  would  dispense  with  for  pebbles  ;  it  were  of 
no  value,  and  therefore  the  sooner  lost  the  better.  But  O  ! 
believer,  Christ's  love  was  unpurchased  love.  Thou  brought- 
est  him  no  present.  Jacob  said,  when  his  sons  went  to 
Egypt,  "  Take  the  man  a  present,  a  little  oil,  a  little  balm,  a 
few  nuts  and  almonds;"  but  you  took  Christ  no  presents. 
When  you  came  to  him  you  said, 

"  Nothing  in  my  hands  I  bring, 
Simply  to  thy  cross  I  chng." 

You  did  not  even  promise  that  you  would  love  him ;  for  you 
had  such  a  faithless  heart,  you  durst  not  say  so.  You  asked 
him  to  make  you  love  him  ;  that  was  the  most  you  could  do. 
He  loved  you  for  nothing  at  all — simply  because  he  would 
love  you.  Well,  that  love  which  so  lived  on  nothing  but  its 
own  resources,  will  not  starve  through  the  scantiness  of  your 
returns ;  the  love  which  grew  in  such  a  rocky  heart  as  tliis, 
will  not  die  for  want  of  soil.  That  love  which  sprang  up  in 
the  barren  desert,  in  your  unirrigated  soul,  will  never,  never 
die  for  want  of  moisture :  it  must  live,  it  can  not  expire. 
Jesus  must  be  "  a  friend  that  sticketh  closer  than  a  brother." 

8.  Shall  I  stay  to  urge  more  reasons  ?  I  may  but  mention 
one  other,  namely,  this — that  ther^^  can  not^  by  any  possibility^ 


22  A    FAITHFUL    FRIEND. 

arise  any  cause  lohich  could  make  Christ  love  us  less.  You 
say,  how  is  this  ?  One  man  loves  his  friend,  but  he  on  a  sud- 
den grows  rich,  and  now  he  says,  1  ain  a  greater  man  than  I 
used  to  be,  I  Ibrgel  my  old  acquaintances.  But  Christ  can 
grow  no  richer  ;  he  is  as  rich  as  he  can  be,  infinitely  so.  He 
loves  you  now;  then  it  can  not  be  possible  that  he  will  by 
reason  of  an  increase  in  his  own  personal  glory  forsake  you, 
for  everlasting  glories  now  crown  his  head  :  he  can  never  be 
more  glorious  and  great,  and.  therefore  he  will  love  you  still. 
Sometimes,  on  the  other  hand,  one  friend  grows  poorer,  and 
then  the  other  forsakes  him  ;  but  you  never  can  grow  poorer 
than  you  are,  for  you  are  "  a  poor  sinner  and  nothing  at  all" 
now ;  you  have  nothing  of  your  own ;  all  you  have  is  bor- 
rowed, all  given  you  by  him.  He  can  not  love  you,  then,  less, 
because  you  grow  poorer ;  for  poverty  that  hath  nothing  is  at 
least  as  poor  as  it  can  be,  and  can  never  sink  lower  in  the 
scale.  Christ,  therefore,  must  love  thee  for  all  thy  nakedness 
and  all  thy  poverty. 

"  But  I  may  prove  sinful,"  sayest  thou.  Yes,  but  thou  canst 
not  be  more  so  than  he  foreknew  thou  wouldst  be ;  and  yet 
he  loved  thee  with  the  foreknowledge  of  all  thy  sins.  Surely, 
then,  when  it  happens  it  will  occasion  no  surprise  to  him  ;  he 
knew  it  all  beforehand,  and  he  can  not  swerve  from  his  love  ; 
no  circumstance  can  possibly  arise  that  ever  will  divide  the 
Saviour  from  his  love  to  his  people,  and  the  saint  from  his  love 
to  his  Saviour.  He  is  "  a  friend  that  sticketh  closer  than  a 
brother." 

III.  Now,  then,  an  inference  to  be  derived  from  this. 
Lavater  says,  "  The  qualities  of  your  friends  will  be  those  of 
your  enemies :  cold  friends,  cold  enemies,  half  friends,  half  ene- 
mies ;  fervid  enemies,  warm  friends."  Knowing  this  to  be  a 
truth,  I  have  often  congratulated  myself,  when  my  enemies 
have  spoken  fiercely  against  me.  Well,  I  have  thought,  "  My 
friends  love  me  hard  and  fast ;  let  my  enemies  be  as  hot  as 
they  please ;  it  only  indicates  that  the  friends  are  proportion- 
ately firm  in  affection.  Then  we  draw  this  inference,  that  if 
Christ  sticks  close,  and  he  is  our  friend,  then  our  enemies  will 
stick  close,  and  never  leave  us  till  we  die.  O,  Christian,  be- 
cause Christ  sticks  close,  the  devil  w\ll  stick  close  too  :  he  will 


A   FA-ITHFUL    FRIEND.  23 

be  at  you  aud  with  you ;  the  dog  of  hell  will  never  cease  his 
howlings,  till  you  reach  the  other  side  of  Jordan ;  no  place  in 
this  world  is  out  of  bow-shot  of  that  great  enemy ;  till  you 
have  crossed  the  stream  his  arrows  can  reach  you,  and  they 
will.  If  Christ  gave  himself  for  you,  the  devil  will  do  all  he 
can  to  destroy  you ;  if  Christ  has  been  long-suffering  to  you, 
Satan  will  be  persevering,  in  hopes  that  Christ  may  forget 
you ;  he  will  strive  after  you,  and  strive  until  he  shall  see  you 
safely  lauded  in  heaven.  But  be  not  disappointed  :  the  louder 
Satan  roars,  the  more  proof  you  shall  have  of  Christ's  love. 
"Give  me,"  said  old  Rutherford,  "give  me  a  roaring  devil 
rather  than  a  sleeping  one  ;  for  sleeping  devils  make  me  slum- 
ber, but  roaring  ones  provoke  me  to  run  to  my  Master."  O  ! 
be  glad,  then,  if  the  world  rant  at  thee,  if  thy  foes  attack  thee 
fiercely.  Christ  is  just  as  full  of  love  to  thee  as  they  are  of 
hatred.     Therefore, 

"  Be  firm  and  strong ; 
Be  grace  thy  shield  and  Christ  thy  song." 

And  now  I  have  a  question  to  ask  :  that  question  I  ask  of 
every  man  aud  every  woman  in  this  place,  and  of  every  child 
too — Is  Jesus  Christ  your  friend  ?  Have  you  a  friend  at  court 
— at  heaven's  court  ?  Is  the  judge  of  quick  and  dead  your 
friend  ?  Can  you  say  that  you  love  him,  and  has  he  ever  re- 
vealed himself  in  the  way  of  love  to  you  ?  Dear  hearer,  do 
not  answer  that  question  for  thy  neighbor  ;  answer  it  for  thy- 
self. Peer  or  peasant,  rich  or  poor,  learned  or  illiterate,  this 
question  is  for  each  of  you  ;  therefore,  ask  it :  Is  Christ  my 
friend?  Did  you  ever  consider  that  question?  Have  you 
ever  asked  it  ?  O !  to  be  able  to  say  "  Christ  is  my  friend," 
is  one  of  the  sweetest  things  in  the  world.  A  man  who  had 
lived  much  in  sin,  one  day  casually  entered  a  place  of  worship. 
Before  the  sermon,  this  hymn  was  sung — 

"  Jesus,  lover  of  my  soul." 

The  next  day  the  man  was  met  by  an  acquaintance  who  asked 
him  how  he  liked  the  sermon.  Said  he,  "  I  do  not  know,  but 
there  were  two  or  three  words  that  took  such  a  hold  of  me 
that  I  did  not  know  what  to  do  w^ith  myself.     TJie  minister 


24  A    FAITHFUL    FRIEND. 

read  that  hymn,  '  Jesus,  lover  of  my  soul.'  Ah !"  said  he, 
though  he  was  by  no  means  a  religious  man,  "  to  be  able  to 
say  that,  I  would  give  up  all  I  have  got!  But  do  you  think," 
he  asked  "  that  Jesus  ever  will  be  the  lover  of  such  a  man 
as  I  am  ?  '  Jesus,  lover  of  ray  soul !'  O  !  could  I  say  it." 
And  then  he  buried  his  head  in  his  hands  and  wept.  I  have 
every  reason  to  fear  that  he  went  back  to  his  sin,  and  was  the 
same  afterwards  as  before.  But,  you  see,  he  had  conscience 
enough  to  let  him  know  how  valuable  it  was  to  have  Christ 
for  his  lover  and  his  friend.  Ah  !  rich  man,  thou  hast  many 
friends.  There  be  some  here  who  have  learned  the  faith- 
lessness of  friends ;  there  be  some  here  who  have  toiled  for 
their  country's  good,  and  deserve  a  meed  of  honor  at  their 
country's  hands,  who,  for  one  mistake — or  what,  perhaps,  was 
a  mistake — have  been  neglected  by  too  many  who  once  ap- 
peared to  be  their  most  trusty  adherents.  O  !  put  no  confi- 
dence, ye  great  men  and  ye  rich,  in  the  adherence  of  your 
friends.  David  said  in  his  haste,  "  All  men  are  liars ;"  you 
may  one  day  have  to  say  it  at  your  leisure.  And  O  !  ye  kind 
and  affectionate  hearts,  who  are  not  rich  in  wealth,  but  who 
are  rich  in  love — and  that  is  the  world's  best  wealth — put  this 
golden  coin  among  your  silver  ones,  and  it  will  sanctify  them 
all.  Get  Christ's  love  shed  abroad  in  your  hearts,  and  your 
mother's  love,  your  daughtei-'s  love,  your  husband's  love,  your 
wife's  love,  will  become  more  sweet  than  ever.  The  love  of 
Christ  casts  not  out  the  love  of  relatives,  but  it  sanctifies  our 
loves,  and  makes  them  sweeter  far.  Remember,  dear  hearer, 
the  love  of  men  and  women  is  very  sweet ;  but  all  must  pass 
away  ;  and  what  will  you  do,  if  you  have  no  wealth  but  the 
wealth  that  fadeth,  and  no  love  but  the  love  which  dies,  when 
death  shall  come  ?  O !  to  have  the  love  of  Christ !  You 
can  take  that  across  the  river  of  death  with  you  ;  you  can  wear 
it  as  your  bracelet  in  heaven,  and  set  it  up  as  a  seal  upon  your 
hand;  for  his  love  is  "strong  as  death  and  mightier  than  the 
grave."  Good  old  Bishop  Beveridge,  I  think  it  w^as,  when 
dying,  did  not  know  his  best  friends.  Said  one,  "  Bishop 
Beveridge,  do  you  know  me  ?"  Said  he,  "  "Who  are  you  ?" 
and  when  the  name  was  mentioned,  he  said,  "  No."  "  But 
don't  you  know  your  wife.  Bishop  ?"     "  What  is  her  name  ?'• 


A   FAITHFUL   FRIEND.  25 

said  he.  Said  she,  "  I  am  your  wife."  "  I  did  not  know  I 
had  got  one,"  said  he.  Poor  old  man !  his  faculties  all  failed 
him.  At  last  one  stooped  down  and  whispered,  "Do  you 
know  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ?"  "  Yes,"  said  he,  making  an 
efibrt  to  speak,  "  I  have  known  him  these  forty  years,  and  I 
never  can  forget  him."  It  is  marvelous  how  memory  will 
hold  the  place  with  Jesus,  when  it  will  with  no  one  else ;  and 
it  is  equally  marvelous,  that, 

"  When  all  created  things  are  dry, 
Christ's  fullness  is  the  same." 

My  dear  hearers,  do  think  of  this  matter.  O  that  you 
might  get  Christ  for  your  friend ;  he  will  never  be  your  friend 
while  you  are  self-righteous ;  he  will  never  be  your  friend 
while  you  live  in  sin.  But  do  you  believe  yourselves  guilty  ? 
Do  you  desire  to  leave  off  sin  ?  Do  you  want  to  be  saved  ? 
Do  you  desire  to  be  renewed  ?  Then  let  me  tell  you,  my 
Master  loves  you !  Poor,  weak,  and  helpless  worms,  my 
Master's  heart  is  full  of  love  to  you ;  his  eyes  at  this  moment 
are  looking  down  with  pity  on  you.  "  O  !  Jerusalem,  Jerusa- 
lem, Jerusalem  !"  He  now  bids  me  tell  you  that  he  died  for 
all  of  you  who  confess  yourselves  to  be  sinners,  and  feel  it. 
He  bids  me  say  to  you,  "  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
and  you  shall  be  saved."  He  tells  me  to  proclaim  salvation 
full  and  free  ;  full,  needing  nothing  of  yours  to  help  it ;  free» 
needing  nothing  of  yours  to  buy  it. 

"  Come,  ye  thirsty,  come  and  welcome ; 

God's  free  bounty  glorify : 
True  belief  and  true  repentance. 

Every  grace  that  brings  us  nigh — 
Without  money. 
Come  to  Jesus  Christ,  and  buy." 

There  is  nothing  I  feel  that  I  fail  so  much  in  as  addressing  sin- 
ners. O  !  I  wish  I  could  cry  ray  heart  out,  and  preach  my 
heart  out,  to  you  and  at  you. 

"  Dear  Saviour,  draw  reluctant  hearts ; 
To  thee  let  sinners  fly. 
And  take  the  bliss  thy  love  imparts ; 
And  drink,  and  never  die." 


26  A   FAITHFUL   FRIEND. 

Farewell,  with  this  one  thought — we  shall  never  all  of  ua 
meet  together  here  again.  It  is  a  very  solemn  thought,  but 
according  to  the  course  of  nature  and  the  number  of  deaths, 
if  all  of  you  were  willing  to  come  here  next  Sabbath  morn- 
ing, it  is  not  at  all  likely  that  all  of  you  would  be  alive  ;  one 
out  of  this  congregation  will  be  sure  to  have  gone  the  way  of 
all  flesh.  Farewell,  thou  that  are  appointed  to  death  ;  I  know 
not  where  thou  art — yon  strong  man,  or  yon  tender  maiden 
with  the  hectic  flush  of  consumption  on  her  cheek.  I  know 
no$  who  is  appointed  to  death  ;  but  I  do  now  most  solemnly 
take  my  farewell  of  such  an  one.  Farewell,  poor  soul ;  and  ia 
it  farewell  for  ever  ?  Shall  we  meet  in  the  land  of  the  here- 
after, in  the  home  of  the  blessed  ;  or  do  I  bid  you  farewell 
now  for  ever?  I  do  solemnly  bid  farewell  to  you  for  ever,  if 
you  live  and  die  without  Christ.  But  I  can  not  bear  that 
dreary  thought ;  and  I  therefore  say,  poor  sinner !  stop  and 
consider — consider  thy  ways,  and  now  "  turn  ye,  turn  ye,  why 
will  ye  die  ?»  "  Why  will  ye  die  .^"  "  Why  will  ye  die  ?» 
"  Why  icill  ye  die  ?"  Ah  !  ye  can  not  answer  that  question. 
May  God  help  you  to  answer  it  in  a  better  fashion,  by  saying, 
"  Here,  Lord ! 

Just  as  I  am,  without  one  plea, 
But  that  thy  blood  was  shed  for  me, 
0  Son  of  God  I  come  to  thee." 

I  trust  my  soul  in  thy  kind  hands."     The  Lord  bless  you  all ; 
for  Christ's  sake  I     Amen. 


SERMON    II. 

THE   LEAFLESS  TREE. 

"  But  yet  in  i"!;  shall  be  a  tenth,  and  it  shall  return,  and  it  shall  be  eaten; 
as  a  teil  tree,  and  as  an  oak,  whose  substance  is  in  them,  when  they  cast  theii 
leaves  ;  so  the  holy  seed  shall  be  the  substance  thereof." — Isaiah,  vi.  13. 

Our  first  business  to-night  will  be  briefly  to  explain  the 
metaphor  employed  in  the  text.  The  prophet  was  told  that 
despite  all  the  remonstrances  he  was  instructed  to  deliver,  and 
notwithstanding  the  eloquent  earnestness  of  his  lips,  which 
had  been  just  touched  by  a  live  coal  from  off  the  altar,  still  the 
people  of  Israel  would  persevere  in  their  sins,  and  would  there- 
fore be  certainly  destroyed.  He  asked  the  question,  "  Lord, 
how  long  ?"  that  is.  How  long  will  the  people  be  thus  impen- 
itent ?  How  long  will  thy  sore  judgment  thus  continue  ?  and 
he  was  informed  that  God  would  waste  and  destroy  the  cities 
and  their  inhabitants,  till  the  land  should  be  utterly  desolate. 
Then  it  w^as  added,  for  his  comfort,  "  Yet  in  it  shall  be  a 
tenth."  And  so  it  happened  ;  for  when  "  Nebuchadnezzar  car- 
ried away  all  Jerusalem,"  the  historian  gives  this  reservation — 
"  none  remained  save  the  poorer  sort  of  the  people  of  the  land." 
They  were  left  by  the  captain  of  the  guard,  "to  be  vine-dress- 
ers and  husbandmen."  Thus  in  it  there  was  a  tenth  ;  this 
small  remnant  of  the  people,  however,  was  to  be  nearly  de- 
stroyed too.  "  It  shall  retm-n  and  shall  be  eaten  ;"  the  sense 
is,  eaten  up  or  consumed.  The  poor  creatures  left  in  the  land, 
many  of  them  fled  into  Egypt  at  the  time  of  the  conspiracy  of 
Ishmael  (not  Ishmael,  the  son  of  Hagar,  but  an  unworthy 
member  of  the  royal  family  of  Judah),  and  there  in  Egypt 
most  of  them  were  cut  off  and  perished.  "  But,"  says  God, 
"although  this -tenth  only  shall  be  preserved,  and  then  even 
this  small  part  shall  be  subiected  to  many  perils,  yet  Israel 


28  THE   LEAFLESS   TEEE. 

shall  Dot  be  destroyed,  for  it  shall  be  as  a  terebinth  tree  and  as 
an  oak ;"  their  *'  substance  is  in  them,  when  they  cast  their 
leaves,"  and  so  lose  their  verdure  and  their  beauty ;  thus,  in 
like  manner,  a  holy  seed,  a  chosen  remnant,  shall  still  be  the 
substance  of  the  children  of  Israel,  when  the  fruitful  land  is 
stripped  of  its  foliage,  and  that  fair  garden  of  earth  is  barren 
as  the  desert. 

The  figure  is  taken,  first  of  all,  trom  the  terebinth  or  tur- 
pentine tree — here  translated  the  teil  tree.  That  tree  is  an 
evergreen,  with  this  exception,  that  in  very  severe  and  in- 
clement weather  it  loses  its  leaves ;  but  even  then  the  tere- 
binth tree  is  not  dead.  And  so  of  the  oak  ;  it  loses  its  leaves 
every  year,  of  course,  but  even  then  it  is  not  dead.  "  So," 
says  God,  "  you  have  seen  the  tree  in  winter,  standing  naked 
and  bare,  without  any  sign  of  life,  its  roots  buried  in  the  hard 
and  frozen  soil,  and  its  naked  branches  exposed  to  every  blast, 
without  a  bloom  or  a  bud  ;  yet  the  substance  is  in  the  tree 
when  the  leaves  are  gone.  It  is  still  alive,  and  it  shall,  by  and 
by,  in  due  season,  bud  and  bloom ;  so,"  says  he,  "  Nebuchad- 
nezzar shall  cut  off  all  the  leaves  of  the  tree  of  Israel — take 
away  the  inhabitants,  only  a  tenth  shall  be  left,  and  they  shall 
well  nigh  be  eaten  up ;  still  the  church  of  God  and  the  Israel 
of  God  never  shall  be  destroyed  ;  they  shall  be  like  the  tere- 
binth tree  and  the  oak,  whose  substance  is  in  them,  when  they 
cast  their  leaves;  so  the  holy  seed  shall  be  the  substance 
thereof." 

I  hope  I  have  made  the  meaning  of  the  passage  as  plain  as 
words  can  make  it.  Now,  then,  for  the  application — first,  to 
the  Jews  ;  secondly,  to  the  Church j  thirdly,  to  each  believer . 

I.  First,  TO  THE  Jews. 

What  a  history  is  the  history  of  the  Jew !  He  has  an- 
tiquity stamped  upon  his  forehead.  His  is  a  lineage  more 
noble  than  that  of  any  knights  or  even  kings  of  this  our  island, 
for  he  can  trace  his  pedigree  back  to  the  very  loins  of  Abra- 
ham, and  through  him  to  that  patriarch  who  entered  into  the 
ark,  and  thence  up  to  Adam  himself  Our  history  is  hidden  in 
gloom  and  darkness ;  but  theirs,  with  certainty,  may  be  read 
from  the  first  moment  even  down  till  now.  And  what  a 
checkered  history  has  been  the  history  of  the  Jewish  nation  \ 


THE   LEAFLESS    TKEE.  29 

Nebuchadnezzar  seemed  to  have  swept  them  all  away  with 
the  huge  broom  of  destruction  ;  the  tenth  left  was  again  given 
over  to  the  slaughter  ;  and  one  would  have  thought  we  should 
have  heard  no  more  of  Israel ;  but  in  a  little  time  they  rose, 
phoenix-like,  from  their  ashes.  A  second  temple  was  builded, 
and  the  nation  became  strong  once  more,  and  though  often 
swept  with  desolations  in  the  mean  time,  yet  it  did  not  abide, 
and  the  scepter  did  not  depart  from  Judah,  nor  a  lawgiver 
from  between  his  feet,  until  Shiloh  came.  And,  since  then, 
how  huge  have  been  the  waves  that  have  rushed  over  the  Jew- 
ish race  !  The  Roman  emperor  razed  the  city  to  the  ground, 
and  left  not  a  vestige  standing  ;  another  emperor  changed  the 
name  of  Jerusalem  into  that  of  Eliah,  and  forbade  a  Jew  to  go 
within  some  miles  of  it,  so  that  he  might  not  even  look  upon 
his  beloved  city.  It  was  plowed  and  left  desolate.  But  is  the 
Jew  conquered  ?  Is  he  a  subjugated  man  ?  Is  his  country 
seized  ?  No ;  he  is  still  one  of  earth's  nobles — distressed,  in- 
sulted, spit  upon  ;  still  it  is  written,  "  To  the  Jew  first,  and 
afterward  to  the  Gentile."  He  claims  a  high  dignity  above 
us,  and  he  has  a  history  to  come  which  will  be  greater  and 
more  splendid  than  the  history  of  any  nation  that  has  yet  ex- 
isted. If  we  read  the  Scriptures  aright,  the  Jews  have  a  great 
deal  to  do  with  this  world's  history.  They  shall  be  gathered 
in  ;  Messiah  shall  come,  the  Messiah  they  are  looking  for — the 
same  Messiah  who  came  once  shall  come  again — shall  come  as 
they  expected  him  to  come  the  first  time.  They  then  thought 
he  would  come  a  prince  to  reign  over  them,  and  so  he  will 
when  he  comes  again.  He  will  come  to  be  king  of  the  Jews, 
and  to  reign  over  his  people  most  gloriously ;  for  when  he 
comes,  Jew  and  Gentile  will  have  equal  privileges,  though 
there  shall  yet  be  some  distinction  afibrded  to  that  royal  fam- 
ily from  whose  loins  Jesus  came ;  for  he  shall  sit  upon  the 
throne  of  his  father  David,  and  unto  him  shaU  be  gathered  all 
nations.     O ! 

"  Ye  chosen  seed  of  Israel's  race, 
A  remnant  weak  and  small," 

ye  may,  indeed, 

"  Hail  him  who  saves  you  by  his  grace, 
And  crown  him  Lord  of  all ;" 


50  THE    LEAFLESS   TREE. 

your  church  sliall  never  die,  and  your  race  sliall  never  become 
extinct.  The  Lord  liath  said  it.  "  The  race  of  Abraham  sliall 
endure  for  ever,  and  his  «eed  as  many  generations." 

But  why  is  it  that  the  Jewish  race  is  preserved  ?  We  have 
our  answer  in  the  text :  "  The  holy  seed  is  the  substance 
thereof."  There  is  something  within  a  tree  mysterious,  hid- 
den, and  unknown,  which  preserves  life  in  it  when  every  thing 
outward  tends  to  kill  it.  So  in  the  Jewish  race  there  is  a  se- 
cret element  which  keeps  it  alive.  We  know  what  it  is :  it  is 
the  "remnant  according  to  the  election  of  grace:"  in  the 
worst  of  agcs  there  has  never  been  a  day  so  black  but  there 
was  a  Hebrew  found  to  hold  the  lamp  of  God.  There  has 
always  been  found  a  Jew  who  loved  Jesus ;  and  though  the 
race  no\v  despise  the  great  Redeemer,  yet  there  are  not  a  few 
of  the  Hebrew  race  who  still  love  Jesus,  the  Saviour  of  the 
uncircumcised,  and  bow  before  him.  It  is  these  few,  this 
holy  seed,  that  are  the  substance  of  the  nation  ;  and  for  their 
sake,  through  their  prayers,  because  of  God's  love  to  them,  he 
still  says  of  Israel  to  all  nations,  "Touch  not  these  mine  an- 
ointed, do  my  prophets  no  harm.  These  are  the  descendants 
of  Abraham,  my  friend.  I  have  sworn,  and  will  not  repent ; 
I  will  show  kindness  unto  them  for  their  father's  sake,  and  for 
the  sake  of  the  remnant  I  have  chosen." 

Let  us  think  a  little  more  of  the  Jews  than  we  have  been 
wont;  let  us  pray  oftener  for  them.  "Pray  for  the  peace  of 
Jerusalem  ;  they  shall  prosper  that  love  her."  As  truly  as  any 
great  thing  is  done  in  this  world  for  Christ's  kingdom,  the 
Jews  will  have  more  to  do  with  it  than  any  of  us  have 
dreamed.  So  much  for  the  first  point.  The  Jewish  nation  is 
like  "  a  terebinth  tree,  and  as  an  oak,  whose  substance  is  in 
them,  when  they  cast  their  leaves ;  so  the  holy  seed  shall  be 
the  substance  thereof" 

II.  And  now,  secondly,  the  Church  of  Christ,  whereof 
the  Jewish  people  are  but  a  dim  shadow,  and  an  emblem. 

The  church  has  had  its  trials ;  trials  from  without  and  trials 
within.  It  has  had  days  of  blood-red  persecution,  and  of  fiery 
trial ;  it  has  had  times  of  sad  apostacy,  when  an  evil  heart  of 
unbelief  and  departing  from  the  living  God  has  broken  out, 
and  a  root  of  bitterness  springing  up  has  troubled  many,  and 


THE   LEAFLESS   TREE.  31 

thereby  they  have  been  defiled.  Yet,  blessed  be  God,  through 
all  the  winters  of  the  church  she  still  lived,  and  she  gives  signs 
now  of  a  sweeter  spring-tide,  a  fresher  greenness  and  a  health- 
ier condition  than  she  has  shown  before  for  many  a  day.  AVhy 
is  it  that  the  church  is  still  preserved,  when  she  looks  so  dead  ? 
For  this  reason  :  that  there  is  in  the  midst  of  her — though 
many  are  hypocrites  and  impostors — a  "chosen  seed,"  who 
are  "the  substance  thereof."  You 'might  have  looked  back  a 
hundred  years  ago  upon  the  professing  church  of  Christ  in  this 
land,  and  what  a  sad  spectacle  it  would  have  exhibited !  In 
the  Church  of  England  there  was  mere  formality  ;  in  the  In- 
dependent and  Baptist  denominations  there  was  truth,  but  it 
was  dead,  cold,  lifeless  truth.  Ministers  dreamed  on  in  their 
pulpits,  and  hearers  snored  in  their  pews ;  infidelity  was 
triumphant ;  the  house  of  God  was  neglected  and  desecrated. 
The  church  was  like  a  tree  that  had  lost  its  leaves  :  it  was  in 
a  wintry  state.  But  did  it  die  ?  No ;  there  was  a  holy  seed 
within  it.  Six  young  men  were  expelled  from  Oxford  for 
praying,  reading  the  Bible,  and  talking  to  poor  people  about 
Christ ;  and  these  six  young  men,  with  many  others  whom  the 
Lord  had  hidden  by  fifties  in  the  caves  of  the  earth,  secret  and 
unknown — these  young  men,  leaders  of  a  glorious  revival,  came 
out,  and  though  ridiculed  and  laughed  at  as  Methodists,  they 
brought  forth  a  great  and  glorious  revival,  almost  equaling 
the  commencement  of  the  gospel  triumphs  under  Paul  and  the 
apostles,  and  very  little  inferior  to  the  great  Reformation  of 
Luther,  of  Calvin,  and  Zwingle.  And  just  now  the  church  is 
to  a  great  degree  in  a  barren  and  lifeless  state.  But  will  she 
therefore  die  ?  You  say  that  true  doctrine  is  scarce,  that  zeal 
is  rare,  that  there  is  little  life  and  energy  in  the  pulpit  and  true 
devotion  in  the  pew,  while  formality  and  hypocrisy  stalk  over 
us,  and  we  sleep  m  our  cradles.  But  will  the  church  die  ? 
No  ;  she  is  like  a  teil  tree  and  an  oak  ;  her  substance  is  in  her 
when  she  has  lost  her  leaves ;  there  is  a  holy  seed  in  her  still 
that  is  the  substance  thereof.  Where  these  are  we  know  not; 
Bome,  I  doubt  not,  are  here  in  this  church — some,  I  hope,  are 
to  be  found  in  every  church  of  professing  Christians  :  and  wo« 
worth  the  day  to  the  church  that  loses  her  holy  seed ;  for  sh« 
must  die,  like  the  oak  blasted  by  the  lightning,  whose  heart  is 


82  THE   LEAFLESS   TREE. 

scorched  out  of  it — broken  down,  because  it  has  no  substance 
in  it. 

Let  me  now  draw  your  attention,  as  a  church  connected 
with  this  place,  to  this  point — that  the  holy  seed  is  the  sub- 
stance of  the  church.  A  great  many  of  you  might  be  com- 
pared to  the  bark  of  the  tree  ;  some  of  you  are  like  the  big 
limbs ;  others  are  like  pieces  of  the  trunk.  Well,  we  should 
be  very  sorry  to  lose  any  of  you ;  but  we  could  afford  to  do 
so  without  any  serious  damage  to  the  life  of  the  tree.  Yet 
there  are  some  here — God  knoweth  who  they  are — who  are 
the  substance  of  the  tree.  By  the  word  "  substance"  is  meant 
the  life,  the  inward  principle.  The  inward  principle  is  in  the 
tree,  when  it  has  lost  its  leaves.  Now,  God  discerns  some 
men  in  this  church,  I  doubt  not,  who  are  toward  us  like  the 
inward  principle  of  the  oak ;  they  are  the  substance  of  the 
church.  I  would  feign  hope  that  all  the  members  of  the 
church  in  some  degree  contribute  to  the  substance  ;  but  I  can 
not  think  so.  I  am  obliged  to  say  I  doubt  it ;  because  when 
one  hath  fallen  and  another,  it  makes  us  remember  that  a 
church  hath  much  in  it  that  is  not  life.  There  be  some 
branches  on  the  vine  that  be  cut  off*,  because  they  do  not  draw 
sap  from  the  heart  of  it,  they  are  only  branches  bound  on  by 
profession,  pretended  graftings  that  have  never  struck  root 
into  the  parent  stock,  and  that  must  be  cut  off",  and  hewn 
down,  and  cast  into  the  fire.  But  there  is  a  holy  seed  in  the 
church  that  is  the  substance  of  it. 

Please  to  note  here,  that  the  hfe  of  a  tree  is  not  determined 
by  the  shape  of  the  branches,  nor  by  the  way  it  grows,  but  it 
is  the  substance.  The  shape  of  a  church  is  not  its  life.  In  one 
place  I  see  a  church  formed  in  an  Episcopalian  shape ;  in  an- 
other place  I  see  one  formed  in  a  Presbyterian  shape ;  then, 
again,  I  see  one,  like  ours,  formed  on  an  Independent  princi- 
ple. Here  I  see  one  with  sixteen  ounces  to  the  pound  of  doc- 
trine; there  I  see  one  with  eight,  and  some  with  very  little  clear 
doctrine  at  all.  And  yet  I  find  life  in  all  the  churches,  in  some 
degree — some  good  men  in  all  of  them.  How  do  I  account 
for  this  ?  Why,  just  in  this  way — that  the  oak  may  be  alive, 
whatever  its  shape,  if  it  has  got  the  substance.  If  there  be 
but  a  holy  seed  in  the  church,  the  church  will  live  ;  and  it  is 


THE   LEAFLESS    TREE.  33 

astonishing  how  the  church  will  live  under  a  thousand  errors, 
if  there  be  but  the  vital  principle  in  it.  You  will  find  good 
men  among  the  denominations  that  you  can  not  receive  as 
being  sound  in  faith.  You  say,  "  What !  can  any  good  thing 
come  out  of  Nazareth  ?"  and  you  go  through,  and  find  that 
there  are  even  in  them  some  true  Nazarites  of  the  right  order. 
The  very  best  of  men  found  in  the  worst  of  churches !  A 
church  lives  not  because  of  its  rubrics,  and  its  canonj«,  and  its 
articles  ;  it  lives  because  of  the  holy  seed  that  is  in  it  as  the 
substance.  No  church  can  die  while  it  has  a  holy  seed  in  it, 
and  no  church  can  live  that  has  not  the  holy  seed,  for  "  the 
holy  seed  is  the  substance  thereof." 

Observe,  again,  that  the  substance  of  the  oak  is  a  hidden 
thing  ;  you  can  not  see  it.  When  the  oak  or  the  terebinth  is 
standing  destitute  of  leaves,  you  know  that  life  is  there  some- 
where. But  you  can  not  see  it.  And  very  likely  you  can  not 
and  do  not  know  the  men  that  are  the  holy  seed,  the  substance 
of  the  church.  Perhaps  you  imagine  the  substance  of  the 
chm'ch  lies  in  the  pulpit.  Nay,  friend  !  Let  us  pray  to  God 
that  such  of  us  as  are  in  the  pulpit  may  be  a  part  of  that  sub- 
stance ;  but  much  of  the  substance  of  the  church  lies  where 
you  don't  know  any  thing  of  it.  There  is  a  mine  near  Ply- 
mouth, where  the  men  who  work  in  it,  two  hundred  and  fifty 
feet  below  the  surface,  have  a  little  shelf  for  their  Bibles  and 
hymn-books,  and  a  little  place  where  every  morning,  when 
they  go  down  in  the  black  darkness,  they  bow  before  God, 
and  praise  him  whose  tender  mercies  are  over  all  his  works. 
You  never  heard  of  these  miners,  perhaps,  and  do  not  know* 
of  them;  but  perhaps  some  of  them  are  the  very  substance  of 
the  church.  There  sits  Mr.  Somebody  in  that  pew;  O  !  what 
a  support  he  is  to  the  church.  Yes,  in  money  matters,  per- 
haps ;  but  do  you  know,  there  is  poor  old  Mrs.  Nobody  in  the 
aisle  that  is  most  Hkely  a  greater  pillar  to  the  church  than  he, 
for  she  is  a  holier  Christian,  one  who  lives  nearer  to  her  God 
and  serves  him  better,  and  she  is  "  the  substance  thereof." 
Ah !  that  old  woman  in  the  garret  who  is  often  in  prayer ; 
that  old  man  on  his  bed  who  spends  days  and  nights  in  sup- 
plication ;  sucii  people  as  these  are  the  substance  of  the  church. 
O !  you  may  take  a\^ay  your  prelates,  your  orators,  and  the 


84  THE   LEAFLESS   TREE. 

best  and  greatest  of  those  who  stand  among  earth's  mighty 
men,  and  their  place  could  be  supplied ;  but  take  away  our 
intercessors  ;  take  away  the  men  and  women  that  breathe  out 
prayer  by  night  and  day,  and  like  the  priests  of  old  offer  the 
morning  and  evening  lamb  as  a  perpetual  sacrifice,  and  you 
kill  the  church  at  once.  What  are  the  ministers  ?  They  are 
but  the  arms  of  the  church,  and  the  lips  of  it.  A  man  may  b^ 
both  dumb  and  armless,  and  yet  live.  But  these,  the  heavenly 
seed,  the  chosen  men  and  women  who  live  near  their  God,  and 
serve  him  with  sacred  fervent  piety — these  are  the  heart  of 
the  church  ;  we  can  not  do  without  them.  If  we  lose  them  we 
must  die.     "  The  holy  seed  is  the  substance  thereof." 

Then,  my  hearer,  thou  art  a  church  member.  Let  me  ask 
thee — art  thou  one  of  the  holy  seed  ?  Hast  thou  been*begot- 
ten  again  to  a  lively  hope  ?  Has  God  made  thee  holy  by  the 
sanctifying  influence  of  his  Spirit,  and  by  the  justifying  righte- 
ousness of  Christ,  and  by  the  application  to  thy  conscience  of 
the  blood  of  Jesus  ?  If  so,  then  thou  art  the  substance  of  the 
church.  They  may  pass  by  thee  and  not  notice  thee,  for  thou 
art  little  ;  but  the  substance  is  little  ;  the  life-germ  within  the 
grain  of  barley  is  too  small  for  us,  perhaps,  to  detect ;  the  life 
within  the  egg  is  almost  an  animalcula — you  can  scarcely  see 
it ;  and  so  the  life  of  the  church  is  among  the  little  ones, 
where  we  can  scarcely  find  it  out.  Rejoice,  if  you  are  much 
in  prayer ;  you  are  the  life  of  the  church.  But  you,  O  you 
proud  man,  pull  down  your  grand  thoughts  of  yourself;  you 
may  give  to  the  church,  you  may  speak  for  tlie  church,  and 
act  for  the  church,  but  unless  you  are  a  holy  seed  you  are  not 
the  substance  thereof,  and  it  is  the  substance  which  is  in  reality 
of  the  greatest  value. 

But  here  let  me  say  one  thing  before  I  leave  this  point. 
Some  of  yon  will  say,  "  How  is  it  that  good  men  are  the 
means  of  preserving  the  visible  church  ?"  I  answer,  the  holy 
seed  doth  this,  because  it  derives  its  life  from  Christ.  If  the 
holy  seed  had  to  preserve  the  church  by  its  own  purity  and 
its  own  strength,  the  church  would  go  to  ruin  to-morrow ;  but 
it  is  because  these  holy  ones  draw  fresh  life  from  Christ  con- 
tinually that  they  are  able  to  be,  as  it  were,  the  salvation  of 
the  body,  and  by  their  influence,  di3ct  and  indirect,  shed  life 


THE    LEAiTLKSS    TREK,  8,5 

over  the  whole  visible  church.  The  prayers  of  those  living 
ones  in  Zion  bring  down  many  a  blessing  upon  us;  the  groans 
and  cries  of  these  earnest  intercessors  prevail  with  heaven, 
and  bring  down  very  argosies  of  mercy  from  the  gates  of  par- 
adise. And  besides,  their  holy  example  tends  to  check  us 
and  preserve  us  in  purity ;  they  walk  among  us  like  God's 
own  favored  ones,  wrapped  in  white,  reflecting  his  image 
wherever  they  go,  and  tending,  under  God,  to  the  sanctifying 
of  believers,  not  through  their  vaunting  any  self-righteousness, 
but  by  stirring  up  believers  to  do  more  for  Christ,  and  to  be 
more  like  him.  "  The  holy  seed  shall  be  the  substance 
thereof," 

III.  And  now  I  come  to  the  third  point.  This  is  true  of 
EVERY  INDIVIDUAL  BELIEVER  I  his  substauce  is  in  him  when 
he  has  lost  his  leaves. 

The  Arminian  says  that  when  a  Christian  loses  his  leaves  he 
ifi  dead.  "  No,"  says  God's  Word,  "  he  is  not ;  he  may  look 
as  if  be  were  dead,  and  not  have  so  much  as  here  and  there  a 
leaf  upon  the  topmost  bough ;  but  he  is  not  dead.  Their 
substance  is  in  them  even  when  they  lose  their  leaves." 

By  losing  their  leaves  allow  me  to  understand  two  things. 
Christian  men  lose  their  leaves  when  they  lose  their  comforts, 
when  they  lose  the  sensible  enjoyment  of  their  Master's  pres- 
ence, and  when  their  full  assurance  is  turned  into  doubting. 
You  have  had  many  such  a  time  as  that,  have  you  not  ?  Ah  I 
you  were  one  day  in  such  a  state  of  joy,  that  you  said  you 

could 

"  Sit  and  sing  yourself  away 
To  everlasting  bliss." 

But  a  wintry  state  came,  and  your  joy  all  departed,  and 
you  stood  hke  a  bare  tree,  after  the  wind  had  swept  it  in  the 
time  of  winter,  with  just  perhaps  one  sere  leaf  hanging  by  a 
thread  on  the  topmost  bough.  But  you  were  not  dead  then ; 
no,  your  substance  was  in  you,  when  you  had  lost  your  leaves. 
You  could  not  see  that  substance,  and  good  reason  why,  be- 
cause your  life  was  hid  with  Christ  in  God  ;  you  saw  not  your 
signs,  but  you  had  your  substance  still,  though  you  could  not 
discover  it.  There  were  no  heavings  of  faith,  but  faith  was 
there  ;  there  w^re  no  lockings  out  of  hope,  but  though  hope's 


36  THE    LEAFLESS   TREE. 

eyelids  were  shut,  the  eyes  were  there,  to  be  opened  after- 
wards;  there  was  no  lifting,  perhaps,  of  the  hand  of  ardent 
prayer,  bat  the  hands  and  arms  were  there,  though  they  hung 
powerless  by  the  side.  God  said,  afterwards,  "Strengthen 
the  feeble  knees,  and  lift  up  the  hands  that  hang  down." 
Your  substance  was  in  you  when  you  had  lost  your  leaves. 
Good  Baxter  says — "  "We  do  not  see  graces,  except  when 
they  are  in  exercise  ;  and  yet  they  are  as  much  t'here  when 
they  are  not  in  exercise  as  when  they  are."  Saith  he,  "  Let 
a  man  take  a  walk  into  a  wood  ;  there  lieth  a  hare  or  a  rabbit 
asleep  under  the  leaves ;  but  he  can  not  see  the  creature  until 
it  is  frightened,  and  it  runneth  out,  and  then  he  seeth  it  to  be 
there."  So  if  faith  be  in  exercise  you  will  perceive  your  evi- 
dence, but  if  faith  be  slumbering  and  still,  you  will  be  led  to 
doubt  its  existence  ;  and  yet  it  is  there  all  the  while. 

"  Mountains  when  in  darkness  hidden, 
Are  as  real  as  in  day," 

said  one  ;  and  truly  the  faith  of  the  Christian,  when  shrouded 
by  doubts  and  fears,  is  just  as  much  there  as  when  he  re- 
joiceth  devoutly  in  the  display  of  it. 

It  is  a  common  error  of  young  converts  that  they  attempt 
to  live  by  their  experience,  instead  of  tracing  their  life  up  to 
its  precious  source.  I  have  known  persons  rejoicing  in  the 
fullest  assurance  one  day,  and  sinking  into  the  deepest  des- 
pondency the  next.  The  Lord  will  sometimes  strip  you  of 
the  leaves  of  evidence  to  teach  you  to  live  by  faith,  as  John 
Kent  says — 

"  If  to-day  he  deigns  to  bless  us 
With  a  sense  of  pardoned  sin ; 
He  to-morrow  may  distress  us, 
Make  us  feel  the  plague  within ; 

All  to  make  us 
Sick  of  self  and  fond  of  him." 

But  ah !  there  is  a  worse  phase  to  the  subject  than  this 
Some  Christians  lose  their  leaves  not  by  doubts,  but  by  sin. 
This  is  a  tender  topic — one  which  needs  a  tender  hand  to 
touch.  O!  there  are  some  in  our  churches  that  have  lost 
their  leaves  by  lust  and  sin.     Fair  professors  once  they  were.* 


THE    LEAFLESS   TKEE.  37 

they  stood  green  among  the  church,  like  the  very  leaves  of 
paradise ;  but  in  an  evil  hour  they  fell,  the  slaves  of  tempta- 
tion. They  were  God's  own  people  by  many  infallible  marks 
and  signs ;  and  if  they  were  so,  though  it  is  grievous  that 
they  should  have  lost  their  leaves,  yet  there  is  the  sweet  con- 
solation, their  substance  is  in  them  still :  they  are  still  the 
Lord's,  still  his  living  children,  though  they  have  fallen  into 
the  coma  of  sin,  and  are  now  in  a  fainting  fit,  having  gone 
astray  from  him,  and  having  their  animation  suspended,  while 
life  is  still  there.  Some,  as  soon  as  they  see  a  Christian  do 
any  thing  inconsistent  with  his  profession,  say,  "  That  man  is 
no  child  of  God  ;  he  can  not  be  ;  it  is  impossible."  Ay,  but, 
sir,  remember  what  he  thought  who  once  said — "  If  a  brother 
err,  ye  that  are  spiritual  restore  such  an  one  in  the  spirit  of 
meekness,  considering  thyself,  lest  thou  also  be  tempted."  It 
is  a  fact,  deny  it  who  will,  and  abuse  it,  if  you  please,  to  your 
own  wicked  purposes ;  I  can  not  help  it — it  is  a  fact  that 
some  living  children  of  God  have  been  allowed — and  an  aw- 
ful allowance  it  is — to  go  into  the  very  blackest  sins.  Do  you 
think  David  was  not  a  child  of  God,  even  when  he  sinned  ? 
It  is  a  hard  subject  to  touch  ;  but  it  is  not  to  be  denied.  He 
had  the  life  of  God  within  him  before  ;  and  though  he  sinned 
— O !  horrid  and  awful  was  the  crime  ! — yet  his  substance 
was  in  him  when  he  lost  his  leaves.  And  many  a  child  of 
God  has  gone  far  away  from  his  Master  ;  but  his  substance  is 
in  him.  And  how  know  we  this  ?  Because  a  dead  tree  never 
lives  again  ;  if  the  substance  be  really  gone,  it  never  live.^ ; 
and  God's  holy  Word  assures  us,  that  if  the  real  life  of  grace 
could  die  out  in  any  one,  it  could  never  come  again  ;  for  saith 
the  apostle,  "  it  is  impossible,  if  they  have  been  once  enlight 
ened,  and  have  tasted  the  heavenly  gift,  and  have  been  made 
partakers  of  the  Holy  Ghost"— if  these  fall  away—"  it  is  im- 
possible to  renew  them  again  unto  repentance."  Their  tree  is 
"  dead,  plucked  up  by  the  roots."  And  the  apostle  Peter 
says — "  For  if,  after  they  have  escaped  the  corruption  that  is 
in  the  world  through  lust,  they  are  again  turned  back,  their 
last  end  shall  be  worse  than  the  first."  But  now  take  David, 
or  take  Pete ',  which  you  please.  Peter  we  will  have.  O  ! 
how  foully  di  \  he  curse  his  Master  !     With  many  an  oath  lie 


38  THE   LEAFLESS    TREK. 

denied  him.  But  had  not  Peter  the  life  of  God  in  him  then  ? 
Yes ;  and  how  do  we  know  ?  Because  when  his  Master 
looked  upon  him,  he  "  went  out  and  wept  bitterly."  Ah  !  if 
he  had  been  a  dead  man,  hardened  and  without  the  substance 
in  him,  his  Master  might  have  looked  to  all  eternity,  and  ho 
would  not  have  wept  bitterly.  How  know  I  that  David  wa^ 
yet  alive  ?  Why,  by  this — that  although  there  was  a  long, 
long  winter,  and  there  were  many  prickings  of  conscience, 
like  the  workings  of  the  sap  within  a  tree,  abortive  attempts 
to  thrust  forward  here  and  there  a  shoot  before  its  time,  yet 
when  the  hour  was  come,  and  Nathan  came  to  him  and  said, 
*'  Thou  art  the  man,"  had  David  been  dead,  without  the  life 
of  God,  he  would  have  spurned  Nathan  from  him,  and  might 
have  done  what  Manasseh  did  with  Isaiah,  cut  him  in  pieces 
in  his  anger ;  but  instead  of  that  he  bowed  his  head  and  wept 
before  God  ;  and  still  it  is  written,  "  The  Lord  hath  put  awaj 
thy  sin,  thou  shalt  not  die."  His  substance  was  in  him,  when 
ho  lost  his  leaves.  O  !  have  pity  upon  poor  fallen  brethren. 
O  !  burn  them  not ;  they  are  not  dead  logs  ;  though  their 
leaves  are  gone  their  substance  is  in  them.  God  can  see 
grace  in  their  hearts  when  you  can  not  see  it ;  he  has  put  a 
life  there  that  can  never  expire,  for  he  has  said,  "  I  give  unto 
my  sheep  eternal  life,"  and  that  means  a  life  that  lives  for 
ever ;  "  the  water  that  I  shall  give  him  shall  be  in  him  a  well 
of  water  springing  up  into  everlasting  life."  You  may  choke 
the  well  up  with  big  stones,  but  the  water  will  find  its  way 
out  yet,  and  well  up  notwithstanding.  And  so  the  heir  of 
heaven  may,  to  the  grief  of  the  church  and  to  the  injury  of 
himself,  most  grievously  transgress — and  weep,  my  eyes,  O 
weep  for  any  that  have  done  so,  and  O  bleed,  ray  heart,  and 
thou  hast  bled,  for  any  that  have  so  sinned — but  yet  their 
"  substance  is  in  them,  when  they  cast  their  leaves  :  so  the 
holy  seed" — that  is,  Christ  within  them,  the  Holy  Ghost 
within  them,  the  new  creature  within  them — "  the  holy  seed 
shall  be  the  substance  thereof"  Poor  backslider !  here  is  a 
word  of  comfort  for  you.  I  would  not  comfort  you  in  your 
sins  ;  God  forbid  !  But  if  you  know  your  sins  and  hate  them, 
let  me  comfort  you.  Thou  art  not  dead  !  As  Jesus  said  of 
the  damsel,  "  She  is  not  de.ad,  but  sleepeth,"  so  let  me  say  of 


THE    LEAFLESS    TREE.  39 

thee,  "Thou  art  not  dead;  thou  shalt  yet  live."  Dost  thou 
repent  ?  Dost  thou  grieve  over  thy  sin  ?  That  is  the  bud 
that  shows  that  there  is  life  within.  When  a  common  sinner 
sins  he  repents  not,  or  if  he  doth  repent  it  is  with  a  legal  re- 
pentance. His  conscience  pricks  him,  but  he  hushes  it.  He 
does  not  leave  his  sin  and  turn  from  it. 

But  did  you  ever  see  a  child  of  God  after  he  had  been 
washed  from  a  foul  sin  ?  He  was  a  changed  man.  I  know 
such  an  one,  who  used  to  carry  a  merry  countenance,  and 
many  were  the  jokes  he  made  in  company ;  but  when  I  met 
him  after  an  awful  sin,  there  was  a  solemnity  about  his  coun- 
tenance that  was  unusual  to  him.  He  looked,  I  should  say, 
something  like  Dante,  the  poet,  of  whom  the  boys  said,  "  There 
is  the  man  that  has  been  in  hell ;"  because  he  had  written  of 
hell,  and  looked  like  it — he  looked  so  terrible.  And  when  we 
spoke  of  sin  there  w^as  such  a  solemnity  about  him  ;  and  when 
vre  spoke  of  going  astray  the  tears  ran  down  his  cheeks,  as 
much  as  to  say,  "  I  have  been  astray  too."  He  seemed  like 
good  Christian,  after  he  had  been  in  Giant  Despair's  castle. 
Do  you  not  remember,  beloved,  the  guide  who  took  the  pil- 
grims up  to  the  top  of  a  hill  called  Clear,  and  he  showed  them 
from  the  top  of  the  hill  a  lot  of  men  with  their  eyes  put  out, 
groping  among  the  tombs,  and  Christian  asked  what  it  meant. 
Said  the  guide,  "  These  are  pilgrims  that  were  caught  in 
Giant  Despair's  castle  ;  the  giant  had  their  eyes  put  out,  and 
they  are  left  to  wander  among  the  tombs  to  die,  and  their 
bones  are  to  be  left  in  the  court-yard."  Whereupon  John 
Bunyan  very  naively  says,  "  I  looked,  and  saw  their  eyes  full 
of  water,  for  they  remembered  they  might  have  been  there 
too."  Just  as  the  man  talked  and  spoke  that  I  once  knew. 
He  seemed  to  wonder  why  God  had  not  left  him  to  be  an 
apostate  for  ever,  as  the  lot  of  Judas  or  Demas.  He  seemed 
to  think  it  such  a  startling  thing  that  while  many  had  gone 
aside  altogether  from  God's  way,  he  should  still  have  had  his 
substance  in  him,  when  he  had  lost  his  leaves,  and  that  God 
should  still  have  loved  him.  Perhaps,  beloved,  God  allows 
some  such  men  to  live,  and  sin,  and  afterward  repent,  for  this 
reason.  You  know  there  are  some  voices  needed  in  music 
that  are  very  rare,  and  when,  now^  and  then,  such  a  voice  is  t^ 


40  THE    LEAFLESS    TREE. 

be  heard,  every  one  will  go  to  hear  it.  I  have  thought  that 
perhaps  some  of  these  men  in  heaven  will  sing  soprano  notes 
before  the  throne — choice,  wondrous  notes  of  grace,  because 
they  have  gone  into  the  depths  of  sin  after  profession ;  and 
yet  he  hath  loved  them  when  their  feet  made  haste  to  perdi- 
tion, and  fetched  them  up,  because  he  "  loved  them  well." 
There  are  but  few  such  ;  for  most  men  wdll  go  foully  into  sin  ; 
they  will  go  out  from  us  because  they  are  not  of  us,  for  if  they 
had  been  of  us  they  would  doubtless  have  continued  with  us. 
But  there  have  been  a  few  such — great  saints,  then  great 
backsliding  sinners,  and  then  great  saints  again.  Their  sub- 
stance was  in  them  when  they  had  lost  their  leaves.  O  !  you 
that  have  gone  far  astray,  sit  and  weep.  You  can  not  weep 
too  much,  though  you  should  cry  with  Herbert — 

"  0,  who  will  give  me  tears  ?     Come,  all  ye  springs, 
Dwell  in  my  head  and  eyes ;  come,  clouds  and  rain  I 
My  grief  hath  need  of  all  the  watery  things 
That  nature  hath  produced." 

You  might  well  say, 

"  Let  every  vein 
Suck  up  a  river  to  supply  mine  eyes, 
My  weary,  weeping  eyes ;  too  dry  for  me. 
Unless  they  get  new  conduits,  new  suppHes, 
To  bear  them  out,  and  with  my  state  agree." 

But  yet  remember,  "  He  hath  not  forsaken  his  people,  neither 
hath  he  cut  them  off;  for  still  he  says, 

"  Ketum,  0  wanderer,  return. 

And  seek  an  injured  father's  heart." 

Return  !  return !  return !  Thy  Father's  bowels  still  move 
for  thee.  He  speaks  through  the  written  oracles  at  this  mo- 
ment, saying,  "  How  shall  I  give  thee  up,  Ephraira  ?  How 
shall  I  deliver  thee,  O  Israel  ?  How  can  I  make  thee  as  Ad- 
raah  ?  How  can  I  set  thee  as  Zeboim  ?"  My  bowels  are 
moved  ;  my  repentings  are  kindled  together ;  for  I  will  heal 
their  backslidings,  I  will  receive  them  graciously,  I  will  love 
them  freely,  for  they  are  mine  still.  As  the  terebinth  and  as 
the  oak,  whose  substance  is  in  them  when  they  cast  their 
leaves,  even  so  the  holy  seed  within  the  elect  and  called  ves- 
sels of  mercy,  is  still  the  substance  thereof. 


THE   LEAFLESS    TREE.  41 

And  now,  what  have  I  to  say  to  some  of  you  that  live  in 
black  sin,  and  yet  excuse  yourselves  on  account  of  the  re- 
corded falls  of  God's  people  ?  Sir,  know  this  !  Inasmuch  as 
you  do  this,  you  wrest  the  Scriptures  to  your  own  destruc- 
tion. If  one  man  has  taken  poison,  and  there  has  been  a  phy- 
sician by  his  side  so  skillful  that  he  has  saved  his  life  by  a 
heavenly  antidote,  is  that  any  roason  why  thou,  who  hast  no 
physician  and  no  antidote,  should  yet  think  that  the  poison 
will  not  kill  thee  ?  Why,  man,  the  sin  that  does  not  damn  a 
Christian,  because  Christ  washes  him  in  his  blood,  will  damn 
you.  Said  Brookes — and  I  will  repeat  his  words  and  have 
done — "  He  that  believeth  and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved,  said 
the  apostle,  be  his  sins  never  so  many  ;  but  he  that  believeth 
not  shall  be  damned,  be  his  sins  never  so  few."  Truly  your 
sins  may  be  little  ;  but  you  are  lost  for  them  without  Christ. 
Your  sins  may  be  great ;  but  if  Christ  shall  pardon  them,  then 
you  shall  be  saved.  The  one  question,  then,  I  have  to  ask  of 
thee,  is — Hast  thou  Christ  ?  For  if  thou  hast  not,  then  thou 
hast  not  the  holy  seed ;  thou  art  a  dead  tree,  and  in  due  time 
thou  shalt  be  tinder  for  hell.  Thou  art  a  rotten-hearted  tree, 
all  touch-wood,  ready  to  be  broken  in  pieces ;  eaten  by  the 
worms  of  lust ;  and  ah  !  when  the  lire  shall  take  hold  of  thee, 
what  a  blazing  and  a  burning !  O  !  that  thou  hadst  life  !  O  ! 
that  God  would  give  it  to  thee  !  O  !  that  thou  wouldst  now 
repent !  O  !  that  thou  wouldst  cast  thyself  on  Jesus  !  O  ! 
that  thou  wouldst  turn  to  him  with  full  purpose  of  heart ! 
For  then,  remember,  thou  wouldst  be  saved — saved  now,  and 
saved  for  ever ;  for  "  the  holy  seed"  would  be  "  ih&  substance 
thereof." 


SERMON  III. 
THE    SNARE   OF  THE  FOWLER. 

"Surely  he  shall  deliver  thee  from  the  snare  of  tlie  fowler." — Psalm  xcL  3. 

If  Moses  wrote  this  Psalm  he  might  represent  the  fowler  as 
being  in  his  case  the  king  of  Egypt,  who  sought  to  slay  him, 
or  the  Amalekites,  who  jDounced  upon  Israel  in  the  plain,  when 
they  little  expected  it.  If  David  penned  it,  he  might  have 
compared  Saul  to  the  fowler,  for  he  himself  says,  he  was 
hunted  like  a  partridge  upon  the  mountains.  But  we  believe, 
if  the  verse  be  applicable  to  either  of  those  cases,  it  was  in 
tended  by  the  Psalmist  not  to  have  a  private  interpretation, 
but  to  be  applicable  to  all  time ;  and  we  believe  it  is  spoken 
concerning  that  arch-enemy  of  souls,  the  great  deceiver,  Satan, 
of  whom  we  just  now  sang, 

"Satan,  the  fowler,  who  betrays 
Unguarded  souls  a  thousand  ways," 

"The  prince  of  the  power  of  this  world,  the  spirit  which  still 
worketh  in  the  children  of  disobedience,"  is  like  a  fowler, 
always  attempting  to  destroy  us.  It  was  once  said  by  a 
talented  writer,  that  the  old  devil  was  dead,  and  that  there 
was  a  new  devil  noAV ;  by  which  he  meant  to  say,  that  the 
devil  of  old  times  was  a  rather  different  devil  from  the  de- 
ceiver of  these  times.  We  believe  that  it  is  the  same  evil 
spirit ;  but  there  is  a  difference  in  his  mode  of  attack.  The 
devil  of  five  hundred  years  ago  was  a  black  and  grimy  thing, 
well  portrayed  in  our  old  pictures  of  that  evil  spirit.  He  was 
a  persecutor,  who  cast  men  into  the  furnace,  and  put  them  to 
death  for  serving  Christ.  The  devil  of  this  day  is  a  wellr 
spoken  gentleman  :  he  does  not  persecute — he  rather  attempts 
to   persuade   and   to   beguile.     He  is  not  now  so  much  the 


THE    SNARE    OF    TUE    FOWI.ER.  in 

furious  Romanist,  so  much  as  the  insinuating  unbeliever,  at- 
tempting to  overturn  our  religion,  while  at  the  same  time  he 
pretends  he  would  make  it  more  rational,  and  so  more  tri- 
umphant. He  would  only  link  worldliness  with  rehgion  ;  and 
so  he  would  really  make  religion  void,  under  the  cover  of 
developing  the  great  power  of  the  gospel,  and  bringing  out 
secrets  which  our  forefathers  had  never  discovered.  Satan  is 
always  a  fowler.  Whatever  his  tactics  may  be,  his  object  is 
still  the  same — to  catch  men  in  his  net.  Men  are  here  com- 
l)ai-ed  to  silly,  weak  birds,  that  have  not  skill  enough  to  avoid 
the  snare,  and  have  not  strength  enough  to  escape  from  it. 
Satan  is  the  fowler ;  he  has  been  so  and  is  so  still ;  and  if  he 
does  not  now  attack  us  as  the  roaring  lion,  roaring  against  us 
in  persecution,  he  attacks  us  as  the  adder,  creeping  silently 
along  the  path,  endeavoring  to  bite  our  heel  with  his  poisoned 
fangs,  and  weaken  the  power  of  grace  and  ruin  the  life  of 
godliness  within  us.  Our  text  is  a  very  comforting  one  to  all 
believers,  when  they  are  beset  by  temptation.  "  Surely  he 
shall  deliver  them  from  the  snare  of  the  fowler." 

First,  a  fero  words  concer7iing  the  snare  of  the  fowler ; 
secondly,  the  deliverance  j  and,  thirdly,  the  certainty  of  it ; 
dwelling  upon  that  word  surely^  for  it  seems  to  be  the  dia- 
mond wlierewith  this  precious  golden  promise  is  embellished. 
"  Surely  he  shall  deliver  thee  from  the  snare  of  the  fowler." 

I.  First,  then,  the  snake  of  the  fowlek.  It  is  an  illus 
tration  too  suggestive  for  me  thoroughly  to  unravel.  I  must 
leave  it  for  your  meditations  at  home  to  enumerate  the  divers 
ways  in  which  a  fowler  attemi^ts  to  take  his  birds,  and  then 
you  will  have  suggested  to  you  the  divers  means  which  the 
evil  spirit  employs  for  the  destruction  of  souls.  Allow  me, 
however,  just  to  begin,  and  pass  over  two  or  three  points  con- 
nected with  the  fowler  and  with  the  evil  one. 

1.  First,  the  fowWs  snare  is  intimately  connected  with 
secrecy.  "  Surely  in  vain  is  the  net  spread  in  the  sight  of  any 
bird."  Therefore  the  fowler  carefully  covers  up  his  ti-ap  ;  or, 
if  the  trap  itself  be  uncovered  he  doth  well  beguile  the  bird, 
so  that  it  is  utterly  ignorant  of  his  intention  to  take  it  in  the 
trap,  little  thinking  that  the  food  laid  there  for  its  banqueting 
is  really  |)laced  there  for  its  enticement  and  destruction.     The 


ii  THE    SNAJIE    OF   THE   FOWLER. 

fowler,  when  he  goes  after  his  birds,  is  very  careful  lest  they 
should  discover  him.  We  hear,  for  instance,  that  in  the  taking 
of  wild  ducks,  in  Lincolnshire,  a  man  will  hold  before  his 
mouth  a  piece  of  turf,  in  order  that  the  smell  of  his  breath 
may  not  be  perceived  by  the  birds,  who  are  exceedingly  wary. 
The  temptations  of  the  world  are  of  this  secret  sort  to  a 
Christian,  though  not  to  the  wicked  man,  for  the  ^\^cked  man 
sins  with  his  eyes  wide  open  ;  dashing  into  the  net  knowing 
it  is  a  net,  laying  hold  of  iniquity  with  both  his  hands,  even 
when  destruction  stareth  him  in  the  face.  He  will  commit  a 
sin  that  he  knows  is  condemned  even  l)y  the  law  of  the  land : 
he  will  rush  into  a  crime,  concerning  the  guilt  of  which  no 
doubt  can  be  entertained.  Not  so  the  Christian  :  he  is  taken 
by  secrecy.  "Ah  !"  says  one,  "if  I  thought  such-and-such  a 
thing  were  really  wrong ;  if  I  were  perfectly  convinced  of  its 
wrongfulness,  I  would  give  it  up."  It  is  just  there  the  diffi- 
culty lies.  So  would  the  bird  say  :  "  If  I  thought  that  really 
were  a  trap,  I  would  not  enter  it ;  if  I  v\-ere  perfectly  per- 
suaded that  net  would  entangle  me,  I  would  not  fly  to  such- 
and-such  a  spot ;  I  would  not  approach  there  at  all,  if  I  were 
sure  it  would  be  my  destruction."  How  many  a  professor 
there  is  who  asks  the  question,  "  May  I  go  to  this  place  ? 
May  I  go  to  that  place  ?"  and  some  of  us  answer  "  No,"  and 
we  are  called  Puritans  for  it;  but  let  those  who  have  at- 
tempted to  keep  their  godlmess  intact,  while  they  pursued  the 
pleasures  of  this  world,  stand  up  and  make  the  mournful  con- 
fession, that  the  healthiness  of  the  two  things  can  never  exist 
together.  We  must  either  serve  God  wholly,  or  serve  the 
evil  one  wholly.  "  If  God  be  God,  serve  him  ;  if  Baal  be  God 
serve  him."  One,  or  else  the  other.  Many  a  man  has  been 
entrapped  into  sin  by  Satan ;  not  knowing  that  it  was  evil  I 
Some  one  has  hinted  to  him  in  business,  for  instance — "  You 
may  very  safely  do  such-and-such  a  thing  ;  all  the  shopkeepers 
in  the  street  have  done  it;  it  is  not  actually  dishonest;  it  im- 
proves the  article,  it  really  does ;  and  although  you  can  thus 
sell  an  article  at  a  dearer  rate  than  you  ought  to  sell  it,  yet 
you  need  not  tell  the  public  ;  and  if  the  article  is  all  the  bet- 
ter for  it,  it  is  quite  fair  and  safe  that  you  should  adulterate 
it."     And  so  the  good  easy  man,  net  opening  both  his  eyes,  I 


THE    SNARE    OF    THE   FOWLEK.  45 

think,  but  shutting  one  of  them  a  little,  lest  he  should  see  too 
well  to  be  able  to  fill  his  pockets  in  the  dark,  is  a  little  taken 
aside ;  and  by-and-by  he  is  led  to  discover  that  the  act  which 
he  has  done  is  the  taking  of  him  in  the  snare  of  the  fowler, 
for  he  has  been  sinning  against  his  God,  and  his  God  therefore 
punishes  him  for  it  with  many  stripes,  and  lays  his  rod  upon 
him.  I  do  not  think  that  a  Christian  is  so  often  betrayed 
nto  a  sin  that  is  palpable  and  known,  as  he  is  into  a  sin  that  is 
secret.  If  the  devil  comes  to  my  door  with  his  horns  visible, 
I  will  never  let  him  in ;  but  if  he  comes  with  his  hat  on  as  a 
respectable  gentleman,  he  is  at  once  admitted.  The  metaphor 
may  be  very  quamt,  but  it  is  quite  true.  Many  a  man  has 
taken  in  an  evil  thing,  because  it  has  been  varnished  and 
glossed  over,  and  not  apparently  an  evil  ;  and  he  has  thought 
in  his  heart,  there  is  not  much  harm  in  it ;  so  he  has  let  in  the 
little  thing,  and  it  has  been  like  the  breaking  forth  of  water — 
the  first  drop  has  brought  after  it  a  torrent.  The  beginning 
has  been  but  the  beginning  of  a  fearful  end.  Take  care. 
Christian,  of  things  that  are  secret ;  take  care  of  the  common 
domgs  of  the  world,  which  are  well  enough  for  them,  perhaps. 
We  would  not  deny  them  their  pleasures,  for  they  have  no 
others ;  but  they  are  not  good  for  you,  for  you  have  a  finer 
life — a  life  of  a  finer  texture  and  order  than  can  exist  in  the 
haunts  of  ungodly  persons.  Remember,  you  are  not  to  be  a 
judge  for  others.  Some  men,  especially  those  who  are  micon- 
verted,  can,  without  being  led  into  sin,  indulge  in  many  gayet- 
ies  and  merriments  ;  but  the  Christian  is  like  the  Englishman, 
who  can  not  hope  to  survive  long  where  the  jungle  fever 
reigns.  The  native  can  live  there,  but  he  can  not.  And  so 
you  who  are  twice-born  men  will  find  your  piety  ruined,  by 
that  which,  to  a  worldly  man,  does  not  lead  him  into  greater 
evil  than  that  which  he  would  naturally  commit.  You  are  to 
have  a  stricter  rule  on  yourselves  than  others,  and  are  to  be 
more  stern  in  your  piety  than  the  world  would  have  you  be  ; 
for  sin  is  usually  hidden,  and  the  snare  is  not  often  made 
apparent.  "  Surely  he  shall  deliver  thee  from  the  snare  of 
the  fowler." 

2.  In  the  second  place,  the  snare  of  the  fowler  is  generally 
noted  for  its  adaptation.     You  do  not  find  a  fowler  setting 


46  THE    SNARR    OF   THE    FOWLER. 


the  same  snare  for  one  bird  as  for  another;  he  knows  his  bird 
and  he  adapts  his  bait  to  it.  He  would  be  an  unwise  fovvlei 
who  should  go  to  work  with  the  same  machinery  to  catch  the 
lark  that  flies  on  high  as  the  duck  that  swims  along  the  stream. 
The  fowler  is  wiser  than  that :  he  adapts  his  snare  to  the  con- 
dition of  the  bird  which  he  desires  to  take.  Satan  the  fowler 
does  just  the  same.  There  is  one  man  here ;  he  tempts  him 
to  drunkenness.  Perhaps  that  would  naturally  be  his  sin,  if 
left  without  grace  in  his  heart ;  and  Satan,  knowing  it  to  be 
his  weak  point,  attempts  to  overcome  him  by  surfeiting,  glut- 
tony, and  drunkenness.  Another  man  is  utterly  impervious 
to  any  temptation  to  that  bestial  habit ;  but,  it  may  be,  he  is 
easily  taken  in  another  snare — the  snare  of  lust ;  therefore 
Satan  adapts  his  temptation  to  the  hot  blood  of  the  man  who 
naturally  would  be  inclined  to  live  a  life  of  sin.  Another  one 
perhaps  eschews  every  lascivious  and  sensual  habit ;  then  Satan 
comes  to  him,  and  adapts  his  temptation  to  the  shape  of  pride. 
The  man  is  naturally  a  melancholy  man,  full  of  solitude* 
Satan  gets  him,  if  he  can,  to  wrap  himself  up  in  a  solitary 
dignity,  to  say,  "  I  am  holy."  "  Lord,  I  thank  thee,  I  am  not 
as  other  men  are."  Or  if  a  man  is  not  naturally  inclined  to  a 
very  high  degree  of  pride,  Satan  takes  him  with  sloth.  The 
man  likes  an  easy  life  ;  Satan  therefore  adapts  his  bait  to  him 
by  letting  him  sit  still,  fold  his  arms,  and  so  perish  by  sloth- 
fulness  :  and  mark  this,  he  who  sitteth  still  in  the  frost,  when 
the  snow  is  on  the  ground,  in  the  depths  of  the  wild  regions 
of  the  frozen  zone,  must  as  surely  perish  by  his  idleness  as  if 
he  drove  a  dagger  to  his  heart.  Satan  knows  that,  and  so 
adapts  his  bait  accordingly.  O  !  how  often  it  happens,  be- 
loved, that  you  and  I  condemn  a  thing  in  another  person 
which  we  allow  in  ourselves,  perhaps  without  knowing  it.  We 
say  of  such  a  one,  How  proud  he  is !  Well,  our  pride  is  not 
exactly  of  that  shape  ;  we  have  got  another  shaped  pride,  but 
the  same  article ;  labeled  differently,  but  the  same  thing. 
Satan  adapts  the  pride  to  each  particular  case.  We  are  rich  : 
he  does  not  perhaps  tempt  us  to  the  pride  of  riches,  but  he 
tempts  us  to  the  pride  of  mastership,  and  makes  us  harsh 
masters  to  our  servants.  Or  if  he  does  not  tempt  us  to  that 
pride,  he  perhaps  enchants  us  with  the  pride  of  generosity. 


THE  SNARE  OF  THE  FOWLER.  47 

aid  we  are  apt  to  boast  of  our  kindness  and  of  what  we  have 
given  away.  He  will  always  adapt  his  trap  to  his  man,  and 
bis  bait  to  his  bird.  He  will  not  tempt  you  all  with  the  same 
temptation  he  would  tempt  me  with ;  nor  me  with  the  temp- 
tation with  which  he  would  naturally  assail  another.  "The 
snare  of  the  fowler."  A  cunning  enemy  we  have  to  deal  with  ; 
he  knows  our  weak  points ;  he  has  been  dealing  with  men  for 
these  last  six  thousand  years ;  he  knows  all  about  them.  He 
is  possessed  of  a  gigantic  intellect ;  though  he  be  a  fallen  sj^irit ; 
and  he  is  easily  able  to  discover  where  our  sore  places  are,  and 
there  it  is  he  immediately  attacks  us.  If  we  be  like  Achilles, 
and  can  not  be  wounded  anywhere  but  in  our  heel,  then  at  the 
heel  he  will  send  his  dart,  and  nowhere  else.  He  will  find  out 
our  easily  besetting  sin,  and  there,  if  he  can,  he  will  attempt 
to  work  our  ruin  and  our  destruction.  Let  us  bless  God  that 
it  is  written,  "  Surely  he  shall  deliver  thee  from  the  snare  of 
the  fowler." 

3.  In  the  next  place,  the  foioler''s  snare  is  freqvently  con- 
nected vnth  pleasure^  P^'^^fiU  ^^^  advantage.  In  the  bird's 
case  it  is  for  the  seed  scattered  on  the  ground  that  he  flies  to 
the  snare.  It  is  some  tempting  bait  which  allures  him  to  his 
death.  And  usually  Satan,  the  fowler,  uses  a  temptation 
wherewith  to  beguile  us.  "  O  !"  says  one,  "  I  can  not  give 
up  such-and-such  a  thing,  it  is  so  pleasant.  Sir,  you  never 
knew  the  charms  of  such-and-such  a  pursuit,  otherwise  you 
could  never  advise  me  to  relinquish  it."  Yes,  my  friend,  but 
it  is  just  the  sweetness  of  it  to  you  that  makes  it  the  more 
dangerous.  Satan  never  sells  his  poisons  naked ;  he  always 
gilds  them  before  he  vends  them.  He  knows  very  well  that 
men  will  buy  them  and  swallow  them,  if  he  does  but  gild 
them  beforehand.  Take  care  of  pleasures ;  mind  what  you 
are  at  when  you  are  at  them.  Many  of  them  are  innocent 
and  healthful,  but  many  of  them  are  destructive.  It  is  said 
that  where  the  most  beautiful  cacti  grow,  there  the  most 
venomous  serpents  are  to  be  found  at  the  root  of  every  plant. 
And  it  is  so  with  sin.  Your  fairest  pleasures  will  harbor  your 
grossest  sins.  Take  care ;  take  care  of  your  pleasures.  Cleo- 
patra's asp  was  introduced  in  a  basket  of  flowers ;  so  are 
our  sins  often  brought  to  us  in  the  flowers  of  our  pleasures. 


*a  THE    SNARE    OF    THE   FOWLER. 

Satan  offers  to  the  drunkard  the  sweetness  of  the  intoxicating 
cup,  which  rejoices  him,  when  his  brain  is  rioting  in  frolic, 
and  Avhen  his  soul  is  lifted  up  within  him.  He  offers  to  the 
lustful  man  the  scenes  and  pleasures  of  carnal  mirth,  and  mer- 
riment, and  delight,  and  so  he  leadeth  him  astray  with  the  bait, 
concealing  the  hook  which  afterwards  shall  pain  him.  He 
gives  to  you  and  to  me,  each  of  us,  the  offer  of  our  peculiar 
joy  ;  he  tickleth  us  with  pleasures,  that  he  may  lay  hold  upon 
us,  and  so  have  us  in  his  power.  I  would  have  every  Chris- 
tian be  especially  on  his  guard  against  the  very  thing  that  is 
most  pleasing  to  his  human  nature.  I  would  not  have  him 
avoid  every  thing  that  pleases  him,  but  I  would  have  him  be 
on  his  guard  against  it.  Just  like  Job,  when  his  sons  had 
been  feasting  in  their  houses.  He  did  not  forbid  them  doing 
it,  but  he  said,  "  I  wdll  offer  a  sacrifice,  lest  my  sons  should 
have  sinned  in  their  hearts,  and  should  have  cursed  God  fool- 
ishly." He  was  more  careful  over  them  at  the  time  of  their 
feasting  than  at  any  other  season.  Let  us  be  the  same.  Let 
us  remember  that  the  snare  of  the  fowler  is  generally  con- 
nected with  some  pretended  pleasure  or  profit,  but  that 
Satan's  end  is  not  our  pleasing,  but  our  destruction. 

4.  In  the  next  place,  sometimes  the  fowler  very  wisely  em- 
ploys the  force  of  example.  We  all  know  the  influence  of  the 
decoy-duck,  in  endeavoring  to  brmg  others  into  the  snare. 
How  very  often  Satan,  the  fowler,  employs  a  decoy  to  lead 
God's  people  into  sin !  You  get  with  a  man ;  you  think  him 
to  be  a  true  Christian  ;  you  have  some  respect  for  his  charac- 
ter ;  he  is  a  high  professor,  can  talk  religion  by  the  yard,  and 
can  give  you  any  quantity  of  theology  you  like  to  ask  for. 
You  see  him  commit  a  sin  ;  ten  to  one  but  you  will  do  the 
same,  if  you  have  much  respect  for  him ;  and  so  he  will  lead 
you  on.  And  mark,  Satan  is  very  careful  in  the  men  w^hom 
he  chooses  to  be  decoys.  He  never  employs  a  wicked  man 
to  be  a  decoy  for  a  good  man.  It  is  very  seldom,  when  Satan 
would  decoy  a  Christian  into  a  snare,  that  he  makes  use  of  an 
open  reprobate.  No ;  he  makes  use  of  a  man  who  is  pre- 
tendedly  religious,  and  who  looks  to  be  of  the  same  quality  aa 
yourself,  and  therefore  entices  you  astray.  Let  a  bad  man 
meet  me  in  the  street,  and  ask  me  to  commit  sin  !     The  devil 


THE    SNARE    OP   THE    ^OAYLER.  49 

knows  better  than  to  set  him  at  any  such  work  &s  that,  be- 
cause he  knows  I  should  pass  by  directly.  If  he  wants  his 
errand  well  done,  he  sends  one  to  me  whom  I  call  brother ; 
and  so  through  the  brotherhood  of  profession  I  am  apt  to  give 
him  credence  and  pay  him  respect ;  and  then  if  he  goeth 
astray,  the  force  of  example  is  very  powerful,  and  so  I  may 
easily  be  led  into  the  net  too.  Take  care  of  your  best  friends ; 
be  careful  of  your  companions.  Choose  the  best  you  can ; 
then  follow  them  no  further  than  they  follow  Christ.  Let  your 
course  be  entirely  independent  of  every  one  else.  Say  with 
Joshua,  let  others  do  what  they  will,  "As  for  me  and  my 
house  we  will  serve  the  Lord." 

5.  Note,  once  more,  that  sometimes  the  foioler^  lohen  he 
faileth  to  take  his  bird  by  deceit  and  crafty  icill  go  a  haioklng 
after  it — will  send  his  hawk  into  the  air,  to  bring  down  his 
prey.  It  often  happens,  when  the  devil  can  not  ruin  a  man  by 
getting  him  to  commit  a  sin,  he  attempts  to  slander  him;  he 
sends  a  hawk  after  him,  and  tries  to  bring  him  down  by  slan- 
dering his  good  name.  I  will  give  you  a  piece  of  advice.  I 
know  a  good  minister,  now  in  venerable  old  age,  who  was 
once  most  villainously  lied  against  and  slandered  by  a  man 
who  had  hated  him  only  for  the  truth's  sake.  The  good  man 
was  grieved ;  he  threatened  the  slanderer  with  a  lawsuit,  un- 
less he  apologized.  He  did  apologize.  The  slander  was 
printed  in  the  papers  in  a  public  apology ;  and  you  know  what 
was  the  consequence.  The  slander  was  more  believed  than  if 
he  had  said  nothing  about  it.  And  I  have  learned  this  lesson 
— to  do  with  the  slanderous  hawk  what  the  little  birds  do, 
just  fly  up.  The  hawk  can  not  do  them  any  hurt  while  they 
can  keep  above  him — it  is  only  when  they  come  down  that  he 
can  injure  them.  It  is  only  when  by  mounting  he  gets  above 
the  birds,  that  the  hawk  comes  sweeping  down  upon  them, 
and  destroys  them.  If  any  slander  you,  do  not  come  down 
to  them  ;  let  them  slander  on.  Say,  as  David  said  concerning 
Shimei,  "  If  the  Lord  hath  given  him  commandment  to  curse, 
let  him  curse  ;"  and  if  the  sons  of  Zeruiah  say,  "  Let  us  go 
and  take  this  dead  dog's  head,"  you  say,  "  Xay,  let  him  curse  ;" 
and  in  that  way  you  will  live  down  slander.  If  some  of  us 
turned  aside   to  notice  every  bit  of  a   sparrow  that  began 

3 


60  THE   SNARE    OF   TTIE   FOWLEE. 

chirping  at  us,  we  should  hare  nothing  to  do  but  to  answer 
them.  If  I  were  to  fight  people  on  every  doctrine  I  preach, 
I  should  do  nothing  else  but  just  amuse  the  devil,  and  indulge 
the  combative  principles  of  certain  religionists  who  Uke  noth- 
ing better  than  quarreling.  By  the  grace  of  God,  say  what 
you  please  against  me,  I  will  never  answer  you,  but  go  straight 
on.  All  shall  end  well,  if  the  character  be  but  kept  clean  ;  the 
more  dirt  that  is  thrown  on  it  by  slander,  the  more  it  shall 
glisten,  and  the  more  brightly  it  shall  shine.  Have  you  never 
felt  your  fingers  itch  sometimes  to  be  at  a  man  who  slanders 
you  ?  1  have.  I  have  sometimes  thought,  "  I  can  not  hold  my 
tongue  now  ;  I  must  answer  that  fellow ;"  but  I  have  asked  of 
God  grace  to  imitate  Jesus,  who,  "  when  he  was  reviled  re- 
viled not  again,"  and  by  his  strength  let  them  go  straight  on. 
The  surest  way  in  the  world  to  get  rid  of  a  slander  is  just  to 
let  it  alone  and  say  nothing  about  it,  for  if  you  prosecute  the 
rascal  who  utters  it,  or  if  you  threaten  him  with  an  action, 
and  he  has  to  apologize,  you  will  be  no  better  ofl' — some  fools 
will  still  believe  it.  Let  it  ^lone — let  it  keep  as  it  is  ;  and  so 
God  will  help  you  to  fulfill  by  your  wisdom  his  own  promise, 
"  Surely  he  shall  deliver  thee  from  the  snare  of  the  fowler." 

And  now,  ere  I  close  this  point,  let  me  observe  once  more, 
the  fowler,  when  he  is  determined  to  take  his  birds,  uses  all 
these  arts  at  once,  perhaps,  and  besets  the  bird  on  every  side. 
So,  you  will  remember,  beloved,  it  is  with  you.     Satan  will 
not  leave  a  stone  unturned  to  ruin  your  soul  for  ever. 
"  Amidst  a  thousand  snares  I  stand, 
Upheld  and  guarded  by  thy  hand." 
Old  Master  Quarles  says. 

The  close  pursuer's  busy  hands  do  plant 

Snares  in  thy  substance  ;  snares  attend  thy  want ; 

Snares  in  thy  credit ;  snares  in  thy  disgrace  ; 

Snares  in  thy  liigh  estate ;  snares  in  thy  base  : 

Snares  tuck  thy  bed ;  and  snares  surround  thy  board ; 

Snares  watch  thy  thoughts ;  and  snares  attach  thy  word ; 

Snares  in  thy  quiet ;  snares  in  thy  commotion ; 

Snares  in  thy  diet ;  snares  in  thy  devotion  ; 

Snares  lurk  in  thy  resolves,  snares  in  thy  doubt ; 

Snares  lie  within  thy  heart,  and  snares  without ; 

Snares  are  above  thy  head,  and  snares  beneath  ; 

Snares  in  thy  sickness,  snares  are  in  thy  death." 


THE  SNARE  OF  THE  *  ^  WLEE.  61 

There  is  not  a  place  beneath  which  a  believer  walks  that  is 
free  from  snares.  Behind  every  tree  there  is  the  Indian  with 
his  barbed  arrow ;  behind  every  bush  there  is  the  lion  seeking 
to  devour ;  under  every  piece  of  grass  there  lieth  the  adder. 
Everywhere  they  are.  Let  us  be  careful ;  let  us  gird  our- 
selves with  the  might  of  God's  omnipotence,  and  then  shall  his 
Holy  Spirit  keep  us,  so  that  we  shall  tread  on  the  lion  and  the 
adder,  the  young  lion  and  the  dragon  shall  w^e  trample  under 
our  feet,  and  we  shall  be  "  delivered  from  the  snare  of  the 
fowler." 

II.  Now  we  pass  to  the  second  point — the  deliverance 
God  delivers  his  people  from  the  snare  of  the  fowler.  Two 
thoughts  here  :  from — out  of.  First,  he  delivers  them  from 
the  snare — does  not  let  them  get  in  it ;  secondly,  when  they 
do  get  in  it,  he  delivers  them  out  o/it.  The  first  promise  is 
the  most  precious  to  some  of  us ;  the  second  is  the  best  to 
others. 

He  shall  deliver  thee  from  the  snare.  How  does  he  do 
that  ? 

Very  often  by  trouble.  Trouble  is  often  the  means  whereby 
God  delivers  us  from  snares.  You  have  all  heard  the  old 
etory  of  the  celebrated  painter  who  was  painting  in  St.  Paul's, 
and  who,  looking  at  his  work,  went  gradually  back,  inch  by 
inch,  to  get  a  view  of  it,  so  that  he  might  see  the  excellence  of 
its  proportions,  until  his  feet  were  just  on  the  edge  of  the 
platform  upon  which  he  stood  ;  and  he  would  have  fallen  down 
and  been  dashed  in  pieces  upon  the  pavement  beneath,  but 
just  at  that  moment  a  workman  who  stood  there,  desirous  to 
save  his  life,  and  not  knowing  how  to  do  it,  hit  npon  an  expe- 
dient which  proved  to  be  a  very  wise  one.  Instead  of  shout- 
ing out  to  his  master,  "  Sir,  you  are  in  danger,"  which  would 
most  certainly  have  sent  him  backward,  he  took  up  a  brush, 
and  dipping  it  in  a  pot  of  paint,  dashed  it  at  the  picture.  The 
good  man  rushed  forward  in  anger  to  chastise  him  ;  but  when 
it  was  explained,  he  clearly  saw  that  he  had  acted  wisely. 
Just  so  with  God.  You  and  I  have  often  painted  a  fine  pic- 
ture, and  we  have  been  walking  backward  admiring  it.  God 
knows  that  our  backsliding  will  soon  end  in  our  destruction  ; 
and  he,  by  a  sad  providence,  blasts  our  prospect,  takes  away 


62  THE    SNARE    OF   THE   FOWLEB. 

our  child  from  us,  buries  our  wife,  removes  some  darling  object 
of  our  pleasures  ;  and  we  rush  forward  and  say,  "  Lord,  why 
is  this  ?" — utterly  unconscious  that  if  it  had  not  been  for 
trouble  we  might  have  been  dashed  in  pieces,  and  our  lives 
would  have  been  ended  in  destruction.  I  doubt  not,  many  of 
you  have  been  saved  from  ruin  by  your  sorrows,  your  griefs, 
your  troubles,  your  woes,  your  losses,  and  your  crosses.  All 
these  have  been  the  breaking  of  the  net  that  set  you  free  from 
the  snare  of  the  fowler. 

At  other  times  God  keeps  his  people  from  the  sin  of  the 
fowler  ^y  giving  them  great  spiritual  strength^  a  spirit  of 
greccc  courage  /  so  that  when  they  are  tempted  to  do  evil  they 
say,  with  decision,  "  How  can  I  do  this  great  wickedness  and 
sin  against  God  ?"  O !  that  was  a  noble  escape  of  Joseph, 
when  his  mistress  laid  hold  of  his  garment ;  that  was  a  noble 
escape  of  his,  when  his  soul  escaped  like  a  bird  out  of  the  snare 
of  the  fowler ;  and  I  doubt  not  there  are  many  here  who  have 
done  deeds  almost  as  noble  as  that  of  Joseph,  who  have  had 
grace  within  their  hearts,  so  that  they  have  turned  away  their 
eyes  from  beholding  folly,  and  w^hen  they  have  been  tempted 
to  evil  they  have  put  their  foot  upon  it,  and  said,  "  I  can  not, 
I  can  not ;  I  am  a  child  of  God ;  I  can  not  and  I  must  not ;" 
and  though  the  thing  was  pleasing  to  themselves  yet  they  ab- 
jured it.  You  remember  the  case  of  Mr.  Standfast  in  Bunyan's 
Pilgrim's  Progress.  Madame  Bubble  had  greatly  enticed 
poor  Mr.  Standfast  with  her  offers.  He  says,  "  There  was  one 
in  very  pleasant  attire,  but  old,  who  presented  herself  to  me, 
and  offered  me  three  things,  to  wit,  her  body,  her  purse,  and 
her  bed.  Now  the  truth  is,  I  was  both  weary  and  sleepy :  I 
am  also  as  poor  as  an  owlet,  and  that  perhaps  the  witch  knew. 
Well,  I  repulsed  her  once  and  again,  but  she  put  by  my  re- 
pulses and  smiled.  Then  I  began  to  be  angry  ;  but  she  mat- 
tered that  nothing  at  all.  Then  she  made  offers  again,  and 
said  if  I  would  be  ruled  by  her,  she  would  make  me  great  and 
happy ;  for,  said  she,  I  am  the  mistress  of  the  world,  and  men 
are  made  happy  by  me.  Then  I  asked  her  her  name,  and  she 
told  me  it  was  Madame  Bubble.  This  set  me  further  from  her ; 
but  she  still  followed  me  with  enticements.  Then  I  betook 
me,  as  you  saw,  to  my  knees,  and  with  hands  lifted  up,  and 


THE    SNARE    OF   THE    FOWLER.  53 

cries,  I  j)rayed  to  him  that  had  said  he  would  help.  So  just 
as  you  came  up  the  gentlewoman  went  her  way.  Then  I  con- 
tinued to  give  thanks  for  this  my  great  deliverance  ;  for  I  verily 
believe  she  intended  no  good,  but  rather  sought  to  make  stop 
of  me  in  my  journey."  Thus  God  delivers  his  people  from  the 
snares  of  the  fowler,  by  giving  them  the  spirit  of  prayer  as 
well  as  the  spirit  of  courage,  so  that  they  call  upon  God  in  the 
day  of  trouble,  and  he  delivers  them. 

And  I  have  noticed  one  more  very  singular  thing.  Some- 
times I,  myself,  have  been  saved  from  the  snare  of  the  fowler 
(I  can  not  tell  you  how  exactly),  in  this  w\ay.  I  have  felt  that 
if  the  temptation  had  come  a  week  before,  my  mind  was  in 
that  peculiar  condition,  that  I  should  almost  inevitably  have 
been  led  away  by  it ;  but  when  it  came,  the  mind,  by  passing 
through  some  process,  had  become  in  such  a  condition  that  the 
temptation  was  no  temptation  at  all.  We  were  just  brought 
to  such  a  state,  that  what  might  have  ruined  us  before,  Ave 
would  not  then  look  at.  "  No,"  we  have  said,  "  if  you  had 
oifered  me  this  some  time  ago  it  might  have  been  accepted  ; 
but  now  God  has,  by  some  mysterious  influence  of  his  Spirit, 
turned  my  heart  in  another  direction,  and  it  is  not  even  a 
temptation  to  me  at  all — not  worthy  of  a  moment's  thought." 
So  God  delivers  his  people  from  the  snare  of  the  fowler. 

But  the  second  thought  was,  that  God  delivers  his  people^ 
eveoi  v:)hen  they  get  into  the  snare.  Alas !  my  hearer,  you  and 
I  know  something  about  the  net ;  we  have  been  inside  it,  we 
have ;  we  have  not  only  seen  it  spread,  we  have  been  in  its 
folds.  We  know  something  about  the  cage,  for  we  have,  un- 
fortunately, been  in  the  cage  ourselves,  even  since  we  have 
known  the  Lord.  The  fowler's  hand  has  been  upon  our  neck ; 
it  has  only  been  the  sovereign  grace  of  God  that  has  prevented 
him  from  utterly  destroying  us.  What  a  blessed  thing  it  is, 
that  if  the  believer  shall,  in  an  evil  hour,  come  into  the  net, 
yet  God  will  bring  him  out  of  it !  Poor  Christian  and  Hope- 
ful got  into  the  fowler's  net  when  they  entered  into  the  castle 
of  Giant  Despair  ;  but  the  key  of  promise  picked  the  lock,  and 
they  escaped.  They  were  in  the  fowler's  net,  too,  when 
Flatterer  cast  a  net  over  them,  and  left  them  in  the  lane  ;  but 
there  came  one  wdio,  after  he  had  beaten  thei":  full  sore,  took 


54  THE   SNARE    OF   THE   FOWLER. 

the  net  off,  and  then  they  went  on  tlieir  way,  better  men  than 
they  were  before  tliey  were  in  the  n«t.  I  know  one  who  is 
in  the  net  now.  Some  bird,  one  of  God's  own  ones  too,  has 
been  taken  in  the  snare,  and  is  now  groaning  and  crying  out, 
because,  alas !  alas !  he  has  sinned.  I  have  a  person  here,  a 
good  man,  a  professor  of  religion,  and  a  truly  worthy  one ! 
but  alas!  he  has  sinned,  and  at  this  hour  the  tears  are  in  his 
eyes,  and  he  is  saying, 

"  The  tumult  of  my  thoughts 
Doth  but  increase  my  woe  ; 
My  spirit  languishes,  my  heart 
Is  desolate  and  low. 

"  Turn,  turn  thee  to  my  soul ; 
Bring  thy  salvation  near ; 
When  will  thy  hand  release  my  feet 
Out  of  the  deadly  snare  ?" 

O  backslider,  be  cast  down,  but  do  not  despair ;  God  will  re- 
store thee  yet.  Wanderer  though  thou  hast  been,  hear  what 
he  says !  "  Return,  O  backsliding  children ;  I  will  have 
mercy  upon  you."  But  you  say  you  can  not  return.  Then 
here  is  still  a  promise — "  Surely  he  shall  deliver  thee  from  the 
snare  of  the  fowler."  Thou  shalt  yet  be  brought  out  from 
all  the  evil  into  which  thou  hast  fallen,  and  though  thou  shalt 
never  cease  to  repent  thy  ways  even  to  thy  dying  day,  yet  he 
that  hath  loved  thee  will  not  cast  thee  away ;  he  will  receive 
thee  ;  he  will  admit  thee  into  his  dwelling-place,  and  will  even 
now  restore  thee  to  the  number  of  his  people,  and  give  thee 
joy  and  gladness,  that  the  bones  which  he  has  broken  may 
rejoice.  "  Surely  he  shall  deliver  thee  from  the  snare  of  tl  .e 
fowler." 

There  have  been  very  remarkable  instances  of  God  deliver- 
ing his  people  out  of  the  snare  of  the  fowler,  as  the  following 
illustration  will  show : 

"  A  young  lady,  who  belonged  to  a  church  in  the  city  of 
New  York,  married  a  young  man  who  was  not  a  Christian. 
He  was  a  merchant,  engaged  in  a  lucrative  business,  and  the 
golden  stream  of  wealth  flowed  in  upon  him  till  he  had 
amassed  a  large  fortune.  He  accordingly  retired  from  busi- 
ness, and  went  into  the  country.     He  purchased  a  splendid 


THE   SNARE    OF   THE   FOWLER,  55 

residence  ;  fine  trees  waved  their  luxuriant  foliage  around  it; 
here  was  a  lake  filled  with  fish,  and  there  a  garden  full  of  rare 
shrubbery  and  flowers.  Their  house  wa^  fashionably  and  ex- 
pensively furnished  ;  and  they  seemed  to  possess  all  of  earth 
that  mortal  could  desire.  Thus  prospered,  and  plied  with  an 
interchange  of  civilities  among  her  gay  and  flishionable  neigh- 
bors, the  piety  of  the  lady  declined,  and  her  heart  became 
wedded  to  the  world.  And  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  that 
her  three  children,  as  they  grew  up,  imbibed  her  spirit  anc' 
copied  her  example.  '  A  severe  disease,'  it  is  said,  '  demands 
a  severe  remedy  ;'  and  that  God  soon  applied.  One  morning 
intelligence  came  that  her  little  son  had  fallen  into  the  fish- 
lake,  and  was  drowned.  The  mother's  heart  was  pierced 
with  the  affliction,  and  she  wept  and  murmured  against  the 
providence  of  God.  Soon  afterwards,  her  only  daughter,  a 
blooming  girl  of  sixteen,  was  taken  sick  of  a  fever  and  died. 
It  seemed  then  as  if  the  mother's  heart  would  have  broken. 
But  this  new  stroke  of  the  rod  of  a  chastening  Father  seemed 
but  to  increase  her  displeasure  against  his  will.  The  only  re- 
maining child,  her  eldest  son,  who  had  come  home  from  col- 
lege to  attend  his  sister's  funeral,  went  out  into  the  fields  soon 
afterwards,  for  the  purpose  of  hunting.  In  getting  over  a 
fence,  he  put  his  gun  over  first  to  assist  himself  in  springing 
to  the  ground,  v>'hen  it  accidentally  discharged  itself  and 
killed  him !  What  then  were  that  mother's  feelings  ?  In 
the  extravagance  of  her  grief,  she  fell  down,  tore  her  hair, 
and  raved  hke  a  maniac  against  the  providence  of  God.  The 
father,  whose  grief  was  already  almost  insupportable,  when  he 
looked  upon  the  shocking  spectacle,  and  heard  her  frenzied 
ravings,  could  endure  his  misery  no  longer.  The  iron  entered 
into  his  soul  and  he  fell  a  speedy  victim  to  his  accumulated 
afilictions.  From  the  wife  and  mother,  her  husband  and  all 
her  children  were  now  taken  away.  Reason  returned,  and 
she  was  led  to  reflection.  She  saw  her  dreadful  backslidings, 
her  pride,  lier  rebellion  ;  and  she  wept  with  the  tears  of  a 
deep  repentance.  Peace  was  restored  to  her  soul.  Tlien 
could  she  lift  up  her  hands  to  heaven,  exclaiming,  '  I  thank 
thee,  O  Father  ! — the  Lord  hath  given,  the  Lord  hath  taken 
away,  and  blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord.'     Thus  did  her 


56  THE   SNAilE  -OF    THE   FOWLER. 

afflictions  yield  the  peaceable  fruit  of  righteousness,  and  her 
heavenly  Father  ci*«!5ten  her,  '  not  for  his  pleasure,  but  for 
her  profit,  that  she  mjvrht  become  partaker  of  hisjioliness.'  " 

So  God  delivered  her  soul  out  of  the  snare  of  the  fowler. 
She  started  afresh  in  the  ways  of  righteousness,-  serving  God 
with  diligence  and  zeal,  and  growing  up  in  his  fear.  By 
trouble  and  trial,  1)y  some  means  or  another,  God  will  surely 
deliver  his  people  out  of  the  snare  of  the  fowler,  even  when 
they  are  in  it. 

III.  And  now,  to  conclude,  I  am  to  dwell  for  a  moment  or 
two  upon  that  word  "  surely."  The  assurance  of  every 
truth  of  Scripture  is  just  the  beauty  of  it.  If  it  were  not 
sure,  it  were  not  precious  ;  and  it  is  precious  just  because  it 
is  sure. 

Now,  it  says,  "  surely  he  shall  deliver  thee."  Why  ? 
First,  because  he  has  promised  to  do  it ;  and  God's  promises 
are  bonds  that  never  yet  were  dishonored.  If  he  hatli  said  he 
will,  he  will.  Secondly,  because  Christ  Jesus  hath  taken  an 
oath  tliat  he  will  do  it.  In  ages  long  gone  by  Christ  Jesus 
became  the  shepherd  of  the  sheep,  and  the  surety  of  them 
too.  "If  any  of  them  perish,"  said  he,  "at  my  hand,  thou 
shalt  require  it ;"  and,  therefore,  because  Christ  is  responsi- 
ble, because  he  is  the  heavenly  sponsor  for  all  God's  people, 
they  must  be  kept :  for  otherwise  Christ's  bond  were  for- 
feited, and  his  oath  were  null  and  void.  They  must  be  kept, 
again,  because  otherwise  the  union  that  there  is  between  all 
of  them  and  Christ  would  not  be  a  real  one.  Christ  and  his 
church  are  one — one  body  ;  but  if  any  of  the  members  of  my 
body  were  cut  off,  I  should  be  maimed,  and  if  Christ  could 
lose  one  of  his  children  he  would  be  a  maimed  Christ.  "  We 
are  his  body,  the  fullness  of  him  that  fiUeth  all  in  all."  If, 
then,  the  whole  church  were  not  gathered  in,  Christ  would 
be  an  incomplete  Christ,  seeing  he  would  want  his  fullness. 
They  must  all  be  saved,  for  God  the  Father  has  determined 
that  they  shall  be  ;  nay,  the  Son  has  sworn  they  shall  be  ;  and 
God  the  Holy  Spirit  vouches  for  it  they  shall  be.  IsTone  of 
God's  people  shall  be  cast  away,  or  else  the  Bible  is  not  true. 
The  whole  stability  of  the  covenant  rests  on  their  final  perse- 
verance     The  whole  covenant  of  grace  rests  on  this — 


THE   SNARE    OF   THE   FOWLER.  5*7 

"  He  shall  present  our  souls, 
Unblemished  and  complete, 
Before  the  glory  of  his  face, 
With  joys  divinely  great." 

And  there  fee  they  must  be  preserved  out  of  the  snare  of  the 
fowler,  because  otherwise  the  covenant  would  be  null  and 
void.  If  one  should  perish  the  oath  would  be  broken  ;  if  one 
should  be  cast  away  the  covenant  would  be  void  ;  and  there- 
fore they  must  be  kept  secure. 

"  His  honor  is  engaged  to  save 
The  meanest  of  his  sheep ; 
All  that  his  heavenly  Father  gave, 
His  hands  securely  keep," 

I  have  no  time  to  enlarge  upon  that  subject,  which  is  big 
with  glory,  and  might  afford  a  topic  for  many  discourses.  I 
now  close  up  by  saying,  Men  and  brethren,  is  this  promise 
yours  ?  "  Surely  he  shall  deliver  thee."  Are  you  the  men  ? 
"  How  can  I  tell  ?"  you  say.  Do  you  believe  on  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  ?  Do  you,  as  a  guilty  sinner,  cast  yourself 
wholly  on  the  blood  and  righteousness  of  the  immaculate  Re- 
deemer ?  I  do  not  ask  you  whether  you  are  a  Wesleyan,  a 
Churchman,  a  Baj^tist,  an  Independent,  or  a  Presbyterian ; 
my  only  question  is.  Are  you  born  again  ?  Have  you  passed 
from  death  unto  life  ?  Are  you  "  a  new  creature  in  Christ 
Jesus  ?"  Is  all  your  trust  put  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ? 
Has  his  life  become  your  model,  and  does  his  Spirit  dwell  in 
your  mortal  body  ?  If  so,  peace  be  unto  you  :  this  promise  is 
yours.  You  may  have  been  the  worst  of  men ;  but  if  you 
have  faith  in  Christ  those  sins  are  all  forgiven,  and  you  may 
take  this  promise  to  be  yours  for  ever.  But  if  you  are  self- 
righteous,  self-sufficient,  ungodly,  careless,  worldly,  there  is 
no  such  promise  for  you ;  you  are  in  the  snare,  you  shall  be 
there,  and  you  shall  perish,  unless  you  repent ;  for  it  is  writ- 
ten, "  Except  ye  repent  ye  shall  all  likewise  perish."  May 
God  save  you  from  perishing,  by  giving  you  an  interest  in  the 
blood  of  Christ ;  and  to  the  Father,  the  Sou,  and  the  Holy 
Ghost,  be  glory  for  ever  and  ever. 


SERMON  IV. 

THE    FRUITLESS    VINE. 

"  And  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  unto  me,  saying,  Son  of  man,  "What  is 
the  vine-tree  more  than  any  tree,  or  than  a  branch  which  is  among  the  treea 
of  the  forest  ?" — Ezekiel,  xv.  1,  2. 

The  Jewish  nation  had  arrogant  ideas  of  themselves  ;  when 
they  sinned  against  God,  they  supposed  that  on  account  of  the 
superior  sanctity  of  their  forefathers,  or  by  reason  of  some 
special  sanctity  in  themselves,  they  would  be  delivered,  sin  as 
they  pleased.  In  consequence  of  the  infinite  mercy  of  Jeho- 
vah, which  he  had  displayed  toward  them,  in  delivering  them 
out  of  so  many  distresses,  they  gradually  came  to  imagine  that 
they  were  the  favorite  children  of  Providence,  and  that  God 
could  by  no  means  ever  cast  them  away.  God,  therefore,  in 
order  to  humble  their  pride,  tells  them  that  they  in  them- 
selves were  nothing  more  than  any  other  nation  ;  and  he  asks 
them  what  there  was  about  them  to  recommend  them ?  "I 
have  often  called  you  a  vine ;  I  have  planted  you,  and  nur- 
tured you  in  a  very  fruitful  hill,  but  now  you  bring  forth  no 
fruit ;  what  is  there  in  you  why  I  should  continue  you  in  my 
favor  ?  If  you  imagine  there  is  any  thing  about  you  more 
than  about  any  other  nation,  your  are  mightily  mistaken." 
"  What  is  the  vine-tree  more  than  any  tree,  or  than  a  branch 
which  is  among  the  trees  of  the  forest  ?" 

Let  us  remember  that  these  thino-s  misfht  be  said  without 

o  o 

implying  that  God  in  the  least  degree  alters  his  eternal  pur- 
pose toward  any  chosen  vessel  of  mercy ;  for  the  Israelitish 
nation  was  not  chosen  to  eternal  salvation,  as  a  nation,  but 
chosen  to  special  privileges  ;  a  type  and  shadow  of  that  eter- 
nal personal  election  which  Christ  has  given  to  his  church. 
From  his  own  elect  church  God  will  never  withdraw  his  love ; 


THE   FRUITLESS    VINE.  69 

but  from  the  outward  and  visible  church  he  sometimes  may. 
From  his  own  people  he  never  will  take  away  his  afiection ; 
but  from  professors,  from  those  who  merely  stand  in  his  peo- 
ple's external  condition,  and  are  not  his  children,  he  may,  yea, 
and  he  will,  withdraw  every  token  of  his  favor.  God  humbles 
Israel,  by  reminding  tKem  that  they  had  nothing  which  other 
nations  had  not ;  that,  in  fact,  they  were  a  contemptible  na- 
tion, not  worthy  to  be  set  side  by  side  with  the  cedar  of  Baby- 
lon, or  with  the  oak  of  Samaria ;  they  were  of  no  use,  they 
were  worthless,  unless  they  brought  forth  fruit  to  him.  He 
checks  theih»  pride  and  humbles  them,  with  the  parable  we 
have  here  before  us. 

Beloved,  we  shall,  by  God's  help,  use  this  parable  for  our- 
selves, and  learn  two  lessons  from  it.  The  first  shall  be  a  les- 
son of  humility  for  saints  /  and  the  second,  a  lesson  of 
searching  for  all  who  are  professors. 

I.  First,  here  is  a  lesson  of  humility  for  all  you  who  have 
"  tasted  that  the  Lord  is  gracious."  "  What  is  the  vine-tree 
more  than  any  tree,  or  than  a  branch  which  is  among  the 
trees  of  the  forest  ?" 

In  looking  upon  all  the  various  trees,  w^e  observe  that  the 
vine  is  distinguished  among  them  ;  so  that,  in  the  old  parable 
of  Jotham,  the  trees  waited  upon  the  vine-tree,  and  said  unto 
it,  "  Come  thou  and  reign  over  us."  But  merely  looking  at 
the  vine,  without  regard  to  its  fruitfulness,  we  should  not  see 
any  kingship  in  it  over  other  trees.  In  size,  form,  beauty,  or 
utility,  it  has  not  the  slightest  advantage.  We  can  do  noth- 
ing with  the  wood  of  the  vine.  "  Shall  w^ood  be  taken  thereof 
to  do  any  work  ?  or  will  men  make  a  pin  of  it  to  hang  any 
vessel  thereon  ?"  It  is  a  useless  plant  apart  from  its  fruitful- 
ness. We  sometimes  see  it  in  beauty,  trained  up  by  the  side 
of  our  walls,  and  in  the  East  it  might  be  seen  in  all  its  luxuri- 
ance, and  great  care  is  bestowed  in  its  training  ;  but  leave  the 
vine  to  itself,  and  consider  it  apart  from  its  fruitfulness,  it  i? 
the  most  insignificant  and  despicable  of  all  things  that  bear  the 
name  of  trees.  Now,  beloved,  this  is  for  tlie  humbling  of 
God's  people.  They  are  called  God's  vine  ;  but  what  are  they 
by  nature  more  than  others  ?  Others  are  as  good  as  they  ; 
yea,  some  others  are  even  greater  and  better  than  they.    They, 


60  THE    FRUITLESS    VINE. 

by  God's  goodness,  have  become  fruitful,  have  been  planted  in 
a  good  soil ;  the  Lord  hath  trained  them  upon  the  walls  of  the 
sanctuary,  and  they  bring  forth  fruit  to  his  glory.  But  what 
are  they  without  their  God  ?  What  are  they  without  the 
continual  influence  of  the  Spirit,  begetting  fruitfulness  in 
them  ?  Are  they  not  the  least  among  the  sons  of  men,  and 
the  most  to  be  despised  of  those  that  have  been  brought  forth 
of  women  ?     Look  upon  this,  believer. 

**  What  was  there  in  thee  to  merit  esteem, 
Or  give  the  Creator  dehght  ?" 

Yea,  look  upon  thyself  as  thou  art  now.  Doth  not  thy  con- 
science reproach  thee  ?  Do  not  thy  thousand  wanderings 
stand  before  thee,  and  tell  thee  that  thou  art  unworthy  to  be 
called  his  son  ?  Does  not  the  weakness  of  thy  mental  power, 
the  frailty  of  thy  moral  power,  thy  continual  unbelief,  and  thy 
perpetual  backsliding  from  God,  tell  thee  that  thou  art  less 
than  the  least  of  all  saints  ?  And  if  he  hath  made  thee  any 
thing,  art  thou  not  thereby  taught  that  it  is  grace,  free,  sov- 
ereign grace,  which  hath  made  thee  to  differ  ?  Should  any 
here,  supposing  themselves  to  be  the  children  of  God,  imagine 
that  there  is  some  reason  in  them  why  they  should  have  been 
chosen,  let  them  know,  that  as  yet  they  are  in  the  dark  con- 
cerning the  first  principles  of  grace,  and  have  not  yet  learned 
the  gospel.  If  ever  they  had  known  the  gospel,  they  would, 
on  the  other  hand,  confess  that  they  were  less  than  the  least — 
the  offscouring  of  all  things — unworthy,  ill-deserving,  unde- 
serving, and  hell-deserving,  and  ascribe  it  all  to  distinguishing 
grace,  which  has  made  them  to  differ ;  and  to  discriminating 
love,  which  has  chosen  them  out  from  the  rest  of  the  world. 
Great  Christian,  thou  wouldst  have  been  a  great  sinner  if  God 
had  not  made  thee  to  differ.  O !  thou  who  art  valiant  for 
truth,  thou  wouldst  have  been  as  valiant  for  the  devil  if  grace 
had  not  laid  hold  of  thee.  A  seat  in  heaven  shall  one  day  be 
thine ;  but  a  chain  in  hell  would  have  been  thine  if  grace  had 
not  changed  thee.  Thou  canst  now  sing  his  love ;  but  a  li- 
centious song  might  have  been  on  thy  lips,  if  grace  had  not 
washed  thee  in  the  blood  of  Jesus.  Thou  art  now  sanctified, 
thou  art  quickened,  thou  ait  justified  ;  but  what  wouldst  thou 


THE   FRUITLESS    VINE.  61 

have  been  to-day  if  it  had  not  been  for  the  interposition  of  the 
divine  hand  ?  There  U  not  a  crime  thou  mightest  not  have 
committed;  there  is  no:  a  folly  into  which  thou  mightest  not 
have  run.  Even  murder  itself  thou  mightest  have  committed 
if  grace  had  not  kept  thee.  Thou  shalt  be  like  the  angels;  but 
thou  wouldst  have  been  like  the  devil  if  thou  hadst  not  been 
changed  by  grace.  Therefore,  never  be  proud  ;  all  thy  gar- 
ments thou  hast  from  above ;  rags  were  thine  only  heritage. 
Be  not  proud,  though  thou  hast  a  large  estate,  a  wide  domain 
of  grace;  thou  hadst  once  not  a  single  thing  to  call  thine  own, 
except  thy  sin  and  misery.  Thou  art  now  wrapped  up  in  the 
golden  righteousness  of  the  Saviour,  and  accepted  in  the  gar- 
ments of  the  beloved  ;  but  thou  wouldst  have  been  buried 
under  the  black  mountain  of  sin,  and  clothed  with  the  filthy 
rags  of  unrighteousness,  if  he  had  not  changed  thee.  And  art 
thou  proud?  Dost  thou  exalt  thyself?  O  !  strange  mystery, 
that  thou,  who  hast  borrowed  every  thing,  should  exalt  thy- 
self; that  thou,  who  hast  nothing  of  thine  own,  but  hast  still 
to  draw  upon  grace,  shouldst  be  proud ;  a  poor  dependent 
pensioner  upon  the  bounty  of  thy  Saviour,  and  yet  proud  ;  one 
who  hath  a  life  which  can  only  live  by  fresh  streams  of  life 
from  Jesus,  and  yet  proud  !  Go,  hang  thy  pride  upon  the  gal- 
lows, as  high  as  Haman  ;  hang  it  there  to  rot,  and  stand  thou 
beneath,  aud  execrate  it  to  all  eternity ;  for  sure  of  all  things 
most  to  be  cursed  and  despised  is  the  pride  of  a  Christian.  He, 
of  all  men,  has  ten  thousand  times  more  reason  than  any  other 
to  be  humble,  and  walk  lowly  with  his  God,  and  kindly  and 
humbly  toward  his  fellow-creatures.  Let  this,  then,  humble 
thee,  Christian,  that  the  vine-tree  is  nothing  more  than  any 
other  tree,  save  only  for  the  fruitfulness  which  God  has  given  it. 

II.  But  now  here  comes  a  lesson  of  search.  As  the 
vine  without  its  fruit  is  useless  and  worthless ;  so,  too,  the 
professor,  without  fruit,  is  useless  and  worthless ;  yea,  he  is 
the  most  useless  thing  in  the  wide  world. 

Now,  let  us  dwell  upon  this  point.  A  f'fiuiiless  profession. 
And  while  I  am  preaching  on  it,  let  the  words  go  round  to 
each  one,  and  let  the  minister,  and  let  his  deacons,  and  let  his 
hearers  all  try  their  hearts  and  search  their  reins,  and  see 
whether  they  hav  ^  a  fruitless  profession. 


62  THE   FRUITLESS    VINE, 

1 .  First,  a  fruitless  professor.  How  do  we  know  him  f  whai 
is  his  character?  Secondly.  What  is  the  reason  he  is  fruit- 
less f  Thirdly,  What  is  the  estimation  God  holds  him  in  f 
He  is  good  for  nothing  at  all.  And,  then,  fourthly,  What  wiU 
he  his  end?     He  is  to  be  burned  with  fire. 

First,  Where  are  we  to  find  fruitless  jyrofessoi^s  9  Every- 
where, dear  friends,  everywhere — down  here,  up  there,  every- 
where ;  in  pulpits  and  in  pews.  False  professors  are  to  be 
found  in  every  cliurcli.  Let  us  leave  other  denominations 
alone,  then.  They  are  to  be  found  in  this  church  ;  they  are 
to  be  found  in  this  present  assembly.  To  whatever  denomi- 
nation you  may  belong,  there  are  some  false  and  fruitless  pro- 
fessors in  it.  How  know  you  that  you  may  not  belong  to  tlios6, 
who  bring  forth  no  fruit  ?  There  are  fruitless  professors  to  be 
found  in  every  position  of  the  church,  and  in  every  part  of 
society.  You  may  find  the  false  professor  among  the  rich ;  ht> 
hath  much  wealth,  and  he  is  hailed  w4th  gladness  by  the  church. 
God  hath  given  him  much  of  this  world's  good ;  and  there- 
fore, the  church,  forgetful  that  God  hath  chosen  the  poor, 
giveth  him  honor,  and  what  doth  she  get  from  him  ?  She 
getteth  but  little  to  help  her.  Her  poor  are  still  neglected, 
and  her  means  not  in  the  least  recruited  by  his  riches.  Or  if 
she  gain  a  portion  of  his  riches,  yet  she  getteth  none  of  his 
prayers  ;  nor  is  she  in  the  least  supported  by  his  holy  living, 
for  he  that  hath  riches  often  liveth  in  sin,  and  rolleth  in  un- 
cleanness;  and,  then,  weareth  his  profession  as  a  uniform, 
wherewith  to  cover  his  guilt.  Rich  men  have  sometimes  been 
false  professors ;  and  they  are  to  be  found  among  poor  men 
too.  Full  many  a  poor  man  has  entered  into  the  church,  and 
been  cordially  received.  He  has  been  poor,  and  they  have 
thought  it  a  good  thing  that  poverty  and  grace  should  go  to- 
gether— that  grace  should  cheer  his  hovel,  and  make  his 
poverty-stricken  home  a  glad  one.  But  then,  tliis  poor  man 
hath  turned  aside  to  follies,  and  hath  degraded  himself  with 
drunkenness,  hath  sworn,  and  by  unworthy  conduct  dishon- 
ored his  God ;  or,  if  not,  he  hath  been  idle,  and  sat  still,  and 
been  of  little  service  to  the  church ;  and  so  he  hath  been  false 
and  fruitless  in  his  profession. 

Fa/se  professors  are  to  be  found  in  the  men  that  lead  the 


THE    FRUITLESS    VINE.  63 

vanguard  of  God's  army ;  the  men  who  preach  eloquently, 
whose  opinion  is  law,  who  speak  like  prophets,  and  whose  lan- 
guage seems  to  be  inspired.  They  have  brought  forth  the 
fruit  of  popularity,  ay,  and  the  fruit  of  philanthropy  too,  but 
their  heart  has  not  been  right  with  God,  therefore,  the  fruit, 
good  in  itself,  was  not  fruit  unto  holiness ;  the  moral  benefit 
of  their  labors  does  not  extend  to  everlasting  life.  They  have 
not  brought  forth  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit,  seeing  that  they 
were  not  living  branches  of  the  living  vine.  Then  there  have 
been  false  professors  in  obscurity ;  modest  j^eople,  who  have 
said  nothing,  and  seldom  been  heard  of;  they  have  glided  into 
their  pews  on  the  Sunday  morning,  taken  their  seats,  gone  out, 
and  satisfied  themselves  that  by  their  presence  they  had  fufii^ed 
a  religious  duty.  They  have  been  so  silent,  quiet,  and  retired. 
Lazy  fellows,  doing  nothing.  You  may  think  that  all  the  fruit- 
less trees  grow  in  the  hedge  outside  of  the  garden.  No  they 
don't.  There  are  some  fruitless  trees  in  the  inside  of  it  in  the 
very  center  of  it.  There  are  some  false  professors  to  be  found 
in  obscurity  as  well  as  in  publicity ;  some  among  the  poor  as 
well  as  among  the  rich. 

And  there  are  false  professors  to  be  found  among  men  that 
doubt  a  great  deal.  They  are  always  afraid  they  do  not  love 
Jesus,  and  always  saying,  "  Ah,  if  I  did  but  know  I  were  his ! 

"  'Tis  a  point  I  long  to  know, 
Oft  it  causes  anxious  tliought," 

Yes,  and  it  ought  to  cause  them  anxious  thought,  too,  if  they 
are  bringing  forth  no  fruit  and  giving  no  "  diligence  to  make 
their  calling  and  election  sure."  Fruitless  professors  are  to 
be  found,  on  the .  other  hand,  among  the  confident  men,  who 
say,  without  a  blush,  "  I  know  whom  I  have  believed ;  I 
know  I  am  a  Christian,  let  who  will  doubt.  I  am  sure  and 
certain  my  sins  can  not  destroy  me,  and  my  righteousness  can 
not  save  me.  I  may  do  what  I  like ;  I  know  I  am  one  of  the 
Lord's."  Ah  !  fruitless  professor  again ;  just  as  fruitless  as 
the  other  man,  who  had  all  doubts  and  no  faith,  and  did  noth- 
ing for  his  Master. 

And  then  there  is  the  fruitless  professor,  who,  when  he  is 
asked  to  Dray  at  the  prayer  meeting,  never  does  so  ;  and  who 


64  THE   FRUITLESS    VINE. 

neglects  family  prayer.  We  will  not  say  any  thing  about  pri- 
vate devotion  ;  no  doubt  he  neglects  that  too  :  he  is  a  fruitless 
ope.  Ah  !  but  there  may  be  another,  who  stands  up  and 
prays  such  an  eloquent  prayer  for  a  quarter  of  an  hour,  per- 
haps, just  as  fruitless  a  professor  as  the  silent  one ;  with  plenty 
of  words,  but  no  realities ;  many  leaves,  but  no  fruits ;  great 
gifts  of  utterance,  but  no  gifts  of  consistency ;  able  to  talk 
well,  but  not  to  walk  well ;  to  speak  piously,  but  not  to  walk 
humbly  with  his  God,  and  serve  him  with  gladness.  I  do  not 
know  your  individual  characters  ;  but  I  know  enough  of  you 
to  say  that  your  position,  however  honorable  in  the  church, 
and  your  character,  however  fair  before  men,  is  not  enough 
to  warrant  any  of  you  in  concluding  at  once  that  you  are 
not  a  fruitless  professor.  For  fruitless  professors  are  of 
every  character  and  every  rank,  from  the  highest  to  the 
lowest,  from  the  most  talented  to  the  most  illiterate,  from 
the  richest  to  the  poorest,  from  the  most  retiring  to  the 
most  conspicuous.  Fruitless  professors  there  are  in  every 
part  of  the  church. 

Now,  shall  I  tell  you  who  is  a  fruitless  professor  ?  The  man 
who  neglects  private  prayer,  and  does  not  walk  with  his  God 
in  public ;  that  man  whose  carriage  and  conversation  before 
God  are  hypocritical ;  who  cheats  in  trade  and  robs  in  busi- 
ness, yet  wraps  it  up,  and  comes  out  with  a  fair  face,  like  the 
hypocrite  with  a  widow's  house  sticking  in  his  throat,  and  says, 
"  Lord,  I  thank  thee  I  am  not  as  other  men  are !"  There  is  a 
man  for  you,  w^ho  brings  forth  no  fruit  to  perfection.  Another 
one  is  he  who  lives  right  morally  and  excellently,  and  depends 
upon  his  works,  and  hopes  to  be  saved  by  his  righteousness ; 
who  comes  before  God,  and  asks  for  pardon,  wdth  a  lie  in  his 
right  hand,  for  he  has  brought  his  own  self-righteousness  with 
him.  Such  a  man  is  a  fruitless  professor ;  he  has  brought 
forth  no  fruit.  That  man,  again,  is  a  fruitless  professor  who 
talks  big  words  about  high  doctrine,  and  likes  sound  truth, 
but  he  does  not  like  sound  living;  his  pretensions  are  high, 
but  not  his  practice.     He  can  bear  to  hear  it  said, 

"  Once  in  Christ,  in  Christ  for  ever." 
But  as  for  himself,  he  never  was  in  Christ  at  all,  for  he  neither 


THE   FRUITLESS    VINE.  65 

loves  nor  serves  his  Master,  but  lives  in  sin  that  grace  may 
abound.    T'lere  is  another  fruitless  vine  for  you. 

But  why  need  I  stop  to  pick  you  out  ?  May  the  Lord  find 
you  out  to-night !  There  are  many  of  you  here,  concerning 
whom  the  curse  of  Meroz  might  be  uttered.  "  Curse  ye 
Meroz,  said  the  angel  of  the  Lord,  curse  ye  bitterly  the  in- 
habitants thereof,  because  they  came  not  to  the  help  of  the 
Lord  ;  to  the  help  of  the  Lord  against  the  mighty."  Many 
of  you  are  content  to  eat  the  fat  and  drink  the  sweet,  and 
bring  forth  no  fruit  to  God ;  nor  do  you  serve  him — lazy  Issa- 
chars,  crouching  down  like  a  strong  ass  between  two  burdens ; 
neither  speaking  for  Christ,  nor  praying  for  Christ,  nor  giving 
to  Christ,  nor  living  to  Christ ;  but  having  a  name  to  live, 
while  you  are  dead ;  wrapping  yourselves  up  in  a  profession, 
while  you  are  not  living  to  Christ,  nor  consecrating  your  being 
to  him.  Judge  ye  what  I  say ;  if  ye  were  put  into  the  sieve 
this  night,  how  many  of  you  would  come  out  clean  in  this 
matter  ?  Are  there  not  many  high-flying  professors  here,  who 
fly  high,  but  who  do  nothing  ;  who  can  talk  fast,  but  live  as 
slowly  as  you  like  ;  who,  perhaps,  delight  in  hearing  the  truth, 
but  who  never  practice  the  truth  in  serving  their  God,  nor  liv- 
ing to  his  honor  ?  Such  as  you,  sirs,  are  the  most  useless  and 
worthless  of  all  creatures  in  the  world !  For,  like  the  vine, 
you  would  be  honorable  if  you  were  fruitful ;  but  without 
fruit,  as  the  vine  is  despicable,  so  are  you  good  for  nothing  but 
to  be  cast  out  and  burned.  * 

2.  And  now  I  come  to  the  second  question —  Why  is  it  that 
these  men  are  fruitless  ^  and  must  he  cast  away  f  The  reason 
is,  because  they  have  no  roots.  Many,  many  professors  have 
no  roots ;  fine  professors  they  are,  beautiful  to  look  at,  but 
they  have  no  roots  whatever.  Don't  you  remember  your 
childish  freak,  when  you  had  a  little  garden  of  your  own ; 
when  you  plucked  some  flowers,  and  put  them  in  the  ground, 
and  said  that  was  your  garden ;  and  when  you  went  the  next 
day,  and  found  that  all  the  flowers  were  withered  and  dead  ? 
Such  are  many  professors — pretty  flowers,  plucked  ofl"  without 
roots ;  having  no  adherence  to  the  soil,  drawing  no  sap  and  no 
nourishment  from  it.  And  therefore  it  is  they  die,  and  bring 
forth  no  frui\     You  come  to  us ;  and  say,  "  I  wish  to  joic 


66  THE   FRUITLESS   VINE. 

the  church."  We  question  you  as  far  as  we  are  able ;  you 
solemnly  tell  us  that  your  hearts  are  right  with  God.  We 
baptize  you,  receive  you  into  our  number  ;  but  then  there  was 
no  root  in  many  of  you,  and  after  a  while  you  die  ;  when  the 
sun  has  risen  with  a  burning  heat  you  perish  ;  or  if  you  main- 
tain a  tolerably  fair  profession,  yet  there  is  never  any  fruit 
upon  you,  because  you  did  not  get  the  root  first ;  you  got  the 
notion  first,  and  then  thought  you  would  get  the  root  after- 
ward. I  dc  tremble  for  many  young  people  in  my  church — I 
will  not  exclude  my  own  church.  They  get  an  idea  into  their 
heads  that  they  are  converted :  the  work  was  not  true,  not 
genuine,  not  real ;  it  was  an  excitement ;  it  was  a  stir  in  the 
conscience  for  a  while,  and  it  will  not  last.  But  the  worst  of 
it  is,  that  though  it  does  not  last,  they  last  as  professors. 
When  they  have  been  received  into  the  church,  they  say,  "  I 
am  sure  enough  !"  Preach  about  them  as  long  as  you  please, 
you  can  not  get  at  them.  They  are  church  members,  they  are 
baptized  persons,  they  have  passed  the  Rubicon ;  what  do  they 
want  more  ?  You  can  do  little  for  them.  I  do  tremble  for 
these.  For  my  most  hard-hearted  hearers  I  weep  before  God ; 
but  for  these  people  I  need  to  have  four  eyes  to  weep  with. 
For  who  can  make  an  impression  upon  them,  when  they  are 
firmly  persuaded  that  they  are  right,  and  have  had  the  seal  of 
the  church  that  they  are  right,  though  they  are  deceiving 
themselves  and  others,  and  are  still  "  in  the  gall  of  bitterness 
and  in  the  bond  of  iniquity."  My  young  friends,  I  do  not 
want  to  check  any  of  you  in  joining  a  church  ;  but  I  do  say  to 
you,  make  sure  work  before  you  make  a  profession.  I  would 
say  to  as  many  of  you  as  love  the  Lord,  come  forward  and 
unite  with  God's  people  ;  but,  I  beseech  you,  do  be  sure  ;  do 
"  search  your  hearts  and  try  your  reins."  Many  have  thought 
themselves  converted  when  they  were  not ;  hundreds  of  thou- 
sands have  had  an  impression,  a  kind  of  conversion,  not  real, 
which  for  a  while  endured,  but  afterward  it  passed  away  as  a 
summer's  dream.  It  was  but  a  little  while  ago  that  I  had  in 
my  house  a  gentleman,  an  excellent  man,  and  I  believe  a  true 
child  of  God,  who  told  me  he  had  been  brought  seriously 
under  impression,  on  account  of  sin,  through  hearing  a  sermon 
of  late.     "  But,"  said  he,  "  I  was  baptized  in  my  childhood. 


THE    FRUITLESS    VINE.  67 

When  I  was  but  young,  there  was  a  revival  in  our  village,  in 
New  England.  Mine  was  the  hardest  lieart  in  the  village ;  but 
I  was  found  out  at  last.  There  was  scarcely  a  girl  or  boy  that 
did  not  join  the  church,  and  I  was  at  last  brought  under  deep 
impression.  I  used  to  weep  before  God,  and  pray  to  him.  I 
went  to  the  minister  and  told  him  I  was  converted,  deceived 
him,  and  was  baptized."  And  then  he  went  on  to  tell  me  that 
he  had  dived  into  the  blackest  crimes,  and  gone  far  away,  even 
from  the  profession  of  religion  ;  that  after  going  to  college  he 
had  been  struck  off  the  church-roll  on  account  of  wickedness, 
and  that  up  to  this  time  he  had  been  an  infidel,  and  had  not 
so  much  as  thought  of  the  things  of  the  kingdom.  Take  heed, 
many  of  you,  that  you  do  not  get  a  sham  religion.  Many 
jump  into  godliness  as  they  would  into  a  bath  ;  but  they  are 
very  glad  to  jump  out  of  it  again,  when  they  find  the  world 
pays  them  better.  And  many  there  are  who  will  just  come 
and  say  they  are  the  Lord's,  and  they  think  they  are,  but  there 
is  no  root  in  them,  and  therefore  by-and-by  their  impressions 
pass  away.  O  we  have  many  fruitless  professors  in  our  midst, 
because  they  do  not  look  well  to  their  beginnings ;  they  did 
not  take  heed  at  their  starting  point,  they  did  not  watch  well 
the  first  dawn  ;  they  thought  the  little  farthing  rushlight  of 
their  own  hopes  was  the  dawning  of  the  Sun  of  righteousness; 
they  thought  the  bleeding  of  their  own  conscience  was  a  kill- 
ing by  the  hand  of  God,  whereas  it  was  a  deeper,  and  better, 
and  surer,  and  more  entire  work  that  they  needed,  than  that 
which  they  received.  Let  us  take  heed,  my  brethren,  that  we 
do  not  put  too  much  trust  in  our  experiences,  and  take  too 
much  for  granted  while  it  is  not  yet  proved  in  our  beginnings ; 
let  us  often  go  back  and  begin  again  ;  let  us  often  go  to  Christ 
with  the  old  cry, 

"  Nothing  in  my  hands  I  bring, 
Simply  to  thy  cross  I  cling;" 

tor  remember  that  these  bad  beginnings  have  had  a  great 
effect  in  making  a  man  fruitless. 

3.  And  again,  thirdly —  What  is  God's  estimation  of  fruitless 
'^yrofessors  f  I  shall  not  ask  you  their  own  ;  for  there  ar§ 
many  men  who  are  professors  of  religion,  with  whom  you 


08  THE   FRUITLESS   VINE. 

might  make  your  fortune  very  speedily  if  you  could  buy  them 
at  your  price  and  sell  them  at  their  own.  There  are  many, 
too,  that  have  a  very  good  opinion  of  themselves,  which  they 
have  gained  from  the  church.  The  minister  thinks  well  of 
them ;  the  church  thinks  well  of  them ;  they  are  respectable 
people  ;  it  is  so  nice  to  have  them  come,  it  helps  the  cause  so, 
to  see  such  respectable  people  sitting  in  the  pews  !  Really,  I 
do  think  he  would  do  for  a  deacon  !  Everybody  thinks  well 
of  him  ;  everybody  praises  him.  Now  we  have  nothing  to  do 
with  this  kind  of  opinion  to-night ;  our  business  is  with  God's 
opinion  of  such  a  man.  And  God's  opinion  of  a  man  who 
makes  a  profession  without  being  sincere,  is  this — that  he  is 
the  most  useless  thing  in  the  world.  And  now  let  me  try  to 
prove  it.  Is  there  any  one  that  will  prove  that  this  man  is 
of  any  use  at  all  ?  I  will  ask  the  church — Here  is  a  man  that 
brings  forth  no  fruit,  and  has  only  a  profession.  Members  of 
the  church,  what  is  the  use  of  this  man  ?  Will  he  comfort  any 
of  you  in  your  distress  ?  Will  he  hold  up  the  pastor's  hands 
in  prayer,  Avhen  he  is  weary?  Will  he  lead  the  troops  to 
battle  ?  Will  he  be  of  any  service  to  you  ?  I  see  you  unani- 
mously lift  up  your  hands,  and  say,  "  The  man  is  of  no  use  to 
us  whatever,  if  he  brings  forth  no  fruit ;  if  his  life  be  not  con- 
sistent with  his  profession ;  strike  his  name  off  the  church-roll ; 
let  him  go  ;  he  is  of  no  use."  Where  has  he  gone  to  ?  He 
has  gone  to  the  world.  Bring  the  worldling  up.  What  do 
you  think  of  this  man  ?  He  makes  a  profession  of  religion. 
Is  he  of  any  use  to  you  ?  "  No,"  they  say,  "  we  do  not  want 
such  a  fellow  as  that.  The  man  is  Jack-of-both-sides ;  he  is 
sometimes  a  professor  of  religion,  and  sometimes  a  sinner  in 
the  world.  We  will  have  nothing  tp  do  with  him ;  turn  him 
out  of  our  company."  Where  shall  we  sell  him  then  ?  How 
shall  we  dispose  of  him?  He  seems  to  be  of  no  use  either  to 
the  church  or  the  world.  Is  he  of  any  use  to  his  family?  Ask 
his  eldest  son.  *'  John,  is  your  father  any  good  to  you  ?" 
"  No,  sir  ;  none  at  all.  He  used  to  pray  the  Lord  to  save  us 
with  seeming  earnestness,  and  rise  from  his  knees  to  give  vent 
to  his  temper.  Many  a  violent  blow  has  he  given  me  without 
any  reasonable  provocation.  He  was  always  a  passionate  man 
He  used  to  go  to  chapel  on  Sunday  and  take  us  with  him 


THE   FRUITLESS   VINE.  69 

and  then  we  "know  what  he  used  to  do  on  Monday  he  would 
get  drunk,  or  swear.  A  deal  of  use  he  was  ever  tc  me  !  He 
made  me  an  infidel,  sir !"  And  his  wife,  "  Well,  what  do  you 
think  of  this  good  husband  of  yours  ?  He  has  long  made  a 
profession  of  religion,"  *'  Ah !  sir,  it  is  not  for  me  to  say  a 
word  about  my  husband ;  but  he  has  made  me  a  miserable 
woman.  I  think  I  should  have  joined  your  church  long  ago, 
if  it  had  not  been  for  his  miserable  inconsistencies.  But  really 
he  has  grieved  my  heart ;  he  has  always  been  a  stumbling- 
block  to  me ;  and  what  to  do  with  him  I  do  not  know." 
Well,  Jane,  we  will  have  you  out  of  the  kitchen.  "  What 
think  you  of  your  master  ;  he  makes  a  profession  of  religion, 
yet  does  not  live  a  right  life.  What  do  you  think  of  him  ?" 
''  Well,  I  did  think  that  Christians  were  a  good  sort  of  people, 
and  that  I  should  like  to  live  with  them ;  but  if  this  be  Chris- 
tianity, sir,  I  will  take  five  pounds  a  year  less  to  live  with  a 
worldly  man  ;  th^'s  all  I  can  say."  Well,  what  is  the  use  of 
him?  I  suppose  he  does  something  in  business.  He  is  a 
grand  professor.  He  keeps  a  shop  ;  everybody  thinks  him  a 
most  respectable  man.  Has  he  not  given  a  hundred  pounds 
just  now  to  the  building  of  a  new  church?  Is  he  not  always 
known  to  subscribe  liberally  to  ragged  schools  ?  We  will  ask 
his  men.  "  What  do  you  think  of  your  master  ?"  "What  do 
we  think  of  him  ?  Why,  we  would  think  a  great  deal  more  of 
him  if  he  would  give  us  a  half  crown  a  week  more  wages;  for 
he  is  the  worst  paymaster  in  the  parish."  "  That  is  nothing, 
perhaps.  But  what  do  you  think  of  hira  ?"  "  Why,  that  he 
is  an  unutterable  cant !  Some  of  us  did  go  to  a  place  of 
worship,  but  we  are  honest,  and  we  would  rather  stay  away 
than  go  with  such  a  miserable  hypocrite."  I  am  describing 
real  cases  and  not  fictions.  I  need  not  to  go  further  than  be- 
tween this  and  London  Bridge  to  knock  at  the  door  and  wake 
them  up,  some  of  them.  What  is  the  good  of  such  professors  ? 
If  they  would  speak  fairly  out,  and  say,  "I  am  no  Christian," 
there  would  be  some  sense  in  it.  For  if  Baal  be  God,  let  ^aal 
be  served ;  and  if  the  world  be  worth  serving,  let  a  man  serve 
it  out  and  out ;  and  let  him  get  the  credit  of  candor— not 
cheating  the  devil.  But  if  God  be  God,  and  a  man  live  in  sin, 
and  talk  about  grace,  then  of  what  use  is  he  ?    God  himself 


70  THE   FRUITLESS    VINE. 

will  disown  him.  Ask  him  if  this  man  has  been  of  any  use, 
and  he  replies,  "  No,  of  no  nse  whatever."  The  vine  is  of  no 
use  unless  it  bring  forth  fruit ;  and  this  man,  making  a  pro- 
fession, is  worse  than  worthless,  because  he  does  not  live  up  to 
it.  My  dear  friends,  I  would  not  say  an  extravagant  thing, 
but  I  will  say  this  very  coolly — if  any  of  you,  who  make  a 
profession  of  religion,  are  deceiving  others,  by  not  living  up  to 
it,  I  do  request  you — and  I  say  it  advisedly — I  do  request  you 
to  give  up  your  profession,  unless  God  give  you  grace  to  live 
up  to  it.  Do  not,  I  beseech  you,  halt  between  two  opinions ; 
if  God  be  God,  serve  him,  and  do  it  thoroughly ;  do  not  tell 
lies  about  it.  If  Baal  be  God  ;  if  he  be  a  nice  master  ;  if  you 
would  like  to  serve  him,  and  wan  his  wages,  serve  him  ;  but  do 
not  mix  the  two  together ;  be  one  thing,  or  else  the  other. 
Renounce  your  profession,  and  serve  the  devil  thoroughly,  or 
else  keep  your  profession,  and  serve  God  with  your  heart — 
one  thing,  or  else  the  other.  I  solemnly  exhort  you  to  choose 
which  you  will  have,  but  never  think  that  you  can  keep  both  ; 
for  "  no  man  can  serve  two  masters."  "  Ye  can  not  serve  God 
and  mammon." 

4.  And  now  let  me  close  up  by  mentioning  what  is  to  become 
of  this  fruitless  tree  f  We  are  told  it  is  to  be  devoured  in 
the  lire.  When  an  old  vine  is  jDulled  off  the  wall,  after  having 
brought  forth  no  fruit,  what  becomes  of  it  ?  You  know  there 
is  a  lot  of  weeds  raked  up  in  the  corner  of  the  garden,  and 
the  gardener,  without  taking  any  notice  of  it,  just  throws  the 
vine  on  the  heap  of  weeds,  and  it  is  burned  up.  If  it  were 
any  other  kind  of  a  tree  he  would  at  least  reserve  it  for  chop- 
ping up  to  ^lake  a  fire  w^ithin  the  master's  house ;  but  this  is 
much  an  ignominious  thing,  he  throws  it  away  in  the  corner, 
and  burns  it  up  with  the  weeds.  If  it  were  a  stout  old  oak,  it 
might  have  the  funeral  of  the  yule  log,  with  honor  in  its  burn- 
ing, and  brightness  in  its  flame ;  but  the  fruitless  vine  is 
treated  with  contempt,  and  left  to  smoulder  with  the  weeds, 
the  refuse,  and  rubbish.  It  is  a  miserable  thing.  Just  so  with 
professors ;  all  men  that  love  not  God  must  perish.  But  those 
who  profess  to  love  him,  and  do  not,  shall  perish  with  singul^a* 
ignominy.  "They  shall  not  come  into  the  sepulchres  of  the 
kings."     Something  like  that  ancient  king,  of  whom  it  was 


THE    FRUITLESS    VINE.  71 

said,  "  He  shall  be  buried  with  the  burial  of  an  ass,  drawn  and 
cast  forth  beyond  the  gates  of  Jerusalem."  The  damnation 
of  a  professor  will  be  the  most  horrible  and  ignominious  sight 
that  ever  hell  itself  has  seen  !  When  Satan  fell  from  heaven, 
with  his  black  Satanic  mahce  against  God,  there  was  a  kind 
of  grandeur  in  his  devilry ;  there  was  an  awful,  terrific  sub- 
limity in  his  damnation ;  and  when  a  great  blasphemer  and  a 
hard  swearer  shall  be  sent  at  last  to  perdition,  there  shall  be 
something  of  sublimity  in  it,  because  he  has  been  consistent 
with  his  profession.  But  when  a  professor  of  religion  finds 
himself  in  hell,  it  shall  be  the  most  miserable,  contemptible, 
and  yet  terrible  mode  of  damnation  wherewith  men  were  ever 
damned.  I  think  I  see  honest  blasphemers  lifting  themselves 
from  their  chains  of  fire,  and  hissing  between  their  teeth  at 
the  minister  who  comes  there,  after  having  been  a  deceiver — 
"  Aha  !  aha !  aha !  art  thou  here  with  us  ?  Thou  didst  warn  us 
of  our  drunkenness,  and  tell  us  of  our  curse  ;  ah  !  art  thou 
come  into  the  drunkard's  hell  thyself?"  "Pshaw!"  says 
another,  "  that  is  your  strict  Pharisee.  Ah  !  I  remember  how 
he  told  me  one  night  that  I  should  perish,  unless  I  made  a 
profession  of  religion.  Tahe  that,  sir !"  and  he  spits  upon 
him.  "  Thou  art  a  loathsome  thing.  I  perished  ;  but  I  served 
my  master  well.  Thou — thou  didst  pretend  to  serve  God,  and 
yet  thou  art  a  sneaking  hypocrite!"  Says  another,  yelling 
from  the  corner  of  the  pit,  "  Let  us  have  a  Methodist  hymn, 
sir ;  quote  a  promise  from  the  Bible ;  tell  us  about  election. 
Let  us  have  a  little  of  your  fine  preaching  now."  And  round 
hell  there  goes  the  hiss,  and  the  "  aha !  aha !  aha  !"  *nd  the  yell 
of  spitefulness  and  scorn  upon  the  man  who  professed  to  be  a 
Christian,  but  became  a  castaway,  because  his  heart  was  not 
right  in  the  matter.  I  confess,  I  should  dread  above  all  things 
the  unutterable  hell  of  hells  of  hypbcritical  apostates,  of  men 
that  stand  in  the  ranks,  profess  to  love  God,  prate  godliness, 
that  sit  in  the  pews  and  uphold  Christianity,  that  take  the 
sacrament,  and  speak  about  communion,  that  stand  up  to  pray, 
and  talk  about  being  heard  for  their  faith,  who  are  all  the 
while  committing  abominations,  and  under  cover  of  their  pro- 
fessions are  cheating  the  poor,  robbing  the  fatherless,  and 
doing  all  kinds  of  iniquity.     I  confess,  I  as  much  dread  the 


72  THE   FRUITLESS   VINE. 

excess  of  their  damnation,  above  the  damnation  of  others,  as 
I  dread  to  be  damned  at  all.  It  is  as  if  in  hell  another  hell 
had  been  made,  to  damn  those  that  sin  above  others,  to  damn 
them  after  being  damned — for  hypocrites,  for  men  who  have 
been  with  ns,  and  not  of  us  ;  who  professed  to  be  Christ's, 
and  yet  have  been  mean  deceivers  after  all.  O  !  sirs,  if  ye 
would  not  make  your  chains  more  heavy,  if  ye  would  not  stir 
the  fire  to  a  more  furious  heat,  if  ye  would  not  make  your 
yells  more  hideous,  quit  your  professions  this  night,  if  ye  are 
not  worthy  of  them.  Go  out  of  this  place,  and  send  in  your 
resignation  to  the  church  ;  or  else,  sirs,  be  honest,  and  bend 
your  knee  before  God,  and  ask  him  to  search  you,  and  try  you, 
and  make  you  sincere  and  upright  before  him.  Be  one  thing, 
or  else  the  other ;  do  not  cloak  yourself  in  the  robes  of  sanc- 
tity to  hide  the  corruptions  that  all  the  while  fester  beneath. 
Stand  out,  bold,  brave  sinners ;  and  do  not  be  mean,  sneaking 
sinners,  that  wear  the  masks  of  saints.  "  What  is  the  vine 
more  than  any  other  tree  ?"  Without  fruit  it  is  worse  than 
any  other.  It  must  perish  more  dolefully,  more  horribly  than 
any  other,  if  there  be  on  it  no  fruit  brought  to  perfection. 
Does  not  this  shake  us  ?  Ah !  it  will  shake  you,  very  likely, 
that  do  not  want  the  shaking ;  but  the  men  that  want  arous- 
ing will  keep  just  as  they  were.  It  will  go  into  the  hearts  of 
some  of  you,  like  the  cry,  "  Howl,  Moab,  howl,  Moab !"  but 
alas!  Moab  will  not  howl.  You  will  weep  for  Kirhareseth, 
but  Kirhareseth  will  not  weep  for  herself.  You  will  weep  for 
yonr  hypocritical  friends ;  but  they  will  rub  their  eyes,  and 
say,  "  A  strong  sermon ;  but  it  has  nothing  to  do  with  me." 
And  they  will  go  out  with  cool  presumption ;  sin  with  one 
hand,  and  take  the  sacramental  cup  with  the  other ;  sing  the 
lascivious  song  one  night,  and  then  sing, 

"  Jesus,  lover  of  my  soul," 

the  day  after.  Meet  Christ  here,  and  take  the  devil  yonder, 
and  bid  him  God  speed  in  all  his  freaks  of  devilry.  Ah !  sirs, 
sirs,  sirs,  take  heed,  take  heed,  I  beseech  you,  of  this  matter. 
Let  us  each  search  our  hearts,  lest  we  should  have  been  de- 
ceived. And  may  God  bring  us  to  a  right  understanding  in 
this  matter,  that  we  may  be  clear  before  him.     "  Search  me, 


THE   FRUITLESS    VINE.  73 

0  God,  and  know  my  ways ;  try  me,  and  know  my  thoughts, 
and  see  if  there  be  any  wicked  thing  in  me  ;  and  lead  me  in  the 
way  everlasting." 

And,  now,  I  must  not  send  you  away  until  I  have  had  a 
word  with  my  friend  in  the  aisle  there.    He  says,  "Hike  that, 

1  like  that ;  I  am  no  professor,  I  am  not ;  I  am  all  right.  No 
on  J  can  call  me  a  hypocrite."  Well,  my  dear  friend,  I  am 
very  glad  you  are  not,  because  you  say  you  are  no  Christian. 
But  let  me  tell  you,  you  must  not  expect  to  be  a  wonderful 
deal  the  better  off  for  that.  Suppose  two  men  are  brought 
up  before  the  Lord  Mayor,  and  one  says,  "  Your  worship,  I 
an-  an  honest  man  and  not  guilty ;"  and  he  blushes  that  an 
imputation  should  be  cast  on  his  character.  Well,  he  is  proved 
to  be  guilty,  and  gets  committed  to  prison  for  three  months. 
Up  comes  the  other  one,  and  says,  "  Your  worship,  I  am  a 
gi  Ilty  man  ;  I  alwa3^s  was  a  rogue,  and  I  always  shall  be  ;  I 
don't  make  a  profession  at  all."  "  I  think  I  must  give  you  six 
months,"  says  his  worship,  "  for  really  I  think  you  must  be 
th?  more  determined  rascal  of  the  two."  So  if  any  of  you 
say,  "  I  do  not  make  a  profession,  I  shall  be  all  right,"  let  me 
te'l  you,  that  to  make  a  lying  profession  is  a  very  fearful  thing ; 
bi  t  for  you  to  think  of  getting  off  because  you  make  no  pro- 
fession at  all,  is  equally  bad.  Take  heed  you  do  not  deceive 
yourselves ;  it  must  be  the  new  heart  and  the  right  spirit  with 
God,  or  else,  profession  or  no  profession,  we  must  perish.  O  ! 
that  God  would  give  us  grace  to  go  to  our  houses,  and  cry  to 
him  for  mercy,  and  would  help  us  to  repent  of  our  sins,  and 
bring  us  to  put  our  trust  simply  and  wholly  upon  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ !     So  should  we  be  saved  now,  and  saved  for  ever. 

4 


SERMON  V. 

SPIRITUAL  REVIVAL  THE  WANT  OF  THE  CHURCH. 

"  0  Lord,  revive  thy  work," — Hab.,  iii.  2. 

All  true  religion  is  the  work  of  God :  it  is  pre-eminently 
RO.  If  he  should  select  out  of  his  works  that  which  he  esteems 
most  of  all,  he  would  select  true  religion.  He  regards  the 
work  of  grace  as  being  even  more  glorious  than  the  works  of 
nature ;  and  he  is,  therefore,  especially  careful  that  it  shall  al 
w^ays  be  known,  so  that  if  any  one  dare  to  deny  it,  they  shall 
do  so  in  the  teeth  of  repeated  testimonies  to  the  contrary,  that 
God  is  indeed  the  author  of  salvation  in  the  world  and  in  the 
hearts  of  men,  and  that  religion  is  the  effect  of  grace,  and  is 
the  work  of  God.  I  believe  the  Eternal  might  sooner  forgive 
the  sin  of  ascribing  the  creation  of  the  heavens  and  of  the 
earth  to  an  idol,  than  that  of  ascribing  the  works  of  grace  to 
the  efforts  of  the  flesh,  or  to  any  thing  else  but  God.  It  is  a 
sin  of  the  greatest  magnitude  to  suppose  that  there  is  aught  in 
the  heart  which  can  be  acceptable  unto  God,  save  that  which 
God  himself  has  first  created  there.  When  I  deny  God's 
work  in  creating  the  sun,  I  deny  one  truth  ;  but  when  I  deny 
that  he  w^orks  grace  in  the  heart,  I  deny  a  hundred  truths  in 
one ;  for  in  the  denial  of  that  one  great  truth,  that  God  is  the 
author  of  good  in  the  souls  of  men,  I  have  denied  all  the  doc- 
trines which  make  up  the  great  articles  of  faith,  and  have  run 
in  the  very  teeth  of  the  whole  testimony  of  sacred  Scripture. 
I  trust,  beloved,  that  many  of  us  have  been  taught,  that  if 
there  be  any  thing  in  our  souls  which  can  carry  us  to  heaven, 
it  is  God's  work,  and,  moreover,  that  if  there  be  aught  that  is 
good  and  excellent  found  in  his  church,  it  is  entirely  God's 
work,  from  first  to  last.  We  firmly  believe  that  it  is  God  who 
quickens  the  soul  which  was  dead,  positively  "  dead  in  tres- 


SPIRITUAL    REVIVAL    THE    WANT    OF    THE    CHURCH.  75 

passes  and  sins  ;"  that  it  is  God  who  maintains  the  life  of  that 
soul,  and  God  who  consummates  and  perfects  that  life  in  the 
home  of  the  blessed,  in  the  land  of  the  hereafter.  We  ascribe 
nothing  to  man,  but  all  to  God.  We  dare  not  for  a  moment 
think  that  the  conversion  of  the  soul  is  effected  either  by  its 
own  effort  or  by  the  efforts  of  others  ;  we  conceive  that  there 
are  means  and  agencies  employed,  but  that  the  work  is,  both 
alpha  and  omega,  wholly  the  Lord's.  We  think,  therefore, 
that  we  are  right  in  applying  the  text  to  the  work  of  divine 
grace,  both  in  the  heart  and  in  the  church  at  large  ;  and  we 
think  we  can  have  no  subject  more  appropriate  for  our  consid- 
eration than  the  text.     "  O  Lord,  revive  thy  work !" 

First,  beloved,  trusting  that  the  Spirit  of  God  will  help  me, 
I  shall  endeavor  to  apply  the  text  to  our  own  souls  personally^ 
and  then  to  the  state  of  the  church  at  large^  for  it  well  needs 
that  the  Lord  should  revive  his  work  in  its  midst. 

I.  First,  then,  to  ourselves.  We  should  begin  at  home. 
We  too  often  flog  the  church,  when  the  whip  should  be  laid 
on  our  own  shoulders.  We  drag  the  church,  like  a  colossal 
culprit,  to  the  altar ;  we  bind  her,  and  try  to  execute  her  at 
once ;  we  bind  her  hands  fast,  and  tear  off  thongfuU  after 
thongfull  of  her  quivering  flesh — finding  fault  with  her  w^here 
there  is  none,  and  magnifying  her  little  errors ;  while  we  too 
often  forget  ourselves.  Let  us,  therefore,  commence  with 
ourselves,  remembering  that  we  are  part  of  the  church,  and 
that  our  own  want  of  revival  is  in  some  measure  the  cause  of 
that  want  in  the  church  at  large. 

Now,  I  directly  charge  the  great  majority  of  professing 
Christians — and  I  take  the  charge  to  myself  also — with  a  need 
of  a  revival  of  piety  in  these  days.  I  shall  lay  the  charge  be- 
fore you  very  peremptorily,  because  I  think  I  have  abundant 
grounds  to  prove  it.  I  believe  that  the  mass  of  Christian  men 
in  this  age  need  a  revival,  and  my  reasons  are  these  : 

Li  the  first  place,  look  at  the  conduct  and  conversation  of 
too  many  who  profess  to  be  the  children  of  God.  It  ill  be- 
comes any  man  who  occupies  the  sacred  place  of  a  pulpit  to 
flatter  his  hearers,  and  I  shall  not  attempt  to  do  so.  The  evil 
lies  with  too  many  of  you  who  unite  yourselves  with  Christian 
churches,  and  in  practically  protesting  against  your  profession. 


76        spiBinrAL  revival  the  vant  of  the  church. 

It  has  become  very  common  now-a-days  to  join  a  church  ;  go 
where  you  may  you  find  professing  Christians  who  sit  down 
at  some  Lord's  table  or  another ;  but  are  there  fewer  cheats 
than  there  used  to  be  ?  Are  there  less  frauds  committed  ? 
Do  we  find  morality  more  extensive  ?  Do  we  find  vice  en- 
tirely at  an  end  ?  No,  we  do  not.  The  age  is  as  immoral  as 
any  that  preceded  it ;  there  is  still  as  much  sin,  although  it  is 
more  cloaked  a:id  hidden.  The  joutside  of  the  sepulcher  may 
be  whiter ;  but  within,  the  bones  are  just  as  rotten  as  before. 
Society  is  not  one  whit  improved.  Those  men  who,  in  our 
popular  magazines,  give  us  a  true  picture  of  the  state  of  Lon- 
don life,  are  to  be  believed  and  credited,  for  they  do  not  stretch 
the  truth — they  have  no  motive  for  so  doing  ;  and  the  picture 
which  they  give  of  the  morality  of  this  great  city  is  certainly 
appalling.  It  is  a  huge  criminal,  full  of  sin ;  and  I  say  this, 
that  if  all  the  profession  in  London  were  true  profession,  it 
would  not  be  nearly  such  a  wicked  place  as  it  is ;  it  could  not 
be,  by  any  manner  of  means.  My  brethren,  it  is  well  known 
— and  who  dares  deny  it  that  is  not  too  partial,  and  who  will 
not  speak  willful  falsehood  ? — it  is  well  known  that  it  is  not  in 
these  days  a  sufficient  guaranty  even  of  a  man's  honesty,  that 
he  is  a  member  of  a  church.  It  is  a  hard  thing  for  Christian 
ministers  to  say,  but  we  must  say  it,  and  if  friends  say  it  not, 
enemies  will ;  and  better  that  the  truth  should  be  spoken  in 
our  own  midst,  that  men  may  see  that  we  are  ashamed  of  it, 
than  that  they  should  hear  us  impudently  deny  what  we  must 
confess  to  be  true  !  O  sirs,  the  lives  of  too  many  members  of 
Christian  churches  give  us  grave  cause  to  suspect  that  there  is 
none  of  the  life  of  godliness  in  them  all !  Why  that  reaching 
after  money,  why  that  covetousness,  why  that  follomng  of  the 
crafts  and  devices  of  a  wicked  world,  why  that  clutching  here 
and  clutching  there,  that  grinding  of  the  faces  of  the  j^oor, 
that  stamping  down  of  the  workman,  and  such  like  things,  if 
men  are  truly  what  they  profess  to  be  ?  God  in  heaven  knows 
that  what  I  speak  is  true,  and  too  many  here  know  it  them- 
selves. If  they  be  Christians,  at  least  they  want  revival ;  if 
there  be  life  in  them,  it  is  but  a  spark  that  is  covered  up  with 
heaps  of  ashes ;  it  needs  to  be  fanned,  ay,  and  it  needs  to  be 
stirred  also,  that,  haply,  'some  of  the  ashes  may  be  removed, 


SPIRITUAL    REVIVAL   THE    WANT    OF   THE    CHURCH.  77 

and  the  spark  may  have  place  to  live.  The  church  wants  re- 
vival in  the  persons  of  its  members.  The  members  of  Chris- 
tian churches  are  not  what  once  they  were.  It  is  fashionable 
to  be  religious  now ;  persecution  is  taken  away ;  and  ah !  I 
had  almost  said,  the  gates  of  the  church  were  taken  a^^^ay  with 
it.  The  church  has,  with  few  exceptions,  no  gates  now  ;  per- 
sons come  in,  and  go  out  of  it,  just  as  they  would  march 
through  St.  Paul's  cathedral,  and  make  it  a  very  place  of  traf- 
fic, instead  of  regarding  it  as  a  select  and  sacred  spot,  to  be 
apportioned  to  the  holy  of  the  Lord,  and  to  the  excellent  of 
the  earth,  in  whom  is  God's  delight.  If  this  be  not  true,  you 
know  how  to  treat  it ;  you  need  not  confess  to  sin  you  have 
not  committed ;  but  if  it  be  true,  and  true  in  your  case,  O  ! 
humble  yourselves  under  the  mighty  hand  of  God ;  ask  him 
to  search  and  try  you,  that  if  you  be  not  his  child  you  may  be 
helped  to  renounce  your  profession,  lest  it  should  be  to  you 
but  the  gaudy  pageantry  of  death,  and  mere  tinsel  and  gew- 
gaw in  which  to  go  to  hell.  If  you  be  his,  ask  that  he  may 
give  you  more  grace,  that  you  may  renounce  these  faults  and 
follies,  and  turn  unto  him  with  full  purpose  of  heart,  as  the  ef- 
fect of  a  revived  godliness  in  your  soul. 

Again  :  where  the  condiLct  of  professing  Christians  is  con- 
sistent, let  me  ask  the  question.  Does  not  the  conversation  of 
many  a  professor  lead  us  either  to  doubt  the  truthfulness  of 
his  piety,  or  else  to  pray  that  his  piety  may  be  revived  ?  Have 
you  noticed  the  conversation  of  too  many  who  think  them- 
selves Christians  ?  You  might  live  with  them  from  the  first 
of  January  to  the  end  of  December,  and  you  would  never  be 
tired  of  their  religion  for  what  you  would  hear  of  it.  They 
scarcely  mention  the  name  of  Jesus  Christ  at  all.  On  Sabbath 
afternoon  all  the  ministers  are  talked  over,  faults  are  found 
with  this  one  and  the  other,  and  all  kinds  of  conversation  take 
place,  which  they  call  religious,  because  it  is  concerning  re- 
ligious places.  But  do  they  ever  talk  of  what  he  said  and  did, 
and  what  he  suffered  for  us  here  below  ?  Do  you  often  liear 
the  salutation  addressed  to  you  by  your  brother  Christian, 
"  Friend,  how  doth  thy  soul  prosper  ?"  When  we  step  into 
each  other's  houses,  do  we  begin  to  talk  concerning  the  cause 
and  truth  of  God  ?     Do  you  think  that  God  would  now  stoop 


78  SPIRITUAL    REVIVAL   THE   WANT    OF   THE   CHURCH. 

from  heaven  to  listen  to  the  conversation  of  his  church,  aa 
once  he  did,  when  it  was  said,  "  The  Lord  hearkened  and 
heard,  and  a  book  of  remembrance  was  written  for  them  that 
feared  the  Lord  and  that  thought  ui^on  his  name  ?"  I  sol- 
emnly declare,  as  the  result  of  thorough,  and,  I  trust,  impar- 
tial observation,  that  the  conversation  of  Christians,  while  it 
can  not  be  condemned  on  the  score  of  morality,  mast  almost 
invariably  be  condemned  on  the  score  of  Christianity.  We 
talk  too  little  about  our  Lord  and  Master.  That  word  secta- 
rianism has  crept  into  our  midst,  and  w^e  must  say  nothing 
about  Christ,  because  we  are  afraid  of  being  called  sectarians. 
I  am  a  sectarian,  and  hope  to  be  so  until  I  die,  and  to  glory  in 
it ;  for  I  can  not  see,  now-a-days,  that  a  man  can  be  a  Chris- 
tian, thoroughly  in  earnest,  without  winning  for  himself  the 
title.  Why,  we  must  not  talk  of  this  doctrine,  because  per- 
haps such  a  one  disbelieves  it ;  we  must  not  notice  such  and 
such  a  truth  in  Scripture,  because  such  and  such  a  friend 
doubts  or  denies  it ;  and  so  we  drop  all  the  great  and  grand 
topics  which  used  to  be  the  staple  commodities  of  godly  talk, 
and  begin  to  speak  of  any  thing  else,  because  we  feel  that  we 
can  agree  better  on  worldly  things  than  we  can  on  spiritual.  Is 
not  that  the  truth  ?  and  is  it  not  a  sad  sin  wdth  some  of  us, 
that  we  have  need  to  pray  unto  God,  "  O  Lord,  revive  thy 
work  in  my  soul,  that  my  conversation  may  be  more  Christ- 
like, seasoned  with  salt,  and  kept  by  the  Holy  Spirit?" 

And  yet  a  third  remark  here.  There  are  some  whose  con- 
duct is  all  that  we  could  wish,  whose  conversation  is  for  the 
most  part  unctuous  with  the  gospel,  and  savory  of  truth  ;  but 
even  they  wdll  confess  to  a  third  charge,  which  I  must  now 
sorrowfully  bring  against  them  and  against  myself,  namely, 
that  there  is  too  little  real  communion  loith  tTesus  Christ.  If, 
thanks  to  divine  grace,  we  are  enabled  to  keep  our  conduct 
tolerably  consistent,  and  our  lives  unblemished,  yet  how  much 
have  we  to  cry  out  against  ourselves,  from  a  lack  of  that  holy 
fellowship  with  Jesus  which  is  the  high  mark  of  the  true  child 
of  God  '  Brethren,  let  me  ask  some  of  you  how  long  it  is 
since  you  have  had  a  love-visit  from  Jesus  Christ — how  long 
eince  you  could  say,  "  My  beloved  is  mine,  and  I  am  his  :  he 
feedeth  among  the  lilies  ?"    How  long  is  it  since  "  he  brought 


JSPIBITUAL    REVIVAL   THE    WANT    OF   THE   CHURCH.  70 

you  into  his  banqueting  house,  and  his  banner  over  you  was 
love  ?"  Perhaps  some  of  you  will  be  able  to  say,  "  It  was  but 
this  morning  that  I  saw  him  ;  I  beheld  his  face  w^ith  joy,  and 
was  ravished  Avith  his  countenance."  But  I  fear  the  greatest 
part  of  you  will  have  to  say,  "  Ah,  sir,  for  months  I  have  been 
without  the  shinings  of  his  countenance."  What  have  you 
been  doing,  then,  and  what  has  been  your  way  of  life  ?  Have 
you  been  groaning  every  day  ?  Have  you  been  weeping 
every  minute  ?  "  No  !"  Then  you  ought  to  have  been.  I 
can  not  understand  how  your  piety  can  be  of  any  very  brilliant 
order,  if  you  can  live  without  the  sunlight  of  Christ,  and  yet 
be  happy.  Christians  will  lose  sometimes  the  society  of  Jesus ; 
the  connection  between  themselves  and  Christ  will  be  at  times 
severed,  as  to  their  own  feeling  of  it;  but  they  will  always 
groan  and  cry  when  they  lose  their  Jesus.  What!  is  Christ 
thy  Brother,  and  does  he  live  in  thine  house,  and  yet  thou 
hast  not  spoken  to  him  for  a  month  ?  I  fear  there  is  little 
love  between  thee  and  thy  Brother,  for  thou  hast  had  no  con- 
versation with  him  for  so  long.  What!  is  Christ  the  Hus- 
band of  his  church,  and  has  she  had  no  fellowship  with  him 
for  all  this  time  ?  Brethren,  let  me  not  condemn  you,  let  me 
not  even  judge  you,  but  let  your  conscience  speak.  Mine 
shall,  and  so  shall  yours.  Have  we  not  too  much  forgotten 
Christ  ?  Have  we  not  lived  too  much  without  him  ?  Have 
we  not  been  contented  with  the  world,  instead  of  desiring 
Christ  ?  Have  w^e  been,  all  of  us,  like  that  little  ewe  lamb 
that  did  drink  out  of  the  master's  cup,  and  feed  from  his 
table  ?  Have  we  not  rather  been  content  to  stray  upon  the 
mountains,  feeding  anyw^here  but  at  home  ?  I  fear  many  of 
the  troubles  of  our  heart  spring  from  want  of  communion  with 
Jesus.  Not  many  of  us  are  the  kind  of  men  who,  living  with 
Jesus,  his  secrets  must  know.  O  !  no ;  we  live  too  much 
without  the  light  of  his  countenance  ;  and  are  too  happy  when 
he  is  gone  from  us.  Let  us,  each  of  us,  then,  for  I  am  sure 
we  have  each  of  us  need,  in  some  measure,  put  up  the  prayer. 
*'  O  Lord,  revive  thy  work  !"  All !  methinks  I  hear  one  pro" 
fessor  saying,  "  Sir,  I  need  no  revival  in  my  heart ;  I  an 
every  thing  I  wish  to  be."  Down  on  your  knees,  my  breth 
ren  !  down  on  your  knees  for  him  !     He  is  the  man  that  most, 


80  SPIKITUAL    REVIVAL   THE    WANT    OF    THE   CHURCH. 

needs  to  be  prayed  for.  He  says  that  he  needs  no  revival  in 
his  soul ;  but  he  needs  a  revival  of  his  humility,  at  any  rate. 
If  he  supposes  that  he  is  all  that  he  ought  to  be,  and  if  he 
knows  that  he  is  all  he  wishes  to  be,  he  has  very  mean  notions 
of  what  a  Christian  is,  or  of  what  a  Christian  should  be,  and 
very  unjust  ideas  of  himself.  Those  are  in  the  best  condition 
who,  while  they  know  they  want  reviving,  yet  feel  their  con- 
dition and  groan  under  it. 

Now,  I  think  I  have  in  some  degree  substantiated  my 
charge,  I  fear  with  too  strong  arguments ;  and  now  let  me 
notice,  that  the  text  has  something  in  it  which  I  trust  that 
each  of  us  has.  Here  is  not  only  an  evil  implied  in  these 
words — "  O  Lord,  revive  thy  work  ;"  but  there  is  an  evil  e\i- 
dently  felt.  You  see  Habakkuk  knew  how  to  groan  about  it. 
"  O  Lord,"  said  he,  "  revive  thy  work !"  Ah  !  we  many  of  us 
want  revival,  but  few  of  us  feel  that  we  want  it.  It  is  a 
blessed  sign  of  life  within,  when  we  know  how  to  groan  over 
our  departures  from  the  living  God.  It  is  easy  to  find  by 
hundreds  those  that  have  departed,  but  you  must  count  those 
by  ones  who  know  how  to  groan  over  their  departure.  The 
true  believer,  however,  when  he  discovers  that  he  needs  re- 
vival, will  not  be  happy  ;  he  will  begin  at  once  that  incessant 
and  continuous  strain  of  cries  and  groans  which  will  at  last 
prevail  with  God,  and  bring  the  blessing  of  revival  down. 
He  will,  days  and  nights  in  succession,  cry,  "  O  Lord,  revive 
thy  work !" 

Let  me  mention  some  groaning  times,  which  will  always 
occur  to  the  Christian  who  needs  revival.  I  am  sure  he  will 
always  groan,  yjhen  he  looks  upon  lohat  the  Lord  did  for  him 
of  old.  When  he  recollects  the  Mizars  and  the  Hermons, 
and  those  places  where  the  Lord  appeared  of  old  to  him,  say- 
ing, "  I  have  loved  thee  with  an  everlasting  love,"  I  know  he 
will  never  look  back  to  them  without  tears.  If  he  is  what  he 
should  be  as  a  Christian,  or  if  he  thinks  he  is  not  in  a  right 
condition,  he  will  always  weep  when  he  remembers  Goa's 
loving-kindness  of  old.  O  !  whenever  the  soul  has  lost  fello  7- 
ship  with  Jesus,  it  can  not  bear  to  think  of  the  "  chariots  of 
Aminadab ;"  it  can  not  endure  to  think  of  "  the  banqueting- 


SPIRITUAL    REVIVAL   THE    WANT    OF   THE   CHURCH.  81 

house,"  for  it  hath  not  been  there  so  long ;  and  when  it  does 
think  of  it,  it  says, 

"  The  peaceful  hours  I  then  enjoyed, 
How  sweet  then*  memory  still, 
But  they  have  left  an  aching  void 
The  world  can  never  fill." 

When  he  hears  a  sermon  which  relates  the  glorious  experience 
of  the  believer  who  is  in  a  healthy  state,  he  will  put  his  hand 
upon  his  heart,  and  say,  "Ah  !  such  was  my  experience  once  ; 
but  those  happy  days  are  gone.  My  sun  is  set ;  those  stars 
which  once  lit  up  my  darkness  are  all  quenched ;  O  !  that  I 
might  again  behold  him  ;  O !  that  I  might  once  more  see  his 
face ;  O  !  for  those  sweet  visits  from  on  high ;  O !  for  the 
grapes  of  Eschol  once  more."  And  by  the  rivers  of  Babylon 
you  will  sit  down  and  weep.  You  will  weep,  when  you  re- 
member your  goings  up  to  Zion — when  the  Lord  was  precious 
to  you,  when  he  laid  bare  his  heart,  and  was  pleased  also  to 
fill  your  heart  with  the  fullness  of  his  love.  Such  times  will 
be  groaning  times,  when  you  remember  "  the  years  of  the 
right  hand  of  the  Most  High." 

Again,  to  a  Christian  who  wants  revival,  ordi7iances  will  be 
also  groaning  times.  He  will  go  up  to  the  house  of  God ;  but 
he  will  say  of  himself  when  he  comes  away,  "  Ah  !  how  changed ! 
When  I  once  went  with  the  multitude  that  kept  holy  day  every 
word  was  precious.  When  the  song  ascended  my  soul  had 
wings,  and  up  it  flew  to  its  nest  among  the  stars ;  when  the 
prayer  was  offered,  I  could  devoutly  say,  '  Amen ;'  but  now 
the  preacher  preaches  as  he  did  before ;  my  brethren  are  as 
profited  as  once  they  were ;  but  the  sermon  is  dry  to  me,  and 
dull.  I  find  no  fiiult  with  the  preacher ;  I  know  the  fault  is 
in  myself  The  song  is  just  the  same — as  sweet  the  melody, 
as  pure  the  harmony ;  but  ah  !  my  heart  is  heavy  ;  my  harp 
strhigs  are  broken,  and  I  can  not  sing  ;"  and  the  Christian  will 
return  fi'om  those  blessed  means  of  grace,  sighing  and  sobbing, 
because  he  knows  he  wants  revival.  More  especially  at  the 
Lord's  Supper  he  will  think,  when  he  sits  at  the  table,  "  O ! 
what  seasons  I  once  had  here !  In  breaking  the  bread  and 
drinkir  g  the  wine  my  Master  was  present."     He  will  bethink 

4* 


82  SPIRITUAL    REVIVAL   THE   WANT    OF    THE   CHURCH. 

himself  how  his  soul  was  even  carried  to  the  seventh  heaven, 
and  the  house  was  made  "  the  very  house  of  God  and  the  gate 
of  heaven."  "  But  now,"  he  says,  "  it  is  bread,  dry  bread  to 
me ;  it  is  wine,  tasteless  wine,  with  none  of  the  sweetness  of 
paradise  in  it ;  I  drink,  but  all  in  vain.  No  thoughts  of  Christ. 
My  heart  will  not  rise  ;  my  soul  can  not  heave  a  thought  half 
\vay  to  him !"  And  then  the  Christian  will  begin  to  groan 
agan — "  O  Lord  revive  thy  work!" 

But  I  shall  not  detain  you  u^Don  that  subject.  Those  of  you 
who  know  that  you  are  in  Christ,  but  feel  that  you  are  not  in 
a  d^^sirable  condition,  because  you  do  not  love  him  enough, 
and  have  not  that  faith  in  him  which  you  desire  to  have,  I 
would  just  ask  you  this :  Do  you  groan  over  it  ?  Can  you 
groan  now  ?  When  you  feel  your  heart  is  empty,  is  it  "  an 
aching  void  ?"  When  you  feel  that  your  garments  are  stained, 
can  you  wash  those  garments  Avith  tears  ?  When  you  think 
your  Lord  is  gone,  can  you  hang  out  the  black  flag  of  sor- 
row, and  cry,  "  O  my  Jesus !  O  my  Jesus !  art  thou  gone  ?" 
If  thou  canst,  then  I  bid  thee  do  it.  Do  it,  do  it ;  and  may 
God  be  pleased  to  give  thee  grace  to  continue  to  do  it,  until 
a  happier  era  shall  dawn  in  the  reviving  of  thy  soul ! 

And  remark,  in  the  last  j^lace,  upon  this  point,  that  the  soul, 
when  it  is  really  brought  to  feel  its  owm  sad  estate,  because  of 
its  declension  and  departure  from  God,  is  never  content  wit/i- 
out  turning  its  groanings  into  prayer^  and  without  address- 
ing tlie  prayer  to  the  right  quarter:  "O  Lord,  revive  thy 
work!"  Some  of  you,  perhaps,  will  say,  "  Sir,  I  feel  my  need 
of  revival ;  I  intend  to  set  to  work  this  very  afternoon,  as  soon 
as  I  shall  retire  from  this  place,  to  revive  my  soul."  Do  not 
say  it ;  and,  above  all  things,  do  not  try  to  do  it,  for  you  never 
will  do  it.  Make  no  resolutions  as  to  what  you  will  do ;  your 
resolutions  will  as  certainly  be  broken  as  they  are  made,  and 
your  broken  resolutions  will  but  increase  the  number  of  your 
sins.  I  exhort  you,  instead  of  trying  to  revive  yourself,  to 
offer  prayers.  Say  not,  "  I  will  revive  myself,"  but  cry,  "  O 
Lord,  revive  thy  work  !"  And  let  me  solemnly  tell  thee,  thou 
hast  not  yet  felt  what  it  is  to  decline,  thou  dost  not  yet  know 
how  sad  is  thine  estate,  otherwise  thou  wouldest  not  talk  of 
reviving  thyself     If  thou  didst  know  thy  own  position,  thou 


SPIRITUAL    REVIVAL    THE    WANT    OF    THE    CHURCH.  6^ 

wouldest  as  soon  ex23ect  to  see  the  wounded  soldier  on  the 
battle-field  heal  himself  without  medicine,  or  convey  himself 
to  the  hospital  when  his  limbs  are  shot  away,  as  thon  wouldest 
expect  to  revive  thyself  without  the  help  of  God.  I  bid  thee 
not  do  any  thing,  nor  seek  to  do  any  thing,  until  first  of  all 
thou  hast  addressed  Jehovah  himself  by  mighty  prayer — until 
thou  hast  cried  out,  "  O  Lord,  revive  thy  work !-'  Remember, 
he  that  first  made  you  must  keep  you  alive ;  and  he  that  has 
kept  you  alive  must  restore  more  life  to  you.  He  that  has 
preserved  you  from  going  down  to  the  pit,  when  your  feet 
have  been  sliding,  can  alone  set  you  again  upon  a  rock,  and 
establish  your  goings.  Begin,  then,  by  humbling  yourself — 
giving  up  all  hope  of  reviving  yourself  as  a  Christian,  but  be- 
ginning at  once  with  firm  prayer  and  earnest  supplication  to 
God  :  "  O  Lord,  what  I  can  not  do,  do  thou  !  O  Lord,  revive 
thy  work  !" 

Christian  brethren,  I  leave  these  matters  with  you.  Give 
them  the  attention  they  deserve.  If  I  have  erred,  and  in 
aught  judged  you  too  harshly,  God  shall  forgive  me,  for  I 
have  meant  it  honestly.  But  if  I  have  spoken  truly,  lay  it 
to  your  hearts,  and  turn  your  houses  into  a  "  Bochim."  Weep 
men  apart,  and  women  apart,  husbands  apart,  and  wi  es  apart. 
Weep,  weep,  my  bi-ethren  :  "  It  is  a  sad  thing  to  depart  from 
the  living  God."  Weep,  and  may  he  bring  you  back  to  Zion, 
that  you  may  one  day  return  like  Israel,  not  with  weeping, 
but  with  songs  of  everlasting  joy ! 

II.  And  now  I  come  to  the  second  part  of  the  subject,  upon 
which  I  must  be  more  brief.  In  the  church  itself,  taken  as 
a  body,  this  prayer  ought  to  be  one  incessant  and  solemn  lit- 
any :  "  O  Lord,  revive  thy  work  !" 

In  the  present  era  there  is  a  sad  decline  of  the  vitcdity  of 
godliness.  This  age  lias  become  too  much  the  age  of  form, 
instead  of  the  age  of  life.  I  date  the  hour  of  life  from  this  day 
one  hundred  years  ago  when  the  first  stone  was  laid  of  this 
building  in  which  we  now  worship  God.  Then  was  the  day 
of  life  divine,  and  of  power,  sent  down  from  on  high.  God 
had  clothed  Whitefield  with  power :  he  was  preaching  w^ith  a 
majesty  and  a  might  of  which  one  could  scarcely  think  mortal 
could  ever  be  capable ;  not  because  he  was  any  thing  in  hinx- 


84  SPIRITUAL   REVIVAL   THE   WANT    OF   THE    CHUROH. 

self,  but  because  his  Master  girded  him  with  might.  After 
Whitefield  there  was  a  succession  of  great  and  holy  men.  But 
now,  sirs,  we  have  fallen  upon  the  dregs  of  time.  Men  are 
the  rarest  things  in  all  this  world;  we  have  not  many  Ic  fl 
now.  We  have  no  men  in  government  hardly,  to  conduct 
our  politics,  and  scarcely  any  men  in  religion.  We  have  t^  e 
things  that  perform  their  duties,  as  they  are  called  ;  we  ha^e 
the  good,  and,  perhaps,  the  honest  things,  who  in  the  regular 
routine  go  on  like  pack-horses  with  their  bells,  for  ever  in  the 
old  style  ;  but  men  who  dare  to  be  singular,  because  to  be 
singular  is  generally  to  be  right  in  a  wicked  world,  are  not 
very  many  in  this  age.  Compared  with  the  puritanic  times 
even,  where  are  our  divines?  Could  we  marshal  together 
our  Howes  and  our  Charnocks  ?  Could  we  gather  together 
such  names  as  I  could  mention  about  fifty  at  a  time  ?  I  trcw 
not.  Xor  could  we  bring  together  such  a  galaxy  of  grace 
and  talent  as  that  which  immediately  followed  Whitefield. 
Think  of  Rowland  Hill,  Newton,  Toplady,  Doddridge,  and 
numbers  of  others  wiiom  time  would  fill  me  to  mention. 
They  are  gone,  they  are  gone;  their  venerated  dust  sleeps  in 
the  earth  ,  and  where  are  their  successors  ?  Ask  where,  and 
echo  shud  reply,  "  Where  ?"  There  are  none.  Successors  of 
them,  where  are  they  ?  God  hath  not  yet  raised  them  up,  or, 
if  he  have,  you  have  not  yet  found  out  where  they  are.  There 
is  preaching,  and  what  is  it  ?  "  O  Lord,,  help  thy  servant  to 
preach,  and  teach  him  by  thy  Spirit  what  to  say."  Then  out 
comes  the  manuscript,  and  they  read  it.  A  pure  insult  to  Al- 
mighty God !  We  have  preaching,  but  it  is  of  this  order.  It 
is  not  preaching  at  all.  It  is  speaking  very  beautifully  and 
very  finely,  possibly  eloquently,  in  some  sense  of  the  w^ord  ; 
but  where  is  the  right  down  preaching,  such  as  Whitefield's  ? 
Have  you  ever  read  one  of  his  sermons  ?  You  will  not  think 
him  eloquent ;  you  can  not  think  him  so.  Plis  expressions 
were  rough,  frequently  very  coarse  and  unconnected ;  there 
was  very  much  declamation  about  him ;  it  was  a  great  part, 
indeed,  of  his  speech.  But  where  lay  his  eloquence  ?  Not  in 
the  words  you  read,  but  in  the  tone  in  which  he  delivered 
them,  and  in  the  earnestness  with  which  he  felt  them,  and  in 
the  tears  which  ran  down  his  cheeks,  and  in  the  pouring  out 


SPIRITUAL   REVIVAL   THE   WANT    OF   THE    CHUKOH.  ^5 

of  his  soul.  The  reason  why  he  was  eloquent  was  just  what 
the  word  means.  He  was  eloquent,  because  he  spoke  right 
out  from  his  heart — from  the  innermost  depths  of  the  ra.  n. 
You  could  see  when  he  spoke. that  he  meant  what  he  sr  i. 
He  did  not  speak  as  a  trade,  or  as  a  mere  machine,  but  ;e 
preached  what  he  felt  to  be  the  truth,  and  what  he  could  i  3t 
help  preaching.  When  you  heard  him  preach,  you  could  ii  )t 
help  feeling  that  he  was  a  man  who  would  die  if  he  could  not 
preach,  and  with  all  his  might  call  to  men  and  say,  "  Com  3 ! 
come  !  come  to  Jesus  Christ,  and  believe  on  him !"  Now, 
that  is  just  the  lack  of  these  times.  Where,  where  is  earne  t- 
ness  now  ?  It  is  neither  in  pulpit  nor  yet  in  pew,  in  such  a 
measure  as  we  desire  it ;  and  it  is  a  sad,  sad  age,  when  ea  n- 
estness  is  scofted  at,  and  when  that  very  zeal  which  ought  to 
be  the  prominent  characteristic  of  the  pulpit  is  regarded  as 
enthusiasm  and  fanaticism.  I  ask  God  to  make  us  all  su.;h 
fanatics  as  most  men  laugh  at — to  make  us  all  just  such  entl  a- 
siasts  as  many  despise.  We  reckon  it  the  greatest  fanatici'  m 
in  the  world  to  go  to  hell,  the  greatest  enthusiasm  upon  eai  :h 
to  love  sin  better  than  righteousness;  and  we  think  these 
neither  fanatics  nor  enthusiasts  who  seek  to  obey  God  rath  iv 
than  man,  and  follow  Christ  in  all  his  ways.  We  repeat,  that 
one  sad  proof  that  the  church  wants  revival  is  the  absence  ;>f 
that  death-like,  solemn  earnestness  which  was  once  seen  "n 
C  hristian  pulpits. 

The  absence  of  sound  doctrine  is  another  proof  of  our  want 
>f  revival.  Do  you  know  who  are  called  Antimonians  no.v, 
who  are  called  " hypers,"  who  are  laughed  at,  who  are  re- 
jected as  being  unsound  in  the  faith?  Why,  the  men  thit 
once  were  the  orthodox  are  now  the  heretics.  We  can  tii  11 
back  to  the  records  of  our  Puritan  fathers,  to  the  articles  if 
the  Church  of  England,  to  the  preaching  of  Whitelield,  and  we 
can  say  of  that  preaching,  it  is  the  very  thing  we  love ;  a.  d 
the  d/)ctrines  which  were  then  uttered  are — and  we  dare  to  s  'y 
it  everywhere — the  very  self-same  doctrines  that  he  proclaime  1. 
But  because  we  choose  to  proclaim  them,  we  are  thought  sing- 
ular and  strange;  and  the  reason  is,  because  sound  doctri  le 
hath  to  a  great  degree  ceased.  It  began  in  this  way.  Fii  st 
of  all  the  truths  were  fully  believed,  but  the  angles  were  a 


86  SPIRITUAL    REVIVAL    THE    WANT    OF    THE    CHURCH. 

little  taken  off.  The  minister  believed  election,  but  he  did  not 
use  the  word,  for  fear  it  should  in  some  degree  disturb  the 
equanimity  of  the  deacon  in  the  green  pew  in  the  corner. 
He  believed  that  all  men  were  depraved,  but  he  did  not  say  it 
positively,  because  if  he  did,  there  was  a  lady  who  had  sub- 
scribed so  much  to  the  chapel — she  would  not  come  again;  so 
that  while  he  did  believe  it,  and  did  say  it  in  some  sense,  he 
rounded  it  a  little.  Afterward  it  came  to  this.  Ministers 
said,  "  We  believe  these  doctrines,  but  we  do  not  think  them 
profitable  to  preach  to  the  people.  They  are  quite  true  :  free 
grace  is  true ;  the  great  doctrines  of  grace  that  were  preached 
by  Christ,  by  Paul,  by  Augustine,  by  Calvin,  and  down  to  this 
age  by  their  successors,  are  true  ;  but  they  had  better  be  kept 
back — they  must  be  very  cautiously  dealt  with  ;  they  are  very 
high  and  dreadful  doctrines,  and  they  must  not  be  preached : 
we  believe  them,  but  we  dare  not  speak  them  out."  After 
that  it  came  to  something  worse.  They  said  within  them- 
selves, "  Well,  if  these  doctrines  will  not  do  for  us  to  preach, 
perhaps  they  are  not  true  at  all ;"  and  going  one  step  further, 
they  said  they  dare  not  preach  them.  They  did  not  actually 
say  it,  perhaps,  but  they  began  just  to  hint  that  they  were  not 
true ;  then  they  went  one  step  further,  giving  us  something 
which  they  said  was  the  truth ;  and  then  they  would  cast  us 
out  of  the  synagogue,  as  if  they  were  the  rightful  owners  of  it, 
and  we  were  the  hitruders.  So  they  have  passed  on  from  bad 
to  worse ;  and  if  you  read  the  standard  divinity  of  this  age, 
and  the  standard  divinity  of  Whitefield's  day,  you  will  find  that 
the  two  can  not  by  any  possibility  stand  together.  We  have 
got  a  "new  theology."  New  theology?  Why,  it  is  any 
thing  but  a  :7yieology ;  it  is  an  ology  which  hath  cast  out  God 
utterly  and  entirely,  and  enthroned  man,  as  it  is  the  doctrine 
of  man,  and  not  the  doctrine  of  the  everlasting  God.  We 
want  a  revival  of  sound  doctrine  once  more  in  the  midst  of  the 
land. 

And  the  church  at  large,  may  be,  wants  a  revival  of  doion- 
right  earnestness  i7i  its  members.  Ye  are  not  the  men  to  fight 
the  Lord's  battles  yet.  Ye  have  not  the  earnestness,  the  zeal, 
which  once  the  children  of  God  had.  Your  forefathers  were 
oaken  men;  ye  are  willow  men.     Our  people,  what  are  they. 


SPIRITUAL    REVIVAL   THE    WANT    OF   THE    CHURCH.  87 

many  of  them  ?  Strong  in  doctrine  when  they  are  with  strong- 
doctrine  men  ;  but  they  waver  when  they  get  with  others,  and 
they  change  as  often  as  they  change  their  company  ;  they  are 
sometimes  one  thing,  and  sometimes  another.  They  are  not 
the  men  to  go  to  the  stake  and  die ;  they  are  not  the  men  that 
know  how  to  die  daily,  and  so  are  ready  for  death  when  it 
comes.  Look  at  our  prayer-meetings,  with  here  and  there  a 
briglit  exception.  Go  in.  There  are  six  women ;  scarcely 
ever  enough  members  come  to  pray  four  times.  Look  at 
them.  Prayer-meetings  they  are  called  ;  spare  meetings  they 
ought  to  be  called,  for  sparely  enough  they  are  attended.  And 
very  few  there  are  that  go  to  our  fellowship-meetings,  or  to 
any  other  meetings  that  we  have  to  help  one  another  in  the 
fear  of  the  Lord.  Are  they  attended  at  all  ?  I  would  like  to 
see  a  newspaper  printed  somewhere,  containing  a  list  of  all  the 
persons  that  went  to  those  meetings  during  the  week  in  any  of 
our  chapels.  Ah  !  my  friends,  if  they  should  comprise  all  the 
Christians  in  London,  you  might  find  that  a  chapel  or  two 
would  hold  them  all.  There  are  few  enough  that  go.  We 
have  not  earnestness,  we  have  not  life,  as  we  once  had ;  if  we 
had,  we  should  be  called  worse  names  than  we  are ;  we  should 
have  viler  epithets  thrown  at  us,  if  we  were  more  true  to  our 
Master ;  we  sliould  not  have  all  things  quite  so  comfortable, 
if  we  served  God  better.  We  are  getting  the  church  to  be  an 
institution  of  our  land — an  honorable  institution.  Ah!  some 
think  it  a  grand  thing  when  the  church  becomes  an  honorable 
institution  !  Methinks  it  shows  the  church  has  swerved,  when 
she  begins  to  be  very  honorable  in  the  eyes  of  the  world.  She 
must  still  be  cast  out,  she  must  still  be  called  evil,  and  still  be 
despised,  until  that  day  shall  come,  when  her  Lord  shall  honor 
her  because  she  has  honored  him — shall  honor  her,  even  n  this 
world,  in  the  day  of  his  appearing. 

Beloved,  do  you  think  it  is  true  that  the  church  wants  re- 
viving ?  Yes,  or  no  ?  "  N"o,"  you  say,  "  not  to  the  extent 
that  you  suppose.  We  think  the  church  is  in  a  good  condi- 
tion. We  are  not  among  those  who  cry,  '  The  former  days 
were  better  than  these.'  "  Perhaps  you  are  not :  you  may  be 
far  wiser  than  we  are,  and  therefore  you  are  able  to  see  those 
various  signs  of  goodness  which  are  to  us  so  small  that  we  art* 


88  SPIRITUAL    REVIVAL   THE    WANT    OF   THE    CHURCH. 

not  able  to  discover  them.  You  may  suppose  that  the  church 
is  in  a  good  condition  ;  if  so,  of  course  you  can  not  sympathize 
with  me  in  preacliing  from  such  a  text,  and  urging  you  to  use 
such  a  prayer.  But  there  are  others  of  you  who  are  frequently 
prone  to  cry,  "The church  wants  reviving."  Let  me  bid  you, 
instead  of  grumbling  at  your  minister,  instead  of  finding  fault 
with  the  different  parts  of  the  church,  to  cry,  "O  Lord  revive 
thy  work!"  "  O !"  says  one,  "if  we  had  another  minister. 
O  !  if  we  had  another  kind  of  worship.  O  !  if  we  had  a  dif- 
ferent sort  of  preaching."  Just  as  if  that  were  all !  It  is, 
"  O  !  if  the  Lord  would  come  into  the  hearts  of  the  men  you 
have  got.  O  !  if  he  would  make  the  forms  you  do  use  full  of 
power."  You  do  not  want  fresh  ways  or  fresh  machinery ; 
you  want  the  life  in  what  you  have.  There  is  an  engine  on 
a  railway  ;  a  train  has  to  be  moved.  "  Bring  another  engine," 
says  one,  "  and  another,  and  another."  The  engines  are 
brought,  but  the  train  does  not  move  at  all.  Light  the  fire, 
and  get  the  steam  up,  that  is  what  you  want ;  not  fresh  en- 
gines. We  do  not  want  fresh  ministers,  or  fresh  plans,  or 
fresh  ways,  though  many  might  be  invented,  to  make  the 
church  better;  we  only  want  life  in  what  we  have  got.  Given, 
the  very  man  who  has  emptied  your  chapel ;  given,  the  self- 
same person  that  brought  your  prayer-meeting  low  ;  God  can 
make  the  chapel  crowded  to  the  doors  yet,  and  give  thousands 
of  souls  to  that  very  man.  It  is  not  a  new  man  that  is  wanted  ; 
it  is  the  life  of  God  in  him.  Do  not  be  crying  out  for  some- 
thing new ;  it  will  no  more  succeed,  of  itself,  than  what  you 
have.  Cry,  "  O  Lord,  revive  thy  work!"  I  have  noticed  in 
different  churches,  that  the  minister  has  thought  first  of  this 
contrivance,  then  of  that.  He  tried  one  plan,  and  thought 
that  would  succeed ;  then  he  tried  another ;  that  was  not  it. 
Keep  to  the  old  plan,  but  get  life  in  it.  We  do  not  want  any- 
thing new  ;  "  the  old  is  better" — let  us  keep  to  it.  But  we 
want  the  hfe  in  the  old.  "  O  !"  men  cry,  "  we  have  nothing 
but  the  shell ;  they  are  going  to  give  us  a  new  shell."  No, 
sirs,  we  will  keep  the  old  one,  but  we  will  have  the  life  in  the 
shell  too ;  we  will  have  the  old  thing ;  but  we  must,  or  else  we 
will  throw  the  old  away,  have  the  life  in  the  old.  O !  that 
God  would  give  us  life.     The  church  wants  fresh  revivals 


SPIRITUAL    REVIVAL    THE    WANT    OF   THE   CHURCH.  89 

O !  for  the  days  of  Cambuslang  again,  whenWhitefield  preached 
with  power.  O  !  for  the  days  Avhen  in  this  place  hundreds 
were  converted  sometimes  under  Whitefield's  sermons.  It  lis 
been  known  that  two  thousand  credible  cases  of  conversi  n 
liave  happened  under  one  solitary  discourse.  O  !  for  the  a  ;e 
when  eyes  should  be  strained,  and  ears  should  be  ready  to  i  e- 
ceive  the  word  of  God,  and  when  men  should  drink  in  tie 
word  of  life,  as  it  is  indeed,  the  very  water  of  life,  which  G  )d 
gives  to  dying  souls !  O  !  for  the  age  of  deep  feeling — t  ae 
age  of  deep,  thorough-going  earnestness  !  Let  us  ask  God  lor 
it ;  let  us  plead  with  him  for  it.  Perhaps  he  has  the  man,  or 
the  men,  somewhere,  who  will  shake  the  world  yet ;  perhaps 
even  now  he  is  about  to  pour  forth  a  mighty  influence  upon 
men,  which  shall  make  the  church  as  wonderful  in  this  age,  as 
it  ever  was  in  any  age  that  has  passed. 


SERMON    VI. 

THE    ANXIOUS    INQUIRER. 

"  0  that  I  knew  where  I  might  find  him." — Job,  xxiii.  3. 

We  will  say  nothing  at  this  time  concerning  Job — we  will 
leave  the  patriarch  out  of  the  question,  and  take  these  words 
as  the  exclamation  forced  from  the  aching  heart  of  a  sinner, 
when  he  linds  that  he  is  lost  on  account  of  sin,  and  can  only 
be  saved  by  Christ.  "  O  that  I  knew  where  I  might  find 
him" — "  my  Saviour — that  I  might  be  saved  by  his  love  and 
blood  !"  There  are  some  who  tell  us  that  a  man  can,  if  he 
pleases,  in  one  moment  obtain  peace  with  God  and  joy  in  the 
Holy  Ghost.  Such  persons  may  know  something  of  religion 
in  their  own  hearts;  but  I  think  they  are  not  competent  to  be 
judges  of  others.  God  may  have  given  them  some  peace 
through  believing,  and  brought  them  immediately  into  a  state 
of  joy ;  he  may  have  given  them  some  repentance  for  sin,  and 
then  given  them  quickly  to  rejoice  in  Jesus;  but  I  believe 
that,  in  many  more  cases,  God  begins  by  breaking  the  iron 
heart  in  pieces,  and  often  makes  a  delay  of  days,  of  weeks, 
and  of  months,  before  he  heals  the  heart  which  he  has  wounded, 
and  gives  life  to  the  spirit  which  he  has  killed.  Many  of  God's 
people  have  been,  even  for  years,  seeking  peace,  and  finding 
none ;  they  have  known  their  sins,  they  have  been  permitted 
to  feel  their  guilt,  and  yet,  notwithstanding  that  they  have 
sought  earnestly  with  tears,  they  have  not  attained  to  a  knowl- 
edge of  their  justification  by. faith  in  Christ.  Such  was  the 
case  with  John  Bunyan ;  for  many  a  dreary  month  he  walked 
the  earth  desolate,  and  said  he  knew  himself  to  be  lost  with- 
out Christ ;  on  his  bended  knees,  with  tears  pouring  like 
showers  from  his  eyes,  he  sought  mercy  but  he  found  none. 
Terrible  words  haunted  him  continually ;    dreadful  passages 


THE    ANXIOUS    INQUIRER.  91 

of  Scriptui-e  were  quoted  in  his  ears ;  and  be  found  no  conso- 
lation, until  afterward  God  was  pleased  to  appear  to  him  in 
all  the  plenitude  of  grace,  and  give  him  to  cast  himself  on  the 
Saviour. 

I  think  there  may  be  some  here  who  have  been  for  some 
time  under  the  hand  of  God — some  who  have  been  brought  so 
fir  toward  heaven  as  to  know  this,  that  they  are  undone  un- 
less Christ  shall  save  them.  I  may  be  addressing  some  who 
have  begun  to  pray ;  many  a  time  the  walls  of  their  chamber 
have  listened  to  their  supplication ;  not  once,  nor  twice,  nor 
fifty  times,  but  very  often  have  they  bent  their  knee  in  agon- 
izing prayer  :  and  yet  up  to  this  moment,  so  far  as  their  own 
feelings  are  concerned,  their  prayers  are  unanswered,  Christ 
has  not  smiled  upon  them,  they  have  not  received  the  appli- 
cation of  his  precious  blood,  and  mayhap  they  are  saying  at 
this  hour,  "I  am  ready  to  give  up  all  in  despair;  he  said  he 
would  receive  all  that  came  to  him,  and  he  has  apparently  re- 
jected me."  Take  heart,  O  mourner  !  I  have  a  sweet  message 
to  thee  ;  and  I  pray  the  Lord  that  thou  mayest  find  Christ  on 
the  spot  whei-e  thou  art  now  standing  or  sitting,  and  rejoice 
in  a  pardon  bought  with  blood. 

I  shall  now  proceed  to  consider  the  case  of  a  man  who 
is  awakened,  who  is  seeking  Christ,  but  who  at  present  has 
not,  in  his  own  apprehension,  found  him.  First,  I  shall  notice 
some  hojyeful  signs  in  this  onan^s  case;  secondly,  I  shall  try 
to  give  some  reasons  lohy  it  is  that  a  gracious  God  delays  an 
answer  to  prayer  in  the  case  of  penitent  sinners;  and  then, 
thirdly,  I  shall  close  up  by  giving  some  brief  and  suitable  ad- 
vice to  those  icho  have  been  seeking  Christy  but  have  up  to  the 
present  time  found  it  a  hopeless  search. 

I.  First,  then,  I  notice,  there  are  some  very  hopeful 
signs  in  the  case  of  the  man  who  has  been  seeking 
Christ,  though  he  may  not  have  found  him. 

And  taking  the  text  for  a  ground-work,  we  notice  as  one 
hopeful  sign,  that  the  7nan  has  oiily  one  object.,  and  that  is 
Christ.  "  O  that  I  knew  where  I  might  find  him  I"  The 
worldling's  cry  is,  "  Wlio  will  show  us  any  good  ;  this  good, 
that  good,  or  any  other  good — fifty  kinds  of  good  :  who  will 
show  us  these  ?"     But  the  quickened  sinner  knows  of  only 


92  THE    ANXIOQS    INQUIRER. 

one  good.  "  O  that  I  knew  where  I  might  find  him!^ 
When  the  shiner  is  truly  awakened  to  feel  his  guilt,  if  you 
could  pour  the  gold  of  India  at  his  feet,  he  would  say,  "  Take 
it  away  :  I  want  to  find  him."  If  you  could  then  give  him  all 
the  joys  and  delights  of  the  flesh,  he  would  tell  you  he  had 
tried  all  these,  and  they  but  cloyed  upon  his  appetite.  His 
only  cry  is,  "  O  that  I  knew  where  I  might  find  him  !" 

"  These  ^oll  never  satisfy ; 
Give  me  Christ  or  else  I  die." 

It  is  a  blessed  thing  for  a  man  when  he  has  brought  his  de- 
sires into  a  focus.  When  a  man  has  fifty  diiferent  desires,  his 
heart  resembles  a  pool  of  water,  which  is  spread  over  a  marsh, 
breeding  miasma  and  pestilence  ;  but  when  all  his  desires  are 
brought  into  one  channel,  his  heart  becomes  like  a  river  of 
pure  water,  running  along  and  fertilizing  the  fields.  Haj^py  is 
the  man  who  hath  one  desire,  if  that  one  desire  is  set  on  Christ, 
though  it  may  not  yet  have  been  realized.  If  it  be  his  desire, 
it  is  a  blessed  sign  of  the  divine  work  within  him.  Such  a 
man  will  never  be  content  with  mere  ordinances.  Other  men 
will  go  up  to  God's  house,  and  when  they  have  heard  the  ser- 
mon, they  will  be  satisfied  ;  but  not  so  this  man  ;  he  will  say, 
"O  that  I  knew  where  I  might  find  him!"  His  neighbor 
who  hears  the  sermon  will  be  satisfied  ;  but  this  man  will  say, 
"  I  want  more  than  that ;  I  want  to  find  Christ  in  it."  An- 
other man  will  go  to  the  sacramental  table ;  he  will  eat  the 
bread  and  drink  the  wine,  and  that  will  be  enough  for  him  ; 
he  will  be  contented  with  it.  But  the  quickened  sinner  will 
say,  "No  bread,  no  wine  will  satisfy  me;  I  want  Christ;  I 
must  have  him  ;  mere  ordinances  are  of  no  nse  to  me  ;  I  want 
not  the  Saviour's  clothes ;  I  want  himself;  do  not  ofter  me 
these ;  you  offer  me  the  empty  pitcher  while  I  am  dying  of 
thirst ;  give  me  water,  water,  or  I  die.  It  is  this  I  want." 
As  we  have  it  here  in  the  text,  "  O  that  I  knew  where  I 
might  find  him !" 

Is  tins  thy  condition,  my  friend,  at  this  moment  ?  Hast 
thou  but  one  desire,  and  is  that  after  Christ  ?  Then,  as  the 
Lord  liveth,  thou  art  not  far  from  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 
Hast  thou  but  one  wish  in  thy  heart,  and  that  one  wish  that 


THE   ANXIOUS    IN^QUTTT^R.  93 

thou  mayest  be  washed  from  all  thy  sins  in  Jesus'  blood? 
Canst  thou  rtally  say,  "  I  would  give  all  I  have  to  be  a  Chris- 
tian ;  I  would  give  up  every  thing  I  have  and  hope  for,  if  I 
might  but  feel  that  I  have  an  interest  in  the  person  and  death 
of  Christ  ?"  Then,  poor  soul,  despite  all  thy  fears,  be  of  good 
cheer ;  the  Lord  loveth  thee,  and  thou  shalt  come  out  into 
daylight  soon,  and  rejoice  in  the  liberty  wherewith  Christ 
makes  men  free. 

There  is  another  hopeful  sign  ;  not  only  that  the  man  has 
only  one  desire,  but  that  it  is  an  i7itense  one.  Hear  the  text 
again !  "  O  that  I  knew  where  I  might  find  him !"  There  is 
an  "  O"  here :  there  is  an  intensity  of  desire.  There  are 
some  men  who  are  mighty  religious,  but  their  religion  is  never 
more  than  skin  deep  only,  it  never  goes  into  their  heart ;  they 
can  talk  it  finely,  but  they  never  feel  it ;  it  does  not  well  up 
from  the  heart,  and  that  is  a  bad  spring  that  only  comes  fi'om 
the  lip  ;  it  is  the  true  spring  from  the  inmost  heart  of  man 
that  can  send  forth  living  water.  But  this  character  is  no 
hypocrite  :  he  means  what  he  says.  Other  men  will  say, 
"  Yes,  I  should  like  to  be  a  Christian  ;  I  should  like  to  be  par- 
doned ;  I  should  like  to  be  forgiven."  And  so  they  would ; 
but  they  would  like  to  go  on  in  sin  too.  They  would  like  to 
be  saved ;  yes,  but  they  would  like  to  live  in  sin  ;  they  would 
like  to  hold  with  the  hare  and  run  with  the  hounds.  They 
have  no  desire  whatever  to  give  up  their  sins.  They  would 
like  to  be  pardoned  for  all  their  past  transgressions,  and  then 
go  on  just  the  same  as  before.  Their  wish  is  of  no  use,  be- 
cause it  is  so  superficial.  But  when  the  sinner  is  really  quick- 
ened, there  is  nothing  superficial  in  him  then.  It  is,  "  O 
that  I  knew  where  I  might  find  him  !"  coming  from  his  very 
heart.  Art  thou  in  that  position,  my  friend  ?  Is  thy  sigh  a 
real  one  ?  Is  thy  groan  no  mere  fancy,  but  a  real  groan  from 
the  heart  ?  Is  that  tear  which  steals  down  thy  cheek  a  real 
tear,  which  comes  from  the  grief  of  thy  spirit  ?  I  think  I  hear 
you  saying,  "  Sir,  if  you  knew  me  you  would  not  ask  me  that 
question,  for  my  friends  say  I  am  miserable  day  after  day,  and 
so  indeed  I  am.  I  go  to  my  chamber  there,  in  the  lean  to,  at 
the  top  of  the  house,  and  often  do  I  cry  to  God ;  ay,  sir,  I 
cry  in  such  a  style,  I  would  not  ha  T-e  any  one  hear  me  ;  I  cry 


94  THE    ANXIOUS    INQUIRER. 

with  groans  and  tears,  that  I  may  be  brought  near  to  God  ;  I 
do  mean  wliat  I  say."  Then,  beloved,  thou  shalt  be  saved ; 
80  sure  as  it  is  a  real  emotion  of  thy  heart,  God  will  not  let 
thee  perish.  Never  was  there  a  sinner  whose  inmost  heart 
cried  to  God,  who  was  not  loved  of  God ;  never  was  there 
one  who  desired  with  all  his  might  to  be  saved,  and  whose 
soul  groaned  out  that  desire  in  hearty  prayer,  who  was  cast 
away.  His  mercy  may  tarry,  but  it  shall  come.  Pray  on 
still ;  he  will  hear  thee  at  last,  and  thou  shalt  yet  "  rejoice  in 
hope  of  the  glory  of  God." 

But  notice  again,  that  in  the  text  there  is  an  admission  of 
ignorance^  which  is  also  a  very  hopeful  sign.  "  O  that  I  knew!"*^ 
Many  people  think  they  know  every  thing,  and  consequently 
know  nothing,  I  think  it  is  Seneca  who  says,  "  Many  a  man 
would  have  been  a  wise  man,  if  he  had  not  thought  himself 
so  ;  if  he  had  but  known  himself  to  have  been  a  fool,  he  would 
have  become  wise."  The  doorstep  to  the  temple  of  wisdom 
is  a  knowledge  of  our  own  ignorance.  He  can  not  learn 
aright  who  has  not  first  been  taught  that  he  knows  nothing. 
A  sense  of  ignorance  is  a  very  excellent  sign  of  grace.  It  is 
a  singular  thing,  that  every  man  thinks  himself  qualified  to  be 
a  doctor  of  divinity ;  a  man  who  knows  nothing  of  any  other 
science,  thinks  he  must  understand  this  perfectly;  and,  alas! 
alas !  f  )r  those  who  think  they  know  so  much  about  God's 
things,  and  have  never  been  taught  of  God !  Man's  school  is 
not  God's  school.  A  man  may  go  to  all  the  colleges  in  crea- 
tion, and  know  as  little  of  theology  when  he  comes  out  as 
when  he  went  into  them.  It  is  a  good  thing  for  a  man  to  feel 
that  he  is  only  beginning  to  learn,  and  to  be  willing  to  submit 
his  heart  to  the  teaching  of  God's  Spirit,  that  he  may  be  guid- 
ed in  every  thing  by  him.  He  that  knoweth  every  thing  need 
not  think  himself  a  Christian;  he  that  boasteth  that  he  can 
understand  all  mysteries  needeth  to  fear.  But  the  quickened 
soul  says,  *'  Teach  thou  me."  We  become  little  children  when 
God  begins  to  deal  with  us.  Before,  we  were  big,  tall  men 
and  women,  and  so  wise ;  but  when  he  begins  to  deal  with  us, 
he  cuts  us  down  to  the  stature  of  children,  and  we  are  put  on 
the  form  of  humility,  to  learn  the  true  lessons  of  wisdom,  and 
then  we  are  taught  the  great  things  of  God.     Happy  art  thou, 


THE    ANXIOUS    INQUIRER.  1>5 

0  man,  if  thou  knowest  thyself  to  know  nothing.  If  God 
hath  emptied  thee  of  thy  carnal  wisdom,  he  will  fill  thee  with 
heavenly ;  if  he  hath  taught  thee  thine  ignorance,  he  will 
teach  thee  hisAvisdom,  and  bring  thee  to  himself;  and  if  thou 
art  taught  to  reject  all  thy  knowings  and  findings-out,  God  w  ill 
certainly  reveal  himself  to  thee. 

There  is  one  more  hopeful  sign  in  my  text  that  I  must  men- 
tion. It  is  this :  that  the  person  I  have  spoken  of  is  quite  care- 
less where  it  is  he  finds  Christy  so  that  he  does  find  him.  Do 
you  know,  beloved,  that  people  when  they  feel  their  sins,  are 
the  worst  people  in  the  world  to  stick  up  for  sects  ?  Other 
men  can  fight  with  broad-swords  against  their  fellow-creatures; 
but  a  poor  awakened  sinner  says,  "  Lord,  I  will  meet  thee  any- 
where." When  w«  are  whole-hearted,  and  have  never  felt 
our  sins,  we  are  the  most  respectable  religionists  in  the  world ; 
we  venerate  every  nail  in  the  church  door,  and  every  woj-d  in 
the  Book,  and  think  so  much  of  it,  that  we  would  not  have 
any  one  differ  from  us — we  would  cut  him  off  at  once;  but 
when  we  feel  our  sins  we  say,  "  Lord,  if  I  could  find  thee  any- 
where, I  would  be  glad  ;  it  I  could  find  thee  at  the  Baptist 
meeting-house,  if  I  could  find  thee  in  the  Independent  chapel, 

1  should  be  glad  enough  to  go  there.  I  have  always  attended 
a  large,  handsome  church ;  but  if  I  could  find  thee  in  that 
little  despised  meeting-house,  I  should  be  glad  to  go  there ; 
though  it  would  be  degrading  my  rank  and  respectability, 
there  would  I  go  to  find  my  Saviour."  Others  think  they 
would  rather  not  have  Christ,  if  Christ  goes  anywhere  except 
to  their  own  church  ;  they  must  keep  to  their  own  sect,  and  can 
by  no  means  overstep  the  line.  It  is  a  marvelous  thing,  but  I 
believe  I  only  speak  the  experience  of  many,  when  I  say  that 
there  are  very  few  of  you  were  brought  to  know  the  Lord 
where  you  were  in  the  habit  of  attending.  You  have  attend- 
ed there  perhaps  since ;  but  it  w^as  not  your  father's  church, 
not  the  church  of  the  place  where  you  were  born  and  bred, 
but  some  other  church,  into  which  you  strayed  for  a  time,  and 
where  the  arrows  stuck  fast  in  the  heart  of  the  King's  ene- 
mies. I  know  it  was  so  with  me ;  I  never  thought  of  going 
to  the  despised  chapel  whei'e  I  was  first  brought  to  know  the 
Lord,  but  it  s'^iowed  so  hard  that  I  could  not  go  to  a  more  re- 


96  THE    ANXIOUS    INQUIRER. 

sp'  '["table  place,  so  I  was  obliged  to  go  to  the  little  meeting ; 
an  when  I  got  in,  the  preacher  read  his  text — "  Look  unto  me, 
an  _  be  ye  saved,  all  the  ends  of  the  earth."  It  was  a  blessed 
ter  t,  and  blessedly  applied :  but  if  there  had  been  any  stick- 
lin  •  as  to  going  into  places,  I  should  not  have  been  there.  The 
aw  ikened  sinner  says,  "  O  that  I  knew  where  I  might  find 
hii  !  Only  let  me  know  where ;  let  the  minister  of  it  be 
th.;  most  desjjised  in  the  world,  I  will  go  and  hear  him ;  let 
tht  sect  to  which  he  belongs  be  the  most  calumniated  and 
sla  idered,  there  I  will  be  found  seeking  him.  If  I  can  but 
fin  1  Christ,  I  will  be  content  to  find  him  anywhere."  If 
di-  ers  can  go  into  the  deeps  to  bring  up  pearls,  we  should  not 
be  ashamed  sometimes  to  dive  deep  to  bring  up  precious 
je  vels.  Men  will  do  any  thing  to  get  gold  ;  they  will  work 
in  ohe  most  muddy  streams,  or  under  the  most  scorching  sun  ; 
su.ely,  then,  we  ought  not  to  mind  how  much  we  stoop,  if  we 
fin  [  that  which  is  more  precious  than  gold  and  silver,  even 
"  J  2SUS  Christ,  and  him  crucified."  Is  this  also  thy  feeling  ? 
Tl  3n,  beloved,  I  have  not  only  a  hope  of  thee,  but  I  have  a 
cci  tainty  of  thee.  If  thou  art  brought  to  cry  out,  in  all  the 
sei  ses  I  have  mentioned,  "  O  that  I  knew  where  I  might  find 
hill!"  then  assuredly  the  Lord  hath  begun  a  good  work  in 
thee,  and  he  wdll  carry  it  on  even  unto  the  end. 

TI.  But  now,  for  the  second  point,  I  shall  endeavor  to 

GI^  E  SOME  reasons  WHY  A  GRACIOUS  GOD  DELAYS  AN  AN- 
SWER  TO    THE    PRAYERS    OF    PENITENT     SINNERS.        Methiuks    I 

he  ir  some  one  saying,  "  How  is  it  that  God  does  not  give  a 
mm  comfort  as  soon  as  he  repents  ?  Why  is  it  that  the  Lord 
mrkes  some  of  his  people  wait  in  bondage  till  he  gives  them 
libBrty?" 

In  the  first  place,  it  is  to  display  his  ovm  sovereignity.  Ah  ! 
thi.t  is  a  word  that  is  not  often  mentioned  in  pulpits.  Divine 
so^  ereignty  is  a  very  unfashionable  doctrine.  Few  people  care 
to  hear  of  a  God  who  doeth  as  he  pleaseth,  and  is  absolute 
m-  narch  over  man ;  who  knoweth  of  no  law  but  his  own 
ab  <olute'  will,  which  is  always  the  will  to  do  that  which  is 
right,  to  do  good  to  those  whom  he  hath  ordained  unto  eter- 
nal life,  and  to  scatter  mercy  lavishly  upon  all  creatures.  But 
we  do  assert,  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  divine  sovereignty, 


THE    ANXIOUS    INQUIRER.  97 

and  more  especially  in  the  work  of  salvation.  God  said  thus  : 
"  If  I  gave  to  all  men  peace  as  soon  as  they  asked  for  it,  they 
would  begin  to  think  they  had  a  right  to  it.  Now,  I  will  make 
some  of  them  wait,  so  that  they  may  see  that  the  mercy  is 
absolutely  in  my  hand,  and  that  if  I  choose  to  withhold  it 
altogether  I  might  do  so  most  justly ;  and  I  will  make  men 
see  that  it  is  a  gift  of  my  free  grace,  and  not  of  their  deserv- 
ing." In  some  of  our  squares,  where  they  are  anxious  to  keep 
the  right  of  way,  you  know  they  sometimes  shut  the  gates, 
not  because  they  would  inconvenience  us,  but  because  they 
would  preserve  the  right  of  way,  and  let  the  public  see  that 
although  they  let  them  through,  yet  they  have  no  right  of 
way,  and  might  be  excluded  if  the  proprietors  pleased.  So 
with  God :  he  says,  "  Man,  if  I  save  thee,  it  is  entirely  of  my 
will  and  pleasure  ;  my  grace  I  give,  not  because  thou  deserv- 
est  it,  for  then  it  were  no  grace  at  all ;  but  I  give  it  to  the 
most  undeserving  of  men,  that  I  may  keep  my  claim  to  it." 
And  I  take  it  that  this  is  the  best  way  of  proving  God's  sov- 
eignty,  namely,  his  making  delay  between  penitence  and  faith, 
or  between  penitence  and  that  faith  which  brings  peace  with 
God  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost.  I  think  this  is  one  very  im- 
portant reason. 

But  there  is  another.  God  sometimes  delayeth  manifesting 
his  forgi\'ing  mercy  to  them,  in  order  that  they  may  find  out 
some  secret  siv.  There  is  something  hidden  in  their  hearts 
which  they  do  not  know  of  They  come  to  God  confessing 
their  sins,  and  they  think  they  have  made  a  clean  breast  of  all 
their  transgressions.  "  Nay,"  saith  God,  "  I  will  not  give  you 
pardon  yet,  or  I  will  not  apply  it  to  your  conscience  yet ; 
there  is  a  sin  you  have  not  yet  discovered  ;"  and  he  sets  the 
heart  searching  itself  again,  till  Jerusalem  is  searched  as  with 
candles,  and  lo,  there  is  some  sin  dragged  out  from  the  corner 
in  which  it  was  hidden.  Conscience  says,  "  I  never  knew  this 
sin  before  ;  I  never  felt  it  as  a  sin  ;  LoFd,  I  repent."  "  Ah," 
saith  the  mighty  Maker,  "  now  I  have  proved  thee  and  tried 
thee,  and  found  out  this  dross,  I  will  speak  to  thee  the  word 
of  consolation  and  comfort."  Art  thou,  then,  a  mourner, 
seeking  rest,  and  not  finding  it  ?  I  beseech  thee,  look  into 
thine  heart  once  more.     Perhaps  there  is  some  hidden  lust 

S 


03  THE   ANXIOUS   INQUIRER. 

there,  some  secret  sin.  Look  within  once  more ;  turn  the 
traitor  out.  Then  will  God  come  and  dwell  in  thy  soul,  and 
give  unto  thee  the  "  peace  that  passeth  all  understanding." 

Another  reason  is,  that  he  may  make  its  mo7'e  useful  i?i  after 
life.  A  man  is  never  made  thoroughly  useful  unless  he  has 
suffering.  I  do  not  think  there  is  much  done  by  a  man  who 
is  not  a  suffering  man.  We  must  first  suffer  in  our  heads  and 
hearts  the  things  we  preach,  or  we  shall  ne^'er  preach  them 
with  effect ;  and  if  we  are  private  Christians  we  can  never  be 
of  use  to  our  fellow  men,  unless  we  have  passed  through  some- 
what the  same  trials  they  have  had  to  endure.  So  God  makes 
some  of  his  people  wait  a  long  time  before  he  gives  them  the 
manifestation  of  their  pardon,  in  order  that  they  may  comfort 
others  in  after  days.  "  I  need  thee  to  be  a  consolation  to 
others ;  therefore  I  will  make  thee  full  of  grief,  and  drunken 
with  wormwood,  so  that  when  thou  shalt  in  after  years  meet 
with  the  mourner,  thou  mayest  say  to  him,  I  have  suffered  the 
same  and  endured  the  same."  And  there  are  none  so  fit  to 
comfort  others,  as  those  who  have  once  needed  comfort  them- 
selves. Then  take  heart.  Perhaps  the  Lord  designs  thee  for 
a  great  work.  He  is  keeping  thee  low  in  bondage,  and  doubt, 
and  fear,  that  he  may  bring  thee  out  more  clearly,  and  make 
thy  light  like  the  light  of  seven  days,  and  bring  forth  thy 
righteousness  "  clear  as  the  sun,  fair  as  the  moon,  and  terrible 
as  an  army  with  banners."  Wait,  then,  for  God  designs  good 
to  thee,  and  good  to  others  through  thee,  by  this  delay. 

But  it  often  arises  not  so  much  from  God  as  from  ourselves. 
It  is  ignora:ice  of  the  way  of  salvation  which  keeps  many  a 
man  longer  in  doubt  than  he  would  be,  if  he  knew  more  of  it. 
I  do  not  hesitate  to  affirm,  that  one  of  the  hardest  things  for 
a  sinner  to  understand  is  the  way  of  salvation.  It  seems  the 
plainest  thing  in  all  the  world;  nothing  appears  more  easy 
than,  "  Believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be 
saved."  But  when  the  sinner  is  led  tc  feel  himself  a  sinner,  he 
finds  it  not  so  easy  to  understand  as  he  thought.  We  tell  a  man 
that,  with  all  their  blackness,  sinners  are  to  be  pardoned  ;  that, 
with  all  their  sins,  they  are  to  be  forgiven  freely  for  Christ's 
Bake.  "  But,"  says  the  man  when  he  feels  himself  to  be  black, 
"  do  you  mean  to  tell  me  that  I  am  to  be  made  whiter  than 


IHE   ANXIOUS    INyUIREE.  99 

snow  ?  Do  you  mean  to  tell  me  that  I  who  am  lost  am  to  be 
saved,  not  through  any  tiling  I  do,  or  hope  to  do,  but  purely 
through  what  another  did  ?"  He  can  hardly  believe  it  pos- 
sible ;  he  will  have  it,  he  must  do  something ;  he  must  do  this, 
or  that,  or  the  other,  to  help  Christ ;  and  the  hardest  thing  in 
the  world  is  to  bring  a  man  to  see  that  salvation  is  of  the  Lord 
alone,  and  not  at  all  of  himself;  that  it  is  God's  free  and  per- 
fect gift,  which  leaves  nothing  of  ours  to  be  added  to  it,  but 
is  given  to  us  to  cover  us  completely,  from  head  to  foot  without 
any  thing  of  our  own.  Men  will  conceive  what  God  would  not 
have  them  conceive,  and  they  will  not  receive  that  which  God 
would  have  them  embrace.  You  know,  it  may  be  very  easy 
to  talk  of  certain  cures,  and  to  read  of  them.  We  may  say 
*'  Such  and  such  a  medicine  is  very  effective,  and  will  work 
such  and  such  a  cure ;"  but  when  we  are  sick  ourselves,  we 
are  often  very  dubious  of  the  medicine,  and  if,  having  taken 
draught  after  draught  of  it,  we  find  it  does  not  cure  us,  perhaps 
we  are  brought  to  think,  that  thougti  it  may  cure  others,  it 
can  not  cure  us,  because  there  has  been  such  delay  in  the 
operation  of  it.  So  the  poor  soul  thinks  of  the  gospel,  "  Cer- 
tainly it  can  not  heal  me ;"  and  then  he  misunderstands  the 
nature  of  the  sacred  medicine  altogether,  and  begins  to  take 
the  law  instead  of  the  gospel.  Now  the  law  never  saved  any 
yet,  though  it  has  condemned  full  many  in  its  time,  and  will 
condemn  us  all,  unless  we  have  the  gospel.  If  any  man  here 
should  be  in  doubt  on  account  of  ignorance,  let  me,  as  plainly 
as  I  can,  state  the  gospel.  I  believe  it  to  be  wrapt  up  in  one 
word — /Substitution.  I  have  always  considei-ed,  with  Luther 
and  Calvin,  that  the  sum  and  substance  of  the  gospel  lies  in 
that  word.  Substitution,  Christ  standing  in  the  stead  of  man. 
If  I  understand  the  gospel,  it  is  this  :  I  deserve  to  be  lost  and 
ruined ;  the  only  reason  why  I  should  not  be  damned  is  this, 
that  Christ  was  punished  in  my  stead,  and  there  is  no  need  to 
execute  a  sentence  twice  for  sin.  On  the  other  hand,  I  know 
I  can  not  enter  heaven,  unless  I  have  a  perfect  righteousness ; 
I  am  absolutely  certain  I  shall  never  have  one  of  my  own,  for 
I  find  I  sin  every  day  ;  but  then  Christ  had  a  perfect  righteous- 
ness, and  he  said,  "There,  take  my  garment,  put  it  on;  you 
shall  stand  before   God   as  if  you  were    Christ,  and   T  will 


100  THE    ANXIOUS    INQUIRER. 

stand  before  God  as  if  I  had  been  the  sinner  ;  I  will  suffer  m 
the  sinner's  stead,  and  you  shall  be  rewarded  for  works  which 
you  did  not  do,  but  which  Christ  did  for  you."  I  think  the 
whole  substance  of  salvation  lies  in  the  thought,  that  Christ 
stood  in  the  place  of  man.  The  prisoner  is  in  the  dock ;  he  is 
about  to  be  taken  away  for  death  ;  he  deserves  to  die ;  he  has 
been  a  mighty  criminal.  But  before  he  is  taken  away,  the 
judge  asks  whether  there  is  any  possible  plan  wiiereby  that 
prisoner's  life  can  be  spared.  Up  rises  one  who  is  pure  and 
perfect  himself,  and  has  known  no  sin,  and  by  the  allowance  of 
the  judge,  for  that  is  necessary,  he  steps  into  the  dock,  and 
says,  "  Consider  me  to  be  the  prisoner ;  pass  the  sentence  on 
me,  and  let  me  die.  Gentlemen  of  the  court,"  says  he,  "  con- 
sider the  prisoner  to  be  myself.  I  have  fought  for  my  coun- 
try ;  I  have  dared,  and  deserved  well  of  it ;  reward  him  as  if 
he  had  done  good,  and  punish  me  as  if  I  had  committed  the 
sin."  You  say,  '*  Such  a  thing  could  not  occur  in  an  earthly 
court  of  law."  Ay,  but  it  has  happened  in  God's  court  of 
law.  In  the  great  court  of  King's  Bench,  where  God  is 
Judge  of  all,  it  has  happened.  The  Saviour  said,  "  The  sinner 
deserves  to  die ;  let  me  die  in  his  stead,  and  let  him  be  clothed 
in  my  righteousness."  To  illustrate  this,  I  will  give  you  two 
instances.  One  is  that  of  an  ancient  king,  who  passed  a  law 
against  a  crime,  and  the  punishment  of  the  crime  was,  that 
any  one  who  committed  it  should  have  both  his  eyes  put  out. 
His  own  son  committed  the  crime.  The  king,  as  a  strict  judge, 
said,  "  I  can  not  alter  the  law  ;  I  have  said  that  the  Joss  of  eyes 
shall  be  the  penalty ;  take  out  one  of  mine  and  one  of  his." 
So,  you  see,  he  strictly  carried  out  the  law  ;  but  at  the  same 
time  he  was  able  to  have  mercy  in  part  upon  his  son.  But  in 
the  case  of  Christ  we  must  go  a  little  further.  He  did  not 
say  "  Exact  half  the  penalty  of  me,  and  half  of  the  sinner ;" 
he  said,  "  Put  both  my  eyes  out ;  nail  me  to  the  tree ;  let  me 
die;  let  me  take  all  the  guilt  away,  and  then  the  sinner 
may  go  free."  We  have  heard  of  another  case,  that  of  two 
brothers,  one  of  whom  had  been  a  great  criminal,  and  was 
about  to  die,  when  his  brother,  coming  into  court,  decorated 
with  medals,  and  having  many  wounds  upon  him,  rose  up  to 
plead  with  the  judge,  that  he  would  have  mercy  on  the  crimi- 


THE    ANXIOUS    INQUIRER.  101 

oal  for  his  sake.  Then  he  began  to  strip  himself  and  show 
his  scars — how  here  and  there  on  his  big  broad  breast  he  had 
received  saber  cuts  in  defense  of  his  country.  "By  these 
wounds,"  he  said — and  he  lifted  up  one  arm,  the  other  having 
been  cut  away — "  by  these  my  wounds,  and  the  sufferings  I 
have  endured  for  my  country,  I  beseech  thee,  have  mercy  on 
him."  For  his  brother's  sake  the  criminal  was  allowed  to 
escape  the  punishment  that  was  hanging  over  his  head.  It 
was  even  i'o  with  Christ.  "  The  sinner,"  he  said,  "  deserves 
to  die ;  then  I  will  die  in  his  stead.  He  deserves  not  to  enter 
heaven,  for  he  has  not  kept  the  law ;  but  I  have  kept  the  law 
for  him,  he  shall  have  my  righteousness,  and  I  will  take  his 
sin  ;  and  so  the  just  shall  die  for  the  unjust,  to  bring  him  to 
God."  I  have  thus  run  away  from  the  subject  somewhat,  in 
order  to  clear  up  any  ignorance  that  might  exist  in  the  minds 
of  some  of  my  hearers,  as  to  this  essential  point  of  the  gospel 
plan. 

III.  And  now  I  am  to  give  some  advice  to  those  who  have 

BEEN  SEEKING  ChRIST,  AND  WHO  HAVE  NEVER  FOUND  HIM,  HOW 
THEY  MAY  FIND  HIM. 

In  the  iirst  place,  let  me  say.  Go  wherever  Christ  goes.  The 
sick  man  knew  that  Christ  went  to  Bethesda,  and  there  he 
lay.  If  Christ  were  to  walk  this  earth  again,  and  heal  the 
eick,  all  the  sick  people  would  inquire,  '*  Where  does  Christ 
walk  to-morrow  ?"  and  as  soon  as  they  found  out  where  he 
would  take  his  walks  abroad,  there  they  would  be  lying  thick 
on  the  pavement,  in  the  hope  that  as  he  passed  by  he  would  heal 
them.  Go  up,  then,  to  Christ's  house  :  it  is  there  he  meets 
w^ith  his  people.  Read  his  Word  :  it  is  there  he  blesses  them, 
by  applying  sweet  promises  to  them.  Keep  to  the  ordinances : 
do  not  neglect  them.  Christ  comes  to  Bethesda  pool :  lie  by 
the  water.  If  you  can  not  put  in  your  foot,  be  where  Christ 
comes.  You  know,  Thomas  did  not  get  the  blessing,  for  he 
was  not  there  when  Jesus  came.  Be  not  away  from  the  house 
of  God  ;  so  that  when  he  passes  by  he  may  haply  look  on  thee, 
and  say,  "  Thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee." 

And  whatever  you  do,  when  Christ  passes  by,  cri/  after  htm 
with  all  your  might;  never  be  satisfied  until  you  do  make 
him  heat  ;  and  if  he  frown  on  yoa   seemingly,  for  the  moment, 


102  THE    ANXIOUS    INQUIRER. 

do  not  be  stoppe  I  or  stfiyed.  If  you  are  a  little  stirred  by  a 
sermon,  pray  over  it ;  do  not  lose  the  auspicious  moment.  li 
you  hear  any  thing  read  which  gives  you  some  hope,  lift  up 
your  heart  in  prayer  at  once  ;  when  the  wind  blows,  then 
should  the  sails  be  set  up  ;  and  it  may  happen  that  God  may 
give  you  grace  to  cross  the  harbor's  mouth,  and  you  may  find 
the  haven  inside,  the  haven  of  perpetual  rest.  There  was  a  man, 
you  know,  who  was  born  blind,  and  who  wanted  to  have  his 
sight.  As  he  sat  by  the  road-side  one  day,  he  heard  that 
Jesus  passed  by,  and  when  he  heard  that,  he  cried  after  him, 
"  Jesus,  thou  son  of  David,  have  mercy  on  me."  The  people 
wanted  to  hear  Christ  preach,  so  they  hushed  the  poor  man ; 
but  he  cried  again,  "Thou  Son  of  David,  have  mercy  on  me." 
The  Son  of  David  turned  not  his  head  ;  he  did  not  look  upon 
the  man,  but  continued  his  discourse  ;  but  still  the  man  shout- 
ed, "  Jesus,  thou  Son  of  David,  have  mercy  on  me !"  And 
then  Jesus  stojiped.  The  disciples  ran  to  the  poor  man,  and 
said,  "  Be  still,  trouble  not  the  Master."  But  he  cried  so 
much  the  more,  "  Jesus,  thou  Son  of  David,  have  mercy  on 
me."  And  Jesus  at  last  said,  "  What  wilt  thou  that  I  shall  do 
unto  thee  ?"  He  said,  "  Lord,  that  I  may  receive  my  sight." 
He  received  it,  and  "  went  on  his  way  rejoicing."  Now,  your 
doubts  say,  "  Hush  !  do  not  pray  any  more ;"  Satan  says,  *'  Be 
still ;  do  not  cry  any  more."  Tell  your  doubts  and  fears,  arid 
the  demon  too,  that  you  will  give  Christ  no  rest  till  he  turns 
his  eyes  upon  you  in  love,  and  heals  your  diseases.  Cry  aloud 
unto  him,  O  thou  awakened  sinner,  when  he  passes  by. 

The  next  piece  of  advice  I  would  give  you  is  this :  tJiinh 
very  much  of  Christ.  No  way  that  I  know  of  will  get  you 
faith  in  Christ  so  well  as  thinking  of  him.  I  would  advise  you, 
conscience-stricken  sinner,  to  spend  an  hour  in  meditation  on 
Christ.  You  do  not  want  to  spend  an  hour  in  meditation  on 
yourself;  you  will  get  very  little  good  from  that;  you  may 
know  beforehand  that  there  is  no  hope  for  you  in  yourself. 
But  spend  an  h^ur  in  meditation  on  Christ.  Go,  beloved,  to 
thy  closet,  and  sit  down  in  that  chamber  of  yours;  picture 
him  in  th  3  garden  ;  think  you  see  him  there,  sweating  "  great 
drops  of  blood,  falling  down  to  the  ground."  Then  picture 
him  standing  in  Pilate's  hall ;  think  you  see  him  with  hia 


THE    ANXIOUS    INQUIRER.  103 

hands  bound,  his  back  pouring  down  rivers  of  gore  ;  then  fol- 
low him  till  you  see  him  coming  to  the  hill,  Calvary ;  think 
you  see  him  hurled  backward,  and  nailed  to  the  tree  ;  then 
let  your  imagination,  or  rather  your  faith,  bring  before  you 
the  cross  lifted  up,  and  dashed  into  its  socket,  when  every 
bone  of  Christ  was  put  out  of  joint.  Look  at  him  ;  look  at  his 
thorn-crown,  and  see  the  beaded  drops  of  blood  trickling  down 
his  cheek. 

"  See  from  his  head,  his  hands,  his  feet, 
Sorrow  and  love  flow  mingling  down." 

I  know  of  no  means,  under  God,  so  profitable  for  getting  faith, 
as  thoughts  of  Christ ;  for  while  you  are  looking  at  him  you 
will  say,  "  Blessed  Jesus,  didst  thou  die  ?  Surely,  my  soul,  his 
death  is  sufficient  for  thee."  He  is  able  to  save  unto  the  ut- 
termost all  those  who  trust  in  him.  You  may  think  of  a  doc- 
trine for  ever,  and  get  no  good  from  it,  if  you  are  not  already 
saved  ;  but  think  of  the  person  of  Christ,  and  that  will  give 
you  faith.  Take  him  everywhere,  wherever  you  go,  and  try 
to  meditate  on  him  in  your  leisure  moments,  and  then  he  will 
reveal  himself  to  you,  and  give  you  peace.  Ah  !  that  is  the 
point  where  we  feel  that  none  of  us  have  enough  of  Christ,  not 
even  the  best  of  Christians.  I  went  into  a  friend's  house  one 
day,  and  he  said  to  me,  as  a  sort  of  hint,  I  suppose,  "  I  have 
known  so  and  so  these  thirty  years,  without  hearing  any  thing 
of  his  religion."  Said  I,  "  You  will  not  know  me  thirty  min- 
utes without  hearing  something  of  mine."  It  is  a  fict,  that 
mauy  Christian  people  spend  their  Sunday  afternoons  in  talk- 
ing about  common-place  subjects,  and  Jesus  Christ  is  scarcely 
ever  mentioned.  As  for  the  poor  ungodly  world,  of  course 
they  neither  say  nor  think  any  thing  of  him.  But  O,  thou 
that  knowest  thyself  to  be  a  sinner,  despise  not  the  Man  of 
sorrows  !  Let  his  bleeding  hands  drop  on  thee ;  look  thou  on 
his  pierced  side  ;  and,  looking,  thou  shalt  live  ;  for,  remem- 
ber, it  is  only  by  looking  to  Christ  we  shall  live,  not  by  doing 
any  thing  ourselves.  We  must  venture  on  Christ,  and  venture 
wholly,  or  else  we  never  can  be  saved. 

And  this  brings  me  to  close  up  by  saying  to  every  awakened 
sinner,  if  you  would  have  peace  with  God,  and  have  it  now, 
venture  on  Christ.     It  is  hardly  fair  to  say  venture,  for  it  is  no 


104  THE    ANXIOUS    INQUIRER. 

venture  ;  there  is  not  a  grain  of  hap-hazard  in  it ;  it  is  quite 
safe.  He  that  trusteth  himself  to  Christ  need  never  fear 
"  But,"  you  will  say,  "  how  am  I  to  trust  Christ  ?  What  do 
you  mean  by  trusting  in  Christ  ?"  Why,  I  mean  just  what  I 
say.  Fully  rely  upon  what  Christ  did,  as  the  way  of  salvation. 
Yow  know  the  negro,  when  he  was  asked  how  he  believed, 
said,  "  Massa,  dis  is  how  I  believe  ;  I  fall  flat  down  on  de 
promise ;  I  can't  fall  no  lower."  He  had  just  a  right  idea 
about  believing.  Believing  is  falling  down  on  Christ,  and 
looking  to  him  to  hold  you  up.  Or,  to  illustrate  it  by  an  an- 
ecdote which  I  have  often  told  :  a  boy  at  sea,  who  was  very 
fond  of  climbing  to  the  mast-head,  one  day  climbed  to  the 
main-truck,  and  could  not  get  down  again.  The  sea  was  very 
rough,  and  it  was  seen  that  in  a  little  while  the  boy  would  fall 
on  the  deck,  and  be  dashed  to  pieces.  His  father  saw  but  one 
way  of  saving  his  life.  Seizing  a  speaking-trumpet,  he  cried 
out,  "  Boy,  the  next  time  the  ship  lurches,  you  fall  into  the 
sea."  The  next  time  the  ship  lurched  the  boy  looked  down, 
and,  not  much  liking  the  idea  of  throwing  himself  into  the 
sea,  still  held  to  the  mast.  The  father,  who  saw  that  the 
boy's  strength  would  soon  fail  him,  took  a  gun  in  his  hand, 
and  cried  out,  "  Boy,  if  you  do  not  drop  into  the  sea  the  next 
time  the  ship  lurches,  I'll  shoot  you!"  The  boy  knew  his 
father  meant  it,  and  the  next  time  the  ship  lurched  he  leaped 
into  the  sea.  It  seemed  like  certain  destruction,  but  out 
went  a  dozen  brawny  arms,  and  he  was  saved.  The  sinner,  in 
the  midst  of  the  storm,  thinks  he  must  cling  to  the  mast  of  his 
good  works,  and  so  be  saved.  Says  the  gospel,  "  Let  go  your 
good  works,  and  drop  into  the  ocean  of  God's  love."  "  No," 
says  the  sinner,  "  it  is  a  long  way  between  me  and  God's  love ; 
I  must  perish  if  I  trust  to  that ;  I  must  have  some  other  reli- 
ance." "  If  you  have  any  other  rehance  than  that,  you  are 
lost."  Then  comes  the  thundering  law,  and  declares  to  the 
sinner,  that  unless  he  gives  up  every  dependence,  he  will  be 
lost.  And  then  comes  the  happy  moment,  when  the  sinner 
says,  "  Dear  Lord,  I  give  up  all  my  dependence,  and  cast  my- 
self on  thee ;  I  take  thee,  Jesus,  to  be  my  one  object  in  hfe, 
my  only  trust,  the  refuge  of  my  soul."  Can  any  of  you  say 
that  in  your  hearts  ?     I  know  there  are  some  of  you  who  can- 


THE    ANXIOUS    INQUIRER.  105 

But  are  there  any  who  could  not  say  it  when  they  came 
here,  but  wlio  can  say  it  now  ?  O,  I  would  rejoice  if  one  such 
Avere  brought  to  God.  I  am  conscious  that  I  have  not 
preached  to  you  as  I  could  desire  ;  but  if  one  such  has  been 
brought  to  believe  and  trust  in  the  Saviour,  it  is  enough ;  God 
will  be  glorified. 

But  alas  !  for  such  of  you  as  will  go  away  and  say,  "  The 
man  has  talked  about  salvation,  but  what  matters  it  to  us  ?" 
Yes,  go  your  way  ;  you  can  afford  to  laugh  to-day  at  God  and 
his  gospel ;  but,  remember,  men  can  not  afford  to  scoff  at 
boats  when  they  are  in  a  storm,  although  they  may  be  on 
iand.  Death  is  after  you,  and  will  soon  seize  you  ;  your  pulse 
must  soon  cease  to  beat ;  strong  as  you  are  now,  )^our  bones 
are  not  of  brass,  nor  your  ribs  of  steel ;  you  must  lie  on  your 
lowly  pallet,  and  there  breathe  out  your  last ;  or,  if  you  be 
ever  so  rich,  you  must  die  on  your  curtained  beds,  and  must 
depart  from  all  your  enjoyment  into  everlasting  punishment. 
You  will  find  it  hard  work  to  laugh  at  Christ  then  ;  you  will 
find  it  dreadful  work  to  scoff  at  religion  then,  in  that  day  when 
death  gets  hold  of  you.  I  think  I  could  almost  stand  by  you 
and  say,  "  Laugh  now,  scoffer,"  "  Ah  !"  you  would  say,  "  I 
find  it  different  from  what  I  supposed ;  I  can  not  laugh  now — 
death  is  near  me."  Take  warning,  then,  before  death  comes ! 
take  warning  !  He  must  be  a  poor  ignorant  man  who  does  not 
insure  his  house  before  it  is  on  fire  ;  and  he  must  be  a  fool  of 
all  fools,  who  thinks  it  unnecessary  to  seek  the  salvation  of  his 
soul  till  he  comes  to  the  last  moment,  and  is  in  peril  of  his  life. 
May  God  give  you  thought  and  consideration,  so  that  you 
may  be  led  to  flee  from  sin,  and  fly  to  heaven  ;  and  may  God 
the  everlasting  Father  give  you  what  I  can  not — give  you  his 
grace,  which  saveth  the  soul,  and  maketh  sinners  into  saints, 
and  landeth  them  in  heaven.  I  can  only  close  by  repeating 
the  words  of  the  gospel — "  He  that  believeth  and  is  baptized 
shall  be  saved  ;  he  that  believeth  not  shall  be  damned."  Hav- 
ing said  this,  if  I  had  said  no  more,  I  should  have  preached 
Christ's  gospel  to  you.  The  Lord  give  you  understanding  in 
all  things,  and  help  you  to  believe  ;  for  Jesus  Christ's  sake  ! 

3* 


SERMON   VII. 

THE  SINNER'S  REFUGE. 

"  Then  ye  shall  appoint  you  cities  to  bo  cities  of  refuge  for  you ;  that  the 
slayer  may  flee  thither,  -v-hich  killeth  any  person  at  unawares." — Num- 
bers, XXXV.  11. 

You  are  aware  that  tie  principle  of  blood  revenge  is  a  deep- 
seated  one  in  the  eastern  mind.  From  the  oldest  ages  it  was 
always  the  custom  with  the  Orientals,  when  a  man  was  raur 
dered  or  slain  by  chance-medley,  for  the  nearest  relative,  his 
heir  or  any  person  related  to  him,  to  take  revenge  for  him 
upon  the  person  who,  either  intentionally  or  unintentionally, 
was  the  means  of  his  death.  This  revenge  was  a  very  choice 
and  special  thing  to  the  Oriental  mind.  The  revenger  of 
blood  would  hunt  his  victim  for  forty  years — ay,  until  he  died, 
if  he  was  not  able  to  reach  him  before — and  would  be  at  his 
lieels  all  his  life,  that  he  might  slay  him.  It  was  not  necessary 
that  the  man-slayer  should  have  any  trial  before  a  judge ;  the 
man  was  dead,  and  if  he  who  killed  him  was  not  put  to  death, 
it  was  reckoned  among  some  tribes  to  be  legitimate  to  kill  his 
father,  or  indeed  any  relative  of  his  tribe;  and  until  some 
relative  of  that  tribe  was  put  to  death,  as  a  revenge  for  tlie 
man  who  was  slain,  by  accident  or  otherwise,  a  deadly  feud 
existed  between  the  two  clans,  which  never  could  be  quenched 
except  by  blood.  Kow,  when  God  gave  this  law  unto  the 
Jews,  he  found  all  this  deep-rooted  love  toward  the  system  of 
the  vengeance  of  blood  by  the  nearest  relative;  and  God 
acted  wisely  in  this,  as  he  has  done  in  all  things.  There  are 
two  things  mentioned  in  Scripture  which  I  do  not  believe  God 
ever  approved,  but  which,  finding  they  were  deep-seated,  he 
did  not  forbid  to  the  Jews.  One  was  polygamy  :  the  practice 
of  marrying   many  wives  had   become   so   established    that- 


THE    sinner's    llEFUGE.  107 

thong]]  God  fil)horred  the  thing  himself,  yet  he  allowed  and 
permitted  it  to  his  people,  the  Jews  ;  becanse  he  foresaw  they 
wonld  inevitably  have  broken  the  commandment,  even  if  he 
had  made  a  command  that  they  should  have  but  one  wife.  It 
was  even  so  with  this  matter  of  blood  vengeance.  It  was  so 
deeply  seated  in  the  mind,  that  God,  instead  of  refusing  to 
the  Jews  what  they  regarded  as  the  privilege  of  taking  ven- 
ireance,  passed  a  commandment  which  rendered  it  impossible 
almost  that  a  man  should  be  killed,  unless  he  were  really  a 
murderer  ;  for  he  appointed  six  cities,  at  convenient  distances, 
so  that  when  one  man  killed  another  by  chance-medley  and 
committed  homicide,  he  might  at  once  flee  to  one  of  these 
cities ;  and  though  he  must  live  there  all  his  life,  yet  the 
avenger  of  blood  could  never  touch  him,  if  he  were  innocent. 
He  must  have  a  fair  trial ;  but  even  if  he  were  found  innocent 
he  must  stay  within  the  city,  into  which  the  avenger  of  blood 
could  not  by  any  possibility  come.  If  he  went  out  of  the  city 
the  avenger  might  kill  him ;  he  was  therefore  to  suffer  per- 
petual banishment,  even  for  causing  death  accidentally,  in 
order  that  it  mio-ht  be  seen  how  much  God  res^arded  the 
rights  of  blood,  and  how  fearful  a  thing  it  is  to  put  a  man  to 
death  in  any  way.  And  we  see  that  this  prevented  the  likeli- 
hood of  any  one  being  killed  who  was  not  guilty ;  for  as  soon 
as  one  man  struck  another  to  the  ground  by  accident,  by  a 
stone,  or  any  other  means,  he  fled  to  the  city  of  refuge.  He 
had  a  start  of  the  pursuer;  and  if  he  arrived  there,  he  was 
secure  and  safe. 

Now,  I  wish  to  use  this  custom  of  the  Jews  as  a  metaphor 
and  type,  to  set  forth  the  salvation  of  men  through  Jesus 
Christ  our  Lord,  I  shall  give  you  first  an  explanation,  and 
then  an  exhortation. 

I.  We  shall  attempt  an  explanation  of  this  type. 

1.  Note,  The  person  for  whom  the  city  of  refuge  loas  pro- 
vided. It  was  not  provided  for  the  willful  murderer ;  if  he 
fled  there,  he  must  be  dragged  out  of  it,  and  given  up  to  the 
aveno^er  after  a  fair  trial,  and  the  aveno-er  of  death  was  to  kill 
him,  and  so  have  blood  for  blood,  and  life  for  life.  But  in 
case  of  accident,  when  one  man  had  slain  another,  without 
malice  or  forethought,   and  had  only  committed   homicide, 


108  THE  sinner's  refuge. 

then  the  man  fleeing  there  was  perfectly  safe.  Here,  how- 
ever, the  type  of  Christ  is  not  in  keeping ;  Cln-ist  is  not  a  city 
of  refuge  provided  for  men  that  are  innocent,  but  a  city  pro- 
vided for  men  that  are  guilty — not  for  men  who  have  acci- 
dentally transgressed,  but  for  men  who  have  willfully  gone 
astray.  Our  Saviour  has  come  into  the  world  to  save,  not 
those  who  have  by  mistake  and  error  committed  sin,  but  those 
who  have  fearfully  transgressed  against  his  known  command- 
ments, and  have  gone  astray  of  their  own  free-will,  their  own 
perversity  leading  them  to  rebel  against  God. 

2.  The  avenger  of  blood.  In  explaining  this,  I  must,  of 
course,  take  every  part  of  the  figure.  The  avenger  of  blood, 
I  have  said,  was  usually  next  of  kin,  but  I  believe  any  one  of 
the  family  was  held  to  be  competent.  If,  for  instance,  my 
brother  had  been  killed,  it  would  have  been  my  duty,  as  the 
first  of  the  family,  to  avenge  his  blood,  if  possible,  there  and 
then ;  to  go  after  the  murderer,  or  the  man  who  had  caused 
death  accidentally,  and  put  him  to  death  at  once  ;  and  if  I 
could  not  do  that,  it  would  be  my  business,  and  that  of  my 
father,  and,  indeed,  of  every  male  of  the  family,  to  hunt  and 
pursue  that  man,  until  God  should  deliver  him  into  our  hand, 
so  that  we  might  put  him  to  death.  I  mean  not  that  it  is  our 
duty  now,  but  it  would  have  been  under  the  old  Jewish  dis- 
pensation. It  was  allowed  by  the  Jewish  law,  that  those  who 
were  of  the  kith  and  kin  of  the  man  killed,  should  be  the 
avengers  of  his  blood.  We  find  the  type  of  this,  then,  for  the 
sinner,  in  the  law  of  God.  Sinner,  the  law  of  God  is  the  blood 
avenger  against  you ;  you  have  willfully  transgressed,  you 
have  killed  God's  commandments,  you  have  trampled  them 
under  foot ;  the  law  is  the  avenger  of  blood  ;  that  is  after  you, 
and  it  will  have  you  ;  condemnation  is  hanging  over  your 
head  now,  and  ere  long  it  shall  overtake  you  ;  though  it  reach 
you  not  in  this  life,  yet,  in  the  world  to  come,  the  avenger  of 
blood,  the  Moses,  the  law  shall  have  its  vengeance  upon  you, 
and  you  shall  be  utterly  destroyed. 

3.  But  there  was  a  city  of  refuge  provided  under  the  law  ; 
and  let  me  tell  you  a  fev)  things  concerning  this  city.  You 
will  remember  there  were  six  cities  of  refuge,  in  order  that 
one  of  them  migh"'  be  at  a  convenient  distance  from  any  part 


THE  sinner's  refl^ge.  109 

of  the  country.  N"ow,  there  are  not  six  Christs  ;  there  is  but 
one ;  but  then  there  is  a  Christ  everywhere.  "  The  word  is 
nigh  thee,  in  thy  mouth,  in  thy  heart ;  if  thou  wilt  confess 
with  thy  mouth  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  believe  in  thine  heart, 
thou  shalt  be  saved."  The  city  of  refuge  was  a  priestly  city 
— a  city  of  the  Levites,  and  it  afforded  protection  to  the  man- 
slayer  for  life.  He  might  never  go  out  of  it,  till  the  death  of 
the  then  reigning  high  priest ;  after  w^hich  he  might  go  free, 
without  being  touched  by  the  avenger  of  blood  at  all.  But 
during  the  time  of  his  sojourn  there,  he  was  housed  and  fed 
gratuitously  ;  every  thing  was  provided  for  him,  and  he  was 
kept  entirely  safe.  And  I  would  have  you  mark  that  he  was 
safe  in  this  city,  not  because  of  the  bolts  or  bars  of  the  city, 
but  simply  because  it  was  of  divine  appointment.  Do  you  see 
the  man  running  from  the  avenger?  The  avenger  is  after 
him,  fast  and  furious;  the  man  has  just  reached  the  borders  of 
the  city  ;  in  a  moment  the  avenger  halts  ;  he  knows  it  is  of  no 
use  going  any  further  after  him,  not  because  the  city  walls  are 
strong,  nor  because  the  gates  are  barred,  nor  because  an  army 
standeth  without  to  resist,  but  because  God  hath  said  the  man 
shall  be  safe  as  soon  as  he  has  crossed  the  border,  and  has 
come  into  the  suburbs  of  the  city.  Divine  appointment  was 
the  only  thing  which  made  the  city  of  refuge  secure.  Now, 
beloved,  Jesus  Christ  is  the  divinely  appointed  way  of  salva- 
tion ;  whosoever  amongst  us  shall  make  haste  from  our  sins, 
and  fly  to  Christ,  being  convinced  of  our  guilt,  and  helped  by 
God's  Spirit  to  pursue  the  road,  we  shall,  without  doubt,  find 
security  ;  the  course  of  the  law  shall  not  touch  us,  Satan  shall 
not  harm  us,  vengeance  shall  not  reach  us,  for  the  divine  ap- 
pointment, stronger  than  gates  of  iron  or  brass,  shieldeth 
every  one  of  us  who  has  "  fled  for  refuge  to  the  hope  set  be- 
fore us  in  the  gospel." 

This  city  of  refuge,  I  must  have  you  note,  too,  had  round 
it  suburbs  of  a  very  great  extent.  Two  thousand  cubits  were 
allowed  for  grazing  land  for  the  cattle  of  the  priests,  and  a 
thousand  cubits  within  these  for  fields  and  vineyards.  Now, 
no  sooner  did  the  man  reach  the  outside  of  the  city,  the  sub- 
urbs, than  he  was  safe ;  it  was  not  necessary  for  him  to  get 
within  the  walls  but  the  suburbs  themselves  were  sufficient 


110  TlIK    SINNKR'S    RKFUGK. 

protect  ion.  Lenrn,  honco,  that  if  yo  do  but  tonrb  the  hem  of 
(.'hrist'.-^  o-aiinent.,  ye  sliall  he  inach'  whole;  if  ye  do  but  lay 
hold  of  him  with  ^M'aith  as  a  grain  of  mustard  seed,"  witb 
faith  which  is  scarcely  a  bclieviii«j:,  but  is  truly  a  believing, 

you  are  safe. 

*'  A  littlo  genuino  grace  ensures 
The  death  of  all  our  sins." 

Get  within  the  borders;  lay  hold  of  the  hem  of  Christ's 
garments,  and  thou  art  secure. 

We  have  some  interesting  ])articulars,  also,  with  regard  to 
tlie  distance  of  these  cities  from  the  habitations  of  men  in 
Judea.  Tt  is  said,  that  wherever  a  homicide  might  occur,  any 
man  might  get  to  a  city  o\.'  refuge  within  half  a  day.  And 
verily,  beloved,  it  is  no  great  distance  to  the  breast  of  Christ; 
it  is  but  a  simple  renunciation  of  our  own  powers,  and  a  laying 
liold  of  Christ,  to  be  our  all  in  all,  that  is  required,  in  order  to 
our  being  found  in  the  city  of  refuge.  And  with  regard  to 
the  roads  to  the  city,  we  are  told  that  they  were  strictly  pre- 
served. Every  river  was  bridged  ;  as  far  as  possible,  the  road 
was  made  level,  and  every  obstruction  removed,  so  that  the 
man  who  tied  might  iind  an  easy  passage  to  the  city.  Once  a 
year  the  elders  of  the  city  went  along  the  roads  to  keep  them 
in  order,  so  that  nothing  might  occur,  through  the  breaking 
down  of  bridges,  or  the  stopping  up  of  the  highway,  to  im- 
pede the  tlight  of  any  one,  and  cause  him  to  be  overtaken  and 
killed.  And  wherever  there  were  by-roads  and  turnings,  there 
were  tixed  up  hand-posts,  and  with  this  word  upon  them 
"  j\fi'A'Iat  " — '"  refuge  " — pointing  out  the  way  in  which  the 
man  should  tly,  if  he  wished  to  reach  the  city.  And  there 
were  two  people  always  kept  on  the  road  :  so  tliat  in  case  the 
avenger  of  blood  should  overtake  a  man,  thoy  might  come  in 
the  way  and  entreat  the  avenger  to  stay  his  hand,  until  the 
man  had  reached  the  city,  lest  haply  innocent  blood  should  be 
shed,  without  a  lair  trial,  and  so  the  avenger  should  be  proved 
guilty  of  murder ;  for  the  risk,  of  course,  was  upon  the  head 
of  the  avenger,  if  he  put  one  to  death  that  did  not  deserve  to 
die.  Now,  beloved,  I  think  this  is  a  picture  of  the  road  to 
Christ  Jesus.  It  is  no  rouud-about  road  of  the  law ;  it  is  no 
obeying  this,  that,  and  the   )thor ;  it  is  a  straight  road  :  '^Bo^ 


THE  sinner's  refuge.  Ill 

Hove  and  live."  It  is  a  road  so  hard,  that  no  solf-violiteonsi 
man  can  over  troad  it ;  but  it  is  a  road  so  easy,  tliat  evory  sin- 
ner, wlio  knows  liiniself  to  be  a  sinner,  miglit  by  it  find  liis 
^\cly  to  Clirist,  and  his  ^vay  to  heaven.  And  lest  tliey  slionld 
be  mistaken,  God  has  set  me  and  my  brethren  in  the  ministry, 
to  be  like  hand-posts  in  the  way,  to  point  poor  sinners  to  Jesus; 
and  we  desire  ever  to  liave  on  our  lips,  tlie  cry  "Refuge, 
refuge,  refuge  !"  Sinner,  tliat  is  the  way  ;  walk  thou  tlierein 
and  be  thou  saved. 

I  think  I  liave  thus  given  the  exphmation.  Christ  is  the 
city  of  refuge,  who  preserves  all  tliose  that  flee  to  him  for 
mercy  ;  lie  does  that  because  he  is  the  divinely  appointed 
Saviour,  able  to  save  unto  the  uttermost  them  that  come  unto 
God  by  him. 

II.  We  have  an  exhortation  to  give. 

You  must  allow  me  to  picture  a  scene.  You  see  that  man 
in  the  iield.  He  has  been  at  work;  he  has  taken  an  ox-goad 
in  his  hand,  to  use  it  in  some  part  of  his  husbandry.  Unfor- 
tunately, instead  of  doing  what  he  desires  to  do,  he  strikes  a 
companion  of  his  to  the  heart,  and  he  tails  down  dead !  You 
see  the  poor  man  with  liorror  in  his  face ;  he  is  a  guiltless 
man  ;  but,  O !  what  misery  he  feels  when  he  sees  the  corpse 
lying  at  his  feet !  A  pang  shoots  through  his  heart,  such  as 
you  and  I  have  never  felt — horror,  dread,  desolation !  Yes, 
some  of  us  have  felt  something  akin  to  it ;  we  will  not  allude 
to  the  when  and  the  wherefore ;  but  who  can  describe  the 
horror  of  a  man  at  seeing  his  companion  fall  at  his  feet? 
AVords  are  incapable  of  expressing  the  anguish  of  his  spirit ; 
he  looks  upon  him,  he  takes  him  up — he  ascertains  that  he  is 
really  dead.  What  next !  Do  you  not  see  him  ?  In  a  mo- 
ment he  tlies  out  of  the  field  where  he  was  at  labor,  and  runs 
along  the  road  with  all  his  might ;  he  has  many  miles  before 
him,  six  long  hours  of  hard  running,  and  just  as  he  passes  the 
gate,  he  turns  his  head,  and  there  is  the  man's  brother!  He 
has  just  come  into  the  field,  and  seen  his  brother  lying  dead. 
C) !  can  you  conceive  how  the  man's  heai't  palpitates  with 
fear?  He  has  a  little  start  upon  the  road.  He  just  sees  the 
other,  with  red  face,  hot  and  fiery,  rushing  out  of  the  field 
with  the  ox-goad  in  his   hand,  and  runninc:  ^fter  him.      The 


112  THE    sinner's    refuge. 

way  lies  through  the  village  where  the  man's  father  lives 
how  he  rushes  through  the  streets !  He  does  not  even  stop 
to  bid  good-by  to  his  wife,  nor  kiss  his  children  !  But  on,  on 
he  flies  for  his  very  life.  The  relative  calls  his  father,  and  his 
other  friends,  and  tliey  all  rush  after  him.  Now,  there  is  a 
troop  on  the  road ;  the  man  is  still  flying  a-head — no  rest  for 
him.  Though  one  of  his  pursuers  rests,  the  others  still  track 
liini.  There  is  a  horse  in  the  village ;  they  take  it,  and  pursue 
him.  If  they  can  find  any  animal  that  can  assist  their  swift- 
ness, they  will  take  it.  Can  you  not  conceive  him  crying, 
"  O,  that  I  had  wings  that  I  might  fly  ?"  See  how  he  spurns 
the  earth  beneath  his  feet !  What  to  him  the  green  fields  on 
either  hand ;  what  the  brooks ;  he  stops  not  even  so  much  as 
to  wet  his  mouth.  The  sun  is  scorching  him ;  but  it  is  still 
on,  on,  on !  He  casts  aside  one  garment  after  another  ;  still 
he  rushes  on,  and  the  pursuers  are  behind  him.  He  feels  like 
the  poor  stag  pursued  by  the  hounds ;  he  knows  they  are 
eager  for  his  blood,  and  that  if  they  do  but  once  overtake  him 
it  will  be  a  word,  a  blow — dead  !  See  how  he  speeds  his  way ! 
Now,  do  you  see  him  ?  A  city  is  rising  into  sight ;  he  can 
see  the  towers  of  the  city  of  refuge ;  his  weary  feet  almost 
refuse  to  carry  him  flirther ;  the  veins  are  standing  out  on  his 
brow,  like  whipcords ;  the  blood  spirts  from  his  nostrils  ;  he 
is  straining  to  the  utmost,  as  he  rushes  on,  and  faster  he  would 
go  if  he  were  master  of  more  strength.  The  pursuers  are 
after  him — they  have  almost  reached  him;  but  see,  and  re- 
joice !  He  has  just  got  to  the  outskirts  of  the  city ;  there  is 
the  line  of  demarcation ;  he  leaps  it,  and  falls  senseless  to  the 
ground  ;  and  there  is  joy  in  his  heart.  The  pursuers  come 
and  look  at  him  ;  but  they  dare  not  slay  him.  The  knife  is 
in  their  hand,  and  the  stones  too,  to  stone  him  or  draw  his 
blood  ;  but  they  dare  not  touch  him.  He  is  safe,  he  is  secure; 
his  running  has  been  just  fast  enough  ;  he  has  just  managed 
to  leap  into  the  kingdom  of  life,  and  avoid  death. 

Sinner,  that  picture  I  have  given  thee  is  a  picture  of  thy- 
self, in  all  but  the  man's  guiltlessness,  for  thou  art  a  guilty 
man.  O !  if  thou  didst  but  know  that  the  avenger  of  blood 
IS  after  thee !  O  !  that  God  would  give  thee  grace  that  thou 
couldst  have  a  sense  of  thy  danger  to-night !  thou  wouldst 


THE  sinner's  refuge.  113 

not  then  stoj)  a  solitary  instant  without  flying  to  Christ.  Thou 
wouldst  say,  even  while  sitting  in  thy  pew,  "  Let  me  away, 
aAvay,  away,  where  mercy  is  to  be  found,"  and  thou  wouldst 
give  neither  sleep  to  thine  eyes,  nor  slumber  to  thine  eyelids, 
till  thou  hadst  in  Christ  found  a  refuge  for  thy  spirit.  I  am 
come,  then,  to  exhort  thee  to-night.  Let  me  pick  out  one  ot 
you  to  be  a  case  for  all  the  rest ;  there  is  a  young  man  hero 
who  is  guilty ;  the  proofs  of  his  guilt  lie  at  his  feet  to-night 
He  knows  himself  to  be  a  great  transgressor;  he  has  foully 
offended  against  God's  law.  Young  man,  young  man,  cer- 
tainly, as  you  are  guilty,  the  avenger  of  blood  is  after  you  !  O  ! 
he  is  a  horrid  thing,  that  avenger — God's  fiery  law ;  did  you 
ever  see  it?  It  speaketh  words  of  flame;  it  hath  eyes  like 
him2:)s  of  fire.  If  you  could  once  see  the  law  of  God,  and  mark 
the  dread  keenness  of  its  horrible  sword,  you  might,  as  you 
sat  in  your  pew,  quiver  to  death  itself  in  horror  at  your  doom. 
Sinner,  bethink  thee,  if  this  avenger  get  hold  of  thee,  it  will 
not  be  temporal  death  merely ;  it  will  be  death  eternally.  Sin- 
ner, remember,  if  the  law  doth  get  its  hand  on  thee,  thou  art 
damned  ;  and  dost  tliou  know  what  damnation  means  ?  Say, 
canst  thou  tell  what  are  the  billows  of  eternal  wrath,  and 
what  the  worm  that  never  dies ;  what  the  lake  of  fire,  what 
the  pit  that  is  bottomless?  No,  thou  canst  not  know  how 
dreadful  these  things  are.  Surely,  if  thou  couldst,  man,  thou 
wouldst  be  up  on  thy  feet,  and  ofl"  for  life,  eternal  life.  Thou 
wouldst  be  like  that  man  in  Bunyan's  "  Progress,"  who  put 
his  fingers  in  his  ears,  and  ran  away ;  and  when  his  neighbors 
ran  after  him,  he  cried,  "Eternal  life,  eternal  life!"  O,  stolid 
stupidity — O,  sottish  ignorance — O,  worse  than  brutal  ignor- 
ance, that  makes  men  sit  down  in  their  sins,  and  rest  content. 
The  drunkard  quaffeth  still  his  bowl ;  he  knoweth  not  that  in 
its  dregs  there  lieth  wrath.  The  swearer  still  indulgeth  in  his 
blasphemy  ;  he  knoweth  not  that  one  day  his  oaths  shall  re- 
turn upon  his  own  head.  You  will  go  your  way,  and  eat  the 
fat,  and  drink  the  sweet,  and  live  merrily  and  happily;  but, 
ah !  poor  souls,  if  ye  knew  that  the  avenger  of  blood  was 
after  you,  you  would  not  act  so  foolishly !  Would  you  sup- 
pose that  ths  man,  after  he  had  killed  his  neighbor,  and  when 
he  saw  the  avenger  o^ming,  would  coolly  take  his  seat,  and 


114  THB   sinner's   EEFUGE. 

.vait,  when  there  was  a  city  of  refuge  provided  ?  No  ;  such 
folly  was  reserved  for  such  as  you  are ;  God  has  left  that  folly 
to  be  the  topstone  of  the  folly  of  the  human  race,  to  be  the 
most  glittering  jewel  in  tlie  crown  of  free  will,  to  be  consum- 
mate folly — the  dress  wherein  free  will  doth  robe  itself.  O  ! 
you  will  not  fly  to  Christ,  you  will  stop  where  you  are,  you 
will  rest  contented,  and  one  day  the  law  will  seize  you,  and 
then  wrath,  eternal  wrath,  will  lay  hold  upon  you !  How 
foolish  is  the  man  who  wastes  his  time,  and  carelessly  loiters, 
when  the  city  of  refuge  is  before  him,  and  when  the  avenger 
of  blood  is  after  him ! 

Suppose,  now,  I  take  another  case.  I  have  a  young  man 
here  w-ho  says,  "  Why,  sir,  it  is  no  use  in  trying  to  be  saved ; 
T  shall  not  think  of  prayer,  or  faith,  or  any  thing  of  that  sort, 
because  there  is  no  city  of  refuge  for  me."  Why,  suppose 
that  poor  man  who  had  killed  his  neighbor  had  said  that;  sup- 
pose he  had  sat  still,  and  folded  his  arms,  and  said,  "  There  is 
no  city  of  refuge  for  me."  You  do  not  mean  what  you  say. 
If  you  thought  there  was  no  city  of  refuge  for  you,  I  know 
what  you  would  do  ;  you  would  shriek,  and  cry,  and  groan. 
There  is  a  kind  of  despair  that  some  people  have,  which  is  a 
sham  despair.  I  have  met  with  many  w'ho  say,  "  I  do  not  be- 
lieve I  ever  could  be  saved,"  and  they  seem  not  to  care  whether 
they  are  saved  or  not.  Why,  man,  how  foolish  would  he  be, 
who  would  sit  still,  because  he  fancied  there  was  no  entrance 
for  him  into  the  city,  and  let  the  avenger  slay  him  !  But  your 
folly  is  just  as  great  and  w^orse,  if  you  sit  still,  and  say,  "  He 
will  never  have  mercy  on  me."  He  is  as  much  a  suicide  who 
refuses  the  medicine,  because  he  thinks  it  will  not  cure  him, 
as  the  man  who  takes  the  dirk,  and  stabs  himself  to  the  heart. 
You  have  no  right,  sir,  to  let  your  despair  triumph  over  the 
promise  of  God.  He  hath  said  it,  and  he  means  it :  "  Whoso- 
ever calleth  on  the  name  of  the  Lord  shall  be  saved."  If  he 
has  shown  you  your  guilt,  depend  upon  it,  there  is  a  city  of 
refuge  for  you  ;  haste  thee  to  it ;  haste  thee  to  it ;  may  God 
help  you  to  betake  yourselves  to  it  now !  Ay,  if  men  knew 
how  dreadful  is  the  wrath  to  come,  and  how  terrible  is  judg- 
ment, how  swiftly  wo  ild  they  fly !  There  is  not  a  hearer  of 
mine  here  that  woula  delay  an  hour  to  fly  to  Christ,  if  he  did 


THE    sinner's    refuge.  115 

but  know  how  fearful  is  hi.s  condition  out  of  Christ.  When 
God  the  Spirit  once  convinces  us  of  our  sin,  there  is  no  halting 
then  ;  the  Spirit  says,  "  To-day,  if  you  will  hear  his  voice,"  and 
we  say,  "  To-day,  Lord,  to-day,  hear  our  voice  !"  There  is  no 
halting  then  ;  there  is  no  pausing  then  ;  it  is  on,  on,  on,  for 
our  very  life ;  and  I  beseech  you,  men,  brethren,  you,  who  have 
sinned  against  God,  and  know  it ;  you  that  want  to  be  deliv- 
ered from  the  wrath  to  come,  I  beseech  you,  by  him  that 
liveth  and  was  dead,  flee  to  Christ ;  but  take  this  exhortation, 
take  heed  it  is  Christ  you  flee  to ;  for  if  the  man  who  had 
slain  his  neighbor,  had  fled  to  another  city,  it  would  have  been 
of  no  avail ;  had  he  fled  to  a  city  that  was  not  an  ordained  city 
of  refuge,  he  might  have  sped  on  with  all  the  impetuosity  of 
desire,  and  yet  have  been  slain  within  the  city  gates.  So,  ye 
self-righteous  ones-,  ye  may  fly  on  to  your  good  works,  ye  may 
practice  your  baptism,  and  your  confirmation,  and  your  church 
going,  and  jour  chapel  going ;  ye  may  be  all  that  is  good  and 
excellent,  bat  ye  are  flying  to  the  wrong  city,  and  the  avenger 
of  blood  will  find  you,  after  all.  Poor  soul !  remember  Christ 
Jesus  is  the  only  refuge  for  a  guilty  sinner :  his  blood,  his 
wounds,  his  agonies,  his  sufferings,  his  death,  these,  then,  are 
the  gates  and  walls  of  the  city  of  salvation.  But  if  we  trust 
not  in  these,  without  a  doubt,  trust  where  we  may,  our  hope 
shall  be  as  a  broken  reed,  and  we  shall  perish  after  all. 

I  may  have  one  here  who  is  just  awakened,  just  led  to  see  his 
sin,  as  if  it  were  a  murdered  corpse  beneath  his  feet;  it  seems 
to  me  that  God  has  sent  me  to  that  one  man  in  particular. 
Man,  God  has  shown  you  your  guilt ;  he  sent  me  to-night  to 
tell  you  that  there  is  a  refuge  for  you ;  though  you  are  guilty, 
he  is  good ;  though  you  have  revolted  and  rebelled,  he  will 
nave  mercy  on  those  that  repent,  and  trust  in  the  merits  of  his 
Son.  And  now  he  has  bidden  me  say  to  you,  "  Fly,  fly,  fly  !" 
In  God's  name,  I  say  to  you,  fly  to  Christ.  He  has  bidden  me 
warn  you  to-night  against  delays ;  he  has  bidden  me  remind 
you  that  death  surprises  men  when  least  they  expect  it;  he  has 
bidden  me  to  warn  you  that  the  avenger  will  not  spare,  neither 
will  his  eye  pity.  Hiii  sword  was  forged  for  vengeance,  and 
vengeance  it  will  have.  And  he  has  bidden  me  exhort  you 
by  the  terrors  of  the  law,  by  the  day  of  judgment,  by  the 


116  THE   sinner's    refuge. 

wrath  to  come,  by  the  uncertainty  of  life,  and  by  the  nearness 
of  death,  this  night  to  fly  to  Christ. 

"Haste,  traveler,  haste,  the  night  comes  on: 
And  thou  far  off  from  rest  and  home  : 
Haste,  traveler,  haste!" 

But,  O  how  much  more  earnest  is  our  cry,  when  we  say, 
"  Haste,  sinner,  haste."  N'ot  only  doth  the  night  come  on  ; 
but,  lo  !  the  blood  avenger  is  behind.  Already  he  has  slain 
his  thousands.  Let  the  shrieks  of  souls,  already  damned,  come 
up  in  your  ears.  Already  the  avenger  has  done  wonders  of 
wrath  ;  let  the  howhngs  of  Gehenna  startle  you  ;  let  the  tor- 
ments of  hell  amaze  you.  What !  will  you  stop  with  such  a 
sword  behind  you  ?  will  you  pause  w^ith  such  an  avenger  in 
swift  pursuit?  What!  young  man,  wdll  you  stop  this  night? 
God  has  convinced  you  of  your  sin ;  will  you  go  to  your  rest 
this  night  without  a  prayer?  Will  you  live  another  day  with- 
out fleeing  to  Christ  ?  No  ;  I  think  I  see  the  Spirit  of  God  in 
you  to-night,  and  I  think  I  hear  what  he  makes  you  say.  He 
makes  you  say,  "  No,  God  helping  me,  I  give  myself  to  Chiist 
now ;  and  if  he  will  not  now  shed  abroad  his  love  in  my  heart, 
yet  this  is  my  one  resolve ;  no  slumber  to  my  eyes  will  I  afford 
till  Christ  shall  look  on  me,  and  seal  my  pardon  with  his  Spirit 
— the  pardon  bought  with  blood."  But  if  thou  sittest  still, 
young  man,  and  thou  wilt  do  so,  left  to  thy  own  free  will,  I 
can  do  no  more  for  thee  than  this,  I  must  weep  for  thee  in 
secret.  Alas !  for  thee,  my  hearer  ;  alas !  for  thee ;  the  ox  led 
to  the  slaughter  is  more  wise  than  thou  ;  the  sheep  that  goeth 
to  its  death  is  not  so  foolish  as  thou  art.  Alas !  for  thee,  my 
hearer,  that  thy  pulse  should  beat  a  march  to  hell.  Alas !  that 
yonder  clock,  like  the  muffled  drum,  should  be  the  music  of 
the  funeral  march  of  thy  soul.  Alas !  alas  !  that  thou  shouldst 
fold  thine  arms  in  pleasure,  when  the  knife  is  at  thy  heart. 
Alas  !  alas  !  for  thee,  that  thou  shouldst  sing,  and  make  mer- 
riment, when  the  rope  is  about  thy  neck,  and  the  drop  is  tot- 
tering under  thee.  Alas !  for  thee,  that  thou  shouldst  go  thy 
way,  and  live  merrily  and  happily,  and  yet  be  lost.  Thou  re 
raindest  me  of  the  silly  moth  that  dances  round  about  the 
flame,  singeing  itself  for  a  w^hile,  and  then  at  last  plunging  to 


THE   SINNER'S   REFUGE.  H'] 

its  death.  Such  art  thou  !  Young  woman,  with  thy  butter- 
fly  clothing,  thou  art  leaping  round  the  flame  that  shall  destroy 
thee.  Young  man,  light  and  frothy  in  thy  conversation,  gay 
in  thy  life,  thou  art  dancing  to  hell ;  thou  art  singing  thy  way 
to  damnation,  and  promenading  the  road  to  destruction. 
Alas!  alas!  that  ye  should  be  spinning  your  own  winding 
sheets ;  that  ye  should  every  day  by  your  sins  be  building 
jour  own  gallows ;  that  by  your  transgressions  ye  should  be 
digging  your  own  graves,  and  working  hard  to  pile  the  faggots 
for  your  own  eternal  burning.  O  !  that  ye  were  wise,  that  ye 
understood  this,  that  ye  would  consider  your  latter  end.  O  ! 
that  ye  would  flee  from  the  wrath  to  come.  O  !  my  hearers, 
the  wrath  to  come,  the  wrath  to  come !  O,  God  !  how  ter- 
rible! these  lips  dare  not  venture  to  describe,  this  heart  filleth 
in  agony ;  and,  my  hearers,  are  there  not  some  of  you  that 
will  soon  be  in  the  wrath  to  come  ?  Yes,  yes !  there  are 
some  of  you,  who,  if  you  were  now  to  drop  dead  in  your  pews, 
must  be  damned.  Ah  !  ye  know  it ;  ye  know  it ;  ye  dare  not 
deny  it ;  I  see  you  know ;  as  you  hang  down  your  heads,  you 
seem  to  say  it  is  true  ;  I  have  no  Christ  to  trust  to,  no  robe  of 
righteousness  to  wear,  no  heaven  to  hope  for.  My  hearer, 
give  me  thine  hand  ;  never  did  father  plead  with  son  with 
more  impassioned  earnestness  than  I  would  with  thee.  Why 
wouldst  thou  sit  still,  when  hell  is  burning  in  thy  face.  "  Why 
will  ye  die,  O  house  of  Israel !"  O,  God !  must  I  preach  to 
these  people  in  their  place  in  hell ;  and  must  I  continue  to 
preach  to  them,  and  be  "  a  savor  of  death  unto  death  to  them," 
and  not  "  a  savor  of  life  unto  life  ?"  And  must  I,  must  I,  help 
to  make  their  hell  more  intolerable  ?  Must  it  be  so  ?  Must 
the  people  who  now  listen  to  us,  like  the  people  of  Chorazin 
and  Bethsaida,  have  a  more  terrible  doom  than  the  people  of 
Sodom  ?  Ah !  yes,  the  Lord  hath  said  it,  and  we  believe  it. 
O !  ye  that  are  left  to  your  own  free  will,  to  choose  the  way 
to  hell,  as  all  men  do  when  left  alone — let  these  eyes  run  down 
with  tears  for  ye,  because  ye  will  not  weep  for  yourselves. 
Strange  !  strange !  that  I  should  feel  more  for  some  of  your 
souls  than  you  do  for  yourselves  !  My  God  knoweth,  there  is 
not  a  stone  that  I  would  leave  unturned  to  save  each  one  of 
you  ;  there  is  nought  that  human  strength  could  do,  or  human 


118  THE  SINNER'S  REFUGE. 

study  would  learn,  which  I  would  not  seek  after,  if  I  might  but 
be  the  instrument  of  saving  you  from  hell ;  and  yet  you  act  as 
though  it  concerned  you  not,  whom  it  should  concern  the 
most ;  it  is  my  business,  but  it  is  far  more  yours.  Sirs,  if  ye  be 
lost,  remember,  it  is  yourselves  that  will  be  lost ;  if  ye  perish, 
ye  perish  ;  I  am  clean  of  your  blood.  If  ye  flee  not  from  the 
wrath  to  come,  I  have  warned  you  ;  I  could  not  bear  to  have 
the  blood  upon  my  head  which  some,  even  of  those  who  like 
sound  doctrine,  I  fear,  will  have  at  the  last  day  of  account.  I 
tremble  for  some  I  know,  that  preach  God's  gospel,  in  some 
sense  fully,  but  who  never  warn  sinners.  A  member  of  my 
church  said  to  me  lately,  "  I  heard  such  a  one  preach ;  a  sound 
doctrine  man  he  is  called.  I  heard  him  preach  for  nine  years, 
attending  the  theater  all  the  time.  I  could  curse,  I  could 
swear,  I  could  sin,  and  I  never  heard  a  warning  from  that 
man's  lips  the  whole  nine  years."  Ah  !  my  God,  my  God,  let 
this  world  hiss  me ;  let  me  wear  the  coat  that  sparkleth,  and 
the  cap  that  garnisheth  a  fool.  Let  earth  condemn  me,  and 
let  the  fools  of  the  universe  spurn  me  ;  but  free  me  from  the 
blood  of  my  hearers.  By  God's  grace,  again  I  register  the 
vow,  God  helping  me  ;  the  only  thing  I  seek  in  this  world  is 
to  be  faithful  to  my  hearers'  souls.  If  you  are  damned,  it  is 
not  for  want  of  preaching  to,  nor  for  want  of  earnest  warning. 
Young  men  and  maidens,  old  men  with  gray  hairs,  merchants 
and  tradesmen,  servants,  fathers,  mothers,  children,  I  have 
warned  you  this  night,  you  are  in  danger  of  hell,  and  as  God 
liveth,  before  whom  I  stand,  you  will  be  there  soon,  unless  you 
flee  from  the  wrath  to  come.  Remember,  none  but  Jesus  can 
save  you.  But  if  God  shall  enable  you  to  see  your  danger, 
and  fly  to  Christ,  he  will  have  mercy  upon  you  fur  ever,  and 
the  avenger  of  blood  will  never  find  you  out.  No,  not  even 
when  the  red  lightnings  shall  be  flashing  from  the  hand  of  God 
in  the  day  of  judgment.  That  city  of  refuge  shall  shelter  you, 
and  in  the  heart  of  Jesus,  triumphant,  blessed,  secure,  you 
shall  sing  the  righteousness  and  the  blood  of  Christ  who  shel- 
ters sinners  from  the  wrath  to  come. 


SERMON    VIII. 

THE    DUMB    SINGING. 

"  Then  the  e  >^es  of  the  blind  shall  be  opened,  and  the  ears  of  the  deaf  shall 
be  unstopped.  Then  shall  the  lame  man  leap  as  an  hart,  and  the  tongue  of 
the  dumb  sing ;  for  in  the  wilderness  shall  waters  break  out,  and  streams  in 
the  desert." — Isaiah,  xxxv.  5,  6. 

What  a  diiFerence  grace  makes,  wlierever  it  enters  the 
heart!  We  find  here  the  blind  spoken  of ;  but  they  are  not 
blind  when  once  grace  has  touched  their  eyes ;  then  "  the 
eyes  of  the  blind  are  opened."  We  read  also  of  the  deaf; 
but  they  are  not  deaf  after  grace  has  operated  upon  them  : 
"  the  ears  of  the  deaf  are  unstopped."  Here  are  men  who 
have  been  lame  before ;  but  when  once  the  omnipotent  influ- 
ence of  divine  grace  has  come  upon  them,  they  leap  like  a 
hart.  And  those  who  were  dumb  once,  so  far  from  being 
dumb  any  longer,  have  experienced  a  change  that  must  be 
radical,  for  its  effects  are  surprising.  The  tongue  of  the  dumb 
not  simply  speaks,  but  it  sings. 

Grace  makes  a  great  diflerence  in  a  man,  when  it  enters 
into  him.  How  vain,  then,  ar-e  the  boasts  and  professions  of 
some  persons,  who  assert  themselves  to  be  the  children  of 
God,  and  yet  live  in  sin.  There  is  no  perceivable  difference  in 
their  conduct ;  they  are  just  what  they  used  to  be  before  their 
pretended  conversion  ;  they  are  not  changed  in  their  acts, 
even  in  the  least  degree,  and  yet  they  do  most  positively 
alhrm  that  they  are  the  called  and  living  children  of  God, 
although  they  are  entirely  unchanged.  Let  such  know  that 
their  pretensions  are  lies,  and  that  falsehood  is  the  only  ground- 
work that  they  have  for  their  hopes ;  for,  wherever  the  gracca 
of  God  is,  it  makes  men  to  differ.  A  graceless  man  is  not  liko 
ft  gracious  man  ;  and  a  gracious  man  is  not  like  a  graceless  oi>e 


120  THE   DUMB    SINGING. 

We  are  "  new  creatures  in  Christ  Jesus."  When  God  looks 
upon  us  with  the  eye  of  lo^•e,  in  conversion  and  regeneration, 
he  makes  us  as  opposite  from  what  we  were  before  as  Ught 
is  from  darkness,  as  even  heaven  itself  is  from  hell.  God 
changes  man.  He  works  in  him  a  change  so  great,  that  no 
reformation  can  even  so  much  as  thoroughly  imitate  it ;  it  is 
an  entire  change — a  change  of  the  wil],  of  the  being,  of  the 
desires,  of  the  hates,  of  the  dislikings,  and  of  the  likings.  In 
every  respect  the  man  becomes  new  when  divine  grace  enters 
into  his  heart.  And  yet  thou  sayest  of  thyself,  "  I  am  con- 
verted," and  remain  what  thou  wast !  I  tell  thee  once  again 
to  thy  face,  that  thou  sayest  an  empty  thing ;  thou  hast  no 
ground  for  saying  it.  If  grace  permits  thee  to  sin  as  thou  wast 
wont  to  do,  then  that  grace  is  no  grace  at  all.  That  grace 
were  not  worth  the  having  which  permits  a  man  to  be,  after 
he  receives  it,  what  he  was  before.  No,  we  must  ever  hold 
and  teach  the  great  doctrine  of  sanctification.  Where  God 
really  justifies  he  really  sanctifies  too  ;  and  where  there  is  the 
remission  of  sin,  there  is  also  the  forsaking  of  it.  Where  God 
hath  blotted  out  transgression,  he  also  removeth  our  love  of 
it,  and  maketh  us  seek  after  holiness,  and  walk  in  the  ways  of 
the  Lord.  I  think  we  may  fairly  infer  this  from  the  text,  as  a 
prelude  to  the  observations  we  have  to  make  concerning  it. 

And  now  I  shall  want  you,  first  of  all,  to  notice  the  sort  of 
people  lohom  God  has  chosen  to  sing  his  praises^  and  to  sing 
them  eternally.  Then,  in  the  second  place,  I  shall  enter  into  a 
more  full  description  of  the  dumb  people  here  described.  Then, 
thirdly,  I  shall  try  to  notice  certain  special  times  and  seasons 
when  those  dumb  people  sing  more  sweetly  than  at  others. 

I.  First,  then,  the  persons  whom  God  hath  chosen  to 
SING  HIS  SONGS  FOR  EVER.  "The  tougue  of  the  dumb  shall 
sing."  We  may  make  this  the  first  point.  There  is  no  dififer- 
ence,  by  nature,  between  the  elect  and  others;  those  who  are 
now  glorified  in  heaven,  and  who  walk  the  golden  streets  clad 
in  robes  of  purity,  were  by  nature  as  unholy  and  defiled,  and 
as  far  from  original  righteousness,  as  those  who,  by  their  own 
rejection  of  Christ,  and  by  their  love  of  sin,  have  brought  them- 
selves into  the  pit  of  eternal  torment,  as  a  punishment  for  their 
iniquities.     The  only  reason  why  there  is  a  difierence  between 


THE    DUMB    SINGING.  121 

those  who  are  in  heaven  and  those  who  are  m  hell,  rests  with 
divine  grace,  and  with  divine  grace  alone.  Those  in  heaven  must 
inevitably  have  been  cast  away,  had  not  everlasting  mercy 
stretched  out  its  hand  and  redeemed  them.  They  were  by 
nature  not  one  whit  superior  to  others.  They  would  as  certainly 
have  rejected  Christ,  and  have  trodden  under  foot  the  blood  of 
Jesus,  as  did  those  who  were  cast  away,  if  grace,  free  grace, 
had  not  prevented  them  from  committing  this  sin.  The  reason 
why  they  are  Christians  is  not  because  they  did  naturally  will 
to  be  so,  nor  because  they  did  by  nature  desire  to  know  Christ, 
or  to  be  found  of  him ;  but  they  are  now  saints  simply  be- 
cause God  made  them  so.  He  gave  them  the  desire  to  be 
saved ;  he  ])nt  into  them  the  will  to  seek  after  him ;  he 
helped  them  in  their  seekings,  and  afterward  brought  them  to 
feel  that  peace  Avhich  is  the  fruit  of  justification.  But  by 
nature  they  were  just  the  same  as  others ;  and  if  there  is  any 
difference,  we  are  obliged  to  say  that  the  difference  does  not 
lie  in  their  favor.  In  very  many  cases,  we  who  now  "  rejoice 
in  hope  of  the  glory  of  God"  were  the  very  worst  of  men. 
There  are  multitudes  that  now  bless  God  for  their  redemption, 
who  once  cursed  him  ;  who  implored,  as  frequently  as  they 
da.-ed  to  do,  with  oaths  and  swearing,  tiat  the  curse  of  God 
might  rest  upon  their  fellows  and  upon  themselves.  Many  of 
th  3  Lord's  anointed  were  once  the  very  castaways  of  Satan, 
the  sweepings  of  society,  the  refuse  of  the  earth,  those  whom 
no  man  cared  for,  who  were  called  outcasts,  but  whom  God 
ha-h  now  called  desired  ones,  seeing  he  hath  loved  them. 

1  am  led  to  these  thoughts  from  the  fact  that  we  are  told 
here  that  those  who  sing  were  dumb  by  nature.  Their  sing- 
ing does  not  come  naturally  from  themselves ;  they  were  not 
born  songsters ;  no,  they  were  dumb  ones,  those  whom  God 
would  have  to  sing  his  praisas.  It  does  not  say  the  tongue 
of  the  stammerer,  or  the  tongue  of  him  that  blasphemed,  or 
the  tongue  of  him  that  misused  his  tODgue,  but  "the  tongue 
of  the  dumb,"  of  those  who  have  gone  furthest  from  any 
thought  of  singing,  of  those  who  have  no  power  of  will  to 
sing — the  tongue  of  such  as  these  shall  yet  be  made  to  sing 
God's  p?  aises.  Strange  choice  that  God  has  made  !  Strange, 
for  its  graciousness !  strangely  manifesting  the  sovereignty  of 


122  THE   DUMB   SINGING. 

his  will !  God  would  build  for  himself  a  palace  in  heaven 
of  living  stones:  where  did  he  get  them?  Did  he  go  to  the 
quarries  of  Paros  ?  Hatli  he  brought  forth  the  richest  and 
the  purest  marble  from  the  quarries  of  perfection  ?  No,  ye 
saints,  look  to  "  the  hole  of  the  pit  whence  ye  were  digged, 
and  to  the  rock  whence  ye  were  hewn !"  Ye  were  full  of 
sin :  so  far  from  being  stones  that  were  white  with  purity,  ye 
were  black  with  defilement,  seemingly  utterly  uniit  to  be  stones 
in  the  spiritual  temple,  which  should  be  the  dwelling-place  of 
the  Most  High.  And  yet  he  chose  you  to  be  trophies  of  his 
grace,  and  of  his  power  to  save.  When  Solomon  built  for 
himself  a  palace,  he  built  it  of  cedar :  but  when  God  would 
build  for  himself  a  dwelling  for  ever,  he  cut  not  down  the 
goodly  cedars,  but  he  dwelt  in  a  bush,  and  hath  preserved  it 
as  his  memorial  for  ever  :  "  The  God  that  dwelt  in  the  bush." 
Goldsmiths  make  exquisite  forms  from  precious  metals  ;  they 
fashion  the  bracelet  and  the  ring  from  gold : — God  maketh 
his  precious  things  out  of  base  material ;  and  from  the  black 
pebbles  of  the  detiling  brooks  he  hath  taken  up  stones,  which 
he  hath  set  in  the  golden  ring  of  his  immutable  love,  to  make 
them  gems  to  sparkle  on  his  finger  for  ever.  He  hath  not 
selected  the  best,  but  apparently  the  worst  of  men,  to  be  the 
monuments  of  his  grace ;  and  when  he  would  have  a  choir  in 
heaven  that  should  with  tongues  harmonious  sing  his  praises 
— a  chorus  that  should  for  ever  chant  hallelujahs  louder  than 
the  noise  of  many  waters,  and  like  great  thunders,  he  did  not 
send  Mercy  down  to  seek  earth's  songsters,  and  cull  from  those 
who  have  the  sweetest  voices:  he  said,  "Go,  Mercy,  and  find 
out  the  dumb,  and  touch  their  Hps,  and  make  them  sing.  The 
virgin  tongues  that  never  sang  my  praise  before,  that  have 
been  silent  till  now,  shall  break  forth  in  rhapsodies  sublime, 
and  they  shall  lead  the  soi^g ;  even  angels  shall  but  attend  be- 
hind, and  catch  the  notes  from  the  lips  of  those  who  once  were 
dumb."  "  The  tongue  of  the  dumb  shall  sing"  God's  praises 
in  heaven. 

O !  what  a  fountain  of  consolation  this  opens  for  you  and 
for  rae !  Ay,  beloved,  if  God  did  not  choose  the  base  things 
of  this  world,  he  would  never  have  chosen  us ;  if  he  had  re- 
•.pect  unto  the  countenances  of  men,  if  he  were  a  respecter 


THE   DUMB    SURGING.  123 

of  persons,  where  had  you  and  I  been  this  day ;  we  had  never 
been  instances  of  his  love  and  mercy.  No,  as  we  look  upon 
ourselves  now,  and  remember  what  we  once  were,  we  are 
often  obliged  to  say, 

"  Depths  of  mercy,  can  there  be 
Mercy  still  reserved  for  me  ?" 

How  many  times  we  have  sung  at  the  Lord's  table — at  th 
sacramental  supper  of  our  Master — 

"  "Why  was  I  made  to  hear  thy  voice 
And  enter  while  there  's  room, 
While  thousands  make  a  wretched  choice, 
And  rather  starve  then  come  ?" 

And  we  have  joined  too  in  singing — 

"  'Twas  the  same  love  that  spread  the  feast, 
That  sweetly  forced  us  in ; 
Else  we  had  still  refused  to  taste. 
And  perished  in  our  sin." 

Grace  is  always  grace,  but  it  never  seems  so  gracious  as  when 
we  see  it  brought  to  our  unworthy  selves.  Ay,  my  friends, 
you  may  be  Arminians  in  your  doctrine,  but  you  never  can  be 
Arminians  in  your  feelings  ;  you  are  obliged  to  confess  that  it 
is  all  of  grace,  and  cast  away  the  thought  that  it  was  of  your 
foreseen  faith  or  of  your  foreseen  good  works  that  the  Lord 
chose  you.  We  are  obliged  to  come  to  this,  to  feel  and  know 
that  it  must  have  been  of  mercy,  free  mercy,  and  of  that  alone  ; 
that  we  were  not  capable  of  doing  good  works  without  his 
grace  preventing  us  before  good  works,  and  without  his  grace 
also  in  good  works,  efnabling  us  to  do  them  ;  and,  therefore, 
they  never  could  have  been  the  motive  to  divine  love,  nor  the 
reason  why  it  flowed  toward  us.  O !  ye  unworthy  ones,  ye 
saints  that  feel  your  deep  natural  depravity,  and  mourn  over 
your  ruin  by  the  fall  of  Adam,  lift  up  your  hearts  to  God !  He 
hath  delivered  you  from  all  the  impediments  which  Adam  cast 
upon  you ;  your  tongue  is  loosed,  it  is  loose  now  ;  Adam  made 
it  dumb,  but  God  hath  loosed  it ;  your  eyes  that  were  blinded 
by  Adam's  f;ill  are  opened  now  ;  he  hath  lifted  you  from  the 
miry  clay.  What  Adam  lost  for  us,  Christ  hath  regained  for 
us;  he  hath  plucked  ua  out  of  the  pit,  and  "set  us  upon  a 


124  THE   DUMB   SINGING. 

rock,  and  established  our  goings,  and  hath  put  a  new  song 
into  our  mouth,  even  praise  for  evermore."  Yes,  "  the  tongue 
of  the  dumb  sliall  sing." 

And  then  just  anotlier  hint  here,  before  I  leave  this  point. 
How  this  ought  to  give  you  encouragement  in  seeking  to  do 
good  to  others !  Why,  my  brethren,  I  can  never  think  any 
man  too  far  gone  for  divine  mercy,  since  I  know  that  God 
saved  me.  Whenever  I  have  felt  desponding  about  any  of  my 
hearers,  who  have  for  a  long  time  persevered  in  guilt,  I  have 
only  had  to  reach  down  my  oAvn  biography  from  the  shelves 
of  my  memory  and  just  think  what  I  too  was,  till  grace 
redeemed  me,  and  brought  me  to  my  Saviour's  feet;  and  then 
I  have  said,  "  It  will  be  no  wonder  if  that  man  is  saved  ;  after 
what  he  hath  done  for  me,  I  can  believe  any  thing  of  my  Master. 
If  he  hath  blotted  out  my  transgressions,  if  he  hath  clean 
melted  away  my  sin,  then  I  can  never  despair  of  any  of  my 
fellow-creatures ;  I  may  of  myself,  but  I  can  not  of  them." 
Remember,  they  may  be  dumb  now,  but  he  can  make  them 
sing.  Your  son  John  is  a  sad  reprobate  ;  keep  on  praying  for 
him,  mother ;  God  can  change  his  heart.  Your  daughter's 
heart  seems  hard  as  adamant ;  he  who  makes  the  dumb  sing 
can  make  rocks  melt.  Believe  in  God  for  your  children,  as 
well  as  for  yourselves  ;  trust  him  ;  take  their  cases  before  his 
throne ;  rely  upon  him  that  he  can  save  them,  and  believe  that 
in  answer  to  earnest  prayer,  he  also  will  do  it.  And  if  you 
have  neighbors  that  are  full  of  the  pestilence  of  sin,  whose 
vices  come  up  before  you  as  a  stench  in  your  nostrils,  yet  fear 
not  to  carry  the  gospel  to  them ;  though  they  be  harlots,  drunk- 
ards, swearers,  be  not  afraid  to  tell  them  of  the  Saviour's  dying 
love.  He  makes  the  dumb  sing ;  he  does  not  ask  even  of  them 
a  voice  to  begin  with;  they  are  dumb,  and  he  does  not  ask  of 
them  even  the  power  of  speech,  but  he  gives  them  the  power. 
O !  if  you  have  neighbors  who  are  haters  of  the  Sabbath, 
haters  of  God,  unwilling  to  come  to  the  house  of  God,  despis- 
ing Christ:  if  you  find  them  as  fir  gone  as  you  can  find  them, 
recollect,  he  maketh  the  dumb  to  sing,  and  therefore,  he  can 
make  them  live.  He  wants  no  goodness  in  them  to  begin 
with ;  all  he  wants  is  just  the  rough,  raw  material,  unhewn, 
uncut,  unpolished.     And  he  does  not  want  even  good  mate- 


THE    DUMB   SINGING.  125 

rial ;  bad  as  the  material  may  be,  he  can  make  it  into  some- 
thing inestimably  })recioiis,  something  that  is  worthy  of  the 
Saviour's  blood.  Go  on  ;  fear  not !  If  the  dumb  can  sing, 
then  surely  you  can  never  say  that  any  man  need  be  cast  av.ay. 

II,  I  am  now  to  enter  into  some  rather  more  lucid  descnp- 
tion  of  these  dumb  people.     Who  are  they  ? 

Well,  sometimes  I  g^t  a  good  thought  out  of  old  Master 
Cruden's  Concordance.  I  believe  that  is  the  best  commentary 
to  the  Bible,  and  I  like  o  study  it.  I  opened  it  lately  at  this 
passage,  and  I  found  Master  Cruden  describing  different  kinds 
of  dumb  people.  He  says  there  are  four  or  five  different  sorts ; 
but  I  shall  name  only  four  of  them.  The  first  sort  of  dumb 
people  he  mentions  are  those  that  can  not  speak ;  the  second 
sort  are  those  that  won't  speak  ;  the  third  sort  are  those  that 
dare  not  speak ;  and  the  fourth  sort  are  those  that  have  got 
nothing  to  say,  and  therefore  they  are  dumb. 

1.  The  first  sort  of  people  who  shall  sing  are  those  xcho  can 
not  speaJc.  This  is  the  usual  acceptation  of  the  word  dumb  : 
the  others  are,  of  course,  only  figurative  applications  of  the 
term.  We  call  a  man  dumb  when  he  can  not  speak.  Now, 
spiritually,  the  man  who  is  still  in  his  trespasses  and  sins  ia 
dumb  ;  and  I  will  prove  that.  He  is  dead  ;  and  there  is  none 
so  dumb  as  a  dead  man.  We  used  to  hear  in  our  childhood 
that  they  buried  none  but  deaf  and  dumb  persons  in  certain 
churchyards.  It  was  intended  to  tickle  our  childish  fancies, 
and  misled  us  a  little ;  but  the  meaning  was,  that  none  but  dead 
people  were  buried  there ;  none  are  so  dumb  as  those  who  are 
dead.  "Shall  the  dead  arise  and  praise  thee?  Shall  thy 
loving-kindness  be  declared  in  the  grave,  or  thy  faithfulness  in 
destruction  ?"  The  word  of  God  assures  us  that  unregenerate 
men  are  spiritually  dead ;  it  folloAvs,  then,  that  they  must  be 
spiritually  dumb.  They  can  not  sing  God's  praises  ;  they  know 
him  not,  and,  therefore,  they  can  not  exalt  his  glorious  name. 
They  can  not  confess  their  sins  ;  they  can  utter  the  mere  words 
of  confession,  but  they  can  not  really  confess,  for  they  do  not 
know  the  evil  of  sin,  nor  have  they  been  taught  to  feel  what  a 
bitter  thing  ii:  is,  and  to  know  themselves  as  sinners.  But 
"  no  man  can  call  Jesus  Lord,  except  by  the  Holy  Ghost ;" 
and  these  pe  )ple  can  not  do  so  truly.     Perhaps,  it  may  be, 


126  THE    DUMB    SINGING. 

fchey  can  talk  well  on  the  doctrines ;  but  they  can  not  speak 
them  out  of  the  fulness  of  theii-  liearts,  as  living  and  vital  prin- 
ciples which  they  know  in  themselves.  They  can  not  join  in 
the  songs,  nor  can  they  take  part  in  the  conversation  of  a 
Christian.  If  they  sit  down  with  the  saints,  perhaps  thev 
have  culled  a  few  phrases  from  the  garden  of  the  Lord,  which 
they  use  and  apply  to  certain  things  which  they  do  not  know- 
any  thing  about.  They  talk  a  language  the  meaning  of  which 
they  do  not  comprehend — like  Milton's  daughters  reading  a 
language  to  their  father  which  they  did  not  understand.  Still, 
so  far  as  the  essence  of  the  matter  is  concerned,  they  are 
dumb.  But,  hail  to  sovereign  grace!  "the  tongue  of  the 
dumb  shall  sing !"  God  will  have  his  darhngs  made  what  they 
should  be.  They  are  dumb  by  nature,  but  he  will  not  leave 
them  so ;  they  can  not  now  sing  his  praises,  but  they  shall  do 
it ;  they  do  not  now  confess  their  sins,  but  he  will  bring  them 
on  their  knees  yet,  and  make  them  pour  out  their  hearts 
before  him.  They  can  not  now  talk  the  brogue  of  Canaan, 
nor  speak  the  language  of  Sion,  but  they  shall  do  it  soon. 
Grace,  omnipotent  grace,  will  have  its  way  with  them.  They 
shall  be  taught  to  pray ;  their  eyes  shall  be  made  to  flow  with 
tears  of  penitence  ;  and  then,  after  that,  their  lips  shall  sing  to 
the  praise  of  sovereign  grace. 

I  need  not  dwell  upon  this  point,  because  I  have  many  here 
that  were  dumb  once,  who  can  bless  God  that  they  can  now 
sing.  And  does  it  not  sometimes  seem  to  you,  beloved,  a  very 
strange  thing,  that  you  are  what  you  are  ?  I  should  think  it 
must  be  the  strangest  thing  in  the  world  for  a  dumb  man  to 
speak,  because  he  has  no  idea  how  a  man  feels  when  he  is 
speaking;  he  has  no  notion  of  the  thing  at  all.  Like  a  man 
blind  from  his  birth,  he  has  no  idea  what  kind  of  a  thing  sight 
can  be.  We  have  heard  of  a  blind  man,  who  supposed  that 
the  color  scarlet  must  be  very  much  like  the  sound  of  a  trumpet : 
he  had  no  other  way  of  comparing  it.  So  the  dumb  man  has 
no  notion  of  the  way  to  talk.  Do  you  not  think  it  is  a  strange 
thing  that  you. are  what  you  are?  You  said  once,  "I will 
never  be  one  of  the  canting  Methodists.  Do  you  think  I  shall 
ever  make  a  profession  of  religion  ?  What !  I  attend  a  prayer 
meeting  ?     No."     And  you  went  along  the  streets  in  all  your 


THE   DUMB   SINGING.  127 

gayety  of  mirth,  and  said,  "  What !  I  become  a  little  child,  and 
give  up  my  mind  to  simple  faith,  and  not  reason  at  all? 
What !  am  I  to  give  up  all  argument  about  things,  and  simply 
take  them  for  granted,  because  God  has  said  them  ?  Nay, 
that  never  can  be."  I  will  be  bound  to  say,  it  will  be  a  won- 
der to  you  as  long  as  you  are  here,  that  yon  are  the  children 
of  God ;  and  even  in  heaven  itself  your  greatest  wonder  will 
be  that  you  were  ever  brought  to  know  the  Saviour. 

2.  But  there  is  a  sort  of  dumb  people  that  icill  not  speak. 
They  are  mentioned  by  Isaiah.  He  said  of  preachers  in  his 
day,  they  were  dumb  dogs  that  would  not  bark.  I  bless  God 
we  are  not  now  quite  so  much  inundated  by  this  kind  of  dumb 
people  as  w^e  used  to  be.  God  has  raised  up,  especially  in  the 
Church  of  England,  of  late,  a  large  number  of  evangelical 
men,  who  are  not  afraid  to  preach  the  whole  counsel  of  God. 
There  are  many  such  fiithful  preachers  of  the  gospel  to  be 
found ;  and  although  we  used  to  say  we  were  the  only  evan- 
gelicals that  preached  the  gospel,  the  time  has  come  when 
"  she  that  was  barren  keeps  house,  and  lias  become  the  joyful 
mother  of  children."  There  is  no  reason  why  the  Church  ot 
England  should  not  be  thoroughly  evangelical ;  if  it  keeps  to 
its  articles,  it  ought  to  be.  It  is  the  most  inconsistent  church 
in  the  world,  if  it  is  not  a  Calvinistic  one.  It  must  be  incon- 
sistent, unless  it  keeps  to  those  grand  fundamental  truths  which 
are  indeed  a  code  of  faith  to  be  received  by  all  believers — the 
truths  which  are  written  in  its  articles. 

But,  O !  there  are  a  great  many  among  us  Dissenters,  and 
in  the  Church  of  England,  too,  that  are  dumb  dogs.  There 
are  still  plenty  who  do  not  know  any  thing  about  the  gospel ; 
who  preach  a  vast  deal  about  a  great  many  things,  but  noth- 
hig  about  Jesus  Christ ;  who  buy  their  sermons  cheap,  and 
preach  them  at  their  ease  ;  -who  ask  God  to  tell  them  what  to 
say,  and  then  pull  their  manuscripts  out  of  their  pockets.  We 
have  had  to  mourn,  especially  in  years  gone  by,  that  we  could 
look  from  parish  to  parish,  and  find  nobody  but  a  dumb  dog 
in  the  church,  and  in  the  pulpits  of  Dissenters  too.  And  some 
men  who  might  have  spoken  with  a  little  earnestness,  if  they 
liked,  let  the  people  slumber  under  them,  instead  of  preaching 
the  word  with  true  fidelity,  as  if  they  would  not  have  to  give. 


128  THE   DUMB    SrXGmQ. 

account  to  God  at  the  last.  My  aged  grandfather  tells  a 
story,  that  I  believe  he  himself  could  verify,  of  a  person  who 
once  resided  near  him,  and  caUcd  himself-a  preacher  of  tlie 
gospel.  He  was  visited  by  a  poor  woman,  wlo  asked  h'^n 
what  was  the  meaning  of  the  now  birth  ?  He  replied,  "  My 
good  woman,  what  do  you  come  to  me  about  that  for  ?  Nic- 
odemus,  a  ruler  of  the  Jews,  did  not  know ;  he  was  a  wise 
man,  and  did  not  know  ;  and  how  do  you  think  I  should  ?" 
So  she  had  to  go  away  with  only  that  answer.  Time  was 
when  such  an  answer  might  have  been  given  by  a  great  many 
who  were  reckoned  to  be  the  authorized  teachers  of  religion, 
but  knew  nothing  really  about  the  matter.  They  miderstood 
a  great  deal  more  about  fox-hunting  than  about  preaching,  and 
more  about  farming  their  land  than  about  the  spiritual  hus- 
bandry of  God's  church.  But  we  bless  God  that  there  are  not 
so  many  of  that  sort  now  ;  and  we  pray  that  the  race  may  be- 
come thoroughly  extinct ;  that  every  pulpit,  and  every  pi?  36 
of  worship  may  be  filled  with  a  man  who  has  a  tongue  of  fit-e 
and  a  heart  of  flame,  and  shuns  not  to  declare  the  whole  coun- 
sel of  God,  neither  seeking  the  smile  of  men  nor  dreadhig 
their  frown.  We  have  a  promise  that  it  shall  be  so.  "  The 
tongue  of  the  dumb  shall  sing."  And,  ah  !  they  do  sing  w.'ll 
too,  when  God  makes  them  sing. 

You  remember  Rowland  Hill's  story  in  "The  Village  Dia- 
logues," about  Mr.  Merriman.  Mr.  Mei-riman  was  a  sad 
scapegrace  of  a  preacher ;  he  was  to  be  seen  at  every  fair  a  id 
revel,  and  used  seldom  to  be  found  in  his  pulpit  when  he 
should  have  been  ;  but  when  he  was  converted,  he  began  to 
preach  with  tears  running  down  his  face — and  how  the  church 
began  to  be  crowded  !  The  squire  would  not  go  and  hear  any 
of  that  stuff,  and  locked  up  his  pew ;  and  Mr.  Merrhnan  had 
a  little  ladder  made  outside  the  door,  as  he  did  not  wish  to 
break  the  door  open  ;  and  the  people  used  to  sit  on  the  steps, 
up  one  side  and  down  the  other,  so  that  it  made  twice  as  much 
room  as  there  was  before. 

No  people  make  such  good  preachers  as  those  who  were 
dumb  once.  If  the  Lord  opens  their  mouths,  they  will  thiiik 
they  can  not  preach  often  enough,  and  earnestly  enough,  to 
make  up  for  the  mischief  they  did  before.     Chalmers  himseli 


THE    DUMB    SINGING.  1?*^ 

might  never  have  been  so  eloquent  a  preacher,  had  he  not 
been  for  a  long  time  a  dumb  dog.  He  preached  morality,  he 
said,  till  he  made  all  the  people  in  his  pai-ish  immoral ;  he  kept 
on  urging  them  to  keep  God's  law,  till  he  made  them  break 
it ;  but  when  he  turned  round,  and  began  to  preach  God's 
gospel,  then  the  dumb  began  to  sing.  O  !  may  God  bi'ing 
this  about  in  every  one  of  us  !  If  we  are  dumb  as  professed 
ministers,  may  he  open  our  mouths,  and  force  us  to  speak 
forth  his  word,  lest  at  the  last  day  the  blood  of  our  hearers' 
souls  should  be  found  upon  our  skirts,  and  we  should  be  cast 
away  as  unfaithful  stewards  of  the  gospel  of  Christ ! 

3.  I  now  introduce  you  to  a  third  sort  of  dumb  people. 
They  are  dumb  because  they  dare  not  speak ;  and  they  are 
good  people,  blessed  souls.  Here  is  one  of  them :  "  I  was 
dumb  wiih  silence ;  I  opened  not  my  mouth,  because  thou 
didst  it !"  Ah !  it  is  blessed  to  be  dumb  in  that  fashion.  The 
Lord's  servant  will  often  have  to  be  dumb  under  trials  and 
troubles.  When  Satan  tempts  him  to  repine,  he  will  put  his 
finger  to  his  lip  and  say,  "  Hush,  murmuring  heart,  be  still !" 
"  Wherefore  doth  a  living  man  complain,  a  man  for  the  pun- 
ishment of  his  sins  ?"  Even  the  child  of  God  will  do  like  Job 
who  sat  down  for  seven  days  and  nights,  and  said  not  a  word, 
for  he  felt  that  his  trouble  was  heavy,  and  he  could  say  nothing. 
It  would  have  been  as  well  if  Job  had  kept  his  mouth  shut  al^ 
the  next  few  days  ;  he  would  not  have  said  so  much  amiss  as 
he  did  in  some  things  that  he  uttered.  It  would  have  been 
well  if  he  could  always  have  kept  silence.  O  !  there  are  times 
when  you  and  I,  beloved,  are  obliged  to  keep  the  bridle  on 
our  tongues,  lest  we  should  murmur  against  God.  We  are  in 
evil  company ;  perhaps  our  spirits  are  hot  within  us,  and  we 
want  to  take  vengeance  for  the  Lord  ;  Ave  are  like  the  friends 
of  David,  who  wanted  to  take  away  the  head  of  Shimei.  "Let 
us  take  off  this  dead  dog's  head,"  we  say;  and  then  our  Jesus 
tells  us  to  put  our  sword  into  its  scabbard,  for  the  "  servant  of 
the  Lord  must  not  strive."  How  often  have  we  thus  been 
dumb  !  And  sometimes  when  there  have  been  slanders  against 
our  character,  and  men  have  calumniated  us,  O  !  how  our  fin- 
gers have  itched  to  be  at  them  !  We  have  wanted  to  be  at 
them  at  once,  anc   let  them  see  who  was  the  strongest  of  the 


130  THE    DUMB   SINGING. 

two.  But  we  have  said,  "  No  ;  our  Master  did  not  answer, 
and  he  '  left  us  an  example  that  we  should  follow  his  steps.'  " 
The  chief  priests  accused  him  of  many  things,  but  he  "  an- 
swered them  not  a  word.'-  But  we  have  found  it  hard  some- 
times to  be  dumb,  like  th }  sheep  when  it  is  brought  to  the 
shearer,  or  the  lamb  when  it  is  in  the  slaughter-house.  We 
coiild  scarcely  keep  quiet.  When  we  have  been  upon  our 
beds  in  sickness,  we  have  tried  to  quench  every  murmuring 
word ;  we  have  not  let  a  sentence  escape  our  lips,  when  we 
could  possibly  avoid  it ;  but  notwithstanding  all  that,  we  have 
found  it  hard  work  to  keep  dumb,  though  it  is  blessed  work 
when  we  are  enabled  to  do  it.  Now,  ye  who  have  been  dumb 
under  great  weights  of  sorrow ;  ye  whose  songs  have  been 
suspended,  because  ye  durst  not  open  your  lips,  lest  sighs 
should  usurp  the  place  of  praise,  come,  listen  to  this  promise, 
"  The  tongue  of  the  dumb  shall  sing."  Yes,  though  you  are 
in  the  deepest  trouble  now,  and  are  obliged  to  be  silent,  you 
shall  sing  yet.  Though,  like  Jonah,  you  are  in  the  whale's 
belly,  carried  down,  as  he  called  it,  into  the  lowest  hell ; 
though  the  earth  with  her  bars  is  about  you  for  ever,  and  the 
weeds  are  wrapped  about  your  head,  yet  you  "shall  look 
again  toward  his  holy  temple."  Though  you  have  hung  your 
harp  upon  the  willows,  bless  God  you  have  not  broken  it ; 
you  will  have  use  for  it  by-and-by ;  you  shall  take  it  down 
from  its  resting-place,  and 

"  Loud  to  the  praise  of  sovereign  grace, 
Bid  every  string  awake." 

If  you  have  no  songs  in  the  night,  yet  he  shall  compass  you 
about  with  songs  of  deliverance ;  if  you  can  not  sing  his 
praises  now,  you  shall  do  so  by-and-by,  when  greater  grace  shall 
have  come  into  your  heart,  or  when  delivermg  mercy  shall  be 
the  subject  of  your  song,  in  better  days  that  are  yet  to  come. 
But,  blessed  be  God,  we  are  not  always  to  be  silent  in  afflic- 
tion ;  we  are  bound  to  siiig.  And  I  think  we  ought  to  sing 
even  when  we  ought  to  })e  dumb  ;  though  we  are  dumb  as  to 
murmuring,  we  ought  to  sing  God's  praises.  An  old  Puritan 
said,  "  God's  people  are  like  birds  ;  they  sing  best  in  cages." 
He  said,  "  God's  people  often  sing  the  best  when  they  are  in 


THE    DUMB    SINGING.  i5i 

the  deej^est  trouble."  Said  old  Master  Brooks,  "  The  deeper 
the  flood  was,  the  higher  tlie  ark  went  up  to  heaven."  So  it 
is  with  the  child  of  God :  the  deeper  his  troubles,  the  nearer 
to  heaven  he  goes,  if  he  lives  close  to  his  Master.  Troubles 
are  called  weights,  and  weights,  you  know,  generally  clog  us 
and  keep  us  down  to  tlic  earth  ;  but  there  are  ways,  by  the 
use  of  the  laws  of  mechanics,  by  which  you  can  make  a  weight 
lift  you  ;  and  so  it  is  possible  to  make  your  troubles  lift  you 
nearer  heaven,  instead  of  making  them  sink  you.  Ah !  we 
thank  our  God  he  has  sometimes  opened  our  mouth  when  we 
were  dumb  ;  when  we  were  ungrateful  and  did  not  praise  him, 
he  has  opened  our  mouth  by  a  trial,  and  though  when  we  had 
a  thousand  mercies  we  did  not  praise  him,  when  he  sent  a 
sharp  aflliction,  then  we  began  to  do  so.  He  has  thus  made 
the  tongue  of  the  dumb  to  shig. 

4.  We  will  mention  one  more  kind  of  dumb  people,  and 
then  we  shall  have  done.  There  are  those  loho  have  nothing 
to  say^  and,  therefore,  they  are  dumb.  I  will  give  you  an  in- 
stance :  Solomon  says  in  the  Proverbs — "  Open  thy  mouth  for 
the  dumb  ;"  and  he  shows  by  the  context  that  he  means  those 
who  in  the  court  of  judgm.ent  have  nothing  to  plead  for  them- 
selves, and  have  to  stand  dumb  before  the  bar.  Like  that 
man  of  old,  who,  when  the  king  came  in  to  see  the  guests,  had 
not  on  a  wedding  garment,  and  when  the  king  said,  "Friend, 
how  camest  thou  in  hither  ?"  stood  speechless,  not  because  he 
could  not  speak,  but  because  he  had  nothing  to  say.  Have 
not  you  and  I  been  dumb,  and  are  we  not  now,  when  we 
stand  on  law  terms  with  God,  when  we  forget  that  Jesus 
Christ  and  his  blood  and  righteousness  were  our  full  acquit- 
tal ?  Are  we  not  obliged  to  be  dumb  when  the  command- 
ments are  laid  bare  before  us,  and  when  the  law  of  God  is 
brought  home  to  our  conscience  ?  There  was  a  time  with  each 
of  us,  and  not  long  ago  with  some  here  present,  when  we 
stood  before  Moses's  seat,  and  heard  the  commandments  read  ; 
and  when  we  were  asked,  "  Sinner,  canst  thou  claim  to  have 
kept  these  commandments  ?"  we  were  dumb.  Tlien  we  were 
asked,  "  Sinner,  canst  thou  give  any  atonement  for  the  breach 
of  these  commandments?"  and  we  were  dumb.  We  were 
asked,  "  Sinner,  canst  thou,  by  a  future  obedience,  wipe  out 


132  THE    DUMB   SINGING. 

thy  past  sin  ?"  We  knew  it  was  impossible,  and  we  were 
dumb.  Then  we  were  asked,  "  Canst  thou  endure  the  pen- 
alty ;  canst  thou  bear  to  welter  for  ever  in  the  flames  of  heli  ? 
Canst  thou  suffer  everlasting  torments  from  the  red  rig  it 
hand  of  an  angry  God  ?  Can^^t  thou  dwell  with  everlasth.g 
burnings,  and  abide  with  eternal  fires?"  and  vre  were  dumb. 
And  then  we  were  asked  the  question,  "Prisoner  at  the  bi  r, 
hast  thou  any  reason  to  plead  why  thou  shouldst  not  be  con- 
demned ?"  and  we  w^ere  dumb.  And  we  were  asked,  " Piis- 
oner,  hast  thou  any  helper  ?  hast  thou  any  one  that  can  de- 
liver thee  ?"  and  we  stood  dumb,  for  we  had  nothing  to  say. 
Ay,  but  blessed  be  God,  the  tongue  of  the  dumb  can  now 
sing.  And  shall  I  tell  you  what  Ave  can  sing  ?,  Why,  we  can 
sing  this :  "  Who  shall  lay  any  thing  to  the  charge  of  God's 
elect?"  Not  God,  for  he  has  justified.  "Who  is  he  that 
condemneth  ?"  Not  Christ,  for  "  he  hath  died,  yea,  rather 
hath  risen  again,  who  is  also  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  and 
maketh  intercession  for  us."  We  who  had  not  a  word  to  say 
for  ourselves,  can  now  say  every  thing.     We  can  say, 

"Bold  shall  I  stand  at  that  great  day, 
For  who  aught  to  my  charge  can  lay  ? 
Fully  absolved  by  Christ  I  am, 
From  sin's  tremendous  curse  and  shame." 

Yes,  the  dumb  ones  can  sing.  So  shall  you,  poor  dumb 
one  :  if  God  has  made  you  dumb  by  taking  away  all  the  names 
of  Baal  out  of  your  mouth — if  he  has  taken  away  all  your 
self-righteousness  and  all  your  trust  in  yourself,  as  truly  as 
ever  he  has  shut  your  mouth  he  will  open  it.  If  God  has 
killed  your  self-righteousness,  he  will  give  you  a  better;  if 
he  has  knocked  down  all  your  refuges  of  lies,  he  wdll  build 
you  up  a  good  refuge.  He  has  not  come  to  destroy  you ;  he 
has  shut  your  mouth  to  fill  .it  with  his  praise.  Be  of  good 
cheer ;  look  to  Jesus ;  cast  thine  eyes  to  the  cross  ;  put  thy 
confidence  in  him ;  and  even  thou,  wdio  think.est  thyself  a 
castaway,  even  thou,  poor,  weeping  Mary,  even  thou  shalt  ^et 
sing  of  redeeming  love. 

IV.  And  now  I  have  to  conclude  by  just  noticing  the  occa 
eions  when  the  tongues  of  fhese  dumh  people  sing  the  best. 


THE   DUMB    SIN(fi?rG.  lir? 

When  does  the  tongue  of  the  dumb  sing  ?  Why,  I  thiuk 
it  sings  always,  little  or  much.  It  is  always  singing.  If  ii  is 
once  set  at  liberty,  it  will  never  leave  off.  There  are  some  )f 
you  people  who  say  this  world  is  a  howling  wilderness;  w«  .1, 
you  are  tho  howlers — you  make  all  the  howling.  If  you  choc  ;e 
to  howl,  I  .\an  not  help  it :  I  prefer  the  promise  of  my  text  — 
"Then  shall  the  tongue  of  the  dumb,"  not  howl,  but  "  sin^  ." 
Yes,  they  do  sing  always,  little  or  much  ;  sometimes  it  is  in  a 
low  hush-note;  sometimes  they  have  to  go  rather  deep  in  t  le 
bass ;  but  there  are  other  times,  when  they  can  mount  to  t'^-e 
highest  notes  of  all.  They  have  special  times  of  singi:  7. 
When  they  lose  their  burden  at  the  foot  of  the  cross,  that  is 
the  time  when  they  begin  to  sing.  Never  did  a  harp  of  heav.^n 
sound  so  sweetly  as  when  touched  by  the  finger  of  some  e- 
turning  prodigal,  not  even  the  songs  of  the  angels  seem  to  "le 
to  be  so  sweet  as  that  first  song  of  rapture  which  gushes  for  .h 
from  the  inmost  soul  of  the  forgiven  child  of  God.  Youkn-.w 
how  John  Bunyan  describes  it.  He  says,  when  poor  Pilgr'.m 
lost  his  burden  at  the  cross,  he  gave  three  great  leaps,  a^  d 
went  on  his  way  singing.  We  have  not  forgotten  those  thi  ^e 
great  leaps ;  they  were  great  leaps — leaps  of  praise.  A  ^e 
have  leaped  many  times  since  then  with  joy  and  gratituci  > ; 
but  we  think  we  never  leaped  so  high  as  we  did  at  the  tii  le 
when  we  saw  our  many  sins  all  gone,  and  our  transgressic.is 
covered  up  in  the  tomb  of  the  Saviour.  By  the  way,  let  1  le 
tell  you  a  little  story  about  that  matter  of  John  Bunyan.  I 
am  a  great  lover  of  John  Bunyan,  but  I  do  not  believe  h  in 
infalhble ;  for  I  met  with  a  story  the  other  day  which  I  thi  k 
a  very  good  one.  There  was  a  young  man  in  Edinburg  w^o 
wished  to  be  a  missionary.  He  was  a  wise  young  man  ;  le 
thought — "  Wei],  if  I  am  to  be  a  missionary,  there  is  no  ne  ^d 
for  me  to  transport  myself  far  away  from  home ;  I  may  as  w  ^11 
be  a  missionary  in  Edinburg."  There's  a  hint  to  some  )f 
you  ladies,  who  give  away  tracts  in  your  district,  and  ncv.u 
give  your  servant  Mary  one.  Well,  this  young  man  start*  -l. 
and  determined  to  speak  to  the  first  person  he  met.  He  n  et 
one  of  those  old  fishwives ;  those  of  us  who  have  seen  th  'U 
can  never  forget  them;  they  are  extraordinary  women  inde  d. 
So  stepping  up  to  her  ho  siaid,  "Here  you  are,  coming  wth 


134  THE    DUMB    SIXGING. 

your  burden  on  yonr  back ;  let  me  ask  you  if  you  have  got 
another  burden,  a  spiritual  burden  !"  "  What !"  she  said ; 
*'  do  you  mean  that  burden  in  John  Banyan's  Pilgrim's  Prog- 
ress? Because  if  you  do,  young  man,  I  have  got  rid  of  that 
many  years  ago,  before  you  were  born.  But  I  went  a  better 
way  to  work  than  the  Pilgrim  did.  The  evangelist  that  John 
Bunyan  talks  about  was  one  of  your  parsons  that  do  not 
preach  the  gospel ;  for  he  said,  '  Keep  that  light  in  thine  eye 
and  run  to  the  wicket-gate.'  "Why,  man  alive!  that  was  not 
the  place  for  him  to  run  to.  He  should  have  said,  'Do  you 
see  that  cross  ?  Run  there  at  once !  But  instead  of  that,  he 
sent  the  poor  Pilgrim  to  the  wicket-gate  first;  and  much  good 
he  got  by  going  there!  He  got  tumbling  into  the  slough,  and 
was  like  to  have  been  killed  by  it."  "But  did  not  you,"  he 
asked,  "  go  through  any  Slough  of  Despond  ?"  "Yes,  young 
man,  I  did ;  but  I  found  it  a  great  deal  easier  going  through 
with  my  burden  off  than  with  it  on  my  back."  The  old 
woman  was  quite  right.  John  Bunyan  put  the  getting  rid  of 
the  burden  too  far  off  from  the  commencement  of  the  Pilgrim- 
age. If  he  meant  to  show  what  usually  happens,  he  was 
right ;  but  if  he  meant  to  show  what  ought  to  have  happened, 
he  is  wrong.  We  must  not  say  to  the  sinner,  "  Now,  sinner, 
if  thou  wilt  be  saved  go  to  the  baptismal  pool ;  go  to  the 
wicket-gate ;  go  to  the  church ;  do  this  or  that."  No,  the 
cross  should  be  right  in  front  of  the  wicket-gate ;  and  we 
should  say  to  the  sinner,  "  Throw  thyself  there,  and  thou  art 
safe  ;  but  thou  art  not  safe  till  thou  canst  cast  off  thy  burden, 
and  lie  at  the  foot  of  the  cross,  and  find  peace  in  Jesus.  Well, 
that  is  a  time  when  we  can  sing. 

And  after  that  do  God's  people  sing  ?  Yes,  they  have 
sweet  singing  times  in  their  house  of  .communion.  Oh!  the 
music  of  that  word  "  communion,"  when  it  is  heard  in  the 
soul — communion  with  Jesus,  fellowship  with  Jesus,  whether 
in  his  sufferings,  or  in  his  glories !  Those  are  singing  times 
when  the  heart  is  lifted  up  to  feel  its  oneness  with  Christ,  and 
its  vital  union  with  him,  and  is  enabled  to  "rejoice  in  hope 
of  the  glory  of  God,"  through  communion  with  the  Saviour. 

Have  not  y  m  had  some  precious  singing  times  at  the  Lord's 
table  ?     Ah  !  when  the  bread  has  been  broken,  and  the  wine 


THE    DUMB    SINGING.  135 

poured  out,  how  often  has  it  been  to  me  a  time  of  song,  when 
the  people  liave  all  joined  in  singing, 

"  Gethsemane,  can  I  forget, 
Or  there  thy  conflict  see, 
Thine  agony  and  bloody  sweat. 
And  not  remember  thee  ? 

"  When  to  the  cross  I  turn  my  eyes, 
And  rest  on  Calvary, 
0  !  Lamb  of  God,  my  sacrifice, 
I  must  remember  thee." 

I  am  in  the  house  of  God,  I  think,  every  day.  I  believe 
that  David  could  not  have  prayed  for  more  than  I  have 
got,  when  he  prayed  that  he  might  dwell  in  the  house  of  the 
Lord  for  ever  ;  for  I  spend  more  of  my  time  in  the  house  of 
God  than  I  do  anywhere  else.  But  my  best  moments  are  at 
the  Lord's  table.  I  do  rejoice  then,  when  I  have  no  thought 
of  what  I  have  to  say  to  others,  but  simply  to  sit  down 
amongst  the  Lord's  family,  and  taste  my  morsel  of  bread,  and 
have  my  sip  of  the  wine.  O  !  it  is  then  the  soul  finds  its 
Saviour  precious.  I  look  forward  for  every  month  to  come, 
wdien  I  may  once  more  sit  at  the  table  of  my  Master,  and 
spiritually  eat  his  flesh  and  drink  liis  blood,  and  feel  that  I 
have  indeed  life  in  him,  because  I  have  got  union  with  him. 
Ah  !  those  are  singing  times  to  the  family  of  God.  And  so, 
sometimes  are  preaching  times  and  sometimes  hearing  times. 
Prayer  meetings  are  often  special  singing  times ;  in  fact,  the 
means  of  grace  will  very  frequently  be  blessed  of  God  to  be 
to  us  the  occasion  of  song. 

But  lastly,  my  dear  friends,  for  I  can  not  stop  to  mention  all 
these  singing  times,  the  best  we  shall  have  will  be  when  you 
and  I  come  to  die.  Ah  !  there  are  some  of  you  that  are  like 
what  is  fabled  of  the  swan.  The  ancients  said  the  swan  never 
sang  in  his  life-time,  but  always  sang  just  when  he  died.  Now, 
there  are  many  of  God's  desponding  children  who  seem  to 
go  all  their  life  under  a  cloud ;  but  they  get  a  swan's  song 
before  they  die.  The  river  of  their  life  comes  running  down, 
perhaps  black  and  miry  with  troubles,  and  when  it  begins  to 
touch  the  white  foam  of  the  sea  there  comes  a  little  glistening 


136  THE    DUMB   SINGING. 

ill  its  waters.  So,  beloved,  though  we  may  have  been  very- 
much  dispirited  by  reason  of  the  burden  of  the  way,  when  we 
get  to  the  end  we  shall  have  sweet  songs.  Are  you  afraid  of 
dying  ?  O !  never  be  afraid  of  that ;  be  afraid  of  living. 
Living  is  the  only  thing  which  can  do  any  mischief;  dying 
never  can  hurt  a  Christian.  Afraid  of  the  grave?  It  is  like 
the  bath  of  Esther,  in  which  she  lay  for  a  time,  to  purify  her- 
self with  spices,  that  she  might  be  fit  for  her  lord.  The  grave 
fits  the  body  for  heaven.  There  it  lieth  :  and  corruption, 
earth  and  worms,  do  but  refine  and  purify  our  flesh.  Be  not 
afraid  of  dying ;  it  does  not  take  any  time  at  all.  All  that 
death  is,  is  emancipation,  deliverance,  heaven's  bliss  to  a  child 
of  God.  Never  fear  it ;  it  will  be  a  singing  time.  You  are 
afraid  of  dying,  you  say,  because  of  the  pains  of  death.  Nay, 
they  are  the  pains  of  life — of  life  struggling  to  continue. 
Death  has  no  pain  ;  death  itself  is  but  one  gentle  sigh — the 
fetter  is  broken,  and  the  spirit  fled.  The  best  moment  of  a 
Christian's  life  is  his  last  one,  because  it  is  the  one  that  is 
nearest  heaven  ;  and  then  it  is  that  he  begins  to  strike  the  key- 
note of  the  song  which  he  shall  sing  to  all  eternity.  O ! 
what  a  song  will  that  be  !  It  is  a  poor  noise  we  make  now  ; 
when  we  join  the  song  perhaps  we  are  almost  ashamed  to 
sing ;  but  up  there  our  voices  shall  be  clear  and  good ;  and 
there 

"Loudest  of  the  crowd  we'll  sing, 
While  heaven's  resounding  mansions  ring 
With  shouts  of  sovereign  grace." 

The  thought  struck  me  the  other  day,  that  the  Lord  will 
have  in  heaven  some  of  those  very  big  sinners  that  have  gone 
further  astray  than  any  body  that  ever  lived — the  most  extra- 
ordinary extravaganzas  of  vice — just  to  make  the  melody  com- 
plete by  singing  some  of  those  alto  notes  we  sometimes  hear, 
which  you  and  I,  because  we  have  not  gone  so  far  astray,  will 
never  be  able  to  utter.  I  wonder  whether  one  has  stepped 
into  this  chapel  this  morning,  whom  God  has  selected  to  take 
some  of  those  alto  notes  in  the  scale  of  praise.  Perhaps  there 
is  one  such  here.  O  !  how  will  such  a  one  sing,  if  grace,  free 
grace,  shall  have  mercy  upon  him ! 

And  now,  farewell,  with  just  this  solitary  word :  My  breth- 


THE    DUMB   SINGING.  ISY 

ren,  the  members  of  this  clmrcli,  strive  together  in  your  prr'.y- 
ers,  that  God  may  bless  you.  Be  not  content  with  what  }  ou 
are,  however  prosperous  you  may  be  ;  but  seek  to  incrc  so 
more  and  more.  Pray  tliat  you  and  }'our  cliildren  may  oo 
added  to  the  chureh  of  Christ  here,  and  may  live  to  see  c  h- 
ers  added  too.  Keep  prayer  going;  do  not  neglect  y^ar 
jirayer  meetings.  Christmas  Evans  gives  us  a  good  idea  ab  ut 
})rayer.  lie  says,  "Prayer  is  the  rope  in  the  belfry  ;  we  ]  ull 
it  and  it  rings  tlie  bell  uj)  in  heaven."  And  so  it  is.  Mind  ;;  on 
keep  that  bell  going.  Pull  it  well.  Come  up  to  prayer  nu  't- 
ings.  Keep  on  pulling  it;  and  though  the  bell  is  up  so  h  ^li 
that  you  can  not  hear  it  ring,  depend  upon  it,  it  can  be  he;  rd 
in  the  tower  of  heaven,  and  is  ringing  before  the  throne  of 
God,  who  will  give  you  answers  of  peace  according  to  yi  ur 
faith.  May  your  faith  be  large  and  plentiful,  and  so  will  y*  ur 
answers  be  I 


S  E  It  M  0  N     IX. 

FORETASTES   OF   THE   HEAVENLY   LIFE. 

"And  thoy  took  of  the  fruit  of  tho  land  in  their  hands,  and  'oroughtit  down 
unto  us,  and  broiight  us  word  again,  and  said,  It  is  a  good  land  which  the 
Lord  our  God  doth  give  us." — Deut.,  i.  25. 

You  rcrnornbor  tho  occasion  concerning  which  these  words 
were  written.  The  children  of" Israel  sent  twelve  men  as  spies 
into  the  land  of  Canaan,  who  brought  back  with  them  the  fruit 
of  the  land,  amongst  the  rest  a  bunch  of  grapes  from  E.shcol 
too  lieavy  to  be  borne  by  one  man,  and  which,  therefore,  two 
of  them  carried  on  a  staff  between  them.  But  I  shall  not  re- 
mark u])on  the  figure,  but  only  say  that  as  they  learned  of  Ca- 
naan by  the  fruit  of  the  land  bi'ought  to  them  by  the  spies,  so 
you  and  I,  even  while  we  are  on  earth,  if  we  be  the  Lord's  be- 
loved, may  learn  sorrKithing  of  what  heaven  is — a  state  to 
which  we  are  to  attain  hereafter — by  cei'tain  blessings  which 
are  brought  to  us  on  (;artli. 

Tfiey  were  sure  that  the  land  of  Isi-aol  was  a  fertile  land 
when  they  saw  the  fruits  which  it  produced,  brought  by  their 
bicthren,  and  when  they  ate  thereof.  Perhaps  there  was  but 
little  for  so  many,  and  yet  those  wlio  did  eat  were  made  at 
once  to  understand  that  it  must  have  been  a  goodly  soil  that 
produced  such  fruit.  Now,  then,  beloved,  we  who  love  the 
Lord  Jesus  Cfiriwt  have  })ad  clusters  of  the  grapes  of  Eshcol. 
We  have  had  some  fruits  of  heaven  even  since  we  have  been 
on  earth,  and  by  tliem  we  are  aV)le  to  judge  of  the  ricfmess  of 
the  soil  of  Paradise  which  bringetli  forth  such  rare  and  choice 
fruits. 

I  shall,  therefore,  present  to  you  some  views  of  heaven  in. 
order  to  give  you  some  idea  liow  it  is  that  the  Christian  on 
earth  enjoys  a  foretaste  of  them. 


FOKKTASTKS    OK     TMIi:    IlfiAVKXr-Y    LIFK.  130 

Possibly,  llici-c  mi-c  scared!  two  Cliristiiins  wlio  liavo  tlio  same 
vitnvH  of  licMvcii  ;  tlioii;-,!!  Ihcyull  cxpcci  the  same  lioavcn, 
yet  tli(!  most  j)i-(uniii('iil.  Icaliiie  in  it  is  (lillei-ciit  to  each  diJler- 
cnt  mind  uceordim;-  to  its  coiistituliou.  Now,  I  will  confess 
wiiat  is  to  me  tlie  most  prominent  feature  of  lieavei),  jii(lLi;ini; 
at  tlic  jircscnt  moment.  At  aiiotlier  time  I  may  love  lu^aven 
Letter  for  anotliei-  tiling:  but  latvjly  I  have  learned  to  love 
lieuven  as  w  pUn'c  of  security.  Wo  have  seen  high  professors 
tni-ning  from  theii*  profession,  ay,  und  we  have  seen  some  of 
the  Lord's  own  Ixiloved  committing  grievous  faults  and  slips, 
w  Inch  have  bi'ought  disgrace  upon  tlnsir  character,  and  injury 
to  their  souls.  Now  I  have  leariu'd  to  look  to  heaven  lately 
as  a  phure  where  we  shall  never,  never  sin — where  our  feet 
shall  l)e  fixed  fiiinly  upon  a  rock — Mdiere  there  is  neither  ti'ip- 
])ing  nor  sliding — where;  faults  shall  \n\  uidviiown — where  wo 
shall  have  no  need  to  keep  watch  against,  an  indefatigable  ene- 
my, because  there  is  lU)  foe;  that  shall  amioy  us — where  we 
shall  not  be  on  our  guard  day  and  night  watching  agaiiist  the 
incursion  of  foes,  for  there  "the  wicked  cease  from  troul)rm<T 
and  th(5  weary  are  at  rest."  I  liave  lookc^l  upon  it  as  the  land 
of  complete  security,  whei-e  the  garment  shall  be  always  white, 
M'liere  the  face  shall  b(;  always  anointed  witJi  fresh  oil,  where 
there  is  no  fear  of  slipping  or  turning  away,  but  Avhere  we 
shall  stand  fast  for  ever.  And  T  ask  you,  if  that  be  a  true 
view  of  heaven — and  I  am  sure;  it  is  one;  feature  of  it — do  not 
the  saints  (!ven  on  earth  enjoy  some  fruits  of  J*ai"a(lise,  even  in 
this  sense?  Do  we  not  even  in  these  huts  au<l  villages  below 
souu;times  taste  the  joys  of  blissful  security  ?  The  doctrine 
of  (iod's  word  is,  that  all  who  are  in  union  with  the  Laml)  are 
safe,  that  all  beltevei's  must  hold  on  tlunr  way,  that  those  who 
hav(!  committ.ed  their  souls  to  the  kee[)ing  of  Clwist  s'lall  find 
him  a  faithful  and  immutable  kctepcM-.  On  such  a  doctrine  we 
can  enjoy  secuiity  even  on  earth  ;  not  that  high  and  glorious 
security  which  renders  us  free  from  every  slip  and  trip,  but  nev- 
ertheless a  security  well  nigh  as  great,  because  it  si-cures  us 
against  ultimate  riii;!,  and  renders  us  certain  that  we  shall  at- 
tain to  eternal  felicity.  And,  beloved,  liave  you  never  sat 
down  and  reflected  on  the  doctrine  of  the  perseverance  of  the 
saints?     I  trow  you  have,     (rod  has  brought  home  to  you  a 


140  FORETASTES    OF   THE    HEAVENLY   LIFE. 

sense  of  your  security  in  the  person  of  Christ.  He  has  told 
you  that  your  name  is  graven  on  his  liand  ;  he  has  whispered 
in  your  ear  the  promise,  "  Fear  not,  I  am  with  thee."  You 
have  been  led  to  look  upon  him,  the  great  surety  of  the  cove- 
nant, as  faithful  and  true,  and,  therefore,  bound  and  engaged 
to  present  you,  tlie  weakest  of  the  family,  with  all  the  chosen 
race,  before  the  throne  of  God  ;  and  in  such  sweet  contem- 
plation I  am  sure  you  have  been  drinking  some  of  the  juice  of 
his  spiced  pomegranates ;  you  have  had  some  of  the  dainty 
fruits  of  Paradise;  you  have  had  some  of  the  enjoyments 
which  the  i)erfect  saints  have  above  in  a  sense  of  security. 

O  how  I  love  that  doctrine  of  the  perseverance  of  the  saints  ! 
I  renounce  the  pulpit  when  I  can  not  preach  it,  for  the  gospel 
seems  to  be  a  blank  desert  and  a  howling  wilderness — a  gospel 
as  unworthy  of  God  as  it  would  be  beneath  even  my  accept- 
ance, frail  worm  as  I  am — a  gospel  which  saves  me  to-day  and 
rejects  me  to-morrow — a  gospel  which  puts  me  in  Christ's 
family  one  hour,  and  makes  me  a  child  of  the  devil  the  next — 
a  gospel  which  justifies  and  then  condemns  me — a  gospel 
which  pardons  me,  and  afterward  casts  me  to  hell.  Such  a 
gospel  is  abhorrent  to  reason  itself,  much  more  to  the  God  of 
the  whole  earth.     But  on  the  other  ground  of  faith,  that 

"  He  to  the  end  must  endure 

As  sure  as  the  earnest  is  given," 

we  do  enjoy  a  sense  of  perfect  security  even  as  we  dwell  in 
this  land  of  wars  and  fightings.  As  the  spies  brought  their 
brethren  bunches  of  the  grapes,  so  in  the  security  we  enjoy, 
we  have  a  foretaste  and  earnest  of  the  joy  of  Paradise. 

In  the  next  place,  most  probably  the  greater  part  of  you 
love  to  think  of  heaven  under  another  aspect :  as  a  place  of 
'perfect  rest.  You  sons  of  toil,  you  love  the  sanctuary  because 
it  is  there  you  sit  to  hear  God's  word,  and  rest  your  wearied 
limbs.  When  you  have  wiped  the  hot  sweat  from  your  burn- 
ing brow,  you  have  often  thought  of  heaven  where  your  la- 
bors shall  be  over ;  you  have  sung  with  sweet  emphasis, 

"There  shall  I  bathe  my  weary  soul 
In  seas  of  heavenly  rest." 

Rest,  rest,  rest, — this  is  what  you  want.     And  to  me  this  idea 


FORETASTES    OF   THE    HEAVENLY    LIFE.  141 

of  heaven  is  exceedingly  beautiful.  Rest  I  know  I  never  shall 
have  beneath  this  sky,  while  Christ's  church  is  as  barbarous  as 
it  is ;  for  the  most  barbarous  of  masters  is  the  church  of 
Christ.  I  have  served  it,  and  am  well-nigh  hounded  to  ray 
grave  by  Christian  ministers  perpetually  requiring  me  to  do 
impossibilities  that  they  know  no  mortal  strength  can  accom- 
plish. Willing  I  am  to  labor  till  I  drop,  but  more  I  can  not 
do  ;  yet  I  am  perpetually  assailed  on  this  side  and  the  other, 
till,  go  where  I  may,  there  seems  no  rest  for  me  till  I  slumber 
in  my  grave ;  and  I  do  look  forward  to  heaven  with  some  de- 
gree of  happiness.  There  I  shall  rest  from  labors  constant 
and  perpetual,  though  much  loved.  And  you,  too,  who  have 
been  toiling  long  to  gain  an  object  you  have  sought  after — 
you  have  said  if  you  could  get  it  you  would  lie  down  and  rest; 
you  have  toiled  after  a  certain  amount  of  riches,  you  have  said 
if  you  could  once  gain  a  competence  you  would  then  make 
yourself  at  ease.  Or,  you  have  been  laboring  long  to  gain  a 
certain  point  of  character,  and  then  you  have  said  you  would 
lay  down  your  arms  and  rest.  Ay,  but  you  have  not  reached 
it  yet ;  and  you  love  heaven  because  heaven  is  the  goal  to  the 
racei,  the  target  of  the  arrow  of  existence  ;  you  love  heaven 
because  it  will  be  the  couch  of  time,  ay,  an  eternal  rest  for  the 
poor  weary  struggler  upon  earth.  You  love  it  as  a  place  of 
rest ;  and  do  we  never  enjoy  a  foretaste  of  heaven  upon  earth 
in  that  sense  ?  O,  yes,  beloved  !  blessed  be  God,  "  we  who 
have  believed  do  enter  into  rest."  Our  peace  is  like  a  river, 
and  our  righteousness  like  the  waves  of  the  sea.  God  may 
give  to  his  people  rest :  even  the  rest  that  remaineth  for  the 
people  of  God.  We  have  stormy  trials  and  bitter  troubles  in 
the  world ;  but  we  have  learned  to  say,  "  Return  unto  thy 
rest,  O  my  soul !  for  the  Lord  hath  dealt  bountifully  with 
thee."  Did  you  never,  in  times  of  great  distress,  climb  up  to 
your  closet,  and  there  on  your  knees  pour  out  your  heart  be- 
fore God  ?  Did  you  never  feel  after  you  had  so  done  that 
you  had  bathed  yourself  in  rest,  so  that 

"  Let  cares  like  a  wild  deluge  come, 
And  storms  of  sorrow  fall," 

you  cared  not  one  whit  for  them?     For  you  had  found  a 


142  FORETASTES    OF    THE    HEAVENLY    LIFE. 

Bhield  in  Christ ;  you  bad  looked  upon  the  face  of  God'a 
anointed.  Ah,  Christian,  that  rest  without  a  billow  of  dis- 
turbance, that  rest  so  placid  and  serene,  which  in  your  deep- 
est troubles  you  have  been  enabled  to  enjoy  in  the  bosom  of 
Christ,  is  to  you  a  bunch  of  the  mighty  vintage  of  heaven,  one 
grape  of  the  heavenly  cluster  which  you  shall  soon  partake  of 
in  the  land  of  the  hereafter.  Here,  again,  you  see  we  can 
have  a  foreta>;te  of  heaven,  and  realize  what  it  is  even  while 
here  upon  earth. 

But  that  idea  of  rest  will  suit  some  indolent  professors,  and, 
therefore,  let  me  just  give  the  very  opposite  of  it.  I  do  think 
that  one  of  the  worst  sins  a  man  can  be  guilty  of  in  this  world 
is  to  be  idle.  I  can  almost  forgive  a  drunkard,  but  a  lazy  man 
I  do  think  there  is  very  little  pardon  for.  I  think  a  man  who 
is  idle  has  as  good  a  reason  to  be  a  penitent  before  God  as 
David  had  when  he  was  an  adulterer,  for  the  most  abominable 
thing  in  the  world  is  for  a  man  to  let  the  grass  grow  up  to  his 
ankles  and  do  nothing.  God  never  sent  a  man  into  the  world 
to  be  idle.  And  there  are  some  who  make  a  tolerably  fair 
profession,  but  who  do  nothing  from  one  year's  end  to  the 
other. 

The  next  idea  of  heaven  is,  that  it  is  a  place  of  uninter- 
rupted service.  It  is  a  plaee  where  they  serve  God  day  and 
night  in  his  temple,  and  never  know  weariness,  and  never  re- 
quire to  slumber.  Do  you  know^  what  is  the  deliciousness  of 
work  ?  For  although  we  must  complain  wdien  people  expect 
impossibilities  of  us,  it  is  the  highest  enjoyment  of  life  to  be 
busily  engaged  for  Christ.  Tell  me  the  day  I  do  not  preach, 
I  will  tell  you  the  day  in  which  I  am  not  happy ;  but  the  day 
in  which  it  is  my  privilege  to  preach  the  gospel,  and  labor  for 
God,  is  generally  the  day  of  my  peaceful  and  quiet  enjoyment 
after  all.  Service  is  delight.  Praising  God  is  pleasure.  La- 
boring for  him  is  the  highest  delight  a  mortal  can  knoAV,  O, 
how  sweet  it  must  be  to  sing  his  praises,  and  never  feel  that 
the  throat  is  dry !  O,  how  blessed  to  flap  the  wing  for  ever 
and  never  feel  it  flag  !  O,  wdiat  sweet  enjoyment  to  run  upon 
his  errands,  evermore  to  circle  round  the  throne  of  God  in 
heaven  while  eternity  shall  last,  and  never  once  lay  the  head 
on  the  pillow,  never  once  feel  the  throbbings  of  fatigue,  never 


FORETASTES    OF   THE    HEAVENF.Y    LIFE.  143 

once  the  pangs  that  admonish  us  that  we  need  to  cease,  but  to 
keep  on  for  .ever  hke  eternity's  own  self — a  broad  river  roll- 
ing on  with  perpetual  floods  of  labor  !  O,  that  must  be  enjoy- 
ment !  That  must  be,  indeed,  a  heaven,  to  serve  God  day 
and  night  in  his  temple  !  But  you  have  served  God  on  earth, 
and  have  had  foretastes  of  that.  I  wish  some  of  you  knew  the 
sweets  of  labor  a  little  more,  for  although  labor  breedeth 
sweat,  it  breedeth  sweets  too — more  especially  labor  for 
Christ.  There  is  a  satisfaction  before  the  work ;  there  is  a 
satisfaction  in  the  work ;  there  is  a  satisfaction  after  the  work ; 
and  there  is  a  satisfaction  in  looking  for  the  fruits  of  the  work  ; 
and  a  great  satisfaction  when  we  get  the  fruits.  Labor  for 
Christ  is,  indeed,  the  robing-room  of  heaven  ;  if  it  be  not 
heaven  itself,  it  is  one  of  the  most  blissful  foretastes  of  it. 
Thank  God,  Christian,  if  you  can  do  any  tiling  for  your  Mas- 
ter. Thank  him  if  it  is  your  privilege  to  do  the  least  thing  for 
him,  for  remember  in  so  doing  he  is  giving  you  a  taste  of  the 
grapes  of  Eshcol.  Bnt  you  indolent  people,  you  do  not  get 
the  grapes  of  Eshcol,  because  you  are  too  lazy  to  carry  that 
big  bunch.  You  would  like  it  to  come  into  your  mouths 
without  the  trouble  of  gathering  it ;  but  you  do  not  care  to 
go  forth  and  serve  God.  You  sit  still  and  look  after  your- 
selves, but  what  do  you  do  for  other  people  ?  You  go  to 
your  place  of  Avorship  ;  you  talk  about  your  Sunday-school 
and  sick  society,  and  so  on.  You  never  teach  in  the  Sunday- 
school,  and  you  never  visit  a  sick  person,  and  yet  you  take 
a  great  deal  of  credit  to  yourself  while  you  do  nothing  at  all. 
You  will  never  know  much  of  the  enjoyments  of  heavenly 
glory  until  you  know  a  little  of  the  work  of  the  kingdom  of 
heaven  on  earth. 

Now,  let  us  proceed  to  some  other  points.  Another  view 
of  heaven  is,  that  it  is  a  place  of  cotnplete  mctory  and  glorious 
triumph.  This  is  the  battle-field  ;  there  is  the  triumphal  pro- 
cession. This  is  the  land  of  the  sword  and  the  spear  ;  that  is 
the  land  of  the  w^reath  and  the  crown.  This  is  the  land  of  the 
garment  rolled  in  blood  and  of  the  dust  of  the  fight ;  that  is 
the  land  of  the  trumpet's  joyful  sound — that  is  the  place  of  the 
white  robe  and  of  the  shout  of  conquest.  O,  what  a  thrill  of 
joy  shall  shoot  through  the  hearts  of  all  the  blessed  when 


144  FOEETASTES    OF   THE    HEAVENLY    LIFE. 

their  conquests  shall  be  complete  in  heaven,  when  death  it- 
sel"  the  last  of  foes,  shall  be  slain — when  Satan  shall  be 
dr:  o^ged  captive  at  the  chariot  wheels  of  Ciirist — when  he 
sh.^ll  have  overthrown  sin  and  trampled  corruption  as  the  mire 
of  rhe  streets — when  the  great  shout  of  universal  victory  shall 
ris(  from  the  hearts  of  all  the  redeemed  !  What  a  moment 
of  pleasure  shall  that  be  !  O,  dear  brethren,  you  and  I  have 
foretastes  of  even  that.  We  know  what  conquests,  what 
sorJs'  battles  we  have  even  here.  Did  you  never  struggle 
ag;  inst  an  evil  heart,  and  at  last  overcome  it  ?  O,  with  what 
joy  did  you  lift  your  eyes  to  heaven,  the  tears  flowing  down 
yovr  cheeks,  and  say,  *'  Lord,  I  bless  thee  that  I  have  been 
able  to  overcome  that  sin."  Did  you  ever  have  a  strong 
teriptation,  and  did  you  wrestle  hard  with  it,  and  know  what 
it  was  to  sing  with  great  joy,  "  My  feet  slipped ;  but  thy 
mercy  held  me  up?"  Have  you,  like  Bunyan's  Christian, 
for^ht  with  old  Apollyon,  and  have  you  seen  him  flap  his 
dr.gon-wings  and  fly  away  ?  There  you  had  a  foretaste  of 
he  ven  ;  you  had  just  a  guess  of  what  the  ultimate  victory 
wi  I  be.  In  the  death  of  that  one  Philistine  you  had  the  de- 
str  iction  of  the  whole  army.  That  Goliath  who  fell  beneath 
yo  r  sling  and  stone  was  but  one  out  of  the  multitude  who 
must  yield  their  bodies  to  the  fowls  of  heaven.  God  gives 
yo  I  partial  triumphs  that  they  may  be  the  earnest  of  ultimate 
an  [  complete  victory.  Go  on  and  conquer,  and  let  each  con- 
qu  ^st,  though  a  harder  one  and  more  strenuously  contested, 
be  to  you  as  a  grape  of  Eshcol,  a  foretaste  of  the  joys  of 
he  ven. 

furthermore,  without  doubt  one  of  the  best  views  we  can 
ev  r  give  of  heaven  is,  that  it  is  a  state  of  complete  acceptance 
wi  h  God^  recognized  and  felt  in  the  conscience.  I  suppose 
th- 1  a  great  part  of  the  joy  of  the  blessed  saints  consists  in  a 
kr  )wledge  that  there  is  nothing  in  them  to  which  God  is  hos- 
tii  3 ;  that  their  peace  with  God  has  not  any  thmg  to  mar  it ; 
th  t  they  are  so  completely  in  union  with  the  principles  and 
th  oughts  of  the  Most  High  ;  that  his  love  is  set  on  them  ;  that 
th3ir  love  is  set  on  him  ;  that  they  are  one  with  God  in  every 
respect.  Well,  beloved,  and  have  we  not  enjoyed  a  sense  of 
acoeptance  here  below  ?     Blotted  and  blurred  by  many  doubts 


FORETASTES    OF   THE    HEAVENLY    LIFE.  145 

and  fears,  yet  there  have  been  moments  when  we  have  known 
ourselves  as  well  accepted  as  we  shall  know  ourselves  lo  be 
even  when  we  stand  before  the  throne.  There  have  been 
bright  days  with  some  of  us,  when  we  could  "  set  to  our  seal" 
that  God  was  true ;  and,  when  afterward,  feeling  that  the  Lord 
knoweth  them  that  are  his,  we  could  say,  "  And  I  know  that 
I  am  his  too."  There  have  been  moments  when,  with  an  un- 
faltering lip,  we  could  say, 

'*  Now,  I  can  call  my  Jesus  mine; 
Now,  I  can  all  mv  joys  resign  ; 
Can  tread  the  world  beneath  my  feet, 
And  all  that  earth  calls  good  and  great :" 

when  we  had  such  a  view  of  the  perfection  of  Christ's  righte- 
ousness that  we  felt  that  God  had  accepted  us,  and  could  not 
do  otherwise  ;  we  had  such  a  sense  of  the  efficacy  of  the  blood 
of  Christ,  we  felt  sure  that  our  sins  were  all  pardoned,  and  that 
they  never  could  be  mentioned  unto  us  in  mercy  for  ever. 
And,  beloved,  though  I  have  spoken  of  other  joys,  let  me  say, 
this  is  the  cream  of  all  of  them,  to  know  ourselves  accepted  in 
God's  sight.  O  !  to  feel  that  I,  a  guilty  worm,  am  now  re- 
ceived in  my  Father's  bosom  ;  that  I,  a  lost  prodigal,  am  now 
feasting  at  his  table  with  delight ;  that  I,  who  once  heard  the 
voice  of  his  anger,  now  listen  to  the  notes  of  his  love.  This  is 
joy — this  is  joy  worth  worlds.  What  more  can  they  know 
up  there  than  that  ?  And  were  it  not  that  our  sense  of  it  were 
so  imperfect,  we  might  bring  heaven  down  to  earth,  and  might 
at  least  dwell  in  the  suburbs  of  the  celestial  city,  if  we  could 
not  be  privileged  to  go  within  the  gates.  So  you  see,  again, 
we  can  have  bunches  of  the  grapes  of  Eshcol  in  that  sense. 
Seeing  that  heaven  is  a  state  of  acceptance,  we,  too,  can  know 
and  feel  that  acceptance,  and  rejoice  in  it. 

And,  again,  heaven  is  a  state  of  great  and  glorious  manifes- 
tations.    You  look  forward  to  heaven  as  the  place  where  you 

shall 

"  See,  and  hear,  and  know 
All  you  desire  and  wish  below.'* 

You  are  now  looking  at  it  darkly  through  a  glass :  there  you 
shall  see  face  to  face.     Christ  looks  down  on  the  Bible,  and  the 


146  FORETASTES    OF    THE    HEAVENLY    LIFE. 

Bible  is  his  looking-glass.  You  look  into  it,  and  see  the  faco 
of  Christ  as  in  a  mirror  darkly  ;  but  soon  you  shall  look  upon 
himself,  and  see  him  face  to  face.  You  expect  heaven  as  a 
place  of  peculiar  manifestations.  You  believe  that  there  he 
will  unvail  his  face  to  you  ;  that 

"  Millions  of  years  your  wondering  eyes 
Shall  o'er  your  Saviour's  beauties  rove." 

You  are  expecting  to  see  his  face,  and  never,  never  sin.  You 
are  longing  to  know  the  secrets  of  his  heart.  You  believe  that 
in  that  day  you  shall  see  him  as  he  is,  and  shall  be  like  him  in 
the  world  of  spirits.  Well,  beloved,  though  Christ  does  not 
manifest  himself  to  us  as  he  does  to  the  bright  ones  there,  have 
not  you  and  I  had  manifestations  even  while  we  have  been  in 
this  vale  of  tears  ?  Speak,  beloved  ;  let  your  heart  speak  ; 
hast  thou  not  had  visions  of  Calvary  ;  has  not  thy  Master 
sometimes  touched  thy  eyes  with  eye- salve,  and  let  thee  see 
him  on  his  cross  ?     Hast  thou  not  said 

"  Here  I'd  sit  for  ever  viewing 
Mercy  stream  in  streams  of  blood  1 
Precious  drops  my  soul  bedewing, 
Plead  and  claim  my  peace  with  G-od." 

Have  you  not  wept  for  joy  and  grief  when  you  saw  him  bleed- 
ing out  his  life  from  his  heart  for  you,  and  beheld  him  nailed 
to  the  tree  for  your  sakes !  O  yes !  I  know  you  have  had 
such  manifestations  of  him.  And  have  you  not  seen  him  in 
his  risen  glories  ?  Have  you  not  beheld  him  there  exalted  on 
his  throne  ?  Have  you  not  by  faith  beheld  him  as  the  Judge 
of  the  quick  and  the  dead,  and  as  the  Prince  of  the  kings  of 
the  earth  ?  Have  you  not  looked  through  the  dim  future,  and 
seen  him  with  the  crown  of  all  the  kingdoms  on  his  head,  with 
the  diadems  of  all  monarchies  beneath  his  feet,  and  the  scepters 
of  all  thrones  in  his  hand  ?  Have  you  not  anticipated  the 
moment  of  his  most  glorious  triumphs,  when  he 

"  Shall  reign  from  pole  to  pole  with  inimitable  sway  ?" 

Yes,  you  have,  and  therein  you  have  had  foretastes  of  heaven. 
When  Christ  has  thus  revealed  himself  to  you,  you  have  looked 


FORETASTES    OF   THE    HEAVENLY    LIFE.  147 

within  the  vail,  and,  therefore,  yon  have  seen  what  is  there ; 
you  have  had  some  glimpses  of  Jesus  while  here ;  those 
glimpses  of  Jesus  are  but  the  beginning  of  what  shall  never 
end.  Those  joyous  melodies  of  praise  and  thanksgiving  are 
but  the  preludes  of  the  notes  of  Paradise. 

And  now,  lastly,  the  highest  idea  of  heaven,  perhaps,  is  the 
idea  of  most  hallowed  and  hlissfid  communion.  I  have  not 
given  you  near  half  that  I  might  have  given  you  of  the  various 
characteristics  of  heaven,  as  described  in  God's  w^ord,  but  com- 
munion is  the  best.  Communion !  that  word  so  little  spoken 
of,  so  seldom  imderstood.  That  w^ord,  communion  !  Dearly 
beloved,  you  hear  us  say,  "  And  the  communion  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  be  with  you  all ;"  but  there  are  many  of  you  that  do 
not  know  the  meaning  of  that  sweet  heaven  in  a  word.  Com- 
munion !  It  is  the  flower  of  language  ;  it  is  the  honeycomb 
of  words.  Communion !  You  like  to  talk  of  corruption  best, 
do  you  not  ?  Well,  if  you  like  that  filthy  word,  you  are  very 
willing  to  meditate  upon  it.  I  do  so  when  I  am  forced  to  do 
it ;  but  communion  seems  to  me  to  be  a  sweeter  word  than 
that.  You  like  to  talk  a  great  deal  about  aflliction,  don't  you  ? 
Well,  if  you  love  the  black  word — ah  !  you  have  reason  to  love 
it ;  but  if  you  love  to  be  happy  upon  it,  you  may  do  so  ;  but 
give  me  for  my  constant  text  and  for  my  constant  joy,  com- 
munion. And  I  will  not  choose  which  kind  of  communion  it 
shall  be.  Sweet  Master,  if  thou  givest  me  communion  with 
thee  in  thy  sufferings,  if  I  have  to  bear  reproach  and  shame 
for  thy  name's  sake,  I  will  thank  thee  ;  if  I  may  have  fellow- 
ship with  thee  in  it,  and  if  thou  wilt  give  me  to  suffer  for  thy 
sake,  I  will  call  it  honor,  that  so  I  can  be  a  partaker  of  thy 
sufferings:  and  if  thou  givest  me  sweet  enjoyments,  if  thou 
dost  raise  me  up  and  make  me  to  sit  in  heavenly  places  in 
Christ,  I  wdll  bless  thee.  I  will  bless  thee  for  ascension  com- 
munion— communion  with  Christ  in  his  glories.  Do  you  not 
say  the  same?  And  for  communion  with  Christ  in  death. 
Have  you  died  unto  the  world,  as  Christ  did  die  unto  him- 
self? And  then  have  you  had  communion  with  him  in  resur- 
rection ?  Have  you  felt  that  you  are  raised  to  newness  of 
life,  even  as  was  he  ?  And  have  you  had  communion  with 
him  in  ascension,  so  that  you  could  know  yourself  to  be  an 


148  FORETASTES    OP   THE    HEAVENLY    LIFE. 

heir  to  a  throne  in  Paradise  ?  If  so,  you  have  had  the  best 
earnest  you  can  receive  of  the  joys  of  Paradise.  To  be  in 
hearen  is  to  lean  one's  head  upon  the  breast  of  Jesus.  You 
have  done  it  on  earth  ?  Then  you  know  what  heaven  is.  To 
be  in  heaven  is  to  talk  with  Jesus,  to  sit  at  his  feet,  to  let  our 
heart  beat  against  his  heart.  If  you  have  had  that  on  earth, 
you  have  had  some  of  the  grapes  of  heaven. 

Oierish,  then,  these  foretastes,  of  whatever  kind  they  may 
have  been  in  your  individual  case.  Differently  constituted, 
you  will  all  look  at  heaven  in  a  different  light.  Keep  your 
foretaste  just  as  God  has  given  it  to  you.  He  has  given  each 
of  you  some  one  ;  if  you  love  it,  it  is  most  suitable  to  your  own 
condition.  Treasure  it  up ;  think  much  of  it.  Think  more  of 
your  Master.  For,  remember,  it  is  "  Christ  in  you  the  hope 
of  glory,"  after  all,  that  is  your  only  foretaste  of  heaven;  and 
the  more  fully  prepared  shall  you  be  for  the  bliss  of  the  joyous 
ones  in  the  land  of  the  hapj^y. 


SERMON  X. 
PREACHING    FOR   THE  POOR. 

"  The  poor  liave  the  gospel  preached  to  them." — Matt.,  xi.  5 

Jonisr,  the  forerunner  of  Christ,  had  some  follower*  who 
continued  with  him  after  Christ  had  come  in  the  flesh,  and 
openly  manifested  himself  among  the  people.  These  disciples 
were  in  doubt  as  to  whether  Jesus  was  the  Messiah  or  no.  I 
believe  that  John  himself  had  no  doubt  whatever  upon  the 
matter,  for  he  had  received  positive  revelations,  and  had  given 
substantial  testimonies  on  the  subject.  But  in  order  to  relieve 
their  doubts,  John  said  to  his  disciples,  in  some  such  words, 
"  Go  and  ask  him  yourselves ;"  and,  therefore,  he  dispatched 
them  with  this  message,  "  Tell  us  whether  thou  art  he  that 
should  come,  or  do  we  look  for  another?"  Jesus  Christ  con- 
tinuing his  preaching  for  a  while,  said,  "  Stay  and  receive  your 
answer ;"  and  instead  of  giving  them  an  affirmative  reply,  *'  I 
am  that  Messiah,"  he  said,  "  Go  and  show  John  agaii:  those 
things  which  ye  do  hear  and  see  :  the  blind  receive  their  sight, 
and  the  lame  walk,  the  lepers  are  cleansed,  and  the  deaf  hear, 
the  dead  are  raised  up,  and  the  poor  have  the  gospel  preached 
to  them."  As  much  as  to  say,  "That  is  my  answer;  these 
things  are  my  testimonies — on  the  one  hand,  that  I  come  from 
God,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  that  I  am  the  Messiah.''''  You 
will  see  the  truth  and  force  of  this  reply,  if  you  will  observe 
that  it  was  prophesied  of  the  Messiah,  that  he  should  do  the 
very  things  which  Jesus  at  that  moment  was  doing.  It  is  said 
of  Messias,  in  the  35th  chapter  of  Isaiah,  at  the  5th  and  6th 
verses:  "Then  the  eyes  of  the  blind  shall  be  opened,  ancl  the 
ears  of  the  deaf  shall  be  unstopped.  Then  shall  the  lame  man 
leap  as  an  hart,  and  the  tongue  of  the  dumb  sing ;  for  in  the 
widerness  shall  waters  break  out,  and  streams  in  the  desert." 


150  PREACHING  FOR  THE  POOR. 

The  Jews  had  forgotten  this  too  much  ;  they  only  looked  for  a 
Messiah  who  should  be  clothed  with  temporal  grandeur  and 
dignity,  and  they  overlooked  the  teaching  of  Isaiah,  that  he 
should  be  "  a  man  of  sorrows  and  acquainted  with  grief." 
And,  besides  that,  you  observe,  they  overlooked  the  miracles 
which  it  was  prophesied  should  attend  the  coming  of  the  glo- 
rious one,  the  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords,  Jesus  gave 
this  as  his  answer  -a  practical  demonstration  of  John's  prob- 
lem, proving  it  to  an  absolute  certainty.  But  he  not  only  re- 
ferred to  the  miracles,  he  gave  them  a  further  proof — "  The 
poor  have  the  gospel  preached  to  them."  This,  also,  was  one 
evidence  that  he  was  Messias.  For  Isaiah,  the  great  Mes- 
sianic prophet,  had  said,  "  He  shall  preach  the  gospel  unto  the 
meek ;"  that  is,  the  poor.  And  in  that  Jesus  did  so,  it  was 
proved  that  he  was  the  man  intended  by  Isaiah.  Beside,  Zech- 
aviah  mentions  the  congregation  of  the  poor  who  attend  on 
him,  and  therein  evidently  foretold  the  commg  of  Jesus  Christ, 
the  preacher  to  the  poor. 

I  shall  not,  however,  dwell  upon  these  circumstances  this 
morning ;  it  must  be  apparent  to  every  hearer,  that  here  is 
sufficient  proof  that  Jesus  Christ  is  the  person  who  had  been 
foretold  under  the  name  of  Shiloh,  or  Messiah.  We  all  believe 
that^  and,  therefore,  there  is  little  need  that  I  should  try  to 
prove  what  you  have  already  received.  I  rather  select  my 
text  this  morning  as  one  of  the  constant  marks  of  the  gospel 
in  all  ages  and  in  every  land.  "The  poor  have  the  gospel 
preached  to  them."  This  is  to  be  its  semper  eadem^  its  constant 
stamp.  And  we  believe,  where  the  poor  have  not  the  gospel 
preached  unto  them,  there  is  a  departure  from  the  dispensa- 
tion of  the  gospel,  the  forsaking  of  this  which  was  to  be  a 
fundamental  trait  and  characteristic  of  the  gospel  dispensation  : 
"The  poor  have  the  gospel  preached  to  them." 

I  find  that  these  words  will  bear  three  translations ;  I  shall, 
therefore,  have  three  heads,  which  shall  be  composed  of  three 
translations  of  the  text.  The  first  is  that  of  the  authorized 
version:  "  The  poor  have  the  gospel  preached  to  them ;"  it  is 
also  Tyndal's  version.  The  second  is  the  version  of  Cranmer^ 
and  the  version  of  Geneva^  which  is  the  best,  "  The  poor 
are  evai  gelized,"  that  is  to  say,  they  not  only  hear  the  gospel, 


PREACHma  FOR  THE  POOR.  151 

Imt  they  are  influenced  by  it — the  poor  receive  it.  The  last 
is  the  translation  of  some  eminent  loriters^  and  above  all  of 
WycJdiffe^  which  amused  me  when  I  read  it,  although  I  be- 
lieve it  to  be  as  correct  as  any  of  the  others.  Wyckliffe 
translates  it — "  pore  men  ben  taken  to  prechynge  of  the  gos- 
pel." The  verb  may  be  equally  well  translated  in  the  active 
as  in  the  passive  sense  :  "  The  poor  have  taken  to  the  preach- 
ing of  the  gospel."  That  is  to  be  one  of  the  marks  of  the 
gospel  dispensation  in  all  times. 

I.  First,  then,  the  authorized  version,  "  The  poor  have 
the  gospel  preached  to  them."  It  was  so  in  Christ's  day;  it 
is  to  be  so  with  Christ's  gospel  to  the  end  of  time.  Almost 
every  impostor  who  has  come  into  the  world  has  aimed  prin- 
cipally at  the  rich,  and  the  mighty,  and  the  respectable ;  very 
few  impostors  have  found  it  to  be  worth  their  while  to  make 
it  prominent  in  their  preaching  that  they  preach  to  the  poor. 
They  went  before  princes  to  promulgate  their  doctrines  ;  they 
sought  the  halls  of  nobles,  where  they  might  expatiate  upon 
their  pretended  revelations.  Few  of  them  thought  it  worth 
their  while  to  address  themselves  to  those  who  have  been  most 
wickedly  called  "  the  swinish  multitude,"  and  to  speak  to  them 
the  glorious  things  of  the  gospel  of  Christ.  But  it  is  one  de- 
lightful mark  of  Christ's  dispensation,  that  he  aims  first  at  the 
poor.  "  The  poor  have  the  gospel  preached  to  them."  It  was 
wise  in  him  to  do  so.  If  we  would  fire  a  building,  it  is  best 
to  light  it  at  the  basement ;  so  our  Saviour,  when  he  would 
save  a  world,  and  convert  men  of  all  classes  and  all  ranks,  be- 
gins at  the  lowest  rank,  that  the  fire  may  burn  upward,  know- 
ing right  well  that  what  is  received  by  the  poor  will  ultimately 
by  his  grace  be  received  by  the  rich  also.  Nevertheless,  he 
chose  this  to  be  given  to  his  disciples,  and  to  be  the  mark  of 
his  gospel — "the  poor  have  the  gospel  preached  unto  them." 
Now,  I  have  some  things  to  say  this  morning,  which  I  think 
are  absolutely  necessary  if  the  poor  are  to  have  the  gospel 
preached  unto  them. 

In  the  first  place,  let  me  say,  then,  that  the  gospel  mvM  he 
preached  where  the  poor  can  come  and  hear  it.  How  can  the 
poor  have  the  gospel  preached  to  them,  if  they  can  not  conio 
and  listen  to  it  ?  and  yet  how  many  of  our  places  of  worship 


152  PREACHING  FOK  THE  POOR. 

are  there  into  which  they  can  not  corn e,  and  into  which,  if 
they  couhl  come,  they  would  only  come  as  inferior  creatures. 
They  may  sit  in  the  back  seats,  but  are  not  to  be  known  and 
recognized  as  any  thing  like  other  people.  Hence  the  absohite 
necessity  of  having  places  of  worship  large  enough  to  accom- 
modate the  multitude  ;  and  hence,  moreover,  the  obligation  to 
go  out  into  the  highways  and  hedges.  If  the  poor  are  to 
have  the  gospel  preached  unto  them,  then  we  must  take  it 
where  they  can  get  it.  If  I  wanted  to  preach  to  English 
people,  it  would  be  of  no  use  for  me  to  go  and  stand  on  one 
of  the  peaks  of  the  Himalayas,  and  begin  preaching ;  they 
could  not  hear  me  there.  And  it  is  of  little  avail  to  build  a 
gorgeous  structure  for  a  fashionable  congregation,  and  then  to 
think  of  preaching  to  the  poor  ;  they  can  not  come  any  more 
than  the  Hottentots  can  make  the  journey  from  Africa  and 
listen  to  me  here.  I  should  not  expect  them  to  come  to  such 
a  place,  nor  "will  they  willingly  enter  it.  The  gospel  should  be 
preached,  then,  where  the  poor  will  come ;  and  if  they  will 
not  come  after  it,  then  let  it  be  taken  to  them.  We  should 
have  places  where  there  is  accommodation  for  them,  and 
where  they  are  regarded  and  respected  as  much  as  any  other 
rank  and  condition  of  men.  It  is  with  this  view  alone  that  I 
have  labored  earnestly  to  be  the  means  of  building  a  large 
place  of  worship,  because  I  feel  that  although  the  bulk  of  my 
congregation  in  New  Park-street  chapel  are  poor,  yet  thei-e 
are  many  poor  who  can,  by  no  possibility,  enter  the  doors,  be- 
cause we  can  not  find  room  for  the  multitudes  to  be  received. 
You  ask  me  why  I  do  not  preach  in  the  street.  I  reply,  I 
w^ould  do  so,  and  am  constantly  doing  so  in  every  place  except 
London,  but  here  I  can  not  do  it,  since  it  would  amount  to  an 
absolute  breach  of  the  peace:  it  is  impossible  to  conceive  what  a 
-multitude  of  people  must  be  necessarily  assembled.  I  trembled 
when  I  saw  twelve  thousand  on  the  last  occasion  I  preached  in 
the  open  air ;  therefore  I  have  thought  it  best,  f:>r  the  present 
at  least,  to  desist,  until  happily  there  shall  be  ;€wer  to  follow 
me.  Otherwise  my  heart  is  in  the  open  air  movement ;  I  prac- 
tice it  everywhere  else,  and  I  pray  God  to  give  tc  our  ministers 
zeal  and  earnestness,  that  they  may  take  the  gospel  into  the 
streets,  highways  and  by-ways,  and  compel  the  people  to  coma 


PREACHING  FOE  THE  POOR.  153 

in,  that  the  house  may  be  filled.  O  that  God  would  give  this 
characteristic  mark  of  his  precious  grace,  that  the  poor  might 
have  the  gospel  preached  unto  thera. 

"  But,"  you  reply,  "  there  are  plenty  of  churches  and  chapels 
to  which  they  might  come."  I  answer,  yes,  but  that  is  only 
one  half  of  the  matter.  The  gospel  must  he  preached  attract- 
ively before  the  poor  will  have  the  gospel  preached  unto  them. 
Why,  there  is  i  j  attraction  in  the  gos})el  to  the  great  mass  of 
our  race,  as  it  is  currently  preached.  I  confess  that  when  I 
have  a  violent  headache,  and  can  not  sleep,  I  could  almost 
wish  for  some  droning  minister  to  preach  to  me ;  I  feel  certain 
I  could  go  to  sleep  then,  for  I  have  heard  some  under  the 
soporific  influence  of  whose  eloquence  I  could  most  comfort- 
ably snore.  But  it  is  not  at  all  likely  that  the  poor  will  ever 
go  to  hear  such  preachers  as  these.  If  they  are  preached  to 
in  fine  terms — in  grandiloquent  language  which  they  can  not 
lay  hold  of— the  poor  will  not  have  the  gospel  preached  to 
them,  for  they  Avill  not  go  to  hear  it.  They  must  have  some- 
thing attractive  to  them  ;  we  must  preach  as  Clirist  did  ;  we 
must  tell  anecdotes,  and  stories,  and  parables,  as  he  did ;  we 
must  come  down  and  make  the  gospel  attractive.  The  reason 
why  the  old  Puritan  preachers  could  get  congregations,  was 
this — they  did  not  give  their  hearers  dry  theology  ;  tliey  illus- 
trated it ;  they  had  an  anecdote  from  this  and  a  quaint  pas&age 
from  that  classic  author  ;  here  a  verse  of  poetry  ;  here  and  there 
even  a  quip  or  pun — a  thing  which  now-a-days  is  a  sin  above 
all  sins,  but  which  was  constantly  committed  by  these  preach- 
ei's,  whom  I  have  ever  esteemed  as  the  patterns  of  pulpit  elo- 
quence. Christ  Jesus  was  an  attractive  preacher ;  he  sought 
above  all  means  to  set  the  pearl  in  a  frame  of  gold,  that  it 
might  attract  the  attention  of  the  people.  He.wasnot  willing 
to  place  himself  in  a  parish  church,  and  preach  to  a  larore  con- 
gregation of  thirteen  and  a-half,  like  our  good  brethren  in  the 
city,  but  would  preach  in  such  a  style  that  people  felt  they 
must  go  to  hear  him.  Some  of  them  gnashed  their  teeth  in 
rage  and  left  his  presence  in  wrath,  but  the  multitudes  still 
thronged  to  him  to  hear  and  to  be  healed.  It  was  no  dull 
work  to  hear  this  King  of  preachers,  he  was  too  much  in  ear- 
nest  to  be  dull,  and  too  'lumane  to  be  incomprehensible.    I  be- 


154  F^lEACHING   FOR   THE   POOR. 

lieve  tliat  antil  t  .is  is  imitated,  the  poor  will  not  have  the 
gospel  preached  to  them.  There  must  be  an  interesting  style 
adopted,  to  bring  the  people  to  hear.  But  if  we  adopt  such  a 
style  they  will  call  us  clownish,  vulgar,  and  so  on.  Blessed  be 
God,  we  have  long  learned  that  vulgarity  is  a  very  different 
thing  from  what  some  men  suppose.  We  have  been  so  taught, 
that  we  are  willing  to  be  even  clowns  for  Christ's  sake,  and  so 
long  as  we  are  seeing  souls  saved  we  are  not  likely  to  alter  our 
course.  During  this  last  week  I  have  seen,  I  believe,  a  score 
of  persons  who  have  been  in  the  lowest  ranks,  the  very  mean- 
est sinners,  the  greatest  of  transgressors,  who  have,  through 
preaching  in  this  place,  been  restored  and  reclaimed.  Do  you 
think,  then,  that  I  shall  shear  my  locks  to  please  the  Philis- 
tine ?  O,  no ;  by  the  grace  of  God,  Samson  knoweth  where 
his  strength  lieth,  and  is  not  likely  to  do  that  to  please  any 
man,  or  any  set  of  men.  Preaching  must  reach  the  popular 
ear  ;  and  to  get  at  the  people  it  must  be  interesting  to  them, 
and  by  the  grace  of  God  we  hope  it  shall  be. 

But,  in  the  next  place,  if  the  poor  are  to  have  the  gospel 
preached  unto  them,  it  must  he  preached  simply.  It  is  a  waste 
of  time  to  preach  Latin  to  you,  is  it  not  ?  To  the  multitude 
of  people  it  is  of  no  use  delivering  a  discourse  in  Greek. 
Possibly  five  or  six  of  the  assembly  might  be  mightily  edified, 
and  go  away  delighted ;  but  what  of  that  ?  The  mass  would 
retire  unedified  and  uninstructed.  You  talk  about  the  educa- 
tion of  the  people,  don't  you,  and  about  the  vast  extent  of 
English  refinement  ?  For  the  most  part  it  is  a  dream.  Igno- 
rance is  not  buried  yet.  The  language  of  one  class  of  En- 
ghshmen  is  a  dead  language  to  another  class  ;  and  many  a  word 
which  is  very  plain  to  many  of  us,  is  as  hard  and  difficult  a 
word  to  the  multitude  as  if  it  had  been  culled  out  of  Hindos- 
tani  or  Bengali.  There  are  multitudes  who  can  not  understand 
words  composed  of  Latin,  but  must  have  the  truth  told  them 
in  round  homely  Saxon,  if  it  is  to  reach  their  hearts.  There  is 
my  friend  the  Rev.  So-and-so,  Doctor  of  Divinity ;  he  is  a 
great  student ;  and  whenever  he  finds  a  hard  word  in  his  books 
he  tells  it  next  Sunday  to  his  congregation.  He  has  a  little 
intellectual  circle,  who  think  his  preaching  must  be  good,  be- 
cause they  can  not  understand  it,  and  who  think  it  proven 


PREACHING  FOR  THE  POOR.  155 

that  he  must  be  an  intelligent  man  because  all  the  pews  are 
empty.  They  believe  he  must  be  a  very  useful  member  of 
society  ;  in  fact,  they  compare  him  to  Luther,  and  think  he  is 
a  second  Paul,  because  nobody  will  listen  to  him,  seeing  it  is 
impossible  to  understand  him.  Well,  we  conceive  of  that 
good  man  that  he  may  have  a  work  to  do,  but  we  do 
not  know  what  it  is.  There  is  another  friend  of  ours,  Mr. 
Cloudyton,  who  always  preaches  in  such  a  style  that  if  you 
should  try  to  dissect  the  sermon  for  a  week  afterwards  you 
could  by  no  possibiHty  tell  what  he  meant.  If  you  could  look 
at  things  from  his  point  of  view  you  might  possibly  discover 
something;  but  it  does  appear  by  his  preaching  as  if  him- 
self had  lost  his  way  in  a  fog,  and  were  scattering  a  whole 
mass  of  mist  about  him  everywhere.  I  suppose  he  goes  so 
deep  down  into  the  subject  that  he  stirs  the  mud  at  the  bot- 
tom, and  he  can  not  find  his  way  up  again.  There  are  some 
such  preachers,  whom  you  can  not  possibly  understand.  Now, 
we  say.  and  say  very  boldly  too,  that  while  such  preaching 
may  be  esteemed  by  some  people  to  be  good,  we  have  no  faith 
in  it  at  all.  If  ever  the  world  is  to  be  reclaimed,  and  if  sinners 
are  to  be  saved,  we  can  see  no  likelihood  in  the  world  of  its 
being  done  by  such  means.  We  think  the  word  must  be  un 
derstood  before  it  can  really  penetrate  the  conscience  and  the 
heart;  and  we  would  always  be  preaching  such  as  men  can 
understand,  otherwise  the  poor  will  not  "  have  the  gospel 
preached  to  them."  Why  did  John  Bunyan  become  the  apos- 
tle of  Bedfordshire  and  Huntingdonshire,  and  round  about  ? 
It  was  because  John  Bunyan,  while  he  had  a  surpassing  genius, 
would  not  condescend  to  cull  his  language  from  the  garden  ot 
flowers,  but  he  went  into  the  hayfield,  and  the  meadow,  and 
plucked  up  his  language  by  the  roots,  and  spoke  out  in  the 
words  that  the  people  used  in  their  cottages.  Why  is  it  that 
God  has  blessed  other  men  to  the  stirring  of  the  people,  to  the 
bringing  about  of  spiritual  revivals,  to  the  renewal  of  the 
power  of  godliness?  We  believe  it  has  always  been  owing 
to  this,  under  God's  Spirit,  that  they  have  adopted  the  phrase- 
ologt^  of  the  people,  and  have  not  been  ashamed  to  be  despised 
because  they  talked  as  common  people  did. 

But  now  Ave  have  something  to  say  more  important  than 


156  PREACIIINQ    FOR   THE   POOR. 

this.  We  may  preach,  very  simply  too,  and  very  attractively, 
and  yet  it  may  not  bo  true  that  "  the  poor  have  the  gospel 
preached  to  them,"  for  the  poor  may  have  something  else 
preached  to  them  beside  the  gospel.  It  is,  then,  highly  im- 
portant that  we  should  each  of  us  ask  what  the  gospel  is,  and 
that  when  we  think  we  know  it  we  should  not  be  ashamed  to 
say,  "  this  is  the  gospel,  and  I  will  preach  it  boldly,  though  all 
men  should  deny  it."  O  !  I  fear  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as 
preaching  another  gospel,  "  which  is  not  another,  but  there 
be  some  that  trouble  us."  There  is  such  a  thing  as  preaching 
science  and  philosophy  attractively,  but  not  preaching  the 
gospel.  Mark,  it  is  not  preaching,  but  it  is  preaching  the 
gospel  that  is  the  mark  of  Christ's  dispensation  and  of  his 
truth.  Let  us  take  care  to  preach  fnlly  the  depravity  of  man, 
let  us  dwell  thoroughly  upon  his  lost  and  ruined  estate  under 
the  law,  and  his  restoration  under  the  gospel ;  let  us  preach  ot 
these  three  things,  for,  as  a  good  brother  said,  "  The  gospel 
lies  in  three  things,  the  word  of  God  only,  the  blood  of  Christ 
only,  and  the  Holy  Spirit  only."  These  three  things  make  up 
the  gospel.  "  The  Bible,  the  Bible  alone  the  religion  of  Prot^ 
estants ;  the  blood  of  Christ  the  only  salvation  from  sin,  the 
only  means  of  the  pardon  of  our  guilt ;  and  the  Holy  Spirit 
the  only  regenerator,  the  only  converting  power  that  will  alone 
work  in  us  to  will  and  to  do  of  his  good  pleasure."  Without 
these  three  things  there  is  no  gospel..  Let  us  take  heed,  then, 
for  it  is  a  serious  matter,  that  when  the  people  listen  to  us,  it 
is  the  gospel  that  we  preach,  or  else  we  may  be  as  guilty  as 
was  Nero,  the  tyrant,  who,  when  Rome  was  starving,  sent  his 
ships  to  Alexandria,  where  there  was  corn  in  plenty,  not  for 
wheat,  but  for  sand  to  scatter  in  the  arena  for  his  gladiators. 
Ah!  there  be  some  who  seem  to  do  so — scattering  the  floor  of 
their  sanctuary  not  with  the  good  corn  of  the  kingdom,  upon 
which  the  soul's  of  God's  people  may  feed  and  grow  thereby, 
but  with  sand  of  controversy,  sand  of  logic,  which  no  child 
of  God  can  ever  receive  to  his  soul's  profit.  "  The  poor  have 
the  gospel  preached  to  them."  Let  us  take  heed  that  it  is 
the  gospel.  Hear,  then,  ye  chief  of  sinners,  the  voice  of  Jesus: 
"This  is  a  faithful  saying,  and  worthy  of  all  acceptation,  that 
Christ  Jesus  cave  into  the  world  to  save  sinners;  of  vvhom  I 


PREACHING  FOR  THE  POOR.  157 

am  chief."  "  Him  that  cometli  to  me  I  will  in  no  wise  cast 
out."  "  Whosoever  believeth  and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved." 
"  For  the  Son  of  man  is  come  to  seek  and  to  save  that  which 
was  lost." 

And  just  one  more  hint  on  this  point,  namely,  this — it  must 
be  said  of  us,  if  we  would  keep  true  to  Christ's  rule  and  apos- 
tolic practice,  that  "  the  poor  have  the  gos^^el  preached  to 
them."  In  these  days  there  is  a  growing  hatred  of  the  pulpit. 
The  pulpit  has  maintained  its  ground  full  many  a  year,  but 
partially  by  its  becoming  inefficient,  it  is  losing  its  high  posi- 
tion. Through  a  timid  abuse  of  it,  instead  of  a  strong,  stiff 
use  of  the  pulj,'t,  the  world  has  come  to  despise  it;  and  now 
most  certainly  \  e  are  not  a  priest-ridden  people  one  half  so 
much  as  we  are  a  press-ridden  people.  By  the  press  we  are 
ridden  indeed.  Mercuries,  Dispatches,  Journals,  Gazettes, 
and  Magazines,  are  now  the  judges  of  pulpit  eloquence  and 
style.  They  thrust  themselves  into  the  censor's  seat,  and  cen- 
sure those  whose  office  it  should  rather  be  to  censure  them. 
The  pulpit  has  become  dishonored  ;  it  is  esteemed  as  being  of 
very  litHe  worth  and  of  no  esteem.  Ah!  we  must  always 
maintain  the  dignity  of  the  pulpit.  I  hold  that  it  is  the  Ther- 
mopylte  of  Christendom  ;  it  is  here  that  the  battle  must  be 
fought  between  right  and  wrong  ;  not  so  much  with  the  pen, 
valuable  as  that  is  as  an  assistant,  as  with  the  living  voice  of 
earnest  men,  "  contending  earnestly  for  the  faith  once  deliv- 
ered unto  the  saints."  In  some  churches  the  pulpit  is  put 
away ;  there  is  a  prominent  altar,  but  the  pulpit  is  omitted. 
Now,  the  most  prominent  thing  under  the  gospel  dispensation 
is  not  the  altar,  which  belonged  to  the  Jewish  dispensation, 
but  the  pulpit.     "  We  have  an  altar,  whereof  they  have  no 

f  right  to  eat  which  serve  the  tabernacles  ;"  that  altar  is  Chiist ; 

'  but  Christ  has  been  pleased  to  exalt  "  the  foolishness  of  preach- 
ing" to  the  most  prominent  position  in  his  house  of  prayer. 
We  must  take  heed  that  we  always  maintain  preaching.  It  is 
this  that  God  will  bless  ;  it  is  this  that  he  has  promised  to 
crown  with  success.  "Faith  cometh  by  hearing,  and  hearing 
by  the  Word  of  God."  We  must  not  expect  to  see  great 
changes,  nor  any  great  progress  of  the  gospel,  until  there  is 
greater  est3em  for  the  pulpit — more  said  of  it  and  thought  of 


158  PRK^V.CHING    FOR   THE    POOR. 

it.  "  Well,"  some  may  reply,  "  you  speak  of  the  dignity  of 
the  pulpit ;  I  take  it,  you  lower  it  yourself,  sir,  by  speaking  ir 
such  a  style  to  your  hearers."  Ah  !  no  doubt  you  think  so. 
Some  pulpits  die  of  dignity.  I  take  it,  the  greatest  dignity  in 
the  world  is  the  dignity  of  converts — that  the  glory  of  the 
pulpit  is,  if  I  may  use  such  a  metaphor,  to  have  captives  at  its 
chariot-wheels,  to  see  converts  following  it,  and  where  there 
are  such,  and  those  from  the  very  worst  of  men  ;  there  is  a 
dignity  in  the  pu'pit  beyond  any  dignity  which  a  fine  mouth- 
ing of  words  and  a  grand  selection  of  fantastic  language  could 
ever  give  to  it.  "  The  poor  have  the  gospel  preached  to 
them." 

II.  Now,  the  next  translation  is,  the  translation  of  Ge- 
neva, principally  used  by  Calvin  in  his  commentary ;  and  it  is 
also  the  translation  of  Thomas  Cranmer,  whose  translation,  I 
believe,  was  at  least  in  some  degree  molded  by  the  Genevan 
translation.  He  translates  it  thus  :  "  The  poor  receive  the 
gospel."  The  Genevan  translation  has  it,  "The  poor  receive 
the  glad  tidings  of  the  gospel,"  which  is  a  tautology,  since 
glad  tidings  mean  the  same  thing  as  gospel.  The  Greek  has 
it,  "  The  poor  are  evangelized."  Now,  what  is  the  meaning 
of  this  word  "  evangelized  ?"  They  talk  with  a  sneer  in  these 
days  of  evangelical  drawing-rooms  and  evangelicals,  and  so  on. 
It  is  one  of  the  most  singular  sneers  in  the  world,  for  to  call  a 
man  an  evangelical  by  way  of  joke,  is  the  same  as  calling  a 
man  a  gentleman  by  way  of  scoffing  at  him.  To  say  a  man  is 
one  of  the  gospelers,  by  way  of  scorn,  is  hke  calling  a  man  a 
king  by  way  of  contempt.  It  is  an  honorable,  a  great,  a  glo- 
rious title,  and  nothing  is  more  honorable  than  to  be  ranked 
among  the  evangelicals.  What  is  meant,  then,  by  the  people 
being  evangehzed  ?  Old  Master  Burkitt,  thinking  that  -we 
should  not  easily  understand  the  word,  says,  that  as  a  man  is 
said  to  be  Italianized  by  living  among  the  Italians,  gettinor 
tl  eir  manners  and  customs,  and  becoming  a  citizen  of  the 
state, 'so  a  man  is  evangelized  when  he  lives  where  the  gospel 
is  preached,  and  gets  the  manners  and  customs  of  those  w^ho 
profess  it.  Now,  that  is  one  meaning  of  the  text.  One  of  the 
proofs  of  our  Saviour's  mission  is  not  only  that  the  poor  hear 
the  Wor  1,  but  are  influenced  by  it  and  are  gospelized.     O! 


PREACHING  FOR  THE  POOR.  150 

how  great  a  work  it  is  to  gospelize  any  man,  and  to  gospelize 
a  poor  man.  What  does  it  mean  ?  It  means,  to  make  him 
like  the  gospel.  Now,  the  gospel  is  holy,  just,  and  true,  and 
loving,  and  honest,  and  benevolent,  and  kind,  and  gracious. 
So,  then,  to  gospelize  a  man  is  to  make  a  rogue  honest,  to 
make  a  harlot  modest,  to  make  a  profane  man  serious,  to  make 
a  grasping  man  liberal,  to  make  a  covetous  man  benevolent,  to 
make  the  drunken  man  sober,  to  make  the  untruthful  man 
truthful,  to  make  the  unkind  man  loving,  to  make  the  hater 
the  lover  of  hiss  pecies,  and,  in  a  word,  to  gospelize  a  man  is, 
in  his  outward  character,  to  bring  him  into  such  a  condition 
that  he  labors  to  carry  out  the  command  of  Christ,  "  Love  thy 
God  with  all  thy  heart,  and  thy  neighbor  as  thyself."  Gospel- 
izing,  furthermore,  has  something  to  do  with  an  inner  prin- 
ciple; gospelizing  a  man  means  saving  him  from  hell  and  mak- 
ing him  a  heavenly  character ;  it  means  blotting  out  his  sins, 
writing  a  new  name  upon  his  heart — the  new  name  of  God.  It 
means  bringing  him  to  know  his  election,  to  put  his  trust  in 
Christ,  to  renounce  his  sins,  and  his  good  works  too,  and  to 
trust  solely  and  wholly  u])on  Jesus  Christ,  as  his  Redeemer. 
O  !  what  a  blessed  thing  it  is  to  be  gospelized  !  How  many 
of  you  have  been  so  gospelized  ?  The  Lord  grant  that  the 
whole  of  us  may  feel  the  influence  of  the  gospel.  I  contend 
for  this,  that  to  gospelize  a  man  is  the  greatest  "iniracle  in  the 
world.  All  the  other  miracles  are  wrapped  up  in  this  one. 
To  gospelize  a  man,  or,  in  other  words,  to  convert  him,  is  a 
greater  work  than  to  open  the  eyes  of  the  blind  ;  for  is  it  not 
opening  the  eyes  of  the  blind  soul  that  he  may  see  spiritual 
matters,  and  understand  the  things  of  heavenly  wisdom,  and 
is  not  a  surgical  operation  easier  than  an  operation  on  the  soul  ? 
Souls  we  can  not  touch,  although  science  and  skill  have  been 
able  to  remove  films  and  cataracts  from  the  eyes.  "  The  lame 
walk."  Gospelizing  a  man  is  more  than  this.  It  is  not  only 
making  a  lame  man  walk,  but  it  is  making  a  dead  man  who 
could  not  walk  in  the  right  way,  walk  in  the  right  way  ever 
afterv.-ard.  "  The  lepers  are  cleansed."  Ah  !  but  to  cleanse 
a  sinner  is  greater  work  than  cleansing  a  leper.  "  The  deaf 
hear."  Yes,  and  to  make  a  man,  who  never  listened  to  the 
voice  nf'God,  hear  the  voice  of  his  Maker,  is  a  miracle  greater 


160  PREACHING  FOR  THE  POOR. 

than  to  make  the  deaf  hear,  or  even  to  raise  the  dead.  Great 
though  that  be,  it  is  not  a  more  stupendous  effort  of  divine 
power  than  to  save  a  soul,  since  men  are  naturally  dead  in 
sins,  and  must  be  quickened  by  divine  grace  if  they  are  saved. 
To  gospelize  a  man  is  the  highest  instance  of  divine  might, 
and  remains  an  unparalleled  miracle,  a  miracle  of  miracles. 
"  The  poor  are  evangelized." 

Beloved,  there  have  been  some  very  precious  specimens  of 
poor  people  who  have  come  under  the  influence  of  the  gospel. 
I  think  1  appeal  to  the  hearts  of  all  of  you  who  are  now  pres- 
ent, when  I  say  there  is  nothing  we  more  reverence  and  re- 
spect than  the  piety  of  the  poor  and  needy.  I  had  an  engra- 
ving sent  to  me  the  other  day  which  pleased  me  beyond 
measure.  It  was  an  engraving  simply  but  exquisitely  ex- 
ecuted. It  represented  a  poor  girl  in  an  upper  room,  with  a 
lean-to  roof.  There  was  a  post  driven  in  the  ground,  on 
which  was  a  piece  of  wood,  standing  on  which  were  a  candle 
and  a  Bible.  She  was  on  her  knees  at  a  chair,  praying, 
wrestling  with  God.  Every  thing  in  the  room  had  on  it  the 
stamp  of  poverty.  There  was  the  mean  coverlet  to  the  old 
stump  bedstead ;  there  were  the  walls  that  had  never  been 
papered,  and  perhaps  scarcely  whitewashed.  It  was  an  upper 
story  to  which  she  had  climbed  with  aching  knees,  and  where, 
perhaps,  she  had  worked  away  till  her  fingers  were  worn  to 
the  bone,  to  earn  her  bread  at  needle-work.  There  it  was 
that  she  was  wrestling  with  God.  Some  would  turn  away 
and  laugh  at  it ;  but  it  appeals  to  the  best  feelings  of  man,  and 
moves  the  heart  far  more  than  does  the  fine  engraving  of  the 
monarch  on  his  knees  in  the  grand  assembly.  We  have  had 
lately  a  most  excellent  volume,  the  Life  of  Captain  Hedley 
Vicars ;  it  is  calculated  to  do  great  good,  and  I  pray  God  to 
bless  it;  but  I  question  whether  the  history  of  Captain  Hed- 
ley Vicars  will  last  as  long  in  the  public  mind  as  the  history  oi 
the  Dairyman's  Daughter  or  the  Shepjierd  of  Salisbury  Plain. 
The  histories  of  those  who  have  come  from  the  ranks  of  the 
poor  always  lay  hold  of  the  Christian  mind.  O !  we  love 
piety  anywhere ;  we  bless  God  when  coronets  and  grace  go 
together ;  but  if  piety  in  any  place  does  shine  more  brightly 
than  anywhere  else,  it  is  in  rags  and  poverty.   When  the  poor 


PREACHING   FOR   Tllli   POOR.  ^61 

woman  in  the  almshouse  takes  her  bread  and  her  wat'  ,  and 
blesses  God  for  both — when  the  poor  creature  who  has  not 
where  to  lay  his  head,  yet  lifts  his  eye  and  says,  "  My  Fatlier 
will  provide,"  it  is  then  like  the  glow-worm  in  the  damp 
leaves,  a  spark  the  more  conspicuous  for  the  blackness  around 
it.  Their  religion  gleams  in  its  true  brightness,  and  is  seen 
in  all  its  luster.  It  is  a  mark  of  Christ's  gospel  that  the  poor 
are  gospelized — that  they  can  receive  the  gospel.  True,  it  is, 
the  gospel  affects  all  ranks,  and  is  equally  adapted  to  them 
all ;  but  yet  we  say,  "  If  one  class  be  more  prominent  than 
another,  we  believe  that  in  Holy  Scripture  the  poor  are  most 
of  all  appealed  to."  "  O  !"  say  some  very  often,  "  the  converts 
whom  God  has  given  to  such  a  man  are  all  from  the  lower 
ranks  ;  they  are  all  people  with  no  sense  ;  they  are  all  unedu- 
cated people  that  hear  such  and  such  a  person."  Very  well, 
if  you  say  so ;  we  might  deny  it  if  we  pleased,  but  W(  do  not 
know  that  we  shall  take  the  trouble,  because  we  thin.c  it  no 
disgrace  wliatever ;  we  think  it  rather  to  be  an  honor  that  the 
poor  are  evangelized,  and  that  they  listen  to  the  gospel  from 
our  lips.  I  have  never  thought  it  a  disgrace  at  any  time. 
When  any  have  said,  "  Look,  what  a  mass  of  uneducated  peo- 
ple they  are."  Yes,  I  have  thought,  and  blessed  be  God  they 
are,  for  those  are  the  very  people  that  want  the  gospel  most-. 
If  you  saw  a  physician's  door  surrounded  by  a  number  of  la- 
dies of  the  sentimental  school,  who  are  sick  about  three  times 
a  week,  and  never  were  ill  at  all — if  it  were  said  he  cured 
them,  yOu  would  say,  "  No  great  wonder  too,  for  there  never 
was  any  thing  the  matter  with  them."  But  if  you  heard  of 
another  man,  that  people  with  the  worst  diseases  have  come 
to  him,  and  that  God  has  made  use  of  him,  and  his  medicine 
has  been  the  means  of  healing  their  diseases  ;  you  would  thc'n 
say,  "  There  is  something  in  it,  for  the  people  that  want  it 
most  have  received  it."  If,  then,  it  be  true  that  the  poor  will 
come  to  hear  the  gospel  more  than  others,  it  is  no  disgrace  to 
the  gospel,  it  is  an  honor  to  it  that  those  who  most  want  it  do 
freely  receive  it. 

III.  And  now  I  must  close  up  by  briefly  dwelling  on  the 
last  point.  It  was  the  third  translation,  Wyckliffe's  trans- 
lation.    To  give   it   you   in    ^Id   English — "Poor  men  are 


162  PREACHING  FOR  THE  POOR. 

taking  to  the  preaching  of  the  gospel."  *'  Ah !"  say  somej 
"  they  had  better  remain  at  home,  minding  their  plows  or 
their  blacksmith's  hammer ;  they  had  better  have  kept  on 
with  their  tinkering  and  tailoring,  and  not  have  turned 
preachers.  But  it  is  one  of  the  honors  of  the  gospel  that 
poor  men  h.ave  taken  to  the  preaching  of  it.  There  was  a 
tinker  once,  and  let  the  worldly-wise  blush  when  they  hear  of 
it — there  was  a  tinker  once,  a  tinker  of  whom  a  great  divine 
said  he  would  give  all  his  learning  if  he  could  preach  hke  him. 
There  was  a  tinker  once,  who  ne'er  so  much  as  brushed  his 
back  against  the  walls  of  a  college,  who  wrote  a  Pilgrim's 
Progress.  Did  ever  a  doctor  in  divinity  write  such  a  book  ? 
There  was  a  pot-boy  once — a  boy  who  carried  on  his  back  the 
pewter-pots  for  his  mother,  who  kept  the  Old  Bell.  That  man 
drove  men  mad,  as  the  world  had  it,  but  led  them  to  Christ, 
as  we  '  ave  it,  all  his  life  long,  until,  loaded  with  honors  he 
sank  into  his  grave,  with  the  good  will  of  a  multitude  round 
about  him,  with  an  imperishable  name  written  in  the  world's 
records,  as  well  as  in  the  records  of  the  church.  Did  you  ever 
hear  of  any  mighty  man,  whose  name  stood  in  more  esteem 
among  God's  people  than  the  name  of  George  Whitefield.  And 
yet  these  were  poor  men,  who,  as  Wyckliffe  said,  were  taking 
to  the  preaching  of  the  gospel.  If  you  will  read  the  life  of 
Wyckliffe,  you  will  find  him  saying  there,  that  he  believed 
that  the  Reformation  in  England  was  more  promoted  by  the 
labors  of  the  poor  men,  whom  he  sent  out  from  Lutterworth 
than  by  his  own.  He  gathered  round  him  a  number  of  the 
poor  people  whom  he  instructed  in  the  faith,  and  then  he  sent 
them  two  and  two  into  every  village,  as  Jesus  did.  They 
went  into  the  market-place  and  they  gathered  the  people 
around ;  they  opened  the  book  and  read  a  chapter,  and  then 
they  left  them  a  manuscript  of  it,  which  for  months  and  years 
after  the  people  would  assemble  to  read,  and  would  remember 
the  gospellers  that  had  come  to  tell  them  the  gospel  of  Christ. 
These  men  went  from  market-place  to  market-place,  from 
town  to  town,  and  from  village  to  village,  and  though  their 
names  are  unknown  to  fame,  they  were  the  real  reformers. 
You  may  talk  of  Cranmer  and  Latimer  and  Ridley  ;  they  did 
much,  but  tie  real  reformers  of  the  English  nation  were  people 


PREACHING  FOR  THE  POOR.  16o 

whose  names  have  perished  from  tlie  anuals  of  time,  but  are 
written  in  the  records  of  eternity.  God  has  blessed  the  poor 
man  in  preaching  the  truth.  Far  be  it  from  me  to  depreciate 
learning  and  wisdom.  We  should  not  have  had  the  Bible 
translated  without  learning,  and  the  more  learning  a  man  car 
have,  if  he  be  a  sanctified  man,  the  better ;  he  has  so  man}' 
more  talents  to  lay  out  in  his  Master's  service ;  but  it  is  not 
absolutely  necessary  for  preaching  of  the  Word.  Rough,  un 
tamed,  untaught  energy,  has  done  much  in  the  church.  A 
Boanerges  has  stood  up  in  a  village ;  he  could  not  put  three 
words  together  in  grammatical  English  ;  but  where  the  drowsy 
parson  had  for  many  a  year  lulled  all  his  people  into  an  unhal 
lowed  rest,  this  man  started  up,  like  the  herdsman  Amos,  and 
brought  about  a  great  awakening.  He  began  to  preach  in  some 
cottage ;  people  thronged  around  him,  then  a  house  was  built, 
and  his  name  is  handed  down  to  us  as  the  Rev.  So-and-so,  but 
then  he  was  known  as  Tom  the  plowman,  or  John  the  tinker, 
God  has  made  use  of  men  whose  origin  was  the  most  obscure, 
who  seemed  to  have  little,  except  the  gifts  of  nature,  which 
could  be  made  use  of  in  God's  service ;  and  we  hold  that  this 
is  no  disgrace,  but  on  the  contrary  an  honor,  that  poor  men 
are  taking  to  preaching  the  gospel. 

And  now,  beloved,  I  have  opened  my  mouth  for  the  dumb, 
and  pleaded  the  cause  of  the  poor,  let  me  end  by  entreating 
the  poor  of  the  flock  to  consider  the  poor  man's  Christ ;  let 
me  urge  them  to  give  him  their  thoughts,  and  may  the  Lord 
enable  them  to  yield  him  their  hearts.  "  He  that  believeth 
and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved;  but  he  that  believeth  not  shall 
be  damned." 

May  God  bless  the  high  and  low,  the  rich  and  poor ;  yea, 
all  of  you,  for  his  name's  sake. 


SERMON    XI. 

SECRET    SINS. 

"  Cleanse  thou  me  from  secret  faults." — Psalm  xix.  12 

Self-righteousness  arises  partly  from  pride,  but  mainly 
from  ignorance  of  God's  law.  It  is  because  men  know  little 
or  nothing  concerning  the  terrible  character  of  the  divine  law, 
that  they  foolishly  imagine  themselves  to  be  righteous.  They 
are  not  aware  of  the  deep  spirituality,  and  the  stern  severity 
of  the  law,  or  they  would  have  other  and  wiser  notions.  Once 
let  them  know  how  strictly  the  law  deals  with  the  thoughts, 
how  it  brings  itself  to  bear  upon  every  emotion  of  the  inner 
man,  and  there  is  not  one  creature  beneath  God's  heaven  who 
would  dare  to  think  himself  righteous  in  God's  sight  in  virtue 
of  his  own  deeds  and  thoughts.  Only  let  the  law  be  revealed 
to  a  man  ;  let  him  know  how  strict  the  law  is,  and  how  in- 
finitely just,  and  his  self-righteousness  will  shrivel  into  nothing 
— it  will  become  a  filthy  rag  in  his  sight,  whereas  before  he 
thought  it  to  be  a  goodly  garment. 

Now,  David,  having  seen  God's  law,  and  having  praised  it 
m  his  Psalm,  which  I  have  read  in  your  hearing,  he  is  brought 
by  reflecting  on  its  excellency  to  utter  this  thought,  "  Who 
can  understand  his  errors  ?"  and  then  to  oifer  this  prayer, 
"  Cleanse  thou  me  from  secret  faults." 

In  the  Lateran  Council  of  the  Church  of  Rome,  a  decree  was 
passed  that  every  true  believer  must  confess  his  sins,  all  of 
them,  once  in  a  year  to  the  priest,  and  they  afiixed  to  it  this 
declaration,  that  there  is  no  hope  of  pardon  but  in  complying 
with  that  decree.  What  can  equal  the  absurdity  of  such  a 
decree  as  that  ?  Do  they  suppose  they  can  tell  their  sins  as 
easily  as  they  can  count  their  fingers  ?  Why,  if  we  could  re- 
ceive pardon  for  all  our  sins  by  telling  every  sin  we  have  com- 


SECEET   SINS.  165 

mitted  in  one  hour,  there  is  not  one  of  us  wh  5  would  be  able 
to  enter  heaven,  since,  besides  the  sins  that  are  known  to  us 
and  that  we  are  able  to  confess,  there  are  a  vast  mass  of  sins 
which  are  as  truly  sins  as  those  which  we  do  not  observe,  but 
which  are  secret  and  come  not  beneath  our  eye.  O  !  if  we  had 
eyes  like  those  of  God,  we  should  think  very  differently  of 
ourselves.  The  sins  that  we  see  and  confess  are  but  like  the 
farmer's  small  samples  which  he  brings  to  market,  when  he 
has  left  his  granary  full  at  home.  We  have  but  a  very  few 
sins  which  we  can  observe  and  detect,  compared  with  those 
which  are  hidden  to  ourselves  and  unseen  to  our  fellow  crea- 
tures. I  doubt  not  it  is  true  of  all  of  us  who  are  here,  that  in 
every  hour  of  our  existence  in  which  we  are  active,  we  com- 
mit tens  of  thousands  of  unholinesses  for  which  conscience  has 
never  reproved  us,  because  we  have  never  seen  them  to  be 
wrong,  seeing  we  have  not  studied  God's  laws  as  we  ought  to 
have  done.  Now,  be  it  known  to  us  all  that  sin  is  sin,  whether 
we  see  it  or  not — that  a  sin  secret  to  us  is  a  sin  as  truly  as  if 
we  knew  it  to  be  a  sin,  though  not  so  great  a  sin  in  the  sight 
of  God  as  if  it  had  been  committed  presumptuously,  seeing 
that  it  lacks  the  aggravation  of  wilfulness.  Let  all  of  us  who 
know  our  sins,  offer  this  prayer  after  all  our  confessions : 
"  Lord,  I  have  confessed  as  many  as  I  know,  but  I  must  add 
an  et  cetera  after  them,  and  say,  '  Cleanse  thou  me  from  secret 
faults.' " 

That,  however,  will  not  be  the  pith  of  my  sermon  this  morn- 
ing. I  am  going  after  a  certain  class  of  men  who  have  sins 
not  unknown  to  themselves,  but  secret  to  their  fellow  creatures. 
Every  now  and  then  we  turn  up  a  fair  stone  which  lies  upon 
the  greensward  of  the  professing  church,  surrounded  with  the 
verdure  of  apparent  goodness,  and  to  our  astonishment  we  find 
beneath  all  kinds  of  filthy  insects  and  loathsome  reptiles,  and 
in  our  disgust  at  such  hypocrisy,  we  are  driven  to  exclaim, 
"  All  men  are  liars  ;  there  are  none  in  whom  we  can  put  any 
trust  at  all."  It  is  not  fair  to  say  so  of  all  ;  but  really,  the 
discoveries  which  are  made  of  the  insincerity  of  our  fellow 
creatures  are  enough  to  make  us  despise  our  kind,  because 
they  can  go  so  far  in  appearances,  and  yet  have  so  little  sound- 
ness of  heart.     To  you,  sirs,  who  sin  secretly,  and  yet  make  a 


106  SECRET   SINS. 

profession  ;  who  break  God's  covenants  in  the  dark  and  wear 
a  mask  of  goodness  in  the  light — to  you,  sirs,  who  shut  the 
doors  and  commit  wickedness  in  secret — to  you  I  shall  speak 
this  morning.  O  may  God  also  be  pleased  to  speak  to  you, 
and  make  you  pray  this  prayer,  "  Cleanse  thou  me  from  secret 
faults." 

I  shall  endeavor  to  urge  upon  all  pretenders  present  to  give 
up,  to  renounce,  to  detest,  to  hate,  to  abhor  all  their  secret 
sins.  And,  first,  I  shall  endeavor  to  show  the  folly  of  secret 
sins  ;  secondly,  the  misery  of  secret  sins  /  thirdly,  the  guilt  of 
secret  sins ;  fourthly,  the  danger  of  secret  sins  ;  and  then  I 
shall  try  to  apply  some  words  by  way  of  remedy,  that  we  may 
all  of  us  be  enabled  to  avoid  secret  sins. 

I.  First,  then,  the  folly  of  secret  sii^s. 

Pretender,  thou  art  fair  to  look  upon ;  thy  conduct  out- 
w^ardly  upright,  amiable,  liberal,  generous,  and  Christian ;  but 
thou  dost  indulge  in  some  sin  which  the  eye  of  man  has  not 
yet  detected.  Perhaps  it  is  private  drunkenness.  Thou  dost 
revile  the  drunkard  when  he  staggers  through  the  street ;  but 
thou  canst  thyself  indulge  in  the  same  habit  in  private.  It 
may  be  some  other  lust  or  vice,  it  is  not  for  me  just  now  to 
mention  what  it  is.  But,  pretender,  we  say  unto  thee,  thou 
art  a  fool  to  think  of  harboring  a  secret  sin ;  and  thou  art  a 
fool  for  this  one  reason,  that  thy  sin  is  not  a  secret  sin  ;  it  is 
hnown^  and  shall  one  day  be  revealed ;  perhaps  very  soon. 
Thy  sin  is  not  a  secret ;  the  eye  of  God  hath  seen  it ;  thou 
hast  sinned  before  his  face.  Thou  hast  shut  to  the  door,  and 
drawn  the  curtains,  and  kept  out  the  eye  of  the  sun,  but  God's 
eye  pierceth  through  the  darkness ;  the  brick  walls  which  sur- 
rounded thee  were  as  transparent  as  glass  to  the  eye  of  the 
Almighty ;  the  darkness  which  did  gird  thee  was  as  bright  as 
the  summer's  noon  to  the  eye  of  him  who  beholdeth  all  things. 
Knovvest  thou  not,  O  man,  that  "  all  things  are  naked  and 
open  to  the  eyes  of  him  with  whom  we  have  to  do  ?"  As  the 
priest  ran  his  knife  into  the  entrails  of  his  victim,  discovered 
the  heart  and  liver,  and  what  else  did  lie  within,  so  avt  thou, 
O  man,  seen  by  God,  cut  open  by  the  Almighty;  thou  hast 
no  secret  chamber  where  thou  canst  hide  thyself  thou  hast 
no   dark   cellar  where   thou   canst    conceal   thy   soul.      Dig 


SECRET    SINS.  167 

deep,  ay,  deep  as  hell,  but  thou  canst  not  find  earth  enougli 
apon  this  globe  to  cover  thy  sm  ;  if  thou  shouldst  heap  the 
mountains  on  its  grave,  those  mountains  would  tell  the  tale  of 
what  was  buried  in  their  bowels.  If  thou  couldst  cast  thy 
sin  into  the  sea,  a  thousand  babbling  waves  would  tell  the 
secret  out.  There  is  no  hiding  it  from  God.  Thy  sin  is 
photographed  in  high  heaven ;  the  deed  when  it  was  done  was 
photographed  upon  the  sky,  and  there  it  shall  remain,  and 
thou  shalt  see  thyself  one  day  revealed  to  the  gazing  eyes 
of  all  men,  a  hypocrite,  a  pretender,  who  didst  sin  in  fancied 
secret,  observed  in  all  thine  acts  by  the  all-seeing  Jehovah. 
O  what  fools  men  are,  to  think  they  can  do  any  thing  in  secret. 
This  world  is  like  the  glass  hives  w^herein  bees  sometimes  work; 
we  look  down  upon  them,  and  we  see  all  the  operations  of  the 
little  creatures.  So  God  looketh  down  and  seeth  all.  Our 
eyes  are  M^eak  ;  we  can  not  look  through  the  darkness ;  but 
his  eye,  like  an  orb  of  flame,  penetrateth  the  blackness,  and 
readeth  the  thoughts  of  man,  and  seeth  his  acts  when  he  thinks 
himself  most  concealed.  O  it  were  a  thought  enough  to  curb 
us  all  from  sin,  if  it  were  truly  applied  to  us — "  Thou,  God, 
seest  me!"  Stop  thief!  Drop  thou  that  which  thou  hast 
taken  to  thyself.  God  seeth  thee !  No  eye  of  detection  on 
earth  hath  discovered  thee,  but  God's  eyes  are  now  looking 
through  the  clouds  upon  thee.  Swearer !  scarce  any  for  whom 
thou  carest  heard  thy  oath  ;  but  God  heard  it ;  it  entered  into 
the  ears  of  the  Lord  God  of  Sabaoth.  Ah!  thou  who  leadest 
a  filthy  life,  and  yet  art  a  respectable  merchant,  bearing  among 
men  a  fair  and  goodly  character,  thy  vices  are  all  known  ; 
written  in  God's  book.  He  keepeth  a  diary  of  all  thine  acts ; 
and  what  wilt  thou  think  on  that  day  when  a  crowd  shall  be 
assembled,  compared  with  which  this  immense  multitude  is 
but  a  drop  of  a  bucket,  and  God  shall  read  out  the  story  of 
thy  secret  life,  and  men  and  angels  shall  hear  it.  Certain  I 
am  there  are  none  of  us  who  would  like  to  have  all  our  secrets 
read,  especially  our  secret  thoughts.  If  I  should  select  out  of 
this  congregation  the  most  holy  man,  should  bring  him  for- 
ward and  say,  "  Now,  sir,  I  know  all  your  thoughts,  and  am 
about  to  tell  them,"  I  am  sure  he  would  ofler  me  the  largest 
bribe  that  he  could  gather  if  I  would  be  pleased  to  conceal  at 


168  SECEET   SINS. 

least  some  of  them.  "  Tell,"  he  would  say,  "  of  my  acts  ;  of 
them  I  am  not  ashamed ;  but  do  not  tell  my  thoughts  and 
imaginations — of  them  I  must  ever  stand  ashamed  before 
God."  What,  then,  sinner,  ^vill  be  thy  shame  when  thy  privy 
lusts,  thy  closet  transgressions,  thy  secret  crimes  shall  be  ga- 
zetted from  God's  throne,  published  by  his  own  mouth,  and 
with  a  voice  louder  than  a  thousand  thunders  preached  in  the 
ears  of  an  assembled  world  ?  What  will  be  thy  terror  and 
confusion  then,  when  all  the  deeds  thou  hast  done  shall  be 
published  in  the  face  of  the  sun,  in  the  ears  of  all  mankind.  O 
renounce  the  foolish  hope  of  secrecy,  for  thy  sin  is  this  day  re- 
corded, and  shall  one  day  be  advertised  upon  the  walls  of 
heaven. 

II.    In  the  next  place,  let  us  notice  the  misery  of  secret 

SINS. 

Of  all  the  sinners,  the  man  who  makes  a  profession  of  re- 
ligion, and  yet  lives  in  iniquity,  is  the  most  miserable.  A 
downright  wicked  man,  who  takes  a  glass  in  his  hand,  and 
says,  "  I  am  a  drunkard,  I  am  not  ashamed  of  it,"  he  shall  be 
unutterably  miserable  in  worlds  to  come,  but  brief  though  it 
be,  he  has  his  hour  of  pleasure.  A  man  who  curses  and 
swears,  and  says,  "  That  is  my  habit  I  am  a  profane  man,"  and 
makes  a  profession  of  it,  he  has  at  least,  some  peace  in  his  soul ; 
but  the  man  who  walks  with  God's  minister,  who  is  united 
with  God's  church,  who  comes  out  before  God's  people,  and 
UDites  with  them,  and  then  lives  in  sin,  what  a  miserable  ex- 
istence he  must  have  of  it !  Why,  he  has  a  worse  existence 
than  the  mouse  that  is  in  the  parlor,  running  out  now  and  then 
to  pick  up  the  crumbs,  and  then  back  again  to  his  hole.  Such 
men  must  run  out  now  and  then  to  sin ;  and  O !  how  fearful 
they  are  to  be  discovered !  One  day,  perhaps,  their  character 
turns  up ;  with  wonderful  cunning  they  manage  to  conceal 
and  gloss  it  over ;  but  the  next  day  something  else  comes,  and 
they  live  in  constant  fear,  telling  lie  after  lie,  to  make  the  last 
lie  appear  truthful,  adding  deception  to  deception,  in  order 
that  they  may  not  be  discovered. 


"01  'tis  a  tangled  web  we  weave, 
"When  once  we  venture  to  deceive." 


SECRET   SINS.  169 

If  I  must  be  a  wicked  man,  give  me  the  life  of  a  roystering 
sinner,  who  sins  before  the  face  of  day ;  if  I  must  sin,  let 
me  not  act  as  a  hypocrite  and  a  coward  ;  let  me  not  profess  to 
be  God's  and  spend  my  life  for  the  devil.  This  way  of  cheat- 
ing the  devil  is  a  thing  which  every  honest  sinner  will  be 
ashamed  of  He  will  say,  "  Now,  if  I  do  serve  my  master  I 
will  serve  him  out  and  out,  I  will  have  no  sham  about  it ;  if  I 
make  a  profession  I  will  carry  it  out ;  but  if  I  do  not,  if  I  live 
in  sin,  I  am  not  going  to  gloss  it  over  by  cant  and  hypocrisy." 
One  thing  which  has  ham-stringed  the  church,  and  cut  her 
very  sinews  in  twain,  has  been  this  most  damnable  hypocrisy. 

0  !  ij  how  many  places  have  we  men  whom  you  might  praise 
to  t)-e  very  skies,  if  you  could  believe  their  words,  but  whom 
you  might  cast  into  the  nethermost  pit  if  you  could  see  their 
secrrt  actions.     God  forgive  any  of  you  who  are  so  acting ! 

1  ha-''  almost  said,  I  can  scarce  forgive  you.  I  can  forgive  the 
man  who  riots  openly,  and  makes  no  profession  of  being  be  t- 
ter,  but  the  man  who  fawns,  and  cants,  and  pretends  and  prays, 
and  then  lives  in  sin,  that  man  I  hate,  I  can  not  bear  him,  I  .*ib- 
hor  him  from  my  very  soul.  If  he  will  turn  from  his  way?;,  I 
will  love  him,  but  in  his  hypocrisy  he  is  to  me  the  most  loath- 
some of  all  creatures.  'Tis  said  the  toad  doth  wear  a  jewrl  in 
her  head, -but  this  man  hath  none,  but  beareth  filthiness  about 
him,  while  he  pretends  to  be  in  love  with  righteousness.  A 
mere  profession,  my  hearers,  is  but  painted  pageantry  to  go  to 
hell  in  :  it  is  like  the  plumes  upon  the  hearse  and  the  trap- 
pings upon  the  black  horses  which  drag  men  to  their  graves, 
the  funeral  array  of  dead  souls.  Take  heed  above  every  thing 
of  a  waxen  profession  that  will  not  stand  the  sun  ;  take  care 
of  a  life  that  needs  to  have  two  faces  to  carry  it  out ;  be  one 
thing,  or  else  the  other.  If  yon  make  up  your  mind  to  serve 
Satan,  do  not  pretend  to  serve  God ;  and  if  you  serve  God, 
serve  him  with  all  your  heart.  "  No  man  can  serve  two  mas- 
ters;'^ do  not  try  it,  do  not  endeavor  to  do  it,  for  no  life  will 
be  more  miserable  than  that.  Above  all,  beware  of  commit- 
ting acts  which  it  will  be  necessary  to  conceal.  There  is  a  sin- 
gular poem  by  Hood,  called  "  The  Dream  of  Eugene  Aram"— 
a  most  remarkable  piece  it  is  indeed,  illustrating  the  point  oiv 
which  I  am   now  dwelling.     Aram  has  murdered  a  man  ana 

8 


1  T  0  SECRET   SINS. 

cast  his  body  into  the  river — "  a  sluggish  water,  black  as  ink, 
the  depth  was  so  extreme."  The  next  morning  he  visited  the 
scene  of  his  guilt, 

"  And  sought  the  black  accursed  pool, 
"SVith  a  wild  misgivirg  hye ; 
And  he  saw  the  dead  in  the  river  bed, 
For  the  faithless  strewn?  was  dry." 

Xext  he  covered  the  corpse  with  heaps  of  leaves,  but  h 
mighty  wind  swept  through  the  wood  and  left  the  secret  bare 

before  the  sun. 

"  Then  down  I  cast  m  3  on  my  face, 

And  first  began  to  weop, 
For  I  knew  my  seor'rt  then  was  ono 

That  earth  refused  to  keep, 
On  land  or  sea,  ihor.j,'h  it  should  be 
Ten  thousand  fathoms  deep." 

In  plaintive  notes  he  prophesies  his  own  discovery.  He  buried 
his  victim  in  a  cave,  and  trod  him  down  with  stones,  but  when 
years  had  run  their  weary  round  the  foul  deed  was  discovered 
and  tlie  murderer  put  to  death. 

Guilt  is  a  *'  grim  chamberlain,"  even  when  his  fingers  are 
not  bloody  red.  Secret  sins  bring  fevered  eyes  and  sleepless 
nights,  until  men  burn  out  their  consciences,  and  become  in 
very  deed  ripe  for  the  pit.  Hypocrisy  is  a  hard  game  to  play 
at,  for  it  is  one  deceiver  against  many  observers  ;  and  for  cer- 
tain it  is  a  miserable  trade,  whi^h  will  earn  at  last,  as  its  cer- 
tain climax,  a  tremendous  banKruptcy.  Ah !  ye  who  have 
sinned  without  discovery,  ''be  sure  your  sins  will  find  you 
out ;"  and  bethink  you  it  may  find  you  out  ere  long.  Sin, 
like  murder,  will  come  out;  men  will  even  tell  tales  about 
themselve^  in  their  dreams.  God  has  sometimes  made  men  so 
pricked  in  their  consciences,  that  they  have  been  obliged  to 
stand  forth  and  confess  the  story.  Secret  sinner !  if  thou 
wantest  the  foretaste  of  damnation  upon  earth,  continue  in 
thy  secret  sins ;  for  no  man  is  more  miserable  than  he  who 
sinneth  secretly,  and  yet  trioth  to  preserve  a  character.  Yon 
stag,  followed  by  the  hungry  hounds,  with  open  mouths,  is  far 
more  happy  than  the  man  who  is  followed  by  his  sins.  Yon 
bird  taken  in  the  fowler's  net,  and  laboring  to  escape,  is  far 


SECRET   SINS.  iTl 

more  happy  than  he  who  hath  weaved  around  himself  a  web 
of  deception,  and  labors  to  escape  from  it  day  by  day  by  mak- 
ing the  toils  more  thick  and  the  web  more  strong.  O  !  the 
misery  of  secret  sins  !  Truly,  one  may  pray,  "  Cleanse  thou 
me  from  secret  faults." 

Til.  But  now,  next,  the  guilt,  the  solemn  gtjilt  of  secret 

61 N-. 

Now,  John,  you  do  not  think  there  is  any  evil  in  a  thing 
unless  some  body  sees  it,  do  you  ?  You  feel  that  it  is  a  very 
great  sin  if  your  master  finds  you  out  in  robbing  the  till ;  but 
there  is  no  sin  if  he  should  not  discover  it — none  at  all.  And 
you,  sir,  you  fancy  it  to  be  a  very  great  sin  to  play  a  trick  in 
trade,  in  case  you  should  be  discovered  and  brought  before 
the  court ;  but  to  play  a  trick  and  never  be  discovered,  that 
is  all  fair — do  not  say  a  word  about  it,  Mr.  Spnrgeon,  it  is  all 
business  ;  you  must  not  touch  business  ;  tricks  that  are  not 
discovered,  of  course  you  are  not  to  find  fault  with  them.  The 
common  measure  of  sin  is  the  notoriety  of  it.  But  I  do  not 
believe  in  that.  A  sin  is  a  sin,  whether  done  in  private  or  be- 
fore the  wide  world.  It  is  singular  how  men  will  measure 
guilt.  A  railway  servant  puts  up  a  wrong  signal,  there  is  an 
accident ;  the  man  is  tried  and  severely  reprimanded.  The 
day  before  he  put  up  the  wrong  signal,  but  there  was  no  acci- 
dent, and  therefore  no  one  accused  him  for  his  neglect.  But 
it  was  just  the  same,  accident  or  no  accident:  the  accident  did 
not  make  the  guilt,  it  w^as  the  deed  which  made  the  guilt,  not 
the  notoriety  nor  yet  the  consequence  of  it.  It  was  his  busi-' 
ness  to  have  taken  care  ;  and  he  was  as  guilty  the  first  time 
as  he  was  the  second,  for  he  negligently  exposed  the  lires  ot 
men.  Do  not  measure  sin  by  what  other  people  say  of  it; 
but  measure  sin  by  what  God  says  of  it,  and  what  your  own 
conscience  says  of  it. 

Now,  I  hold  that  secret  sin,  if  any  thing,  is  the  worst  of 
sin ;  because  secret  sin  implies  that  the  man  who  commits  it 
has  Atheism  in  his  heart.  You  will  ask  how  that  can  be.  I 
re})ly,  he  may  be  a  professing  Christian,  but  I  shall  tell  him  to 
his  face  that  he  is  a  practical  Atheist,  if  he  labors  to  keep  up  a 
respectable  profession  before  man,  and  then  secretly  trans- 
gresses.    Why,  is  not  he  an  Atheist,  who  will  say  there  is  a 


172  SECRET   SINS. 

God,  yet  at  tlie  same  time  thinks  more  of  man  than  he  does 
of  God  ?     Is  it  not  the  very  essence  of  Atheism — is  it  not  a 
denial  of  the  divinity  of  the  Most  High  when  men  lightly 
esteem  him  and  think  more  of  the  eye  of  a  creature  than  of 
the  observation  of  their  Creator  ?     There  are  some  who  would 
not,  for  the  life  of  them,  say  a  wicked  word  in  the  presence  of 
their  minister,  but  they  can  do  it,  knowing  God  is  looking  at 
them.     They  are   Atheists.     There   are  some  who  would  not 
trick  in  trade  for  all  the  world  if  they  thought  they  should  be 
discovered,  but  they  can  do  it  while  God  is  with  them;  that 
is,  they  think  more  of  the  eye  of  man  than  of  the  eye  of  God  ; 
and  they  think  it  worse  to  be  condemned  by  man  than  to  be 
condemned  by  God.    Call  it  by  what  name  you  will,  the  proper 
name  of  that  is  practical  Atheism.     It  is  dishonoring  God ;  it 
is  dethroning  him ;    putting  him  down  below  his  own  crea- 
tures ;    and  what  is  that,  but   to   take   away  his   divinity? 
Brethren,  do  not,  I  beseech  you,  incur  the  fearful  guilt  of 
secret  sins.     'No  man  can  sin  a  little  in  secret,  it  will  certainly 
engender  more  sin ;  no  man  can  be  a  hypocrite  and  yet  be 
moderate  in  guilt ;  he  will  go  from  bad  to  worse,  and  still 
proceed,  until  when  his  guilt  shall  be  published,  he  shall  be 
found  to  be  the  very  worst  and  the  most  hardened  of  men. 
Take  heed  of  the  guilt  of  "secret  sin.     Ah,  now,  if  I  could 
preach  as  Rowland  Hill  did,  I  would  make  some  people  look 
to  themselves  at  home,  and  tremble  too  !     It  is  sai^  that  when 
he  preached  there  was  not  a  man  in  the  window,  or  standing 
in  the  crowd,  or  perched  up  any  where,  but  said,  "  There,  he 
is  preaching  at  me ;  he  is  telling  me  about  my  secret  sins." 
And  when  he  proclaimed  God's  omniscience,  it  is  said  men 
would  almost  think  they  saw  God  bodily  present  in  the  midst 
of  them,  looking  at  them.    And  when  he  had  done  his  sermon, 
they  would  hear  a  voice  in  their  ears,  "  Can  any  hide  himself 
in  secret  places  that  I  can  not  see  him  ?  saith  the  Lord.     Do 
not  I  fill  heaven  and  earth  ?  saith  the  Lord."     I  would  I  could 
do  that ;  that  I  could  make  every  man  look  to  himself,  and 
find  out  his  secret  sin.     Come,  my  hearer,  what  is  it  ?     Bring 
it  forth  to  the  daylight ;  perhaps  it  will  die  in  the  light  of  the 
sun.     These  things  love  not  to  be  discovered.     Tell  thine  own 
conscience,  now,  what  it  is.     Look  it  in  the  face ;  confess  i\ 


SECRET  sms.  173 

before  God,  and  may  be  give  thee  grace  to  remove  that  sin 
and  every  other,  and  turn  to  him  with  full  purpose  of  heart ! 
But  this  know — that  thy  guilt  is  guilt  discovered  or  undis- 
covered, and  that,  if  there  be  any  diflerence,  it  is  worse,  be- 
cause it  has  been  secret.  God  save  us  from  the  guilt  of  secret 
sin !     "  Cleanse  thou  me  from  secret  fiults." 

IV.  And  note,  next,  the  danger  of  secret  sin.  One 
danger  is  that  a  man  can  not  commit  a  little  sin  in  secret,  with- 
out being  by-the-by  betrayed  into  a  public  sin.  You  can  not, 
sir,  though  you  may  think  you  can,  preserve  a  moderation  in 
sin.  If  you  commit  one  sin,  it  is  like  the  melting  of  the  lower 
glacier  upon  the  Alps ;  the  others  must  follow  in  time.  As 
certainly  as  you  heap  one  stone  upon  the  cairn  to-day,  the 
next  day  you  will  cast  another,  until  the  heap,  reared  stone  by 
stone,  shall  become  a  very  pyramid.  Set  the  coral  insect  at 
work,  you  can  not  decree  where  it  shall  stay  its  work.  It  will 
not  build  its  rock  just  as  high  as  you  please,  it  will  not  stay 
until  it  shall  be  covered  with  weeds,  until  the  weeds  shall  de- 
cay, and  there  shall  be  soil  upon  it,  and  an  island  shall  be 
created  by  tiny  creatures.  Sin  can  not  be  held  in  with  bit  and 
bridle.  "  But  I  am  going  to  have  a  little  drink  now  and  then. 
I  am  only  going  to  be  intoxicated  once  a  week  or  so.  No 
body  will  see  it ;  I  shall  be  in  bed  directly."  You  will  be 
drunk  in  the  streets  soon.  "  I  am  only  just  going  to  read  one 
lascivious  book ;  I  will  put  it  under  the  sofa-cover  when  any 
one  comes  in."  You  will  keep  it  in  your  library  yet,  sir.  "  I 
am  only  going  into  that  company  now  and  then."  You  will 
go  there  every  day,  such  is  the  bewitching  character  of  it ; 
you  can  not  help  it.  You  may  as  well  ask  the  lion  to  let  you 
put  your  head  into  his  mouth.  You  can  not  regulate  his  jaws  ; 
neither  can  you  regulate  sin.  Once  go  into  it,  you  can  not  tell 
when  you  will  be  destroyed.  You  may  be  such  a  fortunate 
individual,  that,  like  Van  Amburgh,  you  may  put  you  head  in 
and  out  a  great  many  times ;  rest  assured  that  one  of  these 
days  it  will  be  a  costly  venture.  Again,  you  may  labor  to 
conceal  your  vicious  habit,  but  it  will  come  out,  you  can  not 
help  it.  You  keep  your  little  pet  sin  at  home  ;  but  mark  this, 
when  the  door  is  ajar  the  dog  will  be  out  in  the  street;  wrap 
him  up  in  your  bosom,  pa*,  over  him  fold  after  fold  of  hypoc- 


174  SECRET    SINS. 

risy  to  keep  him  secret :  the  wretch  will  be  singing  some  day 
when  you  are  in  company  ;  you  can  not  keej)  the  evil  bird 
still.  Your  sin  will  gad  abroad  ;  and  what  is  more,  you  will 
not  mind  it  some  of  these  days.  A  man  who  indulges  in  sin 
privately,  by  degrees  gets  his  forehead  as  hard  as  brass.  The 
first  time  he  sinned,  the  drops  of  sweat  stood  on  his  brow  at 
the  recollection  of  what  he  had  done ;  the  second  time  no 
hot  sweat  on  his  brow — only  an  agitation  of  the  muscles ;  the 
third  time  there  was  the  sly,  sneaky  look,  but  no  agitation  ; 
the  next  time,  he  sinned  a  little  further ;  and  by  degrees  he 
became  the  bold  blasphemer  of  his  God,  who  exclaimed, 
*'  Who  am  I  that  I  should  fear  Jehovah,  and  who  is  he  that  I 
should  serve  him  ?"  Men  go  from  bad  to  worse.  Launch 
your  boat  in  the  current — it  must  go  where  the  current  takes 
it.  Put  yourself  in  the  whirlwind — you  are  but  a  straw  in 
the  wind:  you  must  go  which  way  the  wind  carries  you — 
you  can  not  control  yourself.  The  balloon  can  mount,  but  it 
can  not  direct  its  coarse  ;  it  must  go  which  ever  way  the  wind 
blows.  If  you  once  mount  into  sin,  there  is  no  stopping. 
Take  heed,  if  you  would  not  become  the  worst  of  characters, 
take  heed  of  the  little  sins,  which,  mounting  one  upon  another, 
may  at  last  heave  you  from  the  summit  and  destroy  your  soul 
for  ever.     There  is  a  great  danger  in  secret  sins. 

But  I  have  here  some  true  Christians  who  indulge  in  secret 
sins.  They  say  it  is  but  a  little  one,  and  therefore  do  they 
spare  it.  Dear  brethren,  I  speak  to  you,  and  I  speak  to  my- 
self, when  I  say  this — let  us  destroy  all  our  little  secret  sins. 
They  are  called  little,  and  if  they  be,  let  us  remember  that  it 
is  the  foxes,  even  the  little  foxes,  that  spoil  our  vines;  for  our 
vines  have  tender  shoots.  Let  us  take  heed  of  our  little  sins. 
A  little  sin,  like  a  little  pebble  in  the  shoe,  will  make  a  traveler 
to  heaven  walk  very  wearily.  Little  sins,  like  little  thieves, 
may  open  the  door  to  greater  ones  outside.  Christians,  recol- 
lect that  little  sins  will  spoil  your  communion  with  Christ. 
Little  sins,  like  little  stains  in  silk,  may  damage  the  fine  tex- 
ture of  fellowship ;  little  sins,  like  little  irregularities  in  the 
machinery,  may  spoil  the  whole  fabric  of  your  religion.  The 
one  dead  fly  spoileth  the  whole  pot  of  ointment.  That  one 
thistle  may  seed  a  continent  with  noxious  weeds.     Let  us, 


SECRET   SINS.  175 

brethren,  kill  our  sins  as  often  as  we  can  find  them.  One  said 
— "The  heart  is  full  of  unclean  birds;  it  is  a  cage  of  them." 
"All,  but,"  said  another  divine,  "  you  must  not  make  that  an 
apology,  for  a  Christian's  business  is  to  wring  their  necks." 
And  so  it  is ;  if  there  be  evil  things  it  is  our  business  to  kill 
them.  Christians  must  not  tolerate  secret  sins.  We  must  not 
harbor  traitors ;  it  is  high  treason  against  the  King  of  heaven. 
Let  us  drag  them  out  to  light,  and  offer  them  upon  the  altar, 
giving  up  the  dearest  of  our  secret  sins  at  the  will  and  bid- 
ding of  God.  There  is  a  great  danger  in  a  little  secret  sin  ; 
therefore  avoid  it,  pass  not  by  it,  turn  from  it  and  shun  it ;  and 
God  give  thee  grace  to  overcome  it ! 

V.  And  now  I  come,  in  finishing  up,  to  plead  with  all  my 
might  with  some  of  you  whom  God  has  pricked  in  your  con- 
sciences. I  have  come  to  intreat  you,  if  it  be  possible,  even 
to  tears,  that  you  will  give  up  your  secret  sins.  I  have  one 
here  for  Avliom  I  bless  God ;  I  love  him,  though  I  know  him 
not.  He  is  almost  persuaded  to  be  a  Christian  ;  he  halteth 
between  two  opinions;  he  intendeth  to  serve  God,  he  striveth 
to  give  up  sin,  but  he  findeth  it  a  hard  straggle,  and  as  yet  he 
knoweth  not  what  shall  become  of  him.  I  speak  to  him  with 
all  love :  my  friend,  will  you  have  your  sin  and  go  to  hell,  or 
leave  your  sin  and  go  to  heaven  ?  This  is  the  solemn  alterna- 
tive ;  to  all  awakened  sinners  I  put  it ;  may  God  choose  for 
you,  otherwise  I  tremble  as  to  which  you  may  choose.  The 
pleasures  of  this  life  are  so  intoxicating,  the  joys  of  it  so  en- 
snaring, that  did  I  not  believe  that  God  worketh  in  us  to  will 
and  to  do,  I  should  despair  of  you.  But  I  have  confidence 
that  God  will  decide  the  matter.  Let  me  lay  the  alternative 
before  you  : — on  the  one  hand  there  is  an  hour's  merriment,  a 
short  life  of  bliss,  and  that  a  poor,  poor  bliss ;  on  the  other 
hand,  there  is  everlasting  life  and  eternal  glory.  On  the  one 
hand,  there  is  a  transient  happiness,  and  afterward  over- 
whelming woe ;  in  this  case  there  is  a  solid  peace  and  everlast- 
ing joy,  and  after  it  overflowing  bliss.  I  shall  not  fear  to  be 
called  an  Arminian,  when  I  say,  as  Elijah  did,  "  Choose  you 
this  day  whom  you  will  servo.  If  God  be  God,  serve  him  ;  if 
Baal  be  God,  serve  him."  But,  now,  make  your  choice  de- 
liberately ;  and  may  God  help  you  to  do  it !     Do  not  say  you 


176  SECRET   SINS. 

will  take  up  with  religion,  without  first  counting  the  cost  of 
it ;  remember,  there  is  your  lust  to  be  given  up,  your  pleasure 
to  be  renounced  ;  can  you  do  it  for  Christ's  sake  ?  Can  you  ? 
I  know  you  can  not,  unless  God's  grace  shall  assist  you  in 
making  such  a  choice.  But  can  you  say,  "  Yes,  by  the  help 
of  God,  earth's  gaudy  toys,  its  pomps,  pageantries,  gewgaws 
all  these  I  renounce  ? 

"  '  These  can  never  satisfy ; 
Give  me  Christ  or  else  I  die.'  " 

Sinner,  thou  wilt  never  regret  that  choice,  if  God  help  thee  to 
make  it ;  thou  wilt  find  thyself  a  happy  man  here,  and  thrice 
happy  throughout  eternity. 

"  But,"  says  one,  "  sir,  I  intend  to  be  religious,  but  I  do 
not  hold  with  your  strictness."  I  do  not  ask  you  to  do  so  ;  I 
hope,  however,  you  will  hold  with  GocVs  strictness,  and  God's 
strictness  is  ten  thousand  times  greater  than  mine.  You  may 
say  that  I  am  puritanical  in  my  preaching  ;  God  will  be  puri- 
tanical in  judging  in  that  great  day.  I  may  appear  severe, 
but  I  can  never  be  so  severe  as  God  will  be.  I  may  draw  the 
harrow  with  sharp  teeth  across  your  conscience,  but  God 
shall  drag  harrows  of  eternal  fire  across  you  one  day.  I  may 
speak  thundering  things ;  God  will  not  speak  them,  but  hurl 
them  from  his  hands.  Remember,  men  may  laugh  at  hell,  and 
say  there  is  none ;  but  they  must  reject  their  Bibles  before 
they  can  believe  the  lie.     Men's  consciences  tell  them  that 

"  There  is  a  dreadful  hell 
And  everlasting  pains, 
Where  sinners  must  with  devils  dwell 
In  darkness,  fire,  and  chains," 

Sir,  will  you  keep  your  secret  sins,  and  have  eternal  fire  for 
them  ?  Remember,  it  is  of  no  use,  they  must  all  be  given  up, 
or  else  you  can  not  be  God's  child.  You  can  not  by  any 
means  have  both  ;  it  can  not  be  God  and  the  world,  it  can  not 
be  Christ  and  the  devil ;  it  must  be  one  or  the  other.  O, 
that  God  would  give  you  grace  to  resign  all ;  for  what  are 
they  worth  ?  They  are  your  deceivers  now,  and  will  be  your 
tormentors  for  ever.  O  !  that  your  eyes  were  open  to  see  the 
rottenness,  the  emptmess  and  trickery  of  iniquity.  O  !  that 
God  would  turn  you  to  himself.     O  !  may  God  give  you  grace 


SECRET   SINS.  177 

to  cross  the  Rubicon  of  repentance  at  this  very  hour  •,  to  say, 
"  Henceforth  it  is  war  to  the  knife  with  my  sins ;  not  one  of 
them  will  I  willingly  keep,  but  down  with  them,  down  with 
them;  Canaanite,  Hittite,  Jebusite,  they  shall  all  be  driven  out. 

"  *  The  dearest  idol  I  have  known, 
Whate'er  that  idol  be ; 
Help  me  to  tear  it  from  its  throne, 
And  worship  only  thee.'  " 

"But  O!  sir,  I  can  not  do  it;  it  would  be  like  pulling  my 
eyes  out."  Ay,  but  hear  what  Christ  says  :  "  It  were  better 
for  thee  to  enter  into  life  with  one  eye,  than  having  two  eyes 
to  be  cast  into  hell  fire."  "  But  it  would  be  like  cutting  my 
arm  oiF."  Ay,  and  it  would  be  better  for  thee  to  enter  into 
life  halt  or  maimed,  than  to  be  cast  into  hell  fire  for  ever.  O  ! 
when  the  sinner  comes  before  God  at  last,  do  you  think  he 
will  speak  as  he  does  now  ?  God  will  reveal  his  secret  sins : 
the  sinner  will  not  then  say,  "  Lord,  I  thought  my  secret  sins 
so  sweet,  I  could  not  give  them  up."  I  think  I  see  how 
changed  it  will  be  then.  "  >S'^V,"  you  say  now,  "  you  are  too 
strict  y"  will  you  say  that  when  the  eyes  of  the  Almighty  are 
glowering  on  you  ?  You  say  now,  "  Sh\  you  are  too  pre- 
cise;''"'  will  you  say  that  to  God  Almighty's  face?  '■^  Sir^  I 
mean  to  heep  such-and-such  a  sin.''''  Can  you  say  it  at  God's 
bar  at  last  ?  You  will  not  dare  to  do  it  then.  Ah  !  when 
Christ  comes  a  second  time,  there  will  be  a  marvelous  change 
in  the  way  men  talk.  Methinks  I  see  him  ;  there  he  sits  upon 
his  throne.  Now,  Caiaphas,  come  and  condemn  him  now ! 
Judas !  come  and  kiss  him  now !  What  do  you  stick  at, 
man  ?  Are  you  afraid  of  him  ?  Now,  Barabbas !  go  ;  see 
whether  they  will  prefer  you  to  Christ  now.  Swearer,  now 
is  your  time ;  you  have  been  a  bold  man  ;  curse  him  to  liis 
face  now.  Now,  drunkard  ;  stagger  up  to  him  now.  Now, 
infidel ;  tell  him  there  is  no  Christ  now — now  that  the  world 
is  lit  with  ligiitning  and  the  earth  is  shaken  with  thunder  till 
the  solid  pillars  thereof  do  bow  themselves — tell  God  there  is 
no  God  now ;  now  laugh  at  the  Bible  ;  now  scoff  at  the  min- 
ister. Why  men,  what  is  the  matter  with  you  ?  Why^  can't 
you  do  it  ?  Ah !  there  you  are ;  you  have  fled  to  the  hills 
and  to  the  rocks — "  Rocks,  hide  us !  mountains,  fall  on  us ; 

8* 


178  SECRET   SINS. 

hide  us  from  tlie  face  of  him  that  sitteth  on  the  throne."  Ah ! 
where  are  now  your  boasts,  your  vauntings,  and  your  glories? 
Alas !  alas !  for  you,  in  that  dread  day  of  wonders. 

Secret  sinner,  what  will  then  become  of  thee  ?  Go  out  of 
this  place  unmasked  ;  go  out  to  examine  thyself,  go  out  to 
bend  thy  knee,  go  out  *o  weep,  go  out  to  pray.  God  give 
thee  grace  to  believe  !  And  O,  how  sweet  and  pleasant  the 
thought,  that  this  day  sinners  have  fled  to  Christ,  and  men 
have  been  born  again  to  Jesus !  Brethren,  ere  I  finish,  I  re- 
peat the  woi-ds  at  which  so  many  have  caviled — it  is  now  or 
never,  it  is  turn  or  burn.  Solemnly  in  God's  sight  I  say  it ; 
if  it  be  not  God's  truth  I  must  answer  for  it  in  the  great  day 
of  account.  Your  consciences  tell  you  it  is  true.  Take  it 
home,  and  mock  me  if  you  will ;  this  morning  I  am  clear  of 
your  blood ;  if  any  seek  not  God,  but  live  in  sin,  I  shall  be 
clear  of  your  blood  in  that  day  when  the  watchman  shall  have 
your  souls  demanded  of  him ;  O,  may  God  grant  that  you 
may  be  cleared  in  a  blessed  manner !  When  I  went  down 
these  pulpit  stairs  a  Sabbath  or  two  ago,  a  friend  said  to  me 
words  which  have  been  in  my  mind  ever  since — "  Sir,  there 
are  nine  thousund  people  this  day  without  excuse  in  the  day 
of  judgment."  It  is  true  of  you  this  morning.  If  you  are 
damned,  it  will  not  be  for  want  of  preaching  to  you,  and  it 
shall  not  be  for  want  of  praying  for  you.  God  knoweth  that 
if  my  heart  could  break  of  itself,  it  would,  for  your  souls,  for 
God  is  my  witness,  how  earnestly  I  long  for  you  in  the  bow- 
els of  Christ  Jesus.  O,  that  he  might  touch  your  hearts  and 
bring  you  to  him !  For  death  is  a  solemn  thing,  damnation  is 
a  horrible  thing,  to  be  out  of  Christ  is  a  dreadful  thing,  to  be 
dead  in  sins  is  a  terrific  thing.  May  God  lead  you  to  view 
these  things  as  they. are,  and  save  you,  for  his  mercy's  sake! 
'He  tiiat  believeth  and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved." 

"  Lord,  search  my  soul,  try  every  thought ; 
Though  my  own  heart  accuse  me  not 
Of  walking  in  a  false  disguise, 
I  beg  the  trial  of  thine  eyes. 
Doth  secret  mischief  lurk  within  ? 
Do  I  indulge  some  unknown  sin  ? 
0  turn  n  y  feet  whene're  I  stray, 
And  leat  me  in  thy  perfect  way." 


SERMON    XII. 

ELIJAH'S  APPEAL  TO  THE  UNDECIDED. 

"  H'^-w  long  halt  ye  between  two  opinions  ?  If  the  Lord  be  God,  follow 
him;  if  Baal,  then  follow  him." — 1  Kings,  xviii.  21. 

It  was  a  day  to  be  remembered,  when  the  multitudes  of 
Israel  were  assembled  at  the  foot  of  Carmel,  and  when  the 
solitary  prophet  of  the  Lord  came  forth  to  defy  the  four  hun- 
dred and  fifty  priests  of  the  false  god.  We  might  look  upon 
that  scene  with  the  eye  of  historical  curiosity,  and  we  should 
find  it  rich  with  interest.  Instead  of  doing  so,  however,  we 
shall  look  upon  it  with  the  eye  of  attentive  consideration,  and 
see  whether  we  can  not  improve  by  its  teachings.  We  have 
upon  that  hill  of  Carmel,  and  along  the  plain,  lliree  kinds  of 
persons.  We  have  first  the  devoted  servant  of  Jehovah,  a 
solitary  prophet ;  we  have,  on  the  other  hand,  the  decided 
servants  of  the  evil  one,  the  four  hundred  and  fifty  prophets  of 
Baal;  but  the  vast  mass  of  that  day  belonged  to  a  third  class 
— they  were  those  who  had  not  fully  determined  whether  fully 
to  worship  Jehovah,  the  God  of  their  fathers,  or  Baal,  the  god 
of  Jezebel.  On  the  one  hand,  their  ancient  traditions  led 
them  to  fear  Jehovah,  and  on  the  ..cma,  then*  interest  at 

court  led  them  to  bow  before  Baal.  Many  of  them,  theiefore, 
were  secret  and  half-hearted  followers  of  Jehovah,  while  tliey 
were  the  public  worshipers  of  Baal.  The  whole  of  them  at 
this  juncture  were  halting  between  two  oi)inions.  Elijah  does 
not  address  his  sermon  to  the  priests  of  Baal ;  he  will  have 
something  to  say  to  them  by-and-by,  he  will  preach  them  hor- 
rible sermons  in  deeds  of  blood.  Nor  has  he  aught  to  say  to 
those  who  are  the  thorough  servants  of  Jehovah,  for  they  are 
not  there  ;  but  his  discourse  is  alone  directed  to  those  who  are 
baiting  between  two  opinions. 


180  ELIJAH'S    APPEAL   TO    THE    UNDECIDED. 

Now,  we  have  these  three  classes  here  this  morning.  We 
have,  I  hope,  a  very  large  number  who  are  on  Jehovah's  side, 
who  fear  God  and  serve  him ;  we  have  a  number  who  are  on 
the  side  of  the  evil  one,  who  make  no  profession  of  religion,  and 
do  not  observe  even  the  outward  symptoms  of  it ;  because  they 
are  both  inwardly  and  outwardly  the  servants  of  the  evil  one. 
But  the  great  mass  of  my  hearers  belong  to  the  third  class — 
the  waverers.  Like  empty  clouds  they  are  driven  hither  and 
thither  by  the  wind  ;  like  j^ainted  beauties,  they  lack  the  fresh 
ness  of  life  ;  they  have  a  name  to  live  and  are  dead.  Procras- 
tinators,  double-minded  men,  undecided  persons,  to  you  I 
speak  this  morning — "  How  long  halt  ye  between  two  opin- 
ions?" May  the  question  be  answered  by  God's  Spirit  in 
your  hearts,  and  may  you  be  led  to  say,  "  N"o  longer,  Lord, 
do  I  halt ;  but  this  day  I  decide  for  thee,  and  am  thy  servant 
for  ever !" 

Let  us  proceed  at  once  to  the  text.  Instead  of  giving  the 
divisions  at  the  commencement,  I  will  mention  them  one  by 
one  as  I  proceed. 

I.  First,  you  will  note  that  the  prophet  insisted  iipon  the 
distinction  which  existed  between  the  loorship  of  JBaal  and  the 
loorship  of  Jehovah.  Most  of  the  people  who  were  before 
him  thought  that  Jehovah  was  God,  and  that  Baal  was  God 
too ;  and  that  for  this  I'eason  the  worship  of  both  was  quite 
consistent.  The  great  mass  of  them  did  not  reject  the  God  of 
their  fathers  wholly,  nor  did  they  bow  before  Baal  wholly ; 
but  as  polytheists,  believing  in  many  gods,  they  thought  both 
Gods  might  be  worshiped,  and  each  of  them  have  a  share  in 
their  hearts.  "  N^o,"  said  the  prophet  when  he  began;  "  this 
will  not  do,  these  are  two  opinions ;  you  can  never  make  them 
one,  they  are  two  contradictory  things  which  can  not  be  com- 
bined. I  tell  you  that  instead  of  combining  the  two,  which  is 
impossible,  you  are  halting  between  the  two,  which  makes  a 
vast  difterence."  "I  will  build  in  my  house,"  said  one  of 
them,  "  an  altar  for  Jehovah  here,  and  an  altar  for  Baal  there. 
I  am  of  one  opinion  ;  I  believe  them  both  to  be  God."  "  No, 
no,"  said  Elijah,  "  it  can  not  be  so  ;  they  are  two^  and  must  be 
two.  These  things  are  not  one  opinion,  but  two  opinions. 
No,  you  can  not  unite  them."  Have  I  not  many  here  who  say, 


ELIJAH'S    APPEAL    TO    THE    UNDECIDED.  181 

"  I  am  worldly,  but  I  cam  religious  too  ;  I  can  go  to  the  Music 
Hall  to  worship  God  on  Sunday ;  I  went  to  the  Derby  races 
the  other  day :  I  go,  on  the  one  hand,  to  the  place  where  I 
can  serve  my  lusts ;  I  am  to  be  met  with  in  every  dancing 
room  of  every  description,  and  yet  at  the  same  time  I  say  my 
prayers  most  devoutly.  May  I  not  be  a  good  churchman,  or 
a  right  go-^d  dissenter,  and  a  man  of  the  world  too  ?  May  I 
not,  afte  all,  hold  with  the  hounds  as  well  as  run  with  the 
hare  ?  May  I  not  love  God  and  serve  the  devil  too — take  the 
pleasure  of  each  of  them,  and  give  my  heart  to  neither  ?  We 
answer — Not  so,  they  are  two  opinions ;  you  can  not  do  it, 
they  are  distinct  and  separate.  Mark  Anthony  yoked  two 
lions  to  his  chariot ;  but  there  are  two  lions  no  man  ever  yoked 
together  yet — the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah  and  the  lion  of 
the  pit.  These  can  never  go  together.  Two  opinions  you 
may  hold  in  politics,  perhaps,  but  then  you  will  be  despised 
by  every  body,  unless  you  are  of  one  opinion  or  the  other,  and 
act  as  an  independent  man.  But  two  opinions  in  the  matter 
of  soul-religion  you  can  not  hold.  If  God  be  God,  serve  him, 
and  do  it  thoroughly  ;  but  if  this  world  be  God,  serve  it,  and 
make  no  profession  of  religion.  If  you  are  a  worldling,  and 
think  the  things  of  the  world  the  best,  serve  them ;  devote 
yourself  to  them,  do  not  be  kept  back  by  conscience ;  spite 
your  conscience,  and  run  into  sin.  But  remember,  if  the  Lord 
be  your  God,  you  can  not  have  Baal  too  ;  you  must  have  one 
thing  or  else  the  other.  "  No  man  can  serve  two  masters. '''* 
If  God  be  served,  he  will  be  a  master;  and  if  the  devil  be 
served  he  will  not  be  long  before  he  will  be  a  master ;  and  "  ye 
can  not  serve  two  masters.''''  O  !  be  wise,  and  think  not  that 
the  two  can  be  mingled  together.  How  many  a  respectable 
deacon  thinks  that  he  can  be  covetous,  and  grasping  in  busi- 
ness, and  grind  the  faces  of  the  poor,  and  yet  be  a  saint !  O  ! 
liar  to  God  and  to  man  !  He  is  no  saint ;  he  is  the  very  chief 
of  sinners !  How  many  a  very  excellent  woman,  who  is  le- 
ceived  into  church  fellowship  among  the  people  of  God,  and 
thinks  herself  one  of  the  elect,  is  to  be  found  full  of  wrath 
and  bitterness,  a  slave  of  mischief  and  of  sin,  a  tattler,  a 
slanderer,  a  busybody ;  entering  into  other  people's  houses, 
and  turning  every  thing  like  comfort  out  of  the  minds  of  those 


182  ELIJAH'S    APPEAL   TO    THE    UNDECIDED. 

with  whom  she  comes  in  contact — and  yet  she  is  the  servant 
of  God  and  of  the  devil  too !  Nay,  ray  lady  this  will  never  an- 
swer ;  the  two  never  can  be  served  thoroughly.  Serve  your 
master,  whoever  he  be.  If  you  do  profess  to  be  religious,  be 
so  thoroughly ;  if  you  make  any  profession  to  be  a  Christian, 
be  one;  but  if  you  are  no  Christian,  do  not  2y7'ete)  id  to  be.  If 
you  love  the  world,  then  love  it ;  but  cast  off  the  mask,  and 
do  not  be  a  hypocrite.  The  double-minded  man  is  of  all  men 
the  most  despicable ;  the  follower  of  Janus,  who  wears  two 
faces,  and  who  can  look  with  one  eye  upon  the  (so-called) 
Christian  world  with  great  delight,  and  give  his  subscription 
to  the  Tract  Society,  the  Bible  Society,  and  the  Missionary 
Society,  but  who  has  another  eye  over  there,  with  which  he 
looks  at  the  Casino,  the  Coal-hole,  and  other  pleasures,  which 
I  do  not  care  to  mention,  but  which  some  of  you  may  know 
more  of  than  I  wish  to  know.  Such  a  man,  I  say,  is  worse  than 
the  most  reprobate  of  men,  in  the  opinion  of  any  one  who 
knows  how  to  judge.  Not  worse  in  his  open  character,  but 
worse  really,  because  he  is  not  honest  enough  to  go  through 
with  that  he  professes.  And  how  many  such  are  there  in  Lon- 
don, in  England  ;  everywhere  else  !  They  try  to  serve  both 
masters ;  but  it  can  not  be  ;  the  two  things  can  not  be  recon- 
ciled ;  God  and  Mammon,  Christ  and  Belial,  these  never  can 
meet;  there  never  can  be  an  agreement  between  them,  they 
never  can  be  brought  into  unity,  and  why  should  you  seek  to 
do  it?  "7i(Jo  opinions^^^  said  the  prophet.  He  would  not 
allow  any  of  his  hearers  to  profess  to  worship  both.  "No," 
said  he,  "  these  are  two  opinions,  and  you  are  halting  between 
the  two." 

II.  In  the  second  place,  the  prophet  calls  these  waverers  to 
an  account  for  the  amowit  of  time  v)hich  they  had  consumed 
in  making  their  choice.  Some  of  them  might  have  replied, 
"We  have  not  had  yet  an  opportunity  of  judging  between 
God  and  Baal ;  we  have  not  yet  had  time  enough  to  make  up 
our  minds  ;"  but  the  prophet  puts  away  that  objection,  and  he 
says,  ^^How  long  halt  ye  between  two  opinions  ?  How  long  ? 
For  three  years  and  a  half  not  a  drop  of  rain  has  fallen  at  the 
command  of  Jehovah  ;  is  not  that  proof  enough  ?  Ye  have 
been  all  this  time,  three  years  and  a  half,  expecting,  till  I 


ELIJAH'S    APPEAL   TO    THE    UNDECIDED,  183 

should  come,  Jehovah's  servant,  and  give  you  rain ;  and  yet, 
though  you  yourselves  are  starving,  your  cattle  dead,  your 
fields  parched,  and  your  meadows  covered  with  dust,  like  the 
very  deserts,  yet  all  this  time  of  judgment,  and  trial,  and  af- 
fliction, has  not  been  enough  for  you  to  make  up  your  minds. 
IToio  long^  then,"  said  he,  "  halt  ye  between  two  opinions  ?" 

I  speak  not,  this  morning,  to  the  thoroughly  worldly ;  with 
them  I  have  now  nothing  to  do  ;  another  time  I  may  address 
them.  But  I  am  now  speaking  to  you  who  are  seeking  to 
serve  God  and  to  serve  Satan  ;  you  who  are  trying  to  be 
Christian  worldlings,  trying  to  be  members  of  that  extraor- 
dinary corporation,  called  the  "  religious  world,"  which  is  a 
thing  that  never  had  an  existence  except  in  title.  You  are  en- 
deavoring, if  you  can,  to  make  up  your  mind  which  it  shall  be; 
you  know  you  can  not  serve  both,  and  you  are  coming  now  to 
the  period  when  you  are  saying,  "Which  shall  it  be?  Shall  I 
go  thoroughly  into  sin,  and  revel  in  the  pleasures  of  the  earth, 
or  become  a  servant  of  God  ?"  Now,  I  say  to  you  this  morn- 
ing, as  the  prophet  did,  ''''How  long  halt  ye?"  Some  of  you 
have  been  halting  until  your  hair  has  grown  gray ;  the  sixtieth 
year  of  some  you  is  drawing  nigh.  Is  not  sixty  years  long 
enough  to  make  up  your  choice?  '"'''How  long  halt  ye?" 
Perhaps  one  of  you  may  have  tottered  into  this  place,  leaning 
on  his  staff,  and  you  have  been  undecided  up  till  now.  Your 
eightieth  year  has  come  ;  you  have  been  a  religious  character 
outwardly,  but  a  worldling  truly ;  you  are  still  up  to  this  date 
halting,  saying,  "  I  know  not  on  which  side  to  be."  How 
long,  sirs,  in  the  name  of  reason,  in  the  name  of  mortality,  in 
the  name  of  death,  in  the  name  of  eternity,  "  IIoio  long  halt  ye 
between  two  opinions  ?"  Ye  middle-aged  men,  ye  said  when 
ye  were  youths,  "  When  we  are  out  of  our  apprenticeship  we 
will  become  religious  ;  let  us  sow  our  wild  oats  in  our  youth, 
and  let  us  then  begin  to  be  diligent  servants  of  the  Lord."  Lo ! 
ye  have  come  to  middle  age,  and  are  waiting  till  that  quiet 
villa  shall  be  built,  and  ye  shall  retire  from  business,  and  then 
ye  think  ye  will  serve  God.  Sirs,  ye  said  that  same  when  ye 
came  of  age,  and  when  your  business  began  to  increase.  I 
therefore  solemnly  demand  of  you,  "  How  long  halt  ye  be- 
tween two  opinions  ?''     How  much  time  do  you  want  ?     O ' 


184  ELIJAH'S    APPEAL   TO    THE   UNDECIDED. 

young  man,  thou  saidst  in  thine  early  childhood,  when  a 
mother's  prayer  followed  thee,  "  I  will  seek  God  when  I  come 
to  manhood  ;"  and  thou  hast  passed  that  day ;  thou  art  a 
man,  and  more  than  that,  and  yet  thou  art  halting  still. 
"  How  long  halt  ye  between  two  opinions?"  How  many  of 
you  have  been  church-goers  and  chapel-goers  for  years  !  Ye 
have  been  impressed,  too,  many  a  time,  but  ye  have  wiped  the 
tears  from  your  eyes,  and  have  said,  "  I  will  seek  God  and 
turn  to  him  with  full  purpose  of  heart ;"  and  you  are  now  just 
where  you  were.  How  many  sermons  do  you  want  ?  How 
many  more  Sundays  must  roll  away  wasted  ?  How  many 
warnings,  how  many  sicknesses,  how  many  tollings  of  the  bell 
to  wariv  you  that  you  must  die  ?  How  many  graves  must  be 
dug  for  your  family  before  you  will  be  impressed  ?  How 
many  plagues  and  pestilences  must  ravage  this  city  before  you 
will  turn  to  God  in  truth  ?  "  How  long  halt  ye  between  two 
opinions  ?"  Would  God  ye  could  answer  this  question,  and 
not  allow  the  sands  of  life  to  drop,  drop,  drop  from  the  glass, 
saying,  "  When  the  next  goes  I  will  repent,"  and  yet  that 
next  one  findeth  you  impenitent.  You  say,  "  When  the  glass 
is  just  so  low,  I  will  turn  to  God."  No,  sir,  no  ;  it  will  not 
answer  for  you  to  talk  so ;  for  thou  may  est  find  thy  glass 
empty  before  thou  thoughtest  it  had  begun  to  run  low,  and 
thou  mayest  find  thyself  in  eternity  Tvhen  thou  didst  but 
think  of  repenting  and  turning  to  God.  How  long,  ye  gray 
heads,  how  long,  ye  men  of  ripe  years,  how  long,  ye  youths 
and  maidens,  how  long  will  ye  be  in  this  undecided,  unhappy 
state  ?     "  How  long  halt  ye  between  two  opinions  ?" 

Thus  we  have  brought  you  so  far.  We  have  noted  that 
there  are  two  opinions,  and  we  have  asked  the  question.  How 
long  time  you  want  to  decide  ?  One  would  think  the  question 
would  require  very  little  time,  if  time  were  all ;  if  the  will 
were  not  biassed  to  evil  and  contrary  to  good,  it  would  re- 
quire no  more  time  than  the  decision  of  a  man  who  has  to 
choose  a  halter  or  life,  wealth  or  poverty ;  and  if  we  were 
wise,  it  would  take  no  time  at  all;  if  we  understood  the 
things  of  God,  we  should  not  hesitate,  but  say  at  once,  "  Now 
God  is  my  God,  and  that  for  ever." 

HI.  But  the  prophet  charges  these  people  loith  the  absurdity 


ELIJAH'S    APPEAL   TO    THE    UNDECIDED.  185 

of  their positim.  Some  of  them  said,  "  What !  prophet,  may 
we  not  continue  to  halt  between  two  opinions  ?  We  are  not 
desperately  irreligious,  so  we  are  better  than  the  profane-, 
certainly  we  are  not  thoroughly  pious ;  but,  at  any  rate,  a  lit- 
tle piety  is  better  than  none,  and  the  mere  profession  of  it 
keeps  us  decent,  let  us  try  both  !"  "  Now,"  says  the  prophet, 
"  how  long  halt  ye  ?"  or,  if  you  like  to  read  it  so,  "  how  long 
limp  ye  between  two  opinions  ?"  (How  long  loriggle  ye  be- 
tween two  opinions  ?  would  be  a  good  word,  if  I  might  em- 
ploy it.)  He  represents  them  as  like  a  man  whose  legs  are 
entirely  out  of  joint ;  he  first  goes  on  one  side,  and  then  on 
the  other,  and  can  not  go  far  either  way.  I  could  not  de- 
scribe it  without  putting  myself  into  a  most  ludicrous  posture. 
"  How  long  Urn}?  ye  between  two  opinions  ?"  The  prophet 
laughs  at  them,  as  it  were.  And  is  it  not  true,  tliat  a  man 
who  is  neither  one  thing  or  another  is  in  a  most  absurd  posi- 
tion ?  Let  him  go  among  the  worldUngs  ;  they  laugh  under 
their  sleeve,  and  say,  "  This  is  one  of  the  Exeter  Plall  saints," 
or,  "  Thrft  is  one  of  the  elect."  Let  him  go  among  the  Chris- 
tian people,  those  that  are  saints,  and  they  say,  "  How  a  man 
can  be  so  inconsistent,  how  he  can  come  into  our  midst  one 
day,  and  the  next  be  found  in  such  and  such  society,  we  can 
not  tell."  Methinks  even  the  devil  himself  must  laugh  at 
such  a  man  in  scorn.  "There,"  says  he,  "I  am  every  thing 
that  is  bad  ;  I  do  sometimes  pretend  to  be  an  angel  of  light, 
and  put  on  that  garb ;  but  you  do  really  excell  me  in  every 
respect,  for  I  do  it  to  get  something  by  it,  but  you  do  not 
get  any  thing  by  it.  You  do  not  have  the  pleasures  of 
this  world,  and  you  do  not  have  the  pleasures  of  religion 
either ;  you  have  the  fears  of  religion  without  its  hopes  ;  you 
are  afraid  to  do  wrong,  and  yet  you  have  no  hope  of  heaven ; 
you  have  the  duties  of  religion  without  the  joys  ;  you  have  to 
do  just  as  religious  people  do,  and  yet  there  is  no  heart  in  tlie 
matter ;  you  have  to  sit  down,  and  see  the  table  all  spread  be- 
tbre  you,  and  then  you  have  not  power  to  eat  a  single  morsel 
of  the  precious  dainties  of  the  gospel."  It  is  just  the  same 
with  the  world  ;  you  dare  not  go  into  this  or  that  miscliief 
that  brings  joy  to  the  wicked  man's  heart;  you  think  of  what 
society  would  say      We  do  not  know  what  to  make  of  you. 


18fl  ELIJAH'S    APPEAL   TO   THE    UNDECIDED. 

I  might  describe  you,  if  I  might  sjoeak  as  the  Americans  do, 
but  I  will  not.  Ye  are  half  one  thing,  and  half  the  other. 
You  come  into  the  society  of  the  saints,  and  try  to  talk  as  they 
talk  ;  but  you  are  like  a  man  who  has  been  taught  French  in 
some  day-school  in  England  ;  he  makes  a  queer  sort  of  French- 
ified English,  and  Englishized  French,  and  every  one  laughs  at 
him.  The  English  laugh  at  him  for  trying  to  do  it,  and  the 
French  laugh  at  him  for  failing  in  it.  If  you  spoke  your  own 
language,  if  you  just  spoke  out  as  a  sinner,  if  you  professed  to 
be  what  you  are,  you  would  at  least  get  the  respect  of  one 
side ;  but  now  you  are  rejected  by  one  class,  and  equally  re- 
jected by  the  other.  You  come  into  our  midst,  we  can  not 
receive  you;  you  go  amongst  worldlings,  they  reject  you  too  ; 
you  are  too  good  for  them,  and  too  bad  for  us.  Where  are 
you  to  be  put  ?  If  there  were  a  purgatory,  that  would  be  the 
place  for  you  ;  where  you  might  be  tossed  on  the  one  side 
into  ice,  and  on  the  other  into  the  burning  fire,  and  that  for 
ever.  But  as  there  is  no  such  place  as  j^urgatory,  and  as  you 
really  are  a  servant  of  Satan,  and  not  a  child  of  God,  take 
heed,  take  heed,  how  long  you  stay  in  a  position  so  absurdly 
ridiculous.  At  the  day  of  judgment,  wavering  men  will  be 
the  scofiTand  the  laughter  even  of  hell.  The  angels  will  look 
down  in  scorn  upon  the  man  who  was  ashamed  to  own  his 
Master  thoroughly,  while  hell  itself  will  ring  with  laughter. 
When  that  grand  hypocrite  shall  come  there — that  undecided 
man,  they  will  say,  "Aha!  we  have  to  drink  the  dregs,  but 
above  them  there  were  sweets  ;  you  have  only  the  di-egs.  You 
dare  not  go  into  the  riotous  and  boisterous  mirth  of  our 
youthful  days,  and  now  you  have  come  here  with  us  to  drink 
the  same  dregs ;  you  have  the  punishment  without  the  plea- 
sure." O  !  how  foolish  will  even  the  damned  call  you,  to 
think  that  you  halted  between  two  opinions  !  "  How  long 
limp  ye,  wriggle  ye,  walk  ye  in  an  absurd  manner,  between 
two  opinions?"  In.  adopting  either  opinion,  you  would  at 
least  be  consistent ;  but  in  trying  to  hold  both,  to  seek  to  be 
both  one  and  the  other,  and  not  knowing  which  to  decide 
upon,  you  are  limping  between  two  opinions.  I  think  a  good 
translation  is  a  very  different  one  from  that  of  the  authorized 
version — "  How  long  hop  ye  upon  two  sprays  ?"      So  tha 


ELIJAH'S    APPEAL   TO    THE    UNDECIDED.  187 

Hebrew  lias  it.  Like  a  bird,  wliich  perpetually  flies  from 
bouf(h  to  bongh,  and  is  never  still.  If  it  keeps  on  doing  this, 
It  will  never  have  a  nest.  And  so  Avith  you :  you  keep  leaping 
between  two  boughs,  from  one  opinion  to  the  other  ;  and  so 
between  the  two,  you  get  no  rest  for  the  sole  of  your  foot,  no 
peace,  no  joy,  no  comfort,  but  are  just  a  poor  miserable  thing 
all  your  hfe  long. 

IV.  We  have  brought  you  thus  far,  then  ;  we  have  shown 
you  the  absurdity  of  this  halting.  N'ow,  very  briefly,  the  next 
point  in  my  text  is  this.  The  multitude  who  had  worshiped 
Jehovah  and  Baal,  and  who  were  now  undecided,  might  reply, 
"  But  how  do  you  knoio  that  «/;e  do  not  believe  that  Jehovah  is 
God  f  Hoio  do  yon  knoio  v^e  are  not  decided  in  opinion  .^" 
The  prophet  meets  this  objection  by  saying,  "  I  know  you  are 
not  decided  in  opinion,  because  you  are  not  decided  in  prac- 
tice. If  God  be  God, /b/^c»?o  him  ;  if  Baal,/b^^M^  him.  You 
are  not  decided  in  practice."  Men's  opinions  are  not  such 
things  as  we  imagine.  It  is  generally  said  now-a-days,  that  all 
opinions  are  right,  and  if  a  man  shall  honestly  hold  his  con- 
victions, he  is,  without  doubt,  right.  Not  so  ;  truth  is  not 
changed  by  our  opinions ;  a  thing  is  either  true  or  false  of  it- 
self, and  it  is  neither  made  true  nor  false  by  our  views  of  it.  It 
is  for  us,  therefore,  to  judge  carefully,  and  not  to  think  that 
any  opinion  will  do.  Besides,  opinions  have  influence  upon 
the  conduct,  and  if  a  man  have  a  wrong  opinion,  he  will,  most 
likely,  in  some  way  or  other,  have  wrong  conduct,  for  the  two 
usually  go  together.  "  Xow,"  said  Elijah,  "  that  you  are  not 
the  servants  of  God,  is  quite  evident,  for  you  do  not  follow 
him  ;  that  you  are  not  thoroughly  servants  of  Baal  either,  is 
quite  evident,  for  you  do  not  follow  him."  Now  I  address 
myself  to  you  again.  Many  of  you  are  not  the  servants  of 
God  ;  you  do  not  follow  him ;  you  follow  him  a  certain  dis- 
tance in  the  form,  but  not  in  the  spirit ;  you  follow  him  on 
Sundays  ;  but  what  do  you  do  on  Mondays?  You  follow  him 
in  religious  company,  in  evangelical  drawing-rooms,  and  so  on ; 
but  what  do  you  do  in  other  society?  You  do  not  follow 
him.  And,  on  the  other  hand,  you  do  not  follow  Baal;  you 
go  a  little  way  with  the  world,  but  tliere  is  a  place  to  which 
you  dare  not  go ;  you  are  too  respectable  to  sin  as  others  sin, 


188  ELIJAH'S    APPEAL   TO   THE   UNDECIDED. 

or  to  go  the  whole  way  of  the  world.  Ye  dare  not  go  to  the 
utmost  lengths  of  evil.  "  Now,"  says  the  prophet,  twitting 
them  upon  this — "  if  the  Lord  be  God,  follow  him.  Let  your 
conduct  be  consistent  with  your  opinions  ;  if  you  believe  the 
Lord  to  be  God,  carry  it  out  in  your  daily  life  ;  be  holy,  be 
prayerful,  trust  in  Christ,  be  faithful,  be  upright,  be  loving ; 
give  your  heart  to  God,  and  follow  him.  If  Baal  be  God,  then 
follow  him ;  but  do  not  pretend  to  follow  the  other."  Let 
your  conduct  back  up  your  opinion  ;  if  you  really  think  that 
the  follies  of  this  world  are  the  best,  and  believe  that  a  line 
fashionable  life,  a  hfe  of  frivolity  and  gayety,  flying  from  flower 
to  flower,  getting  honey  from  none,  is  the  most  desirable,  carry 
it  out.  If  you  think  the  life  of  the  debauchee  is  so  very  desir- 
able, if  you  think  his  end  is  to  be  much  wished  for,  if  you  think 
his  pleasures  are  right,  follow  them.  Go  the  whole  way  with 
them.  If  you  believe  that  to  cheat  in  business  is  right,  put  it 
up  over  your  door — "  I  sell  trickery  goods  here  ;"  or  if  you  do 
not  say  it  to  the  public,  tell  your  conscience  so ;  but  do  not 
deceive  the  public;  do  not  call  the  people  to  prayers  when 
you  are  opening  a  "  British  Bank."  If  you  mean  to  be  religi- 
ous, follow  out  your  determination  thoroughly ;  but  if  you  mean 
to  be  worldly,  go  the  whole  way  with  the  world.  Let  your 
conduct  follow  out  your  opinions.  Make  your  life  tally  with 
your  profession.  Carry  out  your  opinions  whatever  they  be. 
But  you  dare  not ;  you  are  too  cowardly  to  sin  as  others  do, 
honestly  before  God's  sun  ;  your  conscience  will  not  let  you 
do  it — and  yet  you  are  just  so  fond  of  Satan,  that  you  dare  not 
leave  him  wholly  and  become  thoroughly  the  servants  of  God. 
O  do  not  let  your  character  be  like  your  profession  ;  either 
keep  up  your  profession,  or  give  it  up :  do  be  one  thing  or 
the  other. 

Y.  And  now  the  prophet  cries,  "  If  the  Lord  be  God,  follow 
him ;  if  Baal,  then  follow  him,"  and  in  so  doing,  he  states  the 
grotmd  of  his  practical  claim.  Let  your  conduct  be  con- 
sistent with  your  opinions.  There  is  another  objection  raised 
by  the  crowd.  "  Prophet,"  says  one,  "  thou  comest  to  de- 
mand a  practical  proof  of  our  afi*ection  ;  thou  sayest.  Follow 
God.  Now,  if  I  believe  God  to  be  God,  and  that  is  my 
opinion,  yet  I  do  not  see  what  claim  he  has  to  my  opinions.'* 


ELIJAH'S    APPEAL   TO   THE   UNDECIDED.  189 

Now,  mark  how  the  prophet  puts  it :  he  says,  "  If  God  be 
Gody  follow  him."  The  reason  why  I  claim  that  you  sliould 
follow  out  your  opinion  concerning  God  is,  that  God  is  God  ; 
God  has  a  claim  upon  you,  as  creatures,  for  your  devout  obe- 
dience. One  person  replies,  "What  profit  should  I  have,  if  I 
served  God  thoroughly  ?  Should  I  be  more  happy  ?  Should 
I  get  on  better  in  this  world  ?  Should  I  have  more  peace  of 
mind  ?"  Nay,  nay,  that  is  a  secondary  consideration.  The 
only  question  for  you  is,  "  If  God  be  God  follow  him."  Not 
if  it  be  more  advantageous  to  you;  but,  "  if  God  be  God,  follow 
him."  The  secularist  would  plead  for  religion  on  the  ground 
that  religion  might  be  the  best  for  this  world,  and  best  for  the 
world  to  come.  Not  so  with  the  prophet ;  he  says,  "  I  do  not 
put  it  on  that  ground,  I  insist  that  it  is  your  bounden  duty,  if  you 
believe  in  God,  simply  because  he  is  God,  to  serve  him  and  obey 
him.  I  do  not  tell  you  it  is  for  your  advantage — it  may  be,  I 
believe  it  is — but  that  I  put  aside  from  the  question ;  I  demand 
of  you  that  you  follow  God,  if  you  believe  him  to  be  God.  If 
you  do  not  tliink  he  is  God ;  if  you  really  think  that  the  devil  is 
God,  then  follow  him;  his  pretended  godhead  shall  be  your  plea, 
and  you  shall  be  consistent ;  but  if  God  be  God,  if  he  made 
you,  I  demand  that  you  serve  him ;  if  it  is  he  who  puts  the 
breath  into  your  nostrils,  I  demand  that  you  obey  him.  If 
God  be  really  worthy  of  your  worship,  and  you  really  think 
so,  I  demand  that  you  either  follow  him,  or  else  deny  that  he 
is  God  at  all."  Now,  professor,  if  thou  say  est  that  Christ's 
gospel  is  the  gospel,  if  thou  believest  in  the  divinity  of  the 
gospel,  and  puttest  thy  trust  in  Christ,  I  demand  of  thee  to 
follow  out  the  gospel,  not  merely  because  it  will  be  to  thy  ad- 
vantage, but  because  the  gospel  is  divine.  If  thou  makest  a 
profession  of  being  a  child  of  God,  if  thou  art  a  believer,  and 
thinkest  and  believest  religion  is  the  best,  the  service  of  God 
the  most  desirable,  I  do  not  come  to  plead  with  thee  because 
of  any  advantage  thou  wouldst  get  by  being  holy  ;  it  is  on  this 
ground  that  I  put  it,  that  the  Lord  is  God  ;  and  if  he  be  God, 
it  is  thy  business  to  serve  him.  If  his  gospel  be  true,  and  tliou 
believest  it  to  be  true,  it  is  thy  duty  to  carry  it  out.  If  thou 
sayest  Christ  is  not  the  Son  of  God,  carry  out  thy  Jewish  or 
thy  infidel  convictions,  and  see  whether  it  will  end  well.     If 


190  ELIJAH'S    APPEAL   TO   THE    UNEECIDED. 

thou  dost  not  believe  Christ  to  be  the  Son  of  God,  if  thou  art  a 
Mohammedan,  be  consistent,  carry  out  thy  Mohammedan  con- 
victions, and  see  whether  it  will  end  well.  But,  take  heed, 
take  heed  !  If,  however,  thou  sayest  God  is  God,  and  Christ 
the  Saviour,  and  the  gospel  true  ;  I  demand  of  thee,  only  on 
this  account,  that  thou  carry  it  out.  What  a  strong  plea  some 
would  think  the  prophet  might  have  had,  if  he  had  said,  "God 
is  your  fathers'  God,  therefore  follow  him !"  But  no,  he  did 
not  come  down  to  that ;  he  said,  "  If  God  be  God — I  do  not 
care  whether  he  be  your  fathers'  God  or  not — follow  him." 
"  Why  do  you  go  to  chapel  ?"  says  one,  "  and  not  to  church  ?" 
"  Because  my  father  and  grandfather  were  dissenters."  Ask 
a  churchman,  very  often,  why  he  attends  the  establishment. 
"  Well,  our  family  were  always  brought  up  to  it ;  that  is  why 
I  go."  Now,  I  do  think  that  the  worst  of  all  reasons  for  a 
particular  religion,  is  that  of  our  being  brought  up  to  it.  I 
never  could  see  that  at  all.  I  have  attended  the  house  of  God 
wdth  my  father  and  my  grandfather;  but  I  thought,  when  I  read 
the  Scriptures,  that  it  was  my  business  to  judge  for  myself  I 
knew  that  my  father  and  my  grandfather  took  little  children 
in  their  arms,  and  put  drops  of  water  on  their  faces,  and  they 
were  baptized.  I  took  up  my  Bible,  and  I  could  not  see  any 
thing  about  babes  being  baptized.  I  picked  up  a  little  Greek ; 
and  I  could  not  discover  that  the  word  "  baptized"  meant  to 
sprinkle ;  so  I  said  to  myself,  "  Suppose  they  are  good  men, 
they  may  be  wrong ;  and  though  I  love  and  revere  them,  yet 
it  is  no  reason  why  I  should  imitate  them."  And  therefore  I 
left  them,  and  became  what  I  am  to-day,  a  Baptist  minister, 
so  called,  but  I  hope  a  great  deal  more  a  Christian  than  a 
Baptist.  It  is  seldom  I  mention  it ;  I  only  do  so  by  way  of 
illustration  here.  Many  a  one  will  go  to  chapel,  because  his 
grandmother  did.  Well,  she  was  a  good  old  soul,  but  I  do 
not  see  that  she  ought  to  influence  your  judgment.  "  That 
does  not  signify,"  says  one,  "  I  do  not  like  to  leave  the  church 
of  my  fathers."  No  more  do  I ;  I  would  rather  belong  to  the 
same  denomination  wdth  my  father ;  I  would  not  willfully  difier 
from  any  of  my  friends,  or  leave  their  sect  and  denomination  ; 
but  let  God  be  above  our  parents;  though  our  parents  are  at  the 
very  top  of  our  hearts,  and  we  love  them  and  reverence  them, 


ELIJAH'S    APPEAL   TO    THE   UNDECIDED.  191 

and  in  all  other  matters  pay  them  strict  obedience,  yet,  with 
regard  to  religion,  to  our  own  Master  we  stand  or  fall,  and  we 
claim  to  have  the  right  of  judging  for  ourselves  as  men,  and 
then  we  think  it  our  duty,  having  judged,  to  carry  out  our 
convictions.  Now  I  am  not  going  to  say,  "  If  God  be  your 
mother's  God,  serve  him  ;"  though  that  would  be  a  very  good 
argument  with  some  of  you  ;  but  with  you  wavererSj  the  only 
plea  I  use  is,  "  If  God  be  God,  serve  him ;"  if  the  gospel  be 
right,  believe  it ;  if  a  religious  life  be  right,  carry  it  out ;  if  not, 
give  it  up.  I  only  put  my  argument  on  Elijah's  plea — "  If  God 
be  God,  follow  him;  but  if  Baal,  then  follow  him." 

VI.  And  now  I  make  my  appeal  to  the  halters  and  waver- 
ers,  with  some  questions,  which  I  pray  the  Lord  to  apply. 
Now  I  will  put  this  question  to  them:  '■''How  long  halt  yeP'' 
I  will  tell  them  ;  ye  will  halt  between  two  opinions,  all  of  you 
who  are  undecided,  until  God  shall  answer  by  fire.  Fire  was 
not  what  these  poor  people  wanted  that  were  assembled  there. 
When  Elijah  says,  that  "  the  God  that  answereth  by  lire  let 
him  be  God,"  I  fancy  I  hear  some  of  them  saying,  "  No  ;  the 
God  that  answereth  by  water  let  him  be  God  ;  we  want  rain 
badly  enough."  "  No,"  said  Elijah,  "  if  rain  should  come, 
you  would  say  that  it  was  the  common  course  of  providence ; 
and  that  would  not  decide  you."  I  tell  you,  all  the  provi- 
dences that  befill  you  undecided  ones  will  not  decide  you. 
God  may  surround  you  with  providences ;  he  may  surround 
you  with  frequent  warnings  from  the  death-bed  of  your  fel- 
lows ;  but  providences  will  never  decide  you.  It  is  not  the 
God  of  rain,  but  the  God  of  fire  that  will  do  it.  There  are 
two  ways  in  which  you  undecided  ones  will  be  decided  by- 
and-bye.  You  that  are  decided  for  God  will  want  no  de- 
cision ;  you  that  are  decided  for  Satan  will  want  no  decision  ; 
you  are  on  Satan's  side,  and  must  dwell  for  ever  in  eternal 
burning.  But  these  undecided  ones  want  something  to  de- 
cide them,  and  will  have  either  one  of  the  two  things  ;  they 
will  either  have  the  fire  of  God's  Spirit  to  decide  them,  or  else 
the  fire  of  eternal  judgment,  and  that  will  decide  them.  I 
may  preach  to  you,  my  hearers  ;  and  all  the  ministers  in  the 
world  may  preach  to  you  that  are  wavering,  but  you  will 
never  decide  for  God  through   the   force  of  your  own    will. 


192  ELIJAH'S    APPEAL   TO   THE   UNDECIDED. 

None  of  you,  if  left  to  your  natural  judgment,  to  the  use  of 
your  own  reason,  will  ever  decide  for  God.  You  may  decide 
for  him  merely  as  an  outward  form,  but  not  as  an  inward 
spiritual  thing,  which  should  possess  your  heart  as  a  Christian, 
as  a  believer  in  the  doctrine  of  effectual  grace.  I  know  that 
none  of  you  will  ever  decide  for  God's  gospel,  unless  God  de- 
cide you  ;  and  I  tell  you  that  you  must  either  be  decided  by 
the  descent  of  the  fire  of  his  Spirit  into  your  hearts  now,  or 
else  in  the  day  of  judgment.  O !  which  shall  it  be  ?  O  ! 
that  the  prayer  might  be  put  up  by  the  thousand  lips  that  are 
here :  "  Lord,  decide  me  now  by  the  fire  of  thy  Spirit ;  O ! 
let  thy  Spirit  descend  into  my  heart,  to  burn  up  the  bullock, 
that  I  may  be  a  whole  burnt  offering  to  God  ;  to  burn  up  the 
wood  and  the  stones  of  my  sin  ;  to  burn  up  the  very  dust  of 
worldliness ;  ah,  and  to  lick  up  the  water  of  my  impiety, 
which  now  lieth  in  the  trenches,  and  my  cold  indifference, 
that  seek  to  put  out  the  sacrifice." 

"  0  make  this  heart  rejoice  or  ache ! 
Decide  this  doubt  for  me ; 
And  if  it  be  not  broken,  break, 
And  heal  it,  if  it  be. 

"  0  sovereign  grace,  my  heart  subdue ; 
I  would  be  led  in  triumph  too, 
A  willing  captive  to  my  Lord, 
To  sing  the  triumphs  of  his  word." 

And  it  may  be,  that  whilst  I  speak,  the  mighty  fire,  unseen  by 
men,  and  unfelt  by  the  vast  majority  of  you,  shall  descend 
into  some  heart  which  has  of  old  been  dedicated  to  God  by 
his  divine  election,  which  is  now  like  an  altar  broken  down, 
but  which  God,  by  his  free  grace,  will  this  day  build  up.  O  ! 
I  pray  that  that  influence  may  enter  into  some  hearts,  that 
there  may  be  some  go  out  of  this  place,  saying, 

"  'Tis  done,  the  great  transaction's  done, 
I  am  my  Lord's,  and  he  is  mine  ; 
He  drew  me,  and  I  followed  on, 
Glad  to  obey  the  voice  divine." 


*'  Now  rest,  my  undivided  heart. 
Fixed  on  this  stable  center,  rest." 


ELIJAH'S    APPEAL   TO    THE    UNDECIDED.  193 

O !  that  many  may  say  that !  But  remember,  if  it  be  not  so, 
the  day  is  coming — dies  iroe^  the  day  of  wrath  and  anger — 
when  ye  shall  be  decided  of  God ;  when  the  firmament  shall 
be  lit  up  with  lightnings,  when  the  earth  shall  roll  with 
drunken  terror,  when  the  pillars  of  the  universe  shall  shake, 
and  God  shall  sit,  in  the  person  of  his  Son,  to  judge  the  world 
in  righteousness.  You  will  not  be  undecided  then,  when, 
*'  Depart  ye  cursed,"  or  "  Come,  ye  blessed,"  shall  be  your 
doom.  There  will  be  no  indecision  then,  when  you  shall  meet 
him  with  joy  or  else  with  terror — when,  "rocks  hide  me, 
mountains  on  me  fall,"  shall  be  your  doleful  shriek ;  or  else 
your  joyful  song  shall  be,  "  The  Lord  is  come."  In  that  day 
you  will  be  decided  ;  but  till  then,  unless  the  living  fire  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  decide  you,  you  will  go  on  halting  between  two 
opinions.  May  God  grant  you  his  Holy  Spirit,  that  you  may 
turn  unto  him  and  be  saved  ! 

9 


SERMON     XIII. 
SALVATION    OF    THE    LORD. 

"  Salvation  is  of  the  Lord."  — Jonah,  ii.  9. 

Jonah  learned  this  sentence  of  good  theology  in  a  strange 
college.  He  learned  it  in  the  whale's  belly,  at  the  bottom  of 
the  mountains,  with  the  weeds  wrapped  about  his  head,  when 
he  supposed  that  the  earth  with  her  bars  was  about  him  for 
ever.  Most  of  the  grand  truths  of  God  have  to  be  learned 
by  trouble ;  they  must  be  burned  into  us  with  the  hot  iron  of 
affliction,  otherwise  we  shall  not  truly  receiA^e  them.  No  man 
is  competent  to  judge  in  matters  of  the  kingdom,  until  first  he 
has  been  tried ;  since  there  are  many  things  to  be  learned  in 
the  depths  which  w^e  can  never  know  in  the  heights.  We 
discover  many  secrets  in  the  caverns  of  the  ocean,  which, 
though  we  had  soared  to  heaven,  we  never  could  have  known. 
He  shall  best  meet  the  wants  of  God's  people  as  a  preacher 
who  has  had  those  wants  himself;  he  shall  best  comfort  God's 
Israel  who  has  needed  comfort ;  and  he  shall  best  preach  sal- 
vation who  has  felt  his  own  need  of  it.  Jonah,  when  he  was 
delivered  from  his  great  danger,  when,  by  the  command  of 
God  the  fish  had  obediently  left  its  great  deeps  and  delivered 
its  cargo  upon  dry  land,  was  then  capable  of  judging;  and 
this  was  the  result  of  his  experience  under  his  trouble — "  Sal- 
vation is  of  the  Lord." 

By  salvation  here  we  do  not  merely  understand  t'he  special 
salvation  which  Jonah  received  from  death ;  for  according  to 
Dr.  Gill,  there  is  something  so  special  in  the  original,  in  the 
word  salvation  having  one  more  letter  than  it  usually  has, 
when  it  only  refers  to  some  temporary  deliverance,  that  we 
can  only  understand  it  here  as  relating  to  the  great  work  of 
the  salvation  of  the  soul  which  endureth  for  ever.     That  "  sal- 


SAXVATION    OF    THE    LORD.  195 

vation  is  of  the  Lord,"  I  sliall  this  morning  try  to  show  as  best 
I  can.  First,  I  shall  endeavor  to  explain  the  doctrine  /  then  I 
shall  try  to  show  you  hoio  God  has  guarded  us  from  making 
any  mistakes^  and  has  hedged  us  up  to  make  us  believe  the  gos- 
'pel ;  then  I  shall  dwell  upon  the  influence  of  this  truth  y2)07i 
men;  and  shall  close  up  by  showing  you  the  counterpart  of 
the  doctrine.  Seeing  every  truth  hath  its  obverse,  so  hath 
this. 

I.  First,  then,  to  begin  by  ex]  lanation,  let  us  expound  this 
DOCTKiNE — the  doctrine  that  sa  vation  is  of  the  Lord,  or  of 
Jehovah.  We  are  to  understand  by  this,  that  the  whole  of 
the  work  whereby  men  are  saved  from  their  natural  estate  of 
sin  and  ruin,  and  are  translated  into  the  kingdom  of  God  and 
made  heirs  of  eternal  happiness,  is  of  God,  and  of  him  only. 
"  Salvation  is  of  the  Lord." 

To  begin,  then,  at  the  beginning,  the  plan  of  salvation  is 
entirely  of  God.  No  human  intellect  and  no  created  intelli- 
gence assisted  God  in  the  planning  of  salvation ;  he  contrived 
the  way,  even  as  he  himself  carried  it  out.  The  plan  of  salva- 
tion was  devised  before  the  existence  of  angels.  Before  the 
day-star  flung  its  ray  across  the  darkness,  when  as  yet  the  un- 
navigated  ether  had  not  been  fanned  by  the  wing  of  seraph, 
and  when  the  solemnity  of  silence  had  never  been  disturbed 
by  the  song  of  angel,  God  had  devised  a  way  whereby  he 
might  save  man,  whom  he  foresaw  would  fall.  He  did  not 
create  angels  to  consult  with  them ;  no,  of  himself  he  did  it. 
We  might  truly  ask  the  question,  "  With  whom  took  he  coun- 
sel ?  Who  instructed  him,  when  he  planned  the  great  archi- 
tecture of  the  temple  of  mercy  ?  With  whom  took  he  counsel 
w^hen  he  digged  the  deeps  of  love,  that  out  of  them  there 
might  well  up  springs  of  salvation  ?  Who  aided  him  ?" 
None.  He  himself,  alone,  did  it.  In  fact,  if  angels  had  then 
been  in  existence,  they  could  not  have  assisted  God  ;  for  I  can 
well  suppose  that  if  a  solemn  conclave  of  those  spirits  had 
been  held,  if  God  had  put  to  them  this  question,  "  Man  will 
rebel;  I  declare  I  will  punish;  my  justice,  inflexible  and 
severe,  demands  that  I  should  do  so;  but  yet  I  intend  to  have 
mercy  ;"  if  he  had  put  the  question  to  the  celestial  squadrons 
of  mighty  ones,  "  How  can  those  things  be  ?     How  can  justice 


196  SALVATION    OF   THE   LOED. 

have  its  demands  fulfilled,  and  how  can  mercy  reign  ?"  the 
angels  would  have  sat  in  silence  until  now;  they  could  not 
have  dictated  the  plan ;  it  would  have  surpassed  angelic  intel- 
lect to  have  conceived  the  way  whereby  righteousness  and 
peace  should  meet  together,  and  judgment  and  mercy  should 
kiss  each  other.  God  devised  it,  because  without  God  it  could 
not  have  been  devised.  It  is  a  plan  too  splendid  to  have  been 
the  product  of  any  mind  except  of  that  mind  which  afterward 
carried  it  out.  "  Salvation"  i^  older  than  creation  ;  it  is  "  of 
the  Lord." 

And  as  it  was  of  the  Lord  in  planning  so  it  was  of  the  Lord 
in  execution.  No  one  has  helped  to  provide  salvation ;  God 
has  done  it  all  himself.  The  banquet  of  mercy  is  served  up 
by  one  host ;  that  host  is  he  to  whom  the  cattle  on  a  thousand 
hills  belong.  But  non«3  have  contributed  any  dainties  to  that 
royal  banquet ;  he  hath  done  it  all  himself.  The  royal  bath 
of  mercy,  wherein  black  souls  are  washed,  was  filled  from  the 
veins  of  Jesus ;  not  a  drop  was  contributed  by  any  other 
being.  He  died  upon  the  cross,  and  as  an  expiator  he  died 
alone.  No  blood  of  martyrs  mingled  with  that  stream ;  no 
blood  of  noble  confessors  and  of  heroes  of  the  cross  entered 
into  the  river  of  atonement ;  that  is  filled  from  the  veins  of 
Christ,  and  from  nowhere  else  beside.  He  hath  done  it  wholly. 
Atonement  is  the  unaided  work  of  Jesus.  On  yonder  cross  I 
see  the  man  who  "  trod  the  winepress  alone  ;"  in  yonder  gar- 
den I  see  the  solitary  conqueror,  who  came  to  the  fight  single- 
handed,  whose  own  arm  brought  salvation,  and  whose  omnip- 
otence sustained  him.  "  Salvation  is  of  the  Lord,"  as  to  its 
provisions  ;  Jehovah — Father,  Son,  and  Spirit — hath  provided 
every  thing. 

So  far  we  are  all  agreed :  but  now  we  shall  have  to  separate 
a  bit.  "  Salvation  is  of  the  Lord,"  in  the  applicatimi  of  it. 
"  No,"  says  the  Arminian,  "  it  is  not ;  salvation  is  of  the  Lord, 
inasmuch  as  he  does  all  for  man  that  he  can  do ;  but  there  is 
sometbing  that  man  must  do,  which  if  he  does  not  do,  he  must 
perish."  That  is  the  Arminian  way  of  salvation.  Now  last 
week  I  thought  of  this  very  theory  of  salvation,  when  I  stood 
by  the  side  of  that  window  of  Carisbrooke  castle,  out  of  which 
King  Charles  of  unhappy  ard  unrighteous  memory,  attempted 


SALVATION    OF   Tili   LORD.  197 

to  escape.  I  read  in  the  guide  book  that  every  thing  was  pro- 
vided for  his  escape ;  his  followers  had  means  at  the  bottom 
of  the  wall  to  enable  him  to  fly  across  the  country,  and  on  tlie 
coast  they  had  their  boats  lying  ready  to  take  him  to  another 
land  ;  in  fact  every  thing  was  ready  for  his  escape.  But  here 
M-as  the  important  circumstance  :  his  friends  had  done  all  they 
could  ;  he  w^as  to  do  the  rest ;  but  that  doing  the  rest  was 
just  the  point  and  brunt  of  the  battle.  It  was  to  get  out  of 
the  window,  out  of  which  he  was  not  able  to  escape  by  any 
means,  so  that  all  his  friends  did  for  hun  went  for  nothing,  so 
far  as  he  was  concerned.  So  with  the  sinner.  If  God  had 
provided  every  means  of  escape,  and  only  required  him  to  get 
out  of  his  dungeon,  he  would  have  remained  there  to  all  eter- 
nity. Why,  is  not  the  sinner  by  nature  dead  in  sin  ?  And  if 
God  requires  him  to  make  himself  alive,  and  then  afterward 
he  will  do  the  rest  for  him,  then  verily,  my  friends,  we  are  not 
so  much  obliged  to  God  as  we  had  thought  for;  for  if  he  re- 
quire so  much  as  that  of  us,  and  we  can  do  it,  w'e  can  do  the 
rest  without  his  assistance.  The  Romanists  have  an  extraor- 
dinary miracle  of  their  own  about  St.  Dennis,  of  whom  they 
tell  the  lying  legend  that  after  his  head  was  off  he  took  it  up  in 
his  hands  and  walked  with  it  two  thousand  miles ;  whereupon, 
said  a  wit,  "  So  flir  as  the  two  thousand  miles  go,  it  is  nothing 
at  all ;  it  is  only  the  first  step  in  which  there  is  any  difficulty." 
So  I  believe,  if  that  is  taken,  all  the  rest  can  be  easily  accom- 
plished. And  if  God  does  rei^iire  of  the  sinner — dead  in  sin 
— that  he  should  take  the  first  step,  then  he  requireth  just 
that  which  renders  salvation  as  impossible  under  the  gospel  as 
ever  it  was  under  the  law,  seeing  man  is  as  unable  to  believe 
as  he  is  to  obey,  and  is  just  as  much  without  power  to  come 
to  Christ  as  he  is  without  power  to  go  to  heaven  without 
Christ.  The  power  must  be  given  to  him  of  the  Spirit.  TT(i 
lieth  dead  in  sin  ;  the  Spirit  must  quicken  liim.  He  is  bound 
hand  and  foot  and  fettered  by  transgression  ;  the  Spirit  must 
cut  his  bonds,  and  then  he  will  leap  to  liberty.  God  must 
come  and  dash  the  iron  bars  out  of  their  sockets,  and  then  he 
can  escape  from  the  window,  and  make  good  his  escape  a^ler- 
ward ;  but  unless  the  first  thing  be  done  for  him,  he  nnist 
perish  as  surely  under  the  gospel  as  he  would  have  done  under 


198  SALVATION    OF   THE    LORD. 

the  law.  I  would  cease  to  preach,  if  I  believed  that  God,  in 
the  matter  of  salvation,  required  any  thing  whatever  of  man 
which  he  himself  had  not  also  engaged  to  furnish.  For  how 
many  have  I  frequently  hanging  upon  my  lips  of  the  worst  of 
characters — men  whose  lives  have  become  so  horribly  bad, 
that  the  lip  of  morality  would  refuse  to  give  a  descriptijon  of 
their  character  ?  When  I  enter  my  pulpit  am  I  to  believe 
that  these  men  are  to  do  something  before  God's  Spirit  will 
operate  upon  them?  If  so,  I  should  go  there  with  a  faint 
heart,  feeling  that  I  never  could  induce  them  to  do  the  first 
part.  But  now  I  come  to  my  pulpit  with  a  sure  confidence — 
God  the  Holy  Spirit  will  meet  with  these  men  this  morning. 
They  are  as  bad  as  they  can  be ;  he  will  put  a  new  thought 
into  their  hearts  ;  he  will  give  them  new  wishes  ;  he  will  give 
them  new  wills,  and  those  who  hated  Christ  will  desire  to 
love  him ;  those  who  once  loved  sin  will,  by  God's  divine 
Spirit,  be  made  to  hate  it ;  and  here  is  my  confidence,  that 
what  they  can  not  do,  in  that  they  are  weak  through  the 
flesh,  God  sending  his  Spirit  into  their  hearts  will  do  for 
them,  and  in  them,  and  so  they  shall  be  saved. 

Well  then,  says  one,  that  will  make  people  sit  still  and  fold 
their  arms.  Sir,  it  will  not.  But  if  men  did  so  I  could  not 
help  it ;  my  business,  as  I  have  often  said  in  this  place  be- 
fore, is  not  to  prove  to  you  the  reasonableness  of  any  truth, 
nor  to  defend  any  truth  from  its  consequences ;  all  I  do  here, 
and  T  mean  to  keep  to  it,  is  just  to  assert  the  truth,  because  it 
is  in  the  Bible  ;  then,  if  you  do  not  like  it,  you  must  settle  the 
quarrel  with  my  Master,  and  if  you  think  it  unreasonable,  you 
must  quarrel  with  the  Bible.  Let  others  defend  Scripture 
and  prove  it  to  be  true  ;  they  can  do  their  work  better  than 
I  could ;  mine  is  just  the  mere  work  of  proclaiming.  I  am 
the  messenger ;  I  tell  the  Master's  message ;  if  you  do  not 
like  the  message,  quarrel  with  the  Bible,  not  with  me ;  so  long 
as  I  have  Scripture  on  my  side  I  will  dare  and  defy  you  to  do 
any  thing  against  me.  "  Salvation  is  of  the  Lord."  The  Lord 
has  to  apply  it,  to  make  the  unwilling  willing,  to  make  the  un- 
godly godly,  and  bring  the  vile  rebel  to  the  feet  of  Jesus,  or 
else  salvation  will  never  be  accomplished.  Leave  that  one 
thing  undone,  and  you  have  broken  the  link  of  the  chain,  the 


SALVATION    OF    THE   LORD.  199 

very  link  which  was  just  necessary  to  its  integrity.  Take 
away  the  fact  that  God  begins  the  good  work,  and  that  he 
sends  us  what  the  old  divines  call  preventing  grace — take  that 
away,  and  you  have  spoilt  the  whole  of  salvation ;  you  have 
just  taken  the  key-stone  out  of  the  arch,  and  down  it  tumbles. 
There  is  nothing  left  then. 

And  now  on  the  next  point  we  shall  a  little  disagree  again. 
"  Salvation  is  of  the  Lord,"  as  the  sustai7iing  of  the  loorJc  i?i 
any  inan''s  heart.  When  a  man  is  made  a  child  of  God  he 
does  not  have  a  stock  of  grace  given  to  him  with  which  to  go 
on  for  ever,  but  he  has  grace  for  that  day ;  and  he  must  have 
grace  for  the  next  day,  and  grace  for  the  next,  and  grace  for  the 
next,  until  days  shall  end,  or  else  the  beginning  shall  be  of  no 
avail.  As  a  man  does  not  make  himself  spiritually  alive,  so 
neither  can  he  keep  himself  so.  He  can  feed  on  spiritual  food, 
and  so  preserve  his  spiritual  strength  ;  he  can  walk  in  the  com- 
mandments of  the  Lord,  and  so  enjoy  rest  and  peace,  but  still 
the  inner  life  is  dependent  upon  the  Spirit  as  much  for  its  after 
existence  as  for  its  first  begetting.  I  do  verily  believe  that  if  it 
should  ever  be  my  lot  to  put  my  foot  upon  the  golden  threshold 
of  Paradise,  and  put  this  thumb  upon  the  pearly  latch,  I  should 
never  cross  the  threshold  unless  I  had  grace  given  me  to  take 
that  last  step  whereby  I  might  enter  heaven.  No  man  of  him- 
self, even  when  converted,  hath  any  power,  except  as  that  power 
is  daily,  constantly,  and  perpetually  infused  into  him  by  the 
Spn-it.  But  Christians  often  set  up  for  independent  gentlemen  ; 
they  get  a  little  stock  of  grace  in  hand,  and  they  say,  "  My 
mountain  standeth  firm,  I  shall  never  be  moved."  But  ah  !  it  is 
not'  long  before  the  manna  begins  to  be  putrid.  It  was  only 
meant  to  be  the  manna  for  the  day,  and  we  have  kept  it  for 
the  morrow,  and  therefore  it  fails  us.  We  must  have  fresh 
grace. 

*'  For  day  by  day  the  manna  fell ; 
0  to  learn  that  lesson  well." 

So  look  day  by  day  for  fresh  grace.  Frequently  too  the  Chris- 
tian wants  to  have  grace  enough  for  a  month  vouchsafed  to 
him  in  one  moment.  "  O  !"  he  says,  "  what  a  host  of  troubles 
I  have  coming — how  shall  T  meet  them  all  ?     O !  that  T  had 


200  SALTATION    OP   THE   LORD. 

grace  enough  to  bear  me  through  them  all !"  My  dear  friends, 
you  will  have  grace  enough  for  your  troubles,  as  they  come 
one  by  one.  "  As  thy  days,  so  shall  thy  strength  be ;"  but 
thy  strength  shall  never  be  as  thy  months,  or  as  thy  weeks. 
Thou  shalt  have  thy  strength  as  thou  hast  thy  bread.  *'  Give 
us  this  day  our  daily  bread."  Give  us  this  day  our  daily 
grace.  But  why  is  it  you  will  be  troubling  yourself  about 
the  things  of  to-morrow  ?  The  common  people  say,  "  Cross 
a  bridge  when  you  come  to  it."  That  is  good  advice.  Do 
the  same.  When  a  trouble  comes,  attack  it,  and  down  with 
it,  and  master  it ;  but  do  not  begin  now  to  forestall  your 
woes.  "  Ah !  but  I  have  so  many,"  says  one.  Therefore  I 
say,  do  not  look  further  before  thee  than  thou  needest.  "  Suf- 
ficient unto  the  day  is  the  evil  thereof."  Do  as  the  brave  Gre- 
cian did,  who,  when  he  defended  his  country  from  Persia,  did 
not  go  into  the  plains  to  fight,  but  stood  in  the  narrow  pass 
of  Thermopylae  ;  there,  when  the  myriads  came  to  him,  they 
had  to  come  one  by  one,  and  he  felled  them  to  the  earth.  Had 
he  ventured  into  the  plain  he  would  have  been  soon  devoured, 
and  his  handfull  would  have  been  melted  like  a  drop  of  dew 
in  the  sea.  Stand  in  the  narrow  pass  of  to-day,  and  fight  thy 
troubles  one  by  one ;  but  do  not  rush  into  the  plains  of  to- 
morrow, for  there  thou  wilt  be  routed  and  killed.  As  the 
evil  is  sufficient  so  will  the  grace  be.  "  Salvation  is  of  the 
Lord." 

But,  lastly,  upon  this  point.  The  ultimate  perfection  of  sal- 
vation is  of  the  Lord.  Soon,  soon,  the  saints  of  earth  shall  be 
saints  in  light ;  their  hairs  of  snowy  age  shall  be  crowned  with 
perpetual  joy  and  everlasting  youth  ;  their  eyes  suffused  \Wth 
tears  shall  be  made  bright  as  stars,  never  to  be  clouded  again  by 
sorrow  ;  their  hearts  that  tremble  now  are  t-o  be  made  joyous 
and  fast,  and  set  for  ever  like  pillars  in  the  temple  of  God. 
Their  follies,  their  burdens,  their  griefs,  their  woes,  are  soon 
to  be  over ;  sin  is  to  be  slain,  corruption  is  to  be  removed,  and 
a  heaven  of  spotless  purity  and  of  unmingled  peace  is  to  be 
theirs  for  ever.  But  it  must  still  be  by  grace.  As  was  the 
foundation  such  must  the  top-stone  be ;  that  which  laid  on 
earth  the  first  beginning  must  lay  in  heaven  the  top-most 
stone.     As  they  were  redeemed  from  their  filthy  conversation 


SALVATION    OF   TUK   LORD.  201 

by  grace,  so  they  must  be  redeemed  from  death  and  the  grave 
by  grace  too,  and  they  must  enter  heaven  singing 

"  Salvation  of  the  Lord  alone  ; 
Grace  is  a  shoreless  sea." 

There  may  be  Arminians  here,  but  they  will  not  be  Armin- 
ians  there;  they  may  here  say,  "It  is  of  the  will  of  the  flesh," 
but  in  heaven  they  shall  not  think  so.  Here  they  may  ascribe 
some  little  to  the  creature  ;  but  there  they  shall  cast  tlieir 
crowns  at  the  Redeemer's  feet,  and  acknowledge  that  he  did 
it  all.  Here  they  may  sometimes  look  a  little  at  themselves, 
and  boast  somewhat  of  their  own  strength  ;  but  there,  "Not 
unto  us,  not  unto  us,"  shall  be  sung  with  deeper  sincerity  and 
with  more  profound  emphasis  than  they  have  even  sung  it 
here  below.  In  heaven,  when  grace  shall  have  done  its  work, 
this  truth  shall  stand  out  in  blazing  letters  of  gold,  "Salvation 
is  of  the  Lord." 

II.  Thus  I  have  tried  to  expound  the  gospel.  Now  shall  I 
show-  you  HOW  God  has  hedged  this  doctrine  about. 

Some  have  said  salvation  in  some  cases  is  the  result  of  natu- 
ral  temperament.  Well,  sir,  well ;  God  has  effectually  an- 
swered your  argument.  You  say  that  some  people  are  saved 
because  they  are  naturally  religious  and  inclined  to  be  good ; 
unfortunately  I  have  never  met  with  any  of  that  class  of  per- 
sons yet ;  but  1  will  suppose  for  a  moment  that  there  are  such 
people.  God  has  unanswerably  met  your  objection  ;  for,  strange 
to  say,  the  great  number  of  those  who  are  saved  are  just  the 
most  unlikely  people  in  the  world  to  have  been  saved,  while 
a  great  number  of  those  who  perish  were  once  just  the  very 
people  whom,  if  natural  disposition  had  any  thing  to  do  with 
it,  we  should  have  expected  to  see  in  heaven.  Why,  there  is 
one  here  who  in  his  youth  was  a  child  of  many  follies.  Often 
did  his  mother  weep  over  him,  and  cry  and  groan  over  her 
son's  wanderings  ;  for  what  with  a  fierce  high  spirit  that  could 
brook  neither  bit  nor  bridle,  what  with  perpetual  rebellions 
and  ebullitions  of  hot  anger,  she  said,  "  My  son,  ray  son,  what 
wilt  thou  be  in  thy  riper  years?  Surely  thou  wilt  dash 
in  pieces  law  and  order,  and  be  a  disgrace  to  thy  father's 
name."     He  grew  up  ;  in  youth  he  was  wild  and  wanton,  but, 

9* 


202  SALVATION    OF   THE   LORD. 

wonder  of  wonders,  on  a  sudden  he  became  a  new  man, 
changed,  altogetLer  changed ;  no  more  like  what  he  was  be- 
fore than  angels  are  like  lost  spirits.  He  sat  at  her  feet,  he 
cheered  her  heart,  and  the  lost,  fiery  one  became  gentle,  mild, 
humble  as  a  little  child,  and  obedient  to  God's  commandments. 
You  say,  wonder  of  wonders!  But  there  is  another  here. 
He  was  a  fair  youth  :  w^hen  but  a  child  he  talked  of  Jesus  ; 
often  when  his  mother  had  him  on  her  knee  he  asked  her  ques- 
tions about  heaven  ;  he  was  a  prodigy,  a  wonder  of  piety  in 
his  youth.  As  he  grew  up,  the  tear  rolled  down  his  cheek 
under  any  sermon  ;  he  could  scarcely  bear  to  hear  of  death 
without  a  sijxh  ;  sometimes  his  mother  caught  him,  as  she 
thought,  in  prayer  alone.  And  what  is  he  now  ?  He  has  just 
this  very  morning  come  from  sin;  he  has  become  the  debauched 
desperate  villain,  has  gone  far  into  all  manner  of  wicked- 
ness and  lust,  and  sin,  and  has  become  more  damnably  cor- 
rupt than  other  men  could  have  made  him ;  only  his  own  evil 
spirit,  once  confined,  has  now  developed  itself;  he  has  learned 
to  play  the  lion  in  his  manhood,  as  once  he  played  the  fox  in 
his  youth.  I  do  not  know  whether  you  have  ever  met  with 
such  a  case ;  but  it  very  frequently  is  so.  I  know  I  can  say 
that  in  my  congregation  some  abandoned  wicked  fellow  has 
had  his  heart  broken,  and  been  led  to  weep,  and  has  cried  to 
God  for  mercy,  and  renounced  his  vile  sin ;  whilst  some  fair 
maiden  by  his  side  hath  heard  the  same  sermon,  and  if  there 
was  a  tear  she  brushed  it  away  ;  she  still  continues  just  what 
she  was,  "  without  God  and  without  hope  in  the  world."  God 
has  taken  the  base  things  of  the  world,  and  has  just  picked 
his  people  out  of  the  very  roughest  of  men,  in  order  that  he 
may  prove  that  it  is  not  natural  disposition,  but  that  "  salva- 
tion is  of  the  Lord"  alone. 

Well,  but  some  say,  it  is  the  minister  they  hear  who  converts 
men.  Ah  !  that  is  a  grand  idea,  full  sure.  No  man  but  a  fool 
would  entertain  it.  I  met  with  a  man  some  time  ago  who  as- 
sured me  that  he  knew  a  minister  who  had  a  very  large  amount 
of  converting  power  in  him.  Speaking  of  a  great  evangelist  in 
America,  he  said,  "  That  man,  sir,  has  got  the  greatest  quan- 
tity of  converting  power  I  ever  knew  a  man  to  have  ;  and  Mr. 
So-and-so  in  a  neighli  ^ring  town  I  think  is  second  to  him."  At 


SALVATION    OF    THE    LORD.  203 

that  time  this  converting  power  was  being  exhibited  ;  two 
hundred  persons  were  converted  by  the  converting  power  of 
this  second  best,  and  joined  to  the  church  in  a  few  months.  I 
went  to  the  place  some  time  afterwards — it  was  in  Enghxnd — 
and  I  said,  "  How  do  your  converts  get  on  ?"  "  Well,"  said 
he,  "  I  can  not  say  much  about  them."  "  How  many  out  of 
those  two  hundred  whom  you  received  in  a  year  ago  stand 
fast  ?"  "  Well,"  he  said,  "  I  am  afraid  not  many  of  them  ;  we 
have  turned  seventy  of  them  out  for  drunkenness  already." 
"  Yes,"  I  said,  "  I  thought  so :  that  is  the  end  of  the  grand 
experiment  of  converting  powder."  If  I  could  convert  you  all, 
any  one  else  might  unconvert  you;  what  any  man  can  do 
another  man  can  undo  ;  it  is  only  what  God  does  that  is  abiding. 
No,  my  brethren  ;  God  has  taken  good  care  it  shall  never  be 
said  conversion  is  of  man,  for  usually  he  blesses  those  who 
seem  to  be  the  most  unlikely  to  be  useful.  I  do  not  expect  to 
see  so  many  conversions  in  this  place  as  I  had  a  year  ago, 
when  I  had  far  fewer  hearers.  Do  you  ask  why  ?  Why,  a 
year  ago  I  was  abused  by  every  body ;  to  mention  my  name 
was  to  mention  the  name  of  the  most  abominable  buffoon  that 
lived.  The  mere  utterance  of  it  brought  forth  oaths  and  cur- 
sing ;  with  many  men  it  was  a  name  of  contempt,  kicked  about 
the  street  as  a  foot-ball ;  but  then  God  gave  me  souls  by  hun- 
dreds, who  were  added  to  my  church,  and  in  one  year  it  was 
my  happiness  to  see  not  less  than  a  thousand  personally  who 
had  then  been  converted.  I  do  not  expect  that  now.  My 
name  is  somewhat  esteemed  now,  and  the  great  ones  of  the 
earth  think  it  no  dishonor  to  sit  at  my  feet ;  but  this  makes  me 
fear  lest  my  God  should  forsake  me  now  that  the  world  es- 
teems me.  I  would  rather  be  despised  and  slandered  than 
aught  else.  This  assembly  that  you  think  so  grand  and  fine, 
T  would  readily  part  with,  if  by  such  a  loss  I  could  gain  a 
greater  blessing.  "God  has  chosen  the  base  things  of  the 
world  ;"  and,  therefore,  I  reckon  that  the  more  esteemed  T 
may  be,  the  worse  is  my  position,  so  much  the  less  expecta- 
tion shall  I  have  that  God  will  bless  me.  He  hath  but  his 
"  treasure  in  earthen  vessels,  that  the  excellency  of  the  power 
may  be  of  God,  and  not  of  man."  A  poor  minister  began  to 
preach  once,  and  all  the  world  spoke  ill  of  him  ;  but   God 


204  SALVATION    OF   THE   LORD. 

blessed  him.  By-and-bye  they  turned  roimd  and  petted  him. 
He  was  the  man — a  wonder  !  God  left  him !  It  has  often 
been  the  same.  It  is  for  us  to  recollect,  in  all  times  of  popu- 
larity, that  "  Crucify  him,  crucify  him"  follows  fast  upon  the 
heels  of  "  Hosanna,"  and  that  the  crowd  to-day,  if  dealt  faith- 
fully with,  may  turn  into  the  handful  of  to-morrow  ;  for  men 
love  not  plain  speaking.  We  should  learn  to  be  despised, 
earn  to  be  contemned,  learn  to  be  slandered,  and  then  we 
shall  learn  to  be  made  useful  by  God.  Down  on  ray  knees  I 
have  often  fallen,  with  the  hot  sweat  rising  from  my  brow, 
under  some  fresh  slander  poured  upon  me ;  in  an  agony  of 
grief  my  heart  has  been  well-nigh  broken  ;  till  at  last  I  learned 
the^art  of  bearing  all  and  caring  for  none.  And  now  my  grief 
runneth  in  another  line.  It  is  just  the  opposite.  I  fear  lest 
God  should  forsake  me,  to  prove  that  he  is  the  author  of  sal- 
vation, that  it  is  not  in  the  preacher,  that  it  is  not  in  the  crowd, 
that  it  is  not  in  the  attention  I  can  attract,  but  in  God,  and  in 
God  alone.  And  this  thing  I  hope  I  can  say  from  my  heart : 
if  to  be  made  as  the  mire  of  the  streets  again,  if  to  be  the 
lauo^hincr-stock  of  fools  and  the  sono^  of  the  drunkard  once 
more  will  make  me  more  serviceable  to  my  Master,  and  more 
useful  to  his  cause,  I  will  prefer  it  to  all  this  multitude,  or  to 
all  the  applause  that  man  could  give.  Pray  for  me,  dear 
friends,  pray  for  me,  that  God  would  still  make  me  the  means 
of  the  salvation  of  souls  ;  for  I  fear  he  may  say,  "  I  will  not 
help  that  man,  lest  the  world  should  say  he  has  done  it,"  for 
"  salvation  is  of  the  Lord,"  and  so  it  must  be,  even  to  the 
w^orld's  end. 

III.  And  now  what  is,  what  should  be,  the  influence 

OF  THIS  doctrine  UPON  MEN  ? 

Why,  first,  with  sinners,  this  doctrine  is  a  great  battering' 
ram  against  their  pride.  I  will  give  you  a  figure.  The  sinner 
in  his  natural  estate  reminds  me  of  a  man  who  has  a  strong 
and  well-nigh  impenetrable  castle  into  which  he  has  fled. 
There  is  the  outer  moat;  there  is  a  second  moat;  there  are 
the  high  walls ;  and  then  afterward  there  is  the  dungeon  and 
keep,  into  which  the  sinner  will  retire.  Now,  the  first  moat 
that  goes  round  the  sinner's  trusting  place  is  his  good  works. 
"  Ah  !"  he  says,  "I  am  as  good  as  my  neighbor  ;  twenty  shil- 


SALVATION    OP   THE   LORD.  205 

lings  in  the  pound  down,  ready  money,  I  have  always  paid  ;  I 
am  no  sinner ;  '  I  tithe  mint  and  cummin  ;'  a  good  respectal)le 
gentleman  I  am  indeed."  Well,  when  God  comes  to  work 
with  him,  to  save  him,  he  sends  his  army  across  the  tirst  moat ; 
and  as  they  go  througl  it,  they  cry,  "  Salvation  is  of  the  Lord  ;" 
and  the  moat  is  dried  up,  for  if  it  be  of  the  Lord,  how  can  it 
be  of  good  works  ?  But  when  that  is  done,  he  has  a  second 
intrenchment — ceremonies.  "  Well,"  he  says,  "  I  will  not  trust 
in  my  good  works,  but  I  have  been  baptized,  I  have  been  con- 
hrmed  ;  do  not  I  take  the  sacrament  ?  That  shall  be  my  trust." 
"  Over  the  moat  !  Over  the  moat !"  And  the  soldiers  go 
over  again,  shouting,  "  Salvation  is  of  the  Lord."  The  second 
moat  is  dried  up ;  it  is  all  over  with  that.  Now  they  come  to 
the  next  strong  wall ;  the  sinner,  looking  over  it,  says,  "  I  can 
repent,  I  can  believe,  whenever  I  like ;  I  will  save  myself  by 
repenting  and  believing."  Up  come  the  soldiers  of  God,  his 
great  army  of  conviction,  and  they  batter  this  wall  to  the 
ground,  crying,  "  '  Salvation  is  of  the  Lord.'  Your  faith  and 
your  repentance  must  all  be  given  you,  or  else  you  will  neither 
believe  nor  repent  of  sin."  And  now  the  castle  is  taken  ;  the 
man's  hopes  are  all  cut  off;  he  feels  that  it  is  not  of  self;  the 
castle  of  self  is  overcome,  and  the  great  banner  upon  which 
is  written  "  Salvation  is  of  the  Lord"  is  displayed  upon  the 
battlements.  But  is  the  battle  over  ?  O  no  ;  the  sinner  haa 
retired  to  the  keep,  in  the  center  of  the  castle ;  and  now  he 
changes  his  tactics.  "  I  can  not  save  myself,"  says  he,  "  there- 
fore I  will  despair  ;  there  is  no  salvation  for  me."  Now  this 
second  castle  is  as  hard  to  take  .as  the  first,  for  the  sinner  sits 
down  and  says,  "  I  can't  be  saved,  I  must  perish."  But  God 
commands  the  soldiers  to  take  this  castle  too,  shouting,  "  Sal- 
vation is  of  the  Lord  ;"  though  it  is  not  of  man,  ii  is  of  God  ; 
"  he  is  able  to  save,  even  to  the  uttermost,"  though  you  can 
not  save  yourself  This  sword,  you  see,  cuts  two  ways  ;  it  cuts 
pride  down,  and  then  it  cleaves  the  skull  of  despair.  If  any 
man  say  he  can  save  himself,  it  halveth  his  pride  at  once ;  and 
if  another  man  say  he  can  not  be  saved,  it  dasheth  his  despair 
to  the  earth  ;  for  it  affirms  that  he  can  be  saved,  seeing,  "  Sal- 
vation is  of  the  Lord."  That  is  the  effect  tliis  doctrine  haa 
upon  the  sinnei  :  may  it  have  that  effect  on  you ! 


206  SALVATION    OF   THE    LORD. 

Bat  what  influence  has  it  upon  the  saint  ?  Why,  it  is  the 
keystone  of  all  divinity.  I  loill  defy  you  to  he  heterodox  if  you 
believe  this  truth.  You  must  be  sound  in  the  faith  if  you  have 
learned  to  spell  this  sentence — "  Salvation  is  of  the  Lord ;" 
and  if  you  feel  it  in  your  soul  you  will  not  he  proud ;  you  can 
not  be  ;  you  will  cast  e^ery  thing  at  his  feet,  confessing  that 
you  have  done  nothing,  save  what  he  has  helped  you  to  do ; 
and  therefore  the  glory  must  be  where  the  salvation  is.  If  you 
believe  this  you  will  not  he  distrustful.  You  will  say,  "  My 
salvation  does  not  depend  on  my  faith,  but  on  the  Lord  ;  my 
keeping  does  not  depend  on  myself,  but  on  God  who  keepeth 
me  ;  my  being  brought  to  heaven  rests  not  now  in  ray  own 
hands,  but  in  the  hands  of  God  ;"  you  will,  when  doubts  and 
fears  prevail,  fold  your  arms,  look  upward  and  say, 

"  And  now  my  eye  of  faith  is  dim, 
I  trust  in  Jesus,  sink  or  swim." 

If  you  can  keep  this  in  your  mind  you  may  always  he  joyful. 
He  can  have  no  cause  for  trouble  who  knows  and  feels  that 
liis  salvation  is  of  God.  Come  on,  legions  of  hell ;  come  on, 
demons  of  the  pit ! 

"  He  that  has  helped  me  bears  me  through, 
And  makes  me  more  than  conqueror  too, " 

Salvation  resteth  not  on  this  poor  arm,  else  should  I  despair, 
but  on  the  arm  of  yon  Omnipotent — that  arm  on  which  the 
pillars  of  the  heavens  do  lean.  "  Whom  should  I  fear  ?  The 
Lord  is  my  strength  and  my  life;  of  whom  shall  I  be  afraid  ?" 
And  this,  may  by  grace,  7ierve  you  to  work  for  God.  If  you 
had  to  save  your  neighbors  you  might  sit  down  and  do  noth- 
ing ;  but  since  "salvation  is  of  the  Lord,"  go  on  and  prosper. 
Go  and  preach  the  gospel ;  go  and  tell  the  gospel  everywhere. 
Tell  it  in  your  house,  tell  it  in  the  street,  tell  it  in  every  land 
and  every  nation  ;  for  it  is  not  of  yourself,  it  is  "  of  the  Lord.'^ 
Why  do  not  our  friends  go  to  Ireland  to  preach  the  gospel  ? 
Ireland  is  a  disgrace  to  the  Protestant  church.  Why  do  not 
they  go  and  preach  there?  A  year  or  so  ago  a  number  of 
our  brave  ministers  went  over  there  to  preach  ;  they  did  right 
bravely  ;  thoy  went  there,  and  they  came  back  again,  and  that 


SALVATION    OF   THE    LOllD.  20*7 

is  about  the  sum  total  of  the  glorious  expedition  against 
Popery.  But  why  come  back  again?  Because  they  were 
stoned,  good  easy  men !  Do  they  not  think  that  the  gospel 
ever  w^ill  spread  without  a  few  stones  ?  But  they  would  have 
been  killed  !  Brave  martyrs  they  !  Let  them  be  enrolled  in 
the  red  chronicle.  Did  the  martyrs  of  old,  did  the  apostles 
shrink  from  going  to  any  country  because  they  would  have 
been  killed?  No,  they  were  ready  to  die  :  and  if  half  a  dozen 
ministers  had  been  killed  in  Ireland,  it  would  have  been  the 
finest  thing  in  the  world  for  liberty  in  future ;  for  after  that 
the  people  dare  not  have  touched  us ;  the  strong  arm  of  the 
law  would  have  put  them  down  ;  we  might  have  gone  through 
every  village  of  Ireland  afterwards,  and  been  at  peace ;  the 
constabulary  would  soon  liave  put  an  end  to  such  infamous  mur- 
der ;  it  would  have  awakened  the  Protestantism  of  England 
to  claim  the  liberty  which  is  our  right  there  as  we  give  it  ejse- 
where.  We  shall  never  see  any  great  change  till  we  have 
some  men  in  our  ranks  who  are  willing  to  be  martyrs.  That 
deep  ditch  can  never  be  crossed  till  the  bodies  of  a  few  of  us 
shall  fill  it  up  ;  and  after  that  it  will  be  easy  work  to  preach 
the  gospel  there.  Our  brethren  should  go  there  once  more. 
They  can  leave  their  white  cravats  at  home,  and  the  white 
feather  too,  and  go  forth  with  a  brave  heart  and  a  bold  spirit ; 
and  if  the  people  mock  and  scoff,  let  them  mock  and  scoff  on. 
George  Whitefield  said,  when  he  preached  on  Kennington 
Common,  where  they  threw  dead  cats  and  rotten  eggs  at  him, 
"This  is  only  the  manure  of  Methodism,  the  best  thing  in  the 
world  to  make  it  grow ;  throw  away  as  fast  as  you  please." 
And  when  a  stone  cut  him  on  the  forehead,  he  seemed  to 
preach  the  better  for  a  little  blood-letting.  O !  for  such  a  man 
to  dare  the  mob,  and  then  the  mob  would  not  need  to  be  dared. 
Let  us  go  there,  recollecting  that  "salvation  is  of  the  Lord," 
and  let  us  in  every  place  and  at  every  time  preach  God's 
Word,  believing  that  God's  Word  is  more  than  a  match  for 
man's  sin,  and  God  will  yet  be  master  over  all  the  earth. 

My  voice  fails  me  again,  and  my  thoughts  too,  I  was  weary 
this  morning,  when  I  came  into  this  pulpit,  and  I  am  weary 
now.  Sometimes  I  am  joyous  and  glad,  and  feel  in  the  pul- 
])it  as  if  I  could  pronoh  foi-  ever ;  at  other  times  I  feel  glad  to 


208  SALVATION    OF    THE    LORD. 

close ;  but  yet  with  such  a  text  I  would  that  I  could  have 
finished  up  with  all  the  might  that  mortal  lip  could  summon. 
O !  to  let  men  know  this,  that  their  salvation  is  of  God ! 
Swearer,  swear  not  against  him  in  whose  hand  thy  breath  is ! 
Despiser,  despise  not  him  who  can  save  you  or  destroy  you. 
And  thou  hypocrite,  seek  not  to  deceive  him  from  whom  sal- 
vation comes,  and  who  therefore  knows  right  well  whether 
thy  salvation  come  from  him. 

lY.  And  now  in  concluding,  let  me  just  tell  you  v^hat  is  the 
OBVERSE  OF  THIS  TRUTH.  Salvatioii  is  of  God ;  then  damna- 
Hon  is  of  man.  If  any  of  you  are  damned,  you  will  have  no 
one  to  blame  but  yourselves ;  if  any  of  you  perish,  the  blame 
will  not  lie  at  God's  door ;  if  you  are  lost  and  cast  away,  you 
will  have  to  bear  all  the  blame  and  all  the  tortures  of 
conscience  yourself;  you  will  lie  for  ever  in  perdition,  and  re- 
flectj  "I  have  destroyed  myself;  I  have  made  a  suicide  of  my 
soul ;  I  have  been  my  own  destroyer ;  I  can  lay  no  blame  to 
God."  Remember,  if  saved,  you  must  be  saved  by  God  alone, 
though  if  lost  you  have  lost  yourselves.  "  Turn  ye,  turn  ye 
why  will  ye  die,  O  house  of  Israel."  With  my  last  faltering 
sentence  I  bid  you  stop  and  think.  Ah !  my  hearers,  my 
hearers!  it  is  an  awful  thing  to  preach  to  such  a  mass  as  this. 
But  the  other  Sunday,  as  I  came  down  stairs,  I  was  struck 
with  a  memorable  sentence,  uttered  by  one  who  stood  there. 
He  said,  "  There  are  9000  people  this  morning  without  excuse 
in  the  day  of  judgment."  I  should  like  to  preach  so  that 
this  always  might  be  said ;  and  if  I  can  not,  O  may  God  have 
mercy  on  me,  for  his  name's  sake !  But  now  remember !  Ye 
have  souls ;  those  souls  will  be  damned,  or  saved.  Which 
will  it  be  ?  Damned  they  must  be  for  ever,  unless  God  shall 
save  you ;  unless  Christ  shall  have  mercy  upon  you,  there  is 
no  hope  for  you.  Down  on  your  knees !  Cry  to  God  for 
mercy.  Now  lift  up  your  heart  in  prayer  to  God.  May  now 
be  the  very  time  when  you  shall  be  saved.  Or  ever  the  next 
drop  of  blood  shall  run  through  your  veins,  may  you  find 
peace  !  Remember,  that  peace  is  to  be  had  now.  If  you  feel 
now  your  need  of  it,  it  is  to  be  had  now.  And  hoAv  ?  For 
the  mere  asking  for  it.  "  Ask,  and  it  shall  be  given  you ;  seek, 
and  ye  shall  find." 


SALTATION    OF   THE   LORD.  209 

"  But  if  your  eara  refuse 

The  language  of  his  grace, 
Your  hearts  grow  hard,  like  stubborn  Jews, 
That  unbelieving  race, 

The  Lord  with  vengeance  drest, 

Shall  lift  his  hand  and  swear, 
You  that  despised  my  promised  rest 

Shall  have  no  portion  there." 

O I  that  ye  may  not  be  despisers,  lest  ye  "  wonder  and  per- 
ish !"  May  ye  now  fly  to  Christ,  and  be  accepted  in  the  be- 
loved. It  is  ray  last  best  prayer.  May  the  Lord  hear  it  1 
Amen. 


SERMON     XIV. 

REGENERATION. 

"  Exoept  a  man  be  bom  again,  he  can  not  see  the  kingdom  o*  (3oCl  "  — 
John,  iii.  3. 

In  daily  life  our  thoughts  are  most  occupied  with  thmgg 
that  are  most  necessary  for  our  existence.  No  one  murmured 
that  the  subject  of  the  price  of  bread  was  frequently  on  the 
lips  of  men  at  a  time  of  scarcity,  because  they  felt  that  the 
subject  was  one  of  vital  importance  to  the  mass  of  the  popula- 
tion, and  therefore  they  murmured  not,  though  they  listened 
to  continual  declamatory  speeches,  and  read  perpetual  articles 
in  the  newspapers  concerning  it.  I  must  offer  the  same  ex- 
cuse, then,  for  bringing  before  you  this  morning  the  subject 
of  regeneration.  It  is  one  of  absolute  and  vital  importance; 
it  is  the  hinge  of  the  gospel ;  it  is  the  point  upon  which  most 
Christians  are  agreed,  yea,  all  who  are  Christians  in  sincerity 
and  truth.  It  is  a  subject  which  lies  at  the  very  basis  of  sal- 
vation. It  is  the  very  groundwork  of  our  hopes  for  heaven  ; 
and  as  we  ought  to  be  very  careful  of  the  basement  of  our 
structure,  so  should  we  be  very  diligent  to  take  heed  that  we 
are  really  born  again,  and  that  we  have  made  sure  work  of  it 
for  eternity.  There  are  many  who  fancy  they  are  born  again 
who  are  not.  It  well  becomes  us,  then,  frequently  to  exam- 
ine ourselves ;  and  it  is  the  minister's  duty  to  bring  forward 
those  subjects  which  lead  to  self-examination,  and  have  a  tend- 
ency to  search  the  heart  and  try  the  reins  of  the  children  of 
men. 

To  proceed  at  once,  I  shall  first  make  some  remarks  upon 
the  nexo  birth  ;  secondly,  I  shall  note  what  is  meant  by  not  be- 
ing able  to  see  the  kingdom  of  God  if  loe  are  not  born  again  ; 
then  I  shall  go  further  on  to  note  why  it  is  that  "  except  we 


REGENERATION.  211 

are  horn  again  we  can  not  see  the  kuigdom  of  God ;""  and 
then  expostulate  xoith  men  as  God's  ambassador  before  I  close. 
I.  First,  then,  the  matter  of  regexeration.  In  endeav- 
oring to  explain  it,  I  must  have  you  notice,  first  of  all,  the 
figure  that  is  employed.  It  is  said  a  man  must  be  born  again. 
I  can  not  illustrate  this  better  than  by  supposing  a  case. 
Suppose  tliat  in  England  there  should  be  a  law  passed,  that 
admission  to  royal  courts,  preference  in  office,  and  any  privi- 
leges that  might  belong  to  the  nation,  could  only  be  given  to 
persons  who  were  born  in  England — suppose  that  birth  in  this 
land  was  made  a  sine  qua  non^  and  it  was  definitely  declared 
that  whatever  men  might  do  or  be,  unless  they  were  native 
born  subjects  of  England  they  could  not  enter  into  her  maj- 
esty's presence,  and  could  enjoy  none  of  the  emoluments  or 
offices  of  the  state,  nor  any  of  the  privileges  of  citizens.  I 
think  if  you  suppose  such  a  case  I  shall  be  able  to  illustrate 
the  difference  between  any  changes  and  reforms  that  men 
make  in  themselves  and  the  real  work  of  being  born  again. 
We  will  suppose,  then,  that  some  man — a  red  Indian,  for  in- 
stance— should  come  to  this  country,  and  should  endeavor  to 
obtain  the  privileges  of  citizenship,  well  knowing  that  the  rule 
is  absolute  and  can  not  be  altered,  that  a  man  must  be  a  born 
subject,  or  else  he  can  not  enjoy  them.  Suppose  he  says,  "  I 
will  change  my  name^  I  will  take  up  the  name  of  an  Englisfi- 
man  ;  I  have  been  called  by  my  high-sounding  title  among  the 
Sioux  ;  I  have  been  called  the  son  of  the  Great  Westwind,  or 
some  such  name  ;  but  I  will  take  an  English  name,  I  will  be 
called  a  Christian  man,  an  English  subject."  Will  that  admit 
him  ?  You  see  him  coming  to  the  palace  gates  and  asking  for 
admission.  He  says,  "  I  have  taken  an  English  name."  "  But 
are  you  an  Englishman  born  and  bred  ?"  "  I  am  not,"  says 
he.  "  Then  the  gates  must  be  shut  against  you,  for  the  law  is 
absolute ;  and  though  you  may  have  the  name  of  even  the 
royal  flimily  itself  upon  you,  yet  because  you  have  not  been 
born  here  you  must  be  shut  out."  That  illustration  will  apply 
to  all  of  us  who  are  here  present.  At  least,  nearly  tlie  whole 
of  us  bear  the  professing  Christian  name  ;  living  in  England, 
you  would  think  it  a  disgrace  to  you  if  you  were  not  called 
Christian.     You  are  not  heathen,  you  are  not  infidel ;  you  are 


212  REGENERATION. 

neither  Mohammedans  nor  Jews ;  you  think  that  the  name, 
Christian,  is  a  creditable  one  to  you,  and  you  have  taken  it. 
Be  ye  quite  assured  that  the  name  of  a  Christian  is  not  the 
nature  of  a  Christian,  and  that  your  being  born  in  a  Christian 
land,  and  being  recognized  as  professing  the  Christian  religion 
is  of  no  avail  whatever,  unless  there  be  something  more  added 
to  it — the  being  born  again  as  a  subject  of  Jesus  Christ. 

"  But,"  says  this  red  Indian,  "  I  am  prepared  to  renounce 
my  dress,  and  to  become  an  Englishman  in  fashion  ;  in  fact,  I 
will  go  to  the  very  top  of  the  fashion  ;  you  shall  not  see  me 
in  any  thing  differing  from  the  accepted  style  of  the  present 
day.  May  I  not,  when  I  am  arrayed  in  court  dress,  and  have 
decorated  myself  as  etiquette  demands,  come  in  before  her 
majesty  ?  See,  I'll  doff  this  plume,  I  will  not  shake  this  tom- 
ahawk, I  renounce  these  garments.  The  moccasin  I  cast  away 
for  ever  ;  I  am  an  Englishman  in  dress,  as  well  as  name."  He 
comes  to  the  gate,  dressed  out  like  one  of  our  own  country- 
men ;  but  the  gates  are  still  shut  in  his  face,  because  the  law 
required  that  he  must  be  born  in  the  country;  and  without 
that,  whatever  his  dress  might  be,  he  could  not  enter  the  pal- 
ace. So  how  many  there  are  of  you,  who  do  not  barely  take 
the  Christian  name  upon  you,  but  have  adopted  Christian 
manners ;  you  go  to  your  churches  and  your  chapels,  you  at- 
tend the  hou&e  of  God,  you  take  care  that  there  is  some  form 
of  religion  observed  in  your  family  ;  your  children  are  not  left 
without  hearing  the  name  of  Jesus !  So  far  so  good  ;  God 
forbid  that  I  should  say  a  word  against  it !  But  remember, 
it  is  bad  because  you  do  not  go  further.  All  this  is  of  no 
avail  whatever  for  admitting  you  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven, 
unless  this  also  is  complied  with — the  being  born  again,  O  ! 
dress  yourselves  never  so  grandly  with  the  habiliments  of  god- 
liness ;  put  the  chaplet  of  benevolence  upon  your  brow,  and 
gird  your  loins  with  integrity  ;  put  on  your  feet  the  shoes  of 
perseverance,  and  walk  through  the  earth  an  honest  and  up- 
right man  ;  yet,  remember,  unless  you  are  born  again,  "that 
which  is  of  the  flesh  is  flesh,"  and  you,  not  having  the  opera- 
tions of  the  Spirit  in  you,  still  have  heaven's  gates  shut 
against  you,  because  you  are  not  born  again. 

"Well,"  but  says  the  Indian,  "I  will  not  only  adopt  the 


REGENERATION.  213 

dress,  bat  I  will  learn  the  language  :  I  will  put  away  my 
brogue  and  my  language  that  I  once  spoke,  in  the  wild  prairie 
or  in  the  woods,  far  away  from  my  lips.  I  shall  not  talk  of 
the  Shu-Shuh-gah,  and  of  the  strange  names  wherewith  I  have 
called  my  wild  fowl  and  my  deer,  but  I  will  speak  as  you 
speak,  and  act  as  you  act ;  I  will  not  only  have  your  dress, 
but  precisely  your  manners,  I  will  talk  just  in  the  same  fashion, 
I  will  adopt  your  brogue,  I  will  take  care  that  it  shall  be 
grammatically  correct ;  will  you  not  then  admit  me  ?  I  have 
become  thoroughly  Englishized  ;  may  I  not  then  be  received  ?" 
"  No,"  says  the  keeper  of  the  door,  "  there  is  no  admittance ; 
for  except  a  man  be  born  in  this  country,  he  can  not  be  ad- 
mitted." So  with  some  of  you  ;  you  talk  just  like  Christians. 
Perhaps  you  have  a  little  too  much  cant  about  you  ;  you  have 
began  so  strictly  to  imitate  what  you  think  to  be  a  godly  man, 
that  you  go  a  little  beyond  the  mark,  and  you  gloss  it  so  much 
that  we  are  able  to  detect  the  counterfeit.  Still  you  j^ass  cur- 
rent among  most  men  as  being  a  right  down  sort  of  Christian 
man.  You  have  studied  biographies,  and  sometimes  you  tell 
long  yarns  about  divine  experience  ;  you  have  borrowed  them 
from  the  biographies  of  good  men  ;  you  have  been  with  Chris- 
tians, and  know  how  to  talk  as  they  do ;  you  have  caught  a 
puritanical  twang,  perhaps ;  you  go  through  the  world  just 
like  professors  ;  and  if  you  were  to  be  observed,  no  one  would 
detect  you.  You  are  a  member  of  the  church ;  you  have 
been  baptized  ;  you  take  the  Lord's  Supper  ;  perhaps  you  are 
a  deacon,  or  an  elder ;  you  pass  the  sacramental  cup  round  ; 
you  are  just  all  that  a  Christian  can  be,  except  that  you  are 
without  a  Christian  heart.  You  are  whitewashed  sepulchres, 
still  full  of  rottenness  within,  though  garnished  fairly  on  the 
outside.  Well,  take  heed,  take  heed !  It  is  an  astonishing 
thing,  how  near  the  painter  can  go  to  the  expression  of  life, 
and  yet  the  canvas  is  dead  and  motionless ;  and  it  is  equally 
astonishing  how  near  a  man  may  go  to  a  Christian,  and  yet, 
through  not  being  born  again,  the  absolute  rule  shuts  him  out 
of  heaven  ;  and  with  all  his  profession,  with  all  the  trappings 
of  his  professed  godliness,  and  with  all  the  gorgeous  plumes 
of  experience,  yet  must  he  be  borne  away  from  heaven's  gates. 
You  are  uncharitable  Mr.  Spurgeon.     I  do  not  care  what 


214  REGENERATION. 

you  say  about  that;  I  never  wish  to  be  more  charitable  than 
Christ.  I  did  not  say  this ;  Christ  said  it.  If  you  have  any 
quarrel  with  him,  settle  it  there  ;  I  am  not  the  maker  of  this 
truth,  but  simply  the  speaker  of  it.  I  find  it  written,  "  Exc(ipt 
a  man  be  born  again,  he  can  not  see  the  kingdom  of  God."  Il 
your  footman  should  go  to  the  door,  and  deliver  your  message 
correctly,  the  man  at  the  door  might  abuse  him  never  so 
much,  but  the  footman  would  say,  "  Sir,  d  j  not  abuse  me,  I 
can  not  help  it ;  I  can  only  tell  you  what  my  master  told  me. 
I  am  not  the  originator  of  it."  So  if  you  think  me  uncharit- 
able, remember  you  do  not  accuse  me,  you  accuse  Christ ;  you 
are  not  finding  fault  with  the  messenger,  you  are  finding  fault 
with  the  message ;  Christ  has  said  it — "  Except  a  man  be  born 
again."  I  can  not  dispute  with  you,  and  shall  not  try.  That 
is  simply  God's  Word.  Reject  it  at  your  peril.  Believe  it 
and  receive  it,  I  entreat  you,  because  it  comes  from  the  lips  of 
the  Most  High. 

But  now  note  the  manner  in  which  this  regeneration  is  ob- 
tained. I  think  I  have  none  here  so  profoundly  stupid  as  to 
be  Puseyites.  I  can  scarcely  believe  that  I  have  been  tht 
means  of  attracting  one  person  here,  so  utterly  devoid  of  every 
remnant  of  brain,  as  to  believe  the  doctrine  of  baptismal  regen- 
eration. Yet  I  must  just  hint  at  it.  There  be  some  who  teach 
that  by  a  few  drops  of  water  sprinkled  on  an  infant's  brow  the 
infant  becomes  regenerate.  Well,  granted.  And  now  I  will 
find  out  your  regenerate  ones  twenty  years  afterward.  The 
champion  of  the  prize  ring  is  a  regenerated  man.  O  !  yes,  he 
was  regenerated,  because  in  infancy  he  was  baptized  ;  and, 
therefore,  if  all  infants  in  baptism  are  regenerated,  the  prize- 
fighter is  a  regenerated  man.  Take  hold  of  him  and  receive 
him  as  your  brother  in  the  Lord.  Do  you  hear  that  man 
swearing  and  blaspheming  God  ?  He  is  regenerate  ;  believe 
me,  he  is  regenerate  ;  the  priest  put  a  few  drops  of  water  on 
his  brow,  and  he  is  a  regenerated  man.  Do  you  see  the 
drunkard  reeling  down  the  street,  the  pest  of  the  neighbor- 
hood, fighting  every  body,  and  beating  his  wife,  worse  than 
the  brute.  Well,  he  is  regenerate,  he  is  one  of  those  Pusey- 
ite's  regenerates — O !  goodly  regenerate  !  Mark  you  the 
crowd  assembled  in  the  streets !      The  gallows  is  erected, 


REGENERATION.  2 1  5 

Palmer  is  about  to  be  executed ;  the  man  whose  name  should 
be  execrated  through  all  eternity  for  his  villainy !  Here  is 
one  of  the  Puseyite's  regenerates.  Yes,  he  is  regenerate  be- 
cause he  was  baptized  in  infancy  ;  regenerate,  while  he  mixes 
his  strychnine  ;  regenerate  while  he  administers  his  poison 
slowly,  that  he  may  cause  death,  and  infinite  pain,  all  the  while 
he  is  causing  it.  Regenerate,  forsooth  !  If  that  be  regenera^ 
tion,  such  regeneration  is  not  worth  having ;  if  that  be  the 
thing  that  makes  us  free  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  verily,  the 
gospel  is  indeed  a  licentious  gospel ;  we  can  say  nothing  about 
it.  If  that  be  the  gospel,  that  all  such  men  are  regenerate 
and  will  be  saved,  we  can  only  say,  that  it  would  be  the  duty 
of  every  man  in  the  world  to  move  that  gospel  right  away, 
because  it  is  so  inconsistent  with  the  commonest  principles  of 
morality,  that  it  could  not  possibly  be  of  God,  but  of  the 
devil. 

But  some  say  all  are  regenerate  when  they  are  baptized. 
Well,  if  you  think  so,  stick  to  your  own  thoughts ;  I  can  not 
help  it.  Simon  Magus  was  certainly  one  exception  ;  he  was 
baptized  on  a  profession  of  his  faith  ;  but  so  far  from  being  re- 
generated by  his  baptism,  we  find  Paul  saying,  "  I  perceive 
that  thou  art  in  the  gall  of  bitterness,  and  in  the  bond  of  in- 
iquity." And  yet  he  was  one  of  those  regenerates,  because  he 
had  been  baptized.  Ah  !  that  doctrine  only  needs  to  be 
stated  to  sensible  men,  and  they  will  at  once  reject  it.  Gen- 
tlemen that  are  fond  of  a  filagree  religion,  and  like  ornament 
and  show ;  gentlemen  of  the  high  Beau  Brummel  school  will 
very  likely  prefer  this  religion,  because  they  have  cultivated 
their  taste  at  the  expense  of  their  brain,  and  have  forgotten 
that  what  is  consistent  with  the  sound  judgment  of  a  man  can 
not  be  consistent  with  the  Word  of  God.  So  much  for  the 
first  point. 

Neither  is  a  man  regenerated,  we  say,  in  the  next  place,  by 
his  own  exertions.  A  man  may  reform  himself  very  much, 
and  that  is  well  and  good;  let  all  do  that.  A  man  may  cast 
away  many  vices,  forsake  many  lusts  in  which  he  indulged,  and 
conquer  evil  habits ;  but  no  man  in  the  world  can  make  him- 
self to  be  born  in  God ;  though  he  should  struggle  never  so 
much,  he  could  npver  accomplish  what  is  beyond  his  power. 


216  REGENERATION. 

And,  mark  you,  if  he  could  make  himself  to  be  born  again, 
still  he  would  not  enter  heaven,  because  there  is  another  point 
in  the  condition  which  he  would  have  violated — "unless  a 
man  be  born  of  the  Spirit,  he  can  not  see  the  kingdom  of 
God."  So  that  the  best  exertions  of  the  flesh  do  not  reach 
this  high  point,  the  being  born  again  of  the  Spirit  of  God. 

And  now  we  must  say,  that  regeneration  consists  in  this : 
God  the  Holy  Spirit,  in  a  supernatural  manner — mark,  by  the 
word  supernatural  I  mean  just  what  it  strictly  means ;  super- 
natural, more  than  natural — works  upon  the  hearts  of  men, 
and  they  by  the  operations  of  the  divine  Spirit  become  regen- 
erate men  ;  but  without  the  Spirit  they  never  can  be  regener- 
ated. And  unless  God  the  Holy  Spirit,  who  "  worketh  in  us 
to  will  and  to  do,"  should  operate  upon  the  will  and  the  con- 
science, regeneration  is  an  absolute  impossibility,  and  there- 
fore so  is  salvation.  "  What !"  says  one,  "  do  you  mean  to 
say  that  God  absolutely  interposes  in  the  salvation  of  every 
man  to  make  him  regenerate  ?"  I  do  indeed ;  in  the  salvation 
of  evei-y  person  there  is  an  actual  putting  forth  of  the  divine 
power,  whereby  the  dead  sinner  is  quickened,  the  unwilling 
sinner  is  made  willing,  the  desperately  hard  sinner  has  his 
conscience  made  tender ;  and  he  who  rejected  God  and  de- 
spised Christ,  is  brought  to  cast  himself  down  at  the  feet  of 
Jesus.  This  is  called  fanatical  doctrine,  mayhap;  that  we 
can  not  help ;  it  is  scriptural  doctrine,  that  is  enough  for  us. 
"  Except  a  man  be  born  of  the  Spirit  he  can  not  see  the  king- 
dom of  God  ;  that  which  is  born  of  the  flesh  is  flesh,  and  that 
which  is  born  of  the  Spirit  is  spirit."  If  you  like  it  not,  quar- 
rel with  my  Master,  not  with  me  ;  I  do  but  simply  declare  his 
own  revelation,  that  there  must  be  in  your  heart  something 
more  than  you  can  ever  work  there.  There  must  be  a  divine 
operation  ;  call  it  a  miraculous  operation,  if  you  please  ;  it  is 
in  some  sense  so.  There  must  be  a  divine  interposition,  a 
divine  working,  a  divine  influence,  or  else,  do  what  you  may, 
without  that  you  perish,  and  are  undone  ;  "  for  except  a  man 
be  born  again,  he  can  not  see  the  kingdom  of  God."  The 
change  is  radical ;  it  gives  us  new  natures,  makes  us  love  what 
we  hated  and  hate  what  we  loved,  sets  us  in  a  new  road  ; 
makes  our  habits  different,  our  thoughts  different,  makes  us 


REGENERATION.  217 

different  in  private,  and  different  in  public.  So  that  being  in 
Christ  it  is  fulfilled :  "  If  any  man  be  in  Christ  he  is  a  new 
creature ;  old  things  are  passed  aAvay,  behold  all  things  are 
become  new." 

II.  And  now  I  must  corae  to  the  second  point.  I  trust  I  have 
explained  regeneration,  so  that  all  may  see  what  it  is.     Now 

WHAT  DOES  THE  EXPRESSION,  "  SEEING  THE  KINGDOM  OF  GoD," 

MEAN  ?  It  means  two  things.  To  see  the  kingdom  of  God  on 
earth  is  to  be  a  member  of  the  mystical  church — it  is  to  enjoy 
the  liberty  and  privileges  of  the  child  of  God.  To  see  the 
kingdom  of  heaven  means  to  have  power  in  prayer,  to  have 
communion  with  Christ,  to  have  fellowship  with  the  Holy 
Ghost ;  and  to  bring  forth  and  produce  all  those  joyous  and 
blessed  fruits  which  are  the  effect  of  regeneration.  In  a 
higher  sense,  "  to  see  the  kingdom  of  God,"  means  to  be  ad- 
mitted into  heaven.  Except  a  man  be  born  again,  he  can  not 
know  about  heavenly  things  on  earth,  and  he  can  not  enjoy 
heavenly  blessings  for  ever — "  he  can  not  see  the  kingdom  of. 
God." 

III.  I  think  I  may  just  pass  over  the  second  point  without 
remark,  and  proceed  to  notice,  in  the  third  place,  why  it  is 

THAT  "  UNLESS  A    MAN   BE   BORN   AGAIN,   HE  CAN   NOT   SEE   THE 

KINGDOM  OF  GoD."  And  I  will  confine  my  remarks  to  the 
kingdom  of  God  in  the  world  to  come. 

Why,  he  can  not  see  the  kingdom  of  God,  because  he  would 
be  out  of  place  in  heaven.  A  man  that  is  not  born  again  could 
not  enjoy  heaven.  There  is  an  actual  impossibility  hi  his  na- 
ture, which  prevents  him  from  enjoying  any  of  the  bliss  of 
Paradise.  You  think,  mayhap,  that  heaven  consists  in  those 
walls  of  jewels,  in  those  pearly  gates,  and  gates  of  gold  ;  not 
so,  that  is  the  habitation  of  heaven.  Heaven  dwells  there, 
but  that  is  not  heaven.  Heaven  is  a  state  that  is  made  here, 
that  is  made  in  the  heart;  made  by  God's  Spirit  witlun  us, 
and  unless  God  the  Spirit  has  renewed  us,  and  caused  us  to  be 
born  again,  we  can  not  enjoy  the  things  of  heaven  Why,  it 
is  a  physical  impossibility  that  ever  a  swine  should  deliver  a 
lecture  on  astronomy  ;  every  man  will  clearly  perceive  that  it 
must  be  impossible  that  a  snail  should  build  a  city ;  ajid  .here 
is  just  as  much  impossibility  that  a  sinner  unmended,  should 

10 


218  BEGENERATION. 

enjoy  heaven.  Why,  there  would  be  notl-ing  there  for  him  to 
enjoy  ;  if  he  could  be  put  into  the  place  Avhere  heaven  is,  he 
would  be  miserable  ;  he  would  cry,  "  Let  me  away,  let  me 
away;  let  me  away  from  this  miserable  place  !"  I  appeal  to 
yourselves ;  a  sermon  is  too  long  fo-  you  very  often  ;  the 
singing  of  God's  praises  is  dull,  dry  work ;  you  think  that 
going  up  to  God's  house  is  very  tedious.  What  Avill  you  do 
where  they  praise  God  day  without  night  ?  If  just  a  short 
discourse  here  is  very  wearying,  what  Will  you  think  of  the 
eternal  talkings  of  the  redeemed  throTigh  all  ages  of  the  won- 
ders of  redeeming  love  ?  If  the  company  of  the  righteous  is 
very  irksome  to  you,  what  will  be  their  company  throughout 
eternity  ?  I  think  many  of  you  are  free  to  confess  that  psalm- 
singing  is  not  a  bit  to  your  taste,  that  yoi  care  naught  about 
any  spiritual  things  ;  give  you  your  not'le  of  wine,  and  set 
you  down  at  your  ease,  that  is  heaven  for  you  !  Well,  there 
is  no  such  a  heaven  yet  made ;  and  thore/ore  there  is  no  hea- 
ven for  you.  The  only  heaven  there  u,  is  the  heaven  of  spir- 
itual men,  the  heaven  of  praise,  the  heaven  of  delight  in  God, 
the  heaven  of  acceptance  in  the  beloved^  the  heaven  of  com- 
munion with  Christ.  Now,  you  do  not  understand  any  thing 
about  this  ;  you  could  not  enjoy  it  if  you  v^ere  to  have  it;  you 
have  not  the  capabilities  for  doing  so.  You,  yourselves,  from 
the  very  fact  of  your  not  being  born  again,  are  your  own  bar- 
rier to  heaven,  and  if  God  were  to  open  the  gate  wide,  and 
say,  "  Come  in,"  you  could  not  enjoy  heaven,  if  you  were  ad- 
mitted ;  for  unless  a  man  be  born  again,  there  is  an  impossi- 
bility, a  moral  impossibility,  of  his  seeicg  the  kingdom  of  God. 
Suppose  there  are  some  persons  here  who  are  entirely  deaf, 
who  have  never  heard  sounds ;  well,  1  say  they  can  not  hear 
singing.  Do  I  when  I  say  it,  say  a  cruel  thing  ?  It  is  their 
own  disability  that  prevents  them.  So  when  God  says  you 
can  not  see  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  h3  liieans  that  it  is  your 
own  disability  for  the  enjoyment  of  heaven,  tkat  will  prevent 
you  ever  entering  there. 

But  there  are  some  other  reasons ;  there  are  reasons  why 

"  Those  holy  gates  for  e\  er  t>ar 
Pollution,  sin,  and  shpine." 


REaENERATION.  219 

There  are  reasons,  besides  those  in  yourselves,  why  you  can 
not  see  the  kingdom  of  God,  unless  you  are  born  again.  Ask 
yon  spirits  before  the  throne:  "Angels,  princiijalities,  and 
powers,  would  ye  be  willing  that  men  who  love  not  God,  who 
believe  not  in  Christ,  who  have  not  been  born  again,  should 
dwell  here  ?"  I  see  them,  as  they  look  down  upon  us,  and 
hear  them  answering,  *'No!  Once  we  fought  the  dragon, 
and  expelled  him  because  he  tempted  us  to  sin ;  we  must  not 
and  we  will  not,  have  the  wicked  here.  These  alabaster  walla 
must  not  be  soiled  with  black  and  lustful  fingers ;  the  white 
pavement  of  heaven  must  not  be  stained  and  rendered  filthy 
by  the  unholy  feet  of  ungodly  men.  No  !"  I  see  a  thousand 
spears  bristling,  and  the  fiery  faces  of  a  myriad  seraphs  thrust 
over  the  w^alls  of  Paradise.  "  No,  while  these  arms  have 
strength,  and  these  wings  have  power,  no  sin  shall  ever  entei 
here."  I  address  myself  moreover  to  the  saints  in  heaven,  re- 
deemed by  sovereign  grace  :  "  Children  of  God,  are  ye  willing 
that  the  wicked  should  enter  heaven  as  they  are,  without  being 
born  again  ?  Ye  love  men,  say, "say,  say,  are  ye  willing  that 
they  should  be  admitted  as  they  are  ?"  I  see  Lot  rise  up,  and 
he  cries,  "  Admit  them  into  heaven  !  No  !  What !  must  I  be 
vexed  with  the  conversation  of  Sodomites  again,  as  once  I  was?" 
I  see  Abraham  ;  and  he  comes  forward,  and  he  says,  "  No  ;  1 
can  not  have  them  here.  I  had  enough  of  them  while  I  wa? 
with  them  on  earth — their  jests  and  jeers,  their  silly  talkiugs, 
their  vain  conversation,  vexed  and  grieved  us.  We  want 
them  not  here."  And,  heavenly  though  they  be,  and  loving 
as  their  spirits  are,  yet  there  is  not  a  saint  in  heaven  who 
would  not  resent  with  the  utmost  indignation  the  approach  of 
any  one  of  you  to  the  gates  of  paradise,  if  you  are  still  unholy, 
and  have  not  been  born  again. 

But  all  that  were  nothing.  We  might  perhaps  scale  the 
ramparts  of  heaven,  if  they  were  only  protected  by  angels, 
and  burst  the  gates  of  paradise  open,  if  only  the  saints  de- 
fended them.  But  there  is  another  reason  than  that — God 
has  said  it  himself— ''''Except  a  man  be  born  again,  he  can 
not  see  the  kingdom  of  God."  What  sinner,  wilt  thou  scale 
the  bxttlements  of  paradise  when  God  is  ready  to  thrust  thee 
down  to  hell  ?     Wilt  thou  with  impudent  face  brazen  him  out  ? 


2!20  EBQENERATIOX. 

God  has  said  it,  God  hath  said  it,  with  a  voice  of  thunder, 
"  Ye  shall  not  see  the  kingdom  of  heaven."     Can  ye  wrestle 
with  the  Almighty  ?     Can  ye  overthrow  Omnipotence  ?     Can 
ye  grapple  with  the  Most  High  ?     Worm  of  the  dust !  canst 
thou  overcome  thy  Maker  ?     Trembling  insect  of  an  hour, 
shaken  by  the  lightnings  when  far  overhead  they  flash  far 
athwart  the  sky,  wilt  thou  dare  the  hand  of  God  ?     Wilt  thou 
venture  to  defy  him  to  his  face  ?     Ah !  he  would  laugh  at 
thee.     As  the  snow  melteth  before  the  sun,  as  wax  runneth  at 
the  fierceness  of  the  fire,  so  wouldst  thou,  if  his  fury  should 
once  lay  hold  of  thee.     Think  not  that  thou  canst  overcome 
him.     He  has  sealed  the  gate  of  Paradise  against  thee,  and 
there  is  no  entrance.     The  God  of  justice  says,  "I  will  not 
reward  the  wicked  with  the  righteous ;  I  will  not  sufier  my 
goodly,  godly  Paradise  to  be  stained  by  wicked  ungodly  men. 
If  they  turn  I  will  have  mercy  upon  them ;  but  if  they  turn 
not,  as  I  live,  I  will  rend  them  in  pieces,  and  there  shall  be 
none   to   deliver."     Now,  sinner,  canst  thou   brazen   it   out 
against  him !     Wilt  thou  rush  upon  the  thick  bosses  of  Jeho- 
vah's bucklers  ?     Wilt  thou  try  to  scale  his  heaven  when  his 
arrow  is  stringed  upon  the  bow  to  reach  thine  heart  ?   What ! 
when  the  glittering  sword  is  at  thy  neck  and  ready  to  slay 
thee  ?    Wilt  thou  endeavor  to  strive  against  thy  Maker  ?    No 
potsherd,  no ;  contend  with  thy  fellow  potsherd.     Go,  crawl- 
ing grasshopper;  go,  fight  with  thy  brothers  ;  strive  with  them, 
but  come  not  against  the  Almighty.     He  hath  said  it,  and  you 
never  shall,  you  never  shall  enter  heaven,  unless  you  are  born 
again.     Again,  I   say,  quarrel  not  with  me  ;  I  have  but  de- 
livered my  Master's  message.     Take  it,  disbelieve  it  if  you 
dare ;  but  if  you  believe  it,  rail  not  at  me,  for  it  is  God's  mes- 
sage, and  I  speak  in  love  to  your  soul,  lest,  lacking  it,  you 
should  perish  in  the  dark,  and  walk  blindfold  to  your  ever- 
lasting perdition. 

IV.  Now,  my  friends,  a  little  expostulation  with  you  ; 
and  then  farewell.  I  hear  one  man  say,  "  Well,  well,  well,  I 
see  it.  I  loill  hope  that  I  shall  he  horn  again  after  I  am 
dead.''"'  O,  sir,  believe  me,  you  will  be  a  miserable  fool  for 
your  pains.     When  men  die  their  state  is  fixed. 


EEGENERATIONT.  221 

"  Fixed  aa  their  everlasting  state, 
Could  they  repent,  'tis  now  too  late." 

Our  lifo  is  like  that  wax  melting  in  the  flame ;  death  puts  its 
stamp  on  it,  and  then  it  cools,  and  the  impress  never  can  be 
changed.  You  to  day  are  like  the  burning  metal  running  forth 
Irom  the  cauldron  in  the  mold ;  death  cools  you  in  your 
mold,  and  you  are  cast  in  that  shape  throughout  eternity. 
The  voice  of  doom  crieth  over  the  dead,  *'  He  that  is  holy  let 
him  be  holy  still ;  he  that  is  unjust  let  him  be  unjust  still;  he 
that  is  filthy,  let  him  be  filthy  still."  The  damned  are  lost  for 
ever ;  they  can  not  be  born  again ;  they  go  on  cursing,  ever 
being  cursed  ;  ever  fighting  against  God,  and  ever  being  tram- 
pled beneath  his  feet ;  they  go  on  ever  mocking,  ever  being 
laughed  at  for  their  mockery ;  ever  rebelling  and  ever  being 
tortured  with  the  whips  of  conscience,  because  they  are  ever 
sinning.  They  can  not  be  regenerated  because  they  are 
dead. 

"  Well,"  says  another,  "  /  will  take  care  that  I  am  regen- 
erated first  before  I  die?'^  Sir,  I  repeat  again,  thou  art  a  fool 
in  talking  thus  ;  how  knowest  thou  that  thou  shalt  live  ?  Hast 
thou  taken  a  lease  of  thy  life,  as  thou  hast  of  thy  house  ? 
Canst  thou  insure  the  breath  within  thy  nostrils  ?  Canst  thou' 
say  in  certainty  that  another  ray  of  light  shall  ever  reach  thine 
eye  ?  Canst  thou  be  sure  that,  as  thine  heart  is  beating  a 
funeral  march  to  the  grave,  thou  wilt  not  soon  beat  the  last 
note ;  and  so  thou  shalt  die  where  thou  standest  or  sittest 
now  ?  O,  man !  if  thy  bones  were  iron,  and  thy  sinews  brass, 
and  thy  lungs  steel,  then  mightest  thou  say,  "  I  shall  live." 
But  thou  art  made  of  dust ;  thou  art  like  the  flower  of  the 
field;  thou  mayest  die  now.  Lo  !  I  see  death  standing  yon- 
der, moving  to  and  fro  the  stone  of  time  upon  his  scythe,  to 
sharpen  it;  to-day,  to-day,  for  some  of  you  he  grasps  the 
scythe — and  away,  away,  he  mows  the  fields,  and  you  fall  one 
by  one.  You  must  not,  and  you  can  not  live.  God  carries  us 
away  as  a  flood,  like  a  ship  in  a  whirlpool ;  like  the  log  in  a 
current,  dashed  onward  to  the  cataract.  There  is  no  stopping 
any  one  of  us ;  we  are  all  dying  now !  and  yet  you  say  you 
will  be  regenerated  ere  you  die !  Ay  sirs,  but  are  you  regen- 
erated now?     FDr  if  not,  it  may  be  too  late  to  hope  for  to- 


222  REGENERATION. 

morrow.     To-raorrow  you  m.ay  be  in  hell,  sealed  up  for  ever 
by  adamantine  destiny,  which  never  can  be  moved. 

"Well,"  cries  another,  "jTc^o  not  care  much  about  it ;  for 
I  see  very  little  in  being  shut  out  of  Paradise."  Ah,  sir,  it  is 
because  thou  dost  not  understand  it.  Thou  smilest  at  it  now ; 
but  there  Avill  be  a  day  when  thy  conscience  will  be  tender, 
when  thy  memory  will  be  strong,  when  thy  judgment  will  be 
enlightened,  and  when  thou  wilt  think  very  diiferently  from 
what  thou  dost  now.  Sinners  in  hell  are  not  the  fools  they  are 
on  earth  ;  in  hell  they  do  not  laugh  at  everlasting  burnings  ; 
in  the  pit  they  do  not  despise  the  words  "  eternal  fire."  The 
worm  that  never  dieth,  when  it  is  gnawing,  gnaws  out  all  joke 
and  laughter  ;  you  may  despise  God  now,  and  despise  me  now, 
for  what  I  say,  but  death  will  change  your  note.  O,  my 
hearers,  if  that  were  all,  I  would  be  willing.  You  may  despise 
me,  yes,  you  may  ;  but  O!  I  beseech  you,  do  not  despise  your- 
selves ;  O  !  be  not  so  fool-hardy  as  to  go  whistling  to  hell,  and 
laughing  to  the  pit ;  for  when  you  are  there,  sirs,  you  will  find 
it  a  different  thing  from  what  you  dream  it  to  be  now.  When 
you  see  the  gates  of  Paradise  shut  against  you,  you  will  find  it 
to  be  a  more  important  matter  than  you  judge  of  now.  You 
came  to  hear  me  preach  to-day,  as  you  would  have  gone  to  the 
opera  or  play-house  ;  you  thought  I  should  amuse  you.  Ah  ! 
that  is  not  my  aim,  God  is  my  witness,  I  came  here  solemnly 
in  earnest,  to  wash  my  hands  of  your  blood.  If  you  are 
damned,  any  one  of  you,  it  shall  not  be  because  I  did  not  warn 
you.  Men  and  women,  if  ye  perish,  my  hands  are  washed  in 
innocency ;  I  have  told  you  of  your  doom.  I  again  cry,  re- 
pent, repent,  repent,  for  "  unless  ye  repent  ye  shall  all  likewise 
perish."  I  came  here  determined  this  morning,  if  I  must  use 
rough  words,  to  use  them  ;  to  speak  right  on  against  men,  and 
for  men  too  ;  for  the  things  we  say  against  you  now  are  really 
for  your  good.  We  do  but  warn  you,  lest  you  perish.  But  ah  ! 
I  hear  one  of  you  saying,  "  I  do  not  understand  this  mystery; 
pray  explain  it  to,  me."  Fool,  fool,  that  thou  art ;  do  3^ou  see 
that  fire  ?  We  are  startled  up  from  our  beds,  the  light  is  at 
the  window ;  we  rush  down  stairs ;  people  are  hurrying  to  and 
fro  ;  the  street  is  trampled  thick  with  crowds  :  they  are  rush- 
ing toward  the  house,  which  is  in  a  burst  of  flame.  The  fire- 
% 


REGENERATION.  223 

men  are  at  their  work  ;  a  stream  of  water  is  pouring  upon  the 
house  ;  but  hark  ye  !  hark  ye  !  there  is  a  man  up  stairs ;  there 
is  a  man  in  the  top  room  ;  there  is  just  time  for  him  to  escape, 
and  barely.  A  shout  is  raised — "Alio!  fire!  fire!  fire!  aho !" 
— but  the  man  does  not  make  his  appearance  at  the  window. 
See,  *he  ladder  is  i)laced  against  the  walls  ;  it  is  up  to  the 
window  sill — a  strong  hand  dashes  in  the  casement !  What  is 
the  man  after,  all  tl  e  while?  What !  is  he  tied  down  in  his 
bed  ?  Is  he  a  cripple  ?  Has  some  fiend  got  hold  of  him,  and 
nailed  him  to  the  floor  ?  No,  no,  no  ;  he  feels  the  boards  get- 
ting hot  beneath  hi:^  feet,  the  smoke  is  stifling  him,  the  flame 
is  burning  all  around,  he  knows  there  is  but  one  way  of  escape, 
by  that  ladder !  What  is  he  doing?  He  is  sitting  down — 
no,  you  can  not  believe  me — he  is  sitting;  down  and  saying, 
"  The  origin  of  this  fire  is  very  mysterio'is  ;  I  wonder  how  it 
is  to  be  discovered  ;  tow  shall  we  understand  it  ?"  Why, 
you  laugh  at  him !  You  are  laughing  at  yourselves.  You  are 
seeking  to  have  this  question  and  that  question  answered, 
when  your  soul  is  ii  peril  of  eternal  life !  O  !  when  you  are 
saved,  it  will  be  time  then  to  ask  questions ;  but  while  you  are 
now  in  the  burning  house,  and  in  danger  of  destruction,  it  is 
not  your  time  to  be  puzzling  yourselves  about  free  will,  fixed 
fate,  predestination  absolute.  All  these  questions  are  good 
and  well  enough  afterward  for  those  that  are  saved.  Let  the 
man  on  shore  try  to  find  out  the  cause  of  the  storm  ;  your  only 
business  now  is  to  ask,  "What  must  I  do  to  be  saved?  And 
how  can  I  escape  from  the  great  damnation  that  awaiteth 
me?" 

But  ah  !  my  friends,  T  can  not  speak  as  I  wish.  I  thir?k  I 
feel,  this  morning,  something  like  Dante,  when  he  wrote  his 
"  n  Inferno?''  Men  said  of  him  that  he  had  been  in  hell ;  he 
looked  like  it.  He  had  thought  of  it  so  long,  that  they  said, 
"  He  has  been  in  h^ll,"  he  spoke  with  such  an  awful  earnest- 
ness. Ah!  if  I  could,  I  would  speak  like  that  too.  It  is  only 
a  few  days  more,  and  I  shall  meet  you  fiice  to  face  ;  I  can  look 
over  the  lapse  of  a  few  years,  when  you  and  I  shall  stand  face 
to  face  before  God's  bar.  "  Watchman,  watchman,"  saith  a 
voice,  "  didst  thou  warn  them  ?  didst  thou  warn  them  ?"  Will 
any  of  you  then  say  I  did  not  ?     No.  even  the  most  abandoned 


224  REGENERATION. 


of  you  will,  at  that  day,  say,  "  We  laughed,  we  scoffed  at  it, 
we  cared  not  for  it ;  but,  O  Lord,  we  are  obliged  to  speak  the 
truth  ;  the  man  was  in  earnest  about  it ;  he  told  us  of  our 
doom,  and  he  is  clear."  Will  you  say  so  ?  I  know  you  will. 
But  yet  this  one  remark — to  be  cast  out  of  heaven  is  an 
awful  thing.  Some  of  you  have  parents  there  ;  you  have  dear 
friends  there;  they  grasped  your  hand  in  death,  and  said, 
"  Farewell,  until  we  meet  you."  But  if  you  never  see  the 
kingdom  of  God,  you  can  never  see  them  again.  "  My 
mother,"  says  one,  "  sleeps  in  the  graveyard  ;  I  often  go  to 
the  tomb  and  put  some  flowers  upon  it,  in  remembrance  of  her 
who  nursed  me  ;  but  must  I  never  see  her  again  ?"  No,  never 
again ;  no,  never,  unless  you  are  born  again.  Mothers,  you 
have  had  infants  that  have  gone  to  heaven  ;  you  would  like  to 
see  your  family  all  around  the  throne ;  but  you  will  never  see 
your  children  more,  unless  you  are  born  again.  Will  you  bid 
adieu  this  day  to  the  immortal  ?  Will  you  say  farewell  this 
hour  to  your  glorified  friends  in  Paradise  ?  You  must  say  so, 
or  else  be  converted.  You  must  fly  to  Christ,  an«  trust  in 
him,  and  his  Spirit  must  renew  you,  or  else  you  must  look  up 
to  heaven,  and  say,  "Choir  of  the  blest!  I  slmll  never  hear 
you  sing  ;  parents  of  my  youth,  guardians  of  my  infancy,  I  love 
you,  but  between  you  and  myself  there  is  a  great  gulf  fixed  ; 
I  am  cast  away,  and  you  are  saved."  O,  I  beseech  you,  think 
on  these  matters  ;  and  when  you  go  away,  let  it  not  be  to  for- 
get what  I  have  said.  If  you  are  at  all  impressed  this  morn- 
ing, put  not  away  the  impression  ;  it  may  be  your  last  warn- 
ing ;  it  will  be  a  sorrowful  thing  to  be  lost  with  the  notes  of 
the  gospel  in  your  ears,  and  to  perish  under  the  ministry  of 
truth. 


SERMON    XV. 

SPIRITUAL  RESURRECTION. 

"  And  you  hath  he  quickened,  who  were  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins."— 
Ephesiaxs,  ii.  1. 

It  might  naturally  be  expected  that  I  should  have  selected 
the  topic  of  the  resurrection  on  what  is  usually  called  the 
Easter  Sabbath.  I  shall  not  do  so  ;  for  although  1  have  read 
portions  which  refer  to  that  glorious  subject,  I  have  had 
pressed  on  ray  mind  a  subject  which  is  not  the  resurrection  of 
Christ,  but  which  is  in  some  measure  connected  with  it — the 
resurrection  of  lost  and  ruined  man  by  the  Spirit  of  God  in 
this  life. 

The  apostle  is  here  speaking,  you  will  observe,  of  the  church 
at  Ephesus,  and,  indeed,  of  all  those  who  were  chosen  in  Christ 
Jesus,  accepted  in  him,  and  redeemed  with  his  blood  ;  and  he 
says  of  them,  "  You  hath  he  quickened,  who  were  dead  in 
trespasses  and  sins." 

What  a  solemn  sight  is  presented  to  us  by  a  dead  body ! 
When  last  evening  trying  to  realize  the  thought,  it  utterly 
overcame  me.  The  thought  is  overwhelming,  that  soon  tliis 
body  of  mine  must  be  a  carnival  for  worms  ;  that  in  and  out 
of  these  places,  where  my  eyes  are  glistening,  foul  things,  the 
offspring  of  loathsomeness,  shall  crawl ;  that  this  body  must  be 
stretched  in  still,  cold,  abject,  passive  death,  must  then  be- 
come a  noxious,  nauseous  thing,  cast  out  even  by  those  that 
loved  me,  who  will  say,  "  Bury  my  dead  out  of  my  sight." 
Perhaps  you  can  scarcely,  in  the  moment  I  can  afford  you,  ap- 
propriate the  idea  to  yourselves.  Does  it  not  seem  a  strange 
thing,  that  you,  who  have  walked  to  this  place  this  morning, 
shall  be  carried  to  your  graves  ;  that  the  eyes  with  which  you 
now  behold  me  sh..'^  soon  be  glazed  in  everlasting  darkness  ; 

10* 


226  SPIRITUAL    KESUEBECTIOiT. 

that  the  tongues,  which  just  now  moved  in  song,  shall  soon 
be  silent  lumps  of  clay ;  and  that  your  strong  and  stalwart 
frame,  now  standing  in  this  place,  will  soon  be  unable  to  move 
a  muscle,  and  become  a  loathsome  thing,  the  brother  of  the 
worm  and  the  sister  of  corruption  ?  You  can  scarcely  get 
hold  of  the  idea ;  death  doth  such  awful  work  with  us,  it  is 
such  a  Vandal  with  this  mortal  fabric,  it  so  rendeth  to  pieces 
this  fair  thing  that  God  hath  builded  up,  that  we  can  scarcely 
bear  to  contemplate  his  works  of  ruin. 

Now,  endeavor,  as  well  as  you  can,  to  get  the  idea  of  a 
corpse,  and  when  you  have  so  done,  please  to  understand, 
that  that  is  the  metaphor  employed  in  my  text  to  set  forth 
the  condition  of  your  soul  by  nature.  Just  as  the  body  is 
dead,  incapable,  unable,  unfeeling,  and  soon  about  to  become 
corrupt  and  putrid,  so  are  we  if  we  be  unquickened  by  divine 
grace ;  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins,  having  within  us  death, 
which  is  capable  of  developing  itself  in  worse  and  worse  stages 
of  sin  and  wickedness,  until  all  of  us  here,  left  by  God's  grace, 
should  become  loathsome  beings;  loathsome  through  sin  and 
wickedness,  even  as  the  corpse  through  natural  decay.  Un- 
derstand, that  the  doctrine  of  the  holy  Scripture  is,  that  man 
by  nature,  since  the  fall,  is  dead  ;  he  is  a  corrupt  and  ruined 
thing ;  in  a  spiritual  sense,  utterly  and  entirely  dead.  And  if 
any  of  us  shall  come  to  spiritual  life,  it  must  be  by  the  quick- 
t3ning  of  God's  Spirit,  vouchsafed  to  us  sovereignly  through 
the  good  will  of  God  the  Father,  not  for  any  merits  of  our 
own,  but  entirely  of  his  own  abounding  and  infinite  grace. 

Now,  this  morning,  I  trust  I  shall  not  be  tedious  ;  I  shall 
endeavor  to  make  the  subject  as  interesting  as  possible,  and 
also  endeavor  to  be  brief.  The  general  doctrine  of  this 
morning  is,  that  every  man  that  is  born  into  the  world  is  dead 
spiritually,  and  that  spiritual  lite  must  be  given  by  the  Holy 
Spirit,  and  can  be  obtained  from  no  other  source.  That  gene- 
ral doctrine,  I  shall  illustrate  in  rather  a  singular  way.  You 
remember  that  our  Saviour  raised  three  dead  persons ;  I  do 
not  find  that  during  his  lifetime  he  caused  more  than  three 
resurrections.  The  first  was  the  young  maiden,  the  daughter 
of  Jairus^  who,  when  she  lay  on  her  bed  dead,  rose  up  to  life 
at  the  single   utterance  of  Christ,  "  Talitha  cumi  !^^     The 


SPIRITUAL    RESURBECllON.  227 

second  was  the  case  of  the  toidow'^s  son,  who  was  on  his  bier, 
about  to  be  carried  t )  his  tomb ;  and  Jesus  raised  him  up  to  hfe 
by  saying,  "  Young  man,  I  say  unto  thee,  arise."  The  third, 
and  most  memorab  e  cj.se,  was  that  of  JOazai'us,  who  was  not 
on  his  bed,  nor  on  his  bier,  but  in  his  tomb,  ay,  and  corrupt  too ; 
but  notwithstanding  that,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  by  the  voice 
of  his  omnipotence,  ci'ying,  "Lazarus  come  forth,"  brought 
him  out  of  the  tomb. 

I  shall  use  these  three  facts  as  illustrations  of  the  different 
states  of  men,  though  they  be  all  thoroughly  dead  ;  secondly, 
as  illustrations  oi  the  different  tneans  of  grace  used  for  raising 
them,  though,  after  all,  the  same  great  agency  is  employed ; 
and,  in  the  third  place,  as  illustrations  of  the  after  experience 
of  quickened  men  ;  for  though  that  to  a  great  degree  is  the 
same,  yet  there  are  some  points  of  difference. 

I.  I  shall  begin  by  noticing,  then,  first  of  all,  the  condition 
OF  MEN  BY  NATURE.  Men  by  nature  are  all  dead.  There  is 
Jairus's  daughter  ;  she  lies  on  her  bed  ;  she  seems  as  if  she 
were  alive ;  her  mother  has  scarce  ceased  to  kiss  her  brow,  her 
hand  is  still  in  her  father's  loving  grasp,  and  he  can  scarcely 
think  that  she  is  dead ;  but  dead  she  is,  as  thoroughly  dead 
as  she  ever  can  be.  Next  comes  the  case  of  the  .young 
man  brought  out  of  hi-  grave  ;  he  is  more  than  dead,  he  has 
begun  to  be  corrupt,  the  signs  of  decay  are  upon  his  face,  and 
they  are  carrying  him  to  his  tomb ;  yet  though  there  are  moi-e 
manifestations  of  death  about  him,  he  is  no  more  dead  than 
the  other.  He  is  just  as  dead  ;  they  are  both  dead,  and  death 
really  knows  of  no  decrees.  The  third  case  goes  further  still 
in  the  manifestation  of  death ;  for  it  is  the  case  of  which  Martha, 
using  strong  words,  said,  '-Lord,  by  this  time  he  stinketh  ;  for 
he  hath  been  dead  four  days."  And  yet,  mark  you,  the  daugh- 
ter of  Jairus  was  as  dead  as  Lazarus ;  though  the  manifesta- 
tion of  death  was  not  so  complete  in  her  case.  All  were  dead 
alike.  I  have  in  my  congregation  some  blessed  beings,  fair  to 
look  upon  ;  fair,  I  mean,  ivi  their  character,  as  well  as  their 
outward  appearance  ;  Jiey  have  about  them  every  thing  that 
is  good  and  lovely;  but  mark  this,  if  they  are  unregenerate 
they  are  dead  still.  That  girl,  dead  in  the  room,  upon  her 
bed,  had  little  ab)ut  her  that  could  show  her  death.     Not  yet 


228  SPIRITUAL    llESUIiRKCTION. 

had  the  loving  finger  closed  the  eyelid  ;  there  seemed  to  be 
a  light  still  lingering  in  her  eye  ;  like  a  lily  just  nipped  off,  she 
was  as  fair  as  life  itself.  The  wornri  had  not  yet  begun  to  gnaw 
her  check,  the  flush  had  not  yet  faded  from  her  face;  she 
seemed  well-nigh  alive.  And  so  is  it  with  some  I  liave  here. 
Ye  have  all  that  heart  could  wish  for,  except  the  one  thhig 
needful ;  ye  have  all  things  save  love  to  the  Saviour.  Ye  are 
not  yet  united  to  him  by  a  hving  faith.  Ah  !  then,  I  grieve  to 
say  it,  ye  are  dead  !  ye  are  dead !  As  much  dead  as  the  worst 
of  men,  although  your  death  is  not  so  apparent.  Again,  I  have 
in  my  presence  young  men  who  have  grown  to  riper  years 
than  that  fair  damsel  who  died  in  her  cliildhood.  You  have 
much  about  you  that  is  lovely,  but  you  have  just  begun  to  in- 
dulge in  evil  habits  ;  you  have  not  yet  become  the  desperate 
sinner ;  you  have  not  yet  become  altogether  noxious  in  the 
eyes  of  other  men ;  you  are  but  beginning  to  sin,  you  are  like 
the  young  man  carried  out  on  his  bier ;  you  have  not  yet  be- 
come the  confirmed  drunkard ;  you  have  not  yet  begun  to 
curse  and  blaspheme  God ;  you  are  still  accepted  in  good  so- 
ciety ;  you  are  not  yet  cast  out ;  but  you  are  dead,  thoroughly 
dead,  just  as  dead  as  the  third  and  worst  case.  But  I  dare 
say  I  have  some  characters  that  are  illustrations  of  that  case 
too.  There  is  Lazarus  in  his  tomb,  rotten  and  putrid  ;  and  so 
there  are  some  men  not  more  dead  than  others,  but  their  death 
has  become  more  apparent,  their  character  has  become  abomi- 
nable, their  deeds  cry  out  against  them,  they  are  jHit  out  of 
decent  society,  the  stone  is  rolled  to  the  mouth  of  tlieir  tomb, 
men  feel  that  they  can  not  hold  acquaintance  with  them,  for 
they  have  so  utterly  abandoned  every  sense  of  right,  that  we 
say,  "Put  them  out  of  sight,  we  can  not  endure  them !"  And 
yet  these  putrid  ones  may  live  ;  these  last  are  not  more  dead 
than  the  maiden  upon  her  bed,  though  death  has  more  fully  re- 
vealed itself  in  their  corruption.  Jestis  Christ  must  quicken 
the  one  as  well  as  the  other,  and  bring  them  all  to  know  and 
love  his  name. 

1.  Now,  then,  I  am  about  to  enter  into  the  minutiae  of  the 
difiTerence  of  these  three  cases.  I  will  take  the  case  of  the 
young  maiden.  I  have  her  here  to-day  ;  I  have  many  illustra- 
tions of  her  present  before  nie  ;  at  least,  I  trust  so.     Now,  wili 


SPIRITUAL    RKSURR1CCTI0N-.  229 

you  allow  me  to  point  out  all  the  differences  ?  Here  is  th(^ 
young  maiden ;  look  upon  her ;  you  can  bear  the  sight ;  she 
is  dead,  but  O  !  beauty  Ungereth  there  /  she  is  fair  and  lovely, 
though  the  life  hath  departed  from  her.  In  the  young  man's 
case  there  is  no  beauty ;  the  wcrm  hath  begun  to  eat  him  ; 
his  honor  hath  departed.  In  the  third  case,  there  is  absolute 
rottenness.  But  here  there  is  beauty  still  upon  her  cheek.  Is 
she  not  amiable  ?  Is  she  not  lovely  ?  Would  not  all  love  her  ? 
Is  she  not  to  be  admired,  even  to  be  imitated  ?  Is  she  not 
fjiirest  of  the  fair?  Ay,  that  she  is;  but  God  the  Spirit  has 
not  yet  looked  upon  her ;  she  has  not  yet  bent  her  knee  to 
Jesus,  and  cried  for  mercy ;  she  has  every  thing,  except  true 
religion.  Alas!  for  her;  alas!  that  so  fair  a  character  should 
be  a  dead  one.  Alas  !  my  sister  ;  alas  !  that  thou,  the  benev- 
olent, the  kind  one,  should  yet  be,  after  all,  dead  in  thy  tres- 
passes and  sins.  As  Jesus  wept  over  that  young  man  who  had 
kept  all  the  commandments,  and  yet  one  thing  he  lacked,  so 
weep  I  over  thee  this  morning.  Alas !  thou  fair  one,  lovely 
in  thy  character,  and  amiable  in  thy  carriage,  why  shouldst 
thou  lie  dead  ?  For  dead  thou  art,  unless  thou  hast  faith  in 
Christ.  Thine  excellence,  thy  virtue,  and  thy  goodness,  shall 
avail  thee  nought ;  thou  art  dead,  and  dead  thou  must  be,  un- 
less he  make  thee  live. 

Note,  too,  that  in  the  case  of  this  maiden,  whom  we  have 
introduced  to  you,  the  daughter  of  Jairus,  she  is  yet  caressed ; 
she  has  only  been  dead  a  moment  or  two,  and  the  mother  still 
presses  her  cheek  with  kisses.  O  !  can  she  be  dead  ?  Do  not 
the  tears  rain  on  her,  as  if  they  would  sow  the  seeds  of  life  in 
that  dead  earth  again  ? — earth  that  looks  fertile  enough  to 
bring  forth  life  with  but  one  living  tear?  Ay,  but  those  salt 
tears  are  tears  of  barrenness.  She  liveth  not;  but  she  is  still 
caressed.  Not  so  the  young  man  ;  he  is  put  on  the  bier  ;  no 
man  will  touch  him  any  more,  or  else  he  will  be  utterly  defiled. 
And  as  for  Lazarus,  he  is  shut  up  with  a  stone.  But  this  young 
maiden  is  still  caressed  ;  so  it  is  with  many  of  you ;  you  are 
loved  even  by  the  living  in  Sion  ;  God's  own  people  love  you  ; 
the  minister  has  often  prayed  for  you  ;  you  are  admitted  into 
the  assemblies  of  the  saints,  you  sit  with  them  as  God's  people, 
you  hear  as  they  hear,  and  you  sing  as  they  sing.     Alas!  for 


230  SPIRITUAL    RESURRECTION. 

you;  alas!  for  you,  that  you  should  still  be  dead!  O!  it 
grieves  me  to  the  heart,  to  think  that  some  of  you  are  all  that 
heart  could  wish,  except  that  one  thing;  yet  lacking  that 
which  is  the  only  thing  that  can  deliver  you.  You  are  caressed 
by  us,  received  by  the  living  in  Sion  into  their  company  and 
acquaintance,  approved  of  and  accepted ;  alas !  that  you 
should  yet  be  without  life !  O !  in  your  case,  if  you  are 
saved,  you  will  have  to  join  with  even  the  worst  in  saying, 
"  I  have  been  quickened  by  divine  grace,  or  else  I  had  never 
lived." 

And  now  will  you  look  at  this  maiden  again  ?  Note,  she 
has  no  grave  clothes  on  her  yet  /  she  is  dressed  in  her  own 
raiment ;  just  as  she  retired  to  her  bed  a  little  sick,  so  lieth  she 
there ;  not  yet  have  the  napkin  and  the  shroud  been  wrapped 
about  her ;  she  still  weareth  the  habiliments  of  sleep  ;  she  is 
not  yet  given  up  to  death,  ISTot  so  the  young  man  yonder — 
he  is  in  his  grave  clothes  ;  not  so  Lazarus — he  is  bound  hand 
and  foot.  But  this  young  maiden  hath  no  grave  clothes  upon 
her.  So  with  the  young  person  we  wish  to  speak  of  this  morn- 
ing;  she  has  as  yet  no  evil  habits,  she  hath  not  yet  reached 
that  point;  the  young  man  yonder  has  begun  to  have  evil  hab- 
its; and  yon  gray-headed  sinner  is  bound  hand  and  foot  by 
them  ;  but  as  yet  she  appeareth  just  like  the  living,  she  acteth 
just  like  the  Christian  ;  her  habit's  are  fair,  goodly,  and  com{3ly ; 
there  seemeth  to  be  little  ill  about  her.  Alas !  alas  !  that  thou 
shouldst  be  dead,  even  in  thy  fairest  raiment.  Alas !  thou 
who  hast  set  the  cbaplet  of  benevolence  on  thy  brow,  thou 
w^ho  dost  gird  thyself  with  the  white  robes  of  outward  purity,  if 
thou  art  not  born  again,  thou  art  dead  still.  Thy  beauty  shall 
fade  away  like  a  moth  ;  and  in  the  day  of  judgment  thou  wilt 
be  severed  from  the  righteous,  unless  God  shall  make  thee  live. 
O !  I  could  w^eep  over  those  young  ones  who  seem  at  present 
to  have  been  delivered  from  forming  any  habits  which  could 
lead  them  astray,  but  who  are  yet  unquickened  and  unsaved. 
O !  would  to  God,  young  man  and  young  woman,  you  might 
in  early  years  be  quickened  by  the  Spirit. 

And  will  you  notice,  yet  once  more,  that  this  young 
maiien-s  death  was  a  death  cotifined  to  her  chamber.  N'ot 
so  with  the  young  man  ;  he  was  carried  to  the  gat<»  of  the  city, 


SPIRITUAL    RESURRECTION.  231 

and  much  people  saw  him.  Not  so  Lazarus;  the  Jews  came 
to  weep  at  his  tomb.  But  this  young  woman's  death  is  in  her 
chamber.  Ay,  so  it  is  with  tlie  young  woman  or  young  man 
I  mean  to  describe  now.  His  sin  is  as  yet  a  secret  tiling,  kept 
to  himself;  as  yet  there  has  been  no  breaking  forth  of  iniquity, 
but  only  the  conception  of  it  in  the  heart ;  just  the  embryo 
of  lust,  not  as  yet  broken  out  into  act.  The  young  man  has 
not  yet  drained  the  intoxicating  cup,  although  he  has  had 
some  whisperings  of  the  sweetness  of  it ;  he  has  not  yet  run 
into  the  ways  of  wickedness,  though  he  has  had  temptations 
thrust  upon  him ;  as  yet  he  has  kept  his  sin  in  his  chamber, 
and  most  of  it  has  been  unseen.  Alas !  my  brother,  alas !  my 
sister,  that  thou  M'ho  in  thine  outward  carriage  art  so  good, 
should  yet  have  sins  in  the  chamber  of  thine  heart,  and  death 
in  the  secrecy  of  thy  being,  which  is  as  true  a  death  as  that  of 
the  grossest  sinner,  though  not  so  thoroughly  manifested. 
Would  to  God  that  thou  couldst  say,  "  And  he  hath  quickened 
me,  for  with  all  my  loveliness,  and  all  my  excellence,  I  was  by 
nature  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins."  Come,  let  me  just  press 
this  matter  home.  I  have  some  in  my  congregation  that  I 
look  upon  with  fear.  O !  my  dear  friends,  my  much  loved 
friends,  how  many  there  are  among  you,  I  repeat,  that  are  all 
that  the  heart  could  wish,  except  that  one  thing — that  you 
love  not  my  Master.  O  !  ye  young  men  who  come  up  to  the 
house  of  God,  and  who  are  outwardly  so  good  ;  alas  !  for  you, 
that  you  should  lack  the  root  of  the  matter.  O  !  ye  daughters 
of  Sion,  who  are  ever  at  the  house  of  prayer,  O !  that  ye 
should  yet  be  without  grace  in  your  heart !  Take  heed,  I  be- 
Beech  you,  ye  fairest,  youngest,  most  upright,  and  most  honest; 
when  the  dead  are  separated  from  the  living,  unless  ye  be  re- 
generated, ye  must  go  with  the  dead  ;  though  ye  be  never  so 
fair  and  goodly,  ye  must  be  cast  away,  unless  ye  live. 

2.  Thus,  I  hav^e  done  with  the  first  case ;  now  we  will  go  to 
the  young  man,  who  stands  second.  He  is  not  more  dead  than 
the  other,  but  he  is  further  gone.  Come,  now,  and  stop  the 
bier ;  you  can  not  look  upon  him !  Why,  the  cheek  is  sunken 
— there  is  ahollowness  there  ;  not  as  in  the  case  of  the  maideii, 
whose  cheek  was  still  round  and  ruddy.  And  the  eye — O ! 
what  a  blackness  is  there  !     Look  on  him  ;  you  can  see  that 


232  SPIRITUAL    RESURRECTION. 

the  gnawings  of  tlie  worm  will  soon  burst  forth ;  corruption 
hath  begun  its  work.  So  it  is  with  some  young  men  I  have 
here.  They  are  not  what  they  were  in  their  childhood,  when 
their  habits  were  proper  and  correct ;  but  mayhap  they  have 
just  been  enticed  into  the  house  of  the  strange  woman;  they 
have  just  been  tempted  to  go  astray  from  the  path  of  recti- 
tude ;  their  corruption  is  just  breaking  forth ;  they  disdain  now 
to  sit  at  their  mother's  apron-strings ;  they  think  it  foul  scorn 
to  keep  to  the  rules  that  bind  the  moral !  They  !  they  are  free, 
they  say,  and  they  will  be  free;  they  will  live  a  jolly  and  a 
happy  life ;  and  so  they  run  on  in  boisterous  yet  wicked  merri- 
ment, and  betray  the  marks  of  death  about  them.  They  have 
gone  further  than  the  maiden  ;  she  was  still  fair  and  comely ; 
but  here  there  is  something  that  is  the  afterwork  of  death. 
The  maiden  was  caressed,  but  the  young  man  is  untouched  ; 
he  lieth  on  the  bier,  and  though  men  bear  him  on  their 
shoulders,  yet  there  is  a  shrinking  from  him ;  he  is  dead,  and 
it  is  known  that  he  is  dead.  Young  man,  you  have  got  as  far 
as  that ;  you  know  that  good  men  shrink  from  you.  It  was 
but  yesterday  that  your  mother's  tears  fell  fast  and  thick  as 
she  warned  your  younger  brother  to  avoid  your  sin ;  your  very 
sister,  when  she  kissed  you  but  this  morning,  prayed  to  God 
that  you  might  get  good  in  this  house  of  prayer ;  but  you 
know  that  of  late  she  has  been  ashamed  of  you ;  your  conver- 
sation has  become  so  profane  and  wicked,  that  even  she  could 
scarce  endure  it.  There  are  houses  in  which  you  were  once 
welcome ;  where  you  once  bowed  your  knee  with  them  at  the 
family  prayer,  and  your  name  was  mentioned  too  ;  but  now" 
you  do  not  choose  to  go  there,  for  when  you  go,  you  arc 
treated  with  reserve.  The  good  man  of  the  house  feels  that 
he  could  not  let  his  son  go  with  you,  for  you  would  contami- 
nate him ;  he  does  not  sit  down  now  side  by  side  with  you,  as 
he  used  to  do,  and  talk  about  the  best  things;  he  lets  you  sit 
m  the  room  as  a  matter  of  mere  courtesy  ;  he  stands  fir  away 
from  you,  as  it  were ;  he  feels  that  you  have  not  a  spirit  con- 
genial with  his  own.  You  are  a  little  shunned  ;  you  are  not 
quite  avoided ;  you  are  still  received  among  the  people  of 
God,  yet  there  is  a  coldness  that  manifests  that  they  under- 
stand that  you  are  not  a  living  one. 


SPIRITUAL    RESURRECTION.  233 

And  note,  too,  that  this  young  man,  though  carried  out  to 
his  grave,  was  not  like  the  maiden ;  she  was  in  the  garments 
of  life,  but  he  was  lorcqyped  in  the  cerements  of  death.  So  many 
of  you  have  begun  to  form  habits  that  are  evil ;  you  know 
that  already  the  screw  of  the  devil  is  tightening  on  your  finger. 
Once  it  was  a  screw  you  could  slip  off  or  on  ;  you  said  you 
were  master  of  your  pleasures — now  your  pleasures  are  mas- 
ter of  you.  Your  habits  are  not  now  commendable,  you  know 
they  are  not ;  you  stand  convicted  while  I  speak  to  you  this 
morning ;  you  know  your  ways  are  evil.  Ah !  young  man, 
though  thou  hast  not  yet  gone  so  far  as  the  open  profligate  and 
desperately  profane,  take  heed,  thou  art  dead  !  thou  art  dead  ! 
and  unless  the  Spirit  quicken  thee,  thou  shalt  be  cast  into  the 
valley  of  Gehenna,  to  be  the  food  of  that  worm  which  never 
dieth,  but  eateth  souls  throughout  eternity.  And  ah  !  young 
man,  I  weep,  I  weep  over  thee  ;  thou  art  not  yet  so  far  gone, 
that  they  have  rolled  the  stone  against  thee  ;  thou  art  not  yet 
become  obnoxious  ;  thou  art  not  yet  the  staggering  drunkard, 
nor  yet  the  blasphemous  infidel ;  thou  hast  much  that  is  ill 
about  thee,  but  thou  hast  not  gone  all  the  lengths  yet.  Take 
heed  ;  thou  wilt  go  further  still ;  there  is  no  stopping  in  sin. 
When  the  worm  is  there,  you  can  not  put  your  finger  on  it, 
and  say,  "  Stop ;  eat  no  more."  No,  it  will  go  on  to  your 
utter  ruin.  May  God  save  you  now,  ere  you  shall  come  to 
that  consummation  for  which  hell  so  sighs,  and  which  heaven 
can  alone  avert. 

One  more  remark  concerning  this  young  man.  The  maiden's 
death  was  in  her  chamber ;  the  you7ig  'mail's  death  teas  in  the 
city  gates.  In  the  first  case  I  described,  the  sin  was  secret. 
But,  young  man,  yours  is  not.  You  have  gone  so  far  that 
your  habits  are  openly  wicked  ;  you  have  dared  to  sin  in  the 
face  of  God's  sun.  You  are  not  as  some  others — seemingly 
good  ;  but  you  go  out  and  openly  say,  "  I  am  no  hypocrite ; 
I  dare  to  do  wrong.  I  do  not  profess  to  be  righteous  ;  I  know 
I  am  a  scapegrace  rascal.  I  have  gone  astray,  and  I  am  not 
ashamed  to  sin  in  the  street."  Ah  !  young  man,  young  man  ! 
Thy  father,  perhaps  is  sayiflg  now,  "  Would  God  that  I  had 
died  for  him — would  God  that  I  had  seen  him  buried  in  his 
grave,  ere  he  should  hsve  gone  to   uch  a  length  in  wickedness  ! 


234  SPIRITUAL    RESURRECTION. 

Would  God  that  when  I  first  saw  him,  and  mme  eye  was  glad- 
dened with  my  son,  I  had  seen  him  the  next  minute  smitten 
with  disease  and  death !  O,  would  to  God  that  his  infant 
spirit  had  been  called  to  heaven,  that  he  might  not  have  lived 
to  bring  in  this  way  my  gray  hairs  in  sorrow  to  the  grave !" 
Your  sport  in  the  city  gates  is  misery  in  your  father's  house  ; 
your  open  merriment  before  the  world  brings  agony  into  a 
mother's  heart.  O,  I  beseech  you,  stay.  O,  Lord  Jesua ! 
touch  the  bier  this  morning  !  Stop  some  young  man  in  his 
evil  habits,  and  say  unto  him,  "Arise."  Then  will  he  join 
with  us  in  confessing  that  those  who  are  alive  have  been  quick- 
ened by  Jesus,  through  the  Spirit,  though  they  were  dead  in 
trespasses  and  sins. 

3.  Now  w^e  come  to  the  third  and  last  case — Lazarus  dead 
AND  BURIED.  Ah  I  dear  friends,  I  can  not  take  you  to  see  Laz- 
arus in  his  grave.  Stand,  O  stand  away  from  him.  Whither 
shall  we  flee  to  avoid  the  noxious  odor  of  that  reeking  corpse  ? 
Ah,  whither  shall  we  flee?  There  is  no  beauty  there ;  we 
dare  not  look  upon  it.  There  is  not  even  the  gloss  of  life  left. 
O,  hideous  spectacle  !  I  must  not  attempt  to  describe  it ; 
w^ords  would  fail  me,  and  you  would  be  too  much  shocked. 
Nor  dare  I  tell  the  character  of  some  men  present  here.  I 
should  be  ashamed  to  tell  the  things  which  some  of  you  have 
done.  This  cheek  might  mantle  with  a  blush  to  tell  the  deeds 
of  darkness  which  some  of  the  ungodly  of  this  world  habit- 
ually practice.  Ah,  the  last  stage  of  death,  the  last  stage  of 
corruption,  O,  how  hideous ;  but  the  last  stage  of  sin,  hide- 
ous far  more !  Some  writers  seem  to  have  an  aptitude  for 
puddling  in  this  mud,  and  digging  up  this  miry  clay  ;  I  confess 
that  I  have  none.  I  can  not  describe  to  you  the  lusts  and 
vices  of  a  full-grown  sinner.  I  can  not  tell  you  what  are  the 
debaucheries,  the  degrading  lusts,  the  devilish,  the  bestial  sins 
into  which  wicked  men  will  run,  when  spiritual  death  has 
had  its  perfect  work  in  them,  and  sin  has  manifested  itself  in 
all  its  fearful  wickedness.  I  may  have  some  here.  They  are 
not  Christians.  They  are  not,  like  the  young  maiden,  still 
fondled,  nor  even  like  the  young  man,  still  kept  in  the  funeral 
procession  :  no,  they  have  gone  so  far  that  decent  people  avoid 
then.     Their  very  wafe,  when  they  go  into  the  house,  rushes 


SPIRITUAL    RESURRECTION.  235 

up  stairs  to  be  out  of  tlie  way.  They  are  scorned.  Such  a 
one  is  the  harlot,  from  whom  one's  head  is  turned  in  the  very 
street.  Such  a  one  is  tlie  openly  profligate,  to  whom  we  give 
wide  quarters,  lest  we  touch  him.  He  is  a  man  that  is  far 
gone.  The  stone  is  rolled  before  him.  No  one  calls  him  re- 
spectable. He  dwelleth,  perhaps,  in  some  back  slum  of  a  dirty 
lane  ;  he  knoweth  not  w^here  to  go.  Even  as  he  stands  in  this 
place,  he  feels  that  if  his  next-door  neighbor  knew  his  guilt  he 
would  give  him  a  wide  berth,  and  stand  far  away  from  him  ; 
for  he  has  come  to  the  last  stage  ;  he  has  no  marks  of  life :  he 
is  utterly  rotten.  And  mark ;  as  in  the  case  of  the  maiden, 
the  sin  was  in  the  chamber,  secret;  in  the  next  case  it  was  in 
the  open  streets,  public;  but  in  this  case  it  is  secret  again.  It 
is  in  the  tomb.  For  you  will  mark  that  men,  when  they  are 
only  half  gone  in  wickedness,  do  it  openly  ;  but  when  they 
are  fully  gone  their  lust  becomes  so  degrading  that  they  are 
obliged  to  do  it  in  secret.  They  are  put  into  the  grave,  in 
order  that  all  may  be  hidden.  Their  lust  is  one  which  can 
only  be  perpetrated  at  midnight ;  a  deed  which  can  only  be 
done  when  shrouded  by  the  astonished  curtains  of  darkness. 
Have  I  any  such  here  ?  I  can  not  tell  that  I  have  many  ;  but 
still  I  have  some.  Ah !  in  being  constantly  visited  by  peni- 
tents I  have  sometimes  blushed  for  this  city  of  London.  There 
are  merchants  whose  names  stand  high  and  fair.  Shall  I  tell 
it  here  ?  I  know  it  on  the  best  authority,  and  the  truest,  too. 
There  are  some  w^ho  have  houses  large  and  tall,  who  on  the 
exchange  are  reputable  and  honorable,  and  every  one  admits 
them  and  receives  them  into  their  society;  but  ah  !  there  are 
some  of  the  merchants  of  London  who  practice  lusts  that  are 
abominable.  I  have  in  my  church  and  congregation — and  I 
dare  say  what  men  dare  to  do — I  have  in  my  congregation 
women  whose  ruin  and  destruction  have  been  wrought  by 
some  of  the  most  respected  men  in  respectable  society.  Few 
would  venture  on  so  bold  a  statement  as  that ;  but  if  you 
boldly  do  the  thing,  T  must  speak  of  it.  It  is  not  for  God's 
ambassador  to  Avash  his  mouth  beforehand  ;  let  him  boldly  re- 
prove, as  men  do  boldly  sin.  Ah  !  there  are  some  that  are  a 
stench  in  the  nostrils  of  the  Almighty  ;  some  whose  charac- 
ter is  hideous  beyond   all  hideousness.     They  have  to  be  cov 


236  SPIRITUAL    RESURRECTION. 

ered  up  in  the  tomb  of  secrecy  ;  for  men  would  scout  them 
from  society,  and  hiss  them  from  existence,  if  they  knew  all. 
And  yet — and  now  comes  a  blessed  interposition — yet  this 
last  case  may  be  saved  as  well  as  the  first,  and  as  easily  too. 
The  rotten  Lazarus  may  come  out  of  his  tomb,  as  well  as  the 
slumbering  maiden  li'om  her  bed.  The  last,  the  most  cor- 
rupt, the  most  desperately  abominable,  may  yet  be  quickened ; 
and  he  may  join  in  exclaiming,  "  And  I  have  been  quickened, 
though  I  was  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins."  I  trust  you  will 
understand  what  I  wish  to  convey — that  the  death  is  the  same 
in  all  cases  ;  but  the  manifestation  of  it  is  difterent ;  and  that 
the  life  must  come  from  God,  and  from  God  alone. 

IT.  And  now  I  will  go  on  to  another  point — the  quicken- 
ing. These  three  persons  were  all  quickened,  and  they  wei'e 
all  quickened  by  the  same  being — that  is  by  Jesus.  But  they 
were  all  quickened  in  a  different  manner.  Note,  first,  the 
young  maiden  on  her  bed.  When  she  was  brought  to  life,  it 
is  said,  "  Jesus  took  her  by  the  hand  and  said,  Maiden,  arise." 
It  was  a  still  small  voice.  Her  heart  received  its  pulse  again, 
and  she  lived.  It  was  the  gentle  touching  of  the  hand — no 
open  demonstration — and  the  soft  voice  was  heard,  "  Arise." 
Now  usually  when  God  converts  young  people  in  the  first 
stage  of  sin,  before  they  have  formed  evil  habits,  he  does  it 
in  a  gentle  manner  ;  not  by  the  "  terrors  of  the  law,  the  tem- 
pest, fire  and  smoke,"  but  he  makes  them  like  Lydia,  "  whose 
heart  the  Lord  opened"  that  she  received  the  word.  On  such 
"  it  droppeth  like  the  gentle  dew  from  heaven  upon  the  place 
beneath."  With  hardened  sinners  grace  cometh  down  in 
shov/ers  that  rattle  on  tliem  ;  but  in  young  converts  it  often 
cometh  gently.  There  is  just  the  sweet  breathing  of  the 
Spirit.  They  perhaps  scarcely  think  it  is  a  true  conversion  ; 
but  true  it  is,  if  they  are  brought  to  life. 

Now  note  the  next  case.  Christ  did  not  do  the  same  thing 
with  the  young  man  that  he  did  with  the  daughter  of  Jairus. 
No ;  the  first  thing  he  did  was,  he  put  his  hand,  not  on  him,  mark 
you,  but  on  the  hier  ;  "  and  they  that  bare  it  stood  still,"  and 
after  that,  without  touching  the  young  man,  he  said  in  a  louder 
voice,  "Young  man,  I  say  unto  thee,  arise!"  Note  the  dif- 
ference ;  the  young  maiden's  new  life  was  given  to  her  secretly 


SPIRITUAL   RESURKECTTION.  287 

The  young  man's  was  given  more  publicly.  It  was  done  in 
the  very  street  of  the  city.  The  maiden's  life  was  given  gently 
by  a  touch  ;  but  in  the  young  man's  case  it  must  be  done,  not 
by  the  touching  of  him,  but  by  the  touching  of  the  bier.  Christ 
takes  away  from  the  young  man  his  means  of  pleasure.  He 
commands  his  companions,  who  by  bad  example  are  bearing 
him  on  his  bier  to  his  grave,  to  stop,  and  then  there  is  a  partial 
reformation  for  a  while ;  after  that  there  comes  the  strong  out- 
spoken voice,  "  Young  man,  I  say  unto  thee,  arise !" 

But  now  comes  the  worst  case  ;  and  will  you  please  at  your 
leisure  at  home  to  notice  what  preparations  Christ  made  for 
the  last  case  of  Lazarus  ?  When  he  raised  the  maiden,  he 
walked  up  into  the  chamber,  smiling,  and  said,  "  She  is  not 
dead,  but  sleepeth."  When  he  raised  the  young  man,  he  said 
to  the  mother,  "  Weep  not."  Not  so  when  he  came  to  the 
last  case ;  there  was  something  more  terrible  about  that :  it 
was  a  man  in  his  grave  corrupting.  It  was  on  that  occasion 
you  read,  "  Jesus  wept ;"  and  after  he  had  wept,  it  is  said  that 
"  he  groaned  in  his  spirit ;"  and  then  he  said,  "  Take  away  the 
stone  ;"  and  then  there  came  the  prayer,  "  I  know  that  thou 
hearest  me  always."  And  then,  will  you  notice,  there  came, 
what  is  not  expressed  so  fully  in  either  of  the  other  cases.  It 
is.  written,  "  Jesus  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  Lazarus,  come 
forth  !"  It  is  not  written  that  he  cried  with  the  loud  voice  to 
either  of  ihe  others.  He  spake  to  them ;  it  was  his  word  that 
saved  all  of  them  ;  but  in  the  case  of  Lazarus,  he  cried  to  him 
in  a  loud  voice.  Now  I  have,  perhaps,  some  of  the  last  char- 
acters here— the  worst  of  the  worst.  Ah,  sinner,  may  the 
Lord  quicken  thee  !  But  it  is  a  work  that  makes  the  Saviour 
weep.  I  think  when  he  comes  to  call  some  of  you  from  your 
death  in  sin  who  have  gone  to  the  utmost  extremity  of  guilt, 
he  comes  weeping  and  sighing  for  you.  There  is  a  stone  there 
to  be  rolled  away — your  bad  and  evil  habits  ;  and  when  that 
stone  is  taken  away,  a  still  small  voice  will  not  do  for  you ;  it 
must  be  the  loud  crashing  voice,  like  the  voice  of  the  Lord, 
which  breaketh  the  cedars  of  Lebanon,  "Lazarus,  come  forth!" 
John  Bunyan  was  one  of  those  rotten  ones.  What  strong 
means  were  used  in  his  case.  Terrible  dreams,  fearful  convul- 
sions, awful  shakings  to  and  fro— all  had  to  be  employed  to 


238  SPIRITUAL    RESURRECTION. 

make  him  live.  And  yet  some  of  you  think,  when  God  is  ter- 
rifying you  by  the  thunders  of  Sinai,  that  he  really  does  not 
love  you.  It  is  not  so  :  you  were  so  dead  that  it  needed  a 
loud  voice  to  arrest  your  ears. 

III.  This  is  an  interesting  subject :  I  wish  I  could  dilate 
upon  it,  but  my  voice  fails  me  ;  and,  therefore,  permit  me  to 
go  to  the  third  point  very  briefly.  The  after-experience 
OF  these  three  people  was  different — at  least,  you  gather 
it  from  the  commands  of  Christ.  As  soon  as  the  maiden  was 
alive,  Christ  said,  "  Give  her  meat ;"  as  soon  as  the  young  man 
was  alive,  "  he  delivered  him  to  his  mother  ;"  as  soon  as  Laz- 
arus was  alive,  he  said,  "  Loose  him,  and  let  him  go."  I  think 
there  is  something  in  this.  When  young  people  are  converted 
who  have  not  yet  acquired  evil  habits ;  when  they  are  saved 
before  they  become  obnoxious  in  the  eyes  of  the  world,  the 
command  is,  "  Give  them  meat.''''  Young  people  want  instruc- 
tion ;  they  want  building  up  in  the  faith ;  they  generally  lack 
knowledge  ;  they  have  not  the  deep  experience  of  the  older 
man ;  they  do  not  know  so  much  about  sin,  nor  even  so  much 
about  salvation  as  the  older  man  that  has  been  a  guilty  sinner ; 
they  need  to  be  fed.  So  that  our  business  as  ministers,  when 
the  young  lambs  are  brought  in,  is  to  remember  the  injunc- 
tion, "  Feed  my  lambs ;"  take  care  of  them ;  give  them  plenty 
of  meat.  Young  people,  search  after  an  instructive  minister  ; 
seek  after  instructive- books ;  search  the  Scriptures,  and  seek 
to  be  instructed  :  that  is  your  principal  business.  "  Give  Iier 
meat." 

The  next  case  was  a  difl*erent  one.  He  gave  the  young  man 
up  to  his  mother.  Ah!  that  is  just  what  he  will  do  with  you 
young  man,  if  he  makes  you  live.  As  sure  as  ever  you  are 
converted,  he  will  give  you  up  to  your  mother  again.  You 
were  with  her  when  you  first  as  a  babe  sat  on  hev  knee ;  and 
that  is  where  you  will  have  to  go  again.  O,  yes ;  grace  knits 
together  again  the  ties  which  sin  has  loosed.  Lot  a  youig 
man  become  abandoned ;  he  casts  oflf  the  tender  influence  of  a 
sister  and  the  kind  associations  of  a  mother ;  but  if  he  is  c  m- 
verted,  one  of  the  first  things  he  will  do  will  be  to  find  the 
mother  out,  and  the  sister  out,  and  he  will  find  a  charm  in 
their  society  that  he  never  knew  before.     You  that  have  gone 


SPIRITUAL    RESURRECTION.  230 

into  sin,  let  this  be  your  business,  if  God  has  saved  you.  Seek 
good  company.  Just  as  Christ  delivered  the  young  man  to 
his  mother,  do  you  seek  after  your  mother,  the  church.  En- 
deavor as  much  as  possible  to  be  found  in  the  company  of  the 
righteous ;  for,  as  you  were  carried  before  to  your  grave  by 
bad  companions,  you  need  to  be  led  to  heaven  by  good 
ones. 

And  then  comes  the  case  of  Lazarus.  '•''Loose  Tiim^  and  let 
him  go.''''  I  do  not  know  how  it  is  that  the  young  man  never 
was  loosed,  I  have  been  looking  through  every  book  I  have 
about  the  manners  and  customs  of  the  East,  and  have  not  been 
able  to  get  a  clew  to  the  difference  between  the  young  man 
and  Lazarus.  The  young  man,  as  soon  as  Christ  spoke  to  him, 
"sat  up  and  began  to  speak;"  but  Lazarus,  in  his  grave- 
clothes,  lying  in  the  niche  of  the  tomb,  could  do  no  more  than 
just  shuffle  himself  out  from  the  hole  that  was  cut  in  the  wall, 
and  then  stand  leaning  against  it.  He  could  not  speak ;  he 
was  bound  about  in  a  napkin.  Why  was  it  not  so  with  the 
young  man  ?  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  the  difference  lay  in 
the  difference  of  their  wealth.  The  young  man  was  the  son  of 
a  widow.  Very  likely  he  was  only  wrapped  up  in  a  few  com- 
mon things,  and  not  so  tightly  bound  about  as  Lazarus.  Laz- 
arus was  of  a  rich  family ;  very  likely  they  wrapped  him  up 
with  more  care.  Whether  it  was  or  not,  I  do  not  know. 
What  I  want  to  hint  at  is  this :  when  a  man  is  far  gone  into 
sin,  Christ  does  this  for  him — he  breaks  off  his  evil  habits. 
Very  likely  the  old  sinner's  experience  will  not  be  a  feeding 
experience.  It  will  not  be  the  experience  of  walking  with  the 
saints.  It  will  be  as  much  as  he  can  do  to  pull  off  his  grave- 
clothes,  to  get  rid  of  his  old  habits :  perhaps  to  his  death  he 
will  have  to  be  rending  off  bit  after  bit  of  the  cerements  in 
which  he  has  been  wrapped.  There  is  his  drunkenness  ;  O 
what  a  fight  he  will  have  with  that !  There  is  his  lust,  what  a 
combat  he  will  have  with  that,  for  many  a  month  !  There  is 
his  habit  of  swearing ;  how  often  will  an  oath  come  into  his 
mouth,  and  he  will  have  as  hard  work  as  he  can  to  thrust  it 
down  again  !  There  is  his  pleasure-seeking  ;  he  has  given  it 
up ;  but  how  often  will  his  companions  be  after  him,  to  get 
him  to  go  with  them.     His  life  will  be  ever  afterward  a  loos- 


240  SPIRITUAL  RESURRECTION. 

ing  and  letting  go  ;  for  he  will  need  it  till  he  cometh  up  tol)e 
with  God  for  ever  and  ever. 

And  now,  dear  friends,  I  must  close  by  asking  you  this 
question,  Hai^e  you  heen  quicJcened  ?  And  I  must  warn  you 
that,  good,  or  bad,  or  indifferent,  if  you  have  never  been 
quickened  you  are  dead  in  sins,  and  must  be  cast  away  at  the 
last.  I  must  bid  you,  however,  who  have  gone  the  furthest 
into  sin,  not  to  despair ;  Christ  can  quicken  you  as  well  as  the 
best.  O  that  he  would  quicken  you  and  lead  you  to  believe ! 
O  that  he  now  would  cry  to  some,  "Lazarus,  come  forth  !" 
and  make  some  harlot  virtuous,  some  drunkard  sober.  O  thjat 
he  would  bless  the  word,  especially  to  the  young  and  amiable 
and  lovely,  by  making  them  now  the  heirs  of  God  and  the 
children  of  Christ ! 

And  now  but  one  thing  I  have  to  say  to  those  who  are 
quickened ;  and  then  adieu  this  morning,  and  may  God  bless 
you  !  My  dear  friends,  you  who  are  quickened,  let  me  advise 
you  to  take  care  of  the  devil ;  he  will  be  sure  to  be  after  you. 
Keep  your  mind  always  employed,  and  so  you  will  escape  him. 
O  be  aware  of  his  devices  ;  seek  to  "  keep  the  heart  with  all 
diligence,  for  out  of  it  are  the  issues  of  life."  Tlie  Lord  bless 
you,  for  Jesus'  sake. 


SERMON  XVI. 

CONFESSION    OF    SIN. 

A  SERMON  WITH  SEVEN  TEXTS. 

My  sermon  this  morning  will  have  seven  texts,  and  yet  I 
pledge  myself  that  there  shall  be  but  three  different  words  in 
the  whole  of  them  ;  for  it  so  happens  that  the  seven  texts  are 
all  alike,  occurring  in  seven  different  portions  of  God's  holy 
Word.  I  shall  require,  however,  to  use  the  whole  of  them  to 
exemplify  different  cases  ;  and  I  must  request  those  of  you 
who  have  brought  your  Bibles  with  you  to  refer  to  the  texts 
as  I  shall  mention  them. 

The  subject  of  this  morning's  discourse  will  be  this — con- 
fession OF  SIN.  We  know  that  this  is  absolutely  necessary 
to  salvation.  Unless  there  be  a  true  and  hearty  confession  of 
our  sins  to  God,  we  have  no  promise  that  we  shall  find  mercy 
through  the  blood  of  the  Redeemer.  "  Whosoever  confesseth 
his  sins  and  forsaketh  them  shall  find  mercy."  But  there  is 
no  promise  in  the  Bible  to  the  man  who  will  not  confess  his 
sins.  Yet,  as  upon  every  point  of  Scripture  there  is  a  liability 
of  being  deceived,  so  more  especially  in  the  matter  of  confes- 
sion of  sin.  There  be  many  v/ho  make  a  confession,  and  a 
confession  before  God,  who,  notwithstanding,  receive  no 
blessing,  because  their  confession  has  not  in  it  certain  marks 
which  are  required  by  God  to  prove  it  genuine  and  sincere, 
and  which  demonstrate  it  to  be  the  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
My  text  this  morning  consists  of  three  words,  "  I  have  sinned." 
And  you  will  see  how  these  words,  in  the  lips  of  different  men, 
indicate  very  different  feelings.  While  one  says,  "I  have 
sinned,"  and  receives  forgiveness  ;  another  we  shall  meet  with 
says,  "  T  have  sinned,"  and  goes  his  way  to  blacken  himself 
with  worse  crimes  than  before,  and  dive  into  greater  depths 
of  sin  than  heretofore  he  had  discovered. 

11 


242  CONFESSION   OF   SIN. 

THE     HARDENED    SINNER. 
Pharaoh — "I  have  sinned." — Exodus,  ul  21. 

I.  The  first  case  I  shall  bring  before  you  is  that  of  the  hard- 
ened sinner^  who,  when  under  terror,  says,  "  I  have  sinned." 
And  you  will  find  the  text  in  the  book  of  Exodus,  the  9th 
chapter,  and  27th  verse  :  "  And  Pharaoh  sent,  and  called  for 
Moses  and  Aaron,  and  said  unto  them,  I  have  sinned  this 
time  :  the  Lord  is  righteous,  and  I  and  my  people  are 
wicked." 

But  why  this  confession  from  the  lips  of  the  haughty  ty- 
rant ?  He  was  not  often  wont  to  humble  himself  before  Je- 
hovah, Why  doth  the  proud  one  bow  himself?  You  will 
judge  of  the  value  of  his  confession  when  you  hear  the  cir- 
cumstances under  which  it  was  made.  "•  And  Moses  stretched 
forth  his  rod  toward  heaven  ;  and  the  ]jord  sent  thunder  and 
hail,  and  the  fire  ran  along  upon  the  ground  ;  and  the  Lord 
rained  hail  upon  the  land  of  Egypt.  So  that  there  was  hail, 
and  fire  mingled  with  the  hail,  very  grievous,  such  as  there 
was  none  like  it  in  all  the  land  of  Egypt  since  it  became  a  na- 
tion." "  Now,"  says  Pharaoh,  whilst  the  thunder  is  rolling 
through  the  sky,  while  the  lightning  flashes  are  setting  the 
very  ground  on  fire,  and  while  the  hail  is  descending  in  big 
lumps  of  ice,  now,  says  he,  "  I  have  sinned."  He  is  but  a  type 
and  specimen  of  multitudes  of  the  same  class.  How  many  a 
hardened  rebel  on  ship-board,  when  the  timbers  are  strained 
and  creaking,  when  the  mast  is  broken,  and  the  ship  is  drift- 
ing before  the  gale,  when  the  hungry  waves  are  opening  their 
mouths  to  swallow  the  ship  up  alive,  and  quick  as  those  that 
go  into  the  j^it — how  many  a  hardened  sailor  has  then  bowed 
his  knee,  with  tears  in  his  eyes,  and  cried,  "  I  have  sinned  !" 
But  of  what  avail  and  of  what  value  was  his  confession  ?  The 
repentance  that  was  born  in  the  storm  died  in  the  calm ;  that 
repentance  of  his  that  was  begotten  amid  the  thunder  and  the 
lightning,  ceased  so  soon  as  all  was  hushed  in  quiet,  and  the 
man  who  was  a  pious  mariner  when  on  board  ship,  became 
the  most  wicked  and  abominable  of  sailors  when  he  placed  his 
foot  on  terra  firma.     How  often,  too,  have  we  seen  this  in  a 


CONFESSION   OF   SIN.  243 

storm  of  thunder  and  lightning?  Many  a  man's  cheek  is 
blanched  when  he  hears  the  thunder  rolling ;  the  tears  start 
to  his  eyes,  and  he  cries,  "  O  God,  I  have  sinned  !"  while  the 
rafters  of  his  house  are  shaking,  and  the  very  ground  beneath 
him  reeling  at  the  voice  of  God  which  is  full  of  majesty.  But 
alas,  for  such  a  repentance  !  When  the  sun  again  shines,  and 
the  black  clouds  are  withdrawn,  sin  comes  again  upon  the 
man,  and  he  becomes  worse  than  before.  How  many  of  the 
same  sort  of  confessions,  too,  have  we  seen  in  times  of  cholera, 
and  fever,  and  pestilence  !  Then  our  churches  have  been 
crammed  with  hearers,  who,  because  so  many  funerals  have 
passed  their  door,  or  so  many  have  died  in  the  street,  could 
not  refrain  from  going  up  to  God's  house  to  confess  their  sins. 
And  under  that  visitation,  when  one,  two,  and  three  have 
been  lying  dead  in  the  house,  or  next  door,  how  many  have 
thought  they  would  really  turn  to  God  !  But,  alas !  vv^hen  the 
pestilence  had  done  its  work,  conviction  ceased ;  and  when 
the  bell  had  tolled  the  last  time  for  a  death  caused  by  cholera, 
then  their  hearts  ceased  to  beat  with  penitence,  and  their  tears 
did  flow  no  more. 

Have  I  any  such  here  this  morning  ?  I  doubt  not  I  have 
hardened  persons  who  would  scorn  the  very  idea  of  religion, 
who  would  count  me  a  cant  and  hypocrite  if  I  should  en- 
deavor to  press  it  home  upon  them,  but  who  know  right  well 
that  religion  is  true,  and  who  feel  it  in  their  times  of  terror ! 
If  I  have  such  here  this  morning,  let  me  solemnly  say  to  them, 
"  Sirs,  you  have  forgotten  the  feelings  you  had  in  your  hours 
of  alarm  ;  but,  remember,  God  has  not  forgotten  the  vows  you 
then  made."  Sailor,  you  said,  if  God  would  spare  you  to  see 
the  land  again,  you  would  be  his  servant ;  you  are  not  so,  you 
have  lied  against  God,  you  have  made  him  a  false  promise,  for 
you  have  never  kept  the  vow  which  your  lips  did  utter.  Yoii 
said,  on  a  bed  of  sickness,  that  if  he  would  spare  your  life  you 
would  never  again  sin  as  you  did  before ;  but  here  you  are, 
and  this  week's  sins  shall  speak  for  themselves.  You  are  no 
better  than  you  were  before  your  sickness.  Couldst  thou  lie 
to  thy  fellow-man,  and  yet  go  unreproved  ?  And  thinkest 
thou  that  thou  wilt  lie  against  God,  and  yet  go  unpunished  ? 
No  ;  the  vow,  however  rashly  made,  is  registered  in  heaven ; 


244  CONFESSION   OF   SIN. 

and  though  it  be  a  vow  which  man  can  not  perform,  yet,  as  it 
is  a  vow  which  he  has  made  himself,  and  made  voluntarily  too, 
he  shall  be  punished  for  the  non-keeping  it ;  and  God  shall 
execute  vengeance  upon  him  at  last,  because  he  said  he  would 
turn  from  his  ways,  and  then  when  the  blow  was  removed  he 
did  it  not.  A  great  outcry  has  been  raised  of  late  against 
tickets-of-leave ;  I  have  no  doubt  there  are  some  men  here, 
who  before  high  heaven  stand  in  the  same  position  as  the 
ticket-of-leave  men  stand  to  our  government.  They  were 
about  to  die,  as  they  thought ;  they  promised  good  behavior 
if  they  might  be  spared,  and  they  are  here  to-day  on  ticket-of- 
leave  in  this  world :  and  how  have  they  fulfilled  their  prom- 
ise? Justice  might  raise  the  same  outcry  against  them  as 
they  do  against  the  burglars  so  constantly  let  loose  upon  us. 
The  avenging  angel  might  say,  "  O  God,  these  men  said,  if 
they  were  spared  they  would  be  so  much  better  ;  if  any  thing 
they  are  worse.  How  have  they  violated  their  promise,  and 
how  have  they  brought  down  divine  wrath  upon  their  heads !" 
This  is  the  first  style  of  penitence ;  and  it  is  a  style  I  hope 
none  of  you  wall  imitate,  for  it  is  utterly  worthless.  It  is  of 
no  use  for  you  to  say,  "I  have  sinned,"  merely  under  the  in- 
fluence of  terror,  and  then  to  forget  it  afterwards. 


THE    DOUBLE-MINDED    MAN. 
Balaam — "I  have  sinned." — Numbers,  xxii.  34. 

II.  Now  for  a  second  text.  I  beg  to  introduce  to  you 
another  character — the  double  niiiided  man^  who  says,  "  I 
have  sinned,"  and  feels  that  he  has,  and  feels  it  deeply  too, 
but  who  is  so  worldly-minded  that  he  "  loves  the  wages  of 
unrighteousness."  The  character  I  have  chosen  to  illustrate 
this,  is  that  of  Balaam.  Turn  to  the  book  of  Numbers,  the 
22d  chapter  and  the  34th  verse  :  "  And  Balaam  said  unto  the 
angel  of  the  Lord,  I  have  sinned." 

"  I  have  sinned,"  said  Balaam  ;  but  yet  he  went  on  with  his 
sin  afterward.  One  of  the  strangest  characters  of  the  whole 
w^orld  is  Balaam.     I  have  often  marveled  at  that  man ;  ke 


CONFESSION   OF   SIN.  245 

seems  really  in  another  sense  to  have  come  up  to  the  lines  of 
Ralph  Erskine, 

"  To  good  and  evil  equal  bent, 
And  both  a  devil  and  a  saint." 

For  he  did  seem  to  be  so.  At  times  no  man  could  speak  more 
eloquently  and  more  truthfully,  and  at  other  times  he  exhibited 
the  most  mean  and  sordid  coveteousness  that  could  disgrace 
human  nature.  Think  you  see  Balaam ;  he  stands  upon  the 
brow  of  the  hill,  and  there  lie  the  multitudes  of  Israel  at  his 
feet ;  he  is  bidden  to  curse  them,  and  he  cries,  "  How  shall  I 
curse  whom  God  hath  not  cursed  ?"  And  God  opening  his  eyes, 
he  begins  to  tell  even  about  the  coming  of  Christ,  and  he  says, 
*'  I  shall  see  him  but  not  now:  I  shall  behold  him  but  not  nigh." 
And  then  he  winds  up  his  oration  by  saying — "  Let  me  die 
the  death  of  the  righteous,  and  let  my  last  end  be  like  his !" 
And  ye  will  say  of  that  man,  he  is  a  hopeful  character.  Wait 
till  he  has  come  off  the  brow  of  the  hill,  and  ye  will  hear  him 
give  the  most  diabolical  advice  to  the  king  of  Moab,  which  it 
was  even  possible  for  Satan  himself  to  suggest.  Said  he  to 
the  king,  "  You  can  not  overthrow  these  people  in  battle,  for 
God  is  w^ith  them ;  try  and  entice  them  from  their  God." 
And  ye  know  how  with  wanton  lusts  they  of  Moab  tried  to 
entice  the  children  of  Israel  from  allegiance  to  Jehovah ;  so 
that  this  man  seemed  to  have  the  voice  of  an  angel  at  one 
time,  and  yet  the  very  soul  of  a  devil  in  his  bowels.  He  was 
a  terrible  character ;  he  was  a  man  of  two  things,  a  man  who 
went  all  the  way  with  two  things  to  a  very  great  extent.  I 
know  the  Scripture  says,  "  No  man  can  serve  two  masters." 
Now  this  is  often  misunderstood.  Some  read  it,  "  No  man  can 
S67've  two  masters."  Yes  he  can  ;  he  can  serve  three  or  four. 
The  way  to  read  it  is  this  ;  "  No  man  can  serve  two  masters.''^ 
Tliey  can  not  both  be  masters.  He  can  serve  two,  but  they 
can  not  both  be  his  master.  A  man  can  serve  two  who  are 
not  his  masters  or  tw^enty  either  ;  he  may  live  for  twenty  dif- 
ferent purposes,  but  he  can  not  live  for  more  than  one  master 
purpose — there  can  only  be  one  master  purpose  in  his  soul. 
But  Balaam  labored  to  serve  two ;  it  was  like  the  people  of 
whom  it  was  said,  "They  feared  the  Lord,  and  served  other 
gods."     Or  like  Rufus,  who  was  a  loaf  of  the  same  leaven  ; 


246  CONFESSION    OF    SIN. 

for  you  kuow  our  old  king  Rufus  painted  God  on  one  side  of 
his  shield,  and  the  devil  on  the  other,  and  had  underneath  the 
motto,  "  Ready  for  both  ;  catch  who  can."  There  are  many 
such,  who  are  ready  for  both.  They  meet  a  minister,  and 
how  pious  and  holy  they  are  ;  on  the  Sabbath  they  are  most 
respectable  and  upright  people  in  the  world,  as  you  would 
think;  indeed,  they  affect  a  drawling  in  their  speech  which 
they  think  to  be  eminently  religious.  But  on  a  week  day,  if 
you  want  to  find  the  greatest  rogues  and  cheats,  they  are  some 
of  those  men  who  are  so  sanctimonious  in  their  piety,  Now, 
rest  assured,  my  hearers,  that  no  confession  of  sin  can  be  genu- 
ine, unless  it  be  a  whole  hearted  one.  It  is  of  no  use  for  you 
to  say,  "  I  have  sinned,"  and  then  to  keep  on  sinning.  "  I 
have  sinned,"  say  you,  and  it  is  a  fair,  fair  face  you  show ;  but, 
alas !  alas  !  for  the  sin  you  will  go  away  and  commit.  Some 
men  seem  to  be  born  with  two  characters.  T  remarked  when 
in  the  library  at  Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  a  very  fine  statue 
of  Lord  Byron.  The  librarian  said  to  me,  "  Stand  here,  sir." 
I  looked,  and  I  said,  "  what  a  fine  intellectual  countenance  ! 
What  a  grand  genius  he  was!"  "Come  here,"  he  said,  "to 
the  other  side."  "  Ah  !  what  a  demon !  There  stands  the 
man  that  could  defy  the  deity."  He  seemed  to  have  such  a 
scowl  and  sucli  a  dreadful  leer  in  his  face ;  even  as  Milton 
would  have  painted  Satan  when  he  said — "  Better  to  reign  m 
hell  than  serve  in  heaven."  I  turned  away  and  said  to  the 
librarian,  "  Do  you  think  the  artist  designed  this  ?"  "  Yes," 
he  said,  "  he  wished  to  picture  the  two  characters — the  great, 
the  grand,  the  almost  superhuman  genius  that  he  possessed, 
and  yet  the  enormous  mass  of  sin  that  was  in  his  soul."  There 
are  some  men  here  of  the  same  sort.  I  dare  say,  like  Balaam, 
they  would  overthrow  every  thing  in  argument  with  their  en- 
chantments ;  they  could  work  miracles ;  and  yet  at  the  same 
time  there  is  something  about  them  which  betrays  a  horrid 
character  of  sin,  as  great  as  that  which  would  appear  to  be 
their  character  for  righteousness.  Balaam,  you  know,  ofiered 
sacrifices  to  God  upon  the  altar  of  Baal ;  that  was  just  the 
type  of  his  character.  So  many  do  ;  they  off*er  sacrifices  to 
God  on  the  shrine  of  Mammon ;  and  while  they  will  gire  to 
the  building  of  a  church,  and  distribute  to  the  poor,  they  will 


CONFESSION   OP   SIN.  247 

at  the  other  door  of  their  counting-house  grind  the  poor  for 
bread,  and  press  the  very  blood  out  of  the  widow,  that  they 
may  enrich  themselves.  Ah  I  it  is  idle  and  useless  for  you  to 
say,  "I  have  sinned,"  unless  you  mean  it  from  your  heart. 
That  double  minded  man's  confession  is  of  no  avail. 


THE    INSINCERE    MAN. 
Saul — "  I  have  sinned," — 1  Samuel,  xv.  24. 

III.  And  now  a  third  character,  and  a  third  text.  In  the 
first  book  of  Samuel,  the  15th  chapter  and  24th  verse:  "  And 
Saul  said  unto  Samuel,  I  have  sinned." 

Here  is  the  insincere  man — the  man  who  is  not  like  Balaam, 
to  a  certain  extent  sincere  in  two  things ;  but  the  man  who  is 
just  the  opposite — who  has  no  prominent  point  in  his  character 
at  all,  but  is  molded  everlastingly  by  the  circumstances  that 
are  passing,  over  his  head.  Such  a  man  was  Saul.  Samuel 
reproved  him,  and  he  said,  "  I  have  sinned."  But  he  did  not 
mean  what  he  said ;  for,  if  you  read  the  whole  verse,  you  will 
find  him  saying,  "  I  have  sinned :  for  I  ha.ve  transgressed  the 
commandment  of  the  Lord,  and  thy  words ;  because  I  feared 
the  people  .*"  which  was  a  lying  excuse.  Saul  never  feared 
any  body ;  he  was  always  ready  enough  to  do  his  own  will — he 
was  the  despot.  And  just  before,  he  had  pleaded  another  ex- 
cuse, that  he  had  saved  the  bullocks  and  lambs  to  ofter  to 
Jehovah,  and  therefore  both  excuses  could  not  have  been  true. 
You  remember,  my  friends,  that  the  most  prominent  feature  in 
the  character  of  Saul  was  his  insincerity.  One  day  he  fetched 
David  from  his  bed,  as  he  thought,  to  put  him  to  death  in  his 
house.  Another  time  he  declares,  "  God  forbid  that  I  should 
do  aught  against  thee,  my  son  David."  One  day,  because 
David  saved  his  life,  he  said,  "  Thou  art  more  righteous  than 
I ;  I  will  do  so  no  more."  The  day  before  he  had  gone  out  to 
fight  against  his  own  son-in-law,  in  order  to  slay  him.  Some- 
times Saul  was  among  the  prophets,  easily  turned  into  a  pro- 
phet, and  then  afterward  among  the  witches ;  sometimes  in 
one  place,  and  then  another,  and  insincere  in  every  thing. 
How  many  such  we  have  in  every  Christian  assembly ;  meo 


248  CONCESSION    OF   SIN. 

who  are  very  easily  molded !  Say  what  you  please  to  them, 
they  always  agree  with  you.  They  have  affectionate  disposi- 
tions, very  likely  a  tender  conscience ;  but  then  the  conscience 
is  so  remarkably  tender,  that  when  touched  it  seems  to  give, 
and  you  are  afraid  to  probe  deeper — it  heals  as  soon  as  it  is 
wounded.  I  think  I  used  the  very  singular  comparison  once 
before,  which  I  must  use  again:  there  are  some  men  who 
seem  to  have  India-rubber  hearts.  If  you  do  but  touch  them, 
there  is  an  impression  made  at  once  ;  but  then  it  is  of  no  use, 
it  soon  restores  itself  to  its  original  character.  Tou  may  press 
them  whichever  way  you  wish  ;  they  are  so  elastic  you  can 
always  effect  your  purpose ;  but  then  they  are  not  fixed  in 
their  character,  and  soon  return  to  be  what  they  were  before. 
O  sirs,  too  many  of  you  have  done  the  same  ;  you  have  bowed 
your  heads  in  church,  and  said,  "  We  have  erred  and  strayed 
from  thy  ways  :"  and  you  did  not  mean  what  you  said.  You 
have  come  to  your  minister ;  you  have  said,  "  I  repent  of  my 
sins ;"  you  did  not  then  feel  you  were  a  sinner ;  you  only  said 
it  to  please  him.  And  now  you  attend  the  house  of  God  :  no 
one  more  impressible  than  you ;  the  tear  will  run  down  your 
cheek  in  a  moment,  but  yet,  notwithstanding  all  that,  the  tear 
is  dried  as  quickly  as  it  is  brought  forth,  and  you  remain  to  all 
intents  and  purposes  the  same  as  you  were  before.  To  say, 
"I  have  sinned,"  in  an  unmeaning  manner,  is  worse  than 
worthless,  for  it  is  a  mockery  of  God  thus  to  confess  with 
insincerity  of  heart. 

I  have  been  brief  upon  this  charactei-,  for  it  seemed  to  touch 
upon  that  of  Balaam ;  though  any  thinking  man  will  at  once 
see  there  was  a  real  contrast  between  Saul  and  Balaam,  even 
though  there  is  an  affinity  between  the  two.  Balaam  was  the 
great  bad  man,  great  in  all  he  did ;  Saul  was  little  in  every 
thing,  except  in  stature — little  in  his  good  and  little  in  his 
vice ;  and  he  was  too  much  of  a  fool  to  be  desperately  bad, 
though  too  wicked  to  be  at  any  time  good  :  while  Balaam  was 
great  in  both  :  the  man  who  could  at  one  time  defy  Jehovah, 
and  yet  at  another  time  could  say,  "  If  Balak  would  give  me 
his  house  full  of  silver  and  gold,  I  can  not  go  beyond  the  word 
of  the  Lord  my  God,  to  do  less  or  more." 


CONFESSION   OF   SIN.  240 

THE  DOUBTFUL  PENITENT. 
AoHAN — "  I  have  sinned." — Joshua,  vil  20, 

rV.  And  now  I  have  to  introduce  to  yon  a  very  interesting 
case  ;  it  is  the  case  of  the  doubtful  penitent,  in  the  case  of 
Achan^  in  the  book  of  Joshua,  the  7th  chapter  and  the  20th 
verse :  "  And  Achan  answered  Joshua,  Indeed  I  have  sinned." 

You  know  that  Achan  stole  some  of  the  prey  from  the  city 
of  Jericho — that  he  was  discovered  by  lot,  and  put  to  death. 
I  have  singled  his  case  out  as  the  representative  of  some  whose 
characters  are  doubtful  on  their  death-beds ;  who  do  repent 
apparently,  but  of  whom  the  most  we  can  say  is,  that  we  hope 
their  souls  are  saved  at  last,  but  indeed  we  can  not  tell. 
Achan,  you  are  aware,  was  stoned  with  stones,  for  defiling  Is- 
rael. But  I  find  in  the  Mishna,  an  old  Jewish  exposition  of  the 
Bible,  these  words,  "  Joshua  said  to  Achan,  The  Lord  shall 
trouble  thee  this  day."  And  the  note  upon  it  is — "  He  said 
this  day,  implying  that  he  was  only  to  be  troubled  in  this  life, 
by  behig  stoned  to  death,  but  that  God  would  have  mercy  on 
his  soul,  seeing  that  he  had  made  a  full  confession  of  his  sin." 
And  I,  too,  am  inclined,  from  reading  the  chapter,  to  concur  in 
the  idea  of  my  venerable  and  now  glorified  predecessor.  Dr. 
Gill,  in  believing  that  Achan  really  was  saved,  although  he 
was  put  to  death  for  the  crime,  as  an  example.  For  you  will 
observe  how  kindly  Joshua  spoke  to  him.  He  said,  "  My  son, 
give,  I  pray  thee,  glory  to  the  Lord  God  of  Israel,  and  make 
confession  unto  him  ;  and  tell  me  now  what  thou  hast  done ; 
hide  it  not  from  me."  And  you  find  Achan  making  a  very 
full  confession.  He  says,  "  Indeed  I  have  sinned  against  the 
Lord  God  of  Israel,  and  thus  and  thus  have  I  done  :  when  I 
saw  among  the  spoils  a  goodly  Babylonish  garment,  and  two 
hundred  shekels  of  silver,  and  a  wedge  of  gold  of  fifty  shekels 
weight,  then  I  coveted  them,  and  took  them ;  and,  behold, 
they  are  hid  in  the  earth  in  the  midst  of  my  tent,  and  the  sil- 
ver under  it."  It  seems  so  full  a  confession,  that  if  I  might  be 
allowed  to  judge,  I  should  say,  "  I  hope  to  meet  Achan,  the 
sinner,  before  the  throne  of  God."  But  I  find  Matthew  Henry 
has  no  such  opinion  ;  and  many  other  expositors  consider  that 

11* 


250  CONFESSION   OF   SIN. 

as  his  body  was  destroyed,  so  was  his  soul.  I  have,  therefore, 
selected  his  case,  as  being  one  of  doubtful  repentance.  Ah ! 
dear  friends,  it  has  been  my  lot  to  stand  by  many  a  death-bed, 
and  to  see  many  such  a  repentance  as  this.  I  have  seen  the 
man,  when  worn  to  a  skeleton,  sustained  by  pillows  in  his  bed  , 
and  he  has  said,  when  I  have  talked  to  him  of  judgment  to 
come,  "  Sir,  I  feel  I  have  been  guilty,  but  Christ  is  good  ;  I 
trust  in  him."  And  I  have  said  within  myself,  "  I  believe  the 
man's  soul  is  safe."  But  I  have  always  come  away  with  the 
melancholy  reflection  that  I  had  no  proof  of  it  beyond  his  own 
words;  for  it  needs  proof  in  acts  and  in  future  life,  in  order  to 
sustain  any  firm  conviction  of  a  man's  salvation.  You  know 
that  great  fact,  that  a  physician  once  kept  a  record  of  a  thou- 
sand persons  who  thought  they  were  dying,  and  whom  he 
thought  were  j)enitents ;  he  wrote  their  names  down  in  a 
book  as  those  who,  if  they  had  died,  would  go  to  heaven  ; 
they  did  not  die,  they  lived  ;  and  he  says  that  out  of  the  whole 
thousand  he  had  not  three  persons  who  turned  out  well  after- 
ward, but  they  returned  to  their  sins  again,  and  were  as  bad 
as  ever.  Ah  !  dear  friends,  I  hope  none  of  you  will  have  such 
a  death-bed  repentance  as  that ;  I  hope  your  minister  or  your 
parents  will  not  have  to  stand  by  your  bedside,  and  then  go 
away  and  say,  "  Poor  fellow !  I  hope  he  is  saved."  But  alas  ! 
death-bed  repentances  are  such  flimsy  things ;  such  poor,  such 
trivial  grounds  of  hope,  that  I  am  afraid,  after  all,  his  soul  may 
be  lost."  O  !  to  die  with  a  full  assurance  ;  O  !  to  die  with  an 
abundant  entrance,  leaving  a  testimony  behind  that  we  have 
departed  this  life  in  peace !  That  is  a  far  happier  way  than  to 
die  in  a  doubtful  manner,  lying  sick,  hovering  between  two 
worlds,  and  neither  ourselves  nor  yet  our  friends  knowing  to 
which  of  the  two  worlds  we  are  going.  May  God  grant  us 
grace  to  give  in  our  lives  evidences  of  true  conversion,  that 
our  case  may  not  be  doubtful. 

THE  REPENTANCE  OF  DESPAIR. 

Judas — "  I  have  sinned." — Matthew,  xxviL  4. 

V.  I  shall  not  detain  you  too  long,  I  trust,  but  I  must  now 
give  you  another  bad  case  ;  the  worst  of  all.     It  is  the  repent- 


CONFESSION    OF    SIN.  261 

ance  of  despair.  Will  you  turn  to  the  27th  chapter  of 
Matthew  and  the  4th  verse  ?  There  you  have  the  dreadful 
case  of  the  repentance  of  despiir.  You  will  recognize  the 
'character  the  moment  I  read  the  verse :  "And  Judas  said,  I 
have  sinned."  Yes,  Judas  the  traitor,  who  had  betrayed  his 
Master,  vrhen  he  saw  that  his  Master  was  condemned,  "  re- 
pented, and  brought  again  the  thirty  pieces  of  silver  to  the 
chief  pi-iests  and  elders,  saying,  I  have  sinned  in  that  I  have 
betrayed  innocent  blood,  and  cast  down  the  pieces  in  the  tem- 
ple, and  went"  and  what  ? — "  and  hanged  himself P  Here  is 
the  worst  kind  of  repentance  of  all ;  in  fact,  I  know  not  that  I 
am  justified  in  calling  it  repentance ;  it  must  be  called  remorse 
of  conscience.  But  Judas  did  confess  his  sin,  and  then  went 
and  hanged  himself.  O  !  that  dreadful,  that  terrible,  that  hid- 
eous confession  of  despair.  Have  you  never  seen  it  ?  If  you 
never  have,  then  bless  God  that  you  never  were  called  to  see 
such  a  sight.  I  have  seen  it  once  in  my  life,  I  pray  God  I  may 
never  see  it  again — the  repentance  of  the  man  who  sees  death 
staring  him  in  the  face,  and  who  says,  "  I  have  sinned."  You 
tell  him  that  Christ  has  died  for  sinners ;  and  he  answers, 
*'  There  is  no  hope  for  me  ;  I  have  cursed  God  to  his  face  ;  I 
have  defied  him ;  my  day  of  grace  I  know  is  past ;  my  con- 
science is  seared  with  a  hot  iron  ;  I  am  dying,  and  I  know  I 
shall  be  lost !"  Such  a  case  as  that  happened  long  ago,  you 
know,  and  is  on  record — the  case  of  Francis  Spira — the  most 
dreadful  case,  perhaps,  except  that  of  Judas,  which  is  upon 
record  in  tlie  memory  of  man.  O  !  my  hearers,  will  any  of 
you  have  such  a  repentance  ?  If  you  do,  it  will  be  a  beacon  to 
all  persons  who  sin  in  future ;  if  you  have  such  a  repentance 
as  that,  it  will  be  a  warning  to  generations  yet  to  come.  In 
the  life  of  Benjamin  Keach— and  he  also  was  one  of  my  prede- 
cessors— I  find  the  case  of  a  man  who  had  been-  a  professor  of 
religion,  but  had  departed  from  the  profession,  and  had  gone 
into  awful  sin.  When  he  came  to  die,  Keach,  with  many 
other  friends  went  to  see  him,  but  they  could  never  stay  with 
liim  above  five  minutes  at  a  time ;  for  he  said,  "  Get  ye  gone ; 
it  is  of  no  use  your  coming  to  me ;  I  have  sinned  away  the 
Holy  Ghost ;  I  am  Uke  Esau,  I  have  sold  my  birthright,  and 
though  I  seek  it  carefully  with  tears,  I  can  never  find  it  again." 


262  CONFESSION   OF   SIN. 

And  then  he  would  repeat  dreadful  words,  like  these :  "  My 
mouth  is  filled  with  gravel-stones,  and  I  drink  wormwood  day 
and  niglit.  Tell  me  not,  teh  me  not  of  Christ !  I  know  he  is 
a  Saviour,  but  I  hate  him,  and  he  hates  me.  I  know  I  must 
die  ;  I  know  I  must  perish  !"  And  then  followed  doleful  cries, 
and  hideous  noises,  such  as  none  could  bear.  They  returned 
again  in  his  placid  moments,  only  to  stir  him  once  more,  and 
make  him  cry  out  in  his  despair,  "  I  am  lost !  I  am  lost !  It  is 
of  no  use  your  telling  me  anything  about  it!"  Ah!  there 
may  be  a  man  here  who  may  have  such  a  death  as  that ;  let 
me  warn  him,  ere  he  come  to  it ;  and  may  God  the  Holy 
Spirit  grant  that  that  man  may  be  turned  unto  God,  and  made 
a  true  penitent,  and  then  he  need  not  have  any  more  fear ;  for 
he  who  has  had  his  sins  washed  away  in  a  Saviour's  blood, 
need  not  have  any  remorse  for  his  sins,  for  they  are  pardoned 
through  the  Redeemer. 

THE    REPENTANCE    OE    TflE    SAINT. 
Job — "I  have  sinned." — Job,  vii.  20. 

VI.  And  now  I  come  into  daylight.  I  have  been  taking 
you  through  dark  and  dreary  confessions  ;  I  shall  detain  you 
there  no  longer,  but  bring  you  out  to  the  two  good  confessions 
which  I  have  read  to  you.  The  first  is  that  of  Job  in  Vth  chap- 
ter at  the  20th  verse  :  "  I  have  sinned  ;  what  shall  I  do  unto 
thee,  O  thou  preserver  of  men  ?"  This  is  the  repentance  of  tha 
saint.  Job  was  a  saint,  but  he  sinned.  This  is  the  repentance 
of  the  man  who  is  a  child  of  God  already,  an  acceptable  re- 
pentance before  God.  But  as  I  intend  to  dwell  upon  this  in 
the  evening,  I  shall  now  leave  it,  for  fear  of  wearying  you. 
David  was  a  specimen  of  this  kind  of  repentanca,  and  I  would 
have  you  carefully  study  his  penitential  Psalms,  the  language 
of  which  is  ever  full  of  weeping  humility  and  earnest  penitence. 

THE    BLESSED    CONFESSION. 
The  Prodigal — "I  have  sinned." — Luke,  iv.  18. 

VII.  I  come  now  to  llie  last  instance,  which  I  shall  men- 
tion;  it  is  the  case  of  the  pmdigal.     In  Luke  xv.  18,  we  find 


CONFESSION    OF    SIN.  253 

the  prodigal  says:  "Father,  I  have  sinned."  O,  here  is  a 
blessed  confession }  Here  is  that  whicli  proves  a  man  to  be  a 
regenerate  character — "  Father,  I  liave  sinned."  Let  me  pic- 
ture the  scene  There  is  the  prodigal ;  he  has  run  away  from 
a  good  home  and  a  kind  father,  and  he  has  spent  all  his  money 
with  harlots,  and  now  he  has  none  left.  He  goes  to  his  old 
companions,  and  asks  them  for  reHef.  They  laugh  him  to 
scorn.  "  O,"  says  he,  "  you  have  drunk  my  wine  many  a  day  ; 
I  have  always  stood  ]3aymaster  to  you  in  all  our  revelries ;  will 
you  not  help  me?"  "Get  you  gone,"  they  say;  and  he  is 
turned  out  of  doors.  He  goes  to  all  his  friends  with  whom 
he  had  associated,  but  no  man  gives  him  any  thing.  At  last  a 
certain  citizen  of  the  country  said, — "  You  want  something  to 
do,  do  you  ?  Well,  go  and  feed  my  swine."  The  poor  prodi- 
gal, the  son  of  a  rich  landowner,  Avho  had  a  great  fortune  of 
his  own,  has  to  go  out  to  feed  swine ;  and  he  a  Jew,  too !  the 
worst  employment  (to  his  mind),  to  which  he  could  be  put. 
See  him  there,  in  squalid  rags,  feeding  grwine  ;  and  what  are  his 
wages  ?  Why,  so  little  that  he  "  would  fain  have  filled  his  belly 
with  the  husks  that  the  swine  did  eat,  but  no  man  gave  to 
him."  Look,  there  he  is,  with  the  fellow-commoners  of  the  sty, 
in  all  his  mire  and  filthiness.  Suddenly  a  thought,  put  there 
by  the  good  Spirit,  strikes  his  mind.  "  How  is  it,"  says  he, 
"  that  in  my  father's  house  there  is  bread  enough  and  to  spare, 
and  I  perish  with  hunger  ?  I  will  arise  and  go  to  my  father, 
and  say  unto  him.  Father,  I  have  sinned  against  heaven  and 
before  thee,  and  am  no  more  worthy  to  be  called  thy  son : 
make  me  as  one  of  thy  hired  servants."  Off  he  goes.  He 
begs  his  way  from  town  to  town.  Sometimes  he  gets  a  lift 
on  a  coach  perhaps,  but  at  other  times  he  goes  trudging  his 
way  up  barren  hills  and  down  desolate  vales  all  alone.  And 
now  at  last  he  comes  to  the  hill  outside  the  village,  and  sees 
his  father's  house  down  below.  There  it  is ;  the  old  poplar 
tree  against  it,  and  there  are  the  stacks  round  which  he  and 
hia  brother  used  to  run  and  play  ;  and  at  the  sight  of  the 
old  homestead  all  the  feelings  and  associations  of  his  for- 
mer life  rush  upon  him,  and  tears  run  down  his  cheeks,  and 
be  is  almost  ready  to  run  away  again.  He  says,  "  I  wonder 
whether  father's   dead.  '  I  dare  say  mother  broke  her  heart 


254  CONFESSION    OF    SIN. 

when  I  went  away ;  I  always  was  her  favorite.  And  if  they 
are  either  of  them  alive,  they  will  never  see  me  again ;  they 
will  shut  the  door  in  my  face.  What  am  I  to  do  ?  I  can  not 
go  back,  I  am  afraid  to  go  forward."  And  while  he  was  thus 
deliberating  his  father  had  been  walking  on  the  house-top  look- 
ing out  for  his  son ;  and  though  he  could  not  see  his  father 
his  father  could  see  him.  Well,  the  father  comes  down  stairs 
with  all  his  might,  runs  up  to  him,  and  whilst  he  is  thinking 
of  running  away,  his  father's  arms  are  round  his  neck,  and  he 
falls  to  kissing  him,  like  a  loving  father  indeed,  and  then  the 
son  begins, — "  Father,  I  have  sinned  against  heaven  and  in 
thy  sight,  and  am  no  more  worthy  to  be  called  thy  son,"  and 
he  was  going  to  say,  "  Make  me  as  one  of  thy  hired  servants." 
But  his  father  put  his  hand  on  his  mouth.  "  No  more  of  that," 
says  he ;  "  I  forgive  you  all ;  you  shall  not  say  any  thing  about 
being  my  servant — -I  will  have  none  of  that.  Come  along," 
says  he,  "  come  in,  poor  prodigal.  Ho,"  said  he  to  the  ser- 
vants, "  bring  hither  the  best  robe,  and  put  it  on  him,  and  put 
shoes  on  his  poor  bleeding  feet ;  and  bring  hither  the  fatted 
calf,  and  kill  it ;  and  let  us  eat  and  be  merry  :  for  this  my 
son  was  dead,  and  is  alive  again,  he  was  lost,  and  is  found. 
And  then  they  began  to  be  merry."  O,  what  a  precious  re- 
ception for  one  of  the  chief  of  sinners !  Good  Matthew  Henry 
says — "  His  father  saw  him,  there  were  eyes  of  mercy  ;  he  ran 
to  meet  him,  there  were  legs  of  mercy ;  he  put  his  arms  round 
his  neck,  there  were  arms  of  mercy ;  he  kissed  him,  there 
were  kisses  of  mercy ;  he  said  to  him — there  were  words  of 
mercy — 'Bring  hither  the  best  robe,'  there  were  deeds  of 
mercy,  wonders  of  mercy — all  mercy.  O,  what  a  God  of 
mercy  he  is !" 

Now,  prodigal,  you  do  the  same.  Has  God  put  it  into  your 
heart  ?  There  are  many  who  have  been  running  away  a  long 
time  now.  Does  God  say  "  return  ?"  0,1  bid  you  return,  then, 
for  as  surely  as  ever  thou  dost  return  he  will  take  thee  in. 
There  never  was  a  poor  sinner  yet  who  came  to  Christ,  whom 
Christ  turned  away.  If  he  turns  you  away  you  will  be  the 
first.  O,  if  you  could  but  try  him !  "  Ah,  sir,  I  am  so  black, 
80  filthy,  so  vile."  Well,  come  along  with  you — you  can  not 
be  blacker  than  the  prodigal.     Come  to  your  father's  house, 


CONFESSION    OF   SIN.  256 

and  as  surely  as  he  is  God  he  will  keep  his  word — "  Him  that 
cometh  unto  me  I  will  no  wise  cast  out." 

O,  if  I  might  hear  that  some  had  come  to  Christ  this  morn- 
ing, I  would  indeed  bless  God !  I  must  tell  here,  for  the  honor 
of  God  and  Christ,  one  remarkable  circumstance,  and  then  I 
have  done.  You  will  remember  that  one  morning  I  mentioned 
the  case  of  an  infidel  who  had  been  a  scorner  and  scoffer,  but 
who,  through  reading  one  of  my  printed  sermons,  had  been 
brought  to  God's  house  and  then  to  God's  feet.  Well,  last 
Christmas  day,  the  same  infidel  gathered  together  all  his  books, 
afid  went  into  the  market-place  at  Norwich,  and  there  made  a 
public  recantation  of  all  his  errors,  and  a  profession  of  Christ, 
and  then  taking  up  all  his  books  which  he  had  written,  and 
had  in  his  house,  on  evil  subjects,  burned  them  in  the  sight  of 
the  people.  I  have  blessed  God  for  such  a  wonder  of  grace 
as  that,  and  pray  that  there  may  be  many  more  such,  who, 
though  they  be  born  prodigal,  will  yet  return  home,  saying, 
"  I  have  sinned." 


SERMON    XVII. 
FAITH. 

"  Without  faith  it  is  impossible  to  please  God." — Hebrews,  xi.  6. 

The  old  Assembly's  Catechism  asks,  "What  is  the  chief 
end  of  man  ?"  and  its  answer  is,  "  To  glorify  God,  and  to  en- 
joy him  for  ever."  The  answer  is  exceedingly  correct ;  but 
it  might  have  been  equally  truthful  if  it  had  been  shorter. 
The  chief  end  of  man  is  "  to  please  God  ;"  for  in  so  doing — we 
need  not  say  it,  because  it  is  an  undoubted  fact — in  so  doing 
he  will  please  himself  The  chief  end  of  man,  we  believe,  in 
this  life  and  in  the  next,  is  to  please  God  his  Maker.  If  any 
man  pleases  God,  he  does  that  which  conduces  most  to  his  own 
temporal  and  eternal  welfare.  Man  can  not  please  God  with- 
out bringing  to  himself  a  great  amount  of  happiness ;  for  if 
any  man  pleases  God,  it  is  because  God  accepts  him  as  his  son, 
gives  him  the  blessings  of  adoption,  pours  upon  him  the  boun- 
ties of  his  grace,  makes  him  a  blessed  man  in  this  life,  and  in- 
sures him  a  crown  of  evei'lasting  life,  which  he  shall  wear,  and 
which  shall  shine  with  unfading  luster^  when  the  wreaths  of 
earth's  glory  have  all  been  melted  away  ;  while,  on  tlie  other 
hand,  if  a  man  does  not  please  God,  he  inevitably  brings  upon 
himself  sorrow  and  suffering  in  this  life  ;  he  puts  a  worm  and 
a  rottenness  in  the  core  of  all  his  joys  ;  he  iills  his  death-pillow 
with  thorns,  and  he  supplies  the  eternal  fire  with  faggots  of 
flame  which  shall  for  ever  consume  him.  He  that  pleases  God 
is,  through  divine  grace,  journeying  onward  to  the  ultimate 
reward  of  all  those  that  love  and  fear  God ;  but  he  who  is  ill- 
pleasing  to  God  must,  for  Scripture  has  declared  it,  be  ban- 
ished from  the  presence  of  God,  and  consequently  from  the 
enjoyment  of  happiness.  If,  then,  we  be  right  in  saying  that 
to  please  God  is  to  be  happy,  the  one  important  question  is. 


FAITH.  357 

how  can  I  please  God  ?  and  there  is  something  very  solemn 
in  the  utterance  of  our  text :  "  Without  faith  it  is  impossible 
to  please  God."  That  is  to  say,  do  what  you  may,  strive  as 
earnestly  as  you  can,  live  as  excellently  as  you  2:)lease,  make 
what  sacrifices  you  choose,  be  as  eminent  as  you  can  for  every 
thing  that  is  lovely  and  of  good  repute,  yet  none  of  these 
things  can  be  pleasing  to  God  unless  they  be  mixed  with  faith. 
As  the  Lord  said  to  the  Jews,  "  With  all  your  sacrifices  you 
must  offer  salt ;"  so  he  says  to  us,  "  With  all  your  doings  you 
must  bring  faith,  or  else  '  without  faith  it  is  impossible  to 
please  God.' " 

This  is  an  old  law  ;  it  is  as  old  as  the  first  man.  No  sooner 
were  Cain  and  Abel  born  into  this  world,  and  no  sooner  had 
they  attained  to  manhood,  than  God  gave  a  practical  procla- 
mation of  this  law,  that  "  without  faith  it  is  impossible  to 
please  him."  Cain  and  Abel,  one  bright  day,  erected  an  altar 
side  by  side  Avith  each  other.  Cain  fetched  of  the  fruits  of  the 
trees  and  of  the  abundance  of  the  soil,  and  placed  them  upon 
his  altar  ;  Abel  brought  of  the  firstlings  of  the  flock,  and  laid 
it  upon  his  altar.  It  was  to  be  decided  which  God  would  ac- 
cept. Cain  had  brought  his  best,  but  he  brought  it  without 
faith  ;  Abel  brought  his  sacrifice,  but  he  brought  it  with  faith 
in  Christ.  Now,  then^  which  shall  best  succeed  ?  The  offer- 
ings are  equal  in  value ;  so  far  as  they  themselves  are  con- 
cerned they  are  alike  good.  Upon  which  will  the  heavenly 
fire  descend  ?  Which  will  the  Lord  God  consume  with  the 
fire  of  his  pleasure  ?  O  !  I  see  Abel's  ofiering  burning,  and 
Cain's  countenance  has  fallen,  for  unto  Abel  and  unto  his 
offering  the  Lord  had  respect,  but  unto  Cain  and  his  offering 
the  Lord  had  no  respect.  It  shall  be  the  same  till  the  last 
man  shall  be  gathered  into  heaven.  There  shall  never  be  an 
acceptable  ofiering  which  has  not  been  seasoned  with  faith. 
Good  though  it  may  be,  as  apparently  good  in  itself  as  that 
which  has  faith,  yet  unless  faith  be  with  it  God  never  can  and 
never  will  accept  it,  for  he  here  declares,  "  Without  faith  it  is 
impossible  to  please  God." 

I  shall  endeavor  to  pack  my  thoughts  closely  this  morning, 
ind  be  as  brief  as  I  can,  consistently  with  a  full  explanation  of 
the  theme.     I  shall  first  have  an  exposition  of  what  is  faith ; 


258  FAITH. 

secondly,  I  shall  have  an  argument^  that  without  faith  it  is  im 
possible  to  be  saved ;  and  thirdly,  I  shall  ask  a  question — 
Have  you  that  faith  which  pleases  God  ?  We  shall  have, 
then,  an  exposition,  an  argument,  and  a  question. 

I.  First,  for  the  exposition.     What  is  faith  ? 

The  old  writers,  who  are  by  far  the  most  sensible — for  you 
will  notice  that  the  books  that  were  written  about  two  hun- 
dred years  ago  by  the  old  Puritans  have  more  sense  in  one 
line  than  there  is  in  a  page  of  our  new  books,  and  more  in  a 
page  than  there  is  in  a  whole  volume  of  our  modern  divinity 
— the  old  writers  tell  yon,  that  faith  is  made  up  of  three 
things :  first,  knowledge,  then  assent,  and  then  what  they  call 
affiance,  or  the  laying  hold  of  the  knowledge  to  which  we  give 
assent  and  making  it  our  own  by  trusting  in  it. 

1.  Let  us  begin,  then,  at  the  beginning.  The  first  thing  in 
faith  is  knoioledge,  A  man  can  not  believe  what  he  does  not 
know.  That  is  a  clear,  self-evident  axiom.  If  I  have  never 
heard  of  a  thing  in  all  my  life,  and  do  not  know  it,  I  can  not 
believe  it.  And  yet  there  are  some  persons  who  have  a  faith 
like  that  of  the  fuller,  who  when  he  was  asked  what  he  be- 
lieved, said,  "  I  believe  what  the  church  believes."  "  What 
does  the  church  believe  ?"  "  The  church  believes  what  I 
believe."  "  And  pray  what  do  you  and  the  church  believe  ?" 
"  Why  we  both  believe  the  same  thing."  Now  this  man  be- 
lieved nothing,  except  that  the  church  was  right,  but  in  what 
he  could  not  tell.  It  is  idle  for  a  man  to  say,  "  I  am  a  be- 
liever," and  yet  not  to  know  what  he  believes  ;  but  yet  I  have 
seen  some  persons  in  this  position.  A  violent  sermon  has  been 
preached,  which  has  stirred  up  their  blood  ;  the  minister  has 
cried,  "  Believe  !  believe !  believe !"  and  the  people  on  a  sud- 
den have  got  it  into  their  heads  that  they  were  believers,  and 
have  walked  out  of  their  place  of  worship  and  said,  "  I  am  a 
believer."  And  if  they  were  asked,  "  Pray  what  do  you  be- 
lieve ?"  they  could  not  give  a  reason  for  the  hope  that  was  in 
them.  They  beheve  they  intend  to  go  to  chapel  next  Sunday  ; 
they  intend  to  join  that  class  of  people  ;  they  intend  to  be  very 
violent  in  their  singing  and  very  wonderful  in  their  rant ; 
therefore  they  believe  they  shall  be  saved  ;  but  what  they  be- 
lieve they  can  not  tell.     New,  I  hold  no  man's  faith  to  be  sure 


FAITH.  250 

faith,  unless  he  knows  what  he  believes.  If  he  says,  "  I  be- 
lieve," and  does  not  know  what  he  believes,  how  can  that  be 
true  faith  ?  The  apostle  has  said,  "  How  can  they  believe  on 
him  of  whom  they  have  not  heard?  and  how  can  they  hear 
without  a  preacher  ?  and  how  can  they  preach  except  they  be 
sent  ?"  It  is  necessary,  then,  to  true  faith,  that  a  man  should 
know  something  of  the  Bible.  Believe  me,  this  is  an  age 
when  the  Bible  is  not  so  much  thought  of  as  it  used  to  be. 
Some  hundred  years  ago  the  world  was  covered  with  bigotry, 
cruelty,  and  superstition.  We  always  run  to  extremes,  and 
we  have  just  gone  to  the  other  extreme  now.  It  was  then 
said,  "  One  faith  is  right,  down  with  all  others  by  the  rack  and 
by  the  sword  !"  Now  it  is  said,  "  However  contradictory  our 
creeds  may  be,  they  are  all  right."  If  we  did  but  use  our 
common  sense  we  should  know  that  it  is  not  so.  But  some 
reply,  "  Such-and-such  a  doctrine  need  not  be  preached,  and 
need  not  be  believed."  Then,  sir,  if  it  need  not  bo  preached 
it  need  not  be  revealed.  You  impugn  the  wisdom  of  God, 
when  you  say  a  doctrine  is  unnecessary ;  for  you  do  as  much 
as  say  that  God  has  revealed  something  which  Avas  not  neces- 
sary, and  he  would  be  as  unwise  to  do  more  than  was  neces- 
sary as  if  he  had  done  less  than  was  necessary.  We  believe 
that  every  doctrine  of  God's  Word  ought  to  be  studied  by 
men,  and  that  their  faith  should  lay  hold  of  the  whole  matter 
of  the  sacred  Scriptures,  and  more  especially  upon  all  that 
part  of  Scripture  which  concerns  the  person  of  our  all-blessed 
Redeemer.  There  must  be  some  degree  of  knowledge  before 
there  can  be  faith.  "  Search  the  Scriptures,"  then,  "  for  in 
them  ye  think  ye  have  eternal  life,  and  they  are  they  which 
testify  of  Christ ;"  and  by  searching  and  reading  cometh 
knowledge,  and  by  knowledge  cometh  faith,  and  through  faith 
cometh  salvation. 

2.  But  a  man  may  know  a  thing,  and  yet  not  have  fiith.  I 
may  know  a  thing,  and  yet  not  believe  it.  Therefore  assent 
must  go  with  faith  :  that  is  to  say,  what  we  know  we  must  also 
agree  unto,  as  being  most  certainly  the  verity  of  God.  Now, 
in  order  to  faith  it  is  necessary  that  I  should  not  only  read  the 
Scriptures  and  'understand  them,  but  that  I  should  receive 
them  in  my  soul  as  being  the  very  truth  of  the  living  God. 


260  FATTH. 

and  should  devoutly  with  my  whole  heart  receive  the  whole 
of  Scripture  as  being  inspired  of  the  Most  High,  and  the  whole 
of  the  doctrine  which  he  requires  me  to  believe  to  ray  salva- 
tion. You  are  not  allowed  to  halve  the  Scriptures,  and  to  be- 
lieve what  you  please;  you  are  not  allow^ed  to  believe  the 
Scriptures  with  a  half  heartedness,  for  if  you  do  this  willfully, 
you  have  not  the  faith  which  looks  alone  to  Christ.  True  faith 
gives  its  full  assent  to  the  Scriptures  ;  it  takes  a  page  and  says, 
"  No  matter  what  is  in  the  page,  I  believe  it ;"  it  turns  over 
the  next  chapter  and  says,  "Herein  are  seme  things  hard  to  be 
understood,  which  they  that  are  unlearned  and  unstable  do 
wrest,  as  they  do  also  the  other  Scriptures,  to  their  destru«- 
tion ;  but,  hard  though  it  be,  I  believe  it."  It  sees  the  Trin- 
ity ;  it  can  not  understand  the  Trinity  in  Unity,  but  it  believes 
it.  It  sees  an  atoning  sacrifice  ;  there  is  something  difficult  in 
the  thought,  but  it  believes  it ;  and  whatever  it  be  which  it 
sees  in  revelation,  it  devoutly  puts  its  lips  to  the  book,  and 
says,  "  I  love  it  all ;  I  give  my  full,  free,  and  hearty  assent  to 
every  word  of  it,  whether  it  be  the  threatening,  or  the  prom- 
ise, the  proverb,  the  precept,  or  the  blessing.  I  believe  that 
since  it  is  all  the  word  of  God  it  is  all  most  assuredly  true." 
Whosoever  would  be  saved  must  know  the  Scriptures,  and 
must  give  full  assent  unto  them. 

3.  But  a  man  may  have  all  this,  and  yet  not  possess  true 
faith ;  for  the  chief  part  of  faith  lies  in  the  last  head,  namely, 
in  an  affiance  to  the  truth ;  not  the  believing  it  merely,  but 
the  taking  hold  of  it  as  being  ours,  and  in  the  resting  on  it  for 
salvation.  Recumbency  on  the  truth  was  the  word  which  the 
old  preachers  used.  You  will  understand  that  word.  Lean- 
ing on  it ;  saying,  "  This  is  truth,  I  trust  my  salvation  on  it." 
Now,  true  faith  in  its  very  essence  rests  in  this — a  leaning 
upon  Christ.  It  will  not  save  me  to  know  that  Christ  is  a 
Saviour ;  but  it  Avill  save  me  to  trust  him  to  be  my  Saviour. 
I  shall  not  be  delivered  from  the  wrath  to  come,  by  believing 
that  his  atonement  is  sufficient,  but  I  shall  be  saved  by  making 
that  atonement  my  trust,  my  refuge,  and  my  all.  The  pith, 
the  essence  of  faith  lies  in  this — a  casting  one's-self  on  the  prom- 
ise. It  is  not  the  life-buoy  on  board  the  ship  that  saves  the 
man  when  he  is  drowning,  nor  is  it  his  beUef  that  it  is  an  ex- 


FAITH.  261 

cellent  and  successful  invention.  No  !  He  must  have  it  around 
his  loins,  or  his  hand  upon  it,  or  else  he  will  sink.  To  use  an 
old  and  hackneyed  illustration :  suppose  a  fire  in  the  upper 
room  of  a  house,  and  the  people  gathered  in  the  street.  A 
child  is  in  the  upper  story :  how  is  he  to  escape  ?  He  can 
not  leap  down — that  were  to  be  dashed  to  pieces.  A  strong 
man  comes  beneath,  and  cries,  "  Drop  into  my  arms."  It  is  a 
part  of  faith  to  know  that  the  man  is  there  ;  it  is  another 
part  of  faith  to  believe  that  the  man  is  strong  ;  but  the  essence 
of  faith  lies  in  the  dropping  down  into  the  man's  arms.  That 
is  the  proof  of  faith,  and  the  real  pith  and  essence  of  it.  So, 
sinner,  thou  art  to  know  that  Christ  died  for  sin ;  thou  art 
also  to  understand  that  Christ  is  able  to  save,  and  thou  art  to 
believe  that ;  but  thou  art  not  saved,  unless  in  addition  to  that 
thou  puttest  thy  trust  in  him  to  be  thy  Saviour,  and  to  be 
thine  for  ever.  As  Hart  says  in  the  hymn,  which  really  ex- 
presses the  gospel, 

"  Venture  on  him,  venture  wholly ; 
Let  no  other  trust  intrude ; 

None  but  Jesus 
Can  do  helpless  sinners  good." 

This  is  the  faith  which  saves ;  and  however  unholy  may  have 
been  your  lives  up  to  this  hour,  this  faith,  if  given  to  you  at  this 
moment,  will  blot  out  all  your  sins,  will  change  your  nature, 
make  you  a  new  man  in  Christ  Jesus,  lead  you  to  Hve  a  holy 
life,  and  make  your  eternal  salvation  as  secure  as  if  an  angel 
-should  take  you  on  his  bright  wings  this  morning,  and  carry 
you  immediately  to  heaven.  Have  you  that  fiiith  ?  That  is 
the  one  all-important  question ;  for  while  with  faith  men  are 
saved,  without  it  men  are  damned.  As  Brookes  hath  said  in  one 
of  his  admirable  works,  "  He  that  believeth  on  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  shall  be  saved,  be  his  sins  never  so  many ;  but  he  that 
believeth  not  in  the  Lord  Jesus  must  be  damned,  be  his  sins 
never  so  few."  Hast  thou  faith  ?  For  the  text  declares, 
*'  Without  faith  it  is  impossible  to  please  God." 

II.  And  now  we  come  to  the  argument,  why,  without  faith, 
we  can  not  be  saved. 

Now  there  are  some  gentlemen  present  who  are  saying, 


262  FAITH. 

*'  Now  we  shall  see  whether  Mr.  Spurgeon  has  any  logic  in 
him."  No,  you  won't,  sirs,  because  I  never  pretend  to  exor- 
cise it.  I  hope  I  have  the  logic  which  can  appeal  to  men's 
hearts ;  but  I  am  not  very  prone  to  use  the  less  powerful  logic 
of  the  head,  when  I  can  win  the  heart  in  another  manner. 
But  if  it  were  needful,  I  should  not  be  afraid  to  prove  that  I 
know  more  of  logic  and  of  many  other  things  than  the  little 
men  who  undertake  to  censure  me.  It  were  well  if  they 
knew  how  to  hold  their  tongues,  which  is  at  least  a  fine  part 
of  rhetoric.  My  argument  shall  be  such  as  I  trust  will  appeal 
to  the  heart  and  conscience,  although  it  may  not  exactly 
please  those  who  are  always  so  fond  of  syllogistic  demonstra- 
tion, 

"  "Who  could  a  hair  divide 
Between  the  west  and  north-west  side." 

1.  "Without  faith  it  is  impossible  to  please  God."  And  I 
gather  it  from  the  fact,  that  there  never  has  been  the  case  of 
a  man  recorded  in  Scripture  who  did  please  God  without 
faith.  The  11th  chapter  of  the  Hebrews  is  the  chapter  of  the 
men  who  pleased  God.  Listen  to  their  names :  "  by  faith 
Abel  offered  unto  God  a  more  excellent  sacrifice  ;"  "  by  faith 
Enoch  was  translated ;"  "  by  faith  Noah  built  an  ark ;"  "  by 
faith  Abraham  went  out  into  a  place  that  he  should  afterward 
receive ;"  "  by  faith  he  sojourned  in  the  land  of  promise ;" 
"  by  faith  Sarah  bore  Isaac ;"  "  by  faith  Abraham  offered  up 
Isaac ;"  "  by  faith  Moses  gave  up  the  wealth  of  Egypt ;"  "  by 
faith  Isaac  blessed  Jacob  ;"  "by  faith  Jacob  blessed  the  sons 
of  Joseph  ;"  "  by  faith  Joseph,  when  he  died,  made  mention 
of  the  departure  of  the  children  of  Israel ;"  "by  faith  the  Red 
Sea  was  dried  up  ;"  "  by  faith  the  walls  of  Jericho  fell  down  ;" 
"  by  faith  the  harlot  Rahab  was  saved  ;"  "  and  what  shall  I 
more  say  ?  for  the  time  would  fiiil  me  to  tell  of  Gideon,  and 
of  Barak,  and  of  Samson,  and  of  Jephtha,  of  David  also,  and 
Samuel,  and  of  the  prophets."  But  all  these  were  men  of 
faith.  Others  mentioned  in  Scripture  have  done  something ; 
but  God  did  not  accept  them.  Men  have  humbled  themselves, 
and  yet  God  has  not  saved  them.  Ahab  did,  and  yet  his  sins 
were  never  forgiven.  Men  have  repented,  and  yet  have  not 
been  saved,  because  theirs  was  the  wrong  repentance.     Judas 


FAITH.  263 

repented,  and  went  and  hanged  himself,  and  was  not  saved. 
Men  have  confessed  then-  sins,  and  have  not  been  saved. 
Saul  did  it.  He  said  to  David,  "  I  have  sinned  against  thee, 
my  son  David  ;"  and  yet  he  went  on  as  he  did  before.  Multi- 
tudes have  confessed  the  name  of  Christ,  and  have  done  many 
marvelous  things,  and  yet  they  have  never  been  pleasing  to 
God,  fi'om  this  simple  reason,  that  they  had  not  faith.  And 
if  there  be  not  one  mentioned  in  Scripture,  which  is  the  his- 
tory of  some  thousand  years,  it  is  not  likely  that  in  the  other 
two  thousand  years  of  the  world's  history  there  would  have 
been  one,  when  there  was  not  one  during  the  first  four  thou- 
sand. 

2.  But  the  next  argument  \%  faith  is  the  stoojnnff  grace^ 
and  nothing  can  make  a  man  stoop  without  faith.  Now,  un- 
less man  does  stoop,  his  sacrifice  can  not  be  accepted.  The 
angels  know  this.  When  they  praise  God,  they  do  it  vailing 
their  faces  with  their  wings.  The  redeemed  know  it.  When 
they  praise  God,  they  cast  their  crowns  before  his  feet.  Now, 
a  man  that  has  not  faith  proves  that  he  can  not  stoop ;  for  he 
has  not  faith  for  this  reason,  because  he  is  too  proud  to  be- 
lieve. He  declares  he  will  not  yield  his  intellect,  he  will  not 
become  a  child  and  believe  meekly  what  God  tells  him  to  be- 
lieve. He  is  too  proud,  and  he  can  not  enter  heaven,  because 
the  door  of  heaven  is  so  low  that  no  one  can  enter  in  by  it 
unless  they  will  bow  their  heads.  There  never  was  a  man 
who  could  walk  into  salvation  erect.  We  must  go  to  Christ 
on  our  bended  knees ;  for  though  he  is  a  door  big  enough  for 
the  greatest  sinner  to  come  in,  he  is  a  door  so  low  that  men 
must  stoop  if  they  would  be  saved.  Therefore,  it  is  that  faith 
is  necessary,  because  a  want  of  faith  is  certain  evidence  of 
absence  of  humility. 

3.  But  now  for  other  reasons.  Faith  is  necessary  to  salva- 
tion, because  we  are  told  in  Scripture  that  works  can  not  save. 
To  tell  a  very  familiar  story,  that  even  the  poorest  may  not 
misunderstand  what  I  say.  A  minister  was  one  day  going  to 
preach.  He  climbed  a  hill  on  his  road.  Beneath  him  lay  the 
villages,  sleeping  in  their  beauty,  with  the  corn  fields  motion- 
less in  the  sunshine  ;  but  he  did  not  look  at  them,  for  his  at- 
tention was  arrested  by  a  woman  standing  at  her  door,  and 


264  FAITH. 

who,  upon  seeing  him,  came  up  to  him  with  the  greatest  anx- 
iety, and  said,  "  O,  sir,  have  you  any  keys  about  you  ?  I  have 
broken  the  key  of  my  drawers,  and  there  are  some  things  that 
I  must  get  directly."  Said  he,  "  I  have  no  keys."  She  was 
disappointed,  expecting  that  every  one  would  have  keys. 
"  But  suppose,"  he  said,  "  I  had  some  keys,  they  might  not  fit 
your  lock,  and  therefore  you  could  not  get  the  articles  you 
want.  But  do  not  distress  yourself,  wait  till  some  one  else 
comes  up.  But,"  said  he,  wishing  to  improve  the  occasion, 
"  have  you  never  heard  of  the  key  of  heaven  ?"  "  Ah !  yes," 
she  said,  "  I  have  lived  long  enough  and  have  gone  to  church 
long  enough  to  know  that  if  we  work  hard  and  get  our  bread 
by  the  sweat  of  our  brow,  and  act  well  toward  our  neighbors, 
and  behave,  as  the  catechism  says,  lowly  and  reverenly  to  all 
our  betters,  and  if  we  do  our  duty  in  that  station  of  life  in 
which  it  has  pleased  God  to  place  us,  and  say  our  prayers  regu- 
larly, we  shall  be  saved."  "  Ah !"  said  he,  "  my  good  woman, 
that  is  a  broken  key,  for  you  have  broken  the  commandments, 
you*  have  not  fulfilled  all  your  duties.  It  is  a  good  key,  but 
you  have  broken  it."  "  Pray,  sir,"  said  she,  believing  that  he 
understood  the  matter,  and  looking  frightened,  "  what  have 
I  left  out  ?"  "  Why,"  said  he,  "  the  all-important  thing,  the 
blood  of  Jesus  Christ.  Don't  you  know  it  is  said,  the  key  of 
heaven  is  at  his  girdle  ;  he  openeth,  and  no  man  shutteth ;  he 
shutteth,  and  no  man  openeth?"  And  explaining  it  more  fully 
to  her,  he  said,  "  It  is  Christ,  and  Christ  alone,  that  can  open 
heaven  to  you,  and  not  your  good  works."  "  What,  minister," 
said  she,  "  are  our  good  works  useless  then  ?"  "  No,"  said 
he,  "  not  after  faith.  If  you  believe  first,  you  may  have  as 
many  good  works  as  you  please  ;  but  if  you  believe  you  will 
never  trust  in  them,  for  if  you  trust  in  them  you  have, spoiled 
them,  and  they  are  not  good  works  any  longer.  '  Have  as 
many  good  works  as  you  please ;  still,  put  your  trust  wholly 
in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  for  if  you  do  not,  your  key  will  never 
unlock  heaven's  gate,"  So,  then,  my  hearers,  we  must  have 
true  faith,  because  the  old  key  of  works  is  so  broken  by  us  all 
that  we  never  shall  enter  Paradise  by  it.  If  any  of  you  pre- 
tend  that  you  have  no  sins,  to  be  very  plain  with  you,  you  de- 
ceive yourselves,  and  the  truth  is  not  in  you.     If  you  conceive 


-  FAITH.  265 

that  by  your  good  works  you  shall  enter  heaven,  never  was 
there  a  more  fell  delusion,  and  you  shall  find  at  the  last  great 
day  that  your  hopes  are  worthless,  and  that  like  sere  leaves 
from  the  autumn  trees  your  noblest  doings  shall  be  blown 
away,  or  kindled  into  a  flame  wherein  you  yourselves  must 
suffer  for  ever.  Take  heed  of  your  good  works ;  get  them 
afler  faith,  but  remember,  the  way  to  be  saved  is  simply  to 
believe  in  Jesus  Christ. 

4.  Again :  without  feitli  it  is  impossible  to  be  saved,  and  to 
please  God,  because  without  faith  there  is  7io  union  to  Christ. 
Now,  union  to  Christ  is  indispensable  to  our  salvation.  If  I 
come  before  God's  throne  with  my  prayers,  I  shall  never  get 
them  answered  unless  I  bring  Christ  with  me.  The  Molos- 
sians  of  old,  when  they  could  not  get  a  favor  from  their  king, 
adopted  a  singular  expedient ;  they  took  the  king's  only  son 
in  their  arms,  and  falling  on  their  knees,  cried,  "  O  king,  for 
thy  son's  sake  grant  our  request."  He  smiled  and  said,  "  I 
deny- nothing  to  those  who  plead  my  son's  name."  It  is  so 
with  God.  He  will  deny  nothing  to  the  man  who  comes,  hav- 
ing Christ  at  his  elbow  ;  but  if  he  comes  alone  he  must  be  cast 
away.  Union  to  Christ  is,  after  all,  the  great  point  in  salva- 
tion. Let  me  tell  you  a  story  to  illustrate  this.  The  stupen- 
dous falls  of  Niagara  have  been  spoken  of  in  every  part  of  the 
world ;  but  while  they  are  marvelous  to  hear  of,  and  wonder- 
ful as  a  spectacle,  they  have  been  very  destructive  to  human 
life,  when  by  accident  any  have  been  carried  down  the  cataract. 
Some  years  ago  two  men,  a  bargeman  and  a  collier,  were  in  a 
boat,  and  found  themselves  unable  to  manage  it,  it  being 
carried  oo  swiftly  down  the  current  that  they  must  both  in- 
evitably^ be  borne  down  and  dashed  to  pieces.  Persons  on  the 
shore  saw  them,  but  were  unable  to  do  much  for  their  rescue. 
At  last,  however,  one  man  was  saved  by  floating  a  rope  to 
him,  which  he  grasped.  The  same  instant  that  the  rope  came 
into  his  hand  a  log  floated  by  the  other  man.  The  thoughtless 
and  confused  bargeman  histead  of  seizing  the  rope  laid  hold  on 
the  log.  It  was  a  f^ital  mistake  ;  they  were  both  in  imminent 
peril,  but  the  one  was  drawn  to  shore  because  he  had  a  con- 
nection with  the  people  on  the  land,  whilst  the  other,  clinging 
to  the  log,  was  bornp  irresistibly  along  and  never  heard  of 

12 


266  FAITH. 

afterward.  Do  you  not  see  that  here  is  a  practical  illustra- 
tion ?  Faith  is  a  connection  with  Christ.  Christ  is  on  the 
shore,  so  to  speak,  holding  the  rope  of  faith,  and  if  we  lay  hold 
of  it  with  the  hand  of  our  confidence  he  pulls  us  to  shore;  but 
our  good  works,  having  no  connection  with  Christ,  are  drifted 
along  down  the  gulf  of  fell  despair.  Grapple  them  as  tightly 
as  we  may,  even  with  hooks  of  steel,  they  can  not  avail  us  in 
the  least  degree.  You  will  see,  I  am  sure,  what  I  wish  to  show 
you.  Some  object  to  anecdotes  ;  I  shall  use  them  till  they  have 
done  objecting  to  them.  The  truth  is  never  more  powerfully 
set  forth  to  men  than  by  telling  them,  as  Christ  did,  a  story 
of  a  certain  man  with  two  sons,  or  a  certain  householder  who 
went  a  journey,  divided  his  substance,  and  gave  to  some  ten 
talents,  to  another  one. 

Faith,  then,  is  a  union  with  Christ.  Take  care  you  have  it ; 
for  if  not,  cling  to  your  works,  and  there  you  go  floating  down 
the  stream !  Cling  to  your  works,  and  there  you  go  dashing 
down  the  gulf!  Lost  because  your  works  have  no  hold  on 
Christ  and  no  connection  with  the  blessed  Redeemer !  But 
thou,  poor  sinner,  with  all  thy  sin  about  thee,  if  the  rope  is 
round  thy  loins,  and  Christ  has  a  hold  of  it,  fear  not ! 

"  His  honor  is  engaged  to  save 
The  meanest  of  his  sheep ; 
All  that  his  heavenly  Fathor  gave, 
His  hands  securely  keep." 

5.  Just  one  more  argument,  and  then  I  have  done  with  it. 
"  Without  faith  it  is  impossible  to  please  God,"  because  it  is 
impossible  to  preserve  holiness  without  faith.  What  a  multi- 
tude of  fair-weather  Christians  we  have  in  this  age!  Many 
Christians  resemble  the  nautilus,  which  in  fine  smooth  weather 
swims  on  the  surface  of  the  sea,  in  a  splendid  little  squadron, 
like  the  mighty  ships ;  but  the  moment  the  first  breath  of 
wind  ruffles  the  waves,  they  take  in  their  sails  and  sink  into 
the  depths.  Many  Christians  are  the  same.  In  good  com- 
pany, in  evangelical  drawing-rooms,  in  pious  parlors,  in  chapels 
and  vestries,  they  are  tremendously  religious;  but  if  they  are 
exposed  to  a  little  ridicule,  if  some  should  smile  at  them  and 
call  them  Methodist  or  Presbyterian,  or  some  name  of  re- 


PAITH.  267 

proach,  it  is  all  over  with  religion  till  the  next  fine  day.  Then 
when  it  is  fine  weather,  and  religion  will  answer  their  purpose, 
np  go  the  sails  again,  and  they  are  as  pious  as  before.  Believe 
me,  that  kind  of  religion  is  worse  than  irreligion.  I  do  like  a 
man  to  be  thoroughly  what  he  is — a  downright  man  ;  and  if  a 
man  does  not  love  God,  do  not  let  him  say  he  does;  but  if  he 
be  a  true  Christian,  a  follower  of  Jesus,  let  him  say  it  and 
stand  up  for  it ;  there  is  nothing  to  be  ashamed  of  it  in  it ;  the 
only  thing  to  be  ashamed  of  is  to  be  hypocritical.  Let  us  be 
honest  to  our  profession,  and  it  will  be  our  glory.  Ah  !  what 
would  you  do  without  faith  in  times  of  persecution  ?  You 
good  and  pious  people  that  have  no  faith,  what  would  you  do 
if  the  stake  were  again  erected  in  Smithfield,  and  if  once  more 
the  fires  consumed  the  saints  to  ashes — if  the  Lollard's  tower 
were  again  opened,  if  the  rack  were  again  plied,  or  even  if  the 
stocks  were  used,  as  they  have  been  used  by  a  Protestant 
church,  as  witness  the  persecution  of  my  predecessor,  Benja- 
min Keach,  who  was  once  set  in  the  stocks  at  Aylesbury  for 
writing  a  book  against  infant  baptism.  If  even  the  mildest 
form  of  persecution  were  revived,  how  would  the  people  be 
scattered  abroad !  And  some  of  the  shepherds  would  be 
leaving  their  flocks. 

III.  And  now,  in  conclusion,  the  question,  the  vital  ques- 
tion. Dear  hearer,  have  you  faith?  Dost  thou  believe  on 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  with  all  thy  heart  ?  If  so,  thou  raayest 
hope  to  be  saved.  Ay,  thou  mayest  conclude  with  absolute 
certainty  that  thou  shalt  never  see  perdition.  Have  you  faith  ? 
Shall  I  help  you  to  answer  that  question  ?  I  will  give  you 
three  tests,  as  briefly  as  ever  I  can,  not  to  weary  you,  and 
then  farewell  this  morning.  He  that  has  faith  has  renounced 
his  own  righteousness.  If  thou  puttest  one  atom  of  trust  in 
thyself  thou  hast  no  faith ;  if  thou  dost  place  even  a  particle  of 
leliance  upon  any  thing  else  but  what  Christ  did,  thou  hast  no 
faith.  If  thou  dost  trust  in  thy  works,  then  thy  works  are 
antichrist,  and  Christ  and  antichrist  can  never  go  together 
Christ  will  have  all  or  nothing  ;  he  must  be  a  whole  Saviour 
or  no  Saviour  at  all.     If  then,  you  have  faith,  you  can  say, 

"  Nothing  in  my  hands  I  bring, 
Simply  to  the  cross  I  cling." 


268  FAITH. 

Then  true  faith  may  be  known  by  this,  that  it  begets  a  great 
esteem  for  the  person  of  Christ.  Dost  thou  love  Christ? 
Couldst  thou  die  for  him  ?  Dost  thou  seek  to  serve  him  ? 
Dost  thou  love  his  people  ?     Canst  thou  say 

"  Jesus,  I  love  thy  charming  name, 
'Tis  music  to  my  ear." 

O  !  if  thou  dost  not  love  Christ  thou  dost  not  believe  in  him ; 
for  to  believe  in  Christ,  begets  love.  And  yet  more  :  he  that 
has  true  faith  will  have  true  obedience.  If  a  man  says  he  has 
faith  and  has  no  works,  he  lies ;  if  any  man  declares  that  he 
believes  on  Christ,  and  yet  does  not  lead  a  holy  life,  he  makes 
a  mistake ;  for  while  we  do  not  trust  in  good  works,  we  know 
that  faith  always  begets  good  works.  Faith  is  the  father  of 
holiness,  and  he  has  not  the  parent  who  loves  not  the  child. 
God's  blessings  are  blessings  with  both  his  hands.  In  the  one 
hand  he  gives  pardon :  but  in  the  other  hand  he  always  gives 
holiness ;  and  no  man  can  have  "the  one,  unless  he  has  the 
other. 

And  now,  dear  hearers,  shall  I  down  upon  my  knees,  and 
entreat  you  for  Christ's  sake  to  answer  this  question  in  your 
own  silent  chamber :  Have  you  faith  ?  O  !  answer  it.  Yes — 
or  No.  Leave  off  saying,  "I  do  not  know,"  or  "I  do  not 
care."  Ah  !  ye  will  care  one  day,  when  the  earth  is  reeling, 
and  the  world  is  tossing  to  and  fro ;  ye  will  care  when  God 
shall  summon  you  to  judgment,  and  when  he  shall  condemn 
the  faithless  and  the  unbelieving.  O  !  that  ye  were  wise — that 
ye  would  care  now,  and  if  any  of  you  feel  your  need  of  Christ, 
let  me  beg  of  you,  for  Christ's  sake,  now  to  seek  faith  in  him 
who  is  exalted  on  high  to  give  repentance  and  remission,  and 
who,  if  he  has  given  you  repentance,  will  give  you  remission 
too.  O  sinners,  who  know  your  sins !  "  believe  on  the  Lord 
Jesus,  and  ye  shall  be  saved."  Cast  yourselves  upon  his  love 
and  blood,  his  doing  and  his  dying,  his  miseries  and  his  merits ; 
and  if  you  do  this  you  shall  never  fall,  but  you  shall  be  saved 
now,  and  saved  in  that  great  day,  when  not  to  be  saved  will 
be  horrible  indeed.  "  Turn  ye,  turn  ye  ;  why  will  ye  die,  O 
house  of  Israel  ?"  Lay  hold  on  him,  touch  the  hem  of  his 
garment,  and  ye  shall  be  healed.  May  God  help  you  so  to 
do  ;  for  Christ's  sake !     Amen  and  Amen. 


SERMON     XVIII  . 

RAHAB'S    FAITH. 

'  By  faith  the  harlot  Rahab  perishe^  not  with  them  that  beheved  notj  when 
she  h£ul  received  the  spies  with  peace.  — Hebrews,  xi.  31. 

In  almost  every  capital  of  Europe  there  are  varieties  of  tri- 
umphal arches  or  columns,  upon  which  are  recorded  the  val- 
iant deeds  of  the  country's  generals,  its  emperors,  or  its  mon- 
archs.  You  will  find,  in  one  case,  the  thousand  battles  of  a 
Napoleon  recorded,  and  in  another,  you  find  the  victories  of  a 
Nelson  pictured.  It  seems,  therefore,  but  right,  that  faith, 
which  is  the  mightiest  of  the  mighty,  should  have  a  pillar  raised 
to  its  honor,  upon  which  its  valiant  deeds  should  be  recorded. 
The  apostle  Paul  undertook  to  raise  the  structure,  and  he 
erected  a  most  magnificent  pillar  in  the  chapter  before  us.  It 
recites  the  victories  of  faith.  It  begins  with  one  triumph  of 
faith,  and  then  proceeds  to  others.  We  have,  in  one  place, 
faith  triumpliing  over  death  ;  Enoch  entered  not  the  gates  of 
hades,  but  reached  heaven  by  another  road  from  that  which  is 
usual  to  men.  We  have  faith,  in  another  place,  wrestling  with 
time  ]  Noah,  warned  of  God  concerning  things  not  seen  as 
yet,  wrestled  with  time,  which  placed  his  deluge  a  hundred 
and  twenty  years  away  ;  and  yet,  in  the  confidence  of  faith, 
he  believed  against  all  rational  expectation,  against  all  proba- 
bility, and  his  faith  was  more  than  a  match  for  prob;Ability  and 
time  too.  We  have  faith  triumphing  over  infirmity — when 
Abraham  begetteth  a  son  in  his  old  age.  And  then  we  have 
faith,  triumphing  over  natural  affection^  as  we  see  Abraham 
climbing  to  the  top  of  the  hill  and  raising  the  knife  to  slay  his 
only  and  beloved  son  at  the  command  of  God.  We  see  fliith, 
again,  entering  the  lists  with  the  iniirmities  of  old  age  and 
the  pains  of  the  last  gruggie,    as  w^e  read,  "By  faith  Jacob, 


270  RAHAB'S    FAITH. 

when  lie  was  dying,  blessed  both  the  sons  of  Joseph,  and  wor 
shiped,  leuiiing  on  the  top  of  his  stalF."  Then  we  have  faith 
combathig  the  allurements  of  a  wealthy  court.  "  By  faith 
Moses  esteemed  the  reproach  of  Christ  greater  riches  than 
the  treasures  in  Egypt."  We  see  faith  dauntless  in  courage 
when  Moses  forsook  Egypt,  not  fearing  the  wrath  of  the  king, 
and  equally  patient  hi  suffering  when  he  endured  f«s  seeing 
him  who  is  invisible.  We  have  fkith  dividing  seas,  and  cast- 
ing down  strong  walls.  And  tl  en,  as  though  the  greatest 
victory  should  be  recorded  last,  we  have  faith  entering  the 
lists  with  sin,  holding  a  tournament  with  iniquity,  and  coining 
off  more  than  a  conqueror.  "  Rahab  perished  not  with  them 
that  believed  not,  when  she  had  received  the  spies  with  peace." 
That  this  woman  was  no  mere  hostess,  but  a  real  harlot,  I 
Iiave  abundantly  proved  to  every  candid  hearer  while  reading 
the  chapter.  I  am  persuaded  that  nothing  but  a  spirit  of  dis- 
taste for  free  grace  would  ever  have  led  any  commentator  to 
deny  her  sin. 

I  do  think  this  triumph  of  faith  over  sin  is  not  the  least  here 
recorded,  but  that  if  there  be  any  superiority  ascribable  to  any 
one  of  faith's  exploits,  this  is,  in  some  sense,  the  greatest  of 
all.  What !  faith,  didst  tliou  light  with  hideous  lust  ?  What ! 
wouldst  thou  struggle  with  the  fiery  passion  which  sendeth 
forth  flame  from  human  breasts?  What!  wouldst  thou  touch 
with  thy  hallowed  fingers  foul  and  bestial  debauchery  ?  "Yea," 
says  faith,  "I  did  encounter  this  abomination  of  iniquity;  I 
delivered  this  woman  from  the  loathsome  chambers  of  vice, 
the  wily  snares  of  enchantment,  and  the  fearful  penalty  of 
transgression  ;  yea,  I  brought  her  off  saved  and  rescued,  gave 
her  purity  of  heart,  and  renewed  in  her  the  beauty  of  holi- 
ness ;  and  now  her  name  sliall  be  recorded  in  the  roll  of  my 
triumphs  as  a  woman  full  of  sin,  yet  saved- by  faith." 

I  shall  have  some  things  to  say  this  morning  concerning  this 
notable  victory  of  fiiilh  over  sin,  such  as  I  think  will  lead  you 
to  see  that  this  was  indeed  a  superemincnt  triumph  of  faith.  I 
will  make  my  divisions  alliterative,  that  you  may  recollect 
them.  This  woman's  faith  was  saving  faith^  singular  foMJi^ 
stable  faith^  self-denying  faith^  sympathising  faith^  and  sane- 
tifying  faith,     Le'.  no  one  run  away,  when  I  shall  have  ex- 


rahab's  faith.  271 

pounded  the  first  point,  and  miss  the  rest,  for  you  can  not  ap- 
prehend the  whole  power  of  her  faith  unless  you  remember 
each  of  those  })articulars  I  am  about  to  mention. 

I.  In  the  iirst  place,  this  woman's  faith  was  aAViNCt  faith. 
All  the  other  persons  mentioned  here  were  doubtless  saved  by- 
faith  ;  but  I  do  not  iind  it  specially  remarked  concerning  any  of 
them  that  they  perished  not  through  their  faith ;  while  it  is 
particularly  said  of  this  woman,  that  she  was  dehvered  amid 
the  general  destruction  of  Jericho  purely  and  only  through  her 
faith.  And,  without  doubt,  lier  salvation  was  not  merely  of  i 
temporal  nature,  not  merely  a  deliverance  of  her  body  from 
the  sword,  but  redemption  of  her  soul  from  hell.  O!  what  a 
mighty  thing  faith  is,  when  it  saves  the  soul  from  going  down 
to  the  pit !  So  mighty  is  the  ever-rushing  torrent  of  sin,  that 
no  arm  but  that  which  is  as  strong  as  Deity  can  ever  stop  the 
sinner  from  being  hurried  down  to  the  gulf  of  black  despair, 
and,  when  nearing  that  gulf,  so  impetuous  is  the  torrent  of 
divine  wrath,  that  nothing  can  snatch  the  soul  from  perdition 
but  an  atonement  which  is  as  divine  as  God  himself  Yet  faith 
is  the  instrument  of  accomplishing  the  whole  work.  It  de- 
livers the  sinner  from  the  stream  of  sin,  and  so,  laying  hold 
upon  the  omnipotence  of  the  Spirit,  it  rescues  him  from  that 
great  wliirlpool  of  destruction  into  whicli  his  soul  was  being  hur 
ried.  What  a  great  thing  it  is  to  save  a  soul !  You  can 
never  know  how  great  it  is  unless  you  have  stood  in  the 
capacity  of  a  saviour  to  other  men.  Yon  heroic  man  who, 
yesterday,  when  the  house  was  burning,  climbed  the  creaking 
stair-case,  and,  almost  suifocated  by  the  smoke,  entered  an  up- 
per chamljer,  snatched  a  babe  from  its  bed  and  a  woman  from 
the  window,  bore  them  both  down  in  his  arms,  and  saved  them 
at  the  peril  of  his  own  life,  he  can  tell  you  what  a  great  thing  it 
is  to  save  a  fellow-creature.  Yon  noble-hearted  youth  who, 
yesterday,  sprang  into  the  river,  at  the  hazard  of  himself,  and 
snatched  a  drowning  man  from  death,  he  felt,  when  he  stood 
upon  the  shore,  what  a  great  thing  it  was  to  save  life.  Ah  ! 
but  you  can  not  tell  what  a  great  thing  it  is  to  save  a  soul.  It 
is  only  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  who  can  tell  you  that,  for  he  is 
the  only  one  who  has  ever  been  the  Saviour  of  sinners.  And 
remember,  you  can  only  know  how  great  a  thing  faith  is  by 


212  rahab's  faith. 

knowing  the  infinite  value  of  the  salvation  of  a  soul.  "Now, 
by  faith,  the  harlot  Rahab  was  delivered."  That  she  was  really 
saved  in  a  gospel  sense  as  well  as  temporally,  seems  to  me  to 
be  proved  from  her  reception  of  the  spies  which  was  an  emblem 
of  the  entrance  of  the  word  into  her  heart,  and  her  hanging 
out  of  the  scarlet  thread  was  an  evidence  of  faith,  not  unaptly 
picturing  faith  in  the  blood  of  Jesus  the  Redeemer.  But  who 
can  measure  the  length  and  breadth  of  that  word — salvatio7i. 
Ah !  it  was  a  mighty  deed  which  faith  accomplished  when  he 
bore  her  off  in  safety.  Poor  sinner !  take  comfort.  The  same 
faith  which  saved  Rahab  can  save  thee.  Art  thou  literally  one 
of  Rahab's  sisters  in  guilt  ?  She  was  saved,  and  so  mayest 
thou  be,  if  God  shall  grant  thee  repentance.  Woman  !  art 
thou  loathsome  to  thyself?  Dost  thou  stand  at  this  moment 
in  this  assembly,  and  say,  "  I  am  ashamed  to  be  here  ;  I  know 
I  have  no  right  to  stand  among  people  who  are  chaste  and 
honest  ?"  I  bid  thee  still  remain ;  yea,  come  again  and  make 
this  thy  Sabbath  house  of  prayer.  Thou  art  no  intruder ! 
Thou  art  welcome !  For  thou  hast  a  sacred  right  to  the  courts 
of  mercy.  Thou  hast  a  sacred  right;  for  here  sinnei^s  are  in- 
vited, and  thou  art  such.  Believe  in  Christ,  and  thou,  like 
Rahab,  shalt  not  perish  with  the  disobedient,  but  even  thou 
shalt  be  saved. 

And  now  there  is  some  gentleman  in  the  audience  who  says, 
"  There's  a  gospel  for  you ;  it  is  a  kind  of  sanctuary  for  wicked 
men,  unto  which  the  worst  of  people  may  run  and  be  saved." 
Yes,  that  is  the  stale  objection  which  Celsus  used  against  Ori- 
gen  in  his  discussion.  "  But,"  said  Origen,  "  it  is  true,  Celsus, 
that  Christ's  gospel  is  a  sanctuary  for  thieves,  robbers,  mur- 
derers, and  harlots.  But  know  this,  it  is  not  a  sanctuary 
merely,  it  is  an  hospital  too ;  for  it  heals  their  sins,  delivers 
them  from  their  diseases,  and  they  are  not  afterwards  what 
they  were  before  they  received  the  gospel."  I  ask  no  man  to- 
day to  come  to  Christ,  and  then  continue  his  sins.  If  so,  I 
should  ask  him  to  do  an  absurdity.  As  well  might  I  talk  of 
delivering  a  Prometheus,  wiiile  his  chains  are  allowed  to  re- 
main upon  him  and  bind  him  to  his  rock.  It  can  not  be. 
Christ  taketh  away  the  vulture  from  the  conscience,  but  he 
taketh  away  the  chains  too,  and  maketh  the  man  whollv  freft 


RAHAB'S   FAITH.  2*^3 

when  he  floeth  it  all.  Yet,  we  repeat  it  again,  the  chief  of  sin- 
ners are  as  welcome  to  Christ  as  the  best  of  saints.  The  foun- 
tain filled  with  blood  was  opened  for  black  ones ;  the  robe  of 
Christ  was  woven  for  naked  ones ;  the  balm  of  Calvary  was 
compounded  for  sick  ones ;  life  came  into  the  world  to  raise 
the  dead.  And  O  !  ye  perishing  and  guilty  souls,  may  God 
give  you  Rahab's  faith,  and  you  shall  have  this  salvation,  and 
shall  with  her  stand  yonder,  w^here  the  white-robed  spotless 
hosts  sing  unending  hallelujah  to  God  and  the  Lamb. 

II.  But  mark,  Rahab's  fiith  w^as  a  singular  faith.  The 
city  of  Jericho  was  about  to  be  attacked ;  within  its  walls 
there  were  hosts  of  people  of  all  classes  and  characters,  and 
they  knew  right  well  that  if  their  city  should  be  sacked  and 
stormed  they  would  all  be  put  to  death ;  but  yet,  strange  to 
say,  there  w^as  not  one  of  them  who  repented  of  sin,  or  who 
even  asked  for  mercy,  except  this  woman  who  had  been  a  har- 
lot. She,  and  slie  alone  was  delivered,  a  solitary  one  among 
a  multitude.  Now,  have  you  ever  felt  that  it  is  a  very  hard 
thing  to  have  a  singular  faith  ?  It  is  the  easiest  thing  in  the 
world  to  believe  as  every  body  else  believes,  but  the  difficulty 
is  to  believe  a  thing  alone,  when  no  one  else  thinks  as  you 
think ;  to  be  the  solitary  champion  of  a  righteous  cause  when 
the  enemy  mustereth  his  thousands  to  the  battle.  Now,  this 
was  the  fixith  of  Rahab.  She  had  not  one  who  felt  as  she  did, 
who  could  enter  into  her  feelings  and  realize  the  value  of  her 
faith.  She  stood  alone.  O !  it  is  a  noble  thing  to  be  the  lonely 
follower  of  despised  truth.  Tliere  be  some  who  could  tell  you 
a  tale  of  standing  up  alone.  There  have  been  days  when  the 
world  poured  continually  a  river  of  infamy  and  calumny  upon 
them,  but  they  stemmed  the  torrent,  and,  by  continued  grace, 
made  strong  in  weakness,  they  held  their  own  until  the  current 
turned,  and  they,  in  their  success,  were  praised  and  applauded 
by  the  very  men  who  sneered  before.  Then  did  the  world 
accord  them  the  name  of  "  great."  But  where  lay  their  great- 
ness ?  Why,  in  this,  that  they  stood  as  firm  in  the  storm  as 
they  stood  in  the  calm — that  they  were  as  content  to  serve 
God  alone  as  they  were  to  run  by  fifties.  To  be  good  we  must 
be  singular.  Christians  must  swim  against  the  stream.  Dead 
fish  always  float  down  th?  stream,  but  the  living  fish  forces  its 

12* 


274  rahab's  faith. 

way  against  the  current.  Now,  worldly  religious  meti  will  go 
just  as  every  body  else  goes.  That  is  nothing.  The  thing  is, 
to  stand  alone.  Like  Elijah,  when  he  said,  "  I  only  am  left, 
and  they  seek  my  life ;"  to  feel  in  one's  self  that  we  believe  as 
firmly  as  if  a  thousand  witnesses  stood  up  by  our  side.  O ! 
there  is  no  great  right  in  a  man,  no  strong-minded  right,  un- 
less he  dares  to  be  singular.  "Why,  the  most  of  you  are  as 
afraid  as  you  ever  can  be  to  go  out  of  the  fashions,  and  you 
spend  more  money  than  you  ought  because  you  think  you 
must  be  respectable.  You  dare  not  move  in  opposition  to 
your  brethren  and  sisters  in  the  circle  in  which  you  move ; 
and  therefore  you  involve  yourselves  in  difficulties.  You  are 
bUndfolded  by  the  rich  fabric  of  fashion,  and  therefore  many 
a  wrong  thing  is  tolerated  because  it  is  customary.  But  a 
strong-minded  man  is  one  who  does  not  try  to  be  singular,  but 
who  dares  to  be  singular,  when  he  knows  that  to  be  singular 
is  to  be  right.  Now,  Rahab's  faith,  sinner  as  she  was,  had 
this  glory,  this  crown  about  its  head,  that  she  stood  alone, 
"  faithful  among  the  faithless  found." 

And  why  should  not  God  vouchsafe  the  same  faith  to  thee 
my  poor,  sinning,  but  contrite  hearer  ?  You  live  in  a  back 
street,  in  a  house  which  contains  none  but  Sabbath  breakers, 
and  irreligious  men  and  women.  But  if  you  have  grace  in 
your  heart  you  will  dare  to  do  right.  You  belong  to  an  infi- 
del club  ;  if  you  should  make  them  a  speech  after  your  own 
conscience,  they  would  hiss  you  ;  and  if  you  forsook  their  com- 
pany, they  would  persecute  you.  Go  and  try  them.  Dare 
them.  See,  whether  you  can  do  it ;  for  if  you  are  afraid  of 
men,  you  are  taken  in  a  snare  which  may  prove  your  ^We/'and 
is  novj  your  sin.  Mark  you,  the  chief  of  sinners  can  make  the 
most  daring  of  saints;  the  worst  men  in  the  devil's  army,  when 
they  are  converted,  make  the  truest  soldiers  for  Jesus.  The 
forlorn  hope  of  Christendom  has  generally  been  led  by  men 
who  have  proved  the  high  efficacy  of  grace  to  an  eminent  de- 
gree by  having  been  saved  from  the  deepest  sins.  Go  on,  and 
the  Lord  give  you  that  high  and  singular  faith  ! 

IIL  Furthermore,  this  woman's  faith  was  a  stable  FArrn, 
which  stood  firm  in  the  midst  of  trouble.  I  have  heard  of  a 
church  clergyman  who  was  once  waited  upon  by  his  church- 


liAHAB\s    FAITH.  275 

warden,  after  a  long  tmie  of  drouglil,  and  was  requested  to 
put  up  the  prayer  for  raiia.  "Well,"  said  he,  "my  good  man, 
I  will  ofter  it,  but  it's  not  a  bit  of  use  while  the  wind  is  in  tlie 
east,  I'm  sure."  There  are  many  who. have  that  kind  of  faith: 
they  believe  just  so  far  as  probabilities  go  with  them,  but  when 
the  promise  and  the  probabiUty  part,  then  tliey  follow  the 
probability  and  part  w'tli  the  promise.  They  say,  "The  thing 
is  likely,  therefore  I  l^elieve  it."  But  that  is  no  faith,  it  is 
eight.  True  faith  exJaims,  "The  thing  is  unlikely,  yet  I 
believe  it."  This  is  r?al  faitli.  Faith  is  to  say,  that  "  moun- 
tains, when  in  darkness  hidden,  are  as  real  as  in  day."  Faith 
is  to  look  through  thaf  cloud,  not  with  the  eye  of  sight,  which 
seeth  naught,  but  with  the  eye  of  faith,  which  seeth  every 
thing,  and  to  say,  "  I  trust  him  when  I  can  not  trace  him ;  I 
tread  the  sea  as  iirnily  as  I  would  the  rock ;  I  walk  as  securely 
in  the  tempest  as  in  the  sunshine,  and  lay  myself  to  rest  upon 
the  surging  billows  of  the  ocean  as  contentedly  as  upon  my 
bed."  The  faith  of  Kahab  was  the  right  sort  of  faith,  for  it 
was  firm  and  enduring. 

I  will  just  have  a  liUle  talk  with  Kahab  this  morning,  as  I 
suppose  old  Unbelief  did  commune  with  her.  Now,  my  good 
woman,  don't  you  see  tlie  absurdity  of  this  thing?  Why,  the 
people  of  Israel  are  on  the  other  side  of  Jordan,  and  there  is 
no  bridge  :  how  are  they  to  get  ovei  ?  Of  course  they  must 
go  up  higher  toward  tne  fords  ;  and  tiien  Jericho  will  be  for  a 
long  time  secure.  They  will  take  other  cities  before  coming 
to  Jericho  ;  and,  besides,  the  Can;janites  avo.  mighty,  and  the 
Israelites  are  only  a  pi' reel  of  slaves  ;  tliey  will  soon  be  cut  in 
pieces,  and  there  will  be  an  end  of  them ;  therefore,  do  not 
harbor  these  spies.  Wliy  put  your  life  in  jeapordy  for  such 
an  itnpi-obability  ?  "  Ah,"  says  she,  "  I  do  not  care  about  the 
Jordan  ;  my  faith  can  ])(;li(;ve  across  the  Jordan,  or  else  it 
were  only  a  dry-land  faith."  By-and-by,  tliey  niarclj  througli 
the  Jordan  dry  shod,  and  then  faith  gets  firmer  confidence. 
"Ah  !"  says  she,  secretly  within  herself,  what  she  would  will- 
ingly have  said  to  her  neighbors,  "  will  you  not  now  believe  ? 
will  you  not  now  sue  for  mercy  ?"  "No,"  they  say;  "the 
walls  of  Jericho  are  strong;  can  the  flMible  host  resist  us? 
And  lo.  on  the  morrow  the  troops  ai-e  out,  and  what  do  thej 


276  RAHAB'S    FAITH. 

do  ?  They  simply  blow  a  number  of  rams'  horns  ;  her  neigh 
bors  say,  "  Why,  Rahab,  you  do  not  mean  to  say  you  believe 
now?  They  are  mad."  The  people  just  go  round  the  city, 
and  all  hold  their  tongues,  except  the  few  priests  blowing 
rams'  horns.  "  Why,  it  is  ridiculous.  It  were  quite  a  new 
thing  in  warfare  to  hear  of  men  taking  a  city  by  blowing  rams' 
horns."  That  was  the  first  day  ;  probably  the  next  day  Ra- 
hab thought  they  would  come  with  scaling-ladders  and  mount 
the  walls ;  but  no,  rams'  horns  again,  up  to  the  seventh  day  ; 
and  this  woman  kept  the  scarlet  thread  in  the  window  all  the 
time,  kept  her  father  and  mother,  and  brothers  and  sisters  ir\ 
the  house,  and  would  not  let  them  go  out ;  and  on  the  seventh 
day,  when  the  people  made  a  great  shout,  the  wall  of  the  city 
fell  flat  to' the  ground  ;  but  her  faith  overcame  her  womanly 
timidity,  and  she  remained  within,  although  the  wall  was  tum- 
bling to  the  ground.  Rahab's  house  stood  alone  upon  the 
wall,  a  solitary  fragment  amid  a  universal  wreck,  and  she 
and  her  household  were  all  saved.  Now  woifld  you  have 
thought  that  such  a  rich  plant  would  grow  in  such  poor  soil — 
that  strong  faith  could  grow  in  such  a  sinful  heart  as  that  of 
Rahab  ?  Ah  I  but  here  it  is  that  God  exercises  his  great  hus- 
bandry. "  My  Father  is  the  liusbandman,"  said  Christ.  Any 
husbandman  can  get  a  good  crop  out  of  good  soil ;  but  God  is 
the  husbandman  who  can  grow  cedars  on  rocks,  who  can  not 
only  put  the  hyssop  upon  the  wall,  but  put  the  oak  there  too, 
and  make  the  greatest  faith  spring  up  in  the  most  unlikely  po- 
sition. All  glory  to  his  grace  !  the  great  sinner  may  becotne 
great  in  faith.  Be  of  good  cheer,  then,  sinner !  If  Christ 
should  make  thee  repent,  thou  hast  no  need  to  think  that  thou 
shalt  be  the  least  in  the  family,  O !  no  ;  thy  name  may  yet 
be  written  among  the  mightiest  of  the  mighty,  and  thou  may- 
est  stand  as  a  memorable  and  triumphant  instance  of  the 
power  of  faith. 

IV.  This  woman's  faith  was  a  self-denying  faith.  She 
dared  to  risk  her  life  for  the  sake  of  the  spies.  She  knew 
that  if  they  were  found  in  her  house  she  would  be  put  to 
death ;  but  though  she  was  so  weak  as  to  do  a  sinful  deed  to 
preserve  them,  yet  she  was  so  strong  that  she  would  run  the 
risk  of  being  put  to  death  to  savo  these  two  men.     It  is  some- 


rahab's  faith.  27^ 

thing  tc.  be  able  to  deny  ourselves.  An  American  once  said 
"  I  have  got  a  good  religion  ;  it's  the  right  sort  of  religion  ;  I 
do  not  know  that  it  costs  me  a  cent  a  year  ;  and  yet  I  believe 
I  am  as  truly  a  religious  man  as  any  body."  "  Ah  !"  said  one 
who  heard  it,  "the  Lord  have  mercy  on  your  miserable  stingy 
soul '  for  if  you  had  been  saved  you  would  not  have  been  con 
tent  with  a  cent  a  year" — a  halfpenny  per  annum  !  I  hazard 
this  assertion,  that  there  is  nothing  in  the  faith  of  that  man 
who  does  not  exercise  self-denial.  If  we  never  give  any  thing 
to  Christ's  cause,  work  for  Christ,  deny  ourselves  for  Christ, 
the  root  of  the  matter  is  not  in  us.  I  might  call  some  of  you 
hypocrites :  you  sing, 

"  And  if  I  might  make  some  reserve, 
And  duty  did  not  call, 
I  love  my  God  with  zeal  so  great, 
That  I  could  give  him  all." 

Yes,  but  you  v^iould  7iot^  though  ;  you  know  better  than  that, 
for  you  do  not,  as  it  is,  give  all,  no,  nor  yet  half,  nor  yet  the 
thousandth  part.  I  suppose  you  think  you  are jt^oor  yourselves, 
though  you  have  got  some  thousand  pounds  odd  a  year,  and 
so  you  keep  it  yourself,  under  the  notion  that  "  he  that  giveth 
to  the  poor  lendeth  to  the  Lord."  I  don't  know  how  else  it 
is  you  make  your  religion  square  with  itself,  and  be  at  all  con- 
sistent. This  woman  said,  "  If  I  must  die  for  these  men,  I 
will ;  I  am  prepared,  bad  name  as  I  have,  to  have  a  worse 
name  still ;  as  a  traitor  to  my  country  I  am  prepared  to  bo 
handed  down  to  infimy,  if  it  be  necessary,  for  having  betrayed 
my  country  in  taking  in  these  spies,  for  I  know  it  is  God's  will 
it  should  be  done,  and  do  it  I  will  at  every  hazard."  O  men 
and  brethren,  trust  not  your  fiith,  unless  it  has  self-denial 
with  it.  Faith  and  selfdenial,  like  the  Siamese  twins,  are 
born  together,  and  must  live  together,  and  the  food  that  nour- 
isheth  one  must  nourish  both.  But  this  woman,  poor  sinner 
as  she  was,  would  deny  herself.  She  brought  her  life,  even  as 
that  other  woman,  who  was  a  sinner,  brought  the  alabaster  box 
of  precious  ointment,  and  broke  it  on  the  head  of  Christ. 

V.  Not  to  detain  you  too  long,  another  point  very  briefly. 
This  woman's  fa'^h  was  a  sympathising  faith.     She  did  not 


278  rahab's  faith. 

believe  for  herself  only  ;  she  desh-ed  mercy  for  her  relations. 
Said  si  e,  "  I  want  to  be  saved,  but  that  very  desire  makes  me 
want  to  have  my  father  saved,  and  my  mother  saved,  and  my 
brother  saved,  and  my  sister  saved."  I  know  a  man  who 
walks  seven  miles  every  Sabbath  to  hear  the  gospel  preached 
at  a  certain  j^lace — a  place  where  they  preach  the  gospel.  You 
know  that  very  particular,  superfine  sort — the  gospel,  a  gosj^el, 
the  spirit  of  which  consists  in  bad  temper,  carnal  security,  ar- 
rogance, and  a  seared  conscience.  But  this  man  was  one  day 
met  by  a  friend,  who  said  to  him,  "  Where  is  your  wife  ?" 
"  Wife  .^"  said  he  to  him.  "  What !  does  she  not  come  with 
you  ?"  "  O  !  no,"  said  the  man  ;  "  she  never  goes  anywhere." 
"  Well,  but,"  said  he,  "  don't  you  try  to  get  her  to  go,  and 
the  children  ?"  "  No  ;  the  fact  of  it  is,  I  think,  if  I  look  to 
myself,  that  is  quite  enough."  "Well,"  said  the  other,  "and 
you  believe  that  you  are  God's  elect,  do  you?"  "Yes." 
"  Well,  then,"  said  the  other,  "  I  don't  think  you  are,  because 
you  are  worse  than  a  heathen  man  and  a  publican,  for  you 
don't  care  for  your  own  household ;  therefore  I  don't  think 
you  give  much  evidence  of  being  God's  elect,  for  they  love 
their  fellow-creatures."  So  sure  as  our  faith  is  real,  it  will 
want  to  bring  others  in.  You  will  say,  "  You  want  to  make 
proselytes."  Yes  ;  and  you  Avill  re23ly,  that  Christ  said  to  the 
Pharisees,  "  Ye  compass  sea  and  land  to  make  one  proselyte." 
Yes,  and  Christ  did  not 'find  fault  with  them  for  doing  so: 
what  he  found  fault  with  them  for  was  this — "  When  ye  have 
found  him  ye  make  him  tenfold  more  the  child  of  hell  than 
yourselves."  *** 

The  spirit  of  proselyting  is  the  spirit  of  Christianity,  and  we 
ought  to  be  desirous  of  possessing  it.  If  any  man  will  say,  "  I 
believe  such  and  such  a  thing  is  true,  but  I  do  not  wish  any 
one  else  to  believe  it,  I  will  tell  you,  it  is  a  lie ;  he  does  not 
believe  it,  for  it  is  impossible,  heartily  and  really  to  believe  a 
thing,  without  desiring  to  make  others  believe  the  same.  And 
I  am  sure  of  this,  moreover,  it  is  impossible  to  know  the  value 
of  salvation  without  desiring  to  see  others  brought  in.  Said 
that  renowned  preacher,  Whitefield,  "  As  soon  as  I  was  con- 
verted, I  wanted  to  be  the  means  of  the  conversion  of  all  that 
I  had  ever  known.     There  were  a  number  of  young  men  that 


rahab's  faith.  270 

I  had  played  cards  with,  that  I  had  sinned  with,  and  trans- 
gressed with  :  the  first  thing  I  did  was,  to  go  to  their  houses 
to  see  what  I  could  do  for  their  salvation,  nor  could  I  rest 
until  I  had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  many  of  them  brought  to 
the  Saviour."  This  is  a  first-fruit  of  the  Spirit.  It  is  a  kind 
of  instinct  in  a  young  Christian.  He  must  have  other  people 
feel  what  he  feels.  Says  one  young  man,  in  writing  to  me  this 
week,  "  I  have  been  praying  for  my  fellow-clerk  in  the  office  ; 
I  have  desired  that  he  might  be  brought  to  the  Saviour,  but 
at  present  there  is  no  answer  to  my  prayers." 

Do  not  give  a  penny  for  that  man's  piety  which  will  not 
spread  itself  Unless  we  desire  others  to  taste  the  benefits 
we  have  enjoyed,  we  are  either  inhuman  monsters  or  out- 
rageous hypocrites  ;  I  think  the  last  is  most  likely.  But  this 
woman  was  so  strong  in  faith  that  all  her  family  were  saved 
from  destruction.  Young  woman!  you  have  a  father,  and 
he  hates  the  Saviour.  O !  pray  for  him.  Mother !  you 
have  a  son:  he  scofis  at  Christ.  Cry  out  to  God  for  him. 
Ay,  my  friends — young  people  like  myself — we  little  know 
what  we  owe  to  the  prayers  of  our  parents.  I  feel  that  I  shall 
never  be  able  sufficiently  to  bless  God  for  a  praying  mother. 
I  thought  it  was  a  great  nuisance  to  be  had  in  at  such  a  time 
to  pray,  and  more  especially  to  be  made  to  cry,  as  my  mother 
used  to  make  me  cry.  I  would  have  laughed  at  the  idea  of 
any  body  else  talking  to  me  about  these  things  ;  but  when  she 
prayed,  and  said,  ''  Lord,  save  my  son  Charles,"  and  then  was 
overcome,  and  could  not  get  any  further  for  crying,  you  could 
not  help  ci-^^ing  too ;  you  could  not  help  feeling ;  it  was  of  no 
use  trying  to  stand  against  it.  Ah  !  and  there  you  are  young 
man  !  Your  mother  is  dying,  and  one  thing  which  makes  her 
death-bed  bitter  is,  that  you  scoff  God  and  hate  Christ.  O  ! 
it  is  the  last  stage  of  impiety,  when  a  man  can  think  lightly 
of  a  mother's  feelings.  I  would  hope  there  are  none  such 
here,  but  that  those  of  you  who  have  been  so  blessed,  as  to 
have  been  begotten  and  brought  forth  by  pious  men  and 
women  may  take  this  into  consideration — that  to  perish  with 
a  mother's  prayers  is  to  perish  fearfully ;  for  if  a  mother's 
prayers  do  not  bring  us  to  Christ,  they  are  like  drops  of  oil 
dropped  into  the  ti'^mes  of  hell  that  will  make  them  burn  more 


280  rahab'8  faith. 

fiercely  upon  the  soul  for  ever  and  ever.  Take  heed  of  rush- 
ing to  perdition  over  your  mother's  prayers ! 

There  is  an  old  woman  vreeping — do  you  know  why?  I 
believe  she  has  sons  too,  and  she  loves  them.  I  met  with  a 
little  incident  in  company,  the  other  day,  after  preaching. 
There  was  a  little  boy  at  the  corner  of  the  table,  and  his  father 
asked  him,  "  Why  does  your  father  love  you,  John  ?"  Said 
the  dear  little  lad,  very  prettily,  "  Because  I'm  a  good  boy." 
"  Yes,"  said  the  father,  "  he  would  not  love  you  if  you  were 
not  a  good  boy."  I  turned  to  the  good  father  and  remarked 
that  I  was  not  quite  sure  about  the  truth  of  the  last  remark, 
for  I  believed  he  would  love  him  if  he  were  ever  so  bad. 
"  Well,"  he  said,  "  I  think  I  should."  And  said  a  minister  at 
the  table,  "  I  had  an  instance  of  that  yesterday.  I  stepped 
into  the  house  of  a  woman  who  had  a  son  transported  for  life, 
and  she  was  as  full  of  her  son  Richard  as  if  he  had  been  prime 
minister,  or  had  been  her  most  faithful  and  dutiful  son."  Well, 
young  man,  will  you  kick  against  love  like  that — love  that  will 
bear  your  kicks,  and  will  not  turn  round  against  you,  but  love 
you  straight  on  still  ?  But  perhaps  that  w^oman — I  saw  her 
weep  just  now — had  a  mother,  w^ho  has  gone  long  ago,  and 
she  was  married  to  a  brutal  husband,  and  at  last  left  a  poor 
widow ;  she  calls  to  mind  the  days  of  her  childhood,  when  the 
big  Bible  was  brought  out  and  read  around  the  hearth,  and 
"  Our  Father  which  art  in  heaven"  was  their  nightly  prayer. 
Now,  perhaps,  God  is  beginning  some  good  thing  in  her  heart. 
O  !  that  he  would  bring  her  now,  though  seventy  years  of  age, 
to  love  the  Saviour !  Then  would  she  h^ve  the  beginning  of 
life  over  again  in  her  last  days,  which  will  be  made  her  best 
days. 

VI.  One  more  head,  and  then  we  have  done.  Rahab's  faith 
was  a  SANCTIFYING  FAITH.  Did  Rahab  continue  a  harlot  after 
she  had  faith  ?  No,  no,  she  did  not.  I  do  not  believe  she  was  a 
harlot  at  the  time  the  men  went  to  her  house,  though  tlie  name 
still  stuck  to  her,  as  such  ill  names  will ;  but  I  am  sure  she  was 
not  afterward,  for  Salmon  the  prince  of  Judah  married  her, 
and  her  name  is  put  down  among  the  ancestors  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  She  became  after  that  a  woman  eminent  for 
piety    walking  in  ^he  fear  of  God.     Now,   you  may  have  a 


rahab's  faith.  281 

dead  faith  which  will  ruin  your  soul.  The  faith  that  will  save 
you  is  a  faith  which  sanctifies.  "  Ah  !"  says  the  drunkard,  "  I 
like  the  gospel,  sir  ;  I  believe  in  Christ ;"  then  he  will  go  over 
to  the  Blue  Lion  to-night,  and  get  drunk.  Sir,  that  is  not  the 
believing  in  Christ  that  is  of  any  use.  "Yes,"  says  another, 
"  I  believe  in  Christ ;"  and  when  he  gets  outside  he  will  begin 
to  talk  lightly,  frothy  words,  perhaps  lascivious  ones,  and  sin 
as  before.  Sir,  you  speak  falsely ;  you  do  not  believe  in  Christ. 
That  faith  which  saves  the  soul  is  a  real  faith,  and  a  real  faith 
sanctifies  men.  It  makes  them  say,  "  Lord,  thou  hast  forgiven 
me  my  sins ;  I  will  sin  no  more.  Thou  hast  been  so  merciful 
to  me,  I  will  renounce  my  guilt ;  so  kindly  hast  thou  treated 
me,  so  lovingly  hast  thou  embraced  me.  Lord,  I  will  serve  thee 
till  I  die ;  and  if  thou  wilt  give  me  grace,  and  help  me  so  to 
be,  I  will  be  as  holy  as  thou  art."  You  can  not  have  faith,  and 
yet  live  in  sin.  To  believe  is  to  be  holy.  The  two  things 
must  go  together.  That  faith  is  a  dead  faith,  a  corrupt  faith, 
which  lives  in  sin  that  grace  may  abound.  Rahab  was  a 
sanctified  woman.  O  that  God  might  sanctify  some  that  are 
here !  The  world  has  been  trying  all  manner  of  processes 
to  reform  men :  there  is  but  one  thing  that  ever  will  reform 
them,  and  that  is,  faith  in  the  preached  gospel.  But  in  tliis 
age  preaching  is  much  despised.  You  read  the  newspaper ; 
you  read  the  book ;  you  hear  the  lecturer ;  you  sit  and  listen 
to  the  pretty  essayist ;  but  where  is  the  preacher  ?  Preach- 
ing is  not  taking  out  a  manuscript  sermon,  asking  God  to  di- 
rect your  heart,  and  then  reading  pages  prepared  beforehand. 
That  is  reading — not  preaching.  There  is  a  good  tale  told  of 
an  old  man  whose  minister  used  to  read.  Tbe  minister  called 
to  see  him,  and  said,  "  What  are  you  doing  John  ?"  "  Why, 
I'm  prophesying,  sir."  "  Prophesying  ;  how  is  that  ?  You 
mean  you  are  reading  the  prophecies  ?"  "  No,  I  don't ;  I'm 
prophesying ;  for  you  read  preaching,  and  call  it  preaching,  and 
I  read  prophecies,  and,  on  the  same  rule,  that  is  prophesying." 
And  the  man  was  not  far  from  right.  We  want  to  have  more 
outspoken,  downright  utterances  of  truth  and  appeals  to  the 
conscience,  and  until  we  get  these,  we  shall  never  see  any  very 
great  and  lasting  reforms.  But  by  the  preaching  of  God's 
word,  foolishness  though  it  seem  to  some,  harlots  are  reformed, 


282  bahab's  faith. 

thieves  are  made  honest,  and  the  worst  of  men  brought  to  the 
Saviour.  Again  let  me  affectionately  give  the  invitation  to 
the  vilest  of  men,  if  so  they  feel  themselves  to  be, 

"  Come,  ye  needy,  come  and  welcome, 

God's  free  bounty  glorify : 
True  belief  and  true  repentance^ 

Every  grace  that  brings  us  nigh — 
"Without  money, 
Come  to  Jesus  Christ  and  buy." 

Your  sins  will  be  forgiven,  your  transgressions  cast  away,  and 
you  shall  henceforth  go  and  sin  no  more,  God  having  renewed 
you,  and  he  will  keep  you  even  to  the  end.  May  God  give 
his  blessing,  for  Jesus'  sake !     Amen. 


SERMON    XIX. 
THE    BLOOD-SHEDDING. 

"Without  shedding  of  blood  is  no  remission." — Hebrews,  ix  22. 

I  WILL  show  you  three  fools.  One  is  yonder  soldier,  who 
has  been  wounded  on  the  field  of  battle,  grievously  wounded, 
well  nigh  unto  death  ;  the  surgeon  is  by  his  side,  and  the 
soldier  asks  hira  a  question.  Listen,  and  judge  of  his  folly. 
What  question  does  he  ask  ?  Does  he  raise  his  eyes  with 
eager  anxiety  a,nd  inquire  if  the  wound  be  mortal,  if  the  prac- 
titioner's skill  can  suggest  the  means  of  healing,  or  if  the  rem- 
edies are  within  reach  and  the  medicine  at  hand  ?  No,  nothing 
of  the  sort ;  strange  to  tell,  he  asks,  "  Can  you  inform  me  with 
what  sword  I  was  wounded,  and  by  what  Russian  I  have  been 
thus  grievously  mauled  ?  I  want,"  he  adds,  "  to  learn  every 
minute  particular  respecting  the  origin  of  my  wound."  The 
man  is  delirious  or  his  head  is  aifected.  Surely  such  questions 
at  such  a  time  are  proof  enough  that  he  is  bereft  of  his  senses. 

There  is  another  fool.  The  storm  is  raging,  the  ship  is  fly- 
ing impetuous  before  the  gale,  the  dark  scud  moves  swiftly 
over  head,  the  masts  are  creaking,  the  sails  are  rent  to  rags, 
and  still  the  gathering  tempest  grows  more  fierce.  Where  is 
the  captain?  Is  he  busily  engaged  on  the  deck,  is  he  manfully 
facing  the  danger,  and  skillfully  suggesting  means  to  avert  it  ? 
No,  sir,  he  has  retired  to  his  cabin,  and  there  with  studious 
thoughts  and  crazy  fancies  he  is  speculating  on  the  place  where 
this  storm  took  its  rise.  "It  is  mysterious,  this  wind  ;  no  one 
ever  yet,"  he  says,  "  has  been  able  to  discover  it."  And,  so 
reckless  of  the  vessel,  the  lives  of  the  passengers,  and  nis  own 
life,  he  is  careful  only  to  solve  his  curious  questions.  The  man 
is  mad,  sir  ;  take  the  '"Tdder  from  his  hand  ;  he  is  clean  gone 


284  THE    BLOOD-SHEDDING. 

raad  !     If  he  should  ever  run  on  shore,  shut  him  up  as  a  hope- 
less lunatic. 

The  third  fool  I  shall  doubtless  find  among  yourselves.  You 
are  sick  and  wounded  with  sin,  you  are  in  the  storm  and  hur- 
ricane of  Almighty  vengeance,  and  yet  the  question  which  you 
would  ask  of  me,  this  morning,  would  be,  "  Sir,  what  is  the 
origin  of  evil  ?"  You  are  mad,  sir,  spiritually  mad  ;  that  ia 
not  the  question  you  would  ask  if  you  were  in  a  sane  and 
healthy  state  of  mind  ;  your  question  would  be,  "  How  can  I 
get  rid  of  the  evil  ?"  Not,  "  How  did  it  come  into  the  world  ?" 
but  "  How  am  I  to  escape  from  it  ?"  Not,  "  How  is  it  that 
hail  descends  from  heaven  upon  Sodom  ?"  but  "  How  may  I, 
like  Lot,  escape  out  of  the  city  to  a  Zoar  ?"  Not,  "  How  is  it 
that  I  am  sick  ?"  but  "  Are  there  medicines  that  will  heal  me  ? 
Is  there  a  physician  to  be  found  that  can  restore  my  soul  to 
health  ?"  Ah !  you  trifle  with  subtleties  while  you  neglect 
certainties.  More  questions  have  been  asked  concerning  the 
origin  of  evil  than  upon  any  thing  else.  Men  have  puzzled 
their  heads,  and  twisted  their  brains  into  knots,  in  order  to 
understand  what  men  can  never  know — how  evil  came  into 
this  world,  and  how  its  entrance  is  consistent  with  divine 
goodness  ?  The  broad  fact  is  this,  there  is  evil ;  and  your 
question  should  be,  "How  can  I  escape  from  the  wrath  to 
come,  which  is  engendered  of  this  evil  ?"  In  answering  that 
question  this  verse  stands  light  in  the  middle  of  the  way  (like 
the  angel  with  the  sword,  who  once  stopped  Balaam  on  his 
road  to  Barak),  "Without  shedding  of  blood  is  no  remission." 
Your  real  want  is  to  know  how  you  can  be  saved ;  if  you  are 
aware  that  your  sin  must  be  pardoned  or  punished,  your  ques- 
tion will  be,  "  How  can  it  be  pardoned  ?"  and  then  point  blank, 
in  the  very  teeth  of  your  inquiry,  there  stands  out  this  fact, 
"Without  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no  remission."  Mark 
you,  this  is  not  merely  a  Jewish  maxim ;  it  is  a  world-wide 
and  eternal  truth.  It  pertaineth  not  to  the  Hebrews  only,  but 
to  the  Gentiles  likewise.  Never  in  any  time,  never  in  any 
place,  never  in  any  person,  can  there  be  .remission  apart  from 
shedding  of  blood.  This  great  fact,  I  say,  is  stamped  on  na« 
ture ;  it  is  an  essential  law  of  God's  moral  government,  it  is 
one  of  the  fundamental  principles  which  can  neither  be  shaken 


THE   BLOOD-SHEDDING.  285 

nor  denied.  Never  can  there  be  any  exception  to  it ;  it  stands 
the  same  in  every  place  throughout  all  ages — "  Without  shed- 
ding of  blood  there  is  no  remission."  It  was  so  with  the  Jews ; 
they  had  no  remission  without  the  shedding  of  blood.  Some 
things  under  the  Jewish  law  might  be  cleansed  by  water  or 
by  fire,  but  in  no  case  where  absolute  sin  was  concerned  was 
there  ever  purification  without  blood — teaching  this  doctrine, 
that  blood,  and  blood  alone,  must  be  applied  for  the  remission 
of  sin.  Indeed,  the  very  heathen  seem  to  have  an  inkling  of 
this  fact.  Do  not  I  see  their  knives  gory  with  the  blood  of 
victims  ?  Have  I  not  heard  horrid  tales  of  human  immola; 
tions,  of  holocausts,  of  sacrifices ;  and  what  mean  these",  but 
that  there  lies  deep  in  the  human  breast,  deep  as  the  very  ex- 
istence of  man,  this  truth,  "  that  Avithout  shedding  of  blood 
there  is  no  remission."  And  I  assert  once  more,  that  even  in 
the  hearts  and  consciences  of  my  hearers  there  is  something 
which  will  never  let  them  believe  in  remission  apart  from  a 
shedding  of  blood.  This  is  the  grand  truth  of  Christianity, 
and  it  is  a  truth  which  I  will  endeavor  now  to  fix  upon  your 
memory ;  and  may  God  by  his  grace  bless  it  to  your  souls. 
"  Without  shedding  of  blood  is  no  remission." 

First,  let  me  show  you  the  blood-shedding,  before  I  begin 
to  dwell  upon  the  text.  Is  there  not  a  special  blood-shedding 
meant  ?  Yes,  there  was  a  shedding  of  most  precious  blood, 
to  which  I  must  forthwith  refer  you.  I  shall  not  tell  you  now 
of  massacres  and  murders,  nor  of  rivers  of  blood  of  goats  and 
rams.  There  was  a  blood-shedding  once,  which  did  all  other 
shedding  of  blood  by  far  outvie  ;  it  was  a  man — a  God — that 
shed  his  blood  at  that  memorable  season.  Come  and  see  it. 
Here  is  a  garden  dark  and  gloomy  ;  the  ground  is  crisp  with 
the  cold  frost  of  midnight ;  between  those  gloomy  olive  trees 
I  see  a  man,  I  hear  him  groan  out  his  life  in  prayer  ;  hearken, 
angels  ;  hearken,  men,  and  wonder  ;  it  is  the  Saviour  groaning 
out  his  soul !  Come  and  see  him.  Behold  his  brow  !  O 
heavens !  drops  of  blood  are  streaming  down  his  face  and  from 
his  body ;  every  pore  is  open,  and  it  sweats !  but  not  the  sweat 
of  men  that  toil  for  bread:  it  is  the  sweat  of  one  that  toils  for 
heaven — ^he  "  sweats  great  drops  of  blood  !"  That  is  t.ie 
hlood-shedding,  without  which  there  is  no  remission.     Follow 


286  THE   BLOOD-SHEDl/ING. 

that  man  further ;  they  have  dragged  him  with  sacrilegious 
hands  from  the  place  of  his  prayer  and  his  agony,  and  they 
have  taken  him  to  the  hall  of  Pilate ;  they  seat  him  in  a  chair 
and  mock- him;  a  robe  of  purple  is  put  on  his  shoulders  in 
mockery ;  and  mark  his  brow — they  have  put  about  it  a  crown 
of  thorns,  and  the  crimson  drops  of  gore  are  rushing  down  his 
cheeks !  Ye  angels !  the  drops  of  blood  are  running  down  his 
cheeks !  But  turn  aside  that  purple  robe  for  a  moment.  Hig 
back  is  bleeding.  Tell  me,  demons,  who  did  this  ?  They  lift 
up  the  thongs  still  dripping  clots  of  gore ;  they  scourge  and 
tear  his  flesh,  and  make  a  river  of  blood  to  run  down  his 
shoulders  !  That  is  the  shedding  of  blood,  without  which  there 
is  no  remission.  Not  yet  have  I  done ;  they  hurry  him 
through  the  streets ;  they  fling  him  on  the  ground ;  they  nail 
his  hands  and  feet  to  the  transverse  wood,  they  hoist  it  in  the 
air,  they  dash  it  into  its  socket,  it  is  fixed,  and  there  he  hangs 
the  Christ  of  God.  Blood  from  his  head,  blood  from  his  hands 
blood  from  his  feet !  In  agony  unknown  he  bleeds  aw-ay  hi/ 
life :  in  terrible  throes  he  exhausts  his  soul.  "  Eloi,  Eloi,  lama 
sabacthani."  And  then  see !  they  pierce  his  side,  and  forth- 
with runneth  out  blood  and  water !  This  is  the  shedding  of 
blood,  sinners  and  saints,  this  is  the  awful  shedding  of  blood, 
the  terrible  pouring  out  of  blood,  without  w^hich,  for  you,  .-md 
for  the  whole  human  race,  there  is  no  remission. 

I  have  then,  I  hope,  brought  my  text  fairly  out :  witl.out 
this  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no  remission.  Now  I  ^hall 
come  to  dwell  upon  it  more  particularly.        * 

Why  is  it  that  the  story  doth  not  make  men  weep  ?  I  told 
it  ill,  you  say.  Ay,  so  I  did ;  I  will  take  all  the  blame.  But, 
sirs,  if  it  were  told  as  ill  as  men  could  speak,  were  our  hearts 
what  they  should  be,  we  should  bleed  away  our  lives  in  sor- 
row. O,  it  was  a  horrid  murder  that !  It  was  not  an  act  of 
regicide  ;  it  was  not  the  deed  of  a  fratricide,  or  of  a  parricide  ; 
it  was — what  shall  I  say  ? — I  must  make  a  word — a  deicide ; 
the  killing  of  a  God ;  the  slaying  of  him  who  became  incar- 
nate for  our  sins.  O,  if  our  hearts  were  but  soft  as  iron,  we 
must  weep ;  if  they  were  but  tender  as  the  marble  of  the 
mountains,  we  should  shed  great  drops  of  grief;  but  they  are 
harder  than  the  nether  millstone;  we  forget  the  griefs  of  him 


THE   BLOOD-SHEDDINO.  28^ 

that  died  this  ignominious  death  ;  we  pity  not  his  sorrows,  nor 
do  we  account  the  interest  we  have  in  him  as  though  lie  suf- 
fered and  accomplished  all  for  us.  Nevertheless,  here  stands 
the  principle — "  Without  shedding  of  blood  is  no  remission." 

Now,  I  take  it,  there  are  two  things  here.  First,  there  is 
a  negative  exiyressed:  "  No  remission  without  shedding  of 
blood."  And  then  there  is  a  positive  implied^  forsooth,  with 
shedding  of  blood  there  is  remission. 

I.  First,  I  say,  here  is  a  negative  expressed  ;  there  is  no 
remission  without  blood — without  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ. 
This  is  of  divine  authority  ;  when  I  utter  this  sentence  I  have 
divinity  to  plead.  It  is  not  a  thing  which  you  may  doubt,  or 
which  you  may  believe  ;  it  must  be  beUeved  and  received, 
otherwise  you  have  denied  the  Scriptures,  and  turned  aside 
from  God.  Some  truths  I  utter,  perhaps,  have  little  better 
basis  than  my  own  reasoning  and  inference,  which  are  of  little 
value  enough  ;  but  this  I  utter,  not  with  quotations  from  God's 
Word  to  back  up  my  assertion,  but  from  the  lips  of  God  him- 
self. Here  it  stands  in  great  letters,  "  There  is  no  remission." 
So  divine  its  authority.  Perhaps  you  will  kick  at  it :  but  re- 
member, your  rebellion  is  not  against  me,  but  against  God. 
If  any  of  you  reject  this  truth,  I  shall  not  controvert ;  God 
forbid  I  should  turn  aside  from  proclaiming  his  gospel,  to  dis- 
pute with  men.  I  have  God's  irrevocable  statute  to  plead 
now,  here  it  stands  :  "  Without  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no 
remission."  You  may  believe  or  disbelieve  many  things  the 
preacher  utters ;  but  this  you  disbelieve  at  the  peril  of  youi 
souls.  It  is  God's  utterance  :  will  you  tell  God  to  his  face  you 
do  not  beheve  it  ?  That  were  impious.  The  negative  is  di 
vine  in  its  authority ;  bow  yourselves  to  it,  and  accept  ita 
solemn  warning. 

But  some  men  will  say  that  God's  way  of  saving  men,  by 
shedding  of  blood,  is  a  cruel  way,  an  unjust  way,  an  unkind 
way  ;  and  all  kinds  of  things  they  will  say  of  it.  Sirs,  I  have 
nothing  to  do  with  your  opinion  of  the  matter ;  it  is  so.  If 
you  have  any  faults  to  find  with  your  Maker,  fight  your  battles 
out  with  him  at  last.  But  take  heed  before  you  throw  the 
gauntlet  down ;  it  will  go  ill  with  a  worm  when  he  fighteth 
his  Maker,  and  it  will  go  ill  with  you  when  you  contend  with 


288  THE    BLOOD-SHEDDING. 

him  The  doctrine  of  atonement  when  rightly  miderstood  and 
faithfully  received,  is  delightful,  for  it  exhibits  boundless  love, 
immeasurable  goodness,  and  infinite  truth;  but  to  unbelievers 
it  will  always  be  a  hated  doctrine.  So  it  must  be,  sirs ;  you 
hate  your  own  mercies ;  you  despise  your  own  salvation.  I 
tarry  not  to  dispute  with  you ;  I  affirm  it  in  God's  name : 
"  Without  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no  remission." 

And  note  how  decisive  this  is  in  its  character :  "  Without 
shedding  of  blood  there  is  no  remission."  "  But,  sir,  can't  I 
get  my  sins  forgiven  by  my  repentance  ?  if  I  weep,  and  plead, 
and  pray,  will  not  God  forgive  me  for  the  sake  of  my  tears  ?" 
"  Xo  remission,"  says  the  text,  "  without  shedding  of  blood." 
"  But,  sir,  if  I  never  sin  again,  and  if  I  serve  God  more  zeal- 
ously than  other  men,  will  he  not  forgive  me  for  the  sake  of 
my  obedience?"  "No  remission,"  says  the  text,  '^without 
shedding  of  blood."  "  But,  sir,  may  I  not  trust  that  God  is 
merciful,  and  will  forgive  me  without  the  shedding  of  blood  ?" 
"  No,"  says  the  text,  "  without  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no 
remission;"  none  whatever.  It  cuts  off  every  other  hope. 
Bring  your  hopes  here,  and  if  they  are  not  based  in  blood,  and 
stamped  with  blood,  they  are  as  useless  as  castles  in-  the  air  and 
dreams  of  the  night.  "  There  is  no  remission,"  says  the  text, 
in  positive  and  plain  words ;  and  yet  men  will  be  trying  to  get 
remission  in  fifty  other  ways,  until  their  special  pleading  be- 
comes as  irksome  to  us  as  it  is  useless  for  them.  Sirs,  do  what 
you  like,  say  what  you  please,  but  you  are  as  far  off  remission 
when  you  have  done  your  best,  as  you  were  when  you  began, 
except  you  put  confidence  in  the  shedding  of  our  Saviour's 
blood,  and  in  the  blood-shedding  alone,  for  without  it  there  is 
no  remission. 

And  note  again,  how  universal  it  is  in  its  character.  "What ! 
may  not  I  get  remission  without  blood-shedding  ?"  says  the 
king;  and  he  comes  with  the  crown  on  his  head;  "  may  not  I 
in  all  my  robes,  with  this  rich  ransom,  get  pardon  without  the 
blood-shedding  ?"  "  None,"  is  the  reply ;  "  none."  Forthwith 
comes  the  wise  man,  with  a  number  of  letters  after  his  name — 
"  Can  I  not  get  remission  by  these  grand  titles  of  my  learning  ?" 
"  None  ;  none."  Then  comes  the  benevolent  man — "  I  have 
dispersed  my  money  to  the  poor,  and  given  my  body  to  feed 


TiJK   BLOOD-SHEDDING.  289 

tbom ;  shall  not  I  get  remission  ?"  "  Xone,"  says  the  text. 
"  Without  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no  remission."  How  this 
puts  every  one  on  a  level !  My  lord,  you  are  no  bigger  than 
your  coachman  ;  Sir  squire,  you  are  no  better  off  than  John  that 
plows  the  ground ;  minister,  your  office  does  not  serve  you  with 
any  exemption — your  poorest  hearer  stands  on  the  very  same 
footing.  "  Without  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no  remission." 
No  hope  for  the  best,  any  more  than  for  the  worst,  without  this 
shedding  of  blood !  O !  I  love  the  gospel,  for  this  reason 
among  others,  because  it  is  such  a  leveling  gospel.  Some 
persons  do  not  like  a  leveling  gospel ;  nor  would  I,  in  some 
senses  of  the  word.  Let  men  have  their  rank,  and  their  titles, 
and  their  riches,  if  they  will;  but  I  do  like,  and  I  am  sure  all 
good  men  like,  to  see  rich  and  poor  meet  together,  and  feel 
that  they  are  on  a  level ;  the  gospel  makes  them  so.  It  says 
*'  Put  up  your  money-bags,  they  will  not  procure  remission ; 
roll  up  your  diploma,  that  will  not  get  you  remission;  for- 
get your  farm  and  youj-  park,  they  will  not  get  you  remis- 
sion ;  just  cover  up  that  escutcheon,  that  coat  of  arms  will  not 
get  remission.  Come,  ye  ragged  beggars,  filthy  off-scourings 
of  the  world,  penniless  ;  come  hither  ;  here  is  remission  as  much 
for  you,  ill-bred  and  ill-mannered  though  ye  be,  as  for  the 
noble,  the  honorable,  the  titled  and  the  wealthy.  All  stand 
on  a  level  here ;  the  text  is  universal :  "  Without  shedding  of 
blood  there  is  no  remission." 

Mark,  too,  hov)  perpetual  my  text  is.  Paul  said,  "  there  is 
no  remission ;"  I  must  repeat  this  testimony  too.  When 
thousands  of  years  have  rolled  away,  some  minister  may  stand 
on  this  spot  and 'say  the  same.  This  will  never  alter  at  all; 
it  will  always  be  so,  in  the  next  world  as  well  as  this:  no  re- 
mission without  shedding  of  blood.  "  O  !  yes,  there  is,"  says 
one,  "  the  priest  takes  the  shilling,  and  he  gets  the  soul  out  of 
purgatory."  That  is  a  mere  pretense  ;  it  never  was  in.  But 
without  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no  real  remission.  There 
may  be  tales  and  fancies,  but  there  is  no  true  remission  with- 
out the  blood  of  propitiation.  Never,  though  you  strained 
yourselves  in  prayer ;  never,  though  you  wept  yourselves 
away  in  tears  ;  never,  though  you  groaned  and  cried  till  your 
heart-strings  bi-eak ;  never  in  this  world,  nor  in  that  which  is 

13 


290  THE   BLOOD- SHEDDING. 

to  come,  can  the  forgiveness  of  sins  be  procured  on  any  other 
ground  than  redemption  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  and  never  can 
the  conscience  be  cleansed  but  by  faith  in  that  sacrifice.  The 
fact  is,  beloved,  there  is  no  use  for  you  to  satisfy  your  hearts 
with  any  thing  less  than  what  satisfied  God  the  Father.  With- 
out the  shedding  of  blood  nothing  would  appease  his  justice; 
and  without  the  application  of  that  same  blood  nothing  can 
purge  your  consciences. 

II.  But  as  there  is  no  remission  without  blood-shedding,  it 

IS    IMPLIED    THAT   THERE  IS  REMISSION  W^ITH  IT.       Mark  it  WcU, 

this  remission  is  a  present  fact.  The  blood  having  been  al- 
ready shed,  the  remission  is  already  obtained.  I  took  you  to 
the  garden  of  Gethsemane  and  the  mount  of  Calvary  to  see 
the  blood-shedding.  I  might  now  conduct  you  to  another 
garden  and  another  mount  to  show  you  the  grand  proof  of  the 
remission.  Another  garden,  did  I  say  ?  Yes,  it  is  a  garden 
fraught  with  many  pleasing  and  even  tnumphant  reminis- 
cences. Aside  from  the  haunts  of  this  bus)  /v'orld,  in  it  was  a 
new  sepulcher,  hewn  out  of  a  rock  where  Joseph  of  Arimathea 
thought  his  own  poor  body  should  presently  be  laid.  But 
there  they  laid  Jesus  after  his  crucifixion. 

He  had  stood  surety  for  his  people,  and  the  law  had  de- 
manded his  blood  ;  death  had  held  him  with  strong  grasp ; 
and  that  tomb  was,  as  it  were,  the  dungeon  of  his  captivity, 
when,  as  the  good  Shepherd,  he  laid  down  his  life  for  the 
sheep.  Why,  then,  do  I  see  in  that  garden  an  open,  unten- 
anted grave  ?  I  will  tell  you.  The  debts  are  paid,  the  sins 
are  canceled,  the  remission  is  obtained.  How,  think  you  ? 
That  great  Shepherd  of  the  sheep  hath  been  brought  again 
from  the  dead  by  the  blood  of  ^he  everlasting  covenant,  and 
in  him  also  we  have  obtained  redemption  through  his  blood. 
There,  beloved,  is  proof  the  first. 

Do  you  ask  further  evidence  ?  I  will  take  you  to  mount 
Olivet.  You  shall  behold  Jesus  there  with  his  hands  raised 
like  the  high  priest  of  old  to  blesa  his  people,  and  while  he  is 
blessing  them,  he  ascends,  the  clouds  receiving  him  out  of 
their  sight.  But  why,  you  ask,  O  why  hath  he  thus  ascended, 
and  whither  is  he  gone  ?  Behold  he  entereth,  not  into  the 
holy  place  made  with  hands,  but  he  entereth  into  heaven  it- 


THE   BLOOD-SHEDDING.  291 

self  with  big  own  blood,  there  to  appear  in  the  presence  of 
God  for  us.  Now,  therefore,  we  have  boldness  to  draw  near 
by  the  blood  of  Christ.  The  remission  is  obtained,  here  is 
proof  the  second.  O  believer,  v/hat  springs  of  comfort  are 
there  here  for  thee. 

And  now  let  me  commend  this  remission  by  the  shedding 
of  blood  to  those  who  have  not  yet  believed.  Mr.  Innis,  a 
great  Scotch  minister,  once  visited  an  infidel  who  was  dying. 
When  he  came  to  him  the  first  time,  he  said,  "  Mr.  Innis,  I 
am  relying  on  the  mercy  of  God ;  God  is  merciful,  and  he  will 
never  damn  a  man  for  ever."  When  he  got  worse  and  was 
nearer  death,  Mr.  Innis  went  to  him  again,  and  he  said,  "  O ! 
Mr.  Innis,  my  hope  is  gone ;  for  I  have  been  thinking,  if  God 
be  merciful,  God  is  just  too  ;  and  what  if,  instead  of  being 
merciful  to  me,  he  should  be  just  to  me?  What  would  then 
become  of  me  ?  I  must  give  up  my  hope  in  the  mere  mercy 
of  God;  tell  me  how  to  be  saved!"  Mr.  Innis  told  him  that 
Christ  had  died  in  the  stead  of  all  believers — that  God  could 
be  just,  and  yet  the  justifier  through  the  death  of  Christ. 
*'  Ah  !"  said  he,  "  Mr.  Innis,  there  is  something  solid  in  that ; 
I  can  rest  on  that ;  I  can  not  rest  on  any  thing  else  ;"  and  it 
is  a  remarkable  fact  that  none  of  us  ever  met  with  a  man  who 
thought  he  had  his  sins  forgiven  unless  it  was  through  the 
blood  of  Christ.  Meet  a  Mussulman  ;  he  never  had  his  sins 
forgiven  ;  he  does  not  say  so.  Meet  an  infidel ;  he  never 
knows  that  his  sins  are  forgiven.  Meet  a  legalist ;  he  says, 
"  I  hope  they  will  be  forgiven  ;"  but  he  does  not  pretend  they 
are.  No  one  ever  gets  even  a  fancied  hope  apart  from  this, 
that  Christ,  and  Christ  alone,  must  save  by  the  shedding  of 
his  blood. 

Let  me  tell  a  story  to  show  how  Christ  saves  souls.  Mi-, 
Whitefield  had  a  brother,  who  had  been  like  him  an  earnest 
Christian,  but  he  had  backslidden  ;  he  went  far  from  the  ways 
of  godliness ;  and  one  afternoon,  after  he  had  been  recovered 
from  his  backsliding,  he  was  sitting  in  a  room  in  a  chapel- 
house.  He  had  heard  his  brother  preach  the  day  before,  and 
his  poor  conscience  had  been  cut  to  the  very  quick.  Said 
Whitefield's  brother,  when  he  was  at  tea,  "  I  am  a  lost  man," 
and  he  groaned  and  cried,  and  could  neither  eat  nor  drink. 


i?92  THE   BLOOD-SHEDDING. 

Said  Lady  Huntingdon,  who  sat  opposite,  "  What  did  you  say, 
Mr.  Whitetield?"  "Madam,"  said  he,  "I  said  I  am  a  lost 
man."  "  I'm  glad  of  it,"  said  she  ;  "  I'm  glad  of  it."  "  Your 
ladyship,  how  can  you  say  so  ?  It  is  cruel  to  say  you  are  glad 
that  I  am  a  lost  man."  "  I  repeat  it,  sir,"  said  she  ;  "  I  am 
heartily  glad  of  it."  He  looked  at  her,  more  and  more  as- 
tonished at  her  barbarity.  "  I  am  glad  of  it,"  said  she,  "  be- 
cause it  is  written,  '  The  Son  of  man  came  to  seek  and  to  save 
that  which  was  lost.' "  With  the  tears  rolling  down  his 
cheeks,  he  said,  "  What  a  j^recious  Scripture  ;  and  how  is  it 
that  it  comes  with  such  force  to  me  ?  O !  madam,"  said 
he,  "  madam,  I  bless  God  for  that ;  then  he  will  save  me ;  I 
trust  my  soul  in  his  hands ;  he  has  forgiven  me."  He  went 
outside  the  house,  felt  ill,  fell  upon  the  ground,  and  exjDired. 
I  may  have  a  lost  man  here  this  morning.  As  I  can  not  say 
much,  I  will  leave  you,  good  people ;  you  do  not  want  any 
thing. 

Have  I  a  lost  man  here  ?  Lost  man  !  Lost  woman !  Where 
are  you  ?  Do  you  feel  yourself  to  be  lost  ?  I  am  so  glad  of 
it ;  for  there  is  remission  by  the  blood-shed diug.  O  sinner, 
are  there  tears  in  your  eyes  ?  Look  through  them.  Do  you 
see  that  man  in  the  garden  ?  That  man  sweat  drops  of  blood 
for  you.  Do  you  see  that  man  on  the  cross  ?  That  man  was 
nailed  there  for  you.  O  !  if  I  could  be  nailed  on  a  cross  this 
morning  for  you  all,  I  know  w^hat  you  would  do :  you  would 
fall  down  and  kiss  my  feet,  and  weep  that  I  should  have  to  die 
for  you.  But  sinner,  lost  sinner,  Jesus  died  for  you — for  you^ 
and  if  he  died  for  you,  you  can  not  be  lost.  Christ  died  in 
vain  for  no  one.  Are  you,  then,  a  sinner?  Are  you  con- 
vinced of  sin  because  you  believe  not  in  Christ  ?  I  have  au- 
thority to  preach  to  you.  Believe  in  his  name  and  you  can 
not  be  lost.  Do  you  say  you  are  no  sinner  ?  Then  I  do  not 
know  that  Christ  died  for  you.  Do  you  say  that  you  have  no 
sins  to  repent  of?  Then  I  have  no  Christ  to  preach  to  you. 
He  did  not  come  to  save  the  righteous;  he  came  to  save  the 
wicked  .  Are  you  wicked  ?  Do  you  feel  it  ?  Are  you  lost  ? 
Do  you  know  it  ?  Are  you  sinful  ?  Will  you  confess  it  ? 
Sinner  !  if  Jesus  were  heiJe  this  morning  he  would  put  out  his 
bleeding  hands,  and  say,  *'  Sinner,  I  died  for  you ;  will  you  be- 


THE    BLOOD-SHEDDING.  293 

lieve  me  ?"  He  is  not  here  in  person  ;  he  has  sent  his  servant 
to  tell  yon.  Won't  you  beheve  him?  "  O !"  but  you  say, 
"  I  am  such  a  sinner  !"  "  Ah  !"  says  he,  "  that  is  just  why  I 
died  for  you,  because  you  are  a  sinner."  "  But,"  you  say, 
"I  do  not  deserve  it."  "Ah  !"  says  he,  "  that  is  just  why  I 
did  it."  Say  you,  "I  have  hated  him."  "But,"  says  he,  "I 
have  always  loved  you,"  "  But,  Lord,  I  have  spat  on  thy 
minister,  and  scorned  thy  word."  "  It  is  all  forgiven,"  says 
be,  "  all  washed  away  by  the  blood  which  did  run  from  my 
side.  Only  believe  me ;  that  is  all  I  ask.  And  that  I  will 
give  you.  I  will  help  you  to  believe."  "  Ah !"  says  one, 
"  but  I  do  not  want  a  Saviour."  Sir,  I  have  nothing  to  say  to 
you  except  this,  "  The  wrath  to  come  !  the  wrath  to  come  !" 
But  there  is  one  who  says,  "  Sir,  you  do  not  mean  what  you 
say  ?  Do  you  mean  to  preach  to  the  most  wicked  men  or 
w^omen  in  the  place  ?"  I  mean  what  I  say.  There  she  is  !  She 
is  a  harlot ;  she  has  led  many  into  sin,  and  many  into  hell. 
There  she  is  ;  her  own  friends  have  turned  her  out  of  doors ; 
her  father  called  her  a  good-for-nothing  hussey,  and  said  she 
should  never  come  to  the  house  again.  Woman  !  dost  thou 
repent?  Dost  thou  feel  thyself  to  be  guilty  ?  Christ  died  to 
save  thee,  and  thoushaltbe  saved.  There  he  is.  I  can  see  him. 
He  Avas  drunk ;  he  has  been  drunk  very  often.  Not  many 
nights  ago  I  heard  his  voice  in  the  street,  as  he  went  home  at 
a  late  hour  on  Saturday  night,  disturbing  every  body  ;  and  he 
beat  his  wife  too.  He  has  broken  the  Sabbath  ;  and  as  to 
sw.earing,  if  oaths  be  like  soot,  his  throat  must  want  sweep- 
ing bad  enough,  for  he  has  cursed  God  often.  Do  you  feel 
yourself  to  be  guilty,  my  hearer  ?  Do  you  hate  your  sins, 
and  are  you  willing  to  forsake  them  ?  Then  I  bless  God  for 
you.  Chi-ist  died  for  you.  Believe !  I  had  a  letter  a  few 
days  ago  from  a  young  man  who  heard  that  during  this  week 
I  was  going  to  a  certain  town.  Said  he,  "  Sir,  when  you  come 
do  preach  a  sermon  that  will  tit  me ;  for  do  you  know,  sir,  I 
have  hoard  it  said  that  we  must  all  think  ourselves  to  be  the 
wickedest  people  in  the  world,  or  else  we  can  not  be  saved.  I 
try  to  think  so,  but  I  can  not,  because  I  have  not  been  the 
wickedest.  I  want  to  think  so,  but  I  can  not.  I  want  to  be 
saved,  but  I  do  not  know  how  to  repent  enough."     Now,  if  I 


294  THE    BLOOD-SHEDDING. 

have  the  pleasure  of  seemg  him  I  shall  tell  him,  God  does  not 
require  a  mau  to  think  himself  the  wickedest  in  the  world, 
because  that  would  sometimes  be  to  think  a  falsehood  ;  there 
are  some  men  who  are  not  so  wicked  as  others  are.  What  God 
requires  is  this,  that  a  man  should  say, "  I  know  more  of  myself 
than  I  do  of  other  people  ;  I  know  little  about  them,  and  from 
what  I  see  of  myself,  not  of  my  actions,  but  of  my  heart,  I  do 
think  that  there  can  be  few  worse  than  I  am.  They  may  be 
more  guilty  openly,  but  then  I  have  had  more  light,  more 
privileges,  more  opportunities,  more  warnings,  and  therefore  I 
am  still  guiltier."  I  do  not  want  you  to  bring  your  brother 
with  you  and  say,  "  I  am  more  wicked  than  he  is ;"  I  want 
you  to  come  yourself,  and  say,  "  Father,  I  have  sinned ;"  you 
have  nothing  to  do  with  your  brother  William,  whether  he 
has  sinned  more  or  less;  your  cry  should  be,  "Father,  I  have 
sinned."  You  have  nothing  to  do  with  your  cousin  Jane, 
whether  or  not  she  has  rebelled  more  than  you.  Your  busi- 
ness is  to  cry,  "  Lord  have  mercy  upon  me  a  sinner  I"  That 
is  all.     Do  you  feel  yourselves  lost  ?     Again,  I  say, 

"Come,  and  welcome,  sinner,  comel" 

To  conclude.  There  is  not  a  sinner  in  this  place  who  knows 
himself  to  be  lost  and  ruined,  who  may  not  have  all  his  sins 
forgiven,  and  "rejoice  in  the  hope  of  the  glory  of  God." 
You  may,  though  black  as  hell,  be  white  as  heaven  this  very 
instant.  I  know  that  'tis  only  by  a  desperate  struggle  that 
faith  takes  hold  of  the  promise,  but,  the  very  moment  a  sinner 
beUeves,  that  conflict  is  past.  It  is  his  first  victory  and  a 
blessed  one.  Let  this  verse  be  the  language  of  your  heart ; 
adopt  it  and  make  it  your  own  : 

"  A  guilty,  weak,  and  helpless  worm, 
In  Christ's  kind  arms  I  fall ; 
He  is  my  strength  and  righteousness, 
My  Jesus  and  my  all." 


SERMON  XX. 
JUSTIFICATION   BY   GRACE. 

'*  Being  justified  freely  by  his  grace,  through  the  redemption  that  is  in  Christ 
Josus." — Romans,  iii.  24. 

The  hill  of  comfort  is  the  hill  of  Calvary  ;  the  house  of  con- 
solation is  builded  with  the  wood  of  the  cross ;  the  temple  of 
heavenly  cordials  is  founded  upon  the  riven  rock,  riven  by  the 
spear  which  pierced  its  side.  No  scene  in  sacred  history  ever 
gladdens  the  soul  like  the  scene  on  Calvary. 

"Is  it  not  strange,  the  darkest  hour 

That  ever  dawned  on  sinful  earth 
Should  touch  the  heart  with  softer  power 

For  comfort,  than  an  angel's  mirth  ? 
That  to  the  cross  the  mourner's  eye  should  turn, 
Sooner  than  where  the  stars  of  Bethlehem  bum  ?" 

Nowhere  does  the  soul  ever  find  such  consolation  as  on  that 
very  spot  where  misery  reigned,  where  woe  triumphed,  where 
agony  reached  its  climax.  There  grace  hath  dug  a  fountain, 
which  ever  gusheth  with  waters  pure  as  crystal,  each  drop 
capable  of  alleviating  the  woes  and  the  agonies  of  mankind. 
Ye  have  had  your  seasons  of  woe,  my  brethren  and  my  sisters 
in  Christ  Jesus ;  and  ye  will  confess  it  was  not  at  Olivet  that 
ve  ever  found  comfort,  not  on  the  hill  of  Sinai,  nor  on  Tabor ; 
out  Gethseraane,  Gabbatha,  and  Golgotha  have  been  a  means 
)f  comfort  to  you.  The  bitter  herbs  of  Gethsemane  have 
often  taken  away  the  bitters  of  your  life ;  the  scourge  of  Gab- 
batha hath  often  scourged  away  your  cares,  and  the  groans 
of  Calvary  have  put  all  other  groans  to  flight. 

We  have,  this  morning  then,  a  subject  which  I  trust  may 
be  the  means  of  comforting  God's  saints,  seeing  it  takes  its 


296  JUSTIFICATION    BY    GRACE. 

rise  at  the  cross,  and  thence  runs  on  in  a  rich  stream  of  peren- 
nial blessings  to  all  believers.  You  note,  we  have  in  our  text, 
first  of  all,  the  redemption  of  Christ  Jesus  ;  secondly,  the  jus- 
tification of  shiners  flowing  from  it ;  and  then  thirdly,  the 
maimer  of  the  givhig  of  this  justification^  "  freely  by  his 
grace." 

I  First,  then,  we  have  the  redemption. that  is  in  or  by 
Christ  Jesus. 

The  figure  of  redemption  is  very  simple,  and  has  been  very 
frequently  used  in  Scripture.  When  a  prisoner  has  been  taken 
captive,  and  has  been  made  a  slave  by  some  barbarous  power, 
it  has  been  usual,  before  he  could  be  set  free,  that  a  ransom 
price  should  be  paid  down.  Now,  we  being,  by  the  fall  of 
Adam,  prone  to  guiltiness,  and,  indeed,  virtually  guilty,  we 
were  by  the  irreproachable  judgment  of  God  given  up  to  the 
vengeance  of  the  law;  we  were  given  to  the  hands  of  justice; 
justice  claimed  us  to  be  his  bond-slaves  for  ever,  unless  we 
could  pay  a  ransom,  whereby  our  souls  could  be  redeemed.  We 
were,  indeed,  poor  as  owlets,  we  had  not  wherewith  to  bless 
ourselves.  We  were  as  our  hymn  hath  worded  it,  "  bankrupt 
debtors  ;"  an  execution  was  put  into  our  house ;  all  we  had  was 
sold  ;  we  were  left  naked,  and  poor,  and  miserable,  and  we 
could  by  no  means  find  a  ransom  ;  it  was  just  then  that  Christ 
stepped  in,  stood  sponsor  for  us,  and,  in  the  room  and  stead 
of  all  believers,  did  pay  the  ransom  price,  that  we  might  in  that 
hour  be  delivered  from  the  curse  of  th6  law  and  the  vengeance 
of  God,  and  go  our  way,  clean,  free,  justified  by  his  blood. 

Let  me  just  endeavor  to  show  you  some  qualities  of  the  re- 
demption that  is  in  Christ  Jesus.  You  will  remember  the 
multitude  he  has  redeemed ;  not  me  alone,  nor  you  alone,  but 
"  a  multitude  that  no  man  can  number,"  which  shall  as  far  ex- 
ceed the  stars  of  heaven  for  number,  as  they  exceed  all  mortal 
reckoning.  Christ  hath  bought  for  himself  some  out  of  every 
kingdom,  and  nation,  and  tongue,  under  heaven ;  he  hath  re- 
deemed from  among  men  some  of  every  rank,  from  the  high- 
est to  the  lowest;  some  of  every  color — black  and  white; 
some  of  every  standing  in  society,  the  best  and  the  worst.  For 
some  of  all  sorts  hath  Jesus  Christ  given  himself  a  ransom  thaJ. 
they  might  be  red^^med  unto  himself. 


JUSTIFICATION    BY    GRACE.  297 

Now,  concerning  tliis  ransom,  we  have  to  observe,  tliat  it 
was  all  paid^  and  all  paid  at  once.  When  Christ  redeemed 
his  people,  he  did  it  thoroughly  ;  he  did  not  leave  a  single 
debt  unpaid,  nor  yet  one  farthing  for  them  to  settle  afterwards. 
God  demanded  of  Christ  the  payment  for  the  sins  of  all  his 
people  ;  Christ  stood  forward,  and  to  the  utmost  farthing  paid 
whate'er  liis  people  owed.  The  sacrifice  of  Calvary  was  not  a 
part  payment ;  it  was  not  a  partial  exoneration,  it  was  a  com- 
plete and  perfect  payment,  and  it  obtained  a  complete  and 
perfect  remittal  of  all  the  debts  of  all  believers  that  have  lived, 
do  live,  or  shall  live,  to  the  very  end  of  time.  On  that  day 
when  Christ  hung  on  the  cross,  he  did  not  leave  a  single  fiir- 
thing  for  us  to  pay  as  a  satisfaction  to  God  ;  he  did  not  leave, 
fi'om  a  thread  even  to  a  shoe-latchet,  that  he  had  not  satisfied. 
The  whole  of  the  demands  of  the  law  were  paid  down  there 
and  then  by  Jehovah  Jesus,  the  great  high  priest  of  all  his 
people.  And  blessed  be  his  name,  he  paid  it  all  at  once  too. 
So  jDriceless  was  the  ransom,  so  princely  and  munificent  was 
the  price  demanded  for  our  souls,  one  might  have  thought  it 
would  have  been  marvelous  if  Christ  had  paid  it  by  instal- 
ments; some  of  it  now,  and  some  of  it  then.  Kings'  ransoms 
have  sometimes  been  paid  part  at  once,  and  part  in  dues  after- 
wards, to  run  through  years.  But  not  so  our  Saviour :  once 
for  all  he  gave  himself  a  sacrifice  ;  at  once  he  counted  down 
the  price,  and  said,  "  It  is  finished,"  leaving  nothing  fijr  him 
to  do,  nor  for  us  to  accomplish.  He  did  not  drivel  out  a  part- 
payment,  and  then  declare  that  he  would  come  again  to  die, 
or  that  he  would  again  suffer,  or  that  he  would  again  obey ; 
but  down  upon  the  nail,  to  the  utmost  farthing,  the  ransom  of 
all  his  people  was  paid,  and  a  full  receipt  given  to  them,  and 
Christ  nailed  that  receipt  to  his  cross,  and  said,  "It  is  done,  it 
is  done ;  I  have  taken  away  the  handwriting  of  ordinances,  I 
have  nailed  it  to  the  cross;  who  is  he  that  shall  condenm  my 
people,  or  lay  any  thing  to  their  cliarge?  for  I  have  blotted 
out  like  a  cloud  their  transgressions,  and  like  a  thick  cloud 
their  sins !" 

And  when  Christ  paid  all  this  ransom,  will  you  just  notice, 
that  he  did  it  all  himself!  He  was  very  particular  about  that. 
Simor   +he  Cyrenian,  migl^  bear  the  cross;  but  Simon,  the 

13* 


298  JUSTIPICATION    BY    GRACE. 

Cyrenian,  might  not  be  nailed  to  it.  Tliat  sacred  circle  of 
Calvary  was  kept  for  Christ  alone.  Two  thieves  were  with 
him  there  ;  not  righteous  men,  lest  any  should  have  said  that 
the  death  of  those  two  righteous  men  helped  the  Saviour. 
Two  thieves  hung  there  with  him,  that  men  might  see  that 
there  was  majesty  in  his  misery,  and  that  he  could  pardon  men 
and  show  his  sovereignty,  even  when  he  was  dying.  There 
were  no  righteous  men  to  suffer;  no  disciples  shared  his  death ; 
Peter  was  not  dragged  there  to  be  beheaded,  John  was  not 
nailed  to  a  cross  side  by  side  with  him ;  he  was  left  there 
alone.  He  says,  "  I  have  trodden  the  wine-press  alone  ;  and 
of  the  people  there  was  none  with  me."  The  whole  of  the 
tremendous  debt  was  put  upon  his  shoulders;  the  whole 
weight  of  the  sins  of  all  his  people  was  placed  upon  him.  Once 
he  seemed  to  stagger  under  it :  "  Father,  if  it  be  possible." 
But  again  he  stood  upright :  "  Xevertheless,  not  my  will,  but 
thine  be  done."  The  whole  of  the  punishment  of  his  people 
was  distilled  into  one  cup  ;  no  mortal  lip  might  give  it  so  much 
as  a  solitary  sip.  When  he  put  it  to  his  own  lips,  it  was  so 
bitter,  he  well  nigh  spurned  it :  "Let  this  cup  pass  from  me." 
But  his  love  for  his  people  was  so  strong,  that  he  took  the  cup 
in  both  his  hands,  and 

' '  At  one  tremendous  draught  of  love 
He  drank  damnation  dry," 

for  all  his  people.  He  drank  it  all,  he  endured  all,  he  suffered 
all ;  so  that  now  for  ever  there  are  no  flames  of  hell  for  them, 
no  racks  of  torment;  they  have  no  eternal  woes;  Christ  hath 
suffered  all  they  ought  to  have  suffered,  and  they  must,  they 
shall  go  free,  The  work  was  completely  done  by  himsejf, 
without  a  helper. 

And  note,  again,  it  teas  accepted.  In  truth,  it  was  a  goodly 
ransom.  What  could  equal  it  ?  A  soul  "  exceeding  sorrow- 
ful even  unto  death  ;"  a  body  torn  with  torture  ;  a  death  of 
the  most  inhuman  kind ;  and  an  agony  of  such  a  character 
that  tongue  can  not  speak  of  it,  nor  can  even  man's  mind  im- 
agine its  horror.  It  was  a  goodly  price.  But  say,  was  it  ac- 
cepted ?  Ther*-.  have  been  prices  paid  sometimes,  or  rather 
offered,  which  never  were  accepted  by  the  party  to  whom  they 


JUSTIFICATION    BY    GRACE.  299 

were  offered,  and  therefore  the  slave  did  not  go  free.  But  this 
was  accepted.  The  evidence  I  will  show  you.  When  Christ 
declared  that  he  would  pay  the  debt  for  all  his  people,  God 
sent  the  officer  to  arrest  him  for  it ;  he  arrested  him  in  the 
garden  of  Gethsemane,  and  seizing  upon  him,  he  dragged  him 
to  the  bar  of  Pilate,  to  the  bar  of  Herod,  and  to  the  judgment- 
seat  of  Caiaphas ;  the  payment  was  all  made,  and  Christ  was 
put  into  the  grave.  He  was  there,  locked  up  in  durance  vile, 
until  the  acceptance  should  have  been  ratified  in  heaven.  He 
slept*there  a  portion  of  three  days  in  his  tomb.  It  was  de- 
clared that  the  ratification  was  to  be  this  :  the  surety  was  to 
go  his  way  as  soon  as  his  suretyship  engagements  had  been 
fulfilled.  Now  let  your  minds  picture  the  buried  Jesus.  He 
is  in  the  sepulcher.  'Tis  true  he  has  paid  all  the  debt,  but  the 
receipt  is  not  yet  given ;  he  slumbers  in  that  narrow  tomb. 
Fastened  in  with  a  seal  upon  a  giant  stone,  he  sleeps  still  in 
his  grave  ;  not  yet  has  the  acceptance  been  given  from  God  ; 
the  angels  have  not  yet  come  from  heaven  to  say,  "  The  deed 
is  done,  God  has  accepted  thy  sacrifice."  jSTow  is  the  crisis 
of  this  world  ;  it  hangs  trembling  in  the  balance.  Will  God 
accept  the  ransom,  or  will  he  not?  We  shall  see.  An  angel 
comes  from  heaven  with  exceeding  brig.'itness;  he  rolls  away 
the  stone;  and  forth  comes  the  captive,  with  no  manacles 
upon  his  hands,  with  the  grave-clothes  left  behind  him ;  free, 
never  more  to  sufter,  never  more  to  die.     Now, 

"  If  Jesus  had  not  paid  the  debt, 
He  ne'er  had  been  at  freedom  set." 

If  God  had  not  accepted  his  sacrifice,  he  would  have  been  in 
his  tomb  at  this  moment ;  he  never  would  have  risen  from  his 
grave.  But  his  resurrection  was  a  pledge  of  God's  accepting 
him.  He  said,  "T  have  had  a  claim  upon  thee  to  this  hour; 
that  claim  is  paid  now  ;  go  thy  way."  And  death  gave  up  his 
royal  captive,  the  stone  was  rolled  into  the  garden,  and  the 
Conqueror  came  forth,  leadin<,'  captivity  captive. 

And,  moreover,  God  gave  a  second  proof  of  acceptance ; 
for  he  took  his  only-hegotten  Son  to  heauen,  and  set  hirn  at  his 
right  hand,  far  above  all  principalities  and  poAvers  ;  and  therein 
be  meant  to  say  to  him,  "  Sit  upon  the  throne,  for  thou  hast 


300  JUSTIFICATION    BY    GRACE. 

done  the  mighty  deed ;  all  thy  works  and  all  thy  miseries  are 
accepted  as  tlie  ransom  of  men."  O  my  beloved,  think  what 
a  grand  sight  it  must  ha\  e  been  when  Christ  ascended  into 
glory ;  what  a  noble  certificate  it  must  have  been  of  his  Fath- 
er's acceptance  of  him  !  Do  you  not  think  you  see  the  scene 
on  earth  ?  It  is  very  simple.  A  few  disciples  are  standing 
upon  a  hill,  and  Christ  mounts  into  the  air  in  slow  and  solemn 
movement,  as  if  an  angel  sped  his  way  by  gentle  degrees,  like 
mist  or  exhalation  from  the  lake  into  the  skies.  Can  you  im- 
agine what  is  going  on  up  yonder  ?  Can  you  for  a  molnent 
conceive  how,  when  the  mighty  Conqueror  entered  the  gates 
of  heaven,  the  angels  met  him ; 

"  They  brought  his  chariot  from  on  high, 
To  bear  him  to  his  tlirone  ; 
Clapped  their  triumphant  wings,  and  cried. 
'  The  glorious  work  is  done  I'  " 

Can  you  think  how  loud  were  the  plaudits  when  he  entered 
the  gates  of  heaven?  Can  you  conceive  how  they  pressed  on 
one  another,  to  behold  how  he  came  conquering  and  red  from 
the  fight  ?  Do  you  see  Abraham,  Isaac,  Jacob,  and  all  the 
saints  redeemed,  con^e  to  behold  the  Saviour  and  the  Lord? 
They  had  desire  a  to  see  him,  and  now  their  eyes  behold  liim 
in  flesh  and  blood,  the  conqueror  over  death  and  hell !  Do 
you  think  you  see  him,  with  hell  at  his  chariot-^vheels,  with 
death  dragged  as  a  captive  through  the  royal  streets  of  hea- 
ven ?  O,  what  a  spectacle  was  there  that  day  !  Xo  Roman 
warrior  ever  had  such  a  triumph;  none  ever  saw  such  a  ma- 
jestic sight.  The  pomp  of  a  whole  uuivei'se,  the  royalty  of 
entire  creation,  cherubim  and  seraphim,  and  all  powers  create, 
did  swell  the  show  ;  and  God  himself,  the  Everlasting  One, 
crowned  all,  when  he  pressed  his  Son  to  his  bosom,  and  said, 
"  Well  done,  well  done  ;  thou  hast  finished  the  work  which  I 
gave  thee  to  do.  Rest  here  for  ever,  mine  accepted  one." 
Ah,  but  he  never  would  have  1  ad  that  triumph,  if  he  had  not 
paid  all  the  debt.  Unless  his  Father  had  accepted  the  ransom- 
price,  the  ransomer  had  never  been  so  honored ;  but  because 
it  was  accepted,  therefore  did  he  so  triumph.  So  far,  then, 
concerning  the  ransom. 


JUSTIFICATION    BY    GRACE.  301 

II.  And  now,  by  the  help  of  God's  Spirit,  let  me  address  my- 
self to  the  EFFECT  OF  THE  RANSOM;  being  justified — "justi- 
fied freely  by  his  grace  through  the  redemption." 

Now,  lohat  is  the  meaning  of  justification?  Divines  will 
puzzle  you,  if  you  ask  them.  I  must  try  the  best  I  can  to 
make  justification  plain  and  simple,  even  to  the  comp-ehension 
of  a  child.  There  is  not  such  a  thing  as  justification  to  be  had 
on  earth  for  mortal  men,  except  in  one  way.  Justification, 
you  know,  is  a  forensic  term ;  it  is  employed  always  in  a  legal 
sense.  A  prisoner  is  brought  to  the  bar  of  justice  to  be  tried. 
There  is  only  one  way  whereby  that  prisoner  can  be  justified  ; 
that  is,  he  must  be  found  not  guilty ;  and  if  he  is  found  not 
guilty,  then  he  is  justified — that  is,  he  is  proved  to  be  a  just, 
man.  If  you  find  that  man  guilty,  you  can  not  justify  him. 
The  Queen  may  pardon  him,  but  she  can  not  justify  him.  The 
deed  is  not  a  justifiable  one,  if  he  were  guilty  concerning  it ; 
and  he  can  not  be  justified  on  account  of  it.  He  may  be  par- 
doned ;  but  not  royalty  itself  can  ever  wash  that  man's  char- 
acter. He  is  as  much  a  real  criminal  when  he  is  parJ.oned  as 
before.  There  is  no  means  among  men  of  justifying  j  man  of 
an  accusation  which  is  laid  against  him,  except  by  Lis  being 
proved  not  guilty.  Now,  the  wonder  of  wonders  i^,  that  we 
are  proved  guilty,  and  yet  we  are  justified:  the  serdict  has 
been  brought  in  against  us,  guilty  ;  and  yet,  notwithstanding, 
we  are  justified.  Can  any  earthly  tribunal  do  that  ?  No  ;  it 
remained  for  the  ransom  of  Christ  to  eflTect  that  wliich  is  an 
impossibility  to  any  tribunal  upon  earth.  We  are  all  guilty. 
Read  the  23d  verse,  immediately  preceding  the  text — "For 
all  have  sinned,  and  come  short  of  the  glory  of  God."  There 
the  verdict  of  guilty  is  brought  in,  and  yet  we  are  immediately 
afterward  said  to  be  justified  freely  by  his  grace. 

Now,  allow  me  to  explain  the  way  whereby  Ood justifies  a 
sinner.  I  am  about  to  suppose  an  impossible  case.  A  pris- 
oner has  been  tried,  and  condemned  to  death.  He  is  a  guilty 
man  ;  he  can  not  be  justified,  because  he  is  guilty.  But  now, 
suppose  for  a  moment  that  such  a  thing  as  this  could  happen 
— that  some  second  party  could  be  introduced,  who  could  take 
all  that  man's  guilt  upon  himself,  who  could  change  places 
witV   ""hat  man,  and  by  some  mysterious  process,  which,  of 


'S02  JUSTIFICATION    BY    GRACE. 

course,  is  impossible  with  men,  become  tliat  man  ;  or  take 
that  man's  character  upon  himself;  he,  the  righteous  man, 
putting  the  rebel  in  his  place,  and  making  the  rebel  a  right- 
eous man.  We  can  not  do  that  in  our  courts.  If  I  were  to 
go  before  a  judge,  and  he  should  agree  that  I  should  be  com- 
mitted fo#a  year's  imprisonment,  instead  of  some  wretch  who 
was  condemned  yesterday  to  a  year's  imprisonment,  I  could 
not  take  his  guilt.  I  might  take  his  punishment,  but  not  his 
guilt.  Now,  what  flesh  and  blood  can  not  do,  that  Jesus 
Christ  by  his  redemption  did.  Here  I  stand,  the  sinner.  I 
mention  myself  as  the  representative  of  you  all.  I  am  con- 
demned to  die.  God  says,  "  I  will  condemn  that  man ;  I 
^must,  I  will — ^I  will  punish  him."  Christ  comes  in,  puts  me 
aside,  and  stands  himself  in  my  stead.  When  the  plea  is  de- 
manded, Christ  says,  "  Guilty  ;"  takes  my  guilt  to  be  his  own 
guilt.  When  the  punishment  is  to  be  executed,  forth  comes 
Christ.  "  Punish  me,"  he  says  ;  "  I  have  put  my  righteous- 
ness on  that  man,  and  I  have  taken  that  man's  sins  on  me. 
Father,  punish  me,  and  consider  that  man  to  have  been  me. 
Let  him  reign  in  heaven  ;  let  me  suffer  misery.  Let  me  en- 
dure his  curse,  and  let  him  receive  my  blessing."  This  mar- 
velous doctrine  of  the  changing  of  places  of  Christ  with  poor 
sinners,  is  a  doctrine  of  revelation,  for  it  never  could  have 
been  conceived  by  nature.  Let  me,  lest  I  should  have  made 
a  mistake,  explain  myself  again.  The  way  whereby  God  saves 
a  sinner  is  not,  as  some  say,  by  passing  over  the  penalty.  No ; 
the  penalty  has  been  all  paid.  It  is  the  putting  of  another 
person  in  the  rebel's  place.  The  rebel  must  die ;  God  says  he 
must.  Christ  says,  "  I  will  be  substitute  for  the  rebel.  The 
rebel  shall  take  my  place  ;  I  will  take  his."  God  consents  to 
it.  No  earthly  monarch  could  have  power  to  consent  to  such 
a  change.  But  the  God  of  heaven  had  a  right  to  do  as  he 
pleased.  In  his  infinite  mercy  he  consented  to  the  arrange- 
ment. "  Son  of  my  love,"  said  he,  "  you  must  stand  in  the 
sinner's  place ;  you  must  suffer  what  he  ought  to  have  suf- 
fered ;  you  must  be  accounted  guilty,  just  as  he  was  accounted 
guilty ;  and  then  I  will  look  upon  the  sinner  in  another  light. 
I  will  look  at  him  as  if  he  were  Christ ;  I  will  accept  him 
as  if  he  were  my  only-begotten  Son,  full  of  grace  and  truth.    I 


JUSTIFICATION    BY    GRACE.  303 

will  give  liim  a  crown  in  heaven,  and  I  will  take  him  to  my 
heart  for  ever  and  ever."  This  is  the  way  we  are  saved  ; 
*' Being  justified  freely  by  his  grace,  through  the  redemption 
whi(}h  is  in  Christ  Jesus." 

And  now,  let  me  further  go  on  to  explain  some  of  the  cha- 
racteristics of  this  justification.  As  soon  as  a  repenting  sin- 
ner is  justified,  remember,  he  is  justified  for  all  his  sins.  Here 
stands  a  man  all  guilty;  The  moment  he  believes  in  Christ, 
his  pardon  at  once  he  receives,  and  his  sins  are  no  longer  his ; 
they  are  cast  into  the  depths  of  the  sea.  They  were  laid  upon 
the  shoulders  of  Christ,  and  they  are  gone.  The  man  stands 
a  guiltless  man  in  the  sight  of  God,  accepted  in  the  beloved. 
"  What !"  say  you,  "  do  you  mean  that  literally  ?"  Yes,  I 
do,  that  is  the  doctrine  of  justification  by  faith.  Man  ceases 
to  be  regarded  by  divine  justice  as  a  guilty  being ;  the  moment 
he  believes  in  Christ  his  guilt  is  all  taken  away.  But  I  am 
going  a  step  further.  The  moment  the  man  believes  in  Christ, 
he  ceases  to  be  guilty  in  God's  esteem ;  but  what  is  more,  he 
becomes  righteous,  he  becomes  meritorious ;  for,  in  the  mo- 
ment when  Christ  takes  his  sins  he  takes  Christ's  righteous- 
ness ;  so  that,  when  God  looks  upon  the  sinner  who  but  an 
hour  ago  w\as  dead  in  sins,  he  looks  upon  him  with  as  much 
love  and  affection  as  he  ever  looked  upon  his  Son.  He  him- 
self has  said  it — "  As  the  Father  loved  me,  so  have  I  loved 
you."  He  loves  us  as  much  as  his  Father  loved  him.  Can 
you  believe  such  a  doctrine  as  that  ?  Does  it  not  pass  all 
thought  ?  Well,  it  is  a  doctrine  of  the  Holy  Spirit ;  the  doc- 
trine whereby  we  must  hope  to  be  saved.  Can  I  to  any  un- 
enlightened person  illustrate  this  thought  better  ?  I  will  give 
him  the  parable  we  have  given  to  us  in  the  prophets — the 
parable  of  Joshua  the  high  priest.  Joshua  comes  in,  clothed 
in  filthy  garments,  those  filthy  garments  repsesenting  his  sins. 
Take  away  the  filthy  garments  ;  that  is  pardon.  Put  a  miter 
on  his  head  ;  clothe  him  in  royal  raiment ;  make  him  rich  and 
fair;  that  is  justification.  But  where  do  these  garments  come 
from  ?  and  where  do  those  rags  go  to  ?  Why,  the  rags  that 
Joshua  had  on  go  to  Christ,  and  the  garments  put  on  Joshua 
are  tlie  garments  that  Christ  wore.  The  sinner  and  Christ  do 
just  what  Jonathan  and  David  did.     Jonathan  put  his  robes 


304  JUSTIFICATION    B\     3JRACE. 

on  David,  David  gave  Jonathan  his  garments ;  so  Christ  takes 
our  sins,  we  take  Christ's  righteousness ;  and  it  is  by  a  glori- 
ous substitution  and  interchange  of  places  that  sinners  go  free 
and  are  justified  by  his  grace. 

"  But,"  says  one,  "  no  one  is  justified  like  that  till  he  dies." 
Believe  me,  he  is. 

"  The  moment  a  sinner  believes 
And  trusts  in  his  crucified  God, 
His  pardon  at  once  ho  receives ; 

Salvation  in  full,  through  his  blood." 

If  that  young  man  over  there  has  really  believed  in  Christ 
this  morning,  realizing  by  a  spiritual  experience  what  I  have 
attempted  to  describe,  he  is  as  much  justified  in  God's  sight 
now  as  he  will  be  when  he  stands  before  the  throne.  Not  the 
glorified  spirits  above  are  more  acceptable  to  God  than  the 
poor  man  below,  who  is  once  justified  by  grace.  It  is  a  per- 
fect washing,  it  is  perfect  pardon  ;  perfect  imputation  ;  we  are 
fully,  freely,  and  wholly  accepted,  through  Christ  our  Lord. 
Just  one  more  word  here,  and  then  I  will  leave  this  matter  of 
justification.  Those  who  are  once  justified  are  justified  irre- 
versibly. As  soon  as  a  sinner  takes  Christ's  place,  and  Christ 
takes  the  sinner's  place,  there  is  no  fear  of  a  second  change. 
If  Christ  has  once  paid  the  debt,  the  debt  is  paid,  and  it  w411 
never  be  asked  for  again ;  if  you  are  pardoned,  you  are  par- 
doned once  for  ever.  God  does  not  give  man  a  free  pardon 
under  his  own  sign-manual,  and  then  afterward  retract  it  and 
punish  man  :  that  be  far  from  God  so  to  do.  He  says,  "  I  have 
punished  Christ ;  you  may  go  free."  And  after  that  we  may 
"  rejoice  in  hope  of  the  glory  of  God,"  that  "being  justified 
by  faith  we  have  peace  with  God,  through  our  Lord  Jesua 
Christ."  And  now  I  hear  one  cry,  "  That  is  an  extraordinary 
doctrine."  Well,  so  some  may  think  ;  but  let  me  say  to  you, 
it  is  a  doctrine  professed  by  all  Protestant  churches,  though 
they  may  not  preach  it.  It  is  the  doctrine  of  the  Church 
of  England,  it  is  the  doctrine  of  Luther,  it  is  the  doctrine  of 
the  Presbyterian  church  ;  it  is  professedly  the  doctrine  of  ail 
Christian  churches  ;  and  if  it  seems  strange  in  your  ears,  it  is 
because  your  ears  are  estranged,  and  not  because  the  doctruie 
is  a  strange  one.     It  is  the  doctrine  of  holy  writ,  that  none 


JUSTIFICATION    BY    GRACE.  305 

can  condemn  whom  God  justifies,  and  that  none  can  accuse 
those  for  whom  Christ  hath  died  ;  for  they  are  totally  free 
from  sin.  So  that,  as  one  of  the  prophets  has  it,  God  sees  no 
sin  in  Jacob  nor  iniquity  in  Israel.  In  the  moment  they  be- 
lieve, their  sins  being  imputed  to  Christ,  they  cease  to  be 
theirg,  and  Christ's  righteousness  is  imputed  to  them  and 
accounted  theirs,  so  that  they  are  accepted. 

III.  And  now  I  close  up  with  the  third  point,  upon  which  1 
shall  be  brief,  and  I  hope  very  earnest :  the  manner  of  giv- 
ing THE  JUSTIFICATION.  Johii  Buuyan  wouW  have  it,  that 
there  are  some  whose  mouths  are  set  a  watering  for  this  great 
gift  of  justification.  Are  there  not  some  here  who  are  saying, 
"  O  !  if  I  could  be  justified  !  But,  sir,  can  I  be  justified  ?  I 
have  been  a  drunkard,  I  have  been  a  swearer,  I  have  been 
every  thing  that  is  vile.  Can  I  be  justified  ?  Will  Christ 
take  my  black  sins,  and  am  I  to  take  his  white  robes  ?"  Yes, 
poor  soul,  if  thou  desirest  it ;  if  God  has  made  thee  willing,  if 
thou  dost  confess  thy  sins,  Christ  is  willing  to  take  thy  rags, 
and  ^ive  thee  his  righteousness,  to  be  thine  for  ever.  "  Well, 
but  how  is  it  to  be  obtained?"  says  one ;  "  must  I  be  a  holy  man 
for  many  years,  and  then  get  it  ?"  Listen  !  "  Freely  by  his 
grace ;"  "  freely,"  because  there  is.  no  price  to  be  paid  for  it ; 
"  by  his  grace,"  because  it  is  not  of  our  deservings.  "  But, 
O  sir,  I  have  been  praying,  and  I  do  not  think  God  will  for- 
give me,  unless  I  do  something  to  deserve  it."  I  tell  you,  sir, 
if  you  bring  in  a^iy  of  your  deservings,  you  shall  never  have 
it.  God  gives  away  his  justification  freely ;  and  if  you  bring 
any  thing  to  pay  for  it,  he  will  throw  it  in  your  face,  and  will 
not  give  his  justification  to  you.  He  gives  it  away  freely.  Old 
Rowland  Hill  once  went  preaching  at  a  fair ;  he  noticed  the 
chapmen  selling  their  wares  by  auction  ;  so  Rowland  said,  "  I 
am  going  to  hold  an  auction  too,  to  sell  wine  and  milk,  with- 
out money  and  without  price.  My  friends  over  there,"  said 
he,  "  find  a  great  difficulty  to  get  you  up  to  their  price  ;  my 
difficulty  is  to  bring  you  down  to  mine."  So  it  is  with  men. 
If  I  could  preach  justification  to  be  bought  by  you  at  a  sov- 
ereign a  piece,  who  would  ^o  out  of  the  place  without  being 
justified?  If  I  could  preach  justification  to  you  by  walking 
a  hundred  miles,  '.yould  we  not  be  pilgrims  to-morrow  morn- 


30G  JUSTIFICATION   BY   GRACE. 

ing,  every  one  of  us  ?  If  I  were  to  preach  justification  which 
would  consist  in  whippings  and  torture,  there  are  very  few 
here  who  would  not  whip  themselves,  and  that  severely  too. 
But  when  it  is  freely,  freely,  freely,  men  turn  away.  "  What ! 
am  I  to  have  it  for  nothing  at  all,  without  doing  any  thing  ?" 
Yes,  sir,  you  are  to  have  it  for  nothing,  or  else  not  at  all ;  it 
is  "  freely."  "  But  may  I  not  go  to  Christ,  lay  some  claim  to 
his  mercy,  and  say,  Lord,  justify  me  because  I  am  not  so  bad 
as  others?"  It  will  not  do,  sir,  because  it  is  "  by  his  grace." 
"  But  may  I  not  indulge  a  hope,  because  I  go  to  church  twice 
a-day  ?"  No,  sir,  it  is  "  by  his  grace."  "  But  may  I  not  offer 
this  plea,  I  mean  to  be  better  ?"  ISTo,  sir ;  it  is  "  by  his  grace." 
You  insult  God  by  bringing  your  counterfeit  coin  to  pay  for 
his  treasures.  O  !  what  poor  ideas  men  have  of  the  value  of 
Christ's  gospel,  if  they  think  they  can  buy  it !  God  will  not 
have  your  rusty  farthings  to  buy  heaven  with.  A  rich  man 
once,  when  he  was  dying,  had  a  notion  that  he  could  buy  a 
place  in  heaven  by  building  a  row  of  alms-houses.  A  good 
man  stood  by  his  bedside,  and  said,  "  How  much  more  are 
you  going  to  leave  ?"  "  Twenty  thousand  pounds."  Said  he, 
"That  would  not  buy  enough  for  your  foot  to  stand  on  in 
heaven  ;  for  the  streets  are  all  made  of  gold  there,  and  there- 
fore of  what  value  can  your  gold  be  ?  it  would  be  accounted 
nothing  of,  when  the  very  streets  are  paved  with  it."  Nay, 
friends,  we  can  not  buy  heaven  with  gold  nor  good  works,  nor 
prayers,  nor  any  thing  in  the  world.  But  how  is  it  to  be  got  ? 
Why  it  is  to  be  got  for  asking  only.  As  many  of  us  as  know 
ourselves  to  be  sinners  may  have  Christ  for  asking  for  him. 
Do  you  know  that  you  want  Christ  ?  You  may  have  Christ ! 
"  Whosoever  will,  let  him  come  and  take  of  the  water  of  life 
freely."  But  if  you  cleave  to  your  own  notions,  and  say, 
"  No,  sir,  I  mean  to  do  a  great  many  good  things,  and  then  I 
will  believe  in  Christ."  Sir,  you  will  be  damned  if  you  hold 
by  such  delusions.  I  earnestly  warn  you.  You  can  not  be 
saved  so.  "  Well,  but  are  we  not  to  do  good  works  ?"  Cer- 
tainly you  are;  but  you  are  not  to  trust  in  them.  You  must 
trust  in  Christ  wholly,  and  then  do  good  works  afterward. 
"  But,"  says  one,  "  I  think  if  I  were  to  do  a  few  good  works, 
it  would  be  a  little  recommendation  when  I  came."     It  would 


JUSTIFICATION    BY    GRACE.  307 

not,  sir ;  they  would  be  no  recommendation  at  all.  Let  a 
beggar  come  to  your  house  in  white  kid  gloves,  and  say  he  is 
very  badly  off,  and  wants  some  charity ;  would  the  white  kid 
gloves  recommend  him  to  your  charity  ?  Would  a  good  new 
hat  that  he  has  been  buying  this  morning  recommend  him  to 
your  charity  ?  "  No,"  you  would  say,  "  you  are  a  miserable 
impostor ;  you  do  not  want  any  thing,  and  you  shall  not  have 
any  thing  either  !     Out  with  you !" 

The  best  livery  for  a  beggar  is  rags,  and  the  best  livery  for 
a  sinner  to  go  to  Christ  in,  is  for  him  to  go  just  as  he  is,  with 
nothing  but  sin  about  him.  "  But  no,'^  say  you,  "  I  must  be 
a  little  better,  and  then  I  think  Christ  will  save  me."  You 
can  not  get  any  better,  try  as  long  as  you  please.  And  be- 
sides— to  use  a  paradox — if  you  were  to  get  better,  you  would 
be  all  the  worse ;  for  the  worse  you  are,  the  better  to  come  to 
Christ.  If  you  are  all  unholy,  come  to  Christ;  if  you  feel  your 
sin,  and  renounce  it,  come  to  Christ ;  though  you  have  been 
the  most  debased  and  abandoned  soul,  come  to  Christ;  if  you 
feel  yourself  to  have  nothing  about  you  to  recommend  you, 
come  to  Christ. 

"  Yenture  on  him,  venture  wholly ; 
Let  no  other  trust  intrude." 

I  do  not  say  this  to  urge  any  man  to  continue  in  sin.  God 
forbid  !  If  you  continue  in  sin,  you  must  not  come  to  Christ ; 
you  can  not;  your  sins  will  hamper  you.  You  can  not  be 
chained  to  your  galley-oar — the  oar  of  your  sins — yet  come  to 
Christ,  and  be  a  free  man.  No,  sir,  it  is  repentance  ;  it  is  the 
immediate  leaving  off  the  sin.  But  mark  thee,  neither  re- 
pentance, nor  leaving  off  thy  sin,  can  save  thee.  It  is  Christ, 
Christ,  Chist — Christ  only. 

But  I  know  you  will  go  away,  many  of  you,  and  try  to  build 
up  your  own  Babel  tower,  to  go  to  heaven.  Some  of  you  will 
go  one  way  to  work,  and  some  another.  You  will  go  the 
ceremony  way :  you  will  lay  the  foundation  of  the  structure 
Avith  infant  baptism,  build  confirmation  on  it,  and  the  Lord's 
Supper.  "  I  shall  go  to  heaven,"  you  say ;  "  do  not  I  keep 
Good  Friday  and  Christmas-day?  I  am  a  better  man  than 
those  dissentei's.     I  am  a  most  extraordinary  man.     Do  I  not 


308  JUSTIFICATION   BY    GRACE. 

say  more  prayers  than  any  one  ?"  You  will  be  a  long  while 
going  up  that  treadmill  before  you  get  an  inch  higher.  That 
is  not  the  way  to  get  to  the  stars.  One  says,  "  I  will  go  and 
study  the  Bible,  and  believe  right  doctrine ;  and  I  have  no 
doubt  that  by  believing  right  doctrine"!  shall  be  saved."  In- 
deed you  will  not !  You  can  be  no  more  saved  by  believing 
right  doctrine  than  you  can  by  doing  right  actions.  "  There," 
says  another,  "I  like  that;  I  shall  go  and  believe  in  Christ, 
and  live  as  I  like."  Indeed  you  will  not !  For  if  you  believe 
in  Christ  he  will  not  let  you  live  as  your  flesh  liketh ;  by  his 
Spirit  he  will  constrain  you  to  mortify  its  affections  and  lusts. 
If  he  gives  you  the  grace  to  make  you  believe,  he  will  give  you 
the  grace  to  live  a  holy  life  afterward.  If  he  gives  you  faith, 
he  gives  you  good  works  afterward.  You  can  not  believe  in 
Christ,  unless  you  renounce  every  fault,  and  resolve  to  serve 
him  with  full  purpose  of  heart.  Methinks  at  last  I  hear  a  sin- 
ner say,  "  Is  that  the  only  door  ?  And  may  I  venture  through 
it  ?  Then  I  will.  But  I  do  not  quite  understand  you  ;  I  am 
something  like  poor  Tiff,  in  that  remarkable  book  'Dred.' 
They  talk  a  great  deal  about  a  door,  but  I  can  not  see  the 
door ;  they  talk  a  great  deal  about  the  way,  but  I  can  not  see 
the  way.  For  if  poor  Tiff  could  see  the  way,  he  would  take 
these  children  away  by  it.  They  talk  about  lighting,  but  I  do 
not  see  any  one  to  fight,  or  else  I  would  fight."  Let  me  ex- 
plain it  then.  I  find  in  the  Bible,  "  This  is  a  faithful  saying, 
and  worthy  of  all  acceptation,  that  Christ  Jesus  came  into  the 
world  to  save  sinners."  What  have  you  to  do,  but  to  believe 
this  and  trust  in  him  ?  You  will  never  be  disappointed  with 
such  a  faith  as  that.  Let  me  give  you  over  again  an  illustra- 
tion I  have  given  hundreds  of  times,  but  I  can  not  find  another 
so  good,  so  I  must  give  it  again.  Faith  is  something  like  this. 
There  is  a  story  told  of  a  captain  of  a  man-of-war,  whose  son — 
a  young  lad — was  very  fond  of  running  up  the  rigging  of  the 
ship ;  and  one  time,  running  after  a  monkey,  he  ran  up  the 
mast,  till  at  last  he  got  on  the  main-truck.  N'ow,  the  main- 
truck,  you  are  aware,  is  like  a  large  round  table  put  on  the 
mast,  so  that  when  the  boy  was  on  the  main-truck  there  was 
plenty  of  room  for  him  ;  but  the  difficulty  was — to  use  the  best 
explanation  I  can — that  he  could  not  reach  the  mast  that  was 


JUSTIFICATION   BY   GEACEn  300 

under  the  table ;  he  was  not  tall  enough  to  get  down  from  this 
main-truck,  reach  the  mast,  and  so  descend.  There  he  was  on 
the  main-truck ;  he  managed  to  get  up  there,  somehow  or 
other,  but  down  he  never  could  get.  His  father  saw  that,  and 
he  looked  up  in  horror  ;  what  was  he  to  do  ?  In  a  few  mo- 
ments his  son  would  fill  down,  and  be  dashed  to  pieces.  He 
tvas  clinging  to  the  main-truck  with  all  his  might,  but  in  a  little 
time  he  would  fall  down  on  the  deck,  and  there  he  would  be 
a  mangled  corpse.  The  captain  called  for  a  speaking-trumpet ; 
he  put  it  to  his  mouth,  and  shouted,  "  Boy,  the  next  time  the 
ship  lurches,  throw  yourself  into  the  sea."  It  was,  in  truth, 
his  only  way  of  escape  ;  he  might  be  picked  up  out  of  the  sea, 
but  he  could  not  be  rescued  if  he  fell  on  the  deck.  The  poor 
boy  looked  down  on  the  sea ;  it  was  a  long  way ;  he  could  not 
bear  the  idea  of  throwing  himself  into  the  roaring  current  be- 
neath him ;  he  thought  it  looked  angry  and  dangerous.  How 
could  he  cast  himself  down  into  it  ?  So  he  clung  to  the  main- 
truck  with  all  his  might,  though  there  was  no  doubt  that  he 
must  soon  let  go  and  perish.  The  father  called  for  a  gun,  and 
pointing  it  up  at  him,  said,  "  Boy,  the  next  time  the  ship 
lurches,  throw  yourself  into  the  sea,  or  I'll  shoot  you  !"  He 
knew  his  father  would  keep  his  word ;  the  ship  lurched  on  one 
side,  over  went  the  boy  splash  into  the  sea,  and  out  went 
brawny  arms  after  him  ;  the  sailors  rescued  him,  and  brought 
him  on  deck.  Now,  we,  like  the  boy,  are  in  a  position  of  ex- 
traordinary danger,  by  nature,  which  neither  you  nor  I  can 
possibly  escape  of  ourselves.  Unfortunately,  we  have  got 
some  good  works  of  our  own,  like  that  main-tiuck,  and  we 
cling  to  them  so  fondly  that  we  never  will  give  them  up. 
Christ  knows  that  unless  we  do  give  them  up,  we  shall  be 
dashed  to  pieces  at  last,  for  that  rotten  trust  must  ruin  us. 
He,  therefore,  says,  "  Sinner  let  go  thine  own  trust,  and  drop 
into  the  sea  of  my  love."  We  look  down,  and  say,  "  Can  I  be 
saved  by  trusting  in  God  ?  He  looks  as  if  he  were  angry  with 
me,  and  I  could  not  trust  him."  Ah !  will  not  mercy's  tender 
cry  persuade  you? — "He  that  believeth  shall  be  saved.'* 
Must  the  weapon  of  destruction  be  pointed  directly  at  you  ? 
Must  you  hear  the  dreadful  threat — "  He  that  believeth  not 
shall  be  damned?"     It  is  with  you  noio  as  with  that  boy; 


310  JUSTIFICATION    BY    GRACE. 

your  position  is  one  of  imminent  peril  in  itself,  and  your  slight- 
ing the  Father's  counsel  is  a  matter  of  niore  terrible  alarm,  it 
makes  peril  more  perilous.  You  must  do  it,  or  else  you 
perish  !  Let  go  your  hold !  That  is  faith  when  the  poor 
sinner  lets  go  his  hold,  drops  down,  and  so  is  saved ;  and  the 
very  thing  which  looks  as  if  it  would  destroy  him,  is  the  means 
of  his  being  saved.  O  !  believe  on  Christ,  poor  sinners ;  be- 
lieve on  Christ.  Ye  who  know  your  guilt  and  misery  come, 
cast  yourselves  upon  him ;  come,  and  trust  my  Master,  and  as 
he  lives,  before  whom  I  stand,  ye  shall  never  trust  him  in 
vain  ;  but  ye  shall  find  yourselves  forgiven,  and  go  your  way 
rejoicing  in  Christ  Jesus. 


SERMON    XXI. 

MANASSEH. 

•  Then  Manasseh  knew  that  the  Lord  he  was  God." — 2  Ohron.,  xxxiil  13. 

Manasseh  is  one  of  the  most  remarkable  characters  whose 
history  is  written  in  the  sacred  pages.  We  are  accustomed 
to  mention  his  name  in  the  hst  of  those  who  greatly  sinned, 
and  yet  found  great  mercy.  Side  by  side  with  Saul  of  Tar- 
sus, with  that  great  sinner  who  washed  the  feet  of  Jesus 
with  her  tears,  and  wiped  them  with  the  hairs  of  her  head, 
and  with  the  thief  that  died  upon  the  cross — a  forgiven  sin- 
ner at  the  eleventh  hour — we  are  wont  to  write  the  name  of 
Manasseh,  who  "  shed  innocent  blood  very  much,"  and  not- 
withstanding that,  was  forgiven  and  pardoned,  finding  mercy 
throuo;h  the  blood  of  a  Saviour  who  had  not  then  died,  but 
whom  God  foresaw  should  die,  and  the  merits  of  whose  sacri- 
fice he  therefore  imputed  to  so  great  a  transgressor  as  Ma- 
nasseh. 

Without  preface  we  shall  enter  on  the  history  of  Manasseh 
this  morning,  and  consider  him  in  a  threefold  light :  first,  as 
a  simier,  then  as  a7i  unbeliever^  and  thirdly,  as  a  convert.  It 
may  be  there  shall  be  some  Manasseh  within  these  walls  now; 
and  if  in  describing  the  case  of  this  ancient  king  of  Israel  I 
shall  in  some  degree  describe  him,  I  trust  he  will  take  to  him- 
self the  same  consoling  truths  which  were  the  means  of  the 
comfort  of  Manasseh  when  in  the  dungeon  of  repentance. 

I.  First,  then,  we  shall  consider  Manasseh  in  his  sin. 

1.  And  we  note,  first,  that  he  belonged  to  that  class  of  sin- 
ners who  stand  first  in  the  phalanx  of  evil — namely,  those 
who  sin  against  great  lights  against  a  pious  education  and 
early  training.     Manasseh  was  the  son  of  Hezekiah,  a  man 


312  MANASSEH. 

who  had  some  faults,  but  of  whom  it  is  nevertheless  said,  "  He 
did  right  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord."  To  a  great  degree  he 
walked  before  God  with  a  perfect  heart,  even  as  did  David 
his  father.  We  can  not  suppose  that  he  neglected  the  educa- 
tion of  his  son  Manasseh.  He  was  the  son  of  his  old  age.  You 
will  remember  that  at  a  time  of  heavy  sickness  God  promised 
him  that  he  should  have  his  life  prolonged  fifteen  years.  Three 
years  after  that  event  Manasseh  was  born,  and  he  was,  there- 
fore, only  twelve  years  old  when  his  father  died  ;  still  he  was 
old  enough  to  remember  the  pious  prayers  of  a  father  and  a 
mother,  and  had  arrived  at  sufficient  maturity  to  understand 
right  from  wrong,  and  to  have  received  those  early  impres- 
sions which  we  believe  are,  in  most  cases,  eminently  useful  for 
after  life.  And  yet  Manasseh  pulled  down  what  his  father  had 
built  up,  and  built  up  the  idol  temples  which  his  father  had 
pulled  down.  Now,  it  is  a  notorious  fact,  that  men  who  do  go 
wrong  after  a  good  training,  are  the  worst  men  in  the  world. 
You  may  not  know,  but  it  is  a  fact,  that  the  late  lamented 
murder  of  Williams  at  Erromanga,  was  brought  about  by  the 
evil  doings  of  a  trader  who  had  gone  to  the  island,  and  who 
was  also  the  son  of  a  missionary.  He  had  become  reckless  in 
his  habits,  and  treated  the  islanders  with  such  barbarity  and 
cruelty,  that  they  revenged  his  conduct  upon  the  next  white 
man  who  put  his  foot  on  their  shore ;  and  the  beloved  Wil- 
liams, one  of  the  last  of  the  martyrs,  died  a'  victim  of  the 
guilt  of  those  who  had  gone  before  him.  The  worst  of  men 
are  those  who,  having  much  light,  still  run  astray.  You  shall 
find  among  the  greatest  champions  of  the  camp  of  hell,  men 
who  were  brought  up  and  educated  in  our  very  ranks.  It  is 
not  necessary  that  I  should  mention  names ;  but  any  of  you 
that  are  acquainted  with  those  who  are  the  leaders  of  infidel- 
ity at  the  present  time  will  at  once  recognize  the  fact.  And 
such  men  actually  make  the  very  worst  of  infidels  ;  while  the 
best  of  Christians  often  come  from  the  very  worst  of  sinners. 
Our  John  Bunyans  have  come  from  the  pot-house  and  the  tap- 
room, from  the  bowling-alley,  or  places  lower  in  the  scale ; 
our  best  of  men  have  come  from  the  very  worst  of  places, 
and  have  been  the  best  adapted  to  reclaim  sinners,  because 
they  themselves  had  stepped  into  the  kennel,  and  had  never- 


MANASSEH.  313 

tbeless  been  washed  in  a  Saviour's  cleansing  blood.  And  so 
it  is  true  that  the  worst  of  the  enemies  of  Christ  are  those 
who  are  nourished  in  our  midst,  and  like  the  vipor  of  old, 
which  the  husbandman  nursed  in  his  bosom,  turn  round  to 
sting  the  bosom  which  has  nurtured  them.  Such  a  one  was 
Manasseh. 

2.  In  the  next  place,  Manasseh  as  a  sinner  was  a  very  hold 
one.  He  was  one  of  those  men  who  do  not  sin  covertly, 
but  who,  when  they  transgress,  do  not  seem  to  be  at  all 
ashamed,  who  are  born  with  brazen  foreheads,  and  lift  their 
faces  to  heaven  with  insolence  and  impudence.  He  was  a  man 
who,  if  he  would  set  up  an  idol,  as  you  would  see  by  reading 
this  chapter,  did  not  set  it  up  in  an  obscure  part  of  the  land, 
but  put  it  in  the  very  temple  of  God  ;  and  when  he  would 
desecrate  the  name  of  the  Most  High,  he  did  not  privily  go 
to  his  chapel,  where  he  might  Vv^orsliip  some  evil  deity,  but  he 
put  the  deity  into  the  very  temple  itself,  as  if  to  insult  God  to 
his  very  face.  He  was  a  desperado  in  sin,  and  went  to  the  ut- 
most limit  of  it,  being  very  bold,  and  desperately  set  on  mis- 
chief. Now,  whether  it  be  for  right  or  wrong,  boldness  is 
always  sure  to  win  the  day.  Give  me  a  coward — you  give 
me  nothing ;  give  me  a  bold  man,  and  you  give  me  one  that 
can  do  something,  whetlier  for  Christ's  cause  or  for  the  devil's. 
Manasseh  was  a  man  of  this  kind.  If  he  cursed  God,  it  was 
with  a  loud  voice ;  it  was  not  in  hole  or  corner,  but  upon  his 
throne,  that  he  issued  proclamations  against  the  Most  High, 
and  in  the  most  daring  manner  insulted  the  Lord  God  of 
Israel.  And  yet,  dear  friends,  this  man  was  saved,  notwith- 
standing all  this.  This  greatest  sinner,  this  man  who  had 
trampled  on  his  father's  prayers,  who  had  wiped  from  his 
brow  the  tears  which  had  been  shed  there  by  an  anxious 
parent,  who  had  stifled  the  convictions  of  his  conscience,  and 
had  gone  to  an  extremity  of  guilt,  in  bold,  open,  and  despe- 
rate sin,  yet  this  man  was  at  last,  by  divine  grace,  humbled 
and  brought  on  his  knees  to  acknowledge  that  God  was  God 
alone.  Let  no  man,  therefore,  despair  of  his  fellow.  I  never 
do,  since  I  think  and  hope  that  God  has  saved  me.  I  am  per- 
suaded that,  live  as  long  as  I  may,  I  shall  never  see  the  indi- 
vidual of  whom  I  can  say,  "  That  man  is  a  hopeless  case."     I 

14 


814  MANASSEH. 

may  peradventure  meet  with  the  person  who  has  been  so 
exhorted  and  so  warned,  and  has  so  put  off  all  the  sweet  woo- 
ings  of  his  conscience,  that  he  has  become  seared  and  hardened, 
and  consequently  apparently  hopeless  ;  but  I  shall  never  meet 
a  man  who  has  sinned  so  desperately  that  I  can  say  of  him  he 
never  can  be  saved.  Ah  !  no  ;  that  arm  of  mercy  which  was 
long  enough  to  save  me  is  long  enough  to  save  you  ;  and  if  he 
could  redeem  you  from  your  transgression,  assuredly  there  are 
none  sunk  lower  than  you  were,  and  th'erefore  you  may  be- 
lieve that  his  arm  of  mercy  can  reach  them.  Above  all,  let  no 
man  despair  of  himself.  Whilst  there  is  hfe  there  is  hope. 
Give  not  up  yourselves  into  Satan's  arms.  He  tells  you  that 
your  death-warrant  is  sealed,  that  your  doom  is  cast,  and  that 
you  never  can  be  saved.  Tell  him  to  his  face  that  he  is  a  liar, 
for  that  Jesus  Christ  "  is  able  to  save  unto  the  uttermost  them 
that  come  unto  God  by  him,  seeing  that  he  ever  liveth  to 
make  intercession  for  them." 

3.  Again,  Manasseh  was  a  sinner  of  that  peculiar  caste  which 
we  suspect  is  not  to  be  found  very  frequently.  He  was  one  of 
those  who  had  the  power  of  leading  others  to  a  very  large  ex- 
jsnt  astray  from  the  truth  and  religion  of  God.  He  was  a  king, 
find  had,  therefore,  great  influence ;  what  he  commanded  was 
done.  Among  the  rank  of  idolaters  Manasseh  stood  first,  and  it 
was  the  song  and  glory  of  the  false  priests  that  the  king  of  Ju- 
dah  was  on  the  side  of  the  gods  of  the  heathen.  He  was  the 
leader — the  first  man  in  the  battle.  When  the  troops  of  the 
ungodly  went  to  war  against  the  God  of  the  whole  earth, 
Manasseh  led  the  vanguard  and  cheered  them  on.  He  was 
their  great  Goliath,  challenging  all  the  armies  of  the  living 
God.  Many  among  the  wicked  stood  back  and  feared  the 
conflict ;  but  he  never  feared.  "  He  spake  and  it  was  done  ; 
he  commanded,  and  it  stood  fast ;"  and  therefore  he  was  bold 
and  arrogant  in  leading  others  astray.  There  are  some  such 
still  alive — men  not  content  with  treading  the  broad  road 
themselves,  but  seeking  to  entice  others  into  it.  And  O,  how 
active  they  are  in  their  efforts !  They  will  go  from  house  to 
house,  and  distribute  those  publications  which  are  impure  and 
polluting  ;  they  will  stand  in  our  streets  and  endeavor  to  draw 
around  them  the  young,  ay,  men  and  women  just  fresh  come 


MANASSEli.  315 

from  the  house  of  God,  or  going  to  God's  sanctuary,  to  tell 
them  that  dreary  story  tliat  there  is  no  God,  or  the  dismal 
falsehood  that  there  is  no  future,  but  that  we  must  all  die  like 
dogs  and  suffer  annihilation.  There  are  some  such  who  never 
seem  to  be  happy  unless  when  they  are  leading  others  astray. 
It  is  not  enough  for  them  to  go  alone  against  God,  but  they 
must  sin  in  company.  Like  the  woman  in  the  Proverbs,  they 
hunt  for  precious  life,  and  like  hounds  thirsting  for  blood,  they 
are  seeking  after  men  to  destroy  them.  Society  now  is  like 
Prometheus :  it  is,  to  a  great  extent,  bound  hand  and  foot  by 
the  very  customs  that  surround  it,  and  like  Prometheus,  we 
have  upon  us  the  winged  hound  of  hell  perpetually  tapping 
at  our  heart  and  swallowing  the  life-blood  of  our  spirit.  I 
mean  we  have  that  accursed  infidelity  which  seeks  to  lead 
men  from  God  and  drive  them  from  their  Maker.  But,  nev- 
ertheless, leaders  among  them  have  yet  been  saved.  Manas- 
seh,  the  leader  of  those  who  hated  God,  was  yet  humbled, 
and  made  to  love  the  Most  High. 

Do  you  ask  me  whether  such  cases  ever  occur  now  ?  I  an- 
swer, yes  they  do ;  too  rarely,  but  they  do  happen.  Yester- 
day I  received  something  which  cheered  my  heart  very  much, 
and  made  me  bless  my  God,  that  notwithstanding  all  oppo- 
sition, he  had  still  made  me  of  some  little  use  in  the  world.  I 
received  a  long  letter  from  a  certain  city,  from  one  who  has 
been  one  of  the  leaders  of  the  secular  society  in  that  place. 
The  writer  says,  "  I  purchased  one  of  the  pamphlets  entitled 
*  Who  is  this  Spurgeon  ?'  and  also  your  portrait  (or  a  portrait 
sold  as  yours)  for  3d.  I  brought  these  home,  and  exhibited 
them  in  my  shop  window.  I  was  induced  to  do  so  from  a  feel- 
ing of  derisive  pleasure.  The  title  of  the  pamphlet  is,  natu- 
rally, suggestive  of  caricature,  and  it  was  especially  to  incite 
that  impression  that  I  attached  it  to  your  portrait  and  placed 
it  in  my  window.  But  I  also  had  another  object  in  view.  I 
thought  by  its  attraction  to  improve  my  trade.  I  am  not  at 
all  in  the  book  or  paper  business,  which  rendered  its  exposure 
and  my  motive  the  more  conspicuous.  I  have  taken  it  down 
now  :  /  am  taken  doion  too.  *  *  *  I  had  bought  one  of 
your  sermons  of  an  old  infidel  a  day  or  two  previous.  In  that 
sermon  I  read  these  words  : — '  They  go  on  ;  that  step  is  safe 


516  MANASSEH. 

— they  take  it ;  the  next  is  safe — they  take  it ;  their  foot  hangs 
over  a  gulf  of  darkness.'  I  read  on,  but  the  word  darkness  stag- 
gered me.  It  was  all  dark  with  me.  '  True,  the  way  has  been 
safe  so  far,  but  I  am  lost  in  bewilderment.  No,  no,  no,  I  will  not 
risk  it.'  I  left  the  apartment  in  which  I  had  been  musing,  and 
as  I  did  so,  the  three  words, '  "Who  can  tell  ?'  seemed  to  be  whis- 
pered at  my  heart.  I  determined  not  to  let  another  Sunday  pass 
M'ithout  visiting  a  place  of  worship.  How  soon  my  soul  might 
be  required  of  me  I  knew  not,  but  felt  that  it  would  be  mean, 
base,  cowardly,  not  to  give  it  a  chance.  Ay,  my  associates  may 
laugh,  scoff,  deride,  call  me  coward,  turncoat,  I  will  do  an  act  of 
justice  to  my  soul.  I  went  to  the  chapel ;  I  was  just  stupefied 
with  awe.   What  could  I  want  there  ?   The  doorkeeper  opened 

his  eyes  wider,  and  involuntarily  demanded,   '  It's   Mr. 

isn't  it  ?'  'Yes,'  I  said, '  it  is.'  He  conducted  me  to  a  seat,  and 
afterward  biought  me  a  hymn-book.  I  was  fit  to  burst  with 
anguish.  '  jSTow,'  I  thought,  '  I  am  here,  if  it  be  the  house  of 
God,  heaven  grant  me  an  audience,  and  I  will  make  full  sur- 
"^'ender.  O  God,  show  me  some  token  by  which  I  may  know 
that  thou  art,  and  that  thou  wilt  in  no  wise  cast  out  the  vile 
deserter  who  has  ventured  to  seek  thy  face  and  thy  pardoning 
mercy.'  I  opened  the  hymn-book  to  divert  my  mind  from 
feelings  that  were  rending  me,  and  the  first  words  that  caught 
my  eyes  were, 

" '  Dark,  dark  indeed  the  grave  would  be, 
Had  we  no  light,  0  G-od,  from  thee.'  " 

After  giving  some  things  which  he  looks  upon  as  evidences  that 
he  is  a  true  convert  of  religion,  he  closes  up  by  saying,  "  O  sir, 
tell  this  to  the  poor  wretch  whose  pride,  like  mine,  has  made  him 
league  with  hell ;  tell  it  to  the  hesitating  and  to  the  timid  ;  tell 
it  to  the  cooling  Christian,  that  God  is  a  very  present  help  to 
all  that  are  in  need.  *  *  *  Think  of  the  poor  sinner  who 
may  never  look  upon  you  in  this  world,  but  who  will  live  to 
bless  and  pray  for  you  here,  and  long  to  meet  you  in  the  world 
exempt  from  sinful  doubts,  from  human  pride,  and  backsliding 
hearts."  Ah,  he  need  not  ask  my  forgiveness ;  I  am  happy,  too 
happy,  in  the  hope  of  calling  him  ''  brother"  in  the  Christian 
church.     This  letter  is  fi*om  a  place  many  miles  from  this  city, 


MANASSEH.  817 

and  fr::m  a  man  who  had  no  small  standing  among  the  ranks 
of  those  who  hate  Christ.  Ah !  there  have  been  Manassehs 
saved,  and  there  sliall  be  yet.  There  have  been  men  who 
hated  God,  who  have  leaped  for  joy,  and  said, 

"  I'm  forgiven,  I'm  forgiven, 
I'm  a  miracle  of  grace," 

and  have  kissed  the  very  feet  which  once  they  scorned  and 
scoffed,  and  could  not  bear  to  hear  the  mention  of. 

There  is  one  fact  concerning  JNUfciasseh  which  stamps  him  as 
being  a  very  prince  of  sinners,  namely  this  :  "  He  caused  his 
children  to  pass  through  the  tire  in  the  valley  of  the  son  of 
Hinnom,"  and  dedicated  his  sons  unto  Tophet.  This  was  a 
dreadful  sin ;  for  though  Manasseh  repented,  we  find  that  his 
son  Amon  followed  in  the  steps  of  his  father  in  his  wicked- 
ness but  not  in  his  righteousness.  Listen !  "  Amon  was  two- 
and-twenty  years  old  when  he  began  to  reign,  and  reigned  two 
years  in  Jerusalem.  But  he  did  that  which  was  evil  in  the  sight 
of  the  Lord,  as  did  Manasseh  his  father :  for  Amon  sacrificed 
unto  all  the  carved  images  which  Manasseh  his  father  had  made, 
and  served  them ;  and  humbled  not  himself  before  the  Lord,  as 
Manasseh  his  father  had  humbled  himself;  but  Amon  trespassed 
more  and  more."  Children  will  imitate  their  fathers  in  their 
vices,  seldom  in  their  repentance ;  if  parents  sin,  their  children 
will  follow  them,  without  much  doubt;  but  when  they  repent 
and  turn  to  God,  it  is  not  easy  to  lead  a  child  back  in  the  way 
which  it  has  once  forsaken.  Are  there  any  here,  who,  like 
that  ancient  Carthaginian,  have  dedicated  their  sons  to  the 
opposition  of  their  enemy.  You  remember  one  who  dedicated 
his  son  Hannibal  from  his  very  birth  to  be  the  everlasting  enemy 
of  the  Romans.  There  may  be  such  a  man  here,  who  has 
dedicated  his  offspring  to  Satan,  to  be  the  everlasting  enemy 
of  Christ's  gospel,  and  is  trying  to  train  up  and  tutor  him  in 
a  way  which  is  contrary  to  the  fear  of  the  Lord.  Is  such  a 
man  hopeless  ?  His  sin  is  dreadful,  his  state  is  dreary,  his 
ein  without  repentance  will  assuredly  damn  him  ;  but  so  long 
as  he  is  here,  we  still  will  preach  repentance  to  him,  knov^ing 
that  Manasseh  was  brought  to  know  God,  and  was  forgiven  all 
his  manifold  sins. 


318  MANASSEH. 

II.  The  second  aspect  in  which  we  are  to  regard  Manasseh 
is  as  an  unbeliever  ;  for  it  appears  that  Manasseh  did  not  be- 
lieve that  Jehovah  was  God  alone ;  he  was,  therefore,  a  be- 
liever in  false  gods,  but  an  unbeliever,  so  iar  as  the  truth  is 
concerned.  Now,  does  it  not  strike  you  at  the  outset,  that 
while  Manasseh  was  an  unbeliever  in  the  truth,  he  must  have 
been  a  very  credulous  person  to  believe  in  the  all  imaginary 
deities  of  the  heathen  ?  In  fact,  the  most  credulous  persons 
in  the  w^orld  are  unbelievers.  It  takes  ten  thousand  times 
more  faith  to  be  an  unbeliever  than  to  be  a  believer  in  revela- 
tion. One  man  comes  to  me  and  tells  me  I  am  credulous,  be- 
cause I  believe  in  a  great  First  Cause  who  created  the  heavens 
and  the  earth,  and  that  God  became  man  and  died  for  sin,  I 
tell  him  I  may  be,  and  no  doubt  am  very  credulous,  as  he  con- 
ceives credulity,  but  I  conceive  that  which  I  believe  is  in  per- 
fect consistency  with  my  reason,  and  I  therefore  receive  it. 
"  But,"  saith  he,  "  i"am  not  credulous — not  at  all."  Sir,  I  say, 
I  should  like  to  ask  you  one  thing.  You  do  not  believe  the 
w^orld  was  created  by  God?  "  No."  You  must  be  amazingly 
credulous,  then,  I  am  sure.  Do  you  think  this  Bible  exists 
without  being  made  ?  If  you  should  say  I  am  credulous  be- 
cause I  believe  it  had  a  printer  and  a  binder,  I  should  say  you 
were  infinitely  more  credulous,  if  you  assured  me  that  it 
was  made  at  all.  And  should  you  begin  to  tell  me  one  of 
your  theories  about  creation — that  atoms  floated  through 
space,  and  came  to  a  certain  shape,  I  should  resign  the  palm 
of  credulity  to  you.  You  believe,  perhaps,  moreover,  that 
man  came  to  be  in  this  world  through  the  improvement  of 
certain  creatures.  I  have  read,  you  say,  that  there  were 
certain  monads — that  these  monads  improved  themselves  until 
they  came  to  be  small  animalculae — that  afterward  they  grew 
into  fishes — that  these  fishes  wanted  to  fly,  and  then  wings 
grew — that  by-and-bye  they  wanted  to  crawl,  and  then  legs 
came,  and  they  became  lizards,  and  by  divers  steps  they  then 
became  monkeys,  and  then  the  monkeys  became  men,  and  you 
believe  yourself  to  be  cousin-german  to  an  ourang-outang. 
Now,  I  may  be  very  credulous,  but  really  not  so  credulous  as 
you  are.  I  may  believe  very  strange  things ;  I  may  believe  that, 
with  the  jaw-bone  of  an  ass,  Samson  slew  a  thousand  men ;  I 


MANiASSEH.  819 

may  believe  that  the  earth  was  drowned  with  water,  and  many 
other  strange  things,  as  you  call  them ;  but  as  for  your  creed, 
your  non-creed,  "  'tis  strange,  'tis  passing  strange,  'tis  wonder- 
ful," and  it  as  much  outvies  mine  in  creduUty,  if  I  be  credulous, 
as  an  ocean  outvies  a  drop.  It  requires  the  hardest  faith  in  the 
world  to  deny  the  Scriptures,  because  the  man,  in  his  secret 
heart,  knows  they  are  true,  and,  go  where  he  will,  something 
whispers  to  him,  "  You  may  be  wrong — perhaps  you  are," 
and  it  is  as  much  as  he  can  do,  to  say,  "  Lie  down,  con- 
science !  down  with  you ;  I  must  not  let  you  speak,  or  I  could 
not  deliver  my  lecture  to-morrow,  I  could  not  go  among  my 
friends,  I  could  not  go  to  such-and-such  a  club;  for  I  can 
not  afford  to  keep  a  conscience,  if  I  can  not  afford  to  keep  a 
God." 

And  now  let  me  tell  you  what  I  conceive  to  be  the  reasons 
why  Manasseh  was  an  unbeliever.  In  the  first  place,  I  con- 
ceive that  the  unlimited poicer  which  Manasseh  possessed  had 
a  very  great  tendency  to  make  him  a  disbeliever  in  God.  I 
should  not  wonder  if  an  autocrat — a  man  with  absolute  do- 
minion, should  deny  God ;  I  should  think  it  only  naturaL 
You  remember  that  memorable  speech  of  Napoleon's.  He 
was  told  that  man  proposed,  but  that  God  disposed.  "Ah  !" 
said  Napoleon,  "  I  propose  and  dispose  too ;"  and  therein  he 
arrogated  to  himself  the  very  supremacy  of  God.  We  do  not 
wondei'  at  it,  because  his  victories  had  so  speedily  succeeded 
^ach  other,  his  prowess  had  been  so  complete,  his  fame  so 
great,  and  his  power  over  his  subjects  so  absolute.  Power  al- 
ways, as  I  believe,  except  in  the  heart  which  is  rightly  gov- 
erned by  grace,  has  a  tendency  to  lead  us  to  deny  God.  It  is 
that  noble  intellect  of  such-and-such  a  man  which  has  led  hum 
into  discussion  ;  he  has  twice,  thrice,  four,  five,  six,  seven 
times,  come  off  more  than  conqueror  in  the  field  of  contro- 
versy ;  he  looks  round  and  says,  "  I  am,  there  is  none  beside 
me  ;  let  me  take  up  whatever  I  please,  I  can  defend  it ;  there 
is  no  man  can  stand  against  the  blade  of  my  intellect ;  I  can 
give  him  such  a  home  thrust  as  will  assuredly  overcome  him  ;" 
and  then,  like  Dr.  Johnson,  who  often  took  up  the  side  of  the 
question  he  did  not  believe,  just  because  he  liked  to  get  a  vic- 
tory that  was  hard  to  win,  so  do  these  men  espouse  what  they 


S20  MANASSEH. 

believe  to  be  wrong,  because  they  conceive  it  gives  thera  the 
finest  opportunity  of  displaying  -their  abilities.  "  Let  me," 
says  some  mighty  intellect,  "  fight  with  a  Christian  ;  I  shall 
have  hard  enough  work  to  prove  my  thesis,  I  know  I  shall 
have  a  great  difficulty  to  undermine  the  bastions  of  truth 
which  he  opposes  to  bear  against  me  ;  so  much  the  better  ;  it 
were  worth  while  to  be  conquered  by  so  stout  an  opposition, 
and  if  I  can  overcome  my  antagonist,  if  I  can  prove  myself  to 
have  more  logic  than  he  has,  then  I  can  say,  His  glorious  ;  'tis 
glorious  to  have  fought  against  an  opponent  with  so  much  on 
his  side,  and  yet  to  have  come  off  more  than  conqueror."  I 
do  believe  the  best  man  in  the  world  is  very  hard  to  be 
trusted  with  power ;  he  will,  unless  grace  keeps  him,  make  a 
wrong  use  of  it  before  long.  Hence  it  is  that  the  most  influ- 
ential of  God's  servants  are  almost  invariably  the  most  tried 
ones,  because  our  heavenly  Father  knows  that  if  it  were  not 
for  great  trials  and  afflictions  we  should  begin  to  set  ourselves 
up  against  him,  and  arrogate  to  ourselves  a  glory  which  we 
had  no  right  to  claim. 

But  another  reason  why  Manasseh  was  an  unbeliever,  I 
take  it,  was  because  he  loas  proud.  Pride  lieth  at  the  root  of 
infidelity;  j^ride  is  the  very  germ  of  opposition  to  God.  The 
man  saith,  "  Why  should  I  believe  ?  The  Sunday-school 
child  reads  his  Bible,  and  says  it  is  true.  Am  I,  a  man  of  in- 
tellect, to  sit  side  by  side  with  him,  and  receive  a  thing  as 
true  simply  at  the  dictum  of  God's  Word  ?  Xo,  I  will  not ; 
I  will  find  it  out  for  myself,  and  I  will  not  believe  simply  be- 
cause it  is  revealed  to  me,  for  that  were  to  make  myself  a 
child."  And  when  he  turns  to  the  page  of  revelation,  and 
reads  thus,  "  Except  ye  be  converted  and  become  as  little 
children,  ye  can  in  nowise  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven," 
he  says,  "  Pshaw !  I  shall  not  be  converted  then ;  I  am  not 
going  to  be  a  child ;  I  am  a  man,  and  a  man  I  will  be,  and  I 
would  rather  be  lost  a  man  than  saved  a  child.  What !  am  I 
to  surrender  my  judgment,  and  sit  down  tacitly  to  beheve  in 
God's  Word  ?"  "  Yes,"  says  God's  Word,  "  thou  art  ;  thou 
art  to  become  as  a  child,  and  meekly  to  receive  my  Word." 
"  Then,"  says  he,  in  his  arrogance  and  pride,  "  I  mil  not," 
and  like  Satan,  he  declares  it  were  better  to  rule  in  hell  than 


MANASSEH.  321 

serve  in  heaven,  and  he  goes  away  an  nnbeliever,  because  to 
believe  is  too  humblinor  a  thinsj. 

But  perhaps  the  most  potent  reason  for  Manasseh's  unbelief 
lies  here  that  he  loved  sin  too  toell.  When  Manasseh  built 
the  altars  for  his  false  gods,  he  could  sin  easily,  and  keep  his 
conscience  ;  but  he  felt  Jehovah's  laws  so  stringent,  that  if  he 
once  believed  in  the  one  God  he  could  not  sin  as  he  did.  He 
read  it  thus  :  "  Remember  the  Sabbath-day  to  keep  it  holy  ; 
thou  shalt  not  kill ;  thou  shalt  not  steal ;"  and  so  on.  Manas- 
seh wanted  to  do  all  these  things,  and  therefore  he  would  not 
believe  because  he  could  not  believe  and  keep  his  sin.  The 
very  reason  why  we  have  much  unbelief  is  because  we  have 
much  love  of  sin.  Men  will  have  no  God,  because  God  inter- 
feres with  their  lusts.  They  could  not  go  on  in  their  sins,  if 
they  once  believed  there  was  an  everlasting  God  above  them, 
or  professed  to  believe  it,  for  all  do  believe  it,  whether  they 
say  so  or  not;  and  because  the  thought  of  God  checks  them 
in  their  impiety  and  their  lust,  therefore  they  cry  out,  "  There 
is  no  God,"  and  say  it  with  their  lips  as  well  as  in  their  hearts. 
I  believe  it  was  this  that  led  Manasseh  to  persecute  the  saints 
of  God  ;  for  among  his  sins  it  is  written,  "  he  shed  innocent 
blood  very  much."  It  is  a  tradition  among  the  Jews  that  the 
prophet  Isaiah  was  sawn  in  sunder  by  Manasseh,  on  account 
of  a  rebuke  which  he  gave  him  for  his  sin.  Isaiah  was  not 
wont  to  be  very  timid,  and  he  told  the  king  of  his  lusts,  and 
therefore  placing  him  between  two  planks,  he  cut  him  in  sun- 
der from  head  to  foot.  It  is  just  the  reason  why  men  hate 
God,  and  hate  his  servants,  because  the  truth  is  too  hot  for 
them.  Send  you  a  preacher  who  would  not  tell  you  of  your 
sins,  and  you  would  hear  him  peaceably  ;  but  when  the  gospel 
comes  with  power,  then  it  is  that  men  can  not  bear  it ;  when 
it  trenches  upon  that  pleasure,  that  sin,  or  that  lust,  then  they 
will  not  believe  it.  Ye  would  believe  the  gospel,  if  ye  could 
believe  it  and  live  in  your  sins  too.  O  !  how  many  a  drunken 
reprobate  would  be  a  Christian,  if  he  might  be  a  drunkard 
and  a  Christian  too  !  How  many  a  wicked  wretch  would  turn 
behever,  if  he  might  believe  and  yet  go  on  in  his  sins  !  But 
because  faith  in  the  everlasting  God  can  never  stand  side  by 
side  with  sin,  ar,d  because  the  gospel  cries,  "  Down  with  it  I 


822  MANASSEH. 

down  with  it !  down  with  your  sin,"  therefore  it  is  that  men 
turn  round  and  say,  "  Down  with  the  gospel."  It  is  too  hot 
for  you,  O  ye  sinful  generation  ;  therefore  ye  turn  aside  from 
it,  because  it  will  not  tolerate  your  lusts,  nor  indulge  your  in- 
iquity. 

III.  We  look,  then,  at  Manasseh  as  an  unbeliever,  and  now 
we  have  our  last  most  pleasing  task  of  looking  at  Manasseh  as 
A  CONVERT.  Hear  it,  O  heavens,  and  listen,  O  earth!  The 
Lord  God  hath  said  it.  Manasseh  shall  be  saved.  He 
on  his  throne  of  cruelty  has  just  appended  his  name  to  an- 
other murderous  edict  against  the  saints  of  God ;  yet  he  shall 
be  humbled  ;  he  shall  ask  for  mercy  and  shall  be  saved.  Ma- 
nasseh hears  the  decree  of  God  ;  he  laughs.  "  What  I  I  play 
the  hypocrite,  and  bend  my  knee  ?  Never  !  It  is  not  possi- 
ble ;  and  when  the  godly  hear  of  it,  they  all  say,  '  It  is  not 
possible.'  What !  Saul  among  the  prophets  ?  Manasseh  re- 
generated ?  Manasseh  made  to  bow  before  the  Most  High  ? 
The  thing  is  impossible."  Ah !  it  is  impossible  with  man,  but 
it  is  possible  with  God ;  God  knows  how  to  do  it.  The  ene- 
my is  at  the  gates  of  the  city  ;  a  hostile  king  has  just  be- 
sieged the  walls  of  Jerusalem  ;  Manasseh  flees  from  his  palace 
and  hides  himself  among  the  thorns  ;  he  is  there  taken,  carried 
captive  to  Babylon,  and  shut  up  in  prison.  And  now  we  see 
what  God  can  do.  The  proud  king  is  proud  no  longer,  for  he 
has  lost  his  power  ;  the  mighty  man  is  mighty  no  more,  for  his 
might  is  taken  from  him  ;  and  now  in  a  low  dungeon  listen  to 
him.  It  is  no  more  the  blasphemer,  no  more  the  hater  of 
God  ;  bat  see  him  cold  on  the  floor  !  Manasseh  bows  his 
knee,  and  with  the  tears  rolling  down  his  cheeks,  he  cries,  "  O 
God !  niy  father's  God  !  an  outcast  comes  to  thee  ;  a  hell- 
hound stained  with  blood  throws  himself  at  thy  feet ;  I,  a  very 
demon,  full  of  filthiness,  now  prostrate  myself  before  thee!  O 
my  God,  canst  thou,  wilt  thou  have  mercy  on  such  a  wretch 
as  I  ?"  Hear  it,  ye  heavens !  Listen  yet  again.  See,  from 
the  skies  the  angel  flies  with  mercy  in  his  hand.  Ah  !  whither 
speeds  he  ?  It  is  to  the  dungeon  of  Babylon.  The  proud 
king  is  on  his  knee,  and  mercy  comes  and  whispers  in  his  ear 
— "  Hope  !"  He  starts  from  his  knees,  and  cries,  "  Is  there 
hope  ?"     And  down  he  falls  again.     Once  more  he  pleads,  and 


MANASSEH.  323 

mercy  whispers  that  sweet  promise,  uttered  once  by  the  mur- 
dered Isaiah — "  I,  even  I,  am  he  that  blotteth  out  thy  trans- 
gressions for  my  name's  sake,  and  will  not  remember  thy 
sins."  O  !  do  you  see  him  ?  His  very  heart  is  running  over 
in  his  eyes.  O !  how  he  weeps  for  joy,  and  yet  for  sorrow 
that  he  ever  could  have  sinned  against  a  God  so  kind.  A  mo- 
ment more,  and  the  dungeon  is  opened  ;  the  king  of  Babylon, 
moved  by  God,  bids  him  go  free,  and  he  returns  to  his  king- 
dom and  throne,  a  happier  and  a  better  man  than  he  had  ever 
been  before.  I  think  I  see  him  coming  into  Jerusalem.  Thert 
are  his  statesmen  and  favorites,  crying  to  him,  "  Come  in,  Ma- 
nasseh ;  the  bowl  shall  be  filled,  and  we  will  have  a  merry 
night  to-night ;  we  will  bow  before  the  shrine  of  Ashtaroth, 
and  thank  her  that  she  has  set  thee  at  liberty  ;  lo,  the  horses 
of  the  sun  are  ready ;  come  and  pay  thy  devotions  to  him 
that  shines  on  the  earth,  and  leads  the  host  of  heaven  !"  Me- 
thinks  I  see  their  astonishment  when  he  cries,  "  Stand  back ! 
stand  back !  ye  are  my  friends  no  longer,  until  ye  become 
God's  friends ;  I  have  dandled  you  on  my  knees,  and,  vipers, 
you  have  stung  me  with  the  poison  of  asps  ;  I  made  you  my 
friends,  and  you  have  led  nje  down  to  the  gulf  of  hell.  But  I 
know  it  now.  Stand  back  till  ye  are  better  men  ;  and  I  will 
find  others  to  be  my  courtiers."  And  there  the  poor  saints, 
hidden  in  the  back  streets  of  the  city,  so  frightened  because 
the  king  has  come  back,  are  holding  meetings  of  solemn 
prayer,  crying  unto  God  that  no  more  murderous,  persecut- 
ing edicts  might  go  forth.  And  lo,  a  messenger  comes  and 
says,  "  The  king  is  returned  ;"  and  while  they  are  looking  at 
him,  wondering  what  th^  messenger  is  about  to  say,  he  adds, 
*'  He  has  returned,  not  Manasseh  as  he  went,  but  as  a  very 
angel.  I  saw  him  with  his  own  hands  dash  Ashtaroth  in 
pieces ;  I  heard  him  cry,  '  The  horses  of  the  sun  shall  be 
hoofed ;  sweep  out  the  house  of  God ;  we  will  hold  a  pass- 
over  there ;  the  morning  and  evening  lamb  shall  again  burn 
on  Jehovah's  altars,  for  he  is  God,  and  beside  him  there  is 
none  else.'"  O  !  can  you  conceive  the  joy  of  believers  on  that 
auspicious  day  ?  Can  you  think  how  they  went  up  to  God's 
house  with  joy  and  thanksgiving  ?  And  on  tlie  next  Sabbath 
they  sung,  as  tUey  ^^ad  never  sung  before,  "  O  come  let  us 


324  MANASSEH. 

Bing  unto  the  Lord,  let  us  make  a  joyful  noise  unto  the  rock 
of  our  salvation,"  while  they  remembered  that  he  who  had 
persecuted  the  saints  of  God  aforetime,  now  defended  that 
very  truth  which  once  he  abhorred.  There  was  joy  on  earth, 
ay,  and  there  was  joy  in  heaven  too  ;  the  bells  of  heaven  rang 
merry  peals  the  day  Manasseh  prayed  ;  the  angels  of  heaven 
flapped  their  wings  with  double  alacrity  the  day  Manasseh  re- 
pented ;  earth  and  heaven  were  glad,  and  even  the  Almighty 
on  his  throne  smiled  gracious  approbation,  while  he  again  said, 
"  I,  even  I,  am  he  that  blotteth  out  thy  transgressions  for  my 
name's  sake,  and  will  not  remember  thy  sins." 

And  now  are  you  curious  to  know  what  were  the  bases  of  the 
faith  of  Manasseh — what  were  the  rocks  on  which  he  built  his 
trust  in  God  ?  I  think  they  were  two.  He  believed  in  God, 
first,  because  he  had  answered  his  prayer  /  and  secondly,  56- 
cause  he  had  fbrgiuen  his  sin.  I  have  sometimes  said,  when 
I  have  become  the  prey  of  doubting  thoughts,  "  Well,  now  I 
dare  not  doubt  whether  there  be  a  God,  for  I  can  look  back 
in  my  diary  and  say,  on  such  a  day  in  the  depths  of  trouble  I 
bent  my  knee  to  God,  and  or  ever  I  had  risen  from  my  knees 
the  answer  was  given  me."  And  so  can  many  of  you  say;  and 
therefore  whatever  others  may  say,  you  know  there  is  a  God, 
because  he  answered  your  prayer.  You  heard  of  that  holy 
man,  Mr.  Mtiller,  of  Bristol.  If  you  were  to  tell  George  Mill- 
ler  there  Avas  not  a  God,  he  would  weep  over  you.  "  Not  a 
God?"  he  would  say;  "  why,  I  have  seen  his  hand.  Whence 
came  those  answers  to  my  prayers  ?"  Ah  !  sirs,  ye  may  laugh 
at  us  for  credulity ;  but  there  are  hundreds  here  who  could 
most  solemnly  assert  that  they  havg  asked  of  God  for  divers 
matters,  and  that  God  has  not  failed  them,  but  granted  their 
request.  This  was  one  reason  why  Manasseh  knew  that  the 
Lord  he  was  God. 

The  other  reason  was,  that  Manasseh  had  a  sense  of  par- 
doned sin.  Ah !  that  is  a  delightful  proof  of  the  existence  of 
a  God.  Here  comes  a  poor  miserable  wretch :  his  knees  are 
knocking  together,  his  heart  is  sinking  within  him,  he  is  giving 
himself  up  to  despair.  Bring  th-e  physicians  to  him  !  they  cry, 
"  We  fear  his  mind  is  infirm.  We  believe  he  will  at  last  have 
to  be  taken  to  some  lunatic  asylum ;"  and  they  apply  theii 


MANASSEH.  325 

remedies,  but  he  is  none  the  better,  but  rather  grows  worse. 
On  a  sudden  this  poor  creature,  afflicted  with  a  sense  of  sin, 
groaning  on  account  of  guilt,  is  brought  within  the  sound  of 
the  sacred  Word ;  he  hears  it — it  increases  his  misery  ;  he 
hears  again — his  pain  becomes  doubled  ;  till  at  last  every  one 
says  his  case  is  utterly  hopeless.  Suddenly,  on  a  happy  morn- 
ing which  God  had  ordained,  the  minister  is  led  to  some  sweet 
passage.  Perhaps  it  is  this  :  "  Come  now,  and  let  us  reason 
together ;  though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet,  they  shall  be  white 
as  snow ;  though  they  be  red  like  crimson,  they  shall  be  as 
wool."  The  Spirit  applies  it,  and  the  poor  man  goes  home 
light  as  air,  and  says  to  his  wife  and  children,  "  Come  rejoice 
with  me."  "  Why  ?"  say  they.  "  Because,"  says  he,  "  ray  sins 
are  forgiven."  "How  do  you  know  that?"  "O!"  says  he, 
"  I  have  a  sense  of  pardoning  love  within  ray  heart,  which  all 
the  doubters  in  the  world  could  not  gainsay  ;  and  if  all  the  earth 
should  rise  up  against  me  and  say  I  should  be  condemned,  I 
could  say,  'I  know  there  is  now  no  condemnation  for  me.'" 
Have  you  ever  felt  pardoning  blood  applied  ?  You  will  never 
doubt  God,  I  know,  if  you  have.  Why,  dear  friends,  if  the 
poorest  old  woman  in  the  world  should  be  brought  before  an 
infidel  of  the  wisest  order,  having  a  mind  of  the  greatest  cal- 
iber, and  he  should  endeavor  to  pervert  her,  I  think  I  see  her 
smile  at  him,  and  say,  "  My  good  man,  it  is  of  no  use  at  all, 
for  the  Lord  has  appeared  unto  me  of  old,  saying,  'Yea  I  have 
loved  thee  with  an  everlasting  love,'  and  so  you  may  tell  nie 
what  you  please :  I  have  had  a  sense  of  blood-bought  pardon 
shed  abroad  in  my  heart,  and  I  know  that  he  is  God,  and  you 
can  never  beat  it  out  of  me."  As  good  Watts  says,  when  we 
have  once  such  an  assurance  as  that, 

"  Should  all  the  forms  that  men  devise 
Assault  my  faith  with  treacherous  art, 
I'd  call  them  vanity  and  lies, 

A.nd  bind  the  gospel  to  my  heart." 

O  !  if  you  have  a  sense  that  sin  is  forgiven,  you  can  never 
doubt  the  existence  of  a  God ;  for  it  will  be  said  of  you, 
"  Then  he  knew  that  the  Lord  he  was  God." 

And  now  1  gather  up  m}  strength  for  just  one  moment,  to 


326  MANASSEH. 

speak  to  those  of  you  who  desire  to  know  what  you  must  do 
to  be  saved.  My  hearer,  no  question  can  be  more  important 
than  that ;  none  is  so  requisite  to  ask.  Alas !  there  are  too 
many  who  never  ask  it,  but  who  go  sailing  down  to  the  gulf 
of  black  despair,  listening  to  the  syren  song  of  procrastination 
and  delay.  Bu'.  if  you  have  been  brought  to  ask  the  question 
solemnly  and  st.riously,  "  What  must  I  do  to  be  saved  ?  "I 
am  happy,  thrice  happy  to  be  able  to  tell  you  God's  own  word, 
"  He  that  believeth  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  and  is  baptized, 
shall  he  saved ;  he  that  believeth  not,"  the  Scripture  saith, 
"  shall  be  damned."  "  Not  of  works,  lest  any  man  should 
boast."  "But  sir,"  you  say,  "I  have  many  good  works,  and 
would  trust  in  them."  If  you  do,  you  are  a  lost  man.  As  old 
Matthew  Wilks  most  quaintly  said  once,  speaking  in  his  usual 
tone — "  You  might  as  well  try  to  sail  to  America  in  a  paper 
boat,  as  to  go  to  heaven  by  your  own  works;  you  will  be 
swamped  on  the  passage  if  you  attempt  it."  We  can  not  spin 
a  robe  that  is  long  enough  to  cover  us ;  we  can  not  make  a 
righteousness  that,  is  good  enough  to  satisfy  God.  If  you 
would  be  saved,  it  must  be  through  what  Christ  did,  and  not 
what  you  did.  You  can  not  be  your  own  Saviour ;  Christ  must 
save  you,  if  you  are  saved  at  all.  How  then  can  you  be  saved 
by  Christ  ?  Here  is  the  plan  of  salvation.  It  is  written — 
"  This  is  a  faithful  saying,  and  worthy  of  all  acceptation,  that 
Christ  Jesus  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners."  Do  you 
feel  that  you  are  a  sinner  ?  Then  believe  that  Jesus  Christ 
came  to  save  you ;  for  so  sure  as  ever  you  feel  you  are  a  sin- 
ner, it  is  a  fact  that  Christ  died  for  you ;  and  if  he  died  for 
you,  you  shall  not  perish,  for  I  can  not  conceive  that  Christ 
would  die  in  vain.  If  he  did  die  for  you,  you  shall  most  assur- 
edly be  pardoned  and  saved,  and  shall  one  day  sing  in  heaven. 
The  only  question  is.  Did  he  die  for  you?  He  most  certainly 
did  if  you  are  a  sinner  ;  for  it  is  written — I  will  repeat  it  again 
— "  It  is  a  faithful  saying,  that  Christ  Jesus  came  to  save  sin- 
ners." Poor  sinner,  believe  !  My  dear  friend,  give  me  thine 
hand  !  I  wish  I  could  put  it  inside  Christ's  hand.  O  !  embrace 
him'  embrace  him!  lest  haply  the  clouds  of  night  should 
come  upon  ttee,  and  the  sun  should  set  ere  thou  hast  found 
him.     O  !  lay  hold  on  him,  lest  death  and  destruction  should 


MANASSEH.  32? 

avertake  thee ;  fly  to  this  mountain,  lest  thou  be  consumed ; 
and  remember,  once  in  Christ,  thou  art  safe  beyond  hazard. 

"  Once  in  Christ,  in  Christ  for  ever, 
Nothing  from  his  love  can  sever." 

O !  believe  him !  believe  him,  my  dear,  dear  nearers  for  Jesus 
sake !     Amen. 


SERMON    XXII. 

WHY    ARE    MEN    SAVED? 

Nevertheless  he  saved  them  for  his  name's  sake." — Psalm  cvi.  8. 

In  looking  upon  the  works  of  God  in  creation,  there  are  two 
questions  which  at  once  occur  to  the  thoughtful  mind,  and 
which  must  be  answered  before  we  can  procure  a  clew  to  the 
philosophy  and  science  of  creation  itself.  The  first  one  is  the 
question  of  authorship  :  "  Who  made  all  these  things  ?"  And 
the  next  question  is  that  of  design  :  "  For  what  purpose  were 
all  these  things  created  ?"  The  first  question,  "  Who  made  all 
these  things  ?"  is  one  which  is  easily  answered  by  a  man  who 
has  an  honest  conscience  and  a  sane  mind ;  for  when  he  lifts 
his  eyes  up  yonder  to  read  the  stars,  he  will  see  ■  those  stars 
spell  out  in  golden  letters  this  word — God ;  and  when  he  looks 
below  upon  the  waves,  if  his  ears  are  honestly  opened,  he  will 
hear  each  wave  proclaiming — God.  If  he  looks  to  the  summits 
of  the  mountains,  they  will  not  speak,  but  with  a  dignified 
answer  of  silence  they  seem  to  say, 

"  The  hand  that  made  us  is  divine." 

If  we  listen  to  the  rippling  of  the  freshet  at  the  mountain  side, 
to  the  tumbling  of  the  avalanche,  to  the  lowing  of  the  cattle, 
to  the  singing  of  the  birds,  to  every  voice  and  sound  of  nature, 
we  shall  hear  this  answer  to  the  question,  "  God  is  our  maker ; 
he  hath  made  us,  and  not  we  ourselves." 

The  next  question,  as  to  design — "  Why  were  these  things 
made  ?" — is  not  so  easy  to  answer  apart  from  Scripture  ;  but 
when  we  look  at  Scripture  we  discover  this  fact — that  as  the 
answer  to  the  first  question  is  God,  so  the  answer  to  the  second 
question  is  the  same.  Why  were  these  things  made  ?  The 
answer  is,  for  God's  glory,  for  his  honor,  and  for  his  j^leasura 


WHY    ARE   MEN   SAVED!  329 

No  other  answer  can  be  consistent  with  reason.  Whatever 
other  replies  man  may  propound,  no  other  can  be  really  sound. 
If  they  will  for  one  moment  consider  that  there  was  a  time 
when  God  had  no  creatures — when  he  dwelt  alone,  the  mighty 
maker  of  ages,  glorious  in  an  uncreated  solitude,  divine  in  his 
eternal  loneliness — "  I  am  and  there  is  none  beside  me" — can 
any  one  answer  this  question — Why  did  God  make  creatures 
to  exist  ? — in  any  other  way  than  by  answering  it  thus :  "  He 
made  them  for  his  own  pleasure  and  for  his  own  glory  ?"  You 
may  say  he  made  them  for  his  creatures ;  but  we  answer,  there 
were  then  no  creatures  to  make  them  for.  We  admit  that  the 
answer  may  be  a  sound  one  oiow.  God  makes  the  harvest  for 
his  creatures ;  he  hangs  the  sun  in  the  firmament  to  bless  his 
creatures  with  light  and  sunshine  ;  he  bids  the  moon  walk  in 
her  course  by  night,  to  cheer  the  darkness  of  his  creatures 
upon  earth.  But  the  first  answer,  going  back  to  the  origin  of 
all  things,  can  be  nothing  else  than  this :  "  For  his  pleasure 
they  are  and  were  created."  "  He  made  all  things  for  himself 
and  by  himself." 

Now,  this  which  holds  good  in  the  works  of  creation,  holds 
equally  good  in  the  works  of  salvation.  Lift  up  your  eyes  on 
high  ;  higher  than  those  stars  which  glimmer  on  the  floor  of 
lieaven  ;  look  up,  where  spirits  in  white,  clearer  than  light, 
shine  like  stars  in  their  magnificence ;  look  there,  where  the 
redeemed  with  their  choral  symphonies  "  circle  the  throne  of 
God  rejoicing,"  and  put  this  question  :  "  Who  saved  those 
glorified  beings,  and  for  what  purpose  were  they  saved?" 
We  tell  you  that  the  same  answer  must  be  given  as  we  have 
previously  given  to  the  former  question — "^  saved  them ;" 
"  he  saved  them  for  his  name's  sake."  The  text  is  an  answer 
to  the  two  great  questions  concerning  salvation  :  Who  saved 
men,  and  Avhy  are  they  saved  ?  "  He  saved  them  for  his 
name's  sake." 

Into  this  subject  I  shall  endeavor  to  look  this  morning.  May 
God  make  it  profitable  to  each  of  us,  and  may  Ave  be  found 
among  the  number  who  shall  be  saved  "  for  his  name's  sake." 
Treating  the  text  verbally — and  that  is  the  way  most  will  un- 
derstand— here  are  four  things.  First,  a  glorious  Saviour — 
''He  saved  them  ;"  secondly,    i  favored  people — "  He  saved 


530  WHY    ARE   MEN   SAVED? 

them  y"  thirdly,  a  divine  reason  why  he  saved  them — "  for  his 
name's  sake ;"  and  fourthly,  a;z  obstruction  conquered^  in  the 
word  "  nevertheless,"  implying  that  there  was  some  difficulty 
that  was  removed.  "Nevertheless  he  saved  them  for  his 
name's  sake."  A  Saviour ;  the  saved  ;  the  reason ;  the  ob- 
struction removed. 

I.  First,  then,  here  is  a  glorious  Saviour — "  He  saved 
them."  Who  is  to  be  understood  by  tbat  pronoun  "  he  ?" 
Possibly  many  of  my  hearers  may  answer,  "  Why,  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  is  the  Saviour  of  men."  Right,  my  friends ;  but 
not  all  the  truth.  Jesus  Christ  is  the  Saviour  ;  but  not  more 
so  than  God  the  Father,  or  God  the  Holy  Ghost.  Some  per- 
sons who  are  ignorant  of  the  system  of  divine  truth  think  of 
God  the  Father  as  being  a  great  being  full  of  wrath,  and 
anger,  and  justice,  but  having  no  love;  they  think  of  God  the 
Spirit  perhaps  as  a  mere  influence  proceeding  from  the  Father 
and  the  Son.  Now,  nothing  can  be  more  incorrect  than  such 
opinions.  It  is  true  the  Son  redeems  me,  but  then  the  Father 
gave  the  Son  to  die  for  me,  and  the  Father  chose  me  in  the 
everlasting  election  of  his  grace.  The  Father  blots  out  my  sin ; 
the  Father  accepts  me  and  adopts  me  into  his  family  through 
Christ.  The  Son  could  not  save  without  the  Father  any  more 
than  the  Father  without  the  Son  ;  and  as  for  the  Holy  Spirit, 
if  the  Son  redeems,  know  ye  not  that  the  Holy  Gliost  regen- 
erates. It  is  he  that  makes  us  new  creatures  in  Christ,  who 
begets  us  again  unto  a  lively  hope,  who  purities  our  soul,  who 
sanctifies  our  spirit,  and  who,  at  last,  presents  us  spotless  and 
faultless  before  the  throne  of  the  Most  High,  accepted  in  the 
beloved.  When  thou  sayest  "  Saviour,"  remember  there  is  a 
Trinity  in  that  word — the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy 
Ghost — this  Saviour  being  three  persons  under  one  name. 
Thou  canst  not  be  saved  by  the  Son  without  the  Father,  nor 
by  the  Father  without  the  Son,  nor  by  the  Father  and  Son 
without  the  Spirit.  But  as  they  are  one  in  creation,  so  are 
they  one  in  salvation,  working  together  in  one  God  for  our 
ealvation,  and  unto  that  God  be  glory  everlasting,  world  with- 
out end.  Amen. 

But,  note  here,  how  this  divine  being  claims  salvation 
wholly  to  himself.      "  Nevertheless  he  saved  them."     But, 


WHY    ARE    MEN    SAVED?  331 

Moses,  where  art  thou  ?  Didst  not  thou  save  them,  Moses  ? 
Thou  didst  stretch  thy  rod  over  tlie  sea,  and  it  clave  in  halves ; 
thou  didst  lift  up  thy  prayer  to  heaven,  and  the  frogs  came, 
and  the  flies  swarmed,  and  the  water  was  turned  into  blood, 
and  the  hail  smote  the  land  of  Egypt.  Wast  not  thou  their 
Saviour,  Moses  ?  And  tliou,  Aaron,  thou  didst  offer  the  bul- 
locks which  God  accepted ;  thou  didst  lead  them,  with  Moses, 
through  the  wilderness.  Wast  not  thou  their  Saviour  ?  They 
answer,  "  Nay,  we  were  the  instruments,  but  he  saved  them." 
God  made  use  of  us,  but  unto  his  name  be  all  the  glory,  and 
none  unto  ourselves.  But,  Israel,  thou  wast  a  strong  and 
miglity  people;  didst  thou  not  save  thyself?  Perhaps  it  was 
by  thine  own  holiness  that  the  Red  Sea  was  dried  up;  per- 
haps the  parted  floods  were  frightened  at  the  piety  of  the 
saints  that  stood  upon  their  margin  ;  perhaps  it  was  Israel  that 
delivered  itself.  Nay,  nay,  saith  God's  Word ;  he  saved  them ; 
they  did  not  save  themselves,  nor  did  their  fellow-men  redeem 
them.  And  yet,  mark  you,  there  are  some  who  dispute  this 
point,  who  think  that  men  save  themselves,  or,  at  least,  that 
priests  and  preachers  can  help  to  do  it.  We  say  that  the 
preacher,  under  God,  may  be  the  instrument  of  arresting  man's 
attention,  of  warning  liim  and  arousing  him;  but  the  preacher 
is  nothing ;  God  is  every  thing.  The  most  mighty  eloquence 
that  ever  distilled  from  the  lips  of  seraphic  preacher  is  nothing 
apart  from  God's  Holy  Spirit.  Neither  Paul,  nor  A])ollos,  nor 
Cephas,  are  any  thing :  God  gave  the  increase,  and  God  must 
have  all  the  glory.  There  are  some  we  meet  with  here  and 
there  who  say,  "  I  am  Mr.  So-and-so's  convert ;  I  am  a  con- 
vert of  the  Rev.  Dr.  this  or  that."  Well,  if  you  are  sir,  I  can 
not  give  you  much  hope  of  heaven.  Only  God's  converts  go 
there ;  not  proselytes  of  man,  but  the  redeemed  of  the  Lord. 
O  !  it  is  very  little  to  convert  a  man  to  our  own  opinions  ;  it 
is  something  to  be  the  means  of  converting  him  to  the  Lord 
our  God.  I  had  a  letter  some  time  ago  from  a  good  Baptist 
minister  in  Ireland,  who  very  much  wanted  me  to  come  over 
to  Ireland,  as  he  h.vid,  to  represent  the  Baptist  interest,  be- 
cause it  was  low  there,  and  perhaps  it  might  lead  the  people* 
to  think  a  little  more  of  Baptists.  I  told  him  I  would  not  go 
across  the  street  merely  to  do  that,  much  less  would  I  cross 


332  WHY    ARE   MEN    SAVED? 

the  Irish  Channel.  I  should  not  think  of  going  to  Ireland  for 
that ;  but  if  I  might  go  there  to  make  Christians,  under  God, 
and  be  the"  means  of  bringing  men  to  Christ,  I  would  leave  it 
to  them  what  they  should  be  afterward,  and  trust  to  God's 
Holy  Spirit  to  direct  and  guide  them  as  to  what  denomination 
they  should  consider  nearest  akin  to  God's  truth.  Brethren, 
I  might  make  all  of  you  Baptists,  perhaps,  and  yet  you  would 
be  none  the  better  for  it ;  I  might  convert  you  all  in  that  way, 
but  such  a  conversion  would  be  that  you  would  be  washed  to 
greater  stains,  converted  into  hypocrites,  and  not  into  saints. 
I  have  seen  something  of  wholesale  conversion.  Great  reviv- 
alists have  risen  up  ;  they  have  preached  thundering  sermons 
that  have  made  men's  knees  knock  together.  "  What  a  won- 
derful man !"  people  have  said.  "  He  has  converted  so  many 
under  one  sermon."  But  look  for  his  converts  in  a  month, 
and  where  will  they  be  ?  You  will  see  some  of  them  in  the 
alehouse,  you  will  hear  others  of  them  swear,  you  will  find 
many  of  them  rogues  and  cheats,  because  they  were  not  God's 
converts,  but  only  man's.  Brethren,  if  the  work  be  done  at 
all,  it  must  be  done  of  God,  for  if  God  do  not  convert  there  is 
nothing  done  that  shall  last,  and  nothing  that  shall  be  of  any 
avail  for  eternity. 

But  some  reply,  "Well,  sir,  but  men  convert  themselves." 
Yes,  they  do,  and  a  fine  conversion  it  is.  Very  frequently 
they  convert  themselves.  But,  then,  that  which  man  did,  man 
undoes.  He  who  converts  himself  one  day,  unconverts  him- 
self the  next ;  he  tieth  a  knot  which  his  own  fingers  can  loosen. 
Remember  this — you  may  convert  yourselves  a  dozen  times 
over,  but  "  that  which  is  born  of  the  flesh  is  flesh,"  and  "  can 
not  see  the  kingdom  of  God."  It  is  only  "  that  which  is  born 
of  the  Spirit"  that  "  is  spirit,"  and  is  therefore  able  to  be 
gathered  at  last  into  the  spirit  realm,  where  only  spiritual 
things  can  be  found  before  the  throne  of  the  Most  High.  We 
must  reserve  this  prerogative  wholly  to  God.  If  any  man 
state  that  God  is  not  Creator,  we  call  him  infidel ;  if  any  man 
entrench  upon  this  doctrine,  that  God  is  not  the  absolute 
maker  of  all  things,  we  hiss  him  down  in  a  moment ;  but  he  is 
an  infidel  of  the  worst  kind,  because  more  specious,  who  puts 
God  out  of  the  mercy  throne,  instead  of  putting  him  out  of 


WHY    ARE   MEN   SAVED?  333 

the  creation  throne,  and  who  tells  men  that  they  may  convert 
themselves,  whereas  God  doth  it  all.  "  He'''  only,  the  great 
Jehovah — Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Gliost — "  he  saved  them  for 
his  name's  sake." 

Thus  have  I  endeavored  to  set  out  clearly  the  first  truth  of 
the  divine  and  glorious  Saviour. 

II.  Now,  secondly,  the  favored  persons — "He  saved 
themP  Who  are  they?  You  will  reply,  "They  were  the 
most  respectable  people  that  could  be  found  in  the  world ; 
they  were  a  very  prayerful,  loving,  holy,  and  deserving 
people  ;  and,  therefore,  because  they  were  good  he  saved 
them."  Very  well,  that  is  your  opinion,  I  will  tell  you  w^hat 
Moses  says — "  Our  fathers  understood  not  thy  wonders  in 
Egypt ;  they  remembered  not  the  multitudes  of  thy  mercies ; 
but  provoked  him  at  the  sea,  even  at  the  Red  Sea.  Never- 
theless he  saved  them."  Look  at  the  seventh  verse,  and  you 
will  have  their  character.  In  the  first  place,  they  were  a  stupid 
people — "  Our  fathers  understood  not  thy  wonders  in  Egypt." 
In  the  next  place,  they  were  an  ungrateful  people — "  they  re- 
membered not  the  multitude  of  thy  mercies."  In  the  third 
place,  they  were  a  provoking  people — "  they  provoked  him  at 
the  sea,  even  at  the  Red  Sea."  Ah,  these  are  the  people 
whom  free  grace  saves,  these  are  the  men  and  these  the  women 
whom  the  God  of  all  grace  condescends  to  take  to  his  bosom 
and  to  make  anew. 

Note,  first,  that  they  were  a  stupid  people.  God  sends  his 
gospel  not  always  to  the  wise  and  prudent,  but  unto  fools : 

"  He  takes  the  fool  and  makes  him  know 
The  wonders  of  his  dying  love." 

Do  not  suppose,  my  hearer,  because  you  are  very  unlettered 
and  can  scarcely  read — do  not  imagine,  because  you  have 
always  been  brought  up  in  extreme  ignorance,  and  have 
scarcely  learned  to  spell  your  name,  that  therefore  you  can 
not  be  saved.  God's  grace  can  save  you,  and  then  enlighten 
you.  A  brother  minister  once  told  me  a  story  of  a  man  who 
was  known  in  a  certain  village  as  a  simpleton,  and  was  always 
considered  to  be  soft  in  the  head ;  no  one  thought  he  could 
ever  understand  any  thing.     But  one  day  he  came  to  hear  the 


334  WHY    ARE    MEN    SAVED? 

gospel  preached.  He  had  been  a  drunken  fellow,  having  wit 
enough  to  be  wicked,  which  is  a  very  common  kind  of  wit. 
The  Lord  was  pleased  to  bless  the  Word  to  his  soul,  so  that 
he  became  a  changed  character  ;  and  what  was  the  marvel  of 
all  was,  his  religion  gave  him  a  something  which  began  to  de- 
velop his  latent  faculties.  He  found  he  had  something  to  Uve 
for,  and  he  began  to  try  what  he  could  do.  In  the  first  place 
he  wanted  to  read  his  Bible,  that  he  might  read  his  Saviour's 
name ;  and  after  much  hammering  and  spelling  away,  at 
last  he  was  able  to  read  a  chapter.  Then  he  was  asked  to 
jjray  at  a  prayer-meeting ;  here  was  an  exercise  of  his  vocal 
powers.  Five  or  six  words  made  up  his  prayer,  and  down  he 
sat  abashed.  But  by  continually  praying  in  his  own  family  at 
home,  he  came  to  jDray  like  the  rest  of  the  brethren,  and  he 
went  on  till  he  became  a  preacher,  and  singular  enough,  he 
had  a  fluency — a  depth  of  understanding,  and  a  power  of 
thought,  such  as  are  seldom  found  among  ministers  who  only 
occasionally  occupy  pulpits.  Strange  it  was,  that  grace  should 
even  tend  to  develop  his  natural  powers,  giving  him  an  object, 
setting  him  devoutly  and  firmly  upon  it,  and  so  bringing  out 
all  his  resources  that  they  were  fully  shown.  Ah,  ignorant 
ones,  ye  need  not  despair.  He  saved  them;  not  for  their 
sakes — there  was  nothing  in  them  why  they  should  be  saved. 
He  saved  them,  not  for  their  wisdom's  sake ;  but,  ignorant 
though  they  were,  understanding  not  the  meaning  of  his 
miracles,  "  he  saved  them  for  his  name's  sake." 

Note,  again,  they  were  a  very  ungrateful  people^  and  yet  he 
saved  them.  He  delivered  them  times  without  number,  and 
worked  for  them  mighty  miracles ;  but  they  still  rebelled. 
Ah,  that  is  like  you,  my  hearer.  •  You  have  had  many  deliver- 
ances from  the  borders  of  the  grave ;  God  has  given  you  house 
and  food  day  after  day,  and  provided  for  you,  and  kept  you  to 
this  hour;  but  how  ungrateful  you  have  been!  As  Isaiah 
said,  "  The  ox  knoweth  his  owner,  and  the  ass  his  master's 
crib  ;  but  my  people  doth  not  know,  Israel  doth  not  consider." 
How  many  there  are  of  this  character,  who  have  favors  from 
God,  the  history  of  which  they  could  not  give  in  a  year ;  but 
yet  what  have  they  ever  done  for  him  ?  They  would  not 
keep  a  horse  that  did  not  work  for  them,  nor  as  much  as  a  do^ 


WHY    ARE   MEN    SAVED?  335 

that  would  not  notice  them.  But  here  is  God ;  he  has  kept 
them  day  by  day,  and  they  have  done  a  great  deal  against  him, 
but  they  have  done  notliing  lor  him.  Pie  has  put  the  bread  into 
their  very  mouths,  nurtured  them,  and  sustained  their  strength, 
and  they  have  spent  that  strength  in  defying  him,  in  cursing 
his  name  and  breaking  his  Sabbath,  "  nevertheless  he  saved 
them."  Some  of  this  sort  have  been  saved.  I  hope  I  have 
some  here  now  who  will  be  saved  by  conquering  grace,  made 
new  men  by  the  mighty  power  of  God's  Spirit.  "  Nevertlie- 
less  he  saved  them."  When  there  was  nothing  to  recommend 
them,  but  every  reason  why  they  should  be  cast  away  for  their 
ingratitude,  "  nevertheless  he  saved  them." 

And  note,  once  more,  the]j  were  a  provoJdng  people — "  They 
provoked  him  at  the  sea,  even  at  the  Red  Sea."  Ah !  how 
many  people  there  are  in  this  World  that  are  a  provoking 
people  to  God  !  If  God  were  Uke  man,  who  among  us  would 
be  here  to-day  ?  If  Ave  are  provoked  once  or  twice,  up  goes 
the  hand.  With  some  men  tlieir  passions  stir  at  the  very  Hrst 
offense  ;  others,  who  are  somewhat  placid,  will  bear  offense 
after  offense,  till  at  last  they  say,  "  there  is  an  end  of  every 
thing,  and  I  can  bear  that  no  longer ;  you  must  stay  it,  or  else 
I  must  stay  you!"  Ah!  if  God  had  that  temper,  where 
would  we  be?  Well  might  he  say,  "My  thoughts  are  not  as 
your  thoughts ;  I  am  God,  I  change  not,  or  else  ye  sons  of 
Jacob  had  been  consumed."  They  were  a  provoking  people, 
*'  nevertheless  he  saved  them."  Have  you  provoked  him  ? 
Take  heart ;  if  you  repent,  God  has  promised  to  save  you ; 
and  what  is  more,  he  may  this  morning  give  you  repentance, 
and  even  give  you  remission  of  sins,  for  he  saves  provoking 
people  for  his  name's  sake.  I  hear  one  of  my  hearers  say, 
"  Well,  sir,  that  is  encouraging  sin  with  a  vengeance  !"  Is  it, 
indeed,  sir?  Why?  "Because  you  are  talking  to  the  very 
worst  of  men,  and  you  are  saying  that  they  may  yet  be  saved." 
Fray,  sirs,  when  I  spoke  to  the  worst  of  men,  did  I  speak  to 
you  or  not  ?  You  say  "  No ;  I  am  one  of  the  most  respectable 
and  best  of  men."  Well,  then,  sir,  I  have  no  need  to  preach 
to  you,  for  you  think  you  do  not  need  any.  "  The  whole 
have  no  need  of  a  physician,  but  they  that  are  sick."  But 
these  poor  people,  whom  you  say  I  am  encouraging  in  sin,  need 


836  WHY    AKE   MEN   SAVED* 

to  be  spoken  to.  I  will  leave  you.  Good-morning  to  you ! 
You  keep  to  your  own  gospel,  and  I  wonder  whether  you  will 
find  your  way  to  heaven  by  it.  Nay,  I  do  not  wonder,  I  know 
you  will  not,  unless  you  are  brought  as  a  poor  sinner  to  take 
Christ  at  his  word,  and  be  saved  for  his  name's  sake.  But  I 
say  farewell  to  you,  and  I  will  keep  on  in  my  course.  But 
why  did  you  say  I  encourage  men  in  sin  ?  I  encourage  them 
to  turn  from  it.  I  did  not  say  he  saved  the  provoking  people, 
and  then  let  them  still  provoke  him  as  they  had  done  before ; 
I  did  not  say  he  saved  the  wicked  peoj^le,  and  then  let  them 
sin  as  they  did  before.  But  you  know  the  meaning  of  the 
word  "  saved  ;"  I  explained  it  the  other  morning.  The  word 
"  saved"  does  not  merely  mean  takmg  men  to  he^tven ;  it 
means  more — it  means  saving  them  from  their  sin;  it  means 
giving  them  a  new  heart,  new  spirits,  new  lives ;  it  means  mak- 
ing them  into  new  men.  Is  there  any  thing  licentious  in  say- 
ing that  Christ  takes  the  worst  of  men  to  make  them  into 
saints  ?  If  there  be,  I  can  not  see  it.  I  only  ^^sh  he  would 
take  the  worst  of  this  congregation  and  make  them  into  the 
saints  of  the  living  God,  and  then  there  would  be  far  less 
licentiousness.  Sinner,  I  comfort  thee  ;  not  in  thy  sin,  but  in 
thy  repentance.  Sinner,  the  saints  of  heaven  were  once  as 
bad  as  thou  hast  been.  Art  thou  a  drunkard,  a  swearer,  an 
unclean  person  ?  "  Such  were  some  of  them  ;  but  they  have 
been  washed — but  they  have  been  sanctified."  Is  thy  robe 
black?  Ask  them  whether  their  robes  were  ever  black? 
They  will  tell  you,  "  Yes,  we  have  washed  our  robes."  If 
they  had  been  black,  they  would  not  have  wanted  washing. 
"  We  have  washed  our  robes  and  made  them  white  in  the 
blood  of  the  Lamb."  Then,  sinner,  if  they  were  black,  and 
were  saved,  why  not  thyself? 

"  Are  not  bis  mercies  rich  and  freo  ? 
Then  say,  my  soul,  why  not  for  thee  ? 
Our  Jesus  died  upon  the  tree, 
Then  why,  my  soul,  why  not  for  thee  ?" 

Take  heart,  penitents  ;  God  will  have  mercy  on  you.  "  Nev- 
ertheless he  saved  them  for  his  name's  sake." 


WHY    ARE    MEN    SAVED?  337 

III.  Now  we  come  to  the  third  pomt — the  reason  of  sai/- 
VATiON  :  "  He  saved  them  for  his  name's  sake."  There  is  no 
other  reason  why  God  should  save  a  man,  but  for  his  name's 
sake ;  there  is  nothing  in  a  sinner  which  can  entitle  him  to  sal- 
vation, or  recommend  him  to  mercy  ;  it  must  be  God's  own 
heart  which  must  dictate  the  motive  why  men  are  to  be  saved. 
One  person  will  say,  "  God  will  save  me  because  I  am  so  up- 
right." Sir,  he  will  do  no  such  thing.  Says  another,  "  God 
will  save  me  because  I  am  so  talented."  Sir,  he  will  not. 
Your  talent !  Why,  thou  driveling,  self  conceited  idiot,  thy 
talent  is  nothing  compared  with  that  of  the  angel  that  once 
stood  before  the  throne,  and  sinned,  and  who  is  now  cast  into 
the  bottomless  pit  for  ever  !  If  he  would  save  men  for  their 
talent,  he  would  have  saved  Satan  ;  for  he  had  talents  enough. 
As  for  thy  morality  and  goodness,  they  are  but  filthy  rags,  and 
he  will  never  save  thee  for  aught  thou  doest.  None  of  us  would 
ever  be  saved,  if  God  expected  any  thing  of  us  :  we  must  be 
saved  purely  and  solely  for  reasons  connected  with  himself, 
and  l}'ing  in  his  own  bosom.  Blessed  be  his  name,  he  saves 
us  for  "  his  name's  sake."  What  does  that  mean  ?  I  think  it 
means  this  :  the  name  of  God  is  his  person,  his  attributes,  and 
his  nature.  For  his  nature's  sake,  for  his  very  attributes' 
sake,  he  saved  men  ;  and,  perhaps,  we  may  include  this  also  : 
"  My  name  is  in  him" — that  is,  in  Christ ;  he  saves  us  for  the 
sake  of  Christ,  who  is  the  name  of  God.  And  what  does  that 
mean  ?     I  think  it  means  this  : 

He  saved  them,  first,  that  he  might  manifest  his  nature. 
God  was  all  love,  and  he  wanted  to  manifest  it ;  he  did  show 
it  when  he  made  the  sun,  the  moon,  and  the  stars,  and  scat- 
tered flowers  over  the  green  and  laughing  earth.  He  did 
show  his  love  when  he  made  the  air  balmy  to  the  body,  and 
the  sunshine  cheering  to  the  eye.  He  gives  us  warmth  even 
in  winter,  by  the  clothing  and  by  the  fuel  which  he  has  stored 
in  the  bowels  of 'the  earth.  But  he  wanted  to  reveal  himself 
still  more.  "  How  can  I  show  them  that  I  love  them  with  all 
my  infinite  heart  ?  I  will  give  my  Son  to  die  to  save  the  very 
worst  of  them,  and  so  I  will  manifest  my  nature."  And  God 
has  done  it;  he  has  manifested  his  power,  his  justice,  his  love, 
his  faithfulness,  and  his  truth ;  he  has  manifested  his  whole 

15 


838  WHY    AKE   MEN    SAVED? 

self  on  tlie  great  platform  of  salvation.  It  was,  so  to  speak, 
the  balcony  on  which  God  stepped  to  show  himself  to  man — - 
the  balcony  of  salvation — here  it  is  he  manifests  himself  by 
saving  men's  souls. 

He  did  it,  again,  to  vindicate  his  name.  Some  say  God  is 
cruel ;  they  wickedly  call  him  tyrant.  "  Ah  !"  says  God, 
"  but  I  will  save  the  worst  of  sinners,  and  vindicate  my  name ; 
I  will  blot  out  the  stigma ;  I  will  remove  the  slur ;  they  shall 
not  be  able  to  say  that,  unless  they  be  filthy  liars,  for  I  will  be 
abundantly  merciful.  I  will  take  away  this  stain,  and  they 
shall  see  that  my  great  name  is  the  name  of  Love."  And  said 
he  again,  "I  will  do  this  for  my  name's  sake;  that  is,  to  make 
these  people  love  my  name.  I  know  if  I  take  the  best  of  men, 
and  save  them,  they  Avill  love  my  name ;  but  if  I  take  the 
worst  of  nien,  O,  how  they  will  love  me !  If  I  go  and  take 
some  of  the  offscouring  of  the  earth,  and  make  them  my  chil- 
dren, O,  how  they  will  love  me  !  Then  they  will  cleave  to  my 
name  ;  they  will  think  it  more  sweet  than  music ;  it  will  be 
more  precious  to  them  than  the  spikenard  of  the  eastern  mer- 
chants ;  they  will  value  it  as  gold,  yea,  as  mu(;h  fine  gold. 
The  man  who  loves  me  best  is  the  man  who  hast  most  sins 
forgiven:  he  owes  much,  therefore  he  will  love  much."  This 
is  the  reason  why  God  often  selects  the  worst  of  men  to  make 
them  his.  Saith  an  old  writer,  "  All  the  carvings  of  heaven 
were  made  out  of  knots;  the  temple  of  God,  the  King  of  hea- 
ven, is  a  cedar  one,  but  the  cedars  were  all  knotty  trees  be- 
fore he  cut  them  dowm."  He  chose  the  worst,  that  he  might 
display  his  workmanship  and  his  skill,  to  make  unto  himself  a 
name ;  as  it  is  written,  ''  It  shall  be  nnto  me  for  a  name ;  for 
an  everlasting  sign  that  shall  not  be  cut  off."  Now,  dear 
liearers,  of  whatever  class  you  are,  here  is  something  I  have  to 
offer  well  worthy  of  yom*  consideration,  namely — that  if  saved, 
we  are  saved  for  the  sake  of  God,  for  his  name's  sake,  and  not 
for  our  own. 

Now,  this  puts  all  men  on  a  level  with  regard  to  salvation. 
Suppose  that  in  coming  into  this  garden,  the  rule  had  been 
that  every  one  should  have  made  mention  of  my  name  as  the 
key  of  admittance ;  the  law  is,  no  man  is  to  be  admitted  for 
his  rank  or  title,  but  only  by  the  use  of  a  certain  name.     Up 


WHi!^    A]fkiK    MEN    SAVED  339 

comes  a  lord  ;  he  makes  use  of  the  name  and  £omes  in  ;  up 
comes  a  beggar,  all  in  patches  ;  he  makes  use  of  the  name — 
the  law  says  it  is  only  the  use  of  the  name  that  will  admit  you 
— he  makes  use  of  it  and  he  enters,  for  there  is  no  distinction. 
So,  my  lady,  if  you  come,  with  all  your  morality,  you  must 
make  use  of  his  name  ;  if  you  come,  poor,  filthy  inhabitant  of 
a  cellar  or  a  garret,  and  make  use  of  his  name,  the  doors  will 
fly  wide  open,  for  there  is  salvation  for  every  one  who  makes 
mention  of  the  name  of  Christ,  and  for  none  other.  This  pulls 
down  the  pride  of  the  moralist,  abases  the  self-exaltation  of 
the  self-righteous,  and  puts  us  all,  as  guilty  sinners,  on  an 
equal  footing  before  God,  to  receive  mercy  at  his  hands,  "  for 
his  name's  sake,"  and  for  that  reason  i^lone. 

lY.  I  have  detained  you  too  long ;  let  me  close  by  noticing 
obstacles  removed,  in  the  word  "  nevertheless."  I  shall  do 
that  in  somewhat  of  an  interesting  form  by  way  of  parable. 

Once  on  a  time,  Mercy  sat  upon  her  snow-white  throne,  sur- 
rounded by  the  troops  of  love.  A  sinner  was  brought  before 
her,  whom  Mercy  designed  to  save.  The  herald  blew  the  trum- 
pet, and  after  three  blasts  thereof,  with  a  loud  voice,  he  said,  "  O 
heaven,  and  earth,  and  hell,  I  summon  you  this  day  to  come 
before  the  throne  of  Mercy,  to  tell  why  this  sinner  should  not 
be  saved."  There  stood  the  sinner,  trembling  with  fear  ;  he 
knew  that  there  were  multitudes  of  opponents,  who  would 
press  into  the  hall  of  Mercy,  and  with  eyes  full  of  wrath,  would 
say,  "  He  must  not,  and  he  shall  not  escape ;  he  must  be  lost !" 
The  trumpet  was  blown,  and  Mercy  sat  placidly  on  her  throne, 
until  there  stepped  in  one  with  a  fiery  countenance  ;  his  head 
was  covered  with  light ;  he  spoke  wath  a  voice  like  thunder, 
and  out  of  his  eyes  flashed  lightning  !  "  Who  art  thou  ?"  said 
Mercy.  He  replied,  "  I  am  Law  ;  the  law  of  God."  "  And 
what  hast  thou  to  say  ?"  "  I  have  this  to  say,"  and  he  lifted 
up  a  stony  tablet,  written  on  both  sides ;  "  these  ten  commands 
this  wretch  has  broken.  My  demand  is  blood  ;  for  it  is  writ- 
ten, '  The  soul  that  sinneth  it  shall  die.'  Die  he,  or  Justice 
must."  The  wretch  trembles,  his  knees  knock  together,  the 
marrow  of  his  bones  melts  within  him,  as  if  it  were  ice  dis- 
solved by  fire,  and  he  shakes  with  very  fright.  Already  he 
thought  he  saw  the  thunderbolt  launched  at  hira,  he  saw  the 


340  WHY    ARE   MEN    SAVED  I 

lightning  penetrate  into  liis  soul,  hell  yawned  before  him  in 
imagination,  and  he  thought  liimsclf  cast  away  for  ever.  But 
Mercy  smiled,  and  said,  "  Law,  I  will  answer  thee.  This 
wretch  deserves  to  die  ;  Justice  demands  that  he  should  perish 
— I  award  thee  thy  claim."  And,  O  !  how  the  sinner  trembles, 
"  But  there  is  one  yonder  w^ho  has  come  with  me  to-day,  my 
King,  my  Lord  ;  his  name  is  Jesus  ;  he  will  tell  you  how  the 
debt  can  be  paid,  and  the  sinner  can  go  Tree."  Then  Jesus 
spake,  and  said,  "  O  Mercy,  I  will  do  thy  bidding.  Take  me, 
Law  ;  put  me  in  a  garden  ;  make  me  sweat  drops  of  blood  ; 
then  nail  me  to  a  tree  ;  scourge  my  back  before  you  put  me  to 
death ;  hang  me  on  the  cross ;  let  blood  run  from  my  hands 
and  feet ;  let  me  descend  into  the  grave  ;  let  me  pay  all  the 
sinner  oweth  ;  I  will  die  in  his  stead."  And  the  Law  went 
out  and  scourged  the  Saviour,  nailed  him  to  the  cross,  and 
coming  back  with  his  face  all  bright  with  satisfaction,  stood 
again  at  the  throne  of  Mercy,  and  Mercy  said,  "  Law,  what 
hast  thou  now  to  say  ?"  "  Nothing,"  said  he  ;  "  fair  angel, 
nothing."  "What !  not  one  of  these  commands  against  him?" 
*'  No,  not  one.  Jesus,  his  substitute,  has  kept  them  all — has 
paid  the  penalty  for  his  disobedience  ;  and  now,  instead  of  his 
condemnation,  I  demand,  as  a  debt  of  Justice,  that  he  be  ac- 
quitted." "  Stand  thou  here,"  said  Mercy ;  "  sit  on  my 
throne ;  I  and  thou  together  will  now  send  forth  another 
summons."  The  trumpet  rang  again.  "  Come  hither,  all  ye 
who  have  aught  to  say  against  this  sinner,  why  he  should  not 
be  acquitted ;"  and  up  comes  another — one  who  often  troubled 
the  sinner — one  who  had  a  voice  not  so  loud  as  that  of  the 
Law,  but  still  piercing  and  thrilling — a  voice  whose  whispers 
were  like  the  cuttings  of  a  dagger.  "  Who  art  thou  ?"  says 
Mercy.  "  I  am  Conscience ;  this  sinner  must  be  punished ; 
he  has  done  so  much  against  the  law  of  God  that  he  must  be 
punished ;  I  demand  it ;  and  I  will  give  him  no  rest  till  he  is 
punished,  nor  even  then,  for  I  will  follow  him  even  to  the 
grave,  and  persecute  him  after  death  with  pangs  unutterable." 
"  Nay,"  said  Mercy,  "  hear  me ;"  and  while  he  paused  for  a 
moment,  she  took  a  bunch  of  hyssop  and  sprinkled  Conscience 
with  the  blood,  saying,  "  Hear  me,  Conscience,  '  The  blood  of 


WHY    ARK    MEN    SAVED?  341 

Jesus  Christ,  God's  Son,  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin.'  Now  hast 
thou  aught  to  say  ?"     "  No,"  said  Conscience,  "  nothing — 

"  '  Covered  is  his  unrighteousness; 
From  condemnation  he  is  free.' 

Henceforth  I  will  not  grieve  him  ;  I  will  be  a  good  conscience 
unto  him,  through  the  blood  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  The 
trumpet  rang  a  third  time,  and  growling  from  the  innermost 
vaults,  up  there  came  a  grim  black  fiend,  with  hate  in  his 
eyes,  and  hellish  maj  3sty  on  his  brows.  He  is  asked,  "  Hast 
thou  any  thing  against  that  sinner  ?"  "  Yes,"  said  he,  "  I 
have ;  he  has  made  a  league  with  hell,  and  a  covenant  with 
the  grave,  and  here  it  is,  signed  with  his  own  hand.  He 
asked  God  to  destroy  his  soul  in  a  drunken  fit,  and  vowed  he 
would  never  turn  to  God ;  see,  here  is  his  covenant  with  hell !" 
"  Let  us  look  at  it,"  said  Mercy  ;  and  it  was  handed  up,  while 
the  grim  fiend  looked  at  the  sinner,  and  pierced  him  through 
with  his  black  looks.  "  x\h !  but,"  said  Mercy,  "  this  man  had 
no  right  to  sign  the  deed  ;  a  man  must  not  sign  away  anoth- 
er's property.  This  man  was  bought  and  paid  for  long  before- 
hand ;  he  is  not  his  own  ;  the  covenant  with  Death  is  dis- 
annulled, and  the  league  with  hell  is  rent  in  pieces.  Go  thy 
way,  Satan."  "Nay,"  said  he,  howling  again,  "I  have  some- 
thing else  to  say  :  that  man  was  always  my  friend  ;  he  listened 
ever  to  my  insinuations ;  he  scofied  at  the  gospel ;  he  scorned 
the  majesty  of  heaven  :  is  he  to  be  pardoned,  while  I  repair  to 
my  hellish  den,  for  ever  to  bear  the  penalty  of  guilt  ?"  Said 
Mercy,  "  Avaunt,  thou  fiend  ;  these  things  he  did  in  the  days 
of  his  unregeneracy ;  but  this  word  '  nevertheless'  blots  them 
out.  Go  thou  to  thy  hell ;  take  this  for  another  lash  upon 
thyself — the  sinner  shall  be  pardoned,  but  thou — never,  treach- 
erous fiend  !"  And  then  Mercy,  smilingly  turning  to  the  sin- 
ner, said,  "  Sinner,  the  trumpet  must  be  blown  for  the  last 
time  !"  Again  it  was  blown,  and  no  one  answered.  Then 
stood  the  sinner  up,  and  Mercy  said,  "  Sinner,  ask  thyself  the 
question — ask  thou  of  heaven,  of  earth,  of  hell — whether  any 
can  condemn  thee  ?"  And  the  sinner  stood  up,  and  with  a 
bold,  loud  voice,  said,  "  Who  shall  lay  any  thing  to  the  charge 
of  God's  elect?"     And  he   looked  into  hell,  and  Satan  lay 


842  WHY    ARE    MEN    SAVED? 

there,  biting  his  iron  bonds ;  and  he  looked  on  earth,  and 
earth  was  silent ;  and  in  the  majesty  of  faith  the  sinner  did 
even  climb  to  heaven  itself,  and  he  said,  "  Who  shall  lay  any 
thing  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect  ?  God  ?"  And  the  answer 
came,  "  No  ;  he  justifieth."  "  Christ  ?"  Sweetly  it  was 
whispered,  "No;  he  died."  Then  tm-ning  romid,  the  sinner 
joyfully  exclaimed,  "  Who  shall  separate  me  from  the  love  of 
God,  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord  ?"  And  the  once  con- 
demned sinno''  came  back  to  Mercy  ;  prostrate  at  her  feet  he 
lay,  and  vowed  henceforth  to  be  hers  for  ever,  if  she  would 
keep  him  to  the  end,  and  make  him  what  she  would  desire  him 
to  be.  Then  no  longer  did  the  trumpet  ring,  but  angels  re- 
joiced, and  heaven  was  glad,  for  the  sinner  was  saved. 

Thus,  you  see,  I  have,  what  is  called,  dramatized  the  thing ; 
but  I  don't  care  what  it  is  called  ;  it  is  a  way  of  arresting  the 
ear,  when  nothing  else  will.  "  Nevertheless ;"  there  is  the 
obstruction  taken  away !  Sinner,  whatever  be  the  "  never- 
theless," it  shall  never  the  less  abate  the  Saviour's  love ;  not 
the  less  shall  it  ever  make  it,  but  it  shall  remain  the  same. 

"  Come,  guilty  soul,  and  flee  away 
To  Christ  and  heal  thy  wounds; 
This  is  the  glorious  gospel-day 
Wherein  free  grace  abounds : 

Come  to  Jesus,  sinner,  come." 

On  thy  knee  weep  out  a  sorrowful  confession  ;  look  to  his 
cross,  and  see  the  substitute ;  believe,  and  live.  Ye  almost  de- 
mons, ye  that  have  gone  furthest  into  sin,  now,  Jesus  says, 
"  If  you  know  your  need  of  me,  turn  unto  me,  and  I  will  have 
mercy  upon  you :  and  to  our  God,  tor  he  will  abundantly  par- 
don." 


SERMON  XXIII. 

PARTICULAR   ELECTION. 

"  "Wherefore  the  rather,  brethren,  give  diligence  to  make  your  calling  and 
election  sure :  for  if  ye  do  these  things,  ye  shall  never  fall :  for  so  an  en- 
trance shall  be  ministered  unto  you  abundantly  into  the  everlasting  king- 
dom of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ." — 2  Peter,  i.  10,  11. 

It  is  exceedingly  desirable  that  in  the  hours  of  worship  and 
in  the  house  of  prayer  our  minds  should  be  as  much  as  possi- 
ble divested  of  every  worldly  thought.  Although  the  busi- 
ness of  the  week  will  very  naturally  struggle  with  us  to  en- 
croach upon  the  Sabbath,  it  is  our  business  to  guard  the 
Sabbath  from  the  intrusion  of  our  worldly  cares,  as  we  would 
guard  an  oasis  from  the  overwhelming  irruption  of  the  sand. 
1  have  felt,  however,  that  to-day  we  should  be  surrounded 
with  circumstances  of  peculiar  difficulty  in  endeavoring  to 
bring  our  minds  to  spiritual  matters  ;  for  of  all  times,*perhaps 
tiie  most  unhkely  for  getting  any  good  in  the  sanctuary,  if 
that  depends  upon  mental  abstraction,  are  election  times.  So 
important,  in  the  minds  of  most  men,  are  political  matters, 
that  very  naturally,  after  the  hurry  of  the  week,  combined 
with  the  engrossing  pursuit  of  elections,  we  are  apt  to  bring 
the  same  thoughts  and  the  same  feelings  into  the  house  of 
prayer,  and  speculate,  perhaps,  even  in  the  place  of  worship, 
whether  a  conservative  or  a  liberal  shall  be  returned  for  our 
borough,  or  whether  for  the  city  of  London  there  shall  be  re- 
turned Lord  John  Russell,  Baron  Rothschild,  or  Mr.  Currle. 
I  thought,  this  morning,  "  Well,  it  is  of  no  use  my  trying  to 
stop  this  great  ti'ain  in  its  progress.  People  are  just  now  go- 
ing on  at  an  express  rate  in  these  matters ;  I  think  I  will  be 
wise,  and  instead  of  endeavormg  to  turn  them  off  the  line,  I 
♦v'ill  turn  the  po^rts.  so  that  they  may  still  continue  their  pur- 


344  PARTICULAR    ELECTION. 

suits  with  the  same  swiftness  as  ever,  but  in  a  new  iirection 
It  shall  be  the  same  line ;  they  shall  still  be  traveling  in  earn 
est  toward  election,  but  j^erhaps  I  may  have  some  skill  to  turn 
the  points,  so  that  they  shall  be  enabled  to  consider  election 
in  a  rather  different  manner." 

When  Mr.  Whitefield  was  once  applied  to  to  use  his  influ- 
ence at  a  general  election,  he  returned  answer  to  his  lordship 
who  requested  him,  that  he  knew  very  little  about  general 
elections,  but  that  if  his  lordship  took  his  advice  he  w^ould 
make  his  own  particular  "  calling  and  election  sure ;"  which 
was  a  very  proper  remark.  I  would  not,  however,  say  to  any 
persons  here  present,  despise  the  privilege  which  you  have  as 
citizens.  Far  be  it  from  me  to  do  it.  When  we  become 
Christians,  w^e  do  not  leave  off  being  Englishmen ;  when  we 
become  professors  of  religion  we  do  not  cease  to  have  the 
rights  and  privileges  which  citizenship  has  bestowed  on  us. 
Let  us,  whenever  we  shall  have  the  opportunity  of  using  the 
right  of  voting,  use  it  as  in  the  sight  of  Almighty  God,  know- 
ing that  for  every  thing  we  shall  be  brought  into  account,  and 
for  that  amono^  the  rest,  seeiuo-  that  we  are  intrusted  with  it. 
And  let  us  remember  that  we  are  our  own  governors,  to  a 
great  degree,  and  that  if  at  the  next  election  we  should  choose 
wrong  governors,  we  shall  have  nobody  to  blame  but  ourselves, 
however* wrongly  they  may  afterward  act,  unless  we  exercise 
all  prudence  and  j^rayer  to  Almighty  God  to  direct  our  hearts 
to  a  right  choice  in  this  matter.  May  God  so  help  us,  and 
may  the  result  be  for  his  glory,  however  unexpected  that  re- 
sult may  be  to  any  of  us  ! 

Having  said  so  much,  let  me,  then,  turn  the  points,  and 
draw  you  to  a  consideration  of  your  own  particular  calling  and 
election,  bidding  you  in  the  words  of  the  apostle,  "  the  rather, 
brethren,  give  diligence  to  make  your  calling  and  election 
sure :  for  if  ye  do  these  things,  ye  shall  never  fall :  for  so  an 
entrance  shall  be  ministered  unto  you  abundantly  into  the 
everlasting  kingdom  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ." 
We  have  here,  first  of  all,  Uoo  fundamental  points  in  religion 
— "  calling  and  election  ;  we  have  here,  secondly,  some  good 
advice — "  to  make  your  calling  and  election  sure^''  or,  rather, 
to  assure  ourselves  that  we  are  called  and  elected ;  and  then, 


PARTICULAR   ELECTION.  345 

in  the  third  place,  we  liave  so7ne  reasons  given  us  why  we 
should  use  this  diligence  to  he  assured  of  our  election — be- 
cause, on  the  one  hand,  we  shall  so  be  kept  from  falling,  and 
on  the  other  hand,  we  shall  attain  unto  "  an  abundant  entrance 
into  the  everlasting  kingdom  of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesua 
Christ." 

I.  First  of  all,  then,  there  are  the  two  important  matters 
IN  RELIGION — secrets,  both  of  them,  to  the  world — only  to  be 
understood  by  those  who  have  been  quickened  by  divine 
grace  :  "  calling  and  election." 

By  the  word  "calling"  in  Scripture,  we  understand  two 
things — one,  the  genercd  call^  which  in  the  preaching  of  the 
gospel  is  given  to  every  creature  under  heaven  ;  the  second 
call  (that  which  is  here  intended)  is  the  special  call — which 
we  call  the  effectual  call,  whereby  God  secretly,  in  the  use  of 
means,  by  the  irresistible  power  of  his  Holy  Spirit,  calls  out 
of  mankind  a  certain  number,  whom  he  himself  hath  before 
elected,  calling  them  from  their  sins  to  become  righteous,  from 
their  death  in  trespasses  and  sins  to  become  living  spiritual 
men,  and  from  their  worldly  pursuits  to  become  the  lovers  of 
Jesus  Christ.  The  two  callings  differ  very  much.  As  Bun- 
yan  puts  it,  very  prettily,  "  By  his  common  call,  he  gives 
nothing  ;  by  his  special  call,  he  always  has  something  to  give ; 
he  has  also  a  brooding  voice,  for  them  that  are  under  his  wing ; 
and  he  has  an  outcry,  to  give  the  alarm  when  he  seeth  the  en- 
emy come."  What  we  have  to  obtain,  as  absolutely  necessary 
to  our  salvation,  is  a  special  calling,  made  in  us,  not  to  our 
ears  but  to  our  hearts,  not  to  our  mere  fleshly  understanding, 
but  to  the  inner  man,  by  the  power  of  the  Spirit.  And  then 
the  other  important  thing  is  election.  As  without  calling 
there  is  no  salvation,  so  without  election  there  is  no  calling. 
Holy  Scripture  teaches  us  that  God  hath  from  the  beginning 
chosen  us  who  are  saved  unto  holiness  through  Jesus  Christ. 
We  are  told  that  as  many  as  are  ordained  unto  eternal  life 
believe,  and  that  their  believing  is  the  effect  of  their  being  or- 
dained to  eternal  life  from  before  all  worlds.  However  much 
this  may  be  disputed,  as  it  frequently  is,  you  must  first  deny 
the  authenticity  and  full  insjDiration  of  the  holy  Scriptures 
before  you  can   legit'mately  and  truly  deny  it.     And  sin^e, 

15* 


$46  PARTICULAR   ELECTTION. 

without  doubt,  I  have  many  here  who  are  members  of  the 
Episcopal  church,  allow  me  to  say  to  them  what  I  have  often 
said  before,  "  You,  of  all  men,  are  the  most  inconsistent  in  the 
world,  unless  you  believe  the  doctrine  of  election,  for  if  it  be 
not  taught  in  Scripture  there  is  this  one  thing  for  an  absolute 
certainty,  it  is  taught  in  your  Articles."  Nothing  can  be 
more  forcibly  expressed,  nothing  more  definitely  laid  down, 
than  the  doctrine  of  predestination  in  the  Book  of  Common 
Prayer  ;  although  we  are  told  what  we  already  know,  that  the 
doctrine  is  a  high  mystery,  and  is  only  to  be  handled  carefully 
by  men  who  are  enlightened.  However,  without  doubt,  it  is 
the  doctrine  of  Scripture,  that  those  who  are  saved  are  saved 
because  God  chose  them  to  be  saved,  and  are  called  as  the 
effect  of  that  first  choice  of  God.  If  any  of  you  dispute  this, 
I  stand  upon  the  authority  of  holy  Scripture;  ay,  and  if  it 
were  necessary  to  appeal  to  tradition,  which  I  am  sure  it  is 
not,  and  no  Christian  man  would  ever  do  it,  yet  I  would  take 
you  upon  that  point ;  for  I  can  trace  this  doctrine  through  the 
lips  of  a  succession  of  holy  men,  from  this  present  moment  to 
the  days  of  Calvin,  thence  to  Augustine,  and  thence  on  to 
Paul  himself;  and  even  to  the  lips  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
The  doctrine  is,  without  doubt,  taught  in  Scrij^ture,  and  were 
not  men  too  proud  to  humble  themselves  to  it,  it  would  uni- 
versally be  believed  and  received  as  being  no  other  than  man- 
ifest truth.  Why,  sirs,  do  you  not  believe  that  God  loves  his 
children  ?  and  do  you  not  know  that  God  is  unchangeable  ? 
therefore,  if  he  loves  them  now  he  must  always  have  loved 
them.  Do  you  not  believe  that  if  men  be  saved  God  saves 
them  ?  And  if  so,  can  you  see  any  difficulty  in  admitting  that 
because  he  saves  them  there  must  have  been  a  purpose  to 
save  them — a  purpose  which  existed  before  all  worlds  ?  Will 
you  not  grant  me  that  ?  If  you  will  not,  I  must  leave  you  to 
the  Scriptures  themselves ;  and  if  they  will  not  convince  you 
on  the  point,  then  I  must  leave  you  unconvinced. 

It  will  be  asked,  however,  why  is  calling  here  put  before 
election^  seeing  election  is  eternal,  and  calling  takes  place  in 
time  ?  I  reply,  because  calling  is  first  to  us.  The  first  thing 
which  you  and  I  can  know  is  our  calling:  we  can  not  tell 
wl  3ther  we  are  elect  until  we  feel  that  we  are  called.     We 


PARTICULAR    ELECTION.  $i1 

must,  first  of  all,  prove  onr  calling,  and  then  our  election  ia 
sure  most  certainly.  "  Moreover,  whom  he  did  predestinate, 
them  he  also  called;  and  whom  he  called,  them  he  also 
justified:  and  whom  he  justiHed,  them  he  also  glorified." 
Calling  comes  first  in  our  ai^prehension.  We  are  by  God's 
Spirit  called  from  our  evil  estate,  regenerated  and  made 
new  creatures,  and  then,  looking  backward,  Ave  behold  our- 
selves as  being  most  assuredly  Cicct  because  we  were 
called. 

Here,  then,  I  think  I  have  explained  the  text.  There  are 
the  two  things  which  you  and  I  are  to  prove  to  be  sure  to  our- 
selves— whether  we  are  called  and  whether  we  are  elected. 
And  O,  dear  friends,  this  is  a  matter  about  which  you  and  I 
should  be  very  anxious.  For  consider  what  an  honorable 
thing  it  is  to  be  elected.  In  this  world  it  is  thought  a  mighty 
thing  to  be  elected  to  the  House  of  Commons;  but  how  nuch 
more  honorable  to  be  elected  to  eternal  life  ;  to  be  elected  to 
"the  church  of  the  first  born,  whose  names  are  written  in 
heaven  ;"  to  be  elected  to  be  a  compeer  of  angels,  to  be  a 
favorite  of  the  living  God,  to  dwell  with  the  Most  High, 
among  the  fairest  of  the  sons  of  light,  nearest  to  the  eternal 
throne !  Election  in  this  world  is  but  a  short-lived  thing,  but 
God's  election  is  eternal.  Let  a  man  be  elected  to  a  seat  in  the 
House :  seven  years  must  be  the  longest  period  that  he  can 
hold  his  election  ;  but  if  you  and  I  be  elected  according  to  the 
divine  purpose,  we  shall  hold  our  seats  when  the  day-star  shall 
have  ceased  to  burn,  when  the  sun  shall  have  grown  dim  with 
age,  and  when  the  eternal  hills  shall  have  bowed  themselves 
with  weakness.  If  we  be  chosen  of  God  and  precious,  then 
are  we  chosen  for  ever  ;  for  God  changeth  not  in  the  objects 
of  his  election.  Those  whom  he  hath  ordained  he  hath  or- 
dained to  eternal  life,  "  and  they  shall  never  perish,  neither 
shall  any  man  pluck  them  out  of  his  hand."  It  is  worth  while 
to  know  ourselves  elect,  for  nothing  in  this  world  can  make  a 
man  more  happy  or  more  valiant  than  the  knowledge  of  his 
election.  "  Nevertheless,"  said  Christ  to  his  apostles,  "  rejoice 
not  in  this,  but  rather  rejoice  that  your  names  are  written  in 
heaven" — that  being  the  sweetest  comfort,  the  honeycomb  that 
droppeth  with  the  most  precious  drops  of  all,  the  knowledge 


348  PARTICULAR    ELECTION. 

of  our  being  chosen  by  God.  And  this,  too,  beloved,  makes  a 
man  valiant.  When  a  man  by  diligence  has  attained  to  the 
assurance  of  his  election,  you  can  not  make  him  a  coward,  you 
can  never  *make  him  cry  craven  even  in  the  thickest  battle ; 
he  holds  the  standard  fast  and  firm,  and  cleaves  his  foes  with 
the  ciraeter  of  truth.  '•  Was  not  I  ordained  by  God  to  be  the 
standard  bearer  of  this  truth  ?  I  must,  I  will  stand  by  it,  de- 
spite you  all."  He  saith  to  every  enemy,  "  Am  I  not  a  chosen 
king  ?  Can  floods  of  water  wash  out  the  sacred  unction  from 
a  king's  bright  brow  ?  No,  never  !  And  if  God  hath  chosen 
me  to  be  a  king  and  a  priest  unto  God  for  ever  and  ever,  come 
what  may  or  come  what  will — the  lion's  teeth,  the  fiery  fur- 
nace, the  spear,  the  rack,  the  stake,  all  these  things  are  less 
than  nothing,  seeing  I  am  chosen  of  God  unto  salvation."  It 
has  been  said  that  the  doctrine  of  necessity  makes  men  weak. 
It  if^  a  lie.  It  may  seem  so  in  theory,  but  in  practice  it  has 
always  been  found  to  be  tho  reverse.  The  men  who  have  be- 
lieved in  destiny,  and  hav^  held  fast  and  firm  by  it,  have  al- 
ways done  the  most  valiant  deeds.  There  is  one  point  in  which 
this  is  akin  even  with  Mohammed's  faith.  The  deeds  that  were 
done  by  him  were  chiefly  done  from  a  firm  confidence  that 
Go'i  had  ordained  him  to  h^'s  work.  Never  had  Ci-omweh 
driven  his  foes  before  him  if  it  had  not  been  in  the  stern 
strength  of  this  almost  omni]:otent  truth;  and  there  shall 
scarcely  be  found  a  man  strong  to  do  great  and  valiant  deeds 
unless,  confident  in  the  God  of  providence,  he  looks  upon  the 
accidents  of  life  as  being  steered  by  God,  and  give  himself  up 
to  ^od's  firm  predestination,  to  be  borne  along  by  the  current 
of  his  will,  contrary  to  all  the  willc  and  all  the  wishes  of  the 
world.  "  Wherefore  the  rather,  brethren,  give  diligence  to 
make  your  calling  and  election  sure. ' 

II.  Come,  then,  here  is  the  second  point — good  advice. 
"  Make  your  calling  and  election  sure.'^  Not  toward  God,  for 
they  are  sure  to  him ;  make  them  sure  to  yourself  Be  quite 
certain  of  them ;  be  fully  satisfied  aboat  them.  In  many  of 
our  dissenting  places  of  worship  very  groat  encouragement  is 
held  out  to  doubting.  A  person  comes  before  the  pastor,  and 
says,  "  O !  sir,  I  am  so  afraid  I  am  not  convened :  I  tremble 
lest  I  should  not  be  a  child  of  God.    O !  I  i^?v  T  aT»  ^o^  owq  o^ 


PARTICULAR    ELECTION.  349 

the  Lord's  elect."  The  pastor  will  put  out  his  hands  to  him 
and  say,  "  Dear  brother,  you  are  all  riglit  so  long  as  you 
can  doubt."  Now,  I  hold,  that  is  altogether  wrong.  Sc"ip- 
ture  never  says,  "  lie  that  doubteth  shall  be  saved,"  but  "He 
that  believeth."  It  may  be  true  that  the  man  is  in  a  good 
state;  it  may  be  true  that  he  wants  a  little  comfort;  but  his 
(loi  bts  are  not  good  things,  nor  ought  Ave  to  encourage  Lim 
in  liis  doubts.  Our  business  is  to  encourage  him  out  of  his 
doubts,  and  by  the  grace  of  God  to  urge  him  to  "  give  all  dil- 
igence to  make  his  calling  and  election  sure  y"  not  to  doubt  it, 
but  to  be  sure  of  it.  Ah  !  I  have  heard  some  hypocritical  doubt- 
ers say,  "  O  !  I  have  had  such  doubts  whether  I  am  the  Lord's," 
and  I  have  thought  to  myself,  "And  so  have  I  very  great 
doubts  about  you."  I  have  heard  some  say  they  do  tremble 
so  because  they  are  afraid  they  are  not  the  Lord's  people ; 
and  the  lazy  fellows  sit  in  their  pews  on  the  Sunday,  and  just 
listen  to  the  sermon  ;  but  they  never  think  of  giving  diligence, 
they  never  do  good,  perhaps  are  inconsistent  in  their  lives,  and 
then  talk  about  doubting.  It  is  quite  right  they  should  doubt, 
it  is  well  they  should  ;  and  if  they  did  not  doubt  we  might  be- 
gin to  doubt  for  them.  Idle  men  have  no  right  to  assurance. 
The  Scripture  says,  "  Give  diligence  to  make  your  calling  and 
election  sure." 

Full  assurance  is  an  excellent  attainment.  It  is  profitable 
for  a  man  to  be  certain  in  this  life,  and  absolutely  sure  of  his 
own  calling  and  election.  But  how  can  he  be  sure  ?  Now, 
many  of  our  more  ignorant  hearers  imagine  that  the  only  way 
they  have  of  being  sure  of  their  election  is  by  some  revelation, 
some  dream,  or  some  mystery.  I  have  enjoyed  very  hearty 
laughs  at  the  expense  of  some  people  who  have  trusted  in  their 
visions.  Really,  if  you  had  passed  among  so  many  shades  of 
ignorant  professing  Christians  as  I  have,  and  had  to  resolve  so 
many  doubts  and  fears,  you  would  be  so  infinitely  sick  of 
dreams  and  visions  that  you  would  say,  as  soon  as  a  person  be- 
gan to  speak  about  them,  "  Now,  do  just  hold  your  tongue." 
"Sir,"  said  a  woman,  "I  saw  blue  lights  in  the  front  parlor  when 
I  was  in  prayer,  and  I  thought  I  saw  the  Saviour  in  the  corner, 
and  I  said  to  myself,  I  am  safe."  (Mr.  Spurgeon  here  narrated 
a  remarkable  story  of  a  poor  woman  who  was  possessed  with  a 


350  PARTICULAR   ELECTION. 

singular  delusion.)  And  yet  there  are  tens  of  thousands  of  peo- 
ple in  every  part  of  the  country,  and  members  too  of  Christian 
bodies,  who  have  no  better  ground  for  their  belief  that  they 
are  called  and  elected,  than  some  vision  equally  ridiculous,  or 
the  equally  absurd  hearing  of  a  voice.  A  young  woman  came 
to  me  some  time  ago ;  she  wanted  to  join  the  church,  and 
when  I  asked  her  how  she  knew  herself  to  be  converted,  she 
said  she  was  down  at  the  bottom  of  the  garden,  and  she  thought 
she  heard  a  voice,  and  she  thought  she  saw  something  up  in 
the  clouds  that  said  to  her  so-and-so.  "  Well,"  I  said  to  her, 
"  that  thing  may  have  been  the  means  of  doing  good  to  you, 
but  if  you  put  any  trust  in  it,  it  is  all  over  with  you."  A 
dream,  ay,  and  a  vision,  may  often  bring  men  to  Christ;  I 
have  known  many  who  have  been  brought  to  him  by  them, 
beyond  a  doubt,  though  it  has  been  mysterious  to  me  how  it 
was ;  but  when  men  bring  these  forward  as  a  proof  of  their 
conversion,  there  is  the  mistake;  because  you  may  have  fifty 
thousand  dreams  and  see  fifty  thousand  visions,  and  you 
may  be  a  fool  for  all  that,  and  all  the  bigger  sinner  for  having 
seen  them.  There  is  better  evidence  to  be  had  than  all 
this:  "Give  diligence  to  make  your  calling  and  election 
sure." 

"  How  then,"  says  one,  "  am  I  to  make  my  calling  and  elec- 
tion sure  ?"  Why,  thus : — If  thou  wouldst  get  out  of  a  doubt- 
ing state,  get  out  of  an  idle  state ;  if  thou  wouldst  get  out  of 
a  trembling  state,  get  out  of  an  indifferent  lukewarm  state  ; 
for  lukewarmness  and  doubting,  and  laziness  and  trembling, 
very  naturally  go  hand  in  hand.  If  thou  wouldst  enjoy  the 
eminent  grace  of  the  full  assurance  of  faith  under  the  blessed 
Spirit's  influence  and  assistance,  do  what  the  Scripture  tells 
th-ee — "  Give  diligence  to  make  your  calling  and  election  sure." 
Wherein  shalt  thou  be  diligent  ? 

Note  how  the  Scripture  has  given  us  a  list.  Be  diligent  in 
your  faith.  Take  care  that  your  faith  is  of  the  right  kind — 
that  it  is  not  a  creed,  but  a  credence — that  it  is  not  a  mere  be- 
lief of  doctrine,  but  a  reception  of  doctrine  into  your  heart, 
and  the  practical  light  of  the  doctrine  in  your  soul.  Take 
care  that  your  faith  results  from  necessity — that  you  believe  in 
Christ  because  you  have  nothing  else  to  believe  in.     Take  care 


PARTICULAR    ELECTION.  351 

It  is  simple  faith,  hanging  alone  on  Christ,  without  any  other 
dependence  but  Jesus  Christ  and  him  crucified.  And  when 
thou  hast  given  diligence  about  that,  give  diligence  next  to 
thy  courage.  Labor  to  get  virtue  /  plead  with  God  that  he 
would  give  thee  the  face  of  a  lion,  that  thou  mayest  never  be 
afraid  of  any  enemy,  however  much  he  may  jeer  or  threaten 
thee,  but  tliat  thou  mayest  with  a  consciousness  of  right,  gO 
on,  boldly  trusting  in  God.  And  having,  by  the  help^of  the 
Holy  Spirit,  obtained  that,  study  well  the  Scriptures,  and  get 
knowledge  ;  for  a  knowledge  of  doctrine  will  tend  very  much 
to  confirm  your  faith.  Try  to  understand  God's  Word,  get  a 
sensible,  spiritual  idea  of  it.  Get,  if  you  can,  a  system  of 
divinity  out  of  God's  Bible.  Put  the  doctrines  together. 
Get  real,  theological  knowledge,  founded  upon  the  infallible 
Word.  Get  a  knowledge  of  that  science  which  is  most  de- 
spised, but  which  is  the  most  necessary  of  all,  the  science  of 
Christ  and  of  him  crucified,  and  of  the  great  doctrines  of 
grace.  And  when  thou  hast  done  this,  "  add  to  thy  knowl- 
edge temperance.''''  Take  heed  to  thy  body  :  be  temperate 
there.  Take  heed  to  thy  soul :  be  temperate  there.  Be  not 
drunken  with  pride  ;  be  not  lifted  up  with  self-confidence. 
Be  temperate.  Be  not  harsh  toward  thy  friends,  nor  bitter 
to  thine  enemies.  Get  temperance  of  lip,  temperance  of  life, 
temperance  of  heart,  temperance  of  thought.  Be  not  pas- 
sionate :  be  not  carried  away  by  every  wind  of  doctrine.  Get 
temperance,  and  then  add  to  it  by  God's  Holy  ^Y'xIi.,  patience; 
ask  him  to  give  thee  that  patience  which  endureth  aflfliction, 
which,  when  it  is  tried,  shall  come  forth  as  gold.  Ari-ay  your- 
self with  patience,  that  you  may  not  murmur  in  your  sick- 
nesses; that  you  may  not  curse  God  in  your  losses,  nor  be 
depressed  in  your  aftlictions.  Pray  without  ceasing,  until  the 
Holy  Ghost  has  nerved  you  with  patience  to  endure  unto  the 
end.  And  when  you  have  that,  get  godliness.  Godliness  is 
something  more  than  religion.  The  most  religious  men  may 
be  the  most  godless  men,  and  sometimes  a  godly  man  may 
seem  to  be  irreligious.  Let  me  just  explain  that  seeming  para- 
dox. A  real  religious  man  is  a  man  who  sighs  after  saci-a- 
ments,  attends  churches  and  chapels,  and  is  outwardly  good, 
but  goes  no  further.     A  godly  man  is  a  man  who  does  not 


352  PARTICULAR  ELECTION. 

look  SO  much  to  the  dress  as  to  the  person :  he  looks  not  to 
tlie  outward  form,  but  to  the  inward  and  spiritual  grace  ;  he 
is  a  godly  man,  as  well  as  attentive  to  religion.  Some  men, 
however,  are  godly,  and  to  a  great  extent  despise  form  ;  they 
may  be  godly,  without  some  degree  of  religion  ;  but  a  man 
can  not  be  fully  righteous  without  being  godly  in  the  true 
meaning  of  each  of  these  words,  though  not  in  the  general 
vulgar*  sense  of  them.  Add  to  thy  patience  an  eye  to  God  ; 
live  in  his  sight ;  dwell  close  to  him ;  seek  for  fellowship  with 
him  ;  and  thou  hast  got  godliness.  And  to  that  add  brotherly 
love.  Be  loving  towards  all  the  members  of  Christ's  church ; 
have  a  love  to  all  the  saints  of  every  denomination.  And  then 
add  to  that  charity^  which  openeth  its  arms  to  all  men,  and 
loves  them ;  and  when  you  have  got  all  these,  then  you  will 
know  your  calling  and  election,  and  just  in  proportion  as  you 
practice  these  heavenly  rules  of  life,  in  this  heavenly  manner, 
will  you  come  to  know  that  you  are  called  and  that  you  are 
elect.  But  by  no  other  means  can  you  attain  to  a  knowledge 
of  that,  except  by  the  witness  of  the  Spirit,  bearing  witness 
with  your  spirit  that  you  are  born  of  God,  and  then  witness- 
ing in  your  conscience  that  you  are  not  what  you  were,  but 
are  a  new  man  in  Christ  Jesus,  and  are  therefore  called,  and 
therefore  elected. 

A  man  over  there  says  he  is  elect.  He  gets  drunk.  Ay, 
you  are  elect  by  the  devil,  sir  ;  that  is  about  your  only  elec- 
tion. Another  man  says,  "  Blessed  be  God,  I  do  not  care 
about  evidences  a  bit ;  I  am  not  so  legal  as  you  are !"  ISTo,  I 
dare  say  you  are  not :  but  you  have  no  great  reason  to  bless 
God  about  it,  for,  my  dear  friend,  unless  you  have  these  evi- 
dences of  a  new  birth  take  heed  to  yourself.  "  God  is  not 
mocked :  whatsoever  a  man  soweth,  that  shall  he  also  reap." 
"  Well,"  says  another,  "  but  I  think  that  doctrine  of  election 
a  very  licentious  doctrine."  Think  on  as  long  as  you  please  ; 
but  please  to  bear  me  witness  that  as  I  have  preached  it  to- 
day there  is  nothing  licentious  about  it.  Very  likely  you  are 
licentious,  and  you  would  make  the  doctrine  licentious  if  you 
believed  it ;  but  "  to  the  pure  all  things  are  pure."  He  who 
receiveth  God's  truth  in  his  heart  doth  not  often  pervert  it 
and  turn  aside  from  it  unto  wicked  ways.     No  man,  let  me 


PARTICULAR   ELECTION.  353 

repeat,  has  any  right  to  believe  himself  elect  of  God,  unless 
he  has  been  renewed  by  God  ;  no  man  has  any  right  to  believe 
himself  called,  unless  his  life  be  in  the  main  consistent  with 
his  vocation,  and  he  walk  worthy  of  that  whereunto  he  is 
called.  Out  upon  an  election  that  lets  you  Uve  in  sin !  Away 
with  it !  away  with  it !  That  was  never  the  design  of  God's 
Word ;  and  it  never  was  the  doctrine  of  Calvinists  either. 
Though  we  have  been  lied  against  and  our  teachings  per- 
verted, we  have  always  stood  by  this — that  good  works,  though 
they  do  not  procure  nor  in  any  degree  merit  salvation,  yet  are 
the  necessary  evidences  of  salvation  ;  and  unless  they  be  in 
men  the  soul  is  still  dead,  uncalled,  and  unrenewed.  The 
nearer  you  live  to  Christ,  the  more  you  imitate  him,  the  more 
your  life  is  conformed  to  him,  and  the  more  simply  you  hang 
upon  him  by  faith,  the  more  certain  you  may  be  of  your  elec- 
tion in  Christ  and  of  your  calling  by  his  Holy  Spirit.  May 
the  Holy  One  of  Israel  give  you  the  sweet  assurance  of  grace, 
by  affording  you  "  tokens  for  good"  in  the  graces  which  he 
enables  you  to  manifest. 

IH.  And  now  I  shall  close  up  by  giving  you  the  apostle's 

REASONS  WHY  YOU  SHOULD  MAKE  YOUR  CALLING  AND  ELECTION 
SURE. 

I  put  in  one  of  my  own  to  begin  with.  It  is  because,  as  I 
have  said,  it  will  make  you  so  happy.  Men  who  doubt  their 
calling  and  election  can  not  be  full  of  joy :  but  the  happiest 
saints  are  those  who  know  and  believe  it.  You  know  our 
friends  say  this  is  a  howling  wilderness,  and  you  know  my  re- 
ply to  it  is,  that  they  make  all  the  howling  themselves :  there 
would  not  be  much  howling  if  they  were  to  look  up  a  little 
more  and  dowm  a  little  less,  for  by  faith  they  would  make  it 
blossom  like  the  rose,  and  give  to  it  the  excellence  and  glory 
of  Carmel  and  Sharon.  But  why  they  howl  so  much  is  be- 
cause they  do  not  believe.  Our  happiness  and  our  faith  are 
to  a  great  degree  proportionate;  they  are  Siamese  twins  t-o 
the  Christian  ;  they  must  flourish  or  decay  together. 

"  When  I  can  say  my  God  is  mine, 
Then  I  can  all  my  griefs  resign ; 
Can  tread  the  world  beneath  my  feet, 
And  all  that  earth  calls  good  or  great." 


354  PARTICULAR    ELECTION. 


*  "  When  gloomy  doubts  prevail, 

1  fear  to  call  him  mine ; 
The  sti'eams  of  comfort  seem  to  fail, 
And  all  my  hopes  decline." 

Only  faith  can  make  a  Christian  lead  a  happy  life. 

But  now  for  Peter's  reasons.  First,  because  "  if  ye  do 
these  things  ye  will  never  fall?"*  "  Perhaps,"  says  one,  "  in 
attention  to  election  we  may  forget  our  daily  walk,  and  like 
the  old  pliilosopher  who  looked  up  to  the  stars,  we  may  walk 
on  and  tumble  into  the  ditch  !"  "  Nay,  nay,"  says  Peter,  "  ii 
you  take  care  of  your  calling  and  election,  you  sliall  not  trip ; 
but  with  your  eyes  up  there,  looking  for  your  calling  and  elec- 
tion, God  will  take  care  of  your  feet,  and  you  shall  never  fall." 
Is  it  not  very  notable,  that,  in  many  churches  and  chapels,  you 
do  not  often  hear  a  sermon  about  to-day;  it  is  always  either 
about  old  eternity,  or  else  about  the  millennium  ;  either  about 
what  God  did  before  man  was  made,  or  else  about  what  God 
will  do  when  all  are  dead  and  buried?  Pity  they  do  not  tell 
us  something  about  what  we  are  to  do  to-day,  now  in  our 
daily  walk  and  conversation  !  Peter  removes  this  difficulty. 
He  says,  "  This  point  is  a  pi-actical  point ;  for  you  can  only 
answer  your  election  for  yourself  by  taking  care  of  your  prac- 
tice ;  and  while  you  are  so  taking  care  of  your  practice  and 
assuring  yourself  of  your  election,  you  are  doing  the  best  pos- 
sible thing  to  keep  you  from  falling."  And  is  it  not  desir- 
able that  a  true  Christian  should  be  kept  from  falling  ?  Mark 
the  difference  hetween  falling  ^wdi  falling  aio ay .  The  true  be- 
liever can  never  fall  away  and  perish  ;  but  he  may  fell  and 
injure  himself  He  shall  not  fall  and  break  his  neck ;  but  a 
broken  leg  is  bad  enough  without  a  broken  neck.  "  Though 
he  fall  he  shall  not  be  utterly  cast  down  ;"  but  that  is  no 
reason  why  he  should  dash  himself  against  a  stone.  His  do- 
sire  is,  that  day  by  day  he  may  grow  more  holy;  that  houi- 
by  hour  he  may  be  more  thoroughly  renewed,  until,  conformed 
to  the  image  of  Christ,  he  may  enter  int  bliss  eternal.  If, 
then,  you  take  care  of  your  calling  and  election,  you  are  doing 
the  best  thing  in  the  world  to  prevent  you  from  faUing;  for 
in  so  doinor  you  shall  never  fall. 


PARTICULAR    ELECTION.  355 

Ami  now,  tlie  other  reason,  and  tlien  I  shall  have  almost 
concluded.  "  ^br  so  an  entrance  shall  be  ministered  unto 
you  abundantly  into  the  everlasting  kingdom  of  our  Lord 
and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ:^  An  "abundant  entrance"  has 
sometimes  been  illustrated  in  this  way.  You  see  yonder  ship. 
After  a  long  voyage,  it  has  neared  the  haven,  but  is  much  in- 
jured ;  the  sails  are  rent  to  ribbons,  and  it  is  in  such  a  forlorn 
condition  that  it  can  not  come  up  to  the  harbor:  a  steam-tug 
is  pulling  it  in  with  the  greatest  possible  difficulty.  That  is 
like  the  righteous  being  "  scarcely  saved."  But  do  you  see 
that  other  slup  ?  It  has  made  a  prosperous  voyage  ;  and  now, 
laden  to  the  water's  edge,  with  the  sails  all  up  and  with  the 
white  canvas  tilled  with  the  wind,  it  rides  into  the  harbor  joy- 
ously and  nobly.  That  is  an  "  abundant  enti-ance ;"  and  if 
you  and  I  are  helped  by  God's  Spirit  to  add  to  our  faith  vir- 
tue, and  so  on,  we  shall  have  at  the  last  "  an  abundant  en- 
trance into  the  kingdom  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  Tiiere 
is  a  man  who  is  a  Christian  ;  but,  alas!  there  are  many  incon- 
sistencies in  his  life  for  which  he  has  to  mourn.  He  lies  there, 
dying  on  his  bed.  The  thought  of  his  past  life, rushes  upon 
him.  He  cries,  "  O  Lord,  have  mercy  upon  me,  a  simier,"  and 
the  prayer  is  answered;  his  faith  is  in  Christ,  and  he  shall  be 
saved.  But  O!  wiiat  griefs  he  has  upon  his  bed.  "  O,  if  I 
had  served  my  God  better !  And  these  children  of  mine — if 
I  had  but  trained  them  up  better,  'in  the  nurture  and  admo- 
nition of  the  Lord  !'  I  am  saved,"  says  he  ;  "  but  ivlas,  alas ! 
though  it  be  a  great  salvation,  I  can  not  enjoy  it  yet.  I  am 
dying  in  gloom,  and  clouds,  and  darkness.  I  trust,  I  hope,  I 
shall  be  gathered  to  n\y  fathers,  but  I  have  no  works  to  follow 
me — or  very  few  indeed  ;  for  though  I  am  saved,  I  am  but  just 
saved — saved  '  so  as  by  tire.'  "  Here  is  another  one  ;  he  too  is 
dying.  Ask  him  what  his  dependence  is:  he  tells  you,  "I  rest 
in  none  else  but  Jesus."  But  mark  him  as  he  looks  back  to 
his  past  life.  "  In  such  a  place,"  says  he,  "I  preached  the  gos- 
pel, and  God  helped  me."  And  though  with  no  pride  about 
him — he  will  not  congratulate  himself  upon  what  he  has  done 
— yet  doth  he  lift  his  hands  to  heaven,  and  he  blesses  God  that 
tliroughout  a  long  life  he  has  been  able  to  keep  liis  garments 
white  ;  that  he  has  served  his  Master ;  and  now,  like  a  shock 


356  PARTICULAR    ELECTION. 

of  corn  fully  ripe,  lie  is  about  to  be  gathered  into  his  Master's 
garner.  Hark  to  him  !  It  is  not  the  feeble  lisp  of  the  trem- 
bler ;  but  with  "  victory  !  victory  !  victory  !"  for  his  dying 
shout,  he  shuts  his  eyes,  and  dies  like  a  warrior  in  his  glory. 
That  is  the  "  abundant  entrance."  Now,  the  man  that  "  gives 
diligence  to  make  his  calling  and  election  sure,"  shall  insure 
for  himself  "  an  abundant  entrance  into  the  kingdon  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ." 

What  a  terrible  picture  is  hinted  at  in  these  words  of  the 
apostle — "  saved  so  as  by  fire  !"  Let  me  try  and  present  it 
to  you.  The  man  has  come  to  the  edge  of  Jordan  ;  the  time 
has  arrived  for  him  to  die.  He  is  a  believer — -just  a  believer; 
but  his  life  has  not  been  what  he  could  wish  ;  not  all  that  he 
now  desires  that  it  had  been.  And  now  stern  death  is  at  him, 
and  he  has  to  take  his  first  step  into  the  Jordan.  Judge  of 
his  horror  when  the  flames  surround  his  foot.  He  treads 
upon  the  hot  sand  of  the  stream ;  and  the  next  step  he  takes, 
with  his  hair  well  nigh  on  end,  with  his  eye  fixed  on  heaven 
on  the  other  side  of  the  shore,  his  face  is  yet  marked  with 
horror.  He  .takes  another  step,  and  he  is  all  bathed  in  fire 
Another  step,  and  he  is  up  to  his  very  loins  in  flames — "saved, 
so  as  by  fire."  A  strong  hand  has  grasped  him,  that  drags 
him  onward  through  the  stream.  But  how  dreadful  must  be 
the  death  even  of  a  Christian,  when  he  is  saved  "  so  as  by 
fire !"  There  on  the  river's  brink,  astonished,  he  looks  back 
and  sees  the  liquid  flames  through  which  he  has  been  called 
to  walk,  as  a  consequence  of  his  indiflerence  in  this  life.  Saved 
he  is — thanks  to  God  ;  and  his  heaven  shall  be  great,  and  his 
crown  shall  be  golden,  and  his  harp  shall  be  sweet,  and  his 
hymns  shall  be  eternal,  and  his  bliss  unfading; — but  his  dying 
moment,  the  last  article  of  death,  was  blackened  by  sin ;  and 
he  was  saved  "  so  as  by  fire !"  Mark  the  other  man  ;  he  too 
has  to  die.  He  has  often  feared  death.  He  dips  his  foot  in 
Jordan ;  and  his  body  trembles,  his  pulse  waxes  fiunt,  and 
even  his  eyes  are  well  nigh  closed.  His  lij^s  scarcely  speak, 
but  still  he  says  "  Jesus,  thou  art  with  me,  thou  art  with  me, 
passing  through  the  stream  !"  He  takes  another  step,  and  the 
waters  now  begin  to  refresh  him.  He  dips  his  hand  and  tastes 
the  stream,  and  tells  tho^5e  who  are  watching  him  in  tears,  that 


PARTICULAR    ELECTION.  357 

to  die  is  blessed.  "  The  stream  is  sweet,"  he  says,  "  it  is  not 
bitter  :  it  is  blessed  to  die."  Then  he  takes  another  step,  and 
when  he  is  well  nigh  submerged  in  the  stream,  and  lost  to 
vision,  he  says, 

*'  And  when  ye  hear  my  heart-strings  break, 
How  sweet  the  minutes  roll  1 
A  mortal  paleness  on  my  cheek, 
But  glory  in  my  soul!" 

That  is  the  "  abundant  entrance"  of  the  man  who  has  manfully 
served  his  God — who,  by  his  divine  grace,  has  had  a  path  un- 
clouded and  serene — who,  by  diligence,  has  "  made  his  calling 
and  election  sure  ;"  and,  therefore,  as  a  reward,  not  of  debt, 
but  of  grace,  hath  entered  heaven  with  higher  honors  and 
with  greater  ease  than  others  equally  saved,  but  not  saved  in 
so  splendid  a  manner. 

Just  one  thought  more.  It  is  said  that  the  entrance  is  to 
be  "  ministered  to  us."  That  gives  me  a  sweet  hint  that,  I 
find,  is  dwelt  upon  by  Doddridge.  Christ  will  open  the  gates 
of  heaven  ;  but  the  heavenly  train  of  virtues — the  works  which 
follow  us — will  go  up  with  us  and  minister  an  entrance  to  us. 
I  sometimes  think,  if  God  should  enable  me  to  live  and  die 
for  the  good  of  these  congregations,  so  that  many  of  them 
shall  be  saved,  how  sweet  it  will  be  to  enter  heaven,  and  when 
I  shaH  come  there,  to  have  an  entrance  ministered  unto  me, 
not  by  Christ  alone,  but  by  some  of  you  for  whom  I  have  min- 
istered. One  shall  meet  me  at  the  gate,  and  say,  "  Minister, 
thou  wast  the  cause  of  my  salvation  !"  And  another,  and 
another,  and  another,  shall  all  exclaim  the  same.  When 
Whitefield  entered  heaven — that  highly  honored  servant  of 
the  Lord — I  think  I  can  see  the  hosts  rushing  to  the  gates  to 
meet  him.  There  are  thousands  there  that  have  been  brought 
to  God  by  him.  O  how  they  open  wide  the  gates  ;  and  how 
they  praise  God  that  he  has  been  the  means  of  bringing  them 
to  heaven  ;  and  how  do  they  minister  unto  him  an  abundant 
entrance !  There  will  be  some  of  you,  perhaps,  in  heaven, 
with  starless  crowns :  for  you  never  did  good  to  your  fellow- 
creatures  ;  you  never  were  the  means  of  saving  souls ;  you 
are  to  have  crowns  without  stars.  But  "  they  that  turn  many 
tc  righteousness"  shall  "  shine  as  the  stars,  for  ever  and  ever;" 


358  PARllCULAR   ELECTION. 

and  an  entrance  shall  be  abundantly  ministered  to  them.  I 
do  want  to  get  a  heavy  crown  in  heaven — not  to  wear,  but 
to  have  all  the  more  costly  gift  to  give  to  Christ.  And 
you  ought  to  desire  the  same,  that  you  may  have  all  the  more 
honors,  and  so  have  the  more  to  cast  at  his  feet,  with,  "  Not 
unto  us,  but  unto  thy  name,  O  Christ,  be  the  glory!"  "Ra- 
ther, brethren,  give  all  diligence  to  make  your  calling  and 
election  sure." 

And  now,  to  conclude.  There  are  some  of  you  with  whom 
this  text  has  nothing  to  do.  You  can  not  make  "  your  calling 
and  election  sure,"  for  you  have  not  been  called ;  and  you 
have  no  right  to  believe  that  you  are  elected,  if  you  have 
never  been  called.  To  such  of  you,  let  me  say,  do  not  ask 
whether  you  are  elected  first,  but  ask  whether  you  are  called. 
And  go  to  God's  house,  and  bend  your  knee  in  prayer ;  and 
may  God,  in  his  infinite  mercy,  call  you  !  And  mark  this — if 
any  of  you  can  say, 

"  Nothing  in  my  hands  I  bring, 
Simply  to  the  cross  I  cling ;" 

if  any  of  you,  abjuring  your  sell-righteousness,  can  now  come 
to  Christ  and  take  him  to  be  your  all  in  all ;  you  are  called, 
you  are  elect.  "  Make  your  calling  and  election  sure,"  and 
go  on  your  way  rejoicing !  May  God  bless  you ;  and  to 
Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit,  be  glory  for  evermore  '     Amen. 


SERMON     XXIV. 

MERCY,    OMNIPOTENCE,    AND    JUSTICE. 

"  The  Lord  is  slow  to  anger,  and  great  in  power,  and  will  not  at  all  acquit 
the  wicked," — Nahum,  i.  3. 

Works  of  art  require  some  education  in  the  beholder,  be- 
fore they  can  be  thoroughly  appreciated.  We  do  not  expect 
that  the  uninstructed  should  at  once  perceive  the  varied  ex- 
cellencies of  a  painting  from  some  master  hand  ;  we  do  tiot 
imagine  that  the  superlative  glories  of  the  harmonies  of  the 
prince  of  song  will  enrapture  the  ears  of  clownish  listeners. 
There  must  be  something  in  the  man  himself,  before  he  can 
understand  the  wonders  either  of  nature  or  of  art.  Certainly 
this  is  true  of  character.  By  reason  of  failures  in  our  character 
and  fjiults  in  our  life,  we  are  not  capable  of  understanding  all 
the  separate  beauties,  and  the  united  perfection  of  the  charac- 
ter of  Christ,  or  of  God,  his  Father.  Were  we  ourselves  as 
pure  as  the  angels  in  heaven,  were  we  what  our  race  once  was 
in  the  garden  of  Eden,  immaculate  and  perfect,  it  is  quite  c.er,- 
tain  that  we  sliould  have  a  far  better  and  nobler  idea  of  the 
character  of  God  than  we  can  by  possibility  attain  unto  in  our 
fallen  state.  But  yOu  can  notfail  to  notice,  that  men,  through 
the  alienation  of  their  natures,  are  continually  misrepresenting 
God,  because  they  can  not  appreciate  his  perfection.  Does 
God  at  one  time  withhold  his  hand  from  wrath  ?  Lo,  they 
say  that  God  hath  ceased  to  judge  the  world,  and  looks  upon 
it  with  listless  phlegmatic  indifference.  Does  he  at  another 
time  punish  the  world  for  sin  ?  They  say  he  is  severe  and 
cruel.  Men  will  misunderstand  him,  because  they  are  imper- 
fect themselves,  and  are  not  capable  of  admiring  the  character 
of  God. 

Now,  this  is  especially  true  with  regard  to  certain  lights  and 


360  MERCY,    OMNIPOTENCE,    AND   JUSTICE. 

shadows  in  the  character  of  God,  which  lie  has  so  marvelously 
blended  in  the  perfection  of  his  nature  :  that  although  we  can 
not  see  the  exact  point  of  meeting,  yet  (if  we  have  been  at  all 
enlightened  by  the  Spirit)  we  are  struck  with  wonder  at  the 
sacred  harmony.  In  reading  holy  Scripture,  you  can  say  of 
Paul,  that  he  was  noted  for  his  zeal — of  Peter,  that  he  will 
ever  be  memorable  for  his  courage — of  John,  that  he  was 
noted  for  his  lovingness.  But  did  you  ever  notice,  when  you 
read  the  history  of  our  Master,  Jesus  Christ,  that  you  never 
could  say  he  was  natable  for  any  one  virtue  at  all  ?  Why  was 
that  ?  It  was  because  the  boldness  of  Peter  did  so  outgrow 
itself  as  to  throw  other  virtues  into  the  shade,  or  else  the  other 
virtues  were  so  deficient  that  they  set  forth  his  boldness.  The 
very  fact  of  a  man  being  noted  for  something  is  a  sure  sign 
that  he  is  not  so  notable  in  other  things  ;  and  it  is  because  of 
the  complete  perfection  of  Jesus  Christ,  that  we  are  not  ac- 
customed to  say  of  him  that  he  was  eminent  for  his  zeal,  or  for 
his  love,  or  for  his  courage.  We  say  of  him  that  he  was  a 
perfect  character ;  but  we  are  not  able  very  easily  to  perceive 
where  the  shadov^'s  and  the  lights  blended,  where  the  meek- 
ness of  Christ  blended  into  his  courage,  and  where  his  loveli- 
ness blended  into  his  boldness  in  denouncing  sin.  We  are  not 
able  to  detect  the  points  where  they  meet ;  and  I  believe  the 
more  thoroughly  we  are  sanctified,  the  more  it  will  be  a  sub- 
ject of  wonder  to  us  how  it  could  be  that  virtues  which  seemed 
so  diverse  were  in  so  majestic  a  manner  united  in  one  char- 
acter. 

It  is  just  the  same  of  God ;  and  I  have  been  led  to  make  the 
remarks  I  have  made  on  my  text,  because  of  the  two  clauses 
thereof  which  seem  to  describe  contrary  attributes.  You  will 
notice  that  there  are  two  things  in  my  text :  lie  is  "  slow  to 
anger,"  and  yet  he  "  will  not  at  all  acquit  the  wicked."  Our 
character  is  so  imperfect  that  we  can  not  see  the  congruity  of 
these  two  attributes.  We  are  wondering,  perhaps,  and  saying, 
"  How  is  it  he  is  slow  to  anger,  and  yet  will  not  acquit  the 
wicked  ?"  It  is  because  his  character  is  perfect  that  we  do 
not  see  where  these  two  things  melt  into  each  other — the  in- 
fallible righteousness  and  severity  of  the  ruler  of  the  world, 
and  his   loving-kindness,   his   long-suffering,   and    his   tender 


MEKCY,    OMNIPOTENTCE,    AND    JUSTICE.  361 

mercies.  The  absence  of  any  one  of  these  things  from  the 
character  of  God  would  have  rendered  it  imperfect ;  the  pres- 
ence of  them  all,  though  we  may  not  see  how  they  can  be 
congruous  with  each  other,  stamps  the  character  of  God  with 
a  perfection  elsewhere  unknown. 

And  now  I  shall  endeavor  this  morning  to  set  forth  these 
two  attributes  of  God,  and  the  connecting  link.  "  The  Lord 
is  slov)  to  anger  ;''''  then  comes  the  connecting  linh^  "  great  in 
power."  I  shall  have  to  show  you  how  that  "  great  in  power" 
refers  to  the  sentence  foregoing  and  the  sentence  succeeding. 
And  then  we  shall  consider  tlie  next  attribute — "  He  will  not 
at  all  acquit  the  wicked  :"  cm  attribute  of  justice. 

I.  Let  us  begin  with  the  first  characteristic  of  God.  He  is 
said  to  be  "  slow  to  anger."  Let  me  declare  the  attribute, 
and  then  trace  it  to  its  source. 

God  is  "  slow  to  anger."  When  Mercy  cometh  into  the 
world,  she  driveth  winged  steeds ;  the  axles  of  her  chariot- 
wheels  are  glowing  hot  with  speed  ;  but  when  Wrath  cometh, 
it  walketh  with  tardy  footsteps  ;  it  is  not  in  haste  to  slay,  it  is 
not  swift  to  condemn.  God's  rod  of  mercy  is  ever  in  his  hands 
outstretched ;  God's  sword  of  justice  is  in  its  scabbard  :  not 
rusted  in  it — it  can  be  easily  withdrawn — but  held  there  by 
that  hand  that  presses  it  back  into  its  sheath,  crying,  "  Sleep, 
O  sword,  sleep ;  for  I  will  have  mercy  upon  sinners,  and  will 
forgive  their  transgressions."  God  hath  many  orators  in 
heaven  ;  some  of  them  speak  with  swift  words.  Gabriel,  when 
he  cometh  down  to  tell  glad  tidings,  speaketh  swiftly;  angelic 
hosts,  when  they  descend  from  glory,  fly  with  wings  of  light- 
ning, when  they  proclaim,  "  Peace  on  earth,  good  will  toward 
men  ;"  but  the  dark  angel  of  Wrath  is  a  slow  orator ;  with 
many  a  pause  between,  where  melting  Pity  joins  her  languid 
notes,  he  speaks;  and  when  but  half  his  oration  is  completed 
he  often  stays,  and  withdraws  himself  from  his  rostrum,  giving 
way  to  Pardon  and  to  Mercy ;  he  having  but  addressed  the 
people  that  they  might  be  driven  to  repentance,  and  so  might 
receive  peace  from  the  scepter  of  God's  love. 

Brethren,  I  shall  just  try  to  show  you  now  how  Goc'  *s  slow 
to  anger. 

First,  T  will  prove  that  he  is  "  slow  to  anger ;"  because  he 
10 


862  MERCY,    OMNIPOTENCE,    AND   JUSTICE. 

never  smites  without  first  threatening.  Men  who  are  passion- 
ate and  swift  in  anger  give  a  word  and  a  blow ;  sometimes  the 
blow  first  and  the  word  afterward.  Oftentimes  kings,  when 
sul)jects  have  rebelled  against  them,  have  crushed  them  first, 
and  then  reasoned  with  them  afterward  ;  they  have  given  no 
time  of  threatening,  no  period  of  repentance ;  they  have  al- 
lowed no  space  for  turning  to  their  allegiance ;  they  have  at 
once  crushed  them  in  their  hot  displeasure,  making  a  full 
end  of  them.  ISTot  so  God  :  he  will  not  cut  down  the  tree  that 
doth  much  cumber  the  ground,  until  he  hath  digged  about  it, 
and  dunged  it ;  he  will  not  at  once  slay  the  man  whose  char- 
acter is  the  most  vile  ;  until  he  has  first  hewn  him  by  the  pro- 
phets he  will  not  hew  him  by  judgments ;  he  will  warn  the 
sinner  ere  he  condemn  him  ;  he  will  send  his  prophets,  "  rising 
up  early  and  late,"  giving  him  "line  upon  line,  and  precept 
upon  precept,  hei-e  a  little  and  there  a  little."  He  will  not 
smite  the  city  without  warningr ;  Sodom  shall  not  perish,  until 
Lot  hath  been  within  her.  The  world  shall  not  be  drowned, 
until  eight  prophets  have  been  preaching  in  it,  and  Noah,  the 
eighth,  cometii  to  prophesy  of  the  coming  of  the  Lord.  He 
will  not  smite  Nineveh  until  he  hath  sent  a  Jonah.  He  will 
not  crush  Babylon  till  his  prophets  have  cried  through  its 
streets.  He  will  not  slay  a  man  until  he  hath  given  many 
warnings,  by  sicknesses,  by  the  pulpit,  by  providences,  and  by 
consequences.  He  smites  not  with  a  heavy  blow  at  once ;  he 
threateneth  first.  He  doth  not  in  grace,  as  in  nature,  send 
liglitnings  first  and  thunder  afterward  ;  but  he  sendeth  the 
thunder  of  his  law  first,  and  the  lighfning  of  execution  follows 
it.  The  lictor  of  divine  justice  carries  his  axe  bound  up  in  a 
bundle  of  rods,  for  he  will  not  cut  off  men,  until  he  has  re- 
proved them,  that  they  may  repent.  He  is  "  slow  to  anger." 
But  again  :  God  is  also  very  sloio  to  threaten.  Although  he 
w-ill  threaten  before  he  condemns,  yet  he  is  slow  even  in  his 
threatening.  God's  lips  rac  ve  swiftly  when  he  promises,  but 
slowly  when  he  threatens.  Long  rolls  the  pealing  thunder, 
slowly  roll  the  drums  of  heiven,  when  they  sound  the  death- 
march  of  sinners  ;  sweetly  floweth  the  music  of  the  rap-id  notes 
which  proclaim  free  grace,  and  love,  and  mercy.  God  is  slow 
to  threaten.      He  will  not  send  a   Jonah  to    Nineveh,  until 


MERCY,    OMNIPOTEiNxJE,    AND    JUSTICE.  8G3 

Nineveh  has  become  foul  with  sin  ;  he  will  not  even  tell  Sodom 
it  shall  be  burned  with  fire,  until  Sodom  has  become  a  reeking 
dung-hill,  obnoxious  to  earth  as  well  as  heaven  ;  he  will  not 
drown  the  world  with  a  deluge,  or  even  threaten  to  do  it,  until 
the  sons  of  God  themselves  make  unholy  alliances  and  begin 
to  depart  from  him.  He  doth  not  even  threaten  the  sinner  by 
his  conscience,  until  the  sinner  hath  oftentimes  sinned.  He 
will  often  tell  the  sinner  of  his  sins,  often  urge  him  to  repent  ; 
but  he  will  not  make  hell  stare  him  hard  in  the  face,  with  ail 
its  dreadful  terroi',  until  much  sin  has  stirred  up  the  lion  from 
his  lair,  and  made  God  hot  with  wrath  against  the  iniquities 
of  man.     He  is  slow  even  to  threaten. 

But,  best  of  all,  when  God  threatens,  hoio  slow  he  is  to  sen' 
tence  the  criminal!  When  he  lias  told  them  that  he  will 
punish  unless  they  repent,  how  long  a  space  he  gives  them,  in 
which  to  turn  unto  himself!  "  He  doth  not  afflict  wilhngly, 
nor  grieve  the  children  of  men  for  naught ;"  he  stayeth  his 
hand  ;  he  will  not  be  in  hot  haste,  when  he  hath  threatened 
them,  to  execute  the  sentence  upon  them.  Have  you  ever  ob- 
served that  scene  in  the  garden  of  Eden  at  the  time  of  the 
fall  ?  God  had  threatened  Adam  that  if  he  sinned  he  should 
surely  die.  Adam  sinned  :  did  God  make  haste  to  sentence 
him  ?  'Tis  sweetly  said,  "  The  Lord  God  walked  in  the  gar- 
den in  the  cool  of  the  day."  Perhaps  that  fruit  was  plucked 
at  early  morn,  mayhap  it  was  plucked  at  noontide  ;  but  God 
was  in  no  haste  to  condemn ;  he  waited  till  the  sun  w^is  well 
nigh  set,  and  in  the  cool  of  the  day  came,  and  as  an  old  ex- 
positor has  put  it  very  beautifully,  when  he  did  come  he  did 
not  come  on  wings  of  wrath,  but  he  "  walked  in  the  garden  in 
the  cool  of  the  day."  He  was  in  no  haste  to  slay.  I  think  I 
see  him,  as  he  was  represented  then  to  Adam,  in  those  glorious 
days  when  God  walked  with  man.  Mcthinks  I  see  the  won- 
derful similitude  in  which  the  Unseen  did  vail  himself:  T  see  it 
walking  among  the  trees  so  slowly — ay,  if  it  were  right  to  give 
such  a  picture — beating  its  breast,  and  shedding  tears  that  it 
should  have  to  condemn  man.  At  last  I  hear  its  dolefid  voice : 
"  Adam,  where  art  thou  ?  Where  hast  thou  cast  thyself,  poor 
Adam?  Thou  hast  cast  thyself  from  my  favor  ;  thou  hast  east 
thyself  into  nakedness  and  into  fear  ;  for  thou  art  hiding  thy- 


864  MERCY,    OMNIPOTENCE,    AND   JUSTICE. 

self.  Adam,  where  art  thou  ?  I  pity  thee.  Thou  thoughtest 
to  be  God.  Before  I  condemn  thee  I  will  give  thee  one  note 
of  pity.  Adam,  where  art  thou  ?"  Yes,  the  Lord  was  slow 
to  anger,  slow  to  write  the  sentence,  even  though  the  com- 
mand had  been  broken,  and  the  threatening  was  therefore  ot 
necessity  brought  into  force.  It  was  so  with  the  flood:  he 
threatened  the  earth,  but  he  would  not  fully  seal  the  sentence, 
and  stamp  it  with  the  seal  of  heaven,  until  he  had  given  space 
for  repentance.  Noah  must  come,  and  through  his  hundred 
and  twenty  years  must  preach  the  word ;  he  must  come  and 
testify  to  an  unthinking  and  an  ungodly  generation ;  tlie  ark 
must  be  builded,  to  be  a  perpetual  sermon ;  there  it  must  be 
upon  its  mountain-top,  waiting  for  the  floods  to  float  it,  that  it 
might  be  an  every-day  warning  to  the  ungodly.  O  heavens, 
why  did  ye  not  at  once  open  your  floods  ?  Ye  fountains  of 
the  great  deep,  why  did  ye  not  burst  up  in  a  moment  ?  God 
said,  "  I  will  sweep  away  the  world  Avith  a  flood :"  why,  why 
did  ye  not  rise  ?  "  Because,"  I  hear  them  saying  with  gurgling 
notes,  "because,  although  God  had  threatened,  he  was  slow  to 
sentence,  and  he  said  in  himself,  '  Haply  they  may  repent ; 
perad venture  they  may  turn  from  their  sin ;'  and  therefore  did 
he  bid  us  rest  and  be  quiet,  for  he  is  slow  to  anger." 

And  yet  once  more :  even  when  the  sentence  against  a  sin- 
ner is  signed  and  sealed  by  heaven's  broad  seal  of  condemna- 
tion, even  then  God  is  slow  to  carry  it  out.  The  doom  of 
Sodom  is  sealed ;  God  hath  declared  it  shall  be  burned  with 
fire.  But  God  is  tardy.  He  stops.  He  will  himself  go  down 
to  Sodom,  that  he  may  see  the  iniquity  of  it.  And  when  he 
gets  there  guilt  is  rife  in  the  streets.  'Tis  night,  and  the  crew 
of  worse  than  beasts  besiege  the  door.  Does  he  then  hft  his 
hands  ?  Does  he  then  say,  "  Rain  hell  out  of  heaven,  ye  skies  ?*' 
No,  he  lets  them  pursue  their  riot  all  night,  spares  them  to  the 
last  moment,  and  though  when  the  sun  was  risen  the  burning 
hail  began  to  fall,  yet  was  the  reprieve  as  long  as  possible. 
God  was  not  in  haste  to  condemn.  God  had  threatened  to 
root  out  the  Canaanites;  he  declared  that  all  the  children  of 
Amnion  should  be  cut  ofl*;  he  had  promised  Abraham  that  he 
would  give  their  land  unto  his  seed  for  ever,  and  they  were  to 
be  utterly  slain  ;  but  he  made  the  children  of  Israel  wait  four 


MEECY,    OMNIPO-rtiNCE,    AND    JUSTICE.  865 

hundred  years  ii  Egypt,  and  lie  let  these  Canaanites  live  all 
through  the  days  of  the  patriarchs  j  and  even  then,  when  he  led 
his  avenging  ones  out  of  Egypt,  he  stayed  them  forty  years  in 
the  wilderness,  because  he  was  loth  to  slay  poor  Canaan.  "  Yet," 
said  he,  "I  will  give  them  space.  Though  I  have  stamped 
their  condemnation,  though  their  death  warrant  has  come 
forth  from  the  court  of  King's  Bench,  and  must  be  executed, 
yet  will  I  reprieve  them  as  long  as  I  can :"  and  he  stops,  until 
at  last  mercy  had  had  enough,  and  Jericho's  melting  ashes  and 
the  destruction  of  Ai  betokened  that  the  sword  was  out  of  its 
scabbard,  and  God  had  awaked  Hke  a  mighty  man,  and  like  a 
strong  man  full  of  wrath.  God  is  slow  to  execute  the  sentence, 
even  when  he  has  declared  it. 

And  ah!  my  friends,  there  is  a  sorrowful  thought  that  has 
just  crossed  my  mind.  There  are  some  men  yet  alive  who  are 
sentenced  now.  I  believe  that  Scripture  bears  me  out  in  a 
dreadful  thought  which  I  just  wish  to  hint  at.  There  are  some 
men  that  are  condemned  before  they  are  finally  damned  ;  there 
are  some  men  whose  sins  go  before  them  unto  judgment,  who 
are  given  over  to  a  seared  conscience,  concerning  whom  it 
may  be  said  that  repentance  and  salvation  are  impossible. 
There  are  some  few  men  in  the  world  who  are  like  John 
Bunyan's  man  in  the  iron  cage,  can  never  get  out.  They  are 
like  Esau — they  fiMd  no  place  of  repentance,  though,  unlike  him, 
they  do  not  seek  it,  for  if  they  sought  it  they  would  find  it. 
Many  there  are  who  have  sinned  "  the  sin  unto  death,"  con- 
cerning whom  we  can  not  pray  ;  for  we  are  told,  "  I  do  not  say 
that  ye  shall  pray  for  it."  But  why,  why,  why  are  they  not 
already  in  the  flame  ?  If  they  be  condemned,  if  mercy  has  shut 
its  eye  forever  upon  them,  if  it  never  will  stretch  out  its  hand, 
to  give  them  pardon,  why,  why,  why  are  they  not  cut  down 
and  swept  away  ?  Because  God  saith,  "  I  will  not  have  mercy 
upon  them,  but  I  will  let  them  live  a  little  while  longer ;  though 
I  have  condemned  them  I  am  loth  to  carry  the  sentence  out, 
and  will  spare  them  as  long  as  it  is  right  that  man  should  live ; 
I  will  let  them  have  a  long  life  here,  for  they  will  have  a  fear- 
ful eternity  of  wra.h  for  ever."  Yes,  let  them  have  their  little 
whirl  of  pleasure ;  their  end  shall  be  most  fearful.  Let  them 
beware,  for  although  Goc  is  slow  to  anger  he  is  sure  in  lU 


860  MERCY,    OMNIPOTKNCK,    AND    JUSTICE. 

If  God  were  not  si  )w  to  anger,  would  he  not  have  smitten 
this  huge  cit;  of  ours,  this  behemoth  city  ? — would  he  not 
have  smitten  it  into  a  thousand  pieces,  and  blotted  out  the  re- 
membrance of  it  from  the  earth  ?  The  iniquities  of  this  city- 
are  so  great,  that  if  God  ahould  dig  up  her  very  found;Uions!, 
and  cast  her  into  the  sea,  she  well  dcservcth  it.  Our  streets 
at  night  present  spectacles  of  vice  that  can  not  be  equaled. 
Surely  there  can  be  no  nation  and  i  ^  country  that  can  show  a 
city  so  utterly  debauched  as  this  great  city  of  London,  if  our 
midnight  streets  are  indications  of  our  immorality.  You  al- 
low in  your  public  places  of  resort — I  mean  you — my  lords 
and  ladies — you  allow  things  to  be  said  in  your  hearing,  of 
which  your  modesty  ought  to  be  ashamed.  Ye  can  sit  in 
theaters  to  hear  plays  at  which  modesty  should  blush  ;  I  say 
naught  of  piety.  That  the  ruder  sex  should  have  listened  to  the 
obscenities  of  Xa  Traviata  is  surely  bad  enough,  but  that  ladies 
of  the  highest  relinement,  and  the  most  approved  taste,  shoukl 
dishonor  themselves  by  such  a  patronage  of  vice  is  indeed  in- 
tolerable. Let  the  sins  of  the  lower  theaters  escape  without 
your  censure,  ye  gentlemen  of  England,  the  lowest  bestiality 
of  the  nethermost  hell  of  a  play-house  can  look  to  your  opera^ 
houses  for  their  excuse.  I  thought  that  with  the  pretensions 
this  city  makes  to  piety,  for  sure,  they  would  not  have  so  far 
gone,  and  that  after  such  a  warning  as  they  have  had  from  the 
press  itself — a  press  which  is  certainly  not  too  religious — they 
would  not  so  indulge  their  evil  passions.  But  because  the  pill 
is  gilded,  ye  suck  down  the  poison  ;  because  the  thing  is  popu- 
lar, ye  patronize  it :  it  is  lustful,  it  is  abominable,  ft  is  deceitful ! 
Ye  take  your  children  to  hear  what  yoinselves  never  ought  to 
listen  to.  Ye  yourselves  will  sit  in  gay  and  grand  company,  to 
listen  to  things  from  which  your  modesty  ought  to  revolt. 
And  I  would  lain  hope  it  does,  although  the  tide  may  for  a 
while  deceive  you.  Ah  !  God, only  knoweth  the  secret  wicked- 
ness of  this  great  city  ;  it  demandeth  a  loud  and  a  trumpet 
voice ;  it  needs  a  prophet  to  cry  aloud,  "  Sound  an  alarm, 
sound  an  alarm,  sound  an  alarm,"  in  this  city ;  for  verily  the 
enemy  groweth  upon  us,  the  power  of  the  evil  one  is  mighty, 
and  we  are  fast  going  to  perdition,  unless  God  shall  put  forth 
his  hand   and    roL.  back  the    black  torrent   of  iniquity  that 


MERCY,    OMNIPOTENCE,    AND   JUSTICE.  367 

streameth  down  our  streets.  But  God  is  slow  to  anger,  and 
doth  still  stay  his  sword.  Wrath  said  yesterday,  "  Unsheath 
thyself,  O  sword  ;"  and  the  sword  struggled  to  get  free.  Mercy 
put  her  hand  upon  the  hilt,  and  said,  "  Be  still !"  "  Unsheath 
thyself,  O  sword !"  Again  it  struggled  from  its  scabbard  ; 
Mercy  put  her  hand  on  it,  and  said,  "Back!" — and  it  rat- 
tled back  again.  AVrath  stamped  his  foot,  and  said,  "  Awake, 
O  sword,  awake  !"  It  struggled  yet  again,  till  half  its  blade 
was  outdrawn  ;  "  Back,  back  !"  said  Mercy,  and  with  manly 
push  she  sent  it  back  rattling  into  its  sheath  ;  and  there  it 
'^^eeps  still,  for  the  Lord  is  "  slow  to  anger,  and  plenteous  in 
mercy." 

Now  I  am  to  trace  this  attribute  of  God  to  its  source  :  why 
is  he  slow  to  anger  ? 

He  is  slow  to  anger  because  Jie  is  hifinitely  good.  Good  ia 
his  name  ;  "  good"-God.  Good  is  his  nature  ;  because  he  is 
slow  to  anger. 

He  is  slow  to  anger,  again,  because  he  is  great.  Little 
things  are  always  swift  in  anger  ;  great  things  are  not  so. 
The  surly  cur  barks-  at  every  passer-by,  and  bears  no  insult ; 
the  Hon  would  bear  a  thousand  times  as  much  ;  and  the  bull 
sleeps  in  his  pasture,  and  will  bear  much,  before  he  lifteth  up 
his  might.  The  leviathan  in  the  sea,  though  he  makes  the 
deep  to  be  hoary  when  he  is  enraged,  yet  is  slow  to  be  stirred 
up,  while  the  little  and  puny  are  always  swift  in  anger.  God's 
greatness  is  one  reason  of  the  slowness  of  his  wrath. 

H.  But  to  proceed  at  once  to  the  link.  A  great  reason  why 
he  is  slow  to  anger,  is  because  he  is  great  in  power.  This  is 
to  be  the  connecting  link  between  this  part  of  the  subject  and 
the  last,  and  therefore  I  must  beg  your  attention.  I  say  that 
this  word  great  in  poicer  connects  the  first  sentence  to  the 
last ;  and  it  does  so  in  this  way.  The  Lord  is  slow  to  anger  ; 
and  he  is  slow  to  anger  because  he  is  great  in  power.  "How 
say  you  so  ?"  says  one.  I  answer,  he  that  is  great  in  power 
has  power  over  himself;  and  he  that  can  keep  his  own  temper 
down,  and  subdue  himselfj  is  greater  than  he  wdio  rules  a  city, 
or  can  conquer  nations.  We  heard  but  yesterday,  or  the  day 
before,  mighty  displays  of  God's  power  in  the  rolling  thun- 
der '^•hich  alaimed  us  •  and  when  we  saw  the  splendor  of  hi* 


868  MEBCY,    OMNIPOTENCE,    AND    JUSTICE. 

might  in  the  glistening  Hghtning,  when  he  lifted  up  the  gates 
of  heaven  and  we  saw  the  brightness  thereof,  and  then  he 
closed  them  again  upon  the  dusty  earth  in  a  moment — even 
then  we  did  not  see  any  thing  but  the  hidings  of  his  power, 
compared  with  the  power  which  he  has  over  himself.  When 
God's  power  doth  restrain  himself,  then  it  is  power  indeed,  the 
power  to  curb  power,  the  power  that  binds  omnipotence  is 
omnipotence  surpassed.  God  is  gi-eat  in  power,  and  therefore 
doth  he  keep  in  his  anger.  A  man  who  has  a  strong  mhid 
can  bear  to  be  insulted,  can  bear  offenses,  because  he  is  strong. 
The  weak  mind  snaps  and  snarls  at  the  little ;  the  strong  mind 
bears  it  like  a  rock ;  it  moveth  not,  though  a  thousand  breakers 
dash  upon  it,  and  cast  their  pitiful  malice  in  the  spray  upon  its 
summit.  God  marketh  his  enemies,  and  yet  he  moveth  not ; 
he  standeth  still,  and  letteth  them  curse  him,  yet  is  he  not 
wrathful.  If  he  were  less  of  a  God  than  he  is,  if  he  were  less 
mighty  than  we  know  him  to  be,  he  would  long  ere  this  have 
sent  forth  the  whole  of  his  thunder,  and  emptied  the  magazines 
of  heaven  ;  he  would  long  ere  this  have  blasted  the  earth  with 
the  wondrous  mines  he  hath  prepared  in  its  lower  surface ;  the 
flame  that  burneth  there  would  have  consumed  us,  and  we 
should  have  been  utterly  destroyed.  We  bless  God  that  the 
greatness  of  his  power  is  just  our  protection ;  he  is  slow  to 
anger  because  he  is  great  in  power. 

And,  now,  there  is  no  difficulty  in  showing  how  this  link 
unites  itself  with  the  next  part  of  the  text.  "He  is  great  in 
power,  and  will  not  at  all  acquit  the  wicked."  This  needs  no 
demonstration  in  words ;  I  have  but  to  touch  the  feelings,  and 
you  will  see  it.  The  greatness  of  his  power  is  an  assurance, 
and  an  assurance  that  he  will  not  acquit  the  wicked.  Who 
among  you  could  witness  the  storm  on  Friday  night  without 
having  thoughts  concerning  your  own  sinfulness  stirred  in 
your  bosoms  ?  Men  do  not  think  of  God  the  punisher,  or  Je- 
hovah the  avenger,  when  the  sun  is  shining,  and  the  weather 
calm  ;  but  in  times  of  tempest,  whose  cheek  is  not  blanched  ? 
The  Christian  oftentimes  rejoiceth  in  it;  he  can  say,  "My  soul 
is  well  at  ease,  amid  this  revelry  of  earth ;  I  do  rejoice  in  it ; 
it  is  a  day  of  feasting  in  my  Father's  hall,  a  day  of  high-feast 
and  carnival  in  h  ^aven,  9 'id  I  am  glad. 


MERCY,    OMNIPOTENCE,    AND   JUSTICE.  369 

"  Tbe  God  that  reigns  oA  high, 
And  thunders  when  ho  please, 
That  rides  upon  the  stormy  sky. 
And  manages  the  seas, 

This  awful  <^od  is  ours, 

Our  Father  and  our  love, 
He  shall  send  down  his  heavenly  powers 

To  carry  us  above." 

But  the  man  who  is  not  of  an  easy  conscience  will  be  ill  at 
ease  when  the  timbers  of  the  house  are  creaking,  and  the 
foundations  of  the  solid  earth  seem  to  groan.  Ah  !  who  is  he 
then  that  doth  not  tremble  ?  Yon  lofty  tree  is  riven  in  half; 
that  lightning  flash  has  smitten  its  trunk,  and  there  it  lies  for 
ever  blasted,  a  monument  of  what  God  can  do.  Who  stood 
there  and  saw  it  ?  Was  he  a  swearer  ?  Did  he  swear  then  ? 
Was  he  a  Sabbath-breaker  ?  Did  he  love  his  Sabbath-break- 
ing then  ?  Was  he  haughty  ?  Did  he  then  despise  God  ? 
Ah  !  how  he  she  )k  then  !  Saw  you  not  his  hair  stand  on  end  ? 
Did  not  his  chet  .c  blanch  in  an  instant  ?  Did  he  not  close  his 
eyes  and  start  back  in  horror  when  he  saw  that  dreadful  spec- 
tacle, and  thought  God  would  smite  him  too  ?  Yes,  the 
power  of  God,  when  seen  in  the  tempest,  on  sea  or  on  land,  in 
the  earthquake  or  in  the  hurricane,  is  instinctively  a  proof  that 
he  will  not  acquit  the  wicked.  I  know  not  how  to  explain  the 
feeling,  but  it  is  nevertheless  the  truth  ;  majestic  displays  of 
om.nipotence  have  an  efiect  upon  the  mind  of  convincing  even 
the  hardened,  that  God,  who  is  so  powerful,  "  will  not  at  all 
acquit  the  wicked."  Thus  have  I  just  tried  to  explain  and 
make  bare  the  link  of  the  chain. 

III.  The  last  attribute,  and  the  most  terrible  one,  is,  "  he 

WILL  NOT   AT   ALL    ACQUIT   THE  WICKED."       Let  mC  Unfold  this, 

first  of  all ;  and  then  let  me,  after  that,  endeavor  to  trace  it 
also  to  its  source,  as  I  did  the  first  attribute. 

God  "  will  not  acquit  the  wicked."  How  prove  I  this  ?  I 
prove  it  thus.  Never  once  has  he  pardoned  an  unpunished 
sin  ;  not  in  all  the  years  of  the  Most  High,  not  in  all  the  days 
of  his  right  hand,  has  he  once  blotted  out  sin  without  punish- 
ment. What!  say  you,  were  not  those  in  heaven  pardoned? 
Are  there  not  m?ny  transgre  sors  pardoned,  and  do  they  not 
16* 


370  MERCY,    OMNIPOTENCE,    AND    JUSTICE. 

escape  without  punishment  ?  Has  he  not  said,  "  I  have  blot- 
ted out  thy  transgressions  like  a  cloud,  and  like  a  thick  cloud 
thine  iniquities  ?"  Yes,  true,  most  true,  and  yet  my  assertion 
is  true  also — not  one  of  all  those  sins  that  have  been  pardoned 
were  pardoned  without  punishment.  Do  you  ask  me  why  and 
how  such  a  thing  as  that  can  be  the  truth  ?  I  point  you  to  yon 
dreadful  sight  on  Calvary  ;  the  punishment  which  fell  not  on 
the  forgiven  sin^::-  fell  there.  The  cloud  of  justice  was 
charged  with  tiery  hail ;  the  sinner  deserved  it ;  it  fell  on 
him  ;  but,  for  all  that,  it  fell,  and  spent  its  fury  ;  it  fell  there, 
in  that  great  reservoir  of  misery  ;  it  fell  into  the  Saviour's 
heart.  The  plagues,  which  need  should  light  on  our  in- 
gratitude, did  not  fall  on  us,  but  they  fell  somewhere ;  and 
who  was  it  that  was  plagued  ?  Tell  me,  Gethsemane  ;  tell 
me,  O  Calvary's  summit,  who  was  plagued.  The  doleful  an- 
swer comes,  '•'•Eli^  JEli^  lama  sabachthani ?^''  "My  God,  my 
God,  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?"  It  is  Jesus  suffering  all 
the  plagues  of  sin.  Sin  is  still  punished,  tho'  gh  the  sinner  is 
delivered. 

But,  you  say,  this  has  scarcely  proved  that  he  will  not  acquit 
the  wicked.  I  hold  it  has  proved  it,  and  proved  it  clearly. 
}Jut  do  ye  want  any  further  proof  that  God  will  not  acquit  the 
ivicked  ?  Need  I  lead  you  through  a  long  list  of  terrible  won- 
deis  that  God  has  wrought — ^the  wonders  of  his  vengeance? 
Shall  I  show  you  blighted  Eden  ?  Shall  I  let  you  see  a  world 
all  drowned — sea  monsters  whelping  and  stabling  in  tne  pal- 
aces of  kings  ?  Shall  I  let  you  hear  the  last  shriek  of  the  last 
drowning  man  as  he  falls  into  the  flood  and  dies,  washed  by 
that  huge  wave  from  the  hill-top  ?  Shall  I  let  you  see  death 
riding  upon  the  summit  of  a  crested  billow,  upon  a  sea  that 
knows  no  shore,  and  triumphing  because  his  work  is  done  ; 
his  quiver  empty,  for  all  men  are  slain,  save  where  life  floats  in 
the  midst  of  death  in  yonder  ark  ?  Need  I  let  you  see  Sodom 
with  its  terrified  inhabitants,  when  the  volcano  of  almighty 
wrath  spouted  fiery  hail  upon  it  ?  Shall  I  show  you  the  earth 
opening  its  mouth  to  swallow  up  Korah,  Dathan,  and  Abiram  ? 
Need  I  take  you  to  the  plagues  of  Egypt  ?  Shall  I  again  re- 
peat the  death-shriek  of  Pharaoh,  and  the  drowning  of  his 
host  ?     Surely,  ye'nei  d  not  to  be  told  of  cities  that  are  in  ruins, 


MERCY,    OMNIPOTENCE,    A>iD    JUSTICE.  37 1 

^r  of  nations  that  liave  been  cut  ofl'  in  a  day ;  ye  need  not 
to  be  told  how  God  has  smitten  the  earth  from  one  side  to  the 
other,  when  he  has  been  wroth,  and  how  he  has  melted  mount- 
ains in  his  hot  displeasure.  Nay,  we  have  proofs  enough  in 
liistory,  proofs  enough  in  Scripture,  that  "he  will  not  at  all 
acquit  the  wicked."  If  ye  w^anted  the  best  proof,  however, 
ye  should  borrow  the  black  wings  of  a  miserable  imagination, 
and  fly  beyond  the  world,  through  the  dark  realm  of  chaos, 
on,  far  on,  where  those  battlements  of  fire  are  gleaming  w^ith 
a  horrid  light — if  through  them,  with  a  spirit's  safety,  ye 
would  fly,  and  would  behold  the  worm  that  never  dies,  the  pit 
that  knows  no  bottom,  and  could  you  there  see  the  fire  un- 
quenchable, and  listen  to  the  shrieks  and  wails  of  men  that  are 
banished  for  ever  from  God — if,  sirs,  it  were  possible  for  you 
to  hear  tlie  sullen  groans  and  hollow  moans,  and  shrieks  of 
tortured  ghosts,  then  would  ye  come  back  to  this  world, 
amazed  and  petrified  with  horror,  and  you  would  say,  "  Indeed 
he  will  not  acquit  the  wicked."  You  know,  hell  is  the  argu- 
ment of  the  text ;  may  you  never  have  to  prove  the  text  by 
feeling  in  yourselves  the  argument  fully  carried  out,  "  He  will 
not  at  all  acquit  the  wicked." 

And  now  we  trace  this  terrible  attribute  to  its  source.  Why 
is  this  ? 

We  reply,  God  will  not  acquit  the  wicked,  because  he  is 
good.  Wiiat!  doth  goodness  demand  that  sinners  shall  be 
punished  ?  It  doth.  The  Judge  must  condemn  the  murderer, 
because  he  loves  his  nation.  "  I  can  not  let  you  go  free ;  I 
can  not,  and  I  must  not;  you  would  slay  others,  who  belong 
to  this  fair  commonwealth,  if  I  were  to  let  you  go  free ;  no,  I 
must  condemn  you  from  the  very  loveliness  of  my  nature." 
The  kindness  of  a  king  demands  the  punishment  of  those  who 
are  guilty.  It  is  not  wrathful  in  the  legislature  to  make  severe 
laws  against  great  sinners  ;  it  is  but  love  toward  the  rest  that 
sin  should  be  restrained.  Yon  great  flood-gates,  which  keej. 
back  the  torrent  of  sin,  are  painted  black,  and  look  right  hor- 
rible ;  like  horrid  dungeon  gates,  they  aflfright  my  spirit ;  but 
are  they  proofs  that  God  is  not  good  ?  No,  sirs  ;  if  ye  could 
open  wide  those  gates,  and  let  the  deluge  of  sin  flow  on  us, 
then  would  vou  cry   "  O  G^d,  O  God  !  shut-to  the  gates  of 


3^2  MERCY,    OilNIPOTENCE,    AND    JUSTICE. 

punishment  again,  let  law  again  be  established,  set  up  the  pil- 
lars, and  swing  the  gates  upon  their  hinges ;  shut  again  the 
gates  of  punishment,  that  this  world  may  not  again  be  utterly 
destroyed  by  men  wlio  have  become  worse  than  brutes."  It 
needs  for  very  goodness'  sake  that  sin  should  be  punished. 
Mercy,  with  her  weeping  eyes  (for  she  hath  wept  for  sinners), 
when  she  fnids  they  will  not  repent,  looks  more  terribly  stern 
in  her  loveliness  than  Justice  in  all  his  majesty  ;  she  drops" the 
white  flag  from  her  hand,  and  saith — "  No  ;  I  called,  and  they 
refused ;  I  stretched  out  my  hand,  and  no  man  regarded ;  let 
them  die,  let  them  die  ;"  and  that  terrible  word  from  the  lip 
of  Mercy's  self  is  hapsher  thunder  than  the  very  damnation 
of  Justice.  O,  yes,  the  goodness  of  God  demands  that  men 
should  perish,  if  they  will  sin. 

And  again,  the  justice  of  God  demands  it.  God  is  infin- 
itely just,  and  his  justice  demands  that  men  should  be  pun- 
ished, unless  they  turn  to  him  with  full  purpose  of  heart. 
Need  I  pass  through  all  the  attributes  of  God  to  prove  it  ? 
Methinks  I  need  not.  We  must  all  of  us  believe  that  the  God 
who  is  slow  to  anger  and  great  in  power  is  also  sure  not  to 
acquit  the  wicked.  And  noiv  just  a  home-thrust  or  two  with 
you.  What  is  your  state  this  morning?  My  friend,  man  or 
woman,  what  is  thy  state  ?  Canst  thou  look  up  to  heaven  and 
say,  "Though  I  have  sinned  greatly  I  believe  Christ  was 
punished  in  my  stead, 

"  My  faith  looks  back  to  see 
The  burden  he  did  bear 
"When  hanging  on  the  cursed  tree, 
And  knows  her  guilt  was  there?" 

Can  you  by  humble  faith  look  to  Jesus,  and  say,  "  My  substi- 
tute, ray  refuge,  my  shield ;  thou  art  my  rock,  my  trust ;  in 
thee  do  I  confide  ?"  Then,  beloved,  to  you  I  have  nothing  to 
say,  except  this,  Never  be  afraid  when  you  see  God's  power; 
for  now  that  you  are  forgiven  and  accepted,  now  that  by  faith 
you  have  fled  to  Christ  for  refuge,  the  power  of  God  need  no 
more  terrify  you,  than  the  shield  and  sword  of  the  warrior 
need  terrify  his  wife  or  his  child.  "Nay,"  saith  the  woman, 
"  is  he  strong  ?     He  is  strong  for  me.     Is  his  arm   brawney, 


MERCY,    OMNIPOTENCE,    AND    JUSTICE,  373 

and  are  all  his  sinews  fast  and  strong?  Then  are  they  fast 
and  strong  for  me.  While  he  lives,  and  wears  a  shield,  he 
will  stretch  it  over  my  head ;  and  while  his  good  sword  cair 
sleave  foes,  it  will  cleave  my  foes  too,  and  ransom  me."  Be 
of  good  cheer  ;  fear  not  his  power. 

But  hast  thou  never  fled  to  Christ  for  refuge?  Dost  thou 
not  believe  in  the  Redeemer  ?  Hast  thou  never  confided  thy 
soul  to  his  hands  ?  Then,  my  friends,  hear  me ;  in  God's^ 
name,  hear  me  just  a  moment.  My  friend,  I  w^ould  not  stand 
in  thy  position  for  an  hour,  for  all  the  stars  twice  spelt  in  gold ! 
For  what  is  thy  position  ?  Thou  hast  sinned,  and  God  will 
not  acquit  thee ;  he  will  punish  thee.  He  is  letting  thee  live ; 
thou  art  reprieved.  Poor  is  the  hfe  of  one  that  is  reprieved 
without  a  pardon  !  Thy  reprieve  will  soon  run  out ;  thine 
hour-glass  is  emptying  every  day.  I  see  on  some  of  you  death 
has  put  his  cold  hand,  and  frozen  your  hair  to  whiteness.  Ye 
need  your  staff ;  it  is  the  only  barrier  between  you  and  the 
grave  now  ;  and  you  are,  all  of  you,  old  and  young,  standing 
on  a  narrow  neck  of  land,  between  two  boundless  seas — that 
neck  of  land,  tiiat  isthmus  of  life,  narrowing  every  moment, 
and  you,  and  you,  and  you,  ai'e  yet  unpardoned.  There  is  a 
city  to  be  sacked,  and  you  are  in  it — soldiers  are  at  the  gates  ; 
the  command  is  given  that  every  man  in  the  city  is  to  be 
slaughtered  save  he  who  can  give  the  password.  "  Sleep  on, 
sleep  on  ;  the  attack  is  not  to-day  ;  sleep  on,  sleep  on."  "  But 
it  is  to-morrow,  sir."  "  Ay,  sleep  on,  sleep  on ;  it  is  not  till  to- 
morrow ;  sleep  on,  procrastinate,  procrastinate."  "  Hai'k  !  I 
hear  a  rumbling  at  tlie  gates;  the  battering-ram  is  at  them  ; 
the  gates  are  tottering."  "  Sleep  on,  sleep  on  ;  the  soldiers 
are  not  yet  at  your  doors;  sleep  on,  sleep  on;  ask  for  no 
mercy  yet ;  sleep  on,  sleep  on  !"  "  Ay,  but  I  hear  the  shrill 
clarion  sound ;  they  are  in  the  streets.  Hark,  to  the  shrieks 
of  men  and  women  !  They  are  slaughtering  them ;  they  fall, 
they  fall,  they  fall  I"  "  Sleep  on  ;  they  are  not  yet  at  your 
door."  "  But  hark,  they  are  at  the  gate  ;  with  heavy  tramp 
I  hear  the  soldiers  marching  up  the  stairs  !"  "  Nay,  sleep  on, 
sleep  on  ;  they  are  not  yet  in  your  room."  "  Why,  they  are 
there ;  they  have  burst  open  the  door  that  parted  you  from 
them,  and  there  they  standi"     "No,  sleep  on,  sleep  on;  the 


374  MERCY,    OilNIPOTliNCE,    AND    JUSTICE. 

sword  is  not  3  et  at  your  throat ;  sleep  on,  sleep  on  !"  It  is  at 
your  throat,  you  start  with  horror.  Sleep  on,  sleep  on  !  But 
you  are  gone !  "  Demon,  why  toldest  thou  me  to  slumber  ?  It 
would  have  been  wise  in  me  to  have  escaped  the  city  when 
first  the  gates  were  shaken.  Wliy  did  I  not  ask  for  the  pass- 
word before  the  troops  came  ?  Why,  by  all  that  is  wise,  why 
did  I  not  rush  into  the  streets,  and  cry  the  password  when  the 
.soldiers  were  there  ?  Why  stood  I  till  the  knife  was  at  my 
throat  ?  Ay,  demon  that  thou  art,  be  cursed ;  but  I  am  cursed 
with  thee  for  ever!-'  You  know  the  application  ;  it  is  a  para- 
ble ye  can  all  expound ;  ye  need  not  that  I  should  tell  you 
that  death  is  after  you,  that  justice  must  devour  you,  that 
Christ  crucified  is  the  only  password  that  can  save  you ;  and 
yet  you  have  not  learned  it — that  with  some  of  you  death  is 
n  earing,  nearing,  nearing,  and  that  with  all  of  you  he  is  close 
at  hand  !  I  need  not  expound  how  Satan  is  the  demon,  how 
in  hell  you  shall  curse  him  and  curse  yourselves  because  you 
procrastinated — how,  that  seeing  God  was  slow  to  anger  you 
Avere  slow  to  repentance — how,  because  he  was  great  in  power, 
and  kept  back  his  anger,  therefore  you  kept  back  your  steps 
from  seeking  him ;  and  here  you  are  what  you  are ! 

Spirit  of  God,  bless  these  words  to  some  souls  that  they  may 
be  saved  !  May  some  sinners  be  brought  to  the  Saviour's  feet, 
and  cry  for  mercy !     We  ask  it  for  Jesus'  sak(i.     Amen. 


SERMON    XXV. 

CHRIST— THE  POWER  AND  WISDOM  OF  GOD. 

"  Christ  the  power  of  God,  and  the  wisdom  of  God," — 1  Cor.,  i.  24 

Unbelisf  toward  the  gospel  of  Christ  is  the  most  unreason, 
able  thing  jn  all  the  world,  because  the  reason  which  the  un- 
believer gives  for  his  unbelief  is  fairly  met  by  the  character 
and  constitution  of  the  gospel  of  Christ.  Notice  that  before 
this  verse  we  read — "  The  Jews  required  a  sign,  the  Greeks 
seek  after  wisdom."  If  you  met  the  Jew  who  believed  not  on 
Christ  in  the  apostle's  day,  he  said,  "lean  not  believe,  because' 
I  want  a  sign  ;"  and  if  you  met  the  Greek,  he  said,  "  I  can  not 
believe,  because  I  want  a  philosophic  system,  one  that  is  full 
of  wisdom."  "  Now,"  says  the  apostle,  "  both  these  objections 
are  untenable  and  unreasonable.  If  you  suppose  that  the  Jew 
requires  a  sign,  that  sign  is  given  him  :  Christ  is  the  power  of 
God,  The  nuracles  that  Christ  wrought  upon  earth  were  signs 
more  than  sufficiently  abundant ;  and  if  the  Jewish  people  had 
but  the  will  to  believe,  they  would  have  found  abundant  signs 
and  reasons  for  believing  in  the  personal  acts  of  Christ  and  his 
apostles."  And  let  the  Greeks  say,  "I  can  not  believe,  be- 
cause I  require  a  wise  system :  O  Greek,  Christ  is  the  wisdom 
of  God.  If  thou  wouldst  but  investigate  the  subject,  thou 
wouldst  find  in  it  profoundness  of  wisdom — a  depth  where  the 
most  gigantic  intellect  might  be  drowned.  It  is  no  shallow 
gospel,  but  a  deep,  and  a  great  deep  too,  a  deep  which  passeth 
understanding.  Thine  objection  is  ill-founded  ;  for  Christ  is 
the  wisdom  of  God,  and  his  gospel  is  the  highest  of  all  sciences. 
If  thou  wishest  to  find  wisdom,  thou  must  find  it  in  the  word 
of  revelation." 

Xow.  this  morning,  we  shall  try  to  bring  cut  these  two 


376  CURIST THE    POWER    AND    WISDOM    OF    GO©. 

thoughts  of  the  gospel ;  and  it  may  be  that  God  shall  bless 
what  we  shall  say  to  the  removing  of  the  objection  of  either 
Jew  or  Greek  ;  that  the  one  requiring  a  sign  may  see  it  in  the 
poioer  of  God  in  Christ,  and  that  he  who  i-equireth  wisdom 
may  behold  it  in  the  wisdom  of  God  in  Christ.  We  shall  un- 
derstand our  text  in  a  threefold  manner :  Christ,  that  is, 
Christ  personally^  is  "  the  power  of  God  and  the  wisdom  of 
God  ;"  Christ,  that  is,  CkrisPs  gospel^  is  "  the  power  of  God 
and  the  wisdom  of  God ;"  Christ,  that  is,  Christ  in  the  hearty 
true  rdigion^  is  "the  power  of  God  and  the  wisdom  of  God." 

I.  First,  to  begin,  then,  with  Christ  personally.  Christ 
considered  as  God  and  man,  the  Son  of  God  equal  with  his 
Father,  and  yet  the  man,  born  of  the  Virgin  Mary.  Christ,  in 
his  complex  person,  is  "  the  power  of  God  and  the  wisdom  of 
God."  He  is  the  power  of  God  from,  all  eternity.  "  By  his 
word  were  the  heavens  made,  and  all  the  host  of  them."  "  The 
Word  was  God,  and  the  Word  was  with  God."  "  All  things 
were  made  by  him,  and  without  him  was  not  any  thing  made 
that  was  made."  The  pillars  of  the  earth  were  placed  in  their 
everlasting  sockets  by  the  omnipotent  right  hand  of  Christ ; 
the  curtains  of  the  heavens  were  drawn  upon  their  rings  of 
starry  light  by  him  who  was  from  everlasting  the  All-glorious 
Son  of  God.  The  orbs  that  float  aloft  in  ether,  those  ponder- 
ous planets,  and  those  mighty  stars,  were  placed  in  their  posi- 
tions, or  sent  rolling  through  space  by  the  eternal  strength  of 
him  who  is  "  the  first  and  the  last,"  "  the  Prince  of  the  kings 
of  the  earth."  Christ  is  the  j)ower  of  God,  for  he  is  the 
Creator  of  all  things,  and  by  him  all  things  exist. 

But  lohen  he  came  to  earthy  took  upon  himself  the  fashion 
of  a  man,  tabernacled  in  the  inn,  and  slept  in  the  manger,  he 
still  gave  proof  that  he  was  the  Son  of  God  ;  not  so  much  so 
when,  as  an  infant  of  a  span  long,  the  immortal  was  the  mortal, 
and  the  infinite  became  a  babe ;  not  so  much  so  in  his  youth, 
but  afterward  when  he  began  his  public  ministry,  he  gave 
abundant  proofs  of  his  power  and  Godhead.  The  winds  hushed 
by  his  finger  uplifted,  the  waves  calmed  by  his  voice,  so  that 
they  became  solid  as  marble  beneath  his  tread  ;  the  tempest, 
cowering  at  his  feet,  as  before  a  conqueror  whom  it  knew  and 
obeyed ;  these  things,  these  stormy  elements,  the  wind,  the 


CHRIST THE    POWER    AND    WISDOM    OF    QOD.  377 

tempest,  and  the  water,  gave  full  proof  of  his  abundant  power. 
The  lame  man  leaping,  the  deaf  man  liearing,  the  dumb  man 
singing,  the  dead  rising,  these,  again,  were  proofs  that  he  was 
the  ''  power  of  God."  When  the  voice  of  Jesus  startled  the 
shades  of  Ilades,  and  rent  the  bonds  of  death,  with  "Lazarus, 
come  forth  I"  and  when  the  carcass  rotten  in  the  tomb  woke 
up  to  life,  there  was  proof  of  his  divine  power  and  Godhead. 
A  thousand  other  proofs  he  afforded ;  but  we  need  not  stay 
to  mention  them  to  you  who  have  Bibles  in  your  houses,  and 
who  can  read  them  every  day.  At  last  he  yielded  up  his  life, 
and  was  buried  in  the  tomb.  Not  long,  however,  did  he 
sleep;  for  he  gave  another  proof  of  his  divine  power  and  God- 
head, when  starting  from  his  slumber,  he  affrighted  the  guards 
with  the  majesty  of  his  grandeur,  not  being  holden  by  the 
bonds  of  death,  they  being  like  green  withes  before  our  con- 
quering Samson,  who  had  meanwhile  pulled  up  the  gates  of 
hell,  and  carried  them  on  his  shoulders  far  away. 

That  he  is  the  poicer  of  God  now^  Scripture  very  positively 
afRrmeth  ;  for  it  is  written,  "  he  sitteth  at  the  right  hand  of 
God."  He  hath  the  reins  of  Providence  gathered  in  his  hands; 
the  fleet  coursers  of  Time  are  driven  by  him  who  sits  in  the 
chariot  of  the  world,  and  bids  its  wheels  run  round ;  and  he 
shall  bid  them  stay  when  it  shall  please  him.  He  is  the  great 
umpire  of  all  disputes,  the  great  Sovereign  Head  of  the  church, 
the  Lord  of  heaven,  and  death,  and  hell ;  and  by-and-by  we 
shall  know  that  he  shall  come, 

"  On  fiery  clouds  and  wings  of  wind, 
Appointed  Judge  of  all  mankind  ;" 

and  then  the  quickened  dead,  the  startled  myriads,  the  divided 
firmaments,  the  "Depart,  ye  cursed,"  and  the  "Come,  ye 
blessed,"  shall  proclaim  him  to  be  the  power  of  God,  who  hath 
power  over  all  flesh,  to  save  or  to  condemn,  as  it  pleaseth  hina. 
But  he  is  equally  "  the  wisdom  of  God."  The  great  things 
that  he  did  before  all  worlds  were  proofs  of  his  wisdom.  He 
planned  the  way  of  salvation  ;  he  devised  the  system  of  atone- 
ment and  substitution ;  he  laid  the  foundations  of  the  great 
plan  of  salvation.  There  was  wisdom.  But  he  built  the 
heavens  by  wisdom,  and  he  laid  the  pillars  of  light,  whereoa 


878 


C'llHIHT 1  III-:    I'OVV  K.U    AND    WIHUOM    OK    GOD. 


tlin  f]i-tiiuiticiit,  JH  l>;il.'iN(u;(],  ))y  li'm  Hkill  and  wiHdotn.  Mark  tlio 
world  ;  Miid  Icjirn,  jis  yc  h(m!  mI!  ils  miill.iluditiouM  proofn  of  llio 
\vlH<loiri  o('(J()d,  ;iii<l  llicMi  yoii  li;ivc  t.ln'  wisdom  ol'CliriHt;  for 
li(!  WHH  iJic,  crcal.or  o  il,.  And  m/ir//.  Iir  Ihuuuiu'.  a.  imin^  Ik;  ^mvo 
prooln  ciioii^^li  (»r  wisdom.  Vavm  in  cliildliood,  wIkmi  Fm;  rnjido 
t.lic  do(  lors  mIi,  ;il»;isl)cd  |»y  (Ik;  (jncstionH  tli;U,  Im;  jiskcd,  lio 
h)iow<!(|  I.IimI,  lid  w.'is  more  lii.ui  mortal.  And  when  tlio  IMiMii- 
M(Mj  and  Saddiic,('('  and  li<Todi;m  \\'('\-('  :ill  :il,  last,  flcfcal.cd,  and 
llwir  rnM,H  W(u*(!  broken,  In*  pioved  ;i,;4;i.in  llnr  HUpcrlativcj  vvIh- 
dom  of  |,Im!  Son  (»('  (Jod.  And  wIkmi  llir)S('  wlio  r.'AWw.  to  tako 
liim,  Hl,ood  <'iicli;iinc(|  by  his  chxiinncc,  H)»('ll-l)onn<i  hy  his  inar- 
vclons  oratory,  l.hrrij  was  a;^;i.in  ;i.  prooC  l,h;il,  he.  was  Ihn  wiH- 
dotn of  (ilod,  who  could  HO  (Michain  \\\v  minds  of  nwn.  And 
now  t.hal,  he  inlcrccMJoth  l>(!ror(!  lln*  ihronc  of  (Jo<i,  now  that 
h<i  is  onr  Advocate  Ix-forc;  the  thi'onc,  th<!  pledge!  jmd  Hurcity 
lor  the  Messed,  now  tJiat  the  I'eins  of  ^•o\'<Tnm<'nt  ;u(!  in  hin 
hands,  and  are  (!ver  wiscily  direete(l,  vv<;  hav(!  abundant  proofs 
that  the  wisdom  of  (lod  is  in  (Mirist,  as  well  as  tin;  power  of 
(iod.  How  before  him,  yv.  that  lo\c  him  ;  bow  bcil'ore  him, 
ye  that  desire  him!  <  Irown  him,  crown  him,  crown  him!  IIo 
is  worthy  (»('  it,  milo  him  is  everlastin;j;  niij^ht  ;  unio  him  iii 
unswerving  wisdom:  bless  his  name;  exalt  him;  elap  youi 
win;j;s,  ye  Hc^'aphs  ;  cry  aloud,  yi\  <'.herubim ;  sliont,  shout, 
Hhout,  to  his  praise,  y<!  ransomed  host  abov(!.  And  ycf,  Omen 
that  know  bin  grace,  extol  him  in  your  son;^H  for  ever;  for  ho 
is  (yhrist,  tim  powcir  of  (iod  and  the  wisdom  of  God. 

II.  But  now  ('hiisi,,  that  is,  (/Iiims'|''s  ( loseici.,  is  the  power 
and  th(^  wisdom  of  ( i!od. 

I.  (Jhi'iMfH  gospel  is  <t  thimj  <tj' di nine  power.  \)o  you  want 
j)rool's  of  il,  ?  Ye  shall  not,  go  far.  IIow  (rouhl  Christ's  gos- 
pel have  been  established  in  this  world  as  it,  was,  if  it  had  not 
in  itself  intrinsic,  might?  Hy  whom  was  it  Hprea<l  V  By  ini- 
tercil  prelates,  by  li'arne(l  dcictors,  l)y  (ier<H)  waniors,  by  ea. 
liphs,  by  prophets  ?  No  ;  by  lisln'mien,  untaught,,  unlett,('r(!d  ; 
Have  aH  the  Spirit  ga,ve  them  utterance,  not  knowing  how  to 
]>r(»aeh  or  speak.  How  did  tlu^y  sprctad  it?  I>y  tin;  bayonet, 
l)y  their  HWo"ds,  by  the  keen  nn-tal  of  their  bIa,d(!S?  Did  they 
driv(»  their  gospel  into  nuMi  at  th(5  point  of  IIk^  lanc.((,  am!  with 
the   cimeter  ?     Say,  di<l    myriads   rush    to   ])atth(,  hh  tlu)y  did 


(.'IllilSI—   1  HI.    I'OWIOi:     AND     WISDOM     0|'    (lOD. 


M\) 


wlu'ii  1,1m  y  Collowcd  l,li(!  crcscciil,  of  IMolininiiicd,  ;iii<i  did  tlicy 
convert  iiM'ii  by  lorcc,  l»y  hiw,  by  iiii'dil  ?  Ah!  no,  NolJi- 
iii^;-  but,  tJicir  him|>l(i  \V(»rdM,  (licir  iiii\  niiiislicd  clocjiiciici!,  l.lioir 
roiiirb  (Icdlainiitioii,,  llicir  iiiilicwii  oriilory  ;  iJicsc  it,  wuh,  vvliicli, 
by  tlio  bU'ssiii!^  ol'  (Jod'n  Spirit,  cHiiicd  t.lid  <^(),M|)«'i  loimd  iJio 
world  within  ;i  (•ciiliiry  Ml'lcr  the  (b'Mth  ol"  il,H  limiidcr. 

r»iil-  \sli;it.  w  :is  this  l;<'M|»<1  wiiicli  :i<-liit'\cd  ho  iiiiich  ?  VV;im 
it,  M  lhiii;4  |);il;il iiblc  t,o  liiiiii:iii  ii:iliii(!?  I  )id  it,  ollrr  ;i,  |»;ir;idi,so 
of  |ii('S('iit,  iiJi|i|)iii('KH?  Did  il  ollrr  dcji'dil,  to  lli.-  Ilrsh  :iiid  t,() 
1,1m  sciiHcs  ?  Did  it,  •^ivc.  chiinniii;^^  proHpcct-H  ol' wcultii  ?  Did 
it,  ^'w'v.  licciitionH  idciiH  t,o  iiicii  V  No  ;  it,  w:im  h  ^^'o.spcl  ol"  iiio- 
r.ilily  m<»,sl,  .sliict,,  it,  wjis  ;i.  «;o,spt'l  \\il,h  ddiidil.s  ciilircly  Hpirit,- 
ii:il — :i  gospel  which  Mbjnictl  the  llcsli,  which,  imlikc  the  coui.so 
dcliiHioii  ol'.Ioc  Smith,  cut,  oil"  every  prospect,  IVom  men  ol'  d((- 
li;4iitin<4'  t,h('mHelv<'M  wit.li  tim  joys  ol"  lii.st.  It,  w;is  ;i  ;.;osp(?i 
iioly,  spotless,  cle;m  ;is  tlie  breat.h  ol'  he.'ivciu  ;  it,  wms  piirc!  um 
the  wiiiL;-  ol'  :iii,!';el  ;  not,  like  ih.il,  which  spre;id  of  old,  in  t,h() 
days  ol"  Mohannned,  a,  ^osjnd  ol"  bist,  ol' vice,  an<l  w  icke<biess, 
bill,  pure,  and  conse<pient  ly  not,  palatable  to  human  nature. 
AimI  yet,  il,  spread.  Why?  IMy  rriends,  I  t,liiidv  t,he  only  aii- 
swi'r  I  can  !',i\<'  you  is,  because  it,  has  in  il,  t,h(^  powei"  ol"  (iio(l. 

ibil,  do  you  \\*ant,  another  |tro(»ry  llow  has  it,  been  main- 
laiiH'd  since  tlu'ii 'r'  No  easy  path  has  iIm;  <;(»spel  iuid,  'I'hn 
^ood  bark  ol'  I, In;  church  has  had  t,o  plow  litsr  wuy  through 
Kcas  oi"  Idood,  :ind  ihosn  who  iiavo  iiiiiimed  her  Inivt;  biMtii  ixs 
spattered  with  the  bhtody  spray  ;  yea,  they  have  liad  to  man 
her  an<l  ki-ej*  jier  in  motion,  by  layiiiuj  down  their  lives  imt,o 
tin;  death.  iMaik  tlu!  bitter  piU'seciitioii  of  the  ciiui'cii  of 
('hrist  ri'(un  the  tinu;  of  Nero  t,o  tlio  dn,yH  of  Mary,  uiid  fur- 
ther on,  throu«;li  the  days  of  (Miarles  the  Second,  und  ol'tlioHO 
kin^M  of  unhappy  meimu-y,  who  iiad  not  as  yet  learned  iM)w  to 
Hpell  "  loleralioii."  l''rom  the  dra<.';oons  oi'  ( 'laverhouse,  ri;.;ht 
strai^^ht  away  to  the  L',ladiul<u  iai  shows  ol'  Ivoine,  what  u  Ion;.;- 
Hcries  of  p(UNe(UitionH  haH  l,h(i  ^osp(d  had  I  l»ul,,  as  tlu-  ohl 
<livines  use<l  to  nay,  "  The  biyod  of  tint  martyrs"  lias  been 
"th(!  N('e(|  of  tluf  church."  It  has  been,  as  tlu!  old  lierbalistH 
had  it,  lik(!  the  herb  camomile,  the  more  it,  is  trodden  on,  tint 
more  it  ^roWH;  .and  the  more  the  church  has  been  ilbtrejit,ed, 
the  more  il  has  pnjspeicd.      Hehohl  tlm  iiKiuntuiiiH  wlioro  tlio 


380  CHRIST THE    POWER    AND    WISDOM    OF    GOD. 

Albigenses  walk  in  their  white  garments ;  see  the  stakes  of 
Smithtield,  not  yet  forgotten  ;  behold  ye  the  fields  among 
the  towering  hills,  where  brave  hands  kept  themselves  free 
from  despotic  tyranny.  Mark  ye  the  Pilgrim  Fathers,  driven 
by  a  government  of  persecution  across  the  briny  deep.  See 
what  vitality  the  gospel  has.  Plunge  her  under  the  wave, 
and  she  rises,  the  purer  for  her  washing ;  thrust  her  m  the  fire, 
and  she  comes  out,  the  more  bright  for  her  burning ;  cut  her 
in  sunder,  and  each  piece  shall  make  another  church  ;  behead 
her,  and  like  the  hydra  of  old,  she  shall  have  a  hundred  heads 
for  every  one  you  cut  away.  She  can  not  die,  she  must  live ; 
for  she  has  the  power  of  God  within  her. 

Do  you  want  another  proof?  I  give  you  a  better  one  than 
the  last.  I  do  not  wonder  that  the  church  has  outlived  per- 
secution so  much  as  I  wonder  she  has  outlived  the  unfaith- 
fulness of  her  professed  teachers.  Never  was  church  so 
abused  as  the  church  of  Christ  has  been,  all  through  her  his- 
tory ;  from  the  days  of  Diotrephes,  who  sought  to  have  the 
pre-eminence,  even  to  these  later  times,  we  can  read  of  proud, 
arrogant  prelates,  and  supercilious,  haughty  lords  over  God's 
inheritance.  Bonners,  Dunstans,  and  men  of  all  sorts,  have 
come  into  her  ranks,  and  done  all  they  could  to  kill  her ;  and 
with  their  lordly  piiestcraft  they  have  tried  to  turn  her  aside. 
And  what  shall  we  say  to  that  huge  apostacy  of  Rome  ?  A 
thousand  miracles  that  ever  the  church  outlived  that !  When 
her  pretended  head  became  apostate,  and  all  her  bishops  dis- 
ciples of  hell,  and  she  had  gone  far  away,  wonder  of  wonders, 
that  s^ie  should  come  out,  in  the  days  of  the  glorious  Refor- 
mation, and  should  still  live.  And,  even  now,  when  I  mark  the 
supineness  of  many  of  my  brethren  in  the  ministry — when  I 
mark  their  utter  and  entire  inefiiciency  of  doing  aught  for 
God — when  I  see  their  waste  of  time,  preaching  now  and  then 
on  tlie  Sunday,  instead  of  going  to  the  highways  and  hedges 
and  preaching  the  gospel  everywhere  to  the  poor — when  I  see 
the  want  of  unction  in  the  church  itself,  the  want  of  prayerful- 
ness — when  I  see  Mars  and  fightings,  factions  and  disunions — 
when  I  see  hot  blood  and  pride,  even  in  the  meetings  of  the 
saints ;  I  say  it  is  a  thousand  thousand  miracles  that  the  church 
of  God  should  be  alive  at  all,  after  the  unfaithfulness  of  her 


CHRIST THE   POWER    AND   WISDOM    OF    GCD.  381 

members,  her  ministers,  and  her  bishops.  She  has  the  power 
of  God  within  her,  or  else  slie  would  have  been  destroyed ;  for 
she  has  got  enough  within  her  own  loins  to  work  her  destruc- 
tion. 

"  But,"  says  one,  "  you  have  not  yet  proved  it  is  the  power 
of  God  to  my  understanding."  Sir,  I  will  give  you  another 
proof.  There  are  not  a  few  of  you,  who  are  now  present,  who 
would  be  ready,  I  know,  if  it  were  necessary,  to  rise  in  your 
seats  and  bear  me  witness  that  I  speak  the  truth.  There  are 
some  who,  not  many  months  ago,  were  drunkards ;  some  who 
were  loose  livers;  men  who  were  unfaithful  to  every  vow 
which  should  keep  man  to  truth,  and  right,  and  chastity,  and 
honesty,  and  integrity.  Yes,  I  repeat,  I  have  some  here  who 
look  back  to  a  life  of  detestable  sin.  You  tell  me,  some  of 
you,  that  for  thirty  years  even  (there  is  one  such  present  now) 
you  never  listened  to  a  gospel  ministry,  nor  ever  entered  the 
house  of  God  at  all ;  you  despised  the  Sabbath,  you  spent  it  in 
all  kinds  of  evil  pleasures,  you  plunged  headlong  into  sin  and 
vice,  and  your  only  wonder  is,  that  God  has  not  out  you  oiF 
long  ago,  as  cumberers  of  the  ground  ;  and  now  you  are  here, 
as  different  as  light  from  darkness.  I  know  your  characters, 
and  have  watched  you  with  a  father's  love  ;  for,  child  though 
I  am,  I  am  the  spiritual  father  of  some  here  whose  years 
outcount  mine  by  four  times  the  number ;  and  I  have  seen 
you  honest  who  were  thieves,  and  you  sober  who  were  drunk- 
ards. I  have  seen  the  wife's  glad  eye  sparkling  with  happi- 
ness ;  and  many  a  woman  has  grasped  me  by  the  hand,  shed 
her  tears  upon  me,  and  said,  "  I  bless  God ;  I  am  a  happy 
woman  now  ;  my  husband  is  reclaimed,  my  house  is  blessed  ; 
our  children  are  brought  up  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord."  Not 
one  or  two,  but  scores  of  such  are  here.  And,  my  friends,  if 
these  bo  not  proofs  that  the  gospel  is  the  power  of  God,  I  say 
there  is  no  proof  of  any  thing  to  be  had  in  the  world,  and 
every  thing  must  be  conjecture.  Yes,  and  there  worsh'ps 
with  you  this  day  (and  if  there  be  a  secularist  here,  my  frie  id 
will  pardon  me  for  alluding  to  him  for  a  moment),  there  is  in 
the  house  of  God  this  day  one  who  was  a  leader  in  your  ranks, 
one  who  despised  God,  and  ran  very  far  away  from  right. 
And  here  he  is !     It  is  his  honor  this  day  to  own  himself  a 


382  CHRIST THE   POWER   ASD    WISDOM    OF    GOD. 

Christian ;  and  I  hope,  when  this  sermon  is  er,ded,  to  grasp 
him  by  the  hand,  for  he  has  done  a  vahaiit  deed  ;  he  has 
bravely  burned  his  papers  in  the  sight  of  all  the  people,  and 
has  turned  to  God  with  full  purpose  of  heart.  I  could  give 
you  proofs  enough,  if  proofs  were  wanted,  that  the  gospel  has 
been  to  men  the  power  of  God  and  the  wisdom  of  God.  More 
proofs  I  could  give,  yea,  thousands,  one  upon  the  other. 

But  we  must  notice  the  other  points.  Christ's  gospel  is  the 
wisdom  of  God.  Look  at  the  gospel  itself  and  you  will  see  it 
to  be  wisdom.  The  man  who  scoffs  and  sneers  at  the  gospel, 
does  so  for  no  other  reason  but  because  he  does  not  understand 
it.  We  have  two  of  the  richest  books  of  theology  extant  that 
were  written  by  professed  infidels — by  men  that  were  so,  I 
mean,  before  they  wrote  the  books.  You  may  have  heard  the 
story  of  Lord  Lyttleton  and  West.  I  believe  they  deter- 
mined to  refute  Christianity  ;  one  of  them  took  up  the  subject 
of  Paul's  conversion,  and  the  other,  the  subject  of  the  resur- 
rection ;  they  sat  down,  both  of  them,  to  write  books  to  ridi- 
cule those  two  events,  and  the  effect  was,  that  in  studying  the 
subject,  they,  both  of  them,  became  Christians,  and  wrote 
books  which  are  now  bulwarks  to  the  church  they  hoped  to 
have  overthrown.  Every  man  who  looks  the  gospel  fairly  in 
the  face,  and  gives  it  the  study  it  ought  to  have,  will  discover 
that  it  is  no  false  gospel,  but  a  gospel  that  is  replete  with  wis- 
dom, and  full  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ.  If  any  man  will 
cavil  at  the  Bible,  he  must  cavil.  There  are  some  men  wh(? 
can  find  no  wisdom  anywhere,  except  in  their  own  heads. 
Such  men,  however,  are  no  judges  of  wisdom.  We  should  not 
set  a  mouse  to  explain  the  phenomena  of  astronomy,  nor  should 
we  set  a  man  who  is  so  foolish  as  to  do  nothing  but  cavil  to 
understand  the  wisdom  of  the  gospel.  It  needs  that  a  man 
should  at  least  be  honest,  and  have  some  share  of  sense,  or  we 
can  not  dispute  with  him  at  all.  Christ's  gospel,  to  any  man 
who  believes  it,  is  the  wisdom  of  God. 

Allow  me  just  to  hint  that  to  be  a  believer  in  t'He  gospel  ia 
no  dishonor  to  a  man's  intellect.  While  the  gospel  can  be  un- 
derstood by  the  poorest  and  the  most  illiterate,  while  there 
are  shallows  in  it  where  a  lamb  may  wade,  there  are  depths 
where  leviathan  may  swim.     The  intellect  of  Locke  found  am- 


CHEIST THE    POWER    AND    WISDOM    OF    GOD.  883 

pie  space  in  the  gospel ;  the  mmd  of  Newton  submitted  to  re- 
ceive the  truth  of  inspiration  as  a  little  child,  and  found  a 
something  in  its  majestic  being  higher  than  itself,  unto  which 
it  could  not  attain.  The  rudest  and  most  untaught  have  been 
enabled,  by  the  study  of  the  holy  Scripture  of  God's  truth  to 
enter  the  kingdom  ;  and  the  most  erudite  have  said  of  the 
gospel,  it  surpasses  thought.  I  was  thinking  the  other  day 
what  a  vast  amount  of  literature  must  be  lost  if  the  gospel 
be  not  true.  No  book  was  ever  so  suggestive  as  the  Bible. 
Large  tomes  we  have  in  our  libraries  which  it  takes  all  our 
strength  to  lift,  all  upon  holy  Scripture ;  myriads  upon  my- 
riads of  smaller  volumes,  tens  of  thousands  of  every  shape  and 
size,  all  written  upon  the  Bible ;  and  I  have  thought  that  the 
very  suggestiveness  of  Scripture,  the  supernatural  suggestive- 
ness  of  holy  Writ,  may  be  in  itself  a  proof  of  its  divine  wis- 
dom, since  no  man  has  ever  been  able  to  write  a  book  which 
could  have  so  many  commentators  and  so  many  writers  upon 
its  text  as  the  Bible  has  received,  by  so  much  as  one  millionth 
part. 

III.  Christ  ix  a  man,  the  gospel  in  the  soul,  is  the  pow- 
er of  God  and  tlie  wisdom  of  God.  We  will  picture  the  Chris- 
tian from  his  beginning  to  his  end.  We  will  give  a  short  map 
of  his  history.  He  begins  there,  in  that  prison-house,  with 
huge  iron  bars,  which  he  can  not  file ;  in  that  dark,  damp  cell, 
where  pestilence  and  death  are  bred.  There,  in  poverty  and 
nakedness,  without  a  pitcher  to  put  to  his  thirsty  lips,  without 
a  mouthful  even  of  dry  crust  to  satisfy  his  hunger,  that  is 
where  he  begins — in  the  prison  chamber  of  conviction,  power- 
less, lost  and  ruined.  Between  the  bars  I  thrust  my  hand  to 
him,  and  give  to  him  in  God's  name  the  name  of  Christ  to 
plead.  Look  at  him  ;  he  has  been  filing  away  at  these  bars 
many  and  many  a  day,  without  their  yielding  an  inch ;  but 
now  he  has  got  the  name  of  Christ  upon  his  lips ;  he  puts  his 
hands  upon  the  bars,  and  one  of  them  is  gone,  and  another,  and 
another ;  and  he  makes  a  happy  escape,  crying,  "  I  am  free,  I 
am  free,  I  am  tree !  Christ  has  been  the  power  of  God  to  me, 
in  bringing  me  out  of  my  trouble."  No  sooner  is  he  free,  how- 
ever, than  a  thousand  doubts  meet  him.  This  one  cries,  "  You 
are   not  elect ;"    another    cries,    "  You    are    not   redeemed  ;" 


384  CHRIST THE   POWER    AXD    WISDOM    OF    GOD. 

another  says,  "You  are  not  called  ;"  another  says,  "You  are 
not  converted."  "  Avaunt,"  says  he,  "  avaunt !  Christ  died ;" 
and  he  just  pleads  the  name  of  Christ  as  the  power  of  God, 
and  the  doubts  flee  apace,  and  he  walks  straight  on.  He  comes 
soon  into  the  furnace  of  trouble ;  lie  is  thrust  into  the  inner- 
most prison,  and  his  feet  are  made  fast  in  the  stocks.  God  has 
put  his  hand  upon  him.  He  is  in  deep  trouble;  at  midnight 
he  begins  to  sing  of  Christ ;  and  lo  !  the  walls  begin  to  totter, 
and  the  foundation  of  the  prison  to  shake  ;  and  the  man's  chains 
are  taken  ofi",  and  he  comes  out  free ;  for  Christ  hath  delivered 
him  from  trouble.  Here  is  a  hill  to  climb,  on  the  road  to 
heaven.  Wearily  he  pants  up  the  side  of  that  hill,  and  thinks 
he  must  die  ere  he  can  reach  the  summit.  The  name  of  Jesus 
is  whispered  in  his  ear ;  he  leaps  to  his  feet,  and  pursues  his 
way,  with  fresh  courage,  until  the  summit  is  gained,  when  he 
cries,  "  Jesus  Christ  is  the  strength  of  my  song ;  he  also  hath 
become  my  salvation."  See  him  again.  He  is  on  a  sudden  be- 
set by  many  enemies ;  how  shall  he  resist  them  ?  With  this 
true  sword,  this  true  Jerusalem  blade,  Christ,  and  him  cruci- 
fied. With  this  he  keeps  the  devil  at  arm's  length  ;  with  this 
he  fights  against  temptation,  and  against  lust,  against  spiritual 
wickedness  in  high  places,  and  with  this  he  resists.  Now,  he 
has  come  to  his  last  struggle  ;  the  river  Death  rolls  black  and 
sullen  before  him ;  dark  shapes  rise  upward  from  the  flood, 
and  howl  and  fright  him.  How  shall  he  cross  the  stream? 
How  shall  he  find  a  landing  place  on  the  other  side  ?  Dread 
thoughts  perplex  him  for  a  moment ;  he  is  alarmed ;  but  he 
remembers,  Jesus  died;  and  catching  up  that  watchword  he 
ventures  to  the  flood.  Before  his  feet  the  Jordan  flies  apace ; 
like  Israel  of  old,  he  walks  through,  dry  shod,  singing  as  he 
goes  to  heaven,  "  Christ  is  with  me,  Christ  is  with  me,  passing 
through  the  stream !  Victory,  victory,  victory,  to  him  that 
loveth  me  I" 

To  the  Christian  in  his  own  experience  Christ  is  ever  the 
power  of  God.  As  for  temptation  he  can  meet  that  with  Christ; 
as  for  trouble  he  can  endure  that  through  Christ  who  strength- 
ens him,  yea,  he  can  say  with  Paul,  "I  can  do  all  things 
through  Christ  who  strengthens  me."  Have  you  never  seen 
a  Christian  in  trouble,  a  true  Christian  ?     T  have  read  a  story 


CHRIST THE    POWER    AND    WISDOM    OF    GOD.  385 

of  a  man  who  was  converted  to  God  by  seeing  the  conduct  of 
his  wife  in  the  hour  of  trouble.  They  had  a  lovely  child,  their 
only  offspring.  The  lather's  heart  doted  on  it  perpetually, 
and  the  mother's  soul  was  knit  up  in  the  heart  of  the  little  one. 
It  lay  sick  upon  its  bed,  and  the  parents  watched  it  night  and 
day.  At  last  it  died.  The  father  had  no  God:  he  rent  his 
hah",  he  rolled  upon  the  floor  in  misery,  wallowed  upon  the 
earth,  cursing  his  being,  and  defying  God  in  the  utter  casting 
down  of  his  agony.  There  sat  his  wife,  as  fond  of  the  child  as 
ever  he  could  be  ;  and  though  tears  would  come,  she  gently 
said,  "  The  Lord  gave,  and  the  Lord  hath  taken  away  ;  blessed 
be  the  name  of  the  Lord."  "  What,"  said  he,  starting  to  his 
feet,  "  you  love  that  child  ?  I  thought  that  when  that  child 
died  you  would  break  your  heart.  Here  am  I,  a  strong  man ; 
I  am  mad :  here  are  you,  a  weak  woman,  and  yet  you  are 
strong  and  bold  ;  tell  me  what  it  is  possesses  you  ?"  Said  she, 
"  Christ  is  my  Lord,  I  trust  in  him ;  surely  I  can  give  this 
child  to  him  who  gave  himself  for  me."  From  that  instant 
the  man  became  a  believer.  "  There  must,"  said  he,  "  be  some 
truth  and  some  power  in  the  gospel,  which  could  lead  you  to 
believe  in  such  a  manner,  under  such  a  trial."  Christians  !  try 
to  exhibit  that  spirit  wherever  you  are,  and  prove  to  the 
worldling  that  in  your  experience  at  least  "  Christ  is  the  power 
of  God  and  the  wisdom  of  God." 

And  now  the  last  point.  In  the  Christian''s  experience^ 
Christ  is  wisdom,  as  well  as  power.  If  you  want  to  be  a  thor- 
oughly learned  man  the  best  place  to  begin,  is  to  begin  at  the 
Bi'>le,  to  begin  at  Christ.  It  is  said  that  even  children  learn  to 
read  more  quickly  from  the  Bible  than  from  any  other  book ; 
and  this  I  am  sure  of,  that  we,  who  are  but  grown-up  children, 
will  learn  better  and  learn  faster  by  beginning  with  Christ, 
than  we  could  by  beginning  with  any  thing  else.  I  remember 
saying  once,  and  as  I  can  not  say  it  better  I  will  repeat  it,  that 
before  I  knew  the  gospel  I  gathered  up  a  heterogeneous  mass 
of  all  kinds  of  knowledge  from  here,  there,  and  everywhere; 
a  bit  of  chemistry,  a  bit  of  botany,  a  bit  of  astronomy,  and  a 
bit  of  this,  that,  and  the  other.  I  put  them  altogether,  in  one 
great  confused  chaos.  When  I  learned  the  gospel,  I  got  a 
tthelf  hi   my  head  to  put  every  thing  away  upon  just  where  it 

17 


886  CHRIST — THE   POWER    AND    WISDOM    OF    (JOD. 

should  be.  It  seemed  to  me  as  if,  when  I  had  discoverc  J 
Christ  and  him  crucified,  I  had  got  the  center  of  the  system, 
so  that  I  could  see  every  other  science  revolving  around  in 
order.  From  the  earth,  you  know,  the  planets  appear  to 
move  in  a  very  irregular  manner — they  are  progressive,  retro 
grade,  stationary ;  but  if  you  could  get  upon  the  sun,  you 
Should  see  them  marching  round  in  their  constant,  uniform, 
circular  motion.  So  with  knowledge.  Begin  with  any  other 
science  you  like,  atid  truth  will  seem  to  be  awry.  Begin  with 
the  science  of  Christ  crucified,  and  you  will  begin  with  the  sun, 
you  will  see  every  other  science  moving-  round  it  in  complete 
harmony.  The  greatest  mind  in  the  world  will  be  evolved  by 
beginning  at  the  right  end.  The  old  saying  is,  "  Go  from  na- 
ture up  to  nature's  God  ;"  but  it  is  hard  work  going  up  hill. 
The  best  thing  is  to  go  from  nature's  God  down  to  nature  ; 
and  if  you  once  get  to  nature's  God,  and  believe  him  and  love 
him,  it  is  surprising  how  easy  it  is  to  hear  music  in  the  waves, 
and  songs  in  the  wild  whisperings  of  the  winds ;  to  see  God 
everywhere,  in  the  stones,  in  the  rocks,  in  the  rippling  brooks, 
and  hear  him  every  whei-e,  in  the  lowing  of  cattle,  in  the  rolling 
of  thunder,  and  in  the  fury  of  tempests.  Get  Christ  first,  put 
him  in  the  right  place,  and  you  will  find  him  to  be  the  wisdom 
of  God  in  your  own  experience. 

But  wisdom  is  not  knowledge ;  and  we  must  not  confound 
the  two.  Wisdom  is  the  right  use  of  knowledge  ;  and 
Christ's  gospel  helps  us,  by  teaching  us  the  right  use  of  knowl- 
edge. It  directs  us.  Yon  Christian  has  lost  his  way  in  a 
dark  wood ;  but  God's  Word  is  a  compass  to  him,  and  a  lan- 
tern too  :  he  finds  his  way  by  Christ.  He  comes  to  a  turn  in 
the  road.  Wliich  is  right,  and  which  is  wrong  ?  He  can  not 
tell.  Christ  is  the  great  sign-post,  telling  him  which  way  to 
go.  He  sees  every  day  new  straits  attend  ;  he  knows  not 
which  way  to  steer.  Christ  is  the  great  pilot  who  puts  his 
hand  on  the  tiller,  and  makes  him  wise  to  steer  through  the 
shoals  of  temptation  and  the  r^eks  of  sin.  Get  the  gospel, 
and  you  are  a  wise  man.  "The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the  begin- 
ning of  wisdom,  and  right  understanding  have  they  who  keep 
his  commandments."  Ah!  Christian,  you  have  had  many 
doubts,  but  you  h  r  >-  had  them  all  unriddled,  when  you  have 


CHKIST — THE   POWiiR    AND   WLSi^OM    OF    GOD.  38^ 

come  to  the  cross  of  Christ.  You  have  had  many  difficulties; 
but  they  have  been  all  explained  in  the  light  of  Calvary.  You 
have  seen  mysteries,  when  you  have  brought  them  to  the  face 
of  Christ,  made  clear  and  manifest,  which  once  you  never 
could  have  known.  Allow  me  to  remark  here,  that  some  peo- 
ple make  use  of  Christ's  gospel  to  illuminate  their  heads,  in- 
stead of  making  use  of  it  to  illuminate  their  hearts.  They  are 
like  the  flirmer  Rowland  Hill  once  described.  The  farmer  is 
sitting  by  the  fire  with  his  children ;  the  cat  is  purring  on  tlie 
hearth,  and  they  are  all  in  great  comfort.  The  plowman 
rushes  in  and  cries,  "  Thieves  !  thieves  1  thieves !"  The  farmer 
rises  up  in  a  moment,  grasps  the  candle,  holds  it  up  to  his 
head,  rushes  after  the  thieves,  and,  says  Rowland  Hill,  "  he 
tumbles  over  a  wheelbarrow,  because  he  holds  the  light  to  his 
head,  instead  of  holding  it  to  his  feet."  So  there  are  many 
who  just  hold  religion  up  to  illuminate  their  intellect,  instead 
of  holdifig  it  down  to  illuminate  their  practice  ;  and  so  they 
make  a  sad  tumble  of  it,  and  cast  themselves  into  the  mire, 
and  do  more  hurt  to  their  Christian  profession  in  one  hour 
than  they  will  ever  be  able  to  retrieve.  Take  care  that  you 
make  the  wisdom  of  God,  by  God's  Holy  Spirit,  a  thing  of 
true  wisdom,  directing  your  feet  into  his  statutes,  and  keeping 
you  in  his  ways. 

And  now  a  practical  appeal,  and  we  have  done.  I  have  been 
putting  my  arrow  on  the  string ;  and  if  I  have  used  any  light 
similes,  I  have  but  done  so  just  as  the  archer  tips  his  arrow 
wnth  a  feather,  to  make  it  fly  the  better.  I  know  that  a  rough 
quaint  saying  often  sticks,  when  another  thing  is  entirely  for- 
gotten. Now  let  us  draw  the  bow,  and  send  the  arrow  right 
at  your  hearts.  Men,  brethren,  fathers,  how  many  of  you 
have  felt  in  yourselves  that  Christ  is  the  power  of  God,  and 
the  wisdom  of  God?  Internal  evidence  is  the  best  evidence  in 
the  world  for  the  truth  of  the  gospel.  No  Paley  or  Butler 
can  prove  the  truth  of  the  gospel  so  well  as  Mary,  the  servant 
girl  yonder,  that  has  got  the  gospel  in  her  heart,  and  the  pow- 
er of  it  manifest  in  her  life.  Say,  has  Christ  ever  broken  your 
bonds  and  set  you  free?  Has  he  delivered  you  from  your 
evil  life,  and  from  your  sin  ?  Has  he  given  you  "  a  good  hope 
through  grace,"  and  can  you  now  say,  "  On  him  T  lean  ;  on 


588  CHRIST — THE   POWER    AND    WISDOM    OF    GOD. 

my  beloved  I  stay  myself  ?"  If  so,  go  away  and  rejoice  :  you 
are  a  saint ;  for  the  apostle  has  said,  "  He  is  unto  us  who  are 
saved,  Christ  the  power  of  God  and  the  wisdom  of  God." 
But  if  you  can  not  say  this,  allow^  me  affectionately  to  warn 
you.  If  you  want  not  this  power  of  Christ,  and  this  wisdom 
of  Christ  now,  you  will  want  them  in  a  few  short  moments, 
when  God  shall  come  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead,when  you 
shall  stand  before  his  bar,  and  when  all  the  deeds  that  you  have 
done  shall  be  read  before  an  assembled  world.  You  will  want 
religion  then.  O  that  you  had  grace  to  tremble  now ;  grace 
to  kiss  the  Son,  lest  he  be  angry,  and  you  perish  from  the  way, 
when  his  wrath  is  kindled  but  a  little."  Hear  ye  how  to  be 
saved,  and  I  have  done.  Do  you  feel  that  you  are  a  sinner  ? 
Are  you  conscious  that  you  have  rebelled  against  God  ?  Are 
you  willing  to  acknowledge  your  transgressions,  and  do  you 
hate  and  abhor  them,  while  at  the  same  time  you  feel  you  can 
do  nothing  to  atone  for  them  ?  Then  hear  this.  Chfist  died 
for  you;  and  if  he  died  for  you,  you  can  not  be  lost.  Christ 
died  in  vain  for  no  man  for  whom  he  died.  If  you  are  a  pen- 
itent and  a  believer,  he  died  for  you,  and  you  are  safe  ;  go  your 
way  :  rejoice  "  with  joy  unspeakable,  and  full  of  glory  ;"  for 
he  who  has  taught  you  your  need  of  a  Saviour,  will  you  give 
that  Saviour's  blood  to  be  applied  to  your  conscience,  and  you 
shall  ere  long,  with  yonder  blood- washed  host,  praise  God  and 
the  Lamb  saying,  "  Hallelujah,  for  ever.  Amen !"  Only  do 
you  feel  that  you  are  a  sinner  ?  If  not,  I  have  no  gospel  to 
preach  to  you  ;  I  can  but  warn  you.  But  if  you  feel  your  lost 
estate,  and  come  to  Christ,  come,  and  w^elcome,  for  he  will 
never  cast  you  away. 


SERMON    XXVI. 

I 

GOING    HOME— A    CHRISTMAS    SERMON. 

"  Go  home  to  thy  friends,  and  tell  them  how  great  things  tho  Lord  hath 
done  for  thee,  and  hath  had  compassion  on  thee." — Mark,  v.  19. 

The  case  of  the  man  here  referred  to  is  a  very  extraor- 
dinary one :  it  occupies  a  place  among  the  memorabilia  of 
Christ's  life,  perhaps  as  high  as  any  thing  which  is  recorded  by 
either  of  the  evangelists.  This  poor  wretch  being  possessed 
with  a  .legion  of  evil  spirits  had  been  driven  to  something 
worse  than  madness.  He  fixed  his  home  among  the  tombs, 
where  he  dwelt  by  night  and  day,  and  was  the  terror  of  all 
those  who  passed  by.  The  authoriticG  had  attempted  to  curb 
him ;  he  had  been  bound  witli  fetters  and  chains,  but  in  the 
pai'oxysms  of  his  madness  he  had  torn  the  chains  in  sunder, 
and  broken  the  fetters  in  pieces.  Attempts  had  been  made  to 
reclaim  him ;  but  no  man  could  tame  him.  He  was  worse 
than  the  wild  beasts,  for  they  might  be  tamed  ;  but  his  fierce 
nature  would  not  yield.  He  was  a  misery  to  himself,  for  he 
would  run  u})on  the  mountains  by  night  and  day,  crying  and 
howling  fearfully,  cutting  himself  with  the  sharp  flints,  and 
torturing  his  poor  body  in  the  most  frightful  manner.  Jesus 
Christ  passed  by  ;  he  said  to  the  devils,  "  Come  out  of  him." 
The  man  was  healed  in  a  moment;  he  fell  down  at  Jesus'  feet; 
he  became  a  rational  being — an  intelligent  man,  yea,  what  is 
more,  a  convert  to  the  Saviour.  Oat  of  gratitude  to  his  deliv- 
erer, he  said,  "Lord,  I  will  follow  thee  whithersoever  ihou 
goest ;  I  will  be  thy  constant  companion  and  thy  servant ;  per- 
mit me  so  to  be."  "  No,"  said  Christ,  '*  I  esteem  your  motive  ; 
it  is  one  of  gratitude  to  me  ;  but  if  you  would  show  your  grat- 
itude, '  go  home  to  thy  friends,  and  tell  them  how  great  things 
the  Lord  hath  done  for  thee,  and  hath  had  compassion  on  thee.'  ** 


300  GOING    HOME — A    CHRISTMAS    SERMON. 

Now,  tliis  teaches  us  a  very  important  fact,  namely,  this, 
true  religion  does  not  break  in  sunder  the  bonds  of  family  re- 
lationship. True  religion  seldom  encroaches  upon  that  sacred, 
I  had  almost  said  divine  institution  called  home  ;  it  does  not 
separate  men  from  their  families,  and  make  tliem  aliens  to  then- 
flesh  and  blood.  Superstition  has  done  that ;  an  awful  super- 
stition, which  calls  itself  Christianity,  has  sundered  men  from 
their  kind ;  but  true  religion  has  never  done  so.  Why,  if  I 
might  be  allowed  to  do  such  a  thing,  I  would  seek  out  the 
hermit  in  his  lonely  cavern,  and  I  would  go  to  him  and  say, 
"  Friend,  if  thou  art  what  thou  dost  profess  to  be,  a  true  serv- 
ant of  the  living  God,  and  not  a  hypocrite,  as  I  guess  thou 
art — if  thou  art  a  true  believer  in  Christ,  and  would  show 
forth  what  he  has  done  for  thee,  upset  that  pitcher,  eat  the 
last  piece  of  thy  bread,  leave  this  dreary  cave,  wash  thy  face, 
untie  thy  hempen  girdle  ;  and  if  thou  wouldst  show  thy  grati- 
tude, go  home  to  thy  friends,  and  tell  them  what  great  things 
the  Lord  hath  done  for  thee.  Canst  thou  edify  the  sere  leaves 
of  the  forest  ?  Can  the  beasts  learn  to  adore  that  God  whom 
thy  gratitude  should  strive  to  honor  ?  Dost  thou  hope  to 
convert  these  rocks,  and  wake  the  echoes  into  songs  ?  Nay, 
go  back ;  dwell  with  thy  friends,  reclaim  thy  kinship  with 
men,  and  unite  again  with  thy  fellows,  for  this  is  Christ's  ap- 
proved way  of  showing  gratitude."  And  I  would  go  to  every 
monastery  and  every  nunnery,  and  say  to  the  monks,  "  Come 
out,  brethren,  come  out !  If  you  are  what  you  say  you  are, 
servants  of  God,  go  home  to  your  friends.  No  more  of  this 
absurd  discipline  ;  it  is  not  Christ's  rule  ;  you  are  acting  dif- 
ferently from  what  he  would  have  you ;  go  home  to  your 
friends!"  And  to  the  Sisters  of  Mercy  we  would  say,  "Be 
sisters  of  mercy  to  your  own  sisters  ;  go  home  to  your  friends ; 
take  care  of  your  aged  parents  ;  turn  your  own  houses  into 
convents ;  do  not  sit  here  nursing  your  pride  by  a  disobedience 
to  Christ's  rule,  which  says,  '  go  home  to  thy  friends.' "  "  Go 
home  to  thy  friends,  and  tell  them  how  great  things  the  Lord 
hath  done  for  thee,  and  hath  had  compassion  on  thee."  The 
love  of  a  solitary  and  ascetic  life,  which  is  by  some  considered 
to  be  a  divine  virtue,  is  neither  more  nor  less  than  a  disease 
of  the  mind.     In  the  ages  when  there  was  but  little  benevo- 


GOING    HOME A    CHRISTMAS    SERMOX.  391 

lence,  and  consequently  few  hands  to  build  lunatic  asylums, 
superstition  supplied  the  lack  of  charity,  and  silly  men  and 
women  were  allowed  the  indulgence  of  their  fancies  in  secluded 
haunts  or  in  easy  laziness.     Young  has  most  truly  said, 

"  The  first  sure  symptoms  of  a  mind  in  health 
Are  rest  of  heart  and  pleasure  found  at  home." 

Avoid,  my  friends,  above  all  things,  those  romantic  and  absurd 
conceptions  of  virtue  which  are  the  offspring  of  superstition 
and  the  enemies  of  righteousness.  Be  not  without  natural 
affection,  but  love  those  who  are  knit  to  you  by  ties  of  nature. 
True  religion  can  not  be  inconsistent  with  nature.  It  never 
can  demand  that  I  should  abstain  from  weeping  when  my 
friend  is  dead.  "  Jesus  wept."  It  can  not  deny  me  the  priv- 
ilege of  a  smile,  when  Providence  looks  favorably  upon  me  ; 
for  once  "  Jesus  rejoiced  in  spirit,  and  said,  Father,  I  thank 
thee."  It  does  not  make  a  man  say  to  his  flither  and  mother, 
"I  am  no  longer  your  son."  That  is  not  Christianity,  but 
something  worse  than  what  beasts  would  do,  which  would 
lead  us  to  be  entirely  sundered  from  our  fellows,  to  walk 
among  them  as  if  we  had  no  kinship  with  them.  To  all  who 
tiiink  a  solitary  life  must  be  a  life  of  l^iety,  I  would  say,  "  It 
is  the  greatest  delusion."  To  all  who  think  that  those  must 
be  good  people  who  snap  the  ties  of  relationship,  let  us  say, 
"  Those  are  the  best  who  maintain  them."  Christianity  makes 
a  husband  a  better  husband,  it  makes  a  wife  a  better  wife  than 
she  was  before.  It  does  not  free  me  from  my  duties  as  a  son  ; 
it  makes  me  a  better  son,  and  my  parents  better  parents.  In- 
stead of  weakening  my  love,  it  gives  me  fresh  reason  for  ray 
aftection  ;  md  he  whom  I  loved  before  as  my  father,  I  now 
love  as  my  brother  and  co-worker  in  Christ  Jesus  ;  and  she 
whom  I  reverenced  as  my  mother,  I  now  love  as  my  sister  in 
the  covenant  of  grace,  to  be  mine  for  ever  in  the  state  that  is 
to  come.  O  !  suppose  not,  any  of  you,  that  Christianity  was 
ever  meant  to  interfere  with  households ;  it  is  intended  to 
cement  ';hem,  and  to  make  them  households  which  death  itself 
shall  n'  ver  sever,  for  it  binds  them  up  in  the  bundle  of  life 
with  tlie  Lord  their  God,  and  reunites  the  several  individuals 
on  the  other  side  of  the  flood. 


392  GOING    HOME — A    CHRISTMAS    SERMON. 

Now,  I  will  just  tell  you  the  reason  why  I  selected  my  text. 
I  thought  within  myself,  there  are  a  large  number  of  young 
men  who  always  come  to  hear  me  preach ;  they  always  crowd 
the  aisles  of  my  chapel,  and  many  of  them  have  been  con- 
verted to  God.  Now,  here  is  Christmas  day  come  round 
again,  and  they  are  going  home  to  see  their  friends.  When 
they  get  home  they  will  want  a  Christmas  carol  in  the  eveii- 
in  ;  I  think  I  will  suggest  one  to  them — more  especially  to 
such  of  them  as  have  been  lately  converted.  I  will  give  them 
a  theme  for  their  discourse  on  Christmas  evening  ;  it  may  not 
be  quite  so  amusing  as  "  The  Wreck  of  the  Golden  Mary^'' 
but  it  will  be  quite  as  interesting  to  Christian  people.  It  shall 
be  this :  "  Go  home  and  tell  your  friends  what  the  Lord  hath 
done  for  your  souls,  and  how  he  hath  had  compassion  on  you." 
For  my  part  I  wish  there  were  twenty  Christmas  days  in  the 
year.  It  is  seldom  that  young  men  can  meet  with  their 
friends ;  it  is  rarely  they  can  all  be  united  as  happy  families  ; 
and  though  I  have  no  respect  to  the  religious  observance  of 
the  day,  yet  I  love  it  as  a  family  institution,  as  one  of  En- 
gland's brightest  days,  the  great  Sabbath  of  the  year,  when 
the  plow  rests  in  its  farrow,  when  the  din  of  business  is  hushed, 
when  the  mechanic  and  the  working-man  go  out  to  refresh 
themselves  upon  the  green  sward  of  the  glad  earth.  If  aiiy 
of  you  are  masters  you  will  pardon  me  for  the  digression,  when 
I  most  respectfully  beg  you  to  pay  your  servants  the  same 
wages  on  Christmas  day  as  if  they  were  at  work.  I  am  sure 
it  will  make  their  houses  glad  if  you  will  do  so.  It  is  unfjiir 
for  you  to  make  them  feast,  or  fest,  unless  you  give  them 
wherewithal  to  feast  and  make  themselves  glad  on  that  day 
of  joy. 

But  now  to  come  to  the  subject.  We  are  going  home  to 
Bee  our  friends,  and  here  is  the  story  some  of  us  have  to  tell. 
"  Go  home  to  thy  friends,  and  te  11  them  how  great  things  the 
Lord  hath  done  for  thee,  and  hath  had  compassion  on  thee ." 
First,  here  is  what  they  are  to  tell ;  then,  secondly,  ichy  th?.y 
are  to  tell  it ;  and  then,  thirdly,  hoio  they  ought  to  tell  it. 

I.  First,  then,  here  is  what  they  are  to  tell.  It  is  to  be 
a  story  of  2)erso?ial  exjjerieiice.  "  Go  home  to  thy  friends,  and 
tell  them  how  irre^t  things  the  Lord  hath  done  for  thee,  and 


GOING    HOME — A    CHRISTMAS    SERMON.  393 

hath  had  comi)assion  on  thee."  You  are  not  to  repair  to  your 
houses,  and  fortliwith  begin  to  preach.  That  you  aie  not 
commanded  to  do.  You  are  not  to  begin  to  take  up  doctrinal 
subjects,  and  expatiate  on  them,  and  endeavor  to  bring  per- 
sons to  your  pecuhar  views  and  sentiments.  You  are  not  to 
go  home  with  sundry  doctrines  you  have  lately  learned,  and 
try  to  teach  these.  At  least  you  are  not  commanded  so  to 
do  ;  you  may,  if  you  please,  and  none  shall  hinder  you ;  but 
you  are  to  go  home  and  tell  not  what  you  have  believed,  but 
what  you  have  felt — what  you  really  know  to  be  your  own  ; 
not  what  great  things  you  have  read,  but  what  great  things 
the  Lord  hath  done  for  you  /  not  alone  what  you  have  seen 
done  in  the  great  congregation,  and  Iioav  great  sinners  have 
turned  to  God,  but  what  the  Lord  has  done  for  you.  And 
mark  this :  there  is  never  a  more  interesting  story  than  that 
which  a  man  tells  about  himself.  The  Rhyme  of  the  Ancient 
Mariner  derives  much  of  its  interest  because  the  man  who  told 
it  was  himself  the  mariner.  He  sat  down,  that  man  whose 
finger  was  skinny,  like  the  finger  of  death,  and  began  to  tell 
that  dismal  story  of  the  ship  at  sea  in  a  great  calm,  when  slimy 
things  did  crawl  with  legs  over  the  shiny  sea.  The  wedding 
guest  sat  still  to  listen,  for  the  old  man  was  himself  a  story. 
There  is  always  a  great  deal  of  interest  excited  by  a  personal 
narrative.  Virgil,  the  poet,  knew  this,  and,  therefore,  he 
wisely  makes  ^neas  tell  his  own  story,  and  makes  him  begin 
it  by  saying,  "  In  which  I  also  had  a  great  part  myself."  So 
if  you  would  interest  your  friends,  tell  them  what  you  felt 
yourself.  Tell  them  how  you  were  once  a  lost  abandoned 
sinner,  how  the  Lord  met  with  you,  how  you  bowed  your 
knees,  and  poured  out  your  soul  before  God,  and  how  at  last 
you  leaped  with  joy,  for  you  thought  you  heard  him  say  within 
you,  "I,  even  I,  am  he  that  blotteth  out  thy  transgressions  for 
my  name's  sake."  Tell  your  friends  a  story  of  your  own  per- 
sonal experience. 

Note,  next,  it  must  be  a  story  oi  free  grace.  It  is  not,  "  Tell 
thy  friends  how  great  things  thou  hast  done  thyself,"  but 
"  how  great  things  the  Lord  hath  done  for  thee."  The  man 
who  always  dwells  upon  free  will  and  the  power  of  the  crea- 
ture, and  denies  the  doctrines  of  grace,  invariably  mixes  up  a 


894  GOING    HOME — A    CHRISTMAS    SERMON. 

great  deal  of  what  he  has  done  himself  in  telling  his  experi- 
ence^  but  the  believer  in  free  grace,  who  holds  the  great  car- 
dinal truths  of  the  gospel,  ignores  tliis,  and  declares,  "  I  will 
tell  what  the  Lord  hath  done  for  me.  It  is  true  I  must  tell 
how  I  was  first  made  to  j^ray  ;  but  I  will  tell  it  thus— 

"  '  Grace  ta  .^.ght  mj  soul  to  pray, 
Grace  made  my  eyes  o'erflow.' 

It  is  true,  I  must  tell  in  how  many  troubles  and  trials  God  has 
been  with  me  ;  b'-it  I  will  tell  it  thus — 

"  '  'Twas  grace  which  kept  me  to  this  day, 
And  will  not  let  me  go.' " 

He  says  notlnng  about  his  own  doings,  or  willings,  or  prayings, 
or  seekings,  but  he  ascribes  it  all  to  the  love  and  grace  of  the 
great  God  who  looks  on  sinners  in  love,  and  makes  them  his 
children,  heirs  of  everlasting  life.  Go  home,  young  man,  and 
tell  the  poor  sinner's  story  ;  go  home,  young  woman,  and  open 
your  diary,  and  give  your  frieiids-stories  of  grace.  Tell  them 
of  the  mighty  works  of  God's  hand  which  he  hath  wrought  in 
you  from  his  own  free,  sovereign,  undeserved  love.  Make  it 
a  free-grace  story  around  your  fiimily  fire. 

In  the  next  place,  this  poor  man's  tale  was  a  grateful  story. 
I  know  it  was  grateful,  because  the  man  said,  "  I  will  tell  thee 
ho\v  great  things  the  Lord  hath  done  for  me ;"  and  (not  mean- 
ing a  pun  in  the  least  degree)  I  may  observe,  that  a  man  who 
is  grateful  is  always  full  of  the  greatness  of  the  mercy  which 
God  has  shown  him  ;  he  always  thinks  that  what  God  has  done 
for  him  is  immensely  good  and  supremely  great.  Perhaps 
when  you  are  telling  the  story  one  of  your  friends  will  say, 
"  And  what  of  that  ?"  And  your  answer  will  be,  *'  It  may 
not  be  a  great  thing  to  you,  but  it  is  to  me.  You  say  it  is 
little  to  repent,  but  I  have  not  found  it  so ;  it  is  a  great  and 
precious  thing  to  be  brought  to  know  myself  to  be  a  sinner, 
and  to  confess  it;  do  you  say  it  is  a  little  thing  to  have  found 
a  Saviour  ?"  Look  them  in  the  face,  and  say,  "  If  you  had 
found  him  too  you  would  not  think  it  little.  You  think  it  little 
I  have  lost  the  burden  from  my  back  ;  but  if  you  had  suffered 
with  it,  and  felt  its  weight  as  I  have  for  many  a  long  year,  you 


GOING    HOME A    CUKlSTMAS    SERMOX.  395 

would  tliiuk  it  no  little  thing  to  be  emancipated  and  free, 
through  a  s'ght  of  the  cross."  Tell  them  it  is  a  great  story, 
and  if  they  can  not  see  its  greatness,  shed  great  tears,  and  tell 
it  to  them  with  great  earnestness,  and  I  hope  they  may  be 
brought  to  believe  that  you  at  least  are  grateful,  if  they  are 
not.  May  God  grant  that  you  may  tell  a  grateful  story.  No 
story  is  more  worth  hearing  than  a  tale  of  gratitude. 

And  lastly,  upon  this  point :  it  must  be  a  tale  told  by  a  poor 
sinner  who  feels  himself  not  to  have  deserved  what  he  has  re- 
ceived. "How  he  hath  had  compassion  on  thee."  It  was 
not  a  mere  act  of  .kindness,  but  an  act  of  free  compassion  to- 
ward one  who  was  in  misery.  O  !  I  have  heard  men  tell  the 
story  of  their  conversion  and  of  their  spiritual  life  in  such  a 
way  that  my  heart  hath  loathed  them  and  their  story  too,  for 
they  have  told  of  their  sins  as  if  they  did  boast  in  the  great- 
ness of  their  crime,  and  they  have  mentioned  the  love  of  God 
not  with  a  tear  of  gratitude,  not  with  the  simple  thanksgiving 
of  the  really  humble  heart,  but  as  if  they  as  much  exalted 
themselves  as  they  exalted  God.  O  !  when  we  tell  the  story 
of  our  own  conversion,  I  would  liave  it  done  with  deep  sor- 
row, remembering  what  we  used  to  be,  and  with  great  joy  and 
gratitude,  remembering  how  little  we  deserve  these  things.  1 
was  once  preaching  upon  conversion  and  salvation,  and  I  felt 
within  myself,  as  preachers  often  do,  that  it  was' but  dry  work 
to  tell  this  story,  and  a  dull,  dull  tale  it  was  to  me ;  but  on  a 
sudden  the  thougjht  crossed  my  mind,  "  Why,  you  are  a  poor 
lost  ruined  sinner  yourself;  tell  it,  tell  it,  as  you  received  it: 
be.ii^in  to  tell  of  the  grace  of  God  as  you  trust  you  feel  it  your- 
self." When,  then,  my  eyes  began  to  be  fountains  of  tears, 
those  hearers  who  had  nodded  their  heads  began  to  brighten 
up,  and  they  hstened,  because  they  were  hearing  something 
which  the  man  felt  himself,  and  which  they  recognized  as  be- 
ing true  to  him,  if  it  was  not  true  to  them.  Tell  your  story,  my 
hearers,  as  lost  sinners.  Do  not  go  to  your  home,  and  walk 
into  the  house  with  a  supercilious  air,  as  much  as  to  s;iy,  "  Here's 
a  saint  come  home  to  the  poor  sinners,  to  tell  them  a  story  ;'* 
but  go  home  like  a  poor  sinner  yourself;  and  when  you  go  in, 
your  mother  reminnbers  what  you  used  to  be,  you  need  not 
tell  her  there  is  a  change— she  will  notice  it,  if  it  is  only  ono 


396  GOING    HOME A    CIIKISTMAS    SERMON. 

day  you  are  with  lier ;  and  perhaps  she  will  say,  "  John,  what 
is  this  change  that  is  in  you  ?"  and  if  she  is  a  pious  mother 
you  will  begin  to  tell  her  the  story,  and  I  know,  man  though 
you  an»,  you  will  not  blush  when  I  say  it,  she  will  put  her 
arms  round  your  neck  and  kiss  you  as  she  never  did  befoi  e, 
for  you  are  lier  twice-born  son,  hers  from  whom  she  shpJl 
never  ])art,  even  though  death  itself  shall  divide  you  for  a 
brief  moment.  Go  home,  then,  and  tell  your  friends  what 
gieat  things  the  Lo^'d  hath  done  for  you,  and  ho^v  he  hath  had 
compassion  on  you. 

II.  But  now,  in  the  second  place,  why  should  ave  tell 
TUTS  STORY  ?  For  I  hear  many  of  my  congregation  say,  "  Sir, 
I  could  relate  that  story  to  any  one  sooner  than  I  could  to  my 
friends  ;  I  could  come  to  your  vestry,  and  tell  you  something 
of  what  I  have  tasted  and  handled  of  the  word  of  God  ;  but 
I  could  not  tell  my  father,  nor  my  mother,  nor  ray  brethren, 
nor  my  sisters."  Come,  then  ;  I  will  try  and  argue  with  you, 
to  induce  you  to  do  so,  that  I  may  send  you  home  this  Christ- 
mas day,  to  be  missionaries  in  the  localities  to  which  you  be- 
long, and  to  be  real  preachers,  though  you  are  not  so  by  name. 
Dear  friends,  do  tell  this  story  when  you  go  home. 

First,  for  your  Master's  sake.  O  !  I  know  you  love  him  ;  I 
am  sure  you  do,  if  you  have  proof  that  he  loved  you.  You 
can  never  think  of  Gethsemane  and  of  its  bloody  sweat ;  of 
Gabbatha  and  of  the  mangled  back  of  Christ,  flayed  by  the 
whip ;  you  can  never  think  of  Calvary  and  his  pierced  hands 
and  feet,  without  loving  him  ;  and  it  y5  a"  strong  argument 
when  I  say  to  you,  for  his  dear  sake  who  loved  you  so  mucli, 
go  home  and  tell  it.  What !  do  you  think  we  can  have  so 
much  done  for  us,  and  yet  not  tell  it  ?  Our  children,  if  any 
thing  should  be  done  for  them,  do  not  stay  many  minutes  be- 
fore they  are  telling  all  the  company,  "such  a  one  hath  given 
me  such  a  present,  and  bestowed  on  me  such-and-such  a  fa- 
vor." And  should  the  children  of  God  be  backward  in  de- 
claring how  they  were  saved  when  their  feet  made  haste  to 
hell,  and  how  redeeming  mercy  snatched  them  as  brands  from 
the  burning  ?  You  love  Jesus,  young  man  !  I  put  it  to  you, 
then,  will  you  refuse  to  tell  the  tale  of  his  love  to  you  ?  Shall 
your  lii)s  be  dumb,  when  his  honor  is  concerned  ?     Will  yop 


GOING    HOME A    CHRISTMAS    SERMOX.  307 

not,  whorever  you  go,  tell  of  the  Gocl  who  loved  you  and  died 
for  you  ?  This  poor  man,  we  are  told,  "departed,  and  be;jan 
to  publish  in  Pecapolis  how  great  things  Jesus  had  done  for 
him,  and  all  men  did  marvel."  So  with  you.  If  Christ  has 
done  much  for  you,  you  can  not  help  it — you  must  tell  it.  yLy 
esteemed  friend,  Mr.  Oncken,  a  minister  in  Germany,  tol  .  us 
last  Monday  evening  that  so  soon  as  he  was  converted  lira- 
self,  tlie  first  impulse  of  his  n-ew-born  soul  was  to  do  gooc"  to 
others.  And  where  should  he  do  that  good  ?  Well,  he 
thought  he  would  go  to  Germany.  It  was  his  own  nr  ive 
land,  and  he  thought  the  command  was,  "Go  home  to  thy 
friends,  and  tell  them."  Well,  there  was  not  a  single  Baitist 
in  all  Germany,  nor  any  with  whom  he  could  sympathize,  for 
the  Lutherans  had  swerved  from  the  faith  of  Luther,  and  gone 
aside  from  the  truth  of  God.  But  he  went  there  and  preac;  ed, 
and  he  has  now  seventy  or  eighty  churches  established  on  the 
Continent.  What  made  him  do  it  ?  Nothing  but  love  foi  his 
Master,  who  had  done  so  much  for  him,  could  have  foiled 
him  to  go  and  tell  his  kinsmen  the  marvelous  tale  of  di /ine 
goodness. 

But,  in  the  next  place,  are  your  friends  pious  ?  Then  go 
home  and  tell  them,  in  order  to  make  their  hearts  glad.  J  re- 
ceived last  night  a  short  epistle  written  with  a  trembling  1  md. 
by  one  who  is  past  the  natural  age  of  man,  living  in  the  county 
of  Essex.  His  son,  under  God,  had  been  converted  by  h. tar- 
ing the  word  preached,  and  the  good  man  could  not  l^elp 
writing  to  the  minister,  thanking  him,  and  blessing  most  of 
all  his  God,  that  his  son  had  been  regenerated.  "  Sir,'  he 
begins,  "an  old  rebel  writes  to  thank  you,  and  above  al  to 
thank  his  God,  that  liis  dear  son  has  been  converted."  I  t  hall 
treasure  up  that  epistle.  It  goes  on  to  say,  "  Go  on  !  and  the 
Lord  bless  you."  And  there  was  another  case  I  heard  s^me 
time  ago,  where  a  young  woman  went  home  to  her  pare  its, 
and  when  her  mother  saw  her  she  said,  "  There  !  if  the  mi  lis- 
ter had  made  me  a  present  of  all  London,  I  should  not  1'  ive 
thought  so  much  of  it  as  I  do  of  this — to  think  that  you  1  ive 
really  become  a  changed  character,  and  are  living  in  the  bar 
of  God."  O  !  if  you  want  to  make  your  mother's  heart  Isap 
within  her,  and  to  raak'^  your  father  glad — if  you  would  mak<» 


398  GOING    HOME A    CHRISTMAS    SEKMON. 

lliat  sister  happy  who  sent  you  so  many  letters,  which  some- 
times you  read  against  a  lamp-post,  with  your  pipe  in  your 
mouth — go  home  and  tell  your  mother  that  her  wishes  are  all 
accomplished,  that  her  prayers  are  heard,  that  you  will  no 
longer  chaff  lier  about  her  Sunday-school  class,  and  no  longer 
laugh  at  her  because  she  loves  the  Lord,  but  that  you  will  go 
with  her  to  the  house  of  God,  for  you  love  God,  and  you  have 
said,  "  Your  peop^  shall  be  my  people,  and  your  God  shall  be 
my  God,  for  I  have  a  hope  that  your  heaven  shall  be  my 
Leaven  for  ever."  O !  what  a  happy  thing  it  would  be  if 
some  here  who  had  gone  astray  should  thus  go  home  !  It  was 
my  privilege  a  little  while  ago  to  preach  for  a  noble  institution 
for  the  reception  of  women  who  had  led  abandoned  lives — and 
before  I  preached  the  sermon  I  prayed  to  God  to  bless  it,  and 
in  the  printed  sermon  you  will  notice  that  at  the  end  of  it 
there  is  an  account  of  two  persons  who  w^ere  blessed  by  that 
sermon,  and  restored.  Kow,  let  me  tell  you  a  story  of  what 
once  happened  to  Mr.  Vanderki^t,  a  city  missionary,  Avho  toils 
all  night  long  to  do  good  in  that  great  work.  There  had 
been  a  drunken  broil  in  the  street ;  he  stepped  between  the 
men  to  i^art  them,  and  said  something  to  a  woman  who  stood 
there  concerning  how  dreadful  a  thing  it  was  that  men  should 
thus  be  intemperate.  She  walked  with  him  a  little  way,  and 
he  wdth  her,  and  she  began  to  tell  him  such  a  tale  of  woe  and 
sin  too,  how  she  had  been  lured  away  from  her  parents'  home 
in  Somersetshire,  and  had  been  brought  up  here  to  her  soul's 
eternal  hurt.  He  took  her  home  with  him,  and  taught  her 
the  fear  and  love  of  Christ ;  and  what  was  the  first  thing  she 
did,  when  she  returned  to  the  paths  of  godliness,  and  found 
Christ  to  be  the  sinner'^  Saviour?  She  said,  "  Now  1  must 
go  home  to  my  friends."  Her  friends  were  written  to  ;  they 
came  to  meet  her  at  the  station  at  Bristol,  and  you  can  hardly 
conceive  what  a  happy  meeting  it  was.  The  Tather  and 
mother  had  lost  their  daughter;  they  had  never  heard  fi'om 
her ;  and  there  she  was,  brought  back  by  the  agency  of  this 
Institution,  and  restored  to  the  bosom  of  her  family.  Ah  !  if 
such  a  one  be  here !  I  know  not ;  among  such  a  multitude 
there  may  be  such  a  one.  Woman  !  hast  thou  strayed  from 
thy  fiimily  ?     Hast  thou  left  them  long?     "  G  ,  Imme  to  thy 


GOING    HOME — A    CHRISTMAS    SERMON".  399 

friends,"  T  beseech  tliee,  ere  thy  father  totters  to  liis  grave, 
and  ere  thy  mother's  gray  hairs  sleep  on  tlie  snow-white  pil- 
low of  her  coffin.  Go  back,  I  beseech  thee !  Tell  her  thou 
art  penitent ;  tell  her  that  God  liath  met  with  thee — that  the 
young  minister  said,  "  Go  back  to  thy  friends."  And  if  so,  I 
shall  not  blush  to  have  said  these  things,  though  you  may 
think  I  ought  not  to  have  mentioned  them ;  for  if  I  may  but 
win  one  such  soul,  I  will  bless  God  to  all  eternity.  "  Go  home 
to  thy  friends."  Go  home  and  tell  them  how  great  things  the 
Lord  hath  done  for  thee.  Can  not  you  imagine  the  scene, 
when  the  poor  demoniac  mentioned  in  my  text  went  home? 
He  had  been  a  raving  madman  ;  and  when  he  came  and 
knocked  at  the  door,  don't  you  think  you  see  his  friends  call- 
ing to  one  another  in  affright,  "  O  !  there  he  is  again,"  and 
the  mother  i-unning  up  stairs  and  locking  all  the  doors,  be- 
cause her  son  had  come  back  that  was  raving  mad  ;  and  the 
little  ones  crying,  because  they  knew  what  he  had  been  be 
fore — how  he  cut  himself  with  stones,  because  he  was  pos- 
sessed with  devils.  And  can  you  picture  their  joy,  when  the 
man  said,  "  Mother  !  Je.sus  Christ  has  healed  me  ;  let  me  in  ; 
I  am  no  lunatic  now  '?"  And  when  the  father  opened  the 
door,  he  said,  "  Father  I  I  am  not  what  I  was  ;  all  the  evil 
spirits  are  gone  ;  I  shall  liv.e  in  the  tombs  no  longer.  I  want 
to  tell  you  how  the  glorious  man  who  wrought  my  deliver- 
ance accomplished  the  miracle — how  he  said  to  the  devils, 
'  Get  ye  hence,'  and  they  ran  down  a  steep  place  into  the 
sea,  and  I  am  come  home  healed  and  saved."  O !  if  such  a 
one,  possessed  with  sin,  were  here  this  morning,  and.  would  go 
home  to  his  friends,  to  tell  them  of  his  release,  methinks  the 
scene  would  be  somewhat  similar. 

Once  more,  dear  friends.  I  hear  one  of  you  say,  "  Ah  !  sir, 
would  to  God  I  could  go  home  to  pious  friends  !  But  when  I 
go  home  I  go  into  the  worst  of  places;  for  my  home  is  among 
those  who  never  knew  God  themselves,  and  consequently 
never  prayed  for  me,  and  never  taught  me  any  thing  concern- 
ing heaven."  Well,  young  man,  go  home  to  your  friends. 
If  they  are  ever  so  bad,  they  are  your  friends.  I  sometimes 
meet  with  young  men  wishing  to  join  the  church,  who  say, 
when  I  ask  them  about  their  father,  "  O,  sir,  I  am  parted  from 


400  GOING    HOME A    CHRISTMAS    SERMON. 

my  fjitlier."  Then  I  s:iy,  "  Young  nuan,  you  may  just  go  and 
see  your  father  before  I  have  any  thing  to  do  with  you  ;  if 
you  are  at  ill-will  with  your  father  and  mother  I  \nll  not  re- 
ceive you  into  the  church  ;  if  they  are  ever  so  bad  they  are 
your  parents:''  Go  home  to  them,  and  tell  them,  not  to  make 
them  glad,  for  they  will  very  likely  be  angry  with  you  ;  but 
tell  them  for  their  souVs  salvation.  I  hope,  Avhen  you  are 
telling  the  story  of  what  God  did  for  you,  that  they  will  be 
led  by  the  Spirit  to  desire  the  same  mercy  themselves.  But  I 
will  give  you  a  piece  of  advice.  Do  not  tell  this  story  to  your 
ungodly  friends  when  they  are  all  together,  for  they  will 
laugh  at  you.  Take  them  one  by  one,  when  you  can  get 
them  alone,  and  begin  to  tell  it  to  them,  and  they  will  hear 
you  seriously.  There  was  once  a  very  pious  lady  who  kept  a 
lodging-house  for  young  men.  All  the  young  men  were  very 
gay  and  giddy,  and  she  wanted  to  say  something  to  them  con- 
cerning religion.  She  introduced  the  subject,  and  it  was 
passed  off  immediately  with  a  laugh.  She  thought  within 
herself,  "  I  have  made  a  mistake."  The  next  morning,  after 
breakfast,  when  they  were  all  going,  she  said  to  one  of  them, 
"  Sir,  I  should  like  to  speak  with  you  a  moment  or  two,"  and 
taking  him  aside  into  another  room  she  talked  with  him. 
The  next  morning  she  took  another,  and  the  next  morning 
another,  and  it  pleased  God  to  bless  her  simple  statement, 
when  it  was  given  individually  :  but,  without  doubt,  if  she 
had  spoken  to  them  all  together  they  would  have  backed -each 
other  up  in  laughing  her  to  scorn.  Reprove  a  man  alone.  A 
verse  may  liit  him  whom  a  sermon  flies.  You  may  be  the 
means  of  bringing  a  man  to  Christ  who  has  often  heard  the 
Word  and  only  laughed  at  it,  but  who  can  not  resist  a  gentle 
admonition.  In  one  of  the  States  of  America  there  was  an  in- 
fidel who  was  a  great  despiser  of  God,  a  hater  of  the  Sabbath 
and  all  religious  institutions.  What  to  do  with  him  the  min- 
isters did  not  know.     They  met  together  and  prayed  for  him. 

But  among  the  rest,  one  Elder  B resolved  to  spend  along 

time  in  prayer  for  the  man ;  after  that  he  got  on  horseback, 
and  rode  down  to  the  man's  forge,  for  he  was  a  blacksmith 
He  left  his  horse  outside,  and  said,  "Neighbor,  I  am  under 
verj  great  concern  about  your  soul's  salvation  ;  I  tell  you  I 


GOING    HOME — A    CHRISTMAS    SER-MON.  401 

praj"  day  and  night  for  your  soul's  salvation."  He  left  him, 
and  rode  Lome  on  his  horse.  The  man  went  inside  to  his 
house,  after  a  minute  or  two,  and  said  to  one  of  his  inf  (^el 

friends,  "  Here's  a  new  argument ;  here's  Elder  B b(  en 

down  here,  he  did  not  dispute,  and  never  said  a  word  to  mo 
except  this,  '  I  say,  I  am  under  great  concern  about  your  so  ,1 ; 
T  can  not  bear  you  should  be  lost.'  O  !  that  fellow,"  he  sf  d, 
"I  can  not  answer  him  ;"  and  the  tears  began  to  roll  down  jis 
cheeks.  He  went  to  his  wife,  and  said,  "  I  can't  make  1  ns 
out;  I  never  cared  about  my  soul,  but  here's  an  elder,  t'  at 
has  no  connection  with  me,  but  I  have  always  laughed  at  h  m, 
and  he  has  come  five  miles  this  morning  on  horseback  just  to 
tell  me  he  is  under  concern  about  my  salvation."  After  a  'it- 
tie  while  he  thought  it  was  time  he  should  be  under  concf  rn 
about  his  salvation  too.  He  went  in,  shut  the  door,  began  to 
pray,  and  the  next  day  he  was  at  the  deacon's  house,  tell  ig 
him  that  he  too  was  imder  concern  about  his  salvation,  c  id 
asking  him  to  tell  him  what  he  mtist  do  to  be  saved.  O  !  t'at 
the  everlasting  God  might  make  use  of  some  of  those  n  )W 
present  in  the  same  way,  that  they  might  be  induced  to 

"  Tell  to  others  round 
What  a  dear  Saviour  they  have  found ; 
To  point  to  his  redeeming  blood, 
And  say,  Behold  the  way  to  God  I" 

HI.  I  shall  not  detain  you  much  longer;  but  there  is  a  th.'rd 
point,  upon  which  we  must  be  very  brief.     How  is  the  sto:IY 


TO  BE  TOLD 


First,  tell  it  truthfully.  Do  not  tell  more  than  you  know; 
do  not  tell  John  Bunyan's  experience,  when  you  ought  to  tell 
your  own.  Do  not  tell  your  mother  you  have  felt  what  o.ily 
Rutherford  felt.  Tell  her  no  more  than  the  truth.  Tell  y  w 
experience  truthfully ;  for  mayhap  one  single  fly  in  the  pot  of 
ointment  will  spoil  it,  and  one  statement  you  may  make  wh  jh 
is  not  true  may  ruin  it  all.     Tell  the  story  truthfully. 

In  the  next  place,  tell  it  vei^j  hiimhly.  I  have  said  that  e- 
fore.  Do  not  intrude  yourselves  upon  those  who  are  okl  r, 
and  know  more  ;  but  tell  your  story  humbly  ;  not  as  a  preach  or 
not  ex-cathedra^  but  as  a  friend  and  as  a  son. 

Next,  tell  it  very  e'^rnestly.     Let  them  see  you  mean  iL 


402  GOING    HOME — A    CHRISTMAS    SERMON. 

Do  not  talk  about  religion  flippantly ;  you  will  do  no  good  if 
you  do.  Do  not  make  puns  on  texts  ;  do  not  quote  Scripture 
by  way  of  joke :  if  you  do,  you  may  talk  till  you  are  dumb, 
you  will  do  no  good,  if  you  in  the  least  degree  give  them  oc- 
casion to  laugh  by  laughing  at  holy  things  yourself.  Tell  it 
very  earnestly. 

And  then,  tell  it  very  devoutly.  Do  not  try  to  tell  your 
tale  to  man  till  you  have  told  it  first  to  God.  When  you  aie 
at  home  on  Christmas  day,  let  no  one  see  your  face  till  God 
has  seen  it.  Be  up  in  the  morning,  wrestle  with  God  ;  and  if 
your  fi-iends  are  not  converted,  lorestle  with  God  for  them;  and 
then  you  will  find  it  easy  work  to  lorestle  loith  them  for  God. 
Seek,  if  you  can,  to  get  them  one  by  one,  and  tell  them  the 
story.  Do  not  be  afraid ;  only  think  of  the  good  you  may 
possibly  do.  Remember,  he  that  saves  a  soul  from  death  hath 
covered  a  multitude  of  shi«,  and  he  shall  have  stars  in  his  crown 
f  )r  ever  and  ever.  Seek  to  be,  under  God,  saviours  in  your 
family,  to  be  the  means  of  leading  your  own  beloved  brethren 
and  sisters  to  seek  and  to  find  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  then 
one  day,  when  you  shall  meet  in  Pai-adise,  it  will  be  a  joy  and 
blessedness  to  think  that  you  are  there,  and  that  your  friends 
are  there  too,  whom  God  will  have  made  you  the  instrument 
of  saving.  Let  your  reliance  on  the  Holy  Spirit  be  entire  and 
honest.  Trust  not  yourself,  but  fear  not  to  trust  him.  He 
can  give  you  words.  He  can  apply  those  words  to  their 
hearts,  and  so  enable  you  to  "minister  grace  to  the  hearers." 

To  close  up,  by  a  short,  and  I  think  a  pleasant  turning  of 
the  text,  to  suggest  another  meaning  to  it.  Soon,  dear  friends, 
very  soon  with  some  of  ns,  the  Master  will  say,  "  Go  home  to 
thy  friends."  You  know  where  the  home  is.  It  is  up  above 
the  stars, 

"  'Where  our  best  friends,  our  kindred,  dTfell, 
Where  God  our  Saviour  reigns." 

Yon  gray-headed  man  lias  buried  all  his  friends  ;  he  has 
said,  "  I  shall  go  to  them,  but  they  will  not  return  to  me." 
Soon  his  Master  will  say,  "Thou  hast  had  enough  tarrying 
here  in  this  vale  of  tears :  go  home  to  thy  friends  !"  O !  happy 
hour.  O  !  blessed  moment,  when  that  shall  be  the  word — 
*'  Go  home  to  thy  friends  '       And  when  we  go  home  to  our 


GOING    IIOMP: — A    CHRISTMAS    SERMON.  403 

friends  in  Paradise,  what  shall  we  do?  Why,  first,  we  will 
repair  to  that  blest  seat  where  Jesus  sits,  take  off  our  crown 
and  cast  it  at  his  feet,  and  crown  him  Lord  of  all.  And  when 
we  have  done  that,  what  shall  be  our  next  employ  ?  Why, 
we  will  tell  the  blessed  ones  in  heaven  what  the  Lord  hath 
done  for  us,  and  how  he  hath  had  compassion  on  us.  And 
shall  such  a  tale  be  told  in  heaven  ?  Shall  that  be  the  Christ- 
mas carol  of  the  angels  ?  Yes,  it  shall  be  ;  it  has  been  pub- 
lished there  before — blush  not  to  tell  it  yet  again — for  Jesus 
lias  told  it  before,  *'  When  he  cometh  home,  he  calleth  together 
his  friends  and  neighbors,  saying  unto  them.  Rejoice  with  me  ; 
for  I  have  found  my  sheep  which  was  lost."  And  thou,  poor 
sheep,  when  thou  shalt  be  gathered  in,  wilt  thou  not  tell  how 
thy  Shepherd  sought  thee,  and  bow  he  found  thee  ?  Wilt 
thou  not  sit  in  the  grassy  meads  of  heaven,  and  tell  the  story 
of  thine  own  redemption  ?  Wilt  thou  not  talk  with  thy  breth- 
ren and  thy  sisters,  and  tell  them  how  God  loved  thee  and 
liath  bi'onght  thee  there?  Perhaps  thou  sayest,  "It  will  be  a 
very  short  story."  Ah  !  it  would  be  if  you  could  write  now, 
A  little  book  might  be  the  whole  of  your  biography;  but  up 
there,  when  your  memoryshall  be  enlai-ged,  when  your  pas- 
sions shall  be  purified  and  your  understanding  clear,  you  v.^ill 
find  that  what  was  but  a  tract  on  earth  will  be  a  huge  tome  in 
heaven.  You  will  tell  a  long  story  there  of  God's  sustaining, 
restraining,  constraining  grace,  and  I  think  that  when  you 
pause  to  let  another  tell  his  tale,  and  then  another,  and  then 
another,  you  will  at  last,  when  you  have  been  in  heaven  a 
thousand  years,  break  out  and  exclaim,  "  O  saints,  I  have 
something  else  to  say."  Again  they  will  tell  their  tales,  and 
again  you  will  interrupt  them  with  "  O  beloved,  I  have  thought 
of  another  case  of  God's  delivering  mercy."  And  so  you  will 
go  on,  giving  them  themes  for  songs,  finding  them  the  material 
for  the  warp  and  woof  of  heavenly  sonnets.  "  Go  home,"  he 
will  soon  say,  "  go  home  to  thy  friends,  and  tell  them  how 
great  things  the  Lord  hath  done  for  thee,  and  hath  had  com- 
passion on  thee."  Wait  a  while ;  tarry  his  leisure,  and  ye 
shall  soon  be  gathered  to  the  land  of  the  hereafter,  to  the 
home  of  the  blessed,  where  endless  felicity  shall  be  thy  por- 
tion.    God  grant  a  blessing,  for  his  name's  sake  ! 


SERMON  XXVII. 

A  MIGHTY  SAVIOUR. 

"  Mighty  to  save." — Tsatah,  Ixiii.  1. 

This,  of  course,  refers  to  our  blessed  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who 
is  described  as  "  coming  from  Edom  with  dyed  garments  from 
Bozrah,"  and  who,  when  it  is  questioned  who  he  is,  replies,  "I 
that  speak  in  righteousness,  mighty  to  save."  It  will  be  well, 
then,  at  the  commencement  of  our  discourse  to  make  one  or 
two  remarks  concerning  the  mysteriously  complex  person  of 
the  man  and  God  whom  we  call  our  Redeemer,  Jesus  Christ 
our  Saviour,  It  is  one  of  the  mysteries  of  the  Christian  relig- 
ion, that  we  are  taught  to  believe  that  Christ  is  God,  and  yet  a 
man.  According  to  Scripture,  w^e  hold  that  he  is  '"''very  God^^'* 
equal  and  co-eternal  with  the  Father,  possessing,  as  his  Father 
doth,  all  divine  attributes  in  an  infinite  degree.  He  partici- 
pated with  his  Father  in  all  the  acts  of  his  divine  might;  he 
was  concerned  in  the  decree  of  election,  in  the  fashioning  of 
the  covenant;  in  the  creation  of  the  angels,  in  the  making  of 
the  world,  when  it  was  wheeled  from  nothing  into  space,  and 
in  the  ordering  of  this  fair  frame  of  nature.  Before  any  of 
these  acts  the  divine  Redeemer  was  the  eternal  Son  of  God. 
"  From  everlasting  to  everlasting  he  is  God."  Nor  did  he 
cease  to  be  God  when  he  became  man.  He  was  equally  "  God 
over  all,  blessed  for  evermore,"  when  he  was  *'the  man  of 
sori-ows,  acquainted  with  grief,"  as  before  his  incarnation.  We 
have  abundant  proof  of  that  in  the  constant  affirmations  of 
Scripture,  and,  indeed,  also  in  the  mii-acles  which  he  wrought. 
The  raising  of  the  dead,  the  treading  of  the  billows  of  the 
ocean,  the  hushing  of  the  winds,  and  the  rending  of  the  rocks, 
with  all  those  marvelous  acts  of  his,  which  we  have  not  time 
here  to  mention,  were  strong  and  potent  proofs  that  he  was 


A    MIGHTY    SAVIOUR.  405 

God,  most  truly  God,  even  when  he  condescended  to  be  man. 
And  Scripture,  most  certainly,  teaches  us  that  he  is  God  now, 
that  he  shares  the  throne  of  his  Father — that  he  sits  high 
above  all  "  principalities  and  powers,  and  every  name  that  is 
named,"  and  is  the  true  and  proper  object  of  the  veneration, 
the  worship,  and  the  homage  of  all  worlds.  We  are  equally 
taught  to  believe  that  he  is  7na7i.  Scripture  informs  us  that, 
on  a  day  appointed,  he  came  from  heaven  and  did  become  man 
as  well  as  God,  taking  upon  himself  the  nature  of  a  babe  in  the 
manger  of  Bethlehem.  From  that  babe,  we  are  told,  he  did 
grow  to  the  stature  of  manhood,  and  became  "  bone  of  our 
bone,  and  flesh  of  our  flesh,"  in  every  thing  except  our  sin. 
His  sufierings,  his  hunger,  above  all,  his  death  and  burial,  are 
strong  proofs  that  he  was  man,  most  truly  man ;  and  yet  it 
is  demanded  of  ns  by  the  Christian  religion,  to  believe,  that 
while  he  was  man,  he  was  most  truly  God.  We  are  taught 
that  he  was  a  "  child  born,  a  son  given,"  and  yet,  at  the  same 
time,  the  "Wonderful,  the  Counselor,  the  mighty  God,  the 
everlasting  Father."  Whosoever  would  have  clear  and  right 
views  of  Jesus,  must  not  mingle  his  natures.  We  must  not 
consider  him  as  a  God  diluted  into  deified  manhood,  or  as  a 
mere  man  officially  exalted  to  the  Godhead,  but  as  being  two 
distinct  natures  in  one  person  ;  not  God  melted  into  man,  nor 
man  made  into  God,  but  man  and  God  taken  into  union  to- 
gether. Thei-efore,  do  we  trust  in  him,  as  the  Daysman,  the 
Mediator,  Son  of  God,  and  Son  of  Man.  This  is  the  person 
who  is  our  Saviour.  It  is  this  glorious,  yet  mysterious  being, 
of  whom  the  text  speaks,  when  it  says,  he  is  mighty—"  mighty 
to  save." 

That  he  is  mighty  we  need  not  inform  you  ;  for  as  readers 
of  the  Scriptures  you  all  believe  in  the  might  and  majesty  of 
the  incarnate  Son  of  God.  You  believe  him  to  be  the  Regent 
of  providence,  the  King  of  death,  the  Conqueror  of  hell,  the 
Lord  of  angels,  the  Master  of  storms,  and  the  God  of  battles, 
and,  therefore,  you  can  need  no  proof  that  he  is  mighty.  The 
subject  of  this  morning  is  one  part  of  his  mightiness.  He  is 
"  mighty  to  save."  May  God  the  Holy  Spirit  help  us  in  briefly 
entering  upon  this  subject,  and  make  use  of  it  to  the  salvation 
of  our  souls  ! 


406  A   MIGHTY    SAVIOliR. 

First,  we  shall  consider  what  is  meant  by  the  words  ''''to 
save  y"  secondly,  hoio  we  prove  the  fact  that  he  is  "  mighty  to 
save  ;"  thirdly,  the  reason  lohy  he  is  "  mighty  to  saije  ;^'  and 
then,  fourthly,  the  inferences  which  are  to  he  deduced fi'om  the 
doctrine  that  Jesus  Christ  is  "  mighty  to  save:^ 

I.  First,  then,  wHxVT  are  ave  to  understand  by  the  words 

"  TO  SAVE  ?" 

Commonly,  most  men,  when  they  read  these  words,  consider 
them  to  mean  salvation  fronrhell.  They  are  partially  correct, 
but  the  notion  is  highly  defective.  It  is  true  Christ  does  save 
men  from  the  penalty  of  their  guilt ;  he  does  take  those  tc 
heaven  who  deserve  the  eternal  wrath  and  displeasure  of  the 
Most  High  ;  it  is  true  that  he  does  blot  out  "  iniquity,  trans- 
gression, and  sin,"  and  that  the  iniquities  of  the  remnant  of  his 
people  are  passed  over  for  the  sake  of  his  blood  and  atone- 
ment. But  that  is  not  the  whole  meaning  of  the  words  "  to 
save."  This  deficient  explanation  lies  at  the  root  of  mistakes 
which  many  theologians  have  made,  and  by  which  they  have 
surrounded  their  system  of  divinity  with  mist.  They  have  said 
that  to  save  is  to  pluck  men  as  brands  from  the  burning — to 
save  them  from  destruction  if  they  repent.  Now,  it  means 
vastly,  I  had  almost  said  infinitely  more  than  this.  "  To  save" 
means  something  more  than  just  delivering  penitents  from 
going  down  to  hell.  By  the  words  "  to  save"  I  understand 
the  whole  of  the  great  work  of  salvation,  from  the  first  holy 
desire,  the  first  spiritual  conviction,  onward  to  complete  sancti- 
fication.  All  is  done  of  God  through  Jesus  Christ.  Christ  is 
not  only  mighty  to  save  those  who  do  repent,  but  be  is  able 
to  make  men  repent ;  he  is  engaged  not  merely  to  carry  those 
to  heaven  who  believe,  but  he  is  mighty  to  give  men  new 
hearts  and  to  work  faith  in  them ;  he  is  mighty  not  merely  to 
give  heaven  to  one  who  wishes  for  it,  but  he  is  mighty  to  make 
the  man  who  hates  holiness  love  it,  to  constrain  the  despiser 
of  his  name  to  bend  his  knee  before  him,  and  to  make  the  most 
abandoned  reprobate  turn  from  the  error  of  his  ways. 

By  the  words  "  to  save,"  I  do  not  understand  what  some 
men  say  they  mean.  They  tell  us  in  their  divinity  that  Christ 
came  into  the  world  to  put  all  men  into  a  salvable  state — to 
make  the  salvation  of  all  men  possible  by  their  own  exertions. 


A    MIGHTY    SAVIOUR.  407 

I  believe  that  Christ  came  for  no  such  thing — that  he  came 
into  the  world  not  to  put  men  into  a  salvable  state,  but  into  a 
saved  state ;  not  to  j^ut  them  where  they  could  sa^ve  them- 
selves, but  to  do  the  work  in  them  and  for  them,  from  the  first 
even  to  the  last.  If  I  believed  that  Christ  came  only  to  put 
you,  my  hearers,  and  myself  into  a  state  where  we  might  save 
ourselves,  I  should  give  up  preaching  henceforth  and  for  ever; 
for  knowing  a  little  of  the  wickedness  of  men's  hearts,  because 
I  know  something  of  my  own-j— knowing  how  much  men  natu- 
rally hate  the  religion  of  Christ — I  should  despair  of  any  suc- 
cess in  preaching  a  gospel  which  I  had  only  to  offer,  its  effects 
depending  upon  the  voluntary  acceptance  of  it  by  unrenewed 
and  unregenerate  men.  If  I  did  not  believe  that  there  was  a 
might  going  forth  with  the  word  of  Jesus,  which  makes  men 
willing  in  the  day  of  his  power,  and  which  turns  them  from 
the  error  of  their  ways  by  the  mighty,  overwhelming,  con- 
straining force  of  a  divine  and  mysterious  influence,  I  should 
cease  to  glory  in  the  cross  of  Christ.  Christ,  we  repeat,  is 
mighty,  not  merely  to  put  men  into  a  salvable  condition,  but 
mighty  absolutely  and  entirely  to  save  them.  This  fact  I  re- 
gard as  one  of  the  grandest  proofs  of  the  divine  character  of 
the  Bible  revelation.  I  have  many  a  time  had  doubts  and 
fears,  as  most  of  you  have  had ;  and  where  is  the  strong  be- 
liever that  lias  not  sometimes  wavered  ?  I  have  said,  within 
myself,  "  Is  this  religion  true,  which,  day  after  day,  I  inces- 
santly preach  to  the  people  ?  Is  it  the  correct  one  ?  Is  it  true 
that  this  religion  has  an  influence  upon  mankind  ?"  And  I 
M'ill  tell  you  how  I  have  reassured  myself.  I  have  looked  upon 
the  hundreds,  nay,  upon  the  thousands  whom  I  have  around 
me,  who  were  once  the  vilest  of  the  vile — drunkards,  swearers, 
and  such  like — and  I  now  see  them  "  clothed,  and  in  their  right 
mind,"  walking  in  holiness  and  in  the  fear  of  God  ;  and  I  have 
said  within  myself,  "This  must  be  the  truth,  then,  because  I 
s(?e  its  marvelous  efiects.  It  is  true,  because  it  is  efficient  for 
purposes  which  error  never  could  accomplish.  It  exerts  an  in- 
fluence among  the  lowest  order  of  mortals,  and  over  the  most 
abominable  of  our  race.  It  is  a  power,  an  irresistible  agent 
of  good;  who,  then,  shall  deny  its  truth?  I  take  it  that  the 
highest  proof  of  Chiist's  power  is  not  that  he  offers  salvation, 


408  A   MIGHTY    SAVIOUR. 

not  that  he  bids  you  take  it  if  you  will,  but  that  when  you  re- 
jert  it,  when  you  hate  it,  when  you  despise  it,  he  has  a  power 
wh  ^reby  he  can  change  your  raind,  make  you  think  differently 
fro.n  your  former  thoughts,  and  turn  you  from  the  error  of 
yo'..r  ways.  This  I  conceive  to  be  the  meaning  of  the  text, 
"n  ighty  to  save." 

}^ut  it  is  not  all  the  meaning.  Our  Lord  is  not  only  mighty 
to  make  men  repent,  to  quicken  the  dead  in  sin,  to  turn  them 
froai  their  follies  and  their  iniquities.  But  he  is  exalted  to  do 
more  than  that :  he  is  mighty  to  keep  them  Christians  after  he 
haf  made  them  so,  and  mighty  to  preserve  them  in  his  fear 
an<l  love,  until  he  consummates  their  spiritual  existence  in 
heaven.  Christ's  might  doth  not  lie  in  making  a  believer,  and 
thtn  leaving  him  to  shift  for  himself  afterward ;  but  he  who 
berins  the  good  work  carries  it  on  ;  he  who  imparts  the  first 
germ  of  life  which  quickens  the  dead  soul,  gives  afterward  the 
life  which  prolongs  the  divine  existence,  and  bestows  that 
nii-hty  power  which  at  last  bursts  asunder  every  bond  of  sin, 
and  lands  the  soul  perfected  in  glory.  We  hold  and  teach, 
and,  we  believe,  upon  scriptural  authority,  that  all  men  unto 
whim  Christ  has  given  repentance,  must  infallibly  hold  on 
their  way.  We  do  believe  that  God  never  begins  a  good 
woi-k  in  a  man  without  finishing  it ;  that  he  never  makes  a 
maa  truly  alive  to  spiritual  things  without  carrying  on  that 
wc.-k  in  his  soul  even  to  the  end,  by  giving  him  a  place  among 
the  choirs  of  the  sanctified.  We  do  not  think  that  Christ's 
ponder  dwells  in  merely  bringing  me  one  day  into  grace,  and 
the  a  telling  me  to  keep  myself  there,  but  in  so  putting  me  into 
a  g  .'acious  state,  and  giving  me  such  an  inward  life,  and  such 
a  power  within  myself,  that  I  can  no  more  turn  back  than  the 
wery  sun  in  the  heavens  can  stay  itself  in  its  course,  or  cease 
to  bine.  Beloved,  we  regard  this  as  signified  by  the  terms 
"i.  ighty  to  save."  This  is  commonly  called  Calvinistic  doc- 
trine ;  it  is  none  other  than  Christian  doctrine,  the  doctrine  of 
the  holy  Bible ;  for  despite  that  it  is  now  called  Calvinism,  it 
co;  Id  not  be  so  called  in  Augustine's  days  ;  and  yet  in  Augus- 
tinj's  works  you  find  the  very  same  things.  And  it  is  not  to 
be  called  Augustinism :  it  is  to  be  found  in  the  writings  of  the 
Apostle  Paul.     And  yet  it  was  not  called  Paulism,  simply  fbr 


A   MIGHTY    SAVIOUR.  409 

this  reason,  that  it  is  the  expansion,  the  fliUness  of  the  gospel 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  To  repeat  what  we  have  before 
said,  we  hold  and  boldly  teach,  that  Jesus  Christ  is  not  merely 
able  to  save  men  who  put  themselves  in  his  way,  and  who  are 
willing  to  be  saved,  but  that  he  is  able  to  make  men  willing — 
that  he  is  able  to  make  the  drunkard  renounce  his  drunken- 
ness and  come  to  him — that  he  is  able  to  make  the  despiser 
bend  his  knee,  and  make  hard  hearts  melt  before  his  love. 
Now,  it  is  ours  to  show  that  he  is  able  to  do  so. 

IT.  How  CAN  WE  PROVE  THAT  ChRIST  IS  "  MIGHTY  TO 
SAVE  ?" 

We  will  give  you  the  strongest  argument  first ;  and  we 
sh  .11  need  but  one.  The  argument  is,  that  he  has  done  it. 
We  need  no  other ;  it  were  superfluous  to  add  another.  He 
has  saved  men.  He  has  saved  them,  in  the  full  extent  and 
moaning  of  the  word  which  we  have  endeavored  to  explain. 
But  in  order  to  set  this  truth  in  a  clear  light,  we  will  suppose 
the  worst  of  cases.  It  is  very  easy  to  imagine,  say  some,  that 
when  Christ's  gospel  is  preached  to  some  here  who  are  ami- 
able and  lovely,  and  have  always  been  trained  up  in  the  fear 
of  God,  they  will  receive  the  gospel  in  the  love  of  it.  Very 
well,  then  we  will  not  take  such  a  case.  You  see  this  South 
Sea  Islander.  He  has  just  been  eating  a  diabolical  meal  of 
human  flesh  ;  he  is  a  cannibal ;  at  his  bit  are  slung  the  scalps 
of  men  whom  he  has  murdered,  and  in  whose  blood  he  glo- 
ries. If  you  land  on  the  coast  he  will  eat  you  too,  unless  you 
mind  what  you  are  after.  That  man  bows  himself  before  a 
block  of  wood.  He  is  a  poor,  ignorant,  debased  creature,  but 
very  little  removed  from  the  brute.  Now,  has  Christ's  gospel 
power  to  tame  that  man,  to  take  the  scalps  from  his  girdle,  to 
make  him  give  up  his  bloody  practices,  renounce  his  gods,  and 
become  a  civilized  and  Christian  man  ?  You  know,  my  dear 
friends,  you  talk  about  the  power  of  education  in  England ; 
there  may  be  a  great  deal  in  it ;  education  may  do  very  much 
foi-  some  who  are  here,  not  in  a  spiritual,  but  in  a  natural  way ; 
but  what  would  education  do  with  this  savage :  go  and  try. 
Send  the  best  schoolmaster  in  England  over  to  him  ;  he  will 
eat  him  before  the  day  is  up.  That  will  be  all  the  good  of  it. 
But  if  the  missionary  goes  with  Christ's  gospel,  what  will  be- 

18 


410  A   MIGHTY   SAVIOUE. 

come  of  him  ?  Why,  in  multitudes  of  cases,  he  has  been  the 
pioneer  of  civilization,  and,  under  the  providence  of  God,  has 
escaped  a  cruel  death.  He  goes  with  love  in  his  hands  and  in 
his  eyes ;  he  speaks  to  the  savage.  And,  mark  ye,  we  are 
telling  facts  now,  not  dreams.  The  savage  drops  his  toma- 
liawk.  Says  he,  "  It  is  marvelous ;  the  things  that  this  man 
tells  me  are  wonderful ;  I  will  sit  and  listen."  He  listens,  and 
the  tears  roll  down  his  cheeks ;  a  feeling  oi  humanity  which 
never  burned  within  his  soul  before  is  kindled  in  him.  He 
says,  "  I  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ ;"  and  soon  he  is 
"  clothed,  and  in  his  right  mind,"  and  becomes  in  every  respect 
a  man — such  a  man  as  we  could  desire  all  men  to  be.  Now, 
we  say  that  this  is  a  proof  that  Christ's  gospel  does  not  come 
to  the  mind  that  is  prepared  for  it,  but  prepares  the  mind  for 
itself;  that  Christ  does  not  merely  put  the  seed  into  the 
ground  that  has  been  prepared  beforehand,  but  plows  the 
ground  too — ay,  and  harrows  it,  and  does  the  whole  of  the 
work.  He  is  able  to  do  all  this.  Ask  our  missionaries  who 
are  in  Africa,  in  the  midst  of  the  greatest  barbarians  in  the 
w^orld — ask  them  whether  Christ's  gospel  is  able  to  save,  and 
they  will  point  to  the  kraal  of  the  Hottentot,  and  then  they 
will  point  to  the  houses  of  the  Kuraman,  and  they  will  say, 
"  What  has  made  this  difference  but  the  word  of  the  gospel 
of  Christ  Jesus  ?"  Yes,  dear  brethren,  we  have  had  proofs 
enough  in  heathen  countries  ;  and  why  need  we  say  more,  but 
merely  to  add  this — we  have  had  proofs  enough  at  home. 
There  are  some  who  preach  a  gospel  which  is  very  well  fitted 
to  train  man  in  morals,  but  utterly  unfitted  to  save  him — a 
gospel  which  does  well  enough  to  keep  men  sober  when  they 
are  so,  but  not  a  gospel  which  makes  men  sober  when  they 
have  become  drunkards.  It  is  a  good  thing  enough  to  supply 
them  with  a  kind  of  life  when  they  have  it  already,  but  not  to 
quicken  the  dead  and  save  the  soul,  and  it  can  give  up  to  de- 
spair the  very  characters  whom  Christ's  gospel  w^as  most  of  all 
intended  to  affect.  I  could  a  tale  unfold  of  some  who  have 
plunged  head-first  into  the  blackest  gulfs  of  sin,  who  would 
horrify  you  and  me,  if  we  could  allow  them  to  recount  their 
guilt.  I  could  tell  you  how  they  have  come  into  God's  house 
with  ih  3ir  teeth  set  against  the  minister,  determined  that,  say 


A   MIGHTY    SAVIOUR.  411 

what  he  would,  they  might  listen,  but  it  would  be  to  scoff.  They 
stayed  a  moment ;  some  word  arrested  their  attention  ;  they 
thought  within  themselves,  "  I  will  hear  that  senten(;e."  It 
was  some  pointed,  terse  saying  that  entered  into  their  souls. 
They  knew  not  how  it  was,  but  they  were  spell-bound,  and 
stood  to  listen  a  little  longer ;  and  by-and-by,  unconsciously  to 
themselves,  the  tears  began  to  fall,  and  when  they  went  away, 
they  had  a  strange,  mysterious  feeling  about  them  that  led 
them  to  their  chambers.  Down  they  fell  on  their  knees  ;  the 
story  of  their  life  was  all  told  before  God;  he  gave  them 
peace  through  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  and  they  went  to  God's 
house,  many  of  them  to  say,  "  Come  and  hear  what  God  hath 
done  for  my  soul,"  and  to 

"  Tell  to  sinners  round 
"What  a  dear  Saviour  they  had  found." 

Remember  the  case  of  John  Newton,  the  great  and  mighty 
preacher  of  St  Mary,  Woolnoth — an  instance  of  the  power  of 
God  to  change  the  heart,  as  well  as  to  give  peace  wlffen  the 
heart  is  changed.  Ah  !  dear  hearers,  I  often  think  within 
myself,  "  This  is  the  greatest  proof  of  the  Saviour's  power." 
Let  another  doctrine  be  preached  :  will  it  do  the  same  ?  If  it 
will,  why  not  let  every  man  gather  a  crowd  round  him  and 
preach  it  ?  Will  it  really  do  it  ?  If  it  will,  then  the  blood 
of  men's  souls  must  rest  upon  the  man  who  does  not  boldly 
proclaim  it.  If  he  believes  his  gospel  does  save  souls,  how 
does  he  account  for  it  that  he  stands  in  his  pulpit  from  the 
first  of  January  till  the  last  of  December,  and  never  hears  of  a 
harlot  made  honest,  nor  of  a  drunkard  reclaimed  ?  Why  ? 
For  this  reason,  that  it  is  a  poor  dilution  of  Christianity.  It  is 
something  like  it,  but  it  is  not  the  bold,  broad  Christianity  of 
the  Bible  ;  it  is  not  the  full  gospel  of  the  blessed  God,  for  that 
has  power  to  save.  But  if  they  do  believe  that  theirs  is  the 
gospel,  let  them  come  out  to  preach  it,  and  let  them  strive 
with  all  their  might  to  win  souls  from  sin,  which  is  rife  enough, 
God  knows.  We  say  again,  that  we  have  proof  positive  in 
cases  even  here  before  us,  that  Christ  is  mighty  to  save  even 
the  worst   )f  men — to  turn  them  from  follies  in  which  they 


412  A    MIGHTT    SAVIOUR. 

have  too  long  indulged,  and  we  believe  that  the  same  gospel 
preached  elsewhere  would  produce  the  same  results. 

The  best  proof  you  can  ever  have  of  God's  being  mighty 
to  save,  dear  hearers,  is  that  he  saved  you.  Ah !  my  dear 
iiearer,  it  were  a  miracle  if  he  should  save  thy  fellow  that 
stands  by  thy  side ;  but  it  were  more  a  miracle  if  he  should 
save  thee.  What  art  thou  this  mornmg  ?  Answer!  "lam 
an  infidel,"  says  one,  "  I  hate  and  despise  Christ's  religion." 
But  suppose,  sir,  there  should  be  such  a  power  in  that  religion 
that  one  day  thou  shouldst  be  brought  to  believe  it !  What 
w^ouldst  thou  say  then  ?  Ah !  I  know  thou  wouldst  be  in  love 
with  that  gospel  for  ever  ;  for  thou  wouldst  say,  "  I  above  all 
men  was  the  last  to  receive  it ;  and  yet  here  am  I,  I  know  not 
how,  brought  to  love  it."  O  !  such  a  man,  when  constrained 
to  believe,  makes  the  most  eloquent  preacher  in  the  world. 
"Ah  !  but,"  says  another,  "  I  have  been  a  Sabbath-breaker  upon 
principle ;  I  despise  the  Sabbath,  I  hate  utterly  and  entirely 
every  thing  religious."  Well,  I  can  never  prove  religion  to 
you  to  be  true,  unless  it  should  ever  lay  hold  of  you,  and 
make  you  a  new  man.  Then  you  will  say  there  is  something 
in  it.  "  We  speak  that  we  do  know,  and  testify  that  we  have 
seen."  When  we  have  felt  the  change  it  works  in  ourselves, 
then  we  speak  of  facts,  and  not  of  fancies,  and  we  speak  very 
boldly  too.     We  say  again,  then,  he  is  "  mighty  to  save." 

III.  But  now  it  is  asked.  Why  is  Christ  "  mighty  to  save  ?'* 
To  this  there  are  sundry  answers. 

First,  if  we  understand  the  word  "  save"  in  the  popular  ac- 
ceptation of  the  word,  which  is  not,  after  all,  the  full  one, 
though  a  true  one — if  we  understand  salvation  to  mean  the 
pardon  of  sin  and  salvation  from  hell,  Christ  is  mighty  to  save, 
because  of  the  infinite  efficacy  of  his  atoning  hlood.  Sinner ! 
black  as  thou  art  with  sin,  Christ  this  morning  is  able  to  make 
thee  whiter  than  the  driven  snow.  Thou  askest  why.  I  will 
tell  thee.  He  is  able  to  forgive,  because  he  has  been  punished 
for  thy  sin.  If  thou  dost  know  and  feel  thyself  to  be  a  sin- 
ner, if  thou  hast  no  hope  or  refuge  before  God  but  in  Christ, 
then  be  it  known  that  Christ  is  able  to  forgive,  because  he 
was  once  punished  for  the  very  sin  which  thou  hast  commit- 
ted,  and  therefore  he  can  freely  remit,  because  the  punish- 


A    MK^HTY    SAVIOUR.  413 

ment  has  been  entirely  paid  by  himself.  Whenever  I  get  ou 
this  subject  I  am  tempted  to  tell  a  story  ;  and  though  I  have 
told  it  times  enough  in  the  hearing  of  many  of  you,  others  of 
you  have  never  heard  it,  and  it  is  tlie  simplest  way  I  know  of 
setting  out  the  belief  I  have  in  the  atonement  of  Christ.  Once 
a  poor  Irishman  came  to  me  in  my  vestry.  He  announced 
himself  something  in  this  way  :  "  Your  riverence,  I'm  come 
to  ax  you  a  question."  "  In  the  first  place,"  said  I,  "  I  am 
not  a  reverend,  nor  do  I  claim  the  title;  and  in  the  next  place, 
why  don't  you  go  and  ask  your  priest  that  question  ?"  Said 
he,  "  Well  your  riv — sir,  I  meant — I  did  go  to  him,  but  he 
did  not  answer  me  to  my  satisfaction  exactly ;  so  I  have  come 
to  ask  you,  and  if  you  will  answer  this  you  will  set  my  mind 
at  peace,  for  I  am  much  disturbed  about  it."  "  What  is  the 
question  ?"  said  I.  "  Why,  this.  You  say,  and  others  say 
too,  that  God  is  able  to  forgive  sin.  Now,  I  can't  see  how  he 
can  be  just,  and  yet  forgive  sin  :  for,"  said  this  poor  man,  "I 
have  been  so  greatly  guilty  that  if  God  Almighty  does  not 
punish  me,  ht  ought  ;  I  feel  that  he  would  not  be  just  if  he 
were  to  suffer  me  to  go  without  punishment.  How,  then,  sir, 
can  it  be  true  that  he  can  forgive,  and  still  retain  the  title  of 
just  ?"  "  Well,"  said  I,  "  it  is  through  the  blood  and  merits  of 
Jesus  Christ."  "  Ah  !"  said  he,  "  but  then  I  do  not  understand 
what  you  mean  by  that.  It  is  the  kind  of  answer  I  got  from 
the  priest,  but  I  wanted  him  to  explain  it  to  me  more  fully, 
how  it  was  that  the  blood  of  Christ  could  make  God  just. 
You  say  it  does,  but  I  want  to  know  how."  "  Well,  then," 
said  I,  "  I  will  tell  you  what  I  think  to  be  the  whole  system  of 
atonement,  which  I  think  is  the  sum  and  substance,  the  root, 
the  marrow,  and  the  essence  of  all  the  gospel.  This  is  the  way 
Christ  is  able  to  forgive.  Suppose,"  said  I,  "  you  had  killed 
some  one.  You  were  a  murderer ;  you  were  condemned  to 
die,  and  you  deserved  it."  "Faith,"  said  he,  "yes,  I  should 
deserve  it."  "Well,  her  majesty  is  very  desirous  of  saving 
your  life,  and  yet  at  the  same  time  universal  justice  demands 
that  some  one  should  die  on  account  of  the  deed  that  is  done. 
Now,  how  is  she  to  manage?"  Said  he,  "That  is  the  ques- 
tion. I  can  not  see  how  she  can  be  inflexibly  just,  and  yet  suf- 
fer me  to  escape."  "Well,"  said  I,  "  suppose,  Pat,  I  should  go 


414  A    MIGHTY    SAVIOUtw. 

to  her,  and  say,  '  Here  is  this  poor  Irishman,  he  deserves  to  be 
hanged,  your  majesty ;  I  don't  want  to  quarrel  with  the  sen- 
tence, because  I  think  it  just:  but,  if  you  please,  I  so  love  him 
tliat  if  you  were  to  hang  me  instead  of  him  I  should  be  very 
willing.'  Pat,  suj^pose  she  should  agree  to  it,  and  hang  me 
instead  of  you:  what  then  ?  would  she  be  just  in  letthig  you 
go?"  "Ay,"  said  he,  "I  should  think  she  would.  Would 
she  hang  two  for  one  thing  ?  I  should  say  not.  I'd  walk 
away,  and  there  isn't  a  policeman  that  would  touch  me  for  it." 
"  Ah,"  said  I,  "  that  is  how  Jesus  saves.  '  Father,'  he  said, 
I  love  these  poor  sinners:  let  me  suffer  instead  of  them!' 
*  Yes,'  said  God,  '  thou  shalt,'  and  on  the  tree  he  died,  and 
suffered  the  punishment  which  all  his  elect  people  ought  to 
have  suffered ;  so  that  now  all  who  believe  on  him,  thus  prov- 
ing themselves  to  be  his  chosen,  may  conclude  that  he  was 
punished  for  them,  and  that  therefore  they  never  can  be  pun- 
ished." "  Well,"  said  he,  looking  me  in  the  face  once  more, 
"  I  understand  what  you  mean ;  but  how  is  it,  if  Christ  died 
for  all  men,  that,  notwithstanding,  some  men  are  punished 
again  ?  For  that  is  unjust."  "  Ah  !"  said  I,  "  I  never  told 
you  that.  I  say  to  you  that  he  has  died  for  all  who  believe  in 
Inm,  and  all  who  repent,  and  that  he  was  punished  for  their 
sins  so  absolutely  and  so  really,  that  none  of  them  shall  ever 
be  punished  again."  "  Faith,"  said  the  man,  clapping  his 
hands,  "  that's  the  gospel ;  if  it  isn't,  then  I  don't  know  any 
thing,  for  no  man  could  have  made  that  np  :  it  is  so  wonder- 
ful. Ah !"  he  said,  as  he  went  down  the  stairs,  "  Pat's  safe 
now  ;  with  all  his  sins  about  him  he'll  trust  in  the  man  that 
died  for  him,  and  so  he  shall  be  saved."  Dear  hearer,  Christ 
is  mighty  to  save,  because  God  did  not  turn  away  the  sword, 
but  he  sheathed  it  in  his  own  Son's  heart ;  he  did  not  remit 
the  debt,  for  it  was  paid  in  drops  of  precious  blood  ;  and  now 
the  great  receipt  is  nailed  to  the  cross,  and  our  sins  with  it,  so 
that  we  may  go  free  if  we  are  believers  in  him.  For  this  rea- 
(3on  he  is  "  mighty  to  save,"  in  the  true  sense  of  the  word. 

But  in  the  large  sense  of  the  word,  understanding  it  to 
mean  all  that  I  have  said  it  does  mean,  he  is  "  mighty  to  save." 
How  is  it  that  Chi-ist  is  able  to  make  men  repent,  to  make 
men  believe,  and  to  make  them  turn  to  God  ?     One  answers, 


A   MIGHTY    SAVIOUE.  416 

"  Why,  by  the  eloquence  of  preachers."  God  forbid  we  should 
ever  say  that !  It  is  "  not  by  might  nor  by  power."  Others 
reply,  "  It  is  by  the  force  of  moral  suasion."  God  forbid  we 
should  say  "  ay"  to  that ;  for  moral  suasion  has  been  tried 
long  enough  on  man,  and  yet  it  has  failed  of  success.  How 
does  he  do  it  ?  We  answer,  by  something  which  some  of  you 
despise,  but  which  nevertheless  is  a  fact.  He  does  it  by  the 
omnipotent  influence  of  his  divine  Spirit.  While  men  are 
hearing  the  word  (in  those  whom  God  will  save)  the  Holy 
Spirit  works  repentance  ;  he  changes  the  heart  and  renews  the 
soul.  True,  the  preaching  is  the  instrument,  but  the  Holy 
Spirit  is  the  great  agent.  It  is  certain  that  the  truth  is  the 
means  of  saving,  but  it  is  the  Holy  Ghost  applying  the  truth 
which  saves  souls.  Ah  !  and  with  this  power  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  we  may  go  to  the  most  debased  and  degraded  of  men, 
and  we  need  not  be  afraid  but  that  God  can  save  them.  If 
God  should  please,  the  Holy  Spirit  could  at  this  moment  make 
every  one  of  you  fall  on  your  knees,  confess  your  sins,  and 
turn  to  God.  He  is  an  Almighty  Spirit,  able  to  do  wonders. 
In  the  life  of  Whitefield,  we  read  that  sometimes  under  one 
of  his  sermons  two  thousand  persons  would  at  once  profess  to 
be  saved,  and  were  really  so,  many  of  them.  We  ask  why  it 
was  ?  At  other  times  he  preached  just  as  powerfully,  and  not 
one  soul  was  saved.  Why  ?  Because  in  the  one  case  the 
Holy  Spirit  went  with  the  word,  and  in  the  other  case  it  did 
not.  All  the  heavenly  result  of  preaching  is  owing  to  the 
divine  Spirit  sent  from  above.  I  am  nothing ;  my  brethren 
in  the  ministry  around  are  all  nothing ;  it  is  God  that  doeth 
eveiy  thing.  "Who  is  Paul,  who  is  Apollos,  and  who  is 
Cephas,  but  ministers  by  whom  ye  believed,  even  as  God  gave 
to  every  man."  It  must  be  "  not  by  might,  nor  by  power, 
but  by  my  Spirit,  saith  the  Lord."  Go  forth,  poor  minister ! 
Thou  hast  no  power  to  preach  with  poUshed  diction  and 
elegant  refinement ;  go  and  preach  as  thou  canst.  The  Spirit 
can  make  thy  feeble  words  more  mighty  than  the  most  ravish- 
ing eloquence.  Alas !  alas !  for  oratory !  Alas !  for  elo- 
quence !  It  hath  long  enough  been  tried.  We  have  had 
polished  periods,  and  finely-turned  sentences;  but  in  what 
place  have  the  people  been  saved  by  them  ?     We  have  had 


416  A    MIGHTY    SAVIOUR. 

grand  and  gaudy  language ;  but  where  have  hearts  been  re- 
newed? But  now,  "by  the  foolishness  of  preaching,"  by  the 
simple  utterance  by  a  child  of  God's  Word,  he  is  pleased  to 
save  them  that  believe,  and  to  save  sinners  from  the  error  of 
their  ways.  May  God  prove  his  word  again  this  morning ! 
IV.  The  fourth  point  was,  Wi/at  are  the  inferences  to 

BE  DERIVED  FROM  THE   FACT  THAT   JeSUS  ChRIST  IS  MIGHTY  TO 
SAVE? 

Why,  first,  there  is  a  fact  for  ministers  to  learn — that  they 
should  endeavor  to  preach  in  f^th,  nothing  wavering.  "  O 
God,"  cries  the  minister  at  times,  when  he  is  on  his  knees,  *'  I 
am  weak  ;  I  have  preached  to  my  hearers,  and  have  wept  over 
them ;  I  have  groaned  for  them  ;  but  they  will  not  turn  to 
thee.  Their  hearts  are  like  the  nether  mill-stone ;  they  will 
not  weep  for  sin,  nor  will  they  love  the  Saviour."  Then  I 
think  I  see  the  angel  standing  at  his  elbow,  and  whispering  in 
liis  ear,  "  Thou  art  weak,  but  he  is  strong ;  thou  canst  do 
nothing,  but  he  is  *  mighty  to  save.'  "  Bethink  thyself  of  this. 
It  is  not  the  instrument,  but  the  God.  It  is  not  the  pen 
wherewith  the  author  writes  which  is  to  have  the  praise  of  his 
wisdom  or  the  raaldng  of  the  volume,  but  it  is  the  brain  that 
thinks  it,  and  the  hand  that  moves  the  pen.  So  in  salvation. 
It  is  not  the  minister,  it  is  not  the  preacher,  but  the  God  who 
first  designs  the  salvation,  and  afterward  uses  the  preacher  to 
work  it  out.  Ah!  poor  disconsolate  preacher,  if  thou  hast  had 
but  little  fruit  of  thy  ministry,  go  on  still  in  faith,  remember- 
ing it  is  written,  "  My  word  shall  not  return  unto  me  void,  but 
it  shall  accomplish  that  which  I  please,  and  prosper  in  the 
thing  whereto  I  sent  it."  Go  on  ;  be  of  good  courage  ;  God 
shall  help  thee  ;  he  shall  help  thee,  and  that  right  early. 

Again,  here  is  another  encouragement  for  praying  men  and 
women,  who  are  praying  to  God  for  their  friends.  Moth.r, 
you  have  been  groaning  for  yotr  son  for  many  a  year  ;  he  is 
now  grown  up,  and  has  left  year  roof,  but  your  prayers  ha/e 
not  been  heard.  So  you  think.  He  is  as  gay  as  ever;  not 
yet  has  he  made  your  breast  rejoice.  Sometimes  you  think  he 
will  bring  your  gray  hairs  with  sorrow  to  the  grave.  It  was 
but  yesterday  you  said,  "  I  will  give  him  up,  I  will  never  pray 
for  him  again."     Stop,  mother,  stop  !     By  all  that  is  holy  and 


A    MIGHTY    SAVIOUR.  417 

that  is  heavenly,  stop  !  Utter  not  that  resohition  again  ;  be- 
gin once  more  !  Thou  hast  prayed  over  him  ;  thou  didst  weep 
over  his  infant  forehead,  when  he  lay  in  his  cradle  ;  thou  didst 
teach  him  when  he  came  to  years  of  understanding,  and  thou 
hast  often  warned  him  since ;  but  all  of  no  avail.  O  !  give  not 
up  thy  prayers ;  for  remember,  Christ  is  "  mighty  to  save." 
It  may  be  that  he  waits  to  be  gracious,  and  he  keeps  thee  wait- 
ing, that  thou  mayest  know  more  of  his  graciousness  when  the 
mercy  comes.  But  pray  on.  I  have  heard  of  mothers  who 
have  prayed  for  their  childrefi  twenty  years  ;  ay,  and  of  some 
who  have  died  without  seeing  them  converted,  and  then  their 
very  death  has  been  the  means  of  saving  their  children,  by 
leading  them  to  think.  A  father  once  had  been  a  pious  man 
for  many  years,  yet  never  had  he  the  happiness  of  seeing  one 
of  his  sons  converted.  He  had  his  children  round  his  bed,  and 
he  said  to  them  when  dying,  "  My  sons,  I  could  die  in  peace 
if  I  could  but  believe  you  would  follow  me  to  heaven  ;  but  this 
is  the  most  sorrowful  thing  of  all — not  that  I  am  dying,  but 
that  I  am  leaving  you  to  meet  you  no  more."  They  looked 
at  him,  but  they  would  not  weep,  nor  would  they  think  on 
their  ways.  They  went  away.  Their  father  was  suddenly 
overtaken  with  great  clouds  and  darkness  of  mind;  instead  of 
dying  peacefully  and  happily,  he  died  in  great  misery  of  soul, 
but  still  trusting  in  Christ.  He  said,  when  he  died,  "  O  that 
I  had  died  a  happy  death,  for  that  would  have  been  a  testi- 
mony to  my  sons ;  but  now,  O  God,  this  darkness  and  these 
clouds  have  in  some  degree  taken  away  my  power  to  witness 
to  the  truth  of  thy  religion."  Well,  he  died,  and  was  buried. 
The  sons  came  to  the  funeral.  The  day  after,  one  of  them 
said  to  his  brother,  "  Brother,  I  have  been  thinking,  father 
was  always  a  pious  man,  and  if  his  death  was  yet  such  a  gloomy 
one,  how  gloomy  must  ours  be,  without  God  and  without 
Christ."  "Ah!"  said  the  other,  "that  thought  struck  me 
too."  They  went  up  to  God's  house,  heard  God's  word,  they 
came  home  and  bent  their  knee  in  prayer,  and  to  their  surprise 
they  found  that  the  rest  of  the  family  had  done  the  same,  and 
that  the  God  who  had  never  answered  the  father's  prayer  in 
his  life  had  answered  it  after  his  death,  and  by  his  death  too, 
and  by  such  a  d  ^ath  as  would  appear  to  be  most  unlikely  to  have 

18* 


418  A   MIGHTY    SAVIOUR. 

wrought  the  conversion  of  any.  Pray  on,  then,  my  sister ; 
pray  on,  my  brother!  God  shall  yet  bring  thy  sons  and 
daughters  to  his  love  and  fear,  and  thou  shalt  rejoice  over 
them  in  heaven,  if  thou  never  dost  on  earth. 

And  finally,  my  dear  hearers,  there  are  many  of  you  here 
this  morning  who  have  no  love  to  God,  no  love  to  Christ ; J^ut 
you  have  a  desire  in  your  hearts  to  love  him.  You  are  say- 
incr,  "  O  !  can  he  save  me  ?  Can  such  a  wretch  as  I  be  saved  ?" 
In  the  thick  of  the  crowd  there  you  are  standing,  and  you  are 
now  saying  within  yourself,  "  May  I  one  day  sing  among  the 
saints  above  ?  May  I  have  all  my  sins  blotted  out  by  blood 
divine?"  Yes,  sinner,  he  is  "mighty  to  save;"  and  this  is 
comfort  for  thee.  Dost  thou  think  thyself  the  worst  of  men  ? 
Does  conscience  smite  thee  as  with  a  mailed  fist,  and  does  he 
say  it  is  all  over  with  thee  ;  thou  wilt  be  lost ;  thy  repentance 
will  be  of  no  avail ;  thy  prayers  never  will  be  heard  ;  thou  art 
lost  to  all  intents  and  purposes  ?  My  hearer,  think  not  so. 
He  is  "  mighty  to  save."  If  thou  canst  not  pray,  he  can  help 
thee  to  do  it ;  if  thou  canst  not  repent,  he  can  give  thee  re- 
pentance ;  if  thou  feelest  it  hard  to  believe,  he  can  help  thee 
to  believe,  for  he  is  exalted  on  high  to  give  repentance,  as 
well  as  to  give  remission  of  sins.  O  poor  sinner,  trust  in  Jesus; 
oast  thyself  on  him.  Cry,  and  may  God  help  thee  to  do  it 
now.  May  he  help  thee  this  very  day  to  cast  thy  soul  on 
Jesus ;  and  this  will  be  one  of  the  best  years  of  all  thy  life. 
"  Turn  ye,  turn  ye ;  why  will  ye  die,  O  house  of  Israel  ?" 
Turn  unto  Jesus,  ye  wearied  souls  ;  come  unto  him,  for  lo !  he 
bids  you  come.  "  The  Spirit  and  the  bride  say,  Come  ;  and  let 
him  that  heareth  say.  Come  ;  and  whosoever  will,  let  him  come 
and  take  of  the  water  of  life,"  and  have  Christ's  grace  freely. 
It  is  preached  to  you,  and  to  all  of  you  who  are  willing  to  re- 
ceive it,  it  has  been  already  given. 

May  God  of  his  grace  make  you  willing,  and  so  save  youf 
Bouls,  through  Jesus  Christ  our  Lord  and  Saviour  !     Amei  ^ 


SERMON    XXVIII. 

ISRAEL   IN    EGYPT. 

"  And  they  sing  the  song  of  Moses  the  servant  of  God,  and  the  song  of  the 
Lamb,  saying,  Great  and  marvelous  are  thy  works,  Lord  God  Almighty ; 
just  and  true  are  thy  ways,  thou  King  of  saints." — Rev.,  xv.  3. 

At  the  out&at,  let  us  remark  the  carefuhiess  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  in  guarding  the  honor  of  our  blessed  Lord.  This  verse 
is  often  quoted  as  if  it  runs  thus — "  They  sing  the  song  of 
Moses  and  the  Lamb."  This  mistake  has  led  many  weak 
minds  to  wonder  at  the  expression,  for  they  have  imagined 
that  it  divided  the  honor  of  the  song  of  heaven  between  Mo- 
ses and  the  Redeemer.  The  clause — "  the  servant  of  God" —  . 
is  doubtless  inserted  by  the  Holy  Spirit  to  prevent  any  error 
upon  this  point,  an.d  therefore  it  should  be  carefully  included 
in  the  quotation.  I  take  it  that  the  song  of  Moses  is  here 
united  with  the  song  of  the  Lamb,  because  the  one  was  a  type 
and  picture  of  the  other.  The  glorious  overthrow  of  Pharaoh 
in  the  Red  Sea  shadowed  forth  the  total  destruction  of  Satan 
and  all  his  host  in  the  day  of  the  great  battle  of  '.he  Lord; 
and  there  was  in  the  song  of  Moses  the  expression  oft'  e  same 
feelings  of  triumph  which  will  pervade  the  breasts  of  t^  ."!  re- 
deemed when  they  shall  triumph  with  their  Captain. 

May  God  the  Holy  Spirit  enable  me  to  exhibit  the  parallel 
which  exists  between  the  condition  of  Israel  when  passing 
through  the  sea^  and  the  position  of  the  church  of  Christ  a, 
the  present  day.  Next,  we  shall  compare  the  triumph  of  the 
Lord  at  the  Red  Sea  with  the  victory  of  the  Lamb  in  the 
great  and  terrible  day  of  the  I^ord.  And  lastly,  I  shall  point 
out  certain  prominent  features  of  the  song  of  Moses ^  which 
will  doubtless  be  as  prominent  in  the  song  of  the  Lamb. 


420  ISRAEL   IN   EGYPT. 

I.  First,  it  is  our  business  to  regard  the  position  of  the 

CHILDREN    OF  ISRAEL    AS    EMBLEMATICAL    OF    OUR    OWN.      And 

here  we  observe  that,  like  the  church  of  God,  the  vast  host  of 
Israel  had  been  delivered  from  bondage.  We,  my  brethren, 
Avho  constitute  a  part  of  the  Israel  of  God,  were  once  the 
slaves  of  sin  and  Satan  ;  we  served  with  hard  bondage  ar.d 
ri^-or  while  in  our  natural  state ;  no  bondage  was  ever  more 
terrible  than  ours  ;  we  indeed  made  bricks  without  straw,  ard 
labored  in  the  very  fire ;  but  by  the  strong  hand  of  God  we 
have  been  delivered.  We  have  come  forth  from  the  prison- 
house  ;  with  joy  we  beheld  ourselves  emancipated — the  Lord's 
free  men.  The  iron  yoke  is  taken  from  our  necks ;  we  no 
longer  serve  our  lusts,  and  pay  obedience  to  the  tyrant  sin. 
With  a  high  hand  and  an  outstretched  arm,  our  God  has  led 
us  forth  from  the  place  of  our  captivity,  and  joyfully  we  pur- 
sue our  way  through  the  wilderness. 

But  with  the  children  of  Israel  it  was  not  all  joy  ;  they  were 
free,  but  their  master  was  at  their  heels.  Pharaoh  was  loch 
to  lose  so  valuable  a  nation  of  servants ;  and  therefore  with 
his  chosen  captains,  his  horsemen,  and  his  chariots,  he  pur- 
sued them  in  angry  haste.  Affrighted  Israel  beheld  her  infu- 
riated oppressor  jclose  at  her  rear,  and  trembled  for  the  issue 
— the  hearts  of  the  people  failed  them  while  they  saw  their 
hopes  blighted  and  their  joys  ended  by  the  approach  of  the 
oppressor ;  even  so  it  is  with  some  of  you ;  you  think  you 
must  be  driven  back  again  like  dumb  cattle,  into  Egypt,  and 
once  more  become  what  you  were.  "  Surely,"  you  say,  "  I 
can  not  hold  on  my  way  with  such  a  host  seeking  to  drive  me 
back ;  I  must  again  become  the  slave  of  my  iniquities."  And 
thus  dreading  apostacy,  and  feeling  that  you  would  rather  die 
than  become  what  you  were  ;  you  this  morning  are  filled  with 
trepidation.  You  are  saying,  "  Alas  for  me !  Better  that  I 
had  died  in  Egypt  than  that  I  should  have  come  out  into  this 
wilderness  to  be  again  captured."  You  have  tasted  for  a  mo- 
ment the  joys  of  holiness  and  the  sweets  of  liberty ;  and  now 
again  to  go  back  to  endure  the  bondage  of  a  spiritual  Egypt, 
would  be  worse  than  before.  This  is  the  position  of  the  sac- 
ramental host  of  God's  elect ;  they  have  come  out  of  Egypt, 
and  they  are  pursuing  their  way  to  Canaan.     But  the  world  is 


ISRAEL    IN    KGXPT.  421 

against  them  ;  the  kings  of  the  earth  stand  up,  and  the  rulera 
take  counsel  together  against  the  Lord  and  against  his  people, 
saying,  "Let  ns  scatter  them;  let  us  utterly  destroy  them." 
From  the  fiery  days  of  the  stakes  of  Smithfield  even  until  r  ow, 
the  world's  black  heart  has  hated  the  church,  and  the  woi  d's 
cruel  hand  and  laughing  lip  have  been  for  ever  agains'  us. 
The  host  of  the  mighty  are  pursuing  us,  and  are  thirsty  for  mr 
blood,  and  anxious  to  cut  us  off  from  the  earth.  Such  is  )ur 
position  unto  this  hour,  and  such  must  it  be  until  we  are 
landed  on  the  other  side  of  Jordan,  and  until  our  Maker  cc  nes 
to  reign  on  the  earth. 

But  once  more :  the  children  of  Israel  were  in  a  posi  ion 
more  wonderful  than  this.  They  came  to  the  edge  of  the 
Red  Sea  ;  they  feared  their  enemies  behind  ;  they  could  not 
fly  on  either  hand,  for  they  were  flanked  by  mountains  and 
stupendous  rocks;  one  course  only  was  open  to  them,  ind 
that  course  was  through  the  sea.  God  commands  them  to  go 
forward.  The  rod  of  Moses  is  outstretched,  and  the  affri  ;ht- 
ed  w^aters  divide  ;  a  channel  is  left  while  the  floods  stand  up- 
right, and  the  waters  are  congealed  in  the  heart  of  the  ;ea. 
The  priests,  beaiing  the  ark,  march  forward  ;  the  whole  lOst 
of  Israel  follow.  And  now  behold  the  wondrous  pilgrim;  ge. 
A  wall  of  alabaster  is  on  either  side,  and  myriads  are  in  ihe 
pebbly  depths.  Like  a  wall  of  glass  the  sea  stands  on  ei  her 
side  of  them,  frowning  with  beetling  cliffs  of  foam ;  but  till 
on  they  march ;  and  until  the  last  of  God's  Israel  is  safe  the 
water  stands  still  and  firm,  frozen  by  the  lipo  of  God.  Si  ch, 
my  hearers,  is  the  position  of  God's  church  now.  ^ou  ar-d  I 
are  marching  through  a  sea,  the  floods  of  which  are  kept  up- 
right only  by  the  sovereign  power  of  God.  This  world  s  a 
world  which  is  suddenly  to  be  destroyed ;  and  cur  positio  •.  in 
it  is  just  the  position  of  the  children  of  Isi-ael,  for  whose  .  ike 
the  floods  refused  to  meet  until  they  w^ere  safely  landed.  O 
church  of  God  !  thou  art  the  salt  of  the  earth:  w^hen  thou  art 
removed  this  earth  must  putrify  and  decay.  O  living  a^my 
of  the  Uving  God  !  ye,  like  Israel,  keep  the  floods  of  pi  jvi- 
dence  still  standing  fast ;  but  when  the  last  of  you  shal'  be 
gone  from  this  stage  of  action,  God's  fiery  wrath  and  treu  en- 
dous  anger  sh?U  dash  down  upon  the  ground  whereon  you 


422  ISRAEL    IN    EGYPT. 

now  are  standing,  and  your  enemies  shall  be  overwhelmed  in 
the  place  through  which  you  now  walk  safely.  Let  me  put 
ray  thoughts  as  plainly  as  I  can.  Naturally,  according  to  the 
common  order,  the  Red  Sea  should  have  flowed  on  in  a  level 
and  even  manner,  constant  in  its  waves,  and  unbroken  in  its 
surface.  By  the  might  of  God  the  Red  Sea  was  divided  into 
two  parts,  and  the  floods  stood  back.  Now  mark.  Natur- 
ally, according  to  the  common  course  of  justice,  this  world, 
which  groaneth  and  travaileth  until  now,  ought,  if  we  only 
consider  the  wicked,  to  be  utterly  destroyed.  The  only  rea- 
son why  the  Red  Sea  afibrded  a  safe  passage  for  the  host  was 
this — that  Israel  marched  through  it ;  and  the  only  reason 
why  this  world  stands,  and  the  only  reason  why  it  is  not  de- 
stroyed by  fire,  as  it  is  to  be  at  the  last  great  day,  is  because 
God's  Israel  are  in  it ;  but  when  once  they  shall  have  passed 
through,  the  parted  floods  shall  meet  their  hands,  and  em- 
brace with  eager  joy  to  clasp  the  adverse  host  Avithin  their 
arms.  The  day  is  coming  when  this  world  shall  reel  to  and 
fro  and  stagger  like  a  drunken  man.  Every  Christian  may 
say,  with  due  reverence  to  God,  "The  earth  is  dissolved;  I 
bear  up  the  pillars  thereof"  Let  all  the  Christians  that  are 
in  the  world  die,  and  the  pillars  of  the  earth  would  fall,  and 
like  a  wreck  and  a  vision  all  this  universe  of  ours  would  pass 
away,  never  to  be  seen  again.  We  are  to-day,  I  say,  passing 
through  the  floods,  with  enemies  behind,  pursuing  us  who  are 
going  out  of  Egypt  up  to  Canaan. 

II.  And  now  the  triumph  of  Moses  was  a  picture  of  the  ul- 
timate triumph  of  the  Lamb.  Moses  sang  a  song  unto  the 
Lord  by  the  sea  of  Egypt.  If  you  will  turn  to  holy  Scripture 
you  will  find  that  my  text  was  sung  by  the  holy  spirits  who 
had  been  preserved  from  sin  and  from  the  contamination  of 
the  beast ;  and  it  is  said  that  they  sung  this  song  upon  "  a  sea 
of  glass  mingled  with  fire."  Now^  the  song  of  Moses  was  sung 
by  the  side  of  a  sea,  which  was  glassy,  and  still ;  for  a  little 
season  the  floods  had  been  disturbed,  divided,  separated,  con- 
gealed, but  in  a  few  moments  afterward,  when  Israel  had  safe- 
ly passed  the  flood,  thsy  became  as  glassy  as  ever,  for  the 
enemy  had  sunken  to  the  bottom  like  a  stone,  and  the  sea  re- 
turned to  i*^^s  strength  when  the  morning  appeared.     Is  there 


ISRAEL   IN    EGYPT.  423 

ever  a  time,  then,  when  this  great  sea  of  Providence,  which 
now  stands  parted  to  give  a  passage  to  God's  saints  shall  be- 
come a  level  surface  ?  Is  there  a  day  when  the  now  divided 
dispensations  of  God,  which  are  kept  from  following  out  their 
legitimate  tendency  to  do  justice  upon  sin — when  the  two 
seas  of  justice  shall  commingle,  and  the  one  sea  of  God's  prov- 
idence shall  be  "  a  sea  of  glass  mingled  with  fire  ?"  Yes,  the 
day  is  drawing  nigh  when  God's  enemies  shall  no  longer  make 
it  necessary  for  God's  providence  to  be  apparently  disturbed 
to  save  his  people,  when  the  great  designs  of  God  shall  be  ac- 
complished, and  therefore  when  the  walls  of  water  shall  roll 
together,  while  in  their  inmost  depths  the  everlasting  burn- 
ing fire  shall  still  consume  the  wicked.  O,  the  sea  shall  be 
calm  upon  the  surface  ;  the  sea  upon  which  God's  people  shall 
walk  shall  seem  to  be  a  sea  that  is  clear,  without  a  weed,  with- 
out an  impurity  ;  while  down  in  its  hollow  bosom,  far  beyond 
all  mortal  ken,  shall  be  the  horrid  depths  where  the  wicked 
must  for  ever  dwell  in  the  fire  which  is  mingled  with  the  glass. 
Well,  I  now  want  to  show  you  why  it  was  that  Moses 
triumphed,  and  why  it  is  that  by-and-by  we  shall  triumph. 
One  reason  why  Moses  sung  his  song  was  because  all  Israel 
were  safe.  They  were  all  safely  across  the  sea.  Not  a  drop  of 
spray  fell  from  that  solid  wall  until  the  last  of  God's  Israel  had 
safely  planted  his  foot  on  the  other  side  of  the  flood.  That 
done,  immediately  the  floods  dissolved  into  their  proper  place 
again,  but  not  till  then.  Part  of  that  song  was,  "  Thou  hast 
led  thy  people  like  a  flock  through  the  wilderness."  Now,  in 
the  last  time,  when  Christ  shall  come  upon  earth,  the  great 
song  will  be — "  Lord,  thou  hast  saved  thy  people  ;  thou  hast 
led  them  all  safely  through  the  paths  of  providence,  and  not 
one  of  them  has  fiillen  into  the  hands  of  the  enemy."  O,  it 
is  my  strong  belief,  that  in  heaven  there  shall  not  be  a  vacant 
throne.  I  rejoice  that  all  who  love  the  Lord  belovmust  at 
last  attain  to  heaven,  I  do  not  believe  with  some  that  men 
may  start  on  the  road  to  heaven,  and  be  saved,  and  yet  fall  by 
the  hand  of  the  enem^*.     God  forbid,  my  friends  ! 

"  All  the  chosen  race 

Shall  meet  around  the  throne, 

Shall  bless  the  conduct  of  his  grace, 

And  make  his  glories  knowii." 


424  ISRAEL    IN    EGYPT. 

Part  of  the  triumph  of  heaven  will  be,  that  there  is  not  one 
throne  that  is  unoccupied.  As  many  as  God  hath  chosen,  as 
many  as  Christ  hath  redeemed,  as  many  as  the  Spirit  hath 
called,  as  many  as  believe,  shall  arrive  safe  across  the  stream. 
We  are  not  all  safely  landed  yet : 

"  Part  of  the  host  have  crossed  the  flood, 
And  part  are  crossing  now." 

The  vanguard  of  the  army  have  already  reached  the  shore.  I 
see  them  yonder ; 

"  I  greet  the  blood-besprinkled  bands 
Upon  th'  eternal  shore." 

And  you  and  I,  my  brethren,  are  marching  through  the 
depths.  We  are  at  this  day  following  hard  after  Christ,  and 
walking  through  the  wilderness.  Let  us  be  of  good  cheer : 
the  rearguard  shall  soon  be  where  the  vanguard  already  is ; 
the  last  of  the  chosen  shall  soon  have  landed  ;  the  last  of  God's 
elect  shall  have  crossed  the  sea,  and  then  shall  be  heard  the 
song  of  triumph,  when  all  are  secure.  But  O  !  if  one  were  ab- 
sent— O  !  if  one  of  his  chosen  family  should  be  cast  away — it 
would  make  an  everlasting  discord  in  the  song  of  the  redeemed, 
and  cut  the  strings  of  the  harps  of  Paradise,  so  that  music 
could  never  be  distilled  from  them  again. 

But,  perhaps,  the  major  part  of  the  joy  of  Moses  lay  in  the 
destruction  of  all  the  enemies  of  God.  He  looked  upon  his 
people  the  day  before. 

"  He  looked  upon  his  people, 
And  the  tear  was  in  his  eye ; 
He  looked  upon  the  foeman, 

And  his  glance  was  stem  and  high." 

And  now  to-day  he  looks  upon  his  people,  and  he  says, 
"  Blessed  art  thou,  O  Israel,  safely  landed  on  the  shore;"  and 
he  looks  not  upon  the  foeman,  but  upon  the  foeman's  tomb 
he  looks  where  the  living  were  protected  by  the  shield  of  God 
from  all  their  enemies;  and  he  sees — what?  A  mighty 
sepulcher  of  water ;  a  mighty  tomb  in  which  were  engulfed 
princes,  monarchs,  potentates.     "  The  horse  and  his  rider  hath 


ISRAEL   IN    EGYPT.  425 

he  thrown  into  the  sea."  Pharaoh's  chariots  also  are  drowned 
therein.  And  soon,  my  hearers,  you  and  I  shall  do  the  saiae. 
I  say  that  now  we  have  to  look  abroad  on  hosts  of  enem  >s. 
What  with  the  wild  beasts  of  Rome,  what  with  the  antich  ist 
of  Mohammed,  what  with  the  thousands  of  idolatries  and  fa'se 
gods,  what  with  infidelity  in  all  its  myriad  shapes,  many  :a-e 
the  enemies  of  God,  and  mighty  are  the  hosts  of  hell.  ]  ^o, 
you  see  them  gathered  together  this  day;  horseman  upon 
horseman,  chariot  upon  chariot,  gathered  together  against  .  iie 
Most  High.  I  see  the  trembling  church,  fearing  to  be  o\  3y- 
thrown;  I  mark  her  leaders  bending  their  knees  in  sole  an 
prayer,  and  crying,  "Lord,  save  thy  people,  and  bless  t  ly 
heritage."  But  mine  eye  looks  through  the  future  with  t(  le- 
scopic  glance,  and  I  see  the  happy  period  of  the  latter  da^s, 
when  Christ  shall  reign  triumphant.  I  shall  ask  them  wh(  re 
is  Babel  ?  where  is  Rome  ?  where  is  Mohammed  ?  and  the  an- 
swer shall  come — where  ?  Why  they  have  sunk  into  '  'le 
depths ;  they  have  sunk  to  the  bottom  as  a  stone.  Do  vn 
there  the  horrid  fire  devours  them,  for  the  sea  of  glas;  is 
mingled  with  the  fire  of  judgment.  To-day  I  see  a  battle-fie  3  : 
the  whole  earth  is  torn  by  the  hoofs  of  horses ;  there  is  he 
rumble  of  cannon  and  the  roll  of  drum.  "  To  arms  !  to  arm  !" 
both  hosts  are  shouting.  But  you  wait  awhile,  and  you  si  all 
walk  across  this  plain  of  battle,  and  say,  "  Seest  thou  t/iat 
colosal  system  of  error  dead  ?  There  lies  another,  all  fro?  n, 
in  ghastly  death,  in  motionless  stupor.  There  lieth  infideli  y ; 
there  sleepeth  secularism  and  the  secularist;  there  lie  th  se 
who  defied  God.  I  see  all  this  vast  host  of  rebels  lying  S(  it- 
tered  upon  the  earth.  "  Sing  unto  the  Lord,  for  he  hath  ri- 
umphed  gloriously ;  Jehovah  has  gotten  unto  himself  tlie  ic- 
tory,  and  the  last  of  his  enemies  are  destroyed."  Then  s  all 
be  the  time  when  shall  be  sung  "the  song  of  Moses  and  of  he 
Lamb." 

in.  Now,  turning  to  the  song  of  Moses,  I  shall  concl  le 
ray  address  to  you  by  noticing  some  interesting  particular  in 
the  song  which  will  doubtless  have  a  place  in  the  everlast  ig 
orchestra  of  the  redeemed,  when  they  shall  praise  the  Mjst 
High.  () !  ray  brethren,  I  could  but  wish  that  I  had  stood  by 
the  Red  Sea,  to  have  heard  that  mighty  shout,  and  that  tre- 


426  ISRAEL    IN    EGYPT. 

mendous  roar  of  acclamation !  Methinks  one  might  well  have 
borne  a  servitude  in  Egypt,  to  have  stood  in  that  mighty  host 
who  sung  such  mighty  praise.  Music  hath  charms ;  but  never 
had  it  such  charms  as  it  had  that  day  when  fair  Miriam  led  the 
women,  and  Moses  led  the  men,  like  some  mighty  leader,  beat- 
ing time  with  his  hand.  "  Sing  unto  the  Lord,  for  he  hath 
done  gloriously."  Methinks  I  see  the  scene  ;  and  I  anticipate 
the  greater  day,  when  the  song  shall  be  sung  again,  "  as  the 
song  of  Moses  and  of  the  Lamb." 

Now,  just  notice  this  song.  In  the  15th  chapter  of  Exodus 
you  find  it,  and  in  divers  of  the  Psalms  you  will  see  it  ampli- 
fied. The  first  thing  I  would  have  you  notice  in  it  is,  that 
from  beginning  to  end  it  is  a  praise  of  God^  and  of  nobody 
else  but  God.  Moses,  thou  hast  said  nothing  of  thyself.  O 
great  lawgiver,  mightiest  of  men,  did  not  thine  hand  grasp  the 
mighty  rod  that  split  the  sea — that  burned  its  fair  breast,  and 
left  a  scar  for  awhile  upon  its  bosom  ?  Didst  not  thou  lead 
the  hosts  of  Israel  ?  Didst  not  thou  marshal  their  thousands 
for  battle,  and  like  a  mighty  commander  led  them  through 
the  depths  ?  Is  there  not  a  word  for  thee  ?  Not  one.  The 
whole  strain  of  the  song  is,  "I  will  sing  unto  the  Lord,"  from 
beginning  to  end.  It  is  all  praise  of  Jehovah ;  there  is  not 
one  word  about  Moses,  nor  a  single  word  in  praise  of  the 
children  of  Israel.  Dear  friends,  the  last  song  in  this  world, 
the  song  of  triumph,  shall  be  full  of  God,  and  of  no  one  else. 
Here  you  praise  the  instrument ;  to-day  you  look  on  this  man 
and  on  that,  and  you  say,  "  Thank  God  for  this  minister,  and 
for  this  man  ?"  To-day  you  say,  "  Blessed  be  God  for  Luther 
who  shook  the  Vatican,  and  thank  God  for  Whitefield,  who 
stirred  up  a  slumbering  church  ;"  but  in  that  day  you  shall 
not  sing  of  Luther,  nor  of  Whitefield,  nor  of  any  of  the 
mighty  ones  of  God's  hosts ;  forgotten  shall  their  names  be 
for  a  season,  even  as  the  stars  refuse  to  shine  when  the  sun 
himself  appeareth.  The  song  shall  be  unto  Jehovah,  and 
Jehovah  only ;  we  shall  not  have  a  word  to  say  for  preach- 
ers nor  bishops,  not  a  syllable  to  say  for  good  men  and 
true ;  but  the  whole  song  from  first  to  last  shall  be,  "  Unto 
him  that  loved  us,  and  hath  washed  us  from  our  sins  in  his  own 
blood,  unto  him  be  glory  for  ever  and  ever.     Amen." 


ISRAEL    IN    EGYPT.  427 

And  next  will  you  please  to  note,  that  this  song  celebrated 
something  of  the  fierceness  of  the  enemy  !  Do  you  observe 
how,  when  the  songster  describes  the  attack  of  Pharaoh,  he 
says,  "The  enemy  said,  I  will  pursue,  I  will  overtake,  I  Avill 
divide  the  spoil ;  my  lust  shall  be  satisfied  upon  them  ;  I  will 
draw  my  sword,  my  hand  shall  destroy  them."  A  song  is  made 
out  of  the  wrath  of  Pharaoh.  And  it  shall  be  so  at  the  last. 
The  wrath  of  man  shall  praise  God.  I  believe  the  last  song 
of  the  redeemed,  when  they  shall  ultimately  triumph,  will 
celebrate  in  heavenly  stanzas  the  wrath  of  man  overcome  by 
God.  Sometimes  after  great  battles,  monuments  are  raised  to 
the  memory  of  the  fight ;  and  of  what  are  they  composed  ? 
They  are  composed  of  weapons  of  death  and  of  instruments 
of  war  which  have  been  taken  from  the  enemy.  Now,  to  use 
that  illustration  as  I  think  it  may  be  properly  used,  the  day  is 
coming  when  fury,  and  wrath,  and  hatred,  and  strife,  shall  all 
be  woven  into  a  song  ;  and  the  weapons  of  our  enemies,  w^hen 
taken  from  them,  shall  serve  to  make  monuments  to  tlie  praise 
of  God.  Rail  on,  rail  on,  blasphemer !  Smite  on,  smite  on, 
tyrant !  Lift  thy  'he^vy  hand,  O  despot ;  crush  the  truth, 
which  yet  thou  canst  not  crush ;  knock  from  his  head  the 
crown — the  crown  that  is  far  above  thy  reach — poor  puny  im- 
potent mortal  as  thou  art !  Go  on,  go  on  !  But  all  thou 
doest  shall  but  increase  his  glories.  For  aught  we  care,  we 
bid  you  still  proceed  with  all  your  wrath  and  malice.  Though 
it  shall  be  worse  for  you,  it  shall  be  more  glorious  for  our 
Master ;  the  greater  your  preparations  for  war,  the  more 
splendid  shall  be  his  triumphal  chariot,  when  he  shall  ride 
through  the  streets  of  heaven  in  pompous  array.  The  more 
mighty  your  preparations  for  battle,  the  more  rich  the  spoil 
which  he  shall  divide  with  the  strong.  O  !  Christian,  fear  not 
the  foe !  Remember  the  harder  his  blows,  the  sweeter  thy 
song;  the  greater  his  wrath,  the  more  splendid  thy  triumph  ; 
the  more  he  rages,  the  more  shall  Christ  be  honored  in  the 
day  of  his  appearing.  They  sung  the  song  of  Moses  and  the 
Lamb. 

And  then  will  ye  note,  in  the  next  place,  how  they  sang  the 
total  overthrow  of  the  enemy.  There  is  one  expression  in  this 
song,  which  ought  to  be  and  I  believe  is,  when  set  to  music, 


428  ISRAEL    IN    EGYPT. 

very  frequently  repeated.  It  is  that  part  of  the  song,  as  re- 
corded in  the  Psalms,  where  it  is  declared  that  the  whole  host 
of  Pliaraoh  were  utterly  destroyed,  and  there  was  not  one  of 
them  left.  When  that  great  song  w^as  sung  by  the  side  of 
the  Red  Sea,  there  was,  no  doubt,  a  special  emphasis  laid  upon 
that  expression,  "not  one."  I  think  I  hear  the  hosts  of  Israel. 
When  the  words  w^ere  known  by  them,  they  began  and  they 
proceeded  thus — "  There  is  not  one  of  them  left ;"  and  then 
in  various  parts  the  words  were  repeated,  "  Not  one,  not  one." 
And  then  the  women  with  their  sweet  voices  sang,  "  Not  one, 
not  one."  I  believe  that  at  the  last,  a  part  of  our  triumph 
wdll  be  the  fact,  that  there  is  not  one  left.  We  shall  look 
abroad  throughout  the  earth,  and  see  it  all  a  level  sea ;  and 
not  one  foeman  pursuing  us — "  not  one,  not  one !"  Raise 
thyself  never  so  high,  O  thou  deceiver,  thou  canst  not  live ; 
for  not  one  shall  escape.  Lift  thy  head  never  so  proudly,  O 
despot,  thou  canst  not  live  ;  for  not  one  shall  escape.  O  heir 
of  heaven,  not  one  sin  shall  cross  the  Jordan  after  thee ;  not 
one  shall  pass  the  Red  Sea  to  overtake  thee  ;  but  this  shall  be 
the  summit  of  thy  triumph — "  Not  on^  not  one  !  not  one  of 
them  is  left." 

Just  let  us  note  again,  and  I  will  not  detain  you  too  long, 
lest  I  weary  you.  One  part  of  the  song  of  Moses  consisted  in 
praising  the  ease  with  which  God  destroyed  his  enemies. 
"  Thou  didst  blow  wdth  thy  wind,  the  sea  covered  them ;  they 
sank  as  lead  in  the  mighty  waters."  If  we  had  gone  to  work 
to  destroy  the  hosts  of  Pharaoh,  what  a  multitude  of  engines 
of  death  should  we  have  required.  If  the  work  had  been  com- 
mitted to  us,  to  cut  off  the  hosts,  what  marvelous  preparations, 
what  thunder,  what  noise,  what  great  activity  there  would 
have  been.  But  mark  the  grandeur  of  the  expression.  God 
did  not  even  lift  himself  from  his  throne  to  do  it :  he  saw 
Pharaoh  coming  ;  he  seemed  to  look  upon  him  with  a  placid 
smile ;  he  did  just  blow  with  his  lips,  and  the  sea  covered  them. 
You  and  I  will  marvel  at  the  last  how  easy  it  has  been  to  over- 
throw the  enemies  of  the  Lord.  We  have  been  tugging  and 
toiling  all  our  Hfe-time  to  be  the  means  of  overthrowing  sys- 
tems of  error ;  it  will  astonish  the  church,  when  her  Master 
shall  come,  to  see  how,  as  the  ice  dissolveth  before  the  fire,  all 


ISRAEL    IN    EGYPT.  429 

error  and  sin  shall  be  utterly  destroyed  in  the  coming  of  the 
Most  High.  We  must  have  our  societies  and  our  machinery, 
our  preachings  and  our  gatherings,  and  rightly  too  ;  but  God 
will  not  require  them  at  the  last.  The  destruction  of  his  ene- 
mies shall  be  as  easy  to  him  as  the  making  of  a  world.  In 
passive  silence  unmoved  he  sat ;  and  he  did  but  break  the 
silence  with  "  Let  there  be  light ;  and  light  was."  So  shall 
he  at  the  last,  when  his  enemies  are  raging  furiously,  blow 
with  his  winds,  and  they  shall  be  scattered  ;  they  shall  melt 
even  as  wax,  and  shall  be  burned  like  tow  ;  they  shall  be  as  the 
fat  of  rams  ;  into  smoke  shall  they  consume,  yea,  into  smoke 
shall  they  consume  away. 

Furthermore,  in  this  song  of  Moses,  you  will  notice  there  is 
one  peculiar  beauty.  Moses  not  only  rejoiced  for  what  had 
been  done,  but  for  the  future  consequences  of  it.  He  says, 
"  The  people  of  Canaan,  whom  we  are  about  to  attack,  will 
now  be  seized  with  sudden  fear;  by  the  greatness  of  thy  arm 
they  shall  be  as  still  as  a  stone."  O !  I  think  I  hear  them 
singing  that  too,  sweetly  and  softly,  "  as  still  as  a  stone." 
How  would  the  words  come  full,  like  gentle  thunder  heard  in 
the  distance,  *'  as  still  as  a  stone !"  And  when  we  shall  get 
on  the  other  side  the  flood,  see  the  triumph  over  our  ene- 
mies, and  behold  our  Master  reigning,  this  will  form  a  part  of 
our  song,  that  they  must  henceforth  be  "  as  still  as  a  stone." 
There  will  be  a  hell,  but  it  will  not  be  a  hell  of  roaring  devils, 
as  it  now  is.  They  shall  be  "  as  still  as  a  stone."  There  will 
be  legions  of  fallen  angels,  but  they  shall  no  longer  have  cour- 
age to  attack  us  or  defy  God :  they  shall  be  "  as  still  as  a  stone." 
O  how  grand  will  that  sound,  when  the  hosts  of  God's  re- 
deemed, looking  down  on  the  demons  chained,  bound,  silenced, 
struck  dumb  with  terror,  shall  sing  exultingly  over  them ! 
They  must  be  "  as  still  as  a  stone  ;"  and  there  they  must  lie, 
and  bite  their  iron  bands.  The  fierce  despiser  of  Christ  can 
no  more  spit  in  his  face  ;  the  proud  tyrant  can  no  more  lift  his 
hands  to  oppress  the  saints ;  even  Satan  can  no  more  attempt 
to  destroy.     They  shall  be  "  as  still  as  a  stone." 

And  last  of  all,  the  song  concludes  by  noticing  the  eternity 
of  God's  reign  ;  and  this  will  always  make  a  part  of  the  tri- 
umphant song.    They  sang,  "  The  Lord  shall  reign  for  ever  and 


430  ISRAEL   IN   EGYPT. 

ever."  Then  I  can  suppose  the  whole  band  broke  out  into 
their  loudest  strain  of  music.  "  The  Lord  shall  reign  for  ever 
and  ever."  Part  of  the  melody  of  heaven  will  be  "  The  Lord 
shall  reign  for  ever  and  ever."  That  song  has  cheered  us 
here,  "  The  Lord  reigneth  ;  blessed  be  my  Rock  !"  And  that 
song  shall  be  our  exultation  there.  *'  The  Lord  reigneth  for 
ever  and  ever."  When  we  shall  see  the  placid  sea  of  provi- 
dence, when  we  shall  behold  the  world  all  fair  and  lovely, 
when  we  shall  mark  our  enemies  destroyed,  and  God  Almighty 
triumphant,  then  we  shall  shout  the  song, 

"  HaUelujah !  for  the  Lord 

God  Omnipotent  shall  reign  •, 
Hallelujah!  let  the  word 

Echo  round  the  earth  and  main." 

0  !  may  we  be  there  to  sing  it ! 

1  have  one  remark  to  make,  and  I  have  done.  You  know^ 
my  friends,  that  as  there  is  something  in  the  song  of  Moses 
which  is  typical  of  the  song  of  the  Lamb,  there  was  another 
song  sung  by  the  waters  of  the  Red  Sea  which  is  typical  of 
the  song  of  hell.  "  What  mean  you,  sir,  by  that  dread 
thought  ?"  O  !  shall  I  use  the  word  music  ?  Shall  I  profane 
the  heavenly  word  so  mucii  as  to  say,  'twas  doleful  music 
which  came  from  the  lips  of  Pharaoh  and  his  host  ?  Boldly 
and  pompously,  with  roll  of  drum  and  blast  of  trumpet  they 
had  entered  into  the  sea.  On  a  sudden  their  martial  music 
ceased  ;  and  ah  !  ye  heavens  and  ye  floods  what  was  it  ?  The 
sea  was  coming  down  upon  them,  utterly  to  devour  them.  O! 
may  we  never  hear  that  shriek,  that  awful  yell  of  hideous 
agony,  that  seemed  to  rend  the  sky,  and  then  was  hushed 
again,  when  Pharaoh  and  his  mighty  men  were  swallowed  up, 
and  went  down  quick  into  hell !  Ah!  stars,  if  ye  had  heard 
it,  if  the  black  pall  of  waters  had  not  shut  out  the  sound  from 
you,  ye  might  have  continued  trembling  unto  this  hour,  and 
mayhap  ye  are  trembling  now ;  mayhap  your  twinklings  by 
night  are  on  account  of  that  terrible  shriek  ye  heard ;  for  sure 
it  were  enough  to  make  you  tremble  on  for  ever.  That  dread- 
ful shriek,  that  hideous  moan,  that  horrible  howl,  when  a  whole 
army  sank  into  hell  at  once,  when  the  waters  swallowed  them 
up! 


ISRA.EL    IN    EGYPT.  431 

Take  heed,  my  friends,  take  heed,  lest  you  should  have  to 
join  in  that  terrible  miserere ;  take  heed,  less  that  horrible 
howl  should  be  yours,  instead  of  the  song  of  the  redeemed. 
And  remember,  so  must  it  be,  unless  ye  be  born  again,  unless 
ye  believe  in  Christ,  unless  ye  repent  of  sin  and  renounce  it 
wholly,  and  with  trembling  hearts  put  your  confidence  in  the 
man  of  sorrows,  who  is  soon  to  be  crowned  the  King  of  kings 
and  Lord  of  lords.  May  God  bless  you,  and  give  you  all  to 
taste  of  his  salvation,  that  you  may  stand  upon  the  sea  of 
glass,  and  not  have  to  feel  the  terrors  of  the  mingled  fire  in 
the  lower  depths  thereof!  God  Almighty  bless  this  vast  as- 
sembly, for  Jesus'  sake. 


SERMON  XXIX. 

PRESUMPTUOUS    SINS. 

"  Keep  back  thy  servant  also  from  presumptuous  sins." — Psalm  xix.  13. 

All  sins  are  great  sins,  but  yet  some  sins  are  greater  than 
oti  ers.  Every  sin  has  in  it  the  very  venom  of  rebellion,  and 
is  lall  of  the  essential  marrow  of  traitorous  rejection  of  God. 
Bi  fc  there  be  some  sins  which  have  in  them  a  greater  develop- 
me  it  of  the  essential  mischief  of  rebellion,  and  which  wear 
upon  their  faces  more  of  the  brazen  pride  which  defies  the 
M(St  High.  It  is  wrong  to  suppose  that  because  all  sins  will 
CO'  demn  us,  that  therefore  one  sin  is  not  greater  than  another. 
Th  3  fact  is,  that  while  all  transgression  is  a  greatly  grievous 
sin  a\  thing,  yet  there  are  some  transgressions  which  have  a 
de  per  shade  of  blackness,  and  a  more  double  scarlet-dyed  hue 
of  rirainahty  than  others.  Now  the  presumptuous  sins  of  our 
te>  :  are  just  the  chief  of  all  sins :  they  rank  head  and  foremost 
in  ,he  list  of  iniquities.  It  is  remarkable,  that  though  an 
ate  lement  was  provided  under  the  Jewish  law  for  every  kind 
of  ;in,  there  was  this  one  exception  :  "  But  the  soul  that  sin- 
ne.  h  presumptuously  shall  have  no  atonement ;  it  shall  be  cut 
ofi  from  the  midst  of  my  peojDle."  And  now,  under  the  Chris- 
tia.i  dispensation,  although  in  the  sacrifice  of  our  blessed  Lord 
th'^  **e  is  a  great  and  precious  atonement  for  presumptuous  sins, 
wh  ireby  sinners  who  have  sinned  in  this  manner  are  made 
elf  m,  yet,  without  doubt,  presumptuous  sinners,  dying  with- 
ou:  pardon,  must  expect  to  receive  a  double  portion  of  the 
wr  .th  of  God,  and  a  more  wonderful  manifestation  of  the  un- 
uttorable  anguish  of  the  torment  of  eternal  punishment  in  the 
pit  that  is  digged  for  the  wicked. 

I  shall  this  morning,  first  of  all,  endeavor  to  describe  pre- 
smnptuous  sins  ;  then,  secondly,  I  shall  try,  if  I  can,  to  show^ 


PRESUMPTUOUS   SINS.  433 

by  sortie  illustrations^  lohy  the  presumptuous  shi  is  more  hein- 
ous than  any  other  •  and  then  thirdly,  I  shall  try  to  press  the 
prayer  upon  your  notice — the  prayer,  mark  you,  of  the  holy 
man — the  prayer  of  Dn.vid :  "  Keep  back  thy  servant  also 
from  presumptuous  sins  " 

I.  First,  then,  aviiat  iS  a  presumptuous  sin?  Now,  I  think 
there  must  be  one  of  four  things  in  a  sin  in  order  to  make  it 
presumptuous.  It  must  either  be  a  sin  against  light  and 
knowledge,  or  a  sin  committed  with  deliberation,  or  a  sin 
committed  with  a  design  of  sinning,  merely  for  sinning's  sake, 
or  else  it  must  be  a  sin  committed  through  hardihood,  from  a 
man's  rash  confidence  in  his  own  strength.  We  will  mark 
these  points  one  by  one. 

1.  A  sin  that  is  conmiitted  willfully  against  tnanifest  light 
and  knoicledge  is  a  presumptuous  sin.  A  sin  of  ignorance  is 
not  presumptuous,  unless  tliat  ignorance  also  be  willful,  in 
which  case  the  ignorance  itself  is  a  presumptuous  sin.  But 
when  a  man  sins  for  want  of  knowing  better — for  want  of 
knowing  the  law,  for  want  of  instruction,  reproof,  advice,  and 
admonition,  we  say  that  his  sin,  so  committed,  does  not  par- 
take to  any  great  extent  of  the  nature  of  a  presumptuous  sin. 
But  when  a  man  knows  better,  and  sins  in  the  very  teeth  and 
face  of  his  increased  light  and  knowledge,  then  his  sin  deserves 
to  be  branded  with  this  ignominious  title  of  a  presumptuous 
sin.  Let  me  just  dwell  on  this  thought  a  moment.  Conscience 
is  often  an  inner  light  to  men,  whereby  they  are  warned  of 
forbidden  acts  as  being  sinful.  Then  if  I  sin  against  conscience, 
though  I  have  no  greater  light  than  conscience  affords  me, 
still  my  sin  is  presumptuous,  if  I  have  presumed  to  go  against 
that  voice  of  God  in  my  h  iart,  an  enlightened  conscience. 
You,  young  man,  were  once  tempted  (and  perhaps  it  was  but 
yesterday)  to  commit  a  certain  act.  The  very  moment  you 
were  tempted,  conscience  said,  "  It  is  wrong,  it  is  wrong" — 
it  shouted  murder  in  your  heart,  and  told  you  the  deed  you 
were  about  to  commit  was  abominable  in  the  sight  of  the 
Lord.  Your  fellow-apprentice  committed  the  same  sin  with- 
out the  warning  of  conscience  ;  in  him  it  was  guilt — guilt 
which  needs  to  be  washed  away  with  the  Saviour's  blood.  But 
it  was  not  such  guilt  in  him  as  it  was  in  you,  because  your 

19 


434  PRESUMPTUOUS    SINS. 

conscience  checked  you  ;  your  conscience  told  you  of  the  dan- 
ger, warned  you  of  the  punishment,  and  yet  you  dared  to  go 
astray  against  God,  and  therefore  you  sinned  presumptuously. 
You  have  sinned  very  grievously  in  having  done  so.  When  a 
man  shall  trespass  on  my  ground,  he  shall  be  a  trespasser 
though  he  have  no  warning,  but  if  straight  before  his  face 
there  stands  a  warning,  and  if  he  knowingly  and  wiUingly 
trespasses,  then  he  is  guilty  of  a  presumptuous  trespass,  and  is 
to  be  so  far  punished  accordingly.  So  you,  if  you  had  not 
known  better ;  if  your  conscience  had  been  less  enlightened, 
you  might  have  committed  the  deed  with  far  less  of  the  crim- 
inality which  now  attaches  to  you,  because  you  sinned  against 
conscience,  and  consequently  sinned  presumptuously. 

But,  O !  how  much  greater  is  the  sin,  when  man  not  only  has 
the  light  of  conscience,  but  has  also  the  admonition  of  friends, 
tne  advice  of  those  who  are  wise  and  esteemed  by  him.  If  I 
have  but  one  check,  the  check  of  my  enlightened  conscience, 
and  I  transgress  against  it,  I  am  presumptuous ;  but  if  a  mother 
with  tearful  eye  warns  me  of  the  consequence  of  my  guilt,  and 
if  a  father  with  steady  look,  and  with  aflectionate  determined 
earnestness,  tells  me  what  will  be  the  effect  of  my  transgres- 
sion— if  friends  who  are  dear  to  me  counsel  me  to  avoid  the 
way  of  the  wicked,  and  warn  me  what  must  be  the  inevitable 
result  of  continuing  in  it,  then  I  am  presumptuous,  and  my 
act  in  that  very  proportion  becomes  more  guilty.  I  should 
have  been  presumptuous  for  having  sinned  against  the  light  of 
nature,  but  I  am  more  presumptuous  when,  added  to  that,  I 
have  the  light  of  affectionate  counsel  and  of  kind  advice,  and 
therein  I  bring  upon  my  head  a  double  amount  of  divine 
wrath.  And  how  much  more  is  this  the  case,  when  the  trans- 
gressor has  been  gifted  with  what  is  usually  called  a  religious 
education  ;  in  childhood  he  has  been  lighted  to  his  bed  by  the 
lamps  of  the  sanctuary,  the  name  of  Jesus  was  mingled  with 
the  husli  of  lullaby,  the  music  of  the  sanctuary  woke  him  like 
a  matin  hymn  at  morning ;  he  has  been  dandled  on  the  knee 
of  piety  and  has  sucked  the  breasts  of  godliness ;  he  has  been 
tutored  and  trained  in  the  way  he  should  go  ;  how  much  more 
fearful  I  say,  is  the  guilt  of  such  a  man  than  that  of  those  who 
have  never  had  such  training,  but  have  been  left  to  follow 


♦  •  :.      FEESUMPTUOUS    S^NS.  435 

then-  OAvn  wayward  lusts  and  pleasures  without  the  restraint 
of  a  holy  education  and  the  restrjiipts.of  an  enlightened  con- 

science!r  ■^•v-^'^-v-^^-' 

-But,-  my  friends,  eyen  this  niayi^^e'lfisjaiU^^orse  still.     A  man 
sins-tve't^inbre  pi^sitliiptuously,  loJi^^^'has  had  most  special 

■  ';  v^ufk'P^^frQrini:  the  voice  of  God  agaiiMMhe  sin.  "  What  mean. 
fyf'Qi'^f^^'.Hf^^o'n.;  'Why,  Iiriean  this;->  .^ti  saw I5ut  ,y:^<erday;-^;i  ,.^;. , 

■  strovig  iijaii  i"n  your.ineighborhbo'd  ^bfeught  to  tb^^  gratVe  by"v.'.  •-, 
'••"  Sudden "  cTeath  ;  itis  Tt>ut  a  month  ago  that  you  heard  the  bell 
:;•^toll.:fdf*OIle  whonlfprice  you  knew  and  loved,  who  procrasti- 
>/Tiated  arfd  procrastinated  until  he  perished  in  procrastinatioix.    .. 

•'.•••  Jo ii'liave. had  strange  things  happen  in  your  very  street,  apdj^^'  "  .;; 
•"ither^bjce-qf  God  has  been  spoken  loudly  through  the  Jips-pi:,^\'"   "^ 
Peath  to-  you.     Ay,  and  you  have  had  warnings- too. in  your-; '.'!      f 
•owii.bo.dy;  you  have  been  sick  with  fever,  you  have  beeh^;...       .  :' 
.^■fcrdtight-to  the  jaws  of  the  grave,  and  you  have  looked  'down/.".^^ 
intpUhe,  bottomless  vault  of  destruction.     It  is  not  long  %9'  • 
siird^'  youAyere  given  up  ;  all  said  they  might  prepare  a  coI^h';^.-.;. 
jTor- you,. Jfor  your  breath  could  not  long  be  in  your  bod!.y;.-v  V 
.  Then -you  turned  your  face  to  the  wall,  and  prayed;   yod'f.y": 
,  vowed  that  if  God  would  spare  you  you  would  live  a  godly    ■:  .'  :] 
lifie,  jhat  yoa  would  repent  of  your  sins  ;  but  to  your  own  con-  -V;  :•;  •  ■■> 
fusion" you  are  now  just  what  you  were.     Ah  !  let  me  tell  you, .  ^v  •/U^-;-: 
V  y-oiuf  guilt -is: -more  grievous  than  that  of  any  other  man,  for  ;?;  ;|;^J 
'?  yaU|iav«. slewed  presumptuously,  in  the  very  highest  sense  in   ■'•^-   ■  V'fi 
/.whi&h  ydu- cbyld  have  done  so.     You  have  sinned  against  re-         •  .•(/ 
•*•  j)j-0*(^s,  b'ii^'what  is  worse  still,  you  have  sinned  against  your  " ". 

I 'OwnV.sole.ma.t^ths  and  covenants,  and  against  the  promises  .^ 

J  :that\\^oJi  jfta4^.tK^_  God.     He  who  plays  with  fire  must  be  con- 
V.-denflifid.  aS'(?^i:eless.j  but  he  who  has  been  burned  out  once, 
.^ -and^afterwarii  ^5jajs  with  the  destroying  element,  is  worse 
'^.'. than";careless*;  antthe  who  has  himself  been  scorched  in  :th^-  [..       ' 
•i^fiatne;  and  has  ha^'.hjs.  locks  all;  hot  and  crisp  with  the  burnll>g,Vf*|--"..-^i 
yjf.  .|r|  i-again  .sli'q\ilji;a*«sh  headlong  into  fire,  I  say  he  is  worsia.Vv-^-, '  ,^1 
,v'l61^Yir4Tf.elik«^^^  than  presumptuous,  he  is  mad.    IBut  y  .  \u' 

'Xhayet'SOii^silejlJi^'erfi.     They  have  had  warnings  so  terrible  .^'*  •-.>■■; 
.I3ia1b:t'key,mig^ft:']?$ve- known  better;  they  have   gone  into  /    . 
lusts 'whicA  hav^/l^rpught  their  bodies  into  sickness,  and  per- 
haps tliisv  day  th^yT&ave  crept  up  to  this  house,  and  they  dare 


136  PRESUMPTUOUS    SINS.  • 

not  tell  to  their  neighbor  who  stands  by  their  side  what  is  the 
loathsomeness  tliat  even  now  doth  breed  upon  their  frame. 
And  yet  they  will  go.bacl<:  to  the  same  lusts ;  the  fool  will  go 
again  to  the  stocks,  the^^beep  will  lick  the  knife  that  is  to  slay 
him.  You  will  go  on  in  your  lust  and  in  your  sins,"  despite 
warnings,  despite  advice,  until  you  perish  in  your  guilt.  How 
^vorse  than  children  are  grown-up  men !  The  child  who  goes 
for  a  merry  slide  upon  a  pond,  if  he  be  told  that  the  ice  will 
not  bear  him,  starteth  back  affrighted,  or  if  he  daringly  creep- 
eth  upon  it  how  soon  he  leaves  it,  if  he  hears  but  a  crack  upon 
the  slender  covering  of  the  water  !  But  you  men  have  con- 
science, which  tells  you  that  your  sins  are  vile,  and  that  they 
will  be  your  ruin  ;  you  hear  the  crack  of  sin,  as  its  thin  sheet 
of  pleasure  gives  way  beneath  your  feet ;  ay,  and  some  of  you 
have  seen  your  comrades  sink  in  the  flood,  and  lost ;  and  yet 
you  go  sliding  on,  worse  than  childish,  worse  than  mad  are 
you,  thus  presumptuously  to  play  with  your  own  everlasting 
state.  O  my  God,  how  terrible  is  the  presumption  of  some  ! 
How  fearful  is  presumption  in  any !  O  !  that  we  might  be  en- 
abled to  cry,  "  Keep  back  thy  servant  also  from  presumptu- 
ous sins." 

2.  I  said  again,  that  another  characteristic  of  a  presumptu- 
ous sin  was  deUheratio7i.  A  man,  perhaps,  may  have  a  passion- 
ate spirit,  and  in  a  moment  of  hot  haste  he  may  utter  an  angry 
word  of  which  in  a  few  short  minutes  he  will  sincei;ely  repent. 
A  man  may  have  a  temper  so  hot  that  the  least  provocation 
causes  him  at  once  to  be  full  of  wrath.  But  he  may 'also  have  a 
temperament  which  has  this  benefit  to  balance  it,  that  he  very 
soon  learns  to  forgive,  and  cools  in  a  moment.  .'  Now,  such  a 
man  does  not  sin  presumptuously,  when  suddenly  overcome 
by  anger,  though,  without  doubt,  there  is  presumption  in  his 
sin,  unless  he  strives  to  correct  that  passion  and  keep  it  down. 
A  man,  again,  who  is  suddenly  tempted  and  surprised  into  *a 
sin  which  is  not  his  habit,  but  which  he  commits  through  the 
force  of  some  strong  temptation,  is  guilty,"  h'xxX,  -npt.  guilty  of 
presumption,  because  he  was  taken  unawares,  in  the  net  and 
caught  in  the  snare.  But  there  are  other  meij*  "who  sin  delib- 
erately ;  there  are  some  who  can  think  of  a  lust  for  weeks 
beforehand,  and  dote  upon  their  darling  crime  with  pleasure. 


PRESUMPTUOUS    SINS.  437 

They  do,  as  it  were,  water  the  young  seedling  of  hist  until  it 
grows  to  the  maturity  of  desire,  and  then  they  go  and  commit 
the  crime.  There  are  some  to  whom  lust  is  not  a  passer-by, 
but  a  lodger  at  home.  They  receive  it,  they  house  it,  they 
feast  it ;  and  when  they  sin  they  sin  deliberately,  walk  coolly 
to  their  lusts,  and  in  cold  blood  commit  the  act  which  another 
might  haply  do  in  hot  and  furious  haste.  Now,  such  a  sin  has 
in  it  a  great  extent  of  sinfulness,  it  is  a  sin  of  high  presump- 
tion. To  be  carried  away,  as  by  a  whirlwind  of  passion,  in 
a  moment  is  wrong ;  but  to  sit  down  and  deliberately  resolve 
upon  revenge  is  cursed  and  diabolical.  To  sit  down  and  de- 
liberately fashion  schemes  of  wickedness  is  heinous,  and  I  can 
find  no  other  word  fitly  to  express  it.  To  deliberate  carefully 
how  the  crime  is  to  be  done,  and,  Ilaman-like,  to  build  the 
gallows,  and  to  set  to  work  to  destroy  one's  neighbor,  to  get 
the  pit  digged  that  the  friend  may  fall  into  it  and  be  destroyed, 
to  lay  snares  in  secret,  to  plot  wickedness  upon  one's  bed — 
this  is  a  high  pitch  of  presumptuous  sin.  May  God  forgive 
any  of  us,  if  we  have  been  so  far  guilty ! 

Again,  xohen  a  man  conthmes  long  in  sin^  and  has  time  to 
deliberate  about  it^  that  also  is  a  proof  that  it  is  a  presump- 
tuous sin.  He  that  sins  once,  being  overtaken  in  a  fault,  and 
then  abhors  the  sin,  has  not  sinned  presumptuously ;  but  he 
who  transgresses  to-day,  to-morrow,  and  the  next  day,  week 
after  week,  and  year  after  year,  until  he  has  piled  up  a  heap 
of  sins  that  are  high  as  a  mountain,  such  a  man,  I  say,  sins 
presumptuously,  because  in  a  continued  habitof  sin  there  must 
be  a  deliberation  to  sin ;  there  must  be  at  least  such  a  force 
and  strength  of  mind  as  could  not  have  come  upon  any  man 
if  his  sin  were  but  the  hasty  ^fiect  of  sudden  passion.  Ah ! 
take  heed,  ye  that  are  sodden  in  sin,  ye  that  drink  it  down  as 
the  greedy  ox  drinketh  down  water,  ye  who  run  to  your  lust 
as  the  rivers  run  to  the  sea,  and  ye  who  go  to  your  passions 
as  the  sow  to  her  wallowing  in  the  mire.  Take  heed !  your 
crimes  are  grievous,  and  the  hand  of  God  shall  soon  fill  terri- 
bly on  your  heads,  unless  by  divine  grace  it  be  granted  to  you 
to  repent  and  turn  unto  him.  Fearful  must  be  your  doom 
if,  unpardoned,  God  should  condemn  you  for  presumptuous 


438  PRESUMPTUOUS    SINS. 

sm.     O  "  Lord,  keep  back  thy  servant  also  from  presumptu- 
ous sins." 

3.  Again :  I  said  that  a  presumptuous  sin  must  be  a  matter 
of  design^  and  have  been  committed  with  the  intention  of  sin. 
If  at  your  leisure  at  home  you  will  turn  to  that  passage  in  the 
book  of  Numbers,  where  it  says  there  is  no  pardon  for  a  pre- 
sumptuous sin  under  the  Jewish  dispensation,  you  will  find 
immediately  afterward  a  case  recorded.  A  man  went  out  on 
the  Sabbath-day  to  gather  sticks ;  he  was  taken  in  the  act 
of  Sabbath-breaking,  and  the  law  being  very  stringent  under 
the  Jewish  dispensation,  he  was  ordered  at  once  to  be  put  to 
death.  Now,  the  reason  why  he  was  put  to  death  was  not 
because  he  gathered  sticks  on  the  Sabbath  merely,  but  because 
the  law  had  just  then  been  proclaimed,  "  In  it  thou  shalt  do  no 
manner  of  work."  This  man  willfully,  out  of  design,  in  order, 
as  it  were,  to  show  that  he  despised  God — to  show  that  he  did 
not  care  for  God — Avithout  any  necessity,  without  any  hope  of 
advantage,  went  straight  oivt,  in  the  very  teeth  of  the  law,  to 
perform,  not  an  act  which  he  kept  in  his  own  house,  which 
might  perhaps  have  been  overlooked,  but  an  act  which  brought 
shame  upon  the  whole  congregation,  because,  infidel-like,  he 
dared  to  brazen  it  out  before  God ;  as  much  as  to  say,  "  I  care 
not  for  God.  Has  God  just  commanded,  '  Ye  shall  do  no 
manner  of  work  ?'  Here  am  I ;  I  do  not  want  s'ticks  to-day  ; 
I  do  not  want  to  work ;  not  for  the  sake  of  sticks,  but  w^ith 
the  design  of  showing  that  I  despise  God,  I  go  out  this  day 
and  gather  sticks."  "  Now,"  says  one,  "  surely  there  are  no 
people  in  the  world  that  have  ever  done  such  a  thing  as  this." 
Yes,  there  are ;  and  there  are  such  in  the  Surrey  Music  Hall 
this  day.  They  have  sinned  against  God,  not  merely  for  the 
pleasure  of  it,  but  because  they  would  show  their  want  of 
reverence  to  God.  That  young  man  burned  his  Bible  in  the 
midst  of  his  wicked  companions — not  because  he  hated  his 
Bible,  for  he  quivered  and  looked  pale  at  the  ashes  on  the 
hearth  when  he  was  doing  it;  but  he  did  it  out  of  pure  bra- 
vado, in  order  to  show  them,  as  he  thought,  that  he  really  was 
far  gone  from  any  thing  like  a  profession  of  religion.  That 
other  man  is  accustomed  sometimes  to  stand  by  the  wayside, 
wben  the  people  are  going  to  the  house  of  God  ;  and  he  swears 


PRESUMPTUOUS    SINS.  439 

at  them,  not  because  he  delights  in  swearing,  but  because  he 
will  show  that  he  is  irreligious,  that  he  is  ungodly.  How  many 
an  infidel  has  done  the  same — not  because  he  had  any  pleasure 
in  the  thing  itself,  but  because  out  of  the  wickedness  of  his 
heart  he  would  spit  at  God,  if  it  were  possible,  having  a  de- 
sign to  let  men  know  that  though  the  sin  itself  was  cheap 
enough,  he  was  determined  to  do  something  which  would  be 
like  spitting  in  the  face  of  his  Maker,  and  despising  God  who 
created  him !  Now,  such  a  sin  is  a  master-piece  of  iniquity. 
There  is  pardon  for  suoh  a  one — there  is  full  pardon  to  those 
who  are  brought  to  repentance ;  but  few  of  such  men  ever 
receive  it ;  for  when  they  are  so  far  gone  as  to  sin  presumptu- 
ously, because  they  will  do  it — to  sin  merely  foi-  the  sake  of 
showing  their  disregard  of  God  and  of  God's  law,  we  say  of 
such,  there  is  pardon  for  them,  but  it  is  wondrous  grace  which 
brings  them  into  such  a  condition  that  they  are  willing  to 
accept  it.  O  that  God  would  keep  back  his  servants  here 
from  presumptuous  sins!  And  if  any  of  us  here  have  com- 
mitted them,  may  he  bring  us  back,  to  the  praise  of  the  glory 
of  his  grace ! 

4.  But  one  more  point,  and  I  think  I  shall  have  explained 
these  presumptuous  sins.  A  presumptuous  sin  also  is  one  that 
is  committed  through  a  hardihood  of f tended  strength  of  mind. 
Says  one,  "  I  intend  to-morrow  to  go  into  such-and-such  a 
society,  because  I  believe,  though  it  hurts  other  people,  it 
does  me  no  hurt."  You  turn  round  and  say  to  some  young 
man,  "  I  could  not  advise  you  to  frequent  the  Casitio — it  would 
be  your  ruin."  But  you  go  yourself,  sir  ?  "Yes."  But  how 
do  you  justify  yourself?  Because  I  have  such  strength  of 
principle  that  I  know  just  how  far  to  go,  and  no  further.  Thou 
liest,  sir;  against  thyself  thou  liest ;  thou  liest  presumptuously 
in  so  doing.  Thou  art  playing  with  bombshells  that  shall  burst 
and  destroy  thee;  thou  art  sitting  over  the  mouth  of  hell, 
with  a  fancy  that  thou  shalt  not  be  burned.  Because  thou 
hast  gone  to  haunts  of  vice  and  come  back  tainted,  much 
tainted,  but  because  thou  art  so  blind  as  not  to  see  the  taint, 
ihou  thinkest  thyself  secure.  Thou  art  not  so.  Thy  sin,  in 
dar  ng  to  think  that  thou  art  proof  against  sin,  is  a  sin  of  pre- 
sumption.    "No,  no,"  says  one;  "but  I  know  that  I  can  %o 


440  PRESUMPTUOUS   SINS. 

just  SO  far  in  such-and-such  a  sin,  and  there  I  can  stop."  Pre- 
sumption, sir;  nothing  but  presumption.  It  would  be  pre- 
sumption for  any  man  to  cUmb  to  the  top  of  the  spire  of  a 
church,  and  stand  upon  his  liead.  "  Well,  but  he  might  come 
down  safe,  if  he  were  skilled  in  it."  Yes,  but  it  is  presump- 
tuous. I  would  no  more  think  of  subscribing  a  farthing  to  a 
man's  ascent  in  a  balloon,  than  I  would  to  a  poor  wretch  cut- 
ting his  own  throat.  I  would  no  more  think  of  standing  and 
gazing  at  any  man  who  puts  his  life  in  a  position  of  peril, 
than  I  would  of  paying  a  man  to  blow  his  brains  out.  I  think 
such  things,  if  not  murders,  are  murderous.  There  is  suicide 
in  men  risking  themselves  in  that  way ;  and  if  there  be  suicide 
in  the  risk  of  the  body,  how  much  more  in  the  case  of  a  man 
who  puts  his  own  soul  in  jeopardy  just  because  he  thinks  he 
has  strength  of  mind  enough  to  prevent  its  being  ruined  and 
destroyed.  Sir,  your  sin  is  a  sin  of  presumption  ;  it  is  a  great 
and  grievous  one  ;  it  is  one  of  the  master-pieces  of  iniquity. 

O  !  how  many  people  there  are  who  are  sinning  presumptu- 
ously to-day !  You  are  sinning  presumptuously  in  being  to- 
day what  you  are.  You  are  saying,  "  In  a  little  time  I  will 
solemnly  and  seriously  think  of  religion ;  in  a  few  years,  when 
I  am  a  little  more  settled  in  life,  I  intend  to  turn  over  a  new 
leaf,  and  think  about  the  matters  of  godliness."  Sir,  you  are 
presumptuous.  You  are  presuming  that  you  shall  live ;  you 
are  speculathig  upon  a  thing  which  is  as  frail  as  the  bubble  on 
the  breaker ;  you  are  staking  your  everlasting  soul  on  the 
deadly  odds  that  you  shall  live  for  a  few  years,  whereas,  the" 
probabilities  are-,  that  you  may  be  cut  down  ere  the  sun  shall 
set :  and  it  is  possible,  that  ere  another  year  shall  have  passed 
over  your  head,  you  may  be  in  the  land  where  repentance  is 
impossible,  and  useless  were  it  possible.  O !  dear  friends,  pro- 
crastination is  a  presumptuous  sin.  The  putting  off  a  thing 
which  should  be  done  to-day,  because  you  hope  to  live  to- 
morrow, is  a  presumption.  You  have  no  right  to  do  it — you 
are,  in  so  doing,  sinning  against  God,  and  bringing  on  your 
heads  the  guilt  of  presumptuous  sin.  I  remember  that  striking- 
passage  in  Jonathan  Edwards'  wonderful  sermon,  which  w-tS 
the  means  of  a  great  revival,  where  he  says,  "  Sinner,  thou  art 
this  moment  standing  over  the  mouth  of  hell,  upon  a  single 


PRESUMPTUOUS    SINS.  441 

plank,  and  that  plank  is  rotten  ;  tlion  art  hanging  over  the 
jaws  of  perdition,  by  a  solitary  rope,  and  the  strands  of  tliat 
rope  are  creaking  now."  It  is  a  terrible  thing  to  be  in  such 
a  position  as  that,  and  yet  to  say,  "  to-morrow,"  and  to  pro- 
crastinate. You  remind  me,  some  of  you,  of  that  story  of 
Dionysius  the  tyrant,  who,  wishing  to  punish  one  who  had  dis- 
pleased him,  invited  him  to  a  noble  feast.  Rich  were  the  viands 
that  were  spread  upon  the  table,  and  rare  the  wines. of  which 
he  Avas  invited  to  drink.  A  chair  was  placed  at  the  head  of  the 
table,  and  the  guest  was  seated  within  it.  Horror  of  hoi-rors! 
The  feast  might  be  rich,  but  the  guest  was  miserable,  dreadful 
beyond  thought.  However  splendid  might  be  the  array  of 
the  servants,  and  however  rich  the  danties,  yet  he  wlio  had 
been  invited  sat  there  in  agony.  For  what  reason  ?  Becayse 
over  his  head,  immediately  over  it,  there  hung  a  sword,  a  fur- 
bished sword,  suspended  by  a  single  hair.  He  had  to  sit  all 
the  time  with  this  sword  above  him,  with  nothing  but  a  hair 
between  him  and  death.  You  may  conceive  the  poor  man's 
misery.  He  could  not  escape;  he  must  sit  where  he  was. 
How  could  he  feast  ?  How  could  he  rejoice  !  But  O,  my  un- 
converted hearer,  thou  art  there  this  morning,  man,  with  all  thy 
riches  and  thy  wealth  before  thee,  with  the  comforts  of  a  home 
and  the  joys  of  a  household  ;  thou  art  there  this  day,  in  a  place 
from  which  thou  canst  not  escape ;  the  sword  of  death  above 
thee,  prepared  to  descend ;  and  woe  unto  thee,  when  it  shall 
cleave  thy  soul  from  thy  body !  Canst  thou  yet  make  mirth, 
and  yet  procrastinate  ?  If  thou  canst,  then  verily  thy  sin  is 
presumptuous  in  a  high  degree.  "Keep  back  thy  servant 
also  from  presumptuous  sins." 

H.  And  now  I  come  to  the  second  part  of  the  subject,  with 
which  I  shall  deal  very  briefly.     I  am  to  try  and  show  why  it 

IS  THAT  THERE  IS  GREAT  ENORMITY  IN  A  PRESUMPTUOUS  SIN. 

Let  me  take  any  one  of  the  sins;  for  instance,  the  sin 
against  light  and  knowledge.  There  is  greater  enormity  in 
such  a  presumptuous  sin  than  in  any  other.  In  this  our  happy 
land  it  is  just  possible  for  a  man  to  commit  treason.  I  think 
it  must  be  rather  difficulfi'for  him  to  do  it;  for  we  are  allowed 
to  say  words  here  which  would  have  brought  our  necks  be- 
neath the  guillotino  if  they  had  been  spoken  on  the  other  side 

19* 


442  PRESUMPTUOUS    SINS. 

the  Channel ;  and  we  are  allowed  to  do  deeds  here  which 
would  have  brought  us  long  years  of  imprisonment  if  the  deed 
had  been  done  in  any  other  land.  But  I  suppose  it  is  just  pos- 
sible to  commit  treason  here.  Now,  if  two  men  should  com- 
mit treason — if  one  of  them  should  wantonly  and  wickedly 
raise  the  standard  of  revolt  to-morrow,  should  denounce  the 
ri2:htful  sovereign  of  this  land  in  the  strongest  and  most  abom- 
inable  language,  should  seek  to  entice  the  loyal  subjects  of 
this  country  from  their  allegiance,  and  should  draw  some  of 
them  astray,  to  the  hurt  and  injury  of  the  common  weal ;  he 
might  have  in  his  rebellious  ranks  one  who  had  joined  incau- 
tiously, not  knowing  whereunto  the  matter  might  tend,  who 
might  come  into  the  midst  of  the  rebels,  not  understanding-, 
the  intention  of  their  unlawful  assembling,  not  even  knowing 
the  law  which  prohibited  them  from  being  banded  together, 
I  can  suppose  these  two  men  brought  up  upon  a  charge  of 
high  treason :  they  have  both,  legally,  been  guilty  of  it ;  but 
I  can  suppose  that  the  one  man  who  had  sinned  ignorantly 
would  be  acquitted,  because  there  was  no  malignant  intent ; 
and  I  can  suppose  that  the  other  man,  who  had  willfully, 
knowingly,  maliciously  and  wickedly  raised  the  standard  of 
revolt,  would  receive  the  highest  punishment  which  the  law 
could  demand.  And  why  ?  Because  in  the  one  case  it  was  a 
sin  of  presumption,  and  in  the  other  case  it  was  not  so.  In 
the  one  case  the  man  dared  to  defy  the  sovereign,  and  defy 
the  law  of  the  land,  willfully,  out  of  mere  presumption.  In 
the  other  case  not  so.  Now,  every  man  sees  that  it  would  be 
just  to  make  a  distinction  in  the  punishment,  because  there 
is — conscience  itself  tells  us — a  distinction  in  the  guilt. 

Again  :  some  men,  I  have  said,  sin  deliberately/^  and  others 
do  not  do  so.  Now,  in  order  to  show  that  there  is  a  distinc- 
tion here,  let  me  take  a  case.  To-morrow  the  bench  of  magis- 
trates are  sitting.  Two  men  are  brought  up.  They  are  each 
of  them  charged  with  stealing  a  loaf  of  bread.  It  is  clearly 
proved,  in  the  one  case,  that  the  man  was  hungry,  and  that  he 
snatched  the  loaf  of  bread  to  satisfy  his  necessities.  He  is 
sorry  for  his  deed,  he  grieves  that  he  has  done  this  act ;  but 
mosfmanifestly  he  had  a  strong  temptation  to  it.  In  the  other 
case  the  man  was  "'.ch,  and  he   willfully  vrent  into  the  shop 


PKESUMPTUOUS    SINS.  443 

merely  because  he  would  break  the  law  and  show  that  he  was 
a  law-breaker.  He  said  to  the  policeman  outside,  "  Now,  I 
care  neither  for  you  nor  the  law ;  I  intend  to  go  in  there,  just 
to  see  what  you  can  do  with  me."  I  can  suppose  the  magis- 
trate w^ould  say  to  one  man,  "  You  are  discharged ;  take  care 
not  to  do  the  like  again  ;  there  is  something  for  your  present 
necessities;  seek  to  earn  an  honest  living."  But  to  the  other 
I  can  conceive  him  saying,  "  You  are  an  infamous  wretch  ; 
you  have  committed  the  same  deed  as  the  other,  but  from 
very  different  motives ;  I  give  you  the  longest  term  of  im- 
prisonment which  the  law  allows  me,  and  I  can  only  regret 
that  1  can  not  treat  you  worse  than  I  have  done."  The  pre- 
sumption of  sin  made  the  difference.  So  when  you  sin  delib- 
erately and  knowingly,  your  sin  against  Almighty  God  is  a 
higher  and  a  blacker  sin  than  it  would  have  been  if  you  had 
sinned  ignorantly,  or  sinned  in  haste. 

Now  let  us  suppose  one  more  case.  In  the  heat  of  some 
little  dispute  some  one  shall  insult  a  man.  You  shall  be  in- 
sulted by  a  man  of  angry  temper ;  you  have  not  provoked  him, 
you  gave  him  no  just  cause  for  it;  but  at  the  same  time  he 
was  of  a  hot  and  angry  disposition  ;  he  was  somewhat  foiled 
in  the  debate,  and  he  insulted  you,  calling  you  by  some  name 
which  has  left  a  stain  upon  your  character,  so  far  as  epithets 
can  do  it.  I  can  suppose  that  you  would  ask  no  reparation 
of  hitn,  if  by  to-morrow  you  saw  that  it  was  just  a  rash  word 
spoken  in  haste,  of  which  he  repented.  But  suppose  another 
person  should  waylay  you  in  the  street,  should  week  after  week 
seek  to  meet  you  in  the  market-place,  and  should,  after  a  great 
deal  of  toil  and  trouble,  at  last  meet  you,  and  there,  in  the 
center  of  a  number  of  people,  unprovoked,  just  out  of  sheer, 
deliberate  malice,  come  before  you  and  call  you  a  liar  in  the 
street ;  I  can  suppose  that.  Christian  as  you  are,  you  might  find 
it  necessary  to  chastise  such  insolence,  not  with  your  hand,  but 
with  the  arm  of  that  equitable  law  which  protects  us  all  from 
insulting  violence.  In  the  other  case  T  can  suppose  it  would 
be  no  trouble  to  forgive.  You  would  say,  "  My  dear  fellow, 
I  know  we  are  all  hasty  sometinjes — there,  now,  I  don't  care 
at  all  for  it ;  you  did  not  mean  it."  But  in  this  case,  where  a 
man  has  dared  and  defied  you  without  any  provocation  what- 


444  PRESUMPTUOUS    SINS. 

ever,  you  would  say  to  him,  "  Sir,  you  have  endeavored  to  in- 
jure me  in  respectable  society  ;  I  can  forgive  you  as  a  Chris- 
tian, but  as  a  man  and  a  citizen  I  sliall  demand  that  I  am  pro- 
tected against  your  insolence." 

You  see,  therefore,  in  the  cases  that  occur  between  man  and 
man,  how  there  is  an  excess  of  guilt  added  to  a  sin  by  pre- 
sumption. O  !  ye  that  have  smned  presumptuously — and  who 
among  us  has  not  done  so  ? — bow  your  heads  in  silence,  con- 
fess your  guilt,  and  then  open  your  mouths,  and  cry,  "  Lord 
have  mercy  upon  me,  a  presumptuous  sinner." 

III.  And  now  I  have  nearly  done — not  to  weary  you  by  too 
long  a  discourse — we  shall  notice  the  appropriateness  of 
THIS  PRAYER — "  Keep  back  thy  servant  also  from  presumptu- 
ous sins." 

Will  you  just  note,  that  this  prayer  was  the  prayer  of  a 
sam%  the  prayer  of  a  holy  man  of  God  ?  Did  David  need  to 
pray  thus  ?  Did  the  "  man  after  God's  own  heart"  need  to 
cry,  "  Keep  back  thy  servant  ?"  Yes,  he  did.  And  note  the 
beauty  of  the  prayer.  If  I  might  translate  it  into  more  meta- 
phorical style,  it  is  like  this :  "  Curb  thy  servant  from  pre- 
sumptuous sin."  "Keep  him  back  or  he  will  wander  to  the 
edge  of  the  precipice  of  sin.  Hold  him  in,  Lord  ;  he  is  apt  to 
run  away ;  curb  him  ;  put  the  bridle  on  him  ;  do  not  let  him 
do  it ;  let  tiiine  overpow^ering  grace  keep  him  holy  ;  when  he 
would  do  evil,  then  do  thou  draw  him  to  good,  and  when  his 
evil  propensities  would  lead  him  astray,  then  do  thou  check 
him."     "  Check  thy  servant  from  presumptuous  sins." 

What  then  ?  Is  it  true  that  the  best  of  men  may  sin  pre- 
sumptuously ?  Ah !  it  is  true.  It  is  a  solemn  thing  to  find 
the  Apostle  Paul  warning  saints  against  the  most  loathsome  of 
sins.  He  says,  "  Mortify  therefore  your  members  which  are 
upon  the  earth,  fornication,  uncleanness,  idolatry,  inordinate 
aifection,"  and  such  like.  What !  do  saints  w^ant  warning 
against  such  sins  as  these  ?  Yes,  they  do.  The  highest  saints 
may  sin  the  lowest  sins,  unless  kept  by  divine  grace.  You 
old  experienced  Christians,  boast  not  in  your  experience  ;  you 
may  trip  yet,  unless  you  cry,  "  Hold  thou  me  up,  and  I  shall 
be  safe."  Ye  whose  love  is  fervent,  whose  faith  is  constant, 
whose  hopes   are   bright,   say  not,  "  I  shall  never  sin,"  but. 


PRESUMPTUOUS   SINS.  445 

rather  cry  out,  "  Lord,  lead  me  not  into  temptation,  and  when 
there  leave  me  not  there ;  for  unless  thou  hold  me  fast  I  feel 
I  must,  I  shall  decline,  and  prove  an  apostate  after  all."  There 
is  enough  tinder  in  the  hearts  of  the  best  men  in  the  world 
to  light  a  fire  that  shall  burn  to  the  lowest  hell,  unless  God 
should  quench  the  sparks  as  they  fall.  There  is  enough  cor- 
ruption, depravity,  and  wickedness  in  the  heart  of  the  most 
holy  man  that  is  now  alive  to  damn  his  soul  to  all  eternity,  if 
free  and  sovereign  grace  does  not  prevent.  O  Christian,  tbou 
hast  need  to  pray  this  prayer.  But  I  think  I  hear  you  saying, 
"  Is  tliy  servant  a  dog,  that  I  should  do  this  thing  ?"  So  said 
Hazael,  when  the  prophet  told  him  that  he  would  slay  his 
master ;  but  he  went  home  and  took  a  wet  cloth  and  spread 
it  over  his  master's  face  and  choked  him,  and  did  the  next  day 
the  sin  which  he  abhorred  before.  Think  it  not  enough  to 
abhor  sin,  you  may  yet  fall  into  it.  Say  not,  "  I  never  can  be 
drunken,  for  I  have  such  an  abhorrence  of  drunkenness ;" 
thou  mayest  fall  where  thou  art  most  secure.  Say  not,  "  I 
can  never  blaspheme  God,  for  I  have  never  done  so  in  my 
life ;"  take  care  ;  you  may  yet  swear  most  profanely.  Job 
miglit  have  said,  "I  will  never  curse  the  day  of  my  birth;" 
but  he  lived  to  do  it.  He  was  a  patient  man  ;  he  might  have 
said,  "  I  will  never  murmur ;  though  he  slay  me,  yet  will  I 
trust  in  him ;"  and  yet  he  lived  to  wish  that  the  day  were 
darkness  wherein  he  was  brought  forth.  Boast  not,  then,  O 
Clu'istian  ;  by  faith  thou  standest.  "  Let  him  that  thinketh 
he  standeth  take  heed  lest  he  fall." 

But  if  this  need  to  be  the  prayer  of  the  best,  how  ought  it 
to  be  the  prayer  of  you  and  me  ?  If  the  highest  saint  must 
pi-ay  it,  O  mere  moralist,  thou  hast  good  need  to  utter  it.  And 
ye  who  have  begun  to  sin,  who  make  no  pretensions  to  piety, 
how  much  need  is  there  for  you  to  pray  that  you  may  be  kept 
from  presumptuously  rebelling  against  God. 

Instead,  however,  of  enlarging  upon  that  point,  I  shall  close 
my  few  remarks  this  morning  by  just  addressing  myself  most 
affectionately  to  such  of  you  as  are  now  under  a  sense  of  guilt 
by  reason  of  presumptuous  sins.  God's  Spirit  has  found  some 
of  you  out  this  morning.  I  thought  when  I  was  describing 
presumptuous  sin  that  I  saw  here  and  there  an  eye  that  was 


446  PRESUMPTUOUS    SINS. 

siiifiised  with  tears;  I  thought  I  saw  here  and  there  a  head 
that  was  bowed  down,  as  much  as  to  say,  "  I  am  guilty  there." 
I  thought  tliere  were  some  hearts  that  palpitated  with  confes- 
sion, when  I  described  the  guilt  of  presumption.  I  hope  it 
was  so.  If  it  was,  I  am  glad  of  it.  If  I  hit  your  consciences, 
it  was  that  I  meant  to  do.  Not  to  your  ears  do  I  speak,  but 
to  your  hearts.  I  would  not  give  the  snap  of  this  my  finger 
to  gratify  you  with  mere  words  of  oratory,  with  a  mere  flow 
of  language.  No,  God  is  my  witness.  I  never  sought  effect 
yet,  except  the  effect  of  hitting  your  consciences.  I  would  use 
the  words  that  would  be  most  rough  and  vulgar  in  all  our  lan- 
guage, if  I  could  get  at  your  heart  better  with  them  than 
with  any  other  ;  for  I  reckon  that  the  chief  matter  with  a 
minister  is  to  touch  the  conscience.  If  any  of  you  feel,  then, 
that  you  have  presumed  against  God  in  sinning,  let  me  just 
bid  you  look  at  your  sin,  and  weep  over  the  blackness  of  it ; 
let  me  exhort  you  to  go  home  and  bow  your  heads  with  sor- 
row, and  confess  your  guilt,  and  weep  over  it  with  many  tears 
and  sighs.  You  have  greatly  sinned,  and  if  God  should  blast 
you  into  perdition  now,  he  would  be  just;  if  now  his  fiery 
thunderbolt  of  vengeance  should  pierce  you  through,  if  the 
arrow  that  is  now  upon  the  string  of  the  Almighty  should  find 
a  target  in  your  heart,  he  would  be  just.  Go  home  and  con- 
fess that,  confess  it  with  cries  and  sighs.  And  then  what  next 
wilt  thou  do  ?  Why,  I  bid  thee  remember  that  there  was  a 
man  who  was  a  God.  That  man  suffered  for  presumptuous 
sin.  I  would  bid  thee  this  day,  sinner,  if  thou  knowest  thy 
need  of  a  Saviour,  go  up  to  thy  chamber,  cast  thyself  upon 
thy  face,  and  weep  for  sin ;  and  when  thou  hast  done  that, 
turn  to  the  Scriptures,  and  read  the  story  of  that  man  who 
suffered  and  died  for  sin.  Think  you  see  him  in  all  his  unut- 
terable agonies,  and  griefs,  and  woes,  and  say  this — 

"  My  soul  looks  back  to  see 

The  burdens  thou  didst  bear 
When  hanging  on  ihe  accursed  tree, 
And  hopes  her  guilt  was  there." 

Lift  up  your  hand,  and  put  it  on  his  head  who  bled,  and 
sav. 


PRESUMPTUOUS    SINS.  447 

''  My  faith  would  lay  ita  hand 
On  that  dear  head  of  thine, 
While,  like  a  penitent,  I  stand, 
And  there  confess  my  sin." 

Sit  down  at  the  foot  of  his  cross,  and  watch  him  till  your  heart 
is  moved,  till  the  tears  begin  to  flow  again,  until  your  heart 
bi'*aks  within  you;  and  then  you  will  rise  and  say, 

"  Dissolved  by  his  mercy,  1  lall  to  rhe  gronnu, 
And  weep  to  the  praise  of  the  mercy  I  found." 

O  dinner,  thou  canst  never  perish,  if  thou  wilt  cast  thyself  at 
thf^  foot  of  the  cross.  If  thou  seekest  to  save  thyself  thou 
shalt  die ;  if  thou  wilt  come,  just  as  thou  art,  all  black,  all 
filthy,  all  hell-deservmg,  all  ill-deserving,  I  am  my  Master's 
hostage,  I  will  be  answerable  at  the  day  of  judgment  for  this 
matter,  if  he  does  not  save  thee.  J  can  preach  on  this  sub- 
ject now,  for  I  trust  I  have  tried  my  Master  myself.  As  a 
yoa  h  I  sinned,  as  a  child  I  rebelled,  as  a  young  man  I  wan- 
dered into  lusts  and  vanities :  my  Master  made  me  feel  how 
great  a  sinner  I  was,  and  I  sought  to  reform,  to  mend  the 
matter ;  but  I  grew  worse.  At  last  I  heard  it  said,  "  Look 
unto  me,  and  be  ye  saved,  all  the  ends  of  the  earth ;"  and  I 
looked  to  Jesus.  And  O !  my  Saviour,  thou  hast  eased  my 
aching  conscience,  thou  hast  given  me  peace ;  thou  hast  en- 
abled me  to  say, 

*'  Now,  freed  from  sin,  I  walk  at  large  ; 
My  Saviour's  blood's  a  full  discharge ; 
At  his  dear  feet  my  soul  I  lay, 
A  sinner  saved,  and  homage  pay." 

And  O  !  my  heart  pants  for  you.  O  that  you  who  never  knew 
him  could  taste  his  love  now.  O  that  you  who  have  never  re- 
pented might  now  receive  the  Holy  Ghost  who  is  able  to  melt 
the  heart!  And  O  that  you  who  are  penitents  would  look  to 
him  now!  And  I  repeat  that  solemn  assertion — I  am  God's 
hostage  this  morning  ;  ye  shall  feed  me  on  bread  and  water  to 
my  life's  end,  ay,  and  I  will  bear  the  blame  for  ever,  if  any  of 
you  se^k  Christ,  and  Christ  rejects  you.     It  must  not,  it  can 


448  PRESUMPTUOUS   SINS. 

not  be.  "  Whosoever  cometh,"  he  says,  "  I  will  in  nowise  cast 
out."  He  is  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost  them  that  come 
unto  God  by  him."  May  God  Almighty  bless  you ;  and  may 
we  meet  again  in  yonder  Paradise ;  and  there  will  we  sing 
more  sweetly  of  redeeming  love  and  dying  blood,  and  of 
Jesus'  power  to  save, 

"When  this  poor  lisping,  stammering  tongue, 
Tiiea  silent  in  the  e;rave." 


THB     EKD. 


P(. 


H'^. 


THE   NEW  YORK  PUBLIC  LIBRARY 

REFERENCE  DEPARTMENT 

This  book  is  under  no  circumstances  to  be 
taken  from  the  Building 


'  'I 


