wssmm 


W 
m 


m 


Um 


up 


Hi 


1 


'LIBRARY OF  CONGRESS." 

."BK^is — 

ilwP felit  j\V 


UNITED  STATES  OK  AMERICA 


^; 


# 


SERMONS 


BY 

/ 

RICHARD  FULLER, 

\  i 

PREACHED  DURING  HIS  MINISTRY  WITH   THE 

SEVENTH  AND  EUTAW  PLACE  BAPTIST  CHURCHES, 

BALTIMORE,  1847—1876, 

PREPARED  BY  HIMSELF. 


"Quisquis  haec  legit,  ubi  pariter,  certus  est,  pergat  mecum  ;  ubi  pariter 
haesitat,  quserat  mecum  ;  ubi  errorem  suum  cognoscit,  redeat  ad  me ; 
ubi  meum,  revocet  me."— St.  Augustine,  de  Trin.  i.  5. 


0°  FIRST  SERIES. 


Baltimore : 

PUBLISHED  BY  JOHN  F.  WEISHAMPEL,  JR. 

PHILADELPHIA:  AMERICAN  BAPTIST  PUBLICATION  SOCIETY 

NEW  YORK  :  SHELDON  AND  COMPANY. 

[Copyright,  1877.] 


m 


"Preface. 


The  following  Sermons  are  published  in  accordance  with  the 
dying  request  of  their  lamented  author.  Several  years  before  his 
decease,  Dr.  Fuller  prepared  them  for  publication  with  especial 
care.  Correcting  his  original  notes,  they  were  then  placed  in  the 
hands  of  a  friend  to  be  copied.  The  copy  was  subsequently  re- 
vised ;  and  so  thoroughly  was  the  work  done  that  when  the  man- 
uscripts were  opened,  they  were  found  to  be  in  complete  readiness 
for  the  press. 

.Posthumous  discourses  of  eminent  ministers  are  often  given  to 
the  world.  But  these  are  generally  selected  by  surviving  friends 
from  such  imperfect  materials  as  may  be  accessible.  In  this  case 
we  have  those  which  the  author  himself  designated  for  publica- 
tion, and  which  received  his  final  review.  It  is  quite  unusual 
for  Pastors,  amid  the  demands  of  their  engrossing  work,  to  pre- 
pare discourses  to  be  read  after  they  have  ceased  to  speak.  That 
two  such  volumes  as  are  now  presented  to  the  public  should  be 
furnished  by  Dr.  Fuller,  is  a  witness  both  to  his  industry  and  his 
zeal  in  the  service  of  Jesus. 

It  is  probable  that  these  Sermons  are  published  nearly  as  they 
were  delivered.  It  was  the  author's  habit  in  preaching  to  have 
every  important  thought  carefully  premeditated.  Not  unfre- 
quently  he  employed  the  very  words  which  had  been  pre- 
arranged. Many  will  recognize  in  these  glowing  pages  ex- 
pressions often  heard  from  the  living  voice.  The  language 
will  serve  to  recall  the  tone,  the  features,  the  very  gesture  of 
the  beloved  speaker,  though  the  eloquent  tongue  is  silent ;  and  im. 
pressions,  partially  effaced  by  time,  will  be  revived.    Others,  who 


8 


Richard  Fuller's  Sermons, 


did  not  enjoy  the  benefit  of  his  personal  ministry,  will  find  in 
the  lucid  statement,  the  pathetic  appeal,  the  Scriptural  exposition, 
the  fervent  rhetoric  and  the  heavenly  unction  which  abound  in 
these  discourses,  an  ample  explanation  of  his  commanding  power 
in  the  pulpit. 

It  is  an  occasion  of  profound  gratitude  to  God  that  though  the 
majestic  form  which  went  in  and  out  among  us  is  in  ruins,  and 
the  tones  which  so  often  stirred  our  hearts  are  hushed,  these  pre- 
cious truths  he  spoke,  selected  and  reviewed  by  himself,  remain 
for  our  profit  and  delight.  As  these  Sermons  proved  the  power 
of  God  unto  salvation  unto  many  who  heard  them,  God  grant 
that  they  may  conduce  to  the  spiritual  good  of  all  who  may  read 
them. 

W.  T.  B. 

Baltimore,  July,  1877, 


pEDICATIOJi 


T  DEDICATE  these  Discourses  to  "all  thetn  that  love  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  sincerity ;"  and  especially  to  the 
Churches  in  Baltimore  over  which  I  have  been  pastor  for  so 
many  laborious  but  happy  years.  To  the  deacons  and  members 
of  these  Churches  I  would  say,  Here  is  my  "  endeavor  that  ye 
may  be  able,  after  my  decease,  to  have  these  things  always  in 
remembrance." 

RICHARD  FULLER. 


f  ONTEJ^T£. 


PAGE. 

I.  The  Gospel  not  a  Philosophy,  but  a  Revelation 13 

II.  The  Star  of  Bethlehem 35 

III.  Bible  Testimony  the  Best  Testimony 55 

IV.  Bible  Testimony  the  Best  Testimony 66 

V.  The  Good  Samaritan — a  Charity  Sermon 76 

VI.  What  will   You  do  with  Jesus  ? 95 

VII.  The  Penitent  of  Nain Ill 

VIII.  The  Lamb  of  God 127 

IX.  The  Redeemer's  Agony  and  Prayer 151 

X.  John's  Message  to  Jesus 169 

XI.  Joy  in  the  Lord 190 

XII.  Mercy  Remembered  in  Wrath 211 

XIII.  The  Christian  Delivered  from  Fear  of  Death 235 

XIV.  Prosperity  and  Adversity 263 

XV.  Christians  to  be  Lights  and  Examples 284 

XVI.  Love  to  Christians  an  Evidence  of  Conversion 303 

XVII.  Christ  our  Passover 317 

XVIII.  Simeon's  Faith  and  Consolation 333 


Sbmttou  iFirst. 


THE 

GOSPEL    NOT  A  PHILOSOPHY, 

BUT  A  REVELATION. 

"Eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither  have  entered  into  the  heart 
of  man,  the  things  which  God  hath  prepared  for  them  that  love  him  ; 
but  God  hath  revealed  them  unto  us  by  his  Spirit."— I  Cor.  2  :  9-10. 

AFTER  the  confession  which  Scott,  Chalmers  and 
others  have  left  as  to  their  early  ministry,  there  can 
be  no  uncharitableness  in  fearing  that  there  are  multi- 
tudes who  would  be  shocked  if  they  were  charged  with 
infidelity,  who  devoutly  read  the  Scriptures  every  day 
and  never  doubt  their  truth,  but  who  yet  do  not  believe 
these  Scriptures ;  that  many  are  very  zealous  and  eloquent 
in  preaching  about  religion,  who  are  themselves  utterly 
ignorant  of  the  religion  of  the  Gospel,  and  of  the  faith,  the 
peace,  the  joy  of  that  Gospel. 

A  man  depressed  by  deep  habitual  melancholy  applied 
to  a  physician  in  London  to  know  what  could  relieve  him 
from  this  settled  gloom.  His  medical  adviser  counselled 
him  to  go  and  hear  a  celebrated  actor  who  was  every  night 
convulsing  crowds  with  mirth.  "Alas,"  replied  the  pa- 
tient, "I  am  myself  that  actor."  If,  as  we  are  told,  the 
actor  can  teach  the  preacher,  it  is  only  where  the  preach- 
er is  an  actor ;  but  the  confession  of  this  comedian  may 
well  bring  us  all  to  serious  thought.  For  something  like 
this  may  be  going  on  in  other  matters  than  the  drama, 
on  other  boards  besides  the  stage.  In  religion;  in  a 
church  where  Sabbath  after  Sabbath  there  are  finished 
compositions  in  the  pulpit  and  reverent  audiences  in  the 
pews;  all  may  be,  on  one  part,  only  a  theatrical  exhibi- 
tion, and  on  the  other  part  only  an  imposing  spectacle — 
a  most  deceitful  illusion. 


14  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

Baffled,  humbled,  instructed  by  the  failure  of  his  phi- 
losophical dissertations  at  Athens,  Paul  visited  Corinth, 
with  a  fixed  purpose  "not  to  know  anything  but  Jesus 
Christ  and  him  crucified;"  and  you  remember  how  rich 
was  the  harvest  he  there  reaped.  The  fame  of  his  elo- 
quence, of  his  powers  of  reasoning  and  of  his  new  doctrines, 
had  probably  preceded  him,  as  Corinth  was  not  far  from 
Athens;  but  his  conceited  and  fastidious  hearers  were 
disappointed  in  the  subject  to  which  he  scrupulously 
adhered.  Christ  crucified  was  foolishness  to  these  Greeks, 
who  sought  after  questions  of  human  wisdom.  In  this 
chapter  the  apostle  vindicates  his  course;  declaring  that 
the  doctrines  of  the  Gospel  are  not  theories  of  human  dis- 
covery, nor  theses  for  human  speculation,  but  truths  re- 
vealed directly  by  the  Spirit;  truths  not  to  be  established 
by  reasoning,  by  "the  excellency  of  speech  or  of  wisdom," 
but  truths  resting  where  a  true  religion  must  rest — upon 
"the  testimony  of  God."  The  text  is  often  quoted,  as  if 
it  referred  to  the  invisible  glories  of  heaven;  this  is  a 
palpable  mistake,  for  the  things  here  spoken  of  have  been 
revealed.  "Eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither 
have  entered  into  the  heart  of  man,  the  things  which 
God  hath  prepared  for  them  that  love  him ;  but  God 
hath  revealed  them  unto  us  by  his  Spirit." 

T.  The  disclosures  of  the  Gospel  are  the  things  indi- 
cated in  the  passage  before  us.  And,  entering  at  once  in- 
to the  subject,  I  remark,  that  Christianity  is  not  a  comple- 
ment of  natural  religion,  not  a  new  phase,  a  perfect  de- 
velopement  of  truths  partially  known  before, but  a  distinct 
message,  a  peculiar  interposition,  a  direct  communication 
from  God,  of  things  entirely  novel.  It  is  news,  "glad 
tidings  of  great  joy,"  sent  immediately  from  heaven  to 
earth.  It  is  intelligence  confirmed  by  the  divine  veracity, 
and  therefore  announced  dogmatically  to  the  recipiency 
of  faith. 

Let  me  not  be  misunderstood.  Far  be  it  from  me  to 
unite  with  those  who  depreciate  the  knowledge  which  is 
derived  from  nature.  Philosophy  having  attempted  to 
set  the  works  of  God  against  his  word,  to  exalt  nature  by 
detracting  from  the  glory  of  revelation,  orthodoxy  has 


The  Gospel  not  a  Philosophy,  but  a  Revelation.       1 5 


taken  the  alarm  and  gone  to  the  other  extreme,  seeking  to 
extol  the  Bible  by  degrading  reason  and  nature.  At 
any  time,  but  especially  in  this  age  of  bold,  restless  sci- 
entific investigation,  such  advocacy  is  most  damaging  to 
the  cause  of  truth.  The  Gospel  does  not  contradict  nor 
supersede  nature;  it  recognizes,  it  requires,  much  that 
is  natural  to  man,  and  without  which  a  revelation  would 
be  impossible. 

What  are  the  sacred  oracles? — they  are  a  compilation 
of  inspired  words.  Are  these  Avords  found  first  in  this 
book?  Certainly  not;  they  had  been  in  common  use 
long  before  they  were  adopted  as  vehicles  of  heavenly 
truth.  In  speaking  to  you,  I  must  employ  terms  which 
you  understand;  and  in  giving  us  a  revelation,  God  must 
address  us  in  a  language  and  by  images  to  which  we  are 
accustomed;  otherwise  there  can  be  no  communication. 
As  I  make  this  statement,  it  seems  to  you  self-evident; 
yet  in  polemical  controversies  it  is  overlooked,  and  we 
are  gravely  told  that,  in  imparting  his  instructions,  Je- 
sus sometimes  used  phrases  not  in  the  ordinary  vernacular 
sense,  but  with  a  new,  cabalistic,  theological  signification. 

Nor  is  revelation  dependent  upon  nature  only  for  the 
medium  by  which  it  must  be  conveyed  ;  it  supposes  much 
knowledge  which  is  derived  from  nature.  Around 
every  man  now  born,  the  old  creation  lies  fresh  and  new, 
just  as  it  lay  around  the  first  man  ;  and  this  creation  is 
the  volume  from  which  we  receive  our  earliest  impres- 
sions. Long  before  we  can  read  the  inspired  page,  other 
pages  are  unfolded  to  our  senses  and  minds;  and  from 
these  we  obtain  information,  which  is  not  only  necessary 
to  our  existence,  but  is  indispensable,  if  we  are  to  attach 
any  meaning  to  the  language  of  the  Bible. 

Our  text  recognizes  the  senses  as  avenues  of  important 
knowledges,  and  the  mind  (for  this  is  the  import  of  the 
phrase  rendered  "the  heart  of  man'')  as  an  endowment 
which  achieves  sublime  triumphs  in  science  and  wisdom. 
The  eyes  see.  Upon  these  exquisitely  delicate  orbs  are  pen- 
cilled all  the  loveliness  of  the  earth  by  day  and  all  the 
starry  glories  of  the  heavens  by  night.  The  ears  hear. — 
Notes  of  joy,  of  sorrow,  of  pain,  of  pleasure,  the  cries  of 
fear,  the  tender  accents  of  friendship,  harsh  discords  and 


16  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

sweet,  soft  harmonies,  penetrate  these  vocal  chambers. — 
Then,  too,  how  much  "  enters  into  the  mind  of  man ;" 
the  intellect  with  its  far-reaching  thoughts,  overstepping 
the  grave  and  wandering  into  eternity ;  the  conscience 
with  its  clear  light  and  severe  authority ;  the  fancy  with 
its  exhaustless  creations ;  memory  expatiating  through 
all  the  past;  hope  gilding  all  the  future;  faith,  love, 
that  inward  sense  of  beauty,  truth,  purity,  which  instinct- 
ively discovers  the  true  and  good  and  beautiful  around 
us, — these,  all  these,  are  faculties  of  the  human  mind, 
and  they  teach  us  much,  they  speak  to  us  with  a  voice 
more  potent  than  that  of  any  outward  monitor. 

We  dishonor  God,  we  repudiate  the  Bible,  when  we 
debase  one  department  of  knowledge  for  the  purpose  of 
recommending  another ;  when  we  either  deny  that  nature 
teaches  anything,  or  admit  that  there  is  any  discrepancy 
between  works  proceeding  from  the  same  divine  Author. 
Nature  is  the  oldest  revelation  we  have  of  God,  manifest- 
ing many  "invisible  things  of  him;"  but  nature  is  not 
the  revelation  required  for  such  a  being  as  man. 

There  is  a  principle  in  our  constitution  which,  I  be- 
lieve would  have  rendered  a  special  interposition  by  God 
necessary,  even  if  man  had  never  fallen.  Familiarity 
soon  produces  indifference.  The  uniformity,  the  mono- 
tony of  Nature  would  have  made  us  insensible  to  her 
teachings.  But  man  is  plainly  a  fallen  being.  He  is 
self-absorbed  and  absorbed  by  the  earth ;  and  if  he  is  to 
be  recalled  to  a  sense  of  his  true  duty,  dignity,  destiny, 
he  must  have  a  teacher  more  rousing  and  urgent  than 
Nature.  Enveloped  in  the  senses  and  passions,  he  wishes 
not  to  be  disturbed,  and  easily  closes  his  ear  to  tones  re- 
served and  gentle.  His  attention  must  be  arrested  by  a 
voice  direct,  loud,  striking,  which  will  compel  him  to 
listen. 

I  will  not  however  insist  upon  this  point.  The  doc- 
trine of  the  text  which  I  wish  to  impress  upon  you  is, 
that  the  annunciations  of  the  Gospel  are  truths  entirely 
different  from  everything  which  our  senses  or  our  intel- 
lects ever  discovered ;  that  they  are  a  pure,  direct  revela- 
tion made  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  Philosophy,  falsely  so 
called,  has  pretended  that  the  idea  of  a  revelation  from 


The  Gospel  not  a  Philosophy,  hut  a  Revelation.       V 


God  is  unnatural ;  and  we  grow  up  with  I  know  not  what 
lurking  scepticism  as  to  a  fact  withoutwhich  our  preach- 
ing is  presumption  and  your  hearing  is  folly.  But  this 
is  only  another  proof  of  our  blindness  and  degeneracy. — 
To  unperverted  reason,  it  seems  not  only  probable,  but 
almost  certain,  that  some  information  would  come  to  us 
directly  from  heaven. 

God  is  our  Father ;  he  is  not  an  architect  who  has 
fashioned  us,  and  then  fcrsaken  the  work  of  his  hands; 
he  is  our  Father.  Is  it  strange  that  a  parent  should  have 
intercourse  with  his  children  ?  God  is  "  the  Father  of 
our  spirits."  Compared  with  him  and  our  relations  to 
him,  all  other  beings — those  united  to  us  by  the  closest 
ties — are  strangers  and  foreigners;  is  it  unreasonable  that 
he  should  communicate  to  us  messages  of  love  and  coun- 
sels of  paternal  wisdom  ?  In  accents  of  piercing  tender- 
ness he  summons  the  universe  to  rise  up  in  horror  at  the 
hideous  phenomenon  presented  in  our  apostasy  from  him. 
"Hear,  0  heavens,  and  be  astonished  0  earth,  for  I  have 
nourished  and  brought  up  children,  and  they  have  re- 
belled against  me."  Would  it  be  less  monstrous  that  he 
should  abandon  us  ? 

Another  thought.  We  feel  that  we  are  immortal,  and 
within  us  are  irrepressible  longings  to  know  something 
about  that  immortality.  On  every  side  we  are  surround- 
ed by  that  great  mystery,  death.  Multitudes  whom  we 
once  knew,  some  of  them  dearer  to  us  than  life,  have  dis- 
appeared from  this  scene  of  action.  Where,  what  are 
they  now?  To-morrow,  we  too  must  enter  upon  that  in- 
terminable existence.  Where,  what  shall  we  be  ?  Com- 
pared with  these  questions,  all  other  enquiries,  all  other 
investigations  are  perfectly  insignificant.  We  yearn  to 
know  something  of  the  life  beyond  the  grave;  but  the 
senses,  reason,  science,  experience,  afford  not  a  single 
glimpse  of  the  unseen  world.  Is  it  incredible  that  the 
Eternal  Father  should  vouchsafe  us  the  knowledge  which 
so  unspeakably  concerns  us,  and  for  which  he  has  im- 
planted in  our  souls  such  inextinguishable  desires  ? 

Add,  too,  that  by  the  communion  of  a  parent's  mind 
with  the  minds  of  his  children,  the  ties  between  them  are 
drawn   closer;  reverence,  gratitude,  love   are  awakened 


18  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

and  nourished  in  the  hearts  of  the  family.  If  we  could 
gather  from  nature  the  knowledge  we  need,  especially  on 
such  subjects  as  sin  and  salvation  from  sin,  God  would 
not  be  throned  in  our  affections  as  "the  Father  of  lights." 
Instead  of  ascending  to  him  in  humble,  adoring  docil- 
ity, our  thoughts  would  turn  proudly  and  self-compla- 
cently  towards  another  teacher,  from  whom,  by  our  own 
researches,  Ave  had  extorted  that  tuition  which  an  unna- 
tural father  had  refused  to  give  us.  I  rejoice  that  be- 
tween God  and  the  human  race  there  exist  the  affinities 
and  sympathies  which  spring  up  between  the  teacher  and 
the  taught;  that  the  Divine  Mind  acts  directly  upon  our 
minds,  and  thus  begins  and  carries  on  the  education 
which  is  to  regenerate  and  invigorate  our  moral  nature 
now,  and  to  prepare  us  for  life  and  immortality  beyond 
the  tomb. 

The  religion  of  Jesus  does  not  depreciate  nature.  It 
recognizes  man's  rational  faculties  and  honors  the  im- 
portant knowledge  they  teach.  Still  the  Gospel  is  not 
an  advance  in  natural  religion,  not  an  ampler  supplement 
of  things  which  the  senses  and  intellect  had  imperfectly 
disclosed.  It  is  a  direct,  original  revelation  of  things 
which  "eye  had  never  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither  had 
entered  into  the  heart  of  man."  This  is  our  first  propo- 
sition. 

II.  I  pass  now  to  our  second  article,  and  affirm  that  the 
truths  of  the  Gospel  are  not  only  things  of  which  Nature 
had  given  no  previous  intimation,  but  things  as  to  which 
Nature  never  could  have  conceived  any  sort  of  presenti- 
ment. 

I  have  said  that  reason  would  teach  us  to  expect  a  rev- 
elation from  God;  but  in  the  light  of  the  Gospel  all  the 
anticipations  of  reason  were  and  must  ever  have  been  so 
many  imbecilities;  just  as  a  candle  becomes  ridiculous 
when  the  sun  rises.  We  cannot  open  the  Xew  Testament 
without  confessing  the  truth  of  this  assertion.  We  lind 
there,  it  is  true,  a  religion  which  so  commends  itself  to 
our  conscious  necessities,  so  wonderfully  meets  our  deep- 
est, most  essential  wants,  so  interprets  and  satisfies  all  the 
articulate,  prophetic  longings  of  the  soul,  that  it  carries 


The  Gospel  not  a  P7iilosop7iy,  but  a  He  rein  Hon.      19 

along  with.it   self-authenticating   credentials;  but  its 
communications  entirely  transcend  the  discoveries  which 

our  senses  or  our  reason  ever  could  have  made. 

The  senses  are  organs  of  surpassing,  of  divine  work- 
manship, and  how  vast  the  knowledge  which  they  can 
impart.  By  them  I  may  explore  the  whole  field  of  na- 
ture, may  riot  in  all  the  charms  of  the  landscape,  in  all 
the  pomp  and  majesty  of  the  azure  firmament  and  the 
sparkling  canopy.  Through  them  I  can  take  in  strains 
of  thrilling,  enrapturing  music.  But  where,  in  all  the 
exuberant  brilliancy  of  the  magnificent  panorama,  can  I 
find  a  single  ray  of  light  to  guide  my  feet  in  the  way  of 
salvation  ?  0,  this  is  the  knowledge  I  want,  I  must 
have.  All  sublunary  interests  sink  into  contempt,  when 
compared  with  the  interests  of  the  undying  spirit.  But 
as  to  these  Nature  is  entirely  mute;  not  a  faint  whisper 
comes  to  me  from  the  waving  forest,  not  a  murmur 
breathes  from  the  solemn  groves,  not  a  solitary  beam 
shines  in  the  nightly  empyrean  fires,  or  in  the  streaming 
splendors  of  the  orb  of  day.  The  voices  of  Nature — 
snowy  summits,  smiling  valleys,  tossing  seas,  flowing  riv- 
ers, gushing  fountains,  the  teeming  earth,  the  spangled 
skies — lisp  not  a  single  syllable.  Vainly  do  I  investigate 
creation,  vainly  question  the  universe.  "Day  unto  day 
uttereth  speech,  night  unto  night  sheweth  knowledge." 
There  are  visible  melodies,  silent  but  ravishing  harmon- 
ies, the  unfading  anthems  of  sun,  moon,  stars — which 
have  for  ages  been  appealing  to  the  population  of  this 
globe.  "There  is  no  speech  nor  language  where  their 
voice  is  not  heard."  Very  marvellous  was  the  gift  of 
tongues  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  when  the  pilgrims  from 
different  lands  heard  the  Apostles  "speak  in  their  own 
tongues  the  wonderful  works  of  God  and  were  amazed." 
But  far  more  wonderful  is  that  power  of  utterance  with 
which  these  old  preachers,  ordained  at  the  creation,  have, 
from  their  pulpit  in  the  skies,  been  incessantly  proclaim- 
ing the  glory  of  God  in  a  language  vernacular  to  our  com- 
mon humanity.  These  teachers,  however,  know  nothing, 
say  nothing,  can  know  nothing,  never  can  say  anything 
of  that  salvation  from  sin  which  is  the  one  great  necessity 
to  man. 


20  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

Our  text  refers  to  faculties  nobler  than  the' senses,  but 
it  exults  Revelation  high  above  this  imperial  endowment. 
The  distinction  which  the  Apostle  makes  is  strictly  meta- 
physical. We  do  not  acquire  all  our  knowledge  by  in- 
terrogating and  interpreting  the  material  world  around 
us.  The  mind  is  enriched  from  itself.  The  elements  of 
its  growth  and  perfection  are  not  wholly  exotic.  There 
lies  in  us  a  deep,  mysterious,  infinite  love  of  truth,  beauty, 
purity.  It  is  by  its  own  native  light  that  the  soul  dis- 
cerns what  is  morally  lovely  and  perfect.  But,  now, 
amidst  all  the  intuitions  of  the  mind,  the  inductions  of 
reason,  the  fantastic  soarings  of  imagination,  the  glowing 
dreams  and  visions  of  the  human  spirit,  could  there  ever 
have  been  discovered  an  answer  to  the  question — "What 
must  I  do  to  be  saved  ?" 

Man  is  guilty.  He  carries  the  consciousness  of  sin 
within  him.  He  feels,  too,  instinctively,  that  sin  is  the 
great,  the  only  real  evil;  that  poverty,  pain,  disease, 
all  other  calamities,  are  not  to  be  compared  with  wrong 
doing.  But  what  can  all  the  speculations  of  metaphysics, 
all  the  exploits  of  science  do  to  appease  the  cries  of  an 
accusing  conscience  ?  The  consequences  of  sin  are  not 
exhausted  in  this  world.  No  matter  though  existence 
be  to  me  only  a  dreary  wraste,  death  will  open  a  door  of 
escape ;  let  the  springs  of  life  be  for  me  all  poisoned,  a 
morrow  is  coming  to  set  me  free ;  but  the  misery  of  sin 
will  pursue  us  into  eternity,  and  be  perfected  and  perpet- 
uated there.  After  death  comes  the  judgment;  and  it 
is  the  certainty  of  that  judgment  which  lends  such  ter- 
rible energy  to  the  conscience.  How  can  I  meet  this 
awful  responsibility  ?  how  may  I  prepare  for  that  dread 
tribunal?  I  ask  the  earth,  I  adjure  the  skies,  I  torment 
the  depths  of  nature  and  of  my  own  unaided  thoughts; 
but  they  give — they  can  give  me  no  reply. 

Again,  man  is  unholy.  Here  is  another  profound  and 
pressing  want  which  no  researches  of  reason  could  ever 
have  supplied.  Here  is  an  evil  not  foreign  nor  accidental, 
but  universal  and  at  the  very  core  of  our  being.  Within 
the  blight  works,  and  all  groan  under  it.  How  can  this 
painful  consciousness  be  relieved?     JN'o  enquiry  can  be 


The  Oospel  not  a  Philosophy,  but  a  Revelation.      21 

more   intensely   important,   yet   none  more   completely 
bailies  all  our  thoughts. 

I  will  only  add,  that  man  is  alienated  from  God;  and 
until  he  is  reconciled  to  the  source  of  all  light  and 
holiness,  he  must  be  restless,  unsatisfied,  forever  lost. 
Like  the  Prodigal,  humanity  has  wandered  far  away  from 
Him  who  is  its  only  home,  the  true  centre  of  its  life 
and  homage.  But  in  all  its  aberrations  it  carries  a  dim 
sense  of  its  original  happiness;  and  turns,  with  mys- 
terious, and  at  times  yearning  memories,  to  all  it  has  lost. 
Vainly  does  it  "join  itself"  to  earthly  objects,  and  seek 
with  these  to  slake  its  "thirst  for  God."  Without  him, 
the  soul  will  pine  and  perish  with  inward,  central  famine. 
Its  capacities,  its  necessities  cry  out  for  God,  for  the  living 
God.  And  this  fact  alone  is  enough  to  make  us  feel  that 
a  revelation  was  necessary, — this  fact,  that  humanity  was 
painfully  conscious  of  its  separation  from  God,  that  its 
most  authentic,  earnest  longing  is  for  God,  and  that  to 
interpret  this  phenomenon,  and  meet  this  waut,  no  beam 
of  light  or  hope  ever  could  have  dawned  upon  the  unin- 
spired mind  of  man. 

III.  Up  to  this  point,  I  have  been  speaking  generally 
of  the  Gospel  and  its  preternatural  disclosures;  let  us 
now  come  closer  to  "  the  things  "  of  which  our  xipostle 
treats.  A  glance  at  one  or  two  of  these  mysteries  of 
godliness,  is  all  which  the  time  allows;  but  the  most 
cursory  view  will  show  how  infinitely  they  transcend  all 
unaided  human — nay,  angelic  conceptions.  It  is  with 
reference  to  the  scheme  of  redemption,  the  masterpiece 
of  the  divine  counsels,  God  admonishes  us  so  emphat- 
ically, that  "his  thoughts  are  not  our  thoughts,  neither 
are  his  ways  our  ways,"  that  to  receive  the  Gospel,  not 
only  must  "  the  wicked  forsake  his  ways,"  but  "  the  un- 
righteous must  forsake  his  thoughts."  And  with  reason ; 
for  the  truths  unfolded  in  that  Gospel  are  "things  which 
eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither  have  entered 
into  the  heart  of  man." 

Of  these  "  deep  things"  which  God  hath  revealed  unto 
us  by  his  Spirit,  let  us  take,  first,  the  Wisdom  displayed 
in  the  plan  of  redemption. 

1* 


22  Richard  Fuller 's  Sermons. 

Look  where  we  will,  we  behold  surpassing  wisdom  in 
the  material  creation.  What  beauty,  what  variety,  what 
order,  what  fitness  of  everything  to  its  end.  "  He  hath 
made  every  thing  beautiful  in  his  time."  "0  Lord,  how 
manifold  are  thy  works,  in  wisdom  hast  thou  ordained 
them  all."  So,  too,  in  the  machinery  of  providence, 
what  unfathomable  skill.  Who  by  searching  can  find 
out  all  those  pre-adjusted  harmonies  by  which  the  great- 
est miracles  are  constantly  wrought  but  by  general  laws 
so  controlling  and  modifying  each  other,  that  no  miracle 
is  necessary.  In  a  word,  how  incomprehensible  is  the 
wisdom  of  a  Being  who  knows  perfectly  all  the  properties 
of  matter,  all  the  attributes  of  spirit;  who  regulates  un- 
counted myriads  of  worlds,  everywhere  diffusing  hap- 
piness and  securing  perfect  order ;  who  is  the  fountain 
of  all  knowledge  and  wisdom  to  angel  and  archangel,  to 
all  the  hosts  of  lofty  intelligences  that  crowd  the  teeming 
universe. 

But  wonderful  as  is  this  wisdom,  it  is  still  only  the  perfec- 
tion of  a  genius,  some  vestiges  of  which  are  found  in  man. 
The  wisdom  displayed  in  salvation  is  unique,  peculiar; 
it  differs  entirely  from  every  thing  which  the  senses  or 
the  highest  intellect  could  have  gathered  from  the  world 
of  nature  without,  or  the  world  of  thought  within.  Not 
a  trace  of  any  thing  like  it  ever  could  have  been  detected 
in  all  the  eye  ever  could  have  seen,  or  the  ear  ever  could 
have  heard,  or  that  ever  could  have  entered  into  the  heart 
of  man.  Imagination,  in  its  most  imperial  range,  could 
never  have  anticipated  one  single  feature  of  such  a  scheme. 
It  is  a  pure  revelation  made  by  "the  Spirit  of  God  which 
searcheth  the  deep  things  of  God,"  and  which  has  access 
directly  to  the  spirit  of  man.  And  not  only  does  no 
glimmer  of  earthly  radiance  mingle  with  this  light  from 
heaven,  but  the  light  is  generally  obscured  by  smoke 
when  mere  earthly  fires  are  brought  to  shine  upon  it. 

"  The  Greeks  seek  after  wisdom,"  says  our  Apostle ; 
but  to  them,  "Christ  crucified  is  foolishness.''"  Degraded 
as  Greece  was  at  the  time  of  Paul's  visit,  there  yet  sur- 
vived some  of  the  old  enthusiasm  for  all  noble  achieve- 
ments in  literature  and  science  ;  and  a  highly  educated 
inhabitant  of  Athens  or  Corinth,  had  the  finest  suscepti- 


The  Gospel  not  a  Philosophy,  but  a  Revelation.      -11 

bility  to  every  form  of  beauty.  To  him  Nature  was  a 
mysterious  presence  in  whose  charms  lie  revelled.  The 
loveliness  so  prodigally  lavished  all  around  him  in  that  en- 
chanting clime;  soft  vales  of  evergreen  ;  purple  summits, 
now  clad  with  the  sun,  now  flecked  with  glittering  snow ; 
sweet  sylvan  groves ;  fields  gay  with  the  richest  verdure  ; 
the  blooming  tones  of  such  landscapes  ;  "the  strange  su- 
perfluous glories"  of  such  an  atmosphere;  the  gorgeous 
dyes  of  such  heavens  ;  these  kindled  in  his  bosom  a  rapt- 
ure Avhich  became  a  religion.  He  worshipped  the  out- 
ward creation;  or  rather  he  revered  it  as  a  solemn  temple 
in  which  the  Kosmos,  the  spirit  of  beauty  was  enshrined. 

Then,  too,  what  witching  affluence  of  imagination  had 
been  poured  upon  the  glowing  canvass  by  these  Greeks  ; 
what  celestial  illuminations  were  bodied  forth  in  the  warm, 
breathing,  speaking  marble;  what  calm,  clear,  earnest, 
deep  philosophy  was  theirs  ;  what  "mild  wisdom  wedded 
in  living  union  to  harmony  divine."  In  letters,  art, 
poetic  inspiration,  polite  accomplishments,  lofty  genius, 
all  true  eloquence — that  eloquence  which  is  logic  on  fire 
— these  men  and  their  ancestors  are  the  masters  before 
whom  succeeding  ages  have  instinctively  and  reverently 
bowed.  They  sought  after  wisdom  and  they  found  it. 
But  the  wisdom  unfolded  in  the  Gospel  has  no  affinity 
with  their  knowledge.  It  is  as  high  above  human  thoughts 
as  the  heavens  are  high  above  the  earth. 

To  rescue  a  lost  world  from  the  abysses  of  ruin  and  to 
reinstate  it  in  holiness  and  happiness — this,  you  at  once 
feel,  was  a  task  for  Omniscience  infinitely  more  arduous 
than  the  creation  of  a  world.  For  the  salvation  of  a 
single  child  of  Adam,  an  expedient  was  necessary  of 
which  nature  could  suggest  absolutely  nothing.  The 
invention  of  the  human  mind  could  contrive  nothing.  The 
guilty  must  be  pardoned  and  raised  to  glory;  and  yet  the 
divine  government — dishonored  by  man's  re  volt — must  be 
amply  vindicated.  Creatures  in  open  rebellion  and 
utterly  corrupt  must  be  recovered  and  purified;  and  yet 
the  divine  holiness,  God's  inflexible  abhorrence  of  sin,  be 
awfully  proclaimed.  Here  was  an  emergency  which 
must  forever  have  baffled  all  finite  intelligences,  and  for 
which  the  Gospel  reveals  the  masterpiece  of  eternal  wisdom, 


24  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

a  signal  anomaly  which  provides  full  salvation  for  the 
vilest,  and,  at  the  same  time,  not  only  asserts  the  honor 
of  the  divine  law,  but  magnifies  that  law,  sheds  new  and 
amazing  lustre  on  its  august  purity  and  inviolability. 
This  is  the  wisdom  of  God ;  the  distinguishing  glory  of 
the  eternal  mind,  and  to  this  the  Apostle  expressly 
alludes  in  the  context :  "  Howbeit  we  speak  wisdom 
among  them  that  are  perfect,  yet  not  the  wisdom  of  this 
world,  nor  of  the  princes  of  this  world  that  come  to 
nought ;  but  we  speak  the  wisdom  of  God  in  a  mystery,  even 
the  hidden  wisdom,  which  God  ordained  before  the  world 
unto  our  glory  ;  which  none  of  the  princes  of  this  world 
knew;  for  had  they  known  it  they  would  not  have  cru- 
cified the  Lord  of  Glory.  But  as  it  is  written,  Eye  hath 
not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither  have  entered  into  the 
heart  of  man  the  things  which  God  hath  prepared  for 
them  that  love  him;  but  God  hath  revealed  them  unto  us 
by  his  Spirit."  Here  is  wisdom,  "the  manifold  wisdom 
of  God,"  which  principalities  and  powers  in  heavenly 
places  desire  to  look  into.  Our  Apostle  declares  that 
Christ  is  not  only  the  wisdom  of  God,  but  "the  power  of 
God,"  and  what  I  have  just  been  saying  applies  equally 
to  this  attribute. 

Unthinking  men  do  not  perceive  the  difficulties  which 
seemed  to  render  our  salvation  impossible  ;  and  many 
who  profess  to  receive  the  Gospel,  regard  it  as  a  revelation 
in  which  the  divine  mercy  is  the  foundation  of  hope. 
But  a  devout  mind  at  once  perceives  that  if  man  be  saved, 
it  must  be  by  justice  as  well  as  by  mercy.  This,  in  fact, 
is  the  great  defect  of  all  human  systems  that  they  over- 
look God's  moral  government,  and  make  no  reparation  to 
the  violated  majesty  of  his  law.  When  Dr.  Duff  asked  a 
learned  Mohammedan  convert,  what  was  the  cardinal 
deficiency  in  the  religion  of  the  Koran,  and  that  which 
he  felt  the  Gospel  supplied,  the  answer  was  full  of 
instruction.  "Mohammedanism  is  full  of  the  mercy  of 
God.  While  I  had  no  real  consciousness  of  inward  guilt 
as  a  breaker  of  God's  law,  this  satisfied  me.  But  when 
I  felt  myself  guilty  before  God,  a  transgressor  of  his  law, 
I  felt,  also,  that  it  was  not  witli  God's  mercy,  but  with 
God's  justice  I  had  first  to  do.     How  to  meet  the  claims 


The  Gospel  not  a  Ph ilosoph y,  but  a  Revel >i Ho n.       25 

of  God's  justice,  Mohammedanism  has  made  no  provision, 
but  this  is  the  very  thing  which  I  have  found  fully  ac- 
complished by  the  atoning  sacrifice  of  Christ  and  his 
cross.  And,  therefore,Christianityis  nowthe  only  adequate 
religion  for  me  a  guilty  sinner."  And  this  was  the  ex- 
perience of  the  Apostle  Paul.  It  is  as  the  most  wonderful 
display  of  power,  that  his  grand  mind  glories  in  the 
Gospel.  "I  am  not  ashamed  of  the  Gospel  of  Christ,  for 
it  is  the  power  of  God  unto  salvation;"  power  over  the 
powerful ;  power  where  all  else  is  powerless ;  power 
where,  to  human  reason,  omnipotence  itself  seemed 
impotent. 

We  cannot  glance  at  the  works  of  God,  nor  reflect  up- 
on his  nature,  without  being  overwhelmed  at  the  thought 
of  his  almigbtiness.  Apply  here  the  train  of  argument 
which  we  just  now  pursued  as  to  his  wisdom.  Study 
God's  omnipotence  in  the  variety,  the  magniiicence  of 
creation  ;  worlds  upon  worlds,  suns  upon  suns,  systems 
upon  systems  ;  all  formed,  garnished,  peopled  with  life  ; 
and  all  this  by  the  breath  of  his  nostrils.  "He  spake 
and  it  was  done,  he  commanded  and  it  stood  fast."  And 
this  potency  is,  of  course,  infinite;  for  the  very  idea  of  a 
creative  being  comprehends  the  idea  of  a  being  whose 
will  is  self-efficient,  and  who  can  multiply  creations  at  his 
sovereign  pleasure.  It  is  self-evident,  that  he  who  can 
create  a  man,  can  create  myriads  of  men ;  and  that  he 
who  can  create  a  man,  can  create  an  angel  or  myriads  of 
angels.  God  has  but  to  will,  and  on  earth,  in  heaven,  in 
hell,  over  the  entire  universe,  all  things  are  controlled  by 
an  impulse  as  direct  and  irresistible  as  that  communica- 
ted by  my  will  to  the  nerves  by  which  I  thus  open  and 
shut  my  hand. 

But,  while  the  mechanism  of  creation  thus  attests  the 
"thunder  of  God's  power,"  still  it  is  power  which  "the 
eye  sees,  the  ear  hears,  and  which  enters  into  the  heart 
of  man."  The  power,  like  the  wisdom,  manifested  in  the 
Gospel,  is  one  of  those  "  things"  as  to  which  neither  ob- 
servation nor  science  could  have  given  any  sort  of  idea. — 
In  the  salvation  of  sinners  God  achieves  what,  to  human 
judgment  and  experience,  seemed  wholly  impossible. — 
You  may  ask,  Can  any  thing  be  impossible  to  God  ? — 


26  Richard  Fuller 's  Sermons. 

I  answer,  Yes.     "  God  cannot  lie,"  he  cannot  contradict 
himself. 

He  is  omnipotent  when  anything  is  the  object  of  pow- 
er ;  but  some  things  are  not  the  objects  of  power :  and  in 
redemption  things  are  accomplished  which,  to  finite 
minds,  are  quite  beyond  the  sphere  of  any  power.  "  Who 
can  bring  a  clean  thing  out  of  an  unclean  ?"  How  can 
a  guilty  creature  be  delivered,  not  only  from  punishment, 
but  from  guilt — so  that  be  can  exclaim,  "Who  shall  lay 
any  thing  to  my  charge  ?"  A  criminal  may  be  pardoned  ; 
but  then  he  is  only  absolved  from  the  claims  which  jus- 
tice had  upon  him.  Here  is  one  covered  by  sin,  who  yet 
challenges  the  law,  the  judge,  the  universe,  and  boldly 
defies  any  accusation.  Nay,  this  transgressor  is  not  only 
rescued  from  his  guilt,  but  he  is  justified  ;  and — while 
angels  veil  their  faces  and  "cry,  Unclean  " — he  appears 
before  the  inspection  of  Omniscience  clothed  in  a  perfect 
righteousness,  he  stands  calm,  serene,  rejoicing  amidst 
the  awful  splendors  of  that  countenance  from  which  the 
heavens  and  the  earth  flee  away. 

To  human  reason,  these  assertions  seem  like  contradic- 
tions ;  we  would  have  pronounced  them  (the  Greeks  did 
esteem  them)  "foolishness."  But  in  the  great  propitia- 
tory sacrifice,  the  power  of  God  has  gloriously  harmon- 
ized these  anomalies,  and  solved  the  problem  by  which 
God  can  be  just,  and  justify  the  ungodly.  "  I  have  glo- 
rified thee  upon  the  earth !  "  Ponder  the  eternity  of 
meaning  crowded  into  these  few  words.  Here,  upon  this 
earth,  God  had  been  dishonored ;  nor  could  any  created 
being  render  satisfaction  for  the  insult  to  infinite  majes- 
ty and  holiness.  On  this  earth,  an  amazing  reparation  is 
made.  Here,  on  the  very  spot  where  guilty  rebels  had 
outraged  divine  justice,  that  justice  is  satisfied,  and  at 
the  same  time  mercy  flows  like  an  ocean  for  the  guiltiest 
rebel.  Here  is  power;  "the  exceeding  greatness  of  his 
power."  "  I  have  glorifi  >3  thee  upon  the  earth."  By 
man  God  has  been  disparaged  ;  by  man  God  is  glorified  ; 
by  a  man — but  what  a  Man  !  what  a  phenomenon  !  the 
"Brightness  of  the  Father's  glory  "  eclipsed  in  poverty, 
sorrow,  shame,  darkness;  the  Celestial  Beatitude  torn  by 
cruel  anguish  ;  the  Lord  of  life  and  glory  expiring  upon 


The  Gospel  nota  Philosophy,  but  <<  Revelation.       27 

a  cross,  while  men  and  angels  look  on  with  amazement 

and  tears. 

I  might  thus  speak  of  the  pomp  and  glory  of  all  the 
divine  perfections  as  disclosed  in  the  Gospel,  but  I  will 
mention  only  one  more.  I  mean  the  love  of  God.  It  is 
above  all,  the  love  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus  which  passeth 
knowledge:  which, in  tenderness,  in  intensity,  transcend- 
entl  v  surpasses  all  that  "  eye  had  ever  seen  or  ear  heard, 
or  had  entered  into  the  heart  of  man." 

It  is  very  common  to  hear  people  speak  of  God's  mercy, 
as  a  truth  taught  us  by  nature,  but  this  is  a  great  mis- 
take: nature  utters  not  one  syllable  as  to  this  great  at- 
tribute. In  the  economy  of  nature  there  is,  positively, 
no  mercy.  If  a  natural  law  be  violated,  the  penalty  is 
enforced  with  inexorable  severity.  All  around  me  I  be- 
hold proofs  of  the  goodness  of  God,  but  they  are,  at  times, 
mingled  with  tokens  which  would  bewilder  and  xerrify 
my  unassisted  reason.  If  in  the  green  and  fruitful  earth, 
in  the  sunshine,  in  the  firmament  all  fretted  with  golden 
fires,  I  see  a  God  who  is  good;  what  do  I  see  in  the  light- 
ning, the  tempest,  the  shipwreck,  the  earthquake  ?  If 
in  life,  health,  prosperity,  I  learn  the  benevolence  of  God  ; 
what  do  I  learn  in  disease,  famine,  death  ?  in  those  strokes 
which  break  the  heart,  in  the  pestilence  which  spreads 
desolation  and  terror  over  a  whole  land?  It  is  only  in 
the  Sacred  Volume,  that  these  enigmas  find  any  explan- 
ation. There,  we  are  assured  that  "  God  is  love,"'  and 
that  if  there  be  misery  and  death,  they  are  the  baneful 
effects  of  sin. 

All  this,  however,  is  not  what  our  text  declares.  The 
love  displayed  in  the  Gospel,  is  mercy  to  sinners.  Of 
this  nature  gives,  cair  give  no  intimation  whatever,  and 
reason  can  only  form  conjectures  vague  and  perplexing. — 
Perish  the  cold  revolting  philosophy  which  excludes  God 
from  the  immediate  government  of  the  earth, — the  me- 
chanical religion  which  regards  him  as  an  artist  who  has 
constructed  an  ingenious  piece  of  machinery,  and  then 
abandoned  it  to  its  own  forces.  This  theory  would  for- 
ever extinguish  all  hope  of  man's  recovery.  But  equally 
false  is  the  romantic  religion  which  strips  God  of  his 
moral  attributes;  and  makes  him  a  weak,  poetical,  senti- 


28  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

mental  deity.  "  Truth,"  as  well  as  "  Grace,"  "  came  by 
Jesus  Christ."  The  Bible  is  a  disclosure  of  amazing 
mercy ;  but  a  disclosure  which  causes  us  to  exclaim, 
"  There  is  forgiveness  with  thee,  that  thou  mayst  be 
feared."  This  revelation  of  mercy  is  the  great  tiling  in 
the  Gospel,  it  is  the  Gospel,  the  "  glad  tidings  of  great 
joy."  Salvation  by  the  atonement  is  not  only  *'  a  faith- 
ful saying,"  but  it  is  "  worthy  of  all  acceptation."  It  is 
so  precisely  adapted  to  the  wants  of  the  soul,  it  so  com- 
mends itself  at  once  to  a  mind  enlightened  by  the  Holy 
Spirit,  that  if  you  can  suppose  such  a  mind  to  have  found 
this  truth  among  the  records  dug  up  from  the  ruins  of 
some  long  buried  city,  though  nothing  else  might  be 
discovered  as  to  the  history  of  that  perished  population, 
this  fragment  of  their  faith  would  render  it  certain  that 
they  had  received  their  religion  directly  from  heaven. — 
And  yet  so  strange  and  wonderful,  and  immeasurably 
above  all  which  imagination  ever  took  in  during  her 
widest  excursions,  is  the  love  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus,  that, 
now,  here,  in  the  meridian  of  Christian  knowledge,  the 
natural  man  receiveth  it  not,  for  it  is  foolishness  to  him, 
because  it  is  spiritally  discerned. 

"  God  so  loved  the  world,  that  he  gave  his  only  begot- 
ten Son,  that  whosoever  believeth  in  him  should  not  per- 
ish, but  have  everlasting  life."  "  He  spared  not  his  own 
Son,  but  delivered  him  up  for  us  all."  Enter  into  these 
truths.  What  things  are  these !  What  <i  style  of  love  is 
this!  And  when  we  consider  the  sins  which  are  all  par- 
doned through  the  immolation  of  this  adorable  victim  ; 
and  the  intimacies  to  which  God  now  welcomes  such 
rebels ;  and  the  tender  care  with  which  he  guards  them; 
and  the  glory  to  which  he  will  exalt  them  in  eternity, — 
0,  my  brethren,  after  this,  let  us  confess  that  we  have 
been  mistaken.,  when  we  called  the  most  devoted  earthly 
attachment  by  that  sacred  term  '  Love.'  No.  God  alone 
knows  what  love  is.  Only  in  his  heart  burns  this  celes- 
tial energy.  "  Herein  is  love ;  not  that  we  loved  God, 
but  that  he  loved  us,  and  sent  his  Son  to  be  a  propitiation 
for  our  sins."  "Herein  is  love"  Yes,  fathers,  mothers, 
ye  Davids,  ye  Eachels,  whose  souls  yearn  over  your  chil- 
dren; ye  who  suffer  a  thousand  pangs,  when  one  is  in- 


The  Gospel  not  a  Philosophy,  hit  a  Ri  velation.      20 

flicted  upon  those  so  tenderly  allied  to  you  ;  who  would 
woo  death,  and  hug  it  to  your  embrace  if  you  could  but 
die  for  those  so  precious  to  you  ;  parents,  fathers,  mothers, 
after  all,  you  deceive  yourselves;  you  do  not  love;  you  do 
not  comprehend  what  love  means.  God  is  love.  God. 
only  can  love.  And  the  Gospel  is  the  revelation  of  this 
love;  love  which  is  not  a  weakness,  a  blind  effeminate  at- 
tachment overlooking  the  guilt  of  its  object;  but  love 
holy,  righteous,  uncompromising  in  its  abhorrence  of 
sin  ;  and  yet  rescuing  the  lost  and  ruined  by  an  inter- 
position before  which  reason  is  staggered,  imagination  re- 
coils, and  faith  can  only  wonder,  admire,  weep,  rejoice, 
adore. 

IV.  Having  shown  you  that  the  Gospel  is  not  a  devel- 
opement  of  natural  religion,  but  a  direct  communication 
from  God,— a  revelation  of  things  as  to  which  nature  and 
reason  never  gave  and  never  could  have  given  any  infor- 
mation, I  ought  now  to  dwell  upon  the  fact  that  the  treas- 
ures of  the  Gospel  are  God's  provision  for  all  who  love 
him.  But  lest  I  weary  you,  I  abridge  the  matter,  and 
simply  repeat,  with  a  word  of  comment,  the  declaration  in 
the  text — "  Eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard,  neither  have 
entered  into  the  heart  of  man,  the  things  which  God  hath 
prepared  for  them  that  love  him",  but  God  hath  revealed 
them  unto  us  by  his  Spirit." 

A  preparation  made  from  eternity.  Impious  is  any 
system  which  represents  God  as  having  been  surprised 
and  defeated  by  the  unexpected  entrance  of  sin  into  the 
world.  God's  purposes  cannot  be  of  recent  date.  Xothing 
is  plainer  in  Keveiation  than  that  the  Gospel  is  "  the  hid- 
den wisdom,  which  God  ordained  before  the  world  unto 
our  glory  ;"  and  that,  by  the  redemption  which  is  in  Je- 
sus, even  the  existence  of  moral  evil—  that  dark  mystery 
— is  overruled,  so  as  toreflect  amazing  splendor  upon  all 
the  divine  perfections  and  at  the  same  time  to  exalt  those 
who  are  saved  from  among  men  to  an  immortality  of  sur- 
passing blessedness  and  glory.  This  is  a  truth  at  which, 
as  the  text  intimates,  human  pride  and  reason  will  cavil; 
but  which  will  cause  the  devout  mind  to  exclaim,  '"Touch- 
ing the  Almighty  we  cannot  find  him  out ;  his  judgments 


30  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

are  a  great  deep  ;  he  doeth  great  things  and  unsearchable, 
marvellous  things  without  number.  How  unsearchable 
are  his  judgments  and  his  ways  past  rinding  out." 

A  preparation  most  abundant.  Our  Apostle  declares 
that  it  is  "exceeding  abundant;"  "the  exceeding  riches 
of  his  grace  and  kindness  towards  us  through  Christ  Je- 
sus." It  is  compared  not  only  to  a  feast  supplying  all 
our  wants,  but  to  a  royal  banquet,  the  magnificence  and 
munificence  of  which  dazzle  the  eye,  and  mock  to  scorn 
the  highest  anticipations  of  the  beggars  who  are  the 
guests.  When,  my  friends,  when  will  man  believe  God, 
and  know  that  "all  things  are  now  ready  ?"  When  will 
Christians  believe  the  Bible,  and  have  done  with  all 
thought  of  merit,  and  know  that  we  are  complete  in 
Christ  "  who  of  God  is  made  to  us  wisdom,  and  righteous- 
ness, and  sanctitication,  and  redemption." 

A  preparation  offered  freely  to  all.  For  whom  hath 
God  provided  the  blessings  of  the  Gospel?  For  the 
learned?  the  moral?  the  righteous?  No,  but  for  those 
"who  love  him."  If  you  hate  God,  if  you  prefer  sin  to 
the  riches  he  offers  you,  vainly  do  I  plead  with  you. — 
Without  love,  you  can  have  no  relish  for  the  "things 
prepared  ;"  and  if  admitted  to  the  marriage  supper  of 
the  saints  in  heaven,  there  would  be  nothing  in  all  that 
festival  of  purity  and  love  to  regale  one  taste  or  appetite 
of  your  soul.  But  if  you  love  God,  if  the  love  of  Christ 
draws  you  to  him,  these  "'things"  are  prepared  for  you  ; 
they  are  suited  to  your  wants  ;  they  are  yours  to  enjoy 
freely  now  and  forever.  Why  are  you  a  stranger,  an  ex- 
ile, not  at  home  in  your  own  Father's  house  ?  Why  are 
you  not  now  rejoicing  with  the  best  ring  on  your  finger, 
your  rags  exchanged  for  the  best  robe,  your  hunger  feed- 
ing upon  the  richest  dainties,  and  earth  and  heaven  ex- 
ulting over  your  return  ? 

I  will  only  add  that,  as  this  preparation  is  from  eter- 
nity, so  it  is  for  eternity.  This  is  the  great  concern  to 
an  immortal  being.  With  what  contempt  does  Jesus  re- 
gard the  body,  the  whole  world,  when  compared  with 
the  soul's  redemption.  It  is  the  future  that  makes  n  an 
noble.  Yonder  J  shall  be  great,  mingling — myself  their 
peer — with  glorious  kings  and  resplendent  immortals. — 


Tlie  Gospel  not  a  Philosophy,  but  a  Revelation.      31 

The  soul    alone   1ms    real  grandeur.    The  inevitable  mo- 
mentous crisis  approaches,  when  we  must  surrender  all 
that  is  mortal.     It  is  the  immortal  principle,  which  is 
the  real  man,  which  will  then  pass  into  a  life  of  amazing 
intensity  and  activity.     Beings  situated  as  we  are  ought 
habitually  to  feel  that  they  have  much  more  to  do  with 
eternity  than  with  time,  with  heaven  than  with  earth. — 
And  fur  that  eternity,  that  heaven,  what  glorious  prospects 
are  unveiled  by  the  Gospel.     For  those  who  love  him, 
God  hath  prepared  things  so  ravishing  that  inspiration 
exhausts  all  language,  all  imagery,  when  seeking  to  con- 
vey to  our  faith  some  glimpses  of  "  what  we  shall  be." — 
Paul  was  caught  up  into  the  third  heaven  ;  his  eye  saw, 
his  ear  heard  the  extasies  of  the  redeemed;  his  heart  took 
in  some  conceptions  of  those  beatific  raptures.     But  when 
he  returns  to  earth,  and  we  gather  around  him  and  ask 
him  to  tell  us  something  of  that  state  towards  which  all 
our  thoughts,  prayers,  aspirations,  longings,  so  earnestly 
tend,  he  disappoints  us,  he  puts  his  finger  upon  his  lips, 
he  declares  that  "  it  is  not  lawful "  (not  possible  with  our 
material  organization)  to  describe  such  things.     He  only 
exclaims  in  a  sort  of  sacred,  inexplicable  rhapsody,  "Glo- 
ry."   "Exceeding  gloiy."  "  More  exceeding  glory."  "Far 
more  exceeding  glory."     "  Far  more  exceeding  and  eter- 
nal glory."     "  Far  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of 
glory  !" 

And  while  God  hath  prepared  such  things  for  them 
that  love  him,  lie  is  preparing  those  who  love  him  for 
these  things.  The  whole  of  a  Christian's  life  is  an  edu- 
cation for  heaven.  Reason,  experience,  flesh  and  blood, 
will  mutiny  at  things  ^vhich  God  prescribes  as  parts  of 
this  necessary  discipline;  but  love  can  comprehend  what 
love  does  ,  or  it  can  trust  where  it  cannot  trace.  Hence 
it  is  said,  "We  know  that  all  things  work  together  for 
good  to  them  that  love  God."  We  do  not  see  that  all 
things  work  together  for  our  good,  but  we  know  it;  know 
it  because  we  love  God ;  because  our  love  to  God  is  only 
a  repercussion  of  the  love  wherewith  "he  first  loved  us;" 
because  "every  one  thatloveth  is  born  of  God,  and  know- 
ethGod;"  because  as  the  text .  intimates,  the  hidden 
things  of   God  are  understood   only  by  those  who  love 


32  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 


him;  because,  with  an  inspiration  deeper  than  that  of 
prophets,  with  a  vision  more  gifted  than  that  of  seers, 
love,  sweet  confiding,  luminous  love  knows  how  to  in- 
terpret all  the  mysteries  of  faith,  all  the  obscurities  of 
providence,  and  in  all  thankfully  to  acknowledge  the 
wisdom  and  love  of  a  Father  who  is  making  us  "  meet 
for  the  inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light. 


,v 


ft 


&J 


In  conclusion,  let  me  again  remind  you  that  the  Gos- 
pel is  not  a  system  of  philosophy  or  morality  or  theology 
submitted  to  our  judgments,  but  a  religion,  "  the  testi- 
mony of  God,"  addressed  to  onr  faith.  And  now,  can 
anything  be  more  preposterous  than  the  objections  we 
sometimes  hear  to  the  mysteries  of  such  a  revelation  ? — 
I  at  once  admit  that  no  evidence  could  prove  a  religion 
to  come  from  God,  if  it  contained  contradictions ;  but 
there  is  no  contradiction  in  any  doctrine  of  the  Bible. — 
Nay,  it  is  folly  in  us  to  pretend  that  we  can  detect  such 
contradictions,  for  this  supposes  that  we  fully  comprehend 
the  divine  mind  and  essence.  There  is  no  truth  in  the 
natural  world  which  does  not  involve  mysteries ;  and  if  na- 
ture reserves  much,  if  she  has  secrets  she  will  not  yield  to 
our  most  earnest  importunities,  can  we  expect  religion  to 
reveal  all  her  mysteries  at  once  ?  The  truths  of  the  Gos- 
pel are  clearly  announced.  To  demand  that  nothing  shall 
be  withheld,  is  to  forget  that  "  secret  things  belong  unto 
the  Lord  ;"  and  that  "  it  is  the  glory  of  God  to  conceal  a 
thing;"  it  is  to  pretend  that  we  have  claims  upon  Jeho- 
vah which  he  is  bound  to  satisfy;  it  is,  in  short,  to  ne- 
glect plain  duty,  and  ruin  ourselves  forever,  because  God 
will  not  do  for  us  more  than  he  has  done  for  unfallen 
angels — because  he  will  not  perform  what  is  absolutely 
impossible. 

Have  done  with  this  folly  and  impiety,  my  dear  friend, 
The  Gospel  is  good  news ;  rejoice  in  these  glad  tidings 
of  great  joy ;  adore  the  riches  of  mercy  which  are  this 
day  unfolded  to  you.  "  The  things  which  are  revealed 
belong  to  you."  God  hath  prepared  them  for  those  that 
love  him.  One  day  we  shall  pass  to  an  economy  of  light. 
Now  we  "know  in  part,  we  prophesy  in  part;"  but  let 
us  not  love  in  part.  In  heaven  we  shall  be  "saints  in 
light ;"  here  we  are   to  be   saints   in    love.     Instead  of 


The,  Gospel  not  a  Philosophy,  but  a  Revelation,      33 

wasting  the  few  hours  of  life  which  are  left  us  in  vain 
discussions,  let  us  love  God,  let  us  consecrate  our  hearts 
to  such  a  Redeemer.  This  is  religion —  "  Though  I  un- 
derstand all  mysteries  and  all  knowledge,  and  have  not 
love,  I  am  nothing."  This  is  peace,  happiness,  the  assur- 
ance and  foretaste  of  heaven.  This  comes  from  God  and 
must  conduct  to  him. 

Christians, my  belovedbrethren,what  emotions  ought  not 
this  subject  to  awaken  in  your  bosoms.  The  opening  of 
the  seventh  seal  caused  silence  in  heaven  for  half  an  hour; 
the  loosing  the  seals  of  the  Gospel  has  broken  the  silence 
that  brooded  over  eternity.  To  others  our  theme  may  be 
invested  with  no  charms;  but  to  you  it  is  full  of  unspeak- 
able sublimity  and  glory.  The  preaching  of  the  Cross 
is  to  them  that  perish  foolishness,  but  unto  us  which  are 
saved  it  is  the  power  of  God.  You  know  that  faith  is 
something  more  than  the  conviction  of  the  intellect;  that 
until  love  opens  our  eyes,  the  things  of  the  Gospel  are 
hidden  from  us ;  that  it  is  love  which  comprehends,  feels, 
rejoices  in  the  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ. 

Let  me  beseech  you  to  make  these  things  the  subject 
of  adoring  study  and  meditation.  Can  there  be  a  more 
substantial  mortification  than  this,  that  we  are  constant- 
ly reading  the  Bible,  and  yet  know  so  little  of  the  won- 
ders of  redemption  ?  These  pages  are  called  "Oracles," 
because  they  are  a  direct  revelation  of  God's  mind;  "liv- 
ing oracles"  because  they  breathe  life  into  the  soul.  "The 
words  that  I  speak  unto  you,"  said  Jesus,  "  they  are  spirit 
and  they  are  life."  Supplicate  earnestly  the  light  of  that 
Spirit  who  reveals  these  things  unto  us — that  he  may 
"receive  of  the  things  of  Christ  and  show  them  unto 
you."  Make  the  prayer  of  the  Psalmist  yours,  "Open 
thou  mine  eyes  that  1  may  behold  wondrous  things  out 
of  thy  law!" 

And  seek  to  grow  in  love,  to  be  made  perfect  in  love. 
It  is  to  love  that  God  reveals  himself;  for  love  alone  can 
comprehend  love  ;  and  God  is  love.  It  is  by  love  that 
the  spiritual  eye  is  couched  to  discern  the  truths  of  the 
Gospel.  It  is  love  which  initiates  us  into  the  mysteries 
of  the  C.'oss.  He  who  knows  not  this  is  in  great  dark- 
ness; the  highest  truth  has  not  dawned  upon  bim.     No 


34  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

earthly  illumination  could  cause  the  fabled  statue  to  give 
out  its  strange,  glorious  music;  it  was  mute  until  beams 
fell  upon  it  from  the  sun  himself.  And  before  the  soul 
can  sing  the  New  Song,  its  eternal  harmonies  must  be 
awakened  by  the  touch  of  celestial  love.  Love,  sincere, 
meek,  humble,  obedient  love  gives  not  only  heat,  but 
light.  A  simple,  loving,  tender  heart  has  ever  a  clear 
eye;  it  is  endowed  with  a  sympathy,  an  intuition  surer 
than  all  the  deductions  of  the  intellect.  Such  a  heart 
the  Holy  Spirit  delights  to  lead  into  the  innermost  shrine 
of  truth,  into  the  holiest  of  holies  ;  and  there  to  reveal  to 
it  the  secret  of  the  Lord  ;  to  pour  into  it  light  which  is 
felt  to  be  light  from  heaven ;  so  to  unveil  the  majesty, 
the  glory,  the  sweetness  of  the  Gospel  that  the  soul  runs 
over  with  its  fullness. 

My  beloved  hearers,  may  we  know  this  love,  this  lu- 
minous all  revealing  love;  and  may  it  enrich  us  with 
these  unspeakable  blessings.  "And  this  I  pray  that, 
your  love  may  abound  yet  more  and  more  in  knowledge 
and  in  all  judgment."  "Wherefore  I  also  after  I  heard  of 
your  faith  in  the  Lord  Jesus,  and  love  unto  all  the  saints, 
cease  not  to  give  thanks  for  you,  making  mention  of  you 
in  my  prayers ;  that  the  God  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
the  Father  of  glory,  may  give  unto  you  the  spirit  of  wis- 
dom and  revelation  in  the  knowledge  of  him ;  the  eyes 
of  your  understanding  being  enlightened  that  ye  may 
know  what  is  the  hope  of  his  calling,  and  what  the  riches 
of  the  glory  of  his  inheritance  in  the  saints,  and  what  is 
the  exceeding  greatness  of  his  power  toward  us  who  be- 
lieve according  to  the  working  of  his  mighty  power.'' 

What  noble,  what  heaven-inspired  petitions  are  these! 
God  grant  that  we  may  experience  their  fulfilment  in  our 
own  souls.  To  him  be  glory  and  dominion,  forever  and 
ever.    Amen. 


The  Star  of  Bethlehem.  35 


THE  STAR   OF    BETHLEHEM. 

"And  lo,  the  star  which  they  saw  in  the  East  went  before  them,  till  it 
came  and  stood  over  where  the  young  child  was."— Matt.  2:  9. 

AX  7" II AT  a  profound  mystery  is  the  Incarnation. — 
V  V  "Without  controversy  great  is  the  mystery  of  god- 
liness ;  God  was  manifest  in  the  flesh."  And  the  tem- 
per that  becomes  us  with  reference  to  this  amazing  phe- 
nomenon is,  not  vain  curiosity,  but  the  adoring  reverence 
which  turns  aside  to  behold  this  great  sight,  and  to  wor- 
ship "Emmanuel,  God  Avith  us."  He  would  be  an  idiot 
who  to  aid  the  sun  by  day  or  to  supply  his  place  by  night, 
— should  hold  a  candle  over  a  dial.  Greater,  if  possi- 
ble, is  the  folly  which,  upon  such  a  subject,  seeks  to  em- 
ploy human  reason  any  farther  than  we  have  the  light 
of  revelation. 

The  star  in  the  East  was  an  emblem  of  that  Gospel 
which,  coming  from  heaven,  is  "a  light  shining  in  a  dark 
place"  to  guide  us  to  the  Redeemer  of  our  souls.  The 
treatment  which  the  Gospel  receives  is  strikingly  illus- 
trated by  the  conduct  of  Herod,  the  priests,  and  the  Magi ; 
and  it  is  this  last  thought  which  shall  engage  our  atten- 
tion to  day.  First,  however,  let  us  glance  at  the  narra- 
tive itself. 

I.  The  narrative.  "Through  the  tender  mercy  of  our 
God  the  dayspring  from  on  high  hath  visited  us,  to  give 
light  to  them  that  sit  in  darkness  and  in  the  shadow  of 
death,  to  guide  our  feet  into  the  May  of  peace."  Such 
Mas  the  sublime  epiphany  at  Bethlehem;  and  to  two  very 
different  classes  this  wonderful  birth  is  miraculously  re- 
vealed; to  the  shepherds  by  an  angel;  while  for  the  Magi 
a  star  is  the  appointed  missionary.     We  have  now  to  do 


36  Richard  Fuller  s  Sermons. 

with  the  latter  manifestation;  and  some  enquiries  natur- 
ally arise,  in  reference  to  this  brilliant  light  and  these 
oriental  pilgrims. 

As  to  the  star,  the  evangelist  furnishes  no  sort  of 
explanation;  he  simply  relates  the  event.  Aluminous 
body  attracts  the  attention  of  these  scientific  men.  God, 
who  has  direct  control  over  all  minds,  reveals  to  them  the 
glorious  fact,  that  it  is  the  herald  of  the  Messiah  who  was 
"the  Desire  of  all  nations;"  and  they  are  at  once  obedi- 
ent to  the  heavenly  vision,  and  follow  this  extraordinary 
guide  until  it  stops  and  pours  its  lustre  upon  the  lowly 
shed. 

These  venerable  sages  do  not  speculate,  they  obey ; 
but  learned  astronomers  have  wished  to  be  wise  above 
what  is  written,  and  to  explain  this  sidereal  phenomenon. 
One  of  them  discovers  that,  about  the  time  of  the  imperial 
birth,  there  was  a  remarkable  conjunction  of  three  large 
planets,  whose  combined  light  must  have  shone  with 
wonderful  effulgence.  Another  compares  this  star  to  a 
strange,  temporary  orb  which  visited  the  heavens  in  the 
year  fifteen  hundred  and  seventy-two,  burning  with  sifch 
brilliancy  that  it  was  visible  by  day  as  well  as  by  night, 
and  after  some  months  disappearing  entirely.  A  third 
apprehends  that  the  star  was  a  comet.  A  fourth — but  I 
will  not  waste  your  time  with  these  idle,  though  learned 
conjectures.  Attempts  to  find  natural  explanations  for 
facts  which  the  sacred  writers  state  as  miracles,  may  be 
well  intended  and  have  an  appearance  of  piety ;  in  truth, 
however,  they  betray  a  lurking  spirit  of  scepticism.  Or, 
if  not  in  the  direction  of  infidelity,  such  speculations 
mistake  the  very  meaning  of  a  revelation,  which  is  given 
to  teach  us  salvation,  and  not  to  divert  our  minds  into 
fields  of  scientific  study.  Even  in  the  department  of 
nature,  true  philosophy  will  bring  the  mind  back  from 
its  vain  researches  to  much  of  the  simplicity  of  the  peas- 
ant who  takes  things  as  they  are,  without  seeking  to 
penetrate  to  their  hidden  sources;  but  in  receiving  a 
revelation  from  God,  the  very  first  temper  required  is  the 
docility  of  children. 

Men  and  brethren,  reason  exercises  one  of  her  no- 
blest  powers  when  she   determines  her  own  limits,  and 


The  Star  of  Bethlehem.  37 


submits  to  a  revelation  coining  from  heaven.  But  this 
truth,  however  self-evident,  is  often  overlooked.  To  any 
humble,  candid  man  it  is  plain,  that  when  the  Saviour 
was  upon  earth,  evil  spirits  were  permitted  to  exert  great 
power,  that  they  might  he  openly  condemned  and  defeat- 
ed. Science,  however, — while  professing  great  reverence 
for  the  Scriptures— has  wished  to  regard  these  demoniacal 
possessions  as  nothing  more  than  diseases.  So  as  to  the 
star  mentioned  in  our  text ;  why  seek  any  astronomical 
solution  of  a  phenomenon  plainly  miraculous?  It  was  mani- 
festly an  orb  of  light  created  for  the  purpose;  moving  not 
far  away  among  the  heavenly  bodies,  but  in  the  atmos- 
phere of  our  earth;  conducting  the  Magians  first  to  Pal- 
estine, then  to  Jerusalem,  then  changing  its  course  and 
leading  them  to  Bethlehem,  where  it  paused  and  hung 
directly  over  the  destined  house.  The  fiery  pillar  which 
heralded  Israel  through  the  wilderness  to  the  promised 
land  indicated  to  that  vast  multitude  what  course  they 
should  pursue,  when  they  should  rest,  and  when  resume 
their  journey  ;  and  such  was  the  office  of  the  mysterious 
luminary  which  beckoned  on  these  distinguished  for- 
eigners. 

So  much  as  to  the  Star.  Now  for  the  Magi.  The 
term  means  men  of  science.  It  is  almost  certain  that 
these  men  were  sages  among  the  Persians;  adherents  of 
the  Zoroasterian  worship  in  which  light  was  adored;  and 
that  they  shared  in  the  expectations,  then  diffused  through 
the  East,  of  a  great  king  and  saviour  who  should  be  the 
light  of  the  world.  But  here,  again,  let  us  not  indulge 
in  useless  disquisitions.  Once  introduce  fancy  into  reli- 
gion, and  there  will  be  no  end  of  fictions.  Men  say  they 
consecrate  their  imaginations  to  piety.  It  reminds  me  of 
the  Jews,  who  devoted  their  ornaments  to  God,  but  made 
a  golden  calf  out  of  them.  Nor  are  ministers  only  to  be 
blamed  for  the  fantastical  conceits  which  too  often  dis- 
grace the  pulpit;  they  are  influenced  by  a  low  taste  among 
the  people  for  these  extravagancies.  It  was  not  the  priest 
who  first  degraded  the  religion  of  heaven  into  idolatry. — 
When  condemned  for  making  the  golden  calf,  Aaron's 
plea  was,  that  he  complied  with  the  popular  voice. 

The  foolish  traditions  of  Rome  as  to  these  Magi  are 
2 


38  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

fables  suited  only  to  the  nursery.  That  they  were  mon- 
archs,  the  kings  of  Tarshish  and  Sbeba  and  Seba,  who,  it 
had  been  prophesied,  should  ''offer  gifts;"  how  they 
were  baptized  in  the  river  Jordan;  how  they  returned 
home  and  published  the  Gospel;  and  how,  after  their 
deaths,  the  city  of  Cologne  received  their  remains; — these, 
and  similar  figments,  are  gravely  recorded  in  the  annals 
of  superstition;  but  they  are  wholly  unworthy  of your at- 
tention.  AH  we  know  is,  that  a  deputation  of  wise  men 
from  the  East  visited  Jerusalem  under  supernatural  guid- 
ance. Baalam  had  foretold  that  there  should  "come  a 
Star  out  of  Jacob  and  a  sceptre  out  of  Israel;"  and  influ- 
enced, either  by  some  knowledge  of  prophecy  which  must 
have  been  widely  diffused  by  the  Jewish  captives,  or,  as 
is  most  probable,  by  direct  inspiration,  these  venerable 
patriarchs  leave  their  homes  and  undertake  a  long  and 
perilous  journey.  For  Ezra,  with  his  companions,  was 
four  months  in  reaching  Jerusalem  from  Persia;  and  the 
road,  passing  .through  Assyria,  Mesopotamia,  and  Syria, 
would  traverse  toilsome  mountains,  vast  parched  plains, 
and  dreary  wildernesses. 

Such,  then,  is  the  sacred  narrative;  and  let  us  not  turn 
from  it  without  a  reflection  or  two  suggested  by  this  his- 
tory. I  have  adopted  the  common  and,  I  believe,  the 
correct  opinion,  that  these  Magi  were  men  devoted  to  the 
study  of  the  starry  firmament.  So  absorbing  is  this  sci- 
ence, that  Anaxagoras  became  wholly  dead  to  all  earthly 
things;  and,  when  asked,  if  he  had  no  love  for  his  country, 
pointed  upwards  and  said,  "There  is  my  country." — 
Moreover,  in  all  ages  superstition  has  invested  these  roll- 
ing splendors  with  some  inscrutable  potency  over  human 
affairs.  And  we  need  not  be  surprised  at  this.  With- 
out one  of  these  bodies — the  sun — our  earth  would  be 
shrouded  in  night,  the  air  would  stagnate,  vegetation 
would  cease,  and  human  life  perish.  Why,  then,  the  ne- 
cromancer asks,  may  not  all  these  orbs  of  living  fire  dis- 
pense some  charm  tor  good  or  evil  as  they  wheel  their 
mystic  rounds  ? 

Physical  astronomy  easily  degenerated  into  a  compli- 
cated system  of  judicial  astrology.  The  fiery  cope  of 
heaven  was    regarded  as  a  scroll  written  all  over  with 


The  Star  of  Bethlehem.  39 


flaming  hieroglyphics  and  burning  revelations  of  the  fu- 
ture. Nor  is  it  improbable  that  this  belief  had  taken 
strong  hold  upon  the  minds  of  these  learned  orientals. 

But  I  am  wandering  from  the  subject.  These  Magi 
were  astronomers;  and  now  see  how  God  is  wont, 
mercifully,  to  meet  meu  in  their  pursuits;  and  not  only 

to  honor  their  industry — as  in  the  case  of  the  "shepherds 
abiding  in  the  fields,  keeping  watch  over  their  flocks  by 
night" — hut  to  employ  their  vocations  as  vehicles  of  spir- 
itual instruction.  David,  tending  his  fold,  is  prepared 
and  chosen  to  be  a  shepherd  of  Israel.  The  Samaritan 
woman,  while  drawing  at  the  well,  is  reminded  of  "living 
water."  The  Apostles  by  their  lines  and  nets  are  taught 
how  to  become  "  fishers  of  men."  And  these  Magians 
are  drawn  by  the  science  most  familiar  to  their  minds. 

Observe,  again,  from  this  narrative,  that  the  Gospel  is 
for  "every  creature,"  that  it  recognizes  no  distinctions, 
either  national  or  social,  among  men.  The  shepherds 
were  Jews,  the  Magi  were  Gentiles.  "In  thee,  and  in 
thy  Seed,  shall  all  the  families  of  the  earth  be  blessed.*' 
'•'And  men  shall  be  blessed  in  him,  all  nations  shall  call 
him  blessed."  "To  him  shall  the  gathering  of  the  people 
be."  The  shepherds  were  humble  and  illiterate  men; 
the  Magi  were  men  of  exalted  position  and  profound  learn- 
ing. Both  classes,  however,  kneel  reverently  before  the 
incarnate  Redeemer.  If  there  be  any  distinguishing 
honor  conferred,  it  is  upon  the  lowly  shepherds,  for  to 
them  this  glorious  revelation  is  first  made,  and — while  a 
star  is  the  apostle  for  the  noble  men  of  science — an  angel 
from  heaven  kindles  their  souls  with  this  wonderful 
message. 

Above  all,  let  this  recital  teach  us  the  mingled  dignity 
and  meekness  of  the  Saviour.  Here  is  glorv  such  as  no 
mortal  ever  received  or  can  receive.  This  is  no  common 
monarch  who  is  born:  for  in  Herod's  dominion. and  as  if 
the  reign  of  that  prince  was  wholly  eclipsed,  the  wise 
men  enquire  for  "the  king  of  the  Jews."  To  usher  them 
to  t'ne  abode  of  this  august  sovereign,  a  new  star  is  cre- 
ated: an  orb  more  glorious  in  its  ministry  than  all  the 
spheres  which  sweep  the  firmament  in  planetary  pomp 
and  solemnity.  Nor  do  they  enter  that  presence  only  to 
render   courtly  homage;  they  come  to  -worship  him." 


40  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

And  well  may  they  adore,  and  pour  their  treasures  be- 
fore that  imperial  child;  for  soon  all  the  heavenly  host 
will  fall  at  his  feet, casting  their  crowns  there  and  crying, 
"Worthy  is  the  Lamb  that  was  slain  to  receive  power  and 
riches,  and  wisdom,  and  strength,  and  honor,  and  glory, 
and  blessing."  But,  while  such  is  his  majesty;  while 
the  skies  are  strangely  illuminated;  while  from  near  and 
from  afar  worshippers  bow  low  in  wonder  and  love;  while 
angels  leave  their  bright  abodes  and  gaze,  and  exult,  and 
from  heavenly  lyres  shed  heavenly  music  upon  the  listen- 
ing ear  of  night; — with  all  this  retinue  of  kingly  state 
and  divine  glory — where  do  we  find  this  illustrious  visit- 
ant?    Come  see  the  place  where  he  lies. 

In  the  meanest  village  of  Judea,  in  the  meanest 
habitation  of  that  village,  in  the  meanest  shed  attached 
to  that  habitation, — there  this  regal  guest  firstappears. — 
And  the  meekness  and  lowliness  incarnate  in  that  rude 
cradle  unfolded  themselves  in  all  his  future  life.  "In 
him  dwelt  all  the  fullness  of  the  Godhead" — a  fullness  of 
pardon  and  strength  and  peace  and  life,  to  satisfy  the 
cravings  of  every  weary,  heavy  laden  soul;  and  he  invited 
all  to  share  these  exhaustless  treasures.  But  it  was  be- 
cause he  was  "meek  and  lowly  in  heart,"  that  he  bade 
them  come  and  find  rest  to  their  souls. 

II.  From  the  narrative  I  pass  now,  to  our  principal 
topic;  marking  the  different  conduct  of  those  who  wit- 
nessed this  wonderful  phenomenon, and  the  faithful  rep- 
resentation we  find  in  their  conduct  of  the  treatment 
which  the  truth  now  receives  from  those  whom  it  seeks 
to  enlighten  and  save.  Follow  me  carefully  in  this  ex- 
amination. 

I  am  to  speak  of  the  entertainment  which  the  truth 
receives  from  different  sorts  of  people:  and  1  begin  with 
the  most  odious  class — that  represented  by  Herod. 

This  king  was  called  Herod  the  Great;  and  ought  it 
not  to  cure  us  of  th.it  low  ambition  which  seeks  honor 
from  men,"  when  we  find  such  a  monster  thus  exalted? 
He  was  now  in  the  thirty-fifth  year  of  his  reign.  He 
was  not  a  Jew  but  an  Edomite,  and  had  no  legitimate  ti- 
tle to  the  throne.     \\\  the  midst  of  that  wealth  and  splen- 


The  Star  of  Bethlehem.  41 

dor  which  he  had  usurped,  a  deputation  of  venerable 
emirs  visit  Ids  capital;  and  observe  what  is  the  object  of 
this  imposing  embassy.  They  enquire  "Where  ishe  that 
is  born  king  of  the  Jews  ?  for  we  have  seen  Ins  star  in  the 
East,  and  are  come  to  worship  him."  A  hereditary  mon- 
arch; a  lineal  heir  to  the  throne  of  David;  a  rival  •won- 
derfully announced  by  heaven  and  thus  openly  pro- 
claimed;— the  tyrant  is  filled  with  rage;  and  you  recol- 
lect his  duplicity,  perfidiousness,  unrelenting  cruelty ; 
I  need  not  go  into  the  history.  I  mention  him  only  be- 
cause the  truth  now  too  often  meets  with  the  same  tem- 
per which  rankled  in  the  bosom  of  this  unscrupulous  and 
ferocious  despot. 

So  captivating  is  the  very  name  by  which  this  incar- 
nation of  love  is  introduced  to  our  world;  such  charms 
invest  that  word  "Jesus;"  so  touching,  subduing, divinely 
endearing  is  the  mission  of  him  who  stooped  to  seek  and 
to  save  those  who  were  lost;  that  we  would  expect  all  to 
welcome  with  adoring  rapture  "the  glad  tidings  of  great 
joy."  But  as  the  very  approach  of  the  glorious  deliverer 
awakened  the  bitter  hostility  of  Herod,  so  now,  the  pas- 
sions—those usurpers  of  God's  throne  in  the  heart — rise 
up  against  the  truth;  and  we  find  in  too  many  of  those 
whom  the  Gospel  addresses,  the  very  same  enmity  which 
glowed  in  the  soul  of  that  relentless  persecutor. 

Several  things  are  recorded  of  Herod.  He  stirred  up 
the  whole  city  against  the  truth  which  had  been  revealed. 
He  consulted  the  priests,  but  it  was  only  that  he  might 
gratify  bis  evil  passions.  He  even  professed  a  desire  to 
worship  the  marvellous  child;  and,  flattering  the  Magi, 
requested  them  to  inform  him  as  soon  as  they  had  discov- 
ered the  birthplace;  but  his  pretensions  were  false,  his 
purposes  selfish  and  inhuman.  In  tine,  when  baffled  in 
his  scheme,  he  betrayed  his  real  character  by  that  horri- 
ble massacre,  which  at  a  stroke  swept  the  nurseries  of 
their  sweetest  treasures.  And,  though  disguised,  the 
same  temper  still  lurks  in  the  carnal  mind;  the  same  an- 
imosity to  the  truth;  and  all  this  under  a  professed  rev- 
erence for  Jesus  and  his  religion.  Nor — if  unrestrained 
by  law — would  this  spirit  now  hesitate  about  those  deeds 
of  blood  by  which  persecution  has  always  sought  to  ac- 
complish its  victories. 


42  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

It  is  remarkable  that  the  very  first  promise  of  a  Saviour 
announced  this  enmity  to  that  glorious  child  who  should 
be  born  of  a  woman.  "I  will  put  enmity  between  thy 
seed  and  her  seed."  And,  at  an  early  period  of  his  min- 
istry, Jesus  admonished  his  disciples  against  any  illusion 
as  to  this  matter.  "Think  not  that  1  am  come  to  send 
peace  on  earth.  I  am  come  not  to  send  peace,  but  a 
sword." 

On  the  night  of  that  amazing  birth  at  Bethlehem,  the 
"Prince  of  Peace"  entered  our  world;  and  cherub  and 
seraph  hailed  the  dawn  of  an  empire  in  which  hatred 
should  cease  and  love  forever  reign.  "And  suddenly 
there  was  with  the  angel  a  multitude  of  the  heavenly 
host,  praising  God,  and  saying,  Glory  to  God  in  the 
highest,  and  on  earth  peace,  goodwill  toward  men."  But 
in  Herod's  breast  this  event  at  once  inflames  the  fiercest 
hostility.  And  just  so  now.  In  itself — in  its  maxims, 
precepts,  promises,  spirit,  influence — the  Gospel  breathes 
peace ;  and  were  it  received  universally,  the  whole  world 
would  be  filled  with  peace  and  happiness.  But  in  the 
depraved  hearts  of  men  it  encounters  only  a  lodged  and 
rooted  hatred. 

Truth,  spiritual  truth  as  revealed  by  Jesus  and  in  Je- 
sus, who  can  estimate  its  value?  It  is  the  real  treasure 
of  the  mind,  the  true  joy  of  the  heart;  it  fills  the  con- 
science with  heavenly  tranquility,  and  elevates  the  soul 
above  all  the  follies  and  falsehoods  of  the  world.  Truth 
is  so  distinctively  the  characteristic,  the  very  essence  of 
Christ's  religion,  that  he  declares  he  came  to  "bear  wit- 
ness to  the  truth."  To  be  a  Christian,  a  man  must  post- 
pone all  other  questions,  and  first  ask,  "What  is  truth  ?" 
For  unless  this  enquiry  be  made  first,  it  will  never  be 
honestly  made  at  all. 

And  a  Christian  is  bound  not  only  to  believe  what  he 
professes,  but  to  profess  and  maintain  mid  teach  what  he 
believes.  Hence  the  enmity  he  will  experience.  "Be- 
hold this  child  is  set  for  a  sign  which  shall  be  spoken 
against,  that  the  thoughts  of  many  hearts  may  be  re- 
vealed." The  religion  of  Jesus  will  be  hated;  because  it 
pierces  the  secrets  of  men's  hearts, disturbs  t  heir  security, 
— assailingthe  usurpations  of  custom,  of  honored  example, 


The  Star  of  Bethlehem.  43 

of  old  hereditary  sanctities — compelling  men  to  prove  all 
things,  to  examine  for  themselves  the  foundations  upon 
which  they  have  been  resting, — and  thus  arrays  against 
each  other  those  who  were  formerly  bound  by  the  ties  of 
authority  or  kindred. 

"What  is  the  first  quality  you  desire  in  a  friend?  What? 
yon  reply;  why  sincerity,  of  course.  He  only  is  my 
friend,  who  is  candid  in  all  things,  especially  in  those 
things  which  affect  my  soul  and  my  salvation.  Truth  is 
of  such  infinite  value,  that  he  is  my  enemy  who  conceals 
it;  he  alone  loves  me  who  tells  me  the  truth  plainly  and 
faithfully.  Now,  all  this  sounds  very  well,  and  yon  be- 
lieve yourself  in  all  this;  but  if  your  friend  should  take 
you  at  your  word,  how  long  would  your  intimacy  with 
him  continue?  No,  what  we  desire  in  a  friend  is  not 
candor,  it  is  flattery.  The  Galatians  received  Paul  as  an 
"angel  of  God,"  "would  have  plucked  out  their  eyes  and 
have  given  them  to  him;"  but  they  could  not  endure  his 
fidelity;  and  Ave  hear  him  saying,  "Am  I  therefore  be- 
come your  enemy  because  I  tell  yon  the  truth?"  Nor 
has  it  ever  been,  nor  will  it  ever  be  otherwise  in  the  pro- 
pagation of  the  Gospel.  How  large  a  portion  of  the  ar- 
chives of  our  earth  is  a  record  of  persecution  levelled 
against  the  truths  of  the  Bible.  Hostility  to  Jesus  and 
his  precepts  glares  upon  us  from  every  side,  whether  we 
consider  the  annals  of  the  past, or  the  "history  now  enact- 
ing before  our  eyes.  Tyrants  fulminating  vengeance 
against  their  subjects,  priests  persecuting  the  people  with 
unrelenting  malignity,  even  children  arrayed  against 
their  parents,  and  parents  against  their  children  —  such 
divisions  the  Gospel  will  produce  when  fearlessly 
preached.  And  let  us,  my  brethren,  never  forget  a  truth 
predicted  by  the  Redeemer,  and  exemplified  in  the  expe- 
rience of  the  faithful  in  all  ages.  Let  us  remember  that 
wherever  placed,  whatever  be  our  condition,  loyalty  to 
Jesus  is  impossible  unless,  for  his  sake,  we  are  ready  to 
endure  painful  alienations,  to  feel  perhaps  under  the  vel- 
vet, the  cruel  steel  severing  ties  which  have  long  been 
most  dear  to  our  hearts. 

You  —  you  sit,  Sabbath  after  Sabbath  under  the  min- 
istrv  of  the  word.     Remember  that  the  commission  of  the 


44.  Richard  Fuller  s  Sermons. 

man  of  God  is  not  to  please  you  but  to  save  you.  When, 
then,  he  plainly  reproves  your  sins,  do  not  regard  him 
with  resentment  —  as  Ahab  regarded  Elijah —  and  Herod 
John  the  Baptist — but  listen  to  his  faithful  admonitions 
in  the  spirit  in  which  David  received  the  reproofs,  severe 
but  salutary,  of  the  prophet  whose  v<rice  restored  to  him 
the  joys  of  salvation.  The  Pharisees  persecuted  Jesus 
and  his  Apostles,  but  garnished  sepulchres  in  honor  of 
the  prophets  whom  their  fathers  had  slain  for  the  truth. 
Guard  against  this  delusion.  You  admire  the  courage  of 
those  preachers  who  braved  the  rack  and  scaffold  in  other 
days;  reverence,  then,  the  same  fidelity  when  it  now  for- 
feits your  favor  and  incurs  your  displeasure,  that  it  may 
rescue  you  from  perdition. 

You  —  you  mingle  and  have  influence  in  society,  the 
society  of  the  rich,  worldly,  proud,  where  the  only  fash- 
ion that  passeth  not  away  is  the  fashion  of  being  damned, 
where  the  secret  universal  compact  is,  that  each  shall  let 
the  other  go  to  hell  as  quietly  and  comfortably  and  grace- 
fully as  possible.  To  violate  this  mutual  engagement, 
to  utter  a  word  disapproving  of  this  contract,  is  to  be  a 
troublesome  fellow,  it  shews  an  entire  want  of  all  good- 
breeding.  Form  no  part  of  this  fatal  communion.  En- 
ter not  into  this  inhuman,  barbarous  compact.  As  a 
Christian  you  must  exert,  you  are  exerting,  some  influ- 
ence; let  it  be  openly,  distinctly,  unreservedly  for  Christ 
and  his  truth.  Otherwise,  you  not  only  wrong  your  own 
soul;  but  those  whom  you  now  seek  to  please  must  in 
their  hearts  despise  you,  and  on  their  deathbeds,  and  in 
eternity,  they  will  justly  heap  curses  upon  you  for  your 
cruel  faithlessness. 

Above  all,  the  family.  You  are  a  member  of  a  family 
in  which  the  spirit  of  the  world  reigns,  or  in  which  re- 
ligious prejudice  and  error  have  long  been  consecrated 
heirlooms.  If  you  are  true  to  truth,  to  your  own  con- 
science, and  the  souls  of  those  whom  you  love,  you  will 
meet  unkindness  which  Jesus  says  shall  pierce  you  like 
iron  entering  your  soul,  you  will  bitterly  experience  the 
fulfillment  of  that  prophetic  warning,  "I  am  not  come  to 
send  peace  but  a  sword;  lor  1  am  come  to  set  a  man  at 
variance  against  his  father,  and  the  daughter  against  her 


The  Slny  of  Bethlehem.  r> 


mother,  and  the  daughter  id  law  against  the  mother  in 
law,  and  a  man's  foes  shall  be  they  of  his  own  household." 

Shrink  not,  however  from  your  solemn  duty.  Speak 
in  love,  but  speak  the  truth,  as  God  shall  furnish  auspi- 
cious moments  to  you.  All  hearts  are  in  his  hands,  lie 
will  overrule  all  things,  and  you  shall  yet  see  those  who 
at  first  wounded  you  as  with  a  sword,  blessing  you  and 
glorifying  God  in  you  lor  a  devotion  so  strong,  so  true, 
so  willing  to  sutler  wrong  that  their  souls  might  be  en- 
lightened and  guided  in  the  way  of  salvation. 

Herod  —  those  who  hate  and  persecute  the  truth. — 
This  is  the  firsl  class  who  are  marked  in  the  history  be- 
fore us.  The  second  class  is  composed  of  those  who  do 
not  indeed  persecute  the  truth,  but  it  is  only  because 
they  treat  it  with  perfect  indifference,  if  not  with  con- 
tempt. These  find  their  type  in  the  priests,  and  1  now 
turn  to  them. 

How  infatuated,  indeed,  how  incredible,  my  brethren, 
was  the  conduct  of  these  men.  For  just  consider,  in  the 
first  place,  the  question  which  is  agitating  the  public 
mind.  Has  the  Messiah  really  come?  Prophecies  have 
foretold  that  about  this  period  "a  virgin  shall  conceive 
and  bring  forth  a  son  whose  name  shall  be  Emmanuel, 
Wonderful,  Counsellor,  Mighty  God;"  —  has  this  mag- 
nificent prediction  been  accomplished?  All  the  religion, 
all  the  glory,  all  the  hopes  of  the  nation  and  of  these  men 
are  involved  in  this  momentous  enquiry. 

In  the  next  place,  think  what  light  these  dignitaries 
possessed.  They  did  not  belong  to  the  ignorant  masses. 
They  were  the  appointed  guardians  and  interpreters  of 
the  Sacred  Oracles;  and  they  were  familiar  with  the  pre- 
dictions which  assured  Israel  that  the  glorious  Messiah 
should  appear  at  this  time.  When  Herod  inquired  of 
them,  they  at  once  repeated  the  language  of  the  inspired 
books,  declaring  that  Bethlehem  would  be  the  birthplace 
of  the  regal  offspring  of  David. 

In  line,  the  admonitions  on  every  side  that  the  "full- 
ness of  the  time  had  con  e,"'  that  the  majestic  epiphany 
was  at  hand  —  reflect  upon  these;  till  the  prophecies  con- 
verging to  the  present  year;  the  universal  expectation  of 
the  nation;  the  vision  of  Zachariah,  a  priest,  one  of  them- 


46  Richard  Fuller  s  Sermons. 


selves,  proclaiming  the  immediate  advent  of  the  august 
Deliverer  of  Israel;  the  presence  of  these  noble  pilgrims, 
and  the  mysterious  lamp  which  guided  them  on  their 
way; — enter  into  these  thoughts,  combine  them;  are  you 
not  astonished  at  the  indifference  of  these  priests  ?     What 
strange  folly  and  stupidity  theirs  not  to  hasten  at  once  to 
Bethlehem,  not  to  solve  immediately  this  great  problem, 
nor  to  be  wholly  absorbed  in  a  question  so  deeply  inter- 
esting.    Instead  of  this,  they  see  the  Magi  and  hear  their 
wonderful  report,  they  answer  the  enquiries  of  Herod, 
and  then  dismiss  the  whole  matter.     How  infatuated  this 
apathy.     What  sort  of  people  could  they  have  been? — 
Cease  your  astonishment.     These  scribes  and  priests  were 
a  sort  of  people  very  common  at  that  day,  and  very  com- 
mon now.     They  were  the  same  sort  of  people  who  live 
in  this  age;  who  live  in  this  city;  whom  you  meet  every 
day  in  your  streets,  in  your  marts,  on  change,  in  the  so- 
cial and  domestic  circle.     They  were  the  same  sort  of 
people  who  frequent  our  churches  on  the  Sabbath;  who 
have  come  into  this  house  this  morning;  who  are  now 
looking  me  in  the  face,  and  affecting  such  surprise  at 
conduct  which  seems  to  them  almost  incredible  in  others, 
but  which  they  every  day  imitate. 

Yes,  my  friends,  the  practical  indifference  of  these  Jews 
may  well  astonish  you,  but  yours  amazes  me  still  more. 
The  question  as  to  their  Shiloh  was  of  vast  importance  to 
these  enlightened  Hebrews;  but  think  of  the  inquiries 
which  are  every  day  pressing  upon  our  minds  and  solicit- 
ing our  attention.  Is  it  indeed  a  faithful  saying  and 
worthy  of  all  acceptation,  that  Christ  Jesus  has  come  in- 
to the  world  to  save  sinners?  Am  I  every  hour  exposed 
to  eternal  punishment,  and  is  salvation  possible  to  me? 
How  may  I  obtain  an  interest  in  this  great  salvation? 
What  must  1  do  to  be  saved?  How  am  1  to  prepare  to 
meet  my  God,  to  welcome  death,  to  stand  accepted  at  the 
judgment,  to  secure  an  immortality  of  blessedness  and 
glory?  What  questions  these;  yet,  day  after  day,  week 
after  week,  month  after  month,  year  after  year,  yon  treat 
them  with  utter  unconcern.  You  have  time  and  a  heart 
for  everything  else,  but  nothing — no  warnings,  no  en- 
treaties, no  mercies,  no  judgments,  no  tears  of  Jesus  who 


The  Star  of  Bethlehem.  47 

weeps  over  you,  of  your  pastor  who  has  often  wepl  and 
now  weeps  over  you — no  motives  from  earth  or  hell  or 
heaven — can  fix  your  attention  upon  these  solemn  and 
stupendous  truths.  These  priests  had  the  inspired  vol- 
ume, and  were  admonished  of  the  amazing  phenomenon. 
Well,  from  your  very  infancy  the  light  has  been  all 
around  you  and  within  you;  the  knowledge  they  could 
gather  was  ignorance  compared  with  that  which  from 
the  cradle  has  been  mercifully  lodged  in  your  mind. 
After  this  how  can  you  pretend  to  be  surprised  at  their 
conduct?  And  do  not  pass  this-  remark  hastily,  for  it 
deserves  your  most  careful  consideration. 

Had  I  time,  I  would  speak  of  that  want  of  zeal  for  the 
truth  which  causes  so  many  professed  Christians  to  re- 
semble these  priests,  who  utter  indeed  a  few  pious  words, 
but,  for  fear  of  offending  Herod,  practice  a  most  unwor- 
thy and  perfidious  silence, — thus  betraying  the  cause 
confided  to  them. 

It  is  not,  however,  to  the  reserves  and  compromises  of 
the  church  that  I  now  refer,  but  to  the  apathy  we  see 
everywhere  in  the  world.  We  constantly  hear  sneers 
cast  upon  the  disciples  of  Jesus  for  their  "Isms/'  but 
our  cavillers  ought  to  know  that  no  "Ism"  is  half  so 
bigoted  and  deplorable  as  their  Indifferent  ism.  It  is  one 
of  the  most  obstinate,  besotted,  fatal  forms  of  sectarian- 
ism and  fanaticism.  It  is  far  more  hopeless  than 
any  heresy,  nay,  than  infidelity  itself.  He  who  errs  may 
be  enlightened.  He  who  sincerely  rejects  Christianity, 
believing  it  to  be  false,  may  be  convinced  by  the  mass  of 
testimony  easily  furnished.  But  he  who  treats  a  revela- 
tion from  God  with  cool  habitual  indifference,  betrays  a 
temper  most  insidious  and  incurable.  Where  one  is  lost 
through  vice  or  open  resistance  to  the  truth,  thousands 
perish  through  this  guilty  negligence.  iS'or  is  it  any- 
thing but  absurdity  to  attempt  a  justification  of  this 
conduct,  by  pleading  the  unhappy  strifes  and  schisms 
which  afflict  the  Gospel.  Because  there  are  different  roads, 
will  a  man  lie  down  and  die,  rather  than  enquire  the 
right  path?  Because  a  field  yields  thorns  and  brambles, 
will  a  farmer  condemn  it  to  utter  sterility  ?  In  religion, 
as  in  all  things,  men  will  differ;  and  these  dissensions 


48  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

are  too  often  urged  with  violence  and  even  fierceness,  so 
that  controversy  has  become  a  contaminated  phrase.  This 
you  condemn,  and  the  Gospel  condemns;  but,  after  all, 
do  men  thus  contend  about  trifles  ?  These  angry  and 
sinful  disputes  admonish  you  to  cease  from  man — to  search 
the  Scriptures  for  yourself;  but  they  also  warn  you  of 
the  vast  importance  of  religion,  and  of  the  unspeakable 
folly  which  can  look  with  indifference  upon  the  only 
subject  really  worthy  of  an  immortal  being. 

The  last  class  comprises  those  who  love  the  truth, 
honor  the  truth,  rejoice  in  the  guidance  of  the  truth. 
For  them  the  Star  of  Bethlehem  is  a  peerless  orb ;  it  has 
no  fellow  in  the  firmament.  To  these  I  now  gladly 
turn ;  and  they,  in  all  the  characteristics  of  real  pity, 
find  their  exact  archetype  in  those  noble  missionaries  of 
the  East. 

Observe  the  sincerity  and  earnestness  of  these  Magi. 
Vainly  for  many  does  the  truth  shine  with  clearest 
lustre ;  their  eyes  are  closed,  or,  if  opened,  it  is  only 
that  they  may  be  shut  again,  and  exclude  the  unwelcome 
light;  they  are  not  in  earnest  and  sincere;  vain  reason- 
ings, an  unwillingness  to  be  convinced,  a  dread  of  the 
self-denials  which  obedience  will  demand,  cause  them  to 
love  darkness  rather  than  light.  If  we  seek  a  knowledge 
of  our  duty,  we  shall  surely  find  it;  but  there  is  another 
thing  which  most  men  seek  and  as  certainly  find ;  it  is 
an  excuse  for  the  error  which  they  love.  Sechele,  an 
African  chief,  having  been  converted,  at  once  renounced 
polygamy.  When  Dr.  Livingstone  visited  another  chief, 
he  was  hospitably  received;  presents  of  ivory  and  cattle 
were  offered  him.  As  soon,  however,  as  he  declared  that 
his  object  was  to  make  Christians,  the  chief  refused  to 
hear  him.  "  No,"  he  said,  "  I  do  not  want  to  learn 
from  that  book;  I  fear  it  will  change  my  heart,  and 
make  me  have  only  one  wife,  as  Sechele  has."  Would 
that  this  spirit,  which  repels  the  truth  because  it  will 
require  sacrifices,  were  confined  to  the  barbarians  of 
Africa;  but  it  is  in  our  midst,  and  is  the  secret  of  wilful 
ignorance  in  thousands. 

Very  different  was  the  temper  of  these  Magians.  They 
might  have  perplexed  themselves  with  curious  specula- 


The  Shir  of  Bethlehem.  40 

tions  as  to  the  star;  they  might  have  lulled  themselves 
by  pleading  the  length  and  cost  of  such  a  journey;  they 
might  have  waited  for  other  lights — for  more  clear  and 
man i lest  tokens.  But  when  were  such  pretexts  ever 
heard  from  men  really  sincere  and  truly  in  earnest?  No, 
they  hail  with  joy  the  light  vouchsafed  to  them — 
though  it  is  not  a  sun,  but  only  a  star.  They  arise 
quickly,  they  are  at  once  obedient  to  the  heavenly  call; 
and  from  the  regions  of  the  morning,  they  urge  their 
camels  over  mountains  and  through  deserts;  until  all 
travel-worn,  yet  with  unaoated  eagerness,  they  present 
themselves  before  that  lowly  but  imperial  presence. 

See,  in  the  next  place,  the  noble  independence  of  these 
distinguished  sages.  Without  this  habitual  assertion  of 
our  spiritual  freedom,  we  cannot  be  Christians;  for  Ave 
shall  neither  discover  nor  obey  the  truth.  We  will  con- 
sult the  impressions  which  the  truth  makes,  not  upon 
ourselves,  but  on  others;  our  docility  will  be  shown  in 
our  submission,  not  to  God,  but  to  man;  our  creed  will 
be,  not  what  is,  but  what  is  commonly  accepted  as,  the 
truth.  Recollect,  my  friends,  that  the  right  of  every 
man  to  think  and  act  tor  himself  is  not  only  a  privilege,  but 
a  duty  which  can  never  be  renounced.  Jf  we  are  to  follow 
Jesus,  we  must  liberate  our  minds  and  consciences  and 
wills,  so  that  truth  shall  be  revered  and  obeyed  in  all 
things.  Relying  upon  God  alone  for  strength  and  appro- 
bation, we  must  recognize  the  grandeur  of  the  soul,  and 
protect  the  interests  of  that  soul  ;  calling  no  man  mas- 
ter, resisting  the  usurpation  of  sects,  or  priests,  or 
authority,  or  custom;  asserting  the  control  over  our  own 
thoughts  and  acts  as  the  noblest  treasure  we  possess — far 
nobler  than  the  empire  over  the  material  creation. 

In  these  Magi  this  heroical  spirit  is  admirably  illus- 
trated. "  When  it  pleased  God,"  says  the  Apostle,  "to 
reveal  his  Son  in  me,  straightway  I  conferred  not  with 
flesh  and  blood.''  And  such  is  the  spirit  of  these  ven- 
erable men,  who  look  not  to  earth,  but  to  heaven  for  the 
light  which  is  to  guide  their  feet.  At  home,  they  do  not 
wait  to  consult  witli  the  wise  and  learned  of  their  own 
land;  but,  alone,  they  leave  all  and  follow  the  celestial 
herald  which  marshals  them  away.     Arriving  at    Jeru- 


50  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

salem,  what  do  they  find?  They  expected,  beyond  a 
doubt,  to  meet  the  whole  city  and  land  alive  to  this 
great  event,  filled  with  joy,  other  objects  forgotten,  and 
the  stupendous  phenomenon  absorbing  all  hearts.  In- 
stead of  this,  the  people  and  the  priests  are  sunk  in 
ignorance  and  sensuality,  are  clinging  to  their  prejudi- 
ces, and  regardless  of  him  who  had  come  to  set  them 
free.  But  none  of  these  things  move  them,  nothing  can 
shake  their  purpose.  They  are  firm,  they  will  neither 
use  any  disguises;  nor  will  they  soften  the  truth  to 
please  people,  or  priest,  or  king.  "  Where  is  he,"  they 
boldly  inquire,  "  who  is  born  king  of  the  Jews-?  for  we 
have  seen  his  star  in  the  east,  and  have  come  to  worship 
him;"  and,  spurning  the  solicitations  of  Herod  who 
wished  to  seduce  them,  they  repair  to  the  royal  birth- 
place, adoring  the  princely  offspring  of  heaven,  pledging 
to  him  their  delighted  allegiance. 

And  this  suggests  the  only  other  trait  T  shall  notice  in 
these  Magi;  I  mean  their  great  faith — a  faith  which  ap- 
pears to  me  the  more  admirable,  the  more  I  contemplate  it. 

There  are  those  who  maintain  that  the  faith  of  the 
ignorant,  who  only  believe  what  their  priests  and  pas- 
tors have  taught  them,  is  the  best  faith ;  but  what  a  doc- 
trine this,  especially  what  a  doctrine  in  the  creed  of  a 
Christian.  For  it  is  to  maintain,  that  the  Jews  ought 
never  to  have  changed  their  hereditary  opinions  and 
received  the  Gospel.     It  is  really  to  affirm,  that  Protest- 

tism  ought  never  to  have  condemned   the  errors  of 


an 


i& 


Rome  ;  that  the  heathen  ought  not  to  abandon  their 
idols,  and  turn  to  Christ.  The  faith  required  in  the 
Christian  is  an  enlightened  faith  ;  and  if  it  be  true,  as 
has  been  said,  that  the  faith  of  the  Gospel  encounters 
peculiar  obstacles  in  the  learned  and  honored,  the  diffi- 
culty is  not  in  their  great  minds,  but  in  their  proud 
hearts.  Peter,  indeed,  speaks  of  things  in  the  Scripture 
which  are  "  hard  to  be  understood  ;"  but  it  is  not  these 
obscure  doctrines  which  offend  such  men,  it  is  things 
easy  to  be  understood,  and  only  "hard"  to  be  obeyed  ; 
it  is  the  truths  which  assail  their  pride,  their  passions, 
and  lusts.  Let  the  Gospel  be  once  truly  enthroned  in 
the  heart,  and  the  more  noble  the  intellect,  the  more 


The  Star  of  Bethlehem.  51 


simple  will  I*;1  the  faith  ;  for  reason  will  teach,  that  faith 
m  God's  word  is  the  highest  reason.  It  was  thus  with 
Daniel,  thus  with  Paul  ;  and  it  is  thus  with  these  Magi, 
for  how  practical,  how  wise,  how  immovable,  how  sub- 
lime is  their  faith. 

A  practical  faith.  Do  they  foolishly  argue,  as  some 
do  who  arrogate  to  themselves  all  the  orthodoxy  upon 
earth,  and  say.  If  God  means  ns  to  go,  we  need  not  bestir 
ourselves,  he  will  in  his  own  time  compel  us  ?  No,  they 
arise  and  follow  the  light  which  beckons  them  to  obe- 
dience. 

A  wise  faith.  For,  when,  arriving  at  Jerusalem,  the 
star  disappears,  they  do  not  murmur  and  abandon  the 
pursuit,  but  they  employ  the  means  which  are  now  left. 
They  enquire  diligently  of  those  who  ought  to  Know, 
and  seek  to  find  the  object  of  their  journey;  and  it  is 
while  they  are  thus  earnestly  employing- these  means 
that  the  star  again  gladdens  their  souls  with  his  beams. 
True  faith  will  long  for  clearer  light;  but  it  will  use  the 
light  which  it  has;  just  as  the  traveller  wishes  for  the 
morning,  but  is  thankful  for  the  moon  or  the  stars  or  for 
a  lamp  by  which  he  may  be  guided. 

The  faith  of  these  Magians  was  a  steadfast  faith. 
Accustomed  to  oriental  ideas  of  regal  pomp  and  mag- 
nificence, how  great  is  their  surprise  when  they  find  the 
King  of  Glory  in  a  manger.  What,  they  might  well 
have  said,  Is  this  a  palace?  Are  these  the  royal  cham- 
berlains? Is  this  the  equipage  of  majesty  ?  We  have 
been  mocked,  seduced  into  an  arduous  journey  only  to  find 
ourselves  the  dupes  of  some  magical  imposture.  But 
they  "stagger  not  through  unbelief/*  and — though  his 
couch  was  thus  obscure  and  humble — shepherds  his  only 
retinue, — they  see  and  worship  the  incarnate  God.  It  is 
the  very  office  of  faith,  to  penetrate  clouds  and  triumph 
where  the  senses  would  despair;  otherwise  we  Christians 
would  be  of  all  men  most  miserable,  for  when  we  ask, 
k-  Where  is  lie  who  was  born  king  of  the  Jews,  who  is 
the  king  of  our  souls,  in  whom  are  centred  all  our  affec- 
tions and  hopes  ?  what  an  answer  do  we  receive,  what  a 
spectacle  is   presented    to   our   eyes.     "We   behold    him 


52  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

nailed  to  a  cross;  expiring  as  a  malefactor  between  two 
thieves  ;  and  over  his  head,  pierced  and  bleeding,  is  writ- 
ten, "  THIS  IS  JESUS  TEE  KING  OF  THE  JEWS." 

I  will  only  add,  that  .  every  other  element  of  moral 
grandeur  which  belongs  to  the  sublimest  faith,  is  illus- 
trated in  the  conduct  of  these  reverend  apostles.  In- 
trepid courage,  profound  humility,  disinterested  munifi- 
cence, the  warmest  love,  the  most  inextinguishable 
loyalty.  In  all  these  virtues  and  graces  the  Christian 
will  ever  find  in  these  noble  sages  an  example  to  stimu- 
late and  regulate  his  faith. 

Having  thus  set  before  you  three  classes,  let  me  finish 
with  a  single  question;  let  me,  with  individual  refer- 
ence, ask  those  who  hear  me,  To  which  of  these  classes 
do  you  belong  ? 

My  friend,  will  you  range  yourself  among  those  who 
find  their  representatives  in  Herod  ?  No,  you  vehe- 
mently exclaim,  God  forbid  that  I  should  be  found 
among  those  who  hate  and  persecute  the  truth.  But, 
though  less  impious,  is  your  conduct  less  infatuated 
and  fatal,  if  you  persevere  in  imitating  the  Priests  ?  if, 
enlightened  as  to  the  truth,  seeing  plainly  your  duty, 
you  basely  betray  that  truth,  you  timidly  compromise 
that  duty,  and  persist  in  treating  the  Gospel  with  a  ne- 
glect which  is  even  more  unnatural  than  the  open  enmity 
of  the  infidel  ? 

My  dear  friends,  let  us  at  length  learn  to  be  truly 
wise.  Let  us  study  the  lessons  which  the  Holy  Spirit 
teaches  us  in  the  example  of  these  eastern  Parsees.  Re- 
member, he  only  is  a  Christian  who,  like  them,  seeks,  in 
simplicity,  candor,  faith,  to  know  the  truth  ;  and  who  at 
any  cost  obeys  the  truth.  Like  this  lowly  child,  truth 
is  indeed  neglected  by  the  world,  but  what  honor  does 
God  confer  upon  it,  how  ought  we  to  prize  and  honor  it. 
Truth,  I  repeat  it,  truth  is  the  only  treasure  of  the 
mind,  the  only  purifier  of  the  heart,  the  only  joy  of  the 
conscience,  our  true  glory  in  life,  our  exceeding  and 
ineffable  consolation  in  death. 


The  Star  of  Bethlehem.  53 


Having  once  caught  a  sight  of  that  kingly  star  of  Ja- 
cob, these  venerable  sages  can  afterwards  see  no- other  in 
all  God's  heavens.  All  their  lifetime  it  had  been  their 
delight  to  contemplate  the  shining  hosts  which  nightly 
stud  the  burning  dome;  but  now,  stars,  clusters,  con- 
stellations, all  the  golden  fires  which  fret  the  brave  o'er- 
hanging  roof,  shed  no  light  for  them.  One  single  orb 
has  fixed  their  hearts,  and  fixed  them  forever.  Vainly 
does  the  gentlest  of  the  planets  woo  them  at  early  dawn 
and  evening  with  her  silver  radiance.  Vainly  does  the 
ringed  Saturn  sparkle  with  refulgent  glories,  and  the 
mooned  Jupiter  "flame  in  the  forehead  of  the  morning 
sky."  and  Arctnrus  gird  himself  with  his  blazing  zones, 
and  the  belted  Orion  brandish  his  glittering  sword,  and 
the  Pleiades  seek  to  bind  them  with  their  sweet  influen- 
ces. One  star  now  absorbs  them;  it  fills  their  eyes  ;  it 
inflames  their  souls.  The  Star  of  Bethlehem  reigns  in 
the  ascendant ;  to  know  no  decline  nor  obscuration; 
but  to  hang  forever  and  forever  above  their  horizon — 
their  guide  through  life;  and  the  Hespems  of  the  grave, 
illuminating  all  the  dusky  valley  of  the  shadow  of 
death. 


Let  us  cherish  this  sublime  faith,  this  supreme  ador- 
ing loyalty  to  Jesus  and  his  truth.  "If  ye  continue  in 
my  words,  then  are  ye  my  disciples  indeed,  and  ye  shall 
know  the  truth,  and  the  truth  shall  make  you  free. 
God  grant  that  this  sublime  freedom  may  be  secured  by 
each  of  us.  "  When  they  saw  the  star," — it  is  said  of 
these  oriental  travellers — they  "  rejoiced  with  exceeding 
great  joy."  If  Pagans  could  thus  rejoice  in  the  truth, 
what  ought  to  be  the  emotions  of  Christians?  If  a  few 
mvsterious  beams  could  delight  the  hearts  of  those  who 
had  been  nurtured  in  superstition,  what  should  we  feel, 
who  have  lived  from  childhood  under  the  splendors  of 
the  Gospel  ?  If  the  followers  of  Zoroaster  were  thus 
transported  by  the  rays  of  a  star,  what  rapture,  what 
adoring  ecstacy  should  forever  glow  in  the  bosom  of  a 
disciple  of  Jesns  beholding  the  noonday  effulgence  of 
the  Sun  himself?  May  each  of  us  know  the  truth. 
May  we  obey  the  truth.    May  we  understand  from  blessed 


13 


54 


Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 


experience  the  tranquility,  the  freedom,  the  happiness 
which  the  truth  can  bestow.  God  grant  us  this  un- 
speakable blessing.  To  him  be  glory  and  dominion  for- 
ever.    Amen-. 


Bible  Testimony  the  Best  Testimony.  55 


Sermon  ©turn. 


BIBLE   TESTIMONY  THE   BEST 
TESTIMONY. 

[first  sermon  on  the  text.] 

"If  they  hear  not  Moses  and  the  prophets,  neither  will  they  be  per- 
suaded though  one  rise  from  the  dead."— Luke  XAri :  31. 

TN  the  parable  of  the  rich  man  and  Lazarus,  there  are 
■*-  several  most  solemn  and  instructive  lessons  given  by 
Him  to  whom  the  secrets  of  eternity  were  all  open.  He 
here  speaks  to  us  of  the  surprising  contrasts  which  will 
take  place  in  men's  conditions,  when  death  shall  strike 
a  balance  and  their  destinies  be  fixed  forever.  And  he 
here  lifts  the  veil  and  shews  us  one  man  whose  soul  passed, 
immediately  after  death,  into  a  state  of  unspeakable  and 
everlasting  torment.  If  this  is  not  in  the  parable,  then 
nothing  is  there,  and  Jesus  is  a  false  teacher.  And  when 
we  examine  the  character  of  the  man  thus  lost,  what  was 
he?  an  infidel?  a  debauchee?  a  blasphemer?  let  us  not 
thus  turn  oft*  the  edge  of  the  Saviour's  warning.  The 
rich  man  is  not  charged  with  these  vices ;  nor  was  he  a 
glutton,  a  cruel  monster  of  inhumanity,  as  we  are  wont 
to  represent  him.  It  was  not  necessary  that  Jesus  should 
uncover  the  abyss  of  hell  to  shew  us  the  doom  of  such 
criminals.  His  allowing  a  diseased  and  loathsome  beg- 
gar to  take  his  stand  at  the  porch  of  his  palace  and  thus 
to  receive  alms  from  his  wealthy  and  noble  visitors,  Avas 
really  an  evidence  of  his  charitable  disposition.*     The 

*  Speaking  of  the  Palazzo  Lanfranchi,  in  Pisa,  Simond  says, 
"Alighting  at  the  door  of  this  very  fine  abode,  we  found  it  beset, 
and  the  outside  flight  of  steps  literally  crowded  with  frightful 
looking  objects,  men,  women,  children,  basking  in  the  sun  togeth- 
er, eaten  up  with  sores  and  vermin,  and  clamorous  for  alms. 
Such  a  sight,  denoting  a  charitable  house,  is  here  deemed  cred- 
itable." 


56  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

sin  by  which  this  man  involved  himself  in  such  misery 
was  a  life  of  selfish  ease,  indolence,  sensual  enjoyment — 
the  very  life  which  all  envy,  which  many  of  the  poor  as 
well  as  the  rich  now  lead,  and  which  Jesus  here  declares 
to  be  incompatible  with  salvation,  directly  opposed  to  the 
life  of  faith,  self-denial,  holiness,  which  he  requires  in 
his  disciples. 

But  these  and  other  truths  taught  in  the  parable  I 
must  sacrifice,  that  I  may  come  to  the  very  important 
declaration  in  the  text.  His  eyes  now  opened  to  the  real 
estimate  of  things,  this  unhappy  man  sees  that  salvation 
alone  deserves  our  cares,  prayers  and  sacrifices  ;  he  there- 
fore beseeches  that  Lazarus  may  be  sent  to  admonish  his 
five  brethren,  lest  they  too  come  to  this  place  of  torment. 
Abraham  answers,  that  God  has  given  a  revelation  to 
them  which  was  abundantly  sufficient.  And  when  Dives 
insists  that  a  messenger  from  the  grave  would  be  effect- 
ual, the  patriarch  replies  in  these  remarkable  words — "If 
they  believe  not  Moses  and  the  prophets,  neither  will 
they  be  persuaded  though  one  rise  from  the  dead." 

It  is  to  this  assertion  I  am  going  to  ask  your  attention. 
Before  proceeding  with  the  matter  allow  me,  however,  to 
remind  you  that  the  truth  of  this  affirmation  does  not 
depend  at  all  upon  the  successor  failure  of  my  argument. 
It  is  the  declaration  of  that  God  who  made  us,  and  who 
knows  perfectly  what  means  are  best  adapted  to  con- 
vince and  persuade  us.  I  grieve  when  I  hear  ministers 
speak  of  proving  what  God  has  proclaimed  ;  it  insinuates 
that  the  communication  may  be  false.  But  a  preacher 
may  humbly  seek  to  elucidate  a  passage  in  God's  word. 
"By  manifestation  of  the  truth  he  may  commend  him- 
self to  every  man's  conscience  in  the  sight  of  God." — 
This  is  what  I  would  now  attempt;  and  for  this  purpose 
I  submit  to  you  two  propositions.  First,  I  say,  that  a 
man  living  in  Jerusalem,  in  the  days  of  the  apostles,  had 
evidence  of  the  truth  of  the  revelation  given  us  by  God, 
superior  to  any  which  could  have  been  furnished  by  an 
apparition  from  the  grave.  Secondly,  we,  living  at  this 
day,  have  evidence  as  to  revealed  truth  superior  to  any 
which  could  have  been  possessed  by  a  man  living  at  Je- 
rusalem in  the  days  of  the  apostles.     These  two  propo- 


Bible  Testimony  the  Best  Testimony.  57 


sit  ions  cover  the  entire  ground;  and,  these  being  estab- 
lished, it  will  follow,  of  course,  that  the  same  causes 
which  now  defeat  the  ordinary  means  of  grace  would  ren- 
der ineffectual,  for  any  permanent  saving  influence,  a 
message  delivered  by  one  sent  from  the  dead.  Honor  me 
with  even  more  than  your  usual  attention,  as  I  must  com- 
press into  two  brief  discourses  matter  which  might  easily 
be  expanded  into  a  volume. 

First,  then,  I  affirm  that  a  man  living  at  Jerusalem  in 
the  days  of  the  apostles  had  evidence  of  the  truth  of  the 
revelation  given  us  by  God,  superior  to  any  which  could 
have  been  furnished  by  an  apparition  from  the  grave. — 
This  is  my  first  proposition  ;  and  to  put  the  argument  in 
a  form  so  simple  that  a  child  may  comprehend  it,  let  us 
suppose  that  the  prayer  of  this  rich  man  had  been  grant- 
ed, and  that. Lazarus  had  been  sent  to  his  five  brethren 
living  in  their  palaces  at  Jerusalem. 

Now  to  this  miserable  outcast  from  heaven  and  from 
hope,  it  seemed  impossible  that  such  a  warning  could  be 
unheeded.  Nor  am  I  at  all  surprised  at  this.  To  a  man 
in  hell,  to  a  man  in  the  midst  of  all  those  tremendous  re- 
alities,— afar  off  that  heaven  which  he  had  wantonly  for- 
feited— all  around  and  within  the  anguish  of  the  damned, 
— to  a  man  suddenly  torn  from  all  the  pleasures,  the  vo- 
luptuous charms  and  luxuries  of  such  a  life,  and  precip- 
itated into  "the  lake  that  burnetii  with  lire  and  brim- 
stone"— I  understand  that  it  would  appear  impossible  for 
such  an  admonition  to  be  in  vain.  Which  of  you  would 
disregard  this  sermon,  if  you  had  been  plunged  into  these 
llaming  gulfs  for  an  hour,  and  then  brought  back  to 
earth?  If  a  preacher  were  sent  to  those  dungeons  of  des- 
pair, and  were  only  for  once  to  proclaim  free  pardon, 
for  once  to  cry  "Escape  for  your  lives,"  how  many  of  that 
gloomy  population  would  treat  lightly  his  exhortation  or 
begin  to  make  excuses? 

With  the  five  aristocratic  citizens  of  the  metropolis, 
sunk  in  earthliness,  filled  with  pride,  revelling  in  all  the 
gratifications  and  appliances  of  wealth  and  fashion,  the 
matter  would,  however,  have  been  very  different.  A 
message  like  that  which  Lazarus  would  bear,  a  message 
so  unwelcome,  a  message  recpiiring  them   to   renounce 


58  Richard  Fullers  /Sermons. 

all  their  darling  pleasures,  their  old  habits  of  effeminacy 
and  self-indulgence,  to  surmount  all  the  seductions  of  the 
world,  to  crucify  the  flesh  with  its  affections  and  lusts,  its 
inveterate  passions,  and  to  lead  lives  of  self-denial,  mor- 
tification, holiness — he  must  be  indeed  a  novice  in  human 
observation  and  experience  who  believes  that  these  five 
brethren  would  have  been  persuaded  by  it. 

Nor  let  any  stop  me  by  questioning  what  I  am  assert- 
ing. On  this  point  I  have  practical  demonstration.  I 
have  facts  with  which  there  can  be  no  sort  of  equivoca- 
tion. Witness  the  Jews.  How  often  did  God  send  mes- 
sages to  them  from  eternity — speaking  to  them  by  his 
prophets,  multiplying  visions,  instructions,  admonitions, 
entreaties.  Nor  did  they  doubt  that  the  communications 
were  from  Jehovah,  yet  they  despised  these  reproofs  and 
set  at  naught  these  counsels.  Yea,  God  himself  spake  to 
them,  at  Sinai,  with  thunder  and  lightning  and  with  the 
terrible  clangor  of  a  trumpet  smiting  the  silence  of  the 
desert.  God  himself  went  with  them  in  the  pillar  of  tire 
and  cloud.  "Ask  now  of  the  days  that  are  past  which 
were  before  thee,  since  the  day  that  God  created  man  up- 
on the  earth;  and  ask  from  the  one  side  of  heaven  to  the 
other,  whether  there  has  been  any  such  thing  as  this 
great  thing  is,  or  hath  been  heard  like  it?  Did  ever  peo- 
ple hear  the  voice  of  God  speaking  out  of  the  midst  of 
the  fire  as  thou  hast  heard?"  But  scarcely  had  the  sight 
of  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  like  devouring  fire  on  the  top  of 
the  mount,  ceased;  even  while  Moses  was  in  the  mount, 
and  b?fore  forty  days  had  elapsed,  "they  made  a  calf  in 
Horeb,  worshipped  the  molten  image,  and  changed  their 
glorious  God  into  the  similitude  of  an  ox  that  eateth 
grass."  During  that  wonderful  journey  in  which  they 
were  fed  every  day  miraculously,  and  with  that  august 
banner  hanging  over  them,  they  rebelled  against  God  and 
wearied  him  with  their  sins  and  passions.  I  need  not, 
however,  go  to  other  ages  or  to  another  people.  The  de- 
monstration needed  I  find  at  this  day  and  nearer  home. 
I  have  it  here  in  this  city,  here  in  this  house,  a  nong  you, 
who  are  listening  to  this  sermon.  For  are  there  any  of 
you  who  doubt  the  truth  of  the  Bible?  Not  one.  i"et 
how  many  of  you  show  in  your  lives  that  the  snares  of  the 


Bible  Testimony  the  Best  Testimony.  59 


senses,  the  fascinations  of  the  world,  the  temptations  of 
the  passions,  the  cures  of  business,  the  deceitfulness  of 
riches,  the  lust  of  many  things  are  stronger  than  "the 
powers  of  the  world  to  come;"  too  strong  for  the  admon- 
itions, invitations,  convictions  which  crowd  upon  yon 
from  eternity. 

The  fact  is  that  we  take  up  the  whole  thing  amiss, 
when  Ave  reason  about  revelation  as  we  do  about  mathemat- 
ical problems.  The  reception  of  religious  truth  depends 
far  more  upon  the  heart  than  upon  the  head ;  and  when 
truth  condemns  us,  or  requires  painful  sacrifices,  the  heart 
is  deceitful  above  all  things,  it  is  inexhaustible  in  in- 
venting doubts,  objections,  suggestions  and  artifices  by 
which  the  force  of  evidence  maybe  evaded.  We  see  this 
constantly,  not  only  in  our  pretended  sceptics,  but  in 
multitudes  who  believe  the  Scriptures,  yet  "obey  not  the 
truth,"  and  whose  conduct  is  so  unaccountable  upon  any 
rational  supposition,  that  the  apostle  declares  they  are 
"bewitched."  And  if  Lazarus  had  been  sent  to  the  rich 
man's  brethren,  these  same  pretexts  would  have  lulled 
their  consciences. 

Affecting  to  be  a  philosopher,  the  first  brother  would 
say,  How  can  it  be  proved  that  the  man  died  and  rose 
from  the  dead  ?  This  would  be  a  miracle,  but  a  miracle 
contradicts  nature  and  therefore  no  evidence  can  estab- 
lish it.  Such  is  Mr.  Hume's  sophistry  against  miracles; 
and  the  "  father  of  lies  "  would  not  have  failed  to  sug- 
gest it  to  tiiis  lover  of  pleasure  in  Jerusalem.  This  ap- 
parition at  the  time  seemed  real  enough,  the  second 
brother,  a  pretender  to  science,  would  say;,  but  it  is 
easily  explained  on  physiological  principles.  It  was 
simply  one  of  those  very  strange  optical  delusions — the 
effect  of  a  disturbed  nervous  system — of  which  we  read 
such  singular  accounts.  The  third  brother,  a  practical 
man,  piqueing  himself  on  his  knowledge  of  human  na- 
ture— would  treat  the  appearance  with  ridicule,  and, 
with  his  gay  companions  would  pronounce  it  only 
another  of  these  tricks  of  jugglery  by  which  artful 
rogues  impose  upon  the  credulity  of  women  and  chil- 
dren.   The  fourth  brother,  feigning  great  humility,  would 


60  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 


ask,  whether  anybody  could  believe  thai  God  would 
thus  trouble  himself  about  things  so  insignificant  and 
unworthy  ?  While  the  fifth,  unable  to  overcome  some 
superstitious  misgivings,  would  ascribe  the  phenomenon 
to  demoniacal  agency.  I  cannot  deny  that  a  ghost  did 
visit  me  ;  but  did  not  the  witch  of  Enclor  raise  Samuel 
from  the  dead  ?  The  sacred  books  warn  us  of  the 
charms  used  by  evil  spirits;  and  as  to  his  seemingly 
kind  admonitions,  and  all  he  gibbered  about  our  brother, 
why  Satan,  we  know,  can  transform  himself  into  an 
angel  of  light  for  the  malignant  purpose  of  troubling  us 
in  the  innocent  use  of  that  wealth  which  God  has  given 
us  richly  to  enjoy. 

I  am  supposing  that  they  would  condescend  to  pay 
any  attention  to  a  messenger  from  the  grave.  The  prob- 
ability is  that  they  would  refuse  to  listen  at  all,  and  dis- 
miss with  contempt  an  impostor  telling  such  a  prepos- 
terous tale.  But  supposing  the  vision  to  be  such  as  to 
startle  them  at  the  moment;  the  subterfuges  which  I 
have  put  into  the  mouths  of  these  brethren  are  only  a 
few  out  of  a  hundred  I  might  suggest,  all  of  which  are 
much  more  rational  than  the  pleas  for  doubts  and  dis- 
obedience which  we  every  day  hear  from  people  around 
us.  No  sooner  had  he  been  converted  than — his  mind 
irradiated  with  divine  light — his  heart  glowing  with 
love  for  souls — Melancthon  hastened  forth,  confident 
that  he  could  bring  everybody  to  welcome  the  truth 
which  had  broken  in  upon  him  in  such  power  and  glory. 
But  he  soon  returned  to  Luther  and  said,  u  I  find  the 
world  too  strong  for  young  Philip."  His  experience 
had  been  that  of  prophets  and  apostles  and  of  the  Sa- 
viour himself;  they  still  had  mournfully  to  exclaim, 
"  Who  hath  believed  our  report  ?"  Kor  would  Lazarus 
have  fared  better  in  his  ministry.  These  five  brethren 
were  like  the  rest  of  mankind  ;  they  had  the  same  en- 
grossments, the  same  aversion  from  religious  concerns, 
the  same  love  of  wealth,  honor,  power,  sensual  pleasures. 
They  would  either  have  made  light  of  the  warning  ;  or 
they  would  have  gone  to  their  farms  or  to  their  mer- 
chandise. Purple  and  fine  linen  and  sumptuous  living 
every  day,  would    have    been   stronger  logic   than    any 


Bible  Testimony  the  Best  Testimony,  ff] 


which  a  visitant  from  another  world  could  have  urged  ; 
and  soon  their  old  habits,  their  customary  gratifications, 
a  round  of  fashionable  company  and  amusements — halls, 

clubs,  theatres,  gaming,  the  care  of  their  large  estates 
now  augmented  by  their  brother's  death,  and  the  di- 
vision of  which  demanded  their  immediate  attention  — 
would  have  displaced  all  serious  feeling;  and  the  world 
and  the  things  of  the  world — the  lusts  of  the  flesh,  the 
lust  of  the  eye  and  the  pride  of  life — would  have  reas- 
serted and  resumed  the  supremacy  over  them. 

All  this  seems  to  me  to  be  incontestable;  and  all  this 
appeals  to  your  common  sense;  for  the  arguments  sub- 
mitted to  you  have  been  drawn,  not  from  books  of  theolo- 
gy, but  from  universal  observation  and  experience.  I 
am  well  aware,  however,  that  some  of  you  may  still  dis- 
sent. "  Nay,"  said  the  rich  man,  ;; but  if  one  went  unto 
them  from  the  dead,  they  will  repent,"  and  what  he  ut- 
tered you  are  secretly  thinking.  When  charged  with  his 
sin,  Adam  replied,  "The  woman  that  thou  gavest  me,  she 
tempted  me."  The  language  of  Dives  repeats  this  impu- 
tation by  insinuating  that  God  had  given  an  insufficient 
revelation— an  impiety  not  confined  to  hell  from  whence 
it  came,  but  still  heard  amongst  us;  and  to  expose  which 
I  have  only  to  refer  to  the  volume  thus  assailed,  in  whose 
pages  we  find  the  very  attestation  required,  and  as  to 
which  our  cavillers,  like  those  in  the  Saviour's  day,  tell 
us  that  if  this  were  given  they  would  believe. 

I  am  supposing,  you  remember,  that  a  man  had  lived 
at  Jerusalem  in  the  days  of  the  apostles.  Xow  at  that 
time  there  was  really  living  in  Bethany,  a  village  only 
two  miles  from  the  city,  a  man  named  Lazarus  who  had 
been  raised  from  the  dead.  Many  of  the  Jews  witnessed 
this  miracle,  and  he  who  had  come  back  from  the  grave 
was,  no  doubt,  often  in  the  city.  Nobody  then  questioned 
this  resurrection.  Celsus,  the  most  acute  and  learned  of 
the  ancient  pretenders  to  infidelity,  and  who  lived  but  a 
few  years  after  the  apostles,  distinctly  admits  it  as  a  fact, 
but  he  ascribes  it  to  ma2,ic.     Magic!  but  if  magic  could 

DO  O 

explain  the  raising  of  this  man,  it  might  then  explain 
every  other  phenomenon  of  the  same  kind. 

This,  however,  is  little  when  compared  with  another 

3 


62  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

fact  which  I  now  bring  forward.  The  raising  of  Lazarus 
was  the  return  only  of  a  common  man  from  a  common 
grave.  One  living  in  Jerusalem  during  the  time  of  the 
apostles  had  before  him  a  death  and  resurrection  of  a 
very  different  sort;  I  mean,  of  course,  those  of  Jesus  him- 
self, to  which  it  is  not  improbable  he  referred  when 
— addressing  the  captious  Pharisees  who  were  always  re- 
quiring a  sign — he  made  Abraham,  the  father  of  whom 
they  boasted,  declare  from  heaven,  "If  they  believe  not 
Moses  and  the  prophets,  neither  will  they  be  persuaded 
though  one  rose  from  the  dead." 

Now  as  to  this  grand,  central  fact  upon  which  the 
Christian  rests  with  a  faith,  an  assurance,  a  joy  unspeak- 
able and  full  of  glory,  I  speak  confidently — as  one  accus- 
tomed in  other  days  to  sift  evidence  most  carefully, 
and  as  one  who  feels  that  everything  depends  upon  per- 
fect certainty  here — when  J  affirm  that  no  event  in  history 
is  ascertained  by  testimony  more  absolutely  conclusive. 
With  the  mass  of  evidence  on  this  subject  you  are  fa- 
miliar and  I  need  not  now  go  into  the  details.  Let  me 
only  repeat  what  I  have  just  asserted,  that  no  ordi- 
nary death  and  resurrection  could  have  been  half  so  con- 
vincing. In  the  first  place,  rememher  that  a  long  series 
of  prophecies  not  to  be  misunderstood,  had  concentrated 
universal  attention  upon  Jesus  as  the  promised  Messiah. 
Then,  his  doctrines  and  miracles  proclaimed  openly  that 
God  was  with  him.  His  life  and  character  elevated  him 
immeasurably  above  the  sons  of  men,  and  repelled  the 
thought  that  he  could  deceive  others  or  be  himself  de- 
ceived. His  execution  was  public,  so  that  there  could  be 
not  a  question  about  his  death;  and  as  if  to  make  assur- 
ance doubly  sure,  he  was  pierced  by  a  lance,  and  blood 
and  water  gushing  from  the  wound  showed  that  the  peri- 
cardium had  been  perforated.  To  all  this  add,  that  he 
had  staked  the  truth  of  his  doctrines  upon  his  resurrec- 
tion;  and  that  the  Jews,  accepting  the  issue,  used  every 
precaution  to  prevent  any  deception,  sealing  the  tomb  and 
placing  a  guard  of  veteran  Roman  soldiers  as  a  watch 
over  it  day  and  night.  Collect  these  thoughts,  and  you 
will  confess  that  no  common  death  and  resurrection  could 
have  so  defied  all  controversy  and  cavil. 


Bible  Testimony  Ihe  Best  Testimony,  63 

Now,  suppose  the  contemporary  of  fhe  apostles  of  whom 
I  am  speaking  to  have  possessed  the  evidence  which 
the  apostles  had;  to  have  known  Jesus  before  his  cruci- 
fixion, and  to  have  seen  him  after  he  had  risen;  you  will 
admit  that  no  other  death  and  resurrection  could  have 
shed  such  perfect  certainty  ujxm  the  Gospel.  Or,  sup- 
pose that,  although  he  had  not  himself  beheld  the  risen 
Redeemer,  he,  like  thousands  around  him,  had  been  thor- 
oughly satisfied  by  the  testimony  of  the  witnesses,  you 
will  concede  that  it  was  all  one  as  if  he  had  had  ocular 
demonstration;  for  this  could  have  done  no  more  than  to 
convince  him.  All  this  is  self-evident.  But  how,  you 
say,  if  he  had  heard  the  testimony  and  still  doubted  ? — 
Why,  then,  he  would  have  been  an  incurable  sceptic  who 
would  doubt  anything  which  he  did  not  wish  to  believe. 
His  unbelief  must  have  sprung,  not  from  his  head,  but 
his  heart,  from  a  lodged  and  rooted  prejudice 
against  truth,  from  a  love  of  darkness  rather  than  light; 
and  vainly  for  him  would  a  messenger  have  been  sent 
from  the  world  of  spirits. 

Here,  again,  we  take  up  the  whole  thing  amiss  and  en- 
tirely mistake  the  philosophy  of  the  human  intellect, 
when  we  think  that  the  testimony  of  the  senses  to  an  ap- 
parition would  exert  any  permanent  influence.  For  a 
day  or  two,  I  grant,  that  such  a  phenomenon  would  ter- 
rify a  guilty  soul.  But  the  visit  would,  of  necessity,  be 
only  transient,  and  it  requires  little  knowledge  of  man — 
of  the  jealousy  with  which  he  revises  and  scrutinizes  his 
past  feelings  and  conclusions  when  he  wishes  to  get  rid 
of  them — not  to  anticipate  what  would  follow  after  a 
while;  how  this  ghost-seer  would  begin  to  suspect,  and 
then  gradually  succeed  in  banishing  the  whole  thing  as 
an  illusion,  a  dream,  a  phantom  conjured  up  by  distem- 
pered nerves,  and  by  the  strange,  inexplicable,  mysterious 
power  which  such  nerves  exert  upon  the  brain  and  im- 
agination ;  in  short  as  one  of  those  spectra  about  which 
volumes  have  been  written,  and  which  no  medical  science 
can  fully  explain. 

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  impossible  to  conceive  how 
any  sane  mind  could  have  resisted  the  accumulated 
proofs  of  the  Saviour's  resurrection.      Why  just  look  a 


64  Richard  Fuller  s  Sermons. 

moment  at  the  number  of  witnesses;  not  one  but  many; 
not  only  the  apostles  at  different  times,  but  five  hundred 
at  one  time;  not  only  the  disciples,  who  if  Christ  had 
not  risen,  were  the  dupes  of  an  impostor,  but  enemies 
among  whom  was  that  bitter  persecutor  Saul  of  Tar- 
sus. Consider  the  fact  to  which  they  testify,  one  as  to 
which  they  could  not  possibly  have  been  mistaken  ; — 
that  they  had  seen  him,  touched  him,  conversed  with 
him;  eaten  with  him;  and  this  not  for  a  brief  hour  but 
for  forty  days. 

Mark  the  time  and  place  of  this  testimony;  not  after  the 
lapse  of  years,  but  immediately;  not  in  some  district 
remote  from  the  scene;  but  in  Jerusalem,  in  the  very 
face  of  the  people  and  the  Sanhedrim.  Observe  their 
perfect  unanimity.  If  you  enter  a  court-house  and  listen 
to  half  a  dozen  men  who  have  been  subpoenaed  as  to 
some  tragedy  which  took  place  in  their  presence,  you 
will  find  scarcely  two  agreeing  in  all  the  details.  But 
as  to  Christ's  resurrection — though  the  witnesses  differ 
in  age,  temperament,  education,  prejudices — there  is  not 
the  slightest  shade  of  discrepancy.  Study  the  lives  of 
these  witnesses,  and  see  the  wonderful  revolution 
wrought  in  their  character  and  conduct  by  the  great 
truth  which  they  attest.  Behold  the  miracles  by  which 
God  vindicates  the  veracity  of  this  cloud  of  witnesses. 
Bring  forth,  they  said,  your  sick,  your  lame,  your  halt, 
your  blind;  and  in  the  name  of  risen  Jesus  they  healed 
them  all.  Place  yourselves  at  the  tribunals  before  which 
they  are  dragged,  and  examined,  and  cross-examined, 
and  threatened  with  the  severest  penalties;  and  note  the 
intrepid,  triumphant  confidence  with  which  they  repeat 
their  depositions.  And  add,  lastly,  the  poverty,  con- 
tempt, persecution,  torture,  cruel  martyrdom  with  which 
they  sealed  their  testimony — braving  all,  welcoming  all, 
in  all  exclaiming,  "  Blessed  be  the  God  and  Father  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  who  hath  begotten  us  again  to  a 
lively  hope  by  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ  from  the 
dead. " 

Now  I  ask,  could  a  man  living  in  Jerusalem  at  that 
time  resist  all  this?  Really  I  should  say  he  could  not. 
I  would  pronounce  it  impossible,  if  1  did  not  know  that 


Bible  Testimony  the  Best  Testimony.  65 

the  heart  will  resist  anything  which  it  is  unwilling  to 

believe.  Nothing  can  be  plainer,  however,  than  this, 
that  if  a  man  could  stand  it  out  against  such  proof, 
neither  would  he  be  persuaded  though  Lazarus  had  come 
to  him  from  the  dead. 

For  just  see  how  the  matter  stands.  In  order  to 
evade  or  resist  all  this  testimony,  consider  what  absurd- 
ities a  man  would  have  had  to  digest.  He  must  either 
have  supposed  that  all  these  witnesses  had  been  deceived, 
which  was  impossible;  or  he  must  have  believed  that  a 
fable  changed  entirely  the  character  of  these  witnesses; 
that .without  any  motive,  nay,  in  spite  of  every  motive 
by  which  men  are  influenced,  they  combined  to  testify  to 
a  fable,  to  suffer  all  mortal  evils  for  a  fable;  to  die  the 
most  painful  deaths  for  a  fable,  and  for  a  fable  most  easily 
exposed;  since  if  Jesus  had  not  risen,  the  Jews  possessed 
his  dead  body  and  could  at  any  time  have  produced  it 
— all  which  would  have  required  the  stupidity  of  an 
idiot,  for  all  which  a  man  must  have   stultified  himself. 

Whereas,  as  wre  have  seen,  it  would  not  have  been  at 
all  impossible,  nay  not  at  all  difficult,  gradually  to  doubt, 
then  to  reject,  then  to  banish  all  thought  of  a  vision,  the 
reality  of  which  rested  only  upon  the  remembered,  ever 
receding  evidence  of  organs  which  are  often  diseased  and 
strangely  distorted. 


66  Richard  Fuller  s  Sermons. 


Sermon  Jfourtti- 


BIBLE    TESTIMONY  THE   BEST 
TESTIMONY. 

[second  sermon  on  the  text  ] 

"If  they  hear  not  Moses  and  the  prophets,  neither  will  they  be  per- 
suaded though  one  rose  from  the  dead."— Luke  xvi  :  31. 

IN  the  former  discourse  I  think  I  have  established  our 
first  proposition,  and  have  demonstrated  that  a  man  liv- 
ing at  Jerusalem  in  the  times  of  the  apostles  had  stronger 
evidence  of  the  truths  recorded  in  the  Bible  than  could 
have  been  furnished  by  the  mission  of  Lazarus  from  the 
dead.  I  pass,  now  to  our  remaining  proposition,  which 
maintains  that  we,  at  this  day,  have  evidence  superior  to 
that  which  could  have  been  possessed  by  a  man  in  Jeru- 
salem during  the  ministry  of  the  Apostles. 

We  have  just  seen  that  the  evidence  of  the  truth  of 
Christ's  doctrine  must  have  convinced  such  a  man  if  he 
were  sane;  but  now,  this  evidence  is  just  as  conclusive 
for  us  as  it  was  for  him.     If,  indeed,  the  testimony  had 
been  only  by  word  of  mouth,  and  had  been  transmitted 
to  us  through  a  succession  of  oral  witnesses,  why,  then,  I 
could  not  have  denied  that  it  would  be  liable  to  suspicion, 
just  in  proportion  to  our  distance  from   the    time   and 
place  of  the  transactions  put  in  issue.     But  you  know 
that  this  is  not  the  case.     The  testimony  on  which  we 
rely  is  the  original  deposition  of  the  apostles  themselves; 
and  this  record  is,  of  course,  invested  with  the  same  au- 
thority new  as  when  it  was  first  written.     It  would  be 
simply  foolish  to  pretend  that  the  lapse  of  years  invali- 
dates the  genuineness  or  authenticity  or  force  of  a  docu- 
ment drawn  up  and  signed  on  the  spot  by  those  who 
were  eye-witnesses  of  an  important  event,  and  which  has 
come  down  to  us  in  the  very  words  of  its  authors.     Do 


Bible  Testimony  the  Best  Testimony.  67 

any  of  you  doubt  that  such  a  man  as  Washington  once 
lived  and  composed  the  letters  and  dispatches,  and  per- 
formed the  deeds  attributed  to  him?  Nbrdoesany  inter- 
val of  time  affect  our  faith  in  a  well-authenticated  his- 
torical fact. 

You  read  the  writings  of  Luther,  and.  the  Commentaries 
of  Julius  Caesar,  and  you  are  just  as  sure  about  the  exist- 
ence and  works  and  achievements  of  these  heroes  as  you 
are  about  those  of  Washington.  Well,  now,  all  this  ap- 
plies to  the  matter  conveyed  to  us  by  the  sacred  biogra- 
phers. I  lay  no  stress  here  upon  the  inspiration  of  the 
Gospels,  which,  of  course,  verities  them  for  all  ages;  our 
argument  regards  them  as  we  would  any  other  annals  the 
truth  of  which  we  do  not  question.  And  I  say  that  prox- 
imity to  the  period  of  the  Saviour's  resurrection  could 
add  just  nothing  at  all  to  a  man's  convictions  as  to  that 
grand  event.  Those  convictions  must  depend  entirely 
upon  the  amount  and  w7eight  of  evidence;  and  this  wre 
have  as  fully  and  irrefragably  as  if  we  had  lived  in  the 
second  or  third  century,  as  if  we  had  conversed  with  the 
apostles,  and  had  received  their  narrative  from  their  own 
lips.  Up  to  this  point,  then,  you  will  admit  that  we 
stand  upon  the  same  footing  with  a  man  who  lived  at  Je- 
rusalem in  the  days  of  the  first  disciples.  But  there  are 
other  aspects  of  the  case  in  which  Ave  possess  vast  advan- 
tages. In  the  fact  that,  instead  of  having  to  overcome 
the  prejudices  of  a  Jew,  we  have  the  force  of  public  opin- 
ion on  the  side  of  the  Gospel;  in  the  fact  that  age  after 
age  has  sat  in  assize  upon  the  Scripture  canon,  and  has 
delivered  verdict  after  verdict  confirming  its  certainty; 
in  the  fact  that  all  the  assaults  of  infidelity  have  only  vin- 
dicated the  invulnerable  strength  of  the  foundation  on 
which  the  Christian's  faith  reposes;  in  the  standing  mira- 
cles afforded  by  the  clear  fulfillment  of  prophecies;  fi- 
nally in  the  cumulative  and  constantly  accumulating  ev- 
idence furnished  by  the  wonderful  triumphs  of  the  king- 
dom of  Jesus — triumphs  confessedly  beyond  the  power 
of  a  few  illiterate  obscure  fishermen,  triumphs  which 
have  shaped  and  are  shaping  the  growing  stature  of  the 
world,  moulding  its  character  and  destiny — and  which 
Gamaliel,  the  most  distinguished  Jewish  contemporary  of 


68  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

the  apostles,  pronounced  impossible  unless  the  cause  was 
the  cause  of  God  himself;  in  all  these  respects  we  enjoy 
unspeakable  advantages  over  a  man  in  Jerusalem  at  the 
commencement  of  Christianity. 

I  have  now,  I  humbly  conceive,  established  beyond  all 
fair  controversy  both  the  propositions  submitted  to  you. 
And  these  having  been  established,  the  assertion  in  our 
text  at  once  commends  itself  to  your  conscience  and  chal- 
lenges your  candid  acquiescence.  As  I  remarked  in  the 
outset  of  this  discourse,  that  assertion  rests  upon  the  ve- 
racity of  God,  and  does  not  require  any  confirmation  from 
man  or  angel.  I  hope,  however,  indeed  I  see  in  your 
countenances,  that  I  have  induced  you  to 'reflect  upon  it, 
and  constrained  you  to  give  it  your  full  concurrence. — 
And  this  being  so,  it  follows  that,  if  the  means  of  salva- 
tion vouchsafed  us  by  infinite  wisdom  and  mercy  do  not 
bring  you  to  repent  and  cast  your  souls  upon  the  great 
atonement,  no  other  means  would  be  effectual.  If  one 
should  come  to  you  from  the  dead  you  would  not  be  per- 
suaded; you  would  still  shelter  yourself  in  some  refuge 
of  lies;  you  would  still  invent  pleas,  pretexts,  subterfu- 
ges for  worldliness  and  disobedience;  you  would  still  con- 
tinue to  swell  the  number  of  those  to  whom  God  says, 
"  Behold  ye  despisers  and  wonder  and  perish,  for  I  work 
a  work  in  your  days,  a  work  which  ye  shall  in  no  wise 
believe  though  a  man  declare  it  unto  you."' 

It  may  be  that  some  of  you  are  saying,  Far  be  it  from 
us  to  despise  the  Gospel.  It  is  true  we  do  not  believe  it; 
we  confess  that  we  are  sceptics,  but  it  is  not  our  fault; 
our  doubts  are  involuntary,  we  cannot  prevent  them. — 
Very  well.  Kest  assured,  however,  that  you  would  still 
have  these  involuntary  doubts  though  one  rose  from  the 
dead.  1  will  not  say  to  you  what  I  ought  to  say,  and 
what  death  will  soon  force  you  to  confess.  I  will  not  re- 
mind you  how  preposterous  it  is  for  one  to  talk  about  in- 
voluntary doubts,  whose  indolence  and  worldliness  have 
prevented  him  from  examining  the  subject.  JNor  will  1 
stop  to  shew  that  these  doubts  spring  from  your  ignor- 
ance, or  your  passions,  or  a  most  unworthy  vanity.  Let 
this  pass.  You  tell  me  you  are  sincere  in  your  increduli- 
ity.     13e  it  so.     You  would  justly  be  offended  if  I  should 


Bible  Testimony  the  Best  Testimony,  69 

question  your  veracity.  But  I  tell  you  that  you  would  be 
equally  sincere  in  youriucredulity,  whatever  method  God 
might  use  with  you  as  a  rational,  moral,  accountable  be- 
ing. 

In  fact,  however,  why  need  I  speak  in  this  strain? — 
In  all  candor,  are  there  any  of  this  class  of  people  here? 
Are  there  any  pretended  infidels  in  this  house  ?  Not  one. 
And  if  the  question  were  only  about  belief  in  the  Bible, 
and  not  about  forsaking  the  world  and  your  sins,  there 
is  not  a  man  nor  a  woman  within  these  walls  who  would 
not  be  a  sincere  Christian.  If,  then,  you  still  neglect  the 
great  salvation,  it  is  quite  certain  that  no  real  permanent 
conversion  would  be  wrought  in  yon,  if  an  apparition 
came  to  you  from  the  grave.  For  you  could  only  believe 
then;  and  you  now  believe. 

To  bring  this  matter  home  to  ourselves,  let  it  be  sup- 
posed that  some  supernatural  vision,  say  some  angelic  mes- 
senger should  present  himself  to  you  to  night  as  you  are 
returning  home,  or  in  the  loneliness  of  your  chamber; 
what  would  he  say  to  you?  He  would  speak  to  you  of 
the  glories  of  heaven  ;  he  would  warn  you  of  the  miseries 
of  hell ;  he  would  perhaps  expostulate  with  you  as  to  some 
besetting  sin  for  which  you  are  every  moment  perilling 
your  soul ;  he  would  assure  you  that  almost  all  who  per- 
ish from  congregations  to  which  the  Gospel  is  faithfully 
preached,  perish  through  procrastination,  through  the 
fatal  influence  of  worldly  cares  and  pursuits,  perish  by 
thinking  and  acting  just  as  you  are  thinking  and  acting 
now,  and  have  been  for  yea;s  thinking  and  acting.  If 
some  resplendent  visitor  should  be  manifested  to  your 
senses,  and  should  thus  address  you,  the  effect,  you  think, 
Mould  be  instantaneous  and  abiding.  Well,  now,  see  howr 
the  case  stands.  Everything  which  I  have  supposed 
this  celestial  monitor  to  say,  you  know,  you  now  believe, 
and  believe  on  God's  testimony.  Why  then  do  you  not 
act  as  if  you  had  been  thus  visited? 

I  have  suggested  some  subjects  upon  which  an  angel 
would  admonish  you.  But  there  is  one  topic  as  to  which, 
above  all,  he  would  plead  with  you,  as  to  which  he  would 
entreat  you,  implore  you,  conjure  you  with  tears  (if  celes- 
tial beings  can  weep;)  and  you  well  know  what  that  topic 

3* 


70  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 


is.  It  is  the  amazing  mystery  which  "angels  desire 
to  look  into."  It  is  that  stupendous  deed  of  Jove  which 
was  wrought,  not  in  heaven,  but  on  earth,  not  for  angels, 
hut  for  men.  To  cherub  or  seraph,  to  one  of  the  heaven- 
ly host  who  rejoice  over  the  repentance  of  a  sinner,  the 
cross,  the  altar  on  Calvary,  and  the  great  atonement  fin- 
ished on  that  altar  would  be  the  absorbing  theme — a 
theme  transcendently  more  awful,  affecting,  irresistible 
than  all  the  disclosures  he  could  bring  from  eternity — 
more  appalling  than  hell,  more  touching,  subduing,  in- 
spiring, rejoicing  than  heaven.  Bat  upon  this  topic  you 
know,  from  childhood  up  you  have  listened  to  all,  you 
have  believed  all  which  a  preternatural  messenger  could 
tell  you.  Visiting  the  earth  and  witnessing  the  conduct 
of  most  of  those  to  whom  the  Gospel  is  preached,  an  in- 
habitant of  the  other  world  would  unquestionably  sup- 
pose, at  first,  that  they  did  not  believe  the  glad  tidings. — 
But  Avhen  he  came  to  know  that  these  things  were  be- 
lieved and  produced  so  little  effect,  he  would  surely  re- 
gard this  as  the  most  incredible  infatuation,  as  the  most 
astounding  of  all  the  manifestations  of  human  guilt,  apos- 
tasy, depravity,  and  of  the  dismal  power  of  the  god  of 
this  world  "who  hath  blinded  the  minds  of  them  that 
believe  not,  lest  the  light  of  the  glorious  Gospel  of  Christ 
who  is  the  image  of  God  should  shine  unto  them.'' 


•-r 


My  friends,  we  are  so  accustomed  to  see  the  Gospel 
preached  and  believed  without  any  saving  influence,  that 
we  have  come  to  regard  it  as  something  nol  at  all  surpris- 
ing; but  nothing  can  be  more  unnatural  and  astonishing. 
Appealing,  as  they  do,  to  every  feeling,  motive,  passion 
by  which  the  conscience  can  be  alarmed,  the  intellect 
absorbed,  the  heart  moved  and  melted,  it  would  seem — 
supposing  men  to  be  men — that  the  truths  of  revelation 
must  at  once  produce  their  legitimate  effects.  That  they 
are  treated  with  indifference  betrays  a  fund  of  apathy 
and  insanity  as  amazing  as  it  is  deplorable.  What,  my 
dear  hearer,  you  believe,  you  know  that  your  soul  is  im- 
mortal, that  it  must  be  saved  or  lost — yet  this  knowledge 
has  no  sort  of  effect  upon  you;  you  believe,  you  know 
that  you  must  soon  die,  that  you  may  die  to-night,  and 
that  death  will  translate  you  either  to  the  hymns,  halle- 


Bible  Testimony  the  Best  Testimony.  71 

lujahs,  raptures  of  the  redeemed,  or  to  chains  of  darkness, 

to  weeping  and  wailing  and  gnashing  of  teeth  forever — 
yet  this  knowledge  has  do  effect  upon  you  ;  above  all,  you 
believe,  you  know  that  for  you  the  Brightness  of  the 
Father's  glory  stooped  to  earth  and,  after  a  weary  pil- 
grimage of  sorrow,  expired  upon  the  cross — yet  this 
belief,  this  knowledge  has  no  effect  upon  you,  all 
this  cannot  move  you,  all  this  does  not  signify;  you 
will  in  spite  of  all  this,  precipitate  yourself 
upon  everlasting  destruction.  For  my  part,  I  declare 
that  when,  in  my  closet  I  ponder  these  things,  1  am  con- 
vinced that  they  are  absolutely  impossible.  I  read  of 
the  deceitfulness  of  the  human  heart,  of  "all  the  deceiv- 
ableness  of  unrighteousness  in  them  that  perish;"  but  in- 
fidelity, atheism  itself  appears  to  me  not  half  so  utterly 
irreconcilable  with  sanity  of  mind.  To  think  thus,  how- 
ever, one  must  remain  in  his  closet.  To  think  thus  one 
must  close  his  eyes  and  ears  to  what  is  passing  around 
him.  Let  him  open  his  eyes,  let  him  go  into  the 
world,  let  him  even  come  into  the  sanctuary,  and  very 
different  convictions  will  force  themselves  upon  him. — 
On  no  side  can  he  turn,  without  meeting  melancholy  ex- 
emplifications of  this  Avorsethan  brutish  indifference  and 
stupidity,  without  seeing  men  and  Avomen  who,  in  the 
language  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  have  "madness  in  their 
hearts" — people  otherwise  sane,  but  as  to  eternal  things 
bereft  of  all  reason — immortal  beings  in  whose  bosoms 
these  truths  have  had  a  lodgment  from  their  childhood, 
and  who  are  yet  driving  on,  resolved  to  rush  into  a  per- 
dition most  horrible,  and  to  their  minds  not  more  horri- 
ble than  certain. 

And  after  this  will  you  pretend  that  some  other  expe- 
dient will  arrest  and  change  you?  Ko,  my  dear  hearer, 
no.  Grod  who  created  man,  knows  the  agencies  which 
are  best  calculated  to  rouse:  him  from  the  lethargy  of 
nature  and  to  bring  him  to  obedience.  In  giving  us  a 
standing  revelation  he  plies  us  with  these  agencies.  If 
these  fail,  he  himself  declares,  and  reason,  observation, 
experience  compel  you  to  confess,  that  a  disembodied 
spirit  coming  from  the  unseen  world  would  also  fail.  It  is 
quite  certain  that  God  will  not  try  by  any  other  expedient. 
What  more  can  he  do  to  win  your  heart,  than  to  give  his 


72  Richard  Fuller' s  Sermons. 

Son  to  die  for  you  ?  What  more  to  alarm  you  and  cause 
you  to  flee  from  the  coming  wrath,  than  to  uncover  hell 
and  point  you  to  the  wretchedness  of  the  lost?  But  it  is 
equally  certain  that,  whatever  expedient  he  might  try, 
the  same  causes  would  frustrate  it;  the  same  hardness, 
the  same  cares  and  distractions,  the  same  devoted ness  to 
the  world,  the  same  unwillingness  to  suspend  your  pur- 
suitofpleasure,  toceaseto  be  fascinated  by  thepassior.sand 
to  give  your  attention  to  the  investigation  of  truth  ;  the 
same  prejudices,  the  same  pride  and  vanity,  the  same 
pretexts  and  subterfuges  which  now  defeat  the  Gospel 
would  defeat  any  other  ministry;  neither  would  you  be 
persuaded  though  one  rose  from  the  dead. 

And  now  what  remains  but  that  I  implore  those  of  you 
for  whom  this  discourse  is  intended  to  make  the  personal 
application  which  is  so  plain  and  solemn.  My  friends, 
you  every  day  ask  us,  what  is  conversion?  what  is  saving 
faith?  Our  subject  gives  you  the  answer.  It  tells  you 
that  conversion,  saving  faith  is  no  transient,  intermittent, 
accident  or  emotion,  but  the  being  so  "  persuaded"  by 
revealed  truth  as  to  yield  your  heart  and  life  to  its 
lessons  and  requirements.  The  Gospel  is  "the  wisdom 
and  the  power  of  God."  If  you  neglect  this  Gospel,  you 
destroy  yourself  wilfully  and  wantonly;  for  you  despise 
the  wisdom  and  resist  the  power  of  him  who  is  thor- 
oughly acquainted  witii  the  mechanism  of  our  nature,  and 
who,  in  the  means  of  grace  now  exhibited,  employs  the 
very  apparatus  which  he  knows  is  best  calculated  to  save 
us;  and  you  will  therefore  perish  certainly,  unnecessa- 
rily, wilfully,  wantonly. 

And  0  see  what  it  will  be  to  perish.  Look  at  this  lost 
soul.  See  this  wretched  man  casting  his  longing  glances 
across  the  great  gulf  up  to  that  heaven  which  lie 
had  slighted ;  and  think  what  this  sight  will  be  to  you, 
if  in  hell  you  shall  lift  up  your  eyes  and  see  afar  off  your 
father,  mother,,  wife,  sister,  brother,  child  in  those  abodes 
of  blessedness.  Hear  this  wretched  man  crying,  "  I  am 
tormented  in  this  flame,"  ami  feeling  that  a  drop  of 
water  to  cool  his  parched  tongue  would  be  a  eort  of 
heaven  to  him.  What  a  doom  this  for  you.  YViiat  a 
doom  for  one  who  might  have  been  saved.     What  a  doom 


Bible  Testimony  the  Best  Testimony,  73 

for  one.  who  was  entreated  to  be  saved.  What  a  doom 
for  one  to  whom  I  this  night  unfold  all  the  riches  of 

grace  and  love;  to  whom  thisnight  I  offer  without  money 
or  price  the  waters  of  the  river  of  life,  those  oceans  of 
delight  in  which  his  soul  may  bathe  forever. 

My  dearly  beloved  hearers,  have  you  heard  me?  Have 
yon  listened  to  what  1  have  been  saying?  Do  you 
believe  these  things  and  can  you  still  be  proof  against 
them  ?  Recollect  that  these  truths  are  not  from  the 
Law,  but  from  the  Gospel,  from  the  lips  of  Jesus.  Recol- 
lect who  are  those  for  whom  this  misery  is  reserved  ;  and 
not  only  for  the  infidel,  the  debauched,  the  blasphemer; 
but  "all  who  obey  not  the  truth.  "  To  these  reflections 
add  another;  it  is,  that  many  of  you  now  before  me,  now 
looking  me  in  the  face,  belong  to  the  class  \  have  just- 
described.  Lastly,  life  is  the  only  period  during  which 
you  can  escape  this  impending  doom — a  life  so  brief,  so 
uncertain,  which  may  be  suddenly  terminated  by  any  one 
of  the  thousand  diseases,  the  thousand  accidents  which 
lie  in  ambuscade  everywhere  in  your  path.  Enter  into 
these  truths.  Will  you  still  continue  unconcerned? 
Can  you  "  make  light  of  it  ?  "  Can  you  eat,  drink,  sleep, 
while  the  tremendous  problem  is  undecided  as  to  your 
future  destiny  ? 

I  implore,  I  conjure,  I  adjure  you,  let  it  not  be.  Have 
mercy  upon  me,  if  not  upon  yourselves.  I  know  not 
what  were  the  emotions  of  Abraham  as  he  beheld  this  lost 
soul  in  hell.  But  1  am  not  to  you  what  he  was  to  the 
rich  man.  I  am  your  pastor  who  loves  you,  who  day  and 
night  prays  for  you.  The  very  thought  that  such  a 
destiny  may  be  yours,  fills  my  eyes  with  tears,  my  heart 
with  unutterable  anguish:  how  then  could  I  endure  the 
spectacle  itself?  Some  of  you  seem  to  have  made  up 
your  minds  to  neglect  the  great  salvation,  to  slight,  des- 
pise all  which  God  has  done  or  can  do  to  arouse  and 
warn  you.  Well,  remember,  that  you  will  die  as  you 
live.  Let  me  tell  you  this  now  while  1  can  speak  plainly 
to  you.  The  hour  may  be  at  hand  when  I  cannot  be  thus 
faithful;  the  hour  when  I  shall  be  summoned  to  your 
dying  pillow,  and  when  my  love  for  you  and  my  sympa- 
thy   lor    your    weeping    family    will    disarm  me.     At 


7-±  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

such  a  time,  and  in  such  a  case,  a  pastor  knows 
what  he  ought  to  do;  and,  believing  the  Scripture 
to  be  true — you  know  what  lie  ought  to  do.  As 
his  ministry  can  then  no  longer  avail  you,  he 
ought  to  use  your  example  as  a  warning  to  others;  he 
ought  to  employ  it  to  save  wife,  children,  friends  on 
whom  your  influence  has  been  so  pernicious.  He  ought 
to  say,  See  this  man.  For  ten,  twenty,  thirty,  forty  years 
he  has  set  at  naught  all  God's  reproofs  and  has  despised 
his  mercies,  counsels,  entreaties.  Now  he  is  dying.  In 
half  an  hour  he  will  pass  into  eternity  and  will  know  by 
experience  what  is  the  frightful  doom  which  he  defied. 
He  is  dying,  and  his  soul  will  this  night  be  cast  into  the 
lake  that  burnetii. 

But  can  a  pastor  ever  be  thus  true  to  the  Bible  and  his 
own  convictions  ?  No.  We  are  weak  men,  our  hearts  are 
melted  by  the  scenes  we  witness  in  the  chambers  of  the 
dying;  and  we  seek  to  invent  hopes  and  illusions  to  con- 
sole those  who  look  to  us  for  supports  in  that  fearful 
moment.  Let  me  then  warn  you  now,  and  tell  you  from 
God,  that  the  end  of  the  rich  man  must  be  yours  if  you 
continue  unbelieving,  impenitent,  disobedient. 

And  yet  why  should  this  be?  Why  will  you  die? 
What  are  you  waiting  for?  Is  it  for  some  calamity  to 
rouse  you  to  solemn  reflection?  But  can  any  calamity 
compare  with  this,  that  you  are  every  moment  exposed 
to  such  a  frightful  doom  for  eternity  ?  Or  are  you  wait- 
ing until  some  voice  of  unutterable  love  and  tenderness 
shall  speak  to  you  from  heaven.  Such  a  voice  now  pleads 
with  you.  It  is  to  keep  you  from  sinking  into  everlasting 
fire  prepared  for  the  devil  and  his  angels,  that  Jesus  has,  in 
this  parable,  drawn  the  curtain  and  disclosed  to  you  the 
realities  of  another  world.  It  is  to  save  you  that,  in 
accents  of  beseeching  earnestness,  he  cries  to  you  from 
the  top  of  the  cross,  from  his  throne  in  glory.  Or,  per- 
haps, you  wish  some  messenger  to  come  to  you  from  the 
dead.  My  friend,  God  will  not  send  any  such  messen- 
ger. What  am  I  saying?  He  does  send  such  a  mes- 
senger. Lo,  he  is  here.  I  step  aside,  I  vacate  the  pulpit. 
Behold  one  from  the  dead,  one  from  hell  has  been  com- 
missioned to  come  to  you,  and  now  stands  in  my  place 


Bible  Testimony  the  Best  Testimony.  75 

ami  preaches  to  you.  Terrible  preacher;  hear  him.  A 
preacher  robed  in  flames  and  emerging  from  the  caverns 
of  despair.  A  preacher  who,  for  an  exordium,  throws 
his  baleful  eyes  around,  and  clasps  his  burning  hands 
upon  his  head  :  who,  for  an  argument,  points  to  the  bil- 
lows of  lire  which  rage  and  toss  in  the  bottomless  pit, 
and  to  the  smoke  of  their  torment  ascending  forever  and 
ever;  who  for  a  peroration,  wails  out,  above  the  clamor 
and  thunder  of  the  roaring  surges,  0  go  not,  go  not  to 
that  place  of  torment. 

Hear,  ah,  hear  him.  My  sermons  are  weak  and  vain 
I  bring  to  you  this  night  another  preacher,  whose  ser- 
mon is  not  weak  ;  let  it  not  be  in  vain.  Hear  him,  apply 
to  yourselves  his  warnings,  exhortations,  entreaties.  And 
apply  them  now.  Delay  not.  To-morrow  it  may  be  too 
late.  To-morrow  another  messenger  may  come  to  you 
from  eternity ;  and  that  messenger  maybe  death.  To- 
morrow you  may  die  and  be  buried;  and  in  hell  you  may 
lift  up  your  eyes  being  in  torment,  and  see  across  the  im- 
passable gulf  all  the  glories  you  this  night  despised; 
and  may  cry  in  vain  for  a  drop  of  water  to  cool  your 
parched  tongue;  while  those  words,  "Son,  remember  !  " 
shall  sting  you  with  intolerable  remorse,  as  they  pour 
in  upon  you  a  flood  of  bitter  recollections — reminding 
you  of  all  the  mercies,  means,  opportunities,  counsels 
which  Avere  exhausted  upon  you,  and  of  the  obduracy 
and  obstinacy  by  which — "despising  the  riches  of  God's 
goodness  and  forbearance  and  long  suffering — you  treas- 
ured up  unto  yourself  wrath  against  the  day  of  wrath 
and  revelation  of  the  righteous  judgment  of  God." 


76  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 


ermotx  JFtftfu 


THE  GOOD  SAMARITAN. 

"Then  said  Jesus  unto  him,  Go,  and  do  thou  likewise."— Luke  x:  37. 

A  S  the  most  beautiful  uninspired  portrait  of  the 
^~*-  Redeemer's  character  has  been  drawn  by  an  infidel, 
(I  refer  to  Rousseau's  letter  which  ends  with  that  ques- 
tion,— "My  friend,  could  Jesus  Christ  have  been  a 
man?")  so  it  is  very  remarkable  that  two  of  the  finest 
eulogiums  on  the  Christian  religion  were  pronounced, 
unintentionally  of  course,  by  two  of  its  bitterest  enemies. 
"  Let  us  consider,"  thus  wrote  Julian  the  Aposlate  to  a 
pagan  priest,  "that  nothing  has  contributed  so  much  to 
the  progress  of  the  Christian  superstition  as  their  charity 
to  strangers.  We  must  begin  to  discharge  this  obliga- 
tion ourselves.  AVe  must  establish  hospitals.  For  it 
would  be  a  shame  for  us  to  abandon  our  poor,  while  the 
Jews  have  none,  and  while  the  impious  Galileans  provide 
not  only  for  their  own  poor  but  for  ours."  And  Lucian 
the  satirist  said,  "  It  is  incredible  what  pains  and  dili- 
gence they  use  to  succor  one  another.  Their  legislator 
made  them  believe  that  they  are  all  brethren,  and  since 
they  renounced  our  religion  and  worshipped  their  cru- 
cified leader,  they  live  according  to  his  laws,  and  all  their 
riches  are  in  common." 

Whatever  assaults  a  modern  Julian  or  Lucian  might 
make  upon  our  conduct,  it  is  quite  certain  they  would 
bring  no  such  charges  as  these.  There  is  no  danger  that 
any  body  will  upbraid  us  with  a  delusion  which  causes 
us  to  regard  each  other  as  brothers,  with  a  superstition 
which  betrays  us  into  excesses  of  charity  and  benev- 
olence. 

The  truth  is,  the  first  Christians  were  infected  with  a 


The  Good  Samaritan.  77 


celestial  contagion.  They  caught  from  Jesus  the  very 
spirit  which  he  brought  from  heaven.  "God  is  love." 
Jesus  was  "God  manifest  in  the  flesh."  lie  was  the 
incarnation  of  love; — love  exploring  the  abysses  of 
human  wretchedness;  love  uttering  tones  which  sank 
into  men's  hearts,  as  the  soft  rain  into  the  thirsty  earth  ; 
love  diffusing  itself  everywhere  in  the  dearest,  sweetest 
charities;  love  sympathizing  with  human  sorrow;  weep- 
ing over  human  misery,  relieving  human  distress,  expir- 
ing for  human  redemption.  And  these  disciples  "  learned 
Christ,"  studied  the  truth,  not  in  cold  systems  and 
creeds,  but  "truth  as  it  was  in  Jesus."  Hence  their 
souls  were  so  fired  that  nothing  could  satisfy  them. 
Bach  regarded  himself  as  a  missionary.  Each  glowed 
with  a  spirit  which  we  are  so  ready  to  admire,  so  slow  to 
emulate.  Not  only  did  the  churches  send  the  Gospel  to 
to  distant  lands,  but  every  church  became  the  centre  of 
beneficent  influences  at  home.  Their  Jove  for  the  poor 
and  suffering  knew  no  bounds,  and  their  munificence 
seems  to  be  almost  fabulous.  Chrysostom  mentions  one 
church  which  supported  three  thousand  old  people  and 
widows  and  orphans.  When  the  emperor  Decius 
demanded  the  wealth  of  another  church,  the  deacons 
asked  for  one  day  in  which  to  collect  them;  and  at  the 
expiration  of  that  time  they  appeared  with  a  multitude 
of  the  poor,  the  maimed,  the  blind,  the  sick,  the  aged, 
tire  orphaned,  and  said,  "  Sire,  these  are  the  riches  of  our 
church." 

Such  was  their  charity.     For  ours but  I  stop,  I 

check  myself,  I  draw  a  veil  over  the  melancholy  contrast, 
and  proceed  with  what  heart  and  hope  I  may,  to  the 
business  before  me. 

I  anr  here  this  morning  to  address  you  in  behalf  of  our 
"Ladies7  Home  Mission  Society''' — a  society  formed  to 
visit  the  poor  and  suffering,  to  relieve  their  wants,  to  read 
the  Scriptures  and  impart  spiritual  instruction  to  them, 
to  clothe  their  children  and  bring  them  into  the  Sabbath 
school  ;  and  I  cannot  discharge  the  office  with  which 
these  Christian  women  have  honored  me  better  than  by 
offei  ing  you  a  simple  commentary  on  the  parable  from 
which  niv  text  is  taken. 


78  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

I.  The  scene  is  on  the  road  from  Jerusalem  to  Jericho; 
a  road  leading  among  ravines,  desolate,  gloomy,  and  one 
portion  of  it  so  dangerous  that  it  was  called  "  The 
Bloody  Way."  Here,  says  the  Saviour,  lay  a  man  one 
morning,  who  the  night  before  had  been  attacked  by 
banditti,  stripped  of  his  clothing,  and  dreadfully  wounded. 
There  has  been  much  discussion  about  this  sufferer, 
whether  he  was  a  Samaritan,  or  a  Jew.  A  Jew  he  cer- 
tainly was;  but  Jesus  says  nothing  about  his  country. 
He  was  a  man — something  more  than  Jew  or  Samari- 
tan ; — a  man.  As  he  thus  lay  naked,  mangled,  filling  the 
air  with  his  moans,  life  ebbing  away  through  the  cruel 
gashes,  a  priest  approached;  but  no  sooner  did  he  catch 
a  sight  of  the  piteous  spectacle  than  he  averted  his 
looks,  and  hurried  away.  In  vain  do  the  wounds,  the 
groans  of  this  wretched  victim  appeal  to  his  humanity; 
he  turns  away  suddenly,  quickens  the  pace  of  his  horse, 
and  passes  by   "  on  the  other  side." 

Jericho  was  the  chief  station  of  the  priests.  From 
this  city  they  went  up  "in  their  courses,"  to  Jerusalem 
to  discharge  their  sacred  functions.  The  language 
shows  that  this  priest  was  returning;  and  we  see  how 
little  influence  his  official  sanctity  exerted  upon  his  heart. 
"By  chance  there  came  down  a  certain  priest."  Not  by 
chance  however  in  the  common  acceptation  of  the  term. 
In  these  events  of  life  which  seem  fortuitous,  God 
is  putting  our  characters  to  the  test.  And  we  see  under 
his  clerical  vestments,  what  was  the  character  of  this 
man.  But  let  us  not  waste  our  indignation  upon  him. 
The  characters  in  this  parable  are  portraits,  and  this 
portrait  still  finds  its  original  in  the  world.  This  priest 
is  the  representative  of  the  utterly  selfish  and  heartless. 
And  now  in  what  light  can  we  regard  a  man  of  this  class 
without  feeling  that  he  ought  to  be  placed  upon  an  emi- 
nence of  infamy,  and  that  his  picture  cannot  be  charged 
with  colors  too  dark  and  odious. 

Consider  him  for  a  moment  with  reference  to  God. 
"A  Priest!" — and  I  make  no  doubt  that  in  Jerusalem, 
while  seen  of  men,  he  moved  about  in  full  canonicals,  and, 
like  another  Judas  Iscariot,  whined  most  sanctimoni- 
ously about  his  great  compassion  for  the  poor  and  suffer- 


The  Good  Samaritan.  79 

ing;  and  had  this  miserable  object  been  presented  there, 
he  would  have  won  great  eclat,  and  the  populace  would 
have  been  edified  by  a  most  hypocritical  ostentation  of 
mercy.  But  it  is  not  when  we  are  before  the  world  that 
our  true  character  comes  out;  it  is  when  God  alone  sees 
us;  and  God  is  nobody  to  a  thoroughly  selfish  man. 
The  pharisees  paraded  the  first  table  of  the  law  on  their 
phylacteries.  But  they  never  wrote  the  second  table 
which  requires  love  to  man;  and  the  very  design  of  this 
parable  was  to  expose  the  subterfuge  of  a  lawyer  who 
pretended  that  there  was  some  doubt  as  to  the  word 
"  neighbor,"  and  to  teach  us  that  all  professions  of  love 
to  God  are  mere  sheer,  downright  falsehood,  if  we  have 
no  love  for  our  fellow  men.  "  Whoso  hath  this  world's 
goods,  and  seeth  his  brother  have  need  and  shutteth  up 
his  bowels  from  him,  how  dwelleth  the  love  of  God  in 
him?" 

Nor  is  this  all.  Such  a  man  sets  himself,  habitually 
and  on  principle,  in  diametrical  opposition  to  the  fixed, 
plain  arrangements  of  God's  providential  government  of 
this  world.  Look  where  we  may,  from  the  grains  of  dirt 
under  our  feet,  up  to  the  "majestical  roof  fretted  with 
golden  fires,"  we  find  that  cohesion  is  the  law  of  this 
planet.  Through  the  entire  range  of  creation  nothing  is 
insulated.  Every  particle  of  matter  has  affinities  to 
other  particles.  Especially  are  human  beings  dependent 
on  each  other  for  mutual  assistance.  While  God  direct- 
ly caters  for  the  sparrow,  and  clothes  the  lilies,  and 
feeds  the  young  lions  who  seek  their  meat  from  him,  we 
are  left  to  rely  upon  each  other.  Multitudes,  indeed,  are 
so  destitute,  so  absolutely  helpless  that  they  must  perish 
if  they  receive  no  support.  This  is  the  economy  under 
which  Ave  are  placed;  and  in  it  we  perceive  plainly  that 
God  means  each  of  us  to  see  a  brother  in  every  other 
human  being,  and  that  those  who  have  earthly  posses- 
sions shall  be  benefactors  to  those  who  have  not. 

This  is  God's  ordinance;  but  the  selfish  and  hard- 
hearted subvert  and  despise  this  ordinance.  They  violate 
it  constantly,  systematically.  They  do  more.  They 
teach  others  to  arraign  the  wisdom  and  love  of  God's 
administration.     "He  that  oppresseththe  poor  reproach- 


80  Richard  Fuller's  bennoiis. 


eth  his  Maker."  In  this  passage  it  is  declared  that  he 
who  refuses  mercy  to  the  poor,  wrongs  and  oppresses 
him,  and  that  he  causes  men  to  upbraid  God's  providen- 
tial government  with  injustice,  and  we  know,  in  fact,  that 
no  infidel  or  atheist  can  do  half  as  much  to  diffuse  impi- 
ety and  atheism;  especially  if  this  sordid  wretch  be  a 
professed  Christian. 

I  will  only  add  that  the  whole  life  and  character  of  him 
who  refuses  to  succor  the  poor,  proclaim  a  settled  con- 
tempt for  the  plainest  precepts  of  the  Bible.     Are  you 
rich?     "Charge  them    that  are  rich  in  this  world  that 
they  do  good,  that  they  be  rich  in  good  works,  ready  to 
distribute,  willing  to  communicate."     Are  you  poor?   "I 
have  shewed  you  all  things,  how  that  so   laboring  we 
ought  to  support  the  weak,  and  to  remember  the  words 
of  the  Lord  Jesus,  how  he  said,  It  is  more  blessed  to  give 
than  to  receive."     It  was  the  poverty  of  the  widow  which 
made  her  mite  a  richer  donation  than  the  liberal  offerings 
of  the  wealthy;  and  of  the  Corinthians  it  is   recorded 
that  "their  deep  poverty  abounded   unto   the  riches  of 
their  liberality."     Does  conscience  tell  you  that  you  have 
at  any  time  thriven  in  your  business  by  concealment  and 
fraud  ?     Let  him  that  stole,  steal  no  more,  but  rather  let 
him  labor,  working  with  his  hands  the  thing  which  is 
good,  that  he  may  have  to  give  to  him  that  needeth." — 
Are  you  praying  and  striving  after  holiness  ?   "  Give  alms 
of  such  things  as  ye  have,  and  behold  all  things  are  clean 
unto  you."     Are  you  tempted  to  overlook  the  urgency  of 
the  wants  of  those  who  apply  to  you  for  help?     "Say 
not  to  thy  neighbor,  Go  and  come  again,  when  thou  hast 
it  by  thee."     l)o  you  last  or  pray  ?     "  Is  not  this  the  fast 
which  I  have  chosen,  that  thou  deal  thy  bread  to  the  hun- 
gry, and  when  thou  seest  the  naked  that  thou  cover  him, 
and  hide  not  thyself  from  thine  own  flesh  ?"     "  The  an- 
gel said  unto  him,  Thy  prayers  and  thine  alms  are  come 
up  as  a  memorial  before  God."    Is  it  your  desire  to  have 
this  testimony  that  you  please  God  ?     "To  do  good  and 
to  communicate  forget  not,  for  with  such  sacrifices  God 
is  well  pleased."   Would  you  secure  heavenly  consolations 
for  those  hours  when  yours  shall  be  the  shattered  health, 
and  the  hollow  cough,  when  wearisome  nights  shall  be 


The  Good  Samaritan,  81 

appointed  unto  you,  and  days  of  languor  and  wasting 
disease?  " Blessed  is  be  that  considereth  the  poor,  the 
Lord  will  deliver  him  in  time  of  trouble;  the  Lord  will 
strengthen  him  upon  the  bed  of  languishing;  thou  wilt 
make  all  his  bud  in  his  sickness.*'  In  short,  would  you 
lay  up  treasures  in  heaven?"  "Sell  that  thou  hast  and 
give  unto  the  poor,  and  thou  shalt  have  treasure  in  heaven." 
'•Make  to  yourselves  friends  of  the  mammon  of  unright- 
ousness  ;  that  when  ye  fail  they  may  receive  you  into  ever- 
lasting habitations."  Passages  like  these  could  be  multi- 
plied indefinitely;  but  all  these  admonitions,  counsels, 
plain  solemn  commands,  the  man  before  us  despises,  de- 
fies, tramples  under  foot. 

Considered,  then,  with  reference  to  the  Being  whom 
we  ought  to  glorify  in  all  our  actions,  you  see  the  cool 
atrocity  of  the  conduct  portrayed  in  this  part  of  the  par- 
able. And  do  not  pass  this  truth  hastily,  and  without 
reflecting  on  the  real  character  of  that  selfishness  which 
Jesus  here  exposes.  For  my  part;  the  more  T  analyze  it, 
the  more  clearly  do  I  perceive  that  selfishness  is  the 
essence  of  all  sin  in  men  and  devils.  A  selfish  man  dis- 
cards the  will  of  God  which  is  the  only  safeguard  to  the 
peace,  order,  happiness  of  the  universe,  and  resolves  that 
his  own  will  shall  predominate.  If  unrestrained,  he 
would  immolate  the  whole  world  to  his  cupidity.  Nay, 
as  only  one  supremely  selfish  being  could  ever  be  gratified, 
he  would,  if  it  were  possible,  seek  to  make  all  worlds 
tributary  to  his  lust  for  dominion.  Xor  would  he  be 
satisfied  with  even  this.  His  inordinate  spirit  would  aim 
at  the  throne  of  Jehovah  himself,  and  be  restless  until 
not  only  the  creation  but  the  Creator  were  subjected  to 
his  insane  ambition. 

Having  examined  the  character  of  the  selfish  and  heart- 
less man  in  the  relation  he  sustains  towards  God,  let  us 
now  view  it  in  another  aspect, — with  reference  to  his 
fellow  men.  In  this  view  observe  the  unnaturalness,  the 
flagrant  injustice  of  his  conduct. 

Descended  from  a  common  parentage,  involved  in  the 
same  fall — like  shipwrecked  mariners  cast  upon  a  desert 
island,  exposed  to  the  same  dangers  and  miseries — what 
monsters  are  we  if  no  sympathy  nor  commiseration  for  each 


82  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

other  touches  our  hearts.  "And  when  he  saw  him  lie 
passed  by  on  the  other  side."  Wretch!  it  is  a  brother's 
form  which  lies  there  naked  and  weltering  in  gore.  Jt 
is  a  brother's  eye  which  turns  so  imploringly  to  you.  Jt 
is  a  brother's  voice  which  pierces  your  ear.  He  sees,  he 
hears,  but  turns  his  back  and  steels  his  soul  against  all. 
"He  passed  by  on  the  other  side;"  but  on  what  side  could 
he  pass,  and  so  stop  up  the  access  and  passage  to  mercy, 
that  no  compunctious  visitings  of  nature  might  arrest 
•and  soften  him? 

And  this  conduct  is  as  unjnstas  it  is  unnatural — a  truth 
this  to  which  I  ask  your  attention.  Forthosewhoharden 
their  hearts  against  the  claims  of  charity  generally  pique 
themselves  upon  their  honesty,  their  high  sense  of  honor, 
while  at  the  tribunal  of  impartial  equity,  they  are  guilty 
of  the  grossest  injustice. 

Injustice,  because  when  possessions  exceeding  our  real 
necessities  are  multiplied  in  our  hands,  we  are  bound  to 
regard  them  as  deposits  made  by  God,  to  whom  all  things 
belono-  and  who  thus  constitutes  us  his  stewards  and 
almoners. 

Injustice,  because  poverty  is  notan  accident;  it  is  God's 
appointment.  "The  poor  shall  not  cease  out  of  the  land;" 
this  is  a  prophecy  which  ever  has  been  and  ever  shall 
be  fulfilled  in  every  age  and  nation.  "  The  poor  ye  have 
always  with  you."  Whenever  and  wherever  men  are 
gathered  together  in  communities,  cities,  villages,  the 
declaration  will  hold  good,  that  "the  rich  and  the  poor 
meet  together,  and  the  Lord  is  the  maker  of  them  all." 
And  in  this  unequal  distribution  of  earthly  allotments, 
we  see  clearly  that  those  who  hold  a  surplus  of  worldly 
goods,  hold  them  in  trust  for  those  who  are  destitute; 
and  that  society  is   based    upon  this  implied  compact. 

There  was  room  enough  in  the  universe  for  God  to 
create  and  place  us  apart  from  each  other  in  separate  and 
selfish  isolation  ;  but  he  has  ordained  asocial  destination 
which  causes  us  to  touch  each  other,  to  be  knit  closely 
to  each  other.  And  in  making  poverty  one  of  the  ele- 
ments of  society,  he  designs  that  the  noblest  charities  of 
our  nature  shall  have  full  scope,  and  that  Ave  shall  thus 
resemble  him  as  angels  cannot,  in  the  divine  prerogative 
of  imparting  beneficence  to  the  needy  and  afflicted. 


The  (Uiod  Samaritan.  <s;5 

And  so  solemn  is  this  obligation,  so  crying  and  decisive 
a  test  of  character  is  our  conduct  as  to  this  duty,  that  in 
the  programme  of  the  last  judgment  furnished  by  Jesus, 
we  find  the  single  inquest  will  be  upon  this  specification. 
If  it  then  appears  that  we  pitied,  visited,  relieved  the 
poor,  the  Judge  will  say,  "Come  ye  blessed  of  my  Father." 
Hut  if  we  have  been  perfidious  to  the  trust  committed  to 
us,  if  we  have  imbezzled  the  sums  invested  with  us  for 
the  poor  and  suffering,  if  we  did  not  feel  for  them  and 
succor  them,  woe  unto  us.  Vainly  shall  we  then  plead 
our  faith,  and  prayers,  and  zeal  for  religion.  Do  you 
suppose  that  this  priest  did  not  make  long  prayers,  and 
profess  great  faith,  and  glow  with  zeal  for  his  creed? 
Our  piety  will  then  be  exposed  in  its  true  colors,  as  the 
religion  of  a  mercenary  spirit,  which  after  making  riches 
its  idol  here,  hopes,  by  a  few  cheap  observances,  by  an 
orthodoxy  that  costs  nothing,  that  flatters  and  pampers 
its  reigning  covetousness,  to  secure  riches  in  heaven. 

I  have  thus  spoken  of  the  priest  and  the  class  he  rep- 
resents, and  you  feel  how  detestable  is  the  character  here 
portrayed  by  the  Saviour.  Indeed,  my  brethren,  only 
suppose  a  community  entirely  composed  of  such  mem- 
bers. Suppose  that  each  should  seek  to  satisfy  only  his 
own  wants;  that  each  should  stand  aloof  in  lonely, 
repulsive  misanthropy;  that  each  should  view  the  miser- 
ies of  others  with  cold  indifference,  if  not  with  secret 
complacency;  that  each  (for  sellishness  stops  at  nothing; 
it  will  not  only  abandon  the  wounded  man,  but  will 
search  his  pockets  to  see  if  anything  is  left)  should  prac- 
tice the  infernal  art  of  turning  to  advantage  a  brother's 
misfortunes — availing  himself  of  a  brother's  calamities  to 
extort  from  him  exorbitant,  oppressive,  barbarous  profits. 
The  bare  supposition  of  a  community  like  this  shocks 
and  revolts  our  nature;  yet  such  would  be  society,  if  its 
members  all  resembled  this  priest.  If  all  were  like  him, 
it  were  far  better  to  dwell  in  deserts  than  in  the  abodes 
of  men;  no  ties  would  then  bind  human  beings  together, 
but  those  of  avarice,  envy,  rapacity;  and  pestilence,  fam- 
ine, war  could  add  but  little  horror  to  the  universal,  pro- 
lilic  blight  and  curse  resting  upon  the  earth. 

The   priest; — the   selfish   and    heartless.     And   such 


84  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons, 

characters  are  not  only  found  among  us  in  this  city,  but 
are  treated  with  respect.  Money  purchases  for  them  an 
homage  which  T  would  much  rather  give  to  the  wolf  and 
the  hyena.  Since  God  made  them,  we  must  let  them 
pass  for  men.  But  I  utter  simply  what  I  feel  when  I  say, 
that  such  men  ought  not  to  be  permitted  to  live  in  any 
civilized  community.  When  I  consider  how  plainly  we 
were  formed  for  mutual  affection  and  aid  ;  how — from 
the  moment  when  an  infant  is  folded  in  the  arms  of  love, 
to  that  in  which  the  soothing  ministries  of  friendship 
raise  the  dying  head  and  wipe  the  cold  damps  of  death 
from  the  throbbing  brow — we  crave  and  must  have  each 
other's  sympathies  ;  and  that  the  human  race  would  be- 
come extinct,  if  all  had  the  heart  of  these  monsters ;  I  do 
not  hesitate  to  affirm  that  such  miscreants  ought  to  be 
driven  forth  from  the  habitations  of  men,  and  be  banished 
to  the  haunts  of  wild  beasts,  their  proper,  congenial  asso- 
ciates. 

II.  From  the  class  who  find  their  type  in  the  priest, 
let  us  now  pass  to  the  second  class,  who  are  condemned 
in  the  parable;  those  represented  by  the  Levite;  people 
who  concur  warmly  with  us  while  we  denounce  the  un- 
feeling and  inhuman,  yet  practically  imitate  them ;  and 
who — though  far  less  odious  in  the  sight  of  men — are 
almost  as  criminal  in  the  eye  of  God. 

At  first  it  may  perhaps  seem  to  you  that  there  was  real- 
ly no  difference  between  the  priest  and  the  Levite;  but 
the  narrative  presents  traits  which  clearly  distinguish 
them  from  each  other.  The  priest  no  sooner  saw  the 
disfigured  form  and  oozing  blood,  than  instantly  he  hur- 
ried away.  The  Levite,  says  the  Saviour,  "  when  he  was 
at  the  place  came  and  looked  on  him."  The  sight  of 
such  misery  causes  him  to  approach.  He  is  touched;  his 
better  feelings  have  triumphed ;  he  is  about  to  alight  and 
minister  to  the  wretched  victim  of  midnight  assassins* — 
Suddenly,  however,  he  checks  himself.  Some  counter- 
thought,  some  plea,  some  prudential  reflection,  some  pre- 
caution occurs  to  his  mind.  Whatever  the  reason,  he 
does  nothing;  all  his  benevolence  is  chilled,  and  he,  too, 
turns  away  and  passes  by  on  the  other  side. 


The  Good  Samaritan.  85 


In  sensibility  and  pity  the  Levite,  then,  was  superior 
to  the  priest;  but  only  in  these;  and  1  fear  the  class  he 
represents  is  a  large  class,  and  that  too  many  in  all  our 
churches,  too  many  in  the  present  audience  belong  to  it. 

Who,  indeed,  is  ignorant  of  what  generally  takes  place 
on  occasions  like  this?  Who  ever  pleaded  such  a  cause 
as  that  which  now  appeals  to  your  hearts,  without  being 
conscious  that  he  has  but  one  thing  to  fear?  My  beloved 
hearers,  let  me  speak  plainly  to  you.  After  nearly  eigh- 
teen years  constant  intercourse  with  you,  in  the  pulpit, 
and  out  of  it,  1  ought  to  know  you  well ;  and  I  do  not  mean 
to  flatter  you  when  I  express  my  entire  conviction  that  there 
is  not  one  here  who  resembles  the  priest.  But  the  Le- 
vite,— feelings,  commiseration,  sympathy,  all  evaporating 
in  pretexts — do  not  too  many  of  you  bear  a  very  striking 
likeness  to  the  Levite  ? 

At  the  judgment,  it  seems,  there  will  not  be  a  single 
excuse  offered  ;  the  only  answer  will  be,  "Lord,  when  ??' 
"  Lord,  where ?"  Now,  however,  no  charity  can  be  pre- 
sented, but  all  begin  to  make  excuses — excuses  advanced 
with  confidence,  and  which,  therefore,  lidelity  to  your 
souls,  as  well  as  to  the  cause  T  am  advocating,  requires 
me  to  examine,  that  we  may  see  what  they  are  really 
worth. 

I  am  to  examine  the  pleas  most  commonly  urged,  and 
I  take,  first,  that  of  inability; — a  plea  which  we  hear 
every  day,  and  from  almost  everybody;  and  yet  which  I 
venture  to  say  none  of  us  will  dare  to  mention  before  the 
bar  of  God. 

For,  my  friends,  might  I  not  appeal  to  your  candor, 
whether  you  make  this  reply  to  the  solicitations  of  pleas- 
ure and  fashion,  of  your  appetites  and  passions?  whether 
your  inability  has  caused  you  to  retrench  the  expenses  of 
your  dress,  your  table,  your  carnal  indulgences?  Might 
I  not  inquire  whether  others,  less  able  than  you  are,  do 
nor  contribute  constantly  and  cheerfully  to  the  interests 
of  humanity?  And  there  is  another  question  which  I 
ought  to  submit  to  vou.  If  I  do  not.  it  is  because  I  am 
anxious  to  propitiate  your  good  wishes  and  liberality  to- 
day, and  I  remember  Solomon's  remark,  that  "the  poor 
useth  entreaty,  but  the  rich  answereth  roughly."     1  know 

4 


86  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

too  well  how  ready  we  all  are  to  take  offence  at  a  beggar, 
unless  he  speak  with  bated  breath  and  whispering  hum- 
bleness, and  to  find  in  fr.s  want  of  obsequiousness,  a  rea- 
son for  rejecting  his  suit.  I  do  not  therefore  ask  you,  but 
you  ought  to  ask  yourself,  Why  it  is,  that  you  are  so  poor 
only  on  occasions  like  the  present?  At  all  other  times 
you  are  unwilling  to  be  regarded  as  in  such  straitened  cir- 
cumstances; you  magnify  your  property  ;  and  by  a  certain 
air  and  manner,  you  wish  to  impose  upon  the  world  by 
representing  yourself  as  worth  much  more  than  you 
really  possess.  How  is  it  that  you  have  so  little  only 
when  solicited  by  the  calls  of  charity  ? 

But  passing  these  and  similar  questions,  as  unbecom- 
ing me  now,  let  me  beseech  you  to  weigh  this  excuse  in 
the  balances  of  impartial  truth.  Conceding  this  plea  of 
inability  to  some,  are  you  among  them  ?  Is  it  a  fact  that 
you  have  barely  enough  for  your  subsistence  ?  If  situa- 
tions were  reversed,  and  you  were  suffering  from  want, 
would  you  consider  this  plea  as  proper  from  one  in  your 
present  circumstances  ?  In  fine,  you  are  unable  to  give, 
you  have  "  nothing  over  and  above."  But  over  and  above 
what  ?  Your  real  wants  ?  or  your  pleasures?  your  irreg- 
ular desires?  the  cravings  of  your  passions?  your  undue 
conformity  to  the  world  ?  your  inordnate  love  of  accu- 
mulation ?  in  a  word,  your  sins?  These  are  points  upon 
which  I  may  question  you  without  exciting  your  displeas- 
ure. At  least  they  are  matters  about  which  God  will  one 
day  bring  you  to  a  strict  reckoning,  whether  it  pleases  you 
or  not. 

"Well,  well,  I  admit  all  you  say.  I  have  something 
more  than  a  mere  sufficiency  for  the  present,  but  what 
then?  Am  I  not  right  in  securing  myself  against  the 
future?  At  least  is  it  not  my  duty  to  make  some  pro- 
vision for  my  children  ?  This  is  your  second  plea;  but 
what  a  plea?  especially  what  a  plea  from  the  lips  of  a 
Christian? 

For  if  the  possibility  of  future  casualties  releases  us 
from  the  duty  of  charity,  who  is  bound  to  give?  Are 
not  all  liable  to  calamities?  Were  not  the  priest  and 
Levite,  travelling  on  the  very  road  so  infested  by  robbers, 
exposed  to  danger? 


The  Good  Samaritan.  87 


Moreover,  whatever  our  precautions,  God  alone  ran 
preserve  ns  from  the  day  of  adversity.  Many  may  say, 
\\  e  do  not  want;  but  in  all  the  earth  there  is  only  one 
man  who  can  say  "I   shall  not  want."     It   is  lie  who 

knows  that  the  Lord  is  his  shepherd.  Now  if  God  alone 
can  avert  the  evils  we  dread,  is  it  wise  to  provoke  him  by 
violating  the  plainest  duty  ?  We  are  commanded  to 
"  honor  the  Lord  with  our  substance,"  and  are  assured 
that  "he  who  giveth  to  the  poor  Jendeth  to  the  Lord;" 
can  we  do  better  against  any  possible  emergency,  than  to 
invest  with  God  upon  these  invitations  and  promises?— 
And  after  all,  what  does  God  demand  of  us?  Does  he 
say  to  us,  as  Jesus  did  to  the  rich  nobleman,  "Sell  all 
that  thou  hast,  and  give  to  the  poor  ?"  He  requires  only 
some  inconsiderable  portion  of  your  means  ;  and  you  re- 
fuse this  on  the  pretext,  that  you  may  meet  with  some 
disaster  at  a  future  day. 

But  ought  I  not  to  make  some  provision  for  mv  chil- 
dren? and  thus  to  protect  them    from   the  humiliations 
and  miseries  and  temptations  of  dependence?     Be  it  so. 
I  acquiesce.    Is  this,  however, all  your  desire?   No.    You 
are  toiling  to  bequeath  wealth  to  your  children.     This  is 
your  ambition,  an  ambition  that  will  increase  with  your 
possessions.     For,  let  avarice  take  this  form,  and  it  is  an 
insatiable,  incurable  passion.     Disguised,  consecrated  as 
parental  love,  it  will  at  once  be  an  absorbing  lust,  and 
stifle  every  benevolent  feeling  in  your  bosoms;  its  domin- 
ion will  become  more  inexorable  with    advancing  years; 
and  death  will  find  you    scheming,  laboring,  engrossed 
with  anxious  cares,  hardening  your  heart   against   every 
appeal  of  charity,  that   you    may   entail  upon  your  off- 
spring riches  which  will  almost  certainly  be  a  curse  to 
them,  exempting  them  from  the  necessity  of  self-reliance 
and  industry,  filling  them  with  pride,  vanity,  an   insane 
independence  of  God,  nourishing  effeminacy,  sensuality, 
irreligion,  and  delivering  them  up  as  victims  to  the  un- 
searchable seductions  of  pernicious  associations.     Ts  this 
your  affection   for   your  children?     Would  it   not   be  a 
lai-  better  provision,  to  secure  for  them  the  favor  of  that 
Being  who  will  watch  over  them  when   you   are    o-one  ? 
"I  have  been  young,"  says  the  Psalmist,   "and  now  am 


88  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

old,  yet  have  I  not  seen  the  righteous  forsaken,  nor  his 
seed  begging  bread."  Why  not?  We  are  informed  in  the 
next  verse.  "He  is  ever  merciful  and  lendeth,  and  his 
seed  is  blessed." 

But  the  great  number  of  these  applications; — this  is 
your  third  plea.  And  I  might  dispose  of  this  in  a  very 
summary  way,  by  simply  replying,  What  then  ?  Is  this 
a  reason  why  you  should  give  to  none  of  these  objects? — 
Ah,  what  would  become  of  you,  if  God  should  act  thus? 
if  he  should  exclude  you,  because  such  multitudes  cry 
unto  him  daily  ?  or  if  he  should  be  weary  of  the  "con- 
tinual coming"  with  which  you  have  to  supplicate  his 
compassion,  and  refuse  any  longer  to  hear  you? 

This,  however,  is  not  the  only,  nor  the  true  answer  to 
this  excuse.  To  expose  it,  we  must  consider  what  it 
supposes.  It  really  assumes  that  you  have  already  given 
all  which  you  ought  to  give;  but  are  you  prepared  to 
affirm  this  ?  Make  the  calculation,  and  decide  this  mat- 
ter for  yoursel  f.  In  the  first  place,  deduct  those  dona- 
tions, which  cannot,  by  any  self-deception,  be  styled 
charity;  those  I  mean  which  were  only  bids  for  public 
applause,  or  in  which  love,  obedience  to  God  was  not  the 
motive.  Strike  out  all  these,  then  take  what  remains 
and  measure  it  by  the  standard  of  the  Bible.  Compare  it 
with  the  libeiv.lity  of  the  first  Christians,  who  gave  all 
they  possessed  for  the  support  of  the  indigent. 

Or,  if  you  regard  their  conduct  as  a  holy  excess,  which 
I  grant  it  was, — compare  your  contributions  with  a  stand- 
ard to  which  you  cannot  object,  that,  namely,  which  was 
prescribed  to  the  Jews,  from  whom  God  exacted  a  tariff 
for  religious  purposes,  amounting  in  the  aggregate  to 
one-third  of  their  annual  income.  Judged  by  this  divine 
regulation,  how  does  this  plea  appear  ? 

I  am  well  aware,  my  brethren,  that  the  Gospel  does  not 
prescribe  any  such  rule,  any  rule  at  all  for  us ;  but  it  is 
for  a  reason  which  ought  to  inflame  our  souls  and  con- 
strain us  to  the  noblest  munificence.  Before  the  sacrifice 
on  Calvary,  (rod  was  exact,  he  arranged  everything,  en- 
forced everything  as  to  the  sums  to  be  given  in  behalf  of 
religion'  and  benevolence.  Since  that  amazing  deed  of 
love,  he  makes  no  rules,  he  enjoins  no  amounts,  he  seems 


The  Good  Samaritan.  89 

to  regard  it  as  unworthy  of  Christians  that  any  sum 
should  be  assessed  upon  them,  he  simply  points  to  the 
cross  and  says,  "Ye  know  the  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,  that  though  lie  was  rich,  yet  for  your  sakes  he 
became  poor,  that  ye  through  his  poverty  might  be  rich," 
and  he  leaves  it  to  our  own  hearts  to  impose  the  law  of 
love  which  has  superseded  the  law  of  compulsion,  and  to 
prescribe  the  limits  to  our  charity. 

Yes,  all  is  now  confided  to  our  hearts.  Jesus  leaves  it 
to  our  gratitude  to  determine  the  measure  of  our  liberal- 
ity. Can  we  abuse  this  confidence,  and  in  the  multiplied 
wants  and  miseries  of  our  race,  find  a  motive  for  our 
covetousness  ? 

After  all,  however,  where  there  are  so  many  solicita- 
tions, are  we  not  bound  to  be  prudent  in  the  bestowal  of 
our  charities  ?  and  to  discriminate  carefully  between  ob- 
jects so  numerous?  Unquestionably.  I  fully  concur  in 
this  view.  In  fact,  it  is  upon  this  very  argument  that  I 
rest  the  claims  of  the  Society  which  solicits  your  contri- 
butions. I  wHl  not,  therefore,  consider  it  separately,  but, 
uniting  it  with  our  last  article,  i  will  abridge  the  discus- 
sion and  so  finish  this  discourse. 

III.  Yes,  my  hearers,  when  you  appeal  to  me,  whether 
there  is  not  great  danger  of  imposition,  and  if  it  be  not 
our  duty  to  distinguish  cautiously  between  the  different 
objects  which  are  presented,  1  answer,  Certainly;  and  be- 
hold the  simplest  of  all  issues  upon  which  I  am  willing 
to  leave  the  case  I  am  advocating.  You  all  know  the 
members  of  this  benevolent  association,  you  are  well  ac- 
quainted with  these  Christian  women.  If  now  you  be- 
lieve them  capable  of  any  deception but  no,  I  will 

not  insult  them,  nor  offend  you,  by  the  supposition; — 
if,  however,  you  believe  them  wanting  in  judgment  and 
diligence,  if  you  really  fear  that  they  will  misapply  your 
liberalities,  if,  in  a  word,  you  do  not  regard  them  as  en- 
tirely qualified  to  be  the  almoners  of  your  bounty; — then 
reject  the  suit  1  am  urging;  do  more,  rise  up  and 
pronounce  their  condemnation.  But  you  will  not,  can- 
not do  this.  These  ladies  have  your  full,  unbounded 
confidence;  and,  as  I  said,  I  might  safely  rest  the   cause 


90  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 


here,  not  doubting  that  you  will,  by  your  conduct,  assure 
them  not  only  of  your  esteem,  but  of  your  cordial  appro- 
bation. 

I  feel,  however,  that  to  leave  the  cause  here  will  not 
be  doing  it  justice  ;  it  would  be  to  place  it  only  on  a  foot- 
ing with  many  other  noble  enterprises;  whereas  I  venture 
to  affirm  that  few  charities  combine  so  many  excellences; 
at  least  it  is  certain  that  none  can  correspond  more  exact- 
ly to  all  the  qualities  of  that  benevolence  which  the  Sa- 
viour here  so  strongly  recommends ;  as  to  which  he  says 
to  each  of  us,  "Go  thou,  and  do  likewise." 

For  what  is  the  lirst  trait  in  the  charity  of  the  Samar- 
itan? It  is  Disinterestedness.  His  kindness  was  to  a 
stranger;  one  whom  he  had  probably  never  seen  before, 
and  who  had  upon  him  no  other  claim  than  that  he  was 
a  man  and  a  sufferer.  And  to-day  you  are  invited  to  im- 
itate him  in  this  quality  of  mercy.  Your  generous  aid  is 
sought  for  those  whom  you  do  not  know — f  jr  the  poor,  the 
aged,  the  diseased,  the  wretched  sons  and  daughters  of 
affliction  and  want,  pining  in  comfortless  abodes,  shiver- 
ing with  cold,  stretched  upon  beds  of  languishing. 

What  is  the  next  trait  in  the  charity  of  the  Samaritan? 
It  is  its  catholic  spirit.  Too  often  our  donations  only 
prove  our  sectarian  zeal;  and  are  offered,  not  under  the 
influence  of  our  love  to  Jesus  and  humanity  ,  but  under 
the  influence  of  party  prejudice  or  pride.  In  the  parable 
Jesus  designs  especially  to  guard  against  this  spirit. 
Hence  he  selects  a  Samaritan — one  of  a  people  hated  by 
the  Jews  for  their  heresies— as  the  benefactor  of  the 
wounded  Jew.  And  here  again  this  enterprise  breathes 
the  very  love  which  Jesus  commends.  In  their  visits 
and  deeds  of  mercy,  these  ladies  know  nothing  of  sects  or 
parties.  Enough  for  them  that  human  beings  are  in  dis- 
tress; and  that  they  can  minister  to  their  wants,  and,  by 
prayer  and  counsel,  can  lead  them  to  Jesus  and  salvation. 

The  third  characteristic  of  the  Samaritan's  charity, 
which  Jesus  enjoins  and  I  beseech  you  to  copy,  is  its  gen- 
erosity. Upon  this  point  Paul  uses  a  phrase  full  of 
meaning,!  had  almost  said,  of  irony.  He  speaks  of  a 
giving  which  is  a  matter  of  " covetousness ; "  and  we  see 
the  force  of  his  remark.     A  man  who  refuses  to  give  may 


The  Good  Samaritan.  91 

be  a  liberal  man  who  does  not  approve  of  the  cause;  but 
by  giving,  a  man  acknowledges  the  excellence  of  the 
object;  and  if  the  sum  contributed  be  grossly  dispropor- 
tioned  to  his  means,  he  gives  the  strongest  proof  of  the 
mean  love  of  filthy  lucre  which  stifles  all  noble  feelings 
in  his  bosom.  Measured  by  the  Saviour's  rule  in  the 
case  of  the  widow  and  her  mite,  the  conduct  of  the 
Samaritan  was  munificent.  For  though  on  a  journey, 
he  stops;  he  pours  into  the  wounds  the  oil  and  wine  pro- 
vided for  his  own  use;  he  sets  the  wounded  man  upon 
his  beast,  and,  walking  by  his  side,  carries  him  to  the 
nearest  inn,  where  he  remains  all  that  day  and  night 
nursing  him.  Nor  does  this  satisfy  him.  He  leaves  a 
sum  of  money — probably  all  he  had,  with  the  host; — 
and,  bidding  him  to  take  care  of  his  guest,  he  pledges 
himself,  without  stint,  to  repay  any  expenses  incurred 
for  his  relief  and  comfort. 

I  will  only  add,  that  the  charity  of  the  Samaritan  was 
as  prompt,  as  it  was  disinterested  and  generous.  Many 
feel  for  the  poor  and  suffering,  and  mean  to  succor  them; 
but  they  delay  the  remedy  until  the  patient,  dies.  With 
them  evil  is  wrought,  not  by  want  of  heart,  but  of 
thought.  What  a  contrast  in  the  active  beneficence  here 
commended ;  for,  though  it  was  most  inconvenient,  the 
heart  of  the  Samaritan  would  defer  nothing;  he  acts  at 
once.  And  if  ever  it  was  true,  that  he  who  delays  refuses, 
while  he  gives  twice  who  gives  quickly,  it  is  so  to-day  ; 
for  this  noble  work  of  mercy  must  cease,  unless  it  be  at 
once  and  liberally  patronized. 

My  friends,  this  last  thought  is  so  important,  that  I 
desire  to  leave  it  impressed  upon  your  minds.  I  am 
aware  that  rich  men,  who  do  very  little  during  life, 
sometimes  make  some  reparation  in  a  dying  hour;  and 
of  course,  charitable  legacies  are  to  be  commended.  But 
in  every  view  it  is  far  better  to  be  our  own  executors 
of  such  bounties.  I.  repeat  that  I  admire  those  bequests 
which  are  made  for  purposes  of  benevolence,  and  I  blush 
as  I  think  that  men  of  the  world,  even  infidels,  have,  by 
such  acts,  caused  thousands  to  bless  their  memories, 
while  professed  Christians  so  often  cling,  even  on  their 
death- beds,  to  that  lust  which  starves  the  soul  here,  and 


92  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

damns  it  in  eternity.  After  all,  however,  there  is  gener- 
ally something  suspicions  in  this  tardy,  posthumous 
charity.  A  man  devotes  his  "whole  life  to  the  acquisi- 
sition  of  money,  hoarding  it  with  sordid  avarice;  and 
yields  to  the  painful  necessity  of  parting  with  a  portion 
of  it,  only  when  death  violently  relaxes  his  gripe  upon  all. 
If  this  ue  charity,  what  is  covetousness  ?  Such  w  man  virt  u- 
aily  confesses  thai  his  heart  is  as  base  as  ever,  that  were  it 
possible,  he  would  still  he  as  grasping  as  ever.  No  it  is  not 
charity  he  feels,  it  is  only  a  craven  terror  which  extorts  a 
reluctant  sacrifice.  Or  rather,  it  is  the  same  low,  mer- 
cenary ruling  passion  of  his  life,  which  now,  when  he 
can  no  longer  speculate  and  invest  upon  earth,  seeks  to 
speculate  and  invest  in  heaven. 

How  much  wiser,  happier  he  who,  by  cheerful,  gener- 
ous giving,  enlarges  his  own  soul,  elevates  his  own  char- 
acter; and,  by  habitual  deeds  of  mercy  bestowed  out  of  a 
heart  glowing  with  gratitude  to  Jesus  and  love  to  man- 
kind, provides  for  himself  "treasure  in  the  heavens  which 
faileth  not,  where  no  thief  approacheth,  nor  moth  cor- 
rupteth,"  secures  the  fulfillment  of  (hat  promise,  "They 
cannot  recompense  thee,  but  thou  shall  be  recompensed 
at  the  resurrection  of  the  just."  lie  transported  his 
fortune  to  heaven  and  has  gone  there  to  enjoy  it"  This 
was  the  noble  epitaph  written  upon  the  tomb  of  Atolus 
of  liheims.  What  a  contrast  between  such  a  tine  eulo- 
gium  and  the  comments,  may  I  not  say  the  satires,  we 
every  day  hear  at  the  funerals  of  our  rich  men — some  of 
them  Christian  men,  so  called. 

"He  left  a  large  fortune"  He  left  it,  How  melan- 
choly that  he  had  to  leave  it.  lie  toiled  for  it  day  and 
night,  He  amassed  it  from  the  smallest  begin- 
nings, and  by  the  severest  thrift.  It  was  all  his 
care  and  thought.  He  loved  it  and  he  loved  to 
increase  it,  It  was  hard  to  part  with  it;  but  he  has 
gone.  He  sent  none  of  it  before  him  by  his  charities. 
He  carried  none  of  it  with  him.  He  left  it  all.  lie 
might  have  acted  more  wisely,  might-  have  remitted  large 
sums  before  him  to  enrich  him  on  hisarrival.  Over  and 
over,  had  the  invitations  and  promises  of  God  been 
urged  upon  his  attention.     "Blessed  are  the  merciful,  for 


The  Goo  I  Sama/ritan.  93 


they  shall  receive  mercy."  "Give  and  it  shall  be  given 
unto  you,  good  measure,  pressed  down,  and  running 
over.  "  Whoso  stoppeth  his  ears  al  the  cry  of  the  poor, 
he  shall  cry  himself  and  nol  be  heard."  These  and  sim- 
ilar truths  he  well  knew,  and  every  day  opportunities 
were  offered  him  to  lay  up  enduring  riches,  to  become 
rich  toward  God."  Bui  he  was  absorbed  in  laying  up 
treasure  on  earth.  And  he  has  been  compelled  to  leave 
it  and  go  into  eternity,  like  Dives,  too  poor  to  buy  a  drop 
of  cold  water  to  cool  his  parched  tongue. 

Hut  I  will  not  detain  vou  longer.  I  leave  the  case 
with  you.  That  you  will  give,  I  have  no  doubt.  This, 
however,  does  nol  satisfy  me;  for  the  winter  is  already 
upon  us  with  almost  unprecedented  severity,  and  the 
funds  of  the  Society  are  entirely  exhausted.  Unless, 
therefore,  the  sums  you  contribute  exceed  those  usually 
received  on  occasions  like  this,  we  shall  be  compelled 
to  appeal  to  you  again.  And  though  this  -night  not 
weary  you,  it  would  be  most  painful  to  us.  Relieve  us 
from  such  a  necessity.  Terminate  our  importunity,  by 
terminating  our  wants. 

Let  the  response  you  give  to  our  petition  be  such  as 
these  noble  women  have  a  right  to  expect.  Toil, 
fatigue,  exposure,  care,  pain  they  arc  ready  to  welcome. 
They  look  to  you  to  bid  them  God-speeu,  and  to  give 
them  such  an  out  tit  as  shall  enable  them  to  go  as  angels  of 
mercy  to  tiie  hovels  of  the  destitute  and  wretched.  Let 
your  liberality  be  worthy  of  such  a  cause.  Let  it  be 
worthy  of  yourselves,  of  all  I  have  known  of  you  from 
the  moment  1  became  your  pastor.  Let  it  be  such  as 
becomes  this  sanctuary.  It  was  with  reason  that  the 
cripple  was  laid  at  the  gate  of  the  temple  to  ask  alms; 
for,  entering  there  to  supplicate  God's  mercy,  their 
prayers  taught  all  who  passed  to  render  deeds  of  mercy. 
To-day  the  poor,  the  aged,  the  sick,  the  halt,  the  blind, 
lie  not  at  the  gate,  but  in  the  temple  itself.  To-day  this 
sanctuary  is  converted  into  an  almshouse.  Through 
their  representatives  these  miserable  objects  of  compas- 
sion Stretch  out  their  hands  to  you  ;  and  .Jesus,  putting 
them  in  his  place,  says,  "The  poor  ye  have  always  with 

you."     "Inasmuch  as  ye  do  it  unto   them,    ye  do  it  unto 

4* 


94  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

me."     Who  can  refuse  anything  to  such  an  appeal,  pre- 
sented in  such  a  place? 

Lastly — death,  and  the  judgment  after  death;  give  in 
view  of  these.  When  death  shall  be  closing  your  eyes 
to  all  earthly  things,  of  how  little  real  profit  will  appear 
all  you  have  gained,  and  spent,  and  laid  up  for  yourself; 
what  ineffable  consolation  in  remembering  anything:  done 
for  Christ  and  for  the  cause  of  humanity.  When  Elliott, 
the  missionary,  was  dying  he  said,  "Charity  never  fail- 
eth ;  my  strength  fails  me,  my  sight  fails  me,  my  life 
fails  me  ;  but  the  charities  which  the  grace  of  God  led 
me  to  give  failed  me  not."  And  Baxter,  on  his  dying 
bed,  quoted  that  remark  and  added,  "Such,  too,  is  my 
experience  now.  J  have  laboured  much,  I  have  written 
much,  1  have  preached  much;  but  I  cannot  think  of 
these.  It  is  only  the  charity  I  have  given  which  I  can 
recall  with  pleasure,  with  thankfulness  to  God."  What 
touching  commentaries  these  upon  that  promise, 
"Blessed  is  he  that  considereth  the  poor,  the  Lord  will 
deliver  him  in  time  of  trouble,  the  Lord  will  strengthen 
him  upon  the  bed  of  languishing;  thou  wilt  make  all 
his  bed  in  his  sickness." 

My  dearly  beloved  brethren  and  friends,  let  us  so  act 
to-day,  and  in  all  our  future  lives,  that  we  may  lay  up 
in  store  for  our  dying  chambers  these  peaceful  recollec- 
tions, these  divine  supports,  these  heavenly  consolations. 
Let  us  do  more.  Let  us  so  act  to-day,  and  in  all  our 
future  lives,  that  when  the  great  white  throne  shall  be 
spread,  and  before  the  gathered  multitudes  around  that 
throne,  the  Judge  shall  say  to  us,  Inasmuch  as  ye  did  it 
unto  these,  ye  did  it  unto  me.  I  was  a  hungered,  and 
ye  gave  me  meat;  I  was  thirsty,  and  ye  gave  me  drink; 
I  was  a  stranger,  and  ye  took  me  in ;  naked  and  ye  clothed 
me;  I  was  sick  and  ye  visited  me;  1  was  in  prison,  and 
ye  came  unto  me.  Come,  ye  blessed  of  my  Father,  inherit 
the  kingdom  prepared  for  you  from  the  foundation  of 
the  world. 

May  God  grant  us  grace  thus  to  act  and  live.  May  he 
thus  crown  the  deeds  his  grace  inclined  and  enabled  us 
to  perform.  To  Him  be  honor,  and  glory,  and  majesty, 
forever.     Amen. 


}\'//(t/  mill  )'<>u  <lo  /i'il//  Jesus0/  95 


.Sbrrmou  &irtfi» 


WHAT    WILL  YOU    DO    WITH 

JESUS  ? 

"What  shall  I  do  then  with  Jesus?"— Matthew  xxvii:  22. 

YOU  are  familiar  with  the  occasion  of  this  question. 
Jesus  stood  before  the  Roman  governor,  and  before 
the  priests  and  the  people  as  one  who  had  attracted  uni- 
versal attention,  who  had  asserted  his  title  to  the  highest 
honors,  even  those  which  are  the  peculiar  prerogative  of 
Deity.  For  thus  making  himself  equal  with  God,  he  had 
been  arrested,  and  Pilate  must  make  some  disposition  of 
his  case.  He  wishes  to  discharge  him,  declaring  that 
neither  Herod  nor  himself  could  find  any  fault  in. him. 
The  popular  voice,  however,  demands  his  crucifixion. 

As  it  was  customary  to  liberate  some  prisoner  at  the 
paschal  feast,  the  Roman  governor  proposes  to  release 
Jesus;  but  the  chief  priests  (when  was  there  ever  a  per- 
secution except  at  the  instigation  of  priests  ?)  "persuaded 
the  multitude  that  they  should  ask  Barabbas  and  destroy 
Jesus."  In  this  dilemma,  Pilate  proposes  the  question  I 
have  read  as  our  text,  "  What  shall  I  do  then  with  Jesus?" 

Men  and  brethren,  the  hour  hastens  on  when  Jesus 
will  have  to  do  with  each  of  us  at  his  awful  tribunal. — 
uWe  must  all  appear  before  the  judgment  seat  of  Christ." 
"Behold  he  comet h  with  clouds;  and  every  eye  shall  see 
him,  and  they  also  which  pierced  him;  and  all  the  kin- 
dreds of  the  earth  shall  wail  because  of  him."  I  do  not 
wonderthat,  in  view  of  the  solemn  retributions  of  that 
hour,  Paul,  praying  for  his  beloved  Onesiphorus,  forgets 
everything  else  and  exclaims,  "  The  Lord  grant  that  he 
may  find  mercy  of  the  Lord  in  that  day."     In  that  day 


96  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

what  will  Jesus  do  with  us  ?  Nor  need  we  be  at  a  loss  to 
answer  this  enquiry;  for  the  decision  then  is  suspended 
upon  the  practical  reply  we  give  to  the  question  now  sub- 
mitted to  each  of  us,  What  are  you  doing,  what  will  you 
do  with  Jesus  ? 

I.  I  have  said  that  Jesus  stood  before  the  governor  and 
the  Jews  as  one  who  had  attracted  universal  attention; 
and  thus  he  stands  before  us.  "Behold  the  man  !"  ex- 
claimed Pilate.  For  eighteen  centuries  the  world  has 
been  beholding  the  man.  For  eighteen  centuries  he  has 
been  the  object  of  the  profoundest  interest  to  human 
minds  and  hearts.  For  nearly  eighteen  centuries  he  has 
been  the  centre  and  source  of  the  most  potent  influences 
which  have  disturbed,  agitated,  upheaved  society.  Of 
these  influences,  all  that  can  be  properly  ascribed  to 
him  have  been  most  benignant.  They  have  banished 
idolatry,  barbarism,  cruelty,  vice,  misery ;  and  have  dif- 
fused light,  hope,  peace,  purity,  happiness.  And  those 
baleful  influences  which  have  been  unjustly  imputed  to 
him,  (for  we  have  too  much  cause  to  exclaim,  0  Religion  ! 
what  crimes  have  been  perpetrated  in  thy  name! ) — these 
proclaim  with  almost  greater  emphasis,  how  vast,  how 
resistless  is  the  power  he  sways  over  the  world. 

Now  here  is  a  remarkable  fact,  what  will  you  do  with 
it  ?  This  fact  is,  that  more  than  eighteen  hundred  years 
ago,  there  appeared  on  the  platform  of  human  affairs  a 
Being  who,  as  to  his  outward  conditions  was  a  poor,  ob- 
scure, unlettered  Hebrew  youth;  that  his  whole  life, — 
thoughts,  words,  actions, — was  a  mysterious  exception  to 
the  laws  which  prevail  among  the  children  of  men  ;  that 
he  was  not  only  sinless  by  tiie  confession  of  his  enemies 
who  closely  watched  him  and  by  the  testimony  of  his 
friends  avIio  were,  constantly  with  him,  but  that  his  char- 
acter and  doctrines  placed  him  unapproachably  above  all 
who  ever  bore  our  humanity;  that  his  ministry  was  very 
brief — only  three  years;  that,  though  he  devoted  himself 
constantly  to  "doing  good,"  the  world  could  not  endure 
him,  hated  him,  murdered  him;  that  in  all  succeeding 
ages  his  influence  has  not  only  mingled  in  the  concerns 
of  humanity,  but  has  been  their  grand  controlling  ele- 
ment.    This  is  the  fact,  what  will  you  do  with  it? 


What  will  You  do  with  Jesus  f  07 


You  must  do  something  with  it.  You  cannot  get  rid 
of  it.  It  meets  the  historian  in  all  his  researches.  When 
lie  explores  the  literature,  laws,  customs,  morals  of  civi- 
lized nations,  lie  discovers  great  diversities;  they  are 
modified  by  climate,  by  hereditary  prejudices,  by  venera- 
tion for  ancestral  sanctities,  by  differences  in  forms  of 
government;  but  this  great  fact  pervades  them  all.  So 
it  is,  somehow  or  other  so  it  has  gor,  to  be,  that  Jesus  is 
found  penetrating  the  library  in  which  the  scholar  trims 
his  midnight  lamp,  the  studio  where  the  artist  spreads 
his  canvass  or  moulds  the  plastic  marble,  and  giving  tone 
and  character  to  their  compositions;  that  he  invades  sen- 
ate chambers  and  halls  of  legislation,  and  frames  the 
statutes  enacted  there;  that  he  presides  in  courts  of  just- 
ice, and  shapes  their  decisions;  that  he  dictates  in  cabi- 
nets and  prescribes  decrees  to  kings  and  emperors;  that 
he  enters  palaces  and  hovels,  and  impresses  himself  upon 
the  habits  and  conduct  of  rulers,  nations,  peoples  every- 
where. 

And  what  the  historian  detects  in  his  investigations 
we  all  feel.  Even  those  who  reject  the  saving  efficacy  of 
the  Gospel,  who  have  no  hope  of  gaining  its  eternal  re- 
wards, at  once,  almost  unconsciously  confess  that  the 
principles  of  the  Gospel  ought  co  govern  men  in  their 
lives;  just  as  the  mariner  who  never  expects  to  possess 
the  North  Star,  knows  that  he  must  guide  his  vessel  by 
its  light.  The  moralist  admits  that  they  are  the  only 
foundation  of  virtue;  the  statesman,  that  they  are  the 
only  basis  of  national  prosperity  and  safety;  and  princes 
and  potentates — though  wicked  men — appeal  to  these 
principles  as  the  highest  law,  as  the  law  of  all  laws,  as 
final  and  conclusive  with  reference  to  all  the  enterprises, 
reformations,  revolutions  they  undertake. 

Xow  here  is  a  marvellous  thing,  a  most  striking  phe- 
nomenon, what  will  you  do  with  it?  how  can  you  explain 
it?  As  Pilate  had  to  dispose  of  Jesus  in  some  way,  so 
we  have  to  dispose  of  this  singular  anomaly.  At  this 
day  it  is  too  late  to  say  that  you  will  do  nothing  with  it. 
You  must  have  to  do  with  it.  For  this  is  no  trifle,  it  is 
a  matter  of  infinite,  urgent  importance,  and  it  pursues 
you,  compasses  you,  confronts  you  everywhere  witii  inex- 
orable earnestness  and  importunity. 


98  Richard  Fuller  s  Sermons. 


If  you  return  to  your  homes,  Jesus  is  there,  meddling 
with  everything  dearest  to  your  heart ;  he  is  in  the  old 
family  Bible  on  the  stand  ;  he  is  in  the  hymn  book  on 
your  table;  he  is  in  the  volumes  ranged  along  }rour  li- 
brary; he  is  in  the  nursery  among  your  children  ;  your 
aged  mother  speaks  to  you  of  Jesus,  and  tells  you  what 
he  has  been  to  her  during  her  long  pilgrimage  ;  your  wife 
falls  at  the  feet  of  Jesus  and  loves  and  worships  him; 
even  the  infant  at  your  knees  lisps  the  name  of  Jesus  and 
clasps  its  little  hands  in  prayer  to  him.  Indeed  you 
would  be  shocked  if  Jesns  were  not  in  your  house,  shed- 
ding his  influence  there.  If  you  visit  the  schools  where 
the  intellectual,  social,  moral  character  of  your  family  is 
forming,  Jesus  is  there.  If  you  repair  to  places  of  busi- 
ness— whatever  may  be  the  secret  turnings,  windings, 
shiftings  of  their  practical  negotiations,  all  men  agree 
that  their  transactions  ought  to  be  regulated  by  his  laws. 
And  then  Sabbaths,  and  churches,  and  pulpits,  and 
Sunday  schools  and  every  benevolent  association,  and 
every  charitable  institution — in  all  these  Jesus  encoun- 
ters you,  meets  you  as  the  pervading,  animating  soul  of 
all.  How  do  you  account  for  this?  How  has  he  come 
to  be  thus  blended  in  all  our  pursuits,  interests,  joys, 
sorrows,  hopes  ?  There  is  no  law  of  the  land  conferring 
this  sovereignty  upon  him;  yet  here  he  is  before  us, 
around  us,  within  us  exerting  this  sovereignty,  and  none 
durst  ask  him,  Who  art  thou  ?  whence  hast  thou  this 
power?  who  gave  thee  this  authority?  We  feel  his  power, 
we  acquiesce  in  it  instinctively  and  of  course. 

I  am  well  aware  that,  at  remote  intervals,  some  mere 
human  actor  on  the  stage  of  the  world  has,  for  a  little 
brief  season,  drawn  upon  himself  the  eyes  of  men,  and 
engaged  their  admiration  and  homage ;  but  these  honors 
have  been  rendered  by  only  a  limited  portion  of  mankind, 
and  they  can  be  easily  explained.  They  have  been  won 
by  exalted  position,  or  by  surpassing  genius,  or  by  armies 
and  fleets,  by  victories  whose  splendor  has  for  a  while 
dazzled  the  bleared  vision  of  fallen  depraved  humanity. 

Just  the  reverse  of  all  this  is  true  as  to  the  supremacy 
of  Jesus.  All  observation  shows  that,  if  a  man  of  tran- 
scendent    power    arise    in    one    nation,  other    nations 


What  will  You  do  with  Jesus?  99 


immediately  begin  to  regard  his  movements  with 
jealousy;  and  by  diplomacy,  by  detraction,  by  war,  they 
seek  to  cripple  his  influence, — shrewdly  suspecting— nay 
knowing  certainly,  that  such  greatness  is  sure  to  foster  a 
restless  and  dangerous  ambition.  But  all  civilized  nations 
cheerfully  recognize  the  sovereignty  of  Jesus.  As  to  him 
the  only  rivalry  among  princes  is,  who  shall  be  styled 
the  most  Christian,  and  they  vie  with  each  other  in 
blazoning  upon  their  escutcheons,  flags  and  banners,  the 
emblems  of  their  loyalty. 

And  he  has  established  this  invisible  throne  with  no 
earthly  resources,  with  all  human  agencies  banded  against 
him.  Without  wealth,  without  arms,  without  intrigue 
or  violence;  with  the  wealth,  the  arms,  the  intrigue  and 
violence  of  the  whole  world  in  deadly  hostility  to  him, 
he  has  triumphed  gloriously.  The  empires  founded  by 
Alexander,  Charlemagne,  Napoleon  soon  crumbled  away, 
but  in  each  succeeding  age  Jesus  has  been  extending  his 
kingdom.  At  this  day  he  reigns  in  the  hearts  of  millions 
who  would  die  for  him;  and  even  where  his  spiritual 
sceptre  is  not  acknowledged,  with  the  exception  of  coun- 
tries still  sunk  in  the  darkness  of  paganism,  the  entire 
population  of  the  earth  confesses  the  imperial  influence 
of  him  who  is  shaping  the  growing  stature  of  the  world, 
who,  holiest  among  the  mighty,  and  mightiest  among  the 
holy,  hath,  with  his  pierced  hand  hurled  dynasties  from 
their  old  foundations  and  is  ruling  the  spirit  of  the 
ages.  Such,  indeed,  is  this  tacit  concession  of  his  power,  so 
commensurate  with  the  progress  of  mankind,  that  in  all 
classical  vocabularies,  Christianity  and  Civilization  mean 
the  same  thing. 

I  do  not  think  that  the  advocates  of  the  Gospel  have 
availed  themselves  sufficiently  of  this  argument.  It  is 
entirely  unanswerable.  Men  may  cavil  and  carp,  but  it 
will  cost  something  more  than  a  sneer  to  set  aside  this 
fact.       Here  it  is,  surrounding,  pressing  them  like  the 

atmosphere,  and  mocking  to  scorn  all  their  shallow,  ribald 
flippancies.  It  is  on  all  hands  admitted,  that  since  the 
mysterious  birth  at  Bethlehem  a  new  moral  power  lias 
been  at  work,  gradually  but  irresistibly  vancpuishing  op- 
position, and  changing,  elevating  humanity.     Since  that 


100  Richard  Fuller  s  Sermons. 

event  the  truth  is  that  men  have  been  inhabiting  a  new 
world.  How  are  we  to  account  for  this  fact?  At  first, 
when  Jesus  and  his  apostles  began  to  assert  his  pre-eminent 
glory,  I  grant  that  the  burden  of  proof  was  upon  them. 
No  one  was  bound  to  receive  him  until  he  had  shown 
sufficient  cause ;  and  the  demand  of  the  people  was  very- 
reasonable.  "What  signs  show^st  thou,  then,  that  we 
may  see  and  believe  thee?  What  dost  thou  work?" 
But  now  the  burden  of  proof  is  thrown  upon  the  oppo- 
sers  of  the  Gospel.  They  must  explain  how  Jesus  has 
achieved  these  triumphs.  They  have  been  eighteen 
hundred  years  trying  to  solve  this  problem,  and  confess 
that  they  have  failed. 

Gamaliel  well  said,  "  If  this  counsel  or  this  work  be  of 
man,  it  will  come  to  nought."  Has  it  came  to  nought? 
Is  there  one  in  this  audience  who  will  pretend  that  it 
Avas  of  men  ?  Not  one.  Not  one.  The  very  idea  is 
preposterous.  What,  he,  all  whose  doctrines  assailed  and 
condemned  the  most  cherished  passions  and  prejudices  of 
every  class,  won  this  triumph  by  human  devices;  he  who 
possessed  no  earthly  resources, conquered  by  human  con- 
trivances. No,  and  again,  No.  There  is  but  one  single 
way  out  of  this  dilemma,  and  the  Jewish  "doctor  of  the 
law  "  hit  it  when  he  added,  "  If  it  be  of  God,  ye  cannot 
overthrow  it."  The  ancient  oracle  throws  a  flood  of  light 
upon  the  mysterious  potency  of  this  adorable  Being. 
"Unto  us  a  child  is  born,  unto  us  a  son  is  given,  and  the 
government  shall  be  upon  his  shoulders,  and  his  name 
shall  be  called  Wonderful,  Counsellor,  the  Mighty  God, 
the  Everlasting  Father,  the  Prince  of  Peace."  Yes,  Je- 
sus is  the  Christ,  the  great  promised  deliverer,  "  the  De- 
sire of  all  nations,"  the  predicted  "  seed  of  the  woman''" 
who  should  bruise  the  serpent's  head" — who  has  bruised 
and  will  go  on  bruising  Satan  under  his  feet.  In  the 
mind,  the  conscience,  the  heart  the  deepest  and  most 
crying  wants  of  humanity,  he  was  and  is  felt  to  be  the 
light,  the  truth,  the  Good  lost  hut  now  recovered.  And 
it  this  be  so,  what  will  you  do  then  with  Jesus  ?  0  guilt, 
madness  worse  than  brutish  to  reject  him.  Are  you  ca- 
pable of  this  infatuation  ?  Will  you,  can  you  imitate  the 
Jews  and  cry  out,  "Away  with  him,  away  with  him,  cru- 


]Yluif  will  Vou  do  villi  Jesusl  101 


cify  him,  crucify  him,"  and  by  your  conduct  mock  him, 
and  smite  him.  and  spit  upon  him,  and  crucify  to  your- 
Belves  the  Son  of  God  ami  put  him  to  an  open  shame? 

II.  But,  my  brethren,  when  Pilate  proposed  the  enquiry 
in  our  text,  Jesus  not  only  stood  before  the  multitude  as 
an  object  of  universal  attention,  he  was  also  a  Being  in- 
vested with  every  interest  which  can  arrest  and  subdue 
the  most  obdurate  soul.  "Then  came  Jesus  forth,  wear- 
ing the  crown  of  thorns  and  the  purple  robe.  And  Pilate 
said.  "  Behold  the  man."  To  day,  not  only  this,  amazing 
spectacle,  but  all  the  dismal  tragedy  which  followed  is 
repeated  in  our  midst  and  before  our  eyes.  And,  now, 
what  will  you  do  with  this  injured,  crucified  Jesus? 

In  making-  this  assertion  do  not  think  I  am  drawing 
upon  your  imaginations;  I  am  only  stating  what  the  Bi- 
ble expressly  declares.  "0  foolish  Galatians,  who  hath 
bewitched  you,  that  you  should  not  obey  the  truth 
before  whose  eyes  Jesus  Christ  hath  been  evidently  set 
forth  crucified  among  you."  What  does  the  Holy  Spirit 
teach  us  by  this  language?  These  Galatians  lived  at  a 
distance  from  Jerusalem  where  the  Saviour  suffered,  nor 
does  the  apostle  refer  at  all  to  their  presence  at  that 
scene.  In  whatever  sense  it  was  said  to  these  Galatians, 
it  may  also  be  said  to  us,  that  "Jesus  Christ  hath  been 
evidently  set  forth  crucified  among  you;"  for  it  is  mani- 
fest that  the  declaration  recognizes  the  ministry  of  the 
Gospel  by  preaching  and  by  the  ordinances,  as  effectually 
bringing  us  in  contact  with  the  great  sacrifice  for  sin  of- 
fered upon  Calvary. 

I  say  the  ministrations  of  the  pulpit.  By  these  "Jesus 
Christ  is  evidently  set  forth  crucified  among  you."  For 
the  crucifixion  and  all  its  retinue  of  suffering  and  blood 
are  truths,  the  great  facts  on  which  the  entire  Gospel 
hinges;  and  with  which  mere  bodily  presence  and  vision 
had  nothing  to  do.  If  we  believe  them,  they  enter  and 
remain  in  our  minds,  we  are  conversant  with  them  as 
grand  moral  elements;  nor  could  our  convictions  nor 
their  power  receive  any  accession  from  the  aid  of  our 
senses.  God  who  formed  the  physical  organs  to  take  in 
outward  objects,  has  endowed  us  with  faculties  by  which 


102  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 


we  reason  upon  evidence  and  rest  upon  certainty.  It  is 
because  preaching  is  God's  ordinance  that  we  "magnify 
our  office"  and  venture  to  tell  yon,  that  yon  have  no  right 
to  listen  to  Christ's  ministers  as  to  other  speakers. — 
Supposing  you  to  regard  them  as  commissioned  by  heav- 
en, why  then  their  messages  are  "not  the  words  of  man, 
but  of  God;"  they  "speak  as  the  oracles  of  God."  They 
may  be  enriched  with  glorious  gifts,  or  may  be  destitute 
of  the  graces  and  eloquence  of  the  orator;  but  the  excel- 
lency of  the  treasure  depends  not  at  all  upon  the  earth- 
en vessels  which  convey  it.  Paul  renounced  the  arts  of 
oratory,  that  the  faith  of  his  hearers  should  not  "stand 
in  the  wisdom  of  men,  but  in  the  power  of  God." — 
Preaching  is  a  divine  ordinance.  I  have  sometimes 
heard  people  say,  We  can  read  better  sermons  at  home. 
I  might  ask  such  persons,  whether  tins  is  the  cause  of 
their  absence  from  the  sanctuary;  and  whether  they  spend 
their  time  reading  these  edifying  discourses?  whether  he 
who  has  piety  enough  to  enjoy  spiritual  exercises  at  home, 
has  not  too  much  piety  to  stay  at  home  when  God  com- 
mands us  "not  to  forsake  the  assembling  of  ourselves  to- 
gether?" This,  however,  only  by  the  way.  What  I 
would  impress  upon  you  is,  that  the  living  ministry  is  an 
ordinance  of  the  Gospel;  and  as  well  therefore,  may  you 
neglect  baptism  under  the  pretence  that  you  can  bailie  in 
purer  water  at  home,  or  slight  the  supper  because  you  have 
better  bread  and  wine  at  home.  Preaching  is  God's  ordi- 
nance. But,  now,  what  is  the  design  of  preaching?  Itis  to 
"set  forth  Christ  crucified  among  you;"  it  is  to  deliver 
to  you  that  which  we  "also  received  how  that  Christ 
died  for  our  sins."  Preaching  is  the  divinely  instituted 
appointment  by  which  you  are  to  be  placed  among  those 
who  thronged  Pilate's  judgment  hall,  to  be  carried  to 
mount  Calvary  and  there  to  have  your  gaze  fixed  upon 
that  amazing  altar,  that  bleeding  victim.  " I determined 
not  to  know  anything  among  you,  save  Jesus  Christ  and 
him  crucified" — this  is  the  abridgment  of  all  our  doctrine. 
"Behold  the  Lamb  of  God  who  taketli  away  the  si/i  of  the 
world,'7 — there  is  the  whole  of  our  message. 

And  the    same  great  truth  is  proclaimed  by  the  ordi- 
nances of  the  Gospel.     One  design  of  baptism  is  to  keep 


What  will  You  do  witJi  Jesusf  103 

before  us  the  sacrificial  death  of  the  Redeemer.  "Know 
ye  not,  that  so  many  of  us  as  were  baptized  into  Jesus 
Christ,  were  baptized  into  his  death?  Therefore  we  are 
buried  with  him  by  baptism  into  death."  And  in  the 
supper  the  consecrated  memorials  revive  and  perpetuate 
the  agony  of  the  cross  with  such  energy  and  pathos,  that 
it  may  be  truly  said  to  us,  "  Christ  Jesus  is  evidently  set 
forth  crucified  among  you." 

To-day,  then,  this  Jesus  stands  before  you  as  he  stood 
before  Pilate  and  the  people.  To-day,  your  gaze  is  settled 
upon  him  as  he  hangs  pale,  and  bleeding,  expiring  upon 
the  cross.  And  turning  upon  you  his  dying  eyes,  he  this 
day  utters  that  touching  invocation,  "Is  it  nothing  to  you? 
Behold  and  see  if  there  be  any  sorrow  like  unto  that 
wherewith  the  Lord  hath  afflicted  me  in  the  day  of  his 
fierce  anger."  My  friends,  are  you  men?  are  you  women? 
— and  can  your  souls  continue  unmoved  by  such  an  ap- 
peal? It  is  no  metaphor,  it  is  a  plain  thing  which  the 
apostle  affirms  when  he  proposes  the  question,  "Who 
hath  bewitched  you,  that  you  should  not  obey  the  truth  ?" 
For,  supposing  your  minds  to  be  rational,  and  the  play 
of  human  feelings  to  be  free  in  your  bosoms,  it  is  impos- 
sible that  you  should  either  discard  an  object  so  absorb- 
ing in  interest,  or  that,  if  you  admit  it  into  your  souls, 
you  should  not  confess  its  strange,  mysterious,  transform- 
ing power.  What  will  you  do,  then,  with  Jesus?  "His 
blood  be  upon  us  and  upon  our  children,"  exclaimed  the 
infuriated  populace.  Will  you  adopt  this  horrible  impre- 
cation? You  shudder  at  the  very  thought.  His  blood 
be  upon  us  and  upon  our  children,  not,  however,  to  curse, 
but  to  bless,  to  purify,  to  save! — such  is  the  Christian's 
prayer.  What  is  yours  ?  How  will  you  treat  this  ador- 
able Saviour  ?  What  will  you  do  with  Jesus? — with 
this  Lamb  of  God  thus  led  to  the  slaughter  for  }Tou? 

III.  A  third  enquiry  is  suggested  by  what  I  have  just 
said;  it  refers  to  the  mediatorial  claims  of  Jesus.  He 
suffered — stooped  to  poverty,  to  contempt,  to  bitter  an- 
guish, to  a  death  the  very  thought  of  which  fills  the  im- 
agination with  horror,  to  all  the  unknown  agony  of  his 
soul — that  he  might  establish  these   claims,    "that    he 


104  Richard  Fidler's  Sermons. 


might  be  Lord  both  of  the  dead  and  the  living."  What 
do  you  say  to  this  demand?  What  will  you  do  with  Je- 
sus who  now  asserts  his  right  to  this  lordship  over  you? 

Here  again  you  must  do  something;  you  cannot  evade 
the  alternative  of  loyalty  or  disloyalty.  Jesus  himself 
declares  there  can  be  no  neutrality.  From  the  throne 
of  God  down  to  the  nethermost  hell,  every  moral  being 
is  cither  honoring  or  resisting  his  demands. 

When  he  wr.s  upon  earth  demons  openly  abjured  him 
and  his  authority;  they  "cried  out,  saying,  What 
have  we  to  do  with  thee,  Jesus  thou  Son  of  God?" 
And  in  all  the  gloomy  regions  of  despair,  devils  and 
damned  spirits  gnash  their  teeth  and  blaspheme  his 
name  in  impotent  rage  and  hate. 

When  heaven  was  opened  to  the  seer  on  Patmos  he 
heard  all  the  abodes  of  glory  resounding  with  the  merits 
of  this  adorable  Being.  "Every  creature  which  is  in 
heaven  heard  I  saying,  Blessing  and  honor,  and 
glory,  and  power,  be  unto  him  that  sitteth  upcn  the 
throne,  and  unto  the  Lamb  forever  and  ever."  The 
Eternal  Father  delights  to  crown  with  glory  the  august 
victor  over  death  and  the  powers  of  darkness.  "Who 
being  in  the  form  of  God,  thought  it  not  robbery  to  be 
equal  with  God,  but  made  himself  of  no  reputation,  and 
took  upon  him  the  form  of  a  servant,  and  was  made  in 
the  likeness  of  men;  and  being  found  in  fashion  as  a 
man,  he  humbled  himself,  and  became  obedient  unto 
death,  even  the  death  of  the  cross.  Wheforere  God  also 
hath  highly  exalted  him,  and  given  him  a  name  which  is 
above  every  name  ;  that  at  the  name  of  Jesus,  every  knee 
should  boAV,  of  things  in  heaven,  and  things  in  earth,  and 
things  under  the  earth,  and  that  every  tongue  should 
confess  that  Jesus  Christ  is  Lord,  to  the  glory  of  God  the 
Father."  "  Unto  the  Son  he  saith,  thy  throne,  0  God,  is 
forever  and  ever."  The  angelic  hosts  bow  in  homage  to 
the  imperial  conquerer.  "I  beheld  and  heard  the  voice 
of  many  angels  round  about  the  throne,  and  the  number 
of  them  was  ten  thousand  times  ten  thousand  and  thou- 
sands of  thousands,  saying  with  a  loud  voice,  Worthy  is 
the  Lamb  that  was  slain  to  receive   power,   and   riches, 


What  mill  You  do  with  Jesus  ¥  105 


and    wisdom,    and    strength,  and    honor  and  glory,  and 
blessing/5 

Above  all,  the  ransomed  in  glory  forever  fill  the  atmos- 
phere with  raptured  strains,  as  they  proclaim  the  regal  su- 
premacy of  him  that  liveth,  and  was  dead,  and  is  alive 
again.  "And  they  sang  a  new  song,  saying,  Thou  art  wor- 
thy to  take  the  book,  and  to  open  the  seals  thereof ;  for  thou 
wast  slain,  and  hast  redeemed  us  to  God  by  thy  blood 
out  of  every  kindred,  and  tongue,  and  people,  and 
nation." 

What  will  you  do  with  these  claims  of  the  glorified 
Jesus?  Is  there  one  here  who  will  dispute  his  merits? 
Perish  the  impiety.  0  no.  If  we  had  a  thousand  hearts 
and  lives  they  would  be  too  few  for  this  princely 
Redeemer.  To  him  are  due  our  reverence,  gratitude, 
and  love.  It  is  our  baunden  duty  to  give  him  our  faith 
and  loyalty.  We  owe  it  to  his  amazing  sacrifice  of  him- 
self, to  receive  him  with  delight  as  a  Saviour  from  sin. 
We  wrong  him,  almost  more  than  we  do  ourselves,  every 
moment  we  neglect  so  great  salvation.  To  him  is  due 
our  prompt  and  unqualified  obedience.  Reason,  con- 
science, every  magnanimous,  every  honorable  sentiment 
ought  to  compel  us,  with  soft  but  resistless  violence,  to 
consecrate  ourselves  to  his  service.  We  ought  to  rejoice 
that  the  universe  contains  such  a  treasure,  that  he  has 
inaugurated  his  glorious  kingdom  upon  earth,  and  that 
he  reigns  and  will  forever  reign  in  heaven. 

Sinners,  miserable  captives  of  death  and  hell,  what  do 
yon  say  to  these  claims?  0,  ye  who  have  been  bought 
with  a  price,  ye  who  have  been  redeemed  with  the  pre- 
cious blood  of  the  Son  of  God,  to-day  I  press  this  solemn 
enquiry  upon  you.  I  point  to  the  manger,  the  garden, 
the  cross,  and  I  ask,  ought  not  the  love  of  Christ  to  con- 
strain you?  Will  you,  can  you  repel  this  celestial  suitor, 
and  range  yourselves  among  his  enemies,  and  say,  "  We 
will  not  have  this  man  to  reign  over  us." 

IV.  One  more  thought.  We  not  only  have  to  deter- 
mine what  we  will  do  with  Jesus  as  a  Being  with  whom 
we  are  in  constant  contact,  who  has  endured  so  much 
for  us,  and  who  urges  such   incontestable  claims,  but  we 


106  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

have  to  settle  the  question  with  our  affections,  what  we 
will  do  with  him  as  an  object  clothed  with  every  charm 
which  can  captivate  the  heart,  with  him  as  the  chiefest 
among  ten  thousand  and  altogether  lovely.  "To  you 
that  believe,"  says  the  apostle,  "he  is  precious;"  and 
in  what  light  can  we  regard  this  amiable  Redeemer,  and 
not  confess  his  peerless  attractions  ? 

Does  the  soul,  conscious  of  its  spirituality  and  immor- 
tality, cry  out  for  God,  for  the  living  God  ?  Jesus  satis- 
fies this  want.  Creation  is  glorious,  but  our  minds,  our 
hearts  crave  something  more  glorious;  it  is  the  Creator. 
"We  have  reason  to  bless  God  for  the  facilities  by  which 
we  can  study  the  material  world,  and  make  all  its  ele- 
ments tributary  to  our  comfort  and  happiness;  but  our 
divinest  powers  are  those  by  which  we  can  extricate  our- 
selves from  matter,  and,  rising  to  the  Father  of  our 
spirits,  know  and  love  and  worship  him.  We  are  not 
all  matter,  we  are  spirit.  We  feel  this  spirituality.  Even 
when  most  eagerly  pursuing  them,  we  carry  within  us 
the  consciousness  that  our  blessedness  can  never  be  found 
where  we  seek  it,  in  objects  beneath  us;  and  we  instinct- 
ively exclaim,  "  Show  us  the  Father,  and  itsufficeth  us." 
In  that  word  "  Father  "  what  heavenly  truths,  consola- 
tions, joys  are  folded  up;  and  Jesus  reveals  the  Father. 
"  He  that  hath  seen  me,  hath  seen  the  Father." 
He  is  "Emmanuel,  God  with  us,"  "God  manifest  in  the 
flesh;"— and  so  manifested  that  our  hearts  give  way 
before  all  this  exhibition  of  love  and  tenderness;  rever- 
ence for  incarnate  deity  is  softened  into  the  sweetest, 
dearest  affections  which  can  enamour  all  the  boundless 
capacities  of  our  souls. 

Then,  how  precious  is,  he  for  all  the  inestimable  bless- 
ings secured  by  his  sufferings.  This  was  the  topic 
which  caused  the  disciples  going  to  Emmaus  to  say, 
"Did  notour  hearts  burn  within  us  while  he  talked  with 
us  by  the  way?"  By  his  sufferings  an  innumerable 
company  of  our  ruined  race  arc  rescued  from  tin1  abysses 
of  hell,  and  raised  to  all  the  privileges  of  the  sons  of 
God.  By  his  sufferings,  "unsearchable  riches''  of  grace 
and  glory  are  ours;  we  are  made  "partakers  of  the 
divine    nature;"     by    nature    children    of  wrath,    we 


What  will  You  do  with,  Jesus  f  107 


become  children  of  God,  heirs  of  God,  and  joint  heirs 
with  Christ  of  an  inheritance,  incorruptible,  undefiled 
and  that  fadeth  not  away. 

How  precious  is  Jesus  as  "the  consolation  of  Israel." 
It  was  by  this  title  he  was  promised  to  patriarchs, 
prophets,  kings;  and  the  very  anticipation  of  such  a 
"mercy"  caused  their  souls  to  run  over  with  feelings  of 
joy.  It  was  for  this  "consolation  of  Israel"  Simeon 
waited,  and  taking  him  up  in  his  arms,  feeling  that  life 
could  offer  nothing  to  detain  his  ravished  spirit  another 
moment,  he  exclaims,  "Lord,  now  lettest  thou  thy 
servant  depart  in  peace,"  and  he  is  still  the  consolation 
of  Israel  to  us.  At  what  time  the  heart  bows  under  a 
load  of  sin,  groans  under  strong  corruption,  is  sore  pressed 
by  temptation,  is  plucked  and  crushed  by  affliction — 
then,  0  then,  how  are  all  our  glooms  brightened,  and 
every  fear  dispelled,  and  heavenly  serenity  and  happiness 
breathed  into  our  souls,  as  we  lean  our  heads  upon  his 
bosom,  and  hear  him  whisper,  "  It  is  I,  be  not 
afraid  ; "  "I,  even  I,  am  he  that  blotteth  out  thine  iniqui- 
ties for  my  name's  sake,"  "A  bruised  reed  I  will  not 
break,  the  smoking  flax  I  will  not  quench."  In  such 
moments  we  rejoice  with  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of 
glory;  we  lose  all  sense  of  pain,  and  are  conscious  only 
of  that  peace  which  passeth  all  understanding;  we  know 
the  love  of  Christ  which  passeth  knowledge  ;  and  taste 
the  rapture  of  victory  while  still  engaged  in  the  conflict. 

But  I  will  never  have  done.  I  know  not  where  to  begin, 
where  to  end,  when  speaking  of  this  precious  Redeemer. 
Well  does  the  apostle  say  that  he  "is  all  and  in  all"  the 
precious  things  of  the  Gospel.  If  the  Bible  be  precious, 
he  "is  all  and  in  all"  the  Bible;  the  Bible  is  the  "reve- 
lation of  Jesus  Christ."  If  pardon  be  precious,  Christ  "is 
all  and  in  all"  in  our  pardon  ;  we  are  washed  from  our 
sins  in  his  blood.  If  justification  be  precious,  he  "is  all 
and  in  all"  in  our  justification ;  we  are  "justified  freely 
by  his  grace."*  If  sanctification  be  precious,  he  "is  all 
and  in  all"  in  our  sanctification ;  we  are  ••'sanctified 
through  the  offering  of  the  body  of  Jesus  Christ,  once  for 
all."     If  redemption  be  precious,  he  "is  all  and  in  all" 


108  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

in  our  redemption;  we  are  "redeemed  by  the  precious 
blood  of  Christ,  as  of  a  lamb  without  spot  and  without 
blemish."  Lastly,  in  the  hour  of  death,  in  the  day  of 
judgment,  in  the  blessedness  of  heaven,  "  Christ  is  all, 
and  in  all."  When  flesh  and  heart  are  failing,  the  be- 
liever can  mock  at  death,  can  insult  death,  can  say,  0 
death,  where  is  thy  sting?  0  grave,  where  is  thy  victory  ? 
"  Thanks  be  unto  God,  who  giveth  us  the  victory,  through 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  In  view  of  the  dread  tribunal, 
he  triumphantly  exclaims,  ''Who  shall  lay  anything 
to  the  charge  of  God's  elect?  it  is  God  that  justifieth; 
who  is  he  that  condemneth  ?  it  is  Christ  that  died,  yea 
rather  that  is  risen  again."  And  through  eternity  the 
praises  of  Jesus  shall  be  the  theme  of  ceaseless  hosannas, 
of  ever  deepening  transport  and  raptures. 

Yes,  to  them  that  believe  he  is  precious,  or  as  the  origin- 
al imports,  he  is  preciousness  itself.  What  is  he  to  us? 
He  is  precious  to  all  but  the  devils,  the  damned,  and  the 
unbelieving;  what  is  he  to  us?  "We  love  him,  because 
he  first  loved  us."  We  know  his  amazing  love  for  us  : 
do  we  love  him  in  return?  "If  any  man  love  not  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  let  him  be  anathema,  maranatha;" 
do  we  love  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ?  Or  is  that  dreadful 
curse  resting  upon  us  for  not  loving  perfect  incarnate 
Love  itself?  Mortals,  men,  women,  what  emotions  are 
in  your  bosom  toward  this  Jesus?  You  have  minds  to 
appreciate  what  is  noble,  souls  to  adore  what  is  glorious, 
hearts  to  love  what  is  amiable;  and  has  he  no  charms 
for  you  ?  He  said,  "I  if  I  be  lifted  up  will  draw  all  men, 
unto  me;"  do  you  feel  no  attractions  drawing  you  to  him 
who  is  his  "Father's  chief  delight,"  whose  are  unsearch- 
able riches  of  grace,  in  whom  dwelleth  all  "  the  fullness" 
of  that  God  who  is  the  absolute  uncreated  Love  ?  While 
the  redeemed  in  heaven — and  among  them  those  once 
dear  to  you  on  earth — are  celebrating  his  praises  with 
extasy,  can  you  heap  such  insult  upon  him  as  to  renew 
the  cry,  "Not  this  man,  but  Barabbas  ?"  will  you  prefer 
to  Jesus  some  vile  passion  which  robs  you  of  real  happi- 
ness now,  and  will  plunge  you  into  misery  hereafter? 

But  it  is  time  to  bring  these  remarks  to  a  close,  and  I 
finish  by  repeating  the  solemn  question  in  the  text  and 


\\ Iml  will  Von  do  with  Jcsus.J  lo'j 


demanding  an  answer.  .Men  of  the  world,  you  must  conic 
to  some  definite  conclusion  upon  this  subject.  You  can- 
not thrust  it  from  you.  It  appeals  incessantly  to  every 
principle,  every  feeling  in  your  breasts, — to  your  reason- 
able fears,  to  all  your  hopes  for  eternity,  to  every  manly, 
generous,  tender,  grateful  susceptibility.  And  what  is 
your  reply?  What  think  you  of  Christ?  You  must 
think  of  him  very  soon  and  very  seriously.  What  will 
you  do  with  Jesus  ?  In  all  your  actions,  your  most  secret 
thoughts,  you  have  now  to  do  with  him,  and  "all  things 
are  naked  and  open  before  the  eyes  of  him  with  whom 
you  have  to  do."  The  hour  is  near  at  hand  when  you 
will  have  to  do  with  him  in  a  more  fearful  sense,  to  meet 
him  face  to  face,  to  do  with  him  alone,  with  him  evermore. 
What  will  you  do  with  him?  Do  'with  him,  did  I  say? 
0  what,  what  will  you  do  without  him  ?  what,  when  af- 
fliction and  anguish  shall  come  upon  you?  what,  when 
closing  your  eyelids  in  death  ?  what,  when  appearing  be- 
fore the  awful  judgment  seat? 

Christians,  my  dearly  beloved  brethren,  we  have  set- 
tled this  matter — settled  it  once  and  forever;  and  with 
reason.  For  what  has  Jesus  not  done  for  us;  what  has 
he  not  done  in  us;  what  is  he  not  to  us;  what  will  he 
not  do  with  us,  and  be  to  us  in  that  day  when  he  shall 
take  us  to  be  with  him  to  behold,  and  to  share  his  glory. 
The  question  in  the  text  we  answered  long  ago,  and  each 
year,  month,  week,  day — as  we  know  more  of  this  precious 
Saviour — we  answer  it  with  fresh  emphasis,  with  increas- 
ing delight  in  the  choice  we  have  made.  What  will  we 
do  with  Jesus?  Why  this,  our  inmost  souls  instinctive- 
ly respond,  we  will  do  this:  We  will  love  him,  serve 
him,  honor  him,  adore  him,  while  life  and  immortality 
endure. 

Y"es,  Ave  have  throned  him  in  our  minds  and  hearts — 
the  cynosure  of  our  wondering  thoughts — the  monarch  of 
our  warmest  affections,  hopes,  desires.  This  we  have  done. 
And  the  more  Ave  meditate  upon  his  astonishing  love,  his 
amazing  sacrifice,  the  more  we  feel  that  if  Ave  had  a 
thousand  minds,  hearts,  souls,  we  would  crown  him  Lord 
of  all.  Living,  AAre  Avill  live  in  him,  for  him,  to  him. — 
Dying,  we  will  clasp  him  in  our  arms,  and,  with  Simeon, 

5 


110  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

welcome  death  as  the  consummation  of  bliss.  Nor  to  our 
longing  aspirations  has  eternity  any  charm  so  ravishing 
as  this,  that  there  we  shall  meet  him — this  precious  Je- 
sus, without  whom  heaven  would  be  only  a  scene  of 
wearisome  splendor  (0  black  streets  of  gold,  black  trees 
of  life,  black  river  of  life,  black  angels  and  archangels,  if 
Jesus  be  not  there!)  that  there  we  shall  "see  him  as  he 
is ;"  and  that,  with  souls  unstained  by  sin  or  frailty 
with  eyes  undimmecl  by  a  tear,  with  a  gratitude 
and  adoration  which  can  know  no  intermission  nor 
abatement, — our  love,  our  ardors,  our  consecration 
perfected  and  perpetuated, — we  shall  cast  our  crowns 
at  his  feet,  saying,  "  Worthy  is  the  Lamb."  "  Unto  him 
that  hath  loved  us,  and  washed  us  from  our  sins  in  his 
own  blood,  and  hath  made  us  kings  and  priests  unto  God 
and  his  Father,  to  him  be  glory  and  dominion  forever  and 
ever."    Amen-. 


The  Penitent  of  Wain.  1 1 1 


lermcu  Sctocntft- 


THE  PENITENT  OF  NAIN. 


"And  behold,  a  woman  in  the  city,  which  was  a  sinner,  when  she 
knew  that  Jesus  sat  at  meat  in  the  Pharisee's  house  brought  an  alabas- 
ter box  of  ointment,  and  stood  at  his  feet  behind  him  weeping-,  and 
began  to  wash  his  feet  with  tears,  and  did  wipe  them  with  the 
hairs  of  her  head,  and  kissed  his  feet,  and  anointed  them  with  the 
ointment.  Now  when  the  Pharisee  which  had  bidden  him  saw  it,  he 
spake  within  himself,  saying.  This  man  if  he  were  a  prophet,  would 
have  known  who  and  what  manner  of  women  this  is  that  toucheth  him, 
for  she  is  a  sinner.  And  Jesus  answering  said  unto  him, 
Simon,  I  have  somewhat  to  say  unto  thee,  and  he  saith,  Master,  say  on. 
There  was  a  certain  creditor  which  had  two  debtors;  the  one  owed  five 
hundred  pence,  and  the  other  fifty;  and  when  they  had  nothing  to  pay, 
he  frankly  forgave  them  both.  Tell  me,  therefore,  which  of  them 
will  love  him  most?  Simon  answered  and  said,  I  suppose  that  he  to 
whom  he  forgave  most.  And  he  said  unto  him,  Thou  hast  rightly 
judged.  And  he  turned  to  the  woman,  and  said  unto  Simon, 
Seest  thou  this  woman  ?  I  entered  into  thine  house,  thou  gavest  me  no 
water  for  my  feet ;  but  she  hath  washed  my  feet  with  tears  and  wiped 
thorn  with  the  hairs  of  her  head.  Thou  gavest  me  no  lass,  but  this 
woman,  since  the  time  I  came  in,  hath  not  ceased  to  kiss  my  feet.  My 
head  with  oil  thou  didst  not  anoint,  but  this  woman  hath  anointed  my 
feet  with  ointment.  Wherefore  I  say  unto  thee,  her  sins  which  are 
many  are  forgiven  :  for  she  loved  much ;  but  to  whom  little  is  forgiven, 
the  same  loveth  little.  And  he  said  unto  her,  Thy  sins  are  forgiven. 
And  they  that  sat  at  meat  with  him  began  to  say  within  themselves, 
Who  is  this  that  forgiveth  sins  also?  And  he  said  to  the  woman,  Thy 
faith  hath  saved  thee;  go  in  peace."— Luke  vii :  37—50. 

44  A  LL  flesh  is  grass,  and  all  the  glory  of  man  is  as  the 
^  flower  of  grass ;  the  grass  withereth,  and  the  flower 
thereof  falleth  away,  but  the  word  of  the  Lord  endureth 
forever."  Yes.  my  brethren,  while  nations  are  convulsed, 
and  thrones  are  subverted,  and  empires  crumble — all  their 
splendor  shattered ;  while  one  generation  with  its 
schemes,  fashions,  discoveries,  goeth,  and  another  with 
new  fashions,  schemes,  discoveries,  cometh,  the  Bible  is 


112  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

unchanged,  its  instructions,  warnings,   consolations  are 
for  all  nations  and  for  all  ages. 

The  passage  just  read  as  our  text  was  written  almost 
nineteen  centuries  ago,  yet  it  appeals  to  our  hearts  as  if 
recorded  yesterday.  And  especially  is  this  true  of  those 
features  in  this  narrative  to  which  I  invite  your  attention 
and  which  will  constitute  the  subject  and  division  of  our 
discourse. 

I.  The  first  thing  T  notice  is  the  portrait  of  a  true, 
evangelical  penitent. 

Because  the  three  other  evangelists  relate  that,  at 
Bethany,  Mary  anointed  the  Saviour's  feet,  some  have 
maintained  that  the  history  before  us  refers  to  the  same 
event;  thus,  not  only  forgetting  that  the  scene  of  our 
narrative  is  Nam,  but  shocking  all  our  feelings  by  sup- 
posing that  the  gentle  sister  of  Lazarus  was  unchaste. 
And  because  Mary  of  Magdala  had  been  the  unhappy 
victim  of  a  fearful  demoniacal  possession  from  which  Jesus 
emancipated  her,  others  have  taken  it  for  granted  that 
she  was  "the  sinner "  here  introduced;  and  thus  the 
fair  fame  of  one  of  the  purest,  noblest  saints  in  the  Bible 
has  been  transmitted  from  age  to  age  to  be  libelled  by 
Magdalen  associations  and  hospitals.  The  woman  men- 
tioned in  our  text  lived  in  the  city  of  Nain.  We  have 
no  information  as  to  her  name  or  her  preceding 
biography,  except  that  she  was  unchaste ;  for  such  is  the 
meaning  of  the  term  here  translated  "a  sinner."  Instead 
of  gratifying  the  pruriency  which  would  pry  into  her 
frailties  and  errors,  the  Gospel  throws  a  veil  over  the 
passions,  crimes,  miseries  of  her  previous  life.  She  was  a 
sinner,  fallen,  lost;  but  Jesus  come  to  "seek  and  to  save 
that  which  was  lost."  The  Gospel  was  for  sinners,  the 
chief  of  sinners.     And  now  see  its  effects  upon  her. 

To  comprehend  her  case  fully,  we  must  consider  what  is 
here  implied,  and  what  is  expressly  narrated.  It  is 
implied  that  she  had  already  seen  and  heard  Jesus,  and 
had  experienced  the  peace  of  that  pardon  which  he 
came  to  bestow.  She  resided  in  Nain.  Here  Jesus  had 
publicly  raised  from  death  the  son  of  the  widow;  "  and 
there  came  a  fear  on  all,  and  they  glorified  God,  saying, 


The  Pen  it  en  t  of  Na  in.  II 3 


thai    a  great   prophet  is  risen  up  amongsi  us,  and  that 
God  hath  visited  his  people."     Eere,  before   the   people, 
Jesus  had  received  the  message  which  John  had  sent  by 
two  of  his  disciples;  and  in   that  same  hour  he  cured 
many  of  their  infirmities  and  plagues,  and  of  evil  spirits, 
and  to  many  that  were  blind  he  gave  sight;  then  Jesus 
answering  said  unto  them,  Go  your  way  and  tell  John 
what  things  ye  have  seen  and  heard,  how  that  the  Wind 
see,  the  lame  walk,  the  lepers  are  cleansed,  the  deaf  hear, 
the  dead  are  raised,  to  the  poor  the  Gospel  is  preached, 
and  blessed  is  he  whosoever  shall  not  be  offended  in  me." 
In  fine,  it  was  in  Nain  the  liedeemer  uttered  that  blessed 
invitation,    "Come  unto  me  all  ye  that    labor  and  are 
heavy-laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest;    take   my   yoke 
upon  you,  and  learn  of  me,  for  I  am  meek  and  lowly  in 
heart,    and  ye  shall  find  rest  unto  your  souls ;  for  my 
yoke  is  easy  and  my  burden  is  light."     On  one— on  each 
of  these  occasions  this  woman  had  probably  been  present, 
and   had    been   arrested    and  drawn  to  Christ.     In  the 
restoration  of  the  young  man,  it  may  be  that  the  Holy 
Spirit  had  opened  her  eyes  to  see  her  own  deplorable 
condition    as    "  dead   in  trespasses  and  sins,"  and  had 
quickened    her   to    life.     If   "  the  poor  had  the  Gospel 
preached  to  them,"  she  was  poor  indeed,  and  the  Gospel 
was  for  her.     And  if  the  weary  and   heavy-laden  were 
invited,  who  so  weary,  so  heavy-laden,  so    bowed    down 
under    a    burden    of  guilt,  pollution,  shame,    as   she? 
Where  in  the  whole  world  was  there  a  soul  which  so 
longed  for  rest,  which  so  cried  out  for  the  sympathy,  the 
compassion    of    a    Saviour  who  was  meek    and    lowly 
in  heart?     How   sweet  to   exchange  the   galling  yoke 
of  the  passions  for  his  yoke  which  was  easy.     And  com- 
pared with  the  bondage  of  sin,  how  light  his  burden ; — 
a  burden  such  as  sails  are  to  a  ship,  such   as  to  a  bird 
are  the  Avings  with  which  it  springs  from  earth  and  soars 
to  heaven. 

She  had  heard  Jesus.  His  words  had  breathed  heaven- 
ly peace  into  her  soul.  And  now  observe  her  conduct. 
She  must  see  him  and  tell  him  of  the  change  he  had 
wrought  in  her,  and  pour  out  her  heart  in  gratitude. 
She  must  see  him ;  for  no  sooner  is  a  soul  conscious  of 


114  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

deliverance,  than  it  seeks  to  know  him  by  whom  that 
deliverance  has  been  achieved;  and  hearing  that  he  is  in 
the  Pharisee's  house,  partaking  of  a  collation,  she  at 
once  enters  there.  Her  errand  is  apparent  to  all  from 
the  alabaster  box  in  her  hand.  She  is  going  to  anoint 
the  head  of  some  one  at  the  board;  a  custom  to  which 
the  Psalmist  alludes  in  those  words — "  Thou  preparest  a 
table  before  me,  thou  anointest  my  head  with  oil."  But 
no  sooner  does  she  approach  the  Saviour,  as  he  reclines 
at  the  meal,  than  her  feelings  entirely  overpower  her. 
As  she  bends  over  his  feet,  her  tears  .fall  on  them  like 
rain ;  indeed  the  original  is,  she  began  to  rain  tears  upon 
his  feet.  Then  she  wipes  them  with  the  hairs  of  her 
head.  Scarcely,  however,  are  they  dried,  before  they 
are  again  bathed  in  the  rivers  which  run  from  her 
streaming  eyes.  And  thus  she  continues  washing  his 
feet,  wiping  them,  kissing  them  as  if  her  lips  would 
cling  there  forever,  ("  she  hath  not  ceased  to  kiss  my 
feet,")  and  anointing  them  with  fragrant  ointment. 

But  it  is  not  enough  that  we  are  touched  by  the  pathos 
of  this  scene;  we  must  analyze  this  woman's  conduct, 
and  learn  from  it  what  are  the  marks  of  true  evangelical 
repentance. 

It  may,  perhaps,  surprise  you  that  not  a  word  is  said 
of  her  legal  distress,  of  the  pain  and  horror  into  which 
she  is  plunged  on  account  of  her  crimes.  For — although 
nothing  requires  us  to  infer,  as  the  scoff  of  the  Pharisee 
would  insinuate,  that  she  was  notorious  through  the  city 
as  the  shame  and  reproach  of  her  sex — yet  at  least  mod- 
esty, chastity,  virtue  were  gone.  How  is  it,  then,  that 
she  is  not  clothed  in  sackcloth  and  terrified  by  the  cla- 
mors of  an  upbraiding  conscience  ?  How  is  it  that  we 
see  in  her  only  tenderness  and  love?   • 

The  answer  to  this  question  is  to  be  found  in  the  nature 
of  true,  evangelical  penitence.  In  a  state  of  unpardoned 
sin  there  will  be  conviction  and  anguish  when  the  Holy 
Spirit  opens  the  eyes  of  a  sinner  to  see  himself  as  he  ap- 
pears at  the  bar  of  divine  justice  ;  there  will  be  "  a  cer- 
tain fearful  looking  for  of  judgment  and  fiery  indigna- 
tion." But  the  repentance  of  the  Gospel  dissipates  these 
fears,  and  sheds  peace  into  the  soul  by  reconciling  us  to 


The  Penitent  of  Nain.  115 

the  justice  of  God  and  to  our  own  consciences.  Judas 
hangs  himself;  it  is  remorse  without  repentance.  Peter 
goes  out  and  weeps  bitterly,  but  hastens  to  Jesus ;  it  is 
remorse  leading  to  repentance.  "  Godly  sorrow  worketh 
repentance  not  to  be  repented  of;"  that  is  to  say,  it  is  the 
source  of  consolation  and  joy.  And  in  this  woman  we 
see  all  the  traits  of  such  repentance. 

Observe  her  faith.  An  outcast  from  society;  without  a 
single  friend  upon  earth;  having  no  home  to  which  she 
can  fly  and  hide  herself ;  brothers,  sisters,  father,  even 
mother  abhorring  her  as  the  disgrace  of  the  family ;  he 
who  had  betrayed  her  confiding  innocence  forsaking  her 
to  the  contempt  of  the  world,  and,  what  is  far  worse,  to 
that  self-contempt  which  must  sink  man  or  woman  lower 
and  lower  ; — in  spite  of  all  this,  she  comes  to  Jesus 
without  a  doubt  or  fear.  Whoever  despises  her,  he  will 
not,  he  does  not.  Whoever  may  cast  her  off,  he  has  wel- 
comed her.  Poor  child  of  frailty  and  error,  she  has  found 
not  only  a  human  heart  to  pity  her,  but  a  divine  Redeem- 
er who  has  rescued  her  from  her  guilt  and  pollution,  has 
given  her  "beauty  for  ashes,  the  oil  of  joy  for  mourning, 
and  the  garments  of  praise  for  the  spirit  of  heaviness." 

See,  next,  her  contrition.  Though  forgiven  by  God, 
she  cannot  forgive  herself.  The  free  sovereign  grace  and 
mercy  so  exceeding  abundant  in  her  pardon  humble  her 
in  the  very  dust.  In  her  experience  is  fulfilled  the  lan- 
guage of  the  Lord  by  his  prophet  Ezekiel,  "  That  thou 
mayest  remember  and  be  confounded,  and  never  open  thy 
mouth  any  more  because  of  thy  shame,  when  I  am  paci- 
fied toward  thee  for  all  that  thou  hast  done,  saith  the 
Lord  God."  Harsh  as  is  the  judgment  of  the  Pharisee 
who,  because  she  had  fallen,  still  charges  her  with  crimes 
which  she  now  loathes  and  detests,  there  is  in  her  breast 
a  judge  far  more  severe  and  inexorable.  In  a  similar 
case  Jesus  stooped  down  and  wrote  a  ruined  woman's 
sentence  in  the  sand.  Her  soul  is  prostrate  in  the  dust, 
but  she  has  written  her  condemnation  in  the  depths  of 
her  being.  Awakened  from  her  delirious  dream  she  is 
covered  with  confusion.  She  cannot  raise  her  eyes  from 
the  ground.  She  does  not  utter  a  single  word.  Sighs, 
tears,  lamentations  are  her  only  language.     We  have  seen 


116  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

that  ointment  was  for  the  heads  of  those  who   feasted ; 
she  pours  it  upon  the  Saviour's  feet. 

While  thus  self-abased,  however,  behold  in  her  another 
element  always  found  in  true  penitence.  I  mean  her 
courage.  The  derision  of  her  former  accomplices ;  the 
contemptuous  sneers  of  all  who  are  acquainted  with  her 
frailty — and  when  her  virtue  has  been  surrendered  a 
woman  feels  as  if  the  whole  world  knows  her  dishonor; — 
before  yielding  to  temptation  she  persuades  herself  that 
her  secret  will  be  safe,  but  no  sooner  is  the  deed  done 
than,  besides  that  glance  which  pierces  all  disguises, 
every  eye  she  meets  seems  to  be  exploring  her  guilt, 
reading  it  in  her  face,  detecting  it  in  her  looks;  above 
all,  the  repulsive  horror  of  the  virtuous  and  upright  who 
shun  her  presence  as  defiling  the  very  atmosphere  ; — all 
this  she  must  encounter;  but  there  is  that  within  her 
soul  which  can  brave  all  this.  Her  passions  had  defied 
the  opinion  of  men;  shall  her  piety  be  afraid  of  it? 
What  had  she  found  in  a  wretched  world  that  its  frown 
should  keep  her  from  her  Kedeemer  ?  What  will  they  say  ? 
— that  "they"  is,  terrible  to  most  people,  but  it  is  nothing 
to  her.  What  will  he  say,  what  has  he  said? — this  is 
everything.  Let  them  curse,  but  bless  thou! — She  had 
gloried  in  her  shame ;  she  will  not  now  be  ashamed  of 
her  glory. 

And  this  suggests  the  only  other  trait  I  notice  in  our 
penitent ;  it  is  her  love.  Jesus  ascribes  her  conduct  en- 
tirely to  love.  Jesus  sees  in  her  nothing  but  love.  This, 
my  brethren,  is  the  power  of  the  Gospel,  that  it  breathes 
a  new  affection  into  the  soul,  an  affection  which  changes 
the  entire  character.  This  is  "what  the  law  could  not 
do,"  what  no  fears,  threats,  punishments  can  do ;  but 
what  is  done  by  the  mission  of  the  Son  of  God  into  the 
world.  Everything  in  this  woman's  conduct  shows  the 
love  glowing  in  her  heart.  During  all  this  scene  not  a 
syllable  escapes  her.  Mutely  she  enters  the  hall,  mutely 
she  passes  to  the  Savour's  couch,  and  there  reverently 
bows  herself;  but  how  eloquent  is  her  silence.  We  feel 
instinctively  how  much  has  been  forgiven,  and  how  much 
she  loves. 

Love  so  tender.     Jesus  does  not  seem  even  to  notice 


Tlw  Penitent  of  Nain.  1 17 

her,  but  she  asks  no  notice;  it  is  enough  that  she  can  he 
near  him;  can  kneel  and  caress  his   feet,  and  wash  them 
with  her  tears,  and  wipe  them  and   kiss  them  and  anoint 
them.     Love  so  active     Real  affection  deals  not  in  pro- 
fessions but  in  deeds;  and  she  does  what  she  can;  she 
omits  nothing  that  can  express  her  gratitude  and  devo- 
tion.    Love  which  hastens   to  make  reparation  for  the 
past  by  devoting  to  Jesus  the  gifts  she  had  so  deplorably 
abused.     Those  eyes  which  had  burned  with  unhallowed 
fires,  are  now  blinded  with  weeping.    Those  tresses  which 
had  been  her  pride,  which  had  allured  to  voluptuousness 
hearts  formed  to  serve  God,  now  fall  dishevelled  over  her 
blushing  face  and  minister  to  the  menial  office  she  de- 
lighrs  to  perform  for  her  deliverer.   Her  hair  the  Apostle 
declares  is  the  glory  of  the  woman ;  and  she  thus  expresses 
the     inward    adoration  which    lays  at    the  feet  of   the 
Son  of  God  that  which  constitutes  the  highest  honor, 
beauty,  glory  of  her  humanity.     The  perfumes  which  once 
gratified  her  vanity  are  now  consecrated  to  him  whose 
name  is  sweeter  than  myrrh,  aloes,  and  cassia.     And  her 
lips,  so  often  profaned  by  unholy  passions,  are  now  pressed 
again  and  again  to  the  sacred  feet  which  had  brought  her 
the  news  of  salvation.      Lastly,  love  which   satislies  all 
the    boundless  capacities  of  her  heart.      How  wretched 
the  pleasures  of  sin  when  compared  with  the  happiness 
which  now  fills  her  soul.      Criminal  love  had  been  the 
cause   of  her  errors  and  sorrows;  holy  love  is  now  the 
source   of  a   thousand  heavenly   consolations.     What  a 
change  indeed   has   she  experienced.      What   a  change 
from  men  who  had  sought  only  their  own  selfish  gratifi- 
cation, to  him  who  has  come  to  die  for  her,  and  who  has 
thus   signally  distinguished  her  by  his  grace;  from  ob- 
jects she  had  always  been  forced  to  feel  were  unworthy 
of  her  affections,  to  him  who  is  '''the  chiefest  among  ten 
thousand  and  altogether  lovely;"  from  Amnonswhohad 
slighted  and  despised  her  for  the  very  sacrifices  she  con- 
ceded, to  him  who  does  not  overlook,  who  overvalues  the 
slightest  tokens  of  her  preference;  from  those  whose  love 
was  so  inconstant  and  perfidious,  to  him  whose  love,  like 
himself,  is  the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  forever;  in  a 
word,  from  the  tyranny  of  a  delirious  lust,  from  the  cruel 
agitations  of  an  upbraiding  conscience,  from  the  mortifying 

5  * 


118  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

precautions,  subterfuges,  jealousies,  alarms,  torments  of 
guilt,  from  the  dismal  weight  hanging  upon  her  heart, 
the  self-reproaches,  the  self-loathing  revulsions  of  those 
moments  when  the  soul  had  leisure  to  inspect  itself — 
from  all  this  to  the  solid  peace,  the  blessedness,  the  sweet 
confidence  of  pardon  and  communion  Avith  heaven.  I 
spoke  just  now  of  what  this  woman  had  immolated  as  a 
proof  of  her  love.  I  was  mistaken.  It  is  her  chains, 
her  afflictions,  her  miseries  which  she  casts  at  the  feet  of 
her  adorable  Eedeemer. 

Behold,  my  brethren,  the  love,  the  penitence  of  this 
sinner  ; — a  spectacle  worthy  of  God  himself.  She  is  an 
object  now  dearer  to  the  heart  of  God  than  she  had  been 
in  the  pomp  of  her  unsullied  womanhood,  a  sight  which 
kindles  unspeakable  joy  among  the  angels  in  glory.  But 
with  what  emotions  does  the  Pharisee  view  this  scene  ? 
Let  us  now  turn  to  him,  for  in  him  we  have  the  second 
lesson  taught  by  the  history  before  us.  In  him,  as  in  its 
type,  we  see  the  temper  with  which  a  censorious  world 
regards  those  whom  the  grace  of  God  has  mercifully 
drawn  from  the  vortex  of  its  temptations  and  crimes. 

II.  As  we  read  the  narrative  we  feel  that  the  conduct  of 
this  woman — her  grief,  tears,  gratitude,  love — must  have 
touched  for  a  moment  even  the  heart  of  Simon.  However 
that  might  have  been,  he  perceives  that  his  guest  not 
only  receives  but  encourages  these  marks,  of  homage. 
He  is,  therefore,  silent.  He  waits  to  see  what  Jesus  will 
say  to  her.  Perhaps — his  pride  quelling  the  better 
thought  rising  in  his  breast — he  hopes  to  discover  some 
fresh  grounds  for  the  charge  which  had  been  brought 
against  him  by  the  Pharisees  who  said,  "He  is  the  friend 
of  publicans  and  sinners."     (v.  34.) 

I  have  already  remarked  that  up  to  this  time  Jesus  had 
not  seemed  to  notice  the  penitent  at  his  feet,  but  he  has 
been  closely  scrutinizing  another  person  in  that  apart- 
ment. He  has  penetrated  Simon's  bosom,  and  detected 
there  sentiments  in  every  view  hateful,  to  God,  yet  con- 
stantly harbored  by  those  of  whom  Simon  is  a  faithful 
representative.  "Now  when  the  Pharisee  which  had 
bidden  him  saw  it,  he  spake  within  himself  saying,  This 
man,  if  he  were  a  prophet,  would  have  known  who  and 


The  Penitent  of  Nain.  119 


what  manner  of  woman  this  is  that  toucheth  him,  for 
she  is  a  sinner." 

Such  are  the  thoughts  with  which  he  secretly  hardens 
his  heart  against  an  object  deserving  his  compassion  and 
sympathy, — so  unfeeling,  so  harsh,  so  wanton.  But  it  is  on- 
ly the  temper  of  the  world; — a  world  which  never  forgets, 
which  takes  pleasure  in  recalling  and  exaggerating  the 
former  sins  of  those  who  are  converted  to  Jesus;  a  world 
all  whose  maxims,  fashions,  examples  tend  to  corrupt  the 
heart,  but  which  makes  no  allowance  for  that  corruption; 
a  world  which  prepares,  admires,  applauds  theatres,  balls, 
exhibitions  that  captivate  the  senses,  intoxicate  the  pas- 
sions, inflame  the  imagination,  yet  pretends  that  its  puri- 
ty is  outraged  if  the  natural  consequences  follow,  and 
covers  with  infamy  those  whom  it  has  itself  seduced  and 
ruined. 

Then,  too,  the  Pharisee's  utter  ignorance  of  the  Saviour 
and  of  himself.  "This  man  if  he  were  a  prophet."  1  do 
not  stop  to  enquire  why  Simon  believed  that  a  prophet 
was  a  discerner  of  spirits,  and  to  show  you  that  it  was,  at 
that  day,  the  general  opinion  that  a  true  prophet  could 
read  characters,  was  always  endowed  with  a  moral  clair- 
voyance. The  Pharisee's  remark  may  even  have  referred 
to  The  Prophet — the  Messiah,  one  of  whose  attributes 
Isaiah  had  predicted  would  be  the  power  of  penetrating 
the  secrets  of  the  human  bosom.  Hence,  when  Jesus 
convinced  Nathaniel  of  his  acquaintance  with  his 
thoughts,  he  at  once  exclaimed,  "  Thou  art  the  Son  of 
God,  thou  art  the  King  of  Israel."  Hence  the  appeal  of 
the  woman  of  Samaria,  "  Come  see  a  man  who  told  me  all 
things  which  ever  I  did.  Is  not  this  the  Christ  ?"  And 
hence  the  earnestness  with  which  the  Evangelist  reminds 
us  that  Jesus  "needed  not  that  any  should  testify  of  man, 
for  he  knew  what  was  in  man."  But  I  am  digressing. — 
The  point  to  which  I  am  speaking  is  Simon's  ignorance. 
For  is  a  prophet  to  refuse  all  intercourse  with  sinners? 
AVhere  did  he  learn  this  theology?  In  what  school  did 
he  acquire  such  ideas  of  that  God  who  invites  the  vilest 
to  return  to  him,  who  says,  '*  Though  your  sins  be  as  scar- 
let, they  shall  be  as  white  as  snow;  though  they  be  red 
like  crimson,  they  shall  be  as  wool  ?"     Ah,  Simon,  it  is 


120  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

because  he  is  not  only  a  prophet,  but  more  than  a  pro- 
phet, that  this  poor  child  of  sin  and  misery  is  welcome  to 
him.  "  This  man  if  he  were  a  prophet  would  have  known 
who  and  what  manner  of  woman  this  is  that  toucheth 
him,  for  she  is  a  sinner."  All  her  contrition,  her  tender- 
ness, the  profusion  of  love,  gratitude,  tears,  he  describes 
by  the  cold  phrase  "  touches  him;"  and  he  shrinks  from 
the  very  thought  of  such  a  contact,  "for  she  is  a  sinner." 
But,  Simon, what  art  thou  in  the  sight  of  God?  Magnify 
as  thou  mayest  the  guilt  of  this  woman,  nothing  in  her 
life  has  been  more  odious  and  abominable  in  his  eyes  than 
is  this  supercilious  self-conceit,  this  arrogance  which  des- 
pises others.  Nor  only  self-conceit  and  arrogance,  what 
hypocrisy.  For,  after  all,  in  his  eyes  with  whom  an  im- 
pure look  is  adultery  in  the  heart,  how  little  real  difference 
is  there  between  the  holiest  and  the  most  erring.  We  are 
loud,  unsparing  against  one  who  has  yielded  to  tempta- 
tion ;  yet  how  often  are  we  conscious  of  thoughts  and 
feelings  which  would  have  been  carried  out  into  the  vilest 
acts,  if  one  mightier  than  ourselves  had  not  "withheld  us 
from  sinning,"  Thou  superb  Pharisee,  flown  with  van- 
ity, puffed  up  with  admiration  of  thine  own  righteous- 
ness, if  thou  knewest  the  gift  of  God  and  who  it  is  that 
hath  condescended  to  come  under  thy  roof,  and  what  is 
thine  own  character  at  the  tribunal  of  divine  justice,  and 
what  is  the  gush  of  gratitude  springing  up  in  the  bosom 
of  this  penitent  noAV  when  her  soul  has  been  absolved  and 
life  and  light  are  in  her  heart,  instead  of  thus  pointing 
disdainfully  at  her,  thou  wouldst  have  fallen  at  the  feet 
of  this  compassionate  Eedeemer,  imploring  the  mercy  she 
has  obtained,  and  without  which  thou  must  one  day 
"  awake  to  shame  and  everlasting  contempt." 

In  short,  there  is  something  still  more  criminal  in  the 
judgment  of  this  Pharisee.  It  is  cruel  and  barbarous. 
All  her  penitence, — tears  so  abundant,  contrition  so  sin- 
cere, confusion  so  overwhelming,  humiliation  so  profound, 
homage  so  mute  because  it  can  find  no  language  in  which 
to  express  its  gratitude  and  adoration, — all  this  he  thinks 
Jesus  ought  to  spurn  with  contempt.  Fallen  low.,  he 
would  have  the  Saviour  join  with  the  world  in  sinking 
her  to  still  deeper  degradation.     The  respect  of  others, 


The  Penitent  of  Nain.  121 


and  what  is  far  more  deplorable,  her  own  self-respect  lost 
lie  desires  that  the  Redeemer  may  crush  out  in  her  every 
vestige  of  hope,  and  plunge  her  into  despair.     Above  all, 

this  woman  is  now  a  trophy  and  model  of  triumphant 
grace,  but  of  grace  in  a  soul  which  still  feels  the  bruises 
of  sin,  and  rejoices  with  trembling;  and  Simon  wishes 
the  friend  of  sinners  to  "break  the  bruised  reed  and  to 
quench  the  smoking  flax,"  to  repel  the  devotion  he  him- 
self has  inspired,  to  trample  under  foot  a  heart  sprinkled 
with  his  blood,  glowing  with  his  love,  and  to  cast  back 
into  the  eternal  abysses  a  brand  he  has  just  plucked  from 
the  burning. 

II L  We  cannot  penetrate  the  sentiments  which  the 
Pharisee  secretly  revolves  in  his  bosom  without  exclaim- 
ing, with  David,  "Let  me  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  Lord, 
for  his  mercies  are  great,  but  let  me  not  fall  into  the 
hands  of  man.''  And  this  petition  we  would  utter  with 
still  greater  emphasis,  if  I  had  time  to  go  on,  as  I 
intended,  and  to  dwell  upon  the  treatment  which  both 
the  woman  and  Simon  receive  at  the.  hands  of  Jesus. 

There  are  among  men  two  very  different  estimates  of 
sin;  each  false  and  fatal.  In  reference  to  their  own  con- 
duct the}7  make  light  of  sin.  Human  nature  is  frail; 
their  hearts  are  good ;  and  if  they  are  betrayed  into  cer- 
tain aberrations,  after  all,  their  intentions  were  right  and 
ought  to  atone  for  such  indiscretions.  Xow  this  view  of 
sin  may  seem  very  well  before  the  world,  and  might  be 
sufficient  if  an  apology  were  all  we  want;  but  this  is  not 
what  an  enlightened  conscience  seeks;  it  must  have 
pardon  and  peace  which  can  never  be  reached  through 
these  palliations. 

When  men  sit  upon  the  sins  of  others,  all  this  is  re- 
versed ;  they  resemble  the  Pharisee,  they  are  stern  and 
inexorable  censors.  Forgetting  that  universal  brother- 
hood of  weakness  and  temptation  by  which  they  and  all 
the  children  of  Adam  are  linked  together,  they  erect  a 
standard  suited  only  to  unfallen  beings.  It  is  because 
the  Gospel  is  an  economy  of  mercy  that  there  is  hope  for 
any  man:  but  they  seem  to  think  that  they  do  God 
homage  by  expunging  the  most  lovely  of  his  attributes, 


122  Richard  Fullers  Sermons. 


by  asserting  only  the  severe  aspects  and  awful  penalties 
of  his  law,  by  leaving  nothing  but  condemnation  and 
despair  for  those  who  shed  the  bitterest  tears  over  the 
disorders  of  their  lives. 

What  is  the  view  which  Jesus  takes  of  sin  ?  Study 
the  parable  by  which  he  silences  Simon  and  comforts 
this  woman.  In  his  estimate  sin  is  no  trifle.  It  is  a 
debt  which  binds  us  hand  and  foot  under  the  dreadful 
curse  of  the  law.  Does  he  then  regard  it  as  involving  us 
in  irretrievable  perdition  ?  Certainly  if  left  to  ourselves. 
But.  blessed  be  God,  hosannas  to  that  love  which  hath 
interposed  and  wrought  out  an  amazing  salvation  for  the 
guiltiest, — we  are  not  left  to  ourselves.  "When  they  had 
nothing  to  pay,  he  freely  forgave  them  both.'7  This  is 
the  way  in  which  he  deals  with  sin.  This  is  the  Gospel  of 
the  grace  of  God  ;  and  it  is  with  this  he  exposes  the  self- 
righteous  Pharisee,  and  assures  the  penitent  kneeling  at 
his  feet. 

The  former  he  leads  unconsciously  to  confess  that 
where  sin  is  forgiven  love  will  spring  up  in  the  heart. — 
love  in  proportion  to  the  guilt  cancelled.  He  then  con- 
trasts the  warm,  gushing  gratitude  of  this  woman  with 
the  cold,  heartless  hospitality  which  had  been  extended 
to  him.  "I  entered  into  thy  house,  thou  gavest  me  no 
water  for  my  feet;  but  she  hath  washed  my  feet  with 
tears,  and  wiped  them  with  the  hairs  of  her  head.  Thou 
gavest  me  no  kiss  ;  but  this  woman,  since  the  time  I  came 
in,  hath  not  ceased  to  kiss  my  feet.  My  head  with  oil 
thou  didst  not  anoint;  but  this  woman  hath  anointed  my 
feet  with  ointment."  Enter,  my  brethren,  into  this  re- 
buke. How  must  the  soul  of  this  conceited  Pharisee 
have  shrunk  abashed,  as  he  felt  those  piercing  eves  search- 
ing the  labyrinths  of  his  hypocrisy,  exposing  thoughts 
which  he  believed  were  hidden  in  his  own  bosom,  and 
convicting  him  by  his  own  confession,  of  being  still  un- 
pardoned, because  utterly  destitute  of  that  love  without 
which  all  his  exterior  sanctity  was  only  an  abomination  in 
the  sight  of  God. 

Having  thus  rebuked  the  Pharisee,  Jesus  now  turns 
to  the  woman.  Hitherto  he  has  seemed  to  pay  no  atten- 
tion   to   her.     She   goes  on  weeping,  washing  his  feet, 


The  Penitent  of  Wain.  123 

wiping  and  kissing  them;    but  his  face  is  turned  from 
her,  and  he  acts  as  if  he  had  not  observed  her.     Now  her 
time    has  come;    and   with   what    affection,    with   what 
tenderness,  with  what  generous  devotion  does  lie  vindi- 
cate and  commend  her,  and  make   her  cause   his  own. 
Simon   can    discover  nothing  but  her  sin ;    Jesus   sees 
nothing   but   her   penitence   and   love.      The    Pharisee 
secretly   despises   and   denounces  her;  Jesus  openly  de- 
fends her,  and  shews  that,  while  the  self-righteousness 
of  her  accuser  renders  him  odious  before  heaven,  her  very 
crimes  have  wrought  in  her  that  contrition  and  piety 
which  are  acceptable  to  God.     Lastly,  instead  of  scorn- 
ing, he  encourages,  applauds,  assures  her.     She  had  for- 
feited the  esteem  of  the  world;    he  raises  her  to  know 
that  she  is  honorable  in  the  esteem  of  the  Lord  of  heaven 
and  earth.     Far  more  deplorable  and  fatal  was  her  loss 
of  self-respect,  her  utter  degradation  in  her  own  eyes; 
he  breathes  into  her  a  new  life,  and  the  hope  and  confi- 
dence which  are  inspired  by  the  consciousness   of   that 
life.     Her   principles,  her  character  all  ruined;    there 
were  voices  which  she  had  heard  at  times  among   these 
% ruins,  as  if  angels  were  pleading  with  her  to  rise  up  and 
break  the  shackles  under  which  she  groaned  and  termi- 
nate her  misery  with  her  sins.     Underneath  all  her  guilt 
and  shame,  she  had  never  ceased  to  feel  that  in  her  being 
there  was  the  mysterious  germ  of  something  better,  after 
which  she  often  cried  and  struggled,  but  cried  and  strug- 
gled   in   vain.     Jesus   gives   efficacy  to  these  heavenly 
calls,  he  touches  that  germ  and  causes  it  to  bloom  and 
expand.     His  Spirit  arms  her  with  strength,  crowns  her 
trembling   resolutions   with    victory,    makes  her  a  new 
creature — inhaling  a  new  atmosphere — rejoicing  in  new 
thoughts,   emotions,   affections,   prospects — living   in    a 
new  world. 

Behold  what  Jesus  does  for  this  sinner;  and  in  her 
behold  what  he  does  for  every  one  who  comes  thus  in 
faith  and  penitence  to  his  feet.  He  said  to  the  woman 
••Thy  sins  are  forgiven.'*'  He  said  more.  I  have  on  a 
former  occasion,  made  some  remarks  upon  a  question  once 
agitated,  whether  the  love  of  this  woman  was  the  cause 
or  the  effect  of  her  forgiveness ;  and  we  then  saw  that  it 


124  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

was  clearly  the  effect.  Jesus  confirms  this  view  by  his 
final  words.  He  said  to  the  woman,  "  Thy  faith  hath 
saved  thee,  go  in  peace."  Not  her  love,  but  her  faith 
had  brought  pardon  and  peace  into  her  soul.  He  tells 
her  too,  that  it  is  by  this  grace  she  is  to  persevere  in  a 
life  of  holiness.  "Go  in  peace."  Goon  believing;  and 
as  faith  hath  delivered  thee  from  the  guilt,  it  will  conquer 
in  thee  all  the  power  and  corruption  of  sin.  To  us 
this  is  the  Gospel  conveyed  to  all  by  this  nar- 
rative. This  is  the  Gospel  found  on  every  page  of  this 
volume.  Far  be  it  from  me  to  depreciate  morality.  Of 
one  virtue  we  are  assured  that  "  it  is  in  the  sight  of  God 
of  great  price."  Here  as  elsewhere  sin  is  represented  as 
a  debt,  not  only  to  warn  us  that  the  longer  it  remains 
the  more  it  accumulates,  but  that  we  may  regard  our 
good  works  as  to  their  mercantile  value,  and  may  feel 
that  they  have  no  such  value  in  the  jurisprudence  of 
heaven,  that  they  are  not  legal  tenders  to  make  satisfac- 
tion for  sins  against  God  and  to  purchase  anything  of 
him.  Until  we  feel  ourselves  utterly  undone  wre  may 
render  to  Jesus  some  respect  which  coses  no  humiliation, 
just  as  Simon  invited  him  to  supper.  It  is  when  we  see 
our  guilt,  our  ruin,  and  how  through  the  great  atone-' 
ment  all  is  freely  forgiven,  that  we  resemble  this  sinner 
in  her  humility,  her  gratitude,  her  love,  her  devotion. 
Men  may  frame  a  thousand  objections  and  cavils,  but  the 
simple  fact  is,  that  God's  method  of  reaching,  melting, 
converting  the  soul  is  the  free  offer  of  pardon  and  salva- 
tion through  the  sacrifice  of  Calvary.  I  know  the 
terrors  of  the  Lord  have  their  work  to  do,  but  it  is  only 
to  prepare  the  way  that  we  may  "persuade  men."  Fear 
is  to  make  a  breach  through  which  love  may  enter.  Our 
message  is  mercy,  not  wrath;  heaven,  not  hell.  Could 
the  accusations  of  Simon,  could  the  threats  of  all  the 
Pharisees  in  Nain  have  reformed  this  woman  ?  And  just 
as  ineffectual  now  are  the  severities  of  the  law.  To  hum- 
ble, subdue,  change  the  heart — this  is  "what  the  law 
could  not  do,"  but  what  is  done  by  that  proclamation  of 
free  mercy  and  forgiveness,  through  the  blood  of  Christ, 
which  substitutes  repentance  unto  life"  for  the  remorse, 
the  sorrow  of  the  world  that  worketh  death,"  which 
relieves  the  conscience  of  its  load  of  guilt,  discharges  the 


The  Penitent  of  Nain.  125 

heart  of  every  debt  except  that  of  gratitude,  and  causes 
our  memory  to  recall  our  sins  only  with  the  sweet  assur- 
ance that  they  are  blotted  out  forever. 

And  there  is  something  else  the  law  could  not  do. — 
Even  after  we  have  received  remission  of  our  past  sins 
through  the  atonement,  the  law  has  no  power  to  uphold 
and  carry  us  forward  in  a  life  of  holiness  and  peace. — 
It  is  the  Gospel  which  produces  in  our  characters  and 
lives  a  change,  not  dependent  on  feeling,  and  therefore 
transient,  but  fixed  and  permanent.  It  is  the  Gospel, 
which,  not  only  "magnifies  the  law  and  makes  it  honor- 
able," but  makes  it  delightful  by  casting  over  it  all  the 
charms  which  ravish  our  souls  and  bind  them  to  thelie- 
deemer.  And  it  is  the  Gospel,  the  assurance  of  almighty, 
everlasting  grace  and  strength  which  cheers  and  sustains 
ns,  inspiring  confidence,  securing  victory  in  all  our  con- 
flicts. 

My  beloved  brethren,  what  a  Saviour  is  ours;  what  a 
great,  glorious  salvation;  let  us  understand  it;  let  us  open 
our  hearts  to  all  its  blessed  motives  and  influences.  "To 
whom  little  is  forgiven,  the  same  loveth  little."  This 
does  not  mean  that  any  need  the  pardon  only  of  a  few  sins. 
Jesus  does  not  refer  to  the  amount  of  sin,  for  then  it 
might  be  said,  let  us  "continue  in  sin  that  grace  may 
abound;"  he  refers  to  our  sense  of  guilt  and  our  estimate 
of  what  has  been  forgiven.  Just  as  Ave  believe  there  is 
any  merit  in  ourselves,  we,  of  course,  deduct  from  the 
mercy  which  hath  blotted  out  our  sins,  and  from  our 
gratitude  for  deliverance.  It  is  when  our  eyes  are  opened 
to  see  all  our  guilt,  our  depravity,  and  the  free,  sovereign, 
distinguishing  grace  which  hath  raised  us  from  such  an 
abyss  to  glory,  honor  and  immortality — it  is  then  that 
love  absorbs  all  our  souls;  that  we  cry  out,  Lord,  what 
wilt  thou  have  us  to  do?  and  would  weep  if  not  permit- 
ted to  do  something  as  an  expression  of  the  ardors  burn- 
ing in  our  souls;  that,  with  the  first  christians,  we  exclaim, 
"The  love  of  Christ  constrains  us;"  that,  with  this 
woman,  we  instinctively  consecrate  to  Jesus  all  in  which 
we  once  gloried, — knowing  on  earth  no  dignity,  no  privi- 
lege to  compare  with  that  of  confessing  and  serving  such 


126 


Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 


a  Bedeemer, — anticipating  in  heaven  no  higher  honor, 
no  sublimer  happiness  than  to  cast  our  crowns  at  his  feet, 
and  mingle  with  the  multitude  who  forever  ascribe  all 
power,  majesty  and  glory  to  Him  that  redeemed  them  and 
washed  them  from  their  sins  in  his  own  precious  blood. 
To  him  be  praise  and  dominion  forever.      Ame:n". 


The  Lamb  of  God.  L27 


Sermon  Stjjfitfi- 


THE  LAMB  OF  GOD. 

"Again  the  next  day  after,  John  stood  and  two  of  his  disciples,  and 
looking  upon  Jesus  as  he  walked,  he  saith,  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God." — 
John  i :  35-36. 

HE  who  would  commune  with  the  soul  of  the  prince 
of  apostles  and  preachers  must  study  his  epistles. 
In  the  recital  of  his  travels  and  labors  we  have  only  his 
external  life  sketched  by  another.  In  his  letters,  which 
even  his  enemies  admitted  to  be  "weighty  and  powerful," 
we  have  a  revelation  of  his  inner  life  coming  from  him- 
self. And  in  these  autobiographical  disclosures  we  find 
that  the  secret  of  his  holiness,  his  deadness  to  the  world, 
his  pre-eminent  power  as  an  evangelist  was  his  knowledge 
of  a  crucified  Saviour. 

It  was  after  a  full  experiment  of  the  power  of  the  cross 
that  he  said,  "I  determined  not  to  know  anything  among 
you,  save  Jesus  Christ  and  him  crucified."  In  the  pol- 
ished city  of  Athens,  he  saw  all  around  him  a  beautiful 
superstition;  and  he  made  the  attempt,  which  has  since 
been  more  than  once  made,  to  engraft  the  Gospel  npon 
the  popular  religious  sentiment.  He  failed.  Scarcely 
any  effect  was  produced  by  his  sermons.  Thus  admon- 
ished, he  visited  Corinth:  and  then, renouncing  all  philo- 
sophical argument  and  accommodation,  he  preached 
Christ,  and  a  nourishing  church  was  soon  established. 

The  same  object  which  thus  monopolized  the  mind  and 
heart  of  this  accomplished  scholar  and  orator  had,  in  the 
twilight  of  the  Gospel,  absorbed  the  soul  of  the  austere 
herald  of  the  wilderness.  The  first  genius  in  the  acade- 
my of  Gamaliel  rejoiced  in  the  refinements  and  elegancies 
of  literature,  but  John's  was  the  spirit  and  mood  of  Eli- 
jah.    Stern,  abstemious,  spurning   ease  and  effeminacy 


128  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

he  loved  the  congenial  rudeness  and  solitude  of  the  desert; 
and  not  the  common  people  only,  but  Herod  himself  soon 
felt  that  he  had  as  little  taste  for  soft  speech  as  for  soft 
raiment. 

I  wish  I  had  time  to  speak  of  the  character  of  this  re- 
markable man.  What  greatness  and  yet  what  humility. 
"Verily  I  say  unto  you  among  them  that  are  born  of 
woman  there  hath  not  arisen  a  greater  than  John  the 
Baptist ;"  in  all  that  august  catalogue  of  patriarchs, 
prophets,  priests,  kings,  there  had  been  none  nobler  than 
he;  but  he  counted  himself  unworthy  to  unloose  the  shoe- 
latchet  of  the  Eedeemer.  What  popularity,  and  yet  what 
desire  to  hide  himself  behind  the  glory  of  his  Master. 
"He  was  a  burning  and  shining  light,  and  there  went 
out  unto  him  all  Jerusalem,  and  all  Judea,  and  all  the 
region  round  about  Jordan  ;"  the  scribes  and  Pharisees, 
and  even  the  haughty  monarch,  listened  eagerly  to  his 
stirring  eloquence ;  but  he  styled  himself  a  mere  voice — 
vox  et  prater ea  nihil]  and  exulted  in  the  thought  that  he 
would  decrease,  while  the  Messiah  would  increase. 

I  may  not,  however,  dwell  upon  the  life  and  ministry 
of  one  whose  career  was  as  brief  as  it  was  brilliant.  It 
is  his  theme  which  demands  our  attention  to-day.  "  The 
law  and  the  prophets  were  until  John,  since  that  time 
the  kingdom  of  God  is  preached."  John,  then  inaugu- 
rated prophetically  the  Gospel  dispensation,  and  you  see 
what  was  his  theology.  Under  direct  inspiration  he 
points  his  own  disciples  away  from  himself  to  the  Lamb 
of  God  as  the  only  hope  for  man.  "Behold  the  Lamb  of 
God!"  this  was  the  all  engrossing  topic  of  the  Baptist; 
this  is  the  all  engrossing  topic  for  us;  this  is  the 
abridgement  of  all  sermons,  the  epitome  of  all  doctrines, 
the  substance  of  all  exhortations,  the  whole  body  of  evan- 
gelical divinity.  Nor,  this  morning,  have  I  any  argu- 
ments or  counsels  or  entreaties  or  warnings  or  expostu- 
lations or  consolations  to  address  to  you,  which  are  not 
all  comprehended  in  this  short,  but  emphatic,  energetical 
exclamation,  "Behold  the  Lamb  of  God!" 

T.  Entering  at  once  into  the  matter,  I  begin  by  regard- 
ing the  text  as  a  call  to  contemplate  the  earthly  life  of  the 


The  Lamb  of  God.  129 

adorable  Being  upon  whose  form  John's  gaze  was  riveted. 
And  passing  other  aspects,  I  wish  you  to  study  his  char- 
acter us  a  demonstration  of  the  truth  of  his  doctrines, 
rpon  this  subject  age  after  age  has  transmitted  to  us  an 
ever  accumulating  legacy  of  evidence,  but  this  I  do  not 
now  touch.  No  testimonies  appeal  more  directly  to  the 
reason,  and  are  more  calculated  to  produce  conviction, 
than  those  derived  from  the  character  and  conduct  of  the 
Saviour.  And  this  sort  of  proof  is  the  more  worthy  of 
your  attention,  because  it  is  generally  overlooked  by  the 
advocates  of  Christianity. 

Of  course  he  only  is  a  Christian,  who  embraces  the 
religion  of  Jesus  because  he  believes  it  to  be  true.  A 
Christian  loves  truth  first,  and  receives  the  Gospel 
because  it  is  truth  from  God.  To  love  the  Bible  more 
than  truth,  or  to  adopt  its  teachings  through  the  preju- 
dice of  education  or  because  we  hope  for  some  benefit, 
all  this,  you  at  once  see,  is  not  the  faith  of  the  Christian, 
in  such  a  blind  and  selfish  assent,  there  is  nothing  which 
can  secure  the  approbation  of  conscience  or  of  God.  A 
Christian  embraces  the  doctrines  of  revelation  because 
they  are  true.  He  knows  when  and  where  his  religion 
began.  And  he  knows  its  author.  Indeed  Jesus  was 
himself  the  embodiment  of  his  religion,  he  cannot  be 
separated  from  it,  as  other  teachers  may  be  from  their 
systems.  And,  now,  what  T  say  is,  that  the  more  you 
contemplate  this  extraordinary  Being — the  more  closely 
you  "  behold  him  as  he  walked"  and  lived  upon  the  earth, 
the  more  irresistible  will  be  the  conclusion  that  he  com- 
municated truth  to  mankind.  Prophecies,  miracles, — 
very  well,  I  appreciate  the  force  of  the  arguments  which 
they  furnish;  but  in  the  character  of  Christ — so  entirely 
transcending  the  attributes  of  our  fallen  humanity — 
there  is  an  accession  of  evidence  which  establishes  a  cer- 
tainty and  defies  cavil  or  evasion. 

Any  historical  name  calls  up  certain  biographical 
associations,  and  from  infancy  we  have  been  accustomed 
to  hear  of  Jesus.  This  familiarity  causes  us  to  regard  as 
commonplace  the  most  astonishing  phenomenon  which 
has  ever  appeared  among  men.  And,  moreover,  pardon 
me  for  saying  that  few  ever  bring  to  the    study  of  this 


130  Richard  Fuller's' Sermons. 

character  those  lights  and  reflections  which   are  indis- 
pensable, if  Ave  would  feel  its  celestial  purity  and  glory. 
If  you  would    comprehend   something   of  the  Saviour's 
character,   you   must   consider   its    perfect   originality. 
Once,  and  only  once,  has  there  appeared  upon  this  earth 
such  an  impersonation.     The  minds  of  philosophers  are 
every  day  more  and  more  perplexed  by  that  question  of 
Pilate,  ''What  shall  I  do  then  with  Jesus?"     We  have 
had  "  Ecce  Homo,"  and  "Ecce  Deus,"  and  "Ecce  Deus 
Homo,"  and  I  know  not  how  many  other  treatises;  but 
high  above  them  all,  amidst  the  lapse  of  centuries  and 
the  waste  of  worlds,  the  Christ  of  the  Bible  stands  alone, 
by  himself,  a  solitary,  unapproachable,  paragon  of  purity 
and  love,  an  original  revelation  of  divine  perfection.     It 
is,  indeed,  this  very  perfection  which  renders  the  charac- 
ter of  Jesus  less  striking  to  common  readers.     Not  only 
are  there  no -defects  to  act  as  foils,  no  shades  to  contrast 
with  the  lights,  but  there  are  no  salient  virtues,  no  one 
trait  of  excellence  having  pre-eminence  over  other  traits. 
His   life   is  given    by   four  very  different  writers,  each 
simply  recording  "  what  Jesus  both  said  and  did    until 
the  day  that  he  was  taken  up,"  and  the  whole  brings  out 
an  entirely  new  manifestation.     Never  did  a  history  bear 
upon   its  face  such  marks  of  truth ;  and  so  unlabored 
and  artless  are  all  the  narratives,  that  we  are  more  inti- 
mately acquainted  with  the  biography  of  Jesus  than  with 
that  of  any  remarkable  personage.      The  evangelists  do 
not  present  him  only  on  set  occasions,   they  bring   him 
before  us  in  every  position.      In    language  unadorned, 
chastened   by   veneration   into   the   severest  simplicity, 
they  recount  his  public  deeds  and  sayings.      With  the 
same  calm  consciousness  of  his  greatness,  with  a  love 
which  rises  into  reverence,  and  a  reverence  which  melts 
back  into  love,  they  introduce  us  to  his  most  confidential 
interchange  of  thoughts  with  his  disciples.     They  pro- 
nounce   no    eulogies,    utter    no    exclamations;     at   all 
times  and   everywhere   they    seek  only   to   place    him 
before  us  as  he  was.     And  at  all  times  and  everywhere, 
we  feel  instinctively  that  in  him  humanity  existed  under 
conditions  entirely  distinct  from  those  of  our  fallen  na- 
ture ;  that  only  one  such  being  ever  appeared  upon  earth  ; 
that  he  lived  a  life  of  perfection   and   communion  with 


The  Lamb  of  Gotf.  131 


the  Eternal  Father  impossible  to  the  constitution  of  a 
mere  creature;  that  he  was  "  holy,  harmless,  undeliled, 
and  separate  from  sinners;"  that — while  the  purest  of 
the  children  of  Adam  have  ever  been  imperfect  and 
"  from  beneath,"  he  was  "  from  above,"  the  incarnation 
of  celestial  truth,  sanctity,  benignity. 

I  need  not  say  that  the  sacred  writers  describe  a  charac- 
ter of  which  they  could  have  previously  formed  no  con- 
ception. Nor  was  the  perfection  of  Jesus  a  combination 
of  traits  which  had  existed  separately  in  others.  His 
virtues  were  heavenly;  never  had  one  of  them  been  exem- 
plified in  a  single  pattern.  The  portraits  we  have  of 
this  wonderful  personage  are  plainly  drawn  by  those  who 
had  but  one  single  object — to  "set  forth  in  order  a  de- 
claration of  those  things"  they  knew  of  their  Master. — 
And  the  Being  who  thus  becomes  the  subject  of  our  con- 
templation is,  in  his  personal  character,  in  his  ministry, 
in  his  life,  in  his  death,  as  immeasurably  above  human- 
ity as  the  heavens  are  above  the  earth.  Not  only  could 
he  demand  of  his  enemies,  "Which  of  you  convinceth  me 
of  sin?"  but  he  is  himself  plainly  conscious  of  immacu- 
late holiness.  Mingling  among  men  as  a  man,  entering 
with  the  tenderest  sympathy  into  their  miseries,  reliev- 
ing their  wants,  healing  their  diseases,  assuaging  their 
griefs,  weeping  at  their  afflictions; — we  yet  behold  in  him 
a  visitant  from  another  world,  one  who  is  not  from  men 
nor  of  men.  A  sunbeam  penetrating  sinks  of  pollution  is 
not  more  unstained  and  insulated,  not  more  plainly  "from 
above,"  than  he  was  in  all  his  intercourse  with  human 
passions  and  corruptions.  And  whether  we  consider  the 
judicial  authority  with  which  he  condemned  sin,  or  the 
tenderness  of  his  sympathy  for  human  sorrow  and  suffer- 
ing, or  the  unaffected  majesty  with  which  he  asserts  his 
eternal  power  and  glory,  or  his  life,  or  his  preparation 
for  death,  or  his  death, — we  will  at  once  confess,  that  a 
new  unique  Being  has  appeared  on  the  platform  of  hu- 
man affairs;  that  he  is  invested  with  unrivalled  peerless 
dignity;  and  that  his  words  are  truth,  his  doctrines  the 
wisdom  which  is  to  enlighten  and  elevate  and  save  man- 
kind. 

If  you  would  comprehend  something  of  the  Saviour's 


132  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 


character,  you  must  remember  the  age  in  which  he 
appeared.  "When  the  fullness  of  the  time  was  come, 
God  sent  forth  his  Son  made  of  a  woman."  It  is  true 
that  the  season  of  his  manifestation  was  the  fittest;  for  the 
world  was  then  in  a  state  of  great  scientific  and  literary 
advancement ; — so  that  men's  minds  were  ready  to  inves- 
tigate the  claims  and  teachings  of  Him  who  now  became 
an  actor  in  its  history.  But  the  period  was  oue  of  deep 
and  universal  moral  degeneracy.  I  will  not  disgust  you 
with  the  proofs  of  this  assertion.  It  is  a  matter 
of  easy  demonstration,  that  every  form  of  vice  rioted 
in  the  world,  every  form  of  hypocrisy  and  corruption 
reigned  in  the  religion  both  of  Jew  and  Gentile.  At 
such  a  time,  this  adorable  Being  stood  before  men. — 
Was  he  only  a  man  r  only  the  carpenter's  son  ? — 
Suppose  that  up  to  this  hour  our  earth  had  been 
shrouded  in  thick  darkness,  with  only  here  and  there  a 
dim  star  in  all  that  night.  And  suppose  that,  all  at 
once,  the  East  should  be  mantled  with  rosy  light ;  and 
then  we  should  see  a  limb  of  the  orb  of  day ;  and  then, 
trailing  streams  of  glory,  the  dazzling  luminary  should 
ride  sublimely  up  to  the  zenith  in  all  his  unchastened 
splendor;  would  he  not  be  an  idiot  who  could  believe 
that  human  hands  had  kindled  the  radiant  disc,  and 
that  human  skill  was  guiding  it  on  its  imperial  path- 
way ?  To  a  reflecting  mind,  this  miracle  would  not  be 
so  amazing,  it  would  not  so  clearly  attest  the  interposi- 
tion of  divine  wisdom  and  power,  as  the  revelation,  at 
such  an  epoch,  of  that  life  and  character  which  we  admire 
in  Jesus. 

A  third  view  of  the  subject  before  us  has  reference  to 
the  pecular  people  among  whom  Jesus  was  born,  "of  whom 
as  concerning  the  flesh  Christ  came."  Never  were  preju- 
dices more  lodged  and  rooted  than  those  of  the  Jews. 
As  God's  chosen  people  they  walled  themselves  oft*  from 
the  rest  of  mankind,  despising  others  as  outcasts  from 
Jehovah's  favor,  refusing  to  eat  or  to  have  any  sort  of 
communion  with  them.  For  themselves  they  arrogated 
the  exclusive  protection  of  heaven  ;  they  were  sure  of  sal- 
vation ;  and  gloried  in  the  magnificence  of  their  temple, 
the  gorgeous  splendor  of  their  priesthood,  and  the  impos- 
ing pomp  of  their  rituals.     True,  the  Eomans  had  been 


The  Lamb  of  U od.  133 

mysteriously  permitted  to  subjugate  them ;  but  this  was 
only  for  a  while.  The  hour  of  deliverance,  the  day  of 
vengeance  and  recompenses,  was  now  at  hand.  Jehovah 
had  not  forgotten  Zion.  Shiloh  was  about  to  come  and 
break  the  hated  yoke,  and  smite  in  pieces  the  might  of 
their  haughty  foe.  "Marvellous  things  did  he  in  the 
sight  of  their  fathers  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  in  the  field 
of  Zoan,"  but  a  more  signal  triumph  would  soon  be 
achieved,  when  Salem  should  be  crowned  with  the  dia- 
dem of  the  whole  earth,  and  the  once  invincible  prowess 
of  the  Caesars  cower  humbly  at  the  feet  of  the  illustrious 
conqueror. 

While  these  expectations  are  standing  on  tiptoe,  Jesus 
appears,  and  very  soon  all  eyes  are  turned  to  him.  The 
people  hail  him  as  the  long  expected  Messiah,  and  are 
eager  to  crown  him.  Nor  does  he,  like  John,  repel  their 
homage  ;  he  claims  it.  He  is  the  glorious  monarch  who 
had  been  the  theme  of  prophecy.  But,  from  first  to 
last,  he  rises  superior  to  the  feelings  of  his  nation,  he 
looks  down  with  pity  upon  their  earthly  ambition.  He 
declares  that  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand ;  but  that 
it  is  a  kingdom  not  of  this  world,  its  sceptre  to  be  won 
not  by  arms  but  by  truth  ;  a  spiritual  empire,  the  reign 
of  peace  and  holiness  and  love;  a  throne  to  be  established 
not  in  Jerusalem,  but  in  the  heart  of  a  renovated  world. 
Crowding  about  this  mysterious  Being,  the  multitudes 
hold  their  breath,  that  they  may  catch  the  first  word  of 
command  which  shall  marshal  them  in  battle  array  and 
lead  them  to  victory.  But,  instead  of  appealing  to  the 
popular  enthusiasm,  he  speaks  to  them  of  repentance, 
of  peace,  of  humility,  of  the  blessedness  of  persecution. 

Represent  to  yourselves  the  disappointment,  the  cha- 
grin of  the  feverish  throng  eagerly  pressing  around  him, 
burning  with  patriotic  ardor  and  revenge,  when,  in  his 
very  first  address,  he  thus  announces  the  privileges  and 
distinctions  of  his  subjects:  "Blessed  are  the  poor  in 
spirit,  for  theirs  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven;"  "Blessed 
are  the  meek,  for  they  shall  inherit  the  earth;"  "  Blessed 
are  the  pure  in  heart,  for  they  shall  see  God  ;"  "  Blessed 
are  ye  when  men  shall  revile  you,  and  persecute  you, 
and  shall  say  all  manner  of  evil  against  you  falsely  for 


134  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

my  sake."  And  in  all  his  life  we  find  the  same  sus- 
tained elevation  above  the  hereditary  hopes,  the  ancient 
religious  faith  of  his  nation;  above  the  influences  of  birth, 
education,  society.  In  his  entire  ministry  he  reveals  the 
sublime  and  perfectly  original  conception  of  a  kingdom 
of  God  which  is  in  the  soul.  And  he  constantly  pro- 
claims that  his  mission  is  spiritual,  that  he  had  come  to 
deliver  man  from  sin,  and  conduct  him  to  glory,  honor 
and  immortality  beyond  the  skies. 

My  brethren,  enter  into  these  truths.  And  to  these 
reflections  I  ought  to  add  others.  I  ought  to  point  to 
the  wonderful  changes  which  have  been  wrought  in  the 
moral  condition  of  the  world  by  the  brief  residence  of 
this  heavenly  visitant  amongst  men.  Since  he  entered 
humanity,  a  new  power  has  been  at  work;  a  new  force, 
acquiring  fresh  momentum  every  year,  has  been  moulding 
human  affairs.  Since  the  wonderful  birth  at  Bethlehem, 
the  world  has  been  a  new  world.  I  ought  to  remind 
you  that  this  clay  three  continents  confess  the  sovereignty, 
and  every  portion  of  the  earth  is  feeling  the  influence  of 
him  who,  "being  the  holiest  among  the  mighty,  and  the 
mightiest  among  the  holy,  has,  with  his  pierced  hand, 
lifted  empires  off  their  hinges,  has  turned  the  stream  of 
centuries  out  of  its  channel,  and  still  governs  the  ages." 
And  I  ought  to  collect  at  least  some  of  those  traits  which 
were  united  in  his  character;  traits  to  which  we  still  look 
up  and  feel  their  incomparable  exaltation  above  our  na- 
ture; traits  which  did  not  mature  slowly  and  mutinously 
like  human  virtues,  but  shone  out  at  once  in  God-like 
perfection;  and  traits  which  render  the  manifestation  of 
such  a  character  at  that  period,  and  among  that  nation, 
a  moral  wonder  far  more  striking  than  any  physical 
miracle. 

These  and  other  thoughts  I  ought  to  urge,  but  I  will 
not.  I  have  said  enough.  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God;" 
contemplate  this  extraordinary  Being,  and  you  will  con- 
fess that  his  religion  must  be  true.  Again  I  lament  tho 
influence  of  familiarity  in  deadening  the  impression 
which  such  a  character  ought  to  make  upon  us.  But, 
after  all,  "Behold  the  Lamb  of  God;"  study  his  life,  his 
character,  and  you  will  pity  the  childish  cavils  of  infidel- 


The  Lamb  of  Cud.  135 


ity.  Why,  t  lie  conception  of  such  excellence,  such  purity, 
grandeur,  love,  never  dawned  upon  the  mind  of  sage  or 
seer.  An  infidel  says  that  "  the  inventor  of  such  a  bi- 
ography would  have  been  not  less  "wonderful  than  its 
Subject.''*  And  when  I  know  that  this  full-orbed, 
heaven-born  perfection  really  existed  among  men  ;  existed 
did  I  say? — "when  I  see  him  still  existing;  -when  I  feel 
him  still  living,  moving,  acting,  speaking  all  around  me 
and  within  me;  when — though  the  outer  conditions  of 
his  life  have  passed  away  for  eighteen  hundred  years — 
I  behold  him  still  present,  breathing  life  and  love  into 
millions  wrho  would  die  for  him,  inspiring  his  churches 
with  courage  and  strength  as  if  the  shout  of  a  king  were 
among  them,  vanquishing  his  foes,  consoling,  sustaining 
his  people,  slowly  but  surely  regenerating  the  world: — 
when  I  see,  when  I  feel  all  this,  J  ask,  I  want  no  more, 
I  can  have  not  a  doubt;  I  say,  with  the  centurion, 
"  Truly  this  was  the  Son  of  God ;"  I  exclaim,  with  Peter, 
"  Lord,  to  whom  shall  wre  go,  thou  hast  the  words  of  eter- 
nal life,  and  we  believe,  and  are  sure,  that  thou  art  that 
Christ,  the  Son  of  the  living  God."  As  I  read  the  his- 
tory of  Jesus,  I  exult  in  a  confidence  I  cannot  express ; 
I  need  no  other  testimony  ;  I  no  longer  examine  pro- 
phecies or  miracles ;  the  truth  carries  conviction  to  my 
mind  instantly  and  irresistibly  by  its  own  self-evidence. 
Look  at  the  sun;  it  shines  by  its  own  radiance,  it  needs 
no  foreign  light.  And  thus  it  is  with  the  character  of 
the  Lamb  of  God;  the  morel  explore  it,  the  more  trans- 
parent is  its  divine  glory;  and  the  more  clearly,  of  course, 
do  I  see  truth  stamped  upon  Christianity;  for  the  char- 
acter of  Jesus  is  not  only  the  proof  of  the  religion  he 
taught,  it  is  that  religion  itself. 


II.  I  pass  now  to  a  second  view  of  our  text, — a  second 
import  of  the  exclamation,  "Behold  the  Lamb  of  God  ;" 
regarding  it  as  having  reference  to  the  Redeemer's  work, 


*  I  refer,  of  course,  to  the  well-known  language  of  "Emile"  by 
Rosseau,  "et  1-Evangile  a  des  caracteres  de  verite  si  grands,  si 
frappants,  si  parfaitement  inimitables,  que  1-inventeur  en  serait 
plus  etonnant  que  le  heros." 


136  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

to  the  great  atonement  which  he  wrought  out  for  man. 
That  this  stupendous  transaction — however  dimly  fore- 
shadowed or  rather  fore-shined  as  yet — was  prophetically 
revealed  to  John,  we  can  have  no  doubt.  The  very 
phraseology  of  the  passage  shows  this.  "  Lamb,"  "  Lamb 
of  God," — "Lamb  of  God  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of 
the  world," — these  terms  admit  of  only  one  interpreta- 
tion ;  they  allude  evidently  to  the  Paschal  lamb,  and 
prove  that  the  Spirit  of  Christ  which  was  in  John  dis- 
closed to  him,  in  this  Being,  the  great  antitype. 

Jesus  has  now  returned  to  the  Jordan,  after  his  bap- 
tism and  the  temptation  of  the  wilderness.  Though 
awed  by  his  dignity,  John  did  not  know  him  when  he 
administered  the  sacred  rite  (v.  33);  but  now  the  myste- 
rious victim  is  prophetically  disclosed  to  his  faith.  As 
the  Redeemer  walks  in  sublime  silence,  equipped  for  his 
majestic  and  awful  achievement,  it  is  the  office  of  the  fore- 
runner to  announce  him.  This  John  had  done  the  day 
before,  proclaiming  him  to  the  multitude.  Now  he 
repeats  his  testimony  more  pointedly  to  some  of  his  own 
disciples,  who  at  once  follow  Jesus.  The  Lamb  of  God  as 
the  great  sacrifice  for  sin,  this  is  the  object  towards 
whom  the  herald  seeks  to  direct  the  attention  of  all. 
And  now,  my  brethren,  in  all  the  past,  the  present,  the 
future,  on  earth,  in  heaven,  in  time,  in  eternity — what 
ever  has  been,  or  ever  can  be  so  novel,  so  wonderful, 
so  profoundly,  absorbingly  interesting  as  this?  Before 
the  sublimity  of  the  Saviour's  enterprise,  the  exploits  of 
kings  and  heroes  sink  into  contempt.  We  cannot  reflect 
upon  its  intrinsic  grandeur,  its  bearings  upon  this  fallen 
world,  its  relations  to  other  portions  of  the  moral  uni- 
verse, without  feeling  our  souls  alternately  exalted  and 
humbled,  subdued  by  awe,  melted  into  tenderness,  and 
swept  by  wondering,  adoring  hosannas. 

I  have  said  that  the  title  "Lamb"  refers  to  a  sacri- 
fice. The  first  great  truth  here  unfolded,  then,  is  that 
the  death  of  Jesus  was  a  real  sacrifice,  a  propitiation  for 
sin; — a  doctrine  this,  most  repulsive  to  those  who  deny 
the  Saviour's  divinity,  but  which  is  one  of  the  clearest 
matters  of  revelation ;  a  doctrine  which  is  the  very  reve- 
lation itself  given  in  the  Gospel;  and  which  is  the  pre- 


The  Lamb  of  God.  137 


cise  point  of  separation  between  those  who  preach  the 
Gospel,  and  those  who  "preach  another  Gospel  "  which 
is  no  Gospel,  but  a  fraud  and  a  sham. 

Men  and  brethren  hear  me  on  this  topic.  All  things 
from  the  planets  overhead  to  the  dust  beneath  your  feet, 
are  under  law.  Man's  true  liberty,  like  that  of  angels, 
is  not  to  be  free  from  law,  but  to  be  under  the  best  law. 
The  child  is  born  and  grows  up  into  the  citizen,  carrying 
within  him  the  sense  of  responsibility  to  government  as 
his  normal  condition;  and  no  two  ideas  are  more  indisso- 
lubly  connected  in  our  minds  than  punishment  and  the 
violation  of  law. 

Now,  God,  in  his  moral  administration,  governs  this 
earth  by  laws  written  in  the  Bible,  or  in  our  own  con- 
sciences. All  men  bear  in  their  own  bosoms  the  convic- 
tion that  the  laws  of  God  are  good,  they  are  compelled 
to  confess  their  absolute  perfection  ;  and  they  are  also 
conscious  that  they  have  violated  these  laws.  Penalty 
is,  of  course,  a  part  of  law;  without  it  the  most  solemn 
enactments  would  be  only  advice  and  exhortation.  If 
law  be  violated,  the  penalty  must  be  enforced,  except 
where  there  is  some  extenuation  of  guilt;  for  better  no 
laws,  than  laws  which  are  not  executed.  Such  are  the 
majesty  and  inviolability  of  the  divine  law,  that  a  single 
transgression  instantly  changes  altogether  the  state  and 
destiny  of  the  creature  ;  involving  a  fatal  and  irrevocable 
ruin — as  we  see  in  the  history  of  reprobate  angels.  And 
if  one  sin  work  such  desperate  conclusions,  what  is  the 
state  of  man  whose  iniquities  are  as  the  sands  of  the  sea? 
Lastly  it  follows,  of  course,  that  there  can  be  no  escape 
for  a  single  human  being,  unless  the  divine  law  be 
repealed — (which  is  impossible,  for  that  law  is  a  tran- 
script of  God's  character,  and  its  revocation  would  quite 
expunge  his  perfections) — or  else  some  medium  be  found 
by  which  God  can  be  just  and  yet  justify  the  ungodly. 

These  propositions  could  be  easily  established,  but  it 
is  unnecessary ;  they  are  really  so  many  axioms.  And 
these  maxims  conceded,  the  only  question  is,  by  what 
interposition  can  man  be  rescued  from  the  seemingly  irre- 
mediable consequences  of  sin  ?  There  must  be  some  me- 
dium;   and  as  repentance  is  the  only  medium  which — 


138  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

without  the  Gospel — a  reflecting  mind  could  suggest,  let 
us,  for  a  moment,  examine  this  ground  of  hope. 

Now,  to  my  judgment,  it  is  enough  to  expose  this  sys- 
tem, that  I  find  it  contradicted  everywhere  in  the  econo- 
my of  nature.  The  physical  laws  of  this  planet  are  from 
the  same  author  who  has  framed  the  moral  code,  and  as 
to  them  what  is  the  fact?  Does  penitence  retrieve  the 
mischief  of  a  violated  law?  In  the  natural  world  we 
find  a  vast  disproportion  between  our  ability  to  inflict 
harm  and  to  repair  it.  If  a  man  throw  himself  from  the 
top  of  a  lofty  column,  will  repentance  cure  his  wounds 
and  knit  together  his  fractured  limbs  ?  If  he  swallow 
arsenic,  will  repentance  arrest  the  deadly  distillment? 
Now,  surely,  God's  moral  administration  must  beat  least 
as  inviolable  as  his  physical  government.  Why,  then, 
should  we  expect  that  repentance  can  absolve  us  from  a 
thousand  infractions  of  the  moral  law? 

From  nature,  let  us  appeal  to  reason  ;  what  is  its  ver- 
dict? Sorrow  for  sin  and  reformation  are  duties  which 
reason  and  conscience  enforce;  but  can  the  discharge  of 
a  present  duty  atone  for  a  past  sin?  Why,  it  were  not 
more  irrational  to  suppose  that  the  performance  of  past 
duty  would  justify  present  transgression. 

In  short,  civil  government  is  the  ordinance  of  God; 
but  where  is  the  government  which  remits  the  punish- 
ment due  to  crime,  because  the  culprit  repents?  Add, 
too,  that  in  the  dispensation  of  the  Gospel,  the  only  alter- 
native is  hell  or  heaven.  If,  then,  repentance  can  save, 
it  secures  not  only  forgiveness  but  everlasting  glory. 
What  would  be  thought  of  human  laws  which  should 
provide,  not  only  pardon,  but  the  highest  honors  for  all 
penitent  criminals?  With  such  legislation  no  adminis- 
tration could  escape  hopeless  demoralization. 

As  I  thus  state  these  truths,  you  at  once  admit  them; 
you  see  that  neither  natural  religion  nor  philosophy  can 
aid  us  in  discovering  the  medium  by  which  guilty  man 
can  be  rescued;  that  God  must  devise  and  disclose  the 
remedy.  Well,  well,  you  say,  but  we  have  a  revelation, 
and  is  not  pardon  there  promised  immediately  ?  With 
those  who  receive  the  Bible  as  a  communication  from 
heaven — this  is  really  the  only  question;  and  the  answer 


The  Lamb  of  God.  139 


is  unequivocal  and  conclusive.  For  my  part,  every  oper- 
ation of  the  Supreme  Ruler  which  I  see  around  me  for- 
bids my  expecting  from  him  a  direct  amnesty.  Nature 
is  full  of  a  mediatorial  scheme.  In  the  animal  and 
physical  world,  in  illuminating  and  fertilizing  the  earth, 
in  sustaining  and  perpetuating  human  life,  in  the  entire 
material  economy.  God  always  accomplishes  his  pur- 
poses and  confers  blessings  mediately — by  the  employ- 
ment of  agencies; — why  should  I  expect  a  deviation  from 
this  settled  plan  in  his  spiritual  dispensations? 

In  the  next  place,  there  is  as  to  sin  and  the  pardon  of 
sin, a  revelation  older  than  the  Sacred  Books.  Itis  writ- 
ten in  the  human  bosom,  and  what  does  this  proclaim? 
Its  mysterious  yet  explicit  admonition  is,  not  only  that 
there  must  be  some  medium,  but  that  the  medium  must 
be  sacrificial.  Wherever  men  are  found  they  seek  to 
expiate  for  sin,  not  only  by  mediation,  but  by  multiply- 
ing the  number  of  mediators,  by  numerous  priests  and 
repeated  offerings; — thus  confessing  their  guilt,  the  felt 
necessity  of  some  medium,  and  the  imperfection  of  their 
schemes.  Reason  can  detect  no  connection  between  the 
forgiveness  of  sin  and  the  blood  of  a  victim.  The  uni- 
versal prevalence  of  sacrifices  must,  then,  be  traced  to  a 
revelation,  either  orally  transmitted,  or  recorded  in  our 
very  nature. 

In  fine,  upon  no  point  is  the  Bible  more  clear  and  full. 
Here  every  page  is  blood-red ;  patriarch,  prophet,  apos- 
tle, all  repeating  this  truth,  that  "without  shedding  of 
blood  there  is  no  remission  of  sin."  Morality  sends  us 
to  our  good  deeds,  our  character,  our  penitence;  super- 
stition sends  us  to  forms  and  sacraments;  the  Gospel 
gathers  all  its  inspiration  into  one  glorious  note  and 
cries,  "Behold  the  Lamb  of  God!"  In  the  jurispru- 
dence of  heaven  our  virtues  have  great  moral  worth,  but 
they  have  no  mercantile  value  so  as  to  purchase  anything 
from  God.  As  far  as  salvation  is  concerned,  morality  is 
useful  -only  because  it  leads  to  religion.  1  he  sacred  pages 
know  absolutely  nothing  of  any  mercy  independent]}"  of 
the  atonement,  "With  the  Lord  is  mercy,  and  with  him 
is  plenteous  redemption,  and  lie  shall  redeem  Israel  from 
all  his  iniquities."     "Being  justified  freely  by  his  grace, 


140  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

through  the  redemption  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus."  The  Gos- 
pel reveals  no  vague  abstract  benevolence,  but  love  reach- 
ing us  through  a  mediator.  "  God  so  loved  the  world  ;" — 
this  language  refers  not  only  to  the  greatness,  but  to  the 
peculiarity  of  the  love.  God's  philanthropy  did  not  par- 
don man  immediately,  but  it  found  expression  through  a 
medium.  "  God  so  loved  the  world,  that  he  gave  his  only 
begotten  Son,  that  whosoever  believeth  in  him  should 
not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life." 

"The  Lamb; "  you  perceive  the  import  of  this  term. 
Salvation  is  not  through  a  moral  but  through  a  sacrifi- 
cial righteousness;  through  the  vicarious  sufferings  of  a 
victim.  I  go  on,  now,  and  observe,  that  the  Lamb  is 
God's  Lamb — "the  Lamb  of  God."  For  thousands  of 
years  had  the  priests  stood  immolating  those  animals 
which,  as  the  appointed  representatives,  forfeited  their 
lives  for  man;  but  these  sacrifices  were  furnished  by 
those  who  had  sinned.  Now  the  victim  is  provided  by 
God.     A  truth  this  full  of  sublimity  and  consolation. 

"  Wherewitli  shall  I  come  before  the  Lord,  and  bow 
myself  before  the  high  God?  Shall  I  come  before  him 
with  burnt  offerings,  with  calves  of  a  year  old?  Will 
the  Lord  be  pleased  with  thousands  of  rams,  or  wTith  ten 
thousand  rivers  of  oil?  Shall  I  give  my  first  born  for 
my  transgression,  the  fruit  of  my  body  for  the  sin  of  my 
soul  ?  "  This  "  Wherewith  "  has  ever  been  the  pressing 
difficulty  to  the  convicted  soul.  kWith  all  his  holiness, 
Job  saw  that  between  him  and  Jehovah  there  must  be  a 
mediator.  How  bitter  his  complaint,  "  Neither  is  there 
any  daysmen  betwixt  us."  Everywhere  the  earnest  im- 
ploring cry  of  humanity — longing  to  return  to  God  but 
repelled  by  a  sense  of  guilt — has  been,  "  Wherewith  shall 
I  come  ?"  And  the  answer;  the  only  answer  to  that  en- 
quiry is  found  in  our  text,  "Behold  the  Lamb  of  God!" 

This,  indeed,  is  the  great,  unique,  signal  peculiarity  of 
the  Gospel.  Go  where  they  would,  there  was  never  any 
dispute  between  the  apostles  and  their  hearers — as  there 
is  between  us  and  our  audiences — with  reference  to 
the  necessity  of  a  sacrifice  for  sin ;  but  here  was  the  great 
difference.  In  other  religions  the  sinner  offered  the  sa- 
crifice to  God.     In  the  Gospel  God  offers  the  sacrifice  for 


The  Lamb  of  God.  141 


sinners.  At  this  day  it  is  impossible  for  ns  to  feel  the 
force  of  this  singular  truth.  But  if  we  could  place  our- 
selves in  the  position  of  a  Jew,  at  the  period  when  Jesus 
appeared,  we  would  feel  the  sheer,  downright  absurdity, 
of  that  ribaldry  which  ascribes  Christianity  to  priest- 
craft; we  would  understand  the  implacable  hostility  of 
the  priests  to  such  a  religion.  The  pardon  of  sin  was 
the  very  matter  at  issue  between  the  apostles  and  the 
Jewish  hierarchy.  Century  after  century,  the  blood  of  birds 
and  beasts  had  flowed  upon  consecrated  altars.  These  al- 
tars, priests,  sacrifices, oblations  are  all  now  to  cease  ;  and 
why?  is  man  no  longer  a  sinner?  is  humanity  perfect? 
Not  at  all.  They  must  be  discontinued  because  the  true 
Priest,  the  real  sacrifice  has  appeared.  "The  one  obla- 
tion "  of  the  Gospel  is  never  mentioned,  as  the  offering  of 
men;  but  always  as  the  amazing  gift  of  God,  as  the  grand 
master-piece  of  divine  wisdom,  power,  and  love.  "He 
spared  not  his  own  Son,  but  delivered  him  up  for  us  all." 
"  Herein  is  love,  not  that  we  loved  God,  but  that  he  loved 
us,  and  sent  his  Son  to  be  the  propitiation  for  our  sins." 
"  Whom  God  hath  set  forth  to  be  a  propitiation  through 
faith  in  his  blood."  "The  precious  blood  of  Christ  as  of 
a  lamb  without  blemish  and  without  spot,  who  verily 
was  fore-ordained  before  the  foundation  of  the  world,  but 
was  manifest  in  these  last  times  for  you."  When  vindi- 
cating the  evangelical  character  of  his  ministry,  the 
Apostle  reminds  the  Corinthians  that  he  had  first  laid 
the  foundation  of  all  doctrine  and  of  all  piety,  by  preach- 
ing the  atonement  of  Calvary.  "For  I  delivered  unto 
you,  first  of  all,  that  which  I  also  received,  how  that 
Christ  died  for  our  sins  according  to  the  Scriptures." 

That  God  offers  the  sacrifice,  this  is  the  great  thing  in 
the  Gospel ;  this  is  the  Gospel,  the  "glad  tidings  of  great 
joy."  \Vherever  the  disciples  of  Christ  went,  this  truth 
was  the  substance  of  all  their  preaching;  Christ  cruci- 
fied was  their  only  theme,  their  only  religion.  And 
whenever  their  ministry  was  successful,  the  former  sa- 
crifices were,  of  course,  superseded.  In  his  celebrated 
letter  to  Trajan,  Pliny  informs  the  emperor,  that  the 
eifect  of  Christianity  had  been  to  "render  the  sacrificial 
victims  wholly  unsalable."      Indeed,  my  brethren,  who 

6* 


142  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

but  God  could  provide  the  sacrifice  demanded  for  so 
stupendous  an  atonement?  After  all  that  human  wisdom 
and  virtue  could  do,  after  seeking  to  submit  himself  to 
the  will  of  God,  after  all  his  tears  and  penances,  his  zeal 
and  devotion,  and  though  he  climb  like  Isaac  up  to  any 
self-sacritlce — still,  with  Isaac,  man  could  only  exclaim, 
"Behold  the  fire  and  the  wood,  but  wrhere  is  the  lamb 
for  a  burnt  offering  ?"  It  remained  for  faith  to  see  Christ's 
day,  and,  with  Abraham  the  "  father  of  the  faithful," 
rejoicingly  to  answer,  "My  son,  God  will  provide  himself 
a  lamb  for  a  burnt  offering" 

You  see,  then,  that  the  adorable  victim  was  bestowed 
by  God  himself.  And,  now,  what  shall  I  say  of  the  bless- 
ings conveyed  in  this  gift?  The  Baptist  proclaims  the 
efficacy  of  this  precious  sacrifice  to  remove  all  the  load  of 
guilt.  Have  you  any  adequate  appreciation  of  such  a 
deliverance  ?  Contemplate  this  amazing  tragedy, — this 
catastrophe  in  which  such  a  being,  the  "Brightness  of 
the  Father's  glory,"  his  "Beloved  Son,"  is  stretched  upon 
such  an  altar,  as  the  only  possible  expiation  for  our  guilt, 
— and  you  will  have  conceptions  of  the  malignity  of  sin 
which  no  language  can  express.  The  Scriptures  portray 
in  the  strongest  colors  God's  abhorrence  of  this  detesta- 
ble thing.  Jesus  himself,  in  his  pathetic  address  to  the 
weeping  "daughters  of  Jerusalem,"  declares  that,  dismal 
as  were  his  sufferings — the  humiliations,  the  insults,  the 
buffetings,  the  spitting,  the  scourges,  the  thorns,  the  robe, 
the  nails,  the  shame,  the  cross — there  is  a  more  doleful 
object  demanding  our  tears,  and  that  this  object  is  sin. 
But  it  is  when  beholding  the  glory  and  the  august  agony 
of  this  spotless  victim,  that  we  are  overwhelmed  with 
views  of  the  atrocity  of  sin  in  itself  and  of  our  desperate 
condition.  Whether  such  a  horrible  evil  admitted  of  a 
remedy,  and  what  was  the  remedy,  God  alone  could  de- 
cide. And  he  assures  us  that  the  blood  of  his  Son 
cleanseth  from  all  sin.  "Behold  the  Lamb  of  God, 
which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world."  Not  who 
took  away  ;  but  who  now  "taketh  away"  sin.  Yes,  to  all 
the  millions  in  America,  Europe,  Asia,  Africa, — to  all — 
to  each — this  victim  is  set  forth,  as  the  Lamb  of  the  Bass- 
over  was  prescribed  to  the  Jew.  What  an  object  to 
attract  the  concentrated  gaze  of  the  universe.     What  an 


The  Lamb  of  God.  I  t3 


object  to  engage  and  absorb  all  the  passions  of  my  soul. 
The  Israelite  knew  what  he  did  when  he  laid  his  sins 
upon  the  appointed  substitute;  and  the  Christian  acts 
intelligently,  when  he  rolls  the  burden  of  conscious  guilt 
upon  this  vicarious  sufferer. 

This  is  not  all.  The  death  of  Jesns  secures  not  only 
a  full  discharge,  but  justification.  Xot  only  are  we  re- 
instated in  that  favor  which  was  the  glory  of  unfallen 
man,  but  we  are  clothed  in  a  righteousness  to  which 
unfallen  man  could  never  have  aspired.  In  a  word,  "He 
that  spared  not  his  own  Son,  but  delivered  him  up  for 
us  all,  bow  shall  he  not  with  him,  also  freely  give  us  all 
things  ?"  The  Bible  constantly  represents  the  redemption 
by  Christ  as  the  donation  of  treasures  which  never  conld 
have  been  purchased  by  human  or  angelic  obedience. 
The  inspired  writers  exhaust  all  their  powers  to  extol 
this  magnificent  and  "unspeakable  gift."  How  deplora- 
ble it  is  to  find  those  who  call  themselves  Christians,  de- 
preciating this  "mystery  hid  from  ages  and  generations ;" 
degrading  to  the  level  of  common  humanity  him  whom 
the  Holy  Spirit  denominates  "The  Wonderful,"  whose 
pre-eminent  dignity  constitutes  him  a  sin-offering  which 
vindicates  the  divine  attributes  and  raises  the  guilty  to 
immortal  glory.  He  was  a  good  man,  they  say; — that 
is,  he  was  not  a  bad  man  !  And  they  are  greatly  alarmed, 
lest  Ave  should  too  highly  exalt  him,  to  whom  the  Scrip- 
tures ascribe  the  whole  work  of  our  salvation  ;  whom  we 
are  commanded  to  honor  even  as  Ave  "honor  the  Father;" 
and  at  Avhose  feet  the  shining  hosts  of  heaA'en  incessantly 
cast  their  crowns,  "  saying  with  a  loud  voice, — "Worthy 
is  the  Lamb  that  Avas  slain,  to  receive  poAver,  and  riches, 
and  Avisdom,  and  strength,  and  honor,  and  glory,  and 
blessing," — "For  thou  Avast  slain,  and  hast  redeemed  us 
to  God  by  thy  blood  out  of  every  kindred  and  tongue 
and  people  and  nation,  and  hast  made  us  unto  our  God 
kings  and  priests." 

III.  I  had  intended  to  propose  the  Lamb  of  God  to 
your  meditations  in  one  other  aspect.  He  is  our  exam- 
ple; and  the  title  by  which  he  is  commended  in  the  text 
suggests  those  graces  of  meekness,  gentleness,  tenderness, 


144  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

patience,  which  are  peculiar  to  the  Gospel,  and  which 
were  so  perfect  in  him;  but  as  I  have  already  detained 
you  long  enough,  I  abridge  the  matter  and  hasten  to  a 
conclusion. 

The  subject  upon  which  I  have  addressed  you  to-day 
is  of  infinite  importance  to  us  all.  It  deeply  concerns  us 
ministers  of  the  Gospel.  We  live  at  a  period  when  the 
very  air  is  tremulous  with  excitements,  and  it  is  expected 
that  our  discourses  shall  refer  to  passing  events.  If  I 
have  disappointed  you,  let  my  apology  be  that  of  Arch- 
bishop Leigh  ton  in  similar  circumstances.  The  pastors 
of  his  day,  like  many  now,  deemed  it  their  duty  to 
harangue  their  audiences  as  to  political  matters;  and  at 
their  clerical  meetings  they  catechised  each  other  as  to 
their  fidelity  in  this  duty.  Upon  one  of  these  occasions 
the  question  was  carried  around — "  Do  you  preach  for  the 
times?'"  "  Do  you  preach  for  the  times?"  There  was 
but  one  reply  ;  each  answering,  "  Yes,  certainly  and  con- 
stantly; my  sermons  are  such  as  the  times  require."  At 
length  the  inquiry  was  made  of  Leighton,  who  said, 
"  Since  so  many  able  ministers  preach  for  the  times,  suffer 
one  humble  servant  of  Christ  to  preach  for  eternity." 
Men  and  brethren,  this  earth  has  seen  but  one  perfect 
model  of  a  preacher  ;  it  was  Jesus ;  and  how  did  he  spend 
his  time?  Did  he  engage  in  the  civil  strifes  or  in  any  of 
the  ephemeral  conflicts  of  the  day  ?  No,  he  was  entirely 
occupied  in  proclaiming  the  everlasting  Gospel.  Or  take 
John  the  Baptist,  "He  was  a  burning  and  a  shining 
light;"  but  was  he  ever  a  firebrand  ?  Did  he  ever  de- 
grade himself  and  his  office  by  forgetting  his  holy  calling 
and  playing  the  demagogue  among  the  multitudes  who 
hung  upon  his  lips?    . 

Nor  can  our  ministry  be  a  blessing  to  the  world  or  the 
church  except  as  we  imitate  these  example.-:.  "Behold 
the  Lamb  of  God," — this  was  all  the  counsel  John  gave 
to  his  disciples  who  were  about  to  follow  the  Redeemer 
and  to  be  ordained  as  ambassadors  for  God.  And  it  is 
because  this  glorious,  inspiring  object  is  not  always  be- 
fore our  eyes,  that  we  ministers  are  what  we  are;  that, 
with  themes  which  ought  to  inflame  all  our  being,  we  are 
so  often  formal  and  lifeless.     For  my  own  part,  if  I  could, 


The  Lamb  of  God,  145 


without  insufferable  presumption,  write  a  treatise  on  the 
secret  of  successful  preaching,  every  chapter,  every  page, 
everysentence  should  but  repeat  and  paraphrase  the  lan- 
guage of  our  text.  Herald  of  salvation,  would  you  be 
earnest?  behold  the  Lamb  of  God.  Would  you  be  im- 
pressive? behold  the  Lamb  of  God.  Would  you  glow 
with  irrepressible  ardor  for  souls?  behold  the  Lamb  of 
God  ?  Would  you  be  direct  and  pointed  in  your  appeals  ? 
behold  the  Lamb  of  God.  Would  you  have  your  heart 
melt  in  tenderness?  behold  the  Lamb  of  God.  Would 
you  have  the  solemnitiesof  eternity,  the  judgment,  heaven, 
hell,  always  pressing  upon  you — firing  your  zeal,  glowing 
in  your  breast,  throbbing  in  your  pulses,  burning  upon 
your  lips,  beaming  in  your  eye,  informing,  inspiring  all 
your  being  and  all  your  thoughts  and  words  with  native, 
spontaneous,  resistless  power?  behold  the  Lamb  of  God. 
The  cruel,  barbarous  heartlessness,  the  childish  rhetorical 
embellishments,  the  disgusting  theatrical  tricks  and 
starts  and  struts  and  attitudes,  the  cold  correct  dullness, 
the  still  colder  and  more  freezing  bombast  and  declama- 
tion,— if  a  minister  would  avoid  these  vices  which  too 
often  dishonor  the  pulpit; — if  he  would  be  simple,  easy, 
natural ;  if  he  would  preach  not  before  but  to  his  audience, 
rousing  the  consciences  of  sinners,  and  elevating  the 
characters  of  Christians;  if  he  would  pray,  and  study, 
and  labor  so  as  to  be  a  workman  that  needeth  not  to  be 
ashamed  ;  let  him  behold  the  Limb  of  God.  In  a  word, 
the  entire  art  of  preaching;  the  whole  system  of  homi- 
letics;  whatever  can  equip  and  adorn  the  sacred  orator; 
whatsoever  things  are  original,  whatsoever  things  are 
lovely,  whatsoever  things  are  pure,  whatsoever  things  are 
true;  if  there  be  any  virtue,  if  any  grace,  if  any  dignity, 
if  any  eloquence,  if  any  glory; — all,  all  are  condensed 
in  this  single,  comprehensive,  sublime  counsel,  "Behold 
the  Lamb  of  God,  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the 
world." 

Our  subject  addresses  itself  most  solemnly  to  those  who 
have  neglected  the  Gospel;  who  have  hitherto  been  in- 
different to  an  object  which  engages  the  admiring,  adoring 
attention  of  angels  and  archangels.  That  there  is  such 
a  class  upon  this  earth  where  the  Lamb  of  God  lived  and 


146  Richard  Fuller 's  Sermons. 

suffered — among  those  for  whom  he  died — is,  to  a  devout 
mind,  a  grief  and  a  marvel.  My  friends,  in  this  astonish- 
ing apathy  you  are  entirely  alone,  you  are  a  wonder  to 
heaven  and  to  hell.  Look  where  we  will  in  the  revelation 
vouchsafed  to  man,  Christ  is  the  great  central  object. 
Even  Moses,  the  representative  of  the  law,  lifts  up  the 
serpent  as  the  emblem  of  the  Redeemer.  You  profess  to 
honor  this  revelation  ;  what  infatuation,  then,  is  yours, 
when  you  remain  unconcerned  about  the  Saviour. 

That  he  has  come  into  the  world,  is  the  amazing  fact 
which  sheds  new  interest  upon  everything;  and  to  his 
cross  must  be  traced  all  those  influences  which  are  now 
"shaping  the  growing  stature  of  the  world."  Pious  men 
make  pilgrimages  to  Palestine;  they  call  it  "The  Holy 
Land,"  and  find  it  good  to  be  there,  as  they  feel  the  in- 
spirations of  those  spots  where  this  Being  lingered,  and 
prayed,  and  wept,  and  expired.  To  a  sanctified  heart 
the  whole  earth  is  now  a  Palestine,  a  holy  land  breath- 
ing and  burning  of  Him;  and  everything  connected  with 
the  earth  is  consecrated.  The  ground  is  hallowed,  since 
he  trod  upon  it;  the  skies  are  hallowed,  since  they  bent 
over  him;  the  sun  is  hallowed,  since  its  beams  fell  upon 
him  by  day;  the  stars  are  hallowed,  since  they  looked 
down  on  him  at  night;  the  winds  are  hallowed,  since 
they  heard  and  obeyed  his  voice;  and  the  waves,  since 
he  walked  upon  them  and  stilled  their  clamor.  Moun- 
tains are  hallowed,  for  he  climbed  their  sides  to  com- 
mune with  his  "Father;  valleys  are  hallowed,  for  he 
dwelt  there  with  his  disciples;  gardens  are  hallowed,  for 
Gethsemane  was  a  garden;  deserts  are  hallowed,  for  a 
desert  was  the  scene  of  his  temptation  and  victory;  vil- 
lages are  hallowed,  for  Bethlehem  and  Bethany  were 
villages;  cities  are  hallowed,  for  he  poured  out  his  flow- 
ing anguish  over  a  city.  In  short,  upon  every  earthly 
object  there  has  been  flung  a  new  lustre,  since  this  Being 
stooped  to  our  humanity.  The  grave,  even  the  cross,  is 
now  invested  with  sacred  glory.  How  is  it,  my  dear 
hearer,  that  you  are  unaffected!''  that  you  live  as  if  the 
Lamb  of  God  had  never  visited  this  world,  had  never 
stood  upon  its  surface  bathed  in  grief  for  you,  and  for 
you   expired   upon   that  dreadful  altar?  Oh,  if  after  all 


The  Lamb  of  God.  147 


this,  you  perish but  you  must  not  perish.     It  will 

never  do.  By  the  love  of  Christ,  by  his  humiliation,  by 
Ins  tears,  his  groans,  his  bloody  swe.  r,  his  agony  and 
death,  [  conjure  you  to  open  your  eves,  to  see  your  guilt 
and  danger,  and  to  "behold  the  Lamb  of  God  who  tak- 
eth  away  the  sin  of  the  world." 

There  are  those  before  me  who  are  not  indifferent  to 
this  great  object,  who  are  deeply  anxious  to  secure  an 
interest  in  him;  and  to  them  the  exhortation  in  our  text 
conies  home  at  once.  Sin  and  a  Saviour  from  Sin,— 
these— even  more  than  the  existence  of  a  God— are  the 
themes  of  revelation.  And  without  terms  or  con- 
ditions.—with  only  this  qualification  that  you  feel  your 
guiltiness  and  are  willing,  penitently  to  renounce  your 
sins  and  to  receive  him, — the  Lamb  of  God  stands  re- 
vealed before  you  and  for  you.  The  sacrifice  for  sins  is 
now  finished.  If  for  you  had  been  offered  all  the  heca- 
tombs which  have  for  centuries  smoked  with  blood,  they 
would  be  worthless  compared  with  this  "offering  of  the 
body  of  Jesus  Christ  once  for  all."     All  that  is°compre- 

hended  in  the  great  salvation  becomes  yours  by  faith. 

To  this  faith  you  have  long  felt  yourselves  "shut  up." 

And  now  to-day  while  it  is  called  to-day— from  how 
many  voices— the  voices  of  reason,  conscience,  the  Holy 
Spirit  in  your  own  bosoms,  the  voices  of  the  redeemed  in 
glory  who  have  been  saved  by  his  precious  blood,  the 
voices  of  the  lost  in  hell  who  perished  because  they  ne- 
glected that  blood— from  how  many  voices  peals  upon 
you  the  exhortation  of  our  text,  "Behold  the  Lamb  of 
God  which  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world."  "  Look 
unto  him  and  be  saved." 

A  look  of  penitence;  can  you  look  on  him  whom  your 
sins  have  pierced  and  not  mourn  for  him,  and  be  in  bit- 
terness for  your  vileness  and  ingratitude? 

A  look  of  faith;  though  the  sins  of  all  the  world  were  on 
you,— the  sins  of  the  old  world,— of  Sodom  and  Gomor- 
rah—of all  the  guilty  generations  which  have  insulted 
and  blasphemed  the  God  of  heaven  and  sunk  into  per- 
dition—though all  were  crushing  you  down  ;— here  is  a 
sacrifice  which  can  pluck  you  as  a  brand  from  the  burn- 
ing, and  raise  you  to  glory,  honor  and  immortality. 


148  Elchard  Fuller  s  Sermons. 


A  direct  look;  do  not  be  averting  your  eyes  to  your 
prayers,  your  promises,  your  reformations;  nothing  can 
avail  but  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  and  that  is  all  sufficient. 
If  you  turn  your  back  to  the  sun,  your  shadow  will 
stretch  out  before  you.  Wheel  around,  and  the  shadow 
is  gone.  So,  while  you  turn  from  Christ,  you  will  see 
only  your  unworthiness  and  vileness.  Look  to  him,  and 
you  will  see  only  his  dazzling  merit  and  righteousness. 

In  fine,  a  look  of  hope,  confidence,  joy.  John  was  a 
voice  crying  in  the  wilderness,  preparing  the  way  of  the 
Lord;  and  such  a  voice  hath  been  heard  in  your  bosom. 
Sorrow  hath  saddened  your  being,  affliction  hath  made 
your  heart  desolate,  or  convictions  have  shed  gloom  over 
your  mind;  and,  now,  that  the  way  has  been  prepared, 
the  Holy  Spirit  is  seeking  to  glorify  Jesus  in  your  soul. 
Listen  to  his  voice ;  welcome  him  who  is  waiting  to  com- 
fort, to  sanctify  you,  and  who  will  never  cast  you  off. 

Christians,  my  beloved  brethren,  what  shall  I  say  to 
you?  As  John  pointed  his  disciples  to  Jesus,  so  my 
highest  ambition  is  to  direct  your  faith  to  him,  and  to 
keep  it  forever  settled  there.  It  is  little  to  say  that  the 
word  "  Behold  "  is  a  note  of  admiration.  True,  all  other 
objects  are  turned  into  insignificance,  compared  with  this 
prodigy.  "He  was  seen  of  angels  ;"  their  admiring  gaze 
was  fixed  upon  incarnate  Deity,  upon  "Emmanuel,  God 
with  us" — a  mystery  more  amazing  than  any  which 
heaven  could  present.  But  it  is  not  only  with  admira- 
tion, it  is  with  appropriating  faith,  with  joy  unspeakable 
and  full  of  glory,  that  you  behold  the  Lamb  of  God. 

He  may  be  as  a  root  out  of  dry  ground  to  others,  but 
to  you  he  is  "the  chiefest  among  ten  thousand  and  alto- 
gether lovely."  Your  eyes  have  been  opened  to  discover 
the  greatness  and  suitableness  and  beauty  of  this  majestic 
substitute  who  offers  himself  to  Eternal  Justice  for  you. 
Upon  him  you  have  cast  your  souls  with  all  their  hopes 
and  interests.  x\nd  now  let  me  remind  you,  that  in  him 
is  all  your  spiritual  life,  and  from  him  you  must  derive 
all  your  spiritual  strength.  In  the  eleventh  chapter  of 
Hebrews  the  apostle  surrounds  us  with  an  illustrious 
galaxy  of  the  faithful,  and  proposes  them  to  our  contem- 
plation.    Soon,  however,  in  the  twelfth  chapter,  he  bids 


The  Lamb  of  God.  149 


us  concentrate  our  gaze  not  on  them,  but  on  Jesus. — 
Nor  is  it  enough  that  you  have  looked  to  him,  you  must 
still  be  looking  unto  Jesus.  The  fire  in  the  temple  was 
from  heaven,  but  it  needed  to  be  fed.  Make  him  the  ob- 
ject to  which  you  always  look  first  and  midst  and  last; 
and  let  all  the  charms  of  this  earth  be  despised,  when 
they  would  come  in  competition  with  his  loveliness. — 
Look  earnestly  at  him;  with  intense,  longing  desires  to 
know  more  of  his  love,  to  enjoy  more  of  his  friendship. — 
Look  steadfastly  at  him;  not  with  affections  which  are 
ever  wavering  between  him  and  the  world,  but  with  ha- 
bitual, unremitted  devotion.  Let  the  blood  of  Christ  be 
warm  in  your  hearts.  Let  the  love  of  Christ  constrain 
you;  let  it  be  the  motive  of  all  your  services  and  self- 
denials.  It  is  love  which  not  only  sweetens  our  sacrifices, 
but  makes  them  acceptable  to  God.  Let  the  fullness  of 
Christ  cause  you  to  exult  in  those  treasures  which  are 
yours.  He  is  wisdom  for  your  ignorance,  strength  for 
your  weakness,  righteousness  for  your  guilt,  sanctifica- 
tion  for  your  corruption,  redemption  from  all  the  thral- 
dom of  your  apostasy. 

Do  you  lament  the  hardness  of  your  heart?  behold  the 
Lamb  of  God,  and  you  will  feel  that  obduracy  dissolving 
in  ingenuous  grief  and  tenderness.  Are  you  tempted  to 
yield  to  sin  ?  behold  the  Lamb  of  God,  and  you  will  cast 
away  in  horror  the  cup  crimsoned  with  his  blood.  Are 
you  cold  and  withered  in  your  affections?  behold  the 
Lamb  of  God;  the  purple  shower  which  falls  from  the 
cross  is  to  the  soul  what  dew  and  rain  are  to  the  parched 
fields.  The  trials  and  sorrows  of  life,  are  these  grievous 
to  you  ?  do  you  sometimes  murmur  at  these  ?  Behold  the 
Lamb  of  God.  Think  of  his  sorrows;  and  you  will  ex- 
claim, "  My  light  afflictions  which  are  but  for  a  moment." 
The  painful  separations  and  humiliations  of  obedience, — 
you  wish  at  times  to  shrink  from  these;  but  turn  your 
eye  to  him  who  for  you  "endured  the  cross,  despising  the 
shame;"  and  you  will  "take  pleasure  in  reproaches,  in 
necessities, in  persecutions,  in  distresses  for  Christ's  sake;" 
you  will  esteem  the  reproach  of  Christ  greater  riches  than 
all  the  treasures  of  the  universe. 


150  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

I  feel,  however,  that  I  will  never  have  done.  "In  him 
dwelleth  all  the  fullness  of  the  Godhead  bodily."  As  all 
light  is  garnered  in  the  sun,  so  all  the  affluence  of  Deity 
is  treasured  up  in  this  Lamb  of  God,  that  we  maybe  en- 
riched from  him.  While  life  lasts,  behold  him,  Chris- 
tian, and  you  can  want  nothing.  When  death  comes,  be- 
hold him,  and  you  will  fear  nothing.  Stephen  saw 
"heaven  opened,"  and  his  "face  shone"  because  "he  saw 
Jesus;"  and  fixing  your  eye  upon  this  loadstar  of  eternity, 
your  parting  soul  will  be  irradiated  with  celestial  glory. 
Nor  will  your  gaze  cease  after  death.  It  will  be  only 
clearer,  more  adoring,  more  ravishing;  and  0  how  pleas- 
ant to  behold  the  Lamb  in  the  midst  of  the  throne;  after 
all  the  contempt,  insult,  injury  heaped  upon  him  here,  to 
see  him  crowned  with  glory,  encircled  by  the  praises  of 
eternity. 

Ye  blessed  inhabitants  of  heaven,  ye  spirits  of  the  just 
made  perfect,  ye  shining  multitudes  around  the  throne, 
ye  ten  thousand  times  ten  thousand  and  thousands  of 
thousands,  and  numbers  without  number, — we  hear  from 
afar  your  pealing  anthems ;  and  worthy  is  he — that  peer- 
less Lamb — of  all  your  noblest  worship.  But  not  always 
shall  we  be  detained  here  upon  this  sad  earth,  compelled 
thus  to  listen  at  a  distance  to  your  choral  harmonies. — 
The  term  of  our  exile  will  soon  be  over;  and  we  too  shall 
see  him  whom  our  souls  love.  We  are  coining.  We  are 
coming.  Sinners  like  yourselves  and  washed  in  the  same 
blood,  wTe  are  coming;  through  clouds  and  storms  we  are 
cleaving  our  way  and  pressing  on  to  you.  Soon  shall  we 
join  your  exulting  throng.  Soon  shall  we  stand  in  }rour 
midst,  gazing  as  you  gaze  upon  his  beauty  ;  adoring  him 
as  you  adore  him ;  casting  our  crowns  at  his  feet  as  you 
cast  yours;  and  with  hallelujahs  long  and  loud  and  trans- 
porting as  yours,  crying,  "Worthy  is  the  Lamb!"  "Unto 
him  that  loved  us  and  washed  us  from  our  sins  in  his 
own  blood,  and  hath  made  us  kings  and  priests  unto 
God  and  his  Father,  to  him  be  glory  and  dominion,  for- 
ever and  ever,  Amen." 


The  Redeemer's  Agony  and  Prayer.  151 


icrmott  Jltutft- 


THE  REDEEMER'S  AGONY  AND 
PRAYER. 

"And  he  went  a  little  further  and  fell  on  his  face  and  prayed,  saying", 
O  my  Father,  if  it  be  possible  let  this  cup  pass  from  me,  nevertheless 
not  as  I  will,  but  as  thou  wilt.-'  "  And  there  appeared  an  angel  unto 
him  from  heaven  strengthening  him.  And  being  in  an  agony  he  prayed 
more  earnestly  ;  and  his  sweat  was  as  it  were  great  drops  of  blood  fall- 
ing down  to  the  ground."    Matt,  xxvi :  39.    Luke  xxii:  43,  44. 

T^HE  entire  Gospel — all  its  salvation,  its  doctrines,  its 
-*-  practical  piety — is  comprehended  in  two  great 
truths:  the  atonement,  and  the  example  of  Jesus.  With- 
out the  atonement  a  sinner  can  never  satisfy  the  demands 
of  justice — no  matter  how  profuse  his  tears,  how  pro- 
found his  repentance,  how  unstinted  his  charity.  But 
vainly  do  we  profess  to  have  faith  in  the  blood  of  Christ, 
unless  by  our  characters  and  lives  we  attest  the  vitality 
of  that  faith;  unless  we  obey  him  who  says,  "If  any 
man  will  be  my  disciple,  let  him  deny  himself  and  take 
up  his  cross  and  follow  me." 

I.  It  is  in  this  twofold  aspect  the  texts  just  read 
present  Jesus  to  our  meditations.  Let  us  develop  these 
passages;  and,  contemplating  the  adorable  Redeemer, 
first,  as  offering  himself  a  sacrifice  for  our  sins,  let  us 
study  his  mysterious  sufferings  in  the  garden,  and  the 
prayer  extorted  from  him  by  his  anguish. 

In  the  verse  quoted  from  Matthew  we  have  the  Sa- 
viour's first  prayer.  "And  he  went  a  little  further,  and 
fell  on  his  face  and  prayed,  saying,  0  my  Father,  if  it  be 


possible,  let  this  cup  pass  from  me  ;    nevertheless  not  * 
I  will,  but  as  thou  wilt."     Now  what  was  this    "cup? 


152  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

and  what  is  the  meaning  of  this  imploring  supplication 
wrung  from  the  adorable  sufferer  by  the  first  taste  of  its 
bitterness  ? 

To  comprehend  the  answer  to  these  most  important 
questions,  we  must  recollect  that  when  "the  Word  was 
made  flesh,"  Jesus  took  our  humanity  with  all  its  infirm- 
ities, and  was  in  all  things  fashioned  as  we  are,  only 
without  the  taint  of  sin.  As  the  divine  nature  con  Id  not 
share  in  the  weakness  of  the  human  nature,  so  it  did  not 
communicate  its  strength  and  glory  to  that  nature.  The 
man  Jesus  grew  up  from  childhood,  and  his  was  that 
frail,  forlorn  humanity  which,  in  its  highest  vigor  and 
beauty,  is  "  crushed  before  the  moth,"  and  is  compared 
by  the  Scriptures  to  the  grass  that  withereth  in  a  day, 
to  the  flower  that  fades  before  the  blast.  This  humanity, 
we  know,  is  greatly  dependent  upon  sympathy,  cries  out 
for  sympathy  in  its  trials  and  sorrows,  and  yearns  for 
sympathy  in  proportion  to  its  refinement.  Jesus  assumed 
our  nature  with  this  element  in  all  its  most  intense  solici- 
tude. The  scene  in  Gethsemane  reminds  us  of  this;  for 
he  takes  with  him  the  three  apostles  in  whom  he  found 
most  congeniality,  and  again  and  again,  he  turns  to  them 
in  the  anguish  of  his  spirit. 

Add,  too,  the  fearful  power  of  temptation  over  beings 
constituted  as  we  are;  and  that  upon  Him  were  concen- 
trated and  exhausted  all  the  unsearchable  artifices  of  the 
Tempter.  I  mention  this,  because  there  can  be  no  doubt 
that  on  this  eventful  night  the  whole  power  of  the  arch- 
enemy was  spent  in  a  final  assault  upon  the  Son  of  God. 
After  the  temptation  in  the  wilderness  it  is  said,  "The 
Devil  departed  from  him  for  a  season  ;" — language  which 
intimates  that  he  would  one  day  renew  his  hellish  attack. 
In  anticipation  of  this  very  scene  Jesus  said,  "The  Prince 
of  this  world  cometh  and  hath  nothing  in  me."  "This 
is  your  hour  and  the  power  of  darkness."  And  we  may 
form  some  conception  of  the  terribleness  of  the  conflict, 
when  we  see  him  literally  resisting  unto  blood  ;  and  when 
we  remember  the  energy  with  which  he  seeks  to  forearm 
his  drowsy  disciples, — coming  to  them  after  each  succes- 
sive encounter,  and  uttering  that  earnest  admonition, — 


The  Redeemer's  Agony  and  Prayer.  l.VJ 

"  Watch  aud  pray  that  ye  enter  not  into  temptation ;  the 
spirit  indeed  is  willing  but  the  flesh  is  weak." 

If  you  enter  into  these  truths  you  will  be  prepared  to 
interpret,  though,  of  course,  very  inadequately,  the  recoil 
and  cry  of  the  Saviour's  humanity  amidst  the  mysterious 
horrors  of  the  garden.  It  is  said  that  he  was  "in  an 
agony."  The  term  agony  means  a  severe  struggle. — 
His  agony  was  a  struggle  between  human  weakness  and 
the  terrific  views  then  disclosed  to  his  soul  of  that  death 
which  was  at  hand; — a  death  in  which  he  was  to  be  im- 
molated as  a  sacrifice  for  sin,  and  to  exhaust  the  penalties 
of  the  law. 

Let  us  entertain  correct  views  upon  a  subject  so  im- 
portant and  yet  so  mysterious.  To  die  in  sin  is  a  fear- 
ful thing,  because  we  carry  within  us  the  sense  of  moral 
pollution,  because  the  conscience  is  filled  with  remorse 
for  personal  guilt,  because  the  soul  is  oppressed  by  a 
"fearful  looking  for  of  judgment  and  fiery  indignation." 
I  need  not  tell  you  that  for  the  "  Holy,  Harmless  and 
Undefiled,"  death  had  none  of  these  poisoned  faugs. — 
He  could  confidently  challenge  the  malignity  of  the  world 
and  say,  "  Which  of  you  accuseth  me  of  sin  ?"  Death  is 
formidable  because  the  devil,  "who  hath  the  power  of 
death,"  terrifies  the  soul  with  his  suggestions ;  but  the 
accuser  could  "find  nothing  in  him."  Amidst  the  an- 
guish of  Gethsemane  and  the  desolation  of  Calvary,  he 
addresses  his  Father  in  all  the  filial  confidence  of  a  dear- 
ly beloved  son.  It  is  still  "my  Father,"  "  my  God."  He 
"  knew  that  he  came  from  God  and  went  to  God." 

But,  though  Jesus  "knew  no  sin,"  he  was  made  "sin 
for  us."  He  suffered  "the  just  for  the  unjust."  "He 
was  wounded  for  our  transgressions,  he  was  bruised  for 
our  iniquities;  the  chastisement  of  our  peace  was  upon 
him,  and  with  his  stripes  we  are  healed."  By  his  inter- 
position in  our  behalf  "he  tasted  death  for  every  man." 
— death  as  "  the  wages  of  sin."  Never  can  we  compre- 
hend the* mental  wretchedness  with  which  his  soul  was 
smitten  and  convulsed,  but  this  we  know  ;  that  "he  bare 
our  sins  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree;"  that  to  each  man 
"the    sting   of  death    is    sin;"    and    myriads    of  these 


154  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 


venomed  stings  pierced  and  lacerated  the  very  core  of 
his  heart. 

The  agony  of  that  dismal  night  was  not,  as  many  sup- 
pose, the  effect  of  some  transient  grief  which  then  op- 
pressed the  Saviour's  mind ;  it  was  caused  by  the  clear 
apprehensions  he  bad  of  the  cross  and  the  terrible  sacri- 
fice he  was  about  to  offer  on  that  altar.  Upon  this  point 
we  are  not  left  to  speculation  or  conjecture.  The  in- 
spired record  gives  us  direct  information.  It  declares 
that  "in  the  days  of  his  flesh  he  offered  up  prayers  and 
supplications,  with  strong  crying  and  tears,  unto  him 
that  was  able  to  save  him  from  death,  and  was  heard  in 
that  he  feared.-'  The  Scriptures  constantly  testify,  that 
to  die  for  our  sins  was  the  very  purpose  for  which  Christ 
Jesus  came  into  the  world.  This  death  he  himself,  more 
than  once,  designated  as  "the  cup  "  of  which  he  was  to 
drink.  During  all  his  ministry  this  consummation  was 
in  his  thoughts;  its  anticipation  mingled  even  with 
the  splendors  of  Mount  Tabor;  for  the  celestial  visitants 
there  spake  with  him  "of  his  decease  which  he  should 
accomplish  at  Jerusalem;"  and  as  his  weary  pilgrimage 
wore  on,  it  cast  a  bleak  shadow  over  all  his  deportment, 
a  sadness  which  at  times  deepened  into  gloom.  Only 
four  days  before  the  present  crisis,  he  exclaimed,  "Now 
is  my  soul  troubled,  and  what  shall  I  say?  Father  save 
me  from  this  hour."  Scarcely,  however,  has  this  prayer 
escaped  his  burdened  heart,  before  his  faith  hastens  after 
it  and  recalls  it;  and  he  says,  "But  for  this  cause  came 
I  unto  this  hour.  Father  glorify  thy  name!  Then 
came  there  a  voice  from  heaven  saying,  1  have  both 
glorified  it,  and  will  glorify  it  again." 

But  now,  in  the  garden,  there  rises  upon  his  vision  an 
overwhelming  prospect  of  the  dreadful  catastrophe.  It 
had  been  at  some  distance  in  all  his  former  antici- 
pations ;  now  the  dismal  tragedy  is  about  to  commence. 
Before,  he  had  been  sustained  by  the  presence  and  love 
of  his  friends;  now  he  is  entirely  alone,  all  contact  with 
human  sympathy  has  ceased.  It  is  the  hour  when  the 
Son  of  Man  is  betrayed  into  the  hands  of  sinners;  it  is 
"the  hour  and  the  power  of  darkness."  He  is  brought 
to  the  mouth  of  the  terrible  raging  furnace  into  which 
he  must  enter;  before  which  his  feeble  human  nature 


The  Redeemer's  Afjony  and  Prayer.  155 

faints  and  fails  like  grass  in  a  heated  oven.  How  ex- 
cruciating was  his  anguish,  we  may  judge  from  the 
sacred  narrative  in  which  there  can  he  no  exaggeration. 
••He  began  to  be  sore  amazed,  and  to  be  very  heavy,  and 
saitli  unto  them,  My  soul  is  exceeding  sorrowful  even 
unto  death  ;"  meaning  by  this  last  expression,  that 
"  the  sorrows  of  deatli  compassed  him,  and  the  pains  of 
hell  were  getting  hold  upon  him."  And  see,  too,  the 
effects  upon  his  physical  frame.  Again  and  again  had 
he  defied  all  the  power  of  his  enemies,  encountering  their 
insults  and  violence  with  calm  intrepidity;  but  no  sooner 
do  his  lips  touch  the  brim  of  this  cup  and  sip  its  first 
drop,  than  his  flesh  and  heart  quail,  and  he  falls  to  the 
earth  upon  his  face.  Hunger,  thirst,  fatigue,  pain,  seemed 
to  make  no  impression  upon  his  vigorous  human  consti- 
tution ;  but  now,  although  the  night  is  cold,  (John 
xviii :  18)  his  body  is  bathed  in  sweat,  and  that  sweat  is 
blood  gushing  from  every  pore. 

What  seems  at  first,  however,  to  be  most  surprising  in 
this  history  is  the  Saviour's  prayer ;  for  did  he  really  de- 
sire that  the  mission  upon  which  he  came  might  be  de- 
feated ?  that  the  atonement  might  not  be  finished  ? — 
Perish  such  a  thought !  Had  he  so  willed,  the  awful 
drama  would  at  once  have  been  arrested.  In  reference 
to  his  crucifixion,  he  uttered  this  imperial  language,  "I 
lay  down  my  life  for  the  sheep.  Therefore  doth  my  Fa- 
ther love  me,  because  I  lav  down  my  life  that  I  may  take 
it  again.  Xo  man  taketh  it  from  me,  but  I  lay  it  down 
of  myself.  I  have  power  to  lay  it  down,  and  I  have  power 
to  take  it  again."  "  Thinkest  thou  that  I  cannot  now  pray 
to  my  Father  and  he  shall  presently  give  me  twelve  le- 
gions of  angels  ?"  In  a  word,  he  had  not  yet  been  seized; 
the  spot  was  lonely;  it  was  towards  midnight;  and  had 
he  chosen  to  do  so.  he  might  easily  have  eluded  his  en- 
emies. 

It  is  certain  then  that  in  the  steadfast  soul  of  the  Re- 
deemer there  was  no  shrinking  from  the  sublime  enter- 
prise to  which  he  had  devoted  himself.  But  if  this  were 
so,  what  is  the  meaning  of  his  prayer  that,  "if  possible 
the  cup  might  pass  away  "  ?  As  already  intimated,  many 
commentators  get  rid  of  this   seeming"difficulty  by  sup- 


156  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

posing  that  the  prayer  refers  to  some  momentary  gloom 
pressing  upon  the  Saviour's  spirit ;  but  this  is  plainly  a 
mistake.  By  the  "  cup  "  he  clearly  intends  the  sore  tra- 
vail of  his  soul  in  the  approaching  sacrifice.  Instead, 
then,  of  seeking  to  explain  away  a  fact  which  is  incon- 
testable, let  us  attempt  to  penetrate  its  depths  and  to  in- 
terpret the  truths  it  teaches. 

For  this  purpose  let  me  again  remind  you  that  Jesus 
was  as  truly  human  as  he  was  divine.  "Forasmuch  as 
the  children  are  partakers  of  flesh  and  blood,  he  also  took 
part  of  the  same."  He  assumed  our  nature ;  and 
in  the  experience  of  this  nature,  no  matter  how  purified 
and  elevated,  it  is  one  thing  for  the  heroic  spirit  to  devote 
itself  with  generous  enthusiasm  to  a  fearful  sacrifice,  and 
quite  another  thing  for  the  weak  flesh  actually  to 
endure  the  extremity  without  any  fainting.  The  baptism 
may  be  longed  for,  and  yet  there  may  be  a  shivering 
when  the  cold  waters  go  over  our  heads.  In  the  eternal 
counsels  it  was  deemed  necessary  that  the  adorable  victim 
should  fully  comprehend  the  bitter  passion  of  the  cross. 
From  us  God  mercifully  conceals  the  future  with  its  suf- 
ferings; but  in  the  substitution  of  an  innocent  person 
for  the  guilty,  it  was  indispensable  that  the  self-im- 
molation should  be  voluntary,  and  with  a  clear  appre- 
hension of  the  consequences. 

Some  foresight  of  his  sufferings  had  before  brought 
the  soul  of  Jesus  into  a  paroxysm  of  conflict  and  prayer. 
"The  hour  is  come  that. the  Son  of  Man  should  be  glori- 
fied." "  Now  is  my  soul  troubled,  and  what  shall  I  say  ? 
Father  save  me  from  this  hour;  but  for  this  cause  came 
I  unto  this  hour.  Father,  glorify  thy  name."  That, 
however,  was  only  a  transient  glimpse  of  the  approaching 
storm;  now  all  its  waves  and  billows  are  about  to  go  over 
him. 

Not  only,  therefore,  was  the  Eedeemer's  oblation  of 
himself  the  result  of  ancient,  deliberate  purpose,  so  that 
he  was  "  The  Lamb  slain  before  the  foundation  of  the 
world,"  but  he  was  made  to  taste  some  prelibations  of 
the  mysterious  chalice;  his  soul  groaned  with  the  pre- 
monitory pains  of  its  bitter  travail.  Hence  the  terrible 
agony  which  convulsed  his  *-• "        His  weak  humanity 


The  Redeemer's  Agony  and  Prayer.  157 

recoiled  from  the  fierceness  of  the  winepress  which  lie 
was  to  tread  alone;  his  sinless,  immortal  humanity  re- 
sented the  loathsome  approaches  of  such  a  death — an  ig- 
nominious death,  and  the  death  of  a  criminal.  For  a 
moment  the  conflict  was  so  dreadful  that  his  heart  and 
his  flesh  cried  out  to  the  living  God  in  sobs  and  prayers, 
in  "strong  crying  and  tears."  These  tears  are  not  men- 
tioned in  the  narrative,  but  they  intensify  our  conceptions 
of  the  forlornness  and  wretchedness  of  his  spirit.  From 
the  depths  of  his  human  nature,  thus  rent  and  torn,  as- 
cends the  supplication  we  are  examining,  "0  my  Father, 
if  it  be  possible,  let  this  cup  pass  from  me,  nevertheless 
not  as  I  will  but  as  thou  wilt."  That  cup  was  charged 
with  ingredients  which  only  Eternal  Justice  could  have 
collected,  and  no  mere  mortal  could  sip  one  drop  of  its 
wormwood  and  live.  The  afflicting  thunders  of  divine 
wrath  were  now  to  be  quenched  in  his  blood.  He  was 
placed  before  the  very  jaws  of  the  pit,  with  hell  vomiting 
its  sulphurous  smoke,  and  dashing  its  red  lightnings  in 
his  face.  Into  a  few  hours  were  to  be  condensed  miseries 
which  should  equal  the  everlasting  damnation  due 
to  our  sins.  And  amidst  these  torments  he  was  to  be 
forsaken  by  his  Father,  suffering  a  suspension  of  that  in- 
effable communion  which  from  eternity  had  been  to  him 
the  source  and  essence  of  celestial  beatitude.  This  hor- 
rible tempest  was  now  about  to  pour  its  vengeance  upon 
his  solitary  spirit.  And — his  nature  shrinking  as  the 
ghastly  deluge  begins  to  discharge  itself — he  prays  that 
"  if  it  be  possible"  if  his  Father's  glory  and  man's  sal- 
vation can  be  otherwise  secured — the  storm  might  p>ass 
away. 

You  now  comprehend  the  Redeemer's  prayer;  and, 
thus  understood,  it  ought  often  to  engage  our  devout 
reflections  and  be  made  the  subject  of  our  adoring  med- 
itation. 

While  listening  to  the  sobbings  and  cryingsof  Gethse- 
mane,  who  can  help  feeling  that  sin  and  its  punishment 
are  things  appalling  and  horrible  ?  As  we  behold  the 
amazement  and  consternation  of  the  Redeemer  at  the 
execution  of  that  sentence  for  which  he  had  been  con- 
stantly preparing,  what  fearful  presentiments  insinuate 

7 


158  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

themselves  into  our  minds  as  to  the  doom  of  those  who 
die  in  their  sins.  Again,  how  impossible  is  the  salvation 
of  sinners  except  through  the  atonement.  How  passing 
knowledge  is  the  love  of  him,  who  amidst  such  dreari- 
ness and  agony,  still  thought  of  man,  and  would  not  let 
the  cup  pass,  if  our  redemption  required  him  to  drink  it. 
In  short,  the  exceeding  great  and  precious  assurances  of 
the  Gospel,  that  all  the  blessings  of  time  and  eternity 
are  ours,  if  we  are  Christ's;  "He  that  spared  not  his  own 
Son,  but  delivered  him  up  for  us  all,  how  shall  he  not 
with  him  also  freely  give  us  all  things." 

I  read  just  now  that  remarkable  verse  from  the 
Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  in  which  the  apostle  speaks  of 
the  strong  crying  and  tears  of  the  Eedeemer.  In  that 
passage  it  is  said,  "He  was  heard  in  that  he  feared  ;"  the 
cry  of  his  human  weakness  in  its  mortal  distress  was 
answered.  But  how  was  this,  since  he  prayed  to  him 
who.  was  able  to  deliver  him  from  death  and  was  not  de- 
livered from  death?  Luke  explains  this  point,  he  in- 
forms us  as  to  this  answer.  "  There  appeared  an  angel 
unto  him  from  heaven,  strengthening  him."  And,  now, 
see  the  effect  of  this  celestial  invigoration  of  his  fainting 
humanity. 

Observe  it  in  the  two  prayers  which  he  afterwards  ut- 
tered. We  usually  suppose  that  he  repeated  his  first  pe- 
tition; but  this  is  entirely  to  misunderstand  the  teach- 
ings of  the  Holy  Spirit.  Luke  simply  relates  the  visit 
of  the  angel,  adding  this  remark,  "  And  being  in  an 
agony  he  prayed  more  earnestly" — more  earnestly  than  in 
the  first  prayer.  But  Matthew  records  the  words  of  the 
second  supplication,  and  also  of  the  third.  "He  went 
away  again  the  second  time,  and  prayed,  saying,  0  my  Fa- 
ther, if  this  cup  may  not  pass  away  from  me  except  I  drink 
it,  thy  will  be  done.  And  he  came  and  found  them 
asleep  again ;  for  their  eyes  were  heavy.  And  he  left 
them  and  went  away  again  and  prayed  the  third  time, 
saying  the  same  words."  Stung  by  the  thorn  in  his  flesh, 
Paul  thrice  besought  the  Lord  that  it  might  depart  from 
him;  each  request  terminating  in  himself;  and  the 
answer  was,  "My  grace  is  sufficient  for  thee."  It  was 
only  in  the  first  terrible  agony  that  Jesus  prayed  with 


The  Redeemers  Agony  and  Prayer.  159 

any  reference  to  his  own  misery;  and  then  be  added 
these  words,  "  Nevertheless  not  as  T  will,  but  as  thou 
wilt."  He  is  reminded  by  the  heavenly  messenger,  that 
the  cup  cannot  pass,  and  the  purposes  of  the  atonement 
beaccomplished.  His  weak  human  nature  is  "strength- 
ened," too,  by  this  radiant  ministry.  And  immediately 
every  thought  of  himself  is  forever  banished.  He  now 
prays  "more  earnestly"  than  he  had  done  for  himself, 
that  his  Father's  will  may  be  done  at  whatever  cost  tohim. 
"  If  this  cup"  (since  this  cup)  "may  not  pass  away  from 
me  except  I  drink  it,  thy.  will  be  done."  This  is  his  only 
petition;  and  he  utters  this  "more  earnestly" — with 
more  intense  fervor  than  his  first  supplication,  though 
that  had  been  with  "strong  crying  and  tears."  He  has 
now  extraordinary  views  of  the  terrible  consequences  to 
man.  if  the  sacrifice  be  not  consummated.  He  has  also 
been  made  to  feel  the  feebleness  of  his  humanity,  its 
absolute  dependence  upon  supernatural  succor.  There- 
fore with  redoubled  earnestness,  again  and  again,  he 
prays  that  he  might  be  supported,  that  his  Father  might 
be  glorified  upon  the  earth,  and  his  church  be  redeemed 
by  his  blood. 

You  see,  then,  in  the  two  prayers  succeeding  it,  what 
efficacy  there  was  in  this  angelic  visit.  The  celestial 
vigor  it  infused  is  still  more  striking  in  the  Saviour's 
subsequent  conduct.  Calm,  collected,  filled  with  divine 
intrepidity,  he  goes  to  meet  his  executioners.  Pointing 
to  the  band  whose  torches  were  now  beginning  to  flash 
among  the  dark  olive  branches,  he  says  to  his  disciples, 
"  The  hour  is  come  ;  behold  the  Son  of  Man  is  betrayed 
into  the  hands  of  sinners.  Eise  up,  let  us  go,  lo  he  that 
betrayeth  me  is  at  hand."  Confronting  the  company  of 
armed  soldiers,  he  announces  himself  with  a  majesty  so 
commanding,  that  these  veterans  quail  and  fall  to  the 
earth  before  the  mysterious  power  of  his  presence.  Demand- 
ing that  his  disciples  should  not  be  harmed,  he  at  once 
surrenders  himself.  And  when  Peter  attempts  a  rescue, 
he  rebukes  him,  saying,  "Put  up  thy  sword  into  its 
sheath  ;  the  cup  which  my  Father  hath  given  me  shall  I 
not  drink  it  ?"  What  followed,  it  is  unnecessary  for  me 
to  tell  you;  for  you  know  how  he  did  drink  that  cup; 


160  Ricliard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

how  be  stretched  out  his  hand  steadfastly,  and  took  it 
and  in  silence  drained  every  drop  of  the  wormwood  and  gall 
in  that  terrible  chalice.  6'H>  drank  at  the  hand  of  the 
Lord  the  cup  of  his  fury,  drank  the  dregs  of  the  cup  of 
trembling,  and  wrung  them  out;"  that  we  might  "take 
the  cup  of  salvation  and  call  upon  the  name  of  the  Lord." 
He  went  meekly  forth  to  the  judgment,  went  as  a  lamb 
to  the  slaughter,  was  dumb  as  a  sheep  before  her  shearers, 
was  oppressed,  was  afflicted,  yet  opened  not  his  mouth  ; 
that  we  might  be  healed  by  his  stripes,  that  before 
the  dread  tribunal  we  might  not  be  speechless,  but  might, 
with  unspeakable  joy  and  assurance  exclaim,  "  Who 
shall  lay  arything  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect?  it  is 
God  that  justineth.  Who  is  he  that  condemneth  ?  it 
is  Christ  that  died,  yea  rather  that  is  risen  again,  who  is 
even  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  who  also  maketh  inter- 
cession for  us." 

II.  Thus  far  we  have  been  "considering  him"  who 
was  called  Jesus  because  he  would  deliver  his  people 
from  their  sins.  I  pass  now  to  the  other  aspect  in  which 
we  proposed  to  contemplate  this  adorable  Being,  regard- 
ing him  as  our  example — as  the  model  of  that  temper 
which  becomes  a  child  of  God  at  all  times,  but  especially 
when  called  to  suffer  affliction. 

Studied  in  Gethsemane,  the  example  of  Jesus  is 
unspeakably  precious  and  consoling  because  it  throws  a 
sanction  and  sacredness  over  feelings  which  stern 
casuists  have  condemned  as  sinful.  In  the  perfect  human- 
ity of  the  Redeemer  we  here  find  sensibilities  which 
quail  at  the  prospect,  or  shrink  under  the  pressure  of 
calamities  and  sufferings.  "  My  son,  despise  not  thou  the 
chastening  of  the  Lord,  neither  faint  when  thou  art 
rebuked  of  him;"  such  is  the  admonition  addressed  to 
those  who  are  called  to  mourn;  but  let  us  never  suppose 
that  any  censure  is  conveyed  by  this  exhortation.  No  ; 
it  is  the  tender  language  of  a  Father  who  pities  his  poor 
children,  knowing  their  frame  and  remembering  that 
they  are  dust.  And  in  the  history  before  us  we  see  this 
infirmity  and  fainting  in  him  whose  whole  conduct  is  an 
illustration  of  perfect  submission  to  the  divine  will. 


The  Redeemer's  Agony  and  Prayer.  161 

If  we  are  Christians  at  all,  this  is  certain,  that  our 
fears  and  distresses  will  cause  us  to  cast  our  burdens 
upon  the  Lord;  solitary  prayer  will  be  our  instinctive 
resource.  Like  Jesus,  we  will,  indeed,  desire  the  sympa- 
thy of  the  few  who  love  us;  but,  like  him,  we  will  turn 
from  all  human  comforters  and  roll  our  anguished  spirit 
upon  God,— upon  the  compassions  of  our  Heavenly 
Father.  And  while  thus  pouring  out  our  hearts  before 
him,  while  we  are  not  to  be  peremptory,  Ave  may  be  im- 
portunate; it  is  natural,  it  is  proper  to  pray  that  we  may 
be  spared  or  delivered ;  it  is  right  to  say,  if  it  be  possi- 
ble, let  this  cup  pass  away." 

For  afflictions  are  not  in  themselves  blessings,  they  are 
evils  from  which  we  ought  to  shrink.  "No  chastening 
for  the  present  is  joyous,  but  grievous."  Nay,  afflictions 
may  become  temptations ;  "  Give  me  not  poverty  lest  I 
steal."  In  a  word,  our  very  natures  deprecate  pain  and 
sorrow.  It  is,  therefore,  proper  to  say,  "0  my  Father, 
if  it  be  possible  let  this  cup  pass  from  me."  If  it  be  pos- 
sible, spare  me  this  bitter  bereavement  which  threatens 
to  rend  from  my  heart  this  parent,  this  sister,  this  wife, 
this  child,  who  is  dearer  to  me  than  life  itself.  If  it  be 
possible,  heal  this  disease  which  has  stretched  me  upon 
a  bed  of  languishing,  which  seems  about  to  hurry  me 
to  the  tomb,  or  to  doom  me  to  years  of  protracted  misery. 
If  it  be  possible,  avert  from  me  these  reverses  and  losses 
which  are  impending,  which  should  cast  suspicion  upon 
my  character,  and  consign  my  children  to  all  the  humil- 
iations and  temptations  of  poverty.  If  it  be  possible, 
deliver  me  from  this  visitation  which  has  crippled  me 
for  thy  work,  and  keeps  me  from  that  service  which  is 
my  meat  and  my  drink,  my  strength,  consolation,  joy, 
and  for  which  alone  I  desire  to  live.  Thou  knowest, 
0  Lord  of  hosts,  how  amiable  to  me  are  thy  taberna- 
cles;  how  my  soul  longeth,  yea  even  fainteth  for  the 
courts  of  the  Lord  ;  how  my  heart  and  my  llesh  cry  out 
for  the  living  God ;  how  1  esteem  those  blessed  who 
dwell  in  thy  house,  and  envy  the  sparrow  and  the  swal- 
low that  can  frequent  thine  altars.  My  King,  my  God, 
my  Father,  if  it  be  possible,  let  this  cup  pass  away  :  save 
me  from  these  dumb  !Sai>baths  which  are  killing  me,  from 


162  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

these  voiceless  sermons   and   prayers   and  exhortations 
which  burn  like  fire  in  my  bones.  * 

In  this  recoiling,  these  entreaties,  there  is  nothing 
criminal.  Still,  however,  just  in  proportion  to  the  depth 
of  our  piety,  will  be  our  spirit  of  submission,  nay  our 
preference  of  the  divine  will  to  our  own.  Even  in  the 
Saviour's  first  agony,  amidst  the  wail  for  help  wrung 
out  of  his  soul  by  the  first  crushing  blow  of  the  tempest, 
we  find  the  predominance  of  filial  submission;  and 
soon  there  was  in  him  the  entire  supremacy  of  his  Fa- 
ther's will.  When  pain  and  anguish  take  hold  upon  us, 
our  wills  may  for  a  while  mutiny.  But  as  we  receive 
light  and  strength,  we  will  be  "still;" — we  will 
calm  our  ruffled  spirits ;  we  will  quell  every 
murmur;  with  a  love  which  casts  out  fear  and 
gives  God  our  unlimited  confidence  Ave  will  exclaim, 
"The  cup  which  my  Father  hath  given  me,  shall  I  not 
drink  it?"  And  as  the  Saviour's  entire  sanctification 
of  himself  to  the  sacrifice  was  rendered  more  glorious  by 
his  previous  agony,  so  our  submission  will  give  more 
honor  to  God,  and  bring  richer  fruits  into  our  own  souls 
because  it  is  a  victory  to  which  we  passed  through  the 
bitterest  conflict. 

I  know,  my  brethren,  that  to  "  stand  perfect  and  com- 
plete in  all  the  will  of  God"  is  no  easy  attainment. 
Sometimes  we  are  called  to  acquiesce  in  dispensations 
where  all  is  inscrutable,  as  to  which  "clouds  and  dark- 
ness are  round  about  him,"  and  we  exclaim,  Verily  thou 
art  a  God  that  hideth  thyself."  Jesus  requires  his  dis- 
ciples to  adjourn  to  another  period  the  solution  of  some 
things  which  he  does  in  this  present  economy.  It  still 
pleases  the  Father  to  bruise  many  of  his  dearest  chil- 
dren. God  has  had  but  one  Son  without  sin;  never  one 
without  sorrow ;  and  sometimes  our  hearts  are  tempted 
to  murmur  and  repine.  It  was  not  for  nothing  that 
Jesus  said  "Blessed  are  they  who  shall  not  be  offended 
in  me."     For  how  many  of  those  dear  to  him  measure 

*  This  sermon  was  preached,  April  12,  1862,  after  a  severe 
inflammation  of  the  throat  which  had  prevented  the  author  from 
preaching  for  several  Sabbaths.  • 


The  Redeemer's  Agony  and  Prayer.  1  63 

the  length  of  their  pilgrimage  by  the  graves  they  leave1 
behind  them.  How  many  drag  on  their  days  bleakly  and 
heavily — their  years  all  winters.  How  many  see  all  their 
purposes  broken  off,  their  hopes  withered  ;  and  to  them 
God  appoints  care-worn  aspects,  and  hearts  cleft  by 
silent  but  sharp  endurance.  How  many,  wasted  by  dis- 
ease, or  consumed  by  hidden  grief,  grow  old  in  youth, 
and  sink  into  the  valley  of  years,  bending,  not  under 
age,  but  misery.  How  many  go  to  weep  at  tombs 
which  have  made  the  whole  world  a  tomb  to  them ; — 
standing  over  which  they  feel  that  for  them  the  bright- 
ness of  life,  the  bitterness  of  death  are  passed.  In  short, 
how  many  find  life  one  incessant  struggle,  one  scene 
of  toil  and  suffering,  in  which  they  can  hope  for  nothing 
from  earth,  and  can  only  seek  not  to  reel  and  sink  under 
breach  after  breach  by  which  they  are  broken. 

But  it  is  the  very  office  of  faith  to  sustain  the  soul 
when  flesh  and  heart  are  failing.  Amidst  gloomy  clouds 
and  chilling  blasts  faith  can  say,  "Why  art  thou  cast 
down,  0  my  soul" — Jesus  is  thine,  the  promises  are  thine, 
the  consolations  of  God  are  thine,  eternal  glory  is  thine, 
and  thou,  thou  art  dejected!  — "  Why  art  thou  cast  down, 
0  my  soul,  and  why  art  thou  disquieted  within  me? 
Hope  thou  in  God,  for  I  shall  yet  pra;se  him  who  is  the 
health  of  my  countenance  and  my  God."  Now,  in  the 
darkest  night,  faith  can  see  and  feel  an  angel  strength- 
ening us  to  bear  what  God  sends.  And  one  day  an  angel 
will  roll  the  stone  away,  and  from  out  the  grave  where 
we  thought  all  our  hope  and  joys  had  been  buried,  shall 
come  forth  their  resurrection,  their  life.  "Neverthe- 
less, not  my  will,  but  thine  be  done."  AVe  have  seen 
what  the  Saviour's  ")ievcrtlicless"  comprehended — 
what  an  eternity  of  wretchedness  was  concentrated  in  that 
word  ;  and  whatever  may  be  the  import  of  our  "  never- 
theless" whatever  we  are  called  to  endure,  let  us  remem- 
ber that  we  "suffer  according  to  the  will  of  God  ;"  "  let 
the  same  mind  be  in  us  which  was  also  in  Christ  Jesus;  " 
"let  us  humble  ourselves  under  the  mighty  hand  of  God, 
that  he  may  exalt  us  in  due  time,  casting  all  our  care 
upon  him,  for  he  careth  for  us."  Let  us  consider  him 
who  endured  such  things  for  us,  lest  at  any  time  we  be 


164  Br  chard  Fuller 's  Sermons. 

weary  and  faint  in  our  minds.  And  let  us  not  only 
contemplate,  but  let  us  follow  him  who  hath  left  us  an 
example  that  we  should  walk  in  his  steps. 

Two  traits  in  the  character  of  the  Redeemer  are  espe- 
cially brought  out  in  the  history  before  us,  and  these 
ought  to  be  the  peculiar  objects  of  study  and  imitation  to 
us.  The  first  is  his  habitual  sense  of  his  Father's  pres- 
ence and  love.  Amidst  all  the  solitariness  and  anguish 
of  G-ethsemane  this  filial  confidence  was  never  for  a  mo- 
ment interrupted  ;  nay,  his  communion  with  his  Father 
became  more  intimate  and  earnest  as  darkness  and  sorrow 
gathered  over  him. 

When  he  crossed  the  brook  and  entered  the  scene  of 
that  dismal  tragedy  he  took  the  eleven  with  him.  Ad- 
vancing further  into  the  shades  of  the  garden,  he  is  ac- 
companied by  only  Peter  and  James  and  John.  But 
they  must  stop ;  they  cannot  penetrate  the  depths  amidst 
whose  gloom  his  mysterious  agony  bows  him  to  the 
earth,  and  forces  a  crimson  sweat  through  his  pores. — 
There,  only  one  can  be  with  him;  it  is  his  Father.  "  Ye 
shall  leave  me  alone,  and  yet  I  am  not  alone,  for  my  Fa- 
ther is  with  me." 

Now  in  this  sense  of  loneliness  and  want  of  human 
sympathy,  Ave  must  have  fellowship  with  him,  and  we 
ought  instinctively  to  ascend  to  the  same  source  of 
strength  and  consolation.  In  its  deepest  sorrows  and 
conflicts  every  human  spirit  must  be  alone.  Earthly 
friendship  and  companionship  may  go  some  way  in  their 
sympathy ;  they  may  cross  Cedron  with  us.  Christian 
love  may  go  still  further;  it  may  enter  Gethsemane.  But 
when  "the  strong  hour  conquers  us;"  when  afflictions 
rend  the  soul, — driving  the  blood  through  the  pores  of 
the  heart,  if  not  of  the  body, — and  when,  in  this  hour  of 
darkness  and  weakness,  the  violence  of  temptation  wrings 
from  us  strong  crying  and  tears;  then,  oh  then,  we  must 
be  entirely  alone.  For  each  heart  knows  its  own  bitter- 
ness. Its  trials  and  sorrows  are  made  up  of  things 
which  the  dearest  human  affection  cannot  share,  cannot 
know.  But  God  knows  all ;  and  if  we  would  be  sustained, 
Ave  must  cultivate  the  filial,  confiding  spirit  of  Jesus. — 
If  we  Avould  not  be  moved,  Ave  must  set  the  Lord  always 


The  Redeetner's  Agony  and  Prayer.  165 

before  us,  as  a  Father  pitying  our  infirmities,  listening  to 
the  voice  of  our  weeping ;  we  must  hear  him  saying  to 
us,  "Fear  not  I  am  with  thee,  when  thou  passest  through 
the  waters  they  shall  not  overflow  thee,  when  thou  walk- 
est  through  the  fire  thou  shalt  not  be  burned,  neither 
shall  the  flames  kindle  upon  thee." 

The  other  grace  emphatically  commended  to  us  by  this 
passage  in  the  Saviour's  life  is  his  perfect  resignation  to 
his  Father's  will  or,  rather,  his  adoring  preference  of 
that  will,  even  when  smitten  by  the  most  inscrutable  and 
overwhelming  wretchedness.  Under  the  first  appalling 
burst  of  the  tempest  his  cry  is,  "  Xot  as  I  will,  but  as 
thou  wilt;"  and  as  the  storm  beats  upon  his  uncovered 
head  with  accumulating  fury,  he  prays,  with  increasing 
earnestness,  that  not  his  will  but  his  Father's  may  be 
done.  Let  us  cultivate  this  spirit.  Eest  assured  that 
living  upon  "every  word  which  proceedem  out  of  the 
mouth  of  God,"  living  upon  God's  will  revealed  or  unre- 
vealed,  acquiescing  in  that  will  because  it  is  the  will  of 
God,  and  thus  rising  above  our  joys  and  sorrows  to  God 
himself — this  is  the  only,  the  heavenly  secret  of  peace, 
holiness,  happiness.  We  must  lose  ourselves  in  God's 
supremacy;  and  then  shall  be  realized  in  us  that  promise, 
"Thou  wilt  keep  him  in  perfect  peace  whose  mind  is 
stayed  on  thee,  because  he  trusteth  in  thee."  All  impa- 
tience arises  from  ignorance  of  God  and  of  ourselves. — 
"Be  still  and  know  that  I  am  God."  "Acquaint  now 
thyself  with  him  and  be  at  peace,  thereby  good  shall 
come  unto  thee."  The  love,  the  wisdom  of  that  Father 
whom  Jesus  here  teaches  us  to  trust  and  reverence,  his 
parental  designs  in  all  his  chastisements, — let  these 
thoughts  penetrate  our  souls  and  bring  them  into  unfal- 
tering submission  under  every  dispensation. 

"  My  will :"  blindness,  weakness,  selfishness.  "Thy 
will:"  the  decisions  of  him  who  is  perfectly  right  in  all 
his  ways — of  whose  throne  righteousness  and  judgment 
are  the  habitations,  though  clouds  and  darkness  may  be 
round  about  him; — would  I  thwart  these  decisions  and 
prefer  confusion  and  disorder  ?  the  plans  of  him  who  is 
the  only  wise  God,  who  alone  knows  what  is  best  for  me; 
— shall  I  seek  to  defeat  these  plans,  and  to  follow  my  own 

7* 


166  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

ignorance?  In  a  word,  infinite  love  and  mercy  which 
are  engaged  to  cause  all  things  to  work  together  for  my 
good,  and  by  exposure,  suffering,  experience,  to  elevate 
me  to  a  higher  life  and  build  np  all  that  is  spiritual  and 
glorious  in  my  nature  ;  the  will  of  that  Saviour  who,  in 
full  view  of  the  dreadful  inundation  about  to  go  over  him, 
"  endured  the  cross  and  despised  the  shame"  for  me 
while  I  was  yet  an  enemy;  the  will  of  that  God  who, 
amidst  the  anguish  of  the  garden  and  the  cross,  spared 
not  his  own  Son,  but  delivered  him  up  for  me; — how  can 
I  resist  all  this? — how  can  I  ever  doubt  this  mercy  and 
love?  "The  cup  that  my  Father  hath  given  me,  shall  I 
not  drink  it?"  -"  Yea,  though  he  slay  me,  vet  will  I  trust 
him." 

In  conclusion,  let  the  subject  upon  which  we  have 
been  meditating  convince  us  how  vain  are  all  hopes  that 
any  can  be  saved  except  through  the  great  atonement. — 
If  in  the  jurisprudence  of  heaven  this  had  been  "possi- 
ble," such  a  victim  would  not  have  been  stretched  upon 
such  an  altar.  "There  is  salvation  in  none  other,  for 
there  is  no  other  name  under  heaven  given  among  men 
whereby  we  must  be  saved."  Come,  then,  my  friend, 
come  just  as  you  are  ;  come  now,  and  cast  your  guilty, 
helpless  soul  on  him  who  hath  paid  the  full  price  of  re- 
demption. Nor  let  any  sense  of  sin  deter  you.  Never 
again  can  an  audience  be  assembled  so  steeped  in  guilt 
as  that  which  was  addressed  by  Peter  on  the  day  of  Pen- 
tecost ;  yet  speaking  to  them — their  lips  dripping  with 
blasphemy — their  hands  red  with  the  blood  of  the  Lord 
of  Glory — hear  him  say  "Repent  and  be  baptized  every 
one  of  you  in  the  name  of  Jesus  for  the  remission  of  sius" 
— "  every  one  of  you."  But  I  am  the  wretch  who  suborned 
Judas  to  betray  him  and  paid  him  the  thirty  pieces  of 
silver  ; — "Every  one  of  you."  But  I  led  the  band  at  mid- 
night into  the  garden  and  seized  him  as  a  malefactor; — 
"  Every  one  of  you."  But  I  conducted  him  to  Pilate's 
bar,  I  dragged  him  to  Herod's  hall,  and  there  stripped 
him,  and  put  the  robj  upon  him,  and  pressed  the  thorns 
into  his  brow,  and  struck  him  in  the  l'aee  and  spit  upon 
him; — "  Every  one  of  you."  But  I  followed  him  through 
the  streets  and  joined  the  infuriated  rabble  in  jeering  and 


The  Redeemers  Agony  and  Prayer.  167 


insulting  and  cursing  him,  as  he  moved  slowly  along 
Lending  under  the  cruel  load  ; — "Every  one  of  you.'' — 
But  I  laid  the  cross  upon  the  ground,  and  stretched  that 
sacred  form  upon  it  and  drove  the  spikes  through  his 
mangled  and  quivering  hands  and  feet; — "Every  one  of 
yon."  But  I  plunged  the  spear  into  his  side,  and  the 
blood  and  water  are  upon  my  head  to  curse  me  forever ; 
— "Every  one  of  you." — "  Kepent  and  be  baptized  every 
one  of  you  in  the  name  of  Jesus  for  the  remission  of  sins." 
God  can  say,  can  do  nothing  more  to  assure  the  vilest 
that  in  the  atonement  there  is  present,  full  eternal  salva- 
tion for  them. 

And  let  the  example  we  have  been  studying  raise  our 
souls  to  a  habitual,  intelligent,  filial  acquiescence  at  all 
times  and  under  every  paternal  chastisement.  "Father, 
not  my  will  but  thine  !" — this  cry  coming  sincerely  from 
the  heart,  is  not  only  a  prayer,  but  a  prayer  already  an- 
swered. 

As  to  the  past,  let  us  cherish  the  spirit  of  resignation. 
We  are  prone,  in  looking  back,  to  reproach  ourselves,  to 
afflict  ourselves  with  vain  regrets  over  something  done  or 
left  undone.  All  these  reflections  are  wrong;  they  savor 
of  atheism  by  forgetting  that  all  was  ordered  by  unerring 
wisdom  and  unchanging  love.  Too  sadly  does  experi- 
ence teach  some  of  us  the  error  of  those  who  tell  us  that 
years  will  efface  the  impression  made  upon  the  heart  by 
the  strokes  of  affliction.  Alas,  where  we  have  truly  loved, 
time,  instead  of  healing  our  wounds,  is  only  like  a  river 
which  is  constantly  deepening  its  channel.  There  is  but 
one  consolation  in  these  bitter  musings  and  retrospects  ; 
it  is  to  ascend  at  once  to  God,  and  to  lose  ourselves  in 
him.  "I  was  dumb;  I  opened  not  my  mouth,  because 
thou  didst  it." 

For  the  future,  take  no  anxious  thought.  These 
gloomy  forebodings  are  sinful,  for  they  imply  a  want  of 
confidence  in  God.  Perfect  love  would  cast  out  these 
tormenting  fears.  But  they  are  still  more  foolish.  They 
fill  us  with  distress  about  evils  which  may  never  come; 
or  which,  if  they  do  come,  will  bring  with  them  strength 
for  our  day — the  morrow  thus  caring  for  itself. 


168  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

And  under  present  afflictions  and  trials,  the  habitual 
contemplation  of  a  suffering  Redeemer  will  be  the  most 
effectual  antidote  to  all  complaints,  the  most  fruitful 
source  of  patience  and  filial  submission.  "Forasmuch 
then  as  Christ  hath  suffered  in  the  flesh,  arm  yourselves 
with  the  same  mind."  Can  we  follow  him — the  holy, 
harmless,  undefiled — as  he  crosses  Cedron — :tnd  falls 
convulsed  upon  the  ground,  filling  the  air  of  Gethsemane 
with  his  groans, — and  as  he  expires  upon  the  cross; — 
can  we  see  him  endure  all  this  for  us,  and  yet  murmur 
at  those  sufferings  which  are  needful  for  our  souls?  0 
cup,  which  my  Father  gives  me,  however  bitter,  though 
thy  portion  be  gall  and  wormwood,  thou  art  medicine  for 
my  spiritual  health  and  prosperity.  May  I  have  grace  to 
feel  that  thou  art  welcome.  May  we  all  esteem  it  our 
highest  honor  and  felicity  to  suffer  with  Jesus,  that  we 
may  be  glorified  with  him. 

To  this  adorable  Redeemer,  and  to  the  Father  of  an 
infinite  majesty,  and  to  the  Holy  Spirit,  be  praise,  wor- 
ship and  glory  forever.     Amen. 


John98  Message  to  Jesus.  161 


Sermon  ffrntft* 


JOHN'S  MESSAGE  TO  JESUS. 

"Art  thou  he  that  should  come,  or  do  we  look  for  "another?  Jesm 
answered  anl  sai  I  unto  them,  Go  an  1  shew  John  a^ain  those  things 
which  ye  do  hear  and  see-"— Matthew  xi :  3,  4. 

"AS  John  fulfilled  his  course;"  there  is  in  this  lan- 
-<-*-  guage  something  very  affecting  and  instructive. 
The  beginning  of  a  in  ill's  existence  resembles  the  little 
well-spring  of  a  stream  whose  course  and  destination 
none  can  foretell.  Like  rivers  onward  roll  our  lives. — 
We  may  be  renowned  or  obscure;  we  may  become  bene- 
factors or  scourges  of  our  race;  our  career  may  be  calm 
and  bright,  or  dark  and  turbulent;  but  to  each  a  period 
is  allotted,  after  which  we  are  confounded  together  in  the 
tomb: — even  as  rivers  the  most  celebrated  and  the  most 
unknown,  the  tranquil  and  the  impetuous,  those  which 
desolate  and  those  which  bless  the  earth,  all  traverse 
spaces  accurately  prescribed,  and  then  mingle  their  wa- 
ters and  lose  their  names  and  distinctions  in  the  ocean. 

"John  fulfilled  his  course;"  and  very  pleasant  it  is  to 
turn  from  the  universal  selfishness  of  our  race,  and  to 
study  the  biography  of  such  a  man.  He  was  indeed  "  a 
burning  and  a  shining  light;"  and  though  his  beams 
were  quenched  at  noonday  and  in  blood,  yet  hasting 
never,  resting  never,  he  bravelvand  triumphantly  accom- 
plished his  glorious  mission  ;  nor  can  we  lift  our  eyes 
from  the  common  range,  the  dead  level  of  human  char- 
acter to  such  courage,  devotion,  magnanimity,  entire  su- 
periority to  all  earthly  appetites  and  passions,  combined 
with  such  profound  humility,  without  confessing,  that 
of  all  who  had  been  born  of  women,  a  greater  than  John 


170  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

had  not  appeared  upon  the  scene  of  mortal  affairs.  It  is 
strengthening,  rejoicing  to  contemplate  that,  grand  soul; 
but  can  there  be  a  more  substantial  mortification  than 
that  which  accompanies  the  consciousness,  that  we  be- 
long to  the  same  species,  have  the  same  faculties,  enjoy 
vastly  superior  advantages,  and  yet  are  what  we  are. 

This  heroic  and  extraordinary  man  was  in  prison,  when 
he  sent  to  Jesus  a  deputation  of  his  disciples  bearing  the 
message  recorded  in  the  text:  "Now  when  John  had 
heard  in  prison,  the  works  of  Christ,  he  sent  two  of  his 
disciples,  and  said  unto  him,  Art  thou  he  that  should 
come  or  look  we  for  another?  Jesus  answered  and  said 
unto  them,  Go  and  shew  John  again  these  things  which 
ye  do  hear  and  see.  The  blind  receive  their  sight,  and 
the  lame  walk,  the  lepers  are  cleansed,  and  the  deaf  hear, 
the  dead  are  raised  up,  and  the  poor  have  the  Gospel 
preached  to  them.  And  blessed  is  he,  whosoever  is  not 
offended  in  me." 

This  question  and  its  answer  are  so  remarkable,  that  I 
shall  make  them  the  subject  of  our  meditations  to-day. 

I.  "Art  thou  he  that  should  come,  or  do  we  look  for 
another?"  This  enquiry  furnishes  our  first  topic;  and 
it  deserves  our  closest  attention,  for  what  was  John's  mo- 
tive in  sending  such  a  message?  We  are  at  no  loss  to 
account  for  the  variety  of  popular  opinions  as  to  Jesus; 
some  saying  that  "he  was  John  the  Baptist;  some,  Elias; 
and  others,  Jeremias  or  one  of  the  prophets."  We  at  once 
penetrate,  too,  the  hypocrisy  of  the  Pharisees  who  said  to 
him,  "How  long  dost  thou  make  us  to  doubt?  If  thou 
be  the  Christ  tell  us  plainly."  We  every  day  hear  peo- 
ple affecting  doubts  which  are  only  pretexts  for  their 
sins,  and  seeking  to  lull  their  consciences  by  pre, ending 
that  they  are  waiting  for  more  light.  But  how  are  we 
to  explain  this  enquiry  coining  from  the  great  harbinger? 
Two  solutions  of  the  problem  may  be  proposed,  only  two 
worthy  of  discussion.  For,  as  to  the  supposition  that 
John  meant  to  upbraid  and  quicken  him  whom  he  knew 
to  be  the  Messiah — it  is  such  a  charge  of  presumption, 
as  ought  not  even  to  be  mentioned  in  the  pulpit.  Let  us 
examine  these  two  interpretations. 


John's  Message  to  Jesus  171 


Now  taking  the  case  simply  as  it  is  recorded,  fehe  first 
natural  impression  assuredly  is,  that  some  misgivings  as 
to  the  Messiahship  of  Jesus  had  insinuated  themselves 
into  the  mind  of  the  Baptist.  This  i.lca  is,  however,  in- 
dignantly rejected  by  most  commentators,  who  maintain 
that  it  was  not  for  himself,  but  for  his  disciples  that  John' 
sent  this  message;  they  were  incredulous,  and  he  sends 
them  to  Jeans  that  they  may  be  convinced  by  him.— 
Inis  is  the  common  interpretation,  and  one  pohit  must 
certainly  be  conceded  to  its  advocates.  We  must  all  see 
why  Johns  disciples  would  naturally  discredit  the 
claims  of  Jesus.  Consider  the  contrast  between  these 
two  contemporaneous  teachers.  He  whom  they  admired 
came  neither  eating  nor  drinking;"  his  piety  was  aus- 
tere, ascetical,  resembling  that  of  the  ancient  prophets. 
He  was  the  voice  of  one  crying  in  the  wilderness,  Pre- 
pare ye  the  way  of  the  Lord."  Commissioned  to  arouse 
and  rebuke  a  people  sunk  in  sensuality  and  superstition, 
his  entire  work  was  in  the  spirit  and  power  of  Elijah.— 
In  the  wilderness,  and  beside  the  flowing  waters  of  the 
Jordan,  his  cry  still  was,  "Flee  from  the  wrath  to  come  " 
His  ministry  was  that  of  the  storm  and  earthquake  and 
lire  which  should  awaken  men's  souls,  and  hold  them  in 
mute  awe  in  solemn  attention,  for  the  "still  small  voice." 
And  his  habits  corresponded  with  his  work.  Absorbed 
with  the  grand  object  before  him,  he  was  coarse  in  his 
apparel,  abstemious  in  his  food;  he  despised  all  the 
amenities  of  life,  and  shared  in  his  character,  the  con- 
genial sternness  of  the  mountain  and  desert. 

"The  Son  of  Man  came  eating  and  drinking."  Jesus 
mingled  in  society.  His  first  miracle  was  performed  to 
contribute  to  the  innocent  festivities  of  a  marriage;  and 
in  all  his  life  he  sympathized  with  the  joys  as  well  as  the 
sorrows  of  humanity.  At  an  early  stage  of  his  ministry 
the  disciples  ot  John  had  captiously  noticed  this  differ- 
ence. <■  Ihen  came  to  him  the  disciples  of  John,  saying 
Why  oWand  the  Phaiisees  fast  oft,  but  thy  discip^s 

Moreover  some  of  John's  disciples  had  forsaken  him 
and  followed  Jesus;  and  the  adherents  of  a  party  are  al- 
ways very  reluctant  to  acknowledge  the  merits  of  a  leader 


172  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

who  is  drawing  recruits  from  their  ranks.  These  deser- 
tions, too,  had  been  caused  by  John's  glowing  eulogiums 
upon  Jesus.  But,  while  their  Master  thus  generously 
exalted  him  whom  they  regarded  with  envy  as  a  success- 
ful rival,  that  rival  had  not  as  yet  uttered  a  single  word 
in  commendation  of  John.  This  jealousy  of  the  new 
teacher  betrayed  itself  in  that  somewhat  querulous  obser- 
vation: "And  they  came  to  John  and  said  unto  him, 
Rabbi,  he  that  was  with  thee  beyond  Jordan,  to  whom 
thou  barest  witness,  behold  the  same  baptizeth,  and  all 
men  come  to  him." 

Above  all,  John  was  now  imprisoned.  This  noble  in- 
trepid herald  had  been  for  some  time  languishing  in  a 
dungeon.  Could  he  be  the  Messiah,  who,  possessing  the 
power  to  work  miracles  and  to  rescue  their  leader,  was 
thus  indifferent  to  the  fate  of  so  devoted  and  loyal  a 
champion? 

Nothing  could  be  more  natural  than  that  John's  dis- 
ciples should  be  prejudiced,  sceptical,  slow  to  confer 
upon  Jesus  that  magnificent  title,  compared  with  which 
the  pomp  of  princes,  the  diadem  of  earthly  monarchs 
faded  into  contempt. 

But  there  is  one  reason  why  I  cannot  adopt  the  opin- 
ion of  those  who  attribute  John's  message  to  the  doubts 
of  his  followers; — a  reason  which,  with  me,  is  always 
conclusive  in  reading  the  Sacred  Books.  The  plain  lan- 
guage of  the  narrative  forbids  this  interpretation.  The 
enquiry  clearly  proceeds  from  John  himself,  for  himself. 
"  John  Baptist  has  sent  us  unto  thee,  saying,  Art  thou 
he  that  should  come,  or  look  we  for  another  ? "  And 
the  Saviour's  answer  is  sent  back  directly  to  John." 
"Go  your  way,  and  tell  John."  Besides,  John's  disci- 
ples knew  that  Jesus  had  wrought  miracles;  if  they  still 
doubted,  and  in  spite  of  John's  assurances,  why  should 
other  miracles  convince  them?  In  a  word,  either  Jesus 
supposed — as  he  manifestly  did — that  some  unbelief  had 
entered  the  mind  of  the  Baptist,  (and  if  he  thought  this 
possible,  why  should  not  we? — or  in  the  entire  transac- 
tion— in  his  language  as  well  as  in  that  of  John — there 
is  a  want  of  frankness,  there  is  an  air  of  collusion  and 


John's  Message  to  Jesus.  173 

contrivance  wholly    unnecessary,  and    which  cannot   be 
even  intimated  without  some  irreverence.  * 

To  those  who  are  willing  lo  receive  the  Scriptures 
no  testimony  can  be  more  explicit  than  this.  Indeed  the 
last  words  in  the  answer  returned — "Blessed  is  he  who- 
soever shall  not  be  offended  in  me,"  clearly  convey  a 
reproof  to  the  Baptist.  And  if  any  further  evidence  be 
needed  to  prove  that  the  floubt  is  to  be  ascribed  to  John 
himself,  we  will  find  it  in  the  language  which  Jesus 
uttered  as  soon  as  the  messengers  had  departed.  For, 
although  he  pronounced  the  noblest  panegyric  upon  the 
imprisoned  martyr,  he  yet  pointedly  notices  a  disadvan- 
tage under  which  he  labored,  as  an  apology  for  his 
being  deficient  in  that  strong  faith  and  full  assurance 
which  would  be  the  privilege  of  all,  even  the  least,  in 
the  maturity  of  the  Gospel  dispensation.  "Verily  I  say 
unto  you,  among  them  that  are  born  of  women,  there  hath 
not  arisen  a  greater  than  John  the  Baptist;  notwith- 
standing, he  that  is  least  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is 
greater  than  he." 

Rejecting,  therefore,  as  unnatural,  and  wholly  un- 
warrantable, the  common  interpretation  of  our  text; 
regarding  it  as  far-fetched,  as  doing  violence  to  the  inspired 
record,  as  imputing  to  John  and  to  Jesus  an  indiscretion 
wholly  unworthy  and  uncalled  for;  seeing  in  it  simply 
a  shift  to  get  rid  of  a  seeming  difficulty; — the  only  other 
explanation  of  the  passage  deserving  our  attention,  is 
that  which  traces  the  message  to  some  doubts  and  mis- 
givings in  the  mind  of  John  himself.  But,  now,  can  this 
hypothesis  be  justified  ? 

Of  course,  there  is  an  objection  to  this  viewT  which  at 
first  appears  almost  insuperable,  otherwise,  the  mass  of 
commentators  would  not  have  discarded  it;  and  this 
objection  is  found  in  the  fact,  that,  of  all  then  living  in 
Judea,  John  was  precisely  the  person  who  most  cer- 
tainly knew  the  character  and  mission  of  the  Redeemer. 


*  Olshausen  well  says,  that  this  interpretation  "  has  absolutely 
no  weight ;  for  the  disciples  of  the  Baptist  would  have  been  com- 
pletely satisfied  by  the  decided  declaration  of  their  master,  as  we 
see  in  the  case  of  the  Apostles.    Jobn  i:  37." 


174  Richard  Fuller 's  Sermons, 

Eecollect  his  address  when  Jesus  came  to  him  for  bap- 
tism; "John  forbade  him,  saying,  I  have  need  to  be 
baptized  of  thee,  and  comest  thou  to  me  ?  "  After  the 
baptism,  he  saw  "  the  Spirit  descending  and  remaining 
upon  him ;"  and  he  had  been  divinely  admonished,  that 
this  sign  would  designate  the  illustrious  personage  who 
should  "  baptize  with  the  Holy  Ghost."  In  short,  his 
clear  and  repeated  attestations,  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of 
God!  "  "Behold  the  Lamb  of  God  which  taketh  away 
the  sin  of  the  world ! "  As  you  recall  these  facts,  you  are 
ready  to  dismiss  forever  a  solution  which  supposes  that 
any  incredulity  could  have  arisen  in  the  mind  of  one  so 
thoroughly  enlightened.  But  do  not  decide  thus  hastily. 
Pause  before  you  thus  renounce,  the  plain  import  of  the 
sacred  narrative.  I  have  stated  the  common  arguments 
in  the  strongest  terms.  A  little  reflection  will  I  think 
convince  you,  however,  that  they  are  not  at  all  conclu- 
sive, and  that  the  interpretation  now  before  us  com- 
mends itself  to  our  judgment  and  is  moreover  full  of 
instruction. 

For,  is  it  quite  certain  that,  before  his  imprisonment, 
John  had  ever  been  fully  and  personally  acquainted  with 
Christ  as  the  true  Messiah?  His  profoundly  reverent  and 
self-abasing  address  when  Jesus  approached  for  baptism 
we  have  already  quoted;  and  had  John  not  confessed  his 
ignorance,  we  would  have  been  positive  that  this  implied 
a  full  recognition  of  the  Being  who  stood  before  him. 
He,  himself,  however,  informs  us  that  he  then  knew  him 
not;  "And  I  knew  him  not,  but  that  he  should  be 
made  manifest  in  Israel,  therefore  am  I  come  baptizing 
with  water."  Whether  John,  living  in  the  desert,  had 
ever  seen  Jesus  before,  we  are  not  informed  ;  but  he  was 
at  once  deeply  impressed  by  his  majestic  presence.  No 
sooner  did  that  form  enter  the  wave,  and  those  calm 
heavenly  eyes  meet  his,  than  a  solemn  awe  fell  upon 
his  soul,  and  he  shrank  from  administering  to  him  a 
rite  intended  for  sinners ;  yet  he  did  not  discover  in 
him  the  glorious  Messiah. 

But  after  the  baptism  did  not  John  receive  a  revelation 
which  disclosed  the  character  of  this  holy  and  mysteri- 
ous visitant  ?     This  I  concede.     "  And  I  knew  him  not, 


J oli lis  Message  to  Jesus.  1T5 


but  he  that  sent  me  to  baptize  with  water,  the  same  said 
unto  me,  upon  whom  thou  shalt  see  the  Spirit  descend- 
ing and  remaining  upon  him,  the  same  is  lie  which  shall 
baptize  with  the  Holy  Ghost/'  Nor,  thus  divinely  illu- 
minated, and  hearing  the  voice  from  heaven,  which  I 
suppose  was  audible  to  all,  could  John  for  a  moment 
doubt  the  surpassing  dignity  of  him  who  ascended  from 
the  waters.  And  knowing  that  the  Messiah  had  come, 
he  testified  that  this  was  he.  "1  saw  and  bare  record 
that  this  is  the  Son  of  God." 

"No  man,"  however,  "can  say  that  Jesus  is  the  Lord, 
but  by  the  Holy  Ghost."  That  Holy  Spirit  whose  office 
it  is  to  "glorify"  Jesus  was  not  yet  fully  come.  In 
close  connection  with  the  passage  in  hand  is  the  context, 
which  reminds  us  of  the  inferior  light  possessed  by  John. 
And  even  after  such  a  sensible,  miraculous  phenomenon, 
it  is  still  possible  that  his  spiritual  conceptions  were 
less  clear  and  permanent  than  we  would  infer  from  the 
fticts.  I  am  not  unmindful  of  those  announcements  in 
which  he  pointed  to  "the  Lamb  of  God"  but  he  was 
then  plainly  under  inspiration.  The  prophetical  office 
long  suspended  had  been  revived  in  him;  and  we  know 
that  prophets  were  often  the  vehicles  of  revelations 
which  they  did  not  fully  comprehend.  "  They  searched 
what,  or  what  manner  of  time,  the  Spirit  of  Christ  which 
was  in  them  did  signify,  when  it  testified  beforehand 
the  sufferings  of  Christ  and  the  glory  that  should  follow." 

But,  admit  the  common  opinion,  that  Jesus  was  at 
first  known  to  John  with  certainty  as  the  Messiah;  this 
knowledge  was,  of  course,  inward,  spiritual,  a  matter  of 
faith  ;  and  in  the  holiest  this  light  may  suffer  a  sad 
eclipse.  Twice  only  did  Jesus  express  his  admiration  at 
the  greatness  of  faith  ;  and  it  is  remarkable  that  in  each 
case — the  woman  of  Canaan,  and  the  Roman  centurion 
— it  was  the  faith  of  a  Gentile.  Among  his  own  disci- 
ples we  find  many  mournful  instances  of  a  faith,  once 
most  triumphant,  utterly  overborne  in  dark  and  trying 
hours.  The  Apostles  knew  Jesus  as  John  could  not 
know  him,  yet  Thomas  and  Peter  yielded  to  unbelief; 
and  this  after  the  enthusiastic  loyalty  in  the  former 
who  exclaimed,  "Let   us  go  that  we  may  die  with  him;" 


176  Eichard  Fuller  s  Sermons. 

and  after  that  direct  revelation  to  the  latter,  for  which 
the  Saviour  pronounced  him  "blessed."  Indeed  they 
all  forsook  him  and  surrendered  their  hope,  giving  way 
to  despondency,  and  repeating  those  words  of  bitter  dis- 
appointment, "  We  trusted  that  it  had  been  he."  You, 
yourselves,  my  dear  hearers,  are  you  never  stnggered  and 
tempted  to  unbelief?  And  if,  with  all  the  superior 
light  and  advantages  enjoyed  by  us,  the  Tempter  can 
shake  our  souls,  is  it  strange  that  John's. spiritual  vision 
should  be  darkened,  and  gloomy  doubts  cast  a  transient 
cloud  over  his  spirit? 

As  the  Eedeemer  walked  before  him  rapt  in  profound 
contemplation  of  his  sublime  and  awful  enterprise,  the 
spirit  of  prophecy  breathed  his  inspirations  into  the  soul 
of  the  appointed  harbinger;  and  he  "spake  as  moved  by 
the  Holy  Ghost;" — pointing  the  multitudes,  and  his  own 
disciples,  to  the  Lamb  of  God.  But,  as  a  man,  John's 
spiritual  apprehension  of  the  Saviour  resembled  that  of 
all  in  whom  it  now  pleases  God  "to reveal  his  Son  ;"  and 
his  faith  was  liable  to  the  same  obscuration. 

Even  though  there  had  been,  at  this  time,  nothing  to 
expose  the  Baptist  in  a  peculiar  manner  to  the  suggestions 
of  unbelief,  our  own  experience  would  readily  account 
for  any  alternations  of  darkness  and  light  in  his  inward 
life.     These  sad  moments  when  the  firmest  convictions  are 
shaken  constitute  a  part  of  that  discipline  through  which 
the  soul    is  cast  in  utter  helplessness  upon    Jesus  and 
faith  itself  is  corroborated.     Dr.  Payson  tells  us,  he  some- 
times went  into  the  pulpit  doubting  the  existence  of  God, 
yet  crying  to  God   to  deliver  him  from  this  blasphemy. 
Amidst  his  gloomy  fears  John's  faith  is  still  triumphant, 
for  he  applies  at  once  and  only  to  Jesus.       He  turns  to 
him  in  the  very  spirit  which  exclaims,  "Lord,  I  believe, 
help  thou  mine  unbelief. '      But  that  he  was  perplexed 
and  distressed,  there  can  be  no  question  ;  nor  is  it  at  all 
difficult  to  see  why  doubts  would  naturally  arise  in  his 
mind."     Honor  me  with  your  attention  while  I  give  my 
reasons  for  this  assertion. 

And,  first,  let  me  remind  you,  that  John  had  now  been 
some  time  in  his  gloomy  dungeon  at  Machaerus.  The 
Evangelist  notices  this  fact;  "Sow  when  John  had  heard 


John's  Message  to  Jesus.  177 

in  prison  the  works  of  Jesus;"  and  does  not  this  go  far 
to  account  for  the  darkness  which  came  over  his  soul? 
In  natures  seemingly  the  most  rugged,  there  is  often  a 
fund  of  the  keenest  sensibility.  Our  prophet  was  ev- 
idently a  man  of  this  sort;  and  now,  deserted  by  some  of 
his  most  devoted  friends,  imprisoned  for  his  faithfulness, 
his  career  prematurely  cut  off, — can  we  be  surprised,  if 
the  melancholy  thought  crept  into  his  heart,  that  perhaps 
his  faith  had  been  an  illusion  ?  We  are  prone  to  regard 
the  characters  mentioned  in  the  Bible  too  much  as  his- 
torical abstractions,  and  we  thus  lose  much  of  the  benefit 
Ave  ought  to  derive  from  them.  Contemplate  John  as  a 
man  of  like  passions  with  yourselves,  and  you  already 
begin  to  comprehend  his  feelings. 

Pent  up  there  within  cold,  clammy  walls,  this  wild 
lion  of  a  man  is,  for  a  while,  broken  in  the  elasticity  of 
his  confidence  ;  and  why  should  not  this  be  ?  In  matters 
of  religious  experience  we  must  never  overlook  this  cu- 
riously wrought  material  frame,  this  net-work  of  nerves 
and  fibres  in  which  the  soul  resides.  When,  after  his 
long  journey,  Elijah  sits  down  under  a  juniper  tree  and 
wishes  to  die,  God's  first  act  in  reviving  the  spirit  of  his 
disconsolate  servant,  is  to  supply  him  with  food  to  nour- 
ish his  body.  Much  of  what  we  call  spiritual  depression 
may  be  traced  to  physical  causes.  Every  pastor  has 
known  painful  cases,  in  which  those  whose  piety  was 
above  suspicion  were  ready  to  give  up  their  hope,  to 
plunge  into  despair.  Xor,  for  this  sad  malady  is  there 
any  remedy  in  sermons  and  meditations.  It  craves  fresh 
air,  exercise,  wholesome  diet,  and  change  of  scene.  And 
is  it  strange,  if,  after  pining  in  that  dreary  jail,  the  as- 
surance of  even  such  a  man  as  John  should  for  a  moment 
break  down  ?  0,  it  was  a  free,  earnest,  stirring  life  he 
had  lived  and  loved.  Xo  sybarite  was  he;  no  carpet 
apostle  clothed  in  silk  and  lawn  ;  no  velvet  preacher 
lisping  droning  soft  things  to  sleepy  audiences  reposing 
upon  cushions  of  satin  and  down.  His  voice  shook 
men's  consciences,  roused  the  most  heedless,  alarmed  the 
boldest,  humbled  the  proudest;  and  as  a  man — a  true, 
earnest   man — wiil   ever  be  heard   by  men,  multitudes 


178  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 


crowded  eagerly  to  hear  him,  hanging  in  breathless  rev- 
erence upon  his  lips. 

All  this  has  now  ceased.  His  eagle  spirit  is  no  longer 
invigorated  by  the  bracing  mountain  breezes;  his  pulses 
no  more  bound,  his  heart  no  more  burns  within  him,  as 
they  used  to  do  when  he  traversed  the  solemn  depths  of 
the  forest,  and  clomb  the  blue  hills  of  Judea;  his  soul 
no  longer  glows  at  the  spectacle  of  listening  throngs 
melted  into  penitence  by  his  sacred  eloquence.  Arrested, 
immured,  curbed  in  his  warmest  aspirations,  his  work 
seemingly  a  failure;  shut  out  just  as  he  had  reached  the 
maturity  of  years  and  usefulness,  from  the  common  air 
and  from  human  sympathy,  shut  up  in  a  damp  chilling 
cell,  the  strong  hour  conquers  him,  he  yields  to  moment- 
ary despondency,  sorrow  begins  to  dislimn  the  visions  of 
his  faith,  and  to  quell  all  the  passionate  energy  which  lay 
in  him.  If  he  be  truly  the  Messiah  why  is  this  permitted  ? 
Would  the  glorious  deliverer  of  Israel  be  satisfied  with 
cautious  and  gentle  measures,  and  leave  his  herald  thus 
to  languish  in  the  power  of  a  tyrant  ? 

Brethren,  he  knows  nothing  of  man  psychologically, 
who  does  not  perceive  that,  in  some  unhappy  moment  of 
deep  dejection,  John's  faith  might  commence  to  fail.  Sad 
it  is,  but  not  the  less  certain,  that  simple  loving  confiding 
hearts,  after  experiencing  the  perfidy  so  common  in  the 
world,  begin  at  length  to  find  their  lives  embittered  by 
almost  universal  distrust.  Cold  hearts,  in  Avhich  consis- 
tency and  constancy  are  no  virtues,  do  not  comprehend 
this;  but  warm  trusting  souls  know  what  I  say  to  be 
true;  and  when  such  enthusiastic  natures  are  baffled, 
and  see  their  hopes  all  cruelly  frustrated,  they  are 
strongly  tempted  to  lose  faith  in  every  thing  and  every 
body. 

But  the  depressing  influence  of  the  dungeon  was  not 
the  only  cause  which  would  naturally  weaken  the  confi- 
dence of  the  man  of  God.  His  imprisonment  removed 
him  from  his  work;  and  without  true,  clear,  decided 
activity  for  Christ,  no  one  can  be  always  strong  in  faith. 
Work,  Christian,  work,  for  the  time  to  work  is  short; 
"  Whatever  thy  hand  findeth  to  do,  do  with  thy  might, 
for  there  is  no  work,  nor  device,  nor  knowledge,  nor  wis- 


John's  Message  to  Jesus,  179 

dom  in  the  grave  whither  thou  goest."  Work,  Chris- 
tian, work,  for  though  life  be  spared,  you  know  not  how 
soon  yon  may  be  disabled  for  work.  Diseases  are  thick 
around  yon;  perhaps  some  insidious  malady  has  already 
invaded  your  system,  or  at  any  moment  one  of  a  thousand 
accidents  may  cripple  your  strength.  Work,  Christian, 
work,  for  all  around  you  is  work  to  be  done  for  Jesus 
and  a  perishing  world,  "Lift  up  your  eyes  and  look  on 
the  fields  ;  for  they  are  white  already  to  harvest."  Work, 
Christian,  work;  now  it  is  "well  doing,"  soon  it  will  be 
"well  done;"  yonder  He  stands  holding  your  crown  in 
his  hands,  and  all  your  toils  and  sacrifices  are  weaving 
fresh  stars  into  that  crown;  nor,  (and  I  speak  without 
extravagance,  I  utter  only  what  the  Scriptures  justify) 
nor  would  [  barter  the  lightest  coronet  which  shall  en- 
circle the  brow  of  the  humblest  sinner  ransomed  by  blood, 
who  has  devoted  his  life  to  Jesus,  for  the  massiest  diadem 
which  coruscates  upon  the  brow  of  an  archangel. 
Work,  Christian,  work;  all  things  are  passing  away; 
time  is  passing,  youth  is  passing,  health  is  passing,  op- 
portunity is  passing ;  work,  true  work  for  God  alone  re- 
mains forever. 

These  and  other  reasons  urge  us  to  be  "steadfast,  im- 
movable, always  abounding  in  the  work  of  the  Lord ; "  but 
if  all  these  motives  were  wanting,  this  truth  ought  to 
make  us  unwearied  in  our  diligence — that  without  work 
faith  will  become  a  cold,  dull,  lifeless,  ineffectual  thing. 
There  is  no  casuist  like  an  earnest  spirit  clearly  and  tri- 
umphantly at  work.  Shew  me  a  man  thoroughly  en- 
gaged in  the  service  of  Jesus,  and  I  will  show  you  a  man 
who  has  no  time,  who  feels  no  temptation  to  doubt.  AVe 
are  to  pray  for  faith  ;  but  it  is  folly  to  rest  there,  and 
expect  it  to  come  to  us  passively  from  without.  Assur- 
ance, like  true  happiness,  can  be  reached  and  nourished 
only  by  real  determined  activity  in  the  sphere  assigned  us 
by  God. 

In  the  ministry  of  the  Baptist  we  have  a  noble  illustra- 
tion of  the  power  of  faith,  while  a  Christian  is  steadily 
toiling  for  God.  John  is  first  introduced  to  us  as  a  popu- 
lar, flaming,  indefatigable  evangelist.  In  this  field  of  la- 
bor, his  whole  soul  is  absorbed  by  his  work;  and   with 


ISO  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

what  zeal,  with  what  rugged  energy,  with  what  elevation 
above  all  the  weaknesses  and  passions  of  humanity,  with 
what  self-immolating  devotion,  did  he  execute  his  mis- 
sion. As  his  fume  increased,  his  sphere  of  usefulness  was 
enlarged.  At  length  he  became  a  court  preacher;  roy- 
alty began  to  patronize  him,  and  he  was  thus  exposed  to 
snares  far  more  perilous  than  any  which  could  have  as- 
sailed the  wild  child  of  nature,  the  rude  prophet  of  the 
wilderness.  "Herod  feared  John,  knowing  that  he  was 
a  just  and  a  holy  man  and  observed  him  ;  and  when  he 
heard  him,  he  did  many  things,  and  heard  him  gladly." 
Amidst  hatred  and  persecution  a  true  soul  is  armed  with 
courage  and  strength.  It  is  when  the  world  smiles,  es- 
pecially when  the  blandishments  of  princes  beguile  the 
heart;  above  all,  when  he  is  caressed — not  for  worldly 
compliance,  but  because  he  is  "a  just  and  holy  man," 
and  the  most  insidious  of  all  self-complacencies  is  thus 
flattered — it  is  then  that  we  tremble  for  the  servant  of 
God.  John,  however,  was  as  superior  to  the  seductions 
of  the  city  and  palace  as  he  had  been  to  the  hardships  of 
the  desert.  "They  that  are  in  kings'  houses  wear  soft 
clothing,"  said  Jesus ;  but  no  effeminacy  could  reach  this 
incorruptible  herald,  though  he  was  in  royal  pavilions. 
Amidst  voluptuous  halls,  basking  under  regal  patronage, 
his  fidelity  to  duty  swerved  not.  He  scorned  the  cring- 
ing obsequiousness  of  the  fawning  sycophants  and  para- 
sites around  him.  and  with  majestic  simplicity  and  sin- 
cerity he  rebuked  the  monarch  for  his  adultery. 

His  occupation  is  now  gone,  and  in  that  lonely  cell 
what  can  this  grand  reformer  do  ?  A  true  soul  cannot 
bear  idleness;  and  here  was  a  true  soul,  all  glowing  with 
the  sublimest  ardors,  suddenly,  violently  torn  from  the 
work  he  loved,  and  Hung  there, — his  bright  eye  to  grow 
dim,  his  great  heart  to  moulder  and  languish  in  a  dun- 
geon. No  wonder  he  becomes  dark  and  morbid,  a  prey 
to  glociny  doubts  and  suspicions.  A  Christian  actively 
engaged  for  Jesus  will  never  complain  of  unbelief.  His 
doubts,  like  the  nightmare,  will  be  gone,  the  moment  he 
bestirs  himself  in  leal  earnest.  There  is  an  evidence  be- 
yond all  argument  which  is  wrought  in  us  by  clear,  self- 
sacriiicing  loyalty  to  the  Redeemer.     A  soul   thus  con- 


John's  Message  to  Jesus.  181 

centra  ted  is  informed  with  light  and  fire  from  above; 
onward  it  moves,  "  trailing  clouds  of  glory,"  heaven  all 
abont  it  and  within  it.  "  If  any  man  will  do,  he  shall 
know."  But  if  he  will  not  do,  he  shall  not  know.  Let 
a  Christian,  like  Elijah,  abandon  his  work  ;  nay,  though 
it  seems  hard,  let  him,  like  John,  be  compelled  to  leave 
his  work,  and  what  follows?  His  past  experience,  his 
strength  acquired  by  the  long  struggle  will  sustain  him, 
you  are  ready  to  say.  But  it  may  be  far  otherwise.  God 
has  linked  faith  and  works  together  and  we  cannot  sep- 
arate them.  In  the  moral  economy  under  which  we 
live,  it  is  only  when  acted  out,  that  truth  can  sustain  us. 
Truth  known  but  lying  dormant  in  the  mind  is  dead 
truth  ;  and  like  a  dead  substance  in  the  body,  will  pro- 
duce disease  if  not  mortification. 

Those  who  observe  their  own  inner  life  will  find  no 
difficulty  in  explaining  the  transient  depression  and  in- 
credulity which  overtook  the  Baptist,  if  they  reflect  upon 
the  two  causes  already  indicated  —his  confinement  in  a 
clammy  dungeon  producing  an  inward  imprisonment, 
gloom,  darkness;  and  his  want  of  occupation.  I  will 
now  add  one  other  thought — which  of  itself  might  well 
explain  the  misgivings  of  John,  and  which,  combined 
with  those  just  mentioned,  puts  us  in  possession  of  the 
whole  secret  of  his  doubts  and  perplexities. 

The  most  cursory  study  of  Jewish  history  will  shew 
that  this  people  differed  from  all  ancient  nations  chiefly 
in  the  fact,  that  religion  was  the  very  life  and  soul  of 
their  existence,  and  that  a  sense  of  sin  in  all  its  black- 
uess  was  constantly  impressed  upon  their  consciences. 
The  consequence  was  that,  at  first,  they  looked  for  a 
Messiah  who  was  to  be  a  divine  deliverer  from  this  dread- 
ful curse.  Long,  however,  before  the  period  with  which 
our  narration  has  to  do,  this  high  aspiration  had  almost 
ceased.  Bowed,  successively,  under  the  Persian,  the 
Syrian,  the  Idumean  and  Roman  yokes,  the  Jews  had 
degenerated  from  the  glorious  hope  once  proclaimed  by 
their  prophets,  and  they  now  yearned  only  for  a  magnifi- 
cent political  Saviour. 

Among  this  people  Jesus  appeared,  and  asserted  his 
claims  as  the  Messiah.     At  first  John  hailed  him  as  the 

8 


182  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

promised  deliverer  of  Israel;  and,  prophetically,  as  we 
have  seen,  he  announced  him  as  the  great  atoning  sa- 
crifice. But  public  opinion  is  a  flood  which  carries  along 
the  wisest  and  strongest ;  nor  is  it  to  he  questioned,  that, 
though  possessing  superior  illumination,  the  Baptist 
still  shared  in  the  popular  faith  as  to  the  Messiah's  tem- 
poral majesty.  The  Jews  clung  to  this  belief  with  such 
energy  of  patriotism,  that  we  find  the  Apostles,  after  a 
long  intimacy  with  Jesus,  cherishing  their  earthly  ambi- 
tion. Nay,  even  after  his  resurrection,  they  ask,  "  Lord 
wilt  thou  at  this  time  restore  again  the  kingdom  of  Is- 
rael ?"  It  is  certain,  that  the  ardent  noble  heart  of  the 
Baptist  sympathized  with  the  high  and  fond  hopes  of 
his  nation;  but  how  entirely  had  Jesus  disappointed  all 
these  hopes.  "Now,  when  John  had  heard  in  prison  the 
works  of  Christ."  He  is  languishing  in  prison,  and  sad- 
ness, solitude,  disappointment,  have  well  nigh  crushed 
his  imperial  spirit.  In  his  desolate  cell  he  hears  of  the 
works  of  Christ.  But  what  works  ?  Those  which  had 
been  anticipated  ?  armies  collected  ?  victories  achieved  ? 
the  glory  of  Israel  vindicated?  the  undisputed  pre-emi- 
nence of  the  chosen  race  asserted?  a  throne?  a  regal 
sceptre?  an  august  supremacy  established?  Nothing  of 
all  this.  Healing  a  few  sick,  feeding  a  hungry  mob, 
gathering  a  crowd  of  admiring  followers  to  listen  to  his 
doctrine.  And  is  this  all  ?  Are  these  the  magnificent 
exploits  of  the  mighty  Shiloh  ?  Was  it  for  this  that  pa- 
triarchs and  prophets  and  kings  longed  to  see  his  day? 
and  that  Jehovah  had  heralded  him  with  such  pomp  as 
the  splendid  emancipator  of  Israel,  the  monarch  who 
should  wield  his  sceptre  from  Jerusalem  over  the  whole 
earth  ? 

Enter  into  their  thoughts,  unite  them,  and  you  will 
not  be  surprised  that  John  became  intolerant  of  suspense  ; 
that  expectations  sensitively  jealous  for  the  national  glory 
should  begin  to  fail.  Nothing  can  be  more  natural  than 
that  a  dark,  gloomy,  and  perhaps  somewhat  impatient 
uncertainty  should  brood  for  awhile  over  the  soul  of  the 
Baptist,  that  his  faith  should  be  staggered,  and  ominous 
conjectures  perplex  and  distract  his  mind. 

II.  "Now  when  John  had  heard  in  prison  the  works 


John's  Message  to  Jesus. 


of  Christ,  he  sent  two  of  his  disciples,  and  said  unto  him, 
Art  thou  lie  that  should  come,  or  look  we  for  another?'' 
We  have  examined  the  message  which  certainly  proceeded 
from  some  painful  questionings  in  the  mind  of  John 
himself.  From  the  message  let  us  turn  to  the  answer ; 
let  us  see  how  Jesus  dealt  with  this  case  of  a  staggered 
and  almost  expiring  faith. 

To  the  enquiry  proposed,  a  human  teacher  would 
have  simply  replied  affirmatively.  Jesus  well  knew,  how- 
ever, that  such  was  not  the  answer  which  the  unhappy 
state  of  John's  mind  demanded.  To  the  Samaritan 
woman  he  said,  "I  that  speak  unto  thee  am  he;"  but 
the  incredulity  of  the  Baptist  was  not  thus  to  be  treated. 
Indeed  it  is  never  by  words  but  by  works,  that  men's 
doubts  as  to  our  characters  and  claims  are  to  be  removed. 
"If  I  do  not  the  works  of  my  Father,  believe  me  not; 
but  if  1  do,  though  ye  believe  not  me,  believe  the  works; 
that  ye  may  know  and  believe  that  the  Father  is  in  me, 
and  I  in  him."  And  there  is  another  remarkable  passage 
in  which — alluding  to  John's  testimony — Jesus  seems  to 
intimate  some  'possible  deficiency  even  in  him  as  a  wit- 
ness ;  and  refers  to  his  own  works  as  the  real  credentials 
of  his  Messiahship:  "Ye  sent  unto  John,  and  he  bare 
witness  to  the  truth,  but  I  receive  not  testimony  from 
man;  I  have  a  greater  witness  than  that  of  John;  for 
the  works  which  the  Father  hath  given  me  to  finish,  the 
same  works  that  I  do,  bear  witness  of  me,  that  the  Father 
hath  sent  me." 

Moreover,  it  was  by  his  deeds  that  prophecy  declared 
the  Messiah  should  be  known.  Hence  the  answer  which 
Jesus  returns; — not  words,  but  mighty  deeds.  An  an- 
swer which  John  would  at  once  comprehend;  which 
would  forever  dispel  his  apprehensions;  on  receiving 
which  his  consolation,  his  joy,  his  triumph  were  full,  for 
he  knew  that  all  was  well.  After  this  assurance  he 
could  cheerfully  lay  his  head  upon  the  block,  satisfied 
that  his  work,  though  brief,  was  done;  and — even  while 
the  executioner  was  binding  him  and  the  cruel  steel  was 
cleaving  the  air,  he  could  exult  in  the  full  confidence 
that — in  hastening  to  mingle  with  kindred  spirits  around 
the  throne — he  left  One  upon  earth  whose  great  enter- 


184  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

prise  no  tyrant  could  arrest,  whose  empire  should  be 
boundless  and  eternal. 

Glancing  at  the  Saviour's  answer,  observe,  first,  that 
he  says  nothing  about  his  Messiahship,  but  refers  directly 
to  credentials  which  were  conclusive.  "  If  I  bear  witness 
of  myself,  my  witness  is  not  true;  there  is  another  that 
beareth  witness  of  me;" — that  is,  my  testimony  is  liable 
to  suspicion;  you  may  say,  "Thou  bearest  witness  of 
thyself;"  but  the  authority  of  my  Father  in  heaven 
cannot  be  disputed.  John  may  require  that  authority, 
and  he  shall  have  it.  "  And  in  the  same  hour  he  cured 
many  of  their  infirmities,  and  plagues,  and  of  evil  spirits; 
and  unto  many  that  were  blind  he  gave  sight.  Then 
Jesus  answering  said  unto  them,  go  your  way  and  tell 
John  what  things  ye  have  seen  and  heard  ;  how  that  the 
blind  see,  the  lame  walk,  the  lepers  are  cleansed,  the  deaf 
hear,  the  dead  are  raised,  to  the  poor  the  Gospel  is 
preached.  And  blessed  is  he,  whosoever  shall  not  be 
offended  in  me." 

Another  thing  in  this  remarkable  answer.  The  cre- 
dentials which  Jesus  exhibited  were  precisely  those  which 
prophecy  had  foretold.  The  title  "He  that  should 
come,"  is  often  applied  to  the  Messiah  by  the  sacred  wri- 
ters. "Behold  your  God  will  come."  "He  will  come 
and  save  you."  In  the  question,  "Art  thou  he  that 
should  come?"  John,  of  course,  alluded  to  these  pre- 
dictions. And  when  we  examine  these  prophecies,  we 
find  Isaiah  declaring  that  this  glorious  personage  should 
vindicate  his  title  by  the  very  miracles  which  were  now 
wrought.  "He  will  come  and  save  you.  Then  the  eyes 
of  the  blind  shall  be  opened,  and  the  ears  of  the  deaf 
shall  be  unstopped.  Then  shall  the  lame  man  leap  as  a 
hart,  and  the  tongue  of  the  dumb  sing." 

But  the  most  convincing  and  instructive  part  of  this 
answer  is  that  which  least  strikes  us  at  this  day.  The 
reply  is  cumulative.  First  there  is  the  healing  of  dis- 
eases; then  raising  the  dead;  but  the  last  and  crowning 
proof  of  his  Messiahship  is,  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel 
to  the  poor.  This  had  been  predicted,  as  the  peculiar 
glory  of  Shiloh.  "  The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  God  is  upon 
me,  because  the  Lord  has  anointed  me  to  preach  good 


John's  Message  to  Jesus.  185 

tidings  unto  the  meek."  Such  is  the  prophecy,  and  it 
was  exactly  fulfilled;  for  the  Hebrew  term  rendered, 
"ineek"  is  translated,  in  the  Septuagint  which  Jesus 
often  quoted,  by  a  Greek  word  signifying  "the poor" — 
the  very  word,  indeed,  which  is  employed  in  our  text. 
Others  had  taught  great  truths,  and  performed  illus- 
trious miracles  ;  but  hitherto  the  poor  had  been  over- 
looked. Jesus  first  proclaimed  the  grandeur  of  the  soul, 
and  the  common  fatherhood  of  God; — revelations  these 
which  pour  contempt  upon  all  artificial  and  superficial 
distinctions; — investing  the  humblest  and  most  despised 
child  of  earth  with  transcendent  honor;  and  unfolding 
to  the  poorest,  spiritual  and  imperishable  riches. 

"  The  poor  have  the  Gospel  preached  unto  them;" — 
this  was  a  sign  which  John  could  not  misunderstand, 
but,  the  full  glory  of  which  none  of  us  begin  to  compre- 
hend. To  recognize  the  sacred  rights  of  humanity,  to 
"  honor  all  men,"  as  men  and  because  they  are  men,  this 
is  an  elevation  of  which  earthly  wisdom  and  benevolence 
had  hitherto  formed  no  sort  of  conception.  Jesus  was  the 
first  philanthropist.  He  first  breathed  into  man  a  love 
forman,  as  man, a  love forthepoor,alovewhich penetrates 
through  the  rags  of  penury,  and  honors  the  soul  as  of 
more  value  than  the  whole  material  creation.  This  love 
was  unknown  before  upon  this  fallen  earth;  Jesus 
brought  it  with  him  from  heaven.  Now  and  then,  some 
man, — perhaps  some  simple  unlettered  man — touched  by 
this  love — hath  spoken,  and  all  hearts  have  at  once  con- 
fessed the  strange  mysterious  influence  of  his  words.  But 
none  of  us  can  conceive  the  power  which  this  principle 
is  yet  to  exert,  the  revolutions  which  it  will  some  clay 
achieve,  when  it  shall  have  bestowed  upon  our  churches 
the  real  gift  of  tongues — the  true  miraculous  endowment 
which  descended  in  flames  upon  the  apostles;  not  the 
faculty  of  speaking  in  foreign  unknown  accents,  but  the 
more  glorious  power  of  reaching  the  heart  of  humanity, 
everywhere,  with  a  language  vernacular  to  the  whole 
brotherhood  of  man.  Miracles  attested  the  divine  mis- 
sion of  the  Redeemer;  but  miracles  are  poor  compared 
with  that  celestial  love  which,  through  clouds  of  human 
guilt  and  wretchedness,  sees  the  dignity  of  the  soul,  and, 
by  toil  and  sacrifice,  seeks  to  regenerate  and  save  it. 


.1 8G  Richard  Fuller 's  Sermons. 

In  conclusion  let  this  subject  teach  us,  that  temptations 
to  doubt  and  unbelief  are  no  evidence  of  a  want  of  gen- 
uine piety.  John  "  was  a  burning  and  a  shining  light" — 
one  of  the  most  illustrious  heroes  and  martyrs  who 
ever  adorned  the  sacred  annals;  yet  in  a  gloomy  moment 
his  faith  was  at  fault;  and  he  began  to  fear  that  his 
dearest  hopes,  his  once  buoyant  and  triumphant  confi- 
dence, might  all  be  a  deception.  The  heartless,  the 
masses  engrossed  with  earthly  cares — know  nothing  of 
these  strange  caprices  of  feeling  which  come  over  those 
who  love  and  live  earnest,  enthusiastic  lives.  Nervous, 
passionate  natures  are,  in  dark  moments,  pressed  by  mys- 
terious apprehensions  under  which  the  soul  gives  way 
drifts  from  its  firm  moorings,  and  tends  to  universal 
scepticism.  The  truest  earthly  friendship,  the  sincerest 
earthly  love,  even  the  faith  which  is  dearer  than  life,  and 
which, — like  John  in  this  sad  hour — still  turns  to  Christ 

for  succor, — all,  all the  thought  enters  the  mind, 

whether  all  may  not  be  the  delusion  of  a  fond,  confiding 
temperament  which  has  believed  because  it  wished  to 
believe. 

See,  too,  where  a  true  soul  will  go  in  seasons  of  darkness 
and  despondency.  See  how  much  faith  there  is  in  the 
doubts  of  an  earnest  heart.  John  sends  at  once  and  di- 
rectly to  Jesus;  — a  lesson  his  disciples  learned  from  him; 
for  when  he  was  beheaded,  they  "took  up  the  body  and 
buried  it,  and  went  and  told  Jesus."  Sensitive  natures 
find  themselves  depressed  and  disheartened  ;  they  do  not 
know  what  to  do  with  their  burden ;  they  turn  to  them- 
selves, to  their  past  experience,  or  their  preseut  faithful- 
ness; but  they  can  derive  no  real  consolation  from  these 
sources.  Not  only  at  first,  but  as  often  as  he  was  strick- 
en, the  Israelite  had  to  look  directly  to  the  Brazen  Ser- 
pent; and  the  oppressed  spirit  must  repair  at  all  times 
and  at  once  to  the  Redeemer.  "Look  unto  me,  and  be  ye 
saved."  "  Come  unto  me,  all  ye  that  are  weary  and  heavy 
laden,  and  I  will  give  you  rest."  Christians,  lose  what 
you  may  of  comfort  and  peace,  hold  fast  your  confidence 
in  Jesus.  With  that  you  can  look  anything  in  the  face; 
with  that,  desperation  itself  will  cease  to  be  desperate. 

A  third   lesson.     True   greatness  does  not  depend  on 


John's  Message  to  Jesus.  1ST 

what  the  world  culls  success.  In  difficult  enterprises 
pioneers  generally  seem  to  fail,  but  they  really  secure  the 
triumphs  of  those  who  succeed  them.  John's  course  was 
us  brief  as  it  was  bright.  He  died  when  he  was  only 
thirty  years  of  age,  and  his  end  was  tragical ;  but  he  did 
not  die,  until  he  had  "fulfilled  his  course."  His  was  a 
life  not  of  words,  but  of  deeds.  lie  was  sent  to  prepare 
a  guilty  world  for  the  reception  of  the  Messiah.  Arduous 
as  was  his  office,  he  concentrated  his  whole  being  upon 
its  discharge;  and  died  rather  than  be  recreant  to  duty. 
This  was  success,  this  was  his  glory;  and  rest  assured 
there  is  for  you  and  me  no  other  success,  no  honor,  no 
happiness  bat  in  occupying  faithfully  the  sphere  assigned 
us,  in  devoting  our  lives  to  the  duties  of  that  station  in 
which  the  divine  wisdom  and  love  have  placed  us.  Our 
great  business,  our  true  life  is,  not  to  be  prying  into  what 
lies  dimly  in  the  distance,  but  to  do  what  lies  clearly  be- 
fore us.  Conforming  ourselves  to  the  will  of  God,  let  us 
never  be  discouraged  or  diverted  because  we  cannot  com- 
prehend the  conduct  of  him  whom  we  serve.  In  the 
verse  just  succeeding  our  text  Jesus  warns  us,  that  there 
may  be  much  in  what  he  does  to  perplex  and  try  our 
faith  ;  but  he  says,  "Blessed  is  he  whosoever  shall  not  be 
offended  in  me."  To  trust  is  better,  nobler,  happier  than 
to  reason.  To  love  and  worship  Jesus,  to  confide  all  in- 
to his  hands, — this  is  the  religion  of  the  Gospel, — this  is 
duty  and  strength  and  victory. 

Above  all,  let  us  learn  the  surpassing  dignity  of  the 
Christian  ministry.  Jesus  declared  that  the  preaching 
of  the  Gospel  to  the  poor  and  the  perishing  was  the 
crowning  proof  of  his  divine  mission,  the  great  crowning 
glory  of  his  kingdom.  Let  us  rejoice  in  this  Gospel. — 
Happy  are  our  eyes  which  see  the  heavenly  light,  and  our 
ears  which  hear  the  joyful  sound.  Miracles  blessed  only 
the  body;  the  Gospel  blesses  the  soul.  Miracles  have 
ceased;  but  the  Gospel  is  still  pouring  light  and  purity 
and  truth  and  joy  over  the  earth.  Miracles  are  the  pow- 
er of  God  to  heal  the  sick,  to  give  sight  to  the  blind,  to 
raise  the  dead  ;  the  Gospel  is  "  the  power  of  God  unto  sal- 
vation"— infusing  spiritual  health,  opening  the  eyes  to 
rejoice  in  celestial  truth,  raising  the  immortal  spirit  from 


188  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons, 

the  death  of  sin  and  corruption  to  everlasting  life — to  an 
exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory. 

Christians,  my  dearly  beloved  brethren,  what  a  price- 
less treasure  is  this  Gospel  to  us.  What  a  precious  Re- 
deemer does  it  disclose.  "Art  thou  he  that  should  come, 
or  look  we  for  another?"  0,  it  is  he.  It  is  he  whom  our 
souls  love  and  adore.  We  look  for  no  other.  We  desire 
no  other,  no  other  Friend,  High  Priest,  Advocate,  Re- 
deemer. To  whom  can  we  go  but  unto  him?  to  whom, 
for  pardon,  for  sanctification,  for  comfort,  for  strength  in 
temptation,  for  grace  in  trial,  for  light  in  darkness,  for 
peace  in  tribulation,  for  heavenly  support  when  flesh  and 
heart  shall  be  failing,  for  victory  over  death,  for  tri- 
umphant assurance  at  the  judgment?  "Lord  to  whom 
shall  we  go?  thou  hast  the  words  of  eternal  life;  and  we 
believe,  and  are  sure,  that  thou  art  the  Christ,  the  Son  of 
the  living  God." 

Whatever  you  may  say,  some  of  you,  my  friends,  are 
plainly  looking  for  another.  You  deny  this;  but  your 
conduct,  your  secret  hopes  from  your  virtues,  your  pleas 
of  unworthiness — all  prove  it.  You  are  not  willing  to 
receive  Jesus  as  the  Christ,  and  to  cast  yourselves  entire- 
ly upon  his  great  atonement.  If  you  persist  in  this  un- 
belief, you  must  perish.  For  me,  for  you,  there  is  no 
other  hope,  "  Neither  is  there  salvation  in  any  other,  for 
there  is  none  other  name  under  heaven  given  among  men, 
whereby  ye  must  be  saved." 

Blessed,  forever  blessed  is  he,  who  shall  not  be  offend- 
ed in  Jesus.  What  peace  and  joy  does  he  not  find  in 
obedience.  What  a  crown  of  glory  is  reserved  for  him 
in  heaven.  But  you  who  neglect  the  Saviour,  remember 
you,  too,  are  fulfilling  a  course,  and  what  must  be  the 
end  of  that  course  if  you  persevere  in  it  ?  Recollect  that, 
to  perish,  you  need  not  openly  reject  the  Gospel  ;  you 
have  only  to  continue  to  "neglect"  it.  Jesus  is  an  al- 
mighty Saviour,  "  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost  all  that 
come  unto  God  by  him;  but  if  you  refuse  to  come,  his 
almightiness  will  avail  you  nothing. 

Jesus  is  a  willing  Saviour.  "Rim  that  cometh  unto 
me,"  he  says,  "I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out;"  but  remember 
you  may  die  to-night,    and   if  you   pass  as  you  now  are 


John's  Message  to  Jesus.  189 


into  eternity,  the  great  gulf  will  be  fixed,  so  that  you  can 
never  come  to  him.  Jesus  is  a  patient  Saviour.  "How 
often" — (such  has  long  been  his  weeping  complaint  as, 
by  mercy,  by  affliction,  by  his  word,  by  the  secret  move- 
ments of  his  Spirit,  he  has  sought  to  draw  you  to  him- 
self)— "how  often  would  I  have  gathered  thee  under  my 
wings,  but  thou  wouldst  not."  Remember  that  this  pa- 
tience, though  it  last  long,  will  not  last  forever.  At  any 
hour  the  sentence  may  go  forth,  "Ephraim  is  joined  to 
his  idols,  let  him  alone."  This  night  Jesus  may  say,  "  I 
go  away,  and  ye  shall  seek  me  and  shall  die  in  your  sins." 
%iDie  in  your  sins" — the  second  death,  the  soul's  death, 
what  a  doom.  An  immortality  of  pain  and  tears  ;  an  in- 
finity of  wretchedness  and  despair;  the  blackness  of 
darkness  across  whic'i  conscience  will  forever  shoot  her 
clear  and  ghastly  flashes,  like  lightning  streaming  over  a 
desert  when  midnight  and  tempest  are  there;  weeping 
and  wailing  and  gnashing  of  teeth  ;  long,  long  eternity, 
and  things  that  will  make  eternity  seem  longer, — making 
each  moment  seem  an  eternity, — oh,  miserable  condition 
of  the  damned  !  What  a  doom  this  for  you.  What  a 
doom  for  one  who  was  warned,  urged,  entreated  to  be 
saved.  My  dear  friend,  or  ever  it  be  too  late,  open  your 
eyes  to  your  danger  and  your  duty.  "  Then  I  saw,"  says 
Bunyan,  "  that  there  was  a  way  to  hell  even  from  the 
very  gate  of  heaven  ;  and  I  awoke,  and  lo,  it  was  a  dream." 
Beware  lest  you  precipitate  yourself  into  such  a  doom, 
and  awake  and  find  it  no  dream,  but  a  terrible  reality; 
a  reality  rendered  the  more  intolerable  by  the  memory 
of  all  the  love  and  mercy  which  sought  to  save  you,  but 
which  you  resolutely,  wilfully,  wantonly  resisted. 


8* 


190  Richard  Fuller  s  Sermons. 


Sermon  SSletoeutti- 


JOY  IN  THE  LORD. 

"Although  the  fig  tree  shall  not  blossom,  neither  shall  fruit  be  in 
the  vines  ;  the  labor  of  the  olive  shall  fail,  and  the  fields  shall  yield  no 
meat ;  the  flock  shall  be  cut  off  from  the  fold,  and  there  shall  be  no 
herd  in  the  stalls ;  yet  will  I  rejoice  in  the  Lord,  I  will  joy  in  the  God  of 
my  salvation."— Habakkuk hi:  17,  18. 

I  SUB  MIT  to  yourselves  whether  you  ought  to  be  sat- 
isfied with  a  religion  which  affords  you  no  enjoyment. 
I  appeal  to  the  law  of  Christ's  kingdom,  "Kejoice  in  the 
Lord  alway,  and  again  I  say,  Kejoice;" — no  command  can 
be  more  explicit.  I  lay  before  you  the  experience  of 
God's  people  in  all  ages; — "the  joy  of  salvation/'  "the 
joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory,"  which  delighted 
their  souls,  causing  them  to  "rejoice  in  tribulation,"  that 
is,  to  find  a  source  of  happiness  in  tribulation  itself.  I 
open  to  you  the  legacy  of  the  Redeemer: — "These  things 
have  I  spoken  unto  you,  that  my  joy  might  remain  in  you, 
and  that  your  joy  might  be  full."  In  a  word,  I  ask  you 
to  consider,  that  in  its  very  nature,  piety,  if  it  be  one  part 
duty,  is  two  parts  happiness;  "The  kingdom  of  God  is 
righteousness,  and  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost." — 
Unite  these  reflections.  Can  you  rest  in  a  religion  which 
gives  you  no  joy? — nay,  which,  so  far  from  being  your 
consolation  in  trouble,  is  itself  the  source  of  your  great- 
est trouble;  from  which  you  hasten  to  escape  and  find 
pleasure  in  the  world,  until  your  fears  or  the  voice  of 
conscience  drives  you  back  again? 

The  word  happiness  does  not  apply  to  brutes;  but  hu- 
manity— though  stunned  by  the  Fall — still  retains  some 
dim  consciousness  of  the  bliss  it  has  forfeited,  and,  there- 
fore, pines  constantly  for  a  felicity  not   to  be   found   in 


Joy  in  the  Lord.  191 


this  world.  Religion  alone  satisfies  these  universal  and 
infinite  cravings.  Your  pastors  are  to  "be  helpers  of 
yonr  joy."  And  if,  instead  of  wasting  life  in  pursuits  ont 
of  yourselves,  you  would  second  our  wishes,  and — enter- 
ing into  yonr  own  hearts — would  let  Jesus  correct  the 
disorders  there,  and  establish  his  throne  over  all  your 
passions,  you  would  know  by  experience  that,  even  here, 
in  its  pathway  to  immortality,  the  Gospel  scatters  bless- 
ings which  can  banish  all  our  fears,  can  fill  us  with  joy 
and  peace  in  believing,  can  elevate  us  into  a  noble  super- 
iority to  sensible  gratifications,  can  cause  us  to  be  ab- 
sorbed in  God  our  '-'exceeding  joy,"  and  to  feel  that  the 
loss  of  the  whole  world  would  only  make  room  for  him 
and  for  the  pure  heavenly  delight  which  is  found  in  him. 

I.  h\  unfolding  our  text,  let  us  first  speak  of  the  joy 
here  mentioned.  This  chapter  is  styled  a  lyrical  prayer 
or  meditation.  It  is  full  of  epic  fire  and  sublimity.  Sad- 
ness, fear,  confidence  alternately  shake  and  calm  the 
prophet's  soul;  but  all  his  emotions  at  last  subside,  or, 
rather,  rise  and  expand  into  the  noblest  and  divinest  joy. 

Isow,  as  to  this  joy  you  feel  at  once  that,  in  its  origin 
and  nature,  it  is  high  above  the  world.  For  it  is  perfect 
satisfaction  in  God; — not  in  his  gifts,  not  even  in  the 
spiritual  gifts  and  blessings  he  bestows  ; — but  in  himself. 
And  it  abides  when  all  earthly  prospects  are  withered;  it 
•  consoles  and  cheers  when  every  source  of  mortal  happi- 
ness has  shrunk  and  perished.  It  is  when  his  heart  is 
overwhelmed  within  him,  that  the  child  of  God  is  led  to 
a  Eock  higher  than  he  is — higher  than  his  fears  and  sins 
and  sorrows — higher  than  all  the  billows  and  storms 
and  darkness  around  him. 

There  are  natural  enjoyments  common  to  all — to  the 
enemies  as  well  as  the  friends  of  God.  There  are  sensual 
gratifications,  "the  pleasures  of  sin  for  a  season."  And 
there  are  in  religion  excitements  and  fervors  of  the  pas- 
sions— airy  castles  of  happiness  which,  like  the  rainbow, 
depend  on  the  state  of  the  atmosphere.  But  heaven  is 
not  more  superior  to  earth  than  is  the  joy  in  our  text  to 
all  these  transient  feverish  delights,  which  impart  no 
abiding,  sustaining  happiness,  which    indeed  leave   the 


192  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

heart  more  weak,  exhausted,  weary  and  void  than  it  was 
before.  The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  calm,  intelligent,  pure, 
spiritual,  invigorating,  celestial  happiness.  It  is  not  na- 
tural, but  the  fruit  of  the  Spirit.  It  is  the  bliss  of  angels 
— the  deep  speechless  rapture  of  cherub  and  seraph  upon 
whom  God  directly  pours  a  flood  of  love  and  blessedness ; 
but  to  us  it  is  vouchsafed  only  through  the  atonement  of 
Jesus.  It  is  the  perfect  satisfaction  of  all  our  immortal 
appetites  at  the  "  bright  fountain  of  goodness."  It  is  the 
repose  of  the  soul  which  rises  above  the  scope  and  verge 
of  sublunary  things  and  loses  itself  in  that  Being  who  is 
the  essential  happiness,  whose  perfections  are  the  ex- 
haustless  treasure-house  of  glory  and  ecstacy  to  all  holy 
intelligences,  and  who  is  to  us,  far  more  than  to  angel 
and  archangel,  the  object  of  boundless  gratitude,  love,  wor- 
ship, since  we  rejoice  in  him  as  "the  God  of  our  salva- 
tion." 

I  have  just  said  that  this  joy  can  be  ours  only  through 
the  atonement.  It  is  "rejoicing  in  the  Lord;"  and  we 
know  that  it  is  in  Jesus  the  Christian  rejoices  "  with  joy 
unspeakable  and  full  of  glory."  The  distinguishing 
characteristics  of  the  renewed  soul  are  that  it  "  worships 
God  in  the  Spirit,  rejoices  in  Jesus  Christ,  and  has  no 
confidence  in  the  flesh."  Indeed  the  text  expressly  de- 
clares that  the  emotion  which  thus  exalts  above  all  sorrow 
and  calamity  is  "joy  in  the  God  of  our  salvation."  The 
first  donation  and  every  accession  of  this  heavenly  treas- 
ure come  to  us  by  personal  union  with  our  Redeemer. — 
Tne  soul  of  our  prophet  is  absorbed  in  the  contemplation 
not  of  abstract  attributes,  but  of  a  Person.  And  this  is  a 
striking  and  important  trait  in  the  religion  of  Jesus,  that 
he  himself  is  "all  and  in  all."  Faith,  love,  hope,  joy,  all 
the  graces  and  duties  of  the  Christian's  life,  all  the  tri- 
umphs of  the  Christian's  death,  all  the  glories  of  the 
Christian's  heaven  have  reference  to  him. 

If,  then,  I  were  required  to  give  a  general  definition  of 
the  joy  in  our  text,  I  would  say,  that  it  is  the  gratitude, 
peace,  confidence,  solid  reality  of  happiness  experienced 
by  a  soul  which  reposes  wholly  in  Jesus.  For  the  more 
simple  and  entire  our  trust  in  him,  the  more  will  we  re- 
joice in  God — in  his  will,  character,  blessedness,  glory. 


Joy  in  the  Lord.  1 93 


Many  of  God's  dearest  children  walk  in  sadnesa  all  their 
lives,  lamenting,  not  for  any  known  sin,  but  that  they 
taste  so  1  i t tie  joy.  And  this  is  because  they  look  not 
directly  and  steadily  to  Jesus,  but  take  counsel  in  their 
own  souls,  looking  to  their  own  experiences  for  assurance, 
and  thus  "have  sorrow  in  their  hearts  daily."  "Oh," 
exclaims  Cougar,  "had  I  learned  this  secret  earlier  of 
looking  always  to  Jesus  how  much  more  I  should  have 
enjoyed  these  fourscore  years;  how  much  happier  I  might 
have  been  as  a  Christian  all  my  days.  I  have  found  it 
to  be  only  union  with  Christ  by  faith,  and  a  constant 
recollection  of  him  as  a  present  Saviour,  that  can  keep  the 
soul  happy  by  keeping  it  from  sin." 

True  spiritual  joy  is,  then,  the  fruit  of  faith  in  Jesus; 
a  faith  which  is  always  accompanied  by  a  tender  remem- 
brance of  sin,  by  inward  renovation,  and  by  a  filial  sur- 
render of  the  will  to  God.  But  this  is  too  vague.  Many 
of  you,  all  of  you,  I  hope,  would  wish  me  to  be  more 
particular — to  go  into  an  analysis  of  this  sublime  senti- 
ment— to  search  for  the  ingredients  of  this  noble  pleasure. 
Nor  need  we  go  far  to  find  them.  They  are  the  know- 
ledge of  God,  love  for  God,  and  harmony  with  God;  three 
elements  of  spiritual  happiness  which,  in  their  perfection, 
will  be  heaven,  which,  even  now,  are  heaven;  and  to 
surrender  which  for  any  earthly  enjoyment  is  an  infatua- 
tion far  surpassing  that  of  the  idiot  who  should  ex- 
change a  legacy  of  millions  for  poverty  and  rags. 

The  knowledge  of  God — of  God  revealed,  seen,  felt  in 
Jesus — this  is  the  first  source  of  satisfying  joy.  My 
.riends,  let  us  understan  dourselves.  Our  highest,  noblest 
connection  is  not  with  the  earth.  Let  us  bless  God  for 
faculties  by  which  we  can  explore  the  wonders  and  enjoy 
the  beauties  of  creation;  for  powers  which  can  subdue 
the  earth,  the  sea,  the  elements,  can  subsidize  all  the 
materials  of  nature,  and  compel  all  her  forces  into  alli- 
ance with  our  progress  and  welfare.  But  could  we 
achieve  "all  knowledge"  of  all  visible  worlds,  it  would 
only  mock  the  profoundest  want  of  minds  which  are  from 
God  and  can  be  satisfied  only  with  the  knowledge  of  God. 
Great  is  the  human  intellect:  greater  than  stars,  moon, 
sun  ;  for  these  radiant  spheres,  while  they  shine  and  burn 


194  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

along  their  glorious  circles,  and  hymn  God's  praises  in 
sweetest  melody, — are  all  unconscious  of  their  beauty, 
and  hear  not  their  own  music ;  but  the  mind  can  expa- 
tiate among  these  naming  orbs,  can  exult  in  their  bright- 
ness, and  take  in  all  their  ravishing  harmonies.  Greater, 
however,  far  greater  is  that  intellect,  because  it  can 
ascend  to  the  Creator  himself,  and  know  him,  can  study 
and  adore  his  character  and  perfections. 

Nor  does  this  knowledge  secure  repose  and  delight 
merely  for  the  mind.  It  satisfies  the  heart.  It  elevates 
our  affections  above  the  earthly  and  mutable,  and  fixes 
them  upon  the  heavenly  and  eternal.  "Acquaint  now 
thyself  with  Him,  and  be  at  peace."  It  is  only  this  light 
which  can  shed  life  and  peace  into  the  soul.  It  is  only 
as  God  is  the  object  of  our  contemplation  that  our  affec- 
tions rise  to  their  proper  centre  and  portion.  "Lord 
shew  us  the  Father  and  it  sufficeth  us."  It  is  as  we 
know  God  that  the  soul  rejoices  in  a  portion  spiritual, 
infinite,  eternal  as  itself.  If  we  seek  the  cause  of  all  the 
restlessness  and  misery  upon  the  earth,  the  Saviour  re- 
veals it  in  that  weeping  lamentation,  "0  righteous  Father, 
the  world  hath  not  known  thee."  If  we  ask  what  judg- 
ment from  God  would  cause  man's  inner  life  to  pine  and 
die,  the  answer  is,  "Not  a  famine  of  bread  nor  a  thirst 
for  water,  but  of  hearing  the  word  of  the  Lord."  And 
if  we  enquire  when  this  fallen  earth  shall  be  regenerated; 
when  sin  and  suffering  shall  cease;  when  righteousness 
shall  cover  the  hills  and  flow  along  the  valleys ;  when 
purity  and  joy  shall  pour  the  golden  atmosphere  of 
heaven  all  over  this  globe,  and  waken  the  music  of  heaven 
in  all  its  peopling  multitudes — making  every  spot  a  tem- 
ple, and  every  day  a  Sabbath,  and  every  breath  gratitude 
and  praise;  the  prophet  replies  by  pointing  to  that 
millennial  noontide  when  "The  earth  shall  be  filled  with 
the  knowledge  of  the  glory  of  the  Lord,  as  the  waters 
cover  the  sea." 

"  Knowledge  is  power."  If  this  be  true  of  knowledges 
which  are  earthly,  political,  material,  what  shall  we  say 
of  spiritual  knowledge  ?  The  knowledge  of  God  is  power 
— power  over  the  powerful — power  where  all  else  is  pow- 
erless.    Nothing  can  so  pluck  up  pride  and  all  its  bitter 


Joy  in  the  Lord.  195 


roots.  Nothing  can  so  calm  every  tumult  in  our  bosoms. 
Nor  is  there  a  sinful  passion,  nor  a  rising  murmur,  nor 
a  movement  of  discontent  or  envy  or  cupidity  which  is 
not  hushed  as  the  discoveries  of  this  glorious  Being 
break  in  softly,  sweetly,  all-subduingly  upon  the  soul. 

I  lament  that  this  knowledge  is  so  imperfect.     It  must 
ever  be  imperfect;  for  so  fringed  and  covered  with  splen- 
dor  is    the   glory  of  God,   that  the  gaze  of  angel  and 
archangel  is  dazzled.     But  if  in  the  "glass"  given  us, 
if  in  "  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ"  we  would  contemplate 
this  glory  more  constantly,  we  would  be  "changed  into 
the  same  image  from  glory  to  glory;"  our  exulting  souls 
would  exclaim,  "  This  is  life  eternal,  to  know  thee  the 
only  true  God,  and  Jesus  Christ  whom  thou  hast  sent;" 
grace  and    peace  would  be  multiplied  unto  us  through 
the  knowledge  of  God  and  of  Jesus  our  Lord;  the  full 
assurance  of  faith  and  hope  would  be  ours.     "  liejoice 
with  trembling"  we  should;  but  the  trembling  would 
resemble  that  of  those  stars  which  quiver  because  they 
are  tixed  in  the  highest  heaven.     It  would  not  be  the 
tremulousness  of  alarm  and  agitation,  but  the  thrilling 
pulsations  of  a  joy  inarticulate,  unspeakable,  yet  so  full 
of  glory  that,  were  all  vintage  and  harvest  of  his  earthly 
hopes  withered   by   drought  or  drowned    by  floods — the 
Christian  could  still  look  up  with  eyes  suffused  but  bright 
with  gratitude  and  exclaim,  "Although  the  fig  tree  shall 
not  blossom, neither  shall  fruit  be  in  the  vines;  the  labor 
of  the  olive  shall  fail,  and  the  fields  shall  yield  no  meat ; 
the  flock  shall  be  cut  off  from   the  fold,  and  there  shall 
be  no  herd  in  the  stalls;  yet  will  I  rejoice  in  the  Lord,  I 
will  joy  in  the  God  of  my  salvation." 

The  knowledge  of  God.  From  this  knowledge,  love 
for  God  must  spring  up  in  the  soul;  for  "  he  who  loveth 
not,  knoweth  not  God."  And  this  love  is  the  second 
element  in  that  sublime  joy  of  which  I  am  speaking. 

Our  miseries  arise  from  our  errors;  and  to  nothing  is 
man  more  blind  than  to  his  own  happiness.  The  case 
in  our  text  is  sad.  Our  hearts  sink  at  the  very  descrip- 
tion of  prospects  thus  darkened  and  dreary ;  and  we 
wonder  at  the  calm  triumphant  joy  of  the  prophet  in 
the  midst  of  this  desolation.     But  are  we  Christians  ? 


106  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

Where  is  our  faith,  when  this  superiority  to  earth] y  joy 
seems  to  us  so  incredible?  Fig  trees,  olives,  vines,  fields, 
flocks,  herds, — is  the  soul  then,  dependant  on  these 
things  ?  And  are  we  yet  to  be  cured  of  the  folly  of  him 
who  supposed  that  in  his  barns,  where  he  had  stored 
away  food  for  his  cattle  and  horses,  he  could  also  garner 
up  goods  for  his  soul? 

Such  are  our  ignorance  and  infatuation.  Such  is  the 
error  as  to  our  wants  which  keeps  us  always  occupied 
about  superficial  necessities,  while  we  overlook  those 
which  are  deepest  and  essential.  And  hence  the  mistake 
in  all  our  projects  of  happiness; — each  man  adding  his 
infallible  plan  to  the  two  hundred  and  eighty-eight 
schemes  proposed  by  the  ancient  philosophers ; — and 
each  man,  after  succeeding  in  his  plan,  confessing  it  to 
be  a  failure; — Solomon,  who  tried  all  plans,  pronouncing 
"all  vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit." 

My  friends,  God  is  happy,  because  he  is  Love.  God  is 
supremely,  absolutely  happy,  because  he  is  the  essential, 
uncreated,  absolute  Love.  Our  hearts  are  formed  to  love 
this  God,  to  find  all  their  boundless  affections  delighting 
themselves  in  this  God.  And  in  such  a  Being  the  heart 
may  well  find  compensation  for  the  loss  of  all  earthly 
good.     Loving  him,  and  assured  of  his  love,  it  must  be 

"  Too  blest 
To  mourn  creation's  obsequies." 

Whether  it  rests  with  us  to  love,  I  will  not  undertake 
to  decide.  It  does  however,  rest  with  us  what  to  love  ; 
and  it  is  the  very  essence  of  love  to  find  happiness  in  its 
object.  To  give  our  hearts  to  objects  unworthy  of  them, 
to  make  these  objects  indispensable  to  us — this  is  at  once 
the  great  error,  and  sin,  and  misery  of  the  world.  On 
the  other  hand,  to  love  God  ;  to  hear  him  say,  "  My  son, 
give  me  thy  heart,"  and  to  make  this  Being,  this  adora- 
ble Saviour,  the  object  of  our  supreme  affection,  our 
portion,  our  wealth,  all  our  ambition — behold  the  happi- 
ness of  heaven;  and  behold  a  joy  which  is  not  only  un- 
troubled but  increased  by  the  wreck  and  decay  of  every- 
thing on  earth. 

Not  only  is  it  impossible  to  exhaust  the  whole  heart 


Joy  in  the  Lord.  107 


on  material  things,  but  there  is  no  created  thing  which 
can  be  loved  so  as  to  be  essential  to  our  happiness  with- 
out restlessness  and  pain.  It  is  in  loving  God  that  the 
bliss  and  perfection  of  the  soul  begin  on  earth  and  are 
consummated  in  heaven.  Pure  love  for  God  seeks  no  other 
reward  than  that  found  in  loving  him.  And  as  in  loving 
things  gross  and  sensual,  the  soul  is  debased  and  made 
like  those  things,  so  in  loving  God  it  becomes  like  God 
in  purity  and  felicity.  The  soul  can  be  made  perfect 
only  in  this  love.  In  loving  earth  wre  become  earth  ;  in 
loving  God  we  become  "partakers  of  the  divine  nature." 

Love  to  God.  Nor  let  any  one  tell* me  that  this  senti- 
ment, this  delightful  complacency  in  such  a  Being  is 
something  romantic  and  visionary.  Alas  for  us,  if  we 
are  thus  ignorant.  Visionary  !  Romantic  !  Would,  then 
that  we  were  all  visionary  and  romantic.  But  no,  and 
again,  no;  never  was  attachment  more  rational;  and 
never,  too,  was  there  attachment  which,  by  all  the  tests 
of  love,  more  nobly  vindicated  its  sincerity  and  power. 
Love  seen  in  the  choice  of  the  soul ;  which  gathers  all 
earthly  things  into  one  aggregate  and,  trampling  them 
in  the  dust,  ascends  to  God — exclaiming  "Whom  have  I 
in  heaven  but  thee,  and  there  is  none  upon  earth  that  I 
desire  besides  thee."  Love  which  delights  itself  habit- 
ually, instinctively  in  the  Lord;  when  alone,  surrendering 
itself  to  the  most  delicious  intercourse  with  him;  and 
amid  the  tumult  of  business,  still  carrying  within  mem- 
ories of  that  communion.  Oh,  how  much  dearer  than 
all  which  the  world  can  supply.  Love  which  "thirsts 
for  God,  for  the  living  God;'7  feeling  that  with  him, 
wildernesses  and  frightful  deserts  would  blossom  as  a 
garden,  that,  without  him  heaven  itself  would  be  only 
a  scene  of  melancholy  and  fatiguing  splendor.  A  love 
which  finds  its  glory  and  happiness  in  God's  glory  and 
happiness.  That  whatever  becomes  of  me,  he  is  and 
must  forever  be  happy — that  he  is  and  must  be  forever 
glorified — how  precious  are  these  thoughts,  what  light 
and  music  do  they  breathe  into  the  heart.  In  fine,  a  love 
which  expects  happiness  only  from  God;  a  love  which 
can  keep  the  mind  tranquil  and  serene  when  bereft  of  all 
earthly  comforts;  which  finds  "him  sweetest  when  the 


193  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

world  is  bitterest;"  which  tastes  more  of  his  preciousness 
when  all  other  precious  things  are  withdrawn ;  and  which 
shedding  freshness  and  greenness  into  the  soul  when  all 
outward  hopes  and  joys  are  smitten  and  withered  like 
grass, — causes  it  to  exclaim  with  the  prophet,  "Although 
the  fig  tree  shall  not  blossom,  neither  shall  fruit  be  in  the 
vine ;  the  labor  of  the  olive  shall  fail,  and  the  fields  shall 
yield  no  meat;  the  flock  shall  be  cut  off  from  the  fold, 
and  there  shall  be  no  herd  in  the  stalls;  yet  will  I  rejoice 
in  the  Lord,  I  will  joy  in  the  God  of  my  salvation." 

The  knowledge  and  love  of  God  must  produce  harmo- 
ny with  God,  and  from  this  harmony  flows  the  joy  which 
I  am  attempting  to  describe. 

The  Christian  is  said  to  "  have  rejoicing  in  himself 
alone  and  not  in  another,"  because — his  will  being  in 
sympathy  with  the  divine  will,  and  his  heart  in  sympathy 
with  the  heart  of  God — his  happiness,  like  that  of  God, 
is  beyond  the  reach  of  all  changes  and  alternations.  No 
inferior  exercises  of  religion  can  thus  enrich  the  heart. 
Hopes,  tender  meltings  at  the  first  view  of  a  crucified 
Saviour,  are  feeble  and  wavering;  but  when  his  soul  is 
established  and  settled  in  unison  with  God,  and  moves  in 
harmony  with  him,  the  Christian  exclaims,  "  My  heart 
is  fixed,  0  God,  my  heart  is  fixed.  I  will  sing  and  give 
praise.  Awake  up  my  glory,  awake  psaltery  and  harp, 
I  myself  will  awake  early.  I  will  praise  thee,  0  Lord, 
among  the  people;  I  will  sing  unto  thee  among  the 
nations;  for  thy  mercy  is  great  unto  the  heavens,  and 
thy  truth  unto  the  clouds.  Be  thou  exalted  0  God, 
above  the  heavens ;  let  thy  glory  be  above  all  the  earth." 
His  joy  then  becomes  firm,  immovable  as  the  eternal 
throne  itself. 

"Thy  will  be  done  on  earth,  as  it  is  done  in  heaven;" 
in  this  prayer  Jesus  reveals  the  secret  of  all  happiness. 
Without  this  concert  with  God,  heaven  could  be  no  hea- 
ven to  us;  wearisome  would  be  eternity  with  its  "forced 
hallelujahs."  But  this  concord  established,  heaven  is 
already  ours.  We  shall  be  no  longer  at  the  sport  and 
mercy  of  events;  we  will  view  all  vicissitudes  with  a 
tranquil  eye,  because  there  is  harmony  between  the  di- 
vine mind  and  our  minds.     We  shall  no  more  be  over- 


Joy  in  the  Lord.  199 


whelmed  by  afflictions  ;  under  the  most  crushing  blows 
the  same  rod  which  smites  will  infuse  balm  into  the 
wound;  celestial  comforts  will  delight  our  souls;  be- 
cause our  chastisements  are  designed  to  make  us  par- 
takers of  the  di  viae  holiness,  and  there  is  harmony  be- 
tween the  perfection  of  God  and  our  desires  after  perfec- 
tion. Lastly,  God,  as  I  have  said,  is  happy  in  himself. 
The  whole  creation — the  beauty  of  the  earth,  the  gran- 
deur of  the  ocean,  the  visible  music  and  glory  of  the  hea- 
vens, the  sun,  the  moon,  the  stars,  men,  angels,  archan- 
gels— adds,  can  add  nothing  to  his  infinite  beatitude. 
JS"or  could  the  extinction  of  the  whole  universe — of  the 
earth,  the  sea,  the  sky,  of  sun,  moon,  stars — of  men  and 
angels  and  archangels — deduct  anything  from  it.  And 
as  there  is  harmony  between  him  and  our  souls  we  shall 
share  in  this  happiness;  there  will  be  harmony  between 
his  felicity  and  ours.  Our  joy  will  be  derived  from  the 
same  sources — from  his  perfections,  his  works,  his  provi- 
dence, his  government,  his  sovereignty,  above  all  from 
the  amazing  scheme  of  redemption.  As  God  is  his  own 
happiness;  so  we — yet  not  we,  but  Christ  dwelling 
in  us— shall  be  our  happiness.  Nor  in  the  darkest  hour 
will  anything  be  able  to  damp  a  blessedness  which  is 
so  high  above  the  earth,  so  full  of  heaven.  Still,  amidst 
all  outward  dearth  and  ruin,  the  Christian  will  feel  that 
"the  statutes  of  the  Lord  are  right,  rejoicing  the  heart ;" 
he  will  repose  with  delight  in  a  covenant  God.  "How 
precious  aiso" — (such  will  be  his  adoring  reflections) — 
"how  precious  also  are  thy  thoughts  unto  me,  0  God, 
how  great  is  the  sum  of  them;  if  I  should  count  them 
they  are  more  in  number  than  the  sand.  When  I  awake, 
I  am  still  with  thee;"  "My  soul  shall  be  satisfied  as 
with  marrow  and  fatness,  and  my  mouth  shall  praise 
thee  with  joyful  lips,  when  I  remember  thee  upon  my 
bed,  and  meditate  upon  thee  in  the  night  watches;" 
"Thy  statutes  have  been  my  song  in  the  house  of  my 
pilgrimage;"  "  Weeping  may  endure  for  a  night,  but  joy 
cometh  in  the  morning;"  "The  Lord  will  command 
his  loving  kindness  in  the  day-time,  and  in  the  night 
his  song  shall  be  with  me,  and  my  prayer  unto  the  God 
of  my  life;"  "Although  the  fig  tree  shall  not  blossom, 
neither  shall  fruit  be  in  the  vine;  the  labor  of  the  olive 


200  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

shall  fail,  and  the  fields  shall  yield  no  meat ;  the  flock 
shall  be  cut  off  from  the  fold  and  there  shall  be  no  herd 
in  the  stalls;  yet  will  I  rejoice  in  the  Lord,  I  will  joy  in 
the  God  of  my  salvation." 

II.  I  have  dwelt  longer  than  I  intended  upon  onr  first 
article.  I  confess  that  I  know  too  little  of  this  rejoicing; 
yet  the  theme  is  delightful  to  me.  Having  defined  this 
joy,  I  wish  now  to  say  a  word  or  two  as  to  its  importance. 
And  surely  this  topic  ought  to  require  no  other  argument 
than  that  which  the  text  presents. 

The  imagery  here  is,  of  course,  oriental  ;  and  it  is  a 
picture  of  unmitigated  famine  and  desolation.  The  fail- 
ure of  blossom  and  fruit  on  fi^ftree,  vine  and  olive  ;  these 
fields  all  sterile,  parched,  blackened  wastes;  these  lowing 
herds  and  bleating  folds  stricken  with  sudden  pestilence, 
filling  the  air  with  their  groans,  and  strewing  the  earth 
with  their  ruins; — amidst  such  soul -rending  spectacles 
the  heart,  left  to  itself,  must  sicken,  must  sink  into  gloom 
and  despondency.  But  the  prophet  anticipates  these 
ravages  without  consternation  or  dread.  His  life,  his 
truest,  highest  life  is  in  God;  it  is  nourished  and  built 
up,  not  by  bread,  but  by  faith,  by  love,  by  the  direct  com- 
munications which  Jesus  imparts  to  the  soul  as  the  vine 
infuses  its  own  life  into  the  branches.  As  1  before  said, 
it  is  because  our  faith  deserves  not  the  name,  that  the  joy 
seems  strange  and  wonderful  to  us.  For  al  1  which  drought 
or  plague  can  destroy  is  material  and  perishing,  but  the 
soul  is  spiritual  and  immortal. 

If,  as  Creator,  Gcd  clothes  the  grass  of  the  field  and 
satisfies  the  wants  of  every  living  thing,  shall  he  not,  as 
a  Father,  much  rather  breathe  life  and  strength  and  joy 
into  the  soul?  He  manifests  himself  gloriously  to  the 
world;  but  he  manifests  himself  to  those  who  love  him 
as  he  does  not  to  the  world.  Intimately  present  to  the 
created  spirit,  he  can  instil — he  does  instil  peace,  conso- 
lation, ineffable  blessedness,  a  joy  which  gives  "songs  in 
the  night,"  which  can  make  life  one  anthem;  can  cheer 
and  delight  the  soul  amid  universal  disaster  and  dismay; 
which  will  be  perfected  and  perpetuated  when  the  whole 
material  world  shall  have  perished.     The  imagery  in  our 


Joy  in  the  Lord.  201 


text  is  oriental,  but  there  is  nothing  oriental  in  the  great 
truths  it  teaches.  Public  calamities  and  distresses  are 
not  confined  to  the  East,  norto  the  fields.  Cities,  nations 
are  sometimes  swept  and  scourged  by  war,  pestilence, 
famine,  commercial  panic  and  desolation;  and  it  is  then 
that  the  Christian  feels — as  he  did  not,  could  not  feel  in 
prosperity — what  it  is  to  have  garnered  up  his  heart  and 
his  treasure  in  heaven,  what  it  is  to  have  his  life,  his  joy 
in  the  God  of  his  salvation.  The  language  before  us  does 
not  apply,  however,  only  to  public  calamities.  These  are 
rare,  and  we  are  then  sustained  by  the  sympathies  of  those 
around  us.  We  may  never  know  such  seasons,  but  there 
are  sorrows  we  all  must  know.  "  If  a  man  live  many  years 
and  rejoice  in  them  all,  yet  let  him  remember  the  days 
of  darkness,  for  they  shall  »be  many."  "  Man  is  born  un- 
to trouble;"  it  is  the  universal  indefeasible  inheritance. 
Afflictions  must  come,  the  furnace  must  be  entered,  waves 
and  billows  must  roll  over  us;  and  then,  it  is  only  this 
joy  in  the  Lord  which  can  sustain  and  cheer  us.  Patience, 
resignation,  submission — these  are  the  graces  generally 
recommended  in  the  house  of  mourning,  and  they  are 
noble  virtues;  but  there  is  something  nobler  provided  by 
the  Gospel.  It  is  joy — joy  in  the  God  of  our  salvation. 
Nor  for  my  part,  have  I  any  language  in  which  to  speak 
of  the  divine  efficacy  of  this  sublime  principle. 

Can  there  be  a  darker  hour  than  that  in  which  David 
wrote  the  ninety-fourth  Psalm?  Yet,  persecuted,  de- 
serted, bowed  down  by  his  own  sorrows  and.  the  afflictions 
of  Zion,  we  hear  him  exclaiming,  "Jn  the  multitude  of 
my  thoughts  within  me,  thy  comforts  delight  my  soul." 

I  asked  if  any  hour  can  be  darker  than  that  which  then 
oppressed  the  soul  of  the  Psalmist.  There  did  come, 
however,  a  darker  and  drearier  day  to  him.  It  was  when 
he  lay  upon  his  death  bed.  In  those  moments  of  weak- 
ness, pain,  decay,  we  need  sympathy  and  support,  and  we 
turn  instinctively  to  our  family  for  love  and  consolation. 
But  what  sharp  anguish  pierced  and  rent  all  his  soul,  as 
the  memories  of  his  own  blighted  hearth  and  home  broke 
in  bitterly  upon  him;  as  he  recalled  the  ingratitude  and 
violent  death  of  Absalom  ;  as  he  mused  upon  the  sins  and 
miseries  of  his  children   which    had    brought  his   grey 


202  Richard  Fuller  s  Sermons. 

hairs  with  sorrow  to  the  grave.  Yet  even  when  thus 
bowed  clown  heavily,  he  can  still  lift  his  fading  eyes  to 
God  as  his  satisfying  portion,  and  can  say,  "Although 
my  house  be  not  so  with  God,"  (not  so  as  I  had  wished, 
not  so  as  I  had  prayed,  not  so  as  I  had  hoped,)  "  yet  he 
hath  made  with  me  an  everlasting  covenant,  ordered  in 
all  things  and  sure;  for  this  is  all  my  salvation  and  all 
my  desire,  although  he  make  it  not  to  grow."  This  last 
'  although  '  is  the  most  touchingly  mournful  note  in  this 
bitter  Avail  of  sorrow.  It  implies  that  not  only  his  house 
but  his  heart  was  not  so  with  God.  Upon  examining  his 
spiritual  condition,  he  lamented  so  little  growth,  so  little 
enlargement.  His  soul  did  not  prosper  and  nourish,  nor 
did  sensible  religious  enjoyments  cheer  him  in  that  try- 
ing moment.  But  there  was  that,  out  of  himself  and 
high  above  all  his  griefs  and  defects  which  was  "so  with 
God" — so  firm,  so  immovable,  that  he  reposes  upon  it 
with  exulting  confidence.  The  everlasting  covenant 
could  never  fail.  Clouds  and  miseries  might  darken  all 
his  years;  the  mountains  might  depart  and  the  hills  be 
removed, but  the  kindness  of  his  Redeemer  would  not  de- 
part from  him,  neither  should  the  covenant  of  his  peace 
be  removed. 

There  is  one  other  view  in  which  the  value  of  religious 
joy  cannot  be  too  highly  estimated  ;  and  I  am  anxious  to 
urge  it,  because  it  is  generally  overlooked.  From  the 
context  we  find  that  our  prophet  was  at  first  filled  with 
fear  and  trembling  ;  and  that  his  joy  in  the  Lord  was 
not  only  a  source  of  consolation,  but  inspired  confidence 
and  strength.  And  this  is  the  truth  I  would  now  im- 
press upon  you. 

Had  I  time,  it  would  be  easy  to  show  that  joy  is  the 
life  of  any  pursuit;  that  the  mind,  sluggish  and  inert 
before,  feels  and  obeys  every  noble  impulse  when  buoyant 
with  happiness,  just  as  a  boat  which  imbedded  in  the 
sand  had  been  immovable  by  a  cable,  is  drawn  by  the 
feeblest  cord  when  afloat  upon  the  water.  It  is  not 
enough  to  give  your  child  a  profession  ;  he  must  have  a 
taste  for  it,  enthusiasm  in  it,  if  he  is  ever  to  be  distin- 
guished. In  the  profession  of  arms  what  a  difference  is 
there  between  two  men ;  one  instinct  with  martial  ardor, 


Joy  in  the  Lord.  203 


his  pulses  thrilling,  all  his  spirit  lifted  up  by  martial 
ambition,  bis  soul  kindling  with  the  stern  magnificent 
delights  of  war;*  the  other  equally  brave  but  discharg- 
ing bis  duties  only  under  a  sense  of  obligation,  and  long- 
ing for  the  repose  of  peace.  In  literature  what  a  differ- 
ence between  two  scholars;  one  fired  with  lofty  inspira- 
tions, glowing  with  thoughts  which  he  feels  "  posterity 
will  not  let  die;"  the  other  toiling  day  and  night  at  a 
weary,  irksome  task.  I  need  not  tell  you  which  of  these 
soldiers  will  be  a  hero;  which  of  these  students  will 
achieve  exalted  fame  in  letters. 

And,  now,  all  this  applies  even  more  emphatically  to 
the  Christian,  because  piety — far  more  than  any  earthly 
pursuit — requires  engagedness  of  heart.  As  I  have 
before  remarked,  the  economy  of  the  Gospel  is  an  econo- 
my of  joy.  Again  and  again  we  are  commanded  to  re- 
joice. In  short  "the  joy  of  the  Lord  is  our  strength." 
Without  this  joy  we  will  fail  to  commend  the  religion  of 
Jesus  to  others, — we  will  have  nothing  to  commend  ;  in- 
deed, we  will  injure  that  religion  ;  we  will  go  mourning 
and  cause  the  enemies  of  the  Gospel  to  say  continually 
to  us,  "  Where  is  now  your  God?"  Without  this  joy  our 
religion  will  have  nothing  to  recommend  it  to  ourselves; 
it  will  be  only  a  round  of  heartless  forms  and  exercises. 
The  joy  of  the  Lord  is  the  Christian's  strength  when  called, 
to  make  sacrifices  for  Christ  and  for  truth.  It  is  his 
strength  in  overcoming  the  world.  He  only  will  triumph 
over  the  pleasures  of  sin,  who  can  oppose  to  them  the 
greater  pleasures  of  piety ;  who, — when  tempted  by  the 
seductions  of  the  passions — can  ascend  to  God  and  find 
fullness  of  joy  in  him.  In  all  our  devotions  this  joy 
must  be  the  life  and  light  of  the  soul.  The  closet,  the 
sacred  pages,  the  sanctuary,  the  supper — he  who  rejoices 
in  the  God  of  his  salvation  experiences  inexplicable 
peace,  divine  consolations,  unspeakable  assurances  and 
foretastes  of  glory  ministered  to  his  spirit  through  these 
heaven -appointed  resources. 

And  what  shall  I  more  say?  This  joy  is  the  principle 
which  animates  the  Christian  in  all  the  duties  of  active 


*"  Gaudia  ceitaminis."— Tacitus. 


204  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

life.  It  is  liis  strength  and  victory  when  he  conies  to  die. 
I  honor  the  man  who  seeks  to  do  good  because  it  is  his 
duty;  but  to  be  a  burning  and  a  shining  light,  there 
must  be  a  burning  heart,  a  soul  rejoicing  in  the  service  of 
Jesus.  It  is  a  noble  spectacle  to  behold  a  Christian  calm- 
ly meeting  the  last  struggle,  enduring  with  patience  the 
pains  of  a  protracted  illness,  and  resigning  himself  tran- 
quilly to  the  necessity  of  dying.  But  is  it  thus  a  Chris- 
tian ought  to  die  ?  Oh,  no.  It  is  the  privilege  of  every 
child  of  God  to  have  a  desire  to  depart  and  be  with  Christ 
which  is  far  better;  to  long  with  holy  impatience  for  the 
Eedeemer  of  his  soul ;  to  close  bis  eyes  upon  the  whole 
world  and  feel  the  sublime  attractions  of  eternity;  to  ex- 
claim, "My  soul  longeth,  yea  even  fainteth  for  the  courts 
of  the  Lord,  my  heart  and  my  flesh  crieth  out  for  the 
living  God,  when  shall  I  come  and  appear  before  God?" 
"  Come  Lord  Jesus,  come  quickly."  It  is  the  privilege 
of  every  child  of  God  not  only  to  rejoice  when  fig  tree 
and  vine  and  olive  wither,  but  when  the  whole  universe  is 
receding  from  his  vision.  Then,  when  flesh  and  heart 
shall  be  failing,  it  will  be  your  privilege,  Christian,  your 
consolation  and  joy,  to  look  up  and  see  the  heavens 
opened,  to  triumph  in  an  Almighty  Saviour  who  is  the 
strength  of  your  heart  and  your  portion  forever,  to  re- 
joice in  the  Lord,  to  exult  with  transports  ineffable  and 
full  of  glory  in  the  God  of  your  salvation. 

Men  and  brethren,  the  truths  to  which  you  have  lis- 
tened this  morning  address  themselves  to  three  classes  of 
people,  who  ought  to  draw  very  different  conclusions 
from  them. 

The  first  class  is  composed  of  those  who  not  only  are 
strangers  to  this  joy,  but  who  treat  the  whole  subject 
with  indifference,  if  not  with  contempt.  If  these  people 
were  infidels,  their  conduct  might  be  explained;  but  they 
profess  to  believe  the  Bible,  they  reverence  the  Bible. — 
How  strange,  then,  how  astonishing  and  infatuated  their 
course.  My  friends,  have  you  no  desire  to  know  that  God 
in  whom  you  live  and  move  and  have  your  being,  with 
whom  your  relations  are  so  intimate  that,  compared  with 
him  all  earthly  objects,  those  nearest  and  dearest  to  you 
are  strangers  and  at  a  distance  ?     Have  you  no  wish  to 


Joy  in  Ilif  Lord.  205 


love  thai  God  who  is  the  absolute,  infinite  essential  Love, 
and  who  seeks  to  win  your  heart  by  such  proofs  of  his 
love  for  you?  While  all  holy  intelligences  find  their 
bliss  in  harmony  with  God,  can  you  persist  in  enmity  to 
him?  "Whoever  hardened  himself  against  God  and 
prospered  ?"  Can  you  consent  to  find  all  your  felicity  in 
this  world,  and  to  be  "without God  ?  '  Without  a  friend, 
without  human  sympathy,  without  a  home — this  would 
be  dreary  enough.  But  "without  God!" — without  him 
who  only  is  the  source  of  all  life,  peace,  strength, 
victory,  glory ;  to  be  bereft  of  light,  his  love,  his  com- 
passion, his  grace,  his  salvation; — what  an  inward  cen- 
tral desolateness  this.  Are  you  willing  to  live  thus 
bereaved  and  lonely,  and  to  die  cut  off  from  that  joy  in 
the  Lord  which  alone  can  disarm  death  of  its  terrors  and 
make  you  more  than  conqueror  over  death  and  hell  ? 
Can  you,  will  you,  make  such  a  choice,  and  force  your 
way  into  eternity  undone,  ruined,  wretched,  blighted, 
condemned  forever? — forever  wilfully,  wantonly  severed 
from  that  joy  in  the  Lord  which  is  the  beatific  glory  and 
perfection  of  heaven  ?  Would  that  I  knew  what  to  say 
to  you;  but  I  do  not.  Mortals,  sinners,  infatuated  slaves 
of  the  world,  why  will  you  die?  Who  hath  bewitched 
you  ?  What  fatal  spell  is  this  which  stupifies  your  minds  ? 
— How  is  it  that  you  suffer  all  that  is  noble  and  rational 
in  your  nature  to  be  thus  bound  and  imbruited  by  the 
sorcery  of  your  lusts  and  passions  ? 

But  I  fear  my  expostulations,  my  entreaties,  my  tears 
are  all  in  vain.  I  leave  you  a  spectacle  for  angels  to  gaze 
at  in  grief  and  amazement. 

The  second  class  consists  of  those  who  profess  to  be 
Christians;  but  whose  religion  has  never  afforded  them 
any  of  those  consolations  which  give  beauty  for  ashes, 
the  oil  of  joy  for  mourning,  and  the  garments  of  praise 
for  the  spirit  of  heaviness.  And  to  this  class  our  subject 
is  full  of  solemn  instruction. 

Not  that  there  may  not  be  sincere  piety  with  but  little 
sensible  delight.  The  promises  of  salvation  are  not  to 
joy,  but  to  faith,  to  self  denial,  to  obedience.  "If  any 
man  will  come  after  me,  let  him  deny  himself  and  take 
up  his  cross  and  follow  me."     The   experience  of  many 

9 


206  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

who  were  models  of  devotion,  whose  whole  lives  adorned 
the  Gospel,  and  who  died  in  the  triumphs  of  a  full  assur- 
ance, has  resembled  the  prophet's  day  which  was 
"neither  clear  nor  dark,  but  at  the  evening  time  was 
light."  Indeed,  there  is  the  highest  proof  of  sincerity  in 
a  loyalty  which  is  still  faithful  and  constant,  although 
there  are  none  of  those  joys  which  recruit  our  zeal  and 
reinforce  our  wearied  virtue.  Certainly  that  Christian 
gives  most  glory  to  God,  who,  when  walking  in  darkness 
and  seeing  no  light,  still  stays  himself  upon  the  Lord, 
and  says,  "Though  he  slay  me  yet  will  1  trust  him." — 
Let  such  be  not  "weary  in  well-doing,  for  in  due  season 
they  shall  reap  if  they  faint  not."  "Light  is  sown  for 
the  righteous,  and  gladness  for  the  upright  in  heart." — 
It  is  good  for  a  man  to  hope  and  patiently  to  wait  till  the 
day  break  and  the  shadows  flee  away. 

But  if  there  be  never  any  consolation;  if  our  religion 
be  wholly  the  fruit  of  conviction,  of  fear,  of  stern  com- 
pulsion, of  duty  with  no  relish  and  refreshment,  the  case 
is  very  suspicious.  For  can  this  be  the  kingdom  of  God 
which  "is  righteousness  and  peace  and  joy  in  the  Holy 
Ghost  ?  "  And  if  we  can  rest  satisfied  under  such  be- 
reavements; if  they  do  not  alarm  and  afflict  us;  if  we  do 
not  earnestly  seek  by  prayer  and  obedience  to  secure  the 
joys  which  God  promises  to  his  children;  then,  indeed, 
every  symptom  in  our  malady  is  most  portentous. 

It  is,  however,  above  all,  to  those  who  have  tasted  this 
happiness,  but  who  mourn  its  loss;  whose  prayer  is  "Ee- 
store  unto  us  the  joys  of  thy  salvation  ;  or  who  lament  that 
they  experience  so  little  of  it; — it  is  to  these  that  our 
subject  applies  most  directly  and  emphatically.  And  to 
these, — placing  myself  among  them, — let  me  speak  plain- 
ly and  faithfully  in  finishing  this  discourse. 

My  brethren,  it  is  not  often  that  we  have  to  confess  our- 
selves vanquished  by  the  objections  which  the  world 
urges  against  our  sermons;  but  to-day  I  am  compelled  to 
make  such  a  confession.  For,  while  I  have  been  preach- 
ing about  this  sublime  happiness,  what  have  those  who 
know  us  and  meet  us  daily  been  secretly  saying  ?  Shall  I 
tell  you?  They  have  been  saying,  This  is  all  very  fine, 
but  it  is  a  fancy  sketch.     This  joy  in  the  Lord  would  be 


Joy  in  the  Lord.  207 

indeed  a  priceless  treasure,  but  who  possesses  it?  Where 
are  the  Christians  whose  lives  Bhew  that  it  sustains  and 
cheers  them? 

Now  these  humiliating  reproaches  we  must  all  ac- 
knowledge to  be  only  too  well  founded,  nay  to  be  quite 
unanswerable.  And  why  is  this?  Why  are  we  so  desti- 
tute of  this  joy,  the  privation  of  which  is  a  far  sorer  pen- 
ury than  any  outward  poverty?  To  answer  this  question 
we  need  only  examine  our  own  lives,  and  observe  how 
much  they  are  under  the  empire  of  the  senses  and  pas- 
sions. Each  professes,  indeed,  to  believe  that  religion 
is  the  great  thing,  the  one  thing  needful;  but  our 
practical  estimate — our  cares  and  toils  and  sacrifices  speak 
a  very  different  language.  "!Seek  first  the  kingdom  of 
God  and  his  righteousness,  and  all  these  things  shall  be 
added  unto  you" — this  is  God's  plan.  Our  plan  is  just 
the  reverse;  it  is  first  to  secure  the  objects  we  covet,  leav- 
ing religion  to  follow  and  fall  in  as  it  can.  Hence  we 
are  what  we  are.  Our  feelings,  tastes,  recollections,  im- 
aginations are  earthly;  and  our  pietyis  the  submission  of 
the  mind  and  the  conscience,  not  the  love  of  the  heart,  not 
the  holy  ardors  of  a  soul  united  to  God  by  the  dearest  in- 
timacies, merging,  losing  itself  in  him,  and  finding  all  its 
desires  not  only  satisfied  but  anticipated  by  the  very  pow- 
er of  delighting  itself  in  his  fullness. 

Behold  the  reason  why  this  joy  is  such  an  exile  from 
our  bosoms.  The  barrenness  upon  us  is  not  that  of  the 
fields,  but  of  our  souls.  Instead  of  finding  in  God  a 
happiness  which  indemnifies  us  for  outward  losses,  we 
are  well  reconciled  to  spiritual  famine  if  we  can  secure 
external  prosperity.  And,  now,  having  detected  the 
cause  of  this  evil,  let  me  beseech  you, — if  your  happiness, 
your  usefulness,  the  health  and  prosperity  of  your  souls 
be  precious  in  your  sight, — at  once  to  apply  the  remedy. 
And  as  the  disease  is  chrouic,  the  cure  must  be  chronic 
also. 

Do  we  know  but  little  of  this  sublime  happiness  which 
tilled  the  soul  of  the  prophet?  It  is  because  this  happi- 
ness is  the  "joy  of  salvation  j"  and  salvation  occupies  so 
little  of  our  thoughts  and  cares.  It  is  because  the  pas- 
sions leave  us  so  little  time  and  taste  for  heavenly  things. 


208  Richard  Fuller  s  Sermons. 

Apply  the  remedy.  The  pardon  of  sin,  the  appropriation 
of  Christ's  righteousness,  the  peace  of  a  soul  reposing  in 
the  promises  of  Eternal  Truth,  the  certainty  that  all 
things  are  working  together  for  our  good,  the  holy  re- 
wards of  obedience,  the  consciousness  of  increasing  holi- 
ness, the  sweetness  of  communion  with  the  Redeemer,  the 
anticipations  of  heaven,  the  earnests  and  foretastes  of 
heaven, — what  things  are  these,  how  infinitely  superior 
to  all  earthly  gratifications.  Let  us  appreciate  these 
inestimable  blessings.  Salvation,  so  great  salvation, — 
let  us  seek  daily,  hourly  to  know  more  of  the  joys  of  a 
free,  full,  present,  perfect  salvation.  This,  this  alone  is 
worthy  of  our  cares,  toils,  prayers,  sacrifices. 

Do  we  know  but  little  of  this  sublime,  spiritual  hap- 
piness? It  is  because  this  happiness  springs  from  faith, 
it  is  rejoicing  in  the  Lord  ;  and  our  souls  are  debased  by 
the  love  of  the  world  and  the  things  of  the  world.  Apply 
the  remedy.  Such  a  world;  a  world  whose  maxims  and 
examples  war  against  the  soul;  a  world  of  which  the 
Holy  Spirit  warns  us  that,  "If  any  man  love  the  world, 
the  love  of  the  Father  is  not  in  him ;" — can  we  forget 
that  bright  world  to  which  we  are  passing  and  allow  this 
present  evil  world  to  fascinate  us  with  its  charms,  to 
sweep  us  along  like  its  own  giddy  votaries,  who  know  no 
other  God  and  have  tasted  no  other  joys? 

Lastly,  even  when  we  have  come  out  from  the  world, 
after  we  have  seen  its  general  vanity  and  insufficiency, 
and  have  relinquished  it, — how  constantly  do  we  carry 
a  portion  of  the  world  with  us  into  our  religion ;— each 
one  indemnifying  himself  for  the  general  renunciation  by 
some  darling  passion,  by  some  object  which  is  only  the 
more  dangerous  because,  (while  in  itself  not  sinful.)  it 
monopolizes  all  the  powers  once  shared  by  other  objects, 
and  thus, — by  absorbing  our  cares  and  tastes  aud 
thoughts — makes  itself  the  centre  and  circle  of  our  devo- 
tion, becomes  our  god,  and  leaves  no  room  for  the  God 
of  heaven.  This,  this  is  the  great  reason  why  celestial 
joy  is  not  ours ;  and  to  this  most  insidious  evil  let  us 
apply  the  remedy.  Let  us  not  foolishly  think  to  destroy 
our  passions ;  God  has  bestowed  upon  us  few  nobler  en- 
dowments; and  their  extinction  would  be  a  suicide  more 


Joy  in  the  Lord.  209 


criminal  and  insane  than  that  of  the  body.  We  cannot 
extirpate  our  passions.  Those  who  have  attempted  this 
in  cloisters  and  monasteries,  furnish  mournful  exempli- 
fications of  the  consequences  which  must  follow,  when 
men  prescribe  to  themselves  virtues  not  designed  for  men. 
But  let  us  educate  cur  passions.  But  let  us  elevate  our 
passions  to  their  true  objects.  But  let  us  inflame  our 
passions  by  the  prospect  of  riches,  honors,  pleasures, 
spiritual  and  eternal. 

Since  it  has  pleased  God  to  place  us  in  the  midst  of 
such  an  economy,  let  us  not  seek  to  wrench  our  hearts 
from  objects  which  ought  to  be  dear  to  us.  But  let  us 
school  these  hearts.  Let  us  ever  remember  that  no 
earthly  object  is  essential  to  our  happiness.  Let  us  never 
forget  that  to  all  earth-born  objects,  however  endeared 
and  cherished,  we  are  united  only  by  ties  which  each 
hour  is  dissolving.  And  if,  if  we  must  love  something 
supremely,  as  we  must; — if  some  object  must  absorb  our 
souls,  and  fill  our  hearts,  and  become  the  ruling  passion, 
strong  in  life  and  stronger  in  death,  and  be  all  our  de- 
sire and  all  our  bliss my  soul,  dost  thou  not  know 

that  object?  Hast  thou  not  tasted  the  preciousness  of 
Him  who  is  "the  chiefest  among  ten  thousand  and  al- 
together lovely,"  who  alone  is  worthy  of  such  a  treasure 
as  a  human  heart,  and  who  will  repay  our  love  with  an 
atfection  boundless, changeless, everlasting?  0  Christian, 
love  him;  love  him  supremely;  make  him  your  ruling 
passion.  Venture,  venture  farther  and  farther,  wade 
deeper  and  deeper,  till  you  are  swallowed  up  in  the 
abysses  of  that  Jove  "which  passeth  knowledge." 

My  brethren,  my  beloved  brethren,  shall  any  mortal 
thing  dispute  our  hearts  with  Jesus  ?  And  possessed  of 
his  love,  what  is  any  earthly  privation  ?  What  a  gain 
would  be  the  loss  of  the  whole  world,  if  thus  our  hearts 
were  enlarged  to  make  room  for  him  ;  if  bereft  of  all,  we 
were  thus  taught  to  ciing  only  the  more  closely  to  that 
ever  lovely,  loving  and  beloved  Redeemer. 

Enter  into  these  truths,  my  dear  hearers,  and  you  will 
not  be  without  spiritual  pleasures.  You  will  find  wis- 
dom's ways  to  be  ways  of  pleasantness  and  all  her  paths 
peace.     !Not  only  hereafter,  and  for  keeping  God's  com- 


210  Richard  Fuller  s  Sermons. 

mandments — but  now,  and"  Mi"  keeping  his  command- 
ments you  will  reap  "  great  reward."  You  will  rejoice 
evermore.  You  will  "have  your  rejoicing  in  yourself 
alone,  and  not  in  another."  United  to  Jesus  by  a  vital 
faith,  knowing  him,  loving  him,  living  in  harmony  with 
him,  all  earthly  joys  will  be  increased,  the  sting  will  be 
so  plucked  out  of  all  earthly  griefs  that  you  will  be  "as 
sorrowful,  yet  always  rejoicing ;"  and — mounting  to  God 
— gathering  all  your  hopes  and  confidences  and  concen- 
trating them  in  him — exulting  that  the  universe  contains 
such  a  treasure,  and  in  the  full  triumphant  assurance  that 
this  treasure  is  yours  forever — you  will  exclaim  with  the 
sacred  rapture  of  the  prophet,  "Although  the  fig  tree 
shall  not  blossom,  neither  shall  fruit  be  in  the  vine;  the 
labor  of  the  olive  shall  fail,  and  the  fields  shall  yield  no 
meat;  the  flock  shall  be  cut  off  from  the  fold,  and  there 
shall  be  no  herds  in  the  stalls;  yet  I  will  rejoice  in  the 
Lord,  I  will  joy  in  the  God  of  my  salvation." 


Mercy  Remembered  in  Wrath.  211 


Sermon  ffUiciftft* 


MERCY    REMEMBERED    IN 
WRATH.* 

"  O  Lord,  in  Wrath  remember  Mercy"— Habakkuk  iii :  2. 

THERE  are  some  duties  which  we  never  feel  until  our 
souls  are  bowed  in  humility;  and  the  convictions  of 
which  will  be  erased  by  the  incessant  cares  of  life,  its 
restless  urgencies  and  activities,  unless  we  are  frequently 
reminded  of  them.  They  resemble  signs  and  notices 
traced  on  our  pavements,  which  we  can  read  only  when 
we  look  down,  and  which  must  be  often  swept  and  some- 
times renewed,  or  they  will  be  entirely  obliterated. 

Of  these  duties  the  most  important  is  the  practical 
recognition  of  God,  as  the  inspector  and  controller  of  all 
things,  the  supreme  moral  governor  of  all  men.  God  is 
so  great,  and  we  are  so  insignificant,  that  it  is  preposter- 
ous to  suppose  he  observes  our  thoughts  and  actions, — 
such  is  the  atheism  of  some  men  ;  but  nothing  can  be 
more  insincere  than  this  pretext.  For — not  to  speak  of 
the  impiety  concealed  under  an  affectation  of  humility, 
which  makes  Jehovah  such  an  one  as  ourselves  and  ex- 
cludes him  from  the  management  of  the  earth — let  these 
libertines  be  betrayed  into  a  single  good  deed  and  they 
at  once  regard  God  as  their  debtor  and  seem  to  think  that 
he  has  nothing  to  do  but  to  notice  and  reward  this  little 
parenthetical   accident   in  a  whole  life  of  sin.     Others 


*  Preached  on  Thursday,  September  26,  1861,  a  Day  appointed 
by  the  President  of  the  United  States  for  National  Fasting,  Hu- 
miliation and  Prayer. 


212  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

deny  that  God  can  ever  be  angry  with  us  for  our  actions, 
since  sin  is  never  against  him  but  for  him.  "Shall  there 
be  evil  in  a  city,  and  the  Lord  hath  not  done  it?"  "Both 
Herod  and  Pontius  Pilate,  with  the  Gentiles,  and  the 
people  of  Israel,  were  gathered  together,  to  do  whatsoever 
thy  hand,  and  thy  counsel  determined  before  to  be  done." 
"Why  then  doth  he  yet  find  fault,  for  who  hath  resisted 
his  will?"  I  remember  but  a  single  passage  in  all  the 
Scriptures,  in  which  God  shuts  up  the  mouth  of  one  of 
his  creatures  who  pleads  with  him,  and  it  is  the  over- 
whelming rebuke  administered  to  an  incorrigible  scoffer, 
who  had  insulted  Jehovah  ivith  this  very  blasphemy, — 
to  whom  the  Apostle  says,  "  Nay,  but  who  art  thou,  0 
man,  that  repliest  against  God  ?" 

The  words  to  which  I  have  invited  your  meditations 
this  morning  speak  of  God's  wrath  for  sin.  On  this 
solemn  day  we  are  summoned  to  hear  not  only  "  the  rod," 
but  "who  hath  appointed  it.'  It  was  a  season  of  suffer- 
ing and  rebuke,  of  fierce  indignation  and  fearful  omen, 
when  the  prophet  uttered  the  text.  Upon  such  a  day, 
we  have  assembled  in  this  temple,  and  I  know  no  lan- 
guage, no  supplication,  more  exactly  suited  to  our  condi- 
tion than  that  I  have  read,  "  0  Lord,  in  wrath  remember 
mercy." 

I.  Habakkuk  uttered  this  prayer  for  the  nation. — 
Tempests  and  hurricanes  try  the  strength  of  a  ship,  and 
disclose  its  leaks.  And  as  a  people  Ave  come  before  God 
in  a  time  of  terrible  calamity,  when  everything  in  our 
political  organization  is  strained  and  staggering  and 
threatening  shipwreck;  when  the  noble  vessel  which, 
freighted  with  such  rich  and  glorious  hopes,  once  rode 
triumphantly  on  her  course,  is  quivering  from  keelson  to 
crosstrees,  is  smitten  by  blasts  and  lashed  by  raging  bil- 
lows that  may  well  cause  the  heart  of  the  stoutest  pilot 
to  quail  and  his  face  to  gather  paleness.  Thirty  years 
ago  there  appeared  on  the  skirts  of  our  horizon  a  cloud 
no  bigger  than  a  man's  hand.  There  it  has  since  hung 
portentously,  mustering  gloomy  elements  of  destruction, 
ever   and  anon    shooting  baleful    fires,    muttering   deep 


Mercy  Remembered  in  Wrath.  213 

though  distant  thunders.  And  now  the  heavens  are  all 
black  with  clouds,  and  a  storm  is  discharging  itself  upon 
us,  sweeping  like  a  tropical  tornado,  mocking  to  scorn  all 
human  skill  and  power  in  its  fierceness  and  its  fury. 
Such  is  our  condition.  And  the  first  truth  suggested  by 
the  text  and  the  occasion  is,  that  as  a  nation  we  are 
guilty,  and  God  is  angry  with  us  for  our  sins. 

While  partisan  politics  should  be  scrupulously  excluded 
from  the  pulpit,  the  duties  of  states,  rulers,  legislators, 
are  a  very  different  thing,  and  belong  to  religion.  In 
the  teachings  of  the  Bible,  nations  have  an  organic  char- 
acter, and  they  are  constantly  held  to  a  responsibility  for 
their  conduct  as  rigorous  as  that  of  individuals.*  Nor 
was  there  ever  a  period  when  it  was  more  necessary  to 
urge  upon  governments  the  great  maxim,  recorded  by  the 
wisest  of  princes,  after  long  experience,  that  "Righteous- 
ness exalteth  a  nation." 

"Righteousness;"  and  by  this  I  mean  true  religion. 
Governments  are  established  for  purposes  strictly  tem- 
poral, churches  for  purposes  strictly  spiritual.  The 
union  of  Church  and  State  is,  therefore,  as  incongruous 
a  thing  as  would  be  the  combination  of  the  church  with 
a  gas  company  or  a  railroad  corporation.  But  let  us 
not  go  to  the  other  extreme.  Let  us  never  forget  that  a 
state,  like  an  individual,  must  have  a  religion.  Civil  law 
and  philosophy  cannot  repress  the  depravities  of  our 
nature.  Without  the  controlling  fear  of  God,  men  would 
have  to  be  governed  as  the  keeper  of  wild  beasts  predom- 
inates over  his  menagerie — distributing  food  to  some, 
and  blows  to  others  whose  might  and  ferocity  could  rend 
him  to  pieces  in  a  moment.    A  state  must  have  a  religion, 


*  "The  iniquity  of  the  Amorites  is  not  yet  full."  "  That  the 
blood  of  all  the  propheti  which  was  shed  from  the  foundation  of 
the  world,  may  be  required  of  this  generation,  from  the  blood  of 
Abel  unto  the  blood  of  Zachariah,  which  perished  between  the 
altar  and  the  temple;  Verily  1  say  unto  you,  it  shall  be  required 
of  this  generation."  These  and  similar  passages  find  their  inter- 
pretation in  the  fact  that  nations  are  regarded  as  moral  persons 
having  a  certain  duration  of  life  and  accountable  for  their  conduct^ 

9  * 


214  Ricliard  Fuller  s  Sermons. 


and  it  must  be  the  true  religion;  otherwise,  Solomon's 
proverb  is  a  glaring  falsehood.  How  can  a  nation  be 
elevated  by  the  religion  of  idolatry,  which  mocks  God 
and  degrades  all  that  is  noble  in  humanity  ?  How  can 
a  nation  be  exalted  by  the  religion  of  superstition,  which 
stultifies  the  human  intellect?  or  by  the  faith  of  the 
fanatic,  wTith  its  unrelenting  malignity?  or  by  the  heresy 
of  the  antinomian,  which  turns  the  grace  of  God  into 
licentiousness  ? 

By  "  Kighteousness''*  I  mean  the  doctrines  and  spirit 
of  the  Gospel.  These  are  the  true  strength  and  glory 
of  a  nation — a  proposition  this  which  is  almost  self- 
evident. 

For,  if  we  use  the  term  nation  as  comprehending  the 
whole  people,  we  at  once  feel  that  the  real  prosperity  and 
glory  of  a  community  are  not  wealth,  nor  numbers,  nor 
flourishing  commerce,  nor  splendid  palaces,  nor  magnifi- 
cent armies  and  victories  and  triumphal  arches.  May 
God  deliver  us  from  such  prosperity,  unless  it  be  hallowed 
to  a  noble  use.  The  great  thing  in  a  state  is  man  him- 
self; and  the  only  true  prosperity  of  a  people  is  the 
moral  elevation  of  the  citizen — the  intelligence,  virtue, 
integrity,  domestic  purity,  which  cause  the  human  soul 
to  grow,  and  which  are  inbred  and  nourished  by  the 
religion  of  Jesus.  Society  is  a  structure  whose  stability 
depends  not  upon  the  accomplishments  and  refinements 
of  a  few  elevated  minds,  but  upon  the  principles  which 
the  Gospel  establishes  in  the  public  heart  and  conscience  ; 
it  is  a  monument  supported  by  its  granite  base,  not  by  the 
sculptured  ornaments  that  decorate  and  crown  its  shaft. 

Or,  if  we  employ  the  word  nation  with  reference  to  the 
government,  there  is  no  civil  polity  which  Christianity 
does  not  convert  into  a  source  of  honor  and  happiness. 
It  corrects  the  abuses  of  a  monarchy;  it  rebukes  the  pride 
and  ambition  of  an  aristocracy  ;  above  all,  it  reaches  and 
purifies  the  springs  of  a  popular  administration,  shedding 
the  most  healthful  influence  over  all  the  institutions  of 
the  republic. 

Nations,  then,  like  individuals,  are  accountable  to  God. 
Governments  are  kept  to  a  strict  reckoning,  and  the  con- 
stituency who  invest  rulers  with  authority  are  dealt  with 


Mercy  Remembered  in  Wrath.  215 

as  stewards  to  whom  God  has  delegated  mosi  solemn 
trusts.  And,  now,  it'  a  nation — especially  a  nation 
blessed  with  the  Gospel — shall  be  perfidious  to  its  duty, 

why  then  it  stands  before  the  Moral  Governor  of  the  uni- 
verse as  a  heinous  criminal,  and  will  be  dealt  with  as 
such.  It  will  be  dealt  with  now.  For  individuals  there 
is  a  judgment  after  death,  and  they  may  be  left  to  the 
retributions  of  eternity;  but  nations,  as  such,  exist  only 
in  the  present  economy.  "While  it  is  most  unjust,  then, 
to  pronounce  any  man  guilty  because  he  is  afflicted — a 
cruelty  which  Jesus  condemned  in  the  insinuation  of  the 
Jews  as  to  the  man  born  blind — it  may  be  affirmed  with 
positive  certainty,  that  no  judgment  ever  falls  upon  a 
nation  except  as  a  chastisement  for  national  sins.  And 
it  is  with  equity  that  nations  are  sorely  punished.  "At 
what  instant  1  shall  speak  concerning  a  nation  and  con- 
cerning a  kingdom,  to  build  and  to  plant  it" — such  is  the 
language  in  which  Jehovah  declares  that  nations  are 
established  by  him  for  high  raid  holy  purposes.  Their 
work  is  of  course  transcendently  more  momentous  than 
that  of  any  individual.  They  are  the  ministers,  the 
apostles  created  and  ordained  by  sovereign  wisdom  and 
love  for  the  sublimest  mission;  and  just  in  proportion  to 
the  trust  confided  to  them,  will  be  their  guilt,  if  they 
prove  faithless. 

My  friends,  the  propositions  which  I  have  thus  ad- 
vanced commend  themselves  at  once  to  your  minds.  Xor 
can  I  have  announced  these  truths  even  thus  generally, 
without  forcing  upon  you  the  conviction  thatwe  are  most 
guilty,  and  that  God  is  correcting  us  for  our  sins.  "When, 
where,  I  ask  you,  under  the  whole  heavens,  has  there 
ever  been  a  people  so  distinguished  by  the  special  marks 
of  the  favor  of  the  Most  High  ?  When,  where,  a  people 
so  signally  raised  up  to  be  a  blessing  to  the  whole  earth  ? 
And  when,  where,  a  people  who  have  been  more  perfidi- 
ous to  their  high  calling?  "And  shall  J  not  visit  for 
these  things,  saith  the  Lord,  shall  not  my  soul  be  avenged 
upon  such  a  nation  as  this? 

All  this,  however,  I  feel  to  be  too  vague.  These  gen- 
eralities affect  nobody.  Let  us  then  go  a  little  into  detail. 
Of  course,  you  will  understand  me  as  referring  to  our 


216  Richard  Fuller's  Sermoiis. 

sins  before  any  disruption  had  severed  the  Union  and 
rent  it  into  hostile  fragments.  Were  I  to  speak  of  the 
iniquities  now  crying  to  heaven  from  every  portion  of 
the  land,  I  should  be  compelled  to  place  this  unnatural 
war  at  the  head  of  the  list.  Upon  whom  the  guilt  lies, 
I  leave  for  the  Judge  of  all  to  determine.  I  owe  it  to 
you,  who  have  ever  generously  spared  your  pastor  the 
misery  of  seeing  the  harmony  of  a  church  dearer  to  him 
than  life  disturbed  by  politics — I  owe  it  to  the  sanctity 
of  this  hour — to  the  charity  of  this  place — to  the  purity 
of  this  pulpit  from  which  Christ  only  has  ever  been 
preached,  not  to  breathe  a  whisper  upon  so  delicate  and 
painful  a  question. 

My  brethren,  when  I  so  far  forget  my  duty  to  you,  to 
my  office,  to  my  Master  who  says  "  My  kingdom  is  not  of 
this  world," — when  I  can  so  degrade  the  Christian  minis- 
try, as  to  descend  into  the  arena  of  political  strife  and 
partisan  clamor;  above  all,  when,  at  such  an  awful  crisis 
as  this,  instead  of  weeping  between  the  porch  and  the 
altar  and  mingling  with  you  in  the  profoundest  humilia- 
tion, instead  of  lifting  up  that  cross  which  speaks  peace 
among  men — I  am  found  fulminating  anathemas  from 
this  desk,  seeking  to  inflame  the  worst  passions  of  the 
human  heart,  and  to  intensify  wrath,  hatred,  malice, 
vindictiveness  among  those  who  ought  to  Jove  as  brothers ; 
— when  I  am  thus  recreant  to  men  and  to  God,  then 
cease  to  respect  me,  class  me  among  those  apostates  from 
the  religion  of  the  meek  and  loving  Jesus  who  have  for 
years  been  casting  firebrands  into  that  temple,  around 
whose  altars  our  fathers — the  Morning  Stars  of  this 
glorious  Republic — sang  together  and  shouted  for  joy. 

But  were  T  to  speak  of  the  sins  now  crying  to  heaven 
from  every  part  of  the  land,  I  would  place  this  dismal 
fratricidal  war  at  the  head  of  the  dark  catalogue.  For 
war  is  a  crime,  always  everywhere  a  crime,  the  prolific 
source  of  the  worst  crime ;  nor  can  any  man  become  its 
advocate  who  reflects  upon  the  immortality  and  accounta- 
bility of  the  thousands  that,  wholly  unprepared,  with  the 
fiercest  passions  glowing  in  their  breasts,  are  hurried  in- 
stantaneously from  the  battle-field  into  the  presence  of 
the  Supreme  Judge.     The  only  arms  of  a  Christian,  his 


Mercy  Remembered  in  Wrath.  217 

only  victories  are  those  of  peace.*  Jesus  commands  us 
to  love  our  enemies,  and  to  do  them  all  the  good  we  can  ; 
war  requires  us  to  hate  our  enemies,  and  to  do  them  all 
the  harm  we  can.  In  the  words  of  the  Apostle,  "Wars 
and  lightings  come  from  the  lusts  that  war  in  our  corrupt 
natures/'  In  the  language  of  one  of  the  noblest  men  of 
this  or  any  age — of  one  whose  work  has  long  been  a 
classic  in  our  schools  and  colleges,  and  whom  1  must  ever 
love  and  honor,  "ail  wars  are  contrary  to  the  revealed  will 
of  God;  and  the  individual  has  no  right  to  commit  to 
society,  nor  society  to  commit  to  the  government,  the 
power  to  declare  war.  Hence,  to  all  arguments  brought 
in  favor  of  war,  it  would  be  a  sufficient  answer,  that  God 
has  forbidden  it,  and  that  no  consequences  can  be  possi- 
bly conceived  to  arise  from  keeping  his  law,  so  terrible 
as  those  which  must  arise  from  violating  it.  God  com- 
mands us  to  love  every  man,  alien  or  citizen,  Samaritan 
or  Jew,  as  ourselves;  and  the  act  neither  of  society,  nor 
of  government  can  render  it  our  duty  to  violate  this 
command,  "f 

But  this  thought  has  carried  me  farther  than  I  intended. 
You  will  understand  me  as  alluding  to  the  United  States 
in  their  integrity ;  for  it  is  in  reference  to  our  sins  as  a 
whole  people,  that  God  is  punishing  us.  It  is  of  these 
sins  I  speak. 

And,  now,  what  shall  I  say  ?  AVhere  shall  I  begin  ? 
Where  can  I  end  ?  "Ah!  sinful  nation,  a  people  laden 
with  iniquity,  a  seed  of  evil  doers,  children  that  are  cor- 
rupters ;  they  have  forsaken  the  Lord,  they  have  provoked 
the  Holy  One  of  Israel  to  anger.  Why  should  ye  be 
stricken  any  more  ?  The  while  head  is  sick,  and  the 
whole  heart  faint,  from  the  sole  of  the  foot,  even  unto 
the  head,  there  is  no  soundness  in  it,  but  wounds  and 
bruises  and  putrefying  sores."  God  in  mercy  grant,  that 
it  may  not  be  necessary  soon  to  add  the  dreary  dirge  of 
the  prophet  which  follows  that  description  :  "  Your 
country  is  desolate,  your  cities  burnt  with  fire,  your  land 
strangers  devour  it  in  your  presence." 


*Victori3e,   difflciles,   quidem,    et    incruentae,    illis   bellicis  et 
cruentis  longe  pulchriores. — Milton,  Defens,  Sec.  p.  731. 
fWayland's  Moral  Science,  p.  441. 


218  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

Our  Sins.  And  let  me  begin  with  those  of  our  General 
Government.  It  is  the  doctrine  "of  demagogues,  that,  as 
the  whole  people  cannot  meet,  they  elect  delegates  who 
are  to  obey  their  instructions.  But  this  idea  of  principal 
and  agent  has  no  place  in  a  representative  government. 
The  true  theory  of  such  a  system  is,  that  men  are  chosen 
who  are  eminent  for  wisdom,  uprightness,  dignity,  expe- 
rience, and  that  they  are  to  administer  public  affairs  for 
the  good  of  the  nation.  Now,  our  Federal  Government 
rests  entirely  upon  the  Constitution;  but,  while  Ave  pro- 
fess to  be  a  Christian  people,  that  Constitution  is  a  docu- 
ment absolutely  atheistical.  Eegarded  only  in  its  politi- 
cal aspects,  that  instrument  is  certainly  a  noble  monument 
of  human  wisdom  and  patriotism.  Would  that  its  in- 
tegrity had  ever  been  preserved  inviolate  !  Were  I  not  a 
Christian  I  could  know  no  wish  dearer  to  my  heart,  than 
once  more  to  see  that  august  charter  restored  to  its  origi- 
nal virtue, — knowing  no  North,  no  South,  no  East,  no 
West — but,  full  high  advanced  as  an  ensign  to  the  nation, 
like  the  pillar  of  hie  and  cloud,  heralding  a  united  peo- 
ple to  honor  and  true  glory.  But,  while  the  jurist  must 
admire  the  Constitution,  the  Christian  must  regard  it 
with  sorrow  and  alarm.  From  the  first  word  to  the  last, 
there  is  not  even  an  allusion  to  that  Being  who  is  the 
king  of  nations,  who,  armed  with  infinite  power,  pervades 
all  nature  with  his  presence,  and  sits  as  Supreme  Head  of 
the  universe.  Had  it  been  composed  by  Pagans,  or  Mo- 
hammedans, or  Atheists,  it  could  not  have  shut  out  every 
idea  of  Deity  with  a  more  irreligious  precaution. 

Under  the  provisions  of  this  Constitution,  legislators 
and  rulers  are  appointed  by  the  people ;  and  what,  at  least 
for  forty  years,  have  been  the  qualifications  required? 
Disinterestedness?  virtue?  piety?  Nothing  of  the  kind. 
The  single  question  has  everywhere  been  as  to  allegiance 
to  some  faction  struggling  for  power.  He  is  a  good  Dem- 
ocrat, a  good  lvepublican,  his  record  shows  his  loyalty  to 
a  party,  if  elected  all  his  energies  will  be  devoted  to  a 
party,  he  will  seek  to  exalt  a  party,  and  to  secure  the 
spoils  of  victory  for  a  party.  Suppose,  during  any  can- 
vass for  the  last  forty  years,  that  some  candidate  had  been 
proposed,  whose  claim  was   based  upon  his  uprightness 


Mercy  Remembered  in  Wrath.  219 


and  purity,  what  caucus  would  haveselected  such  a  leader? 
Suppose  (but  the  very  idea  is  preposterous)  I  hat  at  t  lie  hust- 
ings people  should  ever  have  been  urged  to  range  them- 
selves on  the  Lord's  side,  and  to  cast  their  suffrages  for 
a  man,  because — in  addition    to  other  excellences  —  he 
Mas  superior  to  party,  and  was  a  meek  and  faithful  dis- 
ciple  of  Jesus;  where,  when,  would    such    an    appeal 
have   provoked  anything    but  astonishment   and  secret 
ridicule  ?     Reflect  upon  the  arts  and  intrigues  employed 
to  secure  success   at  our  elections.      It   may  be   safely 
affirmed,  that,  from  Maine  to  Texas,  bribery  and  corrup- 
tion have  been  the  common  weapons  of  political  rivalry, 
and  that  the  traffic  in  votes  has  got  to  be  a  business  as 
well  established  and  as  industriously  and  systematically 
pursued  as  any  merchandize  in  the  stores  or  the  sham- 
bles.      Thus    elected,  our    rulers    and    representatives 
assemble  at  Washington;  and  you  know  what  the  eye  of 
God  has  seen  there,  with  a  few  noble  exceptions.     There 
the  Sabbath  has  been  openly  despised.     There  the  name 
of  God  has  been  everywhere  blasphemed.     There  pride, 
luxury,  licentiousness,  have  held  their  carnivals.     There 
power  and  patronage  have  been  abused  for  selfish  and 
mercenary  objects.     There  vast  sums  extorted  from  hon- 
est industry  have  been  most  profligately  wasted  and  often 
embezzled.     And  there — in  the  very  halls  which  ought 
to  be  consecrated  to  calm  wisdom  and  true  patriotism,  to 
the  good  of  mankind  and  the  fear  of   God, — there  has 
been  exhibited  a  ruffianism  which  would  have  disgraced 
barbarians.       Sectional    rancor,   party   malignity,    low, 
ribald,  personal  scurrility — these  have  long  been  among 
the  most  striking  elements  of  our  parliamentary  rhetoric. 
And  bludgeons,  daggers,  pistols,  bowie  knives,  the  threats 
and  blows  of  the  assassin,  the  deliberate  murders  of  the 
duellist — these  have  been  the  conspicuous  proofs  of  our 
parliamentary  wisdom  and  piety.     And  think  you,  my 
friends,  as  the  Lord  formerly  said  to  his  prophet  Ezekiel, 
think  you,  "it   is  a  light  thing  that  such  abominations 
are  committed  ?"     No,  G  )d  will  visit,  God  is  now  visiting 
us  for  sins  like  these  in  high  places. 

When  from  the  General  Government  we  pass  to  that  of 
the  States,  we  find  the  same  sins  flaunting  through  the 


220  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

land;  the  same  bribery,  the  same  corruptions,  the  same 
frauds,  the  same  embezzlements,  the  same  violence,  the 
same — in  short,  the  same  outrages  upon  all  religion  and 
patriotism.  But  looking  at  this  State,  becoming  a  pro- 
phet in  my  own  country,  I  find  a  new  count  in  the  indict- 
ment. I  refer  to  Slavery.  All  who  know  anything  of  so 
humble  an  individual  as  myself,  know  my  sentiments  as 
to  this  institution.  Here  it  is.  We  are  not  responsible  for 
its  introduction ;  and  he  is  either  a  politician,  or  a  man 
made  mad  not  by  much  learning  but  much  ignorance, 
who  asserts  that  it  would  be  wise  suddenly  to  eradicate 
it  from  our  social  system.  But  have  we  been  faithful  to 
this  other  race  who  are  in  our  power,  and  therefore  espe- 
cially entrusted  to  our  care  ?  Have  we  recognized  their 
relation  to  us  as  members  of  a  common  fatherhood  and 
brotherhood?  Have  we  rendered  to  them — to  their 
bodies,  minds,  souls — "the  things  that  are  just  and  equal, 
remembering  that  we  too  have  a  Master  in  heaven?" 

Let  us  go  on  and  glance  at  the  guilt  of  our  churches. 
Jesus  is  especially  jealous  of  the  purity  and  fidelity  of 
his  church ;  it  is  his  peculiar  treasure,  purchased  with 
his  own  blood.  There  have  been  many  fiery  disputes  as 
to  the  true  church.  Peace  to  the  ashes  of  all  such  con- 
troversies! In  the  Scriptures  the  Greek  term  translated 
"church"  is  ecclesia,  a  noun  derived  from  the  verb  eccaleo, 
to  call  out.  The  church  of  Christ  is  a  body  called  by 
grace  out  of  the  world;  called  that  it  may,  by  its  holiness, 
condemn  the  world,  as  righteous  Lot  "  condemned  the 
wickedness  of  Sodom ;"  called  to  exemplify  the  doctrines 
of  the  Gospel,  and  thus  be  a  light  to  the  world.  The 
members  of  this  church  publicly  profess  that  they  "are 
not  their  own," — that  their  wealth,  talents,  influence, 
time,  life,  are  all  offered  as  a  grateful  sacrifice  to  the  Re- 
deemer. Nor  is  their  duty  restricted  to  this  or  any  land. 
The  church  exists  under  a  constitution  which  binds  it 
to  "go  into  all  the  world  and  preach  the  Gospel  to  every 
creature."  Enter  into  these  truths;  then  look  at  the 
bodies  called  churches  and  the  people  called  Christians, 
—the  worldliness,  pride,  covetousness,  selfishness,  which 
have  effaced  almost  entirely  every  line  of  demarkation 
between  the  church  and  the  world.     "Are  there  not  with 


Mercy  Remembered  in  Wrath.  221 

—  -■  ■  — 

you,  oven  with  you,  sins  against  the  Lord  your  God?"  — 
Nor  tell  me  that,  for  this  perfidy  and  perjury,  God  will 
punish  the  churches.  This  is  true.  To  the  minister 
commissioned  to  execute  vengeance  upon  guilty  Jerusa- 
lem the  command  was  "  Begin  at  my  sanctuary."  Judg- 
ment may  begin  at  the  house  of  God;  but — as  the  fires  of 
Sodom  paid  no  regard  to  the  houses  and  possessions  of 
Lot, — so,  when  Jonah  betrayed  his  trust,  the  winds  and 
waves  did  not  distinguish  between  him  and  those  who 
were  with  him,  but  smote  the  ship  until  it  was  well  nigh 
"  broken  in  pieces." 

It  is  a  beautiful  thought  of  the  Apostle,  when  writing 
to  heads  of  families  among  the  first  disciples,  he  sends 
greetings  to  the  "churches  in  their  houses."  In  the  con- 
templation of  the  Gospel,  every  Christian  family  ought 
to  be  a  church.  There,  within  a  shrine  more  sacred  than 
aisle  and  chancel  and  "fretted  vault,"  the  father,  as  a 
priest  over  his  own  house,  is  to  offer  morning  and  evening 
incense.  And  there  the  holy  influence  of  a  mother's  love 
is  to  embrace  the  earliest  affections  of  her  children — 
their  young  faith,  hope,  love — and  twine  them  like  ten- 
drils around  the  Cross,  that  they  may  spring  and  grow 
upwards.  The  family  ought  to  find  its  type  not  only  in 
the  church  on  earth, but  the  church  in  heaven.  What  a 
mournful  contrast  to  such  a  community  is  presented  to 
the  sight  of  God  by  the  families  of  this  land.  To  what 
different  objects  are  the  cares  and  solicitudes  of  most  pa- 
rents devoted.  I  know  that  when  your  child  dies,  you 
assure  us  that  your  great  concern  is  about  the  soul  and 
its  salvation ;  but  how  can  we  believe  you,  when  we  ob- 
serve your  conduct  towards  those  children  who  are  still 
spared  ?  when  we  see  in  you  scarcely  a  desire  that  they 
maybe  humble  followers  of  Jesus,  but  restless,  bound- 
less anxiety  that  they  may  be  rich  and  honored,  may 
gratify  those  passions  which  war  against  the  soul  ?  You 
are  priests,  not  to  devote  your  offspring  to  God,  but  to 
decorate  them  as  offerings  to  the  world  and  its  fatal  at- 
tractions. Here,  in  this  domestic  unfaithfulness,  is  a 
crime  so  unnatural  and  shocking,  that  God's  peculiar 
displeasure  burns  against  it;  and  we  hear  his  prophet 
uttering  this  frightful  anathema:  "Pour  out  thy  fury 
upon  the  families  that  call  not  upon  thy  name." 


222  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

Up  to  this  time  I  have  been  speaking  of  the  sins  com- 
mitted by  bodies  raised  up  by  God  to  meet  the  social 
wants  of  our  nature.  But  as  these  organizations  are  com- 
posed of  the  members  of  society,  if  we  would  go  to  the 
sources  of  our  crimes,  we  must  turn  our  eyes  to  the  com- 
munity around  us.  And,  when  we  draw  within  the  cir- 
cle of  our  observation  the  character  and  manners  of  the 
world  in  which  we  live,  what  dismal  phenomena  present 
themselves  on  every  side.  "Thus  saith  the  Lord, for  three 
■transgressions  of  Damascus,  yea  for  four,  will  I  not  turn 
away  the  punishment  thereof. 

Atheism.  We  are  shocked  at  this  charge.  But  God 
is  the  moral  Governor  of  the  universe.  Not  to  recognize 
him  is  atheism.  And  we  can  look  nowhere,  without  see- 
ing that,  in  their  thoughts,  their  plans,  their  whole 
lives,  almost  all  men  are  "without  God  in  the  world." 

Ingratitude.  Review  the  history  of  this  nation,  and 
you  will  instinctively  exclaim,  "  He  hath  not  dealt  thus 
with  any  people."  How  have  we  dealt  with  him  ?  In- 
stead of  leading  us  to  repentance,  his  goodness  has  nour- 
ished vanity,  boasting,  an  insane  independence.  Our 
vaunted  refinement  has  been  a  whited  sepulchre,  fair 
without,  but  "within  full  of  dead  men's  bones  and  all 
uncleanness."  Wealth  has  become  a  suare  and  a  bane. 
Prosperity  has  ministered  to  pride,  arrogance,  luxury. — 
"  Because  they  have  no  changes,  therefore  they  fear  not 
God."  These  disasters  were  needed.  God  has  tried  blessings 
upon  us;  he  is  now  trying  judgments.  He  is  saying  "1 
will  go  and  return  unto  my  place,  till  they  acknowledge 
their  offences  and  seek  my  face.  In  their  affliction  they 
will  seek  me  early." 

A  degeneracy  from  all  true  love  of  country.  Mr.  Web- 
ster was  the  last  of  a  noble  army  of  martyrs  who  took  in 
the  whole  Republic  in  their  ample  patriotism;  and  he 
fell  a  victim  to  his  magnanimity.  We  have  become  a  na- 
tion of  politicians  and  scramblers  for  office,  giving  up  to 
section  and  party  and  self,  the  zeal  and  devotion  which 
were  due  the  public  weal;  filled  under  the  pretence  of 
principle  with  restless  eager  vanity;  convulsing  society 
by  the  incessant,  often  vindictive  struggles  of  ambition 
in  men  born  for  obscurity,  and  who  hesitate  at  nothing — 


Mercy  Remembered  in  Wrath.  323 


no  calumny,  corruption,  treachery — if  they  may  bur  sup- 
plant a  rival  and  grasp  that  most  seductive  oi'  all  pri: 
political  power. 

A  fourth  evil  under  our  sun  lias  been  the  decay  of  that 
love  of  liberty  which  inspired  the  venerable  Father  of  his 

country  and  all  those  heroical  men  who  laid  the  founda- 
tions of  this  free  government,  causing  them  to  pledge 
their  lives,  their  interests  and  their  sacred  honor  to  an 
undertaking  so  sublime.  This  loyalty  to  freedom  has 
long  been  ;-  ready  to  die."  If  these  distractions  continue 
long,  I  fear  a  ruined,  demoralized,  exhausted  people  will 
be  ready  to  exchange  liberty  for  repose  even  under  a  des- 
potism. May  God  help  us  to  "be  watchful  and  strengthen 
the  things  that  remain." 

Everywhere  among  our  population  is  seen  a  fifth  and 
heinous  iniquity.  It  is  a  contempt  for  the  Revelation 
which  has  been  in  mercy  vouchsafed  to  us.  No  mortal 
thought  can  appreciate  the  worth  of  the  Bible,  the  Sab- 
bath and  the  Sanctuary.  That  volume,  to  unloose  whose 
seals  the  Lamb  of  God  welcomed  death,  has  notonlv  been 
openly  assailed  by  Infidelity,  but  its  sacred  pages  have 
been  everywhere  neglected.  The  Sanctuary  has  been  des- 
pised. And  for  convenience,  for  pleasure,  for  profit,  the 
Sabbath  has  been  profaned  by  the  people,  by  corporations, 
by  judges,  by  rulers:  and  this  often  under  the  auspices 
of  legislative  enactments. 

In  enumerating  the  sins  which  especially  attract  the 
curses  of  heaven,  Isaiah  specifies  one  which  "is  peculiarly 
an  American  vice,  though  it  is  indeed  the  besetting  sin 
of  humanity.  "  Wo  unto  them  who  add  house  to  house, 
and  land  to  land."  "Covetousness  is  idolatry."  Idolatry 
is  not  a  speculative  error;  it  bows  the  whole  man  down. 
and  binds  and  moulds  all  the  passions  of  its  votaries.— 
Hence  idolatry  is  the  object  of  God's  signal  detestation. 
And  if  this  be  so,  we  can  be  at  no  loss  for  the  cause  of 
these  chastisements  visited  upon  this  nation.  For  here 
is  an  idolatry  which  pervades  all  classes  and  conditions. 
To  it  the  whole  land  is  devoted  as  a  temple.  Its  power 
surrounds  and  presses  us  like  the  atmosphere.  Seven 
days  are  too  i'^w  for  its  week  of  sabbaths.  Dayand  night 
are  too  short  for  its  devout  worship. 


224  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

We  are  a  by-word  over  the  whole  earth  for  this  reckless 
lust  of  money;  for  a  profligate  eagerness  to  amass  large 
fortunes,  with  but  little  prudery  about  the  means  em- 
ployed. Our  mercantile  code  has  repealed  every  letter 
of  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount.  On  'Change,  it  is  not  Je- 
sus, but  Machiavelli  who  teaches  ethics.  Success  is  merit, 
failure  is  crime.  Uprightness  is  no  longer  with  us — 
what  it  was  to  our  simple  forefathers — an  ultimate  good  ; 
it  is  only  the  means  to  an  end.  The  morality  of  trade 
finds  its  oracles  neither  in  the  Word  of  God  nor  in  con- 
science, but  in  the  low  calculations  of  expediency  and 
profit.  Honesty  is  a  virtue  while  it  is  the  best  policy; 
otherwise  it  is  a  commodity  too  costly  for  us  to  deal  in. 

A  reputation  for  integrity  is  chiefly  important  because  it 
is  a  profitable   investment.     The   great   thing  is  to  get 
money.     If  the  representative  man  of  this  age  and  coun- 
try could,  like  Paul,  be  caught  up  into  the  third  heaven, 
it  would  prove  only  the  ecstasy  of  a  speculator  and  ad- 
venturer ;    his  only  beatific  vision  would  be  the  golden 
streets;  and  when  brought  back  his  only  grief  would  be 
that  so  many  trodden  shekels  had  been  left  behind.     At 
every  turn  is  seen  the  jobber  described  by  Solomon,  saying, 
"It  isnaught,itis  naught,  bntwhen  he  goeth  his  way,  then 
he  boasteth."     This  every  day  rogue  is,  however,  too  in- 
significant to  attract  much  notice.     If  we  would  compre- 
hend the  cool  atrocity  of  unprincipled   and   exhaustless 
enterprise  which  has  placed  us,  as  a  commercial  people, 
upon  such  a  bad  eminence,  we  must  study  it  in  our  stock 
gamblers,  and  rich  bankrupts,  and  above  all  in  the  plun- 
derers of  our   public   exchequers.     That  a  man  may  be 
honest  as  a  citizen,  pious  as  a  church  member,  and  yet  an 
unscrupulous  knave  as  a  politician — this  is  a  maxim  not 
confined  to  us.     But  there  is  one  proverb,  of  which  we 
can  claim    the  exclusive  authorship.     It  is,  that  fraud 
loses  half  its  infamy,  by  losing  all  its  timidity.     What 
would  be  theft  in  a  shop,  is,  in  a  public  office,  the  com- 
mendable forethought  of  the  unjust  steward  in  the  para- 
ble.     The   felony  which    would   consign   a  merchant's 
clerk  to  the  dungeon  for  life,  need  only  be  committed 
against  the  Government,  and  be  multiplied  by  a  hundred 
thousand,  and  it  at  once  rises  to  something  like  respecta- 


Mercy  Remembered  in  Wrath.  225 


bility.     It  meets  not  only  sympathy,  but  a  sort  of  admi- 
ration. 

As  T  said,  howeYer,  I  will  never  have  done  with  these 
details.  Everywhere  guilt  and  corruption  stalk  abroad 
with  unblushing  front.  The  land  mourns  for  drunken- 
ness; and  this  State,  like  others,  derives  much  of  its  rev- 
enue from  licenses  to  curse  women  with  a  blight  far  more 
mournful  than  widowhood,  to  make  children  worse  than 
orphans,  to  destroy  soul  and  body  for  time  and  eternity. 
Men's  mouths  are  full  of  cursing;  children  are  baptized 
unto  profanity,  and  are  perfected  in  it  at  our  schools  and 
on  our  streets.  In  fine,  Jehovah  says,  "  Cursed  be  the 
man  that  trusteth  in  man,  and  maketh  flesh  his  arm,  and 
whose  heart  departeth  from  the  Lord."  And  if  ever  a 
people  defied  that  imprecation,  we  are  the  people.  Men 
and  brethren,  Cotton  is  not  king;  God  is  King.  Gun- 
powder is  not  king;  education  is  not  king;  the  constitu- 
tion is  not  king  ;  the  people  are  not  king  ;  the  President 
is  not  king;  the  army  is  not  king.  No,  no,  "The  Lord 
he  is  God,  the  Lord  he  is  God."  But,  as  fire  had  to  come 
down  from  heaven,  and  vindicate  the  sovereignty  of  Jeho- 
vah, and  thus  extort  from  Israel  that  sublime  confession; 
so  God  will  have  to  burn  up  our  earthly  confidences,  be- 
fore we  will  know  that  the  Lord  is  God,  and,  casting 
away  all  our  idols,  will  crown  Jesus  Lord  of  all. 

IT.  As  a  nation  we  are  most  guilty  and  God  is  angry 
with  us  for  onr  sins;  I  was  right  when  I  made  this  asser- 
tion. I  pass  now  to  a  second  truth  of  most  solemn  portent, 
which  I  must  treat  briefly,  but  to  which,  for  that  very 
reason,  it  becomes  you  all  at  this  time  to  give  the  more 
earnest  heed.  This  proposition  is,  that  present  chastise- 
ments are  oftentimes  only  the  precursors  of  more  fearful 
dispensations. 

That  judgment  has  begun  upon  us,  you,  alas!  require 
no  preacher  to  warn  you.  It  is  written  in  the  Book  of 
Judges,  that  when  Benjamin,  "little  Benjamin,"  was 
alienated  from  Israel,  the  men  of  all  the  other  cribes 
"came  to  the  house  of  God,  and  abode  there  till  evening 
before  God,  and  lifted  up  their  voices  and  wept  sore,  and 
said   0  Lord  God  of  Israel,  why  is  this  come  to  pass  in 


226  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

Israel,  that  there  should  be  to-day  one  tribe  lacking  in 
Israel  ?"  Would  that  we  hod  witnessed  such  a  lovely 
spectacle  of  affection  among  the  members  of  this  Union, 
at  the  period  when  one  of  them,  a  little  one — but  dear  to 
my  heart — was  separated  from  the  other  States.  Would 
that  we  could  see  this  spirit  of  true  patriotism  and  piety 
to-day.  Would  that  — instead  of  declamations  and  ha- 
rangues which  exasperate  malignant  passions — we  all, 
the  people,  the  rulers,  the  ministers  of  Christ,  were  this 
morning  gathered  in  the  house  of  God,  bathed  in  tears, 
and  saying,  0  Lord  God  of  our  Fathers,  why  is  this  come 
to  pass  in  the  land,  that  there  should  be  so  many  tribes 
lacking  in  Israel  ?  Why  is  it?  Who  is  guilty  of  the  sin 
which  hath  brought  this  sore  calamity  upon  us  ?  Search 
us,  0  God — and  search  our  brethren  who  are  severed 
from  us,  and  restore  us  to  the  paths  of  righteousness  and 
peace!  Xor  has  there  been  only  alienation.  "The 
primal  eldest  curse"  is  on  us.  The  soil  redeemed  by  our 
common  fathers  has  been  soaked  with  fraternal  blood. 
Such  is  our  bitter  affliction,  after  naming  which,  I  can 
hardly  think  of  our  commercial  stagnation  and  desola- 
tion, sad  as  that  is ;  or  of  the  pecuniary  distress  and 
poverty  which  multitudes  are  facing  but  cannot  outface. 

All  this,  however,  may  be  only  the  premonition  of 
what  is  to  come.  There  is  at  present  a  pause  ; — may  it 
not  be  that  God  is  giving  us  "  space  to  repent  ?" — that  he 
has  waited  for  this  day,  to  try  us  and  see  if  we  will  hum- 
ble ourselves  and  forsake  our  sins?  There  is  a  pause; — 
but  it  may  be  only  the  calm  which  precedes  the  rush  of 
the  whirlwind — the  interval  between  the  roar  of  a  distant 
park  of  artillery,  and  the  crash  of  the  iron  tempest  shiv- 
ering, shattering  everything  in  its  path. 

Present  judgments  are  the  precursors  of  more  fearful 
judgments,  when,  instead  of  bowing  humbly  before  the 
Chastener  and  seeking  deliverance  from  him,  a  people 
harden  their  hearts  and  proudly  rely  upon  their  own  wis- 
dom and  power.  Thus  it  was  with  Pharoah.  At  first  he 
reeled  under  the  strokes  from  an  unseen  almighty  hand; 
but  soon  he  rallied,  and  resolved  to  brave  and  light  the 
crisis  out  in  his  own  imperial  grandeur.  You  remember 
the  issue.     Bolt  followed  bolt,  till  he  perished  miserably 


Mercy  Remembered  in  Wrath,  227 

forever.  How  docs  this  article  appl y  to  yon,  my  brethren  ? 
I  do  not  know.  J  cannot  decide.  I  therefore  say  nothing. 
But  you  know.     You  can  decide.     You  can  answer. 

Present  judgments  are  premonitions  of  more  fearful 
judgments,  when  the  terrors  and  supplications  of  a  people 
have  reference  not  to  their  guilt,  but  to  their  dangers  and 
losses.  ''Lord  when  thy  hand  is  lifted  up,  they  will  not 
see."  Nothing  can  more  outrage  a  jealous  God  than  this 
temper  which,  even  under  his  chastisements,  only  proves 
how  resolutely  he  is  contemned,  and  how  tenaciously  the 
world  is  loved.  Genuine  sorrow  is  described  as  "  Godly 
sorrow*' — that  is  to  say,  it  is  sorrow  such  as  we  may  sup- 
pose God  to  feel  in  view  of  sin  :  it  is  grief  like  that 
which  pierced  the  Redeemer's  heart,  when  he  saw  the 
city  and  wept  over  it ;  it  is  anguish  for  the  insult  offered  to 
the  tenderest  of  Fathers,  and  for  the  wrong  inflicted  upon 
the  soul.  With  this  the  Scriptures  contrast  "  the  sorrow 
of  the  wot  Id," — a  distress  purely  selfish — misery,  not 
from  a  sense  of  the  evil  of  sin,  but  from  the  fear  of  its 
punishment.  How  does  this  article  apply  to  you,  my 
brethren?  I  do  not  know.  I  cannot  decide.  I  there- 
fore say  nothing.  But  you  know.  You  can  decide. 
You  can  answer. 

Our  last  maxim  as  to  the  laws  by  which  God  is  wont 
to  regulate  his  dealings  with  a  people  when  once  he 
begins  to  afflict  them,  has  respect  to  the  sincerity  of  their 
repentance  under  his  first  visitations.  "The  word  of  the 
Lord  came  unto  me  saying,  at  what  instant  I  shall  speak 
concerning  a  nation,  and  concerning  a  kingdom,  to  pluck 
up,  and  to  pull  down  and  to  destroy  it;  if  that  nation  against 
whom  I  have  pronounced  turn  from  their  evil,  I  will 
repent  of  the  evil  that  1  thought  to  do  them."  At  the 
commencement  of  this  year  we  assembled  in  this  sanctu- 
ary to  confess  our  sins  as  a  nation  and  individuals,  to 
humble  ourselves  beneath  the  impending  vengeance  of 
heaven,  and  to  hear  and  obey  "the  voice  of  the  rod." 
Were  you  then  sincere?  Or  did  you  only  mock  God? 
"When  he  slew  them,  then  they  sought  him;  they 
returned  and  enquired  early  after  God  ;  and  they  remem- 
bered that  God  was  their  rock,  and  the  high  God  their 
Redeemer.     Nevertheless  they  did  flatter  him  with  their 


228  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

mouths,  and  they  lied  unto  him  with  their  tongues." 
It  rests  with  you,  men  and  brethren,  to  apply  this 
thought.  How  does  it  affect  you?  What  have  been  the 
fruits  of  all  the  confessions  you  uttered  on  that  solemn 
fast-clay  ?  of  all  the  vows  you  then  made  ?  of  all  the  tears 
you  then  shed  ?  I  do  not  know.  I  cannot  speak.  I 
cannot  answer.  But  you  know.  You  can  speak.  Yon 
can  answer. 

And  yet  why  may  I  not  speak?  why  may  I  not  decide? 
why  should  I  not  answer?  Ah,  my  brethren,  my  breth- 
ren, if  I  were  to  apply  these  tests  severely,  and  by  them 
forecast  your  destiny,  I  should  have  no  heart  to  stand 
here  and  plead  with  you  for  God,  or  with  God  for  you. 
If  I  did  not  remember  that  into  whatever  depths  we  may 
sink,  the  blood  of  Christ  can  reach  and  rescue  us. — that 
"even  from  thence,  if  we  seek  the  Lord  our  God,  we 
shall  find  him,  if  we  seek  him  with  all  our  heart  and 
with  all  our  soul," — if  I  did  not  remember  this,  I  should 
be  dumb,  for  my  ministry  could  be  only  a  prophecy  of 
mourning,  lamentation,  and  woe ;  fearfulness  and  trem- 
bling would  take  hold  on  me,  and  rivers  of  waters  would 
run  down  my  eyes,  for  I  would  know  that  the  calamities 
now  pressing  upon  us  are  only  the  faint  presages  of 
calamities  far  more  terrible;  coming  events  would,  to  my 
vision,  scarf  and  muffle  up  all  the  future  in  lurid  dismal 
clouds  and  darkness.  If  God's  wTays  were  as  our  ways, 
and  his  thoughts  as  our  thoughts,  my  ears  would  but 
take  in  these  dreadful  words,  "  I  will  cast  them  out  of 
my  sight.  Therefore  pray  not  thou  for  this  people, 
neither  lift  up  cry  nor  prayer  for  them,  neither  make  in- 
tercession to  me  ;  for  I  will  not  hear  thee."  "  Though 
Moses  and  Samuel  stood  before  me,  my  mind  could  not 
be  towards  this  people."     If  God's  ways  Avere  as  our  ways, 

and  his  thoughts  as  our  thoughts but,  blessed  be 

his  gracious  name!  hosannahs  to  that  love  which  hath 
interposed  to  save  the  lost,  to  respite  the  righteous  sen- 
tence and  arrest  the  lifted  thunder!  thanks  be  unto  God! 
his  ways  are  not  as  our  ways,  neither  are  his  thoughts  as 
our  thoughts.  It  is  when  reasoning  with  guilty  man  on 
this  very  subject  of  pardon  for  the  vilest,  that  our  injured 
Father  repeats  over  and  over  the  most  earnest  tender  as- 


Mercy  Remembered  in  Wrath.  229 

surances  of  his  long-suffering  forgiving  mercy.  And  it 
is  these  assurances  which  embolden  me  again  to  unite 
with  you  and  lead  your  devotions  on  this  solemn  occasion. 
It  is  because  "  He,  being  full  of  compassion,  forgives  our 
iniquities  and  destroys  us  not,  but  many  a  time  turns  his 
anger  away,  and  does  not  stir  up  all  his  wrath," — itis  this 
which  has  encouraged  me  to  come  here,  and  exhort,  ani- 
mate, console  you;  to  conjure  }tou  by  the  mercies  of  God, 
and  by  all  your  hopes  and  fears,  that  your  penitence,  your 
faith,  your  reformation  may  be  such  as  to  avert  the  over- 
hanging wrath,  and  to  attract  the  blessings  promised  to 
the  humble  and  the  contrite. 

uO  Lord,  in  wrath  remember  mercy!"  This  was  the 
prayer  with  which  I  began  this  discourse.  And  this 
prayer  I  adjure  you  to  make  your  fervent,  effectual,  un- 
relaxing  supplication,  until  these  calamities  shall  be  over- 
past. But  remember,  this  prayer  is  the  cry  of  a  soul  lying 
low  before  God,  and  fixing  its  pleading  eye  steadfastly 
upon  that  great  atonement  through  which  alone  mercy 
can  reach  such  wretches  as  we  are.  Xor  can  it  be  uttered 
sincerely,  unless  we  enter  into  its  spirit  and  breathe  all 
its  sighs  and  aspirations. 

This  prayer  cannot  be  ours,  until  we  awake  from  insen- 
sibility under  the  anger  of  the  great  and  dreadful  God. 
"Yet  they  were  not  afraid,  nor  rent  their  garments, 
neither  the  king  nor  any  of  his  servants."  Apathy  under 
God's  judgments  is  an  "evident  token  of  perdition"  upon 
a  smitten  people.  And  with  reason.  For  it  betrays  a 
rooted  unbelief,  hardness,  contempt,  most  insulting  to 
the  Majesty  of  heaven. 

Xor  can  we  truly  utter  this  prayer,  until  we  recognize 
God's  purposes  in  chastening  us,  and  comply  with  tnem. 
A\  hether  he  afflicts  us  to  bring  our  sins  to  remembrance, 
or  to  show  us  their  heinousness,  or  to  wean  us  from  our 
idolatry,  or  to  assert  his  sovereignty  o\er  us  and  all  we 
have  and  hope  for,  our  first  duty  is  to  correspond  to  his 
movements.  "Righteous  art  thou,0  Lord,  when  I  plead 
with  thee,  yet  let  me  talk  with  thee  of  thy  judgments." 
"I  will  say  unto  God,  do  not  condemn  me.  Show  me 
wherefore  thou  contendest  with  me."  "  Clouds  and  dark- 
ness are  round  about  thee  ;  righteousness  and  judgment 

10 


230  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

are  the  habitation  of  thy  throne."  Such  must  be  the  lan- 
guage of  our  hearts;  and  our  lives  must  attest  the  sin- 
cerity of  this  confession,  this  sympathy  with  the  divine 
will  concerning  us. 

Lastly,  we  use  this  prayer  and  supplication  only  when, 
acknowledging  our  sins,  having  our  iniquities  always  be- 
fore us,  we  renounce  all  other  hope  and  cast  ourselves  ut- 
terly upon  the  mercy  of  God  through  Christ  Jesus  our 
Saviour.  To  frame  excuses — to  trust  in  our  own  strength, 
in  chariots  and  horses  and  armies — to  confess  the  sins  of 
others  and  exaggerate  their  guilt,  and  dare  to  appeal  to 
the  scrutiny  of  Omniscient  Justice  for  our  own  innocence 
— all  this  is  impiously  to  invoke  unmingled  wrath,  un- 
mitigated ruin. 

No,  no,  there  is  only  one  single  hope  left  us :  u  0  Lord, 
in  wrath,  remember  mercy."  But  this  hope  is  left  us, 
and  inspired  by  this  hope.  I  do  not  despond  for  this  land; 
I  am  full  of  confidence;  my  soul  rises  from  the  dust,  and 
stands  erect,  and  rejoices  in  full  assurance  of  compassion, 
mercy,  deliverance  from  on  high.  I  cannot  despond,  for 
my  expectations  are  from  Him  who  hath  promised,  and 
who  "  keepeth  covenant  and  mercy."  J  will  not,  cannot 
despond.  God's  love  in  times  past  forbids  the  thought, 
that  he  will  abandon  us  amidst  these  raging  waves,  that 
he  can  leave  us  to  perish  in  this  fiery  ordeal.  His  own 
right  hand,  his  stretched  out  arm  hath  planted  a  people 
on  these  shores.  He  hath  distinguished  them  abovcall 
nations  by  his  loving  kindness  and  tender  care.  He  hath 
been  our  help  in  ages  gone  by ;  and,  "  because  he  hath 
been  our  help,  therefore  in  the  shadow  of  his  wings  we 
will  rejoice."  This  whole  people,  from  ocean  to  ocean, 
from  the  lakes  to  the  gulf,  have  cried  to  him  again  and 
again.  This  day,  we — the  people,  the  rulers,  magistrates, 
judges,  his  churches — fall  at  his  feet,  and,  with  united 
heart  and  voice,  deprecate  the  vengeance  we  justly  merit, 
and  supplicate  the  mercy  he  hath  graciously  promised. 
"Promotion  cometh  neither  from  the  East,  nor  from  the 
West,  nor  from  the  South  ;  but  God  is  the  judge  ;  he  put- 
teth  down  one,  and  setteth  up  another."  And,  though 
these  afflictions  are  for  the  present  not  joyous  but  most 
grievous  and  heart-rending,  yet  I  must  question  the  effi- 


Mercy  Remembered  in  Wrath.  231 

cacy  of  prayer,  before  I  can  doubt  thai  "afterwards  they 
will  work  the  peaceable  fruits  of  righteousness,"  through 
the  overruling  power  and  wisdom  oi*  Him  who  doeth  all 
things  well. 

But  it  is  lime  for  me  to  finish.  My  dearly  beloved 
friends  and  brethren,  I  have  spoken  to  you  not  as  I 
wished,  but  as  I  could.  You  have  heard  truths  not  de- 
signed to  flatter  but  to  save  you,  and  uttered  in  the  sim- 
plicity, honesty,  affection  which  become  a  Christian 
pulpit,  instead  of  neglecting  this  call  to  humiliation,  fast- 
ing and  prayer,  I  have  eagerly  availed  myself  of  it,  T 
only  wish  we  could  observe  such  a  day  every  week,  until 
our  cries  shall  move  Him  who  doth  not  willingly  afflict 
the  children  of  men,  who  threatens  that  he  may  be  dis- 
armed. If  we  have  any  fear  of  God,  if  any  love  for  our 
whole  country,  for  man,  for  the  suffering  cause  of  Jesus 
at  home  and  abroad, — we  must  welcome  any  and  every 
occasion  for  devout  fasting,  humiliation,  and  supplica- 
tion. 

I  do  implore  you  all  to  cherish  the  deep  solemnity  due 
to  a  time  like  this.  "The  Lord  hath  Avatched  upon  the 
evil,  and  brought  it  upon  us."  God's  wrath  so  far  sur- 
passes all  other  calamities,  that  the  very  thought  of  it 
would  agitate,  alarm,  frighten  us,  were  we  not  blinded 
and  stupefied  by  sin.  This  wrath  has  now  begun  to  descend 
upon  our  guilty  land.  Jehovah  is  saying,  "  Now  will  I 
shortly  pour  out  my  fury  upon  thee,  and  accomplish  my 
anger  upon  thee,  and  I  will  judge  thee  according  to  thy 
ways,  and  will  recompense  thee  for  all  thy  abominations. 
And  my  eye  shall  not  spare,  neither  will  I  have  pity.  I 
will  recompense  thee  according  to  thy  ways,  and  the 
abominations  in  the  midst  of  thee;  and  you  shall  know 
that  I  am  the  Lord.  The  time  is  come,  the  day  draweth 
near.  Destruction  cometh,  and  they  shall  seek  peace, 
and  there  shall  be  none.  I  will  do  unto  them  after  their 
way,  according  to  their  deserts  will  I  judge  them,  and 
they  shall  know  that  I  am  the  Lord."7  Brethren,  dear 
brethren,  God  is  serious  in  his  present  dealings  with  us; 
oh,  let  us  be  serious.  Through  our  cities  and  villages,  and 
in  our  own  streets;  a  voice  is  heard,  Availing  out  this 
warning,   "Yet  forty   days   and  Kineveh   shall    be  de- 


232  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons, 

stroyed."  Let  ns,  like  that  doomed  capital,  clothe  our- 
selves in  sackcloth  and  ashes.  "The  wrath  of  man  worketh 
never  the  righteousness  of  God." 

The  wrath,  clamor,  bitterness,  vindictiveness,  crim- 
ination and  recrimination,  which  have  so  often  pro- 
faned our  national  fasts,  would  be  shocking  to  every 
moral  sentiment  in  an  hour  like  this;  they  would  be 
scarcely  more  insane  and  impious  at  the  last  judgment 
and  before  the  great  white  throne.  Whatever  others  do, 
let  us  abhor  ourselves  before  God  as  a  nation,  and  let  us 
with  one  voice  cry  unto  him  and  say,  "0  Lord,  in  wrath 
remember  mercy." 

Nor  let  us  be  satisfied  with  general  confessions,  which 
are  almost  always  only  an  ingenious  mode  of  deceiving 
and  flattering  ourselves  in  our  own  eyes.  We  should, 
lament  the  iniquities  abounding  in  the  land,  but  we  can 
repent  only  of"  our  own  sins.  Let  each  of  us  enter  into  his 
own  bosom,  and  explore  his  own  heart  and  life.  "  I 
hearkened  and  heard  but  they  spake  not  aright ;  no  man 
repented  him  of  his  wickedness,  saying,  What  have  I  donef 
Let  each  enquire:  "  Lord  is  it  I  ?  Lord  is  it  I  ?"  "  Let 
us  turn  every  one  from  his  evil  way,  and  who  can  tell  if 
God  will  turn  and  repent  and  turn  away  from  his  fierce 
anger,  that  we  perish  not  ?"  "  Search  me,  0  God,  and 
know  my  heart;  try  me,  and  know  my  thoughts;  and  see 
if  there  be  any  wicked  way  in  meimd  lead  me  in  the  way 
everlasting." 

Prepare  to  meet  thy  God,  0  Israel.  Let  us  prepare 
for  this  solemn  interview,  whether  in  the  judg- 
ments now  upon  us,  or  in  the  judgment  after 
death.  After  all,  whatever  may  betide  us,  God's 
will  must  triumph.  Be  this  our  consolation  in  the 
darkest  moment.  What  his  inscrutable  wisdom 
designs,  I  know  not;  whether  to  break  up  these  once 
United  States,  and  to  make  of  them  two  great  nations, 
who,  forgetting  this  unnatural  strife,  cherishing  only  the 
hallowed  memories  of  the  past,  shall  live  side  by  side  in 
alliance  and  amity;  or  whether  to  reconstruct  the  Union, 
to  corroborate  its  vigor  by  teaching  us  many  severe  lessons 
of  mutual  forbearance,  of  honest  compliance  with  consti- 
tutional compacts,  of  reciprocal  dependence,  of  political 


Mercy  Remembered  hi  Wrath.  2  13 

wisdom  and  religions  obligation;  or  whether  io  destroy 
us  altogether,  as  he  lias  blotted  out  other  guilty  empires. 
But  this  one  thing  I  know,  that  all  shall  work  together 
for  his  glory  and  for  the  good  of  them  that  love  and  obey 
him. 

And  I  know  more.  I  know  that  we  are  rapidly  passing 
away,  and  shall  tomorrow  stand  amidst  the  realities  of 
that  eternity,  in  the  light  of  which  all  earthly  things 
will  shrink  into  insignificance,  all  mortal  conflicts  will 
appear  only  as  the  delirious  frenzy  of  lunatics  contending 
about  straws.  For  we  shall  then  see  that  the  soul  alone 
has  real  greatness,  that  salvation  alone  is  worthy  of  our 
cares  and  toils  and  sacrifices.  Let  us  save  our  souls. 
Let  us  secure  the  great  salvation.  Let  us  prepare  to 
meet  our  God  in  death  and  at  the  dread  tribunal.  Jesus 
is  the  "hiding  place  from  the  wind,  and  the  covert  from 
the  tempest."  Sheltered  beneath  his  cross,  we  are  safe 
for  time  and  eternity. 

AYherefore,  beloved,  seeing  that  ye  look  for  such  things, 
be  diligent  that  ye  may  be  found  of  Him  in  peace,  with- 
out spot  and  blameless.  "Come,  my  people,  enter  thou 
into  thy  chambers,  and  shut  thy  doors  about  thee,  and 
hide  thyself  as  it  were  for  a  little  moment,  until  the  in- 
dignation be  overpast."  Into  these  pavilions,  these  inner 
sanctuaries  of  almighty  power,  unerring  wisdom,  eternal 
faithfulness  and  love,  let  us  enter.  And  let  our  prayers 
for  a  guilty  land  cause  all  these  chambers  to  resound, 
till  our  cries  go  up  into  the  ear  and  penetrate  and  melt 
the  heart  of  that  God  who  is  waiting  to  be  gracious. 

"  0  Lord,  the  great  and  dreadful  God,  keeping  the 
covenant  and  mercy  to  them  that  love  him,  and  to  them 
that  keep  his  commandments;  we  have  sinned,  and  have 
committed  iniquity  and  have  done  wickedly  and  have  re- 
belled even  by  departing  from  thy  precepts  and  from  thy 
judgments.  0  Lord,  righteousness  belongeth  unto  thee, 
but  unto  us  confusion  of  faces,  as  at  this  day; — to  the 
men  of  Judah,  and  to  the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem,  and 
unto  all  Israel  that  are  near  and  that  are  far  off,  because 
of  their  trespass  that  they  have  trespassed  against  thee. 
To  the  Lord  our  God  belong  mercies  and  forgiveness, 
though  we  have   rebelled   against  him  ;  neither  have  we 


234  Richard  Fuller  s  Sermons. 

obeyed  the  voice  of  the  Lord  our  God,  to  walk  in  his 
laws  which  he  set  before  us  by  his  servants  the  prophets. 
Yea,  all  Israel  have  transgressed  thy  law,  even  by  depart- 
ing that  they  might  not  obey  thy  voice.  Therefore  the 
curse  is  poured  upon  us.  0  Lord,  according  to  all  thy 
righteousness,  I  beseech  thee,  let  thy  anger  and  thy  fury 
be  turned  away  from  thy  city  Jerusalem,  thy  holy  moun- 
tain ;  because  for  our  sins  and  for  the  iniquities  of  our 
fathers,  Jerusalem  and  thy  people  are  become  a  reproach 
to  all  that  are  about  us.  Now  therefore,  0  our  God,  hear 
the  prayer  of  thy  servant,  and  his  supplications,  and 
cause  thy  face  to  shine  upon  thy  sanctuary  that  is  desolate, 
for  the  Lord's  sake.  0  Lord,  hear  ;  0  Lord,  forgive;  0 
Lord,  hearken  and  do ;  defer  not,  for  thy  own  sake,  0  my 
God  ;  for  thy  city  and  thy  people  are  called  by  thy  name." 
"  0  Lord,  in  wrath  remember  mercy." 


The  Chris!  inn  Delivered  from  Fear  of  Death,     235 


Smuou  fffiirtcrtttfi* 


THE     CHRISTIAN     DELIVERED 
FROM  FEAR  OF  DEATH.* 

"  FORASMUCH  then  as  the  children  are  partakers  of  flesh  and  blood,  he 
als  i  himself  likewise  took  part  of  the  same;  that  through  death  he 
might  destroy  him  that  had  the  power  of  death,  that  is,  the  devil:  And 
deliver  them  who,  through  fear  of  death,  were  all  their  lifetime  subject 
to  bondage.— Heb.  ii:  U,  15. 

UA  WHETHER  we  be  afflicted,  it  is  for  your  consola- 
*  *  tion  and  salvation."  It  may  seem  hard  that — • 
besides  their  studies,  toils  and  sacrifices — pastors  must  be 
smitten  by  God  for  the  sake  of  their  flocks  :  but  any  sor- 
row should  be  welcome  to  us,  when  we  remember  what 
he  endured  who  "  loved  the  Church  and  gave  himself  for 
it."  The  Scriptures,  indeed,  represent  this  as  a  sublime 
privilege,  that  to  us  it  is  given  thus  to  be  partakers  of 
Christ's  afflictions — "Who  now  rejoice  in  my  sufferings 
for  you,  and  fill  up  that  which  is  behind  of  the  afflictions 
of  Christ  in  my  flesh  for  his  bodv's  sake,  which  is  the 
Church."  Nor  can  tongue  tell  nor  thought  conceive  the 
sweetness  of  those  consolations  which  are  mercifully 
vouchsafed  to  ministers,  while  passing  through  this  dis- 
cipline, by  him  "who  comforteth  us  in  all  our  tribulation, 
that  we  may  be  able  to  comfort  them  that  are  in  any 
trouble,  by  the  comfort  wherewith  we  ourselves  are  com- 
forted of  God." 

The  passage  selected  for  this  morning  comes  to  you 
from  a  chamber  in  which — with  a  triumph  far  transcend- 


*  Preached,  December  1,  1801,  on  the  Sabbath  after  the  death 
of  a  beloved  daughter,  and  written  out  afterwards  lor  publication 
at  the  special  request  of  many  members  of  the  Seventh  Church. 


236  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

ing  all  I  had  ever  witnessed  or  read  or  imagined, — death 
was  swallowed  up  in  victory.  During  the  last  four  days 
of  her  illness,  the  physicians  assured  nie  that  my  sainted 
child  suffered  the  pangs  of  a  hundred  deaths;  but  her 
soul  was  filled  with  unutterable  blessedness.  While  com- 
plying with  the  prescriptions  of  her  medical  attendants, 
she  desired  that  no  anodynes  might  be  administered,  lest 
they  should  affect  her  mind.  "  The  cup  that  my  Father 
hath  given  me,"  she  said,  "shall  I  not  drink  it?  "  My 
body  suffers,  but  my  soul  is  flooded  with  happiness."  "I 
have  no  wish  but  to  glorify  God  by  my  death." — 
"  How  ineffably  precious  is  Jesus  to  me — how  I  love  and 
adore  him."  After  remarking  that  she  had  all  her  life 
been  afraid  to  die,  she  repeated  the  words  just  read 
as  our  text,  exclaiming,  '■  Not  a  fear  njw,  not  a  doubt ; 
all  is  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory." 

My  beloved  brethren,  wherever  I  may  be,  I  am  still 
thinking  of  you  ;  and  I  no  sooner  heard  this  last  remark, 
than  my  mind  reverted  to  you.  I  said,  I  will  preach  to 
them  from  those  verses — I  must  seek  to  arm  them  with 
these  defenses,  these  heavenly  consolations  against  death. 

The  Apostle  is  speaking  of  the  children  of  God.  "  For- 
asmuch then,  as  the  children,"  the  same  "children  "  men- 
tioned in  the  preceding  verse.  The  Devil,  who  "  hath  the 
power  of  death,"  is  careful  not  to  alarm  his  victims  ;  he 
disguises  from  them  the  formidable  character  of  death. 
Hence  philosophers,  falsely  so  called  libertines,  duellists, 
men  of  the  world,  and  worldly  professors,  can,  like  guilty 
Jonah,  sleep  on,  regardless  of  their  danger.  The  god  of 
this  world  blinds  their  minds,  lulls  them  into  a  repose 
which  is  only  the  smoothness  of  the  cataract  before  it 
glides  over  the  precipice  ;  they  die  as  the  fool  dieth. — 
The  text  refers  to  the  children  of  God.  Of  them  it  de- 
clares that  the  tempter — by  inspiring  a  dread  of  death — 
often  impairs  their  joy,  keeps  them  under  a  miserable 
bondage — literally,  depresses  them  ;  and,  that  the  incar- 
nation and  death  of  the  Son  of  God  ought  to  liberate 
them  from  this  servile  yoke,  dispel  their  apprehensions, 
and  cause  them  to  rise  to  a  triumphant  superiority  over 
all  fear  of  death.     Let  us  meditate  upon  a  truth  which 


TheChristian  Delivered  from  Fear  of  Death.     237 

so  deeply  concerns  each  of  us,  and    which   is  so  full  of 
consolation. 

I.  Sitting,  as  I  have  sat  for  several  days  and.  nights, 
looking  death  in  the  face,  and  seeing  in  that  face  only 
smiles,  I  asked  myself,  What  then  is  it  which  renders  this 
event  so  universally  formidable ?  And  the  first  answer 
was,  The  impenetrable  veil  which  shrouds  the  future,  the 
darkness  which  to  sense  and  reason,  hangs  so  gloomily 
over  all  beyond  the  grave.  Love  keeps  its  vigils  at  the 
bedside  of  one  dearer  to  you  than  life.  At  this  post  of 
observation,  you  watch  the  insidious,  inexorable  progress 
of  the  disease.  The  fatal  moment  at  length  arrives. — 
You  embrace  your  child,  so  beloved  and  cherished.  You 
exchange  the  tenderest  adieus.  Gradually  an  invisible 
curtain  descends  between  you  and  the  object  of  these 
warm  and  yearning  affections.  In  a  momenta  separation 
takes  place,  most  mysterious  and  awful ;  there  is  a  silence 
which  no  cries,  no  imploring  appeals  can  break.  Those 
lips  which  had  just  spoken  to  you  in  such  endearing  ac- 
cents are  sealed.  The  hands  you  still  hold,  and  whose 
last  pressure  told  you  so  much,  are  relaxed.  The  eyes 
which  a  moment  before  had  beamed  upon  you  with  such 
heavenly  softness  are  quenched.  And  the  question  breaks 
in  on  i\\\d  heart  with  the  power  and  earnestness  of  eter- 
nity— Is  this  the  termination  of  life?  or  is  there  another, 
an  immortal  life,  upon  which  the  soul  has  entered  ? 

And  there  is  no  question  which  can  so  agitate  the  hu- 
man mind.  Oh,  this  is  no  matter  of  cold  abstract  specu- 
lation. Every  day  it  is  pressing  upon  the  inmost  spirit 
of  some  mourner  bending  over  the  couch  of  death.  Every 
day  some  Martha  and  Mary  are  shedding  floods  of  tears 
for  a  brother,  who  had  been  to  them  friend,  counsellor 
and  protector.  Every  day  some  Joseph  is  mourning  for 
his  father  with  a  lamentation  so  bitter  that  "  the  place  is 
called  Abel  Mizraim ;"  some  Rachel  is  weeping  for  her 
children  and  refusing  to  be  comforted;  some  David  is 
exclaiming,  "0  my  son,  my  son,  would  God  I  had  died 
for  thee."  Yes,  each  day,  hour,  minute,  second,  some 
human  heart  is  cleft  in  twain;  and  pours  its  unavailing 
bursts  of  anguish,  or  sits  in  a  silent  agony  more  terrible 
than  the  most  piercing  shrieks  and  wailings.     Now,  need 

10  * 


238  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

I  tell  you  that  a  heart  thus  ho  wed  down  cannot  he  satis- 
fied with  conjectures  and  peradventures.  It  needs  solid, 
stable  consolation;  it  requires  a  light  from  heaven  to 
dissipate  the  obscurity  of  the  future,  a  revelation  from 
God  to  lift  the  veil  and  dispel  all  fear  and  misgiving. 

I  do  not  undervalue  the  arguments  for  an  indestructi- 
ble life  which  reason  furnishes;  and,  as  the  subject  is  of 
such  vast  concern,  I  will  indicate,  in  so  many  words, 
those  which  seem  to  me  of  most  value. 

First,  we  carry  within  ourselves  the  instinctive  con- 
sciousness of  a  principle  distinct  from  and  infinitely  su- 
perior to  the  material  body.  When  you  use  your  tongue 
to  utter,  or  your  fingers  to  write  your  thoughts,  you  know- 
it  is  not  the  tongue  nor  the  fingers  which  think  ;  they 
are  only  the  instruments  employed  by  the  mind,  the  spir- 
itual faculty.  We  compare,  reason,  reflect,  contrive,  re- 
member, hope,  love;  but  it  is  palpably  absurd  to  sup- 
pose that  these  are  acts  of  our  physical  organization. — 
JSTow  whether  this  spiritual  principle  shall  live  forever 
or  be  destroyed,  depends  entirely  upon  the  will  of  God  ; 
and  God  has  written  upon  our  very  nature  some  intima- 
tions of  its  immortal  existence. 

For  he  has  impressed  upon  humanity,  wherever  it  is 
diffused,  a  conviction  of  existence  beyond  the  tomb.  Ko 
nation  has  ever  been  discovered  which  did  not  cling  to 
this  faith.  Whence  this  universal  belief  ?  That  which 
has  been  held  as  certain  by  all  men,  everywhere  and  at 
all  times,  assuredly  seems  to  be  a  truth  either  inscribed 
on  the  structure  of  the  soul,  or  transmitted  from  an  orig- 
inal revelation  communicated  at  our  creation. 

Another  fact.  We  are  endowed  by  God  with  irrepress- 
ible aspirations  and  longings  for  a  happiness  which  we 
knoAV  can  never  be  attained  in  this  lite,  tor  a  happiness 
which  is  eternal.  Is  not  this  yearning  a  prophecy  ?  The 
body  has  no  appetites  for  which  God  has  not  provided  ; 
is  it  possible  that  this  hungering  and  thirsting  of  the 
soul  is  never  to  be  gratified  ?  The  future,  like  the  past, 
\i-  nothing  to  a  brute,  it  lives  only  in  the  present.  But 
man  is  a  thinking  being  only  as  he  forgets  the  present  in 
t  lie  past  and  future.  To  him  the  present  is  comparatively 
little — the  transcendant  value  of  life — its  happiness 
and  dignity— is  in  memory  and  hope. 


The  Christian  Delivered  from  Fear  of  Death,    2:59 

Hence  the  very  idea  of  annihilation  is  overwhelming  to 
him.  He  instinctively  revolts  at  the  very  thought  that 
memory,  hope,  reason,  love  ever  can  be  destroyed.  And 
it  is  a  most  instructive — 1  bad  almost  said  a  conclusive 
fact,  that  this  recoil  from  extinction,  this  instinct  of  end- 
less duration,  this  anticipation  of  immortal  life,  becomes 
more  articulate  and  stronger,  just  as  the  soul  becomes 
holy  ; — that  is,  just  as  its  views  are  clear,  and  its  dictates 
and  wishes  in  harmony  with  the  will  of  God. 

I  know  that,  look  where  we  will  around  us,,  the  pros- 
pect is  gloomy  enough  as  to  the  perpetuation  of  life.  The 
vegetable  and  animal  creations  are  ever  decaying  and 
perishing.  So,  too,  with  human  existence.  "One  gen- 
eration passeth  away  and  another  cometh."  The  dark- 
ness, corruption,  oblivion  of  the  tomb  swallow  up  race 
alter  race,  and  no  trace  of  them  remains.  In  all  this, 
however,  we  see  only  "the  dust  returning  to  the  dust 
from  which  it  was  taken."  The  Scriptures  declare  that 
"The  spirit  returns  to  God  who  gave  it;"  and  to  argue 
that,  because  material  substances  decay,  therefore  the 
soul  must  perish,  is  to  overlook  entirely  the  distinctions 
between  matter  and  spirit. 

Observe  carefully  any  merely  material  development, 
and  you  will  find  that  it  soon  attains  its  completion  and 
then  ceases.  This  is  true  of  all  vegetable  growth,  of  all 
animal  life,  even  of  that  noblest  organism,  the  human 
frame.  But  the  more  the  soul  expands,  the  more  it  un- 
folds boundless  powers  of  growth  and  expansion.  Nay, 
the  very  properties  of  matter  require  that  its  increase 
should  be  soon  arrested.  If  a  tree  should  continue  to 
grow,  it  would  cast  its  shade  over  the  land  and  prevent 
the  growth  of  other  trees.  But  the  more  the  soul  is  en- 
larged, the  more  invigorating  and  blessed  are  the  influ- 
ences it  exerts  over  other  souls.  Extend  this  thought 
into  eternity,  and  you  will  feel  something  of  the  meaning 
of  that  expression,  "the  power  of  an  endless  life,"  the 
power  of  the  soul  to  dilate  its  own  divine  faculties 
through  eternity,  and  through  eternity  to  diffuse  happi- 
ness upon  other  souls.  Ponder,  too,  another  distinction 
between  spirit  and  matter.  The  latter,  when  it  decays, 
is  not  destroyed;  it  still  exists,  and  passes  into  other, 


240  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

often  into  higher  forms.  In  nature  nothing-  perishes, 
nothing  is  lost,  every  fragment  is  gathered  up  that  there 
may  be  no  waste.  But  if  my  mind,  thought,  reason,  con- 
science, memory,  hope,  love  of  truth,  of  purity,  of  God, 
become  extinct,  there  is  utter  and  unutterable  destruction. 
For  these  are  peculiar  to  myself,  and  can  never  belong  to 
any  other  being. 

We  are  sometimes  told  of  man's  insignificance.  But  a 
being  who  can  know  himself,  and  lament  his  inferiority 
to  his  own  standard  of  intellectual  and  moral  perfection, 
cannot  be  insignificant.  He  is  great — greater  than  the 
earth,  greater  than  the  stars,  greater  than  the  sun, 
greater  than  all  the  material  universe;  for  the  earth,  the 
stars,  the  sun,  the  material  universe  are  all  unconscious 
of  their  own  existence,  nor  can  they  conceive  of,  and 
aspire  after  higher  and  more  splendid  creations. 

But  man's  guilt  and  depravity.  Be  it  so.  What  then  ? 
This  very  consciousness  of  guilt  is  an  intimation— a  very 
strong  intimation  of  immortality,  For,  if  there  were  no 
future  life,  no  judgment,  no  retribution  after  death,  con- 
science could  not  exert  its  tremendous  power.  The  sense 
of  sin  is  terrible,  because  Ave  feel  that  the  consequences 
of  sin  are  not  exhausted  here,  that  its  real  punishment 
will  be  inflicted  hereafter. 

Let  me  only  add  that  the  scenes  often  presented  in  the 
chambers  of  dying  Christians  furnish  an  evidence  almost 
irresistible  that  the  soul  does  not  decay  with  the  decay 
of  the  physical  system.  Those  superhuman  triumphs 
amidst  convulsions  of  pain — those  ineffable  joys  which 
transport  the  soul  while  disease  and  anguish  shoot  through 
every  nerve  and  fibre  of  the  material  frame — those  songs 
of  exultation  in  the  very  moment  when  the  body  is  dis- 
solving— it  is  almost  impossible  to  witness  such  a  specta- 
cle, without  feeling  that  there  is  in  man  the  germ  of  an 
imperishable  existence,  that  he  is  destined  by  God  for 
immortality. 

J  might  multiply  reflections  like  these.  I  do  not  pre- 
tend, however,  that  these  arguments,  with  the  addition 
of  others,  would  establish  a  certainty.  Still,  if  nam  is 
created  for  future  and  unwasting  life,  I  would  expect 
reason  to  give  some  intimation  of  this  magnificent  truth; 


The  Christian  Delivered  from  Fear  of  Death.    2-11 


and  I  think  we  have  enough  to  awaken  presumption,  ex- 
pectation, a  well  founded  hope. 

But,  my  brethren — when  just  parted  by  death  from 
one  most  loving,  lovely,  and  beloved — presumption,  ex- 
pectation, hope  will  not  do.  "  I  hope  there  is  something 
after  death  ;" — this  was  all  that  the  wisest  and  best  of 
the  ancient  philosophers  could  say.  But  0,  cruel  conso- 
lation, excruciating  conjecture,  which  soon  remits  the 
heart  to  the  most  agonizing  doubts  and  apprehensions. 
No,  no ;  guesses,  peradventures,  probabilities  will  not  do  ; 
we  need  proof,  assurance  ;  let  me  have  these,  let  the  veil 
be  removed  ;  let  me  know  certainly  that  the  being  so  dear 
lias  been  translated  to  a  sphere  of  immortal  life;  and  I 
am  satisfied,  I  dry  my  tears;  death  is  disarmed  of  this 
terror,  death  is  but  the  beginning  of  a  higher,  sublimer 
existence,  death  is  swallowed   up  in  victory.     Give    me 

this  assurance, but  who    can    give    it   to    me? — 

Five  hundred  generations  have  passed  into  that  shadowy 
land,  but  no  messenger,  no  whisper  has  come  back  from 
the  tomb.  Worlds  were  little  to  barter  for  the  certainty, 
but  worlds  cannot  purchase  it.  I  ask  the  earth,  I  conjure 
the  skies,  I  weary  the  heights  and  torture  the  depths  with 
my  beseeching  cries; — but  earth  and  sky,  heights  and 
depths  return  only  a  cold,  dead,  chilling  echo.  Where, 
then,  can  assurance  be  obtained  ?  Blessed  be  (Jod,  there 
is  a  teacher  who  perfectly  ascertains  every  thing  here. 
The  Cross  towers  like  a  heacon  between  that  dusky  world 
and  ours,  irradiating  each  with  celestial  brightness. 
"  By  his  death  "  Jesus  delivers  his  children  from  all  fear 
of  falling  back  into  nothing.  He  has  "  abolished  death," 
(how  energetically  does  the  Apostle  announce  the  very 
truth  I  am  urging)  "and  has  brought  life  an  1  immor- 
tality to  light  through  the  Gospel."  The  demonstration 
here  is  so  simple  that  a  child  can  comprehend  it,  and  so 
irrefragable  that  I  defy  the  acutest  genius  to  detect  a 
flaw  or  frame  even  a  plausible  objection. 

For,  if  anything  is  incontestable,  then  without  contro- 
versy, the  death  and  resurrection  of  the  Redeemer  for- 
ever establish  the  truth  of  his  doctrine.  The  proofs  of 
that  death  and  resurrection  I  need  not.  here  exhibit.  If 
it  were  proper  to  convey  such  communications  from  this 


242  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 


place,  I  would  make  or.e  remark,  I  would  say  that,  in 
other  days  I  was  accustomed  to  sift  evidence — to  subject 
it  to  the  severest  cross  examination  ;  that  I  have  scruti- 
nized the  testimony  on  this  subject  with  a  more  critical 
jealousy  for  fear  lest  a  religious  education  might  have 
biased  my  mind  ;  and  that  no  fact  in  history  rests  upon 
more  "rocky  strength  of  foundation"  than  the  Saviour's 
death  and  resurrection.  On  this  great  event,  you  remem- 
ber, he  staked  the  certainty  of  his  doctrine.  The  Jews 
would  not  be  convinced  by  his  miracles,  they  demanded 
a  sign.  "  Let  him  come  down  from  the  cross,"  they 
said,  "and  we  will  believe."  He  gives  them  more  than 
they  required.  He  enters  the  tomb,  and  emerges,  "  the 
resurrection  and  the  life,"  on  the  third  day.  His  doc- 
trine, then,  is  forever  established. 

But,  now,  what  is  the  Saviour's  doctrine  ?  It  is,  as  we 
have  already  seen,  the  assertion  of  life  and  immortality. 
AVe  said,  just  now  that  upon  our  very  nature  there  is  the 
impress  of  a  future  existence;  and  it  is  a  striking  fact, 
that  Eevelation  takes  for  granted  this  irrepressible  con- 
sciousness. Jesus  never  once  enters  into  any  argument, 
nor  advances  any  proofs  upon  this  subject,  lie  speaks 
to  man  as  a  being  who  carries  within  him  a  light  which 
had  only  become  dim,  and  needed  but  to  be  trimmed  and 
refreshed.  He  appeals  constantly  and  directly  to  a  spir- 
itual principle  in  the  human  bosom;  this  he  addresses 
clearly,  solemnly,  and  with  perfect  confidence,  knowing 
that  his  voice  would  find  an  instant  response. 

Another  remark.  The  soul's  immortality  is  taught  by 
Jesus,  not  in  any  detached  passages  ;  it  is  a  truth  which 
underlies  and  pervades  the  whole  of  his  religion.  Much 
he  promises  to  "the  life  which  now  is;"  but  it  is  "the 
life  that  is  to  come"  which  he  constantly  proposes,  as 
the  object  of  our  devoutest  aspirations.  His  disciples 
are  not  to  fear  them  who  can  destroy  only  the  body,  but 
him  Mho  can  cast  soul  and  body  into  hell.  They  arc  to 
labor,  not  for  the  meat  which  perisheth,  but  for  that 
which  endureth  to  everlasting  life.  They  are  not  to  lay 
up  treasure  on  earth,  but  in  heaven.  They  are  not  to 
expect  rewards  on  earth,  but  in  heaven.  They  are  to 
welcome  trials  and  sacrifices,  that  they  may  receive  a 
kingdom  prepared  for  them  before  the  foundation  of  the 


The  Christian  Delivered  from  Fear  of  Death. 


world.  In  short,  all  terrestrial  pomps  and  charms  are 
to  be  despised,  and  persecution,  poverty,  pain,  dungeons, 
swords,  scaffolds,  (ires,  the  most  frightful  martyrdoms 
are  to  be  preferred  to  the  pleasures  of  sin.     And  why  all 

this?  Why,  because  the  soul  is  immortal,  because  the 
gain  of  the  whole  world  would  be  no  sort  of  equivalent 

for  its  loss. 

And,  oh!  the  earnestness  with  which  the  Saviour 
pressed  this  grand  doctrine.  Man's  ignorance  of  God 
drew  from  him  his  bitterest  tears,  causing  him  to  utter 
that  wailing  lamentation,  "  0,  righteous  Father,  the 
world  hath  not  known  thee."  But  next  to  this  dismal 
phenomenon,  the  spectacle  which  pierced  his  heart  with 
the  acutest  anguish  was  man's  neglect  of  his  spiritual 
nature.  He  did  not  overlook  the  body  ;  he  sympathized 
with  its  wants  and  miseries.  He  fed  it,  healed  its  infirm- 
ities, cured  its  diseases,  raised  it  from  the  tomb.  But 
it  was  the  soul — its  imperial  capacities — its  magnificent 
endowments — above  all,  its  eternal  life — an  existence 
Avhich  shall  endure  when  Avorlds,  stars,  suns,  shall  have 
expired — it  was  this  that  absorbed  his  thoughts  and 
kindled  solicitudes  indefatigable,  inextinguishable:  for 
this  he  pleaded  with  unutterable  yearnings.  His  entire 
ministry — his  sermons,  his  warnings,  his  entreaties,  his 
tears — was  a  voice  from  heaven,  proclaiming  the  immor- 
tality of  the  soul,  and  beseeching  men  to  awake  to  a  truth 
so  solemn,  glorious,  consoling,  rejoicing,  inspiring. 

My  friends,  I  cannot  tell  how  this  subject  affects  you. 
Even  in  Christians  the  cry  of  the  soul  is  stifled  by  the 
clamors  of  the  world  and  the  passions.  Here,  to-day,  in 
the  sanctuary  itself,  your  spiritual  discernments  are  so 
dull  and  darkened,  that  this  truth  excites  scarcely  an 
emotion  in  your  minds.  But  in  the  chamber  where 
death  has  just  removed  one  most  dear  to  you  :  kneeling 
beside  the  bed  and  gazing  upon  that  form  which  had  so 
long  been  the  object  of  your  tenderest  affections;  looking 
into  that  pale,  sweet  face,  and  feeling  that  for  one  word 
from  those  lips  you  would  give  all  which  life  has  or  hopes 
for;  there,  oh.  there,  this  doctrine  is  nns]  eakably  precious. 
Close  your  eyes.  Do  not  let  your  thoughts  rest  upon  the 
casket,   lovely  as    lliat   is.   'The  soul,  the  spirit — that 


244  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

which  was  and  is  the  being  you  loved — has  been  taken 
from  this  valley  of  tears,  and  has  entered  upon  its  true 
life.  The  angels  who  rejoiced  over  the  repentance  of 
this  child  of  God  experience  new  delights  at  her  emanci- 
pation. Could  she  speak,  she  would  say,  in  the  language 
of  Jesus,  "Why  seek  you  the  living  among  the  dead?" 
"  If  you  loved  me  you  would  rejoice  because  I  go  to  my 
Father."  Shall  not  this  assurance  sweeten  the  bitterness 
of  separation  ?  Will  you  surrender  yourself  to  convul- 
sions of  grief,  and  shed  floods  of  tears,  because  the  im- 
prisoned spirit  is  set  free  and  exults  in  everlasting  life  ? 
Was  it  only  yourself  you  loved,  and  the  happiness  you 
enjoyed  in  her  society  ?  If  you  truly  loved  her,  could  you 
mourn  and  Aveep,  because  she  has  ceased  to  see,  as  you 
see — through  organs  so  limited  in  their  vision — and  now 
sees  as  she  is  seen  by  God  ?  because  she  no  longer  knows 
as  you  know — with  a  knowledge  which  is  only  a  sort  of 
ignorance — but  knows  even  as  she  is  known  ?  because 
she  lives — not  as  we  live — a  few  years  of  weakness,  infir- 
mity, sorrow,  sin — but  as  God  lives — expatiating  in  spir- 
itual, celestial,  immortal  existence  ? 

The  first  fearful  trait  about  death  is,  the  uncertainty 
as  to  the  something,  anything,  after  death;  and  you  see 
how  the  Cross  supplies  such  an  antidote  to  these  appre- 
hensions, that  it  may  be  truly  said,  "Jesus  Christ  hath 
abolished  death  and  brought  life  and  immortality  to  light 
through  the  Gospel."  I  wish  here  to  pause  for  a  moment;, 
and — as  the  matter  is  of  infinite  importance — to  ask  each 
of  you  with  individual  reference,  whether  you  believe  in 
this  glorious  doctrine?  I  know  you  will  answer,  To  be  sure 
I  do,  I  never  had  a  doubt  of  it.  But  if  you  have  never 
known  the  misery  of  an  earnest  doubt,  I  am  afraid  you 
have  never  known  the  rapture  of  an  earnest  faith,  as  to 
this  subject.  There  is  no  truth — not  even  the  eternity 
of  God — which,  so  nearly  concerns  us,  none — if  the  mind 
can  only  be  brought  to  dwell  intently  upon  it — which 
can  so  overmaster  our  thoughts  and  effect  such  an  entire 
change  in  all  our  feelings  and  estimates  of  things  as  this 
of  our  destiny  to  live  forever.  To  rejoice  in  the  full  assur- 
ance of  immortality,  however,  you  must  reflect;  you 
must  penetrate  the  folly  of  all  those  sophistries  which 


The  Christian  Delivered  from  Fmr  of  Death.     24."> 


infidels  can  bring  against  it;  you  must  take  in  the  proofs 
which  reason  furnishes,  and  the  demonstration  which  the 
Gospel  supplies.  "If  a  man  die,  shall  he  live  again  ?" 
Never,  in  all  my  life,  have  J  ever  known  any  sort  of  scep- 
ticism as  to  this  question  ;  yet  it  seems  to  me  I  only  be- 
lieved that  I  believed.  Would  that  I  could  impart  to 
you  the  happiness,  the  triumphant  assurance,  the  trans- 
ports, with  which  I  now  rea  ize  its  certainty  and  itsmag- 
nilicence. 

II.  Thus  far  our  argument  has  supposed  that  man  is 
innocent,  and  it  fortifies  us  only  against  the  fear  of  anni- 
hilation; but  there  is  another  and  more  awful  terror  in 
leaving  this  world.  Man  is  a  sinner.  AVe  have  seen  that 
he  carries  within  him  an  instinct  of  his  spiritual  nature, 
and  that  Jesus  constantly  takes  this  for  granted.  Now 
his  consciousness  of  guilt  is  still  more  clear,  and  the  Sa- 


viour always  deals  with  him  as  a  being  Avhose  conscience 
leaves  no  room  for  denial  or  evasion  on  thispoinc;  he  takes 
for  granted  man's  inward  sense  of  transgression  and  ac- 
countability after  death  for  sin.  This  truth  renders  death 
formidable  indeed,  for  the  soul  then  passes  into  the  pres- 
ence of  its  Judge,  and  receives  that  sentence  which  fixes 
its  destiny  amidst  the  changeless  retributions  of  eternity. 
And,  now,  what  [  say  is,  that  by  his  death  Jesus  delivers 
his  people  forever  and  perfectly  from  all  fear  on  this  score. 
This  is  our  second  article.  "  Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto 
you,  If  a  man  keep  my  saying  he  shall  never  see  death." 
"The  sting  of  death  is  sin,  and  the  strength  of  sin  is  the 
law,  but  thanks  be  unto  God  who  giveth  us  the  victory, 
through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ." 

Men  and  brethren,  for  twenty-five  years — ever  since  it 
pleased  God  to  call  me  by  his  grace  and  to  put  me  into 
the  ministry— I  have  sought  always  and  everywhere  to 
preach  Christ  Jesus  and  him  crucified.  As  a  fact,  as  a 
doctrine,  as  the  only  foundation  of  hope,  holiness,  salva- 
tion, Christ  has  been  to  me  "all  and  in  all;"  but  never 
did  my  faith  rest  upon  the  atonement  with  such  a  perfect 
confidence,  such  a  delightful  recumbency  as  now  rejoices 
my  wnole  soul.  Sitting  beside  that  departed  saint,  and 
hearing  her  often  exclaim,  "  Xot  a  doubt,  not  a  fear,  all  is 


246  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 


peace  and  joy  and  blessedness,"  T  asked  her,  upon  what 
she  relied  with  such  triumphant  assurance?  "I  know, 
my  dearest  child,"  I  said,  "that  'many  daughters  have 
done  virtuously,  but  you  have  excelled  them  all,'  and 
members  of  the  church  have  called  and  told  me  how  they 
all  loved  you."  She  at  once  interrupted  me.  "Do  not, 
my  dear  father,  I  beg  you,  utter  one  word  about  me. 
Speak  only  of  Jesus,  his  blood  and  righteousness.  I  am 
a  poor  sinner  saved  by  grace,  who  feels  her  un worthiness, 
and  laments  that,  having  so  short  a  life,  she  did  not  de- 
vote it  more  entirely  to  such  a  Saviour."  "  How,  then, 
is  it  that  not  a  cloud,  not  a  shadow  is  upon  the  brightness 
of  your  prospect?"  "  How  ?"  she  replied,  looking  up  into 
my  face  with  surprise,  "  How  ?  did  he  not  die  for  me? 
does  not  his  blood  cleanse  from  all  sin  ?"  Here  she  was 
convulsed  by  one  of  those  paroxysms  of  agony  which 
nearly  suffocated  her,  during  which  I  heard  her  murmur- 
ing in  broken  accents,  "Father,  not  my  will,  but  thine." 
As  soon  as  it  had  passed,  she  remarked,  with  a  smile  of 
angelic  sweetness,  "These  are  only  the  throes  of  the  poor 
body;  the  spirit  is  in  perfect  peace.  For  your  sakes  I 
hope  God  will  spare  me  these  spasms,  for  I  see  they 
overcome  you  ;  but  for  myself  I  scarcely  feel  them,  such 
is  the  blessedness  which  fills  my  whole  being  till  it  runs 
over.  I  desire  not  a  pang  less  than  my  Saviour  sees  good 
for  me.  He  does  all  things  well."  And  then,  resuming 
her  former  theme,  she  said,  "Washed  in  his  blood, 
how  can  I  doubt?  Clothed  in  his  spotless  righteousnes, 
what  can  I  fear?  'They  have  washed  their  robes  and 
made  them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.'  " 

Our  text  ascribes  the  Christian's  disenthrallment  from 
fear  to  the  "death  of  Jesus."  Socinians  tells  us  of  his 
virtues,  his  miracles,  his  example ;  and  if  they  refer  to 
his  crucifixion,  it  is  only  as  the  highest  exhibition  of 
disinterested  love,  or  as  a  proof  of  the  truth  of  his 
doctrine — bad  reasoning,  by  the  way,  for  a  man's  sealing 
his  creed  with  his  blood  has  nothing  to  do  with  its  truth. 
A  martyr  convinces  us  of  his  sincerity,  but  more  men 
have  died  for  error  than  for  truth.  The  Scriptures 
attribute  the  whole  of  salvation  to  the  blood,  the  death  of 
Christ.     This  fundamental  truth,  that  his  death  was  a 


The  Christian  Delivered  from  Fear  of  Death,     247 

real  satisfaction  for  sin.  foolish.men  have  denounced  as  a 
dogma  utterly  irrational.  But — while  the  atonement  is 
a  mystery— the  very  mystery  which  the  Apostle  declares, 

"  Eye  had  not  seen,  nor  car  heard,  neither  had  it  entered 
into  the  heart  of  man," — yet,  of  this  greal  doctrine,  as  of 
immortality,  I  affirm,  that  reason  and  revelation  speak 
with  one  voice. 

Without  at  all  discussing  the  inspired  account  of  the 
Fall,  it  is  a  matter  of  palpable  observation  and  experi- 
ence, that  man  is  a  fallen  being,  that  humanity  is  not  in 
its  normal  and  original  purity,  as  it  must  have  come 
from  the  hands  of  the  Creator.  Now — admitting  this 
degeneracy — I  can  form  no  idea  of  the  Deity  which  does 
nor  inspire  the  hope  that  he  will  interpose  to  rescue  us 
from  ruin,  and  restore  us  to  his  favor  and  his  image. 

More  than  that.  Such  an  expectation  is  confirmed  and 
raised  almost  to  certainty  by  multiplied  and  most  signifi- 
cant intimations,  which  I  find  in  God's  conduct  towards 
our  apostate  world.  For,  if  humanity  be  abandoned — 
if,  in  the  divine  contemplation,  there  had  been  no  purpose 
of  restoration,  why  has  the  race  been  continued?  why 
are  we  the  recipients  of  so  many  mercies?  why  so  much 
pains — such  care — so  many  heaven-appointed  checks  to 
restrain  us  from  vice?  why  so  many  motives  to  impel  us 
to  virtue?  why,  amidst  conscious  guilt  and  ruin,  has  man 
always  cherished  such  anticipations  of  an  august  de- 
liverer, that  Jesus  is  styled  "The  Desire  of  all  nations," 
and  the  whole  creation  is  represented  as  "groaning 
together,'''  travailing  in  the  pangs  of  a  magnificent  regen- 
eration ?  "When  the  old  men  wept  as  they  remembered 
the  gorgeousness  of  Solomon's  temple,  God  assured  them 
that  the  "  glory  of  the  latter  house  should  be  greater," 
because  the  Messiah  would  appear  in  its  courts.  And  in 
man's  very  nature  there  is  a  gospel  which,  while  he 
mourns  his  conscious  degeneracy,  inspires  the  noblest 
hopes  of  a  salvation,  which  shall  confer  upon  him  a  more 
abundant  life  than  that  received  at  creation — of  a  re- 
demption to  crown  him  with  a  glory  far  transcending 
that  of  Paradis  . 

And  then  see,  too,  how  enlightened  reason  confesses 
and  admires  the  harmony  of  this  "great  salvation"  with 


248  Richard  Fuller  s  Sermons. 

every  attribute  of  the  divide  Being.  In  the  satisfaction 
of  Calvary,  God's  justice  is  satisfied;  for,  on  the  very 
theatre  which  had  witnessed  the  dishonor  of  the  law, 
that  law  is  vindicated  and  magnified  :  God's  holiness  is 
satisfied;  for  Jesus  does  not  save  his  people  in  sin,  but 
from  sin.  In  the  Gospel  scheme  mercy  is  not  a  weakness 
— as  it  often  is  in  human  administrations, — it  is  the  ex- 
ercise of  amazing  love  and  compassion  through  an  ex- 
pedient which  awfully  asserts  the  inviolable  majesty  of 
Jehovah's  moral  government.  In  short,  from  the  vi- 
carious sufferings  of  the  Son  of  God  a  fresh  revenue  of 
honor  accrues  to  every  perfection  of  the  Deity.  They 
are  all  blended  into  a  belt  of  light,  a  zodiac  of  softened 
splendors,  which  illuminates  the  earth  with  joy,  irradiates 
heaven  with  new  raptures,  and  pours  fresh  adorable 
effulgence  upon  the  divine  character. 

I  was  right,  then,  when  I  affirmed,  not  only  that  there 
is  in  the  doctrine  of  the  atonement  nothing  to  shock  my 
intellect,  but  that  reason  stands  ready  to  welcome  such 
a  salvation  as  the  only  possible  salvation  for  man — if  in- 
deed it  be  revealed.  And  is  it  not  revealed?  Is  it  not 
the  great  revelation  of  the  Gospel  ?  Is  it  not  the  Gospel, 
"  the  good  news,"  "  the  glad  tidings  of  great  joy  ?"  Upon 
this  point  1  need  not  accumulate  proofs  from  the  sacred 
Oracles.  Thank  God,  I  am  addressinga  Christian  church. 
You  not  only  know  the  certainty  of  this  "  faithful  saying 
and  worthy  of  all  acceptation,"  but  yen  have  gladly 
received  it  as  the  foundation  of  all  your  faith  and  hope. 
Let  me  only  quote  a  single  text,  which  I  select  because  I 
am  speaking  of  our  deliverance  from  every  apprehension 
as  to  the  consequences  of  sin  in  eternit}7,  and  the  passage 
occurs  in  precisely  such  an  argument  addressed  by  Paul 
to  the  Corinthians.  "Moreover,  brethren,"  these  are 
his  words,  "  I  declare  unto  you  the  Gospel  which  I 
preached  unto  you,  which  also  ye  received,  and  wherein 
ye  stand,  by  which  also  ye  are  saved."  He  is  recapitu- 
lating, you  observe,  that  Gospel  which  was  the  substance 
of  all  his  preaching,  the  source  of  all  piety  to  his 
hearers,  and  the  only  ground  of  salvation.  Well, 
and  what  is  that  Gospel?  "For  I  delivered  unto 
you  first  of  all,  that    which    I   also   received,    how    that 


The  Christian  Delivered  from  Fan-  of  Death.    249 

Christ  died  for  our  sins  according  to  the  Scriptures." 
This,  then,  is  that  Gospel.  It  is  not  thai  Christ  died  as 
a  martyr,  but  that  he  "  died  for  our  sins."  There  was 
an  adequate  object  for  that  amazing  phenomenon,  the 

Lord  of  life  and  glory  expiring  upon  the  cross.  "He 
bore  our  sins  in  his  own  body  on  the  tree."  "He  who 
knew  no  sin  was  made  a  sin-offering  for  us."  This  is 
the  Gospel  ;  this  is  the  revelation  which  Paul  "received" 
from  God  ;  which  is  the  burden  of  all  the  "Scriptures," 
— the  adoring  theme  of  patriarchs,  prophets,  apostles; 
and  which,  acting  by  inspiration,  he  delivered  "first  of 
all,— predicated  as  the  great  doctrine  on  which  all  evan- 
gelical truth  rests, — as  thi  only  foundation  of  salvation 
which  can  be  laid — the  foundation  which  God  has  laid — 
and,  building  upon  which,  no  man,  no  matter  how 
multiplied  and  aggravated  his  guilt,  can  ever  be  dis- 
appointed. 

Christ  having  died  for  our  sins — having  carried  them 
with  him  up  on  the  cross, down  into  the  tomb, — and  hav- 
ing "risen  tor  our  justification," — his  resurrection  being 
the  proclamation  of  heaven  that  a  full  satisfaction  had 
been  made, — the  Holy  Spirit  assures  us  that  those  who 
believe  in  him  cannot  die  in  their  sins.  "  There  is, 
therefore,  now  no  condemnation  to  them  that  are  in  Christ 
Jesus."  Why  not?  Because  in  Christ,  they  died,  in 
Christ  they  rose,  in  Christ  they  perfectly  satisfied  the 
demands  of  justice.  After  this,  how  can  a  Christian 
have  a  single  doubt  or  fear?  Ah,  I  know  the  tempter 
sometimes  exerts  all  his  malignity  in  that  trying  moment 
when  the  child  of  God  is  enfeebled  by  disease,  when 
iiesli  and  heart  are  failing.  Satan  is  branded  by  inspi- 
ration as  "  the  accuser  of  the  brethren."  And  never  is  he 
more  subtle  and  malicious  than  wlien  he  employs  what 
the  Apostle  designates  as  the  "power  of  death  ;"  when 
he  assails  the  mind  during  its  conflict  with  the  last  en- 
emy, arraying  before  the  memory  all  the  sins  of  the  past, 
and  seeking  to  fill  the  conscience  with  alarms.  But,  let 
the  Christian  only  remember  "  whom  he  has  believed  ;" 
let  him  turn  from  these  suggestions  of  his  own  faith- 
lessness and  vileness,  and  fix  his  eyes  upon  the  Cross. 
One  single  look  there  will  be  enough  ;  all  terror  will  in- 


0~ 


50  Richard  Fullers  Sermons. 


stantly  vanish;  heavenly  peace,  assurance,  jov,  will  settle 
down  upon  his  soul. 

m  To  his  prophet  Zachariah,  God  disclosed  a  vision  which 
is  full  of  consolation  for  us.  "And  he  showed  me 
Joshua,  the  high  priest,  standing  before  the  angel  of  the 
Lord,  and  Satan  standing  at  his  right  hand  to  resist 
(accuse)  him.  And  die  Lord  said  unto  Satan,  The 
Lord  rebuke  thee,  0  Satan;  even  the  Lord  that  hath 
chosen  Jerusalem,  rebuke  thee.  Is  not  this  a  brand 
plucked  out  of  the  fire?  Now  Joshua  was  clothed  with 
filthy  garments,  and  stood  before  the  angel.  And  he 
answered,  and  spake  unto  those  that  stood  before  him, 
saying,  Take  away  the  filthy  garments  from  him.  And 
unto  him  he  said,  Behold  I  have  caused  thine  iniquity 
to  pass  from  thee,  and  I  will  clothe  thee  with  change  of 
raiment.  And  I  said,  Let  them  set  a  fair  mitre  upon 
his  head.  So  they  set  a  fair  mitre  upon  his  head,  and 
clothed  him  with  garments.  And  the  angel  of  the  Lord 
stood  by."  Here,  even  in  the  presence  of  the  Angel  of 
the  covenant,  the  devil  appears,  and  the  High  Priest 
himself  is  charged  with  defilement.  Nor  canine  man 
of  God  repel  the  impeachment:  for,  in  the  light  of  God's 
countenance,  all  his  righteousnesses  are  only  as  filthy 
apparel.  But  there  was  one  who  could  silence  the  ac- 
cuser; and  who  at  once  dispels  the  alarm  and  confusion 
of  his  servant,  by  assuring  him  that  he  was  a  brand 
plucked  by  sovereign  grace  from  the  burning,  that  all 
his  iniquity  was  taken  away,  that  he  should  receive  white 
garments  and  a  crown  of  righteousness  which  the  Lord, 
the  righteous  Judge,  would  give  him. 

TIL  The  last  mournful  and  fearful  thing  in  death  is 
the  parting  0f  all  sublunary  ties,  the  disruption  of  those 
cords  which  had  so  long  and  closely  bound  us  to  the 
earth.  In  this  view  death  is  a  shipwreck  of  all  our  affec- 
tions, associations,  possessions,  prospects,  hopes  and  joys. 
Everything  near  and  dear  to  us  is  comprehended  in 'that 
word  Life.  Death  rends  us  away  from  existence,  and 
seems  to  consign  its  victims  to  a  darkness  and  sterility 
only  the  more  dismal  by  their  contrast  with  the  bright- 
ness and  redundancy  of  life  in  the  world  around  us;— a 


The  Christ  in  n  Delivered  from  Fan'  of  Death.     251 


thought  this,  thai  explains  the  peculiar  sadness  with 
which,  amidst  the  dazzling  beauties  of  Spring,  the  heart 
recalls  the  images  of  those  whom  it  misses.  Jn  this  as- 
pect death  appears  especially  gloomy.  In  (his  aspect  the 
Gospel  is  especially  rich  in  revelations  which  rob  the 
grave  of  its  terrors.  But  it  is  just  in  this  view  of  death, 
and  of  the  power  of  the  Cross  to  raise  the  Christian  above 
every  fear  and  inspire  the  most  glorious  anticipations, 
that  a  preacher  feels  the  utter  inadequacy  of  all  human 
thought  and  language. 

I  have  told  you  that,  during  the  days  and  nights  which 
it  pleased  God  to  allow  ine  to  spend  in  that  chamber  so 
filled  with  heavenly  manifestations,  my  thoughts  turned 
to  yon.  And,  last  Sabbath,  at  this  very  hour,  you  were 
thinking  of  me,  your  prayers  were  ascending  for  me.  My 
beloved  brethren,  those  supplications  were  not  in  vain. — 
It  was  then,  above  all,  that  the  soul  of  my  child  was  rav- 
ished with  illapses  of  celestial  joy  which  seemed  too  much 
for  her  to  bear,  that  the  hearts  of  all  who  were  present 
burned  within  them,  and  their  eyes  overflowed  with  tears 
of  wonder,  love  and  adoration.  "This  light  affliction, 
which  is  but  for  a  moment,  worketh  out  for  me  a  far 
more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory."  "My  soul 
longeth,  yea  even  fainteth  for  the  courts  of  the  Lord." — 
"I  reckon  that  the  sufferings  of  this  present  time  are  not 
worthy  to  be  compared  with  the  glory  which  shall  be  re- 
vealed in  me."  "My  whole  being  is  flooded  with  unut- 
terable blessedness."  "I  rejoice  with  joy  unspeakable 
and  full  of  glory."  These  are  some  of  the  passages  she 
repeated  again  and  again  ;  but  I  can  give  you  no  idea  of 
the  tones  of  her  voice  trembling  with  delight,  of  the  rap- 
ture which  shone  in  her  eyes,  of  the  angelic  light 
which  suffused  her  whole  countenance.  All  this  was 
only  a  faint  morning  twilight  breaking  in  through  the 
decaying  tenement  of  clay, — only  a  few  feeble  rays  fall- 
ing upon  a  form  racked  with  pain.  What,  then,  must 
the  noontide  torrents  of  glory  be  to  the  emancipated 
spirit  exulting  in  immortal  vigor. 

We  see  one  dear  to  us  depart  in  peace,  we  are  assured 
of  the  soul's  higher,  everduring  life,  and  we  know  that 
sin  has  been  expiated;    but  how   irrepressible   are  our 


252  Richard  Fuller'' s  Sermons. 


yearnings  to  penetrate  the  unseen  world  and  learn  some- 
thins-  of  its  economy?  That  thinking,  rejoicing-  bein°\ 
which  was  here  but  a  moment  since,  where  is  it  now  ?  what 
is  it  now  ?  She,  so  long  and  intimately  present  with  me, 
so  recently  conversing  with  me,  how  does  she  now  exist? 
with  what  society  does  she  now  mingle?  what  are  her 
employments?  how  does  she  communicate  with  other 
spirits?  what  are  her  thoughts,  feelings,  enjoyments? — 
All  that  I  so  long  to  know,  she  is  this  instant  ex- 
periencing. Would  that  some  voice  would  solve  the  pro- 
blem; that  some  glimpse  could  dart  upon  my  mind. 

Reclining  on  her  Saviour's  bosom,  at  "  the  very 
gate  of  heaven,'' — I  use  her  own  words, — not  at  the  out- 
side of  the  gate  where  Jacob  lay  and  angels  could  reach 
him  only  by  a  ladder,  but  inside  among  the  angels, — my 
daughter  again  and  again  said  to  us,  "  Would  that  I  had 
words  to  utter  what  I  feel,  but  it  is  as  unspeakable  as  it 
is  full  of  glory."  In  short,  the  Holy  Spirit  tells  us  that 
"it  doth  not  yet  appear  what  we  shall  be."  And,  now, 
if  this  be  so,  of  course  1  can  only  impair  the  surpassing- 
grandeur  of  the  subject  by  attempting  to  say  anything 
upon  it. 

However, — as  the  text  declares  that  we  know  enough 
of  heaven  to  dissipate  all  gloomy  images  of  death, — let 
me  stammer  out  a  thought  or  two;  thoughts  which  are 
not  mine,  but  which  God  has  revealed  to  us  by  his  Spirit. 
Let  me  falter  out  some  of  these  ideas,  and,  then,  let  me 
ask  how  it  is  that  Christians  can  ever  speak  oflosses,  dis- 
ruptions, separations  at  death?  how  we  can  be  so  unbe- 
lieving as  to  afflict  ourselves— so  seltish  as  not  to  rejoice, 
when  one  Ave  love  has  escaped  from  this  vale  of  sorrow, 
and  passed  to  the  full  fruition  of  such  ''glory,  honor  and 
immortality." 

Regard  death  as  a  repose  from  all  which  makes  life  a 
sea  of  troubles,  a  ceaseless  struggle  with  fears  without  and 
fightings  within;  from  all  that  causes  the  heart  to  faint 
and  tempts  the  spirit  to  rebel.  "There  the  wicked  cease 
from  troubling,  and  the  weary  are  at  rest."  "There  re- 
maineth  a  rest  for  the  people  of  God," — rest  from  sin, 
temptation,  affliction,  disappointment,  fear,  pain,  sick- 
ness, all  infirmities  of  the  body,  the  mind,  the  spirit. 


Tlte  Christian  Delivered  from  Fear  of  Death.     &53 

Regard  death  as  an  emancipation  from  all  the  gross 
appetites  of  the  body,— from  all  those  passions,  those 
"fleshly  lusts  which  war  against  the  soul," — and  as  the 
full  gratification   of*  all    the  boundless  longings  of  the 

spirit  after  the  "beautiesof  holiness,"  after  perfect  trans- 
formation into  the  image  of  God.  "We  shall  he  like  him, 
for  we  shall  see  him  as  he  is."  "As  for  me  I  shall  be 
satisfied,  when  I  awake  with  thy  likeness."  "And  they 
shall  hunger  no  more,  neither  thirst  any  more,  neither 
shall  the  sun  light  on  them,  nor  any  heat.  For  the 
Lamb  which  is  in  the  midst  of  the  throne  shall  feed  them, 
and  shall  lead  them  unto  fountains  of  living  water.     And 

God  shall  wipe  away  all  tears  from  their  eyes;" all 

tears  of  sorrow, — but,  0  Lamb  of  God,  Redeemer  of  my 
soul,  never  shalt  thou  wipe  away  the  tears  of  love  and 
gratitude  with  which  I  will  wash  those  feet  once  pierced 
with  cruel  nails  for  me. 

Consider  death  as  the  translation  of  the  purified  spirit 
from  the  darkness  which  now  clouds  its  vision,  into  the 
clear  azure  radiance  which  bathes  and  ravishes  the  "saints 
in  light.'''  "Now  we  see  through  a  glass  darkly,  but 
then  face  to  face;  now  I  know  in  part,  but  then  shall  I 
know  even  as  also  1  am  known."  "And  there  shall  be 
no  night  there  ;  and  they  need  no  candle,  neither  light  of 
the  sun  ;  for  the  Lord  God  giveth  them  light,  and  they 
shall  reign  forever  and  ever."  "  The  sun  shall  be  no  more 
thy  light  by  day.  neither  for  brightness  shall  the  moon 
give  light  unto  thee;  but  the  Lord  shall  be  unto  thee  an 
everlasting  light,  and  thy  God  thy  glory. 

View  death  as  the  final  and  complete  overthrow  of  all 
our  spiritual  enemies: — as  the  hour  in  which  we  shall  be 
"more  than  conquerors  through  him  that  loved  us," — in 
which  we  shall  everlastingly  triumph  over  the  world, 
over  those  inward  foes  whose  treacherous  power  con- 
spires against  our  salvation,  over  "  the  last  enemy"  him- 
self. This  conflict  finished,  the  Christian  will  exclaim, 
"  Thanks  be  unto  God  who  giveth  us  the  victory  through 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ;"  the  whole  field  will  then  beclear, 
nothing  will  be  left  which  can  ever  molest  or  make  him 
afraid;  his  soul  will  expatiate  through  eternity,  at  d  find 
only  immortal  life  and  <rlorv.     "After  this  I  beheld,  and 

11 


254  Richard  Fuller  $  Sermons. 

lo,  a  great  multitude  "which  no  man  could  number,  of  all 
nations  and  kindreds,  and  people,  and  tongues,  stood  be- 
fore the  throne  and  before  the  Lamb,  clothed  with  white 
robes,  and  palms  in  their  hands.  And  one  of  the  elders 
answered,  saying  unto  me,  What  are  these  which  are 
arrayed  in  white  robes,  and  whence  come  they?  And  I 
said,  Sir,  thou  knowest  And  he  said  to  me.  These  are 
they  which  came  out  of  great  tribulation,  and  have 
washed  their  robes  and  made  them  white  in  the  blood  of 
the  Lamb."  "And  they  overcame  by  the  blood  of  the 
Lamb." 

Contemplate  death  as  the  investiture  of  the  child  and 
heir  of  God  with  the  full  reversion  of  glory  from  which 
he  had  been  so  long  debarred  in  this  house  of  his  bondage. 
To  convey  some  idea  of  this  glory,  inspiration  has  heaped 
up  and  exhausted  all  glowing  and  dazzling  imagery. — 
We  are  told  of  a  city  whose  streets  are  gold  ; — of  rivers 
of  water  pure  as  crystal  : — of  the  walls  of  the  city  re- 
splendent with  the  mingled  effulgence  of  diamonds,  ame- 
thysts, sapphires,  every  radiant  jewel,  with  the  illumin- 
ation of  all  gems ;— of  a  building  so  magnificent  that 
God  alone  could  be  its  architect,  rearing  and  garnishing 
it  with  all  the  exuberance  of  celestial  skill  and  affluence  ; 
— of  regal  sceptres,  diadems,  thrones; — of  a  glory  which 
shall  cause  cherubim  and  seraphim  forever  to  gaze  upon 
the  saints  and  to  ••admire  in  them  M  the  matchless  beau- 
ties of  the  Redeemer  himself; — of  a  glory,  an  exceeding 
glory,  a  far  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory  ; 
— of  the  mediatorial  glory  of  the  Son  of  God  in  whose 
victorious  honors  all  the  ransomed  shall  share,  being  glo- 
rified together  with  him,  "  sitting  with  him  in  his  throne 
even  as  he  sits  in  his  Father's  throne." 

We  speak  oi'  the  bitter  separations  caused  by  death ; 
and  to  the  living  they  are  bitter,  heart  rending.  But 
think  of  the  society  into  which  the  soul  is  then  intro- 
duced. Here,  how  unsatisfying  are  all  our  friendships  ; 
how  impossible,  even  in  the  dearest  associations,  to  find 
perfect  congeniality  and  sympathy;  how  foolish  to  apply 
the  term  permanent  to  unions  so  easily  impaired,  and 
which,  however  sincere,  must  to-morrow  be  dissolved. 
In  heaven  we  shall  experience  all  the   delights  of  the 


The  Christian  Delivered  front  Fear  of  Death. 


purest  love,  of  the  mosl  tender  intimacies,  of  the  divin 
communications, of  harmonies  which  Jesus  declares  shalJ 
be  as  ineffable  and  eternal  as  those  between  him  and  his 

Father.  "  Ye  are  come  unto  Mount  Xion,  and  unto  the 
city  of  the  living  God,  the  heavenly  Jerusalem,  and  to  an 
innumerable  company  of  angels,  to  the  general  assembly 
and  church  of  the  first  born,  which  are  written  in  heaven, 
and  to  the  spirits  of  the  justified  made  perfect," 

I  had  just  repeated  this  glowing  passage  to  my  dying 

child,  when,  lifting  her  eyes  to  heaven,  she  at  once  said, 
"  Yes,  and  oh,  to  him,  to  him,  to  Jesus."  Take  in  that 
thought.  "  Father,  J  will  that  they  also  whom  thou 
hast  given  me,  be  with  me  where  1  am;"  death  accom- 
plishes this  prayer,  death  wafts  me  to  the  arms  of  my 
Redeemer.  Who  can  conceive  the  rapture  of  that  meet- 
ing— the  eternity  of  blessedness  concentrated  in  that 
first  embrace  ?  There  he  is !  that  Jesus  in  whom  I 
believed;  in  whom — when  I  saw  him  not — I  rejoiced  with 
joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory.  My  beloved  is  now 
mine,  and  I  am  his  forever;  nor  can  height,  nor  depth, 
not  length,  nor  breadth  ever  again  separate  me  from  this 
"  fairest  among  ten  thousand,  and  altogether  lovely," — 
ever  again  interrupt  the  seraphic  ardors  which  absorb 
my  soul. 

Nor  only  this  outward  and  ravishing  beauty  of  the 
divine  "Mediator  of  the  new  covenant."  Death  bears 
the  purified  spirit  "  to  God  ;"  reveals  the  glories  of  the 
Godhead  spiritually,  directly,  clearly.  This  is  the 
beatific  vision — the  soul's  highest  delight,  its  perfection 
in  knowledge,  sanctity,  love,  bliss.  "  Blessed  are  the 
pure  in  heart,  for  they  shall  see  God."  "  Therefore  are 
they  before  the  throne  of  God,  and  serve  him  day  and 
night  in  his  temple,  and  he  that  sitteth  on  the  throne 
shall  dwell  among  them." 

But  I  shall  never  have  done;  and  after  having  said  all, 
I  would  feel  that  I  had  said  nothing — that  L  had  only 
faltered  out  some  imbecilities  and  incoherences.  How- 
ever, these  incoherencies  and  imbecilities  are  not  rhapso- 
dies, they  are — to  employ  the  Apostle's  idea — the  inartic- 
ulate lispings  of  achild  who  catches  some  glimpses  of  the 
excellent  glory  vouchsafed  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  but  can 


256  Richard  Fuller  s  Sermons, 

neither  comprehend,  nor  utter  what  he  feels.  And,  now 
enter  if  you  can — enter  as  well  as  you  can — into  these 
thoughts,  unite  them,  give  full  plumage  to  your  faith,  let 
imagination  transport  you  to  those  abodes  of  purity,  love, 
and  blessedness.  After  this,  comeback  to  earth,  and  say 
to  yourself, — My  friend,  my  father,  my  mother,  my  wife, 
my  child  has  passed  from  a  world  of  sorrow,  and  is  now 
in  full  possession  of  all  this  felicity,  comprehends  all  this 
felicity,  experiences  all  these  joys,  raptures,  ecstasies; 
and  will  be  entranced  with  new,  ever  increasing  joys, 
raptures,  ecstacies,  while  the  ages  of  eternity  roll  on. 

For  my  part,  I  am  overwhelmed  by  the  reflection',  that 
for  man,  for  sinners,  such  things  have  been  prepared  by 
God.  If  a  single  shadow  could  dim  the  triumphant  ex- 
ultation of  my  soul,  it  would  be  a  doubt  whether  such  a 
destiny  can  indeed  be  ours.  But  eternal  truth  dissipates 
all  doubt.  God's  word  dispels  every  fear  and  gives  an  as- 
surance as  immovable  as  his  throne.  On  every  page 
of  this  volume  I  find  the  certainty  of  these  things 
forever  settled.  Above  all,  when  I  fix  my  eyes  upon  the 
Cross,  I  glory  in  a  faith  which  "is  the  substance" — the 
unequivocal  evidence — of  these  unseen  realities.  "  He 
that  spared  not  his  own  Son.  but  delivered  him  up  for  us 
all,  how  shall  he  not  with  him  also  freely  give  us  all 
things  ?  What  treasures  can  God's  wealth  possess,  God's 
love  bestow,  which  are  too  rich  after  such  a  donation? 
'  If  children,  then  heirs,  heirs  of  God  and  joint  heirs 
with  Christ."  Yes,  "all  things  are  ours,  whether  life,  or 
death,  things  present,  or  things  to  come,  all  are  ours;" 
and  ours  by  no  foreign  conveyance,  no  doubtful  claim, 
but  indefeasibly,  by  the  most  amazing  title,  by  our  new 
birthright;  ours  because  we  are  the  children  and  heirs 
of  God. 

And  now  what  shall  I  say  to  these  things?  My  soul, 
if  these  truths  are  unmeaning  sounds  to  thee,  if  they  do 
not  inspire  the  noblest  gratitude  and  joy,  the  fault  is 
thine  own;  thou  art  "  loading  thyself  with  thick  clay," 
thou  art  debasing  thyself  in  the  pursuit  of  "lying  vani- 
ties," and  forgetting  a  heritage  which  turns  the  whole 
earth  into  contempt.  After  this,  shall  death  be  formid- 
able to  me  ?     "Who  does  not  long  for  that  city,  out  of 


The  Christian  Delivered  from  Fear  of  Dea(h.     257 

which  do  friend  departs,  into  which  no  enemy  enters?* 
And  when  one  I  love  has  been  mercifully  removed  from 
this  scene  of  tribulation  to  those  mansions  of  glory,  can 
I  wish  to  bring  her  back  again?  We  speak  of  death  as 
a  gloomy  valley — ah,  radiant  gloom,  brightened  by  her 
Saviour's  presence,  through  which  angels  bore  her  re- 
joicing spirit  up  to  the  bosom  of  her  God.  We  mourn 
the  loss  she  lias  suffered  in  death; — inestimable  loss  by 
which  she  has  gained  "an  inheritance  among  the  saints  in 
light."  We  represent  death  as  a  shipwreck; — blessed 
shipwreck,  which  has  rescued  her  from  all  the  storms, 
surges,  fears,  sufferings  of  a  weary  voyage,  and  stranded 
her  sonl  upon  "an  inheritance,  incorruptible,  undefiled, 
and  that  fadeth  not  away." 

But  it  is  time  to  finish.  My  friends,  God  declares 
that  when  he  afflicts  a  pastor,  it  is  "for  your  consolation 
and  salvation.*'  Upon  some  of  yon,  all  my  preaching 
from  this  desk  and  from  house  to  house,  all  my  exhorta- 
tions and  tears  have  been  fruitless;  shall  my  repeated 
sorrows  also  be  in  vain  ?  Is  it  not  high  time  to  awake 
out  of  sleep  and  come  to  Christ,  that  he  may  give  you 
life  ?  Twice,  and  in  quick  succession,  have  my  afflictions 
appealed  to  the  young  in  this  congregation,  and  admon- 
ished them  that  death  envies  those  who  seem  to  bid 
fairest  for  many  years.  I  implore  the  young  not  to 
despise  these  touching,  piercing  calls  from  eternity,  but 
to  cast  themselves  upon  the  Saviour  and  receive  the 
mercy  he  offers.  Some  of  you  are  advanced  in  life  ;  is  it 
not  unutterable  infa' nation  to  put  away  the  thought  of 
death,  and,  while  "'gray  hairs  are  here  and  there  upon 
you,'  still  to  neglect  so  great  salvation?  All  of  you,  all 
of  you,  before  it  shall  be  forever  too  late,  be  warned,  be 
wise.  This  immortality  is  yours;  will  you  make  it  an 
immortality  of  darkness  and  despair?  To  you,  all  the 
exceeding  riches  of  Christ's  atonement,  all  the  glory  and 
blessedness  of  heaven  are  freely  proffered  ;  will  you  reject 
them,  and  plant  thorns  in  your  dying  pillow,  and  pre- 
cipitate yourselves  into  abysses  of  everlasting  misery  ? 


*"  Quis  non  desideret  illam  civitatem,  undc  amicus  non  exit, 
quo  iuiuiicus  nou  intrat'r" — Augustine. 


258  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

But  I  have  no  heart  to-day  for  sucli  gloomy  thoughts. 
Christians,  my  dearly  beloved  brethren,  I  turn  to  you. 
Would  that  I  could  make  you  feel  this  subject  as  I  do; 
after  all,  however,  if  you  are  Christians,  the  truths  you 
have  heard  are  to  you  the  realities  of  faith.  And,  now, 
is  it  not  deplorable  that  you  still  regard  death  as  most  of 
you  do?  that — while  in  the  New  Testament  death  is 
constantly  represented  as  a  consummation  "far  better" 
than  life;  while  the  first  Christians  had  "a  desire  to 
depart  and  be  with  Christ ;"  while  they  were  "ever  look- 
ing for,  and  hasting  to,  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  God ;" 
while  they  habitually  viewed  the  body  as  only  "  the 
tent  "  *  in  which  the  soul  tarries  a  few  days,  and  rejoiced 
in  the  certainty  that  as  soon  as  the  tabernacle  should  be 
taken  down  the  soul  would  enter  into  "a  building  of 
God, a  house  notmad.e  with  hands, eternal  in  theheavens;" 
while  they  groaned,  earnestly  desiring  to  exchange  this 
temporary  abode  for  celestial  mansions,  for  royal  garments 
in  the  skies;  while  they  longed  that  "  mortality  should 
be  swallowed  up  in  life  " — the  mortal  life  be  merged  in 

the   immortal; is   it   not  lamentable,  that,   while 

these  aspirations  glowed  in  their  bosoms,  and  these  pros- 
pects filled  them  with  rapture,  we  feel  none  of  the  sub- 
lime attractions  of  the  tomb,  the  grave  appears  to  us 
thronged  with  dreadful  aspects,  we  shrink  from  death  as 
the  direst  calamity,  anticipate  it  as  a  sad  necessity,  com- 
pared with  which  the  weariest  and  most  wretched  earthly 
life  is  a  sort  of  paradise.  How  is  it,  that  our  theology, 
our  sermons,  our  prayers,  our  very  hymns  are  all  wrong  as 
to  a  matter  of  such  infinite  importance  ? 

Alas,  the  reason  is  too  manifest.  We  have  no  realiz- 
ing sense  of  our  immortality.  We  plunge  into  the 
world,  and  are  so  absorbed  by  its  cares  and  projects,  that 
eternal  life  is  to  us  only  an  empty  idea.  We  do  not  med- 
itate upon  the  Cross  and  its  soul  subliming  revelations, 
and  hence  do  not  glory  in  it,  nor  experience  its  power  to 
lift  us  above  all  fear  of  condemnation.  We  drive  hard 
after  earthly  pleasures,  riches,  honors,  devote  no  time  to 
heavenly  contemplations,  and  thus  debase  our  spiritual 


*II  Corinthians  v:  1—5. 


The  Christian  Delivered  from  Fear  of  Death.     259 


capacities,  and  averl  our  eyes  from  the  pleasures,  riches, 
honors  reserved  for  ns  beyond  the  skies. 

I  beseech  you,  J  adjure  you,  lei  not  the  afflictions  of  a 
pastor  who  loves  you  with  his  whole  heart  he  lost  upon 
you.  If  you  frustrate  the  gracious  purpose  of  God 
towards  you  in  these  strokes,  under  which  my  heart 
bleeds,  he  may  send  others  upon  me,  and  "  break  me 
with  breach  upon  breach."  Have  pity  upon  me,  0,  my 
friends,  and  spare  me,  "lest  I  should  have  sorrow  upon 
sorrow."  But  recollect,  if  your  pastor's  afflictions  will 
not  do,  God  may  turn  his  hand  upon  you,  and  chasten 
you  in  his  sore  displeasure,  and  heap  desolation  upon 
your  hearths. 

At  all  events,  sickness,  sorrow,  death  must  one  day 
enter  your  habitations.  Prepare  to  meet  them.  Ponder 
the  truths  to  which  you  have  listened,  that  you  may  be 
armed  for  the  trying  hour.  I  bow  my  knees  to  the 
Father  of  mercy,  that  your  dear  children  may  be  con- 
tinued to  you  ;  but  0,  give  yourselves  no  rest,  give  God 
no  rest,  day  nor  night,  until  they  be  all  gathered  to 
Jesus; — that  so,  if  they  should  be  taken,  you  may  know 
the  unspeakable  solace  which  sweetens  my  otherwise 
overwhelming  bereavements,  and  without  which  grief 
would  bury  itself  in  the  depths  of  my  heart  and  consume 
all  my  life. 

I  feel  that  there  has  been  much  which  is  personal  in 

this  discourse,  but  I  know  you  will  bear  it  with  indul- 
gence. The  thoughts  and  emotions  which,  while  I  sat 
in  that  glorified  chamber,  exalted  my  soul  to  heaven  in 
the  consciousness  of  new  and  ravishing  manifestations  of 
the  Redeemer  "in  me," — and  which  have  vainly  strug- 
gled for  utterance  here  to-day,  may  appear  to  you  too 
hallowed  for  such  a  public  communication.  They  at 
first  seemed  to  me  as  revelations  which,  like  Mary,  1 
ought  to  "  keep  and  ponder  in  my  own  heart."  But  the 
more  I  have  mused  on  them,  the  more  has  the  tire 
burned,  and  the  more  have  I  been  compelled  to  speak 
with  my  tongue.  "What  I  shew  you  in  secret."  says 
Jesus,  "that  speak  ye  in  the  light;  what  ye  hear  in  the 
ear,  that  preach  ye  on  the  house  tops."  And,  now,  why 
should  I  not  open  to  you  all  my  heart,  and  tell  you,  that 


260  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

the  last  Thursday  was  the  only  real  thanksgiving  day  I 
ever  passed  in  my  life.  It  was,  you  remember,  the  day 
appointed  for  the  public  acknowledgment  of  mercies 
received  from  God.  Its  early  dawn  found  me  beside  the 
couch  upon  which  lay,  in  all  the  surpassing  loveliness  of 
death,  that  form  so  long  and  tenderly  cherished.  There 
I  Sat  "in  bitterness  for  my  first-born,"  but  serene  with 
heavenly  consolations — feeling  that  heaven  was  only  an 
apartment  of  my  own  house,  in  which  she  was  waiting 
for  me;  and  there  the  tempter  dared  to  intrude,  and  to 
profane  even  the  sanctity  of  that  shrine  with  his  loath- 
some suggestions.  Yes,  he  whispered,  this  is  thanksgiv- 
ing day  ;  and  you  at  least  ought  to  observe  it  with  devout 
gratitude  ;  for  the  God  you  worship  has  loaded  you  with 
benefits.  Without  any  fault  of  yours,  nay  in  spite  of 
your  earnest  efforts,  the  country  you  love  is  rent  by  civil 
war.  Your  dear  native  State  has  been  invaded.  The 
place  of  your  birth,  the  scenes  of  your  childhood  and 
youth,  are  laid  waste.  Your  earliest  friends,  all  who 
have  cherished  you  and  been  endeared  to  you  from  your 
infancy,  are  driven  as  exiles  from  their  old  ancestral 
homes,  and  the  temple  in  which  you  first  preached  Jesus 
is  hung  in  sackcloth.  You,  too,  are  reduced  to  compar- 
ative poverty;  and,  in  a  few  brief  months,  blow  after 
blow  has  beat  relentlessly  upon  your  heart,  and  torn 
from  you  those  in  whom  your  life  was  bound  up.  You, 
at  least,  ought  to  adore  the  tender  mercies  of  your  God 

to-day.     He  has  been  very  good  to  you. With  such 

infernal  thoughts  was  my  soul  insulted  by  the  arch 
enemy  of  God  and  man  ;  but  oh  !  the  peace  of  God 
which  passeth  all  understanding,  the  gratitude  and  joy 
which  overflowed  in  gushing  tears,  as  I  turned  away,  and 
exclaimed,  "  Bless  the  Lord,  0  my  soul,  and  all  that  is 
within  me  bless  his  holy  name."  And  all  day  long  that 
psalm  made  melody  in  my  heart ;  and  "  in  the  night  that 
song  Avas  with  me,  and  my  prayer  unto  the  God  of  my 
life."  Yes,  I  then  knew  all  that  David  could  have  ex- 
perienced, when  he  said,  "  Because  thy  loving  kindness 
is  better  than  life,  my  lips  shall  praise  thee.  Thus  will 
I  bless  thee  while  I  live;  I  will  lift  up  my  hands  in  thy 
name.  My  soul  shall  be  satisfied  as  with  marrow  and 
fatness,  and  my  mouth  shall  praise  thee  with  joyful  lips, 


The  Christian  Delivered  from  Fear  of  Deafh.    201 

when  I  remember  thee  upon  my  bed,  and  think  on  thee 
in  the  night  watches." 

Be  prepared,  my  brethren,  for  the  hour  when  your 
homes  shall  become  houses  of  mourning;  be  prepared  to 
meet  death  yourselves.  "Be  ye  also  ready,  for  in  such 
an  hour  as  ye  think  not  the  Son  of  Man  cometh."  Study 
carefully  the  text  upon  which  I  have  attempted  to  preach 
to  you,  replenish  your  minds  with  its  exhaustless  conso- 
lations, and  supplicate  the  aids  of  the  Spirit  whose  office 
it  is  to  "  take  of  the  things  of  Christ  and  shew  them 
unto  us."  Life  and  immortality, — take  in  all  the  glory 
of  these  words.  The  mansions  to  which  Jesus  has  gone, 
to  which  those  so  dear  to  you  have  passed,  and  the  at- 
tractions of  which  you  now  feel, — let  those  mansions  be 
kept  steadily  in  view.  Above  all,  ascend  Mount  Calvary, 
and  make  its  summit  the  Pisgah  of  your  souls.  Live 
near  the  Cross,  in  contrite  confession  of  sin,  in  simple 
childlike  faith,  in  adoring  gratitude,  in  reverential  sym- 
pathy with  that  amazing  mystery  of  love,  that  altar  and 
that  sacrifice. 

Ah  !  I  shall  soon  be  ("lying, 

Time  swiftly  glides  away  ; 
But  on  my  Lord  relying, 

1  hail  the  happy  day. 

The  day  when  I  must  enter 

Upon  a  world  unknown, 
My  helpless  soul  I  venture 

On  Jesus  Christ  alone. 

lie  once,  a  spotless  victim 

Upon  Mount  Calvary  bled, 
Jehovah  did  afflict  him, 

And  bruise  him  in  my  stead. 

Hence,  all  my  hope  arises, 

Unworthy  as  I  am, 
My  soul  most  surely  prizes 

The  sin-atoning  Lamb. 

To  him  by  grace  united, 

I  joy  in  him  alone, 
And  now,  by  faith  delighted, 

Behold  him  on  his  throne. 
11   * 


262 


Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 


There  he  is  interceding 
For  all  who  on  him  rest, 

The  grace  from  him  proceeding 
SJiall  waft  me  to  his  breast. 

Then,  with  the  saints  in  glory, 
The  grateful  song  I'll  raise, 

And  chant  my  blissful  story, 
In  high  seraphic  lays. 

Free  grace,  redeeming  merit, 
And  sanctifying  love, 

Of  Father,  Son  and  Spirit, 
Shall  charm  the  courts  above. 


Prosperity  and  Adversity.  263 


Sermon  jFourtccutft- 


PROSPERITY  and  ADVERSITY. 

ik  I  spake  unto  thee  in  thy  prosperity,  but  thou  saidst,  I  will  not  hear. 
This  hath  been  thy  manner  from  thy  youth,  that  thou  obeyedst  not  my 
voice."— Jeremiah  xxii:  21. 

"When  he  slew  them  then  they  sought  him ;  and  they  returned  and  en- 
quired eariy  after  God  ;  and  they  remembered  that  God  was  their  rock 
and  the  High  God  their  Redeemer.  Nevertheless  they  did  flatter  him 
with  their  mouth,  and  they  lied  unto  him  with  their  tongues-" — Psalm 
xxviii  :  34,  35,  33. 

IF  God  is  ever  irresistible  to  an  ingenuous  heart,  it  is 
when  he  suspends  his  awful  authority,  condescends  to 
reason  with  guilty  man,  and  to  complain  of  his  ingrati- 
tude and  obduracy.  On  more  than  one  occasion  he  thus 
addresses  us,  and  always  in  language  exceedingly 
pathetic. 

''Hear  ye  now  what  the  Lord  saith.  Arise,  contend 
before  the  mountains,  and  let  the  hills  hear  thy  voice. 
Hear  ye,  0  mountains,  the  Lord's  controversy,  and  ye 
strong  foundations  of  the  earth;  for  the  Lord  hath  a 
controversy  with  his  people,  and  he  will  plead  with  Is- 
rael/*' At  a  proclamation  like  this,  at  the  thought  of 
such  a  cause,  such  an  audience,  such  an  adversary,  the 
mind  becomes  agitated,  the  conscience  frightened;  al- 
ready the  earth  seems  to  heave,  the  ocean  to  toss  its  angry 
surges,  the  mountains  to  burn  with  fire,  the  stars  in  their 
courses  to  marshal  their  glittering  hosts,  and  the  sun  to 
collect  his  beams  into  a  focal  blaze,  that  they  may  fight 
against  us.  And  we  exclaim,  "Will  he  plead  against  me 
with  his  great  power  ?  he  is  not  a  man  as  I  am  that  I 
should  answer,  and  we  should  come  together  in  judgment. 
Though  I  were  righteous,  yet  would  I  not  answer,  but  I 
would  make  supplication  to  my  judge."     "Let  not  God 


284  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

speak  unto  us  lest  we  die."  But  calm  your  fears.  It  is 
not  as  an  enemy,  but  as  a  friend  wounded  by  our  un- 
kindness,  that  God  invites  us  to  this  interview.  He  ap- 
pears, not  to  overwhelm  us  with  his  juslice,  but  in  love 
and  tenderness  he  says,  4,0  my  people  what  have  1  done 
unto  thee?  and  wherein  have  I  wearied  thee?  testify 
against  me."  So.  in  another  affecting  appeal  to  all  nature, 
animate  and  inanimate,  it  is  not  an  insulted  sovereign, 
but  a  wronged  and  injured  Father  who  speaks.     "Hear, 

0  heavens,  and  give  ear,  0  earth,  for  the  Lord  hath  spoken. 

1  have  nourished  and  brought  up  children  and  they 
have  rebelled  agiinst  me.  The  ox  knoweth  his  owner, 
and  the  ass  his  master's  crib ;  but  Israel  doth  not  know, 
my  people  doth  not  consider." 

In  each  of  the  passages  just  announced,  as  our  text, 
God  touchingly  expostulates  with  us  as  to  our  conduct 
to  him.  \\\  the  former  he  complains,  that  when  he  blesses 
and  prospers  us  we  repel  his  counsels.  In  the  iatter  he 
upbraids  ns  with  the  perlidiousnessof  vows  and  reforma- 
tions which  only  mock  him  when  he  chastens  us.  I  ask 
your  attention  to  truths  so  calculated  to  humble  us  in 
penitential  sorrow,  and,  at  the  same  time,  to  inspire  grat- 
itude and  love  towards  him  who  doth  not  willingly 
afflict  the  children  of  men,  but  in  all  his  dealings  seeks 
our  ''profit  that  we  may  be  partakers  of  his  holiness." 

I.  When  God  would  give  the  prophet  Ezekiel  an  em- 
blem of  his  providence,  he  showed  him  a  "wheel  within 
a  wheel,  and  the  spirit  of  the  living  creatures  in  the 
wheels;"' — thus  declaring  that,  while  all  events  are  or- 
dered by  his  direct  interposition,  much  must  be  inscru- 
table; and  that  his  purposes  move  on  by  revolutions. 
This  applies  not  only  to  his  economy  in  those  great 
"events  which  shape  the  growing  stature  of  the  world," 
but  to  the  history  of  families  and  individuals;  for  their 
fortunes,  like  the  spokes  of  a  wheel,  are  ever  alternating 
— now  culminating,  now  subsiding  to  the  ground.  And 
we  begin  by  glancing  at  prosperity  and   its  dangers. 

"In  thy  prosperity  ;" — nor  is  thereone  in  this  assembly 
to  whom  this  language  may  not  be  addressed.  There  is 
not  one  of  you  all  who  has  not  received  a  thousand  bless- 


Prosperity  end  Adversity,  265 


iuo-s  from  the  hand  of  God.  Ele  breathed  into  your 
nostrils  the  >reath  of  life,  and  from  the  cradle  to  this 
hour  he  has  nourished  and  brought  you  up.  K or  you 
ho  formed  the  earth,  garnishing  it  with  beauty;  and  tor 
you  he  spread  the  heavens,  kindling  in  them  the  sun 
and  moon  and  stars.  The  curious  mechanism  oi  your 
body,  with  its  exquisite  contrivances  all  so  beneficently 
framed  to  communicate  sensations  of  pleasure  ;  the  heart 
with  all  its  flooding  tides  of  love  and  hope  and  joy  ;  the 
mind  with  its  mysterious  world  of  thoughts,  fancies,  - 
imaginations;  these  are  his  gifts,  the  tokens  of  his  care. 
Then,  too,  his  ever  wakeful  parental  kindness  hath  been 
about  your  path,  and  about  your  bed  by  day  and  by 
night  "  Forsaken  by  him  you  would  have  been  over- 
whelmed in  hopeless  misery;  nay,  you  would  long  since 
have  sunk  into  the  depths  of  eternal  perdition  ;  but 
goodness  and  mercy  have  followed  you  all  the  days  ot 
your  life.  And  "in  thy  prosperity,"— when  health 
bounded  along  your  veins  and  mantled  in  your  cheeks,— 
when  your  soul  rioted  in  cheerfulness,— when  your  plans 
and  hopes  had  been  crowned  with  success,— when  your 
home  was  the  abode  of  happiness,  and  morning  and 
evening  your  board  and  your  hearth  laughed  with  the 
presence  of  all  you  loved; -no  sorrow,  no  sickness,  no 
death,  no  bitter  missing;— "in  thy  prosperity,"  when  all 
was  sunshine  and  gladness,  and  it  seemed,  not  that  you 
would  "die  in  your  nest,"  but  that  you  would  live  in 
your  nest  forever ;— then,  "in  thy  prosperity,  I  spake 
unto  thee." 

Whether  we  be  in  prosperity  or  adversity,  God  is  ever 
speaking  to  us,  Jesus  still  stands  at  the  door  and  knocks. 
Nor  does  he  only  knock,  he  speaks.  And  now,  what 
does  God  say  to  us  in  our  prosperity?  what  are  the  les- 
sons he  seeks  to  impart  by  his  providence,  his  word,  his 
Holy  Spirit  ?     Listen,  I  am  going  to  tell  you. 

And  first,  in  the  day  of  prosperity  God's  Love  speaks 
to  us ;  'speaks  to  us  of  love  and  gratitude.  By  goodness 
and  mercy  the  most  affectionate  of  fathers  appeals  to  our 
hearts,  seeking  to  reach  and  melt  and  win  them.  He 
says,  "My  son,  give  me  thy  heart."  He  whispers,  " V\  ith 
loving  kindness' have  I  drawn  thee." 


266  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

The  apostle  urges  with  great  earnestness  a  remonstrance 
of  most  awful  yet  touching  import.  He  sa)rs,  "ThinJccst 
thou  this,  Oman,  that  thou  shalt  escape  the  judgment  of 
God  ?  not  knowing  that  the  goodness  of  God  leadeth  thee 
to  repentance  f  Men  of  this  world,  absorbed  in  the  cares 
and  calculations  of  business,  can  you  be  careless  of  your 
immortal  interests  ?  Can  you  forget  the  sentence  which 
rests  upon  you  for  sin,  and  that  except  you  repent  you 
must  perish  ?  Votaries  of  ambition,  mad  upon  your  idols, 
intoxicated  by  a  delirious  fury  after  the  honors  of  this 
earth,  can  you  despise  the  honor  which  God  gives?  can 
you  brave  the  shame  and  everlasting  contempt  to  which 
you  must  awake,  except  you  repent  ?  Sons  and  daughters 
of  frivolity  and  fashion,  can  you  dance  the  giddy  round 
of  folly,  and  banish  the  thought  that  the  pleasures  of 
sin  are  but  for  a  season  ;  that  for  all  these  things  God 
will  bring  you  into  judgment,  and  that  then  these  de- 
lights will  augment  the  anguish  of  eternity,  except  you 
repent? 

Yes,  though  judgment  linger,  it  will  come.  All  must 
repent  or  perish ;  and  by  his  mercies  God  seeks  to  bring 
us  to  repentance.  He  has  other  means  which  he  might 
employ,  but  they  are  his  "strange  work;'5  he  prefers  to 
recall  us  to  himself  by  goodness.  Hence,  although  no 
thought  can  conceive  the  hatred  with  which  he  regards 
the  least  sin,  he  follows  with  mercies  those  who  hourly 
insult  him  with  their  crimes;  causing  his  sun  to  shine 
on  the  evil  as  on  the  good,  sending  his  rain  upon  the  just 
and  the  unjust.  Though  his  word  and  our  very  nature 
teach  us  how  abominable  ingratitude  must  be  in  his  eyes, 
he  yet  multiplies  blessings  upon  those  who  requite  all 
with  contempt.  Not  by  commands  addressed  to  our 
fears,  but  by  a  thousand  marks  of  affectionate  bounty,  he 
seeks  to  form  a  friendship  with  us.  And  as  Ave  love  and 
honor  our  parents  because  they  are  the  authors  of  our  life 
and  on  account  of  their  devoted  care  of  us  through  all 
the  helplessness  of  childhood, — so  he  would  awake  in  our 
souls  sentiments  of  duty,  of  filial,  reverential  affection 
toward  him  as  our  Father  in  heaven. 

In  the  day  of  prosperity  God's  wisdom  speaks  to  us; 
speaks  of  heavenly  wisdom;  counsels  us  to  improve  the 


Prosperity  and  Adversity*  -r>^ 


blessings  \ve  enjoy,  thai  our  wealth  may  secure  the  true 
riches,  our  prosperity  may  ensure  everlasting  rewards. — 
Not    by  hare  authority,  but    by  favors  which  "are  new 
every  morning,"  our  heavenly  Father  seeks  to  soften  and 
subdue  our  hearts, that  thus  to  temporal  he  may  add  spir- 
itual blessings.     He  wishes  to  win  our  gratitude,  that  we 
may  devote  ourselves  cordially  and  nobly  to  his  service; 
that  we  may  not  only  love  him  but  be  like  him  in  diffus- 
ing happiness  around  us.     He  says,  "  Freely  ye  have  re- 
ceived, freely  give."     God  is  no  churl,  no  foe  to  any  ra- 
tional pleasure  ;  he  gives  all  things  richly  to  enjoy;  gives 
not  only  bread  to  satisfy  our  hunger,  but  fruits  with  their 
delicious  juices,  and   flowers  arrayed  in  every  beautiful 
hue  and  exhaling  every  fragrant  perfume.     He  scatters 
wide,  with  an  almost  lavish  hand,  provisions  not  only  for 
our  wants,  but  for  our  tastes  and  sensibilities.     And  he 
says,  "  In   the  day  of  prosperity  be  joyful."     He  would 
have  all  creation  bid  you  rejoice.     The  sun,  the  trooping 
stars,  the  trees  and  shrubs  in  your  gardens,  the  waving 
treasures  of  your  fields,  the  abundance  of  your  storehouses, 
the  rich  returns  of  commerce,  the  precious  metals  from 
under  the   earth,  the    sparkling   stream,  hill   and  valley 
and  variegated  landscape,  the  winds,  the  waves,  all  crea- 
tion— he  would  have  all  repeat  that  exhortation,  "Be  joy- 
ful."    But  it  ought  to  be  joy  in  the  Lord, — the  joy  of  a 
grateful  heart  which  daily  exclaims,  '•  What  shall  I  ren- 
der unto  the  Lord  for  all  his  benefits  toward  me?     I  will 
take  the  cup  of  salvation  and  call  upon  the  name  of  the 
Lord."     0  Lord,  truly  I  am  thy  servant,  bound  to  thee 
by  'd  thousand  mercies,  and  bound  to  thee  forever. 

I  will  only  add,  that  in  our  prosperity  the  faithfulness 
of  God  speaks  to  us,  and  warns  us  of  the  dangers  to  which 
we  are  exposed.  Alas  that  it  should  be  so,  but  so  it  is, 
that  the  more  we  are  blessed,  the  more  are  we  prone  to 
forget  God,  to  forsake  the  fountain  of  living  waters,  and 
to  hew  out  for  ourselves  cisterns,  broken  cisterns.  This 
is  a  truth  which  all  must  admit  ;  and  can  there  be  a  more 
deplorable  proof  of  our  depravity?  "  I  a;u  come  to  talk 
with  you,"  said  Mr.  Cecil  to  one  of  his  parishioners, "  1  am 
alarmed  for  you  since  I  have  heard  of  your  affairs.'3 — 
"  Alarmed  !"  answered  the  man  in  surprise,  "  why,  sir,  I 


268  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

never  was  so  prosperous  in  my  life."  "That  is  what  I 
have  heard,"  replied  the  pastor,  "and  it  is  that  which 
makes  me  uneasy  about  you."  It  was  not  a  man  strug- 
gling with  adversity,  but  a  man  in  the  palmy  flood-tide 
of  success,  the  silence  of  whose  chamber  was  smitten  with 
those  words,  "  Thou  fool,  this  night  thy  soul  shall  be  re- 
quired of  thee,  then  whose  shall  those  things  be  which 
thou  hast  provided  ?"  Nor  can  a  devout  man  look  any- 
where in  the  world  or  the  church,  without  trembling  for 
those  around  whose  son  Is  prosperity  is  spreading  its  fatal 
snares,  its  unsearchable  seductions. 

"  In  thy  prosperity  I  spake  unto  thee;"  and  what  is 
the  treatment  of  which  God  complains  ?  It  is  that  all  his 
entreaties  and  admonitions  are  repelled.  "  In  thy  pros- 
perity I  spake  unto  thee,  but  thou  saidst,  I  will  not  hear 
thee."  This  is  the  charge, and  its  justice  is  only  too  read- 
ily established  by  your  own  daily  observation. 

For  of  all  those  whose  sincere  conversion  to  Jesus  you 
have,  ever  known,  how  many  have  traced  their  con  version 
to  prosperity  ?  Thousands  are  now  in  the  church,  and  a 
cloud  of  unseen  witnesses  compasses  us  about,  each  of 
whom  exclaims,  "  It  is  good  for  me  that  I  have  been  af- 
flicted, that  I  might  learn  thy  statutes;"  did  you  ever 
know  one  who,  reviewing  the  way  in  which  the  Lord 
called  him  by  his  grace,  could  say,  It  is  good  for  me  that 
I  have  never  known  affliction  and  sorrow  ?  You  see  con- 
stantly the  noblest  examples  of  piety  among  those  who 
are  poor  and  obscure  in  society;  how  many  of  these 
did  you  ever  find  equally  devoted,  when  they  had  risen  to 
wealth  and  honor?  I  do  not  deny  that  such  miracles 
are  sometimes  wrought,  but  are  they  not  the  rarest  of 
miracles  ?  Does  not  Jeshuran  kick  as  soon  as  he  waxes 
fat?  Does  the  poor  widow  continue  to  cast  in  all  she 
hath,  when  she  suddenly  becomes  heir  to  a  fortune  ?  In 
the  circle  of  your  acquaintance  can  you  name  twenty,  can 
you  name  ten,  five — do  you  know  two  who,  when  thus 
elevated,  have  not  furnished  sad  commentaries  on  that 
prayer,  "  Give  me  not  riches,  lest  I  be  full  and  deny  thee, 
and  say,  Who  is  the  Lord  ?"  To  the  church  at  Smyrna 
Jesus  said,  "I  know  thy  works  and  tribulation  and  pov- 
erty; thou  art  rich;"  but  the  Laodiceans,  who  were  "rich 


Prosperity  and  Adversity.  269 

and  increased  in  goods,"  be  found  to  be  "poor and  blind 
and  naked."  Look  around  yon  in  this  city.  What  is  the 
preaching,  what  the  church  which  the  rich  and  prosper- 
ous select  ?  What  sort  of  religion  do  they  prefer  ?  What 
is  the  temper  with  which  they  listen  to  the  humbling, 
crucifying  truths  of  the  Bible?  And  among  those  thus 
seeking  in  the  house  of  God  an  incense  more  flattering  to 
their  vanity  than  that  which  is  ottered  in  their  own  sump- 
tuous mansions,  are  some  who  were  once  zealous,  self-im- 
molating Christians;  some,  alas,  to©  many,  who  would 
have  triumphed  over  persecution,  who  would  have  braved 
dungeon  and  scaffolds  for  the  truth,  but  whose  faith 
could  not  withstand  prosperity,  who  have  fallen  pitiful 
victims  to  the  temptations  of  pride,  fashion,  ostentation 
and  luxury. 

The  language  cf  our  text  is  very  emphatic:  "Thou 
saidst,  I  will  not  hear  thee."  The  man  who  had  bought 
only  "a  piece  of  ground,"  and  he  who  had  "  bought  live 
yoke  of  oxen,"  and  he  who  had  "married  a  wife," — these 
all  quieted  their  consciences  by  framing  excuses;  but  in 
the  heyday  of  prosperity  no  apology  is  vouchsafed  to 
God,  he  is  at  once  instantly  and  insolently  repelled.  In- 
spiration employs  every  form  of  metaphor  to  convey  some 
conception  of  the  potency  of  God's  voice.  "The  voice  of 
the  Lord  is  powerful,  the  voice  of  the  Lord  is  full  of  ma- 
jesty, the  voice  of  the  Lord  breaketh  the  cedars  of  Leb- 
anon, it  maketh  Sirion  to  skip  like  a  young  unicorn,  it 
divideth  the  flames  of  fire,  it  shaketh  the  wilderness,  it 
maketh  the  forests  bare."  A  single  word  from  God  cre- 
ated all  things,  and  can  annihilate  all  things  in  a  mo- 
ment. "  By  it  the  heavens  and  all  their  hosts  were  made." 
"He  spake  and  it  was  done,  he  commanded  and  it  stood 
fast."  There  is  in  the  whole  universe  but  one  being  who 
spurns  that  voice  ;  it  is  man,  and  he  spurns  it  most  con- 
temptuously when  God's  bounty  loads  him  with  blessings. 
"  Thou  saidst,  /  will  not  hear  thee;" — every  feeling,  every 
passion  rising  up  and  in  hardness  and  defiance  shutting 
out  the  hated  intruder.  '"And  this  lias  been  thy  manner 
from  thy  youth."  This  haughty  resistance  begins  with 
the  prosperous  in  childhood  and  becomes  every  year  more 
inveterate  and  desperate. 


270  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

The  first  passion  which  prosperity  nourishes  and  in- 
flames is  an  absorbing  love  of  the  world  ;  and  I  need  not 
tell  yon  with  what  distinctness  this  Inst  says  to  God,  "  I 
will  not  hear  thee."  My  friends,  yon  know  the  language 
of  the  sacred  oracles  upon  this  subject.  They  charge  us 
not  to  be  conformed  to  this  world.  Over  and  over  they 
say,  "Love  not  the  world,  neither  the  things  that  are  in 
the  world.  If  any  man  love  the  world,  the  love  of  the 
Father  is  not  in  him  ;  for  all  that  is  in  the  world,  the  lust 
of  the  flesh,  the  lust  of  the  eye  and  the  pride  of  life,  is 
not  of  the  Father,  but  is  of  the  world."  They  declare 
that  "the  friendship  of  the  world  is  enmity  against  God.". 
In  short,  they  affirm  that  true  faith  overcomes  the  world; 
that  the  disciple  of  Jesus  is  not  of  the  world;  and  that 
in  his  prayers,  purposes,  efforts,  and  at  least  in  some  actual 
progress,  the  Cross  crucifies  the  world  to  the  Christian, 
and  the  Christian  to  the  world. 

But  now,  unless  grace  interposes  most  victoriously,  you 
know  what  is  the  influence  of  prosperity;  the  supremacy 
it  gives  to  the  empire  of  the  world,  to  its  friendships, 
maxims,  fashions,  examples,  spirit.  To  those  who  are  in 
prosperity,  vainly  does  a  preacher  address  the  most  solemn 
admonitions.  The  more  eloquently  he  inveighs  against 
the  things  of  the  world,  the  more  eagerly  do  they  put 
forth  an  invisible  hand  to  draw  in  closer  to  them  and  to 
grasp  more  tenaciously  the  objects  of  their  darling  pas- 
sions. Elevated  to  the  summit  of  prosperity,  they  ex- 
claim, "It  is  good  to  be  here,"  and  spurn  impatiently 
that  voice  which  warns  them  of  hereafter. 

The  second  passion  which  prosperity  pampers  is  inor- 
dinate self-love;  and  most  energetic  is  the  tone  in  which 
this  vice  rejects  the  counsels  of  the  Most  High,  and  says 
to  him,  "I  will  not  hear  thee." 

Self  abnegation  is,  as  you  all  know,  the  very  essence  of 
the  religion  of  Jesus.  "  If  any  man  will  be  my  disciple, 
let  him  deny  himself;"  and  the  holiest  Christian,  after 
twenty,  thirty  years'  conflict,  still  finds  that  this  duty  re- 
quires him  to  watch  and  pray  without  intermission. — 
After  having  seemed  to  be  finally  triumphant,  the  servant 
of  God  is  humbled  in  the  dust  at  finding  himself  again 
deceived  and  defeated.     He  is  at  times  almost  disheart- 


Prosperity  and  Adversity,  271 

ened,  and  begins  to  complain  that  the  promised  succors 
are  not  afforded  him,  that  the  Gospel  is  not  faithful  to 
its  engagements,  and  that  he  will  be  left,  after  all,  to 
perish. 

Such — so  arduous  and  protracted — is  the  struggle  in 
which  the  faithful  soul   is   compelled   to  engage  and  re- 
engage with  that  selfishness  which,  in  one  or  other  of  its 
diversified    forms,  is  the   ruling  passion  of  the    human 
heart.     And  now  what  is  the  effect  of  much   prosperity 
upon  this    lust  the  great  omniscient   discerner  of   our 
thoughts  lias  told  us.     Perfectly  did  Jesus  know  what  is 
in  man  when,  in  portraying  the  votary  of  this  world  in 
the  midst  of  success,  he  represents  him  as  wholly  en- 
grossed with  himself,  as  saving,  "Soul,  thou  hast  much 
goods  laid  up  for  thyself;  eat,  drink,  and  be  merry." — 
Myself! — my  ease,  my  gratification,  to  shun  whatever  can 
trouble  or  humble  me,  to  secure  whatever  will  flatter  my 
taste  and  promote  my  pleasure  and  aggrandizement, — 
there,  that  is  the  end  and  aim  of  life.     You  remember 
this  parable,  my  brethren  ;  and  there  is  another  parable 
equally  instructive.     I  mean  that  of  the  rich  man  who 
"  lifted  up  his  eyes  in  hell, being  in  torment/'    You  have 
probably  eluded  the  warning  of  the  Saviour,  by  branding 
Dives  as  a  bloated  glutton,  who  revelled  in   luxury  and 
despised  the  poor.    But  undeceive  yourselves.    Jesus  does 
not  condemn  this  opulent  citizen  for  living  and  dressing 
in  a  style  which  his  wealth  allowed,  nor  does  he  breathe 
a  word  about  his  cruelty  to  the  poor.     Indeed  those  who 
have  travelled  in  the  East  know  that  it  is  regarded  as 
one  of  the  highest  evidences  of  benevolence,  if  the  owner 
of  a  noble  mansion  permits  beggars  to  sit  at  his  door  and 
receive  alms  from  his  visitors.     Which  of  you  would  tol- 
erate such  a  nuisance  ?     The  guilt  of  this  sybarite  was  a 
life  of  self  indulgence,  of  elegant  ease,  of  refined  pleasures, 
of  effeminate  gratification,  which  is  almost  as  much  op- 
posed to  the  Gospel  as  a  life  of  gross  sensuality.     When 
the  apostle  speaks  of  those  who  are  the  "enemies  of  the 
cross  of  Christ,"  let  us  recollect  that  he  refers  not  to  the 
doctrine  of  the-cross,  but  to  the  crucifixion  of  self  which 
the  cross  demands,  without  which  our  faith  is  dead,  our 
orthodoxy  only  the  most  deceitful  of  all  heresies. 


272  Richard  Fuller  s  Sermons. 

The  third  passion  which  prosperity  fosters,  and  which 
impiously  contemns  God,  is  pride,  in  the  Bible  this 
vice  is  everywhere  marked  as  the  prolific  source  of  enmity 
to  God,  and  as  the  object  of  Jehovah's  especial  abhorrence. 
"  The  wicked,  through  the  pride  of  his  countenance,  will 
not  seek  after  God."  "Though  the  Lord  be  high,  yet 
hath  he  respect  unto  the  lowly;  but  the  proud  he  know- 
eth  afar  off,"  keeps  him  at  a  distance  and  beholds  in  him 
a  deadly  foe. 

But,  now,  the  influence  of  great  worldly  success  upon 
this  temper  is  proverbial.     "  Charge  them  that  are  rich 
in  this  world  that  they  be  not  high-minded;"  but  unless 
Omnipotence  gives  effect  to  our  ministry,  we  might  as 
well  go  the  sea  shore  and  charge  the  chafing,   roaring 
floods  to  stay  their  proud  waters.     Everything  conspires 
to  swell  the  heart  of  the  prosperous  man.     "  He  is  not 
in  trouble  as  other  men,  neither  is  he  plagued  like  other 
men  ;  therefore  pride  compasseth  him  about  as  a  chain, 
violence  covereth  him  as  a  garment."    A  pensioner  en 
God's  bounty,  he  never  gives  a  thought  to  the  author  of 
the  blessings  he  enjoys,  but  glories  in  the  consciousness  of 
an  insane  independence.  Loaded  with  a  thousand  infirmi- 
ties, the  object  of  God's  detestation,  he  yet  finds  all  those 
around   him,    even   the  children  of  heaven,  doing    him 
homage;   and  he  says,  "Who  is  the  Lord  that  I  should 
obey  his  voice  ?"     I  wish  to  carry  a  high  head  ;  who  is  the 
Lord  that  I  should  hear  him  when  he  commands  me  to 
"esteem  others  better  than  myself?"     1  wish  to  destroy 
the  fortunes  and  characters  of  my  neighbors,  and  to  rise 
upon  their  ruins  ;  who  is  the  Lord  that  I  should  regard 
his  voice  when  he  says,  "  Love  thy  neighbor  as  thyself?" 
I  have  amassed  wealth,  my  own  power  hath  gotten  me 
riches  ;  who  is  the  Lord  that  I  should  respect  his  authority 
wrhen  he  claims  my  possessions  as  his  gifts,  and  undertakes 
to  hold  me  to  account  for  the  use  of  them  ; — I  love  flat- 
tery ;  for  though  neither  I  nor  my  parasites  believe  these 
adulations,  yet  one  must  be  of  importance  when  people 
will  stoop  to  falsehoods  in  order  to  please  him.     All  this 
maybe  condemned  by  God;  but  who  is  he  that,  to  obey 
him,  I  should  cease  to  seek  a  gratification  so  delicious  to 
my  vanity?     Does  he  wish  to  monopolize  for  himself  all 
the  praise  and  applause  of  the  earth  ? 


Prosperity  and  Adversity.  373 

There  are  other  evil  passions  which  quicken  and 
become  rank  in  the  hot-bed  of  prosperity,  but  I  cannot 
dwell  upon  them.  Let  me  only  remark  that  they  all 
"rebel  against  God,  and  contemn  the  counsel  <ji"  the 
Most  High  ;"  each  despising  his  reproof,  setting  at  naught 
all  his  admonitions,  saying,  in  obstinacy  and  obduracy, 
"  I  will  not  hear  thee." 

"I  will  not  hear  thee."  My  friend,  a  life  not  devoted 
to  God  can  never  be  happy.  Believe  it,  0  believe  it, your 
blessedness  can  never  be  found  where  you  are  seeking  it, 
in  objects  beneath  you.  The  soul  is  greater  than  all 
earthly  things  ;  greater  than  -wealth,  greater  than  sensual 
pleasure,  greater  than  honor,  greater  than  the  earth,  the 
sea,  the  moon,  the  stars,  the  sun — the  material  universe; 
and  it  can  know  rest  and  felicity  only  in  God.  There 
you  are,  longing  for  happiness;  why  are  you  not  happy? 
why,  with  all  your  heart  can  wish  in  this  world,  is  every- 
thing so  stale,  flat  and  unprofitable  ?  God  comes  to  you 
in  your  prosperity  to  tell  you  why  it  must  be  so,  and  to 
open  to  you  the  true  source  of  happiness  which  can  be 
found  only  in  his  service.     But  you  spurn  him  away. 

"I  will  not  hear  thee."  No  language  can  describe 
the  dangers  of  the  society  by  which  you  will  find  your- 
self-surrounded  in  the  day  of  prosperity.  God  speaks 
to  you  that  he  may  put  you  upon  your  guard  before  it  is 
too  late.  He  whispers,  "  My  son,  if  sinners  entice  thee, 
consent  thou  not."  But  you  prefer  this  fatal  company 
to  his  presence,  these  flatteries  to  his  faithfulness,  and 
you  casr  in  your  lot  among  them. 

'I  will  not  hear  thee."  The  Gospel  unfolds  to  you 
the  noblest  objects  of  true  ambition  ;"  it  calls  you  to 
"  glory,  honor,  immortality:"  it  proposes  to  you  a  crown 
of  glory  that  will  never  fade  away  ;  it  oilers  yon  "a  far 
more  exceeding  and  an  eternal  weight  of  glory."  God 
seeks  to  lire  your  soul  with  these  sublime  aspirations. 
But  prosperity  debases  every  heavenly  faculty  within 
you,  and  "  the  earth  swallows  you  up." 

"I  will  not  hear  thee."  In  compassion  the  Lord 
wishes  to  find  access  to  your  mind,  thai  he  may  warn 
you  of  the  true  character  of  these  gratifications  which 
usually  captivate  the   heart  in   the  day  of   prosperity. 


274  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

But  the  prodigal  is  impatient  of  his  father's  advice,  ard 
goes  into  a  far  country  where  no  unwelcome  entreaties 
and  admonitions  can  intrude  upon  his  festivities. 

In,  short,  there  is  no  argument  which  God  does  not 
ply  in  your  prosperity, — calling  upon  you  by  your  rela- 
tions to  him  as  the  Father  of  mercies;  addressing  you 
by  everything  generous,  tender,  alarming,  affecting.  And 
this  not  once  or  twice,  but  constantly.  Again  and 
again,  in  the  morning,  the  afternoon,  at  night,  Jesus 
comes  and  knocks  at  your  heart,  and  waits  and  listens 
if,  in  some  propitious  moment,  his  goodness  may  prevail 
on  you  to  remove  the  bars  and  Jet  him  in,  that  he  may 
sup  with  yon,  may  bless  you  with  spiritual  blessings. 
But  it  is  all  in  vain.  Plead,  supplicate,  weep,  implore, 
it  does  not  signify  ;  the  heart  is  only  locked  and  bolted 
more  resolutely.  "And  this  has  been  thy  manner  from 
thy  youth."  The  weeds  and  vines  which  choke  up  the 
portal,  shew  that  for  many  years  it  has  been  fast,  and  no 
visitant  admitted  from  that  quarter. 

II.  "I  spake  unto  thee  in  thy  prosperity,  but  thou 
saidst  I  will  not  hear  thee,"  and  if  God's  ways  were  as 
our  ways,  here  of  course  would  be  an  end  of  the  matter. 
Love,  mercy,  bounty,  thus  crowning  a  man's  days  with 
blessings,  and  all  despised  ;  all  serving  only  to  foster 
worldliness,  selfishness,  pride,  contempt  for  the  bene- 
factor; what  remains  but  that  justice  shall  say,  "Ephraim 
is  joined  to  idols,  let  him  alone,"  or  rather,  "Cut  him 
down,  why  cumbereth  he  the  ground?"  Very  differ- 
ent, however,  is  God's  conduct  to  our  guilty  race.  The 
day  is  indeed  coming  when  those  who  scorn  must  alone 
bear  it;  when,  abandoned  forever,  the  rejectors  of  Christ 
must,  in  solitary  wretchedness,  endure  the  contempt  of 
the  universe  and  the  tortures  of  their  own  self-reproaches. 
But  until  then,  Patience  bears  our  insults,  and  Love 
still  tries  new  methods  to  save  us.  His  beneficence 
spurned,  God  has  another  resource,  it  is  adversity.  "In 
their  affliction  they  will  seek  me  early."  Let  us  now 
glance  at  this  part  of  our  subject. 

The  scene  is  changed.  For  you  a  cloud  muffles  up 
the  sun  and  hangs  the  heavens  in  sackcloth.      You  find 


Prosperity  and  Adversity.  275 


trouble  and  anguish  ;  and  it  is  in  the  thickest  gloom 
that  the  Saviour  now  stands  knocking  at  your  gate,  be- 
seeching you  to  open  and  let  him  hi  that  his  comforts 
may  delight  your  souls. 

"When  lie  slew  them  ;"  nor  let  any  one  impeach  the 
goodness  of  God  when  be  thus  deals  with  us.  Stubborn, 
rebellious  as  we  are,  it  is  love  which  blights  our  earthly 
hopes  and  joys,  that  our  souls  may  be  enriched  by  joys 
and  hopes  which  are  eternal.  "When  he  slew  them." 
Health  had  only  fed  your  sensual  passions;  well,  he 
sends  sickness  into  your  frames,  stretches  you  on  a  bed 
of  languishing,  and  you  draw  nigh  to  death.  The  suc- 
cess of  your  plans  had  only  increased  pride,  worldliness, 
covetousness ;  well,  all  your  schemes  are  shivered  at  a 
blow;  some  failure,  some  sudden  catastrophe  lays  your 
fortune  in  the  dust.  Home  and  its  joys,  wedded  love, 
parental  happiness  had  converted  your  bosom  into  a 
temple  for  idols  and  their  worship;  well,  a  cold  bleak 
shadow  falls  upon  these  joys,  a  coffin  crosses  your  thresh- 
old, a  funeral  train  darkens  your  door,  and  your  heart 
bows  down  heavily  under  blows  which  have  left  it  a  lone 
mourner  in  its  desolation. 

"  When  he  slew  them ;"  this  expression  is  not  too  strong, 
for  there  are  things  which  are  worse  than  death,  which 
cause  us  to  cry  out  for  death  when  it  will  not  come. — 
And  as  the  language  implies,  it  is  fearful  to  think  how, 
in  an  hour,  by  a  single  stroke,  all  this  wretchedness  may 
fall  witheriugly  upon  the  heart.  As  Ferdinand,  king  of 
Spain,  looked  in  admiration  upon  the  portrait  of  a  child 
who  was  laughing  till  the  tears  ran  down  his  cheeks,  the 
painter  said, '  Would  your  majesty  wish  to  see  him  weep  ?' 
And  with  a  single  touch  of  his  brush  upon  the  eyebrows 
and  the  corners  of  the  mouth,  the  child  seemed  to  be 
breaking  its  little  heart  in  an  agony  of  grief.  Alas,  my 
hearers,  it  was  a  counterfeit  presentment  of  human  life. 
A  single. touch  can  blast  all  ;  can  turn  our  smiles  into 
channels  for  tears;  can  cause  the  brightest  and  happiest 
to  exclaim,  "  Have  pity  upon  me,  have  pity  upon  me,  0 
ye,  my  friends,  for  the  hand  of  God  hath  touched  me." 
"  Call  me  not  Naomi,  call  me  Marah,  for  the  Almighty 
hath  dealt  very  bitterly  with  me." 


276  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

"When  he  slew  them,  then  they  sought  him."  Afflic- 
tion will  not  be  without  some  influence  for  evil  or  for 
good.  Under  chastisement  Pharaoh  hardened  his  heart 
but  the  more.  And  hear  how  the  prophet  reproves  the 
obduracy  of  the  Jews,  when  the  Lord  sought  to  correct 
them.  "  In  that  day  did  the  Lord  God  of  hosts  call  to 
weeping,  and  to  baldness,  and  to  girding  with  sackcloth  ; 
but  behold  joy  and  gladness,  slaying  of  oxen  and  killing 
of  sheep,  eating  flesh  and  drinking  wine,  let  us  eat  and 
drink  for  to-morrow  we  die."  "  0  Lord,  thou  hast 
stricken  them,  but  they  have  not  grieved,  thou  hast  con- 
sumed them,  but  they  have  refused  instruction,  they  have 
made  their  faces  harder  than  a  rock."  The  case  before 
us  seems  more  hopeful.  When  in  our  prosperity  God 
had  said,  "  Seek  ye  my  face,"  he  had  been  spurned  away. 
Now,  however,  the  language  of  the  mourning  soul  is, 
"  Thy  face,  Lord,  will  I  seek."  "  Because  they  rebelled 
against  the  words  of  God,  and  contemned  the  counsel  of 
the  Most  High,  therefore  he  brought  down  their  heart 
with  labor,  they  fell  down  and  there  was  none  to  help; 
then  they  cried  unto  the  Lord  in  their  trouble." 

This  is  not  all.  "They  returned  and  inquired  early 
after  God."  Jeremiah  complained  of  Israel,  that  though 
sorely  punished,  "they  refused  to  return."  The  gen- 
uineness of  the  prodigal's  repentance  is  seen  in  his  return 
to  his  father;  and  there  is  the  same  evidence  of  true  re- 
pentance here.  "They  returned."  Affliction  recalled 
them  from  the  sinful  ways  in  which  they  had  long 
wandered.  They  come,  too,  earnestly  seeking  to  know 
Avhat  they  must  do.  In  the  closet,  in  the  sanctuary, 
from  the  lips  of  the  preacher,  from  the  pages  of  the  once 
neglected  Bible,  they  "enquire  early  after  God." 

"  And  they  remembered  that  God  was  their  rock,  the 
high  God  their  Redeemer."  They  confess  that  the  rock 
of  this  world — its  supports  and  confidences — is  not  as 
the  Christian's  Rock.  "From  the  end  of  the  earth," 
from  the  "far  country"  into  which  their  passions  had 
hurried  them — they  cry  unto  the  Lord,  when  their  hearts 
are  overwhelmed  within  them,  and  implore  him  to  lead 
them  "to  the  Rock  which  is  higher  than  they."  They 
acknowledge  the  hand  which  has  dashed  their  earthly 


Prosperity  and  Adversity.  277 

joys,  and  feel  that  it  was  only  thus  they  could  have  been 
brought  to  lift  their  eyes  to  heaven.  They  adore  the  Re- 
deemer who  hath  sent  from  on  high  and  taken  them  and 
snatched  them  out  of  the  vortex  which  was  about  to 
swallow  them  up  forever. 

"  When  he  slew  them,  then  they  sought  him,  and  they 
returned  and  enquired  early  after  God  ;  and  they  remem- 
bered that  God  was  their  Rock,  and  the  high  God  their 
Redeemer."  And  in  all  this  they  were  perfectly  sincere. 
It  would,  indeed,  be  a  shocking  libel  to  say  that  the  ten- 
der emotions,  the  confessions,  the  tears  which  we  witness 
in  the  house  of  mourning  are  hypocritical;  the  deepest 
piety  is  not  more  unquestionably  the  authentic  sentiment 
of  the  heart.  What  God  complains  of  is,  that  all  proves 
abortive;  that  prayers,  confessions,  tears,  vows  all  soon 
evaporate. 

It  is  with  this  God  upbraids  us  in  the  text,  and  I  could 
easily  shew  that  the  indignant  language  he  employs  is 
only  too  justly  merited,  whether  wre  consider  the  incon- 
sistency, or  the  weakness,  or  the  mockery  of  these  fruit- 
less professions. 

But  as  our  present  subject  is  the  danger  of  unsanctified 
adversity,  I  confine  my  remarks  to  this  point.  A  relapse 
is  more  apt  to  be  fatal  than  the  original  disease,  and  if, 
after  we  have  escaped  the  corruptions  of  the  world  through 
the  power  of  chastisement,  we  are  again  entangled  therein, 
our  last  state  is  worse  than  the  first.  It  is,  therefore,  of 
everlasting  importance  that  we  be  upon  cur  guard  against 
the  insidious  processes  by  which  the  influences  of  afflic- 
tion are  gradually  impaired,  and  the  passions  re-usurp  a 
dominion  which  it  was  hoped  they  had  lost  forever. 

In  afflicting  us,  God  designs  to  wean  us  from  the  world. 
He  says,  "Set  your  affections  on  things  above,  not  on 
things  on  the  earth."  He  loves  us  too  much  not  to  seek 
to  break  off  an  attachment  which  will  be  fatal  to  the  soul. 
We  cannot  be  even  superficially  acquainted  with  the  life 
required  by  the  Gospel  without  at  once  feeling  that  either 
Jesus  must  reverse  his  laws  to  allow  us  to  enjoy  uninter- 
rupted prosperity,  or  he  must  establish  these  Jaws  in  our 
hearts  by  disappointment  and  discipline.  Our  bereave- 
ments are  intended  to  act  as  antidotes  to  the  bane  which 

12 


278  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

abundant  success  brings  with  it;  and,  to  judge  by  appear- 
ances, they  at  first  seem  to  accomplish  this  purpose;  but 
by  little  and  little  their  efficacy  is  weakend,  and  former 
associations  and  habits  begin  to  re-assert  their  supremacy 
over  the  heart.  "Seest  thou  how  Ahab  humbleth  himself 
before  me?"  said  the  Lord  to  Elijah;  "because  he  hum- 
bleth himself  before  me  I  will  not  bring  the  evil  in  his 
days."  Yet  Ahab's  heart  was  not  changed;  he  returned 
to  his  sins;  until,  being  often  reproved  and  hardening 
his  neck,  he  was  suddenly  cut  down.  Never  was  there 
repentance  which  seemed  to  be  more  profound  and  gen- 
uine than  that  of  Israel  when  they  exclaimed,  "Come,  let 
us  return  unto  the  Lord;  for  he  hath  torn  and  he  will 
heal  us;  he  hath  smitten  and  he  will  bind  us  up;  after 
two  days  he  will  revive  us,  the  third  day  he  will  raise  us 
up,  and  we  shall  live  in  his  sight."  But  what  follows  ? 
It  is  directly  after  these  professions  that  we  hear  Jehovah 
uttering  the  complaint  of  one  at  a  loss  what  course  to 
take  with  a  people  whose  piety  was  so  transient  and  de- 
ceitful, saying,  "  0  Ephraim,  what  shall  I  do  unto  thee  ? 
0  Judah,  what  shall  I  do  unto  thee?  for  your  goodness 
is  as  the  morning  cloud,  and  as  the  early  dew  it  goeth 
away." 

God's  motive  in  afflicting  us  is  love.  "  Whom  the  Lord 
loveth  he  chasteneth," — designing  thus  to  correct  them 
for  their  sins,  to  keep  them  back  from  greater  sin,  to  draw 
them  nearer  to  himself,  to  fit  them  for  higher  usefulness. 
Even  with  the  severest  discipline  of  sorrow,  how  difficult 
it  is  to  keep  the  heart  detached  from  sinful  desires  and 
glowing  with  love  to  Jesus  and  his  service;  what  then 
would  become  of  us  if  we  were  spared  these  salutary 
chastisements?  And  then  when  the  heart  is  thus  melted, 
we  behold  the  love  of  the  Father  who  has  mercifully  cor- 
rected us  for  our  profit ;  we  cannot  forgive  ourselves  for 
the  past ;  and  for  the  future  we  say,  "All  that  the  Lord 
hath  spoken  we  will  do."  But,  alas,  we  soon  begin  to 
murmur  ;  our  hearts  begin  to  question  the  love  of  God, 
to  complain  of  his  dealings,  to  rise  up  in  mutiny  against 
him. 

This  restless,  rebellious  spirit  prepares  a  third  tempta- 
tion which  finds  in  our  afflictions  an  excuse  for  our  per- 


Prosperity  and  Adversity. 

fidiousness.  What  oughi  to  be  our  temper  wIumi  we  are 
under  chastisements,  you  all  know.  We  should  imitate 
the  example  of  those  -'who  through  faith  and  patience 
inherit  the  promises."  Remembering  (hat  God  is  a  Fa- 
ther correcting  us  in  love,  ^ve  ought  to  cast  all  our  care 
upon  him,  assured  that  he  will  not  break  the  bruised 
reed  nor  quench  the  smoking  flax  ;  we  ought  to  cherish 
the  iilial  submission  and  confidence  of  him  who,  in  his 
bitterest  agony,  still  exclaimed,  "  Nevertheless,  not  my 
will,  but  thine  be  done." 

Instead  of  this,  Ave  make  our  very  afflictions  a  pretext 
for  returning  to  the  world.  We  plead  our  weakness  and 
the  need  of  some  recreation  to  sustain  us;  forgetting  that 
our  weakness  is  the  very  reason  why  we  must  be  detached 
from  these  follies.  We  say  that  our  afflictions  are  pecu- 
liar ;  as  if  it  were  not  indispensable  that  the  remedy  for 
such  hearts  should  be  a  specific.  Nay  we  even  complain 
that  our  distress  renders  it  impossible  for  us  to  devote 
ourselves  to  Jesus;  when  our  own  experience  ought  to 
teach  us  that  it  was  only  by  this  discipline  that  we  could 
be  aroused  to  a  sense  of  our  danger  and  duty.  Ah,  if  in 
anguish  of  soul,  Ave  were  deploring  our  depravity,  God 
would  hear  and  console  us;  but  Ave  love  the  world,  Ave 
long  to  return  to  Egypt,  and  Ave  murmur  against  God  as 
a  hard  master,  because  he  deals  with  us  in  the  only 
method  by  which  Ave  can  be  saved. 

In  fine,  unless  the  Lord  mercifully  interpose  to  arrest 
us,  the  last  step  is  as  inevitable  as  it  is  fatal.  A  heart 
thus  seeking  pretexts  for  faithlessness,  will  not  be  long 
faithful.  A  yoke  so  Avearisome  will  soon  be  cast  off.  The 
world  which  had  been  renounced  for  a  while,  but  whose 
charms  have  borrowed  attractions  from  the  distance,  will 
resume  its  sovereignty.  Some  terms,  some  appearances 
Avill  still  be  observed,  but  the  heart  is  gone.  In  assum- 
ing an  exterior  of  respect,  the  soul  is  only  imitating  Ju- 
das in  his  devotions,  that  it  may  imitate  him  in  its  treach- 
ery. With  whetted  appetites  Ave  surrender  ourselves  to 
pleasures  for  which  Ave  have  long  burned,  and  plunge 
again  into  the  Avhirlpool  from  which  Ave  had  blessed  God 
for  having  mercifully  drawn  us. 


280  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

And  now  what  are  we  to  say  to  such  a  life  ?  Great  as 
was  the  obduracy  of  Moab,  God  bore  with  him  because 
he  had  been  "  at  ease  from  his  youth,  and  had  not  yet 
been  emptied  from  vessel  to  vessel ;"  but  you,  my  dear 
hearers,  to  whom  this  part  of  my  subject  applies,  what 
must  be  your  doom,  if  you  defeat  all  the  appliances  of 
mercy  and  judgment.  In  returning  to  your  former 
courses,  you  make  a  final  and  deliberate  choice  ;  you  say, 
"  There  is  no  hope,  no,  for  I  have  loved  strangers,  and 
after  them  I  will  go."  If,  after  having  made  such  solemn 
resolutions,  you  violate  them,  what  infatuation  is  yours  ; 
for  do  the  truths  which  so  deeply  affected  you  in  afflic- 
tion become  less  true  because  you  cease  to  think  of  them? 

This  conduct  betrays  a  fund  of  depravity  which  is 
most  appalling.  God's  complaint  against  Israel  was  that, 
while  all  other  nations  had  been  left  in  darkness,  they 
had  been  the  objects  of  his  peculiar  attention,  they  had 
been  instructed  ;  yet  they  mingled  in  the  idolatries  of  the 
surrounding  people.  And  so  with  you.  Others  are  aban- 
doned to  their  blindness  ;  but  God  has  enlightened  you. 
In  the  bottom  of  your  heart  you  despise  the  things  which 
others  worship.  Over  and  over  you  confess  the  vanity 
of  the  very  objects  which  you  still  allow  to  seduce  your 
heart.  Is  not  this  the  summit  of  ingratitude  and  wick- 
edness? And  reflect  how  all  this  will  appear  to  you  in  a 
dying  hour.  Then,  at  least,  God  will  be  heard ;  and  what 
reply  will  you  then  make,  when  he  reminds  you  how  you 
frustrated  the  ministers  of  his  word  and  providence, 
when  Jesus  shall  recall  all  his  patience  and  all  your  ob- 
stinacy? What  answer  will  you  give  when  he  says — I 
spake  to  thee  in  thy  prosperity,  but  thou  didst  spurn  me ; 
I  came  in  the  darkness  of  adversity,  but  thou  didst  mock 
me;  I  entreated,  I  addiessed  thy  reason,  I  pleaded  with 
thy  conscience,  I  appealed  to  thy  heart,  and  though  thou 
didst  bar  me  out  and  admit  my  enemies,  still  I  did  not 
forsake  thee.  I  stood  year  after  year,  knocking,  pleading, 
entreating,  beseeching ;  I  counted  nothing  too  costly. — 
I  laid  down  my  life  for  you,  and  stood  at  the  door, 
knocking  with  the  cross  wet  with  my  own  blood,  when 
I  might  have  broken  in  with  a  sword  to  be  bathed  in 
yours.     Yet  all  this  has  been  in  vain.     How  will  you 


Prosperity  and  Adversity.  281 

meet  these  reproofs?  What  will  yon  reply  to  such  a 
charge?  Nothing,  yon  will  have  nothing  to  say.  Yon 
will  be  speechless,  for  yon  will  be  self-condemned.  You 
will  feel,  as  a  dying  man  once  said  to  me,  that  for  you 
there  remains  only  one  doom;  that  the  voice  which  once 
warned  and  entreated  is  now  uttering  those  terrible  words 
of  despair,  "Because  I  have  called  and  ye  refused,  I  have 
stretched  out  my  hand  and  ye  did  not  regard  it,  but  have 
set  at  naught  all  my  counsel,  and  would  none  of  my  re- 
proof, I  also  will  laugh  at  yonr  calamity,  I  will  mock 
when  your  fear  comet h,  when  your  fear  cometh  as  deso- 
lation, and  your  destruction  cometh  as  a  whirlwind,  when 
distress  and  anguish  cometh  upon  you  ;  then  shall  ye 
call  upon  me,  but  I  will  not  answer;  they  shall  seek  me 
early,  but  they  shall  not  find  me." 

The  lessons  to  be  derived  from  our  whole  subject  are 
so  plain  that  I  might  safely  leave  them  to  your  own  re- 
flections. 

One  truth,  and  one  which  ought  to  affect  our  hearts, 
is,  "  the  riches  of  the  goodness  and  forbearance  and  long 
suffering  of  God."  Blessings  multiplied  onlj  to  be  de- 
spised, only  to  nourish  worldliness,  pride,  selfishness, 
contempt ;  afflictions  only  mocking  God  with  tears,  con- 
fessions, promises  to  be  perfidiously  forgotten  as  soon  as 
the  heart  is  consoled; — after  such  obduracy  and  obstina- 
cy what  can  Ave  expect  but  that  justice  shall  take  its 
course,  and  those  who  are  thus  incorrigible  be  suddenly 
destroyed?  Instead  of  this,  hear  how  God  treats  these 
miserable  sinners  who  have  again  and  again  wearied  his 
patience  and  despised  his  entreaties  :  "  But  he  being  full 
of  compassion,  forgave  their  iniquity  and  destroyed  them 
not ;  yea,  many  a  time  turned  he  away  his  anger,  and  did 
not  stir  up  all  his  wrath,  for  he  remembered  that  they 
were  but  flesh, a  wind  that  passeth  away  and  cometh  not 
again."  What  pity,  what  compassion.  Tell  me  what 
sort  of  heart  is  that  which  can  rebel  against  such  a 
Being?  which  can  call  him  a  hard  master,  and  turn  such 
mercy  into  a  motive  for  persevering  in  sin? 

My  beloved  hearers,  what  sentiments  are  in  your  bo- 
soms in  view  of  such  condescension  and  love?  Can  you 
abuse  this  long  suffering  and  goodness?     God  forbid. — 


282  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

No,  when  God  speaks,  let  us  hear  his  voice,  let  us,  like 
Abraham,  say,  "  Here  am  I," and  whatever  be  his  dealings, 
let  us  at  once  correspond  with  his  designs. 

If  he  blesses  us  with  prosperity,  let  us  enter  into  his 
gracious  purposes.  These  mercies  are  intended  to  inspire 
gratitude,  to  bind  us  to  him  in  filial  obedience.  We  are 
enriched  by  his  bounty  that  we  may  be  almoners  to  the 
poor  and  suffering  ;  that  we  may  contribute  to  his  cause 
upon  earth  ;  that  we  may  do  good  to  all,  especially  to 
those  who  are  of  the  household  of  faith.  It  behooves  us, 
too,  in  such  a  state,  to  be  watchful  and  prayerful ;  for  it 
is  when  riches  increase,  that  we  are  tempted  to  set  our 
heart  upon  them,  and  the  dangers  of  temporal  prosperity 
are  the  most  insidious  which  can  assail  the  soul. 

And  in  the  day  of  adversity  let  us  "consider;"  consider 
the  cause  and  designs  of  our  afflictions.  Let  us  say  unto 
God,  "  Do  not  condemn  me;  shew  me  wherefore  thou 
contendest  with  me."  "Righteous  art  thou,  0  Lord, 
when  I  plead  with  thee;  yet  let  me  talk  with  thee  of  thy 
judgments."  The  voice  of  the  rod  may  seem  stern,  but 
let  us  never  forget  that  the  rod  is  in  the  hands  of  a  ten- 
der Father  who  speaketh  unto  us  as  unto  children, — 
"  My  son,  despise  thou  not  the  chastening  of  the  Lord, 
nor  faint  when  thou  art  rebuked  of  him  ;  for  whom  the 
Lord  loveth  he  chastenetb,  and  scourgeth  every  son 
whom  he  receiveth."  The  pillar  which  led  Israel  through 
the  wilderness  was  dark  by  day,  and  luminous  only  at 
night ;  so  God's  dealings  are  during  life  wrapped  in  ob- 
scurity; but  death  will  interpret  all.  Let  us  give  our 
unlimited  confidence  to  him  who  says,  "  What  I  do  you 
know  not  now,  but  you  shall  know  hereafter."  Howev- 
er precious  a  diamond,  it  is  only  when  cut  with  many 
facets  that  it  shines  in  all  its  brilliancy;  and  the  soul 
Avill  reflect  the  radiance  of  the  Sun  of  righteousness  just 
as  it  is  made  perfect  through  suffering.  Let  us  remem- 
ber that  every  sorrow  is  sent  to  wean  us  from  objects  fa- 
tal to  our  spiritual  prosperity,  and  to  cause  us  to  lift  our 
eyes  and  stretch  out  our  hands  to  that  heaven  in  which 
alone  we  can  be  satisfied.  Whatever  our  losses,  let  us 
not  lose  our  afflictions.  However  grievous  they  may  be 
at  present,  let  us  humble  ourselves  and  bow  meekly  be- 


Prosper ihf  and  Adversity.  283 


fore  the  Chastener, knowing  that  "afterwards  they  yield 

the  peaceable  fruits  ol*  righteousness  to  them  who  are  ex- 
ercised thereby." 

Thus  living,  we  shall  be  safe  and  peaceful  in  whatever 
situation  the  providence  of  God  may  place  us.  Affliction 
will  have  no  sting,  prosperity  no  perils.  Heavenly  con- 
solations will  assuage  all  our  griefs  ;  heavenly  benedic- 
tions will  multiply  all  our  joys.  Adversity  will  prove  to 
be  the  highest  prosperity ;  for  it  will  build  up  in  us  a 
faith,  patience,  courage,  assurance,  of  which  we  had  not 
known  that  we  were  capable.  And  earthly  prosperity 
will  elevate  our  hearts,  fill  them  with  celestial  blessed- 
ness, cause  them,  even  in  such  a  world,  to  anticipate 
the  calm,  holy  ecstasy  of  the  glorified,  into  whose  souls 
the  Spirit  of  love  forever  pours  a  full  tide  of  love,  and 
whose  zeal  will  be  fired  with  new  ardors,  whose  adoring 
gratitude  shall  swell  with  fresh  raptures,  as  the  ages  of 
eternity  roll  on. 

Now  the  God  of  all  grace,  who  hath  called  us  unto  his 
eternal  glory  by  Christ  Jesus,  after  that  ye  have  suffered 
awhile,  make  you  perfect,  stablish,  strengthen,  settle  you. 
To  him  be  glory  and  dominion,  forever  and  ever.   Amen. 


2S4  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 


Srrtuon  jFCfteeutft- 


CHRISTIANS  TO  BE  LIGHTS 
AND  EXAMPLES. 

14  That  ye  may  be  blameless  and  harmless,  the  sons  of  God  without 
rebuke  in  the  midst  of  a  crooked  and  perverse  nation,  among 
whom  ye  shine  as  lights  in  the  world,  holding  forth  the  word  of  life, 
that  I  may  rejoice  in  the  day  of  Christ,  that  I  have  not  run  in  vain, 
neither  laboured  in  vain."— Philippians  ii :  15,16. 

THE  regeneration  of  a,  ruined  world  is  the  very  mis- 
sion of  the  Gospel  of  Christ.  The  church  and  the 
world  are,  therefore,  antagonistical  societies.  They  are 
under  such  opposing  influences,  that  there  ever  has  been 
and  ever  must  be,  a  settled,  uncompromising  conflict 
between  them.  Nor,  in  this  controversy  is  there  any 
argument  so  conclusive  as  that  which  is  furnished  iii 
the  lives  of  true,  devoted  Christians. 

We  find  the  first  champions  of  the  cross  constantly 
glorifying  God  for  the  grace  which  commenced  and 
nourished  in  their  converts  a  principle  of  self- renouncing 
holiness;  appealing  triumphantly  to  these  seals  of  their 
ministry  ;  and  in  comparison  with  such  vouchers,  regard- 
ing gifts  of  eloquence,  their  apostolic  office,  their  super- 
natural powers,  as  of  little  worth.  And,  on  the  other 
hand,  the  text,  with  many  similar  passages,  declares,  not 
only  that  the  name  of  God  might  be  blasphemed  among 
the  wicked  by  reason  of  the  misconduct  of  professed 
Christians,  but  that  such  inconsistencies  would  defeat 
the  Gospel,  though  Paul  himself  were  the  preacher. 

I.  In  discoursing  upon  this  subject,  I  begin  by  in- 
quiring, whether  the  religion  of  Jesus  ought  to  be  held 


Christians  to  be  bights  and  Examples.         285 


responsible  for  the  evil  behavior  of  (hose  who  prof 
it?  And  I  submit  to  you  that  there  can  be  hut  one 
answer  to  this  question,  Indeed  the  people  who  are 
forever  croaking  and  clamoring  about  the  inconsisten- 
cies of  professed  Christians  settle  this  matter  by  (heir 
very  invectives;  since  they  thus  unconsciously  confess 
that  the  standard  of  morality  required  by  the  Gospel  is 
most  exalted.  No  matter  how  wicked  an  infidel  may  be, 
nobody  accuses  him  of  not  acting  in  accordance  with  his 
principles ;  it  is  felt  by  society  that  he  is  quite  consistent 
when  he  openly  lives  in  every  sensual  indulgence.  But 
let  a  member  of  the  church  be  only  suspected  of  such 
things,  and  the  world  at  once  exclaims — He  has  fallen  ! 
How  dishonorable !  What  a  scandal  to  religion!  The 
enemies  of  Christ  themselves  being  judges,  the  doctrines 
of  the  Gospel  are  thus  admitted  to  be  most  holy.  A 
decisive  tribute  is  rendered  to  these  doctrines  by  the  very 
sneers  so  liberally  shed  upon  the  personal  deficiencies  of 
professed  converts. 

The  purest  and  most  heavenly  truths  are,  however, 
only  truths.  They  can  enlighten,  admonish,  exhort; 
they  cannot  compel.  If  a  man  supposed  to  be  sane  vio- 
late the  dictates  of  reason  and  ruins  himself,  we  say,  he 
has  acted  irrationally ;  we  do  not  impeach  the  dignity  of 
the  human  intellect.  A  physician  prescribes  medicine, 
regimen,  diet  which  would  cure  a  disease.  His  patient 
promises  to  comply,  but  disobeys  tnese  counsels  and  dies. 
We  condemn  his  folly;  we  do  not  blame  his  medical 
adviser.  And  just  so  with  the  Gospel.  It  dispenses 
doctrines  which  are  pure,  the  reception  of  which  must 
produce  sanctity  in  the  heart  and  life;  but  it  cannot  be 
held  accountable  for  the  delinquencies  of  those  who 
assume  a  form  of  godliness,  while  rejecting  its  power. 

"Well,  well,  all  this  is  incontestable;  but  the  Gospel 
asserts  its  potency  to  change  the  character."  Assuredly; 
and  the  physician  affirms  that  his  medicines  will  correct 
the  disorders  of  the  system  and  cure  the  malady.  Xow, 
do  you  decide  as  to  the  virtue  of  his  prescriptions,  by 
examining  the  sick  people  who  pretend  to  value  and  to 
take — but  who  in  fact  reject  them  ?  Judge  righteous 
judgment   as   to  the  influence  of  the  faith  we   preach. 

12  * 


286  Richard  Fuller  s  Sermons. 

Look  not  at  those  who  have  never  opened  their  hearts  to  its 
transforming  power;  but  look  at  the  examples  of  those 
who  attest  its  celestial  efficacy; — the  noble  army  of 
martyrs,  the  innumerable  company  of  saints,  the  cloud 
of  witnesses  whose  characters  illustrate  the  sacred  records, 
whose  lives  and  deaths  you  so  ardently  admire.  Nor 
only  these  ancient  worthies.  I  appeal  to  living  testimo- 
ny— to  the  pious  around  you,  within  the  circle  of  your 
own  acquaintance,  perhaps  under  your  own  roof — whose 
purity,  zeal,  self-sacrificing  devotion  at  once  receive  your 
willing,  or  extort  your  reluctant  esteem  and  homage. 

I  knew,  with  shame  I  confess,  that  there  have  been, 
and  still  are  most  unworthy  members  in  the  communion 
of  all  the  churches;  but  this  is  not  the  fault  of  the 
Gospel.  Bad  as  these  men  may  be,  rest  assured  they 
would  have  been  much  worse  without  the  restraints  of 
religion.  And  if  in  the  eyes  of  the  world  their  profession 
seems  a  foil  to  their  defects,  setting  them  off  in  strong 
exaggerated  colors,  this  fact  is  itself  a  concession  of  the 
glory  of  the  Gospel.  "  What  do  ye  more  than  others." 
Men  expect  more — they  are  justified  in  demanding  more 
of  a  Christian  than  of  others.  In  him,  therefore,  blem- 
ishes will  be  observed  and  condemned  which  would  not 
be  noticed  in  other  men.  All  this  is  so,  ho.vever,  simply 
because  the  Christian's  faith  is  so  holy.  A  spot  on  the 
sun's  disc  attracts  our  attention  because  there  is  darkness 
where  we  had  a  right  to  expect  that  all  would  be 
bright. 

II.  Here  I  think  I  may  rest  as  to  our  first  topic.  I 
suppose  you  will  all  admit  the  injustice  of  making  the 
religion  of  Jesus  responsible  for  the  misconduct  of  those 
who  profess  it.  I  now  advance  another  assertion.  I 
affirm  that  men  of  the  world  are  not  only  unfair  to  the 
Gospel,  when  they  seek  to  load  it  with  the  sins  of  its 
nominal  professors,  but  they  are  wholly  unjustifiable  in 
most  of  the  censures  which  they  love  to  lavish  upon  the 
members  of  Christ's  church. 

I  at  once  acknowledge  that  there  is  a  defectiveness  in 
the  sincerest  Christians.  This  attests  the  perfection  of 
the   Gospel  standard,  that  the  purest  saint  will    come 


Christians  to  he  Lights  and  Examples.         287 


short  of  it.  I  know,  too,  as  I  have  just  said,  that  the 
faults  of  professed  Christians  stand  out  in  bold  relief, 
while  their  self  denials  and  graces,  shrinking  from 
ostentation,  do  not  appear  unto  men.  And  it  is  not  to 
be  questioned  that  there  is,  at  this  day,  a  greal  deal  of 
spurious  religion.  In  the  age  of  the  apostles  cross- 
bearing  was  a  word  of  the  most  stern  significance  ;  for 
the  cross  was  an  emblem  of  suffering,  shame,  and  death. 
Those  who  then  named  the  name  of  Jesus  had  to  come 
out  from  the  world,  to  fight  the  good  fight  of  faith,  to 
immolate  ease,  honor,  fortune,  family,  often  life.  It  cost 
something  to  be  a  Christian  then.  Now,  Christianity 
has  become  a  most  accommodating,  comfortable  system. 
At  present  one  may  he  an  orthodox  Christian,  may  even 
be  esteemed  an  eminent  Christian,  not  only  without 
making  sacrifices,  but  without  having  really  chosen 
Christ  and  his  truth.  Multitudes  are  Christians  by 
birth,  through  custom,  or  fashion.  And  in  a  period  of 
such  degeneracy  there  will,  of  course,  be  too  much  cause 
for  invidious  comparisons  between  the  maxims,  princi- 
ples, spirit  of  the  New  Testament,  and  the  sad  discrep- 
ancies in  the  conduct  of  those  who  pretend  to  adopt  that 
volume  as  their  rule  of  faith  and  practice. 

But  still,  for  all  that,  I  pronounce  this  everlasting 
carping  and  canting  about  hypocrisy  in  Christians  to  be 
nothing  but  hypocrisy  in  men  of  the  world.  The  more 
you  examine  it,  the  more  will  you  detect  a  want  of  all 
common  equity,  the  utter  absence  of  everything  like  the 
impartiality  and  honesty  which  characterize  the  dealings 
of  honorable  men  in  other  matters.  In  their  sneers  and 
scoffs  we  have,  in  fact,  the  fulfillment  of  the  Saviour's 
prediction.  In  his  farewell  address  he  prepares  his  dis- 
ciples for  the  treatment  they  must  expect;  he  warns  us 
that  a  world  which  hated  him,  will  not  caress  his  fol- 
lowers: that  if  men  call  the  Master  Beelzebub,  the 
servants  will  hardly  be  called  angels — they  must  not 
hope  to  escape  suspicions  and  accusations. 

That  these  tirades  are  only  so  much  ribald  invective, 
is  a  matter  of  common  observation  among  all  candid 
people.  But  if  any  here  present  are  disposed  to  question 
what  I  assert  so  confidently,  I  ask  them  to  make  two  re- 


288  Richard  Fuller  s  Sermons. 

flections ;  one  on  the  character  of  these  censors ;  the 
other  on  the  censures  they  are  constantly  heaping  upon 
the  disciples  of  Jesus.     Follow  me  in  these  thoughts. 

First,  the  censors, — these  purists  thus  eternally  croak- 
ing about  professors  of  religion — who  are  they  ? 

Those  who  love  Christ,  alas,  too  often,  feel  their  hearts 
bleed  for  the  dishonor  which  treachery  brings  upon  his 
cause.  It  is  impossible  to  read  without  deep  emotion  the 
language  of  the  apostle,  in  which  he  speaks  of  the  fre- 
quent declensions  around  him,  and  of  his  anxieties,  his 
sorrows,  his  expostulations,  the  bitter  tears  wrung  from 
his  soul,  in  view  of  such  perfidiuosness.  "  Many  walk 
of  whom  I  have  told  you  o  ten,  and  now  tell  you  even 
weeping,  that  they  are  the  enemies  of  the  cross  of  Christ." 

He  felt  that  the  worldliness,  avarice,  sensuality  of  pro- 
fessed Christians  were  far  more  disastrous  to  the  truth, 
than  all  the  attacks  of  open  hostility.  And  he  could 
not  without  shedding  tears,  see  the  sins  of  professed 
converts  frustrating  all  his  labors,  and  causing  tne  Gos- 
pel to  be  despised.  Nor  was  this  love,  this  zeal,  this 
solicitude  peculiar  to  Paul  ;  it  is  shared  by  every  real 
pastor,  by  every  real  Christian.  These  will  "cry  and 
sigh  for  all  the  abominations"  that  are  done  in  the 
land.  They  will  glow  with  some  of  Elijah's  jealousy. 
They  will  rejoice  in  the  prosperity  of  Zion,  and  weep 
over  her  desolations.  They  will  sympathize  with  the 
Hebrews  who,  though  banished  from  their  homes  and 
bowed  down  under  bondage,  forgot  their  own  miseries, 
thought  only  of  Zion,  as  they  poured  out  that  plaintive 
wail  of  grief  and  love — "  If  I  forget  thee,  0  Jerusalem, 
let  my  right  hand  forget  her  cunning;  if  I  do  not  remem- 
ber thee,  let  my  tongue  cleave  to  the  roof  of  my  mouth  ; 
if  I  prefer  not  Jerusalem  above  my  chief  joy."  This 
language  is  the  instinctive  utterance  of  that  deep  concern 
which  ever;/  faithful  disciple  feels  for  the  honor  of  the 
chinch.  In  all  her  afflictions  he  will  lie  afflicted;  and 
rivers  of  water  will  run  down  his  eyes,  as  he  sees  Christ's 
truth  betrayed  by  those  to  whom  it  has  been  confided. 

Yes,  the  wounds  of  Zion  are  felt  as  personal  griefs  by 
those  who  love  Jesus.     J3ut  is  it  from  them  we  hear  these 


Christian*  to  be  Lights  and  Examples.  289 


clamors  about  the  inconsistencies  of  Christians?  No; 
they  mourn  over  them.  They  seek  to  heal  these  wounds. 
To  them,  dishonor  brought  upon  the  church  is  like  dis- 
grace staining  their  own  families.  Their  souls  are  bowed 
down  in  silent  mortification  ;  or,  if  they  speak,  it  is  to  God, 
pouring  out  their  sorrows  at  his  feet.  It  is  from  those 
who  in  their  conduct  contemn  the  authority  of  Go  I,  who 
violate  the  precepts  of  the  Saviour,  and  who  are  ranged 
among  his  open  enemies,— it  is  from  these  we  hear  all 
this  outcry.  These  are  our  censors  of  Christian  morals. 
these  are  the  men  who  are  so  fastidious  as  to  the  duty,  so 
over  sensitive  as  to  the  reputation  of  the  people  of  God  ; 
and  who  keep  up  such  lamentations  about  the  scandal 
brought  upon  religion.  Now,  does  anybody  believe 
that  these  cavillers  are  sincere?  that  they  are  truly 
jealous  for  the  interests  of  the  Gospel?  that  they  really 
take  to  heart  the  injured  glory  of  God?  If  so,  they 
would  wish  to  conceal  these  defects;  nay,  the  wrong 
done  to  the  Redeemer  would  kindle  in  their  bosoms  holy 
indignation,  a  noble  zeal  to  defend  his  suffering  cause  ; 
a  generous  impulse  would  hurry  them  to  the  rescue  of  one 
so  dear  to  their  hearts. 

Instead  of  this,  it  is  notorious  that  these  men  feel  a 
secret  pleasure  in  the  imperfections  of  Christians.  They 
delight  to  publish  and  exaggerate  them.  They  belong 
invariably  to  one  of  two  classes.  They  are  either  the 
secret  haters  of  God,  who  are  gratified  when  his  cause 
suffers,  who  wish  to  tarnish  his  character  by  exposing 
the  errors  of  his  children,  or  they  are  men  whose  con- 
sciences trouble  them  with  accusations  of  guilt;  and  who, 
enlightened,  but  unwilling  to  forsake  their  evil  ways, find 
an  opiate  for  their  convictions  in  the  irregularities  of 
Christians.  These  are  our  censors.  These  are  the 
puritans  whose  consciences  are  so  tender,  that  they  are 
incessantly  deploring  the  deficiencies  of  the  professors  of 
religion;  ever  proclaiming  what  Christians  ought  to  be, 
but  are  not;  everlastingly  pointing  to  every  aberration, 
every  indiscretion  in  church  members;  thanking  God 
that  they  are  not  hypocrites  as  other  men  are,  and  thus 
quieting  themselves  in  impenitence,  worldliness  and  sin. 

Having  seen  what  is  the  character  of  those  who  are 
every  day  heard  commenting  on  the  conduct  of  Christians 


290  Richard  Fuller  s  Sermons. 


let  us  now  pass  to  our  second  reflection,  let  us  examine 
the  charges  constantly  found  in  their  mouths.  A  glance 
will  expose  the  odiousuess  and  wickedness  of  these  old, 
stale  insinuations  and  detractions. 

Their  cruelty  ;  for  it  may  he  truly  said,  that  the  world 
is  more  severe  in  marking  the  offences  of  the  righteous 
than  the  Bible  itself.  John  and  Jesus  are  the  represent- 
atives of  two  contrasted  types  of  piety.  The  former  was 
austere,  ascetical,  sequestered  from  society;  and  he  had 
this  testimony  that  he  pleased  God.  He  was  "  a  burning 
and  a  shining  light."  "  Of  all  born  of  women  there 
hath  not  arisen  a  greater  than  John  the  Baptist."  Jesus 
was  the  incarnation  of  divine  love,  purity,  tenderness. — 
Twice,  as  if  the  Father's  delight  in  him  could  not  be  re- 
pressed, a  voice  from  heaven  declared,  "This  is  my  be- 
loved Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased."  But  neither 
John  nor  Jesus  could  please  the  world.  Its  gossips  were 
busy  with  the  character  of  each.  John  "had  a  devil." 
Jesus  was  "a  gluttonous  man  and  a  wine-bibber. 

Their  depravity ;  for  uncharitable  judging  really  pro- 
ceeds from  a  corrupt  heart.  When  free  from  the  defile- 
ments of  sin,  David  finds  "rivers  of  waters"  running 
down  his  eyes  as  he  saw  the  real  wickedness  around  him. 
It  was  when  he  had  yielded  to  a  guilty  passion,  that  his 
indignation  against  an  imaginary  criminal  would  know 
no  bounds,  and  he  said,  "The  man  that  hath  done  this 
thing  shall  surely  die."  A  Christian  truly  loving  holi- 
ness and  striving  after  it  finds  so  much  evil  in  himself, 
that  he  lies  low  before  God  in  deep  self-abhorrence.  He 
cannot,  with  the  pharisee  point  to  others  in  self-compla- 
cency and  arrogance.  His  are  the  attitude  and  the  hum- 
ble cry  of  the  publican,  who  "would  not  so  much  as  lift 
his  eyes  to  heaven,  but  smote  upon  his  breast,  saying, 
God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner."  A  man  who  is  thor- 
oughly sincere  and  guileless  himself,  can  scarcely  believe 
that  there  are  impostors  and  hypocrites  in  the  world. — 
He  possesses  that  charity,  "which  thinketh  no  evil," 
which  beiieveth  all  things,  hopeth  all  things."  Those 
who  are  forever  suspecting  others,  doubting  their  piety 
for  the  least  irregularity,  really  judge  others  by  them- 
selves.    They  pique  themselves  on  what  they  call  their 


Christians  to  be  Lights  and  Examples.  291 


knowledge  of  human  nai  are,  which  is  simply  ;i  conscious- 
ness of  their  own  duplicity  and  selfishness.  They  exer- 
cise no  charity,  make  no  allowances,  because  they  think- 
that  others  mast  carry  concealed  in  their  bosoms  the 
same  passions  which  they  nourish,  and  that  in  whatever 
seems  virtuous  all  men  are,  like  them -elves,  acting  a  part 
in  which  deception  is  necessary. 

The  ungenerousness  of  these  taunts  and  invectives; 
since  it  is  almost  always  through  the  influence  of  these 
very  persons  who  are  most  satirical  and  unsparing  that 
the  converts  to  the  G-ospel  are  seduced  into  inconsisten- 
cies. So  many  attentions,  so  many  snares  spread  before 
them,  such  examples,  maxims,  fashions,  flatteries, — it  is 
not  surprising  if  the  young  and  unsuspecting  are  decoyed, 
— nay,  if  some  who  imprudently  comply  in  the  hope  of 
doing  good  are  surprised  into  improper  conformity  to  the 
world.  But  with  what  decency  can  the  tempters  point 
to  the  mischief  which  they  themselves  have  done,  and  re- 
proach the  victims  of  their  own  pernicious  solicitations? 
Lineal  descendants  are  they  of  their  father  the  Devil, 
who  is  styled  "the  accuser  of  the  brethren,"  because  he 
reviles  them,  after  they  have  been  betrayed  by  his  own 
artifices. 

The  palpable  self -contradict  ion  of  these  cynics  who 
thus  sport  themselves  with  the  misbehavior  of  professed 
Christians,  and  its  baneful  consequences.  For,  no  mat- 
ter how  vicious  their  own  conduct  may  be,  they  expect 
us  to  believe  that  their  hearts  are  better  than  their  lives ; 
but  they  cannot  believe  that  the  heart  of  the  most  upright 
is  sincere,  if  he  be  overtaken  by  a  single  fault.  Press 
upon  them  the  duties  of  religion — which,  of  course,  are 
as  binding  upon  them  as  upon  the  Christian — and  what 
is  their  excuse  ?  They  cannot  perform  a  task  so  arduous. 
To  be  a  real  Christian  is  an  achievement  impossible  to 
such  a  being  as  man  is.  Yet  they  grant  no  indulgence 
to  beings  subject  to  like  passions  with  themselves,  who 
are  engaged  in  this  unequal  conflict.  Let  the  guiltiest 
reprobate,  after  a  life  spent  in  open  contempt  of  Cod, 
only  confess  his  crimes  on  his  death-bed,  let  him  implore 
our  prayers,  let  him  shed  a  few  tears  extorted  by  terror, 
— and  these  people  are  shocked  at  our  want  of  charity, 


292  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

if  we  do  not  at  once  open  wide  the  doors  of  paradise  and 
assure  him  of  heaven.  But  the  salvation  of  the  most 
devoted  saint  is  more  than  doubtful,  if,  after  twenty, 
thirty,  fifty  years  of  exemplary  piety,  the  lustre  of  his 
character  be  dimmed  by  a  frailty,  by  an  indiscretion 
which  has  caused  him  to  weep  bitterly,  day  and  night, 
before  God. 

Our  last  remark  as  to  these  opprobriums  and  deprecia- 
tions has  reference  to  their  impiety  and  barbarity. 

Impiety  ;  for  the  Gospel  is  the  only  hope  of  the  world, 
it  is  "  the  wisdom  and  power  of  God  unto  salvation." 
Take  away  this  heavenly  resource,  and  the  whole  human 
family  sinks  into  irretrievable  perdition.  Now  these  in- 
cessant diatribes  against  the  righteous  are,  in  fact,  attacks 
upon  the  Gospel ;  and,  like  all  calumny,  they  are  a  fire 
which  tarnishes  and  blackens  what  it  cannot  destroy. 
It  is  not  hypocrisy  which  is  assailed,  it  is  religion  itself. 
These  detractors  pretend,  indeed,  that  their  remarks  are 
levelled  only  against  dissimulation  and  falsehood;  but 
the  effect  of  their  sarcasms  is  to  impair  all  confidence  in 
the  Bible;  it  is  to  bring  religion  itself  into  contempt. 

And  barbarity ;  for  what  do  these  cavillers  really 
mean  by  the  repetition  of  their  cold  sneers  and  flippan- 
cies ?  They  mean  that  there  are  no  true  Christians. 
Disguise  it  as  they  may,  this  is  the  inference  "they  wish 
people  to  draw.  But  what  an  inference  !  Because  Judas 
and  Simon  Magus  were  false-hearted,  therefore  the  apos- 
tles were  deceivers.  Because  some  merchants  are  dis- 
honorable, some  pastors  unprincipled,  therefore  all  me  r- 
chants  are  rogues,  all  ministers  of  the  Gospel  are  profli- 
gates. I  apply  to  this  insinuation  the  epithet  barbarous, 
because  it  outrages  all  decency.  It  is  a  sort  of  reasoning 
which  is  revolting  and  horrible,  since  it  would  throw 
poison  into  every  source  of  human  confidence.  How 
many  friends  have  proved  unfaithful;  is  there,  therefore, 
no  such  thing  as  sincere  friendship  upon  earth?  How 
many  wives  have  been  perfidious;  is  there,  therefore,  no 
chastity  in  woman  ?  The  world  has  sometimes  known 
such  a  monster  as  an  unnatural  mother;  but  who,  from 
such  a  hideous  phenomenon,  would  wish  to  draw  the 
conclusion    that  all    mothers   are    unnatural — that  this 


Christians  to  be  Lights  and  I-1,  so  tuples.         203 


purest,  dearest,  sweetest,  tenderest  love  is  all  a  counterfeit 
and  a  falsehood  ? 

.III.  If  you  have  followed  me  in  the  preceding  arti- 
cles, you  will  I  hope,  concede  two  truths.  You  will  ad- 
mit that  the  Gospel  is  not  responsible  for  the  misconduct 
of  those  who  dishonor  it;  and  that  this  universal  fault- 
finding with  the  professors  of  religion  is  nothing  but  so 
much  ribaldry  and  profanity.  But,  while  all  this  is  so, 
what  then  ?  What  argument  are  we  to  deduce  from 
these  concessions  ?  Are  we  at  liberty  to  disregard  the 
opinion  of  the  world  ?  Far  from  it.  The  word  of  God 
and  our  own  good  sense  ought  to  carry  us  to  the  very 
opposite  decision.  They  admonish  us  that  the  scrutiny 
and  censoriousness  of  the  world  are  the  very  reasons  why 
we  should  be  more  circumspect,  more  scrupulously  holy 
in  all  our  life  and  conversation. 

Our  text  recognizes  the  injustice  of  which  I  have  been 
speaking.  It  declares  that  the  children  of  this  world 
among  whom  we  have  our  conversation,  are  "  a  crooked 
and  perverse  generation."  And  prophets,  apostles,  the  Sa- 
viour, the  entire  Scriptures  warn  us  to  expect  obloquy 
and  enmity.  But,  after  all,  we  are  sent  to  save  these 
crooked  and  perverse  people ;  and,  if  our  mission  is  to  be 
successful,  we  must  deal  with  them  as  they  are  ;  we  must 
consider  their  prejudices,  their  captiousness,  their  sins. 

True  the  Gospel  cannot  justly  be  held  accountable  for 
the  inconsistencies  of  those  who  profess  it ;  but  it  is  held 
accountable  for  them.  True,  the  charges  against  Chris- 
tians are  most  unfair ;  but  they  are  repeated  every  day 
and  hour.  What  follows  ?  This,  plainly  this :  We 
must  "  with  well-doing  put  to  silence  the  ignorance  of 
foolish  men,"  "  that  whereas  they  speak  evil  of  you  as  of 
evil  doers,  they  may  be  ashamed  who  falsely  accuse  your 
>ood  conversation  in  Christ."  jNTor  must  we  only  main- 
ain  a  character  of  unblemished  integrity  ;  this  the  men 
of  the  world  may  do.  A  Christian  must  go  farther;  he 
must  exemplify  in  his  conduct  the  tempers  and  graces 
which  become  his  heavenly  calling,  and  which  form  a 
style  of  excellence  high  above  the  ethics  of  this  world. — 
We  are  to  be  ''blameless  and  harmless,  the  sons  of  God 


294  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

without  rebuke,  in  the  midst  of  a  crooked  and  perverse 
generation,  among  whom  ye  shine  as  lights  in  the  world, 
holding  forth  the  word  of  life."  As  the  eternal  Word 
became  incarnate  in  the  man  Christ  Jesus,  so  the  written 
word  of  life  must  find  its  incarnation  in  our  lives  and 
characters.  Thus  must  we  vindicate  the  Gospel  from  the 
aspersions  of  those  who  seek  false  witnesses  against  it,  as 
they  did  against  its  Author.  Thus  will  we  compel  an 
unjust  world,  "seeing  our  good  works,  to  glorify  our  Fa- 
ther who  is  in  heaven." 

We  cannot  open  the  sacred  volume  without  at  once 
perceiving  several  striking  facts.  We  find  the  first  preach- 
ers always  appealing  confidently  to  their  converts  as  to 
witnesses  whose  conduct  attested  the  efficacy  of  the  Gospel. 
And  we  find  the  first  Christians  appealing  as  confidently 
to  their  lives  as  proofs  of  their  faith.  The  apostle  de- 
clares that  those  brought  to  Jesus  by  his  ministry  were 
letters  written  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  recommending  not 
only  him  but  the  Gospel  which  he  preached.  They  were 
"  epistles  known  and  read  of  all  men  ;"  those  who  could 
not  spell  out  a  letter  made  with  ink,  easily  comprehend- 
ing the  truth  transcribed  in  a  holy  life ;  those  who  de- 
spised the  revelations  in  the  Bible,  reading  every  day  in 
living  examples  a  revelation  which  they  could  not  de- 
spise, a  revelation  bearing  God's  plain  signature, — a  law 
silently  but  constantly  convincing  them  of  their  guilt, — 
a  Gospel  silently  but  irresistibly  winning  them  to  the 
Eedeemer. 

Another  most  remarkable  fact.  Where  there  were 
churches,  the  apostles  despaired  of  any  great  success  in 
their  preaching,  unless  the  members  of  the  churches  ex- 
hibited practically  the  sanctifying  power  of  the  Gospel. 
Whatever  different  opinions  may  be  entertained  as  to  the 
declaration  that  Jesus  "could  not  do  many  wonderful 
works"  in  a  certain  place  "on  account  of  the  unbelief" 
of  his  hearers,  there  can  be  no  dispute  about  the  language 
of  our  text.  It  is  here  distinctly  affirmed  that  apostolic 
zeal  and  eloquence  might  be  foiled  by  the  misconduct  of 
professed  believers.  And  if  all  the  earnest,  devoted  piety 
— the  miracles,  the  tears,  the  soul-stirring  appeals  of 
those  heavenly   messengers   could   be  thus  disarmed, — 


Christians  to  be  Lights  and  Examples,  295 


what  is  to  become  of  us,  if  our  ministry  be  not  seconded, 
if  it  be  refuted  by  your  lives. 

We  sometimes  express  surprise  at  the  little  success  of 
the  Gospel  ;  that  after  eighteen  hundred  years,  it  has 
achieved  no  wider  conquests,  and  has  still  daily  to  renew 
a  conflict  in  which  it  seems  often  to  be  baffled.  We  are 
even  tempted  at  times  to  doubt  whether  it  can  make  good 
all  which  it  promises.  But  when  we  look  at  the  organ- 
izations called  churches,  and  examine  the  conduct  of  most 
of  the  people  called  Christians,  the  real  wonder  is  that 
the  Gospel  has  done  so  much.  Take  the  most  evangeli- 
cal of  our  churches;  take  this  church.  We  make  our 
boast  of  orthodoxy,  and  are  confident  that  we  are  guides 
to  the  blind,  the  lights  of  those  which  dwell  in  dark 
places.  But  if  Paul  were  here,  would  he  not  find  too 
abundant  cause  to  remonstrate  with  us — as  he  formerly 
did  with  the  Jews — for  resting  in  a  knowledge  of  the 
truth  which  is  miserably  unproductive  ?  On  all  sides 
he  would  see  much  skill  in  expounding  evangelical  doc- 
trine, with  but  little  practical  conformity  to  it;  he  would 
hear  us  exposing  human  depravity  by  overwhelming  de- 
monstrations, while  deplorably  unconscious  of  the  bur- 
den of  our  own  ungodliness;  he  would  behold  too  many 
expatiating  on  the  atonement  and  righteousness  of  Christ, 
without  having  savingly  embraced  them;  and  loudly  in- 
sisting on  the  necessity  of  holiness,  while  wretchedly  de- 
linquent in  all  those  graces  which  are  the  fruits  of  the 
Spirit. 

A  great  deal  has  been  lately  said  and  written  about  the 
mistranslation  of  one  or  two  Greek  words  in  our  version 
of  the  Bible.  But  the  most  lamentable  and  pernicious 
misinterpretations  of  the  Scriptures  are  those  published 
everywhere  in  the  conduct  of  multitudes  who  misrepre- 
sent its  teachings  and  its  power.  The  transcendent  puri- 
ty of  heavenly  truth  renders  it  necessary  that  the  chil- 
dren of  the  world  should  see  it  practised  by  men  like 
themselves ;  and  our  pulpits  will  be  comparatively  im- 
potent, until  our  churches  shall  furnish  such  examples, 
until  they  shall  rescue  the  Gospel  from  the  dishonor  in- 
to which  it  has  been  sunk;  until — illustrating  the  faith 
and  grace  of  Jesus — walking   in    holiness  and   love — a 


296  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

peculiar  people  shall  come  forth  from  the  masses  of  bap- 
tized worldliness,  covetousness,  selfishness  abounding  in 
every  place,  and  shall  shew  what  the  Gospel  is,  and 
what  the  Gospel  can  do  in  changing,  regenerating,  bless- 
ing this  guilty  earth. 

To  no  archangel  has  Jesus  committed  interests  so  dear 
to  his  heart  as  those  which  he  has  confided  to  us;  let  us 
be  faithful  to  the  trust.  I  need  not  tell  you  that  we  live 
in  a  day,  amidst  events,  portending  disaster  to  the  en- 
terprises of  the  Gospel;  and  which  are  testing,  in  the 
severest  crucible,  the  faith,  patience,  meekness,  fidelity 
of  every  child  of  God.  At  all  times  every  Christian 
has  his  mission.  That  he  is  a  Christian  makes  him  also 
an  apostle.  But  it  is  especially  at  such  a  time  as  this, 
that  every  disciple  of  Jesus  is  called  to  shew  the  differ- 
ence between  his  principles  and  those  of  the  world  around 
him.  Civil  war  is  afire  from  hell  which  not  only  brings 
to  the  surface  the  scum  and  feculence  of  a  nation,  but 
stirs  up  all  the  most  malignant  passions  of  our  depraved 
nature.  Amidst  abounding  iniquity,  let  not  our  love 
wax  cold.  "Go  through  the  midst  of  the  city,  through 
the  midst  of  Jerusalem,  and  set  a  mark  upon  the  fore- 
heads of  the  men  that  sigh  and  that  cry  for  the  abomi- 
nations that  are  done  in  the  midst  thereof."  Let  us 
bear  this  mark  upon  our  foreheads  now;  and  so  bear  it, 
that  not  only  angels  but  men  shall  see  and  reverence  its 
lustre.  On  every  side  we  hear  of  loyalty  and  disloyalty, 
of  oaths  of  allegiance  to  human  governments.  Recollect 
that  the  present  is  an  hour  which  is  putting  to  the  proof 
our  loyalty  to  Jesus,  and  when  fidelity  will  clothe  the 
Gospel  with  peculiar  glory.  Let  us  be  faithful.  Jesus 
has  been  wounded  enough  by  wicked  hands, — wounded 
for  our  sins.  Let  him  not  be  wounded  by  our  hands, — 
wounded  by  our  sins.  He  has  been  wronged  and  in- 
sulted by  his  enemies.  Let  him  not  be  wronged  and  in- 
sulted "in  the  house  of  his  friends."  For  us  he  "en- 
dured the  cross,  despising  the  shame;  can  we  bear  the 
thought  of  crucifying  him  afresh,  and  putting  him  to  an 
open  shame  by  our  perfidiousness  ? 

For  my  own  part,  if  I  may  express  my  personal  feelings 
— while  I  see  you  true  to  Jesus  and  his  cause,  my  soul 


Christians  to  be  Lights  and  Example*.  297 

can  stand  erect  and  glorify  God  in  any  fires,  in  any  ca- 
lamity that  may  come.  ''What  is  my  hope,  or  joy,  or 
crown  of  rejoicing  ?  Are  not  even  ye  in  the  presence  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  at  his  coming?  For  ye  are  our 
glory  and  joy."  You  know  the  griefs  which  have  lately 
swept  over  me  in  gust  after  gust ;  but  1  have  been  rilled 
with  unspeakable  consolation,  as  I  beheld  your  harmony, 
"your  order  and  the  steadfastness  of  your  faith  in  Christ." 
And  if  it  should  please  heaven  still  to  try  me  with  afflic- 
tion, to  rain  sorrow  and  pain  upon  my  head,  I  think  I 
could  find  in  some  part  of  my  soul  comfort  and  patience, 
while  reflecting  that  it  was  "for  your  consolation  and 
salvation  "  that  I  thus  suffered. 

"  Yea,"  (to  use  the  words  immediately  following  the 
text)  "and  if  I  be  offered  upon  the  sacrifice  and  service 
of  your  faith,  I  joy  and  rejoice  with  you  all."  But  if 
this  peace  should  be  disturbed,  if  the  animosities  which 
are  everywhere  convulsing  society,  embittering  families 
and  churches,  should  profane  these  altars,  if  your  har- 
mony, your  steadfast  devotion  to  Christ  should  give 
way — then,  indeed,  I  could  have  no  heart  to  bear  up 
under  such  a  calamity;  I  should  feel  that  for  me  the  hap- 
piness of  life,  the  bitterness  of  death  were  past. 

In  finishing  this  address,  let  me  first  speak  to  those 
who  openly  or  covertly  quiet  themselves  by  dwelling 
upon  the  inconsistencies  of  professed  Christians.  For 
yon,  my  friends,  the  subject  is  full  of  solemn  warning. 

The  text  declares  that  these  carpings  are  only  the 
pretexts  of  a  crooked  and  perverse  spirit.  They  are  not 
only  no  pleas,  but  they  condemn  you  out  of  your  own 
mouth.  If  you  should  see  the  pretended  friends  of  your 
father  or  child  dealing  falsely  with  him,  concealing  a 
dagger  to  stab  him — would  you,  for  that  reason,  stand 
aloof  and  moralize  upon  the  hollowness  of  human  affec- 
tions ?  Xo,  your  whole  soul  would  be  roused  to  protect 
him  against  these  disguised  enemies.  And  if  you  had  a 
spark  of  love  for  Jesus,  the  treachery  of  his  professed 
followers  would  instinctively  draw  you  to  him,  and 
enlist  your  influence  in  behalf  of  his  injured  cause. 


298  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

Suppose  I  admit  all  you  allege  against  Christians,  it 
could  furnish  no  sort  of  apology  for  you  ;  for  it  could 
have  no  sort  of  connection  with  your  impenitence  and 
disobedience.  "  Who  art  thou  that  judgest  another 
man's  servant?  To  his  own  master  he  standeth  or 
falleth."  Let  me  recommend  to  you  a  wiser  course.  Be 
a  prophet  in  your  own  country.  Rest  assured  that  this 
eagerness  to  justify  your  own  conduct  by  pointing  to 
that  of  others  is  always  a  desire  to  find  an  excuse  for 
something  of  which  conscience  condemns  you.  Instead, 
then,  of  criticizing  the  defects  of  Christ's  servants,  turn 
your  eyes  upon  your  own  sins  which  have  so  long  pro- 
voked, the  justice,  and  perhaps  have  almost  exhausted  the 
patience  of  God.  It  is  true,  (a  reflection  which  causes 
us  to  tremble)  that,  if  we  are  faithless,  and  you  perish 
through  our  evil  example,  the  Lord  will  require  your 
blood  at  our  hands ;  but  as  he  has  expressly  declared, 
your  destruction  will  not  be  less  certain.  You  have  the 
Bible;  study  the  Gospel  there,  and  not  in  its  human  and 
imperfect  manifestations.  You  have  the  preaching  of 
the  word  and  your  own  conscience.  From  childhood  the 
truth  has  had  a  lodgment  in  your  bosom;  the  Holy 
Spirit  has  been  pouring  light  into  your  mind  ;  and  before 
you  have  been  the  examples  of  those  whose  piety  you 
cannot  question.  Go  not,  then,  ali  the  way  to  the  bar  of 
the  Judge  with  a  pretext  which  can  avail  you  nothing; 
which  will  only  prove  the  depravity  of  your  own  heart, 
and  aggravate  the  sentence  justly  pronounced  upon 
you. 

If  you  are  resolved  not  to  identify  yourself  with  the 
cause  of  Christ,  nor  to  support  his  truth,  at  least  do  not 
join  those  who  are  ever  seeking  to  injure  that  cause  by 
exploring  and  publishing  the  frailties  of  its  advocates. 
You  do  not  intend,  perhaps,  to  damage  religion  ;  but 
such  is  the  inevitable  effect  of  these  "  railing  accusations" 
against  those  who  name  the  name  of  Christ.  Let  me 
admonish  you.  too,  that  this  spirit  of  ribaldry  reacts  most 
disastrously  upon  your  own  character,  and  must  draw 
down  the  anger  of  God  upon  your  head.  When  the  wicked 
children  of  Bethlehem  derided  the  baldness  of  Elisha, 
there   came  forth  ravenous  beasts  which   tore  them  in 


Christians  to  be  Lights  and  Examples*         299 

pieces.  And  I  now  tell  yon,  from  God,  that  none  are 
more  certainly  delivered  over  to  the  dominion  of  wild 
and  fatal  passions  than  those  who  delight  to  mock  at  the 
infirmities  anjj  deficiencies  of  his  people. 

Christians,  my  beloved  brethren,  let  ns  lay  this  subject 
closely  to  heart.  I  ought  to  speak  to  you  of  your  own 
salvation.  The  foolish  virgins  were  condemned,  not  for 
the  evil  they  had  done,  but* because  their  lights  did  not 
shine.  A  religion  which  does  not  clearly  separate  you 
from  a  sinful  world  now,  will  not  suffice  to  separate  you 
from  a  lost  world  in  eternity.  I  ought  to  remind  you, 
also,  of  your  holy  lineage.  The  children  of  earthly  princes 
are  taught  to  regard  as  worse  than  death  any  stain  upon 
their  honor  ;  shall  the  children  of  the  Heavenly  Majesty 
be  less  jealous  of  their  reputation  ?  The  text  appeals  to 
you  as  "  the  sons  of  God ;"  and  the  Scriptures  entreat 
you  to  "be  fo; lowers  of  God  as  dear  children."  They 
seek  to  stir  up  our  filial  longings  after  the  divine  image, 
to  awaken  in  us  a  consciousness  of  our  divine  affinities, 
and  thus  to  raise  our  aspirations  to  that  perfection  of  the 
soul  which  constitutes  its  likeness  to  the  Deity.  But  to- 
day I  would  bring  the  matter  to  a  single  issue;  I  would 
reason  and  plead  as  to  your  influence  upon  those  around 
you.  It  was  with  no  self-complacent  blindness,  it  was 
with  a  conscience  which  made  him  superior  to  the  pre- 
cautions of  a  false  humility,  that  Paul  said,  "Be  followers 
of  me,  and  mark  them  who  walk  so  as  ye  have  us  for  an 
ensample."  Which  of  us  would  venture  to  utter  this  in- 
vitation ?  Alas,  the  best  of  us  cannot  say  Come  ;  we  can 
only  say  Go.  And  yet  men  are  following  us  in  one  di- 
rection or  the  other.  We  cannot  be  hid.  We  cannot  live 
without  distributing  some  influences.  Our  conduct  must 
advance  or  retard  the  cause  for  which  Jesus  died. 

In  the  church  we  cannot  be  worldly,  covetous,  faithless 
to  our  vows  ;  we  cannot  be  indifferent  to  the  success  of 
the  Gospel  and  the  triumphs  of  its  institutions  ;  we  can- 
not be  lukewarm,  contentious,  sellish,  given  to  "mur- 
murings  and  disputings,"  without  bringing  scandal  upon 
the  name  of  Jesus.  And  in  the  world,  if  our  temper 
and  conduct  resemble  those  of  the  unconverted  about 
us ;   if  we   do   not  exemplify   the   meekness,   sincerity, 


300  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

truth,  gentleness,  humility,  purity  of  the  Redeemer,  Ave 
dishonor  the  Gospel,  our  discrepancies  become  spots 
and  stains  upon  religion  itself. 

We  profess  to  be  converted;  but  conversion — by  the 
very  force  of  the  word — is  the  beginning  of  a  new  course 
in  an  opposite  direction;  it  is  the  commencement  of  a 
life,  not  only  new,  but  entirely  different.  We  are 
Christians ;  but  to  be  Christians  is  to  be  "separate  from 
sinners ;  it  is  to  be  "  a  peculiar  people  zealous  of  good 
works  ;"  it  is  to  be  "  not  conformed  to  this  world  ;" 
it  is  to  be  "  crucified  to  the  world  ;"  it  is  to  "  crucify  the 
flesh  with  its  affections  and  lusts;"  it  is  (as  the  text 
declares)  to  "  shine  as  lights  in  the  world." 

If  in  our  conduct  the  world  sees  nothing  of  these  tem- 
pers and  graces  of  the  Gospel,  it  will  form  a  correspond- 
ing estimate  of  the  Gospel  itself,  and  the  reproaches  of 
those  who  reproach  us  will  fall  upon  Jesus  and  his  truth. 
[N~or  will  the  injury  be  diminished — it  will  be  only  aug- 
mented— by  our  apparent  zeal  and  devotion  in  the  ser- 
vices of  the  sanctuary,  by  an  irreproachable  profession,  by 
an  assumption  of  great  orthodoxy  and  spirituality.  We 
are  to  "  shine  as  lights  in  the  world ;"  we  are  to  let  our 
lights  so  shine,  that  "  men  seeing  our  good  works,  may 
glorify  our  Father  in  heaven."  The  world  places  little 
value  upon  exterior  precision ;  it  does  not  understand 
faith,  orthodoxy,  spirituality;  but  it  does  comprehend 
and  reverence  meekness,  humility,  honesty,  purity  ;  and 
if  these  be  wanting,  our  sanctimoniousness  will  inspire 
only  a  deeper  contempt  for  us,  and  religion  will  be  in- 
volved with  us  in  this  contempt. 

Beloved  brethren,  let  these  thoughts  abide  with  us 
always.  "Ye  were  sometimes  darkness,  but  now  are  ye 
light  in  the  Lord;  walk  as  children  of  light;  for  the 
fruit  of  the  Spirit  is  in  all  goodness  and  righteousness 
and  truth;  proving  what  is  acceptable  unto  the  Lord. 
And  have  no  fellowship  with  the  unfruitful  works  of 
darkness,  but  rather  reprove  them."  I  trust,  I  know 
there  are  some  before  me  upon  whom  the  truths  this  day 
uttered  will  not  be  lost ;  some  who  yearn  after  that  life 
of  faith  and  entire  consecration  which  alone  can  raise  the 
church  from  its  present  degeneracy.     Let  us  at  once  obey 


Christians  to  be  Lights  and  Examples.         301 

these  heavenly  aspirations.  By  our  zeal,  holiness,  self- 
immolation,  unwearied  dedication,  let  us  uphold  the  suf- 
fering interests  of  the  Redeemer. 

It  is  not  open  apostasy  which,  at  this  day,  dims  the 
splendor  of  the  truth  ;  it,  is  that  real  Christians  "  mind 
earthly  things,"  and  are  thus,  as  the  npostle  says,  "the 
enemies  of  the  cross  of  Christ ; — its  worst  enemies — since 
their  virtues  invest  their  testimony  with  great  weight, 
and  they  practically  deny  the  potency  of  the  cross  to  cru- 
cify their  pride  and  attachment  to  the  vanities  of  this  life. 
See  that  you  are  not  found  among  these  enemies.  Rest 
satisfied  with  nothing  less  than  the  consciousness  of  a 
piety  which  shall  put  to  shame  all  the  clamors  of  a  cen- 
sorious world.  The  persecutors  of  Daniel  said,  "We  shall 
not  find  any  occasion  against  this  Daniel,  except  we  find 
it  against  him  concerning  the  law  of  his  God."  Let  us 
so  act  that  an  uncompromising  fidelity  to  Jesus  shall  be 
the  only  charge  which  malice  can  invent  against  ns.  If 
the  wicked  love  not  the  Gospel,  let  us  compel  them,  at 
least,  to  respect  it.  In  the  midst  of  a  society  where  all 
are  eagerly  seeking  to  amass  wealth,  to  secure  worldly 
honor,  or  sensual  gratification,  let  us  show  that  our  af- 
fections are  set  upon  things  above.  In  days  like  these, 
when  the  worst  passions  are  abroad,  alienating  those  once 
dear  to  each  other,  and  inflaming  wrath,  malice,  hatred, 
all  uncharitableness — let  us  remember  him  "who,  when 
he  was  reviled,  reviled  not  again,  when  he  suffered,  threat- 
ened not,"  and  who  hath  said,  "  Love  your  enemi-  s,  bless 
them  that  curse  you,  do  good  to  them  that  hate  you,  and 
pray  for  them  which  despitefully  use  you  and  persecute 
you."  Disinterestedness,  gentleness,  uprightness,  a  no- 
ble superiority  to  the  world,  peace, charity,  love, — if  these 
fruits  of  the  Spirit  are  sqqu  in  our  lives,  they  will  not  only 
silence  the  censures  of  "  a  crooked  and  perverse  na- 
tion," but  they  will  subdue  their  enmity,  conquer  their 
prejudices,  and,  with  a  still  but  resistless  eloquence,  draw 
them  to  honor  the  Redeemer  now,  that  they  may  be  hon- 
ored by  him  hereafter. 

"  That  ye  may  be  blameless  and  harmless,  the  sons  of 
God  without  rebuke,  in  the  midst  of  a  crooked  and  per- 
verse nation,  among  whom  ye  slime  as  lights  in  the  world, 

13 


302  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons, 

holding  forth  the  word  of  life."  It  is  the  duty,  dignity, 
responsibility  of  the  Christian  that  the  apostle  is  enforc- 
ing in  the  words  which  I  have  thus  sought  to  impress 
upon  you.  His  allusion  is  to  a  light-house,  and  it  recalls 
to  my  mind  an  incident  related  by  a  distinguished  trav- 
eller, with  which  I  finish  this  discourse. 

"  Being  at  Calais,"  remarks  the  writer,  "  I  climbed  up 
into  the  light-house  and  conversed  with  the  keeper. — 
'  Suppose,'  said  I,  'that  one  of  these  lights  should  go  out.' 
'  Go  out  ?  impossible  ! '  he  exclaimed,  with  a  sort  of  con- 
sternation at  the  bare  hypothesis.  '  Sir,'  he  added,  point- 
ing to  the  ocean,  '  Yonder,  where  nothing  can  be  seen, 
there  are  ships  going  by  to  every  part  of  the  world.  If 
to-night  one  of  my  burners  were  to  go  out,  within  six 
months  would  come  a  letter,  perhaps  from  India,  perhaps 
from  America,  perhaps  from  some  place  I  never  heard  of, 
saying,  On  such  a  night,  at  such  an  hour,  the  lighl  at 
Calais  burned  dim,  the  watchman  neglected  his  post,  and 
vessels  were  in  danger.  Ah,  sir,  sometimes,  in  the  dark 
nights,  in  stormy  weather,  I  look  out  to  sea,  and  feel  as  if 
the  eye  of  the  whole  world  were  looking  at  my  lights. — 
Let  them  go  out?  burn  dim  ?  0  never,  never,  never !'  " 

May  he  who  "walketh  in  the  midst  of  the  golden  can- 
dlesticks" arm  us  all  with  a  jealousy  and  anxiety  wake- 
ful as  that  of  this  guardian  of  the  French  beacon.  May 
we  ever  feel  that  the  eyes  of  God  and  of  the  whole  world  are 
upon  us.  And  in  eternity  may  we  not  only  find  that  no 
souls  have  perished  through  our  faithlessness,  but  may 
we  be  among  those  who — sustained  and  triumphing  by 
almighty  grace — having  turned  many  to  righteousness — 
shall  shine  as  the  brightness  of  the  firmament;  and  as 
the  stars  forever  and  ever.  God  grant  us  this  unspeak- 
able mercy,  for  Jesus'  sake. 

"  Wherefore,  also,  we  pray  always  for  you,  that  our 
God  would  count  you  worthy  of  this  calling,  and  fulfill 
all  the  good  pleasure  of  his  goodness,  and  the  work  of 
faith  with  power ;  that  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ  may  be  glorified  in  you  and  ye  in  him,  according 
to  the  grace  of  our  God,  and  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ." 


Love  to  Christians  an  Evidence  of  Conversion.    303 


Sermon  <3bi? teeutfi. 


LOVE  TO  CHRISTIANS  AN  EVI- 
DENCE OF  CONVERSION. 

'*  We  know  that  we  have  passed  from  death  unto  life,  because  we 
love  the  brethren." — I  John  iii :  14. 

THERE  is  reallyno  reason  why  the  treatise  from  which 
I  select  this  text  should  be  termed,  the  "  General 
Epistle  of  John."  It  has  not  a  single  one  of  the  charac- 
teristics which  mark  that  class  of  compositions.  If  you 
turn  to  the  inspired  epistles,  you  find  them  variously 
addressed;  some  to  particular  churches;  some  to  the 
saints  in  a  specified  part  of  the  world  ;  some  to  the  saints 
at  large;  some  to  a  particular  branch  of  the  faithful; 
and  some  to  individual  christians.  But  this  book  has 
no  address  ;  nor  has  it  anv  farewell  or  benediction.  There 
is,  to  be  sure,  the  easy,  colloquial  style  of  correspondence, 
but  this  idiom  was  very  congenial  to  the  tender,  loving 
heart  of  our  apostle,  and  we  find  it  pervading  the  Gospel 
written  by  him.  This  work  is  really  an  inspired  essay 
or  dissertation  ;  not  an  epistle.  But  whatever  the  title, 
it  is  a  wonderful  production,  breathing  throughout  the 
sweetest,  heavenliest  strains  of  love,  blended  with  the 
most  glorious  doctrines,  the  divinest  precepts,  the  sublim- 
est  mysteries  of  the  Gospel. 

The  passage  which  I  have  just  read  is  familiar  to  you 
all ;  but  on  that  very  account  it  may  not  have  received 
from  you  the  attention  it  deserves.  I  am  going  to  make 
it  the  subject  of  our  meditations  this  morning. 


304  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

I.  And,  first,  observe,  the  text  takes  it  for  granted 
that  assurance  is  attainable  by  every  Christian.  "  We 
knoiv  thut  we  have  passed  from  death  unto  life."  Nor  is 
this  an  isolated  passage;  you  can  easily  recall  others 
equally  emphatic  upon  this  great  truth.  But,  now,  un- 
derstand what  I  am  affirming.  Of  course  no  unregen- 
erate  person  can  know  that  he  is  in  a  state  of  salvation  ; 
for  he  is  not.  He  may  flatter  himself  in  his  own  eyes 
and  cry  "  Peace,  peace;"  but  it  is  because  he  is  wilfully 
blind.  And  a  truly  converted  man  may  be  depressed  by 
fears.  Wo  to  us,  if  doubts  as  to  our  salvation  could 
make  that  salvation  doubtful.  What  I  say  is,  that 
assurance  is  the  privilege  of  every  child  of  God.  Indeed 
it  would  be  most  deplorable  if  he  could  not  attain  this 
certainty;  if  after  his  eyes  have  been  opened  to  the  infi- 
nite importance  of  eternal  things,  he  must  yet  be  left  to 
live  al,l  his  days  in  suspense  and  apprehension. 

For,  just  consider  what  is  the  question  at  stake.  It 
is,  whether  "  we  have  passed  from  death  unto  life." 
You  at  once  perceive  that  the  text  speaks  of  spiritual 
life  and  death  ;  and  the  verb  used — "  have  passed" — like 
all  the  Scriptures-  assumes  as  a  fact  admitted,  that  spirit- 
ual death  is  our  natural  condition. 

But,  now,  what  a  condition.  Death  is  the  privation  of 
life;  I  say  privation  ;  for  you  cannot  apply  the  word  to 
anything  which  was  never  alive.  Objeets  which  were 
never  endowed  with  the  vital  principle  can,  of  course, 
never  die.  Death  is  the  withdrawment,  the  extinction 
of  life.  Spiritual  death  is  the  loss  of  spiritual  life  with 
all  its  ineffable  blessings.  God  is  to  the  soul  what  the 
soul  is  to  the  body.  As  our  material  frame  instantly 
dies,  when  the  soul  leaves  it;  so  the  soul  is  dead  when  its 
union  with  God  ceases.  Sin  has  severed  that  union. 
Cutoff  from  God,  from  all  spiritual  affinity  with  "the 
Father  of  Spirits,"  the  soul  is  dead,  its  divine  existence 
and  immortal  beauty  are  gone,  it  is  separated  from  the 
source  of  peace  and  love  and  life.  What  a  condition 
this  now!  What  a.  future,  should  we  (tie  in  this  condi- 
tion. If  we  had  any  adequate  conception  of  things, 
such  a  state  as  this — moral,  spiritual  death,  and  this 
death  the  harbinger  of  the  second,  eternal  death — would 


Love  In  Christians  an  Evidence  of  Conversion.    305 


fill  us  with  humiliation, concern,  alarm;  il  would  frighten 
and  appal  us. 

I  have  conic  into  this  pulpit  almost  immediately  from 
the  chamber  of  death.  A  few  days  since,  I  was  requested 
to  visit  a  young  man  well  known  to  many  in  this  audi- 
ence, nearlyrelated  to  some  of  you.  This  morning,  at  an 
early  hour,'  1  called  and  found  he  had  just  breathed  Ins 
Last;  and  my  heart  was  wrung,  1  could  not  repress  a 
flood  of  tears,  as  1  stood  as  the  foot  of  his  bod  jmd  gazed 
silently  upon  him.  In  those  eyes  what  living  lustre  had 
burned;  and  now.  all  their  fire  quenched,  bow  dull, 
vacant,  fixed,  and  glazed  those  orbs.  Thai  face  once 
-learned  with  health,  was  radiant  with  light;  and  now 
see  bow  vellow,  wan.  sunken,  haggard.  A  day  or  two 
since  that  form, a  model  of  manly  vigor,  moved  in  elastic 
beauty;  and  now  there  it  lies,  cold,  frozen,  stiffened. 
But  what  is  this  to  the  death  of  a  soul  ?  a  soul  once  the 
abode  of  God,  instinct  with  celestial  vitality,  animated 
by  spiritual  joy  and  glory,  and  now  deserted,  dark,  fallen, 
withered,  dead. 

Nor  is  deatli  a  condition  only  of  privation  ;  it  .is 
a  state  of  total  and  swiftly  progressive  corruption. 
There  are  degrees  in  life,  but  Liiere  are  none  in  death; 
that  which  dies  is  entirely  dead.  And  no  sooner  has 
life  been  withdrawn  from  the  body,  than  the  principle  of 
destruction,  with  a  rapidity  truly  fearful,  reduces  to 
putrefaction  all  the  strength  and  vigor  which  the  more 
sluggish  principle  of  growth  had  required  years  to  con- 
struct. Hence,  alienated  from  all  vital  contact  with 
God,  the  soul  is  not  only  dead,  but  "dead  in  trespasses 
and  sins." 

From  this  mournful  condition  we  pass  when  Ave  are 
converted  to  (uu\.  We  are  then  delivered  from  the 
power  of  darkness,  and  translated  into  the  kingdom  of 
God's  dear  Son.  "You  hath  he  quickened  who  were 
dead  in  trespasses  and  sins."  And  now  can  any  enquiry 
he  half  so  important  to  us  as  that  which  concerns  this 
Biibject?  Havel  known  this  transformation?  Havel 
passed  from  death  unto  life?  Have  [experienced  the 
only  change  which  attracts  any  notice  in  heaven,  and 
compared  with  which  all  earthly  transitions  from  poverty 


306  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

to  wealth,  from  sickness  to  health,  from  a  dunghill  to  a 
throne  are  really  no  sort  of  alterations  in  a  man's  condi- 
tion at  all. 

Take  another  thought  as  to  the  importance  of  certainty 
upon  this  unspeakably  interesting  topic.  I  refer  to  the 
blessings  which  spring  from  assurance  as  to  our  being  in 
a  state  of  acceptance  with  God. 

There  is  not  a  mercy  which  does  not  become  a  thousand 
times  sweeter,  when  I  feel  that  it  comes  from  my  own 
Father.  True,  he  loves  me  too  well  to  give  me  my  por- 
tion in  such  a  world  as  this ;  but  he  sends  me  these 
favors  as  tokens  of  his  affection.  On  the  other  hand, 
if  we  have  no  evidence  of  our  adoption,  prosperity  ought 
to  awaken  apprehensions  lest  we  should  be  receiving  our 
good  things  in  this  life. 

In  trouble  and  adversity,  assurance  of  faith  is  a  bless- 
ing beyond  all  thought.  My  fortune,  all  my  earthly 
possessions  have  departed ;  but  I  know  that  I  have  treas- 
ures in  heaven.  Sorrow  and  anguish  have  laid  hold 
upon  me,  the  sun  has  gone  down  on  my  hearth  and  my  heart ; 
and  amidst  shivered  hopes  and  joys,  I  sit  and  mourn  in 
bitterness  of  soul ;  but  I  know  that  these  afflictions  are  the 
chastenings  of  love,  that  they  are  sent  and  regulated  by 
One  who  watches  over  me  with  more  than  a  mothers 
devotion,  and  whose  sympathies  never  yearn  over  me 
with  such  tender  solicitude  as  when  he  is  purifying  me 
by  sharp  yet  necessary  discipline.  In  pining  sickness  to 
know  that  we  are  Christ's  is  medicine,  it  is  a  cordial, 
it  is  health.  And  what  shall  I  say  of  a  dying  hour? 
How  melancholy  a  spectacle  is  a  Christian  oppressed 
with  fears  and  doubts  in  those  last  eventful  moments. 
What  peace,  joy,  holy  triumphing  is  his  who  can  then 
exultingly  exclaim.  "Iknovj  thatmy  Itedeemer  liveth." 
"  I  know  whom  I  have  believed,  and  that  he  is  able  to 
keep  that  which  I  have  committed  unto  him."  "  Even 
so,  come  Lord  Jesus,  come  quickly." 

In  all  our  approaches  to  God,  the  certainty  of  our 
having  passed  from  condemnation  to  life  will  inspire  the 
most  delightful  confidence.  With  this  assurance,  the 
child  of  God  knows  what  it  is  to  enter  into  his  closet  and 
shut  the  door  behind  him,  and,  falling  on  his  knees,  to 


Love  to  Christians  an  Evidence  of  Conversion.    307 


say  "  Abba  Father."  He  looks  at  the  promises  of  the 
Gospel,  and  feels  that  they  are  all  yea  and  amen  to  him 
in  Christ  Jesus.  He  hears  the  awful  threatenings  of  the 
law  ;  but  they  have  no  terror  for  him.  "  Who  shall  lay 
anything,"  he  exclaims,  "to  the  charge  of  God's  elect? 
It  is  God  that  justifieth.  Who  is  he  that  condemneth  ? 
It  is  Christ  that  died,  yea  rather,  that  is  risen  again,  who 
is  even  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  who  also  maketh 
intercession  for  us.  Who  shall  separate  us  from  the  love 
of  Christ?  Shall  tribulation,  or  distress,  or  famine,  or 
nakedness,  or  peril,  or  sword  ?  Nay,  in  all  these  things 
we  are  more  than  conquerors  through  him  that  hath  loved 
us.  For  I  am  persuaded  that  neither  death,  nor  life, 
nor  angels,  nor  principalities,  nor  powers,  nor  things 
present,  nor  things  to  come,  nor  height,  nor  depth,  nor 
any  other  creature,  shall  be  able  to  separate  us  from  the 
love  of  God,  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord." 

It  is  unnecessary  for  me  to  multiply  arguments  to 
prove  the  benefits  derived  from  assurance  as  to  our  being 
in  a  state  of  salvation.  Nothing  will  excite  such  lively 
gratitude  ;  for  we  cannot  be  thankful  for  mercies  unless 
we  are  sure  they  are  ours ;  Ave  cannot  rejoice  that  our 
names  are  written  in  heaven,  if  we  do  not  know  it.  No- 
thing will  so  effectually  arm  us  against  the  snares  and 
seductions  of  sin.  Nothing  will  enlist  all  our  powers  for 
God  with  such  a  cheerful  consecration  ;  for  "  the  joy  of 
the  Lord  is  our  strength  ;"  and  it  is  as  faith  rises  to  full 
assurance,  that  joy  springs  up  in  our  souls,  that  we  wel- 
come duty,  sacrifice,  suffering  for  Jesus,  that  we  exclaim, 
"  The  love  of  Christ  constraineth  us,  because  we  thus 
judge  that  if  one  died  for  all,  then  were  all  dead,  and  that 
he  died  for  all,  that  they  which  live  should  not  hence- 
forth live  unto  themselves,  but  unto  him  that  died  for 
them  and  rose  again." 

II.  You  see  now  the  great  importance  of  ascertaining 
that  we  have  passed  from  a  state  of  nature  to  a  state  of 
grace  and  salvation.  It  is  to  be  feared  that  in  a  matter 
of  such  surpassing  moment,  too  many  rest  upon  some 
vague  ground  of  hope  which  would  not  satisfy  them  as  to 
their  title  to  any  earthly  possessions.  And  thus  they  live 
on,  singing  lullabies  to  their  consciences,  until  eternity 


308  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

shall  open  their  e)res  to  the  most  fatal  of  delusions.  Or, 
if  their  religion  be  genuine,  they  forfeit  all  its  strength- 
ening, sustaining, -purifying  consolations. 

If,  however,  we  are  guilty  of  this  deplorable  folly,  the 
Scriptures  are  not  to  blame.  They  not  only  admonish  us 
to  examine  ourselves  whether  we  be  in  the  faith,  to  give 
all  diligence  to  the  full  assurance  of  hope,  but  they  fur- 
nish infallible  tests  by  which  we  may  determine  what  is 
our  true  condition  before  God.  And  it  is  to  one  of  these 
criterions  I  ask  you  to  give  your  attention  in  what  re- 
mains of  this  discourse. 

"  We  know  that  we  have  passed  from  death  unto  life, 
because  vie  love  the  brethren."  Affection  for  the  children 
of  God  is  then  a  certain  evidence  of  our  having  passed 
from  a  state  of  spiritual  death  to  a  state  of  spiritual  life; 
and  I  request  you  to  examine  this  point  with  great  care, 
because,  while  of  all  tests  this  seems  the  most  direct  and 
simple,  it  is  really  that  upon  which  our  deceitful  hearts 
are  most  apt  to  mislead  us. 

It  is  self-evident,  for  instance,  that  we  may  cherish 
strong  attachments  to  the  children  of  God  because  they 
sustain  certain  natural  relations  to  us.  There  may  be  so- 
cial or  domestic  ties  uniting  us  to  them  ;  and  piety  will 
not  impair,  it  will  often  elevate  and  strengthen  these  af- 
finities. The  father  or  husband  may  have  no  love  foi  Je- 
sus, and  yet  the  daughter  or  wife  may  become  dearer  to 
him  as  piety  diffuses  its  graces  over  her  life  and  character. 

Or  a  Christian  may  be  naturally  endowed  with  virtues 
and  excellences  which  must  win  the  esteem  and  friend- 
ship of  men  of  the  world.  The  young  man  who  came  to 
Jesus  was  not  only  not  converted,  but  he  wTas  unwilling 
to  be  converted.  Every  human  being  is  just  as  holy  as 
he  really  intends  to  be;  and  just  as  much  converted  as 
he  is  willing  to  be.  This  young  man  "went  away  sor- 
rowful;"  yet,  such  were  his  constitutional  amiabilities 
that  "Jesus  beholding  him,  loved  him.''  Now  suppose 
one  thus  lovable  to  be  regenerated  and  brought  into  the 
church  ;  it  is  plain  that  he  might  attract  admiration  and 
attachment,  not  for  his  new,  spiritual,  gracious  attributes, 
but  for  those  which  he  possessed  in  his  unconverted  con- 
dition.    And  so  of  other  elements  of  character.     The  dis- 


Love  to  Christians  an  Evidence  of  Conversion.    309 


ciples  of  Christ  are  to  cultivate  those  traits  which  are 
"lovely  and  of  good  report.''  ''Demetrius  hath  good  re- 
port of  all  men,  and  of  the  truth."  There  arc  virtues 
which  the  child  of  God  pos  in  common  with  the 

members  of  society  around  him.  Stern  integrity,  stain- 
less honor,  benevolence,  generosity,  patriotism,  disinter- 
estedness, devotedness  in  love  and  friendship— it  Mere  a 
libel  to  deny  that  un regenerate  men  may  be  endowed 
with  these  qualities.  If  piety  be  sincere  it  will  exalt 
these  virtues,  and  throw  a  peculiar  charm  over  them. 
And  if  we  esteem  them  very  highly  in  children  of  the 
world,  they  must   draw  us  towards  the  children  of  God. 

In  these,  and  in  similar  cases,  it  is  plain  that  our  regard 
for  the  people  of  Christ  is  no  sort  of  criterion  as  to  our 
condition.  The  sentiment  in  our  text  is  love  for  the 
children  of  God  as  such,  and  because  they  are  such.  It  is 
a  complacency,  a  delight  in  what  is  spiritual  in  their 
character;  an  affection  called  out  by  the  graces  of  the 
Spirit  seen  in  them,  and  terminating  in  these  graces. 
And  this  attachment,  let  me  say,  must  have  all  the  marks 
of  true,  genuine  love. 

It  must  be  cordial.  "As  I  have  loved  you,  that  ye 
also  love  one  another.''  "  See  that  ye  love  one  another 
with  a  pure  heart  fervently." 

It  must  be  sincere  ;  it  is  called  "  the  unfeigned  love  of 
the  brethren."  To  love  "  in  word  and  in  tongue  "  proves 
nothing  but  our  own  hypocrisy;  it  must  be  "  in  deed  and 
in  truth.'' 

The  love  indicated  in  the  passage  before  us  is  an  affec- 
tion for  all  who  are  Christ's.  It  is  impossible  to  look 
around  us  and  not  feel  that  a  great  deal  which  goes  by 
the  name  of  love  for  Jesus  and  his  people  is  nothing  but 
party  spirit.  John  saw  "no  temple  in  heaven."  But  if 
there  be  no  sectarian  church  there,  what  will  become  of 
the  zeal  and  piety  of  multitudes? — Humbling  as  it  is, 
the  fact  must  be'  confessed,  that  when  we  examine  the 
world  called  Christian,  the  most  conspicuous  feature  in  it 
is  this  wretched  and  deplorable  party  spirit;  a  temper 
which  is  a  compound  of  ignorance,  and  superstition,  and 
arrogance,  and  malice  :  which  contracts  and  debases  the 
mind;    which    empoisons   and   corrupts    the  heart,  and 

13  * 


310  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

which  yet  affects  peculiar  sanctity  and  devotion.  The 
sentiment  which  proves  the  soul  to  be  regenerate  rises 
above  this  selfish  spirit.  True,  we  cannot  help  cherish- 
ing the  strongest  attachment  for  those  who  most  fully 
and  nobly  follow  Jesus;  hut,  however  we  lament  their 
errors,  our  love  will  go  out  to  all  as  far  as  we  discover  in 
them  the  lineaments  of  the  Gospel. 

I  will  only  add,  that  this  love  must  combine  all  the 
ingredients  of  a  disinterested,  ardent  affection  ;  esteem — 
they  are  God's  children,  and  though  the  world  knows 
them  not,  they  are  honorable  in  his  sight,  and  in  oiu* 
judgment  they  will  be  the  excellent  of  the  earth;  sincere 
desire  for  their  welfare  and  happiness;  pleasure  in  com- 
munion with  them;  sympathy  in  their  sorrows  and  joys; 
forbearance  toward  their  infirmities  and  errors.  In  short, 
like  all  true  love,  this  friendship  will  assert  its  character 
by  acts  and  offices  of  kindness,  and  by  sacrifices  when 
they  are  needed.  "  Hereby  perceive  we  the  love  of  God, 
because  he  laid  down  his  life  for  us  ;  and  we  ought  to  lay 
down  our  lives  for  the  brethren." 

III.  If  you  have  followed  me,  you  perceive  now  what 
is  the  love  of  which  the  text  speaks.  I  am  mistaken  if 
you  have  not  begun,  by  this  time,  to  feel  another  thing, 
to  realize  that  this  love  is  not  quite  so  common  as  you 
had  supposed  it  to  be.  When  first  proposed,  this  test  of 
regeneration  serves  as  an  opiate  ;  for  we  quiet  ourselves 
with  some  vague,  natural  partiality  for  certain  traits 
which  we  have  esteemed  in  certain  pious  members  of 
society.  But  when  this  criterion  is  analyzed,  we  find 
that  it  is  exceedingly  searching  in  its  nature;  and  we  see, 
too,  why  it  is  so  decisive  as  to  our  spiritual  condition. 

For,  taking  only  a  general  view  of  the  matter,  it  is 
almost  self-evident  that  this  love,  in  its  very  principle 
and  essence,  is  supernatural  and  divine.  Observe  the 
peculiar  language  of  Peter.  "  Seeing  that  ye  have  puri- 
fied your  souls  in  obeying  the  truth,  through  the  Spirit, 
unto  unfeigned  love  of  the  brethren."  This  love  is,  then, 
not  natural  ;  it  is  a  fruit  of  the  Spirit;  one  of  the  most 
blessed  ell'ects  of  his  highest— his  purifying  influence  in 
the   obedient    heart.     Ponder,    too,    these   words.     "  As 


Love  to  Christians  an  Evidence  of  Conversion.    311 

touching  brotherly  love,  ye  need  not  that  I  write  unto 
you,  for  ye  yourselves  are  taught  of  God  to  love  one 
another;"  and  again,  this  remarkable  passage — "  Beloved 
let  as  love  one  another ;  for  love  is  of  God  ;  and  every  one 
that  loveth  is  born  of  God." 

These  and  similar  declarations  affirm  that  this  love  is 
wrought  in  the  soul  by  God's  own  immediate  tuition,  and 
that  it  is  the  infallible  proof  of  regeneration.  It  is  a  new 
union,  springing  from  sources  entirely  above  those  rela- 
tions and  motives  which  bind  together  the  men  of  the 
world.  It  is  a  spiritual  union,  cemented  by  spiritual 
affinities.  And  it  is  a  heavenly  union  ;  to  be  perfected 
and  perpetuated  when  all  earthly  ties  shall  have  been 
forever  dissolved. 

But  let  us  look  a  little  more  closely  and  practically  at 
the  test  proposed  by  the  apostle,  and  we  will  see  why  it 
is  so  infallible  as  to  our  having  passed  from  a  state  of 
condemnation  to  one  of  acceptance  with  God. 

That  you  may  at  once  feel  this,  let  me  ask,  why  is  it, 
in  fact,  that  our  hearts  go  out  to  those  who  are  Christ's  ? 
It  is  simply  because  we  love  Christ,  because  his  truth, 
his  church,  his  cause  are  dear  to  us.  "Whatever  artificial, 
superficial  distinctions  human  pride  and  vanity  may 
seek  to  erect,  there  are  only  two  parties  which  divide 
all  the  members  of  society;  and  if  we  are  Christians 
Ave  have  chosen  our  party,  we  are  ranged  unequivocally 
"on  the  Lord's  side,"  and  we  rejoice  in  every  accession 
of  strength  to  his  cause.  As  to  the  mass  of  mankind, 
we  know  they  are  not  for  Jesus.  Whatever  may  be  their 
seeming  respect  for  religion  (and  we  thank  them  for 
this,)  they  do  not  even  profess  to  be  the  followers  of  the 
Redeemer,  they  have  no  real  sympathy  with  that  king- 
dom which  he  has  set  up  on  the  earth,  all  the  maxims, 
principles,  the  entire  spirit  of  which  are  irreconcilably 
opposed  to  the  lodged,  rooted  desires  and  purposes  of  the 
carnal  heart.  1  have  already  said  that  they  may  possess 
many  traits  which  attract  our  respect  and  admiration; 
but  love  for  Jesus  is  no  more  an  element  in  their  virtues, 
than  it  is  in  their  vices. 

When,  then,  any  come  out  from  the  world  and  give 
their  allegiance  to  the  Saviour,  we  at  once  welcome  them, 


312  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

our  hearts  go  out  to  embrace  and  encourage  them.  They 
now  occupy  a  new  relation  to  that  Being  who  is  dearest 
to  our  souls.  They  love  him,  they  have  enlisted  in  his 
service.  And  it  is  because  they  are  Christ's  and  have 
thus  engaged  in  behalf  of  his  cause,  that  they  find  a 
place  in  our  affections.  In  this  aspect,  our  love  for  those 
who  are  Christ's  proves  that  we  have  passed  from  death 
unto  life,  because  it  is  really  love  for  Christ  and  zeal  for 
his  cause. 

Another  view  of  this  sentiment  is,  if  possible,  still 
more  conclusive.  I  mean  that  in  which  we  regard  it  as 
an  attachment  for  the  image  of  God  which  we  discover 
in  his  children.  It  is  true,  that  in  the  sincerest  Chris- 
tians there  will  still  be  defects,  and  we  cannot  love  their 
imperfections  and  blemishes.  But  if  they  are  born  of 
God,  they,  of  course,  bear  some  resemblance  to  him ;  and, 
however  dimmed  or  marred  the  lineaments,  if  we  love 
God  we  will  love  his  likeness.  We  are  never  to  propose 
any  human  model  as  our  example.  We  have  only  one 
pattern.  In  running  the  race  set  before  us,  it  is  a  thought 
full  of  sublimity  and  inspiration,  that  "  we  are  compassed 
about  by  a  cloud  of  witnesses."  But  we  are  not  to  be 
looking  at  them.  The  cloud  is  dark  in  itself,  and  owes 
all  its  brightness  to  the  sun.  It  is  upon  that  sun  our 
gaze  is  to  be  fixed.  "  Let  us  run  with  patience  the  race 
set  before  us  looking  unto  Jesus.'''  Still,  wherever  we 
discern  the  features  of  God's  character,  our  affections 
will  be  instinctively  drawn  to  them.  We  will  love  the 
image  of  God  ;  and  this,  let  me  say,  upon  whatever  metal 
that  image  is  engraved,  whether  precious  or  base,  and 
whether  it  be  cut  in  ivory  or  in  ebony.  Nothing  can  be 
more  simple  and  decisive  than  this  reasoning.  It  is  that, 
if  we  love  God,  his  moral  likeness  will  be  dear  to  us;  and 
if  his  moral  likeness  seen  in  our  brethren,  be  dear  to  us, 
it  settles  the  point  that  we  love  God;  and  "  every  one 
that  loveth  is  born  of  God,  ami  knoweth  God." 

One  other  d  jmonstration  from  this  affection  is  supplied 
from  the  words  of  the  text.  It  is  love  for  "  the  brethren" 
■■—an  attachment  for  those  who  belong  to  the  same 
spiritual  household.  If  God  were  only  our  creator,  we 
might  admire  those  who  nobly  forsake  the  ranks  of  his 


Love  to  Christians  an  Evid  mce  of  Conversion.    313 


enemies  and  identify  themselves  with  liis  truth  and 
honor;  we  mighl  esteem  and  love  them,  as  we  will  love 
angels,  for  those  attributes  in  which  they  resemble  the 
Creator.  But  there  would  be  no  family  attachment. 
God  is  more  than  our  creator.  All  Christians  sustain  to 
him  the  dearest  and  tenderest  filial  relations.  He  is  a 
paternal  Deity.  Of  all  the  titles  which  he  wears,  the 
most  endearing  is  that  of  Father.  In  teaching  us  how 
to  pray,  Jesus  commences  with  this  great,  eunobling, 
purifying,  rejoicing  truth,  that  God  is  "our  Father." 
He  thus  recognizes  and  reminds  us  of  the  heavenly  ties 
which  bind  us  together  as  members  of  God's  family. 
But  this  union  of  hearts  on  account  of  our  affinity  to  our 
common  Father,  proves,  of  course,  that  we  are  the 
children  of  God,  and  "have  passed  from  death  unto 
life." 

The  propositions  thus  indicated  have  been  submitted, 
not  to  establish  the  affirmation  in  the  text,  which  rests 
upon  God's  testimony,  but  simply  to  manifest  the  truth 
to  your  consciences.  And  there  are  several  other  passages 
in  the  sacred  oracles  which  bear  so  closely  upon  the  same 
point,  that  1  wish  I  had  time  to  dwell  upon  them. — 
"  Every  one  that  loveth  him  that  begat,  loveth  him  also 
that  is  begotten."  Here  love  for  the  children  is  inferred 
from  love  for  the  Father.  And  the  converse  is  also  im- 
plied. I  mean  that  love  to  the  Father  may  be  inferred 
from  love  to  the  children.  "  But  whoso  hath  this  world's 
goods  and  seeth  his  brother  have  need,  and  shutteth  up 
his  bowels  of  compassion  from  him,  how  dwelleth  the 
love"  (it  is  not  said,  of  his  brother,  but)  "of  God  in  him?" 
Here  affection  for  the  children  and  the  parent  is  reerar  led 
as  the  same  sentiment;  and  it  is  taken  for  granted  that 
without  active  love  for  the  former  all  our  professions  of 
love  for  the  latter  are  glaring  hypocrisy.  "  If  a  man  say, 
I  love  God,  and  hate  his  brother,  he  is  a  liar;  for  he  that 
loveth  not  his  brother  whom  he  hath  seen,  how  cm  he 
love  God  whom  he  hath  not  seen:"'  That  is  to  say,  if 
the  image  of  God  rendered  visible,  brought  near  in  one  of 
his  children  has  no  charms  i'^v  von.  it  is  a  palpabl 
hood  to  pretend  that  you  love  thai  image  vvh  ill  invisi 
"By  this  we   know    that  we   love   the  children   of  God, 


314  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

when  we  love  God  and  keep  his  commandments."  In 
the  former  case,  a  man  professed  to  love  God,  while  he 
had  no  love  for  his  children  ;  here  one  pretends  that  he 
loves  the  children  of  God,  when  he  has  no  love  for  God. 
In  these  and  other  portions  of  the  Scriptures,  the  senti- 
ment of  which  I  have  been  discoursing  is  assumed  to  be 
a  new  and  heavenly  grace.  Indeed  in  that  inventory  of 
spiritual  virtues  which  Peter  enumerates,  and  which  are 
not  independent  graces  clustered  together,  but  graces 
growing  out  of  each  other,  "brotherly  kindness"  is  the 
immediate  fruit  of  "  godliness."  "And  to  godliness,  bro- 
therly kindness."  There  is  an  indefeasible  connection 
between  the  two.  If  we  truly  love  God,  we  love  the  breth- 
ren. If  we  truiy  love  the  brethren,  we  love  God.  And 
if  we  love  God,  we  are  his  children;  "and  if  children, 
then  heirs,  heirs  of  God  and  joint  heirs  with  Jesus  Christ." 

Men  and  brethren,  the  subject  of  our  meditations  this 
morning  is  of  unspeakable  moment  to  us  all.  You  can- 
not read  the  New  Testament  without  feeling  that  friend- 
ship for  each  other  is  called  "a  new  commandment,"  be- 
cause it  was  an  unique  style  of  love — an  affection  which 
for  disinterestedness,  for  comprehensiveness,  for  consider- 
ateness,  for  tenderness,  for  confidence  and  kindness  in 
spite  of  ingratitude  and  unworthiness — was  something 
historically,  ethically  new.  Let  us  therefore  prize  and 
nourish  this  love.  The  enemies  of  God  and  man  are  ever 
seeking  to  embitter  Christians  against  each  other;  but 
let  us  yield  to  almost  any  artifice  of  the  devil  rather  than 
this. 

If  love  for  those  who  are  Christ's  be  so  infallible  a  cri- 
terion of  our  piety,  it  is  of  everlasting  importance  that 
we  examine  whether  this  grace  has  been  implanted  in  us 
by  the  Holy  Spirit.  Recall  the  admonitions  you  have 
heard  to-day  as  to  the  danger  of  self-deception  upon  this 
point.  Recollect  that  we  may  be  strongly  attached  to 
the  people  of  God  on  account  of  our  natural  relations  to 
them;  and  that  Christians  may  be  regarded  with  esteem 
and  affection  for  at  tributes  which  they  possess  in  com- 
mon with  men  of  the  world.  Do  we  love  them  as  Chris- 
tians because  they  are  Christians,  and  for  qualities  which 
are  spiritual  and  heavenly?     If  they  are  thus  dear  to  us, 


Love  to  Christians  an  Evidence  of  Conversion.    315 

"we  know  that  we  have  passed  from  death  unto  life." — 
But  it'  not,  the  converse  is  equally  certain,  and  we  know 
that  we  have  not  passed  from  death  unto  life;  we  have 
experienced  no  spiritual  change  ;  we  do  not  love  Jesus 
and  his  cause,  nor  is  the  love  of  God  in  us.  No  matter 
what  the  consistency  of  our  outward  life,  we  are  in  a  state 
of  impenitence  and  condemnation.  "In  this  the  children 
of  God  are  manifest  and  the  children  of  the  devil  ;  who- 
soever doe th  not  righteousness  is  not  of  God,  neither  he 
that  loveth  not  his  brother."  "He  that  loveth  not  his 
brother  abideth  in  death."  Abideth  in  death — terrible 
thought!  He  lives,  moves,  has  his  being,  eats,  drinks, 
sleeps  in  death.  0  go,  go  into  the  graveyard  yonder, 
open  some  charnel  vault,  take  to  your  arms  any  mass  of 
bine  and  reeking  putrefaction  there,  and  say  "to  corrup- 
tion, Thou  art  my  father,  to  the  worm,  Thou  art  my  mo- 
ther and  my  sister;"  but  stay  not,  I  charge  you,  stay  not 
another  moment  with  this  dreadful  doom  upon  you. — 
Abiding  in  death! — the  death  of  trespasses  and  sins; 
your  guilt  and  corruption  gathering  and  spreading,  and 
your  soul  rapidly  hastening  to  the  second,  the  eternal 
death. 

"  We  know  that  we  have  passed  from  death  unto  life, 
because  we  love  the  brethren."  Let  this  "brotherly  love 
continue."  "  The  Lord  make  you  to  increase  and  to 
abound  in  love  one  to  another."  The  more  we  reflect  up- 
on the  design  of  the  Kedeemer  in  calling  a  church  out 
from  the  world,  the  more  we  shall  feel  that  he  intended 
us  to  cultivate  this  mutual  affection  ;  not  only  to  love, 
but  to  love  each  other  as  he  loved  us.  Our  common  du- 
ties, trials,  conflicts,  hopes,  joys, — above  all,  the  Cross 
around  which  our  souls  cling  together — these  summon 
us  to  step  out  of  the  narrow  circle  in  which  we  are  prone 
to  shut  ourselves  up,  and  to  open  our  souls  to  all  who 
"love  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  sincerity."  It  is  by  this 
love  that  the  world  is  to  know  that  we  are  the  disciples 
of  Christ,  and  that  we  are  to  win  the  most  illustrious 
victories.  Not  to  love  each  other  is  to  violate  a  command 
as  sacred  as  any  in  the  decalogue.  "  This  commandment 
have  we  from  him,  that  he  who  loveth  God  love  his  bro- 
ther also."     Nay,  it  is  to  despise  and  to  trample  under 


316 


Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 


foot  that  precept  which  ought  to  be  dearer  to  ns,  more 
inviolably  dear  than  the  whole  of  the  ten  commandments, 
the  precept  which  Jesns  bequeathed  to  us  with  his  last 
breath,  which  he  has  left  written  in  his  own  tears  and 
blood:  "A  new  commandment  I  give  unto  you,  that  ye 
love  one  another;  as  I  have  loved  you,  that  ye  also  love 
one  another." 

0  God,  the  uncreated, absolute  essential  Love;  0  Jesus, 
incarnate,  suffering,  bleeding,  dying,  risen,  ascended,  glo- 
rified Love;  0  Holy  Spirit,  author  and  giver  of  Love; — 
inspire  us  more  and  more  with  this  celestial  grace;  that 
we  may  "be  made  perfect  in  love;"  and  may  thus  know 
that  we  have  now  passed  from  death  unto  life,  and  that 
soon  we  shall  pass  to  glory,  honor  and  immortality  be- 
yond the  skies.  God  grant  us  this  unspeakable  blessing. 
To  him  be  glory  forever.     Ame^. 


( 'h  r  ist  o  u  r  Passover.  317 


Srvmou  Scfcrutreutti- 


CHRIST     OUR     PASSOVER. 

[preached  before  administering  the  lord's  supper.] 
"For  even  Christ  our  passover  is  sacrificed  for  us." — I  Cor.  v:  7. 

THE  atonement — the  vicarious  sufferings  of  the  Re- 
deemer— is  the  great  central  truth  in  the  Gospel 
system.  To  deny  this  doctrine  is  not  to  misunderstand, 
but  to  reject  the  revelation  which  God  has  given  to  man. 
The  more  close!}7  we  study  the  Scriptures,  the  more 
clearly  will  we  discover  their  divine  harmony.  They 
resemble  a  model  of  architecture  in  which  all  the  mem- 
bers are  in  perfect  symmetry;  or  rather  anarch  which  is 
supported  by  the  mutual  dependence  and  accurate  pro- 
portion of  all  the  parts.  And  of  that  divine  architecture 
the  atonement  is  the  foundation.  Of  that  arch  it  is  the 
keystone.  Discard  this  doctrine  and  what  becomes  of 
the  harmony  of  the  divine  perfections  in  the  salvation  of 
sinners?  what  is  the  meaning  of  all  those  passages  in 
the  sacred  volume  which  so  emphatically  assert  the  utter 
insufficiency  of  man's  righteousness,  and  which  are  so 
interwoven  with  the  entire  body  of  revealed  truth,  that  to 
get  rid  of  them  we  must  rend  the  whole  Bible  in  pieces? 
In  a  word,  blot  out  this  "faithful  saying,''  and  the  exult- 
ing rapture  of  patriarchs,  prophets,  apostles  in  view  of  the 
amazing  love  of  God  in  the  gift  of  his  Son  is  simply  so 
much  distempered  enthusiasm  ;  the  motives  to  love,  confi- 
dence, adoration  which  glow  in  the  Christian's  bosom,  the 
glorious  hopes  and  aspirations  which  cause  his  heart  to 
burn  within  him,  are  a  sheer,  foolish  delusion  ;  the 
worship  rendered  to  Jesus  in  heaven  is.  blasphemy ;  all 
which  constitutes  the  Gospel  is  forever  gone,  and  a  cold, 


318  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

heartless  theology — a  religion  which  is  no  Gospel — 
mocks  the  deepest  wants  of  the  soul  and  plunges  us  into 
an  abyss  of  darkness  and  despair. 

This  great  fundamental  doctrine  it  is  not  necessary  for 
me  to  establish,  standing  where  I  now  do.  I  thank  God 
that  you  not  only  know  its  certainty,  but  rejoice  in  its 
celestial  consolations.  I  design  simply  to  offer  you  a 
commentary  on  our  text,  in  which,  as  you  perceive,  the 
sacrifice  of  Calvary  is  taken  for  granted,  and  is  illustra- 
ted by  a  most  significant  emblem — the  paschal  lamb. 

I.  The  occasion  of  the  Passover  you  all  remember,  and 
never  in  all  the  annals  of  human  anguish,  was  there  a 
more  appalling  tragedy. 

By  nine  successive  judgments  had  Jehovah  warned 
Pharaoh  and  the  nation  who,  as  we  are  expressly  in- 
formed,* participated  in  bis  cruelty,  and  commanded 
them  to  let  the  children  of  Israel  depart;  but  under  all 
these  fearful  experiments  they  hardened  themselves  more 
and  more.  Then  came  a  blow  which  cleft  the  heart  of 
that  guilty  people,  and  caused  all  to  grow  pale  and  stand 
aghast — from  the  monarch  to  the  humblest  of  his  sub- 
jects. The  judgments  sent  upon  nations,  generally  have 
a  close  connection  with  their  sins,— are  the  recoil  of  their 
crimes.  Pharaoh  and  his  minions  had  slain  the  first-born 
sons  of  the  Israelites,  and  now  all  through  a  whole  night 
of  horrors  the  destroying  angel  sweeps  onward  over  the 
land,  the  thunder  of  his  wings  resounding  through  the 
troubled  darkness,  his  eye  of  fire  striking  dismay  into 
the  stoutest  spirits,  and  his  flaming  sword  shedding 
death  at  every  stroke.  Nor  let  any  one  ask,  how  it  can 
be  just  that  the  transgressions  of  the  fathers  should  be 
visited  upon  their  offspring?  The  answer  to  that  ques- 
tion I  leave  with  God.  That  children  do  suffer  for  the 
iniquities  of  their  parents  is  not  only  a  doctrine  of  the 
Bible,  but  a  fact  under  our  own  observation.  If  by  vice 
a  parent  poisons  his  blood  with  disease,  the  virus 
is  transmitted  to  his  descendants.  If  he  be  convicted  of 
felony,  the  disgrace  is  entailed  upon  his  posterity.  When, 
then,  God   smites  the   first-born   of  Egypt,  let   us   not 


*  1  Samuel  vi :  G. 


Christ  our  Passover.  319 

foolishly  arraign  his  justice;  let  us  know  that  the  Judge 
of  all  the  earth  must  do  right;  and  let  us  tremble  at  the 
thought  of  siu,  when  we  find  him  seeking  to  warn  us  of 
its  hdnousness  by  such  an  appeal  to  our  deepest  and 
tenderest  affections. 

But  while,  from  the  palace  to  the  hut  of  the  beggar, 
the  houses  of  this  guilty  people  are  thus  scenes  of  unut- 
terable woe;  while  shriek  after  shriek  pierces  and  shat- 
ters the  silence  of  night ;  while  the  terror  which  sends  a 
mortal  agony  into  every  soul  is  the  more  crushing  be- 
cause the  desolating  strokes  are  so  mysterious,  and  none 
can  see  whence  they  come,  none  can  guard  against  that 
which  they  cannot  see,  none  can  know  where  they  will 
next  fall; — behold  Israel  dwells  in  perfect  safety.  A 
thousand  fall  at  their  side  and  ten  thousand  at  their 
right  hand,  but  harm  comes  not  near  them.  And  this 
security  is  not  on  account  of  any  merit  in  them,  but 
because  blood  is  sprinkled  upon  the  doors  of  their  houses. 
God  commanded  them  to  slay  a  lamb  for  each  family,  to 
take  of  the  blood  and  strike  it  upon  the  two  side  posts 
and  on  the  upper  door  posts  of  their  houses.  "And  the  blood 
shall  be  to  you  for  a  token  upon  the  houses  where  ye  are ; 
and  when  I  see  the  blood,  I  will  pass  over  you,  and  the 
plague  shall  not  be  upon  you  to  destroy  you,  when  I 
smite  the  land  of  Egypt." 

II.  Such  was  the  institution  of  the  Passover.  In  the 
text  and  elsewhere  the  Holy  Spirit  declares  that  the  pas- 
chal lamb  was  a  significant  type  of  that  adorable  Victim 
who  bled  on  Calvary.  Let  us  then  look  at  this  symbol 
and  the  lessons  it  teaches  us. 

Now  certainly  I  should  not  unfold  all  the  allegorical 
import  of  the  passage  before  us,  if  I  made  no  reference 
to  the  lxedeemer's  personal  character.  In  the  Old  and 
New  Testaments,  as  in  all  sacred  and  profane  literature, 
a  lamb  is  the  emblem  of  innocence  and  meekness;  and  in 
Jesus  we  find  a  perfect  incarnation  of  these  qualities. 

The  paschal  lamb  was  to  be  "  without  blemish  ;"  and 
Jesus  was  "  lioly,  harmless,  nndefiled,  and  separate  from 
sinners.''  For  though  he  was  "  made  m  the  likeness  of 
men,  it  was  only  in  "the  likeness  of  sinful   flesh;"  his 


320  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

preternatural  conception  rescuing  him  from  the  lineal 
taint  of  depravity.  When  announcing  to  Mary  the  mys- 
terious birth  for  which  she  was  to  be  honored  above  all 
•women,  the  angel  thus  addressed  her:  "The  HolyGhost 
shall  come  upon  thee, and  the  power  of  the  Highest  shall 
overshadow  thee  :  therefore  also  that  holy  thing  which 
shall  be  born  of  thee  shall  be  called  the  Son  oi'  God." — 
In  all  his  life  he  could  confidently  challenge  the  scrutiny 
of  his  enemies,  saying,  "Which  of  you  convinceth  me  of 
sin?"  and  the  Tempter,  he  affirmed,  could  find  nothing 
in  him.  "Such  an  high  priest  became  us;"  foi  unless 
perfectly  innocent,  he.  could  not  have  ottered  himself  for 
us;  he  would  have  required  sacrifices  for  himself; 
nor  would  lie  have  left  us  an  example  that  in  all  tilings 
we  should  imitate  him. 

The  lamb,  as  I  remarked,  is  also  the  emblem  of  meek- 
ness, and  to  this  feature  of  the  Saviour's  character  Isaiah 
refers  in  those  touching  words,  "He  was  oppressed  and 
he  was  afflicted,  yet  he  opened  not  his  mouth;  he  is 
brought  as  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter,  and  as  a  sheep  be- 
fore her  shearers  is  dumb,  so  he  opened  not  his  mouth." 
Well  might  the  apostle  say,  "1  beseech  you  by  the  gen- 
tleness of  Christ  ;"and  our  souls  at  once  respond  to  that 
touching  self-assertion.  "I  am  meek  and  lowly  in  heart." 
For  during  all  the  stern  vicissitudes  of  his  weary  pilgrim- 
age on  earth, how  sweetly  submissive  is  he  to  his  Father's 
will.  When  spit  upon,  smitten  by  cruel  blows,  and 
nailed  to  the  cross,  with  what  majestic  patience  does  he 
bear  the  storm  of  insult  and  derision  heaped  upon  him; 
with  what  divine  compassion  does  he  lift  his  eyes  to 
heaven  for  the  murderers  whose  hands  were  red  with  his 
blood,  whose  mouths  were  dripping  with  insults  and  ex- 
ecrations. 

But  I  will  not  dwell  upon  this  view  of  the  figure  in  the 
text,  because  the  inspired  writers  insist  upon  it  with 
comparatively  Little  emphasis.  Those  who  maintain  that 
it  is  the  example  of  Jesus  which  the  Scriptures  propose, 
strangely  pervert  the  Bible.  Was  the  paschal  lamb  slain 
as  an  example?  Was  Israel  saved  on  that  fearful  night 
by  copying  an  example?  The  paschal  lamb  was  set  apart 
as-a  propitiatory  sacrifice  for  the  sins  o['  men.    By  its  blood 


( lirist  our  Passover.  321 

the  people  were  rescued.     And  Jesus  is  the  "Lamb  of 

GrOll  who    taketh    away  the  sin  of   t  lie  world."      "We   arc 

redeemed  by  the  precious  blood  of  Christ  as  of  a  lamb 
without  blemish  and  without  spot,  who  verily  was  fore- 
ordained before  the  foundation  of  the  world."  And  in 
heaven  the  ransomed  fall  down  before  the  Lamb,  singing 
a  new  song,  saying,  "  Thou  wast  slain,  and  thou  hast  re- 
deemed us  to  God  by  thy  blood,  out  of  every  kindred  and 
tongue,  and  people  and  nation,  and  hast  made  us  unto 
our  God  kings  and  priests." 

From  the  other  plagues  sent  upon  the  Egyptians  it  is 
remarkable  that  the  Jews  were  preserved  without  any 
prescribed  expedient.  On  that  terrible  night,  however, 
there  was  salvation  only  by  a  specific  provision,  by  the 
sprinkling  of  the  Iamb's  blood.  '-The  blood  shall  be  to 
you  for  a  token."  It  is  to  this  phenomenon  the  apostle 
refers,  when  he  says  that  Christ  our  passover  is  sacrificed 
for  us."  And  now  observe  the  striking  analogy  between 
the  salvation  wrought  upon  the  banks  of  the  Nile  and 
that  finished  upon  .Mount  Calvary. 

First,  (bnl  said  of  the  Passover,"It  is  anight  to  be  much 
observed  unto  the  Lord  for  bringing  them  out  from  the 
land  of  Egypt;  this  is  that  night  of  the  Lord  to  be 
observed  ot  all  the  children  of  Israel  in  their  genera- 
tions." And  in  gratitude,  love,  adoration  should  we 
commemorate  the  sacrifice  of  the  cross,  as  the  miracle  of 
grace  and  power  by  which  a  far  greater  deliverance  was 
achieved  for  us.  Bowed  down  beneath  a  yoke  heavier 
than  that  of  Pharaoh,  enslaved  by  Satan,  bound  hand 
and  foot  by  our  corruptions — such  was  our  condition. 
From  this  we  are  emancipated  by  the  glorious  victim  im- 
molated on  Calvary.  The  yoke  is  broken  and  we,  like 
Israel,  are  marching  onwards  to  the  promised  land, 
guided  by  God's  own  presence,  guarded  by  his  own  right 
hand  ami  strctched-out  arm. 

Someone  may  ask,  Why,  if  God  loved  us  and  resolved 
to  save  us,  was  the  atonement  indispensable?  I  answer 
by  proposing  another  question,  Tell  me,  my  friend, 
would  it  have  been  quite  prudent  in  a  Jew  to  neglect  the 
simple  requirement  of  Jehovah  and  amuse  himself  with 
such  speculations?     Suppose,  while  the  night  was  draw- 


322  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

ing  on  and  his  brethren  were  sprinkling  the  blood  upon 
their  doors,  he  had  refused  to  obey  the  command,  and 
quieted  himself  by  saying,  If  we  are  dear  to  Jehovah  he 
will  not  allow  us  to  perish,  he  has  hitherto  delivered  us 
without  this  useless  blood,  and  he  will  now  deliver  us. 
Equally  foolish  and  impious  are  all  human  cavils  as  to 
the  necessity  of  the  vicarious  death  of  Jesus.  Enlight- 
ened reason  tells  me,  indeed,  that  it  was  only  by  such  an 
interposition  God  could  be  just  and  justify  the  ungodly 
— could  be  a  "just  God  and  a  Saviour."  But  I  rest  the 
matter  where  the  Bible  rests  it, — upon  the  sovereign 
pleasure  of  Jehovah.  He  appointed  the  strange  unique 
sacrifice  for  that  fearful  night;  and  for  the  night  of 
fierce  and  terrible  vengeance  rushing  upon  this  guilty 
world  he  has  provided  the  method  of  deliverance.  "For 
all  have  sinned  and  come  short  of  the  glory  of  God. 
Being  justified  freely  by  his  grace,  through  the  redemp 
tion  that  is  in  Christ  Jesus,  whom  God  hath  set  forth  to 
be  a  propitiation  through  faith  in  his  blood." 

The  Israelite  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  philosophy  of 
his  salvation.  Enough  for  him  that  the  blood  would 
cause  the  destroyer  to  pass  over  his  habitation.  And  so 
the  question  for  you  and  me  is,  not  about  the  reasonable- 
ness, but  about  the  truth  of  the  heavenly  proclamation. 
The  cavils  sometimes  uttered  against  the  doctrine  of  the 
Cross  can,  of  course,  possess  no  intrinsic  force,  since  it  is 
impossible  for  any  finite  intellect  to  comprehend  this 
adorable  "mystery  of  godliness;"  and  to  a  devout  mind 
there  is  a  sublimity,  a  glory  in  the  inspired  announce- 
ment of  this  great  truth  which  at  once  rebuke  the  shal- 
low flippancies  of  the  infidel  and  the  scoffer. 

If  a  Hebrew  had  neglected  to  mark  his  house 
with  blood,  nothing — no  prayers,  vows,  eminence  for 
zeal  and  piety — could  have  rescued  him.  If  Moses  or 
Aaron  had  been  found  without  this  token,  he  would 
have  perished.  And  so  as  to  the  blood  of  Christ.  In 
fact,  let  the  substitution  of  such  a  Being  be  admitted  as 
a  Scripture  truth,  and  we  feel,  at  once,  that  it  must  be 
the  only  ground  of  salvation  ;  the  very  thought  of  com- 
bining the  imperfections  of  human  merit  with  the  work 
of  the  "  Brightness  of  the  Father's  glory  "  shocks  us  as 


Christ  our  Passover,  323 

the  height  of  folly  and  imriety.  The  atonement  by 
Jesus  is  a  complete  satisfaction  to  the  justice  of  God  ; 
"  Neither  is  there  salvation  in  any  other,  for  there  is  no 
other  name  under  heaven  given  among  men,  whereby 
we  must  be  saved."  Nothing  is  left  for  man  but,  with 
a  penitential  faith  and  lively  gratitude,  to  embrace  this 
great  salvation.  "  God  so  loved  the  world  that  he  gave 
his  only  begotten  Son,  that  whosoever  believeth  in  him 
should  not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life."  "  He  that 
believeth  on  the  Son  hath  everlasting  life,  and  he  that 
believeth  not  the  Son,  shall  not  see  life,  but  the  wrath  of 
God  abideth  on  him."  "The  blood  shall  be  to  you  for 
a  token."  While  the  strong-winged  angel  of  death  was 
sweeping  through  the  land  of  Egypt,  there  was  but  a 
single  shelter.  The  Israelite  must  abide  in  the  house 
sprinkled  with  blood.  And,  from  first  to  last,  our  only 
hope  is  in  the  blood  of  Jesus.  If  we  are  pardoned, 
it  is  by  his  blood ;  "  In  whom  we  have  redemption 
through  his  blood,  the  forgiveness  of  sins  according 
to  the  riches  of  his  grace."  If  we  are  justified,  it 
is  by  his  blood  ;  "  Being  now  justified  by  his  blood,  we 
shall  be  saved  from  wrath  through  him."  If  we  are 
sanctified,  it  is  by  his  blood  ;  "  Jesus  also,  that  he  might 
sanctify  the  people  with  his  own  blood,  suffered  without 
the  gate."  If  we  are  redeemed,  it  is  by  his  blood ;  "Thou 
hast  redeemed  us  to  God  by  thy  blood."  "Ye  were  not 
redeemed  with  corruptible  things  as  silver  and  gold,  but 
with  the  precious  blood  of  Christ,  as  of  a  lamb  with- 
out blemish,  and  without  spot."  If  we  are  brought 
into  communion  with  God,  it  is  by  his  blood.  "Ye 
who  sometimes  were  far  off  are  made  nigh  by  the 
blood  of  Christ."  If  we  have  constant  access,  in  delight- 
ful confidence,  to  the  Father,  it  is  by  his  blood.  "  Having 
therefore,  brethren,  boldness  to  enter  into  the  holiest  by 
the  blood  of  Jesus,  let  us  draw  near  with  a  true  heart  in 
full  assurance  of  faith."  Jf  we  triumph  over  our  spirit- 
ual enemies,  it  is  by  his  blood;  "  They  overcame  by  the 
blood  of  the  Lamb."  If  our  robes  are  ever  made  white, 
it  must  be  by  blood;  "These  are  they  which  came  out 
of  great  tribulation,  and  have  washed  their  robes  and 
made  them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb."  In  short, 
over  the  entire  earth,  wherever  fallen  humanity  is  dif- 


324  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

fused,  "without shedding  of  blood  there  is  no  remission  ;" 
and  over  the  whole  heaven,  wherever  glorified  humanity 
is  found,  the  hosanna  which  fills  the  golden  atmosphere 
is  this,  "Unto  him  who  hath  loved  us,  and  washed  us 
from  our  sins  in  his  own  blood,  and  hath  made  us  kings 
and  priests  unto  God  and  his  Father,  to  him  be  glory  and 
dominion  forever  and  ever.     Amen." 

You  see  then  the  first  striking  resemblance  between 
the  Passover  and  the  atonement  by  Jesus,  and  that  the 
great  deliverance  in  each  case  was,  and  is,  entirely  by 
blood.  But  now,  while  the  paschal  blood  thus  sheltered 
the  people  of  Israel,  it  is  evident  that  there  was  no  in- 
herent virtue  in  the  blood  itself.  A  child  perceives  that 
between  the  staining  of  a  door  with  the  blood  of  a  lamb, 
and  the  delivery  from  the  torrible  vengeance  shed  fast 
and  far  through  the  hind  there  was  no  natural  connec- 
tion, no  such  relation  as  that  of  physical  cause  and  effect. 
The  Hebrew  was  safe  only  because  God  had  appointed 
the  blood  as  a  token.  And  in  this  fact  we  find  a  second 
truth  as  to  the  great  atonement. 

There  is  no  natural  relation  between  the  tragical  scene 
upon  Calvary  and  our  salvation;  the  connection  is  en- 
tirely moral,  and  the  efficacy  of  the  sacrifice  is  owing  to 
the  sovereign  will  and  appointment  of  the  Deity.  Hence 
the  blood  of  the  cross  is  styled  "the  blood  of  the  cov- 
enant." Whether  on  that  eventful  night  any  Israelite 
should  be  passed  over,  and  by  what  interposition,  rested 
with  the  sovereign  Governor  of  the  universe;  and  just  so 
as  to  the  adorable  substitution  in  our  behalf.  None  but 
the  supreme  Moral  Ruler  could  dispense  with  the  penal- 
ty of  the  law  and  lay  our  iniquities  upon  another.  We 
are  saved  "through  the  redemption  that  is  in  Christ  Je- 
sus, whom  God  hath  set  forth  to  be  a  propitiation  through 
faith  in  his  blood."  The  Scriptures  everywhere  ascribe 
the  scheme  of  redemption  to  the  wisdom  of  the  Infinite 
Mind,  to  the  counsels  of  eternal  wisdom  and  love.  Je- 
sus is  "the  Lamb  of  God" — the  victim  provided  by  God. 
He  is  the  "Lamb  foreordained  before  the  foundation  of 
the  world  ;"  "the  Lamb  slain  before  the  foundation  of 
the  world."  lie  "gave  himself  for  our  sins,  according 
to  the  will  of  God  and  our  Father."     "In  this  was  mani- 


Christ  our  Passover.     .  -325 

fested  the  love  of  God  toward  us,  because  that  God  sent- 
his  only  begotten  Son  into  the  world,  that  we  might  have 
life  through  him."  "Herein  is  love,  not  that  we  loved 
God,  but  that  he  loved  us,  and  sent  his  Son  to  be  the 
propitiation  for  our  sins." 

The  third  truth  suggested  by  the  emblem  in  the  text 
has  reference  to  our  agency  in  the  salvation  provided  by 
the  Gospel;  and  it  is  this — that,  though  Jesus  has  fin- 
ished a  fall  atonement  for  sin,  we  can  derive  no  benefit 
unless  that  atonement  be  cordially  accepted  by  us. 

Suppose  an  Israelite  had  slain  his  lamb,  but  refused  or 
neglected  to  sprinkle  the  blood  upon  his  house;  he  would 
have  been  destroyed ;  nor  would  any  plea  have  availed 
him.  And  we  are  constantly  admonished  by  the  in- 
spired writers  that  this  is  true  as  to  the  salvation  of  the 
Gospel. 

Vainly  as  to  us  did  Jesus  stoop  to  earth,  and  clothe 
himself  in  mortal  flesh,  and  become  obedient  unto  death 
even  the  death  of  the  cross,  if  his  blood  be  not  applied 
to  our  souls.  Abundant,  redundant  is  the  efficacy  of 
that  imperial  atonement;  but  it  is  only  for  those  who 
open  their  hearts  to  the  great  doctrine  and  humbly  ac- 
cept the  great  salvation.  If  you  ask  me,  what  is  the 
act,  on  our  part,  which  corresponds  to  the  sprinkling  of 
blood  upon  the  door  of  the  house,  the  sacred  oracles 
tell  you  that  it  is  faith,  faith  in  Jesus.  "  Believe  in  the 
Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  thou  shalt  be  saved."  "  Through 
faith  he  kept  the  passover  and  the  sprinkling  of  blood, 
lest  he  that  destroyed  the  first-born  should  touch  them." 
"  Whom  God  hath  set  forth  to  be  a  propitiation  through 
faith  in  his  blood." 

If  you  require  me  to  be  more  explicit  and  define  this 
faith,  I  point  you  to  the  conduct  of  the  Hebrew  on  that 
awful  night.  Tell  me,  who  would  mark  his  dwelling 
with  the  blood?  Would  it  be  the  man  who  did  not 
firmly  believe  all  that  Jehovah  had  declared,  but  said, 
There  is  no  danger ;  or,  if  there  be,  I  shall  escape  with- 
out any  such  precaution?  No.  It  would  be  he  who 
was  persuaded  that  all  which  the  Lord  had  threatened 
and  promised  he  would  most  surely  perform,  and  who, 
submitting  his  reason  to  the  divine  veracity,  was  willing 

14 


326  -Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 


to  take  Gol  at  his  word,  and  to  adore  the  grace  which  so' 
mercifully  provided  a  way  of  escape.  And,  now,  this  is 
the  very  faith  by  which  we  are  saved.  As  an  evidence 
of  Abraham's  faith  it  is  said,  "  Being  not  weak  in  faith, 
he  considered  not."  He  dismissed  from  his  thoughts  all 
the  suggestions  of  mere  sense  and.  reason.  Saving  faith 
is  a  firm  belief  in  the  solemn  warnings  of  the  Bible  as 
to  the  destruction  one  day  to  overwhelm  a  guilty  world; 
a  flying  for  refuge  to  the  hope  set  before  us  in  the  Gos- 
pel ;  a  deep  conviction  of  sin  and  helplessness ;  and  a  re- 
posing the  soul,  with  all  its  concerns,  upon  the  atone- 
ment as  the  heaven-ordained,  and,  therefore,  immovable 
foundation  of  safety. 

1  have  time  to  mention  only  one  other  lesson,  and  a  les- 
son of  unspeakable  blessedness  conveyed  by  this  emblem  of 
the  Passover.  I  mean  the  perfect  security  of  all  who 
receive  the  great  salvation  achieved  by  the  sufferings  of 
the  Lamb  of  God. 

Come  with  me  a  moment,  and  let  us  look  at  the  houses 
of  these  Egyptians.  First,  observe  this  magnificent 
structure,  so  vast  in  its  proportions,  and  adorned  with 
such  splendors  of  architectural  glory.  It  is  the  royal 
palace.  Then,  those  imposing  mansions,  almost  rivalling 
the  palace  in  ample  dimensions,  in  wealth  of  grandeur 
and  beauty.  They  are  the  castles  of  the  princes  and 
nobles,  or  the  abodes  of  men  illustrious  for  genius, 
learning,  wide  domains,  deeds  of  exalted  patriotism,  or 
heroic  achievements  in  arms.  Turning  from  these  aristo- 
cratic edifices,  cast  your  eye  over  the  diversified,  crowded 
dwellings  of  the  teeming  population.  Not  one  of  these 
homes  but  shall  this  night  be  converted  into  a  tomb,  an 
Abel-Mizraim  resounding  with  bitter  cries  and  1  amenta 
tions. 

Having  thus  surveyed  these  abodes,  visit  a  very  differ- 
ent class  of  dwellings.  They  are  in  the  suburbs,  the 
proscribed  purlieus  of  the  cities  and  villages.  In  ap- 
pearance they  are  utterly  mean,  the  hovels  of  bondsmen; 
and,  moreover,  in  the  sight  of  God,  their  inmates  are  sin- 
ners justly  deserving  the  same  doom  which  is  about  to 
descend  upon  the  Egyptians.  Yet  not  near  one  of  these 
humble  cabins  shall  the  flaming  sword  approach. 


Christ  our  Passover,  327 

No  doubt  in  the  midst  of  tlio.se  dismal  scenes  which 
caused  the  night  to  appear  as  il*  it  were  an  age,  the 
tenants  of  these  obscure  roofs  were  agitated  by  con- 
flicting emotions.  One,  as  he  hears  the  shrieks  rending 
the  air,  exclaims,  "  God  be  merciful  to  me  a  sinner,  I  am 
lost;  the  blood  may  do  for  others,  but  I  am  undone;  my 
conscience  tells  me  I  can  look  for  nothing  except  fiery 
indignation  to  consume  me  and  my  house."  Another 
cries,  "Ah,  the  blood  has  efficacy;  it  is,  however,  only 
for  those  who  have  a  strong  faith.  For  me,  my  faith  is 
gone;  Lord,  I  believe,  help  thou  mine  unbelief."  A 
third  falls  in  terror  on  his  face,  and  with  promises,  and 
vows,  and  tears,  supplicates  the  divine  mercy;  "Oh, 
spare  me,  and  the  remnant  of  my  days  shall  be  devoted 
to  thy  service."  While  a  fourth  rises  above  these  un- 
worthy fears,  and,  strong  in  faith,  staggers  not  but  gives 
glory  to  God.  He  looks  neither  at  his  past,  nor  present, 
nor  future  life,  but  simply  at  the  blood  and  God's  prom- 
ise made  to  that  blood.  "  There  it  is.  I,  therefore,  will 
not, — I  cannot  be  alarmed.  God  is  my  refuge  and 
strength,  a  very  present  help  in  time  of  trouble,  there- 
fore will  not  I  fear  though  a  thousand  messengers  of 
death  should  desolate  every  hearth  around  me  and 
drench  the  land  in  blood."  Such  may  be  the  different 
feelings  of  the  Israelites;  but  whatever  their  emotions, 
they  are  safe  for  all  that.  It  is  not  their  fears  and 
doubts  and  lamentations  that  are  going  to  destroy  them; 
nor  is  it  their  peace  and  joy  which  are  going  to  save 
them.  They  are  spared  because  the  blood  is  on  the 
door.  Upon  that,  not  upon  them,  the  minister  of  ven- 
geance looks  and  passes  them  over. 

And  now  all  this  finds  its  exact  analogy  in  our  salva- 
tion through  the  blood  of  Christ.  Christians  are  called 
"God's  house,"  "God's  building."  They  may  be  and 
generally  are  humble  and  obscure  in  their  position. 
"Ye  see  your  calling,  brethren,  how  that  not  many  wise 
men  after  the  flesh,  not  many  mighty,  not  many  noble 
are  called;  but  God  hath  chosen  the  foolish  things  of 
the  world  to  confound  the  wise;  and  God  hath  chosen 
the  weak  things  of  the  world  to  confound  the  things 
which  are  mighty,  and  base  things  of  the  world,  and 


328  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

things  which  are  despised  hath  God  chosen,  yea,  and 
things  which  are  not,  to  bring  to  nought  tilings  that  are, 
that  no  flesh  should  glory  in  his  presence."  In  God's 
presence  now,  and  in  his  presence  at  the  day  of  judg- 
ment, the  Christian  can  glory  in  nothing  that  lie  is  or 
has  done.  He  glories,  and  through  eternity  will  glory 
only  in  the  cross  of  Christ.  It  is  this  which  distin- 
guishes him  from  all  other  men,  from  the  most  moral  as 
widely  as  from  the  most  vicious — this,  that  his  only  con- 
fidence is  in  a  crucified  Bedeemer.  Guilty,  self-con- 
demned, confessing  his  utter  and  unutterable  unworthi- 
ness,  he  points  to  the  blood  of  Jesus  as  the  token  for  his 
salvation,  and  rests  all  his  hope  upon  its  efficacy  to  blot 
out  the  sentence  of  sin  against  him,  and  to  subdue  the 
power  of  sin  within  him. 

At  times,  especially  as  he  thinks  of  death,  he  may  be 
oppressed  by  misgivings  and  apprehensions.  He  may 
write  bitter  things  against  himself,  and  fear  that  his  re- 
pentance, faith,  hope  are  not  genuine.  The  consciousness 
of  his  remaining  corruptions,  the  remembrance  of  his 
unfaithfulness,  the  sense  of  weakness  may  tempt  him  to 
despair;  but,  when  ceasing  to  take  counsel  in  his  own 
heart  and  to  find  sorrow  in  such  legal  thoughts — he 
turns  to  the  cross,  "  the  blood  is  for  a  token  to  him.79 
Suppose  on  that  frightful  night  a  Hebrew,  deploring  his 
sin,  had  exclaimed,  "No,  this  blood  cannot  save  me." 
And  suppose  some  one  had  said  to  him,  "  Well,  go  and 
wash  it  off  then."  What  would  have  been  his  feelings  ? 
With  what  dismay  and  horror  would  he  not  have  re- 
volted at  the  very  thought.  Just  so  with  the  believer  in 
Jesus.  Gloomy  he  may  be;  cast  down  by  fears,  doubts, 
spiritual  depression ;  but  for  worlds  would  he  not  give 
up  his  hope  in  the  precious  blood  of  the  atonement. 

Yes,  they  are  safe,  forever  safe,  to  whose  souls  that 
blood  has  been  applied.  "Go  through  the  midst  of  the 
city  and  smite;  let  not  your  eye  spare,  neither  have  ye 
pity,  but  come  not  near  any  man  on  whom  is  the  mark  ;" 
— such  was  the  command  when  the  slaughtering  weapon 
was  about  to  flash  like  lightning  through  the  doomed 
city;  and  snch  is  now  the  irrevocable  proclamation  of 
heaven.     I  know  there  are  those  who  deny  tae  divinity 


Christ  our  Passover.  329 

of  the  Redeemer,  and,  of  course,  they  have  no  faith  in 
his  piacular  sacrifice  ;  but  no  one  who  receives  this  glor- 
ious truth  can  doubt  the  imperial  efficacy  of  such  an 
amazing  substitution.  The  conviction  is  instinctive  and 
irresistible,  that  nothing  less  than  a  full  and  perfect 
satisfaction  to  the  claims  of  eternal  justice  could  be  the 
result  of  the  incarnation  and  death  of  the  Son  of  God. 
And,  fixing  our  adoring  faith  upon  the  cross,  we 
triumphantly  exclaim,  "  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  his 
Son  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin  ;"  '•'  Whom  he  justified, 
them  also  he  glorified;"  "God  commendeth  his  love 
toward  us  in  that,  while  we  were  yet  sinners,  Christ  died 
for  us;  much  more,  then,  being  justified  by  his  blood, 
we  shall  be  saved  from  wrath  through  him.  For,  if 
when  we  were  enemies  we  were  reconciled  to  God  by  the 
death  of  his  Son,  much  more,  being  reconciled,  we  shall 
be  saved  by  his  life." 

In  conclusion  let  me  ask  each  of  you  whether  this 
blood  is  upon  your  door  as  a  token  for  you  ?  Have  you, 
under  a  deep  sense  of  sin,  and  in  view  of  the  wrath  to 
come,  received  a  crucified  Jesus  into  your  heart,  and 
committed  your  soul  to  his  keeping  ?  He  is"  the  Lamb 
of  God,"  God's  Lamb.  The  Supreme  Authority  has 
provided  and  offered  the  magnificent  victim.  All  that 
he  requires  is  that, — ceasing  to  insult  him,  and  to  insure 
your  own  perdition  by  seeking  any  other  medium  of 
salvation — you  accept  the  inestimable  donation,  and 
yield  your  hearts  and  lives  to  the  influence  of  that  grati- 
tude and  loyalty  which  such  a  sacrifice  for  you  ought 
naturally  to  inspire. 

Some,  alas,  too  many  of  you  have  long  been  careless, 
in  spite  of  all  our  tears  and  entreaties.  My  dear  hear- 
ers, what  is  to  become  of  you?  How  shall  you  escape  if 
you  neglect  so  great  salvation?  Delude  yourselves  no 
more  with  insidious  self-flattery  that  you  respect  reli- 
gion and  hope  and  intend,  one  day,  to  be  Christians. 
All  this  is  only  as  if  an  Israelite  had  omitted  to  sprinkle 
the  door,  and  quieted  his  fears  by  persuading  himself 
that  he  respected  the  blood  and  purposed,  at  some  future 
day,  to  obey  the  voice  of  God. 


330  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

Recollect  that  the  Passover  had  a  significance  for  some 
others  besides  the  people  of  God.  It  was  a  terrible  token 
to  Pharaoh.  It  sealed  him  over  to  destruction.  And  if 
yon  perish,  it  will  not  be  because  you  have  sinned, but  be- 
cause you  have  no  faith  in  the  blood  of  Christ;  because 
year  after  year,  and  now  again  this  day,  when  we  com- 
memorate that  most  astonishiug  and  touching  deed  of 
love,  you  treat  with  contempt  the  propitiation  which  God 
has  provided  at  such  an  expense.  "  He  that  despised 
Moses'  law  died  without  mercy  under  two  or  three  wit- 
nesses; of  how  much  sorer  punishment,  suppose  ye,  shall 
he  be  thought  worthy,  who  hath  trodden  under  foot  the 
Son  of  God  and  hath  counted  the  blood  of  the  covenant 
an  unholy  thing  ?"  If  God  threatens,  it  is  that  he  wills 
not  your  death  ;  it  is  that  fear  may  effect  a  breach  in 
your  heart  through  which  faith  and  love  may  gain  en- 
trance. Your  condemnation  will  be  your  own  choice. — 
God  is  mercifully  and  loudly  calling,  entreating  all  to 
embrace  the  salvation  he  freely  offers.  If  then,  the  com- 
ing tempest  of  vengeance  fall  upon  you,,  it  will  be  all  your 
own  unbelief  and  obstinacy. 

Christians,  how  delightful  to  contemplate  such  a  sal- 
vation and  feel  that  it  is  yours,  yours  indefeasibly  and 
forever.  You  can  say,  "  Christ,  my  passover,  is  sacrificed 
for  me"  Here  is  a  spectacle  which  may  well  absorb  all 
the  immortal  capacities  of  our  minds,  and  inflame  the 
most  ardent  passions  of  our  souls.  Here,  with  the  angels, 
we  may  expatiate  upon  the  wonders  of  that  masterpiece 
of  wisdom,  power  and  goodness  which  finds  no  parallel 
in  the  whole  moral  universe.  Here  we  may  lose  ourselves 
in  the  heights  and  depths  of  a  love  which  passeth  know- 
ledge ;  may  admire  and  adore  the  harmony  of  all  the  di- 
vine perfections  ;  may  exult  in  the  full  assurance  that  all 
our  sins  shall  be  passed  over,  that  our  security  is  beyond 
the  reach  of  earth  or  hell,  and  that  abundant  provision 
has  been  made  for  all  our  wants.  "  He  that  spared  not 
his  own  Son,  but  delivered  him  up  for  us  all,  how  shall 
he  not  with  him  also  freely  give  us  all  things  ?" 

This  morning  we  are  going  to  receive  the  emblems 
which  remind  us  of  the  adorable  victim  who  poured  out 
his  soul  unto  death  for  our  sins.     After  the  paschal  lamb 


Christ  our  Passover,  331 

had  been  slain,  the  Israelites  were  commanded  to  roasl 
the  flesh  and  to  eat  it.  Through  blood  and  fire  the  sacri- 
fice must  pass  before  it  could  become  food;  and  by  what 
a  terrible  ordeal  of  blood  and  fiery  wrath  was  our  Pass- 
over consecrated  that  we  might  feed  on  him  by  faith. — 
Let  us  eat  this  Passover  with  gratitude,  with  the  blood 
of  Christ  warm  in  our  hearts,  with  a  confidence  and  love 
blooming  afresh  in  our  souls.  Let  us  eat  it,  remember- 
ing the  ties  which  are  created  by  this  blood.  Now,  at 
least,  let  us  recall  those  words  uttered  when  the  supper 
was  instituted.  "A  new  commandment  give  I  unto  you, 
that  ye  love  one  another;  as  I  have  loved  you  that  ye  also 
]ove  one  another."  Whatever  differences  of  opinions  or 
feelings  may  lyive  existed  among  the  Israelites,  all  were 
forgotten  when  they  sat  down  to  a  repast  vividly  recall- 
ing their  common  danger  and  such  a  deliverance.  Let  us 
banish  from  this  scene  all  bitterness,  wrath,  anger,  mal- 
ice, strife ;  forgiving  one  another,  even  as  God  for  Christ's 
sake  hath  forgiven  us;  and  let  us  keep  the  feast, not  with 
the  old  leaven,  but  with  the  new  leaven  of  sincerity, 
truth,  forbearance,  brotherly  kindness  and  charity.  Let 
us  partake  of  this  supper  with  joy.  Trouble  and  sorrow 
may  come  upon  us,  and  all  may  seem  dark  and  pitchy  as 
that  night  which  settled  upon  Egypt;  but  the  blood  is 
there,  and  blood  is  God's  own  oath  and  pledge  to  me. — 
Although  my  house  be  not  so  with  God  ;  although  my 
purposes  be  broken  off,  my  prospects  blighted,  my  hopes 
and  affections  withered,  and  my  skies  hung  in  sackcloth, 
yet  hath  he  made  with  me  an  everlasting  covenant,  or- 
dered in  all  things  and  sure.  Lastly,  in  receiving  these 
symbols  of  the  flesh  and  blood  of  him  "  who  gave  himself 
for  us  that  he  might  redeem  us  from  all  iniquity,  and 
purify  unto  himself  a  peculiar  people  zealous  of  good 
works  " — let  us  yield  ourselves  to  the  influences  which 
the  contemplation  of  such  an  amazing  transaction  ought 
habitually  to  exert  over  our  characters  and  lives.  While 
ascribing  our  salvation  entirely  to  this  interposition  of 
sovereign  grace  and  thus  abasing  all  our  pride,  let  us 
arm  ourselves  with  fresh  resolutions,  in  God's  strength, 
to  triumph  over  our  selfishness  and  corruption  ;  to  repay 
such  devotion  to  us  with  the  devotion  of  all  our  souls ; 
and,  with  heart  for  heart,  zeal  for  zeal,  sacrifice  for  sacri- 


332 


Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 


fice,  to  consecrate  ourselves  "  unto  him  that  hath  loved 
us,  and  washed  us  from  our  sins  in  his  own  blood,  and 
hath  made  us  kings  and  priests  unto  God  and  his  Father." 
0  for  a  Christ  not  only  on  the  cross  without,  but  en  the 
cross  within;  a  Christ  to  deliver  us  not  only  from  guilt, 
but  from  corruption;  a  Christ  not  only  seen  but  felt ;  a 
Christ  not  only  represented  by  these  outward  emblems 
of  his  precious  blood,  but  realized  by  the  purifying,  re- 
joicing efficacy  of  that  blood  upon  our  souls. 


Simeon's  Faith  and  Consolation.  333 


Srnuou  SStjjftteentft- 


SIMEON'S 
FAITH  AND  CONSOLATION. 

"  And  behold  there  was  a  man  in  Jerusalem  whose  name  was  Simeon  : 
and  the  same  man  was  just  and  devout,  waiting-  tor  the  consolation  of 
Israel;  and  the  Holy  Ghost  was  upon  him,  and  it  was  revealed  unto 
him  by  the  Holy  Ghost  that  he  should  not  see  death  before  he  had  seen 
the  Lord's  Christ.  And  he  came  by  the  Spirit  into  the  temple;  and 
when  the  parents  brought  in  the  child  Jesus  to  do  lor  him  after  the 
custom  of  the  law,  then  took  he  him  up  in  his  arms,  and  blessed  God, 
and  said.  Lord,  nowlertest  thou  thy  servant  depart  in  peace,  according 
to  thy  word,  for  mine  eyes  have  seen  thy  salvation."— Luke  ii:  25-30. 

"VUHAT  shall  I  do  then  with  Jesus?"— I  addressed 
*  *  you  recently  upon  that  question.  You  are  every- 
where in  contact  with  Jesus ;  and  he  appeals  to  every  no- 
ble, generous,  tender  feeling  in  your  nature.  You  must 
do  something  with  him.  And  behold  in  our  text  faith's 
answer  to  that  enquiry.  What  shall  I  do  then  with  Jesus? 
Faith  takes  Jesns  up  in  its  arms.  Though  he  is  thus 
despoiled  of  all  the  equipage  of  his  glory,  and  appears  to 
be  only  an  obscure  Hebrew  child,  faith  takes  him  up  in 
its  arms,  in  the  arms  of  love,  gratitude,  adoring  confidence, 
and  blesses  God  for  his  unspeakable  gift.  I  say  faith; 
for  it  is  of  Simeon's  faith  I  am  going  to  speak  ;  and  then 
of  the  consolations  of  that  faith.  Honor  me  with  all 
your  attention. 

I.  The  faith  of  Simeon.  There  have  been  some  dis- 
putes, some  very  learned  discussions,  in  which  theologians 
have  undertaken  to  determine  who  Simeon  was;  elaborate 
arguments  proving  nothing;  decisions  pronounced  with 
great  confidence  upon  no  grounds  whatever.     I  have  read 

14  * 


334  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

them,  but  I  have  forgotten  them.     I  am  not  here  to  en- 
tertain you  with  legends  and  fictions. 

All  we  know  is,  that  he  was  one  of  those  devout  men 
who  "waited  for  the  consolation  of  Israel," — that  is,  for 
the  Messiah,  who,  it  would  be  easy  to  demonstrate,  was 
predictedby  this  title.  With  reference  to  him  Isaiah  ut- 
tered those  exulting  strains,  "  Sing,  0  heavens,  and  be 
joyful,  0  earth,  and  break  forth  into  singing,  0  moun- 
tains, for  the  Lord  hath  comforted  his  people;"  "  Com- 
fort ye,  comfort  ye  my  people,  saith  your  God  ;  speak  ye 
comfortably  to  Jerusalem,  and  cry  unto  her  that  her  war- 
fare is  accomplished,  that  her  iniquity  is  pardoned." — 
Indeed  to  this  day,  "  Consolation  "  and  "the  year  of  con- 
solation" are  terms  applied  by  the  Jews  to  the  Messiah 
and  his  advent. 

But,  now,  this  very  fact  shews  how  strong  was  Simeon's 
faith,  how  entirely  it  was  "of  the  operation  of  God  ;"  for 
Simeon  was  a  Jew,  and  you  know  what  was  the  consola- 
tion whicli  the  Jews  expected  in  their  Messiah.  Never 
did  there  glow  in  the  bosom  of  a  nation  such  a  lofty  am- 
bition, never  did  there  burn  in  the  human  breast  such 
high  and  glorious  aspirations.  The  coming  of  Shiloh. 
was  the  theme  which  caused  the  hearts  of  patriarchs,  liv- 
ing and  dying,  to  run  over  with  the  fullness  of  their  joy; 
which  fired  the  spirit  of  prophets  with  unutterable  rap- 
ture ;  and  in  prospect  of  which  pious  kings  were  stirred 
with  holy  impatience  ;  nor  could  all  regal  appliances  ap- 
pease the  longing  of  their  souls  for  the  fulfillment  of  that 
promise.  He  was  to  be  "  the  glory  of  his  people  Israel," 
— their  magnificent  deliverer.  Prosperity  had  no  hap- 
piness which  was  not  augmented,  adversity  could  bring 
no  gloom  which  was  not  cheered  by  the  inspiring  assur- 
ance of  a  day  when  Salem  should  sit  as  a  queen  among 
the  nations,  and  should  wield  a  sceptre  of  universal  em- 
pire. 

At  the  period  of  time  to  which  our  text  refers,  these 
hopes  so  earnestly  clung  to  for  ages,  had  been  kindled  in- 
to irrepressible  enthusiasm  by  the  aggravated  wrongs  un- 
der which  the  nation  groaned,  and  by  the  convergence 
of  all  the  prophecies  to  that  epoch  as  the  time  when 
Zion  should  arise  from  the  dust,  and  her  fetters  be  as 


Simeon's  FaifJi  ami  Consolation.  335 


tow  in  the  fire,  and  her  chains  be  broken  like  threads 
from  her  arms. 

The  Romans  had  overwhelmed  them — them.,  Jehovah's 

chosen  people;  and  on  all  sides  they  saw  the  humiliating 
badges  of  their  degradation.  The  only  coin  permitted  as 
a  circulating  medium  had  Caesar's  image  and  superscrip- 
tion upon  it ;  so  that  a  dew  could  not  go  to  market  and 
purchase  food  for  himself  and  little  ones  without  being 
reminded  of  his  subjugation.  Marching  over  the  holy 
land,  traversing  the  streets  of  their  sacred  city,  day  and 
night,  were  hordes  of  their  haughty  conquerors.  The 
Roman  publicans  were  incessantly  at  their  doors,  extort- 
ing fraudulent  and  exorbitant  taxes  from  those  who  had 
once  received  tribute  of  all  the  surrounding  nations;  and 
at  the  very  gates  of  the  temple  an  Italian  band  scowled 
upon  them,  as  they  passed  to  worship  the  God  of  their 
fathers.  Accustomed  to  regard  himself  as  the  peculiar 
favorite  of  heaven  and  elevated  far  above  all  the  rest  of 
mankind,  to  a  Jew  the  Romans  were  only  barbarians, 
idolators,  with  whom  even  the  common  intercourse  of 
life  would  be  a  pollution.  And  now  to  be  trampled  un- 
der foot  by  their  mailed  heels! — never  perhaps  in  the 
history  of  the  world  did  a  captive  nation  endure  the  yoke 
with  such  mutinous  hate,  such  detestation  and  loathing, 
such  an  inextinguishable  thirst  for  revenge. 

Oh,  but  there  was  "consolation  for  Israel."  Messiah 
would  arise  to  dash  in  pieces  this  abhorred  foreign  des- 
potism, and  his  advent  was  near  at  hand.  The  people 
were  now  to  be  gathered  unto  Shiloh.  He  would  be  "an 
ensign  to  the  nation,"  around  which  millions  of  swords 
were  waiting  to  leap  from  their  scabbards;  and  there  was 
not  a  Hebrew  boy  thirteen  years  of  age.  who  had  heard 
from  his  mother's  lips  the  story  of  Israel's  glory  and  who 
saw  around  him  the  monuments  of  Israel's  wrongs,  who 
would  not  rush  to  battle  and  welcome  death  in  such  a 
cause  as  a  bridegroom  welcomes  his  bride.  Yes,  The 
Erkomenos — the  imperial  hero  of  all  those  hopes,  desires, 
ambitions  which  had  been  transmitted  from  sire  to  son 
and  had  cheered  them  under  oppression  and  tyranny — 
he  was  now  about  to  appear  and  to  marshal  the  hosts  who 
thronged  to  crown  him  and  to  follow  his  triumphant  ban- 


336  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

ner  until  be  should,  not  only  scourge  their  proud  invad- 
ers from  the  soil  they  profaned,  but  should  tbun  ler  at 
the  gate  of  Rome  itself  for  indemnification  and  vengeance. 

Enter,  my  brethren,  into  these  thoughts.  Consider 
how,  from  infancy  down  to  grey  hairs,  Simeon  had  shared 
these  national  aspirations;  and  then  reflect  upon  his 
faith  as  it  is  illustrated  in  the  narrative  before  us.  We 
are  not  surprised  at  the  homage  which  the  shepherds 
rendered  to  the  child,  for  an  angel  proclaimed  to  them 
the  glory  of  that  birth  ;  nor  at  the  adoration  of  the  wise 
men  of  the  east,  for  a  star  heralded  them  to  Bethlehem. 
But  no  celestial  messenger,  no  miraculous  phenomenon 
had  prepared  the  mind  of  Simeon  for  the  manifestation 
which  breaks  in  upon  his  vision.  "  It  was  revealed  unto 
him  by  the  Holy  Spirit  that  he  should  not  see  death  be- 
fore he  had  seen  the  Lord's  Christ."  Revolving  in  his 
thoughts  this  promise,  we  represent  him  to  ourselves  as 
cherishing  the  sublimest  conceptions  of  that  Being  who 
was  to  be  disclosed,  as  expecting  all  the  pomp  of  a  regal 
coronation; — his  imagination  wanned,  his  very  dreams 
glowing  with  vague  but  magnificent  presages  of  that 
august  monarch  who  is  about  to  ascend  the  throne  of 
David.  Instead  of  this,  what  do  we  see  ?  We  behold 
him  with  a  poor  infant  in  his  arms,  and  worshipping 
that  humble  child  as  the  object  of  those  glorious  predic- 
tions, as  the  consummation  of  those  exalted  hopes  and 
aspirations  which  had  burned  forages  in  the  heart  of  the 
nation,  and  had  been  hallowed  in  his  own  breast,  during 
a  long  life  by  all  the  fervor  of  patriotism,  all  the  inten- 
sity of  religion. 

He  is  in  the  temple.  He  '-came  by  the  Spirit  into  the 
temple;"  and  whenever  we  enter  the  temple  under  the 
guidance  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  it  is  that  we  may  see  Jesus. 
A  divine  intimation  led  him  into  the  sanctuary  to  see 
his  Messiah.  God  had  declared  by  his  prophet  ilaggai, 
that  "  this  house  should  be  filled  with  his  glory,"  and 
that  "  the  glory  of  this  latter  house  should  be  greater 
than  that  of  the  former,"  because  "  the  Desire  of  all  na- 
tions" should  come  there  What  must  be  the  majesty,  the 
divinity  of  a  visitant  whose  presence  will  casr  such  glory 
over  this  inferior  structure,  that  it  shall  eclipse  ail  the 


Simeon's  Faith  and  Consolation.  337 

gorgeous  splendor  of  Solomon's  temple.  How  will  he 
come?  Wuafc  shall  be  the  sign  of  liis  coming?  In  what 
form  will  he  burst  forth  like  the  sun  in  his  noonday 
brightness  and  illumine  all  the  place?  And  who  will 
be  his  retinue?  What  brilliant  array  can  form  a  proces- 
sion dazzling  enough  for  such  a  reception  ? 

There  he  is.  That  is  he.  And  these  are  his  retinue. 
Two  obscure  Israelites  enter  in  the  ordinary  way  of  poor 
people,  bringing  a  babe  to  be  dedicated.  But  no  sooner 
do  Simeon's  eyes  meet  them  than  all  his  soul  catches  fire 
within  him,  his  spirit  exults  and  magnifies  the  Lord,  and 
he  takes  the  child  up  in  his  arms,  wondering,  rejoicing, 
adoring. 

In  this  light  the  faith  of  the  holy  man  is  astonishing. 
It  becomes  more  marvellous  when  we  recollect  another 
fact;  I  mean  his  great  age. 

This  remark  will  at  once  strike  those  who  have  reflected 
at  all  upon  the  physiology  of  the  human  constitution, 
and  the  close  intelligence  and  sympathy  which  exist  be- 
tween the  soul  that  thinks  and  the  body  with  which  that 
soul  is  united.  We  are  not  all  spirit,  anu  the  recention 
of  truth  depends  greatly  upon  the  temperament  of  that 
matter  which  enters  so  largely  into  our  composition. — 
With  advancing  years — after  we  have  reached  a  certain 
period — the  brain  becomes  dull,  the  animal  spirits  vapid 
and  languid,  the  energies  inert;  so  that  upon  the  aged 
new  impressions  are  made  with  great  difficulty,  and  old 
sentiments  are  retained  with  great  obstinacy.  Hence,  the 
old  love  to  talk  of  former  days,  and  objects  cherished  in 
early  life  are  constantly  recurring  and  renewing  their 
traces  in  the  memory  and  the  heart. 

But  we  need  not  be  philosophers  to  feel  the  force  of 
this  observation.  In  everything,  especially  in  religious 
faith  and  practice,  it  has  got  to  be  an  axiom,  that  any 
conversion  of  the  aged  is  a  miracle.  The  heart  is  hard- 
ened, the  conscience  is  stupefied,  the  sensibilities  are 
obtuse,  pride  of  opinion  is  inveterate  ;  prejudices  are 
rooted — their  ramifications  becoming  entwined  about  the 
very  foundations  of  character;  above  ail,  old  hereditary 
sanctities  of  birth,  education,   family,  country,  church, 


338  Richard  Fuller  s  Sermons. 

repel  and  resent  every  suggestion  of  change.  Now, 
apply  all  this  to  Simeon,  lie  is  so  aged  that  he  is  look- 
ing for  death  every  day,  and  is  only  detained  until  he 
shall  see  the  Messiah.  During  a  protracted  life  he  had 
nourished  no  hope  so  dear  as  this.  He  "  waited  for  the 
consolation  oi'  Israel."  He  only  lingers  that  his  fading- 
vision  may  be  blest  with  a  sight  of  the  princely  deliverer 
promised  to  his  people,  the  illustrious  assertor  of  the 
glory  which  had  departed  from  Judah.  Vet  he  rises 
above  these  venerable  aspirations,  these  intense  attach- 
ments, and  triumphs  in  the  spiritual  reign  which  that 
child  is  about  to  inaugurate.  And  this  change  is  wrought 
not  gradually,  but  at  once.  At  the  very  first  glance  the 
infant  is  transfigured  before  him,  and  in  the  son  of 
Mary  his  faith  sees  the  Son  of  God. 

In*  this  aspect  how  superior  was  his  faith  to  that  of 
John  the  Baptist,  who — after  all  that  had  been  revealed 
to  him,  when  removed  from  his  inspiring  work,  baffled  in 
his  high-wrought  expectations  of  Christ's  kingdom,  and 
pining  in  a  dungeon, — begins  to  feel  some  morbid  doubts 
creep  into  his  soul;  how  superior  to  the  faith  of  the 
apostles,  who, — even  after  his  resurrection — asked  Jesus 
if  he  would  now  "restore  the  temporal  kingdom  to 
Israel?''  Indeed  it  is  very  remarkable  that  not  only 
Simeon,  but  the  woman  of  Samaria  and  other  Sycharites 
whose  confession  of  faith  is  recorded  in  the  fourth  chapter 
of  John's  Gospel,  and  the  ancient  prophets — though  not 
comprehending  "what  manner  ^['  tune  the  Spirit  of 
Christ  which  was  in  them  did  signify,  when  it  testified 
beforehand  the  sufferings  of  Christ  and  the  glory  which 
should  follow" — entertained  views,  discernments  of  the 
kingdom  of  heaven,  more  spiritual  than  those  reached  by 
the  Saviour's  own  disciples  before  the  day  of  Pentecost. 
The  Samaritans  said  "  we  know  that  this  is  indeed  the 
Christ  the  Saviour  of  the  world,"  while  the  Apostles 
clung  to  the  narrow  unworthy  anticipations  of  a  national 
deliverer.  Daniel  foretold  that  Messiah  should  be  cut 
off,  but  not  for  himself."'  When,  however,  this  truth 
was  announced  to  the  twelve,  Peter  exclaimed.  "  He  it 
far  from  thee,  Lord,  this  thing  shall  not  be  unto  thee." 
Isaiah  declared  that  he  should  be  "  despised  and  rejected 


Simeon's  Faith  and  Consolation.  339 


of  men,"  that  he  would  bo  "  led  as  a  lamb  to  the 
slaughter;"  but  the  apostles  were  ever  intriguing  for 
the  most  distinguished  honors  of  his  royal  court.  When 
he  was  arrested  and  condemned,  they*'all  forsook  him 
and  lied  ;  and  after  the  crucifixion,  two  disciples,  on 
their  way  to  Emmaus — expressing  the  sentiments  of  all — 
uttered  those  words  of  despair,  "  We  trusted  that  it  had 
been  he  which  should  have  redeemed  Israel." 

You  cannot  have  followed  me  thus  far  without  feeling 
how  strong  was  Simeon's  faith.  Take  now  a  second 
characteristic  in  that  faith.  I  refer  to  its  appropriating 
energy,  the  eagerness  with  which  it  receives  and  embraces 
"  the  Gift  of  God." 

Though  a  light  from  heaven  had  shone  around  them, 
though  an  angel  had  communicated  the  glad  tidings  to 
them,  and  a  multitude  of  the  heavenly  host  had  ravished 
their    souls    with    melodious    anthems — the    shepherds 
satisfy  themselves  by  gazing  upon  the  child,  and  spread- 
ing abroad  the  strange  things  they  had  seen  and  heard. 
"  And  it  came  to  pass  as  the  angels  were  gone  away  from 
them  into  heaven,  the  shepherds  said  one  to  another,  Let 
us   now   go    even  unto   Bethlehem,  and  see  this  thing 
which  is  come  to  pass,  which  the  Lord  hath  made  known 
unto  us.     And  they  came  with  haste,  and  found  Mary 
and  Joseph,  and  the  babe  lying  in  a  manger.     And  when 
they  had  seen  it,  they  made  known  abroad  the  saying 
which  was  told  them  concerning  the  child."     Blazing  in 
the  western  sky,  an  orb  of  living  lire  had  been  the  harbin- 
ger of  the  magi.     Yet  when  they  approach  the  consecrated 
cradle,  awe  and  wonder  hold  them  in  mute  and  reverent 
adoration.     They  "fell  down  and  worshipped,  and  when 
they  had  opened  their  treasures,  they  presented  unto  him 
gifts,  gold,  and  frankincense  and  myrrh." 

How  different  the  conduct  of  Simeon.  Inspired  with 
love,  joy,  ecstasy,  nothing  can  keep  him  from  clasping  to 
his  heart  the  divine  treasure.  The  young  and  lovely 
mother  is  folding  to  her  bosom  her  infant,  dear  as  her 
first-born,  dearer  still  for  the  sweet  mysteries  of  his 
birth  ;  and  he — a  stranger — what  right  has  he  to  take 
him  from  her  embrace  ?  Xo  such  question  enters  the 
mind  of  this  venerable  man  ;  for  in  that  child  he  beholds 


340  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 


the  incarnation  of  celestial  blessings  for  the  human  race. 
TJpon  Mary  had  been  conferred  the  unspeakable  honor 
of  being  the  "virgin  who  should  conceive  and  bring 
forth  a  son ;"  but  that  son  is  "Jesus  the  Saviour,"  "Em- 
manuel, God  with  us,"  "  The  Wonderful,  Counsellor, 
Mighty  God,  Everlasting  Father,  Prince  of  Peace."  He 
is  "  the  Mercy  promised  to  the  fathers,"  the  Light  to 
lighten  the  Gentiles,  and  the  Glory  of  his  people  Israel." 
In  him  Simeon  sees  "  The  Salvation  of  God,"  "  the 
Consolation  of  Israel."  It  is  his  Redeemer,  his  life,  his 
hope,  his  joy,  his  "  all  and  in  all ;"  and  he  takes  him  up 
in  his  arms,  and  blesses  God,  and  magnifies  the  riches  of 
graoe  and  love  thus  amazingly  impersonated. 

And  this  suggests  the  only  other  trait  I  can  now  notice 
in  the  faith  of  this  patriarchal  servant  of  God,  which  is 
its  evangelical  character.  It  was  the  genuine  faith  of 
the  Gospel. 

What  is  evangelical  faith  ?  It  is  the  grace  which  re- 
nounces all  saving  merit  in  our  own  works.  "  By  grace 
are  ye  saved  through  faith  ;  and  that  not  of  yourselves, 
it  is  the  gift  of  God  ;  not  of  works,  lest  any  man  should 
boast."  Such  was  the  faith  of  Simeon.  The  highest  en- 
comium is  passed  upon  his  eminent  virtue.  He  "  was 
just," — a  man  of  integrity  and  uprightness;  but  not  in 
his  good  deeds,  in  Jesus  alone  is  his  confidence  and  hope. 

What  is  evangelical  faith  ?  It  is  the  grace  which  re- 
nounces all  saving  worth  not  only  in  our  good  works,  but 
in  the  most  conscientious  performance  of  our  religious 
duties.  Such  was  Simeon's  faith.  He  "  was  devout." — 
He  was  scrupulous  in  every  observance  required  by  the 
Jewish  ritual.  "  Touching  the  righteousness  which  is  in 
the  law,  he  was  blameless.  But  it  is  only  in  the  right- 
eousness of  Jesus  that  he  finds  pardon  and  justification. 

"Mine  eyes  have  seen  thy  salvation  ;" — ponder  these 
remarkable  words.  With  Simeon,  Jesus  and  salvation 
are  the  same  thing.  Beholding  Jesus,  he  beholds  God's 
salvation — the  full,  free,  only  salvation  provided  for 
guilty  man.  Did  Simeon,  then,  have  any  conception  of 
the  atonement  and  the  sacrifice  by  which  that  atonement 
was  to  be  made?  Certainly.  Besides  what  I  have  just 
said  of  the  import  of  the  word  "  salvation,"  his  language 


Simeon's  Faith  and  Consolation.  341 

to  Mary  is  conclusive  upon  this  point.  "And  Simeon 
blessed  them  and  said  unto  Mary,  his  mother,  Behold 
this  child  is  set  for  the  fall  and  rising  again  of  many  in 
Israel,  and  for  a  sign  which  shall  be  spoken  against;  yea, 
a  sword  shall  pierce  through  thy  own  soul  «/*o."  What 
this  "sword"  was,  we  can  be  at  no  loss  to  understand; 
but  who  can  comprehend  the  anguish  of  that  mother 
when  the  cruel  iron  entered  her  soul  ?  Some  of  you  have 
known  what  it  is  to  "  mourn  and  to  be  in  bitterness  for 
your  first-born,"  falling  honorably  on  the  field  in  a  cause 
you  deemed  sacred.  Many  of  us  have  felt  our  very  hearts 
cleft  in  twain  when  a  child  has  died  in  our  arms,  with 
all  the  ministries  which  the  tenderest  love  could  apply 
to  soothe  its  sufferings.  What,  then,  must  have  been  the 
agonies  of  Mary  when  she  saw  her  first-born  son, — and 
such  a  son, — one  who  even  amidst  the  tortures  of  his 
crucifixion  was  still  thinking  of  her  comfort,  turning  his 
eyes  to  her  and  confiding  her  to  the  care  of  his  beloved 
disciple, — what  pangs  must  have  pierced  her  soul  as  she 
saw  this  son  seized  by  ruffians,  buffeted,  mocked,  spit 
upon,  bending  under  the  weight  of  the  cross,  dragged 
through  the  streets  by  an  infuriated  rabbit,  with  curses 
and  execrations,  and  then  nailed  to  that  cross,  and  ex- 
piring by  a  death  from  the  very  thought  of  which  the 
imagination  recoils  in  horror.  By  the  "sword"  Simeon 
meant  the  violent  and  bloody  death  which  Mary  should 
witness.  In  that  mysterious  child  he  saw  the  victim  who 
would  offer  himself  to  divine  justice  as  a  satisfaction  for 
the  sins  of  his  people. 

II.  This  must  suffice  for  our  first  article.  In  the  time 
left  us  I  would  glance  at  our  remaining  topic, — the  con- 
solations of  Simeon's  faith.  He  waited  for  "the  consola- 
tion of  Israel ;"  and,  with  Jesus  in  his  arms,  his  soul 
exults  in  the  full  fruition  of  that  consolation  ;  he  rejoices 
in  that  child  with  "joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory." 

The  Father  of  the  faithful  had  known  something  of 
this  consolation.  "Abraham  rejoiced  to  see  my  day,  and 
he  saw  it  and  was  glad."  Stauding  before  the  altar  upon 
which  Isaac  was  stretched,  there  streamed  upon  his 
vision  some  prophetic  glimpses  of  another  altar  which 


342  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 


was  to  be  erected  on  that  very  spot,  and  of  the  amazing 
sacrifice  to  be  there  immolated.  Moriah  caught  some 
rays  of  that  light  which  one  day  would  crown  the  top  of 
Calvary,  and  become  a  Pisgah  from  which  Abraham 
fixed  his  earnest  eyes  upon  the  prospect,  and  gloried  in 
the  sight. 

To  Moses  there  had  been  vouchsafed  some  foretastes  of 
that  consolation.  Admitted  to  the  closest  and  tenderest 
communion  with  God,  he  exclaimed,  "I  beseech  thee, 
shew  me  thy  glory.  And,  hiding  him  in  the  cleft  of 
a  rock,  and  covering  him  with  his  hand — an  emblem  of 
the  shelter  found  in  a  wounded  Saviour — Jehovah  re- 
vealed some  fore-shinings  of  the  great  salvation  in  which 
attributes  that  seem  utterly  to  conflict  are  harmonized, 
in  which  he  is  just  and  yet  justifies  the  ungodly,  merciful 
without  clearing  the  guilty.  "  And  the  Lord  passed  by 
before  him,  and  proclaimed  the  Lord,  the  Lord  God 
merciful  and  gracious,  long-suffering  and  abundant  in 
goodness  and  truth,  keeping  mercy  for  thousands,  forgiv- 
ing iniquity,  transgression  and  sin,  and  will  by  no  means 
clear  the  guilty" 

But  Simeoti  rejoices  in  the  fullness  of  the  consolation. 
"I  have  waited  for  thy  salvation,  0  Lord,"  said  the  aged 
Israel.  "I  have  seen  thy  salvation,"  is  the  language 
of  the  aged  Simeon.  Patriarchs  and  prophets  had  "died 
in  faith  not  having  received  the  promises,  but  having 
seen  them  afar  off;"  this  venerable  saint  holds  in  his 
arms  that  child  who  was  the  consummation  of  all  the 
promises  and  now  what  can  he  desire  more?  What  has 
life  to  detain  him  longer?  He  waited  to  see  Jesus;  he 
presses  Jesus  to  his  heart.  Earth  has  nothing  more  to 
give,  heaven  nothing  more  to  promise;  and  in  the  delight, 
the  entrancing  happiness  of  a  soul  which  at  last  pos- 
sesses the  long-desired  object  of  its  prayers  and  ador- 
ations, he  exclaims,  "  Lord,  now  lettest  thou  thy  servant 
depart  in  peace,  according  to  thy  word,  for  my  eyes  have 
seen  thy  salvation." 

These  words  are  generally  regarded  as  a  prayer — "Now 
let  thy  servant  depart!"  but  the  original  does  not  allow 
any  such  construction.  The  language  is  very  different 
from  a  prayer.     It  is  the  triumphant  ejaculation  of  one 


Simeon's  Pcuith  and  Consolation.  343 


whose  devoutest  prayer  has  been  granted.  The  verb  is 
in  the  indicative  mood  stating  the  fact  that  he  is  now 
allowed  to  depart;  but  the  indicative  is  here  really  more 
than  the  imperative.  It  is  the  rejoicing  cry  of  a  prisoner 
who  lias  been  set  free — of  one  who  during  long  years 
had  been  desiring  to  depart,  and  who  now  sees  all  for 
which  he  had  been  detained  on  earth  accomplished  and 
his  release  perfected. 

Two  instances  will  at  once  occur  to  your  minds  in 
which  the  very  same  sentiment,  though  in  a  different 
form,  was  uttered  by  aged  men,  in  the  joy,  the  repose,  the 
perfect  satisfaction  of  their  hearts  at  the  accomplishment 
of  their  warmest  wishes.     I  refer  to  Jacob  and  Barzillai. 

For  twenty  years  had  Jacob  believed  that  Joseph  was 
dead.  For  twenty  years  had  he  gone  weeping  all  his 
days  for  a  son  in  whom  his  life  had  been  wrapped  up, 
refusing  to  be  comforted,  and  uttering  that  sad  lamenta- 
tion, "I  will  go  down  into  the  grave  unto  my  son  mourn- 
ing." Suddenly  he  receives  the  glad  tidings  from  Egypt, 
"good  news  from  a  far  country''  which  are  "as  cold 
waters  to  a  thirsty  soul,"  and  he  cries  out,  "It  is  enough; 
Joseph  my  son  is  yet  alive,  I  will  go  down  and  see  him 
before  I  die."  "And  Joseph  made  ready  his  chariot,  and 
went  up  to  meet  Israel,  his  father,  to  Goshen,  and  pre- 
sented himself  unto  him,  and  he  fell  on  his  neck  and 
wept  on  his  neck  a  good  while.  And  Israel  said  unto 
Joseph,  Now  let  me  die,  since  I  have  seen  thy  face,  be- 
cause thou  art  yet  alive." 

The  other  case  is  that  of  Barzillai.  During  David's 
banishment  from  his  kingdom,  this  prince  had  warmly 
espoused  his  cause  and  supplied  his  wants.  When  re- 
called to  the  throne  and  on  his  way  to  Jerusalem,  the 
monarch  is  anxious  to  confer  honors  on  his  faithful  sub- 
ject, and  presses  him  to  return  with  him.  But  Barzillai 
declines,  pleading  his  age.  "Thy  servant  will  go  a  little 
way  over  Jordan  with  the  king;"  and  Ghimham  his  son 
will  proceed  to  the  capital,  but  for  himself  what  charms 
can  a  court  have  for  him  ?  It  is  enough  that  he  sees  the 
prince  so  dear  to  his  heart  again  restored;  let  him  go 
home  that  he  may  die  there.- 


344  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

You  feel  how  natural  was  this  deadness  to  the  world 
in  these  two  patriarchal  men  ;  but  you  feel,  too,  with  how 
much  deeper  emphasis  Simeon  might  utter  the  sentiment 
in  our  text.  Rejoicing  as  was  the  sight  of  Joseph,  what 
was  it  to  the  vision  of  the  Messiah — the  object  of  such 
ardent  hopes  and  aspirations?  It  was  the  infirmities, 
the  insensibilities  of  a  man  stricken  in  years,  and  his 
nearness  to  the  grave  which  Barzillai  pleaded  for  renounc- 
ing the  world;  Simeon  had  long  been  thus  weaned  from 
all  the  pleasures  and  promises  of  life,  but  now  there  is 
added  a  more  powerful  motive.  Faith  has  revealed  that 
Being,  one  glimpse  of  whom  turns  the  whole  world  into 
contempt.  Before  his  eyes,  in  his  very  arms  is  the  dear 
object  of  all  of  his  loving,  longing,  waiting ;  and  he  has 
nothing  more  to  do  with  terrestrial  things.  It  is  enough. 
My  soul  hath  her  content  so  absolute,  that  now  to  die  is 
now  to  be  most  blessed.  My  eyes  have  nothing  more  to 
see,  my  ears  nothing  more  to  hear,  my  heart  has  nothing 
more  to  desire. 

But  to  regard  Simeon's  language  in  this  view  is  not  to 
exhaust  its  meaning.  In  the  original  the  expression  is 
very  significant ;  it  is  the  triumphant  exclamation  of  a 
hope  full  of  immortality.  "Lord  now  deliverest  thou 
thy  servant  in  peace  and  tranquility."  He  welcomes 
death  as  the  emancipation  of  his  imprisoned  soul.  "  Let 
me  go  home  that  I  may  die,"  said  the  Gileadite.  "  Now 
lettest  thou  me -die,"  exclaimed  Simeon,  "  that  I  may  go 
home."  With  Jesus  in  his  arms,  he  possesses  his  pass- 
port to  immortal  blessedness.  "  The  sting  of  death  is 
sin,  and  the  strength  of  sin  is  the  law ;"  but  here  is  the 
propitiation,  the  redeeming  sacrifice.  "  Thanks  be  unto 
God  who  giveth  us  the  victory  through  our  Lord  Jesus 
Christ."  The  darkness  of  the  tomb  is  appalling;  but 
here  is  "the  Light "  which  dissipates  all  that  gloom,  and 
irradiates  the  grave  with  celestial  brightness. 

I  wish  I  had  time  to  dwell  longer  on  the  picture  pre- 
sented in  this  text.  An  old  man  with  Jesus  in  his 
arms! — the  angels  who  left  the  shepherds  and  went  up, 
must  have  returned  tc  view  the  sight;  for  heaven  had 
nothing  more  worthy  of  their  tender  sympathy.  And 
let  me  add  that  devils  can  find  in  hell  no  spectacle  more 


Simeon's  Faith  and  Consolation.  345 

gratifying  to  their  malignity  than  that  which  we  every 
day  behold;  an  old  man  tottering  on  the  brink  of  eter- 
nity, spurning  the  love  of  Jesus,  and  clasping  the  world 
in  bis  arms  as  bis  portion  and  consolation.  Hut  I  must 
hasten  to  a  conclusion,  and  I  finish  by  applying  the  sub- 
ject practically  to  this  audience. 

Men  and  brethren,  we  have  been  considering  Simeon's 
faith,  and  have  found  that  it  renounced  all  merit  in 
himself,  and  embraced  Jesus  as  the  only  and  perfect  sal- 
vation ;  is  this  our  faith?  As  to  the  hope  of  winning 
heaven  by  the  righteousness  of  the  law,  I  do  not  feel  it 
necessary  to  speak  ;  for  none  of  you  I  believe,  are  indulg- 
ing that  delusion.  In  the  early  part  of  my  ministry,  I 
often  used  to  set  myself  to  expose  this  heresy  ;  but  latterly 
I  have  never  touched  it;  and  for  the  simple  reason,  that 
it  does  not  seem  to  me  there  is  any  danger  from  this 
quarter.  At  least  after  preaching  to  you  and  being 
familiar  with  you  for  more  than  fifteen  years,  I  have 
never  met  a  single  man  or  woman  who  had  any  intention 
of  being  saved  by  a  life  of  perfect  holiness.  What  I  have 
to  lament  is,  that  so  many  of  you  appear  to  regard  the 
righteousness  of  Christ  as  superseding  the  necessity  of 
any  righteousness  of  your  own.  Simeon  was  eminent 
for  his  virtues  and  graces,  and,  appealing  to  God,  he 
calls  himself  "  thy  servant ■;"  yet  he  reposed  entirely  on 
the  complete  salvation  which  is  in  Jesus.  Is  this,  our 
character  and  our  confidence?  Balaam  could  wish  to 
"die  the  death  of  the  righteous;"  is  ours  the  faith  which 
causes' us  to  live  the  life  of  the  righteous,  and  yet  in  view 
of  the  judgment,  to  say,  '*  That  I  may  be  found  in  him, 
not  having  mine  own  righteousness  which  is  cf  the  law, 
but  that  which  is  through  the  faith  of  Christ,  the  right- 
eousness which  is  of  God  by  faith  ?" 

Simeon's  soul  was  filled  with  peace  and  joy  because 
the  eyes  of  his  understanding  being  enlightened,  he  em- 
braced the  Saviour  in  the  arms  of  faith.  "The  Holy 
Ghost  was  upon  him;"  and  it  is  the  office  of  the  Spirit 
to  "  glorify  Jesus,"  to  take  of  his  fullness,  grace,  love, 
and  shew  them  unto  us.  lias  Jesus  been  thus  "revealed 
in"  us?  Have  we  thus  embraced  him?  He  is  "the 
gift  of  God;"  have  we  received  him  as   such  ?     He  is 


346  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

the  Saviour  of  sinners  ; — "  this  is  a  faithful  saying  and 
worthy  of  all  acceptation,  that  Christ  Jesus  came  into 
the  world  to  save  sinners  ;•"  do  we  feel  ourselves  lost  and 
ruined,  and  have  we  accepted  the  great  salvation,  as  that 
which  is  suited  to  all  the  fearful  emergencies  of  our  con- 
dition ? 

"  lie  took  him  up  in  his  arms,  and  blessed  God."  0, 
but  faith  has  wonderful  arms.  Winning  arms;  "I  count 
all  things  but  loss,  for  the  excellency  of  the  knowledge 
of  Christ  Jesus  my  Lord;  for  whom  I  have  suffered  the 
loss  of  all  things,  and  do  count  them  but  dung,  that  I 
may  win  Christ." 

Clinging  arms  ;  Jacob  gets  but  one  gripe  on  him,  and 
vainly  is  his  thigh  weakened,  vainly  does  the  mysterious 
Being  say,  "  Let  me  go,  for  the  day  breaketh  ;"  halt  or 
whole,  daybreak,  noon,  or  night,  he  will  not  let  him  go 
without  a  blessing.  Loving  arms  ;  "  To  you  that  believe 
he  is  precious."  Enriching  arms  ;  for  the}7  gather  all 
"  the  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ."  Adopting  arms  ; 
"As  many  as  receive  him,  to  them  gave  he  power  to  be- 
come the  sons  of  God."  In  a  word,  let  faith  only  get  Jesus 
in  its  arms,  and  it  has  him  who  "  is  all  and  in  all,"  the 
pledge  of  all,  the  sum  of  all  which  the  soul  can  need  for 
time  and  eternity ;  "  he  is  made  of  God  unto  us,  wisdom 
righteousness,  sanctification,  and  redemption." 

We  have  spoken,  however,  not  only  of  Simeon's  faith, 
but  of  his  "consolation."  Has  faith  shed  this  consola- 
tion into  our  souls?  Learnedly  and  accurately  we  can 
explain  all  the  doctrines  of  the  Gospel ;  but  have  we 
light  in  our  heart  as  well  as  in  our  head  ?  "  The  Conso- 
lation of  Israel," — not  of  the  Jews,  but  of  all  the  true 
Israel  of  God, — this  is  his  title,  and  well  does  he  deserve 
it.  At  what  time  a  poor  soul,  overwhelmed  by  convic- 
tion, is  crying,  "  Lord,  save,  or  I  perish ;"  when  gloom 
and  night  overshadow  us,  and.  our  hearts  are  cast  down 
within  us ;  when  fainting  through  Aveakness ;  when  in 
heaviness  through  manifold  temptations;  when  sorrow 
and  anguish  take  hold  upon  us,  and  our  moisture  is 
turned  into  the  drought  of  summer;  when  notonly  with- 
out, but  within,  the  fig  tree  blossoms  not,  and  there  is  no 
fruit  in  the  vine,"  when  we  walk  in  darkness  and  see  no 


Simeon's  Faith  and  Consolation.  34? 


light, — thenwhal  is  fchewholeworldtous-?  what  can  the 
whole  world  do  for  us?  then,  how  ineffably  consoling  it 
is  to  look  to  Jesus,  to  say  to  liini,  "  Thou  art  my  hiding 
place,  thou  shalt  preserve  me  from  trouble,  thou  shalt 
compass  me  about  with  songs  of  deliverance ;"  then,  how 
do  all  our  fears  and  doubts  vanish  away,  and  peace, 
assurance,  joy,  How  into  our  souls,  as  we  feel  that  Jesus 
is  in  our  arms,  as,  with  the  heavenly  spouse  we  "  hold 
him  and  will  not  let  him  go."  Or  rather,  it  is  he  who 
holds  us,  and  will  not  let  us  go.  For  if  we  love  him, 
it  is  because  he  first  loved  us;  if  we  choose  him,  it  is 
because  he  first  chose  us ;  if  our  arms  are  around  him,  it 
is  because  his  arms  were  first  around  us, — the  arms  of 
his  love,  of  his  sovereign,  sustaining,  unchangeable,  ever- 
lasting love.  And  as  he  whispers,  "I,  even  I,  am  he 
that  blotteth  out  thine  iniquities  for  my  name's  sake," 
we  rejoice  with  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory;  we 
exultingly  exclaim,  0,  love  of  Christ  which  passeth 
knowledge!  "Who  shall  separate  us  from  the  love  of 
Christ  ?  I  am  persuaded  that  neither  death,  nor  life, 
nor  angels,  nor  principalities,  nor  powers,  nor  things 
present,  nor  things  to  come,  nor  height,  nor  depth,  nor 
any  other  creature,  shall  be  able  to  separate  us  from  the 
love  of  God  which  is  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord." 

My  brethren,  I  trust  that  this  preciousness  of  Jesus  is 
to  you  not  a  speculation,  but  an  experience.  After  all, 
however,  we  will  never  enter  into  all  the  import  of  Simeon's 
consolation  and  song  until,  like  him,  we  are  about  to  bid 
adieu  to  life  forever.  ISo  matter  what  may  be  the  sweet- 
ness of  those  hidden  joys  which  are  now  diffused  into  our 
hearts,  as  Ave  feel  that  our  Beloved  is  ours  and  Ave  are  his, 
it  is  only  in  a  dying  hour  that  Ave  can  fully  knoAV  the 
peace  and  blessedness  of  seeing  and  embracing  the  ador- 
able Redeemer  of  our  souls.  When  the  time  of  our  de- 
liverance shall  be  at  hand,  when  the  world  shall  be  re- 
ceding from  our  sight,  and  heaven  shall  be  opening  upon 
our  vision, — then  Ave  Avill  begin  to  comprehend  what  it  is 
to  be  Christ's,  to  clasp  Jesus  to  our  bosoms,  and  to  feel 
his  everlasting  arms  around  us;  then,  and  not  until 
then,  can  our  souls  rise  to  all  the  rapture  of  Paul  in  his 
glowing  desire  "to  depart,"  and  of  Simeon  when  he  ex- 


348  Richard  Fuller's  Sermons. 

claimed,  "Lord,  now  lettest  thou  thy  servant  depart  in 
peace,  according  to  thy  word,  for  mine  eyes  have  seen 
thy  salvation." 

My  poor  impenitent  hearers,  what  will  become  of  you 
in  that  solemn  hour  ?  Without  Christ,  you  are  without 
hope  or  consolation  now,  and  how  terrible  to  you  the  fast 
approaching  hour  of  yonr  departure.  What  will  you  do 
then  without  Jesus  ?  What  will  become  of  you?  Who 
will  welcome  your  soul  in  eternity  ?  God  is  my  record 
how  I  long  after  you.  0,  if  there  be  any  consolation  in 
Christ,  if  any  bowels  and  mercies,  fulfill  ye  my  joy,  come 
to  this  Saviour  and  accept  the  blessedness  he  waits  to  give 
you. 

Christians,  remember  the  title  of  him  who  is  the 
strength  of  your  heart  and  your  portion  forever.  He  is 
"the  Consolation  of  Israel;"  this  is  his  name;  let  this 
name  make  him  increasingly  dear  to  you.  "God,  willing 
more  abundantly  to  shew  unto  the  heirs  of  promise  the 
immutability  of  his  counsel,  confirmed  it  by  an  oath; 
that  by  two  immutable  things,  in  which  it  was  impossible 
for  God  to  lie,  we  might  have  a  strong  consolation  who 
have  fled  for  refuge  to  lay  hold  on  the  hope  set  before  us." 
What  wonderful  words  of  assurance  are  these.  May  they 
ever  dwell  in  our  hearts  richly  by  faith.  May  the  con- 
solations of  Christ  abound  in  us  now ;  may  they  super- 
abound  in  the  last  closing  hour. 

"Now  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  himself,  and  God  even 
our  Father,  which  hath  loved  us,  and  given  us  everlast- 
ing consolations  and  a  good  hope  through  grace,  comfort 
your  hearts,  and  stablish  you  in  every  good  word  and 
work."     To  him  be  glory  forever.     Amen. 


p 


13 


