
This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 



at |http : //books . google . com/ 



^NIHIVFR-HAHVAHP I IBRAKV 



AH 4 V U 



Harvard Depository 
Brittle Book 





LIBRARY 



DIVINITY SCHOOL. 



GIFT OF 



TJkji. Ccr^Wlu- ixWruJ 




/^/-A **x, /S.' 



i 



i 



SPURGEON'S SERMONS, 



THIRD SERIES. 



i 



/!'• * 



' .--iT 



I 



J - t 



v> 



'•■^ As* 







SERMONS 



OF THB 



« 



REV. C. H. SPURGEON, 



OP LONDON. 



ir)t ^ttiti. 



NEW YORK: 

SHELDON, BLAKEMAN & CO. 

ST. JOHN, N. B.: DEMILL & FILLMORE. 

1857. 



4- ^^o. locp 
Har\ rd "'niv^-si'V. 

Jr«^v6 |'C>rrf<5/^ jhnr>ir\^ 

P^ «pecid2 arrangemeni^ Shaldok, Blakbman ft Co. t^ifi ptMiah Ihs 
Sermena of the Ret. 0. H. SpuRGEONpand it is the autkar^a wish thai no 
parties shaU infringe this contract. 



BTEBEOTYPBD BT PBINTED BY 

T. B. SMITH & SOX, E. O. JENKINS, 

&4 Beekman-st., N, Y. 20 Frankfort-st 



PREFACE. 

I PRAYEBFULLY commit this volume to the blessing of 
Almighty God, with the earnest hope that its reception by 
the American public may be as hearty as that obtained 
by its predecessors, and that the good resulting from its 
circulation may be fiur more abundant. The sermons 
herein contained are not essays laboriously written and 
laboriously heard, they are the verbatim reports of the 
extemporaneous utterances of a very busy man. A few 
minutes of revision is all that I can afford them, and hence 
the reader must be lenient toward the errors of the book. 
Week by week the sermons are issued in haste, almost as 
soon as they are delivered, while I am continually running 
hither and thither preaching the Word, and am therefore 
frequently unable so much as to glance at the proof-sheets. 
The eighteen Sermons at the close of the yolume were de- 
livered to immense audiences in the Eoyal Surrey Music 
Hall, and are purposely made as siiiiple and elementary as 
possible. Without eloquence or learning, these discourses 
have riveted the attention of ten thousand at once, and 
have attracted princes of every nation and noWes of every 
rank, some of whom have «iot been unprofitable hearers, 
but have brought forth fruits meet for repentance. It is 
the Lord's doing, and it is marvelous in our eyes. 



VI PBEPAOE. 

Brefliren in the land of the West, I am linked to your 
great republic by ties which daily multiply ; fellowships 
with the great and holy are the silken bands which bind 
me to your nation. May the old. faith of the men from 
whose loins ye sprang be ever nourished among you- Ye 
are unfettered ; no State Church spreads its upas shade 
over your churches, and no revarence for antiquated errors 
checks your progress. Let a brother beseech you to main- 
tain the faith, once delivered to the saints, whole and in- 
violable. In our land we have been fevored with some 
blessed gleams of sunshine ; but those who know the signs 
of the times are led very fi^uently to tremble for the ark 
of the Lord. Arminianism secretly hirks among us. Our 
ministers prune the laruth, and conceal the great distin- 
guishing doctrines of grace, in a manner much to be la- 
mented. Antinomianism, through its perversions of the 
truth, has done much to check the advance of sound 
opinions, and has made many good men so cautious of 
being too high, that they have run into the opposite ex- 
tremes of error. May the Lord restore unto us all a pure 
language, and may the time come when the Gospel of the 
Lord Jesus shall universally prevail. 

May the perusal of these Sermons confirm the wavering, 
and, by the influence of the Holy Spirit, guide the anxious 
to joy and peace. 

To the sacred name of the Father, the Son, and the 
Holy Spirit, be glory for ever, so prays 

THE AUTHOR. 



CONTENTS. 



» * » 



SERMON L 

TAQM 
A FATTHrDI. F WBND ^ ....• *. 11 



SERMON n. 
The Leafless Tree 2*i 

SERMON ni. 
The Snare op the Fowler 42 

SERMON IV. 
The Frxjitlbss Vine 68 

SERMON V. 

Spiritual Revival the Want of the Church 74 

SERMON VL 
The Anxious Inquirer 90 

SERMON Vn. 

The Sinner's Refuge 106 



Till CONTENTS. 



SERMON Vm. 

FA6K 

The DumbSinqinq 119 



SERMON IX. 
Foretastes of the Heavenly Life 138 



SERMON X, 

PBBACHiKa FOR THE Poor 149 



SERMON XI. 
Secebt Sins ; 164 



SERMON XII. 
Elijah's Appeal to the Undecided 179 



SERMON Xin. 
Salvation of the Lord 194 



SERMON XIV. 
Regeneration 210 



SERMON XV. 

Spdutual RsSURREOnON V 225 



CONTENTS. IX 

I 

8ERM0N XVI. 

PAOB 

CoKFBSsiON OF Sin 241 



SERMON XVII. 
Faith 256 



SERMON XVm 
Rahab's Faith 269 



SERMON XIX. 
The BLOOD-SHEDDma 283 



SERMON XX. 

JUSTDTCATION BY GRACE .' 295 



SERMON XXI. 
Manassbh 311 



SERMON XXTL 
Why are Men Saved 328 



SERMON XXin. 

Pabticul AB Election 343 

1* 



X CONTKNTg. 

I 

SERMON XXIV. 
Mebot, Omnipotence, and Justice 369 

SERMON XXV. 
Chbistv— The Power and Wisdom op God 376 



SERMON XXVL 
QoisQ Home — ^A Christmas Sermon 389 



SERMON XXVII. 
A Mighty Saviour • 404 



SERMON XXVIIL 
Israel in Egypt 419 



SERMON XXIX. 
Presumptuous Sins 432 



SERMON I. 
A FAITHFUL FRIEND. 

*' There is a friend that sticketh closer than a brother/* — ^Pboysbbs, xviii. 24. 

CiCBBO has well said, '' Friendship is the only thing in the 
world concerning the asefolness of which all mankind are 
agreed.'' Friendship seems as necessary an element of a com^ 
fortable existence in this world as fire or water, or even air 
itself. A man may drag along a miseraUe existence in proud 
solitary dignity, but his life is scarce life, it is nothing but an 
existence, the tree of life being stripped of the leaves of hope 
and the fruits of joy. He who would be happy here must have 
fiiends ; and he who would be happy herea^er, must, above 
all things, find a fiiend in the world to come, in the person of 
God, the Father of his people. 

Friendship, however, though very pleasing and exceedingly 
blessed, has been the cause of the greatest misery to men 
when it has been unworthy and unfisdthful ; for just in propor- 
tion as a good fiiend is sweet, a false friend is fiiU of bitter- 
ness. ^^ A faithless fnend is sharper than an adder's tooth." 
It is sweet to repose in some one ; but O I how bitter to have 
that suppoit snapped, and to receive a grievous fall as the 
effect of your confidence. Fidelity is an absolute necessary in 
a true friend ; we can not rejoice in men unless they will stand 
faithful to us. Solomon declares that '^ there is a friend that 
sticketh closer than a brother." That fi^iend, I suppose, he 
never found in the pomps and vanities of the world. He had 
tried them all, but he found them empty ; he passed through 
all their joys, but he found them " vanity of vanities." Poor 
Savage spoke firom sad experience when he said. 



12 A FAITHFUL FIUSND. 

" You'll find the friendship of the world a show I . 
Mere outward show I 'Tis like the harlot's tears, 
The statesman's promise, or false patriot's zeal, 
Full of fair seeming, but delusion alL" 

And so for the most part they are. The world's friendship is 
ever brittle. Trust to it, and you have trusted a robber ; rely 
upon it, and you have leaned upon a thorn ; ay, worse than 
that, upon a spear which shall pierce you to the soul with 
agony. Yet Solomon says he had found " a friend that stick- 
eth closer than a brother." Not in the haunts of his unbridled 
pleasures, nor in the wanderings of his unlimited resources, 
but in the pavilion of the Most High, the secret dwelling-place 
of God, in the person of Jesus, the Son of God, the Friend of 
sinners. 

It is saying a great thing to affirm that " there is a friend 
that sticketh closer than a brother ;" for the love of brother- 
hood has produced most valiant deeds. We have read stories 
of what brotherhood could do, which, we think, could hardly 
be excelled in the annals of friendship. Tiraoleon, with his 
shield, stood over the body of his slain brother, to defend him 
from the insults of the foe. It was reckoned a brave deed of 
brotherhood that he should dare the speais of an army in 
defense of his brother's corpse. And many such instances 
have there been, in ancient and modern warfare, of the attach- 
ment of brethren. There is a story told of a Highland regi- 
ment, who, while marching through the Highlands, lost their 
way ; they were overtaken by one of the terrible storms which 
will sometimes come upon travelei's unawares, and blinded by 
the snow, they lost their way upon the mountains. Well nigh 
frozen to death, it was with difficulty they could continue their 
march. One man after another dropped into the snow and 
disappeared. There were two brothers, however, of the name 
of Forsythe ; one of them fell prostrate on the earth, and 
would have lain there to die, but his brother, though barely 
able to drag his own limbs across the white desert, took him 
on his back, and carried him along, and as others fell one by 
one, this brave, true-hearted brother carried his loved one on 
his back, until at last he himself fell down overcome with 
iatigue, and died. His brother, however, had received such 



▲ FAITHFUL FEIflND. 18 

warmth from his body that he was enabled to reach the end 
of his journey in safety, and so lived. Here we have an in- 
stance of one brother sacrificing his life for another. I hope 
there are some brothers here who would be prepared to do 
the same if they should ever be brought into the same diffi- 
culty. It is saying a great thing, to declare that ^' there is a 
friend that sticketh closer than a brother.*' It is putting that 
fiiend first of all in the list of loving ones ; for, surely, next to 
a mother's love, there is, and there ought to be, no higher af> 
fection in the world than the love of a brother to one begotten 
of the same Either, and dandled on the same knee. Those 
who have " grown in beauty side by side, and filled one house 
with glee," ought to love one another. And we think there 
have been many glorious instances and mighty proofi of the 
love of brethren. Yet, says Solomon, " there is a fiiend that 
sticketh closer than a brother." 

To repeat our assertion, we believe that this friend is the 
blessed Redeemer, Jesus Christ. It shall be ours, first, to 
prove^ this morning, the fact that he sticks closer than a 
brother ; then, as briefly as we can, to show you why he sticks 
closer than a brother; and then to finish up by giving you 
some lessons which may be drawn frqm the doctrine^ that 
Jesus Christ is a faithful Friend. 

I. First, then, beloved, we assert that Chbist is " a friend 

THAT STICKBTH CLOSBB THAK A BROTHER." And in Order tO 

prove this from facts, we appeal to such of you as have had 
him for a friend. Will you not, each of you, at once give 
your verdict, that this is neither more nor less than an unex- 
aggerated truth ? He loved you before all worlds ; long ere 
the day stw flung his ray across the darkness, before the wing 
of angel had flapped the unnavigated ether, befbre aught of 
creation had struggled from the womb of nothingness, God, 
even our God, had set his heart upon all his children. Since 
that time, has he once swerved, has he once turned aside, once 
changed ? No ; ye who have tasted of his love and know his 
grace, will bear me witness, that he has been a certain fiiend 
in uncertain circumstances. 

'* He, near your side hath always stood, 
His loving-kindness, 1 bow good I" 



14 ▲ FAITHFUL VKUESJX 

YqvL fell in Adam ; did he oease to love you ? No ; he beeame 
the second Adam to redeem you. You sinned in practice, 
and brought upon your head the condemnation of GU)d ; you 
deserved his wrath and his utter anger ; did he then forsake 
you ? No ! 

•" He saw you ruined in the fall, 
Yet loved you notwithstanding all," 

He sent his minister after you : you despised him ; he preached 
the gospel in your ears: you laughed at him; you broke 
God's Sabbath, you despised his Word. Did he then forsake 
you ? No I 

" Detennmed to save, he watched o^er your path, 
Whilst, Satan*8 blind slave, you sported with death." 

And at last he arrested you by his grace, he humbled you, he 
made you penitent, he brought you to his feet, and he forgave 
all your sins. Since then, has he left you ? You have often 
left him ; has he ever left you ? You have had many trials 
and troubles ; has he ever deserted you ? Has he ever turned 
away his heart, and shut up his bowels of compassion ? No, 
children of God, it is your solemn duty to say " No," and 
bear witness to his faithfulness. You have been in severe af> 
flictions and in dangerous circumstances ; did your friend de- 
sert you then ? Others have been fjuthless to you ; he that 
eat bread with you has lifted up his heel against you ; but 
has Christ ever forsaken you ? Has there ever been a moment 
when you could go to him, and say, " Master, thou hast be- 
trayed me ?'» Could you once, in the blackest hour of your 
grief, dare to impugn his fidelity ? Could you dare to say of 
him, " Lord, thou hast promised what thou didst not per- 
form?" Will you not bear witness now, "Not one good 
thing hath failed of ail that the Lord God hath promised ; all 
hath come to pass ?" And do you fear he will yet forsake 
you? Ask, then, the bright ones before the throne — "Ye 
glorified spirits! did Christ forsake you? Ye have passed 
through Jordan's stream ; did he leave you there ? Ye 
have been baptized in the black flood of death ; did he there 
forsake you ? Ye have stood before the throne of God ; did 
he then deny you ?" And they answered, " No ; through all 



the troubles of oar life, in all the bittemees of death, in all the 
agonies of our expiring moments, and in all the terrors of 
God's judgment, he hath be^n with us, ' a friend that sticketh 
closer than a brother.' " Out of all the millions of Gk)d's re- 
deemed, there is not one he hath forsaken. Poor they have 
been, mean and distressed, but he hath never abhorred their 
prayer, never turned aside from doing them good. He hath 
been ever with them. 

" For his mercy shall endure, 
^ver fatthfbl, ever supe." 

But I shall not longer stay, since I can not prove this to the 
ungodly, and to the godly it is already proven, for they know 
it by experience; therefore it is but little necessary that I 
should do more than just certify the fact that Christ is a faith- 
ful friend — a friend in every hour of need and every time of 
distress. 

II. And now I have to tell you thb beasons why wb mat 

DEPEND upon ChBIST AS BBINa A FAITHFUL FBIBND. 

There are some things in himself which render it certain 
that he will stick close to his people. 

1. True friendship can only be made between true men. 
Hearts are the soul of honor. There can be no lasting friend- 
ship between bad men. Bad men may pretend to love each 
other, but their friendship is a rope of sand, which shall be 
broken at any convenient season ; but if a man have a sincere 
heart within him, and be true and noble, then we may confide 
in him. Spenser sings in fine old English verse — 

" Ne, certes can that friendship long ttidore^ 
Howe7er gay and goodly be the style. 
That doth ill cause or evil end enure, 
For Yertue is the band that bindeth Harts most sure." 

But who can find a stain in the character of Jesus, or who can 
tarnish his honor ? Has there ever been a ^>ot on his escut- 
cheon ? Has his flag ever been trampled in the dust ? Does 
he not stand the true witness in heaven, the &ithful and just ? 
Is it not declared of him that he is God who can not lie ? 
Have we not found him so up to this moment ; and may we 
not, knowing that he is ^^ Hdy, holy, holy Lord,'' confide in 



16 ▲ FUTBFUL FfiUENP. 

him, that he will stick closer to us than a brother ? His good- 
ness is the guaranty of his fidelity ; he can not f&U. us. 

2. Faithfulness to us in our faults is a certain sign of fidelity 
in a friend. You may depend upon that man who will tell 
you of your faults in a kind and considerate manner. Fawn- 
ing hypocrites, insidious flatterers, are the swe^ings and ofial 
of friendship. They are but the parasites upon that noble tree. 
But true fiiends put enough trust in you to tell you openly of 
your faults. Give me for a Mend the man who will speak 
honestly of me before my face ; who will not tell first one 
neighbor, and then another, but who will come straight to my 
house, and say, " Sir, I feel there is such-and-such a thing in 
you, which, as my brother, I must tell you of." That man is a 
true fiiend ; he has proved himself to be so ; for we never get 
any praise for telling people of their faults ; we rather hazard 
their dislike ; a man will sometimes thank you for it, but he 
does not often like you any the better. Praise is a thing we 
all love. I met with a man the other day who said he was 
impei-vious to flattery ; I was walking with him at the time, 
and turning round i-ather sharply, I said, "At any rate, sir, you 
seem to have a high gift in flattering yourself, for you are 
1-eally doing so, in saying you are impervious to flattery." 
" You can not flatter me," he said. I replied, " I can, if I 
like to try ; and perhaps may do so before the day is out." I 
found I could not flatter him directly, so I began by saying 
what a fine child that was of his ; and he drank it in as a 
precious draught; and when I praised this thing and that 
thing belonging to him, I could see that he was very easily 
flattered ; not directly, but indirectly. We are all pervious 
to flattery ; we like the soothing cordial, only it must not be 
labeled flattery ; for we have a religious abhorrence of flattery 
if it be so called^ call it by any other name, and we drink it 
in, even as the ox drinketh in water. Now, child of God, has 
Christ ever flattered you ? Has he not told you of your faults 
right truly ? Has he not pricked your conscience even upon 
what you thought to ^oss over — ^your little secret sins ? Has 
he not provoked conscience to thunder in your ears notes of 
terror, because of your misdeeds ? Well, then, you may trust 
him, for he shows that faithfulness which renders a man right 



A FAITHFUL FBUEND. 17 

trustworthy. Thn« I have pointed out to you that there are 
reasons in himself for which we may trust him. 

3. In the next place, there are some things in his friend- 
ship which render us sure of not being deceived^ when we 
put our confidence in him. True friendship must not be of 
hasty growth. As quaint old Master Fuller says. " Let friend- 
ship creep gently to a height ; if it rush to it, it may soon run 
itself out of breath.*' It is even so. I think it was Joanna 
BaiUie said, 

" Friendship is no plant of hasty growth. 
Though planted in esteem's deep fixed soil, 
The gradoal coltore of kind intercourso 
Must bring It to perfection." 

In vain thou trustest the gourd over thy head, O Jonah ; it 
will not be of much use to thee ; it came up in a night, it may 
wither in a night. It is the strong stiff oak, of ages' growth, 
which shall abide the tempest ; which shall alike put out its 
wings to shield thee from the sun, and shall aflerward find 
thee a hovel in its heart, if necessary, in its grey old age, when 
its branches tremble in the blast. Friendship is true when it 
begins ; but we must have a man's fi-iendship long before we 
can say of him, that he will stick closer than a brother. And 
how long has Christ loved you? That you can not tell. 
When the ages were not bom he loved you ; when this world 
was an in&nt, wrapped in the swaddling clothes of mist, he 
loved you; when the old pyramids had not begun to be 
builded, his heart was set upon yon ; and ever since you have 
been born he has had a strong affection for you. Ho looked 
on you in your cradle, and he loved you then ; he was affianced 
to you when you were an infant of a span long, and he has 
loved you ever since. Some of you I see with gray hairs, 
some with heads all bald with age ; he has loved you up till 
now, and will he now fi>rsake you ? O I no, his friendship is 
so old that it must last ; it has been matured by so many tem- 
pests, it has been rooted by so many winds of trouble, that it 
can not but endure ; it must stand. Even as the granite peak 
of the mountain shall not be melted, because, unlike the snow, 
it has braved the blast, and borne the heat of the burning sun ; 



18 A FAITHFUL FBISND. 

it has stood out always, catching in its &ce every blow from 
the face of nature, and yet been unmoved and uninjured. It 
shall last, for it has lasted. But when the elements shall melt, 
and in a stream of dissolving fire shall run away, then shall 
Christ's friendship still exbt, for it is of older growth than 
they. He must be ''a friend that sticketh closer than a 
brother ;" for his friendsliip is a hoary friendship— hoary as' 
his own head, of which it is s^d, ^' His head and his hair are 
white like snow, as white as wool." 

4. But note, further, the friendship which lasts does not 
take its rise in the chambers of mirths nor is it fed and fat- 
tened there. Young lady, you speak of a dear friend whom 
you acquired last night in a ball-room. Do not, I beseech 
you, misuse the word ; he is not a friend if he was acquired 
merely there ; friends are better things than those which grow 
in the hot-house of pleasure. Friendship is a more lasting 
plant than those. You have a friend, have you ? Yes ; and 
he keeps a pair of horses, and has a good establishment. Ah ! 
but your best way to prove your fiiend is to know that he will 
be your friend when you have not so much as a mean cottage ; 
and when, houseless and without clothing, you are driven to 
beg your bread. Thus you would make true proof of a Mend. 
Give me a friend who was bom in the winter time, whose 
cradle was rocked in the storm; he will last. Our fair 
weather friends shall flee away firom us. I had rather have a 
rolnn for a friend than a swallow ; for a swallow abides with 
ns only in the summer time, but a robin cometh to us in the 
winter. Those are tight friends that will come the nearest to 
ns when we are in the most distress ; but those are not friends 
who speed themselves away when ill times come. Believer, 
hast thou reason to fear that Christ will leave you now ? Has 
he not been with you in the house of mourning ? You found 
your friend where men find pearls, " in caverns deep, where 
darkness dwells ;" you found Jesus in your hour of trouble. 
It was on the bed of sickness that you first learned the value 
of his name ; it was in the hour of mental anguish that you 
first did lay hold of the hem of his garment ; and since then, 
your nearest and sweetest intercourse has been held with him 
in the hours of darkness. Well, then, such a friend, proved in 



A FAITHFUL FBI^^D. 19 

tbe hoase of sorrow — a friend who gave his heart's blood for 
you, and let his soul run out in one great river of gore — such 
a friend never can and never will forsake you ; he sticketh 
closer than a brother. 

6. Again, aj^iend who is acquired by folly is never a last- 
ing friend. Do a foolish thing, and make a man your friend ; 
'tis but a confederacy in vice, and you will soon discover that 
his friendi^p is worthless; the friendships you acquire by 
doing wrong, you had better be without. O! how many 
silly fHendships there are springing up, the mere fruit of a 
sentimentalism, having no root whatever, but like the plant 
of which our Saviour tells us, " It sprang up because it had no 
depth of earth." Jesus Christ's friendship is not like that ; 
there is no ingredient of folly in it ; he loves us discreetly, not 
winking or conniving at our follies, but instilling into us his 
wisdom. His love is wise ; he hath chosen us according to the 
counsel of his wisdom ; not blindly and rashly, but with all 
judgment and prudence. 

Under this head I may likewise observe, that the friends/dp 
of ignorance is not a very desirable one. I desire no man to 
caM himself my friend, if he doth not know me. Let him 
love me in proportion to his knowledge of me. If he loves 
me for the little he knows, when he knoweth more he may 
east me aside. " That man," says one, " seems to be a very 
amiable man." ** I am sure I can love him," says another, as 
he scans his features. Ay, but do not write " friend" yet ; 
wait a wee bit, until you know more of him ; just see him, 
examine him, try him, t0st him, and not till then enter him on 
the sacred list of friends. Be friendly to all, but make none 
your friends until they know you, and you know them. Many 
a friendship bom in the darkness of ignorance, hath died sud- 
denly in the light of a better acquaintance with each other. 
You supposed men to be different from what they were, and 
when you discovered their real character yoa disregarded 
them. I remember one saying to me, " I have great affection 
for you, sir," and he mentioned a certain reason, I replied, 
" My dear fellow, your reason is absolutely false ; the very 
thing you love me for, I am not, and hope I never shall be." 
And so I said, " I really can not accept your friendship, if ft 



20 A FAITHFUL FRIHNB. 

be founded upon a misunderstanding of what I may have 
said." But our Lord Jesus never can forsake those whom 
once he loves, because he can discover nothing in us worse 
than he knew, for he knew all about us beforehand. He saw 
our leprosy, and yet he loved us ; he knew our deceitfulness 
and unbelief, and yet he did press us to his bosom ; he knew 
what poor fools we were, and yet he said he would never 
leave us nor forsake us. He knew that we should rebel 
against him and despise his counsel otlen times ; he knew that 
even when we loved him our love would be cold and languid ; 
but he loved for his own sake. Surely, then, he will stick 
closer than a brother. 

6. Yet again J friendship and love^ to he real^ must not lie 
in wordsy but in deeds. The friendship of bare compliment 
is the fashion of this age, because this age is the age of deo^t. 
The world is the great house of sham. Go where you may in 
London, sham is staring you in the face ; there are very few 
real things to be discovered. I allude not merely to tricks in 
business, adulterations in food, and such like* Deception is 
' not confined to the tradesman's shop. It prevails throughout 
society ; the sanctuary is not exempt. The preacher adopts a 
sham voice. You hardly ever hear a man speak in the pulpit 
in the same way he would epeak in the parlor. Why, I hear 
my brethren, sometimes, when they are at tea or dinner, speak 
in a very comfortable decent sort of English voice, but when ^ 
they get into their pulpits they adbpt a sanctimonious tone, 
and till their mouths with inflated utterance, or else whine 
most pitifully. They degrade the pulpit by pretending to 
honor it ; speaking in a voice which Grod never intended any 
mortal to have. This is the great house of sham ; and such 
little things show which way the wind blows. You leave your 
^rd at a friend's house; that is an act of friendship — ^the 
card ! I wonder whether, if he were hard up for cash, you 
would leave your banker's book I You write " My dear sir," 
"Yours very truly;" it is a sham; you do not mean it. 
" Dear !" that is a sacred word ; it ought to be used to none 
but those you regard with affection ; but we tolerate false- 
hoods now, as if they wei*e truths ; and we call them courte- 
sies. Couitesies they may be ; but untruths they are in many 



▲ FATTHPUL PSISN]». 21 

oases. Now, Christ's love lieth Dot in words, but in deeds. 
He saith not, >^ My dear people ;" but ho let his heart out, and 
we could see what that was. He doth not come to us, and 
say, "Dearly beloved" simply; but he hangs upon the cross, 
and there we read " Dearly beloved" in red letters. He does 
not come to us with the kisses of his lips first — ^he giveth us 
blessings with both his hands ; he giveth himself /<>r us, and 
then he giveth himself to us. Trust no complimentary friend ; 
rely upon the man who giveth you real tokens worth your 
having, who does for you deeds to show the truthfulness of 
his heart. Such a friend — and such is Jesus — " sticketh closer 
than a brother." 

7. Once more, and I shall not weary you, I trust. A pur- 
ehaaed friend wiU never last long. Give to a man nineteen 
times, and deny him the twentieth, and he shall hate you ; for 
bis love sprang only from your gifts. The love which I could 
buy for gold I would sell for dross ; the friendship that I could 
buy for pearls I would dispense with for pebbles ; it wei*e of 
no value, and therefore the sooner lost the better. But O ! 
believer, Christ's love was unpurchased love. Thou brought- 
est him no present. Jacob said, when his sons went to 
Egypt, " Take the man a present, a little oil, a little balm, a 
few nuts and almonds;" but you took Christ no presents. 
When you came to him you said, 

" Nothing in my hands I bring, 
Simp^ to thy cross I ding." 

You did not even promise that you would love him ; for you 
had such a &ithless heart, you durst not say so. You asked 
him to make you love him ; that was the most you could do. 
He loved you for nothing at all — simply because he would 
love you. Well, that love which so lived on nothing but its 
own resources, will not starve through the scantiness of your 
returns ; the love which grew in such a rocky heart as this, 
will not die for want of soil. That love which sprang up in 
the barren desert, in your unirrigated soul, will never, never 
die for want of moisture : it must live, it can not expire. 
Jesus must be " a friend that sticketh closer than a brother." 

8. Shall I stay to urge more reasons ? I may but mention 
one other, namely, this — that there can not^ by any possibility^ 



22 A VAITBFUL FSIflND. 

arise any cause which could make Christ lam tis less. Yo« 
say, how is this? One man loves his firiend, bat he on a sad* 
den grows rich, and now he says, 1 am a greater man thim I 
used to be, I foi^et my old acquaintances. But Christ caa 
grow no richer ; he is as lich as he can be, infinitely so. He 
loves you now ; then it can not be posdble that he will by 
reason of an increase in his own personal glory forsake you, 
for everlasting glories now crown his head : he can never be 
more glorious and great, and th^efore he will love yon stilL 
Sometimes, on the other hand, one Mend grows poorer, and 
then the other forsakes him ; but you never can grow poorer 
than you are, for you are ^^ a poor sinner and nothing at aU** 
now ; you have nothing of your own ; all you have is bor- 
rowed, all given you by him. He can not love you, then, less, 
because you grow poorer ; for poverty that haUi nothing is at 
least as poor as it can be, and can never ank lower in thid 
scale. Christ, therefore, must love thee for all thy nakedness 
and all thy poverty. 

" But I may prove sinful," sayest thou. Yes, but thou canst 
not be more so than he foreknew thou wouldst be ; aod yet 
he loved thee with the foreknowledge of i^l thy sins. Sur^y, 
then, when it happens it will occasion no surprise to him ; he 
knew it all beforehand, and he can not swerve from his love ; 
no circumstance can possibly arise that ever wOl divide the 
Saviour from his love to his people, and«the saint from his love 
to his Saviour. He is ^^ a friend that sticketh closer than a 
brother." 

III. Now, then, an infbebnce to be derived fbom this* 
Lavater says, " The qualities of your friends will be those of 
your enemies : cold Mends, cold enemies, half friends, half ene- 
mies ; fervid enemies, warm friends." Bjiowing this to be a 
truth, I have often congratulated myself when my enemies 
have spoken fiercely against me. Well, I have thought, " My 
friends love me hard and fiist ; let my enemies be as hot as 
they please ; it only indicates that the Mends are proportion- 
ately firm in affection. Then we draw this inference, that if 
Christ sticks close, and he is our friend, then our enemies will 
stick close, and never leave us till we die. O, Christian, be- 
cause Christ sticks close, the devil w\ll stick close too : he will 



A FATTflFUL FSUND. 2Z 

be at you and with you; the dog of hell will never cease his 
howlings, till you reach the other side of Jordan ; no place in 
this world is out of bow-shot of that great enemy ; till you 
have crossed the stream his arrows can reach you, and they 
will. If Christ gave himself for you, the devil will do all he 
can to destroy you ; if Christ has been long-suffering to you, 
Satan will be persevering, in hopes that Christ may forget 
you ; he will strive after you, and strive until he shall see you 
safely landed in heaven. But be not disappointed : the louder 
Satan roars, the more proof you shall have of Christ's love. 
** Give me," said old Rutherford, " give me a roaring devil 
rather than a sleeping one ; for sleeping devils make me slum- 
ber, but roaring ones provoke me to run to my Master." 1 
be glad, then, if the world rant at thee, if thy foes attack thee 
fiercely. Christ is just as full of love to thee as they are of 
hatred. Therefore, 

'' Be firm and strong ; 
Be grace thy shield and Christ thy song." 

And now I have a question to ask : that question I ask of 
every man and every woman in this place, and of every child 
too — Is Jesus Christ your friend ? Have you a friend at court 
— at heaven's court ? Is the judge of quick and dead your 
friend ? Can you say that you love him, and has he ever re- 
vealed himself in the way of love to you ? Dear hearer, do 
not answer that question for thy neighbor ; answer it for thy- 
self. Peer or peasant, rich or poor, learned or illiterate, this 
question is for eadi of you ; therefore, ask it : Is Christ my 
friend ? Did you ever consider that question ? Have you 
ever asked it ? O I to be able to say " Christ is my friend," 
is one of the sweetest things in the world. A man who had 
lived much in sin, one day casually entered a place of worship. 
Before the sermon, this hymn was sung — 

" Jesus, lover erf my soul." 

The next day the man was met by an acquaintance who asked 
him how he liked the sermon. Said he, " I do not know, but 
there were two or three words that took such a hold of me 
that I did not know what to do with myself. The minister 



24 A FAITHFUL FRIBND. * 

read that hymn, ' Jesns, lover of my soul.' Ah !" said he, 
though he was by no means a religious man, " to be able to 
say that, I would give up all I have got ! But do you think,'* 
he asked " that Jesus ever will be the lover of such a man 
as I am ? ' Jesus, lover of my soul !' O ! could I say it." 
And then he buried his head in his hands and wept. I have 
every reason to fear that he went back to his sin, and was the 
same afterwards as before. But, you see, he had conscience 
enough to let him know how valuable it was to have Christ 
for his lover and his friend. Ah ! rich man, thou hast many 
friends. There be some here who have learned the &ith- 
lessness of friends ; there be some here who have toiled for 
their country's good, and deserve a meed of honor at their 
country's hands, who, for one mistake — or what, perhaps, was 
a mistake — have been neglected by too many who once ap- 
peared to be their most trusty adherents. O ! put no confi- 
dence, ye great men and ye rich, in the adherence of your 
friends. David said in his haste, " All men are liars ;" you 
may one day have to say it at your leisure. And O I ye kind 
and affectionate hearts, who are not rich in wealth, but who 
are rich in love — and that is the world's best wealth — put this 
golden coin among your silver ones, and it will sanctify them 
all. Get Christ's love shed abroad in your hearts, and your 
mother's love, your daughter's love, your husband's love, your 
wife's love, will become more sweet than ever. The love of 
Christ casts not out the love of relatives, but it sanctifies our 
loves, and makes them sweeter far. Remember, dear hearer, 
the love of men and women is very sweet ; but all must pass 
away ; and what will you do, if you have no wealth but the 
wealth that fadeth, and no love but the love which dies, when 
death shall come ? O ! to have the love of Christ ! You 
can take that across the river of death with you ; you can wear 
it as your bracelet in heaven, and set it up as a seal upon your 
hand ; for his love is " strong as death and mightier than the 
grave." Good old Bishop Beveridge, I think it was, when 
dying, did not know .his best friends. Said one, " Bishop 
Beveridge, do you know me ?" Said he, " Who are you ?" 
and when the name was mentioned, he said, " No." " But 
don't you know your wife. Bishop ?" " What is her name ?" 



A FATTHPUL FBISND. 26 

said he. Said she, " I am your wife." " I did not know I 
had got one," said he. Poor old man 1 his faculties all failed 
him. At last one stooped down and whispered, "Do you 
know the Lord Jesus Christ ?" " Yes," said he, making an 
effort to speak, " I have known him these forty years, and I 
never can forget him." It is marvelous how memory will 
hold the place with Jesus, when it will with no one else ; and 
it is equally marvelous,^ that, 

" When all created things are dry, 
Christ's fbllness is the same." 

My dear hearers, do think of this matter. O that you 
might get Christ for your friend ; he will never be your friend 
while you are self-righteous; he will never be your friend 
while you live in sin. But do you believe yourselves guilty ? 
Do you desire to leave off sin ? Do you want to be saved ? 
Do you desire to be renewed ? Then let me tell you, my 
Master loves you! Poor, weak, and helpless worms, my 
. Master's heart is full of love to you ; his eyes at this moment 
are looking down with pity on you. " O I Jerusalem, Jerusa- 
lem, Jerusalem !" He now bids me tell you that he died for 
all of you who confess yourselves to be sinners, and feel it. 
He bids me say to you, " Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, 
and you shall be saved." He tells me to proclaim salvation 
full and free ; full, needing nothing of yours to help it ; free, 
needing nothing of yours to buy it. 

" Come, ye thh^ty, come and w^come ; 

Good's free bounty glorify : 
True belief and true repentance, 

Every grace that brings us nigh — 
Without money, 
Come to Jesus Christ, and buy." 

There is nothing I feel that I fail so much in as addressing sin- 
ners. O ! I wish I could cry my heart out, and preach my 
heart out, to you and at you. 

" Dear Saviour, draw reluctant hearts ; 
To thee let sinners fly, 
And take the bliss thy love imparts ; 
And drink, and never die." 
3 



26 A FAITHFUL FBIEND. 

Farewell, with this one thought — we shall never all of us 
meet together here again. It is a very solemn thoaght, but 
according to the course of nature and the number of deaths, 
if all of you were willing to come here next Sabbath mom- 
ing, it is not at all likely that all of you would be alive ; one 
out of this congregation will be sure to have gone the way of 
all flesh. Farewell, thou that are appointed to death ; I know 
not where thou art — yon strong man, or yon tender maiden 
with the hectic flush of consumption on her cheek. I know 
not who is appointed to death ; but I do now most solemnly 
take my farewell of such an one. Farewell, poor soul ; and is 
it farewell for ever ? Shall we meet in the laud of the here- 
after, in the home of the blessed ; or do I bid you &rewell 
now for ever ? I do solemnly bid farewell to you for ever, if 
you live and die without Christ. But I can not bear that 
dreary thought ; and I therefore say, poor sinner I stop and 
consider — consider thy ways, and now " turn ye, turn ye, why 
will ye die ?" " Why will ye die /" " Why will ye die ?'» 
*' Why wiU ye die ?" Ah ! ye can not, answer that question. 
May God help you to answer it in a better fashion, by saying, 
" Here, Lord I 

Just as I am, without one plea, 
But that thy blood was shed for me, 
Son of God I come to thee." 

I trust my soul in thy kind hands." The Lord bless you all ; 
for Christ's sake I Amen. 



SERMON II. 

THE LEAFLESS TREE. 

" But yet in it shall be a tenth, and it shall return, and it shall be eaten; 
as a teil tree, and as an oak, whose substance is in them, when they cast their 
leaves ; so the holy seed shall be the substance thereof — ^Isaiah, vi 13. 

Our first business to-night will be briefly to explain the 
metaphor employed in the text. The prophet was told that 
despite ail the remonstrances he was instructed to deliver, and 
notwithstanding the eloquent earnestness of his lips, which 
had been just touched by a live coal from off the altar, still the 
people of Israel would persevere in their sins, and would there- 
fore be certainly destroyed. He asked the question, " Lord, 
how long ?" that is. How long will the people be thus impen- 
itent ? How long will thy sore judgment thus continue ? and 
he was informed that God would waste and destroy the cities 
and their inhabitants, till the land should be utterly desolate. 
Then it was added, for his comfort, " Yet in it shall be a 
tenth." And so it happened ; for when " Nebuchadnezzar car- 
ried away all Jerusalem," the historian gives this reservation — 
" none remained save the poorer sort of the people of the land.'* 
They were left by the captain of the guard, "to be vine-dress- 
ers and husbandmen." Thus in it there was a tenth; this 
small remnant of the people, however, was to be nearly de- 
stroyed too. " It shall return and shall be eaten ;" the sense 
is, eaten up or consumed. The poor creatures left in the land, 
many of them fled into Egypt at the time of the conspiracy of 
Ishmael (not Ishmael, the son of Hagar, but an unworthy 
member of the royal family of Judah), and there in Egypt 
most of them were cut off and perished. " But," says God, 
" although this tenth only shall be preserved, and then even 
this small part shall be subjected to many perils, yet Israel 



28 THE LEAFLESS TEBE. 

shall not be destroyed, for it shall be as a terebinth tree and as 
an oak ;" their " substance is in them, when they cast their 
leaves," and so lose their verdure and their beauty ; thus, in 
like manner, a holy seed, a chosen remnant, shall still be the 
substance of the children of Israel, when the fruitful land is 
stripped of its foliage, and that feJr garden of earth is barren 
as the desert. 

The figure is taken, first of all, Irom the terebinth or tur- 
pentine tree — here translated the teil tree. That tree is an 
evergreen, with this exception, that in very severe and in- 
clement weather it loses its leaves ; but even then the tere- 
binth tree is not dead. And so of the oak ; it loses its leaves 
every year, of course, but even then it is not dead. " So," 
says God, " you have seen the tree in winter, standing naked 
and bare, without any sign of life, its roots buried in the hard 
and frozen soil, and its naked branches exposed to every blast, 
without a bloom or a bud ; yet the substance is in the tree 
when the leaves are gone. It is still alive, and it shall, by and 
by, in due season, bud and bloom ; so," says he, " Nebuchad- 
nezzar shall cut off all the leaves of the tree of Israel — take 
away the inhabitants, only a tenth shall be Jeft, and they shall 
well nigh be eaten up ; still the church of God and the Israel 
of God never shall be destroyed ; they shall be like the tere- 
binth tree and the oak, whose substance is in them, when they 
cast their leaves; so the holy seed shall be the substance 
thereof" 

I hope I have made the meaning of the passage as plain as 
words can make it. Now, then, for the application — fii-st, to 
the Jews ; secondly, to the Churchy thirdly, to each believer, 

I. First, TO THE Jews. 

What a history is the history of the Jew ! He has an- 
tiquity stamped upon his forehead. His is a lineage more 
noble than that of any knights or even kings of this our island, 
for he can trace his pedigree back to the very loins of Abra- 
ham, and through him to that patriarch who entered into the 
ark, and thence up to Adam himself. Our history is hidden in 
gloom and darkness ; but theirs, with certainty, may be read 
from the first moment even down till now. And what a 
checkered history has been the histoiy of the Jewish nation I 



THB LSAFLSSS TBEB. 29 

Nebuchadnezzar seemed to have swept them all away with 
the huge broom of destruction ; the tenth left was again given 
over to the slaughter ; and one would have thought we should 
have heard no more of Israel ; but in a little time they rose, 
phoenix-like, from their ashes. A second temple was builded, 
and the nation became strong once more, and though often 
swept with desolations in the mean time, yet it did not abide, 
and the scepter did not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver 
from between his feet, until Shiloh came. And, since then, 
how huge have been the waves that }^ve rushed over the Jew- 
ish race ! The Roman emperor razed the city to the ground, 
and left not a vestige standing ; another emperor changed the 
name of Jerusalem into that of Eliah, and forbade a Jew to go 
within some miles of it, so that he might not even look upon 
his beloved city. It was plowed and left desolate. But is the 
Jew conquered ? Is he a subjugated man ? Is his country 
seized ? No ; he is still one of earth's nobles — distressed, in- 
sulted, spit upon ; still it is written, " To the Jew first, and 
afterward to the Gentile." He claims a high dignity above 
us, and he has a history to come which will be greater and 
more splendid than the history of any nation that has yet ex- 
isted. If we read the Scriptures aright, the Jews have a great 
deal to do with this world's history. They shall be gathered 
in ; Messiah shall come, the Messiah they are looking for — the 
same Messiah who came once shall come again — shall come as 
they expected him to come the first time. They then thought 
he would come a prince to reign over them, and so he will 
when Jie comes again. He will come to be king of the Jews, 
and to reign over his people most gloriously ; for when he 
comes, Jew and Gentile will have equal privileges, though 
there shall yet be some distinction afforded to that royal fam- 
ily from whose loins Jesus came ; for he shall fiit upon the 
throne of his Mher David, and unto him shall be gathered all 
nations. O ! 

" Ye chosen seed of Israers race, 
A remnant weak and small," 

ye may, indeed, 

" Hall him who saves jou by his grace, 
And crown him Lord of all ;" 



90 TBB LEAFLESS TBEB. 

your church shall never die, and your race shall never become 
extinct. The Lord hath said it. " The race of Abraham shall 
endure for ever, and his seed as many generations." 

But why is it that the Jewish race is preserved ? We have 
our answer in the text: "The holy seed is the substance 
thereof." There is something within a tree mysterious, hid- 
den, and unknown, which preserves life in it when every thing 
outward tends to kill it. So in the Jewish race there is a se- 
cret element which keeps it alive. We know what it is : it is 
the "remnant according^ to the election of grace:" in the 
worst of ages there has neVer been a day so black but there 
was a Hebrew found to hold the lamp of God. There has 
always been found a Jew who loved Jesus ; and though the 
race now despise the great Redeemer, yet there are not a few 
of the Hebrew race who still love Jesus, the Saviour of the 
uncircumcised, and bow before him. It is these few, this 
holy seed, that are the substance of the nation ;• and for their 
sake, through their prayers, because of God's love to them, he 
still says of Israel to all natipns, " Touch not these mine an- 
ointed, do my prophets no harm. These are the descendants 
of Abraham, my friend. I hatve sworn, and will not repent ; 
I will show kindness unto them for their father's sake, and for 
the sake of the remnant I have chosen." 

Let us think a little more of the Jews than we have been 
wont ; let us pray oftener for them. " Pray for the peace of 
Jerusalem ; they shall prosper that love her." As truly as any 
great thing is done in this world for Christ's kingdom, the 
Jews will have more to do with it than any of us have 
dreamed. So much for the first point. The Jewish nation is 
like " a terebinth tree, and as an oak, whose substance is in 
them, when they cast their leaves ; so the holy seed shall be 
the' substance thereof." 

II. And now, secondly, the Chubch op Cheist, whereof 
the Jewish people are but a dim shadow, and an emblem. 

The church has had its trials ; trials from without and trials 
within. It has had days of blood-red persecution, and of fiery 
trial ; it has had times of sad apostacy, when an evil heart of 
unbelief and departing from the living God has broken out, 
and a root of bitterness springing up has troubled many, anc* 



TBS LEAPLXSS TBEB. 81 

thereby they have been defiled. Yet, blessed he God, through 
all the winters of the church she still lived, and she gives signs 
now of a sweeter spring-tide, a fresher greenness and a health- 
ier condition than she has shown before for many a day. Why 
is it that the church is still preserved, when she looks so dead ? 
For this reason : that there is in the midst of her — though 
many are hypocrites and impostors — a "chosen seed," who 
are " the substance thereof." You might have looked back a 
hundred years ago upon the professing church of Christ in this 
land, and what a sad spectacle it would have exhibited ! In 
the Church of England there was mere formality ; in the In- 
dependent and Baptist denominations there was truth, but it 
was dead, cold, lifeless truth. Ministers dreamed on in their 
pulpits, and hearers snored in their pews ; infidelity was 
triumphant ; the house of God was neglected and desecrated. 
The church was like a tree that had lost its leaves : it was in 
a wintry state. But did it die ? No ; there was a holy seed 
within it. Six young men were expelled from Oxford for 
praying, reading the Bible, and. talking to poor people about 
Christ ; and these six young men, with many others whom the 
Lord had hidden by fifties in the caves of the earth, secret and 
unknown — ^these young men, leaders of a glorious revival, came 
out, and though ridiculed and laughed at as Methodists, they 
brought forth a great and glorious revival, almost equaling 
the commencement of the gospel triumphs under Paul and the 
apostles, and very little inferior to the great Reformation of 
Luther, of Calvin, and Zwingle. And just now the church is 
to a great degree in a barren and lifeless state. But will she 
therefore die ? You say that true doctrine is scarce, that zeal 
is rare, that there is little life and energy in the pulpit and true 
devotion in the pew, while fonnality and hypociisy stalk over 
us, and we sleep in our cradles. But will the church die ? 
Ko ; she is like a teil tree and an oak ; her substance is in her 
when she has lost her leaves ; there is a holy seed in her still 
that is the substance thereof. Where these are we know not ; 
some, I doubt not, are here in this church — some, I hope, are 
to be found in every church of professing Christians : and woe 
worth the day to the church that loses her holy seed ; for she 
must die, like the oak blasted by the lightning, whose heart is 



32 THB LEAFLESS TBBE. 

scorched out of it — broken down, because it has no substance 
in it. 

Let me now draw your attention, as a church connected 
with this place, to this point — that the holy seed is the sub- 
stance of the church. A great many of you might be com- 
pared to the bark of the tree ; some of you are like the big 
limbs ; others are like pieces of the trunk. Well, we should 
be very sorry to lose any of you ; but we could afford to do 
so without any serious damage to the life of the tree. Yet 
there are some here — God knoweth who they are — who are 
the substance of the tree. By the word " substance" is meant 
the life, the inward principle. The inward principle is in the 
tree, when it has lost its leaves. Now, God discerns some 
men in this church, I doubt not, who are toward us like the 
inward principle of the oak ; they are the substance of the 
church. I would feign hope that all the members of the 
church in some degree contribute to the substance ; but I can 
not think so. I am obliged to say I doubt it ; because when 
one hath fallen and anothet, it makes us remember that a 
church hath much in it that is not life. There be some 
branches on the vine that be cut off, because they do not draw 
sap from the heart of it, they are only branches bound on by 
profession, pretended graftings that have never struck root 
into the parent stock, and that must be cut off, and hewn 
down, and cast into the fire. But there is a holy seed in the 
church that is the substance of it. 

Please to note here, that the life of a tree is not determined 
by the shape of the branches, nor by the way it grows, but it 
is the substance. The shape of a church is not its life. In one 
place I see a church formed in an Episcopalian shape ; in an- 
other place I see one formed in a Presbyterian shape ; then, 
again, I see one, like ours, formed on an Independent princi- 
ple. Here I see one with sixteen ounces to the pound of doc- 
trine; there I see one with eight, and some with very little clear 
doctrine at all. And yet I find life in all the churches, in some 
degree — some good men in all of them. How do I account 
for this ? Why, just in this way — that the oak may be alive, 
whatever its shape, if it has got the substance. If there be 
but a holy seed in the church, the church will live ; and it is 



THE LEAFLESS TBEE. 33 

astonishing how the church will live under a thousand errors, 
if there be but the vital principle in it. You will find good 
men among the denominations that you can not receive as 
being sound in faith. You say, " What ! can any good thing 
come out of Nazareth ?" and you go through, and find that 
there are even in them some true Nazarites of the right order. 
The very best of men found in the worst of churches ! A 
church lives not because of its rubrics, and its canons, and its 
articles ; it lives because of the holy seed that is in it as the 
substance. No church can die while it has a holy seed in it, 
and no church can live that has not the holy seed, for " the 
holy seed is the substance thereof." 

Observe, again, that the substance of the oak is a hidden 
thing ; you can not see it. When the oak or the terebinth is 
standing destitute of leaves, you know that life is there some- 
where. But you can not see it. And very likely you can not 
and do not know the men that are the holy seed, the substance 
of the church. Perhaps you imagine the substance of the 
church lies in the pulpit. Na^, friend ! Let us pray to God 
that such of us as are in the pulpit may be a part of that sub- 
stance ; but much of the substance of the church lies where 
you don't know any thing of it. There is a mine near Ply- 
mouth, where the men who work in it, two hundred and fifty 
feet below the surface, have a little shelf for their Bibles and 
hymn-books, and a little place where every morning, when 
they go down in the black darkness, they bow before God, 
and praise him whose tender mercies are over all his works. 
You never heard of these miners, perhaps, and do not know 
of them ; but perhaps some of them are the very substance of 
the church. There sits Mr. Somebody in that pew ; O ! what 
a support he is to the church. Yes, in money matters, per- 
liaps ; but do you know, there is poor old Mrs. Nobody in the 
aisle that is most likely a greater pillar to the church than he, 
for she is a holier Christian, one whd**lives nearer to her God 
and serves him better, and she is " the substance thereof." 
Ah I that old woman in the garret who is often in prayer ; 
that old man on his bed who spends days and nights in sup- 
plication ; such people as these are the substance of the church. 
O ! you may take a\^'ay your prelates, your orators, and the 



34 THB LSAFLBSS TRBS. 

best and greatest of those who stand among earth's mighty 
men, and their place could be supplied ; but take away our 
intercessors ; take away the men and women that breathe out 
prayer by night and day, and like the priests of old offer the 
morning and evening lamb as a perpetual sacrifice, and you 
kill the church at once. What are the ministers ? They are 
but the arms of the church, and the lips of it. A man may be 
both dumb and armless, and yet liv^. But these, the heavenly 
seed, the chosen men and women who live near their God, and 
serve him with sacred fervent piety — these are the heart of 
the church ; we can not do without them. If we lose them we 
must die. " The holy seed is the substance thereof." 

Then, my hearer, thou art a church member. Let me ask 
thee — art thou one of the holy seed ? Hast thou been begot- 
ten again to a lively hope ? Has God made thee holy by the 
sanctifying influence of his Spirit, and by the justifying righte- 
ousness of Christ, and by the application to thy conscience of 
the blood of Jesus ? If so, then thou art the substance of the 
church. They may pasa by thee and not notice thee, for thou 
art little ; but the substance is little ; the life-germ within the 
grain of barley is too small for us, perhaps, to detect ; the life 
within the egg is almost an animalcula — you can scarcely see 
it ; and so the life of the church is among the little ones, 
where we can scarcely find it oiit. Rejoice, if you are much 
in prayer ; you are the life of the church. But you, O you 
proud man, pull down your grand thoughts of yourself; you 
may give to the church, you may speak for the churchy and 
act for the church, but unless you are a holy seed you are not 
the substance thereof, and it is the substance which is in reality 
of the greatest value. 

But here let me say one thing before I leave this point. 
Some of you will say, " How is it that good men are the 
means of preserving the visible church ?*' I answer, the holy 
seed doth this, because it derives its life from Christ. If the 
holy seed had to preserve the church by its own purity and 
its own strength, the church would go to ruin to-morrow ; but 
it is because these holy ones draw fresh life from Christ con- 
tinually that they are able to be, as it were, the salvation of 
the body, and by their influence, di*3ct and indirect, shed life 



THE LEAFLBSS TRSS. 35 

over the whole visible church. The prayers of those living 
ones in Zion bring down many a blessing upon us ; the groans 
and cries of these earnest intercessors prevail with heaven, 
and bring down very argosies of mercy from the gates of par- 
adise. And besides, their holy example tends to check us 
and preserve us in purity ; they walk among us like God's 
own favored ones, wrapped in white, reflecting his image 
wherever they go, and tending, under God, to the sanctifying 
of believers, not through their vaunting any self-righteousness, 
but by stirring up believers to do more for Christ, and to be 
more like him. "The holy seed shall be the substance 
thereof." 

III. And now I come to the third point. This is true of 
EVERY INDIVIDUAL BELIEVER : his substanco is in him when 
he has lost his leaves. 

The Arminian says that when a Christian loses his leaves he 
is dead. " No," says God's Word, " he is not ; he may look 
as if he ^ere dead, and not have so much as here and there a 
leaf upon the topmost bough ; but he is not dead. Their 
substance is in them even when they lose their leaves." 

By losing their leaves allow me to understand two things. 
Christian men lose their leaves when they lose their comforts, 
when they lose the sensible enjoyment of their Master's pres- 
ence, and when their full assurance is turned into doubting. 
You have had many such a time as that, have you not ? Ah I 
you were one day in such a state of joy, that you said you 

could 

" Sit and sing yoiirself away 
To everlasting bliss." 

But a wintry state came, and your joy all departed, and 
you stood like a bare tree, after the wind had swept it in the 
time of winter, with just perhaps one sere leaf hanging by a 
thread on the topmost bough. But you were not dead then ; 
no, your substance was in you, when you had lost your leaves. 
You could not see that substance, and good reason why, be- 
cause your life was hid with Christ in God ; you saw not your 
signs, but you had your substance still, though you could not 
discover it. There were no heavings of faith, but faith was 
there ; there w«ire no lookings out of hope, but though hope's 



86 THE LEAFLESS TREE. 

» 

eyelids were shut, the eyes were there, to be opened after- 
wards ; there was no lifting, perhaps, of the hand of ardent 
prayer, but the hands and arms were there, though they hung 
powerless by the side. God said, afterwards, "Strengthen 
the feeble knees, and lift up the hands that hang down." 
Your substance was in you when you had lost your leaves. 
Good Baxter says — "We do not see graces, except when 
they are in exercise ; and yet they are as much there when 
they are not in exercise as when they are." Saith he, " Let 
a man take a walk into a wood ; there lieth a hare or a rabbit 
asleep under the leaves ; but he can not see the creature until 
it is frightened, and it runneth out, and then he seeth it to be 
there." So if faith be in exercise you will perceive your evi- 
dence, but if faith be slumbering and still, you will be led to 
doubt its existence ; and yet it is there all the while. 

" Mountains when in darkness hidden, 
Are as real as in day," 

said one ; and truly the Mth of the Chiistian, when shrouded 
by doubts and fears, is just as much there as when he re- 
joiceth devoutly in the display of it. 

It is a common error of young converts that they attempt 
to live by their experience, instead of tracing their life up to 
its precious source. I have known persons rejoicing in the 
fullest assurance one day, and sinking into the deepest des- 
pondency the next. The Lord will sometimes strip you of 
the leaves of evidence to teach you to live by faith, as John 
Kent says — 

" If to-day he deigns to bless us 
With a sense of pardoned sin ; 
He to-morrow may distress us, 
Make us feel the plague within ; 

All to make us 
Sick of self and fond of him." 

But ah ! there is a worse phase to the subject than this. 
Some Christians lose their leaves not by doubts, but by sin. 
This is a tender topic — one which needs a tender hand to 
touch. 01 there are some in our churches that have lost 
their leaves by lust and sin. Fair professors once they were/ 



THE LEAFLESS TEEE. 37 

they stood green among the church, like the very leaves of 
paradise ; but in an evil hour they fell, the slaves of tempta- 
tion. They were God's own people by many infallible marks 
and signs ; and if they were so, though it is grievous that 
they should have lost their leaves, yet there is the sweet con- 
solation, their substance is in them still: they are still the 
Lord's, still his living children, though they have fallen into 
the coma of sin, and are now in a fainting fit, having gone 
astray from him, and having their animation suspended, while 
life is still there. Some, as soon as they see a Christian do 
any thing inconsistent with his profession, say, " That man is 
no child of God ; he can not be ; it is impossible." Ay, but, 
sir, remember what he thought who- once said — " If a brother 
err, ye that are spiritual restore such an one in the spirit ot 
meekness, considering thyself, lest thou also be tempted." It 
is a fact, deny it who will, and abuse it, if you please, to your 
own wicked purposes ; I can not help it — ^it is a fact that 
some living children of God have been allowed — and an aw- 
ful allowance it is — to go into the very blackest sins. Do you 
think David was not a child of God, even when he sinned ? 
It is a hard subject to touch ; but it is not to be denied. He 
had the life of God within him before ; and though he sinned 
— O ! horrid and awful was the crime ! — yet his substance 
was in him when he lost his leaves. And many a child of 
God has gone far away from his Master ; but his substance is 
in him. And how know we this ? Because a dead tree never 
lives again ; if the substance be really gone, it never lives ; 
and God's holy Word assures us, that if the real life of gi-ace 
could die out in any one, it could never come again ; for saith 
the apostle, " it is impossible, if they have been once enlight- 
ened, and have tasted the heavenly gift, and have been made 
partakers of the Holy Ghost" — if these fall away — " it is im- 
possible to renew them again unto repentance." Their tree is 
" dead, plucked up by the roots." And the apostle Peter 
says — " For if, after they have escaped the corruption that is 
in the world through lust, they are again turned back, their 
last end shall be worse than the first." But now take David, 
or take Pete •, which you please. Peter we will have. O I 
how foully di i he curse his Master ! With many an oath he 



88 THS LEAFLES9 TRKS. 

denied him. But had not Peter the life of God in him then ? 
Yes ; and how do we know ? Because when his Master 
looked upon him, he " went out and wept bitterly." Ah ! if 
he had been a dead man, hardened and without the substance 
in* him, his Master might have looked to all eternity, and bo 
would not have wept bitterly. How know I that David was 
yet alive ? Why, by this — that although there was a long, 
long winter, and there were many prickings of conscience, 
like the workings of the sap within a tree, abortive attempts 
to thrust forward here and there a shoot before its time, yet 
when the hour was come, and Nathan came to him and said, 
" Thou art the man," had David been dead, without the life 
of God, he would have spumed Nathan from him, and might 
have done what Manasseh did with Isaiah, cut him in pieces 
in his anger ; but instead of that he bowed his head and wept 
before God ; and still it is written, " The Lord hath put away 
thy sin, thou shalt not die." His substance was in him, when 
he lost his leaves. O ! have pity upon poor fallen brethren. 
O ! burn them not ; they are not dead logs ; though their 
leaves are gone their substance is in them. God can see 
grace in their hearts when you can not see it ; he has put a 
life there that can never expire, for he has said, " I give unto 
my sheep eternal life," and that means a life that lives for 
ever ; " the water that I shall give him shall be in him a well 
of water springing up into everlasting life." You may choke 
the well up with big stones, but the water will find its way 
out yet, and well up notwithstanding. And so the heir of 
heaven may, to the grief of the church and to the injury of 
himself, most grievously transgress — and weep, my eyes, O 
weep for any that have done so, and O bleed, my heart, and 
thou hast bled, for any that have so sinned — ^but yet their 
" substance is in them, when they cast their leaves : so the 
holy seed" — ^that is, Christ within them, the Holy Ghost 
within them, the new creature within them — " the holy seed 
shall be the substance thereof" Poor backslider ! here is a 
word of comfort for you. I would not comfort you in your 
sins ; God forbid ! But if you know your sins and hate them, 
let me comfort you. Thou art not dead ! As Jesus said of 
the damsel, '^ She is not dead, but sleepeth," so let me say of 



THB LBAFLBSS TREE, 39 

thee, " Thou art not dead ; thou shalt yet live." Dost thou 
repent ? Dost thou grieve over thy sin ? That is the bud 
that shows that there is life within. When a common sinner 
sins he repents not, or if he doth repent it is with a legal re- 
pentance. His conscience pricks him, but he hushes it. He 
does not leave his sin and turn from it. 

But did you ever see a child of God after he had been 
washed from a foul sin ? He was a changed man. I know 
such an one, who used to carry Sk merry countenance, and 
many were the jokes he made in company ; but when I met 
him after an awful sin, there was a solemnity about his coun- 
tenance that was unusual to him. He looked, I should say, 
something like Dante, the poet, of whom the boys said, " There 
is the man that has been in hell ;" because he had written of 
hell, and looked like it — ^he looked'so terrible. And when we 
spoke of sin there was such a solemnity about him ; and when 
we spoke of going astray the tears ran down his cheeks, as 
much as to say, " I have been astray too." He seemed like 
good Christian, after he had been in Giant Despair's castle. 
Do you not remember, beloved, the guide who took the pil- 
grims up to the top of a hill called Clear, and he showed them 
from the top of the hill a lot of men with their eyes put out, 
groping among the tombs, and Christian asked what it meant. 
Said the guide, "These are pilgrims that were caught in 
Giant Despair's castle ; the giant had their eyes put out, and 
they are left to wander among the tombs to die, and their 
bones are to be left in the court-yard." Whereupon John 
Bunyan very naively says, " I looked, and saw their eyes full 
of water, for they remembered they might have been there 
too." Just as the man talked and spoke that I once knew. 
He seemed to wonder why God had not left him to be an 
apostate for ever, as the lot of Judas or Demas. He seemed 
to think it such a Startling thiifg that while many had gone 
aside altogether from God's way, he should still have had his 
substance in him, when he had lost his leaves, and that God 
should still have loved him. Perhaps, beloved, God allows 
some such men to live, and sin, and afterward repent, for this 
reason. You know there are some voices needed in music 
that are very rare, and when, now and then, such a voice is to 



40 THE LEAFLESS TBBE. 

be heard, every one will go to hear it. I have thought that 
perhaps some of these men in heaven will sing soprano notes 
before the throne — choice, wondrous notes of grace, because 
they have gone into the depths of sin after profession ; and 
yet he hath loved them when their feet made haste to perdi- 
tion, and fetched them up, because he "loved them well." 
There are but few such ; for most men mil go foully into sin ; 
they will go out from us because they are not of us, for if they 
had been of us they would doubtless have continued with us. 
But there have been a few such — great saints, then great 
backsliding sinners, and then great saints again. Their sub- 
stance was in them when they had lost their leaves. O ! you 
that have gone far astray, sit and weep. You can not weep 
too much, though you should cry with Herbert — 

" 0, who will give me tears ? Come, all ye springs, 
Dwell in my head and eyes ,* come, clouds and rain I 
My grief hath need of all the watery things 
That nature bath produced." 

You might well say, 

" Let every vein 
Suck up a river to supply mine eyes, 
My weary, weeping eyes; too dry for mo, 
Unless they get new conduits, new supplies. 
To bear them out, and with my state agree." 

But yet remember, " He hath not forsaken his people, neither 
hath he cut them off; for still he says, 

" Return, wanderer, return. 

And seek an injured Mher's heart" 

Return I return ! return ! Thy Father's bowels still move 
for thee. He speaks through the written oracles at this mo- 
ment, saying, " How shall I give thee up, Ephraim ? How 
shall I deliver thee, O Israel ? How can I make thee as Ad- 
mah ? How can I set theB as Zeboim ?" My bowels are 
moved ; my repentings are kindled together ; for I will heal 
their backslidings, I will receive them graciously, I will love 
them freely, for they are mine^ still. As the terebinth and as 
the oak, whose substance is in them when they cast their 
leaves, even so the holy seed within the elect and called ves- 
sels of mercy, is still the substance, thereof. 



THE LEAFLESS TREE. 41 

And now, what have I to say to some of you that live in 
black sin, and yet excuse yourselves on account of the re- 
corded falls of God's people ? Sir, know this ! Inasmuch as 
you do this, you wrest the Scriptures to your own destruc- 
tion. If one man has taken poison, and there has been a phy- 
sician by his side so skillful that he has saved his life by a 
heavenly antidote, is that any roason why thou, who hast no 
physician and no antidote, should yet think that the poison 
will not kill thee ? Why, man, the sin that does not damn a 
Christian, because Christ washes him in his blood, will damn 
you. Said Brookes — and I will repeat his words and have 
done — " He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved, said 
the apostle, be his sins never so many ; but he that believeth 
not shall be damned, be his sins never so fewJ*^ Truly your 
sins may be little ; but you are lost for them without Christ. 
Your sins may be great ; but if Christ shall pardon them, then 
you shall be saved. The one question, then, I have to ask of 
thee, is — Hast thou Christ ? For if thou hast not, then thou 
hast not the holy seed ; thou art a ^ead tree, and in due time 
thou shalt be tinder for hell. Thou art a rotten-hearted tree, 
all touch-wood, ready to be broken in pieces ; eaten by the 
worms of lust ; and ah I when the fire shall take hold of thee, 
what a blazing and a burning ! O ! that thou hadst life ! O ! 
that God would give it to thee ! O ! that thou wouldst now 
repent ! O ! that thou wouldst cast thyself on Jesus ! O ! 
that thou wouldst turn to him with full purpose of heart ! 
For then, remember, thou wouldst be saved — saved now, and 
saved for ever ; for " the holy seed" would be " the substance 
thereof." 



SERMON III. 
THE SNARE OF THE FOWLER. 

"Surely he shall deliver thee from the snare of the fowler.*' — ^Psalm xcL 3 

If Moses wrote this Psalm he might represent the fowler as 
being in his case the king of Egypt, who sought to slay him, 
or the Amalekites, who pounced upon Israel in the plain, when 
they little expected it. If David penned it, he might have 
compared Saul to the fowler, for he himself says, he was 
hunted like a partridge upon the mountains. But we believe, 
if the verse be applicable to either of those cases, it was in 
tended by the Psalmist not to have a private interpretation, 
but to be applicable to all time ; and we believe it is spoken 
concerning that arch-enemy of souls, the great deceiver, Satan, 
of whom we just now sang, 

** Satan, the fowler, who betrays 
Unguarded souls a thousand ways." 

" The prince of the power of this world, the spirit which still 
worketh in the children of disobedience," is like a fowler, 
always attempting to destroy us. It was once said by a 
talente'S writer, that the old devil was -dead, and that there 
was a new devil now ; by which he meant to say, that the 
devil of old times was a rather different devil from the de- 
ceiver of these times. We believe that it is the same evil 
spirit ; but there is a difference in his mode of attack. The 
devil of five hundred years ago was a black and grimy thing, 
well portrayed in our old pictures of that evil spirit. . He was 
a persecutor, who cast men into the furnace, and put them to 
death for serving Christ. The devil of this day is a well- 
spoken gentleman : he does not persecute — ^he rather attempts 
to [HBrsuade and to beguile. He is not now so much the 



THE SNABB OF THE FOWLSB. 43 

furious Romanist, so much as the insinuating unbeliever, at- 
tempting to overturn our religion^ while at the same time ho 
pretends he would make it more rational, and so more tri- 
umphant. He would only link worldliness with religion ; and 
so he would really make religion void, under the cover of 
developing the great power of the gospel, and bringing out 
secrets which our forefathers had never discovered. Satan is 
always a fowler. Whatever his tactics may be, his object is 
still the same — ^to catch men in his net. Men are here com- 
pared to silly, weak birds, that have not skill enough to avoid 
the snare, and have not strength enough to escape from it. 
Satan is the fowler ; he has been so and is so still ; and if he 
does not now attack us as the roaring lion, roaring against us 
in persecution, he attacks us as the adder, creeping silently 
along the path, endeavoring to bite our heel with his poisoned 
fangs, and weaken the power of grace and ruin the life of 
godliness within us. Our text i^ a very comforting one to all 
believers, when they are beset by temptation. " Surely he 
shall deliver them from the snare of the fowler." 

First, a few words concerning the snare of the fowler/ 
secondly, the deliverance ; and, thirdly, the certainty of it ; 
dwelling upon that word surely^ for it seems to be the dia- 
mond wherewith this precious golden promise is embellished. 
" Surely he shall deliver thee from the snare of the fowler." 

I. First, then, the snabe of the fowleb. It is an illus- 
tration too suggestive for me thoroughly to unravel. I must 
leave it for your meditations at home to enumerate the divers 
ways in which a fowler attempts to take his birds, and then 
you will have suggested to you the divers means which the 
evil spirit employs for the destruction of Isouls. Allow me, 
however, just to begin, and pass over two or three points con- 
nected with the fowler and with the evil one. 

1. First, the fowler'* s snare is intimately connected with 
secrecy. " Surely in vain is the net spread in the sight of any 
bird." Therefore the fowler carefully covers up his tiap ; or, 
if the trap itself be uncovered, he doth well beguile the bird, 
so that it is utterly ignorant of his intention to take it in the 
ti*ap, little thinking that the food laid there for its banqueting 
10 really placed there for its enticement and destruction. The 



44 THE SNAftE OF THE FOWLBB. 

fowler, when he goes after his birds, is very careful lest they 
should discover him. We bear, for instance, that in the taking 
of wild ducks, in Lincolnshire, a man will hold before his 
mouth a piece of turf, in order that the smell of his breath 
may not be perceived by the birds, who are exceedingly wary. 
The temptations of the world are of this secret sort to a 
Christian, though not to the wicked man, for the wicked man 
sins with his eyes wide open ; dashing into the net knowing 
it is a net, laying hold of iniquity with both his hands, even 
when destruction stareth him in the face. He will commit a 
sin that he knows is condemned even l)y the law of the land : 
he will rush into a crime, concerning the guilt of which no 
doubt can be entertained. Not so the Christian : he is taken 
by secrecy. "Ah !" says one, " if I thought such-and-such a 
thing were really wrong ; if I were perfectly convinced of its 
wrongfulness, I would give it np." It is just there the diffi- 
culty lies. So would the bird say : " If I thought that really 
were a trap, I would not enter it ; if I were perfectly per- 
suaded that net would entangle me, I would not fly to such- 
and-such a spot ; I would not approach there at all, if I were 
sure it would be my destruction." How many a professor 
there is who asks the question, " May I go to this place ? 
May I go to that place ?" and some of us answer " No," and 
we are called Puritans for it; but let those who have at- 
tempted to keep their godliness intact, while they pursued the 
pleasures of this world, stand up and^ make the mournful con- 
fession, that the healthiness of the two things can never exist 
together. We must either serve God wholly, or serve jbhe 
evil one wholly. " If (Sod be God, serve him ; if Baal be God, 
serve him." One, or else the other. Many a man has been 
entrapped into sin by Satan ; not knowing that it was evil ! 
Some one has hinted to him in business, for instance — " You 
may very safely do such-and-such a thing ; all the shopkeepers 
in the street have done it ; it is not actually dishonest ; it im- 
proves the article, it really does ; and although you can thus 
sell an article at a dearer rate than you ought to sell it, yet 
you need not tell the public ; and if the article is all the bet- 
ter for it, it is quite fair and safe that you should adulterate 
it." And so the good easy man, ncf opening both his eyes, I 



THB 8NABB OF THE FOWLEB. 45 

think, but shutting one of them a little, lest he should see too 
well to be able to fill his pockets* in the dark, is a little taken 
aside ; and by-and-by he is led to discover that the act'which 
he has done is the taking of him in the snare of the fowler, 
for he has been sinning against his God, and his God therefore 
punishes him for it with many stripes, and lays his rod upon 
him. I do not think that a Christian is so often betrayed 
into a sin that is palpable and known, as he is into a sin that is 
secret. If the devil comes to my door with his horns visible, 
I will never let him in ; but if he comes with his hat on as a 
respectable gentleman, he is at once admitted. The metaphor 
may be very quaint, but it is quite true. Many a man has 
taken in an evil thing, because it has been varnished and 
glossed over, and not apparently an evil ; and he has thought 
in his heart, there is not much harm in it ; so he has let in the 
little thing, and it has been like the breaking forth of water — 
the first drop has brought after it a torrent. The beginning 
has been but the beginning of a fearful end. Take care, 
Christian, of things that are secret ; take care of the common 
doings of the world, which are well enough for them, perhaps. 
We would not deny them their pleasures, for they have no 
others ; but they are not good for you, for you have a finer 
life — a life of a finer texture and order than can exist in the 
haunts of ungodly persons. Remember, you are not to be a 
judge for others. Some men, especially those who are uncon- 
verted, can, without being led into sin, indulge in many gayet- 
ies and merriments ; but the Christian is like the Englishman, 
who can not hope to survive long where the jungle fever 
reigns. The native can live there, but he can not. And so 
you who are twice-born men will find your piety ruined, by 
that which, to a worldly man, does not lead him into greater 
evil than that which he would naturally commit. You are to 
bave a stricter rule on yourselves than others, and are to be 
more stern in your piety than the world would have you be ; 
for sin is usually hidden, and the snare is not often made 
apparent. " Surely he shall deliver thee from the snare of 
the fowler." 

2. In the second place, the snare of the fowler is generally 
noted for its adaptation. You do not find a fowler setting 



46 THB SNABB OF THB FOWLBB. 

the same snare for one bird as for another; he knows his bird, 
and he adapts his bait to it. He would be an unwise fowler 
who should go to work with the same machinery to catch the 
lark that flies on high as the duck that swims along the stream. 
The fowler is wiser than that : he adapts his snare to the con- 
dition of the bird which he desires to take. Satan the fowler 
does just the same. There is one man here ; he tempts him 
to drunkenness. Perhaps that would naturally be his sin, if 
left without grace in his heart ; and Satan, knowing it to be 
his weak point, attempts to overcome him by surfeiting, glut- 
tony, and drunkenness. Another man is utterly impervious 
to any temptation to that bestial habit ; but, it may be, he i^ 
easily taken in another snare-7-the snare of lust ; therefore 
Satan adapts his temptation to the hot blood of* the man who 
naturally would be inclined to live a life of sin. Another one 
perhaps eschews every lascivious and sensual habit ; then Satan 
comes to him, and adapts his temptation to the shape of pride. 
The man is naturally a melancholy man, full of solitude: 
Satan gets him, if he can, to wrap himself up in a solitary 
dignity, to say, " I am holy." " Lord, I thank thee, I am not 
as other men are." Or if a man is not naturally inclined to a 
very high degree of pride, Satan takes him with sloth. The 
man likes an easy life ; Satan therefore adapts his bait to him 
by letting him sit still, fold his arms, and so perish by sloth- 
fulness : and mark this, he who sitteth still in the frost, when 
the snow is on the ground, in the depths of the wild regions* 
of the frozen zone, must as surely perish by his idleness as if 
he drove a dagger to his heart. Satan knows that, and so 
adapts his bait accordingly. 01 how often it happens, be- 
loved, that you and I condemn a thing in another person 
which we allow in ourselves, perhaps without knowing it. We 
say of such a one. How proud he is ! Well, our pride is not 
exactly of that shape ; we have got another shaped pride, but 
the same article ; labeled differently, but the same * thing. 
Satan adapts the pride to each particular case. We are rich : 
he does not perhaps tempt us to the pride of riches, but he 
tempts us to the pride of mastership, and makes us harsh 
masters to our servants. Or if he does not tempt us to that 
pride, he perhaps enchants us with the pride of generosity, 



THB 8NABB OF THB FOWLEB. 4*J 

aid we are apt to boast of our kindness and of what we have 
given away. He will always adapt his trap to his man, and 
his bait to his bird. He will not tempt you all with the same 
temptation he would tempt me with ; nor me with the temp- 
tation with which he would naturally assail another. "The 
snare of the fowler." A cunning enemy we have to deal with ; 
he knows our weak points ; he has been dealing with men for 
these last six thousand years ; he knows all about them. He 
is possessed of a gigantic intellect ; though he be a Mien spirit ; 
and he is easily able to discover where our sore places are, and 
there it is he immediately attacks us. If we be like Achilles, 
and can not be wounded anywhere but in our heel, then at the 
heel he will send his dart, and nowhere else. He will find out 
our easily besetting sin, and there, if he can, he will attempt 
to work our ruin and our destruction. Let us bless God that 
it is written, " Surely he fcdsall deliver thee from the snare of 
the fowler." 

3. In the next place, the fowler's snare is frequently/ conr 
nected with pleasure^ P^ofit^ and advantage. In the bird's 
case it is for the seed scattered on the ground that he flies to 
the snare. It is some tempting bait which allures him to his 
death. And usually Satan, the fowler, uses a temptation 
wherewith to beguile us. " O !" says one, " I can not give 
up such-and-such a thing, it is so pleasant. Sir, you never 
knew the charms of such-and-such a pursuit, otherwise you 
could never advise me to relinquish it." Yes, my friend, but 
it is just the sweetness of it to you that makes it the more 
dangerous. Satan never sells his poisons naked ; he always 
gilds them before he vends them. He knows very well that 
men will buy them and swallow them, if he does but gild 
them beforehand. Take care of pleasures ; mind what you 
are at when you are at them. Many of them are innocent 
and healthful, but many of them are destructive. It is said 
that where the most beautiful cacti grow, there the most 
venomous serpents are to be found at the root of every plant. 
And it is so with sin. Your fairest pleasures will hai'bor your 
grossest sins. Take care ; take care of your pleasures. Cleo- 
patra's asp was introduced in a basket of flowers ; so are 
our sins often brought to us in the flowers of our pleasures. 



48 THB SNABB OF THE FOWLER. 

Satan offers to the drunkard the sweetness of the intoxicating 
cup, which rejoices him, when his brain is rioting in frolic, 
and when his soul is lifted up within him. He offers to the 
lustful man the scenes and pleasures of carnal mirth, and mer- 
riment, and delight, and so he leadeth him astray with the bait, 
concealing the hook which afterwards shall pain him. He 
gives to you and to me, each of us, the offer of our peculiar 
joy ; he tickleth us with pleasures, that he may lay hold upon 
us, and so have us in his power. I would have every Chris- 
tian be especially on his guard against the very thing that is 
most pleasing to his human nature. I would not have him 
avoid every thing that pleases him, but I would have him be 
on his guard against it. Just like Job, when his sons had 
been feasting in their houses. He did not forbid them doing 
it, but he said, " I will offer a sacrifice, lest my sons should 
have sinned in their hearts, and should have cursed God fool- 
ishly." He was more careful over them at the time of their 
feasting than at any other season. Let us be the same. Let 
us remember that the snare of the fowler is generally con- 
nected with some pretended pleasure or profit, but that 
Satan's end is not our pleasing, but our destruction. 

4. In the next place, sometimes the fowler very wisely em- 
ploys the force of example. . We all know the influence of the 
decoy-duck, in endeavoring to bring others into the snare. 
How very often Satan, the fowler, employs a decoy to lead 
God's people into sin ! You get with a man ; you think him 
to be a true Christian ; you have some respect for his charac- 
ter ; he is a high professor, can talk religion by the yard, and 
can give you any quantity of theology you like to ask for. 
You see him commit a sin ; ten to one but you will do the 
same, if you have much respect for him ; and so he will lead 
you on. And mark, Satan is very careful in the men whom 
he chooses to be decoys. He never employs a wicked man 
to be a decoy for a good man. It is very seldom, when Satan 
would decoy a Christian into a snare, that he makes use of au 
open reprobate. No ; he makes use of a man who is pre- 
tend edly religious, and who looks to be of the same quality as 
yourself, and therefore entices you astray. Let a bad man 
meet me in the street, and ask me to commit sin ! The devil 



THB SNARE OF THE FOWLER. 49 

knows better than to set him at any such work as that, bo- 
cause he knows I should pass by directly. If he wants his 
errand well done, he sends one to me whom I call brother ; 
and so through the brotherhood of profession I am apt to give 
him credence and pay him respect ; and then if he goeth 
astray, the force of example is very powerful, and so I may 
easily be led into the net too. Take care of your best fiiends ; 
be careful of your companions. Choose the best you can ; 
then follow them no fVirther than they follow Christ. Let your 
course be entirely independent of every one else. Say with 
Joshua, let others do what they will, " As for me and my 
house we will serve the Lord." 

5. Note, once more, that sometimes the fowler^ when he 
faileth to take his bird by deceit and crafty wiU go a hawking 
after it — will send his hawk into the air, to bring down his 
prey. It often happens, when the devil can not ruin a man by 
getting him to commit a sin, he attempts to slander him; he 
sends a hawk after him, and tries to bring him down by slan- 
dering his good name. I will give you a piece of advice. I 
know a good minister, now in venerable old age, who was 
once most villainously lied against and slandered by a man 
who had hated him only for the truth's sake. The good man 
was grieved ; he threatened the slanderer with a lawsuit, un- 
less he apologized. He did apologize. The slander was 
printed in the papers in a public apology ; and you know what 
was the consequence. The slander was more believed than if 
he had said nothing about it. And I have learned this lesson 
— to do with the slanderous hawk what the little birds do, 
just fly up. The hawk can not do them any hurt while they 
can keep above him — ^it is only when they come down that he 
can injure them. It is only when by mounting he gets above 
the birds, that the hawk comes sweeping down upon them, 
and destroys them. If any slander you, do not come down 
to them ; let them slander on.. Say, as David said concerning 
Shimei, " If the Lord hatb given him commandment to curse, 
let him curse ;" and if the sons of Zeruiah say, " Let us go 
and take this dead dog's head," you say, " Nay, let him curse ;" 
and in that way you will live down slander. If some of us 
turned aside to notice every bit of a sparrow that began 

3 



50 THE SNABB OF THB FOAYLEB. 

chirping at us, we should hare nothing to do but to answer 
them. If I were to fight people on every doctrine I preach, 
I should do nothing else but just amuse the devil, and indulge 
the combative principles of certain religionists who like noth- 
ing better than quarreling. By the grace of God, say what 
you please against me, I will never answer you, but go straight 
on. All shall end well, if the character be but kept clean ; the 
more dirt that is thrown on it by slander, the more it shall 
glisten, and the more brightly it shall shine. Have you never 
felt your fingers itch sometimes to be at a man who slanders 
you ? I have. I have sometimes thought, " I can not hold my 
tongue now ; I must answer that fellow ;" but I have asked of 
God "grace to imitate Jesus, who, "when he was reviled re- 
viled not again,'^ and by his strength let them go straight on. 
The surest way in the world to get rid of a slander is just to 
let it alone and say nothing about it, for if you prosecute the 
rascal who utters it, or if you threaten him with an action, 
and he has to apologize, you will be/ no better off— some fools 
will still believe it. Let it alone — ^let it keep as it is ; and so 
God will help you to fulfill by your wisdom his own promise, 
" Surely he shall deliver thee from the snare of the fowler." 

And now, ere I close this point, let me observe once more, 
the fowler, when he is determined to take his birds, uses all 
these arts at once, perhaps, and besets the Mrd on every side. 
So, you will remember, beloved, it is with you. Satan will 
not leave a stone unturned to ruin your soul for ever. 
" Amidst a thousand snares I stand, 
Upheld and guarded by thy hand." 
Old Master Quarles says, 

" The dose pursuer's busy hands do plant 

Snares m thy substance ; snares attend thy want ; 

Snares m thy credit ; snares in thy disgrace ; 

Snares in thy high estate ; snares in thy base ; 

Snares tuck thy bed ; and snares surround thy board ; 

Snares watch thy thoughts; and snares attach thy word; 

Snares in thy quiet ; snares in thy commotion ; 

Snares in thy diet ; snares in thy devotion ; 

Snares lurk in thy resolves, snares in thy doubt ; 

Snares lie within thy heart, and snares without ; 

Snares are above thy head, and snares beneath ; 

Snares m thy sickness, snares are in thy death." 



THE SNABB OF THB FOWLBB. 51 

There is not a place beneath which a believer walks that is 
free from snares. Behind every tree there is the Indian with 
his barbed arrow ; behind every bush there is the lion seeking 
to devour ; under every piece of grass there lieth the adder. 
Everywhere they are. Let us be careful; let us gird our- 
selves with the might of God's onmipotence, and then shall his 
Holy Spirit keep us, so that we shall tread on the lion and the 
adder, the young lion and the dragon shall we trample under 
our feet, and we shall be " delivered from the snare of the 
fowler." 

II. Now we pass to the second point — the delivbbancb. 
God delivers his people from the snare of the fowler. Two 
thoughts here : from — out of. First, he delivers them from, 
the snare— does not let them get in it ; secondly, when they 
do get in it, he delivers them out o/it. The first promise is 
the most precious to some of us ; the second is the best to 
others. 

He shall deliver thee from the snare. How does he do 
that ? 

Very often by trouble. Trouble is often the means whereby 
God delivers us from snares. You have all heard the old 
story of the celebrated painter who was painting in St. Paul's, 
and who, looking at his work, went gradually back, inch by 
inch, to get a view of it, so that he might see the excellence of 
its proportions, until his feet were just on the edge of the 
platform upon which he stood ; and he would have fallen down 
and been dashed in pieces upon the pavement beneath, but 
just at that moment a workman who stood there, desirous to 
save his life, and not knowing how to do it, hit upon an expe- 
dient which proved to be a very wise one. Instead of shout- 
ing out to his master, " Sir, you are in danger," which would 
most certainly have sent him backward, he took up a brush, 
and dipping it in a pot of paint, dashed it at the picture. The 
good man rushed forward in anger to chastise him ; but when 
it was explained, he clearly saw that he had acted wisely. 
Just so with God. You and I have often painted a fine pic- 
ture, and we have been walking backward admiring it. God 
knows that our backsliding will soon end in our destruction ; 
and he, by a sad providence, blasts our prospect, takes away 



62 THE SNABE OF THE FOWLBB. 

our child from us, buries our wife, removes some darling object 
of our pleasures ; and we rush forward and say, " Lord, why 
is this?" — utterly unconscious that if it had not been for 
trouble we might have been' dashed in pieces, and our lives 
would have been ended in destruction. I doubt not, many of 
you have been saved from ruin by your sorrows, your griefs, 
your troubles, your woes, your losses, and your crosses. All 
these have been the breaking of the net that set you free from 
the snare of the fowler. 

At other times God keeps his people from the sin of the 
fowler by giving them great spiritual strength^ a spirit of 
great cowrage ; so that when they are tempted to do evil they 
say, with decision, " How can I do this gi'eat wickedness and 
sin against God ?" O I that was a noble escape of Joseph, 
when his mistress laid hold of his garment ; that was a noble 
escape of his, when his soul escaped like a bird out of the snare 
of the fowler ; and I doubt not there are many here who have 
done deeds almost as noble as that of Joseph, who have had 
grace within their hearts, so that they have turned away their 
eyes from beholding folly, and when they have been tempted 
to evil they have put their foot upon it, and said, " I can not, 
I can not ; I am a child of God ; I can not and I must not ;" 
and though the thing was pleasing to themselves yet they ab- 
jured it. You remember the case of Mr. Standfast in Bunyan's 
Pilgrim's Progress. Madame Bubble had greatly enticed 
poor Mr. Standfast with her offers. He says, " There was one 
in very pleasant attire, but old, who presented herself to me, 
and offered me three things, to wit, her body, her purse, and 
her bed. Now the truth is, I was both weary and sleepy : I 
am also as poor as an owlet, and that perhaps the witch knew. 
Well, I repulsed her once and again, but she put by my re- 
pulses and smiled. Then I began to be angry ; but she mat- 
tered that nothing at all. Then she made offers again, and 
said if I would be ruled by her, she would make me great and 
happy ; for, said she, I am the mistress of the world, and men 
are made happy by me. Then I asked her her name, and she 
told me it was Madame Bubble. This set me further from her ; 
but she still followed me with enticements. Then I betook 
me, as you ^aw, to my knees, and with hands lifted up, and 



THE 8NABB OF THB FOWLBB. 58 

cries, I prayed to him that had said he would help. So just 
as you came up the gentlewoman went her way. Then I con- 
tinued to give thanks for this my great deliverance ; for I verily 
believe she intended no good, but rather sought to make stop 
of me in my journey." Thus God delivers his people from the 
snares of the fowler, by giving them the spirit of prayer as 
well as the spirit of courage, so that they call upon God in the 
day of trouble, and he delivers them. 

And I have noticed one more very singular thing. Some- 
times I, myself, have been saved from the snare of the fowler 
(I can not tell you how exactly), in this way. I have felt that 
if the temptation had come a week before, my mind was in 
that peculiar condition, that I should almost inevitably have 
been led away by it ; but when it came, the mind, by passing 
through some process, had become in such a condition that the 
temptation was no temptation at all. We were just brought 
to such a state, that what might have ruined us before, we 
would not then look at. " No," we have said, " if you had 
offered me this some time ago it might have been accepted ; 
but now God has, by some mysterious influence of his Spirit, 
turned my heart in another direction, and it is not even a 
temptation to me at all — not worthy of a moment's thought." 
So God delivers his people from the snare of the fowler. 

But the second thought was, that God delivers his people^ 
even when they get into the snare, Alas ! my hearer, you and 
I know something about the net ; we have been inside it, we 
have ; we have not only seen it spread, we have been in its 
folds. We know something about the cage, for we have, un- 
fortunately, been in the cage ourselves, even since we have 
known the Lord. The fowler's hand has been upon our neck ; 
it has only been the sovereign grace of God that has prevented 
him from utterly destroying us. What a blessed thing it is, 
that if the believer shaU, in an evil hour, come into the net, 
yet God will bring him out of it I Poor Christian and Hope- 
ful got into the fowler's net when they entered into the castle 
of Giant Despair ; but the key of promise picked the lock, and 
they escaped. They were in the fowler's net, too, when 
Flatterer cast a net over them, and left them in the lane ; but 
there came one who, >fter he had beaten them fiill sore, took 



54 THB 'SNABB OF THE FOWLER. 

the net off, and then they went on their way, better men than 
they were before they were in the net. I know one who is 
in the net now. Some bird, one of God's own ones too, has 
been taken in the snare, and is now groaning and crying out, 
because, alas ! alas ! he has sinned. I have a person here, a 
good man, a professor of religion, and a truly worthy one ! 
but alas ! he has sinned, and at this hour the tears are in his 
eyes, and he is saying, 

" The tumult of my thoughts 
Doth but increase my woe ; 
My spirit languishes, my heart 
Is desolate and low. 

" Turn, turn thee to my soul ; 
Bring thy salvation near ; 
When wiU thy hand release my feet 
Out of the deadly snare ?" 

O backslider, be cast down, but do not despair ; God will re- ir 
store thee yet. Wanderer though thou hast been, hear what 
he says! "Return, O backsliding children; I will have 
mercy upon you." But you say you can not return. Then 
here is still a promise — " Surely he shall deliver thee from the 
snare of the fowler." Thou shalt yet be brought out from 
all the evil into which thou hast fallen, and though thou shalt 
never cease to repent thy ways even to thy dying day, yet he 
that hath loved thee will not cast thee away ; he will receive 
thee ; he will admit thee into his dwelling-place, and will even 
now restore thee to the number of his people, and give thee 
joy and gladness, that the bones which he has broken may 
rejoice. " Surely he shall deliver thee from the snare of the 
fowler." 

There have been very remarkable instances of God deliver- 
ing his people out of the snare of the fowler, as the following 
illustration will show : 

" A young lady, who belonged to a church in the city of 
New York, married a young man who was not a Christian. 
He was a merchant, engaged in a lucrative business, and the 
golden stream of wealth flowed in upon him till he had 
amassed a large fortune. He accordingly retired from busi- 
ness, and went into the country. He purchased a splendid 



THE SNABE OF THE FOWLBB. 55 

residence ; fine trees waved their luxuriant foliage around it ; 
here was a lake filled with fish, and there a garden full of rare 
shrubbery and flowers. Their house was fiishionably and ex- 
pensively furnished ; and they seemed to possess all of earth 
that moi-tal could desire. Thus prospered, and plied with an 
interchange of civilities among her gay and fashionable neigh- 
bors, the piety of the lady declined, and her heart became 
wedded to the world. And it is not to be wondered at, that 
her three children, as they grew up, imbibed her spirit and 
copied her example. * A severe disease,' it is said, * demands 
a severe remedy ;' and that God soon applied. One morning 
intelligence came that her little son had fallen into the fish- 
lake, and was drowned. The mother's heart was pierced 
with the affliction, and she wept and murmured against the 
providence of God. Soon afterwards, her only daughter, a 
blooming girl of sixteen, was taken sick of a fever and died. 
It seemed then as if the mother's heart would have broken. 
But this new stroke of the rod of a chastening Father seemed 
but to increase her displeasure against his will. The only re- 
maining child, her eldest son, who had come home from col- 
lege to attend his sister's funeral, went out into the fields soon 
afterwards, for the purpose of hunting. In getting over a 
fence, he put his gun over first to assist himself in springing 
to the ground, when it accidentally discharged itself and 
killed him I What then were that mother's feelings? In 
the extravagance of her grie^ she fell down, tore her hair, 
and raved like a maniac against the providence of God. The 
fiither, whose grief was already almost insupportable, when he 
looked upon the shocking spectacle, and heard her frenzied 
ravings, could endure his misery no longer. The iron entered 
into his soul and he fell a speedy victim to his accumulated 
afflictions. From the wife and mother, her husband and all 
her children were now taken away. Reason returned, and 
she was led to reflection. She saw her dreadful bnckslidings, 
her pride, her rebellion ; and she wept with the tears of a 
deep repentance. Peace was restored to her soul. Then 
could she lift up her hands to heaven, exclaiming, ' I thank 
thee, O Father I — the Lord hath given, the Lord hath taken 
away, and blessed be the name of the Lord.' Thus did her 



56 THE SNABB OF THE FOWLER. 

afflictions yield the peaceable fruit of righteousness, and her 
heavenly Father chasten her, 'not for his pleasure, but for 
her profit, that she might become partaker of his holiness.' " 

So God delivered her soul out of the snare of the fowler. 
She started afresh in the ways of righteousness, serving God 
with diligence and zeal, and growmg up in his fear. By 
trouble and trial, by some means or another, God will surely 
deliver his people out of the snare of the fowler, even when 
they are in it. 

III. And now, to conclude, I am to dwell for a moment or 
two upon that word "surely." The assurance of every 
truth of Scripture is just the beauty of it. If it were not 
sure, it were not precious ; and it is precious just because it 
is sure. 

Now, it says, "surely he shall deliver thee." .Why? 
First, because he has promised to do it ; and God's promises 
are bonds that never yet were dishonored. If he hath said he 
will, ho will. Secondly, because Christ Jesus hath taken an 
oath that he will do it. In ages long gone by Christ Jesus 
became the shepherd of the sheep, and the surety of them 
too. " If any of them perish," said he, " at my hand, thou 
shalt require it ;" and, therefore, because Christ is responsi- 
ble, because he is the heavenly sponsor for all God's people, 
they must be kept: for otherwise Christ's bond were for- 
feited, and his oath were null and void. They must be kept, 
again, because otherwise the union that there is between all 
of them and Clirist would not be a real one. Christ and his 
church are one — one body ; but if any of the members of my 
body were cut off, I should be maimed, and if Christ could 
lose one of his children he would be a maimed Christ. " We 
are his body, the fuUness of him that fiUeth all in all." If, 
then, the whole church were not gathered in, Christ would 
be an incomplete Christ, seeing he would want his fullness. 
They must all be saved, for God the Father has determined 
that they shall be ; nay, the Son has sworn they shall be ; and 
God the Holy Spirit vouches for it they shall be. None of 
God's people shall be cast away, or else the Bible is not true. 
The whole stability of the covenant rests on their final perse- 
verance. The whole covenant of grace rests on this — 



THB SNABB OF THB FOWLEB. 61 

** He shall present our souls, ^ 

Unblemished and complete, 
. Before the glory of his face, 
With joys divinely great" 

And therefo/e they must be preserved out of the snare of the 
Ibwler, because otherwise the covenant would be null and 
void. If one should perish the oath would be broken ; if one 
should be cast away the covenant would be void ; and there- 
fore they must be kept secure. 

" His honor is engaged to save 
The meanest of his sheep ; 
All that his heavenly Father gave, 
His hands securely keep." 

I have no time to enlarge upon that subject, which is big 
with glory, and might afford a topic for many discourses. I 
now close up by saying, Men and brethren, is this promise 
yours ? " Surely he shall deliver thee." Are you the men ? 
" How can I tell ?" you say. Do you believe on the Lord 
Jesus Christ? Do you, as a guilty sinner, cast yourself 
wholly on the blood and righteousness of the immaculate Re- 
deemer ? I do not ask you whether you are a Wesleyan, a 
Churchman, a Baptist, an Independent, or a Presbyterian ; 
my only question is. Are you born again ? Have you passed 
from death unto life ? Are you " a new creature in Christ 
Jesus?" Is all your trust put in the Lord Jesus Christ? 
Has his life become your model, and does his Spirit dwell in 
your mortal body ? If so, peace be unto you : this promise is 
yours. You may have been the worst of men ; but if you 
have faith in Christ those sins are all forgiven, and you may 
take this promise to be yours for ever. But if you are self- 
righteous, self-sufficient, ungodly, careless, worldly, there is 
no such promise for you ; you are in the snare, you shall be 
there, and you shall perish, unless you repent ; for it is writ- 
ten, " Except ye repent ye shall all likewise perish." May 
God save you from perishing, by giving you an interest in the 
blood of Christ ; and to the Father, the Son, and' the Holy 
Ghost, be glory for ever and ever. 



SERMON IV. 
THE FRUITLESS VINE. 

" And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying, Son of man, What is 
the yine-tree more than any tree, or than a branch which is among the trees 
of the forest?" — ^Ezbkdbl, xv. 1, 2. 

The Jewish nation had arrogant ideas of themselves ; when 
they sinned against God, they supposed that on account of the 
superior sanctity of their forefathers, or by reason of some 
special sanctity in themselves, they would be delivered, sin as 
they pleased. In consequence of the infinite mercy of Jeho- 
vah, which he had displayed toward them, in delivering them 
out of so many distresses, they gradually came to imagine that 
they were the fevorite children of Providence, and that God 
could by no means ever cast them away. God, therefore, in 
order to humble their pride, tells them that they in them- 
selves were nothing more than any other nation ; and he asks 
them what there was about them to recommend them ? "I 
have often called you a vine ; I have planted you, and nur- 
tured you in a very fruitful hill, but now you bring forth no 
fruit ; what is there in you why I should continue you in my 
favor ? If you imagine there is any thing about you more 
than about any other nation, your are mightily mistaken." 
*' What is the vine-tree more than any tree, or than a branch 
which is among the trees of the forest ?" 

Let us remember that these things might be said without 
implying that God in the least degree alters his eternal pur- 
pose toward any chosen vessel of mercy ; for the Israelitish 
nation was not chosen to eternal salvation, as a nation, but 
chosen to special privileges ; a type and shadow of that eter- 
nal personal election which Christ has given to his church. 
From his own elect church God will never withdraw his love ; 



THE FBU1TLB8S YINB. 50 

but from the outward and visible church he sometimes may. 
From his own people he never will take away his affection ; 
but from professors, from those who merely stand in his peo- 
ple's external condition, and are not his children, he may, yea, 
and he will, withdraw every token of his favor. God humbles 
Israel, by reminding them that they had nothing which other 
nations had not ; that, in fact, they were a contemptible na- 
tion, not worthy to be set side by side with the cedar of Baby- 
lon, or with the oak of Samaria ; they were of no use, they 
were worthless, unless they brought forth fruit to him. He 
^checks their pride and humbles them, with the parable we 
have here before us. 

Beloved, we shall, by God's help, use this parable for our- 
selves, and learn two lessons from it. The first shall be a lea- 
son of hurmlity for saints / and the second, a lesson of 
searching for all who are professors, 

I. First, here is a lesson op humility for all you who have 
** tasted that the Lord is gracious." " What is the vine-tree 
more than any tree, or than a bi^anch which is among the 
trees of the forest ?" 

' In looking upon all the various trees, we observe that the 
vine is distinguished among them ; so that, in the old parable 
of Jotham, the trees waited upon the vine-tree, and said unto 
it, " Come thou and reign over us." But- merely looking at 
the vine, without regard to its fruitfulness, we should not see 
any kingship in it over other trees. In size, form, beauty, or 
utility, it has not the slightest advantage. We can do notb- 
ing with the wood of the vine. " Shall wood be taken thereof 
to do any work ? or will men make a pin of it to hang any 
vessel thereon ?" It is a useless plant apai't from its fruitful- 
ness. We sometimes see it in beauty, trained up by the side 
of our walls, and in the East it might be seen in all its luxuri- 
ance, and great care is bestowed in its training ; but leave the 
vine to itself, and consider it apart from its fruitfulness, it i? 
the most insignificant and despicable of all things that bear the 
name of trees. Now, beloved, this is for the humbling of 
God's people. They are called God's vine ; but what are they 
by nature more than others ? Others are as good as they ; 
yea, some others are even greater and better, than they. They, 



QO THE FttUlTLBSS YINB. 

by God's goodness, have become fruitful, have been planted in 
a good soil ; the Lord hath trained them upon the walls of the 
sanctuary, and they bring forth fruit to his glory. But what 
are they without their God? What are they without the 
continual influence of the Spirit, begetting fniitfulness in 
them ? Are they not the least among the sons of men, and 
the most to be despised of those that have been brought forth 
of women ? Look upon this, believer. 

" What was there in thee to merit esteem, 
Or give the Creator deUght ?" 

Tea, look upon thyself as thou art now. Doth not thy con- 
science reproach thee? Do not thy thousand wanderings 
stand before thee, and tell thee that thou art unworthy to be 
called his son ? Does not the weakness of thy mental power, 
the frailty of thy moral power, thy continual unbelief, and thy 
perpetual backsliding from God, tell thee that thou art less 
than the least of all saints ? And if he hath made thee any 
thing, art thou not thereby taught that it is grace, free, sov- 
ereign grace, which hath made thee to diflfer ? Should any 
here, supposing themselves to be the children of God, imagine 
that there is some reason in them why they should have been 
chosen, let them know, that as yet they are in the dark con- 
cerning the first principles of grace, and have not yet learned 
the gospel. If ever they had known, the gospel, they would, 
on the other hand, confess that they were less than the least — 
the offscouring of all things — unworthy, ill-deserving, unde- 
serving, and hell-deserving, and ascribe it all to distinguishing 
grace, which has made them to differ ; and to discriminating 
love, which has chosen them out from the rest of the world. 
Great Christian, thou wouldst have been a great sinner if God 
had not made thee to differ. 1 thou who art v^diant for 
truth, thou wouldst have been as valiant for the devil if grace 
had not laid hold of thee. A seat in heaven shall one day be 
thine ; but a chain in hell would have been thine if grace had 
not changed thee. Thou canst now sing his love ; but a li- 
centious song might have been on thy lips, if grace had not 
washed thee in the blood of Jesus. Thou art now sanctified, 
thou art quickened, thou art justified ; but what wouldst thou 



THB FBUTTLBSS YINB. dl 

have been to-day if it had not been for the interposition of the 
divine hand ? There u not a crime thou mightest not have 
committed ; there is no : a folly into which thou mightest not 
have run. Even murder itself thou mightest have committed 
if grace had not kept thee. Thou shalt be like the angels ; but 
thou wouldst have been like the devil if thou hadst not been 
changed by grace. Therefore, never be proud ; all thy gar- 
ments thou hast from above ; rags were thine only 'heritage. 
Be not proud, though thou hast a large estate, a wide domain 
of grace ; thou hadst once not a single thing to call thine own, 
except thy sin and misery. Thou art now wrapped up in the 
golden righteousness of the Saviour, and accepted in the gar- 
ments of the beloved ; but thou wouldst have been buried 
imder the black mountain of sin, and clothed with the filthy 
rags of unrighteousness, if he had not changed thee. And art 
thou proud ? Dost thou exalt thyself? 1 strange mystery, 
that thou, who hast borrowed every thing, should exalt thy- 
self; that thou, who hast nothing of thine own, but hast still 
to draw upon grace, shouldst be proud ; a poor dependent 
pensioner upon the bounty of thy Saviour, and yet proud ; one 
who hath a life which can only live by fresh streams of life 
from Jesus, and yet proud I Go, hang thy pride upon the gal- 
lows, as high as Haman ; hang it there to rot, and stand thou 
beneath, aud execrate it to all eternity ; for sure of all things 
most to be cursed and despised is the pride of a Christian. He, 
of all men, has ten thousand times more reason than any other 
to be humble, and walk lowly with his God, and kindly and 
humbly toward his fellow-creatures. Let this, then, humble 
thee. Christian, that the vine-tree is nothing more than any 
other tree, save only for the fruitfulness which God has given it. 

n. But now here comes a lesson of s|eaech. As the 
vine without its fruit is useless and worthless ; so, too, the 
professor, without fruit, is useless and worthless ; yea, he is 
the most useless thing in the wide world. 

Now, let us dwell upon this point. A fruitless profession. 
And while I am preaching on it, let the words go round to 
each one, and let the minister, and let his deacons, and let his 
hearers all try their hearts and search their reins, and see 
whether they have a fruitless profession. 



62 THB FRUITLESS VINE. 

1. First, a fruitless professor. How do we know him f whai 
is his character? Secondly. What is the reason he is fruit- 
less f Thirdly, What is the estimation God holds him in f 
He is good for nothing at all. And, then, fourthly, What wiU 
be his end? He is to be burned with fire. 

First, Where are we to find fruitless professors ? Every- 
where, dear friends, everywhere — down here, up there, every- 
where ; in pulpits and in pews. False professors are to be 
found in every church. Let us leave other denominations 
alone, then. They are to be found in this church ; they are 
to be found in this present assembly. To whatever denomi- 
nation you may belong, there are some false and fruitless pro- 
fessors in it. How know you that you may not belong to those 
who bring forth no fruit ? There are fruitless professors to be 
found in every position of the church, and in every part of 
society. You may find the false professor among the rich ; he 
hath much wealth, and he is hailed with gladness by the church. 
God hath given him much of this world's good ; and there- 
fore, the churchj forgetful that God hath chosen the poor, 
giveth him honor, and what doth she get from him? She 
getteth but little to help her. Her poor are still neglected, 
and her means not in the least recruited by his riches. Or if 
she gain a portion of his riches, yet she getteth none of his 
prayers ; nor is she in the least supported by his holy living, 
for he that hath riches often liveth in sin, and roUeth in un- 
cleanness; and, then, weareth his profession as a uniform, 
wherewith to cover his guilt. Rich men have sometimes been 
false professors ; and they are to be found among poor men 
too. Full many a poor man has entered into the church, and 
been cordially received. He has been poor, and they have 
thought it a good thing that poverty and grace should go to- 
gether — ^that grace should cheer his hovel, and make his 
poverty-stricken home a glad 05e. But then, this poor man 
hath turned aside to follies, and hath degraded himself with 
drunkenness, hath sworn, and by unworthy conduct dishon- 
ored his God ; or, if not, he hath been idle, and sat still, and 
been of little service to the church ; and so he hath been false 
and fruitless in his profession. 

False professors are to be found in the men that lead the 



THS FRUITLESS VINJfi. OS 

vanguard of God's anny ; the men who preach eloquently, 
whose opinion is law, who speak like prophets^ and whose lan- 
guage seems to be inspired. They have brought forth the 
fruit of popularity, ay, and the fruit of philanthropy too, but 
their heart has not been right with God, therefore, the fruit, 
good in itself, was not fruit unto holiness ; the moral benefit 
of their labors- does not extend to everlasting life. They have 
not brought forth the fruits of the Spirit, seeing that they 
were not living branches of the living vine. Then there have 
been false professors in obscurity ; modest people, who have 
said nothing, and seldom been heard of; they have glided into 
their pews on the Sunday morning, taken their seats, gone out, 
and satisfied themselves that by their presence they had fhfii^ed 
a religious duty. They have been so silent, quiet, and retired. 
Lazy fellows, doing nothing. You may think that all the fruit- 
less trees grow in the hedge outside of the garden. No they 
don't. There are some fruitless trees in the inside of it in the 
very center of it. There are some false professors to be found 
in obscurity as well as in publicity ; some among the poor as 
well as among the rich. ^ 

^ And there are false professors to be found among men that 
doubt a great deal. They are always afraid they do not love 
Jesus, and always saying, " Ah, if I did but know I were his ! 

" 'Tis a point I long to know, 
Oft it causes anxious thought." 

Yes, and it ought to cause them anxious thought, too, if they 
are bringing forth no fruit and giving no " diligence to make 
their calling and election sure." Fruitless professors are to 
be found, on the other hand, among the confident men, who 
say, without a blush, *' I know whom I have believed ; I 
know I am a Christian, let who will doubt. I am sure and 
certain my sins can not destroy me, and my righteousness can 
not save me. I may do what I like ; I know I am one of the 
Lord's." Ah I fruitless professor again ; just as fruitless as 
the other man, who had all doubts and no faith, and did noth- 
ing for his Master. 

And then there is the fruitless professor, who, when he is 
asked to pray at the prayer meeting, never does so ; and who 



64 THE FBU1TLB8S YINB. 

neglects family prayer. We will not say any thing about pri- 
vate devotion ; no doubt he neglects that too : he is a fruitless 
one. Ah! but there may be another, who stands up and 
prays such an eloquent prayer for a quarter of an hour, per- 
haps, just as fruitless a professor as the silent one ; with plenty 
of words, but no realities ; many leaves, but no fruits ; great 
gifts of utterance, but no gifts of consistency ; able to talk 
well, but not to walk well ; to speak piously, but not to walk 
humbly with his God, and serve him with gladness. I do not 
know your individual characters ; but I know enough of you 
to say that your position, however honorable in the church, 
and your character, however fair before men, is not enough 
to warrant any of you in concluding at once that you are 
not a fruitless professor. For fruitless professors are of 
every character and every rank, from the highest to the 
lowest, from the most talented to the most illiterate, from 
the richest to the poorest, from the most retiring to the 
most conspicuous. Fruitless professors there are in every 
part of the church. 

Now, shall I tell you who is a fruitless professor ? The man 
who neglects private prayer, and does not walk with his God 
in public ; that man whose carriage and conversation before 
God are hypocritical ; who cheats in trade and robs in busi- 
ness, yet wraps it up, and comes out with a fair face, like the 
hypocrite with a widow's house sticking in his throat, and says, 
" Lord, I thank thee I am not as other men are !" There is a 
man for you, who brings forth no fruit to perfection. Another 
one is he who lives right morally and excellently, and depends 
upon his works, and hopes to be saved by his righteousness ; 
who comes before God, and asks for pardon, with a lie in his 
right hand, for he has brought his own self-righteousness with 
him. Such a man is a fruitless professor; he has brought 
forth no fruit. That man, again, is a fruitless professor who 
talks big words about high doctrine, and likes sound truth, 
but he does not like sound living; his pretensions are high, 
but not his practice. He can beai* to hear it said, 

" Once in Christ, in Christ for ever." 
But as for himself, he never was in Christ at all, for he neither 



THE FBUITLBSS VINB. 65 

loves nor serves his Master, but lives in sin that grace may 
abound. Tliere is another fruitless vine for you. 

But why need I stop to pick you out ? May the Lord find 
you out to-night ! There are many of you here, concerning 
whom the curse of Meroz might be uttered. "Curse ye 
Meroz, said the angel of the Lord, curse ye bitterly the in- 
habitants thereof, because they came not to the help of the 
Lord ; to the help of the Lord against the mighty." Many 
of 'you are content to eat the fat and drink the sweet, and 
bring forth no fruit to God ; nor do you serve him — lazy Issa- 
cbars, crouching down like a strong ass between two burdens ; 
neither speaking for Christ, nor praying for Christ, nor giving 
to Christ, nor living to Christ ; but having a name to live, 
while you are dead ; wrapping yourselves up in a profession, 
while you are not living to Christ, nor consecrating your being 
to him. Judge ye what I say ; if ye were put into the sieve 
this night, how many of you would come out clean in this 
matter ? Are there not many high-flying professors here, who 
fly high, but who do nothing ; who can talk fast, but live as 
slowly as you like ; who, perhaps, delight in hearing the truth, 
but who never practice the truth in serving their God, nor liv- 
ing to his honor ? Such as you, sirs, are the most useless and 
worthless of all creatures in the world ! For, like the vine, 
you would be honorable if you were fruitful ; but without 
fruit, as the vine is despicable, so are you good for nothing but 
to be cast out and burned. 

2. And now I come to the second question — Why is it that 
these men are fruitless^ and must he cast away ? The reason 
is, because they have no roots. Many, many professors have 
no roots ; fine professors they are, beautifril to look at, but 
they have no roots whatever. Don't you remember your 
childish freak, when you had a little garden of your own ; 
when you plucked some flowers, and put them in the ground, 
and said that was your garden ; and when you went the next 
day, and found that all the flowers were withered and dead ? 
Such are many professors — pretty flowers, plucked off without 
roots ; having no adherence to the soil, drawing no sap and no 
nourishment from it. And therefore it is they die, and bring 
forth no fruit. You come to us ; and say, " I wish to join 



66 THB FBUITLBSS VINE. 

the church." We question you as far aa we are able ; you 
solemnly tell us that your hearts are right with God. We 
baptize you, receive you into our number ; but then there was 
no root in many of you, and after a while you die ; when the 
sun has risen with a burning heat you perish ; or if you main- 
tain a tolerably fair profession, yet there is never any fruit 
upon you, because you did not get the root first ; you got the 
notion first, and then thought you would get the root after- 
ward. I do tremble for many young people in my church — ^I 
will not exclude my own church. They get an idea into their 
heads that they are converted : the work was not true, not 
genuine, not real ; it was an excitement ; it was a stir in the 
conscience for a while, and it will not last. But the worst of 
it is, that though it does not last, they last as professors. 
When they have been received into the church, they say, "I 
am sure enough !" Preach about them as long as you please, 
you can not get at them. They are church members, they are 
baptized persons, they have passed the Rubicon ; what do they 
want more ? You can do little for them. I do tremble for 
these. For my most hard-hearted hearers I weep before God ; 
but for these people I need to have four eyes to weep with. 
For who can make an impression upon them, when they are 
firmly persuaded that they are right, and have had the seal of 
the church that they are right, though they are deceiving 
themselves and others, and are still " in the gall of bitterness 
and in the bond of iniquity." My young friends, I do not 
want to check any of you in joining a church ; but I do say to 
you, make sure work before you make a profession. I would 
say to as many of you as love the Lord, come forward and 
unite with God's people ; but, T beseech you, do be sure ; do 
" search your hearts and try your reins." Many have thought 
themselves converted when they were not ; hundreds of thou- 
sands have had an impression, a kind pf conversion, not real, 
which foi: a while endured, but afterward it passed away as a 
summer's dream. It was but a little while ago that I had in 
my house a gentleman, an excellent man, and I believe a true 
child of God, who told me he had been brought seriously 
under impression, on account of sin, through hearing a sermon 
of late. " But," said he, " I was baptized in my childhood. 



THB FBT7ITLBSS YIKE. W 

When I was but young, there was a revival in our village, in 
Kew England. Mine was the hardest heart in the village ; but 
I was found out at last. There was scarcely a girl or boy that 
did not join the church, and I was at last brought under deep 
impression. I used to weep before Gk)d, and pray to him. I 
went to the minister and told him I was converted, deceived 
him, and was baptized." And then he went on to tell me that 
he had dived into the blackest crimes, and gone far away, even 
from the profession of religion ; that after going to college he 
had been struck off the church-roll on account of wickedness, 
and that up to this time he had been an infidel, and had not 
BO much as thought of the things of the kingdom. Take heed, 
many of you, that you do not get a sham religion. Many 
jump into godliness as they would into a bath ; but they are 
very glad to jump out of it again, when they find the world 
pays them better. And many there are who will just come 
and say they are the Lord's, and they think they are, but there 
is no root in them, and therefore by-and-by their impressiqns 
pass away. O we have many fruitless professors in our midst, 
because they do not look well to their beginnings ; they did 
not take heed at their starting point, they did not watch well 
the first dawn ; they thought the little farthing rushlight of 
their own hopes was the dawning of the Sun of righteousness ; 
they thought the bleeding of their own conscience was a kill- 
ing by the hand of God, whereas it was a deeper, and better, 
and surer, and more entire work that they needed, than that 
which they received. Let us take heed, nay brethren, that we 
do not put too much trust in our experiences, and take too 
much for granted while it is not yet proved in our beginnings ; 
let us often go back and begin again ; let us often go to Christ 
with the old cry, 

" Nothing in my hands I bring, 
Simply to thy cross I oling ;" 

for remember that these bad beginnings have had a great 
effect in making a man fruitless. 

3. And again, thirdly — What is God's estimation of fruitless 
professors f I shall not ask you their own ; for there are 
many men who are professors of religion, with whom you 



08 THB FBUTTLESS YINB. 

might ma^ke your fortune very speedily if you corfd buy them 
at your price and sell theA at their own. There are many, 
too, that have a very good opinion of themselves, which they 
have gained from the church. The minister thinks well of 
them ; tKe church thinks well of them ; they are respectable 
people ; it is so nice to have them come, it helps the cause so, 
to see such respectable people sitting in the pews ! Really, I 
do think he would do for a deacon I Everybody thinks well 
of him ; everybody praises him. Now we have nothing to do 
with this kind of opinion to-night ; our business is with God's 
opinion of such a man. And God's opinion of a man who 
makes a profession without being sincere, is this — that he is 
the most useless thing in the world. And now let me try to 
prove it. Is there any one that will prove that this man is 
of any use at all ? I will ask the church — ^Here is a man that 
brings forth no fruit, and has only a profession. Members of 
the church, what is the use of this man ? Will he comfort any 
of you in your distress ? Will he hold up the pastor's handd 
in prayer, when he is weary ? Will he lead the troops to 
battle ? Will he be of any service to you ? I see you unani- 
mously lift up your hands, and say, " The man is of no use to 
us whatever, if he brings forth no fruit ; if his life be not con- 
sistent with his profession ; strike his name off the church-roU ; 
let him go ; he is of no use." Where has he gone to ? He 
has gone to the world. Bring the worldling up. What do 
you think of this man ? He makes a profession of religion. 
Is he of any use to you ? " No," they say, " we do not want 
such a fellow as that. The man is Jack-of-both-sides ; he is 
sometimes a professor of religion, and sometimes a sinner in 
the world. We will have nothing to do with him ; turn him 
out of our company." Where shall we sell him then ? How 
shall we dispose of him ? He seems to be of no use either to 
the church or the world. Is he of any use to his family ? Ask 
his eldest son. "John, is your father any good to you?" 
" No, sir ; none at all. He used to pray the Lord to save us 
with seeming earnestness, and rise from his knees to give vent 
to his temper. Many a violent blow baa he given me without 
any reasonable provocation. He was always a passionate man. 
He used to go to chapel on Sunday and take us with him ; 



THE FBUTTLBSS VINE. 69 

and then we know what he used to do on Monday ; he would 
get drunk, or swear. A deal of use he was ever to me I He 
made me an infidel, sir !" And his wife, " Well, what do you 
think of this good husband of yours ? He has long made a 
profession of religion." " Ah ! sir, it is not for me to say a 
word about my husband ; but he has made me a miserable 
woman. I think I should have joined your church long ago, 
if it had not been for his miserable inconsistencies. But really 
he has grieved my heart ; he has always been a stumbling- 
block to me; and what to do with him I do not know." 
Well, Jane, we will have you out of the kitchen. " What 
think you of your master ; he makes a profession of religion, 
yet does not live a right life. What do you think of him ?" 
" Well, I did think that Christians were a good sort of people, 
and that I should like to live with them ; but if this be Chris- 
tianity, sir, I will take five pounds a year less to live with a 
worldly man ; that's all I can say." Well, what is the use of 
him? I suppose he does something in business. He is a 
grand professor. He keeps a shop ; everybody thinks him a 
most respectable man. Has he not given a hundred pounds 
just now to the building of a new church ? Is he not always 
known to subscribe liberally to ragged schools ? We will ask 
his men. " What do you think of your master ?" "What do 
we think of him ? Why, we would think a great deal more of 
him if he would ^e us a half-crown a week more wages ; for 
he is the worst paymaster in the psu-ish." " That is nothing, 
perhaps. But what do you think of him ?" " Why, that he 
is an unutterable cant ! Some of us did go to a place of 
worship, but we are honest, and we would rather stay away 
than go with such a miserable hypocrite." I am describing 
real cases and not fictions. I need not to go further than be- 
tween this and London Bridge to knock at the door and wake 
them up, some of them. What is the good of such professors ? 
If they would speak fairly out, and say, " I am no Christian," 
there would be some sense in it. For if Baal be God, let Baal 
be served; and if the world be worth serving, let a man serve 
it out and out ; and let him get the credit of candor — ^not 
cheating the devil. But if God be God, and a man live in sin, 
and talk about grace, then of what use is he ? God himself 



YO THE FBUTTLBSS VINB. 

will disown him. Ask him if this man has been of any use, 
and he replies, " No, of no use whatever." The vine is of no 
nse unless it bring forth fruit ; and this man, making a pro- 
fession, is worse than worthless, because he does not live up to 
it. My dear friends, I would not say an extravagant thing, 
but I will say this very coolly — ^if any of you, who make a 
profession of religion, are deceiving others, by not living up to 
it, I do request you — and I say it advisedly — ^I do request you 
to give up your profession, unless God give you grace to live 
up to it. I)o not, I beseech you, halt between two opinions ; 
if God be God, serve him, and do it thoroughly ; do not tell 
lies about it. If Baal be God ; if he be a nice master ; if you 
would like to serve him, and win his wages, serve him ; but do 
not mix the two together ; be one thing, or else the other. 
Renounce your profession, and serve the devil thoroughly, or 
else keep your profession, and serve God with your heart — 
one thing, or else the other. I solemnly exhort you to choose 
which you will have, but never think that you can keep both ; 
for " no man can serve two masters." " Ye can not serve Gk)d 
and mammon." 

4. And now let me close up by mentioning what ie to become 
of this fruitless tree f We are told it is to be devoured in 
the fire. When an old vine is pulled off the wall, after having 
brought forth no fruit, what becomes of it ? You know there 
is a lot of weeds raked up in the corner «f the garden, and 
the gardener, without taking any notice of it, just throws the 
vine on the heap of weeds, and it is burned up. If it were 
any other kind of a tree he would at least reserve it for chop- 
ping up to make a fire within the. master's house; but this is 
much an ignominious thing, he throws it away in the comer, 
and bums it up with the weeds. If it were a stout old oak, it 
might have the funeral of the yule log, with honor in its burn- 
ing, and brightness in its flame ; but the fruitless vine is 
treated with contempt, and left to smoulder with the weeds, 
the refuse, and rubbish. It is a miserable thing. Just so with 
professors ; all men that love not God must perish. But those 
who profess to love him, and do not, shall perish with singular 
ignominy. " They shall not come into the sepulchres of the 
kings." Something like that ancient king, of whom it was 



THB FBDITLESS YINB. 71 

said, ^^ He shall be buried with the barial of an ass, drawn and 
cast forth beyond the gates of Jerusalem." The damnation 
of a professor will be the most horrible and ignominious sight 
that ever hell itself has seen I When Satan fell from heaven, 
with his black Satanic malice against God, there was a kind 
of grandeur in his devilry ; there was an awful, terrific sub- 
limity in his damnation ; and when a great blasphemer and a 
hard swearer shall be sent at last to perdition, there shall be 
something of sublimity in it, because he has been consistent 
with his profession. But when a professor of religion finds 
himself in hell, it shall be the most miserable, contemptible, 
and yet terrible mode of damnation wherewith men were ever 
damned. I think I see honest blasphemers lifting themselves 
from their chains of fire, and hissing between their teeth at 
the minister who comes there, after having been a deceiver — 
^^ Aha I aha I aha ! art thou here with us ? Thou didst warn us 
of our drunkenness, and tell us of our curse ; ah ! art thou 
come into the drunkard's hell thyself?" "Pshaw!" says 
another, " that is your strict Pharisee. Ah 1 1 remember how 
he told me one night that I should perish, unless I made a 
profession of religion. Take that, sir I" and he spits upon 
him. " Thou art a loathsome thing. I perished ; but I served 
my master well. Thou — thou didst pretend to serve God, and 
yet thou art a sneaking hypocrite!" Says another, yelling 
from the corner of 'the pit, " Let us have a Methodist hymn, 
sir ; quote a promise from the Bible ; tell us about election. 
Let us have a little of your fine preaching now." And round 
hell there goes the hiss, and the " aha ! aha ! aha !" and the yell 
of spitefulness and scorn upon the man who professed to be a 
Christian, but became a castaway, because his heart was not 
right in the matter. I confess, I should dread above all things 
the unutterable hell of hells of hypocritical apostates, of men 
that stand in the ranks, profess to love God, prate godliness, 
that sit in the pews and uphold Christianity, that take the 
sacrament, and speak about communion, that stand up to pray, 
and talk about being heard for their fidth, who are all the 
while committing abominations, and under cover of their pro- 
fessions are cheating the poor, robbing the fatherless, and 
doing all kinds of iniquity. I confess, I as much dread the 



72 THB FBT7ITLBSS VINE. 

J 

excess of their damnation, above the damnation of others, as 
I dread to be damned at all. It is as if in hell another hell 
had been made, to danm those that sin above others, to damn 
them after being damned — ^for hypocrites, for men who have 
been with us, and not of us ; who' professed to be Christ's, 
and yet have been mean deceivers after all. O I sirs, if ye 
would not make your chains more heavy, if ye would not stir 
the fire to a more furious heat, if ye would not make your 
yells more hideous, quit your professions this night, if ye are 
not worthy of them. Go out of this place, and send in your 
resignation to the church ; or else, sirs, be honest, and bend 
your knee before God, and ask him to search you, and try you, 
and make you sincere and upright before him. Be one thing, 
or else the other ; do not cloak yourself in the robes of sanc- 
tity to hide the corruptions that all the while fester beneath. 
Stand out, bold, brave sinners ; and do not be mean, sneaking 
sinners, that wear the masks of saints. " What is the vine 
more than any other tree ?" Without fruit it is worse than 
any other. It must perish more dolefully, more horribly than . 
any other, if there be on it no fruit brought to perfection. 
Does not this shake us ? Ah I it will shake you, very likely, 
that do not want the shaking ; but the men that want arous- 
ing will keep just as they were. It will go into the hearts of 
some of you, like the cry, " Howl, Moab, howl, Moab I" but 
alas I Moab will not howl. You will wei^^ for Kirhareseth, 
but Kirhareseth will not weep for herself. You will weep for 
your hypocritical friends ; but they will rub their eyes, and 
say, " A strong sermon ; but it has nothing to do with me." 
And they will go out with cool presumption ; sin with one 
hand, and take the sacramental cup with the other ; sing the 
lascivious song one night, and then sing, 

" Jeaufl, lover of my soul," 

the day after. Meet Christ here, and take the devil yonder, 
and bid him God speed in all his freaks of devilry. Ah I sirs, 
sirs, sirs, take heed, take heed, I beseech you, of this matter. 
Let us each search our hearts, lest we should have been de- 
ceived. And may God bring us to a right understanding in 
this matter, that we may be clear before him. " Search me. 



THE FBUITLESS VINB. 73 

God, and know my ways ; try me, and know my thoughts, 
and see if there be any wicked thing in me ; and lead me in the 
way everlasting." 

And, now, I must not send you away until I have had a 
word with my friend in the aisle there. He says, " I like that, 

1 like that ; I am no professor, I am not ; I am all right. No 
one can call me a hypocrite." Well, ray dear friend, I am 
very glad you are not, because you say you are no Christian. 
But let me tell you, you must not expect to be a wonderful 
deal the better off for that. Suppose two men are brought 
up before the Lord Mayor, and one says, " Your worship, I 
am an honest man and not guilty ;" and he blushes that an 
imputation should be cast on his character. Well, he is proved 
to be guilty, and gets committed to prison for three months. 
Up comes the other one, and says, " Your worship, I am a 
guilty man ; I always was a rogue, and I always shall be ; I 
don't make a profession at all." " I think I must give you six 
months," says his worship, " for really I think you must be 
the more determined rascal of the two." So if any of you 
say, " I do not make a profession, I shall be all right," let me 
tell you, that to make a lying profession is a very fearful thing ; 
but for you to think of getting off because you make no pro- 
fession at all, is equally bad. Take heed you do not deceive 
yourselves ; it must be the new heart and the right spirit with 
God, or else, profession or no profession, we must perish. O I 
that God would give us grace to go to our houses, and cry to 
him for mercy, and would help us to repent of our sins, and 
bring us to put our trust simply and wholly upon the Lord 
Jesus Christ I So should we be saved now, and saved for even 

4 



SERMON Y. 
SPIEITUAL REVIVAL THE WANT OF THE CHURCH. 

" Lord, revive thy work."— Hab., iH. 2. 

All true religion is the work of God : it is pre-eminently 
BO. If he should select out of his works that which he esteems 
most of all, he would select true religion. He regards the 
work of grace as being even more glorious than the works of 
nature ; and he is, therefore, especiaUj carefbl that it shall al- 
ways be known, so that if any one dare to deny it, they shall 
do so in the teeth of repeated testimonies to the contrary, that 
God is indeed the author of salvation in the world and in the 
hearts of men, and that religion is the effect of grace, and is 
the work of God. I believe the Eternal might sooner forgive 
the sin of ascribing the creation of the heavens and of the 
earth to an idol, than that of ascribing the works of grace to 
the efforts of the flesh, or to any thing else but God. It is a 
sin of the greatest magnitude to suppose that there is aught in 
the heart which can be acceptable unto God, save that which 
God himself has first created there. When I deny God's 
work in creating the sun, I deny one truth ; but when I deny 
that he works grace in the heart, I deny a hundred truths in 
one ; for in the denial of that one great truth, that God is the 
author of good in the souls of men, I have denied all the doc- 
trines which make up the great articles of faith, and have run 
in the very teeth of the whole testimony of sacred Scripture. 
I trust, beloved, that many of us have been taught, that if 
there be any thing in our souls which can carry us to heaven, 
it is God's work, and, moreover, that if there be aught that is 
good and excellent found in his church, it is entirely God's 
work, from first to last. We firmly believe that it is God who 
quickens the soul which was dead, positively " dead in tr#& 



SPIBITUAL BKVIVAL THE WANT OF THE CHUBOH. 15 

passes and sins ;" that it is God who maintains the life of that 
soul, and God who consummates and perfects that life in the 
home of the blessed, in the land of the hereafter. We ascribe 
nothing to man, but all to God. We dare not for a moment 
think that the conversion of the soul is effected either by its 
own effort or by the efforts of others ; we conceive that there 
ai*e means and agencies employed, but that the work is, both 
alpha and omega, wholly the Lord's. We think, therefore, 
that we are right in applying the text to the work of divine 
grace, both in the heart and in the church at large ; and we 
think we can have no subject more appropriate for our consid- 
eration than the text. " O Lord, revive thy work !" 

First, beloved, trusting that the Spirit of God will help me, 
I shall endeavor to apply the text to our ovm souls personally^ 
and then to the state of the chv/rch at large^ for it well needs 
that the Lord should revive his work in its midst. 

I. First, then, to oitbsblvss. We should begin at home. 
We too often flog the church, when the whip should be laid 
on our own shoulders. We drag the church, like a colossal 
culprit, to the altai- ; we bind her, and try to execute her at 
once ; we bind her hands fest, and tear off thongfull after 
thongfull of her quivering flesh — ^finding fault with her where 
there is none, and magnifying her little errors ; while we too 
often forget ourselves. Let us, therefore, commence with 
ourselves, remembering that we are part of the church, and 
that our own want of revival is in some measure the cause of 
that want in the church at large. 

Now, I directly charge the great majority of professing 
Christians — and I take the charge to myself also — with a need 
of a revival of piety in these days. I shall lay the charge be- 
fore you very peremptorily, because I think I have abundant 
grounds to prove it. I believe that the mass of Christian men 
in this age need a revival, and my reasons are these : 

In the first place, look at the conduct and conversation of 
too many who profess to be the children of God. It ill be- 
comes any man who occupies the sacred place of a pulpit to 
flatter his hearers, and I shall not attempt to do so. The evil 
lies with too many of you who unite yourselves with Christian 
churches, and in practically protesting against your profession^ 



1^ SPIBmjAL BEVIVAL THE WANT OF THE CHUBCH. 

It has become very common now-a-days to join a charch ; go 
where you may you find professing Christians who sit down 
at some Lord's table or another ; but are there fewer cheats 
than there used to be? Are there less frauds committed? 
Do we find morality more extensive ? Do we find vice en- 
tirely at an end ? No, we do not. The age is as immoral as 
any that preceded it ; there is still as much sin, although it is 
more cloaked ajd hidden. The outside of the sepulcher may 
be whiter ; but within, the bones are just as rotten as before. 
Society is not one whit improved. Those men who, in our 
popular magazines, give us a true picture of the state of Lon- 
don life, are to be believed and credited, for they do not stretch 
the truth — they have no motive for so doing ; and the picture 
which they give of the morality of this great city is certainly 
appalling. It is a huge criminal, full of sin ; and I say this, 
that if all the profession in London were true profession, it 
would not be nearly such a wicked place as it is ; it could not 
be, by any manner of means. My brethren, it is well known 
— and who dares deny it that is not too partial, smd who will 
not speak willful falsehood ? — ^it is well known that it is not in 
these days a sufficient guaranty even of a man's honesty, that 
he is a member of a church. It is a hard thing for Christian 
ministers to say, but we must say it, and if friends say it not, 
enemies will ; and better that the truth should be spoken in 
our own midst, that men may see that we are ashamed of it, 
than that they should hear us impudently deny what we must 
confess to be true ! O sirs, the lives of too many members of 
Christian churches give us grave cause to suspect that there is 
none of the life of godliness in them all ! Why that reaching 
after money, why that covetousness, why that following of the 
crafts and devices of a wicked world, why that clutching here 
and clutching there, that giinding of the faces of the poor, 
that stamping down of the workman, and such like things, if 
men are truly what they profess to be ? God in heaven knows 
that what I speak is true, and too many here know it them- 
selves. If they be Christians, at least they want revival f if 
there be life in them, it is but a spark that is covered up with 
heaps of ashes ; it needs to be fanned, ay, and it needs to be 
stirred also, that, haply, ^ome of llie ashes may be removed. 



, SPIBmiAL REVIVAL THE WANT OP THE CHUBCti. ?7 

and the spark may have place to live. The church wants re- 
vival in the persons of its members. The members of Chris- 
tian churches are not what once they were. It is fashionable 
to be religious now ; persecution is taken away ; and ah I I 
had almost said, the gates of the church were taken away with 
it. The church has, with few exceptions, no gates now ; per- 
sons come in, and go out of it, just as they would march 
through St. Paul's cathedral, and make it a very place of traf- 
fic, instead of regarding it as a select and sacred spot, to be 
apportioned to the holy of the Lord, and to the excellent of 
the earth, in whom is God's delight. If this be not true, you 
know how to treat it ; you need not confess to sin you have 
not committed ; but if it be true, and true in your case, O ! 
humble yourselves under the mighty hand of God ; ask hira 
to search and try you, that if you be not his child you may be 
helped to renounce your profession, lest it should be to you 
but the gaudy pageantry of death, and mere tinsel and gew- 
gaw in which to go to hell. If you be his, ask that he may 
give you more grace, that you may renounce these faults and 
follies, and turn unto him with full purpose of heart, as the ef- 
fect of a revived godliness in your soul. 

Again : where the conduct of professing Christians is con- 
sistent, let me ask the question. Does not the conversation of 
many a professor lead us either to doubt the truthfulness of 
'his piety, or else to pray that his piety may be revived ? Have 
you noticed the conversation of too many who think them- 
selves Christians ? You might live with them from the first 
of January to the end of December, and you would never be 
tired of their religion for what you would hear of it. They 
scarcely mention the name of Jesus Christ at all. On Sabbath 
afternoon all the ministers are talked over, faults are found 
with this one and the other, and all kinds of conversation take 
place, which they call religious, because it is concerning re- 
ligious places. But do they ever talk of what he said and did, 
and what he suflfered for us here below ? Do you often hear 
the salutation addressed to you by your brother Christian, 
" Friend, how doth thy soul prosper ?" When we step into 
each other's houses, do we begin to talk concerning the cause 
and truth of God ? Do yqu think that God would now stoop 



is SPIRITUAIi BEVTVAL THE WANT OP THE CHUECH. 

from heaven to listen to the conversation of his church, as 
once he did, when it was said, " The Lord hearkened and 
heard, and a book of remembrance was written for them that 
feared the Lord and that thought upon his name ?" I sol- 
emnly declare, as the result of thorough, and, I trust, impar- 
tial observation, that the conversation of Christians, while it 
can not be condemned on the score of morality, must almost 
invariably be condemned on the score of Christianity. We 
talk too little about our Lord and Master. That word secta- 
rianism has crept into our midst, and we must say nothing 
about Christ, because we are afraid of being called sectarians. 
I am a sectarian, and hope to be so until I die, and to glory in 
it ; for I can not see, now-a-days, that «a man can be a Chris- 
tian, thoroughly in earnest, without winning for himself the 
title. Why, we must not talk of this doctrine, because per- 
haps such a one disbelieves it ; we must not notice such and 
such a truth in Scripture, because such and such a friend 
doubts or denies it ; and so we drop all the great and grand 
topics which used to be the staple commodities of godly talk, 
and begin to speak of any thing else, because we feel that we 
can agree better on worldly things than we can on spiritual. Is 
not that the truth ? and is it not a sad sin with some of us, 
that we have need to pray unto God, " O Lord, revive thy 
work in my soul, that my conversation may be more Christ- 
like, seasoned with salt, and kept by the Holy Spirit?" 

And yet a third remark here. There are some whose con- 
duct is all that we could wish, whose conversation is for the 
most part unctuous with the gospel, and savory of truth ; but 
even they will confess to a third charge, which I must now 
sorrowfully bring against them and against myself, namely, 
that there is too little real communion vrlth Jesus Christ, I^ 
thanks to divine grace, we are enabled to keep our conduct 
tolerably consistent, and our lives unblemished, yet how much 
have we to cry out against ourselves, from a lack of that holy 
fellowship with Jesus which is the high mark of the true child 
of God ! Brethren, let me ask some of you how long it is 
since you have had a love-visit from Jesus Christ — how long 
since you could say, " My beloved is mine, and I am his ; he 
feedet^ among the lilies ?" How long is it since " he brought 



jspibitual bevital the want of the chubch. 79 

you into his banqueting house, and his banner over yon was 
love ?" Perhaps some of you will be able to say, " It was but 
this morning that I saw him ; I beheld his face with joy, and 
was ravished with his countenance.^' But I fear the greatest 
part of you will have to say, " Ah, sir, for months I have been 
without the shinings of his countenance." What have you 
been doing, then, and what has been your way of life ? Have 
you been groaning every day? Have you been weeping 
every minute ? " No !" Then you ought to have been. I 
can not understand how your piety can be of'any very brilliant 
order, if you can live without the sunlight of Christ, and yet 
be liappy. Christians will lose sometimes the society of Jesus ; 
the connection between themselves and Christ will be at times 
severed, as to their own feeling of it ; but thisy will always 
groan and cry when they lose their Jesus. What ! is Christ 
thy Brother, and does he live in thine house, and yet thou 
hast not spoken to him for a month ? I fear there is little 
love between thee and thy Brother, for thou hast had no con- 
versation with him for so long. What I is Christ the Hus- 
band of his church, and has she had no fellowship with him 
for all this time ? Brethren, let me not condemn you, let me 
not even judge you, but let your conscience speak. Mine 
shall, and so shall youi*s. Have we not too much forgotten 
Christ ? Have we not lived too much without him ? Have 
we not been contented with the world, instead of desiring 
Christ ? Have we been, all of us, like that little ewe lamb 
that did drink out of the master's cup, and feed from his 
' table ? Have we not rather been content to sti-ay upon the 
mountains, feeding anywhere but at home ? I fear many of 
the troubles of our heart spring from want of communion with 
Jesus. Not many of us are the kind of men who, living with 
Jesus, his secrets must know. O ! no ; we live too much 
without the light of his countenance ; and are too happy when 
he is gone from us. Let us, each of us, then, for I am sure 
we have each of us need, in some measure, put up the prayer, 
*' O Lord, revive thy work !" Ah ! methinks I hear one pro- 
fessor saying, " Sir, I need no revival in my heart ; I am 
every thing I wish to be." Down on your knees, my breth- 
ren ! down on your knees for him ! He is the man that most 



80 SPIBITUAL REVIVAL THE WANT OF THE CHUBOH. 

needs to be pmyed for. He says that he needs no revival in 
his soul ; but he needs a revival of his humility, at any rate. 
If he supposes that he is all that he ought to be, and if he 
knows that he is all he wishes to be, he has very mean notions 
of what a Christian is, or of what a Christian should be, and 
very unjust ideas of himselfi Those are in the best condition 
who, while they know they want reviving, yet feel their con- 
dition and groan under it. 

Now, I think I have in some degree substantiated my 
charge, I fear w*th too strong arguments ; and now let me 
notice, that the text has something in it which I trust that 
each of us has. Here is not only an evil implied in these 
^ords — " O Lord, revive thy work ;" but there is an evil evi- 
dently felt. You see Habakkuk knew how to gi'oan about it. 
" O Lord," said he, " revive thy work !" Ah ! we many of us 
want revival, but few of us feel that we want it. It is a 
blessed sign of life within, when we know how to groan over 
our departures from the living God. It is easy to find by 
hundreds those that have departed, but you must count those 
by ones who know how to groan over their departure. The 
true believer, however, when he discovers that he needs re- 
vival, will not be happy ; he will begin at once that incessant 
and continuous strain of cries and groans which will at last 
prevail with God, and bring the blessing of revival down. 
He will, days and nights in succession, <a-y, " O Lord, revive 
thy work !" 

Let me mention some groaning times, which will always 
occur to the Christian who needs revival. I am sure he will 
always groan, when he looks upon what the Lord did for him 
of old. When he recollects the Mizars and the Hermons, 
and those places where the Lord appeared of old to him, say- 
ing, " I have loved thee with an everlasting love," I know he 
will never look back to them without tears. If he is what he 
should be as a Christian, or if he thinks he is not in a right 
condition, he will always weep when he remembers God's 
loving-kindness of old. O ! whenever the soul has lost fellow- 
ship with Jesus, it can not bear to think of the " chariots of 
Aminadab ;" it can not endure to think of " the banqueting 



SPIEITUAL BBVIVAL THE WANT OP THE CHXTRCH. 81 

house," for it hath not been there so long ; and when it does 
think of it, it says, 

* " The peaceful hours I then enjoyed, 
How sweet their memory still. 
But they have left an aching void 
The worid can never fill" 

When he hears a sermon which relates the glorious experience 
of the believer who is in a healthy state, he will put his hand 
upon his heart, and say, " Ah ! such was my experience once ; 
but those happy days are gone. My sun is set ; those stars 
which once lit up my darkness are all quenched ; O ! that I 
might again behold him ; O ! that I might once more see his 
face ; O ! for those sweet visits from on high ; O I for the 
grapes of Eschol once more." And by the rivers of Babylon 
you will sit down and weep. You will weep, when you re- 
member your goings up to Zion — when the Lord was precious 
to you, when he laid bare his heart, and was pleased also to 
fill your heart with the fullness of his love. Such times will 
be groaning times, when you remember "the years. of the 
right hand of the Most High." 

Again, to a Christian who wants revival, ordinances will be 
also groaning times. He will go up to the house of God ; but 
he will say of himself when he comes away, " Ah I how changed 1 
When I once went with the multitude that kept holy day every 
word was precious. When the song ascended my soul had 
wings, and up it flew to its nest among the stars ; when the 
prayer was offered, I could devoutly say, ' Amen ;' but now 
the preacher preaches as he did before ; my brethren are as 
profited as once they were ; but the sermon is dry to me, and 
dull. I find no fault Avith the preacher ; I know the fault is 
in myself. The song is just the same — as sweet the melody, 
as pure the harmony ; but ah 1 my heart is heavy ; ray harp 
strings are broken, and I can not sing ;" and the Christian will 
return from those blessed means of grace, sighing and sobbing, 
because he knows he wants revival. More especially at the 
Lord's Supper he will think, when he sits at the table, " O ! 
what seasons I once had here ! In breaking the bread and 
drinkif g the wine my Master was present." He will bethink 

4* 



82 spntmrAL revival the want op the church. 

himself how his soul was even carried to the seventh heaven, 
and the house was made " the very house of God and the gate 
of heaven." " But now," he says, " it is bread, ^ry bread to 
me ; it is wine, tasteless wine, with none of the sweetness of 
paradise in it ; I drink, but all in vain. No thoughts of Christ. 
My ^eart >vill not rise ; my soul can not heave a thought half 
waj to him !" And then the Christian will begin to groan 
agan — " O Lord revive thy work !'* 

But I shall not detain you upon that subject. Those of you 
who know that you are in Christ, but feel that you are not in 
a desirable condition, because you do not love him enough, 
and have not that &ith in him which you desire to have, I 
would just ask you this : Do you groan over it ? Can you 
groan now ? When you feel your heart is empty, is it " an 
aching void ?»* When you feel that your garments are stained, 
can you wash those garments with tears ? When you think 
your Lord is gone, can you hang out the black flag of sor- 
row, and cry, " O my Jesus ! O my Jesus ! art thou gone ?'* 
If thou canst, then I bid thee do it. Do it, do it ; and may 
God be pleased to give thee grace to continue to do it, until 
a happier era shall dawn in the reviving of thy soul ! 

And remark, in the last place, upon this^oint, that the soul, 
when it is really brought to feel its own sad estate, because of 
its declension and departure from God, is never content with- 
out turning its groanings into prayer^ and without address- 
ing the prayer to the right quarter: "O Lord, revive thy 
work !" Some of you, perhaps, will say, " Sir, I feel my need 
of revival ; I intend to set to work this very afternoon, as soon 
as I shall retire from this place, to revive my soul." Do not 
say it ; and, above all things, do not try to do it, for you never 
will do it. Make no resolutions as to what you will do ; your 
resolutions will as certainly be broken as they are made, and 
your broken resolutions will but increase the number of your 
sins. I exhort you, instead of trying to revive yourself, to 
offilr prayers. Say not, " I will revive myself," but cry, " O 
Lord, revive thy work !" And let me solemnly tell thee, thou 
hast not yet felt what it is to decline, thou dost not yet know 
how sad is thine estate, otherwise thou wouldest not talk of 
reviving thyself. If thou didst know thy own position, thou 



SPIRITCrAL REVIVAL THE WANT OP THE CHUECH. 88 

wouldest as soon expect to see the wounded soldier on the 
battle-field heal himself without medicine, or convey himself 
to the hospital when his limbs are shot away, as thou wouldest 
expect to revive thyself without the help of God. I bid thee 
not do any thing, nor seek to do any thing, until fii-st of all 
thou hast addressed Jehovah himself by mighty prayer — until 
thou hast cried out, " O Lord, revive thy work !•' Remember, 
he that first made you must keep you alive ; and he that has 
kept you alive must restore more life to you. He that has 
preserved you from going down to the pit, when your feet 
have been sliding, can alone set you again upon a rock, and 
establish your goings. Begin, then, by humbling yourself— 
giving up all hope of reviving yourself as a Christian, but be- 
ginniiyg at once with finn prayer and earnest supplication to 
God : " O Lord, what I can not do, do thou I O Lord, revive 
thy work I" 

Christian brethren, I leave these matters with you. Give 
them the attention they deserve. If I have erred, and in 
aught judged you too harshly, God shall forgive me, for I 
have meant it honestly. But if I have spoken truly, lay it 
to your hearts^ and turn your houses into a " Bochim." .Weep 
men apart^ and women apart, husbands apart, and wives apart. 
Weep, weep, my brethren : " It is a sad thing to depart from 
the liviijg God." Weep, and may he bring you back to Zion, 
that you may one day return like Israel, not with weeping, 
but with songs of everlasting joy ! 

IL And now I come to the second part of the subject, upon 
which I must be more brief. In the chubch itself, taken as 
a body, this prayer ought to be one incessant and solemn lit- 
any : " O Lord, revive thy work !" 

In the present era there is a sad decline of the vitality of 
godlineas. This age has become too much the age of form, 
instead of the age of life. I date the hour of life from this day 
one hundred years ago when the first stone was laid of this 
building in which we now worship God. Then was the day 
of life divine, and of power, sent down from on high. God 
had clothed Whitefield with power : he was preaching with a 
majesty and a might of which one could scarcely think mortal 
could ey^r be capable ; not because he was any thing in him- 



84 spiBrruAL revival thk want op the chuboh. 

sel^ but because his Master girded him with might. After 
Whitetield there was a succession of great and holy men. But 
now, sirs, we have fallen upon the dregs of time. Men are 
the rarest things in all this world ; we have not many left 
now. We have no men in government hardly, to conduct 
our politics, and scarcely any men in religion. We have the 
things that perform their duties, as they are called ; we have 
the good, and, perhaps, the honest things, who in the regular 
routine go on like pack-horses with their bells, for ever in the 
old style ; but men who dare to be singular, because to be 
singular is generally to be right in a wicked world, are not 
very many in this age. Compai'ed with the puritanic times 
even, where are our divines? Could we marshal together 
our Howes and our Chamocks ? Could we gather together 
such names as I could mention about fifty at a time ? I trow 
not. Nor could we bring together such a galaxy of grace 
and talent as that which immediately followed Whitefield. 
Think of Rowland Hill, Newton, Toplady, Doddridge, and 
numbers of others whom time would fail me to mention. 
They are gone, they are gone ; their venerated dust sleeps in 
the earth ; and where are their successors ? Ask where, and 
echo shall reply, " Where ?" There are none. Successors of 
them, where are they ? God hath not yet raised them up, or, 
if he have, you have not yet found out where they are. There 
is preaching, and what is it ? " O Lord, help thy servant to 
preach, and teach him by thy Spirit what to say." Then out 
comes the manuscript, and they read it. A pure insult to Al- 
mighty God ! We have preaching, but it is of this order. It 
is not preaching at all. It is speaking very beautifully and 
very finely, possibly eloquently, in some sense of the word ; 
but where is the right down preaching, such as Whitefield's ? 
Have you ever read one of his sermons ? You will not think 
him eloquent; you can not think him so. His expressions 
were rough, frequently very coarse and unconnected ; there 
was very much declamation about him ; it was a great pari, 
indeed, of his speech. But where lay his eloquence ? Not in^ 
the words you read, but in the tone in which he delivered 
them, and in the earnestness with which he felt them, and in 
the tears which ran down his cheeks, and in the pouring out 



SPIRITUAL BEVIVAL THE WANT OF THE CHUBCH. 85 

of his soul. The reason why he was eloquent was just what 
the word means. He was eloquent, because he spoke right 
out from his heart — ^from the innermost depths of the man. 
You could see when he spoke that he meant what he said. 
He did not speak as a trade, or as a mere machine, but he 
pi*eached what he felt to be the truth, and what he could not 
help preaching. When you heard him preachy you could not 
help feeling that he was a man who would die if he could not 
preach, and with all his might call to men and say, '' Cogpie I 
come I come to Jesus Christ, and believe on him 1" Now, 
that is just the lack of these times. Where, where is eamest- 
^ness now ? It is neither in pulpit nor yet in pew, in such a 
measure as we desire it ; and it is a sad, sad age, when earn- 
estness is scoffed at, and when that very zeal which ought to 
be the promin^it characteristic of the pulpit is regarded as 
enthusiasm and fanaticism. I ask God to make us all such 
fanatics as most men laugh at — ^to make us all just such enthu- 
siasts as many despise. We reckon it the greatest fanaticism 
in the world to go to hell, the greatest enthusiasm upon earth 
to love sin better than righteousness; and we think those 
neither fanatics nor enthusiasts who seek to obey God rather 
than man, and follow Christ in all his ways. We repeat, that 
one sad proof that the church wants revival is the absence of 
that death-like, solemn earnestness which was once seen in 
C hristian pulpits. 

ITie absence of sound doctrine is another proof of our want 
>f revival. Do you know who are* called Antimonians now, 
who are called '* hypeia," who are laughed at, who are re- 
jected as being unsound in the faith ? Why, the men that 
once were the orthodox aj*e now the heretics. We can turn 
back to the records of our Puritan fathers, to the articles of 
the Church of England, to the preaching of Whitefield, and wo 
can say of that preaching, it is the very thing we love ; and 
the doctrines which were then uttered are — and we dare to say 
it everywhere — the very self-same doctrines that he proclaimed. 
But because we choose to proclaim them, we are thought sing- 
ular and strange ; and the reason is, because sound doctrine 
hatli to a great degree ceased. It began in this \Yay. Fhst 
of all tl^ truths were fully believed, but the angles w^re a 



86 spntrrcTAL beyiyal the want of the ohubch. 

little taken off. The minister believed election, but he did not 
use the word, for fear it should in some degree disturb the 
equanimity of the deacon in the green pew in the comer. 
He believed that all men were depraved, but he did not say it 
positively, because if he did, there was a lady who had sub- 
scribed so much to the chapel — she would not come i^ain ; so 
that while he did believe it, and did say it in some sense, he 
rounded it a little. Afterward it came to this. Ministers 
sai^ (( ^e believe these doctrines, but we do not think them 
profitable to preach to the people. They are quite true : free 
grace is true ; the great doctrines of grace that were preached 
Sy Christ, by Paul, by Augustine, by Calvin, and down to this 
age by their successors, are true ; but they had better be kept 
back — they must be very cautiously dealt with ; they are very 
high and dreadful doctrines, and they must not be preached ; 
we believe them, but we dare not speak them out." After 
that it came to something worae. They said within them- 
selves, " Well, if these doctrines will not do for us to preach, 
perhaps they are not true at all ;" and going one step further, 
they said they dare not preach them. They did not actually 
say it, perhaps, but they began just to hint that .they were not 
true ; then they went one step further, giving us something 
which they said was the truth ; and then they would cast us 
out of the synagogue, as if they were the rightful owners of it, 
and we were the intruders. So they have passed on from bad 
to worse ; and if you read the standard divinity of this age, 
and the standard divinity of Whitefield's day, you will find that 
the two can not by any possibility stand together. We have 
got a "new theology." New theology? Why, it is any 
thing but a Theology ; it is an ology which hath cast out God 
utterly and entirely, and enthroned man, as it is the doctrine 
of man, and not the doctrine of the everlasting God. We 
want a revival of sound doctrine once more in the midst of the 
land. 

And the church at large, may be, wants a revival qf down- 
right earnestness in its members. Ye are not the men to fight 
the Lord's battles yet. Ye have not the earnestness, the zeal, 
which once the children of God had. Your fore&thers were 
oaken men ; ye are willow men. Our people, what are they. 



.KPmmTAL REVIVAL THB WANT OP THB CHURCH, 8Y 

many of them ? Strong in doctrine when they are with strong- 
doctrine men 5 but they waver when they get with others, and 
tliey change as often as they change their company 5 they are 
sometimes one thing, and sometimes another. They are not 
the men to go to the stake and die ; they are not the men that 
know how to die daily, and so are ready for death when it 
comes. Look at our prayer-meetings, with here and there a 
bright exception. Go in. There are six women; scarcely 
ever enough members come to pray four times. Look at 
them. Prayer-meetings they are called ; spare meetings they 
ought to be called, for sparely enough they are attended. And 
very few there are that go to our fellowship-meetings, or to 
any other meetings that we have to help one another in the 
fear of the Lord. Are they attended at all ? I would like to 
see a newspaper prmted somewhere, containing a list of all the 
pei*sons that went to those meetings during the week in any of 
our chapels. Ah I my friends, if they should comprise all the 
Ohristians in London, you might find that a chapel or two 
would h(^d them all. There are few enough that go. We 
have not earnestness, we have not life, as we once had ; if we 
had, we i^oald be called worse names than we are ; we should 
have viler epithets thrown at us, if we were more true to our 
Master ; we should not have all things quite so comfortable, 
if we served God better. We are getting the church to be an 
institution of our land — an honorable institution. Ah ! some 
think it a grand thing when the church becomes an honorable 
institution ! Methinks it shows the church has swerved, when 
she begins to be very honorable in the eyes of the world. She 
must still be cast out, she must still be called evil, and still be 
despised, until that day shall come, when her Lord shall honor 
her because she has honored him — shall honor her, even in this 
world, in the day of his appearing. 

Beloved, do you think it is true that the church wants re- 
viving ? Yes, or no ? " No," you say, " not to the extent 
that you suppose. We think the church is in a good condi- 
tion. We are not among those who cry, ' The former days 
were better than these.' " Perhaps you are not : you may be 
far wiser than we are, and therefore you are able to see those 
various signs of goodness which are to us so small that we arM 



88 SPIRITUAL BBYIYAL THB WAin* OF THB CHUBCH. 

not able to diseover them. You may suppose that the church 
is m a good condition ; if so, of course yoU can not sympathize 
with me in preaching from such a text, and urging you to use 
such a prayer. But there are others of you who are frequently 
prone to cry, " The church wants reviving.'* Let me bid you, 
instead of grumbling at your minister, instead of finding &ult 
with the different parts of the church, to cry, " O Lord revive 
thy work !" " O !" says one, " if we had another minister. 
O ! if we had another kind of worship. O I if we had a dif- 
ferent sort of preaching." Just as if that were all I It is, 
" O ! if the Lord would come into the hearts of the men you 
have got. O I if he would make the forms you do use full of 
power." You do not want fi-esh ways or fresh machinery ; 
you want the life in what you have. There is an engine on 
a railway ; a train has to be moved. ** Bring another engine," 
says one, '^and another, and another." The engines are 
brought, but the train does not move at all. Light the fire, 
and get the steam up, that is what you want ; not fresh en^ 
gines. We do not want fresh ministers, or fresh plans, or 
fresh ways, though many might be invented, to make the 
church better; we only want life in what we have g^. Given, 
the very man who has emptied your chapel ; given, the self- 
same person that brought your prayer-meeting low ; God can 
make the chapel crowded to the doors yet, and give thousands 
of souls to that very man. It is not a new man that is wanted ; 
it is the life of God in him. Do not be crying out for some- 
thing new ; it will no more succeed, of itself, than what you 
have. Cry, " O Lord, revive thy work !" I have noticed in 
different churches, that the minister has thought first of this 
contrivance, then of that. He tried one plan, and thought 
that would succeed ; then he tiied another ; that was not it. 
Keep to the old plan, but get life in it. We do not want any- 
thing new ; " the old is better" — ^let us keep to it. But we 
want the life in the old. " O I" men cry, " we have nothing 
but the shell ; they are going to give us a new shell." No, 
sirs, we will keep the old one, but we will have the life in the 
shell too ; we will have the old thing ; but we must, or else we 
will throw the old away, have the life in the old. O ! that 
God would give us lite. The church wants fresh revivals. 



spiBnrrAL bevival the want op the church. 89 

O! for the days of Cambuslang again, when Whitefield preached 
with power. O I for the days when in this place hundreds 
were converted sometimes under Whitefield's sermons. It has 
been known that two thousand credible cases of conversion 
have happened under one solitary discourse. O I for the age 
when eyes should be strained, and ears should be ready to re- 
ceive the word of God, and when men should drink in the 
word of life, as it is indeed, the very water of life, which God 
gives to dying souls ! O ! for the age of deep feeling — the 
age of deep, thorough-going earnestness I Let us ask God for 
it ; let us plead with him for it. Perhaps he has the man, or 
the men, somewhere, who will shake the world yet ; perhaps 
even now he is about to pour forth a mighty influence upon 
men, which shall make the church as wonderful in this age, as 
it ever was in any age that has passed. 



SERMON VI. 
THE ANXIOUS INQUIRER. 

" that I knew where I might find him."-^OB, xriii. 3. 

We will say nothing at this time concerning Job — we will 
leave the patinarch out of the question, and take these words 
as the exclamation forced front the aching heart of a sinner, 
when he iinds that he is lost on account of sin, and can only 
be saved by Christ. "O that I knew where I might find 
him" — " my Saviour — that I might be saved by his love and 
blood !" There are some who tell us that a man can, if he 
pleases, in one moment obtain peace with God and joy in the 
Holy Ghost. Such persons may know something of religion 
in their own hearts ; but I think they are not competent to be 
judges of others. God may have given them some peace 
through believing, and brought them immediately into a state 
of joy ; he may have given them some repentance for sin, and 
then given them quickly to rejoice in Jesus ; but I believe 
that, in many more cases, God begins by breaking the iron 
heart in pieces, and often makes a delay of days, of weeks, 
and of months, before he heals the heart which he has wounded, 
and gives life to the spirit which he has killed. Many of God's 
people have been, even for years, seeking peace, and finding 
none ; they have known their sins, they have been permitted 
to feel their guilt, and yet, notwithstanding that they have 
sought earnestly with tears, they have not attained to a knowl- 
edge of their justification by fiiith in Christ. Such was the 
case with John Bunyan ; for many a dreaiy month he walked 
the earth desolate, and said he knew himself to be lost with- 
out Christ ; on his bended knees, with tears pouring like 
showers from his eyes, he sought mercy but he found none. 
Terrible words haunted him continnally ; dreadful passages 



THB ANXIOUS INQUIBBB. 91 

of Sci-ipture were qaoted in his ears ; and he found no conso- 
lation, until afterward God was pleased to appear to him in 
all the plenitude of grace, and give him to cast himself on the 
Saviour. 

I think there may be some here who have been for some 
time under the hand of Gk)d — some who have been brought so 
fsLT toward heaven as to know this, that they are undone un- 
less Christ shall save them. I may be addressing some who 
have begun to pray ; many a time the walls of their chamber 
have listened to their supplication ; not once, nor twice, nor 
fifty times, but very often have they bent their knee in agon- 
izing prayer : and yet up to this moment, so far as their own 
-feelings are concerned, their prayers are unanswered, Christ 
has not smiled upon them, they have not received the appli- 
cation of his precious blood, and mayhap they are saying at 
this hour, " I am ready to give up all in despair ; he said he 
would i-eceive all that came to him, and he has apparently re- 
jected me.'' Take heart, O mouraer I I have a sweet message 
to thee ; and I pray the Lord that thou mayest find Christ on 
the spot where thou aH now standing or dtting, and rejoice 
in a pardon bought with blood. 

I shall now proceed to consider the case of a man who 
is awakened, who is seeking Christ, but who at present has 
not, in his own apprehension, found him. First, I shall notice 
some hopeful signs in this man?s case; secondly, I shall try 
to give some reasons whxi it is that a gracious ^od delays an 
ansioer to prayer in the case of pemtetit sinners; and then, 
thirdly, I shall close up by giving some brief and suitable ad- 
vice to those who have been seeking Christy but have up to the 
present time found it a hopeless search. 

I. First, then, I notice, there abb soke vbby hopeful 

SIGNS IN THE CASE OP THE MAN WHO HAS BEEN SEEEXNG 
ChBIST, THOUOH he mat NOT HAVE POUND HIM. 

And taking the text for a gronnd-work, we notice as one 
hopeful sign, that the man has only one object^ and that is 
Christ. " O that I knew where I might find him I" The 
worldling's cry is, " Who will show us any good ; this good, 
that good, or any other good — ^fifty kinds of good : who will 
show us these ?" But the quickened sinner knows of only 



92 ^"HB ANXIOUS INQUIREE. 

one good. " O that I knew where I might find him I" 
When the sinner is truly awakened to feel his gailt, if you 
could pour the gold of India at his feet, he would say, " Take 
it away : I want to find him." If you could then give him all 
the joys and delights of the flesh, he would tell you he had 
tried all these, and they but cloyed upon his appetite. His 
only cry is, " O that I knew where I might find him !" 

" These will never satisfy ; 
Give me Christ or else I die." 

It is a blessed thing for a man when he has brought his de- 
sires into a focus. When a man has fifty different desires, his 
heart resembles a pool of water, which is spread over a marsh, 
breeding miasma and pestilence ; but when all his desires are 
brought into one channel, his heart becomes like a river of 
pure water, running along and*fertiliidng the fields. Happy is 
the man who hath one desire, if that one desire is set on Christ, 
though it may not yet have been realized. If it be his desire, 
it is a blessed sign of the divine work within him. Such a 
man will never be content with mere ordinances. Other men 
will go up to God's house, and when they have heard the ser- 
mon, they will be satisfied ; but not so this man ; he will say, 
"O that I knew where I might find him!" His neighbor 
who hears the sermon will be satisfied ; but this man will say, 
" I want more than that ; I want to find Christ in it." An- 
other man will go to the sacramental table ; he will eat the 
bread and drink the wine, and that will be Plough for hira ; 
he will be contented with it. But the quickened sinner will 
say, " No bread, no wine will satisfy me ; I want Christ ; I 
must have him ; mere ordinances are of no use to me ; I want 
not the Saviour's clothes ; I want himself; do not offer me 
these ; you offer me the empty pitcher while I am dying of 
thirst ; give me water, water, or I die. It is this I want." 
As we have it here in the text, " O that I knew where I 
might find him !" 

Is this thy condition, my friend, at this moment ? Hast 
thou but one desire, and is that after Christ ? Then, as the 
Lord liveth, thou art not far from the kingdom of heaven. 
Hast tlion but one wiah in thy lienrt, and that one wish that 



THE ANXIOUS IXQUIRi^R. 93 

thou mayest be washed fiom all thy sins in Jesus' blood? 
Canst thou really say, " I would give all I have to be a Chris- 
tian ; I would give up every thing I have and hope for, if I 
might but feel that I have an interest in the person and death 
of Christ ?" Then, poor soul, despite all thy fears, be of good 
cheer ; the Lord loveth thee, and thou shalt come out into 
daylight soon, and rejoice in the liberty wherewith Christ 
makes men free. 

There is another hopeful sign ; not only that the man has 
only one desire, but that it is an intense one. Hear the text 
again 1 " O that I knew where I might find him 1" There is 
an " O" here : there is an intensity of desire. There are 
some men who are mighty religious, but their religion is never 
more than skin deep only, it never goes into their heart ; they 
can talk it finely, but they never feel it ; it does not well up 
from the heart, and that is a bad spring that only comes from 
the lip ; it is the true spring from the inmost heart of man 
that can send forth living water. But this character is no 
hypocrite: he means what he says. Other men will say, 
*' Yes, I should like to be a Christian ; I should like to be par- 
doned ; I should like to be forgiven." And so they would ; 
but they would like to go on in sin too. They would like to 
be saved ; yes, but they would like to live in sin ; they would 
like to. hold with the hare and run with the hounds. They 
have no desire whatever to give up their' sins. They would 
like to be pardoned for all their past transgressions, and then 
go on just the same as before. Their wish is of no use, be- 
cause it is so superficial. But when the sinner is really quick- 
ened, there is nothing superficial in him then. It is, "O 
that I knew where I might find him !" coming from his very 
heart. Art thou in that position, my friend ? Is thy sigh a 
real one ? Is thy groan no mere fancy, but a real groan from 
the heart ? Is that tear which steals down thy cheek a real 
tear, which comes from the grief of thy spirit ? I think I hear 
you saying, " Sir, if you knew me you would not ask me that 
question, for my friends say I am miserable day after day, and 
80 indeed I am. I go to my chamber there, in the lean to, at 
the top of the house, and often do I cry to God ; ay, sir, I 
cry in such a style, I would net ha tq any one hear me ; I cry 



94 TBB AKXIOUS INQUIBBB. 

with groans and tears, that I may be brought near to God ; I 
do mean what I say." Then, beloved, thou shalt be saved; 
so sure as it is a real emotion of thy heart, God will not let 
thee perish. Never was there a sinner whose inmost heart 
cried to God, who was not loved of God ; never was there 
one who desired with all his might to be saved, and whose 
soul groaned out that desire in hearty prayer, who was cast 
away. His mercy may tarry, but it shall come. Pray on 
still ; he will hear thee at last, and thou shalt yet " rejoice in 
hope of the glory of God." 

But notice again, that in the text there is an admission of 
ignorance^ which is also a very hopeful sign. " O that I kn^l^^ 
Many people think they know every thing, and consequently 
know nothing. I think it is Seneca who says, " Many a man 
would have been a wise man, if he had not thought himself 
so ; if he had but known himself to have been a fool, he would 
have become wise." The doorstep to the temple of wisdom 
is a knowledge of our own ignorance. He can not learn 
aright who has not first been taught that he knows nothing. 
A sense of ignorance is a very excellent sign of grace. It is 
a singular thing, that every man thinks himself qualified to be 
a doctor of divinity ; a man who knows nothing of any other 
science, thinks he must understand this perfectly ; and, alas ! 
alas ! for those who think they know so naudi about . God's 
things, and have never been taught of God I Man's school is 
not God's school. A man may go to all the colleges in crea- 
tion, and know as little of theology when he comes out as 
when he went into them. It is a good thing for a man to feel 
that he is only beginning to learn, and to be willing to submit 
his heart to the teaching of God's Spirit, that he may be guid- 
ed in every thing by him. He that knoweth every thing need 
not think himself a Christian ; he that boasteth that he can 
understand all mysteries needeth to fear. But the quickened 
soul says, " Teach thou me." We become little children when 
God begins to deal with us. Before, we were big, tall men 
and women, and so wise ; but when he begins to deal with us, 
he cuts us down to the stature of children, and we are put on 
the form of humility, to learn the true lessons of wisdom, and 
then we are taught the great things of God. Happy art thou, 



THE ANXIOUS INQUIBSK. t5 

man, if thou knoweat thyself to know nothing. If Gk)d 
hath emptied thee of thy carnal wisdom, he will fill thee with 
heavenly ; if he hath taught thee thine ignorance, he will 
teach thee his wisdom, and bring thee to himself; and if thou 
art taught to reject all thy knowings and findings-out, God will 
certainly reveal himself to thee. 

There is one more hopeful sign in my text that I must men- 
tion. It is this : that the person I have spoken of is quite care^ 
less where it is he finds Christy so that he does find him. Do 
you know, beloved, that people when they feel their sins, are 
the worst people in the world to stick up for sects ? Other 
men can fight with broad-swords against their fellow-creatures; 
but a poor awakened sinner says, " Lord, I will meet thee any- 
where." When we are whole-hearted, and have never felt 
our sins, we are the most respectable religionists in the world ; 
we venerate every nail in the church door, and every word in 
the Book, and think so much of it, that we would not have 
any one differ from us — we would cut him off at once ; * but 
when we feel our sins we say, " Lord, if I could find thee any- 
where, I would be glad ; if I could find thee at the Baptist 
meeting-house, if I could find thee in the Independent chapel, 

1 should be glad enough to go there. I have always attended 
a large, handsome church ; but if I could find thee in that 
little despised meeting-house, I should be glad to go there ; 
though it would be degrading my rank and respectability, 
there would I go to find my Saviour." Others think they 
would rather not have Christ, if Christ goes anywhere except 
to their own church ; they must keep to their own sect, and can 
by no means overstep the line. It is a marvelous thing, but I 
believe I only speak the experience of many, when I say that 
there are very few of you were brought to know the Lord 
where you were in the habit of attending. You have attend- 
ed there perhaps since ; but it was not your father's church, 
not the church of the place where you were born and bred, 
but some other church, into which you strayed for a time, and 
where the arrows stuck fast in the heart of the King's ene- 
mies. I know it was so with me ; I never thought of going 
to the despise i chapel where I was first brought to know the 
Lord, but it -« .owed so hard that I could not go to a more re- 



06 THB ANXIOUS INQUIRER. 

spectable place, so I was obliged to go to the little meeting ; 
and when I got in, the preacher read his text — " Look unto me, 
and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth.** It was a blessed 
text, and blessedly applied : but if there had been any stick- 
ling as to going into places, I should not have been there. The 
awakened sinner says, " O that I knew where I might find 
him ! Only let me know where ; let the minister of it be 
the most despised in the world, I will go and hear him ; let 
the sect to which he belongs be the most calumniated and 
slandered, there I will be found seeking him. If I can but 
find Christ, I will be content to find him anywhere." If 
divers can go into the deeps to bring up pearls, we should not 
be ashamed sometimes to dive deep to bring up precious 
jewels. Men will do any thing to get gold ; they will work 
in the most muddy streams, or under the most scorching sun ; 
surely, then, we ought not to mind how much we stoop, if we 
find that which is more precious than gold and silver, even 
" Jesus Christ, and him crucified." Is this also thy feeling ? 
Then, beloved, I have not only a hope of thee, but I have a 
certainty of thee. If thou art brought to cry out, in all the 
senses I have mentioned, " O that I knew where I might find 
him !" then assuredly the Lord hath begun a good work in 
thee, and he mil carry it on even unto the end. 

II. But now, for the second point, I shall endeavor to 

GIVE SOME reasons WHY A GRACIOUS GOD DELAYS AN AN- 
SWER TO THE PRAYERS OP PENITENT SINNERS. Mcthinks I 

hear some one saying, " How is it that God does not give a 
man comfoit as soon as he repents ? Why is it that the Lord 
makes some of his people wait in bondage till he gives them 
liberty ?" 

In the firftt place, it is to display/ his own sovereignty. Ah ! 
that is a word that is not often mentioned in pulpits. Divine 
sovereignty is a very unfashionable doctnne. Few people care 
to hear of a God who doeth as he pleaseth, and is absolute 
monarch over man ; who knoweth of no law but his own 
absolute will, which is always the will to do that which is 
right, to do good to those whom he hath ordained unto eter- 
nal life, and to scatter mercy lavishly upon all creatures. But 
we do asseit, that there is such a thing as divine sovereignty. 



TUJ£ ANXIOUS INQUIRES. 97 

and more especially in tlie work of salvation. God said thus : 
" If I gave to all men peace as soon as they asked for it, they 
would begin to think they had a right to it. Now, I will make 
some of them wait, so that they may see that the mercy is 
absolutely in my hand, and that if I choose to withhold it 
altogether I might do so most justly ; and I will make men 
see that it is a gift of my free grace, and not of their deserv- 
ing." In some of our squares, where they are anxious to keep 
the right of way, you know they sometimes shut the gates, 
not because they would inconvenience us, but because they 
would preserve the right of way, and let the public see that 
although they let them through, yet they have no right of 
way, and might be excluded if the proprietors pleased. So 
with God ; he says, " Man, if I save thee, it is entirely of my 
will and pleasure ; my grace I give, not because thou deserv- 
est it, for then it were no grace at all ; but I give it to the 
most undeserving of men, that I may keep my claim to it." 
And I take it that this is the best way of proving God's sov- 
eignty, namely, his making delay between penitence and &ith, 
or between penitence and that faith which brings peace with 
God and joy in the Holy Ghost. I think this is one very im- 
portant reason. 

But there is another. God sometimes delay eth manifesting 
Jiis forgiving mercy to them, in oi'der that they may find out 
some secret sin. There is something hidden in their hearts 
which they do not know of They come to God confessing 
their sins, and they think they have made a clean breast of all 
their transgressions. "-Nay," saith God, " I will not give you 
pardon yet, or I will not apply it to your conscience yet ; 
there is a sin you have not yet discovered ;" and he sets the 
heart searching itself again, till Jerusalem is searched as with 
candles, and lo, there is some sin dragged out from the corner 
in which it was hidden. Conscience says, " I never knew this 
sin before ; I never felt it as a sin ; Lord, I repent." " Ah," 
saith the mighty Maker, " now I have proved thee and tried 
thee, and found out this dross, I will speak to thee the word 
of consolation and comfort." Art thou, then, a mourner, 
seeking rest, and not finding it ? I beseech thee, look into 
thine heart once more. Perhaps there is some hidden lust 

3 



98 THE ANXIOUS INQUIBKB. 

there, some secret sin. Look within once? more ; turn the 
traitor out. Then will God come and dwell in thy soul, and 
give unto thee the " peace that passeth all understanding." 

Another reason is, that he may make vs more useful in after 
life. A man is never made thoroughly useful unless he has 
suffering. I do not think there is much done by a man who 
is not a suffering man. We must first suffer in our heads and 
hearts the things we preach, or we shall never preach them 
with effect ; and if we are private Christians we can never be 
of use to our fellow men, unless we have passed through some- 
what the same trials they have had to endure. So God makes 
some of his people wait a long time before he gives them the 
manifestation of their pardon, in order that they may comfort 
others in after days. " I need thee to be a consolation to 
others ; therefore I will make thee full of grief, and drunken 
with wormwood, so that when thou shalt in after years meet 
with the mounier, thou mayest say to him, I have suffered the 
same and endured the same." And there are none so fit to 
comfort others, as those who have once needed comfort them- 
selves. Then take heart. Perhaps the Lord designs thee for 
a great work. He is keeping thee low in bondage, and doubt, 
and fear, that he may bring thee out more clearly, and make 
thy light like the light of seven days, and bring forth thy 
righteousness " clear as the sun, fair as the moon, and terrible 
as an army with banners." Wait, then, for God designs good 
to thee, and good to others through thee, by this delay. 

But it often arises not so much from God as from ourselves. 
It is ignorance of the way of salvation which keeps many a 
man longer in doubt than he would be, if he knew more of it. 
I do not hesitate to affirm, that one of the hardest things for 
a sinner to understand is the way of salvation. It seems the 
plainest thing in all the world; nothing appears more easy 
than, " Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be 
saved." But when the sinner is led to feel himself a sinner, he 
finds it not so easy to understand as he thought. We tell a man 
that, with all their blackness, sinners are to be pardoned ; that, 
with all their sins, they are to be forgiven freely for Christ's 
sake. " But," says the man wh«i he feels himself to be black, 
" do you mean to tell me that I am to be made whiter than 



THE ANXIOUS I»<4inBEB. 90 

snow ? Do you mean to tell me that I who am lost am to be 
saved, not through any thing I do, or hope to do, but purely 
through what another did ?" He can hardly believe it pos- 
sible ; he will have it, he must do something ; he must do this, 
or that, or the other, to help Christ ; and the hardest thing in 
the world is to bring a man to see that salvation is of the Lord 
alone, and not at all of himself; that it is God's free and per- 
fect gift, which leaves nothing of ours to be added to it, but 
is given to us to cover us completely, from head to foot without 
any thing of our own. Men will conceive what God would not 
have them conceive, and they will not receive that which God 
would have them embrace. You know, it may be very easy 
to talk of certain cures, and to read of them. We may say 
" Such and such a medicine is very effective, and will work 
such and such a cure ;" but when we are sick ourselves, we 
are often very dubious of the mediciae, and if, having taken 
draught after draught of it, we find it does not cure us, perhaps 
we are brought to think, that though it may cure others, it 
can not cure us, because there has been such delay in the 
operation of it. So the poor soul thinks of the gospel, " Cer- 
tainly it can not heal me ;" and then he misunderstands the 
nature of the sacred medicine altogether, and begins to take 
the law instead of the gospel. Now the law liever saved any 
yet, though it has condemned full many in its time, and will 
condemn us all, unless we have the gospel. If any man here 
should be in doubt on account of ignorance, let me, as plainly 
as I can, state the gospel. I believe it to be wrapt up in one 
word — Substitution. I have always considered, with Luther 
and Calvin, that the sum and substance of the gospel lies in 
that word. Substitution, Christ standing in the stead of man. 
If I understand the gospel, it is this : I deserve to be lost and 
ruined ; the only reason why I should not be damned is this, 
that Christ was punished in my stead, and there is no need to 
execute a sentence twice for sin. On the other hand, I know 
I can not enter heaven, unless I have a perfect righteousness ; 
I am absolutely certain I shall never have one of my own, for 
I find I sin every day ; but then Christ had a perfect righteous- 
ness, and he said, " There, take my garment, put it on ; you 
shall stand before God as if you were Christ, and I will 



1 00 THE ANXIOUS INQUIRER. 

stand before God as if I had been the sinner ; I will suffer in 
the sinner's stead, and you shall be rewarded for works which 
you did not do, but which Christ did for you." I think the 
whole substance of salvation lies in the thought, that Christ 
stood in the place of man. The prisoner is in the dock ; he is 
about to be taken away for death ; he deserves to die; he has 
been a mighty criminal. But before he is taken away, the 
judge asks whether there is any possible plan whereby that 
prisoner's life can be spared. Up rises one who is pure and 
perfect himself, and has known no sin, and by the allowance of 
the judge, for that is necessary, he steps into the dock, and 
says, " Consider me to be the prisoner ; p&ss the sentence on 
me, and let me die. Gentlemen of the court," says he, " con- 
sider the prisoner to be myself. I have fought for my coun- 
try ; I have dared, and deserved well of it ; reward him as if 
he had done good, and punish me as if I had committed the 
• sin." You say, " Such a thing could not occur in an earthly 
court of law." Ay, but it has happened in God's court of 
law. In the great court of King's Bench, where God is 
Judge of all, it has happened. The Saviour said, " The sinner 
deserves to die ; let me die in his stead, and let him be clothed 
in my righteousness." To illustrate this, I will give you two 
instances. One is that of an ancient king, who passed a law 
against a crime, and the punishment of the crime was, that 
any one who committed it should have both his eyes put out. 
His own son committed the crime. The king, as a strict judge, 
said, " I can not alter the law ; I have said that the loss of eyes 
shall be the penalty ; take out one of mine and one of his." 
So, you see, he strictly carried out the law ; but at the same 
time he was able to have mercy in part upon his son. But in 
the case of Christ we naust go a little further. He did not 
say " Exact half the penalty of me, and half of the sinner ;" 
he said, " Put both my eyes out ; nail me to the tree ; let me 
die; let me take all the guilt away, and then the sinner 
may go free." We have heard of another case, that of two 
brothers, one of whom had been a great criminal, and was 
about to die, when his brother, coming into court, decorated 
with medals, and having many wounds hpon him, rose up to 
plead with the judge, that he would have mercy on the crimi- 



THE ANXIOUS INQUIRER. 101 

nal for his sake. Then he began to strip himself and show 

his scars — how here and there on his big broad breast he had 

received saber cuts in defense of his country, ^^By these 

wounds," he said — and he lifted up one arm, the other having 

been cut away — " by these my wounds, and the sufferings I 

have endured for my country, I beseech thee, have mercy on 

him." For his brother's sake the criminal was allowed to 

escape the punishment that was hanging over his head. It 

^vas even » o with Christ. " The sinner," he said, *' deserves 

to die ; then I will die in his stead. He deserves not to enter 

heaven, for he has not kept the law ; but I have kept the law 

for him, he shall have my righteousness, and I will take his 

sin ; and so the just shall die for the unjust, to bring him to 

God." I have thus run away from the subject sortiewhat, in 

order to clear up any ignorance that might exist in the minds 

of some of my hearers, as to this essential point of the gospel 

plan. 

III. And no w I am to give some advice to those who have 

BEEN SEEKING ChRIST, AND WHO HAVE NEVER FOUND HIM, lIOW 
* THEY MAY FIND HIM. 

In the first place, let me say, Go wherever Christ goes. The 
sick man knew that Christ went to Bethesda, and there he 
lay. If Christ were to walk this earth again, and heal the 
eick, all the sick people would inquire, ** Where does Christ 
walk to-morrow ?" and as soon as they found out where he 
would take his walks abroad, there they would be lying thick 
on the pavement, in the hope that as he passed by he would heal 
them. Go up, then, to Christ's house ; it is there he meets 
with his people. Read his Word : it is there he blesses them, 
by applying sweet promises to them. Keep to the ordinances : 
do not neglect them. Christ comes to Bethesda pool : lie by 
the water. If you can not put in your foot, be where Christ 
comes. You know, Thomas did not get the blessing, for he 
was not there when Jesus came. Be not away from the house 
of God ; so that when he passes by he may haply look on thee, 
and say, " Thy sins are forgiven thee." 

And whatever you do, when Christ passes by, crt/ after him 
with aU your might ; never be satisfied until you do make 
him hear ; and if he frown on you, seemingly, for the moment, 



102 THE ANXIOUS INQUIBEB. 

do not be stoppe I or stayed. If you are a little stirred by a 
sermon, pray over it ; do not lose the auspicious moment. If 
you hear any thing read which gives you some hope, lift up 
your heart in prayer at once ; when the wind blows, then 
should the sails be set up ; and it may happen that God may 
give you grace to cross the harbor's mouth, and you may find 
the haven inside, the haven of perpetual rest. There was a man, 
you know, who was born blind, and wlio wanted to have his 
sight. As he sat by the road-side one day, he heard that 
Jesus passed by, and when he heard that, he cried after him, 
" Jesus, thou son of David, have mercy on me." The people 
wanted to hear Christ preach, so they hushed the poor man ; 
but he cried again, " Thou Son of David, have mercy on me." 
The Son of David turned not his head ; he did not look upon 
the man, but continued his discoui*se ; but still the man shout- 
ed, " Jesus, thou Son of David, have mercy on me I" And 
then Jesus stopped. The disciples ran to the poor man, and 
said, '*Be still, trouble not the Master." But he cried so 
much the more, *' Jesus, thou Son of David, have mercy on 
me." And Jesus at last said, " What wilt thou that I shall do 
unto thee ?" He said, " Lord, that I may receive my sight." 
He received it, and '* went on his way rejoicing." Now, your 
doubts say, " Hush I do not pi-ay any more ;" Satan says, " Be 
still ; do not cry any more." Tell your doubts and fears, and 
the demon too, that you will give Christ no rest till he turns 
his eyes upon you in love, and heals your diseases. Cry aloud 
unto him, O thou awakened sinner, when he passes by. 

The next piece of advice I would give you is this : think 
very much of Christ. No way that I know of will get you 
faith in Christ so well as thinking of him. I w^ould advise you, 
conscience-stricken sinner, to spend an hour in meditation on 
Christ. You do not want to spend an hour in meditation on 
yourself; you will get very little good from that ; you may 
know beforehand that there is no hope for you in yourself. 
But spend an h^ur in meditation on Christ. Go, beloved, to 
thy closet, and sit down in that chamber of yours ; picture 
him in the garden ; think you see him there, sweating " great 
drops of blood, falling down to the ground." Then picture 
him standing in Pilate's hall; think you see him with his 



THE ANXIOUS INQUIBEB. 103 

hands honnd, his back pouring down rivers of goro ; then fol- 
low him till you see him coming to the hill, Calvaiy ; think 
you see him hurled backward, and nailed to the tree ; then 
let your imagination, or rather your faith, bring before you 
the cross lifted up, and dashed into its socket, when every 
bone of Christ was put out of joint. Look at him ; look at his 
thorn-crown, and see the beaded drops of blood trickling down 
his cheek. 

" See from his bead, hU hands, his feet, 
Sorrow and love flow mingling down." 

I know of no means, under God, so profitable forgetting faith, 
as thoughts of Christ ; for while you are looking at him you 
will say, " Blessed Jesus, didst thou die ? Surely, my soul, his 
death is sufficient for thee." He is able to save unto the ut- 
termost all those who trust in him. You may think of a doc- 
trine for ever, and get no good from it, if you are not already 
saved ; but think of the person of Christ, and that will give 
you faith. Take him everywhere, wherever you go, and try 
to meditate on him in your leisure moments, and then he will 
reveal himself to you, and give you peace. Ah ! that is the 
point where we feel that none of us have enough of Christ, not 
even the best of Christians. I went into a fiiend's house one 
day, and he said to me, as a sort of hint, I suppose, " I have 
known so and so these thirty years, without hearing any thing 
of his religion." Said I, " YoM|ill not know me thirty min- 
utes without hearing 8omethin^)f mine." It is a fact, that 
many Christian people spend their Sunday afternoons in talk- 
ing about common-place subjects, and Jesus Christ is scarcely 
ever mentioned. As for the poor ungodly world, of course 
they neither say nor think any thing of him. But O, thou 
tliat knowest thyself to be a sinner, despise not the Man of 
sorrows ! Let his bleeding hands drop on thee ; look thou on 
his pierced side ; and, looking, thou shalt live ; for, remem- 
ber, it is only by looking to Christ we shall live, not by dc ing 
any thing ourselves. We must venture on Christ, and venture 
wholly, or else we never can be saved. 

And this brings me to close up by saying to every awakened 
sinner, if you would have peace with God, and have it now, 
venture on Christ. It is hardly fair to say venture, for it i^ no 



104 THB ANXIOUS IKQUIBBB. 

venture ; there is not a grain of hap-hazard in it ; it is quite 
safe. He that trusteth himself to Christ need never fear. 
*' But," you will say, " how am I to trust Christ ? What do 
you mean by trusting in Christ ?" Why, I mean just what I 
say. Fully rely upon what Christ did, as the way of salvation. 
Yow know the negro, when he was asked how he believed, 
said, " Massa, dis is bow I believe ; I fall flat down on de 
promise; I can't fall no lower." He had just a right idea 
about believing. Believing is falling down on Christ, and 
looking to him to hold you up. Or, to illustrate it by an an- 
ecdote which I have often told : a boy at sea, who was very 
fond of climbing to the mast-head, one day climbed to the 
main-truck, and could not get down again. The sea was very 
rough, and it was seen that in a little while the boy would fall 
on the deck, and be dashed to pieces. His father saw but one 
way of saving his life. Seizing a speaking-trumpet, he cried 
out, " Boy, the next time the ship lurches, yeu fall into the 
sea." The next time the ship lurched the boy looked down, 
and, not much liking the idea of throwing himself into the 
. sea, still held to the mast. The father, who saw that the 
boy's strength would soon fail him, took a gun in his hand, 
and cried out, " Boy, if you do not drop into the sea the next 
time the ship lurches, I'll shoot you I" The boy knew his 
fether meant it, and the next time the ship lurched he leaped 
into the sea. It seemed ijiy certain destruction, but out 
went a dozen brawny arms, Wd he was saved. The sinner, in 
the midst of the storm, thinks he must cling to the mast of his 
good works, and so be saved. Says the gospel, " Let go your 
good works, and drop into the ocean of God's love." " No," 
says the sinner, " it is a long way between me and God's love ; 
I must perish if I trust to that ; I must have some other reli- 
ance." " If you have any other reliance than that, you are 
lost." Then comes the thundering law, and declares to the 
sinner, that unless he gives up every dependence, he will be 
lost. And then comes the happy moment, when the sinner 
says, " Dear Lord, I give up all my dependence, and cast my- 
self on thee ; I take thee, Jesus, to be my one object in life, 
my only trust, the refuge of my soul." Can any of you say 
that in your hearts ? I know there are some of you who can. 



THE ANXIOUS INQUIRER. 105 

But are there any who could not say it when they came 
here, but who can say it now ? O, I would rejoice if one such 
were brought to God. I am conscious that I have not 
preached to you as I could desire ; but if one such has been 
brought to believe and trust in the Saviour, it is enough ; God 
will be glorified. 

But alas ! for such of you as will go away and say, " The 
man has talked about salvation, but what matters it to us ?" 
Yes, go your way ; you can afford to laugh to-day at God and 
Lis gospel; but, remember, men can not afford to scoff at 
boats when they are in a storm, although they may be on 
land. Death is after you, and will soon seize you ; your pulse 
must soon cease to beat ; strong as you are now, your bones 
are not of brass, nor your ribs of steel ; you must lie on your 
lowly pallet, and there breathe out your last ; or, if you be 
ever so rich, you must die on your curtained beds, and must 
depart from all your enjoyment into everlasting punishment. 
You will find it hard work to laugh at Christ then ; you will 
find it dreadful work to scoff at religion then, in that day when 
death gets hold of you. I think I could almost stand by you 
and say, " Laugh now, scoffer." " Ah !" you would say, " I 
find it different from what I supposed ; I can not laugh now — 
death is near me." Take warning, then, before death comes I 
take warning ! He must be a poor ignorant man who does not 
insure his house before it is on fire ; and he must be a fool of 
all fools, who thinks it unnecessary to seek the salvation of his 
soul till he comes to the last moment, and is in peril of his life. 
May God give you thought and consideration, so that you 
may be led to flee from sin, and fly to heaven ; and may God 
the everlasting Father give you what I can not — give you his 
grace, which saveth the soul, and maketh sinners into saints, 
and landeth them in heaven. I can only close by repeating 
the words of the gospel — " He that belicveth and is baptized 
shall be saved ; he that believeth not shall be damned." Hav- 
ing said this, if I had said no more, I should have preached 
Christ's gospel to you. The Lord give you understanding in 
all things, and help you to believe ; for Jesus Christ's sake ! 

3* 



SEEMON VII. 

THE SINNER'S REFUGE. 

" Then ye shall appoint you cities to be cities of refuge for you ; that the 
slayer may flee thither, 'Vrhich killeth any person at unawares." — ^Num- 

BBBb, JLXJLV. 11. 

You are aware that t le principle of blood revenge is a deep- 
seated one in the eastern mind. From the oldest ages it was 
always the custom with the Orientals, when a man was mur 
dered or slain by chance-medley, for the nearest relative, his 
heir or any person related to him, to take revenge for him 
upon the person who, either intentionally or unintentionally, 
was the means of his death. This revenge was a very choice 
and special thing to the Oriental mind. The revenger of 
blood would hunt his victim for forty years — ay, until he died, 
if he was not able to reach him before — and would be at his 
heels aU his life, that he might slay him. It was not necessary 
that the man-slayer should have any trial before a judge ; the 
man was dead, and if he who killed him was not put to death, 
it was reckoned among some tribes to be legitimate to kill his 
father, or indeed any relative of his tribe; and until some 
relative of that tribe was put to death, as a revenge for the 
man who was slain, by accident or otherwise, a deadly feud 
existed between the two clans, which never could be quenched 
except by blood. Now, when God gave this law unto "the 
Jews, he found all this deep-rooted love toward the system of 
the vengeance of blood by the nearest relative; and God 
acted wisely in this, as he has done in all things. There are 
two things mentioned in Scripture which I do not believe God 
ever approved, but which, finding they were deep-seated, he 
did not forbid to the Jews. One was polygamy : the practice 
pf marrying man^ wives had become so established, that 



THE sinner's bkfuge. 107 

though God abhorred the thing hiraseUi yet he allowed and 
permitted it to his people, the Jews ; because he foresaw they 
would inevitably have broken the commandment, even if he 
had made a command that they should have but one wife. It 
was even so with this matter of blood vengeance. It was so 
deeply seated in the mind, that God, instead of refusing to 
the Jews what they regarded as the privilege of taking ven- 
geance, passed a commandment which rendered it impossible 
almost that a man should be killed, unless he were really a 
murderer ; for he appointed six cities, at convenient distances, 
so that when one man killed another by chance-medley and 
committed homicide, he might at once flee to one of these 
cities ; and though he must live there all his life, yet the 
avenger of blood could never touch iiim, if he were innocent. 
He must have a fair trial ; but even if he were found innocent 
he must stay within the city, into which the avenger of blood 
could not by any possibility come. If he went out of the city 
the avenger might kill him ; he was therefore to suffer per- 
petual banishment, even for causing death accidentally, in 
order that it might be seen how much God regarded the 
rights of blood, and how fearful a thing it is to put a man to 
death in any way. And we see that this prevented the likeli- 
hood of any one being killed who was not guilty ; for as soon 
as one man struck another to the ground by accident, by a 
stone, or any other means, he fled to the city of refuge. He 
had a start of the pursuer ; and if he arrived there, he was 
secure and safe. 

Now, I wish to use this custom of the Jews as a metaphor 
and type, to set forth the salvation of men through Jesus 
Christ our Lord. I shall give you first an explanation, and 
then an exhortation. 

I. We shall attempt an explanation of this type. 

1. Note, The person for whom the city of refuge was pro* 
vided. It was not provided for the willful murderer; if he 
fled there, he must be dragged out of it, and given up to the 
avenger after a fair trial, and the avenger of death was to kill 
him, and so have blood for blood, and life for life. But in 
case of accident, when one man had slain another, without 
malice or forethought, J^nd hs^d only comn^itted homicide, 



108 THB SINNER'S REFUGE, 

then the man fleeing there was perfectly safe. Here, how- 
ever, the type of Christ is not in keeping ; Christ is not a city 
of refage provided for men that are innocent, but a city pro- 
vided for men that are guilty — ^not for men who have acci- 
dentally transgressed, but for men who have willfully gone 
astray. Our Saviour has come into the world to save, not 
those who have by mistake and error committed sin, but those 
who have fearfully transgressed against his known command- 
ments, and have gone astray of their own free-will, their own 
perversity leading them to rebel against God, 

2. Tfie avenger of blood. In explaining this, I must, of 
course, take every part of the figure. The avenger of blood, 
I have said, was usually next of kin, but I believe any one of 
the femily was held to be competent. If, for instance, my 
brother had been killed, it would have been my duty, as the 
first of the family, to avenge his blood, if possible, there and 
then ; to go after the murderer, or the man who had caused 
death accidentally, and put him to death at once ; and if I 
could not do that, it would be my business, and that of my 
father, and, indeed, of every male of the family, to hunt and 
pursue that man, until God should deliver him into our hand, 
so that we might put him to death. I mean not that it is our 
duty now, but it would have been under the old Jewish dis- 
pensation. It was allowed by the Jewish law, that those who 
were of the kith and kin of the man killed, should be th« 
avengers of his blood. We find the type of this, then, for the 
sinner, in the law of God. Sinner, the law of God is the blood 
avenger against you ; you have willfully transgressed, you 
have killed God^s commandments, you have trampled them 
under foot ; the law is the avenger of blood ; that is after yuu, 
and it will have you ; condemnation is hanging over your 
liead now, and ere long it shall overtake you ; though it reach 
you not in this life, yet, in the world to come, the avenger of 
blood, the Moses, the law shall have its vengeance upon you, 
and you shall be utterly destroyed. 

3. But there was a city of refuge provided under the law ; 
and let me tell you a few things concerning this city. You 
will remember there were six cities of refuge, in order that 
one of them migh* be at a convenient distance from any part 



THE SINNER'S REFUaE. 109 

of the country.- Now, there are not six Christs ; there is but 
one; but then there is a Christ everywhere. "The word is • 
nigh thee, in thy mouth, in thy heart ; if thou wilt confess 
with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe in thine heart, 
thou shalt be saved," The city of refuge was a priestly city 
— a city of the Levites, and it afforded protection to the man- 
slayer for life. He might never go out of it, till the death of 
the then reigning high priest ; after which he might go free, 
without being touched by the avenger of blood at all. But 
dui-ing the time of his sojourn there, he was housed and fed 
gratuitously ; every thing was provided for him, and he was 
kept entirely safe. And I would have you mark that he was 
safe in this city, not because of the bolts or bars of the city, 
but simply because it was of divine appointment. Do you see 
the man running from the avenger? The avenger is after 
him, fast and furious; the man has just reached the borders of 
the city ; in a moment the avenger halts ; he knows it is of no 
use going any further after him, not because the city walls are 
strong, nor because the gates are barred, nor because an army 
standeth without to resist, but because God hath said the man 
shall be safe as soon as he has crossed the border, and has 
come into the suburbs of the city. Divine appointment was 
the only thing which made the city of.reftige secure. Now, 
beloved, Jesus Christ is the divinely appointed way of salva- 
tion ; whosoever amongst us shall make haste from our sins, 
and fly to Christ, being convinced of our guilt, and helped by 
God's Spirit to pursue the road, we shall, without doubt, find 
security ; the course of the law shall not touch us, Satan shall 
not harm us, vengeance shall not reach us, for the divine ap- 
pointment, stronger than gates of iron or brass, shieldeth 
every one of us who has " fled for refuge to the hope set be- 
fore us in the gospel." 

This city of refuge, I must have you note, too, had round 
it suburbs of a very great extent. Two thousand cubits were 
allowed for grazing land for the cattle of the priests, and a 
thousand cubits within these for fields and vineyards. Now, 
no sooner did the man reach the outside of the city, the sub- 
urbs, than he was safe ; it was not necessary for him to get 
within the walls but the suburbs themselves were sufficient 



110 TUB SLSNEU'S KEFUGB. 

protection^ Learn, hence, that if ye do but touch the hem of 
Christ'i garment, ye shall be made whole ; if ye do but lay 
hold of him with "faith as a grain of mustard seed," with 
faith which is scarcely a believing, but is truly a believing, 

you are safe. 

" A little genuine grace ensures 
The death of all our sins.'' 

Get within the borders; lay hold of the hem of Christ's 
garments, and thou art secure. 

We have some interesting particulars, also, with regard to 
the distance of these cities from the habitations of men in 
Judea. It is said, that wherever a homicide might occur, any 
man might get to a city of refuge within half a day. And 
verily, beloved, it is no great distance to the breast of Chiist ; 
it is but a simple renunciation of our own powers, and a laying 
hold of Chnst, to be our all in all, that is required, in order to 
our being found in the city of refuge. And with regard to 
the roads to the city, we are told that they were strictly pre- 
served. Every liver was bridged ; as far as possible, the road 
was made level, and every obstruction removed, so that the 
man who lied might find an easy passage to the city. Once a 
year the elders of the city went along the roads to keep them 
in order, so that nothyig might occur, through the breaking 
down of bridges, or the stopping up of the highway, to im- 
pede the flight of any one, and cause him to be overtaken and 
killed. And wherever there were by-roads and turnings, there 
were fixed up hand-posts, and with this word upon them 
" Miklat " — " refuge " — pointing out the way in which the 
man should fly, if he wished to reach the city. And there 
were two people always kept on the road : so that in case the 
avenger of blood should overtake a man, tht'y might come in 
the way and entreat the avenger to stay his hand, until the 
man had reached the city, lest haply innocent blood should be 
shed, without a fair trial, and so the avenger should be proved 
guilty of murder ; for the risk, of course, was upon the head 
of the avenger, if he put one to death that did not deserve to 
die. Now, beloved, I think this is a picture of the road to 
Christ Jesus. It is no round-about road of the law ; it is no 
obeying this, that, and the other ; it is a straight road ; " Be- 



THE SIXNKE'S BSFUQE. Ill 

lieve and live." It is a road so hard, that no sel^righteoua 
man can ever tread it ; but it is a road so easy, that every sin- 
ner, who knows himself to be a sinner, might by it find his 
way to Christ, and his way to heaven. And lest they should 
be mistaken, God has set me and my brethren in the ministry^ 
to be like hand-posts in the way, to point poor sinners to Jesus; 
and we desire ever to have on our lips, the cry " Refuge, 
refuge, refuge I" Sinner, that is the way ; walk thou therein 
and be thou saved. 

I think I have thus given the explanation. Christ is the 
city of refuge, who preserves all those that flee to him for 
mercy ; he does that because he is the divinely appointed 
Saviour, able to save unto the uttermost them that come unto 
God by him. 

II. We have an exhortation to give. 

You must allow me to picture a scene. You see that man 
in the field. He has been at work ; he has taken an ox-goad 
in his hand, to use it in some part of his husbandry. XJnfor* 
tunately, instead of doing what he desires to do, he strikes a 
companion of his to the heart, and he falls down dead ! You 
see the poor man with horror in his face; he is a guiltless 
man ; but, O ! what misery he feels when he sees the corpse 
lying at his feet I A pang shoots through Ms heart, such as 
you and I have never felt — ^horror, dread, desolation ! Yes, 
some of us have felt something akin to it ; we Avill not allude 
to the when and the wherefore; but who can describe the 
horror of a man at seeing his companion fall at his feet ? 
Words are incapable of expressing the anguish of his spirit ; 
he looks upon him, he takes him up — ^he ascertains that he is 
really dead. What next I Do you not see him ? In a mo- 
ment he flies out of the field where he was at labor, and runs 
along the road with all his might ; he has many miles before 
him, six long hours of hard running, and just as he passes the 
gate, he turns his head, and there is the man's brother ! He 
has just come into the field, and seen his brother lying dead. 
O! can you conceive how the man's heart palpitates with 
fear? He has a little start upon the road. He just sees the 
other, with red fece, hot and fiery, rushing out of the field, 
with the ox-goad in his hand, and running after him. The 



112 THB SINNBB'S BBFUOE. 

way lies through the village where the man's father lives; 
how he rushes through the streets ! He does not even stop 
to bid good-by to his wife, nor kiss his children ! But on, on 
he flies for his very life. The relative calls his &ther, and his 
other friends, and they all rush after him. Now, there is a 
troop on the road ; the man is still flying a-head — no rest for 
him. Though one of his pursuers rests, the others still track 
him. There is a horse in the village ; they take it, and pursue 
him. If they can find any animal that can assist their swift- 
ness, they will take it. Can you not conceive him crying, 
" O, that I had wings that I might fly ?" See how he spurns 
the earth beneath his feet ! What to him the green fields on 
either hand ; what the brooks ; he stops not even so much as 
to wet his mouth. The sun is scorching him ; but it is still 
on, on, on ! He casts aside one garment after another ; still 
he rushes on, and the pursuers are behind him. He feels like 
the poor stag pursued by the hounds ; he knows they are 
eager for his blood, and that if they do but once overtake him 
it will be a Avord, a blow — dead ! See how he speeds his way I 
Now, do you see him ? A city is rising into sight ; he can 
see the towers of the city of refuge ; his weary feet almost 
refuse to carry him further ; the veins are standing out on his 
brow, like whipcords ; the blood spirts from his nostrils ; he 
is straining to the utmost, as he rushes on, and faster he would 
go if he were master of more strength. The punsuers are 
after him — they have almost reached him; but see, and re- 
joice ! He has just got to the outskirts of the city; there is 
the line of demarcation ; he leaps it, and falls senseless to the 
ground ; and there is joy in his heart. The pursuers come 
and look at him ; but they dare not slay him. The knife is 
in their hand, and the stones too, to stone him or draw his 
blood ; but they dare not touch him. He is safe, he is secure; 
his running has been just fast enough ; he has just managed 
to leap into the kingdom of life, and avoid death. 

Sinner, that picture I have given thee is a picture of thy- 
self, in all but the man's guiltlessness, for thou art a guilty 
man. O ! if thou didst but know that the avenger of blood 
IS after thee ! O ! that God would give thee grace that thou 
couldst have a sense of thy danger to-night ! thou wouldst 



THB SINNBB'S BBFU6B. 113 

not then stop a solitary instant without flying to Christ. Thou 
wouldst say, even while sitting in thy pew, " Let me away, 
away, away, where mercy is to be found," and thou wouldst 
give neither sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine eyelids, 
till thou hadst in Christ found a refuge for thy spirit. I am 
come, then, to exhort thee to-night. Let me pick out one ot 
y<tu to be a case for all the rest; there is a young man here 
who is guilty ; the proofs of his guilt lie at his feet to-night 
He knows himself to be a great transgressor ; he has foully 
offended against God's law. Young man, young man, cer- 
tainly, as you are guilty, the avenger of blood is after you ! O ! 
he is a horrid thing, that avenger — God's fiery law ; did you 
ever see it ? It speaketh words of flame ; it hath eyes like 
lamps of fire. If you could once see the law of God, and mark 
the dread keenness of its horrible sword, you might, as you 
sat in your pew, quiver to death itself in horror at your doom. 
Sinner, bethink thee, if this avenger get hold of thee, it will 
not be temporal death merely ; it will be death eternally. Sin- 
ner, remember, if the law doth get its hand on thee, thou art 
damned ; and dost thou know what damnation means ? Say, 
canst thou tell what are the billows of eternal wrath, and 
what the worm that never dies ; what the lake of fire, what 
the pit that is bottomless ? No, thou canst not know how 
dreadful these things are. Surely, if thou couldst, man, thou 
wouldst be up on thy feet, and off for life, eternal life. Thou 
•wouldst be like that man in Bunyan's " Progress," who put 
his fingers in his ears, and ran away ; and Avhen his neighbors 
ran after him, he cried, " Eternal life, eternal life !" O, stolid 
stupidity — O, sottish ignorance — O, worse than brutal ignor- 
ance, that makes men sit down in their sins, and rest content. 
The drunkard quaffeth still his bowl ; he knoweth not that in 
its dregs there lieth wrath. The swearer still indulgeth in his 
blasphemy ; he knoweth not that one day his oaths shall re- 
turn upon his own head. You will go your way, and eat the 
fat, and drink the sweet, and live merrily and happily ; but, 
ah I poor souls, if ye knew that the avenger of blood was 
after you, you would not act so foolishly ! Would you sup- 
pose that the man, after he had killed his neighbor, and when 
he saw the avenger coming, would coolly take his seat, and 



114 • THS SINNSB'S BBFCJGK. 

wait, when there was a city of refuge provided ? No ; such 
folly was reserved for such as you are ; God has left that folly 
to be the topstone of the folly of the human race, to be the 
most glittering jewel in the cromi of free will, to be consum- 
mate folly — the dress wherein free will doth robe itself. O ! 
you will not fly to Christ, you will stop where you are, you 
will rest contented, and one day the laAv Avill seize you, and 
then wrath, etenial wi*ath, will lay hold upon you I How 
foolish is the man who wastes his time, and carelessly loiters, 
when the city of refuge is before him, and when the avenger 
of blood is after him ! 

Suppose, now, I take another case. I have a young man 
here who says, " Why, sir, it is no use in trying to be saved ; 
I shall not think of prayer, or faith, or any thing of that sort, 
because there is no city of refuge for me." Why, suppose 
that poor man who had killed his neighbor had said that ; sup- 
pose he had sat still, and folded his arms, and said, " There is 
no city of refuge for me." You do not mean what you say. 
If you thought there was no city of refuge for you, I know 
what you would do ; you Avould shriek, and cry, and groan. 
There is a kind of despair that some people have, which is a 
sham despair. I have met Avith many who say, " I do not be- 
lieve I ever could be saved," and they seem not to care whether 
they are saved or not. Why, man, how foolish would he be, 
who would sit still, because he fancied there was no entrance 
for him into the city, and let the avenger slay him ! But your 
folly is just as great and worse, if you sit still, and say, " He 
will never have mercy on me." He is as much a suicide who 
refuses the medicine, because he thinks it will not cure him, 
as the man who takes the dirk, and stabs himself to the heait. 
You have no right, sir, to let your despair triumph over the 
promise of God. He hath said it, and he means it :, " Whoso- 
ever calleth on the name of the Lord shall be saved." If he 
has shown you your guilt, depend upon it, there is a city of 
refuge for you ; haste thee to it ; haste thee to it ; may God 
help you to betake yourselves to it now! Ay, if men knew 
how dreadful is the wrath to come, and how terrible is judg. 
ment, how swiftly wo ild they fly ! There is not a hearer of 
mine here that woula delay an hour to fly to Christ, if he did 



THS BINKEB'S BBFUGB, 115^ 

biit know how fearful is his condition out of Christ. When 
God the Spirit once convinces us of our sin, there is no halting 
then ; the Spirit says, " To-day, if you will hear his voice," and 
we say, " To-day, Lord, to-day, hear our voice !" There is no 
halting then ; there is no pausing then ; it is on, on, on, for 
our very life ; and I beseech you, men, brethren, you, who have 
sinned against God, and know it ; you that want to be deliv- 
ered from the wrath to come, I beseech you, by him that 
liveth and was dead, flee to Christ ; but take this exhortation, 
take heed it is Christ you flee to ; for if the man who had 
slain his neighbor, had fled to another city, it would have been 
of no avail ; had he fled to a city that was not an ordained city 
of refuge, he might have sped on with all the impetuosity of 
desire, and yet have been slain within the city gates. So, ye 
self-righteous ones, ye may fly on to your good works, ye may 
practice your baptism, and your confirmation, and your church 
going, and your chapel going ; ye may be all that is good and 
excellent, but ye are flying to the wrong city, and the avenger 
of blood will find you, after all. Poor soul I remember Christ 
Jesus is the only refuge for a guilty sinner : his blood, his 
wounds, his agonies, his suflerings, his death, these, then, are 
the gates and walls of the city of salvation. But if we trust 
not in these, without a doubt, trust where we may, our hope 
shall be as a broken reed, and we shall perish after all. 

I may have one here who is just awakened, just led to see his 
sin, as if it were a murdered corpse beneath his feet; it seems 
to me that God has sent me to that one man in particular. 
Man, God has shown you your guilt ; he sent me to-night to 
tell you that there is a refuge for you ; though you are guilty^ 
he is good ; though you have revolted and rebelled, he will 
nave mercy on those that repent, and trust in the merits of his 
Son. And now he has bidden me say to you, " Fly, fly, fly 1" 
In God's name, I say to you, fly to Christ. He has bidden me 
warn you to-night against delays ; he has bidden me remind 
you that death surprises men when least they expect it; he has 
bidden me to warn you that the avenger will not spare, neither 
will his eye pity. His sword was forged for vengeance, and 
vengeance it will have. And. he has bidden me exhort you 
by the terrors of the law, by the day of judgment, by tho 



116 THE SINNER'S BEFUGB. 

wrath to come, by the uncertainty of life, and by the iieameaa 
of death, this night to fly to Christ. 

** Haste, traveler, haste, the night comes on: 
And thou far off from rest and home : 
Haste, traveler, haste 1" 

But, O how much more earnest is our cry, when we say, 
" Haste, sinner, haste." Not only doth the night come on ; 
but, lo ! the blood avenger is behind. Already he has slain 
his thousands. Let the shrieks of souls, already damned, come 
up in your ears. Already the avenger has done wonders of 
wrath ; let the bowlings of Gehenna startle you ; let the tor- 
ments of hell amaze you. What ! will you stop with such a 
sword behind you ? will you pause with such an avenger in 
swift pursuit ? What I young man, will you stop this night ? 
God has convinced you of your sin ; will you go to your rest 
this night Avithout a prayer ? Will you live another day with- 
out fleeing to Christ ? No ; I think I see the Spirit of God in 
you to-night, and I think I hear what he makes you say. He 
makes you say, " No, God helping me, I give myself to Christ 
now; and if he will not now shed abroad his love in my heart, 
yet this is my one resolve ; no slumber to my eyes will I afibrd 
till Christ shall look on me, and seal my pardon with his Spirit 
— ^the pardon bought with blood." But if thou sittest still, 
young man, and thou wilt do so, left to thy own free will, I 
can do no more for thee than this, I must weep for thee in 
secret. Alas ! for thee, my hearer ; alas ! for thee ; the ox led 
to the slaughter is more wise than thou ; the sheep that goeth 
to its death is not so foolish as thou art. Alas I for thee, my 
hearer, that thy pulse should beat a march to hell. Alas! that 
yonder clock, like the muffled drum, should be the music of 
the funeral march of thy soul. Alas ! alas ! that thou shouldst 
fold thine arms in pleasure, when the knife is at thy heart. 
Alas ! alas ! for thee, that thou shouldst sing, and make mer- 
I'iment, when the rope is about thy neck, and the drop is tot- 
tering under thee. Alas ! for thee, that thou shouldst go thy 
way, and live merrily and happily, and yet be lost. Thou re 
roindest me of the silly moth, that dances round about the 
flame, singeing itself for a while, and then at last plunging to 



THE SINNER'S EEFUGE. Il7 

Ite death. Such art thou ! Young woman, with thy butter- 
fly clothing, thou art leaping round the flame that shall destroy 
thee. Young man, light and frothy in thy conversation, gay 
in thy life, thou art dancing to hell ; thou art singing thy way 
to damnation, and promenading the road to destruction. 
Alas! alas! that ye should be spinning your own Hvinding 
sheets ; that ye should every day by your sins be building 
your own gallows ; that by your transgressions ye should be 
digging your own graves, and working hard to pile the faggots 
for your own eternal burning. O ! that ye were wise, that ye 
understood this, that ye would consider your latter end. O I 
that ye would flee fi'om the wrath to come. O ! my hearers, 
the wrath to come, the wrath to come ! O, God ! how ter- 
rible I these lips dare not venture to describe, this heart filleth 
in agony; and, my hearers, are there not some of you that 
will soon be in the wrath to come? Yes, yes I there are 
some of )»ou, who, if you were now to drop dead in your pews, 
must be damned. Ah ! ye know it ; ye know it ; ye dare not 
deny it ; I see you know ; as you hang down your heads, you 
seem to say it is true ; I have no Christ to trust to, no robe of 
righteousness to wear, no heaven to hope for. My hearer, 
give me thine hand ; never did father plead with son with 
more impassioned earnestness than I would with thee. Why 
wouldst thou sit still, when hell is burning in thy face. "Why 
will ye die, O house of Israel !" O, God ! must I preach to 
these people in their place in hell; and must I continue to 
preach to them, and be " a savor of death unto death to them," 
and not " a savor of life unto life ?" And must I, must I, help 
to make their hell more intolerable ? Must it be so ? Must 
the people who now listen to us, like the people of Chorazin 
and Bethsaida, have a more terrible doom than the people of 
Sodom ? Ah ! yes, the Lord hath said it, and we beheve it. 
O ! ye that are left to your own free will, to choose the way 
to hell, as all men do when left alone — let these eyes run down 
with tears for ye, because ye will not weep for yourselves. 
Strange ! strange I that I should feel more for some of your 
souls than you do for yourselves ! My God knoweth, there is 
not a.stone that I would lea^e unturned to save each one of 
you ; there is nought that human strength could do, or human 



118 THE SINNER'S BEFCJGE. 

study would learn, which I would not seek after, if I might but 
be the instrument of saving you from hell ; and yet you act as 
though it concerned you not, whom it should concern the 
most ; it is my business, but it is far more yours. Sirs, if ye be 
lost, remember, it is yourselves that will be lost ; if ye perish, 
ye perish ; I am clean of your blood. If ye flee not from the 
wrath to come, I have warned you ; I could not bear to have 
the blood upon my head which some, exen of those who like 
sound doctrine, I fear, will have at the last day of account. I 
tremble for some I know, that preach God's gospel, in some 
sense fully, but who never warn sinners. A member of my 
church said to me lately, " I heard such a one preach ; a sound 
doctrine man he is called. I heard him preach for nine years, 
attending the theater all the time. I could curse, I could 
swear, I could sin, and I never heard a waniing from that 
man's lips the whole nine years." Ah ! my God, my God, let 
this world hiss me ; let me wear the coat that sparklelh, and 
the cap that garnisheth a fool. Let earth condemn me, and 
let the fools of the universe spurn me ; but free me from the 
blood of my hearers. By God's grace, again I register the 
vow, God helping me ; the only thing I seek in this world is 
to be faithful to my hearers' souls. If you are damned, it is 
not for want of preaching to, nor for want of earnest waniing. 
Young men and maidens, old men with gray hairs, merchants 
and tradesmen, servants, fathers, mothers, children, I have 
warned you this night, you are in danger of hell, and as God 
liveth, before whom I stand, you will be there soon, unless you 
flee from the wrath to come. Remember, none but Jesus can 
save you. But if God shall enable you to see your danger, 
and fly to Christ, he will have mercy upon you for ever, and 
the avenger of blood will never find you out. No, not even 
when the red lightnings shall be flashing from the hand of God 
in the day of judgment. That city of refuge shall shelter you, 
and in the heart of Jesus, triumphant, blessed, secure, you 
shall sing the righteousness and the blood of Christ who shel- 
ters sinners from the wrath to come. 



SERMON VIII. 
THE DUMB SINGING. 

" Then the eyes of the blmd shall be opened, and tlie ears of the deaf shall 
be unstopped. Then shall the lame man leap as an hart, and ;the tong'ie of 
the dumb sing ; for in the wilderness shall waters break out, and streams in 
the desert" — ^Ibaiah, xxxv. 6, 6. 

What a difference grace makes, wherever it enters the 
heart I We find here the blind spoken of; but they are not 
blind when once grace has touched their eyes; then "the 
eyes of the blind are opened." We read also of the deaf; 
but they are not deaf after grace has operated upon them : 
" the ears of the deaf are unstopped." Here are men who 
have been l2lme before ; but when once the omnipotent influ- 
ence of dinne grace has come upon them, they leap like a 
hart. And those wlio were dumb once, so far from being 
dumb any longer, have experienced a change that most be 
radical, for itd effects are surprising. The tongue of t)ie dumb 
not simply speaks, but it sings. 

Grace makes a great difference in a man, when it enters 
into him. How vain, then, are the boasts and professions of 
some persons, who assert themselves to be the children of 
God, and yet live in sin. There is no perceivable difference in 
their conduct ; they are just what they used to be before their 
pretended conversion; they are not changed in their acts, 
even in the least degree, and yet they do most positively 
affirm that they are the called and living children of God, 
although they are entirely unchanged. Let such know that 
their pretensions are lies, and that falsehood is the only grounds 
work that they have for their hopes ; for, wherever the grace 
of God is, it makes men to differ. A graceless man is not like 
a gracious man ; and a gracious man is not like a graceless one. 



120 THE DUMB SINGING. 

We are " new creatures in Christ Jesus." When God looks 
upon us with the eye of Ioa e, in conversion and regeneration, 
he makes us as opposite from what we were before as light 
is from dai'kness, as even heaven itself is from hell. God 
changes man. He works in him a change so great, that no 
reformation can even so much as thoroughly imitate it ; it is 
an entire change — a change of the will, of the being, of the 
desires, of the hates, of the dislikings, and of the likings. In 
every respect the man becomes new when divine grace enters 
into his heart. And yet thou sayest of thyself, " I am con- 
verted," and remain what thou wast ! I tell thee once again 
to thy face, that thou sayest an empty thing ; thou hast no 
ground for saying it. If grace permits thee to sin as thou wast 
wont to do, then that grace is no grace at all. That grace 
were not worth the having which pennits a man to be, after 
he receives it, what he was before. No, we must ever hold 
and teach the great doctrine of sanctification. Where God 
really justifies he really sanctifies too ; and where there is the 
remission of sin, there is also the forsaking of it. Where God 
hath blotted out transgression, he also removeth our love of 
it, and maketh us seek after holiness, and walk in the ways of 
the Lord. I think we may fairly infer this from the text, as a 
prelude to the observations we have to make concerning it. 

And now I shall want you, first of all, to notice the sort of 
people whom God has chosen to sing his praises^ and to sing 
them eternally. Then, in the second place, I shall en^r into a 
more full description of the dumb people here described. Then, 
thirdly, I shall try to notice certain special timss and seasons 
when those dumb people sing m.ore s'toeetly than at others. 

I. First, then, the persons whom God hath chosen to 
SING HIS songs for EVER. "The tongue of the dumb shall 
sing." We may make this the first point. There is no differ- 
ence, by nature, between the elect and others ; those who are 
now glonfied in heaven, and who walk the golden streets clad 
in robes of purity, were by nature as unholy and defiled, and 
as far from original righteousness, as those who, by their own 
rejection of Christ, and by their love of sin, have brought them- 
selves into the pit of eternal torment, as a punishment for their 
iniquities. The only' reason why there is a difference between 



THE DUMB SINGING. 121 

those who are in heaven and those who are in hell, rests Vith 
divine grace, and with divine grace alone. Those in heaven must 
inevitably have been cast away, had not everlasting mercy 
stretched out its hand and redeemed them. They were by 
nature not one whit superior to others. They would as certainly 
have rejected Christ, and have trodden under foot the blood of 
Jesus, as did those who were cast away, if grace, free grace, 
had not prevented them from committing this sin. The reason 
why they are Christians is not because they did naturally will 
to be so, nor because they did by nature desire to know Christ, 
or to be, found of him ; but they are now saints simply be- 
cause God. made them so. He gave them the desire to be 
saved ; he put into them the will to seek after him ; he 
helped them in their seekings, and afterward brought them to 
feel that peace which is the fruit of justification. But by 
nature they were just the same as others ; and if there is any 
difference, we are obliged to say that the difference does not 
lie in their favor. In very many cases, we who now *' rejoice 
in hope of the glory of God" were the very worst of men. 
There are multitudes that now bless God for their rederfiption, 
who once cursed him ; who implored, as frequently as they 
dared to do, Avith oaths and swearing, that the curse of God 
might rest upon their fellows and upon themselves. Many of 
the Lord's anointed were once the very castaways of Satan, 
the sweepings of society, the refuse of the earth, those whom 
no man cared for, who were called outcasts, but whom God 
hath now called desired ones, seeing he hath loved them. 

I am led to these thoughts from the -fact that we are told 
here that those who sing were dumb by nature. Their sing- 
ing does not come naturally from themselves ; they were not 
born songsters ; no, they were dumb ones, those whom God 
would have to sing his praises. It does not say the tongue 
of the stammerer, or the tongue of him that blasphemed, or 
the tongue of him that misused his tongue, but " the tongue 
of the dumb," of those who have gone furthest from any 
thought of singing, of those who have no power of will to 
ging — the tongue of such as these shall yet be made to sing 
God's praises. Strange choice that G^d has made ! Strange, 
for its graciousness ! strangely manifesting the sovereignty of 



1^2 THS DUMB SINGING. 

his nv^ill ! God would build for himself a palace in heaven 
of living stones : where did he get them ? Did he go to the 
quarries of Pai-os ? Hath he brought forth the richest and 
the purest marble from the quarries of perfection ? No, ye 
saints, look to " the hole of the pit whence ye were digged, 
and to the rock whence ye were hewni" Ye were full of 
sin : so fiir from being stones that were white with purity, ye 
were black with defilement, seemingly utterly unfit to be stones 
in the spiritual temple, which should be the dwelling-place of 
the Most High. And yet he chose you to be trophies of his 
grace, and of his power to save. When Solomon built for 
himself a palace, he built it of cedar : but when God would 
build for himself a dwelling for ever, he cut not down the 
goodly cedars, but he dwelt in a bush, and hath preserved it 
as his memorial for ever : " The God that dwelt in the bush." 
Goldsmiths make exquisite forms from precious metals ; they 
fashion the bracelet and the ring from gold: — God maketh 
his precious things out of base material ; and from the black 
pebbles of the defiling brooks he hath taken up stones, which 
he hath set in the golden ring of liis immutable love, to make 
them gems to sparkle on his finger for ever. He hath not 
selected the best, but apparently the worst of men, to be the 
monuments of his grace ; and when he would have a choir in 
heaven that should with tongues harmonious sing his praises 
— a chorus that should for ever chant hallelujahs louder than 
the noise of many waters, and like great thunders, he did not 
send Mercy down to seek earth's songsters, and cull from those 
who have the sweetest .voices: he said, "Go, Mercy, and find 
out the dumb, and touch their lips, and make them sing. The 
virgin tongues that never sang my praise before, that have 
been silent till now, shall break forth in rhapsodies sublime, 
and they shall lead the song ; even angels shall but attend be- 
hind, and catch the notes from the lips of those who once were 
dumb." " The tongue of the dumb shall sing" God's praises 
in heaven. 

O ! what a fountain of consolation this opens for you and 
for me ! Ay, beloved, if God did not choose the base things 
of this world, he would never have chosen us ; if he had re- 
spect unto the countenances of men, if he were a respecter 



THB DUMB SINGmO. 123 

of pei*8ons, where bad you and I been tbis day ; we bad never 
been instances of bis love and mercy. No, as we look upon 
ourselves now, and remember wbat we once were, we are 
often obliged to say, 

" Depths of merc7, can there he 
Mercy still reserved for me ?" 

How many times we bave sung at the Lord's table — at tbe 
sacramental supper of our Master — 

" Why was I made to hear tiiy voice 
And enter while there *s room, 
While thousands make a wretched choice, 
And rather starve then come ?" 

And we bave joined too in singing — 

" ^was the same love that spread the feast, 
That sweetly foioed us in ; 
Else we had still refused to taste, 
And perished in our sin." 

Grace is always grace, but it never seems so gracious as wben 
we see it brought to our unworthy selves. Ay, my friends, 
you may be Arminians in your doctrine, but you never can be 
Arminians in your feelings ; you are obliged to confess that it 
is all of grace, and cast away the thought that it was of yo^ir 
foreseen faith or of your foreseen good works that the Lord 
chose you. We are obliged to come to this, to feel and know 
that it must have been of mercy, free mercy, and of that alone ; 
that we were not capable of doing good works without his 
gi-ace preventing us before good works, and without his grace 
also in good works, enabling us to do them ; and, therefore, 
they never could have been the motive to divine love, nor the 
reason why it flowed toward us. O ! ye unworthy ones, ye 
saints that feel your deep natural depravity, and mourn over 
your ruin by the fall of Adam, lift up your hearts to God ! He 
hath delivered you from all the impediments which Adam cast 
upon you ; your tongue is loosed, it is loose now ; Adam made 
it dumb, but God hath loosed it ; your eyes that were blinded 
by Adam's fall are opened now ; he hath lifted you from the 
.miry clay. What Adam lost for us, Chiist hath regained for 
us ; he hath plucked us out of the pit, and " set us upon a 



124 THS DUMB SINGING. 

rock, and established our goings, and hath pat a new song 
into our mouth, even praise for evermore." Yes, "the tongue 
of the dumb shall sing." 

And then just another hint here, before I leave this point. 
How this ought to give you encouragement in seeking to do 
good to others ! Why, my brethren, I can never think any 
man too far gone for divine mercy, since I know that God 
saved me. Whenever I have felt desponding about any of my 
hearei*s, who have for a long time persevered in guilt, I have 
only had to reach down my own biography from the shelves 
of my memory and just think what I too was, till grace 
redeemed me, and brought me to my Saviour's feet ; and then 
I have said, " It will be no wonder if that man is saved ; after 
what he hath done for me, I can believe any thing of my Master. 
If he hath blotted out my transgresdons, if he hath clean 
melted away my sin, then I can never despair of any of my 
fellow-creatures j I may of myself, but I can not of them." 
Remember, they may be dumb now, but he can make them 
sing. Your son John is a sad reprobate ; keep on praying for 
him, mother ; God can change his heart. Your daughter's 
heart seems hard as adamant ; he who makes the dumb sing 
can make rocks melt. Believe in God for your children, as 
well as for yourselves ; trust him ; take their cases before his 
throne ; rely upon him that he can save them, and believe that 
in answer to earnest prayer, he also will do it. And if you 
have neighbors that are full of the pestilence of sin, whose 
vices come up before you as a stench in your nostrils, yet fear 
not to carry the gospel to them ; though they be haiiots, drunk- 
ards, swearers, be not afraid to tell them of the Saviour's dying 
love. He makes the dumb sing ; he does not ask even of them 
a voice to- begin with; they are dumb, and he does not ask of 
them even the power of speech, but he gives them the power. 
O ! if you have neighbors who are haters of the Sabbath, 
haters of God, unwilling to come to the house of God, despis- 
ing Christ ; if you find them as far gone as you can find them, 
recollect, he maketh the dumb to sing, and therefore, he can 
make them live. He wants no goodness in them to begin 
with ; all he wants is just the rough, raw material, unhewn, 
nnout, unpolished. And he does not want even good mate- 



THE DUMB SINGING. IV 

rial ; bad as the material may be, he can make it into some- 
thing inestimably precious, something that is worthy of the 
Saviour's blood. Go on ; fear not ! If the dumb can sing, 
then surely you can never say that any man need be cast away. 

II. I am now to enter into some rather more lucid descrip- 
Hon of these dumb people. Who are they ? 

Well, sometimes I g'^t a good thought out of old Master 
Cruden's Concordance. I believe that is the best commentary 
to the Bible, and I like .o study it. I opened it lately at this 
passage, and I found Master Cruden describing different kinds 
of dumb people. He says there are four or five different sorts ; 
but I shall name only four of them. The first sort of dumb 
people he mentions are those that can not speak ; the second 
sort are those that won't speak ; the third sort are those that 
dare not speak ; and the Iburth sort are those that have got 
nothing to say, and therefore they are dumb. 

1. The first sort of people who shall sing are those who can 
not speak. This is the usual acceptation of the word dumb : 
the others are, of course, only figurative applications of the 
term. We call a man dumb when he can not speak. Now, 
spiritually, the man who is still in his trespasses and sins is 
dumb ; and I will prove that. He is dead ; and there is none 
so dumb as a dead man. We used to hear in our childhood 
that they buried none but deaf and dumb persons in certain 
churchyards. It was intended to tickle our childish fancies, 
and misled ns a little ; but the meaning was, that none but dead 
people were buried there ; none are so dumb as those who are 
dead. *' Shall the dead arise and praise thee? Shall thy 
loving-kindness be declared in the grave, or thy faithfulness in 
destruction ?" The word of God assures us ti.hat unregeneratc 
men are spiritually dead ; it follows,. then, that they must be 
spiritually dumb. They can not sing God's praises ; they know 
liim not, and, therefore, they can not exalt his glorious name. 
They can not confess their sins ; they can utter the mere words 
of confession, but they can not really confess, for they do not 
know the evil of sin, nor have they been taught to feel what a 
bitter thing it is, and to know themselves as sinners. But 
"no man can call Jesus Lord, except by the Holy Ghost;" 
and these pe )ple can not do so truly. Perhaps, it may bo, 



126 THE DUMB SOTGINa. 

they can talk well on the doctrines; bat they can not speak 
them out of the fulness of their hearts, as living and vital prin- 
ciples which they know in themselves. They can not join in 
the songs, nor can they take part in the conversation of a 
Christian. If they sit down with the saints, perhaps they 
have culled a few phrases from the garden of the Lord, which 
they use and apply to certain things which they do not know 
any thing about. They talk a language the meaning of which 
they do not comprehend — ^like Milton's daughters reading a 
language to their faiher which they did not understand. Still, 
so far as the essence of the matter is concerned, they are 
dumb. But, hail to sovereign grace I " the tongue of the 
dumb shall sing !" Grod will have his darlings made what they 
should be. They are dumb by nature, but he will not leave 
them so ; they can not now sing his praises, but they shall do 
it ; they do not now confess their sins, but he will bring them 
on their knees yet, and make them pour out their hearts 
before him. They can not now talk the brogue of Canaan, 
nor speak the language of Sion, but they shall do it soon. 
Grace, omnipotent grace, will have its way with them. They 
shall be taught to pray ; their eyes shall be made to flow with 
tears of penitence ; and then, after that, their lips shall sing to 
the praise of sovereign grace. 

I need not dwell upon this point, because I have many here 
that were dumb once, who can bless God that they can now 
sing. And does it not sometimes seem to you, beloved, a very 
strange thing, that you are what you are ? I should think it 
must be the strangest thing in the world for a dumb man to 
speak, because he has no idea how a man feels when he is 
speaking ; he has no notion of the thing at alt. Like a man 
blind from his biith, he has no idea what kind of a thing sight 
can be. We have heard of a blind man, who supposed that 
the color scarlet must be very much like the sound of a trumpet : 
he had no other way of comparing it. So the dumb man has 
no notion of the way to talk. Do you not think it is a strange 
thing that you are what you are ? You said once, " I will 
never be one of the canting Methodists. Do you think I shall 
ever make a profession of religion ? What I I attend a prayer 
meeting ? No." And you went along the streets in all your 



THE DUMB SINGING. Itl 

gayety of mirth, and said, " What ! I become a little child, and 
give up my mind to simple faith, and not reason at all? 
What ! am I to give up all argunient about things, and simply 
take them for granted, because God has said them ? Nay, 
that never can be." I will be bound to say, it will be a won- 
der to you as long as you are here, that you are the children 
of God ; and even in heaven itself your greatest wonder will 
be that you were ever brought to know the Saviour. 

2. But there is a sort of dumb people that tciU not speak. 
They are mentioned by Isaiah. He said of preachers in his 
day, they were dumb dogs that would not bark. I bless God 
we are not now quite so much inundated by this kind of dumb 
people as we used to be. God has raised up, especially in the 
Church of England, of late, a large number of evangelical 
men, who are not afraid to preach the whole counsel of God. 
There are many such faithful preachers of the gospel to bo 
found ; and although we used to say we were the only evan- 
gelicals that preached the gospel, the time has come when 
" she that was barren keeps house, and has become the joyful 
mother of children." There is no reason why the Church ot 
England should not be thoroughly evangelical ; if it keeps to 
its articles, it ought to be. It is the most inconsistent church 
in the world, if it is not a Calvinistic one. It must be incon- 
sistent, unless it keeps to those grand fundamental truths which 
are indeed a code of faith to be received by all believers — ^the 
truths which are written in its articles. 

But, O I there are a great many among us Dissenters, and 
in the Church of England, too, that are dumb dogs. There 
are still plenty who do not know any thing about the gospel ; 
who preach a vast deal about a great many things, but noth- 
ing about Jesus Christ ; who buy their sermons cheap, and 
preach them at their ease ; who ask God to tell them what to 
say, and then pull their manuscripts out of their pockets. We 
have had to mourn, especially in years gone by, that we could 
look from parish to parish, and find nobody but a dumb dog 
in the church, and in the pulpits of Dissenters too. And some 
men who might have spoken with a little earnestness, if they 
liked, let the people slumber under them, instead of preaching 
the word with true fidelity, as if they would not have to give 



128 THE DUMB SINGING. 

account to God at the last. My aged gi-and&ther tells a 
story, that I believe he himself could verify, of a person who 
once resided near him, and called himself a preacher of the 
gospel. He was visited by a poor woman, who asked him 
what was the meaning of the new birth ? He replied, " My 
good woman, what do you come to me about that for ? Nic- 
odemus, a ruler of the Jews, did not know ; he was a wise 
man, and did not know ; and how do you think I should ?" 
So she had to go away with only that answer. Time was 
when such an answer might have been given by a great many 
who were reckoned to be the authorized teachers of religion, 
but knew nothing really about the matter.' They understood 
a great deal more about fox-hunting than about preaching, and 
more about farming their land than about the spiritual hus- 
bandry of God's church. But we bless God that there are not 
so many of that sort now ; and we pray that the race may be- 
come thoroughly extinct ; that every pulpit, and every place 
of worship may be filled with a man w^ho has a tongue of fire 
and a heart of flame, and shuns not to declare the whole coun- 
sel of God, neither seeking the smile of men nor dreading 
their frown. We have a promise that it shall be so. " The 
tongue of the dumb shall sing." And, ah I they do sing well 
too, when God makes them sing. 

You remember Rowland Hill's story in " The Village Dia- 
logues," about Mr. Merriman. Mr. Merriman was a sad 
scapegrace of a preacher ; he was to be seen at every fair and 
revel, and used seldom to be found in his pulpit when he 
should have been ; but when he was converted, he began to 
preach with tears running down his face^ — and how the church 
began to be crowded ! The squire would not go and hear any 
of that stujff, and locked up his pew ; and Mr. Merriman had 
a little ladder made outside the door, as he did not wish to 
break the door open ; and the people used to sit on the steps, 
up one side and down the other, so that it made twice as much 
room as there was before. 

No people make such good preachers as those who were 
dumb once. If the Lord opens their mouths, they will think 
they can not preach often enough, and earnestly enough, to 
make up for the mischief they did before. Chalmers himseli' 



THE DUMB SINGIKG. 129 

might never have been s6 eloquent a preacher, had he not 
been for a long time a dumb dog. He preached morality, he 
said, till he made all the people in his parish immoral ; he kept 
on urging them to keep God's law, till he made them break 
it; but when he turned round, and began to preach God's 
gospel, then the dumb began to sing. O ! may God bring 
this about in every one of us I If we are dumb as professed 
ministei-s, may he open our mouths, and force us to speak 
forth his word, lest at the last day the blood of our hearers' 
souls should be found upon our skirts, and we should be cast 
away as unfaithful stewards of the gospel of Christ ! 

3. I now introduce you to a third sort of dumb people. 
They are dumb because they dare not speak ; and they are 
good people, blessed souls. Here is one of them : " I- was 
dumb with silence; I opened not my mouth, because thou 
didst it !" Ah ! it is blessed to be dumb in that fashion. The 
Lord's servant will often have to be dumb under trials and 
troubles. When Satan tempts him to repine, he will put his 
finger to his lip and say, " Hush, murmuring heart, be still !" 
" Wherefore doth a living man complain, a man for the pun- 
ishment of his sins ?" Even the child of God will do like Job, 
who sat down for seven days and nights, and said not a word, 
for he felt that his trouble was heavy, and he could say nothing. 
It would have been as well if Job had kept his mouth shut all 
the next few days ; he would not have said so much amiss as 
he did in some things that he uttered. It would have been 
well if he could always have kept silence. O ! there are times 
when you and I, beloved, are obliged to keep the bridle on 
our tongues, lest we should murmur against God. We are in 
evil company ; perhaps our spirits are hot within us, and we 
want to take vengeance for the Lord ; we are like the friends 
of David, who wanted to take away the head of Shimei. "Let 
us take ojffthis dead dog's head," we say; and then our Jesus 
tells us to put our sword into its scabbard, for the " servant of 
the Lord must not strive." How often have we thus been 
dumb ! And sometimes when there have been slandei*s against 
our character, and men have calumniated us, O ! how our fin- 
gers have itched to be at them ! We have wanted to be at 
them at once, anil'let them see who was the strongest of the 



130 THE DUMB SINTGIXG. 

two. But we have said, " No ; our Master did not answer, 
and he ' left us an example that we should follow his steps.' " 
The chief priests accused him of many things, but he " an- 
swered them not a word." But we have found it hard some- 
times to be dumb, like th 3 sheep when it is brought to the 
shearer, or the lamb when it is in the slaughter-house. We 
could scarcely keep quiet. When we have been upon our 
beds in sickness, we have tried to quench every murmuring 
word ; we have not let a sentence escape our lips, when we 
could possibly avoid it ; but notwithstanding all that, we have 
found it hard work to keep dumb, though it is blessed work 
when we are enabled to do it. Now, ye who have been dumb 
under great weights of sorrow ; ye whose songs have been 
suspended, because ye durst not 'open your lips, lest sighs 
should usurp the place of praise, come, listen to this promise, 
" The tongue of the dumb shall sing." Yes, though you are 
in the deepest trouble now, and are obliged to be silent, you 
shall sing yet. Though, like Jonah, you are in the whale's 
belly, carried down, as he called it, into the lowest hell; 
though the earth with her bars is about you for ever, and the 
weeds are wrapped about your head, yet you "shall look 
again toward his holy temple." Though you have hung your 
harp upon the willows, bless God you have not broken it ; 
you will have use for it by-and-by ; you shall take it down 
fi'om its resting-place, and 

" XiOud to the praise of sovereign grace, 
Bid every string awake." 

If you have- no songs in the night, yet he shall compass you 
about with songs of deliverance ; if you can not sing his 
praises now, you shall do so by-and-by, when greater grace shall 
have come into your heart, or when deliveiing mercy shall be 
the subject of your song, in better days that are yet to come. 
But, blessed be God, we are not always to be silent in afflic- 
tion ; we are bound to sing. And I think we ought to sing 
even when we ought to be dumb ; though we are dumb as to 
murmuiing, we ought to sing God's praises. An old Puritan 
said, " God's people are like birds ; they sing best in cages," 
He said, " God's peopla often sing the best when they are in 



THE DUMB SINGING. 131 

the deepest trouble." Said old Master Brooks, " The deeper 
the flood was, the higher the ark went up to heaven." So it 
is with the child of God : the deeper his troubles, the nearer 
to heaven he goes, if he lives close to his Master. Troubles 
are called weights, and weights, you know, generally clog us 
and keep us down to the earth ; but there are ways, by the 
use of the laws of mechanics, by which you can make a. weight 
lift you'; and so it is possible to make your troubles lift you 
nearer heaven, instead of making them sink you. Ah I we 
thank our God he has sometimes opened our mouth when we 
were dumb ; when we were ungrateful and did not praise him, 
he has opened our mouth by a trial, and though when we had 
a thousand mercies we did not praise him, when he sent a 
sharp affliction, then we began to do so. He has thus made 
the tongue of the dumb to sing. 

4. We will mention one more kind of dumb people, and 
then we shall have done. There are those who have nothing 
to say^ and, therefore, they are dumb. I will give you an in- 
stance : Solomon says in the Proverbs — " Open thy mouth for 
the dumb ;" and he shows by the context that he means those 
who in the court of judgment have nothing to plead for them- 
selves, and have to stand dumb before the bar. Like that 
man of old, who, when the king came in to see the guests, had 
not on a wedding garment, and when the king said, " Friend, 
how camest thou in hither ?" stood speechless, not because he 
could not speak, but because he had nothing to say. Have 
not you and I been dumb, and are we not now, when we 
stand on law terms with God, when we forget that Jesus 
Christ and his blood and- righteousness were our full acquit- 
tal ? Are w^e not obliged to be dumb when the command- 
ments are laid bare before us, and when the law of God is 
brought home to our conscience ? There was a time with each 
of us, and not long ago with some here present, when we 
stood before Moses's seat, and heard the commandments read ; 
and when we were asked, " Sinner, canst thou claim to have 
kept these commandments ?" we were dumb. Then we were 
asked, " Sinner, canst thou give any atonement for the breach 
of these commandments ?" and we were dumb. We were 
asked, " Snner, canst thou, by a future obedieuoe, wipe out 



132 THE DUMB SINGING. 

thy past sin?" We knew it wjxs impossible, and we were 
dumb. Then we were asked, " Canst thou endure the pen- 
alty ; canst thou bear to welter for ever in the flames of hell ? 
Canst tHou suffer everlasting torments from the red right 
hand of an angry God ? Canst thou dwell with everlasting 
burnings, and abide with eternal fires ?" and we were dumb. 
And then we were asked the question, " Prisoner at the bai-, 
hast thou any reason to plead why thou shouldst not- be con- 
demned ?" and we were dumb. And we were asked, " Pris- 
oner, hast thou any helper ? hast thou any one that can de- 
liver thee ?" and we stood dumb, for we had nothing to say. 
Ay, lyit blessed be God, the tongue of the dumb can now 
sing. And shall I tell you what we can sing ? Why, we can 
sing this : " Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's 
elect ?" Not God, for he has justified. " Who is he that 
condemneth ?" Not Christ, for " he hath died, yea, rather 
hath risen again, who is also at the right hand of God, and 
maketh intercession for us." We who had not a word to say 
for ourselves, can now say every thing. We can say, 

"Bold shall I stand at that great day, 
For who aught to my charge can lay f 
Fully absolved by Christ I am, 
From sin's tremendous curse and shame." 

Yes, the dumb ones can sing. So shall you, poor dumb 
one : if God has made you dumb by taking away all the names 
of Baal out of your mouth — if he has taken away all your 
self-righteousness and aU your trust in yourself, as truly as 
ever he has shut your mouth he will open it. If God has 
killed your self-righteousness, he will give you a better; if 
he has knocked down all your refuges of lies, he will build 
you up a good refuge. He has not come to destroy you ; he 
has shut your mouth to fill it with his praise. Be of good 
cheer ; look to Jesus ; cast thine eyes to the cross ; put thy 
confidence in him ; and even thou, who thinkest thyself a 
castaway, even thou, poor, weeping Mary, even thou shalt yet 
sing of redeeming love. 

IV. And now I have to conclude by just noticing the occa- 
810918 when the tongues of these dumb people sing the best. 



THE DUMB SINGING. 133 

When does the tongue of the dumb sing? Why, I think 
it sings always, little or much. It is always singing. If it is 
once set at liberty, it will never leave off. There are^ome of 
you people who say this world is a howling wilderness ; well, 
you are tho howlers — ^you make all the howling. If you choose 
to howl, I ^an not help it : I prefer the promise of my text — 
" Then shall the tongue of the dumb," not howl, but " sing." 
Yes, they do sing always, little or much ; sometimes it is in a 
low hush-note ; sometimes they have to go rather deep in the 
bass ; but there are other times, when they can mount to the 
highest notes of all. They have special times of singing. 
When they lose their burden at the foot of the cross, that is 
the time when they begin to sing. Never did a harp of heaven 
sound so sweetly as when touched by the finger of some re- 
turning prodigal, not even the songs of the angels seem to me 
to be so sweet as that first song of rapture which gushes forth 
fi-om the inmost soul of the forgiven child of God. You know 
how John Bunyan describes it. He says, when poor Pilgrim 
lost his burden at the cross, he gave three great leaps, and 
went on his way singing. We have not forgotten those three 
great leaps ; they were great leaps — ^leaps of praise. We 
have leaped many times since then with joy and gratitude ; 
but we think we never leaped so high as we did at the time 
when we saw our many sins all gone, and our transgressions 
covered up in the tomb of the Saviour. By the way, let me 
tell you a little story about that matter of John Bunyan. I 
am a gi*eat lover of John Bunyan, but I do not believe him 
infallible ; for I met with a story the other day which I think, 
a very good one. There was a young man in Edinburg \vho 
wished to be a missionary. He was a wise young man ; he 
thought — " Well, if I am to be a missionary, there is no need 
for me to transport myself far away from home ; I may as well 
be a missionary in Edinburg." There's a hint to some of 
you ladies, who give away tracts in your district, and never 
give your servant Mary one. Well, this young man started, 
and determined to speak to the first person he met. He met 
one of those old fishwives ; those of us who have seen them 
can never forget them ; they are extraordinary women indeed. 
So stepping up to her he said, " Here you are, coming with 



134 THE DUMB 8IN6IK6. 

your burden on your back ; let me ask you if you have got 
another burden, a spiritual burden!" "What!" she said; 
" do you mean that burden in John Bunyan's Pilgnm's Prog- 
ress ? Because if you do, young man, I have got rid of that 
many years ago, before you were bom. But I went a better 
way to work than the Pilgrim did. The evangelist that John 
Bunyan talks about was one of your parsons that do not 
preach the gospel ; for he said, ' Keep that light in thine eye 
and run to the wicket-gate.' W Hy, man alive ! that was not 
the place for him to run to. He should have said, * Do you 
see that cross ? Run there at once ! But instead of that, he 
sent the poor Pilgrim to the wicket-gate first; and much good 
he got by going there! He got tumbling into the slough, and 
was like to have been killed by it." "But did not you," he 
asked, " go through any Slough of Despond ?" " Yes, young 
man, I did ; but I found it a great deal easier going through 
with my burden oflf than with it on my back." The old 
woman was quite right. John Bunyan put the getting rid of 
the burden too far off from the commencement of the Pilgrim- 
age. If he meant to show what usually happens, he was 
right ; but if he meant to show what ought to have happened, 
he is wrong. We must not say to the sinner, " Now, sinner, 
if thou wilt be saved go to the baptismal pool ; go to the 
wicket-gate ; go to the church ; do this or that." No, the 
cross should be right in front of the wicket-gate; and we 
should say to the sinner, " Throw thyself there, and thou art 
safe ; but thou art not safe till thou canst cast off thy burden, 
.and lie at the foot of the cross, and find peace in Jesus. Well, 
thaf is a time when we can sing. 

And after that do God's people sing? Yes, they have 
sweet singing times in their house of communion. Oh ! the 
music of that word " communion," when it is heard in the 
soul — communion with Jesus, fellowship with Jesus, whether 
in his sufferings, or in his glories ! Those are singing times 
when the heart is lifted up to feel its oneness with Christ, and 
its vital union with him, and is enabled to " rejoice in hope 
of the glory of God," through communion with the Saviour. 

Have not y 3U had some precious singing times at the Lord's 
table ? Ah I when the bread has been broken, and the wine 



THE DUMB SIN6INO. 135 

poured out, how often has it been to me a time of song^when 
the people have all joined in singing, 

" Gethsemaoe, can I forget, 
Or there thy conflict see, 
Thine agony and bloody sweat. 
And not remember thee ? 

" When to the cross I lum my eyea^. 
And rest on Calvary, 
1 Lamb of God, my sacrifice, 
I must remember thee." 

I am in the house of God, I think, every day. I believe 
that David could not have prayed lor more than I have 
got, when he prayed that he might dwell in the house of the 
Lord for ever ; for I spend more of my time in the house of 
God than I do anywhere else. But my best moments are at 
the Lord's table. I do rejoice then, when I have no thought 
of what I have to say to others, but simply to sit down 
amongst the Lord's family, and taste my morsel of bread, and 
have ray sip of the wine. O! it is then the soul finds its 
Saviour precious. I look foi'ward for eveiy month to come, 
when I may once more sit at the table of my Master, and 
spiritually eat his flesh and dnnk his blood, and feel that I 
have indeed life in him, because I have got union with him. 
Ah ! those are singing times to the family of God. And so,' 
sometimes are preaching times and sometimes hearing times. 
Prayer meetings are often special singing times ; in fact, the 
means of grace will very frequently be blessed of God to be 
to us the occasion of song. 

But lastly, my dear friends, for I can not stop to mention all 
these singing times, the best we shall have will be when you 
and I come to die. Ah ! there are some of you that are like 
what is fabled of the swan. The ancients said the swan never 
sang in his life-time, but always sang just when he died. Now, 
there are many of God's desponding children who seem to 
go all their life under a cloud ; but they get a swan's song 
before they die. The river of their life comes running dowTi, 
perhaps black and miry with troubles, and when it begins to 
touch the white foam of the sea there comes a little glistening 



136 THB DUITB SINGING. 

in its waters. So, beloved, though we may have been very 
much dispirited by reason of the burden of the way, when we 
get to the end we shall have sweet songs. Are you afraid of 
dying ? O I never be afraid of that ; be afraid of living. 
Living is the only thing which can do any mischief; dying 
never can hurt a Christian. Afraid of the grave ? It is like 
the bath of Esther, in which she lay for a time, to purify her- 
self with spices, that she might be fit for her lord. The grave 
fits the body for heaven. There it lieth : and corruption, 
earth and worms, do but refine and purify our flesh. Be not 
afraid of dying ; it does not take any time at all. All that 
death is, is emancipation, deliverance, heaven^s bliss to a child 
of God. Never fear it ; it will be a sin^ng time. You are 
afraid of dying, you say, because of the pains of death. Nay, 
they are the pains of life — of life struggling to continue. 
Death has no pain ; death itself is but one gentle sigh — the 
fetter is broken, and the spirit fled. The best moment of a 
Christian's life is his last one, because it is the one that is 
nearest heaven ; and then it is that he begins to strike the key- 
note of the song which he shall sing to all eternity. O ! 
what a song will that be ! It is a poor noise we make now ; 
when we join the song perhaps we are almost ashamed to 
sing ; but up there our voices shall be clear and good ; and 
there 

" Loudest of the crowd we'll sing, 
"WTiile heaven's resounding mansions ring 
"With shouts of sovereign grace." 

The thought struck me the other day, that the Lord will 
have in heaven some of those very big sinners that have gone 
further astray than any body that ever lived — the most extra- 
ordinary extravaganzas of vice — just to make the melody com- 
plete by singing some of those alto notes we sometimes hear, 
which you and I, because we have not gone so far astray, will 
never be able to utter. I wonder whether one has stepped 
into this chapel this morning, whom God has selected to take 
some of those alto notes in the scale of praise. Perhaps there 
is one such here. O ! how will such a one sing, if grace, free 
grace, shall have mercy upon him ! 

And now, farewell, with just this solitary word : My breth- 



THS DUMB SINGDIG. 187 

ren, the members of this church, strive together in your pray- 
ers, that God may hless you. Be not content with what you 
are, however prosperous you may be ; but seek to increase 
more and more. Pray that you and your children may be 
added to the church of Christ here, and may live to see oth- 
ers added too. Keep prayer going; do not neglect your 
prayer meetings. Christmas Evans gives us a good idea about 
prayer. He says, " Prayer is the rope in the belfiy ; we pull 
it and it rings the bell up in heaven." And so it is. Mind you 
keep that bell going. Pull it well. Come up to prayer meet- 
ings. Keep on pulling it ; and though the bell is up so high 
that you can not hear it ring, depend upon it, it can be heard 
in the tower of heaven, and is ringing before the throne of 
God, who will give you answer of peace according to your 
faith. May your faith be lai'ge and plentiful, and so will your 
answers be I 



SERMON IX. 

FORETASTES OP THE HEAVENLY LIFE. 

" And they took of the firuit of the land in their hands, and broiight it down 
unto 128, and brought ns word again, and said, It is a good land which the 
Lord our God doth give us." — ^Deut^ i 25. 

You remember the occasion concerning which these words 
were written. The children of Israel sent twelve men as spies 
into the land of Canaan, who brought back with them the fruit 
of the land, amongst the. rest a bunch of grapes from Eshcol 
too heavy to be borne by one man, and which, therefore, two 
of them carried on a staff between them. But I shall not re- 
mark upon the figure, but only say that as they learned of Ca- 
naan by the fruit of the land brought to them by the spies, so 
you and I, even while we are on earth, if we be the Lord's be- 
loved, may learn something of what heaven is — sl state to 
which we are to attain hereafter — ^by certain blessings which - 
are brought to us on earth. 

They were sure that the land of Israel was a fertile land 
when they saw the fruits which it produced, brought by their 
brethren, and when they ate thereof. Perhaps there was but 
little for so many, and yet those who did eat were made at 
once to understand that it must have been a goodly soil that 
produced such fruit. Now, then, beloved, we who love the 
Lord Jesus Christ have had clusters of the grapes of Eshcol. 
We have had some fruits of heaven even since we have been 
on earth, and by them we are able to judge of the richness of 
the soil of Paradise which bringeth forth such rare and choice 
fruits. 

I shall, therefore, present to you some views of heaven in 
order to give you some idea how it is that the Christian on 
earth enjoys a foretaste of them. 



FOBETASTBS OF THB HjEEAYfiNLT LIFE. 139 

Possibly, there are scarce two Christians who have the same 
views of heaven ; though they all expect the same heaven, 
yet the most prominent feature in it is different to each differ- 
ent mind according to its constitution. iTow, I will confess 
what is to me the most prominent feature of heaven, judging 
at the present moment. At another time I may love heaven 
better for another thing : but lately I have learned to lov^ 
heaven as a place of secvtrity. We have seen high professors 
turning from their profession, ay, and we have seen some of 
the Lord's o^ii beloved committing grievous faults and slips, 
which have brought disgrace upon their character, and injury 
to their souls. Now I have learned to look to heaven lately 
as a place where we shall never, never sin — wh^re our feet 
shall be fixed firmly upon a rock — where there is neither trip- 
ping nor sliding — where faults shall be unknown — where wo 
shall have no need to keep watch against an indefatigable ene- 
my, because there is no foe that shall annoy us — where we 
shall not be on our guard day and night watching against the 
incursion of foes, for there " the wicked cease from troubling 
and the weary are at rest." I have looked upon it as the land 
of complete security, where the garment shall be always white, 
where the face shall be always anointed with fresh oil, where 
there is no fear of slipping or turning away, bufr where we 
shall stand fast for ever. And I ask you, if that be a true 
view of heaven — and I am sure it is one feature of it — do not 
the saints even on earth enjoy some fruits of Paradise, even in 
this sense ? Do we not even in these huts and villages below 
sometimes taste the joys of blissful security ? The doctrine 
of God's word is, that all who are in union with the Lamb are 
safe, that all believers must hold on their way, that those who 
have committed their souls to the keeping of Christ shall find 
him a faithful and immutable keeper. On such a doctrine we 
can enjoy security even on earth ; not that high and glorious 
security which renders us free from every slip and trip, but nev- 
ertheless a security well nigh as great, because it secures us 
against ultimate ruin, and renders us certain that we shall at- 
tain to eternal felicity. And, beloved, have you never sat 
down and reflected on the doctrine of the perseverance of the 
saints ? I trow you have. God has brought home to you a 



140 FORETASTES OF THE HEAVENLY LIFE. 

sense of your security in the person of Christ. He has told 
you that your name is graven on his hand ; he has whispered 
in your ear the promise, " Fear not, I am with thee." You 
have been led to look upon him, the great surety of the cove- 
nant, as faithful and true, and, therefore, bound and engaged 
to present you, the weakest of the family, with all the chosen 
race, before the throne of God ; and in such sweet contem- 
plation I am sure you have been drinking some of the juice of 
his spiced pomegranates ; you have had some of the dainty 
fruits of Paradise; you have had some of the enjoyments 
which the perfect saints have above in a sense of security. 

O how I love that doctrine of the perseverance of the saints 1 
I renounce the pulpit when I can not preach it, for the gospel 
seems to be a blank desert and a howling wilderness — ^a gospel 
as unworthy of God as it would be beneath even my accept- 
ance, frail worm as I am — a gospel which saves me to-day and 
rejects me to-morrow — ^a gospel which puts me in Christ^s 
family one hour, and makes me a child of the devil the next — 
a gospel which justifies and then condemns me — ^a gospel 
which pardons me, and afterward casts me to hell. Such a 
gospel is abhorrent to reason itself, much more to the God of 
the whole earth. But on the other ground of faith, that 

" He to the end must endure 

As sure as the earnest is given," 

we do enjoy a sense of peifect security even as we dwell in 
this land of wars and fightings. As the spies brought their 
brethren bunches of the grapes, so in the security we enjoy, 
we have a foretaste and earnest of the joy of Paradise. 

In the next place, most probably the greater part of you 
love to think of heaven under another aspect ; as a place of 
perfect rest. You sons of toil, you love the sanctuary because 
it is there you sit to hear God's word, and rest your wearied 
limbs. When you have wiped Uie hot sweat from your burn- 
ing brow, you have often thought of heaven where your la- 
bors shall be over ; you have sung with sweet emphasis, 

" There shall I bathe my weary soul 
In seas of heavenly rest." 

Rest, rest, rest, — ^this is what you want. And to me this idea 



F0BBTA8TES OF THE HBATSNLY LIFE. 141 

of heaven is exceedingly beautifal. Rest I know I never shall 
have beneath this sky, while Christ's church is as barbarous as 
it is ; for the most barbarous of masters is the church of 
Christ. I have served it, and am well-nigh hounded to my 
grave by Christian ministers perpetually requiring me to do 
impossibilities that they know no mortal strength can accom- 
plish. Willing I am to labor till I drop, but more I can not 
do ; yet I am perpetually assailed on this side and the other, 
till, go where I may, there seems no rest for me till I slumber 
in my grave ; and I do look forward to heaven with some de- 
gree of happiness. There I shall rest from labors constant 
and perpetual, though much loved. And you, too^ who have 
been toiling long to gain an object you have sought afler — 
you have said if you could get it you would lie down and rest; 
you have toiled after a certain amount of riches, you have said 
if you could once gain a competence you would then make 
yourself at ease. Or, you have been laboring long to gain a 
certain point of character, and then you have said you would 
lay down your ai*ms and rest. Ay, but you have not reached 
it yet ; and you love heaven because heaven is the goal to the 
racer, the target of the arrow of existence ; you love heaven 
because it will be the couch of time, ay, an eternal rest for the 
poor weary struggler upon earth. You love it as a place of 
rest ; and do we never enjoy a foretaste of heaven upon eaith 
in that sense ? O, yes, beloved ! blessed be God, " we who 
have believed do enter into rest." Our peace is like a river, 
and our righteousness like the waves of the sea. God may 
give to his people rest : even the rest that remaineth for the 
people of God. We have stormy trials and bitter troubles in 
the world ; but we have learned to say, " Return unto thy 
rest, O my soul! for the Lord hath dealt bountifully witli 
thee." Did you never, in times of great distress, climb up to 
your closet, and there on your knees pour out your heart be- 
fore God ? Did you never feel afler you had so done that 
you had bathed yourself in rest, so that 

" Let cares like a wild deluge come, 
And storms of sorrow fell," 

you cared not one whit for them? For you had found a 



142 FORETASTES OF THE BEATBNLT LIFE. 

shield in Christ; you had looked upon the face of God's 
anointed. Ah, Christian, that rest without a billow of dis- 
turbance, 'that rest so placid and serene, which in your deep- 
est troubles you have been enabled to enjoy in the bosom of 
Christ, is to you a bunch of the mighty vintage of heaven, one 
grape of the heavenly cluster which you i^all soon partake of 
in the land of the hereafter. Here, again, you see we can 
have a foretaste of heaven, and realize what it is even while 
here upon earth. 

But that idea of rest will suit some indolent professors, and, 
therefore, let me just give the very opposite of it. I do think 
that one of the worst sins a man can be guilty of in this world 
is to be idle. I can almost forgive a drunkard, but a lazy man 
I do think there is very little pardon for. I think a man who 
is idle has as good a reason to be a penitent before God as 
David had when he was an adulterer, for the most abominable 
thing in the world is for a man to let the grass grow up to his 
ankles and do nothing. God never sent a man into the world 
to be idle. And there are some who make a tolei'ably fair 
profession, but who do nothing from one year's end to the 
other. 

The next idea of heaven is, that it is a place of uninter- 
rupted service. It is a plaee where they serve God day and 
night in his temple, and never know weariness, and never re- 
quire to slumber. Do you know what is the deliciousness of 
work ? For although we must complain when people expect 
impossibilities of us, it is the highest enjoyment of life to be 
busily engaged for Christ. Tell me the day I do not preach, 
I will tell you the day in which I am not happy ; but the day 
in which it is my privilege to preach the gospel, and labor for 
God, is generally the day of my peaceful and quiet enjoyment 
after all. Service is delight. Praising God is pleasure. La- 
boring for him is the highest delight a mortal can know, O, 
how sweet it must be to sing his praises, and never feel that 
the throat is dry ! O, how blessed to flap the wing for ever 
and never feel it flag ! O, what sweet enjoyment to run upon 
his errands, evermore to circle round the throne of God in 
heaven while eternity shall last, and never once lay the head 
on the pillow, never once feel the throbbuigs of fatigue, nev^ 



F0BETASTB3 OF THB BSA^YSlfLY UFB. 143 

once the pangs that admonish us that we need to cease, but to 
keep on for ever like eternity's owti self— a broad river roll^ 
ing on with perpetual floods of labor ! O, that must be enjoy- 
ment I That must be, indeed, a heaven, to serve God day 
and night in his temple ! But yon have served Grod on earth, 
and have had foretastes of that. I wish some of you knew the 
sweets of labor a little more, for although labor breedeth 
sweat, it breedeth sweets too— more especially labor for 
Christ, There is a satisfaction before the work ; there is a 
satis&ction in the work ; there is a satisfaction after the work ; 
and there is a satisfaction in looking for the fruits of the work ; 
and a great satisfaction when we get the fruits. Labor for 
Christ is, indeed, the robing-room of heaven ; if it be not 
heaven itself, it is one of the most blissful foretastes of it. 
Thank God, Christian, if you can do any thing for your Mas- 
ter. Thank him if it is your privilege to do the least thing for 
him, for remember in so doing he is giving you a taste of the 
grapes of Eshcol. But you indolent people, you do not get 
the grapes of Eshcol, because you are too lazy to carry that 
big bunch. You would like it to come into your mouths 
without the trouble of gathering it ; but you do not care to 
go forth and serve God, You sit still and look after your- 
selves, but what do you do for other people ? You go to 
your place of worship ; you talk about your Sunday-school 
and sick society, and so on. You never teach in the Sunday- 
school, and you never visit a sick person, and yet you take 
a great deal of credit to youi-self while you do nothing at all. 
You will never know much of the enjoyments of heavenly 
glory until you know a little of the work of the kingdom of 
heaven on earth. 

Now, let us proceed to some other points. Another view 
of heaven is, that it is a place of complete victor}/ and glorious 
triumph. This is the battle-field ; there is the triumphal pro- 
cession. This is the land of the sword and the spear ; that is 
the land of the wreath and the crown. This is the land of the 
garment rolled in blood and of the dust of the fight ; that is 
the land of the trumpet's joyful sound — that is the place of the 
white robe and of the shout of conquest. O, what a thrill of 
joy shall shoot through the hearts of all the blessed when 



144 rORETASTBS OF THE BEAYKSLY UFJB. 

their conquests shall be complete in heaven, when death it- 
self, the last of foes, shall be slain — when Satan shall be 
dragged captive at the chariot wheels of Christ — when he 
shall have overthrown sin and trampled corrnption as the mire 
of the streets — when the great shout of universal victory shall 
rise from the hearts of all the redeemed ! What a moment 
of pleasure shall that be ! O, dear brethren, you and I have 
foretastes of even that. We know what conquests, what 
souls' battles we have even here. Did you never struggle 
against an evil heart, and at last overcome it ? O, with what 
joy did you lift your eyes to heaven, the tears flowing down 
your cheeks, and say, ^' Lord, I bless thee that I have been 
able to overcome that sin." Did you ever have a strong 
temptation, and did you wrestle hard with it, and know what 
it was to sing with great joy, "My feet slipped; but thy 
mercy held me up?" Have you, like Bunyan's Christian, 
fought with old Apollypn, and have you seen him flap his 
dragon-wings and fly away ? There you had a foretaste of 
heaven ; you had just a guess of what the ultimate victory 
will be. In the death of that one Philistine you had the de- 
struction of the whole army. That Goliath who fell beneath 
your sling and stone was but one out of the multitude who 
must yield their bodies to the fowls of heaven. God gives 
you partial triumphs that they may be the earnest of ultimate 
and complete victory. Go on and conquer, and let each con- 
quest, though a harder one and more strenuously contested, 
be to you as a grape of Eshcol, a foretaste of the joys of 
heaven. 

Furthermore, without doubt one of the best views we can 
ever give of heaven is, that it is a state of complete acceptance 
with God^ reqognized and felt in the conscience. I suppose 
that a great part of the joy of the blessed saints consists in a 
knowledge that there is nothing in them to which God is hos- 
tile ; that their peace with God has not any thing to mar it ; 
that they are so completely in union with the principles and 
thoughts of the Most High ; that his love is set on them ; that 
their love is set on him ; that they are one with God in every 
respect. Well, beloved, and have we not enjoyed a sense of 
acceptance here below ? Blotted and blurred by many doubts 



FOBETASTES OP THE HEAVENLY LIFE. 145 

and fears, yet there have been moments when we have known 
ourselves as well accepted as we shall know ourselves to be 
even when we stand before the throne. There have been 
bright days with some of us, when we could " set to our seal" 
that God was true ; and, when afterward, feeling that the L^d 
knoweth them that are his, we could say, " And I know that 
I am his too." There have been moments when, with an un- 
faltering lip, we could say, 

" Now, I can call my Jesus mine ; 
Now, I can all my joys resign ; 
Can tread the world beneath my feet, 
And all tiiat earth calls good and great ;'* 

when we had such a view of the perfection of Christ's righte- 
ousness that we felt that God had accepted us, and could not 
do otherwise ; we had such a sense of the efficacy of the blood 
of Christ, we felt sure that our sins were all pardoned, and that 
they never could be mentioned unto us in mercy for ever. 
And, beloved, though I have spoken of other joys, let me say, 
this is the cream of all of them, to know ourselves accepted in 
God's sight. O ! to feel that I, a guilty worm, am now re- 
ceived in my Father's bosom ; that I, a lost prodigal, am now 
feasting at his table with delight ; that I, who once heard the 
voice of his anger, now listen to the notes of his love. This is 
joy — this is joy worth worlds. What more can they know 
up there than that ? And were it not that our sense of it were 
so imperfect, we might bring heaven down to earth, and might 
at least dwell in the suburbs of the celestial city, if we could 
not be privileged to go within the gates. So you see, again, 
we can have bunches of the grapes of Eshcol in that sense. 
Seeing that heaven is a state of acceptance, we, too, can know 
and feel that acceptance, and rejoice in it. 

And, again, heaven is a state of great and glorious manifes- 
tations. You look forward to heaven as the place where you 

shall 

" See, and hear, and know 
All you desire and wish below.'* 

You are now looking at it darkly through a glass : there you 
shall see &ce to face. Christ looks down on the Bible, and the 



146 FORETASTES OF TUB HEAVENLY LIFJB. 

Bible is his looking-glass. You look into it, and see the face 
of Christ as in a mirror darkly ; but soon you shall look upon 
himself and see him face to fece. You expect heaven as a 
place of peculiar manifestations. You believe that there he 
yifji unvail his fkce to you ; that 

" Millions of years your wondering eyes 
Shall o*er your Saviour's beauties rove." 

You are. expecting to see his foce, and never, never sin. You 
are longing to know the secrets of his heart. You believe that 
in that day you shall see him as he is, and shall be like him in 
the world of spirits. Well, beloved, though Christ does not 
manifest himself to us as he does to the bright ones there, have 
not you and I had manifestations even while we have been in 
this vale of tears? Speak, beloved; let your heart speak; 
hast thou not had visions o( Calvary ; has not thy Master 
sometimes touched thy eyes with eyesalve, and let thee see 
him on his cross ? Hast thou not said 

" Here I*d sit for ever viewing 
Mercy stream in streams of blood ! 
Precious drops my soul bedewing, 
Plead and claim my peace with God." 

Have you not wept for joy and grief when you saw him bleed- 
ing out his life from his heart for you, and beheld hhn nailed 
to the tree for your sakes ! O yes I I know you have had 
such manifestations of him. And have you not seen him in 
his risen glories ? Have you not beheld him there exalted on 
his throne ? Have you not by faith Beheld him as the Judge 
of the quick and the dead, and as the Prince of the kings of 
the earth ? Have you not looked through the dim future, and 
seen him with the crown of all the kingdoms on his head, with 
the diadems of all monarchies beneath his feet, and the scepters 
of all thrones in his hand ? Have you not anticipated the 
moment of his most glorious triumphs, when he 

" Shall reign fixjm pole to pole with illimitable sway ?" 

Yes, you have, and therein you have had foretastes of heaven. 
When Christ has thus revealed himself to you, you have looked 



FORETASTES OP THE HEAVENLY LIFE. HI 

within the vail, and, therefore, you have seen what is there ; 
you have had some glimpses of Jesus while here ; those 
glimpses of Jesus are but the beginning of what shall never 
end. Those joyous melodies of praise and thanksgiving are 
but the preludes of the notes of Paradise. 

And now, lastly, the highest idea of heaven, perhaps, is the 
idea of most hallowed and blissful communion. I have not 
given you near half that I might have given you of the various 
charactenstics of heaven, as described in God's word, but com- 
munion is the best. Communion 1 that word so little spoken 
of^ so seldom understood. That word, communion ! Dearly 
beloved, you hear us say, " And the communion of the Holy 
Ghost be with you all ;" but there are many of you that do 
not know the meaning of that sweet heaven in a word. Com- 
munion ! It is the flower of language ; it is the honeycomb 
of words. Communion I You like to talk of corruption best, 
do you not ? Well, if you like that filthy word, you are very 
willing to meditate upon it. I do so when I am forced to do 
it ; but communion seems to me to be a sweeter word than 
that. You like to talk a great de^al about affliction, don't you ? 
Well, if you love the black word — ah ! you have reason to love 
it ; but if you love to be happy upon it, you may do so ; but 
give me for my constant text and for my constant joy, com- 
munion. And I will not choose which kind of communion it 
shall be. Sweet Master, if thou givest me communion with 
thee in thy sufferings, if I have to bear reproach and shame 
for thy name's sake, I will thank thee ; if I may have fellow- 
ship with thee in it, and if thou wilt give me to suffer for thy 
sake, I will call it honor, that so I can be a partaker of thy 
sufferings ; and if thou givest me sweet enjoyments, if thou 
dost raise me up and make me to sit in heavenly places in 
Christ, I will bless thee. I will bless thee for ascension com- 
munion — communion with Christ in his glories. Do you not 
say the same? And for communion with Christ in death. 
Have you died unto the world, as Christ did die unto him- 
self? And then have you had communion with him in resur- 
rection ? Have yoli felt that you are raised to newness of 
life, even as was he ? And have you had communion with 
him in ascension, so that you could know yourself to be an 



148 FORETASTES OF THE HEAVENLY UFE. 

heir to a throne in Paradise ? If so, you have had the best 
earnest you can receive of the joys of Paradise. To be in 
heav-en is to lean one's head upon the breast of Jesus. You 
have done it on earth ? Then you know what heaven is. To 
be in heaven is to talk with Jesus, to sit at his feet, to let our 
heart beat against his heart. If you have had that on earth, 
you have had some of the grapes of heaven. 

Cherish, then, these foretastes, of whatever kind they may 
have been in your individual case. Differently constituted, 
you will all look at heaven in a different light. Keep your 
foretaste just as God has given it to you. He has given each 
of yod some one ; if you love it, it is most suitable to your own 
condition. Treasure it up ; think much of it. Think more of 
your Master. For, remember, it is " Christ in you the hope 
of ^lory," aft^r all, that is your only foretaste of heaven; and 
the more fully prepared shall you be for the bliss of the joyous 
OUC9 in the land of the happy. 



SERMON X. 
PREACHING FOR THE POOR. 

" The poor have the gospel preached to them." — ^Matt., xl 6. 

John, the forerunner of Christ, had some followers who 
continued with him after Christ had come in the flesh, and 
openly manifested himself among the people. These disciples 
were in doubt as to whether Jesus was the Messiah or no. I 
believe that John himself had no doubt whatever upon the 
matter, for he had received positive revelations, and had given 
substantial testimonies on the subject. But in order to r^^lieve 
their doubts, John said to his disciptos, in some such words, 
" Go and ask him yourselves ;" and, therefore, he dispatched 
them with this message, " Tell us whether thou art he that 
should come, or do we look for another?" Jesus Chrisi con- 
tinuing his preaching for a while, said, " Stay and receive your 
answer ;" and instead of giving them an affirmative reply, " I 
am that Messiah," he said, " Go and show John agalc those 
things which ye do hear and see : the blind receive their sight, 
and the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear, 
the dead are raised up, and the poor have the gospel preached 
to them." As much as to say, "That is my answer; these 
things are my testimonies — on the one hand, that I come from 
God, and, on the other hand, that I am th^ Messiah,^'* You 
Mill see the truth and force of this reply, if you will observe 
that it was prophesied of the Messiah, that he should do Ihe 
very things which Jesus at that moment was doing. It is said 
of Messias, in the 35th chapter of Isaiah, at the 5th and (5th 
verses : " Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, ai;cl the 
ears of the deaf shall be unstopped. Then shall the lame man 
leap as an hart, and the tongue of the dumb sing ; for in the 
wideraess shall waters break out, and streams in the desert." 



150 PBEACHING FOR THB POOR. 

The Jews had forgotten this too much ; they only looked for a 
Messiah who should be clothed with temporal grandeur and 
dignity, and they overlooked the teaching of Isaiah, that he 
should be " a man of sorrows and acquainted with grief." 
And, besides that, you observe, they overlooked the miracles 
which it was prophesied should attend the coming of the glo- 
rious one, the King ot kings and Lord of lords. Jesus gave 
this as his answer- -a practical demonstration of John's prob- 
lem, proving it to an absolute certainty. But he not only re- 
ferred to the miracles, he gave them a further prooJ^" The 
poor have the gospel preached to them." This, also, was one 
evidence that he was Messias. For Isaiah, the great Mes- 
sianic prophet, had said, " He shall preach the gospel unto the 
meek ;" that is, the poor. And in that Jesus did so, it was 
proved that he was the man intended by Issdah. Beside, Zech- 
ariah mentions the congregation of the poor who attend on 
him, and therein evidently foretold the coming of Jesus Christ, 
the preacher to the poor. 

I shall not, however dwell upon these circumstances this 
morning ; it must be apparent to every hearer, that here is 
sufficient proof that Jesus Christ is the person who had been 
foretold under the name of Shiloh, or Messiah. We all believe 
tJiaty and, therefore, there is little need that I should try to 
prove what you have already received. I rather select my 
text this morning as one of the constant marks of the gospel 
in all ages and in every land. "The poor have the gospel 
preached to them." This is to be its semper eadem^ its constant 
stamp. And we believe, where the poor have not the gospel 
preached unto them, there is a departure from the dispensa- 
tion of the gospel, the forsaking of this which was to be a 
fundamental trait and characteristic of the gospel dispensation : 
" The poor have the gospel preached to them." 

I find that these words will bear three translations.; I shall, 
therefore, have three heads, which shall be composed of three 
translations of the text. The first is that of the authorized 
version: " The poor have the gospel preached to them ;" it is 
also Tyndal's version. The second is the version of Cranmer^ 
and the version of Geneva^ which is the best, " The poor 
are evargelized," that is to say, they not only hear the gospel. 



PBB ACHING POR THE POOR. 161 

but they are influenced by it — ^the poor receive it. The last 
is the translation of some eminent loriters, and above all of 
Wyckliffe^ which amused rae when I read it, although I be- 
lieve it to be as correct as any of the others. Wyckliffe 
translates it — " pore men ben taken to prechynge of the gos- 
pel." ' The verb may be equally well translated in the active 
as in the passive sense : " The poor have taken to the preach- 
ing of the gospel." That is to be one of the marks of the 
gospel dispensation in all times. 

I. First, then, thb authorized version, " The poor have 
the gospel preached to them." It was so in Ch list's day f it 
is to be so with Christ's gospel to the end of time. Almost 
every impostor who has come into the world has aimed prin- 
cipally at the rich, and the mighty, and the respectable ; very 
i^vf impostors have found it to be worth their while to make 
it prominent in their preaching that they preach to the poor. 
They went before princes to promulgate their doctrines ; they 
sought the halls of nobles, where they might expatiate upon 
their pretended revelations. Few of them thought it worth 
their while to address themselves to those who have been most 
wickedly called " the swinish multitude," and to speak to them 
the glorious things of the gospel of Christ. But it is one de- 
lightful mark of Christ's dispensation, that he aims first at the 
poor. " The poor have the gospel preached to them." It was 
wise in him to do so. If we would fire a building, it is best 
to light it at the basement ; so our Saviour, when he would 
save a world, and convert men of all classes and all ranks, be- 
gins at the lowest rank, that the fire may burn upward, know- 
ing right well that what is received by the poor will ultimately 
by his grace be received by the rich also. Nevertheless, he 
chose this to be given to his disciples, and to be the mark of 
his gospel — " the poor have the gospel preached unto them." 
Now, I have some things to say this morning, which I think 
are absolutely necessary if the poor are to have the gospel 
preached unto them. 

In the first place, let me say, then, that the gospel must be 
If/reached where the poor can come and hear it. How can tho 
poor have the gospel preached to them, if they can not como 
and listen to it ? and yet how many of our places of worship 



152 PBEACUINO FOB THE POOR. 

are there into which they can not. come, and into which, if 
they Qovld come, they would only come as inferior creatures. 
They may sit in the back seats, but are nol to be known and 
recognized as any thing like other people. Hence the absolute 
necessity of having places of worship large enough to accom- 
modate the multitude ; and hence, moreover, the obligation to 
go out into the highways and hedges. If the poor are to 
have the gospel preached unto them, then we must take it 
where they can get it. If I wanted to preach to English 
people, it would be of no use for me to go and stand on one 
oi the peaks of the Himalayas, and begin preaching ; they 
could not hear me there. And it is of little avail to build a 
gorgeous structure for a fashionable congregation, and then to 
think of preaching to the poor ; they can not come any more 
than the Hottentots can make the journey from Africa and 
listen to me here. I should not expect them to come to such 
a place, nor will they willingly enter it. The gospel should be 
preached, then, where the poor will come ; and if they will 
not come after it, then let it be taken to them. We should 
have places where there is accommodation for them, and 
where they are regarded and respected as much as any other 
rank and condition of men. It is with this view alone that I 
have labored earnestly to be the means of building a large 
place of worship, because I feel that although the bulk of ray 
congregation in New Park-street chapel are poor, yet there 
are many poor who can, by no possibility, enter the doors, be- 
cause we can not find room for the multitudes to be received. 
You ask me why I do not preach in the street. I reply, I 
w^ould do so, and am constantly doing so in every place except 
London, but here I can not do it, since it would amount to an 
absolute breach of the peace: it is impossible to conceive what a 
multitude of people must be necessarily assembled. I trembled 
when I saw twelve thousand on the last occasion I preached in 
the open air ; therefore I have thought it best, for the present 
at least, to desist, until happily there shall be fewer to follow 
me. Otherwise my heart is in the open air movement ; I prac- 
tice it everywhere else, and I pray God to give to our ministers 
zeal and earnestness, that they may take the gospel into the 
streets, highways and by-ways, and compel the people to como 



PREACHING FOR THE POOR. 153 

in, that the bouse may be filled. that God would give this 
characteristic mark of his precious grace, that the poor niight. 
have the gospel preached imto them. 

" But," you reply, " there are plenty of churches and chapels 
to which they might come." I answer, yes, but that is only 
one half of the matter. The gospel must be preached attract- 
ively before th<? poor will have the gospel preached unto them. 
Why, there is i j attraction in the gospel to the great mass of 
our race, as it is currently preached. I confess that when I 
have a violent headachy, and can not sleep, I could aiinost 
wish for spme droning minister to preach to me*; I feel certain 
I could go to sleep then, for I have heard some under the 
soporific influence of wkose eloquence I could most cc^ifort- 
ably snore. But it is not at all likely that the poor will ever 
go to hear such preachers as these. If they are preacned to 
in tine terms — in grandilo.quent language which they can not 
lay hold of — the poor will not have the gospel preached to 
them, for they will not go to hear it. They must have some- 
thing attractive to them ; we must preach as Christ did ; we 
must tell anecdotes, and stones, and parables, as he did • we 
must come down and make the gospel attractive. The reason 
why the old Puritan preachers could get congregations was 
this — ^they did not give their hearers dry theology; they illus- 
trated it ; they had an anecdote from this and a quaint passage 
from that classic author ; here a verse of poetry ; here and there 
even a quip or pun — a thing which now-a-days is a sin above 
all sins, but w^hich was constantly committed by these preach- 
ers, whom I have ever esteemed as the patterns of pulpit elo- 
quence. Christ Jesqs was an attractive preacher ; he sought 
above all means to set the pearl iu a frame of gold, that it 
might attract the attention of the people. He was not willing 
to place himself in a parish church, and preach to a, larsje con- 
gregation of thirteen and a-half, like our good brethren in the 
city, but would preach in such a style that peqpie felt they 
must go to hear him. Some of them gnashed their teeth in 
rage and left his presence ift^ wrath, but the multitudes still 
thronged to him to hear and to be healed. It was no dull 
work to hear this King of preachers, he was too much in ear- 
nest to be df 11, and too humane to be incomprehensible. I be- 



154 rtlBACHIKG FOR THE POOB. 

lieve that antil t is is imitated, the poor will not have the 
gospel preached to them. There must be an interesting iStyle 
adopted, to bring the people to hear. But if we adopt such a 
style they will call us clownish, vulgar, and so on. Blessed be 
God, we have long learned that vulgarity is a very different 
thing from what some men suppose. We have been so taught, 
that we are willing to be even clowns for Christ's sake, and so 
long as we are seeing souls saved we are not likely to alter our 
course. During this last week I have seen, I believe, a score 
of persons who have been in the lowest ranks, the very mean- 
est sinners, the greatest of transgressors, who have, through 
preaching in this place, been restored and reclaimed. Do you 
think, then, that I shall shear my lo^ks to please the Philis- 
tine ? O, no ; by the grace of God, Samson knoweth where 
his strength lieth, and is not likely to do that to please any 
man, or any set of men. Preaching must reach the popular 
ear ; and to get at the people it must be interesting to them, 
and by the grace of God we hope it shall be. 

But, in the next place, if the poor are to have the gospel 
preached unto them, it must be preached simply. It is a waste 
of time to preach Latin to you, is it not ? To the multitude 
of people it is of no use delivering a discourse in Greek. 
Possibly five or six of the assembly might be mightily edified, 
and go away delighted ; but what of that ? The mass would 
retire unedified and uninstructed. You talk about the educa- 
tion of the people, don't you, and about the vast extent of 
English refinement ? For the most pait it is a dream. Igno- 
rance is not buried yet. The language of one class of En- 
glishmen is a dead language to another class ; and many a word 
which is very plain to many of us, is as hard and difficult a 
word to the multitude as if it had been culled out of Hindos- 
tani or Bengali, There are multitudes who can not understand 
words composed of Latin, but must have the truth told them 
in round homely Saxon, if it is to reach their hearts. There is 
my friend the Rev. So-and-so, Doctor of Divinity ; he is a 
great student ; and whenever he finds a hard word in his books 
he tells it next Sunday to his congregation. He has a little 
intellectual circle, who think his preaching must be good, be- 
cause they can not understand it, and who think it proven 



PREACHING FOR THE POOR. 155 

that he inust be an intelligent man because all the pews are 
empty. They believe he must be a very useful member of 
society ; in fact, they compare him to Luther, and think he is 
a second Paul, because nobody will listen to him, seeing it is 
impossible to understand him. Well, we conceive of that 
good man that he may have a work to do, but we do 
not know what it is. There is another friend of ours, Mr. 
Cloudyton, who always preaches in* such a style that if you 
should try to dissect the sermon for a week afterwards you 
could by no possibility tell what he meant. If you could look 
at things from his point of view you might possibly discover 
something; but it does appear by his preaching as if him- 
self had lost his way in a fog, and were scattering a whole 
mass of mist about him everywhere. I suppose he goes so 
deep down into the subject that he stirs the mud at the bot- 
tom, and he can not find his way up again. There are some 
such preachers, whom you can not possibly understand. Now, 
we say. and say very boldly too, that while such preaching 
may be esteemed by some people to be good, we have no faith 
in it at all. If ever the world is to be reclaimed, and if sinners 
are to be saved, we can see no likelihood in the world of its 
being done by such means. We think the word must be un- 
derstood before it can really penetrate the conscience and the 
heai-t ; and we would always be preaching such as men can 
understand, otherwise the poor will not "have the gospel 
preached to them." Why did John Bunyan become the apos- 
tle of Bedfordshire and Huntingdonshire, and round about ? 
It was because John Bunyan, while he had a surpassing genius, 
would not condescend to cull his language from the garden of 
flowers, but he went into the hayfield, and the meadow, and 
plucked up his language by the roots, and spoke out in the 
words that the people used in their cottages. Why is it that 
God has blessed other men to the stirring of the people, to the 
bi-inging about of spiritual revivals, to the renewal of the 
power of godliness? We believe it has always been owing 
to this, under God's Spirit, that they have adopted the phrase-^ 
ology of the people, and have not been ashamed to be despised 
because they talked as common people did. 

But now we have something to say more important than 



156 PBSACHING FOR THB POOB. 

this. We may preach, very simply too, and very attractively, 
and yet it may not be true that " the poor have the gospel 
preached to them," for the poor may have something else 
preached to them beside the gospel. It is, then, highly im- 
portant that we should each of us ask what the gospel is, and 
that when we think we know it we should not be ashamed to 
say, '^ this is the gospel, and I will preach it boldly, though all 
men should deny it." O I I fear that there is such a thing as 
preaching another gospel, " which is not another, but there 
be some that trouble us." There is such a thing as preaching 
science and philosophy attractively, but not preaching the 
gospel. Mark, it \s not preaching, but it is preaching the 
gospel that is the mark of Christ's dispensation and of his 
truth. Let us take care to preach fully the depravity of man, 
let us dwell thoroughly upon his lost and ruined estate under 
the law, and his restoration under the gospel ; let us preach of 
these three things, for, as a good brother said, " The gospel 
lies in three things, the word of God only, the blood of Christ 
only, and the Holy Spirit only." These thi-ee things make up 
the gospel. " The Bible, the Bible alone the religion of Prot- 
estants ; the blood of Christ the only salvation from sin, the 
only means of the pardon of our guilt ; and the Holy Spirit 
the only regenerator, the only converting power that will alone 
work in us to will and to do of his good pleasure." Without 
these three things there is no gospel. Let us take heed, then, 
for it is a serious matter, that when the people listen to us, it 
is the gospel that we preach, or else we may be as guilty as 
was Nero, the tyrant, who, when Rome was starving, sent his 
ships to Alexandria, where there was corn in plenty, not for 
wheat, but for sand to scatter in the arena for his gladiators. 
Ah ! there be some who seem to do so — scattering the floor of 
theii' sanctuary not with the good corn of the kingdom, upon 
which the soul's of God's people may feed and grow thereby, 
but with sand of controversy, sand of logic, which no child 
of God can ever receive to his soul's profit. " The poor have 
the gospel preached to them." Let us take heed that it is 
the gospel. Hear, then, ye chief of sinners, the voice of Jesus : 
"This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that 
Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners ; of whom I 



PBKACHING FOE THB POOR. 167 

am cliief." " Him that cometh to me I will in no wise cast 
out." " Whosoever believeth and is baptized shall be saved." 
" For the Son of man is come to seek and to save that which 
was lost." 

And just one more hint on this point, namely, this — it must 
be said of us, if we would keep true to Christ's rule and apos- 
tolic practice, that " the poor have the gospel preached to 
them." In these days there is a growing hatred of the pulpit. 
The pulpit has maintained its ground full many a year, but 
partially by its becoming inefficient,- it is losing its high posi- 
tion. Through a timid abuse of it, instead of a strong, stiff 
use of the pulj.'«t, the world has come to despise it ; and now 
most certainly \ e are not a priest-ridden people one half so 
much as we are a press-ridden people. By the press we are 
ridden indeed. Mercuries, Dispatches, Jouinals, Gazettes, 
and Magazines, are now the judges of pulpit eloquence and 
style. They thrust themselves into the censor's seat, and cen- 
sure those whose office it should rather be to censure them. 
The pulpit has become dishonored ; it is esteemed as being of 
very little worth and of no esteem. Ah! we must always 
maintain the dignity of the pulpit. I hold that it is the Ther- 
mopylae of Christendom ; it is here that the battle must be 
fought between right and wrong ; not so much with the pen, 
valuable as that is as an assistgmt, as with the living voice of 
earnest men, " contending earnestly for the faith once deliv- 
ered unto the saints." In some churches the pulpit is put 
away ; there is a prominent altar, but the pulpit is omitted. 
Now, the most' prominent thing under the gospel dispensation 
is not the altar, which belonged to the Jewish dispensation, 
but the pulpit. " We have an altar, whereof they have no 
right to eat which serve the tabernacles ;" that altar is Christ ; 
but Christ has been pleased to exalt " the foolishness of preach- 
ing" to the most prominent position in his house of prayer. 
We must take heed that we always maintain preaching. It is 
this that God will bless ; it is this that he has promised to 
crown with success. " Faith cometh by hearing, and hearing 
by the Word of God." We must not expect to see great 
changes, nor any great progress of the gospel, until there is 
greater est3em for the pulpit — more said of it and thought of 



158 PBBACHING FOB THB POOB. 

it. " Well," some may reply, " you speak of the dignity of 
the pulpit ; I take it, you lower it yourself, sir, by speaking in 
such a style to your hearers." Ah ! no doubt you think so. 
Some pulpits die of dignity. I take it, the greatest dignity in 
the world is the dignity of converts — ^that the glory of the 
pulpit is, if I may use such a metaphor, to have captives at its 
chariot^wheels, to see converts following it, and where there 
are such, and those from the very worst of men ; there is a 
dignity in the pu'pit beyond any dignity which a fine mouth- 
ing of words and a grand selection of fantastic language could 
ever give to it. "The poor have the gospel preached to 
them." 

II. Now, the next translation is, thb translation of Ge- 
neva, principally used by Calvin in his commentary ; and it is 
also the translation of Thomas Cranmer, whose translation, I 
believe, was at least in some degree molded by the Genevan 
translation. He translates it thus : " The poor receive the 
gospel." The Genevan translation has it, " The poor receive 
the glad tidings of the gospel," which is a tautology, since 
glad tidings mean the same thing as gospel. The Greek has 
it, " The poor are evangelized." Now, what is the meaning 
of this word " evangelized ?" They talk with a sneer in these 
days of evangelical drawing-rooms and evangelicals, and so on. 
It is one of the most singular sneers in the world, for to call a 
man an evangelical by way of joke, is the same as calling a 
man a gentleman by way of scoffing at him. To say a man is 
one of the gospelers, by way of scoiii, is like calling a man a 
king by way of contempt. It is an honorable, a great, a glo- 
i-ious title, and nothing is more honorable than to be ranked 
among the evangelicals. What is meant, then, by the people 
being evangelized ? Old Master Burkitt, thinking that we 
should not easily underetand the word, says, that as a man is 
said to be Italianized by living among the Italians, getting 
their manners and customs, and becoming a citizen of the 
state, so a man is evangelized when he lives where the gospel 
is preached, and gets the manners and customs of those who 
profess it. Now, that is one meaning of the text. One of the 
proofs of our Saviour's mission is not only that the poor hear 
the Wor 1, but are influenced by it and are gospelized. O I 



FBBACHING FOB THB POOR. 159 

how great a work it is to gospelize any man, and to gospelize 
a poor man. What does it mean ? It means, to make him 
like the gospel. Now, the gospel i& holy, just, and true, and 
loving, and honest, and benevolent, and kind, and gracious. 
So, then, to gospelize a man is to make a rogue honest, to 
make a harlot modest, to make a profane man serious, to make 
a grasping man liberal, to make a covetous man benevolent, to 
make the drunken man sober, to make the untruthful man 
truthful, to make the unkind man loving, to make the hater 
the lover of hiss pecies, and, in a word, to gospelize a man is, 
in his outward character, to bring him into such a condition 
that he labors to carry out the command of Christ, " Love thy 
God with all thy heart, and thy neighbor as thyself." Gospel- 
izing, furthermore, has something to do with an inner prin- 
ciple ; gospelizing a man means saving him from hell and mak- 
ing him a heavenly character ; it means blotting out his sins, 
writing a new name upon his heart — the new name of God. It 
means bringing him to know his election, to put his trust in 
Christ, to renounce his sins, and his good works too, and to 
trust solely and wholly upon Jesus Christ, as his Redeemer. 
O ! what a blessed thing it is to be gospelized ! How many 
of you have been so gospelized ? The Lord grant that the 
whole of us may feel the influence of the gospel. I contend 
for this, that to gospelize a man is the greatest miracle in the 
world. All the other miracles are wrapped up in this one. 
To gospelize a man, or, in other words, to convert him, is a 
greater work than to open the eyes of the blind ; for is it not 
opening the eyes of the blind soul that he may see spiritual 
matters, and understand the things of heavenly wisdom, and 
is not a surgical operation easier than an operation on the soul ? 
Souls we can not touch, although science and skill have been 
able to remove films and cataracts from the eyes. " The lame 
walk." Gospelizing a man is more than this. It is not only 
making a lame man walk, but it is making a dead man who 
could not walk .in the* right way, walk in the right way ever 
afterward. " The lepers are cleansed." Ah ! but to cleanse 
a sinner is greater work than cleansing a leper. " The deaf 
hear." Yes, and to make a man, who never listened to the 
voice '^f God, hear the voice of his Maker, is a miracle greater 



160 PBEACHIKG FOB THB POOB. 

than to make the deaf hear, or even to raise the dead. Great 
though that be, it is not a more stupendous effort of divine 
power than to save a soul, since men are naturally dead in 
sins, and must be quickened by divine grace if they are saved. 
To gospelize a man is the highest instance of divine might, 
and remains an unparalleled miracle, a miracle of miracles. 
*' The poor are evangelized." 

Beloved, there have been some very precious specimens of 
poor people who have come mider the influence of the gospel. 
I think 1 appeal to the hearts of all of you who are now pres- 
ent, when I say there is nothing we more reverence and re- 
spect than the piety of the poor and needy. I had an engra- 
ving sent to me the other day which pleased me beyond 
measure. It was an engraving simply but exquisitely ex- 
ecuted. It represented a poor girl in an upper room, with a 
lean-to roof. There was a post driven in the ground, on 
which was a piece of wood, standing on which were a candle 
and a Bible. She was on her knees at a chair, praying, 
wrestling with God. Every thing in the room had on it the 
stamp of poverty. There was the mean coverlet to the old 
stump bedstead ; there were the walls that had never been 
papered, and perhaps scarcely whitewashed. It was an upper 
story to which she had climbed with aching knees, and where, 
perhaps, she had worked aw^y till her fingera were worn to 
the bone, to earn her bread at needle-work. There it was 
that she was wrestling with God. Some would turn away 
and laugh at it ; but it appeals to the best feelings of man, and 
moves the heart far more than does the fine engraving of the 
monarch on his knees in the grand assembly. We have had 
lately a most excellent volume, the Life of Captain Hedley 
Vicars ; it is calculated to do great good, and I pray God to 
bless it ; but I question whether the history of Captain Hed- 
ley Vicars will last as long in the public mind as the history of 
the Dairyman's Daughter or the Shepherd of Salisbury Plain. 
The histories of those who have come from the ranks of the 
poor always lay hold of the Christian mind. O! we love 
piety anywhere ; we bless God when coronets and grace go 
together ; but if piety in any place does shine more brightly 
than anywhere else, it is in rags and poverty. When the poor 



PBBACHIKG FOB THK POOB. 161 

woman in the almshouse takes her bread and her water, and 
blesses God for botli — when the poor creature who has not 
where to lay his head, yet lifts his eye and says, " My Father 
will provide," it is then like the glow-worm in the damp 
leaves, a spark the more conspicuous for the blackness around 
it. Their religion gleams in its true brightness, and is seen 
in all its luster. It iif a mark of •Christ's gospel that the poor 
are gospelized — that they can receive the gospel. True, it is, 
the gospel affects all ranks, and is equally adapted to them 
all ; but yet we say, " If one class* be more prominent than 
another, we believe that in Holy Scripture the poor are most 
of all appealed to." " O I" say some very often, " the converts 
whom God has given to such a man are all from the lower 
ranks ; they are all people with no sense ; they are all unedu- 
cated people that hear such and such a person." Very well, 
if you say so ; we might deny it if we pleased, but we do not 
know that we shall take the trouble, because we think it no 
disgrace whatever ; we think it rather to be an honor that the 
poor are evangelized, and that they listen to the gospel from 
our lips. I have never thought it a disgrace at any time. 
When any have said, " Look, what a mass of uneducated peo- 
ple they are." Yes, I have thought, and blessed be God they 
are, for those are the very people that want the gospel most. 
If you saw a physician's door surrounded by a number of la- 
dies of the sentimental school, who are sick about three times 
a week, and never were ill at all — if it were said he cured 
them, you would say, *' No great wonder too, for there never 
was any thing the matter with them." But if you heard of 
another man, that people with the worst diseases have come 
to him, and that God has made use of him, and his medicine 
has been the means of healing their diseases ; you would then 
say, " There is something in it, for the people that want it 
most have received it." Ii\ then, it be true that the poor will 
come to hear the gospel more than others, it is no disgrace to 
the gospel, it is an honor to it that those who most want it do 
freely receive it. 

III. And now I must close up by briefly dwelling on the 
last point. It was the third translation, Wycklifpe's trans- 
lation. To give it you in old English — "Poor men are 



162 PBBACHING FOR THE POOR. 

taking to the preaching of the gospel." "Ah!" say some, 
" they had better remain at home, minding their plows or 
their blacksmith's hammer; they had better have kept on 
with their tinkering and tailoring, and not have turned 
preachers. But it is one of the honors of the gospel that 
poor men l.avo taken to the preaching of it. There was a 
tinker once, and let the worldly-wise blush when they hear of 
it — ^there was a tinker once, a tinker of whom a great divine 
said he would give all his learning if he could preach like him. 
There was a tinker once, who ne'er so much as brushed his 
back against the walls of a college, who wrote a Pilgrim's 
Progress. Did ever a doctor in divinity wiite such a book ? 
There was a pot-boy once — a boy who carried on his back the 
pewter-pots for his mother, who kept the Old Bell. That maa 
drove men mad, as the world had it, but led them to Christ, 
as we have it, all his life long, until, loaded with honors he 
sank into his grave, with the good will of a multitude round 
about him, with an imperishable name written in the world's 
records, as well as in the records of the church. Did you ever 
liear of any mighty man, whose name stood in more esteem 
among God's people than the name of George Whitefield. And 
yet these were poor men, who, as Wyckliffe said, were taking 
to the preaching of the gospel. If you will read the life of 
Wyckliffe, you will find him saying there, that he believed 
that the Reformation in England was more promoted by the 
labora of the poor men, whom he sent out from Lutterworth 
than by his own. He gathered round him a number of the 
poor people whom he instructed in the faith, and then he sent 
them two and two into every village, as Jesus did. They 
went into the market-place and they gathered the people 
around ; they opened the book and read a chapter, and then 
they left them a manuscript of it, which for months and years 
after the people would assemble to read, and would remember 
the gospellers that had come to tell them the gospel of Christ. 
These men went from market-place to market-place, from 
town to town, and from village to village, and though their 
names are unknown to fame, they were the real reformers. 
You may talk of Cranmer and Latimer and Ridley ; they did 
much, but tl: e real reformers of the English nation were people 



. PBBACHING FOR THB POOB. 163 

whose names have perished from the annals of time, but are 
written in the records of eternity. God has blessed the poor 
man in preaching the truth. Far be it from me to depreciate 
learning and wisdom. We should, not have had the Bible 
translated without learning, and the more learning a man car 
have, if he be a sanctified man, the better ; he has so many 
more talents to lay out in his Master's service ; but it is not 
absolutely necessary for preaching of the Word. Rough, un- 
tamed, untaught energy, has done much in the church. A 
Boanerges has stood up in a village ; he could not put three 
words together in grammatical English ; but where the drowsy 
parson had for many a year lulled all his people into an unhal- 
lowed rest, this man started up, like the herdsman Amos, and 
brought about a great awakening. He began to preach in some 
cottage ; people thronged around him, then a house was built, 
and his name is handed down to us as the Rev. So-and-so, but 
then he was known as Tom the plowman, or John the tinker, 
God has made use of men whose origin was the most obscure, 
who seemed to have little, except the gifts of nature, which 
could be made use of in God's service ; and we hold that this 
is no disgrace, but on the contrary an honor, that poor men 
are taking to preaching the gospel. 

And now, beloved, I have opened my mouth for the dumbf 
and pleaded the cause of the poor, let me end by entreating 
the poor of the flock to consider the poor man's Christ ; let 
me urge them to give him their thoughts, and may the Lord 
enable them to yield him their hearts. " He that believeth 
and is baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth hot shall 
be damned." 

May God bless the high and low, the rich and poor ; yea, 
all of you, for his name's sake. 



SERMON XI. 

SECRET SINS. 

" deanae them me from secret faults."— Psalm xii. 12. 

Self-bighteousnbss arises paitly from pride, but mainly 
from ignorance of God's law. It is because men know little 
or nothing concerning the terrible character of the divine law, 
that they foolishly imagine themselves to be righteous. They 
are not aware of the deep spirituality, and the stem severity 
of the law, or they would have other and wiser notions. Once 
let them know how strictly the law deals with the thoughts, 
how it brings itself to bear upon every emotion of the inner 
man, and there is not one creature beneath God's heaven who 
would dare to think himself righteous in God's sight in virtue 
of his own deeds and thoughts. Only let the law be revealed 
4o a man ; let him know how strict the law is, and how in- 
finitely just, and his self-righteousness will shrivel into nothing 
— ^it will become a filthy rag in his sight, whereas before he 
thought it to be a goodly garment. 

Now, David, having seen God's law, and having praised it 
in his Psalm, which I have read in your hearing, he is brought 
by reflecting on its excellency to utter this thought, " Who 
can understand his errors?" and then to offer this prayer, 
" Cleanse thou me from secret faults." 

In the Lateran Council of the Church of Rome, a decree was 
passed that every true believer must confess his sins, all of 
them, once in a year to the priest, and they affixed to it this 
declaration, that there is no hope of pardon but in complying 
with that decree. What can equal the absurdity of such a 
decree as that ? Do they suppose they can tell their sins as 
easily as they can count their fingers ? Why, if we could re- 
ceive pardon for all our sins by telling every sin we have com- 



SECBET SINS. 165 

mitted in one hour, there is not one of us who would be able 
to enter heaven, since, besides the sins that are known to us 
and that we ai-e able to confess, there are a vast mass of sins 
which are as truly sins as those which we do not observe, but 
which are secret and come not beneath our eye. O ! if we had 
eyes like those of God, we should think very differently of 
ourselves. The sins that we see and confess are but like the 
farmer's small samples which he brings to market, when he 
has left his granary full at home. We have but a very few 
sins which we can observe and detect, compared with those 
which are hidden to ourselves and unseen to our fellow crea- 
tures. I doubt ndt it is true of all of us who are here, that in 
every hour of our existence in which we are active, we com- 
mit tens of thousands of unholinesses for which conscience has 
never reproved us, because we have never seen them to be 
wrong, seeing we have not studied God's laws as we ought to 
have done. Now, be it known to us all that sin is sin, whether 
we see it or not — that a sin secret to us is a sin as truly as if 
we knew it to be a sin, though not so great a sin in the sight 
of God as if it had been committed presumptuously, seeing 
that it lacks the aggravation of wilfulness. Let all of us who 
know our sins, offer this prayer after all our confessions: 
" Lord, I have confessed as many as I know, but I must add 
an et cetera after them, and say, ^ Cleanse thou me from secret 
faults.' " 

That, however, will not be the pith of my sermon this morn- 
ing. I am going after a certain class of men who have sins 
not unknown to themselves, but secret to their fellow creatures. 
Every now and then we turn up a fair stone which lies upon 
the greensward of the professing church, surrounded with the 
verdure of apparent goodness, and to our astonishment we find 
beneath all kinds of filthy insects and loathsome reptiles, and 
in our disgust at such hypocrisy, we are diiven to exclaim, 
" All men are liars ; there are none in whom we can put any 
trust at all." It is not fair to say so of all ; but really, the 
discoveries which are made of the insincerfjty of our fellow 
creatures are enough to make us despise our kind, because 
they can go so far in appearances, and yet have so little sound- 
ness of heart. To you, sirs, who sin secretly, and yet make a 



166 SSGRBT SIMS. 

profession ; who break God's covenants in the dark and wear 
a mask of goodness in the light — ^to you, sirs, who shut the 
, doors and commit wickedness in secret — ^to you I shall speak 
this morning. O may God also be pleased to speak to you, 
and make you pray this prayer, " Cleanse thou me from secret 
faults." 

I shall endeavor to urge upon all pretenders present to give 
up, to renounce, to detest, to hate, to abhor all their secret 
sins. And, first, I shall endeavor to show the fcUy of secret 
eifis ; secondly, the mUery of secret sine ; thirdly, the guiU of 
secret sins ; fourthly, the danger of secret sins / and then I 
shall try to apply some words by way of rdhiedy, that we may 
all of us be enabled to avoid secret sins. 

I. First, then, the folly of sbcret sins. 

Pretender, thou art fidr to look upon; thy conduct out- 
wardly upright, amiable, liberal, generous, and Christian ; but 
thou dost indulge in some sin which the eye of man has not 
yet detected. Perhaps it is piivate drunkenness. Thou dost 
revile the drunkard when he staggers through the street ; but 
thou canst thyself indulge in the same habit in private. It 
may be some other lust or vice, it is not for me just now to 
mention what it is. But, pretender, we say unto thee, thou 
art a fool to think of harboring a secret sin ; and thou art a 
fool for this one reason, that thy sin is not a secret sin ; it is 
Jenownj and shall one day be revealed ; perhaps very soon. 
Thy sin is not a secret ; the eye of God hath seen it ; thou 
hast sinned before his face. Thou hast shut to the door, and 
drawn the curtains, and kept out the eye of the sun, but God's 
eye pierceth through the darkness ; the brick walls which sur- 
rounded thee were as transparent as glass to the eye of the 
Almighty ; the darkness whidi did gird thee was as bright as 
the summer's noon to the eye of him who beholdeth all things. 
Knowest thou not, O man, that " all things are naked and 
open to the eyes of him with whom we have to do ?" As the 
priest ran his knife into the entrails of his victim, discovered 
the heart and liver, and what else did lie within, so art thou, 
O man, seen by God, cut open by the Almighty ; thou hast 
no secret cham}>er where thou canst hide thyself thou hast 
no dark cellar where thou canst conceal thy boul. Dig 



SSCBET SINS. 167 

deep, ay, deep as hell, but thou canst not find earth enough 
upon this globe to cover thy sin ; if thou shouldst heap the 
mountains on its grave, those mountains would tell the tale of 
what was buried in their bowels. If thou couldst cast thy 
sin into the sea, a thousand babbling waves would tell the 
secret out. There is no hiding it from Grod. Thy sin is 
photographed in high heaven ; the deed when it was done was 
photographed upon the sky, and there it shall remain, and 
thou shalt see thyself one day revealed to the gazing eyes 
of all men, a hypocrite, a pretender, who didst sin in fancied 
secret, observed in all thine acts by the all-seeing Jehovah. 
O what fools men are, to think they can do any thing in secret. 
This world is like the glass hives wherein bees sometimes work; 
we look down upon them, and we see all the operations of the 
little creatures. So God looketh down and seeth all. Our 
eyes are weak ; we can not look through the darkness; but 
his eye, like an orb of flame, penetrateth the blackness, and 
readeth the thoughts of man, and seeth his acts when he thinks 
himself most concealed. O it were a thought enough to curb 
us all from sin, if it were truly applied to us — " Thou, God, 
seest me I" Stop thief! Drop thou that which thou hast 
taken to thyself. God seeth thee ! No eye of detection on 
earth hath discovered thee, but God's eyes are now looking 
through the clouds upon thee. Swearer ! scarce any for whom 
thou carest heard thy oath ; but God heard it ; it entered into 
the ears of the Lord God of Sabaoth. Ah ! thou who leadest 
a filthy life, and yet art a respectable merchant, bearing among 
men a fair and goodly character, thy vices are all known ; 
written in God's book. He keepeth a diary of all thine acts ; 
and what wilt thou think on that day when a crowd shall be 
assembled, compared with which this immense multitude is 
but a drop of a bucket, and Grod shall read out the story of 
thy secret life, and men and angels shall hear it. Certain I 
am there are none of us who would like to have all our secrets 
read, especially our secret thoughts. If I should select out of 
this congregation the most holy man, should bring him for- 
ward and say, " Now, sir, I know all your thoughts, and am 
about to tell them," I am sure he would offer me the largest 
bribe that he could gather if I would be pleased to conceal at 



168 SECBKT SINS. 

least some of them. " Tell," he would say, " of my acts ; of 
them I am not ashamed ; but do not tell my thoughts and 
imaginations — of them I must ever stand ashamed before 
God." What, then, sinner, will be thy shame when thy privy 
lusts, thy closet transgressions, thy secret crimes shall be ga^ 
zetted from God's throne, published by his own mouth, and 
with a voice louder than a thousand thunders preached in the 
ears of an assembled world ? What will be thy terror and 
confusion then, when aH the deeds thou hast done shall be 
published in the &ce of the sun, in the ears of all mankind. O 
renounce the foolish hope of secrecy, for thy sin is this day re- 
corded, and shall one day be advertised upon the walls of 
heaven. 
II. In the next place, let us notice thu misery of seobbt 

SINS. 

Of all the sinners, the man who makes a profession of re- 
ligion, and yet lives in iniquity, is the most miserable. A 
downright wicked man, who takes a glass in his hand, and 
says, '^ I am a drunkard, I am not ashamed of it," he shall be 
unutterably miserable in worlds to come, but brief though it 
be, he has his hour of pleasure. A man who curses and 
swears, and says, ^' That is my habit I am a pro&ne man," and 
makes a profession of it, he has at least, some peace in his soul ; 
but the man who walks with God's minister, who is united 
with God's church, who comes out before God's people, and 
unites with them, and then lives in sin, what a miserable ex- 
istence he must have of it I Why, he has a worse existence 
than the mouse that is in the parlor, running out now and then 
to pick up the crumbs, and then back again to his hole. Such 
men must run out now and then to sin ; and O I how fearful 
they are to be discovered I One day, perhaps, their chw^cter 
turns up; with wonderful cunning t^ey manage to conceal 
and gloss it over ; but the next day something e\^e comes, and 
they live in constant fear, telling lie after lie, to make the last 
lie appear truthful, adding deception to deception, in order 
that they may not be discovered. ^ . / 

I 

" 01 *tis a tangled web we weave, ^ 

When onoe we venture to deceive." 



SECBET snffs. 169 

If I must be a wicked man, give me the life of a roysteiiag 
sinner, who sins before the face of day ; if I must sin, let 
me not act as a hypocrite and a coward ; let me not profess to 
be God's and spend my life for the devil. This way of cheat- 
ing the devil is a thing which every honest sinner will be 
ashamed of. He will say, '" Now, if I do serve my master I 
will serve him out and out, I will have no sham about it ; if I 
make a profession I will carry it out ; but if I do not, if I live 
in sin, I am not going to gloss it oveV by cant and hypocrisy.'* 
One thing which has ham-stringed the church, and cut her 
very sinews in twain, has been this most damnable hypocrisy. 

I in how many places have we men whom you might praise 
to the very skies, if you could believe their words, but whom 
you might cast into the nethermost pit if you could see their 
secret actions. God forgive any of you who are so acting I 

1 had almost said, I can scarce forgive you. I can forgive the 
man who riots openly, and makes no profession of being bet- 
ter, but the man who fawns, and cants, and pretends and prays, 
and then lives in sin, tlRt man I hate, I can not bear him, I ab- 
hor him from my very soul. If he will turn from his ways, I 
will love him, but in his hypocrisy he is to me the most loath- 
some of all creatures. Tis said the toad doth wear a jewel in 
her head, but this man hath none, but beareth filthiness about 
him, while he pretends to be in love with righteousness. A 
mere profession, my hearers, is but painted pageantry to go to 
hell in : it is like the plumes upon the hearse and the trap- 
pings upon the black horses which drag men to their graves, 
the funeral array of dead souls. Take heed above every thing 
of a waxen profession that will not stand the sun ; take care 
of a life that needs to have two &ces to carry it out ; be one 
thing, or else the other. If yon make up your mind to serve 
Satam, do not pretend to serve God ; and if you serve God, 
serve him with all your heart. " No man can serve two mas- 
tera;^^ do not try it, do not endeavor to do it, for no life will 
be more miserable than that. Above all, beware of commit- 
ting acts which it will be necessary to conceal. There is a sin- 
gular poem by Hood, called " The Dream of Eugene Aram" — 
a most remarkable piece it is indeed, illustrating the point on. 
which I am now dwelling. Aram ha^ murdered a man and 

8 



170 SaOBET SIMS. 

ca«t his body into the river—" a shig^sb water, Wack as ink, 
the depth was so extreme.** The next momii^ he visited the 
somie of his gailt, 

** And sought the black aocareed pool, 
With a wfld miaghing eye; 
And be saw the dead in tbe liTer bed, 
For the fiuthless stream was diy." 

Next he covered the corpse with heaps of leaves, bnt a 
mighty wind swept through the wood and left the secret bare 
before the smi. 

" Then down I cast me on mj &oe, 

And first began to weep, 
For I knew mj secret then was one 

That earth refiised to keep. 
On land or sea, though it ^onld be 
Ten thoosaad &thoms de^" 

In plaintive notes he prophesies his own discovery. He buried 
his victim in a cave, and trod him down with stones, but when 
years had run their weary round the foul deed was discovered 
and the murderer put to death. 

Guilt is a " grim chamberlain," even when his fingers are 
not bloody red. Secret sins bring fevered eyes and sleepless 
nights, until men bum out their consciences, and become in 
very deed ripe for the pit. Hypocrisy is a hard game to play 
at, for it is one deceiver against many observers ; and for cer- 
tain it is a miserable trade, which will earn at last, as its cer- 
tain climax, a tremendous bankruptcy. Ah I ye who have 
sinned without discovery, "be sure your sins will find you 
out ;" and bethink you it may find you out ere long. Sin, 
like murder, will come out ; men will even tell t^es about 
themselves in their dreams. Gk)d has sometimes made men so 
pricked in their consciences, that they have been obliged to 
stand forth and confess the story. Secret sinner ! if thou 
wantest the foretaste of damnation upon earth, continue in 
thy secret sins ; for no man is more miserable than he who 
sinneth secretly, and yet trieth to preserve a character. Yon 
stag, followed by the hungry hounds, with open mouths, is far 
, more happy than the man who is followed by his sins. Yon 
bird taken in the fowler's net, and laboring to escape, is fiir 



SECBBT SINS. Ill 

more happy than he who hath weaved around himself a web 
of deception, and labors to escape from it day by day by mak« 
ing the toils more thick and the web more strong. O ! the 
misery of secret sins ! Truly, one may pray, " Cleanse thou 
me from secret faults." 

Hr. But now, next, the guilt, the solemn guilt or sbcbet 

SIN. 

Now, John, you do not think there is any evil in a thing 
unless some body sees it, do you ? You feel that it is a very 
great sin if your master finds you out in robbing the till ; but 
there is no sin if he should not discover it — ^none at all. And 
you, sir, you fancy it to be a very great sin to play a trick in 
trade, in case you should be discovered and brought before 
the court ; but to play a trick and never be discovered, that 
is all fair — do not say a word about it^ Mr. Spargeon, it is all 
business ; you must not touch business ; tricks that are not 
discovered, of course you are not to find fault with them. The 
common measure of sin is the notoriety of it. But I do not 
believe in that. A sin is a sin, whether done in private or be- 
fore the wide world. It is singular how men will measure 
guilt. A railway servant puts up a wrong signal, there is an 
accident ; the man is tried and severely reprimanded. The 
day before he put up the wrong signal, but there was no acci- 
dent, and therefore no one accused him for his neglect. But 
it was just the same, accident or no accident : the accident did 
not make the guilt, it was the deed which made the guilt, not 
the notoriety nor yet the consequence of it. It was his busi- 
ness to have taken care ; and he was as guilty the first time 
as he was the second, for he negligently exposed the lives of 
men. Do not measure sin by what other people say of it; 
but measure sin by what God says of it, and what your own 
conscience says of it. 

Kow, I hold that secret sin, if any thing, is the worst of 
sin ; because secret sin implies that the man who commits it 
has Atheism in his heart. You will ask how that can be. I 
reply, he may be a professing Christian, but I shall tell him to 
his face that he is a practical Atheist, if he labors to keep up a 
respectable profession before man, and then secretly trans- 
gresses. Why, is not he an Atheist, who will i^y there is a 



172 SECRET BINS. 

Gpd, yet at the same time thinks more of man than he does 
of Gk)d ? Is it not the very essence of Atheism — ^is it not a 
denial of the divinity of the Most High when men lightly 
esteem him and think more of the eye of a creature than of 
the observation of their Creator ? There are some who woald 
not, for the life of them, say a wicked word in the presence of 
their minister, but they can do it, knowmg God is looking at 
them. They are Atheists. There are some who would not 
trick in trade for all the world if they thought they should be 
discovered, but they can do it while God is with them ; that 
is, they think more of the eye of man than of the eye of God ; 
and they think it worse to be condemned by man than to be 
condemned by God. Call it by what name you will, the proper 
name of that is practicaT Atheism. It is dishonoring God; it 
is dethroning him ; putting him down below his own crea- 
tures ; and what is that, but to take away his divinity? 
Brethren, do not, I beseech you, incur the fearful guilt of 
secret sins. No man can sin a little in secret, it will certainly 
engender more sin ; no man can be a hypocrite and yet be 
moderate in guilt ; he will go from bad to worse, and still 
proceed, until when his guilt shall be published, he shall be 
found to be the very worst and the most hardened of men. 
Take heed of the guilt of secret sin. Ah, now, if I could 
preach as Rowland Hill did, I would make some people look 
to themselves at home, and tremble too ! It is said that when 
he preached there was not a man in the window, or standing 
in the crowd, or perched up any where, but said, " There, he 
is preaching at me ; he is telling me about ray secret sins.'* 
And when he proclaimed God's omniscience, it is said men 
would almost think they saw God bodily present in the midst 
of them, looking at them. And when he had done his sermon, 
they would hear a voice in their ears, " Can any hide himself 
in secret places that I can not see him ? saith the Lord. Do 
not I fill heaven and earth ? saith the Lord." I would I could 
do that ; that I could make every man look to himself, and 
find out his secret sin. Come, my hearer, what is it ? Bring 
it forth to the daylight ; perhaps it will die in the light of the 
sun. These things love not to be discovered. Tell thine own 
conscience, now, what it is. Look it in the face ; confess it 



SJEGSET SUJTS. 173 

before God, and may he give thee gi-aoe to reiA>ve that sin 
and every other, and turn to him with full purpose of heart ! 
But this know — that thy guilt is guilt discovered or undis- 
covered, and that, if there be any difference, it is worse, be- 
cause it has been secret* God save ns from the guilt of secret 
sin ! " Cltianse thou me from secret faults." 

lY. And note, next, the danobb of sbcbet sin. One 
danger is that a man can not commit a little sin in secret, with- 
out being by-the-by betrayed into a public sin. You can not, 
sir, though you may think you can, preserve a moderation in 
sin. If you commit one sin, it is like the melting of the lower 
glacier upon the Alps ; the others must follow in time. As 
certainly as you heap one stone upon the cairn to-day, the 
next day you will cast another, until the heap, reared stone by 
stone, shall become a very pyramid. Set the coral insect at 
work, you can not decree where it shall stay its work. It will 
not build its rock just as high as you please, it will not stay 
until it shall be covered with weeds, until the weeds shall de- 
cay, and there shall be soil upon it, and an island shall be 
created by tiny creatures. Sin can not be held in with bit and 
bridle. " But I am going to have a little drink now and then. 
I am only going to be intoxicated once a week or so. No 
body will see it ; I shall be in bed dii*ectly." You will be 
drunk in the streets soon. ^^I am only just going to read one 
lascivious book ; I will put it under the so^cover when any 
one comes in." You will keep it in your library yet, sir. " I 
am only going into that company now and then." You will 
go there every day, such is the bewitching character of it ; 
you can not help it. You may as well ask the lion to let you 
put your head into his mouth. You can not regulate his jaws ; 
neither can you regulate dn. Once go into it, you can not tell 
when you will be destroyed; You may be such a fortunate 
individual, that, like Van Asnbnrgh, you may put you head in 
and out a great many times ; rest assured that one of these 
days it will be a costly venture. Again, you may labor to 
conceal your vicious habit, but it will come out, you can not 
help it. You keep your little pet sin at home ; but mark this, 
when the door is ajar the dog will be out in the street ; wrap 
him up in your bosom, pu.^ over him told after fold of hyjx)c* 



174 BEOSLET snrg. 

risy to keef^im secret : the wretch will be mnging some daj 
when you are in company ; you can not keep the evil bird 
still. Your sin \\ ill gad abroad ; and what is more, you will 
not mind it some of these days. A man who indulges in sin 
privately, by degrees gets his forehead as hard as brass. The 
first time he sinned, the drops of sweat stood on his brow at 
the recollection of what he had done ; the second time no 
hot sweat on his brow— -only an agitation of the muscles ; the 
third time there was the sly, sneaky look, but no agitation ; 
the next time, he sinned a little further ; and by degrees he 
became the bold blasphemer of his Gk)d, who exclaimed, 
** Who am I that I should fear Jehovah, and who is he that I 
should serve' him ?" Men go from bad to worse. Launch 
your boat in the current — ^it must go where the current takes 
it. Put yourself in the whirlwind — you are but a straw in 
the wind : you must go which way the wind carnes you — 
you can not control yourself. The balloon can mount, but it 
can not direct its course ; it must go which ever way the wind 
blows. If you once mount into sin, there is no stopping. 
Take heed, if you would not become the worst of characters, 
take heed of the little sins, which, mounting one upon another, 
may at last heave you from the summit and destroy your soul 
for ever. There is a great danger in secret sins. 

But I have here some true Christians who indulge in secret 
sins. They say it is but a little one, and therefore do they 
spare it. Dear brethren, I speak to you, and I speak to my- 
self, when I say this — let us destroy all our little secret sins. 
They are called little, and if they be, let us remember that it 
is the foxes, even the little foxes, that spoil our vines ; for our 
vines have tender shoots. Let us take heed of our little sins. 
A little sin, like a little pebble in the shoe, will make a traveler 
to heaven walk very wearily. Little sins, like little thieves, 
may open the door to greater ones outside. Christians, recol- 
lect that little sins will spoil your communion with Christ. 
Little sins, like little stains in silk, may damage the fine tex- 
ture of fellowship ; little sins, like little irregularities in the 
machinery, may spoil the whole fabric of your religion. Tlie 
one dead fly spoileth the whole pot of ointment. That one 
thistle may seed a continent with noxious weeds. Let us, 



8BCBBT SnVS. 1?5 

brethren, kill our sins as often as we can find them. One said 
— "The heart is full of unclean birds; it is a ci^e of them,** 
" Ah, but," said another divine, " you must not make that an 
apology, for a Christiim's business is to wring their necks.*' 
And so it is ; if there be evil things it is our business to kill 
them. Chnstians must not tolerate secret sins. We must not 
harbor traitors ; it is high treason against the Eong of hea;ven. 
Let us drag them out to light, and offer them upon the altar, 
giving up the dearest of our secret sins at the will and bid- 
ding of God. There is a great danger in a little secret sin ; 
therefore avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it and shun it ; and 
God give thee grace to overcome it ! 

V. And now I come, in finishing up, to plead with all my 
might with some of you whom God has pricked in your con- 
sciences. I have come to intreat you, if it be possible, even 
to tears, that you will give up your secret sins. I have one 
here for whom I bless God ; I love him, though I know him 
not. He is almost persuaded to be a Christian ; he halteth 
between two opinions ; he intendeth to serve God, he striveth 
to give up sin, but he findeth it a hard struggle, and as yet he 
knoweth not what shall become of him. I speak to him with 
all love : my friend, will you have your sin and go to hell, or 
leave your sin and go to heaven ? This is the solemn alterna- 
tive ; to all awakened sinners I put it ; may God choose for 
you, otherwise I tremble as to which you may choose. The 
pleasures of this life are so intoxicating, the joys of it so en- 
snaring, that did I not believe that God worketh in us to will 
and to do, I should despair of you. But I have confidence 
that God will decide the matter. Let me lay the alternative 
before yon :— -on the one hand there is an hour's merriment, a 
short life of bliss, and that a poor, poor bliss ; on the other 
hand, there is everlasting life and eternal glory. On the one 
hand, there is a transient happiness, and afterward over- 
whelming woe ; in this case there is a solid peace and everlast- 
ing joy, and after it overflowing bliss. I shall not fear to be 
called an Arminian, when I say, as Elijah did, " Choose you 
this day whoni you will serve. If God be God, serve him ; if 
Baal be God, serve him." But, now, make your choice de- 
liberately ; and may God help you to do it I Do not say you 



176 BBOBXr 61X8. 

will take up with religion, without first connting the cost of 
it ; remember, there is your last to be given up, your pleasure 
to be renounced ; can you do it for Christ^s sake ? Can you ? 
I know you can not, unless Grod's grace shall assist you in 
making such a choice. But can you say, " Yes, by the help 
of God, earth's gaudy toys, its pomps, pageantries, gewgaws, 
all these I renounce ? 

** ' These can neTor ntiaQr ; 
Give me Obrist or else I die.' " 

Sinner, thou wilt never regret that choice, if God help thee to 
make it ; thou wilt find thyself a happy man here, and thrioe 
happy throughout eternity. 

" But," says one, " sir, I intend to be religious, but I do 
not hold with your strictness." I do not ask you to do so ; I 
hope, liowever, you will hold with Ghd*8 strictness, and God*s 
strictness is ten thousand times greater than mine. You may 
say that I am puritanical in my preaching ; God will be puri- 
tanical in judging in that great day. I may appear severe, 
but I can never be so severe as God will be. I may draw the 
harrow with sharp teeth across your conscience, but God 
shall drag harrows of eternal fire across you one day. I may 
speak thundering things ; God will not speak them, but hurl 
them from his hands. Remember, men may laugh at hell, and 
say there is none ; but they must reject their Bibles before 
they can believe the lie. Men's consciences tell them that 

" There is a dreadful hell 
And everlasting pains, 
Wh^re sinners must with devils dwell 
In darkness, fire, and diains." 

Sir, will you keep your secret »ns, and have eternal fire for 
them ? Remember, it is of no use, they must all be given up, 
or else you can not be God's child. You can liot by any 
means have both ; it can not be God and the world, it can not 
be Christ and the devil ; it must be one or the other. O, 
that God would give you gi*ace to resign all ; for what are 
they worth ? They are your deceivers now, and will be your 
tormentors for ever. O ! that your eyes were 'open to see the 
rottenness, the emptiness and trickery of iniquity. O ! that 
GU)d would turn you to himself. O ! may God give you grace 



8SCBBT SIK8. Ill 

to cross the Babioon of repentance at this very hour ; to say, 
** Henceforth it is war to the knife with my sins ; not one of 
them will I willingly keep, but down with them, down with 
them; Canaai;iite, Hittite, Jebusite, they shall all be driven out. 

" • The dearest idol I have known, 
Whate'er that idol be ; 
Help me to tear it from its throne. 
And worship only thee.' " 

" But O I sir, I can not do it ; it would be like pulling my 
eyes out.'* Ay, but hear what Christ says : " It were better 
for thee to enter into life with one eye, than having two eyes 
to be cast into hell fire." ^^ But it would be like cutting my 
arm off." Ay, and it would be better for thee to enter into 
life halt or maimed, than to be cast into hell fire for ever. O I 
when the sinner comes before God at last, do you think he 
will speak as he does now ? God will reveal his secret sins : 
the sinner will not then say, " Lord, I thought my secret sins 
so sweet, I could not give them up." I think I see how 
changed it will be then. " /S'er," you say now, " you are too 
strict /" will you say that when the eyes of the Almighty are 
glowering on you ? You say now, " Sir, you are too pre^ 
cise /" will you say that to God Almighty's face ? " Sir, I 
mean to keq} suchrand-suoh a «m." Can you say it at God's 
bar at last ? You will not dare to do it then. Ah I when 
Christ comes a second -time, there will be a marvelous change 
in the way men talk. Methinks I see him ; there he sits upon 
his throne. Now, Caiaphas, come and condemn him now! 
Judas I come and kiss him now! What do you stick at, 
man ? Are you afraid of him ? Now, Barabbas ! go ; see 
whether they will prefer you to Christ now. Swearer, now 
is your time ; yon have been a bold man ; curse him to his 
face now. Now, drunkard ; staler up to hin^ now. Now, 
infidel ; tell him there is no Christ now — now that the world 
is lit with lightning and the earth is siiaken with thunder till 
the solid pillars thereof do bow themselves — tell God there is 
no God now ; now laugh at the Bible ; now scoff at the min- 
ister. Why men, what is the matter with you ? Why, can't 
you do it ? Ah ! there you are ; you have fled to the hills 
and to the rocks — ^^ Rocks, hide us ! mountains, fall on us ; 

8* 



1?8 SBOBET snrs. 

hide OS from the &oe of him that sitteth on the throne.'' Ah I 
where are now your hoasts, your vauntings, and your glories? 
Alas ! alas ! for you, in that dread day of wonders. 

Secret sinner, what will then become of thee ? Go out of 
this place unmasked ; go out to examine thyself go out to 
bend thy knee, go out *o weep, go out to pray. God give 
thee grace to believe I And O, how sweet and pleasant the 
thought, that this day sinners have fled to Christ, and men 
have been bom again to Jesus I Brethren, ere I finish, I re- 
peat the words at whi<^ so many have caviled — ^it is now or 
never, it is turn or bum. Solemnly in God's sight I say it ; 
if it be not God's truth I must answer for it in the great day 
of account. Your consciences tell you it is true. Take it 
home, and mock me if you will ; this morning I am clear of 
your blood ; if any seek not God, but live in sin, I shall be 
clear of your blood in that day when the watchman shall have 
your souls demanded of him ; O, may God gi*ant that you 
may be cleared in a blessed manner I When I went down 
these pnlpit staire a Sabbath or two ago, a friend said to me 
words which have been in my mind ever since — " Sir, there 
are nine thousand people this day without excuse in the day 
of judgment." It is true of you this morning. If you are 
damned, it will not be for want of preaching to you, and it 
shall not be for want of praying for you. God knoweth that 
if my heart could break of itself, it would, for your sods, for 
God is my witness, how earnestly I long for you in the bow- 
els of Christ Jesus. O, that he mi^ht touch your hearts and 
bring you to him ! For death is a solemn thing, damnation is 
a horrible thing, to be out of Christ is a dreadful thing, to be 
dead in sins is a terrific thing. May God lead you to view 
these things as they are, and save you, for .his mercy's sake 1 
" He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved." * 

" Lord, search my soul, try every thought ; 
Though my own heart accuse me not 
Of walking in a felse disguise, 
I beg the trial of thine eyes. 
Doth secret mischief lurk within? 
Do I indulge some unknown sin ? 
turn n y feet whene're I stray, 
And leat. me in thy perfect way." 



SERMON XII. 
ELIJAH'S APPEAL TO THE UNDECIDED. 

" How long halt je between two ofdniona? If tiie Lord be God, tbflow 
him ; if Baal, tiien fiiQow him.**— 1 Enran, xrm. 21. 

It was a day to be reoMmbered, when the multitades of 
Israel were assembled at the foot of Carmel, and when the 
solitary prophet of the Lord came forth to defy the fonr hun- 
dred and fifty priestis of the felse god. We might look upon 
that scene with the eye of historical curiosity, and we should 
find it rich with interest. Instead of doing so, however, we 
shall look upon it with the eye of attentive consideration, and 
see whether we can not improve by its teachings. We have 
upon that hill of Carmel, and along the plain, Uiree kinds of 
persons. We have first the devoted servant of Jehovah, a 
solitary prophet; we have, on the other hand, the decided 
servants of the evil one, the four hundred and fifty prophets of 
Baal ; but the vast mass of that day belonged to a third class 
— ^they were those who had not folly determined whether fully 
to worship Jehovah, the God of their &thers, or Baal, the god 
of Jezebel. On the one hand, their ancient traditions led 
them to fear Jehovah, and on the c' ' u^od, their interest at 
court led them to bow before BaaL Many of them, therefore^ 
were secret and halfhearted followers of Jehovah, while they 
were the public worshipers of BaaL The whole of them at 
this juncture were halting between two. opinions. Elijah does 
not address his sermon 4o the priests of Baal ; he will have 
something to say to them by-and-by, he will preach them hor- 
rible sermons in deeds of blood. Nor has he aught to say to 
those who are the thoroagh servants of Jehovah, for they are 
not there ; but his discourse is alone directed to Uiose who are 
halting between two opinions. 



180 xluah'8 appkal to thb undecided. 

Now, we have these three classes here this morning. We 
have, I hope, a very large namber who are on Jehovah^s side, 
who fear God and serve hira ; we have a namber who are on 
the side of the evil one, who make no profession of religion, and 
do not observe even the outward symptoms of it ; because they 
are both inwardly and oatwardly the servants of the evil one. 
Bat the great mass of my hearers belong to the third class — 
the waverers. Like empty clouds they are drtven hither and 
thither by the wind ; like painted beauties, they lack the fresh- 
ness of life ; they have a name to live and are dead. Procras- 
tinators, double-minded men, undecided persons, to yos I 
speak this morning — " How long halt ye between two opin- 
ions?" May the qoestion be answered by God's Spirit in 
your heaits, and may you be led to say, " No longer, Lord, 
do I halt ; but this day I decide for thee, and am thy servant 
for ever !" 

Let us proceed at once to the text. Instead of giving ike 
divisions at the commencement, I will mention them one by 
one as I proceed. 

T. First, you will note that the prophet insisted upon the 
distinction which existed between the worship of BaaH and the 
worship of Jehovah. Most of the people who were before 
him thought that Jehovah was Gk>d, and that Baal was God 
too ; Mid that for this reason the worship of both was quite 
consistent. The great mass of them did not reject the God of 
their fkthers wholly, nor did they bow before Baal wholly ; 
bat as polytheists, believing in many gods, they thought both 
€k)ds might be worshiped, jaid each of them have a share in 
their hearts. " No," said the prophet when he began, " this 
will not do, these are two opinions ; you can never mi^e them 
one, they are two contradictory things whidi can not be com- 
bined. I tell you that instead of combining the two, which is 
impossible, you are halting between -the two, which makes a 
vast difference." "I will build in my house," said one of 
them, " an altar for Jehovah here, and an altar for Baal there. 
I am of one opinion ; I believe theni both to be God." **'No, 
no," said Elijah, " it can not be so ; they are two^ and must be 
two. These things are not one opinion, but two opinions. 
No, you can not unite them." Have I not many here who say, 



sluah'8 appeal to the ukdeoded. 181 

^^ I am worldly, bat I arn religious too ; I can go to the Music 
Hall to worship God on Sunday ; I went to the Derby races 
the other day : I go, on the one hand, to the place where I 
can serve my lusts ; I am to be met with in every dancing 
room of every description, and yet at the same time I say my 
prayers most devoutly. May I not be a good churchman, or 
a right go^d dissenter, and a man of the world too ? May I 
not, afte all^ h<^d with the hounds as well as' run with the 
hare ? May I not love God and serve the devil too — ^take the 
pleasure of eadi of them, and give my heart to neither ? We 
answer — Not so, they are two opinions ; you can not do it, 
they are distinct and separate. Mark Anthony yoked two 
Mons to his chariot ; but thei*e are two lions no man ever yoked 
together yet — the Lion of the tribe of Judah and the lion of 
the pit. These can never go together. Two opinions you 
may hold in politics, perhaps, but then you will be despised 
l^ every body, unless you are of one opinion or the other, and 
act as an independent man. But two opinions in the matter 
of soul-religion you can not hold. If God be God, serve him, 
and do it thoroughly ; but if this world be God, serve it, and 
make no profession of religion. If you are a worldling, and 
think the things of the world the best, serve them ; devote 
yourself to them, do not be kept back by oonscience ; spite 
your conscience, and run into sin. But remember, if the Lord 
be your God, you can not have Baal too ; you must have one 
thing or else the other. " No man can serve two masters.^ 
If God be served, he will be a master ; and if the devil be 
served he will not be long before he will be a master ; and '^ ye 
can not serve two maatersJ^^ O ! be wise, and think not that 
the two can be mingled together. How many a respectable 
deacon thinks that he can be covetous, and grasjHng in busi- 
ness, and grind the faces of the poor, and yet be a saint ! O ! 
liar to God and to man I He is no saint ; he is the very chief 
of sianera ! How many a very excellent woman, who is re- 
ceived into church fellowship among the people of God, and 
thinks herself one of the elect, is to be found full of wrath 
and bitterness, a slave of mischief and of sin, a tattler, a 
slanderer, a busybody; entering into other people's houses, 
and turning every thing like comfort out of the minds of those 



1S2 XLTJAH'8 APPEAL TO THS UKDBOIDXB. 

with whom she comes in contact — and yet she is the servant 
of God and of the devil too ! Nay, ray lady this will never an- 
swer ; the two never can be served thoroughly. Serve your 
master, whoever he be. If yon do profess to be religious, be 
so thoroughly ; if you make any profession to be a Christian, 
be one ; but if you are no Christian, do not pretend to be. If 
you love the world, then love it ; but cast off the mask, and 
do not be a hypocrite. The double-minded man is of all men 
the most despicable ; the follower of Janus, who wears two 
faces, and who can look with one eye upon the (so-called) 
Christian world with great delight, and give his subscription 
to the Tract Society, the Bible Society, and the Missionary 
Society, but who has another eye over there, with which he 
looks at the Casino, the Coal-hole, and other pleasures, which 
I do not care to mention, but which some of you may know 
more of than I wish to know. Such a man, I say, is worse than 
the most reprobate of men, in the opinion of any one who 
knows how to judge. Not worse in his open character, but 
worse really, because he is not honest enough to go through 
with that he professes. And how many such are there in Lon- 
don, in England ; everywhere else I They try to serve both 
masters ; but it can not be ; the two things can not be recon- 
ciled ; God and Mammon, Christ and Belial, these never can 
meet ; there never can be an agreement between them, they 
never can be brought into unity, and why shoald you seek to 
do it? "7^0 opinions^^'* said the prophet. He would not 
allow any of his hearers to profess to worship both. " No," 
said he, " these are two opinions, and you are halting between 
the two." 

II. In the second place, tfie prophet caUa these waverera to 
an a/^ountfor the amount of time which they had consumed 
in making their choice. Some of them might have replied, 
*' We have not had yet an opportunity of judging between 
God and Baal ; we have not yet had time enough to make up 
our minds ;" but the prophet puts away that objection, and he 
says, ''Jffow long halt ye between two opinions ? How long ? 
For three years and a half not a drop of rain has fallen at the 
command of Jehovah ; is not that proof enough ? Ye have 
been all this time, three years and a half; expecting, till I 



ELUAH'B APPKAL TO THB UKDBCtDXD. 183 

should come, Jehovah^s servant, and give you rain ; and yet, 
though you yourselves are starving, your cattle dead, your 
fields parched, and your meadows covered with dust, like the 
very deserts, yet all this time of judgment, and trial, and af^ 
diction, has not been enough for you to make up your minds. 
How long^ then,'' said he, " halt ye between two opinions ?" 

I speak not, this morning, to the thoroughly worldly ; with 
them I have now nothing to do ; another time I may address 
them. But I am now speaking to you who are seeking to 
serve God and to serve Satan ; you who are trying to be 
Christian worldlings, trying to be members of that extraor- 
dinary corporation, called the " religious world," which is a 
thing that never had an existence except in title. You are en- 
deavoiing, if you can, to make up your mind which it shall be ; 
you know you can not serve both, and you are coming now to 
the period when you are saying, " Which shall it be ? Shall I 
go thoroughly into sin, and revel in the pleasures of the earth, 
or become a servant of God ?" Now, I say to you this morn- 
ing, as the prophet did, " Mow long halt ye ?" Some of you 
have been halting until your hair has grown gray ; the sixtieth 
year of some you is drawing nigh. Is not sixty years long 
enough to make up your choice ? " Sow long halt ye ?" 
Perhaps one of you may have tottered into this place, leaning 
on his staff, and you have been undecided up till now. Your 
eightieth year has come ; you have been a religious character 
outwardly, but a worldling truly ; you are still up to this date 
halting, saying, " I know not on which side to be." How 
long, sirs, in the name of reason, in the name of mortality, in 
the name of death, in the name of eternity, " How long halt ye 
between two opinions ?" Ye middle-aged men, ye said when 
ye were youths, " When we are out of our apprenticeship we 
will become religious ; let us sow our wild oats in our youth, 
and let us then begin to be diligent servants of the Lord." Lo ! 
ye have come to middle age, and are waiting till that quiet 
villa shall be built, and ye shall retire from business, and then 
ye think ye will serve God. Sirs, ye said that same when ye 
came of age, and when your business began to increase. I 
therefore solemnly demand of you, " How long halt ye be- 
tween two opinions ?" How much time do you want ? O I 



184 xujah's appbal to thb ukdbcidxd, 

young man, thou saidst in thioo early childhood, when a 
mother^s prayer followed thee, " I will seek God when I come 
to manhood;" and thou hast passed that day; thou art a 
man, and more than that, and yet thou art halting stilL 
" How long halt ye between two opinions?" How many of 
yon have been church-goers and ^apel-goers for years I Ye 
have been impressed, too, many a time, but ye have wiped the 
tears from your eyes, and have sfud, " I will seek God and 
tura to him with full purpose of heart ;" and you are now just 
where you were. How many secmons do you want ? How 
many more Sundays must roll away wasted? How many 
warnings, how many sicknesses, how many tellings of the bell 
to warn you that you must die ? How many graves must be 
dug for your family before you will be impressed ? How 
many plagues and pestilences must ravage this city before you 
will turn to God in truth ? " How long halt ye between two 
opinions ?" Would God ye could answer this question, and 
not allow the sands of life to drop, drop, drop from the glass, 
saying, " When the next goes I will repent," and yet that 
next one findeth you impenitent. You say, " When the glass 
is just so low, I will turn to God." No, sir, no ; it will not 
answer for you to talk so ; for thou mayest find thy glass 
empty before thou thoughtest it had begun to run low, and 
thou mayest find thyself in eternity when thou didst but 
think of repenting and turaing to God. How long, ye gray 
heads, how long, ye men of ripe years, how Ipng, ye youths 
and maidens, how long will ye be in this undecided, unhappy 
state ? " How long halt ye between two opinions ?" 

Thus we have brought you so far. We have noted that 
there are two opinions, and we have asked the question. How 
long time you want to decide ? One would think the question 
would require very little time, if time were all ; if the will 
were not biassed to evil and contrary to good, it would re- 
quire no more time than the decision of a man who has to 
choose a halter or life, wealth or poverty ;* and if we were 
wise, it would take no time at all ; if we understood the 
things of God, we should not hesitate, but say at once, " Now 
God is my God, and that for ever." 

in. But the prophet charges these people with the absurdity 



BTJJAH'S APPEAL TO THE UNDBCIDBD. 185 

of their positijn. Some of them said, "What ! prophet, may 
we not continue to halt between two opinions ? We are not 
desperately irreligious, so we are better than the profane; 
certainly we are not thoroughly pious ; but, at any rate, a lit- 
tle piety is better than none, and the mere profession of it 
keeps us decent, let us try both I" " Now," says the prophet, 
" how long halt ye ?" or, if you like to read it so, " how long 
limp ye between two opinions?" (How long wriggle ye be- 
tween two opinions ? would be a good word, if I might em- 
ploy it.) He represents them as like a man whose legs are 
entirely out of joint ; he first goes on one side, and then on 
the other, and can not go far either way. I could not de- 
scribe it without putting myself into a most ludicrous posture. 
" How long limp ye between two opinions ?" The prophet 
laughs at them, a» it were. And is it not true, that a man 
who is neither one thing or another is in a most absurd posi- 
tion ? Let him go among the worldlings ; they laugh under 
their sleeve, and say, " This is one of the Exeter Hall saints," 
or, " That is one of the elect." Let him go among the Chris- 
tian people, those that are saints, and they say, " How a man 
•can be so inconsistent, how he can come into our midst one 
day, and the next be found in such and such society, we can 
not tell." Me thinks even the devil himself must laugh at 
such a man in scorn. " There," says he, " I am every thing 
that is bad ; I do sometimes pretend to be an angel of light, 
and put on that garb ; but you do really excell me in every 
respect, for I do it to get something by it, but you do not 
get any thing by it. You do not have the pleasures of 
this world, and you do not have the pleasures of religion 
either ; you have the fears of religion without its hopes ; you 
are afraid to do wrong, and yet you have no hope of heaven ; 
you have the duties of religion without the joys ; you have to 
do just as religious people do, and yet there is no heart in the 
matter ; you have to sit down, and see the table all spread be- 
fore you, and then you have not power to eat a single morsel 
of the precious dainties of the gospel." It is just the same 
with the world ; you dare not go into this or that mischief 
that brings joy to the wicked man's heart ; you think of what 
society would say. We do not know what to make of you. 



181 XEJJAH'S APPSAL TO THB UNDXdDBD. 

I might describe yon, if I might speak as the Amerioaiis do, 
bat I will not. Ye are half one thing, and half the other. 
Ton oome into the society of the saints, and try to talk as they 
talk ; bat you are like a man who has been taught French in 
some day-school in England ; he makes a queer sort of French- 
ified English, and Elnglishized French, and every one laughs at 
him. The Englbh laugh at him for trying to do it, and the 
French laugh at him for failing in it. If you spoke your own 
language, if you just spoke out as a sinner, if you professed to 
be what you are, you would at least get the respect of one 
side ; but now you are rejected by one class, and equally re- 
jected by the other. Yon come into our midst, we can not 
receive you ; you go amongst worldlings, they reject you too ; 
you are too good for them, and too bad for us. Where are 
yon to be put ? If there were a purgatory, that would be the 
place for you ; where you might be tossed on the one side 
into ice, and on the other into the burning fire, and that for 
ever. But as there is no such place as purgatory, and as you 
really are a servant of Satan, and not a child of God, take 
heed, take heed, how long you stay in a position so absurdly 
ridiculous. At the day of judgment, wavering men will be 
the scoff and the laughter even of hell. The angels will look 
down in scorn upon the man who was ashamed to own his 
]k(aster thoroughly, while hell itself will ring with laughter. 
When that grand hypocrite shall come there — ^that undecided 
man, they will say, " Aha I we have to drink the dregs, but 
above them there were sweets ; you have only the dregs. You 
dare not go into the riotous and boisterous mirth of our 
youthful days, and now you have come here with us to drink 
the same dregs ; you have the punishment without the plea- 
sure." O! how foolish will even the damned call you, to 
think that you halted between two opinions I " How long 
limp ye, wriggle ye, walk ye in an absurd manner, between 
two opinions?" In adopting either opinion, you would at 
least be consistent ; but in trying to hold both, to seek to be 
both one and the other, and not knowing which to decide 
upon, you are limping between two opinions. I think a good 
translation is a very different one from that of the authorized 
version — " How long hop ye upon two sprays ?" So the 



BLUAH'S APPEAL TO l^B UllDXCIDBD. 187 

Hebrew has it. Like a bird, whiich perpetually flies from 
bough to bough, and is never still. If it keeps on doing this, 
it will never have a nest. And so with you : you keep leaping 
between two boughs, from one opinion to the other ; and so 
between the two, you get no rest for the sole of your foot, no 
peace, no joy, no comfort, but are just a poor miserable thing 
all your life long. 

lY. We have brought you thus far, then ; we have shown 
you the absurdity of this halting. Now, very briefly, the next 
point in my text is this. The multitude who had worshiped 
Jehovah and Baal, and who were now undecided, might reply, 
" But how do you know that we do not bdieve that Jehovah is 
Oodf How do you know loe are not decided in opinion ^' 
The prophet meets this objection by saying, " I know you are 
not decided in opinion, because you are not decided in prac- 
tice. If God be Go^ foUow him; if Baal, /o^Zow? him. You 
are not decided in practice." Men's opinions are not such 
things as we imagine. It is generally said now-a-days, that all 
opinions are right, and if a man shall honestly hold his con- 
victions, he is, without doubt, right. Not so ; truth is not 
changed by our opinions ; a thing is either true or false of it- 
self, and it is neither made true nor false by our views of it. It 
is for us, therefore, to judge carefully, and not to think that 
any opinion will do. Besides, opinions have influence upon 
the conduct, and if a man have a wrong opinion, he will, most 
likely, in some way or other, have wrong conduct, for the two 
usually go together. " Now," said Elijah, " that you are not 
the servants of God, is quite evident, for you do not follow 
him ; that you are not thoroughly servants of Baal either, is 
quit^ evident, for you do not follow him." Now I address 
myself to you again. Many of you are not the servants of 
God ; you do not follow him ; you follow him a certain dis- 
tance in the form, but not in the spirit ; you follow him on 
Sundays ; but what do you do on Mondays ? You follow him 
in religious company, in evangelical drawing-rooms, and so on ; 
but what do you do in other society ? You do not follow 
him. And, on the other hand, you do not follow Baal ; you 
go a little way with the world, but there is a place to which 
you dare not go ; you are too respectable to sin as others sin, 



188 XEJJAH'S APPSAL TO TfiS UNDSCIDBD. 

or to go the whole way of the world. Ye dare not go to the 
utmost lengths of evil. *^ Now,*> says the prophet, twitting 
them upon this — " if the Lord be God, follow him. tet your 
conduct be consistent with your opinions; if you believe the 
Lord to be God, carry it out in your daily life ; be holy, be 
prayerful, trust in Christy be &ithfiil, be upright, be loving ; 
give your heart to God, and follow him. If Baal be God, then 
follow him; but do not pretend to £:^ow the other." Let 
your oonduct back up your opinion ; if you really think that 
the follies of this world are the best, and believe that a fine 
^shionable life, a life of fiivolity and gayety, flying from flower 
to flower, getting honey from none, is the most desirable, carry 
it out. If you think the life of the debauchee is so very desir- 
able, if you think his end is to be much wished for, if yon think 
his pleasures are right, follow them. Go the whole way with 
them. If you believe that to cheat in business is right, put it 
up over your door — " I sell trickery goods here ;" or if you do 
not say it to the public, tell your conscience so ; but do not 
deceive the public ; do not call the people to prayers when 
you are opening a " British Bank." If you mean to be religi- 
ous, follow out your determination thoroughly ; but if you mean 
to be worldly, go the whole way with the world. Let your 
conduct follow out your opinions. Make your life tally with 
your profession. Carry out your opinions whatever they he. 
But you dare not ; you are too cowardly to sin as others do, 
honestly before God's sun ; your conscience will not let you 
do it — and y^t you are just so fond of Satan, that you dare not 
leave him wholly and become thoroughly the servants of God. 
O do not let your character be like your profession ; either 
keep up your profession, or give it up : do be one thing or 
the other. 

V. And now the prophet cries, " If the Lord be God, follow 
him ; if Baal, then follow him," and in so doing, he states the 
grotmd of his practiced claim. Let your conduct be con- 
sistent with your o{nnions. There is another objection raised 
by the crowd. " Prophet," says one, " thou comest to de- 
mand a practical proof of our affection ; thou sayest, Follow 
God. Now, if I believe God to be God, and that is my 
opinion, yet I do not see what claim he has to my opinions." 



ELIJAH'S APPEAL TO THE UNDECIDED. 18d 

Kow, mark how the prophet puts it: he says, ^^ If God b6 
God^ follow him." The reason why I claim that you should 
follow out your opinion concerning God is, that God is God ; 
God has a claim upon you, as creatures, for your devout obe- 
dience. One person replies, "What profit should I have, if I 
served God thoroughly ? Should I be more happy ? Should 
I get on better in this world ? Should I have more peace of 
mind ?" Nay, nay, that is a secondary consideration. The 
only question for you is, " If God be God follow him." Not 
if it be more advantageous to you ; but, " if God be God, follow 
him." The secularist would plead for religion on the ground 
that religion might be the best for this world, and best for the 
world to come. Not so with the prophet ; he says, " I do not 
put it on that ground, I insist that it iff your bounden duty, if you 
believe in God, simply because he is God, to serve him and obey 
him. I do not tell you it is for your advantage — ^it may be, I 
believe it is — but that I put aside from the question ; I demand 
of you that you follow God, if you believe him to be God. If 
' you do not think he is God ; if you really think that the devil is 
God, then follow him; his pretended godhead shall be your plea, 
and you shall be consistent ; but if God be God, if he made 
you, I demand that you serve him; if it is he who puts the 
breath into your nostrils, I demand that you obey him. If 
God be really worthy of your worship, and you really think 
so, I demand that you either follow him, or else deny that he 
is God at all." Now, professor, if thou sayest that Chiist's 
gospel is the gospel, if thou believest in the divinity of the 
gospel, and puttest thy trust in Christ, I demand of thee to 
follow out the gospel, not merely because it will be to thy adr 
vantage, but because the gospel is" divine. If thou makest a 
profession of being a child of God, if thou art a believer, and 
thinkest and believest religion is the best, the service of Govi 
the most desirable, I do not come to plead with thee because 
of any advantage thou wouldst get by being holy ; it is on this 
ground that I put it, that the Lord is God ; and if he be God, 
it is thy business to serve him. If his gospel be true, and thou 
believest it to be true, it is thy duty to carry it out. If thou 
sayest Christ is not the Son of God, carry out thy Jewish or 
thy infidel convictions, and see whether it will end well. If 



190 KLUAH'S APPEAL TO THE UNDECIDED. 

thou dost not believe Christ to be the Son of God, if thon art a 
Mohammedan, be consistent, c£u*ry out thj Mohammedan con* 
victions, and see whether it will end well. But, take heed, 
take heed ! If, however, thou sayest God is Grod, and Christ 
the Saviour, and the gospel true ; I demand of thee, only on 
this account, that thou carry it out. What a strong plea some 
would think the prophet might have had, if he had said, ^^CU)d 
is your fitthers^ God, therefore follow him !" But no, he did 
not come down to that ; he said, " If God be God — I do not 
care whether he be your Others' God or not — ^follow him.'* 
" Why do you go to chapel?" says one, "and not to church?'* 
" Because my &ther and grandfather were dissenters." Ask 
a churchman, very often, why he attends the establishment. 
" Well, our family were always brought up to it ; that is why 
I go." Now, I do think that the worst of all reasons for a 
particular religion, is that of our being brought up to it. I 
never could see that at all. I have attended the house of Gk>d 
with my father and my grand&ther ; but I thought, when I read 
the Scriptures, that it was my business to judge for myself. I 
knew that my father and my grandfather took little children 
in their arms, and put drops of water on their feces, and they 
were baptized. I took up my Bible, and I could not see any 
thing about babes being baptized. I picked up a little Greek ; 
and I could not discover that the word ^^ baptized" meant to 
sprinkle ; so I said to myself, " Suppose they are good men, 
they may be wrong ; and though I love and revere them, yet 
it is no reason why I should imitate them." And therefore I 
lefl tliem, and became what I am to-day, a Baptist minister, 
so called, but I hope a great deal more a Christian than a 
Baptist. It is seldom I mention it ; I only do so by way of 
illustration here. Many a one will go to chapel, because his 
grandmother did. Well, she was a good old soul, but I do 
not see that she ought to influence your judgment. " That 
does not signify," says one, " I do not like to leave the church 
of my fathers." No more do I ; I would rather belong to the 
same denomination with my father ; I would not willfully differ 
from any of my friends, or leave their sect and denomination ; 
but let God be above our parents; though our parents are at the 
very top of our hearts, and we love them and reverence them^ 



ELIJAH'S APPEAL TO THE UKDEdDSD. 191 

and in all other matters pay them strict obedience, yet, with 
regard to religion, to our own Mag;er we stand or fall, and we 
clidm to have the right of judging for ourselves as men, and 
then we think it our duty, having judged, to carry out our 
convictions. Now I am not going to say, ** If Grod be your 
mother's God, serve him ;'» though that would be a very good 
argument with some of you ; but with you waverers, the only 
plea I use is, " If God be God, serve him ;" if the gospel be 
right, believe it ; if a religious life be right, carry it out ; if not, 
give it up. I only put my argument on Elijah's plea — " If God 
be God, follow him ; but if Baal, then fellow him." 

VI. And now I make my appeal to the halters and waver- 
ers, with some questions, which I pray the Lord to J^^ply. 
Now I will put this question to them : ^How long halt ye P^ 
I will tell them ; ye will halt between two opinions, all of you 
who are undecided, imtU God shaU answer hyftre, Pire was 
not what these poor people wanted that were assembled there. 
When Elijah says, that " the God that answereth by fire let 
him be God," I fancy I hear some of them saying, *' No ; the 
God that answereth by water let him be God ; we want rain 
badly enough." " No," said Elijah, " if rain should come, 
you would say that it was the common course of providence ; 
and that would not decide you." I tell you, all the provi- 
dences that befall you undecided ones will not decide you. 
God may surround you with providences ; he may surround 
you with frequent warnings from the death-bed of your fel- 
lows ; but providences will never decide you. It is not the 
God of rain, but the God of fire that will do it. There are 
two ways in which you undecided ones will be decided by- 
and-bye. You that are decided for God will want no de- 
cision ; you that are decided for Satan will want no decision ; 
you are on Satan's side, and must dwell for ever in eternal 
burning. But these undecided ones want something to de- 
cide them, and will have either one of the two things ; they 
will either have the fire of God's Spirit to decide them, or else 
the fire of eternal judgment, and that will decide them. I 
may preach to you, my hearers ; and all the ministers in the 
world may preach to you that are* wavering, but you will 
never dedde for God through the force of your own will. 



m ELIJAH'S APPSAL TO THB UNDXOTOBD. 

None of you, if left to yoar Dataral judgment, to the use of 
your own reason, will ever ^eoide for God. You may decide 
fi>r him merely as an outward form, but not as an inward 
sfHritual thing, which should possess your heart as a ChrlBtiaa, 
as a believer in the doctrine of effectual grace. I know that 
none of you will ever decide for God's gospel, unless God de- 
cide you ; and I tell you thai you must either be decided by 
the descent of the fire of his Spirit into your hearts now, or 
else in the day of judgment. O ! which shall it be ? O ! 
that the prayer might be put up by the thousand lips that are 
here : " Lord, decide me now by the fire of thy Spirit ; O I 
let thy Spirit descend into my heart, to bum up the bullock, 
that I may be a whole burnt offering to God ; to burn up the 
wood and the stones of my sin ; to burn up the very dust of 
worldliness; ah, and to lick up the water of my impiety, 
which now lieth in the trenches, and my cold indifference, 
that seek to put out the sacrifice." 

" make this heart rejoice or ache t 
Decide this doubt for me ; 
And if it be not broken, break, 
An(^heal it, if iti>e. 

" sovereign grace, my heart subdue ; 
I would be led in triumph too, 
A willing captive to my Lord, 
To sing the triumphs c^his word." 

And it may be, that whilst I speak, the mighty fire, unseen by 
men, and unfelt by the vast majority of you, shall descend 
into some heart which has of old been dedicated to God by 
his divine election, which is now like an altar broken down, 
but which God, by his free grace, will this day build up. O I 
I pray that that influence may enter into some hearts, that 
there may be some go out of this place, saying, 

« *TiB done, the great traDsaotion's done, 
I am my Lwd's, «id he is mine ,* 
He drew me, and I followed on. 
Glad to obey the voice divine." 

** Now rest, my undivided heart, 
Fixed on this stable centef, rest" 



ELIJAH'S APPEAL TO THE UNDECIDED. 193 

O ! that many may say that ! But remember, if it be not so, 
the day is coming — dies ircBy the day of wrath and anger — 
when ye shall be decided of God ; Avhen the firmament shall 
be lit up with lightnings, when the earth shall roll with 
drunken terror, when the pillars of the universe shall shake, 
and God shall sit, in the person of his Son, to judge the world 
in righteousness. You will not be undecided then, when, 
" Depart ye cursed," or " Come, ye blessed," shall be your 
doom. There will be no indecision then, when you shall meet 
him with joy or else with terror — when, "rocks hide me, 
mountains on me fall," shall be your doleful shriek ; or els© 
your joyful song shall be, " The Lord is come." In that day 
you will be decided ; but till then, unless the living fire of the 
Holy Spirit decide you, you will go on halting between two 
opinions. May God grant you his Holy Spirit, that you may 
turn unto him and be saved ! 

9 



SERMON XIII. 
SALVATION OP THE LORD. 

«* Salvation is of the Lord." —Jonah, il 9. 

Jonah learned this sentence of good theology in a strange 
college. He learned it in the whale's belly, at the bottom of 
the mountains, with the weeds wrapped about his head, when 
be supposed that the eaith with her bars was about him for 
ever. Most of the grand truths of God have to be learned 
by trouble ; they must be burned into us with, the hot iron of 
affliction, otherwise we shall not truly receive them. No man 
is competent to judge in matters of the kingdom, until first he 
has been tried ; since there are many things to be learned in 
the depths which we can never know in the heights. We 
dbcover many secrets in the caverns of the ocean, which, 
though we had soared to heaven, we never coul^ have known. 
He shall best meet the wants of God's people as a preacher 
who has had those wants himself; he shall best comfort God's 
Israel who has needed comfort ; and he shall best preach sal- 
vation who has felt his own need of it. Jonah, when he was 
delivered from his great danger, when, by the command of 
God the fish had obediently left its great deeps and delivered 
its cargo upon dry land, was then capable of judging ; and 
this was the result of his experience under his trouble — " Sal- 
vation is of the Lord." 

By salvation here we do not merely understand "the special 
salvation which Jonah received from death ; for according to 
Dr. Gill, there is something so special in the original, in the 
word salvation having one more letter than it usually has, 
when it only refers to some temporary deliverance, that we 
can only understand it here as relating to the great work of 
the salvation of the soul which endureth for ever. That *' sal- 



SALVATION OP THE LORD. 195 

vation is of the Lord," I shall thfe morning try to show as best 
I can. First, I shall endeavor to explain the doctrine ; then I 
shall try to show you how God has guarded its from making 
any mistakes^ and hxxs Jiedged us up to make us believe the goS" 
pel ; then I shall dwell upon the influence of this truth upon 
men; and shall close up by showing you ths counterpart of 
the doctrine. Seeing every truth hath its obverse, so hath 
this. 

I. First, then, to begin by explanation, let us expound this 
DOCTBiNE — the doctrine that salvation is of the Lord, or of 
Jehovah. We are to understand by this, that the whole of 
the work whereby men are saved from their natural estate of 
sin and ruin, and are translated into the kingdom of God and 
made heirs of eternal happiness, is of God, and of him only. 
" Salvation is of the Lord." 

To begin, then, at the beginning, the plan of salvation is 
entirely of God* !N'o human intellect and no created intelli- 
gence assisted God. in the planning of salvation ; he contrived 
the way, even as he himself carried it out. The plan of salva- 
tion was devised before the existence of angels. Before the 
day-star flung its ray across the darkness, when as yet the un- 
navigated ether had not been fanned by the wing of seraph, 
and when the solemnity of silence had never been disturbed 
by the song of angel, God had devised a way whereby he 
might save man, whom he foresaw would fall. He did not 
create angels to consult with them ; no, of himself he did it. 
We might truly ask the question, " Withivhom took he coun- 
sel ? Who instructed him, when he planned the great archi- 
tecture of the temple of mercy ? With whom took he counsel 
when he digged the deeps of love, that out of them there 
might well up springs of salvation? Who aided him?" 
None. He himself, alone, did it. In fact, if angels had then 
been in existence, they could not have assisted God ; for I can 
well suppose that if a solemn conclave of those spirits had 
been held, if God had put to them this question, " Man will 
rebel ; I declare I will punish ; my justice, * inflexible and 
severe, demands that I should do so ; but yet I intend to have 
mercy ;" if he had put the question to the celestial squadrons 
of mighty ones* " How can those things be ? How can justice 



196 SALVATION OP THB LORD. 

have its demands fnlfilled, and how can mercy r^ign ?'^ the 
angels would have sat in silence until now ; thej could not 
have dictated the plan ; it would have surpassed angelic intel- 
lect to have conceived the way whereby righteousness and 
peace should meet together, and judgment and mercy should 
kiss each other. God devised it, because without God it could 
not have been devised. It is a plan too splendid to have been 
the product of any mind except of that mind which afterward 
carried it out. " Salvation" is older than creation ; it is " of 
the Lord." 

^nd as it was of the Lord in planning so it was of the Lord 
in execution. No one has helped to provide salvation ; God 
has done it all himself. The banquet of mercy is served up 
by one host ; that host is he to whom the cattle on a thousand 
hills belong. But non'i have contributed any dainties to that 
royal banquet ; he hath done it all himself. The royal bath 
of mercy, wherein black souls are washed, was filled from the 
veins of Jesus; not a drop Avas contributed by any other 
being. He died upon the cross, and as an expiator he died 
alone. No blood of martyrs mingled with that stream ; no 
blood of noble confessors and of heroes of the cross entered 
into the river of atonement ; that is filled from the veins of 
Christ, and from nowhere else beside. He hath done it wholly. 
Atonement is the unaided work of Jesus. On yonder cross I 
see the man who " trod the winepress alone ;" in yonder gar- 
den I see the solitary conqueror, who came to the fight single- 
handed, whose own arm brought salvation, and whose omnip- 
otence sustained him. " Salvation is of the Lord," as to its 
provisions ; Jehovah — ^Father, Son, and Spirit — ^hath provided 
every thing. 

So far we are all agreed : but now we shall have to separate 
a bit. " Salvation is of the Lord," in the application of it. 
" No," says the Anninian, " it is not ; salvation is of the Lord, 
inasmuch as he does all for man that he can do ; but there is 
something that man must do, which if he does not do, he must 
perish." That is the Arminian way of salvation. Now last 
week I thought of this very theory of salvation, when I stood 
by the side of that window of Carisbrooke castle, out of which 
King Charles of unhappy at d unrighteous memory, attempted 



SALVATION OF TH.2 LOBD. 10*1 

to escape. I read in the guide book that every thing Avas pro- 
vided for his escape ; his followers had means at the bottom 
of the wall to enable him to fly across the country, and on the 
coast they had their boats lying ready to take him to another 
land ; in fact every thing was ready for his escape. But here 
was the important circumstance : his friends had done all they 
could ; he was to do the rest ; but that doing the rest was 
just the point and brunt of the battle. It was to get out of 
the window, out of which he was not able to escape by any 
meaift, so that all his friends did for him went for nothing, so 
far as he was conceraed. So with the sinner. If God had 
provided every means of escape, and only required him to get 
out of his dungeon, he would have remained there to all eter- 
nity. Why, is not the sinner by nature dead in sin ? And if 
God requires him to make himself alive, and then afterward 
he will do the rest for him, then verily, my friends, we are not 
so much obliged to God as we had thought for ; for if he re- 
quire so much as that of us, and we can do it, we can do the 
rest without his assistance. The Romanists have an extraor- 
dinary miracle of their own about St. Dennis, of whom they 
tell the lying legend that after his head was off he took it up in 
his hands and walked with it two thousand miles ; whereupon, 
said a wit, " So far as the two thousand miles go, it is nothing 
at all ; it is only the tii-st step in which there is any difficulty." 
So I believe, if that is taken, all the rest can be easily accom- 
plished. And if God does rei^iire of the sinner — dead in sin 
— that he should take the first step, then he requireth just 
that which renders salvation as ihipossible under the gospel as 
ever it was under the law, seeing man is as unable to believe 
as he is to obey, and is just as much without power to come 
to Christ as he is without power to go to heaven without 
Christ. The power must be given to him of the Spirit. He 
lieth dead in sin ; the Spirit must quicken him. He is bound 
hand and foot and fettered by transgression ; the Spirit must 
cut his bonds, and then he will leap to liberty. God must 
come and dash the iron bars out of their sockets, and then he 
can escape from the window, and make good his escape after- 
ward ; but unless the first thing be done for him, he must 
perish as surely under tho gospel as he would have done under 



198 SALVATION OF THS LORD. 

the law. I would cease to preach, if I belteyed that Gk)d, in 
the matter of salvation, required any thing whatever of man 
which he himself had not also engaged to fumbh. For how 
many have I frequently hanging upon my lips of the worst of 
characters — ^men whose lives have become so honibly l>ad» 
that the lip of morality would refuse to give a description of 
their character ? When I enter my pulpit am I to believe 
that these men are to do something before God's Spirit will 
operate upon them? If so, I should go there with a fidnt 
heart, feeling that I never could induce them to do tbe first 
part. But now I come to my pulpit with a sure confidence — 
God the Holy Spirit will meet with these men this morning. 
They are as bad as they can be ; he will put a new thought 
into their hearts ; he will give them new wishes ; he will give 
them new wills, and those ^ho hated Christ will desire to 
love him ; those who once loved sin will, by God's divine 
Spirit, be made to hate it ; and here is my confidence, that 
what they can not do, in that they are weak through tbe 
flesh, God sending hb Spirit into their hearts will do for 
them, and in them, and so they shall be saved. 

Well then, says one, that will make people sit still and fold 
their arms. Sir, it will not. But if men did so I c^uld not 
help it ; my business, as I have oflen said in thb {dace be- 
fore, b not to prove to you the reasonableness of any truth, 
nor to defend any truth from its consequences ; all I do here, 
and I mean to keep to it, is just to assert the truth, because it 
is in the Bible ; then, if you do not like it, you must settle the 
quarrel with my Master, and if you think it unreasonable, you 
must quarrel with the Bible. Let others defend Scripture 
and prove it to be true ; they can do their work better than 
I could; mine b just the mere work of proclaiming. I am 
the messenger ; I tell the Master's message ; if you do not 
like the message, quarrel with the Bible, not with me ; so long 
as I have Scripture on my side I willxiare atd defy you to do 
any thing against me. " Salvation is of the Lord." The Lord 
has to apply it, to make the unwilling willing, to make the un- 
godly godly, and bring the vile rebel to the feet of Jesus, or 
else salvation will never bo accomplished. Leave that one 
thing undone, and you have broken the link of the chain, the 



SALVATION OF THS LORD. 190 

very link which was just necessary to its integrity. Take 
away the fact that God begins the good work, and that he 
sends us what the old divines call preventing grace — ^take that 
away, suad you have spoilt the whole of salvation ; you have 
just taken the key-stone out of the arch, and down it tumbles. 
There is nothing left then. 

And now on the next point we shall a little disagree again. 
" Salvation is of the Lord,^' as the sustaining of the work in 
any marCs heart. When a man is made a child of God he 
does not have a stock of grace given to him with which to go 
on for ever, but he has grace for that day ; and he must have 
grace for the next day, and grace for the next, and grace for the 
next, until days shall end, or else the beginning shall be of no 
avail. As a man does not make himself spiritually alive, so 
neither can he keep himself so. He can feed on spiritual food, 
and so preserve his spiritual strength ; he can walk in the com- 
mandments of the Lord, and so enjoy rest and peace, but still 
the inner life fa dependent upon the Spirit as much for its after 
existence as for its first begetting. I do verily belie Ve that if it 
should ever be my lot to put my foot upon the golden threshold 
of Paradfae, and put this thumb upon the pearly latch, I should 
never cross the threshold unless I had grace given me to take 
that last step whereby I might enter heaven. No man of him- 
self, even when converted, hath any power, except as that power 
is daily, constantly, and perpetually inftised into him by the 
Spirit. But Christians often set up for independent gentlemen ; 
they get a little stock of grace in hand, and they say, " My 
mountain standeth firm, I shall never be moved." But ah I it is 
not long before the manna begins to be putrid. Jt was, only 
meant to be the manna for the day, and we have kept it for 
the morrow, and therefore it fiiils us. We must have fresh 
grace. 

" For day by day the manna fell ; 
O to learn tiiat leeson well." 

So look day by day for fresh grace. Frequently too the Chris- 
tian wants to have grace enough for a month vouchsafed to 
him in one moment. " O !" he says, " what a host of troubles 
I have coming — how shall I meet them all ? O ! that I had 



200 SALYATIOir OF THS LOBD, 

grace enoagh to bear me through them all !" My dear friends, 
you will have grace enough for your troubles, as they com^ 
one by one. "As thy days, so shall thy strength be;" but 
thy strength shall never be as thy months, or as thy weeks. 
Thou shalt have thy strength as thou hast thy bread. " Grive 
us this day our daily bread." Give us this day our daily 
grace. But why is it you will be troubling yourself about 
the things of to-morrow ? The common people say, " Cross 
a bridge when you come to it." That is good advice. Do 
the same. When a trouble comes, attack it, and down with. 
it, and master it; but do not begin now to forestall your 
woes. " Ah ! but I have so many," says one. Therefore I 
say, do not look further before thee than thou needest. " Sitf- 
ficient unto the day is the evil thereof." Do as the brave Gre- 
cian did, who, when he defended his country fi'om Perda, did 
not go into the plains to fight, but stood in the narrow pass 
of Thermopylae ; there, when the myiiads came to him, they 
had to come one by one, and he felled them to the earth* Had 
he ventm*ed into the plain he would have been soon devoured, 
and his handfull would have been melted like a drop of dew 
in the sea. Stand in the narrow pass of to-day, and fight thy 
troubles one by one ; but do not rush into the plains of to- 
morrow, for there thou wilt be routed and killed. As the 
evil is sufficient so will the grace be. " Salvation is of the 
Lord." 

But, lastly, upon this point. 7%e uUimcUe perfection of sal- 
vation is of the Lord. Soon, soon, the saints of earth shall be 
saints in light ; their hairs of snowy age shall be crowned with 
perpetual joy and everlasting youth ; their eyes suffused witi 
tears shall be made bdght $w stars, never to be clouded agcdn by 
sorrow ; their hearts that tremble now are to be made joyous 
and fest, and set for ever like pillars in the temple of God. 
Their follies, their burdens, their griefs, their woes, are soon 
to be over ; sin is to be slain, corruption is to be removed, and 
a heaven of spotless purity and of un mingled peace is to be 
theirs for ever. But it nmst still be by grace. As was the 
foundation such must the top-stone be ; that which laid on 
earth the first beginning must lay in heaven the top-most 
stone. As they were redeemed from their filthy conversaticm 



SALVATION OP THE LORD. SOl 

by grace, so they must be redeemed from death and the grave 
by grace too, and they must enter heaven singing 

" Salvation of the Lord alone ; 
Grace is a shoreless sea." 

There may be Arminians hei*e, but they will not be Armin- 
ians there ; they may hei-e say, *' It is of the will of the flesh,** 
but in heaven they shall not think so. Here they may ascribe 
some little to the creature ; but there they shall cast their 
eix>wns at the Redeemer's feet, and acknowledge that he did 
it all. Here they may sometimes look a little at themselves, 
land boast somewhat of their own strength ; but there, "Not 
unto us, nbt unto us," shall be sung with deeped* sincerity and 
with moi'e profound emphasis than they have even sung it 
here below. In heaven, when grace shall have done its work, 
this truth shall stand out in blazing letters of gold, "Salvation 
is of the Lord." 

II. Thus I have tried to expound the gospel. Now shall I 
show you HOW God has hedged this doctrine about. 

Some have said salvation in some cases is the i^esult of natu- 
ral temperament Well, sir, well; God has effectually an- 
swered your argument. You say that some people are saved 
because they are naturally religious and inclined to be good ; 
unfortunately I have never met with any of that class of per- 
sons yet ; but 1 will suppose for a moment that there are such 
people. God has unanswerably met your objection ; foi', strange 
to say, the great number of those who are saveti are just the 
most unlikely people in the world to have been saved, while 
a great number of those who perish were once just the very 
people whom, if natural disposition had any thing to do with 
it, we should have expected to see in heaven. Why, there is 
one here who in his youth was a child of many follies. Oflen 
did his mother weep over him, and cry and groan over her 
son's wanderings ; for what with a fierce high spirit that could 
brook neither bit nor bridle, what with perpetual rebellions 
and ebullitions of hot anger, she said, " My son, ray son, what 
wilt thou be in thy riper yeans? Surely thou wilt dash 
in pieces law and order, and be a disgrace to thy Other's 
name." He grew up ; in youth he was wild and wanton, but, 

9* 



SOS SALVATION OF THE LORD. 

wonder of wonders, on a sadden he became a new man, 
changed, altogelLer changed ; no more like what he was be- 
fore than angels are like lost spirits. He sat at her feet, he 
cheered her heart, and the lost, fiery one became gentle, mild, 
humble as a little child, and obedient to God's commandments. 
You say, wonder of wonders I But there is another here. 
He was a fair youth : when but a child he talked of Jesus ; 
often when his mother had him on her knee he asked her ques- 
tions about heaven ; he was a prodigy, a wonder of piety m 
his youth. As he grew up, the tear rolled down his cheek 
under any sermon ; he could scarcely bear to hear of death 
without a sigh; soi^etimes his mother caught him, as ^e 
thought, in prAyer alone. And what is he now ? He has just 
this very morning come fi'om sin; he has become the debauched 
desperate villain, has gone far into all manner of wicked- 
ness and lust, and sin, and has become more danmably cor- 
rupt than other men could have made him ; only his own evil 
spirit, once confined, has now developed itself; he has learned 
to play the lion in his manhood, as once he played the fox in 
his youth. I do not know whether you have ever met with 
such a case ; but it very frequently is so. I know I can say 
that in my congregation some abandoned wicked fellow has 
had his heart broken, and been led to weep, and has cried to 
God for mercy, and renounced his vile sin ; whilst some fair 
maiden by his side hath heard the same sermon, and if there 
was a tear she brushed it away ; she still continues just what 
she was, " without God and without hope in the world." God 
has taken the base tilings of the world, and lias just picked 
his people out of the very roughest of men, in order that he 
may prove that it is not natural disposition, but that ^' salva- 
tion is of the Lord" alone. 

Well, but some say, it is the minister they hear who converts 
men. Ah I that is a grand idea, full sure. No man but a fool 
would entertain it. I met with a man some time Bgo who as- 
sured me that he knew a minister who had a very large "kmount 
of converting power in him. Speaking of a great evangelist in 
America, he said, *^ That man, sir, has got the greatest quan- 
tity of converting power I ever knew a man to have ; and Mr. 
So-and-so in a neighlr iring town I think is second to him." At 



SALVATION OF THE LOBD. 203 

tliat time this converting power was being exhibited ; two 
hnndred persons were converted by the converting power of 
this second best, and joined to the church in a few months. I 
went to the place some time afterwards — it was in England — 
and T said^ " How do your convei-ts get on ?" " Well," said 
he, ** I can not say much about them." *' How many out of 
those two hundred whom you received in a year ago stand 
fast ?" *' Well," he said, " I am afraid not many of them ; we 
have turned seventy of them out for drunkenness already." 
" Yes," I said, " I thou^t so : that is the end of tke gran<} 
experiment of converting power." If I could convert you all, 
any one else might unconvert you; what any man can do 
another man can undo ; it is only what God does that is abiding. 
No, my brethren ; God has taken good care it shall never be 
said conversion is of man, for usually he blesses those who 
seem to be the most unlikely to. be useful. I do not expect to 
see so many conversions in this place as I had a year ago, 
when I had fer fewer hearers. Do you ask why ? Why, a 
year ago I was abused by every body ; to mention my name 
was to mention the name of the most abominable buffoon that 
lived. The mere utterance of it brought forth oaths and cur- 
sing ; with many men it was a name of contempt, kicked about 
the street as a foot-ball ; but then God gave me souls by hun- 
dreds, who were added to my church, and in one year it was 
my happiness to see not less than a thousand personally who 
had then been converted. I do not expect that now. My 
name is somewhat esteemed now, and the great ones of the 
earth think it no dishonor to sit at my feet ; but this makes me 
fear lest my God should forsake me now that the world es- 
teems me. I would rather be despised and slandered than 
aught else. This assembly that you think so grand and line, 
T would readily part with, if by such a loss I could gain a 
greater blessing. " God has chosen the base things of the 
world ;" and, therefore, I reckon that the more esteemed I 
may be, the worse is my position, so much the less expecta- 
tion shall I have that God will bless me. He hath but his 
" treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power * 
may be of God, and not of man." A poor minister began to 
preach once, aad all the world spoke ill of, him ; but God 



204 SALVATION OF THE LOBD. 

blessed hira. Bj-and-bye they turned ronnd and petted him. 
He was the man — a wonder ! God left him i It has often 
been the same. It is for us to recollect, in all times of popn* 
larity, that " Crucify him, crucify him" follows &at upon the 
heels of " Hosanna," and that the crowd to4ay, if dealt iaith- 
fully with, may turn into the handful of to-morrow ; for men 
love not plain speaking. We should learn to be despised, 
learn to be contemned, learn to be slandered, and then we 
shall learn to be made useful by God. Down on my knees I 
have oftwi fallen, with the hot sweat rising from my brow, 
under some fresh slander poured upon me ; in an agony of 
grief my heart has been well-nigh broken ; till at last I learned 
the art of bearing all and caring for none. And now my grief 
runneth in another line. It is just the opposite. I fear lest 
God should forsake me, to prove that he is the author of sal- 
vation, that it is not in the preacher, that it is not in the crowd, 
that it is not in the attention I can attract, but in God, and in 
God alone. And this thing I hope I can say from my heart : 
if to be made as the mire of the streets again, if to be the 
laughing-stock of fools and the song of the drunkard once 
more will make me more sei-viceable to my Master, and more 
useful to his cause, I will prefer it to all this multitude, or to 
all the applause that man could give. Pray for me, dear 
friends, pray for me, that God would still make me the means 
of the salvation of souls ; for I fear he may say, " I will not 
help that man, lest the world should say he has done it," for 
" salvation is of the Lord," and so it must be, even to the 
world's end. 

III. And now what is, what should be, the influmtce 

OP THIS DOCTRINE UPON MEN ? 

Why, firat, with sinners, this doctrine is a great battering- 
ram against t/ieir pride. I will give you a figure. The sinner 
in his natural estate reminds me of a man who has a strong 
and well-nigh impenetrable castle into which he has fled. 
There is the outer moat ; there is a second moat ; there are 
the high walls ; and then afterward there is the dungeon and 
keep, into which the sinner will retire. Now, the first moat 
that goes round the sinner's trusting place is his good works. 
." Ah !" he says, " I am as good as my neighbor ; twenty shil- 



SALVATION OP THE LORD. 205 

iings in the pound down,, ready money, I have always paid ; 1 
am no sinner ; * I tithe mint and cummin ;' a good respectable 
gentleman I am indeed," Well, when God comes to work 
Avith him, to save him, he sends his army across the tirst moat ; 
and as they go through it, they cry, " Salvation is of the Lord ;" 
and the moat is dried up, for if it be of the Lord, how can it 
be of good works ? But when that is done, he has a second 
intrenchment — ceremonies. " Well," he says, " I will not trust 
in my good works, but I have been baptized, I have been con- 
firmed ; do not I take the sacrament ? That shall be my trust." 
" Over the moat ! Over the moat !" And the soldiers go 
over again, shouting, " Salvation is of the Lord." The second 
moat is dried up ; it is all over with that. Now they come to 
the next strong wall ; the sinner, looking over it, says, " I can 
repent, I can believe, whenever I like ; I will save myself by 
ffepenting and believing." Up come the soldiers of God, his 
great army of conviction, and they batter this wall to the 
ground, crying, " ' Salvation is of the Lord.' Your faith and 
your repentance must all be given you, or else you will neither 
believe noi* repent of sin." And now the castle is taken ; the 
man's hopes are all cut off; he feels that it is not of self; the 
castle of self is overcome, and the great banner upon which 
is written " Salvation is of the Lord" is displayed upon the 
battlements. But is the battle over ? O no ; the sinner has 
retired to the keep, in the center of the castle ; and now he 
changes his tactics. " I can not save myself," says he, " there- 
fore I will despair ; there is no salvation for me." Now this 
second castle is as hard to take as the first, for the f^inner sits 
down and says, "I can't be saved, I must perish." But God 
commands the soldiers to take this castle too, shouting, ** Sal- 
vation is of the Lord ;" though it is not of man, it is of Grod ; 
" he is able to save, even to the uttermost," though you can 
not save yourself. This sword, you see, cuts two ways ; it cuts 
pride down, and then it cleaves the skull of despair. If any 
man say he can save himself, it halve th his pride at once ; and 
if another man say he can not be saved, it dashcth his despair 
to the earth ; for it affirms that he can be saved, seeing, " Sal- 
vation is of the Lord." That is the effect this doctrine has 
upon the sinner : may it have that effect on you ! 



200 SALVATION OP THE LORD. 

Bat what inflacnce has it upon the si^t? Why, it is the 
keystone of all divinity. Iwiil defy you to be heterodox if yoa 
believe this truth. You must be sound iu the fiuth if you have 
learned to spell this sentence — " Salvation is of the Lord ;** 
and if you feel it in your soul you ioiil not be proud; you can 
not be ; you will cast ca ery thing at his feet, ccmfessing that 
you have done nothing, save what he has helped you to do ; 
and therefore the glory must be where the s^vation is. If you 
believe this you %oiU not be distruatfuL You will say, " My 
salvation does not depend on my &ith, but on the Lord ; my 
keeping does not depend on myself but on Ood who keepeth 
me ; my being brought to heaven rests not now in my own 
hands, but in the hands of God ;>' you will, when doubts and 
fears prevail, fold your arms, look upward and say, 

" And now my eye of feifch is dim, ^ 

I trust in Jesus, sin]f or swim." 

If you can keep this in your mind you may altooiys be joyful. 
He can have no cause lor trouble who knows and feels that 
his salvation is of God. Come on, legions of hell ; come on, 
demons of the pit ! 

" He that has helped me bears me through, 
And makes me more than conqueror too." 

Salvation resteth not on this poor arm, else sliould I despsur, 
but on the arm of yon Omnipotent — that arm on which the 
pillars of the heavens do lean. " Whom sliould I fear ? The 
Lord is my strength and my life; of whom shall I be afraid ?" 
And this, may by grace, nerve y(m to work for God. If you 
had to save your neighboi-s you might sit down and do noth- 
ing ; but since "salvation is of the Lord," go on and prosper. 
Go and preach the gospel ; go and tell the gospel everywhere. 
Tell it in your house, tell it in the street, tell it in every Jand 
and every nation ; for it is not of yourself, it is '* of the Lord." 
Why do not our friends go to Ireland to preach the gospel ? 
Ireland is a disgrace to the Protestant church. Why do not 
they go and preach there ? A year or so ago a number of 
our brave ministers went over there to preach ; they did right 
bravely ; they went there, imd they came back again, and that 



SALVATION OF THE LOBD. 207 

18 about the sum total of the glorious expedition against 
Popery. But why coine back again? Because they were 
stoned, good easy men I Do they not think that the gospel 
ever will spread without a few stones? But they would have 
been killed ! Brave martyrs they ! Let them be enrolled in 
the red chronicle. Did the martyrs of old, did the apostles 
shrink from going to any country because they would have 
been killed ? No, they were ready to die : and if half a dozen 
ministers had been killed in Ireland, it would have been the 
finest thing in the world for liberty in future ; for after that 
the people dare not have touched us ; the strong arm of the 
law would have put them down ; we might have gone through 
every village of Ireland afterwards, and been at peace; the 
constabulary would soon have put an end to such infamous mur* 
der ; it would have awakened the Protestantism of England 
to claim the liberty which is our right there as we give it else- 
where. We shall never see any great change till we have 
some men in our ranks who are willing to be martyrs. That 
deep ditch can never be crossed till the bodies of a few of us 
shall fill it up ; and after that it will be easy work to preach 
the gospel there. Our brethren should go there once more. 
They can leave their white cravats at home, and the white 
feather too, and go forth with a brave heart and a bold spirit ; 
and if the people mock and scoff, let them mock and scoff on. 
George Whitefield said, when he preached on Kennington 
Common, where they threw dead cats and rotten eggs at him, 
" This is only the manure of Methodism, the beat thing in the 
world to make it grow ; throw away as fast as you please." 
And when a stone cut him on the forehead, he seemed to 
preach the better fi>r a little blood-letting. O I for such a man 
to dare the mob, and then the mob would not need to be dared. 
Let us go there, recollecting that " salvation is of the Lord," 
and let us in every place and at every time preach God's 
Word, believing that God's Word is more than a match for 
man's sin, and God will yet be master over all the earth. 

My voice fails me again, smd my thoughts too, I was weary 
this morning, when I came into this pulpit, and I am weary 
now. Sometimes I am joyous and glad, and feel in the pul- 
pit as if I could preach for ever ; at other times I feel glad t(> 



208 SALYATION OF THB LOBD. 

close ; but yet with such a text I would that I could have 
finished up with all the might that mortal lip could summon. 
O I to let men know this, that their salvation is of God I 
Swearer, swear not against him m whose hand thy breath is ! 
Despiser, despise not him who can save you or destroy you. 
And thou hypocrite, seek not to deceive him from whom sal- 
vation comes, and who therefore knows right well whether 
thy salvation come from him. 

IV. And now in concluding, let me just tell you what is the 
OBVSRSB OP THIS TRUTH. SalvatioH is of Grod : then damna- 
tion is of man. If any of you are damned, you will have no 
one to blame but yourselves ; if any of you perish, the blame 
will not lie at God's door ; if you are lost and cast away, you 
will have to bear all the blame and all the tortures of 
conscience yourself; you will lie for ever in perdition, and re- 
flect, "I have destroyed myself; I have made a suicide of my 
soul ; I have been my own destroyer ; I can lay no blame to 
God." Remember, if saved, you must be saved by God alone, 
though if lost you have lost yourselves. " Turn ye, turn ye, 
why will ye die, O house of Israel.*^* With my last faltering 
sentence I bid you stop and think. Ah I my hearei^s, my 
hearers ! it is an awful thing to preach to such a mass as this. 
But the other Sunday, as I came down stairs, I was struck 
with a memorable sentence, uttered by one who stood there. 
He said, *' There are 9000 people this morning without excuse 
in the day of judgment." I should like to preach so that 
this always might be said ; and if I can not, O may God have 
mercy on me, for his name's sake ! But now i^emember ! Ye 
have souls; those souls will be damned, or saved. Which 
will it be ? Damned they must be for ever, unless God shall 
save you ; unless Christ shall have mercy upon you, there is 
no hope for you. Down on your knees! Cry to God for 
mercy. Now lift up your heart in prayer to God. May now 
be the very time when you shall be saved. Or ever the next 
drop of blood shall run through your veins, may you find 
peace ! Remember, that peace is to be had now. If you feel 
now your need of it, it is to be had now. And how ? For 
the mere asking for it. "Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, 
and ye shall find." 



SALVATION OF THE LORD. 200 

•* But if your eare rrfuse 

Tbo language of his grace, 
Your hearts grow hard, like stubborn Jews, 
That unbelievmg race. 

The Lord with vengeance drest. 

Shall lift his hand and swear, 
You that despised my promised rest 

Shall have no porticm there." 

O ! that ye may not be despisers, lest ye ** wondei* and per- 
ish !" May ye now fly to Christ, and be accepted in the be- 
loved. It is my last best prayer. May the Lord hear it! 
Amen. 



SERMON XIV. 

REGENERATION. 

** Kxoept a man be bom again, he can not see the kingdom of God." — 
John, ill 3. 

In daily life our thoughts are most occupied with things 
that are most necessary for our existence. No one murmured 
that the subject of the price of bread was frequently on the 
lips of men at a time of scarcity, because they felt that the 
subject was one of vital importance to the mass of the popula- 
tion, and therefore they murmured not, though they listened 
to continual declamatory speeches, and read perpetual articles 
in the newspapers concerning it. I must offer the same ex- 
cuse, then, for bringing before you this morning the subject 
of regeneration. It is one of absolute and vital importance ; 
it is the hinge of the gospel ; it is the point upon which most 
Christians are agreed, yea, all who are Christians in sincerity 
and truth. It is a subject which lies at the very basis of sal- 
vation. It is the very groundwork of our hopes for heaven ; 
and as we ought to be very careful of the basement of our 
structure, so should we be very diligent to take heed that we 
are really born again, and that we have made sure work of it 
for eternity. There are many who fancy they are bom again 
who are not. It well becomes us, then, frequently to exam- 
ine ourselves ; and it is the minister's duty to brbg forward 
those subjects which lead to self-examination, and have a tend- 
ency to search the heart and try the reins of the children of 
men. - . • 

To proceed at once, I shall first make some remarks upon 
the new birth ; secondly, I shall note what is meant by not be- 
ing able to see the kingdom of God if we are not bom again ; 
then I shall go further on to note why it is that *' except we 



BBGENEBATIOK. 211 

are horn again we can not see the kingdom of God ;^^ and 
then expostulate with men as God's ambassador before I close. 
I. First, then, the matter op regeneration. In endeav- 
onng to explain it, I must have you notice, first of all, the 
figure that is employed. It is said a man must be bom again. 
I can not illustrate this better than by supposing a case. 
Suppose that in England there should be a law passed, that 
admission to royal courts, preference in office, and any privi- 
leges that might belong to the nation, could only be given to 
persons who were bora in England — suppose that birth in this 
land was made a sine qud non^ and it was definitely declared 
that whatever men might do or be, unless they were native 
born subjects of England they could not enter into her maj- 
esty's presence, and could enjoy none of the emoluments or 
offices of the state, nor any of the privileges of citizens. I 
think if you suppose such a case I shall be able to illustrate 
the difference between any changes and reforms that men 
make in themselves and the real work of being born again. 
We will suppose, then, that some man — a red Indian, for in- 
stance — should come to this country, and should endeavor to 
obtain the privileges of citizenship, well knowing that the rule 
is absolute and can not be altered, that a man must be a born 
subject, or else he can not enjoy them. Suppose he says, " I 
win change my name^ I will take up the name of an English- 
man ; I have been called by my high-soundmg title among the 
Sioux ; I have been called the son of the Great Westwind, or 
some such name ; but I will take an English name, I will be 
called a Christian man, an English subject." Will that admit 
him ? You see him coming to the palace gates and asking for 
admission. He says, " I have taken an English name." " But 
are you an Englishman born and bred ?" " I am not," says 
he. " Then the gates must be shut against you, for the law is 
absolute ; and though you may have the name of even the 
royal family itself upon you, yet because you have not been 
born here you must be shut out." That illustration will apply 
to all of us who are here present. At least, nearly the whole 
of us bear the professing Christian name ; livi«g in England, 
you would think it a disgrace to you if you were not called 
Chiistian. You are not heathen, you are not infidel ; you are 



212 UEQKHmSUTlON. 

neither Mohammedans nor Jews ; you think that the name, 
Christian, is a creditable one to you, and you have taken it. 
Be ye qoite assured that the name of a Christian is not the 
nature of a Christian, and that your being bom in a Christian 
land, and being recognized as professing the Christian religion 
is of no avail whatever, unless there be something more added 
to it — ^the being bom again as a subject of Jesus Christ. 

^^ But," says this red Indian, *^ I am prepared to renounce 
my dressj and to become an Englishman in fiishion ; in &dt, I 
will go to the very top of the fashion ; you shall not see me 
in any thing differing from the accepted style of the present 
day. May I not, when I am arrayed in court dress, and have 
decorated myself as etiquette demands, come in before h^* 
majesty ? See, I'll doff this plume, I will not shake this tom- 
ahawk, I renounce these garments. The moccasin I cast away 
for ever ; I am an Englishman in dress, as well as name." He 
comes to the gate, dressed out like one of our own country- 
men ; but the gates are still shut in his face, because the law 
required that he must be bom in the country ; and without 
that, whatever his dress might be, he could not enter the pal- 
ace. So how many there are of you, who do not barely take 
the Christian name upon you, but have adopted Christian 
manners ; you go to your churches and your chapels, you at- 
tend the house of Ood, you take care that there is some form 
of religion observed in your family ; your children are not left 
without hearing the name of Jesus ! So far so good ; God 
forbid that I should say a word against it ! But remember, 
it is bad because you do not go further. All this is of no 
avail whatever for admitting you into the kingdom of heav^i, ^ 
unless this also is complied with — ^the being bom again. O ! 
dress yourselves never so grandly with the habiliments of god- 
liness ; put the chaplet of benevolence upon your brow, and 
gird your loins with integrity ; put on your feet the shoes of 
perseverance, and walk through the earth an honest and up- 
right man ; yet, remember, unless you are born again, " that 
which is of the flesh is flesh," and you, not having the opera- 
tions of the Spirit in you, still have heaven's gates shut 
against you, because you are not born again. * 

"Well," but says the Indian, "I will not only adopt the 



BBGENEBATIOK. 213 

dress, but I will learn the language; I will put away my 
brogue and my language that I once spoke, in the wild prairie 
or in the woods, far away from my lips. I shall not talk of 
the Shu-Shuh-gah, and of the strange names wherewith I have 
called ray wild fowl and my deer, but I will speak as you 
speak, and act as you act ; I will not only have your dress, 
but precisely your manners, I will talk just in the same fashion, 
I will adopt your brogue, I wiU take care that it shall be 
grammatically correct ; will you not then«admit me ? I have 
become thoroughly Englishized ; may I not then be received ?'* 
** No,'* says the keeper of the door, " there is no admittance ; 
for except a man be bom in this country, he can not be ad- 
mitted.'* So with some of you ; you talk just like Christians. 
Perhaps you have a little too much cant about you ; you have 
begun so strictly to imitate what you think to be a godly man, 
that you go a little beyond the mark, and you gloss it so much 
that we are able to detect the counterfeit. Still you pass cur- 
rent among most men as being a right down sort of Christian 
man. You have studied biographies, and somelittes you tell 
long yams about divine experience ; you have borrowed them 
from the biographies of good men ; you have been with Chris- 
tians, and know how to tJ^k as they do ; you have caught a 
puritanical twang, perhaps ; you go through the world just 
like professors ; and if you were to be observed, no one would 
detect you. You are a member of the church ; you have 
been baptized ; you take the Lord's Supper ; perhaps you are 
a deacon, or an elder ; you pass the sacramental cup round ; 
you are just all that a Christian can be, except that you are 
without a Christian heart. You are whitewashed sepulchres, 
still full of rottenness within, though garnished fairly on the 
outside. Well, take heed, take heed ! It is an astonishing 
thing, how near the painter can go to the expression of life, 
and yet the canras is dead and motionless ; and it is equally 
astonishing how near a man may go to a Christian, and yet, 
through not being bom again, the absolute rule shuts him out 
of heaven ; and with all his profession, with all the trappings 
of his professed godliness, and with all the gorgeous plumes 
of experience, yet must he be borne away from heaven's gates. 
You are uncharitable Mr. Spurgeon. I do not care what 



214 lOaEVKRATIOK. 

yon saj about that; I never wish to be more charitable than 
Christ. I did not say this; Christ said it. If you have any 
quarrel with him, settle it there ; I am not the maker of this 
tmth, bat simply the speaker of it. I find it written, *^ Except 
a man be bom again, he can not see the kingdom of God." If 
your footman should go to the door, and deliver your message 
correctly, the man at the door might abuse him never so 
much, but the footman would say, " Sir, do not abuse me, I 
can not help it ; I can only tell you what my master told me. 
I am not the originator of it." So if you think me uncharit- 
able, remember yOu do not accuse me, you accuse Christ ; you 
are not finding ikult with the messenger, you are finding &u}t 
with the message ; Christ has said it — " Except a man be bom 
again." I can not dispute with you, and shsdl not try. ^ That 
is simply God's Word. Reject it at your peril. Believe it 
and receive it, I entreat you, because it comes from the lips of 
the Most High. 

But now note the manner in which this regeneration is ob- 
tained, I tlnnk I have none here so profoundly stupid as to 
be Puseyites. I can scarcely believe that I have been the 
means of attracting one person here, so utterly devoid of every 
remnant of brain, as to believe the doctrine of b£4>tismal regen* 
era|;ion. Yet I must just hint at it. There be some who teach 
that by a few drops of water sprinkled on An infant's brow the 
infant becomes regenerate. Well, granted. And now I will 
find out your regenerate ones twenty years afterward. The 
champion of the prize ring is a regenerated man. O ! yes, he 
was regenerated, because in infancy he was baptized ; and, 
therefore, if all inputs in baptism are regenerated, the prize- 
fighter is a regenerated mad. Take hold of him and receive 
him as your brother in the Lord. Do you hear tha^t man 
swearing and blaspheming God ? He is regenerate ; believe 
me, he is regenerate ; the priest put a few drops of water on 
his brow, and he is a regenerated man. Do you see the 
drunkard reeling down the street, the pest of the neighbor- 
hood, fighting every body, and beating his wife, worse than 
the brute. Well, he is regenerate, he is one of those Pusey- 
ite's regenerates — O ! goodly regenerate I Mark you the 
crowd assembled in the streets I The gallows is erected, 



BBGENBRATION. 215 

Palmer is about to be executed ; the mim wbose name should 
be execrated through all eternity for his villainy I Here is 
one of the Puseyite's regenerates. Yes, he is regenerate be- 
cause he was baptized in infancy ; regenerate, while he mixes 
his strychnine; regenerate while he administers his poison 
slowly, that he may cause death, and infinite pain, all the while 
he is causing it. Regenerate, forsooth 1 If that be regenera- 
tion, such regeneration is not worth having ; if that be the 
thing that makes us free of the kingdom of heaven, venly, the 
gospel is indeed a licentious gospel ; we can say nothing about 
it. If that be the gospel, that all such men are regenerate 
and will be saved, we can only say, that it would be the duty 
of every man in the woild to move that gospel right away, 
because it is so inconsistent with the commonest principles of 
moraHty, that it could not possibly be of God, but of the 
devil. 

But some say all are regenerate when they are baptized. 
Well,-if you think so, stick to your own thoughts ; I can not 
help it. Simon Magus was certainly one exception ; he was 
baptized on a profession of his faith ; but so far from being re- 
generated by his baptism, we find Paul saying, " I perceive 
that thou art in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of in- 
iquity." And yet he was one of those regenerates, because he 
had been baptized. Ah ! that doctnne only needs to bo 
stated to sensible men, and they will at once reject it. Gen- 
tlemen that are fond of a filagree religion, and like ornament 
and show ; gentlemen of the high Beau Brummel school will 
very likely prefer this religion, because they have cultivated 
their taste at the expense of their brain, and have forgotten 
that what is consistent with the sound judgment of a man can 
not be consistent with the Word of God. So much for the 
first point. 

Neither is a man regenerated, we say, in the next place, hy 
his own exertions, A man may reform himself very much, 
and that is well and good ; let all do that. A man may cast 
away many vices, forsake many lusts in which he indulged, and 
conquer evil habits ; but no man in the world can make him- 
self to be born in God ; though he should struggle never so 
much, he could never accomplish what is beyond his power. 



fit mBOSIfXRATIOH. 

And, mark you, if he conid make himself to be born again, 
still he would not enter heaven, because there is another point 
in the condition which he would have violated — ^^ unless a 
man be bom of the Spirit^ he can not see the kingdom of 
6od.^ So that the best exertions of the flesh do not reach 
this high point, the being bom again of the Spirit of God. 

And now we mustwiy, that regeneration conssts in this: 
God the Holy Spirit, in a supernatural manner — mark, by the 
word supernatural I mean just what it strictly means ; super- 
natural, more than natural — works upon the hearts of men, 
and they by the operations of the divine Spirit become regen- 
erate men ; but without the Spirit they never can be regener- 
ated. And unless God the Holy Spirit, who " worketh in us 
to will and to do," should operate upon the will and the con- 
science, regeneration is an absolute imposdbility, and there- 
fore so is salvation. " What I" says one, " do you mean to 
say that God absolutely interposes in the salvation of every 
roan to make him regenerate V^ I do indeed ; in the salvation 
of every person there is an actual putting forth of the divine 
power, whereby the dead sinner is quickened, the unwilling 
sinner is made willing, the desperately hard sinner has his 
conscience made tender ; and he who rejected God and de- 
spised Christ, is brought to cast himself down at the feet of 
Jesus. This is called &natical doctrine, mayhap; that we 
can not help ; it is scriptural doctrine, that is enough for us. 
" Except a man be bora of the Spirit he can not see the king- 
dom of God ; that which is bom of the flesh is flesh, and that 
which is bom of the Spirit is spirit." If you like it not, quar- 
rel with my Master, not with roe ; I do but simply declare his 
own rev^ation, that there must be in your heart soraetbing 
more than you can ever work there. There must be a divine 
operation ; call it a miraculous operation, if you please ; it is 
in some sense so. There must be a divine interposition, a 
divine working, a divine influence^ or else, do what you may, 
without that you perish, and are undone ; "for except a man 
be born again, he can not see the kingdom of God." The 
change is radical ; it gives us new natures, makes us love what 
we hated and hate what we loved, sets us in a new road ; 
makes our habits diflerent, our thonghts different, makes us 



BEOKNSBATION. 217 

different in private, and different in public. So that being in 
Christ it is fulfilled : ^^ If apy man be in Christ he is a new- 
creature ; old things are passed away, behold all things are 
become new." 

II. And now I must come to the second point. I trust I have 
explained regeneration, so that all may see what it is. Now 

WHAT DOES THE EXPRESSION, " SSEXNG THE KIl^GDOK OF GOD," 

MEAN ? It means two things. To see the kingdom of God on 
earth is to be a member of the mystical church^t is to enjoy 
the liberty and privileges of the child of God. To see the 
kingdom of heaven means to have power in prayer, to have 
communion with Christ, to have fellowship with the Holy 
Ghost ; and to bring forth and produce all those joyous and 
blessed fruits which are the effect of regeneration. In a 
higher sense, " to see the kingdom of God," means to be ad- 
mitted into heaven. Except a man be bom again, he can not 
know about heavenly things on earth, and he can not enjoy 
heavenly blessings for ever — " he can not see the kingdom of 
God." 

III. I think I may just pass over the second point without 
remark, and proceed to notice, in the third place, why it is 

THAT " unless A MAN BE BORN AGAIN, HE CAN NOT SEE THE 

KINGDOM OF GoD." And I will confine my remarks to the 
kingdom of God in the world to come. 

Why, he can not see the kingdom of God, because he would 
be out o/place in heaven, A man that is not born again could 
'not enjoy heaven. There is an actual impossibility in his na- 
ture, which prevents him from enjoying any of the bliss of 
Paradise. Tou thipk, mayhap, that heaven consists in those 
walls of jewels, in those pearly gates, and gates ^f gold ; not 
so, that is the habitation of heaven. Heaven dwells there, 
but that is not heaven. Heaven is a state that is made here, 
that is made in the heart ; made by God's Spirit within us, 
and unless God the Spirit has renewed us, and caused us to be 
bom again, we can not enjoy the things of heaven. Why, it 
is a physical impossibility that ever a swine should deliver a 
lecture on astronomy ; every man will clearly perceive that it 
must be impossible that a snail should build a city ; and there 
is just as much impossibility that a sinner unmended, should 

10 



21S BBOUfKIUnOV. 

enjoy heaven. Why, there wonld be noti.ing there for him to 
enjoy ; if he could be put into the place where heaven is, he 
would be miserable ; he would cry, " Let me away, let me 
away ; let me away from this miserable place !" I appeal to 
yourselves ; a sermon is too long for you very often ; the 
singing of God's praises is dull, dry work ; you think that 
going up to God's house is very tedious. What will you do 
where they praise God day without night ? If just a short 
discourse here is very wearying, what WiU you think of the 
eternal talkings of the redeemed through all ages of the won- 
ders of redeeming love ? If the company of the righteous k 
very irksome to you, what will be their company throughout 
eternity? I think many of you are free to confess that psdm- 
singing is not a bit to your taste, that yoi care naught about 
any spiritual things ; give you your bot*le of wine, and set 
you down at your ease, that is heaven for you I Well, there 
is no such a heaven yet made ; and there/ore there is no hea- 
ven for you. The only heaven there is, is the heaven of spir- 
itual men, the heaven of praise, the heaven 6f delight in God, 
the heaven of acceptance in the beloved, the heaven of com- 
munion with Christ. Now, you do not understand any thing 
about this ; you could not enjoy it if you irere to have it ; you 
have not the capabilities for doing so. You, yourselves, from 
the very fact of your not being bom again, are your own bar- 
rier to heaven, and if God were to open the gate wide, and 
say, " Come in," you could not enjoy heaven, if you were ad- 
mitted ; for unless a man be born again, there is an impossi- 
bility, a moral impossibility, of his seeing 'he kingdom of God. 
Suppose there are some persons here who are entirely deaf, 
who have never heard sounds ; well, I say they can not hear 
singing. Do I when I say it, say a crue' thing ? It is their 
own disability that prevents them. So when God says you 
can not see the kingdom of heaven, he liieans that it is your 
own disability for the enjoyment of heaven, that will prevent 
you ever entering there. 

But there are some other reasons ; thei s are reasons why 

" Those holy gates for ever r ar 
Pollution, sin, and shame." 



BBGENBBATIOIf. 219 

There are ^reasons, besides those in yourselves, why you can 
not see the kingdom of God, unless you are born again. Ask 
yon spirits before the throne: "Angels, principalities, and 
powers, wo«ld ye be willing that men who love not God, who 
believe not in Christ, who have not been born again, should 
dwell here ?" I see them, as they look down upon us, and 
hear them answenng, " No ! Once we fought the dragon, 
and expelled him because he tempted us to sin ; we njust not 
and we will not, have the wicked here. These alabaster walls 
must not be soiled with black and lustful fingers ; the white 
pavement of heaven must not be stained and rendered filthy 
by the unholy feet of ungodly men. No !" I see a thousand 
spears bristling, and the fiery faces of a myriad seraphs thrust 
over the walls of Paradise. " No, while these arms have 
strength, and these wings have power, no sin shall ever entei 
here." I address myself moreover to the saints in heaven, re- 
deemed by sovereign grace : " Children of God, are ye willing 
that the wicked should enter heaven as they are, without being 
born again ? Ye love men, say, say, say, are ye willing that 
they should be admitted as they are ?" I see Lot rise up, and 
he cries, " Admit them into heaven ! No ! What ! must I be 
vexed with the conversation of Sodomites again, as once I was?"- 
I see Abraham ; and he comes forward, and he says, " No ; 1 
can not have them here. I had enough of them while I wa? 
with them on earth — their jests and jeers, their silly talkings, 
their vain conversation, vexed and grieved us. We want 
them not here." And, heavenly though they be, and loving 
as their spirits are, yet there is not a saint in heaven who 
would not resent with the utmost indignation the approach of 
any one of you to the gates of paradise, if you are still unholy, 
and have not been born again. 

But all that were nothing. We might perhaps scale the 
ramparts of heaven, if they were only protected by angels, 
and burst the gates of paradise open, if only the saints de- 
fended them. But there is another reason than that — God 
has said it himself— " Except a man be bom again, he can 
not see the kingdom of God." What sinner, wilt thou scale 
the battlements of paradise when God is ready to thrust thee 
down to hell ? Wilt thou with impudent face brazen him out ? 



220 SBQEIfKKATIOV. 

God has said it, God hath said it, with a voice ^i thunder, 
" Ye shall not see the kingdom of heaven." Can ye wrestle 
with the Almighty ? Can ye overthrow Omnipotence ? Can 
ye grapple with the Most High ? Worm of th^dust! canst 
thou overcome thy Maker ? Trembling insect of an hour, 
shaken by the lightnings when far overhead they flash £ir 
athwart the sky, wilt thou dare the hand of God ? Wilt thou 
venture to dety him to his face ? Ah ! he would laugh sA 
thee. As the snow roelteth before the sun, as wax runneth at 
the fierceness of the fire, so wouldst thou, if his fury should 
once lay hold of thee. Think not that thou canst overcome 
him. He has sealed the gate of Paradise against thee, and 
there is no entrance. The God of justice says, "I will not 
reward the wicked with the righteous ; I will not suffer my 
goodly, godly Paradise to be stained by wicked ungodly men. 
If they turn 1 will have mercy upon them ; but if they turn 
not, as I live, I will rend them in pieces, and there shall be 
none to deliver." Now, sinner, canst thou brazen it out 
against him! Wilt thou rush upon the thick bosses of Jeho- 
vah's bucklers ? Wilt thou try to scale his heaven when his 
arrow is stringed upon the bow to reach thine heart? What! 
when the glittering sword is at thy neck and ready to slay 
thee ? Wilt thou endeavor to strive agamst thy Maker ? No 
potsherd, no ; contend with thy fellow potsherd. Go, crawl- 
ing grasshopper; go, fight with thy brothers ; strive with them, 
but come not against the Almighty. He hath said it, and you 
never shall, you never shall enter heaven, unless you are bom 
again. Again, I say, quarrel not with me ; I have but de- 
livered my Master's message. Take it, disbelieve it if you 
dare ; but if you believe it, rail not at me, for it is God'fl mes- 
sage, and I speak in love to your soul, lest, lacking it, you 
should perish in the dark, and walk blindfold to your ever- 
lasting perdition. 

IV. Now, my friends, a littlb expostulation with you ; 
and then farewell. I hear one man say, " Well, well, well, I 
see it. J will hope that 1 shall be bom again after 1 am 
dead,'*'* O, sir, believe me, you will be a miserable fool for 
your pains. When men die their state is fixed. 



begensbahon. 221 

" Fixed as their everlasting state, 
Could they repent, 'tis now too late." 

Our life is like that wax melting in the flame ; death puts its 
stamp on it, and then it cools, and the impress never can be 
changed. You to day are like the buniing metal running forth 
from the cauldron in the mold; death cools you in your 
mold, and you are cast in that shape throughout eternity. 
The voice of doom crieth over the dead, " He that is holy let 
him be holy still ; he that is unjust let him be unjust still ; he 
that is filthy, let him be filthy still." The damned are lost for 
ever ; they can not be born again ; they go on cursing, ever 
being cursed ; ever fighting against God, and ever being tram- 
pled beneath his feet ; they go on ever mocking, ever being 
laughed at for their mockery ; ever rebelling and ever being 
tortured with the whips of conscience, because they are ever 
sinning. They can not be regenerated uecause they are 
dead. 

" Well," says another, " / will take care that I am regen- 
erated first before Idiey Sir, I repeat again, thou art a fool 
in talking thus ; how knowest thou that thou shalt live ? Hast 
thou taken a lease of thy life, as thou hast of thy house ? 
Canst thou insure the breath within thy nostrils ? Canst thou 
say in certainty that another ray of light shall ever reach thine 
eye ? Canst thou be sure that, as thine heart is beating a 
funeral march to the grave, thou wilt not soon beat the last 
note ; and so thou shalt die where thou standest or sittest 
now ? O, man ! if thy bones were h'on, and thy sinews brass, 
and thy lungs steel, then mightest thou say, " I shall live." 
But thou art made of dust ; thou art like the flower of the 
field ; thou mayest die now. Lo ! I see death standing yon- 
der, moving to and fi:o the stone of time upon his scythe, to 
sharpen it ; to-day, to-day, for some of you he graspd the 
scythe — and away, away, he mows the fields, and you fall one 
by one. Tou must not, and you can «ot live. Gk)d carries us 
away as a flood, like a ship in a whirlpool ; like the log in a 
current, dashed onward to the cataract. There is no stopping 
any one of us ; we are all dying now ! and yet you say you 
will be regenerated ere you die ! Ay sirs, but are you regen- 
erated now ? F Dr if not, it may be too late to hope for to- 



222 mBOXKBRATIOH. 

morrow. To-morrow you may be in heU, sealed up for ever 
by adamantine destiny, which never can be moved. 

"Well," cries another, ^'' I do not care much about it; for 
I see very little in being shut out of Paradise." Ah, sir, it is 
because thou dost not understand it. Thou smilest at it now ; 
but there will be a day when thy conscience will be tender, 
when thy memory will be strong, when thy judgment will be 
enlightened, and when thou wilt think very differently from 
what thou dost now. Sinners in hell are not the fools they are 
on earth ; in hell they do not laugh at everlasting burnings ; 
in the pit they do not despise tlu$ words " eternal fire." The 
worm that never dieth, when it is gnawing, gnaws out all joke 
and laughter ; you may despise God now, and despise me now, 
for what I say, but death will change your note. O, my 
hearers, if that were all, I would be willing. Tou may despise 
me, yes, you may ; but O ! I beseech you, do not despise your- 
selves ; O I be not so fool-hardy as to go whistling to hell, and 
laughing to the pit ; for when you are there, sirs, you will find 
it a different thing from what you dream it to be now. When 
you see the gates of Paradise shut against you, you will find it 
to be a more important matter than you judge of now. You 
came to hear me preach to-day, as you would have gone to the 
opera or play-house ; you thought I should amuse you. Ah I 
that is not my aim, God is my witness, I came here solemnly 
in earnest, to wash my hands of your blood. If you are 
damned, any one of you, it shall not be because I did not warn 
you. Men and women, if ye perish, my hands are washed in 
innocency ; I have told you of your doom. I again cry, re- 
pent, repent, repent, for " unless ye repent ye shall all likewise 
perish." I came here determined this mommg, if I must use 
rough words, to use them ; to speak right on against men, and 
for men too ; for the things we say against you now are really 
for your good. We do but warn you, lest you perish. But ah ! 
I hear one of you saying,* " I do not understand this mystery ; 
pray explain it to me." Fool, fool, that thou art ; do you see 
that fire ? We are startled up from our beds, the light is at 
the window ; we rush down stairs ; people are hurrying to and 
fro ; the street is trampled thick with crowds : they are rush- 
ing toward the house, which is in a bnrst of flame. The fire- 



BBGENBBATIOir. 223 

men are at their work ; a stream of water is pouring upon the 
house ; but hark ye I hark ye ! there is a man up stairs ; there 
is a man in the top r'>om ; there is just time for him to escape, 
and barely. A shout is raised — " Aho ! fire I fire I fire I aho !'* 
— ^but the man does not make his appearance at the window. 
See, the ladder is ]>laced against the walls ; it is up to the 
window sill — a strong hand dashes in the casement I What is 
the man after, all tl e while? What I is he tied down in his 
bed ? Is he a cripple ? Has some fiend got hold of him, and 
nailed him to the floor ? No, no, no ; he feels the boards get- 
ting hot beneath hw feet, the smoke is stifling him, the flame 
is burning all around, he knows there is but one way of escape, 
by that ladder I What is he doing? He is sitting down — 
no, you can not believe me — he is sitting down and sayings 
" The origin of this fire is very mysterious ; I wonder how it 
is to be discovered ; how shall we understand it ?" Why, 
you laugh at him ! Tou are laughing at yourselves. Tou are 
seeking to have this question and that question answered, 
when your soul is ii* peril of eternal life ! O I when you are 
saved, it will be time then to ask questions ; but while you are 
now in the burning house, and in danger of destruction, it is 
not your time to be puzzling yourselves about free will, fixed 
fate, predestination absolute. All these questions are good 
and well enough afterward for those that are saved. Let the 
man on shore try to find out the cause of the storm ; your only 
business now is to ask, " What must t do to be saved ? And 
how can I escape from the great damnation that awaiteth 
me?" 

But ah ! my friends, I can not speak as I wish. I think I 
feel, this morning, something like Dante, when he wrote his 
" H Inferno?'^ Men said of him that he had been in hell ; he 
looked like it. He had thought of it so long, that they said, 
" He has been in h'^11," he spoke with such an awful earnest- 
ness. Ah ! if I could, I would speak like that too. It is only 
a few days more, and I shall meet you face to face ; I can look 
over the lapse of a few years, when you and I shall stand face 
to face before God's bar. " Watchman, watchman," saith a 
voice, " didst thou warn them ? didst thou warn them ?" Will 
any of you then say I did not ? No, even the most abandoned 



224 XB9XHXEATIOH. 



of yoQ will, at that day, say, ^* We laughed, we scoffed at it, 
we cared not ibr it ; bat, O Lord, we are obliged to speak the 
tmth ; the man was in eameat aboat it ; he told us of our 
doom, and be ii dear.'' Will yoa say so ? I know yoa will. 
Bnt yet this one remark — to be oast oat of heaven is an 
awfol thing. Some of yoa have parents there ; you have dear 
friends there; they grasped yoar hand in death, and said, 
" Farewell, until we meet you.'* But if you never see the 
kingdom of God, you can never see them agidn. '^My 
mother," says one, '^ sleeps in the graveyard ; I often go to 
the tomb and put some flowers upon it, in remembrance of her 
who nursed me ; but must I never see her again ?" No, never 
again ; no, never, unless you are bom again. Mothers, you 
have had infants that have gone to heaven ; you would like to 
see your family all around the throne ; but you will never see 
your children more, unless you are bom again. Will you bid 
adieu this day to the immortal ? Will you say farewell this 
hour to your glorified friends in Paradise ? You must say so, 
or else be converted. You must fly to Christ, and trust in 
him, and his Spirit must renew you, or else you must look up 
to heaven, and say, ^' Choir of the blest I I shall never hear 
you sing ; parents of my youth, guardians of my infancy, I love 
you, but between you and myself there is a great gulf fixed ; 
I am cast away, and you are saved." O, I beseech you, think 
on these matters ; and when you go away, let it not be to for- 
get what I have said. If you are at all impressed this morn- 
ing, put not away the impression ; it may be your last warn- 
ing ; it will be a sorrowful thing to be lost with the notes of 
the gospel in your ears, and to perish under the ministry of 
tmth. 



SERMON Xy. 
SPIEITUAL RESUREECTION. 

^' And yoa halb lie quickened, wlio wera dead in treepBBflea and gioa*' — 

It might naturally be expected that I should have selected 
the topic of the restirrectioti on what is uHually called the 
Easter Sabbath. I shall not do so ; for although 1 have read 
portions which refer to that glorious subject, I have had 
pressed on my mind a subject whicli is not the reaurret^tioii of 
Christj but which is in some mea^sure counected with it — tlie 
resurrection of lost and ruined man by the Spirit of God in 
this Hfe. 

The apostle ia here speaking, you will observe, of tlie church 
at Ephesus, and, indeed, of all those who were chosen in Clirist 
Jesus, accepted in him^ and redeemed with bis blood ; and he 
says of them, '' You biith he quickened, who were dead in 
trespasses and sins." 

What a solemn sight is presented to us by a dead body ! 
When last eve»ing trying to realise the thought, it utterly 
overcame me. The thought ia overwliglming, that soon this 
body of mine must be a carnival for i^'ms ; that in and out 
of these plaoea, where my eyes are glistening, foul things, the 
offspring of loathsomeness, shall crawl ; that this body must be 
stretched in still, cold, abject, passive death, munt then be- 
come a noxioiia, nauseous thing, caat out even by those that 
loved me, who will say, *' Bury my dead out of my sight,'' 
Perhaps you can scarcely^ in the moment I can afford you^ ap- 
propriate the idea to yourselves. Does it not seem a strange 
thing, that you, who liave walked to this phuse this morning, 
shall he carried to your graves ; that the eyes with which you 
now behold me ahlU aoou be glazed in everlasting darkness ; 
* 10* 



J 



226 SPIBITUAL BVSUBRBCnON. 

that the tongues, which jast now moved in song, shall soon 
be silent lamps of clay ; and that your strong and stalwart 
frame, now standing in this place, will soon be nnable to move 
a muscle, and become a loathsome thing, the brother of the 
worm and the sbter of corruption ? You can scarcely get 
hold of the idea ; death doth such awful work with us, it is 
such a Vandal with this mortal fabric, it so rendeth to pieces 
this fair thing that Qod hath builded up, that we can scarcely 
bear to contemplate his works of ruin. 

Now, endeavor, as well as you can, fo get the idea of a 
corpse, and when you have so done, please to understand, 
that that is the metaphor employed in my text to set forth 
the condition of your soul by nature. Just as the body is 
dead, incapable, unable, unfeeling, and soon about to become 
corrupt and putrid, so are we if we be unquickened by divine 
grace ; dead . in trespasses and sins, having within us death, 
which is capable of developing itself in worse and worse stages 
of sin and wickedness, until all of us here, left by God's grace, 
should become loathsome beings ; loathsome through sin and 
wickedness, even as the corpse through natural decay. Un- 
derstand, that the doctrine of the holy Scripture is, that man 
by nature, since the fall, is dead ; he is a corrupt and ruined 
thing ; in a spiritual sense, utterly and entirely dead. And if 
any of us shall come to spiritual life, it must be by the quick- 
ening of God*s Spirit, vouchsafed to us sovereignly through 
the good will of God the Father, not for any merits of our 
own, but entirely of his own abounding and infinite grace. 

Now, this momin|^I trust I shall not be tedious ; I shall 
endeavor to make the subject as interesting as possible, and 
also endeavor to be brief. The general doctrine of this 
morning is, that every man that is born into the world is dead 
spiritually, and that spiritual life must be given by the Holy 
Spirit, and can be obtained from no other source. That gene- 
ral doctrine, I shall illustrate in rather a singular way. You 
remember that our Saviour raised three dead persons ; I do 
not find that during his lifetime he caused more than three 
resurrections. The first was the young maiden, the daughter 
of JairuSy who, when she lay on her bed dead, rose up to life 
at the single utterance of Christ, ^\TdUtha cumi t^"* The 



SPIBITUAL BESUBBECnOK. 227 

second was the case of the widov^a soUj who was on his bier, 
about to be carried to his tomb ; and Jesus raised him up to life 
by saying, " Young man, I say unto thee, arise." The third, 
and most memorable case, was that of Lazarus^ who was not 
on his bed, nor on his bier, but in his tomb, ay, and corrupt too ; 
but notwithstanding that, the Lord Jesus Chiist, by the voice 
of his omnipotence, crying, ^'Lazarus come forth," brought 
him out of the tomb. 

I shall use these three &cts as illustrations of the different 
states of men^ though they be all thoroughly dead ; secondly, 
as illustrations of the different means of grace used for raising 
them^ though, after aU, the same great agency is employed ; 
and, in the third place, as illustrations of the after expetnence 
of quickened men; for though that to a great degree is the 
same, yet there are some points of difference. 

I. I shall begin by noticing, then, first of all, the conditioiit 
OF MEN BY NATUBB. Men by nature are all dead. There is 
Jairus's daughter ; she lies on her bed ; she seems as if she 
were alive ; her mother has scarce ceased to kiss her brow, her 
hand is still in her father's loving grasp, and he can scarcely 
think that she is dead ; but dead she is, as thoroughly dead 
as she ever can be. Next comes the case of the young 
man brought out of his grave ; he is more than dead, he has 
begun to be corrupt, the signs of decay are upon his face, and 
they are carrying him to his tomb ; yet though there are more 
manifestations of death about him, he is no more dead than 
the other. He is just as dead ; they are both dead, and death 
really knows of no degrees. The thirdjptse goes further still 
in the manifestation of death ; for it is th*e case of which Martha, 
using strong words, said, " Lord, by this time he stinketh ; for 
he hath been dead four days." And yet, mark you, the daugh- 
ter of Jairus was as dead as Lazarus ; though the manifesta- 
tion of death was not so complete in her case. All were dead 
alike. I have in my congregation some blessed beings, fair to 
look upon; fair, I mean, in their character, as well as their 
outward appearance ; they have about them every thing that 
is good and lovely ; but mark this, if they -are unregenerate 
they are dead still. That girl, dead in the room, upon her 
bed, had little about her that could show her death. Not yet 



228 SPIBmiAL KXBDA&BCriON. 

had the loving finger olosed the eyelid ; ther^ seemed to be 
a light still Imgering in her eye ; like a lily just nipped o^ d^ 
was as &ir as life itsel£ The worm had not yet began to gnaw 
her check, the flush had not yet &ded from her fitoe; she 
seemed well-nigh alive. And so is it with some I have here. 
Ye have all that heart could wish for, except tl>e ooe thing 
needful ; ye have all things save love to the Saviour. Ye are 
not yet united to him by a living &ith. Ah I then, I grieve to 
say it, ye are dead ! ye are dead ! As much dead as the wor^ 
of men, although your death is not so apparent. Again, I have 
in my presence young men who have grown to riper yean 
than that fair damsel who died in her childhood. You have 
much about you that is lovely, but you have just begun to in- 
dulge in evil habits ; you have not yet become the desp^ate 
sinner ; you have not yet beoome altogether noxious in the 
eyes of other men ; you are but beginning to sin, you are like 
the young man carried out on his bier ; you have not yet be- 
come the confirmed drunkard ; you hav« not yet begun to 
curse and blaspheme God ; you are still accepted in good so- 
ciety ; you are not yet cast out ; but you are dead, thoroughly 
dead, just as dead as the third and worst case. But I dare 
say I have some characters that are illustrations of that case 
too. There is Lazarus in his tomb, rotten and putrid ; and so 
there are some men not more dead than others, but their death 
has become more apparent, their character has become abomi- 
nable, their deeds cry out against them, they are put out of 
decent society, the stone is rolled to the mouth of their tomb, 
men feel that they o^ not hold acquaintance with them, for 
they have so utterly abandoned every sense of right, that we 
say, "Put them out of sight, we can not endure them !" And 
yet these putrid ones may live ; these last are not more dead 
than the maiden upon hei* bed, though death has more fully re- 
vealed itself in their corruption. Jesus Christ must quicken 
the one as well as the other, and bring them all to know and 
love his name. 

1. Now, then, I am about to enter into the minutisB of the 
diflerence of these three cases. I will take the case of the 
young maiden. I have her here to-day ; I have many illustra- 
tions of her present before me ; at least;, I trust sq. ifow, will 



SPIBITUAL BBSUBBBCnOir. 229 

you allow me to point out all the differences ? Here is the 
young maiden ; look upon her ; you can bear the sight ; she 
is dead, but O ! beauty lingereth there ; she is fair and lovely, 
though the life hath departed from her. In the young man's 
case there is no beauty ; the worm hath begun to eat him ; 
his honor hath depaited. In the third case, there is absolute 
rottenness. But here there is beauty still upon her cheek. Is 
she not amiable ? Is she not lovely ? Would not all love her ? 
Is she not to be admired, even to be imitated ? Is she not 
direst of the fair ? Ay, that she is ; but God the Spirit has 
not yet looked upon her ; she has not yet bent her knee to 
JeBus, and cried for mercy ; she has every thing, except true 
rdigion. Alas ! &r her ; alas I that so fair a character should 
be a dead one. Alas ! my sister ; alas ! that thou, the benev- 
olent, the kind one, should yet be, after all, dead in thy tres- 
passes and sins. As Jesus wept over that young man who had 
kept all the commandments, and yet one thing he lacked, so 
weep I over thee this morning. Alas ! thou fair one, lovely 
in thy character, and amiable in thy carriage, why shonldst 
thou lie dead ? For dead thou art, unless thou hast faith in 
Christ. Thine excellence, thy virtue, and thy goodness, shall 
avail thee nought ; thou art dead, and dead thou must be, un«> 
less he make thee live. 

Note, too, that in the case of this madden, whom we have 
introduced to you, the daughter of Jairus, ^he is yet caressed ; 
she has only been dead a moment or two, and the mother still 
^presses her cheek with kisses. O ! can she be dead ? Do not 
the tears rain on her, as if they would S9W the s^eds of life in 
that dead earth again ? — eaith that looks fertile enough to 
bring forth life with but one living tear ? Ay, but those salj; * 
tears are tears of barrenness. She liveth not ; but she is still 
caressed. Not so the young map ; he is put on the bier ; no 
man will touch him any more, or else be will be utteily defile^. 
And as for Lazarus, he is shut up with a stone. But this young 
maiden is still caressed ; so it is with many of you ; you are 
loved even by the living in Sion ; God's own people love you ; 
the minister has often prayed for you ; you are admitted into 
the assemblies of the saints, you sit with them as God's people, 
you heap ^ t^ejr fce^r, an^ yp« ping as they' sing. Alas! for 



230 SPIBrrUAL BBSUBREOnOlC, 

you ; alas ! for you, that you should still be dead ! O ! it 
gneves me to the heart, to think that ssome of you are all that 
heart could wish, except that one thing; yet lacking that 
which is the only thing that can deliver you. You are caressed 
by us, received by the living in Sion into their company and 
acquaintance, approved of and accepted; alas! that you 
should yet be without life!* O! in your case, if you are 
saved, you will have to join with even the worst in saying, 
^^ I have been quit^kened by divine grace, or else I had never 
lived." 

And now will you look at this maiden again ? Note, 9he 
has no grave dothea on her yet ; she is ^dressed in her own 
raiment ; just as she retired to her bed a little sick, so lieth she 
there ; hot yet have the napkin and the shroud been wrapped 
about her ; she still weareth the habiliments of sleep ; she is 
not yet given up to death. Not so the young man yonder — 
he is in his grave clothes ; not so Lazarus — ^he is bound hand 
and foot. But this young maiden hath no grave clothes upon 
her. So with the young person we wish to speak of this morn- 
ing ; she has as yet no evil habits, she hath not yet reached 
that point ; the young man yonder has begun to have evil hab- 
its ; and yon gray-headed sinner is bound hand and foot by 
them ; but as yet she appeareth just like the living, she acteth 
just like the Christian ; her habits are fair, goodly, and comely ; 
there seemeth to be little ill about her. Alas ! alas ! that thou 
shouldst be dead, even in thy fairest raiment. Alas! thou 
who hast set the chaplet of benevolence on thy brow, thou 
who dost gird thyself with the white robes of outward purity, if 
thou art not born again, thou art dead still. Thy beauty shall 
fade away like a moth ; and in the day of judgment thou wilt 
be severed from the righteous, unless God shall make thee live. 
0' I I could weep over those young-ones who seem at present 
to have been delivered from forming any habits which could 
lead them astray, but who are yet unquickened and unsaved. 
O ! would to God, young man and young woman, you might 
in early years be quickened by the Spirit. 

And will you notice, yet once more, that this young 
maiden's death was a death confined to her chamber. Not 
so with the young man ; he was carried to the gate* of the city, 



spmrrtJAL bbscjbbbction. 231 

Mid much people saw him. Not so Lazarus ; the Jews came 
to weep at his tomb. But this young woman's death is in her 
chamber. Ay, so it is with the young woman or young man 
I mean to describe now. His sin is as yet a secret thing, kept 
to himself; as yet there has been no breaking forth of iniquity, 
but only the conception of it in the heart ; just the embryo 
of lust, not as yet broken out into act. The young man has 
not yet drained the intoxicating cup, although he has had 
some whisperings of the sweetness of it ; he has not yet run 
into the ways of wickedness, though he has had temptations 
thrust upon him ; as yet he has kept his sin in his chamber, 
and most of it has been unseen. Alas! my brother, alas! my 
sister, that thou who in thine outward carriage art so good, 
should yet have sins in the chamber of thine heart, and death 
in the secrecy of thy being, which is as true a death as that of 
the grossest sinner, though not so thoroughly manifested. 
Would to God that thou couldst say, " And he hath quickened 
me, for with all my loveliness, and all my excellence, I was by 
nature dead in trespasses and sins.'* Come, let me just press 
this matter home. I have some in my congregation that I 
look upon with fear. O ! my dear friends, my much loved 
friends, how many there are among you, I repeat, that are all 
thj^t the heart could wish, except that one thing — that you 
love not my Master. O ! ye young men who come up to the 
house of God, and who are outwardly so good ; alas ! for yon, 
that you should lack the root of the matter. O ! ye daughters 
of Sion, who are ever at the house of prayer, O ! that ye 
should yet be without grace in your heart ! Take heed, I be- 
seech you, ye fairest, youngest, most upright, and most honest; 
when the dead arc separated from the living, unless ye be re- 
generated, ye must go with the dead ; though ye be never so 
fair and goodly, ye must be cast away, unless ye live. 

2. Thus, I have done with the first case ; now we will go to 
the young man, who stands second. He is not more dead than 
the other, but he is furt/ier gone. Come, now, and stop the 
bier ; you can not look upon him ! Why, the cheek is sunken 
— there ts a hollo wness there ; not as in the case of the maiden, 
whose cheek was still round and ruddy. And the eye — O ! 
what a blackness is there ! Look on him ; you can see that 



232 SPIRrriTAL SBSUBBBOnON. 

the gnawings of the worm will soon burst forth ; corraption 
hath begun its work. So it is with some young men I have 
here. They are not what they were in their childhood, when 
their habits were proper and correct ; but mayhap they have 
just been enticed into the house of the strange woman ; they 
have just been tempted to go astray from the path of recti* 
tude ; their corruption is just breaking forth ; they disdain now 
to sit at their mother's apron-strings ; they think it foul scorn 
to keep to the rules that bind the moral I They I they are free, 
they say, and they will be free ; they will live a jolly and a 
happy life ; and so they run on in boisterous yet wicked merri- 
ment, and betray the marks of death about them. They have 
gone further than the maiden ; she was still &ir and comely ; 
but here there is something that is the afterwork of death. 
The maiden was caressed, but the young man is untouched ; 
he lieth on the bier, and though men bear him on their 
shoulders, yet there is a shrinking from him ; he is dead, and 
it is known that he is dead. Young man, you have got as £ir 
as that ; you know that good men shrink from you. It was 
but yesterday that your mother's tears fell fast and thick aa 
she warned your younger brother to avoid your sin ; your very 
sister, when she kissed you but this morning, prayed to God 
that you might get good in this house of prayer ; but you 
know that of late she has been ashamed of you ; your conver- 
sation has become so profane and wicked, that even she could 
scarce endure it. There are houses in which you were once 
welcome ; where you once bowed your knee with them at the 
family prayer, and your name was mentioned too ; but now 
you do not choose to go there, for when you go, you arc 
treated with reserve. The good mkn of the house feels that 
he could not let his son go with you, for you would contami- 
nate him ; he does not sit down now side by side with you, as 
he used to do, and talk about the best things ; he lets you sit 
ip the room as a matter of mere courtesy ; he stands far away 
from you, as it were ; he feels that you have not a spirit con- 
genial with his own. You are a little shunned ; you are not 
quite avoided; you are still received among the people of 
God, yet there is a coldness that manifests that they under- 
stand that yoi; are not a Uvipg one. 



SPIBITUAL BBSUBBBCnON. 233 

And note, too, that this young man, though carried out to 
his grave, was not like the maiden ; she was in the garments 
of life, but Jie was vyrapped in the cerements, of death. So many 
of you have begun to form habits that are evil ; you know 
that already the screw of the devil is tightening on your finger. 
Once it was a screw you could slip off or on ; you said you 
were master of your pleasures — now your pleasures are mas- 
ter of you. Your habits are not now commendable, you know 
they are not ; you stand convicted while I speak to you this 
morning ; you know your ways are evil. Ah I young man, 
though thou hast not yet gone so &r as the open profligate and 
desperately profane, take heed, thou art dead ! thou art dead ! 
and unless the Spint quicken thee, thou shalt be cast into the 
valley of Gehenna, to be the food of that worm which never 
dieth, but eateth souls throughout eternity. And ah ! young 
man, I weep, I weep over thee ; thou art not yet so far gone, 
that they have rolled the stone against thee ; thou rfrt not yet 
become obnoxious ; thou art not yet the staggering drunkard, 
nor yet the blasphemous infidel ; thou hast much that is ill 
about thee, but thou hast not gone all ^he lengths yet. Take 
heed ; thou wilt go further still ; there is no stopping in sin. 
When the worm is there, you can not put your finger on it, 
and say, " Stop ; eat no more." No, it will go on to your 
utter ruin. May God save you now, ere you shall come to 
that consummation for which hell so sighs, and which heaven 
can alone avert, 

One more remark concerning this young man. The maiden's 
death was in her chamber ; the young man'^s death was in the 
city gates. In the first case I described, the sin was secret. 
But, young man, yours is not. You have gone so far that 
your habits are openly wicked ; you have dared to sin in the 
face of God's sun. You are not as some others — seemingly 
good ; but you go out and openly say, " I am no hypocrite ; 
1 dare to do wrong. I do not profess to be righteous ; I know 
I am a scapegrace rascal. I have gone astray, and I am not 
ashamed to sin in the street." Ah I young man, young man ! 
Thy father, perhaps is saying now, " Would God that I had 
died for him — would God that I had seen him buried in his 
grave, ere he should have gone to -uch a length in wickedness ! 



284 SPIRTTCTAL BBSUBBBOnON. 

Would God that when I fii-st saw him, and mine eye was glad- 
dened with my son, I had seen him the next minute smitteii 
with disease and death ! O, would to God that his infant 
spirit had been called to heaven, that he might not have lived 
to bring in this way my gray hairs in sorrow to the grave !" 
Your sport in the city gates is misery in your father's house ; 
your open meniment before the world brings agony into a 
mother's heart. O, I beseech you, stay. O, Lord Jesua! 
touch the bier this morning ! Stop some young man in his 
evil habits, and say unto him, " Arise." Then will he join 
with us in confessing that those who are alive have been quick- 
ened by Jesus, through the Spirit, though they were dead in 
trespasses and sins. 

8. Now we come to the third and last case — ^Lazarus dead 
AND BURIED. Ah ! dear friends, I can not take you to see Laz- 
arus in his grave. Stand, O stand away from him. Whither 
shall we flee to avoid the noxious odor of that reeking corpse ? 
Ah, whither shall we flee ? There is no beauty there ; we 
dare not look upon it. There is not even the gloss of life left. 
O, hideous spectacle ! I must not attempt to describe it ; 
words would fail me, and you would be too much shocked. 
Nor dare I tell the character of some men present here. I 
should be ashamed to tell the things which some of you have 
done. This cheek might mantle \vith a blush to tell the deeds 
of darkness which some of the ungodly of this world habit- 
ually practice. Ah, the last stage of death, the last stage of 
corruption, O, how hideous ; but the last stage of sin, hide- 
ous far more ! Some writers seem to have an aptitude for 
puddling in this mud, and digginc: up this miry clay ; I confess 
that I have none. I can not describe to you the lusts and 
vices of a full-grown sinner. I can not tell you what are the 
debaucheries, the degrading lusts, the devilish, the bestial sins 
into which wicked men will run, when spiritual death has 
had its perfect work in them, and sin has manifested itself in 
all its fearful wickedness. I may have some here. They are 
not Christians. They are not, like the young maiden, still 
fondled, nor even like the young man, still kept in the funeral 
procession : no, they have gone so far that decent people avoid 
the n. Their very wife, when they go into the house, rushes 



spmrruAL BBSusBscnoN. 2SS 

up stairs to be out of the way. They are scorned. Such a 
one is the harlot, from whom one's head is turned in the very 
street. Such a one is the openly profligate, to whom we give 
wide quarters, lest we touch him. He is a man that is far 
gone. The stone is rolled before him. No one calls him re- 
spectable. He dwelleth, perhaps, in some back slum of a dirty 
lane ; he knoweth not where to go. Even as he stands in this 
place, he feels that if his next-door neighbor knew his guilt he 
would give him a wide berth, and stand &r away from him ; 
for he has come to the last stage ; he has no marks of life : he 
is utterly rotten. And mark ; as in the case of the maiden, 
the sin wSts in the chamber, secret ; in the next case it was in 
the open streets, public ; but in this case it is secret again. It 
is in the tomb. For you will mark that men, when they are 
only half gone in wickedness, do it openly ; but when they 
are fully gone theti* lust becomes so degrading that they are 
obliged to do it in secret. They are put into the grave, in 
order that all may be hidden^ Their lust is one which can 
only be perpetrated at midnight ; a deed which can only be 
done when shrouded by the astonished curtains of darkness. 
Have I any such here ? I can not tell that I have many ; but 
still I have some. Ah ! in being constantly visited by peni- 
tents I have sometimes blushed for this city of London. There 
are merchants whose names stand high and fair. Shall I tell 
it here ? I know it on the best authority, and the truest, too. 
There are some who have houses large and tall,, who on the 
exchange are reputable and honorable, and every one admits 
them and receives them into their society ; but ah ! there are 
some of the merchants of London who practice lusts that are 
abominable. I have in my church and congregation — and I 
dare say what men dare to do— I have in my congregation 
women whose ruin and destruction have been wrought by 
some of the most respected men in respectable society. Few 
would venture on so bold a statement as that ; but if you 
boldly do the thing, I must speak of it. It is not for God's 
ambassador to wash his mouth beforehand ; let him boldly re- 
prove, as men do boldly sin. Ah ! there are some that are a 
stench in the nostrils of the Almighty ; some whose charac- 
ter is hideous beyond all hideousness. They have to be cov- 



230 SPIRITUAL SBSUBRECnON. 

ered up in the tomb of secrecy ; for men would scout them 
from society, and hiss them from existence, if they knew all. 
And yet — and now comes a blessed interposition — yet this 
last case may be saved as well as the first, and as easily too. 
The rotten Lazarus may come out of his tomb, as well as the 
slumbering maiden from her bed. The last, the most cor- 
rupt, the most desperately abominable, may yet be quickened ; 
and he may join in exclaiming, ^' And I have been quickened, 
though I was dead in trespasses and sins." I trust you will 
understand what I wish to convey — that the death is the same 
in all cases ; but the manifestation of it is different ; and that 
the life must come from God, and from God alone. 

n. And now I will go on to another point — ^thb qxticken- 
ING. These three persons were all quickened, and they were 
all quickened by the same being — that is by Jesus. But they 
were all quickened in a different mannei*. Note, first, the 
young maiden on her bed. When she was brought to life, it 
is said, ^' Jesus took her by the hand and said. Maiden, arise.'' 
It was a still small voice. Her heart received its pulse again, 
and she lived. It was the gentle touching of the hand — ^no 
open demonstration — and the soft voice was heard, " Arise." 
Now usually when God converts young people in the first 
stage of sin, before they have formed evil habits, he does it 
in a gentle manner ; not by the " terrors of the law, the tem- 
pest, fire and smoke," but he makes them like Lydia, " whose 
heart the Lord opened" that she received the word. On such 
" it droppeth like the gentle dew from heaven upon the place 
beneath." With hardened sinners grace cometh down in 
showers that rattle on them ; but in young converts it often 
cometh gently. There is just the sweet breathing of the 
Spirit. They perhaps scarcely think it is a true conversion ; 
but true it is, if they are brought to Hfe. 

Now note the next case. Christ did not do the same thing 
with the young man that he did with the daughter of Jairus. 
No ; the first thing he did was, he put his hand, not on him, mark 
you, but on the bier ; " and they that bare it stood still," and 
after that, without touching the young man, he said in a louder 
voice, " Young man, I say unto thee, arise !" Note the dif- 
ference ; the young maiden's new life was given to her secretly. 



SPIRITUAL BBSUBBBOnON. 237 

The young man's was given more publicly. It wais done in 
the very street of the city. The maiden's life was given gently 
by a touch ; but in the young man's case it must be done, not 
by the touching of him, but by the touching of the bier. Christ 
takes away from the young man his means of pleasure. He 
Cifmmands his companions, who by bad example are bearing 
him on his bier to his grave, to stop, and then there is a partial 
reformation for a while ; after that there comes the strong out- 
fi|)oken voice, " Young man, I say unto thee, arise 1" 

But now comes the worst case ; and will you please at your 
leisure at home to notice what preparations Christ made for 
the last case of Lazarus? When he r^sed the maiden, he 
walked up into the chamber, smiling, and said, " She is not 
dead, but sleepeth." When he raised the young man, he said 
to the mother, " Weep not." Not so when he came to the 
last case ; there was something more terrible about that : it 
was a man in his grave corrupting. It was on that occasion 
you read, " Jesus wept ;" and after he had wept, it is said that 
" he groaned in his spirit ;" and then he said, " Take away the 
stone ;" and then there came the prayer, " I know that thou 
hoarest me always." And then, will you notice, there came, 
what is not expressed so fully in either of the other cases. It 
is written, "Jesus cried with a loud voice, Lazarus, come 
forth 1" It is not written that he cried with the loud voice to 
either of the others. He spake to them ; it was his word that 
saved all of them ; but in the case of Lazarus, he cried to him 
in a loud voice. Now I have, perhaps, some of the last char- 
acters here — ^the worst of the worst. Ah, sinner, may the 
Lord quicken thee I But it is a work that makes the Saviour 
weep. I think when he comes to call some of you from your 
death in sin who have gone to the utmost extremity of guilt, 
he comes weeping and sighing for you. There is a stone there 
to be rolled away — your bad and evil habits ; and when that 
stone is taken away, a still small voice will not do for you ; it 
must be the loud crashing voice, like the voice of the Lord, 
which breaketh the cedars of Lebanon, " Lazarus, come forth !" 
John Bnnyan was one of those rotten ones. What strong 
means were used in his case. Terrible dreams, fearful convul- 
sions, awful shgfkings to and fro — all had to be employed to 



238 spntrnrAL BSBUJUUDcrnoN. 

make him live. , And yet some of you think, when Qod is ter- 
rifying yon by the thunders of Sinm, that he really does not 
love yoo. It is not so : yon were so dead that it needed a 
load voice to arrest your ears. 

m. This is an interesting sabject: I wish I coald dilate 
upon it, but my voice fiuls me ; and, therefore, permit me to 
go to the third point very briefly. The aftbb-experisnce 
OF THssB THBBB PEOPLE WAS DIFFERENT — at least, you gather 
it from the commands of Christ. As soon as the maiden was 
alive, Christ said, '* Give her meat ;'* as soon as the young man 
was alive, '^ he delivered him to his mother ;" as soon as Laz- 
arus was alive, he said, ^' Loose him, and let him go." I think 
there is something in this. When young people are converted 
who have not yet acquired evil habits ; when they are saved 
before they become obnoxious in the eyes of the world, the 
command is, " Give them meaV^ Young people want imtmc- 
tion ; they want building up in the fidth ; they generally lack 
knowledge ; they have not the deep experience of the older 
man ; they do not know so much about sin, nor even so much 
about salvation as the older man that has been a guilty sinner; 
they need to be fed. So that our business as ministers, when 
the young lambs are brought in, is to remember the injunc- 
tion, "Feed my lambs ;" take care of them ; give them plenty 
of meat. Young people, search after an instructive minister ; 
seek after instructive books ; search the Scriptures, and seek 
to be instructed : that is your principal business. " Give her 
meat.'* 

The next case was a different one. He gave the young man 
np to his mother. Ah ! that is just what he will do with you 
young man, if he makes you live. As sure as ever yon are 
converted, he will give you up to your mother again. You 
were with her when you first as a babe sat on her knee ; and 
that is where you will have to go again. O, yes ; grace knits 
together again the ties which sin has loosed. Let a yoniTg 
man become abandoned ; he casts off the tender influence of a 
sister and the kind associations of a mother ; but if he is con- 
verted, one of the first things he will do will be to find the 
mother out, and the sister out, and he will find a charm in 
their society that he never knew before. You that have gone 



^ SPIRITUAL BBSUBBBCnON. 230 

into sin, let this be your business, if Grod has saved you. Seek 
good company. Just as Christ deKvered the young man to 
his mother, do you seek after your mother, the church. En- 
deavor as much as possible to be found in the company of the 
righteous ; for, as you were carried before to your grave by 
bad companions, you need to be led to heaven by good 
ones. 

And then comes the case of Lazarus. ^*' Loose him^ and let 
him goJ*^ I do not know how it is that the young man never 
was loosed, I have been looking through every book I have 
about the manners and customs of the East, and have not been 
able to get a clew to the difference between the young man 
and Lazarus. The young man, as soon as Christ spoke to him, 
"sat up and began to speak;" but Lazarus, in his grave^ 
clothes, lying in the niche of the tomb, could do no more than 
just shuffle himself out from the hole that was cut in the wall, 
and then stand leaning against it. He could not speak ; he 
was bound about in a napkin. Why was it not so with the 
young man ? I am inclined to think that the difference lay in 
the difference of their wealth. The young man was the son of 
a widow. Very likely he was only wrapped up in a few com- 
mon things, and not so tightly bound about as Lazarus. Laz- 
arus was of a rich family ; very likely they wrapped him up 
with more care. Whether it was or not, I do not know. 
What I want to hint at is this : when a man is far gone into 
sin, Christ does this for him — ^he breaks off his evil habits. 
Very likely the old sinner^s experience will not be a feeding 
experience. It will not be the experience of walking with the 
saints. It will be as much as he can do to pull off his grave- 
clothes, to get rid of his old habits : perhaps to his death he 
will have to be rending off bit after bit of the cerements in 
which he has been wrapped. There is his drunkenness ; O 
what a fight he will have with that ! There is his lust, what a 
combat he will have with that, for many a month ! There is 
his habit of swearing ; how often will an oath come into his 
mouth, and he will have as hard work as he can to thrust it 
down again I There is his pleasure-seeking ; he has given it 
up ; but how often will his companions be after him, to get 
him to go with them. His life will be ever afterward a loos- 



240 BPIBITUAX BBSUBBBCnOK. 

ing and letting go ; for he will need it till he cometh np to be 
with Grod for ever and ever. 

And now, dear friends, I must close by asking yon this 
question, Have you been quickened f And I must warn yoa 
that, good, or bad, or indifferent, if you have never been 
quickened you are dead in sins, and must be cast away at the 
last. I must bid you, however, who have gone the furthest 
into sin, not to despair ; Christ can quicken you as well as the 
best. O that he would quicken you and lead you to believe ! 
O that he now would cry to some, "Lazarus, come forth !" 
and make some harlot virtuous, some drunkard sober. O that 
he would bless the word, especially to the young and amiable 
and lovely, by making them now the heirs of God and the 
children of Christ! 

And now but one thing I have to say to thosQ who are 
quickened ; and then adieu this morning, and may God bless 
you ! My dear friends, you who are quickened, let me advise 
you to take care of the devil ; he will be sure to be after you. 
Keep your mind always employed, and so you will escape him, 
O be aware of his devices ; seek to " keep the heart with all 
diligence, for out of it are the issues of life." The Lord bless 
you, for Jesus' sake. 



SEKMON XVI. .^ 
CONFESSION OF SIN. 

A BKHIIO^' WITH SEVEN TEXTS. 

Mt serraon this morning will have seven texts, and yet I 
pledge myself that there shall be but three different words in 
tln3 whole of them ; for it so happens that the seven texts are 
all alike, occun ing in seven different portions of God's holy 
Word, T shall rcqiiirej however, to use the whole of them to 
exeni]>lLty different eases ; aod I must request those of you 
who have brought your Bibles with you to refer to the texts 
as I shall mention them. 

The subject of this morning's discourse will be this— €0^- 
F ESS I ox ov SIN, We Itnow that tlm Is absolutely necesi^ary 
to salvation. ITrdcss there ha a truo anil hearty confession of 
our si OS to God, wo have no promise tliat we shall iind meroy 
through the blood of the Kedeomer. '^ Whosoever confeaseth 
his sins and foi'sakcth them shall lind mercy." But there is 
no promise in the Bible to the mau who will not confess Lis 
&iu£?p Yet, as upon every point of Scripture tliere is a liability 
of being deceived, so more e^edally in the matter of confes- 
sion of 5iin. There be raanjWvlio make a confession, and a 
confession before God, who, notwithstanding, receive uo 
blessing, because their confession has not in it ceitaiu marks 
which are required by God to prove it genuine and sincere, 
and which demonstrate it to be the work of the Holy Spirit, 
My text this morning consists of three words, ''■ I have sinned.'* 
And yon will see how these words, in tlie lips of different men, 
indicate very different feelinfrgt. While one says, *' I have 
sinned," and receives forgiveness ; another we shall meet with 
says, " I ]jave sinned," and goes his way to blacken himself 
yt'ith woi'se crimes than beforej and dive Lato greater deptlia^'' 
of mi than heretofore he had discovered, 

11 



242 CONFESSION OF SIN. 

THE HARDENED SINNER. 
Pharaoh — "I have siimed." — ^Exodus, ix. 27. 

I. The first case I shall bring before you is that of the hard- 
ened sinner^ who, when under terror, says, " I have sinned.'* 
And you will find" the text in the book of Exodus, the 9th 
chapter, and 27th verse : ^^ And Pharaoh sent, and called for 
Moses and Aaron, and said unto them, I have sinned this 
time : the Lord is righteous, and I and my people are 
wicked,'* 

But why this confession from the lips of the haughty ty- 
rant ? He was not often wont to humble himself before Je- 
hovah. Why doth the proud one bow himself? You will, 
judge of the value of his confession when you hear the cir- 
cumstances under which it was made. " And Moses stretdied 
forth his rod toward heaven ; and the Lord sent thunder and 
hail, and the fire ran along upon the ground ; and the Lord 
rained hail upon the land of Egypt. So that there was hail, 
and fire mingled with the hail, very grievous, such as there 
was none like it in all the land of Egypt since it became a na- 
tion." " Now," says Pharaoh, whilst the thunder is rolling 
through the sky, while the lightning flashes are setting the 
very ground on fire, and while the hail is descending in big 
lumps of ice, now, says he, " I have sinned." He is but a type 
and specimen of multitudes of the same class. How many a 
hardened rebel on ship-board, when the timbers are strained 
and creaking, when the mafi% iP broken, and the ship is drift- 
ing before the gale, when the hungry waves are opening their 
mouths to swallow the ship up alive, and quick as those that 
go into the pit — how many a hardened sailor has then bowed 
his knee, with tears in his eyes, and cried, " I have sinned I" 
But of what avail and of what value was his confession ? The 
repentance that was born in the storm died in the calm ; that 
repentance of his that was begotten amid the thunder and the 
lightning, ceased so soon as all was hushed in quiet, and the 
man who was a pious mariner when on board ship, became 
the most wicked and abominable of sailors when he placed his 
fobt on terra Jlrma. How often, too, have we seen this in a 



CONFESSION OF SIN. 243 

Storm of thunder and lightning? Many a man's cheek is 
blanched when he hears the thunder rolling ; the tears start 
to his eyes, and he cries, " O God, I have sinned !'^ while the 
rafters of his house are shaking, and the very ground beneath 
him reeling at the voice of God which is full of majesty. But 
alas, for such a repentance I "When the sun again shines, and 
the black clouds are withdrawn, sin comes again upon the 
man, and he becomes worse than before. How many of the 
same sort of confessions, too, have we seen in times of cholera, 
and fever, and pestilence I Then our churches have been 
crammed with hearers, who, because so many funerals have 
passed their door, or so many have died in the street, could 
not refrain from going up to God's house to confess their sins. 
And under that visitation, when one, two, and three have 
been lying dead in the house, or next door, how many have 
thought they would really turn to God I But, alas I when the 
pestilence had done its work, conviction ceased ; and when 
the bell had tolled the la^t time for a death caused by cholera, 
then their hearts ceased to beat with penitence, and their tears 
did flow no more. 

Have I any such here this morning ? I doubt not I have 
hardened persons who would scorn the very idea of religion, 
who would count me a cant and hypocrite if I should en- 
deavor to press it home upon them, but who know right well 
that religion is true, and who feel it in their times of terror I 
If I have such here this morning, let me solemnly say to them, 
" Sirs, you have forgotten the ^elings you had in your hours 
of alarm ; but, remember, Goi. bius not forgotten the vows you 
then made." Sailor, you said, if God would spare you to see 
the land again, you would be his servant ; you are not so, you 
have lied against God, you have made him a false promise, for 
you have never kept the vow which your lips did utter. You 
said, on a bed of sickness, that if he would spare your life you 
would never again sin as you did before ; but here you are, 
and this week's sins shall speak for themselves. You are no 
better than you were before your sickness. Couldst thou lie 
to thy fellow-man, and yet go unreproved V And thinkest 
thou that thou wilt lie against God, and yet go unpunished ? 
No ; the vow, however rashly made, is registered in heaven ; 



244 CONFESSION OF SIN. 

and though it be a vow which man can not perform, yet, as it 
is a vow which he has made himself, and made volantarily too, 
he shall be punished for the non-keeping it ; and God shall 
execute vengeance upon him at last, because he said he would 
turn from his ways, and then when the blow was removed he 
did it not. A great outcry has been raised of late against 
tickets-of-leave ; I have no doubt there are some men here, 
who before high heaven stand in the same position as the 
ticket-of-leave men stand to our government. They were 
about to die, as they thought ; they promised good behavior 
if they might be spared, and they are here to-day on ticket-of- 
leave in this world : and how have they fulfilled their prom- 
ise? Justice might raise the same outcry against them as 
they do against the burglars so constantly let loose upon us. 
The avenging angel might say, " O God, these men said, if 
they were spared they would be so much better ; if any thing 
they are worse. How have they violated their promise, and 
how have they brought down divine wrath upon their heads !'* 
This is the first style of penitence ; and it is a style I hope 
none of you will imitate, for it is utterly worthless. It is of 
no use for you to say, " I have sinned," merely under the in- 
fluehce of terror, and then to forget it afterwards. 



THE DOUBLE-MINDED MAN. 
Balaam — "I have anned." — ^Numbers, xxii 34. 

n. Now for a second text. I beg to introduce to you 
another character — the double minded man^ who says, "I 
have sinned," and feels that he has, and feels it deeply too, 
but who is so worldly-minded that he " loves the wages of 
unrighteousness." The character I have chosen to illustrate 
this, is that of Balaam, Turn to the book of Numbers, the 
22d chapter and the 34th verse : " And Balaam said unto the 
angel of the Lord, I have sinned." '^^ 

" I have sinned," said Balaam ; but yet he went on with his 
sin afterward. One of the strangest characters of the whole 
world is Balaam. I have often marveled at that. man; he 



CONFESSION OF SIN. 245 

seems really in another sense to have come up to the lines of 
Ralph Erskine, 

" To good and evil equal bent, 
And both a devil and a saint" 

For he did seem to be so. At times no man could speak more 
eloquently and more truthfally, and at other times he exhibited 
the most mean and sordid coveteousness that could disgrace 
human nature. Think you see Balaam ; he stands upon the 
brow of the hill, and there lie the multitudes of Israel at his 
feet ; he is bidden to curse them, and he cries, " How shall I 
curse whom God hath not cursed ?" And God opening his eyes, 
he begins to tell even about the coming of Christ, and he says, 
*' I shall see him but not now: I shall behold him but not nigh." 
And then he winds up his oration by saying — " Let me die 
the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his !" 
And ye will say of that man, he is a hopeful character. Wait 
till he has come off the brow of the hill, and ye will hear him 
give the most diabolical advice to the king of Moab, which it 
was even possible for Satan himself to suggest. Said he to 
the king, " You can not overthrow these people in battle, for 
God is with them; try and entice them from their God." 
And ye know how with wanton lusts they of Moab tried to 
entice the children of Israel from allegiance to Jehovah ; so 
that this man seemed to have the voice of an angel at one 
time, and yet the very soul of a devil in his bowels. He was 
a terrible character ; he was a man of two things, a man who 
went all the way with two things to a very great extent. I 
know the Scripture says, " No man can serve two masters." 
Now this is often misunderstood. Some read it, " No man can 
serve two masters." Yes he can ; he can serve three or four. 
The way to read it is this : " No man can serve two masters?^ 
They can not both be masters. He can serve two, but they 
can not both be his master. A man can serve two who are 
not his masters or twenty either ; he may live for twenty dif* 
ferent purposes, but he can not live for more than one master 
purpose — there can only be one master purpose in his soul. 
But Balaam labored to serve two ; it was like the people of 
whom it was said, " They feared the Lord, and served other 
gods." Or like Rufus, who was a loaf of the same leaven ; 



246 CONFESSION or SIN. 

for 70a know oar old king Rnfus painted God on one side of 
his shield, and the devil on the other, and had underneath the 
motto, " Ready for both ; catch who can." There are many 
such, who are ready for both. They meet a minister, and 
how pious and holy they are ; on the Sabbath they are most 
respectable and upright people in the world, as you would 
think ; indeed, they affect a drawling in their speech which 
they think to be eminently religious. But on a week day, if 
you want to find the greatest rogues and cheats, they are some 
of those men who are so sanctimonious in their piety. Now, 
rest assured, my hearers, that no confession of sin can be genu- 
ine, unless it be a whole hearted one. It is of no use for you 
to say, " I have sinned," and then to keep on sinning. *' I 
have sinned," say you, and it is a feir, fair fece you show ; but, 
alas ! alas ! for the sin you will go away and commit. Some 
men seem to be bom with two characters. I remarked when 
in the library at Trinity College, Cambridge, a very fine statue 
of Lord Byron. The librarian said to me, " Stand here, sir." 
I looked, and I said, ^' what a fine intellectual countenance ! 
What a grand genius he was !" " Come here," he said, " to 
the other side." " Ah ! what a demon ! There stands the 
man that could defy the deity." He seemed to have such a 
scowl and such a dreadful leer in his &ce ; even as Milton 
would have painted Satan when he said — " Better to reign in 
hell than serve in heaven." I turned away and said to the 
librarian, "Do you think the artist designed this?" "Yes," 
he said, " he wished to picture the two characters — ^the great, 
the grand, the almost superhuman genius that he possessed, 
and yet the enormous mass of sin that was in his soul." There 
are some men here of the same sort. I dare say, like Balaam, 
they would overthrow every thing in argument with their en- 
chantments ; they could work miracles ; and yet at the same 
time there is something about them which betrays a horrid 
character of sin, as great as that which would appear to be 
their character for righteousness. Balaam, you know, offered 
sacrifices to God upon the altar of Baal ; that was just the 
type of his character. So many do ; they offer sacrifices to 
God on the shrine of Mammon ; and while they will give to 
the building of a church, and distribute to the poor, they will 



CONFESSION OF SIN. 247 

at the other door of their counting-house grind the poor for 
bread, and press the very blood out of the widow, that they 
may enrich themselves. Ah I it is idle and useless for you to 
say, "I have sinned," unless you mean it from your heart. 
That double minded man's confession is of no avaU. 



THE INSINCERE MAN. 
Saul — " I have sinned." — 1 Samuel, xv. 24. 

in. And now a third character, and a third text. In the 
first book of Samuel, the 15th chapter and 24th verse: " And 
Saul said unto Samuel, I have sinned." 

Here is the insincere man — ^the man who is not like Balaam, 
to a certain extent sincere in two things ; but the man who is 
just the opposite — ^who has no prominent point in his character 
at all, but is molded everlastingly by the circumstances that 
are passing over his head. Such a man was Smd, Samuel 
reproved him, and he said, " I have sinned." But he did not 
mean what he said ; for, if you read the whole verse, you will 
find him saying, " I have sinned : for I have transgressed the 
commandment of the Lord, and thy words ; because I feared 
t?ie people :'^ which was a lying excuse. Saul never feared 
any body ; he was always ready enough to do his own will — ^he ' 
was the despot. And just before, he had pleaded another ex- 
cuse, that he had saved the bullocks and lambs to offer to 
Jehovah, and therefore both excuses could not have been true. 
You remember, my fiiends, that the most prominent feature in 
the character of Saul was his insincerity. One day he fetched 
David fi'om his bed, as he thought, to put him to death in his 
house. Another time he declares, " God forbid that I should 
do aught against thee, my son David." One day, because 
David saved his life, he said, " Thou art more righteous than 
I ; I will do so no more." The day before he had gone out to 
fight against his own son-in-law, in order to slay him. Some- 
times Saul was among the prophets, easily turned into a pro- 
phet, and then afterward among the witches ; sometimes in 
one place, and then another, and insincere in every thing. 
How many such we have in every Christian assembly ; men 



248 CONFESSION OF SIN. 

who are very easily molded ! Say what you please to them, 
they always agree with you. They have affectionate disposi- 
tions, very likely a tender conscience ; but then the conscience 
is so remarkably tender, that when touched it seems to give, 
and you are afraid to probe deeper — it heals as soon as it is 
wounded. I think I used the very singular comparison once 
before, which I must use again: there are some men who 
seem to have India-rubber hearts. If you do but touch them, 
there is an impression made at once ; but then it is of no use, 
it soon restores itself to its original character. You may press 
them whichever way you wish ; they are so elastic you can 
always effect your purpose ; but then they are not fixed in 
their character, and soon return to be what they were before. 
O sirs, too many of you have done the same ; you have bowed 
your heads in church, and said, " We have erred and strayed 
from thy ways :" and you did not mean what you said. You 
have come to your minister ; you have sdd, *' I repent of my 
sins ;" you did not then feel you were a sinner ; you only said 
it to please him. And now you attend the house of God : no 
one more impressible than' you; the tear will run down your 
cheek in a moment, but yet, notwithstanding all that, the tear 
is dried as quickly as it is brought forth, and you remain to all 
intents and purposes the same as you were before. To say, 
*' I have sinned," in an unmeaning manner, is worse than 
worthless, for it is a mockery of God thus to confess with 
insincerity of heart. 

I have been brief upon this character, for it seemed to touch 
upon that of Balaam ; though any thinking man will at once 
see there was a real contrast between Saul and Balaam, even 
though there is an affinity between the two. Balaam was the 
great bad man, great in all he did ; Saul was little in every 
thing, except in stature — little in his good and little in his 
vice ; and he was too much of a fool to be desperately bad, 
though too wicked to be at any time good : while Balaam was 
great in both : the man who could at one time defy Jehovah, 
and yet at another time could say, " If Balak would give me 
his house full of silver and gold, I can not go beyond the word 
of the Lord my God, to do less or more." 



CONFESSION OF SIN. 249 

THE DOUBTFUL PENITENT. 
AoHAN — " I have sinned." — Joshua, vil 20. 

IV. And now I have to introduce to you a very interesting 
case ; it is the case of the doubtful penitent, in the case of 
Achan, in the book of Joshua, the 7th chapter and the 20th 
verse : " And Achan answered Joshua, Indeed I have sinned." 

You know that Achan stole some of the prey from the city 
of Jericho — that he was discovered by lot, and put to death. 
I have singled his case out as the representative of some whose 
characters are doubtful on their death-beds ; who do repent 
apparently, but of whom the most we can say is, that we hope 
their souls are saved at last, but indeed we can not tell. 
Achan, you are aware, was stoned with stones, for defiling Is- 
rael. But I find in the Mishna, an old Jewish exposition of the 
Bible, these words, " Joshua said to Achan, The Lord shall 
trouble thee this day." And the note upon it is — " He said 
this day, implying that he was only to be troubled in this life, 
by being stoned to death, but that God would have mercy on 
his soul, seeing that he had made a full confession of his sin." 
And I, too, am inclined, from reading the chapter, to concur in 
the idea of my venerable and now glorified predecessor. Dr. 
Gill, in believing that Achan really was saved, although he 
was put to death for the crime, as an example. For you will 
observe how kindly Joshua spoke to him. He said, " My son, 
give, I pray thee, glory to the Lord God of Israel, and make 
confession unto him ; and tell me now what thou hast done ; 
hide it not from me." And you find Achan making a very 
full confession. He says, " Indeed I have sinned against the 
Lord God of Israel, and thus and thus have I done : when I 
saw among the spoils a goodly Babylonish garment, and two 
hundred shekels of silver, and a wedge of gold of fifty shekels 
weight, then I coveted them, and took them ; and, behold, 
they are hid in the earth in^he midst of my tent, and the sil- 
ver under it." It seems so full a confession, that if I might be 
allowed to judge, I should say, " I hope to meet Achan, the 
sinner, before the throne of God." But I find Matthew Henry 
has no such opinion ; and many other expositors consider that 

11* 



250 CONFESSION OF SIN. 

as his body was destroyed, so was his soul. I have, therefore, 
selected his case, as being one of doubtful repentance. Ah ! 
dear friends, it has been my lot to stand by many a death-bed, 
and to see many such a repentance as this. I have seen the 
man, when worn to a skeleton, sustained by pillows in his bed , 
and he has said, when I have talked to him of judgment to 
come, " Sir, I feel I have been guilty, but Christ is good ; I 
trust in him." And I have said within myself, " I believe the 
man's soul is safe." But I have always come away with the 
melancholy reflection that I had no proof of it beyond his own 
words ; for it needs proof in acts and in future life, in ord^ to 
sustain any firm conviction of a man's salvation. You know 
that great fiwt, that a physician once kept a record of a thou- 
sand persons who thought they were dying, and whom he 
thought were penitents; he wrote their names down in a 
book as those who, if they had died, would go to heaven ; 
they did not die, they lived ; and he says that out of the whole 
thousand he had not three persons who turned out well after- 
ward, but they returned to their sins again, and were as bad 
as ever. Ah ! dear friends, I hope none of you will have such 
a death-bed repentance as that ; I hope your minister or your 
parents will not have to stand by your bedside, and then go 
away and say, " Poor fellow ! I hope he is saved." But alas ! 
death-bed repentances are such flimsy things ; such poor, such 
trivial grounds of hope, that I am afraid, after all, his soul may 
be lost." O ! to die with a full assurance ; O ! to die with an 
abundant entrance, leaving a testimony behind that we have 
departed this life in peace ! That is a far happier way than to 
die in a doubtful manner, lying sick, hovering between two 
worlds, and neither ourselves nor yet our friends knowing to 
which of the two worlds we are going. May God grant us 
grace to give in our lives evidences of true conversion, that 
our case may not be doubtful. 

THE REPENTANCE OF DESPAIR. 

Judas — " I have sinned." — ^Matthew, xxvil 4. 

V. I shall not detain you too long, I trust, but I must now 
give you another bad case ; the worst of all. Jt is the repent- 



CONFESSION OF SIN. 251 

ance of despair. Will you turn to the 2Vth chapter of 
Matthew and the 4th verse ? There you have the dreadful 
caee of the repentance of despair. You will recognize the 
character the moment I read the verse : " And Judas said, I 
have sinned." Yes, Judas the traitor, who had betrayed his 
Master, when he saw that his Master was condemned, " re- 
pented, and brought again the thirty pieces of silver to the 
chief priests and elders, saying, I have sinned in that I have 
betrayed innocent blood, and cast down the pieces in the tern-, 
pie, and went" and what ? — " and hanged himself, '^'^ Here is 
the worst kind of repentance of all ; in fact, I know not that I 
am justified in calling it repentance ; it must be called remorse 
of conscience. But Judas did confess his sin, and then went 
and hanged himself. O I that dreadful, that terrible, that hid- 
eous confession of despair. Have you never seen it ? If you 
never have, then bless God that you never were called to see 
such a sight. I have seen it once in my life, I pray God I may 
never see it again — the repentance of the man who sees death 
staring him in the face, and who says, " I have sinned." You 
tell him that Christ has died for sinners; and he answers, 
" There is no hope for me ; I have cursed God to his face ; I 
have defied him ; my day of grace I know is past ; my con- 
science is seared with a hot iron ; I am dying, and I know I 
shall be lost !" Such a case as that happened long ago, you 
know, and is on record — the case of Francis Spira — the most 
dreadful case, perhaps, except that of Judas, which is upon 
record in the memory of man, O ! my hearers, will any of 
you have such a repentance ? If you do, it will be a beacon to 
all persons who sin in future ; if you have such a repentance 
as that, it will be a warning to generations yet to come. In 
the life of Benjamin Keach— and he also was one of my prede- 
cessors — ^I find the case of a man who had been a professor of 
religion, but had departed from the profession, and had gone 
into awful sin. When he came to die, Keach, with many 
other friends went to see him, but they could never stay with 
him above five minutes at a time ; for he said, " Get ye gone j 
it is of no use your coming to me ; I have sinned away the 
Holy Ghost ; I am like Esau, I have sold my birthright, and 
though I seek it carefully with tears, I cau never find it again.*' 



262 CONFESSION or SIN. 

And then he wonld repeat dreadful words, like these : " My 
mouth is filled with gravel-stones, and I drink wormwood day 
and night. Tell me not, tel. me not of Christ ! I know he is 
a Saviour, but I hate him, and he hates me. I know I must 
die ; I know I must perish !" And then followed doleful cries, 
and hideous noises, such as none could bear. They returned 
again in his placid moments, only to stir him once more, and 
make him cry out in his despair, " I am lost ! I am lost ! It is 
of no us§ your telling me any thing about it !" Ah ! there 
may be a man here who may have such a death as that ; let 
me warn him, ere he come to it; and may God the Holy 
Spirit grant that that man may be turned unto God, and made 
a true penitent, and then he need not have any more fear ; for 
he who has had his sins washed away in a Saviour's blood, 
need not have any remorse for his sins, for they are pardoned 
through the Redeemer. 

THE REPENTANCE OP THE SAINT. 
Job — "I have sinned." — Job, vii 20. 

VI. And now I come into daylight. I have been taking 
you through daijc and dreary confessions ; I shall detain you 
there no longer, but bring you out to the two good confessions 
which I have read to you. The first is that of Job in 7th chap- 
ter at the 20th verse : " I have sinned ; what shall I do unto 
thee, O thou preserver of men ?" This is the repentance of the 
saint. Job was a saint, but he sinned. This is the repentance 
of the man who is a child of God already, an acceptable re- 
pentance before God. But as I intend to dwell upon this in 
the evening, I shall now leave it, for fear of wearying you. 
David was a specimen of this kind of repentance, and I would 
have you carefully study his penitential Psalms, the language 
of which is ever full of weeping humility and earnest penitence. 

THE BLESSED CONPBSSION. 
The Pbodiqal — " I have sinned." — ^Lukb, xv. 18. 

VII. I come now to the last instance, which I shall men- 
tion; it is the case of the prodigal. In Luke xv. 18, we find 



CONFESSION OF SIN. 253 

the prodigal says: "Father, I have sinned." O, h#re is a 
blessed confession ! Here is that which proves a man to be a 
regenerate character — " Father, I have sinned." Let me pic- 
ture the scene. There is the prodigal ; he has run away from 
a good home and a kind father, and he has spent all his money 
with harlots, and now he has none left. He goes to his old 
companions, and asks them for relief. They laugh him to 
scorn. " O," says he, " you have drunk my wine many a day ; 
I have always stood paymaster to you in all our revelries ; will 
you not help me ?" " Get you gone," they say ; and he is 
turned out of doors. He goes to all his friends with whom 
he had associated, but no man gives him any thing. At last a 
certain citizen of the country said, — " You want something to 
do, do you ? Well, go and feed my swine." The poor prodi- 
gal, the son of a rich landowner, who had a great fortune of 
his own, has to go out to feed swine ; and he a Jew, too ! the 
worst employment (to his mind), to which he could be put. 
See him there, in squalid rags, feeding swine ; and what are his 
wages ? "Why, so little that he " would fain have filled his belly 
with the husks that the swine did eat, but no man gave to 
him." Look, there he is, with the fellow-commoners of the sty, 
in all his mire and filthiness. Suddenly a thought, put there 
by the good Spirit, strikes his mind. " How is it," says he, 
*' that in my father's house there is bread enough and to spare, 
and I perish with, hunger ? I will arise and go to my father, 
and say unto him. Father, I have sinned against heaven and 
before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy son : 
make me as one of thy hired servants." Off he goes. He 
beg^ his way from town to town. Sometimes he gets a lift 
on a coach perhaps, but at other times he goes trudging his 
way up barren hills and down desolate vales all alone. And 
now at last he comes to the hill outside the village, and sees 
his father'iJ house down below. There it is ; the /)ld poplar 
tree against it, and there are the stacks round which he and 
his brother used to run and play ; and at the sight of the 
old homestead all the feelings and associations of his for- 
mer life rush upon him, and tears run down his cheeks, and 
he is almost ready to run away again. He says, " I wonder 
whether father's dead. I dare say mother broke her heart 



254 OONFBSSION or 8IK. 

when I^ent away; I always was her favorite. And if they 
are either of them alive, they will never see me again ; they 
will shut the door in my fiice. What am I to do ? I can not 
go back, I am afraid to go forward." And while he was thus 
deliberating his father had been walking on the house-top look- 
ing out for his son ; and though he could not see his father 
his father could see him. Well, the fether comes down stairs 
with all his might, runs up to him, and whilst he is thinking 
of running away, his &ther's arms are round his neck, and he 
falls to kissing him, like a loving father indeed, and then the 
son begins, — " Father, I have sinned against heaven and in 
thy sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy son," and 
he was going to say, " Make me as one of thy hired servants." 
But his father put his hand on hb mouth. " No more of that," 
says he ; " I forgive you all ; you shall not say any thing about 
being my servant — ^I will have none of that. Come along," 
says he, " come in, poor prodigal. Ho," said he to the ser- 
vants, *^ bring hither the best robe, and put it on him, and put 
shoes on his poor bleeding feet ; and bring hither the fatted 
calf, and kill it ; and let us eat and be merry : for this my 
son was dead, and is alive again, he was lost, and is found. 
And then they began to be merry." O, what a precious re- 
ception for one of the chief of sinners I Good Matthew Henry 
says — '* His father saw him, there were eyes of mercy ; he ran 
to meet him, there were legs of mercy ; he put his arms round 
his neck, there were arms of mercy ; he kissed him, there 
were kisses of mercy ; he said to him — there were words of 
mercy — 'Bring hither the best robe,' there were deeds of 
mercy, wonders of mercy — all mercy. O, what a God of 
mercy he is 1" 

Now, prodigal, you do the same. Has God put it into your 
heart ? There are many who have been running away a long 
time now. Does God say " return ?" O, I bid you return, then, 
for as surely as ever thou dost return he will take thee in. 
There never was a poor sinner yet who came to Christ, whom 
Christ turned away. If he turns you away you will be the 
first, O, if you could but try him I " Ah, sir, I am so black, 
80 filthy, so vile." Well, come along with you — ^you can not 
be blacker than the prodigal. Come to your father's house, 



CONFESSION OP SIN. 265 

and as surely as he is God he will keep his word — " Him that 
cometh unto me I will no wise cast out." 

O, if I might hear that some had come to Christ this morn- 
ing, I would indeed bless God ! I must tell here, for the honor 
of God and Christ, one remarkable circumstance, and then I 
have done. You will remember that one morning I mentioned 
the case of an infidel who had been a scomer and scoffer, but 
who, through reading one of my printed sermons, had been 
brought to God's house and then to God's feet. Well, last 
Christmas day, the same infidel gathered together all his books, 
and went into the market-place at Norwich, and there made a 
public recantation of all his errors, and a profession of Christ, 
and then taking up all his books which he had written, and 
had in his house, on evil subjects, burned them in the sight of 
the people. I have blessed God for such a wonder of grace 
as that, and pray that there may be many more such, who, 
though they be born prodigal, will yet return home, saying, 
" I have sinned." 



SERMON XVII. / 
FAITH. 

" Without fidth it is impossible to please God."— Hebrews, xi. 6. 

The old Assembly's Catechism asks, " What is the chief 
end of man ?" and its answer is, " To glorify God, and to en- 
joy him for ever.'* The answer is exceedingly correct ; but 
It might have been equally truthful if it had been shorter. 
The chief end of man is " to please God ;" for in so doing — we 
need not say it, because it is an undoubted fact — in so doing 
he will please himself. The chief end of man, we believe, in 
this life and in the next, is to please God his Maker. If any 
man pleases God, he does that which conduces most to his own 
temporal and eternal welfare. Man can not please God with- 
out bringing to himself a great amount of happiness ; for if 
any man pleases God, it is because God accepts him as his son, 
gives him the blessings of adoption, pours upon him the boun- 
ties of his grace, makes him a blessed man in this life, and in- 
sures him a crown of everlasting life, which he shall wear, and 
which shall shine with unfading luster, when the wreaths of 
earth's glory have all been melted away ; while, on the other 
hand, if a man does not please God, he inevitably brings upon 
himself sorrow and suffering in this life ; he puts a worm and 
a rottenness in the core of all his joys ; he fills his death-pillow 
with thorns, and he supplies the eternal fire with faggots of 
flame which shall for ever consume him. He that pleases God 
is, through divine grace, joui-neying onward to the ultimate 
reward of all those that love and fear God ; but he who is ill- 
pleasing to God must, for Scripture has declared it, be ban- 
ished from the presence of God, and consequently from the 
enjoyment of happiness. If, then, we be right in saying that 
to please God is to be happy, the one important question is, 



FAITH. 



357 



how can I please God ? and there is something very solemn 
in the utterance of our text : " Without faith it is impossible 
to please God." That is to say, do what you may, strive as 
earnestly as you can, live as excellently as you please, make 
what sacrifices you choose, be as eminent as you can for every 
thing that is lovely and of good repute, yet none of these 
things can be pleasing to God unless they be mixed with faith. 
As the Lord said to the Jews, " With all your sacrifices you 
must offer salt ;" so he says to us, " With all your doings you 
must bring fiiith, or else 'without faith it is impossible to 
please God.' " 

This is an old law ; it is as old as the first man. No sooner 
were Cain and Abel born into this world, and no sooner had 
they attained to manhood, than God gave a practical procla- 
mation of this law, that " without faith it is impossible to 
please him." Cain and Abel, one bright day, erected an altar 
side by side with each other. Cain fetched of the fruits of the 
trees and of the abundance of the soil, and placed them upon 
his altar ; Abel brought of the firstlings of the flock, and laid 
it upon his altar. It was to be decided which God would ac- 
cept. Cain had brought his best, but he brought it without 
faith ; Abel brought his sacrifice, but he brought it with faith 
in Christ. Now, then, which shall best succeed ? The offer- 
ings are equal in value ; so far as they themselves are con- 
cerned they are alike good. Upon which will the heavenly 
fire descend ? Which will the Lord God consume with the 
fire of his pleasure ? O ! I see Abel's offering burning, and 
Cain's countenance has fallen, for unto Abel and unto his 
offering the Lord had respect, but unto Cain and his offering 
the Lord had no respect. It shall be the same till the last 
man shall be gathered into heaven. There shall never be an 
acceptable offering which has not been seasoned with faith. 
Good though it may be, as apparently good in itself as that 
which has faith, yet unless faith be with it God never can and 
never will accept it, for he here declares, " Without faith it is 
impossible to please God." 

I shall endeavor to pack my thoughts closely this morning, 
and be as brief as I can, consistently with a full explanation of 
the theme. I shall first have an exposition of what is faith ; 



258 FAITH. 

secondly, I shall have an argument^ that without faith it is im- 
possible to be saved ; and thirdly, I shall ask a qitestion — 
Have you that fidth which pleases God? We shall have, 
then, an exposition, an argument, and a question. 

I. First, for the exposition. What is faith ? 

The old writers, who are by far the most sensible — for yoa 
will notice that the books that were written about two hun^ 
dred years ago by the old Puritans have more sense in one 
line than there is in a page of our new books, and more in a 
page than therp is in a whole volume of our modem divinity 
— ^the old wiiters tell you, that faith is made up of three 
things : first, knowledge, then assent, and then what they call 
affiance, or the laying hold of the knowledge to which we give 
assent and making it our own by trusting in it. 

1. Let us begin, then, at the beginning. The first thing in 
faith is knowledge, A man can not believe what he does not 
know. That is a clear, selfevident axiom. If I have never 
heard of a thing in all my life, and do not know it, I can not 
believe it. And yet there are some persons who have a faith 
like that of the fuller, who when he was asked what he be- 
lieved, said, " I believe what the church believes." " What 
does the church believe?" "The church believes what I 
believe." " And pray what do you and the church believe ?" 
" Why we both believe the same thing." Now this man be- 
lieved nothing, except that the church was right, but in what 
he could not tell. It is idle for a man to say, " I am a be- 
liever," and yet not to know what he believes ; but yet I have 
seen some persons in this position. A violent sermon has been 
preached, which has stirred up their blood ; the minister has 
cried, " Believe ! believe ! believe I" and the people on a sud- 
den have got it into their heads that they were believers, and 
have walked out of their place of worship and said, " I am a 
believer." And if they were asked, " Pray what do you be- 
lieve ?" they could not give a reason for the hope that was in 
them. They believe they intend to go to chapel next Sunday ; 
they intend to join that class of people ; they intend to be very 
violent in their singing and very wonderful in their rant; 
therefore they believe they shall be saved ; but what they be- 
lieve th«y can not tell. Now, I hold no man's faith to be sure 



PATTH. 259 

faith, unless he knows what he believes. If he says, " I be- 
lieve," and does not know what he believes, how can that be 
true faith ? The apostle has said, " How can they believe on 
him of whom they have not heard ? and how can they hear 
without a preacher ? and how can they preach except they be 
sent ?" It is necessary, then, to true faith, that a man should 
know something of the Bible. Believe me, this is an age 
when the Bible is not so much thought of as it used to be. 
Some hundred years ago the world was covered with bigotry, 
cruelty, and superstition. We always run to extremes, and 
we have just gone to the other extreme now. It was then 
said, " One faith is right, down with all others by the rack and 
by the sword !" Now it is said, " However contradictory our 
creeds may be, they are all right." If we did but use our 
common sense we should know that it is not so. But some 
reply, " Such-and-such a doctrine need not be preached, and 
need not be believed." Then, sir, if it need not be preached 
it need not be revealed. You impugn the wisdom of God, 
when you say a doctrine is unnecessary ; for you do as much 
as say that God has revealed something which was not neces- 
sary, and he would be as unwise to do more than was neces- 
sary as if he had done less than was necessary. We believe 
that every doctrine of God's Word ought to be studied by 
men, and that their faith should lay hold of the whole matter 
of the sacred Scriptures, and more especially upon all that 
part of Scripture which concerns the person of our all-blessed 
Redeemer. There must be some degree of knowledge before 
there can be faith. . " Search the Scriptures," then, " for in 
them ye think ye have eternal life, and they are they which 
testify of Christ;" and by searching and reading cometh 
knowledge, and by knowledge cometh faith, and through faith 
cometh salvation. 

2. But a man may know a thing, and yet not have faith. I 
may know a thing, and yet not believe it. Therefore aeeent 
must go with faith : that is to say, what we know we must also 
agree unto, as being most certainly the verity of God. Now, 
in order to faith it is necessary that I should not only read the 
Scriptures and understand them, but that I should receive 
them in ray soul as being the very truth of the living God, 



260 FAITH. 

and should devontly with my whole heart receive the whole 
of Scripture as being inspired of the Most High, and the whole 
of the doctrine which he requires me to believe to my salva- 
tion. You are not allowed to halve the Scriptures, and to be- 
lieve what you please; you are not allowed to believe the 
Scriptures with a half-heartedness, for if you do this willfully, 
you have not the faith which looks alone to Christ. True faith 
gives its full assent to the Scriptures ; it takes a page and says, 
" No matter what is in the page, I believe it ;" it turns over 
the next chapter and says, " Herein are some things hard to be 
understood, which they that are unlearned and unstable do 
wrest, as they do also the other Scnptures, to their destruc- 
tion ; but, hard though it be, I believe it." It sees the Trin- 
ity ; it can not understand the Trinity in Unity, but it believes 
it. It sees an atoning sacrifice ; there is something difficult in 
the thought, but it believes it ; and whatever it be which it 
sees in revelation, it devoutly puts its lips to the book, and 
says, " I love it all ; I give my full, free, and hearty assent to 
every word of it, whether it be the threatening, or the prom- 
ise, the proverb, the precept, or the blessing. I believe that 
since it is all the word of God it is all most assuredly true." 
Whosoever would be saved must know the Scriptures, and 
must give full assent unto them. 

3. But a man may have all this, and yet not possess true 
faith ; for the chief part of faith lies in the last head, namely, 
in an affiance to the truth ; not the believing it merely, but 
the taking hold of it as being ours, and in the resting on it for 
salvation. Recumbency on the truth was the word which the 
old preachers used. You will understand that word. Lean- 
ing on it ; saying, *' This is truth, I trust my salvation on it." 
Now, true faith in its very essence rests in this — a leaning 
upon Christ. It will not save me to know that Christ is a 
Saviour ; but it will save me to trust him to be my Saviour. 
I shall not be delivered from the wrath to come, by believing 
that his atonement is sufficient, but I shall be saved by making 
that atonement my trust, my refuge, and my all. The pith, 
the essence of faith lies in this — a casting one's-self on the prom- 
ise. It is not the life-buoy on board the ship that saves the 
man when he is drowning, nor is it his belief that it is an ex- 



FAITH. , 261 

cellent and successful invention. No ! He must have it around 
his loins, or his hand upon it, or else he will sink. To use an 
old and hackneyed illustration : suppose a fire in the upper 
room of a house, and the people gathered in the street. A 
child is in the upper story : how is he to escape ? He can 
not leap down — ^that were to be dashed to pieces. A strong 
man comes beneath, and cries, " Drop into my arms." It is a 
part of faith to know that the man is there ; it is another 
part of faith to believe that the man is strong ; but the essence 
of faith lies in the dropping down into the man's arms. That 
is the proof of faith, and the real pith and essence of it. So, 
sinner, thou art to know that Christ died for sin ; thou art 
also to understand that Christ is able to save, and thou art to 
believe that ; but thou art not saved, unless in addition to that 
thou puttest thy trust in him to be thy Saviour, and to be 
thine for ever. As Hart says in the hymn, which really ex- 
presses the gospel, 

" Venture on him, venture wholly ; 
Let no other trust intrude ; 

None but Jesus 
Can do helpless sinners good." 

This is the faith which saves ; and however unholy may have 
been your lives up to this hour, this faith, if given to you at this 
moment, will blot out all your sins, wDl change your nature, 
make you a new man in Christ Jesus, lead you to live a holy 
life, and make your eternal salvation as secure as if an angel 
should take you on his bright wings this morning, and cany 
you immediately to heaven. Have you that faith ? That is 
the one all-important question ; for while with faith men are 
saved, without it men are damned. As Brookes hath said in one 
of his admirable works, " He that believeth on the Lord Jesus 
Christ, shall be saved, be his sins never so many ; but he that 
believeth not in the Lord Jesus must be damned, be his sins 
never so few." Hast thou faith? For the text declares, 
" Without feith it is impossible to please Gk>d." 

n. And now we come to the argument, why, without faith, 
we can not be saved. 

Now there are some gentlemen present who are saying. 



262 FAITH. 

^^ Now we shall see whether Mr. Spurgeon has any logio in 
hnn.** No, you won't, sirs, because I never pretend to exer- 
cise it. I hope I have the logio which can appeal to men's 
hearts ; but I am not very prone to use the less powerful logio 
of the head, when I can win the heart in another manner. 
^But if it were needful, I should not be afraid to prove that I 
know more of logic and of many other things than the little 
men who undertake to censure me. It were well if they 
knew how to hold their tongues, which is at least a fine part 
of rhetoric. My argument shall be such as I trust will appeal 
to the heart and conscience, although it may not exactly 
please those who are always so fond of syllogistic demonstra- 
tion, 

"Who could a hair divide 
Between the west and north-west side." 

1. "Without faith it is impossible to please God." And I 
gather it from the fact, that there never has been the case of 
a man recorded in Scripture who did please God without 
feith. The 11th chapter of the. Hebrews is the chapter of the 
men who pleased God. Listen to their names: "by faith 
Abel offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice ;" " by fe.ith 
Enoch was translated ;" " by feith Noah built an ark ;" " by 
j&ith Abraham went out into a place that he should afterward 
receive ;" " by faith he sojourned in the land of promise ;" 
" by faith Sarah bore Isaac ;" " by faith Abraham offered up 
Isaac;" " by faith Moses gave up the wealth of Egypt ;" " by 
faith Isaac blessed Jacob ;" " by faith Jacob blessed the sons 
of Joseph ;" " by faith Joseph, when he died, made mention 
of the departure of the children of Israel ;" "by faith the Red 
Sea was dried up ;" " by faith the walls of Jericho fell down ;" 
" by faith the harlot Rahab was saved ;" " and what shall I 
more say ? for the time would fail me to tell of Gideon, and 
of Barak, and of Samson, and of Jephtha, of David also, and 
Samuel, and .of the prophets." But all these were men of 
faith. Others mentioned in Scripture have done something ; 
but God did not accept them. Men have humbled themselves, 
and yet God has not saved them. Ahab did, and yet his sins 
were never forgiven. Men have repented, and yet have not 
been saved, because theirs was the wrong repentance. Judas 



PATTH. 263 

repented, and went and hanged himself, and was not saved. 
Men have confessed their sins, and have not been saved. 
Saul did it. He said to David, " I have sinned against thee, 
my son David ;" and yet he went on as he did before. Multi- 
tudes have confessed the name of Christ, and have done many 
marvelous things, and yet they have never been pleasing to^ 
God, from this simple reason, that they had not faith. And 
if there be not one mentioned in Scripture, which is the his- 
tory of some thousand years, it is not likely that in the other 
two thousand years of the world's hbtory there would have 
been one, when there was not one during the first four thou- 
sand. 

2. But the next argument is, faith is the stooping grace^ 
and nothing can make a man stoop without faxXh, Now, un- 
less man does stoop, his sacrifice can not be accepted. The 
angels know this. When they praise God, they do it vailing 
their feces with their wings. The redeemed know it. When 
they praise God, they cast their crowns before his feet. Now, 
a man that has not faith proves that he can not stoop ; for he 
has not faith for this reason, because he is too proud to be- 
lieve. He declares he will not yield his intellect, he will not 
become a child and believe meekly what God tells him to be- 
lieve. He is too proud, and he can not enter heaven, because 
the door of heaven is so low that no one can enter in by it 
unless they will bow their heads. There never was a man 
who could walk into salvation erect. We must go to Christ 
on our bended knees ; for though he is a door big enough for 
the greatest sinner to come in, he is a door so low that men 
must stoop if they would be saved. Therefore, it is that faith 
is necessary, because a want of fidth is certain evidence of 
absence of humility. 

8. But now for other reasons. Faith is necessary to salva- 
tion, because we are told in Scripture ih^X works can not save. 
To tell a very familiar story, that even the poorest may not 
misunderstand what I say. A minister was one day going to 
preach. He climbed a hill on his road. Beneath him lay the 
villages, sleeping in their beauty, with the corn fields motion- 
less in the sunshine ; but he did not look at them, for his at- 
tention was arrested by a woman standing at her door, and 



264 FAITH. 

who, upon Beeing him, came up to hhn with the greatest anx- 
iety, and said, " O, sir, have you any keys about you ? I have 
broken the key of my drawers, and there are some things that 
I must get directly." Said he, " I have no keys." She was 
disappointed, expecting that every one would have keys. 
^ " But suppose," he said, " I had some keys, they might not fit 
your lock, and therefore you could not get the articles you 
want. But do not distress yourself, wait till some one else 
comes up. But," said he, wishing to improve the occasion, 
" have you never heard of the key of heaven ?" " Ah ! yes," 
she said, " I have lived long enough and have gone to church 
long enough to know that if we work hard and get our bread 
by the sweat of our brow, and act well toward our neighbors, 
and behave, as the catechism says, lowly and reverenly to all 
our betters, and if we do our duty in that station of life in 
which it has pleased God to place us, and say our prayers regu- 
larly, we shall be saved." " Ah 1" said he, " my good woman, 
that is a broken key, for you have broken the commandments, 
you have not fulfilled all your duties. It is a good key, but 
you have broken it." " Pray, sir," said she, believing that he 
understood the matter, and looking frightened, " what have 
I left out?" "Why," said he, "the all-important thing, the 
blood of Jesus Christ. Don't you know it is said, the key of 
heaven is at his girdle ; he openeth, and no man shutteth ; he 
shutteth, and no man openeth?" And explaining it more fully, 
to her, he said, " It is Christ, and Christ alone, that can open 
heaven to you, and not your good works." " What, minister," 
said she, " are our good works useless then ?" " No," said 
he, " not after faith. If you believe first, you may have as 
many good works as you please ; but if you believe you will 
never trust in them, for if you trust in them you have spoiled 
them, and they are not good works any longer. Have as 
many good works as you please ; still, put your trust wholly 
in the Lord Jesus Christ, for if you do not, your key will never 
unlock heaven's gate." So, then, my hearers, we must have 
true faith, because the old key of works is so broken by us all 
that we never shall enter Paradise by it. If any of you pre- 
tend that you have no sins, to be very plain with you, you de- 
ceive yourselves, and the truth is not in you. If you conceive 



FAITH. 266 

that by your good works you shall enter heaven, never was 
there a more fell delusion, and you shall find at the last great 
day that your hopes are worthless, and that like sere leaves 
from the autumn trees your noblest doings shall be blown 
away, or kindled into a flame wherein you yourselves must 
suffer for ever. Take heed of your good works ; get them 
after faith, but remember, the way to be saved is simply to 
believe in Jesus Christ. 

4. Again : without faith it is impossible to be saved, and to 
please God, because without faith there is no union to Christ 
Now, union to Christ is indispensable to our salvation. If I 
come before God's throne with my prayers, I shall never get 
them answered unless I bring Christ with me. The Molos- 
sians of old, when they could not get a favor from their king, 
adopted a singular expedient ; they took the king's only son 
in their arms, and falling on their knees, cried, " O king, for 
thy son's sake grant our request." He smiled and said, " I 
deny nothing to those who plead my son's name." It is so 
with God. He will deny nothing to the man who comes, hav- 
ing Christ at his elbow ; but if he comes alone he must be cast 
away. Union to Christ is, after all, the great point in salva- 
tion. Let me tell you a story to illustrate this. The stupen- 
dous falls of N'iagara have been spoken of in every part of the 
world ; but while they are marvelous to hear of, and wonder- 
ful as a spectacle, they have been very destructive to human 
life, when by accident any have been carried down the cataract. 
Some years ago two men, a bargeman and a collier, were in a 
boat, and found themselves unable to manage it, it being 
carried so swiftly down the current that they must both in- 
evitably be borne down and dashed to pieces. Persons on the 
shore saw them, but were unable to do much for their rescue. 
At last, however, one man was saved by floating a rope to 
him, which he grasped. The same instant that the rope came 
into his hand a log floated by the other man. The thoughtless 
and confused bargeman instead of seizing the rope laid hold on 
the log. It was a fatal mistake ; they were both in imminent 
peril, but the one was drawn to shore because he had a con- 
nection with the people on the land, whilst the other, clinging 
to the log, was borne irresistibly along and never heard of 

12 



266 FAITH. 

afterward. Do you not see that hero is a practical illastra- 
tioQ ? Fidth is a connection with Christ. Christ is on the 
shore, so to speak, holding the rope of Mth, and if we lay hold 
of it with the hand of onr confidence he polls us to shore ; but 
our good works, having no connection with Christ, are drifted 
along down the gulf of fell despair. Grapple them as tightly 
as we may, even with hooks of steel, they can not avail us in 
the least degree. You will see, I am sure, what I wish to show 
you. Some object to anecdotes ; I shall use them till they have 
done objecting to them. The truth is never more powerfully 
set forth to men than by telling them, as Christ did, a story 
of a certain man with two sons, or a certain householder who 
went a journey, divided his substance, and gave to some ten 
talents, to another one. 

Faith, then, is a union with Christ. Take care you have it ; 
for if not, cling to your works, and there you go floating down 
the stream I Cling to your works, and there you go dashing 
down the gulf! Lost because your works have no hold on 
Christ and no connection t^rith the blessed Redeemer I But 
thou, poor sinner, with all thy sin about thee, if the rope is 
round thy loins, and Christ has a hold of it, fear not I 

" His honor is engaged to save 
The meanest of his sheep ; 
All that his heavenly Fathor gave, 
Hifl hands securely keep." 

6. Just one more argument, and then I have done with it. 
" Without faith it is impossible to please God," because it is 
impossible to preserve holiness without faith. What a multi- 
tude of fair-weather Christians we have in this age I Many 
Christians resemble the nautilus, which in fine smooth weather 
Bwuns on the surface of the sea, in a splendid little squadron, 
like the. mighty ships ; but the moment the first breath of 
wind ruffles the waves, they take in their sails and sink into 
the depths. Many Christians are the same. In good com- 
pany, in evangelical draVing-rooms, in pious parlors, in chapels 
and vestries, they are tremendously religious ; but if they are 
exposed to a little ridicule, if some should smile at them and 
call them Methodist or Presbyterian, or some name of re- 



FAITH. 267 

proach, it is all over with religion till the next fine day. Then 
when it is fine weather, and religion will answer their purpose, 
np go the sails again, and they are as pious as before. Believe 
me, that kind of religion is worse than irreligion. I do like a 
man to be thoroughly what he is — a downright man ; and if a 
man does* not love God, do not let him say he does ; but if he 
be a true Christian, a follower of Jesus, let him say it and 
stand up for it ; there is nothing to be ashamed of it in it ; the 
only thing to be ashamed of is to be hypocritical. Let us be 
honest to our profession, and it will be our glory. Ah 1 what 
would you do without faith in times of persecution ? You 
good and pious people that have no faith, what would you do 
if the stake were again erected in Smithfield, and if once more 
the fires consumed the saints to ashes — if the Lollard's tower 
were again opened, if the rack were again plied, or even if the 
stocks were used, as they have been used by a Protestant 
church, as witness the persecution of my predecessor, Benja- 
min Keach, who was once set in the stocks at Aylesbury for 
writing a book against infant baptism. If even the mildest 
form of persecution were revived, how would the people be 
scattered abroad ! And some of the shepherds would be 
leaving their flocks. 

' III. And now, in conclusion, the question, the vital ques- 
tion. Dear hearer, have you faith? Dost thou believe on 
the Lord Jesus Christ with all thy heart ? If so, thou mayest 
hope to be saved. Ay, thou mayest conclude with absolute 
certainty that thou shalt never see perdition. Have you faith ? 
Shall I help you to answer that question ? I will give you 
three tests, as briefly as ever I can, not to weary you, and 
then farewell this morning. He that has faith has renounced 
his own righteousness. If thou puttest one atom of trust in 
thyself thou hast no faith ; if thou dost place even a particle of 
reliance upon any thing else but what Christ did, thou hast no 
faith. If thou dost trust in thy works, then thy works are 
antichrist, and Christ and antichrist can never go together. 
Christ will have all or nothing ; he must be a whole Saviour, 
or no Saviour at all. If then, you have faith, you can gay, 

" Nothing in my hands I bring, 
Simply to the cross I ding." 



268 FAITH. 

Then true feith may be known by this, that it begets a great 
esteem for the person of Christ. Dost thou love Christ? 
Couldst thou die for him? Dost thou seek to serve him? 
Dost thou love his people ? Canst thou say 

** Jeeos, I love thj charming name, 
Tis mnsio to mj ear." 

O ! if thou dost not love Christ thou dost not believe in him ; 
for to believe in Christ, begets love. And yet more : he that 
has true faith will have true obedience. If a man says he has 
feith and has no works, he lies ; if any man declares that he 
believes on Christ, and yet does not lead a holy life, he makes 
a mistake ; for while we do not trust in good works, we know 
that feith always begets good works. Faith is the father of 
holiness, and he has not the parent who loves not the child. 
God's blessings are blessings with both his hands. In the one 
hand he gives pardon : but In the other hand he always gives 
holiness; and no man can have the one, unless he has the 
other. 

And now, dear hearers, shall I down upon my knees, and 
entreat you for Christ's sake to answer this question in your 
own silent chamber : Have you faith ? O ! answer it. Yes — 
or No. Leave off saying, "I do not know," or "I do not 
care." Ah I ye will care one day, when the earth is reeling, 
and the world is tossing to and fro ; ye will care when God 
shall summon you to judgment, and when he shall condemn 
the faithless and the unbelieving. O I that ye were wise — that 
ye would care now, and if any of you feel your need of Christ, 
let me beg of you, for Christ's sake, now to seek faith in him 
who is exalted on high to give repentance and remission, and 
who, if he has given you repentance, will give you remission 
too. O sinners, who know your sins I " believe on the Lord 
Jesus, and ye shall be saved." Cast yourselves upon his love 
and blood, his doing and his dying, his miseries and his merits ; 
and if you do this you shall never fall, but you shall be saved 
now, and saved in that great day, when not to be saved will 
be horrible indeed. " Turn ye, turn ye ; why will ye die, O 
house of Israel ?" Lay hold on him, touch the hem of his 
garment, and ye shall be healed. May God help you so to 
do ; for Christ's sake I Amen and Amen. 



SERMON XVIII. 
EAHAB'S FAITH. 

' By faith the harlot Bahab perisheil not with them that believed not^ whes 
she had reoeiyed the spies with peace> '— Hebbews, si 31. 

In almost every capital of Europe there are varieties of tri- 
mnphal arches or columns, upon which are recorded the val- 
iant deeds of the country's generals, its emperors, or its mon- 
archs. You will find, in one case, the thousand battles of a 
Napoleon recorded, and in another, you find the victories of a 
Nelson pictured. It seems, therefore, but right, that faith, 
which is the mightiest of the mighty, should have a pillar raised 
to its honor, upon which its valiant deeds should be recorded. 
The apostle Paul undertook to raise the structure, and he 
erected a most magnificent pillar in the diapter before us. It 
recites the victories of faith. It begins with one triumph of 
fiiith, and then proceeds to others. We have, in one place, 
fsith. triumphing over death ; Enoch entered not the gates of 
hades, but reached heaven by another road from that which is 
usual to men. We have Mth, in another place, wrestling with 
time ; Noah, warned of God concernii^g things not seen as 
yet, wrestled with time, which placed his deluge a hundred 
and twenty years away ; and yet, in the confidence of faith, 
he believed against all rational expectation, against all proba- 
bility, and his faith was more than a match for probability and 
time too. We have faith triumphing over infirmity — ^when 
Abraham begetteth a son in his old age. And then we have 
faith triumphing over natural affection^ as we see Abraham 
climbing to the top of the hill and raising the knife to slay his 
only and beloved son at the command of God. We see faith, 
again, entering the lists with the infirmities of old age and 
the pains of the last straggly as we read, *' By &ith Jacob, 



270 BAHAB'S FAITH. 

when he was dying, blessed both the sons of Joseph, and wor- 
shiped, leaning on the top of his staff." Then we have faith 
combating the allarements of a wealthy court. " By faith 
Moses esteemed the reproach of Christ greater riches than 
the treasures in Egypt." We see faith dauntless in courage 
when Moses forsook Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the king, 
and equally patient in suffering when he endured as seeing 
him who is invisible. We have fkith dividing seas, and cast- 
ing down strong walls. And then, as though the greatest 
victory should be recorded last, we have faith entering the 
lists with sin, holding a tournament with iniquity, and coming 
off more than a conqueror. " Rahab perished not with them 
that believed not, when she had received the spies with peace." 
That this woman was no mere hostess, but a real harlot, I 
have abundantly proved to every candid hearer while reading 
the chapter. I am persuaded that nothing but a spirit of dis- 
taste for free grace would ever have led any commentator to 
deny her sin. 

I do think this triumph of faith over sin is not the least here 
recorded, but that if there be any superiority ascribable to any 
one of faith's exploits, this is, in some sense, the greatest of 
all. What I faith, didst thou fight with hideous lust ? What ! 
wouldst thou struggle with the fiery passion which sendeth 
forth fiame from human breasts ? What ! wouldst thou touch 
with thy hallowed fingers foul and bestial debauchery ? "Yea," 
says faith, " I did encounter this abomination of iniquity ; I 
delivered this woman from the loathsome chambers of vice, 
the wily snares of enchantment, and the fearful penalty of 
transgression ; yea, I brought her off saved and rescued, gave 
her purity of heart, and renewed in her the beauty of holi- 
ness ; and now her name shall be recorded in the roll of my 
triumphs as a woman full of sin, yet saved by faith." 

I shall have some things to say this morning concerning this 
notable victory of faith over gin, such as I think will lead you 
to see that this was indeed a supereminent triumph of faith. I 
will make my divisions alliterative, that you may recollect 
them. This woman's fkith was saving faiths singular faith^ 
stable faith^ self-denying faith^ sympathising faith^ and sano- 
tifying faith. Let no one run away, when I shall have ex- 



BAHAB'S FAITH. 271 

pounded the first point, and miss the rest, for you can not ap- 
prehend the whole power of her fidth unless you remember 
each of those particulars I am about to mention. 

I. In the first place, this woman's faith was SAYINCI faith* 
All the other persons mentioned here were doubtless saved by 
fiiith ; but I do not find it specially remarked concerning any of 
them that they perished not through their faith ; while it is 
particularly said of this woman, that she was delivered amid 
the general destruction of Jericho purely and only through her 
faith. And, \\dthout doubt, her salvation was not merely of a 
temporal nature, not merely a deliverance of her body from 
the sword, but redemption of her soul from hell. O ! what a 
mighty thing faith is, when it saves the soul from going down 
to the pit ! So mighty is the ever-rushing torrent of sin, that 
no arm but that which is as strong as Deity can ever stop the 
sinner from being hurried down to the gulf of black despair, 
and, when nearing that gulf, so impetuous is the torrent of 
divine wrath, that nothing can snatch the soul from perdition 
but an atonement which is as divine as God himself. Yet faith 
is the instrument of accomplishing the whole work. It de- 
livers the sinner from the stream of sin, and so, laying hold 
upon the omnipotence of the Spirit, it rescues him from that 
great whirlpool of destruction into which his soul was being hur 
ried. What a great thing it is to save a soul! You can 
never know how great it is unless you have stood in the 
capacity of a saviour to other men. Yon heroic man who, 
yesterday, when the house was burning, climbed the creaking 
stair-case, and, almost suffocated by the smoke, entered an up- 
per chamber, snatched a babe from its bed and a woman from 
the window, bore them both down in his arms, and saved them 
at the peiil of his own life. Tie can tell you what a jgreat thing it 
is to save a fellow-creature. Yon noble-hearted youth who, 
yesterday, sprang into the river, at the hazard of himself, and 
snatched a drowning man from death, he felt, when he stood 
upon the shore, what a great thing it was to save life. Ah I 
but you can not tell what a great thing it is to save a soul. It 
is only our Lord Jesus Christ who can tell you that, for he is 
the only one who has ever been the Saviour of sinners. And 
remember, you can only know how great a thing faith is by 



272 bahab's fatth. 

knowing the infinite value of the salvation of a sooL '^ l^ow, 
by &ith, the harlot Bahab was delivered." That she was really 
saved in a gospel sense as well as temporally, seems to me to 
be proved from her reception of the spies which was an emblem 
of the entrance of the word into her heart, and her hanging 
out of the scarlet thread was an evidence of &ith, not unaptly 
picturing fidth in the blood of Jesus the Redeemer. But who 
can measure the length and breadth of that word — salvation. 
Ah I it was a mighty deed which faith accomplished when he 
bore her off in safety. Poor sinner! take comfort. The same 
&ith which saved Rahab can save thee. Ait thou literally one 
of Rahab's sisters in guilt ? She was saved, and so mayest 
thou be, if God shall grant thee repentance. Woman I art 
thou loathsome to thyself? Dost thou stand at this moment 
in this assembly, and say, '^ I am ashamed to be here ; I know 
I have no right to stand among people who are chaste and 
honest ?" I bid thee still remain ; yea, come again and make 
this thy Sabbath house of prayer. Thou art no intruder ! 
Thou art welcome ! For thou hast a sacred right to the courts 
of mercy. Thou hast a sacred right ; for here sinners are in- 
vited, and thou art such. Believe in Christ, and thou, like 
Rahab, shalt not perish with the disobedient, but even thou 
shalt be saved. 

And now there is some gentleman in the audience who says, 
" There's a gospel for you ; it is a kind of sanctuary for wicked 
men, unto which the worst of people may run and be saved.'* 
Yes, that is the stale objection which Celsus used against Ori- 
gen in his discussion. " But," said Origen, " it is true, Celsus, 
that Christ's gospel is a sanctuary for thieves, robbers, mur- 
derers, and harlots. But know this, it is not a sanctuary 
merely, it is an hospital too; for it heals their sins, delivers 
them from their diseases, and they are not afterwards what 
they were before they received the gospel." I ask no man to- 
day to come to Christ, and then continue his sins. If so, I 
should ask him to do an absurdity. As well might I talk of 
delivering a Prometheus, while his chains are allowed to re- 
main upon him and bind him to his rock. It can not be. 
Christ taketh away the vulture from the conscience, but he 
taketh away the chains too, and maketh the man wholly fre« 



BAHAB'S FATTH. 273 

when he doeth it all. Tet, we repeat it again, the chief of sin- 
ners are as welcome to Christ as the best of saints. The foun- 
tain filled with blood was opened for black ones ; the robe of 
Christ was wdven for naked ones ; the balm of Calvary was 
compounded for sick ones ; life came into the world to raise 
the dead. And O I ye perishing and guilty souls, may God 
give you Rahab's feith, and you shall have this salvation, and 
shall with her stand yonder, where the white-robed spotless 
hosts sing unending hallelujah to God and the Lamb. 

II. But mark, Rahab's faith was a singulab faith. The 
city of Jericho was about to be attacked ; within its walls 
there were hosts of people of all classes and characters, and 
they knew right well that if their city should be sacked and 
stormed they would all be put to death ; but yet, strange to 
say, there was not one of them who repented of sin, or who 
even asked for mercy, except this woman who had been a har- 
lot. She, and she alone was delivered, a solitary one among 
a multitude. Now, have you ever felt that it is a very hard 
thing to have a singular faith ? It is the easiest thing in the 
world to believe as every body else believes, but the difficulty 
is to believe a thing alone, when no one else thinks as you 
think ; to be the solitary champion of a righteous cause when 
the enemy mustereth his thousands to the battle. Now, this 
was the faith of Rahab. She had not one who felt as she did, 
who could enter into her feelings and realize the value of her 
faith. She stood alone. O I it is a noble thing to be the lonely 
follower of despised truth. There be some who could tell you 
a tale of standing up alone. There have been days when the 
world poured continually a river of infemy and calumny upon 
them, but they stemmed the torrent, and, by continued grace, 
made strong in weakness, they held their own until the current 
turned, and they, in their success, were praised and applauded 
by the very men who sneered before. Then did the world 
accord them the name of " great." But where lay their great- 
ness ? Why, in this, that they stood as firm in the storm as 
they stood in the calm — that they were as content to serve 
God alone as they were to run by fifties. To be good we must 
be singular. Christians must swim against the stream. Dead 
fish always float down the stream, but the living fish forces its 

12* 



274 BAHAB'S FAITH. 

way against the current. Now, worldly religious men will go 
just as every body else goes. That is nothing. The thing is, 
to stand alone. Like Elijah, when he said, ^^ I only am left, 
and they seek my life ;" to feel in one's self that we believe as 
firmly as if a thousand witnesses stood up by our side. O I 
there is no great right in a man, no strong-minded right, un- 
less he dares to be singulai*. Why, the most of you are as 
afraid as you ever can be to go out of the fashions, and you 
spend more money than you ought because you think you 
must be respectable. Yo« dare not move in opposition to 
your brethren and sisters in the circle in which you move ; 
and therefore you involve yourselves in difficulties. You are 
blindfolded by the rich fabric of fashion, and therefore many 
a wrong thing is tolerated because it is customary. But a 
strong-minded man is one who does not try to be singular, but 
who dares to be singular, when he knows that to be singular 
is to be right. Now, Rahab's faith, sinner as she was, had 
this glory, this crown about its head, that she stood alone, 
" feithful among the faithless found." 

And why should not God vouchsafe the same faith to thee 
my poor, sinning, but contrite hearer ? You live in a back 
street, in a house which contains none but Sabbath breakers, 
and irreligious men and women. But if you have grace in 
your heart you will dare to do right. You belong to an infi- 
del club ; if you should make them a speech after your own 
conscience, they would hiss you ; and if you forsook their com- 
pany, they would persecute you. Go and try them. Dare 
them. See, whether you can do it ; for if you are afraid of 
men, you are taken in a snare which may prove your ^ne/'and 
is now your sin, Mark you, the chief of sinners can make the 
most daring of saints ; the worst men in the devil's army, when 
they are converted, make the truest soldiers for Jesus. The 
forlorn hope of Christendom has generally been led by men 
who have proved the high efficacy of grace to an eminent de- 
gree by having been saved from the deepest sins. Go on, and 
the Lord give you that high and singular faith ! - 

III. Furthermore, this woman's faith was a stable faith, 
which stood firm in the midst of trouble. I have heard of a 
church clergyman who was once waited upon by his church- 



bahab's faith. 275 

warden, after a long time of drought, and was requested to 
put up the prayer for rain. " Well," said he, " my good man, 
I will offer it, but it's not a bit of use while the wind is in the 
east, I'm sure." There are many who have that kind of faith : 
they believe just so far as probabilities go with them, but when 
the promise and the probability part, then they follow the 
probability and part with the promise. They say, " The thing 
is likely, therefore I believe it." But that is no faith, it is 
sight. True faith exclaims, "The thing is unlikely, yet I 
believe it." This is real faith. Faith is to say, that "moun- 
tains, when in darkness hidden, are as'real as in day." Faith 
is to look through that cloud, not with the eye of sight, which 
seeth naught, but with the eye of faith, which seeth every 
thing, and to say, " I trust him when I can not trace him ; I 
tread the sea as firmly as I would the rock ; I walk as securely 
in the tempest as in the sunshine, and lay myself to rest upon 
the surging billows of the ocean as contentedly as upon my 
bed." The faith of Rahab was the right sort of faith, for it 
was firm and enduring. 

I will just have a little talk with Rahab this morning, as I 
suppose old Unbelief did commune with her. Now, my good 
woman, don't you see the absurdity of this thing? Why, the 
people of Israel are on' the other side of Jordan, and there is 
no bridge : how are they to get ovei ? Of course they must 
go up higher toward tne fords ; and then Jericho will be for a 
long time secure. They will take other cities before coming 
to Jericho ; and, besides, the Canaanites are mighty, and the 
Israelites are only a parcel of slaves ; they will soon be cut in 
pieces, and there will be an end of them ; therefore, do not 
harbor these spies. Why put your life in jeapordy for such 
an improbability ? " Ah," says she, " I do not care about the 
Jordan ; my faith can believe across the Jordan, or else it 
were only a dry-land faith." By-and-by, they march through 
the Jordan dry shod, and then faith gets firmer confidence. 
" Ah !" says she, secretly within herself, what she would will- 
ingly have said to her neighbors, " will you not now believe ? 
will you not now sue for mercy ?" " No," they say ; " the 
walls of Jericho are strong ; can the feeble host resist us ? 
And lo. on the morrow the troops are out, and what do they 



276 BAHAB'S FAITH. 

do ? Tbey simply blow a number of rams' horns ; her neigh- 
bors say, " Why, Rahab, you do not mean to say you believe 
now? They are mad." The people just go round the city, 
and all hold their tongues, except the few priests blowing 
rams' horns. " Why, it is ridiculous. It were quite a new 
thing in war&re to hear of men taking a city by blowing rams' 
horns." That was the first day ; probably the next day Ra- 
hab thought they would come with scaling-ladders and mount 
the walls ; but no, rams' horns again, up to the seventh day ; 
and this woman kept the scarlet thread in the window all the 
time, kept her &ther and mother, and brothers and sisters in 
the house, and would not let them go out ; and on the seventh 
day, when the people made a great shout, the wall of the city 
fell flat to the ground ; but her faith overcame her womanly 
timidity, and she remained within, although the wall was tum- 
bling to the ground. Rahab's house stood alone upon the 
wall, a solitary fragment amid a universal wreck, and she 
and her household were all saved. Now would you have 
thought that such a rich plant would grow in such poor soil — 
that strong faith could grow in such a sinful heart as that of 
Rahab ? Ah I but here it is that God exercises his great hus- 
bandry. " My Father is the husbandman," said Christ. Any . 
husbandman can get a good crop out of good soil ; but God is 
the husbandman who can grow cedars on rocks, who can not 
only put the hyssop upon the wall, but put the oak there too, 
and make the greatest faith spring up in the most unlikely po- 
sition. All glory to his grace I the great sinner may become 
great in faith. Be of good cheer, then, sinner ! If Christ 
should make thee repent, thou hast no need to think that thou 
shalt be the least in the femily. O I no ; thy name may yet 
be written among the mightiest of the mighty, and thou may- 
est stand as a memorable and triumphant instance of the 
power of faith. 

IV. This woman's faith was a self-dekying faith. She 
dared to risk her life for the sake of the spies. She knew 
that if they were found in her house she would be put to 
death ; but though she was so weak as to do a sinful deed to 
preserve them, yet she was so strong that she would run the 
risk of being put to death to save these two men. It is some- 



BAHAB*S FAITH. 277 

thing te be able to deny ourselves. An American once said, 
" I have got a good religion ; it's the right sort of religion ; I 
do not know that it costs me a cent a year ; and yet I believe 
I am as truly a religious man as any body." " Ah I" said one 
who heard it, " the Lord have mercy on your miserable stingy 
soul ; for if you had been saved you would not have been con- 
tent with a cent a year" — a hal:4)enny per annum I I hazard 
this assertion, that there is nothing in the &ith of that man 
who does not exercise self-denial. If we never give any thing 
to Christ's cause, work for Christ, deny ourselves for Christ, 
the root of the matter is not in us. I might call some of you 
hypocrites : you sing, 

*' And if I might make some reserve^ 
And dat7 did not call, 
I love my Grod with zeal so great, 
That I could give him aU." 

Yes, but you would noty though ; you know better than that, 
for you do not, as it is, give all, no, nor yet hal^ nor yet the 
thousandth part. I suppose you think you Bxepoor yourselves, 
though you have got some thousand pounds odd a year, and 
so you keep it yourself, under the notion that " he that giveth 
to the poor lendeth to the Lord." I don't know how else it 
is you make your religion square with itself, and be at all con- 
sistent. This woman said, '^ If I must die for these men, I 
will ; I am prepared, bad name as I have, to have a worse 
name still ; as a traitor to my country I am prepared to be 
handed down to infemy, if it be necessary, for having betrayed 
my country in taking in these spies, for I know it is God's will 
it should be done, and do it I will at every hazard." O men 
and brethren,, trust not your faith, unless it has self-denial 
with it. Faith and self-denial, like the Siamese twins, are 
bom together, and must live together, and the food that nour- 
isheth one must nourish both. But this woman, poor sinner 
as she was, would deny herself. She brought her life, even as 
that other woman, who was a sinner, brought the alabaster box 
of precious ointment, and broke it on the head of Christ. 

V. Not to detain you too long, another point very briefly. 
This woman's faith was a sympathising faith. She did not 



278 BAHAB'S FAITH. 

believe for herself only ; she desired mercy for her relations. 
Said sl.e, " I want to be saved, but that very desire makes me 
want to have my father saved, and my mother saved, and my 
brother saved, and my sister saved." I know a man who 
walks seven miles every Sabbath to hear the gospel preached 
at a certain place — a place where they preach tlie gospel. You 
know that very particular, superfine sort — the gospel, a gospel, 
the spirit of which consists in bad temper, carnal security, ar- 
rogance, and a seared conscience. But this man was one day 
met by a friend, who said to him, " Where is your wife ?*' 
" Wife /" said he to him. " What I does she not come with 
you ?" " O ! no," said the man ; " she never goes anywhere." 
** Well, but," said he, " don't you try to get her to go, and 
the children ?" " No ; the fact of it is, I think, if I look to 
myself, that is quite enough." " Well," said the other, " and 
you believe that you are God's elect, do you?" "Yes." 
" Well, then," said the other, " I don't think you are, because 
you are worse than a heathen man and a publican, for you 
don't care for your own household ; therefore I dont think 
you give much evidence of being God's elect, for they love 
their fellow-creatures." So sure as our faith is real, it will 
want to bring others in. You will say, " You want to make 
proselytes." Yes ; and you will reply, that Christ said to the 
Pharisees, " Ye compass sea and land to make one proselyte." 
Yes, and Christ did not find fault with them for doing so : 
what he found fault with them for was this — " When ye have 
found him ye make him tenfold more the child of hell than 
yourselves." 

The spirit of proselyting is the spirit of Christianity, and we 
ought to be desirous of possessing it. If any man will.say, " I 
believe such and such a thing is true, but I do not wish any 
one else to believe it, I will tell you, it is a lie ; he does not 
believe it, for it is impossible, heartily and really to believe a 
thing, without desiring to make others believe the same. And 
I am sure of this, moreover, it is impossible to know the value 
of salvation without desiring to see others brought in. Said 
that renowned preacher, Whitefield, " As soon as I was con- 
verted, I wanted to be the means of the conversion of all that 
I had ever known. There were a number of young men that 



SAHAB'S FAITH. 279 

I had played cards with, that I had sinned with, and trans- 
gressed with : the first thing I did was, to go to their houses 
to see what I could do for their salvation, nor could I rest 
until I had the pleasure of seeing many of them brought to 
the Saviour." This is a first-fruit of the Spirit. It is a kind 
of instinct in a young Christian. He must have other people 
feel what he feels. Says one young man, in writing to me this 
week, " I have been praying for my fellow-clerk in the oflSce ; 
I have desired that he might be brought to the Saviour, but 
at present there is no answer to my prayers." 

Do not give a penny for that man's piety which will not 
spread itself. Unless we desire others to taste the benefits 
we have enjoyed, we are either inhuman monsters or out- 
rageous hypocrites ; I think the last is most likely. But this 
woman was so strong in faith that all her family were saved 
from destruction. Young woman! you have a father, and 
he hates the Saviour. O! pray for him. Mother! you 
have a son: he scoffs at Christ. Cry out to God for him. 
Ay, my friends — ^young people like myself— we little know 
what we owe to the prayers of our parents. I feel that I shall 
never be able sufficiently to bless God for a praying mother. 
I thought it was a great nuisance to be had in at such a time 
to pray, and more especially to be made to cry, as my mother 
used to make me cry. I would have laughed at the idea of 
any body else talking to me about these things ; but when she 
prayed, and said, " Lord, save my son Charles," and then was 
©vercome, and could not get any further for crying, you could 
not help crying too ; you could not help feeling ; it was of no 
use trying to stand against it. Ah ! and there you are young 
man ! Your mother is dying, and one thing which makes her 
death-bed bitter is, that you scoff God and hate Christ. O ! 
it is the last stage of impiety, when a man can think lightly 
of a mother's feelings. I would hope there are none such 
here, but that those of you who have been so blessed, as to 
have been begotten and brought forth by pious men and 
women may take this into consideration — that to perish with 
a mother's prayers is to perish fearfully ; for if a mother's 
prayers do not bring us to Christ, they are like drops of oil 
dropped into the fl^unes of hell that will make them bum more 



280 BAHAB'S FATTH. 

fiercely upon the soul for ever and ever. Take heed of msb- 
ing to perdition over your mother's prayers ! 

There is an old woman weeping — do you know why ? I 
believe she has sons too, and she loves them. I met with a 
little incident in company, the other day, after preaching. 
There was a little boy at the comer of the table, and his father 
asked him, " Why does your father love you, John ?" Said 
the dear little lad, very prettily, " Because I'm a good boy." 
" Yes," said the fether, " he would not love you if you were 
not a good boy." I turned to the good father and remarked 
that I was not quite sure about the truth of the last remark, 
for I believed he would love hiqi if he were ever so bad. 
** Well," he said, " I think I should." And said a minister at . 
the table, " I had an instance of that yesterday. I stepped 
into the house of a woman who had a son transported for life, 
and she was as ftill of her son Richard as if he had been prime 
minister, or had been her most faithful and dutiful son." Well, 
young man, will you kick against love like that — love that will 
bear your kicks, and will not turn round against you, but love 
you straight on still ? But perhaps that woman — ^I saw her 
weep just now — ^had a mother, who has gone long ago, and 
she was married to a brutal husband, and at last left a poor 
widow ; she calls to mind the days of her childhood, when the 
big Bible was brought out and read around the hearth, and 
" Our Father which art in heaven" was their nightly prayer. 
Now, perhaps, God is beginning some good thing in her heart, 
1 that he would bring her now, though seventy years of agg, 
to love the Saviour 1 Then would she have the beginning of 
life over again in her last days, which will be made her best 
days. 

VI. One more head^ and then we have done. Rahab's faith 
was a sANC?nPYiNG faith. Did Rahab continue a harlot after 
she had faith ? No, no, she did not. I do not believe she was a 
harlot at the time the men went to her house, though the name 
still stuck to her, as such ill names will ; but I am sure she was 
not afterward, for Salmon the prince of Judah married her, 
and her name is put down among the ancestors of our Lord 
Jesus Christ. She became after that a woman eminent for 
piety walking in the fear of God, Now, you may have a 



sahab's faith. 281 

dead faith which will ruin your soul. The faith that will save 
you is a faith which sanctifies. " Ah !" says the drunkard^ " I 
like the gospel, sir ; I believe in Chnst ;" then he will go over 
to the Blue Lion to-night, and get drunk. Sir, that is not the 
believing in Christ that is of any use. " Yes," says another, 
"I believe in Christ;" and when he gets outside he will begin 
to talk lightly, fi*othy words, perhaps lascivious ones, and sin 
as before. Sir, you speak falsely ; you do not believe in Christ. 
That faith which saves the soul is a real faith, and a real faith 
sanctifies men. It makes them say, " Lord, thou hast forgiven 
me my sins ; I will sin no more. Thou hast been so merciful 
to me, I will renounce my guilt ; so kindly hast thou treated 
me, so lovingly hast thou embraced me. Lord, I will serve thee 
till I die ; and if thou wilt give me grace, and help me so to 
be, I will be as holy as thou art." You can not have faith, and 
yet live in sin. To believe is to be holy. The two things 
must go together. That faith is a dead faith, a corrupt faith, 
which lives in sin that grace may abound. Rahab was a 
sanctified woman. O that God might sanctify some that are 
here I The world has been trying all manner of processes 
to refona men : there is but one thing that ever will reform 
them, and that is, faith in the preached gospel. But in this 
age preaching is much despised. You read the newspaper ; 
you read the book ; you hear the lecturer ; you sit and listen 
to the pretty essayist ; but where is the preacher ? Preach- 
ing is not taking out a manuscript sermon, asking God to di- 
rect your heart, and then reading pages prepared beforehand. 
That is reading — not preaching. There is a good tale told of 
an old man whose minister used to read. The minister called 
to see him, and said, " What are you doing John ?" " Why, 
I'm prophesying, sir." " Prophesying ; how is that ? You 
mean you are reading the prophecies ?" " No, I don't ; I'm 
prophesying ; for you read preaching, and call it preaching, and 
I read prophecies, and, on the same rule, that is prophesying." 
And the man was not far from right. We want to have more 
outspoken, downright utterances of truth and appeals to the 
conscience, and until we get these, we shall never see any very 
great and lasting reforms. But by the preaching of God's 
word, foolishness though it seem to some, harlots are reformed. 



282 BAHAB'S FAITH. 

thieves are made honest, and the worst of men brought to the 
Saviour. Again let me affectionately give the invitation to 
the vilest of men, if so they feel themselves to be, 

" Come, ye needy, come and welcome, 

Gk)d*8 free bounty glorify : 
Trae belief and true repentance-^ 

Eyery grace that brings us nigh — 
Without money, 
Gome to Jesus Christ and buy.'' 

Tour sins will be forgiven, your transgressions cast away, and 
you shall henceforth go and sin no more, God having renewed 
you, and he will keep you even to the end. May God give 
his blessing, for Jesus' sake I Amen. 



SERMON XIX. 
THE BLOOD-SHEDDING, 

** 'Without shedding of blood is no remission." — HebebwSi iz 22. 

I WELL show you three fools. One is yonder soldier, who 
has been wounded on the field of battle, grievously wounded, 
well nigh unto death ; the surgeon is by his side, and the 
soldier asks him a question. Listen, and judge of his folly. 
What question does he ask? Does he raise his eyes with 
eager anxiety and inquire if the wound be mortal, if the prac- 
titioner's skill can suggest the means of healing, or if the rem- 
edies are within reach and the medicine at hand ? No, nothing 
of the sort ; strange to tell, he asks, " Can you inform me with 
what sword I was wounded, and by what Russian I have been 
thus grievously mauled ? I want," he adds, " to learn every 
minute particular respecting the origin of my wound." The 
man is delirious or his head is affected. Surely such questions 
at such a time are proof enough that he is bereft of his senses. 

There is another fool. The storm is raging, the ship is fly- 
ing impetuous before the gale, the dark scud moves swiftly 
over head, the masts are creaking, the sails are rent to rags, 
and still the gathering tempest grows more fierce. Where is 
the captain ? Is he busily engaged on the deck, is he manfully 
feeing the danger, and skillfully suggesting means to avert it ? 
No, sir, he has retired to his cabin, and there with studious 
thoughts and crazy fencies he is speculating on the place where 
this storm took its rise. " It is mysterious, this wind ; no one 
ever yet," he says, " has been able to discover it." And, sq 
reckless of the vessel, the lives of the passengers, and his own 
life, he is careful only to solve his curious questions. The man 
is mad, sir ; take the Tudder from his hand ; he is clean gone 



284 THE BLOOD-SHEDDma. 

mad ! If he should ever ran on shore, shut him np as a hope- 
less Itmatic. 

The third fool I shall doubtless find among yourselves. You 
are sick and wounded with sin, you are in the storm and hur- 
ricane of Almighty vengeance, and yet the question which you 
would ask of me, this morning, would be, " Sir, what is the 
origin of evil ?" You are mad, sir, spiritually mad ; that is 
not the question you would ask if you were in a sane and 
healthy state of mind ; your question would be, " How can I 
get rid of the evil ?" Not, " How did it come into the world ?" 
but " How am I to escape from it ?" Not, " How is it that 
hail descends from heaven upon Sodom ?" but " How may I, 
like Lot, escape out of the city to a Zoar ?" Not, " How is it 
that I am sick ?" but " Are there medicines that will heal me ? 
Is there a physician to be found that can restore my soul to 
health?'* Ahl you trifle with subtleties while you neglect 
certainties. More questions have been asked concerning the 
origin of evil than upon any thing else. Men have puzzled 
their heads, and twisted their brains into knots, in order to 
understand what men can never know — ^how evil came into 
this world, and how its entrance is consistent with divine 
goodness? The broad fact is this, there is evil; and your 
question should be, "How can I escape from the wrath to 
come, which is engendered of this evil ?" In answering that 
question this verse stands right in the middle of the way (like 
the angel with the sword, who once stopped Balaam on his 
road to Barak), "Without shedding of blood is no remission." 
Your real want is to know how you can be saved ; if you are 
aware that your sin must be pardoned or punished, your ques- 
tion will be, " How can it be pardoned ?" and then point blank, 
in the very teeth of your inquiry, there stands out this fact, 
" Without shedding of blood there is no remission." Mark 
you, this is not merely a Jewish maxim ; it is a world-wide 
and eternal truth. It pertaineth not to the Hebrews only, but 
to the Gentiles likewise. Never in any time, never in any 
place, never in any person, can there be remission apart from 
shedding of blood. This great fact, I say, is stamped on na- 
ture ; it is an essential law of God's moral government, it is 
one of the fundamental principles which can neither be shaken 



THE BLOOD-SHBBBIKO. 285 

nor denied. Never can there be any exception to it ; it stands 
the same in every place throughout all ages — " Without shed- 
ding of blood there is no remission." It was so with the Jews ; 
they had no remission without the shedding of blood. Some 
things under the Jewish law might be cleansed by water or 
by fire, but in no case where absolute sin was concerned was 
there ever purification without blood — ^teaching this doctrine, 
that blood, and blood alone, must be applied for the remission 
of sin. Indeed, the very heathen seem to have an inkling of 
this fact. Do not I see their knives gory with the blood of 
victims ? Have I not heard horrid tales of human immola- 
tions, of holocausts, of sacrifices ; and what mean these, but 
that there lies deep in the human breast, deep as the very ex- 
istence of man, this truth, " that without shedding of blood 
there is no remission." And I assert once more, that even in 
the hearts and consciences of my hearers there is something 
which will never let them believe in remission apart from a 
shedding of blood. This is the grand truth of Christianity, 
and it is a truth which I will endeavor now to fix upon your 
memory ; and may God by his grace bless it to your souls. 
" Without shedding of blood is no remission." 

First, let me show you the blood-shedding, before I begin 
to dwell upon the text. Is there not a special blood-shedding 
meant ? Yes, there was a shedding of most precious blood, 
to which I must forthwith refer you. I shall not tell you now 
of massacres and murders, nor of rivers of blood of goats and 
rams. There was a blood-shedding once, which did all other 
shedding of blood by far outvie ; it was a man — a God — ^that 
shed his blood at that memorable season. Come and see it. 
Here is a garden dark and gloomy ; the ground is crisp with 
the cold frost of midnight ; between those gloomy olive trees 
I see a man, I hear him groan out his life in prayer ; hearken, 
angels ; hearken, men, and wonder ; it is the Saviour groaning 
out his soul I Come and see him. Behold his brow! O 
heavens 1 drops of blood are streaming down his face and from 
his body ; every pore is open, and it sweats ! but not the sweat 
of men that toil for bread : it is the sweat of one that toils for 
heaven — ^he "sweats great drops of blood!" That is tlie 
blood-shedding, without which there is no remission. Follow 



286 THX BLOOD-SHEDDING. 

that man farther ; they have dragged him with sacrilegious 
bands from the place of his prayer and his agony, and they 
have taken him to the hall of Pilate ; they seat him in a chair 
and mock him ; a robe of purple is put <m his shoulders in 
mockery ; and mark his brow — ^they have put about it a crown 
of thorns, and the crimson drops of gore are rushing down his 
cheeks I Ye angels ! the drops of blood are running down his 
cheeks I But turn aside that purple robe for a moment. Hia 
back is bleeding. Tell me, demons, who did this ? They lift 
up the thongs still dripping clots of gore ; they scourge and 
tear his flesh, and make a river of blood to run down his 
shoulders I That is the shedding of blood, without which there 
is no remission. Not yet have I done; they hurry him 
through the streets ; they fling him on the ground ; they nail 
his hands and feet to the transverse wood, they hoist it in the 
air, they dash it into its socket, it is fixed, and there he hangs, 
the Christ of Gk)d. Blood from his head, blood from his hands, 
blood from his feet I In agony unknown he bleeds away his 
life : in terrible throes he exhausts his soul. " Eloi, Eloi, lama 
sabacthani." And then see I they pierce his side, and forth- 
with runneth out blood and water I This is the shedding of 
blood, sinners and saints, this is the awful shedding of blood, 
the terrible pouring out of blood, without which, for you, and 
for the whole human race, there is no remission. 

I have then, I hope, brought my text fairly out : without 
this shedding of blood there is no remission. Now I shall 
come to dwell upon it more particularly. 

Why is it that the story doth not make men weep ? I told 
it ill, you say. Ay, so I did ; I will take all the blame. But, 
sirs, if it were told as ill as men could speak, were our hearts 
what they should be, we should bleed away our lives in sor- 
row. O, it was a horrid murder that I It was not an act of 
regicide ; it was not the deed of a fratricide, or of a parricide ; 
it was — what shall I say ? — I must make a word — a deicide; 
the killing of a God ; the slaying of him who became incar- 
nate for our sins. O, if our hearts were but soft as iron, we 
must weep ; if they were but tender as the marble of the 
mountains, we should shed great drops of grief; but they are 
harder than the nether millstone; we forget the grie& of him 



THE BLOOD-SHEDDINO. 287 

that died this ignominious death ; we pity not his sorrows, nor 
do we account the interest we have in him as though he suf^ 
fered and accomplished all for us. Nevertheless, here stands 
the principle — " Without shedding of blood is no remission." 

Now, I take it, there are two things here. First, there is 
a negative expressed: " No remission without shedding of 
blood." And then there is a positive implied^ forsooth, with 
shedding of blood there is remission. 

I. First, I say, here is A negative expeessbd ; there is no 
remission without blood — without the blood of Jesus Christ. 
This is of divine authority ; when I utter this sentence I have 
divinity to plead. It is not a thing which you may doubt, or 
which you may believe ; it must be believed and received, 
otherwise you have denied the Scriptures, and turned aside 
from God. Some truths I utter, perhaps, have little better 
basis than my own reasoning and inference, which are of little 
value enough ; but this I utter, not with quotations from God's 
Word to back up my assertion, but from the lips of God him- 
self. Here it stands in great letters, " There is no remission." 
So divine its authority. Perhaps you will kick at it : but re- 
member, your rebellion is not against me, but against God. 
If any of you reject this truth, I shall not controvert ; God 
forbid I should turn aside from proclaiming his gospel, to dis- 
pute with men. I have God's irrevocable statute to plead 
now, here it stands : " Without shedding of blood there is no 
remission." You may believe or disbelieve many things the 
preacher utters ; but this you disbelieve at the peril of your 
souls. It is God's utterance : will you tell God to his face you 
do not believe it ? That were impious. The negative is di- 
vine in its authority; bow yourselves to it, and accept its 
solemn warning. 

But some men will say that God's way of saving men, by 
shedding of blood, is a cruel way, an unjust way, an unkind 
way ; and all kinds of things they will say of it. Sirs, I have 
nothing to do with your opinion of the matter ; it is so. If 
you have any faults to find with your Maker, fight your battles 
out with him at last. But take heed before you throw the 
gauntlet down ; it will go ill with a worm when he fighteth 
his Maker, and it will go ill with you when you contend with 



288 THE BLOOD-SHEDDING. 

him. The doctrine of atonement when rightly understood and 
faithfully received, is delightful, for it exhibits boundless love, 
immeasurable goodness, and infinite truth ; but to unbelievers 
it will always be a hated doctrine. So it must be, sirs ; you 
hate your own mercies ; you despise your own salvation. I 
tarry not to dispute with you; I affirm it in God's name: 
" Without shedding of blood there is no remission." 

And note how decisive this is in its character : " Without 
shedding of blood there is no remission.*' " But, sir, can't I 
get my sins forgiven by my repentance ? if I weep, and plead, 
and pray, will not God forgive me for the sake of my tears ?" 
"No remission," says the text, "without shedding of blood." 
" But, sir, if I never sin again, and if I serve Grod more zeal- 
ously than other men, will he not forgive me for the sake of 
my obedience ?" " No remission," says the text, " without 
shedding of blood." " But, sir, may I not trust that God is 
mercifhl, and will forgive me without the shedding of blood ?" 
" No," says the text, " without shedding of blood there is no 
remission;" none whatever. It cuts off every other hope. 
Bring your hopes here, and if they are not based in blood, and 
stamped with blood, they are as useless as castles in the air and 
dreams of the night. " There is no remission," says the text, 
in positive and plain words ; and yet men will be trying to get 
remission in fifty other ways, until their special pleading be- 
comes as irksome to us as it is useless for them. Sirs, do what 
you like, say what you please, but you are as far off remission 
when you have done your best, as you were when you began, 
except you put confidence in the shedding of our Saviour's 
blood, and in the blood-shedding alone, for without it there is 
no remission. 

And note again, how universal it is in its character. "What I 
may not I get remission without blood-shedding ?" says the 
king ; and he comes with the crown on his head ; " may not I 
in all my robes, with this rich ransom, get pardon without the 
blood-shedding ?" " None," is the reply ; " none." Forthwith 
comes the wise man, with a number of letters after his name — 
" Can I not get remission by these grand titles of my learning ?" 
" None ; none." Then comes the benevolent man — " I have 
dispersed my money to the poor, and given my body to feed 



THE BLOOIHIHSDI>IN6. 289 

them; shall not I get remission?" "None," says the text. 
" Without shedding of blood there is no remission." How this 
f puts every one on a level I My lord, you are no bigger than 
your coachman ; Sir squire, you are no better off than John that 
plows the ground ; minister, your oflSce does not serve you with 
any exemption — ^your poorest hearer stands on the very same 
footing. " Without shedding of blood there is no remission." 
No hope for the best, any more than for the worst, without this 
shedding of blood! O! I love the gospel, for this reason 
among others, because it is such a leveling gospel. Some 
persons do not like a leveling gospel ; nor would I, in some 
senses of the word. Let men have their rank, and their titles, 
and their riches, if they will; but I do like,' and I am sure all 
good men like, to see rich and poor meet together, and feel 
that they are on a level ; the gospel makes them so. It says 
" Put up your money-bags, they will not procure remission ; 
roll up your diploma, that will not get you remission; for- 
get your ferm and your park, they will not get you remis- 
sion ; just cover up that escutcheon, that coat of arms will not 
get remission. Come, ye ragged beggars, filthy off-scourings 
of the world, penniless ; come hither ; here is remission as much 
for you, ill-bred and ill-mannered though ye be, as for the 
noble, the honorable, the titled and the wealthy. All stand 
on a level here ; the text is universal : " Without shedding of 
blood there is no remission." 

Mark, too, how perpetual my text is. Paul said, " there is 
no remission;" I must repeat this testimony too. When 
thousands of years have rolled away, some minister may stand 
on this spot and say the same. This will never alter at all ; 
it will always be so, in the next world as well as this : no re- 
mission without shedding of blood. " O I yes, there is," says 
one, " the priest takes the shilling, and he gets the soul out of 
purgatory." That is a mere pretense ; it never was in. But 
without shedding of blood there is no real remission. There 
may be tales and fancies, but there is no true remission with- 
out the blood of propitiation. Never, though you strained 
yourselves in prayer; never, though you wept yourselves 
away in tears ;* never, though you groaned and cried till your 
heart-strings break ; never in this world, nor in that which i« 

18 



290 THX BLOOD-SHEDDnra. 

to come, can the forgiveness of sins be procured on any other 
ground than redemption by the blood of ChristJ and never can 
the conscience be cleansed but by faith in that sacrifice. The 
tBLCt is, beloved, there is no use for you to satisfy your hearts 
with any thing less than what satisfied God the Father. With- 
out the shedding of blood nothing would appease his justice ; 
and without the application of that same blood nothing can 
purge your consciences. 
n. But as there is no remission without blood-shedding, it 

IS IMPLIED THAT THBBB IS EEMISSION WITH IT. Mark it WcU, 

this remission is a present £u^t. The blood having been al- 
ready shed, the remission is already obtained, I took you to 
the garden of Gethsemane and the mount of Calvary to see 
the blood-shedding. I might now conduct you to another 
garden and another mount to show you the grand proof of the 
remission. Another garden, did I say ? Yes, it is a garden 
fraught with many pleasing and even triumphant reminis- 
cences. Aside from the haunts of this busy world, in it was a 
new sepulcher, hewn out of a rock where Joseph of Arimathea 
thought his own poor body should presently be laid. But 
there they laid Jesus after his crucifixion. 

He had stood surety for his people, and the law had de- 
manded his bjDod ; death had held him with strong grasp ; 
and that tomb was, as it were, the dungeon of his captivity, 
when, as the good Shepherd, he laid down his life for the 
sheep. Why, then, do I see in that garden an open, imten- 
anted grave ? I will tell you. The debts are paid, the sins 
are canceled, the remission is obtained. How, think you? 
That great Shepherd of the sheep hath been brought again 
from thie dead by the blood of the everlasting covenant, and 
in him also we have obtained redemption through his blood. 
There, beloved, is proof the first. 

Do you ask farther evidence ? I will take you to mount 
Olivet. You shall behold Jesus there with his hands raised 
like the high priest of old to bless his people, and while he is 
blessing them, be ascends, the clouds receiving him out of 
their sight. But why, you ask, O why hath he thus ascended, 
and whither is he gone ? Behold he entereth, not into the 
holy place made with hands, but he entereth into heaven it* 



THE BLOOD-BHEDDma. 291 

self with his own blood, there to appear in the presence of 
God for us. Now, therefore, we have boldness to draw near 
by the blood of Chiist. The remission is obtained, here is 
proof the second. O believer, what springs of comfort are 
there here for thee. 

And now let me commend this remission by the shedding 
of blood to those who have not yet believed. Mr. Innis, a 
gi'eat Scotch minister, once visited an infidel who was dying. 
When he came to him the first time, he said, " Mr. Innis, I 
am relying on the mercy of God ; God is merciful, and he will 
never damn a man for ever." When he got worse and was 
nearer death, Mr. Innis went to him again, and he said, " O ! 
Mr. Innis, my hope is gone ; for I have been thinking, if God 
be merciful, God is just too ; and what if, instead of being 
merciful to me, he should be just to me ? What would then 
become of me ? I must give up my hope in the mere mercy 
of God ; tell me how to be saved 1" Mr. Innis told him that 
Christ had died in the stead of all believers — that God could 
be just, and yet the justifier through the death of Christ. 
" Ah !" said he, " Mr. Innis, there is something solid in that ; 
I can rest on that ; I can not rest on any thing else ;" and it 
is a remarkable fact that none of us ever m^t with a man who 
thought he had his sins forgiven unless it was through the 
blood of Christ. Meet a Mussulman ; he never had his sins 
forgiven ; he does not say so. Meet an infidel ; he never 
knows that his sins are forgiven. Meet a legalist ; he says, 
" I hope they will be forgiven ;" but he does not pretend they 
are. No one ever gets even a fancied hope apart from this, 
that Christ, and Christ alone, must save by the shedding of 
his blood. 

Let me tell a story to show how Christ saves souls. Mr. 
Whitefield had a brother, who had been like him an earnest 
Christian, but he had backslidden ; he went far from the ways 
of godliness ; and one afternoon, after he had been recovered 
from his backsliding, he was sitting in a room in a chapel- 
house. He had heard his brother preach the day before, and 
his poor conscience had been cut to the very quick. Said 
Whitefield's brother, when he was at tea, " I am a lost man," 
and he groaned and cried, and could neither eat nor drmk. 



292 THB BLOOD-0HSDDI2fG. 

Said Lady HuntingdoD, who sat opposite, "What did you say, 
Mr. Whitefield?" "Madam," said he, "I said I am a lost 
man." " I'm glad of it," said she ; " I'm glad of it." " Tour 
ladyship, how can you say so ? It is cruel to say you are glad 
that I am a lost man." " I repeat it, sir," said she ; " I am 
heartily glad of it." He looked at her, more and more as- 
tonished at her barbarity. " I am glad of it," said she, " be- 
cause it is written, ^ The Son of man came to seek and to save 
that which was lost.'" With the tears rolling down his 
cheeks, he said, " What a precious Scripture ; and how is it 
that it comes with such force to me? 01 madam," said 
he, " madam, I bless God for that ; then he will save me ; I 
trust my soul in his hands ; he has forgiven me." He went 
outside the house, felt ill, fell upon the ground, and expired. 
I may have a lost man here this morning. As I can not say 
much, I will leave you, good people ; you do not want any 
thing. 

Have I a lost man here ? Lost man ! Lost woman ! Where 
are you ? Do you feel yourself to be lost ? I am so glad of 
it ; for there is remission by the blood-sheddiug. O sinner, 
are there tears in your eyes ? Look through them. Do you 
see that man in the garden ? That man sweat drops of blood 
for you. Do you see that man on the cross ? That man was 
nailed there for you. ! if I could be nailed on a cross this 
morning for you all, I know what you would do : you would 
fall down and kiss my feet, and weep that I should have to die 
for you. But sinner, lost sinner, Jesus died for you — ^for you; 
and if he died for you, you can not be lost. Christ died in 
vain for no one. Are you, then, a sinner ? Are you con- 
vinced of sin because you believe not in Christ ? I have au- 
thority to preach to you. Believe in his name and you can 
not be lost. Do you say you are no sinner ? Then I do not 
know that Christ died for you. Do you say that you have no 
sins to repent of? Then I have no Christ to preach to you. 
He did not come to save the righteous ; he came to save the 
wicked . Are you wicked ? Do you feel it ? Are you lost ? 
Do you know it? Are you sinful? Will you confess it? 
Sinner ! if Jesus were here this morning he would put out his 
bleeding hands, and say, " Sinner, I died for you ; will you be- 



THB BLOOD-SHBDBIKG. 293 

lieve me ?" He is not here in person ; he has sent his servant 
to tell yon. Won't you believe him ? " O !" but you say, 
" I am such a sinner !" " Ah !" says he, " that is just why I 
died for you, because you are a sinner." " But," you say, 
" I do not deserve it." " Ah !" says he, " that is just why I 
did it." Say you, " I have hated him." " But," says he, " I 
have always loved you." " But, Lord, I have spat on thy 
minister, and scorned thy word." " It is all forgiven," says 
he, " all washed away by the blood which did run from my 
side. Only believe me ; that is all I ask. And that I will 
give you. I will help you to believe." "Ah I" says one, 
" but I do not want a Saviour." Sir, I have nothing to say to 
you except this, " The wrath to come I the wrath to come !" 
But there is one who says, " Sir, you do not mean what you 
say ? Do you mean to preach to the most wicked meif or 
women in the place ?" I mean what I say. There she is ! She 
is a harlot ; she has led many into sin, and many into hell. 
There she is ; her own friends have turned her out of doors ; 
her father called her a good-for-nothing hussey, and sa5d she 
should never come to the house again. Woman ! dost thou 
repent ? Dost thou feel thyself to be guilty ? Christ died to 
save thee, and thou shalt be saved. There he is. I can see him. 
He was drunk ; he has been drunk very often. Not many 
nights ago I heard his voice in the street, as he went horiie at 
a late hour on Saturday night, disturbing every body ; and he 
beat his wife too. He has broken the Sabbath ; and as to 
swearing, if oaths be like soot, his throat must want sweep- 
ing bad enough, for he has cursed God often. Do you feel 
yourself to be guilty, my hearer ? Do you hate your sins, 
and are you willing to forsake them ? Then I bless God for 
you. Christ died for you. Believe I I had a letter a few 
days ago .from a young man who heard that during this week 
I was going to a certain town. Said he, " Sir, when you come 
do preach a sermon that will fit me ; for do you know, sir, I 
have heard it said that we must all think ourselves to be tl^ 
wickedest people in the world, or else we can not be saved/' I , 
try to think so, but I can not, because I have not beeivthe 
wickedest. I want to think so, but I can not. I want to be 
saved, but I do not know how to repent enough." Now, if I 



294 THB BLOOD-SHBDDING. 

have the pleasure of seeing him I shall tell him, God does not 
require a man to think himself the wickedest in the world, 
because that would sometimes be to think a falsehood ; there 
are some men who are not so wicked as others are, What God 
requires is this, that a man should say, " I know more of myself 
than I do of other people ; I know little about them, and from 
what I see of myself not of my actions, but of my feeart, I do 
think that there can be few worse than I am. They may be 
more guilty openly, but then I have had more light, more 
privileges, more opportunities, more warnings, and therefore I 
am still guiltier." I do not want you to bring your brother 
with you and say, " I am more wicked than he is ;" I want 
you to come yourself, and say, " Father, I have sinned ;" you 
have nothing to do with your brother William, whether he 
has* sinned more or less; your cry should be, "Father, I have 
sinned." You have nothing to do with your cousin Jane, 
whether or not she has rebelled more than you. Tour busi- 
ness is to cry, " Lord have mercy upon me a sinner I" That 
is all. Do you feel yourselves lost ? Again, I say, 

" Come, and welcome, simier, come I" 

To conclude. There is not a sinner in this place who knows 
himself to be lost and ruined, who may not have all his sins 
forgiven, and "rejoice in the hope of the glory of God." 
You may, though black as hell, be white as heaven this very 
instant. I know that 'tis only by a desperate struggle that 
faith takes hold of the promise, but, the very moment a sinner 
believes, that conflict is past. It is his first victory and a 
blessed one. Let this verse be the language of your heart ; 
adopt it and make it your own : 

" A gmlty, weak, and helpless worm. 
In Christ's kind arms I fkll ; 
He is my strength and righteousness, 
My Jesus and my aU." 



SERMON XX. 
JUSTIFICATION BY GRACE. 

" Being justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Christ 
Jesus."— EOMANS, iii 24. 

Thb hill of comfort is the hill of Calvary ; the house of con- 
solation is builded with the wood of the cross ; the temple of 
heavenly cordials is fomided upon the riven rock, riven by the 
spear which pierced its side. No scene in sacred history ever 
gladdens the soul like the scene on Calvary. 

"Is it not strange, the darkest hour 
That ever dawned on sinM earth 
Should touch the heart with softer power 

For comfort, than an angel's mirth? 
That to the cross the mourner's eye should turn, 
Sooner than where the stars of Bethlehem bum ?" 

Nowhere does the soul ever find such consolation as on that 
very spot where misery reigned, where woe triimiphed, where 
agony reached its climax. There grace hath dug a fountain, 
which ever gusheth with waters pure as crystal, each drop 
capable of alleviating the woes and the agonies of mankind. 
Te have had your seasons of woe, my brethren and my sisters 
in Christ Jesus ; and ye will confess it was not at Olivet that 
ye ever found comfort, not on the hill of Sinai, nor on Tabor ; 
but Gethsemane, Gabbatha, and Golgotha have been a means 
of comfort to you. The bitter herbs of Gethsemane have 
often taken away the bitters of your life ; the scourge of Gab- 
batha hath often scourged away your cares, and the groans 
of Calvary have put all other groans to flight. 

We have, this morning then, a subject which I trust may 
be the means of comforting God's saints, seeing it takes its 



396 JUniFICATION BT QBACX. 

rise at the cross, and thence runs on in a rich stream of peren- 
nial blessings to all believers. You note, we have in our text, 
first of all, the redemption of Christ Jesus ; secondly, the jus- 
tijication of sinners floioing from it ; and then thirdly, ths 
manner of the giving of this justification^ " fireely by his 
grace.** 

I First, then, we have thb bbdemftion that is in os bt 
Chbist Jssus. 

The figure of redemption is very simple, and has been very 
frequently used in Scripture. When a prisoner has been taken 
captive, and has been made a slave by some barbarous power, 
it has been usual, before he could be set free, that a ransom 
price should be paid down, ^ow, we being, by the &11 of 
Adam, prone to guiltiness, and, indeed, virtually guilty, we 
were by the irreproachable judgment of God given up to the 
vengeance of the law ; we were given to the hands of justice ; 
justice claimed us to be his bond-slaves for ever, unless we 
c^juld pay a ransom, whereby our souls could be redeemed. We 
were, indeed, poor as owlets, we had not wherewith to bless 
ourselves. We were as our hymn hath worded it, " bankrupt 
debtors ;*' an execution was put into our house ; all we had was 
sold ; we were left naked, and poor, and miserable, and we 
could by no means find a ransom ; it was just then that Christ 
stepped in, stood sponsor for us, and, in the room and stead 
of all believers, did pay the ransom price, that we might in that 
hour be delivered from the curse of the law and the vengeance 
of God, and go our way, clean, frae, justified by his blood. 

Let me just endeavor to show you some qualities of the re- 
demption that is in Christ Jesus. You will remember the 
micltitude he has redeemed ; not me alone, nor you alone, but 
" a multitude thajt no man can number," which shall as far ex- 
ceed the stars of heaven for number, as they exceed all mortal 
reckomng. Christ hath bought for himself some out of every 
kingdom, and nation, and tongue, under heaven ; he hath re- 
deemed from among men some of every rank, from the high- 
est to the lowest ; some, of every color — ^black and white ; 
some of every standing in society, the best and the worst. For 
some of all sorts hath Jesus Christ given himself a ransom that 
Vnty might be redeemed unto himself. 



JUSTIFICATION BY GBAGB. 297 

Now, concerning this ransom, we have to observe, that it 
was all paidy and all paid at once. When Christ redeemed 
his people, he did it thoroughly ; he did not leave a single 
debt unpaid, nor yet one farthing for them to settle afterwards. 
God demanded of Christ the payment for the sins of all his 
people ; Christ stood forward, and to the utmost farthing paid 
whate'er his people owed. The sacrifice of Calvary was not a 
part payment ; it was not a partial exoneration, it was a com- 
plete and perfect payment, and it obtained a complete and 
perfect remittal of all the debts of all believers that have lived, 
do live, or shall live, to the very end of time. On that day 
when Christ hung on the cross, he did not leave a single far- 
thing for us to pay as a satisfaction to God ; he did not leave, 
fro«i a thread even to a shoe-latchet, that he had not satisfied. 
The whole of the demands of the law were paid down there 
and then by Jehovah Jesus, the great high priest of all his 
people. And blessed be his name, he paid it all at once too. 
So priceless was the ransom, so princely and munificent was 
the price demanded for our souTs, one might have thought it 
would have been marvelous if Christ had paid it by instal- 
ments; some of it now, and some of it then. Kings' ransoms 
have sometimes been paid part at once, and part in dues after- 
wards, to run through years. But not so our Saviour : once 
for all he gave himself a sacrifice ; at once he counted down 
the price, and said, " It is finished," leaving nothing for him 
to do, nor for «s to accomplish. He did not drivel out a part- 
payment, and t!^n declare that he would come again to die, 
or that he wo!^"^ again suffer, or that he would again obey ; 
but down upon the nail, to the utmost farthing, the ransom of 
all his people was paid, and a full receipt given to them, and 
Christ nailed that receipt to his cross, and said, "It is done, it 
is done ; I have taken away the handwriting of ordinances, I 
have nailed it to the cross ; who is he that shall condemn my 
people, or lay any thing to their charge ? for I have blotted 
out like a cloud their transgressions, and like a thick cloud 
their sins !" 

And when Christ paid all this ransom, will you just notice, 
that he did it all himself/ He was very particular about that. 
Simon, the Cyrenian, might bear the cross ; but Simon, the 

13* 



298 JUSTIFICATION BY GBACE. 

Cyrenian, might not be nailed to it. That sacred circle of 
Calvary was kept for Christ alone. Two thieves were with 
him there ; not righteous men, lest any should have said that 
the death of those two righteous men helped the Saviour. 
Two thieves hung there with him, that men might see that 
there was majesty in his misery, and that he could pardon men 
and show his sovereignty, even when he was dying. There 
were no righteous men to suffer; no disciples shared his death ; 
Peter was not dragged there Jo be beheaded, John was not 
nailed to a cross side by side with him ; he was left there 
alone. He says, " I have trodden the wine-press alone ; and 
of the people there was none with me." The whole of the 
tremendous debt was put upon his shoulders; the whole 
weight of the sins of all his people was placed upon him. Once 
he seemed to»stagger under it : " Father, if it be possible.'* 
But again he stood upright : " Nevertheless, not my will, but 
thine be done." The whole of the punishment of his people 
was distilled into one cup ; no mortal lip might give it so much 
as a solitary sip. When he put it to his own lips, it was so 
bitter, he well nigh spurned it : " Let this cup pass from me." 
But his love for his people was so strong, that he took the cup 
in both his hands, and 

" At one tremendous draught of love 
He drank danmation dry," 

for all his people. He drank it all, he endured all, he suffered 
all ; so that now for ever there are no flames of hell for them, 
no racks of torment; they have no eternal woes; Christ hath 
suffered all they ought to have suffered, and they must, they 
shall go free. The work was completely done by himself 
without a helper. 

And note, again, it was accepted. In truth, it was a goodly 
ransom. What could equal it ? A soul " exceeding sorrow- 
ful even unto death ;" a body torn with torture ; a death of 
the most inhuman kind ; and an agony of such a character 
that tongue can not speak of it, nor can even man's mind im- 
agine its horror. It was a goodly price. But say, was it ac- 
cepted ? Thero have been prices paid sometimes, or rather 
offered, which never were accepted by the party to whom they 



JUSTIFICATIO]^ BT aBA.CS. 299 

were offered, and therefore the slave did not go free. But this 
was accepted. The evidence I will show you. When Christ 
declared that he would pay the debt for all his people, God 
sent the officer to arrest him for it ; he arrested him in the 
garden of Gethsemane, and seizing upon him, he dragged him 
to the bar of Pilate, to the bar of Herod, and to the judgment- 
seat of Caiaphas ; the payment was all made, and Christ was 
put into the grave. He was there, locked up in durance vile, 
until the acceptance should have been ratified in heaven. He 
slept there a portion of three days in his tomb. It was de- 
clared that the ratification was to be this : the surety was to 
go his way as soon as his suretyship engagements had been 
fulfilled. Now let your minds picture the buried Jesus. He 
is in the sepulcher. »Tis true he has paid all the debt, but the 
receipt is not yet given ; he slumbers in that narrow tomb. 
Fastened in with a seal upon a giant stone, he sleeps still in 
his grave ; not yet has the acceptance been given from God ; 
the angels have not yet come from heaven to say, " The deed 
is done, God has accepted thy sacrifice." Now is the crisis 
of this world ; it hangs trembling in the balance. Will God 
accept the ransom, or will he not ? We shall see. An angel 
comes from heaven with exceeding brightness ; he rolls away 
the stone; and forth comes the captive, with no manad^ 
upon his hands, with the grave-clothes left behind him ; fr^, 
never more to suffer, never more to die. Now, / 

" If Jesus had not paid the debt, 
He ne*er had been at freedom set." y 

If God had not accepted his sacrifice, he would h|«re been in 
his tomb at this moment ; he never would havp^en from his 
grave. But his resurrection was a pledgj^^^fTGrod's accepting 
him. He said^ " I have had a^aim upon thee to this hour j 
that claim is paid now ; gojbhy way." And death gave up his 
royal captive, the &toxieyW2ia rolled into the garden, and the 
Conqueror came forUli^leading captivity captive. 

And, moreov^ God gave a second proof of acceptance ; 
for he took hi^ only-begotten Son to heaven^ and set him at his 
right hand, far above all principalities and powers ; and therein 
he mjstfit to say to him, " Sit upon the throne, for thou hast 



300 JITSTIFIOATlOir BT GBiCB. 

done the mighty deed ; all thy works and all thy miseries are 
accepted as the ransom of men." O my beloved, think what 
a grand sight it must have been when Christ ascended into 
g'ory ; what a noble certificate it must have been of his Fath- 
er's acceptance of him ! Do you not think you see the scene 
on earth ? It is very simple. A few disciples are standing 
upon a hill, and Christ mounts into the air in slow and solemn 
movement, as if an angel sped his way by gentle degrees, like 
mist or exhalation from the lake into the skies. Can you im- 
agine what is going on up yonder ? Can you for a moment 
conceive how, when the mighty Conqueror entered the gates 
of heaven, the angels met him ; 

" They brought his chariot from on high, 
To bear him to his throne ; 
Clapped their triumphant wings, and cried. 
* The glorious work is done I* " 

Can you think how lojid were the plaudits when he entered 
the gates of heaven ? Can you conceive how they pressed on 
one another, to behold how he came conquering and red from 
the fight ? Do you see Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and all the 
isaints redeemed, come to behold the Saviour and the Lord ? 
They had desired to see him, and now their eyes behold him 
in flesh and blood, the conqueror over death and hell ! Do , 
you think you see him, with hell at his chariot-wheels, with 
doftth dragged as a captive through the royal streets of hea- 
ven ? O, what a spectacle was there that day ! No Roman 
warrior ever had such a triumph ; none ever saw such a ma- 
jestic sight. The pomp of a whole universe, the royalty of 
entire creition, cherubim and seraphim, and all powers create, 
did swell the show r^«l^ God himself, the Everlasting One, 
crowned all, when he pressed his Son to his bosom, and said, 
" Well done, well done ; thou hASt finished the work which I 
gave thee to do. Rest here for ever, mine accepted one." 
Ah, but he never would have had that triumph, if he had not 
paid all the debt. Unless his Father had accepted the ransom- 
price, the ransomer had never been so honorei? ; but because 
it was accepted, therefore did he so triumph. Sir* fer, then, 
concerning the ransom. 



JUSTIFICATION BY 6BACB. 801 

II. And now, by the help of God^s Spirit, let me address my- 
self to THE EFFECT OP THE RANSOM; being justified — "justi- 
fied freely by his grace through the redemption." 

Now, what is the meaning of justification? Divines will 
puzzle you, if you ask them. I must try the best I can to 
make justification plain and simple, even to the comprehension 
of a child. There is not such a thing as justification to be had 
on earth for mortal men, except in one way. Justification, 
you know, is a forensic term ; it is employed always in a legal 
sense. A prisoner is brought to the bar of justice to be tried. 
There is only one way whereby that prisoner can be justified ; 
that is, he must be found not guilty ; and if he is found not 
guilty, then he is justified — ^that is, he is proved to be a just 
man. If you find that man guilty, you can not justify him. 
The Queen may pardon him, but she can not justify him. The 
deed is not a justifiable one, if he were guilty concerning it ; 
and he can not be justified on account of it. He may be par- 
doned ; but not royalty itself can ever wash that man's char- 
acter. He is as much a real criminal when he is pardoned as 
before. There is no means among men of justifying a man of 
an accusation which is laid agmnst him, except by^his being 
proved not guilty. Now, the wonder of wonders is, that we 
are proved guilty, and yet we are justified : the verdict has 
been brought in against us, guilty ; and yet, notwithstanding, 
we are justified. Can any earthly tribunal do that ? No ; it 
remained for the'ransom of Christ to effect that which is an 
impossibility to any tribunal upon earth. We are all guilty. 
^Read the 23d verse, immediately preceding the text — " For 
all have sinned, and "come short of the glory of God." There 
the verdict of guilty is brought in, and yet we are immediately 
afterward said to be justified freely by his grace. 

Now, allow me to explain the way whereby God justifies a 
sinner, I am about* to suppose an impossible case. A pris- 
oner has been tried, and condemned to death. He is a guilty 
man ; he can not be justified, because he is guilty. But now, 
suppose for a moment that such a thing as this could happen 
— that some second party could be introduced, who could take 
all that man's guilt upon himself, who could change places 
with that man, and by somd mysterious process, which, of 



S02 jushficatiox by gbagb. 

coarse, is impossible with men, become that man; or take 
that man's character upon himself; he, the righteous man, 
putting the rebel in his place, and making the rebel a right* 
ecus man. We can not do that in our courts. If I were to 
go before a judge, and he should agree that I should be com- 
mitted for a year's imprisonment, instead of some wretch who 
was condenmed yesterday to a year's imprisonment, I could 
not take his guilt. I might take his punishment, but not his 
guilt. Now, what iiesh and blood can not do, that Jesus 
Christ by his redemption did. Here I stand, the sinner. I 
mention myself as the representative of you all. I am con- 
demned to die. God says, "I will condemn that man; I 
must, I will — ^I will punish him." Christ comes in, puts me 
aside, and stands himself in my stead. When the plea is de- 
manded, Christ says, " Guilty ;" takes my guilt to be his own 
guilt. When the punishment is to be executed, forth comes 
Christ. " Punish me," he says ; " I have put my righteous- 
ness on that man, and I have taken that man's sins on me. 
Father, punish me, and consider that man to have been me. 
Let him reign in heaven ; let me suffer misery. Let me en- 
dure his curse, and let him receive my blessing." This mar- 
velous doctrine of the changing of places of Christ with poor 
sinners, is a doctrine of revelation, for it never could have 
been conceived by nature. Let me, lest I should have made 
a mistake, explain myself again. The way whereby God saves 
a sinner is not, as some say, by passing over the penalty. No ; 
the penalty has been all paid. It is the putting of another 
person in the rebel's place. The rebel must die ; God says he 
must. Christ says, " I will be substitute for the rebel. The 
rebel shall take my place ; I will take his." God consents to 
it. No earthly monarch could have power to consent to such 
a change. But the God of heaven had a right to do as he 
pleased. In his infinite mercy he consented to the arrange- 
ment. " Son of my love," said he, " you must stand in the 
sinner's place ; you must suffer what he ought to have suf. 
fered ; you must be accounted guilty, just as he was accounted 
guilty ; and then I will look upon the sinner in another light. 
I will look at him as if he were Christ ; I will accept him 
as if he were my only-begotten Son, full of grace and truth. I 



JUSTIFICATION BY GBACE. 303 

will give him a crown in heaven, and I will take him to my 
heart for ever and ever." This is the way we are saved ; 
"Being justified freely by his grace, through the redemption 
which is in Christ Jesus." 

And now, let me further go on to ea^lain some of the cha- 
racteristics of this justification. As soon as a repenting sin- 
ner is justified, remember, he is justified for all his sins. Here 
stands a man all guilty. The moment he believes in Christ, 
his pardon at once he receives, and his sins are no longer his; 
they are cast into the depths of the sea. They were laid upon 
the shoulders of Christ, and they are gone. The man stands 
a guiltless man in the sight of God, accepted in the beloved. 
" What !" say you, " do you mean that literally ?" Yes, I 
do, that is the doctrine of justification by faith. Man ceases 
to be regarded by divine justice as a guilty being ; the moment 
he believes in Christ his guilt is all taken away. But I am 
going a step further. The moment the man believes in Christ, 
he ceases to be guilty in God's esteem ; but what is more, he 
becomes righteous, he becomes meritorious ; for, in the mo- 
ment when Christ takes his sins he takes Christ's righteous- 
ness ; so that, when God looks upon the sinner who but an 
hour ago was dead in sins, he looks upon him with as much 
love and affection as he ever looked upon his Son. He him- 
self has said it — " As the Father loved me, so have I loved 
you." He loves us as much as his Father loved him. Can 
you believe such a doctrine as that ? Does it not pass all 
thought ? Well, it is a doctrine of the Holy Spirit ; the doc- 
trine whereby we must hope to be saved. Can I to any un- 
enlightened person illustrate this thought better ? I will give 
him the parable we have given to us in the prophets — ^the 
parable of Joshua the high priest. Joshua comes in, clothed 
in filthy garments, those filthy garments repsesenting his sins. 
Take away the filthy garments ; that is pardon. Put a miter 
on his head ; clothe him in royal raiment ; make him rich and 
fair; that is justification. 'But where do these garments come 
from ? and where do those rags go to ? Why, the rags that 
Joshua had on go to Christ, and the garments put on Joshua 
are the garments that Christ wore. The sinner and Christ do 
just what Jonathan and David did. Jonathan put his robes 



804 jusnFicATioir bt gbacb. 

on David, David gave Jonathan his garments ; so Christ takes 
our sins, we take Christ's righteousness ; and it is by a glori- 
ous substitution and interchange of places that sinners go free 
and are justified by his grace. 

" But," says one, " no one is justified like that till he dies." 
Believe me, he is. 

" The moment a sumer believes 
And trusts in his cruoifled Qod, 
His pardon at once he receives; 
Salvation in full, through his ^lood." 

If that young man over there has really believed in Christ 
this morning, realizing by a spiritual experience what I have 
attempted to describe, he is as much justified in God's sight 
now as he will be when he stands before the throne. Not the 
glorified spirits above are more acceptable to God than the 
poor man below, who is once justified by grace. It is a per- 
fect washing, it is perfect pardon ; perfect imputation ; we are 
fully, freely, and wholly accepted, through Christ our Lord. 
Just one more word here, and then I will leave this matter of 
justification. Those who are once justified are justified irre- 
versibly. As soon as a sinner takes Chiist's place, and Christ 
takes the sinner's place, there is no fear of a second change. 
If Chiist has once paid the debt, the debt is paid, and it will 
never be asked for again ; if you are pardoned, you are par- 
doned once for ever. God does not give man a free pardon 
under his own sigrt-^manual, and then afterward retract it and 
punish man : that be far from God so to do. He says, " I have 
punished Christ ; you may go free." And after that we may 
" rejoice in hope of the glory of Govl," that "being justified 
by faith we have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus 
Christ." And now I hear one cry, " That is an extraordinary 
doctrine." Well, so some may think ; but let me say to you, 
it is a doctrine professed by all Protestant churches, though 
they may not preach it. It is ti\e doctrine of the Ch irch 
of England, it is the doctrine of Luther, it is the doctrine of 
the Presbyterian church ; it is professedly the doctrine of all 
Christian churches ; and if it seems Strange in your ears, it is 
because your ears are estranged, and not because the doctruie 
is a strange one. It is the doctrine of holy writ, that none 



JUmFICATIOK BY QBAGE. 805 

can condemn whom God justifies, and that none can accuse 
those &r whom Christ hath died ; for they are totally free 
from sin. So that, as one of the prophets has it, God sees no 
sin in Jacob nor iniquity in Israel. In the moment they be- 
lieve, their sins being imputed to Christ, they cease to be 
theirs, and Christ's righteousness is imputed to them and 
accounted theirs, so that they are accepted. 

III. And now I close up with the third point, upon which I 
shall be brief, and I hope very earnest : the manner op giv- 
ing THE JUSTIFICATION. Johu Bunyau would have it, that 
there are some whose mouths are set a watering for this great 
gift of justification. Are there not some here who are saying, 
" O ! if I could be justified ! But, sir, can I be justified ? I 
have been a drunkard, I have been a swearer, I have been 
every thing that is vile. Can I be justified ? Will Christ 
take my black sins, and am I to take his white robes ?" Yes, 
poor soul, if thou desirest it ; if God has made thee willing, if 
thou dost confess thy sins, Christ is willing to take thy rags, 
and give thee his righteousness, to be thine for ever. " Well, 
but how is it to be obtained?" says one; " must I be a holy man 
for many years, and then get it ?" Listen ! " Freely by his 
grace ;" " freely," because there i& no price to be paid for it ; 
" by his grace," because it is not of our deservings. " But, 
O sir, I have been praying, and I do not think God will for- 
give me, unless I do something to deserve it." I tell you, sir, 
if you bring in any of your deservings, you shall never have 
it. God gives away his justification freely; and if you bring 
any thing to pay for it, he will throw it in your face, and will 
not give his justification to you. He gives it away freely. Old 
Rowland Hill once went preaching at a fair ; he noticed the 
chapmen selling their wares by auction ; so Rowland said, " I 
am going to hold an auction too, to sell wine and milk, with- 
out money and without price. My friends over there," said 
he, " find a great difliculty to get you up to their price ; my 
difficulty is to bring you down to mine." So it is with men. 
If I could preach justification to be bought by you at a sov- 
ereign a piece, who would go out of the place without being 
justified ? If I could preach justification to you by walking 
a hundred miles, would we not be pilgrims to-morrow morn- 



dOC JUSTIFIOATION BY GBACB. 

iog, every one of us ? If I were to preach jostification whioh 
would consist in whippings and torture, there are very few 
here who would not whip themselves, and that severely too. 
But when it is freely, freely, freely, men turn away. " What ! 
am I to have it for nothing at all, without doing any thing ?" 
Yes, sJr, you are to have it for nothing, or else not at all ; it 
is " freely." " But may I not go to Christ, lay some daim to 
his mercy, and say, Lord, justify me because I am not so bad 
as others ?" It will not do, sir, because it is " by his grace." 
" But may I not indulge a hope, because I go to church twice 
a-day ?" No, sir, it is " by his grace." " But may I not offer 
this plea, I mean to be better ?" No, sir ; it is " by his grace." 
You insult God by bringing your counterfeit coin to pay for 
his treasures. O ! what poor ideas men have of the value of 
Christ's gospel,"if they think they can buy it ! God will not 
, have your rusty farthings to buy heaven with. A rich man 
once, when he was dying, had a notion that he could buy a 
place in heaven by building a row of alms-houses. A good 
man stood by his bedside, and said, '^ How much more are 
you going to leave ?" " Twenty thousand pounds." Said he, 
" That would not buy enough for your foot to stand on in 
heaven ; for the streets are all made of gold there, and there^ 
fore of what value can your gold be ? it would be accounted 
nothing of, when the very streets are paved with it." Nay, 
friends, we can not buy heaven with gold nor good works, nor 
prayers, nor any thing in the world. But how is it to be got ? 
Why it is to be got for asking only. As many of us as know 
ourselves to be sinners may have Christ for asking for him. 
Do you know that you want Christ ? You may have Christ ! 
" Whosoever will, let him come and take of the water of life 
freely." But if you cleave to your own notions, and say, 
" No, sir, I mean to do a great many good things, and then I 
will believe in Christ." Sir, you will be damned if you hold 
by such delusions. I earnestly warn you. You can not be 
saved so. " Well, but are we not to do good works ?" Cer- 
tainly you are ; but you are not to trust in them. You must 
trust in Christ wholly, and then do good works afterward. 
" But," says one, " I think if I were to do a few good works, 
it would be a little recommendation when I came." It would 



jusnpiCAnoN by gsacb. 307 

not, sir ; they would be no recommendation at all. Let a 
beggar come to your house in white kid gloves, and say he is 
very badly off, and wants some charity ; would the white kid 
gloves recommend him to your charity ? Would a good new 
hat that he has been buying this morning recommend him to 
your charity ? " No," you would say, " you are a miserable 
impostor ; you do not want any thing, and you shall not have 
any thing either ! Out with you !" 

The best livery for a beggar is rags, and the best livery for 
a sinner- to go to Christ in, is for him to go just as he is, with 
nothing but sin about him. " But no,*^ say you, " I must be 
a little better, and then I think Christ will save me." You 
can not get any better, try as long as you please. And be- 
sides — ^to use a paradox — ^if you were to get better, you would 
be all the worse ; for the worse you are, the better to come to 
Christ. If you are all unholy, come to Chiist ; if you feel your 
sin, and renounce it, come to Christ ; though you have been 
the*most debased and abandoned soul, come to Christ; if you 
feel yourself to have nothing about you to recommend you, 
come to Christ. 

" Venture on him, venture whoUy ; 
Let no other trust intrude." 

I do not say this to urge any man to continue in sin. God 
forbid ! If you continue in sin, you must not come to Christ ; 
you can not; your sins will hamper you. Yon can not be 
chained to your galley-oar — the oar of your sins — ^yet come to 
Christ, and be a free man. No, sir, it is repentance ; it is the 
immediate leaving off the sin. But mark thee, neither re- 
pentance, nor leaving off thy sin, can save thee. It is Christ, 
Christ, Chnst — Christ ohly. 

But I know you will go away, many of you, and try to build 
up your own Babel tower, to go to heaven. Some of you will 
go one way to work, and some another. You will go the 
ceremony way : you will lay the foundation of the structure 
with infant baptism, build confirmation on it, and the Lord's 
Supper. " I shall go to heaven," you say ; " do not I keep 
Good Friday and Christmas-day ? I am a better man than 
those dissenters. I am a most extraordinary man. Do I not 



808 JUSTIFICATION BY GBACB. 

say more prayers than any one ?'' You will be a long while 
going up that treadmill before you get an inch higher. That 
is not the way to get to the stars. One says, " I will go and 
study the Bible, and believe right doctrine ; and I have no 
doubt that by believing right doctrine I shall be saved." In- 
deed you will not I You can be no more saved by believing 
right doctrine than you can by doing right actions. " There," 
says another, " I like that ; I shall go and believe in Christ, 
and live as I like.'* Indeed you will not I For if you believe 
in Christ he will not let you live as your flesh liketh ; by his 
Spirit he will constrain you to mortify its affections and lusts. 
If he gives you the grace to make you believe, he will give you 
the grace to live a holy life afterward. If he gives you faith, 
he gives you good works afterward. You can not believe in 
Christ, unless you renounce every fault, and resolve to serve 
him with full purpose of heart. Methinks at last I hear a sin- 
ner say, " Is that the only door ? And may I venture through 
it ? Then I will. But I do not quite understand you ; I am 
something like poor Tiff, in that remarkable book 'Dred.* 
They talk a great deal about a door, but I can not see the 
door ; they talk a great deal about the way, but I can not see 
the way. For if poor Tiff could see the way, he would take 
these children away by it. They talk about fighting, but I do 
' not see any one to fight, or else I would fight." Let me ex- 
plain it then. I find in the Bible, " This is a faithful saying, 
and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ Jesus came into the 
world to save sinners." What have you to do, but to believe 
this and trust in him ? You will never be disappointed with 
such a faith as that. Let me give you over again an illustra- 
tion I have given hundreds of times, but I can not find another 
so good, so I must give it again. Faith is something like this. 
There is a story told of a captain of a man-ofwar, whose son — 
a young lad — was ^.ery fond of running up the rigging of the 
ship ; and one time, running after a monkey, he ran up the 
mast, till at last he got on the main-truck. Now, the main- 
truck, you are aware, is like a large round table put on the 
mast, so that when the boy was on the main-truck there was 
plenty of room for him ; but the difliculty was — to use the best 
explanation I can — ^that he could not reach the mast that was 



JUSTIFICATIOlf BT GBACB. S09 

under the table ; he was not tall enough to get down from this 
main-truck, reach the mast, and so descend. There he was on ' 
the main-truck; he managed to get up there, somehow or 
other, but down he never could get. His father saw that, and 
he looked up in horror ; what was he to do? In a few mo- 
ments his son would fall down, and be dashed to pieces. He 
W2iS clinging to the main-truck with alj his might, but in a little 
time he would fall down on the deck, and there he would be 
a mangled corpse. The captain called for a speaking-trumpet ; 
he put it to his mouth, and shouted, " Boy, the next time the 
ship lurches, throw yourself into the sea." It was, in truth, 
his only way of escape ; he might be picked up out of the sea, 
but he could not be rescued if he fell on the deck. The poor 
boy looked down on the sea ; it was a long way ; he could not 
bear the idea of throwing himself into the roaring current be- 
neath him ; he thought it looked angry and dangerous. How 
could he cast himself down into it ? So he dung to the main- 
truck with all his might, though there was no doubt that he 
must soon let go and perish. The father called for a gun, and 
pointing it up at him, said, " Boy, the next time the ship 
lurches, throw yourself into the sea, or I'll shoot you !" He 
knew his father would keep his word ; the ship lurched on one 
side, over went the boy splash into the sea, and out went 
brawny arms after him ; the sailors rescued him, and brought 
him on deck. Now, we, like the boy, are in a position of ex- 
traordinary danger, by nature, which neither you nor I can 
possibly escape of ourselves. Unfortunately, we have got 
some good work's of our own, like that main-truck^ and we 
cling to them so fondly that we never will give them up. 
Christ knows that unless we do give them up, we shall be 
dashed to piecea at last, for that rotten trust must ruin us. 
He, therefore, says, " Sinner let go thine own trust, and drop 
into the sea of my love." We look down, and say, " Can I be 
saved by trusting in God ? He looks as if he were angry with 
me, and I could not trust him." Ah I will not mercy's tender 
cry persuade you? — "He that believeth shall be saved.'' 
Must the weapon of destruction be pointed directly at you ? 
Must you hear the dreadful threat — " He that believeth not 
shall be damned?" It is with you now as with that boy; 



310 JUSTDlCATIOlf BT OBACB. 

your position is one of inumnent peril in itself and your sKght- 
ing the Father's counsel is a matter of niOre terrible alarm, it 
makes peril more perilous. You must do it, or else you 
perish! Let go your hold! That is faith when the poor 
sinner lets go his hold, drops down, and so is saved ; and the 
very thing which looks as if it would destroy him, is the means 
of his being saved. O ! believe on Christ, poor sinners ; be- 
lieve on Christ. Ye who know your guilt and misery com6, 
cast yourselves upon him ; come, and trust my Master, and as 
he lives, before whom I stand, ye shall never trust him in 
vain ; but ye shall find yourselves forgiven, and go your way 
rejoicing iu Christ Jesus. 



SERMON XXI. 
MANASSEH. 

" Then Manasseh knew that the Lord he was God."— 2 Chbon., xxxiil 13. 

Maitassbh is one of the most remarkable characters whose 
history is written in the sacred pages. We are accustomed 
to mention his name in the list of those who greatly sinned, 
and yet fomid great mercy. Side by side with Saul of Tar- 
sus, with that great sinner who washed the feet of Jesus 
with her tears, and wiped them with the hairs of her head, 
and with the thief that died upon the cross — sl forgiven sin- 
ner at the eleventh hour — we are wont to write the name of 
Manasseh, who " shed innocent blood very much," and not- 
withstanding that, was forgiven and pardoned, finding mejcy 
through the blood of a Saviour who had not then died, but 
whom God foresaw should die, and the merits of whose sacri- 
fice he therefore imputed to so great a transgressor as Ma- 
nasseh. 

Without preface we shall enter on the history of Manasseh 
this morning, and consider him in a threefold light : first, as 
a sinner^ then as an unbeliever^ and thirdly, as a convert. It 
may be there shall be some Manasseh within these walls now ; 
and if in describing the case of this ancient king of Israel I 
shall in some degree describe him, I trust he will take to him- 
self the same consoling truths which were the means of the 
comfort of Manasseh when in the dungeon of repentance. 

I. First, then, we shall consider Manasseh in his sin. 

1. And we note, first, that he belonged to that class of sin- 
ners who stand first in the phalanx of evil — ^namely, those 
vsho sin against great lights against a pious education and 
early training, Manasseh was the son of Hezekialf^ a inan 



912 ICANASSBH. 

who had some &alt8, but of whom it is nevertheless said, " He 
did right in the sight of the Lord." To a great degree he 
walked before God with a perfect heart, even as did David 
his father. We can not suppose that he neglected the educsr 
tion of his son Manasseh. He was the son of his old age. You 
will remember that at a time of heavy sickness God promised 
him that he should have his life prolonged fifteen years. Three 
years after that event Manasseh was born, and he was, there- 
fore, only twelve years old when his father died ; still he was 
old enough to remember the pious prayers of a father and a 
mother, and had arrived at sufficient maturity to understand 
right from wrong, and to have received those early impres- 
sions which we believe are, in most cases, eminently useful for 
after life. And yet Manasseh pulled down what his &ther had 
built up, and built up the idol temples which his &ther had 
pulled down. Now, it is a notorious fact, that men who do go 
wrong after a good training, are the worst men in the world. 
You may not know, but it is a fact, that the late lamented 
murder of Williams at Erromanga, was brought about by the 
evil doings of a trader who had gone to the island, and who 
was also the son of a missionary. He had become reckless in 
his habits, and treated the islanders with such barbarity and 
cruelty, that they revenged his conduct upon the next white 
man who put his foot on their shore ; and the beloved Wil- 
liams, one of the last of the martyrs, died a victim of the 
guilt of those who had gone before him. The worst of men 
are those who, having much light, still run astray. You shall 
find among the greatest champions of the camp of hell, men 
who were brought up and educated in our very ranks. It is 
not necessary that I should mention names ; but any of you 
that are acquainted with those who are the leaders of infidel- 
ity at the present time will at once recognize the fact. And 
such men actually make the very worst of infidels ; while the 
best of Christians often-come from the very worst of sinners. 
Our John Bunyans have come from the pot-house and the tap- 
room, from the b6wling-alley, or places lower in the scale ; 
our best of men have come from the very worst of places, 
and have been the best adapted to reclaim sinners, because 
they themselves had stepped into the kennel, and had never- 



MANASSKH. 313 

theless been washed in a Saviour's cleansing blood. And so 
it is true that the worst of the enemies of Christ are those 
who are nourished in our midst, and like the viper of old, 
which the husbandman nursed in his bosom, turn round to 
sting the bosom which has nurtured them. Such a one was 
Manasseh. 

2. In the next place, Manasseh as a sinner was a very hold 
one. He was one of those men who do not sin covertly, 
but who, when they transgress, do not seem to be at all 
ashamed, who are born with brazen foreheads, and lift their 
faces to heaven with insolence and impudence. He was a man 
who, if he would set up an idol, as you would see by reading 
this chapter, did not set it up in an obscure part of the land, 
but put it in the very temple of God ; and when he would 
desecrate the name of the Most High, he did not privily go 
to his chapel, where he might worship some evil deity, but he 
put the deity into the very temple itself, as if to insult God to 
his very face. He was a desperado in sin, and went to the ut- 
most limit of it, being very bold, and desperately set on mis- 
chief. Now, whether it be for right or wrong, boldness is 
always sure to win the day. Give me a coward — you give 
me nothing ; give me a bold man, and you give me one that 
can do something, whether for Christ's cause or for the devil's. 
Manasseh was a man of this kind. If he cursed God, it was 
with a loud voice ; it was not in hole or corner, but upon his 
throne, that he issued proclamations against the Most High, 
and in the most daring manner insulted the Lord God of 
Israel. And yet, dear friends, this man was saved, notwith- 
standing all this. This greatest sinner, this man who had 
trampled on his father's prayers, who had wiped from his 
brow the tears which had been shed there by an anxious 
parent, who had stifled the convictions of his conscience, and 
had gone to an extremity of guilt, in bold, open, and despe- 
rate sin, yet this man was at last, by divine grace, humbled 
and brought on his knees to acknowledge that God was God 
alone. Let no man, therefore, desp^r of his Yellow. I never 
do, since I think and hope that God has saved me. I am per- 
suaded that, live as long as I may, I shall never see the indi- 
vidual of whom I can say, " That man is a hopeless case.'* I 

14 



814 MANASSEH. - 

may peradventare meet with the person who has been so 
exhorted and so warned, and has so pat off all the sweet woo- 
ings of his conscience, that he has become seared and hardened, 
and consequently apparently hopeless ; but I shall never meet 
a man who has sinned so desperately that I can say of him he 
never can be saved. Ah ! no ; that arm of mercy which was 
long enough to save me is long enough to save you ; and if he 
could redeem you from your transgression, assuredly there are 
none sunk lower than you were, and therefore you may be- 
lieve that his arm of mercy can reach them. Above aU, let no 
man despair of himself. Whilst there is life there is hope. 
Give not up yourselves into Satan's arms. He tells you that 
your death-warrant is sealed, that your doom is cast, and that 
you never can be saved. Tell him to his iace that he is a liar, 
for that Jesus Christ " is able to save unto the uttermost them 
that come unto God by him, seeing that he ever liveth to 
make intercession for them." 

3. Again, Manasseh was a sinner of that peculiar caste which 
we suspect is not to be found very frequently. He was one of 
those who had the power of leading others to a very large ex- 
tent astray from the truth and religion of God. He was a king, 
jmd had, therefore, ^eat influence ; what he commanded was 
done. Among the rank of idolaters Manasseh stood first, and it 
was the song and glory of the false priests that the king of Ju- 
dah was on the side of the gods of the heathen. He was the 
leader — the first man in the battle. When the troops of the 
ungodly went to war against the God of the whole earth, 
Manasseh led the vanguard and cheered them on. He was 
their great GoUath, challenging all the armies of the living 
God. Many among the wicked stood back and feared the 
conflict ; but he never feared. " He spake and it was done ; 
he commanded, and it stood fast ;" and therefore he was bold 
and arrogant in leading others astray. There are some such 
still alive — men not content with treading the broad road 
themselves, but seeking to entice others into it. And O, how 
active they are in their efforts I They will go from house to 
house, and distribute those publications which are impure and 
polluting ; they will stand in our streets and endeavor to draw 
ai^und them the young, ay, men and women just fresh come 



MANASSBBT. 315 

from the bouse of God, or going to God's sanctuary, to tell 
them that dreary story that there is no God, or the dismal 
falsehood that there is no future, but that we must all die like 
dogs and suffer annihilation. There are some such who never 
seem to be happy unless when they are leading others astray. 
It is not enough for them to go alone against God, but they 
must sin in company. Like the woman in the Proverbs, they 
hunt for precious life, and like hounds thirsting for blood, they 
are seeking after men to destroy them. Society now is like 
Prometheus : it is, to a great extent, bound hand and foot by 
the very customs that surround it, and like Prometheus, we 
have upon us the winged hound of hell perpetually tapping 
at our heart and swallowing the life-blood of our spirit. I 
mean we have that accursed infidelity which seeks to lead 
men from God and drive them from their Maker. But, nev- 
ertheless, leaders among them have yet been saved. Manas- 
seh, the leader of those who hated God, was yet humbled, 
and made to love the Most High. 

Do you ask me whether such cases ever occur now ? I an- 
swer, yes they do ; too rarely, but they do happen. Yester- 
day I received something whidh cheered ray heart very much, 
and made me bless my God, that notwithstanding all oppo- 
sition, he had still made me of some little use in the world. I. 
received a long letter from a certain city, from one who has 
been one of the leaders of the secular society in that place. 
The writer says, " I purchased one of the pamphlets entitled 
' Who is this Spurgeon ?' and also your portrait (or a portrait 
sold as yours) for 3d. I brought these home, and exhibited 
them in my shop window. I was induced to do so from a feel- 
ing of derisive pleasure. The title of the pamphlet is, natu- 
rally, suggestive of caricature, and it was especially to incite 
that impression that I attached it to your portrait and placed 
it in my window. But I also had another object in view. I 
thought by its attraction to improve my trade. I am not at 
all in the book or paper business, which rendered its exposure 
and my motive the more conspicuous. I have taken it down 
now : I am taken down too. * * * I had bought one of 
your sermons of an old infidel a day or two previous. In that 
sermon I read these words : — 'They go on ; that step is safe 



816 ICANASSBH. 

— ^tiiey take it ; tlie next is safe — ^they take it ; their foot hangs 
over a gulf of darkness.' I read on, but the word darkness stag- 
gered me. It was all dark with me. * True, the way has been 
safe so far, but I am lost in bewilderment. No, no, no, I will not 
risk it.' I left the apartment in which I had been musing, and 
as I did so, the three words, ' Who can tell ?' seemed to be whis- 
pered at my heart. I determined not to let another Sunday pass 
without visiting a place of worship. How soon my soul might 
be required of me I knew not, but felt that it would be mean, 
base, cowardly, not to give it a chance. Ay, my associates may 
laugh, scof^ deride, call me coward, turncoat, I will do an act of 
justice to my soul. I went to the chapel ; I was just stupefied" 
with awe. What could I want there ? The doorkeeper opened 

his eyes wider, and involuntarily demanded, ' It's Mr. 

isn't it ?' 'Yes,' I said, ' it is.' He conducted me to a seat, and 
afterward brought me a hynm-book. I was fit to burst with 
anguish. ' Now,' I thought, ' I am here, if it be the house of 
God, heaven grant me an audience, and I will make ftdl sur- 
render. O God, show me some token by which I may know 
that thou art, and that thou wilt in no wise cast out the vile 
deserter who has ventured to seek thy face and thy pardoning 
mercy.' I opened the hymn-book to divert my mind from 
feelings that were rending me, and the first words that caught 
my eyes were, 

" * Dark, dark indeed the grave would be, 
Had we no lights God, from thee.' " 

After giving some things which he looks upon as evidences that 
he is a true convert of religion, he closes up by saying, " O sir, 
tell this to the poor wretch whose pride, like mine, has made him 
league with hell ; tell it to the hesitating and to the timid ; tell 
it to the cooling Christian, that God is a very present help to 
all that are in need. * * * Think of the poor sinner who 
may never look upon you in this world, but who will live to 
bless and pray for you hef e, and long to meet you in the world 
exempt from sinful doubts, from human pride, and backsliding 
hearts." Ah, he need not ask my forgiveness ; I am happy, too 
happy, in the hope of callmg him " brother" in the Christian 
church. This letter is from a place many miles from this city, 



HANAfiSBH. SlY 

and from a man who had no small standing among the ranks 
of those who hate Christ. Ah I there have been Manassehs 
saved, and there shall be yet. There have been men who 
hated God, who have leaped for joy, and said, 

" I*m forgiven, I*m forgiven, 
Tm a mirade of grace," , 

and have kissed the very feet which once they scorned and 
scoffed, and could not bear to hear the mention of. 

There is one fact concerning Manasseh which stamps him as 
^being a very prince of sinners, namely this : " He caused his 
children to pass through the fire in the valley of the son of 
Hinnom," and dedicated his sons unto Tophet. This was a 
dreadful sin ; for though Manasseh repented, we find that his 
son Amon followed in the steps of hi^ &ther in his wicked- 
ness but not in his righteousness. Listen 1 ^ Amon was two- 
and-twenty years old when he began to reign, and reigned two 
years in Jerusalem. But he did that which was evil in the sight 
of the Lord, as did Manasseh his father : for Amon sacrificed 
unto all the carved images which Manasseh his father had made, 
and served them ; and humbled not himself before the Lord, as 
Manasseh his father had humbled himself; but Amon trespassed 
more and more." Children will imitate their fathers in their 
vices, seldom in their repentance ; if parents sin, their children 
will follow them, without much doubt; but when they repent 
and turn to God, it is not easy talead a child back in the way 
which it has once forsaken. Are there any here, who, like 
that ancient Carthaginian, have dedicated their sons to the 
opposition of their enemy. You remember one who dedicated 
his son Hannibal from his very birth to be the everlasting enemy 
of the Romans. There may be such a man here, who has 
dedicated his offspring to Satan, to be the everlasting enemy 
of Christ's gospel, and is trying to train up and tutor him in 
a way which is contrary to the fear of the Lord. Is such a 
man hopeless? His sin is dreadful, his state is dreary, his 
sin without repentance will assuredly damn him ; but so long 
as he is here, we still will preach repentance to him, knowing 
that Manasseh was brought to know Gk)d, and was forgiven all 
his manifold sins. 



818 

n. The second aspect in whidi we are to regard Manasseli 
is as an ukbkubvsb ; for it appears that Manasseh did not be- 
lieve that Jehovah was God alone ; he was, therefore, a be- 
liever in &lse gods, bat an unbeliever, so &r as the truth is 
concerned. Now, does it not strike yon at the outset, that 
while Manasseh was an unbeliever in the truth, he must have 
been a very credulous person to believe in the all imaginary 
deities of tiie heathen ? In ^t, the most credulous persons 
in the world are unbelievers. It takes ten thousand times 
more faith to be an unbeliever than to be a believer in revela- 
tion. One man comes to me and tdls me I am credulous, be- 
cause I beHeve in a great First Cause who created the heavens 
and the earth, and that God became man and died for sin. I 
tell him I may be, and no doubt am very credulous, as he con- 
ceives credulity, but I conceive that which I believe is in per- 
fect consistency with my reason, and I therefore receive it. 
*' But," saith he, " Zam not credulous — ^not at all." Sir, I say, 
I should like to ask you one thing. You do not believe the 
world was created by God ? " No." You must be amazingly 
credulous, then, I am sure. Do you think this Bible exists 
without being made ? If you should say I am credulous be- 
cause I believe it had a printer and a binder, t should say you 
Were infinitely more credulous, if you assured me that it 
was made at all. And should you begin to tell me one of 
your theories about creation — ^that atoms floated through 
space, and came to a certain shape, I should resign the palm 
of credulity to you. You believe, perhaps, moreover, that 
man came to be in this world through the improvement of 
certain creatures. I have read, you say, that there were 
certain monads-^hat these monads improved themselves until 
they came to be small animalculee — ^that afterward they grew 
into fishes — that these fishes wanted to fly, and then wings 
grew — ^that by-and-bye they wanted to crawl, and then legs 
came, and they became lizards, and by divers steps they then 
became monkeys, and then the monkeys became men, and you 
believe yourself to be cousin-german to an ourang-outang. 
Now, I may be very credulous, but really not so credulous as 
you are. I may believe very strange things ; I may believe that, 
with the jaw-bone of an ass, Samson slew a thousand men ; I 



3£ANASSBH. 819 

may believe that the earth was drowned with water, and many 
other strange things, as you call them ; but as for your creed^ 
your non-creed, " 'tis strange, 'tis passing strange, 'tis wonder- 
ful," and it as much outvies mine in credulity, if I be credulous, 
as an ocean outvies a Hrop. It requires the hardest faith in the 
world to deny the Scriptures, because the man, in his secret 
heart, knows they are true, aiid, go where he will, something 
whispers to him, "You may be wrong — perhaps you are," 
and it is as much as he can do, to say, "Lie down, con- 
science ! down with you ; I must not let you speak, or J could 
not deliver my lecture to-morrow, I could not go among my 
friends, I could not go to such-and-such a club; for I can 
not afford to keep a conscience, if I can not afford to keep a 
God." 

And now let me tell you what I conceive to be the reasons 
why Manasseh was an unbeliever. In the first place, I con- 
ceive that the urdimited power which Manasseh possessed had 
a very great tendency to make him a disbeliever in God. I 
should not wonder if an autocrat — ^a man with absolute do- 
minion, should deny God; I should think it only natural. 
You remember that memorable speech of Napoleon's. He 
was told that man proposed, but that God disposed. " Ah !" 
said Napoleon, " I propose and dispose too ;" and therein hd 
arrogated to himself the very supremacy of God. We do not 
wonder at it, because his victories had so speedily succeeded 
^ach other, his prowess had been so complete, his fame so 
great, and his power over his subjects so absolute. Power al- 
ways, as I believe, except in the heart which is rightly gov- 
erned by grace, has a tendency to lead us to deny God. It is 
that noble intellect of such-and-such a man which has led him 
into discussion ; he has twice, thrice, four, five, six, seven 
times, come off more than conqueror in the field of contro- 
versy ; he looks round and says, " I am, there is none beside 
me ; let me take up whatever I please, I can defend it ; there 
is no man can stand against the blade of my intellect ; I can 
give him such a home thrust as will assuredly overcome him ;" 
and then, like Dr. Johnson, who often took up the side of the 
question he did not believe, just because he liked to get a vic- 
tory that was hard to win, so do these men espouse what they 



820 HANASSEH. 

believe to be wrong, because they conceive it gives them the 
finest opportunity of displaying their abilities. " Let me," 
says some mighty intellect, " fight with a Christian ; I shall 
have hard enough work to prove my thesis, I know I shall 
have a great difficulty to undermine the bastions of truth 
which he opposes to bear against me ; so much the better ; it 
were worth while to be conquered by so stout an opposition, 
and if I can overcome my antagonist, if I can prove myself to 
have more logic than he has, then I can say, 'tis glorious ; 'tis 
glorious to have fought against an opponent with so much on 
his side, and yet to have come off more than conqueror." I 
do believe the best man in the world is very hard to be 
trusted with power ; he will, unless grace keeps him, make a 
wrong use of it before long. Hence it is that the most influ- 
ential of God's servants are almost invariably the most tried 
ones, because our heavenly Father knows that if it were not 
for great trials and afflictions we should begin to set ourselves 
up against him, and arrogate to ourselves a glory which we 
had no right to claim. 

But another reason why Manasseh was an unbeliever, I 
take it, was because he was proud. Pride lieth at the root of 
infidelity; pride is the very germ of opposition to God. The 
man saith, "Why should I believe? The Sunday-school 
child reads his Bible, and says it is true. Am I, a man of in- 
tellect, to sit side by side with him, and receive a thing as 
true simply at the dictum of God's Word ? No, I will not ; 
I will find it out for myself, ^nd I will not believe simply be- 
cause it is revealed to me, for that were to make myself a 
child." And when he turns to the page of revelation, and 
reads thus, " Except ye be converted and become as little 
children, ye can in nowise enter into the kingdom of heaven," 
he says, " Pshaw I I shall not be converted then ; I am not 
going to be a child ; I am a man, and a man I will be, and I 
would rather be lost a man than saved a child. What ! am I 
to surrender my judgment, and sit down tacitly to believe in 
God's Word ?" " Yes," says God's Word, " thou art ; thou 
art to become as a child, and meekly to receive my Word." 
*' Then," says he,- in his arrogance and pride, " I will not," 
and like Satan, he declares it were better to rule in hell than 



MANASSSH, 321 

serve in heaven, and he goes away an unbeliever, because to 
believe is too humbling a thing. 

But perhaps the most potent reason for Manasseh's unbelief 
lies here. tJiat Tie loved sin too well. When Manasseh built 
the altars for his false gods, he could sin easily, and keep his 
conscience ; but he felt Jehovah's laws so stringent, that if he 
once believed in the one God he could not sin as he did. He 
read it thus : " Remember the Sabbath-day to keep it holy ; 
thou shalt not kill ; thou shalt not steal ;" and so on. Manas- 
seh wanted to do all these things, and therefore he would not 
believe because he could not believe and keep his sin. The 
very reason why we have much unbelief is because we have 
much love of sin. Men will have no God, because God inter- 
feres with their lusts. They could not go on in their sins, if 
they once believed there was an everlasting God above them, 
or professed to believe it, for all do believe it, whether they 
say so or not ; and because the thought of God checks them 
in their impiety and their lust, therefore they cry out, " There 
is no God," and say it with their lips as well as in their hearts. 
I believe it was this that led Manasseh to persecute the saints 
of God ; for among his sins it is written, " he shed innocent 
blood very much." It is a tradition among the Jews that the 
prophet Isaiah was sawn in sunder by Manasseh, on account 
of a rebuke which he gave him for his sin. Isaiah was not 
wont to be very timid, and he told the king of his lusts, and 
therefore placing him between two planks, he cut him in sun- 
der from head to foot. It is just the reason why men hate 
God, and hate his servants, because the truth is too hot for 
them. Send you a preacher who would not tell you of your 
sins, and you would hear him peaceably ; but when the gospel 
comes with power, then it is that men can not bear it ; when 
it trenches upon that pleasure, that sin, or that lust, then they 
will not believe it. Ye would believe the gospel, if ye could 
believe it and live in your sins too. O I how many a drunken 
reprobate would be a Christian, if he might be a drunkard 
and a Christian too ! How many a wicked wretch would turn 
believer, if he might believe and yet go on in his sins ! But 
because faith in the everlasting God can never stand side by 
side with sin, aEd because the gospel cries, " Down with it I ' 

14* 



S22 ICANASSKH. 

down with it i down with your sin," therefore it is that men 
turn round and say, " Down with the gospel." It is too hot 
for you, O ye sinful generation ; therefore ye turn aside from 
it, because it will not tolerate your lusts, nor indulge your in- 
iquity. 

m. We look, then, at Manasseh as an unbeliever, and now 
we have our last most pleasing task of looking at Manasseh as 
A OONVKBT. Hear it, O heavens, and listen, O earth ! The 
Lord God haUi said it. Manasseh shall be saved. He 
on his throne of cruelty has just appended his name to an- 
other murderous edict against the saints of God ; yet he shall 
be humbled ; he shall ask for mercy and shall be saved. Ma- 
nasseh hears the decree of Gk)d ; he laughs. '' What ! I play 
the hypocrite, and bend my knee ? Never I It is not possU 
ble ; and when the godly hear of it, they all say, ' It is not 
possible.' What ! Saul among the prophets ? Manasseh re- 
generated ? Manasseh made to bow before the Most High ? 
The thing is impossible." Ah I it is impossible with man, but 
it is possible with God ; God knows how to do it. The ene- 
my is at the gates of the city ; a hostile king has just be- 
sieged the walls of Jerusalem ; Manasseh flees from his palace 
and hides himself among the thorns ; he is there taken, carried 
captive to Babylon, and shut up in prison. And now we see 
what Gk)d can do. The proud king is proud no longer, for he 
has lost his power ; the mighty man is mighty no more, for his 
might is taken from him ; and now in a low dungeon listen to 
him. It is no more the blasphemer, no more the hater of 
God ; but see him cold on the floor I Manasseh bows his 
knee, and with the tears rolling down his cheeks, he cries, " O 
God I my fether's God I an outcast comes to thee ; a hell- 
hound stained with blood throws himself at thy feet; I, a very 
demon, full of filthiness, now prostrate myself before thee I O 
my God, canst thou, wOt thou have mercy on such a wi'etch 
as I ?" Hear it, ye heavens ! Listen yet again. See, from 
the skies the angel flies with mercy in his hand. Ah I whither 
speeds he ? It is to the dungeon of Babylon. The proud 
Idng is on his knee, and mercy comes and whispers in his ear 
— " Hope I" He qtarts from his knees, and cries, " Is there 
hope ?" And down he falls again. Once more he pleads, imd 



i 



MANA8SBH. 323 

mercy whispers that sweet promise, uttered once by the mur- 
dered Isaiah — " I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy trans- 
gressions for my name's sake, and will not remember thy 
sins." O ! do you see him ? His very heart is running over 
in his eyes. O I how he weeps for joy, and yet for sorrow 
that he ever could have sinned against a God so kind. A mo- 
ment more, and the dungeon is opened ; the king of Babylon, 
moved by God, bids him go free, and he returns to his king- 
dom and throne, a happier and a better man than he had ever 
been before. 1 think I see him coming into Jerusalem. There 
are his statesmen and favorites, crying to him, " Come in, Ma- 
nasseh ; the bowl shall be filled, and we will have a merry 
night to-night ; we will bow before the shrine of Ashtaroth, 
and thank her that she has set thee at liberty ; lo, the horses 
*of the sun are ready ; come and pay thy devotions to him 
that shines on the earth, and leads the host of heaven !" Me- 
thinks I see their astonishment when he cries, " Stand back I 
stand back ! ye are my friends no longer, until ye become 
God's friends ; I have dandled you on my knees, and, vipers, 
you have stung me with the poison of asps ; I-made you my 
friends, and you have led me down to the gulf of hell. But I 
know it now. Stand back till ye are better men ; and I will 
find others to be my courtiers." And there the poor saints, 
hidden in the back streets of the city, so frightened because 
the king has come back, are holding meetings of solemn 
prayer, crying unto God that no more murderous, persecut- 
ing edicts might go forth. And lo, a messenger comes and 
says, " The king is returned ;" and while they are looking at 
him, wondering what the messenger*is about to say, he adds, 
" He has returned, not Manasseh as he went, but as a very 
angel. I saw him with his own hands dash Ashtarqth in 
pieces ; I heard him . cry, ' The horses of the sun shall be 
hoofed ; sweep out the house of God ; we will hold a pass- 
over there ; the morning and evening lamb shall again bum 
on Jehovah's altars, for he is God, and beside him there is 
none else.' " O ! can you conceive the joy of believers on that 
auspicious day ? Can you think how they went up to God's 
house with joy and thanksgiving ? And on the next Sabbath 
they sung, as they had never sung before, " O oome let ug 



324 MANASSSH. 

sing unto the Lord, let us make a joyful noise unto the rock 
of our salvation," while they remembered that he who had 
persecuted the saints of God aforetime, now defended that 
very truth which once he abhorred. There was joy on earth, 
ay, and there was joy in heaven too ; the bells of heaven rang 
merry peals the day Manasseh prayed ; the angels of heaven 
flapped their wings with double alacrity the day Manasseh re- 
pented ; earth and heaven were glad, and even the Almighty 
on his throne smiled gracious approbation, while he again s^d, 
" I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for my 
name's sake, and will not remember thy sins." 

And now are you curious to know what were the bases of the 
faith of Manasseh — what were the rocks on which he built his 
trust in God ? I think they were two. He believed in God, 
first, because he had answered his prayer ; and secondly, ^* 
coMse he hadfbrgiven his sin. I have .sometimes said, when 
I have become the prey of doubting thoughts, " Well, now I 
dare not doubt whether there be a God, for I can look back 
in my diary and say, on such a day in the depths of trouble I 
bent my knee to God, and or ever I had risen from my knees 
the answer was given me." And so can many of you say ; and 
therefore whatever others may say, you know there is a God, 
because he answered your prayer. You heard of that holy 
man, Mr. Mtlller,. of Bristol. If you were to tell George Mul- 
ler there was not a God, he would weep over you. " Not a 
God ?" he would say ; " why, I have seen his hand. Whence 
came those answers to my prayers?" Ah ! sirs, ye may laugh 
at us for credulity ; but there are hundreds here who could 
most solemnly assert that they have asked of God for divers 
matters, and that God has not failed them, but granted their 
request. This was one reason why Manasseh knew that the 
Lord he was God. 

The other reason was, that ^Manasseh had a sense of par- 
doned sin. Ah 1 that is a delightful proof of the existence of 
a God. Here comes a poor miserable wretch : his knees are 
knocking together, his heart is sinking within him, he is giving 
himself up to despair. Bring the physicians to him ! they cry, 
" We fear his min^ is infirm. We believe he will at last have 
to be taken to some lunatic asylum 5" and they apply their 



MANASSBH. 325 

remedies, but he is none the better, but rather grows worse. 
On a sudden this poor creature, afficted with a sense of sin, 
groaning on account of guilt, is brought within the sound of 
the sacred Word ; he hears it — it increases his misery ; he 
hears again — ^his pain becomes doubled ; till at last every one 
says his case is utterly hopeless. Suddenly, on a happy morn- 
ing which God had ordained, the minister is led to some sweet 
passage. Perhaps it is ihis : " Come now, and let us reason 
together ; though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be white 
as snow ; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as 
wool." The Spirit applies it, and the poor- man goes home 
light as air, and says to his wife and children, " Come rejoice 
with me.»» "Why?" say they. "Because," says he, "my sins 
are forgiven." " How do you know that ?" " O !" says he, 
" I have a sense of pardoning love within my heart, which all 
the doubters in the world could riot gainsay ; and if all the earth 
should rise up against me and say I should be condemned, I 
could say, * I know there is now no condemnation for me.' " 
Have you ever felt pardoning blood applied ? You will never 
doubt God, I know, if you have. Why, dear friends, if the 
poorest old woman in the world should be brought before an 
infidel of the wisest order, having a mind of the greatest cal- 
iber, and he should endeavor to pervert her, I think I see her 
smile at him, and say, " My good man, it is of no use at all, 
for the Lord has appeared unto me of old, saying, * Yea I have 
loved thee with an everlasting love,' and so you may tell me 
what you please : I have had a sense of blood-bought pardon 
shed abroad in my heart, and I know that he is God, and you 
can never beat it out of me." As good Watts says, when we 
have once such an assurance as that, 

" Should all the forms that men devise 
Assault my faith with treacherous art^ 
I'd call them vanity and lies, 
And bind the gospel to my heart" 

O ! if you have a sense that sin is forgiven, you can never 
doubt the existence of a God ; for it will be said of you, 
" Then he knew that the Lord he was God." 
And now I gather up m}* strength for just one moment, to 



326 KANASSEH. 

speak to those of yon who desire to know what yon mast do 
to be saved. My hearer, no question can be more important 
than that; none is so requisite to ask. Alas! there are too 
many who never ask it, but who go sailing down to the gulf 
of black despair, listening to the syren song of procrastination 
and delay. But if you have been brought to ask the question 
solemnly and suriously, " What must I do to be saved ? "I 
am happy, thrice happy to be able to tell you God's.own word, 
^'He that believeth on the Lord Jesus Christ and is baptized, 
shall he saved ; he that believeth not,'' the Scripture saitb, 
" shall be damned." " Not of works, lest any man should 
boast." " But sir," you say, " I have many good works, and 
would trust in them." If you do, you are a lost man. As old 
Matthew Wilks most quaintly said once, speaking in his usual 
tone — " You might as well try to sail to America in a paper 
boat, as to go to heaven by your own works; you will be 
swamped on the passage if you attempt it." We can not spin 
a robe that is long enough to cover us ; we can not make a 
righteousness that is good enough to^satisfy God. If you 
would be saved, it must be through what Christ did, and not 
what you did. You can not be your own Saviour ; Christ must 
save you, if you are saved at all. How then can you be saved 
by Christ ? Here is the plan of salvation. It is written — 
" This is a feithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that 
Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners." Do you 
feel that you are a sinner ? Then believe that Jesus Christ 
came to save you ; for so sure as ^ver you feel you are a sin- 
ner, it is a feet that Christ died for you ; and if he died for 
you, you shall not perish, for I can not conceive that Christ 
would die in vain. If he did die for you, you shall most assur- 
edly be pardoned and saved, and shall one day sing in heaven. 
The only question is. Did he die for you ? He most certainly 
did if you are a sinner ; for it is written — 1 will repeat it again 
— " It is a faithful saying, that Christ Jesus came to save sin- 
ners." Poor sinner, believe I My dear friend, give me thine 
hand I I wish I could put it inside Christ's hand. O I embrace 
him' embrace him! lest haply the clouds of night should 
come upon thee, and the sun should set ere thou hast found 
hhn. O ! lay hold on him, lest death and destruction should 



HANASSSH. 327 

overtake thee ; fly to this mountsun, lest thou be consumed ; 
and remember, once in Christ, thou art safe beyond hazard. 

" Once in Christ, in Christ for ever, 
Kothing from his love can sever." 

O ! believe him! believe him, my dear, dear hearers for Jesus' 
sake I Amen. 



SERMON XXII. 

WHY ARE MEN SAVED? 

KerertheleeB he sayed them fbr his name's sake." — Psalic cvl 8. 

In looking npon the works of God in creation, there are two 
questions which at once occur to the thoughtful mind, and 
which must be answered before we can procure a clew to the 
philosophy and science of creation itself The first one is the 
question of anthoi-ship : " Who made all these thinga?" And 
the next quiestion is that of design : " For what purpose were 
all these things created ?" The first question, " Who made all 
these things ?" is one which is easily answered by a man who 
has an honest conscience and a sane mind ; for when he lifts 
his eyes up yonder to read the stars, he will see those stars 
spell out in golden letters this word — God; and when he looks 
below upon the waves, if his ears are honestly opened, he will 
hear each wave proclaiming — God, If he looks to the summits 
of the moantains, they will not speak, but with a dignified 
answer of silence they seem to say, 

" The hand that made us is divine." 

If we listen to the rippling of the freshet at the mountain side, 
to the tumbling of the avalanche, to the lowing of the cattle, 
to the singing of the birds, to every voice and sound of nature, 
we shall hear this answer to the question, " God is our maker ; 
he hath made us, and not we ourselves." 

The next question, as to design — " Why were these things 
made ?" — ^is not so easy to answer apart from Scripture ; but 
when we look at Scripture we discover this fact — that as the 
answer to the first question is God, so the answer to the second 
question is the same. Why were these things made ? The 
answer is, for God's glory, for his honor, and for his pleasure. 



WHY ABB MEN SAVBDf 829 

No other answer can be consistent with reason. Whatever 
other replies man may propound, no other can be really sound. 
If they will for one moment consider that there was a time 
when God had no creatures — when he dwelt alone, the mighty 
maker of ages, glorious in an uncreated solitude, divine in his 
eternal loneliness — " I am and there is none beside me" — can 
any one answer this question — ^Why did God make creatures 
to exist ? — ^in any other way than by answering it thus : " He 
made them for his own pleasure and for his own glory ?" You 
may say he made them for his creatures ; but we answer, there 
were then no creatures to make them for. We admit that the 
answer may be a sound one now, God makes the harvest for 
his creatures ; he hangs the sun in the firmament to bless his 
creatures with light and sunshine ; he bids the moon walk in 
her course by night, to cheer the darkness of his creatures 
upon earth. But the first answer, going back to the origin of 
aU things, can be nothing else than this : " For his pleasure 
they are and were created." " He made all things for himself 
and by himself." 

Now, this which holds good in the works of creation, holds 
equally good in the works of salvation. Lift up 'your eyes on 
high ; higher than those stars which glimmer on the floor of 
heaven ; look up, where spirits in white, clearer than light, 
shine like stars in their magnificence ; look there, where the 
redeemed with their choral symphonies " circle the throne of 
God rejoicing," and put this question : " Who saved those 
glorified beings, and for ^hat purpose were they saved?" 
We tell you that the same answer must be given as we have 
previously given to the former question — "-Sa saved them ;" 
" he saved them for his name's sake." The text is an answer 
to the two great questions concerning salvation : Who saved 
men, and why are they saved? "He saved them for his 
name's sake." 

Into this subject I shall endeavor to look this morning. May 
God make it profitable to each of us, and may we be found 
among the number who shall be saved " for his name's sake." 
Treating the text verbally — and that is the way most will un- 
derstand — ^here are four things. First, a glorious Saviour — 
"-Se saved them ;" secondly, a favored people — " He saved 



830 WHT ABB MSN SAVED! 

t?iem /*' thirdly, a divine reason tohy he saved them — " for his 
name's sake ;'* and fonrthly, an obstruction conquered, in the 
word " nevertheless,'* implying that there was some difficulty 
that was removed. "Nevertheless he saved them for his 
name's sake," A Saviour; the saved; the reason; the ob- 
struction removed. 

I. First, then, here is a glorious Savioitb — "J2e saved 
thenu" Who is to be understood by that pronoun "he?" 
Possibly many of my hearers may answer, " Why, the Lord 
Jesus Christ is the Saviour of men." Right, my friends ; but 
not all the truth. Jesus Christ is the Saviour ; but not more 
80 than God the Father, or God the Holy Ghost. Some per- 
sons who are ignorant of the system of divine truth think of 
God the Father as being a great being full of wrath, and 
anger, and justice, but having no love ; they think of God the 
Spirit perhaps as a mere influence proceeding from the Father 
and the Son. Now, nothing can be more incorrect than such 
opinions. It is true the Son redeems me, but then the Father 
gave the Son to die for me, and the Father chose me in the 
everlasting election of his grace. The Father blots out my sin ; 
the Father accepts me and adopts me into his family through 
Christ. The Son could not save without the Father any more 
than the Father without the Son ; and as for the Holy Spirit, 
if the Son redeems, know ye not that the Holy Ghost regen- 
erates. It is he that makes us new creatures in Christ, who 
begets us again unto a lively hope, who purifies our soul, who 
sanctifies our spirit, and who, at lalt, presents us spotless and 
faultless before the throne of the Most High, accepted in the 
beloved. When thou sayest " Saviour," remember there is a 
Trinity in that word — ^the Father, the Son, and the Holy 
Ghost — ^this Saviour being three persons under one name. 
Thou canst not be saved by the Son without the Father, nor 
by the Father without the Son, nor by the Father and Son 
without the Spirit. But as they are one in creation, so are 
they one in salvation, working together in one God for our 
salvation, and unto that God be glory everlasting, world with- 
out end. Amen. 

But, note here, how this divine being claims salvation 
wholly to himself. "Nevertheless he saved them." But, 



WHY ABB HSSr BAYEDf 881 

Moses, where art thou? Didst not thou save them, Mosea? 
Thou didst stretch thy rod over the sea, and it clave in halves ; 
thou didst lift up thy prayer to heaven, and the frogs came, 
and the flies swarmed, and the water was turned into blood, 
and the hsdl smote the land of Egypt. Wast not thou their 
Saviour, Moses ? And thou, Aaron, thou didst offer the bul- 
locks which Gk)d accepted ; thou didst lead them, with Moses, 
through the wilderness. Wast not thou their Saviour ? They 
answer, '*Nay, we were the instruments, but he saved them." 
God made use of us, but unto his name be all the glory, and 
none unto ourselves. But, Israel, thou wast a strong and 
mi^ty people; didst thou not save thyself? Perhaps it was 
by thine own holiness that the Red Sea was dried up ; per- 
haps the parted floods were frightened at the piety of the 
saints that stood upon their margin ; perhaps it was Israel that 
delivered itself Nay, nay, saith God's Word ; he saved them ; 
they did not save themselves, nor did their fellow-men redeem 
them. And yet, mark you, there are some who dispute this 
point, who think that men save themselves, or, at least, that 
priests and preachers can help to do it. We say that the 
preadier, under God, may be the instrument of arresting man's 
attention, of warning him and larousing him ; but the preacher 
is nothing ; God is every thing. The most mighty eloquence 
that ever distilled from the lips of seraphic preacher is nothing 
apart from God's Holy Spirit. Neither Paul, nor ApoUos, nor 
Cephas, are any thing : God gave the increase, and God must 
have all the glory. There are some we meet with here and 
there who say, " I am Mr. So-and-so's convert ; I am a con- 
vert of the Rev. Dr. this or that." Well, if you are sir, I can 
not give you much hope of heaven. Only God's converts go 
there ; not proselytes of man, but the redeemed of the Lord. 
O I it is very little to convert a man to our own opinions ; it 
is something to be the means of converting him to the Lord . 
. our God. I had a letter some time ago from a good Baptist 
minister in Ireland, who* very much wanted me to come over 
to Ireland, as he s«ad, to represent the Baptist interest, be- 
cause it was low there, and perhaps it might lea<J the people 
to think a little more of Baptists. I told him I would not go 
tkcroBs the street merely to dq that, much less would I cross 



832 WHY ABB MEN SAVED f 

the Irish Channel I should not think of going to Ireland for 
that ; but if I might go there to make Christians, under God, 
and be the means of bringing men to Christ, I would leave it 
to them what they should be afterward, and trust to God's 
Holy Spirit to direct and guide them as to what denomination 
they should consider nearest akin to Gt)d's truth. Brethren, 
I might make all of you Baptists, perhaps, and yet you would 
be none the better for it ; I might convert you all in that way, 
but such a conversion would be that you would be washed to 
greater stains, converted into hypocrites, and not into saints. 
I have seen something of wholesale conversion. Great reviv- 
alists have risen up ; they have preached thundering sermons 
that have made men's knees knock together. " What a won- 
derful man !" people have said. " He has converted so many 
under one sermon." But look for his converts in a month^ 
and where will they be ? You will see some of them in the 
alehouse, you will hear others of them swear, you will find 
many of them rogues and cheats, because they were not Gt)d's 
converts, but only man's. Brethren, if the work be done at 
all, it must be done of God, for if God do not convert there is 
nothing done that shall last, and nothing that shall be of any 
avail for eternity. 

But some reply, "Well, sir, but men convert themselves.*' 
Yes, they do, and a fine conversion it is. Very frequently 
they convert themselves. But, then, that which man did, man 
undoes. He who converts himself one day, unconverts him- 
self the next ; he tieth a knot which his own fingers can loosen. 
Remember this — you may convert yourselves a dozen times 
over, but " that which is born of the flesh is flesh," and " can 
not see the kingdom of God." It is only " that which is born 
of the Spirit" that " is spirit," and is therefore able to be 
gathered at last into the spirit realm, where only spiritual 
things can be found before the throne of the Most High. We 
must reserve this prerogative wholly to God. If any man 
state that God is not Creator, we call him infidel ; if any man 
entrench upon this doctrine, that God is not the absolute 
maker of all things, we hiss him down in a moment ; but he is 
an infidel of the worst kind, because more specious, who puts 
God out of the mercy throne, instead of putting him out of 



WHY ABB MBN SAVED » 83^ 

the creation throne, and who tells men that they may convert 
themselves, whereas God doth 'it all. " -fle" only, the great 
Jehovah — ^Father, Son, and Holy Ghost — " he saved them fof 
his name's sake." 

Thus have I endeavored to set out clearly the first truth of 
the divine and glorious Saviour. 

IL Now^ secondly, the pavobkd persons — "He saved 
them:'* Who are they ? You will reply, " They were the 
most respectahle people that could be found in the world ; 
they were a very prayerful, loving, holy, and deserving 
people; and, therefore, because they were good he saved 
them." Very weU, that is your opinion, I will tell you what 
Moses says — "Our fathers understood not thy wonders in 
Egypt ; they remembered not the multitudes of thy mercies ; 
but provoked him at the sea, even at the Red Sea. Never- 
tlieless he saved them." Look at the seventh verse, and you 
will have their character. In the first place, they were a stupid 
people — " Our fathers understood not thy wonders in Egypt." 
In the next place, they were an ungratefiil people — " they re- 
membered not the multitude of thy mercies." In the third 
place, they were a provoking people — " they provoked him at 
the sea, even at the Red Sea." Ah, these are the people 
whomfi-ee grace saves, these are the men and these the women 
whom the God of all grace condescends to take to his bosom 
and to make anew. 

Note, first, that they were a stupid people. God sends his 
gospel not always to the wise and prudent, but unto fools : 

" He takes the fool and makes him know 
The wonders of his dying love." 

Do not suppose, my hearer, because you are very unlettered 
and can scarcely read — do not imagine, because you have 
always been brought up in extreme ignorance, and have 
scarcely learned to spell your name, that therefore you can 
not be saved. God's grace can save you, and then enlighten 
you. A brother minister once told me a story of a man who 
was known in a certain village as a simpleton, and was always 
considered to be sofk in the head ; no one thought he could 
f ver understand any thing. But one day he came to hear the 



834 WHY ABB MEH Si.YBDf 

gospel preached* He had been a dninken fellow, having wit 
enough to be wicked, which is a very common kind of wit. 
The Lord was {leased to bless the Word to his soul, so that 
he became a changed character ; and what was the marvel of 
all was, his religion gave him a something which began to de- 
velop his latent fiiculties. He foond he had something to live 
for, and he began to try what he coold do. In the first {dace 
he wanted to read his Bible, that he might read his Saviour's 
name; and after much hammering and spelling away, at 
last he was aUe to read a chapter. Then he was asked to 
pray at a prayer-meeting ; here was an exercise of his vocal 
powers. Five or six words made up his prayer, and down he 
sat abashed. But by continually praying in his own family at 
home, he came to pray like the rest of the brethren, and he 
went on till he became a preacher, and singular enough, he 
had a fluency — a depth of understanding, and a power of 
thought, such as are seldom found among ministers who only 
occasionally occupy pulpits. Strange it was, that grace should 
even tend to develop his natural powers, giving him an object, 
setting him devoutly and firmly upon it, and so bringing out 
all his resources that they were fully shown. Ah, ignorant 
ones, ye need not despair. He saved them; not for their 
sakes — ^there was nothing in them why they should be saved. 
He saved them, not for their wisdom's sake ; but, ignorant 
though they were, understanding not the meaning of his 
miracles, " he saved them for his name's sake." 

Note, again, tfiey were a very ungrateful people^ and yet he 
saved them. He delivered them times without number, and 
worked for them mighty miracles ; but they still rebelled. 
Ah, that is like you, my hearer. You have had many deliver- 
ances from the borders of the grave ; God has given you house 
and food day after day, and provided for you, and kept you to 
this hour ; but how ungrateful you have been I As Isaiah 
said, " The ox knoweth his owner, and the ass his master's 
crib ; but my people doth not know, Israel doth not consider." 
How many there are of this character, who have favors from 
God, the history of which they could not give in a year ; but 
yet what have they ever done for him ? They would not 
keep a horse that did not work for them, nor as much as a dog 



WHY ABB MEN BAYED f 335 

that would not notice them. But here is God ; he has kept 
them day by day, and they have done a great deal against him, 
but they have done nothing for him. He has put the bread into 
their very mouths, nurtured them, and sustained their strength, 
and they have spent that strength in defying him, in cursing 
his name and breaking his Sabbath, '' nevertheless he saved 
them." Some of this sort have been saved. I hope I have 
some here now who will be saved by conquering grace, made 
new men by the mighty power of God's Spirit. " Neverthe- 
less he saved them." When there was nothing to recommend 
them, but every reason why they should be cast away for their 
ingratitude, " nevertheless he saved them." 

And note, once more, they were a provoking people — " They 
provoked him at the sea, even at the Red Sea." Ah I how 
many peojde there are in this world that are a provoking 
people to God I If God were like man, who among us would 
be here to-day ? If we are provoked once or twice, up goes 
the hand. With some men their passions stir at the very first 
offense ; others, who are somewhat placid, will bear offense 
after offense, till at last they say, " there is an end of every 
thing, and I can bear that no longer; you must stay it, or else 
I must stay you !" Ah ! if God had that temper, where 
would we be? Well might he say, " My thoughts are not as 
your thoughts ; I am God, I change not, or else ye sons of 
Jacob had been consumed," They were a provoking people, 
"nevertheless he saved them." Have you provoked him? 
Take heart ; if you repent, God has promised to save you ; 
and what is more, he may this morning give you repentance, 
and even give you remission of sins, for he saves provoking 
people for his name's sakci I hear one of my hearers say, 
" Well, sir, that is encouraging sin with a vengeance I" Is it, 
indeed, sir ? Why ? " Because you are talking to the very 
worst of men, and you are saying that they may yet be saved." 
Pray, sirs, when I spoke to the worst of men, did I speak to 
you or not ? You say " No ; I am one of the most respectable 
and best of men." Well, then, sir, I have no need to preach 
to you, for you think you do not need any, " The whole 
have no need of a physician, but they that are sick." But 
these poor people, whom you say I am encouraging in sm, need 



896 WHY ABE MEN SAVED^ 

to be spoken to. I will leave you. Good-morning to you I 
You keep to your own gospel, and I wonder whether you will 
find your way to heaven by it. Nay, I do not wonder, I know 
you will not, unless you are brought as a poor sinner to take 
Christ at his word, and be saved for his name's sake. But I 
say £irewell to you, and I will keep on in my course. But 
why did you say I encourage men in sin ? I encourage them 
to turn from it. I did not say he saved the provoking people, 
and then let them still provoke him as they had done before ; 
I did not say he saved the wicked people, and then let them 
sin as they did before. But you know the meaning of the 
word " saved ;" I explained it the other morning. The word 
" saved" does not merely mean taking men to heaven ; it 
means more — it means saving them from their sin ; it means 
giving them a new heart, new spirits, new lives ; it means mak- 
ing them into new men. Is there any thing licentious in say- 
ing that Christ takes the worst of men to make them into 
saints ? If there be, I can not see it. I only wish he would 
take the worst of this congregation and make them into the 
saints of the living God, and then there would be &r less 
licentiousness. Sinner, I comfort thee ; not in thy sin, but in 
tliy repentance. Sinner, the saints of heaven were once as 
bad as thou hast been. Art thou a drunkard, a swearer, an 
unclean person ? " Such were some of them ; bat they have 
been washed — ^bat they have been sanctified." Is thy robe 
black? Ask them whether their robes were ever black? 
They will tell you, " Yes, we have washed our robes." If 
-^^ they had been black, they would not have wanted washing. 
" We have washed our robes and made them white in the 
blood of the Lamb." Then, sinner, if they were black, and 
were saved, why not thyself? 

" Are not his merdes rich and freo ? 
Then aay, my soul, why not for the© ? 
Our Jesus died upon the tree, 
Then why, my soul, why not for thee?" 

Take heart, penitents ; God will have mercy on you. " Nev- 
ertheless he saved them for his name's sake." 



WHY ASB MSN SAVED f 3^7 

in. Now we come to the third point — the bkasojt of sai> 
VATiON : " He saved them for his name's sake." There is no 
other reason why God should save a man, but for his name's 
sake ; there is nothing in a sinner which can. entitle him to sal- 
vation, or recommend him to mercy ; it must be God's own 
heart which must dictate the motive why men are to be saved. 
One person will say, " God will save me because I am so up- 
right." Sir, he will do no such thing. Says another, " God 
will save me because I am so talented." Sir, he will not. 
Your talent / Why, thou driveling, self-conceited idiot, thy 
talent is nothing compared with that of the angel that once 
stood before the throne, and sinned, and who is now cast into 
the bottomless pit for ever ! If he would save men for their 
talent, he would have saved Satan ; for he had talents enough. 
As for thy morahty and goodness, they are but filthy rags, and 
he will never save thee for aught thou doest. None of us would 
ever be saved, if God expected any thing of us : we must be 
saved purely and solely for reasons connected with himself, 
and lying in his own bosom. Blessed be his name, he saves 
us for "his name's sake." What does that mean ? I think it 
means this : the name of God is his person, his attributes, and 
his nature. For his nature's sake, for his very attributes' 
sake, he saved men ; and, perhaps, we may include this also : 
" My name is in him" — that is, in Christ ; he saves us for the 
sake of Christ, who is the name of God. And what does that 
mean ? I think it means this : 

He saved them, fii*st, that he might manifest his nature. 
God was all love, and he wanted to manifest it ; he did show 
it when he made the sun, the moon, and the stars, 'and scat- 
tered flowers over the green and laughing earth. He did 
show his love when he made the air balmy to the body, and 
the sunshine cheering to the eye. He gives us warmth even 
in wmter, by the clothing and by the fuel which he has stored 
in the bowels of the earth. But he wanted to reveal himself 
still more. " How can I show them that I love them with all 
my infinite heart ? I will give my Son to die to save the very 
worst of them, and so I will manifest my nature." And God 
has done it ; he has manifested his power, his justice, his love, 
his &itiifulness, and his truth ; he has manifi^ted bis wholo 

16 



338 WHY ABB MEN BAYBDI 

self on the great platform of salvation. It was, so to speak, 
the balcony on which God stepped*to show himself to man — 
the balcony of salvation — ^here it is he manifests himself by 
saving men's souls. 

He did it, again, to vindicate his name. Some say God is 
cruel; they wickedly call him tyrant. "Ahj" says God, 
" but I will save the worst of sinners, and vindicate my name ; 
I will blot out the stigma ; I will remove the slur ; they shall 
not be able to say that, unless they be filthy liars, for I will be 
abundantly merciful. I will take away this stain, and they 
shall see that my great name is the name of Love." And said 
he again, ^' I will do this for my name's sake ; that is, to make 
these people love my name. I know if I take the best of men, 
and save them, they will love my name ; but if I take the 
worst of men, O, how they will love me ! If I go and take 
some of the offscouring of the earth, and make them my chil- 
dren, O, how they will love me ! Then they will cleave to my 
name ; they will think it more sweet than music ; it will be 
more precious to them than the spikenard of the eastern mer- 
chants ; they will value it as gold, yea, as much fine gold. 
The man who loves me best is the man who hast most sins 
forgiven : he owes much, therefore he will love much." This 
is the reason why God often selects the worst of men to make 
them his. Saith an old writer, " All the carvings of heaven 
were made out of knots ; the temple of God, the King of hea- 
ven, is a cedar one, but the cedars were all knotty trees be- 
fore he cut them down." He chose the worst, that he might 
display his workmanship and his skill, to make unto himself a 
name ; as it is written, " It shall be unto me for a name ; for 
an everlasting sign that shall not be cut off." Now, dear 
heai-ers, of whatever class you are, here is something I have to 
offer well worthy of your consideration, namely — ^that if saved, 
we are saved for the sake of God, for his name's sake, and not 
for our own. 

Now, this puts all men on a level with regard to salvation. 
Suppose that in coming into this garden, the rule had been 
that every one should have made mention of my name as the 
key of admittance ; the law is, no man is to be admitted fo^r 
his rank or title, but only by the use of a certain name. Up 



WHY ARE MEN SAVED* 330 

comes a lord ; he makes use of the name and comes in ; up 
copies a beggar, all in patches ; he makes use of the name — 
the law says it is only the use of the name that will admit you 
— he makes use of it and he enters, for there is no distinction. 
So, my lady, if you come, with all your moi-ality, you must 
make use of his name ; if you come, poor, filthy inhabitant of 
a cellar or a jgarret, and make use of his name, the doors will 
fly wide open, for there is salvation for every one who makes 
mention of the name of Christ, and for none other. This pulls 
down the pride of the moralist, abases the self-exaltation of 
the self-righteous, and puts us all, as guilty sinners, on an 
equal footing before God, to receive mercy at his hands, " for 
his name's sake," and for that reason alone. 

IV. I have detained you too long ; let me close by noticing 
obstacles removed, in the word " nevertheless." I shall do 
that in somewhat of an interesting form by way of parable. 

Once on a time, Mercy sat upon her snow-white throne, sur- 
rounded by the troops of love. A sinner was brought before 
her, whom Mercy designed to save. The herald blew the trum- 
pet, and after three blasts thereof, with a loud voice, he said, *' O 
heaven, and earth, and hell, I summon you this day to come 
before the throne of Mercy, to tell why this sinner should not 
be saved." There stood the sinner, trembling with fear ; he 
knew that there were multitudes of opponents, who would 
press into the hall of Mercy, and with eyes full of wrath, would 
say, " He must not, and he shall not escape ; he must be lost J" 
The trumpet was blown, and Mercy sat placidly on her throne, 
until there stepped in one with a fiery countenance ; his head 
was covered with light ; he 'spoke with a voice like thunder, 
and out of his eyes flashed lightning I " Who art thou ?" said 
Mercy. He replied, " I am Law ; the law of God." " And 
what hast thou to say ?" "I have this to say," and he lifted 
up a stony tablet, written on both sides ; " these ten commands 
this wretch has broken. My demand is blood ; for it is writ- 
ten, ' The soul that sinneth it shall die.' Die he, or Justice 
must." The wretch trembles, his knees knock together, the 
marrow of his bones melts within him, as if it were ice dis- 
solved by fire, and he shakes with very fright. Already be 
thought he saw the thunderbolt launched at him, he saw the 



340 WHY ABB MEN SAYICDf 

lightning penetrate into bis soul, hell yawned before him in 
imagination, and he thought himself cast away for ever. But 
Mercy smiled, ' and said, '' Law, I will answer thee. This 
wretch deserves to die ; Justice demands that he should perish 
— ^I award thee thy claim," And, O I how the sinner trembles. 
** But there is one yonder who has come with me to-day, my 
King, my Lord ; his name is Jesus ; he will tell you how the 
debt can be paid, and the sinner can go iree.'* Then Jesus 
spake, and said, " O Mercy, I will do thy bidding. Take me. 
Law ; put me in a garden ; make me sweat drops of blood ; 
then nail me to a tree ; scourge my back before you put me to 
death ; hang me on the cross ; let blood run from my hands 
and feet ; let me descend into the grave ; let me pay all the 
sinner oweth ; I will die in his stead." And the Law went 
out and scourged the Saviour, nailed him to the cross, and 
coming back with his &ce all bright with satisfaction, stood 
again at the throne of Mercy, and Mercy said, ** Law, what 
hast thou now to say ?" " Nothing," said he ; " fair angel, 
nothing." " What ! not one of these commands against him ?" 
^' No, not one. Jesus, his substitute, has kept them all — ^has 
paid the penalty for his disobedience ; and now, instead of his 
condemnation, I demand, as a debt of Justice, that he be ac- 
quitted." "Stand thou here," said Mercy; "sit on my 
throne; I and thou together will now send forth another 
summons." The trumpet rang again. " Come hither, all ye 
who have aught to say against this sinner, why he should not 
be acquitted ;" and up comes another— one who often troubled 
the sinner — one who had a voice not so loud as that of the 
Law, but still piercing and thrilling — a voice whose whispers 
were like the cuttings of a dagger. " Who art thou ?" says 
Mercy. "I am Conscience; this sinner must be punished; 
he has done so much against the law of Ood that he must be 
punished ; I demand it ; and I will give him no rest till he is 
punished, nor even then, for I will follow him even to the 
grave, and persecute him after death with pangs unutterable."- 
" Nay," said Mefcy, " hear me ;" and while he paused for a 
moment, she took a bunch of hyssop and sprinkled Conscience 
with the blood, saying, " Hear me, Conscience, * The blood of 



WHY ABE MBN SAVED t * 341 

Jesus Christ, God's Son, cleanseth ns from all sin.' Now hast 
thou aught to say ?" " No," said Conscience, " nothing — 

" * Covered is Ms unrighteousness; 
From condemnation he is free.' 

Henceforth I will not grieve him ; I will be a good conscience 
unto him, through the blood of our Lord Jesus Christ." The 
trumpet rang a third time, and growling from the innermost 
vaults, up there came a grim black fiend, with hate in his 
eyes, and hellish majesty on his brows. He is asked, " Hast 
thou any thing against that sinner ?" " Yes," said he, " I 
have ; he has made a league with hell, and a covenant with 
the grave, and here it is, signed with his own hand. He 
asked God to destroy his soul in a drunken fit, and vowed he 
would never turn to God ; see, here is his covenant with hell !" 
" Let us look at it," said Mercy ; and it was handed up, while 
the grim fiend looked at the sinner, and pierced him through 
with his black looks. " Ah ! but," said Mercy, " this man had 
no right to sign the deed ; a man must not sign away anoth- 
er's property. This man was bought and paid for long before- 
hand ; he is not his own ; the covenant with Death is dis- 
annulled, and the league with hell is rent in pieces. Go thy 
way, Satan." " Nay," said he, howling again, " I have some- 
thing else to say : that man was always my friend ; he listened 
ever to my insinuations ; he scoffed at the gospel ; he scorned 
the majesty of heayen : is he to be pardoned, while I repair to 
my hellish den, for ever to bear the penalty of guilt ?" Said 
Mercy, " Avaunt, thou fiend ; these things he did in the days 
of his unregeneracy ; but this word ' nevertheless' blots them 
out. Go thou to thy hell ; take this for another lash upon 
thyself— the sinner shall be pardoned, but thou — never, treach- 
erous fiend !" And then Mercy, smilingly turaing to the sin- 
ner, said, " Sinner, the trumpet must be blown for the last 
time !" Again it was blown, and no one answered. Then 
stood the sinner up, and Mercy said, " Sinner, ask thyself the 
question — ask thou of heaven, of earth, of Jiell — whether any 
can condemn thee ?" And the sinner stood up, and with a 
bold, loud voice, said, " Who shall lay any thing to the charge 
of God's elect?" And he looked into hell, and Satan lay 



343 WHT ABB MEN SAVED f 

there, biting his iron bonds ; and he looked on earth, and 
earth was silent ; and in the majesty of feith the sinner did 
even climb ta heaven itself and he sdd, ^^ Who shall lay any 
thing to the charge of God's elect ? God ?" And the answer 
came, "No; he justifieth." "Christ?" Sweetly it was 
whispered, " No ; he died." Then turning round, the sinner 
joyfully exclaimed, " Who shall separate me from the love of 
God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord ?" And the once con- 
demned sinner came back to Mercy ; prostrate at her feet he 
lay, and vowed henceforth to be hei*s for ever, if she would 
keep him to the end, and make him what she would desire him 
to be. Then no longer did the trumpet ring, but angels re- 
joiced, and heaven was glad, for the sinner was saved. 

Thus, you see, I have, what is called, dramatized the thing ; 
but I don't care what it is called ; it is a way of arresting the 
ear, when nothing else will. ^* Nevertheless ;" there is the 
obstruction taken away I Sinner, whatever be the " never- 
theless," it shall never the less abate the Saviour's love ; not 
the less shall it ever make it, but it shall remain the same. 

" Come, guilty soul, and flee away 
To Obrist and heal thy wounds; 
This is the glorious gospel-day 
Wherein free grace abounds: 

Gome to Jesus, sinner, come." * 

On thy knee weep out a sorrowful confession ; look to his 
cross, and see the substitute ; believe, and live. Ye almost de- 
mons, ye that have gone furthest into sin, now, Jesus says, 
" If you know your need of me, turn unto me, and I will have 
mercy upon you : and to our God, for he will abundantly par- 
don." 



SERMON XXIIi: 

PARTICULAR ELECTION. 

" Wherefore the rather, brethren, give diligence to make your calling and 
election sure : for if ye do these things, ye shall never &11 : for so an en- 
trance shall be ministered unto you abundantly into the everlasting king- 
dom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ" — 2 Peter, 1 10, 11. 

It is exceedingly desirable that in the hours of worship and 
in the house of prayer our minds should be as much as possi- 
ble divested of every worldly thought. Although the busi- 
ness of the week will very naturally struggle with us to en- 
croach upon the Sabbath, it is our business to gu^rd the 
Sabbath from the intrusion of our worldly cares, as we would 
guard an oasis from the overwhelming irruption of the sand. 
I have felt, however, that to-day we should be suiTOunded 
with circumstances of peculiar difficulty in endeavoring to 
bring our minds to spiritual matters ; for of all times, perhaps 
the most unlikely for getting any good in the sanctuary, if 
that depends upon mental abstraction, are election times. So 
important, in the minds of most men, are political mattei*s, 
that very naturally, after the hurry of the week, combined 
with the engrossing pursuit of elections, we are apt to bring 
the same thoughts and the same feelings into the house of 
prayer, and speculate, perhaps, even in the place of worship, 
whether a conservative or a liberal shall be returned for our 
borough, or whether for the city of London there shall be i"e- 
tumed Lord John Russell, Baron Rothschild, or Mr. Currie. 
I thought, this morning, " Well, it is of no use my trying to 
stop this great train in its progress. People are just now go- 
inff on at an express rate in these matters ; I think I will be 
wise, and instead of endeavoring to turn them off the line, I 
will turn the points, so that they may still continue their pur- 



144 PABTICUULB SLVC?nON. 

Baits with the same swiftness as ever, but in a new direction. 
It shall be the same line ; they shall still be traveling in earn- 
est toward election, but perhaps I may have some skill to turn 
the points, so that they shall be enabled to consider election 
in a rather difierent manner.'' 

When Mr. Whitefield was once applied to to use his influ- 
ence at a genera] election, he^ returned answer to his lordship 
who requested him, that he knew very little about general 
elections, but that if his lordship took his advice he would 
make his own particukar *^ calling and election sure ;" which 
was a very proper remark. I would not, however, say to any 
persons here present, despise the privilege which you have as 
citixens. Far be it from me to do it. When we become 
Chrbtians, we do not leave off being Englishmen ; when we 
become professors of religion we do not cease to have the 
rights and privileges which citizenship has bestowed on us. 
Let us, whenever we shall have the opportunity of using the 
right of voting, use it as in the sight of Almighty God, know- 
ing that for every thing we shall be brought into account, and 
for that among the rest, seemg that we are intrusted with it. 
And let us remember that we are our own governors, to a 
great degree, and that if at the next election we should choose 
wrong governors, we shall have nobody to blame but ourselves, 
however wrongly they may afterward act, unless we exercise 
all prudence and prayer to Almighty Ood to direct our hearts 
to a right choice in this matter. May God so help us, and 
may the result be for his glory, however unexpected that re- 
sult may be to any of us I 

Having said so much, let me, then, turn the points, and 
draw you to a consideration of your own particular calling.and 
election, bidding you in the words of the apostle, '^ the rather, 
brethren, give diligence to make your calling and election 
sure : for if ye do these things, ye shall never fell : for so an 
entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly into the 
everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.'' 
We have here, first of all, two fundamenUd points in religiofi 
— " calling and election ; we have here, secondly, some ^ood 
advice — " to make your calling and election sure^^^ or, rather, 
to assure ourselves that we are caUed and elected; and then, 



PABTICULAB ELECTION. 345 

in the third place, we have some reasons given us why we 
should use this diligence to he assured of our election — be- 
cause, on the one hand, we shall so be kept from falling, and 
on the other hand, we shall attain unto " an abundant entrance 
into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord a^d Saviour Jesus 
Christ." 

I. First of all, then, there are the two important matters 
IN religion — secrets, both of them, to the world — only to be 
understood by those who have been quickened by divine 
grace : " calling and election." 

By the word "calling" in Scripture, we understand two 
things — one, the general caJl^ which in the preaching of the 
gospel is given to every creature under heaven ; the second 
call (that which is here intended) is th^ special call — which 
we call the effectual call, whereby God secretly, in the use of 
means^ by the irresistible power of his Holy Spirit, calls out 
of mankind a certain number, whom he himself hath before 
elected, calling them from their sins to become righteous, from 
their death in trespasses and sins to become living spiritual 
men, and from their worldly pursuits to become the lovers of 
Jesus Christ. The two callings differ very much. As Bun- 
yan puts it, very prettily, " By his common call, he gives 
nothing ; by his special call, he always has something to give ; 
he has also a brooding voice, for them that are under his wing ; 
and he has an outcry, to give the alann when he seeth the en- 
emy come." What we have to obtain, as absolutely necessary 
to our salvation, is a special calling, made in us, not to out 
ears but to our hearts, not to our mere fleshly understanding, 
but to the inner man, by the power of the Spirit. And then 
the other important thing is election. As without calling 
there is no salvation, so without election there is no calling. 
Holy Scripture teaches us that God hath from the beginning 
chosen us who are saved unto holiness through Jesus Christ. 
We are told that as many as are ordained unto eternal life 
believe, and that their believing is the effect of their being or- 
dained to eternal life from before all worlds. However much 
this may be disputed, as it frequently is, you must first deny 
the authenticity and fiiU inspiration of the holy Scriptures 
before you can legitimately and truly deny it. And sin^e, 

16* 



846 PABnCULAB BLBCnON. 

without donbt, I have many here who are members of the 
Episcopal church, allow me to say to them what I have often 
said before, " You, of all men, are the most inconsistent in the 
world, unless you believe the doctrine of election, for if it be 
not taught in Scripture there is this one thing for an absolute 
certainty, it is taught in your Articles." Nothing can be 
more forcibly expressed, nothing more definitely laid down, 
than the doctrine of predestination in the Book of Common 
Prayer ; although we are told what we already know, that the 
doctrine is a high mystery, and is only to be handled carefully 
by men who are enlightened. However, without doubt, it is 
the doctrine of Scripture, that those who are saved are saved 
because God chose them to be saved, and are called as the 
effect of that first choice of God. If any of you dispute this, 
I stand upon the authority of holy Scripture ; ay, and if it 
were necessary to appeal to tradition, which I am sure it is 
not, and no Christian man would ever do it, yet I would take 
you upon that point ; for I can trace this doctrine through the 
lips of a succession of holy men, from this present moment to 
the days of Calvin, thence to Augustine, and thence on to 
Paul himself; and even to the lips of the Lord Jesus Chrat. 
The doctrine is, without doubt, taught in Scripture, and were 
not men too proud to humble themselves to it, it would uni- 
versally be believed and received as being no other than man- 
ifest truth. Why, sirs, do you not believe that God loves his 
children ? and do you not know that God is unchangeable ? 
therefore, if he loves them now he must always have loved 
them. Do you not believe that if men be saved God saves 
them ? And if so, can you see any difficulty in admitting that 
because he saves them there must have been a purpose to 
save them — ^a purpose which existed before all worlds ? Will 
you not grant me that ? If you will not, I must leave you to 
the Scriptures themselves ; and if they will not convince you 
on the point, then I must leave you unconvinced. 

It will be asked, however, why is caUing here put before 
election^ seeing election is eternal, and calling takes place in 
time ? I reply, because calling is first to us. The first thing 
which you and I can know is our calling : we can not tell 
>vhether we are elect until we feel that we are called. We 



PARTICITLAB ELBCTION. 347 

must, first of all, prove our calling, and tlien our election is 
sure most certainly. " Moreover, whom he did predestinate, 
them he also called: and whom he called, them he also 
justified: and whom he justified, them he also glorified." 
Calling comes first in our apprehension. We are by God's 
Spirit called fi'om our evil estate, regenerated and made 
new creatures, and then, looking backward, we behold our- 
selves as being most assuredly elect because we were 
called. 

Here, then, I think I have explained the text. There are 
the two things which you and I are to prove to be sure to our- 
selves — whether we are coiled and whether we are elected. 
And O, dear friends, this is a matter about which you and I 
should be very anxious. For consider what an honorable 
thing it is to be elected. In this world it is thought a mighty 
thing to be elected to the House of Commons ; but how nuch 
more honorable to be elected to eternal life ; to be electeJ to 
" the church of the first born, whose names are written in 
heaven ;" to be elected to be a compeer of angels, to be a 
favorite of the living God, to dwell with the Most High, 
among the fairest of the sons of light, nearest to the eternal 
throne! Election in this world is' but a short-lived thing, but 
God's election is eternal. Let a man be elected to a seat in tho 
House : seven years must be the longest period that he can 
hold his election ; but if you and I be elected according to the 
divine purpose, we shall hold our seats when the day-star shall 
' have ceased to burn, when the sun shall have grown dim with 
age, and when the eternal hills shall have bowed themselves 
with weakness. If we be chosen of God and precious, thfen 
are we chosen for ever ; for God changeth not in the objects 
of his election. Those whom he hath ordained he hath or- 
dained to eternal life, " and they shall never perish, neither 
shall any man pluck them out of his hand." It is worth while 
to know ourselves elect, for nothing in this world can mak^ a 
man more happy or more valiant than the knowledge of his 
election. " Nevertheless," said Christ to his apostles, " rejoice 
not in this, but rather rejoice that your names are written in 
heaven" — that being the sweetest comfort, the honeycomb that 
droppeth with the most precious drops of all, the kuowle^g? 



848 FAXnCULAU BLECnON. 

of our being chosen by God. And this, too, beloved, makes a 
man valiayit. When a man by diligence has attained to the 
assurance of his election, you can not make him a coward, you 
can never make him cry craven even in the thickest battle ; 
be holds the standard fast and firm, and cleaves his foes with 
the cimeter of truth. '- Was not I ordained by God to be the 
standard bearer of this truth ? I must, I will stand by it, de- 
spite you all." He saith to every enemy, " Am I not a chosen 
king ? Can floods of water wash out the sacred unction from 
a king's bright brow ? No, never I And if God hath chosen 
me to be a king and a priest unto God for ever and ever, come 
what may or come what will — the Uon's teeth, the fiery fur- 
nace, the spear, the rack, the stake, all these things are less . 
than nothing, seeing I am chosen of God unto salvation." It 
has been said that the doctrine of necessity makes men weak. 
It if a lie. It may seem so in theory, but in practice it has 
always been found to be the reverse. The men who have be- 
lieved in destiny, and have held &st and firm by it, have al- 
ways done the most valiant deeds. There is one point in which 
this is akin even with Mohammed's faith. The deeds that were 
done by him were chiefly nlone from a firm confidence that 
God had ordained him to his work. Never had Cromwell 
driven hvs foes before him if it had not been in the stern 
strength of this almost omnipotent truth ; and there shall 
scarcely be found a man strong to do great and valiant deeds 
unless, confident in the God of providence, he looks upon the 
accidents of life as being steered by God, and give himself up 
to God's firm predestination, to be borne along by the current 
of his will, contrary to all the wills and all the wishes of the 
world. " Wherefore the rather, brethren, give diligence to 
make your calling and election sure." 

II. Come, then, here is the second point — good advice. 
*' Make your calling and election sure." Not toward God, for 
they are sure to him ; make them sure to yourself. Be quite 
certain of them ; be fully satisfied about them. In many .of 
our dissenting places of worship very great encouragement is 
held out to doubting. A person comes before the pastor, and 
says, "01 sir, I am so afraid I am not converted ; I tremble 
lest I should not be a child of God. O ! I fear I am not one of 



PAEnCULAB ELECnOK. 34 D 

the Lord's elect." The pastor will put out his hands to him 
and say, "Dear brother, you are all right so long as you 
can doubt." Now, I hold, that is altogether wrong. Scrip- 
ture never says, " He that doubteth shall be saved," but " He 
that believeth." It may be true that the man is in a good 
state ; it may be true that he wants a little comfort ; but his 
doubts are not good things, nor ought we to encourage him 
in his doubts. Our business is to encourage him out of his 
doubts, and by the grace of God to urge him to " give all dil- 
igence to make his calling and election sure /" not to doubt it, 
but to be sure of it. Ah ! 1 have heard some hypocritical doubt- 
ers say, " O ! I have had such doubts whether I am the Lord's," 
and I h^ve thought to myself, " And so have I very gr^t 
doubts about you." I have heard some say they do tremble 
so because they are afraid they are not the Lord's people ; 
and the lazy fellows sit in their pews on the Sunday, and just 
listen to the sermon ; but they never think of giving diligence, 
they never do good, perhaps are inconsistent in their lives, and 
then talk about doubting. It is quite right they should doubt, 
it is well they should ; and if they did not doubt we might be- 
gin to doubt for them. Idle men have no nght to assurance. 
The Scripture says, ** Give diligence to make your calling and 
election sure." 

Full assurance is an excellent attainment. It is profitable 
for a man to be certain in this life, and absolutely sure of his 
own calling and election. But how qan he be sure ? Now, 
many of our more ignorant hearers imagine that the only way 
they have of bemg gure of their election is by some revelation, 
some dream, or some mystery. I have enjoyed very hearty 
laughs at the expense of some people who have trusted in their 
visions. Really, if you had passed among so many shades of 
ignorant professing Christians as I have, and had to resolve so 
many doubts and fears, you would be so infinitely sick of 
dreams and visions that you would say, as soon as a person be- 
gan to speak about them, "Now, do just hold your tongue." 
"Sir," said a woman, "I saw blue lights in the front parlor when 
I was in prayer, and I thought I saw the Saviour in the corner, 
and I said to myself, I am .safe." (Mr. Spurgeon here narrated 
a remarkable story of a poor woman who was possessed with a 



850 PABnCCTLAB BLSCTIOK. 

singular delusion.) And yet there are tens of thousands of peo- 
ple in every part of the country, and members too of Christian 
bodies, who have no better ground for their belief that they 
are called and elected, than some vision equally ridiculous, or 
the equally absurd hearing of a voice. A young woman came 
to me some time ago ; she wanted to join the church, and 
when I asked her how she knew herself to be converted, she 
said she was down at the bottom of the garden, and she thought 
she heard a voice, and she thought she saw something up in 
the clouds that said to her so-and-so. " Well," I said to her, 
" that thmg may have been the means of doing good to you, 
but if you put any trust in it, it is all over with you." A 
dream, ay, and a vision, may often bring men to Christ ; I 
have known many who have been brought to him by them, 
beyond a doubt, though it has been mysterious to me how it 
was ; but when men bring these forward as a proof of their 
conversion, there is the mistake ; because you may have fifty 
thousand dreams and see fifty thousand visions, and you 
may be a fool for all that, and all the bigger sinner for having 
seen them. There is better evidence to be had than all 
this: "Give diligence to make your calling and election 
sure." 

" How then," says one, " am I to make my calling and elec- 
tion sure ?" Why, thus : — If thou wouldst get out of a doubt- 
ing state, get out of an idle state ; if thou wouldst get out of 
a trembling state, get out of an indifferent lukewarm state ; 
for lukewarmness and doubting, and laziness and trembling, 
very naturally go hand in hand. If thou wouldst enjoy the 
eminent grace of the full assurance of faith under the blessed 
Spirit's influence and assistance, do what the Scripture tells 
thee — " Give diligence to make your calling and election sure." 
Wherein shalt thou be diligent ? 

Note how the Scripture has given us a list. Be diligent in 
your faith. Take care that your faith is of the right kind — 
that it is not a creed, but a credence — that it is not a mere be- 
lief of doctrine, but a reception of doctrine into your heart, 
and the practiqal light of the doctrine in your soul. Take 
care that your faith results from necessity — ^that you believe in 
Christ because you have nothing else to believe in. Take care 



PARTICULAB ELECTION. 361 

it is simple faith, hanging alone on Christ, without any other 
dependence but Jesus Christ and him crucified. And when 
thou hast given diligence, about that, give diligence next to 
thy courage. Labor to get virtus ; plead with God that he 
would give thee the face of ^a lion, that thou mayest never be 
afraid of any enemy, however much he may jeer or threaten 
thee, but that thou mayest with a consciousness of right, go 
on, boldly trusting in God. And having, by the help of the 
Holy Spirit, obtained that, study well the Scriptures, and get 
knowledge ; for a knowledge of doctrine will tend very much 
to confirm your faith. Try to understand God's Word, get a 
sensible, spiritual idea of it. Get, if you can, a system of 
divinity out of God's Bible. Put the doctrines together. 
Get real, theological knowledge, founded upon the infallible 
Word. Get a knowledge of that science which is most de- 
spised, but which is the most necessary of all, the science of 
Christ and of him crucified, and of the great doctrines of 
grace. And when thou hast done this, " add to thy knowl- 
edge temperance,^'* Take heed to thy bo^y : be temperate 
there. Take heed to thy soul : be temperate there. Be not 
drunlcen with pride; be not lifted up with self confidence. 
Be temperate. Be not harsh toward thy friends, nor bitter 
to thine enemies. Get temperance of lip, temperance of life, 
temperance of heart, temperance of thought. Be not pas- 
sionate : be not carried away by every wind of doctrine. Get 
temperance, and then add to it by God's Holy ^i^inX,^ patience; 
ask Jiim to give thee that patience which endureth affliction, 
which, when it is tried, shall come forth as gold. Array your- 
self with patience, that you may not murmur in your sick- 
nesses; that you may not curse God in your losses, nor be 
depressed in your afflictions. Pray without ceasing, until the 
Holy Ghost has nerved you with patience to endure unto the 
end. And when you have that, get godliness. Godliness is 
something more than religion. The most religious men may 
be the most godless men, and sometimes a godly man may 
seem to be irreligious. Let me just explain that seeming para- 
dox. A real religious man is a man vfho sighs after sacra- 
ments, attends churches and chapels, and is outwardly good, 
but goes no further. A godly man is a man who does not 



352 PABnCULAB ELSCnOK. 

look 80 much to the dress as to the person : he looks not to 
the outward form, but to the inward and spiritual grace ; he 
is a godly man, as well as attentive to religion. Some men, 
however, are godly, and to a great extent despise form ; they 
may be godly, without some degree of religion ; but a man 
can not be fully righteous without being godly in the true 
meaning of each of these words, though not in the general 
vulgar sense of them. Add to thy patience an eye to God ; 
live in his sight ; dwell close to him ; seek for fellowship with 
him ; and thou hast got godliness. And to that add brotherly 
love. Be loving towards all the members of Christ's church; 
have a love to all tbe saints of every denomination. And then 
add to that charity^ which openeth its ai-ms to all men, and 
loves them ; and when you have got all these, then you will 
know your calling and election, and just in proportion as you 
practice these heavenly rules of life, in this heavenly manner, 
will you come to know that you are called and that you are 
elect. But by no other means can you attain to a knowledge 
of that, except by the witness of the Spirit, bearing witness 
with your spirit that you are born of God, and then witness- 
ing in your conscience that you are not what you were, but 
are a new man in Christ Jesus, and are therefore called, and 
therefore elected. 

A man over there says he is elect. He gets drunk. Ay, 
you are elect by the devil, sir ; that is about your only elec- 
tion. Another man says, " Blessed be God, I do not care 
about evidences a bit ; I am not so legal as you are !" "No, I 
dare say you are not : but you have no great reason to bless 
God about it, for, my dear friend, unless you have these evi- 
dences of a new birth take heed to yourself. " God is not 
mocked : whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap." 
*' Well," says another, " but I think that doctrine of election 
a very licentious doctrine." Think on as long as you please ; 
but please to bear me witness that as I have preached it to- 
day there is nothing licentious about it. Very likely you are 
licentious, and you would make the doctrine licentious if you 
believed it ; but " to the pure all things are pure." He who 
receiveth God's truth' in his heart doth not often pervert it 
and turn aside from it unto wicked ways. No man, let me 



PABnCDULB ELECTION. 853 

repeat, has any right to believe himself elect of God, unless 
he has been renewed by God ; no man has any right to believe 
himself called, unless his life be in the main consistent with 
his vocation, and he walk worthy of that wheremito he is 
called. Out upon an election that lets you live in sin ! Away 
with it ! away with it ! That was never the design of God's 
Word; and it never was the doctrine of Calvinists either. 
Though we have been lied against' and our teachings per- 
verted, we have always stood by this — that good works, though 
they do not procure nor in any degree merit salvation, yet are 
the necessary evidences of salvation ; and unless they be in 
men the soul is still dead, uncalled, and unrenewed. The 
nearer you live to Christ, the more you imitate him, the more 
your life is conformed to him, and the more simply you hang 
upon him by faith, the more certain you may be of your elec- 
tion in Christ and of your calling by his Holy Spirit. May 
the Holy One of Israel give you the sweet assurance of grace, 
by affording you " tokens for good" in the graces which he 
enables you to manifest. 
in. And now I shall close up by giving you the apostle's 

SEASONS WHY YOU SHOULD MAKE YOUB CALLING AND ELECTION 
SUBE. 

I put in one of my own to begin with. It is because, as I 
have said, it will make you so happy. Men who doubt their 
calling and election can not be full of joy : but the happiest 
saints are those who know and believe it. You know our 
friends say this is a howling wilderness, and you know my re- 
ply to it is, that they make all the howling themselves : there 
would not be much howling if they were to look up a little 
more and down a little less, for by faith they would make it 
blossom like the rose, and give to it the excellence and glory 
of Carmel and Sharon. But why they howl so much is be- 
cause they do not believe. Our happiness and our faith are 
to a great degree proportionate; they are Siamese twins to 
the Christian ; they must flourish or decay together. 

** When I can saj my Grod is mine, 
Then I can all mj gri6& resign ; 
Can tread the world beneath my feet, 
And all that earth calls good or great" 



854 PABTICULAB BLBCTIOIT. 



** When gioomy doobts preyail, 
1 fear to call him mme ; 
The Btreams of comfort seem to &i], 
And all mf hopes decline." 

Only faith can make a Christian lead a happy life. 

But now for Peter's reasons. First, because " if ye do 
these things ye toiU never /aUJ*^ " Perhaps," says one, *' in 
attention to election we may forget our daily walk, and like 
the old philosopher who looked up to the stars, we may walk 
on and tumble into the ditch I" " Nay, nay," says Peter, " ii 
you take care of your calling and election, you shall not trip ; 
but with your eyes up there, looking for your calling and elec- 
*tion, God will take care of your feet, and you shall never fell." 
Is it not very notable, that, in many churches and chapels, you 
do not often hear a sermon about to-day; it is always either 
about old eternity, or else about the millennium ; either about 
what God did before man was made, or else about what God 
will do when all are dead and buried ? Pity they do not tell 
us something about what we are to do to-day, now in our 
daily walk and conversation I Peter removes this difficulty. 
He says, " This point is a practical point ; for you can only 
answer your election for yourself by taking care of your prac- 
tice ; and while you are so taking care of your practice and 
assuring yourself of your election, you are doing the best pos- 
sible thing to keep you from falling." And is it not desir- 
able that a true Christian should be kept from falling ? Mark 
the difference between falling &ndfaUing away. The true be- 
liever can never fall away and perish ; but he may fall and 
injure himself. He shall not fall and break his neck ; but a 
broken leg is bad enough without a broken neck. " Though 
he fall he shall not be utterly cast down ;" but that is no 
reason why he should dash himself against a stone. His de- 
sire is, that day by day he may grow more holy ; that hour 
by hour he may be more thoroughly renewed, until, conformed 
to the image of Christ, he may enter int bliss eternal. If, 
then, you take care of your calling and election, you are doing 
the best thing in the world to prevent you from falling ; for 
in so doing you shall never fall. 



PABTICULAB ELECTION. 856 

And now, the other reason, and then I shall have almost 
concluded. " JPor so an entrance shall he ministered unto 
you abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord 
and Saviour Jesus Christ,''^ An " abundant entrance" has 
sometimes been illustrated in this way. You see yonder ship. 
After a long voyage, it has neared the haven, but is much in- 
jured ; the sails are rent to ribbons, and it is in such a forlorn 
condition that it can not come up to the harbor : a steam-tug 
is pulling it in with the greatest possible difficulty. That is 
like the righteous being " scarcely saved," But do you see 
that other ship ? It has made a prosperous voyage ; and now, 
laden to the water's edge, with the sails all up and with the 
white canvas filled with the wind, it rides into the harbor joy- 
ously and nobly. That is an " abundant entrance ;" and if 
you and I are helped by God's Spirit to add to our faith vir- 
tue, and so on, we shall have at the last *' an abundant en- 
trance into the kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ." There 
is a man who is a Christian ; but, alas ! there are many incon- 
sistencies in his life for which he has to mourn. He lies there, 
dying on his bed. The thought of his past life rushes upon 
him. He cries, " O Lord, have mercy upon me, a sinner," and 
the prayer is answered ; his faith is in Christ, and he shall be 
saved. But O ! what griefs he has upon his bed. " O, if I 
had served my God better ! And these children of mine — if 
I had but trained them up better, ' in the nurture and admo- 
nition of the Lord !' I am saved," says he ; " but alas, alas I 
though it be a great salvation, I can not enjoy it yet. I am 
dying in gloom, and clouds, and darkness. I trust, I hope, I 
shall be gathered to my fathers, but I have no works to follow 
me — or very few indeed ; for though I am saved, I am but just 
saved — saved ' so as by fire.' " Here is another one ; he too is 
dying. Ask him what his dependence is : he tells you, " I rest 
in none else but Jesus." But mark him as he looks back to 
his past life". " In such a place," says he, " I preached the gos- 
pel, and God helped me." And though with no pride about 
him — ^he will not congratulate himself upon what he has done 
— ^yet doth he lift his hands to heaven, and he blesses God that 
throughout a long life he has been able to keep his gai-ments 
white ; that he has served his Master ; and now, like a shock 



360 PASnCULAB ELBCnON. 

of com fully ripe, he is aboat to be gathered into his Master's 
gamer. Hark to him I It is not the feeble lisp of the trem- 
bler; but with "victory! victory! victory!" for his dying 
shout, he shuts his eyes, and dies like a warrior in his glory. 
That is the " abundant entrance," Now, the man that " gives 
diligence to make his calling and election sure," shall insure 
for himself " an abundant entrance into the kingdon of our 
Lord Jesus Christ." 

What a terrible picture is hinted at in these words of the 
apostle — " saved so as by fire !" Let me try and present it 
to you. The man has come to the edge of Jordan ; the time 
has arrived for him to die. He is a believer — just a believer; 
but his life has not been what he could wish ; not all that he 
now desires that it had been. And now stern death is at him, 
and he has to take his first step into the Jordan. Judge of 
his horror when the flames surround his foot. He treads 
upon the hot sand of the stream ; and the next step he takes, 
with his hair well nigh on end, with his eye fixed on heaven 
on the other side of the shore, his face is yet marked with 
horror. He takes another step, and he is all bathed in fire 
Another step, and he is up to his very loins in flames — " saved, 
so as by fire." A strong hand has grasped him, that drags 
him onward through the sti*eam. But how dreadful must be 
the death even of a Christian, when he is saved " so as by 
fire I" There on the river's brink, astonished, }ie looks back 
and sees the liquid flames through which he has been called 
to walk, as a consequence of his indiflerence in this life. Saved 
he is — thanks to God ; and his heaven shall be great, and his 
crown shall be golden, and his harp shall be sweet, and his 
hymns shall be eternal, and his bliss unfading ; — but his dying 
moment, the last article of death, was blackened by sin ; and 
he was saved " so as by fire !" Mark the other man ; he too 
has to die. He has oflen feared death. He dips his foot in 
Jordan ; and his body trembles, his pulse waxes faint, and 
even his eyes are well nigh closed. His lips scarcely speak, 
but still he says " Jesus, thou art with me, thou art with me, 
passing through the stream I" He takes another step, and the 
waters now begin to refresh him. He dips his hand and tastes 
the stream, and tells those who are watching him in tears, that 



PAEnCULAB ELECJnON. 35 7 

to die is blessed. " The stream is sweet," he says, " it is not 
bitter : it is blessed to die." Then he takes another step, and 
when he is well nigh submerged in the stream, and lost to 
vision, he says, 

" And when ye hear my heart-strings break, 
How sweet the minutes roll I 
A| mortal paleness on my cheek, 
But glory in my soul I" 

That is the " abundant entrance" of the man who has manfully 
served his God — who, by his divine grace, has had a path un- 
clouded and serene — who, by diligence, has " made his calling 
and election sure ;" and, therefore, as a reward, not of debt, 
but of gi*ace, hath entered heaven with higher honors and 
with greater ease than others equally saved, but not saved in 
80 splendid a manner. 

♦ Just one thought more. It is said that the entrance is to 
be *' ministered to us." That gives me a sweet hint that, I 
find, is dwelt upon by Doddridge. Christ will open the gates 
of heaven ; but the heavenly train of virtues — the works which 
follow us — will go up with us and minister an entrance to us. 
I sometimes think, if God should enable me to live and die 
for the good of these congregations, so that many of them 
shall be saved, how sweet it will be to enter heaven, and when 
I shall come there, to have aij entrance ministered unto me, 
not by Christ alone, but by some of you foV whom I have mio- 
istered. One shall meet me at the gate, and say, *^ Minister, 
thou wast the cause of my salvation I" And another, and 
another, and another, shall all exclaim the same. When 
Whitefield entered heaven — ^that highly honored servant of 
the Lord — ^I think I can see the hosts rushing to the gates to 
meet him. There are thousands there that have been brought 
to God by him. O how they open wide the gates ; and how 
they praise God that he has been the means of bringing them 
to heaven ; and how do they minister unto him an abundant 
entrance I There will be some of you, perhaps, in heaven, 
with starless crowns : for you never did good to your fellow- 
creatures ; you never were the means of saving souls ; you 
are to have crowns without stars. But " they that turn many 
to righteousness" shall " shine as the stars, for ever and ever;" 



858 PABnCUULB SLBOnON. 

and an entrance shall be abundantly ministered to them. I 
do want to get a heavy crown in heaven — ^not to wear, but 
to have all the more costly gift to give to Christ. And 
you ought to desire the same, that you may have all the more 
honors, and so have the more to cast at his feet, with, '' Not 
unto us, but unto thy name, O Christ, be the glory !" " Ra- 
ther, brethren, give all diligence to make your calling and 
election sure." 

And now, to conclude. There are sOme of you with whom 
this text has nothing to do. You can not make " your calling 
and election sure," for you have not been called ; and you 
have no right to believe that you are elected, if you have 
never been called. To such of you, let me say, do not ask 
whether you are elected first, but ask whether you are called. 
And go to God's house, and bend your knee in prayer ; and 
may God, in his infinite mercy, call you ! And mark this — If 
any of you can say, 

" Nothing in mj hands I bring, 
Simply to the cross I csling ;" 

if any of you, abjuring your self-righteousness, can now come 
to Christ and take him to be your all in all ; you are called, 
you are elect. " Make your calling and election sure," and 
go on your way rejoicing I ^May God bless you; and to 
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, be glory for evermore I Amen. 



SERMON XXIV. 

MERCY, OMNIPOTENCE, AIJD JUSTICE. 

" The Lord is dlow to anger, and great in power, and will not at all acquit 
the wicked." — ^Nahttm, L 3. 

Works of art require some education in the beholder, be- 
fore they can be thoroughly appreciated. We do not expect 
that the uninstructed should at once perceive the varied ex- 
cellencies of a painting from some master hand ; we do not 
imagine that the superlative glories of the harmonies of the 
prince of song will enrapture the ears of clownish listeners. 
There must be something in the man himself, before he can 
understand the wonders either of nature or of art. Certainly 
this is true of character. By reason of failures in our character 
and faults in our life, we are not capable of understanding all 
the separate beauties, and the united perfection of the charac- 
ter of Christ, or of God, his Father. Were we ourselves as 
pure as the angels in heaven, were we what our race once was 
in the garden of Eden, immaculate and perfect, it is quite cer- 
tain that we should have a far better and nobler idea of the 
character of God than we can by possibility attain unto in our 
fellen state. But you can not fail to notice, that men, through 
the alienation of their natures, are continually misrepresenting 
God, because they can not appreciate his perfection. Does 
God at one time withhold his hand from wrath ? Lo, they 
say that God hath ceased to judge the world, and looks upon 
it with listless phlegmatic indifference. Does he at another 
time punish the world for sin ? They say he is severe and 
cruel. Men wiU misunderstand him, because they are imper- 
fect themselves, and are not capable of admiring the character 
of God. 

Now, this is especially true with regard to certain lights and 



S80 MEBOTy OMHIPOTKKCn, AND JUSTICB. 

shadows in the character of God, which he has so marvelonsly 
blended in the perfection of his nature : that althongh we can 
not see the exact point of meeting, ^et (if we have been at all 
enlightened by the Spirit) we are struck with ^wonder at the 
sacred harmony. In reading holy Scripture, you can say of 
Paul, that he was noted for his zeal— of Peter, that he will 
ever be memorable for his courage— of John, that he was 
noted for his lovingness. But did you ever notice, when you 
read the history of our Master, Jesus Christ, that you never 
could say he was notable for any one virtue at all ? Why was 
that ? It was because the boldness of Peter did so outgrow 
itself as to throw other virtues into the shade, or else the other 
virtues were so deficient that they set forth his boldness. The 
very fact of a man being noted for something is a sure sign 
that he is not so notable in other things ; and it is because of 
the complete perfection of Jesus Christ, that we are not ac- 
customed to say of him that he was eminent for his zeal, or for 
his love, or for his courage. We say of him that he was a 
perfect character ; but we are not able very easily to perceive 
where the shadows and the lights blended, where the meek- 
ness of Christ blended iifto his courage, and where hb loveli- 
ness blended into his boldness in denouncing sin. We are not 
able to detect the points where they meet ; and I believe the 
more thoroughly we are sanctified, the more it will be a sub- 
ject of w6nder to us how it could be that virtues which seemed 
so diverse were in so majestic a manner united in one char- 
acter. 

It is just the same of God ; and I. have been led to make the 
remarks I have made on my text, because of the two clauses 
thereof which seem to describe contrary attributes. You will 
notice that there are two things in my text : he is " slow to 
anger," and yet he " will not at all acquit the wicked." Our 
character is so imperfect that we can not see the congruity of 
these two attributes. We are wondering, perhaps, and saying, 
*' How is it he is slow to anger, and yet will not acquit the 
wicked ?" It is because his character is perfect that we do 
not see where these two things melt into each other — the in- 
fallible righteousness and severity of the ruler of the world, 
and his loving-kindness, his long-sufifeiing, and his tender 



MERCY, OMNIPOTENCE, AND JUSTICE. 361 

mercies. The absence of any one of these things from the 
character of God would have rendered it imperfect ; the pres- . 
ence of them all, though we may not see how they can be 
congruous with each other, stamps the character of God with 
a perfection elsewhere unknown. 

And now I shall endeavor this morning to set forth these 
two attributes of God, and the connecting link. " The Lord 
is slow to anger y" then comes the connecting link, " grerft in 
power." I shall have to show you how that " great in power" 
refers to the sentence foregoing and the sentence succeeding. 
And then we shall consider the next attribute — " He will not 
at all acquit the wicked :" an attribute of justice. 

I. Let us begin with the first characteristic of God. He is 
said to be " slow to anger." Let me declare the attribute, 
and then trace it to its source. 

God is " slow to anger." When Mercy cometh into the 
world, she driveth winged steeds ; the axles of her chariot- 
wheels are glowing hot with speed ; but when Wrath cometh, 
it walketh with tardy footsteps ; it is not in haste to slay, it is 
not swift to condemn. God's rod of mercy is ever in his hands 
outstretched ; God's sword of justice is in its scabbard : not 
rusted in it — ^it can be easily withdrawn — ^but held there by 
that hand that presses it back into its sheath, crying, " Sleep, 
O sword, sleep ; for I will have mercy upon sinners, and will 
forgive their transgressions." God hath many orators in 
heaven ; some of them speak with swift words. Gabriel, when 
he cometh down to tell glad tidings, speaketh swiftly ; angelic 
hosts, when they descend from glory, fly with wings of light- 
ning, when they proclaim, " Peace on earth, good will toward 
men ;" but the dark angel of Wrath is a slow orator ; with 
many a pause between, where melting Pity joins her languid 
notes, he speaks ; and when but half his oration is completed 
he often stays, and withdraws himself from his rostrum, giving 
way to Pardon and to Mercy ; he having but addressed the 
people that they might be driven to repentance, and so might 
receive peace from the scepter of God's love. 

Brethren, I shall just try to show you now how God *s slow 
to anger. 

First, I will prove that he is " slow to anger ;" becatcse h^ 
16 



862 MEBCY, OMIOPOTENCE, JLKD JFSXICB. 

neoer smites withoiU first threcUening, Men who are passion- 
ate and swifi in anger give a word and a blow ; sometimes the 
blow first and the word afterward. Oftentimes kings, when 
sabjects have rebelled against them, have crashed them first, 
and then reasoned with them afterward ; they have given no 
time of threatening, no period of repentance ; they have al- 
lowed no space for turning to their allegiance ; they have at 
once crushed them in their hot displeasure, making a full 
end of them, Not so God : he will not cut down the tree that 
doth much cumber the ground, until he hath digged about it, 
and dunged it ; he will not at once slay the man whose char- 
acter is the most vile ; until he has first hewn him by the pro- 
phets he will not hew him by judgments ; he will warn the 
sinner ere he condemn him ; he will send his prophets, " rising 
up early and late," giving him " line upon line, and precept 
upon precept, here a little and there a little." He will not 
smite the city without warning ; Sodom shall not perish, until 
Lot hath been within her. The world shall not be drowned, 
until eight prophets have been preaching in it, and Noah, the 
eighth, Cometh to prophesy of the coming of the Lord. He 
will not smite Nineveh until he hath sent a Jonah. He will 
not crush Babylon till his prophets have cried through its 
streets. He will not slay a man until he hath given many 
warnings, by sicknesses, by the pulpit, by providences, and by 
cpnsequences. He smites not with a heavy blow at once ; he 
threateneth first. He doth not in grace, as in nature, send 
lightnings first and thunder afterward ; but he sendeth the 
thunder of his law first, and the lightning of execution follows 
it. The lictor of divine justice canies his axe bound up in a 
bundle of rods, for he will not cut ofi* men, until he has re- 
proved them, that they may repent. He is " slow to anger." 
But again : God is also v&ty alow to threaten. Although he 
will threaten before he condemns, yet he is slow even in his 
threatening. God's lips mc ve swiftly when he promises, but 
slowly when he threatens. Long rolls the pealing thunder, 
slowly roll the drums of he iven, when they sound the death- 
march of sinners ; sweetly floweth the music of the rapid notes 
which proclaim free grace, and love, and mercy. God is slow 
to threaten. He wiU not send a Jonah to Nineveh, until 



MERCY, OMNIPOTENCE, AND JUSTICE. 863 

Nineveh has become foul with sin ; he will not even tell Sodom 
it shall be burned with fire, until Sodom has become a reeking 
dung-hill, obnoxious to earth as well as heaven ; he will not 
drown the world with a deluge, or even threaten to do it, until 
the sons of God themselves make unholy alliances and begin 
to depart from him. He doth not even threaten the sinner by 
his conscience, until the sinner hath oftentimes sinned^ He 
will often tell the sinner of his sins, often urge him to repent ; 
but he will not make hell stare him hard in the face, with all 
its dreadful terror, until much sin has stirred up the lion from 
his lair, and made God hot with wrath against the iniquities 
of man. He is slow even to threaten. 

But, best of all, when God threatens, how slow he is to sen- 
tence the criminal/ When he has told them that he will 
punish unless they repent, how long a space he gives them, in 
which to turn unto himself! " He doth not afflict willingly, 
nor grieve the children of men for naught ;" he stayeth his 
hand ; he will not be in hot haste, when he hath threatened 
them, to execute the sentence upon them. Have you ever ob- 
served that scene in the garden of Eden at the time of the 
fall ? God had threatened Adam that if he sinned he should 
surely die. Adam sinned : did God make haste to sentence 
him? 'Tis sweetly said, "The Lord God walked in the gar- 
den in the cool of the day." Perhaps that fruit was plucked 
at early mom, mayhap it was plucked at noontide ; but God 
was in no haste to condemn ; he waited till the sun was well 
nigh set, and in the cool of the day came, and as an old ex- 
positor has put it very beautifully, when he did come he did 
not come on wings of wrath, but he " walked in the garden in 
the cool of the day." He was in no haste to slay. I think I 
see him, as he was represented then to Adam, in those glorious 
days when God walked with man. Methinks I see the won- 
derful similitude in which the Unseen did vail himself: I see it 
walking among the trees so slowly — ay, if it were right to give 
such a picture — ^beating its breast, and shedding tears that it 
should have to condemn man. At last I hear its doleful voice : 
" Adam, where art thou ? Where hast thou cast thyself, poor 
Adam? Thou hast cast thyself from my favor ; thou hast cast 
thyself into nakedness and into fear ; for thou art hiding thy- 



364 HSBCTy OKNIPOTENCX, AND JUSTICE. 

self. Adam, where art thoa ? I pity thee. Thou thonghtest 
to be God. Before I condemn thee I will give thee one note 
of pity. Adam, where art thou ?" Yes, the Lord was slow 
to anger, slow to write the sentence, even though the com- 
mand had been broken, and the threatening was therefore ot 
necessity brought into force. It was so with the flood : he 
threatened the earth, but he would not fully seal the sentence, 
and stamp it with the seal of heaven, until he had given space 
for repentance. Noah must come, and through his hundred 
and twenty years must preach the word ; he must come and 
testify to an unthinking and an ungodly generation ; the ark 
must be builded, to be a perpetual sermon ; there it must be 
upon its mountain-top, waiting for the floods to float it, that it 
might be an every-day warning to the ungodly. O heavens, 
why did ye not at once open your floods ? Ye fountains of 
the great deep, why did ye not burst up in a moment ? God 
said, " I will sweep away the world with a flood :" why, why 
did ye not rise ? " Because," I hear them saying with gurgling 
notes, " because, although God had threatened, he was slow to 
sentence, and he said in himself ' Haply they may repent ; 
perad venture they may turn from their sin ;' anjj therefore did 
he bid us rest and be quiet, for he is slow to anger." 

And yet once more : even when the sentence against a sin- 
ner is signed and sealed by heaven's broad seal of condenma- 
tion, even then God is slow to carry it out. The doom of 
Sodom is sealed ; God hath declared it shall be burned with 
fire. But God is tardy. He stops. He will himself go down 
to Sodom, that he taay see the iniquity of it. And when he 
gets there guilt is rife in the streets. 'Tis night, and the crew 
of worse than beasts besiege the door. Does he then lift his 
hands ? Does he then say, '* Ram hell out of heaven, ye skies ?'» 
No, he lets them pursue their riot all night, spares them to the 
last moment, and though when the sun was risen the burning 
hail began to fell, yet was the reprieve as long as possible. 
God was not in haste to condemn. God had threatened to 
root out the Canaanites; be declared that all the children of 
Ammon should be cut off"; he had promised Abraham that he 
would give their land unto his seed for ever, and they were to 
be utterly slain ; but he made the children of Israel wait four 



MEBCr, OMIOPOTENCB, AND JUSTIGB. 365 

hnndred years 11 Egypt, and he let these Canaanites live all 
through the days of the patriarchs; and even then, when he led 
his avenging ones out of Egypt, he stayed them forty years in 
the wilderness, because he was loth to slay poor Canaan. " Yet," 
said he, " I will give them space. Though I have stamped 
their condemnation, though their death warrant has come 
forth from the court of King's Bench, and must be executed, 
yet will I reprieve them as long as I can :" and he stops, until 
at last mercy had had enough, and Jericho's melting ashes and 
the destruction of Ai betokened that the sword was out of its 
scabbard, and God had awaked like a mighty man, and like a 
strong man full of wrath. God is slow to execute the sentence, 
even when he has declared it. 

And ah I my friends, there is a sorrowful thought that has 
just crossed my mind. There are some men yet alive who are 
sentenced now. I believe that Scripture bears me out in a 
dreadful thought which I just wish to hint at. There are some 
men that are condemned before they are finally danmed ; there 
are some men whose sins go before them unto judgment, who 
are given over to a beared conscience, concerning whom it 
may be said .that repentance and salvation are impossible. 
There are some few men in the world who are like John 
Bunyan's man in the iron cage, can never get out. They are 
like Esau — they find no place of repentance, though, unlike him, 
they do not seek it, for if they sought it they would find it. 
Many there are who have sinned " the sin unto death," con- 
cerning whom we can not pray ; for we are told, " I do not say 
that ye shall pray for it." But why, why, why are they not 
already in the flame ? If they be condemned, if mercy has shut 
its eye forever upon them, if it never will stretch out its hand, 
to give them pardon, why, why, why are they not cut down 
and swept away ? Because God saith, " I will not have mercy 
upon them, but I will let them live a little while longer ; though 
I have condemned them I am loth to carry the sentence out, 
and will spare them as long as it is right that man should live ; 
I will let them have a long life here, for they will have a fear- 
ful eternity of wrath for ever." Yes, let them have their little 
whirl of pleasure ; their end shall be most fearfiil. Let them 
beware, for although God is slow to anger, he is sure in it. 



866 HKBCT, OMNIPOTENCE, AND JUSTIGB. 

If God were not slow to anger, would he not have smitten 
this huge city of ours, this behemoth city ? — would he not 
have smitten it into a thousand pieces, and blotted out the re- 
membrance of it from the earth ? The iniquities of this city 
are so great, that if God ahould dig up her very foundations, 
and oast her into the sea, she well deserveth it. Our streets 
at night present spectacles of vice that can not be equaled. 
Surely there can be no nation and i j v'ountry that can show a 
city so utterly debauched as this great city of London, if our 
midnight streets are indications of our immorality. You aU 
low in your public places of resort — I mean you — ^my lords 
and ladies — ^you allow things to be said in your hearing, of 
which your modesty ought to be ashamed. Ye can sit in 
theaters to hear plays at which modesty should blush ; I say 
naught of piety. That the ruder sex should have listened to the 
obscenities of ia Jh'aviata is surely bad enough, but that ladies 
of the highest refinement, and the most approved taste, should 
dishonor themselves by such a patronage of vice is indeed in- 
tolerable. Let the sins of the lower theaters escape without 
your censure, ye gentlemen of England, *the lowest bestiality 
of the nethermost hell of a play-house can look to your opera- 
houses for their excuse. I thought that with the pretensions 
this city makes to piety, for sure, they would not have so far 
gone, and that after such a waniing as they have had from the 
press itself— a press which is certainly not too religious — ^they 
would not so indulge their evil passions. But because the pill 
is gilded, ye suck down the poison ; because the thing is popu- 
lar, ye patronize it : it is lustful, it is aboraiuable, it is deceitftil ! 
Ye take your children to hear what yourselves never ought to 
listen to. Ye yourselves will sit in gay and grand company, to 
listen to things from which your modesty ought to revolt. 
And I would fain hope it does, although the tide may for a 
while deceive you. Ah I God only knoweth the secret wicked- 
ness of this great city ; it demandeth a loud and a trumpet 
voice ; it needs a prophet to cry aloud, " Sound an alarm, 
sound an alarm, sound an alarm," in this city ; for verily the 
enemy groweth upon us, the power of the evil one is mighty, 
and we are fast going to perdition, unless God shall put forth 
his hand and roll back the black torrent of iniquity that 



MBECT, OMNIPOTENCE, AND JUSTICE. 36^ 

streameth down our streets. But God is slow to anger, and 
doth still stay his sword. Wrath said yesterday, " Unsheath 
thyself, O sword ;" and the sword struggled to get free. Mercy 
put her hand upon the hilt, and said, " Be still !" " Unsheath 
thyself, O sword I" Again it struggled from its scabbard ; 
Mercy put her hand on it, and said, "Back!" — and it rat- 
tled back again. Wrath stamped his foot, and said, " Awake, 
O sword, awake !" It struggled yet again, till half its blade 
was outdrawn ; " Back, back !" said Mercy, and with manly 
push she sent it back rattling into its sheath ; and there it 
sleeps still, for the Lord is " slow to anger, and plenteous in 
mercy." 

Now I am to trace this attribute of God to its source : why 
is he slow to anger ? 

He is slow to anger because he is infinitely good. Good is 
his name ; " good"-God. Good is his nature ; because he is 
slow to anger. 

He is slow to anger, again, because he is great. Little 
things are always swift in anger; gi-eat things are not so. 
The surly cur barks at every passer-by, and bears no insult ; 
the lion would bear a thousand times as much ; and the bull 
sleeps in his pasture, and will bear much, before he lifteth up 
his might. The leviathan in the sea, though he makes the 
deep to be hoary when he is enraged, yet is slow to be stirred 
up, while the little and puny are always swift in anger. God's 
greatness is one reason of the slowness of his wrath. 

n. But to proceed at once to the link. A great reason why 
he is slow to anger, is because he is great in power. This is 
to be the connecting link between this part of the subject and 
the last, and therefore I must bdg your attention. I say that 
this word great in power connects the first sentence to the 
last ; and it does so in this way. The Lord is slow to anger ; 
and he is slow to anger because he is great in power. " How 
say you so ?" says one. I answer, he that is great in power 
has power over himself; and he that can keep his own temper 
down, and subdue himself, is greater than he who rules a city, 
or can conquer nations. We heard but yesterday, or the day 
before, mighty displays of God's power in the rolling thun- 
der ^hich alanned us ; and when we saw the splendor of his 



868 IfXBCTy OMNIPaTENCB, Ain> JUSTICE. 

might in the glistening lightning, when he lifted up the gates 
of heaven and we saw the brightness thereof, and then he 
closed them again upon the dusty earth in a moment — even 
then we did not see any thing but the hidings of his power, 
compared with the power which he has over himself. When 
Gk)d's power doth restrain himself, then it is power indeed, the 
power to curb power, the power that binds omnipotence is 
omnipotence surpassed. God is great in power, and therefore 
doth he keep in his anger. A man who has a strong nund 
can bear to be insulted, can bear offenses, because he is strong. 
The weak mind snaps and snarls at the little ; the strong mind 
bears it like a rock ; it moveth not, though a thousand breakers 
dash upon it, and cast their pitiful malice in the spray upon its 
summit. God marketh his enemies, and yet he moveth not ; 
be standeth still, and letteth them curse him, yet is he not 
wrathfuL If he were less of a God than he is, if he were less 
mighty than we know him to be, he would long ere this have 
sent forth the whole of his thunder, and emptied the magazines 
of heaven ; he would long ere this have blasted the earth with 
the wondrous mines he hath prepared in its lower surface ; the 
flame that burneth there would have consumed us, and we 
should have been utterly destroyed. We bless God that the 
greatness of his power is just our protection ; he is slow to 
anger because he is great in power. 

And, now, there is no difficulty in showing how this link 
tmites itself with the next part of the text. "He is great in 
power, and will not at all acquit the wicked." This needs no 
demonstration in words ; I have but to touch the feelings, and 
you will see it. The greatn^Bss of his power is an assurance, 
and an assurance that he wiB not acquit the wicked. Who 
among you could witness the storm on Friday night without 
having thoughts concerning your own sinfulness stirred in 
your bosoms ? Men do not think of God the punisher, or Je- 
hovah the avenger, when the sun is shining, and the weather 
calm ; but in times of tempest, whose cheek is not blanched ? 
The Christian oftentimes rejoiceth in it ; he can say, " My soul 
is well at ease, amid this revelry of earth ; I do rejoice in it ; 
it is a day of feasting in my Father's hall, a day of high-feast 
and carnival in heaven, and I am glad. 



MKECT, OMNIPOTENCB, AND JITSnOK. 369 

" The God that reigns on high, 
And thunders when he please. 
That rides upon the stonny sky, 
And manages the seas, 

This awful God is ours, 

Our Father and our love, 
He shall send down his heavenly powers 

To carry us above." 

But the man who is not of an easy conscience will be ill at 
ease when the timbers of the house are creaking, and the 
foundations of the solid earth seem to groan. Ah ! who is he 
then that doth not tremble ? Yon lofty tree is riven in half; 
that lightning flash has smitten its trunk, and there it lies for 
ever blasted, a monument of what God can do. Who stood 
there and saw it ? Was he a swearer ? Did he swear then ? 
Was he a Sabbath-breaker ? Did he love his Sabbath-break- 
ing then? Was he haughty? Did he then despise God? 
Ah I how he shook then I Saw you not his hair stand on end ? 
Did not his cheek blanch in an instant ? Did he not close his 
eyes and start back in horror when he saw that dreadful spec- 
tacle, and thought God would smite him too? Yes, the 
power of God, when seen in the tempest, on sea or on land, in 
the earthquake or in the hurricane, is instinctively a proof that 
he will not acquit the wicked. I know not how to explain the 
feeling, but it is nevertheless the truth ; majestic displays of 
onmipotence have an effect upon the mind of convincing even 
the hardened, that God, who is so powerful, " will not at all 
acquit the wicked." Thus have I just tried to explain and 
make bare the link of the chain. 

ni. The last attribute, and the most terrible one, is, " he 

WILL NOT AT ALL ACQUIT THE WICKED." Let me Uufold this, 

fir^t of all ; and then let me, after that, endeavor to trace it 
also to its source, as I did the first attribute. 

God " will not acquit the wicked." How prove I this ? I 
prove it thus. Never once has he pardoned an unpunished 
sin ; not in all the years of the Most High, not in all the days 
of his right hand, has he once blotted out sin without punish- 
ment. What I say you, were not those in heaven pardoned ? 
Are there not many transgressors pardoned, and do they not 
16* 



370 ICBBCT, OMNIPaTENCB, AND JITSTICB. 

escape without punishment ? Has he not said, '' I have blot- 
ted out thy transgressions like a cloud, and like a thick cloud 
thine iniquities ?" Yes, true, most true, and yet my assertion 
is true also^not one of all those sins that have been pardoned 
were pardoned without punishment. Do you ask me why and 
how such a thing as that can be the truth ? I point you to yon 
dreadful sight on Calvary ; the punishment which fell not on 
the forgiven sinicc: fell there.- The cloud of justice was 
charged with fiery hail; the sinner deserved it; it fell on 
him ; but, for all that, it fell, and spent its fury ; it fell there, 
in that great reservoir of misery ; it fell into the Saviour's 
heart. The plagues, which need should light on our in- 
gratitude, did not fall on us, but they fell somewhere ; and 
who was it that was plagued ? Tell me, Gethsemane ; tell 
me, O Calvary's summit, who was plagued. The doleful an- 
swer comes, "jE5f^, JE7/, lama aahachtfiani .^" " My God, my 
God, why hast thou forsaken me ?" It is Jesus suffering all 
the plagues of sin. Sin is still punished, though the sinner is 
delivered. 

But, you say, this has scarcely proved that he will not acquit 
the wicked. I hold it has proved it, and proved it clearly. 
But do ye want any further proof that God will not acquit the 
•wicked ? Need I lead you through a long list of terrible won- 
deis that God has wrought — the wonders of his vengeance ? 
Shall I show you blighted Eden ? Shall I let you see a world 
all drowned — sea monsters whelping and stabling in the pal- 
aces of kings ? Shall I let you hear the last shriek of the last 
drowning man as he falls into the flood and dies, washed by 
that huge wave from the hill-top ? Shall I let you see death 
riding upon the summit of a crested billow, upon a sea that 
knows no shore, and triumphing because his work is done ; 
his quiver empty, for all men are slain, save where life floats in 
the midst of death in yonder ark ? Need I let you see Sodom 
with its terrified inhabitants, when the volcano of almighty 
wrath spouted fiery hail upon it ? Shall I show you the earth 
opening its mouth to swallow up Korah, Dathan, and Abiram ? 
Need I take you to the plagues of Egypt ? Shall I again re- 
peat the death-shriek of Pharaoh, and the drowning of his 
host ? Surely, ye need not to be told of cities that are in ruins. 



MBBCY, OMNIPOTENCE, AND JUSTICSB. 371 

or of nations that have been cut off in a day ; ye need not 
to be told how God has smitten the earth from one side to the 
other, when he has been wroth, and how he has melted mount- 
ains in his hot displeasure. Nay, we have proofe enough in 
history, proofe enough in Scripture, that "^e will not at all 
acquit the wicked." If ye wanted the best proof, however, 
ye should borrow the black wings of a miserable imagination^ 
and fly beyond the world, through the dark realm of chaos, 
on, far on, where those battlements of fire are gleaming with 
a horrid light — ^if through them, with a spirit's safety, ye 
would fly, and would behold the worm that never dies, the pit 
that knows no bottom, and could you there see the fire un- 
quenchable, and listen to the shrieks and wails of men that are 
banished for ever from God — if, sirs, it were possible for you 
to hear the sullen groans and hollow moans, and shrieks of 
tortured ghosts, then would ye come back to this world, 
amazed and petrified with horror, and you would say, " Indeed 
he will not acquit the wicked." You know, hell is the argu- 
ment of the text ; may you never have to prove the text by 
feeling in yourselves the argument fully carried out, " He vrill 
not at all acquit the wicked." 

And now we trace this terrible attribute to its source. Why 
is this ? 

We reply, God will not acquit the wicked, because he is 
good. What ! doth goodness demand that sinners shall be 
punished ? It doth. The Judge must condemn the murderer, 
because he loves his nation. "I can not let you go free; I 
can not, and I must not ; you would slay others, who belong 
to this fair commonwealth, if I were to let you go free ; no, I 
must condemn you from the very loveliness of my nature." 
The kindness of a king demands the punishment of those who 
are guilty. It is not wrathful in the legislature to make severe 
laws against great sinners ; it is but love toward the rest that 
sin should be restrained. Yon great flood-gates, which keep 
back the torrent of sin, are painted black, and look right hor- 
rible ; like horrid dungeon gates, they affright my spirit ; but 
are they proofs that God is not good ? No, sirs ; if ye could 
open wide those gates, and let the deluge of sin flow on us, 
hen would you cry, " O God, God ! shiit-to the gates of 



872 MEBCY, OMNIPOTSNCB, Ain> JUSTICE. 

ptmiBhinent again, let law again be established, set up the pil- 
lars, and swing the gates npon their hinges ; shut again the 
gates of punishment, that this world may not again be utterly 
destroyed by men who have become worse than brutes." It 
needs for very goodness' sake that sin should be punished. 
Mercy, with her weeping eyes (for she hath wept for sinners), 
when she finds they will not repent, looks more terribly stem 
in her loveliness than Justice in all his m^esty ; she drops the 
white flag from her hand, and saith — ^' No ; I called, and they 
refused ; I stretched out my hand, and no man regarded ; let 
them die, let them die ;" and that terrible word from the lip 
of Mercy's self is harsher thunder than the very damnation 
of Justice. O, yes, the goodness of God demands that men 
should perish, if they will sin. 

And again, tJie justice of Ood demands it, God is infin- 
itely just, and his justice demands that men should be pun- 
ished, unless they turn to him with full purpose of heart. 
Need I pass through all the attributes of God to prove it ? 
Methinks I need not. We must all of us believe that the God 
who is slow to anger and great in power is also sure not to 
acquit the wicked. And now just a home-thrust or two with 
you. What is your state this morning ? My friend, man or 
woman, what is thy state ? Canst thou look up to heaven and 
say, "Though I have sinned greatly I believe Christ was 
punished in my stead, 

" My &ith looks back to see 
The burden he did bear 
When hanging on the cursed tree, 
And knows her guilt was l^ere?" 

Can you by humble faith look to Jesus, and say, " My substi- 
tute, my refuge, my shield ; thou art my rock, my trust ; in 
thee do I confide ?" Then, beloved, to you I have nothing to 
say, except this. Never be afraid when you see God's power ; 
for now that you are forgiven and accepted, now that by faith 
you have fled to Christ for refuge, the power of God need no 
more terrify you, than the shield and sword of the warrior 
need terrify his wife or his child. " Nay," saith the woman, 
" is he strong ? He is strong for me. Is his arm brawney, 



MBECY, OMNIPOTENCE, AND JITSTICB. 373 

and are all his sinews fast and strong ? Then are they fast 
and strong for me. While he lives, and wears a shield, he 
will stretch it over my head ; and while his good sword can 
cleave foes, it will cleave my foes too, and ransom me.'^ Be 
of good cheer ; fear not his power. « 

But hast thou never fled to Christ for refuge ? Dost thou 
not believe in the Redeemer ? Hast thou never confided thy 
soul to his hands ? Then, my friends, hear me ; in God's 
name, hear me just a moment. My friend, I would not stand 
in thy position for an hour, for all the stars twice spelt in gold! 
For what is thy position ? Thou hast sinned, and God will 
not acquit thee ; he will punish thee. He is letting thee live ; 
thou art reprieved. Poor is the life of one that is reprieved 
without a pardon! Thy reprieve will soon run out; thine 
hour-glass is emptying every day. I see on some of you death 
has put his cold hand, and frozen your hair to whiteness. Ye 
need your staff : it is the only barrier between you and the 
grave now ; and you are, all of you, old and young, standing 
on a narrow neck of land, between two boundless seas — that 
neck of land, that isthmus of life, narrowing every moment, 
and you, and you, and you, are yet unpardoned. There is a 
city to be sacked, and you are in it — ^soldiers are at the gates ; 
the command is given that every man in the city is to be 
slaughtered save he who can give the password. " Sleep on, 
sleep on ; the attack is not to-day ; sleep on, sleep on." " But 
it is to-morrow, sir." " Ay, sleep on, sleep on ; it is not till to- 
morrow ; sleep on, procrastinate, procrastinate." " Hark I I 
hear a rumbling at the gates ; the battering-ram is at them ; 
the gates are tottering." " Sleep on, sleep on ; the soldiers 
are not yet at your doors; sleep on, sleep on; ask for no 
mercy yet ; sleep on, sleep on 1" " Ay, but I hear the shrill 
clarion sound ; they are in the streets. Hark, to the shrieks 
of men and women I They are slaughtering them ; they fall, 
they fall, they fall !" " Sleep on ; they are not yet at your 
door." " But hark, they are at the gate ; with heavy tramp 
I hear the soldiers marching up the stairs !" " Nay, sleep on, 
sleep on ; they are not yet in your room." " Why, they are 
there ; they have burst open the door that parted you from 
them, and there they stand 1" " No, sleep on, sleep on ; the 



374 MBBCr, OMNIPOTENCB, AND JUSTICB. 

sword is not yet at your throat ; sleep on, sleep on !" It is at 
your throat, you start with horror. Sleep on, sleep on ! But 
you are gone ! " Demon, why toldest thou me to slumber ? It 
would have been wise in me to have escaped the city when 
first the gates wore shaken. Why did I not ask for the pass- 
word before the troops came ? Why, by all that is wise, why 
did I not rush into the streets, and cry the password when the 
soldiers were there ? Why stood I till the knife was at my 
throat ? Ay, demon that thou art, be cursed ; but I am cursed 
with thee for ever !-' You know the application ; it is a para- 
ble ye can all expound ; ye need not that I should tell you 
that death is ailer you, that justice must devour you, that 
Christ crucified is the only password that c«ui save you ; and 
yet you have not learned it — that with some of you death is 
neaiing, nearing, nearing, and that with all of you he is close 
at hand I I need not expound how Satan is the demon, how 
in hell you shall curse him and curse yourselves because you 
procrastinated — how, that seeing God was slow to anger you 
were slow to repentance — how, because he was great in power, 
and kept back his anger, therefore you kept back your steps 
from seeking him ; and here you are what you are 1 

Spirit of God, bless these words to some souls that they may 
be saved I May some sinners be brought to the Saviour's feet, 
and cry for mercy ! We ask it for Jesus' sake. Amen. 



SERMON XXY. 

CHRIST— THE POWER AND WISDOM OP GM)D. 

" Chriflt the power of Gk)d, and the wisdom of Gk)d."— 1 OOR, i 24. 

Unbeliep toward the gospel of Christ is the most unreason- 
able thing in all the world, because the reason which the un- 
believer gives for his unbelief is fairly met by the qharacter 
and constitution of the gospel of Christ. Notice that before 
this verse we read — " The Jews required a sign, the Greeks 
seek after wisdom." If you met the Jew who believed not on 
Christ in the apostle's day, he said, " I can not believe, because 
I want a sign ;'* and if you met the Greek, he said, " I can not 
believe, because I want a philosophic system, one that is full 
of wisdom." " Now," says the apostle, " both these objections 
are untenable and unreasonable. If you suppose that the Jew 
requires a sign, that sign is given him : Christ is the power of 
God. The miracles that Christ wrought upon earth were signs 
more than sufficiently abundant ; and if the Jewish people had 
but the will to believe, they would have found abundant signs 
and reasons for believing in the personal acts of Christ and his 
apostles." And let the Greeks say, " I can not believe, be- 
cause I require a wise system : O Gi-eek, Christ is the wisdom 
of God. If thou wouldst but investigate the subject, thou 
wouldst find in it profoundness of wisdom — a depth where the 
most gigantic intellect might be drowned. It is no shallow 
gospel, but a deep, and a great deep too, a deep which passeth 
understanding. Thine objection is ill-founded ; for Christ is 
the wisdom of God, and his gospel is the highest of all sciences. 
If thou wishest to find wisdom, thou must find it in the word 
of revelation." 

Now, this morning, we shall try to Ining out these two 



376 CHBIST— THB POWER AND WISDOM OF GOD. 

thoughts of the gospel ; and it may be that God shall bless 
what we shaH say to the removing of the objection of either 
Jew or Greek ; that the one requiring a sign may see it in the 
power of God in Christ, and that he who requireth wisdom 
may behold it in the wisdom of God in Christ. We shall un- 
derstand our text in a threefold manner: Christ, that is, 
Christ personality is " the power of God and the wisdom of 
God ;" Christ, that is, GhrisVs gospel^ is " the power of God 
and the wisdom of God ;" Christ, that is, Christ m tJie hearty 
true religion^ is " the power of God and the wisdom of God." 

I. First, to begin, then, with Christ personallt. Chrbt 
considered as God and man, the Son of God equal with his 
Father, and yet the man, born of the Virgin Mary. Christ, in 
his complex person, is " the power of God and the wisdom of 
God." JEk is the power of God from all eternity, " By his 
word were the heavens made, and all the host of them." " The 
Word was God, and the Word was with God." " All things 
were made by him, and without him was not any thing made 
that was made." The pillars of the earth were placed in their 
everlasting sockets by the omnipotent right hand of Christ ; 
the curtains of the heavens were drawn upon their rings of 
starry light by him who was from everlasting the All-glorious 
Son of God. The orbs that float aloft in ether, those ponder- 
ous planets, and those mighty stars, were placed in their posi- 
tions, or sent rolling through space by the eternal strength of 
him who is " the first and the last," " the Prince of the kings 
of the earth." Christ is the power of God, for he is the 
Creator of all things, and by him all things exist. 

But when he came to earthy took upon himself the fashion 
of a man, tabernacled in the inn, and slept in the manger, he 
still gave proof that he was the Son of God ; not so much so 
when, as an infant of a span long, the immortal was the mortal, 
and the infinite became a babe ; not so much so in his youth, 
but afterward when he began his public ministry, he gave 
abundant proofs of his power and Godhead. The winds hushed 
by his finger uplifted, the waves calmed by his voice, so that 
they became solid as marble beneath his tread ; the tempest, 
cowering at his feet, as before a conqueror whom it knew and 
obeyed ; these things, these stormy elements, the wind, the 



CHBIST — ^THB POWER AND WISDOM OF GOD. 877 

tempest, and the water, gave fall proof of his abundant power. 
The lame man leaping, the deaf man hearing, tJhe dumb man 
singing, the dead rising, these, again, were proofs that he was 
the " power of God." When the voice of Jesus startled the 
shades of Hades, and rent the bonds of death, with " Lazarus, 
come forth I" and when the carcass rotten in the tomb woke 
up to life, there was proof of his divine power and Godhead. 
A thousand other proofs he afforded ; but we need not stay 
to mention them to you who have Bibles in your houses, and 
who can read them every day. At last he yielded up his life, 
and was buried in the tomb. Not long, however, did he 
sleep ; for he gave another proof of his divine power and God- 
head, when starting from his slumber, he affrighted the guards 
with the majesty of his grandeur, not being holden by the 
bonds of death, they being like green withes before our con- 
quering Samson, who had meanwhile pulled up the gates of 
hell, and carried them on his shoulders far away. 

That he is the power of God now^ Scripture very positively 
affirmeth ; for it is written, " he sitteth at the right hand of 
God." He hath the reins of Providence gathered in his hands ; 
the fleet coursers of Time are driven by him who sits in the 
chariot of the world, and bids its wheels run round ; and he 
shall bid them stay when it shall please him. He is the great 
umpire of all disputes, the great Sovereign Head of the church, 
the Lord of heaven, and death, and hell ; and by-and-by we 
shall know that he shall come, 

" On fiery clouds and wings of wind, 
Appointed Judge of all mankind ;" 

and then the quickened dead, the startled myriads, the divided 
firmaments, the "Depart, ye cursed," and the "Come, ye 
blessed," shall proclaim him to be the power of God, who hath 
power over all flesh, to save or to condemn, as it pleaseth him. 
But he is equally " the wisdom of God." The great things 
that he did before aU worlds were proofs of his wisdom. He 
planned the way of salvation ; he devised the system of atone- 
ment and substitution ; he laid the foundations of the great 
plan of salvation. There was wisdom. But he built the 
heavens by wisdom, and he laid the pillars of light, whereoo 



378 CHBIST — THB POWEB AND WISDOM OF GOD. 

the firmament is balanced, by his skill and wisdom. Mark the 
world ; and learn, as ye see all its multitudinous proofs of the 
wisdom of God, and there you have the wisdom of Christ ; for 
he was the creator of it. And when he became a man^ he gave 
proofs enough of wisdom. Even in childhood, when he made 
the doctors sit abashed by the questions that he asked, he 
showed that he was more than mortal. And when the Phari- 
see and Sadducee and Herodian were all at last defeated, and 
their nets were broken, he proved again the superlative wis- 
dom of the Son of God. And when those who came to take 
him, stood enchained by his eloquence, spell-bound by his mar- 
velous oratory, there was again a proof that he was the wis- 
dom of God, who could so enchain the minds of men. And 
now that he intercedeth before the throne of God, now that 
he is our Advocate before the throne, the pledge and surety 
for the blessed, now that the reins of government are in his 
bands, and are ever wisely directed, we have abundant proofe 
that the wisdom of God is in Christ, as well as the power of 
God. Bow before him, ye that love him ; bow before him, 
ye that desire him ! Crown him, crown him, crown him I He 
is worthy of it, unto him is everlasting might ; unto him is 
unswerving wisdom : bless his name ; exalt him ; clap your 
wings, ye seraphs; cry aloud, ye cherubim; shout, shout, 
shout, to his praise, ye ransomed host above. And ye, O men 
that know his grace, extol him in your songs for ever ; for he 
is Christ, the power of God and the wisdom of God. 

II. But now Christ, that is, Christ's Gospel, is the power 
and the wisdom of God. 

1. Christ's gospel is a thiJig of divine power. Do you want 
proofs of it ? Ye shall not go far. How could Christ's gos- 
pel have been established in this world as it was, if it had not 
in itself intrinsic might ? By whom was it spread ? By mi- 
tered prelates, by learned doctors, by fierce warriors, by ca- 
liphs, by prophets ? No ; by fishermen, untaught, unlettered ; 
save as the Spirit gave them utterance, not knowing how to 
preach or speak. How did they spread it ? By the bayonet, 
by their swords, by the keen metal of their blades ? Did they 
drive their gospel into men at the point of the lance, and with 
the cimeter ? Say, did myriads rush to battle, as they did 



OHBIST — ^THE POWEE AND WISDOM OF GOD. 379 

when they followed the crescent of Mohammed, and did they 
convert men by force, by law, by might ? Ah ! no. Noth- 
ing but their simple words, their unvarnished eloquence, their 
rough declamation, their unhewn oratory ; these it was, which, 
by the blessing of God's Spirit, carried the gospel round the 
world within a century after the death of its •founder. 

But what was this gospel which achieved so much ? Was 
it a thing palatable to human nature ? Did it offer a paradise 
of present happiness ? Did it offer delight to the flesh and to 
the senses ? Did it give charming prospects of wealth ? Did 
it give licentious ideas to men ? No ; it was a gospel of mo- 
rality most strict, it was a gospel with delights entirely spirit- 
ual — a gospel which abjured the flesh, which, unlike the coarse 
delusion of Joe Smith, cut off every prospect from men of de- 
lighting themselves with the joys of lust. It was a gospel 
holy, spotless, clean as the breath of heaven ; it was pure as 
the wing of angel ; not like that which spread of old, in the 
days of Mohammed, a gospel of lust, of vice, and wickedness, 
but pure, and consequently not palatable to human nature. 
And yet it spread. Why ? My friends, I think the only an- 
swer I can give you is, because it has in it the power of God. 

But do you want another proof? How has it been main- 
tained since then ? No easy path has the gospel had. The 
good bark of the church has had to plow her way through 
seas of blood, and those who have manned her have been be- 
spattered with the bloody spray ; yea, they have had to man 
her and keep her in motion, by laying down their lives unto 
the death. Mark the bitter persecution of the church of 
Christ from the time of Nero to the days of Mary, and fur- 
ther on, through the days of Charles the Second, and of those 
kings of unhappy memory, who had not as yet learned how to 
spell " toleration." From the dragoons of Claverhouse, right 
straight away to the gladiatorial shows of Rome, what a long 
series of persecutions has the gospel had ! But, as the old 
divines used to say, " The blood of the martyrs" has been 
"the seed of the church." It has been, as the old herbalists 
had it, like the herb camomile, the more it is trodden on, the 
more it grows ; and the more the church has been ill-treated, 
the more it has prospered. Behold the mountains where the 



380 0HBI8IV— THE POWER AND WISDOM OF OOD* 

Albigenses walk in their white garments ; see the stakes of 
Smithfield, not yet forgotten ; behold ye the fields among 
the towering hills, where brave hands kept themselves firee 
from despotic tyranny. Mark ye the Pilgrim Fathers, driven 
by a government of persecution across the briny deep. See 
what vitality the gospel has. Plunge her under the wave, 
and she rises, the purer for her washing ; thrust her in the fire, 
and she comes out, the more bright for her burning ; cut her 
in sunder, and each piece shall make another church ; behead 
her, and like the hydra of old, she shall have a hundred heads 
for every one you cut away. She can not die, she must live ; 
for she has the power of God within her. 

Do you want another proof? I give you a better one than 
the last. I do not wonder that the church has outlived per- 
secution so much as I wonder she has outlived the un&ith- 
fulness of her professed teachers. Never was church so 
abused as the church of Christ has been, all through her his- 
tory ; from the days of Diotrephes, who sought to have the 
pre-eminence, even to these later times, we can read of proud, 
arrogant prelates, and supercilious, haughty lords over God's 
inheritance. Bonners, Dimstans, and men of all sorts, have 
come into her ranks, and done all they could to kill her ; and 
with their lordly priestcraft they have tried to turn her aside. 
And what shall we say to that huge apostacy of Kome ? A 
thousand miracles that ever the church outlived that I When 
her pretended head became apostate, and all her bishops dis- 
ciples of hell, and she had gone far away, wonder of wonders, 
that she should come out, in the days of the glorious Refor- 
mation, and should still live. And, even now» when I mark the 
supineness of many of my brethren in the ministry — when I 
mark their utter and entire inefficiency of doing aught for 
God — when I see their waste of time, preaching now and then 
on the Sunday, instead of going to the highways and hedges 
and preaching the gospel everywhere to the poor — when I see 
the want of unction in the church itself, the want of prayerful- 
ness — when I see wars and fightings, factions and disunions — 
when I see hot blood and pride, even in the meetings of the 
saints ; I say it is a thousand thousand miracles that the church 
of Qod should be alive at all, after the unfaithfulness of her 



CHBIST — THE POWKE AND WISDOM OP GOD. 381 

members, her ministers, and her bishops. She has the power 
of God within her, or else she would have been destroyed ; for 
she has got enough within her own loins to work her destruc- 
tion. 

"But," says one, " you have not yet proved it is the power 
of God to my understanding." Sir, I will give you another 
proof. There are not a few of you, who are now present, who 
would be ready, I know, if it were necessary, to rise in your 
seats and bear me witness that I speak the truth. There are 
some who, not many months ago, were drunkards ; some who 
were loose livers; men who were unfaithful to every vow 
which should keep man to truth, and right, and chastity, and 
honesty, and integrity. Yes, I repeat, I have some here who 
look back to a life of detestable sin. You tell me, some of 
you, that for thirty years even (there is one such present now) 
you never listened to a gospel ministry, nor ever entered the 
house of God at all ; you despised the Sabbath, you spent it in 
all kinds of evil pleasures, yon plunged headlong into sin and 
vice, and your only wonder is, that God has not out you off 
long ago, as cumberers of the ground ; and now you are here, 
as different as light from darkness. I know your characters, 
and have watched you with a father's love ; for, child though 
I am, I am the spiritual father of some here whose years 
outcount mine by four times the number; and I have seen 
you honest who were thieves, and you sober who were drunk- 
ards. I have seen the wife's glad eye sparkling with happi- 
ness ; and many a woman has grasped me by the hand, shed 
her tears upon me, and said, " I bless God ; I am a happy 
woman now ; my husband is reclaimed, my house is blessed ; 
our children are brought up in the fear of the Lord." Not 
one or two, but scores of such are here. And, my friends, if 
these be jiot proofe that the gospel is the power of God, I say 
there is no proof of any thing to be had in the world, and 
every thing must be conjecture. Yes, and there worships 
with you this day (and if there be a secularist here, my friend 
will pardon me for alluding to him for a moment), there is m 
the house of God this day one who was a leader in your ranks, 
one who despised God, and ran very far away from right. 
And here he is I It is his honor this day to own himself a 



882 GHBIBT — THB POWSB AND WISDOM OF GOD. 

Christian ; and I hope, when this sermon is ended, to grasp 
him bj the hand, for he has done -a valiant deed ; he has 
bravely burned his papers in the sight of all the people, and 
has turned to God with full purpose of heart. I could give 
you proofe enough, if proofs were wanted, that the gospel has 
been to men the power of God and the wisdom of God. More 
proofs I could give, yea, thousands, one upon the other. 

But we must notice the other points. Christ's gospel is the 
wisdom of God. Look at the gospel itself and you will see it 
to be wisdom. The man who scoffs and sneers at the gospel, 
does so for no other reason but because he does not understand 
it. We have two of the richest books of theology extant that 
were written by professed infidels — ^by men that were so, I 
mean, before they wrote the books. You may have heard the 
story of Lord Lyttleton and West. I believe they deter- 
mined to refute Christianity ; one of them took up the subject 
of Paul's conversion, and the other, the subject of the resur- 
rection ; they sat down, both of them, to write books to ridi- 
cule those two events, and the effect was, that in studying the 
subject, they, both of them, became Christians, and wrote 
books which are now bulwarks to the church they hoped to 
have overthrown. Every man who looks the gospel fairly in 
the fece, and gives it the study it ought to have, will discover 
that it is no false gospel, but a gospel that is replete with wis- 
dom, and full of the knowledge of Christ. If any man will 
cavil at the Bible, he must cavil. There are some men who 
can find no wisdom anywhere, except jn their own heads. 
Such men, however, are no judges of wisdom. We should not 
set a mouse to explain the phenomena of astronomy, nor should 
we set a man who is so foolish as to do nothing but cavil to 
understand the wisdom of the gospel. It needs that a man 
should at least be honest, and have some share of sense, or we 
can not dispute with him at all. Chiist's gospel, to any man 
who believes it, is the wisdom of God. 

Allow me just to hint that to be a believer in the gospel is 
no dishonor to a man's intellect. While the gospel can be un- 
derstood by the poorest and the most illiterate, while there 
are shallows in it where a lamb may wade, there are depths 
where leviathan may swim. The intellect of Locke found am- 



CHBIST — ^THE POWBB AND WISDOM OF GOD. 383 

pie space in the gospel ; the mind of Newton submitted to re- 
ceive the truth of inspiration as a little child, and found a 
something in its majestic being higher than itself, unto which 
it could not attain. The rudest and most untaught have been 
enabled, by the study of the holy Scripture of God's truth to 
enter the kingdom; and the most erudite have said of the 
gospel, it surpasses thought. I was thinking the other day 
what a vast amount of literature must be lost if the gospel 
be not true. No book was ever so suggestive as the Bible. 
Large tomes we have in our libraries which it takes all our 
strength to lift, all upon holy Scripture ; myriads upon my- 
riads of smaller volumes, tens of thousands of every shape and 
size, all written upon the Bible ; and I have thought that the 
very suggestiveness of Scripture, the supernatural suggestive- 
ness of holy Writ, may be in itself a proof of its divine wis- 
dom, since no man has ever been able to write a book which 
could have so many commentators and so many writers upon 
its text as the Bible has received, by so much as one millionth 
part. 

III. Christ in a man, the gospel in the soul, is the pow- 
er of God and the wisdom of God. We will picture the Chris- 
tian from his beginning to his end. We will give a short map 
of his history. He begins there, in that prison-house, with 
huge iron bars, which he can not file ; in that dark, damp cell, 
where pestilence and death are bred. There, in poverty and 
nakedness, without a pitcher to put to his thirsty lips, without 
a mouthful even of dry crust to satisfy his hunger, that is 
where he begins— in the prison chamber of conviction, power- 
less, lost and ruined. Between the bars I thrust my hand to 
him, and give to him in God's name the name of Christ to 
plead. Look at him ; he has been filing away at these bars 
many and many a day, without their yielding an inch ; but 
now he has got the name of Christ upon his lips ; he puts his 
hands upon the bars, and one of them is gone, and another, and 
another ; and he makes a happy escape, crying, " I am free, I 
am free, I am free ! Christ has been the power of God to me, 
in bringing me out of my trouble." No sooner is he free, how- 
ever, than a thousand doubts meet him. This one cries, " You 
are not elect ;" another cries, " You are not redeemed ;" 



384 OHSICrr— THB POWSB AND WISDOM OF GOD. 

another says, " You are not called ;" another says, " Ton are 
not converted." " Avaunt," says he, "avauntl Christ died;»' 
and he jost pleads the name of Christ as the power of God, 
and the doubts flee apace, and he walks straight on. He comes 
soon into the furnace of trouble ; he is thrust into the inner- 
most prison, and his feet are made fast in the stocks. God has 
put his hand upon him. He is in deep trouble ; at midnight 
he begins to sing of Christ ; and lo ! the walls begin to totter, 
and the foundation of the prison to shake ; and the man's chains 
are taken ofl^ and he comes out free ; for Chiist hath delivered 
him from trouble. Here is a hill to climb, on the road to 
heaven. Wearily he pants up the side of that hill, and thinks 
he must die ere he can reach the summit. The name of Jesus 
is whispered in his ear ; he leaps to his feet, and pursues his 
way, with fresh courage, until the summit is gained, when he 
cries, '^ Jesus Christ is the strength of my song ; he also hath 
become my salvation." See him again. He is on a sudden be- 
set by many enemies ; how shall he resist them ? With this 
true sword, this true Jerusalem blade, Christ, and him cruci- 
fied. With this he keeps the devil at arm's length ; with this 
he fights against temptation, and against lust, against spiritual 
wickedness in high places, and with this he resists. Now, he 
has come to his last struggle ; the river Death rolls black and 
sullen before him ; dark shapes rise upward from the flood, 
and howl and fright him. How shall he cross the stream ? 
How shall he find a landing place on the other side ? Dread 
thoughts perplex him for a moment ; he is alarmed ; but he 
remembers, Jesus died ; and catching up that watchword he 
ventures to the flood. Before his feet the Jordan flies apace ; 
like Israel of old, he walks through, dry shod, singing as he 
goes to heaven, " Christ is with me, Christ is with me, passing 
through the stream ! Victory, victory, victory, to him that 
loveth me I" 

To the Christian in his own experience Christ is ever the 
power of God. As for temptation he can meet that. with Christ; 
as for trouble he can endure that through Christ who strength- 
ens him, yea, he can say with Paul, "I can do all things 
through Christ who strengthens me." Have you never seen 
a Christian in trouble, a true Christian ? I have read a story 



CHBIST — THB POWSB AND WISDOM OF GOD. 885 

of a man who was converted to God by seeing the conduct of 
his wife in the hour of trouble. They had a lovely child, their 
only of&pring. The father's heart doted on it perpetually, 
and the mother's soul was knit up in the heart of the little one. 
It lay sick upon its bed, and the parents watched it night and 
day. At last it died. The father had no God : he rent his 
hair, he rolled upon the floor in misery, wallowed upon the 
earth, cursing his being, and defying God in the utter casting 
down of his agony. There sat his wife, as fond of the child as 
ever he could be ; and though tears would come, she gently 
said, " The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away ; blessed 
be the name of the Lord." " What," said he, starting to his 
feet, " you love that child ? I thought that when that child 
died you would break your heart. Here am I, a strong man ; 
I am mad : here are you, a weak woman, and yet you are 
strong and bold ; tell me what it is possesses you ?" Said she, 
" Christ is my Lord, I trust in him ; surely I can give this 
child to him who gave himself for me." From that instant 
the man became* a believer. " There must," said he, " be some 
truth and some power in the gospel, which could lead you to 
believe in such a manner, under such a trial." Christians ! try 
to exhibit that spirit wherever you are, and prove to the 
worldling that in your experience at least " Christ is the power 
of God and the wisdom of God." 

And now the last point. In the Christianas eoBperiencey 
Christ is wisdom, as well as power. If you want to be a thor - 
oughly learned man the best place to begin, is to begin at the 
Bible, to begin at Christ. It is said that even children learn to 
read more quickly from the Bible than from any other book ; 
and this I am sure of, that wo, who are but grown-up children, 
will learn better and learn faster by beginning with Christ, 
than we could by beginning with any thing else. I remember 
saying once, and as I can not say it better I will repeat it, that 
before I knew the gospel I gathensd up a heterogeneous mass 
of all kinds of knowledge from here, there, and everywhere ; 
a bit of chemistry, a bit of botany, a bit of astronomy, and a 
bit of this, that, and the other. I put them altogether, in one 
great confused chaos. When I learned the gospel, I got a 
shelf in my head to put every thing away upon just where it 

n 



S86 OHBIST — THB POWXB AND WISDOK OF QOD, 

should be. It seemed to me as if^ when I had discovered 
Christ and him crucified, I had got the center of the system, 
BO that I could see every other science revolving aroimd in 
order. From the earth, you know, the planets appear to 
move in a very irregular manner — ^they are progressive, retro- 
grade, stationary ; but if you could get upon the sun, you 
would see them marching round in their constant, uniform, 
circular motion. So with knowledge. Begin with any other 
science you like, and truth will seem to be awry. Begin with 
the science of Christ crucified, and you will begin with the sun, 
you will see every other science moving round it in complete 
harmony. The greatest mind in the world will be evolved by 
beginning at the right end. . The old saying is, " Go from na- 
ture up to nature's God ;" but it is hard work going up bill 
The best thing is to go from nature's God down to nature ; 
and if you once get to nature's God, and believe him and love 
him, it is surprising how easy it is to hear music in the waves, 
and songs in the wild whisperings of the winds ; to see God 
everywhere, in the stones, in the rocks, in the rippling brooks, 
and hear him everywhere, in the lowing of cattle, in the rolling 
of thunder, and in the fury of tempests. Get Christ first, put 
him in the right place, and you will find him to be the wisdom 
of God in your own experience. 

But wisdom is not knowledge ; and we must not confound 
the two. Wisdom is the right use of knowledge ; and 
Christ's gospel helps us, by teaching us the right use of knowl- 
edge. It directs us. Yon Christian has lost his way in a 
dark wood ; but God's Word is a compass to him, and a lan- 
tern too : he finds his way by Christ. He comes to a turn in 
the road. Which is right, and which is wrong ? He can not 
tell. Christ is the great sign-post, telling him which way to 
go. He sees every day new straits attend ; he knows not 
which way to steer, Christ is the great pilot who puts his 
hand on the tiller, and makes him wise to steer through the 
shoals of temptation and the rocks of sin. Get the gospel, 
and you are a wise man. " The fear of the Lord is the begin- 
ning of wisdom, and right understanding have they who keep 
his commandments." Ah! Christian, you have had many 
doubts, but you have had them all unriddled, when you have 



CHBIST — ^THB POWER AND WISi>OM OF GOD. 387 

come to the cross of Christ. You have had many difficulties ; 
but they have been all explained in the light of Calvary. You 
have seen mysteries, Vhen you have brought them to the face 
of Christ, made clear and manifest, which once you never 
could have known. Allow me to remark here, that some peo- 
ple make use of Christ's gospel to illuminate their heads, in- 
stead of making use of it to illuminate their hearts. They are 
like the farmer Rowland Hill once described. The farmer is 
sitting by the jfire with his children ; the cat is purring on the 
hearth, and they are all in great comfort. The plowman 
rushes in and cries, " Thieves ! thieves ! thieves I" The former 
rises up in a moment, grasps the candle, holds it up to his 
head, rushes after the thieves, and, says Rowland Hill, " he 
tumbles over a wheelbarrow, because he holds the light to his 
head, instead of holding it to his feet." So there are many 
who just hold religion up to illuminate their intellect, instead 
of holding it down to illuminate their practice ; and so they 
make a sad tumble of it, and cast themselves into the mire, 
and do more hurt to their Christian profession in one hour 
than they will ever be able to retrieve. Take care that you 
make the wisdom of God, by God's Holy Spirit, a thing of 
true wisdom, directing your feet into his statutes, and keeping 
you in his ways. 

And now a practical appeal, and we have done. I have been 
putting my arrow on the string ; and if I have used any light 
similes, I have but done so just as the archer tips his arrow 
with a feather, to make it fly the better. I know that a rough 
quaint saying often sticks, when another thing is entirely for- 
gotten. Now let us draw the bow, and send the arrow right 
at your hearts. Men, brethren, fathers, how many of you 
have felt in yourselves that Christ is the power of God, and 
the wisdom of God ? Internal evidence is the best evidence in 
the world for the truth of the gospel. No Paley or Butler 
can prove the truth of the gospel so well as Mary, the servant 
girl yonder, that has got the gospel in her heart, and the pow- 
er of it manifest in her life. Say, has Christ ever broken your 
bonds and set you free ? Has he delivered you from your 
evil life, and from your sin ? Has he given you " a good hope 
through grace," and can you now say, " On him I lean ; on 



388 COnUST — THB POWBB AlO) WISDOM OV GOD. 

my beloved I stay myself ?** If so, go away and rejoice : you 
are a saint ; for the apostle has said, ^' He is unto us who are 
saved, Christ the power of God and the wisdom of God." 
But if you can not say this, allow me affectionately to warn 
you. If you want not tliis power of Christ, and this wisdom 
of Christ now, you will want them in a few short moments, 
when God shall come to judge the quick and the dead, when you 
shall stand before his bar, and when all the deeds that you have 
done shall be read before an assembled world. Tou will want 
religion then. O that you had grace to tremble now ; grace 
to kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and you perish from the way, 
when his wrath is kindled but a little." Hear ye how to be 
saved, and I have done. Do you feel that you are a sinner ? 
Are you conscious that you have rebelled against God ? Are 
you willing to acknowledge your transgressions, and do you 
hate and abhor them, while at the same time you feel you can 
do nothing to atone for them ? Then hear this. Christ died 
for you ; and if he died for you, you can not be lost. Christ 
died in vain for no man for whom he died. If you are a pen- 
itent and a believer, he died for you, and you are safe ; go your 
way : rejoice " with joy unspeakable, and full of glory ;" for 
he who has taught you your need of a Saviour, will you give 
that Sj^viour's blood to be applied to your conscience, and you 
shall ere long, with yonder blood-washed host, praise God and 
the Lamb saying, " Hallelujah, for ever. Amen !" Only do 
you feel that you are a sinner ? If not, I have no gospel to 
preach to you ; I can but warn you. But if you feel your lost 
estate, and come to Christ, come, and welcome, for he will 
never cast you away. 



SERMON XXVI. 
GOING HOME— A CHRISTMAS SERMON. 

" Gro home to thy Mends, and tell them how great things the Lord hath 
done for thee, and hath had compassion on thee/^ — ^Mabk, y. 19. 

The case of the man here referred to is a very extraor- 
dinary one : it occupies a place among the memorabilia of 
Christ's life, perhaps as high as any thing which is recorded by 
either of the evangelists. This poor wretch being possessed 
with a legion of evil spirits had been driven to something 
worse than madness. He -fixed his home among the tombs, 
where he dwelt by night and day, and was the terror of all 
those who passed by. The authorities had attempted to curb 
him ; he had been bound with fetters and chains, but in the 
paroxysms of his madness he had torn the chains in sunder, 
and broken the fetters in pieces. Attempts had been fnade to 
reclaim him; but no man could tame him. He was worse 
than the wild beasts, for they might be tamed ; but his fierce 
nature would not yield. He was a misery to himself, for he 
would run upon the mountains by night and day, crying and 
howling fearfully, cutting himself with the sharp flints, and 
torturing his poor body in the most frightful manner. Jesus 
Christ passed by ; he said to the devils, " Come out of him.'* 
The man was healed in a moment ; he fell down at Jesus' feet ; 
he became a rational being — an intelligent man, yea, what is 
more, a convert to the Saviour. Out of gratitude to his deliv- 
erer, he said, " Lord, I will follow thee whithersoever thou 
goest ; I will be thy constant companion and thy servant ; per- 
mit me so to be." " No," said Christ, '* I esteem your motive ; 
it is one of gratitude to me ; but if you would show your grat- 
itude, * go home to thy friends, and tell them how great things 
the Lord hath done for thee, and hath had compassion on thee.' " 



300 GOING HOKE — ^A CHBISTMAS SEBMOK. 

Now, this teaches us a very important feet, namely, this, 
true religion does not break in sunder the bonds of family re- 
lationship. True religion seldom encroaches upon that sacred, 
I had almost said divine institution called home ; it does not 
separate men from their families, and make them aliens to their 
flesh and blood. Superstition has done that ; an awful super- 
stition, which calls itself Christianity, has sundered men from 
their kind ; but true religion has never done so. Why, if I 
might be allowed to do such a thing, I would seek out the 
hermit in his lonely cavern, and I would go to him and say, 
" Fi-iend, if thou art what thou dost profess to be, a true serv- 
ant of the living God, and not a hypocrite, as I guess thou 
art — ^if thou art a true believer in Christ, and would show 
forth what he has done for thee, upset that pitcher, eat the 
last piece of thy bread, leave this dreary cave, wash thy fece, 
untie thy hempen girdle ; and if thou wouldst show thy grati- 
tude, go home to thy friends, and tell them what great things 
the Lord hath done for thee. Canst thou edify the sere leaves 
of the forest ? Can the beasts learn to adore that God whom 
thy gratitude should strive to honor? Dost thou hope to 
convert these rocks, and wake the echoes into songs ? Nay, 
go back ; dwell with thy friends, reclaim thy kinship with 
men, and unite again with thy fellows, for this is Christ's ap« 
proved way of showing gratitude." And I would go to every 
monastery and every nunnery, and say to the monks, " Come 
out, brethren, come out ! If you are what you say you are, 
servants of God, go home to your friends. No more of this 
absurd discipline; it is not Christ's rule ; you are acting dif- 
ferently from what he would have you ; go home to your 
friends I" And to the Sisters of Mercy we would say, " Be 
sisters of mercy to your own sisters ; go home to your friends ; 
take care of your aged parents ; turn your own houses into 
convents ; do not sit here nursing your pride by a disobedience 
to Christ's rule, which says, ' go home to thy friends.' " " Go 
home to thy friends, and tell them how great things the Lord 
hath done for thee, and hath had compassion on thee." The 
love of a solitary and ascetic life, which is by some considered 
to be a divine virtue, is neither more nor less than a disease 
of the mind. In the ages when there was but little benevo- 



GOING HOMB — A CHBISTMAS SEBMON. 391 

lence, and consequently few hands to build lunatic asylums, 
superstition supplied the lack of charity, and silly men and 
women were allowed the indulgence of their fancies in secluded 
haunts or in easy laziness. Young has most truly said, 

" The first sure symptoms of a mind in health 
Are rest of heart and pleasure found at home." 

Avoid, my friends, above all things, those romantic and absurd 
conceptions of virtue \^hich are the offspring of superstition 
and the enemies of righteousness. Be not without natural 
affection, but love those who are knit to you by ties of nature. 
True religion can not be inconsistent with nature. It never 
can demand that I should abstain from weeping when my 
friend is dead. " Jesus wept." It can not deny me the priv- 
ilege of a smile, when Providence looks favorably upon me ; 
for once " Jesus rejoiced in spirit, and said, Father, I thank 
thee." It does not make a man say to his father and mother, 
*' I am no longer your son." That is not Christianity, but 
something worse than what beasts would do, which would 
lead us to be entirely sundered from our fellows, to walk 
among them as if we had no kinship with them. To all who 
think a solitary life must be a life of piety, I would say, " It 
is the greatest delusion." To all who think that those must 
be good people who snap the ties of relationship, let us say, 
" Those are the best who maintain them." Christianity makes 
a husband a better husband, it makes a wife a better wife than 
shfe was before. It does not free me from my duties as a son ; 
it makes me a better son, and my parents better parents. In- 
stead of weakening my love, it gives me fresh reason /or my 
affection ; and he whom I loved before as my father, I now 
love as my brother and co-worker in Christ Jesus ; and she 
whom I reverenced as my mother, I now love as my sister in 
the covenant of grace, to be mine for ever in the state that is 
to come. O I suppose not, any of you, that Christianity was 
ever meant to interfere with households; it is intended to 
cement them, and to make them households which death itself 
shall never sever, for it binds them up in the bundle of life 
with the Lord their God, and reunites the several individuals 
on the other side of the flood. 



892 Gonro hove — ^a chbistmas sebmok. 

Now, I will just tell you the reason why I selected my text. 
I thought within myself, there are a large number of young 
men who always come to hear me preach ; they always crowd 
the aisles of my chapel, and many of them have been con- 
verted to God. Now, here is Christmas day come round 
again, and they are going home to see their friends. When 
they get home they will want a Christmas carol in the even- 
in ; I think I will suggest one to them — ^more especially to 
such of them as have been lately converted. I will give them 
a theme for their discourse on Christmas evening ; it may not 
be quite so amusing as "The Wreck of the Golden Mary^"^ 
but it will be quite as interesting to Christian people. It shall 
be this : " Go home and tell your friends what the Lord hath 
done for your souls, and how he hath had compassion on you." 
For my part I wish there were twenty Christmas days in the 
year. It is seldom that young men can meet with their 
friends ; it is rarely they can all be united as happy families ; 
and though I have no respect to the religious observance of 
the day, yet I love it as a family institution, as one of En- 
gland's brightest days, the great Sabbath of the year, when 
the plow rests in its furrow, when the din of business is hushed, 
when the mechanic and the working-man go out to refresh 
themselves upon the green sward of the glad earth. If any 
of you are masters you will pardon me for the digression, when 
I most respectfully beg you to pay your servants the same 
wages on Christmas day as if they were at work. I am sure 
it will make their houses glad if yon will do so. It is unfair 
.for you to make them feast, or fast, unless you give them 
wherewithal to feast and make themselves glad on that day 
of joy. 

But now to come to the subject. We are going home to 
dee our Mends, and here is the story some of us have to tell. 
" Go home to thy friends, and tell them how great things the 
Lord hath done for thee, and hath had compassion on thee." 
First, here is what they are to teU ; then, secondly, why t?iey 
are to tell it ; and then, thirdly, how they ought to tell it, 

I. First> then, hebb is what they abb to tell. It is to be 
a story of personal experience. " Go home to thy friends, and 
tell them how great things the Lord hath done for thee, and 



€K)IKa HOME — ^A CHEISTMAS SBBMOK. 393 

hath had compassion on thee." You are not to repair to your 
houses, and forthwith begin to preach. That you are not 
commanded to do. You are not to begin to take up doctrinal 
subjects, and expatiate on them, and endeavor to bring per- 
sons to your peculiar views and sentiments. You are not to 
go home with sundry doctrines you have lately learned, and 
try to teach these. At least you are not commanded so to 
do ; you may, if you please, and none shall hinder you ; but 
you are to go home and tell not what you have believed, but 
what you have felt — what you really know to be your own ; 
not what great things you have read, but what great things 
the Lord hath done jfo ryou ; not alone what you- have seen 
done in the great congregation, and how great sinners have 
turned to God, but what the Lord has done for you. And 
mark this: there is never a more interesting story than that 
which a man tells about himself. The Rhyme of the Ancient 
Mariner derives much of its interest because the man who told 
it was himself the mariner. He sat down, that man whose 
finger was skinny, like the finger of death, and began to tell 
that dismal story of the ship at sea in a great calm, when slimy 
things did crawl with legs over the shiny sea. The wedding 
guest sat still to listen, for the old man was himself a story. 
There is always a great deal of interest excited by a personal 
narrative. Virgil, the poet, knew this, and, therefore, he 
wisely makes JEneas tell his own story, and makes him begin 
it by saying, " In which I also had a great part myself" So 
if you would intei^est your friends, tell them what you felt 
yourself. Tell them how you were once a lost abandoned 
sinner, how the Lord met with you, how you bowed your 
knees, and poured out youi* soul before God, and how at last 
you leaped with joy, for you thought you heard him say within 
you, " I, even I, am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for 
my name's sake." Tell your friends a story of your own per- 
sonal experience. 

Note, next, it must be a story oi free grace. It is not, " Tell 
thy fiiends how great things thou hast done thyself," but 
" how great things tfie Lord hath done for thee." The man 
who always dwells upon free will and the power of the crea- 
ture, and denies the doctrines of grace, invariably mixes up a 



894 GOmO HOMB — X CHRISTMAS 8EEM0N. 

great deal of what he has done himself in telling his experi- 
ence ; but the believer in free grace, who holds the great car- 
dinal truths of the gospel, ignores this, and declares, " I will 
tell what the Lord hath done for me. It is true I must tell 
how I was first made to pray ; but I will tell it thus — 

" * Grace ta 2ght my soul to pray, 
Grace made my eyes o'erflow.' 

It b true, I must tell in how many troubles and trials God has 
been with me ; but I will tell it thus — 

« « »Twas grace which kept me to this day, 
And will not let me go.' " 

He says nothing about his own doings, or willings, or prayings, 
or seekings, but he ascribes it all to the love and grace of the 
great God who looks on sinners in love, and makes them his 
children, heirs of everlasting life. Go home, young man, and 
tell the poor sinner's story ; go home, young woman, and open 
your diary, and give your friends stories of grace. Tell them 
of the mighty works of God's hand which he hath wrought in 
you from his own free, sovereign, undeserved love. Make it 
a free-grace story around your family fire. 

In the next place, this poor man's tale was a grateful story. 
I know it was grateful, because the man said, " 1 will tell thee 
how great things the Lord hath done for me ;" and (not mean- 
ing a pun in the least degree) I may observe, that a man who 
is grateful is always full of the greatness of the mercy which 
God has shown him ; he always thinks that what God has done 
for him is immensely good and supremely great. Perhaps 
when you are telling the story one of your friends will say, 
" And what of that ?" And your Answer will be, " It may 
not be a great thing to you, but it is to me. You say it is 
little to repent, but I have not found it so ; it is a great and 
precious thing to be brought to know myself to be a sinner, 
and to confess it; do you say it is a little thing to have found 
a Saviour ?" Look them in the face, and say, " If you had 
found him too you would not think it little. You think it little 
I have lost the burden from my back ; but if you had suffered 
with it, and felt its weight as I have for many a long year, you 



GOING HOME — A CHBISTMAS SEKMON. 395 

would think it no little thing to be emancipated and free, 
through a sight of the cross." Tell them it is a great story, 
and if they can not see its greatness, shed great tears and tell 
it to them with great earnestness, and I hope they may be 
brought to believe that you at least are grateful, if they are 
not. May God grant that you may tell a grateful story. No 
story is more worth hearing than a tale of gratitude. 

And lastly, upon this point : it must be a tale told by a poor 
sinner who feels himself not to have deserved what he has re- 
ceived. "How he hath had compassion on thee.'* It was 
not a mere act of kindness, but an act of free compassion to- 
ward one who was in misery. O ! I have heard men tell the 
story of their conversion and of their spiritual life in such a 
way that my heart hath loathed tJiem and their story too, for 
they have told of their sins as if they did boast in the great- 
ness of their crime, and they have mentioned the love of God 
not with a tear of gratitude, not with the simple thanksgiving 
of the really humble heart, but as if they as much exalted 
themselves as they exalted God. O I when we tell the story 
of our own conversion, I would have it done with deep sor- 
row, remembering what we used to be, and with great joy and 
gratitude, remembering how little we deserve these things. I 
was once preaching upon conversion and salvation, and I felt 
within myself, as preachers often do, that it was but dry work 
to tell this story, and a dull, dull tale it was to me ; but on a 
sudden the thought crossed my mind, " Why, you are a poor 
lost ruined sinner yourself; tell it, tell it, as you received it : 
begin to tell of the grace of God as you trust you feel it your- 
self." When, then, my eyes began to be fountains of tears, 
those hearers who had nodded theii- heads began to brighten 
up, and they listened, because they were hearing something 
which the man felt himself, and which they recognized as be- 
ing true to him, if it was not true to them. Tell your story, my 
hearers, as lost sinners. Do not go to your home, and walk 
into the house with a supercilious air, as much as to say, " Here's 
a saint come home to the poor sinners, to tell them a story ;" 
but go home like a poor sinner yourself; and when you go in, 
your mother remembers what you used to be, you need not 
tell her there is a change — she will notice it, if it is only one 



300 OOIKG HOME — JL CHBISTMAS SSRMON. 

day you are with her ; and perhaps she .will say, " John, what 
is this change that is in you ?" and if she is a pious mother 
you will hegin to tell her the story, and I know, man though 
you are, you will not blush when I say it, she will put her 
arms round your neck and kiss you as she never did before, 
for you are her twice-born son, hers from whom she shall 
never part, even though death itself shall divide you for a 
brief moment. Go home, then, and tell your friends what 
great things the Lord hath done for you, and how he hath had 
compassion on you. 

II. But now, in the second place, why should we tell 
THIS STOET ? For I hear many of my congregation say, " Sir, 
I could relate that story to any one sooner than I could to my 
friends ; I could come to your vestry, and tell you something 
of what I have tasted and handled of the word of God ; but 
I could not tell my father, nor my mother, nor my brethren, 
nor my sisters." Come, then ; I will try and argue with you, 
to induce you to do so, that I may send you home this Christ- 
mas day, to be missionaries in the localities to which you be- 
long, and to be real preachers, though you are not so by name. 
Dear friends, do tell this story when you go home. 

First, for your Master^s saJce. O I I know you love him ; I 
am sure you do, if you have proof that he loved you. You 
can never think of Gethsemane and of its bloody sweat ; of 
Gabbatha and of the mangled back of Christ, flayed by the 
whip ; you can never think of Calvary and his pierced hands 
and feet, without loving him ; and it is a strong argument 
when I say to you, for his dear sake who loved you so much, 
go home and tell it. What 1 do you think we can have so 
much done for us, and yet not tell it ? Our children, if any 
thing should be done for them, do not stay many minutes be- 
fore they are telling all the company, " such a one hath given 
me such a present, and bestowed on me such-and-such a fa- 
vor." And should the children of God be backward in de- 
claring how they were saved when their feet made haste to 
hell, and how redeeming mercy snatched them as brands from 
the burning ? You love Jesus, young man ! I put it to you, 
then, will you refuse to tell the tale of his love to you ? Shall 
your lips be dumb, when his honor is concerned ? Will you 



GOING HOME — A CHBISTMAS SEBMON. 397 

not, wherever you go, tell of the God who loved you and died 
for you ? This poor man, we are told, " departed, and began 
to publish in Decapolis how great things Jesus had done for 
him, and all men did marvel." So with you. If Christ has 
done much for you, you can not help it — ^you must tell it. My 
esteemed friend, Mr. Oncken, a minister in Germany, told us 
last Monday evening that so soon as he was converted him- 
self, the first impulse of his new-born soul was to do good to 
others. And where should he do that good ? Well, he 
thought he would go to Germany. It was his own native 
land, and he thought the command was, " Go home to thy 
friends, and tell them.'* Well, there was not a single Baptist 
in all Germany, nor any with whom he could sympathize, for 
the Lutherans had swerved from the faith of Luther, and gone 
aside from the truth of God. But he went there and preached, 
and he has now seventy or eighty churches established on the 
Continent. What made him do it ? Nothing but love for his 
Master, who had done so much for him, could have forced 
him to go and tell his kinsmen the marvelous tale of divine 
goodness. 

But, in the next place, are your friends pious ? Then go 
home and tell them, in order to make their hearts glad, I re- 
ceived last night a short epistle written with a trembling hand 
by one who is past the natural age of man, living in the county 
of Essex. His son, under God, had been converted by hear- 
ing the word preached, and the good man could not help 
writing to the minister, thanking hiniy and blessing most of 
all his God, that his son had been regenerated. " Sir," he 
begins, " an old rebel writes to thank you, and above all to 
thank his God, that his dear son has been converted." I shall 
treasure up that epistle. It goes on to say, " Go on ! and the 
Lord bless you." And there Avas another case I heard some 
time ago, where a young woman went home to her parents, 
and when her mother saw her she said, " There ! if the minis- 
ter had made me a present of all London, I should not have 
thought so much of it as I do of this — to think that you have 
really become a changed character, and are living in the fear 
of God." 1 if you want to make your mother's heart leap 
within her, and to make your father glad — if you would make 



398 OOIKG HOME — JL CHRISTMAS SBRMOK. 

tbat sister happy who sent you so many letters, which some- 
times you read against a lamp-post, with your pipe in your 
month — go home and tell your mother that her wishes are all 
accomplished, that her prayers are heard, that you will no 
longer chaff her about her Sunday-school class, and no longer 
laugh at her because she loves the Lord, but that you will go 
with her to the house of God, for you love God, and you have 
said, " Your people shall be my people, and your God shall be 
my God, for I have a hope that your heaven shall be my 
heaven for ever." 01 what a happy thing it would be if 
some here who had gone astray should thus go home ! It was 
my privilege a little while ago to preach for a noble institution 
for the reception of women who had led abandoned lives — and 
before I preached the sermon I prayed to God to bless it, and 
in the piinted sermon you will notice that at the end of it 
there is an account of two persons who were blessed by that 
sermon, and restored. Now, let me tell you a story of what 
once happened to Mr. Vanderkist, a city missionary, who toils 
all night long to do good in that great work. There had 
been a drunken broil in the street ; he stepped between the 
men to part them, and said something to a woman who stood 
there concerning how dreadful a thing it was that men should 
thus be intemperate. She walked with him a little way, and 
he with her, and she began to tell him such a tale of woe and 
sin too, how she had been lured away from her parents' home 
in Somersetshire, and had been brought up here to her soul's 
eternal hurt. He took her home with him, and taught her 
the fear and love of Christ ; and what was the first thing she 
did, when she returned to the paths of godliness, and found 
Christ to be the sinner'? Saviour ? She said, " Now 1 must 
go home to my friends." Her friends were written to ; they 
came to meet her at the station at Bristol, and you can hardly 
conceive what a happy meeting it ^Va8. The father and 
mother had lost their daughter ; they had never heard from 
her ; and there she was, brought back by the agency of this 
Institution, and restored to the bosom of her family. Ah ! if 
such a one be here I I know not ; among such a multitude 
there may be such a one. Woman I hast thou strayed from 
thy &mily ? Hast thou left them long ? " Go home to thy 



GOING HOME — A CHRISTMAS SEEMON. 399 

friends," I beseech thee, ere thy father totters to his grave, 
and ere thy mother's gray hairs sleep on the snow-white pil- 
low of her coffin. Go back, I beseech thee ! Tell her thou 
art penitent ; tell her that God hath met with thee — that the 
young minister said, "Go back to thy friends." And if so, I 
shall not blush to have said these things, though you may 
think I ought not to have mentioned them ; for if I may but 
win one such soul, I will bless God to all eternity. " Go home 
to thy friends." Go home and tell them how great things the 
Lord hath done for thee. Can not you imagine the scene, 
when the poor demoniac mentioned in my text went home ? 
He had been a raving madman ; and when he came and 
knocked at the door, don't you think you see his friends call- 
ing to one another in affright, " O ! there he is again," and 
the mother running up stairs and locking all the doors, be- 
cause her son had come back that was raving mad ; and the 
little ones crying, because they knew what he had been be- 
fore — how he cut himself with stones, because he was pos- 
sessed with devils. And can you picture their joy, when the 
man said, " Mother ! Jesus Christ has healed me ; let me in ; 
I am no lunatic now ?" And when the father opened the 
door, he said, " Father I I am not what I was ; all the evil 
spirits are gone ; I shall live in the tombs no longer. I want 
to tell you how the glorious man who wrought my deliver- 
ance accomplished the miracle — how he said to the devils, 
* Get ye hence,' and they ran down a steep place into the 
sea, and I am come home healed and saved." O ! if such a 
one, possessed with sin, were here this morning, and would go 
honae to his fi-iends, to tell them of his release, methinks the 
scene would be somewhat similar. 

Once more, dear friends. I hear one of you say, " Ah ! sir, 
would to God I could go home to pious friends ! But when I 
go home I go into the worst of places ; for my home is among 
those who never knew God themselves, and consequently 
never prayed for me, and never taught me any thing concern- 
ing heaven." Well, young man, go home to your friends. 
If they are ever so bad, they are your friends. I sometimes 
meet with young men wishing to join the church, who say, 
when I ask them about their father, " O, sii*, I am parted fi-om 



400 oonrG hohb — jl crbistmas bermok. 

my fether." Then I say, " Young man, you may just go and 
see your father before I have any thing to do with you ; if 
you are at ill-will with your father and mother I will not re- 
ceive you into the church ; if they are ever so bad they are 
your parentsJ*^ Go home to them, and tell them, not to make 
them glad, for they will ^ery likely be angry with you ; but 
tell them for their 8atd*8 salvation, I hope, when you are 
telling the story of what God did for you, that they will be 
led by the Spirit to desire the same mercy themselves. But I 
will give you a piece of advice. Do not tell this story to your 
ungodly friends when they are all together, for they will 
laugh at you. Take them one by one, when you can get 
them alone, and begin to tell it to them, and they will hear 
you seriously. There was once a very pious lady who kept a 
lodging-house for young men. All the young men were very 
gay and giddy, and she wanted to say something to them con- 
cerning religion. She introduced the subject, and it was 
passed off immediately with a' laugh. She thought within 
herself, " I have made a mistake." The next morning, after 
breakfast, when they were all going, she said to one of them, 
" Sir, I should like to speak with you a moment or two," and^ 
taking him aside into another room she talked with him. 
The next morning she took another, and the next morning 
another, and it pleased God to bless her simple statement, 
when it was given individually : but, without doubt, if she 
had spoken to them all together they would have backed each 
other up in laughing her to scorn. Reprove a man alone. A 
verse may hit him whom a sermon flies. You may be the 
means of bringing a man to Christ who has often heard the 
Word and only laughed at it, but who can not resist a gentle 
admonition. In one of the States of America there was an in- 
fidel who was a great despiser of God, a hater of the Sabbath 
and all religious institutions. What to do with him the min- 
isters did not know. They met together and prayed for him. 

But among the rest, one Elder B resolved to spend a long 

time in prayer for the man ; after that he got on horseback, 
and rode down to the man's forge, for he was a blacksmith. 
He left his horse outside, and said, " Neighbor, I am under 
verj great concern about your soul's salvation ; I tell you I 



GOING HOMJ — A CHBTSTMAS SKBMON. 401 

pray day and night for your soul's salvation." He left him, 
and rode Lome on his horse. The man went inside to his 
house, after a minute or two, and said to one of his infidel 

friends, " Here's a new argument ; here's Elder B been 

down here, he did not dispute, and never said a word to me 
except this, ' I say, I am under great concern about your soul ; 
I can not bear you should be lost.' O ! that fellow," he said, 
" I can not answer him ;" and the tears began to roll down his 
cheeks. He went to his wife, and said, " I can't make this 
out ; I never cared about my soul, but here's an elder, that 
has no connection with me, but I have always laughed at him, 
and he has come five miles this morning on horseback just to 
tell me he is under concern about my salvation." After a lit- 
tle while he thought it was time he should be under concern 
about his salvation too. He went in, shut the door, began to 
pray, and the next day he was at the deacon's house, telling 
him that he too was under concern about his salvation, and 
asking him to tell him what he must do to be saved.. O I that 
the everlasting God might make use of some of those now 
present in the same way, that they might be induced to 

" Tell to others round 
What a dear Saviour they have found ; 
To point to his redeeming blood, 
And say, Behold the way to Gkwi I" 

ni. I shall not detain you much longer ; but there is a third 
point, upon which we must be very brief. How is the stoby 

TO BE TOLD ? 

First, tell it truthfully. Do not tell more than you know ; 
do not tell John Bunyan's experience, when you ought to tell 
your own. Do not tell your mother you have felt what only 
Rutherford felt. Tell her no more than the truth. Tell your 
experience truthfully ; for mayhap one single fly in the pot of 
ointment will spoil it, and one statement you may make which 
is not true may ruin it all. Tell the story truthfully. 

In the next place, ted it very humbly. I have said that be- 
fore. Do not intrude yourselves upon those who are older, 
and know more ; but tell your story humbly ; not as a preacher, 
not ex-cathedra^ but as a fiiend and as a son. 

Next, tell it very earnestly. Let them see you mean it. 



402 OOIKO BOMB — A CHRISTMAS SBSHOH. 

Do not talk aboat religion flippantlji; you will do no good if 
you do. Do not make puns on texts ; do not quote Scripture 
by way of joke : if yon do, you may talk till you are dumb, 
you will do no good, if you in the least degree give them oc- 
casion to laugh by laughing at holy things yourself. Tell it 
very earnestly. 

And then, tell it very devoutly. Do not try to tell your 
tale to man till you have told it first to God. When you are 
at home on Christmas day, let no one see your face till God 
has seen it. Be up in the morning, wrestle with God ; and if 
your friends are not converted, torestle with God for them; and 
then you will find it easy work to torestle with them for God. 
Seek, if you can, to get them one by one, and tell them the 
story. Do not be afraid ; only think of the good you may 
possibly do. Remember, he that saves a soul firom death hath 
covered a multitude of sins, and he shall have stars in his crown 
for ever and ever. Seek to be, under God, saviours in your 
family, to be the means of leading your own beloved brethren 
and sisters to seek and to find the Lord Jesus Christ, and then 
one day, when you shall meet in Paradise, it will be a joy and 
blessedness to think that you are there, and that your friends 
are there too, whom God will have made you the instrument 
of saving. Let your reliance on the Holy Spirit be entire and 
honest. Trust not yourself, but fear not to trust him. He 
can give you words. He can apply those words to their 
hearts, and so enable you to " minister grace to the hearers." 

To close up, by a short, and I think a pleasant turning of 
the text, to suggest another meaning to it. Soon, dear friends, 
very soon with some of us, the Master will say, " Go home to 
thy friends." You know where the home is. It is up above 

the stars, 

" Where our best friends, our kindred, dwell, 
Where God our Saviour reigns." 

Yon gray-headed man has buried all his friends; he has 
said, " I shall go to them, but they will not return to me." 
Soon his Master will say, "Thou hast had enough tarrying 
here in this vale of tears ; go home to thy friends !" O ! happy 
hour. O I blessed moment, when that shall be the word — 
" Go home to thy friends I" And when we go home to our 



GOING HOME — A CHBISTMAS 8EBM0N. 403 

friends in Paradise, what. shall we do? Why, first, we will 
repair to that blest seat where Jesus sits, take off our crown 
and cast it at his feet, and crown hiin Lord of all. And when 
we have done that, what shall be our next employ ? Why, 
we will tell the blessed ones in heaven what the Lord hath 
done for us, and how he hath had compassion on us. And 
shall such a tale be told in heaven ? Shall that be the Christ- 
mas carol of the ^igels ? Yes, it shall be ; it has been pub- 
lished there before — blush not to tell it yet again — for Jesus 
has told it before, " When he cometh home, he calleth together 
his friends and neighbors, saying unto them, Rejoice with me ; 
for I have found my sheep which was lost." And thou, poor 
sheep, when thou shalt be gathered in, wilt thou not tell how 
thy Shepherd sought thee, and how he found thee ? Wilt 
thou not sit in the grassy meads of heaven, and tell the story 
of thine own redemption ? Wilt thou not talk with thy breth- 
ren and thy sisters, and tell them how God loved thee and 
hath brought thee there ? Perhaps thou sayest, " It will be a 
very short story." Ah I it woujd be if you could write now. 
A little book might be the whole of your biography; but up 
there, when your memory shall be enlarged, when your pas- 
sions shall be purified and your understanding clear, you will 
find that what was but a tract on earth will be a huge tome in 
heaven. You will tell a long story there of God's sustaining, 
restraining, constraining grace, and I think that when you 
pause to let another tell his tale, and then another, and then 
another, you will at last, when you have been in heaven a 
thousand years, break out and exclaim, " O saints, I have 
something else to say." Again they will tell their tales, and 
again you will interrupt them with " O beloved, I have thought 
of another case of God's delivering mercy." And so you will 
go on, giving them themes for songs, finding them the material 
for the warp and woof of heavenly sonnets. " Go home," he 
will soon say, " go home to thy friends, and tell them how 
great things the Lord hath done for thee, and hath had com- 
passion on thee." Wait a while; tarry his leisure, and ye 
shall soon be gathered to the land of the hereafter, to the 
home of the blessed, where endless felicity shall be thy por- 
tion. God grant a blessing, for his name's sake I 



SERMON XXVII. 
A MIGHTY SAVIOUR. 

"Migbty to save."— Isaiah, Ixiii 1. 

This, of course, refers to our blessed Lord Jesus Christ, who 
is described as ^' comiug from Edom with dyed garraents from 
Bozrah," and who, when it is questioned who he is, replies, "I 
that speak in righteousness, mighty to save." It will be well, 
then, at the commencement of our discourse to make one or 
two remarks concerning the mysteriously complex person of 
the man and God whom we call our Redeemer, Jesus Christ 
our Saviour. It is one of th^, mysteries of the Christian relig- 
ion, that we are taught to believe that Ci^rist is God, and yet a 
man. According to Scripture, we hold that he is "very God^'^^ 
equal and co-eternal with the Father,. possessing, ashis J'ather 
doth, all divine attributes in an infinite degree. He partici- 
pated with his Father in all the acts of his divine might ; he 
was concerned in the decree of election, in the fashioning of 
the covenant ; in the creation of the angels, in the making of 
the world, when it was wheeled from nothing into space, and 
in the ordering of this fair frame of nature. Before any of 
these acts the divine Redeemer was the eternal Son of God. 
"From everlasting to everlasting he is God." Nor did he 
cease to be God when he became man. He was equally " God 
over all, blessed for evermore," when he was " the man of 
sorrows, acquainted with grief," as before his incarnation. We 
have abundant proof of that in the constant affirmations of 
Scripture, and, indeed, also in the miracles which he wrought. 
The raising of the dead, the treading of the billows of the 
ocean, the hushing of the winds, and the rending of the rocks, 
with all those marvelous acts of his, which we have not time 
here to mention, were strong and potent proofs that he was 



A MIGHTY SAVIOUE. 405 

God, most truly God, even when he condescended to be man. 
And Scripture, most certainly, teaches us that he is God now, 
that he shares the throne of his Father — ^that he sits high 
above all " principalities and powers, and every name that is 
named," and is the true and proper object of the veneration, 
the worship, and the homage of all worlds. We are equally 
taught to believe that he is man. Scripture informs us that, 
on a day appointed, he came from heaven and did become man 
as well as God, taking upon himself the nature of a babe in the 
manger of Bethlehem. From that babe, we are told, he did 
grow to the statme of manhood, and became " bone of our 
bone, and flesh of our flesh," in every thing except our sin. 
His sufleiings, his hunger, above all, his death and burial, are 
strong proofs that he was man, most truly man ; and yet it 
is demanded of us by the Christian religion, to believe, that 
while he was man, he was most truly God. We are taught 
that he"was a " child bom, a son given," and yet, at the same 
time, the " Wonderful, the Counselor, the mighty God, the 
everlasting Father." Whosoever would have clear and right 
views of Jesus, must not mingle his natures. We must not 
consider him as a God diluted into deified manhood, or as a 
mere man officially exalted to the Godhead, but as being two 
distinct natures in one person ; not God melted into man, nor 
man made into God, but man and God taken into union to- 
gether. Therefore,' do we trust in him, as the Daysman, the 
Mediator, Son of God, and Son of Man. This is the person 
who is our Saviour. It is this glorious, yet mysterious being, 
of whom the text speaks, when it says, he is mighty — " mighty 
to save." 

That he is mighty we need not inform you ; for as readers 
of the Scriptures you all believe in the might and majesty of 
the incarnate Son of God. You believe him to be the Regent 
of providence, the King of death, the Conqueror of hell, the 
Lord of angels, the Master of storms, 'and the God of battles, 
and, therefore, you can need no proof that he is mighty. The 
subject of this morning is one part of his mightiness. He is 
" mighty to save." May God the Holy Spirit help us in briefly 
entering upon this subject, and make use of it to the salvation 
of our souls I 



406 A MIGHTT SAYIOFB. 

First, we shall consider wJiat is meant hy the words " to 
save /" secondly, how we prove the /act that he is " mighty to 
save y" thirdly, the reason why he is " mighty to save /" and 
then, fourthly, the inferences which are to he deduced from, the 
doctrine that Jesus Christ is " m>ighty to save?'* 

I. First, then, what abb we to undeestand by the woeds 
" to save ?" 

Commonly, most men, when they read these words, consider 
them to mean salvation from hell. They are partially correct, 
but the notion is highly defective. It is true Christ does save 
men from the penalty of their guilt ; he does take those to 
heaven who deserve the eternal wrath and displeasure of the 
Most High ; it is true that he does blot out " iniquity, trans- 
gression, and sin," and that the iniquities of the remnant of his 
people are passed over for the sake of his blood and atone- 
ment. But that is not the whole meaning of the words " to 
save." This deficient explanation lies at the root of mistakes 
which many theologians have made, and by which they have 
surrounded their system of divinity with mist. They have said 
that to save is to pluck men as brands from the burning — to 
save them from destruction if they repent. Now, it means 
vastly, I had almost said infinitely more than this. " To save" 
means something more than just delivering penitents from 
going down to hell. By the words " to save" I understand 
the whole of the great work of salvation, from the first holy 
desire, the first spiritual conviction, onward to complete sancti- 
fication. All is done of God through Jesus Christ. Christ is 
not only mighty to save those who do repent, but he is able 
to make men repent ; he is engaged not merely to carry those 
to heaven who believe, but he is mighty to give men new 
hearts and to work faith in them ; he is mighty not merely to 
give heaven to one who wishes for it, but he is mighty to make 
the man who hates holiness love it, to constrain the despiser 
of his name to bend his knee before him, and to make the most 
abandoned reprobate turn from the error of his ways. 

By the* words " to save," I do not understand what some 
men say they mean. They tell us in their divinity that Christ 
came into the world to put all men into a salvable state — ^to 
make the salvation of all men possible by their own exertions. 



A MIGHTY SAVIOUB. 407 

I believe that Christ came for no such thing — ^that he came 
into the world not to put men into a solvable state, but into a 
saved state ; not to put them where they could save them- 
selves, but to do the work in them and for them, from the first 
even to the last. If I believed that Christ came only to put 
you, my hearers, and myself into a state where we might save 
ourselves, I should give up preaching henceforth and for ever; 
for knowing a little of the wickedness of men's hearts, because 
I know- something of my own — ^knowing how much men natu- 
rally hate the religion of Christ — I should despair of any suc- 
cess in preaching a gospel which I had only to offer, its efibcts 
depending upon the voluntary acceptance of it by unrenewed 
and unregenerate men. If I did not believe that there was a 
might going forth with the word of Jesus, which makes men 
willing in the day of his power, and which turns them from 
the error of their ways by the mighty, overwhelming, con- 
straining force of a divine and mysterious influence, I should 
cease to glory in the cross of Christ. Christ, we repeat, is 
mighty, not merely to put men into a salvable condition, but 
mighty absolutely and entirely to save them. This fact I re- 
gard as one of the grandest proofs of the divine character of 
the Bible revelation. I have many a time had doubts and 
fears,' as most of you have had ; and where is the strong be- 
liever that has not sometimes wavered ? I have said, within 
myself, " Is this religion true, which, day after day, I inces- 
santly preach to the people ? Is it the correct one ? Is it true 
that this religion has an influence upon mankind ?" And I 
will tell you how I have reassured myself. I have looked upon 
the hundreds, nay, upon the thousands whom I have around 
me, who were once the vilest of the vile — drunkards, swearers, 
and such like — and I now see them " clothed, and in their right 
mind," walking in holiness and in the fear of God ; and I have 
said within myself, " This must be the truth, then, because I 
see its marvelous effects. It is true, because it is efficient for 
purposes which error never could accomplish. It exerts an in- 
fluence among the lowest order of mortals, and over the most 
abominable of our race. It is a power, an irresistible agent 
of good; who, then, shall deny its truth? I take it that the 
highest proof of Christ's power is not that he offers salvatioUj 



408 A MIGHTY SATIOUB. 

not that he bids you take it if yoa will, but that when you re- 
ject it, when you hate it, when you despise it, he has a power 
whereby be can change your mind, make you think differently 
from your former thoughts, and turn you from the error of 
your ways. This I conceive to be the meaning of the text : 
" mighty to save." 

But it is not all the meaning. Our Lord is not only mighty 
to make men repent, to quicken the dead in jsin, to turn them 
from their follies and their iniquities. But he is exalted to do 
more than that : he is mighty to keep them Christians after he 
has made them so, and mighty to preserve them in his fear 
and love, until he consummates their spiritual existence in 
heaven. Christ's might doth not lie in making a believer, and 
then leaving him to shift for himself afterward ; but he who 
begins the good work carries it on ; he who imparts the first 
germ of life which quickens the dead soul, gives afterward the 
life which prolongs the divine existence, and bestows that 
mighty power which at last bursts asunder every bond of sin, 
and lands the soul perfected in glory. We hold and teach, 
and, we believe, upon scriptural authority, that all men unto 
whom Christ has given repentance, must infallibly hold on 
their way. We do believe that God never begins a good 
work in a man without finishing it ; that he never makes a 
man truly alive to spiritual things without carrying on that 
work in his soul even to the end, by giving him a place among 
the choirs of the sanctified. We do not think that Christ's 
power dwells in merely bringing me one day into grace, and 
then telling me to keep myself there, but in so putting me into 
a gracious state, and giving me such an inward life, and such 
a power within myself that I can no more turn back than the 
very sun in the heavens can stay itself in its course, or cease 
to shine. Beloved, we regard this as signified by the terms 
*' mighty to save." This is commonly called Calvinistic doc- 
trine ; it is none other than Christian doctrine, the doctrine of 
the holy Bible ; for despite that it is now called Calvinism, it 
could not be so called in Augustine's days ; and yet in Augus- 
tine's works you find the very same things. And it is not to 
be called Augnstinism: it is to be found in the writings of the 
AposUe Paul. And yet it was not called Paulism, simply for 



A MlftHtT SAVIOCfB. 406h 

this reason, that it is the expansion, the fullness of the gospel 
of our Lord Jesus Christ. To repeat what we have before 
said, we hold and boldly teac^i, that Jesus Christ is not merely 
able to save men who put themselves in his way, and who are 
willing to be saved, but that he is able to make men willing — 
that he is able to make the drunkard renounce his drunken- 
ness and come to him — ^that he is aWe to make the despiser 
bend his knee, and make hard hearts melt before his love. 
Now, it is ours to show that be is able to do so. 

II. How CAN WB PfiOVB THAT ChMST IS "MIGHTY TO 

SAVE?" 

We will give you the strongest argument first; and wo 
shall netd but one. The argument is, that he hc^s done it. 
We need no other ; it were superfluous to add another. He 
has saved men. He has saved them, in the full extent and 
meaning of the word which we have endeavored to explain. 
But in order to set this truth m a clem* light, we will suppose 
the worst of cases. It is very easy to imagine, say some, that 
when Christ's gospel is preached to some here who are ami* 
able and lovely, and have always beea trained up in the fear 
of God, they will receive the gospel in the love of it. Very 
well, then we will not take such a case. You see this South 
Sea Islander. He has just been eating a diabolical meal of 
human flesh ; he is a cannibal ; at his b It are slung the scalps 
of men whom he has murdered, and ia whose blood he glo- 
ries. If you land on the coast he will eat you too, unless you 
mind what you are after. That man bows himself before a 
block of wood. He is a poor, ignorant, debased creature, but 
very little removed fix)m the brute. Now, has Christ's gospel 
power to tame that man, to take the scalps froxa his girdle, to 
make him give up his bloody practices, renounce his gods, and 
become a civilized and Christian man ? You know, my dear 
friends, you talk about the power of education in England ; 
there may be a great deal in it ; education may do very much 
for some who are here, not in a spiritual, but in a natural way ; 
but what would education do with this savage : go and try. 
Send the best schoolmaster in England over to him ; he will 
eat him before the day is up. That will be all the good of it. 
But if the missionary goes with Christ's go«^el, what will b©- 

18 



410 A MIOHTT 8ATI017B. 

ootne of hhn ? Why, in multitudes of cases, he has been the 
pioneer of civilization, and, nnder the providence of God, has 
escaped a cruel death. He goes with love in his hands and in 
liis eyes ; he speaks to the savage. And, mark ye, we are 
telling facts now, not dreams. The savage drops his toma* 
hawk. Says he, ^^ It is marvelous ; the things that this naan 
tells me are wonderful ; I will sit and listen.*^ He listens, and 
the tears roll down his c^ieeks ; a feeling of humanity which 
never burned within his soul before is kindled in him. He 
says, ^^ I believe in the Lord Jesus Christ ;" and soon he is 
" clothed, and in his right mind," and becomes in every respect 
a man — such a man as we could desire all men to be. Now, 
we say that this is a proof that Christ's goi^l does not come 
to the mind that is prepared for it, but prepares the mind for 
itself; that Christ does not merely put the seed into the 
ground that has been prepared beforehand, but plows the 
ground too — ay, and harrows it, and does the whole of the 
work. He is Me to do all this. Ask our missionaries who 
are in Africa, in the midst of the greatest barbarians in the 
world — ask them whether Christ's gospel is able to save, and 
they will point to the kraal of the Hottentot, and then they 
will point to the houses of the Kuraman, and they will say, 
" What has made this difference but the word of the gospel 
of Christ Jesus ?" Yes, dear brethren, we have had proofe 
enough in heathen countries ; and why need we say more, but 
merely to add this — ^we have had proofe enough at home. 
There are some who preach a gospel which is very well fitted 
to train man in morals, but utterly unfitted to save him — a 
gospel which does well enough to keep men sober when they 
are so, but not a gospel which makes men sober when they 
have become drunkards. It is a good thing enough to supply 
them with a kind of life when they have it ^ready, but not to 
quicken the dead and save the soul, and it can give up to de- 
spair the very characters whom Christ's gospel was most of aU 
intended to affect. I could a tale unfold of some wh<J have 
plunged head-first into the blackest gulfs of sin, who would 
horrify you and me, if we could allow them to recount their 
guilt. I could tell you how they have come into God's house 
with their teeth set against the minister, determined that, say 



A HIGHTT 8AYI0IJR. 411 

what he would, they might listen, but it would be to scoff. They 
stayed a moment ; some word arrested their attention ; they 
thought within themselves, " I will hear that sentence." It 
was some pointed, terse saying that entered into their souls. 
They knew not how it was, but they were spell-bound, and 
stood to listen a little longer ; and by-and-by, unconsciously to 
themselves, the tears began to fell, and when they went away, 
they had a strange, mysterious feeling about them that led 
them to their chambers. Down they fell on their knees ; the 
story of their life was all told before God; he gave them 
peace through the blood of the Lamb, and they went to God's 
house, many of them to say, " Come and hear what God hath 
done for my soul," and to 

** TeU to sinners round 
What a dear Savionr they had fimnd." 

Remember the case of John Newton, the great and mighty 
preacher of St. Mary, Woolnoth — an instance of the power of 
God to change the heart, as well as to give peace when the 
heart is changed. Ah ! dear hearers, I often think within 
myself, " This is the greatest proof of the Saviour's power." 
Let another doctnne be preached : will it do the same ? If it 
will, why not let every man gather a crowd round him and 
preach it ? Will it really do it ? If it will, then the blood 
of men's souls must rest upon the man who does not boldly 
proclaim it. If he believes his gospel does save souls, how 
does he account for it that he stands in his pulpit from the 
first of January till the last of December, and never hears of a 
harlot made honest, nor of a drunkard reclaimed ? Why ? 
For this reason, that it is a poor dilution of Christianity. It is 
something like it, but it is not the bold, broad Christianity of 
the Bible ; it is not the full gospel of the blessed God, for that 
has power to save. But if they do believe that theirs is the 
gospel, let them come out to preach it, and let them strive 
with all their might to win souls from sin, which is rife enliugh, 
God knows. We say again, that we have proof positive in 
cases even here before us, that Christ is mighty to save even 
the worst of men — to turn them from follies in which they 



413 A MIQHTT gJLVlOUB. 

Lave too long indulged, and we believe that the same gospel 
preached elsewhere would produce the same results. 

The best proof you can ever have of God's being mighty 
to save, dear hearers, is that he saved you. Ah ! ray dear 
hearer, it were a miracle if he should save thy fellow that 
stands by thy side ; but it were more a miracle if he should 
save thee. What art thou this morning ? Answer ! " I am 
an infidel," says one, " I hate and despise Christ's rdigion." 
But suppose, sir, there should be such a power in that religion 
that one day thou shouldst be brought to believe it ! What 
wouldst thou say then ? Ah ! I know thou wouldst be in love 
with that gospel for ever ; for thou wouldst say, " I above all 
men was the last to receive it ; and yet here am I, I know m)t 
how, brought to love it." O ! such a man, when constrained 
to believe, makes the most eloquent preacher in the world. 
**Ah I but," says another, " I have been a Sabbath-breaker upon 
principle ; I despise the Sabbath, I hate utterly and entirely 
every thing religious." Well, I can never prove religion to 
you to be true, unless it should ever lay hold of you, and 
make you a new man. Then you will say there is something 
in it. " We speak that we do know, and testify that we have 
seen." When we have felt the change it works in ourselves, 
then we speak of facts, and not of fancies, and we speak very 
boldly too. We say again, then, he is " mighty to save." 

III. But now it is asked. Why is Chbibt " mighty to save ?" 
To this there are sundry answers. 

First, if we understand the word " save" in the popular ac- 
ceptation of the word, which is not, after all, the full one, 
though a true one — ^if we understand salvation to mean the 
pardon of sin and salvation from hell, Christ is mighty to save, 
because of the infinite efficacy of his atoning blood. Sinner I 
black as thou art with sin, Christ this morning is able to make 
thee whiter than the driven snow. Thou askest why. I will 
tell thee. He is able to forgive, because he has been punished 
for thy sin. If thou dost know and feel thyself to be a sin- 
ner. If thou hast no hope or reftige before God but in Christ, 
then be it known that Christ is able to forgive, because he 
was once punished for the very sin which thou hast commit- 
ted, and therefore he can freely remit, because the punish- 



A MiaUTY lAVIOUB. 413 

ment has been entirely paid by himself. Whenever I ^t on 
this subject I am tempted to tell a story ; and though I have^ 
told it times enough in the hearing of many of you, others of 
you have never heard it, and it is the simplest way I know of 
setting out the belief I have in the atonement of Christ. Once 
a poor Irishman came to me in my vestry. He announced 
himself something in this way : " Your riverence» I'm come 
to ax you a question." " In the first place," said I, " I am 
not a reverend, nor do I claim the title ; and in the next place, 
why don't you go and ask your priest that question ?" Said 
he, " Well your riv — sir, I meant — ^I did go to him, but he 
did not answer me to my satis&ction exactly ; so I have come 
to ask you, and if you will answer this you will set 'my mind 
at peace, for I am much disturbed about it." " What is the 
question ?" said I. " Why, this. You say, and others say 
too, that God is able to forgive sin. Now, I can't see how he 
can be just, and yet forgive sin : for," said this poor man, " I 
have been so greatly guilty that if God Almighty does not 
punish me, he ought ; I feel that he would not be just if he 
were to suffer me to go without punishment. How, then, sir, 
can it be true that he can forgive, and still retain the title of 
just ?" " Well," said T, " it is through the blood and merits of 
Jesus Christ." " Ah I" said he, " but then I do not understand 
what you mean by that. It is the kind of answer I got from 
the priest, but I wanted him to explain it to ine more fully, 
how it was that the blood of Christ could make God just. 
You say it does, but I want to know how." " Well, then," 
said I, "I will tell you what I think to be the whole system of 
atonement, which I think is the sum and substance, the root, 
the marrow, and the essence of all the gospel. This is the way 
Christ is able to jforgive. Suppose," said I, " you had killed 
some one. You were a murderer ; you were condemned to 
die, and you deserved it." " Faith," said he, " yes, I should 
deserve it." " Well, her majesty is very desirous of saving 
your life, and yet at the same time universal justice demands 
that some one should die on account of the deed that is done. 
Now, how is she to manage ?" Said he, " That is the ques- 
tion. I can not see how she can be inflexibly just, and yet suf^ 
fer me to escape." " Well," said I, " suppose, Pat, I should go 



414 A MiaBTY BAVIOUX. 

to he% and saj, *• Here is this poor Irishman, he deserv^es to be 
banged, your majesty ; I don't want to quarrel with the sen- 
tenoe, becaase I think it just: bat, if you please, I so love him 
that if you were to hang me instead of him I should be very 
willing.' Pat, suppose she should agree to it, and hang me 
instead of you : what then ? would she be just in letting you 
go ?" " Ay," said he, " I should think sho would. Would 
she hang two for one thing? I should say not. I'd walk 
away, and there isn't a policeman that would touch me for it." 
" Ah," said I, "that is how Jesus saves. 'Firi^her,' he swd, 
I love these poor sinners : let me suffer instead of them !' 
* Yes,' said God, Hhou shalt,' and on the tree he died, and 
suffered the punishment which aH his elect people ought to 
have suffered ; so that now all who believe on him, thus prov- 
ing themselves to be his chosen, may conclude that he was 
punished for them, and that therefore they never can be pun- 
ished." ." Well," said he, looking me in the fiwe once more, 
" I understand what you mean ; but how is it, if Christ died 
for all men, that, notwithstanding, some men are punished 
again ? For that is unjust." " Ah !" said I, " I never told 
you that. I say to you that he has died for all who believe in 
him, and all who repent, and that he was punished for their 
sins so absolutely and so really, that none of them shall ever 
be punished again." "Faith," said the man, clapping his 
hands, " that's the gospel ; if it isn't, then I don't know any 
thing, for no man could hav^ made that up : it is so wonder- 
ful. Ah !" he said, as he went down the stairs, " Pat's safe 
now ; with all his sins about him he'll trust in the man that 
died for him, and so he shall be saved." Dear hearer, Christ 
is mighty to save, because God did not turn away the sword, 
but he sheathed it in his own Son's heart ; he did not remit 
the debt, for it was paid in drops of precious blood ; and now 
the great receipt is nailed to the cross, and our sins with it, so 
that we may go free if we are believers in him. For this rea- 
son he is " mighty to save," in the true sense of the word. 

But in the large sense of the word, understanding it to 
mean all that I have said it does mean, he is " mighty to save." 
How is it that Christ is able to make men repent, to make 
men believe, and to make them turn to God ? One answers, 



A KIGHTT SAVIOUR. 416 

'* Why, by the eloquence of preachers." God forbid we should 
ever say that ! It is " not by might nor by power." Others 
reply, " It is by the force of moral suasion." God forbid we 
should say " ay" to that ; for moral suasion has been tried 
long enough on man, and yet it has ^led of success. How 
does he do it ? We answer, by something which some of you 
despise, but which nevertheless is a feet. He does it by the 
omnipotent influence of his divine Spirit. While men are 
hearing the word (in those whom God will save) the Holy 
Spiiit works repentance ; he changes the heart and renews the 
soul. True, the preaching is the instrument, but the Holy 
Spirit is the great agent. It is certain that the truth is the 
means of saving, but it is the Holy Gho^ applying the truth 
which saves souls. Ah ! and with this power of the Holy 
Ghost we may go to the most debased and degraded of men, 
and we need not be afraid but that God can save them. If 
God should please, the Holy Spirit could at this moment make 
every one of you fall on your knees, confess your sins, and 
turn to God. He is an Almighty Spirit, able to do wonders. 
In the life of Whitefield, we read that sometimes under one 
of his sermons two thousand persons would at once profess to 
be saved, and were really so, many of them. We ask why it 
was ? At other times he preached just as powerfully, and not 
one soul was saved. Why? Because in the one case the 
Holy Spirit went with the word, and in the other case it did 
not. All the heavenly result of preaching is owing to the 
divine Spirit sent from above. I am nothing ; my brethren 
in the ministry around are all nothing ; it is God that doeth 
every thing. " Who is Paul, who is ApoUos, and who is 
Cephas, but ministers by whom ye believed, even as God gave 
to every man." It must be " not by might, nor by power, 
but by my Spirit, saith the Lord." Go forth, poor minister ! 
Thou hast no power to preach with polished diction and 
elegant refinement ; go and preach as thou canst. The Spirit 
can make thy feeble words more mighty than the most ravish- 
ing eloquence. Alas! alas! for oratory! Alas! for elo- 
quence ! It hath long enough been tried. We have had 
polished periods, and finely-turned sentences; but in what 
place have the people been saved by them ? We have had 



416 ▲ laQKTT ftAVIOUB. 

grand and gandy language ; bat where have hearts been re- 
newed ? Bat now, " by the foolishness of preadiing," by the 
simple utterance by a child of God's Word, he is pleased to 
save them that believe, said to save sinners from the error of 
their ways. May Grod prove his word again this morning ! 
IV. The fourth point was, What abb the infebekcss to 

BS DERITSD FBOH THS TACT THAT JjSSUS ChSIST IS MiaHTT TO 
BAVB? 

Why, first, there is a feet for ministers to learn — ^that they 
should endeavor to preach in feith, nothing wavering. " O 
God," cries the minister at times, when he is on his knees, " I 
am weak ; I have preached to my hearers, and have weptx>ver 
them ; I have groaned for them ; but they will not turn to 
thee. Their hearts are like the nether mill-stone ; they will 
not weep for sin, nor will they love the Saviour." Then I 
think I see the angel standing at his elbow, and whispering in 
his ear, " Thou art weak, but he is strong ; thou canst do 
nothing, but he is ' mighty to save.' " Bethink thyself of this. 
It is not the instrument, but the God. It is not the pen 
wherewith the author writes which is to have the praise of his 
wisdom or the making of the volume, but it is the brain that 
thinks it, and the hand that moves the pen. So in salvation. 
It Is not the minister, it is not the preacher, but the God who 
first designs the salvation, and afterward uses the preacher to 
work it out. Ah! poor disconsolate preacher, if thou hast bad 
but little fruit of thy ministry, go on still in feith, reraember- 
ipg it is written, " My word shall not return unto me void, but 
it shall accomplish that which I please, £md prosper in the 
thing whereto I sent it." Go on ; be of good courage ; God 
shall help thee ; he shall help thee, and that right early. 

Again, here is another encouragement for praying men and 
women, who are praying to God for their fHends. Mother, 
you have been groaning for your son for many a year ; he is 
now grown up, and has left your roof, but your prayers have 
not been heard. So you think. He is as gay as ever ; not 
yet has he made your breast rejoice. Sometimes you think he 
will bring your gray hairs with sorrow to the grave. It was 
but yesterday you said, " I will give him up, I will never pray 
for him again." Stop, mother, stop ! By all that is holy and 



A MIGHTY SAVIOUR. 417 

that is heavenly, stop ! Utter not that resolution again ; be- 
gin once more ! Thou hast prayed over him ; thou didst weep 
over, his infant forehead, when he lay in his cradle ; thou didst 
teach him when he came to years of understanding, and thou 
hast often warned him since ; but all of no avail. O I give not 
up thy prayers ; for remember, Christ i^ " mighty to save." 
It may be that he waits to be gracious, and he keeps thee wait- 
ing, that thou mayest know more of his graoiousness when the 
mercy comes. But pray on. I have heard of mothers who 
have prayed for their children twenty years ; ay, and of some 
who have died without seeing them converted, and then their 
very death has been the means of saving their children, by 
leading them to think. A father once had been a pious man 
for many years, yet never had he the happiness of seeing one 
of his sons converted. He had his children round his bed, and 
he said to them when dying, " My sons, I could die in peace 
if I could but believe you would follow me to heaven ; but this 
is the most sorrowful thing of all — not that I am dying, but 
that I am leaving you to meet you no more." They looked 
at him, but they would not weep, nor would they think on 
their ways. They went away. Their father was suddenly 
overtaken with great clouds and darkness of mind ; instead of 
dying peacefully and happily, he died in great misery of soul, 
but still trusting in Christ. He said, when he died, " O that 
I had died a happy death, for that would have be^n a testi- 
mony to my sons ; but now, O God, this darkness and these 
clouds have in some degree taken away my power to witness 
to' the truth of thy religion." Well, he died, and was buried. 
The sons came to the funeral. The day after, one of them 
said to his brother, " Brother, I have been thinking, father 
was always a pious man, and if his death was yet such a gloomy 
one, how gloomy must ours be, without God and without 
Christ." " Ah I" said the other, " that thought struck me 
too." They went up to God's house, heard God's word, they 
came home and bent their knee in prayer, and to their surprise 
they found that the rest of the family had done the same, and 
that the God who had never answered the father's prayer in 
his life had answered it after his death, and by his death too, 
and by such a death as would appear to be most unlikely to have 

18* 



418 A laaHTY SAYIOUB. 

wrooght the conversioii of any. Pray on, then, my sister ; 
pray on, my brother! God shall yet bring thy sons and 
daughters to his love and fear, and thou shalt rejoice over 
them in heaven, if thou never dost on earth. 

And finally, my dear hearers, there are many of you here 
this morning who have no love to God, no love to Christ ; but 
you have a desire in your hearts to love him. You are say- 
ing, " O ! can he save me ? Can such a wretch as I be saved ?" 
In the thick of the crowd there you are standing, and you are 
now saying within yourself, " May I one day sing among the 
sidnts above ? May I have all my sins blotted out by blood 
divine ?'* Yes, sinner, he is " mighty to save ;" and this is 
comfort for thee. Dost thou think thyself the worst of men ? 
Does conscience smite thee as with a mailed fist, and does he 
say it is all over with thee ; thou wilt be lost ; thy repentance 
will be of no avail ; thy prayers never will be heard ; thou art 
lost to all intents and purposes ? My hearer, think not so. 
He is " mighty to save." If thou canst not pray, he can help 
thee to do it ; if thou canst not repent, he can give thee re- 
pentance ; if thou feelest it hard to believe, he can help thee 
to believe, for he is exalted on high to give repentance, as 
well as to give remission of sins. O poor sinner, trust in Jesus; 
oast thyself on him. Cry, and may God help thee to do it 
now. May he help thee this very day to cast thy soul on 
Jesus ; and this will be one of the best years of all thy life. 
" Turn ye, turn ye ; why will ye die, O house of Israel ?" 
Turn unto Jesus, ye wearied souls ; come unto him, for lo ! he 
bids you come. " The Spirit and the bride say. Come ; and let 
him that heareth say, Come ; and whosoever will, let him come 
and take of the water of life," and have Christ's grace freely. 
It is preached to you, and to all of you who are willing to re- 
ceive it, it has been already given. 

May God of his grace make you willing, and so save your 
souls, through Jesus Christ our Lord and Saviour ! Amen. 



SEEMON XXYIII. 

ISRAEL IN EGYPT. 

"And they ang the song of Moses the servant of God, and the song of the 
Lamb, saying, Great and marvelous are thy works, Lord God Ahnighty ; 
just and true are thy ways, thou King of saints."— Rev., xv. 3. 

At the outset, let us remark the carefulness of the Holy 
Spirit in guarding the honor of our blessed Lord. This verse 
is often quoted as if it runs thus — " They sing the song of 
Moses and the Lamb." This mistake has led many weak 
minds to wonder at the expression, for they have imagined 
that it divided the honor of the song of heaven between Mo- 
ses and the Redeemer. The clause — " the servant of God" — 
is doubtless inserted by the Holy Spirit to prevent any error 
upon this point, and therefore it should be carefully included 
in the quotation. I take it that the song of Moses is here 
united with the song of the Lamb, because the one was a tyf e 
and picture of the other. The glorious overthrow of Pharaoh 
hi the Red Sea shadowed forth the total destructi'^n of Satan 
and all his host in the day of the great battle of ihe Lord ; 
and there was in the song of Moses the expression of u e same 
feelings of triumph which will pervade the breasts of tL j re- 
deemed when they shall triumph with their Captain. 

May God the Holy Spirit enable me to exhibit the parallel 
which exists bettoeen the condition of Israel when pa^ssing 
through the sea^ and the position of the church of Christ at 
the present day. Next, we shall compare the triumph of the 
Lord at the Med Sea with the victory of the Lamb in the 
great and terrible day of the^ord. And lastly, I shall point 
out certain prominent features of the song of Moses, which 
will doubtless be as prominent in the song of the Lamb. 



420 ISRAEL nr egtpt. 

I. First, it is our business to regard the position op the 

CHILDREN OF ISEABL AS EMBLESffATICAL OF OUB OWN. And 

here we observe that, like the church of God, the vlist host of 
Israel had been delivered from bondage. We, my brethren, 
who constitute a part of the Israel of God, were once the 
slaves of sin and Satan ; we served with hard bondage and 
rigor while in our natural state ; no bondage was ever more 
terrible than ours ; we indeed made bricks without straw, and 
labored in the very fire ; but by the strong hand of God we 
have been delivered. We have come forth from the prison- 
house ; with joy we beheld ourselves emancipated — the Lord's 
free men. The iron yoke is taken from our necks; we no' 
longer serve our lusts, and pay obedience to the tyrant sin. 
With a high hand and an outstretched arm, our God has led 
us forth from the place of our captivity, and joyfully we pur- 
sue our way through the wilderness. 

But with the children of Israel it was not all joy ; they were 
free, but their master was at their heels. Pharaoh was loth 
to lose so valuable a nation of servants ; and therefore with 
his chosen captains, his horsemen, and his chariots, he pur- 
sued them in angry haste. Affrighted Israel beheld her infti- 
riated oppressor close at her rear, and trembled for the issue 
— the hearts of the people failed them while they saw their 
hopes blighted and their joys ended by the approach of the 
oppressor ; even so it is with some of you ; you think you 
must be diiven back again like dumb cattle, into Egypt, and 
once more become what you were. *' Surely," you say, " I 
can not hold on my way with such a host seeking to drive me 
back ; I must again become the slave of my iniquities." And 
thus dreading apostacy, and feeling that you would rather die 
than become what you were ; you this morning are filled with 
trepidation. You are saying, " Alas for me ! Better that I 
had died in Egypt than that I should have come out into this 
wilderness to be again captured." You have tasted for a mo- 
ment the joys of holiness and the sweets of liberty ; and now 
again to go back to endure the bondage of a spiritual Egypt, 
would be worse than before, ^is is the position of the sac- 
ramental host of God's elect ; they have come out of Egypt, 
and they are pursuing their way to Canaan. But the world is 



ISBAEL IN SGYPT. 421 

against tbem ; the kings of the earth stand up, and the rulers 
take counsel together against the Lord and against his people, 
saying, " Let us scatter them ; let us utterly destroy them." 
From the fiery days of the stakes of Smithfield even until now, 
the world's black heart has hated the church, and the world's 
cruel hand and laughing lip have been for ever against us. 
The host of the mighty are pursuing us, and are thirsty for our 
blood, and anxious to cut us off from the earth. Such is our 
position unto this hour, and such must it be until we are 
landed on the other side of Jordan, and until our Maker comes 
to reign on the earth. 

But once more : the children of Israel were in a position 
more wonderful than this. They came to the edge of the 
Red Sea ; they feared their enemies behind ; they could not 
fly on either hand, for they were flanked by mountains and 
stupendous rocks; one course only was open to them, and 
that course was through the sea. God commands them to go 
forward. The rod of Moses is outstretched, «nd the affright- 
ed waters divide ; a channel is left while the floods stand up- 
right, and the waters are congealed in the heart of the sea. 
The priests, bearing the ark, march forward ; the whole host 
of Israel follow. And now behold the wondrous pilgrimage. 
A wall of alabaster is on either side, and myriads are in the 
pebbly depths. Like a wall of glass the sea stands on either 
side of them, frowning with beetling cliffs of foam; but still 
on they march ; and until the last of God's Israel is safe the 
water stands still and firm, frozen by the lips of God. Such, 
my hearers, is the position of God's church now. You and I 
are marching through a sea, the floods of which are kept up- 
right only by the sovereign power of God. This worid is a 
world which is suddenly to be destroyed ; and our position in 
it is just the position of the children of Israel, for whose sake 
the floods refused to meet until they were safely landed. O 
church of God ! thou art the salt of the earth : when thou art 
removed this earth must putrify and decay. O living army 
of the living God I ye, like Israel, keep the floods of provi- 
dence still standing ^t ; but when the last of you shall be 
gone from this stage of action, God's fiery wrath and tremen- 
dous anger shall dash down upon the ground whereon you 



422 ISRAEL IN EGYPT. 

BOW are staoding, and your enemies shall be overwhelmed iu 
the place through whioh you now walk safely. Let me put 
my thoughts as plainly as I can. Naturally, according to the 
common order, the Red Sea should have flowed on in a level 
and even manner, constant in its waves, and unbroken in its 
surface. By the might of God the Red Sea was divided into 
two parts, and the floods stood back. Now mark. Natur- 
ally, according to the common course of justice, this world, 
which groaneth and travaileth until now, ought, if we only 
consider the wicked, to be utterly destroyed. The only rea- 
son why the Red Sea afforded a safe passage for the host was 
this — that Israel marched through it ; and the only reason 
why this world stands, and the only reason why it is not de- 
stroyed by fire, as it is to be at the last great day, is because 
God's Israel are in it ; but when once they shall have passed 
through, the parted floods shall meet their hands, and em- 
brace with eager joy to clasp the adverse host within their 
arms. The day is coming when this world shall reel to and 
fro and stagger like a drunken man. Every Christian may 
say, with due reverence to God, " The earth is dissolved ; I 
bear up the pillars thereof." Let all the Christians that are 
in the world die, and the pillars of the earth would fall, and 
like a wreck and a vision all this universe of ours would pass 
away, never to be seen again. We are to-day, I say, passing 
through the floods, with enemies behind, pursuing us who are 
going out of Egypt up to Canaan. 

II. And now the triumph of Mosbs was a picture of the ul- 
timate triumph of the Lamb. Moses sang a song unto the 
Lord by the sea of Egypt. If you will turn to holy Scripture 
you will find that my text was sung by the holy spirits who 
had been preserved from sin and from the contamination of 
the beast ; and it is said that they sung this song upon ^^ a sea 
of glass mingled with fire." Now the song of Moses was sung 
by the side of a sea, which was glassy, and still ; for a little 
season the floods had been disturbed, divided, separated, con- 
gealed, but in a few moments afterward, when Israel had safe- 
ly passed the flood, they became as glassy as ever, for the 
enemy had sunken to the bottom like a stone, and the sea re- 
turned to its strength when the morning appeared. Is there 



fSRABL IH BGYPT. 423 

ever a time, then, when this great sea of Providence, which 
now stands parted to give a passage to God's saints shall be- 
oome a level surface ? Is there" a day when the now divided 
dispensations of God, which are kept from following out their 
legitimate tendency to do justice upon sin — ^when the two 
seas of justice shall commingle, and the one sea of God's prov- 
idence shall be " a sea of glass mingled with fire ?" Yes, the 
day is drawing nigh when God's enemies shall no longer make 
it necessary for God's providence to be apparently disturbed 
to save his people, when the great designs of God shall be ac- 
complished, and therefore when the walls of water shall roll 
together, while in their inmost depths the everlasting burn- 
ing fire shall still consume the wicked. O, the sea shall be 
calm upon the surfece ; the sea upon which God's people shall 
walk shall seem to be a sea that is clear, without a weed, with- 
out an impurity ; while down in its hollow bosom, far beyond 
all mortal ken, shall be the horrid depths where the wicked 
must for ever dwell in the fire which is mingled with the glass. 
Well, I now want to show you why it was that Moses 
triumphed, and why it Ts that by-and-by we shall triumph. 
One reason why Moses sung his song was because all Israel 
were safe. They were all safely across the sea. Not a drop of 
spray fell from that solid wall until the last of God's Israel had 
safely planted his foot on the other side of the flood. That 
done, immediately the floods dissolved into their proper place 
again, but not till then. Part of that song was, " Thou hast 
led thy people like a flock through the wilderness," Now, in 
the la^t time, when Christ shall come upon earth, the great 
song will be — " Lord, thou hast saved thy people ; thou hast 
led them all safely through the paths of providence, and not 
onfe of them has fallen into the hands of the enemy." O, it 
is nay strong belief, that in heaven there shall not be a vacant 
throne. I rejoice that all who love the Lord below must at 
last attain to heaven. I do not believe with some that men 
may start on the road to heaven, and be saved, and yet fall by 
the hand of the enemy. God forbid, my friends ! 

" All the chosen race 

Shall meet around" the throne, 

Shall bless the conduct of his grace, 

A.nd make his glories known." 



424 ISBAXL IN SGTFT. 

Part of the triamph of heaven will be, that there is not one 
throne that is unoccupied. As manj as Gk>d bath chosen, as 
many as Christ hath redeemed, as many as the Spirit bath 
called, as many as believe, shall arrive safe across the stream. 
We are not all safely landed yet : 

" Part of the host have crossed the flood, 
And part are crossing now." 

The vanguard of the army have already reached the shore. I 
see them yonder; 

" I greet the blood-besprinkled bands 
Upon th' eternal shore." 

And you and I, my brethren, are marching through the 
depths. We are at this day tbllowing hard after Christ, and 
waltdng through the wilderness. Let us be of good cheer : 
the rearguard shall soon be where the vanguard already is ; 
the last of the chosen shall soon have landed ; the last of God's 
elect shall have crossed the sea, and then shall be heard the 
song of triamph, when all are secure. But O ! if one were ab- 
sent — O ! if one of his chosen family should be cast away — ^it 
would make an everlasting discord in the song of the redeemed, 
and out the strings of the harps of Paradise, so that music 
could never be distilled from them again. 

But, perhaps, the major part of the joy of Moses lay in the 
destruction of aR the enemies of God. He looked upon his 
people the day before. 

" He looked upon his people, 
And the tear was in his eye ; 
He looked upon the foeman, 

And his glance was stem and high." 

And now to-day he looks upon his people, and he says, 
" Blessed art thou, O Israel, safely landed on the shore ;" and 
he looks not upon the foeman, but upon the foeman's tomb ; 
he looks where the living were protected by the shield of God 
from all their enemies; and he sees — what? A mighty 
sepulcher of water ; a mighty tomb in which were engulfed 
princes, monarchs, potentates. " The horse and his rider hath 



nfeL&SL IN SGYFT. 42$ 

he thrown into tke sea." Pharaoh's chariots also are drowned 
therein. And soon, my hearers, you and I shall do the same. 
I say that now we have to look abroad on hosts of enemies. 
What with the wild beasts of Rome, what with the antichrist 
of Mohammed, what with the thousands of idolatri^ and false 
gods, what with infidelity in all its myriad shapes, many are 
the enemies of God, and mighty are the hosts of hell. Lo, 
you see them gathered together this day; horseman upon 
horseman, chariot upon chariot, gathered together against the 
Most High. I see the trembling church, fearing to be over- 
thrown ; I mark her leaders bending their knees in solenm 
pi'ayer, and crying^ ^'Lord, save thy people, and bless thy 
heritage." But mine eye looks through the future with tele- 
scopic glance, and I see the happy period of the latter days, 
when Christ shall reign triumphant. I shall ask them where 
is Babel ? where is Rome ? where is Mohammed ? and the an- 
swer shall come — where? Why they have sunk into the 
depths; they have sunk to the bottom as a stone. Down 
there the horrid fire devours them, for the sea of glass is 
mingled with the fire of judgment. To-<}ay I see a battle-field : 
the whole earth is torn by the hoofs of horses; there is the 
rumble of cannon and the roll of drum. " To arms ! to arms I" 
both hosts are shouting. But you wait awhile, and you shall 
walk across this plain of battle, and say, " Seest thou that 
colosal system of error dead ? There lies another, all fi'ozen, 
in ghastly death, in motionless stupor. There lieth infidehty ; 
there sleepeth secularism and the secularist ; there lie those 
who defied God. I see all this vast host of rebels lying scat- 
tered upon the earth. " Sing unto the Lord, for he hath tri- 
umphed gloriously ; Jehovah has gotten unto himself the vic- 
tory, and the last of his enemies are destroyed." Then shall 
be the time when shall be sung " the song of Moses and of the 
Lamb." 

HI. Now, turning to the song of Moses, I shall conclude 
my address to you by noticing some interesting particulars in 
the song which will doubtless have a place in the everlasting 
orchestra of the redeemed, when they shall praise the Most 
High. O I my brethren, I could but wish that I had stood by 
the Red Sea, to have heard that mighty shout, and that tre- 



426 fiuULSL nr xaYPT. 

meodoos roar of accbunatioai Methinks o&e miglit well bave 
borne a servitude in Egypt, to have stood in that mighty ho^ 
who sung such mighty praise. Music hath charms ; but nev^ 
had it such charms as it had that day when Mr Miriam led the 
women, and Moses led the men, like some mighty leader, beat- 
ing time with his hand. ^^ Sing unto the Lord, for he hath 
done gloriously." Methinks I see the scene ; and I anticipate 
the greater day, when the song shall be sung again, ^^ as the 
song of Moses and of the Lamb." 

Now, just notice this song. In the 15th chapter of Exodus 
you find it, and in divers of the Psalms you will see it ampli- 
fied. The first thing I would have you notice in it is^ that 
from beginning to end it is a praUe of Gody and of nobody 
else but God. Moses, thou hast said nothing of thysdf. O 
great lawgiver, mightiest of men, did not thine hand grasp the 
mi^ty rod that split the sea — ^that burned its fisdr breast, and 
left a scar for awhile upon its bosom f Didst not thou lead 
the hosts of Israel ? Didst not thou marshal their thousands 
for battle, and like a mighty commander led them through 
the depths ? Is there not a word for thee ? Not one. The 
whole strain of the song is, ^' I will sing unto the Lord," from 
beginning to end. It is all praise of Jehovah ; there is not 
one word about Moses, nor a single word in praise of the 
ehildren of Israel. Dear friends, the last song in this world, 
the song of triumph, shall be full of God, and of no one else. 
Here you praise the instrument ; to-day you look on this man 
and on that, and you say, ^^ Thank God for this minister, and 
for this man ?" To-day you say, " Blessed be God for Luth^, 
who shook the Vatican, and thank God for Whitefield, who 
stirred up a slumbering church ;" but in that day you shall 
not sing of Luther, nor of Whitefield, nor of any of the 
mighty ones of God's hosts ; forgotten shall their names be 
for a season, even as the stars refuse to shine when the sun 
himself appeareth. The song shall be unto Jehovah, and 
Jehovah only ; we shall not have a word to say for preadi- 
ers nor bishops, not a syllable to say for good men and 
true ; but the whole song from first to last shall be, " Unto 
him that loved us, and hath washed us from our sins in his own 
blood, unto him be glory for ever and ever. Amen." 



tSUASau IN SGTPT. 427 

And next will yon please to note, that this song celebrated 
something of the fierceness of the enemy t Do you observe 
how, when the songster descnbes the attack of Pharaoh, he 
says, " The enemy said, I will pursue, I will overtake, I will 
divide the spoil ; my lust shall be satisfied upon them ; I will 
draw my sword, my hand shall destroy them." A song is made 
out of the wrath of Pharaoh. And it shall be so at the last. 
The wrath of man shall praise God. I believe the last song 
of the redeemed, when tliey shall ultimately triumph, will 
celebrate in heavenly stanzas the wrath of man overcome by 
God. Sometimes after great battles, monuments are raised to 
the memory of the fight ; and of what are they composed ? 
They are composed of weapons of death and of instruments 
of war which have been taken from the enemy; Now, to use 
that illustration as I think it may be properly used, the day is 
coming when fury, and wrath, and hatred, and strife, shall all 
be woven into a song ; and the weapons of oui* enemies, when 
taken from them, shall serve to make monuments to the praise 
of Grod. Rail on, rail on, blasphemer I Smite on, smite on, 
tyrant! Lift thy heavy hand, O despot; crush the truth, 
which yet thou canst not crush; knock from his head the 
crown — the crown that is far above thy reach- — poor puny im- 
potent mortal as thou art I Go on, go on! But all thou 
doest shall but increase his glories. For aught we care, we 
Wd you still proceed with all your wrath and malice. Though 
it shall be worse for you, it shall be more glorious for our 
Master; the greater your preparations for war, the more 
splendid shall be his triumphal chariot, when he shall ride 
through the streets of heaven in pompous array. The more 
mighty your preparations for battle, the more rich the q)oil 
which he shall divide with the strong. O ! Christian, fear not 
the foe f Remember the harder his blows, the sweeter thy 
song; the greater his wrath, the more splendid thy triumph ; 
the more he rages, the more shs^ Christ be honored in the 
day of his appearing. They sung the song of Moses and the 
Lmnb. 

And then will ye note, in the next place, how they sang the 
total overthrow of the enemy. There is one expresaon in this 
song, which ought to be and I believe is, when set to music, 



426 ISBAJSL IN BaYPT. 

very frequently repeated. It is that part of the song, as re- 
corded in the Psalms, where it is declared that the whole host 
of Pharaoh were utterly destroyed, and there was not one of 
them left. When that great song was sung by the side of 
the Red Sea, there was, no doubt, a special emphasis laid upon 
that expression, ^* not one." I think I hear the hosts of Israel. 
When the words were known by them, they began and they 
proceeded thus — " There is not one of them left ;" and then 
in various parts the words were repeated, " Not one, not one," 
And then the women with their sweet voices sang, " Not one, 
not one." I believe that at the last, a part of our triumph 
will be the fact, that there is not one lefb. We shall look 
abroad throughout the earth, and see it all a level sea ; and 
not one foeman pursuing us — "not one, not one!" Raise 
thyself never so high, O thou deceiver, thou canst not live; 
for not one shall escape. Lift thy head never so proudly, O 
despot, thou canst not live ; for not one shall escape. O heir 
of heaven, not one sin shall cross the Jordan after thee ; not 
one shall pass the Red Sea to oveitake thee ; but this shall be 
the summit of thy triumph — " Not one, not one I not one of 
them is left." 

Just let us note agsdn, and I will not detain you too long, 
lest I weary you. One part of the song of Moses consisted in 
praising the ease with which God destroyed his enemies. 
" Thou didst blow with thy wind, the sea covered them ; ,they 
sank as lead in the mighty waters." If we had gone to work 
to destroy the hosts of Pharaoh, what a multitude of engines 
of death should we have required. If the work had been com- 
mitted to us, to cut off the hosts, what marvelous preparations, 
what thunder, what noise, what great activity there would 
have been. But mark the grandeur of the expression. Gk)d 
did not even lift himself from his throne to do it : he saw 
Pharaoh coming ; he seemed to look upon him with a placid 
smile ; he did just blow with his lips, and the sea covered them. 
You and I will marvel at the last how easy it has been to over- 
throw the enemies of the Lord. We have been tugging and 
toiling all our life-time to be the means of overthrowing sys- 
tems of error ; it will astonish the church, wh^i her Mast^ 
shall come, to see how, as the ice dissolveth before the fire, all 



ISRAEL IN B6TFT. 429 

error and sin shall be utterly destroyed in the coming of the 
Most High. We must have our societies and our machinery, 
our preachings and our gatherings, and rightly too ; but God 
will not I'equire them at the last. The destruction of his ene- 
mies shall be as easy to him as the making of a world. In 
passive silence unmoved he sat ; and he did but break the 
silence with ** Let there be light ; and light was." So shall 
he at the last, when his enemies are raging furiously, blow 
with his winds, and they l^hall be scattered ; they shall melt 
even as wax, and shall be burned like tow ; they shall be as the 
fat of rams ; into smoke shall they consume, yea, into smoke 
shall they consume away. 

Furthermore, in this song of Moses, you will notice there is 
one peculiar beauty. Moses not only rejoiced for what had 
been done, but for the future consequences of it. He says, 
" The people of Canaan, whom we are about to attack, will 
now be seized with sudden fear; by the gi-eatness of thy arm 
they shall be as still as a stone." O I I think I hear them 
singing that too, sweetly and softly, "as still as a stone." 
How would the words come full, like gentle thunder heard in 
the distance, " as still as a stone !" And when we shall get 
on the other side the flood, see the triumph over our ene- 
mies, and behold our Master reigning, this will form a part of 
our song, that they must henceforth be " as still as a stone." 
There will be a hell, but it will not be a hell of roaring devils, 
as it now is. They shall be " as still as a stone." There will 
be legions of f^en angels, but they shall no longer have cour- 
age to attack us or defy God : they shall be " as still as a stone." 
O bow grand will that sound, when the hosts of God's re- 
deemed, looking down on the demons chained, bound, silenced, 
struck dumb with terror, shall sing exultingly over them! 
They must be " as still as a stone ;" and there they must lie, 
and bite their iron bands. The fierce despiser of Christ can 
no more spit in his face ; the proud tyrant can no more lift his 
hands to oppress the saints ; even Satan can no more attempt 
to destroy. They shall be " as still as a stone." 

And last of all, the song concludes by noticing tfie eternity 
o£ Qod?B reign / and this will always make a part of the tri- 
umphant song. They sang, " The Lord shall reign for ever and 



430 ISBAXL IK BQTFT. 

ever." Then I can suppose the whole band broke out into 
their loudest strain of music. " The Lord shall reign for ever 
and ever.** Part of the melody of heaven will be "The Lord 
shall reign for ever and ever." That song has cheered us 
here, " The Lord reigneth ; blessed be my Rock !'* And that 
song shall be our exultation there. " The Lord reigneth for 
ever and ever.*' When we shall see the placid sea of provi- 
dence, when we shall behold the world all fair and lovely, 
when we shall mark our enemies destroyed, and God Almighty 
triumphant, then we shall shout the song, 

" HaUelujah! for the Lord 

Grod Omnipotent shall reign ) 
Hallelajahl let the word 
Echo round the earth and main." 

O I may we be there to sing it ! 

I have one remark to make, and I have done. You know, 
my friends, that as there is something in the song of Moses 
which is typical of the song of the Lamb, there was another 
song sung by the waters of the Red Sea which is typical of 
the song of hell. " What mean you, sir, by that dread 
thought ?" O ! shall I use the word music ? Shall I pro&ne 
the heavenly word so much as to say, 'twas doleful music 
which came from the lips of Pharaoh and his host ? Boldly 
and pompously, with roll of drum and blast of trumpet they 
had entered into the sea. On a sudden their martial music 
ceased ; and ah ! ye heavens and ye floods what was it ? The 
sea was coming down upon them, utterly to devour them. O! 
may we never hear that shriek, that awful yell of hideous 
agony, that seemed to rend the sky, and then was hushed 
again, when Pharaoh and his mighty men were swallowed up, 
and went down quick into hell I Ah I stars, if ye had heard 
it, if the black pall of waters had not shut out the sound from 
you, ye might have continued trembling unto this hour, and 
mayhap ye are trembling now ; mayhap your twinklings by 
night are on account of that terrible shriek ye heard ; for sure 
it were enough to make you tremble on for ever. That dread- 
ful shriek, that hideous moan, that horrible howl, when a whole 
army sank into hell at once, when the waters swallowed them 
up I 



ISRABL IN SaYPT. 481 

Take heed, my friends, take heed, lest you shoald have to 
join in that terrible miserere ; take heed, less that horrible 
howl should be yours, instead of the song of the redeemed. 
And remember, so must it be, unless ye be bom again, unless 
ye believe in Christ, unless ye repent of sin and renounce it 
wholly, and with trembling hearts put your confidence in the 
man of sorrows, who is soon to be crowned the King of kings 
and Lord of lords. May God bless you, and give you all to 
taste of his salvation, that you may stand upon the sea of 
glass, and not have to feel the terrors of the mingled fire in 
the lower depths thereof I God Almighty bless this vast as- 
sembly, for Jesus' sake. 



SERMON XXrX. 

PRESUMPTUOUS SINS. 

** Keep bade thy senrant also from presumptuous sina" — Tsajm xix. 13. 

• 

All sins are great sins, but yet some sins are greater than 
others. Every sin has in it the very venom of rebellion, and 
is full of the essential marrow of traitorous rejection of God. 
But there be some sins which have in them a greater develop- 
ment of the essential mischief of rebellion, and which wear 
upon their faces more of the brazen pride which defies the 
Most High. It is wrong to suppose that because all sins will 
condemn us, that therefore one sin is not greater than another. 
The fact is, that while all transgression is a greatly grievous 
sinful thing, yet there are some transgressions which have a 
deeper shade of blackness, and a more double scarlet-dyed hue 
of criminality than others. Now the presumptuous sins of our 
text are just the chief of all sins : they rank head and foremost 
in the list of iniquities. It is remarkable, that though an 
atonement was provided under the Jewish law for every kind 
of sin, there was this one exception : " But the soul that sin- 
neth presumptuously shall have no atonement ; it shall be cut 
off from the midst of my people." And now, under the Chris- 
tian dispensation, although in the sacrifice of our blessed Lord 
there is a great and precious atonement for presumptuous sins, 
whereby sinners who have sinned in this manner are made 
clean, yet, without doubt, presumptuous sinners, dying with- 
out pardon, must expect to receive a double portion of the 
wrath of God, and a more wonderful manifestation of the un- 
utterable anguish of the torment of eternal punishment in the 
pit that is digged for the wicked. 

I shall this morning, first of all, endeavor to describe pre- 
aumptuoxis sins / then, secondly, I shall try, if I can, to show^ 



PBESUMPTUOUS SINS. ' 433 

by some iUuatrations^ why the presumptuous sin is more hein- 
ous than any other; and then thirdly, I shall try to press the 
prayer upon your Jiotice — ^the prayer, mark you, of the holy 
man — the prayer of David : " Keep back thy servant also 
from presumptuous sins.*' 

I. First, then, what is a presumptuous sin ? Now, I think 
there must be one of four things in a sin in order to make it 
presumptuous. It must either be a sin against light and* 
knowledge, or a sin committed with deliberation, or a sin 
committed with a design of sinning, merely for sinning's sake, 
or else it must be a sin committed through hardihood, from a 
man's rash confidence in his own strength. We will mark 
these points one by one. 

1. A sin that is* committed wUlfuUy against manifest light 
and knowledge is a presumptuous sin. A sin of ignorance is 
not presumptuous, unless that ignorance also be willful, in 
which case the ignorance itself is a presumptuous sin. But 
when a man sins for want of knowing .better — ^for want of 
knowing the law, for want of instruction, reproof advice, and 
admonition, we say that his sin, so committed, does not par- 
take to any great extent of the nature of a presumptuous sin. 
But when a man knows better, and sins in the very teeth and 
face of his increased light and knowledge, then his sin deserves 
to be branded with this ignominious title of a presumptuous 
sin. Let me just dwell on this thought a moment. Conscience 
is often an inner light to men, whereby they are warned of 
forbidden acts as being sinful. Then if I sin against conscience, 
though I have no greater light than conscience affords me, 
still my sin is presumptuous, if I have presumed to go against 
that voice of God in my heart, an enlightened conscience. 
You, young man, were once tempted (and perhaps it was but 
yesterday) to commit a certain act. The very moment you 
were tempted, conscience said, " It is wrong, it is wrong" — 
it shouted murder in your fieart, and told you the deed you 
were about to commit was abominable in the sight of the 
Lord, Your fellow-apprentice committed the same sin with- 
out the warning of conscience ; in him it was guilt — guilt 
which needs to be washed away with the Saviour's blood. But 
it was not such guilt in him as it was in you, because your 

19 



434 PBBSUMPTUOUS SINS., 

conscience checked you ; your conscience told you of the dan- 
ger, warned you of the punishment,' and yet you dared to go 
astray against God, and therefore you sinned presumptuously. 
You have sinned very grievously in having done so. When a 
roan shall trespass on my ground, he shall be a trespasser 
though he have no warning, but if straight before his face 
4.here stands a warning, and if he knowingly and willingly 
trespasses, then he is guilty of a presumptuous trespass, and is 
to be so far punished accordingly. So you, if you had not 
known better ; if your conscience had been less enlightened, 
you might have committed the deed with fer less of the crim- 
inality which now attaches to you, because you sinned against 
conscience, and consequently sinned presumptuously. 

But, O ! how much greater is the sin, whefi man not only has 
the light of conscience, but has also the admonition of friends^ 
the advice of those who are wise and esteemed by him. If I 
have but one check, the check of my enlightened conscience, 
and I transgress against it, I am presumptuous ; but if a mother 
with tearful eye warns me of the consequence of my guilt, and 
if a fether with steady look, and with affectionate determined 
earnestness, tells me what will be the effect of my transgres- 
sion — if fiiends who are dear to me counsel me to avoid the 
way of the wicked, and warn me what must be the inevitable 
result of continuing in it, then I am presumptuous, and my 
act in that very proportion becomes more guilty. I should 
have been presumptuous for having sinned against the light of 
nature, but I am more presumptuous when, added to that, I 
have the light of affectionate counsel and of kind advice, and 
therein I bring upon my head a double amount of divine 
wrath. And how much more is this the case, when the trans- 
gressor has been gifted with what is usually called a religious 
education ; in childhood he has been lighted to his bed by the 
lamps of the sanctuary, the name of Jesus was mingled with 
the hush of lullaby, the music of the sanctuaiy woke him like 
a matin hymn at morning ; he has been dandled on the knee 
of piety and has sucked the breasts of godliness ; he has been 
tutored and trained in the way he should go ; how much more 
fearful I say, is the guilt of such a man than that of those who 
have never had such traming, but have been left to follow 



PBESUMPTUOUS SINS. 435 

their own wayward lusts and pleasures without the restraint 
of a holy education and the restiaints of an enlightened con- 
science ! 

But, my friends, even this may become worse still. A man 
sins yet more presumptuously, when he has had most special 
warning from the voice of God against the sin. " What mean 
you ?" say you. Why, I mean this. Yon saw but yesterday a 
strong man in your neighborhood brought to the grave by 
sudden death ; it is but a month ago that you heard the bell 
toll for one whom once you knew and loved, who procrasti- 
nated and procrastinated until he perished in procrastination. 
You have had strange things happen in your very street, and 
the voice of God has been spoken loudly through the lips of 
Death to you. Ay, and you have had warnings too in your 
own body ; you have been sick with fever, you have been 
brought to the jaws of the grave, and you have looked down 
into the bottomloss vanlt of destruction. It is not long ago 
since you were given up ; all said they might prepare a coffin 
for you, for your breath could not long be in your body. 
Then you turned your fe,ce to the wall, and prayed ; you 
vowed that if God would spare you you would live a godly 
life, that you would repent of your sins ; but to your own con- 
fusion you are now just what you were. Ah I let me tell you, 
your guilt is more grievous than that of any other man, for 
you have sinned presumptuously, in the very highest sense in 
which you could have done so. You have sinned against re- 
proofe, but what is worse still, you have sinned against your 
own solemn oaths and covenants, and against the promises 
that you made to God. He who plays with fire must be con- 
demned as careless ; but he who has been burned out once, 
and afterward plays with the destroying element, is worse 
than careless ; and he who has himself been scorched in the 
flame, and has had his looks all hot and crisp with the burning, 
if he again should rush headlong into fire, I say he is worse 
than careless, he is worse than presumptuous, he is mad. But 
I have some such here. They have had warnings so terrible 
that they might have known better; they have gone into 
lusts which have brought their bodies into sickness, and per- 
haps this day they have crept up to this house, and they dare 



436 PRESUMPTOOUfl SINS. 

not tell to their neighbor who stands by their side what is the 
loathsomeness that even now doth breed upon their frame. 
And yet they will go back to the same lusts ; the fool will go 
again to the stocks, the sheep will lick the knife that is to slay 
him. You will go on in your lust and in your sins, despite 
warnings, despite advice, until you perish in yo^ur guilt. How- 
worse than children are grown-up men ! The child who goes 
for a merry slide upon a pond, if he be told that the ice will 
not bear him, starteth back affrighted, or if he daringly creep- 
eth upon it how soon he leaves it, if he hears but a crack upon 
the slender covering of the water ! But you men have con- 
soieoce, which tells you that your sins are vile, and that they 
will be your ruin ; you hear the crack of sin, as its thin sheet 
of pleasure gives way beneath your feet ; ay, and some of you 
have seen your comrades sink in the flood, and lost ; and yet 
you go sliding on, worse than childish, worse than mad are 
you, thus presumptuously to play with you^ own everlasting 
state. O my God, how terrible is the presumption of some I 
How fearful b presumption in any ! 1 that we might be en- 
abled to cry, " Keep back thy servant also from presumptu- 
ous sins." 

2. I said again, that another characteristic of a presumptu- 
ous sin was ddiberation. A man, perhaps, may have a passion- 
ate spu-it, and in a moment of hot haste he may utter an angry 
word of which in a few short minutes he will sincerely repent. 
A man may have a temper so hot that the least provocation 
causes him at once to be full of wrath. But te may also have a 
temperament which has this benefit to balance it, thai he very 
soon learns to forgive, and cools in a moment. Now, such a 
man does not sin presumptuously, when suddenly overcome 
by anger, though, without doubt, there is presumption in his 
«n, unless he strives to correct that passion and keep it down. 
A man, again, who is suddenly tempted and surprised into a 
sin which is not his habit, but which he commits through the 
force of some strong temptation, is guilty, but not guilty of 
presumption, because he was taken unawares in the net and 
caught in the snare. But there are other men who sin delib- 
erately ; there are some who can think of a lust for weeks 
beforehand, and dote upon their darling crime with pleasure. 



PBBSUMPTUOUS SINS. 43 V 

They do, as it were, water the young seedling of lust until it 
grows to the maturity of desire, and then they go and commit 
the crime. There are some to whom lust is not a passer-by, 
but a lodger at home. They receive it, they house it, they 
feast it ; and when they sin they sin deliberately, walk coolly 
to their luMt.H, a»d in cold blood commit the act which another 
ijiiglit haply do in hot and furious haste. Now, suuh a sm hm 
in it a <jjreat extent of einfulnesa, it is a sin of high presump* 
lion. To be carried away, as by a whiriu ind of paiision, in 
a moment is wrong; but to sit down and deliberately resolve 
u^on revenge is curtaed and diabolical. To sit down and de- 
liberately fashion schemes of wickedness is heioous, and loan 
find no other word fitly to express it. To deliberate carefully 
how the crime is to be done, and, Hanian-Uke, to build the 
gallows, and to set to work to destroy one's neighbor, to get 
the pit digged that the friend may fiill into it and be destroyed^ 
to lay snares in secret, to plot wickedneas upon one's bed — 
this is a high pitch of presumptuous sin. May God forgive 
any of us, if we have been so far guilty ! 

Agaln^ when a man cofitinues long in sin^ and has time to 
deliberate about it^ that also ia a proof that it ia a preaump- 
tuous sin. He that sins once, being overtaken in a faultj ami 
then abhors t lie sin, has not sinned presumptnoudy ; but lie 
who transgresses to-day, to-morrow, and the next day, week 
after week, and year after year, until ho has piled up a ht?af> 
of sins that are high as a mountain, sucli a man, I say, sins 
preaumptuously, because in a continued habit of sin there m«at 
be a deliberation to sin ; there must be at least such a foroe 
and strength of mind as could not have come upon imy man 
if his sill were but the hasty effect of sudden passion. Ah I 
take heed, ye that are sodden in sin, ye that drink it down as 
the greedy ox drinketh Howa water, ye who run to your lust 
aij the rivers run to the sea, and ye who go to your passiona 
as the sow to her wallowing in the mire. Take heed \ your 
Climes are grievous, and the hand of God shall soon fall terri- 
bly on your heads, unless by divine grace it be granted to you 
to repent and turn unto him. Fearful mu^st bo your doom 
if, unpardoned, God should condemn yoti for presumptuous 



438 PBBSUMPTUOUS SINS. 

sin. O " Lord, keep back thy servant also from^presamptu- 
ous sins." 

3. Again : I said that a presumptuous sin must be a matter 
of design^ and have been committed with the intention of sin. 
If at your leisure at home you will turn to that passage in the 
book of Numbers, where it says there is no pardon for a pre- 
sumptuous sin under the Jewish dispensation', you will find 
immediately afterward a case recorded. A man went out on 
the Sabbath-day to gather sticks; he was taken in the act 
of Sabbath-breaking, and the law being very stringent under 
the Jewish dispensation, he was ordered at once to be put to 
death. Now, the reason why he was put to death was not 
because he gathered sticks on the Sabbath merely, but because 
the law had just then been proclaimed, " In it thou shalt do no 
manner of work." This man willfully, out of design, in order, 
as it were, to show that he despised God — to show that he did 
not care for God — without any necessity, without any hope of 
advantage, went straight out, in the very teeth of the law, to 
perform, not an act which he kept in his own house, which 
might perhaps have been overlooked, but an act which brought 
shame upon the whole congregation, because, infidel-like, he 
dared to brazen it out before God ; as much as to say, " I care 
not for God. Has God just commanded, * Ye shall do no 
manner of work ?' Here am I ; I do not want sticks to-day ; 
I do not want to work ; not for the sake of sticks, but with 
the design of showing that I despise God, I go out this day 
and gather sticks." " Now," says one, " surely there are no 
people in the world that have ever done such a thing as this." 
Yes, there are ; and there are such in the Surrey Music Hall 
this day. They have sinned against God, not merely for the 
pleasure of it, but because they would show their want pf 
reverence to God. That young man burned his Bible in the 
midst of his wicked companions — not because he hated his 
Bible, for he quivered and looked pale at the ashes on the 
hearth when he was doing it ; but he did it out of pure bra- 
vado, in order to show them, as lie thought, that he really was 
far gone from any thing like a profession of religion. That 
other man is accustomed sometimes to stand by the wayside, 
when tlie people are going to llie house of God ; and he swears 



/ 

PRESUMPTUOUS SINS. 439 

at them, not because he delights in swearing, but because he 
will show that he is irreligious, that he is ungodly. How many 
an infidel has done the same — not because he had any pleasure 
in the thing itself, but because out of the wickedness of his 
heart he would spit at God, if it were possible, having a de- 
sign to let men know that though the sin itself was cheap 
enough, he was determined to do something which would be 
like spitting in the face of his Maker, and despising God who 
created him ! Now, such a sin is a master-piece of iniquity. 
There is pardon for such a one — there is full pardon to those 
who are brought to repentance ; but few of such men ever 
receive it ; for when they are so far gone as to sin presumptu- 
ously, because they will do it — to sin merely for the sake of 
showing their disregard of God and of God's law, we say of 
such, there is pardon for them, but it is wondrous grace which 
brings them into such a condition that they are willing to 
accept it. O that God jvould keep back his servants here 
from presumptuous sins ! And if any of us here have com- 
mitted them, may he bring us back, to the praise of the glory 
of his grace ! 

4. But one more point, and I think I shall have explained 
these presumptuous sins. A presumptuous sin also is one that 
is committed through a hardihood of fancied strength of mind. 
Says one, "I intend to-morrow to go into such-and-such a 
society, because I believe, though it hurts other people, it 
does me no hurt." You turn round and say to some young 
man, " I could not advise you .to frequent the Casino — it would 
be your ruin." But you go yourself, sir ? "Yes." But how 
do you justify yourself? Because I have such strength of 
principle that I know just how far to go, and no further. Thou 
liest, sir ; against thyself thou liest ; thou liest presumptuously 
in so doing. Thou art playing with bombshells that shall burst 
and destroy thee ; thou art sitting over the mouth of hell, 
with a fancy that thou shalt not be burned. Because thou 
hast gone to haunts of vice and come back tainted, much 
tainted, but because thou art so blind as not to see the taint, 
thou thinkest thyself secure. Thou art not so. Thy sin, in 
daring to think tliat thou art proof against sin, is a sin of pre- 
sumption. "No, no," snys one; "but I know that T can go 



440 PBBSUMPTUOUS SINS.^ 

just SO &r in such-and-such a sin, and there I can stop." Pre- 
sumption, sir; nothing but presumption. It would be pre- 
sumption for any man to climb to the top of the spire of a 
church, and stand upon his head. " Well, but he might come 
down safe, if he were skilled in it." Yes, but it is presump- 
tuous. I would no more think of subscribing a ferthing to a 
man^s ascent in a balloon, than I would to a poor' wretch cut- 
ting his own throat. I would no more think of standing and 
gazmg at any man who puts his life in a position of peril, 
than I would of paying a man to blow his brains out. I think 
such things, if not murders, are murderous. There is suicide 
in men risking themselves in that way ; and if there be suicide 
in the risk of the body, how much more in the case of a man 
who puts his own soul in jeopardy just because he thinks he 
has strength of mind enough to prevent its being ruined and 
destroyed. Sir, your sin is a sin of presumption ; it is a great 
and grievous one ; it is one of the master-pieces of iniquity. 

O I how many people there are who are sinning presumptu- 
ously to-day ! You are sinning presumptuously in being to- 
day what you are. You are saying, " In a little time I will 
solemnly and seriously think of religion ; in a few years, when 
I am a little more settled in life, I intend to turn over a new 
lea^ and think about the matters of godliness." Sir, you are 
presumptuous. You are presuming that you shall live ; you 
are speculating upon a thing which is as frail as the bubble on 
the breaker; you are staking your everlasting soul on the 
deadly odds that you shall live for a few years, whereas, the 
probabilities are, thr^t you may be cut down ere the sun shall 
set : and it is possible, that ere another year shall have passed 
over your head, you may be in the land where repentance is 
impossible, and useless were it possible. O ! dear friends, pro- 
crastination is a presumptuous sin. The putting off a thing 
which should be done to-day, because you hope to live to- 
morrow, is a presumption. You have no right to do it — you 
are, in so doing, sinning against God, and bringing on your 
heads the guilt of presumptuous sin. I remember that stiiking 
passage in Jonathan Edwards' wonderful sermon, which was 
the means of a great revival, where he says, " Sinner, thou art 
this moment standing over the mouth of hell, upon a single 



PBESUMFTUOTTS SINS. 441 

plank, and that plank is rotten ; thou art hanging over the 
jaws of perdition, by a solitary rope, and the strands of that 
rope are creaking now." It is a terrible thing to be in such 
a position as that, and yet to say, " to-morrow," and to pro- 
crastinate. You remind me, some of you, of that story of 
Dionysius the tyrant, who, wishing to punish one who had dis- 
pleased him, invited him to a noble feast. Rich were the viands 
that were spread upon the table, and i*are the wines of which 
he was invited to drink. A chair was placed at the head of the 
table, and the guest was seated within it. Horror of horrors I 
The feast might be rich, but the guest was miserable, dreadful 
beyond thought. However splendid might be the array of 
the servants, and however rich the danties, yet he who had 
been invited sat there in agony. For what reason? Because 
over his head, immediately over it, there hung a sword, a fur- 
bished swordj suspended by a single hair. He had to sit all 
the time with this sword above him, with nothing but a hair 
between him and death. You may conceive the poor man's 
misery. He could not escape; he must sit where he was. 
How could he feast ? How could he rejoice ! But O, my un- 
converted hearer, thou art there this morning, man, with all thy 
riches and thy wealth before thee, with the comforts of a home 
and the joys of a household ; thou art there this day, in a place 
from which thou canst not escape ; the sword of death above 
thee, prepared to descend ; and woe unto thee, when it shall 
cleave thy soul from thy body ! Canst thou yet make mirth, 
and yet procrastinate ? If thou canst, then verily thy sin is 
presumptuous in a high degree. "Keep back thy servant 
also from presumptuous sins." 

11. And now I come to the second part of the subject, with 
which I shall deal very briefly. I am to try and show why it 

IS THAT THBBE IS GREAT ENORMITY IN A PRESUMPTUOUS SIN. 

Let me take any one of the sins; for instance, the sin 
against light and knowledge. There is greater enormity in 
such a presumptuous sin than in any other. In this our happy 
land it is just possible for a man to commit treason. I think 
it must be rather difficult for him to do it ; for we are allowed 
to say words here which would have brought our necks be- 
neath the guillotine, if they had been spoken on the other si4e 

19* 



442 pfiBSUMPnrous snfs. 

the Channel ; and we are allowed to do deeds here which 
would have brought ns long years of imprisonment if the deed 
had been done in any other land. But I suppose it is just pos- 
mWe to commit treason here. Now, if two men should com- 
mit treason — if one of them should wantonly and wickedly 
raise the standard of revolt to-morrow, should denounce the 
rightf\il sovereign of this land in the strongest and most abom- 
inable language, should seek to entice the loyal subjects of 
this country from their allegiance, and should draw some of 
them astray, to the hurt and injury of the common weal ; he 
might have in his rebellious ranks one who had joined incau- 
tiously, not knotnng whereunto the matter might tend, who 
might come into the midst of the rebels, not understanding 
the intention of their unlawful assembling, not even knowing 
the law which prohibited them from being banded together. 
I can suppose these two men brought up upon a diarge of 
high treason : they have both, legally, been guilty of it ; but 
I can suppose that the one man who had sinned ignorantly 
would be acquitted, because there was no malignant intent ; 
and I can suppose that the other man, who had willfully, 
knowingly, maliciously and wickedly raised the standard of 
revolt, would receive the highest punishment which the law 
eould demand. And why ? Because in the one case it was a 
sin of presumption, and in the other case it was not so. In 
the one case the man dared to defy the sovereign, and defy 
the law of the land, wiUfhUy, out of mere presumption. In 
the other case not so. Now, every man sees that it would be 
just to make a distinction in the punishment, because there 
is — conscience itself tells us — a distinction in the guilt. 

Again : some men, I have said, sin ddiheratdy^ and others 
do not do so. Now, in order to show that there is a distinc- 
tion here, let me take a case. To-morrow the bench of magis- 
trates are sitting. Two men are brought up. They are each 
of them charged with stealing a loaf of bread. It is clearly 
proved, in the one case, that the man was hungry, and that he 
snatched the loaf of bread to satisfy hio necessities. He is 
sorry for his deed, he grieves that he has done this act ; but 
most manifestly he had a strong temptation to it. In the other 
case the man was rich, and lie willfally went into the shop 



PKESUMPTUOUS SINS. 443 

merely because he would break the law and show that he was 
a law-breaker. He said to the policeman outside, " Now, I 
care neither for you nor the law ; I intend to go in there, just 
to see what you can do with me." I can suppose the magis- 
trate would say to one man, " You are discharged ; take care 
not to do the like again ; there is something for your present 
necessities ; seek to eani an honest liviug." But to the other 
I can conceive him saying, " You are an infemous wretch ; 
you have committed the same deed as the other, but from 
very different motives ; I give you the longest term of m^ 
prisonment which the law allows me, and I can only regret 
that 1 can not treat you worse than I have done." The pre^ 
sumption of sin made the difference. So when you sin delib- 
erately and knowingly, your sin against Almighty God is a 
higher and a blacker sin than it would have been if you had 
sinned ignorantly, or sinned in haste, 

Now let us suppose one more case. In the heat of some 
little dispute some one shall insult a man. You shall be in- 
sulted by a man of angry temper ; you have not provoked him, 
you gave him no just cause for it ;* but at the same time he 
was of a hot jind angry disposition ; he was somewhat foiled 
in the debate, and he insulted you, calling you by some name 
which has left a stain upon your character, so fiir as epithets 
can do it. I can suppose that you would ask no reparation 
of him, if by to-morrow you saw that it was just a rash word 
spoken in haste, of which he repented. But suppose another 
pei-son should waylay you in the street, should week after week 
seek to meet you in the market-place, and should, after a gi*eat 
deal of toil and trouble, at last meet you, and there, in the 
center of a number of people, unprovoked, just out of sheer, 
deliberate malice, come before you and call you a liar in the 
street ; I can suppose that, Christian as you are, you might find 
it necessary to chastise such insolence, not with your hand, but 
with the arm of that equitable law which protects us all from 
insulting violence. In the other case I can suppose it would 
be no trouble to forgive. You would say, " My dear fellow, 
I know we are all hasty sometimes — there, no^jr, I don't care 
at all for it ; you did not mean it." But in this case, where a 
man has dared and defied you without any provocation wht(^ 



444 PBRSUMPTUOUS SINS^ 

ever, you would say to him, " Sir, you have endeavored to in- 
jure me in respectable society ; I can forgive you as a Chris- 
tian, but as a man and a citizen I shall demand that I am pro- 
tected against your insolence." 

You see, therefore, in the cases that occur between man and 
roan, how there is an excess of guilt added to a sin by pre- 
Ibumption. O ! ye that have sinned presumptuously — and who 
among us has not done so ? — bow your heads in silence, con- 
fess your guilt, and then open your mouths, and cry, " Lord, 
have mercy upon me, a presumptuous sinner." 

in. And now I have nearly done — not to weary you by too 
long a discourse — we shall notice ths afpbopbiatbness of 
THIS PBATEB — ** Keep back thy servant also from presumptu- 
ous sins." 

Will you just note, that this prayer was the prayer of a 
$atrUy the prayer of a holy man of God ? Did David need to 
pray thus ? Did the " man after God's own heart" jieed to 
cry, " Keep back thy servant ?" Yes^ he did. And note the 
beauty of the prayer. If I might translate it into more meta- 
phoiical style, it is like this : " Curb thy servant from pre- 
sumptuous sin." " Keep him back or he will 4vander to the 
edge of the precipice of sin. Hold him in. Lord ; he is apt to 
run away ; curb him ; put the bridle on him ; do not let him 
do it ; let thine overpowering grace keep him holy ; when he 
would do evil, then do thou draw him to good, and when his 
evil propensities would lead him astray, then do thou check 
him." " Check thy servant from presumptuous sins." 

What then ? Is it true that the best of men may sin pre- 
sumptuously ? Ah ! it is true. It is a solemn thing to find 
the Apostle Paul warning saints against the most loathsome of 
sins. He says, " Mortify therefore your members which are 
upon the earth, fornication, uncleanness, idolatry, inordinate 
affection," and such like. What! do saints want warning 
against such sins as these ? Yes, they do. The highest saints 
may sin the lowest sins, unless kept by diviiie grace. You 
old experienced Christians, boast not in your experience ; you 
may trip yet, unless you cry, " Hold thou me up, and I shall 
be safe." Ye whose love is fervent, whose feith is constant, 
whose hopes are bright, say not, "I shall never sin," but 



PMSUMPixroirs sins. 445 

rather cry out, " Lord, lead me not into temptation, and when 
there leave me not there ; for unless thou hold mo fast I feel 
I must, I shall decline, and prove an apostate after all.'' There 
is enough tinder in the hearts of the best men in the world 
to light a fire that shall bum to the lowest hell, unless God 
should quench the sparks as they fall. There is enough cor- 
ruption, depravity, and wickedness in the heart of the most 
holy man that is ndw alive to danm his soul to all eternity, if 
free and sovereign grace does not prevent. O Christian, thou 
hast need to pray this prayer. But I think I hear you saying, 
•^Is thy servant a dog, that I should do this thing ?" So said 
Hazael, when the prophet told him that he would slay his 
master ; but he went home and took a wet cloth and spread 
it over his master's face and choked him, and did the next day 
the sin which he abhorred before. Think it not enough to 
abhor sin, you may yet fell into it. Say not, " I never can be 
drunken, for I have such an abhorrence of drunkenness ;" 
thou mayest fell where thou art most secure. Say not, ^^I 
can never blaspheme God, for I have never done so in my 
life ;" take care ; you may yet swear most profenely. Job 
might have said, " I will never curse the day of my birth ;»» 
but he lived to do it. He was a patient man ; he might have 
said, " I will never murmur ; though he slay me, yet will I 
trust in him ;" and yet he lived to wish that the day were 
darkness wherein he was brought forth. Boast not, then, O 
Christian ; by feith thou standest. ^' Let him that thinketh 
he standeth take heed lest he fall." 

But if this need to be the prayer of the best, how ought it 
to be the prayer of you and me ? If the highest saint must 
pray it, O mere moralist, thou hast good need to utter it. And 
ye who have begun to sin, who make no pretensions to piety, 
how much need is there for you to pray that you may be kept 
from presumptuously rebelling against God. 

Instead, however, of enlarging upoq that point, I shall close 
my few remarks this morning by just addressing myself most 
affectionately to such of you as are now under a sense of guilt 
by reason of presumptuous sins. God's Spirit has found some 
of you out this morning. I thought when I was describing 
presumptuous sin that I saw here and there an eye that was 



ii% PBBSHTMPTUOUS SXKS* 

guffoged with tears ; I thoogbt I saw here and there a head 
that was bo>yed down, as mach as to say, " I am guilty there." 
I thought there were some hearts that palpitated with confes- 
sion, when I described the guilt of presumption. I hope it 
was so. If it was, I am glad of it. If I hit your consciences, 
it was that I meant to do. Not to your ears do I speak, but 
to your hearts. I would not give the snap of this my finger 
to gratify you with mere words of oratory, with a mere flow 
of language. No, God is my witness. I never sought effect 
yet, except the effect of hitting your consciences. I would use 
the words that would be most rough and vulgar in all our lan- 
guage, if I could get at your heart better ,with them than 
with any other ; for I reckon that the chief matter with a 
minister is to touch the conscience. If any of you feel, then, 
that you have presumed against God in sinning, let me just 
bid you look at your sin, and weep over the blackness of it ; 
let me exhort you to go home and bow your heads with sor- 
row, and confess your guilt, and weep over it with many tears 
and sighs. You have greatly sinned, and if God should blast 
you into perdition now, he would be just ; if now his fiery 
thunderbolt of vengeance should pierce you through, if the 
arrow that is now upon the string of the Almighty lihould find 
a target in your heart, he would be just. Go home and con- 
fess that, confess it with cries and sighs. And then what next 
wilt thou do ? Why, I bid thee remember that there was a 
man who was a God. That man suffered for presumptuous 
sin. I would bid thee this day, sinner, if thou knowest thy 
need of a Saviour, go up to thy chamber, cast thyself upon 
thy face, and weep for sin ; and when thou hast done that, 
turn to the Scriptures, and read the story of that man who 
suffered and died for sin. Think you see him in all his nnat- 
terable agonies, and griefe, and woes, and say this — 

" My soul looks back to see 

The burdens thou didst bear 
When hangmg on the accursed tree, 
And hopes her guilt was there." 

Lift up your hand, and put it on his head who bled, and 
•ay. 



FSBSUKFnrOUS SINS. 44t 

** Uy fidtii would lay its haiad 
On that dear head of thine^ 
While, like a penitent, I stand, 
And there confess my sin." 

Sit down at the foot of his cross, and watch him till your heart 
is moved, till the tears begin to flow again, until your heart 
breaks within you ; and then you will rise and Sjay, 

" Dissolved by his mercy, I fall to the ground, 
And weep to the praise of the mercy I found." 

O sinner, thou canst never perish, if thou wilt cast thyself at 
the foot of the cross. If thou seekest to save thyself thou 
shalt die ; if thou wilt come, just as thou art, all black, all 
filthy, all hell-deserving, all ill-deserving, I am my Master's 
hostage, I will be answerable at the day of judgment for this 
matter, if he does not save thee. I can preach on this sub- 
ject now, for I trust I have tried my Master myself As a 
youth I sinned, as a child I rebelled, as a young man I wan- 
dered into lusts and vanities : my Master made me feel how 
great a sinner I was, and I sought to reform, to mend the 
matter ; but I grew worae. . At last I heard it said, " Look 
unto me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth ;" and I 
looked to Jesus. And O ! my Saviour, thou hast eased my 
aching conscience, thou hast given me peace ; thou hast en- 
abled me to say, 

" Now, freed from an, I walk at large ; 
My Saviour's blood's a ftill discharge ; 
At his dear feet my soul I lay, 
A sinner saved, and homage pay." 

And O ! my heart pants for you. O that you who never knew 
him could taste bis love now. O that you who have never re- 
pented might now receive the Holy Ghost who is able to melt 
the heart I And O that you who are penitents would look to 
him now I And I repeat that solemn assertion— I am God's 
hostage this morning ; ye shall feed me on bread and water to 
my life's end, ay, and I will bear the blame for ever, if any of 
you seek Christ, and Christ rejects you. It must not, it ,can 



448 PRESUMPTuoxrs snra. 

not be. " Whosoever cometh," he says, "I will in nowise cast 
out." He is able to save to the attermost them that come 
unto God by him.'* May God Almighty bless you ; and may 
we meet again in yonder Paradise ; and there will we sing 
more sweetly of redeeming love and d}dng blood, and of 
Jesus' power to save, 

'*Wben this poor lisping, stammering t(xi£^e, 
lies silent in the grave." 



THB BKD. 



Books Published by Sheldon, Blaheman dk Co. 
A NEW BAPTIST HYMN AND TUNE-BOOK, 

FOR THE ENCOUBAGEMBNT OP OONGBEOATIONAL SINGING ; 

BEOre THE PLTMOUTH GOLLECTIOK OF HTMKS AlID TUNES: 

ENI.ABGED AKD ADAFTED TO THE UBB OF UAPTI0T CinJBCIIE& 

The groands on which this book has been prepared and offered to the Baptist ChurcheA 
may be learned from the following correspondence addressed to the publishers of the 
*' jnymonth Collection." 

BrooHyn, May 1st, 1867. 

Gents : — ^The Pierrepont Street Baptist Chordi being greatly interested in the improve- 
ment of Congregational Singing, have had their attention directed to the merit and useful- 
ness of the " Plymodtu Collbction of Htm xs and Tunes" published by yon. Many of 
nti have examined it carefully, used it in our families, and observed its influence upon the 
Ringing in public worship, and wo are led to believe that it is, on the whole, better adapted 
to promote Congregational Singing than any other book now before the public, and that, 
with some alterations and additions, it might be well adapted to the use of Baptist OhurcheSy 
and be made to supply a want at present extensively felt among us. 

In this view, at a meeting of the Church, held April 1st, 1857, the following refiolutions 
were passed unanimously, and directed to be communicated to jom—RMolve /, Ist. That 
we request of the editor and publishers an edition of the ** Plymouth Collection of 
Hymns and Tunes" adapted to the use of Baptist Churches. 2d. And that upon issuo 
of such an edition, that this Church use the same in their public worship. 

Yours truly, WILLIAM F. FORBY, Clkek. 

The editor and publishers of the " Plymouth Collection" having signified their will- 
ingness to accede to the above request. Rev. J. S. Holme, Pastor of the Pierrepont Street 
Baptist Church, Brookl}^!, has, at their request, and with the advice and co-operation of 
a large number of the pastors of other Baptist Churches, prepared for publication a new 
edition of the ** Plymouth Collection." All Hymns have been stricken out that seemed 
not in harmony with the views and feelings of Baptists, and a large number have been 
added, not only of a denominational charaeter, but those old familiar hymns, which, by 
long use, have become mndi endeared to the Baptist Churches. The original plan of the 
book has been carried out in restoring old standurd hvmns, which have been mutilated by 
attempted improvements, to their former int^^ty. A few choice hymns have been added 
that have never appeared in any eolleotioii, and a number of original hymns on Baptism 
and subjects in which hymnology appeared especially barren — such as Home Missions — 
have been obtained from very distinguished pens. Especial acknowledgments for orig- 
inal hymns are due, among others, toWtLLiAM C. Bbtant, Esq., G. W. Bethunb, D.l>., 
8. F. Smith, D.D., S. D. Phelps, D.D^ Chables Thubueb, and Rev. Sydney Dyeb. 
This edition contains about 160 hymns and 60 tunes more than the original number of 
the '^ Plymouth Collection," making in all about 1,600 hymns and 400 tunes, which, it ia 
believed will form the most complete collection of the kind ever offered to the public 

The Musical arrangement for the new matter of the present edition has been under the 
control of Pbofebsos Robert R. Raymond. 

Among the peculiarities of this book, the following may in brief be specially noted : 

1. Its primary object is to promote the interests of CongregqJtianal Singing. 

2. Every hymn is set to appropriate music. For the most part, the tune is on the same 
page with the hymn. 

3. It abounds in old familiar tunes, and plain and easy melodies, such as congregations 
generally not only can, but love to sing. 

4 This book, containing about 1,600 hymns and 400 tunes, presents a wider range 
for adaptation and taste than any other book ever presented to the public 
6. It is especially rich in warm, soul-stirring revival melodiea 

6. It is adapted equally to the conference meeting, the family circle, and the great 
congregation ; so that one book will not only suffice for all these places, but in the use of 
one book all these separate exercises are made to contribute to the improvement of tho 
music of each, and especially to that of the more public services of the sanctuary. 

7. The book may be used by churches in the public service, either toith or without a 
choir as they may prefer. 

8. The indexes of this book are so full and complete that it is hoped they will mate- 
rially lessen the inconvenience so generally felt by ministers in the selection of suitablo 
hymns. 

PRICES OF THE BAPTIST HYMN AND TUNE-BOOK, 
In Plahi Binding, $1 60. Extra GUt^ $2 60. Super Extra, $3 60. 

Churches wishing them for introduction will be supplied at a liberal discount 
SHELDON, BLAKBMAN & CO., 

PuBLisHBES, 115 Nassau Stebet, N. T. 



Boohs Published by Sheldon^ Blakeman & Co. 
THE SAINT AND HIS SAVIOUR. 

BY THE REV. C. H. SPURGEON. 
1 vol., 12ino. Price $1. 
ThU Is AB entirely new work, never before published in any form. It is the first ex- 
tended reltgioas work by this disUngnished preacher, and one which in its fervid devo- 
tional spirit, the richness of its sentiments, and the beauty of its imagery, fblly sustains 
bis high reputatioB. 

SERMONS 

OP THE REV. 0. H. SPURGEON, OP LONDON. 

YTUn g |P^T«l , With an Introduction and Sketch of his Life, by the Rev. E. L. 

Maqoon , P.p. t vol., 12mo, 400 paces. With a fine Lithograph Portrait. Price $1. 
8JHX)HD ftHHT*^ Revised by the Author, and Published with his sanction ; contain- 

inga new gteel Plate Portrait, engraved expressly for the Volume. Price $1. 
THnfn 8EUDSS. Revised by the Author, and Published with his sanction ; contain- 

Inga Stect Plate Yiew of Surrey Music Hall, London, engraved expressly for the 

Volame. Price $1. 

AN ILLUSTRATED SKETCH OF THE 

LIFE AND MINISTRY OF THE REV. C. H, SPURGEON. 

Compiled from original and authentic docnments, with numerous Anecdotes and Inci- 
dents of Travel ; and Illustrated with a Portrait of Mr. Spurgeon, engravii^:s of New 
Park-street Chapel, Waterbeach Chapel, Mr. Spurgeon in his Pulpit, his Birth-place, 
etc ; with an Outline of his Articles of Faith. 

1 vol., 12mo. Muslin. Price 60 cents.—! vol., 12mo. Paper Covers. Price 40 cents. 
From ths Rev. E. O. Rohinaoru, D.D., ProfMaor of BibUcal tmd Pastoral Theology 
in BochetAer Uniesrstty. 
** Mbssbs. SmtLDOW, Blakbvan & Co. — Gbntlbmbn : Manv thanks for vour new vol- 
ume of Spurgeon's Sermons. I opened it with a good deal of misgiving, but must con- 
fuss to a most agreeable surprise. It is an extremely rare thing that the sermons of a 
popular preacher will bear reading ; but these of Spurgeon are not only better arranged 
and more logical than I had expected, but with soundness of doctrine, are also written in 
true Banyan-like simplicity, directness, and beauty. I am not surprised at his popular- 
ity, and am only glad it is so well founded. I shall recommend them to the attention of 
my class, and shall take up one or two of them for analysis, as a special exercise. — 
Respectfully yours, E. G. ROBINSON." 

From Francis Wayland^ D.D. 

" Provtdknob, December 15, 185d. 
" Okntlvxkx : When I wrote to you last I was reading Spurgeon's Sermons. I have 
now finished them; and I thank Goa that such a preacher has been raised up to teach as 
how to address men on the subject of their salvation. I am surprised at their eloquence, 
but e!M>ecially at the source of it They are the result of a most thorough reading of the 
New Tostamont bv a man of very remarkable gifts as a public speaker. They are the 
simple truths of the New Testament brought home to the consciences of men with a 
simiilicity, honesty, fearlessness, and affection, such as I have rarely, if ever, witnessed. — 
Yours, truly, F. WAYLAND." 

From the Ret). 8. Irenoms Prime^ D.D. 

" Observer OrnoE, New York, February 28, 1857. 
" Messrs. SiiELnoif, Blakeman A; Co. : I am indebted to you for the pleasure of 
reading several of the sermons you propose to publish of the Rev. Mr. Spurgeon. They 
are far more able, interesting, and instructive, freer from coarseness and extravagance, and 
more evangelical and scriptural than I had supposed, from the notict^sl had read of his 
preaching. Those sermons hnve the root of the matter in them, while their fervid style, 
earnest appeal, and vivid illustration, arrest the attention and impress the truth. The Rev. 
Dr. Camnoell, of London, is the editor of the British Banner. lie is the valiant opponent 
of the ' Negative Theology' now infesting the dissenting churches of England. In his paper 
he says of Mr. Spurgeon : 'That young minister has more knowledge of the sacred Scrip- 
tures, the source of all genuine theology, than the whole of his traducers multiplied by the 
highest figure of the table. Nay, he is a better theologian than was either Grinishaw, or 
Berrldge, or Whitcfield, or Wesley, at the outset of their respective careers, and inferior to 
none of them at the dose.' I shall be pleased to commend the volume to the public when 
you bring it out.— Truly, yours, " S. L PRIME." 

Either of the above sent pt Mail, Postage paid, por the Price annexed. 



Boohs Published by Sheldon^ Blakeman dk Co. 
PRESroENT NOTTS LECTURES ON TEMPERANCE. 

Now ready, a valuable and important work ON THE USE OF INTOXICATING 
LIQUORS, by President NOTT, of Union Colleee, with an able Introduction by Prof. 
TAYLER LEWIS, with an Appendix containing Mr. DELAVAN'S LETTER TO 
GOVERNOR KING. 

The matured opinions and the fVnlts of Icmg and patient study of a great question by 
such a man as President NOTT, of Union College, deserve profound attention. In these 
lectures he exhausts the most difficult and delicate subject in the whole field of Temper- 
ance inquiry, leavirt|; scarcely any thing more to be said or studied, so that this work may 
be lustly regarded as a manual for the use of every man who would be prepared to meet 
and defend the most sacred truths which the discussion has brought into dispute. 

Dr. NOTT is a man of great sagacity, of keen perceptions, of cautious analysis, and 
his views are not lightly formed nor loosely held. He has a reason for them, and a good 
reason, and he gives his reasons with a clearness that all can see, and a force that all 
must feel. 

Professor TAYLER LEWIS has carefully gone over the ground occupied by Dr. 
Nott, revised his positions, traced out every root of every word that needs to be examin- 
ed In settling points at issue, and the results of his extended studies are embodied in the 
elaborate and very able Introduction prefixed to this volume. 

Mr. DELAVAN'S LETTER TO GOVERNOR KING Is a summary of the present 
position and past progress of the Temperance Reformation In this country. 

A volume with such argument, learning, and facts, ought to be Immediately spread 
over the whole country. To aid In this dlflFuslon of the Important Temperance work of 
this age, the publishers solicit the co-operation of all Agents and Officers of Temperanco 
Societies, and all friends of the cause In all parts of the United States. The work will 
be put so low to Agents that It may be sold in great numbers, and to clubs at a large dis- 
count. It is a 12mo. volume of about 850 pages. Price $1. 

FLORAL HOME; 
OR, FIRST YEARS OF MINNESOTA. 
BY MISS HARRIET E. BISHOP. 
1 vol., 12mo. Finely illustrated. Price $1. 
Abookofextraordinary attraction, by a lady who early selected Minnesota for her 
home. With a graphic pen she presents scenes of romaQtlo Interest in the first settle- 
ment of the Territory ; its rapid and splendid career ; the moral and social elements of 
its prosperity ; Its magnificent prospects ; Its resources In soil and waters, and the invito 
Ing field it opens to the emigrant and settler of every persuasion and pursuit The 
handsome volume is profusely Illustrated with striking views of waterfalls, cities, and 
distinguished persons. Thousands, whose thoughts can be turned to the Great West, 
will find this book lust the one they wish to read, while to all, its sketches, anecdotes, 
incidents and valuable Information, will be very acceptable. 
From the Evening Post, 
**So rapid are the strides of civilization, so sudden Is the growth of commonwealths, 
that even the statistics of the West have almost the charm of poetry. 

" But the emigrant westward does not inquire only about the rapidity of growth, the 
comparative fi-ultfulness of the soil, the convenience of rivers, and the mineral wealth of 
the region which he proposes to make his home. The character of the people by whom 
he Is likely to be surrounded, the religious and educational advantages which the country 
has to offer, and the healthfulnesa of its climate, involve considerations of equal import- 
ance. Much information on these points may be gailiered from the narrative contained 
In the present volume. The authoress has be«=!n a witness of the infiux of population Into 
that country, the development of its resources, the establishment of Christian Institu- 
tions within Its borders, and, therefore, Is competent authority on those subjects. She 
has not lived in that now region without having many strange and amusing ex- 
periences." 

From the Home Missionary. 

" She gives a minute account of the country, of its early discoverers and adventurers, 
of Its more recent settlers, the growth of Its towns. Its Indian tribes, missionary labors, 
dlfllcuHles, an4 successes, and of everv thing which one is most Interested to learn. It Is 
embellished with engravings, and Is altogether a book of estimable value, from which the 
purchaser is sure to get the worth of his money." 

From the Kev) York Tribune. 

"Her habit of nice observation, aad hor facility of expression, Impart great interest to 
her sketches," 



The atl6Btk» of Bdiool Committees, SaperiBtendents, Prindpale of Academies, High 
Bchoohij and Teachers, is invited to the following Tsluable Scuooi. Boosb, embnu^ii^ 
■oine of the best and most reliable in the United States. 

NORMAL SERIES OP SCHOOL BOOKS 

PUBUSIIEDBT 

SHELDON, BLAKEfiAJf & CO., 

115 NASSAU STREET, NEW YORK. 

•.. \ 

STODDARD'S ARITHMETICAL SERIES, 

By John F. Stoddabd, A.M. 

COMFSIBIKO 

THE JUVENILE MENTAL ARITHMETIC, 12i cents, 12 pp., for Primaiy 

Schools, to precede 
THE AMERICAN INTELLECTUAL ARITHMETIC, 16^ pp., an extended 

work, designed for Common Schools, Seminaries, and Academies. 20 cents. 
STODDARD'S PRACTICAL ARITHMETIC, half-bound, which embraces 

erery Tariety of exercises appropriate to written Arithmetic 40 cents. 
STODDARD'S PHILOSOPHICAL ARITHMETIC, a higher work for Col- 

legeM and adranced Classes in Union Schools, Seminaries, and Academies. 60 cents. 
1^^ This Arithmetic has neither Bules, Answers, nor Key. 
KEY TO STODDARD'S INTELLECTUAL Al^D PRACTICAL ARITH- 
METIC, in one book. 50 cents. 
STODDARD & HENKLE'S AXGEBRA, designed for the use of High Schools, 

Academies, and Colleges. By Joira F. Stoddaed, A.M., and Peof. W. D. Hznkle, 

of Greenmount College, Indiana. 

The first two nnmbera of the series constitute a complete treatise on the subject of Men- 
tal or Analytic Arithmetic 

The last two are no less thorough in their treatment of Practical or Written Arithmetic 

The series, as a whole, by a truly progressire arrangement and classification of exam> 
pies, including the various kinds and combination in compound and complex ratios, or 
'* Double Position," origiaal methods of computing interest, discount, and percentage, in 
all their variations, together with a variety of iUgcbraic exercises, is carefully designed 
to conduct the learner from iDltiatory steps, by an easy and graduaUy prc^ressive system, 
to the more advanced attainments in Mathematical Science. 

The arrangement of " The Philosophical Arithmetic," without " Rules, Answers, or 
Key," in which the examples are met with in the same manner as in practical business 
life, is adapted to the use of advanced classes in all Schools where there is a desire to take 
an independent course, and prove the scholars masters of the sul^t 

iW Such a work has long been solicited by the most able and profflinent Teachers 
throughout the country. 

The ALGEBRA is the first volume of the Higheb Sebieb of M^THxai atics which Pro- 
fessors Stoddard and Henkle have in preparation, and we doubt not wHl be found to pos- 
sess merits fully equal to the Series of Arithmetics. 



Books Published by Sheldon^ Blakeman 4" A* 



TBSmCONIALS FROX THB 8T1.TB OY MBW YORK. 
NEW YORK drr SCHOOLS. 
I hAT8 ezainmed with much pleasore a work entitled *' Stoddard's American Intellectual 
Arithmetic." It eloeely reeembles in the nature of the exercises Colbum's Mental Arith> 
metic, a work that has met with the unbounded approbation of the ablest teachers in the 
country I observe that Stoddard's eontains many decided improrements on Colbum's ; it 
is more systematic in its arrangement, passing firom what is easy, more gradually to what 
b difficult ; some very important omissions are supplied, and rery considerable additions 
In Interest, Diseount, Percentage, etc. I see that it is also adapted to Federal Money. 

It seems to me to be the best book on Intellectual Arithmetic now in use, and I hope lor 
Ike good of education it will be used in erery school where Arithmetic Is taught. 

DAVID PATTERSON, M. D., 
Principal of Public School No. 8, and one of the Teachers of the Male Normal SehMi 
N«w York, July 2«, 1868 

Concurred in by 
HENRY kiddle; P. D. DEMILT, Priadpal 

H. PANNING, «* N. P. BEERS, " 

a w. FEEKS, " E. Mcelroy, « 

A. MURPHY, " SAML. ST. JOHN, " 

Nkw York, July 18. 1868. 
After a eareftil examination of " Stoddard's Practical Arithmetic." I have no hesitation n 
pronouncing it a work of vwy superior merit. Ihe l»«Tity and clearness of its deflnitioiii 
and rules, its lucid analysis of every operation, and the great variety of its examples cori 
priring almost every possible combination of arithmetical principles, render it one of the bet^ 
Dookf to discipline the mind of the scholar, in mathematical reasoning, I have ever seen. 

HENRY KIDDLE, 

I entirely concur wi^h Mr. Kiddle In his opinion of *< Stoddard's Practical Arithmetle." 

H. FANNING. 
Jvly 16, 1868. 

I also concur with Mr. Kiddle in his opinion of *< Stoddard's Arithmetic." 

DAYH) PATTERSON, Frm. P. & 8. 

I concur In the above. GEO. MOORE, 

BROOKLYN SCHOOLS. 

Having submitted " Stoddard's Intellectual Arithmetic " to the practical test of the sohod 
room, we have no hesitation in expressing a strong preference for it over all Text-books on 
the subject. The author has taken a decided step in advance of those who have preceded 
him ; and his labors are likely to do much towards popularizing a study, the importance ol 
which as a mental discipline can hardly be over-estimated. The works formerly in use were 
deficient of systematic arrangement, were neither gradual enough In their transitiouH, 
nor sufficiently comprehensive and varied as r^;ards their examples. Stoddard's on the 
other hand, is an eminentiy practical book ; philosophical in its arrangement, natural an i 
lucid in its analysis, original in its design, adapted at the commencement to the compre- 
hension of beginners and carrying the pupil by easy inductive steps through the most com 
plicated operations : it seems invulnerable to criticism, and leaves littie or nothing to b 
accomplished by future authors on this subject. The examples are numerous and variet.. 
embracing all cases likely to arise in business ; and there are not less than fifty pages of 
questions capable of Algebraic solution. The Chapters on Percentage, Interest and Discount, 
are worthy of special commendation. In these the author has an entirely orislnal plan, 
which enables the pu]^ to solve mentally, with perfect ease, questions which, withoui this 
drilling, few are aUe to manage even on the slate. 

In view of these striking and excellent features, we warmly commend Prof. Stoddard' 4 
work to all who are Intereipted ia theMueation of youth. 
8. C BARNES, GEO. H. 8TEBBIN8, 

JOSIAH REEVE, « F. D. CLARKE, *• 

J. T. OONKLINO, CHAS. H. OUVER, • 

DAVID tlYMI. PETER ROUGBT, •• 

A. B GLAKU. B. a SETMOUR, •• 

B 



Booki PMuhcd by Sheldon^ Biakernan Sf Co. 



Nbw York, April 8d, ir>Zr 
Uamn. 8nKU»oir, BLAxnukir A Co. : 



▲rlthiii«tl<»l Series. After exMiiining the copies with which you ftirni&hed us in Jaiy 
last, we were rery laTorably Impressed with their merits ; In view of which we Introdu'^a 
them as text-books In oar Insdtution, at the commencement of our Fall session. 1 L« 



•ntire series ts eminently practical. We are much pleased with the sysiemaUc arraik/^ 
im^mi and ci(i««i/Cc<i<tfo»ortbeeabjeets; the indnctive method pursued; and particularly 
the Important principle so obrioosly adhered to throufffaoutf ^of telling one thing at a 
time, and thai In iU proper place."^ **Tbe American Intellectual Arithmetic'' deserToa 
$pecial commendation. It is much more extended^ and much more »ijstematUmUtf 
arranged, than any similar work extant; Aimlsbing many original combinations and 
concise solntions; aad we think eminently adapted to the learner, whether a b^'>u> 
ner, or one more adranoed. Having carerally examined the standard worlu on the si u. 
Jeot, we hare no heelUtion In expressing b decided preference for Prof. Stoddard's Serit^. 
which we earnestly commend to the anention of all who are engaged in conducting ttt^ 
' adueatlon of yoath. 

Betpeetftiny, THE MISSES BUCKNALL^ 

Prindpali of Gramercy Park Instltat«x 



**8eTera] yean ago, we were requested to reoommend for adoption In a townsbl) • n 
Ohio a series of text-books. This request coming both f^om the township Board \r>%% 
town Board, we felt under obligation to make a critical examination of the various Ui^v- 
books before the publlo. After a careful examination of about twenty different wor^e 
on Arithmetic, we came to the conclusion that Stoddard's Series of Arithmetics was ^y 
ftr the best After testing in the ohiss-room the whole series, except the Juvenile Mt«n 
tal Arithmetic, and seeing that tested, we hare no reason to dumge the opinion wtilch •%« 
tk«4i formed. 

** Paor. JosspH ncNBT said. In his Introdnctory Discourse at the last meeting of tt^e 
American Association for the Adtancement of Education: '• I cannot for a momei.t 
Mbsoribe to the opinion which is sometimes advanced, that superflclal men are b>«r 
calculated to prepare populai works on any branch of knowledge. It is true that sotn«i 
persons have apparentlr the art of simplifying solentiflc principles ; but, In the grea^ 
majority, this slmpUcatlon consists In omitting all that Is difficult of comprehension.' 

** We heartily subscribe to this sentiment, and It was a belief in It that led us to ado^v 
the above series of Arithmetics In preference to certain other popular on^ that furnish 
the student with but little that is calcniated to call out his thinking powers. 

** We consider that the popularity of Stoddard's Series Indicates a desire on the part -^^ 
teachers for text-books written In a clear and vigorous style, which attempts to meet tN*» 
U5nal difficulties of the subject by a vigorous discussion of them, instead of an enti>'. 
oro'eslon. W. D. HENKLE, 

*> May 7th, 1860. Mathematical Editor of the Indiana Journal qfEducaUon.' 



Having used Stoddard^ Series of Arithmetics for vd past year, as class-books, Iha^ > 
h«ve no hesitation in calling it the best series of the kina now in use. 

The "Juvenile" Is well calculated for beginners; and the stndentwho masters * n* 
** Intellectual'' must become a thinker. M. 0. STEVENS, Pbof. Matb. 

Oreenmount College, near BIchmond, Ind. 

Mat Ttb, 1858. 

East SAenrAir, Mich., 
MwBBm. Shsldoiv, BLAKmAir A Co. : Jawuary Sth, ISfitf. 

Gentlemen, — For accuracy of definition, and conciseness and clearness of rule abd 
explanation, Stoddard excels anything I ever saw. 'I feel I cannot too highly oommei.4l 
his Arithmetics. 

I think, upon the whole, the series Is as good as any, and vastly better than moat nc xv 
li iisck We shall adopt them without doubt 

Tours respertftilly, A. S. BRIOHAM. 



Books P'Mished hy SJiddon, Blalceman f& Co. 
WEBB'S SERIES OF NOKMAL READERS. 

NORMAL PRIMER, beautifully Illustrated. 12iuo. 24 pp. Paper covers, 5 cents f 

stiff covers, 6 cents. 
PRIBiARY LESSONS, a Series of Cards to be used in connection with No. 1. Price $1 

per set 
THE WORD METHOD FIRST READER. Prica 12i cents. Designed to precede and 

accompany Wsbb's Nobmai. Rbadscb. 
NORMAL READER, No. 1. 12mo. 90 pp. 12i cents. 
NORMAL READER, No. 2. 12mo. 168 pp. 25 cents. 

NORMAL READER, No. 3. 12mo. 21G pp. 87i cents. T 

NORMAL READER, No. 4. 12mo. 312 pp. 50 cents, 
NORMAL READER, No. 6. 1-mo. 400 pp. 75 cents. 

These Readers are used in the principal cities and villages throughout the United States, ' 
and are, rapidly coming into use in the smaller towns of the country. Their merits liave 
been fairly tested, and they have universally been pronounced superior to any series of 
Readers extant, not only for the improvement in the system of teaching, which is tho 
WOBD METHOD ; but also in the high moral tone and inspiriting character of the pieces 
■elected. The author, Mr. W£bb, was recently fi-om the State Normal School, at Albany. 

** They are the bbst Practical Readers that have come under my notice ; they are ali. 
and BVEBT TuiKo they should be. 

" Hon. S. S. RANDALL, Deputy State Supt CJom. Schools.'* 

** Webb*s Readers are the best books of their kind for our schools. 

"D. M. CAMP, Ex-Governor of Vermont." 

" I am happy to commend Webb's Readers to the favorable regard of all educators. 
" J. R. BOYD, Author of ' Rhetoric, Moral Philosophy,' etc'* 

"We have used 'Webb's Normal Readers,* and believe them superior to any with 
which we are acquainted, and would cheerfully recommend their general adoption to all 
of our schools. 

" ROSMAN INQALLS and E. S. INGALLS, Teachers of Select SchooL" 

** Having examined * Webb's Normal Readers,* we believe them to possess many ad- 
vantages over any other series of Readers which has come under our notice, and would 
therefore rectmmiead their introduction into the schools of Binghampton. 

" A. D. 8TOCKWELL, A. W. JACKSON, Trustees of District No. ?. 

" GEORGE PARK, R. S. BARTLETT, Trustees of District No. 1. 

"T. R. MORGAN, WILLIAM E. ABBOTT, Trustees of Distiict No. 4.'* 

" Dkab Sib— I have examined * Webb's Normal Readers,' and consider the system su- 
perior to any now in use. Respectfully yours, 

" H. G. PRINDLE, Town Sup't. Common Schools, Norwich." 

At a meeting of the Town Superintendents of the County of Chenango, held in the vil- 
lage of Norwich, on the 16th of August, the following resolution was adc^ted : 

^■'•BMolved — ^That we consider the uniformity of text-books a matter of infinite import- 
ance to our common schools; and believing * Webb's Normal Readers' to be superior in 
many req)ect8 to any extant, for teaching the principles of reading, and instilling sound 
moral principles in the minds of the schohirs, we therefore recommend their general adop- 
tion in the schools of the county." 

From the City Superintendent of Schools, Utica, N. Y. 
" DxAB Sm— Having somewhat carefully examined * Webb's Normal Readers,' I havo 
no hesitation in saying I consider them to rank high among the best Practical Readers 
that have aime under my notice. We have lately introduced two numbers into some of 
our public schools of this city, which have thus far given good satisfaction. 

" D. S. HEFFRON.'* 

From Mr. A. Cbawto2d, Principal of Union School. 

" Port Huron, July T, 1S6C. 
" The box of Webb*s Readers were received, and have been introduced into my school. 
After a thorough examination, I have not been disappointed in their excellency, and am 
satisfied that they are the best Series of Readers that I am acquainted with." 



Books Published by Sheldon^ Blaheman c6 Oo. 



From Profee8or E. O. Haven, of Ann Arbor. 
•* WUh regard t> the * Word System/ adopted in Webb's Primary Reader, I have not 
Men it iH;>pUed to the experimentum erueis ; but if it does anything to relieve the torture 
of both victim and teachers, often attending the old system, it certainly ought to be used. 
Wef« I a teacher in that department, I should certainly try it, and I do believe it woald 
•aceeed. But the book, and all the books in Webb's Series of Headers, are most beauti- 
fully and perfectly adapted to their purpose. I deem them the best fitted to interest, and 
thus to profit, pupils of every grade, of all that I have examined ; and as one of the Com- 
mittee on Text-Books, in the Union School of Ann Arbor, shall earnestly advise their use 
in that institution. U. O. HAVEN, Pro£ of Eng. Lit in University of Mich." 

From D. M. Beebs, Principal of Hudson High SchooL 

" Hudson, Mich., May 24, 1856. 
** I have tailj adopted Ck>lton and Fitch's Geographies, Webb's Readers, and Stoddard's 
Arithmetics ; all of which are Aow fully established as the text-books on those subjects in 
ny schooL I might make more extended remarks in reference to the merits of the works, 
and my preferences, but deem it sufficient to say that I have adopted them, and use and 
prefer mem to any with which I am acquainted." 

"Monroe, Mich., June 6, 1866. 
" This is to certify that Stoddard's Series of Arithmetics and Webb's S^ies of Normal 
Readers, and Bliles's U. S. Spelling Book, are the established text-books in all the district 
echools of this dty, on those sulyects. F. JOHNSON, Director of Dist. No. 2." 

From Mr. P. S. Hbisobdt, Principal of Public Schools. 

" Saginaw City, June 10. 1856. 
•* We are using Webb's Series of Readers, and think them superior to any other; and 
we are convinced that teaching by the Word Method is the only true way. Taking the 
whole series, we do not think ttiat any improvement can be made in Readers, or any could 
be gotten up better adapted to the wants of our schools." 

From E. W. Cheseubo, Principal of Union SchooL 

" Grand Rapids, Mich., May 24, 1856. 
** The day and age of the world in which a scholar is put through a year of alphabet, 
preparatorv to reading, is entirely past, and that teacher who is so utterly regardless of 
the time of his pupil, or so entirely ignorant of his own duties, as to pursue the old method 
of teaching the young in their first eflForts to read, is totally unqualified for his position. 
You may think this is strong language, but having seen and felt some of the evils of the 
old system, I am confident it is no stronger than is deserved. As invaluable aids in the 
Word Method of teaching. I would say that Webb's Normal Cards and Series of Readers 
have been in use for the last six or eight years, and I have thought that the author should 
have a monument nailed to his memory in every school-house in the land, and benisons 
breathed upon liis head from every fireside in the land — so much, in my opinion, has he 
done for the rising generation. We use the Normal Cards, Primers, First and Second 
Readers. Stoddard's Arithmetics are, without exception, unqualifiedly good, and worthy 
of introduction into every school in the State. We have adopted the Series." 

From Mr. A. L. Bingham, Principal of Union School. 

" East Saginaw, Mich., May 8, 1866. 
" Webb's Series of Normal Readers are used in Union School No. 1, Township of Buena 
Vista, ICaat Saginaw, Michigan. They are not only exclusively used, but give entire sat- 
isfaction to all the teachers ia our school, as being superior to any other series with which 
they are acquainted. We are to set in operation two Primary Schools, branches of our 
Union School, in the course of two weeks, in both of which Webb's Series will be exclu- 
sively used. This Series not only gives satisfaction to the teachers, but also to the pufols 
and parents. As to '■ Intellectual Arithmetic,' a class was formed last winter, soon after 
I came here, numbering twenty ; the class still pursues its lessons, as one of great interest. 
We have also dasses in Colbum's; it was here when I came, and I let it remain for the 
least advanced pupils, while the most advanced use Stoddard's ' IntellectuaL* " 

From J. P. Beebs, iMncipal of Select High Scho<d. 

" Burr Oak, Mieh., May 6, 1866. 
"We hare introduced Webb's Series of Readers, except the fifth, and Stoddard's Intel- 
leetual and Mental Arithmetics. Stoddard's Practical Arithmetic I have examined, and 
I consider it better adapted to the wants of our public and primary schools than any other 
arithmetic now in use. It has many advantages over our other arithmetics, in giving a 
tliorough practical knowledge of business transactions. I have not yet introduced it In 
iny scho<^ but shall do so soon. I am very much pleased with Webb's Readera" 







1 


a 








1 


i 
1 






^H 


Qgljbo ^t 


^H 




M^y - 


m% ^M 


L. 


^^^ 


Ji 


\ 


» 




^ L 


\ 




m 



• I. 



