il 


y at Claremont 
vl 
| 
1001 1408195 


| 


an 
°o 
= 
°o 
SS 
iL 
Re es 
.— }_——_—— 
— 
aS 
o 
<= 
o 
nn 











XK \ \ \ \ 
\ « \ \\ 


_ 



















A 
en ~ 





PRESENTED TO : 
LA VERNE COLLEGE 


BY J, Funk 


DATE 103%% 1939 


WITHDRAWN 








\ a 





The giseie 


SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY 
AT CLAREMONT 


a" 

rt 
fe 

* 


a: " 
i 


— 
a 


r 


WEST FOOTHILL AT COLLEGE AVENUE 
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA ~ 








a 








DA LA VERNE COLLEGr LIDNAN! 
6333 “LA VERNE. CALIFORNIA 


ta SERMONS 


REV. C. H. SPURGEON 
Of Londos 





Volume VIL. 





FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY 
NEW YORK AND LONDON 


Theology ee 


SCHOOL OF THEOLOSY 
AT CLAREMONT 
Califounia 


CONTENTS 


SERMON 
I, A New Yerar’s BENEDICTION 
II. Taz Kine’s Highway Openep 
Ill. Prery REPROVED AND JUSTIFIED 
IV. Tue Treasures or Grace 
VY. Fara ILLUSTRATED 
VI. A Home Quzstion 
VII. Curist TRIUMPHANT . 
VIII. Rememerr Dratu 
IX. Marks or Farrn . ee 
X. THe Precious FROM THD VIELE . 
XI. A Buast acatinst Fans Pracn 
XII. Tan Resurrection 
XIII. Toe Bioop or THE CovENANT:. 
XIV. A Revivat SrrMon 
XY. Sin ImMEASURABLE 
XVI. None But Jesus 
XVII. None sur Jesus—Parrt II. 
XVIII. Taz Crarr DrivEN Away . 
- XIX. Cieansine THE LEPER 
SOX, Tam Warine-or Risca .-: . . 
XXI. Come anD WELCOME. .. . 


XXII. Tae First RESURRECTION ... 





SERMON I. 


A NEW-YEAR’S BENEDICTION. 


[Tus discourse was preached in Exeter Hall, Sabbath mor» 
ing, Jan. 1, 1860. The subject and treatment both are admira- 
bly fitted for the beginning of the year, though scarcely less for 
any other time. The jewels and their dark setting find their 

fulfilment in every godly life.] 


“But the God of all grace who hath called us unto his eternal glory by 
Christ Jesus, after that ye have suffered awhile, make you perfect, establish, 
strengthen, settle you—l Prrsr, v. 10. 


[ nave this morning taken this text as a new-year’s blessing. 
You are aware that a venerable minister of the Church of Eng- 
land always supplies me with the motto for the new year. 
Ripening as he is for eternal glory, he prays much before he 
selects the text, and I know that it is his prayer for you all to- 
day. He constantly favors me with this motto, and I always 
think it my duty to preach from it, and then desire my people 
to remember it through the year as a staff of support in their 
time of trouble, as some sweet morsel, a wafer made with honey, 
a portion of angel’s food, which they may roll under their tongue, 
and carry in their memory till the year ends, and then begin 
with another sweet text. What larger benediction could my 
aged friend have chosen, standing as he is to-day in his pulpit, 
and lifting up holy hands to preach to the people in a quiet vil- 
lage church—what larger ‘lessing could he implore for the thou- 
sands of Israel than that which in his name I pronounce upon 


12 A NEW-YEAR’S BENEDICTION. 


you this day—* But the God of all grace, who hath called us unte 
his eternal glory by Christ Jesus, after that ye have suffered 
awhile, make you perfect, establish, strengthen, settle you.” 

In discoursing upon this text, I shall have to remark :—first, 
what the apostle asks of heaven ; and then, secondly, why he ez- 
pects to receive if. The reason of his expecting to be answered 
is contained in the title by which he addresses the Lord his God 
—“The Gop or att erace who hath called us unto his eternal 
glory by Christ Jesus.” 

I, WHAT THE APOSTLE ASKS FOR ALL TO WHOM THIS EPISTLE 
was WRitTeN. He asks for them four sparkling jewels set in a 
black foil. The four jewels are thes :—Perfection, Establish 
ment, Strengthening, Settling. The jet-black setting is this :— 
“After that ye have suffered awhile.” Worldly compliments 
are of little worth; for as Chesterfield observes, “They cost 
nothing but ink and paper.” I must confess, I think even that 
little expense is often thrown away. Worldly compliments 
generally omit all idea of sorrow. “A merry Christmas! A 
happy new year!” There is no supposition of anything like 
suffering. But Christian benedictions look at the truth of mat- 
ters. We know that men must suffer; we believe that men are 
born to sorrow as the spark flieth upwards; and therefore in 
our benediction we inciude the sorrow. Nay, more than that, 
we believe that the sorrow shall assist in working out the bless- 
ing which we invoke upon your heads. We, in the language of 
Peter, say, “After that ye have suffered awhile, may the God of 
all grace make you perfect, establish, strengthen, settle you.” 
Understand, then, as I take each of these four jewels, that you 
are to look upon them, and consider that they sre only desired 
for you “after that ye have suffered awhile.” We must not 
discard the sufferings. We must take them from the same hand 
from which we receive the mercy; and the blessing bears date 
“after that ye have suffered awhile.” 

1 The first sparkling jewel in this ring is perfection, The 
apostle prays that God would make us perfect. Indeed, though 
this be a large prayer, and the jewel is a diamond of tne first 
water, and of the finest size, yet is it absolutely necessary te a 
Christian that he should ultimately arrive at perfection. Have 


A WEW-YEAR’S BENEDICTION. 13 


ye never on your bed dreamed a dream, when your thoughts 
roamed at large and the bit was taken from your imagination, when 
stretching all your wings, your soul floated through the Infinite, 
grouping strange and marvellous things together, so that the 
dream rolled on in something like supernatural splendor? But 
on a sudden you were awakened, and you have regretted hours 
afterwards that the dream was never concluded. And what isa 
Christian, if he do not arrive at perfection, but an unfinished 
dream? A majestic dream it is true, full of things that earth 
had never known if it had not been that they were revealed to 
flesh and blood by the Spirit. But suppose the voice of sin 
should startle us ere that dream be concluded, and if, as when 
one awaketh, we should despise the image which began to be 
formed in our minds, what were we then? Everlasting regrets, 
8 multiplication of eternal torment must be the result of our 
having begun to be Christians, if we do not arrive at perfection 
If there could be such a thing as a man in whom sanctification 
began, but in whom God the Spirit ceased to work, if there 
could be a being so unhappy as to be called by grace and to be 
deserted before he was perfected, there would not be among the 
damned in hell amore unhappy wretch. It were no blessing for 
God to begin to bless if he did not perfect. It were the grand- 
est curse which Omnipotent hatred itselt could pronounce, to 
give a man grace at all, if that grace did not carry him to the 
end, and land him safely in heaven. I must confess that I would 
rather endure the pangs of that dread archangel, Satan, through- 
out eternity, than have to suffer as one whom God once loved, 
but whom he cast away. But such a thing shall never be. 
Whom once he hath chosen he doth not reject. We know that 
where he hath begun a good work he will carry it on, and he will 
complete it until the day of Christ. 

Grand is the prayer, then, when the apostle asks that we may 
be perfected. What were a Christian if he were not perfected ? 
Have you never seen a canvas upon which the hand of the 
painter has sketched with daring pencil some marvellous scene 
of grandeur? You see where the living color has been said on 
with an al-nost superhuman sk’ll. But the artist was suddenly 
strick dead, and the hand that worked miracles of art was pal 


9 


14 A NEW-YEAR’S BENEDIOTIOR. 


sied. Is it not a source of regret to the world that ever the 
painting was commenced, since it was never finished? Have 
you never seen the human face divine starting out from the 
chiselled marble? You have seen the exquisite skill of the 
sculptor, and you have said within yourself, “ What a marvel- 
lous thing will this be? what a matchless specimen of human 
skill?” But, alas! it was left unfinished. And do you imagine 
that God will begin to sculpture out a perfect being and not 
complete it? Do you think that the hand of divine wisdom 
will sketch the Christian and not fill up the details? Hath God 
taken us as unhewn stones out of the quarry, and hath he begun 
to work upon us, and show his divine art, his marvellous wisdom 
and grace, and will he afterwards cast us away? Shall God 
fail? Shall he leave his works imperfect? Point, if you can, 
my hearers, to a world which God has cast away unfinished. Is 
there one speck in his creation where God hath begun to build 
but was not able to complete? Hath he made a single angel 
deficient? Is there one creature over which it cannot be said, 
“This is very good?’ And shall it be said over the creature 
twice made—the chosen of God, the blood-bought—shall it be 
said, “The Spirit began to work in this man’s heart, but the man 
was mightier than the Spirit, and sin conquered grace? Oh, my 
dear brethren, the prayer shall be fulfilled. After that ye have 
suffered awhile, God shall make you perfect if he has begun the 
good work in you. 

But, beloved, it must be after that ye have suffered awhile. 
Ye cannot be pertected except by the fire. There is no way of 
ridding you of your dross and your tin but by the flames of the 
furnace of affliction, Your folly is so bound up in your hearts, 
ye children of God, that nothing but the rod can bring it out of 
you. It is through the blueness of your wounds that your heart 
is made better. Ye must pass through tribulation, that through 
the Spirit it may act as a refining fire to you: that pure, holy, 
purged, and washed, ye may stand before the face of your God, 
rid of every imperfection, and delivered from every corruption 
within. 

2. Let us now proceed to the second blessing of the benedic- 
tion—establishment. It is not enough even if the Christian had 


A KEW-YEAR’S BENEDIOTION. 15 


received in himself a proportional perfection, if he were not 
established. You have seen the arch of heaven as it spans the 
plain: glorious are its colors, and rare its hues. Though we 
have seen it many and many a time, it never ceases to be “A 
thing of beauty and a joy forever.” But, alas for the rainbow, 
it is not established. It passes away, and lo it is not. The 
fair colors give way to the fleecy clouds, and the sky is no longer 
brilliant with the tints of heaven. It is not established. How 
can it be? A thing that is made of transitory sunbeams and 
passing rain-drops, how can it abide? And mark, the more 
beautiful the vision, the more sorrowful the reflection when that 
vision vanishes, and there is nothing left but darkness. It is, then, 
avery necessary wish for the Christian, that he should be estab- 
lished. Of all God’s known conceptions, next to his incarnate 
Son, I do not hesitate to pronounce a Christian man the noblest 
conception of God. But if this conception is to be but as the 
rainbow painted on the cloud, and is to pass away forever, woe 
worth the day that ever our eyes were tantalized with a sublime 
conception that is so soon to melt away. 

What is a Christian man better than the flower of the field, 
which is here to-day, and which withers when the sun is risen 
with fervent heat, unless God establish him—what is the differ- 
ence between the heir of heaven, the blood-bought child of God, 
and the grass of the field? Oh, may God fulfil to you this rich 
benediction, that you may not be as the smoke out of a chimney,. , 
which is blown away by the wind: that your goodness may not 
be as the morning cloud, and as the early dew which passeth 
away; but may ye be established, may every good thing that 
you have be an abiding thing. May your character be not a 
writing upon the sand, but an inscription upon the rock. May 
your faith be no “baseless fabric of a vision,” but may it be 
builded of stone that shall endure that awful fire which shall 
consume the wood, hay, and stubble of the hypocrite. May ye 
be rooted and grounded inlove. May your convictions be deep. 
May your love be real. May your desires be earnest. May 
your whole life be so settled, fixed, and established, that all the 
blasts of hell and all the storms of earth shall never be able to 
remove you. You know we talk about some Christian men ss be- 


16 (A NEW-YEAR 8 BENEDICTION. 


ing old-established Christians. I do fear there are a great many 
that are old, who are not established. It is one thing to have the 
hair whitened with years, but I fear it is another thing for us to | 
obtain wisdom. There be some who grow no wiser by all their 
experience. Though their fingers be well rapped by experience, 
yet have they not learned in that school. I know there are many 
aged Christians who can say of themselves, and say it sorrow- 
fully too, they wish they had their opportunities over again, that 
they might learn more, and might be more established. We 
have heard them sing— 


ST find myself a learner yet, 
Unskilful, weak, and apt to slide,” 


The benediction however of the apostle is one which I pray 
may be fulfilled in us, whether we be young or old, but es 
pecially in those of you who have long known your Lord and 
Saviour. You ought not now to be the subject of those doubts 
which vex the babe in grace. Those first principles should not 
always be laid again by you: but you should be going forward 
to something higher. You are getting near to heaven; oh, how 
is it that you have not got to the land Beulah yet? to that land 
which floweth with milk and honey? Surely your wavering ill 
beseemeth those gray hairs. Methought they had been whitened 
with the sunlight of heaven, How is it that some of the sun- 
light does not gleam from your eyes? We who are young look 
up to you old-established Christians; and if we see you doubt- 
ing, and hear you speaking with a trembling lip, then we are ex- 
ceedingly castdown. We pray for our sakes as well as for yours, 
that this blessing may be fulfilled in you, that you may be estab- 
lished; that you may no longer be exercised with doubt; that 
you may know your interest in Christ; that you may feel you are 
secure in him ; that, resting upon the rock of ages, you may know 
that you cannot perish while your feet are fixed there. We do 
pray, in fact, for all, of whatever age, that our hope may be fixed 
upon nothing less than Jesu’s blood and righteousness, and that 
it may be so firmly fixed that it may never shake; but that we 
may be as Mount Zion, which can never be removed, and which 
abideth forever. 


A NEW-YEAR’S BENEDICTION. 17 


Thus have I remarked upon the second blessing of this bene- 
diction. But mark, we cannot have it until after we have suffered 
awhile. We cannot be established except by suffering. It is 
of no use our hoping that we shall be well-rooted if no March 
winds have passed over us. The young oak cannot be expected 
to strike its roots so deep as the old one. Those old gnarlings 
on the roots, and those strange twistings of the branches, all tell 
cf many storms that have swept over theaged tree. But they 
aie also indicators of the depths into which the roots have dived ; 
and they tell the woodman that he might as soon expect to rend 
up @ mountain as to tear up that oak by the roots. We must 
sufier a while, then shall we be established. 

3 Now for the third blessing, which is strengthening. Ah, 
brethren, this is a very necessary blessing too for all Christians, 
There be some whose characters seem to be fixed and established. 
But still they lack force and vigor. Shall I give you a picture 
of a Christian without strength? Thereheis. He has espoused 
the cause of King Jesus. He hath put on his armor; he hath 
enlisted in the heavenly host. Do you observe him? He is per- 
fectly ,enoplied from head to foot, and he carries with him the 
shield of faith. Do you notice, too, how firmly he is estab- 
lished? He keeps his ground, and he will not be removed. 
When he uses his sword it falls with feeble force. His shield, 
though he grasps it as firmly as his weakness will allow him, 
trembles in his grasp. There he stands; he will not move, but 
still how tottering is his position, His knees knock together 
_ with affright when he heareth the sound and the noise of war and 
tumult. What doth this man need? His will is right, his in 
tention is right, and his heart is fully set upon good things. Why, 
he needeth strength. The poor man is weak and child-like. 
Either because he has been fed on unsavory and unsubstantial 
meat, or because of some sin which has straitened him, he has 
not that force and strength which ought to dwell in the Christian 
man, But once let the prayer of Peter be fulfilled to him, and 
how strong the Christian becomes, 

There is not in all the world a creature so strong as a Christian 
when God is with him. Talk of Behemoth! he is but as a little 
thing. His might is weakness when matched with the believer. 


18 A REW-YEARS SENEDICTION. 


Talk of Leviathan, that maketh the deep to be hoary! he is nut 
the chief of the ways of God. The true believer is mightier 
far than even he. Have you never seen the Christian when God 
is with him? He smelleth the battle afar off, and he cries in the 
_ midst of the tumult, “Aha! aha! aha!” He laugheth at all the 
hosts of his enemies. Or if you compare him to the Leviathan 
— if he be cast into a sea of trouble, he lashes about him and 
makes the deep hoary with benedictions. He is not overwhelmed 
by the depths, nor is he afraid of the rocks; he has the proteo 
tion of God about him, and the floods cannot drown him ; nay, 
they become an element of delight to him, while by the grace of 
God he rejoiceth in the midst of the billows. If you want a 
proof of the strength of a Christian, you have only to turn to 
history, and you can see there how believers have quenched the 
violence of fire, have shut the mouths of lions, have laughed ty- 
rants to scorn, and have put to flight the armies of aliens, by the 
all-mastering power of faith in God. I pray God, my brethren, 
that he may strengthen you this year. 

The Christians of this age are very feeble. It is a remarkable 
thing that the great mass of children now-a-days are born feeble. 
You ask me for the evidence of it. I can supply it very readily. 
You are aware that in the Church of England Liturgy it is or- 
dered and ordained that all children should be immersed in bap- 
tism, except those that are certified to be of a weakly state. Now 
it were uncharitable to imagine that persons would be guilty of 
falsehood when they come up to what they think to be a sacred 
ordinance; and, therefore, as nearly all children are now sprin- 
kled, and not immersed, I suppose they are born feeble. Wheth- 
er that accounts for the fact that all Christians are so feeble 1 will 
not undertake to say, but certain it is that we have not many 
gigantic Christians now-a-days. Here and there we hear of one 
who seems to work all but miracles in these modern times, and 
we are astonished. Oh that ye had faith like these men! I do 
not think there is much more piety in England now than there 
used to be in the days of the Puritans. I believe there are far 
more pious men; but while the quantity has been multiplied, I 
fear the quality has been depreciated. In those days the stream 
of grace ran very deep indeed. Some of those old Puritans, 


A WEW-YEAR’S BENEDIOCTION. 19 


when we read of their devotion, and of the hours they spent in 
prayer, seem to have as much grace as any hundred of us. But 
now-a-days, the banks are broken down, and great meadows have 
been flooded therewith. So far so good. But while the surface 
has been enlarged, I fear the depth has been greatly diminished. 
And this may account for the fact, that while our piety has be- 
come shallow, our strength has become weak. Oh, may God 
strengthen you this year! But remember, if he does do so, you 
will then have to suffer. “After that ye have suffered awhile,” 
may he strengthen you. 

4. And now I come to the last blessing of the Pare hton is 
“Settling.” Iwill not say that this last blessing is greater than 
the other three, but it is a stepping-stone to each; and strange 
to say, it is often the result of a gradual attainment of the three 
preceding ones. “Settle you!” Oh, how many there are that 
are never settled! The tree which should be transplanted every 
week would soon die. Nay, it it were moved, no matter how 
skilfully, once every year, nu gardener would expect fruit from 
it. How many Christians there be that are transplanting them- 
selves constantly, even as to their doctrinal sentiments, There | 
be some who generally believe according to the last speaker ; 
and there be others who do not know what they do believe, but 
they believe almost anything that is told them. The spirit of 
Christian charity, so much cultivated in these days, and which 
we all love so much, has, I fear, assisted in bringing into the 
world a species of latitudinarianism; or, in other words, men 
have come to believe that it does not matter what they do 
believe; that although one minister says 1 ts so, and the 
other says i# is not so, yet we are both right; though we 
contradict each other flatly, yet we are both correct. I 
know not where men have had their judgments manufactured, 
but to my mind it always seems impossible to believe a contra- 
diction. 

I can never understand how contrary sentiments can both of 
them be in accordance with the Word of God, which is the 
standard of truth. But yet there be some who are like the wea- 
therceck upon the church steeple, they will turn just as the wind 
blows. As good Mr. Whitfield said, “ You might as well mea- 


20 A NEW-YERAR’S BENEDICTION. 


sure the moon for a suit of clothes as tell their doctrinal senti- 
ments,” for they are always shifting and changing. Now, | pray 
that this may be taken away from any of you, if this be your 
weakness, and that you may be settled. Far from us be bigotry 
removed; yet would I have the Christian know what he believes 
to be true and then stand to it. Take your time in weighing the 
controversy, but when you have once decided, be not easily 
moved. Let God be true, though every man be a liar; and 
stand to it, that what is according to God’s Word one day, can- 
not be contrary to it another day; that what was true in Luther’s 
day and Calvin’s day must be true now; that falsehoods may 
shift, for they have a Protean shape; but the truth is one and 
indivisible, and evermore the same. ‘\ Let others think as they 
please. Allow the greatest latitude to others, but to yourself 
allow none. Stand firm and steadfast by that which ye have 
been taught, and ever seek the spirit of the apostle Paul, “If any 
man preach any other gospel than that which we have received, 
let him be accursed.” If, however, I wished you to be firm in 
your doctrines, my prayer would be that you may be especially 
settled in your faith. You believe in Jesus Christ the Son of 
God, and you rest in him. But sometimes your faith wavers; 
then you lose your joy and comfort. I pray that your faith 
may become so settled that it may never be a matter of ques- 
tion with you whether Christ is yours or not, but that you may 
say confidently, “I know whom I have believed, and I am 
persuaded that he is able to keep that which I have commit- 


~ ted to him.” 


Then I pray that you may be settled in your aims and designs. 
There are many Christian people who get a good idea into their 
heads, but they never carry it out, because they ask some friend 
what he thinks of it. “Not much,” says he. Ofcourse he does 
not. Who ever did think much of anybody else’s idea? And 
at once the person who conceived it gives it up, and the work is 
never accomplished. How many a man in his ministry has 
begun to preach the gospel, when some member of the church— 
some deacon possibly—has pulled him by one ear, and he has 
gone a little that way. By-and-bye some other brother has 
thought fit to pull him in the other direction. The man has lost 


A WEW-YEAR’S BENEDICTION. 2) 


his manliness. He has never been settled as to what he ought 
to do; and now he becomes a mere lacquey, waiting upon every- 
body’s opinion, willing to adopt whatever anybody else conceives 
to be right. Now, I pray you, be settled in your aims. See 
what niche it is that God would have you occupy. Stand in it, 
and don’t be got out of it by all the laughter that comes upon 
you. If you believe God has called you to a work, do it. If 
men will help you, thank them. If they will not, tell them to 
stand out of your road or be run over. Let nothing daunt you 
He who will serve his God must expect sometimes to serve him 
alone. Not always shall we fight in the ranks. There are times 
when the Lord’s David must fight Goliath singly, and must take 
with him three stones out of the brook amid the laughter of his 
brethren, yet still in his weapons is he confident of victory 
through faith in God. Be not moved from the work to which 
God has put you. Be not weary in well-doing, for in due sea- 
son ye shall reap if ye faint not. Be ye settled. Oh, may God 
fulfil this rich blessing to you. 

But you will not be settled unless you suffer. You will be- 
come settled in your faith and settled in your aims by suffering. 
Men are soft molluscous animals in these days. We have not 
the tough men that know they are right and stand to it. Even 
when a man is wrong we admire his conscientiousness, if he 
stands up believing that he is right and dares to face the frowns 
of the world. But when a man is right, the worst thing he can 
have is inconstancy, vacillation, the fear of men. Hurl it from 
thee, O knight of the holy cross, and be firm if thou wouldst be 
victorious, Faint heart never stormed a city yet, and thou wilt 
never win nor be crowned with honor, if thy heart be not steeled 
against every assault, and if thou be not settled in thy intention 
to honor thy Master and to win the crown. 


II. Tax REASONS WHY THE APOSTLE PETER EXPLSTED THAT HIB 
PRAYER WOULD BE HEARD. 

1. He asked that they might be made perfect, established, 
strengthened, settled. Did not Unbelief whisper in Peter’s ear, 
“Peter, thou askest too much. Thou wast always headstrong. 
Thou didst say, ‘Bid me come upon the water.’ Surely, this is 


22 A NEW-YEAR’S BENEDICTION. 
| 


‘another instance of thy presumption. If thou hadst said, ‘Lord, 
make them holy,’ had it not been a sufficient prayer? Hast 
thou not asked too much?” “No,” saith Peter; and he replies 
to Unbelief, “I am sure I shall receive what I have asked ‘or; 
for Iam in the first place asking tt of the God of all grace—the 
God of all grace.’ Not the God of the little graces we have re- 
ceived already, but the God of the great boundless grace which 
is stored up for us in the promise, but which as yet we have not 
received in our experience. “The God of all grace ;” of quicken- 
ing grace, of convincing grace, of pardoning grace, of believing 
grace—the God of comforting, supporting, sustaining grace. 
Surely, when we come to him we cannot come for too much, 
If he be the God, not of one grace, or of two graces, but of al] 
graces ; if in him there is stored up an infinite, boundless, limit- 
less supply, how can we ask too much, even though we ask that 
we may be perfect ? 

Believer, when you are on your knees, remember you are going 
toaking. Let your petitions be large. Imitate the example of 
Alexander’s courtier, who, when he was told he might have 
whatever he chose to ask as a reward for his valor, asked a sum 
of money so large that Alexander’s treasurer refused to pay it 
until he had first seen the monarch, When he saw the mon- 
arch, he smiled, and said, “It is true it is much for him to ask, 
but it is not much for Alexander to give. I admire him for his 
faith in me; let him have all he asks for.” And dare I ask that 
I may be perfect, that my angry temper may be taken away, 
my stubbornness removed, my imperfections covered? May I 
ask that I may be like Adam in the garden—nay more, as pure 
and perfect as God himself? May I ask, that one day I may 
tread the golden streets, and “ With my Saviour’s garments on, 
holy as the holy one,” stand in the mid blaze of God’s glory, and 
ery, “ Who shall lay anything to the charge of God’s elect ?” 
Yes, I may ask it; and I shall have it, for he is the God of all 

ace. 

2. Look again at the text, and you see another reason why 
Peter expected that his prayer would be heard :—“ The God of 
sll grace who hath called us.” Unbelief might have said to 
Peter, “ Peter, it is true that God is the God of all grace, but he 


A NEW-YEAR’S BENEDICTION. 23 


is as a fountain shut up, as waters sealed.” “Ah,” saith Peter, 
“get thee hence, Satan; thou savorest not the things that be of 
God. It is not a sealed fountain of all grace, for it has begun to 
flow” —“ The God of all grace hath called us.” Calling is the 
first drop of mercy that trickleth into the thirsty lip of the dying 
man. Calling is the first golden link of the endless chain of 
eternal mercies, Not the first in order of time with God, but 
the first in order of time w.th us. The first thing we know of 
Christ in his mercy, is that he cries, “Come unto me all ye that 
are weary and heavy laden,” and that by his sweet Spirit he ad- 
dresses us, so that we obey the call and come to him. Now, 
mark, if God has called me, I may ask him to stablish and keep 
me; I may ask that as year rolls after year my piety may not 
die out; I may pray that the bush may burn, but not be con- 
sumed; that the barrel of meal may not waste, and the cruse of 
oil may not fail. Dare I ask that to life’s latest hour I may be 
faithful to God, because God is faithful to me? Yes, I may ask 
it, and I shall have it too: because the God that calls, will give 
the rest. “For whom he did foreknow, them he did predestinate, 
and whom he did predestinate, them he also called; and whom 
he called, he also justified; and whom he justified, them he also 
glorified.” Think of thy calling, Christian, and take courage, 
“For the gifts and calling of God are without repentance.” If 
"he has called thee he will never repent of what he has done, nor 
cease to bless or cease to save. 

3. But I think there is a stronger reason coming yet :—“The 
God of all grace, who hath called us unto his eternal glory.” 
Hath God called thee, my hearer? Dost thou know to what he 
has called thee? He called thee first into the house of convio 
tion, where he made thee feel thy sin. Again he called thee tu 
Calvary’s summit, where thou didst see thy sin atoned for and 
thy pardon sealed with precious blood. And now he calls thee 
again, And whither away? I hear a voice to-day—unbelief 
tells me that there is a voice calling me to Jordan’s waves. Qh, 
unbelief! it is true that through the stormy billows of that sea 
my soul must pass. But the voice comes not from the depths 
of the grave, it comes from the eternal glory. There where Je- 
hovah sits resplendent on his throne, surrounded by cherubiza 


94. A KEW-YEAR’S BENEDICTION. 


and seraphim, from that brightness into which angels dare not 
gaze, I hear a voice—“Come unto me, thou blood-washed sinner, 
come unto my eternal glory.” O heavens, is not this a won- 
drous call ?—to be called to glory—called to the shining streets 
and pearly gates—called to the harps and to the songs of eternal 
happiness—and better still, called to Jesu’s bosom—called to his 
Father’s face—called, not to eternal glory, but to His eternal 
glory—called to that very glory and honor with which God in- 
vests himself forever? And now, beloved, is any prayer too 
great after this? Has God called me to heaven, and is there any- 
thing on earth he will deny me? If he has called me to dwell in 
heaven, is not perfection necessary for me? May I not there- 
fore ask for it? If he has called me to glory, is it not necessary 
that I should be strengthened to ae my way thither? May I 
not ask for strengthening? Nay, if there be a mercy upon earth 
too great for me to think of, too large for me to conceive, too 
heavy for my language to carry it before the throne in prayer, 
he will do for me exceeding abundantly above what I can ask, or 
even think. I know he will, because he has called me to his 
eternal glory. 

4. The last reason why the apostle expected that his benedio 
tion would be fulfilled was this: “Who hath called us to his 
eternal glory by Christ Jesus.” It.is a singular fact that no pro- 
mise is ever so sweet to the believer as those in which the name 
of Christ is mentioned. If I] have to preach a comforting ser- 
mon to desponding Christians, I would never select a text which 
did not enable me to lead the desponding one to the cross. Does 
it not seem too much to you, brethren and sisters, this morn- 
ing, that the God of all grace should be your God? Does it not 
surpass your faith that he should actually have called you? Do 
you not sometimes doubt as to whether you were called at all? 
And when you think of eternal glory, does not the question 
arise, “Shall I ever enjoy it? Shall I ever see the face of God 
with acceptance?” Oh, beloved, when ye hear of Chiat, when 
you know that this grace comes through Christ, and the calling 
through Christ, and the glory through Christ, then you say, 
“Lord, I can believe it now, if it is through Christ.” It isnota 
hard thing to believe that Christ’s blood was sufficient to purchase 


A NEW-YEAR’S BENEDICTION. 25 


every blessing for me. If I go to God’s treasury without Christ, 
I am afraid to ask for anything, but when Christ is with me, I 
can then ask for everything. For sure I think he deserves it 
though J do not. If I can claim his merits, then I am not afraid 
to plead. Is perfection too great a boon for God to give to 
Christ? Oh, no. Is the keeping, the stability, the preservation 
of the blood-bought ones too great a reward for the terrible 
agonies and sufferings of the Saviour? I trow not. Then we 
may with confidence plead, because everything comes through 
Christ. 

I would, in concluding, make this remark. I wish, my broth- 
ers and sisters, that during this year you may live nearer to 
Christ than you have ever done before. Depend upon it, it is 
when we think much of Christ, that we think little of ourselves, 
little of our troubles, and little of the doubts and fears that sur- 
round us. Begin from this day, and may God help you. Never 
let a single day pass over your head without a visit to the gar- 
den of Gethsemane, and the cross on Calvary. And as for some 
of you who are not saved, and know not the Redeemer, I would 
to God that this very day you would come to Christ. I dare 
say you think coming to Christ is some terrible thing; that ycu 
need to be prepared before you come ; that he is hard and harsh 
with you. When men have to go to a lawyer they need to tremble; 
when they have to go to the doctor they may fear; though both 
those persons, however unwelcome, may be often necessary 
But when you come to Christ, you may come boldly. There is 
no fee required, there is no preparation necessary. You may 
come just as youare. It was a brave saying of Martin Luther’s, 
when he said, “I would run into Christ’s arms even if he had a 
drawn sword in his hand.” Now, he has not a drawn sword, 
but he has his wounds in his hands. Run into his arms, poor 
sinner. “Oh,” you say, “May I come?” How can you ask 
the question? you are commanded to come. The great com 
mand of the gospel is, “Believe on the Lord Jesus.” Those 
who disobey this command disobey God. It is as much a com 
mand of God that man should believe on Christ, as that we 
should love our neighbor. Now, what is a command I have 

2 


26 A NEW-YEAR’S BENEDIOCTION. 


certainly a right to obey. There can be no question, you see. 
A sinner has liberty to believe in Christ because he is told tc 
do so. God would not have told him to doa thing which he must 
not do. 

You are allowed to believe. “Oh,” saith one, “that is all I 
want to know. I do believe that Christ is able to save to tha 
uttermost. Jay J rest my soul on him, and say, sink or swim, 
most blessed Jesus, thou art my Lord?” May do it! man? 
Why, you are commanded to do it. Oh, that you may be ena- 
bled to do it. Remember, this is not a thing which you will do 
atarisk. The risk is in not doing it. Cast yourself on Christ, 
sinner. Throw away every other dependence, and rest alone on 
him. “No,” says one, ‘Il am not prepared.” Prepared! sir? 
Then you do not understand me. There is no preparation need- 
ed; itis, just as youare. “Oh, I do not feel my need enough.” 
I] know you do not. What has that to do with it? You are 
commanded to cast yourself on Christ. Be you never so black 
or never so bad, trust tohim. He that believeth on Christ shall 
be saved, be his sins never so many; he that believeth not must 
be damned, be his sins never so few. The great command of 
the gospel is, “Believe.” “Oh,” but saith one, “am I to say I 
know that Christ died for me?” Ah, I did not say that, you 
shall learn that by-and-bye. You have nothing to do with that 
question now, your business is to believe on Christ and trust 
him; to cast yourself into his hands. And may God, the Spirit, 
now sweetly compel you to do it. Now, sinner, hands off your 
own righteousness. Drop all idea of becoming better through 
your own strength. Cast yourself on the promise. Say— 


* Just as Iam without one plea, 
But that thy blood was shed for me, 
And that thou bid’st me come to thea, 
Oh, Lamb of God! I come, I come.” 


Now, have I made myself understood? If there were anum 
ber of persons here in debt, and I were to say, “If you will sim 
ply trust to me, your debts shall be paid, and no creditor shal, 
ever molest you,” you would understand me directly. How 


A WEW-YEAR’S BRNEDICTION. 27 


is if you cannot comprehend that trusting in Christ will re- 
move all your debts, take away all your sins, and you shall be 
saved eternally. Oh, Spirit of the living God, open the under- 
standing to receive, and the heart to obey, and may many a soul 
here present cast itself on Christ. On all such, as on all believ- 
ers, do I again pronounce the benediction, with which I shall dis- 
miss you. “May the Ged of all grace, who hath called us unto his 
eternal glory by Christ Jesus, after that ys have suffered awhile, 
make you perfect, establish, strengthen, settle you!” Awzn. 


SERMON If. 


THE KINGS HIGHWAY OPENED. 


[Tax following Sermon was preached at Exeter Hall, Jan. 6, 
1860, and was designed to remove the stumbling-stones from the 
way to the City of Refuge, so that fearful seekers of salvation 
might not be hindered in coming to Christ. Of this discourse 
Mr. Spurezon says: “It has brought very many to comfort of 
soul and decision for Christ. Both in the hearing and reading 
of it, men who were timorous and ignorant have found grace to 
walk in the Lord’s ways. Unto the gracious Spirit be glory.” } 


“ And they said, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved, 
and thy house.”—Acrs, xvi. 81. 


You will remember that when the children of Israel were set- 
tled in ‘ ‘anaan, God ordained that they should set apart certain 
cities ty be called the Cities of Refuge, that to these the man- 
slayer might flee for security. If he killed another unawares, 
and had no malice aforethought, he might flee at once to the City 
of Refuge; and if he could enter its gates before the avenger of 
blood should overtake him, he would be secure. We are told 
by the rabbis that once in the year, or oftener, the magistrates 
of the district were accustomed to survey the high roads which 
led to these cities: they carefully gathered up all the stones, and 
took the greatest possible precautions that there should be no 
stumbling-blocks in the way which might cause the poor fugitive 
to fall, or might by any means impede him in his hasty course. 
We hear, moreover, and we believe the tradition to be grounded 


THE KING’S HIGHWAY OPENED. 2 


in fact, that all along the road there were hand-posts with the 
word “Refuge” written very legibly upon them, so that when 
the fugitive came to a crossroad, he might not need to question 
for a single moment which was the way of escape; but seeing 
the well-known word “Refuge,” he kept on his breathless and 
headlong course until he had entered the suburb of the City of 
Refuge, and he was then at once completely safe. 

Now, my brothers and sisters, God has prepared for the sons 
of men a City of Refuge, and the way to it is by ratrH IN CHRIST 
Jesus. It is needful, however, that very often the ministers of 
Christ should survey this road, lest there should be any stum- 
bling-blocks in the path of the poor sinner. I propose this 
morning to go along it, and, by God’s grace, to remove any im- 
pediment which Satan may have laid upon the path; and may 
God so help me, that this survey may be of spiritual benefit to 
all your souls, that any of you who have been made to stumble 
in the path of faith may now pluck up courage, and run joyfully 
forward, hoping yet to escape from the fierce avenger of your 
sins. 

Well may the minister be careful to keep the road of faith 
clear for the seeking sinner; for surely the sinner hath a heavy 
heart to carry, and we ought to make the road as clear and as 
smooth as we can. We should make straight paths for the feet 
of these poor benighted souls. It should be our endeavor to 
cast loads of promises into every slough that runs across the 
path, that so it may be a king’s highway, and may be safe and 
easy for travelling for those weary feet that have to carry such 
a heavy heart. Besides, we must remember that the sinner will 
make stumbling-blocks enough for himself, even with our great- 
est and most scrupulous care to remove any others that may 
naturally lie in his way. For this is one of the sad follies of the 
poor desponding soul—that it spoils its own road. You have 
sometimes seen, perhaps, the newly-invented engine in the streets, 
the locomotive that lays down its own pathway and then picks 
it up again. Now, the sinner is the very reverse of that; he 
spoils his own road before himself, and then carries behind him 
all the mire and dirt of his own mishaps. Poor soul! he flings 
stones before himself, cute out valleys, and casts up mountains 


3: THE KING'S AIGHWAY OPENED, 


in his own pathway. Well may the ministers, then, be careful 
to keep this road clear. And, let me add, there is another 
weighty reason. Behind him comes the furious avenger of blood. 
Oh, how swift is he! There is Moses armed with all the wrath 
of God, and Death following hard after him—a mounted rider 
upon his pale horse; and after Death there cometh Hell with all 
the powers and. legions of Satan, all athirst for blood, and swift 
to slay. Make straight the road, oh ministers of Christ !—level 
the mountains—fill up the valleys; for this is a desperate flight, 
this flight of the sinner from his ferocious enemies towards the 
one City of Refuge—the atonement of Jesus Christ. 

I have thus given the reasons why I am compelled in spirit te 
make this survey this morning. Come, O Spirit, the Comforter, 
and help us now, that every stone may be cast out of the high 
road to heaven. 

The road to heaven, my brethren, is sy ratrH 1x Curist Jesus. 
It is not by well-doing that you can be saved, though it is by ill- 
doing that you will be damned if you put not trust in Christ. 
Nothing that you can do can save you. Albeit that after you 
are saved it will be your delightful privilege to walk in the ways 
of God and to keep his commandments, yet all your own atterapts 
to keep the commandments previous to faith will but sink you 
deeper into the mire, and will by no means contribute to your 
salvation. The one road to heaven is By raiTH IN Curist. Or, 
to make it plainer still, as the countryman said, there are but 
two steps to heaven—out of self into Christ; and then, out of 
Christ into heaven. Faith is simply explained as trusting in 
Christ. I find that Christ commands me to believe in him, or 
to trust him. I feel that there is no reason in myself why I 
should be allowed to trust him. But he commands me to do so. 
Therefore, altogether apart from my character or from any pre- 
paration that I feel in myself, I obey the command, and sink or 
swim—I trust Christ. Now, that is faith; when, with the eye 
shut as to all evidence of hope in ourselves, we take a leap in 
the dark, right into the arms of an Omnipotent Redeemer. 

Faith is sometimes spoken of in Scripture as being a leaning 
upon Christ—-a casting of one’s self upon him; or, as the old 
Puritans used to put it (using a somewhat hard word), it is re 


THE KING'S HIGHWAY OPENED. 31 


eumbency on Christ—the leaning of the whole weight upon hie 
cross; ceasing to stand by the strength of one’s own power, and 
resting wholly upon the rock of ages. The leaving of the soul 
in the hands of Jesus is the very essence of faith. Faith is re- 
ceiving Cliist into our emptiness. There is Christ like the con- 
duit in the market-place As the water flows from the pipes, so 
does grace continually flow from him. By faith I bring my 
empty pitcher and hold it where the water flows, and receive ot 
its fulness, grace for grace. It is not the beauty of my pitcher, 
it is not even its cleanness that quenches my thirst: it is simply 
holding that pitcher to the place where water flows. Even so | 
am but the vessel, and my faith is the hand which presents the 
empty vessel to the flowing stream. It is the grace, and not the 
qualification of the receiver, which saves the soul. And though 
I hold that pitcher with a trembling hand, and much of that 
which I seek may be lost through my weakness, yet if the soul 
be but held to the fountain, and so much asa single drop trickle 
into it, my soul is saved. Faith is receiving Christ with the 
understanding, and with the will, submitting everything to him, 
taking him to be my all in all, and agreeing to be henceforth 
nothing at all. Faith is ceasing from the creature and coming 
to the Creator. It is looking out of self to Christ, turning the 
eye entirely from any good thing that is here within me, and 
looking for every blessing to those open veins, to that poor 
bleeding heart, to that thorn-crowned head of him whom God 
hath set forth “to be the propitiation for our sins, and not for 
our sins only, but for the sins of the whole world.” 

Well, having thus described the way, I now come to my real 
business of removing these stones. 

1. A very common impediment in the pathway of the soul 
that is desiring to be saved, is the recollection of its past life. 
* Oh,” saith the sinner, “I dare not trust Christ, because my 
past sins have been of an unusually black dye. I have been no 
common sinner, but I have been one singled out from the herd, 
a very monster of sin. I have taken the highest degree in the 
devil’s college, and have become a master of Belial. I have 
learned to sit in the seat of the scornful, and have taught others 
to rebel against God.” Ah, soul, | know very well what this 


32 THE KING'S HIGHWAY OPENED. 

impediment is, for once it laid in my way, and very sorely did 
it trouble me. Before I thought upon my soul’s salvation, I 
dreamed that my sins were very few. All my sins were dead, 
as [ imagined, and buried in the grave-yard of forgetfulness. 
But that trumpet of conviction which aroused my soul to think 
of eternal things, sounded a resurrection-note to ail my sins, and 
oh, how they rose up in multitudes countless as the sands of the 
sea! Now, I saw that my very thoughts were enough to damn 
me, that my words would sink me lower than hell; and as for 
my acts of sin, they now began to be a steuch in my nostrils, so 
that I could not bear them. I recollect the time when I reck- 
oned that the most defiled creature, the most loathsome and con- 
temptible, was a better thing than myself; for I had so grossly 
and grievously sinned against Almighty God. Ah, my breth- 
ren, it may be that this morning your old oaths are echoing back 
from the walls of your memory. You recollect how you have 
cursed God, and you say, “Can I, dare I trust him whom I have 
cursed?” And your old lusts are now rising before you; mid- 
night sins stare you in the face, and snatches of the lascivious 
song are being yelled in the ear of your poor convinced con- 
science. And all your sins as they rise up, ery, “ Depart, thou 
accursed one! Depart! thou hast sinned thyself out of grace! 
Thou arta condemned soul! Depart! There is no hope, there 
is no mercy for thee !” 

Now, permit me in the strength and name of God to remove 
this stumbling-block out of your way. Sinner, I tell thee that 
all thy sins, be they never so many, cannot destroy thee if thou 
dost believe on the Lord Jesus Christ. If now thou castest thy- 
self simply on the merits of Jesus, “ Though thy sins be as scar- 
let, they shall be as wool.” Only believe. Dare to believe that 
Christ is able to save them to the uttermost that come unte God 
by him. Take him at his word and trust him. And thou hast 
a warrant for doing it; for remember it is written, “The blood 
of Jesus Christ, his Son, cleanseth us from all sin.” Thou art 
commanded to believe; therefore, be thou never so black a sin- 
ner, the command is thy warrant—oh, may God help thee to 
cbey the command! Now, just as thou art, cast thyself on 
Christ. It is nov ca> ereatness of the sinner that is the difficulty, 

2* 


"HE KINGS HIGHWAY OPENED. 33 


it is the hardness of the sinner’s heart. If now thoy art con 
scious of the most awful guilt, thy guilt becomes as nothing in 
the eye of God, when once he sees the blood of Christ sprinkled 
upon thee. I tell thee more: if thy sins were ten thousand 
times as many as they be, yet the blood of Christ is able to 
atone for them all. Only dare to believe that. Now, by a 
venturesome faith trust thyself in Christ. If thou art the most 
sick of all the wretches that ever this divine physician essayed 
to cure, so much the more glory to him. When a physician 
cures a man of some little disease, what credit doth he get? 
But when he heals a man who is all over diseased, who has be- 
come but a putrid mass, then there is glory to the physician. 
And so will there be to Christ when he saveth thee. 

But to put this block out of the way once for all. Remem- 
ber, sinner, that all the while thou dost not believe in Christ, 
thou art adding to thy sin this great sin of not believing, which is 
the greatest sin in the worlé. But if thou obey God in this mat- 
ter of putting thy trust in Christ, God’s own Word is guaranteed 
that thy faith shall be rewarded, and thou shalt find that thy sins, 
which are many, are all forgiven thee. By the side of Saul of Tar- 
sus, and of her out of whom was cast seven devils, shalt thou one 
day stand. With the thief shalt thou sing of love divine, and with 
Manasseh shalt thou rejoice in him who can wash away the foul- 
est crimes. Oh, I pray God there may be some one in this 
‘great crowd to-day, who may be saying in his heart, “Sir, you 
have described me. I do feel that I am the blackest sinner any- 
where, but I will risk it, 1 will put my trust in Christ and Christ 
alone.” Ah, soul, God bless thee; thou art an accepted one. 
If thou canst do this this morning, I will be God’s hostage that 
he will be true to thee and true to his Son, for never sinner per 
ished yet that dared to trust the precious blood of Christ. 

2. Now let me endeavor to remove another stumbling block. 
Many an awakened sinner 1s troubled because of the hardness of 
hts heart and the lack of what he thinks to be true penitence. 
“Oh,’ saith he, “I can believe that however great my sins are 
they can be forgiven; but I do not feel the evil of my sins as | 


ought :— 
ne ad 


34 ¥HE KING'S HIGHWAY OPENED. 


“My heart how dreadful hard it is; 
How heavy here it lies ; 

Heavy and cold within my breast, 
Just like a rock of ice.” 


“1 cannot feel,” says one; “I cannot weep; I have heard of the 
repentance of others, but I seem to be just like a stone. My 
heart is petrined, it will not quake at all the thunders of the law, 
it will not melt before all the wooings of Christ’s love.” Ah, 
poor heart, this is a common stumbling-block in the way of 
those who are really seeking Christ. But let me ask thee one 
question. Dost thou read anywhere in the Word of God that 
those who have hard hearts are not commanded to believe? 
Because if thou canst find such a passage as that, I will be sorry 
enough to see it; but, then, I may excuse thee for saying, “I 
cannot trust Christ, because my heart is hard.” Do you not 
know that the Scripture runs thus? “ Whosoever believeth in 
him shall not perish, but have everlasting life.” Now, if thou 
believest, though thy heart be never so hard, thy believing saves 
thee; and what is more, thy believing shall yet soften thy heart. 
If thou canst not feel thy need of a Saviour as thou wouldst, re- 
member that when thou hast a Saviour thou wilt begin then to 
find out more and more how great was thy need of him. 

Why, I believe that many persons find out their needs by re- 
ceiving the supply. Have you never walked along the street, 
and looking in at a shop window have seen an article, and have 
said, “ Why, that is just what I want?’ How do you know 
that? Why, you saw the thing and then you wanted it. And 
I believe there is many a sinner who, when he is hearing about 
Christ Jesus, is led to say, “That is just what I want.” Did 
not he know it before? No, poor soul, not till he saw Christ. 
| find my sense of need of Christ is ten times more acute now 
than it was before I found Christ. I thought I wanted him fora 
good many things then, but now I know I want him for every- 
thing. I thought there were some things which I could not do 
without him ; but now I find that without him I can do nothing. 
But you say, “Sir, 1 must repent before I come to Christ.” 
Find such a passage in the Word if you can. Doth not the 
Word say, “Him hath God exalted with his right hand to be a 


THE KING’S HIGHWAY OPENED. 35 


Prince and a Saviour, for to give repentance to Israel, and for- 
giveness of sins?’ Doth not oneof our hymns translate that 
verse into rhyme, and put it thus :— 


“True belief and true repentance, 
Every grace that brings us nigh— 
Without money, 
Come to Jesus Christ, and buy”? 


Oh, these graces are not of nature’s spinning. We cannot make 
these in the loom of the creature. If you would know your 
need of Christ, take him now by faith, and sense and feeling shall 
follcw in the rear. Trust him now for everything. Dare to 
trust him. Hard as your heart is, say, “ Just as I am, without 
a plea, but that thou commandest me, and bid’st me come, I 
come to thee!” Thy heart shall be softened by the sight of 
Christ, and love divine shall so sweetly commend itself to thee, 
that the heart which terrors could not move shall be dissolved 
by love. 

Do understand me, my dear hearers. I want to preach in the 
broadest manner I possibly can this morning the doctrine that 
we are justified by faith alone; that man is commanded to be- 
lieve; and that altogether apart from anything in man, man has 
a right to believe. Not from any preparation that he feels, not 
from anything good he discerns in himself; but he has a right 
to believe, simply because he is commanded to believe; and if 
relying upon the fact that he is commanded, God the Holy Spirit 
enables him to believe that faith will surely save the soul, and 
deliver him from the wrath to come. Let me take up, then, 
that stumbling stone about hardness of heart. Oh, soul, trust 
Christ, and thy heart shall be softened. And may God the Holy 
Spirit enable thee to trust him, hard heart and all, and then thy 
hard heart shall soon be turned into a heart of flesh, and thou 
shalt love him who hath loved thee. 

3. Now for a third stumbling-block. “Oh,” saith some poor 
soul, “I do not know whether I believe or not, sir. Sometimes 

I do believe; but oh, tt ts such little faith 1 have, that I cannot 
think Christ can save me.” Ah, there you are again, you see, 
looking to yourself. This has made many trip and fall. I 


36 THE KING'S HIGHWAY OPENED. 


pray God I may put this out of your way. Poor sinner, remem 
ber it is not the strength of thy faith that saves thee, but the . 
reality of thy ‘faith. What is more, it is not even the reality of 
thy faith that saves thee, it is the object of thy faith. If thy 
faith be fixed on Christ, though it seems to be in itself a line no 
thicker than a spider’s web, it will hold thy soul throughout time 
and eternity. For remember, it 1s not the thickness of this cable 
of faith, it is the strength of the anchor which imparts strength 
to the cable, and so shall hold thy ship in the midst of the most 
fearful storm. The fuith that saves man is sometimes so small 
that the man himself cannot see it. A grain of mustard seed is 
the smallest of all seeds, and yet if thou hast but that quantity 
of faith, thou art a saved man. Remember what the poor 
woman did. She did not come and take hold of Christ’s person 
with her hand, she did not throw her arms about his knees; but 
she stretched out her finger, and then—she did not touch Christ’s 
feet, or even his dress—she touched but the ravelling, the fringe 
of his garment, and she was made whole. If thy faith be but as 
little as that, seek to get more of it, but still remember that it 
will save thee. Jesus Christ himself compares Little-faith to a 
smoking flax. Does it burn? is there any fire at all? No, 
there is nothing but a little smoke, and that is most offensive. 
“Yes,” saith Jesus, “but I will not quench it.” 

Again, he compares it to a bruised reed. Of what service is 
it? It is broken; you cannot bring music from it; it is but a 
reed when it is whole, and now it is a bruised reed. Break it, 
snap it, throw it away? “No,” says he, “I will not break the 
bruised reed.” Now, if that is the faith thou hast, the faith of 
the smoking flax, the faith of the bruised reed, thou art saved. 
Thou wilt have many a trial and many a trouble in going to 
heaven with so little faith as that, for when there is little wind 
to a boat there must be much tugging at the oar; but still there 
will be wind enough to land thee in glory, if thou dost simply 
trust Christ, be that trust never so feeble. Remember, a little 
child belongs to the human race as much as the greatest giant: 
and so a babe in grace is as truly a child of God as is Mr. Great- 
heart, who can fight all the giants on the road. And thou mays’t 
be as much an heir of heaven in thy minority, in the infancy of 


THE KING'S HIGHWAY OPENED. | By! 


thy grace, as thou wilt be when thou shalt have expanded into 
the full grown Christian, and shalt become a perfect man in 
Christ Jesus. It is not, I tell thee, the strength of thy faith, 
but the olject of thy faith. It is the blood, not the hyssop; not 
the hand that smites the lintel, but the blood that secures the 
Israelite in the day when God’s vengeance passes by. Let that 
stumbling-block be taken out of the way. 

4. “But,” saith another, “I do think sometimes I have a little 
faith, but J have so many doubts and fears. I am tempted every 
day to believe that Jesus Christ did not die for me, or that my 
belief is not genuine, or that I never experienced the regenerat- 
ing influence of the Holy Spirit. Tell me,Sir, canI be a true 
believer in Christ if | have doubts and fears?’ My answer is 
simply this, there is no Scripture which saith, that “ He that be- 
lieveth, shall be damned, if that faith be mixed with doubts.” 
“He that believeth shall be saved,” be that faith never so little, 
and even though it be intermingled with multitudes of doubts 
and fears. You remember that memorable story of our Saviour, 
when he was on board a ship with his disciples. The winds 
roared, the ship rocked to and fro, the mast was strained, the 
sails were rent, and the poor disciples were full of fear:—* Lord, 
save us, or we perish.” Here were doubts. What did Jesus say 
when he rebuked them? “ Why are ye fearful” —O ye of no faith? 
No; “O ye of little faith.” So there may be little faith where 
there are great doubts. There is light at eventide in the air; 
even though there is a great deal of darkness, yet there is light. 
And if thy faith should never come to noon-day, if it do but 
come to twilight, thou art a saved man. 

Nay, more, if it doth not come to twilight, if thy faith is but 
starlight, nay, candlelight, nay, a spark—if it be but a glow-worm 
spark, thou art saved; and all thy doubts, and all thy fears, and 
thy distresses, terrible though they may be, can never trample 
thee in the dust, can never destroy thy soul. Do you not know 
that the best of God’s children are exercised with doubts and 
fears even to the last? Look at such aman asJohn Knox. There 
was a man who could face the frowns of a world, who could 
apeak like a king to kings, and fear no man; yet on his dying bed 
he was troubled about his interest in Christ, because he was 


38 THE KING'S HIGHWAY OPENED. 


tempted to self-righteousness. If such a man have doubts, dost 
thou expect to hve without them? If God’s brightest saints are 
exercised, if Paul himself keeps under his bats lest he should 
be a castaway, why, how canst thou expect to live without clouds? 
Oh, my dear man, drop the idea that the prevalence of thy 
doubts disproves the truth of the promise. Again, believe; 
away with all thy doubts; sink or swim, cast thyself on Jesus; 
and thou canst not be lost, for his honor is engaged to save 
every soul that puts its trust in him. 

5. “ Ah,” says another, “but you have not yet hit upon my 
fear.” I used, when I first knew the Saviour, to try myself in 
a certain manner, and often did I throw stumbling blocks in my 
path through it, and therefore I can speak very affectionately to 
any of you who are doing the same. Sometimes I would go up 
into my chamber, and by way of self-examination, I used to ask 
myself this question—Am JI afraid to die? If I should drop 
down dead in my chamber, can I say that I should joyfully close 
my eyes? Well, it often happened that I could not honestly 
say so. I used to feel that death would be a very solemn thing. 
Ah, then I said, “I have never believed in Christ, for if I had 
put my trust in the Lord Jesus, I should not be afraid to die, but 
I should be quite confident.” I do not doubt that there are 
many here who are saying, “Sir, I cannot follow Christ, because 
I am afraid to die; I cannot believe that Jesus Christ will save 
me, because the sight of death makes me tremble.” Ah, poor 
soul, there are many of God’s blessed ones, who through fear 
of death, have been much of their lifetime subject to bondage. 
I know precious children of God now: I believe that when they 
die, they will die triumphantly; but I know this, that the thought 
of death is never pleasing to them. And this is accounted for, 
because God has stamped on nature that law, the love of life and 
self-preservation. And again, the man that hath kindred and 
friends, it is natural enough that he should scarce like to leave 
behind those that are so dear. I know that when he gets more 
grace he will rejoice in the thought of death; but I do know 
that there are many who could die triumphantly; be now, in 
the prospect of death, feel afraid of it. 

I remember my aged grandfather once bide > sermon 


THE KINGS MIGHWAY OPENED. 39 


which I have not forgotten. He was preaching from the text 
“The God of all grace,” and he somewhat interested the assem- 
bly, after describing the different kinds of grace that God gave, 
by saying at the end of each period, “But there is one kind of 
grace that you do not want.” After each sentence there came the 
like, “But there is one kind of grace you do not want.” And, 
then, he wound up by saying, “You don’t want dying grace in 
living moments, but you shall have dying grace when you want 
it.” Now, you are testing yourself by a condition in which you 
are not placed If you are placed in the condition, you shall 
have grace enough if you put your trust in Christ. Ina party 
of friends we were discussing the question, whether if the days 
of martyrdom should come, we were prepared to be burned. 
Well, now, I must frankly say, that speaking as I feel to-day, | 
am not prepared to be burned. But I do believe if there were . 
a stake in Smithfield, and I knew that I were to be burned there 
at one o’clock, that I should have grace enough to be burned at 
one o’clock; but I have not yet got to a quarter past twelve, 
and the time has not come yet. Do not expect dying grace, 
until you want it, and when the time comes, you may be sure 
you will have suflicient grace to bear it. Cast out that stum- 
pling-block, then. Rest thyself on Christ, and trust him to help 
thee in thy dying hour. 

6. Another most grievous perplexity to many a seeking soul 
is this: “Oh, I would trust Christ, but J feel no joy. I hear 
the children of God singing sweetly about their privileges. 1 
hear them saying they have been to the top of Pisgah and have 
viewed the promised land, have taken a pleasant prospect of the 
world to come; but oh, my faith yields me no joy. I hope I 
do believe, but at the same time I have none of those raptures. 
My worldly troubles press heavily upon me, and sometimes even 
my spiritual woes are greater than I can bear.” Ah, poor soul, 
let me cast out that stone from thy road. Remember, it is not 
written “he that is joyful shall be saved,” but “he that believeth 
shall be saved.” ‘hy faith will make thee joyful by-and-by; 
but it is as powerful to save thee even when it does not make 
thee rejoice. Why, look at many of God’s people, now saa and 

‘sorrowful they have been. I know they ought not te be. Thie 


40 THE KING’® HIGHWAY OPENED. 


is their sin; but still it is such a sin that it does not destroy 
the efficacy of faith. Notwithstanding all the sorrows of the 
saint, faith still keeps alive, and God is still true to his promise 
Remember, it isnot what you feel that saves you; it is what 
you believe. It is not feeling, but believing. “We walk by faith, 
not by sight.” When I feel my soul as cold as an iceberg, as 
hard as a rock, and as sinful as Satan, yet even then faith ceases 
not to justify. Faith prevails as truly in the midst of sad feel- 
ings as of happy feelings, for then, standing alone, it proves the 
majesty of its might. Believe, O son of God, believe in him, 
and look not for aught in thyself. 

7. Then, again, there are many that are distressed becauss 
they have blasphemous thoughts. Here, too, I can heartily sym- 
pathise with many. I remember a certain narrow and crooked 
lane in a certain country town, along which I was walking one 
day, while I was seeking the Saviour. On a sudden the most 
fearful oaths that any of you can conceive rushed through my 
mind. I put my hand to my mouth to prevent the utterance. I 
had not, that I know of, ever heard those words; and I am 
certain that I had never used in my life, from my youth up, se 
much as one of them, for I had never been profane. But these 
things sorely beset me; for half an hour together the most fear- 
ful imprecations would dash through my brain. Oh, how I 
groaned and cried before God. That temptation passed away; 
but ere many days it was renewed again; and when I was in 
prayer, or when was reading the Bible, these blasphemous 
thoughts would pour in upon me more than at any uther time. I 
consulted with an aged godly man about it. He said to me, “Oh, 
all this many of the people of God have proved before you 
But,” said he, “do you hate these thoughts?” “I do,” I truly 
said. “Then,” said he, “they are not yours; serve them as th« 
old parishes used to do with vagrants—whip them and send 
them on to their own parish. Groan over them, repent of them, 
and send them on to the devil, the father, to whom they belong— 
for they are not yours.” Do you not recollect how John Bunyan 
hits off the picture? He says, when Christian was going through 
the valley of the shadow of death, “There stepped up one to him, 
and whispered blasphemous thoughts into his ear, so that poor 


eae 


THE KING'S HIGHWAY OPENED. 4] 


Christian thought they were his own thoughts; but they were 
not his thoughts at all, but the injections of a blasphemous 
spirit.” So when you are about to lay hold on Christ, Satan 
will ply all his engines and try to destroy you. He cannot 
near to lose one of his slaves; he will invent a fresh temptation 
for each believer, so that he may not put his trust in Christ.” 
Now, come, poor soul, notwithstanding all these blasphemous 
thoughts in thy soul, dare to put thy trust in Christ. Even 
should those thoughts have been more blasphemous than any 
thou hast ever heard, come trust in Christ, come cast thyself on 
him. I have heard that when an elephant is going over a bridge 
he will sound the timber with his foot to see if it will bear him 
over. Come thou, who thinkest thyself a great sinner, here isa 
bridge that is strong enough for thee, even with all these 
thoughts of thine:—“ All manner of sin and blasphemy shall be 
forgiven thee.” Throw that in Satan’s face, and trust thyself in 
Christ. 

8. One other stumbling-block, and I will have done. Some 
there be that say, “Oh, sir, I would trust in Christ to save me 
if I could sce that my faith brought forth fruits. When I 
would do good, evil is present with me.” Excuse my always 
bringing in my own feclings as an illustration, but in preaching 
to tried sinners, the testimony of one’s own experience is gener- 
ally more powerful than any other illustration. It is not, be- 
lieve me, any display of egotism, but the simple desire to come 
1ome to you, that makes me state what [ have felt myself. The 
first Sunday after I came to Christ, I went to a Methodist chapel. 
The sermon was upon this text: ‘O, wretched man that I am! 
who shall deliver me from the body of this death?” I had just 
got as far as that inthe week. I knew that I had put my trust 
in Christ, and I knew that, when I sat in that house of prayer, 
my faith was simply and solely fixed on the atonement of the 
Redeemer. But 1 had a weight on my mind, because I could 
not be as holy as I wanted to be. I could not live without sin. 
When I rose in the morning I thought I would abstain from 
every hard word, from every ev] thought and look; and I came 
up to that chapel groaning, because “when I would do good evi: 
was present with me.” The minister said that when Pau! 


42 THE KING'S HIGHWAY OPENED, 


the verse I have quoted, he was not a Christian; that this was 
his experience before he knew the Lord. Ah, what error, for | 
know that Paul was a Christian, and I know the more Chris 
tians look to themselves the more they will have to groan, be 
cause they cannot be what they want to be. What, you will not 
believe in Christ until you are perfect? Then you will never 
believe in him. You will not trust the precious Jesus until you 
have no sins to trust him with! Then you will never trust him 
at all. For rest assured, you will never be perfect till you see 
the face of God in heaven. 

I knew one man who thought himself a perfect man, and that 
man was hump-backed. This was my rebuke to his pride, “Surely 
if the Lord gave you a perfect soul, he would give you a perfect 
body to carry it in.” Perfection will not be found this side of 
the grave. Your business is to trust in Christ. You must de- 
pend on nothing but the blood of Christ. Trust in Christ and 
you stand secure. “He that believeth on the Son of God hath 
everlasting life.” It is our duty to fight against corruption; it 
is our privilege to conquer it; it is our honor to feel that we are 
fighting against sin ; it shall be our glory one day to tread it be- 
neath our feet. But to-day, except not complete victory. Your 
very consciousness of sin proves that you are alive. The very 
fact that you are not what you want to be, proves that there is 
some high and noble thoughts in you that could not come by na- 
ture. You were content with yourself some six weeks ago, 
were you not? And the fact that you are discontent now, proves 
that God has put a new life into you which makes you seek after 
a higher and better element in which to breathe. When you 
become what you want to be on earth, then despair. When the 
law justifies you, then you have fallen from grace; for Paul has 
said, “ When we are justified by the law, we are fallen from 
grace.” But while I feel that the law condemns me, it is my joy 
to know that believing in Christ, “There is no condemnation to 
him that is in Christ Jesus, who walks not after the flesh, but 
after the Spirit.” 

And now, though I have been trying to clear the way, I feel con: 
scious that very likely I have been putting a stone or two in the 
road myself. May God forgive me—it is a sin of inadvertence. J 


THE KING’S HIGHWAY OPENED. 43 


would lay this road as straight and clear as ever was turnpike 
road between one city and another. Sinner, there is nothing 
which can rob thee of thy right to believe in Christ. Thou 
art freely invited to come to the marriage banquet. The table 
is spread, and the invitation freely given. There are no porters 
at the door to keep thee out; there are none to ask a ticket of 
admission of thee. 


“Let not concience make you linger, 
Nor of fitness fondly dream ; 
All the fitness he requireth 
Is to feel your need of him; 
This he gives you— 
Tis his Spirit’s rising beam.” 


Come to him just as thou art. But, ah, I know that when we 
sit in our studies it seems a light thing to preach the gospel and 
make people believe in Christ; but when we come to practice, 
it is the hardest thing in the world. If I were to tell you to do 
some great thing you would do it; but simply, when itis, “Be- 
lieve, wash, and be clean,” you will not do it. If I said, “Give 
me ten thousand pounds,” you would give it. You would crawl 
a thousand miles on your hands and knees, or drink the bitterest 
draught that was ever concocted ; but this trusting in Christ is. 
too hard for your proud spirit. Ah, sinner, art thou too proud 
to be saved? Come, man, I beseech thee, by the love of Christ, 
by the love of thine own soul, come with me, and let us go to- 
gether to the foot of the cross. Believe on him who hangs 
groaning there; oh, put thy trust in him, who is risen from the 
dead, and has !ed captivity captive. And if thou trustest him, 
poor sinner, thou shalt not be disappointed ; it shall not be trust 
misplaced. Again I say it, I am content to be lost, if thou art 
lost trusting in Christ. I dare to say that, and to look that boldly 
in the face; for thou wouldst be the first sinner that was ever 
cast away trusting in Jesus. “But, oh,” saith one, “I cannot 
think that such a wretch as I am can have a right to believe.” 
Soul, I tell thee it is not whether thou art a wretch, or nota 
wretch. Thou art commanded to believe. And when a com- 
mand comes home with power, the power comes with the com 


a4 THE KING’S HIGHWAY OPENED. 


mand; and he who is commanded, being made will.ng, casts 
himself on Christ, and he believes, and is saved. 

I have labored this morning to try and make myself as clear 
as I can about this doctrine. I know if any manis saved it is the 
work of God the Holy Ghost from first to last. “If any man 
is regenerate, it is not of the will of the flesh, nor of blood, but 
of God.” But I do not see how that great truth interferes with 
this other, ““Whomsoever believeth in Christ shall be saved.” 
And I would again, even to the falling down on my knees, as 
though God did beseech you by me, pray you, “ In Christ’s stead, 
be ye reconciled to God.” And this is the reconciliation, “That 
ye believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, whom he hath sent,” that 
ye trust Christ. Do you understand’me? That ye cast your- 
self on him; that ye depend on nothing but what he has done. 
Saved you must be, lost you cannot be, if you fling yourself 
wholly upon Christ, and cast the whole burden of your sins, 
your doubts, your fears, and your anxieties wholly there. Now, 
this is preaching free grace doctrine. And if any wonder how 
a Calvinist can preach thus, let me say that this is the preach- 
ing that Calvin preached, and better still, it is the preaching of 
our Lord Jesus Christ and his apostles. We have divine war- 
rant when we tell you, “He that believeth and is baptised, shal! 
be saved; he that believeth not shall be damnea.” Axwzm. 


SERMON III. 


PIETY REPROVED AND JUSTIFIED. 


[Turs Sermon was delivered at New Park Street Chapel, 
April 8th, 1860. The author calls it “The jeer of sarcasm, and 
the retort of Piety,” a title not very expressive of the main drift 
of the discourse. The first half of it will be found peculiarly 
applicable to the countless instances of social and domestic hind- 
ranees to piety, and calculated much to encourage those who are 
opposed in the ways of godliness by relatives and associates. | 


“Then David returned to bless his household. And Michal the daughter 
of Saul came out to meet David, and said, How glorious was the king of Israel 
to-day, who uncovered himself to-day in the eyes of the handmaids of his ser- 
vants, as one of the vain fellows shamelessly uncovereth himself! And David 
said unto Michal, It was before the Lord, which chose me before thy father, 
and before all his house, to appoint me ruler over the people of the Lord, 
over Israel: therefore will I play before the Lord. AndI will yet be more 
vile than thus, and will be base in my own sight: and of the maidservants 
which thou hast spoken of, of them shall I be had in honor.—2 SamvEL, vi. 


20-22. 


You will remember the remarkable passage of Sacred History 
which I related to you this morning; how David sought on one 
occasion to bring up the ark of God from Kirjathjearim to Je 
rusalem; but neglecting God’s law, they put the ark upon a 
cart, instead of carrying it upon the shoulders of the Levites ; 
and as one mistake very soon leads to another, when the oxen 
stumbled, Uzzah put forth his hand to steady the ark, and pre 


46 ' PIETY REPROVED AND JUSTIFIED. 


vent its falling, and God smote him there for his error, and he 
died. It was an awful moment. The pulse of that vast assem- 
bly beating high with solemn festivity, receives a sudden check, 
The trumpet which erstwhile sent forth its cheerful blast, with 
the sacred melody of cornet, of psaltery, and of harp—all are 
hushed in one instant. Dulness and terror seize the minds of 
all. They separate to their homes; the ark is carried into a 
private house adjoining, the residence of that eminent servant 
of God, Obed-edom, and there it tarried for the space of three 
months. David at last recovered his spirits, and a second time 
having carefully read over God’s law concerning the removal of 
the ark, he went down to the house of Obed-edom to carry it 
away. The priests this time lift up the ark upon their shoulders 
by means of the golden staves which passed through golden 
rings, and so uphold the ark. Finding that they were not smit- 
ten, but that they lived, and were able to carry the ark, David 
paused and offered seven bullocks, and seven rams as a sacrifice 
to God. Then, putting off his royal robe, laying aside his crown, 
he dressed himself like a priest, put on a linen ephod in order 
that he might have ease in the exercise which he meant to take; 
and so, in the midst of all the people, like the poorest and 
meanest of them, he went before the ark, and playing with his 
harp, he danced before the Lord with all his might. 
While he was so doing, he passed by his own house, and Mi- 
chal his wife, looking out, thought it was a strange thing to see 
the king wearing so paltry a robe as a linenephod. She had 
rather see him arrayed in some goodly Babylonish garment of 
fine linen; or she desired to see him clothed with his usual gar- 
ments, and she despised him in her neart, and when he came in, 
the first word she uttered was a taunt—“ How glorious was the 
king of Israel to-day !” then she exaggerated what he did; her 
spleen found vent in sarcasm; she made it out that he had be- 
haved worse than he could have done. He had simply divested 
himself or his robes, and acted like the rest of the people in 
playing before God. She accused him of immodesty ; this was, 
of course, but a pitiful satire, he having in all things acted blame- 
lessly, though humbly, like the rest of the people. His reply to 
her was with unusual tartness. Seldom did he seem to lose his 


PIETY REPROVED AND JUSTIFIED. 47 


temper for a moment, but in this case he half did so at any rate. 
His answer was, “It was before the Lord which chose me before 
thy father, and before all his house.” Thus significantly, and as 
it were ominously did he remind her of her pedigree. And be- 
eause she had slighted her husband when he had acted in God’s 
service according to the dictates of his heart, the Lord struck 
her with a curse—the greatest curse which an Eastern woman 
could possibly know—a curse, moreover, which wiped out the 
last expiring hope of her family pride—she went childless to 
the day of her death. 

This picture is designed to teach us some wholesome les- 
son. I want you to look at it. You remember that old say- 
ing of ours—“ We should expect some danger nigh, when we 
possess delight.” When I see David dancing, I am quite sure 
there will be a darkening of his heart ere long. How happy 
he looks! His whole countenance radiant with joy! Me- 
thinks I hear him shouting loudest of that crowd, “Sing unto 
the Lord; sing psalms unto him ; sing unto him; sing unto him; 
eall ye on his holy name ;” and then awaking all the strings of 
his heart to ecstacy, he sings agatn, “Sing unto the Lord; come 
sing unto him; sing psalms unto his name.” Perhaps, he was 
never in a more holy excitement. Ah! David, there is a sting 
for you somewhere. Now there is a calm, but a tempest is 


rising. 


“ More the treacherous calm I dread, 
Than tempests rolling over-head.” 


This joy is on the threshold of grief. He blesses the people, 
After he has ceased from his worship of God, he distributes to 
every man a flagon of wine, a loaf of bread, and a good pice 
of flesh, and they all eat and are merry before their God; snd 
David says, “I have blessed the people; I have made them all 
glad; I will go into my house, and I will give them a blessing 
there.” But he is met on the threshold by his own wife, and 
she in the most sarcastic manner sneers at himn—“ How glo lous 
was the king of Israel to-day!” Poor David is angry, L2arv 
broken, and sad. His joy is scattered to the winds for av «ile; 


48 PIETY REPROVED AND JUSTIFIED. 


though he puts her off with a rebuke, doubtless the irony went 
to his soul; the joy of that day was sorely marred. 


“ A Christian man is seldom long at ease, 
When one trouble’s gone, another doth him seize.” 


So saith old John Bunyan; and we may truly say, when we are 
at the top of a mountain we are not far from the bottom of a 
valley. When we are riding on the top of one wave it is not 
long before we shall be in the trough of another. Up hill and 
down hill is the way to heaven. Chequered must be our path. 
Golden shades are interwoven with a black ground. We shall 
have joy, but we must have trial; we shall have transport, but 
we must have trouble in the flesh. 

This evening I shall discourse, first, about David's trouble ; 
secondly, the vindication of his conduct; and thirdly, hts nodle 
resolution; and my main purpose will be to stir you ail up, if 
you are ever subject to a trial like this, to make his resolve and 
ground it upon his reason. 


1. First, Davin’s Trous.z. 

His trouble was peculiar. It came from a quarter where he 
ought least to have expected it. “ Oh,” saith old master Framp- 
ton, “Joab smote Abner under his fifth rib; there is many a 
man that has been smitten in his rib too.” Saith another, “It 
is a strange stratagem of Satan to break a man’s head with his 
own bones, and yet many a man hath encountered such rough 
usage. They that have been the chief joy of our hearts, have 
often been the means of causing us the most grievous pain.” 
Has it not been to many a Christian woman that her husband 
has been her greatest enemy in religion, and many a Christian 
man has found the partner of his own bosom the hardest obsta- 
ele in the road to heaven! I will just give you some pictures 
such as I know to have occurred, and to be occurring every day 
—they will suit some of you now present. A man has been up 
to the Lord’s house. - There was some great work going on; he 
helped that work; but when he went home, as soon as he en- 
tered the door, Michal, Saul’s daughter, was there, and she said, 
“You are mad, you are; you are crazy; you don’t know what 


PIETY REPROVED AND JUSTIFIED. 49 


to do with your money; you give it away to this and to that; 
and you leave your children beggars,, You area fool,” said she, 
“vou are deceived ; you are gone mad with your religion.” The 
man put up with it and bore it patiently, though it entered into 
his very heart, and he turned away sorely troubled. There was 
another,—a woman this time. She went up to the house of her 
Master’s brethren, and they made merry there, and there was 
joy in that place. Her heart was carried away with elevated 
emotions, and on her road home there was a bliss unspeakabie 
in her soul. As soon as she entered the door the question was 
asked, “ What brings you home so late ?—why didn’t you stop 
out all night? You look very happy. I dare say you have been 
among those canting hypocrites, haven’t you?” She said nothing; 
brooked it patiently; but the dart had gone into her heart, and 
she felt it sorely, that when she served her God with a good con- 
science, it should be thrown in her teeth as if she had done wrong. 

There is many a young man that dances before God with all 
his might when he has heard about the joyous things of the 
covenant of grace. He has forgotten all his cares and all his 
troubles, and he goes back, and perhaps this time it is his own 
brother, who, when they retire to rest, begins to ridicule him. 
“ Where have you been to-day ? How have you been spending 
your Sunday? I dare say you have been hearing So-and-so, 
What good can he do you? What has he got to tell you?” and 
there is a laugh; no names are contemptuous enough. You are 
called “a fool.” It is supposed that no man in his senses will 
be a Christian ; to think about eternal things is the highest mark 
of folly. For one short hour to turn one’s thoughts away from 
this poor earth and muse upon things eternal is the mark of 
madness! Now, we judge the madness lies on the other side. 
As we weigh the levities of this life and the realities of the life 
to come in the scale of judgment, the madness is found in the 
extreme on the other hand with the despisers, and not with our 
selves. The children of this world never did understand the 
children of the next, and they never will; “the light came into 
the world and the darkness comprehended it not.” How could 
it—how could darkness do anything to light except oppose it? 
It could not be expected that they who serve sin should love 

3 


50 PIETY REPROVED AND JUSTIFIED. 


those that serve righteousness. Oil and water will not mix; 
fire and flood will never lie to sleep in the same cradle; and it 
cannot be expected that that man-child, the church of God, shall 
have peace and be happy in the same house with that old giant 
the church of Satan—the synagogue of the devil. There must 
be wars and fightings, there must be opposition and conflicts, 
while there are two natures in the world and two sorts of men. 
This, then, was the trial David had to endure. And I want you 
to notice how peculiarly sharp this trial must have been. 

Natural affections are so interwoven with a thousand liga 
ments that they cannot be easily broken; but they are delicate 
as the finest nerves, and can never be injured without causing 
the most dolorous sensation. Surely David must remember 
that Michal was the wife of his youth, and there was gladness in 
his heart on the day he espoused her, and after all, she had been 
a good wife to him in many respects. Such reflections would 
make her alienation from him all the harder to bear. “Oh,” he 
might have said, “she preserved my life once at the risk of her 
own, when I lay sick in bed, and her father, Saul, had said, 
‘Bring him in the bed even as he is, that I may slay him.’ Did 
she not let me down the wall in a basket, and then lay an image 
in the bed, and stuff the pillow with goat’s hair, and deceive her 
father, that so I might escape? Ah,” said he, “there was love 
in that woman’s bosom, and how long did she remain faithful 
while I was hunted like a partridge on the mountains.” It is 
true he might call to recollection that in his worst times she had 
forgotten him, but now she had. come back to him, and David 
sincerely loved her; for you recollect that when Abner wanted 
to make peace with David, his stipulation was, “ Except thou 
bring Michal unto me, I will not see thy face ;” so that he had a 
thorough affection for her, and she had done him good. Yet the 
delight of his heart is become the foe of his spirit. She it is who 
now laughs at him for what he had done with a pure desire to 
serve God, and with a holy joy in doing it. Ay, that is the un. 
kindest cut of all, that goes to the very quick of a man, when 
the one he loves and the one who is worth all his love, notwith- 
standing, throws in his teeth his zeal for Christ. 

Ah! brethren, it is a happy thing when we are enabled to re 


PIETY REPROVED AND JUSTIFIED. 5] 


joice together in our family relationships; when husband and 
wife help each other on the path to heaven. There can be no 
happier position than that of the Christian man who finds in 
every holy wish he has for God, a helper; who finds that often 
she outstrips him; that when he would do something she sug. 
gests something more; when he would serve his Master there 
is a hint given that more yet might be done, and no obstacle put 
in the way, but every assistance rendered. Happy is that man 
and blessed is he. He has received a treasure from God, the like 
of which could not be bought for diamonds, and much fine gold 
could not be exchanged for it. That man is blessed of the Most 
High; he is heaven’s favorite, and he may rejoice in the special 
favor of his God. But when it is the other way, and I know it 
is the case with some of you, then it is a sore trial indeed. Per- 
haps, though a careful, cautious, prudent, and excellent worldly 
woman, she cannot see with you in the things which yuu love in 
the kingdom of God, and when you have done something which 
in the excess of your zeal seems to be but little, she thinks it 
inordinate and extravagant. “Oh,” says she, “do you go and 
mix with these people? Does king David go and wear a linen 
ephod like a peasant? Do you go and sit down with that rab- 
ble? You? you can stand up for your dignity—put ‘ esquire’ 
after your name, and yet walk in the street with any beggar that 
likes to call himself a Christian. You,” says she, “ you that are 
so cautious in everything else, you seem to have lost your head 
when you think about your religion;” so she will be sarcastic 
and shoot words like arrows at that man in such a way that ev- 
ery one of them may cause a wound. And now let me say here, 
that this is more frequently done by the husband against the 
wife, and more frequently still by the two fellow-apprentices or 
workmen against one another. It is a curious thing that when 
men are going to hell there is no one to stop them. “Make 
way, make way; open the toll-bars there; stand clear, do not 
let there be a dog in his path! Make way for him!” Is not 
that the cry of the world? But here comes a man who wants to 
go to heaven. ‘Block his path up; throw stones in the way; 
make it as difficult as ever it can be!” Ay, and good people 
too; good people, not knowing what they are doing—they are 
employed by Satan to impede our path to heaven. Poor souls; 


52 PIETY REPROVED AND JUSTIFIED. 


they do not know better. Satan enters into them and sets them 
upon us, to see if they cannot in some way or other mar our ix. 
tegrity, because we love the whole gospel, and will not be con. 
tent to have a part only. Ah, brothers and sisters, this is a sore 
trial, but know that your afflictions are not strange or unusual ; 
the same afflictions are accomplished in your brethren that are 
in the world. 


fI. Now we nave Davin’s sustIFICATION. 

What did David say in extenuation of what he had done? 
He said, “It was before the Lord, which chose me before thy 
father, and before all his house, and appointed me ruler over the 
people, over Israel, therefore will I play before the Lord.” Da- 
vid’s justification of his acts was God’s election of him. Do you 
pot see the doctrine of election here? God had chosen him 
before her father, Saul. “Now,” says David, “inasmuch as by 
special love and divine favor I was lifted up from the common 
people, and made a king, I will stoop down to the common 
people once again, and I will praise my God as the people do, 
robed in their vestments, dancing as they dance, and playing on 
the harp, even as the rest of the joyous crowd are doing.” Grat- 
itude was the key-note of his worship. Let the worldling say of 
the Christian, when he is acting true’to his Master, “You are 
enthusiastic ;” our reply is, “ Yes, we are ; we may be considered 
enthusiastic, if you judge us by ordinary rules, but we are not 
so to be judged; we consider that we have been loved with spe- 
cial love; that God has been pleased to forgive us our sins, to 
accept us of his sovereign grace, and give us the privileges of his 
children. We do not expect ordinary men to do for God what 
the Christian would. “No,” saith he, 


“Love I much, I’ve more forgiven, 
I am a miracle of grace.” 


If he gives more to the cause of God than other men think of 
giving, still it seems very little to him, for he says— 


“Were the whole realm of nature mine, 
That were a tribute far too small ; 
Love so amazing, so divine, 

Demands my soul, my life, my ell” 


PIETY REPROVED AND JUSTIFIED. 53 


Michal may say we have acted madly; she would act the same, 
if she felt as we feel. Men of the world may say we act extrava- 
gantly, and go beyond the rule of prudence; they would go be 
yond the rule of prudence, too, if they had been partakers of like 
iove, and received like favor. The man who feels himself to 
have been chosen of God from before the foundation of the world, 
who has a solid conviction that his sins are all blotted out, that 
he is God’s own child, that he is accepted in the Beloved, that 
his heaven is secure, I say there is nothing extravagant for that 
man to do. He will go and be a missionary to the heathen, 
cross the seas with his life in his hands, and live in the midst of 
a heathen population. Men say, “ What for? He can gain but 
a miserable pittance to sustain life, after giving up the most 
flowery prospects; he must be mad.” Mad, no doubt, you may 
account him, if you judge as Michal judged; but if you consider 
that God has chosen him, and loved him with a special love, it is 
but reasonable, even less than might have been expected, that 
such a man is ready to sacrifice himself for Christ. Take an- 
other example. Let me cull a picture from the memoir of one 
in years gone by. He preaches in a church in Glasgow; he is 
just inducted into the church, preferment lies open before him, 
he may speedily be made a bishop, if he likes. He seeks it not. 
Without mitre or benefice, he takes to Kennington common and 
Moorfields, goes to every stump and hedge in the country, so 
that he is Rural Dean of all the commons everywhere, and Canon 
Residentiary nowhere. He is pelted with rotten eggs; he finds 
one time that his forehead has been laid open in the midst of the 
sermon, while he has been laying men’s hearts open. Men say 
he is fanatical. What did Whitfield need to do this for? What 
did John Wesley need to go all over the country for? Why, 
there is the Rev. Mr. So-and-so, with his fourteen livings, and 
never preaches at all—good man he is. “Qh,” say the world, 
“and he makes a good thing of it, depend upon it.” That is a 
common saying, “ He makes a good thing of it.” And when he 
died, he did make a good thing of it, for he silenced the tongue 
of slander, leaving nothing but an imperishable reputation 
behind. 

When Mr. Wesley was laboring abundantly, they said, “He 


54 PIETY REPROVED AND JUSTIFIED. 


is arich man;” and taxed him for his plate very heavily. He 
said, “You may take my plate at any rate if you like, for all I 
have is two silver spoons; I have one in London, and one in 
York, and by the grace of God, I shall never have any more as 
long as there are poor people about.” But the people said, “De- 
pend upon it, they are making a good thing of it; why cannot 
they be still as other people.” The only reason why they could 
not, was just this: that God had chosen them before the rest of 
mankind; they felt that they were special objects of divine 
favour, and they knew their calling: it was not only to make 
them blessed, but to make them a blessing. What other men 
could not do, or would not do, they did; they could not rest 
before they did it; they could danceNike David before the ark, 
degrading the clerical character ; they could bring down the fine 
dignity of the parson, to stand like a mountebank before the 
shows of Moorfields, or in the Spa-fields’ riding-schools; they 
could come down on stage boards to preach the gospel; they 
were not ashamed to be like David, shamelessly uncovering 
themselves like lewd fellows, in the eyes of the handmaidens 
of their servants:—they thought all this disgrace was honour, 
and all this shame was glory; and they bore it all, for their jus- 
tification was found in the fact that they believed God had cho- 
sen them; and therefore they chose to suffer for Christ’s sake 
rather than reign without Christ. 

And now, brothers and sisters, I say this to you; if you think 
God has chosen you and yet do not feel that he has done great 
things for you, or holds any strong claims upon your gratitude, ‘ 
then shun the cross. If you have never had much forgiven, get _ 
over the stile, and go down the green lane into Bye-path meadow, | 
if it is comfortable walking, go down there. If you do not owe 
much to the Lord Jesus Christ, shirk his service, go up in the 
corner there when the trumpet plays, and tell Michal you are 
very sorry you have displeased her. Say, “I will never do the 
like again, trust me; I am sorry you do not like it; I hope you 
will now forgive me; but as I hold religion to be a thing to 
please everyone as well as myself, I v-ill never dance before the 
ark again.” Do that now if you are under no very great obli- 
gation to the Father of spirits, and have never tasted the dis 


PIETY REPROVED AND JUSTIFIED. 55 


tinguishing love of God to your souls. My brethren, there 
are some of you ready to start up from your seats, and say, 
_ Well, Iam not that man!” And assuredly, as your pastor, 
I can look on some of you that have had much forgiven. Not 
long ago you were up to the throat in drunkenness; you could 
blaspheme God. Not very long ago perhaps you carried cn 
dishonesty, and never entered the house of God. Some of you 
were frivolous, gay, careless, despisers of God, without hope, 
without Christ, strangers to the commonwealth of Israel. Well, 
and what brought you here now? Why, sovereign grace has 
done it; you would not have been here if you had been left to 
yourselves, if God had done no more for you than for other men, 
you would have been left to go on in the same course as before. 
Now the shutters are up; that shop which used to be open all 
day Sunday is closed. Now the pipe and the beer, or dissipa- 
tions more refined, that used to occupy the whole of the Sunday 
afternoon, with five or six jolly companions, are put away, and 
there is the Bible and prayer now, and the oath is not heard as 
before. 1 suppose you set this change of character down to s0o- 
vereign grace, and you are ready to sing with all of us:— 


“Grace led my roving feet 
To tread the heavenly road, 
And new supplies each hour I meet 
While pressing on to God.” 


Then the mercy you have received is a complete justification 
for anything that you may do in God’s service, any ecstacy that you 
may feel when you are worshipping him, and any excess of liberal- 
ity you may display waen you are engaged in pressing on to the 
gingdom of your Lord and Master. If the Church could once 
feel this, what an influence it would exert! Truly I may say, 
without the slightest flattery, I never met with any people on 
the face of the earth who seemed to have a more thorough belief 
in this- fact, who lived mere truly up to this doctrine—than 
those among whom I minister. I have often gone on my knees 
before God to thank him for the wondrous things I have seen 
done by some of the Christians now present. In service they 
have gone beyond anything | could have asked. I should think 


56 PIETY REPROVED AND JUSTIFIED. 


that they would have considered me unreasonable if I had re 
quested it. They have done it without request. At the risk of 
everything they have served their Master, and not only spent 
all that they could spare, but have even spared what they could 
ill afford to spare for the service of Jesus. They have given up 
social comfort and personal ease, that they might be serving 
their Master. Such brethren doubtless meet their reward, and 
if any should say of them, “It is ridiculous, it is absurd, they 
are carried away with fanatical zeal,” I put this answer in their 
mouths, “Yes, I should be ridiculous, 1 should be absurd, if I 
owed no more to God than you; but he has loved me so that I 
cannot love him enough, much less love him too much; he has 
loved me at such a rate that I cannot.do too much for him; in 
fact, I feel I cannot do half enough.” “You being special charac- 
ters have given to God special service, and God bless you fur it; 
yea, he doth bless you in it. Such was David’s justification. 


Il. Not less worthy of our notice was his rEsoLution, of 
which I now come briefly to speak. What did he say? Did he 
draw back and play the craven, bend hus back to the lash of 
rebuke, and give up the extravagancies o' his devotion? No. 
He said, and said frankly, “I will yet be more vile than thus, 
and I will be base in mine own sight.” Now God grant your 
resolution may be the same. Whenever the world reproaches 
you, say, “ Well, I thank you for that word, I will strive to de- 
serve it better: if I have incurred your displeasure by my con- 
sistency, I will be more consistent, and you shall be more 
displeased, if you will. If it be a vile thing to serve Christ, I 
will serve him more than [ have ever done, and be viler still; 
if it be disgraceful to be numbered with the poor, tried and 
afflicted people, I will be disgraced. Nay, the more disgraced I 
am, the more happy shall I be; I shall feel that disgrace is 
honour, that ignominy is glory, that shame and spitting from the 
lips of enemies is but the same thing as praise and glory from 
the mouth of Christ.” Instead of yielding, go forward, show 
your enemies that you do not know how to go back, that you 
are not made of the soft metal of these modern times. 

It is said by an old writer, that in the olden times men used 


PIETY REPROVED AND JUSTIFIED. 5? 


to take care of their houses, but now the houses take care of the 
men; that they used to eat off caken porringers, and then they 
- were oaken men; but now they are willow men, can bend any- 
how; they are earthenware men, which can be dashed to pieces. 
Scarcely in politics, in business, or in religion, have you got a 
man. You sce a lot of things which are called men, whc 
turn the way the wind blows. I pray God to send a few 
men with what the Americans call “grit” in them; men who 
when they know a thing to be right, will not turn away, or turn 
aside, or stop; men who will persevere all the more because 
there are difficulties to meet or foes to encounter; who stand all 
the more true to their Master because they are opposed; who, 
the more they are thrust into the fire, the hotter they become ; 
who, just like the bow, the further the string is drawn, the more 
powerfully will it send forth its arrows, and so, the more they 
are trodden upon, the more mighty will they become in the cause 
of truth against error. Resolve, brothers and sisters, when you 
are in any sort of persecution, to face it with a full countenance. 
Like a nettle is the persecutor; touch it gently and it will sting 
you, but grasp it, and it hurts you not. Lay hold of those who 
oppose you, not with rough vengeance, but with the strong grip 
of quiet decision, and you have won the day. Yield no princi- 
ple, no, not the breadth of a hair of that principle. Stand up for 
every solitary grain of truth; contend for it as for your life. 
Remember your forefathers, not merely your Christian forefath- 
ers, but those who are your progenitors in the faith as Baptists. 
Remember those who, of old, were cast out of the Christian 
Church with contempt, because they would not bend to the errors 
of their times. Think of the snows of the Alps, and call to 
mind the Waldenses, and the Albigenses, your great forerunners. 
Think again, of the Lollards, the disciples of Wickliffe; think 
of your brethren in Germany, who, not many centuries ago, nay, 
but a century ago, were sewn up in sacks, had their hanas chop 
ped off, bled and died—a glorious list of martyrs. Your whole 
pedigree, from the beginning to the end, is stained with blood. 
From the days of John the Baptist until now, the kingdom of 
heaven has been made to suffer the violence of men; and you / 
will you yield? Shall these soft times, these gentle ages, take 
gt 


58 PIETY REPROVED AND JUSTIFIED. 


away your pristine valor—make you the craven sons of heroic 
fathers? No, if you are not called to the sufferings of a martyr, 
yet bear the spirit of a martyr. If you cannot burn as he did 
in the flesh, burn as he did in the spirit. If you have nothing 
to endure but the trial of cruel mockings, take it patiently, en- 
dure it joyfully, for happy are ye, inasmuch as ye are made par- 
takers of the sufferings of your Divine Master. 

Never, I entreat of you, grow faint in your course, but bring 
more of the love of your hearts into the service of your lives. 
Never yield one tittle of the truth which God has committed to 
you, take up the cross and bear it; however weighty, however 
ignominious, carry it manfully. If the father be turned against 
the child, and the child against the father, weep over it and mourn 
it. If the husband be turned against the wife, and the wife 
against the husband, take care that it is not through your own 
fault; but if it be for Christ’s sake, bear it joyfully, bear it with 
transport and delight; you are highly honored. You cannot 
wear the ruby crown of martyrdom and fire—that blazing diadem, 
but you have got at least a stray jewel out of it; thank God for 
it, and never shrink, never blush to suffer for his name sake; 
and give to every laughing Michal the answer, “If this be vile, 
I purpose to be viler still; if this be shameful, I will be more 
shameful ; if this excite your derision, ye shall laugh louder than 
ever; your opportunities for making fun of me shall never be 
wanting, till your disposition to ridicule shall be changed.” Oh, 
that is a glorious way of dealing with adversaries. If a lion is 
roaring at you, look at him and smile, and he will leave off roar- 
ing by-and-bye. When some big dog comes out to bark at you, 
keep quiet, it is marvellous how easily he is tamed. I was once 
staying in the north of Scotland, where there was a ferocious 
dog chained up. He came out and I patted him, and he jump- 
ped up with his fore-feet upon me; I caressed him, and he 
seemed particularly fond of me. The master came out. “Come 
away, my dear sir,” said he, “that dog will rend you to pieces.” 
But I did not know it, and when I passed by he seemed to know 
[ was not at all afraid of him, so he did’nt meddle with me. In 
like manner, Christians, be not terrified at your adversaries, 
They may growl, they may snarl, but do uot you shrink back 


PIETY REPROVED AND JUSTIFIED. SY 


with fear: it will make them bark the more. Take as little no- 
tice of them as possible. Ah! poor things, you can well say, 
“ Father, forgive them, they know not what they do.” Just leave 
them all alone, and if they must know the reason, tell them, 
what David told Michal—God has chosen you to shew forth his 
praise. I dare say you may be insane enough in their eyes. 

A good friend of mine, when he was told he was mad, said, 
“Well, if I am mad, you ought to be very patient with me, for 
fear I should grow worse. If I am mad now, perhaps I might 
grow wild. So, be gentle with me.” There is a good-humored 
way of rallying in return; only it must be without bitterness. 
Tell the people who take needless offence, they must try to teach 
you better; if you have gone so far astray they ought to lead 
you back again. By degrees they will have done with this rail- 
lery, and begin to respect you. If there is one ina family that 
is looked up to most of all, it is usually that one which all the 
family abused at one time. He has borne the brunt of opposi- 
tion; he has held his ground ; and he has won the palm of con- 
sistency. Give way an inch, and you will have to give way an 
ell. Yield a single yard, and your enemy will drive you out. 
Stand right still, calmly, quietly, with the determination that 
you can die, but you cannot fly; that you could suffer anything, 
but you could not deny your Master, and your victory is won. 
Never give an angry word or look; do not imitate Peter in 
that respect; the best of men are only to be followed as far as 
they are like their Master. “When you are reviled, revile not 
again.” But suffer patiently all that is said, but when you suf- 
fer, do not yield. Remember the motto of the old martyrs. 
On some of the old martyr books you will see the picture of an 
anvil, and you might ask, “What does that mean Y It was a 
common saying of Calvin, “The gospel is an anvil that has bro- 
ken.many a hammer, and will break many hammers yet.” Let 
thine adversary be the hammer, and be thou the anvil. Remem- 
ber this—“He that endureth to the end shall be saved.” 

Now, I think I hear some Christian say, “ This sermon is nct 
applicable to me.” Well, brother, Iam glad it is not. I am 
glad if God has put you in such a gracious position of provi- 
dence. But, oh, it is applicable to many, very many, ] say te 


60 PIETY REPROVED AND JUSTIFIED. 


you then, pray for such, mention those who are in bonds as be 
ing bound with them. When you are in prayer, and have to 
thank God that you are a child of pious parents who, so far 
from opposing you, have done all they could to help you, be 
very thankful for it, as a privilege to be prized, because so many 
lack it. It is a happy thing for some of you flowers, that you 
grow in a conservatory where the air is so very warm and so 
very mild, but there are some who have to be outside in the frost 
—pray for these. When you think of the sheep in the fold, take 
care that you think of those out in the wilderness exposed to the 
snow storm coming on, perhaps buried in a hollow and ready 
to expire. Think of them. You may suppose there is very 
little suffering for Christ now. I speak what I know—there is 
a vast deal of suffering still, Ido not mean burning, I do not 
mean hanging; I do not mean persecution by law; it is a sort 
of slow martyrdom. I can tell you how it is effected. Every- 
thing a young man does, is thrown in his teeth. Things harm- 
less and indifferent in themselves, are twisted into accusation 
that he does wrong; if he speaks, his words are brought up 
against him ; if he is silent, it is worse. Whatever he does is 
misrepresented, and from morning to night there is the taunt 
always ready. Everything that can be said against his minis- 
ter is generally used, because the world knows when they find 
fault with the minister, it stings the people, if they are a loving 
people, to the quick; and there are insinuations thrown out 
against the minister for his motives, and there are all things said 
about God’s people too; one says the minister is a “ yea-nay” 
preacher; another says he is too high in doctrine; one will ac- 
cuse him of being sanctimonious; another will charge him with 
laxness. Ah, brethren, you need not fear; you can bear wit- 
ness for the truth whatever is said; you must bear with the slan- 
derer and forbear. If they throw aught in your teeth, still stand 
up for your Lord Jesus. I don’t ask you to stand up for me; 
you will do that I know. Stand up for your Lord and Master ; 
don’t yield a single inch ; and the day shall come when you shall 
have honor even in the eyes of those who in the world once 
laughed at you and put you to open shame. 

Before slosing, let me say a word or two to this whole congre 


PIETY REPROVRD AND JUSTIFIED. 61 


gation. There are three sorts of people upon which my text 
looks with a dark and appalling frown. First, there are those 
whose lips are ever quick to curl, whose countenance is ever 
prompt to sneer, whose tongues are ever ready with a jest pro- 
fane when the service of God crosses their path. I only say to 
you, beware lest that come upon you. “As he loved cursing, so 
let it come upon him; as he delighted not in blessing, so let it 
be far from him.” Secondly, there are those who, up to a cer 
tain point, favor the worship of God, and the services of the 
church. But there comes a season of extraordinary service, a re- 
vival that demands uncommon energy, and almost before they are 
themselves aware of it, the repugnance of their hearts finds some 
strong and unkindly expression. Now let me point you to Saul’s 
daughter, and remind you how in one hour she proved her pedi- 
gree, identified herself with a family which the Lord had re- 
jected, and sealed her own irrevocable doom. Then, thirdly, 
there is the professor of religion, who with David’s trial is awant- 
ing David’s constancy. Have I sown the seed of gospel truth 
broadcast among you so often, and hath none fallen in stony 
places? You may have heard the word, and anon with joy re- 
ceived it; and you may have “ dured awhile, though you have 
no root in yourselves.” But let me ask you, when tribulation 
or persecution ariseth because of the word, are you offended? 
does it prove a stumbling-block to you? If so, your case is de- 
plorable. Do you parry off the first breath of ridicule with flip- 
pant tongue? Did I hear that you said the other day, “ Oh, | 
dont profess anything ; I only just go into that chapel now and 
then to hear the preacher; he rather takes my fancy.” Ah! 
young man, let your conscience witness that you are shrinking 
back unworthily. You may only dissemble a little at first, but 
if you are coward enough to dissemble, you may ere long prove 
infidel enough to apostatize. Brethren and sisters in the Lord, 
“ stand fast in one spirit, with one mind striving together for the 
faith of the gospel, in nothing terrified by your adversaries.” 
“For unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only te 
believe in his name, but also to suffer for his sake.” Awmxw. 


SERMON IV. 


THE TREASURES OF GRACE. 


[Tue fulness of grace in Christ Jesus is a theme on which 
the devout servants of God love to dwell, and which the devout 
people of God love to listen to and contemplate. This was 
preached in Exeter Hall, January 22d, 1860, and is full of the 
savor and fatness of the Gospel. The frequent and expressive 
metaphors used will assist the reader the better to understand 
and retain the subject as presented. ] 


“The forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his grace.”—Erur 
srans, 1-7, 


As is Isaiah among the prophets, so is Paul among the Apos- 
tles; each stands forth with singular prominence, raised up by 
God for a conspicuous purpose, and shining as a star of extra- 
ordinary lustre. Isaiah spoke more of Christ, and described 
more minutely his passion and his death than all the other pro- 
phets together. Paul proclaimed the grace of God—free, full. 
sovereign, eternal grace—beyond all the glorious company of 
the apostles. Sometimes he soared to such amazing heights, 
or dived into such unsearchable depths, that even Peter could 
not follow him. He was ready to confess that “our beloved 
brother Paul, according to the wisdom given unto him,” had 
written “some things hard to be understood.” Jude could write 
of the judgments of God, and reprove with terrible words, “ un- 
godly men, who turned the grace of God into lasciviousness.” 
But he could not tell out the purpose of grace as it was planned 
in the eternal mind, or the experience of grace as it is felt and 


THE TREASURES OF GRACE. 63 


realized in the human heart, like Paul. There is James again: 
he, as a faithful minister, could deal very closely with the prac- 
tical evidences of Christian character. And yet he seems to keep 
very much on the surface; he does not bore down deep into the 
substratum on which must rest the visible soil of all spiritual 
graces. Even John, most favored of all those apostles who 
were companions of our Lord on earth—sweetly as the beloved 
disciple writes of fellowship with the Father and his Son Jesus 
Christ—-even John doth not speak of grace so richly as Paul, 
“in whom God first showed forth all long-suffering as a pattern to 
them which should hereafter believe on him to life everlasting.” 

Not, indeed, that we are at any liberty to prefer one apostle 
above another. We may not divide the Church, saying, I am 
of Paul, I of Peter, I of Apollos; but we may acknowledge 
the instrument which God was pleased to use; we may admire 
the way in which the Holy Ghost fitted him for his work; we 
may, with the churches of Judea, “ glorify God in Paul.” Among 
the early fathers Augustine was singled out as the “ Doctor of 
Grace ;” so much did he delight in those doctrines that exhibit 
the freeness of divine favor. And surely we might affirm the 
like of Paul. Among his compeers he outstripped them all 
in declaring the grace that bringeth salvation. The sense of 
grace pervaded all his thoughts as the life blood circulates 
through all the veins of one’s body. Does he speak of conver 
sion, “he was called by grace.” Nay, he sees grace going be- 
fore his conversion, and “separating him from his mother’s 
womb.” He attributes all his ministry to grace. “To me, 
who am less than the least of all saints, is this grace given, that 
I should preach among the Gentiles the unsearchable riches of 
Christ.” See him at any time, and under any circumstances, 
whether bowed down with infirmity, or lifted to the third heav- 
ens with revelation, he has but one account to give of himself, 
“By the grace of God I am what I am.” 

There are no ministers who contend so fully and so unflinch- 
ingly for free, sovereign, unconditional grace, as those who be- 
fore their conversion have revelled in gross and outrageous sin. 
It is a Bunyan who breathed curses, a Newton who was a very 
monster in sin; it is the like of these, who cannot forget for one 


64 THE TREASURES OF GRACE. 


hour of their lives afterwards, the grace that snatched them from 
the pit, and plucked them as brands from the burning. Strange 
indeed that God should have it so. The providence is inscruta- 
ble that permits some of the Lord’s chosen people to wander 
and rove as far as sheep can stray. Such men, however, make 
the most valiant champions for that grace which only can rescue 
any sinner from eternal woe. 

This morning we propose to expound to you “ the riches of 
Gods grace ;” this is the Treasure; then, secondly, we shall 
speak of the “ Forgiveness of Sins,” which is to be judged of by 
that Measure ; the forgiveness is according to the riches of his 
grace; and we shall afterwards close by considering some of the 
privileges connected therewith. 


I. First, consider the RICHES OF HIS GRACE. 

In attempting to search out that which is unsearchable, we 
must, I suppose, use some of those comparisons by which we are 
wont to estimate the wealth of the monarchs, and mighty ones 
of this world. It happened once that the Spanish ambassador, 
in the haleyon days of Spain, went on a visit to the French am- 
bassador, and was invited by him to see the treasures of his 
master. With feelings of pride he showed the repositories, 
profusely stored with earth’s most precious and most costly 
wealth. “Could you show us gems so rich,” said he, “or aught 
the like of this for magnificence of possessions in all your sov- 
ereign’s kingdom?” “Call your master rich?” replied the am- 
bassador of Spain, “why, my master’s treasures have no bot- 
tom”—alluding, of course, to the mines of Peru and Petrosa. 
So truly in the riches of grace there are mines too deep for man’s 
finite understanding ever to fathom. However profound your 
investigation, there is still a deep couching beneath which baf 
fles all research. Who can ever discover the attributes of God? 
Who can find out the Almighty to perfection? We are at a 
loss to estimate the very quality and properties of grace as it 
dwells in the mind of Deity. Love in the human breast is a 
passion. With God it is not so. Love is an attribute of the 
divine essence. God is love. In men, grace and bounty may 
grow into a habit, but grace with God is an intrinsic attribute 


THE TREASURES OF GRACE. 65 


of his nature. He cannot but be gracious. As by necessity of 
his Godhead he is omnipotent, and omniprescent, so by abso- 
lute necessity of his divinity is he gracious. 

Come then, my brethren, into this glittering mine of the at- 
tributes of God. Every one of God’s attributes is infinite, and 
therefore this attribute of grace is without bounds. You cannot 
conceive the infinity of God, why, therefore, should I attempt 
to describe it. Recollect however, that as the attributes of God 
are of the like extent, the guage of one attribute must be the 
guage of another. Or, further, if one attribute is without limit, 
so is another attribute. Now, you cannot conceive any boundary 
to the omnipotence of God. What cannot he do? He can 
create, he can destroy; he can speak universes into existence ;_ 
or he can quench the light of stars as readily as we tread out a 
spark. Ha hath but to will it, and creatures! without number 
sing his praise; yet another volition, and those creatures subside 
into their naked nothingness, as a moment’s foam subsides into 
the wave that bears it, and is lost forever. The astronomer 
turns his tube to the remotest space, he cannot find a boundary 
to God’s creating power ; but could he seem to find a limit, we 
would then inform him that all the worlds on worlds that clus- 
ter in space, thick as the drops of morning dew upon the mea- 
dows, are but the shreds of God’s power. He can make more 
than all these, can dash those into nothingness, and can begin 
again. Now, as boundless as is his power, so infinite is his grace. 
As he hath power to do anything, so hath he grace enough to 
give anything—to give everything to the very chief of sinners. 

Take another attribute if you please—God’s omniscience, 
there is no boundary to that. We know that his eye is upon 
every individual of our race—he sees him as minutely as if he 
were the only creature that existed. It is boasted of the eagle 
that though he can outstare the sun, yet when at his greatest 
height, he can detect the movement of the smallest fish in the 
depths of the sea. But what is this compared with the omnis- 
cience of God? His eye tracks the sun in his marvellous course, 
his eye marks the winged comet as it flies through space, his 
eye discerns the utmost bound of creation inhabited or unin- 
habited. There 1s nothing hid from the light thereof; with hm 


66 THE TREASURES OF GRACE. 


there is no darkness at all. If I mount to heaven he is there; 
If I dive to hell he is there; if I fly mounted on the morning 
ray beyond the western sea, 


“His swifter hand shall first arrive, 
And there arrest the fugitive.” 


There is no limit to his understanding, nor is there to his grace. 
As his knowledge comprehendeth all things, so doth his grace 
comprehend all the sins, all the trials, all the infirmities of the 
people upon whom his heart is set. Now, my dear brethren, 
the next time we fear that God’s grace will be exhausted, let us 
look into this mine, and then let us reflect that all that has 
ever been taken out of it has never diminished it a single par- 
ticle. All the clouds that have been taken from the sea have 
never diminished its depth, and all the love, and all the mercy 
that_God has given to all but infinite numbers of the race of 
man, has not diminished by a single grain the mountain of his 
grace. 

But to proceed further: we sometimes judge of the wealth of 
men, not only by their real estate in mines and the like, but by 
what they have on hand stored up in the treasury. I must take 
you now, my brethren, to the glittering treasury of divine grace. 
Ye know its name; it is called the Covenant. Have you not 
heard the marvellous story of what was done in the olden time, 
before the world was made. God foreknew that man would 
fall, but he determined of his own infinite purpose and will that 
he would raise out of this fall a multitude which no man can 
number. The Eternal Father held a solemn council with the 
Son and Holy Spirit. Thus spoke the Father :—“I will that 
those whom I have chosen be saved!” Thus said the Son :— 
“My Father, I am ready to bleed and die, that thy justice may 
not suffer, and that thy purpose may be executed.” “1 will,” 
said the Holy Spirit, “that those whom the Son redeems with 
blood shall be called by grace, shall be quickened, shall be pre- 
served, shall be sanctified and perfected, and brought safely home.” 
Then was the Covenant written, signed, and sealed, and ratified 
between the Sacred Three. The Father gave his Son, the Son 
gave himself, and the Spirit promises all his influence, all his 


THE TREASURES OF GRACE. 67 


presence, to all the chosen. Then did the Father give to the 
Son the persons of his elect; then did the Son give himself to 
the elect, and take them into union with him; and then did the 
Spirit in covenant vow that these chosen ones should surely be 
brought safe home at last. Whenever I think of the old cove- 
nant, I am perfectly amazed and staggered with the grace of it, 
The very poetry of our holy religion lies in these ancient things - 
of the everlasting hills—that glorious covenant, signed and sealed 
and ratified, in all things ordered well from old eternity. 

Pause here, my hearer, awhile, and think before this world 
was made, ere God had settled the deep foundations of the moun- 
tains or poured the seas from his hand, he had chosen his people 
and set his heart on them. To them he had given himself, his 
Son, his heaven, his all. For them did Christ determine to re- 
sign his bliss, his home, his life; for them did the Spirit promise 

_all his attributes, that they might be blessed. Oh, grace divine, 
how glorious thou art, without beginning, without end! How 
shall I praise thee? Take up the strain, ye angels; sing these 
noble themes, the love of the Father, the love of the Son, and 
the love of the Spirit. 

This, my brethren, if ye think it over, may well make you 
estimate aright the riches of god’s grace. If you read the roll of 
the covenant fiom beginning to end, containing as it does, elec- 
tion, redemption, calling, justification, pardon, adoption, immor- 
tality—if you read all this, you will say, “This is riches of grace 
—God, great and infinite! Who is a God like unto thee fur the 
riches of thy love ? 

The riches of great kings, again, may often be estimated by 
the munificence of the monuments which they reared to record 
their feats. We have been amazed in these modern times at the 
marvellous riches of the kings of Nineveh and Babylon. Modern 
monarchs, with all their appliances, would fail to erect such mon- 
strous piles of palaces as those in which old Nebuchadnezzar 
walked in times of yore. We turn to the pyramids: we see 
there what the wealth of nations can accomplish; we look across 
the sea to Mexico and Peru, and we see the relics of a semi- 
barbarous people, but we are staggered and amazed to think 
what mines of riches they must have possessed ere such works 


§8 THE TREaSURES OF ¢ RACE. 


could nave beer accomplished. Solomn’s riches a & perhape 
best judged of by us when we think of those great ci ies which 
he built in the wilderness, Tadmor and Palmyra. When we 
go and visit those ruins and see the massive columns ani mag- 
nificent, sculpture, we say, Solomon indeed was rich. We feel, 
as we walk amid the ruins, somewhat like the queen of Sheb : 
even in Scripture the half has not been told us of the riches of 
Solomon. 
My brethren, God has led us to inspect mightier trophies than 
Solomon, or Nebuchadnezzar, or Montezuma, or the Pharaohs. 
Turn your eyes yonder, see that blood-bought host arrayed in 
white, surrounding the throne—hark, how they sing, with voice 
triumphant, with melodies seraphic, “ Unto him that loved us, 
and washed us from our sins in his own blood, to him be glory 
and dominion for ever and ever.” And who are these? Who 
are these trophies of his grace? Some of them have come from 
the stews of harlotry; many of them have come from the taverns 
of drunkenness. Nay, more, the hands of some of those so 
white and fair were once red with the blood of saints. I see 
yonder the men that nailed the Saviour to the tree—men who 
cursed God, and invoked on themselves death and damnation. ] 
see there Manassch, who shed innocent blood so much, and the 
thicf who in the last moment looked to Christ, and said, “ Lord, 
remember me.” But I need not turn your gaze so far aloft: 
lock, my brethren, around; you do not know your next neigh- 
bor by whom you are sitting this morning, it may be. But 
there are stories of grace that might be told by some here this 
morning, that would make the very angels sing more loudly than 
they have done before. Well, I know these cheeks have well nigh 
been scarlet with tears when I have heard the stories of free grace 
wrought in this congregation, Then are those known to me, but 
of course not so to you, who were among the vilest of men, the 
soum of society. We have here those to whom cursing was as 
their breath, and drunkenness had grown to be a habit; and yet 
here they are servants of God, and of his church; and it is their 
delight to testify to others what a Saviour they have found. Ah, 
but my Jearer, perhaps thou art one of those trophies, and if so, 
the best proof of the riches of his grace is that which thou findest 


"vm TREASURES OF GRACE, 69 


in thy own soul. I think God to be gracious, when I see others 
saved. I know he is, because he has saved me—that wayward, 
wilful boy, who scoffed a mother’s love, and would not be melted 
by all her prayers; who only wished to know a sin, in order to 
perpetrate it. Is he standing here to preach the gospel of the 
grace of God to you to-day? Yes. Then there is no sinner out 
of hell that has sinned too much for grace to save. That love 
which can reach to me, can reach to you. Now I know the 
riches of his grace, because I hope I prove it, and feel it in my 
own inmost heart, my dear hearer, and may you know it too, 
and then you will join with our poet, who says— 


“Then loudest of the crowd I’ll sing, 
While heaven’s resounding mansions ring 
With shouts of sovereign grace.” 


Go a little further now. We have thus looked at the wine 
and treasures, and at the monuments. But more. One thing 
which amazed the queen of Sheba, with regard to the riches of 
Solomon, was the sumptuousness of his table. Such multitudes 
-sat down to it to eat and drink, and though they were many, yet 
they all had enough and to spare. She lost all heart when she 
saw the provisions of a single day brought in. I forget just now, 
although I meant to refer to the passage, how many fat beasts, 
how many bullocks of the pasture, how many bucks and fallow 
deer and game of all sorts, and how many measures of flour, and 
how many gallons of oil were brought to Solomon’s table every 
day, but it was something marvellous; and the multitudes that 
had to feast were marvellous also, yet had they all enough. And 
now, think, my brethren, of the hospitalities of the God of grace 
each day. Ten thousand thousand of his people are this day sit- 
ting down to feast; hungry and thirsty they bring large appetites 
with them to the banquet, but not one of them returns unsatis- 
fied; there is enough for each, enough for all, enough for ever- 
more. Though the host that feed there 1s countless as the stars 
of heaven, yet I find that not one lacks his portion. He openeth 
his hand and supplies the want of every living saint upon the 
face of the earth. Think how much grace one saint requires, 90 
much that nothing but the Infinite could supply him for one day, 


My 


70 THE TREASURES OF GRACE. 


We burn so much fuel each day to maintain the fire of love in 
our hearts, that we might drain the mines of all their wealth of 
coal. Surely, were it not that we have infinite treasures of 
grace, the daily consumption of a single saint might outdemand 
everything that is to be found upon the face of the earth. And 
yet it is not one but many saints, and many hundreds, not for 
one day, but for many years; not for many years only, but gen 
eration after generation, century after century, race after race of 
men, living on the fulness of God in Christ. Yet are none of 
them starved; they all drink to the full; they eat and are sat 
isfied. What riches of grace, then, may we see in the sumptu- 
ousness of his hospitality. 

Sometimes, my brethren, I have thought, if I might but get 
the broken meat at God’s back door of grace, I should be satis- 
fied; Uke the woman who said, “The dogs eat of the crumbs 
that full from the master’s table ;” or like the prodigal, who said, 
“ Make me as one of thy hired servants.” But you will remem- 
ber that no child of God is ever made to live on husks; God 
does not give the parings of his grace to the meanest of them, 
but they are al] fed like Mephibosheth ; they eat from the king’s 
own table the damtiest dishes. And if one may speak for the 
rest, I think, in matters of grace we all have Benjamin’s mess— 
we all have ten times as much as we could have expected, and 
though not more than our necessities, yet are we often amazed 
at the marvellous plenty of grace which God gives us in the 
covenant and the promise. 

Now we turn to another point to illustrate the greatness of the 
riches of God’s grace. A man’s riches may often be judged of by 
the equipage of his children, the manner in which he dresses his 
servants and those of his honsehold. It is not to be expected 
that the child of the poor man, though he is comfortably clothed, 
should be arrayed in like garments to those which are worn by 
the sons of princes. Let us see, then, what are the robes in 
which God’s people are apparelled, and how they are attended. 
Here again I speak upon a subject where a large imagination is 
needed, and my own utterly fails me. God’s children are wrap- 
ped abcut with a robe, a seamless robe, which earth and heaven 
could not buy the like of if it were once lost. For texture it 


THE TREASURES OF GRACE val 


excels the fine linen of the merchants; for whiteness, it is pure1 
than the driven snow; no looms on earth could make it, but 
Jesus spent his life to work my robe of righteousness. There 
was a drop of blood in every throw of the shuttle, and every 
thread was made of his own heart’s agonies. Tis a robe that is 
divine, complete; a better one than Adam wore in the perfec 
tion of Eden. He had but a human righteousness though a per 
fect one, but we have a divinely perfect righteousness. Strangely, 
my soul, art thou arrayed, for thy Saviour’s garment is on thee; 
the royal robe of David is wrapped about his J onathan. Look 
at God’s people as they are clothed too in the garments of sane- 
tification. Was there ever such a robe as that? it is literally 
stiff with jewels. He arrays the meanest of his people every 
day as though it were a wedding day; hearrays them as a bride 
adorneth herself with jewels; he has given Ethiopia and Sheba 
for them, and he will have them dressed in gold of Ophir. 
What riches of grace then, must there be in God who thus 
clothes his children! 

But to conclude this point upon which I have not as yet bugun. 
If you would know the full riches of divine grace, read the 
Father’s heart when he sent his Son upon earth to die; read the 
lines upon the Father’s countenance when he pours his wrath 
upon his only begotten and his well-beloved Son. Read too the 
mysterious handwriting on the Saviour’s flesh and soul, when on 
the cross quivering with agony, the waves of swelling grief do 
o’er his bosom roll. If ye would know love ye must repair to 
Christ, and ye shall see a man so full of pain, that his head, his 
hair, his garments bloody be. ’Twas love that made him sweat 
as it were great drops of blood. If ye would know love, you 
must see the Omnipotent mocked by his creatures, you must 
hear the Immaculate slandered by sinners, you must hear the 
Eternal One groaning out his life, and crying in the agonies of 
death, “My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?” In fine, 
to sum up all in one, the riches of the grace of God are infinite, 
beyond all limit; they are inexhaustible, they can never be 
drained; they are all-sufficient, they are enough for every soul 
that ere shall come to take of them; there shall be enough for 
ever while earth endureth, watil the last vessel of merey shall 


be brought home safely. 


72 THE TREASURES OF GRACK. 


{]. Let me now dwell upon THE FORGIVENESS OF BINS. The 
treasure of God’s grace is the measure of our forgiveness; this 
forgiveness of sins is according to the riches of his grace. We 
may infer, then, that the pardon which God gives to the penitent 
is no niggard pardon. Have not you asked a man’s pardon 
sometimes, and he has said, “Yes, I forgive you,” and you have 
thought, “Well, ‘would not even have asked for pardon if I 
thought you would have given it in such a surly style as that; 
I might as well have continued as I was, as to be so ungracious- 
ly forgiven.” But when God forgives 4 man, though he be the 
chief of sinners, he puts out his hand and freely forgives; in 
fact, there is as much joy in the heart of God when he forgives, 
as there is in the heart of the sinner when he is forgiven; God 
is as blessed in giving as we are in receiving. It is his very 
nature to forgive; he must be gracious, he must be loving, and 
when he lets his heart of love out to free us from our sins, it is 
with no stinted stream; he doth it willingly, he upbraideth it 
not. Again: if pardon be in proportion to the riches of his 
grace, we may rest assured it is not a limited pardon, it is not 
the forgiving of some sins and the leaving of others upon the 
back. No, this were not Godlike, it were not consistent with 
the riches of his grace. When God forgives he draws the mark 
through every sin which the believer ever has committed, or 
ever will commit. That last point may stagger you, but I do 
believe with John Kent, that in the blood of Christ 


“There’s pardon for transgressions past, 
It matters not how black their cast; 
And, oh! my soul, with wonder view, 
For sins to come there’s pardon too.” 


However many, however heinous, your sins may have beet 
the moment you believe, they are every one of them blotted out. 
In the Book of God there is not a single sin against any man in 
this place whose trust is in Christ, not a single one, not even the 
shadow of one, not a spot, or the remnant of a sin remaining; all 
is gone. When Noah’s flood covered the deepest mountains, 
you may rest assured it covered the mole-hills;. and when God’s 
love covers the big sins it covers the little ones, and they are 
all gone at once! When a bill is receipted fully there is not aa 


é 


THE TKEASURES OF GRACE. he 


item which can be charged again, and when God pardons the 
sins of the believer there is not one single sin left; not even half- 
ali-one can ever be brought to his remembrance again. Nay, 
more ‘tan this; when God forgives, he not only forgives all, but 
once fox all. Some tell us that God forgives men and yet they 
are lost. A fine God yours! They believe that the penitent 
sinner finds mercy, but that if he slips or stumbles in a little 
while he will be taken out of the covenant of grace and will 
perish. Such a covenant I could not and would not believe in; 
I tread it beneath my feet as utterly despicable. The God whom 
I love when he forgives never punishes afterwards. By one sac- 
rifice there is a full remission of all sin that ever was against a 
believer, or that ever will be against him. Though you should 
live till your hair is bleached thrice over, till Methuselah’s thou- 
sand years should pass over your furrowed brow, not a single 
sin shall ever stand against you, nor shall you ever be punished 
for a single sin; for every sin is forgiven, fully forgiven, so that 
sot even part of the punishment shall be executed against you. 

“Well, but,” saith one, “how is it that God does punish his 
children?” I answer, he does not. He chastises them as a 
father, but that is a different thing from the punishment of a 
judge. If the child of a judge were brought up to the bar, and 
that child were freely forgiven all that he had done amiss, it 
justice exonerated and acquitted him, it might nevertheless hap- 
pen that there was evil in the heart of that child, which the father, 
out of love to the child, might have to whip out of him. But 
there is a great deal of difference between a rod in the hand of 
the executioner, and a rod ina father’s hand. Let God smite 
me, if I sin against him, yet it is not because of the guilt of sin; 
there is no punishment in it whatever, the penal clause is done 
away with. It is only that he may cure me of my fault, that he 
may fetch the folly out of my heart. Do you chasten your 
children vindictively because you are angry with them? No; 
but because you love them; if you are what parents should be, 
the chastisement is a proof of your affection, and your heart 
smarts more than their body pains, when you have to chasten 
them for what they have done amiss. God is not angry against 
his children, nor is there a sin in them which he will punish. He 

4 


T4 THE TREASURES OF GRACE. 


will whip it out of them, but punish them for it he will not. O, 
glorious grace! It is a gospel worth preaching. 


“The moment a sinner believes, 
And trusts in his crucified God 
His pardon at once he receives, 
Redemption in full through Christ’s blood.” 


Having thus spoken of the pardon of sin as being fully commen 
surate with the grace of God, I will put this question to my hearer: 
My friend, are you a forgiven man? Are your sins all gone? 
“No,” saith one, “I cannot say they are, but I am doing my 
best to reform.” Ah! you may do your best to reform, I hope 
you will, but that will never wash out your past sins. All the 
waters of the rivers of reformation can never wash away & sin- 
gle blood-red stain of guilt. “But,” saith one, “may I, just as I 
am, believe that my sins are forgiven?” No, but I tell thee what 
thou mayst do. If God help thee, thou mayst now cast thyself 
simply upon the blood and righteousness of Christ; and the 
moment thou dost that, thy sins are all gone, and gone so that 
they never can return again. “He that believeth on the Lord 
Jesus Christ shall be saved.” Nay, he is saved in the moment 

of his faith. He is no more in the sight of God received as a 
sinner; Christ has been punished for him. The righteousness 
of Christ is wrapped about him, and he stands accepted in the 
beloved. “Well, but,” saith one, “I can believe that a man, 
after he has been a long time a Christian, may know his sins tobe 
forgiven, but I cannot imagine that } can know it at once.” The 
knowledge of our pardon does not always come the moment 
we believe, but the fact of our pardon is before our knowledge of 
it, and we may be pardoned before we know it. But if thou 
believest on the Lord Jesus Christ with all thine heart, I will tell 
thee this: if thy faith be free of all self-trust thou shalt know to- 
day that thy sins are forgiven, for the witness of the Spirit shall 
bear witness with thy heart, and thou shalt hear that secret, still 
small voice, saying, “Be of good cheer; thy sins, which are 
many, are all forgiven.” “Oh,” saith one, “I would give all I 
have for that.” And you might give all you have, but you 
would not have it at that pvice. You might give the first-born 


THE TREASURES OF GRACH. 7D 


for your transgression, the fruit of your body for the sin of your 
soul; you might offer rivers of oil, and ten thousand of the fat 
of fed beasts; you would not have it for money, but you may 
have it for nothing; itis freely brought to you; you are bidden 
to take it. Only acknowledge your sin, and put your trust in 
Christ, and there is not one man among you who shall hear 
aught about his sin in the day of judgment. It shall be cast into 
the depth of the sea—it shall be carried away forever. 

I will give you a picture, and then leave this subject. See, 
there stands the high priest of the Jews. A goat is brought to 
him—it is called the “ scape-goat.” He puts his hands upon the 
head of this goat, and begins to make confession of sin. Will 
you come and do the like? Jesus Christ is the scape-goat ; 
come and lay our hand on his thorn-crowned head by faith, and 
make confession of your sin, as the high priest did of old. Have 
you done it? Is your sin confessed? Now believe that Jesus 
Christ is able and willing to take your sin away. Rest wholly 
and entirely on him. Now what happens? The high-priest 
takes the scape-goat, gives it into the hand of a trusty man, who 
leads it over hill and down dale, till he is many miles away, and 
then, suddenly loosing its bonds, he frightens it, and the goat 
flees with all its might. The man watches it until it is gone, 
and he can see it no more. He comes back, and he says—“1 
took the scape-goat away, and it vanished out of my sight; itis 
gone into the wilderness.” Ah, my hearer, and if thou hast 
put thy sins on Christ by a full confession, remember he has ta- 
ken them all away, as far as the east is from the west, they are 
gone, and gone eternally. Thy drunkenness, thy swearing is 
gone, thy lying, thy theft is gone, thy Sabbath-breaking, thy evil 
thoughts are gcne—all gone, and thou shalt never see them 
again. 


Ul. And now I conclude by noticing THE BLESSED PRIVILEGES 
WHICH ALWAYS FOLLOW THE FORGIVENESS WHICH I8 GIVEN TO US 
ACCORDING TO THE GRACE or Gop. I[ think there are a great many 
people who do not believe there is any reality in religion at all. 
They think it is a very respectable thing to go to church and to 
chapel, but as to ever enjoying a consciousness than their sins © 


76 THE TREASURES OF GRACE. 


are-all forgiven, they never think about that. And I must con- 
fess that, in the religion of these modern times, there does not 
seem to be much reality. I do not hear at this day that clear, 
ringing, distinct proclamation of the gospel that { want to hear 
It is a grand thing to carry the gospel to all manner of men, to 
take it the theatre, and the like, but we want ‘o have the gos- 
pel undiluted—the milk must have a little less water with it. 
There must be a more distinct, palpable truth taught to the peo- 
ple, a something that they can really lay hold of, a something 
that they can understand, even if they will not believe it. | 
trust no man will misunderstand me this morning in what I have 
said. There ts such a thing as having aN our sins forgiven now. 
There is sucha thing as knowing it and enjoying it. Now I will 
show you what will be the happiness resulting to you, should 
you obtain this blessing. 

{In the first place, you will have peace of conscience. That 
heart of yours that throbs so fast when you are alone, will be 
quite still and quiet. You will be least alone when you are 
alone. That fear of yours which makes you quicken your step 
in the dark, because you are afraid of something, and you do not 
know what, will all be gone. Ihave heard of aman who was so 
constantly in debt, and continually being arrested by the bai- 
liffs, that once upon a time, when going by some area railings, 
having caught his sleeve upon one of the rails, he turned round 
and said, “1 don’t owe you anything, sir,” He thought it was a 
bailiff. And so it is with unforgiven sinners, wherever they are, 
they think they are going to be arrested. They can enjoy noth- 
ing. Even their mirth, what is it, but the color of joy, the 
crackling of thorns under the pot? there is no solid, steady fire. 
But when once a man is forgiven, he can walk anywhere. Te 
says, “to me it is nothing whether [ live or die, whether ocean 
jepths engulf me, or whether I am buried beneath the avalanche ; 
with sin forgiven, | am secure. Death has no sting to him. His 
conscience is at rest. Then he goes a step further. Know‘ng 
his sins to be forgiven, he has joy unspeakable. No man has 
such sparkling eyes as the true Christian; a man then knows 
his interest in Christ, and can read his title clear. He is a hap- 
py man, and must be happy. His troubles, what are they 3 


THE TREASURES OF GRACK. ie 


Less than nothing, anu vanity; for all his sins are forgiven. So 
it is with the Christian, he can say in his cottage, when he 
sits down to his crust of bread. thank God I have no sin mixed 
in my cup—it is all forgiven. The bread may be dry, but it is 
not half so dry as it would be if I had to eat it with the bitter 
herbs of a guilty conscience, and with a terrible apprehension of 
the wrath of God. He has a joy that will stand all weathers, a 
joy that will keep in all climates, a joy that shines in the dark, 
and glitters in the night as well as in the day. 

Then, to go further, such a man has access to God. Another 
man, with unforgiven sin about him, stands afar off; and if he 
thinks of God at all, it is as a consuming fire. But the forgiven 
Christian, looking up to God, when he sees the mountains and 
the hills, and rolling streams and the roaring flood, he says, “ My 
father made them all;” and he clasps hands with the Almighty, 
across the infinite expanse that sunders man from his Maker. 
His heart flies up to God. He dwells near to him, and he feels 
that he can talk to God as a man talketh with this friend. 

Then another effect of this is, that the believer fears no hell. 
There are solemn things in the Word of God, but they do not 
affright the believer. There may be a pit that is bottomless, 
but into that his foot shall never slide; it is true there is a fire 
that never shall be quenched, but it cannot burn him. That fire 
is for the sinner; but he has no sin imputed to him, it is all for- 
given. The banded host of all the devils in hell cannot take 
him there, for he has not a single sin that can be laid to his 
charge. Daily sinning though he is, he feels those sins are all 
atoned for; he knows that Christ has been punished in his stead, 
and therefore Justice cannot touch him again. 

Once more; the forgiven Christian is expecting heaven. He 
is waiting for the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ, for if death 
should intervene before that glorious advent, he knows that to 
him sudden death is sudden glory; and in the possession of a 
quiet conscience and of peace with God, he can go up to his 
~ chamber when the last solemn hour shall come; he can gather 
up his feet in his bed; he can bid farewell to his brethren and 
companions, to his wife and to his children, and can shut his eye in 
peace without a fear but that he shall open them in heaven, 


te) THE TREASURES OF GRACE. 


Perhaps never does the joy of forgiven sin come out more bright 
ly than it does on a dying bed. It has often been my privilege 
to test the power of religion when I have been sitting by the 
bedside of the dying. There is a young girl in heaven now, once 
a member of this church. I went with one of my beloved dea- 
cons to see her when she was very near her departure. She was 
in the last stage of consumption. Fair and sweetly beautiful 
she looked, and I think I never heard such syllables as those 
which fell from that girl’s lips. She had had disappointments, 
and trials, and troubles, but all these she had not a word to say 
about, except that she blessed God for them; they had brought 
her nearer to the Saviour. And when we asked her whether she 
was not afraid of dying, “ No,” she said, “the only thing I fear 
is this, Iam afraid of living, lest my patience should wear out. 
[ have not said an impatient word yet, sir; I hope I shall not. 
[t is sad to be so very weak, but I think if I had my choice, I 
would rather be here than be in health, for it is very precious to 
me}; I know that my Redeemer liveth, and I am waiting for the 
moment when he shall send his chariot of fire to take me up to 
him.” I put the question, “ Have you not any doubts?” “No, 
none, sir; why shouldI? I clasp my arms around the neck of 
Christ.” “And have not you any fear about your sins?” “No, 
sir, they are all forgiven; I trust the Saviour’s precious blood.” 
“ And do you think that you will be as brave as this when you 
. come actually to die?” “Not if he leaves me, sir, but he will 
never leave me, for he has said, ‘I will never leave thee nor for- 
sake thee.’” ‘There is faith, dear brothers and sisters; may we 
all have it and receive forgiveness of sins according to the riches 
of his grace. Amun. 


SERMON V. 
FAITH ILLUSTRATED. 


[ Few subjects command more the preacher’s thought, or the 
hearer’s attention, than faith. This discourse, delivered in 
Surrey Music Hall, August 21st, 1859, presents some aspects of 
this Christian Grace in a practical and impressive manner. ] 


“For the which cause I also suffer these things: nevertheless I am not 
ashamed: for I know whom I have believed, and am persuaded that he is 
able to keep that which I have committed unto him against that day.”— 


2 Trworay, i. 12. 


Aw assurance of our safety in Christ will be found useful to 
us all in all states of experience. When Jesus sent forth his 
seventy chosen disciples, endowed with miraculous powers, they 
performed great wonders, and naturally enough were somewhat 
elated when they returned to tell him of their deeds. Jesus 
marked their tendency to pride; he saw that in the utterance— 
“Behold, even devils were subject to us,” there was mingled 
much of self-congratulation and boasting. What cure, think 
you, did he administer? or what was the sacred lesson that he 
taught them which might prevent their being exalted above 
measure? “Nevertheless,” said he, “rejoice not in this, but 
rather rejoice because your names are written in heaven.” The 
assurance of our eternal interest in Christ may help to keep us 
humble in the day of our prosperity ; for when God multiplies 
our wealth, when he blesses our endeavors, when he speeds the 
plough, when he wafis the good ship swiftly onward, he coun- 
terbalances all with the assurance that we have something better 


\ 


80 FAITH ILLUSTRATED, 


than thest things, and therefore we must not set our affections 
upon the things of earth, but upon things above, and let our 
heart be where our greatest treasure is. I say, better than any 
lancet to spill the superfluous blood of our boasting ; better 
than any bitter medicine to chase the burning fever of our 
pride ; better than any mixture of the most pungent ingredien‘s 
is this most precious ard hallowed wine of the covenant—a re. 
membrance of our safety in Christ. This, this alone, opened 
up to us by the Spirit, will suffice to keep us in that happy low- 
liness, which is the true position of the full-grown man in Christ 
Jesus. 

But note this, when at any time we are cast down with mul 
tiplied afflictions, and oppressed with sorrow, the very same fact 
which kept us humble in prosperity, will preserve us from des- 
pair in adversity. For mark you here, the apostle was sur- 
rounded by a great flight of affliction; he was compassed about 
with troubles ; he suffered within and without; and yet he says, 
“Nevertheless, I am not ashamed.” But what is that which 
preserves him from sinking? It is the same truth which kept 
the ancient disciples fromm overweening pride. It is the sweet 
persuasion of his interest in Christ. “ For I know whom I have 
believed, and am persuaded that he is able to keep that which I 
have committed unto him against that day.” Get then, Chris- 
tian brethren and friends, get assurance ; be not content with 
hope, get confidence; rest not in faith, labor after the full assur- 
ance of faith; and never be content, my hearer, till thou canst 
say thou knowest thy election, thou art sure of thy redemption, 
and thou art certain of thy preservation unto that day. 

I propose this morning in preaching upon this text to labor 
both for the edification of the saint, and the conversion of the 
sinner J! shall divide the text very simply thus: First, we have 
in it the grandest action of the Christian’s life, namely, the com- 
mitting of our eternal interests into the hand of Christ. Sec- 
ondly, we have the justification of this grand act of truss—“1 
know in whom | have trusted.” I have not trusted one whose 
character is unknown to me; [ am not foolish; I: have sure 
grounds for what I have done. And then we have, Thirdly, the 
most blessed effect of this confidence—“1 am persuaded that he 
is able to keep that which I have committed unto him.” 


FAITH ILLUSTRATED. 81 


I. Tae Granpest Action or THE Curistian’s Lire. 

With all our preaching, I am afraid that we too much omit 
- the simple explanation of the essential act in salvation. I have 
feared that the anxious enquirer might visit many of our churches 
and chapels, month after month, and yet he would not get a 
clear idea of what he must do to be saved. He would come 
away with an indistinct notion that he was to believe ; but what 
he was to believe he would not know. He would, perhaps, ob- 
tain some glimmering of the fact that he must be saved through 
the merits of Christ, but how those merits can become available 
to him, he would still be left to guess. I know at least that 
this was my case—that when sincere and anxious to do or be 
anything which might save my soul, I was utterly in the dark as 
to the way in which my salvation might be rendered thoroughly 
secure. Now, this morning, I hope I shall be able to put it in 
such a light that he who runs may read, and that the wayfaring 
man, though a fool, may not err therein. 

The apostle says, he committed himself into the hands of 
Christ. His soul with all its eternal interests; his scul with 
all its sins, with all its hopes, and all its fears, he had put into 
the hands of Christ, as the grandest and most precious deposit 
which man could ever make. He had taken himself just as he 
was, and had surrendered himself to Christ, saying—“ Lord save 
me, for I cannot save myself; I give myself up to thee, freely 
relying upon thy power, and believing in thy love. I give my 
soul up to thee to be washed, cleansed, saved and preserved, and 
at last brought home to heaven.” This act of committing him 
self $0 Christ was the first act which ever brought real comfort 
to his spirit; it was the act which he must continue to perform 
whenever he would escape from a painful sense of sin; the act 
with which he must enter heaven itself, if he would die in peace 
and see God’s face with acceptance. He must still continue to 
commit himself into the keeping of Christ. 

I take it that when the apostle committed himself to Christ, 
he meant these three things. He meant first, that from that 
good hour he renownced all dependence upon his own efforts to 
save himself. The apostle had done very much, after a fashion, 


towards his own salvation. He commenced with all the advan- 
4* 


82 FAITH ILLUSTRATED. 


tages of ancestry. He was a Hebrew of the Hebrews, of the 
tribe of Benjamin, as touching the law a Pharisee. He was one 
of the very straightest of the straightest sect of his religion. 
So anxious was he to obtain salvation by his own efforts, that 
he left no stene unturned. Whatever Pharisee might be a hy- 
pocrite, Paul was none. Though he tithed his anise, and his 
mint, and his cummin, he did not neglect the weightier matters 
of the law. He might have united with truth, in the affirmation 
of the young man, “ All these things have I kept from my youth 
up.” Hear ye his own testimony: “Though I might also have 
confidence in the flesh. If any other man thinketh that he hath 
whereof he might trust in the flesh, kmore.” Being exceedingly 
desirous to serve God, he sought to put down what he thought 
was the pestilent heresy of Christ. Being exceeding hot in his 
endeavors against every thing that he thought to be wrong, he 
persecuted the professors of the new religion, hunted them in 
every city, brought them into the synagogue, and compelled 
them to blaspheme ; and when he had emptied his own country, 
he must needs take a journey to another, that he might there 
show his zeal in the cause of his God, by bringing out those 
whom he thought to be the deluded followers of an imposter. 
But suddenly Paul’s mind is changed. Almighty grace leads 
him to see that he is working in a wrong direction, that his toil 
is lost, that as well might Sisyphus seek to roll his stone up hill, 
as for him to find a road to heaven up the steeps of Sinai; that 
as well might the daughters of Danus hope to fill the bottomless 
cauldron with a bucket full of holes, as Paul indulge the idea 
that he could fill up the measure of the laws’ demands. Conse- 
quently he feels that all he has done is nothing worth, and com- 
ing to Christ he cries, “ But what things were gain to me, those 
I counted loss for Christ. Yea, doubtless, and | count all things 
but loss for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my 
Lord; for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do 
count them but dung, that I may win Christ, and be found in | 
him, not having mine own righteousness, which is of the law, 
but that which is through the faith of Christ, the righteousness 
which is of God by faith.” 

And now, my dear friends, if you would be saved, this is what 


FAITH ILLUSTRATED. §3 


you must do. I hope many of you have already performed the 
solemn act; you have said to Jesus in the privacy of your closet, 
“ O Lord, I have tried to save myself, but I renounce all my en- 
deavors. Once I said, ‘I am no worse than my neighbors; my 
goodness shall preserve me. Once I said, ‘I have been bap- 
tized, I have taken the sacrament, in these things will I trust,’ 
and now, Lord, I cast all this false confidence to the winds. 


“ ‘The best obedience of my hands 
Dares not appear before thy throne 
But faith can answer thy demands, 
By pleading what my Lord has done.’” 


You cannot be saved, if you have one hand on self and the other 
hand on Christ. Let go, sinner; renounce all dependence in 
anything thou canst do. Cease to be thine own keeper, give up 
the futile attempt to be thy own Saviour, and then thou wilt 
fave taken the first step to heaven. There are but two—the 
first is, out of self; the next is, into Christ. When Christ is 
thy all, then art thou safe. 

But again, when the apostle says he committed his soul to the 
keeping of Christ, he means that he had ¢mplicit confidence that 
Christ would save him, now that he had relinquished all trust in 
self, Some men have gone far enough to feel that the best per- 
formance of their hands cannot be accepted before the bar of 
God. They have learned that their most holy acts are full of 
sin, that their most faithful service falls short of the demands of 
the law; they have relinquished self, but they are not able yet 
to see that Christ can and will save them. They are waiting for 
some great revelation ; they think, perhaps, that by some mar- 
vellous electric shock, or some miraculous feeling within them, 
they will be led to place their confidence in Christ. They want 
to see an angel or a vision, or to hear a voice. Their cry is, 
“ How could I think that Jesus would save such an one as I am? 
Lam too vile, or else I am too hardened; it is not likely that 
Christ would ever save me.” Now, I doubt not that the apostle 
had felt all this, but he overcame all this attacking of sin, and 
came to Christ at last, and said, “Jesus, I feel that thou art wor- 
thy of my confidence. Behold, I the chief of sinners am, I have 


34 FAITH ILLUSTRATED. 


iothing in myself that can assist thee in taking me to heaven ; l 
shall kick and struggle against thee rather than assist thee. But 
yehold, I feel that such is thy power, and such thy love, that I 
commit myself to thee. Take me as I am, and make me what 
thou wouldst have me be. Iam vile, but thou art worthy; I am 
lost, but thou art the Saviour; I am dead, but thou art the 
quickener; take me, I beseech thee; I put my trust in thee, and 
though I perish, I will perish, relying on thy blood. If I must 
die, I will die with my arms about thy cross, for thou art worthy 
of confidence, and on thee do I rely.” 

And now, my friends, if you will be safe, you must, in the 
strength of the Holy Ghost, do this also. You say you have 
given up all trust in self—well and good; now place your trust 
in Christ, repose your all on him; drop into his arms; cast 
yourself into his power; lay hold on him. You know how Joab, 
when he fled from the sword of Solomon, laid hold on the horns 
of the altar, thinking that surely when he had laid hold on the 
altar he was safe. His was vain confidence, for he was dragged 
frum the horns of the altar and slain. But if thou canst lay 
hold on the horns of the altar of God, even Christ, thou art most 
surely safe, and no sword of vengeance can ever reach thee. 

I saw the other day a remarkable picture, which I shall use 
as an illustration of the way of salvation by faith in Jesus. An 
offender had committed a crime for which he must die, but it 
was in the olden time when churches were considered to be 
sanctuaries in which criminals might hide themselves and so 
escape. See the transgressor—he rushes towards the church, 
the guarJs pursue him with their drawn swords, all athirst for 
his blond ; they pursue him even to the church door. He rushes 
up the steps, and just as they are about to overtake him and hew 
him in pieces on the threshold of the church, out comes the 
bishop, and holding up the crucifix, he cries, “ Back, back! stain 
not the precincts of God’s house with bl-od! stand back !” and 
the guards at once respect the emblem and stand back, while 
the poor fugitive hides himself behind the robes of the priest. 
It is even so with Christ. The guilty sinner flies to the cross— 
flies straight away to Jesus, and though Justice pursues him, 
Christ lifts up his wounded hands and cries to Justice, “Stand 


FAITH ILLUSTRATED. 85 


back! stand back! 1 shelter this sinner; in the secret place of 
my tabernacle do I hide him; I will not suffer him to perish, for 
he puts his trust in me.” 

Sinner, fly‘to Christ! But thou sayest, “I am too vile.” 
The viler thou art, the more wilt thou honor him by believing 
that he is able to make thee clean. “But I am too great a sin- 
ner.” Then the more honor shall be given to him that thou art 
able to confide in him, great sinner though thou art. If you 
have a little sickness, and you tell your physician—“Sir! I am 
quite confident in your skill to heal,” there is no great compli- 
ment; but if you are sore sick with a complication of diseases, 
and you say—*Sir! I seek no better skill, I will ask no more 
excellent advice, [ trust alone in you,” what an honor have you 
conferred on him, that you could trust your life in his hands 
when it was in extreme danger. Do the like with Christ; put 
your soul in his care, dare it, venture it; cast thyself simply on 
him ; let nothing but faith be in thy soul; believe him, and thou 
shalt never be mistaken in thy trust. 

But I think I have not completely stated all the apostle meant, 
when he said that he committed himself to Christ. He certainly 
meant those two things—selfrenunciation, and implicit belief in 
Christ’s power and willingness to save; but in the third place, 
the apostle meant that he did make a full and free surrender of 
himself to Christ, to be Christ’s property, and Christ’s servant 
for ever. If you would be saved, you mnst not be your own. 
Salvation is through being bought with a price; and if you be 
bought with a price, and thus saved, remember, from that day 
forward you will not be your own. To-day, as an ungodly sin- 
ner, you are your own master, free to follow the lusts of the 
flesh; or, rather Satan is your great tyrant, and you are under 
bondage to him. If you would be saved, you must by the aid 
of the Holy Spirit now renounce the bondage of Satan and come 
to Christ, saying, “Lord, I am willing to give up all sin, it is 
not in my power to be perfect, but I wish it were; make me per- 
fect. There is not a sit. I wish to keep; take all away; I pre- 
sent myself before thee. Wash me, make me clean. Do what 
thou wilt in me. I make no reserve, I make a full surrender 
of all to thee. And then you must give up to Christ all you 


46 FAITH ILLUSTRATED. 


are, and all you have by solemn indenture, signed and sealed by 
your own heart. You must say, in the words of the sweet Mo. 
ravian hymn— 
“Take thou my soul and all my powers ; 

O take my memory, mind, and will, 

Take all my goods, and all my hours, 

Take all I know, and all I feel; 

Take all I think, and speak, and do; 

O take my heart, but make it new.” 


Accept the sacrifice—I am worthless, but receive me through 
thy own merits. Take and keep me, I am, I hope I ever shall 
be thine. 

I have now explained that act which is after all the only one 
which marks the day of salvation to the soul. I will give one 
or two figures, however, to set it in a clearer light. Whena 
man hath gold and silver in his house, he fears lest some thief 
may break through and steal, and therefore, if he is a wise man, 
he seeks out a bank in which to store his money. He makes a 
deposit of his gold and his silver; he says, in effect, “Take that, 
sir; keep it forme. To-night I shall sleep securely, I shall have 
no thought of thieves; my treasure is in your hands. Take 
care of that for me, when IJ need it, at your hands shall I require 
it.” Now, in faith, we do just the same with our blessed Re- 
deemer. We bring our soul just as it is and give it up to him. 
“Lord, I cannot keep it; sin and Satan will be sure to ruin it— 
take it and keep it for me, and in that day when God shall re- . 
quire the treasure, stand my sponsor, and on my behalf return 
my soul to my Maker, kept and preserved to the end.” Or take 
another figure. When your adventurous spirit hath sought to 
climb some lofty mountain, delighted with the prospecty ou scale 
many and many a steep; onward you climb up the rocky crags 
until at last you arrive at the verge of the snow and ice. There 
in the midst of precipices that scarcely know a bottom, and of 
summits that seem inaccessible, you are suddenly surrounded 
with a fog. Perhaps it becomes worse and worse, until a snow 
storm completes your bewilderment. You cannot see a step be- 
fore you; your track is lost. A guide appears: “I know this 
mountain,” says he. “In my early days, have I climbed it with my 


FAITH ILLUSTRATED. 87 


father. O’er each of these crags have I leaped in pursuit of the 
chamois; I know every chasm and cavern. If you will follow 
me, even through the darkness, I will find the path and bring 
you down; but mark, before I undertake to guide you in safety, 
T demand of you implicit trust. You must not plant your feet 
where you think it safest, but where I shall bid you. Wherever 
I bid you climb or descend you must implicitly obey, and I un- 
dertake on my part to bring you safely down to your house 
again.” You do so—you have many temptations to prefer your 
own judgment to his, but you resist them—and you are safe. 
Even so must you do with Christ. Lost to-day, and utterly be- 
wildered, Christ appears. “Let me guide you, let me bean eye 
to thee through the thick darkness; let me be thy foot, lean on 
me in the slippery place, let me be thy very life; lut me wrap 
thee in my crimson vest to keep thee from the tempest and the 
storm.” Will you now trust him; rely entirely, simply, and 
implicitly upon him? If so, the grand act of your life is done, 
and you are a saved man, and on the eternal shore you shall one 
day plant your delighted feet, and praise the name of him who 
saved you from your sins. 

I must add, however, that this act of faith must not be per- 
formed only once, but it must be continued as long as you live. 
As long as you live you must have no other confidence but 
“Jesus only.” You must take him, to have and to hold through 
life and in death, in tempest and in sunshine, in poverty and in 
wealth, never to part or sunder from him. You must take him 
to be your only prop, your only pillar from this day forth and 
forever. What sayest thou, sinner? Does God the Holy Ghost 
lead thee to say “Ay?” Does thy heart now confide in Jesus? 
If so, let the angels sing, for a soul is born to God, and a brand 
is plucked from the eternal fire. I have thus described faith in 
Christ—the committing of the soul to him. This brings us to 
our second point. 


Il. Tue Justirication oF THIS GRAND act oF Trust. 

Confidence is sometimes felly; trusting in man is always so. 
When I exhort you, then, to put your entire confidence in Christ, 
am { justified in so doing? and when the apostle could say that 


88 FAITH ILLUSTRATED, 


he trusted alone in Jesus, and had cornmitted himself to him, 
was he a wise man or a fool? What saith the apostle? “Iam 
no fool,” said he, “for | know whom J have believed. Ihave not 
trusted to an unknown and untried pretender. I have not relied 
upon one whose character I could suspect. I have confidence 
in one whose power, whose willingness, whose love, whose truth- 
fulness 1 know. I know whom I have believed.” When silly 
women put their trust in yet more silly and wicked priests 
they may say possibly that they know whom they have believed. 
But we may tell them that their knowledge must be ignorance 
indeed—that they are greatly deluded in imagining that any 
man, be he who he may, or what he may, can have any power 
for the salvation of his fellow’s soul.‘ You come and ask me to 
repose my soul in you; and who are you? “J am an ordained 
priest of the Church of Rome.” And who ordained you? “I 
was ordained by such a one.” And who ordained him? “It 
cometh after all,” saith he, “from the Pope.” And who is he, 
and what is he more than any other man, or any other impos- 
tor? What ordination can he confer? “He obtained it di- 
rectly from Peter.” Did he? Let the link be proved; and if 
he did, what was Peter, and where has God given Peter power 
to forgive sin—a power which he should transmit to all genera- 
tions? Begone! The thick pollutions of thine abominable 
church forbid the idea of descent from any apostle but the trait- 
or Judas. Upon the Papal throne men worse than devils have 
had their seat, and even a woman, big with her adulteries, once 
reigned as head of thine accursed church. Go purge the filthiness - 
of thy priesthood, the debauchery of thy nunneries, and the 
Stygian filth of thy mother city, the old harlot Rome. Talk not- 
of pardoning others, while fornication is licensed in Rome itself, 
and her ministers are steeped to the throat in iniquity. But to 
return. 

I rest no more on Peter than Peter could rest in himself; Pe 
ter must rest on Christ, as a poor guilty sinner himself, an im. 
perfect man who denied his Master with oaths and curses. He 
must rest where I must rest, and we must stand together on the 
same great rock on which Christ doth build his church, ever his 
blood and his everlasting merits. I marvel that any should be 


FAITH ILLUSTRATED. 89 


found to have such confidence in men, that they should put their - 
souis in their hands. If, however, any of you wish to trust ina 
priest, let me advise you, if you do trust him, to do it wholly 
and fully. Trust him with your cash-box, trust him with your 
gold and silver. Perhaps you object to that. You don’t feel 
at all inclined to go that length. But, my friend, if you cannot 
trust the man with your gold and silver, pray don’t trust him 
with your soul. I suggested this because I thought you might 
smile and at once detect your error. If you could not trust 
such a fox with your business; if you would as soon commit 
your flocks to the custody of a wolf, why will you be fool enough 
to lay your soul at the feet of some base priest, who, likely enough, 
is ten thousand times more wicked than yourself? 

Was Paul then justified in his confidence in Christ? He says 
he was, because he knew Christ. And what did he know? Paul 
knew, first of all, Christ’s God-head. Jesus Christ is the Son of 
God, co-equal and 2o-eternal with the Father. If my soul be in 
his hand, 


“Where 18 the power can reach it there, 
Or what can pluck it thence ?” 


If the wings of Omnipotence do cover it, if the eye of Omnipo- 
tence is fixed upon it, and if the heart of eternal love doth cher- 
ish it, how can it be destroyed? Trust not thy soul, my fellow- 
man, anywhere but with thy God. But Jesus is thy God, rely 
thou fully in him, and think not that thou canst place a confi- 
dence too great in him who made the heavens, and bears the 
world upon his shoulders. Paul knew too that Christ was the 
Redeemer. Paul had seen in vision Christ in the garden. He 
had beheld him sweat, as it were, great drops of blood. By 
faith, Paul had seen Jesus hanging on the cross. He had marked 
his agonies on the tree of doom. He had listened to his death 
shriek, of “It is finished !” and he felt that the atonement which 
Jesus offered was more than enough to recompense for the sin 
of man. Paul might have said, “I am not foolish in confiding 
my soul in the pierced and blood-stained hand of him whose sac- 
rifice hath satisfied the Father, and opened the gates of heaven 
to all believers.” Further, Paul knew that Christ was risen 


' 


v0 FAITH ILLUSTRATED. 


from the dead. By faith he saw Christ at the right hand of God 
pleading with his Father for all those who commit themselve: 
to his hand. Paul knew Christ to be the all-prevailing inter- 
cessor. He said to himself, “I am not wrong in believing him, 
for I know whom I have trusted, that when he pleads, the Father 
will not deny him, and when he asks, sooner might he even die 
than he become deaf to Jesus’ prayer.” This was another rea 
son why Paul dared to trust in Christ. He knew his Godhead 
he knew his redemption, he knew his resurrection, he knew his 
ascension, and intercession, and I may add, Paul knew the love 
of Christ, that love which passeth kindness; higher than thought, 
and deeper than conception. He knew Christ’s power, that he 
was Omnipotent, the King of kings\ He knew Christ’s faithful- 
ness; that he was the God, and could not lie. He knew his 
immutability, that he was “Jesus Christ, the same yesterday, 
to-day, and forever;” and having known Christ in every glorious 
office, in every divine attribute, and in all the beauty of his com- 
plex character, Paul said, “I can with confidence repose in him, 
for I know him; I have trusted, and am persuaded that he is 
able to keep that which I have committed to him.” 

But Paul not only knew these things by faith, but he knew 
much of them by experience. Our knowledge of Christ is some- 
what like climbing one of our Welsh mountains. When you 
are at the base you see but little; the mountain itself appears 
to be but one half as high as it really is. Confined in a little 
valley, you discover scarcely anything but the rippling brooks 
as they descend into the stream at the base. Climb the first 
rising knoll, and the valley lengthens and widens beneath your 
feet. Go up higher, and higher still, till you stand upon the 
summit of one of the great roots that start out as spurs from the 
sides of the mountain, you see the country for some four or five 
miles round, and you are delighted with the widening prospect. 
But go onward, and onward, an¢ onward, and how the scene en- 
larges, till at last, when you are on the summit, and look east, west, 
north, and south, you see almost all England lying before you. 
Yonder is a forest in some distant county, perhaps two hundred 
miles away, and yonder the sea, and there a shining river and 
the smoking chimnies of a manufacturing town, or there the 


FAITH ILLUSTRATED. 91 


masts of the ships in some well known port. All these things 
please and delight you, and you say, “I could not have imagined 
that so much could be seen at this elevation.” Now, the Chris- 
tian life is of the same order. When we first believe in Christ, 
we see but little of him. The higher we climb, the more we 
discover of his excellencies and his beauties. But who has ever 
gained the summit? Who has ever known all the fulness of the 
heights, and depths, and lengths and breadths of the love ot 
Christ, which passeth knowledge? Paul now grows old, sitting, 
grey-haired, shivering in a dungeon in Rome—he could say, with 
greater power than we can, “I ‘now whom I have believed ! — 
fur each experience had been like the climbing of a hill, each trial 
had been like the ascending to another summit, and his death 
seemed like the gaining of the very top of the mountain from 
which he could see the whole of the. faithfulness and the love of 
him to whom he had committed his soul. And now comes the 
conclusion. 


Ill. Taz Apostiz’s Con¥FIpDENCcE. 

The apostle said, “I am persuaded that he is able to keep that 
which I have committed to him.” See this man. He is sure 
he shall be saved. But why? Paul! art thou sure that thou 
canst keep thyself? “No,” says he, “1 have nothing to do with 
that :” and yet thou art sure of thy salvation! ‘‘ Yes,” saith he, 
“Tam!” How is it, then? “ Why, I am persuaded that he is 
able to keep me. Christ, to whom I commit myself, I know 
hath power enough to hold me to the end.” Martin Luther 
was bold enough to exclaim, “Let him that died for my soul, 
see to the salvation of it.” Let us catechise the apostle for a few 
minutes, and see if we cannot shake his confidence. Paul! thou 
hast had many trials, and thou wilt have many more. What if 
thou shouldst be subject to the pangs of hunger, combined with 
those of thirst. If not a mouthful of bread should pass thy 
mouth to nourish thy body, or a drop of water should comfor‘ 
thee, will not thy faith fail thee then? If provisions be offered 
thee, on condition of the denial of thy faith, dost thou not ima- 
gine that thou wilt be vanquished, and that the pangs of nature 
will overpcwer thee? “No,” says Paul, “famine shall not 


&2 FAITH ILLUSTRATED. 


-quench my faith; for the keeping of my faith is in the hands of 

Christ.” But what if, combined with this, the whole world 
should rise against thee, and scoff thee? What if hunger within 
should echo to the shout of scorn without? wouldst thou not 
then deny thy faith? If, like Demas, every other Christian 
should turn to the silver of this world, and deny the Master, 
wouldst not thou go with them? “No,” saith the apostle, “my 
soul is not in my keeping, else might it soon apostatize; it is in 
the hand of Christ; though all men should leave me, yet will he 
keep me.” 

But what, O apostle, if thou shouldst be chained to the stake, 
and the flames should kindle, and thy fiesh should begin to burn ; 
when thy beard is singed, and thy cheeks are black, wilt thou 
then hold him fast? “Yea,” saith the apostle, “he will then 
hold me fast;” and I think I hear him, as he stops us in the 
midst of our catechising, and replies, “ Nay, in all these things 
we are more than conquerors, through him that loved us. For 
[ am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor prin 
cipalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, 
nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to 
separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our 
Lord.” Paul, Paul, suppose the world should tempt you in an- 
other way. If kingdom were offered you—if the pomps and 
pleasures of this world should be laid at your feet, proviaed 
you would deny your Master, would your faith maintain its hold 
then? “Yea,” saith the apostle, “Jesus would even then up- 
hold my faith, for my soul is not in my keeping, but in his, and 
empires upon empires could not tempt him to renounce that 
soul of which he has become the guardiar and the keeper. 
Temptation might soon overcome me, but it could not overcome 
him. The world’s blandishments might soon move me to re- 
nounce my own soul; but they could not for one moment move 
Jesus to give me up.” And so the apostle continues his con- 
fidence. 

But Paul, when thou shalt come to die, will thou not then 
fear and tremble? “ Nay,” saith he, “he will be with me there, 
for my soul shall not die; that will be still in the hand of him 
who is immortality and life.” But what will become of thee 


FAITH ILLUSTRATED. 93 


when thy soul is separated from thy body? Canst thou trust 
him in a separate state, in the unknown world which visions 
cannot paint? In the time of God’s mighty thunder, when 
earth shall shake and heaven shall reel, canst thou trust him 
then? “Yea,” saith the apostle, “ until that day when all these 
tempests shall die away into eternal calm, and when the moving 
earth shall settle into a stable land, in which there shall be no 
more sea, even then can I trust him. 


“T know that safe with him remains, 
Protected by his power, 

What I’ve committed to his hands, 
Till the decisive hour.” 


O poor sinner! come and put thy soul into the hands of 
Jesus. Attempt not to take care of it thyself; and then thy 
life shall be hidden in heaven, and kept there by the almighty 
power of God, where none can destroy it, and none can rob thee 
of it. “ Whosoever believeth on the Lord Jesus Christ shall be 
saved.” Amen. 


SERMON VI. 
A HOME QUESTION. 


{Tux Home question is one of the\most pungent and practical 
of these discourses. The treatment of the subject, its divisions 
and propositions, are characteristic, savoring less of the schools, 
than of that plain, good sense, which comprehends the best 
method of reaching heart and conscience with important and 
much needed truth. It was delivered in Exeter Hall, January 
15th, 1860, and must have produced no little heart-searching 
among the many hundreds who listened to it.] 


“But are there not with you, even with you, sins against the Lord your 
God ?”—2 Curon., xxviii. 10. 


Tu1s was a home stroke. When the children of Israet had 
bloodthirsty thoughts towards their brethren of Judah, the pro- 
phet very earnestly dissuaded them. “ Why deal ye so sternly 
with your brethren who are in your power, simply because they 
have sinned. Smite them not too furiously, for are there not 
with you, even with you, sins against the Lord your God?” 
How remarkably pertinent is such a question to different na- 
tions, to different sects, to different classes among men. We 
are too apt to look upon the sins of other nations and forget our 
own. Let us be content to sweep our own streets, to cleanse 
our own cities, and make our own streams pure. Let our re- 
formatior. begin at home, for we cannot hope that our remon- 
strances against the sin of others can be powerful, unless wa 
have cleansed ourselves. How applicable, too, is this question 


A HOME QUESTION. 86 


to the diffs \ 1t sects, especially among Christians. How apt 
we all are t~ be plucking the mote from the eye of others. [| 
hold that evi ry Christian man is bound to give his honest testi- 
mony to ey*ry truth he believes. We must not shun to declare 
the whole counsel of God, because we may be charged with 
sectarianism. Every great man has been called a Sectarian in 
his time, and every true man who stands up for the whole that 
God teaches, will necessarily incur that censure. But let every 
Christian remember that our business is to deal first with our- 
selves. Let each denomination acknowledge its own faults, and 
confess its own iniquities. I am not ashamed of the denomina- 
tion to which I belong, sprung, as we are, direct from the loins 
of Christ, having never passed through the turbid stream of 
Romanism, and having an origin apart from all dissent or Pro- 
testantism, because we have existed before all other sects; but 
Iam equally clear as to our innumerable faults. Indeed, the 
sins and faults of our denomination may well go up against us 
to heaven, and withhold the dew of God’s grace, that we prosper 
not. I believe it to be the same with every other class of Chris- 
tians, and I would that whenever we are prone to rebuke our 
fellows too severely, we would pause and ask ourselves this ques- 
tion: “Are there not with us, even with us, sins against the 
Lord our God ?” 

The like question may be continually reiterated in the ears of 
the different classes into which our commonwealth is divided. 
You see continually on the walls—“ Sermons to the Working 
Classes.” The working classes might return the compliment by 
papering the walls with “Sermons to the Wealthy Classes,” 
for if there be any that need preaching to, it is the rich. If there 
be any men, or any class of men, among whom the gospel has 
its stronghold, it is just that order and class of persons who 
may be fairly ranked among the working classes. I do not be- 
lieve in the intense need of the working classes for evangeliza 
tion any more than any other class among men. All class 
preaching is, I take it, fundamentally wrong. We preach the 
gospel to every creature, and the Christian minister knows noth- 
ing of rich or poor, of young man or old man. The gospel is 
to be preached every day to every body. No doubt the intant 


96 A HOME QUESTION. 


is good, but I think the shape which it takes is calculated to 
raise up party prejudices, and to arouse class feelings. We 
stand up, and we say to all the classes, “ Are there not with you, 
even with you, sins against the Lord your God?” What if the 
poor man has his tavern and his house of drunkenness—what 
are the drinking parties of the rich? What! is there no cov- 
ered and concealed drunkenness hidden under the shadows of 
night? What if the poor have a place where they meet for 
licentiousness! Is there no such licentiousness among the aris- 
tocracy? Ah, my brethren, it is not for the Christian minister 
to set one rank of men against another. We are alike guilty, 
from the highest to the lowest. We have sins to confess and 
acknowledge, and the prophet of God, must go through streets 
of this modern Nineveh, and he must demand that king as well 
as commoner should repent. We have the same gospel for all. 
“Except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall 
in no wise enter into the kingdom of heaven.” “Except a man 
be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God.” “Are 
there not with you, even with you, sins against the Lord our 
God?” 

But if the question be pertinent to nations, to sects, to classes, 
depend upon it, it is equally so to individuals. It is the nature 
of truth, like the crystal, that subdivide it as you may, every 
minute atom of it shall assume the same shape. Break up the 
truth from nations to sects, or from nations to classes, and it 
still holds true; subdivide it, dash it into atoms of indi- 
viduality, and the same question is pertinent to each. “Are 
there not with you, even with you, sins against the Lord your 
God? 

{ propose this morning, God helping me, to preach a very 
plain, faithful, and honest sermon; praying that it may come 
home to some of your hearts. You will find no smoothness 
about my speech, but the very reverse. My sword may have 
‘, very mean hilt, but I trust it shall have a very keen edge, and 
that it shall cut sharp, piercing to the dividing asunder of the 
joints and marrow. I shall first of all, put @ home question ; 
secondly, I shall make a common sense enquiry; and ere I hav3 
done, I shall give you a kittle good advice. 


A HOME QUESTION. 97 


I. A Home Question. ; 

Let me single out the persons and put the questions to them : 

*, Doubtless I have here this morning, the moralist, the 
man who hates the very name of drunkenness. As for pro- 
fanity, if he saw the seat of the scorner, he would pass by it at 
the remotest distance possible. He is a man whose hands are 
clean of all dishonesty. As far as he knows himself, he can say 
that he is upright in his business, that he is kind to his neigh- 
bors, that in everything he endeavors to keep the moral law. 
My friend has no religion perhaps, but still he has the outward 
form of morality. Bring anywhere between the wind and his 
nobility falsehood and fraud, and oh, how disgusted he is! Let 
him but see one evening the drunkard rolling in the streets, and 
no language can be too severe. As for the thief, he condemns 
him, and condemns him rightly too. But one part of his con- 
demnation arises from the fact that he feels himself without any 
guilt or accusation in this matter. He is innocent, and therefore 
he feels that he may throw the first stone. My dear friend, I 
am glad to see you here this morning. I wish that all men 
were as moral as you are. I wish that all hated sin as much as 
you do; but still I have a question to ask of you, which perhaps 
you may not like, for you good moral people are very fond of 
your own righteousness. Let me ask you the question, “Is 
there not with you, even with you, some sin against the Lord 
your God?’ Can you not remember any overt deed of wrong? 
Do you dare to tell me that you have never, never once broken 
a command of God? Well, let it stand so; but have you never 
said an idle word, and have you never read that for every idle 
word a man shall speak, the Lord shall bring him into judg- 
ment? Has your tongue always been as clean of every evil 
thing as God’s law requires it should be? What! have you the 
matchless effrontery to say that? Do you think so well of 
yourself that you will declare nothing has ever come ou: of 
your mouth but that which is good? 

Come then a little deeper, how about your thoughts? Re- 
mem/er, the thought of evil is sin. Wave you never thought an 
evil thought, never desired an evil thing? Oh, man, I will not 
compliment you thus; take down the ten commandments, read 

5 


98 A HOME QUESTION. 


through the twentieth chapter of Exodus, prayerfully, and I think 
you will be compelled to say as you read each commandment, 
“Lord have mercy upon me, for though I thought my life waa 
good, I now discover that with me, even with me, there is sin 
against God.’ Ido not condemn you for finding fault with the 
drunkard or the harlot, but I condemn you for this, that unless 
you are without fault yourself, you ought not to take up the first 
stone. You, too, live in a glass house, why throw stones at 
others? I wish you would turn your attention to yourself, 
Physician, heal thyself; builder, build thine own wall; husband- 
man, plow thine own field and trim thine own vines. What sig- 
nifieth it to thee if other men are worse than thyself, will that 
save thee? Look to thyself, I pray thee, or else thy morality 
shall be but the white winding sheet of thy dead soul. For 
men may be as truly damned in morality as in immorality. 
Morality is good enough for what it is, but for the salvation of 
souls it is not sufficient. There must be a living faith in a dying 
Saviour, there must be the Spirit of God indwelling in the soul, 
or else you can never mount to heaven. Oh, remember, one sin 
will sink your soul lower than the lowest hell. Repent therefore, 
O moralist, and no longer rebuke others, but rebuke thyself, 
2. I now turn to another individual, a very common personage, 
the accuser of the brethren. I fear I have not a few here of that 
-gort. I know I have some, but I fear they may be more than I 
think. Do you not know the man, who, whenever he can say a 
vile thing of a Christian will do it; who, whatever a Christian man 
may do will make mischief of it, who is inclined at all times to 
ve turning that which is good into evil—a man described by 
Spenser in his picture of Envy in the “Faerie Queen?” Envy, 
who always did chaw between his dripping lips a toad, but “in. 
wardly he chawed his own maw,” eating his own heart, spitting 
on every one’s good thing, imagining that every creature was as 
.-f] and as loathsome as himself. I have seen the dirty mangy 
wretch, himself abominable as sin, daring to insinuate that all 
others were as deceitful, vile and filthy as himself. This is when the 
evil has come to its full-grown state. Such persons then become 
the most loathsome creatures in all society, and the most des. 
picable. Who is there that respects the wretch who has ne 


LA VERNE. CALIFORNIA 


4 HOME QUESTION. Os 


respect for others? whose only life is to pull other men’s charac- 
ters to pieces, and whose death would be sure to follow the 
universal reign of truth and goodness? I have seen, however, 
this disease before it has broken out and assumed its basest 
shape. I have seen men, and women too—let me lay a stress 
on that second word, for there is a stress sometimes needed 
there, though I would not be too severe—men and women who 
seem to have a propensity rather to observe that which is evil in 
another than that which is good. Now, I will put this home 
question. My friend, it is all very well for you to have those 
eyes so sharp, and to wear those magnifying glasses for other 
people, but “are there not with you, even with you, sins against 
the Lord your God?” “What about your own life? I will tell 
you something about it. Whatever you think of other people 
is true of yourself—that is an invariable rule. We always 
measure other people’s corn with our own bushel, and ff you 
think you find other people’s corn very gritty, the dirt was ori- 
ginally in your own. Depend upon it, that your judgment of 
others will be God’s judgment of you, for with what measure ye 
mete the same shall be measured to you again. 

Now, what good have you ever got in your life by finding 
fault with other people? 1 will tell you all the good you have 
got. You have often been found fault with by others, you have 
been hated, you have been distrusted, you have lost many loves 
you might have received, you have sundered yourself from kind 
associations, and if you continue in your present course, you will 
be like the dreary iceberg that floats in the sea, always to be 
dreaded and avoided, chilling the atmosphere for miles around, 
and threatening destruction to the unwary mariner who happens 
to come into its neighborhood. Nay, more, if your calumnies 
have been directed against a servant of God, you have brought 
upon your head the most awful doom that can ever fall on man. 
“He that toucheth my people toucheth the apple of mine eye,” 
saith God. You have thrust your finger into the eye of God, 
and what shall be the doom which you shall receive? Tremble, 
sinner, there is nothing that brings a man’s wrath into his face 
like finding fault with his children, He will stand many an in- 
sult, but once touch his children and his spirit boils with indig- 


100 4 HOME QUESTION. 


nation. And so, touch the children of God, find fault with them, 
and verily, verily, I say unto you, it were better for you that a 
millstone were about your neck, and that you were cast into the 
depths of the sea, “Are there not with you, even with you, sins 
against the Lord your God?” I am afraid none will take this 
second passage home, and the person who applies it to himself 
will be very angry. My dear friend, excuse me for saying that 
is a matter which I shall not at all regret, for if you will but be 
angry with yourself, you may be as angry as you please with 
me. 

8. And now for the third class. I have here the man who 
says, “Well, I have not been touched in either of those things. 
[ hope I am something more than moral. I am religious also. 
You never see me absent from my place of worship. I am as 
punctual as a chronometer whenever the doors are open. I add 
to my morality that which is better still. I attend to ceremo- 
nies; there is not one which I have not observed. I have 
endeavored as far as I can to carry out every precept of the 
Christian ritual. I feel indignant with men who break the Sab- 
bath; I feel angry with those who have no reverent regard for 
God’s house.” My dear friend, I do not condemn you for those 
feelings; but permit me to put to you a question. “Are there 
not with you, even with you, sins against the Lord your God?” 
The preacher stands here this morning to make a personal con- 
fession. It not unfrequently happens that in condemning others 
he condemns himself; and while that is a painful thing to him as 
a man, it is always a hopeful sign to him as a minister, because 
surely that which compels contrition and repentance in your 
pastor, may possibly be profitable to you, to bring you also to 
repentance. There are, however, some outwardly religious 
people, who, when this question is put to them, imagine that 
certainly they have no sins whatever. 

Ah, my dear hearers, “if ye say that ye have no sin, ye 
deceive yourselves, and the truth is not in you.” But if you 
answer this question sorrowfully, saying, “Alas, alas, ] am not 
what I would be; I pray God to sanctify me wholly, spirit, soul, 
and body,” then I think there is a sign of life within. But if on 
the contrary, you reply, “No, I have no sin, J am perfect, i am 


A HOME QUESTION. 101 


complete through my ceremonial righteousness; ah, my dear 
hearer, you know not what spirit you are of. Though you have 
attended 40 the outward form, what is that unless you have re- 
ceived the spiritual grace? though you have been constant at the 
place of worship, let me ask you, what is that unless you have 
brought your heart with you? Have you always heard as you 
would desire to hear if the sermon should be your last? Have 
you always prayed as you would desire to pray if you knew 
that rising from your knees you would have to lie down in your 
grave? Ohno, my brethren, we are too cold, too lukewarm, 
too chilled in our affections; we must mourn before God that 
with us, even with us, there are sins against the Lord our God. 

4. But again, I have to speak to a character of a very com- 
mon kind. There is a man here who says, “ Well, sir, ] make 
no profession of religion—do not think of doing such a thing. 
I hate hypocrisy of all things in the world. It is true, sir, / 
commit a great many faults, and am often very loose, but then 
you know everybody knows me; they can see my character at 
once. I never cheat anybody. I would not be a cant, to go up 
to a place of worship and then go on as some people do after- 
wards; I would not be taking the sacrament one day and then 
be grinding the poor on the morrow. No, sir, lam as honest as 
possible, and I have no doubt that when I stand before Almighty 
God I shall have as good a time of it as some of these professing 
Christians.” Well, my friend, I like honesty; but do you know 
{ am inclined to think that there is a little hypocrisy about you. 
I think you are not quite as honest as you seem to be; for if I 
were to put some very pointed questions to you, I should not be 
surprised if you were to get very angry. Have you not heard 
of the monk who said what a miserable sinner he was, and 
some one replied, “ Ay, that you are, there is no mistake about 
it.” Then the monk grew wrathy, and demanded im a passion, 
“What do you know against me? I will not be insulted by 
you.” And probably if I were to take you at your word, and 
say to you, “Yes, that is just the fact, you are as bad a fellow as 
you can be,” you would say, “I will not be insulted, even by a 
minister; go along with you, sir, what do you know about me ?” 
Your honesty is merely worn as a mask. Your conscience is un 


102 A HOME QUESTION. 


easy, and this is a pat on the back for it, a sort of lullaby te 
send it to sleep. ; 

But suppose you are honest, let me ask you what there is to 
beast of in your honesty? A man bounces into the prisoners’ 
box before the Court, and says, “ My Lord Mayor, here I am as 
honest 2 man as can be; I am no hypocrite: I do not plead 
‘Not guilty; for I am in the habit of stealing, and committing 
larceny, felony, highway robbery, and burglary.” Now, is he 
uot an honest man? Yes, with this little exception, that by his 
own confession he is arogue. So is it with you, sir, you say 
you are honest, and yet on your own confession that very hon- 
esty which you jlead is but a confession of your own abom- 
inable wickedness. And you imagine that when you stand be- 
fore God, if you tell him, “ Lord, I never professed to love thee, 
I never pretended to serve thee,” God will accept your tmpu- 
dence as honesty—that he will look upon your presumption as 
sincerity! Why, sir, you cannot mean what you say; you 
must have deceived yourself most terribly if you do. Your 
honesty in avowing yourself to be 9 slave of Satan! Your ef- 
frontery in declaring that you are steeped up to the very throat 
in sin, is this to be an apology for your sin? Oh! man, be 
wiser. But I put now this question to you. You say that you 
are no hypocrite, and that you hate hypocrisy. Then { ask you, 
“ Are there not with you, even with you, sins against the Lord 
your God?” What if you are no hypocrite—yet you are pro- 
fane, and you curse God to his face; what if you are not a de- 
ceiver, yet are you not a drunkard, and a companion of adulterers? 
Ah, sir, there are sins in your heart, and loathsome ones, too ; your 
hardened acknowledgment that you are a sinner is of no value; 
that honesty of which you talk is of no value whatever. Get rid, I 
beseech you, of any hope or confidence that you may place in it. 

And now, if I have omitted one class, if there be one into 
whose heart the question has not penetrated, let me go round 
personally. I cannot do so literally; but let this finger range 
you all, and let this eye look into every face. “ Are there not 
with you, even with you, sins against the Lord your God ” 
Answer it not for others, but for thyself, my hearer; give a re- 
ply from the depth of thine own consciousness, and sitting in 


A HOME QUESTION. 103 


this hall, remember thine own sin, and make the silent confes- 
sion of sin before God. And O, may he fulfil that promise— 
“ He that confesseth his sin and forsaketh it shall find mercy.” 


II. A Common Sensz Inquiry. 

They say that common sense is worth all the other senses 
put together; and methinks if men could but use common sense 
aright, it might be a fine thing for them in matters of religion. 
You know what Young says—“ All men think all men mortal 
but themselves.” We believe that all men will die, but some- 
how or other, we fancy we shall live. Now the question I shall 
put reminds me of that sentence. It is this, “ Who are you that 
you think you shall escape the punishment of sin?” When the 
first question was put, you were compelled to confess that you 
had some guilt; who are you that God should let you off. and 
not punish you? who are you that you should stand clear of 
the sins that you have committed? 

All men think all men guilty but themselves. They think 
all men deserve to be punished; but every man has such a good 
excuse of his own iniquity, that he thinks surely at the last day 
he may hope to creep away without the curse. Now I put this 
common sense question: What is there about you that your 
sins should not be punished as well as the sins of any other 
man? Who has given you an exemption? What is there 
about you that you should walk about this earth and fancy 
your sins are nothing at all, and that other persons’ sins 
are so tremendous? What fine gentleman are you that you 
fancy your pedigree to be so distinguished, that because the 
blood of counts, and dukes, and earls, and princes, and kings 
may happen to stain your veins, therefore, you shall stand 
clear? Of course the sins of the lower classes are dreadful— 
oh, so dreadful—but what is there about yours, my lord, that 
yours are so trivial? Surely if the poor man is to be punished, 
the equal law, which stands for all, and which heaven will carry 
out, will not exempt yow. Let me remind you, that so far from 
exempting, it may perhaps give you a double penalty, because 
your sin has led others into sin, and the prominence of your 
position has been the means of spreading the pestilence of crime 


104 A HOME QUESTIO¥. 


amongst others. I say to you, sir, however great you may be, 
what can there be in that roll of honor that you receive among 
men, that can in the least degree move the Lord your God! 
How he sniffs at this princely blood; he knows that you were 
all made of earth as Adam was, and that you all sprung from 
that gardener—that dishonest gardener, who of old lost his situ- 
ation, because he would steal his Master’s fruit. A pretty 
pedigree if you trace it up to its root! Oh, sir, there is nothing 
in it whatever. I beseech you, remember your sins must be 
punished as well as those of the vagrant, pauper, criminal. 

But make way for yonder gentleman; he imagines he is not 
to be punished because of his respectakility. He has been such 
an honest tradesman; has he not been at the corner of the street 
since eighteen hundred and two? Whoever heard that he failed 
and run through the cows? Is he not respected by everybody ? 
Well, sir, and what do you think your respectability has to do 
with it? You have sinned, sir, and you will be punished as sure- 
ly as anybody else. Every iniquity shall have its just recom- 
pense of reward. It will be in vain for you to plead your paltry 
respectability when you come up before the throne of God. 
You muy wear all the stars and the garters that man was ever 
befooled with; you may come before God with all the coronets 
and glittering marks of respectability that ever man dreamt of; 
but these are nothing. The fire shall try every man’s work of 
what sort it is, and if thy works be found evil, those works must 
be punished, unless thou happily hast found a substitute through 
whom thy sin can be put away. — 

What excuses men make on earth. I wish they would always 
make their excuses believing themselves standing before the 
judgment-seat. My very honest friend, over there, who said he 
got drunk, did not mind saying that he was not a cant and a hy- 
pocrite. Ah! my friend, you will not be likely to say that when 
the world is in a blaze, when the pillars of earth are reeling, and 
the stars are falling, like untimely figs; then you will find that 
excuse shrivelled up like a scroll. Will you not be afraid to 
come before God, you mere moralist, and tell him you have 
kept hislaw? You, even now, know you have not, end you shall 
know it better then, when your conscience has been quicked. 


A HOME QUESTION. 105 


And you, formalist, you may condemn others because you at 
tend to every outward ceremony, but the day of judgment will 
make you feel that ceremonies are less than nothing; and you 
will be compelled then to ery, “ Rocks hide me ; mountains on 
me fall, to hide me from the face of that Lamb whom I despised 
while I trusted in the outward form and the empty ceremony.’ 
Oh, my hearer, whoever you may be, if you have not been born 
again, if your faith is not fixed on Christ alone, you have no 
excuse whatever for your sin. You not only are guilty, be you who 
you may, but you are so guilty that you shall surely be punished 
for your trespasses. Cod will not give any exemption to you. 

Ah, Mr. Accuser, you turn king’s evidence on earth, and so 
hope to escape the bar of man, but there are no king’s evidences 
at the bar of God. You may accuse the church then; you shall 
but the more swiftly be condemned. You may rail against your 
fellow men at the last great day; your words of railing shall 
but be a witness against you. My dear hearer, if you are 
not in Christ, I would that I could so preach that you would be- 
gin to tremble. If Chrisi is not in you, your state is such that 
nothing but the Lord’s mercy keeps y2u out of hell a single 
moment. ‘he wrath of God has gone out against you; you 
are condemnea already, because you have not believed ia Christ. 
I want, if I can, to draw this bow, not at a venture, but in such 
a way that the arrow wil! go home directly to the heart. “Re- 
pent and be converted, every one of you, in the name of the 
Lord Jesus Christ.” Ye have sins, repent of them, I beseech 
you; bewail yourselves before God. May his Spirit give you a 
mind for repentance, and make you humble on account of sin ; 
and then remember there is mercy for the contrite; there is 
pardon for the penitent. But to the man who hugs his sin, cr 
’ seeks to cloak it, there is no pardon, no mercy, but the wrath of 
God abideth on him, and the sword of divine justice shall soon 
be plunged into his heart. 


I. A xurrttz Apvicr; and this shall be threefold. 

1. My first advice is, leave other people alone with regard to 
finding fault. My dear sir, if you have been busying yourself 
with the faults of others, be so good as to cease from that occu 

5 


106 A HOME QUESTION. 


pation. I know a loaths¢ me fly that can only live on the foulest 
food ; I will not compare you to it, but if you ever want a re- 
semblance, there is yourself to the life. You remind me, when 
I hear you talk against others, of those poor creatures dressed 
in rags with a bag on their backs, who go *hrough the streets 
picking up every stale bone and every piece of offal they can 
find ; with this exception, that their calling is honorable, and they 
may possibly live by it, but yours is dishonorable ; it is of no 
service to you or to any one else. There never, perhaps, was an 
age when men’s characters were less safe than now. The best 
man that breathes beneath the sun may live to find some putrid 
wretch standing up to accuse him of crimes of which he never 
dreamed. I beseech you all, if you hear aught against any man, 
do not believe it till you see it. Liars now-a-days are rife as 
wasps in summer. Hold off those black hands, thou devilish 
traducer! O slanderer, have done with thy filthy work; rake 
no more in the kennel, lest thou be sent to rake in the blazing 
kennel of hell, there to find out the faults of others which like 
serpents shall be set to bite thine own bosom and suck thy soul’s 
blood throughout eternity. Take heed, slanderer, for there are 
hot coals of juniper and fiery irons awaiting the false tongue that 
lifteth up itself against God and his people. 

2. After that first piece of advice, let me give another. Treat 
yourselves, my dear friends, as you have been accustomed to treat 
others. We get another man’s character and tie it up to the hal- 
berds, and out with our great whip and begin to lay it on with all 
our force, and after the flogging, we wash the poor creature with 
a kind of briny pretence at excusing his sins. After that again 
we throw him back upon the bed of spikes of our own supposi- 
tion that he is a great deal worse than we have made him out to 
be. Ah, just serve thyselfso. Tie thyself up to the halberds, 
man, and lay on the whip; do not spare him. When you have 
got yourself tied up, hit hard, sir; it is a great rascal you are 
whipping. Never mind his flesh creeping, he deserves it all. 
Never mind, though the white bones start from the raw red 
bleeding back—lay it on. Now then, a heavy blow! kill him 
if you can, the sooner he is dead the better ; for when he is once 
killed as to all idea of righteousness in himself, then he will be- 


A HOME QUESTION. 107 


gin to lead a new life and be a new creature in Christ Jesus. 
Do not be afraid of whipping him, but when the cat-o’-nine-tails 
is heavy with clots of gore, rub the brine into his back. Tell 
him that his sins deserve the wrath of hell. Make him feel that 
it is an awful thing to fall into the hands of our God, for he is e 
consuming fire. Then throw him down on the bed of spikes, anr 
make him sleep there if he can. Moll him on the spikes, am. 
tell him that, bad as he is, he is worse by nature than by prac 
tice. Make him feel that the leprosy lies deep within. Give 
him no rest. Treat him as cruelly as he could treat another. 
’Twould be only his deserts. But who is this that I am telling 
you to treat so? Yoursel/, m7 hearer, yourself. Be as severe as 
you can, but let the culprit be yourself. Put on the wig, and 
sit upon the judgment-seat. Read the king’s commission, There 
is such a commission for you to be a judge. It says—Judge 
thyself; though it says, Judge not others, Put on, I say, your 
robes; sit up there lord chiet justice of the Isle of man, and then 
bring up the culprit. Make him stand at the bar. Accuse him; 
plead against him; condemn im. Say: “Take him away, 
jailor.” Find out the hardest vunishment you can discover in 
the statute book, and believe that he deserves it all. Be as se- 
vere as ever you can on yourself, even to the putting on the 
black cap, and reading the sentence of death. When you have 
done this, you wil! be in a hopeful way for life, for he that con- 
demns himself God absolves. He that stands self-convicted, 
may look to Christ hanging on the cross, and see himself hang- 
ing there, and see his sins forever put away by the sacrifice of 
Jesus on the tree. 

3. The third piece of counsel, with which I am about to close, 
is this: My dear hearer, I beseech you look to the eternal tnter- 
ests of your own souls. I have hard work to plead this last point. 
May God the Holy Spirit take it in hand, and it will be done to 
purpose; but if he do not do it, all I can say will fall with life- 
less dulness upon your ear. As well preach to the dead in the 
grave as to the unawakened sinner, but yet I am commanded to 
preach to the dead, and therefore I do preach to the dead this 
morning. My dear hearer, look to thine own soul’s salvation. 
These are happy times. We are living just now in a period 


108 A HOME QUESTION. 


when the grace of God is manifesting itself in a singular manner, 
There is more prayer now than there has been in the last tex 
years; and I believe more outpouring of the Holy Spirit than 
some of us have ever known. Oh! I beseech you, look well for 
this auspicious gale. Now the wind is blowing, up with thy 
sail; when the tide is coming in full, launch thy boat, and oh, 
may God the Spirit bear thee on towards life and happiness ! 
But, I bescach thee, make thy first object in life thy own salva- 
tion. What is thy shop, compared with thy soul? Nay, what 
is thy body, thine eyes, thy senses, thy reason, compared with 
thine immortal soul? Let this word ring in thine ears, Eter 
nity! Eternity! Eternity! Ard oh,M beseech thee, look well 
to thyself, lest eternity should become to thee a sea without a 
shore, where fiery billows shall forever toss thy wretched soul. 
Eternity! Eternity! And must I climb thy topless steeps and 
never find a summit? Must I plough thy pathless waters and 
never find ahaven? "Tis even so. Then grant me, God, that I 
may climb in eternity the mount of bliss, and not the hill of 
woe; and may I sail across the sea of happiness and joy, and not 
across the lake that burneth with fire and brimstone! 

Look to yourself, sir. This is a day of good tidings for many, 
may it be a day of good tidings for you! I beseech you, give 
up thinking about men at large, about the world, and nations ; 
what have you to do with politics? Let your politics be the 
politics of your own soul. Attend those other things by-and- 
bye, but now give yourself the favor of your own thoughts. 
Begin at home. I fear there are more lost through this than 
almost through any other cause, next to procrastination—think- 
ing about others and forgetting about self. I wish I could put 
you to-day, in some respects, like those who are in the chapel 
of the penitentiary, where every man sees the minister during 
service, but no man sees another. My dear hearer, do recollect 
that what I have said I mean for you, not for other people. Take 
it home; and to-day, I beseech you, go to your chamber, and 
may God compel you by his grace to make a confession of your 
own sins. Seek a Saviour for yourself, and oh may you find 
him for yourself! and then begin to seek him for others. If 
this were a day of famine, would you be content to hear me say, 


A HOME QUESTION. 109 


“ There is bread in abundance stored away in the Tower—there 
is a great quantity of food there?” No, you would say, “ Let 
me go and get some of this bread for myself.” You would go 
home, and the cries of your wife and children would compel you 
to arouse. You would say, “I hear there is bread, I must get it, 
for I cannot bear to see my wife and children starving.” Oh! 
sinner, hear the cry of thy poor starving soul; hear, I beserch 
thee, the cry of thy poor body. Thy body does not wish to be 
cast into fire, and thy soul shrinketh from the thought of ever- 
lasting torment. Hear, then, thine own flesh and blood when it 
cries to thee. Let thine own nature speak; the voice of nature 
that dreads pain, and torment, and wrath to come; and when it 
speaks, listen to it, and come; come, I pray you, to penitence 
and to faith. 

May God the Holy Spirit draw you, or drive you, whichever 
he pleases, so that you may be brought to life, and peace, and 
happiness, and salvation, through the precious blood Amen, 


SERMON VII. 


CHRIST TRIUMPHANT. 


{Tse gorgeous imagery with which this sermon invests s sub- 
ject of surpassing interest, passes before the mind of the reader 
like a splendid pageant. Though the preacher’s fancy may not 
in every instance conform to the strictest rules of rhetoric, yet 
what cares either preacher or hearer, so long as those grand reali- 
ties which inspire Christian hope are pictured before the mind 
in all the hues of living light. This is a fit companion of the 
discourse on the Resurrection. Christ Triumphant was deliv- 
ered in Surrey Music Hall, Sept. 4th, 1859.] 


“ And naving spoiled principalities and powers, he made a show of them 
openly, triumphing over them in it.’—Coxossrans ii, 15. 


To the eye of reason, the Cross is the centre of sorrow and the 
lowest depth of shame. Jesus dies a malefactor’s death. He 
tangs upon the gibbet ofa felon and pours out his blood upon 
the common mount of doom, with thieves for his companions. 
'n the midst of mockery, and jest, and scorn, and ribaldry, and 
blasphemy, he gives up the ghost. Earth rejects him and lifts 
him from her surface, and heaven affords him no light, but dark- 
ens the mid-day sun in the hour of his extremity. Deeper in 
wee than the Saviour dived, imagination cannot descend. A 
blacker calumny than was cast on him, satanic malice itself could 
not invent. He hid not his face from shame and spitting; and 
wa. shame and spitting it was! To the world, the Cross must 
ever be the emblem of shame; to the Jew a stumbling-block, and 


OHRIST TRIUMPHANT. Mi 


to the Greek foolishness. How different, however, 1s the view 
which presents itself to the eye of faith. Faith knows no shame 
in the Cross, except the shame of those who nailed the Saviour 
there; it sees no ground for scorn, but it hurls indignant scorn 
at sin, the enemy which pierced the Lord. Faith sees woe, in- 
deed, but from this woe it marks a fount of mercy springing. 
It 1s true it mourns a dying Saviour, but it beholds him bringing 
life and immortality to light at the very moment when his soul 
was eclipsed in the shadow of death. Faith regards the cross, 
not as the emblem of shame, but as the token of glory. The 
sons of Belial lay the cross in the dust, but the Christian makes 
a constellation of it, and sees it glittering in the seventh heaven. 
Man spits upon it, but believers, having angels for their com 
panions, bow down and worship him who ever liveth, though 
once he was crucified. 

My brethren, our text presents us with a view which faith is 
certain to discover when its eyes are anointed with the eye-salve_ 
of the Spirit. It tells us that the cross was Jesus Christ’s field 
of triumph. There he fought, and there he conquered, too. As 
a victor on the cross, he divided the spoil. Nay, more than this; 
in our text the cross is spoken of as being Christ’s triumphal char- 
iot in which he rode when he led captivity captive, and received 
gifts for men. Calvin thus admirably expounds the last sentence 
of our text: “The expression in the Greek allows, it is true, of 
our reading—in himself; the connection of the passage, how- 
ever, requires that we read it otherwise; for what would be 
meager as applied to Christ, suits admirably well as applied to 
the cross. Jor as he had previously compared the cross to a 
signal trophy or show of triumph, in which Christ led about his 
enemies, so he now also compares it to a triumphal car in which 
he showed himself in great magnificence. For there is no tri- 
bunal so magnificent, no throne so stately, no show of triumph 
go distinguished, no chariot so elevated, as is the gibbet on which 
Christ has subdued death and the devil, the prince of death; nay, 
more, has utterly trodden them under his feet.” 

I shall this morning, by God’s help, address you upon the two 
portions of the text. First, I shall endeavor to describe Christ 
as spoiling his enemies on the cross: and having done that, I shall 


112 CHRIST TRIUMPHANT. 


lead your imagination and your faith further on to see the Sa 
viour in triumphal procession upon his cross, leading his enemies 
captive, and making a show of them openly before the eyes of 
‘he astonished universe. 


I. Curist maxine a Spor or Princrpatitres anp Powers. 

Satan, leagued with sin and death, had made this world the 
home of woe. The Prince of the powers of the air, fell usurp- 
er, not content with his dominions in hell, must need invade this 
fair earth. He found our first parents in the midst of Eden; 
he tempted them to forego their allegiance to the King of heav- 
en, and they became at once his bond-slaves—bond-slaves for. 
ever, if the Lord of heaven had not iXterposed to ransom them 
The voice of mercy was heard, while the fetters were being riv- 
eted upon their feet, crying, “ Ye shall yet be free!” In the 
fulness of time there shall come one who shall bruise the ser- 
pent’s head, and shall deliver his prisoners from the house of their 
bondage. Long did the promise tarry. The earth groaned and 
travailed in its bondage. Man was Satan’s slave, and heavy 
were the clanking chains which were upon his soul. At last, in 
the fulness of time, the Deliverer came forth, born of a woman. 
He lay in the manger-——he who was one day to bind the old 
dragon and cast him into the bottomless pit, and set a seal upon 
him. When the old serpent knew that this en=my was born, he 
conspired to put him to death; he leagued with Herod to seek 
the young child that he might destroy him. But the providence 
of God preserved the future conqueror; he went down into 
Egypt, and there was he i.:dden for a little season. Anon, when 
he had come to fulness of years, he made his public advent, and 
began to preach liberty to the captives, and the opening of the 
prison to them that were bound. Then Satan again shot forth 
his arrows, and sought to end the existence of the woman’s seed. 

By divers raeans he sought to slay him before his time. Once 
the Jews took up stones to stone him; nor did they fail to re- 
peat the attempt. They sought to cast him down from the brow 
of ahill headlong. By all manner of devices they labored to 
take away his life, but his hour was nct yet. Dangers might 
surround him, but he was invulnerable. At last, the tremendous 


OHRIST TRIUMPHANT. 112 


day arrived. Fcot to foot tae conqeror must fight with the dread 
tyrant. A voice wa. neard in heaven, “This is your hour, and ~ 
the power of darkness” And Christ himself exclaimed, “Now 
is the crisis of this w.1id—now must the prince of darkness be 
cast out.” From the table of communion, the Redeemer arose 
at midnight, and roazched forth to the battle. How dreadful 
was the contest! in tue very first onset, the mighty conqueror 
seemed himself to be vanquished. Beaten to the earth at the 
first assault, he fell upon his knees and cried, “ My father, if it be 
possible, let this cup pass from me.” Revived in strength, made 
strong by heaven, he no longer quailed, and from this hour nev- 
er did he utter a word which looked like renouncing the fight 
From the terrible skirmish, all red with bloody sweat, he dashed 
into the thick of the battle. The kiss of Judas was, as it were, 
the first sounding of the trumpet; Pilate’s bar was the glitter- 
ing of the spear; the cruel lash was the crossing of the swords. 
But the cross was the centre of the conflict; there, on the top 
of Calvary, must the dread fight of eternity be fought. Now 
must the son of God arise, and gird his sword upon his thigh. 
Dread defeat or glorious conquest awaits the Champion of the 
church. Which shall it be? We hold our breath with anx- 
ious suspense while the storm is raging. 

I hear the trumpet sound. The howlings of hell rise in awful 
clamor. The pit is emptying out its legions. Terrible as lions, 
hungry as wolves, and black as night, the demons rush on in 
myriads. Satan’s reserved forces, those who had long been kept 
against this day of terrible battle, are roaring from their dens. 
See how countless are their aimies, and how fierce their coun- 
tenances. Brandishing his sword, the arch-fiend leads the van, 
bidding his followers fight neither with small nor great, save only 
with the King of Israel. Terrible are the leaders of the battle. 
Sin is there, and all its innumerable offspring, spitting forth the 
venom of asps, and infixing their poison-fangs in the Saviour’s 
flesh. Death is there vpon his pale horse, and his cruel dart 
tears its way through the body vf Jesus, even to his inmost 
heart. He is “exceeding sorrowful, even unto death.” Hell 
comes, with all its coals of juniper and fiery darts. But chief 
and head amongst tnem is Satan; remembering well the ancient 


114 OHRIST TRIUMPHANT. 


day when Christ hurled him from the battlements of heaven, he 
rushes with all his malice to the attack. The darts shot into 
the air are so many that they blind the sun. Darkness covers 
the battle-field, and like that of Egypt, it was a darkness which 
might be felt. Long does the battle seem to waver, for there is 
but one against many. One man—unay, tell it, lest any should 
misunderstand me, one God stands in battle array against ten 
thousands of principalities and powers. On, on they come, and 
he receives them all. Silently at first he permits their ranks to 
break upon him, too terribly enduring hardness to spare a 
thought for shouting. 

But at last the battle-cry is heard., He who is fighting for his 
people begins to shout, but it is a shout which makes the church 
tremble. He cries, “I thirst.” The battle is so hot upon him, 
and the dust so thick that he is choked with thirst. Surely, 
now, he is about to be defeated? Wait awhile; see ye yon 
heaps; all these have fallen beneath his arm, and as for the rest, 
fear not the issue. The enemy is but rushing to his own des- 
truction. In vain his fury and his rage, for see the last rank is 
charging, the battle of ages is almost over. At last the dark- 
ness is dispersed. Hark how the conqueror cries, “It is finished.” 
And where are now his ‘enemies? They are all dead. There 
lies the king of terrors, pierced through with one of his own 
darts! There lies Satan with his head all bleeding, broken! 
Yonder crawls the broken-backed serpent, writhing in ghastly 
misery! As for sin, it is cut in pieces, and scattered to the 
winds of heaven! “ Jt is jinished,” cries the conqueror, as he 
came with dyed garments from Bozrah, “1 have trodden the wine- 
press alone, I have trampled them in my fury, and their blood 
ts sprinkled on my garments.” 

And now he proceeds to divide the spoii. 

We pause here to remark that when the spoil is divided it is 
asure token that the battle is completely won. The enemy 
will never suffer the spoil te ve divided among the conquerors 
as long as he has any strength remaining. We may gather from 
our text of a surety, that Jesus Christ has totally routed, tho- 
roughly defeated, once for all, and put to retreat all his enemies, 
or else he would not kave divided the spoil 


CHRIST TRIUMPHANT. 115 


And now, what means this expression of Christ dividing the 
spoil? I take it that it means, first of all, that he disarmed all 
his enemies. Satan came against Christ; he had in his hand a 
sharp sword called the Law, dipped in the poison of sin, so that 
every wound which the law inflicted was deadly. Christ dashed 
this sword out of Satan’s hand, and there stood the prince of 
darkness unarmed. His helmet was cleft in twain, and his head 
was crushed as with a rod of iron. Death rose against Christ. 
The Saviour snatched his quiver from him, emptied out all his 
darts, cut them in two, gave Death back the feather end, but kept 
the poisoned barbs, that he might never destroy the ransomed. Sin 
came against Christ; but sin was utterly cut in pieces. It had 
been Satan’s armour-bearer, but its shield was cast away, and it 
lay dead upon the plain. Is it not a noble picture to behold all 
the enemies of Christ?—nay, my brethren, all your enemies, and 
mine, totally disarmed? Satan has nothing left him now where- 
with he may attack us. He may attempt to injure us, but 
wound us he never can, for his sword and spear are utterly 
taken away. In the old battles, especially among the Romans, 
after the enemy had been overcome, it was the custom to take 
away all their weapons and ammunition; afterwards they were 
stripped of their armor and their garments, their hands were 
tied behind their backs, and they were made to pass under the 
yoke. Even so hath Christ done with sin, death, and hell; he 
hath taken their armor, spoiled them of all their weapons, 
and made them all to pass under the yoke; so that now they 
are our slaves, and we in Christ are conquerors of them who 
were mightier than we. 

In the next place, when the victors divide the spoil, they carry 
away not only the weapons but all the treasures which belong 
to their enemies. They dismantle their fortresses, and rifle all 
their stores, so that in future they may not be able to renew 
the attack. Christ hath done the like with all his enemies. Old 
Satan had taken away from us all our possessions. Paradise he 
had added to his territories. All the joy, and happiness, and 
peace of man, he had taken—not that he could enjoy them himself, 
but that he delighted to thrust us down into poverty and dam- 
nation. Now, all our lost inheritances Christ hath gotten back. 


116 CHRIST TRIUMPHANT. 


Paradise ts ours, and more than all the joy and happiness that 
Adam had, Christ hath brought back to us. O, robber of our 
race, how art thou spoiled and carried away captive! Didst 
thou despoil Adam of his riches? The sevord Adam hath des- 
poiled thee! How is the hammer >f the whole earth cut asun- 
der and broken, and the waster is become desolate. Now shall 
the needy be remembered, and again shall the meek inherit the 
earth. “Then is the prey of a great spoil divided, the lame 
take the prey.” 

Moreover, when victors divide the spcil, it is usual to take 
away all the ornam.:its from the enemy, the crowns and the 
jewels. Christ on the cross did the like. Satan had a crown 
on his head, a haughty diadem of triumph. “1 fought the first 
Adam,” he said, “I overcame him, and here’s my glittering dia- 
dem.” Christ snatched it from his brow in the hour when he 
bruised the serpent’s head. And now Satan cannot boast of a 
single victory, he is thoroughly defeated. In tne first skirmish 
he vanquished manhood, but in the second battle manhood van- 
quished him. The crown is taken from him. He is no longer 
the prince of God’s people. His reigning power is gone. He 
may tempt, but he cannot compel; he may threaten, but he can- 
not subdue; for the crown is taken from his head, and the mighty 
are brought low. O sing unto the Lord a new song, all ye his 
people; make a joyful noise unto him with psalms, all ye his 
redeemed ; for he hath broken in sunder the gates of brass, and 
cut the bars of iron; he hath broken the bow, and cut the spear 
in sunder; he hath burned the chariots in the fire, he hath dashed 
in pieces our enemies, and divided the spoil with the strong. 

_ And now, what says this to us? If Christ on the cross hath 
spoiled Satan, let us not be afraid to encounter this great enemy 
of our souls. My brethren, in all things we must be made like 
unto Christ. We must bear our cross, and on that cross we 
must fight as he did with sin, and death, and hell. Let us not 
fear. The result of the battle is certain, for as the Lord our 
Saviour has overcome once, even so shall we most surely con- 
quer in him. Be ye none of you afraid with sudden fear when 
the evil one ccmeth upon you. If he accuse you, reply to him 
in these words: “ Who shall lay anything to the charge of God’. 


CHRIST TRIUMPHANT. 117 


elect?” If he condemn you, laugh him to scorn, crying: “Whe 
is he that condemneth? It is Christ that died, yea rather hath 
risen again.” If he threaten to divide you from Christ’s love, 
encounter him with confidence: “I am persuaded that neither 
things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor 
any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of 
God which is in Christ Jesus your Lord.” i* he iet loove your 
sins upon you dash the hell-dogs aside with thiv. “1: any man 
sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the right- 
eous.” If death should threaten you, shout in his very face: 
“Qdeath! where is thy sting; O grave! where is thy victory.” 
Hold up the cross before you. Let that ke your shield and 
buckler, and rest assured that as your master rot only routed the 
foe, but afterwards took the spoil, it shal] be even so with you. 

Your battles with Satan shall turn tc your advantage. You 
shall become all the richer for your antagonists. The more nu- 
merous they shall be, the greater shal] be your share of the spoil. 
Your tribulation shall work patience, and your patience expe- 
rience, and your experience hope—a hope that maketh not 
ashamed. Through this much tribulation shall you inherit the 
kingdom, and by the very attacks of Satan shall you be helped 
the better to enjoy the rest which remaineth to the people of 
God. Put yourselves in array against sin and Satan. All ye 
that bend the bow shoot at them, spare no arrows, for your en 
emies are rebels against God. Go ye up against them, put your 
feet upon their necks, fear not, neither be ye dismayed, for 
the battle is the Lord’s and he will deliver them into your 
hands, Be ye very courageous, remembering that you have tc 
fight with a stingless dragon. He may hiss, but his teeth are 
broken and his poison fang extracted. You have to do battle 
with an enemy already scarred by your Master’s weapons. You 
have to fight with a naked foe. Every blow you give him tells 
upon him, for he hss nothing to protect him. Christ hath strip. 
ped him naked, divided his armor, and left him defenceless be- 
fore his people. Be not afraid. The Jion may howl, but rend 
you in pieces he never can. The enemy may rush in upon you 
with hideous noise and terrible alarms, but there is « real 
eause for fear. Stand fast in the Lord. Ye war against a king 


118 CHRIST TRIUMPHART. 


who hath lost his crown ; ye fight against an enemy whose cheek 
bones have been smitten, and the joints of whose loins have been 
loosed. Rejoice, rejoice ye in the day of battle, for it is for you 
the beginning of an eternity of triumph 

Ihave thus endeavored to dwell upon the first part of the 
text, Christ on the cross divided the spoil, and he would have us 
dc the same. 


II. Crist m Trivmenat Procession on THE Cross. 

When a Roman general had performed great feats in a foreign 
country, his highest reward was that the Senate should decree 
him a triumph. Of course there was a divisicn of spoil made 
on the battle-field, and each soldier and each captain took his 
share; but every man looked forward rapturously to the day 
when they should enjoy the public triumph. On a set day the 
gates of Rome were thrown open; the houses were all decorated ; 
the people climbed to the roofs, or stood in great crowds along 
the streets. The gates were opened, and by-and-bye the first 
legion began to stream in with its banners flying, and its trum- 
pets sounding. The people saw the stern warriors as they 
marched along the street returning from their blood-red fields 
of battle. After one half of the army had thus defiled, your eye 
would rest upon one who was the centre of all attraction: riding 
in a noble chariot, drawn by milk-white horses, there came the 
conqueror himself, crowned with the laurel crown and standing 
erect. Chained to his chariot were the kings and mighty men 
of the regions which he had conquered. Immediately behind 
them came part of the booty. There were carried the ivory and 
the ebony, and the beasts of the different countries which he had 
subdued. After these came the rest of the soldiery, a long, long 
stream of valiant men, all of them sharing the triumphs of their 
eaptain. Behind them came banners, the old flags which had 
foated aloft in the battle, the standards which had been taken 
from the enemy. And after these, large painted emblems of the 
great victories of the conquerur. Upon one there would be a 
huge map depicting the rivers which he had crossed, or the 
seas through which his navy had found their way. Everything 
was represented in a picture, and the populace gave a fresh shour 


CHRIST TRIUMPHANT. 119 


as they saw the memorial of each triumph. And behind, with 
the trophies, would come the prisoners of less eminent rank, 
Then the rear would be closed with sound of trumpet, adding to 
the acclamation of the throng. It was a noble day for old Rome. 
Children would never forget those triumphs ; they would reckon 
their years from the time of one triumph to another. High 
holiday was kept. Women cast down flowers before the con- 
queror, and he was the true monarch of the day. 

Now, our apostle had evidently seen such a triumph, or read 
of it, and he takes this as a representation of what Christ did on 
the cross. He says, “Jesus made a show of them openly, 
triumphing over them in it.” ave you ever thought that the 
cross could be the scene of atriumph? Most of the old com- 
mentators can scarcely conceive it to be true. They say, “ This 
must certainly refer to Christ’s resurrection and ascension.” 
But, nevertheless, so saith the Scripture, even on the cross Christ 
enjoyed a triumph. Yes! while those hands were bleeding, the 
acclamations of angels were being poured upon his head. Yes, 
while those feet were being rent with the nails, the noblest 
spirits in the world were crowding round him with admiration. 
And when upon that blood-stained cross he died in agonies unut- 
terable, there was heard a shout such as never was heard before 
for the ransomed in heaven, and all the angels of God with loud- 
est harmony chanted his praise. Then was sung, in fullest cho- 
rus, the song of Moses, the servant of God, and the song of the 
Lamb, for he had indeed cut Rahab and sorely wounded the 
dragon, Sing unto the Lord, for he hath triumphed gloriously. 
The Lord shall reign for ever and ever, King of kings, and Lord 
of lords. 

I do not feel able, however, this morning, to work out a scene 
so grand, and yet so contrary to everything that flesh could guess 
as a picture of Christ actually triumphing on the cross—in the 
midst of his bleeding, his wounds, and his pains, actually being 
a triumphant victor, and admired of all. I choose, rather, to 
take my text thus: The cross is the ground of Christ’s ultimate 
triumph, He may be said to have really triumphed there, be- 
cause it was by that one act of his, that one offering of himself, 
that he completely vanquished all ‘is foes, and forever sat down 


120: CHRIST TRIUMPHANT. 

at the right hand of the Majesty in the heavens. In the cross, 
to the spiritual eye, every victory of Christ is contained. It 
may not be there in fact, but it is there in effect ; the germ of 
his glories may be discovered by the eye of faith in the agonies 
of the cross. 

Bear with me while I humbly attempt to depict the triumph 
which now results from the cross. 

Christ has forever overcome all his foes, and divided the spoil 
upon the battle-field, and now, even at this day, is he enjoying 
the well-earned reward and triumph of his fearful struggle. Lift 
up your eyes to the battlements of heaven, the great metrop- 
olis of God. The pearly gates are wide open, and the city shines 
with her jewelled walls like a bride prepared for her husband. 
Do you see the angels crowding to the battlements? Do you 
observe them on every mansion of the celestial city, eagerly de- 
siring and looking for something which has not yet arrived! At 
last, there is heard the sound of a trumpet, and the angels hurry 
to the gates—the vanguard of the redeemed is approaching the 
city. Abel comes in alone, clothed in a crimson garb, the her- 
ald of a glorious army of martyrs. Hark to the shout of accla- 
mation! This is the first of Christ’s warriors, at once a soldier 
and a trophy, that have been delivered. Close at his heels there 
follow others, who in those early times had learned the coming 
Saviour’s fame. Behind them a mighty host may be discovered 
of patriarchal veterans, who have witnessed to the coming of the 
Lord in a wanton age. See Enoch still walking with his God, 
and singing sweetly—“ Behold, the Lord cometh with ten thou- 
sands of his saints.” There, too, is Noah, who had sailed in the 
ark with the Lord as his pilot. Then follow Abraham, Isaac, 
and Jacob, Moses, and Joshua, and Samuel, and David, all 
mighty men of valor. Hearken to them as they enter! Every 
one of them waving his helmet in the air, cries, “ Unto him that 
loved us, and washed ug from our sins in his blood, unto him be 

_acnor, and glory, and dominion, and power, for ever and ever.” 

Look, my brethren, with admirstion upon this noble army . 
Mark the heroes-as they march along the golden streets, every- 
where meeting an enthusiastic welcome from the angels who 

ave kept their first estate. On, on they pour, those countless 


CHRIST TRIUMPHANT. - 124 
legions—was there ever such a spectacle? Itis not the pageant 
of a day, but the ‘‘show” of alltime. For fourthousand years 
streams on the army of Christ’s redeemed. Sometimes there is 
a short rank, for the people have been often minished and 
brought low; but, anon, a crowd succeeds, and on, on, stillon 
they come, all shouting, all praising him who loved them and 
gave himself for them. But see, he comes! I see his imme- 
diate herald, clad in a garment of camel’s hair, and a leathern 
girdle about his loins. The Prince of the house of David is not 
far behind. Leteveryeye be open. Now, mark, how not only 
angels, but the redeemed crowd the windows of heaven! He 
comes! he comes! It is Christ himself! Lash the snow-white 
coursers up the everlasting hills; ‘‘ Lift up your heads, O ye 
gates, and be ye lifted up ye everlasting doors, that the King of 
glory may comein.” See, he enters in the midst of acclama- 
tions. It is he! but he is not crowned with thorns. It is 
he! but though his hands wear the scar, they are stained 
with blood no longer. His eyes are as a flame of fire, and 
on his head are many crowns, and he hath on his vesture 
and on his thigh written, Kine or x1nas, AnD Lorp oF Lorbs, 
He stands aloft in that chariot which is “ paved with love for the 
daughters of Jerusalem.” Clothed in a vesture dipped in blood, 
he stands confessed the emperor of heaven and eartb. On, on 
he rides, and louder than the noise of many waters and like the 
voice of seven thunders are the acclamations which surround him! 

See how John’s vision has become a reality, for now we can 
see for ourselves, and hear with our ears, the new song whereof 
ne writes. “They sung a new song, saying, thou art worthy to 
take the book, and to open the seals therecs . for thou wast slain 
and hast redeemed us to God by thy blood out of every kindred, 
and tongue, and people, and nation; and hast made us unto our 
God kings and priests; and we shall reign on the earth. And I 
beheld, and I heard the voice of many angels round about the 
throne, and the beasts and the elders: and the number of them 
was ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thou- 
sands, saying with a loud voice, Worthy is the Lamb that was 
slain to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, 
and honor, and glory, and blessing. And every creature which 


6 


122 OHRIST TRIUMPHANT, 


is in heaven, and on the earth, and under the earth, and such as 
are in the sea, and all that are in them, heard I saying, Blessing, 
and honor, and glory, and power, be unto him that sitteth upon 
the throne, and unto the Lamb forever and ever. And the four 
beasts said, Amen. And the four-and-twenty elders fell down 
and worshipped him that liveth forever and ever.” 

But who are those at his chariot wheels? Who are those grim 
monsters that come howling in the rear? [know them. First 
of all, there is the arch saemy. Look to the old serpent, bound 
and fettered, how he writhes his ragged length along! his azure 
hues all tarnished and trailing in the dust, his scales despoiled of 
their once-vaunted brightness. Now is captivity led captive, and 
death and hell shall be cast into the lake of fire. With what 
derision is the chief of rebels regarded. How is he become the 
object of everlasting contempt. He that-sitteth in the heavens 
doth laugh, the Lord doth have him in derision. Behold how 
the serpent’s head is broken, and the dragon is trampled under 
foot. And now regard attentively yon hideous monster, sin, 
chained hand in hand with his satanic sire. See how he rolls his 
fiery eye-balls, how he twists and writhes in agonies. Mark 
how he glares upon the holy city, but is unable to spit his ven- 
om there, for he is chained and gagged, and dragged along an 
unwilling captive at the wheels of the victor. And there, too, 
is old Death, with his darts all broken and his hands behind him, 
—the grim king of terrors, he too is a captive. Hark to the 
songs of the redeemed, of those who have entered Paradise, as 
they see these mighty prisoners dragged along! “Worthy is 
he,” they shout, “to live and reign at his Almighty Father’s 
side, for he hath ascended up on high, he hath led captivity cap- 
tive, and received gifls for men.” 

And behind them all, I see the great multitude of the ran- 
somed streaming in. The apostles Fret arrive in one goodly fel- 
lowship, hymning their Lord; and then their immediate succes- 
sors; and then a long array of those who, through cruel mock- 
ings and blood, through flame and sword, have followed their 
Master. These are they of whom the world was not worthy, 
brightest among the stars of heaven. Regard also the mighty 
preachers and confessors of the faith, Chrysostom, Athanasius, 


CHRIST TRIUMPHANT. 1238 


Augustine, and the like. Witness their holy unanimity in prais 
ing their Lord. ‘Then let your eye run along the glittering ranks 
till you come to the days of Reformation. I see in the midst 
of the squadron, Luther, and Calvin, and Zwingle, three holy bro 
thers. I see just before them Wickliffe, and Huss, and Jerome 
marching together. And then I see a company that no man can 
number, converted to God through these mighty reformers, who 
now follow in the rear of the King of kings and Lord of lords. 
And looking down to our own time, I see the stream broader 
and deeper. For many are the soldiers who have in these last 
times entered into their Mastey’s triumph. We may mourn 
their absence from us, but we must rejoice in their presence with 
the Lord. But what is the unanimous shout, what is the one 
song that rolls from the first rank to the last? It is this: “ Un- 
to him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own 
blood, tohim be glory and dominion forever and ever!” Have they 
changed the time? Have they supplanted his name by another 
Have they put the crown on another head, or elevated another here 
to the chariot? Ah, no; they are content still to let the triumph 
ant procession stream along its glorious length; still to rejoice 
as they behold fresh trophies of his love, for every soldier is a 
trophy, every warrior in Christ’s army is another proof of his 
power to save, and his victory over death and hell. 

I have not time to enlarge further, or else ] might describe the 
grand pictures at the end of the procession; for in the old Ro- 
man triumphs, the deeds of the conqueror were all depicted in 
paintings. The towns he had taken, the rivers he had passed, 
the provinces he had subdued, the battles he had fought, were re 
presented in pictures, and exposed to the view of the people, wha, 
with great festivity and rejoicing, accompanied him in throngs, 
o. beheld him from the windows of their houses, and filled the 
air with their acclamations, I might present to you, first of all, 
the picture of hell’s dungeons blown to atoms. Satan had pre 
pared, in the depths of darkness, @ prison-house for God’s elect, 
but Christ has not left one stone upon another. On the picture | 
see the chains broken in pieces, the prison doorsburnt with fire, 
and all the depths of the vasty deep shaken to their foundations. 
On another picture I see heaven open to all believers; I see the 


124 CHRIST TRIUMPHANT. 


gates that were fast shut heaved back by the golden lever of Christ's 
atonement. I see on another picture, the grave despoiled; I be- 
hold Jesus in it, slumbering for awhile, and then rolling away 
the stone and rising to immortality and glory. But we cannot 
stay to describe these mighty victories of his love. We know 
that the time shal! come when the triumphant procession shall 
cease, when the last of his redeemed shall have entered into the 
city of happiness and of joy, and when with the shout of a 
trumpet heard for the last time, he shall ascend to heaven, and 
take his people up to reign with God, even our Father, forever 
and ever. 

Our only question, and with that we conclude, is, have we a 
good hope through grace that we shall march in that sublime 
procession? Shall we pass under review in that day of pomp 
and glory? Say, my soul, shalt thou have an humble part in 
that glorious pageant? Wilt thou follow at his chariot wheels ? 
Wilt thou join in the hosannas? Shall thy voice help to swell 
the everlasting chorus? Sometimes, I fear it shall not. There 
are times when the awful question comes—what if my name 
should be left out when he reads the muster-roll? Brethren, 
does not that thought trouble you? But yet I put the question 
again. Can you answer it? Will you be there—shall you see 
this pomp? Will you behold him triumph over sin, death and 
hell at last? Canst thou answer this question? There is anoth- 
er, but the answer will serve for both—dost thou believe on the 
Lord Jesus Christ? Is he thy confidence and thy trust? Hast 
thou committed thy soul to his keeping? Reposing on his 
might, canst thou say for thine immortal spirit— 


“ Other refuge have I none, 
Hangs my helpless soul on thee ?” 


If thoa canst say that, thine eyes shall see him in the day of his 
glory; nay, thou shalt share his glory, and sit with him upon 
his throne, even as he has overcome and sits down with his 
Father upon his throne. I blush to preach as I have done this 
morning, on a theme far beyond my power; yet I could not 
leave it unsung, but, as best I might, sing it. May God enlarge 


CHRIST TRIUMPHANT. 125 


your faith, and strengthen your hope, and inflame your love, 
and make you ready to be made partakers of the inheritance 
of the saints in light, that when he shall come with flying clouds, 
on wings of wind, you may be ready to meet him, and may 
with him ascend to gaze forever on the vision of his glory. 

May God grant this blessing, “or Christ’s sake. Amun. 


SERMON VIII. 


REMEMBER DEATH. 


[ Prcrorrat representations of a subject so grand and solemn 
as death, is a perilous undertaking before a public audience, even 
for one with the fertile imagination and fluent speech of the 
author. This sermon was preached in Exeter Hall, March 18, 
1860 and was heard with such serious attention and profit, that 
Spurgeon himself says, “Its solemn warnings have been, in the 
hand of God, the means of alarming and convincing many care 
less ones; it has had the high honor of bringing poor procras- 
tinating souls to decision.” To the reader, it lacks the living 
voice and action which made its spoken lessons more impressive. 
To careless minds, these sad thoughts are most unwelcome, but 
most profitable. Why should life claim all regard, and death 
have none ?] 


“Oh that they were wise, that they understood thie, that thoy would com- 
sider their latter end.” —Dxor, xxxii. 29, 


May is unwilling to consider the subject of death. The shroud, 
the mattock, and the grave, he labors to keep continually out of 
sight. He would live here always if he could; and since he can- 
not, he at least will put away every emblem of death as far as pos- 
sible from his sight. Perhaps there is no subject so important, 
which is 90 little thought of. Our common proverb that we use 
is just the expression of our thoughts. “ We must live.” But 


REMEMBER DEATH. 127 


if we were wiser, we should alter it and say, “ We must die.” 
Necessity for life there is not; life is a prolonged miracle. Ne- 
cessity for death there certainly is; it is the end of all things. 
Oh that the living would lay it to heart. Some years ago, a 
celebrated author—Drelincourt— wrote a work on Death; a 
valuable work in itself, but it commanded no sale whatever. 
There were no men who would trouble themselves with death’s 
heads and cress-bones. And to show how foolish man is, a cer- 
tain doctor went home and wrote a silly ghost story, not one 
word of which was true, sent it to the bookseller, he stitched it 
up with his volume, and the whole edition sold. Anything men 
will think of rather than death—any fiction, any lie. But this 
stern reality, this master truth, he puts away, and will not suf- 
fer it to enter his thoughts. 

The old Egyptians were wiser than we are. Weare told that 
at every feast there was always one extraordinary guest that sat 
at the head of the table. He ate not, he drank not, he spake 
not, he was closely veiled. It was a skeleton which they had 
placed there, to warn them that even in their feastings they 
should remember there would be an end of life. We are so 
fond of living, so sad at the very thought of death, that such a 
memento mori as that would be quite unbearable in our days of 
feasting. Yet our text tells us that we should be wise, if we 
would consider our latter end. And certainly we should be, for 
the practical effect of a true meditation upon death would be 
exceedingly healthful to our spirits. It would cool that ardor of 
covetousness, that fever of avarice, always longing after and ac- 
cumulating wealth, if we did but remember that we should have 
to leave our stores, that when we have gotten our most, all that 
we can ever inherit for our body is one six feet of earth. It 
would certainly help us to set lightly by the things which we 
here possess. Perhaps it might lead us to set our affections 
upon things above, and not upon the mouldering things below 
At any rate, thoughts of death might often check us when we 
are about to sin. If we look at sin by the light of death’s lan- 
tern, we might see more of the hollowness of sinful pleasure, and 
of the emptiness of worlély vanity. Surely we should be kept 
hack from many an evil act, if we remembered that we must all 


128 REMEMBER DEATH. 


appear before the judgment seat of Christ. And, mayhap too, 
these thoughts of death might be blessed to us in even a higher 
sense, for we might hear an angel speaking to us from the grave, 
“Prepare to meet your God.” This might lead us to set our 
house in order, because we must die and not live. If even one 
of these effects shall be produced by considering our latter end, 
it would be the purest wisdom continually to walk arm in arm 
with that skeleton teacher—Death. 

I propose this morning, as God shall help me, to lead you to 
consider death. May the Holy Spirit bend your thoughts down- 
ward to the tomb. May he guide you to the grave, that you 
may there see the end of all earthly hopes, of all worldly pomp 
and show. In doing this, I shall thus Yivide my subject. First, 
let us consider Death; secondly, let us consider the warnings 
which Death has given us already ; and then, further, let ue pic- 
ture ourselves as dying. 


{. In the first place, then, tet us consipER Drata. 

1. Let us begin by remarking its origin. Why is it that I 
must die? Whence came these seeds of corruption that are 
sown within this flesh? The angels die not. Those pure ethereal 
spirits live on without knowing the weakness of old age, and 
without suffering the penalties of decay. Why must I die! 
Why has God made me so curiously and so wondrously—why 
4s all this skill and wisdom shown in the fashioning of a man that 
ts to endure for an hour, and then to crumble back to his native 
element—the dust? Can it be that God originally made me to 
die? Did he intend that the noble creature, who is but a little 
lower than the angels, who hath dominion over the works of 
Giod’s hands, beneath whose feet he hath put all beasts of the 
field, yea, and the fowl of the air and the fish of the sea, and 
whatsoever passeth through the paths of the sea—did he intend 
that that creature should waste away as a shadow, and should be 
as a dream that continueth not? ‘Come, my soul, let this mel- 
ancholy thought thrust itself upon thy attention. Thou diest 
because thou sinnest! Thy death is not God’s primal ordinance, 
but it is a penalty brought upon thee on account of the trans. 
gression of thy first parent. ‘Thou wouldst have been immortal. 


REMEMBER DEATH. 129 


if Adam nad been immaculate. Sin, thou art the mother of 
Death! Adam, thou hath digged the graves of thy children! 
We might have lived on, in everlasting youth, if it had not been 
for that thrice-cursed theft of the forbidden fruit. Look, then, 
that thought in the face. Man isa suicide. Sin slays the race, 
We die, because we have sinned. How this should make us 
hate sin! How we should detest it, because the wages of sin 
is death! Brand, then, from this day forward, the word Mur- 
derer on the brow of sin. 

2. In considering Death, let us go a step further, and observe 
not only its origin, but its certainty, Die [ must, I may have 
escaped a thousand diseases, but Death has an arrow in his 
quiver that will reach my heart at last. True, [ have one hope, 
a blissful hope, that if my Lord and Master shall soon come, I 
shall be among the number of them that are alive and remain, 
who shall never die, but who shall be changed. But, however 
if it be not so, die I must. “It is appointed unto all men once 
to die, and after death the judgment.” Run! run! but the fleet 
pursuer shall overtake thee. Like the stag before the hounds 
we fiy swifter than the breeze, but the dogs of Death snall out- 
strip us: Fever and plague, weakness and decay; he hath but to 
let slip these, and they are on us, and who can resist their fury? 
There is a black camel upon which Death rides, say the Arabs, 
and that must kneel at every man’s door. With impartial hand 
he dashes down the palace of the monarch as well as the cabin 
of the peasant. At every man’s door there hangs that black 
‘knocker, and Death nath but to uplift it and the dread sound is 
heard, and the uninvited guest sits down to banquet on our flesh 
and blood. DieI must. No physician can stretch out my life 
beyond its allotted term. {must cross that river. I may usea 
thousand stratagems, but I cannot escape. Even now I am like 
the deer surrounded by the hunters in a circle, a circle which is 
narrowing every day; and soon must I fall and pour out my life 
upon the ground. Let me never forget, then, that while other 
things are uncertain, death is sure. 

3. Then, looking a little further into this shade, let me re- 
member the time of my Death. To God it is fixed and certain. 
He has ordained the hour in which I must expire. A thousand 

6? 


130 REMEMBER DEATH. 


angels cannot keep me from the grave an instant when that hour 
has struck. Nor could legions of spirits cast me into the pit 
before the appointed time. 


‘Plagues and death around me fly, 
Till he please I cannot die; 
Not o single shaft can hit, 
Till the God of love sees ft.” 


All our times are in his hand. The means, the way I shall 
die, how long [ shall be in dying, the sickness, and in what place 
Ishall be seized with the contagion, a!] these are ordained. God 
hath in his mind’s eye the wave that shall engulph me, or the 
bed in which I shall breathe out my last. He knows the stones 
that shall mark my sleeping place. He hath ordained every- 
thing ; and in that Book of Fate it stands, and never can it be 
changed. But to me itis quite uncertain. I know not when, 
nor where, nor how I shall breathe out my life. Into that sacred 
ark I cannot look—that ark of the secrets of God. I cannot 
pry between the folded leaves of that book which is chained to 
the throne of God, wherein is written the whole history of man. 
When I walk by the way I may fall dead in the streets; an ap- 
poplexy may usher me into the presence of my Judge. Riding 
along the road, I may be carried as swiftly to my tomb. While 
I am thinking of the multitudes of miles over which the fiery 
wheels are running, I may be in a minute, without a moment’s 
warning, sent down to the shades of death. In my own house I 
am not safe. There are a thousand gates to Death. From this 
spot in which I stand, there is a straight path to the grave; and 
where you sit there is an entrance into eternity. Oh, let us be- 
think, then, how uncertain life is. Talk we ofa hair; it is some- 
thing massive when compared with the thread of life. Speak 
we of a spider’s web; it is ponderous compared with the 
weo of life. We are but as a bubble; nay, less substantial. 
As s moment’s foam upon the breaker, such are we. As an 
instant spray——nay, the drops of spray are enduring as the orbs 
of heaven compared with the moments of our life. Oh, let usp 
then, prepare to meet our God, because, when and how we shall 
appear before him is quite unknown to us. We may never go 


REMEMBER DEATH. 131 


sat of this hall alive. Some of us may be carried hence on 
young men’s shoulders, as Ananias and Sapphira of old. We 
may not live to see our homes again. We may have given the 
last kiss to the beloved cheek, and spoken the last word of fond 
ness to those who are near to our hearts. We are on the brink 
of our tombs. 


“Ten thousand tc their endless home 
This solemn moment fly; 
And we are to the margin come, 
And soon expect to die!” 


4. But I must not linger here, but go on to observe the terrors 
which surround Death. I would call to your memory %-44y 
the pains, the groans, the dying strife, which make our affrighteé 
souls start back from the tomb. ‘To the best men in the worlc 
dying is a solemn thing. Though “I can read my title clear to 
mansions in the skies,” and know that I have a portion among 
them that are sanctified, yet must it always give some trem}. lng 
to the flesh, some quivering to the human frame, to think of 
breathing out my soul, and launching on an unknown sea. He 
that can laugh at death is a fool—stark, staring mad is he. He 
who can make jokes with regard to his end will find that if he 
should die jesting, it will be no jest to be damned. When this 
tent is being taken down, when this clay tenement begins to creak 
and shake in the rough north wind of Death, when stone after 
stone tumbles from its place, and all the bonds are loosened. it 
will be a terrible moment then. When the poor soul stands 
beneath the temple of the body, and sees it shake, sees rifts in 
its roof, sees the pillars tremble, and all the ruins thereof falling 
about it, it will be an awful moment—a moment which, if it 
were continued and lengthened, would be the most dread picture 
of hell that can be presented to us, for hell is called the second 
Death. An endless dying, the pang of death prolonged eter- 
nally, the woes.and the grief of dissolution made to last with. 
out an end, that, I say, is one of the most terrible pictures of 
hell. Death itself must be a tremendous thing. Let me think, 
too, that when I die I must leave behind me all that I have on 
earth. Farewell! to that house which I have so fondly called 


132 REMEMBER DEATH. 


my home. Farewell to that fireside and the little prattlers that 
have climbed my knee. Farewell! to her who has shared my 
life and been the beloved one of my bosom. Farewell! all 
things—the estate, the gold, the silver. Farewell! earth. Thy 
fairest beauties melt away, thy most melodious strains die in 
the dim distance. I hear no more, and see no more. Ears and 
eyes are closed, and men shall carry me out and bury their 
dead out of their sight. And, now, farewell! to all the means 
of grace. That passing bell is the last sound of the sanctuary 
that shall toll for me. No church bell now shall summon me 
‘9 the house of God. If I have neglected Christ, I shall hear of 
Christ no more. No grace presented now; ne striving of the 
Spirit. 

“ Fix'd is my everlasting fate 

Could I repent, ’tis ney «00 late.” 


Death hath now closed up the windows of my soul. If J am 
impenitent, an everlasting darkness, a darkness like that of 
Egyp, that may be felt, rests on me forever. Ye may sing, ye 
saints uf God, but I must howl eternally. Ye may gather round 
the Sacramental Table and remember your Master’s death, but 
] am east away forever from his presence, where there is weep- 
‘ng, aad wailing, and gnashing of teeth. This is to die, my 
Sriends, and to die with vengeance. To the believer there are 
softening tints; there are lines in the picture which take out the 
plackness. The very shades help to make the believer’s glory 
brighter; the grim passage of Death makes heaven shine with 
a superior lustre. He thinks of the land beyond the flood, of 
the beatific vision, of the face of the exalted Redeemer, of a seat 
at his right hand, of crowns of glory, and of harps of immortal 
bliss. But to you who are ungodly and uncoverted, Death has 
only this black side. It is the leaving of all you have, and of 
all you love. It is an entering upon eternal poverty, everlasting 
shame, and infinite woe. Oh that ye were wise, ye careless sin- 
ners—oh that ye were wise, that ye understood this, and would 
consider your latter end. 

5. I have thus you see pushed into another head which |} 
meant to have dwelt upor for a moment, viz., the results of death. 


» 


REMEMBER DEATH. 133 


For, verily, its results and terrors to the wicked are the same. 
Oh that ye were wise to consider them. Let me, however, re- 
mind the Christian, in order that there may be a flash of light 
in the thick darkness of this sermon, that Death, to him, should 
never be a subject upon which he should loathe to meditate. To 
die!—to shake off my weakness and to be girded with omnipo 
tence. To die!—to leave my pangs, and pains, and fears, and 
woe, my feeble heart, my unbelief, my tremblings and my griefs, 
and leap into the divine bosom. To die! What have I to lose 
by Death? The tumult of the people and the strife of tongues 
A joyous loss indeed! To the believer Death is gain, unalloyed 
gain. Do we leave our friends by Death? We shall see better 
friends, and more numerous up yonder, in the general assembly 
and church of the first-born, whose names are written in heaven 
Do we leave our house and comforts? ‘There is a house no‘ 
made with hands, eternal in the heavens.” Do we lose our life? 
Ah no, we gain a better far; for remember that we die to live. 
and then we live to die no more. Without any fraction of loss. 
death to the believer is a glorious gain. It is greatly wise, then, 
for a Christian to talk with his last hours, because those last 
hours are the beginning of his glory. He leaves off to sin and 
begins to be perfect; he ceases to suffer and begins to be happy; 
he renounces all his poverty and shame, and begins to be rich 
and honored. Comfort, then, comfort, then, ye sorrowing and 
suffering Christians. “Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, saith 
your God.” Say unto them your warfare is accomplished, your 
sin is pardoned, and you shall see your Lord’s face without a 


veil between. 


II. I shall now turn to the second head of my discourse, to 
CONSIDER THE WARNINGS WHICH DEATH HATH ALREADY GIVEN 
TO EACH ONE OF US. 

We are so prone to turn away from this subject, that you 
must excuse me if I continue to bring you back again, again, and 
again to it, during the brief time that can be allotted to the dis- 
course of this morning. Death hath been very near to many 
of us; he has crossed the ecliptic of cur life many and many a 
time. That baleful planet has often been in close conjunction 


with us. 


134 REMEMBER DEATH. 


Let us just observe hovz frequently he has been in our house. 
Call ye then to mind, first of ali, how many warnings you have 
aad in the loss of relatives. There is not a person here, lim- 
agine, who has not had to make a pilgrimage to the tomb, te 
weep over the ashes of your friends. During the few years that 
Shave been the pastor of this church, how many times have | 
journeyed to the tomb. One after another of the valiant men 
in our Israel have been. taken away. Many who were my 
spiritual sons and daughters, whom I buried first in the tomb of 
baptism, have I had to bury afterwards in the tomb of death. 
The scene is always changing. As I stand in my pulpit, I remark 
many an old familiar face. But I have to observe also, how 
many places there are which would have been empty, if it were 
uot that God has sent other Davids to occupy David’s seat. 
And, my dear friends, it cannot be long with some of you, ere 
it shall be my mournful task, unless I die myself, to go weeping 
over your bodies to the tomb. That funeral oration may soon 
be pronounced over some of you. And you have good reason 
to expect it, when you think how one efter another of those who 
were the friends of your youth kave gone. Where is the wife 
with wom you lived joyously in the early days of your life? 
Cr where is the husband, who so often looked on you with eyes 
cf love? Where are those children who sprung up like flowers, 
nut withered as they bloomed? Where are those brothers and 
chose sisters, the elder born, that have crossed the flood before 
us? or, those younger on:s, who shone with us for an hour, but 
whose sun, even before it had reached its zenith, had set in eter- 
nal night? Brothers and sisters, Death has made sad inroads 
into some of our families. There be some of ycu who stand to- 
day like a man upon the shore when the tide is swelling towards 
his feet. There came one wave, and it took away the grand- 
mother ; another came, and a mother was swept away; another 
came, and the wife was taken; and now it dashes at your feet 
How long shall it be ere it breaks over you—and you, too, are 
carried away into the bosom of the deep of Death! The Lord 
has given many of you serious and solemn warnings. T do en- 
treat you, listen tothem. Harken now, to the ery which comes 
up from the grave of those who being dead yet speak to you. 
Hear them now, those lately buried ones, as they cry, “Children, 


REMEMBER DEATH. 135 


husbands, wives, brothers, sisters, prepare to meet your God, lest 
ye should fail in the last dread day.” 

Think, again, what solemn and repeated warnings we have had 
of late, not in our families, but in the wide, wide world. It is 
- @ singular fact, that afflictions and accidents never come alone. 
A few weeks ago, we were all shocked with the news, that one 
who had sailed across the treacherous sea full many a time, and 
who at last had risen in his profession to become captain of the 
largest vessel that was ever launched upon the deep, had sud- 
denly perished in calm waters, and his spirit had appeared be- 
fore hisGod. It seemed to us a sad, sad thing, that one who had 
endured the tempest and the storm, perhaps a thousand times, 
should sink as a ship that founders in the mid-ocean, when not 
a wave rocks her keel. He is at home—he has just left his 
family—his foot slips, and he finds a watery grave. Quick upon 
that, as one messenger foliows another, came the news across the 
sea of the falling of a imill, in which so many hundreds were at 
once overwhelmed by the ruins, and sent hurriedly into the pres- 
ence of God. We can little tell what a thrill of horror went 
through the towns which were adjacent to that mill in America, 
Even we ourselves, across the leagues # sea, felt stunned by 
the blow, when so large a number of our fellow-creatures were 
hurried from this state of being into another. Immediately 
after that, there came another calamity, which is just fresh in 
our memory. A train is whirling along, and suddenly the iron 
horse leaps from his road, and men who are talking together, as 
fully at ease as we are, amid the breaking of bones, and the 
crashing of timber, and whirlwinds of dust and steam, are snatch- 
ed from time into eternity. And, now, this last week, how 
many tokens have we had that man is mortal? A judge who 
has long presided over the trials of his criminal countrymen, 
delivers his charge before a grand jury. He delivers it with his 
usual wisdom, calmness, and deliberation. He has finished; he 
pauses; he lifts the smelling bottle to his nose to refresh him 
self; he falls back; ke is carried from the court to receive his 
own charge, to go from the judgment-seat on which he sat to the 
judgment-seat before which ne must himself stand. 

Then, in the same week, a good man who has served his day 


136 REMEMbe£R DEATH. 


and generation in a sister church of ths city, is suddenly snatched 
away from before us. He who aided every good cause, and 
served his day and generation--perhaps you may know that I 
allude to Mr. Corderoy—is suddenly taken away, and leaves a 
whole denomination rcurning over him. Nay, nearer than that 
has the stroke of death come to some of us. It was but last 
Wednesday that I sat in the house of that mighty servant of 
God, that great defender of the faith, the Luther of his age, Dr. 
Campbell; we were talking then about these sudden deaths, 
little thinking that the like calamity would invade his very 
family ; but, slas! we observed in the next day’s paper. that 
his second son had been swept overboard in returning from one 
of his voyages to America. A hoki brave youth has found a 
liquid grave, So that here, there, everywhere, O Death! I see 
thy doings A‘ home, abroad, on the sea, and across the sea, 
thou art doing marvels. O thou mower! how long ere thy 
scythe shall be quiet? O thou destroyer of men, wilt thou 
never rest, wilt thou ne’er be still? O Death! must thy , 
car go crashing on for ever, and must the blood of human beings 
mark thy teack? Yes, it must be so till He comes who is the 
King of life and immortality ; then the saints shall die no more, 
but be as the angels of God. So then, Death has spoken very 
loudly to us as a nation, as a people, and has spoken to many 
of us, very loudly, in our own family circles. 

Now, man, I will come closer home to you still. Death has 
giver. home strokes to all of us. Put thy finger in thy own 
rouuth, fur thou hast Death’s mark there. What mean those 
decaying teeth, those twitching pains?—an agony despised by 
those alone who feel it not. Why do some parts of the house 
tremple and hurry to decay? Because the rottenness that is in 
the tecth isin the whole body. You talk of a decayed tooth: 
remember, it is but part of a decayed man. You are yourself 
rotting, but a little less rapidly. For, to some of you, what 
wattungs Death has given, He has laid his cold hand upon 

cur head and frozen your hair; and there it lies in snowy flakes 
vpn your @mples. Or, perhaps, he has put that hand yet more 
be:vily upon it, and now your bare head is exposed to the rays 
of the sun, and, remember, this is but a type of the exposure 


REMEMBER DEACH. 137 


of your bare soul to the stroke of Death. What s'gns have 
we all had in our bodies, especially the aged, the infirm, the con- 
sumptive, and the maimed? What mean those lungs that are 
so soon exhausted of their breathing if you travel up a flight of 
stairs to your bed? Why is it you need your optic glasses to 
your eyes, but that they that Icok out of the windows are dark 
ened? Why that affected kearmg? Why that failure of tus 
voice, that weakness of the ertire body, that accumulatior of 
the flesh, or that prominence of vhe bones and leanness of the 
body? What are all these but stabs from the hand of Death? 
They are, if I may say so, his warrants which he presents te 
you, summoning you in a little time to meet him in anotixer 
place, to do your last work, and take youn last farewell. Qh! 
if we would but look at ourselves, we bear Death’s signs and 
tokens about us in every part of our body. 

But some of us have had yet more solemn warnings than 
these. If these suffice not, Death gives us a more thundering 
sermon. It is but a little while ago with me since Death, witn 
his axe, seemed to be felling my tree. How the chips flew about 
me and covered the ground! It isa marvel to myself that lam 
here. Brought to Death’s door, till the mind became distracted, 
and the body weakened, so that one could scarce stand upright, 
and yet azain recovered. Still spared, and yetalive. You have 
had fever, cholera it may be. You have been stretched on your 
bed time after time; and each time the branch has creaked and 
bent almost double, till we have said, “ Surely, it must snap.” 
As a bowing wall have we been, and as a tottering fence; down 
it must come, so we thought; for a rough hand was shaking it, 
and moving us to and fro. There was not a pillar that stood 
firm. There was not a beam or rafter that did not quiver. We 
said, in the bitterness of our soul, “ My days are cut off, and I 
shall go down to my tomb before my time.” Well, man, and 
yet you are living in sin, as careless and unconcerned as you 
were before. Remember, if you will not hear Death’s tongue, 
you sha-. feel his dart. If you will not think of God when he 
gives you a warning from a distance, you shall be made to feel 
God, for “he shall tear you in pieces, and none shall deliver.” 
Methinks I see, this morning, Death fitting his arrow to the bow 


138 REMEMBER DEATH. 


He is drawing it, pulling it tighter, and tighter still; and the 
marvel is that he can hold the arrow in his hand so long. 
“ Shall it fly?” saith Death ; “shall I let fly at yon wretch’s heart! 
he will not repent; let me cut him off, and send him to his de 
struction.” But the Lord saith, “Spare him yet a little longer.” 
Me saith, “My Lord, let me take aim; I have bent my bow, 
and made it ready. So sharp is it that it would cut through 
bars of brass, or triple steel, to reach a human heart. My throat 
is thirsting after his blood. Oh, let me slay him, let him die.” 
* Wo,” cries the long-suffering voice of God; “spare him, spare 
him, spare him yet a little longer.” But the time will soon ar- 
rive. Perhaps, ere that clock shall reach the half hour, it may 
be said in heaven, “Time is! Time, was!” And then shall 
Death let fly ; his arrow shall reach your heart; and you, falling 
down on earth, shall appear before the awful Judge of the quick 
and the dead, and receive your final sentence. And, if you are 
unprepared to die, oh careless sinner! what, then, will become 
of thee ? 

I have thus tried to make you think of Death’s warnings, in 
the loss of friends, and the deaths of many abroad; moreover, 
in the failing of our bodies, and in the ciseases which have begun 
to prey upon us. 


III. Will you, in the last place, pPricTURE YOURSELF #8 DYING 
now ? 

Antedate for a very little while your last day. Suppose it to 
have come. The sun has risen. “Throw up that window! 
let me see that: sun for the last time !—this is my last day !” 
The physicians whisper with one another. You catch some syl 
lables, and you learn the sad news that the case is hopeless. 
Much has been done for you, but skill has its limit. “He may 
survive,” says the physician, “ perhaps another twelve hours, but 
I hardly expect it will be so long as that. You had better 
gather his friends together to see him. Telegraph for the daugh- 
ter; let her come up and sce her father’s face for the last time 
in the world.” Yes, and now! begin to feel that the hour is 
coming. They are gathering round my bed. “ Farewell! to 
vou all, a last farewell! A father bids you follow him upwards 


REMEMBER DEATH, 139 


to the skies. ‘I know that wy Redeemer liveth” My hope 
stands fast and firm in Christ Jesus! Farewell! farewell! 
{ commend you to him who is the Father of the fatherless and 
the husband of the widow.” But the hvur draws nearer still. 
And now the lips refuse to speak. We have a something to 
communicate—a last word to a wife. We mutter through our 
closed teeth, but no audible sounds are heard, no words that can 
be interpreted. We breathe heavily. They stay us up in the 
bed with pillows. And now we begin to understand that ex- 
pression of the hymn, “ The cracking of the eyestrings.” We can- 
not see. Strange to say, we have eyes still, but we cannot see. 
If we want anything, we must feel about us for it; but, no, we 
cannot lift our hands. They begin to hang down. We can still 
hear, and hear them whispering the question, “Is he dead ?” 
One of them says, “I think there is still a little breath.” They 
come very near and try to hear us breathing. What must our 
sensations be in that solemn moment! There isa hush now ir 
the room. The watch alone is heard ticking, as the last sands 
drop from the hour-glass. The last moment is come. My soul 
is severed from my body. And where am Inow—a naked, dis- 
embodied spirit? My soul, if thy hope be sound and real, thou 
art now where thou hast longed to be; thou art in the presence 
of thy Saviour and thy God. Thou art now brother to the an 
gels. Thou standest in the mid-blaze of the splendor of divinity. 
Thou seest Him, whom having not seen, thou hast loved; in 
whom believing, thou hast rejoiced with Joy unspeakable and 
full of glory. 

Ah, but there is another picture, the reverse of this; I cannot 
attempt to draw it; I will give you but the rough outline. Yes, 
jou are dying; and bad as you have been, you have some that 
love you, and they gather round you. You cannot speak to 
them. Alas! you tell them more than if you could speak, for 
they see in your face that clammy sweat, those staring eyes. 
They see tokens that you have a vision of a something which 
would not bear to be revealed. Yo try to be composed; you 
quiet yourself. The doctor assists you to be damned easily; 
he drugs you, helps to send you to sleep. And now you feel 
that you are expiring. Your soul is filled with terror. Black 


140 REMEMBER DEATH. 


horrors and thick darkness gather round you. Your eyestrings 
break. Your flesh and your heart fail. But there is no kind 
angel to whisper, “ Peace, be still.” No convoy of cherubim to 
bear your soul away straight to yonder worlds of joy. You feel 
that the dart of death is a poisoned dart; that you have begun 
to feel the wrath of God betore you enter upon the state where 
7on shall feel it to the full. Ab, l will not describe what has 
fuppened, 

4\s your minister, it may be, i shall have to come up and see 
ya in your last extremity, and [ shall have to say to the mo- 
‘her, to the children, to your brothers and to your sisters, “ Well, 
well, we must leave this in the hands of a Covenant God.” I 
must speak as gently as I can, but I shall go away with the re- 
fection, “ Oh that he had been wise, that he had understood this, 
that he had considered his latter end.” My heart, as I go down 
the stairs, shall ask me this question: “ Was I faithful to this 
man ? did I tell him honestly the way to heaven? if he is lost, 
will his blood be required at my hands?” I know that, with 
regard to some of you, the answer of my conscience will be, “I 
have preached as well asI possibly could the Word of God; 
not with enticing words of man’s wisdom, but with a desire to 
be simple and to come home to the heart. I must leave the 
matter there. If they are lost, oh, horror of horrors! I am 
clear of their plood.” My hearers, I hope it will not be so with 
you, but that each one of you, dying, may have a hope; and 
rising again, may possess immortality, and ascend to the throne 
of my Father and of your Father, te my God and to your 
God. 

And, now, if thers is any impression upon your minds, any 
serious thought, let me send you away with this one sentence. 
The way of salvation is plain: “He that believeth and is bap- 
tised, shall be saved; he that believeth not, shall be damned.” 
Believe—that is, trust—trust the Lord Jesus and thou shalt be 
saved. May God the Holy Spirit enable you to trust him now, 
for with some of you—and mark this last sentence—with some 
of you it is wow or NEVER. AMEN. 


SERMON IX. 


MARKS OF FAITH, 


[Att aids by which a true Evangelical faith may be distin 
guished, will be of special xzlue, particularly to inexperienced 0: 
doubtful Christians. This discourse groups plain practical shar. 
acteristics and illustrations of faith, in an admirable manner. it 
was preached at Exeter Hall, May 27, 1860, and is one of 
several of which the author says: “They have all sounded as 
the silver trumpet of jubilee in the ears of bankrupt sinners.” ] 


“Then said Jesus unto him, Except ye see signs and wonders, ye will not 
believe.” —Joun, iv. 48. 


You will remember that Luke, in his letter to Theophilus, 
speaks of things which Jesus began both to do and to teach, as if 
there was a connection between his doings and his teachings. 
In fact, there was a relation of the most intimate kind. His 
teachings were the explanation of his doings—his doings confir- 
mations of his teachings. Jesus Christ had never occasion to 
say, ‘Do as I say, but not as I do.” His words and his actions 
were in perfect harmony with one another. You might be sure 
that he was honest in what he said, because what he did forced 
that conviction upon your mind. Moreover, you were led to 
see that what he taught you musi be true, because he spoke 
with authority,—an authority proved and demonstrated by the 
miracles he wrought. 

Oh my brethren in Chris+! when our biographies shall come 
to be written at last, God grant that they msy not be all say- 


142 MARKS OF FAITH. 


ings, but that they may be a history of our sayings and doings! 
And may the good Spirit so dwell in us, that at the last it may 
be seen that our doings did not clash with our sayings! It is 
one thing to preach, but another thing to practice; and unless 
preaching and practice g co together, the preacher is himself con- 
Jemned, and his ill practice may be the means of condemning 
multitudes through his leading them astray. If you make a 
profession of being God’s servant, live up to that profession, and 
if you think it necessary to exhort otners to virtue, take care 
that you set the example. You can have no right to teach, if 
you have not yourself learned the lesson which you would teach 
to others. 

Thus much by way of preface; and now concerning the sub- 
ject itself. The narrative before us seems to me to suggest 
three points, and those points each of them triplets. I shall 
notice in this narrative, first, the three stages of faith ; in the 
second place the three diseases to which faith is subject ; and, in 
the third place, to ask three questions about your faith, 


{. To begin, then, with the first point. Farra In THREE OF 
ITs BTAGES. 

Doubtless, the history of faith might with propriety be di 
vided just as accurately into five or six different states of 
growth; but our narrative suggests a threefold division, and — 
therefore we stand to that this morning. 

There is a nobleman living at Capernaum; he hears a rumor 
that a celebrated prophet and preacher is continually going 
through the cities of Galilee and Judea, and is given to under- 
stand that this mighty preacher does not merely charm every 
hearer by his eloquence, but wins the hearts of men by singular- 
ly benevolent miracles which he works as a confirmation of his 
mission. He stores these things in his heart, little thinking 
that they would ever be of any practical service to him. It comes 
to pass on acertain day that his son falls sick,—perhaps his only 
gox, one very dear to his father’s heart—the sickness, instead of 
diminishing, gradually increases. Fever breathes its hot breath 
upon the child, and seems to dry up all the moisture in his 
body, and to blast the bloom from his cheek. The father con 


MARKS OF FAITH, 143 


sults every physician within his reach; they 100k upon the child 
and candidly pronounce him hopeless. No cure can possibly 
be wrought. That child is at the point of death; the arrow of 
death has almost sunk into his flesh; it has well nigh penetrated 
his heart; he is not near death merely, but at death’s very 
point; he has been forced by disease upon the barbed arrows of 
that insatiate archer. The father now bethinks himself, and 
calls to recollection the stories he had heard of the cures 
wrought by Jesus of Nazareth. There isa little faith ir his soul ; 
though but a little, still enough to make him use every endeavor 
to test the truth of what he has heard. 

Jesus Christ has come to Cana again; it is some fifteen or 
twenty miles. The father travels with all speed; he arrives at 
the place where Jesus is; his faith has got to such a stage that, 
as soon as he sees the Master, he begins to ery, “ Lord, come 
down ere my child die.” The Master, instead of giving him an 
answer which might console him, rebukes him for the littleness 
of his faith, and tells him, “ Except ye see signs and wonders, 
ye will not believe.” The man, however, pays little regard to 
the rebuke, for there is a desire which has absorbed all the 
powers of his soul. “Sir,” said he, “come down ere my child 
die.” His faith has how arrived at such a stage that he pleads 
in prayer, and earnestly importunes the Lord to come and heal 
his son. The Master looks upon him with an eye of ineffable 
benevolence, and says to him, “Go thy way; thy son liveth.” 
The father goes his way cheerfully, quickly, contentedly, trust- 
ing in the word which as yet no evidence has confirmed. He 
has now come to the second stage of his faith, he has come out 
of the seeking stage into the relying stage. He no more cries 
and pleads for a thing he has not; he trusts and believes that 
the thing is given to him, though as yet he has not perceived the 
gift. On his road home, the servants meet him with joyful 
haste; they say, “ Master, thy son liveth.” He enquires quickly 
at what hour the fever left him. The answer is given him,— 
about the seventh hour the fever abated; nay, it stayed its 
course. Then he comes to the third stage. He goes home; he 
sees his child perfectly restored. The child springs into his 
arms, covers him with kisses and when he has held him up 


144 MankKS OF FAITH. 


again and again to see if he was really the little one that lay so 
wan, and pale, and sick, he triumphs in a higher sense still 
His faith has gone from reliance up to full assurance ; and then 
his whole house believed as well as himself. 

I have given you just these outlines of the narrative, that you 
may see the three stages of faith. Let us now examine each 
more minutely. 

When faith begins in the soul, it is but as a gram of mustard 
seed. God’s people are not born giants. They are babes at first ; 
and as they are babes in grace, so their graces are as it were 
in their infancy. Faith is but as a little child, when first God 
gives it; or to use another figure, it is not a fire, but a spark, a 
spark which seems as if it must go out, but which is nevertheless 
fanned and kept alive until it cometh to a flame, like unto the 
vehement heat of Nebuchadnezzar’s furnace. The poor man in 
the narrative, when he had faith given him, he had it but in a 
very small degree. It was seeking faith. That is the first stage 
of faith. Now just notice that this seeking faith excited his ac- 
tivity. As soon as ever God gives a man the secking faith, he 
is no more idle about religion; he does not fold his arms with 
the wicked Antinomian, and cry, “If I am to be saved, I shall 
be saved, and I will sit still, for if I am to be damned, I shall be 
damned.” He is not careless and indifferent, as he used to be, 
as to whether he should go up to the house of God orno. He 
has got seeking faith, and that faith makes him attend the means 
of grace, leads him to search the Word, leads him to be diligent 
in the use of every ordained means of blessing for the soul. 
There is a sermon to be heard: no matter that there are five 
miles to walk, seeking faith puts wings upon the feet. There is 
a congregation where God is blessing souls; the man, if he 
enters, will probably have to stand in the crcwd; but it does not 
signify, secking faith gives him strength to bear the uneasiness 
of his position, for, “Oh,” he says, “if I may but hear the 
Word.” See how he leans forward that he may not lose a syl- 
lable, for, “ Perhaps,” saith he, “the sentence that I lose may 
be the very one that I want.” How earnest he is that he may 
not only be sometimes in the house of God, but very often 
there. He becomes amongst the most enthusiastic of hearers 


MARKS OF FAITH. 145 


the most earnest of men that attend that place of worship. 
Seeking faith gives a man activity. 

More than this, seeking faith, though it is very weak in some 
things, gives a man great power in prayer. How earnest was 
this nobleman—“ Lord, come down ere my child die.” Ay, and 
when seeking faith enters into the soul, it makes a man pray, 
He is not content now with muttering over a few words when he 
rises in the morning, and then, half asleep, ringing the same 
chimes at night when he goes to bed; but he gets away—he 
steals a quarter of an hour from his business if he can, that he 
may cry to God in secret. He has not the faith yet which 
enables him to say, “My sins are forgiven;” but he has faith © 
enough to know that Christ can forgive his sins, and what he 
wants is that he may know that his sins are really cast behind 
Jehovah’s back. Sometimes this man has no convenience for 
prayer, but seeking faith will make him pray in a garret, in a 
hay-loft, in a saw-pit, from behind a hedge, or even walking the 
street. Satan may throw a thousand difficulties in the way, but 
seeking faith will compel a man to knock at Mercy’s door. Now 
the faith that you have received doth not yet give you peace, it 
doth not put you where there is no condemnation, but yet it is 
such a faith, that if it grows it will come to that. It has but to 
be nourished, to be cherished, to be exercised, and the little one 
shall become mighty, seeking faith shall come to a higher de- 
gree of development, and you that knocked at Mercy’s gate shall 
enter in and find a welcome at Jesus’ table. 

And I would have you further notice, that the seeking faith in 
this man’s case did not simply make him earnest in prayer, but 
importunate in it. He asked once, and the only answer he re- 
ceived was an apparent rebuff. He did not turn away offended, 
and say, “He rebukes me.” No. “Sir,” saith he, “come down 
ere my child die.” I cannot tell you how he said it, but I have no 
doubt it was expressed in soul-moving terms, with tears starting 
from his eyes, with hands that were placed together in the atti- 
tude of entreaty. He seemed to say, “I cannot let thee go ex- 
cept thou come and save my child. Oh, do come. Is there any 
thing I can say that can induce thee? Leta father’s affection be 
my best argument; and if my lips be not stags let the tears 


146 MARKS OF FAITH. 


of my eyes supply the place of the words of my tongue. Coms 
down, ere my child die.” And oh! what mighty prayers those 
are which seeking faith will make a man pray! I have heard 
the seeker sometimes plead with God with all the power that 
Jacob ever could have had at Jabbok’s brook. I have seen the 
sinner under distress of soul seem to take hold of the pillars of 
the gate of mercy, and rock them to and fro as though he would 
sooner pull them up from their deep foundations than go away 
without effecting an entrance. I have seen him pull and tug, and 
strive and fight, and wrestle, rather than not enter the kingdom 
of heaven, for he knew that the kingdom of heaven suffered vio- 
lence, and the violent would take it by force. No wonder that 
you have not any peace, if you have been bringing before God 
your cold prayers. Heat them red-hot in the furnace of desire, 
or think not they will ever burn their way upwards to heaven. 
You that merely say in the chill form of orthodoxy, “God be 
merciful to me a sinner,” will never find mercy. It is the man 
that cries in the burning anguish of heart-felt emotion—“ God be 
merciful to me a sinner; save me or { perish,” that gains his 
suit. It is he who concentrates his soul in every word, and 
flings the violence of his being into every sentence, that wins his 
way through the gates of heaven. Seeking fuith, when once it is 
given, can make a man do this.’ Doubtless there are some here 
who have got as far as that already. I thought I saw the tears 
starting from many an eye, just now brushed away very hastily, 
but I could see it as an index that some said in their souls, “Ay, 
I know the meaning of that, and I trust God has brought me 
thus far.” 

One word I must say here with regard to the weakness of this 
seeking faith. It can do much, but it makes many mistakes. 
The fault of seeking faith is, that it knows too little, for you will 
observe that this poor man said, “ Sir, come down.” Well, but he 
need not come down. The Lord can work the miracle without 
coming down. But our poor friend thought the Master could 
not save his son, unless he came and looked at him, and put his 
hand upon him, and knelt down perhaps upon him as Elijah did. 
“Oh, come down,” saith he. So is it with you. You have 
been dictating to God how he shall save you. You want him 


MARKS OF FAITH. 147 


to send you some terrible convictions, and then you think you 
could believe; or else, you want to have a dream or a vision, or 
to hear a voice speaking to you, saying, “Son, thy sins are for- 
given thee.” That is your fault, you see. Your seeking faith 
is strong enough to make you pray, but it is not strong enough 
to cast out of the mind your own silly fancies. You are want- 
ing to see signs and wonders, or else you will not believe. Oh 
nobleman, if Jesus chooses to speak the word and thy son is 
healed, will not that suit thee as wellas his coming down? “Oh,” 
saith he, “I never thought of that!’ and so poor sinner, if Jesus 
chooses to give thee peace this morning in this hall, will not that 
suit thee as well as being a month under the whip of the law? 
If, as you pass out of these doors, you be enabled simply to 
trust in Christ, and so find peace, will not that be as good a sal- 
vation as though you should have to go through fire and through 
water, and all your sins should be made to ride over your head ? 
Here, then, is the weakness of your faith. Though there is 
much excellence in it, because it makes you pray, there is some 
fault in it because it makes you imprudently prescribe to the 
Almighty how he shall bless youn—makes you in effect to impugn 
his sovereignty, and leads you ignorantly to dictate to him in 
what form the promised boon shall come. 

We will now pass on to the second stage of faith. The Mas- 
ter stretched out his hand, and said, “Go thy way, thy son 
liveth.” Do you see the face of that nobleman? Those furrows 
that were there seem smoothed in a moment, all gone. Those 
eyes are full of tears, but they are of another sort now—they 
are tears of joy. He claps his hands, retires silently, his heart 
ready to burst with gratitude, his whole soul full of confidence. 
“Why are youso happy, sir?” ‘“ Why, my child is cured,” 
‘saith he. “Nay, but you have not seen himcured.” “ But my 
Lord said he was, and I believe him.” “ But it may be that when 
you get home you will find your faith to be a delusion and your 
child a corpse.” “ Nay,” saith he, “I believe in that man. Once 
I believed him and sought him, now I believe him and have found 
him.” “But you have no evidence whatever that your child is 
healed.” “Nay,” saith he, “Ido not wantany. The naked word 
of that divine prophet is enough for me. He spake it, and I 


. 


148 MARKS OF FAITH. 


know it is true. He told me to go my way; my son lived; I ge 
my way, and I am quite at peace and at ease.” Now mark, when 
your faith gets to a second stage in which you shall be able to take 
Christ at his word, then it is you shall begin to know the happi- 
ness of believing, and then it is your faith saves your soul. Take 
Christ at his word, poor sinner. “ He that believeth on the Lord 
Jesus Christ shall be saved.” “ But,” saith one, “I feel no evi- 
dence.” Believe it none the less for that. “But,” says anoth- 
er, “I do not feel enjoyment in my heart.” Believe it, be your 
heart never so gloomy, that enjoyment shall come afterwards. 
That is an heroic faith which believes Christ in the teeth of a 
thousand contradictions. When the Lord gives you that faith, 
you can say, “I consult not with flesh and blood. He who said 
to me, ‘Believe and be saved,’ gave me grace to believe, and | 
therefore am confident that Iam saved. When I once cast my 
soul, sink or swim, upon the love, and blood, and power of 
Christ, though conscience give no witness to my soul, though 
doubts distress me, and fears plague me, yet it is mine to honor 
my Master by believing his Word, though it be contradictory 
to sense, though reason rebel against it, and present feeling dare 
to give it the lie.’ Oh! it is an honorable thing when a man has 
a follower, and that follower believes that man implicitly. The 
man propounds an opinion which is in contradiction to the re 
ceived opinion of the universe; he stands up and addresses it to 
the people, and they hiss and hoot, and scorn him; but that man 
has one disciple, who says, “1 believe my Master; what he has 
said I believe is true.” There is something noble in the man 
who receives such homage as that. He seems to say, “ Now I 
am master of one heart, at least;” and when you, in the teeth 
of everything that is conflicting, stand to Christ and believe his 
words, you do him greater homage than Cherubim and Seraphim 
before thethrone. Dare to believe; trust Christ, I say, and thou 
art saved. 

In this stage of faith it is that a man begins to enjoy quietness 
and peace of mind. I am not quite certain as to the number of 
miles between Cana and Capernaum, but several excellent ex- 
positors say it is fifteen, some twenty. I suppose the miles may 
have altered in their length lately. It need not, however, have 


MARKS OF FAITR. 149 


taken this good man long to get home to his son. It was at the 
seventh hour that the Master said, “Thy son liveth.” It is evi- 
dent from this text, that he did not meet his servants till the 
next day, because they say, “ Yesterday, at the seventh hour, 
the fever left him.” What do you conclude from that? Why, 
I draw this inference: the nobleman was so sure that his child 
was alive and well, that he was in no violent hurry to return. 
He did not go home immediately, as though he must be in time 
to get another doctor, if Christ had not succeeded ; but he went 
his way leisurely and calmly, confident in the truth of what 
Jesus had said tohim. Well, says an old father of the church, 
“Te that believeth shall not make haste.” In this case it was 
true. The man took histime. He was, it may be, twelve hours 
or more before he reached his home—though probably it was but 
fifteen miles for him to travel. He who takes the naked word 
of Christ to be the basis of his hope, stands on a rock while all 
other ground is sinking sand. My brothers and sisters, some of 
you have got as far as this. You are now taking Christ at his 
word; it shall not be long before you will get to the third and 
best stage of faith. But if it should be ever so long, still stand 
here; still believe your Lord and Master; still trust him. LL 
he does not take you into his banqueting house, still trust him 
Nay, if he locks you up in the castle, or in the dungeon, still 
trust him. Say, ‘Though he slay me, yet will I trust him.” 
Should he let the arrows of affliction stick fast in your flesh, still 
trust him; should he break you to pieces with his right hand, 
still trust him; and by-and-bye your righteousness shall come 
forth as the light, your glory as a lamp that burneth. 

We must now hurry on to the third and best stage of faith. 
The servants meet the nobleman—his son is healed. He arrives 
at home, clasps his child, and sees him perfectly restored. And 
now, says the narrative,—“ Himself believed, and his whole 
house.” And yet, you will have noticed that in the fiftieth verse, 
it says that he believed. “The man believed the word that Jesus 
had spoken unto him.” Now, some expositors have been greatly 
puzzled, for they did not know when this man did believe. Good 
Calvin says—and his remarks are always weighty, and always 
excellent—Calvin says, this man had, in the frst place, only a 


150 MARKS OF FAITH. 


faith which relied for one thing upon Christ. He believed the 
word Christ had spoken. Afterwards he had a faith which took 
Christ into his soul, to become his disciple, and trust him as the 
Messiah, I think I am not wrong in using this as an illustration 
of faith in its highest state. He found his son healed at the very 
hour when Jesus said he should be. “And now,” he says, “1 
believe ;” that is to say, he believed with full assurance of faith. 
His mind was sorid of all its doubts; he believed in Jesns of 
Nazareth as the Christ of God; sure he was a prophet sent from 
God, and doubts and misgivings no longer occupied his soul. 
Ah! I know many poor creatures who want to get up to this 
state, but they want to get there all at first. They are like a 
man who wants to get up a ladder wNhout going up the lowest 
rounds. “Oh,” they say, “if I had the full assurance of faith, 
then I should believe Iam a child of God.” No, no; believe, 
trust in Christ’s naked word, and then you shall come afterwards 
to feel in your soul the witness of the Spirit that you are born 
of God. Assurance is a flower—you must plant the bulb first, 
the naked, perhaps unseemly, bulb of faith—plant it in the grain, 
and you shall have the flower by-and-bye. The shrivelled seed 
of a little faith springs upwards, and then you have the ripe corn 
in the ear of full assurance of faith. But here I want you to no- 
tice, that when this man came to full assurance of faith, it is said 
his house believed too. 

There is a text often quoted, and I do not think I have heard 
it quoted rightly yet. By the way, there are some people who 
know no more of authors than what they hear quoted, and some 
who know no more of the Bible than what they hear quoted too. 
Now, there is that passage, “ Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, 
and thou shalt be saved.”—What have the last three words done 
that they should be cut off?—“And thy house;” those three 
words seem to me to be as precious as the first. “ Believe and 
thou shalt be saved and thy house.” Does the father’s faith save 
the family? Yes! No!—Yes, it does in some way; namely, 
that the father’s faith makes him pray for his family, and God 
hears his prayer, and the family is saved. Vo, the father’s faith 
cannot be a substitute for the faith of the children, they must 
believe too. In both senses of the word, I say, “ Yes, or No.” 


MARKS OF FAITH. — 151 


When a man has believed, there is hope that his children will 
be saved. Nay, there isa promise; and the father ought not to 
rest satisfied until he sees all his children saved. If he does, he 
has not believed right yet. There are many men who only be- 
lieve for themselves. I like, if I get a promise, to believe it as 
broad as ‘it is. Why should not my faith be as broad as the 
promise? Now, thus it stands: “Believe and thou shalt be 
saved, and thy house!” Ihave aclaim on God for my httle ones. 

When I go before God in prayer, I can plead, “ Lord, I be- 
lieve, and thou hast said I shall be saved, and my house; thov 
hast saved me, but thou hast not fulfilled thy promise till thov 
hast saved my house too.” I know it is sometimes thought that 
we who believe the baptism of infants to be a heresy, neglect 
our children. But could there have been a greater slander‘ 
Why, instead thereof, we think we are doing our children the 
greatest service that we can possibly do them, when teaching 
them that they are not members of Christ’s church, that they 
are not made Christians in the day that they are christened, that 
they must be born again, and that that new birth must be in 
them a thing which they can consciously realize, and not a 
thing we can do for them in their babyhood, while they are yet 
in their long clothes, by sprinkling a handful of water in their 
faces. We think they are far more likely to be converted than 
those who are brought up in the delusive notion taught them in 
that expression of the catechism—a most wicked, blasphemous, 
and false expression—“In my baptism wherein I was made a 
member of Christ, a child of God, an inheritor of the kingdom 
of heaven.” The Pope of Rome never uttered a sentence more 
unholy than that; never said a syllable more contradictory to 
the whole tenor of God’s Word. Children are not saved by 
baptism. “ He that believeth shall be saved; and he that believ- 
eth and is baptized shall be saved,’—but the baptism precedes 
not the belief. Nor doth it co-act or co-work m our salvation, 
for salvation is a work of grace, laid hold of by faith and faith 
alone. Baptized or unbaptized, if you believe not, you are lost; 
but unbaptized, if you believe, you are saved. And our children 
dying in their infancy, without any unhallowed or superstitious 
rite, are saved, notwithstanding. 


152 MARKS OF FAITH. 


I. And now we come to the second department of our sub 
ject, the THREE DISEASES TO WHICH FAITH 1S VERY SUBJECT, and 
these three diseases break out in different stages. 

First, with regard to seeking faith. The power of seeking 
faith lies in its driving a man to prayer. And here is the dis- 
ease ; for we are very likely, when we are secking to begin, to 
suspend prayerfulness. How often does the devil whisper in a 
man’s ear, “ Do not pray, it is of no use. You know you will 
be shut out of heaven!” Or, when the man thinks he has got 
an answer to prayer, then Satan says, “You need not pray any 
more; you have got what you asked for.” Or, if after a month » 
of crying he has received a blessing, then Satan whispers, “ Fool 
that thou art, to tarry at Mercy’s gate. Get gone! get gone! 
That gate is nailed up and barred fast, and you will never be 
heard.” Oh, my friends! if you are subject to this disease 
while seeking Christ, I bid you cry against it, and labor against 
it; never cease to pray. A man can never sink in the river of 
wrath so long as ever he can ery. So long as ever you car 
ery to God for mercy, mercy shall never withdraw itself from 

ou. 

Oh! let not Satan push you back from the closet door, but 
push in, whether he will or not. Give up prayer, and you seal 
your own damnation; renounce secret supplication, and you 
renounce Christ and heaven. Continue in prayer, and though 
the blessing tarry, it must come; in God’s own time it must 
appear to you. 

The disease which is most lixely to fall upon those in the 
second stage—namely, those who are trusting implicitly on 
Christ—is the disease of wanting to see signs and wonders, or 
else they will not believe. In the early stage of my ministry, 
in the midst of a rural population, I used to meet continually 
with persons who thought they were Christians because, as they 
imagined, they had seen signs and wonders; and since then, 
stories the most ridiculous have been told me by earnest and 
sincere people, as reasons why they thought they were saved. I 
have heard a narrative something like this :—“I believe my sins 
are put away.” Why! “Well, sir, ] was down in the back 
garden and I saw a great cloud, and I thought, now God can 


MARKS OF FAITH. 153 


make that cloud go away if he pleases, and it did go away: and 
I thought the cloud and my sins were gone too, and I have not 
had a doubt since then.” I thought, Well, you have good rea- 
son to doubt, for that is totally absurd. Were I to tell you the 
whims and fancies that some people get into their heads, you 
might smile, and that might not be to your profit. Certain it 
is, that men patch up any idle story, any strange fancy, in order 
to make them think that they may then trust Christ. Oh! my 
dear friends, if you have no better reason to believe you are in 
Christ than a dream or a vision, it is time you began again. I 
grant you there have been some who have been alarmed, con- 
vinced, and perhaps converted, by strange freaks of their ima- 
gination; but if you rely on these as being pledges from God, 
if you look on these as being evidences that you are saved, I tell 
you that you will be resting on a dream, a delusion. You may 
as well seek to build a castle in the air, or a house upon the 
sands. 

No, he who believes Christ, believes Christ because he says it, 
and because here it is written in the Word ; he does not believe 
it because he dreamed it, or because he heard a voice that migh 
probably be a blackbird singing, or because he thought he saw 
an angel in the sky, which was just as likely to be mist of a pe- 
culiar shape as anything else. No, we must have done with this 
desire to see signs and wonders. If they come, be thankful ; if 
they come not, trust simply in the Word, which says, “All 
manner of sin shall be forgiven unto men.” Ido not wish to say 
this to hurt any tender conscience, which conscience may per- 
haps haye found some little comfort in such singular wonders ; 
but I only say this honestly, lest any of you should be deceived: 
I do solemnly warn you to place no reliance whatever on any 
thing you think you have seen, or dreamed, or heard. Thai 
volume is the sure word of testimony, unto which ye do weil if 
ye take heed, as unto a light which shineth in a dark place. 
Trust in the Lord; wait patiently for him; cast all thy con- 
fidence where he put all thy sins, namely, upon Christ Jesus 
alone, and thou shalt be saved, with or without any of these signs 
and wonders, 

Iam afraid some Christians have fallen into the same error of, 

rh 


154 MARES OF FAITH. 


wanting to see signs and wonders. They have been meeting 
together in special prayer-meetings to seek for a revival; and 
because people have not dropped down in « fainting fit, and have 
not screamed and made a noise, perhaps they have thought the 
revival has not come. Oh that we had but eyes to see God’s 
gifts in the way God chooses to give them! We do not want 
the revival of the north of Ireland; we want the revival in its 
goodness, but not in that particular shape. If the Lord sends it 
in another, we shall be all the more glad to be without these ex- 
ceptional works in the flesh. Where the Spirit works in the 
soul, we are always glad to see true conversicn ; and if he chooses 
to work in the body too, we shall be glad to see it. If men’s 
hearts are renewed, what matter it thqugh they do not scream 
out. - If their consciences are quickened, what matters it though 
they do not fall into a fit; if they do but find Christ, who is to 
regret that they do not lie for five or six weeks motionless and 
senseless? Take it without the signs and wonders. For my 
part, I have no craving for them. Let me see God’s work done 
in God’s own way—a true and thorough revival, but the signs 
and wonders we can readily dispense with, for they are certainly 
not demanded by the faithful, and they will only be the laughing- 
stock of the faithless, 

Having thus spoken of these two diseases, I will only just 
mention the other. There is a third, then, which lies in the way 
of our attaining the highest degree of faith, namely, full assur- 
ance, and that is, want of observation. The nobleman in our 
text made careful inquiries about the day and the hour when his 
son was healed. It was by that he obtained his assurance. But 
we do not observe God’s hand as much as we should. Our 
good puritanic forefathers, when it rained, used to say, that God 
had unstopped the bottles of heaven. When it rains now-a-days, 
we think the clouds have become condensed. If they had a field 
of hay cut, they used to plead of the Lord that he would bid the 
sun shine. We, perhaps, are wiser, as we think; and we con- 
sider it hardly worth while to pray about such things, thinking 
they will come in the course of nature. They believed that God 
was in every storm; nay, in every cloud of dust. They used to 
speak of a present God in everything; but we speak of such 


MARES OF FAITH. 158 


things as laws of nature, as if laws were ever anything, except 
there was some one to carry them out, and some secret power 
to set the whole machinery in motion. We do not get our as- 
surance, because we do not observe enough. If you were to 
watch providential goodness day by day; if you noticed the 
answers to your prayers; if you would just put down some- 
where in the book of your remembrance God’s continued mer- 
cies towards you, I do think you would become like this father 
who was led to full assurance of faith, because he noticed that 
the very hour when Jesus spoke, was the very hour when the 
healing came. Be watchful, Christian. He that looks for prov- 
idences will never lack a providence to look at. 

Take heed then of these three diseases; of ceasing from 
prayer; waiting to see signs and wonders; and neglect of observ- 
ing the manifest hand of God. 


III. And now I come to my third and last head, upon which 
solemnly, though briefly, there are THREE QUESTIONS TO BE 
ADDRRSSED TO YOU ABOUT YOUR FAITH. 

First, then, thou sayest, “I have faith.” Be itso. There be 
many a man who saith he hath gold that hath it not; there be 
many that think themselves rich and increased in goods, that are 
naked, and poor, and miserable. I say unto thee, therefore, in 
the first place, does thy faith make thee pray? Not the praying 
of the man who prates like a parrot the prayers he has learned; 
but dost thou cry the cry of a living child? Dost thou tell to 
God thy wants and thy desires? And dost thou seek his face, 
and ask his mercy? Man, if thou livest without prayer, thou 
art a Christless soul; thy faith is a delusion, and thy confidence 
which results from it, is a dream that will destroy thee. Wake 
up out of thy death-like slumbers; for as long as thou art dumb 
in prayer, God cannot answer thee. Thou shalt not live to God, 
if thou dost not live in the closet; he that is never on his knees 
on earth, shall never stand upon his feet in heaven; he that 
never wrestles with the angel here below, shall never be admit- 
ted into heaven by that angel above. 

I know I speak to some to-day that are prayerlessones. You 
have plenty of time for your counting-house, but you have none 


156 MARKS OF FAITH. 


for your closet. Family prayer you have never had; but I will 
not talk to you about that. Private prayer you have neglected. 
Do you not sometimes rise in the morning so near the time 
when you must keep your appointments, that—you do kneel it 
is true; but where is the prayer? And as to any extra occasions 
of supplication, why, you never indulge yourselves in them. 
Prayer with you, is a sort of luxury too dear to indulge in often. 
Ah! but he who has true faith in his heart, is praying all day 
long. I donot mean that he is on his knees; but often when he 
is bargaining, when he is in his shop, or in his counting-house, 
his heart finds a little space, a vacuum for a moment, and up it 
leaps into the bosom of its God, and it is down again, refreshed 
‘o go about its business and meet they face of man. Oh! those 
ejaculatory prayers—not merely filling the censer in the morn- 
ing with incense, but that casting in of little bits of cinnamon 
and frankincense all day long, so as always to keep it fresh—that 
is the way to live, and that is the life of a true genuine believer. 
If your faith does not make you pray, have nothing to do with 
it; get rid of it, and God help thee to begin again. 

But thou sayest,“I have faith.” I will ask thee a second 
question. Does that faith make thee obedient? Jesus said to 
the nobleman, “Go thy way,” and he went without a word; 
however much he might have wished to stay and listen to the 
Master, he obeyed. Does your faith make you obedient? In 
these days we have specimens of Christians of the most sorry, 
sorry kind. I have heard it observed by tradesmen, that they 
know many men that have not the fear of God before their eyes, 
that are most just and upright men in their dealings; and on the 
other hand, they know some professing Christians, who are not 
positively dishonest, but they can back and hedge a little; they 
do not seem to keep up to the time if they have a bill to pay; 
they are not regular, they are not exact; in fact, sometimes—and 
who shall hide what is true ?—you catch Christians doing dirty 
actions, and professors of religion defiling themselves with acts 
which ‘merely worldly men would scorn. Now, sirs, I bear my 
testimony this morning as God’s minister, too honest to alter a 
word to please any man that lives, you are no Christian if you 
ean act in business beneath the dignity of an honest man. If 


MARKS OF FAITH. 157 


God has not made you honest, he has not saved your soul. Rest 
assured that if you can go on, disobedient to the moral laws of 
God, if your life is inconsistent and lascivious, if your conversa- 
tion is mixed up with things waich even a worldling might re- 
ject, the love of God is not in you. I do not plead for perfection, 
but I do plead for honesty; and if your religion has not made 
you careful and prayerful in common life; if you are not in fact 
made a new creature in Christ Jesus; your faith is but an empty 
name, as sounding brass, or a tinkling cymbal. 

I wil) ask you one more question about your faith, and I have 
done. Thou sayest, “I have faith.” Has thy faith led thee to 
bless thy household? Good Rowland Hill once said, in his own 
quaint way, that when aman became a Christian, his dog and 
his cat ought to be the better for it; and I think it was Mr. Jay 
who always would say, that a man, when he became a Christian 
was better in every relation. He was a better husband, a bet- 
ter master, a better father, than he was before, or else his religion 
was not genuine. Now, have you ever thought, my dear Chris 
tian brethren, about blessing your household? Do I hear one 
saying, “I keep my religion to myself.” Do not be very anx 
ious about its ever being stolen, then; you need not put it under 
lock and key; there is not enough to tempt the devil himself to 
eome and take it from you. A man who can keep his godliness 
to himself, has so small a proportion of it, I am afraid it will be 
no credit to himself, and no blessing to other people. 

But you do sometimes, strange to say, meet with fathers that 
Jo not seem as if they interested themselves in their children’s 
salvation, any more than they do about poor children in the 
back s'ums of St. Giles’s. They would like to see the boy put 
out well, and they would like to see the girl married comfort: 
ably; but as to their being converted, it does not seem to trouble 
their heads. It is true the father occupies his seat in a house 
of worship, and sits down with a community of Christians; and 
he hopes his children may turn out well. They have the benefit of 
his hope—certainly a very large legacy: he will no doubt when 
he dies leave them his best wishes, and may they grow rich up- 
on them! But he never seems to have made it a matter of 
anxiety of soul, as to whether they shall be saved or not. Out 


158 MARKS OF FAITH 


upon such a religion as that! Cast it on the dunghill; hurl it 
to the dogs; let it be buried like Koniah, with the burial of an 
ass; cast it without the camp, like an unclean thing. It is not 
the religion of God. He that careth not for his own household, 
is worse than a heathen man and a publican. 

Never be content, my brethren in Christ, till all your children 
are saved. Lay the promise before your God. The promise is 
unto you and unto your children. The Greek word does not 
refer to infants, but to children, grand-children, and any descend- 
ants you may have, whether grown up or not. Do not cease to 
plead till not only your children, but your great grand-children, if 
you have such, are saved. I stand here to-day a proof that God is 
not untrue to his promise. I can cast my eye back through four 
or five generations, and see that God has been pleased to hear 
the prayers of our grandfather’s grandfather, who used to sup- 
plicate with God that his children might live before him to the 
last generation, and God has never deserted the house, but has 
been pleased to bring first one, and then another, to fear and 
love his name. So be it with you: and in asking this, you are 
not asking more than God is ready to give you. He cannot re- 
fuse unless he run back from his promise. He cannot refuse to 
give you both your own and your children’s souls as an answer 
to the prayer of your faith. “Ah,” says one, “but you do not 
know what children mine are.” No, my dear friend, but I know 
that if you are a Christian, they are children that God has 
promised to bless. “O, but they are such unruly ones, they break 
my heart.” Then pray God to break their hearts, and they will 
not break your heart any more, “But they will bring my 
grey hairs with sorrow to the grave.” Pray God then, that he 
may bring their eyes with sorrow to prayer, and to supplication, 
and to the cross, and then they will not bring you to the grave. 
“But,” you say, “my children have such hard hearts.” Look at 
yourown. You think they cannot be saved: look at yourselves; 
he that saved you can save them. Go to him in prayer, and 
say, “ Lord, I will not let thee go except thou bless me;” and 
if thy child be at the point of death, and, as you think, at the 
point of damnation on account of six, still plead like the noble- 
man, “Lord, come down ere my child perish, and save me for 


MARKS OF FAITH. 159 


thy merey’s sake.” And oh, thou that dwellest in the highest 
heavens thou wilt ne’er refuse thy people. Be it far from us to 
dream that thou wilt. forget thy promise. In the name of all 
thy people, we put our nand upon thy Word most solemnly, 
and pledge thee to thy covenant. Thou hast said thy mercy is 
unto the children’s children of them that fear thee and keep thy 
commandments. Thou hast said the promise is unto us and 
unto our children; Lord, thou wilt not deny thine own cove- 
nant; we challenge thy word by holy faith this morning—“ Do 
as thou hast said.” Awan. 


SERMON X. 


THE PRECIOUS FROM THE VILE. 


[This discourse, delivered in Exetes Hall, March 25, 1860, 
must have been as a keen sword in the soldier’s hand, woanding 
sorely, or savingly, many who listened to it. Its pictures are 
truthful; its exposures painful, but just; its denunciations of 
hypocrisy and false pretense, most severe. Its perusal may be 
less pleasant than many others; but its wounds are those of a 
friend, Its wide range of topic enlarges the field of its useful- 
ness. 


“That ye may know how that the Lord hath put a difference between the 
Egyptians and Israel.” —Exopva, xi, 7. 


Tur difference between the Egyptians and the Israelites was 
exceedingly manifest. At first sight it seemed to be very 
greatly to the advantage of the Egyptians. They had the whip 
in their hand, and poor Israel smarted under the lash. Egypt 
possessed the toil of the Israelites, the sons of Jacob made bricks, 
and the subjects of Pharaoh inhabited the houses which the sons 
of Jacob builded. How soon, however, were the tables turned! 
God wrought plagues in Egypt; but Goshen was spared. He 
sent a thick darkness over all the land, even darkness that might 
be felt; but in all the land of Goshen there was light. He 
sent all manner of flies and lice in all their borders; but 
throughout the habitations of Israel not a fly was to be seen, 
neither were they molested. The Lord sent hail and a murrain 


THE PRECIOUS FROM THE VILE. 16k 


apon all the cattle of the Egyptians ; but the cattle of the child- 
ren of Israel were spared, and on their fields fell no desolating 
shower from heaven. At last the destroying angel unsheathed 
his glittering sword to strike his last decisive blow. In every 
house throughout the land of Egypt there was weeping and 
wailing; he smote the first-born of Egypt, the chief of all their 
strength ; but as for his people, he led them forth like sheep, he 
led them through the wilderness like a flock, by the hand of 
Moses and Aaron. They came to the Red Sca, and he made a 
path for them; they went through the sea on foot, there did 
they rejoice inhim. The floods stood upright as a heap, and 
the depths were congealed in the heart of the sea. They passed 
through the depths as through a wilderness, which the Egyp- 
tians essaying to do were drowned. The Lord, in all these 
things, put a glorious difference between Egypt and Israel. The 
fiery cloudy pillar which gave light to Israel was darkness to 
the eyes of Egypt. Whenever God blessed Israel, he cursed 
Egypt; the same moment that he sent the benediction to the 
one, he sent the maiediction to the other; he looked on Israel 
and the tribes rejoiced, but when he looked on the Egyptians, 
their host were troubled. 

Now, in your ears this day, Egypt and Israel are declared to 
be types of two people who dwell upon the face of the earth,— 
the men that fear the Lord and the men that fear him not. The 
Egyptians are those who are dead in trespasses and sins, ene- 
mies to God by wicked works, and aliens from the common- 
wealth of Israel. The Israelites, God’s ancient people, are set 
before us as the representatives of those who have through grace 
believed in Christ, who fear God and keep his commandments, 
The task of this morning will be to show you, first, the differ- 
ence; secondly, when that difference ts seen; and thirdly, the 
reason why ii should be seen. 


I. First, then, raz pirrzrence. The Lord hath put a differ 
ence between those who are his people and those who are not. 

There are many distinctions among meu which will one day 
be blotted out; but permit me to remind you at the outset that 
this is an eternal distinction. Between the different classes of 


162 —O THE PRECIOUS FROM THE VILE. 


men, the rich and the poor, there are channels of intercommuni 
cation, and very properly so, for the fewer class distinctions are 
maintained, the better for the happiness of all. The social fabric 
is not to be kept up by maintaining one pillar at the expense 
of another, or by gilding the roof, and neglecting the founda- 
tions. The commonwealth is one, and the prosperity of one 
class is proportionately the prosperity of all. But there is a 
distinction so wide that we may truly say of it, “Between us 
and you there is a great gulf fixed,” and the broader the line of 
demarcation, the happier for the church, and the better for the 
world. There is a distinction of infinite width between the sin- 
ner dead in sin, and the child of God guickened by the Spirit, 
who has been adopted into the family of the Most High. Concern- 
ing this distinction, suffer me to make the following remarks. 
First, the distinction between the righteous and wicked is 
mostancient. It was ordained of God from before the founda- 
tion of the world. In the eternal covenant Jehovah wrote the 
names of his elect; for them Christ entered into engagements 
that he would be their surety, and their substitute to suffer in 
their room and stead. Covenant engagements were made for 
them, and for them only. Their names were from of old in- 
scribed in the book of God, and engraved upon the precious 
stones of their great high priest’s breastplate. They were then 
in the covenant set apart: “The Lord hath set apart him that 
is godly for himself.”’ | While the whole world lay in the 
wicked one, these precious jewels were selected from the ruins 
of the fall. Better than other men by nature they certainly 
were not; yet divine sovereignty, linked arm in arm with di- 
vine grace, selected some to be the vessels of mercy, who should 
be fitted for the Master’s use, in whom Jehovah should saow 
forth not his long suffering merely but the plentitude of his 
grace and the riches of his love. Other distinctions are merely 
temporary ; they are things that grew up yesterday, and will die 
to-morrow; but this is older than the everlasting hills. Before 
the starry sky was spread, or the foundations of the earth were 
digged, the Lord had made a difference between Israel and Egypt. 
This, however, is a mighty secret, though we are to tell it as we 
find it in the Word, yet we are not intrusively to pry into it, 


THE PRECIOUS FROM THE VILE. 163 


Second ; God has made this distinction, a vital one. Between 
the righteous and the wicked, there is an essential distinction of 
nature. There are some of you, who imagine that the only dif 
ference between the true Christian and another, is just this,— 
that the one is more attentive to his place of worship—that 
he is more regular in the practice of ceremonies—that he could 
not live without private prayer, and the like. Permit me to 
assure you, that if there is no greater difference than this be ' 
tween you and another man, you are not a child of God 
The distinction between the unconverted and the converted, is 
far wider than this. It is one not of dress or of outward form, but 
of essence and of nature. Bring hither a serpent and an angel « 
there is a distinction between the two of such a character, that 
the serpent could not grow into an angel, let it do its utmost, 
the angel could not eat the dust which forms the serpent’s food, 
nor could the serpent lift up its voice and sing the seraphic song 
of the blessed. As wide a distinction as that is there between 
the man that fears God, and the man that fears him not. If you 
are still what you always were by nature, you cannot be a true 
Christian; and it is utterly impossible for you to grow into one 
by all your doings. You may wash and cleanse, you may 
clothe and dress; you will be the child of nature finely dressed, 
but not the living child of heaven. 

You must be born again; there must be a new nature put 
into you; a spark of divinity must fall into your bosom, and burn 
there. Fallen nature can only rise to nature, just as water will 
only flow up as high as its source; and as you are fallen in nature, 
so must you remain, unless you are renewed by grace. God by his 
infinite power has quickened his people : he has brought them out 
of their old nature, they now love the things which they once 
hated, and they hate the things they once loved. Old things 
wrin them are “passed away; behold all things are become 
new.” ‘The change is not that they speak more solemnly and 
religiously, or that they have left off going to the theatre, or 
that they do not spend their lives in the frivolities of the world . 
that is not the change—it is a consequence of it; but the change 
is deeper and more vital than this; itis a change of the man’s 
very essence. He is no more the man that he once was; he is 


164 THE PRECIOUS FROM YHE VILE. 


“renewed in the spirit of his mind,” born over again, regener: 
ated, re-created; he is a stranger and a foreigner here below, he 
no more belongs to this world, but the world to come. The 
Lord, then, in this respect, hath put a difference between Israel 
and Egypt. 

Third ; this difference of nature is followed by a difference ir 
God’s judicial treatment. With both, his dealings are just and 
right. God forbid that he should be unjust to any man! The 
Lord is never severe beyond what justice demands, nor gracious 
beyond what justice allows. Here comes the unrenewed, the 
ungodly man; he brings up his good works, his prayers, his 
tears; the Lord will judge him according to his works, and woe 
worth the day to him; it will be a day of sorrow indeed, fur he 
will soon discover that his righteousness is as filthy as rags, and 
that all his good works only seemed to be good because he was 
in the dark, and could not see the spots that defiled them. 
Another man approaches, it isthe renewed man. God deals 
with him justly, it is true, but not according to the scale of the 
law ; he looks at that man as accepted in Christ Jesus, justified 
through Christ’s righteousness, and washed in his blood; and 
now he deals with that man, not as a judge with a criminal, nor 
as a king with a subject, but as a father with a child. That map 
is taken to Jehovah’s bosom; his offence is put away, his soul 
constantly renewed by the influence of divine grace, and the 
dealings of God with him are as different from the dealings of 
God with another man, as the love of a husband differs from the 
sternness of an incensed monarch. On the one hand, it is sim- 
ple justice; on the other hand, fervent love; on the one 
hand, the inflexible severity of a judge, and on the other hand, 
the unbounded affection of a parent’s heart. The Lord, then, 
ir this also hath put a difference between Israel and Egypt. 

Fourth. This distinction is carried out in providence. It is 
true, that to the naked eye, one event happens to both; the 
righteous suffer as well as the wicked, and they go to the grave 
which is appointed for all living; but if we could look more 
closely into God’s providence, we should see lines of light divi- 
ding the path of the godly from the lot of the transgressor. To 
the righteous man every providence is a blessing. A blessing is 


FHE PRECIOUS FROM THE VILE. 16é 


wrapped up in all our curses and in all our crosses. Our cups 
are sometimes bitter, but they are always healthful. Our woe 
is our weal. We are never losers by our losses, but we grow 
rich towards God when we become poor towards men. To the 
sinner, however, all things work together for evil. Is he pros. 
perous? He is as the beast that is fattened for the slaughter, 
Is he healthy ? He is as the blooming flower that is ripening for 
the mower’s scythe. Does he suffer? His sufferings are the 
first drops of the eternal hail-storm of vengeance. LEverything 
to the sinner, if he could but open his eye, hath a black aspect. 
The clouds are to him big with thunders, and the whole world 
is alive with terror. If earth could haveits way, it would shake 
off from its bosom the monsters that forget God. But to the 
righteous all things work together for good. Come foul or come 
fair, all shall end well, every wave speeds him to his desired 
haven, ard even the rough blast. swells his sails, and drives him 
the more swiftly towards the port of peace. The Lord hath put 
a difference between Israel and Egypt in this world. 

Fifth. That difference, however, will come out more dis- 
tinctly on the judgment day. Then, when he shall sit upon the 
throne of his glory, he shall divide them, the one from the other. 
as a shepherd divideth the sheep from the goats. He shall cry 
unto his angels, and say, “ Gather out of my kingdom all things 
that offend, and them that do iniquity.’ Then, with the sharp 
sickle in his hand, will the angel fly through the midst of heaven, 
and reap the tares, and gather them together in bundles to burn. 
But, stepping from his throne, not delegating the delightful task 
to an angel, the King himself, the crowned Reaper, shall take his 
own golden sickle, and shall gather the wheat into his barn. Oh! 
then, when hell shall open wide its mouth, and swallow up the 
impenitent, when they shall go down alive into the pit, as Korah, 
Dathan. and Abiram did of old—then, when they shall see the 
righteous ascending to heaven, like a stream of light. in their 
bright and glistering garments, shout triumphant hymns and 
choral symphonies, then shall it be seen that the Lord hath put 
a difference. When, across the impassable gulf, the rich man 
shall see Lazarus in Abraham’s bosom—when, from the lowest 
pit of hell, the condemned one shall see the accepted one glori« 


166 THE PRECIOUS FROM THE VILE. 


fied in bliss—then shall the truth stand out, written in letters of 
fire—“ The Lord hath put a difference between the Egyptians and 
israel,” 

Il. We pass on to our second point—W Hn 1s THIS DIFFER 
ENCE SEEN ? 

First. Our answer is, it is often seen in God’s temple. Two 
men go up to the temple to worship; they take their seats side . 
by side in God’s house; the Word is preached to them both; 
they both hear it, perhaps, with like attention; the one goes his 
way to forget, the other remembers. They come again: the one 
listens, and the minister is to him as one that playeth a goodly 
tune upon an instrument; the other listens and weeps; he feels 
that the word is quick and powerful, skarper than any two-edged 
sword. It comes home to his conscience; it pierces him, cuts 
him to the quick; every word seems to be as an arrow shot 
from the bow of God, and finding a target in his conscience. 
And now they come again. The one feels the world at last to be 
his; he has been led to repentance and faith in Christ through 
it, and now comes up to sing God’s praises as his accepted child ; 
while the other remains to sing, as a mere formalist—to join in 
worship in which he feels but little interest—to lift up his voice 
in a prayer when his heart is far absent. If I had here, this 
morning, a heap of steel filings and of ashes mixed together, and 
I wanted to detect the difference between the two, I should have 
nothing to do but to thrust in a magnet; the filings would be at- 
tracted and the ashes would remain. So with this congregation. 
If I would know to-day who are those who are of God’s Israel, 
and who are still the base-born Egyptians, there is nothing need- 
ed but to preach the gospel. The gospel finds out God’s people; 
it has an affinity to them. When it comes to them they receive 
it, God’s Holy Spirit opening their hearts; they lay hold of it, 
and rejoice init; while those who are not God’s, who have no 
part or interest in the redemption of Christ, hear it in vain, and 
are even hardened by it, and go their way to sin with a higher 
hand, after all the warnings they have received. 

Come now, my hearer, have you ever seen this difference 
made between yourself and another man? Do you hear the 
gospel now as you have never heard it before? This is the age 


THE PRECIOUS FROM THE VILE. 167 


of hearing; there are more people attending our places of wor- 
ship now than ever there were; but still it is not the hearers, 
but the doers of the Word that are blessed. Say, then, have you 
been made to hear the Word as you never heard before? Do 
you listen to it, hoping that it may be blessed to you, desiring 
that your conscience may be subjected to it, just as the gold is 
subject to the goldsmith’s hand? If so, there is the first sign 
of a difference which God has put between you and the Egyp- 
tians. 

Second. If the Israelite is consistent with his duty, as I think 
he must be, in a little while he feels it incumbent upon him to 
come out from the rest of mankind, and to be united with Christ's 
Church. “The Lord hath put a difference,” saith he; “now I 
will show this difference. My Master hath said, “He that be 
lieveth and is baptized shall be saved.” I put no trust in bap- 
tism, but I must show that I am no longer what I was. I desire 
to be obedient to my Lord and Master. I desire to cross the 
rubicon. To draw my sword against the world, once and forever 
to throw away the scabbard. I long to do a something that 
shall make the world see that I am crucified to it, and that it is 
crucified to me. Let me then be buried in water, ‘in the name 
of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost,’ as the 
picture of my death to all the world. Let me rise out of the 
water, as the picture of my resurrection to a new life; and God 
help me from that blessed hour to go on my way walking as one 
who is not of the world, even as Christ is not of the world.” 
As often as the table is spread, upon which we celebrate the me- 
morial of the body and the blood of Christ, God again seals that 
difference. The unconverted, if the minister be faithful, are 
warned to go their way, for if they eat there, they will eat and 
drink damnation to themselves, not discerning the Lord’s body. 
They are invited to come, and they only who are believers in 
Jesus, who have a hope that they are changed men, and have 
been renewed by divine grace in the spirit of their minds. Thus 
do we show to the world, in the two outward symbols, that the 
Lord hath put a difference. 

Third. But further: the whole of a Christian’s life, if he be 
what he should be, is showing forth to the world that the Lord 


168 THE PRECIOUS FROM THE VILE. 


hath put a.difference. Here are two men in trial; the same 
trouble has befallen them both; they are partners in business; 
their money is all gone; the house has gone to ruin; they are 
brought down to beggary, and have to start in the world again. 
Now, which of these two is the Christian man? There is one 
ready to tear his hair; he cannot bear that he should have work- 
ed all his life, and now should be poor as Lazarus. He thinks 
Providence is unfair. ‘There is many a vagabond,” says he, 
“getting rich, and here am I, after toiling hard and paying every 
man his own, brought down to the ground, having nothing left,” 
But the Christian man—if he really be a Christian, (mark that, 
for there are a great many that profess to be Christians and are 
not, and it is the rough wind that tries\them)—-says, “The Lord 
gave and the Lord hath taken away, blessed be the name of the 
Lord.” “I know that all things work together for good. I will 
put my shoulder to the wheel, and work up once more;” and so 
with courage and with confidence in Christ he goes again to his 
labor, and God blesses him yet once more, nay, blesses him in 
his trials more than he was ever blessed in his prosperity. Here 
aretwo men again: they have both been doing wrong, and when 
the righteous fall as well as the wicked, who is to know the dif- 
ference? The next morning one of them rises, and is quite easy 
about the matter—he knows no wounds in his conscience, or if 
he be uneasy it is because he is afraid of being found out. He 
1s like one who, having fallen into the mire, lies and rolls there. 
But here comes the Christian. He feels he has done wrong. 
“ What shall I do?” says he, “to make reparation to man, and 
to show my repentance towards God.” He would be ready to 
go down on his knees before any one he had injured, and confess 
_ how wrong he has been. He hates himself, he loathes himself, 
' because he has done wrong. He would sooner die than sin; and 
now that he finds he has sinned, he wishes he had died sooner 
than he should ever have dishonored his Lord and Master. I 
you see a sheep fall into the mire, it is quick enough up again; 
but if the swine falls there, it wallows in it again and again, and 
nothing but the whip or the stick can make it rise. So that 
there is an essential difference between the righteous and the 
wicked even in their sins. “A righteous man falleth seven 


YHE PRECIOUS FROM THE VILE. 169 


times, but he riseth up again;” as for the wicked, he rolls and 
revels in his sin, abiding and contimuing in it. God has set a 
difference; and even when that difference is obscured it may yet 
be discerned. There is a ring about the Christian man that is 
not to be mistaken. Do what you will with him, he is not what 
the other man is, and you cannot make him so, Here is a new 
coin which looks amazingly like a sovereign, and I turn it over , 
it is so clever a counterfeit that I cannot discover whether it is 
gold or no. Here is another; itis a light sovereign, I find. 1 
look at them both, and at first sight I am inclined to think that 
my new-minted sovereign is the best of the two; for, say I, the 
uther is evidently much worn and light. But there is ring 
about the Christian that proves him to be gold, after all, even 
when he is worn and short in weight. You may deface him so 
that the king’s image is not apparent upon him, but he is gold 
for all that; he only needs to be tried, and in the hour of trial 
that golden sound of grace will detect him, and he will prove 
still to be one in whom God hath made a difference. 

Fourth. This distinction also comes out in a godly man when 
he is under the pressure of some strong temptation. There are two 
tradesmen: both seem to trade in the same way; but at last a 
rare chance occurs to them. If they have no conscience they 
can make a fortune. Now will be the test. One man looks out 
for the opportunity, and unscrupulously grasps it. That man is 
no Christian; put that down as certain. There is another man: 
he feels a longing for the gain, for he is human; but his heart 
hates the sin, for it is renewed by divine grace. ‘No,” he says, 
“better shut up shop than earn my living by dishonesty : better 
for me to be ruined in this life than that I should be ruined in 
the world to come.” ‘The maxim of the establishment on the 
other side of the road is, “We must live:” the maxim of this 
shop will be, “We must die.” You who are customers, soon 
know in which place you will be dealt with most honestly, and 
there you discover in some degree, that the Lord hath put a dif- 
ference between Egypt and Israel. 

Fifth. But not to keep you long on this point: that difference 
shines forth very vividly in the dying hour. Oh! how distinct 
is that difference sometimes! The last time the cholera visited 

8 


170 THE PRECIOUS FROM THE VILE. 


London with severity, though I had many engagements in the 
country, I gave them up to remain in London. It is the duty of 
the minister, always to be on the spot in times of visitation and 
disease. 1 never saw more conspicuously in my life, the differ 
ance between the man that feareth God and the man that feareth 
«im not, than I did then. Called up one Monday morning, at 
bout half-past three, to go and see a man who was dying, I went 
to him, and entered the place where he was lying. He had been 
down to Brighton on the Sunday morning on an excursion, and 
came back ill; and there he lay on the borders of the tomb. I 
stood by his side, and spoke to him. The only consciousness he 
had was a foreboding of terror, mingled with a stupor of alarm ; 
roon even that was gone, and I had td stand sighing there with 
« poor old woman who had watched over him, hopeless alto- 
zether about his soul. I went home. I was called away to see 
& young woman; she was also in the last extremity, but it was a 
air, fair sight: she was singing, though she knew she was dying; 
talking to those round about her, telling her brothers and sisters 
to follow her to heaven, bidding good-bye to her father, smiling 
as if it were a marriage-day. She was happy and blessed. I 
waen saw very clearly, that if there is not a difference in the joy 
of life, there is a difference when we come to the dying hour. 
But the first case I mentioned is not the worst I have ever seen. 
Many have I seen dying, whose histories it would not do to tell. 
| have seen them when their eye-balls have been glaring from 
their sockets—when they have known Christ and have keard the 
gospel, but yet have rejected it. They have been dying in ago- 
ties so extreme, that one could only fly from the room, feeling 
that "t was a dreadful thing to fall into the hands of an angry 
God, and to enter into that all-devouring fire. On the dying bed 
ib will be manifest that the Lord hath put a difference between 
Israel and Egypt. 


Ill. My last point is, WHY SHOULD THAT DIFFERENCE BE SEEN? 
I have here a practical aim and drift; and I hope that if the rest 
of the sermon shall fall dead upon you, this, at least, may 
quicken your consciences. 

This is an age which has many hopeful signs in it; but yet, 


"HE PRECIOUS FROM THE VILE. 171 


if we judge according to the rule of Scr pture, there are some 
very black marks upon this century. I sometimes fear that the 
only age to which we can be truly likened, is the time before 
the flood, when the sons of God intermarried with the daughters 
of men, and when there ceased to be a distinction between the 
Church and the world. It is but the part of candor to acknow 
ledge, that there is such a mixture now-a-days, such a compro 
mise, such a giving and a taking on both sides of religious 
questions, that we are like a leavened mass, mingled and united 
together. All this is wrong; for God has always intended there 
should be a distinction between the righteous and the wicked, 
as clear and as palpable as the distinction between the day and 
the night. 

My first argument is this. Whenever the Church has been 
thoroughly distinct from the world, she has always prospered. 
During the first three centuries the world hated the Church. 
The prison, the stake, the heels of the wild horse, these were 
thought too good for the followers of Christ. When a man be- 
came a Christian, he gave up father and mother, house and lands, 
nay, his own life also. When they met together they must 
meet in the catacombs, burning candles at high noon, because 
there was darkness in the depths of the earth. They were des- 
pised and rejected of men. “ They wandered about in sheeps’ 
skins and goats’ skins, destitute, afllicted, tormented.” But then 
was the age of heroes; that was the time of giants. Never did 
the Church so much prosper, and so truly thrive a» when she 
was baptized in blood. The ship never sails so gloriously along 
as when the bloody spray of her martyrs falls upon her deck. 
We must suffer, and we must die, if we are ever to conquer this 
world for Christ. Was there ever such a surprising miracle as 
the spread of the gospel during the first two or three centuries ? 
Within fifty years after Christ had ascended to heaven, the gos- 
pel was preached in every known part of the world, and there 
were converts to Christ in the most inhospitable regions. Fur- 
ther than the ships of Tarshish had the gospel flown; the pillars 
- of Hercules had not bounded the industry of the apostles. To 
wild and uncivilised tribes, to Picts and Scots, and fierce Britons, 
was the gospel proclaimed, Churches were founded, some of 


172 THE PRECIOUS FROM THE VILE. 


which have lasted in their purity to this day. And all this, I 
believe, was partly the result of that striking, that marked dif 
ference between the Church and the world. 

Certainly, during the period after Constantine professed to be 
a Christian, changing with the times, because he saw it would 
strengthen his empire—from the time when the Church began 
to be linked with the state—the Lord left her, and gave her up 
to barrenness, and Ichabod was written on her walls. It was a 
black day for Christendom when Constantine said, “I am a 
Christian.” “By this sign 1 conquer,” said he. Yes, it was the 
true reason of his pretended conversion. If he could conquer 
by the cross it was well enough; if he could have conquered by 
Jupiter he would have liked it equally well. From that time 
the Church began to degenerate. And coming down to the 
middle ages, when you could not tell a Christian from ¢ world- 
ling, where were you to find piety at all, or life or grace left in 
the land? Then came Luther, and with a rough grasp he rent 
away the Church from the world—pulled her away at the risk 
of rending her in pieces. And then “The kings of the earth 
stood up, and the rulers took counsel together, against the Lord 
and against his Anointed ;” but he that sitteth in the heavens 
did laugh at them; Jehovah had them in derision. The Church 
went forth conquering and to conquer, and her main weapon 
was her non-conformity to the world, her coming out from 
among men. Put your finger on any prosperous page in the 
Church’s history, and I will find a little marginal note reading 
thus: ‘In this age men could readily see where the Church be- 
gan and where the world ended.” Never were there good times 
when the Church and the world were joined in marriage with one 
another. 

But though this were sufficient argument for keeping the 
Church and the world distinct, there are many others. The 
more the Church is distinct from the world in her acts and in 
her maxims, the more true is her testimony for Christ, and the 
more potent is her witness against sin. We are sent into this 
world to testify agaist evils; but if we dabble in them our- 
selves, where is our testimony ? If we ourselves be found faulty, 
we are false witnesses; we are not sent of God; our testimony 


THE PRECIOUS FROM THE VILE. 173 


is of none effect. I donot hesitate te say there are tens of thou- 
sands of professing Christians, whose testimony before the world 
is rather injurious than beneficial, The world looks at them 
and says, “ Well, I see: you can be a Christian, and yet remain 
a rogue.” “Ah!” says another, “you can be a Christian, I 
perceive; but then you will have to be doleful and miserable.’ 
“Ah!” cries another, “these Christians like to drink sin in 
secret behind the door. Their Christianity lies in not liking to 
sin openly ; but they can devour a widow’s house when nobody 
is looking on; they can be drunkards, only it must be in a very 
small party; they would not like to be discovered tipsy where 
there were a hundred eyes to look at them.” Now, what is all 
that? It is just this—that the world has found out that the 
Church visible is not the unmixed Church of Christ, since it is not 
true to its principles, and does not stand up for the uprightness and 
integrity, which are the marks of the genuine Church of God. 
Many Christians forget that they are bearing a testimony : they 
do not think that anybody notices them. Ay, but they do. 
There are no people so much watched as Christians. The world 
reads us from the first letter of our lives to the end; and if they 
ean find a flaw—and, God forgive us, they may find very many 
—they are sure to magnify the flaw as much as ever they can. 
Let us therefore be very watchful, that we live close to Christ, 
that we walk in his commandments always, that the world may 
see that the Lord hath put a difference. 

And what think you is it that props up the system of trade 
that is carried on among us? You all know that there are busi- 
nesses where it is not possible for a young man to be honest in 
the shop, where, if he spoke the downright truth, he would be 
discharged. Why is it, think you, that the system of ticket- 
ing goods in the window differently from what they are sold in- 
doors, or exhibiting one thing and then giving another article, 
the system of telling white lies across the counter with the inten- 
tion of getting a better price, is maintained? Why, it would 
not stand an hour, if it were not for the professing Christians 
who practice it. They have not the moral courage to say, once 
for all, “ We will have nothing to do with these things.” If 
they did, if the Church renounced these unholy customs, busi. 


174 THE PRECIOUS FROM THE VILE. 


ness would alter within the next twelve months. The props 
felony, and the supports of roguery, are these professing Chi is. 
tian men, who bend their backs to do as other men do; who, 
instead of stemming the torrent, give up and swim along with 
it—the dead fish in our churches, that flow with the stream un 
like the living fish which always go against it, and swim upward 
to the river’s source. I would not speak too severely of Christ’s 
Church, for I love her; but because I love her, I must therefore 
utter this. Our being so much like the world, our trading as 
the world trades, our talking as the world talks, our always in- 
sisting upon it that we must do as other people do, this is doing 
more mischief to the world than all our preachers can hope to 
effect good. “Come ye out from among them; touch not the 
unclean thing, be ye separate, saith the Lord: and I will be a 
father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters.” 

This surely, a stern, rough argument, might move us to be 
separate from the world. But, once again, how is it possible for 
us to honor Jesus Christ, while there is no difference between us 
and the world? I can imagine that a man may not profess to 
be a Christian, and yet he may honor his Master; that, however, 
1s a matter of imagination. I do not know of an instance; but 
I cannot imagine a man professing to be a Christian, and then 
acting as the world acts, and yet honoring Christ. 

Methinks I see my Master, now he stands before me. He 
has more than those five blessed wounds. I see his hands run- 
ning with blood. “My Master! my Master!” I ery, “where 
didst thou get those wounds? those are not the piercings of the 
nails, nor the gash of the spear-thrust; whence come those 


wounds?” J hear him mournfully reply, “These are the wounds 


which I have received in the house of my friends; such-and-such 
a Christian fell, such-and-such a disciple followed me afar -off, 
and at last, Peter-like, denied me altogether. Such an one of my 
children is covetous, such another of them is proud, such another 
has taken his neighbor by the throat, and said, ‘Pay me what 
thou owest,’ and I have been wounded in the house of my friends.” 
Oh, blessed, Jesus, forgive us, forgive us, and give us thy grace, 
that we may do so no more, for we would follow thee whither- 
soever thou goest; thou knowest, Lord, we would be thine, we 


— 


THE PRECIOUS FROM THE VIL&. ~ 175 


yuld honor thee and not grieve thee. Oh, give us now then of 

tmane own Spirit, that we may come out from the world and be 
like thyself—holy, harmless, undefiled, and separate from sin- 
ners, 
I have but just these two things to say, and then I have done. 
To professors of religion this word. There are some of you pro- 
fessors of religion that are base coin. When you come to the 
Lord’s table you lie, and when you say of yourself, “] am a 
member of such-and-such a church,” you say what is a disgrace 
to you. Now, let me remind you, sirs, that you may hold your 
profession here, but when you come before God’s bar at last, 
you will find it a terrible thing not to have had a reality in your 
profession. Tremble, sirs, at God’s right hand. There hangs 
the scale, and you must be put into it, and if you are found 
wanting, your portion must be among the deceivers. Tremble, 
deacon, church-member, if you are not what you profess to be; 
there is a doom awaiting you of a direr sort than even for the 
ungodly and the reprobate. From the height of your profession 
you shall be plucked down. You have built your nest among 
the stars, but you must make your bed in hell. You have 
decked your head with a crown, but you must wear a wreath o! 
fire ; you must have those fine robes plucked ofi, that tinsel and 
that paint must all be removed, and you, naked to your shame, 
shall become a hissing even to the damned, as they shall point 
to you and cry, “There goes the man who destroyed himself by 
deceiving others. There is the wretch who talked of God and 
of Christ, and did not think himself such an one as we are, and 
now he too is bound up in the bundle to be burnt.” 

The last word is to those who are not professors at all. God 
has made a difference between you and the righteous. Oh, my 
dear friends, I beseech you turn that thought over in your minds' 
There are no three characters, no intermediate links; there is no 
border-land between the righteous and the wicked. To-day you 
are either a friend to God or an enemy to him. You are at this 
hour either quickened or dead; and oh! remember, when death 
comes, it is either heaven or hell with you—either angels or 
fiends must be your companions, and either the flames must be 
your bed and fiery coverlet, or else the glories of eternity must 


176 THE PRECIOUS FROM THE VILE. 


be your perpetual inheritance. Remember, the way to heaven 
is open. “He that believeth in the Lord Jesus shall be saved.” 
Believe on him, and live. Trust him, and you are saved. Cast 
your soul’s confidence on Jesus, and you are now delivered. 
God help you to do that now, and there shall be no difference 
any more between you and the righteous, but you shall be of 
them, and with them, in the day when Jesus cometh to sit 
upon the throne of his father David, and to reign among men. 
Awan. 


SERMON XI. 
A BLAST AGAINST FALSE PEACE. 


[On Sabbath morning, Feb. 26, 1860, Mr. Spurgeon delivered 
the following discourse to his great audience in Exeter Hall. 
To many who heard him it must have sounded like a blast from 
the trump of doom. It comes down with the sweep of a tempest 
upon slumbering consciences; its smiting is terrible to those 
who are at ease in or out of Zion. Nor was it in vain. The 
author says, “it has aroused slumberers in different parts of the 
land.” May the same effects follow it here.] 


“ Peace, peace, when there is no peace,”—JeremisH, vi. 14, 


Tux physician who should pamper a man in his disease, who 
should feel his cancer, or inject continual poison into the system, 
while at the same time he promised sound health and long life 
—such a physician would not be one half so hideous a monster 
of cruelty as the professed minister of Christ who should bid his 
people take comfort, when, instcad thereof, he ought to be cry- 
ing, “ Woe unto them that are at ease in Zion: be troubled, ye 
careless ones.” The work of the ministry is no child’s play ; it 
is a labor which might fill an angel’s hands. Much prayer we 
need that we may be kept honest, and much grace that we may 
not mislead the souls whom we are bound to guide. The pilot 
who should pretend to steer a ship towards its proper haven, 
but who should meanwhile occupy himself below with boring 
holes in her keel that she might sink, would not be a worse 

ae 


178 A BLAST AGAINST FALSE PEACE. 


traitor than the man who takes the helm of a church, and pro< 
fesses to be steering it towards Christ, while all the while he is 
ruining it by diluting the truth as itis in Jesus, concealing un- 
palatable truths, and lulling men into security with soft and 
flattering words. We might sooner pardon the assassin who 
stretches forth his hand under the guise of friendship, and then 
stabs us to the ‘heart, than we could forgive the man who comes 
towards us with smooth words, telling us that he is God’s am- 
bassador, but all the while foments rebellion in our hearts, and 
pacifies us while we are living in revolt against the majesty of 
heaven. ' 

But, my dear hearers, it is a lamentable fact, that without 
any hireling-shepherd to cry, ‘‘ Peace} peace, when there is no 
peace,” men will cry that for themselves. They need not the 
syren song to entice them to the rocks of presumption and rash 
confidence. There is a tendency in their own hearts to put 
bitter for sweet and sweet for bitter—to think well of their evil 
estate and foster themselves in proud conceit. No man is ever 
too severe with himself. We hold the scales of justice with a 
very unsteady hand when our character is in the balance. We 
are too ready to say, ‘‘I am rich and increased in goods,” when 
at the same time we are naked, and poor, and miserable. Let 
men alone, let no deluder seek to deceive them, hush for ever 
every false and tempting voice, they will themselves, impelled 
by their own pride, run to an evil conceit, and make themselves 
at ease, though God himself is in arms against them. 

It is no uncommon thing with me to meet with people who 
say, ‘Well, [am happy enough. My conscience never troubles 
me. I believe if I were.to die I should go to heaven as well as 
anybody else.” I know that those men are living in the com- 
mission of glaring sins, and I am sure they could not prove 
their innocence even before the bar of man; yet will these men 
look you in the face and tell you that they are not at all dis- 
turbed at the prospect of dying. They laugh at death as though 
it were but a scene in a comedy, and joke at the grave as if 
they could leap in and out of it at their pleasure. Well, gentle- 
men, I will take you at your word, though I don’t believe you. 
I will suppose you have this peace, and I will endeavor to ac- 


A BLAST AGAINST* FALSE PEACE, 179 


count for it on certain grounds which may render it somewhat 
more difficult for you to remain in it. I pray that God the 
Holy Spirit may destroy these foundations, and demolish these 
bulwarks of yours, and make you feel uneasy in your con- 
sciences and troubled in your minds; for un-ease is the road 
to ease, and disquiet in the soul is the road to the true quiet. 
To be tormented on account of sin is the path to peace, and 
happy shall I be if I can hurl a fire-brand into your hearts 
this morning; if I shall be able, like Samson, to turn at least 
some little foxes loose into the standing corn of your self-con- 
ceit and set your conscience in a blaze. 

1. The first person I shall have to deal with this morning, 
is the man who has peace because he spends his life in a cease- 
less round of gaiety and frivolity. You have scarcely come 
from one place of amusement before you enter another. You 
are always planning some excursion, and dividing the day be 
tween one entertainment and another. You know that you are 
never happy except you are in what you call gay society, where 
the frivolous conversation will prevent you from hearing the 
voice of your conscience. In the morning you will be asleep 
while God’s sun is shining, but at night you will be spending 
precious time in some place of foolish, if not lascivious mirth. 
Like Saul, the deserted king, you have an unquiet spirit, and 
therefore you call for music, and it hath its charms, doubtless, 
charms not only to sooth the stubborn breast, but to still a 
stubborn conscience for awhile ; but while its notes are carrying 
you upwards towards heaven, in some grand compositior o: a 
master author, I beseech you never to forget that your sins are 
carrying you down to hell. If the harp should fail you, then 
you call for Nabal’s feast. There shall be a sheep shearing, and 
you shall be drunken with wine, until your souls become as 
stolid as a block. And then you wonder that you have peace. 
What wonder! Surely any man would have peace when his 
heart has become as hard as a stone. What weathers shall it 
feel? What tempests shall move the stubborn bowels of a 
granite rock? You sear your consciences, and then marvel that 
they feel not. Perhaps too, when both wine and the viol fail 
you, you will call for the dance, and the daughter of Herodias 


180 A BLAST AGAINST #¢ALSE PEACR. 


shall please Herod, even though John the Baptist’s head should 
pay the forfeit. Well, well, if you go from one of these scenes 
to another, I am at no loss to solve the riddle that there should 
be with you, “Peace, peace, when there is no peace.” 

And now sit for your portraits; I will paint you to the life. A 
company of idolaters are gathered togther around an hideous 
image. There sits the blood-delighting Moloch. He is heated 
hot. The fire blazes in his brazen centre, and a chilis about to be 
put into his arms. The mother and father are present when the 
offspring of their own loins is to be immolated. The little one 
shrieks with terror; its little body begins to consume in this 
desperate heat. Will not the parents hear the cry of their own 
flesh, and listen to the wailings of the fruit of their own bowels? 
Ah, no, the priests of Moloch will prevent the appeal of nature! 
Sounding their drums, and blowing their trumpets with all their 
might they drown the cries of this immolated victim. It is 
what you are doing! Your soul is the victim to Satan! It is 
being destroyed now: and if you would but listen to its cries, 
if you would give yourself a little quiet, you might hear your 
poor soul shrieking, “ Oh! de not destroy me; put not away 
from me the hope of mercy; send me noi down to hell.” These 
are shrieks that might penetrate your spirit, and startle you 
into wisdom. But no, you beat your drums, and sound your 
trumpets, and you have your dance and your merriment, that 
the noise of your soul may be hushed. Ah, sirs! there will 
be a day when you will have to hear your spirit speak. When 
your cups are empty, and not a drop of water can be given to 
your burning tongue—when your music has ceased, and the 
doleful “ Miserere” of the lost shall be your Black Sanctus,—when 
you shall be launched upon a sea where merriment and mirth 
are strangers—then you will hear the cries of your soal, but 
hear too late. When your conscience shall cry, “ Remember, 
thou hadst thy day of mercy; thou hadst thy day of the pro- 
clamation of the gospel, but thou didst reject it,’ then thou wilt 
wish, but wish in vain, for thunders to come and drown that 
still small voice, which shall be more terrible .n thy ears than 
even the rumbling of the earthquake or the fury of the storm. 
Oh that ye would be wise and not barter away your souls for 


A BLAST AGAINST FALSE PEACE. 18] 


gaiety. Poor sirs! There are nobler things for souls to do 
than to kill time. Well might Young say of it, it resembles 
ocean into tempest tossed, to waft a feather or to drown a fly. 
These things are beneath you; they do no honor to you. Oh 
that you would begin to live! What a price you are paying 
for your mirth—eternal torment for an hour of jollity—separa- 
tion from God for a brief day or two of sin! Be wise, men, | 
beseech you; open your eyes and look about you. Be not for 
ever madmen. Dance not on this precipice, but stop and think. 
O Spirit of the living God! stay thou the frivolous, let him not 
rest until he has tasted the solid joy, the lasting pleasure which 
none but Zion’s children know. 

2. Well, now I turn to another class of men. Finding that 
amusement at last has lost its zest, having drained the cup of 
worldly pleasure till they find first satiety, and then disgust ly- 
ing at the bottom, they want some stronger stimulus, and Satan, 
who has drugged them once, has stronger opiates than mere mer- 
riment for the man who chooses to use them. If the frivolity 
of this world will not suflice to rock a soul to sleep, he hath a 
yet more perilous cradle for the soul. I mean that he will lead 
you to imbibe infidel notions, and when this is fully accomplish- 
ed, you can have “ Peace, peace, when there is no peace.” When 
I hear a man saying, “ Well, Iam peaceful enough, because Iam 
not fool enough to believe in the existence of a God, or ina world 
to come; I cannot imagine that this old story book of youre— 
the Bible—is true.” I have two emotions within my soul; first, 
a disgust of the man for his dishonesty, and secondly, a pity for 
the sad disquietude that needs such dishonesty to cover it. Do 
not suspect the man of being honest. There are two sorts of in- 
fidels; one sort are such fools that they know they never could 
distinguish themselves by anything that was right, so they try 
and get a little fictitious glory by pretending to believe and de- 
fend a lie. There is another set of men who are unquiet in their 
consciences; they do not like the Bible, because it does not like 
them ; it will not let them be comfortable in their sins, it is such 
an uneasy book to them; they did put their heads upon it once, 
but it was like a pillow stufled with thorns, so they have done 
with it, and they would be very glad if they could actually prove 


182 4 BLAST VGAINST FALSE PEACE. 


it to be untrue, which they know they cannot. I say then, I at 
once despise his falsehood, and pity the uneasiness of his evn 
science that could drive him to such a paltry shift as this to cover 
his terrors from the eyes of others. The more the man brags, 
the more I feel he does not mean it; the louder he is in his 
blasphemies, the more he curses, the better he argues, the more 
sure I am that he is not sincere, except in his desire to stifle the 
groans of his uneasy spirit. 

Ah, you remind me, with your fine arguments, of the Chinese 
soldiers, When they go out to battle, they carry on their arm 
a shield with hideous monsters depicted upon it, and making the 
loudest noise they can, they imagine their opponents will run 
away instantly, alarmed by these amazing manifestations. And 
30 you arm yourself with blasphemies, and come out to attack 
God’s ministers, and think we will run away because of your 
sophistries. No, we smile upon them contemptuously. Once, 
we are told, the Chinese hung across their harbor, when the 
English were coming to attack them, a string of tigers’ heads 
They said: “These barbarians will never dare to pass these fe- 
rocious heads.” So do these men hang a string of old, worn- 
out blasphemies and impieties, and then they imagine that con- 
science will not be able to attack them, and that God himself 
will let them live at peace. Ah, sir, you shall find the red-hot 
shafts of divine justice too many and too terrible for your soph 
isms. When you shall fall under the arm of the Eternal God. 
vain will be your logic then. Dashed to shivers, you will be 
lieve in the omnipotence, when you are made to feel it; you 
will know his justice when it is too late to escape from its ter- 
ror. Qh, be wise, cast away these day dreams. Cease to shut 
thy soul out of heaven; be wise, turn thee unto God whom 
thou hast abused. For “All manner of sin and blasphemy, 
shall be forgiven unto man.” He is ready to forgive you, ready 
to receive you, and Christ is ready to wash your blasphemy 
away. Now, to-day, if grace enable you, you may be an ac- 
cepted child of that God whom you have hated, and pressed to 
the bosom of that Jehovah whose very existence you have dared 
to deny. God bless these words to you: if they have seemed 
hard, they were only meant to come home to your conscience; 


el 


A BLAST AGAINST FALSE PEACE. 183 


an affectionate heart has led me to utter them. Oh, do not this 
evil thing, destroy not your soul, for the sake of seeming to be 
wise; stop not the voice of your conscience by those arguments 
which you know in your inmost soul are not true, and which 
you only repeat in order to keep up a semblance of consistency. 

8. I shall come now to a third class of men. These are peo- 
ple not particularly addicted to gaiety, nor especially given to 
infidel notions ; but they are a sort of folk who are careless, and 
determined to let well alone. Their motto is, “Let to-morrow take 
care for the things of itself; let us live while we live; let us eat 
and drink, for to-morrow we die.” If their conscience cries out 
at all, they bid it lie still, When the minister disturbs them, 
instead of listening to what he says, and so being brought into 
a state of real peace, they cry, “Hush! be quiet! there is time 
enough yet; I will not disturb myself with these childish fears ; 
be still, sir, and lie down.” Ah! and you have been doing this 
for years, have you? Whenever you have heard an earnest, 
powerful sermon, you have gone home and labored to get rid of 
it. A tear has stolen down your cheek now and then, and you 
have despised yourself for it. “Oh!” you say, “ it is not manly 
for me to think of these things.” There have been a few twitches 
at times which you could not help, but the moment after you have 
your heart like a flint, impenetrably hard and stony. Well, sir, 
I will give you a picture of yourself. There is a foolish farmer 
yonder in his house. It is the dead of night: the burglars are 
breaking in—men who will neither spare his life nor his treas- 
ure. There is a dog down below, chained in the yard; it barks 
and barks, and howls again. “I cannot be quiet,” says the farm. 
er, “my dog makes too much noise.” Another howl, and yet 
another. He creeps out of bed, gets his loaded gun, opens the 
window, fires it, and kills the dog. “ Ah! it is all right now,” 
he mutters ; he goes to bed, lies down, and quietly rests. “No 
hurt will come,” he says, “ now ; for I have made that dog quiet.” 
Ah! but would that he could have listened to the warning of the 
faithful creature. Ere long he shall feel the knife, and rue his fatal 
folly. So you, when God is warning you—when your faithful 
conscience is doing its best to save you—you try to kill your 
only friend, while Satan and Sin are stealing up to the bedside 


184 _ & BLAST AGAINST FALSE PEAOK. 


of your slothfulness, ready to destroy your soul forever. What 
should we think of the sailor at sea, who should seek to kill all | 
the stormy petrels, that there might be anend to all storms! 
Would you not say, “Poor foolish man! why those birds are 
sent by a kind providence to warn him of the tempest. Why 
needs he iniure them? They cause not the tumult; it is the 
raging sea.” So it is not your conscience that is guilty of the 
disturbance in your heart, it is your sin; and your conscience, 
acting true to its character, as God’s index in your soul, tells 
you that all is wrong. Oh, that ye would arise, and take the 
warning, and fly to Jesus while the hour of mercy lasts. 

To use another picture. A man sees his enemy before him. 
By the light of his candle, he marks his insidious approach. His 
enemy is sceking his life. The man puts out the candle, and 
then exclaims, “I am now quite at peace.” This is what you do. 
Conscience is the candle of the Lord; it shows you your enemy ; 
you try to put it out by saying, “ Peace, peace.” Put the ene- 
my out, sir! put the enemy out! God give you grace to thrust 
sin out! Oh may the Holy Spirit enable you to thrust your 
lusts out of doors! Then let the candle burn; and the more 
brightly its light shall sicne, the better for your soul, now and 
hereafter. Up ye sleepers, ye gaggers of conscience, what mean 
you? Why are you sleeying when death is hastening on, when 
eternity is near, when the great white throne is even now coming 
on the clouds of heaven, when the trumpet of the resurrection 
is now being set to the mouth of the archangel—why do ye 
sleep? why will ye slumber? Oh that the voice of Jehovah 
might wake, wake, that ye may escape from the wrath to come! 

4, A fourth set of men have a kind of peace that is the result 
of resolutions which they have made, but which they will never 
carry into effect. “Oh,” saith one, “I am quite easy enough in 
my mind, for when I have got a little more money I shall retire 
from business, and then I shall begin to think about eternal 
things.” I would remind you that when you were an appren- 
tice, you said you would reform when you became a journey- 
man; and when you were a journeyman, you used to say you 
would give good heed when you became a master. But hitherto 
these billshave never been paid when they became due. They have 


A BLAST AGAINST FALSE PEACE. 185 


every one of them been dishonored as yet; and take my word 
for it, this new accommodation bill will be dishonored too. So 
you think to stifle conscience by what you will do by-and-bye. 
Ah, man, but will that by-and-bye ever come? And should it 
come, what reason is there to expect that you will then be any 
more ready than you arenow? Hearts grow harder, sin grows 
stronger, vice becomes more deeply rooted by the lapse of years, 
You will find it certainly no easier to turn to God then than now. 
Now it is impossible for you, apart from divine grace; then it 
shall be quite as impossible, and if I might say so, there shalt 
be more difficulties in the way then than even there are now. 
What think you is the value of these promises which you have 
made in the court of heaven? Will God take your word again, 
and again, and again, when you have broken it just as often as 
you have given it? Not long ago you were lying on your bed 
with fever, and if you lived you vowed you would repent. Have 
you repented? And yet you are fool enough to believe that you 
will repent by-and- bye; and on the strength of this promise, 
which is not worth a single straw, you are crying to yourself, 
“Peace, peace, when there is no peace.” A man that waits for 
a more convenient season for thinking about the affairs of his 
soul, is like the countryman in ZEsop’s fable, who sat down by 
a flowing river, saying, “If this stream continues to flow as it 
does now for a little while, it will empty itself, and then I skall 
walk over dry-shod.” Ah, but the stream was just as deep when 
he had waited day after day as it was before. And 80 shall it 
be with you. 

You remind me, by your procrastination, of the ludicrous 
position of a man who should sit upon lofty branch of some 
tree with a saw in his hand, cutting away the branch on which 
he was sitting. This is what you are doing. Your delay is 
cutting away your branch of life. No doubt you intend to cover 
the well when the child is drowned, and to lock the stable door 
after the horse is stolen. These birds in the hand you are 
losing, because there may be some better bird in the bush. You 
are thus getting a little quict, but oh, at what a fatal cost! Paul 
was troublesome to you, and so you played the part of Felix, 
and said, “Go thy way for this time; when I have a more cop 


186 A BLAST AGAINST FALSE PEACE. 


venient season I will send for thee.” Conscience was unquiet, 
so you stopped his’ mouth with this sop for Cerberus; and you 
have gone to your bed with this lie under your pillow, with this 
falsehood in your right hand—that you will be better by-and- 
bye. Ah, sir, let me tell you once for all, you live to grow 
worse and worse. While you are procrastinating, time is not 
staying, nor is Satan resting. While you are saying, “Let things 
abide,” things are not abiding, but they are hastening on. You 
are ripening for the dread harvest; the sickle is being sharp- 
ened that shall cut you down; the fire is even now blazing into 
which your spirit shall be cast forever. 

5. Now I turn to another class of men, in order that I may 
miss none here who are saying, “ Peace, peace, when there is no 
peace.” I do not doubt but that many enjoy peace in their 
hearts, because they are ignorant of the things of God. It 
would positively alarm many of our sober orthodox Christians, 
if they could once have an idea of the utter ignorance of spiritual 
things that reigns throughout this land. Some of us, when mov- 
ing about here and there, in all classes of society, have often 
been led to remark, that there is less known of the truths of 
religion than of any science, however recondite that science may 
be. Take asa lamentable instance, the ordinary effusions of the 


secular press, and who can avoid remarking the ignorance they 


manifest as to true religion? Let the papers speak on politics, 
it is a matter they understand, and their ability is astonishing ; 
but, once let them touch religion, and our Sabbath-school chil- 
dren could convict them of entire ignorance. The statements 
they put forth are so crude, so remote from the fact, that we are 
led to imagine that the presentation of a fourpenny testament to 
special correspondents, should be one of the first efforts of our 
societies for spreading the gospel among the heathen. Go among 
all ranks and classes of men, and since the day we gave up our 
catechism, and old Dr. Watts’s and the Assemblies’ ceased to be 
used, people have not aclear idea of what is meant by the gospel 
of Christ. [ have frequently heard it asserted, by those who 
have judged the modern pulpit witheut severity, that if a man 
attended a course of thirteen lectures .« geology, he would get a 
pretty clear idea of the system; but that you might hear not 


= 


A BLAST AGAINST FALSE PEACE. 187 


merely thirteen sermons, but thirteen hundred sermons, and you 
would not have a clear idea of the system of divinity that was 
meant to be taught. I believe to a large extent that has been 
true. But the great change which has passed over the pulpit 
within the last two years, is a cause of the greatest thankfulness 
to God; and we believe will be a boon to the church and to the 
world at large. Ministers do preach more boldly than they did. 
But still there is in many quarters a profound ignorance as to 
the things of Christ. Our old Puritans—what masters they 
were in divinity! They knew the difference between the old 
covenant and the new; they did not mingle works and grace 
together. They penetrated into the recesses of gospel truth; 
they were always studying the Scriptures, and meditating on 
them both by day and night, and they shed a light upon the 
villages in which they preached, until you might have found in 
those days as profound theologians working upon stone heaps as 
you can find in colleges and universities now-a-days. How few 
discern the spirituality of the law, the glory of the atonement, 
the perfection of justification, the beauty of sanctification, and the 
preciousness of real union to Christ. Ido not marvel that we 
have a multitude of men mere professors and mere formalists, 
who are nevertheless quite as comfortable in their minds as 
though they were possessors of vital godliness, and really walked 
in the true fear of God. 

There was not—I speak of things that were—there was not in 
the pulpit a little while ago, a discernment between things that 
Jiffer; there was not a separating between the precious and the 
vile. The grand cardinal points of the gospel, if not denied, 
were ignored. We began to think that the thinkers would over- 
whelm the believers, that intellectuality and philosophy would 
overthrow the simplicity of the gospel of Christ. It is not so 
now. do, therefore, hope that as the gospel shall be more fully 
preached, that as the words of Jesus shall be better understood, 
that as the things of the kingdom of heaven shall be set in a 
clearer light, this stronghold of a false peace, namely, ignorance 
of gospel doctrines, shall be battered to its foundations. If you 
have a peace that is grounded on ignorance, get rid of it; igno- 
rance is a thing, remember, that you are accountable for. You 


188 A BLAST AGAINST FALSE PEAOR. 


are not accountable for the exercise of your judgment to man, 
but you are accountable for it to God. There is no such thing 
as toleration of your sentiments with Jehovah ; I have no right 
to judge you; Iam your fellow-creature. No State has any 
right to dictate what religion I shall believe; but, nevertheless, 
there is a true gospel, and there are many false ones. God has 
given you judgment; use it. Search the Scriptures, and remem- 
ber that if you neglect this Word, and remain ignorant, your 
sins of ignorance will be sins of wilful ignorance, and therefore 
ignorance shall be no excuse. There is the Bible, you have it 
in your houses; you can read it. The Holy Spirit will instruct 
you in its meaning; and if you remain ignorant, charge it no 
more on the minister; charge it on\ne one but yourself, and 
make it no cloak for your sin. 

6. I now pass to another and more dangerous form of this 
false peace. I may have missed some of you, probably ; I shall 
come closer home to you now. Alas! alas! let us weep and 
weep again, for there isa plague among us. There are members 
of our churches who are saying, “ Peace, peace, when there is 
no peace.” It is the part of candor to admit that with all the 
exercise of judgment, and the most rigorous discipline, we can- 
not keep our churches free from hypocrisy. I have had to hear, 
to the very breaking oi my heart, stories of men and women 
who have believed the doctrines of election, and other truths of 
the gospel, and have made them a sort of cover for the most 
frightful iniquity. I could, without uncharitableness, point to 
churches that are hot-beds of hypocrisy, because men are taught 
that it is the belief of a certain set of sentiments that will save 
them, and not warned -that this is all in vain without a real liv- 
ing faith in Christ. The preacher does as good as say, if not in 
so many words: “If you are orthodox, if you believe what I tell 
you, you are saved; if you for a moment turn aside from that 
line which I have chalked out for you, I cannot be accountable 
for you; but if you will give me your whole heart, and believe 
precisely what I say, whether it is Scripture or not, then you 
are a saved man.” And we know persons of that cast, who can 
have their shop open on a Sunday, and then go to enjoy what 
they call a savory sermon in the evening; men who mix up 


A BLAST AGAINST FALSE PEACE, 189 


with drunkards, and yet say they are God’s elect ; men who live 
as others live, and yet they come before you and with brazen 
impudence tell you that they are redeemed by the blood of 
Christ. It is true, they have had a deep experience, as they say. 
God save us from such a muddy experience as that! They have 
had, they say, a great manifestation of the depravity of their 
hearts, but still they are the precious children of God. Precious, 
indeed! Dear at any price that any man should give for them. 
If they be precious to anybody, I am sure I wish they were 
taken to their own place, for they are not precious to any one 
here below, and they are not of the slightest use to either reli- 
gion or morality. Oh! I do not know of a more thoroughly 
damnable delusion than for a man to get a conceit into his head, 
that he is a child of God, and yet live in sin—talk to you about 
sovereign grace, while he is living in sovereign lust—stand up 
and make himself the arbiter of what is truth, while he himself 
contemns the precept of God, and tramples the commandment 
ander foot. Hard as Paul was on such men in his time—when 
he said their damnation is just—he spoke a most righteous sen- 
tence. Surely the devil gloats over men of this kind. A Cal- 
vinist I am, but John Calvin never taught immoral doctrine. A 
more consistent expositor of Scripture than that great reformer 
[ believe never lived, but his doctrine is not the Hyper-Calvinism 
of these modern times, but as diametrically opposed to it as 
light to darkness. There is not a word in any one of his writings 
that would justify any man in going on in iniquity, that grace 
might abound. If you do not hate sin, it is all the same what 
doctrine you may believe. You may go to perdition as rapidly 
with High-Calvinistic doctrine as with any other. You are just 
as surely destroyed in an orthodox as in a heterodox church, 
unless your life manifests that you have been “ begotten again unto 
a lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ trom the dead.” 

7. T have but one other class of persons to describe and then 
[ shall have done when I have addressed a few sentences of 
warning to you all. There remains yet another class of beings, 
who surpass all these in their utter indifference to everything 
that might arouse them. They are men that are given up by 
God, justly given up. They have passed the boundary of his 


190 A BLAST AGAINST FALSE PEACE. 


longsuffering. He has said, “ My spirit shall no more strive 
with them ;” “ Ephraim is joined to idols, let him alone.” Asa 
judicial punishment for their impenitence, God has given them 
up to pride and hardness of heart. I will not say that there is 
such an one here—God grant there may not be—but there have 
been such to whom there has been given a strong delusion, that 
they might believe a lie, that they might be damned because 
they received not the gospel of Christ. Brought up by a holy 
mother, they perhaps learned the gospel when they were almost 
in the cradle. Trained by the example of a holy father, they 
went aside to wantonness, and brought a mother’s grey hairs 
with sorrow to the grave. Nevertheless, conscience still parsued 
them. At the funeral of that mother, the young man paused 
and asked himself the question, “Have | killed her? have I 
brought her here?” He went home, was sober for a day, was 
tempted by a companion, and became as bad as ever. Another 
warning came. He was seized with sickness; he lay in the jaws 
of the grave; he woke up; he hed, and lived as vilely as he had 
lived before. Often did he hear his mother’s voice—though she 
was in the grave, she yet spoke to him. He put the Bible on 
the top shelf—hid it away ; still, sometimes a text he had learned 
in infancy, would thrust itself on his mind. One night as he 
was going to some haunt of vice, something arrested him, con- 
science seemed to say to him, “ Remember all that you have 
learned of her.” He stood still, bit his lip a moment, considered, 
weighed chances. At last he said, “I will go if I am lost.” He 
went, and from that moment it has often been a source of won- 
der to him that he has never thought of his mother nor of the 
Bible. He hears a sermon, which he does not heed. It is all 
the game to him. He is never troubled. He says, “I don’t 
know how it is; I am glad of it; I am as easy now, and as frolic- 
some as ever a young fellow could be.” Oh! I tremble to ex- 
plain this quietude; but it may be—God grant I may not be a 
true prophet—it may be that God has thrown the reins on your 
neck, and said, “Let him go, let him go, I will warn him no 
more; he shall be filled with his own ways; he shall go the 
length of his chain; I will never stop him.” Mark! if it be so, 
your damnation is as sure as if you were in the pit now. O, 


A BLAST AGAINST -FALSE PEACE. 191 


may God grant that I may not have such a hearer here. But 
that dread thought may well make you search yourselves, for it 
may be so. There is that possibility; search and look, and 
God grant that you may no more say, “Peace, peace, when 
there is no peace.” 

Now for these last few solemn words. I will not be guilty 
this morning, of speaking any smooth falsehoods to you, I would 
be faithful with each man, as I believe I shall have to face you 
all at God’s great day, even though you heard me but once in 
your lives. Well, then, let me tell you that if you have a peace 
to-day, which enables you to be at peace with your sins as well 
as with God, that peace is a fulse peace. Unless you hate sin of 
every sort, with all your heart, you are not a child of God, you 
are not reconciled to God by the death of his Son. You will not 
be perfect; I cannot expect you will live without sin; but if 
you are a Christian, you will hate the very sin into which you 
have been betrayed, and hate yourself because you should have 
grieved your Saviour thus. But if you love sin, the love of the 
Father is not in you. Be you who you may, or what you 
may,—minister, deacon, elder, professor, or non-professor—the 
love of sin is utterly inconsistent with the love of Christ. Tane 
that home, and remember it. 

Another solemn thought. If you are at peace to-day through 
a belief that you are righteous in yourself, you are not at peace 
with God. If you are wrapping yourself up in your own right- 
eousness, and saying, “I am as good as other people, I have 
kept God’s law, and have no need for mercy,” you are not at 
peace with God. You are treasuring up in your impenitent 
heart, wrath against the day of wrath; and you will as surely 
be lost if you trust to your good works, as if you had trusted 
to your sins. There is as sure a road to perdition along the 
highway of morality, as down the slough of vice. Take heed 
that you build on nothing else but Christ; for if you do, your 
house will tumble about your ears, when most you need ite pro- 
tection. 

And, yet again, my hearer, if thou art out of Christ, however 
profound may be thy peace, it is a false one; for out of Christ 
there is no true peace to the conscience, and no reconciliation to 


192 A BLAST AGAINST FALSE PEACE. 


God. Ask thyself this question, “Do I believe on the Lord 
Jesus Christ with all my heart? Is he my only trust, the 
simple, solitary rock of my refuge?’ For if not, as the Lord 
my God liveth, before whom I stand, thou art in the gall of bit 
terness, and in the bonds of iniquity, and dying as thou art, out 
of Christ, thou wilt be shut out of heaven; where God and bliss 
are found, thy soul can never come. 

And finally, let me beseech you, if you are at peace in your 
own mind this morning, weigh your peace thus: “Will my 
peace stand me on a sick bed?” There are many that are peace- 
ful enough when they are well, but when their bones begin to 
ache, anc their flesh is sore vexed, then they find they want 
something more substantial than thig dreamy quietness into 
which thei: souls had fallen. If a little sickness makes you 
shake, if the thought that your heart is affected, or that you 
may drop down dead in a fit on a sudden—if that startles you, 
then put that question of Jeremy to yourself, “If thou hast run 
with the footmen and they have wearied thee, what wilt thou do 
when thou contendest with horses? and if in the land of peace 
wherein thou hadst trusted, they have wearied thee, what wilt 
thou dc in the swellings of Jordan?’ If sickness make thee 
shake what will destruction make thee do? Then again, put the 
question in another light. If your peace is good for anything, 
it is one that will bear you up in a dying hour. Are you ready 
to go home to your bed now, to lie there and never rise again ? 
For remember, that which will not stand a dying bed, will never 
stand the day of judgment. If my hope begins to waver when 
the skeleton hand of Death begins to touch me, how will it 
shake, “ When God’s right arm is nerved for war, and thunders 
clothe his cloudy car?’ If death makes me startle, what will the 
glory of God do? How shall I shrink into nothing, and fly 
away from him in despair! Then often put to thyself this 
question, “ Will my peace last me when the heavens are in a 
blaze, and when the trembling universe stands to be judged?” 

My hearers, I know I have spoken feebly to you this morning; 
not as I could have wished, but I do entreat you, if what I have 
said be not an idle dream—if it be true, lay it to heart, and may 
God enable you to prepare to meet him. Do not be wrapping 


A BLAST AGAINST FALSE PEACE. 193 


yourselves up and sleeping. Awake, ye sleepers, awake! Oh! 
that I had a trumpet voice to warn you. While you are dying, 
while you are sinking into perdition, may I not cry to you; may 
not these eyes weep for you! I cannot be extravagant here; | 
am acquitted of being enthusiastic or fanatical on such a matter 
as this. Take to heart, I beseech you, the realities of eternity. 
Do not forever waste your time. “Turn ye, turn ye; why will 
ye die, O house of Israel.” Listen, now, to the word of the 
Gospel, which is sent to you. “Believe on the Lord Jesus 
Christ, and ye shall be saved.” For “he that believeth and is 
baptized shall be saved,” while the solemn sentence remains 
* He thet believeth not shall be damned.” Anza. 


SERMON XII. 


THE RESURRECTION. 


[iw this discourse we have one of the grandest efforts of the 
author’s very fertile imagination; splendia pictorial pageant. 
His many and graphic illustrations invest a sublime subject 
with a life-like reality. It must have impressed his hearers 
with a fearful sense of the unutterable solemnity of scenes in 
the midst of which they and all the living are so soon to stand. 
It was preached at Exeter Hall, April 1, 1860, one week after 
the discourse entitled “ Remember Death.”] 


“But some man will say, How are the dead raised up ? and with what body 
do they come, Thou fool, that which thou sowest is not quickened, except it 
die: and that which thou sowest, thou sowest not that body that shall be, 
but bare grain, it may chance of wheat, or of some other grain: but God 
giveth it a body as it hath pleased him, and to every seed his own body,.”— 
1 Cor. xv. 85—88. ; 


Wx preach with words; God preaches m acts and deeds. If 
we would perceive it, creation and providence are two continual 
sermons, from the mouth of God. The seasons are four evan- 
gelists, each of them having his testimony to utter to us. Doth 
not summer preach to us of God’s bounty, of the richness of his 
goodness, of that lavish munificence with which he has been 
pleased to supply the earth, not simply with food for man, but 
with delights for both ear and eye in the beauteous landscape, 
the melodies of birds, and the flowers of various hue ? Have 
you never heard the still small voice of Autumn, who bears the 


THE RESURRECTION. 195 


wheatsheaf, and whispers to us in the rustling of the seer leaf? 
Ile bids us prepare to die. “ All we,” saith he, “do fade as a 
leaf, and all our righteousness are but as filthy rags.” Then 
comes Winter, crowned with snow, and he thunders out a most 
solemn sermon, which, if we would but listen to, might well im- 
press us with the terrors of God’s vengeance, and let us see how 
soon he can strip the earth of all its pleasantries, and enrobe it 
in storm, when he shall come himself to judge the earth with 
righteousness, and the people with equity. But it seems to me 
that Spring reads us a most excellent discourse upon the grand 
doctrine of revelation. This very month of April, which, if it 
be not the very entrance of spring, yet certainly introduces us 
to the fulness of it; this very month, bearing by its name the — 
title of the opening month, speaks to us of the resurrection. As 
we have walked through our gardens, fields, and woods, we 
have seen the flower-buds ready to burst upon the trees, and 
the fruit-blossoms hastening to unfold themselves; we have seen 
the buried flowers upstarting from the sod, and they have spoken 
to us with sweet, sweet voice, the words, “Thou too shalt rise 
again, thou too shalt be buried in the earth like seeds that are 
lost in winter, but thou shalt rise again, and thou shalt live 
and blossom in eternal spring.” 

I propose this morning, as God shall enable, to listen to that 
voice of Spring, proclaiming the doctrine of the resurrection, a 
meditation all the more appropriate from the fact, that the Sab- 
bath before last we considered the subject of Death, and I hope 
that then very solemn impressions were made upon our minds. 
May the like impressions now return, accompanied with more 
joyous ones, when we shall look beyond the grave, through the 
valley of the shadow of death, to that bright light in the distance 
—tne splendors and glory of life and immortality. 

In speaking to you upon this text, 1 would remark in the outset, 
that the doctrine of the resurrection of the dead is a doctrine pecu- 
liar to Christianity. The heathen, by the feeble light of nature, 
were able to spell out the truth of the immortality of the soul. 
Those professors of religion who deny immortality, are not so 
far advanced in learning as the heathen themselves. When you 
meet with any who think that the soul of man may possibly 


196 THE RESURRECTION. 


become annihilated, make them a present of that little catechism 
brought out by the Westminster Assembly, which bears the 
title, “A Catechism for the Young and Ignorant.” Let them 
read that through, and begin to understand that God hath not 
made man in vain. ‘The resurrection of the body was that 
which was new in the apostolic times. When Paul stood up 
on Mars-hill, in the midst of the learned assembly of the Areo- 
pagites, had he spoken to them about the immortality of the 
soul, they would not have laughed; they would have respected 
him, for this was one of the sublime truths which their own 
wise men had taught; but when he went on to assert that 
the flesh and blood which was laid in the tomb should yet arise 
again, that bones which had become the dwelling place of 
worms, that flesh which had corrupted and decayed, should ac. 
tually start afresh into life, that the body as well as the soul 
should live; some mocked, and others said, “ We will hear 
thee again of this matter.” The fact is, reason teaches the im- 
mortality of the spirit ; it is revelation alone which teaches the 
immortality of the body. It is Christ alone who hath brought 
life and immortality to light by the gospel. He was the clear- ~ 
est proclaimer of that grand truth. Albeit it had lain in the 
secret faith of many of the ancient people of God before, yet he 
it was who first set forth in clear terms the grand truth that 
there should be a resurrection of the dead, both of the just and 
of the unjust. As far as 1 know, the doctrine has not been dis 
puted in the Christian church. There have been some few her- 
etics who have denied it at divers times, but they have been so 
few, so utterly insignificant, that it is not worth while to take 
any notice of their scruples, or of the objections which they 
have urged. Instead thereof, we will turn to our text; we will 
assume that the doctrine is true, and so proceed to utter some 
words of explanation upon it. 


I. First, then, our text suggests the real identity of the resur- 
rection body. 

The apostle uses the figure of a seed, a shrivelled grain of 
wheat. It is put into the ground, there it dies, all the farina. 
cious part of 1t decays and forms a peculiarly fine soil, inte 


THE RESURRECTION. 197 


which the life-germ strikes itself, and upon which the life-germ 
feeds. The seed itself dies, with the exception of a particle 
almost too small to be perceived, which is the real life contained 
within the wheat. By-and bye we see a green blade upstarting; 
that grows, swells, and increases, until it comes to be the full corn in 
the ear. Now no one has any suspicion but that the same wheat 
arises from the soil into which it was cast, Put into the earth, 
we believe it springs up, and we are accustomed to talk of it in 
our ordinary language as being the very seed which we sowed, 
although the difference is striking and marvellous. Here you 
have a plant some three feet high, bearing many grains of 
wheat, and there you had the other day a little shriveled grain ; 
yet no one doubts but that the two are the same. So shall it 
be in the resurrection of the dead. The body is here but asa 
shrivelled seed; there is no beauty in it that we should desire 
it. It is put into a grave, like wheat that is sown in the earth ; 
there it rots and decays, but God preserves within it a sort of 
life germ which is immortal, and when the trump of the arch- 
angel shall shake the heavens and the earth it shall expand to 
the full flower of manhood, a far more glorious form than the 
manhood which was buried. 

You are, my brethren, to-day, but as a heap of wheat. Des- 
pite that earthly beauty which makes glad our countenances, we 
are after all shrivelled and worthless, compared with what your 
bodies shall be when they shall awake from thvir beds of silent 
dust and cold damp clay. Yet while they shall be different, 
they shall be precisely the same; the identity shall be pre- 
served. Though there shall seem to be but little similarity, 
yet shall no man doubt but that the very body which was 
sown in the earth hath sprung up to eternal life. I suppose 
that if I should bring here a certain grain of seed, and 
you had never seen the image of the plant into which it would 
ripen, and I should submit it to a thousand persons here present, 
and ask them this question—“ What form will this seed assume 
when it shall grow into a plant and bear a flower?” none of 
you could possibly tell what it would be like; yet when you 
saw it spring up you would say, “ Well I have no doubt that 
the heart’s-ease sprang from its own seed. I am sure that a 


198 THE RESURRECTION. 


violet springs from a violet seed. 1 cannot doubt that the lily 
hath its own appropriate root.” And another time, when you 
come to see the seed, you perhaps imagine you see some little 
likeness, at least you never mistrust the identity. Though 
there are wide extremes of difference between the tiny mustard 
seed and the great tree beneath the branches of which the birds of 
the air build their nests, yet you never for a moment question 
but what they are precisely the same. The identity is pre- 
served. So shall it be in the resurrection of the dead. The 
difference shall be extraordinary, yet shall the body be the same. 

In order to affirm this, the ancient Christian church was in the 
habit in their creed of adding a sentence to the article which 
runs thus: “I believe in the resurrection of the dead.” They 
added, “1 believe in the resurrection of the dead, of this very 
flesh and blood.” 1 do not know that the addition was ever au- 
thorized by the church, but it was continually used, especially 
at the time when there was a discussion as to the truth of the 
doctrine of the resurrection of the body. The very flesh and 
blood that is buried, the very eyes that are closed in death, the 
very hand which stiffens by my side, these very members shall 
live again—not the identical particles of the same matter any 
more than the self.same particles of the wheat spring up to make 
a blade, and to make full corn in the ear. Yet shall they be 
identical, in the true sense of the term, they shall spring up from 
this body—shall be the true result and development of this poor 
flesh and blood. 

Many objections have been raised against this, but they are all 
readily answered. Some have said, “ But when men’s bodies are 
dead, and are committed to the grave, they are often digged up, 
and the careless sexton mixes them with common mould: nay, it 
sometimes happens that they are carted away from the church- 
yard, and strewn over the fields, to become a rich manare for 
wheat, so that the particles of the body are absorbed in the corn 
that is growing, and they travel round in a circle until they be- 
come the food of man. So that the particle which may have 
been in the body of one man enters into the body of another. 
Now,” say they, “how can all these particles be tracked ?” 
Our answer is, if ' were necessary, every atom could be 


LA VERNE. CALIFORNIA 


THE RESURRECTION. 199 


traced. Omnipotence and Omniscience could do it. If it were 
needful that God should search and find out every individual 
atom that ever existed, he would be able to detect the present 
abode of every single particle. The astronomer is able to tell 
the position of one star by the aberration of another ; by his 
calculation, apart from observation he can discover an unknown 
orb; its hugeness puts it within his reach. But to God there is 
nothing little or great; he can find out the orbit of one atom 
by the aberration of another atom—he can pursue and overtake 
each separate particle. But recollect, this is not necessary at all, 
for, as I said before, the identity may be preserved without there 
being the same atoms. Just go back to the excellent illustra- 
tion of our text. The wheat is just the same, but in the new 
wheat that has grown up there may not be one solitary particle 
of that matter which was in the seed cast into the ground. A 
little seed that shall not weigh the hundredth part of an ounce 
falls into the earth, and springs up and produces a forest tree 
that shall weigh two tons. Now, if there be any part of the 
original seed in the tree, it must be but in the proportion of a 
millionth part, or something less than that. And yet is the tree 
positively identical with the seed—it is the same thing. And so 
there may only be a millionth part of the particles of my body 
in the new body which I shall wear, but yet it may still be the 
same, It is not the identity of the matter that will make posi- 
tive identity. I shall show you that again. 

Are you not aware that our bodies are changing—that in 
about every ten years we have different bodies from what we 
had ten years ago? Thatis to say, by decay, and the continual 
wearing away of our flesh, there is not in this body I have here, 
a single particle that was in my body ten years ago, and yet | 
am the same man. I know I am precisely the same. So you. 
You shall have been born in America, and lived there twenty 
years; you shall suddenly be transferred to India, and live there 
another twenty years; you come back to America to see your 
friends—you are the same man, they know you, recognize you, 
you are precisely the same individual; but yet philosophy 
teaches us a fact which cannot be denied—that your body would 
nave enanged twice in the time you have been absent from your 


200 THE RESURRECTION. 


friends; that every particle is gone, and has had -its place sup: 
plied by another; and yet the body is the same. So that it is 
not necessary there should be the same particles ; it is not need 
ful that you should track every atom and bring it back in order 
that the body should preserve its identity. 

Have you never heard the story of the wife of Peter Martyr, 
a celebrated reformer, who died some years before the time of 
Queen Mary? Since his enemies could not reach his body, 
they took up the body of his wife after she was dead, and 
buried it in a dung-hill. During the reign of Eizabeth, the 
body was removed from its contemptuous hiding-place ; it was 
then reduced to ashes. In order that the Romanists, if they 
should ever prevail again, might never do dishonor to that 
body, they took the ashes of Peter Martyr’s wife and mixed 
them with the reputed ashes of a Romish saint. Mixing the 
two together, they said, “Now these Romanists will never 
defile this body, because they will be afraid of desecrating the 
relics of their own saint.” Perhaps some wiseacres may say, 
“ow can these two be separated?” Why, they could be 
divided readily enough if God willed to do it; for granted that 
God is omniscient and omnipotent, and you have never to ask 
how, for omniscience and omnipotence put the question out of 
court, and decide the thing at once. Besides, it is not necessary 
that it should be so. ‘The life-germs of the two bodies may not 
have mixed together. God has set his angels to watch over 
them, as he set Michael to watch over the body of Moses, and 
he will bring out the two life-germs, and they shall be devel 
oped, and the two bodies shall start up separately at the sound 
of the archangel’s trump. Remember, then, and doubt not that 
the very body in which you sinned shall be the very body in 
which you shall suffer; and the body in which you believe in 
Christ, and in which you yield yourselves to God, shall be the 
very body in which you shall walk the golden streets, and in 
which you shall praise the name of God for ever and ever. 


Il. But observe, while the identity is real, the transformation 
is glorious. 
The body here is mortal, always subject to decay. We dwell 


THE RESURRECTION, 201 


in a poor, uncomfortable tent; continually is the -anvas being 
rent, the cords are being loosed, and the tent pins are being 
pulled up. We are full of sufferings, and aches, and pains, 
which are but the premonitions of coming death. We all 
know, some by our decayed teeth, which are but the emblems | 
of a decayed man; others by those gray hairs which are scat- 
tered here and there; we all know that our bodies are so con- 
stituted that they cannot remain here except for a limited 
period, and they must—so God has willed it—return to their 
native dust. Not so, however, the new body: “It is sown in 
corruption, it is raised in incorruption.” It will be a body upon 
which the tooth of time can have no power, and into which the 
dart of death can never be thrust. Age shall roll after age, but 
that body shall exist in everlasting youth. It shat. sing, but 
never shall its song be stayed by weakness; it s.all fly, but 
never shall its flight flag with weariness. There shall he no 
signs of mortality ; the shroud, the mattock, and the spade are 
never seen in heaven. Such a thing as an open grave shall 
never appear in the celestial kingdom; there they live, live, 
live, but never, never, never‘shall they die. See, then, how dif- 
' ferent the body must be; for as this body is constituted, every 
nerve and every bloodvessel tells me I must die. It cannot be 
otherwise. I must endure this stern decree, “ Dust to dust, 
earth to earth, ashes to ashes,” but in heaven every nerve of the 
new body shall cry, “ Immortality.” Every part of that new 
frame shall speak for itself, and tell to the immortal spirit that 
they are everlasting companions, married in eternal wedlock. 
There shall be, moreover, a great change in the new body as 
to its beauty. “It is sown in dishonor: it shall be raised in 
glory.” The old metaphor employed by all preachers upon 
this doctrine must be used again. You see here a crawling 
caterpillar, a picture of yourself, a creature that eats and drinks, 
and may readily be trodden on. Wait a few weeks, that cater- 
pillar shall spin itself a shroud, lie down, become inactive, and 
sleep. A picture of what you shall do. You must spin your 
winding-sheet and then be laid in the tomb. But wait a while ; 
when the warmth of the sun shall come that apparently lifeless 
thing shall burst its sheath. The chrysalis shall fall off, and the 
g* 


202 THE RESURRECTION. 


insect fly forth equipped with glittering wings. Having arrived 
at its full state of perfection, the very image of the creature 
shall be seen by us all dancing in the sunbeam. So shall we 
after passing through our wormhood here to our chrysalis state 
in the grave, burst our coffins and mount aloft glorious winged 
creatures made like unto the angels; the same creatures, but 
oh! so changed, so different, that we should scarce know our 
former selves, if we could be able to meet them again after 
we have been glorified in heaven. 

There shall be a change, then, in our form and nature. Old 
master Spenser, who was a rare hand at making metaphors, 
says, “The body here is like an old rusty piece of iron, but 
Death shall be the blacksmith; he shall take it and he shall 
make it hot in his fire, until it shall sparkle and send forth 
burning heat and look bright and shining.” And so surely is it. 
We are thrust into the earth as into the fire, and there shall we 
be made to sparkle and to shine and to be full of radiance; no 
more the rusty things that we once were, but fiery spirits, like 
the cherubim and the seraphim, we shall wear a power and a 
glory the like of which we have not even yet conceived. 

Another transformation shall take place, namely, in power. 
“Tt is sown in weakness, it is raised in power.” The same body 
that is weak shall be raised in power. We are puny things 
here; there is a limit to our labors, and our usefulness is 
straightened by reason of our inability to perform what we 
would. And oh, how weak we become when we die! A man 
must be carried by his own friends to his own grave; he cannot 
even lay himself down in his last resting-place. Passively he 
submits to be laid out, to be wrapped up in his winding-sheet, 
and to be shut up in the darkness of the grave. The clods are 
shovelled over him, but he knows it not, neither could he resist 
his burial if he were conscious of it. But that powerless body 
shall be raised in power. That was a fine idea of Martin 
Luther, which he borrowed from St. Anselm, that the saints 
shall be so strong when they are risen from the dead, that if 
they choose they could shake she world; they could pull up 
islands by their roots, or hurl mountains into the air. Some 
modern writers, borrowing their ideas from Milton, where he 


THE RESURRECTION. 203 


speaks of the battles of the angels, where they plucked up the 
hills with all their shaggy loads, rivers and trees at once, and 
hurled them at the fallen spirits, have taught that we shall be 
clothed with gigantic force. I think if we dc not go the sengtn — 
of the poets, we have every reason to believe that the power of 
the risea body will be utterly inconceivable. These, however, are 
but guesses at the truth; this great mystery is yet beyond us. 

I believe that when I shall enter upon my new body, I shall 
be able to fly from one spot to another, like a thought, as swift- 
ly as I will; I shall be here and there, as the rays of light. 
From strength to strength, my spirit shall be able to leap on- 
ward to obey the behests of God; upborne with wings of ether, 
it shall flash its way across that shoreless sea, and see the glory 
of God in all his works, and yet ever behold his face. For the 
eye shall then be strong enough to pierce through distance, and 
the memory shall never fail. It doth not yet appear what we 
shall be. But, brethren, to come back to reality, and leave 
fancy for a moment, though it doth not appear what we shall be, 
yet we know that when /e shall appear, we shall be like him, 
for we shall see him as he is. And do you know what we shall 
be like, if we shall be like him? Behold the picture of what 
Jesus Christ is like, and we shall be like him. “TI saw,” saith 
John, “one like unto the Son of Man, clothed with a garment 
down to the foot, and girt about the paps with a golden girdle. 
His head and his hairs were white like wool, as white as snow; 
and his eyes were as a flame of fire; and his feet like unto fine 
brass, as if they burned in a furnace; and his voice as the sound 
of many waters. And he had in his right hand seven stars, and 
out of his mouth went a sharp two-edged sword; and his coun- 
tenance was as the sun shineth in his strength. And when I 
saw him, I fell at his feet as dead.” Such shall we be when we 
are like Christ; what tongue can tell, what soul can guess the 
glories that surround the saints when they start from their beds 
of dust, and rise to immortality. But to turn away from these, 
which I fear, to very many of you, are rather uninteresting par- 
ticulars, let me give you one or two figures which may show te 
you the change which shall take y'ace in as on the day of resur- 
rection. 


204 THE RESURRECTION. 


Do you see yonder a beggar? he is picking rags from a dung 
hill, he pulls out piece after piece from the heap of dust; you 
may see the like any day, if you will go to those great dust-yards 
in Agar Town. What can be the value of those miserable old 
rags? He takes them away, they are carried off, sorted, rag to 
its own rag, like to like. By-and-bye they are washed, put into 
the mill, beaten hard, ground to pulp; and what is that I see 
Just coming out of yonder mill? A clear white sheet, without 
a stain; and whence came this? “I am the son of the old rag,” 
saith he, “nay, I am the identical rag that was but a few hours 
ago picked from the dung-heap.” Oh! strange! Doth purity 
come out of impurity, and doth this beauty, this utility come 
out of that which was neither comely\nor useful, but which men 
loathed, and cast away as a worthless thing? See here, breth- 
ren, the picture of yourselves; your bodies are like rags, put 
away into this vast dunghill earth, and there buried, but the 
angel shall come and sort you, body to its body, the righteous 
to the righteous, the wicked to the wicked, they shall come to- 
gether, bone to his bone and flesh to his flesh; and what do ] 
see 1—I behold a body like unto an angel, with eyes of fire, and 
a face like the brightness of the sun, and wings like lightnings 
for swiftness. Whence art thou, bright spirit? I am he that 
was buried, I am that thing that once was worms’ meat, but now 
I am glorious through the name of Jesus, and through the power 
of God. You have there before you a picture of the resurrec- 
tion, a homely picture, it is true, but one which may vividly 
convey the idea. 

Take another—one used of old by that mighty preacher, 
Chrysostom—there is an old house, a straight and narrow cottage, 
and the inhabitant of it often shivers with the cold in winter, 
and is greatly oppressed by the heat of summer; it is illy 
adapted to his wants. The windows are too small, and very 
dark, he cannot keep his treasure safely therein; he is often a 
prisoner; and when I have passed by his house I have heard him 
sighing at the window: “Oh, wretched man that I am, who shall 
deliver me from the body of this death.” The good master 
comes, the landlord of the house, he speaks to the tenant, and 
he bids him come away, “1 am about to pull down thy old 


THE RESURRECTION. 205 


house,” saith he, “and I would not have thee here while I am 
pulling it stone from stone, lest thou be hurt and injured. 
Come away with me and live in my palace, while I am pulling 
thy old house to pieces.” He does so, and every stone of the 
old house is thrown down; it is levelled with the ground, and 
even the foundations are dug up. Another is built: it is oi 
costly slabs of marble, the windows thereof are pure and clear, 
all its gates are of agate, and all its borders of precious stones, 
while all the foundations thereof are of chrysolite, and the roof 
thereof is of jasper. And now the master of the house speaks 
to the old inhabitant, “Come back, and I will show thee the 
house which I have built for thee.” O what joy, when that in- 
habitant shall enter and find it so well adapted to his wants, 
where every power shall have full range, where he shall see God 
out of its windows, not as through a glass, darkly, but face to 
face, where he could invite even Christ himself to come and sup 
with him, and not feel that the house is beneath the dignity of 
tne Son of Man. You know the parable, you know how your 
old house, this clay body, is to be pulled down, how your spirit 
is to dwell in heaven for a little while without a body, and how 
afterwards you are to enter into a house not made with hands, 
eternal in the heavens, a mansion which is noly, incorruptible, 
and undefiled, and which shall never decay. 

To use yet a fresh figure, I see a beggar passing by a rich man’s 
door; that poor wretch is covered with filth, his garments are 
hanging about him in pieces as if the wind would blow all away, 
and drive both man and garments amongst the rags upon the 
dunghill. How he shivers, how he seeks to pull about him that 
scant cloak, which will not meet around his loins, and will not 
shield him from the blast. As for his shoes, they are indeed 
old and clouted, and all his garments are of such a sort that one 
never could know the original, for they have been mended and 
patched a thousand times, and now they need to be mended and 
patched again. He is freely invited to come into the rich man’s 
hall; we will not tell you what is done in the meantime, but we 
will see him come out of that door again, and would you know 
kim? Would you believe that he is the same man? He has 
been washed and cleansed; on his back there hangs the impe 


206 THE RESURRECTION. 


rial purple, while on his head glitters a brilliant crown; his feet 
are shod with silver, and on his hands there are rings of gold. 
About the paps he wears a golden girdle, and as he comes 
abroad, bright spirits wait on him and do him honor; angels are 
his servants, and think it their highest pleasure to do his will. 
Is this the same man and is this the same dress? Jt is the same. 
By some marvellous might, God has received this beggar, taken 
him into the inner chamber of the grave; has washed him from 
all imperfections; and now he comes out as one of the princes 
of the blood royal of heaven. And as is his nature, such is his 
apparel ; as is his dignity, such is his estate, and such the com- 
pany of servants who wait upon him. 

Not to multiply illustrations, we will use but one more. | 
see before me an old and battered cup, which many a black lip 
hath touched, out of which many a villain’s throat has received 
moisture. It is marred and covered over with filth. Who could 
tell what metal it is? It is brought in and given to the silver- 
smith; he no sooner receives it, than he begins to break it into 
pieces ; he dashes it into shivers again and again; he pounds it 
until he has broken it, and then puts it into his fining pot and 
melts it. Now you begin to see it sparkle again, and by-and-bye 
he beats it out and fashions it into a goodly chalice, out of which 
a king may drink. Is this the same? the very same thing. 
This glorious cup; is this the old battered silver we saw just 
now? Yes it is the same, and we who are here below like ves- 
sels, alas! too unfit for the Master’s use; vessels which have 
even given comfort to the evil ones, and helped to do the work 
of Satan, we shall be put into the furnace of the grave, and be 
there melted down and fused and fashioned into a glorious wine 
cup, that shall stand upon the banqueting table of the Son of God. 


Ill, I have thus sought to illustrate the change, and now I will 
occupy your attention but one or two minutes on another 
thought, which seems to lie within the range of my text. We 
have had the real identity under the glorious transformation. I 
bring you back to a thought kindred to the first. There will be 
in the bodies of the righteous an undoubted rersonality of 
character. 


THE RESURRECTION, 207 


If you sow barley, it will not produce wheat; if you sow 
tares, they will not spring up in the form of rye. Every grain 
hath its own peculiar form: God hath given to every seed his own 
body. So, my brothers and sisters, there are differences among 
us here; no two bodies are precisely alike: there are marks on 
our countenances, and in our bodily conformation, that show that 
we are different. We are of one blood, but not of one fashion. 
Well, when we are put into the grave, we shall crumble back, 
and come to the same elements; but when we rise, we shall 
every one of us rise diverse from the other. The body of Paul 
shall not produce a body precisely like that of Peter. Nor shall 
the flesh of Andrew bring forth a new body like that of the sons 
of Zebedee; but to every seed his own body. In the case of 
our blessed Lord and Master, you will remember that when he 
rose himself from the dead he preserved his personality ; there 
were still the wounds in his hands, and still there was the spear- 
mark in his side. I do not doubt that he underwent his transfig- 
uration, and at the time of his ascension up to heaven, he still 
retained the marks of his wounds. For do we not sing, and is 
not our song based upon Scripture q 


He looks like a Lamb that has been slain, 
And wears his priesthood still. 


So, brethren, though of course we shall retain no weaknesses, 
nothing which will cause us sorrow, yet every Christian will 
retain his individuality ; he will be like and yet unlike all his 
fellows. As we know Isaiah from Jeremy here, so shall we 
know them above. As I differ from you here, if we two shall 
together praise God, there shall be some difference between us 
above. Not the difference in failings, but the difference in the 
perfections of the form of the new body. I sometimes think 
martyrs will wear their scars. And why should they not? It 
were & loss to them if they should lose their honors. Perhaps 
wney shall wear their ruby crowns in Paradise, and we shall 
snow them— 


“ Foremost ’mongst the sons of light, 
Midst the bright ones deubly bright.” 


208 THE RESURRECTION. 


Perhaps the men who come from the catacombs of Rome will 
wear some sort of pallor on their brow that will show they came 
from darkness, where they saw not the light of the sun. Per. 
haps the minister of Christ, though he shall not need to say to 
his fellows, “ know the Lord,” shall still be chief amung the tell- 
ers of the ways of God. Perhaps the sweet singer of Israel 
shall still be foremost in the choir of the golden harps, and loud- 
est among them that shall lead the strain. And if these be fan- 
cies, yet am I sure that one star differeth from another star in 
glory. Orion shall not be confounded with Arcturus ; nor shall 
Mazaroth for a moment be confounded with Orion. We shall 
all be separate and distinct. Perhaps we shall each one have 
our constellation there, as we shall cluster into our own societies 
and gather around those whom we beSt kave known on earth. 
Personality will be maintained. I do nvt doubt but what you 
will know Isaiah in heaven; and you will recognize the great 
preachers of the ancient Christian church; you will be able to 
speak with Chrysostom, and talk wich Whitfield. It may be 
you shall have for your companions those who were your com- 
panions here; those with whom yvu took sweet counsel, and 
walked to the house of God, shall be with you there, and you 
shall know them, and with transporting joy you shall there to- 
gether tell your former trials and ancient triumphs, and the glo- 
ries you are alike made to share. 

Treasure up, then, these things, the identity of your body after 
its glorious transformation, and, at the same time, the person- 
ality which will prevail. 

I want, now, your solemn attention, while I sketch a most fear. 
ful contrast here. The things I have already spoken should make 
the children of God happy. At Stratford-on-Bow, in the days 
of Queen Mary, there was once a stake erected for the burning 
of two martyrs, one of them a lame man, the other a blind man. 
Just when the fire was lit, the lame man hurled away his staff, 
and turning round, said to the blind man, “Courage, brother, 
this fire will cure us both.” So can the righteous say of the 
grave, “Courage, the grave will cure us all; we shall leave our 
infirmities behind us.” What patience this should give us te 
endure all our trials. for they are not of long duration. They 


THE RESURRECTION. 209 


are but as the carvings of the graver’s tool, shaping these rough 
olocks of clay, to bring them into the right form and shape, 
that they may bear the image of the heavenly. 

But the contrast is awful. Brethren, the wicked must rise 
again from the dead. The lip with which you have drunk the 
intoxicating drink till you have reeled again, that lip shall be 
used in drinking down the fiery wrath of God. Remember, 
too, ungodly woman, the eyes that are full of lust will one day 
be full of horror; the ear with which you listen to lascivious 
conversation must listen to the sullen moans, the hollow groans 
and shrieks of tortured ghosts. Be not deceived ; you sinned in 
your body, you will be damned in your body. When you die, 
your spirit must suffer alone ; that will be the beginning of hell ; 
but your body must rise again—then this very flesh in which 
you have transgressed the laws of God, this very body must 
smart for it. Your body will be raised incorruptible, otherwise 
the fire would consume it. It will become like the asbestos 
stone, which lies in the flame and yet is never consumed. If it 
were this flesh and blood, it would soon die under the pangs we 
must endure; but it will be a body all but omnipotent. AsI 
spoke of the righteous having such great power, so shall you 
have; but it will be power to agonize, power to suffer, power tc 
die, and yet to live, uncrushed by the stern foot of death. Think 
of this, ye sensualists, who care not for your souls; you shall 
have that fair complexion scorched away. Rotting as they will 
do in the grave, they shall nevertheless rise with a fiery immor- 
tality about them, and endure an eternity of agony and unutter- | 
able woe and punishment. Is not that enough to make a man 
tremble and cry, “God be merciful unto me a sinner ?” 

But further, remember that while your body shall be iden- 
tically the same, yet it too will be transformed; and as the 
wheat brings forth the wheat, so the nettle seed brings forth the 
nettle. What your body will be like I cannot tell; but, per- 
haps, as the body of the righteous will come to be like Christ, 
yours may become like the body of the devil, whatever that 
may be—the same hideous conformation, the same demon gaze 
and hellish stare which characterize that proud archangel shall 
gharacterize you; you shall have the image and the lineaments 


210 THE RESURRECTION. 


of the first traitor stamped upon your face. Seeds of sin, are ye 
prepared to ripen into the full blown flower of destruction? Ye 
seeds of evil, are ye ready to be scattered now from Death's 
hand, and then to spring up an awful harvest of tormented ones ? 
Yet so it must be, unless you turn toGod. Except you repent, 
he has said, and he will do it, he is able to cast both body and 
soul into hell. 

And let me remind you yet once again, that there will be in 
you an undoubted personality : you will be known in hell. The 
drunkard shall have the drunkard’s punishment; the swearer 
shall have the swearer’s corner to himself. “Bind them up in 
bundles to burn, and cast them into the fire.’ Thus saith the 
voice of inflexible Justice. You ghall not suffer in another man’s 
body but in your own, and you shall be known to be the very 
man that sinned against God. You shall be looked at by one 
who sees you to-day, if you die impenitent; who will say to 
you, “ We went up to that hall together; we heard a sermon 
on the resurrection which had a frightful ending; we laughed at 
it, but we have found out that it is true.” And one will say to 
the other, “I should have known you, though we had not met 
these many years till we met in hell. There is something about 
your new body which lets me know that it is the same body that 
you had on earth.” And then you will mutually say to one 
another, “ These pangs that we are now enduring, this horror of 
great darkness, these chains of fire that are reserved for us, are 
they not well deserved?’ And you will curse God together 
again, and suffer together, and will be made to feel that you have 
only received the due reward of your deeds. “Did not the 
man warn us,” you will say; “did he not warn us? did he not 
bid us fly to Christ for refuge? did we not despise it, and make 
a jeer of what he said? We are rightly punished.” 

Oh! my dear hearers, I cannot bear to stay on this subject; 
let me finish with this word. ‘ Whoever believeth on the Lord 
Jesus Christ shall be saved.” That means, you poor man, 
though perhaps you were drunk last night, and scarcely got up 
time enough to come here this morning—if thou believest, thou 
shalt be saved. This means thee, poor woman, sinner though 
thou be—if thou cast thyself on Christ thou art saved, This 


THE RESURRECTION. Qi 


means thee, respectable man, thou who trustest in thine own 
works—if thou reliest on Christ, thou shalt be saved, but 
not if thou trustest in thyself. Oh! be wise, be wise. May 
God give us grace now to learn that highest wisdom, and may 
we now look to the cross and to the quivering Lamb that bleeds 
upon it, and see him as he rises from the dead and ascends up 
on high, and believing in him, may we receive the hope and the 
assurance of a blissful resurrection in him to everlasting life 
Awcsp. 


SERMON XIII. 


THE BLOOD OF THE COVENANT. 


[Tuts sermon, preached in Surrey Music Hall, Oct. 2, 1859, 
will give the reader a just view of the author’s standing as to the 
doctrines of grace and the divine sovereignty. He is a sincere 
high Calvinist of the old puritanic school, holding the personal 
election of the saints by the sovereign good pleasure of God, 
wholly aside from the creature; and as sincere a hater of all 
free-will Arminianism, technically so called. A sturdy defender 
of the old land marks.] 


“The blood of the everlasting covenant.”—Hznrgws, xiii, 20, 


Aut God’s dealings with men have had a covenant cnaracter. 
It hath so pleased him to arrange it, that he will not deal with 
us except through a covenant, nor can we deal with him except 
in the same manner. Adam in the garden was under a coven- 
ant with God. That covenant he speedily brake. There is a 
covenant still existing in all its terrible power—terrible I say, 
because it has been broken on man’s part, and therefore God will 
most surely fulfil its solemn threatenings and sanctions. That is 
the covenant of works. By this he dealt with Moses, and in this 
loth he deal with the whole race of men as represented in the , 
first Adam. Afterwards when God would deal with Noah, it 
was by a covenant; and when in succeeding ages he dealt with 
Abraham, he was still pleased to bind himself by a covenant. 
That covenant he preserved and kept, and it was renewed con- 
tinually to many of his seed. God dealt not even with David, 


THE BLOOD OF THE COVENANT. 213 


the man after his own heart, except with a covenant. He made 
& covenant with his anointed; and beloved, he dealeth with 
you and me this day still by covenant. When he shall ceme in 
all his terrors to condemn, he shall smite by covenant—namely, 
by the sword of the covenant of Sinai; and if he comes in the 
splendors cf his grace to save, he still comes to us by covenant 
—namely, the covenant of Zion; the covenant which he has 
made with the Lord Jesus Christ, the head and representative 
of his peonle. 

And mark, whenever we come into close and intimate deal 
ings with God, it is sure to be, on our part, also by covenant, 
We make with God, after conversion, a covenant of gratitude ; 
we come to him sensible of what he has done for us, and we de- 
vote ourselves to him. We set our seal to that covenant when 
in baptism we are united with his church; and day by day, so 
often as we come around the table of the breaking of bread, we 
renew the vow of our covenant, and thus we have personal in- 
tercourse with God. I cannot pray to him except through the 
covenant of grace; and I know that I am not his child unless I 
am his, first through the covenant whereby Christ purchased 
me, and secondly, through the covenant by which | have given 
up myself, and dedicated all that I am and all that I have to 
him. It is important, then, since the covenant is the only 
ladder which reaches from earth to heaven—since it is the only 
way in which God has intercourse with us, and by which we 
can doal with him, that we should know how to discriminate be- 
tween covenant and covenant; and should not be in any dark- 
ness or error with regard to what is the covenant of grace, and 
what is not. It shall be my endeavor, this morning, to make 
as simple and as plain as possible, the matter of the covenant 
spoken of in our text, and IJ shall thus speak—first, upon the 
covenant of grace; secondly, its everlasting character; and 
thirdly, the relationship which the blood bears to it. “ The 
blood of the everlasting covenant.” 


I. First of all, then, I have to speak of ram covenant men. 
tioned in the text; and I observe that we can readily discover 
at first sight what the covenant is not. We see at once that 


214 | (HE BLOOD OF THE COVENANT. 


this is not the covenant of works, for the simple reason that 
this is an everlasting covenant. The covenant of wurks was not 
everlasting in any sense whatever. It was not eternal; it was 
first made in the garden of Eden. It had a beginning, it has 
been broken; it will be violated continually, and will soon be 
finished and pass away: therefore, it is not everlasting in any 
sense. The covenant of works cannot bear an everlasting title : 
but as the one in my text is an everlasting covenant, therefore 
it is not the covenant of works. God made a covenant first of 
all with the human race, which ran in this wise: “If thou, O 
man, wilt be obedient, thou shalt live and be happy, but if thou 
wilt be disobedient, thou shalt perish. In the day that thou 
disobeyest me thou shalt die.” That. covenant was made with 
all of us in the person of our representative, the first Adam. 
tf Adam had kept that covenant, we believe we should every 
one of us have been preserved. But inasmuch as he broke the 
covenant, you and I, and all of us, fell down and were consid- 
ered henceforth as the heirs of wrath, as inheritors of sin, as 
prone to every evil and subject to every misery. That cove- 
nant has passed away with regard to God’s people; it has been 
put away through the new and better covenant which has 
utterly and entirely eclipsed it by its gracious glory. 

Again, I may remark that the covenant here meant is not the 
covenant of gratitude which is made between the loving child 
of God and his Saviour. Such a covenant is very right and 
proper. I trust all of us who know the Saviour have said in 
our very hearts :— 


“Tis done! the great transaction’s done; 
IT am my Lord’s, and he is mine.” 


We have given up everything to him. But that covenant is 
not the one in the text, for the simple reason that the covenant 
in our text is an everlasting one. Ours was only written out 
some few years ago. It would have been despised by us in the 
earlier parts of our life, and cannot at the very utmost be so old 
as ourselves. 

Having thus readily saown what this covenant is not, I may 
ebserve what this covenant is. To understand a covenant, you 


THE BLOOD OF THE COVENANT. Q15 


must know, first who are the contracting parties; secondly, 
what are the stipulations of the contract; thirdly, what are the 
objects of it; and then, if you would go still deeper, you must 
understand something of the motives which lead the contracting 
parties to form the covenant between themselves. 

1. Now, in this covenant of grace, we must first of all observe 
the high contracting parties between whom it was made. The 
covenant of grace was made before the foundation of the world 
between God the Father, and God the Son; or to put it ina 
yet more scriptural light, it was made mutually between the 
three divine persons of the adorable Trinity. This covenant 
- was not made directly between God and man. Man did not at 
that time exist; but Christ stood in the covenant as man’s 
representative. In that sense we will allow that it was a cove- 
nant between God and man, but not a covenant between God 
and any man personally and individually. It was a covenant 
between God with Christ, and through Christ indirectly with all 
the blood-bought seed who were loved of Christ from the foun- 
dation of the world. It is a noble and glorious thought, the 
very poetry of that old Calvinistic doctrine which we teach, that 
long ere the day-star knew its place, before God had spoken 
existence out of nothing, before angel’s wing had stirred the un- 
navigated ether, before a solitary song had disturbed the solem- 
nity of the silence in which God reigned supreme, he had 
entered into solemn counsel with himself, with his Son, and with 
his Spirit, and had in that council decreed, determined, pur- 
posed, and predestinated the salvation of his people. He had, 
moreover, in the covenant arranged the ways and means, and 
fixed and settled everything which should work together for the 
effecting of the purpose and the decree. My soul flies back, 
winged by imagination, and looks into that mysterious council. 
chamber, and by faith I behold the Father pledging himself to 
the Son, and the Son pledging himself to the Father, while the 
Spirit gives his pledge to both, and thus that divine compact, 
long to be hidden in darkness, is completed and settled—the 
covenant which in these latter days has been read in the light 
of heaven, and has become the joy, and hope, and boast of all 
the saints. 


216 THE BLOOD OF THE COVENANT, 


2. What were the stipulations of this covenant? They were 
somewhat in this wise. God had foreseen that man after crea- 
tion would break the covenant of works; that however mild 
and gentle the tenure upon which Adam had possession of Para- 
dise, yet that tenure would be too severe for him, and he would 
be sure to kick against it, and ruin himself. God had also fore: 
seen that his elect ones, wnom he had chosen out of the rest of 
mankind, would fall by the sin of Adam, since they, as well as 
the rest of mankind, were represented in Adam. ‘The covenant 
therefore had for its end the restoration of the chosen people. 
And now we may readily understand what were the stipulations. 
On the Father’s part, thus run the covenant. I cannot tell you 
it in the glorious celestial tongue in which it was written: I ain 
fain to bring it down to the speech which suiteth to the ear of 
flesh, and to the heart of a mortal. Thus, I say, run the covenant, 
in. lines like these: “1, the Most High Jehovah, do hereby give 
unto my only begotten and well-beloved Son, a people, countless 
beyond the number of the stars, who shall be by him washed 
from sin, by him preserved, and kept, and led, and by him, at 
last, presented before my throne, without spot, or wrinkle or 
any such thing. I covenant by oath, and swear by myself, be- 
cause I can swear by no greater, that these whom I now give to 
Christ shall be forever the objects of my eternal love. Them 
will I forgive through the merit of the blood. To these will | 
give a perfect righteousness; these will I adopt and make my 
sons and daughters, and these shall reign with me through Christ 
eternally.” Thus run that glorious side of the covenant. 

The Holy Spirit also, as one of the high contracting parties 


on this side of the covenant, gave his declaration, “I hereby - 


covenant, that all whom the Father giveth to the Son, J will in 


Pa 


Re) 


due time quicken. 1 will show them their need of redemption ;° 


I will cut off from them all groundless hope, and destroy their 
refuges of lies. 1 will bring them tc the blood of sprinkling; I 
will give them faith whereby this blood shall be applied to 
them ; I will work in them every grace; 1 will keep their faith 
alive; I will cleanse them and drive out all depravity from 
them, and they shall be presented at last spotless and faultless.” 
This was the one side of the covenant, which is at this very daj 


THE BLOCD OF THE COVENANT. 217 


being fulfilled and scrupulously kept. As for the other side of 
the covenant, this was the part of it engaged and covenanted by 
Christ. He thus declared, and covenanted with his Father: 
“My Father, on my part I covenant that in the fulness of time 
[ will become man. [ will take upon myself the form and 
nature of the fallen race. I will live in their wretched world, 
and for my people will I keep the law perfectly. I will work 
out a spotless righteousness, which shall be acceptable to the 
demands of thy just and holy law. In due time I will bear the 
sins of all my people. Thou shalt exact their debts on me; the 
chastisement of their peace I will endure, and by my stripes 
they shall be healed. My Father, I covenant and promise that 
I will be obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. I 
will magnify thy law, and make it honorable. I will suffer all 
they ought to have suffered. I will endure the curse of thy law, 
and all the vials of thy wrath shall be emptied and spent upon 
my head. I will then rise again; I will ascend into heaven; | 
will intercede for them at thy right hand; and I will make 
myself responsible for every one of them, that not one of those 
whom thou hast given me shall ever be lost, but I will bring all 
my sheep of whom, by thy blood, thou hast constituted me the 
shepherd—I will bring every one safe to thee at last.” Thus 
ran the covenant; and now, I think, you have a clear idea of 
what it was and how it stands—the covenant between God and 
Christ, between God the Father and God the Spirit, and God 
the Son, as the covenant head and representative of all God’s 
elect. I have told you, as briefly as I could, what were the 
stipulations of it. You will please to remark, my dear friends, 
that the covenant is, on one side, perfectly fulfilled. God the 
Son has paid the debts of all the elect. He has, for us men 
and for our redemption, suffered the whole of wrath divine, 
Nothing remaineth now on this side of the question, except that 
he shall continue to intercede, that he may safely bring all his 
redeemed to glory. 

On the side of the Father this part of the covenant has been 
fulfilled to countless myriads. God the Father and God the 
Spirit, have not been behindhand in their divine coutract. And 
mark you, this side shall be as fully and as completely finished 

10 


218 . THE BLOOD OF THE COVENANT. 


and carried cut as the other. Christ can say of what he pro ~ 
mised to do, “ It is finished!” and the like shall be said by all 
the glorious covenanters. All for whom Christ died shall be 
pardoned, all justified, all adopted. The Spirit shall quicken 
them all, shall give them all faith, shall bring them all to heaven, 
and they shall, every one of them, without let or hindrance, 
stand accepted in the beloved, in the day when the people shall 
be numbered, and Jesus shall be glorified. 

8. And now, having seen who were the high contracting par- 
ties, and what were the terms of the covenant made between 
them, let us see what were the objects of this covenant. Was 
this covenant made for every man of the race of Adam? As- 
suredly not; we discover the secret ky the visible. That which 
is in the covenant is to be seen in due time with the eye and 
to be heard with the ear. I see multitudes of men perishing, 
continuing wantonly in their wicked ways, rejecting the offer of 
Christ, which is presented to them in the gospel day after day, 
treading under foot the blood of the Son of Man, defying the 
Spirit who strives with them; I see these men going on from 
bad to worse, and at last perishing in their sins. I have not the 
folly to believe that they have any part in the covenant of grace. 
Those who die impenitent, the multitudes.who reject the Saviour, 
are clearly proved to have no part.and no lot in the sacred 
covenant of divine grace; for if they were interested in that, 
there would be certain marks and evidences which would show 
us this. We should find that in due time in this life they woulé 
be brought to repentance, would be washed in the Saviour’s 
blood, and would be saved. The covenant—to come at once 
straight to the matter, however offensive the doctrine may be— 
the covenant has relationship to the elect and none besides 
Does this offend you? Be ye offended even more. What saié 
Christ? “I pray for them: I pray not fer the world, but for 
them which thou hast given me: for they are thine.” If Christ 
prayeth for none but for his chosen, why should ye be angry 
that ye are also taught from the Word of God that in the cove- 
nant there was provision made for the like persons, that they 
might receive eternal life. As many as shall believe, as many 
as shall trust in Christ, as many as shall persevere unto the end, 


THE BLOOD OF THE. COVENANT. 219 


as many as shall enter into the eternal rest, so many and no 
more are interested in the covenant of divine grace. 

4. Furthermore, we have to consider what were the motives 
of this covenant? Why was the covenant made at all? There 
was no compulsion or constraint on God. As yet there was no 
creature. Even could the creature have an influence on the 
Creator, there was none existing in the period when the cove 
nant was made. We can look nowhere for God’s motive in the 
covenant except it be in himself, for of God it could be said 
literally in that day, “1 am, and there is none beside me.” Why 
then did he make the covenant? I answer, absolute sovereignty 
dictated it. But why were certain men the objects of it, and 
_why not others? I answer, sovereign grace guided the pen. lt 
was not the merit of man, it was nothing which God foresaw in 
us, that made him choose many, and leave others to go on in 
their sins. It was nothing in them, it was sovereignty and 
grace combined that made the divine choice. If you, my breth- 
ren, have a good hope that you are interested in the covenant 
of grace, you must sing that song— 


“ What was there in me to merit esteem, or give the Creator delight? 
‘Twas even so Father I ever must sing, for go it seemed gond in thy sight.” 


« Fe will have mercy on whom he will have me: oy,” for it 18 
not of him that willeth, nor of him that runneth, bu’ of God that 
showeth mercy.” His sovereignty elected, and his grace distin- 
guished, and immutability decreed. No motive dictated the 
election of the individuals, except a motive in himself of love 
and of divine sovereignty. Doubtless the grand intention of 
God in making the covenant at all was his own glory; any mo 
tive inferior to that would be beneath his dignity. God must 
fnd his motives in himself; he has not to look to moths and 
worms for motives for his deeds. He is the “1 AM.” 


“He sits on no precarious throne, 
Nor borrows leave to be.” 


He doth as he wills in the armies of heaven. Who can stay his 
hand and say unto him, “ What doest thou?” Shall) the clay ash 


220 THE BLOOD OF THE SOVENANT. 


the potter for the motive for his making it into a vessel? Shall 
the thing formed before its creation dictate to its Creator? No, 
tet God be God, and let man shrink into his native nothingness; 
and if God exalt him, let him not boast as though God found a 
reason for the deed in man. He finds his motives in himselt. 
He is self-contained, and findeth nothing beyond nor ueedeth 
anything from any but himself. Thus have I, as fully as time 
permits this morning, discussed the first point concerning the 
govenant. May the Holy Spirit lead us into this sublime truth. 


II. But now, in the second place, we come to notice ITs EVER- 
LASTING CHARACTER. It is called an everlasting covenant. 

1. And here you observe at once its\antiquity. The covenant of 
grace is the oldest of all things. It is sometimes a subject of 
great joy to me to think that the covenant of grace is older than 
the covenant of works. The covenant of works had a beginning, 
but the covenant of grace had not; and blessed be God the cov- 
enant of works has its end, but the covenant of grace shall stand 
fast when heaven and earth shal] pass away. The antiquity of 
the covenant of grace demands our grateful attention. It is a 
truth which tends to elevate the mind. I know of no doctrine 
more grand than this. It is the very soul and essence of all 
poetry, and in sitting down and meditating upon it, I do confess 
my spirit has sometimes been ravished with delight. Can you 
conceive the idea that before all things God thought of you; 
that when as yet he had not made his mountains, he had thought 
of thee, poor puny worm? Before the magnificent constellations 
began to shine, and ere the great centre of the world had been 
fixed, and all the mighty planets and divers worlds had been 
made to revolve around it, then had God fixed the centre of his 
covenant, and ordained the number of those lesser stars which 
should revolve round that blessed centre, and derive light there- 
from. Why, when one is taken up with some grand conceptions 
of the boundless universe, when with the astronomers we fly 
through space, when we find it without end, and the starry hosts 
without number, does it not seem marvellous that God should 
give poor insignificant man the preference beyond even the whole 
univ arse besides? Oh, this cannot make us proud, because it is 


THE BLOOD OF THE COVENANT. 221 


a divine truth; but it must make us feel happy. Oh, believer, 
you think yourself nothing; but God does not think so of you. 
Men despise you, but God remembered you before he made 
anything. ‘The covenant of love which he made with his Son on 
your behalf, is older than the hoary ages, and if ye fly back 
when as yet time had not begun, before those massive rocks that 
bear the marks of grey old age upon them had begun to be 
deposited, he had loved and chosen you, and made a covenant 
on your behalf. Remember well these ancient things of the 
eternal hills. 

2. Then, again, it is an everlasting covenant from its sureness. 
Nothing is everlasting which is not secure. Man may erect his 
structures and think they may last forever; but the Tower of 
Babel has crumbled, and the very Pyramids bear signs of ruin. 
Nothing which man has made is everlasting, because he cannot 
insure it against decay.. But as for the covenant of grace, well 
did David say of it, “It is ordered in all things and sure.” 
There is not an “if” or a “ but” in the whole of it from begin- 
ning to end. Free-will hates God’s “shalls” and “ wills,” and 
likes man’s “ifs” and “ buts,” but there are no “ ifs” and “ buts” 
in the covenant of grace. Thus the tenure runs: “I will” and 
“they shall.” Jehovah swears it and the Son fulfils it. It is— 
it must be true. It must be sure, for “1 AM” determines. 
“Ffath he said, and shall he not do it? or hath he spoken, and 
shall he not make it good?’ It is a sure covenant. I have 
sometimes said, if any man were about to build a bridge or a 
house, if he would leave me just one single stone or one timber 
4o put where I liked, I would undertake that his house would 
fall down. Let me, if there is any one about to construct a 
bridge, have just simply the placing of one stone—I will select 
which stone it shall be—and I will defy him to build a bridge 
shat shall stand. I should simply select the key-stone, and then 
ne might erect whatever he pleased, and it should soon fall. 
Now, the Arminian’s covenant is one that cannot stand, because 
there are one or two bricks in it that are dependent on the will 
of man. It is left to the will of the creature whether he will be 
saved or not. If he will not, there is no constraining influence 
that can master and overcome his will. There is no promis: 


222 THE BLOOD OF THE COVENANT. 


that any influence shall be strong enough to overcome him, a 
cording to the Arminian, So the question is left to man, and 
God the mighty Builder—though he put stone on stone, massive 
as the universe—yet may be defeated by his creature. Out 
upon such blasphemy! The whole structure, from beginning to 
end, is in the hand of God. The very terms and conditions of 
that covenant are become its seals and guarantees, seeing that 
Jesus has fulfilled them all. Its full accomplishment in every 
jot and title is sure, and must be fulfilled by Christ Jesus, 
whether man will or man will not. It is not the creature’s cov- 
enant, it is the Creator’s. It is not man’s covenant, it is the 
Almighty’s covenant, and he will carry it out and perform it, 
the will of man notwithstanding. For this is the very glory of 
grace—that man hates to be saved, that he is at enmity to him, 
yet God will have him redeemed—that God’s covenant is, “ you 
shall,” and man’s intention is, “I will not,” and God’s “shall” 
conquers man’s “I will not.” Almighty grace rides victoriously 
over the neck of free-will, and leads it captive in glorious cap- 
tivity to the all-conquering power of irresistible grace and love. 
It is a sure covenant, and therefore deserves the title of eve: 
lasting. 

3. Furthermore, it is not only sure, but it is immutable. It 
it were not immutable, it could not be everlasting. That which 
changes passes away. We may be quite sure that anything that 
has the word “change” on it, will sooner or later die, and be 
put away as athing of nought. But in the covenant everything 
is immutable. Whatever God has established must come to 
pass, and not word, or line, or letter can be altered. Whatever 
the Spirit voweth shall be done, and whatever God the Son 
promised hath been fulfilled, and shall be consummated at the 
day of his appearing. Oh, if we could believe that the sacred 
lines could be erased—that the covenant could be blotted and 
bluried, why, then, my dear friends, we might lie down in de- 
spair. I have heard it said by some preachers, that when the 
Christian is holy, he is in the covenant; that when he sins, he is 
crossed out again; that when he repents, he is put in again; 
and then, if he falls, he is scratched out once more: and so he 
goes in and out of the door, as he would in and out of his own 


THE BLOOD OF THE COVENANT. 223 


house. He is sometimes the child of God, and sometimes the 
child of the devil—sometimes an heir of heaven, and anon an 
heir of hell. And I know one man who went so far as to say 
that although a man micht have persevered through grace for 
sixty years, yet should he fall away the last year of his life—if 
he should sin and die so, he would perish everlastingly, and all 
his faith, and all the love which God had manifested to him in 
the days gone by would go for nothing. Iam very happy to 
say that such a notion of God is just the very notion I have of 
the devil. I could not believe in such a God, and could not bow 
down before him. A God that loves to-day and hates to 
morrow; a God that gives a promise, and yet foreknows after 
all that man shall not see the promise fulfilled ; a God that for. 
gives and punishes—that justifies and afterwards executes—is a 
God that I cannot endure. He is not the God of the Scriptures, 
I am certain, for he is immutable, just, holy, and true; and hav- 
ing loved his own, he will love them to the end; and if he hath 
given a promise to any man, the promise shall be kept, and that 
man once in grace, is in grace forever, and shall without fail by 
and-bye enter into glory. 

4, And then to finish up this point. The covenant is ever- 
lasting, because tt will never run itself out. It will be fulfilled 
but it will stand firm. When Christ hath completed all, and 
brought every believer to heaven; when the Father hath seen 
all his people gathered in—the covenant it is true, will come to 
@ consummation, but not to a conclusion, for thus the covenant 
runs: The heirs of grace shall be blessed forever, and as long as 
“forever” lasts, this everlasting covenant will demand the hap- 
piness, the security, the glorification of every object of it. 


II. I conclude by the sweetest and most precious portion of 
the doetrine—THE BLOOD OF THE EVERLASTING COVENANT. The 
blood of Christ stands in a four-fold relationship to the cove 
nant. 

1, With regard to Christ, his precious blood shed in Gethse- 
mane, in Gabbatha, and Galgotha, is the fulfilment of the cov- 
enant. By this blood, sin is cancelled; by Jesus’ agonies, jus- 
tice is satisfied ; by his death, the law rs honored; and by that 


224 THE BLOOD OF THE COVENANT. 


precious blood, in all its mediatorial efficacy, and in all its cleans. 
ing power, Christ fulfils all that he stipulated to do on the behalf 
of his people towards God. Oh, believer, look to the blood of 
Christ, and remember that there is Christ’s part of the covenant 
carried out. And now, there remains nothing to be fulfilled but 
God’s part, there is nothing for thee to do—Jesus has done it 
all; there is nothing for free will to supply; Christ has done 
everything that God can demand. The blood is the fulfilment 
of the debtor’s side of the covenant, and now God becometh 
bound by his own solemn oath to show grace and mercy to all 
whom Christ has redeemed by his blood. 

2. With regard to the blood, in another respect, it is to God 
the Father the bond of the covenant. When I see Christ dying 
on the cross, I see the everlasting God\from that time, if I may 
use the term of him who ever must be free, bound by his own 
oath and covenant to carry out every stipulation. Does the cov- 
nant say, “ A new heart will I give thee, and a right spirit will ] 
put within thee? It must be done, for Jesus died, and Jesus’ 
death is the seal of the covenant. Does it say, “I will sprinkle 
pure water upon them and they shall be clean; from all their 
iniquities willI cleanse them ?” Then it must be done, for Christ 
has fulfilled his part. And therefore, now we can present the © 
covenant no more as & thing of doubt, but as our claim on God 
through Christ, and coming humbly on our knees, pleading that 
covenant, our Heavenly Father will not deny the promises con- 
tained therein, but will make every one of them yea and amen 
to us through the blood of Jesus Christ. 

3. Then, again, the blood of the covenant has relation to us as 
the objects of the covenant, and that is its third light; it is not 
only a fulfilment as regards Christ, and a bond as regards his 
Father, but it is an evidence as regards ourselves. And here, 
dear brothers and sisters, let me speak affectionately to you, 
Are you relying wholly upon the blood? Has his blood—the 
precious blood of Christ—been laid to your conscience? Have 
you seen your sins pardoned, through his blood? Have you re- 
ceived forgiveness of sins through the blood of Jesus? Are you 
glorying in his sacrifice, and is nis cross your only hope and 
refuge? Then you are in the covenant. Some men want te 


THE BLOOD OF THE COVENANT. 225 


know whether they are eleet. We cannot tell them unless they 
tell us this. Dost thou believe? Is thy faith fixed on the pre- 
cious blood? Then thou art in the covenant. And oh, poor 
sinner, if thou hast nothing to recommend thee; if thou art 
standing back, and saying, “I dare not come! I am afraid! I 
am not in the covenant!” still Christ bids thee come. ‘“ Come 
unto me,” saith he. “If thou canst not come to the covenant — 
Father, come to the covenant Surety. Come unto me and I will 
give thee rest.” And when thou hast come to him, and his 
blood has been applied to thee, doubt not but that in the red 
roll of election stands thy name. Canst thou read thy name in 
the bloody characters of a Saviour’s atonement? Then shalt 
thou read it one day in the golden letters of the Father’s elec- 
tion! He that believeth is elected. The blood is the symbol. 
the token, the earnest, the surety, the seal of the covenant of 
grace to thee. It must ever be the telescope through which 
thou canst look to see the things that are afar of. Thou canst 
not see thy election with the naked eye, but through the blood 
of Christ thou canst see it clear enough. Trust thou in the 
blood, poor sinner, and then the blood of the everlasting cove- 
nant is a proof that thou art an heir of heaven. 

4, Lastly, the blood stands in a relationship ¢o all three, and 
here I may add, that the blood is the glory of all. To the Son, 
it is the fulfilment; to the Father, the bond; to the sin- 
ner, the evidence, and to all—Father, Son and sinner—it is 
the common glory and the common boast. In. this the Father 
is well pleased; in this the Son also, with joy, looks down and 
_sees the purchase of his agonies—and in this must the sinner 
ever find his comfort and his everlasting song—“ Jesus, thy blood 
and righteousness are my glory, my song, forever and ever !” 

And now, my dear hearers, I have one question to ask, and | 
have done. Have you the hope that you are in the covenant? 
Have you put your trust in the blood? Remember, though you 
imagine, perhaps, from what I have been saying, that the gospel 
is restricted, that the gospel is freely preached to all. The de- 
cree is limited, but the good news is as wide ag the world. The 
good spell, the good news, is as wide as the universe. I tell it 
to every creature under heaven, because I am told to do so. The 

10* 


226 THE BLOOD OF THE COVENANT. 


secret of God, which is to deal with the application, that is re- 
stricted to God’s chosen ones, but not the message, for that is to 
be proclaimed to all nations. Now, thou hast heard the gospel 
many and many a time in thy life. It runs thus—“This is a 
faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ Jesus 
same into the world to save sinners.” Dost thou believe that ? 
And is this thy hope—something like this: “I am a sinner. 1 
trust Christ has died for me; I put my trust in the merit of his 
blood, and, sink or swim, I have no other hope but this.” 

Thou hast heard it; hast thou received it in thy heart, and 
laid hold on it? then thou art one of those in the covenant. And 
why should election frighten thee? If thou .hast chosen Christ, 
depend upon it he has chosen thee. ¥ thy tearful eye is looking 
to him, then his omniscient eye has long looked on thee; if thy 
heart lovest him, his heart loves thee better than ever thou canst 
ove; and if now thou art saying, “ My father, thou shalt be the 
guide of my youth,” I will tell thee a secret—he has been thy 
guide, and has brought thee to be what thou now art, a humble 
seeker, and he will be thy guide and bring thee safe at last. But 
art thou a proud, boastful, free-willer, saying, “1 will repent and 
believe whenever I choose; I have as good a right to be saved 
as anybody, for I do my duty as well as others, and I shall 
doubtless get my reward”—if you are claiming a universal 
atonement, which is to be received at the option of man’s will, 
go and claim it, and you will be disappointed in your claim. 
You will find God will not deal with you on that ground 
at all, but will say, “Get thee hence, I never knew thee. He 
that cometh not to me through the Son, cometh not at all.” | 
believe the man who is not willing to submit to the electing love 
and sovereign grace of God, has great reason to question wheth- 
er he is a Christian at all, for the spirit that kicks against that 
is the spirit of the unhumbled, unrenewed heart. May God 
take away the enmity out of your heart to his own precious 
truth, and reconcile you to it, and then reconcile you to himself 
through tux Boop of his Son, which is the bond and seal of the 
everlasting covenant. Amen. 


SERMON XIV. 


A REVIVAL SERMON. 


Tax Revival Sermon was preached in Exeter Hall, Jan. 28, 
1860, in the midst of a gracious visitation of the Spirit, while 
tokens of still more abundant blessing cheered the sowers and 
the reapers. It was published and widely circulated. The au- 
thor says of it, “The Revival Sermon has met with great ac- 
ceptance from warm hearts, and has therefore had an extensive 
sale.” 


“ Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that the plowman shall overtake 
the reaper, and the treader of grapes him that soweth seed ; and the moun- 
tains shall drop sweet wine, and all the hills shall melt.” —Awos, ix. 18, 


Gon’s promises are not exhausted when they are fulfilled, for 
when once performed, they stand just as good as they did before, 
and we may await a second accomplishment of them. Man’s 
promises even at the best, are like a cistern which holds but a 
temporary supply ; but God’s promises are as a fountain, never 
emptied, ever overflowing, so that you may draw from them the 
whole of that which they apparently contain. and they shall be 
still as full as ever. Hence it is that you will frequently find a 
promise containing both a literal and spiritual meaning. In the 
literal meaning it has already been fulfilled to the letter ; in the 
spiritual meaning it shall also be accomplished, and not a jot or 
tittle of it shall fail. This is true of the particular promise 
which is before us. Originally, as you are aware, the land of 


228 A REVIVAL SERMON. 


Canaan was very fertile; it was a land that flowed with milk 
and honey. Even where no tillage had been exercised upon it 
the land was so fruitful, that the bees who sucked the sweetness 
from the wild flowers produced such masses of honey that the 
very woods were sometimes flooded withit. It was “A land of 
wheat, and barley, and vines, and fig trees, and pomegranates; 4 
land of oil olive, and honey.” » When, however, the children of 
Israel thrust in the ploughshare and began to use the divers arts 
of agriculture, the land became exceedingly fat and fertile, yield- 
ing so much corn, that they could export through the Phoenicians 
both corn, and wine, and oil, even to the pillars of Hercules, so 
that Palestine became, like Egypt, the granary of the nations. 

It is somewhat surprising to find that now the land is barren, 
that its valleys are parched, and that the miserable inhabitants 
gather miserable harvests from the arid soil. Yet the promise 
stands true, that one day Palestine shall be as rich and fruitful as 
ever it was. There be those who understand the matter, who 
assert that if once the rigor of the Turkish rule could be re- 
moved, if men were safe from robbers, it the man who sowed 
could reap, and keep the corn which his own industry had gath- 
ered, the land might yet again laugh in the midst of the nations, 
and become the joyous mother of children. There is no reason 
in the soil for its barrenness. It is simply the neglect that has 
been brought on, from the fact, that when a man has been in- . 
dustrious, his savings are taken from him by the hand of 
rapine, and the very harvest for which he toiled is often reaped 
py another, and his own blood spilt upon the soil. 

But, my dear friends, while this promise will doubtless be 
earried out, and every word of it shall be verified, so that the 
hilltops of that country shall again bear the vine, and the land 
shall flow with wine, yet, i take it, this is more fully a spiritual 
than a temporal promise ; and I think that the beginning of its 
fulfilment is now to be discerned, and we shall see the Lord’s 
good hand upon us, so that the ploughman shall overtake the 
reaper, the mountains shall drop sweet wine, and all the hills 
shall melt. 

First, I shall this morning endeavor to explain my text as a 
promise of revival; secondly, I shall take it as a lesson of doc. 


A REVIVAL SERMON. - 229 


trine; then as a stimulus for Christian exertion ; and I shall 
conclude with a word or two of warning to those whose hearts 
are not given to Christ. 


I, A GREAT PROMISE OF SPIRITUAL REVIVAL. And here, in 
louking attentively at the text, we shall observe several very 
pleasant things. 

1. In the first place, we notice a promise of surprising in- 
gathering. According to the metaphor here used, the harvest 
is to be so great that, before the reapers can have fully gathered 
it in, the ploughman shall begin to plough for the next crop— 
while the abundance of fruit shall be so surprising that before 
the treader of grapes can have trodden out all the juice of the 
vine, the time shall come for sowing seed. One season, by rea- 
son of the abundant fertility, shall run into another. Now you 
all know, beloved, what this means in the church. It prophecies 
that in the Church of Christ we shall see the most abundant in- 
gathering of souls. Pharaoh’s dream has been enacted again in 
the last century. About a hundred years ago, if I may look 
back in my dream, I might have seen seven ears of corn upon 
one stalk, rank and strong ; anon, the time of plenty went away, 
and I have seen, and you have seen, in your own lifetime, the 
seven ears of corn thin and withered in the east wind. The 
seven ears of withered corn have eaten up and devoured the 
seven ears of fat corn, and there has been a sore famine in the 
land. Lo, I see in Whitfield’s time, seven bullocks coming up 
trom the river, fat and well-favoured, and since then we have 
lived to see seven lean kine come up from the same river; and 
lo! the seven lean kine have eaten up the seven fat kine, yet 
have they been nore the better for all that they have eaten. 

We read of such marvellous revivals a hundred years ago, 
that the music of their news has not ceased to ring in our ears ; 
put we have seen, alas, a season of lethargy, of soul-poverty 
among the saints, and of neglect among the ministers of God. 
The product of the seven years has been utterly consumed, and 


the Church has been none the better. Now, I take it, however, 


we are about to see the seven fat years again. God is about te 
send times of surprising fertility to his Church, When a ser- 


230 A REVIVAL SERMON. 


mon has been preached in these modern times, if one sinner has 
been converted by it, we have rejoiced with a suspicious joy ; 
for we have thought it something amazing. But, brethren, 
where we have seen one converted, we may yet see hundreds ; 
where the Word of God has been powerful to scores, it shall be 
blessed to thousands; and where hundreds in past years have 
seen it, nations shall be converted to Christ. There is no reason 
why we should not see all the good that God hath given us mul- 
tiplied a hundred fold; for there is sufficient vigour in the seed 
of the Lord to produce a far more plentiful crop than any we 
have yet gathered. God the Holy Ghost is not stinted in his 
power. When the sower went forth to sow his seed, some of 
it fell on good soil, and it brought forth fruit, some twenty fold, 
some thirty fold, but it is written, “Some a hundred fold.” 
Now, we have been sowing this seed, and thanks be to God, I 
have seen it bring forth twenty and thirty fold; but I do expect 
to see it bring forth a hundred fold. I do trust that our harvest 
shall be so heavy, that while we are taking in the harvest, it 
shall be time to sow again; that prayer meetings shall be suc- 
ceeded by the enquiry of souls as to what they shall do to be 
saved, and ere the enquirers’ meeting shall be done, it shall be 
time again to preach, again to pray; and then, ere that is over, 
there shall be again another influx of ‘souls, the baptismal pool 
shall be again stirred, and hundreds of converted men shall flock 
to Christ. 

Oh! we never can be contented with going on as the churches 
have been during the last twenty years. I would not be censo- 
rious, but solemnly in my own heart I do not believe that the 
rninisters of our churches have been free from the blood of men. 
I would not say a hard word if I did not feel compelled to do it, 
but I am constrained to remind our brethren that let God send 
what revival he may, it will not exonerate them from the 
awfu. guilt that rests upon them of having been idle and 
dilatory during the last twenty years. Let all be saved who 
live now; what about those that have perished while we have 
been sleeping? Let God gather in multitudes of sinners, but 
who shall answer for the blood of those men who have been 
swept into eternity while we have been going on in our canonk 


A REVIVAL SERMON. 23) 


cal fashion, content to go along the path of propriety, and walk 

around the path of dull routine, but never weeping for sinners, 

never agonizing for souls. All the ministers of Christ are not 

awake yet; but the most of them are, There has come a glad 

time of arousing, the trumpet has been set to their mouth, and 

the people have heard the sound also, and times of refreshing 

are come from the presence of the Lord our God; but they 

have not come before they were needed, for much did we re 

quire them ; otherwise surely the Church of Christ would have 
died away into dead formality, and if her name had been re- 
membered, it would have been as a shame and a hissing upon 
the face of the earth. 

2. The promise, then, seems to convey also the idea of amaz- 
ing rapidity. Notice how quickly the crops succeed each other. 
Between the harvest and the ploughing there is a season even in 
our country ; in the east it is a longer period. But here you 
find that no sooner has the reaper ceased his work, or scarce has 
he ceased it, ere the ploughman follows at his heels. This is a 
rapidity that is contrary to the course of nature; still it is quite 
consistent with grace. Our old Baptist churches in the country 
treat young converts with what they call summering and win- 
tering. Any young believer who wants to join the church in 
summer, must wait till the winter, and he is put off from time 
to time, till it is sometimes five or six years before they admit 
him; they want to try him, and see whether he is fit to unite 
with such pious souls as they are. Indeed, among us all there 
is a tendency to imagine that conversion must be a slow work | 
—that as the snail creeps slowly on its way, so must grace move | 
very leisurely in the heart of man. We have come to believe 
that there is more true divinity in stagnant pools than in light. 
ning flashes. We cannot believe for a moment in a quick method 
of travelling to the kingdom of heaven. Every man who goes 
there must go on crutches and limp all the way; but as for the 
swift beasts, as for the chariots whose axles are hot with speed, 
we do not quite understand and comprehend that. 

Now, mark; here is a promise given of a revival, and when 
that revival shall be fulfilled, this will be one ot the signs of it 
—the marvellous growth in grace of those who are converted. 


232 A REVIVAL SERMON. 


The young convert shall that very day come forward to make a 
profession of his faith; perhaps before a week has passed over 
his head you will hear him publicly defending the cause of Christ, 
and ere many months have gone you shall see him standing up 
to tell to others what God has done for his soul. There is no 
need that the pulse of the Church should forever be so slow. 
The Lord can quicken her heart, so that her pulse shall throb as 
rapidly as the pulse of time itself; her floods shall be as the 
rushing of the Kishon when it swept the hosts of Sisera in its 
fury. As the fire from heaven shall the Spirit rush from the 
skies, and as the sacrifice which instantly blazed to heaven, so 
shall the Church burn with holy and glorious ardor. She shall 
no longer drive heavily with her wheels torn away, but as the 
chariot of Jehu, the son of Nimshi, she shall devour the distance 
in her haste. That seems to me to be one of the promises of 
the text—the rapidity of the work of grace, so that the plougher 
shall overtake the reaper. 

3. But a third blessing is very manifest here. Notice the 
activity of labor which is mentioned in the text. God does not 
promise that there shall be fruitful crops without labor; but 
here we find mention made of ploughmen, reapers, treaders of 
grapes, and sowers of seed; and all these persons are girt with 
singular energy. The ploughman does not wait, because, saith 
he, the season has not yet come for me to plough; but seeing 
that God is blessing the land, he has his plough ready, and no 
sooner is one harvest shouted home than he is ready to plough 
again. And so with the sower; he has not to prepare his basket 
and to collect his seed; but while he hears the shouts of the vin- 
tage, he is ready to go out to work. 

Now, my brethren, one sign of a true revival, and, indeed, ar 
essential part of it, is the increased activity o. God’s laborers 
Why, time was when our ministers thought that preaching 
twice on Sunday was the hardest work to which a man could be 
exposed. Poor souls, they could not think of preaching on a 
week-day! or if there was once a lecture, they had bronchitis, 
were obliged to go to Jerusalem, and lay by, for they would 
soon be dead if they were to work too hard. I never believed 
in the hard work of preaching yet. We find ourselves able te 


A REVIVAL SERMON. 233 


preach ten or twelve times a week, and find that we are the 
stronger for it; that, in fact, it is the healthiest and most blessed 
exercise in the world. But the cry used to be, that our mainis- 
ters were hardly done by; they were to be pampered and laid 
aside, done up in velvet, and only to be brought out to do a little 
work occasionally, and then be pitied when the task was over. 
Ido not hear anything of that now-a-days. I meet with my 
brethren in the ministry who are able to preach day after day, 
and are not half so fatigued as they were; and I saw a brother 
minister this week who has been having meetings in his church 
every day, and the people have been so earnest that they will 
keep him very often from six o’clock in the evening to two in 
the morning. “Oh!” said one of the members, “ our minister 
will kill himself.’ “ Not he,” said I, “that is the kind of work 
that will kill no man. It is preaching to a sleepy congregation 
that kills good ministers, but not preaching to earnest people.” 
So, when I saw him, his eyes were sparkling, and I said to him, 
“Brother, you don’t look like a man who is being killed.” 
“Killed! my brother,” said he; “why I am living twice as 
much as I did before; I was never so happy, never so hearty, 
never so well.” Said he, “I sometimes lack my rest, and want 
my sleep, when my people keep me up so late; but it will never 
hurt me. Indeed,” he said, “I should like to die of such a disease 
as that—the disease of being so greatly blessed.” There was a 
specimen before me of the ploughman who overtook the reaper; 
of one who sowed seed, who was treading on the heels of the 
men who were gathering in the vintage. 

And the like activity we have lived to see in the Church of 
Christ. Did you ever know so much doing in the Christian 
world before? There are grey-headed men around me who have 
known the Church of Christ sixty years, and I think they can 
bear me witness that they never knew such life, such vigor and 
activity as there is at present. Everybody seems to have a 
mission, and everybody is doing it. There may be a great 
many sluggards, but they do not come across my path now. I 
used to be always kicking at them, and always being kicked for 
doing so. But now there is nothing to kick at—every one is at 
work—Church of England, Independents, Methodists, and Bap- 


234 A REVIVAL SERMON. 


tists—there is not a single squadron that is behindhand; they 
have all their guns ready, and are standing shoulder to shoulder, 
ready to make a tremendous charge against the common enemy. 
This leads me to hops, since I see the activity of God’s plough- 
men and vine-dressers, that there is a great revival coming—that 
God will bless us, and that right early. 

4, We have not yet, however, exhausted our text. The lat- 
ter part of it says, “The mountains shall drop sweet wine.” It 
is not a likely place for wine upon the mountains. There may 
be freshets and cataracts leaping down their sides; but whoever 
saw fountains of red wine streaming from rocks, or gushing out 
from the hills? Yet here we are told that, “The mountains 
shall drop sweet wine;” by which We are to understand that 
conversions shall take place in unusual quarters. Brethren, this 
day is this promise literally fulfilled to us. I have this week 
seen what I never saw before. It has been my lot these last six 
years to preach to crowded congregations, and to see many, 
many souls brought to Christ; it has been no unusual thing for 
us to see the greatest. and noblest of the land listening to the 
word of God; but this week I have seen, I repeat, what mine 
eyes have never before beheld, used as I am to extraordinary 
things. Ihave seen the people of Dublin, without exception, 
from the highest to the lowest, crowd in to hear the gospel. I 
have known that my congregation has been constituted in a con 
siderable measure of Roman Catholics, and I have seen them 
listening to the Word with as much attention as though they 
had been Protestants. I have seen men who never heard 
the gospel before, military men, whose tastes and habits were 
not likely to be those of the Puritanic minister, who have never- 
theless sat to listen; nay, they have come again—have made it 
a point to find the place where they could hear the best—have 
submitted to be crowded, that they might hear the Word, and 1 
have never before seen such intense eagerness of the people to 
listen to the gospel. 

I have heard, too, cheering news of work going on in the most 
unlikely quarters—men who could not speak without larding 
their conversation richly with oaths—have nevertheless come to 
hear the Word; they have listened, and have been convinced, 


4 REVIVAL SERMON. 235° 


and if the impression does not die away, there has been A 
done for them which they will not forget even in eternity. But 
the most pleasing thing I have seen is this, and J must tell it to 
you. Hervey once said, “ Each floating ship, a floating hell.” 
Of all classes of men, the sailor has been supposed to be the man 
least likely to be reached by the gospel. In crossing over from 
Holyhead to Dublin and back—two excessively rough passages— 
I spent the most pleasant hours that I ever spent. The first 
vessel that I entered, I found my hands very heartily shaken by 
the sailors. I thought, “ What can these sailors know of me?” 
and they were calling me “brother.” Of course, I felt that I was 
their brother too; but I did not know how they came to talk to 
me in that way. It was not generally the way for sailors to 
call ministers “ brother.” There was the most officious attention 
given, and when I made the inquiry, “ What makes you so 
kind?” “Why,” said one, “because I love your Master, the 
Lord Jesus.” I inquired, and found that out of the whole crew 
there were but three unconverted men; that though the most of 
them had been before without God, and without Christ, yet by 
a sudden visitation of the Spirit of God they had all been con- 
verted. I talked to many of these men, and more spiritual, 
heavenly-minded men I never yet saw. They have a prayer- 
meeting every morning before the boat starts, and another 
prayer-meeting after she comes to port; and on Sundays, when 
they lay-to off Kingstown or Holyhead, a minister comes on 
board and preaches the gospel ; the cabins are crowded ; service 
is held on deck when it can be; and, said an eye-witness to me, 
“The minister preaches very earnestly, but I should like you to 
hear the men pray; I never heard such praying before,” said he, 
“they pray with such power as only a sailor can pray.” My 
heart was lifted up with joy, to think of a ship being made a 
floating church—a very Bethel for God. 

When I came back by another ship I did not expect to see the 
like; but it was precisely the same. The same work had been 
going on. I walked among them and talked to them. They all 
knew me. One man took out of his pocket an old leather 
covered book in Welsh—‘Do you know the likeness of that 
mean in front?” said he, “Yes,” I said, “? think I do: do you 


236 A REVIVAL SERMON. 


read these sermons!” “Yes, sir,” replied he, “we have had 
your sermons on board this ship, and I read them aloud as often 
asIcan. If we have a fine passage coming over,I get a few 
around me, and read them a sermon.” Another man told me a 
story of a gentleman who stood laughing when a hymn was 
being sung; and one of the men proposed that they should 
pray for him. They did,and that man was suddenly smitten 
down, and began on the quay to cry for mercy, and plead with 
God for pardon. “Ah! Sir,” said the sailors, “we have the 
best proof that there is a God here, for we have seen this crew 
marvellously brought to a knowledge of the truth; and here we 
are, joyful and happy men, serving the Lord.” 

Now, what shall we say of this, but that the mountains drop 
sweet wine? The men who were loudest with their oaths, are 
now loudest with their songs; those who were the most darling 
children of Satan, have become the most earnest advocates of 
the truth: for mark you, once get sailors converted, and there 
is no end to the good they can do. Of all men who ean preach 
well, sailors are the best. The sailor has seen the wonders of 
God in the deep; the hardy Tar has got a heart that is not 
made of such cold stuff as many of the hearts of landsmen; 
and when that heart is once touched, it gives great big beats ; it 
sends great pulses of energy right through his whole frame ; 
and with his zeal and energy what may he not do, God helping 
him and blessing him. 

5. This seems to be in the text—that a time of revival shall 

be followed by very extraordinary conversion. But albeit that 
’ in the time of revival, grace is put in extraordinary places, and - 
singular individuals are converted, yet these are not a bit behind | 
the usual converts; for if you notice the text does not say, “the 
mountains shall drop wine” merely, but they “shall drop sweet 
wine.” It does not say that the hills shall send forth little 
streams; but all the hills shall melt. When sinners, profligate 
and debauched persons, are converted to God, we say, “Well, 
it is a wonderful thing, but I do not suppose they will be very 
first class Christians.” The most wonderful thing is, that these 
are the best Christians alive; that the wine which God brings 
from the hills is sweet wine that when the hills do melt they 


A REVIVAL SERMON, 537 


all melt. The most extraordinary ministers of any time, have 
been most extraordinary sinners before conversion. 

We might never have had a John Bunyan, if it had not have 
been for the profanity of Elstow Green; we might never have 
heard of a John Newton, if it had not have been for his wicked- 
ness on shipboard. I mean he would not have known the depths 
of Satan, nor the trying experience, nor even the power of divine 
grace, if he had not been suffered wildly to stray, and then won 
drously to be brought back. These great sinners are not 3 whit 
behind those who have been trained under pious influences, and 
so have been brought into the Church. Always in revival you 
will find this to be the case, that the converts are not inferior to 
the best of the converts of ordinary seasons—that the Roman- 
ist, and the men who have never heard the gospel, when they 
are converted, are as true in their faith, as hearty in their love, 
as accurate in their knowledge, and as zealous in their efforts, as 
the best of persons who have ever been brought to Christ. “The 
mountains shall drop sweet wine, and all the hills shall melt.” 


IJ. WHat IS THE DOCTRINAL LESSON WHICH I8 TAUGHT IX OUR 
TEXT: AND WHAT IS TAUGHT TO US BY A REVIVAL? [I think it is 
just this,—that God is absolute monarch of the hearts of men. 
God does not say here if men are willing ; but he gives an ab- 
solute promise of a blessing As much as to say, “J have the 
key of men’s hearts; J.can induce the ploughman to overtake 
the reaper; Jam master of the soil—however hard and rocky 
it may be J can break it, and J can make it fruitful.’ When 
God promises to bless his Church and to save sinners, he does 
not add, “if the sinners be willing to be saved?” No, great 
God! thou leadest free will in sweet captivity, and thy free 
grace is all triumphant. Man has a free will, and God does not 
violate it; but the free will is sweetly bound with fetters of the 
divine love till it becomes more free than it ever was before. 
The Lord, wher he means to save sinners, does not stop to ask 
them whether they mean to be saved, but like a rushing mighty 
wind the divine influence sweeps away every obstacle; the un- 
willing heart bends before the potent gale of grace, and sinners 
that would not yield are made to yield by God. I know this, 


238 A BEVIVAL SERMON. 


if the Lord willed it, there is no man so desperately wicked here 
this morning, that he would not be made now to seek for mercy, 
however infidel he might be; however rooted in his prejudices 
against the gospel, Jehovah hath but to will it, and it is done. 
into thy dark heart, O thou who hast never seen the light, would 
the light stream; if he did but say, “Let there be light,” there 
would be light. Thou mayst bend thy fist and lift up thy 
mouth against Jehovah; but he is thy master yet—thy master 
to destroy thee, if thou goest on in thy wickedness; but thy 
master to save thee now, to change thy heart and turn thy will, 
as he turneth the rivers of water. 

If it were not for this doctrine, I wonder where the ministry 
would be. Old Adam is too strong for young Melancthon. The 
power of our preaching is nought—it can do nothing in the con- 
version of men by itself; men are Rardened, obdurate, indif- 
ferent; but the power of grace is greater than the power of 
éloquence, or the power of earnestness, and once let that power 
be put forth, and what can stand against it? Divine Omnipo- 
tence is the doctrine of a revival. We may not see it in ordi- 
nary days, by reason of the coldness of our hearts ; but we must 
see it when these extraordinary works of grace are wrought. 
Have you never heard the Eastern fables of the dervish, who 
wished to teach a young prince the existence of a God! The 
young prince could not see any proof of the Existence of a 
First Cause: so the dervish brought a little plant and set it 
before him, and in his sight that little plant grew up, blossomed, 
brought forth fruit, and became a towering tree in an hour. The 
young man lifted up his hands in wonder, and he said, “God 
must have done this.” “Oh, but,” said the teacher, thou sayest, 
“God has done this, because it is done in an hour: hath he not 
done it, when it is accomplished in twenty years?” It was the 
same work in both cases; it was only the rapidity that aston- 
ished his pupil. 

So, brethren, when we see the Church gradually built up and 
converted, we lose the sense perhaps of a present God; but 
when the Lord causes the tree suddenly to grow from a sapling 
to a strong tall monarch of the forest, then we say, “ This is 
God.” ‘We are all blind and stupid in a measure, and we want 


A REVIVAL SERMON. 239 


to see these quick upgoings, these extraordinary motions of 
divine influence, before we will fully understand God’s power. 
Learn, then, O Church of God to-day, this great lesson of the 
nothingness of man, and the Eternal All of God. Learn, dis- 
ciples of Jesus, to rest on him: look for your success to his 
power, and while you make your efforts, trust not in your ef- 
forts, but in the Lord Jehovah. If ye have progressed slowly, 
give him thanks for progress: but if now he pleases to give 
you a marvellous increase, multiply your songs, and sing unto 
him that worketh all things according to the counsel of his will. 


lil. I now desire to make the text A STIMULUS FOR FURTHER 
EXERTION. 

The duty of the Church is not to be measured by her success. 
It is as much the minister’s duty to preach the gospel in adverse 
times as in propitious seasons. We are not to think, if God 
withholds the dew, that we are to withhold the plough. We 
are not to imagine that, if unfruitful seasons come, we are there- 
fore to cease from sowing our seed. The Church has to do her 
duty, even though that duty should bring her no present reward. 
“If they hear thee not, Son of Man, if they perish, they shall 
perish, but their blood will I not require at thine hands.” If we 
sow the seed, and the birds of the air devour it, we have done 
what we were commanded to do, and the duty is accepted even 
though the birds devour the seed. We may expect to see a 
blessed result, but even if it did not come, we must not cease 
from duty. But while this is true so far, it must nevertheless 
be a divine and holy stimulant to a gospel laborer, to know that 
God is making him successful. And in the present day we have 
a better prospect of success than we ever had, and we should 
consequently work the harder. 

‘When a tradesman begins business with a little shop at the 
corner, he waits awhile to see whether he will have any custorn- 
ers. By-and-bye his little snop is crowded; he has a name; 
he finds he is making money. What does he do? He enlarges 
his premises ; the back yard is taken in and covered over; there 
are extra men employed; still the business increases, but he will 
nct invest all his capital in it till he sees to what extent it will 


240 A REVIVAL SERMON. 


pay. It still increases, and the next house is taken, and perhaps 
the next: he says, “This is a paying concern, and therefore I~ 
will increase it.” My dear friends, I am using commercial max- 
ims, but they are common-sense rules. There are, in these days, 
happy opportunities. There is a noble business to be done for 
Christ, Where you used to invest a little capital, a little effort, 
and a little donation, invest more. There never was such heavy 
interest to be made as now. It shall be paid back in the re 
sults cent. per cent.; nay, beyond all that you expected, you 
shall see God’s work prospering. If a farmer knew that a bad 
year was coming, he would perhaps only sow an acre or two; 
but if some prophet could tell him, “Farmer, there will be such 
a harvest next year as there never was,” he would say, “I will 
plough up my grass lands, I will stub up those hedges: every 
inch of ground I will sow.” So do you. There is a wondrous 
harvest coming. Plough up your headlands; root up your 
hedges; break up your fallow ground, and sow, even amongst 
the thorns. Ye know not which shall prosper, this or that; but 
ye may hope that they shall be alike good. Enlarged effort 
should always follow an increased hope of success. 

Let me give you another encouragement. Recollect that even 
when this revival comes, an instrumentality will still be wanted. 
The ploughman is wanted, even after the harvest, and the tread- 
er of grapes is wanted, however plentiful the vintage; the great- 
er the success the more need of instrumentality. They began 
at first to think in the North of Ireland that they could do with- 
out ministers; but now that the gospel is spread, never was 
there such a demand for the preachers of the gospel as now. 
Proudly men said in their hearts, “God has done this without 
the intervention of man.” _I say, they said it proudly, for there 
is such a thing as proud humility; but God made them stoop. 
He made them see that, after all, he would bless the Word 
through his servants—that he would make the ministers of God 
“mighty to the pulling down of strongholds.” Brothers and 
sisters, you need not think that if better times should come, the 
world will do without you. You will be wanted. “A man 
shall be precious as the gold of Ophir.” They shall take hold 
of your skirts, and they shall say, “ ‘Tell us what we must do 


A REVIVAL SERMON. 241 


to be saved.” They shall come to your house; they shall ask 
your prayers; they shall demand your instructions; and you 
shall find the meanest of the flock become precious as a wedge 
of gold. The ploughman shall never be so much esteemed as 
when he follows after the reaper, and the sower of seed never so 
much valued as when he comes at the heels of those that tread 
the grapes. The glory which God puts upon instrumentality 
should encourage you to use it. 

And now I beseech you, my dear hearers, inhabitants of this 
great City, let not this auspicious gale pass away without singu- 
lar effort. I sometimes fear lest the wind should blow on us, 
and we should have our sails all furled, and the good ship should 
not speed. Up with the canvas,now. Oh! put on every stitch 
of it. Let every effort be used, while God is helping us. Let 
us be earnest co-workers with him. Methinks I see the clouds 
floating hither ; they have come from the far west, from the shore 
of America; they have crossed the sea, and the wind has wafted 
them till the green isle received the showers in its northern ex- 
tremity. Lo! the clouds are just now passing over Wales, and 
are refreshing the shires that border on the principality. The 
rain is falling on Oxfordshire and Gloucestershire, divine grace 
is distilling, and the clouds are drawing nearer and nearer to 
us. Mark, my brethren, they tarry not for men, neither stay 
they for the sons of men. They are floating o’er our heads to- 
day. Shall they float away, and shall we still be left as dry as 
ever. Tis yours to bring down the rain, though ’tis God’s to 
send the clouds. 

God has sent this day, over this great city, a divine cloud of 
his grace. Now, ye Elijahs, pray it down! To your knees, be 
lievers, to your knees. You can bring it down, and only you. 
“For this thing will ] be enquired of by the house of Israel, to 
do it for them.” “Prove me now herewith,” saith the Lord of 
hosts, “and see if 1 will not open the windows of heaven, and 
give you such a blessing that you shall not have room to contain 
it.” Will you lose the opportunity, Christians? Will you let 
men be lost for want of effort? Will you suffer this all-blessed 
time to roll away unimproved? If so, the Church of one thou- 
sand eight hundred and sixty is a craven Church, and is unworthy 

11 


242 A REVIVAL SERMOX. 


of its time; and he among you, men and brethren, that has not 
an earnest heart to-day, if he be a Christian, is a disgrace to his 
Christianity. When there are such times as these, if we do not 
every man of us thrust in the plough, we shall indecd deserve the 
worst barrenness of soul that can possibly fall upon us. I believe 
that the Church has often been plagued and vexed by her God, be 
cause when God has favored her she has not made a proper use 
of the favor. “Then,” saith he, “I will make thee like Gilboa; 
on thy mount there shall be no dew; | will bid the clouds that 
they rain no more rain upon thee; and thou shalt be barren and 
desolate, till once again I pour out the Spirit from on high. Let 
us spend this week in special prayer. Let us meet together as 
often as we can, and plead at the throne; and each man of you 
in private be mighty with your God, and in public be diligent in 
your efforts to bring your fellow-men to Christ. 


IV. Let me utter one worp oy warnine to those of you who 
know not Christ. 

I am aware that I have many here on Sabbath mornings who 
never were in the habit of attending a place of worship at all. 
There is many a gentleman here to-day, who would be ashamed in 
any society, to confess himself a professor of religion. He has 
never, perhaps for along time, heard the gospel preached, and now 
there is a strange sort of fascination that has drawn him here. 
He came the first time out of curiosity—perhaps to make a joke 
at the minister’s expense ; he has found himself enthralled ; he 
does not know how it is, but he has been all this week uneasy, 
he has been wanting to come again, and when he goes away to- 
day, he will be watching for next Sabbath. He has not given 
up his sins, but some how they are not so pleasurable as they 
used to be. He cannot swear as he did; if an oath comes out, 
it dves not roll out in the round form it used to do; he knows 
better now. Now, it is to such persons that Ispeak. My dear 
friends, allow me to express my hearty joy that you are here, 
and let me also express the hope that you are here for a purpose 
you do not as yet understand. God has a special favor to you, I 
trust, and therefore he has brought you here. I have frequently 
remarked, that in any revival of religion, it is not often the chil, 


* A REVIVAL SERMOX. 243 


dren of pious parents that are brought in, but those who never 
knew anything of Christ before. The ordinary means are usu- 
ally blessed to those who constantly attend them ; but the ex- 
press effort, and the extraordinary influence of the Spirit, reach 
those who were outside the pale of nominal Christians, and made 
no profession of religion. 

I am in hopes it may meet you. But if you should despise 
the Word which you have heard; if the impression that has been 
made—and you know it has been made—should die away, one 
of the most awful regrets you will ever have when you come to 
your right sense and reason in another world, will be the feeling 
that you had an opportunity but that you neglected it. I cannot 
conceive a more doleful wail than that of the man who cries at 
last in hell, “The harvest is past—there was a harvest—the sum- 
mer is ended—there was a summer—and I am not saved.” Te 
go to perdition in ordinary times is hell; but to go from under 
the sound of an earnest ministry, where you are bidden to come 
to Christ, where you are entreated with honest tears to come to 
Jesus—to go there after you have been warned, is to go not to 
hell merely, but ¢o the very hell of hell. Oh! my dear hearer, 
this is a solemn time with you. I pray that God the Holy Spirit 
may remind you that it may be now or never with you. You 
may never have another warning, or, if you have it, you may 
grow so hardened that you may laugh at it and despise it. 
My brother, I beseech thee, by thine own immortal welfare, stop 
and think now whether it be worth while to throw away the hal- 
lowed opportunity which is now presented to thee. Wilt thou 
go and dance away thine impressions, or laugh them out of thy 
soul? Ah! man, thou mayest laugh thyself into hell, but thou 
canst not laugh thyself out of it. 

There is a turning point in each man’s life, when his character 
becomes fixed and settled. That turning point may be to-day. 
It may be that there shall be some solemn seat in this hall, which, 
if a man knew its history, he would never sit in it—a seat in 
which a man shall sit and hear the Word, and shall say, “T will 
not yield; I will resist the impression ; I will despise it; I will 
have my sins, even if I am lost for them.” Mark your seat, 
friend, before you go; make a blood-red stain across it, that 


244 A REVIVAL SERMON. 


next time we come here we may say, “ Here a soul destroyed it- 
self.” But I pray the rather that God the Holy Spirit may 
sweetly whisper in thy heart—“ Man, yield, for Jesus invites 
thee to come to him.” Oh, may my Master smile into your 
face this morning, and say, “I love thy soul—trust me with it. 
Give up thy sins—turn to me.” O Lord Jesus, do it! and men 
shall not resist thee. Oh! show them thy love, and they must 
yield. Do it, O thou Crucified One, for thy mercy’s sake! Send 
forth thine Holy Spirit now, and bring the strangers home; and 
in this hall, grant thou, O Lord, that many hearts may be fully 
resigned to thy love, and to thy grace! Awan. 


SERMON XV. 


SIN IMMEASURABLE. 


{Tux fearful nature, and the limitless extent of sin, are com 
siderations which abundantly justify the fearful punishment with 
which it is threatened. This subject is specially commended to 
those who think sin a trifle, and its penalty too severe. The 
discourse was delivered in Exeter Hall, Feb. 12, 1860, and 
shows the preacher’s method of treating a difficult but most im- 
portant doctrinal truth.] 


“Who can understand his errors.” —Psatm xix. 18 


Waar we know is small when compared with what we 
know not. The sea of wisdom has cast up a shell or two upon 
our shore, but its vast depths have never known the footstep of 
the searcher. Even in natural things we know but the surface 
of matters. He that has travelled the wide world over, and has 
descended into its deepest mines, must yet be aware that he has 
viewed but a part of the mere crust of this world; that as for 
its vast centre, its mysterious fires and molten secrets, the 
mind of man hath not as yet conceived them. The astronomer 
will tell you that the undiscovered stars, the vast mass of 
worlds form the milky way, and the abundant nebulsee—those 
grand clusters of unknown worlds, as infinitely exceed the little 
we can explore, as a mountain exceeds a grain of sand. All 
the knowledge which the wisest men can possibly attain in s 
whole lifetime, is no more than what the child may take up 


246 SIN IMMEASURABLE, 


from the sea with his tiny cup, compared with the boundless 
waters which fill their channels to the brim. Why, when we 
are wisest, we have but come to the threshold of knowledge, we 
have taken but one step in that race of discovery which we may 
have to pursue throughout all eternity. This is equally the 
case with regard to those spiritual things which concern man. 
We see nothing but the surface. Whether I talk to you of God, 
of his attributes, of Christ, of his atonement, or of ourselves and 
our sin, I must confess that as yet we know nothing but the ex- 
terior; we cannot comprehend the length, the breadth, the 
height of any one of these matters. 

The subject of this morning—our own sin, and the error of 
our own heart, is one which we sometimes think we know, but 
of which we may always be quite sure that we have only begun 
to learn, and that when we have have learned the most we shall 
ever know on earth, the question will still be pertinent, “Who 
can understand his errors ?” 

This morning I propose first of all, to explain the question ; 
then to impress it upon our hearts; and lastly we will learn the 
lessons which it would teach we. 


I. First, then, let me expLans THE quesTion.—“ Who can 
understand his errors ?” 

We all acknowledge that we have errors. Surely we are not 
so proud as to imagine ourselves to be perfect. If we pretend 
to perfection we are utterly ignorant, for every profession of 
human perfection arises from perfect ignorance. Any notion 
that we are free from sin should at once discover to us that we 
abound in it. To vindicate my boast of perfection, I must deny 
the Word of God, forget the law, and exalt myself above the 
testimony of truth. Therefore, I say, we are willing to confess 
that we have many errors, yet who amongst us can understand 
them? Who knows precisely how far a thing may be an error 
which we imagine to be a virtue? Who among us can define 
how much of iniquity is mingled with our uprightness—how 
much of unrighteousness with our righteousness? Who is able to 
detect the component parts of every action, so as to see the 
proportion of motive which would constitute it right or wrong ? 


GIN IMMEASURABLE. gar 


He were indeed a crafty man who should be able to anglise an 

action and divide it into three essential elements which are ite 
- component parts. Where we think we are right, who knows 
but that we may be wrong? Where even with the strictest scru- 
tiny we have arrived at the conclusion that we have done a good 
thing, who among us is quite sure that he has not been mis- 
taken? May not the apparent good be so marred with evil 
motives as to become a real evil ? 

Who again can understand his errors, so as always to detect 
a fault when it has been committed? The shades of evil are 
perceptible to God, but not always perceptible tc us. Our eye 
has been so blinded by the fall, the absolute black of sin we can 
detect, but the shades of its darkness we are unable to discern. 
And yet the slightest shadow of sin is perceptible to God, and 
that very shade divides us from the Perfect One, and causes us 
to be guilty of sin. Who amongst us has that keen method of 
judging himself, so that he shall be able to discover the first 
trace of evil? ‘ Who can understand his errors?’ Surely no 
man will claim a wisdom so profound as this. 

But to come to more common matters, by which perhaps we 
may the more understand our text. Who can understand the 
number of his errors? ‘The mightiest mind could not count 
the sins of a single day. As the multitude of sparks from a 
furnace, so innumerable are the iniquities of one day. We 
might sooner tell the grains of sand on the sea-shore, than the 
iniquities of one man’s life. A life most purged and pure is 
still as full of sin as the sea is full of salt. And who is he that 
can weigh the salt of the sea, or can detect it as it mingles with 
every fluid particle? But if he could do this, he could not tell 
how vast an amount of evil saturates our entire life, and how 
innumerable are those deeds, and thoughts, and words of diso- 
bedience, which have cast us out from the presence of God, and 
caused him to abhor the creatures which his own hands have 
made. 

Again, even if we could tell the number of human sins, who, 
in the next place, could estimate their guilt? Before God’s 
mind the guilt of one sin, and such an one as we foolishly call a 
little one—the guilt of one sin merits his eternal displeasure. 


AS ’ STW IMMEASURABLE. 


Until that one iniquity be washed out with blood, God cannot 
accept the soul and take it as his own offspring. Though he has 
made man, and is infinitely benevolent, yet his sense of justice 
is so stern, and inflexible, that from his presence he must drive 
out his dearest child if one single sin should remain unforgiven. 
Who then amongst us can tell the guilt of guilt, the heinousness 
of that ungrateful rebellion which man has commenced and <ai- 
ried on against his wise and gracious Creator. Sin, like hell, is 
a bottomless pit! Oh, brethren, there never lived a man yet 
who really knew how guilty he was; for if such a being could 
be fully conscious of all his own guilt, he would carry perdition 
within him. Nay, I often think that scarcely can the lost know 
all the guilt of their iniquity, or else even their furnace might 
be heated seven times hotter, and Tophet’s streams must be en- 
larged to an unmeasurable depth. The hell which is contained 
in a single evil thought is unutterablé and unimaginable. God 
only knows the blackness, the horror of darkness, which is con- 
densed into the thought of evil. 

And then again, | think our text would convey to us this ides. 
Who can understand the peculiar aggravation of his own trans- 
gression? Now, answering the question for myself, I feel that as 
a minister of Christ I cannot understand my errors. Placed 
where multitudes listen to the Word from my lips, my respon- 
sibilities are so tremendous that, the moment I think of them, a 
mountain presses upon my soul. There have been times when 
Ihave wished to imitate Jonah and take ship and flee away from 
the work which God has thrust upon me; for] am conscious 
that I have not served him as I ought. When I have preached 
most earnestly, I go to my chamber and repent that I have 
preached in so heartless a manner. When I have wept over 
your souls, when I have agonized in prayer, I have yet been con- 
scious that I have not wrestled with God as I ought to have 
wrestled, and that I have not felt for your souls as I ought to feel. 
The errors which a man may commit in the ministry are incal- 
oulable. There can be no curse too heavy to be hurled upon 
the head of that man who leads others astray when he ought to 
guide them in the path of peace, or who deals with sacred things 
as if they were matters of no importance. I bring here any 


SIM IMMEASURABLE. 949 


minister of Christ that lives, and ifhe be » man really filled with 
the Holy Spirit, he will tell you that when he is bowed down 
with the solemnity of his office, he would give up the work if he 
dare; that if it were not for something beyond, mysterious im- 
pulses that drive him forward, he would take his hand from the 
plough and leave the field of toil. Lord have mercy upon thy 
ministers, for, beyond all other men, we need mercy. 

And now I single out any member of my congregation, and 
say whatever be your position in life, whatever your education, 
or the peculiar providences through which you have passed, I 
_ will insist upon it that there is something special about your 
case which makes your sin such sin that you cannot understand 
how vile it is. Perhaps you have had a pious mother who wept 
over you in your childhood, and dedicated you to God when 
you were in your cradle. Your sin is doubly sin. There is 
about it a scarlet hue which is not to be discovered in an ordi- 
nary criminal. You have been directed from your youth up in 
the way of righteousness, and if you have gone astray, every 
step you have taken has been not a step to ruin, but a stride 
thither. You do not sin so cheaply as others. Other men’s 
scores run up fast; but where there are pence put down for 
other sinners there are pounds put down for you, because you 
know your duty but you do it not. He that breaks through a 
mother’s bosom to hell goes to its lowest depths. 

Or you may never know this to account for; but you may 
have an equal aggravation. You have been at sea, sir. Many 
times you have been in danger of being shipwrecked. You 
have had miraculous escapes. Now, every one of these ship- 
wrecks has been a warning to you. God has brought you to the 
gates of death, and you have promised that if he would but save 
your wretched soul, that you would lead a fresh life—that you 
would begin to serve your Maker. You have lied to your 
God. Your sins, before you uttered that vow, were evil enough; 
but now you break not only the law but your own covenant 
which you voluntarily made with God in the hour of sickness. 
You have, some of you, perhaps, been thrown from a horse, or 
have been attacked by fever, or in other ways have been brought 
to the very gates of the grave. What solemnity is attached to 

11* 


250 SIN IMMEASURABLE. 


your life now! He that rode in the charge at Balaklava, and 
yet came back alive—saved alive where hundreds died—should 
from that time consider himself to be a God’s man, saved by a 
singular Providence for singular ends. But you too have had 
your escapes, if not quite so wonderful, yet certainly quite as 
special instances of God’s goodness. And now, every error you 
commit becomes unutterably wicked, and of you I may say, 
“Who can understand his errors ?” 

But I might exhaust the congregation by bringing up one by 
one. Here comes the father. Sir, your sins will be imitated 
by your children. You cannot, therefore, understand your er- 
rors, because they are sins against your own offspring—sins 
against the children that have sprung from your own loins. 
Here is the magistrate. Sir, your sins are of a peculiar dye, 
because, standing in your position, your character 1s watched 
and looked up to, and whatever you do becomes the excuse of 
other men. I bring up another man who holds no office in 
the state whatever, and who, perhaps, is little known among 
men. But, sir, you have received special grace from God, 
you have had rich enjoyment of the light of your Saviour’s 
countenance; you have been poor, but he has made you rich— 
rich in faith. Now, when you rebel against him, the sins of 
God’s favorites are sins indeed. Iniquities committed by the 
people of God become as huge as high Olympus, and reach the 
very stars. Who among us, then, can understand his errors; 
their special aggravations, their number, and their guilt? Lord 
search thou us and know our ways! 


II. Now I come to THE IMPRESSING OF IT ON THE HEART, &8 
God the Holy Spirit shall help me. 

Before a man could understand his errors there are several 
mysteries which he must know. But each one of these myste- 
ries, methinks, is beyond his knowledge, and consequently the 
understanding of the whole depth of the guilt of his sin must be 
quite beyond human power. Now, the first mystery that man 
must understand is the fall. Until I know how much all my 
powers are debased and depraved, how thoroughly my will is 
perverted and my judgment turned from its right channel, how 


SIM IMMEASURABLE. 251 


really and essentially vicious my nature has become, it cannot 
be possible for me to know the whole extent of my guilt. 
Here is a piece of iron laid upon the anvil. The hammers are 
plied upon it lustily. A thousand sparks are scattered on every 
side. Suppose it possible .o count each spark as it falls from 
the anvil; yet who could guess the number of the unborn sparks 
that still lie latent and hidden ix the mass of iron? Now, breth- 
ren, your sinful nature may be compared to that heated bar o 
iron. Temptations are the hammers; your sins the sparks. If 
you could count them (which you cannot do) yet who could tell 
the multitude of unborn iniquities—germs of sin that lie slum- 
bering in your souls? Yet must you know this betore you 
know the whole sinfulness of your nature. Oar open sins are 
like the farmer’s little sample which he brings to market. There 
are granaries full at home. The iniquities that we see are like 
the weeds upon the surface soil; but I have been told, and, in- 
deed, have seen the truth of it, that if you dig six feet into the 
earth, and turn up fresh soil, there will be found in that soil seeds 
indigenous to the land. And so we are not to think merely of 
the sins that grow on the surtace, but if we could turn our heart 
up to its core and centre, we should find it as fully permeated 
with sin as every piece of putridity is with worms and rotten- 
ness. 

The fact is, that man is a reeking mass of corruption. His 
whole soul is by nature so debased and so depraved, that no 
description which can be given of him even by inspired tongues 
can fully tell how base and vile a thing he is. An ancient writer 
said once of the iniquity within, that it was like the stores of 
water which it is believed are hidden in the depths of the earth, 
God once broke up the fountains of the great deep, and then 
they covered the mountains twenty cubits upward. If God 
should ever withdraw his restraining grace and break up in our 
hearts the whole fountains of the great depths of our iniquity, 
st would be a flood so wondrous, that it would cover the highest 
tops of our hopes, and the whole worle within us would be 
drowned in dread despair. Not a living thing could be found 
in this sea of evil. It would cover all, and swallow up the 
whole of our manhood. Ah! says an old proverb, “If man 


252 Bix IMMEASURABLE. 


could wear his sins on his forehead, he would pull his hat over 
his eyes.” That old’ Roman who said he would like to have 
a window into his heart that every man could see within it, did 
not know himself, for if he had had such a window he would 
soon have begged to have a pair of shutters, and he would have 
kept them closed, I am sure; fcr could he ever have seen his 
own heart, he would have been driven raving mad. God, there- 
fore, spares all eyes but his own that desperate sight—a naked 
human heart. Great God, here would we pause and cry, “ Be- 
hold, 1 was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother con- 
ceive me. Thou desirest truth in the inward parts, and in the 
hidden part thou shalt make me to know wisdom. Purge me 
with hyssop and I shall be clean; wash me and I shall be whiter 
than snow.” 

A second thing which it will be needful for us to understand 
before we can comprehend our errors is God’s law. If I just 
describe the law for a moment, you will very readily see that 
you can never hope by any means fully to understand it. The 
law of God, as we read it in the ten great commandments, seems 
very simple, very easy. When we come, however, to put even its 
naked precepts into practice, we find that it is quite impossible 
for us fully to keep them. Our amazement, however, increases, 
when we find that the law does not mean merely what it says, 
but that it has a spiritual meaning, « hidden depth of purpose 
which at first sight we do not discover. For instance, the com- 
mandment, “Thou shalt not commit adultery,” means more 
than the mere act—refers to fornication and uncleanness of any 
shape, both in act, and word, and thought. Nay, to use our 
Saviour’s own exposition of it, “He that looketh upon a woman 
to lust after her, committeth adultery already with her in his 
heart.” So with every commandment. The bare letter is noth- 
ing, compared with the whole stupendous meaning and severe 
strictness of the rule. 

The commandments, if I may so speak, are like the stars. 
When seen with the naked eye, they appear to be brilliant 
points ; if we could draw near to them, we should see them to 
be infinite worlds, greater than even our sun, stupendous though 
it is. So is it with the law of God. It seems to be but a lum 


SIN IMMEASURABLE. 253 


tnous point, because we see it at a distance, but when we come 
nearer where Christ stood, and estimate the law as he saw it, 
then we find it is vast, immeasurable. “The commandment is 
exceeding broad.” Think then for a moment of the spirituasity 
of the law, its extent and strictness. The law of Moses con- 
demns for offence, without hope of pardon, and sin, like a mill 
stone, is bound around the sinner’s neck, and he is cast into the 
depths. Nay, the law deals with sins of thought,—the imagin- 
ation of evil is sin. The transit of sin across the heart leaves 
the stain of impurity behind it. This law, too, extends to every 
act,—tracks us to our bed-chamber, goes with us to our house 
of prayer, and if it discovers so much as the least sign of waver 
ing from the strict path of integrity, it condemns us. When we 
think of the law of God we may well be overwhelmed with 
horror, and sit down and say, “God be merciful to me, for to 
keep this law is utterly beyond power; even to know the ful- 
ness of its meaning is not within finite capacity. Therefore 
great God cleanse us from our secret faults—save us by thy 
grace, for by the law we never can be saved.” 

Nor yet, even if you should know these two things, should 
you be able to answer this question ; for, to comprehend our 
own errors, we must be able to understand the perfection of 
God. To geta full idea of how black sin is, you must know how 
bright God is. We see things by contrast. You will at one 
time have pointed out to you a color which appears perfectly 
white; yet it is possible for something to be whiter still; and 
when you think you have arrived at the very perfection of 
whiteness, you discover that there is still a shade, and that 
something may be found that is blanched to a higher state of 
purity. When we put ourselves in comparison with the apos- 
tles, we discover that we are not what we should be; but if we 
could bring ourselves side by side with the purity of God, O 
what spots! what defilements should we find on our surface ! 
while the Immaculate God stands before us as the bright back- 
ground to set out the blackness of our iniquitous souls. Ere 
thou canst know thine own defilement those eyes must look into 
the unutterable glory of the divine character. Him before 
whom the heavens are not pure—who chargeth the angels with 


254 SIN IMMEASURABLE. 


folly—thou must know him before thou canst know thyself 
Hope not, then, that thou shalt ever attain to a perfect knowl- 
edge of the depths of thine own sin. 

Again: he that would understand his errors in all their hein- 
ousness must know the mystery of hell. We must walk that 
burning marl, stand in the midst of the blazing flame; nay, 
feel it. We must feel the venom of destruction as it makes the 
blood boil in each vein. We must find our nerves converted 
into fiery roads, along which the hot feet of pain shall travel, 
hurrying with lightning pace. We must know the extent of 
eternity, and then the unutterable agony of that wrath which 
abides on the souls of the lost, before we can know the awful 
character of sin. You may best measure the sin by the punish. 
ment. Depend upon it, God will not put his creatures to a sin- 
gle pang more than justice absolutely demands. There is no 
such thing as sovereign torture or sovereign hell. God does 
not stretch his creature on the rack like a tyrant; he will give 
him but what he deserves, and, perhaps, even when God’s wrath 
is fiercest against sin, he does not punish the sinner so much as 
his sin might warrant, but only as much as it demands. At any 
rate, there will not be a grain more of wormwood in the cup of 
the lost than naked justice absolutely requires. Then, O my God! 
if thy creatures are to be cast into a lake that burneth with fire and 
brimstone—if into a pit that is bottomless lost souls must be 
driven, then what a hideous thing sin must be. I cannot under- 
stand that torture, therefore I cannot understand the guilt that 
deserves it. Yet am I conscious that my guilt deserved it, or 
else God would not have threatened me with it, for he is just 
and I 2m unjust; he is holy and righteous, and good, and he 
would not punish me more for my sin than my sin absolutely 
required. 

Yet once more—a last endeavor to impress this question of 
my text upun our hearts, George Herbert saith very sweetly . 
—“ He that would know sin let him repair to Olivet, and he 
shall see a man so wrung with pain that all his head, his hair 
his garments bloody be. Sin was that press which forced pair 
to hunt its cruel food through every vein.” You must see 
Christ sweating as it were great drops of blood; you must have 


SIN IMMEASURABLE, 255 


a vision of him with his back torn by the accursed whip; you 
must see him going on his dolorous journey through Jerusalem ; 
you must bebold him fainting under the weight of the cross ; 
you must see him as the nails are driven through his hands and 
through his feet; your tearful eyes must watch the agonies of 
death; you must drink of the bitterness of wormwood mingled 
with tne gall; you must stand in the thick darkness with your 
own soul exceeding sorrowful even unto death; you must cry 
yourself that awful earth-startling ery of “Lama sabachthani ;” 
you too must, as he did, feel all that weight of God’s almighty 
wrath; you must be ground between the upper and nether 
millstones of justice and vengeance; you must drink of the cup 
to its last dregs, and like Jesus ery—“It is finished ;” or else 
you can never know all your errors, and understand the guilt of 
your sin. But this is clearly impossible. Who wishes to suf 
fer, as the Saviour suffered, ‘all the horrors which he endured 4 
He, blessed be his name, has suffered for us. The cup is emp- 
tied now. The cross stands up no longer for us to die thereon. 
Quenched is the flame of wrath for every true believer. Now 
no more is God angry with his people, for he has put away sip 
through the sacrifice of himself. Yet | say it again, before we 
could know sin we must know the whole of that awful wrath of 
God which Jesus Christ endured. Who then, can understand 
his errors # 


ill. I hope to have your patient attention but a few moments 
longer while I make THE PRACTICAL APPLICATION, by touching 
upon the lessons which are drawn from such a suvject as this. 

The first lesson is—Behold then the folly of all hope of sal 
vation by our own righteousness. Come hither, ye that trust - 
in yourselves. Look to Sinai, tremble and despair. You say 
that you have good works. Alas, your good works are evil, but 
have you no evil ones? Do you deny that you have ever sin- 
ned? Ah! my hearer, art thou so besotted as to declare that 
thy thoughts have all been chaste, thy desires all heavenly, and 
thine actions all pure? Oh, man, if all this were true, if thou 
hadst no sins of commission, yet, what about thy sins of omis- 
sion? Hast thou done all that God and thy brother could 


256 SIM IMMEASURABLE. 


require of thee? Oh these sins of omission! The hungry that 
you have not fed, the naked that you have noi clothed, the sick 
ones, and those that are in prison, that you have not visited—re 
member, it is for sins like these that the goats are found at the 
left hand at last. Not for what they did do, but for what they 
did not do—the things they left undone—these men were cast - 
into the lake of fire. Oh, my hearer, have done with thy boast- 
ing; pull out those plumes from thine helmet, thou rebellious 
one, and come with thy glory draggling in the mire, and with 
thy bright garment stained, and now confess that thou hast no 
righteousness of thine own—that thou art all unclean and full 
of sin. 

If but this one practical lesson were learned, it were sufficient 
to repay this morning’s gathering, and a blessing would be con- 
veyed to every spirit that had learned\t. But now we come to 
another—how vain are all hopes of salvation by our feelings. 
We have a new legalism to fight with in our Christian Churches. 
There are men and women who think they must not believe on 
Christ till their sins rise to a most agonizing point. They think 
they must feel a certain degree of sorrow, a deep sense of need, 
before they may come to Christ at all. Ah' soul, if thou art 
never saved till thou knowest all thy guilt, thou wilt never be 
saved, for thou canst never know it. I have shown thee the 
utter impossibility of thy ever being able to discover the heights 
and depths of thine own lost state. Man, don’t try to be saved 
by thy feelings. Come and take Christ just as he is, and come 
to him just as thou art. “But, Sir, may Jcome? I am not in- 
vited to come.” Yes you are, “ Whosoever will, let him come.” 
Don’t believe that the invitations of the gospel are given only 
to characters; they are, some of them, unlimited invitations. 
It is the duty of every man to believe on the Lord Jesus Christ. 
It is every man’s solemn duty to trust Christ, not because of 
anything that man is, or is not, but because he is commanded to 
do it. “This is the command cf God, that ye believe on Jesus 
Christ whom he has sent.” 

Trust now in his precious blood, you are saved, and you shall 
see his face in heaven. Despair of being saved by feeling, since 
perfect feelings are impossible, and a perfect knowledge of our 


SIN IMMEASURABLE. 257 


own guilt is quite beyond our reach. Come, then, to Christ, 
hard-hearted as thou art, and take him to be the Saviour of thy 
hard heart. Come, poor stony conscience, poor icy soul, come 
as thou art; he will warm thee, ne will melt thee. 


“True belief, and true repentance, 
Every grace that brings us nigh; 
Without money, 
Come to Jesus Christ and buy.” 


Another sweet inference—and surely this might well be the 
last—is this: what grace is this which pardons sin ?—sin so 
great that the most enlarged capacity cannot comprehend its 
heinousness. Oh! I know my sins reach from the east even to 
the west—that aiming at the eternal skies, they rise like pointed 
mountains towards heaven. But then, blessed be the name of 
God, the blood of Christ is wider than my sin. That shoreless 
flood of Jesus’ merit is deeper than the heights of mine iniqui- 
ties. My sin may be great, but: his merit is greater still. I 
cannot conceive my own guilt, much less express it; but the 
blood of Jesus Christ, God’s dear Son, cleanseth us ftom all sin— 
infinite guilt, but Infinite pardon—boundless iniquities, but 
boundless merits to cover all. What if thy sins were greater 
than heaven’s breadth, yet Christ is greater than heaven. The 
‘heaven of heavens cannot contain him. If thy sins were deeper 
than the bottomless hell, yet Christ’s atonement is deeper still, 
for he descended deeper than ever man himself as yet hath 
dived—even damned men, in all the horror of their agony—for 
Christ went to the end of punishment, and deeper thy sins can 
never plunge. Oh! boundless love, that covers all my faults. 
My poor hearer, believe on Christ now. God help thee to 
believe. May the Spirit now enable thee to trust in Jesus. 
Thou canst not save thyself. All hopes of self-salvation are 
delusive. Now give up—have done with self, and take Christ. 
Just as thou art, drop into his arms. He will take thee—he 
will save thee. He died to do it, and he lives to accomplish it. 
He will not lose the spirit that casts itself into his hands, and 
makes him his all in all. 

I think I must not detain you longer. The subjzct is one 


258 SIN IMMEASURABLE. 


which might con:mand a far larger mind than mine, and better 
words than I can gather now. Let me echo again and again the 
one sentiment I wish for all to receive, which is just this. We 
are so vile that our vileness is beyond our own comprehension, 
but nevertheless, the blood of Christ hath infinite efficacy, and 
he that believeth in the Lord Jesus is saved, be his sins ever 80 
many, but he that believeth not must be lost, be his sins never 
eo few. 
God bless you all, for Christ’s sake, Axsms, 


SERMON XVI. 
NONE BUT JESUS. 


{Ow Sunday morning, Feb. 17,1861, Mr. Spurcxon delivered 
the following discourse in Exeter Hall, and in the evening preach- 
ed the following sermon, from the same text, at New Park Street 
Chapel. ‘This one, the author states, “has been translated for 
the aborigines of New Zealand, and some thousands have been 
distributed. The reading of it in Auckland, New Zealand, has 
led to several conversions among Europeans and natives.” A 
testimony most gratifying, and for which all trae Christians 
should thank God.] 


“Hx that believeth on him is not condemned.”—Joun, iii, 18. 


Tue way of salvation is stated in Scripture in the very plain- 
est terms, and yet, perhaps, there is no truth about which more 
errors have been uttered, than concerning the faith which saves 
the soul. Well has it been proved by experience, that all doc- 
trines of Christ are mysteries—mysteries, not so much in them- 
selves, but because they are hid to them that are lost, in whom 
the God of this world hath blinded their eyes. So plain is Scrip- 
ture, that one would have said, “He that runs may read 3” but 
so dim is man’s eye, and so marred is his understanding, that 
the very simplest truth of Scripture he distorts and misrepre- 
sents. And indeed, my brethren, even those who know what 
faith is, personally and experimentally, do not always find it easy 
to give a good definition of it. They think they have hit the 
mark, and then afterwards they lament that they have failed. 
Exerting themselves te describe some one part of faith, they 


260 NONE BUT JESUS. 


find they have forgotten another, and in their earnestness to de 
liver the poor sinner out of one mistake, they often lead him in- 
to another. So that I think I may say that, while faith is the 
aimplest thing in all the world, yet it is one of the most difficult 
upon which to preach, because, from its very importance, our 
soul begins to tremble while speaking of it, and then we are not 
able to describe it so clearly as we would. 

I intend this morning, by God’s help, to put together sundry 
thoughts upon faith, each of which I may have uttered in your 
hearing at different times, but which have not been collected into 
one sermon before, and which, { have no doubt, have been misun 
derstood from the want of their having been put together in their 
proper eonsecutive order. I shall speak alittle on each of these 
points: first, the object of faith, to what it looks; next, the rea- 
son of faith, whence it comes; thirdly, the ground of faith, or 
what it wears when it comes; fourthly, the warrant of faith, or 
why it dares to come to Christ; and fifthly, the result of faith, 
or how it speeds when it doth come to Christ. 


I. First, raz opsecr oF rarrH, or to what faith looks. 

Lam told in the Word of God to believe—What am I to be 
lieve? {am bidden to look—to what am I to look? What is 
to be the object of my hope, beliei, and confidence? The reply 
is simple. The object of faith, to a sinner, is Christ Jesus. How 
many make & mistake about this, and think they are to believe 
on God the Father! Now, belief in God is a result of faith in 
Jesus. We come to believe in the eternal love of the Father 
as the result of trusting the precious blood of the Son. Many 
men say, “I would believe in Christ if 1 knew that I were elect.” 
This is coming to the Father, and no man can come to the Fath- 
er except by Christ. It is the Father’s work to elect; you can- 
not come directly to him, therefore you cannot know your elec- 
tion until first you have believed on Christ the Redeemer, and 
then through redemption you can approach the Father and know 
your election. Some, too, make the mistake of looking to 
the work ot God the Holy Spirit. They look within to see if 
they have certain feelings, and if they tind them their faith is 
strong, but if their feelings have departed from them, then thei 


NONE BUT JESUS. 261 


faith is weak, so that they look to the work of the Spirit which 
is not the object of a sinner’s faith. Both the Father and the 
Spirit must be trusted in order to complete redemption, but for 
the particular mercy of justification and pardon, the blood of the 
Mediator is the only plea. Christians have to trust the Spirit 
after conversion, but the sinner’s business, if he would be saved, 
is not with trusting the Spirit, nor with looking to the Spirit, but 
looking to Christ Jesus, and tohim alone. I know your salva- 
tion depends on the whole Trinity, but yet the first and immedi- 
ate object of asinner’s justifying faith is neither God the Father 
nor God the Holy Ghost, but God the Son, incarnate in human 
fiesh, and offering atonement for sinners. 

Hast thou the eye of faith? Then, soul, look thou to Chrisé 
as God. If thou wouldst be saved, believe him to be God over 
all, blessed forever. Bow before him, and accept him as being 
‘*Very God of very God,” for if thou do not, thou hast no part 
in him. When thou hast this believed, believe in him as man. 
Believe the wondrous story of his incarnation; rely upon the 
testimony of the evangelists, who declare that the Infinite was 
robed in the infant, that the Eternal was concealed within the 
mortal; that he who was King of heaven became a servant of 
servants and the Sonof man. Believe and admire the mystery 
of his incarnation, for unless thou believest this, thou canst not 
besaved thereby. Then, specially, if thou wouldst be saved, let 
thy faith behold Christ in his perfect righteousness. See him 
keeping the law without blemish ; obeying his Father without 
error ; preserving his integrity without flaw. AJI this thou art 
to consider as being done on thy behalf. Thou couldst not keep 
thelaw, hekeptit for thee. Thou couldst not obey God perfectly 
—lo ! his obedience standeth in the stead of thy obedience—by it 
thou art saved. But take care that thy faith mainly fixes itself 
upon Christ as dying andas dead. View the Lamb of God as 
dumb before his shearers ; view him as the man of sorrows and 
acquainted with grief; go thou with him to Gethsemane, and 
behold him sweating drops of blood. Mark, thy faith has noth- 
ing to do with anything within thyself; the object of thy faith 
is nothing within thee, but a something without thee. Be- 
lieve on him then, who on yonder tree with nailed hands 


262 HONE BUT JESUS. 


and feet, pours out his life for sinners. There is the object 
of thy faith for justification; not in thyself, nor in anything 
which the Holy Spirit has done in thee, or anything he has pro- 
mised to do for thee; but thou art to look to Christ and to 
Christ Jesus alone. Then let thy faith behold Chrst as rising 
from the dead. See him—he das borne the curse, and now he 
receives the justification. Ue dies to pay the debt; he rises 
that he may nail the hand writing of that discharged debt to the 
cross. See him ascending up on high, and behold him this day 
pleading before the Father's throne. He is there pleading for 
his people, offering up to-day his authoritative petition for all 
that come to God by him. And he, as God, as man, as living, 
as dying, as rising, and as reigning above—he, and he alone, is to 
be the object of thy faith for the pardon of sin. 

On nothing else must thou trust; fe is to be the only prop 
and pillar of thy confidence; and all thou addest thereunto will 
be a wicked antichrist, a rebellion against the sovereignty of the 
Lord Jesus. But take care if your faith save you, that while 
you look to Christ in all these matters, you view him as being 
a substitute. This doctrine of substitution is so essential to the 
whole plan of salvation, that I must explain it here for the thou- 
sandth time. God is just, he must punish sin ; God is merciful, 
he wills to pardon those who believe in Jesus. How is this to 
be done? How can he be just and exact the penalty—merciful, 
and accept the sinner? He doeth it thus: he taketh the sins of 
his people and actually lifteth them up from off his people to 
Christ, so that they stand as innocent as though they had never 
sinned, and Christ is looked upon by God as though he had been 
all the sinners in the world rolled into one. The sin of his peo- 
ple was taken from their persons, and really and actually, not 
typically and metaphorically, but really and actually laid on 
Christ. Then God came forth with his fiery sword to meet the 
sinner and to punish him. He met Christ. Christ was not a 
sinner himself; but the sins of his people were all imputed to 
him. Justice, therefore, met Christ as though he had been the 
sinner—punished Christ for his people’s sins—punished him as 
far as its rights could go—exacted from him the last atom of the 
penalty, and left not a dreg in the cup. And now, he who can 


NONE BUT JESUS. 263 


see Christ as being his substitute, and puts his trust in him, is 
thereby delivered from the curse of the law. Soul, when thou 
seest Christ obeying the law, thy faithistosay, “He obeys that 
for his people.” When thou seest him dying, thou art to count 
the purple drops and say, “Thus he took my sins away.” When 
thou seest him rising from the dead, thou art to say, “ He rises 
as the head and representative of all his elect.” And when thou 
seest him sitting at the right hand of God, thou art to view him | 
there as the pledge that all for whom he died shall most surely 
sit at the Father’s right hand. Learn to look on Christ as be- 
ing in God’s sight as though he were the sinner. “In him was 
no sin.” He was “ the just,” but he suffered for the unjust. He 
was the righteous, but he stood in the place of the unrighteous ; 
and all that the unrighteous ought to have endured, Christ has 
endured once for all, and put away their sins forever by the sac- 
tifice of himself. Now, this is the great object of faith. I pray 
you, do not make any mistake about this, for a mistake here will 
be dangerous, if not fatal. View Christ, by your faith, as being 
in his life, and death, and sufferings, and resurrection, the substi- 
tute for all whom his Father gave, him—the vicarious sacrifice 
for the sins of all those who will trust him with their souls. 
Christ, then, thus set forth, is the object of justifying taith. 
Now let me further remark, that there are some of you, no 
doubt, saying—“ Oh, [ should believe and I should be saved, if” 
—if what? If Christ had died? “Oh no, sir, my doubt is 
nothing about Christ.” [ thought so. Then what is the doubt? 
“Why, I should believe if J felt this, or tf I had done that.” 
Just so; but I tell you, you could not believe in Jesus if you 
felt that, or if you had done that, for then you would believe in 
yourseli, and not in Christ. If you were so-and so, thea you 
could have confidence. Confidence in what? Why, confidence 
in your feelings, and confidence in your doings, and that is just 
the clear contrary of confidence in Christ. Faith is not to infer 
from something good within me that I shall be saved, but to say 
in despite of the fact that I am guilty in the sight of God and 
deserve his wrath, yet I do nevertheless believe that the blood 
of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth me trom all sin; and though 
my present consciousness cv1ieuas me, yet my faith overpow 


264 NONE BUT JESUS. 


ers my consciousness, and I do believe that “he is able to save 
to the uttermost them that come unto God by him.” To come ~ 
to Christ as a saint is very easy work; to trust to s doctor to 
cure you when you believe you are getting better, is very easy ; 
but to trust your physician when you feel as if the sentence of 
death were in your body, to bear up when the disease is rising 
into the very skin, and when the ulcer is gathering its venom— 
to believe even then in the efficacy of the medicine—that is faith. 
And so, when sin gets the mastery of thee, when thou feelest 
thac the law condemns thee, then, even then, as a sinner, to trust 
Christ, this is the most daring feat in all the world; and the 
faith which shook down the walls of Jericho, the faith which 
raised the dead, the faith which stopped the mouths of lions, was 
not greater than that of a poor sinner, when in the teeth of all 
his sins he dares to trust the blood and righteousness of Jesus 
Christ. Do this, soul, then thou art saved, whosoever thou 
mayest be. The object of faith, then, is Christ as the substitute 
for sinners. God in Christ, but not God apart from Christ, nor 
any work of the Spirit, but the work of Jesus only must be 
viewed by you as the foundation of your hope. 


Il. Secondly, raz REASON OF FAITH, or why doth any man be 
lieve, and whence doth his faith come? 
_ “Faith cometh by hearing.” Granted; but do not all men 
hear, and do not many still remain. unbelieving? How, then, 
doth any man come by his faith? To his own experience his 
faith comes as the result of a sense of need. He feels himself 
needing a Saviour ; he finds Christ to be just such a Saviour as he 
wants, and therefore because he cannot help himself, he believes 
in Jesus. Having nothing of his own, he feels he must take 
Christ or else perish, and therefore he doth it because he cannot 
help doing it. He is fairly driven up in a corner, and there is 
but this one way of escape, namely, by the righteousness of an- 
other; for he feels he cannot escape by any good deeds, or suf- 
ferings of his own, and he cometh to Christ and humbleth himself, 
because he cannot do without Christ, and must perish unless he 
lay hold of him. But to carry the question further back, where 
does that man get his sense of need? How is it that he, rather 


WONE BUT JESUS. 265 


than cthers, feels his need of Christ? It is certain he has ue 
more necessity for Christ than other men. How doth he come 
to know, then, that he is lost and ruined? How is it that he is 
driven by the sense of ruin to take hold on Christ the restorer ? 
The reply is, this is the gift of God; this is the work of the 
Spirit. No man comes to Christ except the Spirit draw him, 
and the Spirit draws men to Christ by shutting them up under 
the law to a conviction that if they do not come to Christ, they 
must perish. Then by sheer stress of weather, they tack about 
and run into this heavenly port. Salvation by Christ is so disa- 
greeable to our carnal mind, so inconsistent with our love of | 
human merit, that we never would take Christ to be our all in 
all, if the Spirit did not convince us that we were wanting at all, 
and did not so compel us to lay hold on Christ. 

But, then, the question goes further back still; how is it that 
the Spirit of God teaches some men their need, and not other 
men? Why is it that some of you were driven by your sense 
of need to Christ, while others go on in their self-righteousness 
and perish? ‘There is no answer to be given but this, “ Even 
so, Father, for so it seemed good in thy sight.” It comes to 
divine sovereignty at the last. The Lord hath “hidden those 
things from the wise and prudent, and hath revealed them unte 
babes.” According to the way in which Christ put it—“ My 
sheep, hear my voice ;” “ye believe not because ye are not of 
my sheep, as I said unto you.” Some divines would like to 
read that—“ Ye are not my sheep, because ye do not believe.” 
As if believing made us the sheep of Christ; but the text puts 
it—“ Ye believe not, because ye are not of my sheep.” “ All 
that the Father giveth me shall come to me.” If they come 
not, itis a clear proof that they were never given; for those 
who were given of old eternity to Christ, chosen of God the 
Father, and then redeemed by God the Son-—these are led by 
the Spirit, through a sense of need to come and lay hold on 
Christ. No man yet ever did, or ever will believe in Christ, 
unless he feels his need of him. No man ever did or will feel 
his need of Christ, unless the Spirit makes him fee], and the 
Spirit will make no man feel his need of Jesus savingly, unless 
it be so written in the eternal book, in which God hath surely 

12 


266 NONE BUT JESUS. 


engraved the names of his chosen. So, then, I think I am not 
to be misunderstood on this point, that the reason of faith, or 
why men believe, is God’s electing love working through the 
Spirit by a sense of need, and so bringing them to Christ Jesus. 


I. Thirdly, rax @RoUND OF THE SINNER’S FAITH, OF on what 
ground he dares to believe on the Lord Jesus Christ. 

My dear friends, 1 have already said that no man will believe 
in Jesus, unless he feels his need of him. But you have often 
heard me say, and I repeat it again, that I do not come to Christ 
pleading that I feel my need of him; my reason for believing in 
Christ, is not that I feel my need of him, but that I Lave a need 
of him. The ground on which a man comes to Jesus, is not as 
a sensible sinner, but as a sinner, and nothing but a sioner. He 
will not come unless he is awakened; but when he comes, he 
does not say, “ Lord, I come to thee because I am an awakened 
sinner, save me.” But he says, “Lord, I am a sinner; save 
me.” Not his awakening, but his sinfulness is the method and 
plan upon which he dares to come. You will, perhaps, perceive 
what I mean, for I cannot exactly explain myself just now. If 
I refer to the preaching of a great many Calvinistic divines, they 
say to a sinner, “Now, if you feel your need of Christ, if you 
nave repented so much, if you have been harrowed by the law 
to such-and-such a degree, then you may come to Christ on the 
ground that you are an awakened sinner.” I say that is false. 
No man may come to Christ on the ground of his being an awak- 
ened sinner; he must come to him as a sinner. When I come 
to Jesus, I know I am not come unless I am awakened, but still, 
} do not come as awakened. I do not stand at the foot of his 
cross to be washed because I have repented; I bring nothing 
when I come but sin. A sense of need is a good feeling; but 
when | stand at the foot of the cross, I do not believe in Christ 
because I have got good feelings, but I believe in him whether 

have good feelings or not. 


* Just as Tam without one plea, 
But that thy blood was shed for me, 
And that thou bidst me come to thee, 
© Lamb of God, I come.” 


WONE BUT JESUS. 267 


- Roger, Sheppard, Flavell, and several excellent divines, in the 
Puritanic age, and especially Richard Baxter, used to give de- 
scriptions of what a man must feel before he may dare to come 
to Christ. Now, I say in the language of the good Fenner, 
another of those divines, who declared he was but a babe in 
grace when compared with them—‘I dare to say it, that all this 
is not Scriptural, Sinners do feel these things before they come, 
_ but they do not come on the ground of having felt it; they come 
on the ground of being sinners, and on no other ground what- 
ever.” The gate of Mercy is opened, and over the door is writ- 
ten, “ This is a faithful saying and worthy of all acceptation, that 
_ Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinnere.” Between 
that word “save” and the word “sinners,” there is no adjective. 
It does not say, “penitent sinners,” “ awakened staners,” “ sen- 
sible sinners,” “grieving sinners,” or “alarmed sinners.” No, 
it only says, “sinners ;” and I know this, that when I come, | 
come to Christ to-day, for I feel it is as much a necessity of my 
life to come to the cross of Christ to-day as it was to come ten 
years ago—when I come to him I dare not come as a conscious 
sinner or an awakened sinner, but I have to come still as a sin- 
ner with nothing in my hands. I saw an aged man this week in 
the vestry of a chapel in Yorkshire. Ihad been saying some- 
thing to this effect: the old man had been a Christian for years, 
and he said, “I never saw it put exactly so, but still I know that 
is just the way I come; I say, ‘Lord, 


*Nothing in my hands I bring, 
Simply to thy cross I cling; 
Naked, look to thee for dress ; 
Helpless, come to thee for grace; 
Black’— 


(“ Black enough,” said the old man.) 


‘T to the fountain fly, 
Wash me, Saviour, or I die.’ ” 


Faith, is getting right out of yourself and getting into Christ 
[ know that many hundreds of poor souls have been troubled 
because the minister has said, “If you feel your need, you may 


268 NONE BUT JESUS. 


come to Christ.” “But,” say they, “I do not feel my need 
enough; Iam sureI do not.” Many a score letters have Ire 
ceived from poor troubled consciences, who have said, “T would 
venture to believe in Christ to save me if I had a tender con- 
science; if I had a soft heart—but oh, my heart is like a rock 
of ice which will not melt. I cannot feel as I would like to feel, 
and therefore I must not believe in Jesus.” Oh! down with it, 
down with it! It is a wicked anti-Christ; it is flat Popery! 
it is not your soft heart that entitles you to believe. You are 
to believe in Christ to renew your hard heart, and come to him 
with nothing about you but sin. The ground on which a sinner 
comes to Christ is that he is dead, and not that he knows he is 
dead ; that he is lost, and not that he knows he is lost. I know 
he will not come unless he does know it, but that is not the 
ground on which he comes. It is thasecret reason why, but it 
is not the public positive ground which he understands. Here 
was I, year after year, afraid to come to Christ, because I thought 
I did not feel enough; and I used to read that hymn of Cowper’s 
about being insensible as steel— 


“Tf aught is felt "tis only pain 
To find I cannot feel.” 


When I believed in Christ, I thought I did not feel at all. Now 
when I look back, I find that I had been fecling all the while 
most acutely and intensely, and most of all because I thought I 
did not feel. Generally the people who repent the most, think 
they are impenitent, and people feel most their need when they 
think they do not feel at all, for we are no judges of our feel- 
ings, and hence, the gospel invitation is not put upon the ground 
of anything of which we can be a judge; it is put on the ground 
of our being sinners, and nothing but sianers. “Well,” replies 
one, “ But it says, ‘Come unto me all ye that are weary and 
heavy-laden and I will give you rest’—then we must be weary 
and heavy-laden.” Just so; so it is in that text, but then there 
is another. “Whosoever will, let him come;” and that does 
not say anything about “weary and heavy-laden.” Besides, 
while the invitation is given to the weary and heavy-laden, you 
wil! perceive that the promise is not made to them as weary and 


NONE BUT JESUS. 269 


heay-laden, but it is made to them as coming to Christ. They 
did not know that they were weary and heavy-laden when they 
came; they thought they were not. They really were, but part 
of their weariness was that they could not be as weary as they 
would like to be, and part of their load was that they did not 
feel their load enough. They came to Christ just as they were, 
and he saved them, not because there was any merit in their 
weariness, or any efficacy in their being heavy-laden, but he 
saved them as sinners and nothing but sinners, and so they were 
washed in his blood and made clean. My dear hearer, let me 
put this truth home to thee. If thou wilt eome to Christ this 
morning, as nothing but a sinner, he will not cast thee out. 

Old Tobias Crisp says, in one of his sermons upon this very 
point, “I dare to say it, but if thou dost come to Christ, who- 
soever thou mayest be, if he does not receive thee, then he is 
not true to his word, for he says, ‘Him that cometh to me I will 
in no wise cast out”” If thou comest, never mind qualification 
or preparation. He needeth no qualification of duties or of 
feelings either. Thou art to come just as thou art, and if thou 
art tne biggest sinner out of hell, thou art as fit to come to 
Christ as if thou wert the most moral and most excellent of men. 
There is a bath: who is fit to be washed? A man’s blackness 
is no reason why he should not be washed, but the clearer reason 
why he should be. When our city magistrates were giving 
relief to the poor, nobody said, “I am so poor, therefore I am 
not fit to have relief”? Your poverty is your preparation, the 
black is the white here. Strange contradiction! The only thing 
you can bring to Christ is your sin and your wickedness. All | 
he asks is, that you will come empty. If you have anything 
of your own, you must leave all before you come. If there be 
anything good in you, you cannot trust Christ, you must come 
with nothing in your hand. Take him as all in all, and that is 
the only ground upon which a poor soul can be saved—as & sin- 
ner, and nothing but a sinner. 


IV. Fourthly, raz WARRANT ov FaiTH, or why 8 man dares 


te trust in Christ. 
Is it not imprudent for any man to trust Christ to save him, 


270 NONE BUT JESUS. 


and especially when he has no good thing whatever? Is it not 
an arrogant presumption for any man to trust Christ? No, 
sirs, it is not. It is a grand and noble work of God the Holy 
Spirit for a man to give the lie to all his sins, and still to believe 
and set to his seal that God is true, and believe in the virtue of 
the blood of Jesus. But why does any man dare to believe in 
Christ, I will ask you now. “Well,” saith one man, “I sum- 
moned faith to believe in Christ because I did feet there was a 
work of the Spirit in me.” You do not believe in Christ at all. 
“Well,” says another, “I thought that I had a right to believe in 
Christ, because I felt somewhat.” You had not any right to be- 
fieve in Christ at all on such a warrant as that. What is a man’s 
warrant then, for believing in Christ? Here it is. Christ tells 
him to do it, that is his warrant. Christ’s word is the warrant 
of the sinner for believing—not what he feels nor what he is, 
nor what he is not, but that Christ has told him to do it. The 
Gospel runs thus: “Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and thou 
shalt be saved. He that believeth not shall be damned.” Faith 
mn Christ, then, is 8 commanded duty as well as a blessed privi- 
lege, and what a mercy it is that it is a duty; because there 
never can be any question but that a man has a right to do his 
duty. Now, on the ground that God commands me to believe, 
I have a right to believe, be I!whoI may. The gospel is sent 
to every creature. Well, I belong to that tribe; I am one of 
the “every” creatures, and that gospel commands me to believe. 
I cannot be wrong in obeying a command of God. Now, it is 
a command of God given to every creature, that he should be- 
lieve on Jesus Christ whom God hath sent. This is your war- 
ant, sinner, and a blessed warrant it is, for it is one which hell 
cannot gainsay, and which heaven cannot withdraw. You need 
not be looking within to find the misty warrants of your expe- 
rience. You need not be looking to your works, and to your 
feelings, to get some dull and insufficient warrants for your con- 
fidence in Christ. You may believe Christ because he tells you 
to do so. That is a sure ground to stand on, and one which 
admits of no doubt. 

I will suppose that we are all starving; that the city has been 
oesieged and shut up, and there has been a long, long famine, 


NONE BUT JESUB. 271 


and we are ready to die of hunger. There comes out an invi- 
tation to us to repair at once to the palace of some great one, 
to eat and drink ; but we have grown foolish, and will not accept 
the invitation. Suppose now that some hideous madness has 
got hold of us, and we prefer to die, and had rather starve than 
come. Suppose the king’s herald should say, “Come and feast, 
poor hungry souls, and because I know you are unwilling to 
come, I add this threat, if you come not my warriors shall be 
upon you; they shall make you feel the sharpness of their 
swords.” I think, my dear friends, we should say, “We bless 
the great man for that threatening, because now we need not 
say, ‘I may not come,’ while the fact is we may not stay away. 
I need not ssy I am not fit to come, for] am commanded to 
come, and I am threatened if ] do not come.” That awful sen- 
tence— He that believeth not shall be damned,” was added not 
out of anger, but because the Lord knew our silly madness, and 
that we should refuse our own mercies unless he thundered at us 
to make us come to the feast, “ Compel them to come in ;” this 
was the Word of the Master of old, and that text is part oi the 
carrying out of that exhortation, “Compel them to come in.” 
Sinner, you cannot be lost by trusting Christ, but you will be 
lost if you do not trust him, ay, and lost for not trusting him. I 
put it boldly now—sinner, not only may you come, but oh! I 
pray you, do not defy the wrath of God by refusing to come. The 
gate of mercy stands wide oper; why will you not come? 
Why will you not? Why so proud? Why will you still re- 
fuse his voice and perish in your sins? Mark, if you perish, 
any one of you, your blood lies not at God’s door, nor Christ’s 
door, but at your own. Te can say of you, “Ye will not come 
unto me that ye might have life.” Oh! poor trembler, if thou 
be willing to come, there is nothing in God’s Word to keep thee 
from coming, but there are both threatenings to drive thee and 
powers to draw thee. Still] hear you say, “] must not trust 
Christ.” You may, 1 say, for every creature under heaven is 
commanded to do it, and what ycu are commanded to do, you 
may do. “Ah! well,” saith one, “still I do not feel that I may.” 
There you are again; you say you will not do what Ccd tells 
you, because of some stupid feelings of your own. You are not 


Bie NONE BUT JESUS. 


told to trust Christ because you feel anything, but simply 
because you are a sinner. Now you know you are a sinner. “] 
am,” says one, “and that is my sorrow.” Why your sorrow? 
That is some sign that you do feel. “Ay,” saith one, “but I do 
not feel enough, and that is why I scrrow. I do not feel as! 
showd.” Well, suppose you do feel, cr suppose you do not, 
you are a sinner, and “ this is a faithful saying and worthy of all 
acceptation, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sin 
ners.” “Qh, but 1am such an old sinner; J have been sixty 
years in sin.” Where is it written that after sixty you cannot 
be saved? Sir, Christ could save you at a hundred—ay, if you 
were a Methuselah in guilt. “The blood of Jesus Christ his 
Son cleanseth us from all sin.” “Whosoever will let him come.” 
“He is able to save to the utmost them that come unto God by 
him.” \ 

“Yes,” says one, “ but I have been a drunkard, a swearer, or 
lascivious, or profane.” Then you are a sinner, you have not 
gone further than the uttermost, and he is able to save you still. 
“ Ay,” saith another, “but you do not know how my guilt has 
been aggravated.” That only proves you to be a sinner, and 
that you are commanded to trust Christ and be saved. “ Ay,” 
cries yet another, “but you do not know how often I have re- 
jected Christ.” Yes, but that only makes you the more a sin- 
ner. “You do not know how hard my heart is.” Just so, but 
that only proves you to be a sinner, and still proves you to be 
one whom Christ came to save. “Oh, but sir, I have not any 
good thing. If I had, you know, I should have something to en- 
courage me.” The fact of your not having any good thing, just 
proves to me that you are the man I am sent to preazh to. Christ 
came to save that which was lost, and all you have said only 
proves that you are lost, and therefore he came to save you. Do 
trust him—dc trust him. “But if I am saved,” saith one, “I 
shal). be the biggest sinner that ever was saved.” Ther the great- 
er music in heaven when you get there; the more glory to Christ, 
for the bigger the sinner the more honor to Christ when at last 
he shall be brought home. “ Ay, but my sin has abounded.” 
His grace shall much more abound. “But my sin has reached 
even to heaven.” Yes, but his mercy reaches above the avavens 


NONE BUT JESUS. 278 


“Oh! but my guilt 1s as broad as the world.” Yes, but his 
righteousness is broader than a thousand worlds. “ Ay, but my 
sin is scarlet.” Yes, but his blood is more scarlet than your 
sins, and can wash the scarlet out by a richer scarlet. “Ay, 
but I deserve to be lost, and death and hell cry for my damna- 
tion.” Yes, and so they may, but the blood of Jesus Christ can 
ery louder than either death or hell; and it cries to-day, “ Father, 
let the sinner live.’ Oh! I wish I could get this thought out of 
my own mouth, and get it into your heads, that when God saves 
you, it is not because of anything in you, it is because of some- 
thing in himself. God’s love has no reason except in his own 
bowels; God’s reason for pardoning a sinner is found in his own 
heart, and not in the sinner. And there is as much reason in you 
why you should be saved as why another should be saved, name- 
ly, no reason at all. There is no reason in you why he should 
have mercy on you, but there is no reason wanted, for the reason 
lies in God, and in God alone. 


V. And now I come to the conclusion, THB RESULT OF FAITH, 
or how it speeds when it comes to Christ. 

The text says, “ He that believeth is not condemned.” There 
is a man there who has just this moment believed; he is not 
condemned. But he has been fifty years in sin, and has plunged 
into all manner of vice; his sins, which are many, are all for- 
given him. He stands in the sight of God now as innocent as 
though he had never sinned. Such is the power of Jesus’ blood, 
that “he that believeth is not condemned.” Does this relate to 
what is to happen at the day of Judgment? I pray you look 
at the text, and you wild find it does not say, “ He that believeth 
shall not be condemned,” but he ts not; he is not now. And if 
he is not now, then it follows that he never shall be; for having 
believed in Christ, that promise still stands, “ He that believeth 
is not condemned.” I believe to-day { am not condemned ; in 
fifty years’ time that promise will be just the same— He that 
believeth is not condemned.” So that the moment a man puts his 
trust in Christ, he is freed from all condemnation—past, present 
and to come; and from that day he stands in God’s sight as 


though he were without spot or wrinkle, or any suco thing 
12* 


274 NONE BUT JESUS. 


“But he sins,” you say. He does indeed, but his sins are nut 
laid to his charge. They are laid to the charge of Christ of old, 
and God can never charge the offence on two—first on Christ, 
and then on the sinner. “Ay, but he often falls into sin.” That 
may be possible; though if the Spirit of God be in him he sin- 
neth not as he was wont to do. He sins by reason of infirmity, 
not by reason of his love to sin, for now he hateth it. 

But mark, you shall put it in your own way if you will, and 
: will answer, “ Yes, but though he sin, yet is he no more guil- 
ty in the sight of God, for all his guilt has been taken fiom him, 
and put on Christ—positively, literally, and actually lifted off 
from him, and put upon Jesus Christ. Do you see the Jewish 
host? There is a scapegoat brought out; the high priest con- 
fesses the sin of the people over the scapegoat’s head. The sin 
is all gone from the people, and laid ‘pon the scapegoat. Away 
goes the scapegoat into the wilderness. Is there any sin left on 
the people? If there be, then the scapegoat has not carried it 
away. Because it cannot be here and there too. It cannot be 
carried away and left behind too. “No,” say you, “Scripture 
says the scapegoat carried away the sin; there was none left on 
the people when the scapegoat had taken away the sin. And so, 
when by faith we put our hand upon the head of Christ, does 
Christ take away our sin, or does he not? If he does not, then 
it is of no use our believing in him: but if he doth really take 
away our sin, then our sin cannot be on him and on us too; if 
it be on Christ, we are free, clear, accepted, justified, and this is 
the true doctrine of justification by faith. As soon asa man 
believeth in Christ Jesus, his sins are gone from him, and gone 
away forever. They are lotted out now. What if a man owe 
a hundred pounds, yet if he has got a receipt for it, he is free; 
it is blotted out; there is an erasure made in the book, and the 
debt is gone. Though the man commit sin, yet the debt having 
been paid before even the debt was acquired, he is no more a 
debtor to the law oi God. Doth not Scripture say, that God 
has cast his people’s sins into the depths of the sea? Now, if 
they are in the depths of the sea, they cannot be on his people 
too. Blessed be his name, in the day when he casts our sins 
into the depth of the sea, he views us as pure in his sight, and 


NONE BUT JESUS. Q75 


we stand accepted in the beloved. Then he says, “ As far as the 
east is from the west, so far hath he removed our transgressions 
from us.” They cannot be removed and be here still. 

Then if thou believest in Christ, thou art no more in the sight 
of God a sinner; thou art accepted as though thou wert perfect. 
as though thou hadst kept the law—for Christ has kept it, and 
his righteousness is thine. You have broken it, but your sin is 
his, and he has been punished for it. Mistake not yourselves 
any longer; you areno more what you were; when you believe, 
you stand in Christ’s stead, even as Christ of old stood in your 
stead. The transformation is complete, the exchange is positive 
and eternal. They who believe in Jesus are as much accepted 
of God the Father as even his Eternal Son is accepted; and 
they that believe not, let them do what they will, they shall but 
go about to work out their own righteousness ; but they abide 
under the law, and still shall they be under the curse. Now, ye 
that believe in Jesus, walk up and down the earth in the glory of 
this great truth. You are sinners in yourselves, but you are 
washed in the blood of Christ. David says, “Wash me and | 
shall be whiter than snow.” You have lately seen the snow 
come down. What could be whiter? Why, the Christian is 
whiter than that. You say, “He is black.” I know he is as 
black as any one, but the blood-drop falls on him, and he is white 
—“ whiter than snow.” The next time you see the snow-white 
crystals falling from heaven, look on them and say, “ Ah, though 
I must confess within myself that I am unworthy and unclean, 
yet, believing in Christ, he hath given me his righteousness so 
completely, that | am even whiter than the snow as it descends 
from the treasury of God.” 

Oh! for faith to lay hold on this. Oh! for an overpowering 
faith that shall get the victory over doubts and fears, and make 
us enjoy the liberty wherewith Christ makes men free. Go 
home, ye that believe in Christ, and go to your beds this night, 
and say, “If I die in my bed, I cannot be condemned.” Should 
you wake the next morning, go into the world and say, “I am 
not condemned.” When the devil howls at you, tell him, “You 
may accuse, but I am not condemned.” And if sometimes your 
sins rise, say, “I know you, but you are all gone forever—! am 


276 NONE BUT JESUS. 


not condemned.” And when your turn shall come to die, shut 
your eyes in peace. 


“ Bold shall you stand in that great day, 
For who aught to your charge can lay ?” 


Fully absolved, by grace you shall be found at last, and all 
sin’s tremendous curse and blame shall be taken away, not be- 
cause of anything you have done. I pray you do all you can 
for Christ out of gratitude, but even when you have done all, do 
not rest there. Rest still in the substitution and the sacrifice. 
Be you what Christ was in his Father’s sight, and when con- 
science awakens, yon can tell it that Christ was for you all that 
you ought to have been, that he has suffered all your penalty ; 
and now neither mercy nor justice can smite you, since justice 
has clasped hands with mercy in a firm decree to save that man 
whose faith is in the cross of Christ. The Lord bless these worda 
for his sake. Axmy. 


SERMON XVII. 


NONE BUT JESUS. 


[ Przacuep on Sunday Evening, Feb. 17, 1861, at New Park 
Street Chapel, from the same text as the preceding. Having in 
that considered Christ the object of Faith, he proceeds in this 
to discuss justification as the great gospel blessing resulting 
from the exercise of evangelical faith. In a word, Christ is the 
object which faith contemplates; Christ is the blessing which 
faith secures. ] 


“ He that believeth on him is not condemned.” —Jonn, iii. 18. 


Iw the morning sermon, our time was mainly taken up with 
the description of Faith—what it is. We had only a few min- 
utes left at its close to describe what it leads to—the privilege 
of justification, which is a gift to the soul as the result of 
Faith. Let this high privilege, then, occupy our attention to- 
night. The text ‘says, “ He that believeth on him (that is on 
Christ Jesus)—is not condemned.” 

To take up the subject in order, we shall notice first, the satis 
factory declaration here made; then, secondly, we shall en- 
deavor tc correct certain misapprehensions respecting it, by 
reason of which, the Christian is often cast down; and we shall 
close with some reflections, positive and negative, as to what this 
pert includes, and what it excludes. 


I. First of all, then, wHAT A SATISFACTORY DEOLARATION !— 
“ He that believeth on him is not condemned 


278 WONE BUT JESUS—-SECOND PART. 


You are aware that in our courts of law, a verdict of “not 
guilty,” amounts to an acquittal, and the prisoner is immediate- 
ly discharged. So is it in the language of the gospel; a sen- 
tence of “not condemned,” implies the justification of the sinner. 
It means that the believer in Christ receives now a present 
justification. Faith does not produce its fruits by-and-bye, but 
now. So far as justification is the result of faith, it is given to 
the soul in the moment when it closes with Christ, and accepts 
him as its all in all, Are they who stand before the throne of 
God justified to-night ?—so are we, as truly and as clearly justi- 
fied as they who walk in white and sing his praises above. The 
thief upon the cross was justified the moment that he turned the 
eye of faith to Jesus, who was just then hanging by his side: 
and Paul, the aged, after years of service, was not more justified 
than was the thief with no service at all. We are to-day accep- 
ted in’the Beloved, to-day absolved trom sin, to-day innocent in 
the sight of God. Oh, ravishing, soul-transporting thought | 
There are some clusters of this vine which we shall not be able 
to gather till we go to heaven; but this is one of the first ripe 
clusters, and may be plucked and eaten here. This is not as 
the corn of the land, which we can never eat till we cross the 
Jordan; but it is part of the manua in the wilderness, and part 
too of our daily raiment, with which God supplies us in our 
journeying to and fro. We are now—even now pardoned; even 
now are our sins put away; even now we stand in the sight of . 
God as though we had never been guilty ; innocent as Adam 
when he stood in integrity, ere he had eaten of the fruit of the 
forbidden tree ; pure as though we had never received the taint 
of depravity in our veins. “There is, therefore, now no con- 
demnation to them which are in Christ Jesus.” There is not a 
sin in the Book of God, even now, against one of his people. 
There is nothing laid to their charge. There is neither speck, 
nor spot, nor wrinkle, nor any such thing remaining upon any 
one believer in the matter ef justification in the sight of the 
Judge of all the earth. 

But to pass on, the text evidently means not simply present, 
but continual justification, In the moment when you and I be- 
lieved, it was said of us, “He is not condemned.” Many days 


NONE BUT JESUS—SECOND PART. SO, 


have passed since then, many changes we have seen; but it is as 
true of us to-night, “He is not condemned.” The Lord alone 
knows how long our appointed day shall be—how long ere we 
shall fulfil the hireling’s time, and like a shadow flee away. 
But this we know, since every word of God is assured, and the 
gifts of God are without repentance, though we should live 
another fifty years, yet would it still be written here, “ He that 
believeth on him is not condemned.” Nay, if by some myster- 
ious dealing in Providence our lives should be lengthened out to 
ten times the usual limit of man, and we should come to the eight 
or nine hundred years of Methuselah, still would it stand the 
same—* He that believeth on him is not condemned.” “TI give 
unto my sheep eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither 
shall any pluck them out of my hand.” “ The just shall live by 
faith.’ “He that believeth on him shall never be confounded.” 
All these promises go to show that the justification which Christ 
gives to our faith is a continual one, which will last as long as we 
shall live. And remember, it will last in eternity as well as in time. 
We shall not in heaven wear any other dress but that which we 
wear here. To-day the righteous stand clothed in the righteous. 
ness of Christ. They shall wear this same wedding dress at the 
great wedding feast. But what if it should wear out? What 
that righteousness should lose its virtue in the eternity to come? 
Oh beloved! we entertain no fear about that. Heaven and 
earth shall pass away, but this righteousness shall never wax 
old. No moth shal: fret it; no thief shall steal it; no weeping 
haud of lamentation shall rend it in twain. It is, it must be 
eternal, even as Christ himself, Jehovah our righteousness. 
Because he is our righteousness, the self-existent, the everlast- 
ing, the immutable Jehovah, of whose years there is no end, and 
whose strength faileth not, thercfore of our righteousness there 
is no end; and of its perfection, and of its peauty there shall 
never be any termination. The text, I think, very clearly — 
teaches us, that he who believeth on Christ has received for eve 
a continual justification. 

Again, think for a moment; the justification which is spoken 
of here is complete. “He that believeth on him is not con- 
demned,”—that is to say, not in any measure or in any degree. 


280 NONE BUT JESUS—-SECOND PART. 


I know some think it is possible for us to be in such a state as to 
be half condemned and half accepted. So far as we are simmers 


so far condemned ; and so far as we are righteous so far accepted. — 


Oh, beloved, there is nothing like that in Scripture. It is alto- 
gether apart from the docirine of the gospel. If it be of works, 
it is no more of grace; and if it be of grace, it is no more of 
works. Works and grace cannot mix and mingle any more 
than fire and water; it is either one or the other, it cannot be 
both; the two can never be allied. There can be no admixture 
of the two, no dilution of one with the other. He that be- 
lieveth is free from all iniquity, from all guilt, from all blame ; 
and though the devil bring an accusation, yet it is a false one, 
for we are free even from accusation, since it is boldly chal- 
lenged, “ Who shall lay anything to the charge of God’s elect ?” 
It does not say “ Who shall prove it?” but “Who shall lay it 
to their charge?” They are so contpletely freed from condem- 
nation, that not the shadow of a spot upon their soul is found ; 
not even the slightest passing by of iniquity to cast its black 
shadow on them. They stand before God not only as half inno- 
cent, but as perfectly so; not only as half washed, but as whiter 
than snow. Their sins are not simply erased, they are blotted 
out; not simply put out of sight, but cast into the depths of 
the sea; not merely gone, and gone as far as the east is from 
the west, but gone forever. You know, beloved, that the Jew 
in his ceremonial purification, never had his conscience free from 
sin. After one sacrifice he needed still another, for these offer- 
ings could never make the comers thereunto perfect. ‘The next 
day’s sins needed a new lamb, and the next year’s iniquity 
needed a new victim for an atonement. “But this man, after 
he had offered one sacrifice for sins for ever, sat down at the 
right hand of God.” No more burnt-offerings are needed, no 
more washing, no more blood, no more atonement, no more 
sacrifice. “It is finished!” hear the dying Saviour cry. Your 
sins have sustained their death-blow, the robe of your righteous- 
ness has received its last thread; it is done, complete, perfect. 
It needs no addition; it can never suffer any diminution. Oh, 
Christian, lay hold of this precious thought; I may not be able 
to state it except in weak terms, but let not my weakness pre- 


r~ 


“NONE BUT JESU8—SECOND PART. 287 
vent your apprehending its glory and its precioustiess. [t is 
enough to make a man leap, though his legs were loaded with 
irons, and to make him sing though his mouth were stopped, to 
think that we are perfectly accepted in Christ, that our justifica. 
tion is not partial; it does not go to a limited extent, but goes 
the whole way. Our unrighteousness is covered; from con 
demnation we are entirely and irrevocably free. 

Once more. The non-condemnation is effectual. The royal 
privilege of justification shall never miscarry. It shall be brought 
home to every believer. In the reign of King George the Third, 
the son of a member of this church lay under sentence of death 
for forgery. My predecessor, Dr. Rippon, after incredible exer- 
tions, obtained a promise that his sentence should be remitted. 
By a singular occurrence, the present senior deacon—then a 
young man—learned from the governor of the jail that the re 
prieve had not been received; and the unhappy prisoner would 
have been executed the next morning, had not Dr. Rippon gone 
post-haste to Windsor, obtained an interview with the king in 
his bedchamber, and received from the monarch’s own hand a 
copy of that reprieve which had been negligently put aside by a 
thoughtless officer. “I charge you, doctor,” said his majesty, 
“to make good speed.” “ Trust me, sire, for that,” responded 
your old pastor, and he returned to London in time, just in time, 
and only just in time, for the prisoner was being marched with 
many others on to the scaffold. Ay, that pardon might have 
been given, and yet the man might have been executed if it ha! 
not been effectually carried out. But, blessed be God, our non- 
condemnation is an effectual thing. It is not a matter of letter 
it is a matter of fact. Ah, poor souls, you know that condem. 
nation is a matter of fact. When you and I suffered in our 
souls, and were brought under the heavy hand of the law, we 
felt that its curses were no mock thunders like the wrath of the 
Vatican, but they were real; we felt that the anger of God was 
indeed a thing to tremble at ; a real substantial fact. Now, just 
as real as the condemnation which Justice brings, just so real is 
the justification which mercy bestows. You are not only nomi- 
nally guiltless, but you are really so, if you believe in Christ ; 
you are not only nominally put into the place of the innocent, 


282 NONE BUT JESUS——-SECOND PART. 


but you are really put there the moment you believe in Jesus, 
Not only is it said that your sins are gone, but they are gone. 
Not only does God look on you as though you were accepted ; 
you are accepted. It is a matter of fact to you, as much a mat- 
ter of fact as that you sinned. You do not doubt that you have 
sinned , you cannot doubt that; do not doubt then that when 
you believe, your sins are put away. For as certain as ever the 
black spot fell on you when you sinned, so certainly and so 
surely was it all washed out when you were bathed in that foun- 
tain filled with blood, which was drawn from Emanuel’s veins. 
Come, my soul, think thou of this. Thou art actually and 
effectually cleared from guilt. Thou art led out of thy prison. 
Thou art no more in fetters as a bond-slave. Thou art delivered 
now from the bondage of the law. Thou art freed from sin and 
thou canst walk at large as a freeman. Thy Saviour’s blood 
has procured thy full discharge. Come, my soul, thou hast 4 
right now to come to thy Father’s feet. No flames of ven 
geance are there to scare thee now; no fiery sword; justice 
cannot smite the innocent. Come, my soul, thy disabilities are 
taken away. Thou wast unable once to see thy Father’s face; 
thou canst see it now. Thou couldst not speak with him, nor 
he with thee; but now thou hast access with boldness to this 
grace wherein we stand. Once there was a fear of hell upon 
thee; there is no hell for thee now. How can there be pun- 
ishment for the guiltless? He that believeth is guiltless, is not 
condemned, and cannot be punished. No frowns of an avenging 
God now. If God be viewed as a Judge, how should he frown 
upon the guiltless? How should the Judge frown upon the ab- 
solved one? More than all the privileges thou mightest have 
enjoyed if thou hadst never sinned, are thine now that thou art 
justified. All the blessings which thou couldst have had if thou 
hadst kept the law and more, are thine to-night because Christ 
has kept it for thee. All the love and the acceptance which a 
perfectly obedient being could have obtained of God, belong to 
thee, because Christ was perfectly obedient on thy behalf, and hath 
imputed all his merits to thy account that thou mightest be exceed- 
ing rich, through him who for thy sake became exceeding poor. 
, Oh that the Holy Spirit would but enlarge our hearts, that we 


NONE BUT JESUS—-SECOND PART. 283 


might suck sweetness out of these thoughts! There fs 1.0 con- 
demnation. Moreover, there never shall be any condemnation. 
The forgiveness is not partial, but perfect ; it is so effectual that 
it delivers us from all the penalties of the Law, gives to us all the 
privileges of obedience, and puts us actually high above where 
we should have been had we never sinned. It fixes our standing 
more secure than it was before we fell. We are not now where 
Adam was, for Adam might fall and perish. We are rather 
where Adam would have been if we could suppose God had put 
him into the garden for seven years, and said, “If you are obe- 
dient for seven years, your time of probation shall be over, and 
I will reward you.” The children of God in one sense may be 
said to be in a state of probation. In another sense there is no 
probation. There is no probation as to whether the child of God 
should be saved. He is saved already; his sins are washed away ; 
his righteousness is complete: and if that righteousness could 
endure a million of years’ probation, it would never be defiled. 
In fact, it always stands the same in the sight of God, and must 
do so forever and ever. 


II. Let me now endeavor to CORRECT SOME MISAPPREHENSIONS, 
BY REASON OF WHICH CHRISTIANS ARE OFTEN CAST DOWN. 

How childish we are in spiritual things! We think that our 
being pardoned involves a great many things which we after- 
wards find have nothing whatever to do with our pardon. For 
instance, we think we shall never sin again; we fancy that the 
battle is all fought; that we have got into a fair field, with ne 
more war to wage; that in fact we have got the victory, and 
have only just to stand up and wave the palm branch; that God 
has only to call us up to himself and we shall enter into heaven 
without having to fight any enemies upon earth Now, all these 
are obvious mistakes. Though the text has a great meaning, it 
does not mean anything of this kind. Observe, that although it 
does assert, “He that believeth is not condemned ;” yet it does 
not say that he that believeth shall not have his faith exercised. 
Your faith will be exercised. An untried faith will be no faith 
at all. God never gave men faith without intending to try it. 
Faith is received for the very purpose of endurance. Just as 


284 NONE BUT JESUS—SECOND PART, 


our Rifle Corps friends put up the target with the intention of — 
shooting at it, so does God give faith with the intention of let- 
ting trials and troubles, and sin and Satan aim all their darts at 
it. When thou hast faith in Christ, it is a great privilege; but 
recollect that it involves a great trial. You asked for great 
faith the other night ; did you consider that you asked for great 
troubles too? You cannot have great faith to lay up and rust. 
Mr. Greatheart in John Bunyan’s Pilgrim was a very strong 
man, but then what strong work he had to do. He had to go 
with all those women and children many scores of times up to 
the celestial city and back again; he had to fight all the giants, 
and drive back all the lions; to slay the giant Slaygood, and 
knock down the Castle of Despair. 

If you have a great measure of faith, you will have need to 
use it all, You will never have a single scrap to spare, you will 
be like the virgins in our Lord’s parable, even though you be a 
wise virgin, you will have to say to others who might borrow 
of you, “Not so, lest there be not enough for us and for you.” 
But when your faith is exercised with trials, do not think you 
are brought into judgment ior your sins. Oh no, believer, there 
is plenty of exercise, but that is not condemnation; there are 
many trials, but still we are justified ; we may often be buffet- 
ted, but we are never accursed; we may ofttimes be cast down, 
but the sword of the Lord never can and never will smite us to 
the heart. Yea, more; not only may our faith be exercised, 
but our faith may come to a very low ebb, and still we may not 
be condemned. When thy faith gets so small that thou canst 
not see it, even then still thou art not condemned. If thou hast 
ever believed in Jesus, thy faith may be like the sea when it 
goes out a very long way irom the shore, and leaves a vast track 
_ of mud, and some might say the sea was gone or dried up. 
But you are not condemned when your faith is most dried up. 
Ay! and I dare to say it,—when your faith is at the flood-tide, 
you are not more accepted then, than when your faith is at the 
lowest ebb; for your acceptance does not depend upon the 
quantity of your faith, it only depends upon its reality. If you 
are really resting in Christ, though your faith may be but as a 
spark, and a thousand devils may try to quench that one spark, 


NONE BUT JESUS—SECOND PART. 285 


yet you are not condemned—you shall stand accepted in Christ. 
Though your comforts will necessarily decay as your faith de- 
clines, yet your acceptance does not decay. Though faith does 
rise and fall like the thermometer, all weathers change it—yet 
God’s love is not affected by the weather of earth, or the changes 
of time. Until the perfect righteousness of Christ can be a mu 
table thing—a football to be kicked about by the feet of fiends 
—your acceptance with God can never change. You are, you 
must be, perfectly accepted in the Beloved. 

There is another thing which often tries the child of God. He 
at times loses the light of his Father’s countenance. Now, re 
member, the text does not say, “ He that believeth shall not lose 
the light of God’s countenance ;” he may do so, but he shall not 
be condemned for all that. You may walk, not only for days 
but for months, in such a state that you have little fellowship 
with Christ, very little communion with God of a joyous sort. 
The promises may seem broken to you, the Bible may afford 
you but little comfort; and when you turn your eye to heaven, 
you may only have to feel the more the smarting that is caused 
by your Father’s rod; you may have vexed and grieved his 
Spirit, and he may have turned away his face from you. But 
you are not condemned for all that. Mark the testimony: “He 
that believeth is not condemned.” Even when your Father 
smites you and leaves a wale at every stroke, and brings the 
blood at every blow, there is not a particle of condemnation in 
any one stroke. Not in his anger, but in his dear covenant love 
he smites you. There is as unmixed and unalloyed affection in 
avery love-stroke of chastisement from your Father’s hand as 
there is in the kisses of Jesus Christ’s lips. Oh! believe this; 
it will tend to lift up thy heart, it will cheer thee when neither 
sun nor moon appear. It will honor thy God, it will show thee 
where thy acceptance really lies. When his face is turned 
away, believe him still, and say, “ He abideth faithful though he 
hide his face from me.” 

I will go a little further still. The child of God. may be so 
assaulted by Satan, that he may be well nigh given up to des- 
pair, and yet he is not condemned. He may read the Bible, 
and think that every threatening is against him, and that every 


286 NONE BUT JESUSB—SECOND PART. 


promise shuts its mouth and will not cheer him: and he may at 
last despond, and despond, till he is ready to break the harp 
that has so long been hanging on the willow. He may say, 
“The Lord hath forsaken me quite, my God will be gracious no 
more ;” but it is not true. Yea, he may be ready to swear a 
thousand times that God’s mercy is clean gone for ever, and 
that his faithfulness will fail for evermore; but it is not trin, 
it is not true. A thousand liars swearing to a falsehood 
could not make it true, and our doubts and fears are all of 
them liars. And if there were ten thousand of tlem, and they 
all professed the same, it is a falsehood that God ever did for- 
sake his people, or that he ever cast from him an innocent man; 
and you are innocent, remember, when you believe in Jesus. 
“ But,” say you, “I am full of sin.” “Ay,” say I, “but that 
sin has been laid on Christ.” “Oh,” say you, “but I sin 
daily.” “Ay,” say I, “but that sin was laid on him before 
you committed it, years ag~. + is not yours; Christ has taken 
it away once for all. You are a righteous man by faith, and 
God will not forsake the righteous, nor will he cast away the 
innocent.” I say, then, the child of God may have his faith at 
a low ebb;,he may lose the light of his Father’s countenance, 
and he may even get into thorough despair; but yet all these 
cannot disprove my text—“ He that believeth is not condemned.” 

“ But what,” say you, “if the child of God should sin?” It 
is a deep and tender subject, yet must we touch it and be bold 
here. I would not mince God’s truth lest any should make a 
bad use of it. I know there are some, not the people of God, 
who will say, “ Let us sin, that grace may abound.” Their con- 
demnation is just. I cannot help the perversion of truth. There 
be always men who will take the best of food as though it were 
poison, and make the best of truth into a lie, and so be damning 
their own souls. You ask, “ What if a child of God should fall 
into sin?” I answer, the child of God does fall into sin ; every 
day he mourns and groans because when he would do good, evil 
is present with him. But though he falls into sins, he is not 
condemned for all that—not by one of them, or by all of them 
put together, because his acceptance does not depend upon him. 
self, but upon the perfect righteousness of Christ; and that per 


NONE BUT JESUS—SECOND PART. 287 


fect righteousness is not invalidated by any sins of his. He is per- 
fect in Christ; and until Christ is imperfect, the imperfections 
of the creature do not mar the justification of the believer in the 
sight of God. Butoh! if he fall into some glaring sin,—Oh God, 
keep us from it!—if he fall into some glaring sin, he shall go with 
broken bones, but he shall reach heaven for all that. Though, 
in order to try him and let him see his vileness, he be suffered 
to go far astray, yet he that bought him will not lose him; he 
that chose him will not cast him away: he will say unto him, “ I, 
even I, am he that blotteth out thy transgressions for mine own 
sake, and will not remember thy sins.” David may go never 
so faraway, but David is not lost. He comes back and he cries, 
“ Have mercy upon me, O God!” And so shall it be with 
every believing soul—Christ shall bring him back. Though he 
slip, he shall be kept, and all the chosen seed shall meet around 
the throne. If it were not for this last truth—though some may 
stick at it—what would become of some of God’s people? They 
would be given up to despair. If I have been speaking to a 
backslider, I pray he will not make a bad use of what I have 
said. Let me say to him, “ Poor backslider! thy father’s 
bowels yearn over thee; he has not erased thy name out of the 
registry. Come back, come back now to him and say, ‘ Re- 
ceive me graciously, and love me freely ;’ and he will say, ‘I 
will put you among the children.” He will pass by your back- 
sliding and will heal your iniquities; and you shall yet stand 
once more in his favor, and know yourself to be still accepted 
in the Redeemer’s righteousness and saved by his blood.” This 
text does not mean that the child of God shall not be tried, or 
that he shall not even sometimes fall under the trial; but it 
does mean this, once for all: He that believeth on Christ is not 
condemned. At no time, by no means, is he under the sentence 
of condemnation, but is evermore justified in the sight of God. 


Il. Now, let me notice WHAT THIS TEXT EVIDENTLY IN 
cLupEs; and may God grant that these few words may never- 
theless do good to our souls! 

“He that believeth on him is not condemned.” If we are 
not condemned, then at no time does God ever look upon his 


288 NONE BUT JESUS— SECOND PART. 


children, when they believe in Christ, as being guilty. Are you 
surprised that I should put it so? I put it so again: from the 
moment when you believe in Christ, God ceases to look upon 
you as being guilty; for he never looks upon you apart from 
Christ. You often look upon yourself as guilty, and you fall 
upon your knees as you should do, and you weep and lament; 
but even then, while you are weeping over inbred and actual sin, 
he is atill saying out of heaven, “So far as your justification is 
concerned, thou art all fair and lovely.” You are black as the 
tents of Kedar—that is yourself by nature; you are fair as the 
curtains of Solomon—that is yourself in Christ. You are black 
—that is yourself in Adam ; but comely, that is yourself in the 
second Adam. Oh, think of that !—that you are always in 
God’s sight comely, always in God's sight lovely, always in 
God’s sight as though you were perfect. For ye are complete 
in Christ Jesus, and perfect in Christ Jesus, as the apostle puts 
it in another place. Always do you stand completely washed 
and fully clothed in Christ. Remember this; for it is certainly 
included in my text. 

Another great thought included in my text is this; you are 
never liable as a believer to punishment for your sins. You 
will be chastised on account of them, as a father chastises his 
child; that is a part of the Gospel dispensation; but you wil 
not be smitten for your sins as a lawgiver smites the criminal, 
Your Father may often punish you as he punisheth the wicked. 
But never for the same reason. The ungodly stand on the 
ground of their own demerits; their sufferings are awarded as 
their due deserts. But your sorrows do not come to you as a 
matter of desert; they come to you as a matter of love. God 
knows that in one sense your sorrows are such a privilege that 
you may account of them asa boon you do not deserve. I[ 
have often thought of that when I have had a sore trouble.” 
I know some people say, “you deserved the trouble.” Yes. 
my dear brethren, but there is not enough merit in all the 
Christians put together, to deserve such a good thing as the lov- 
ing rebuke of our heavenly Father. Perhaps you cannot see 
that; you cannot think that a trouble can come to you as a real 
blessing in the covenant. But I know that the rod of the eove 


NONE BUT JESUS—-SECOND PART, 289 


nant is as much the gift of grace'as the blood of the covenant. 
It is not a matter of desert or merit; it is given to us because 
we need it. But I question whether we were ever so good as 
to deserve it. We were never able to get up to so high a 
standard as to deserve so rich, so gracious a providence as this 
covenant blessing—the rod of our chastening God. Never at 
any time in your life has a law-stroke fallen upon you. Since 
- you believed in Christ you are out of the law’s jurisdiction. 
The law of England cannot touch a Frenchman while he lives 
under the protection of his own Emperor. You are not under 
the law, but you are under grace. The law of Sinai cannot 
touch you, for you are out of its jurisdiction. You are not in 
Sinai or in Arabia. You are not the son of Hagar or the son of 
a handmaid, you are the son of Sarah, and are come to 
Jerusalem and are free. You are out of Arabia, and are come 
to God’s own happy land. You are a child of promise, and you 
shall have God’s own inheritance. Believe this, that never 
shall a law-stroke fall on you; never shall God’s anger in a 
judicial sense drop on you. He may give you a chastising 
stroke, not as the result of sin, but rather as the result of his 
own rich grace, that would get the sin out of you, that you 
may be perfected in sanctification, even as you are now perfect: 
and complete before him in the blood and righteousness of 
Jesus Christ. 


IV. I must spend the last minute or two in saying wHAT THIS 
TEXT EXCLUDES. 

What does it exclude? Well, I am sure it excludes boasting. 
“He that believeth is not condemned.” Ah! if it said, “ He 
that worketh is not condemned,” then you and I might boast in 
any quantity. But when it says, “ He that believeth” —why there 
is no room for us to say half a word for old self. No, Lord, if 
I am not condemned, it is thy free grace, for I have deserved to 
be condemned a thousand times since I have been in this pulpit 
to-night. When I am on my knees, and 1 am not condemned, 
I am sure it must be sovereign grace, for even when I am pray- 
ing, 1 deserve to be condemned. Even when we are repenting 
we are sinning, and adding to our sins while we are repenting of 

18 


290 NOXE BUT JESUS—SECOND PART. 


them. Every act we do, as the result of the flesh, is to sin 
again, and our best performances are so stained with sin, that it 
is hard to know whether they are good works or bad works. So 
far as they are our own, they are bad, and so fur as they are the 
works of the Spirit, they are good. But then the goodness is 
not ours, it is the Spirit’s, and only the evil remains to us. Ah, 
then, we cannot boast! Begone, pride! begone! The Christian 
mast be a humble man. If he lift up his head to say something, 
then he is nothing indeed. He does not know where he is, or 
where he stands, when he once begins to boast, as though his 
own right hand had gotten him the victory. Leave off boasting, 
Christian. Live humbly before thy God, and never let a word 
of self-congratulation escape thy lips. Sacrifice self, and let thy 
song be before the throne—* Not unto us, not unto us, but unto 
thy name be glory forever.” 

What next does the text exclude? Methinks it ought to ex- 
clude—(now I am about to smite myself)—it ought to exclude 
doubts and fears. “ He that believeth is not condemned.” How 
dare you and I draw such long faces, and go about as we do 
sometimes as though we had a world of cares upon our backs? 
What would I have given ten or eleven years ago if I could 
have known this text was sure to me, that I was not condemned. 
Why, I thought if I could feel I was once forgiven, and had to 
live on bread and water, and be locked up in a dungeor, and 
every day be flogged with a cat-o’-nine tails, I would gladly have 
accepted it, if I could have once felt my sins forgiven. Now, 
you are a forgiven man, and yet you are cast down! Oh! shame 
on you. No condemnation! and yet miserable? Fie, Chris- 
tian! Get thee up, and wipe the tears from your eyes. Oh! 
if there be a person lying in jail now, to be executed next week, 
if you could go to him and say, “You are pardoned,” would he 
not spring up with delight from his seat, and although he might 
have lost his goods, and though it would be possible for him, af- 
ter pardon, to have to suffer many things, yet, so long as life 
was spared, what would all this be to him? He would feel that 
it was less than nothing. Now, Christian, you are pardoned, 
your sins are all forgiven. Christ has said to you, “Thy sins, 
which are many, are all forgiven thee”—and art thou yet mis 


NONE BUT JESUS—-SECOND PART. 291 


erable? Well, if we must be so sometimes, let us make it as 
short as we can. If we must be sometimes cast down, let us | 
ask the Lord to lift us up again. Iam afraid some of us get 
into bad habits, and come to make it a matter of practice to be 
downcast. Mind, Christian, mind, it will grow upon you—that 
peevish spirit—if you do not resist that sinfulness at first, it will 
get worse with you. If you do not come to God to turn these 
doubts and fears out of you, they will soon swarm upon you like 
flies in Egypt. When you are able to kill the first great doubt, | 
you will perhaps kill a hundred; for one great doubt will breed 
a thousand, and to kill the mother is to kill the whole brood. 
Therefore, look with ail thy eyes against the first doubt, lest 
thou shouldst become confirmed in thy despondency, and grow 
into sad despair. “ He that believeth on him is not condemned.” 
If this excludes boasting, it ought to exclude doubts too. 

Once more. “He that believeth on him is not condemned.” 
This excludes sinning any more. My Lord, have I sinned against 
thee so many times, and yet hast thou freely furgiven me all ? 
What stronger motive could I have for keeping me from sinning 
again? Ah, there are some who are saying this is licentious 
doctrine. A thousand devils rolled into one, must the man be 
who can find any licentiousness here. What! go and sin be- 
cause I am forgiven? Go and live in iniquity because Jesus 
Christ took my guilt and suffered in my room and stead? Hu- 
man nature is bad enough, but methinks this is the very worst 
state of human nature, when it tries to draw an argument for 
sin from the free grace of God. Bad as J am, I do feel this, that 
it is hard tosin against a pardoning God. Itis far harder to sin 
against the blood of Christ, and against a sense of pardon, than 
it is against the terrors of the law and the fear of hell itself. 
know that when ™y soul is most alarmed by a dread of the 
wrath of God, I can sin with comfort compared with what I could 
when I have a sense of his love shed abroad in my heart. What 
more monstrous! to read your title clear, and sin? Oh, vile 
rebrobate! you are on the borders of the deepest hell. But | 
am sure, if you are a child of God, you will say when you have 
read your title clear, and feel yourself justified in Christ Jesus, 


292 NONE BUT JESUS—SECOND PART, 


“Now, for the love I bear his name, 
What was my gain, I count my loss; 
My former pride I call my shame, 
And nail my glory to his cross.” 


Yes, and I must and will esteem all things but loss for Jesus’ 
sake. Omay my soul be found in him, perfect in his righteous- 
ness! This will make you live near to him; this will make you 
like unto him. Do not think that this doctrine, by dwelling on 
it, will make you think lightly of sin. It will make you think 
of it as a hard and stern executioner to put Christ to death; as 
an awful load that could never be lifted from you except by the 
eternal arm of God; and then you will come to hate it with all 
your soul, because it is rebellion against a loving and gracious 
God, and you shall by this means, far better than by any Armi- 
nian doubts, or any legal quibbles, be led to walk in the foot- 
steps of your Lord Jesus, and to follow the Lamb whithersoever 
he goeth. 

I think this whole sermon, though I have been preaching to 
the children of God, is meant for sinners too. Sinner, I would 
that thou didst say so. If you know this, that he that believeth 
ts not condemned, then sinner, if thou believest, thou wilt not be 
condemned; and may all I have said to-night help you to this 

‘belief in thy soul. Oh, but sayest thou, “ May I trust: Christ ?” 
As I said this morning, it is not a question of whether you may 
or may not, you are commanded. The Scripture commands the 
gospel to be preached to every creature, and the gospel is, “ Be- 
sieve in the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shalt be saved.” I know 
you will be too proud to do it, unless God by his grace should 
humble you. But if ye feel to-night that you are nothing, and 
have nothing of your own, I think you will be right glad to take © 
Christ to be your all-in-all. If you can say with poor Jack, the 
Huckster— 


“Tm a poor sinner and nothing at all,” 
You may go on and say with him, this night, 
“But Jesus Christ is my all in all.” 


God grant that it may be so, for his name’s sake. Axxn, 


SERMON XVIII. 


THE CHAFF DRIVEN AWAY. 


-[ixczzpiexy pointed and searching, this sermon is full of 
truth terrible to the wicked. It is direct, lucid and earnest; 
very severe no doubt it would be thought by those to whom it 
was specially addressed. Its illustrations, mainly suggested by 
the figure in the text, are apt, forcible, and full of life. It is 
one of those subjects in which the preacher’s peculiar power 
over an audience is seen to advantage. He mentions this ser- 
mon as one which had been specially blessed to the saving of 
souls. It was preached at Surrey Music Hall, Oct. 23, 1859.] 


“The ungodly are not so; but are like the chaff which the wind driveth 
away.”—Psatm i, 4, 


Axp who are the ungodly? Are they open and wilful sinners 
—men who take God’s name in vain, and blaspheme—men who 
break the laws of man, the laws of the State—men who are 
scarcely to be trusted with liberty? Certainly these are in- 
cluded, but these are not mainly intended. While such men 
come under the category of “ sinners” and “scorners,” there is 
another class expressly aimed at by the term “ungodly.” And 
who are the ungodly? Are they the men who deny God’s 
existence, who neglect the outward forms of religion, who scoff 
_ at everything that is sacred, and make a jest of things at which 
angels tremble? ‘These are included, most certainly, but neither 
are these the men specially aimed at. They are the scornful, 


294 THE CHAFF DRIVEN AWAY. 


the pestilent; these are the men whose iniquities have gone 
beforehand to judgment against them, and whose sins are clam- 
oring before the throne for justice. Another class of men is 
intended under the term “ungodly.” And who are they? 
Surely my brethren, the answer may well strike you with awe. 
Ido trust there are not many in this hall who may be called 
scorners; and, perhaps, not very many who would come under 
the denomination of open profligates and rebels ; but how large 
a proportion ot all those who attend our places of worship may 
justly be ranked under the character of the ungodly! What 
does this exactly mean? Let me just show its differences once 
again, and then more precisely define it. 

We sometimes call men irreligious; and, surely, to be-irre- 
ligious is bad enough ; but to be religious is not good enough. 
A man may be religious, yet not beygodly. There are many 
who are religious; as touching the law outwardly they are 
blameless ; Hebrews of the Hebrews, Pharisees of the straitest 
sect. They neglect no rubric, they break no law of their 
church, they are exceedingly precise in their religion; yet, nut- 
withstanding this, they may rank under the class of the ungodly ; 
for to be religious is one thing, and to be godly is quite another. 
To be godly, then,—to come at once to the mark—to be godly is 
to have a constant eye to God, to recognize him in all things, to 
trust him, to love him, to serve him. And the ungodly man is 
one who does not have an eye to God in his daily business 
who lives in this world as if there were no God; while he at- 
tends to all the outward ceremonies of religion, he never goes 
to their core, never enters into their secret heart and their deep 
mysteries. He sees the sacraments, but he sees not God there- 
in; he hears the preaching, he comes up to the house of prayer, 
into the midst of the great congregation, he bows his head, but 
there is no present Deity to him, there is no manifest God. 
There is no hearing of his voice, there is no bowing before his 
throne. 

Doubtless, there is a large number here who must confess 
that they are not trusting in the blood of Christ, they are not 
influenced by the Holy Ghost, they do not love God; they can 
not say that the bent and tenor of their lives is towards him. 


THE CHAFF DRIVEN AWAY. 205 


Why you have been the last six days about your business, 
occupying all your time,—and quite right is it to be diligent 
in business—but how many of you have forgotten God all the 
while? You have been trading for yourselves, not for Ged 
The righteous man does everything in the name of God; at 
least, this is his constant desire. Whether he eats or drinks, or 
whatsoever he does, he desires to do all in the name of the Lord 
Jesus. But you have not recognised God in your shop. You 
have not acknowledged him in your dealings with your fellow- 
men. You have acted towards them as it there had been no 
God whatever. 

And, perkaps, even this day you must confess that your 
heart does not love the Lord. You have never gone into his 
company. You do not seek retirement. You do not relish pri- 
vate prayer. Now God’s children cannot be happy without 
sometimes talking to their Father. They love to cling to him. 
They feel that he is their life, their love, their all. Their daily 
cry is, “ Lord, draw me to thyself; come thou to me, or draw 
me up to thee.’ They pant to know more of God ; they long 
to reflect more of his image; they seek to keep his law; and 
it is their desire that they may be pervaded with his Spirit. 
But such are not your desires. You have no such longings as 
these. It is true you are not addicted to strong dink, you do 
not swear, you are no thief, you are no harlot. In all these 
things you are blameless; yet are you ungodly, being without 
God in the world. He is not your friend; he is not your 
helper. You do not cleave to him with purpose of heart. You 
are not his child. You have not “the Spirit of adoption, where 
by we cry, ‘Abba, Father.’” You could do as well without a 
God as with one. In fact you feel that the thought of God, if 
you think of it solemnly, strikes you with terror, and excites in 
your breasts no emotions of delight. You are ungodly. Well 
then, mark, whatever I have to say this morning, belongs to 
you. Don’t be looking round you and saying, I wonder how 
this will suit my neighbour. Do not I beseech you be thinking 
of some thriftless loon who has spent his estate in extravagance 
and debauchery, but be thinking of yourself. If you are not 
born again, if you are not a partaker of the Spint, if you are not 


296 THE CHAFF DRIVEN AWAY. 


reconciled to God, if your sins be not forgiven, if you are act 
this day a living member of the living church of Christ, all the 
curses that are written in this book belong to you, and that part 
of them in particular which it will be my solemn business to 
thunder out this morning. I pray God that this part may be 
applied to your soul, that you may be made to tremble before 
the Most High, and seek him who will certainly be found of 
you, if you seek him with all your hearts. 

You will readily perceive that my text may be divided into 
three parts. You have, first, a fearful negative—“The ungodly 
are not so.” You have in the next place a terrible comparison 

—<They are like the chaf.” Then you 2G thirdly, an ea 
prophesy—* which the wind driveth away.” 


I. First, then, you have here 4 FEARFUL NEGATIVE. The 
vulgate Latin version, the Arabic and Septuagint, read this first 
sentence thus :—“ Not so the ungodly, not so;” for according 
to their version there is a double negative here—* Not so the 
ungodly, not so.” Now in order to understand what is meant 
by this negative you must read the third verse. The righteous 
man is said to be “like a tree planted by the rivers of water, 
that bringeth forth his fruit in his season; his leaf also shall not 
wither; and whatsoever he doeth shall prosper :’—“ Not so the 
ungodly, not so.” 

The ungodly are not like a tree planted. If they may be com- 
pared to a tree at all, they are as trees “ twice dead, plucked up 
by the roots ;” or if they are to be compared to anything that 
hath life, then are they like the tree in the desert which is 
planted there by a chance hand, which hath nought to nourish 
it. It is the peculiar characteristic of the Christian man, that 
he is like “a tree planted.” That is to say, there is a special 
providence exercised in his position and in his culture. You all 
know the difference between a tree that is planted and a tree 
that is selfsown. The tree that is planted in the garden is vis- 
ited by the husbandman. He digs about it; he dungs it; he 
trims it, prunes it, and looks icr its fiuit. It is an object of 
property and o: special care. ‘The wild tree in the forest, the 
tree which is selfsown upon the plain, no one owns, no one 


THE CHAFF DRIVEN AWAY. 297 


watches over it; no heart will sigh if the lightning flash shall 
shiver it; no tear will be wept if the blast should light upon is, 
and all ite leaves should wither. It is no man’s property. I 
shelters ac man’s roof. No man careth for it. Let it die, why 
doth it stand there to suck nourishment from the soil and yield 
none again. 

The ungodly are, it is true, the subjects of a general provi- 
dence, even as everything is ordered of God; but the righteous 
have a special providence over them. They are trees planted. 
Everything which takes place works together for their good. 
The Lord their God is their guardian. He watches the earth 
that it chould bring forth for them its fruit. The precious 
things or the heavens, the dew, and the deep that coucheth be- 
reath, and the precious fruits brought forth by the sun, and the 
precious things put forth by the moon—these are their heritage. 
He watcheth everything round about them. If pestilence stalk 
through the land, he permitteth not one of its shafts to hit, un- 
less he seeth it is for good. If war ariseth, behold he stretches 
his egis over his children; and if famine comes, they shall be 
fed, and in the days of scarcity they shall be satisfied. Is it not 
a glorious thing for the Christian to know that the very hairs 
of his head are all numbered, that the angels of God keep watch 
and ward over him; that the Lord is his shepherd, and there- 
fore, he shall nos want? I know this isa doctrine that often 
comforts me. Let what will happen, if I can but fall back upon 
the thought that there is a providence in everything, what do | 
need? A providence in the great and in the little there assur- 
edly is to every child of God. It may be said of every tree of 
the Lord’s right hand planting—“I the Lord do keep it, and 
will water it every moment; lest any hurt it I will watch it 
night and day.” Upon the righteous there are not only ten 
eyes, but there are all the eyes of the Omniscient ever fixed 
both by night and day. The Lord knoweth the way of the 
righteous. They are like the planted tree. Not so ye that are 
ungodly; there is no special providence for you. To whom 
will ye carry your ‘roubles? Where is your shelter in the day 
of wrath? Where is your shield in the hour of battle? Wha 


shall be ycur sun wher darkness shall gather about you? Whe 
13* 


298 THE CHAFF DRIVEN AWAY. 


shall comfort you when your troubles shall encompass joi 
round? You have no eternal arm to lean upon. You have no 

compassionate heart to beat for you. You have no loving eye 

to watch you. You are left alone! alone! alone! like the 

heath in the desert, or like the forest tree which no man re- 

gardeth, until the time comes when the sharpened axe shall be 

liftec up, and the tree must fall. “Not so,” then “the ungod- 

ly, not so.” Tis a fearful negative the ungodly man is not the 

object of the special providence of God. 

2. The righteous man is like a tree planted by the rivers of 
water, Now, a tree that is planted by the rivers of water sends 
out its rocts, and they soon draw sufficient nourishment. The 
tree that is planted far away upon the arid desert hath its times 
of drought; it depends upon they casual thunder-cloud that 
* sweeps over it, and distils the scanty drops of rain. But this 
tree planted by rivers of water hath a perennial supply. It 
knows no drought, no time of scarcity. Its roots have but to 
suck up the nourishment which pours itselflavishly there. ‘‘Not 
so the ungodly, not so.” They have no such rivers from which 
to suck their joy, their comfort, and their life.’ As for the be- 
liever, come what may, he can say—if earth shall fai] him, then 
will he look to heaven. If man forsake him, then he looks te 
the divine man Christ Jesus. Ifthe world should shake, his in 
heritance is on high. li everything should pass away, he hatha 
portion that can never be dissolved. Heis planted not by brooks 
that may be dried up, far less in a desert, which only hath a 
scanty share, but by the rivers of water. Oh, my beloved breth- 
ren, you and I know something about what this means. We 
know what it is to drink of the rivers of Christ’s fulness. We 
know what it is to partake and satisfy ourselves as with marrow 
and fatness. Well may we rejoice with joy unspeakable and 
full of glory, for our storehouse is inexhaustible, our riches can 
never be spent. We have wealth that can not be counted, a 
treasury that never can be drained. This is our glory, that we 
have a something to rely upon which can never fail us. We 
are trees planted by the rivers of water. 

Ah! but not so you that are ungodly, not so. Your days of 
drought shall come, You may rejoice row, but what will y »u de 


Maat RS Mh ota Row nip wt! to Bees tes Niet Seb” eh Ne 


LA VERNE, CALIFORNIA 


THE CHAFF DRIVEN AWAY. 299 


upon the bed of sickness, when fever shall make you toss from 
side-to-side, when head and heart shall be racked with anguish, 
when death shall stare upon you, and shall glaze your eyes? 
What will ye do when ye come into the swellings of Jordan? You 
have joys to-day, but where will be your joys then? You have 
wells now, but what will you do when these are all svopped up 
when these shall all fail, when your skin-bottles are aried, whe 
your broken cisterns have emptied themselves of their :ast drop— 
what will ye do then, ye ungodly ? Surely this negutive is full 
of awful threatenings to you. You may have a little mirth and 
merriment now, you may erjoy a little excitement at present, 
but what will ye do when the hot wind comes upwa you—the 
wind of tribulation? And above all, what will you do when 
the chilling blast of death shall freeze your blood? Ah, where, 
oh where will you then look? You will look »o longer to 
friends, nor to the comforts o: home. You cannow find in the 
hour of death consolation on the bosom of the most loving wife ; 
you will be quite unable then to find peace in all your riches or 
your treasures. As for your past life, however yood it may 
seem, if you are ungodly, you will find no comfor> in the retro- 
spect; and as for the future, you will find no comfort in the 
prospect; for there will be for you nothing but “a fearful look- 
ing for of judgment and of fiery indignation.” Oh, my ungodly 
friends, I beseech you, think upon this matter, for if there were 
nothing worse, the first sentence of my text sounds like the 
trumpets of doom, and hath in it bitterness like the vials of the 
Revelation. 

3. It is said of the righteous man, that he “ bringeth forth his 
fruit in his season.” “ Not so the ungodly, not so ;” they bring 
forth no fruit; or if there be here and there a shrivelled grape 
upon the vine, it is brought forth in the wrong season, when the 
genial heat of the sun cannot ripen it, and therefore it is sear and 
worthless. Many people imagine that if they do not commit 
positive sin, they are all right. Now let me give you a little 
sermon in the midst of my sermon. Here is the text: “ Curse 
ye, Meroz, said the ange] of the Lord, curse ye bitterly the in- 
habitants thereof; because they came not to the help of the 
Lord, to the help of the Lord against the mighty.” First, what 


300 THE CHAFF DRIVEN AWAY. 


has Meroz done? Nothing. Secondly, is Meroz cursed? Yea _ 
cursed bitterly. What for?—for doing nothing? Yes, for dv 

ing nothing. “Curse ye bitterly the inhabitants thereof,” for 
what they did not do, “because they came not to the help of the 
Lord, to the help of the Lord against the mighty.” Did Meroz 
fight against God? No. Did Meroz put on a buckler and lay 
hold on shield and spear and go forth against the Most High? 
No. What did Meroz do? Nothing. And is it cursed? Yes, 
cursed bitterly, with the inhabitants thereof, * because they came 
not to the help of the Lord, to the help of the Lord against the 
mighty.” Preach that sermon to yourselves when you get 
home. Draw it out at length, and perhaps while you are sit- 
ting down you will say, “ Meroz! why that is myself. I don’t 
fight against God, I am no enemy to Christ, I do not persecute 
his people; in fact { even love his niinisters, I love to go up and 

hear the Word preached. I should not be happy if I spent my 
Sunday anywhere but in God’s house. But still that must mean’ 
me, for I do not go up ‘to the help of the Lord against the 
mighty.” I do nothing. I am a fruitless tree. Ah, then, re- 
member you are cursed, and cursed bitterly, too. Not for what 
you do, but for what you don’t do. 

So here it is one of the sad curses of the ungodly—that they 
bring forth no fruit in theirseason. Why, look at many of you. 
What is the good of you in this world? With regard to your 
families, you are their main-stay and prop. God bless you in 
your work, and may you train up your children well. But as 
to the church, what good are you? You occupy a seat, you have 
had it these years; how do you know but that you have been 
occupying a seat which might have been the place where some 
other sinner would have been converted had he been there? It 
is true you sit and hear the sermon; yes, but what of that, if 
that sermon shall add to your condemnation? It is true that 
you make one among many, but what if you should be a black 
sheep in the midst of the flock! What are you doing for Christ? 
Of what value are you? Have you added one stone to his spirit 
ual temple? Have you done as much as the poor woman whe 
broke the alabaster box upon his head? You have done nothing 
for him. MWe has nourished you and brought you up, and you 


THE CHAFF DRIVEN AWAY. 30] 


have done nothing for him. “The ox knoweth his owner, and 
the ass his master’s crib,” but you do not know, you do not 
consider. Behold, the Lord hath a controversy with you this 
day, not for what you have done, but for what you have not 
done. He has sent you the ministry; you are invited every 
Sabbath-day. You are hearing the Word continually ; you are 
enjoying privileges. God is feeding you in his providence, 
clothing you in his compassion, and you are doing nothing for 
him. You are a cumberer of the ground, bringing forth no 
fruit at all. Oh, my dear hearer, 1 beseech thee lay this to 
heart, for this is a curse as well as a sign to you. It is not only 
a bad trait in thy character, but it is a curse from God. Thou 
art ungodly, and therefore fruitless. Thou lovest him not, 
therefore thou art useless. Thou trustest not in Christ, and 
therefore thou art not like the tree which “ bringeth forth his 
fruit in his season.” 

4. “Tis leaf also shall not wither. Not so the ungodly, not 
so.” The ungodly man’s leaf shall wither. I see before me this 
day many proofs that God’s promise is verified to his people. 
Look round, and behold what a large number of grey-headed 
men assemble every Lord’s day to hear the Word. There are 
many of them who loved Christ in their youth. Then they had 
“a joy unspeakable and full of glory” in making a professior of 
his dear name; and now they have come into what men call 
the sear and yellow leaf of life, but they do not find it so, for 
they still bring forth fruit in old age, they are still fat and flour 
ishing to show that the Lord is upright. Their leaf has rot 
withered, they are just as active in the cause of Christ as ever 
they were, and perhaps ten times more happy. Instead of 
bringing forth no fruit, they bring forth richer and more luscious 
clusters than ever they did before. Walking in the midst of 
the younger ones, they shine as lights in the midst of the world; 
or to return te the simile, they are like trees whose branches 
hang down by reason of the abundance of their fruit, even as 
their heads bow down by reason of the abundance of their years. 
What a mercy it is, dear brethren, to have Christ for your por- 
tion in youth, and such a Christ too as will last us all our life 
long. To see good old Rowz.and Hill preaching when he was 


302 THE CHAFF DRIVEN AWAY. 


tottering on the borders of the grave and talking of the faithful. - 
ness of Christ—what a glorious sight! There was a proof! 
That leaf did not wither. Was there ever a tree like this that 
would maintain its greenness eighty years and yet not wither? 
Was there ever a religion like this that would make the old nen 
youthful and make their tottering feet leap for joy? And yet 
this is the religion of Christ. Our leaf withers not. 

But oh, “ not so the ungodly, not so.” Your leaf shall wither; 
at least when they that look out of the windows are darkened, 
when the grinders fail because they are few, when your days of 
old age shall come upon you, and the grasshopper shall be a 
burden, if not before, shall yovr leaf wither. But how many 
there are whose leaves do wither! There comes a blight from 
God, and the tree which looked oncg green becomes brown and 
dead, and at last it blackens*and has to be removed. We have 
seen such in our lives,—men that seemed to be getting on in 
this world, rich and happy, and respected by almost every body, 
but they had no solid baekground, they had no rock to stand on, 
no God to trust to. I have seen them spreading themselves like 
a green bay tree, and I have often envied them as the Psalmist 
did, but “I looked, and lo they were not;” I passed by and lo 
there was not so much as a stump of them left; God had cursed 
their habitation; as a dream when one awaketh, their image had 
been despised; as the wax before the fire, they had melted away; 
like the fat of rams had they been consumed; into smoke did 
they consume away. “Not so the ungodly not so,” says the 
text, and surely experience proves it, the ungodly man’s leat 
must and shall wither. And thenit is added concerning the 
righteous man, “ Whiatsoever he doeth shall prosper.” Godly 
men, it is true, have many tribulations, but I am not sure that 
they have more than the wicked. I do think that when a man 
is converted he will find it to be true that religion’s “ways are 
ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace,” and he has a 
better hope of even worldly prosperity when he becomes a 
Christian, than the ungodly man has. 

Christian habits are the best business habits, if men would but 
believe it. When aman mixes his religion with his business, 
and allows every act of his life to be guided by it, he stands the 


THE CHAFF DRIVEN AWAY. ~ 303 


best ehance in this world, if 1 may be allowed suena secular ex- 
pression, for “honesty is the best policy” after all, and Chris- 
tianity is the best honesty. The sharp, cutting competition of 
the times may be called honesty; it is only called so down here, 
it is not called so up there, for there is a good deal of cheating in 
it. Honesty in the highest sense—Christian honesty —will be 
found, after all, to be the best policy in everything, and there 
will ordinarily be a prosperity, even worldly prosperity, attend- 
ing a good man in the patient, industrious pursuit of his calling. 
But if he does not have that success he craves, still there is one 
thing ke knows, he would have it if it were best for him. I 
often hear Christian men talk in this fashion: “ Well, I do but 
very little business,” says one, “but I have enough coming in to 
. live upon comfortably and happy. I never cared much for push 
and competition; I never felt that I was fit for it, and I some- 
times thank, God that I never thrust myself out into the 
rough stream, but that I was content to keep along shore.” 
And I have marked this one thing, and, as a matter of fact, 
I know it cannot be disproved, that many such humble-minded 
men are the very best of Christians, they live the happiest lives, 
and whatsoever they do certainly does prosper, for they get what 
they expected, though they did not expect much, and they get 
what they went, though their wants are not very large. They 
are not going in for anything very great, and therefore they do 
not come out plucked and empty-handed, but they just hold on 
their way, looking to Providence constantly for their supplies, 
and they have all they require ; and whatsoever they do prospers. 
But they can say, too, that even if they had lost their all, if they 
had been brought to poverty, they would have felt poverty itself 
was the best prosperity, for God would have made their souls 
prosperous, even though their outward estates had become less. 

“Not so the ungodly, not so.” Whatever an ungodly man 
gets, be it little or be it much, is loss to him. He puts his mo- 
ney into a bag that is full of holes. Ifhe saves it, it corrupts 
and rusts. If he spends it, it does him little service. The man 
that nath no God, hath no prosperity. Is he fat—he fattens for 
the slaughter! Is he in adversity—behold, the first drops of 
the fated storm have begun to fallon him. To the ungodly man 


304 THE CHAFF DRIVEN AWAY. 


there is nothing good in this life. The sweet caat he tasteth is 
the sweetness of poison. That which looketh fair is but as paint 
upon the harlot’s face, beneath there is loathsomeness and dis- 
ease. There may be agreenness and a verdure upon the mound, 
but within there lies the rotting carcass, the loathsomeness of 
corruption. Whatsoever the believer doth, it shall prosper. 
“Not so the ungodly, not so.” Surely this first part of my 
text is quite bad enough—to have the gate of blessedness shut 
against you, to have the promises denied to you, to be without 
the blessing which is given to the godly—this punishment of the 
lost surely were enough to make us start in dismay. 


II. Listen awhile to the TERRIBLE COMPARISON. 

“The ungodly are like the chaff.” They are not like the wild 
tree, for that hath life, and they are dead in sin. They are not 
compared here even to the dead tree plucked up by the roots, 
for that may be of some service. Floating down the stream, 
the hand of poverty may recall it from the water, and kindle its 
fire and relieve its cold: They are nct even like the heath in 
the desert, for it hath some uses, and tends to cheer the arid 
waste. They are like nothing that hath life, nothing that is of 
any value. They are here said to be like chaff which the wind 
driveth away. Now you will at once see how terrible is this 
figure, if you look at it a moment. They are like chaff. Chaff 
envelops good corn, but when the wheat is cut down and carried 
into the barn, the corn alone is useful, the grain alone is looked 
at, and that chaff which has grown side by side with the good 
living wheat, is now become utterly useless, and is to be sepa- 
~ated and driven away. And the wicked are compared to chaft 
-—think for a moment, of two or three reasons. 

First, because they are sapiess and fruitless. Chaff hath no 
-ap of life in itself. It is of no use, of no service. Men do but. 
lesire to get rid of it. They take the fan into their hands that 
they may thoroughly purge their floor, They cast up the wheat 
before the wind with the winnowing shovel, that the breath of 
the air may blow away the chaff, and leave the wheat pure. All 
that they care for the chaff is that they may get rid of it, that it 
may be blown away to waste, for it is sapleas and fruitless. 


THE CHAFF DRIVEN AWAY. _ 805 


7 


Then, again, you notice that it is light and unstable. The wind 
sweeps through the whest, the wheat remains unmoved, the chaff 
flies away. When cast up in the shovel, the wheat soon finds 
its place, and returns to the spot from which it has been lifted 
up; but the chaff is light, it has no stability. Every eddying 
wind, every breath moves it and carries it away. So are the 
ungodly. They have nothing stable; they are light, they are 
but as the froth upon the water; they are but as a bubble on 
the breaker, seen to-day and gone, here and there, and then car- 
ried away forever. 

Again, the wicked are compared to chaff because it is base and 
worthless. Who will buy it? Whocares for it? In the Kast, 
at least, no use whatever can be made ot it. They are content 
to burn it up and get rid of it, and the sooner they are rid of it, 
the better pleased are they. So is it with the wicked. They 
are good for nothing, useless in this world, useless in the world 
to come. They are the dross, the offal of all creation. The 
man who is ungodly, however much he may value himself, is as 
nothing in the estimation of God. Puta gold chain round his 
neck, put a star upon his breast, put a crown upon his head, anc 
what is he but a crowned heap of dust, useless, perhaps worse 
than useless. Base in God's sight, he tramples them beneath 
his feet. The potter’s vessel hath some service, and even the 
broken potsherd might be used. Some Job might scrape him- 
self with it. But what shall be done with the chaff? It is of no 
use anywhere, and no one careth for it. 

See, then, your value, my hearers, if you fear not God. Cast 
up your accounts and look at yourselves in the right light. 
You think, perhaps, that you are good for much, but God saith 
you are good for nothing. You are “like the chaff which the 
wind driveth away.” I linger no more upon this comparison, 
but choose, rather, to dwell upon the third head, which was 
this -— 


Ill. Tux awyu. propuxcy contained in the verse—* They are 
like the chaff which the wind driveth away.” 
‘How near the chaff is to the grain! It is, in fact, its envelop ; 
‘hey grow together. My hearers, I wish to speak now very 
ea 


306 THE CHAFF DRIVEN AWAY. 


pointedly and personally. How nearly related are the ungodly 
to the righteous! One of you, it may be, now present, an un- 
godly man, is the father of a godly child. You have been to 
that child what the chaff is to the wheat; you have nourished 
the child—cherished it in your bosom; you have been wrapt 
about it like the chaff about the grain. Is it not an awful thing 
for you to think that yeu should have been in such close rela- 
tionship to a child of God, but that in the great day of division 
you must be separated from it? The chaff cannot be taken into 
heaven with the wheat. I point to another. You are the son 
of a godly mother ; you have grown up at her knee. She taught 
you, when you were but a little one, to say your little prayer, 
and to sing the little hymn. 


“Gentle Jesus, meek and mild, look upon a little child.” 


That mother looked upon youas her joy and her comfort. She 
is gonenow. But you were once to her what the chafi is to the 
wheat. You grew, as it were, upon the same stock, you were 
of the same tamily, and her heart was wholly wrapt up in you. 
You were her joy and her comfort here below. Does it not 
cause you one pang of regret that, dying as you are, you must 
everlastingly ke separated from her? Where she is you can 
never come. 

Mayhap, too, I have here a mother who has lost several in- 
fants; she has been to those infants what the chaff is to the 
wheat—wrapt up in her bosom, for a little while she fondled 
them; and they, God’s good wheat, have been gathered into the 
garner, and there they are now in Jesu’s floor. There are their 
little spirits rejoicing before the throne of the Most High. The 
mother who is left thinks not of it, but she is the mother of an- 
gels, and, perhaps, herself a child of hell. Ah, mother! what 
think you of this? Is this separation from your child eternal? 
Will you be content to be found at God’s great winnowing-day, 
the chaff, and will you be driven from your children? Shall you 
see them in heaven—them in heaven, and yourselves then cast out 
forever? Can you bear the thought? Has your heart become 
brutish? Is your soul harder than a nether mill-stone? Sure 
ly, if it be not, the thought ot your present intimate connection 


‘THE CHAFF DRIVEN AWAY. 307 


with Gud’s people, and of your sure separation, will make you 
tremble. And, oh! my hearers, here are some of you sitting 
side by side with the godly. You sing as they sing, you hear 
as they hear. Perhaps you assist the outward wants of the 
Church. You are to the church just what the chaff is to the 
wheat. You are the outward husk, the congregation which sur- 
rounds the inner living nucleus of the church. And must it be 
—-rnust you be separated from us? Are you content to go from 
the songs of the saints to the shrieks of the doomed? Will you 
go from the great convocation of the righteous to the last gen- 
eral assembly of the destroyed and cursed? The thought checks 
my voice. I must speak slowly on this matter for awhile. 

Well, dear brethren, well I know that this thought used to be 
dreadful to me. My mother said to me once, after she had long 
prayed for me, and had come to the conviction that I was hope- 
.ess, “ Ah,” said she, “my son, if at the last great day you are 
condemned, remember your mother will say amen to your con- 
demnation.” That stung me to the quick. Must the mother 
that brought me forth, and that loved me, say “ Amen” to my 
being condemned at last? Yet such things must be. Doth not 
the wheat say amen to the chaff being blown away? Is it not, 
in fact, the very prayer of the wheat that it may be separated 
from the chaff? and surely when that prayer is heard, and aw- 
fully answered, the wheat must say amen to the chaff being 
blown into fire unquenchable. Think, my dear hearers, think 
again. And must it be—must I bid farewell to her ] love—who 
served the Lord in spirit. Must I see her body committed to 
the grave, and as J stand there, must I bid her a last, a final fare- 
well? Must 1 be forever separated from her, because I fear not 
God, neither regard him, and therefore cannot have a portion 
among the Lord’s chosen ones? What, have you lost your rel- 
_atives forever? Are your pious fathers and mothers buried in a 
“sure and certain hope” to which you arestrangers? Will you 
never sing the song of rejoicing with them in heaven? Is there 
never to be another salutation? Is death a gulf that cannot be 
pridged to you 

Oh, I hope it is the joy of some of us to know we shall meet 
many of our kindred above; and as we have lost one after an 


808 THE CHAFF DRIVEN AWAY. 


other, this has been our sweet consolation, they are gone and 
we shall soon follow them; they are not lost, but gone before ; 
they are buried as to their flesh, but their souls are in Paradise, 
and we shail be there also ; and, when we have seen our Saviour’s 
‘ace, and rejoiced in tnat glorious vision, then shall we see them 
also, and have deeper and purer fellowship with them than we 
ever had before in all the days of our lives. Well, here is a sad 
prophecy! The wicked are “like the chaff which the wind dri- 
veth away.” 

But you will remark that the awful character of my text does 
not appear upon the surface. They “are like the chaff which 
the wind driveth away.” Where—where—where? Where are 
they driven? ‘The man is in health, the sun shines, the sky is 
calm, the world is still about him. Suddenly there is seen a 
little cloud the size of a man’s hand.’ A little signal overtakes 
him. The hurricane begins to rise, but first it is but a faint 
breath. The wicked man feels the cold air blowing on him, but 
he screens it with the physician, and he thinks that surely he 
shall live. The storm is on. God hath decreed it, and man 
cannot stay it. The breath becomes a wind, the wind a storm, 
the storm a howling hurricane. His soul is swept away. To 
go to heaven on angei’s wings is a glorious thing; but to be 
swept out of this world with the wicked, is an awful thing—to 
be carried, not on wings of cherubs, but on the eagle wings of 
the wind; to be borne, not by yon songsters up to their celes- 
tial seats, but to be carried away in the midst of a howling tem- 
pest, by grim fiends. The wicked are like the chaff which the 
wind driveth away. I do not know how to bring out the ful- 
aess of its poetry—the great storm sweeping man from the place 
on which he stands. Heis driven away. And now cannot your 
thoughts go further on, while I again repeat the question, Whitn- 
er is he driven? Ah! whither is he driven ? 

I cannot tell you into what state that soul at once enters ; that 
is to say, I cannot tell you by any guess of my own—that were 
trivolous, and were to play with a solemn matter; but I can 
tell you one thing, Jesus Christ himself hath said it— he shall 
burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire.” You die, but you 
die not. You depart, but you depart to fire that never shal! be 


THE CHAFF DRIVEN AWAY. 309 


quenched. I will not dwell upon the topic. I return again to 
ask the question—“ Who among us shall dwell with the devour- 
ing fire? Who among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings ?” 
Who here is prepared to make his bed in hell? Who shall lie 
down and rest forever in that lake of fire? You must, my hear- 
ers, if you are ungodly, except you repent. Are there none of 
you behind me there, who have been living without Christ, and 
without hope in the world? Are there none of you? Surely 
there are some such. I beseech you, think of your destiny— 
death, and after death the judgment. The wind, and after the 
wind the whirlwind, and after the whirlwind the fire, and after 
’ the fire—forever, forever lost, cast away, where ray of hope can 
never come; where eye of mercy can never look upon you, and 
hand of grace can never reach you. I beseech you, oh, I beseech 
you, by the living God, before whom you stand this day, trem- 
ble and repent. “Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish 
fom the way, when his wrath is kindled but a little.” “Tophet 
is ordained of old, yea, for the king it is prepared ; he hath made 
it deep and large; the pile thereof is fire and much wood; the 
breath of the Lord, like a stream of brimstone, doth kindle it.” 
‘Turn ye, turn ye, why will ye die, O house of Israel?” “ Let 
he wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts: 
nd let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon 
him; and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon.” 

I pray God, the Holy Spirit, to touch some ungodly hearts 
now. Remember, my dear hearers, if there be in your bosoms 
this morning one desire towards Christ, cherish it—blow the 
little spark till it comes to a flame. If your heart melts ever so 
little this morning, I beseech you resist not-——quench not the hea- 
venly influence. Yield up yourselves, and remember the sweet 
text of last Sunday morning, “Whosoever will, let him come 
and take the water of life freely.” Oh that you would but 
come to him! Oh that ye knew how to weep for yourselves! 
Oh that ye knew what a fearful thing it will be to be cast away 
forever! Why will ye die? Is there anything pleasing in de- 
struction? Is sin so luscious to you that you will burn in hell 
forever for it? Is Christ so hard a master that you will not love 
him? Is his cross so ugly that ye will not look towards it? I 


310 THE CHAFF DRIVEN AWAY. 


beseech you by him whose heartis love, the crucified Redeemer — 


who now speaks, look to him and be saved, for he came into the 


world to seek and to save that which was lost, and him that 
cometh to him he will in no wise cast out, for “he is able also 
to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him.” 

To-day, O Spirit, bring sinners to thyself. I exhort you, sin- 
ners, lay hold on Christ. Touch the hem of his garment now. 
Behold, he hangs before you on the cross. As Moses lified up 
the serpent in the wilderness, even so is Jesus lifted up. Look, 
| beseech you, look and live. Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ 
and you shall be saved. As though God did beseech you by 
me, I pray you in Christ’s stead, be ye reconciled to God. And 
O may the Spirit make my appeal effectual! May angels rejoice 
this day over sinners saved and brought to know the Lord 
Assan. ‘ 


PIN ori 


SERMON XIX. 
CLEANSING THE LEPER. 


[ Tue Cleansing of the Leper, according to the Mosaic Cer 
emonial, is taken here as a type of the great and gracious work 
of Christ in saving souls. It is one of a class of subjects in 
which the Scriptures abound, full of the gospel, and deeply in- 
teresting in their analogies. This discourse was preached in 
Exeter Hall, Dec. 30, 1860, is remarkably accurate and com- 
plete in the treatment of the subject, and is mentioned as one 
that had been specially blessed in the saving of souls.] 


“ And if a leprosy break out abroad in the skin, and the leprosy cover al 
the skin of him that hath the plague from his head even to his foot, where- 
soever the priest looketh ; then the priest shall consider: and, behold, if the 
leprosy have covered all his flesh, he shall pronounce him clean that hath 
the plague: it is all turned white: he is clean.” —LEviTI0U8, xiii. 12. 18. 


Tuts is a singular paradox, but not a paradox to him who un 
derstands the gospel. We have great reason to thank God that 
the terrible disease, leprosy, which was one of the curses of the 
East, is so little known in our own land; and even in the few 
cases where leprosy has broken out in our climate, it has al- 
ways assumed a far more mild and mitigated shape than it did 
with the Jews in the land of Canaan. Yet since they had so 
frightful a disease, God, in his irfinite mercy, made use of it a9 
a sort of sermon to the people. Leprosy is to be considered by 
us as the type of sin; and as we read the chapters in Leviticus, 
which concern the shutting up or putting apart, and the purifi- 
gation of a cleansed leper, we are to understand every sentence 


312 OLEANSING THE LEPER. 


as having in it a gospel sermon to us, teaching what is the con- 
dition of a sinner in the sight of God, how that sinner is to be » 
cured, and how he can be restored to the privileges from which 
the leprosy of sin had utterly shut him out. 

I shall need no preface, for the subject is deeply interesting. 
If we have come up here conscious of guilt, laden with iniquity, 
{ am quite certain there will be somewhat in the discourse of 
this morning to cheer our hearts, and to send us home rejoicing 
+ the Lord our God. Carry in your thoughts the one key to 
our text, namely, that leprosy is the type of sin; and I shall 
want you, first of all, to see the leper, and to see in the leper the 
sinner. After we have well looked to him we shall bring him 
before the priest, and stand still while the priest examines him. 
This done, and the sentence being pronounced, we shall listen at- 
tentively to the announcement of the nights and ceremonies which 
were necessary in order to cleanse this leper, which were but 
representations of the way whereby we too must be cleansed. 
And then we shall havea little time to notice certain after-rites 
which follow cleansing, which were not the cause of the cleans- 
ing itself, but necessary before the man could actually enjoy 
the privileges which the cleansing really gained for him. 


I. First, then, contemplate the LOATHSOME AND @HASTLY SPEC- 
TACLE OF A LEPER. 

A leper was extremely loathsome in his perzon. The leprosy 
broke out, at first almost imperceptibly, in certain red spots 
which appeared in the skin. They were painless, but gradually 
increased. Perhaps the man who was the subject of the com- 
plaint scarcely knew that he had it at all; but it increased, and 
further, and further, it spread. The perspiration was unable to 
find a vent, and the skin became dry, and peeled off in scales 
The withering of the skin was too true an index of what was 
going on within; for in the very marrow of the bones there was 
a most frightful rottenness, which in due time would utterly 
consume the victim. The man would eat and drink; he would 
perform, what is called by the physician, the naturalia; all the 
functions would be discharged as if in health. All things would 
go on as before, and he would be subject to very little pain; but 


CLEANSING THE LEPER. 313 


by degrees the bones would rot, in many cases the fingers 
would drop off, and yet without any surgical operation the rest 
of the body was healed, so that there was no bleeding. When 
it came to its very worst phase, the body would dissolve, all 
the strings being loosened, and the whole house of manhood 
would become a horrible mass of animated rubbish rather than 
the stately temple which God originally made it. I could not 
in your presence this morning describe all the loathsomeness of 
an aggravated case of Jewish leprosy ; it would be too sicken- 
ing, if not disgusting. But let me remind you that this, fearful 
as it seems to be, is a very poor portrait of the loathsomeness 
of sin. If God could tell, or, rather, if we could bear to hear 
what God could tell us of the exceeding wickedness and unclean- 
ness of sin, 1 am sure we should die. God hides from all eyes 
but his own the blackness of sin. There is no creature, not 
even an angel before the throne, that ever knew the intolerable 
wickedness of rebellion against God. Yet that little of it which 
the Holy Ghost taught you and me when we were under con- 
viction of sin, was enough to make us fcel that we wished we 
had never been born. Ah! well must I confess, though my life 
was kept and preserved as a child from outward immorality, 
when I first saw myself as I was by nature, and in the thoughts, 
and intents, and imaginations of my heart, I thought that even 
devils in hell could not be baser than myself. Certain I am 
that, whenever the Spirit of God comes into the soul, our good 
opinion of ourselves soon vanishes. We thought we were all 
that heart could wish, but when once taught of God we think 
uhat we are vile and full of sin, that there is no good thing 
whatsoever in us. Loathsome, I say, as was the leper, it is not 
more so in the type than is sin in the estimation of every en- 
lightened mind. 

Think again. The leper was not only loathsome in his per- 
son, but was defiled in all his acts. If he drank out of a vessel, 
the vessel was defiled. If he lay upon a bed, the bed became 
unclean, and whosoever sat upon the bed afterwards became 
unclean too. If he touched but the wall of a house the wall be- 
came unclean, and must be purged. Wherever he went he 
tainted the atmosphere; his breath was as dangerous as the 

14 


314 OLEANSING THE LEPER. 


pestilence. He shot baneful glances from his eyes. All that 
he did was full of the same loathsomeness as was himself. 
Now, this may seem to bea very humiliating truth, but faithful- 
ness requires us to say it, all the actions of the natural man are 
tainted with sin. Whether he eats, or drinks, or whatsoever he 
does, he continues to sin against his God. Nay, if he should 
come up to God’s house and sing and pray, there is sin in his 
songs, for they are but hypocrisy ; there 1s guilt in his prayers, 
for the prayers of the wicked are an abomination unto the 
Lord. Let him attempt to perform holy actions, he is like 
Uzziah who laid hold upon the censer of the priest while the 
leprosy was on his brow, till he was glad enough to retire from 
the sacred place, lest he should be struck dead. Oh! when we 
saw or thought we saw the sinfulness of sin, this was one of the 
darkest parts of it that we discovered, all our actions to be 
stained and tainted with evil. I know not whether I have any 
in this congregation, who are prepared to deny what I assert. 
If there are, it is my duty solemnly to assure them that they 
are unclean, and covered with an incurable leprosy. They are 
hopeless lepers who cannot be cleansed, for no man can be 
cleansed of sin till he is ready to confess that he is all unholy 
and unclean. Submission to this truth is absolutely necessary 
to salvation. Iam not to condemn any man, but still I must 
speak God’s word, and speak it in loving faithfulness. If thou 
dost not confess that all thy actions before thou wast regenerate 
were full of sin and abominable in the sight of God, thou hast 
not yet learned what thou art, and it is not likely that thou wilt 
wish to know what a Saviour is. 

Think of the leper yet again. Being thus the medium of con- 
tagion and defilement wherever he went, the Lord demanded 
that he should be shut out from the society of Israel. There 
was a spot outside the camp, barren, solitary, where lepers were 
confined. They were commanded to wear a covering over the 
mouth and upon the upper lip, and if any passed by they were 
sompelled to cry, “Unclean! Unclean! Unclean!” a sound 
which being muffled by reason of the covering which they wore, 
must have sounded more ghastly and deathlike than any other 
human cry. Some of the Rabbi translate the ery, “ Avoid! 


CLEANSING THE LEPER. S15 


Avoid! Avoid!” One of the American poets has put it, “Room 
for the leper! room!’ But certainly the sense of it is gener- 
ally understood to be “Unclean!” Living apart from their 
dearest friends, shut out from all the pleasures of society, they 
were required never to drink of a running stream of which 
others might drink ; nor might: they sit down on any stone by 
the roadside upon which it was probable any other person might 
rest. They were to all intents and purposes, dead to all the en- 
joyments of life, dead to the endearments and society of 
their friends. Ay, and such is the case with the sinner, with 
regard to the people of God. Dost not thou feel, poor con- 
victed sinner, that thou art unfit to join Christ’s Church? Thou 
canst go and find such mirth as the company of thy fellow- 
lepers can afford. But where God’s people are, thou art out of 
place. Thou feelest in thyself that thou art shut out from the 
communion of saints. Thou canst not pray their prayer nor 
sing their songs. Thou knowest not their joys. Thou hast 
never tasted of their perfect peace. Thou hast never entered 
into the rest which remaineth for them, but which remaineth 
not for thee whilst thou art such an one as thouart now. This, 
however, is the fearfél part of the leprosy of sin, that many 
who are shut out from goodness become contented with the 
exclusion. There may be some who even pretend tc despise the 
privileges which they cannot enjoy. Since they cannot be 
holy, they make holiness the theme of ridicule. Since they 
must not enjoy the delights of piety they turn their heel upon 
them, and say, “That there are no joys in religion, nor bliss 
in love of Christ.’ This is perhaps one of the most fearful 
parts of this leprosy of sin, that it deceives the man himself, 
makes him think himself to be healthy whilst he is full of 
disease, makes him imagine the healthy ones to be diseased, 
whilst he who is the true leper, thinks himself to be the only . 
sane person in the camp. 

Once more, the leper was wholly unable to come up 40 the 
house of God. Other men might offer sacrifices, but not the 
leper; others had a share in the great High Priest’s sacrifice, 
and when he went within the vail he appeared for all others; 
but the leper had neither part nor lot in this matter. He waa 


316 ‘ CLEANSING THE: LEPER. 


shut out from God, as well as shut out from maa. He was no 
partaker of the sacred things of Israel, and all the ordinances of 
the tabernacle were as nothing to him. Think of that, sinner! 
As one full of guilt, thou art shut out from all communion with 
God. True, he gives thee the mercies of this life as the leper 
had his bread and water, but thou hast none of the spiritual joys 
which God affords to his people. Thou canst not stand in nis 
presence, for he is a devouring fire, and would consume thee. 
Thy prayers are shut out from him, thy words are unheard. 
Thou art a prodigal son, and thy father is far from thee. Thou 
hast spent thy substance in riotous living, and no man will give 
to thee. Thou hast become the companion of the swine, and 
thou wouldest fain fill thy belly with the husks which the swine 
do eat. No father’s eye grects thee; at no father’s table dost 
thou sit. The hired servants have bread enough and to spare, 
but thou dost perish with hunger. Oh, sinner! thou who dost 
not feel thyself to be what I describe thee wilt one day find it to 
be a very awful thing to be denied all fellowship with God, for 
at last thou mayest seek in vain to cross thy father’s threshold. 
After death thou wilt long to enter within the pearly gates, and 
thou shalt be thrust back, for lepers and defiling ones can never 
stand in the sanctified presence of the holy God. Where angels 
veil their faces, lepers shall not exhale their putrid breath. God 
drove Satan out of Paradise because he sinned, and will he suffer 
sin a second time to intrude into his presence? No, thou shalt 
find that as long as thou and thy sins are one, God will always 
be at war with thee. As long as thou art at peace with thy 
guilt, God vows eternal warfare with thee. 

Now I wish I could more forcibly put the position of a sinner 
in God’s sight this morning. Let me recapitulate. Every man 
by nature 1s like a leper; loathsome in his person, infected in 
all his actions, he is incapable of fellowship with God’s people, 
and he is shut out utterly and entirely by his sin from the pres- 
ence and acceptance of God. 


Il. I shall now prove THE LEPER UP TO THE HIGH PRIEST. 
Here he stands; the priest has come out to meet him. Mark, 
whenever a leper was cleansed under the Jewish law—the leper 


OLEANSING THE LEPER.- 817 


did nothing—the priest did all. I invite you to read over this 
chapter when you are at home, and you will see that previous to 
his being pronounced clean, the leper was passive—the priest 
did everything. Well, the priest comes out from the sanctuary 
to the place of the lepers, where no other man might go but he 
in his priestly office. He calls up one leper before him; he 
looks at him, and there is a spot on that leper which is not lep- 
rous—quick, raw, healthy flesh; the priest puts him aside, he is 
an unclean leper. Here is another, and he has but one or two 
red spots appearing beneath the skin; all the rest of his tody is 
perfectly sound—the priest puts him aside, he is an unclean 
leper. Here is another; he is from head to foot covered with 4 
scaly whiteness of the filthy disease; the hair is all turned 
white, owing to the decay of the powers of nature, which are 
unable now to nourish the roots of the hair. There is not a 
single speck of health in him from the crown of his head to the 
sole of his foot, but all is pollution and filth. But hark! the 
high priest says to him, “Thou art clean.” And after certain 
necessary ceremonies he is admitted into the camp, and after- 
wards into the very sanctuary of God. My text asserts, that if 
there was found any sound place in him, he was unclean. But 
when the leprosy had covered him, wheresoever the priest 
looked, then the man became by sacrificial rights a clean leper 

Now, let me bring up the sinner before the Great High Priest 
this morning. How many there are, who, as they come up 
hither, are ready to confess that they have done many things 
which are wrong, but they say, “Though we have done much 
which we cannot justify, yet there have been many good actions 
which might almost counterbalance the sin. Have we not been 
charitable to the poor? have we not sought to instruct the igno 
rant; to help those that are out of the way? We have some 
sins, we do confess; but there is much at the bottom which is 
still right and good, and we therefore hope that we shall be 
delivered.” I put you aside in Gods name, this morning, as 
unclean lepers. For you there is no hope, and no promise of 
salvation whatever. Here comes a second. He admits with 
candor that he has a very great measure of guilt—perhaps not 
open immorality, but he confesses that his thoughts, and the 


318 CLEANSING THE LEPER. 


imaginations of his heart have been evil, and evil frequently. 
: But still,” saith he, “though I have not one good work of which — 
to boast, nor any righteousness in which to glory, yet I do hope 
that by repentance I may amend; I trust that by a resolute per- 
sistence in good works I may yet blot out my past life, and so 
may enter into heaven.” I set him aside again as being an un- 
clean leper, for whom cleansing rites are not provided. He is 
one who must still be kept without the camp; he has not arrived 
at that stage in which it is possible for him to be made clean. 
But here comes another. Probably he is a really better man 
than either of the other two; but not in his own opinion, He 
stands before us, and, with many a sigh and tear, confesses that 
he is utterly ruined and undone. “Sir, a montk or two ago I 
would have claimed a righteousness with the very best of them. 
I, too, could have boasted ‘of what I‘nave done; but now I see 
my righteousness to be as filthy rags, and all my goodness is as 
an unclean thing. I count all these things but dross and dung. 
I tread upon them and despise them. I have done no good 
thing. I have sinned and come short of the glory of God. If 
ever there was a sinner that deserved to be damned, sir, that 
soul am [; if ever there was one who had not any excuse to 
make, but who must plead guilty, without any extenuating cir- 
cumstances, that man am |. As for the future, I can make no 
promise; I have often promised, and so often lied. I have so 
often trusted in myself that I would reform, so often have | 
hoped the energy of my nature might yet heal my disease, that 
I renounce, because I cannot help renouncing all such desires, 
Lord, if ever I am made whole, thy grace must make me so. 
I do desire to be rid of sin, but I can no more rid myself of sin 
than I can pluvk the sun from the firmament, or scoop the wa- 
ters from the depth of the sea. I would be perfect even as thou 
ait perfect; but I cannot change my heart. As well might the 
viper lose his will to poison, the Ethiopian change his skin, or 
the leopard his spots, as I cease to do evil. Lord, at thy feet I 
fall, full of leprosy from head to foot; nothing have I to boast 
of, nothing to trust to except thy mercy.” My brother, you 
are a clean leper; your sins are forgiven you, your iniquities 
are put away. Through the blood of Jesus Christ, who died 


OLEANSING THE LEPER. $19 


apon the tree, you are saved. As soon as ever the leprosy had 
come right out, the man was clean; and as soon as ever your 
sin is fully manifest, so that in your conscience you feel yourself 
to be really a sinner, there is a way of salvation for you. Then 
by the sprinkling of blood and the washing of water, you may 
be made clean. 

As long as a man has anything to boast of, there is no Christ 
for him ; but the moment he has nothing of his own, Christ is 
his. Whilst thou art anything, Christ is nothing to thee; but 
when thou art nothing, Christ is everything. All the warrant 
that a sinner needs in coming to Christ is to know that he is a 
sinner. For “Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners.” 
Do I know myself to be a sinner? Then he came to save me; 
and there I rest and there I trust. IfI have any good feelings 
or good works which take away from me the power to call my- 
self a sinner, or if they diminish the force and emphasis which | 
put upon the word when I use it, then may I fear that I have no 
right to come to Christ. Christ died, “the just for the unjust, 
to bring us to God.” AmI unjust? Must! honestly declare 
I am? “Christ died for the ungodly.” Am I ungodly? is 
this my grief and sorrow that I am ungodly? Then Christ 
died for me.” I do not know, said Martin Luther, when 
men will ever believe that text in which it is written, Christ 
died for our sins. They will think that Christ died for our 
righteousness, whereas he died for our sins. Christ had no eye 
to our goodness when he came to save us, but to our bad- 
ness. A physician, when he comes to my house, has not an eye 
to my present health; he does not come there because I am 
healthy, but because I am sick, and the more sick I am, the more 
call for the physician’s skill, and the more argument does my 
sickness yield why he should exercise all his craft and use his 
best medicines on my behalf. Your only plea with Christ is your 
guilt. Use it, sinner, use it as David did when he said, “ Lord 
have mercy upon my iniquity, for it is great!” If he had said, 
“ Have mercy upon my iniquity, for it is little,’ he would have 
been a legalist, and would have missed his mark. But when he 
said, “ Have mercy, for it is great!” he understood the gospel 
riddle, that strange paradox at which Pharisees are offended, 


320 CLEANSING THE LEPER. 


and which worldlings always hate—the glorious fact that Jesus 
Christ came into the world “not to call the righteous, but sin- 
ners, to repentance.” 


lI. We shall now briefly turn our attention to THE CEREMO- 
NIES WHICH THE PRIEST USED IN THE OLEANSING OF THE LEPER. 

I will read the verses, and expound them briefly. “And the 
priest shall go forth out of the camp; and the priest shall look, 
and, behold, if the plague of leprosy be healed in the leper, 
then shall the priest command to take for him that is to be 
cleansed two birds alive and clean, and cedar wood, and scarlet, 
and hyssop; and the priest shall command that one of the birds 
be killed in an earthen vessel over running water; as for the 
living bird, he shall take it, and the cedar wood, and the scarlet, 
and the hyssop, and shall dip them ‘and the living bird in the 
blood of the bird that was killed over the running water; and 
he shall sprinkle upon him that is to be cleansed from the lep- 
rosy seven times, and shall pronounce him clean, and shall let 
the living bird loose into the open field.” You will perceive, first, 
that the priest went to the leper, not the leper to the priest. We 
go not up to heaven, first, till Christ comes down from his 
Father’s glory to the place where we as lepers are shut out from 
God. Oh! glorious High Priest, methinks I see thee this morn- 
ing coming out from the tabernacle of the Most High, where 
thou hast offered thy complete sacrifice, and thou comest down 
to us loathsome and abhorred sinners. Thou dost take upon 
thyself the form of man. Thou dost not disdain the Virgin’s 
womb; thou comest to sinners; thou eatest and drinkest with them. 

But the coming of the priest was not enough, there must be a 
sacrifice, and on this occasion, in order to set out the two ways 
by which a sinner is saved, there was sacrifice mingled with res- 
urrection. First, there was sacrifice. One of the birds was ta- 
ken, and its blood was shed in a vessel which was full, as the 
Hebrew hath it, of “living water”—of water which had not been 
stagnant, but which was clean. Just as when Jesus Christ was 
put to death, blood and water flowed from his side to be “ of sin 
a double cure,” so in the earthen vessel there was received, first, 
the “living water,” and then the blood of the bird which had 


CLEANSING THh LEPER. $2) 


Just been slain. If sin is put away it must be by blood. There 
is no way of putting sin from before the presence of God except 
by the streams which flow from the open veins of Christ. It 
was nothing that the leper did. You notice he does nothing 
whatever in the whole affair but stand still and humbly partake 
of the benefits which are given to him through the mission of the 
priest, and through the slaughter of the bird: And then the 
second bird was dipped into the blood until all its feathers were 
red and dropping with gore. It was doubtless tied round the 
cedar stick at the end of which was the hyssop to make a kind 
of brush. The bird’s wings were tied along the stick, and the 
whole was dipped in the blood of the bird that was slain; and 
when this had been done seven times, the strings were cut, and 
the living bird allowed to fly away. This is a picture of Christ. 
As a living bird he ascends on high, after being slain ‘or us— 
scattering the red drops of atonement, he rises above the clouds, 
which receive him out of our sight, and there befcre his Fath- 
er’s throne, he pleads the full merit of the sacrifice which he of. 
fered for us once for all. 

The leper was made clean by sacrifice and by resurrection, but 
he was not clean till the blood was sprinkled on him. Chris- 
tians, the cross does not save. us till Christ’s blood is sprinkled 
on our conscience. Yet the virtual salvation was accomplished 
for all the elect when Christ died for them upon the tree. It is 
the Joy of every Christian to stand here saved by another. He 
knows that he is full of leprosy, that in himself there is no rea- 
son whatever why he should be cleansed, but that the reasons 
are all the other way, for there is every reason why he should 
continue to be shut out forever from the presence of God. But 
there stands the High Priest, the great Melchisedec, the Son of 
the Virgin, and the Son of God. He has offered his own blood 
for us. He who offered it, applies it to the conscience. But 
the saving of your soul rests not with yourself, but with Christ 
Jesus, just as the cleansing of the leper was not with the leper, 
but with the priest. How many there are among God’s people 
who say, “1 know that Christ died for sinners, but I don’t get 
any comfort from it, because I do not feel as if I were saved.” 
That is self-righteousness in a very deceitful shape. You will 

14* 


eee CLEANSING THE LEPER. 


not be saved by feeling that Christ died for you, but by his dy- 
ing for you. If he died for you, you were saved when he died. 
If he took your sins, he took them in very deed, and they are 
not yours. If Christ was your substitute at all, then God can 
never punish two for one offence—first the substitute, and then 
the sinner himself. If Christ really died for you, then your sins 
are pardoned, whether you feel that they are pardoned or rot. 
“Yes,” says one, “but I want to realize that.” It is a very 
blessed thing to realize it; but it is not the realizing that saves. 
It is the death of Christ that saves, not your realizing the death. 
If there be a life boat, and some poor man be ready to drown, 
and some strong hand rescues him, when he comes to himself he 
realizes that he is in the boat; but it is not the realizing that he is 
in the boat that saves him, it is the life boat. So it is Christ that 
saves the sinner, not the sinner’s fedlings, or willings, or doings; 
and in heaven the whole glory of salvation will be to the wounds 
of Jesus, and nothing else. 

“But,” says one, “how am I to know that Christ died for 
me?’ You will never know it until you are willing to stand in 
the leper’s place full of leprosy. If you know this day that you 
are full of sin, if you are conscious that in you, that is, in your 
flesh, there dwelleth no good thing, then it is written that Christ 
lied for our sins, according to the Scriptures—not according to 
our feelings, but according to the Scriptures. How do I know 
that I am full of sin? Not merely because [| feel it, but because 
God tells me so. How do I know that Christ died for me? Not 
because I feel it, but because God tells me so. He says Christ 
came into the world to save sinners. [ am a sinner, I feel it, 1 
know it. God forbid that I should be such a liar to myself as 
vo deny it. Then he came to save me, “ Come, now, let us reason 
together. Though your sins be as scarlet’”—that is my case— 
“ they shall be as wool, though they be red like crimson”—that 
is my case—* they shall be as snow.” It is just this—if you are 
willing to stand to-day condemned as a sinner, and nothing more 
tnan a sinner, then Christ died for you. Your business is to 
srust your soul on the fact that Christ did hang on the tree for 
sinners; for mark—faith is trusting Christ, and having done 
with self. Put your finger on any sound place in your flesh, 


CLEANSING THE LEPER. 320 


you are a lost man. Point to any good thing that you can trust 
to, and there is no heaven for you. Rely on anything that you 
have felt, or thought, or said, or done, and you rely on a broken 
reed; but trust in Christ, and Christ alone; cast your arms 
around his cross, and cling to that, you are saved; yet it will not 
be your clinging, it will be the cross that will save you. lo 
not trust to your clinging, trust to the cross. Still to the ercss 
flee away, ye poor, lost, ruined ones, for under its shadow there is 
safety for the defenceless, there is hope even for the despairing. 


IV. Observe, that AFTER THE LEPER WAS CLEANSED, THERE 
WERE CERTAIN THINGS WHICH HE HAD TO DO. 

Yet until he is cleansed, he is to do nothing. The sinner can 
do nothing towards his own salvation. His place is the place of 
death. Christ must be his life. The sinner is so lost that Christ 
must begin, and carry on, and finish all ; but when the sinner is 
saved, then he begins to work in right good earnest. When 
once he is no more a leper, but a leper cleansed, then for the love 
he bears his master’s name, there is no trial too arduous, no ser- 
vice too hard; but he spends his whole strength in magnifying 
and glorifying his Lord. I want to call your attention to the 
further cleansing of the leper. Mark, he was wholly cleansed 
by the priest, and what was done afterwards, was done by a 
cleansed man. “ He that is to be cleansed shall wash his clothes, 
and shave off all his hair, and wash himself in water.” Blood 
first, water afterwards. No cleansing from evil habits until there 
has been cleansing from sin. There is no making the nature 
clean until the guilt is put away. “He shall wash his clothes, 
and shave off his hair, and wash himself in water, that he may 
be clean, and after that he shall come into the camp, and shall 
tarry abroad out of his tent seven days.” He did not tell him 
to wash first. It would have been of no use to him whatever, 
He did not tell him to wash his clothes and shave his hair first. 


“No outward forms could make him clean, 
The leprosy laid deep within.” 


No, the priest must do all the work at first. After that, then the 
leper must be washed. So sinner, if you are to be saved Christ 


324 CLEANSING THE LEPER. 


must do it all; but when once you have faith in Christ, then you 
must be washed; then must you cease from sin, and then by the 
Holy Spirit’s power you shall be enabled to do so. What was 
ineffective before, shall become mighty enough now, through the 
life which God has put into you. The washing with water by 
the word, and the cleansing of yourself from dead works, shall 
become an effectual and mighty duty. You shall be made holy 
and walk in white, in the purity wherewith Christ hath endowed 
you. The shaving off of his hair was fitly to represent how all 
the old things were to pass away, and everything was to become 
new. All the white hair was to be cut off, as you read in the 
9th verse—“ He shall shave all the hair off his head, and nis 
beard, and his eyebrows.” ‘There was not a remnant or relic 
left of the old state in which the hair was white; all was to be 
given up. So it is with the sinner. \ When he is once pardoned, 
once cleansed, then he begins to cut off the old habits, his old 
prides, his old joys. The beard on which the hoary Jew prided 
himself, was to come off, and the eyebrows which seem to be 
necessary to make the countenance look decent, were all to be 
taken away. 

So it is with the pardoned man. He did nothing before, he 
does everything now. He knew that good works were of no 
benefit to him in his carnal state, but now he becomes so strict 
that he will shave off every hair of his old state. Not one dar- 
ling lust shall be left, not one iniquity shall be spared, all must 
be cut away. “He shall wash his clothes also, he shall wash 
his flesh in water, and he shall be clean.” There is one thing ! 
want you to notice in the eighth verse, namely, that he was not 
allowed to go into his own tent. He might go in with the peo- 
ple, but he might not go into his “tent.” Now though the sin 
ner has to trust in Christ just as he is, yet that sinner will not 
at once be able to go into his own tent, that is, he will never be 
able to realize that Christ is personally his own, until there has 
been something more than faith, namely, the cleansing purifica- 
tion of the Spirit’s power. As to full assurance I do not think 
that is to be attained by immediate faith in Christ ; full assurance 
is an after-result. Faith groweth by the influence of the Spirit 
till it comes to assurance. Yet mark, though for seven days 


OLEANSING THE LEPER. 823 


ebe man might not go into his own house, he was clean, and so, 
if you as a sinner full of sin, trust Christ to be your all, though 
no joy may follow for seven days, yet you are a pardoned man. 
Though you may not be able to go into your house and say, 
“1 know I am forgiven,” yet you are forgiven. The very hour 
when sin abounds is the hour when grace abounds. When sin 
has cut the throat of all your hopes, then Jesus Christ, the great 
hope and solace of his people, comes into your heart, and 
though you may scarce be able to see him, yet he is there and 
you are a saved man. What a glorious salvation is this, and 
its after-results, how pure and how heavenly ! 

I will not detain you further than to notice that this man, be 
fore he might further enjoy the privileges of his healed estate, 
was to bring an offering, and the priest was to take him to the 
very door of the tabernacle. He never dare come there before, 
but he may come now. So the pardoned man may come right 
up to God’s mercy-seat, and may bring the offering of holiness 
and good works. He is a pardoned man now. You ask me 
how? Not by anything he did, but by what the priest did, and 
that alone. Read the fourteenth verse, “ The priest shall take 
some of the blood of the trespass offering, and the priest shal] 
put it upon the tip of the right ear of him that is to be 
cleansed.” Here the Lord puts away the sins of the ear, which 
are very many.’ The sin of the ear—when thou used to hear 
lascivious songs, malignant words, and idle tattle. “He shal 
put it upon the tip of the right ear of him that is to be cleansed 
and upon the thumb of his right hand.” Have you read that 
How many times has the right hand sinned against God! How 
have your actions defiled you! “He shall put it upon the tip 
of the right ear of him that is to be cleansed, and upon the 
thumb of his right hand, and upon the great toe of his right 
foot? How have your feet run after wickedness! How great 
ly you need to be cleansed ! 

But mark, when this blood had been put on, the priest did 
more, for he anointed him. [Read the seventeenth verse: “And 
of the rest of the oil that is in his hand shall the priest put 
upon the tip of the right ear of him that is to be cleansed, and 
upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great toe of his 


826 CLEANSING THE LEPER. 


right foot, upou the blood of the trespass offering.” This was 
telling him again very plainly that which he might have seen — 
already in the type of the two birds. As soon as ever 8 map 
is pardoned, there elapses a time before he completely under- 
stands the plan of salvation. When he does, he perceives that 
he is first cleansed with blood, all his sins, of ear, of hand, of 
foot, or whatever they may be, are all put away by blood 
But next, that he may become God’s servant, he is anointed 
by the influence of the Holy Spirit with the sanctifying oil. 
That oil is put on his ear, so that his ear hears his Master’s 
voice, and listens to the Word of God. That oil is put upon his 
hand that he may be a consecrated man to serve his God. That 
sil is put upon his foot that his feet may run in the way of 
3od’s commands, even to the end. But do mark, for I fear lest 
: should spoil that which I want to convey. All this was after 
the leper was cleansed. He could not have done any of this 
aimself until the first part had been done for him. 

To sum up the whole sermon in one or two short sentences. 
Sinner, if thou art this day unrenewed and unregenerate, thou 
art loathsome to thyself; thou art incapable of fellowship with 
God; thou art preparing thyself for the pit of hell. But the 
way of salvation is simply this: If thou art to-day full of sin, 
laden with iniquity, if thou art ready to confess there is no 
good thing in thee, if thou art willing to take the place of a 
prisoner who has been tried, condemned and cast, then Christ 
has died for thee. Christ has shed the blood, Christ has risen 
up on high, and thy salvation is finished. Say not in thy heart, 
“1 do not feel this, I do not feel that.” It is not thy feeling or 
doing; it is what Christ has done. He must do all for thee; 
and all he asks of thee is simply to stand in the place of the un-: 
just that he may come to thee in the place of the just, while he 
stands in thy rocm and stead. Is this too easy for you? Are 
you too proud to be saved by such a system as this? Then, 
what can I say to you, but that you deserve to die if you neg- 
lect a plan of salvation so simple and so admirably adapted to 
your case? But instead thereof, if you say, “That suits me, 
for | have nothing to trust to, I am lost,” why, man, do you 
not see that inasmuch as it suits you, itis yours? For whom 


CLEANSING THE LEPER. 327 


was the wedding garment made—for those who had fine robes 
of their own? No—for the naked. For whom was the bath 
open? for the clean? No—for the filthy. Step in, filthy man, 
thy filth is thy warrant. For whom is medicine provided? for 
the healthy ? No, it were an insult. For the sick. Thy sick- 
ness is thy warrant; come to Mercy’s hospital and be thou 
healed. 

Whom dost thou think Christ came to carry on his shoulders 
to heaven? Those that can walk there themselves? No, let 
them trudge their weary way: if they think they can go to 
heaven with their good works, let them do so. One of two 
things, either you must be saved without deserving to be saved 
—saved by the works of another—or else you must keep the 
whole law, and so inherit heaven of your own right and patent. 
If, then, you are willing to come to Christ, just as you are with- 
out any preparation, but just simply as a sinner, then Christ has 
made atonement for you; your guilt is put away ; God accepts 
you: you are a pardoned man. You may go out at yonder 
door and say in your heart, “ Therefore being justified by faith, 
we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ. And 
not only so, but we also join in God through our Lord Jesus 
Christ, by whom we now have received the atonement.” As 
for holiness and good works, these shall come afterwards. 
Having believed in Christ, his Spirit shall be given, and you 
shall be zealous for good works. While the legalist is talking 
ab ut them, you shall dothem. What you could not do before, 
you shall do now. When you have given up all trust in your- 
self, you shall become holy and pure; and the Spirit of God 
shall enter into you, and shall renew you. You shall be kept 
by the power of God till without spot, or wrinkle, or any such 
thing, you shall be presented before your Father’s face saved— 
saved eternally. 

God add his blessing! I have sought to preach to you the 
zospel as plainly as possible. I may still have been misunder- 
stood. If so, I trust that is not my fault. I have repeated over 
and over again, that the sinner, near despairing, may now come 
and put his trust in Christ, and find life in Jesus’ death, and 
healing in Jesus’ wounds. Amzn. 


SERMON XX. 


THE WAILING OF RISCA. 


[Somzrmm the last of November, 1860, the beautiful valley 
of Risca, in South Wales, was visited by s terrible calamity. 
By an explosion in one of the mines, a large number of lives 
were lost, and the whole valley thrown into consternation and 
grief. Here Spurczon had been accustomed to spend a few 
days occasionally for rest and relaxation. The present discourse, 
preached in Exeter Hall, London, Dec. 9, 1860, commemorates 
the sad event, and he afterwards refers to it as a sermon spe- 
cially blessed of God to souls. | 


“Saddenly are my tents spoiled, and my eurtains in a moment.” 
JEREMIAH, iv. 20. 


Tux sorrow of the weeping prophet was exceeding heavy 
when he uttered these words of lamentation. A great and pres- 
ent burden from the Lord is weighing so heavily upon our heartg 
this morning, that we cannot spare so much as a moment for 
sympathy with the griefs of past ages. God has visited our 
land, and his strokes have been exceeding hard. We are con- 
strained to take up a wailing, and cry aloud, “Suddenly are my 
tents spoiled, and my curtains in a moment.” There is a spot 
in South Wales which has frequently yielded me a quiet and 
delightful retreat. Beautiful for situation, surrounded by lofty 
mountains, pierced by romantic valleys, the breathing of its air 
refreshes the body, and the sight of the eyes makes glad the 
heart. I have climbed its hills, 1 have seen the ever-widening 


THE WAILING OF RISCA, 329 


landscape, the mountains of Wales, the plains of England, and 
the seas sparkling afar. I have descended the hills and marked 
the mist creeping up the side of the hills and covering the woods 
with clouds. I have mingled with its pious men and women, 
and worshipped God in their assemblies. These lips have min- 
istered the Word in that once happy valley I have been fired 
with the devotion of the people when they have listened to the 
Word. Well do Iremember one night, when, crowded together 
in the place of worship, hearty Welsh miners responded to every 
word of Christ’s minister, with their “ gogoniants,” encouraging 
me to preach the gospel, and crying “Glory to God,” while the 
message was proclaimed. I remember how they constrained 
me, and kept me well nigh till midnight, preaching three ser- 
mons, one after another, almost without rest, for they loved to 
listen to the gospel. God was present with us, and many a time 
has the baptismal pool been stirred since then by the fruit of 
that night’s labor. 

Nor shall I ever forget, when standing in the open air beneath 
God’s blue sky, I addressed a vast gathering within a short dis- 
tance of that spot; when the Spirit of God was poured upon us, 
and men and women were swayed to and fro under the heavenly 
message, as the corn is moved by the summer winds. Great 
was our joy that day, when the people met together in thou. 
sands, and with songs and praises separated to their homes, talk- 
ing of what they had heard. But now our visitation of that 
neighborhood must ever be mingled with sorrow. How hath 
God been pleased to smite down strong men, and to take away 
the young men upon a sudden! “How suddenly are my tents 
spoiled, and my curtains ina moment.” Oh! vale of Risca, I 
take up a lamentation for thee: the Lord hath dealt sorely with 
thee. Behold, and see if there be sorrow in any valley like unto 
thy sorrow which is done unto thee. The angel of death has 
emptied out his quiver upon thee; the awful reaper hath gath- 
ered to himself full sheaves from thy beautiful valley. 

You all know the story; it scarce needs that I should tell it 
to you. Last Saturday week, some two hundred or more mi- 
ners descended in health and strength to their usual work in the 
bowels of the earth. They had not been working long, theis 


330 {HR WAILING OF RISCA. 


wives and their children had risen, and their little ones had gone _ 
to their schools, when suddenly there was heard a noise at the 
mouth of the pit —it was an explosion: all knew what it meant. 
Men’s hearts failed them, for well they prophecied the horror 
which would soon reveal itself. They wait awhile; the foul gas 
must first be scattered; brave men with their lives in their 
hands descend into the pit, and when they are abie to see with 
the dim miner’s lamp, the light falls upon corpse after corpse. 
A few, a handful, are brought up alive, and scarce alive ; but yet, 
thank God, with enough of the vital spark remaining to be again 
kindled to a flame; but the great mass of those strong men have 
yielded to death. Some of them were brought up with their 
faces burned and scarred, their bodies disfigured by the fire; 
but many are discovered whose faces looked as if they sweetly 
slept, so that it was scarcely possible to believe that they really 
could be dead, so quietly had the spirit quitted the habitation of 
clay. Can you picture to yourselves the scene? The great 
fires lit around the pit, flaming both night and day; the thick 
mist, the pouring rain drenching the whole of the valley. Do 
you see the women as they come clustering round the pit, 
shrieking for their sons, and their husbands, and their fathers’ 
Do you hear that scream as yonder woman has just discovered 
the partner of her life? and there, do you mark another bending 
over the forms of her two stalwart sons, now, alas! taken from 
her forever? Do you mark the misery that sits upon the face 
of some who have not found their sons, their fathers, their hus. 
bands, or their brothers, and who know not where they are? 
The misery in that valley is past descripfion; those who have 
witnessed it, fail to be able to picture it. As thecry of Egypt 
in the night when the destroying angel went through all the land 
and smote the first-born; as the wail of Rachel when she could 
not be comforted for her children, because they were not: such 
has been the weeping, the lamentation of that fair but desolate 
valley. 

My friends, this judgment has a voice to us, and the scarce 
buried bodies of those men which lie around us in vision, have 
each a sorrowful lesson. The cry of the widow, and of the 
childless mother, shall come up into our ears to-day; and 0 


THE WAILING OF RISOA. 83 i 


Lord God of Sabaoth, may it so arouse us that we may hear, 
and fear, and tremble, and turn unto thee—that this dread ca- 
lamity may be to us the means of our salvation, or if saved, the 
means of stirring us up more earnestly to seek the salvation of 
our fellow-men. 

There are three points upon which I shall try to address you 
this morning, though I feel inadequate to such a task. First, 
shall say somewhat upon sudden bereavements ; then I shal. 
dwell awhile upon the fact of sudden death; and afterwards will 
say but a little, for we know but little of the sudden exchange 
which sudden death shall bring both to saints and sinners. 


I. Our first theme is SUDDEN BEREAVEMENTS. 

Alas! alas! how soon may we be childless; how soon may 
we be widowed of the dearest objects of our affections! O 
Lord, thou hast shown to us this day how soon thou canst blast 
our gourds and wither all the fruits of our vineyard. The dear- 
est ones, the partners of our blood, how soon can death proclaim 
a divorce between us-—our children, the offspring of our loins, 
how soon canst thou lay them beneath the sod! We have not 
a single relative who may not become to us within the next 
moment, a fountain of grief. All that are dear and precious to 
us are only here by God’s good pleasure. What should we be 
to-day, if it were not for those whom we love, and who love us? 
What were our house without its little prattlers? What were 
our habitation without the wife of our bosom? What were our 
daily business without our associates and frends to cheer us in 
our trials? Ah! this were a sad world, indeed, if the ties of 
kindred, of affection, and of friendship all be snapped; and yet 
it is such a world that they must be sundered, and may be 
divided at any moment. 

From the fact that sudden bereavements are possible—not 
only to miners and to women whose husbands are upon the sea, 
but to us also—I would that we would learn profitable lessons. 
And first let us learn to hold loosely our dearest friends. Let us 
love them—love them we may, love them we should—but let 
us always learn to love them as dying things. Oh, build not 
thy nest on any of these trees, for they are all marked for the 


$32 THE WAILING OF RISOA. 


axe. “Set not thine affections on things on earth,” for the things 
of earth must leave thee, and then what wilt thou do when thy 
joy is emptied, and the golden bow] which held thy inirth shall 
be dashed in pieces? Love first and foremost Christ; and 
when thou lovest others, still love them not as though they 
were immortal. Love not clay as though it were undying— 
love not dust as though it were eternal. So hold thy friend that 
thou shalt not wonder when he vanishes from thee; so view the 
partakers of thy life that thou wilt not be amazed when they 
glide into the land of spirits. See thou the disease of mortality 
on every cheek, and write not Eternal upon the creature of an 
hour. 

Take care that thou puttest all thy dear ones into God’s hand. 
Thou hast put thy soul there, put them there. Thou canst trust 
him for temporals for thyself, trust\thy jewels with him. Feel 
that they are not thine own, but that they are God’s loans to 
thee ; loans which may be recalled at any moment—precious 
benisons of heaven, not entailed upon thee, but of which tliou 
art but a tenant at will. Your possessions are never so safe as 
when you are willing to resign them, and you are never so rich 
as when you put all you have into the hand of God. You shall 
find it greatly mitigate the sorrow of bereavements, if before 
bereavement you shall have learned to surrender every day all 
the things that are dearest to you into the keeping of your gra- 
cious God. 

Further, you who are blessed with wife and children, and 
friends, take care that you bless God for them. Sing a song of 
praise to him who hath blessed you so much more than others. 
You are not a widow, but there are many that wear the weeds, and 
why is it not your lot? You are not bereaven of your spouse, 
but there is many a man whose heart is rent by such a calam- 
ity,—why is it not your portion too? You have not to follow 
to-morrow your little ones to their narrow graves—early flow- 
ers that did but bud and never ripened, withering, alas! too 
soon. Oh! by the sorrow which you would feel if they were 
- taken away, I exhort you to bless God for them while you have 
them. Oh! be not ungrateful, lest thou provoke the Lord 
to smite the mercy which thou dost not value. Sing unto the 


THE WAILING OF RISCA. 330 


Lord, sing unto his name. Give unto him the praise which he 
deserves for his sparing favors which he has marifested towards 
you in your household. 

And then permit me to remind you that if these sudden be- 
reavements ma> come, and there may be a dark chamber in 
any house in a moment, and the coffin may be in any one 
of our habitations, let us so act to our kinsfolk and relativey 
as though we knew they were soon about to die. Young man, 
so treat thy hoary father as thou wouldst behave to him if thou 
knewest he would die to-morrow. When thou shalt follow him 
to the grave, amidst all thy tears for his loss, let there not be 
one tear of repentance because of thine illbehavior to him. 
And you, godly fathers and mothers, to you I have a special 
message—your children are committed to your care; they are 
growing up, and what if after they be grown up they should 
plunge into sin and die at last impenitent! Let not the fierce 
regret sting you like an adder,—“ Oh that 1 had prayed for my 
children! Oh that I had taught them before they departed.” 
I pray you so live, that when you stand over your child’s dead 
body you may never hear a voice coming up from that clay, 
“Father, thy negligence was my destruction. Mother, thy 
want of prayer was the instrument of my damnation.” But so 
live tliat when you hear the funeral knell, for a neighbor even, you 
may be able to say, “ Poor soul, whether he is gone to heaven 
or to hell, I know I am clear of his blood.” And with double 
earnestness be it so with your children. “ Yes,” says one, ~ but 
I have tkought of teaching my children more of Christ, and 
peing more earnest in prayer for them bye-and-bye,” but what 
if they should die to-morrow? “Yes,” says the wife, “I have 
thought of speaking to my ungodly husband, and trying to in 
duce him to attend the house of God with me, but ] was afraid 
he would only laugh at me, so ! put it off for a month or two.” 
Ah! what if he dies before you have cleared your conscience of 
him? Oh, my brothers and sisters in Christ, ‘f sinners will be 
damned, at least ‘et them leap to hell over our bodies; and if 
they will perish, let them perish with our arms about their 
knees, imploring them to stay, and not madly to destroy them- 
selves. If hell must be filled, at least let it be filled in the teeth 


334 THE WAILING OF RISCA. 


of our exertions, and let not one go there unwarned and un | 


prayed for. 

In the light,-then, of sudden bereavements, let not 
another hour pass over your head, when you have reached 
home, before you have freed your conscience of the blood of 
your children’s souls. Gather them together around you this 
afternoon, and say to them, “My dear children, I have learned 
to-day that you may die; I knew it before, but I have had it 
mpressed upon my mind by a solemn incident. My dear chil- 
dren, I cannot help telling you, that as you must die, I am 
anxious that God’s Holy Spirit should graciously lead you to 
repent of sin and seek a Saviour.” And then, when you have 
told them the way to salvation in simple terms, put your arms 
about their necks, and bid the little ones kneel down, and pray, 
“O God! upon their infant hearts, stamp thou thine image. 
As they are in the image of the earthly, so make them in the 
image of the heavenly, that at the last I may be able to say, 
‘Here am J, and the children thou hast given me.’” 


II. The second head of my discourse is SuDDEN DEATH, AS WE 
VIEW IT MORE PARTICULARLY IN RELATION TO OURSELVES. 

The miners of Risca had no more idea of dying that Saturday 
morning than you or I have, nor did there seem much likelihood 
that they would. They had gone up and down the pit, some 
of them, many thousands of times in their lives. It is true that 
some had perished there, but then, how very many had gone up 
and dewn and had not perished. Nay, they had grown so fear- 
less of danger, that some of them even thrust themselves into 
it, and in defiance of every regulation for the preservation of 
human life, they were bold and careless, and would gratify a self: 
ish indulgence when a spark might have caused the destruction of 
them all. We will not say that it was any negligence that caused 
this accident—God forbid that we should lay anything to the 
charge of those who have now departed, and have to answer 
before their God—but, at any rate, sure it is that men who have 
most to do with danger are generally the most callous, and 
those who are most exposed are usually utterly careless about 
the very danger which others see, but which they will not see 


THE WAILING OF RISCA. 205 


themselves. Any warning you or I might have given them would 
have been thought unnecessary, if not impertinent. “ Why need 
I be so careful? I have done this fifty times before. Why may 
I not-no it again?” But as in a moment, although there was no 
lightning-flash, no earthquake, no opening of a pit to swallow 
them up, quick, ina moment the gas explodes, and they stand 
before the Eternal God. It was but the twinkling of an eye, 
even as though the last trump had sounded, and down fell the 
lifeless form, and the spirit returned to God who made it. 

You and I are in danger too. Weare not in the pit in the midst 
of explosive air, but there are a thousand gates to death. How 
many there be who have fallen dead in the streets? How many 
sitting in their own homes? I stayed but a week or two ago 
with an excellent Christian man, who was then in sound health. 
I was startled indeed when I heard immediately after that he 
had come home, and sitting down in his chair had shut his eyes 
and died. ‘These things are usual, and in such a city as ours we 
cannot go down a street without hearing of some such visitation. 
Well, our turn must come. Perhaps we shall die falling asleep 
in our beds after long sickness, but probably we shall be sud- 
denly called in such an hour as we think not to face the realities 
of eternity. Well, if it be so, if there bea thousand gates to 
death, if all means and any means may be sufficient to stop the 
current of our life, if really, after all, spiders’ webs and bubbles 
are more substantial things than human existence, if we are but 
a vapor, that soon expires, what then ? Why, first, I say, let 
us all look upon ourselves as dying men, let us not reckon on 
to-morrow. Oh! let us not procrastinate, for taken in Satan’s 
net of procrastination we will wait, and wait, till time is gone 
and the knell of eternity shall toll our dissolution. To-day is 
your only time. O mortal men, the present moment is the 
only moment you may call your own, and oh! how swift its 
wings! This hour is yours; yesterday is gone; to-morrow is 
with God, and may never come. “To-day if ye will hear his 
voice harden not your hearts.” Many have had their first im- 
preasions from thoughts of death, and hence it is that Satan 
never likes to let a man think of the grave. 

I know a family in which the governess, the daughter of a 


336 THE WAILING OF RISCA. 


Christian minister, was told upon her entering her office, that 
she was never to mention the subject of death to the children. 
‘hey were never to know even that children might die. { did 
not marvel when I knew the infidelity of the head of the house 
hold. What better atmosphere for an infidel to breathe in, than 
where the blast of death is never felt? Infidels ought to be im- 
inortal. They ought to live in a world where they can never 
die, for their infidelity will never be able to pass the stream of 
Jordan. There are infidels on earth, but there are none in 
heaven, and there can be none in hell. They are all convinced 
—convinced by terrible facts—convinced that there is a God 
while they are crushed beneath his vengeance, and made to 
tremble at his eternal power. But I pray you, sirs, be not such 
fools as to live as though your bones were iron and your ribs 
were brass. Let us not be such madmen as to run as though 
there were no bounds to our race; let us not play away our 
precious days as though days were common as sands on a sea 
shore. That hour-glass yonder contains all the sands of your 
life. Do you see them running? How swiftly do they empty 
out! With some of you, the most of the sands are in the bot- 
tom bulb of the glass, and there are only a few to go trickling 
through the narrow passway of its days. Ah! and that glass 
shall never be turned again; it shall never run a second time for 
you. Let it once run out and you will die. Oh! live as though 
you meant to die. Live as though you knew you might die to- 
morrow. Think as though you might die now, and act this very 
hour-as though I could utter the mandate of death, and summon 
you to pass through the portals of the tomb. 

And then take care, I pray you, that you who know Christ not 
only live as though you meant to die, but live while you 
live. Oh, what a work we have to do, and how short the time 
to do it in! Millions of men unconverted yet, and nothing but 
our feeble voice with which to preach the word! My soul, shalt 
thou ever condemn thyself in thy dying moments for having 
preached too often or too earnestly? No, never. Thou mayest 
rebuke thy sloth, but thou canst never bemoan thy excessive in. 
dustry. Minister of Christ! in thy dying hour it will never be 
a theme of reproach to you that you preached ten times in a 


a. 


THE WAILING OF RI&CA. $37 


week, that you stood up every day to preach Christ, and that 
you so preached that you spent yourself, and wasted your body 
with weakness. No, it will be our dull sermons that will haunt 
us on our dying beds, our tearless preaching, our long studyings, 
when we might have preached better had we come away and 
preached without them ; our huntings after popularity, by gath- 
ering together fine words instead of saying to the people, “ Men 
and women, you are dying, escape for your life, and fly to Christ,” 
preaching to them in ret-hot, simple words the wrath to come, 
and the love of Christ. 

Oh! there are some of you members of our churches, who 
are living, but what are you living for? Surely you are not liv- 
ing to get money—that is the worldling’s object. Are you living 
merely to please yourselves? Why, that is but the beast’s 
delight. How few there are of the members of our churches, 
who really live for God with all their might. Do we give to 
God as much as we give to our own pleasures? Do we give 
Christ’s service as much time as we give to many of our trifling 
amusements? Why, we have professional men of education, 
men of excellent training and ability, who, when they once get _ 
into a church, feel that they could be very active anywhere else, 
but as Christians they have nothing to do. They can be ener- 
getic in parish vestries, or in the rifle corps, but in the church they 
give their name, but their energies are dormant. Ah! my dear 
hearers, you who love the Saviour, when we shall come before 
Christ in heaven, if there can be a regret, it will be that we did 
not do more for Christ while we were here. J think, as we fall 
down hefore his feet and worship him, if we could know a sor- 
row, it would be because we did not bring him in more jewels 
for his crown—did not seek more to feed the hungry, or to clothe 
the naked—did not give more to his cause and did not labor 
more that the lost sheep of the house of Israel might be re- 
stored. Live while you live, while it is called to-day; work, 
for the night cometh wherein no man can work. 

And let us learn never to do anything which we would not 
wish to be found doing if we were to die. We are sometimes 
asked by young people whether they may go to the theatre, 
whether they may dance, or whether they may do this or that. 


— 15 


cae 


tet 


338 THE WAILING OF RISOA. — 


You may do anything which you would not be ashamed to be 
doing when Christ shall come. You may do anything which 
you would not blush to be found doing if the hand of death 


should smite you; but if you would dread to die in any spot, go’ 


not there; if you would not wish to enter the presence of your 
God with such-and-such a word upon your lip, utter not that word 
—or if there would be a thought that would be uncongenial to 
the judgment-day, seek not to think that thought. So act 
that you may feel you can take your shroud with you wherever 
you went. Happy is he that dies in his pulpit. Blessed is the 
man that dies in his daily business, for he is found with his loins 
girt about him serving his Master ; but, oh, unhappy must he 
be to whom death comes as an intruder, and finds him engaged 
in that which he will blush to have ever touched, when God shall 
appear in judgment. Power supreme—thou everlasting King! 
permit not death to intrude upon an ill-spent hour, but find me 
wrapt in meditation high; hymning my great Creator; pro- 
claiming the love of Jesus; or lifting up my heart in prayer for 
myself and my fellow-sinners. Let me but serve my God, and 
then, Death, I will not say to thee when thou mayest come— 
come when thou wilt; but if I might choose, come to me while 
I am yearning after souls; come to me when the cry of inviting 
love is on my lip, and when I am weeping over the souls of 
men. Come to me, then, that men may say, 


“He did his body with his charge lay down, 
He ceased at once to work and live.” 


But I may talk thus about sudden death, and the likelihood 
of it, but ah! sirs, I cannot stir your hearts, for I cannot stir my 
own asI would. The fact that so many die each day has very 
little force in it for us, because it is so trite an event, we have 
heard of it so many times. We look down the catalogue of 
deaths, and take the average, and we say, “ Fifty below the aver- 
age, or a hundred above the average,” but owr dying never comes 
home to us. All men will persist in thinking all men mortal 
but themselves. If there were a great Hydra in the city of Lon- 
don, which every day ate ten of the inhabitants alive, we should 
be dreadfully miserable, especially if we never knew when it 


eum 


THE WAILING OF RISCA. 339 


would be our turn. If we were certain that it would eat all in Lon- 
don bye-and-by, but would only eat ten in a week, we should all 
tremble as we passed by the huge monstex’s den, and say— 
“ When will it be my time?’ and that would cast a cloud over 
the whole metropolis, blacker than its usual fog. But here is a 
monster, Death, which devours its hundreds at its meal; and 
with iron tongue the funeral knell keeps crying out for more; its 
greedy and insatiable maw never being filled; its teeth nevet 
being blunted; its ravenous hunger never being stayed. And ° 
here we are, and though it will be our turn bye-and-by to be de- 
voured, how little do we think about it! One reason, I think, is 
because we so seldom visit the dying. 

I stood once by the side of a poor boy, whom I had taught as 
a Sunday-school teacher ; he had received very little good train- — 
ing at home, and though he was but lad of seventeen, he be 
came a drunkard and drank himself to death at one debauch. I 
saw him, and talked to him, and tried to point him to the Sa- 
viour, and heard at last the death-throttle in his throat, and as 
I went down stairs I thought every body a fool for doing any- 
thing except preparing to die. I began to look upon the men 
who drove the carts in the streets, the men who were busy at 
their shops, and those who were selling their wares, as being all 
foolish for doing anything except their eternal business, and my- 
self most of all foolish for not pointing dying sinners to a living 
Christ, and inviting them to trust in his precious blood. And 
yet, in an hour all things took their usual shape, and [ began to 
think that I was not dying after all, and I could go away and be, 
I fear, as heartless as before. Then it seemed that men were, 
after all, wise in thinking of this world, and not the next; I 
mean not that I really thought so, but I fear I acted as if | 
thought so; the impression of the dying bed was so soon oblit- 
erated. If you could see all die who die, perhaps the impression 
would be different. 

I would liken the sons of men to a company of South Sea 
Islanders, whose canoe being disabled, floated upon a raft, and 
were attacked by sharks; they disappeared one by one, till but 
three or four were left. Can you conceive the despair which 
would settle upon the countenances of these tew? If they knew 


340 THE WAILING OF RISCA. 


a God, do you not think they would then indeed call on him $ 
And in what respect, except that death was more apparent to 
them, were they different from us? Man after man is being ta- 
ken away from us by the devouring monster. Friends and kins- 
folk have been snatched into the deep, and some of us remain 
upon the edge of the raft. Yon gray-haired man may be the 
next that is carried away. The hosts cf God are crossing the 
flood; some have already passed it and are singing the eternal 
song, and 


“We are to the margin come, 
And goon expect to die.” 


God help us so to live in the expectation of death, that Christ 
may be glorified in us whether we sleep or wake, and that we 
may be able to say, “ For me to live is Christ, to die is gain.” 


II. I now come to the third theme, which is, THAT sUDDEN 
EXCHANGE WHICH A SUDDEN DEATH WILL CAUSE. 

You see yonder Christian man, he is full of fears, he is afraid 
even of his interest in Christ, he is troubled spiritually, and vexed 
with temporal cares. You see him cast down and troubled, his 
faith but very weak; he steps outside yon door, and there meets 
him a messenger from God, who smites him to the heart, and 
he is dead. Can you conceive the change? Death has cured 
him of his fears, his tears are wiped away, once for all, from his 
eyes; and, to his surprise, he stands where he feared he should 
never be, in the midst of the redeemed of God, in the general 
assembly and church of the first-born. If he should think of 
such things, would he not upbraid himself for thinking so much 
of his trials and of his troubles, and for looking into a future 
which he was never to see? See yonder man, he can scarcely 
walk, he has a hundred pains in his body, he says he is more 
tried and pained than any man. Death puts his skeleton hand 
upon him, and he dies. How marvellous the change! No aches 
now, no casting down of spirit, he then is supremely blest, the 
decrepid has become perfect, the weak has become strong, the 
trembling one has become a David, and David has become as 
the angel of the Lord. Hark to the song which pours from the 


THE WAILING OF RISCA. 841 


lips of him who just now groaned; look at the celestial smile 
which lights the features of the man just now racked with pain 
and tormented with anguish! Was ever change so surprising, 
so marvellous ? 

When I think of it, I could almost long for it to come across 
myself this morning ; to go from the thousand eyes of you that 
look upon me, to look into the eyes of Christ, and to go from 
your songs to the songs of spirits before the throne, to leave 
the Sabbath work on earth for an eternal Sabbath of rest; to 
go from unbelieving hearts, from Christians who need to be 
cheered and sinners that need to be convinced, to be with those 
who need no preaching, but who in one eternal song sing “ Hal- 
Jelujah to God and the Lamb.” I can imagine that when a man 
dies thus suddenly, one of the first emotions he experiences in 
the next world will be surprise. I can conceive that the spirit 
knows not where it is. It is like a man waking up from a 
dream. He looks about him. Oh, that glory! how resplen 
dent yon throne! He listens to harps of gold, and he can scarce 
believe it true. “1, the chief of sinners, and yet in heaven! I, 
a doubting one, and yet in paradise!” And then, when he is 
conscious that he is really in heaven, oh! what overwhelming joy. 
How is the spirit flooded with delight, covered over with it, 
searcely able to enjoy it because it seems to be all but crushed 
beneath the eternal weight of glory! And next, when the spirit 
has power to recover itself, and open its eyes from the blindness 
caused by this dazzling light, and to think—when its thoughts 
have recovered themselves from the sudden effect of a tremen 
dous flood of bliss—the next emotion will be gratitude. 

See hew that believer, five minutes ago a mourner, now takes 
his crown from off his head, and with transporting joy and grati- 
tude bows before his Saviour’s throne. Hear how he sings ; 
was ever song like that, the first song he ever sang that had the 
fulness of paradise in it—“Unto him that loved me and washed 
me from my sins in his blood, unto him be glory.” And how he 
repeats it, and looks round to cherubim and seraphim, and prays 
them to assist him till all the harps of heaven, retaught the mel- 
ody of gratitude, retuned by the one faithful heart, send up an- 
other hallelujah, and yet another; while the floods of harmony 
surround the eternal throne of God. 


B42 THE WAILING OF RISCA, 


But what must be the change to the unconverted man? His 
joys are over forever. His death is the death of his happiness 
—his funeral is the funeral of his mirth. He has just risen from 
his cups; but there is another cup to drain, which is full of bit- 
terness. He has just listened to the sound of the harp and the 
viol, and the music of them that make merry; an eternal dirge 
greets his ears, mixed with the doleful chorus of the shrieks of 
damned souls. What horror and surprise shall seize upon him! 
“Good God,” he says, “I thought it was not so, but lo, it is. 
What the minister said to me is true; the things I would not 
believe are at last really so. When the poor soul shall find 
itself in the hands of angry fiends, and lifts up his eyes in hell, 
being in torments, what will be his surprise! “And am I,” he 
will say, “really here? I was in the streets of London but a 
minute ago; I was singing asong but an instant before, and here 
am [in hell! What! sosoon damned? Is the sentence of God 
like a lightning flash? Does it so instantaneously rive the spirit 
and destroy its joys?’ And when the soul has convinced itself 
that it is actually in hell, can you imagine next the overwhelm. 
ing horror that will roll over it? It, too, will be stunned with 
a mighty flood, not of glory, but of anger, of wrath, of divine 
justice. Oh! how the spirit is tormented now—tormented be- 
yond thought. And then at last, when the wave recedes a mo- 
ment, and there is a pause, what black despair shall then seize 
upon the spirit! 

Have you ever seen men die without s hope? I read but 
yesterday the case of a young woman who had procrastinated 

“many times, and at last was told by the physician that within 
nine hours he really believed she would be a corpse. Then, 
when death rea‘ly became a matter of fact to her, she rose up in 
the bed upon which she had been laid by the sudden stroke of 
God, and prayed—prayed till she fell back fainting, and her lips 
were livid and her cheek was pale, while she cried, “God be 
merviful to me a sinner.” Friends talked to her, consoled and 
comforted her, and bade her trust in Christ; but she said, “It 
is of no use for you to comfort me; no, it is too late. I made 
a fatal resolve some months ago that I would again enjoy the 
world, and that resolve has destroyed my soul.” And then she © 
rose up in bed again, with eyes starting from their sockets, and 


THE WalILING OF RISOA, 343 


prayed again till she was breathless, and groaned and cried, and 
fell down again in a faint, needing to be restored once more. 
And so she did, till with a ghastly look—an awful look of hor- 
ror—as though she felt the anguish of another world, she 
expired. 

Now if such is the remorse of a spirit before it feels the 
wrath of God—if the first drops are sufficient thus to destroy all 
hope and beat in pieces all our boastings, what wiil the eternal 
hail be—what will the everlasting sleet of divine wrath be when 
once it is poured out? Sodom and Gomorrah! Why all their 
fiery hail from heaven shall be nothing compared with the eter- 
nal fire that must fall upon the sinner. Do you think | love to 
speak on such a theme as this? My soul trembles while I 
think of it. No, I would sooner preach of other things by far, 
but it is needful that men may be awakened. Oh! I implore 
you, men and brethren, ye that know not God, and are still 
condemned, because you believe not in Christ, I pray you 
think of these things. Oh that I had a Baxter’s heart, that | 
could weep over sinners as he did. Oh that you would be 
saved! My eyes ache; my brow is full of fire now, because | 
cannot [preach as I wanted to preach to you Oh that God 
would take up the work and send that truth right home. | 
know I shall soon die and you too, and I shall face each of you, 
and your eyes shall stare on me forever and ever, if you be lost 
through my unfaithfulness. And shall it be—shall it be? Oh 
that we had a hope that all of us might see the face of God and 
live! “Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and you shall be 
saved.” | 

Spirit of God, convince of sin, and bring the heart to Christ, 
and may we all without exception see thy face in joy and glory, 
and praise thee, world without end. Amz. 


SERMON XXI. 


COME AND WELCOME. 


[Ts Sermon, preached at the Music Hall, Royal Surrey 
Gardens, Oct. 15, 1859, must have been exceedingly precious to 
“willing sinners.” The author say3 it was “greatly blessed ;” 
and this we can well understand—indeed, we scarcely see how it 
could fail to be. It is the very simplicity and fulness of the 
gospel, inviting lost sinners to a willing Saviour. The structure 
of the discourse is excellent—its divisions natural—its illustra- 
tions admirable—its tone devout—its effect most gracious.] 


“ And the Spirit and the bride say, Come. And let him that heareth say, 
Come. And let him that is athirst come. And whosoever will, let him take 
the water of life freely.” —RrvELations, xxii. 17. 


Tux ory of the Christian religion is the simple word, “Come.” - 
The Jewish law said, “Go, and take heed unto thy steps as to_ 
the path in which thou shalt walk. Go, and break the command- - 
ments, and thou shalt perish; @o, and keep them, and thou shalt 
live.” The law was a dispensation of the whip, which drove - 
men before it; the gospel is just the opposite. It is the Shep-- 
herd’s dispensation. He goeth before his sheep, and bids them 
follow him, saying unto them, “Come.” The law repels; the 
gospel attracts. The law shcws the distance between God and 
man: the gospel bridges that distance, and brings the sinner 
across that great gulf which Moses could never cross. The fact 
is, as you will all have to learn, if you know anything of gracious 


COME AND WELCOME. 345 


experience, that from the first moment of your spiritual life un 
til you are ushered into glory, the cry of Christ to you will be 
“ Come, come unto me.” He will always be ahead of you 
bidding you follow him as the soldier follows his leader. HB 

will always go before you to pave your way, and prepare you 

path, and will bid you come after him all through life, and in 
the solemn hour of death, when you shall lie panting upon your 
bed, his sweet word, with which he shall usher you into the hea- 
venly world, shall be— Come, come unto me. Stretch thy 
wings and fly straight to this world of joy, where ] am dwelling. 
Come and be with me where I am.” 

Nay further than this, this is not only Christ’s cry to you; 
but if you are a believer, this is your cry to Christ—“ Come, 
come!” You will be longing for his second advent; you will 
be saying, “Come quickly, even so come, Lord Jesus.” And 
you will be always panting for nearer and closer communion 
with him 4s his voice to you is “ Come,” even so will be your 
prayer to him, “Come, Lord, and abide in my house. Come, 
and consecrate me more fully to thy service; come, and with 
out a rival reign ; come, occupy alone the throne of my heart.” 

“Come,” then, is the very motto-word of the gospel. I hope 
to expand that word, this morning, to beat out the golden grain 
into goldleaf, and may God the Holy Spirit speak this day with 
his minister, and some who have never come to Jesus before, 
now come for the first time. 

Let us go at once to our text—“ Whosoever will, let him take 
the water of life freely.” There are four things very plainly 
deduced from our text, namely, that first, chereis a “ water of 
life;” that secondly, the invitation is very wide—“* Whosoever 
will;” that thirdly, the path is clear, for it says, “ Whosoever 
will, let him come;” and that, fourthly, che only rule that is 
prescribed is—let him take it “ freely.” 


}, First, then, remember I am about to preach a very simple 
sermon this morning, dealing with simple souls. I am longing 
to see sinners brought to Christ; my heart yearns after the 
multitude of men who see no beauty in him that they should de- 
aire him. God has saved many in this place; may he be pleased 

15* 


346 COME AND WELCOME. 


this morning to bring some wanderer to the Father’s house, 
through the merit of the Son, by the Spirit’s influence. Well, 
then, THEREZ 18 A “ watzR or LiFs.” Man is utterly ruined and 
undone. He is lost in a wild, waste wilderness. The heavens 
refuse him rain, and the earth can yield him no moisture. Must 
he perish? He looks aloft, beneath, around, and he discovers 
no means of escape. Must he die? Must thirst devour him? 
Must he fall upon the desert and leave his bones to bleach under 
the hot sun? No; for the text declares there is a fountain of 
life. Ordained in eternity by God in solemn covenant, this 
fountain, this divine well takes its spring from the deep founda- 
tions of God’s decrees. It gusheth up from the depth which 
coucheth beneath ; it cometh from that place which the eagle’s 
eye hath not seen, and which the lion’s whelp hath not trod. 

The deep foundations of God’s government, the depths of his 
own essential goodness and of his divine nature—these are the 
mysterious springs from which gush forth that fountain of the 
“water of life’ which shall do good to man. The Son hath 
digged this well and bored through massive rocks which pre- 
vented this living water from springing upward. Using his cross 
as the grand instrument, he has pierced through; he has himreli 
descended to the lowest depth; he hath broken a passage, by 
which the love and grace of God, the living water which ean 
save the soul, may well up and overflow, to quench the thirst of 
dying men. The Son hath bidden this fountain freely flow, hath 
removed the stone which laid upon the mouth thereof, and now 
having ascended up on high, he standeth there to see that the 
fountain shall never stay its life-giving course, that its floods 
shall never be dry, that its depths shall never be exhausted 
This sacred fountain, established according to God’s good will 
and pleasure in the covenant, opened by Christ when he died 
upon the cross, floweth this day to give life and health, and joy 
and peace to poor sinners dead in sin, and ruined by the fall 
There is a “ water of life.” 

Let ug pause awhile and look at its floods as they come gush 
ing upwards, overflowing on every side, and assuaging men’s 
thirst. Let us look with joyous eye. It is called the “ water of 
life,” and richly doth it deserve its name. God’s favor is lite, 


COME AND WELCOME. 347 


snd in his presence there is pleasure for evermore; but this 
water is God’s favor, and consequently life. By this water of 
life is intended God’s free grace, God’s love for men, so that if 
you come and drink, you shall find this to te life indeed to your 
soul, for in drinking of.God’s grace, you inherit God’s love, you 
are reconciled to God, God stands in a fatherly relation to you, 
and his infinite love yearns towards you. 

Again, it is living water not simply because it is love, and that 
is life, but it saves from impending death. The sinner knows 
that he must die. He has committed sins so that God must 
punish him. God must cease to be just if he does not punish the 
sins of man. Man, when conscious that he has been very guilty, 
stands trembling in the presence of his Maker, feeling in his soul 
that his doom is sealed, and that he must certainly be cast away 
from all hope, and life, and joy. Come hither, then, ye sin- 
doomed; this water can wash away your sins, and when your 
sins are washed away, then shall ye live; for the innocent must 
not be punished. Here is water that can make you whiter than 
snow. What though you be black as Kedar’s smoky tents, here 
is water that can purge you, and wash you to the whiteness of 
perfection, and make you fair as the curtains of King Solomon. 
These waters well deserve the name of life, since pardon is a 
condition of life. Unparduned we die, we perish, we sink into 
the depths of hell; pardoned we live, we rise, we ascend to the 
very heights of heaven. See here, then, this ever-gushing foun- 
tain will give to all who take thereof life from the dead, by the 
pardon of their sins. 

“But,” saith the poor convicted soul, “this is not all I want, 
for if all the sins Ihave ever committed were blotted out, in ten 
minutes I should commit many more. If I were now complete- 
ly pardoned, it would not be many seconds before I should de- 
stroy my soul and sink helplessly again.” Ay! but see here, 
this is living water, it can quench thy thirst of sin; entering into 
thy soul, it shall overcome and cover with: its floods thy propen- 
sites to evil. It shall cover them first, it shall afterwards drown 
them, and at last, it shall utterly carry them away. Oh, sin- 
ners! this fountain of gospel grace can so wash your hearts that 
you shall no longer love sin, yea, so perfectly can this water re 


348 COME AND WELCOME. 


fine the soul, that it shall one day make you as spotless as the 
angels who stand before the throne of God, and you too, like. 
them, shall obey his behests, hearkening to his commands, and 
rejoicing to be his servants. This is life indeed, for here is fa- 
vour, here is pardon, here is sanctity, the renewing of the soul 
by the washing of water, through the Word. 

“But,” saith one, “I have a longing within me which I cannot 
satisfy. I feel sure that if I be pardoned yet there is something 
which 1 want—which nothing I have ever heard of, or have ever 
seer or handled, can satisfy. I have within me an aching void 
which the world can never fill.” “There was a time,” says one, 
“when I was satisfied with the theatre, when the amusements, 
the pleasures of men of the world, were very satisfactory to me. 
But lo! I have pressed this olive till it yields no more the gen- 
erous oil. My joys have faded; the beauty of my fat valley 
hath become as a faded flower. No longer can I rejoice in the 
music of this world.” Ah! soul, glad am I that thy cistern has 
become dry, for till men are dissatisfied with this world they 
never look out for the next; till the god of this world has ut- 
terly deceived them they will not look to him who is the only 
living and true God. 

But hearken ! thou that art wretched and miserable, here is 
living water that can quench thy thirst. Come hither and 
drink, and thou shalt be satisfied; for he that is a believer in 
Christ finds enough for him in Christ now, and enough for ever. 
The believer is not the man who has to pace his room, saying, 
“J find no amusements and no delight.” He is not the man 
whose days are weary, and whose nights are long, for he finds 
in religion such a spring of joy, such a fountain of consolation, 
that he is content and happy. Put him in a dungeon and he 
will find good company ; place him in a barren wilderness, still 
he would eat the bread of heaven; drive him away from friend- 
ship, he will find the “friend that sticketh closer than a 
brother.” Blast all his gourds, and he will find shadow beneath 
the rock of ages; sap the foundation of his earthly hopes, but 
since the foundation of his Ged standeth sure, his hear will still 
be fixed, trusting in the Lord. There is such a fulness in 
religion, that I can honestly testify from experience, 


COME AND WELCOME. 849 


“Tf would not change my best estate, 
For all that earth calle good or great.” 


I never knew what happiness was till I knew Christ. I thought 
I did. I warmed my hands before the fire of sin, but it was a 
painted fire. But, oh, when once I tasted the Saviour’s love, 
and had been washed in Jesu’s blood, that was heaven begun 
below. 


“Tis heaven on earth, ’tis heaven above, 
To see his face, to taste his love.” 


Oh, if ye did but know the joys of religion, if ye did but know 
the sweetness of love to Christ, surely ye could not stand aloof. 
If ye could but catch a glimpse of the believer when he is danc- 
ing for joy, you would renounce your wildest mirth, your great- 
est joy, to become the meanest child in the family of God. 
Thus then it is the living water, it is the water of life, because 
it satisfies our thirst, and gives us the reality of life which we 
can never find in anything beneath the sky. 

And here let me add very briefly, he who once drinks of this 
water of life, drinks that which will quench his thirst for ever. 
You shall never thirst again, except 1t be that you shall long for 
deeper draughts of this living fountain. It shall not be a thirst 
of pain, it shall be a thirst of joy—a happy thirst, you will find 
it a sweet thing to be thirsting after more of Christ’s love. 
Become a Christian, and thou shalt be «atisfied; thou shalt 
then be able to say,—“ Return unto thy est, O my soul, for 
the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee.” Thou shalt rest for 
ever on the dear bosom of the Saviour, » kere thou shalt find 
eternal joy and peace. Oh, come and take ef him, and drink of 
the water of life freely. 

And, moreover, he who drinketh of thie Sving water shall 
never die. His body shall see corruption for 2 ‘ttle while, but 
his soul, mounting aloft, shall dwell with Jesus. Yea! and his 
very body, when it has passed through the purifing process, 
shall rise again more glorious than when it was sown in weak. 
ness. It shall rise in glory, in honor, in power, in maesty, and 
united with the soul, it shall everlastingly inherit the jevs which 
Christ has prepared for them that love him. This is the living 


850 COME AND WELCOME. 


water; I see the fountain flowing now, freely flowing, sparkling 
with all these blessings. Who would not long to come and — 
drink. thereof ? 


IL In the second place we observe from the text that the in- 
vitation is very wide—‘ WHOSOEVER WILL, LET HIM TAKE THE 
WATER OF LIFE FREELY.” How wide is this invitation! There 
are some ministers who are afraid to invite sinners. Then why 
are they ministers? for they are afraid to perform the most im- 
portant part of the sacred office. There was a time, I must con- 
fess, when I somewhat faltered to give a free invitation. My 
doctrinal sentiments did at that time somewhat hamper me. I 
boldly avow that I am unchanged as to the doctrines I have 
preached; I preach Calvanism as high, as stern, and as sound 
as ever; but I do feel, and always djd feel an anxiety to invite 
sinners to Christ. And I do feel also, that not only is such a 
course consistent with the soundest doctrines, but that the other 
course is after all the unsound one, and has no title whatever to 
plead Scripture on its behalf. There has grown up in many 
Baptist churches an idea that none are to be called to Christ 
put those they call sensible sinners. 1 sometimes rebut that by 
remarking, that I call stupid sinners to Christ as well as sensible 
sinners, and that stupid sinners make by far the greatest pro- 
portion of the ungodly. But I glory in the avowal that I 
preach Christ even to insensible sinners—that I would say even 
to the dry bones of the valley, as Ezekiel did, “ Ye dry bones, 
live!” doing it as an act of faith; not faith in the power of 
those that hear to obey the command, but faith in the power of 
God who gives the command to give strength also to those 
addressed, that they may be constrained to obey it. But now 
listen to my text; for here, at least, there is no limitation. But 
sensible or insensible, all that the text saith is, “ Whosoever 
will, let him come and take the water of life freely.” 

The one question I have to ask this morning is, art thou will- 
ing? if so, Christ bids thee take the water of life. Art thou 
willing ? if so, be pardoned, be sanctified, be made whole. For if 
thou art willing, Christ is willing too, and thou art freely invited 
to come and welcome to the fountain of life and grace. 


COME AND WELCOME. bo) 


Now mark, the question has to do with the widl. “Oh,” 
says one, “I am so foolish I cannot understand the plan of sal- 
vation, therefore I may not come and drink.” But my question 
has nothing to do with your understanding, it has to do with 
your will. You may be as big a fool as you choose, but if you 
are willing to come to Christ you are freely invited. If you 
could not read a single letter in the alphabet, or spell out a 
word in the book, yet may your lips—ignorant lips though they 
be—now drink of this water of life. It has nothing to do with 
your understanding ; it does not say “ Whosoever wnderstandeth 
let him come,” but “whosoever will,” and Ido not doubt but | 
what there are many souls who when they first come to Christ, 
have very little understanding of the way of salvation, and very 
little knowledge of the way in which he saves; but they come 
to Christ, the Holy Ghost makes them willing to come, and so 
they are saved. Oh ye who have been for many a year wearing 
the pauper’s garb, ye who come here from the workhouse, ye 
that are ignorant, ye that are despised among men—are you 
willing to be saved? Can you say from your heart, “Lord, 
thou knowest I would have my sins forgiven? Then come and 
welcome. Jesus bids thee come. Let not thine ignorance keep 
thee away. He appeals, not to thine understanding, but to thy 
will. 

“Qh,” says one, “I can understand the plan of salvation, but 
I cannot repent asI would. Sir, my heart is so hard, I cannot 
bring the tear to my eye. I cannot feel my sins as I would 
desire. 

‘My heart, how dreadful hard it is, 
How heavy here it lies ; 
Heavy and cold within my breast, 
Just like a rock of ice'” 


Ay, but this text has nothing to do with your heart; it is 
with your will. Are you willing? Then be your heart hard 
as the nether millstone, if thou art willing to be saved I am 
pidden to invite thee. ‘“ Whosoever will,” not “whosoever 
feels,” but “whosoever will, let him come and take the water 
of life freely.” “Yes,” says one, “I can honestly say I am 
willing, but my heart will not soften. I wish that grace would 


302 COME AND WELCOME. 


change me. I can say I wish that Christ would soften my 
heart. I do desire that he would put the living fire within my ~ 
cold breast and make me repent, and make me love him, and 
make me believe in him. Jam willing.” Well, then, the text 
is for thee, “ Whosoever will, let him come.” If thou art will- 
ing thou art freely invited to Christ. “ No,” saith one, “but I 
am such a great sinner. I have been a drunkard; 1 have been 
a lascivious man; I have gone far astray from the paths of rec- 
titude. I would not have all my sins known to my fellow 
creatures. How can God accept of such a wretch as I am, such 
a foul creature as I have been?’ Mark thee,man! There is 
no reference made here to thy past life. It simply says, “who- 
soever will.” Art thou willing? Art thou willing to be saved? 
Canst thou say, “Now, Lord, I am willing to be saved, give 
me a new heart; I am willing to give up my sins; I am willing 
to be a Christian; I am willing to believe and willing to obey, 
but oh for this no strength have f. Lord, I have the will; give 
me the power.” Then thou art freely invited to come, if thou art 
put willing. There is no barrier between thee and Christ except 
thy stubborn will. If thy will is subdued, and if thou art say- 
ing “Yes, Lord, I am willing,’ then art thou freely invited. 
Oh, reject not the ‘nvitation, but come and welcome, sinner 
come.” 

“ But,” saith one, “I cannot come, I cannot believe, I cannot 
do as I would.” Well, but it does not say, “ Whosoever can, 
let him come,” but “ whosoever will, let him come.” Art thow 
willing? You know there is many a man that has more will 
than power, but God estimates us not by our power, but by our 
will. You see a man on horseback, he is in haste to fetch a 
doctor for some dying man; the horse is a miserable one, and will 
not go as rapidly as the man would like, but you cannot scold 
him, because you see him whipping and spurring, and thus prov- 
ing that he would go if he could, and so the master takes the 
man’s will for the deed. So is it with you, your poor heart 
will not go, but it would go if it could. So Jesus invites you, 
not according to what you can, but according to what you will. 
“ Whosoever will, Jet him come and take the water of life free- 
ly.” All the stipulation is—art thou willing—truly willing? If 


A 
COME AND WELCOME. 353 


80, thou art freely welcome. Thou art earnestly invited to take 
of the water of life, and that freely too. 

Surely as this goes round the hall, there will be many found 
who will answer to it, and who will say, from all their hearts, 
“T am willing, 1am willing.” Come, let the question go per- 
sonally round. Let me not talk to you in the mass, but let the 
arrow reach the individual. Grey head, give thy reply, and let 
yon fair-haired boy answer also. Are you willing now to be 
saved—are you willing to forsake sin—willing to take Christ to 
be your master from this day forth and forever? Are you will- 
ing to be washed in his blood? - Willing to be clothed in his 
righteousness? Are you willing to be made happy—willing to 
escape from hell, and willing to enter heaven? Strange that it 
should be necessary to ask such questions, but still it is. Are 
you willing? Then remember that whatever may be against 
you,—whatever may have defiled you—however black, however 
filthy, however worthless you may be, you are invited this day 
to take of the fountain of the water of life freely, for you are will- 
ing, and it is said, “ Whosoever will, let him come.” 

“ Ah!” saith one, “God knows I am willing, but still Ido not 
think I am worthy.” No, I know you are not, but what is that 
to do with it? Itis not “ whosoever is worthy,” but “ whosoev- 
er will, let him come.” “ Well,” says one, “I believe that who- 
soever will, may come, but not me, for I am the vilest sinner 
out of hell.” But hark thee, sinner, it says, “ whosoever.” What 
a big word that is! Whosoever! There is no standard-height 
here. It is of any height and any size. Little sinners, big sin- 
ners, black sinners, fair sinners, sinners doubled-dyed, old sin- 
ners aggravated sinners, sinners who have committed every 
crime in the whole catalogue,—whosoever. Doth this exempt one ? 
Who can be excluded from this whosoever? It mattereth not 
who thou mayest be, nor what thou mayest have been, if thou art 
willing to be saved ; free as the air thou breathest is the love 
and grace of God. “Whosoever will, let him take the water of 
life freely.” 

Thus have I tried to show you how broad the invitation is. 


{1I, And now I am about te show you, in the third place, how 


854 COME AND WELCOME. 


clear the path is. “WHOSOEVER WILL, LET HIM TAKE THE WATER 
OF LIFE FREELY.” 


That word “let” is a very curious word, because it signifies - 


two opposite things. “Let” sometimes signifies “hinder.” 
“He that letteth shall be taken away,”—that is, “ he that hinder- 
eth.” But here, in our text, it means the removing of all hin- 
drance. “ Let him come,’—methinks I hear Jehovah speaking 
this. Here is the fountain of love and mercy. But you are too 
unworthy, you are too vile. Hear Jehovah! He cries, “ Let 
him come, he is willing. Stand back! doubts and fears; away 
with you; let him come; make a straight road; let him come 
if he be but willing.” Then the devil himself comes forward, and 
striding across the way, he says to the poor trembling soul, “I 
will spill thy blood ; thou shalt never have mercy. I defy thee; 
thou shalt never believe in Christ, and never be saved.” But 
Christ says, “ Let him come,” and Satan, strong though he be, 
quails beneath Jehovah’s voice, and Jesus drives him away, and 
the path stands clear this morning, nor can sin, nor death, nor 
hell block up the way, when Jehovah Jesus says, “ Zet him 
come.” 

Methinks I see several ministers standing in the way. They 
are of such high doctrine that they dare not invite a sinner, and 
therefore they clog the gospel with so many conditions. They 
will have it that the sinner must feel a certain quantity of experi- 
ence before he is invited to come, and so they put their sermons 
up and say, “You are not invited, you are a dead sinner; you 
must not come, you are not invited, you are a hardened rebel.” 
“Stand back,” says Christ, “ every one of you, though ye be 
my servants. Let him come, he is willing—stand not in his 
way.” it isa sad thing that Christ’s ministers should become 
the devil’s aiders and abettors, and yet sometimes they are, for 
when they are telling a sinner how much he must feel, and how 
much he must know before he comes to Christ, they are virtu- 
ally rolling big stones in the path, and saying to the willing sin 
ner, “ Thou mayest not come.” In the name of Almighty God, 
stand back everything this morning that keeps the willing sinner 
from Christ. Away with you, away with you; Christ sprinkles 
his blood upon the way, and cries to you, ‘ Vanish, leave the 


—— 


COME AND WELCOME, 355 


road clear; let ham come, stand not in his path, make straight 
before him his way, level the mountains and fill up the valleys, 
make straight through the wilderness a highway for him to come 
to drink of this water of life freely. ‘ Let him come.” 

Oh! is not that a precious word of command! for it has all 
the might of Omnipotence in it. God said, “ V.et there be light, 
and there was light,” and he says, “Let him come,” and come 
he will and must, that is but willing te come. “ Whosoever 
will, let him take of the water of life freely.” And now, sinner, 
remember God says “come.” Is there anything in thy way ? 
Remember, he adds, “ Let him come.” He bids everything stand 
out of thy way. Standing one day in the court-house, some 
witness was required, I forget his name; it may have been 
Brown, for instance; in one moment the name was announced, 
* Brown, Samuel Brown,” bye-and-by twenty others take up the 
ary, “Samuel Brown, Samuel Brown.” There was seen a man 
pushing his way through. “Make room,” said he, “make room, 
his honor calls me,” and though there were many in his path, they 
gave way, because his being called was a sufficient command for 
them, not to hinder him, but to let him come. And now, soul, 
if thou be a willing sinner, though thy name is not mentioned— 
if thou be a willing sinner, thou art as truly called as though 
thou wert called by name, and therefore push through thy fears. 
Make room, and come; they that would stop thee are cowards. 
He has said “ Let him come,” and they cannot keep you back; 
Jehovah has said, “ Let him come,” and it is yours now to say, 
“J will come.” There is nothing that shall hinder me, I will 
push through everything, and 


“To the gracious King approach, 
Whose sceptre mercy gives.” 


I will go to the fountain and take of the water of life freely. 


IV. This brings me to the last head, the condition which is 
the death of all conditions—.zT HIM TAKE IT FREELY. 

Methinks I see one here, who is saying, “I would be saved, 
and I will do what I can te be worthy of it.” The fountain is 
free, and he comes with his halfpenny in his hand, and that a bad 


256 COME AND WELCOME 


one, and he says, “ Here, sir, give me a cup of this liv.ng water 
to drink; I am well worthy of it, for see the price is in my 
hand.” Wy, man, if you could bring the wealth of Potosi, or 
all the diamonds of Golconda, and all the pearls of Ormuz, you 
could not buy this most costly thing. Put up your money, you 
could not have it for gold or silver. The man brings his merit, 
but heaven is not to be sold to merit-mongers. Or perhaps you 
say, “I will go to church regularly, I will give te the poor, I will 
attend my meeting house, | will take a sitting, I will be baptized, 
1 will do this and the other, and then no doubt I shall have the 
water of life”’ Back, miserable herd! bring not your rags and 
rubbish to God, he wants them not. Stand back! you insult the 
Almighty when you tender anything as payment. Back with 
ye; he invites not such as you to come. He says, come freely. — 
He needs no recommendation. You want no good works. Do 
not bring any. But you have no good feelings. Nevertheless 
you are willing, therefore come. He wants no good feelings of 
you. You have no belief and no repentance, yet nevertheless 
you are willing. 


“True belief and true repentance— 

Every grace that brings us nigh, 
Without money, 

Come to Jesus Christ and buy.” 


Do not try to get them yourself—come to him, and he will 
give them to you. Come just as you are; it is “freely,” 
“without money and without price.” The drinking fountains 
at the corners of our streets are valuable institutions; but I can- 
not imagine any one being so foolish, as when he comes to the 
drinking fountains, saying, “I cannot drink, because I have not 
five pounds in my pocket.” Why, however poor the man is, 
there is the fountain, and, poor as he is, he may drink of it. It 
is put there for the public. Thirsty souls, as they go by, 
whether they are dressed in fustian or in broadcloth, don’t look 
for any warrant for drinking ; they come and drink of it freely. 
Here it is; the liberality of some good friend has put it there, 
and they take it and ask no questions whatever. Perhaps the 
only persons that ever need to go thirsty through the street 


COME AND WELCOME. 357 


where there is a drinking fountain, are the fine ladies and gentle 
men whe are in their carriages. They are very thirsty, and can- 
not think of being so vulgar as to get out to drink, It would 
bemean them, they think, to drink at a common drinking foun- 
tain; so they go with parched lips. Oh, how many there are 
that are rich, rich in their own good works, that cannot come to 
Christ! “I will not be saved,” they say, “in the same way 
as a harlot or a swearer.” What! go to heaven the same way 
as a chimney sweep! Is there no pathway to glory but the 
path which a Magdalen may take? I will not be saved that 
way.” Then you fine gentry may remain without. You are 
not bidden to come, for you are not willing. But remember, 


“None are excluded hence, 
But those who do themselves exclude; 
Welcome the learned and polite, 
The ignorant and rude.” 


“ Whosoever will, let him come.” Let him bring nothing to 
recommend him. Let him not imagine he can give any pay- 
ment to God, or any ransom for his soul; for the one conditioi. 
that excludes all conditions is, “Let him come and take the 
water of life freely.” There is a man of God here, who has 
drank of the river of the water of life many times; but he says, 
“1 want to know more of Christ; I want to have nearer fellow- 
ship with him; I want to enter more closely into the mystery 
of his sacrifice; I want to understand more and more of the fei- 
lowship of his sufferings, and to be made conformable unto his 
death.” Well, believer, drink freely. You have filled your 
bowl of faith once, and you drank the draught off; fill it again, 
drink again, and keep on drinking. Put your mouth to the 
fountain, if you will. As good Rutherford says in one of his 
letters, “I have been sinking my bucket down into the well full 
often, but now my thirst after Christ has become so insatiable, 
that I long to put the well itself to my lips, and drain it all.” 
Well, take it freely as much as ever you can. You have come 
now into the field of Boaz; you may pick up every ear that you 
ean find; nay, more than that, you may carry away the sheaves, 
if you like; and more than that, you may claim the whole field 


358 COME AND WELCOME. 


to be yours, if you will. The eating and drinking at Christ’s 
table is like that of Ahasuerus, only in an opposite way. It is_ 
said of that table, none did compel; it is said of this, none doth 
withhold; none can restrain. If there be a big vessel full of 
this holy water, drink it all up; and if there be one that holdeth 
twelve firkins, drink it, yea, drink it all, and thou shalt find that 
even then there is as much as ever. In Christ there is enough 
for all, enough for each, enough ‘or evermore; and nore shall ever 
have need to say that there was vot enough in Christ for him. 
Drink freely. So you see that there are two meanings—drink 
without price, and drink without stint. 

We have an old proverb, that there sre certain guests who 
come to our houses who are more free than they are welcome. 
They make free themselves, and go further than we can bid them 
weloome. But with regard to ain who come to the fountain 
of living waters, you may make as free as you will and you are 
welcome; make as free as you can, take this water as you will, 
Christ will not deny you. He that stands by the fountain will 
never mourn because you drink too much; he will never be dis- 
satisfied because such a black fellow as you has dared to wash 
himself in the living stream. No, but the blacker you are the 
more will he rejoice that you have been washed; the more 
thirsty you are the more will his soul be gladdened to have you 
drink even to the full and be satisfied. He is not enriched by 
withholding; rather he is enriched in joy by giving. It is as 
much a pleasure to Christ to save you as it will be to you to be 
saved. He is just as glad to see the poor, the lame, the halt and 
the blind sit at his table as ever they can be to sit there. He is 
just as pleased to carry men to heaven as they themselves can — 
be when they drink of the river of joy at the fountain-head 
of eternity. “ Whosoever will, let him take the water of life 

.. freely.” 

And nowI do not know what to say further. My text is 
such a precious one, that { cannot enter into the fulness of its 
freeness and sweetness. Remember, my dear friends, if you 
are willing to be saved, God requires nothing of you except that 
you will yield yeurselves up to Christ. If you are willing to be 
saved, none can prevent; there is no obstacle. You are not 


COME AND WELCOME. 359 


going like the daughters of Hobab to a well from which you will 
be driven by the rudeness of shepherds. You are come where 
Jesus stands—stands with open arms, stands with open mouth, 
crying to you this day, “If any man thirst let him come unto 
me and drink, and whosoever will let him take the water of life 
freely.” 

And now will you refuse the invitation? See that you refuse 
not him that speaketh! Will you go this day and abuse the 
free mercy of God? Shall this very mercy lead you into more 
sin? Will you be wicked enough to. say, that because grace 
is free, therefore you will continne in sin year after year? 

Oh do not so; grieve not the Spirit of God; to-day is the ac- 
cepted time ; to-day is the day of salvation. If ye turn not he 
will whet his sword ; he hath bent his bow, and made it ready. 
You have been warned, your conscience has often pricked you, 
now this day you are sweetly invited. But the time of warn- 
ings and invitations will not last forever ; they will soon be 
over, and when your funeral knell is tolling, you shall be in that 
iake of fire, that land of misery and pain, where not a drop of 
water shall cool your burning tongue. As you would escape 
from the flames of hell, as you would be delivered from the eter- 
nal torments, I beseech thee now consider thy ways, and if now 
thou art willing thou art invited and none can keep thee back 
from his mercy. “ Whosoever will let him take the water ot 
life freely.” Shall I preach in vain? Will you all go away 
and not take the water of life? Come soul—is there not one at 
least that God shall give me this day for my hire—not one? 
May I not take one of you by the hand, some poor sinning, 
erring brother? Come, brother, let us go together and drink, 
Oh, may the Holy Ghost incline you. Take it, my brother, 
See on that bloody tree Jesus hargs; behold, he pays his life a 
ransom for your sins and mine. Believe on him, trust him, 
commit your soul to him and be saved. Will you not say in 
your soul, 


“ Just as Iam without one plea, 
But that thy blood was shed for me, 
And that thou bid’st me come to thee; 
O lamb of God, I come, I come ?” 


4 


360 COME AND WELCOME. 


And as my Master is true and faithful, he cannot cast away one © 
soul that cometh, for “him that cometh unto me I will in no 
wise cast out.” on, Spirit, now draw reluctant hearts, and now 

give timid souls courage to believe for Jesus’ sake. Amun. 


SERMON XXII. 


THE FIRST RESURRECTION. 


[Or this sermon the author makes mention, as one which 
had been used by the Spirit to bless the souls of men, both in the 
hearing and reading of it. It was delivered in his new Church 
Edifice, the Metropolitan Tabernacle, May 5, 1861. The doc 
trinal part of the discourse touches the much disputed question 
of the Millenium, and Christ’s personal reign on the earth. His 
spirit is kind, his discussion manly, and his practical inferences 
plain, earnest and solemn.] 


“ And I saw thrones, and they sat upon them, and judgment was given unto 
them: and I saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of 
Jesus, and for the word of God, and which had not worshiped the beast, 
neither his image, neither had received his mark upon their foreheads, or in 
their hands ; and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years. But 
the rest of the dead lived not again until the thousand years were finished. 
This is the first resurrection. Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the 
first resurrection; on such the second death hath no power, but they shall 
be priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign with him a thousand 
years,”—Regv. xx. 4, 5, 6. 

“ And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God; and the books 
were opened; and another book was opened, which is the book of life ; and 
the dead were judged out of those things which were written in the beoks, 
according to their works.”—Rxv, xx. 12. 


You will bear me witness, my friends that it is exceedingly 
seldom I ever intrude into the mysteries of the future with re- 
gard either to the second advent, the millennial reign, or the 
first and second resurrection. As often as we come across it in 

16 


lay) "THE FIRST RESURRECTION. 


our expositions, we do not turn aside from the point, but if 
guilty at all on this point, it is rather in being too silent than 
saying too much, And now, in bringing forward this question, 
I would say, I do not do it to amuse your curiosity by novelty, 
or that I may pretend to have the true key of the prophecies 
which are as yet unfulfilled. I scarcely think it would be justifia- 
ble for me to spend my time upon prophetic studies for which 
{ have not the necessary talent, nor is it the vocation to which 
my Master has ordained me. I think some ministers would do 
far more for the profit of God’s people, if they would preach 
more about the first advent and less about the second. But | 
have chosen this topic because I believe it has practical bear- 
ings, and may be made useful, instructive, and rousing to us all. 

I find that the most earnest of the Puritanic preachers did 
- not forbear to dwell upon this mysterious subject. I turn to 
Charnock ; and in his disquisition upon the Immutability of God, 
he does not hesitate to speak of the conflagration of the world, 
of the millennial reign, and the new heavens and new earth. | 
turn to Richard Baxter, a man who greatly loved the souls of 
men; who more perhaps than any man, with the exception of 
the apostle Paul, travailed in birth for souls; and I find him mak 
ing a barbed arrow out of the doctrine of the coming of the 
Lord, and thrusting this great truth into the very heart and con- 
science of unbelievers, as though it were heaven’s own sword.. 
John Bunyan too—plain, honest John—he who preached so 
simply that a child could comprehend him, and was certainly 
never guilty of having written upon his forehead the word 
“ Mystery,” he, too, speaks of the advent of Christ, and of the 
glories which shall follow ; and uses this doctrine as a stimulus 
to the saints, and as a warning to the ungodly. I do not think 
therefore I need tremble very much if the charge should be 
brought against me of bringing before you an unprofitable, sub- 
ject. It shall profit if God shall bless the. word ; and if it be 
God’s word we may expect his blessing if we preach it all, but 
he will withdraw it if we refrain from teaching any part of his 
council because in our pretended wisdom we fancy that it would 
not have practical effect. 

Now, my dear friends, in introducing, again these texts te 


THE FIRST RESURRECTION. 868 


you, I shall remark that in the first text which relates to the 
people of God, we have three great privileges ; and in the sec. 
ond text, which relates to the ungodly who are not in covenant 
with Christ, we have three great and terrible facts which may 
soor. be perceived. 


I. We take the first text with its THREE PRivitzexs. “ Blessed 
and holy is he that hath part in the first resurrection: on such 
the second death hath no power, but they shall be priests of 
God and of Christ, and sha'l reign with him a thousand years.” 

Before I proceed to these privileges, I must remark that two 
modes of understanding this verse have been proposed, both of 
which I think are untenable. I have been reading carefally 
through Albert Barnes. He gives it, as his opinion, that the 
first resurrection here spoken of is a resurrection of principles, 
—a resurrection of the patience, the undaunted courage, the 
holy boldness and constancy of the ancient martyrs. He says 
these great principles have been forgotten, and, as it were, 
buried; and that during the spiritual reign of Christ which is to 
come, these great principles will have a resurrection. N ow, | 
appeal to you, would you, in reading that passage, think this to be 
the meaning? Would any man believe that to be its meaning, if 
he had not some thesis to defend? The fact is, we sometimes 
read Scripture, thinking of what it ought to say, rather than 
what it does say. I do not hesitate to affirm that any simple- 
minded person, who was intent upon discovering the mind ot 
the Spirit, and not upon finding a method by which the words 
could be compelled to express his own mind, would say that the 
resurrection of principles, or the resurrection of doctrines, does 
not give the fair meaning of the words here stated. Brethren, 
cannot you perceive at a glance that this is the resurrection of 
men? And is it not a literal resurrection, too? Does it not 
say, “I saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the wit 
ness of Jesus?” 1s it not written, “The rest of the dead lived 
not?” Does this mean the rest of the dead principles ? the rest 
of the dead doctrines? You cannot so translate it. It is—we 
have no doubt whatever—a literal resurrection of the safnts of 
God, and not of principles nor of doctrines. 


864 THE FIRST RESURRECTION. 


But another interpretation has been proposed. 1 once had 
the misfortune to listen to an excellent friend of mine who was 
preaching upon this very text, and I must confess, I did not at- 
tend with very great patience to his exposition. He said it 
meant, blessed and holy is he who has been born again, who 
has been regenerated, and so has had a resurrection from dead 
works by the resurrection of the Lord Jesus Christ. All the 
while he was preaching, I could not help wishing that I could 
propose to him the difficulty, how he would make this meta- 
phorical interpretation agree with the literal fact, that the rest of 
the dead lived not till the thousand years were finished? For, 
if the first resurrection here spoken of is a metaphorical, or spir- 
itual, or typical resurrection, why the next where it speaks of 
the resurrection of the dead must be spiritual, and mystical, 
and metaphorical too. Now, no one would agree to this. You 
know, when you read a chapter, you are not to say, “ This part 
is a symbol, and is to be read so, and the next part is to be read 
literally.” Brethren, the Holy Ghost does not jumble meta- 
phors and facts together. A typical book has plain indications 
that it is so intended, and when you come upon a literal passage 
in a typical chapter, it is always attached to a something else 
which is distinctly literal, so that you cannot, without violence 
to common sense, make a typical meaning out of it. The fact 
is, in reading this passage with an unbiassed judgment, having 
no purpose whatever to serve, having no theory to detead,—and 
I confess I have none, for I know but very little about mysteries 
to come,—lI could not help seeing there are two literal resurrec- 
tions here spoken of, one of the spirits of the just, and the other 
of the bodies of the wicked; one of the saints who sleep in 
Jesus, whom God shall bring with Aim, and another of those 
who live and die impenitent, who perish in their sins. 

But this by way of preface. There are three privileges in the text. 

1. Now the first privilege, the priority of resurrection. 1 
think Scripture is exceedingly plain and explicit upon this point. 
You have perhaps imagired that all men will rise at the same 
moment; that the trump of the archangel will break open every 
grave at the same instant, and sound in the ear of every sleeper 
at the identical moment. Such I do not think is the testimony 


THE FIRST RESURRECTION. 365 


of the Word of God. I think the Word of God teaches, indis- 
putably, that the sairts shall rise first. And be the interval of 
time whatever it may, whether the thousand years are literal 
years, or a very long period of time, I am not now about to deter- 
mine; I have nothing to do except with the fact that there are 
two resurrections, a resurrection of the just, and afterwards of 
the unjust,—a time when the saints of God shall rise, an after- 
time when the wicked shall rise to the resurrection of damnation. 
I shall now refer you to one or two passages in Scripture, and 
you will use your Bibles and followme. First, let us look at the 
words of the apostle in that chapter which we use generally as a 
burial service, the first epistle to the Corinthians, xv. 20 :—“ But 
now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the firstfruits of 
them that slept. For since by man came death, by man came also 
the resurrection of the dead. For as in Adam all die, even so 
in Christ shall all be made alive. But every man in his own 
order: Christ the firstfruits; afterward they that are Christ’s 
at his coming. Then cometh the end, when he shall have de- 
livered up the kingdom to God, even the Father; when he shall 
have put down all rule and all authority and power.” There 
has been an interval of two thousand years between “Christ the 
firstfruits” and the “ afterward they that are Christ’s at his com- 
ing.” Why not then a thousand years between that first resur- 
rection and “the end?” Here is aresurrection of those who are 
Christ’s, and of them only. As for the wicked, one would 
scarce know that they would rise at all from this passage, if it 
were not for the general statement, “ All shall be made alive,” 
and even this may not be so comprehensive as at first sight it 
seems. It is enough for me that there is here a particular and 
exclusive resurrection of those who are Christ’s. 

Turn to another passage, which is, perhaps, plainer still ; the 
first epistle to the Thessalonians, iv. 13:—“ But I would not 
have you to be ignorant, brethren, concerning them which are 
asleep, that ye sorrow not, even as others which have no hope. 
For if we believe that Jesus died and rose again, even so them 
also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him. For this we 
say unto you by the word of the Lord, that we which are alive 
and remain unto the coming of the Lord shall not prevent”—« 


866 THK FIRST RESURRECTION. 


have a preference beyond—“ them which are asleep. For the. 
Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the 
voice of the archangel, and with the trump of God: and the 
dead in Christ shall rise first: then we which are alive and re- 
main shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to 
meet the Lord in the air: and so shall we ever be with the 
Lord.” Here is nothing said whatever about the resurrection 
of the wicked; it is only stated that the dead in Christ shall rise 
first. Our apostle is evidently speaking of a first resurrection : 
and since we know that a first resurrection implies a second, and 
since we know that the wicked dead are to rise as well as the 
righteous dead, we draw the inference that the wicked dead shall 
rise at the second resurrection, after the interval between the 
two resurrections shall have been accomplished. 

Turn to Philippians iii., ats and 11, and compare the 
two. “Yea, doubtless, and I count all things but loss for the 
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord ; for whom 
I have suffered the loss of all things, and do count them but 
dung, that I may win Christ.” “That I may know him, and the 
power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, 
being made conformable unto his death; if by any means | 
might attain unto the resurrection of the dead.” What does he 
mean there? Every one will rise, no orthodox Christian doubts 
that. The doctrine of a general resurrection is received by all 
the Christian Church. What, then, is this resurrection after 
which Paul was exerting himself, if by any means he might 
attain unto it? It could not be the general resurrection; he 
would attain unto that, live as he list. It must have been some 
superior resurrection, of which only those shall be partakers who 
have known Christ and the power of his resurrection, having 
been made conformable unto his death. I think you cannot in- 
terpret this passage, or give it any force of meaning, without 
you admit that there is to be a prior resurrection of the just, 
before the resurrection of the unjust. 

If you will turn to a passage in Luke xx. 35, which probably 
is fresh upon your memories, you will find there something 
which I will venture to call a clear proof of a special resurrec- 
tion. The Sadducees had proposed a difficulty as to the rela 


THE FIRST RESURRECTION, 367 


tionship of mer and women in the future state, and Jesus here 
says, “ But they which shall be accounted worthy to obtain that 
world, and the resurrection from the dead, neither marry, nor 
are given in marriage: neither can they die any more: for they 
are equal unto the angels; and are the children of God, being 
the children of the resurrection.” Now, brethren, there .s some 
worthiness necessary for this resurrection. Do you not perce:ve 
it? There is some distinction involved in being called the chil 
dren of the resurrection. Now, again I say, you do not deub. 
but that all shall rise. In that sense, then, every man would be 
one of the children of the resurrection ; in that sense, no worthi 
ness would be required for resurrection at all. There must be, 
then, a resurrection for which worthiness is needed, a resurree 
tion which shall be a distinguished privilege, which, being ob 
tained, shall confer upon its possessor the distinguished and hon- 
orable title of a “child of the resurrection.” It seems to me 
that this is plain enough, and can be put beyond all dispute. 

In chapter xiv. of the same gospel, in verse 14, you have a 
promise made to those who, when they make a feast, do not de 
it with the intention of getting anything in return, “ Wher 
thou makest a feast, call the poor, the maimed, the lame, the 
blind: and thou shalt be blessed; for they cannot recompense 
thee: for thou shalt be recompensed at the resurrection of the 
just.” I would not insist upon it that this would prove that the 
just rose at a different time; but still there is to be a resurrec- 
tion of the just, and on the other hand, there is to be a resurrec- 
tion of the unjust; and the time of recompense for the righteous 
is to be the resurrection of the just, which is spoken of as being 
a particular period. He might just as well have said, “ Thou 
shalt be recompensed at the general resurrection.” There was 
no need to have said, “ At the resurrection of the just,” if the 
two are to happen at the same time. The words “of the just” 
are superfluous in the passage, unless they do refer to some era 
distinguished and distinct from the resurrection of the unjust. | 
will not say that this is any clear proof, but still, al] these put 
together, with other passages 1 might quote if time did nvt fail 
‘me, would, I think, establish upon a Scriptural basis the doctrine 
of the two resurrections. 


868 THE FIRST RESURRECTION, 


But I would refer to one more, which seerns to me to be ex 
eeedingly clear, in John vi, 39, 40, 44,54. In these verses the 
Saviour four times over speaks of his own believing people, and 
promises them a resurrection. “I will raise him up at the last 
day.” Now, is there any joy or beauty in this, to the people of 
God in particular, unless there be a speciality in it for them? 
It is the lot of all to rise, and yet we have here a privilege for 
the elect! Surely, brethren, there is a different resurrection. 
Besides, there is yet a passage which now springs to my mem- 
ory in the Hebrews, where the apostle, speaking of the trials of 
the godly, and their noble endurance, speaks of them as “not 
accepting deliverance that they might obtain a better resurrec- 
tion.” The betterness was not in the after results of resurrection, 
but in the resurrection itself. How, then, could it be a better 
resurrection, unless there be some distinction between the resur- 
rection of the saint and the resurrection of the sinner? Let the 
one be a resurrection of splendor ; let the other be a resurrection 
of gloom and horror, and let there be a marked division between 
the two, that as it was in the beginning, it may be even to the 
end, the Lord hath put a difference between him that feareth God 
and him that feareth him not 

I am well aware that I have not been able to put the argu- 
ment so well but that any antagonist may cavil at it; but I have 
been preaching to my own congregation rather than fighting 
with opponents, and I hope you will take these passages and 
weigh them for yourselves, and if they do not teach you that the 
dead in Christ shall rise first, do not believe me if I say they do. 
If you cannot perceive the fact yourself, if the Holy Spirit show 
it not unto you, why then read the passage again, and find if you 
can another and a better meaning. 1 have no purpose to serve 
except to make the Scripture as plain to you as possible; and I 
say it yet again, I have not the shadow of a doubt in my own 
mind that these passages do teach us that there shall first 
of all be a resurrection concerning which it shall be said, 
“Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the first resurrec- 
tion; on such the second death hath no power, but they shall 
be priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign with him a 
thousand years.” 


ag) 2 


WHE FIRST RESURRECTION. 869 


2. I now pass to the second privilege promised to the godly. 
The second death on them hath no power. This, too, is a literal 
death; none the less literal because its main terror is spiritual, 
for a spiritual death is as literal as a carnal death. The death 
which shall come upon the ungodly, without exception, can 
never touch the righteous. Oh, brethren, this is the best of 
all. As for the first resurrection, if Christ hath granted that to 
his people, there must be something glorious in it if we cannot 
perceive it. “It doth not yet appear what we shall be, but we 
know when he shall appear we shall be like him.” I think the 
glories of the first resurrection belong to the glories which shall 
be revealed im us rather than to the glories that are revealed to 
us. What shall be the majesty of that form in which we shall 
rise, what the distinguished happiness we shall then enjoy, we 
ean but guess at a distance, we cannot know it to the full. But 
on this point we can understand what Scripture states, and 
understand this much well, that damnation, the second death, 
shall have no power on those who rise at the first resurrection. 
How should it? How can damnation fall on any but those who 
are sinners and are guilty of sin? But the saints are not guilty 
of sin. They have sinned like others, and they were by nature 
the children of wrath even as others. But their sin has been 
lifted from them: it was laid upon the scapegoat’s head of old. 
He, the Eternal substitute, even our Lord Jesus, carried all 
their guilt and their iniquity into the wilderness of forgetfulness, 
where it shall never be found against them forever. They wear 
the Saviour’s righteousness, even as they have been washed in 
his blood; and what wrath can lie on the man who is not only 
guiltless through the blood, but is meritorious through imputed 
righteousness! Oh, arm of Justice, thou art nerveless to smits 
the blood-washed! Oh, ye flames of hell, how could even su 
much as the breath of your heat pass upon the man who is safe 

‘sovered in the Saviour’s wounds! How is it possible for you, 
© Deaths, Destructions, Horrors, Glooms, Plagues, and Terrors, 
so mnuch as to flit over the serene sky of the spirit which 
has found peace with God through the blood of Christ! No, 
brethren, 


16* 


870 THE FIRST RESURRECTION. 


* Bold shall I stand im that great day ; 
For who aught to my charge shall lay? 
While, through thy blood, absolved I am 
From ein’a tremendous curse and shame.” 


There shall be a second death; but over us it shall have no 
power. Do yu understand the beauty of the picture? As if 
we might walk through the flames of’ hell and they should have 
no power to devour us any more than when the holy children 
walked with ease over the hot coals of Nebuchadnezzar’s seven 
times heated furnace. Death may bend his bow and fit the ar- 
row to the string. But we laugh at thee, Q Death! and thee, 
O hell, we will despise! for over both of you, ye enemies of 
man, we shall be more than conquerors through him that hath 
loved us. We shall stand invulnerable and invincible, defying 
and laughing to scorn every foe. And all this because we are 
washed from sin and covered with a spotless righteousness. 

_ But there is another reason why the second death can have no 
power on the believer; because, when the prince of this world 
cometh against us, then we shall be able to say what our Master 
did, “ He hath nothing in me.” ‘When we shall rise again, we 
shall be freed from all corruption ; no evil tendencies shall remain 
in us. “I will cleanse their blood that 1 have not cleansed—for 
the Lord dwelleth in Zion.” ‘“ Without spot or wrinkle, or any 
such thing,” without even the shadow of a spot which the eye 
of Omniscience could discover, we shall be as pure as Adam be- 
fore his fall, as holy as the Immaculate manhood when it first 
came from the divine hand. We shall be better than Adam, 
for Adam might sin, but we shall be so established in goodness, 
in truth, and in righteousness, that we shall not even be tempted 
again, much less shall we have any fear of falling. We shall 
stand spotless and faultless at the last great day. Brethren, litt 
up you heads. Contending with sin, cast down with doubts, lift 
up your heads, and wipe the tears from your eyes. There are 
days coming, the like of which angels have not seen, but you 
shall see them. There are times coming when your spirits shall 
no more fear the chain, nor shall ye even remember the worm 
wood and the gall. And when they rise they shall leave the 
old Adam behind them. Blessed day! One of the most blessed 


{HE FIRST RESURRECTION. 871 


parts of heaven—of heaven above or of heaven bel »w—will be 
freedom from the tendency to sin, a total death to that old ns. 
ture which has been our plague and woe. . 

3. The third privilege of the text is,“ They shall reign wrth 
him a thousand years.” Here is another point upon which there 
has been a long and vigorous contention. It was believed in the 
early Church, (I do not know whether there is any Scriptural 
foundation for the precise date they fixed), that the seventh thou- 
sand years of the world’s history would be a Sabbath; that, as 
there were six days of toil in the week, and the seventh was aday 
of rest, so the world would have six thousand years of toil and 
sorrow, and the seventh thousand would be a thousand years of 
rest. I say I do not know that there is any Scripture for that ; 
I do know that there is none against it. I believe the Lord him- 
self shall come, “but of that day and of that hour knoweth no 
man, no, not even the angels of God.” And I think it is idle to 
attempt to fix the year or even the century, when Christ shall 
come. Our business is to expect him always, to be always 
looking for his appearing, watching for his coming; that wheth- 
er he come at cock-crow, or midnight, or at morning watch, we 
may be ready to go in with the wise virgins to the marriage 
feast, and rejoice with our beloved. If there have been any 
dates given, I am not able at present to find them out. All these 
dates and mysteries I can leave to much more learned men, and 
men who give their whole time to it. 

The book of Revelation needs another expounder besides those 
who have loaded our shelves until they groan, for they have gen- 
erally made confusion worse confounded. Their expositions have 
been rather “ an obvelation” than a revelation ; they have rather 
darkened counsel by words without knowledge, than made the 
dark things plain. I am prepared to go about as far as my pre- 
decessor, Dr. Gill went; as far as the old fathers of the Church 
went ; as far as Baxter and Bunyan would have gone, but to go 20 
further than that. Yet I think we may say this norning, there -s 
in the text a distinct promise that the saints are to ~eign with 
Christ a thousand years; and I believe they are to reign with 
him upon this earth, There are some passages which I think qb- 
tain a singular fulress of meauing if this be true. Turn to 


372 THE FIRST RESURRECTION. 


Psalm xxxvii. 10,11. It is that Psalm where David has been — 


fretting himself, because of the evil doers, and their prosperity 
upon the earth. He says, “ For yet a little while, and the wick- 
ed shall not be: yea, thou shalt diligently consider his place, 
and it shall not be. But the meek shall inherit the earth; and 
shall delight themselves in the abundance of peace.” You can 
interpret that to mean that the meek man shall enjoy much 
more of this world’s goods than the sinner, and that he shal! 
have abundance of peace. But I think you have given it a lean 
meaning, 8 very lean meaning, indeed. If it be true that these 
reek ones shall yet possess this very earth, and that here, in the 
abundance of peace through the Messiah’s reign, they shall rejoice 
in it, | think you have found a fuller meaning, and one which is 
more like God’s promises. 

So it is that God’s promises always have 8 wider meaning than 
we can conceive; now, in this case, if it only mean that the meek 
are to have what they gain in this life, which is very little in- 
deed, if they are only to have what they enjoy here upon earth, 
which is so little, that I think if in this life only they have hope, 
they are of men the most miserable—if it only mean that, then 
the promise means less than we might conceive it to mean. 
But if it mean that they shall have glory even here, then you 
have given to it one of the widest meanings you can conceive, a 
meaning like the promises of God—wide, extensive, and worthy 
of himself. Brethren, the meek do not inherit the earth to any 
great degree at present, and we look for this in another age. 
Let me quote the language of Christ, lest you should think this 
passage peculiar to the Old Testament dispensation, “Blessed 
are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth.’ How? where? 
when? Not now certainly, not in Christ’s days, not in apostolic 
times, by any means. What did the meek inherit, brethren ? 
faggot, flames, racks, pincers, dungeons. Their inheritance, in- 
deed, was nothing. They were destitute, afflicted, tormented ; 
they wandered about in sheepskins and goatskins; and if the 
meek are ever to inherit the earth, certainly it must be in some 
age to come, for they have never inherited it yet. 

Turn again to a passage in Revelation, v. 9,10: “ And they 
sung anew song.” Itis the very song we sang this morning, and it 


Traiger, 


* 


THE FIRST RESURRECTION. 373 


runs thus: “Thou art worthy to take the book, sad o open the 
seals thereof: for thou wast slain, and hast redvemed us to God 
by thy blood out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and 
nation ; and hast made us unto our God kings and priests: and 
we shall reign on the earth.” Whether say one disputes the 
genuineness of these words, I do not know; but if they mear 
anything at all, if the Holy Spirit meant to set forth any mean- 
ing, surely it must have been that the people of Christ shall 
reign upon the earth. Besides, remember our Saviour’s words 
in Matthew, xix. 28, where, in answer to a question which had 
been put by Peter, as to what his caimts should have as the re 
sult of their losses for his sake, he said unto them, “ Verily I say 
unto you, that ye which have folluwed me in the regeneration, 
when the son of man shall sit in tne throne of his glory, ye also 
shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel. 
And every one that hath forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, 
or father, or mother, or wife, ur children, or lands, for my name’s 
sake, shall receive an hundred fcld, and shall inherit everlasting 
life.” It seems that Christ here is to come in the regeneration, 
when in s new-born world there shall be joys fitted for the new- 
born spirits; and then there shall be splendors and glories for 
the apostles first, and for all those who by any means have suf- 
fered any losses for Christ Jesus. 

You find such passages as these in the, Word of God: “ The 
Lord of Hosts shall reign in Mount Zion, and in Jerusalem, and 
before his ancients gloriously.” You find another like this in 
Zachariah, “ My God shall come with the multitude of his saints.” 
Indeed, I could not now take up your time by quoting many pas- 
sages in which it seems to me that nothing but the triumph cn 
the very spot where they have fought the battle, nothing but the 
glory in the very place where they have had the tug of war, will 
meet the meaning of God’s Word. 1! do look forward to this 
with joy, that though I may sleep in Christ before my Master 
come, and I know not whether that shall be or no, yet T shall 
rise at the day of his appearing, and shall be recompensed at the 
resurrection of the just, if I have truly and faithfully served 
him; and that recompense shall be, to be made like unto him, 
and to partake of his glories before the eyes of men, and to reign 


874 THE FIRST RESURRECTION. 


with him during the thousand years. Dr. Watts, I believe, am — 
derstood that Christ is to come literally, for he says, 


“Nor doth it yet appear 
How great we must be made; 
But when we see our Saviour here, 
We shall be like our Head.” 


But, to make one other observation. This doctrine which | 
have preached just now is not an unpractical one. For through- 
out the New Testament, whenever the apostle wants to stir up 
men to patience, to labor, to hope, to endurance, to holiness, he 
generally says something about the advent of Christ. “Be pa- 
tient, brethren,” says he, “for the coming of the Lord draweth 
nigh.” ‘Let your moderation be known unto all men, the Lord 
is at hand.” “Judge nothing before the time, till the Lord come.” 
“ When the great Shepherd shall appear, ye also shall appear with 
him in glory.” Brethren, [ think we shall do wrong if we make 
too much of this; but we shall do equally wrong if we make 
too little of it. Let us give it a fair place in our thoughts, and 
especially let those of us who fear God and believe in Jesus, 
take this to be a window through which we can look, when the 
house is dark and our home is full of misery ; let us look to the 
time when we shall rise among the first, following Christ the 
first fruits, when we shall reign with Christ, sharing in his giories, 
and when we shall know that the second death over us hath no 


power. 


Il. I shall now turn to the second part of the discourse briefly. 
To the ungodly, THREE THINGS IN SIMPLICITY. 

Sinner, you have heard us speak of the resurrection of the 
righteous. To you the word “resurrection” has no music. 
There is no flash of joy in your spirit when you hear that the 
dead shall rise again. But oh, I pray thee lend me thine ear 
while I assure thee in God’s name that thou shalt rise. Not only 
shall your soul live—you have perhaps becomeso brutish that you 
forget you have a soul—but your body itself shall live. Those 
eyes that have been full of lust shall see sights of horror ; those 
ears which have listened to the temptations of the evil one, 


THE FIRST RESURRECTION. 37h 


shall near the thunders of the day of judgment; those very 
feet that bare you to the theatre, shall attempt, but utterly fail 
to sustain you when Christ shall sit in judgment. Think not 
when your body is put into the soil that you have done with it. 
It has been partner with your soul in sin; it shall be share 
with your soul in the punishment. He is able to cast botk 
body and soul into hell. The heathens believed in the immor 
tality of the soul. We need not therefore prove what a heathen 
sould conceive. It is the doctrine of the resurrection of the 
body which is peculiar to Christianity. You are not prepared 
to cast away the revelation of God I know. You receive that 
book as being God’s book, and it tells me that all the dead, 
both small and great, shall rise. When the archangel’s trump 
shall sound, the old inhabitants of the world before the flood 
shall rise out of the ocean. The buried palaces, the sunken 
homes, shall all give up the multitude who once married and 
were given in marriage, until Noah entered into the ark. Up 
shall rise from the great deeps of the fathomless sea, thousands 
upon thousands of men who have slept now these three and four 
thousand years. Every churchyard, too, where men have been 
quietly buried with Christian rites, but yet were unchristian 
still, shall yield up its dead. 

The battle-field shall yield a mighty harvest, a harvest which 
was sown in blood, and which shall be reaped in tempest. 
Every place where man has lived and man has died shall see 
the dying quickened once again, and flesh and blood once more 
instinct with life. But the main thing with you is that you will 
be there. Living and dying as you now are, ungodly and un- 
converted, the most awful curse that could fall on you, with the 
exception of the damnation of your soul, is the sure and certain 
resurrection of your body. Go, now, and paint it if you will, 
and seek a beauty which the worm shall loathe. Go and pamper 
your body; drink the sweet and eat the fat. Go and luxuriate 
and indulge in ease. Oh, sir, you may well pamper your bod- 
ies, for there is short enough time for your body to have mirth; 
and when that short time is over thou shalt drink another wine 
—the dregs of the cup of God’s wrath, which the wicked shall 
drain to the last drop. Satisfy thine ears with music now; thou 


376 THE FIRST RESURRECTION. 


shalt soon hear nothing but the howling of the damned! Go 
thou thy way, eat, drink, and be merry; but for all these the 
Lord shall bring thee into judgment—sevenfold for all thy sin- 
ful pleasures, yea seventy times seven, for all thy joys of /ust, 
and wickedness and crime, shall the Lord be avenged on thee, 
in the great and terrible day of his wrath. Sinner, think thou 
of this, and when thou sinnest think of the resurrection. 

But after the resurrection, according to the text, comes che 
judgment. You have cursed God. The oath died away. No, 
sir, it did not; it imprinted itself upon the great book of God’s 
remembrance. You have entered the chamber of wantonness, 
or the hall of infidelity ; you have walked through the stews of 
crime, and through the stench and filth of the brothel; you have 
wandered into sin and plunged into it, thinking it would all die 
with the day. Notso. The booksshall be opened. I think I 
see you with your biancning cheeks, closing your eyes because 
you dare not look upon the Judge when he opens that page 
where stands your history. I hear yon sinner, boldest among 
you all. He is erying, “Ye rocks fall on me.” There they 
stand, sublime and dread, those granite rocks; he would rather 
be crushed than stand there before the avenging eye; but the 
mountains will not loosen, their flinty bowels feel no pangs of 
sympathy, they will not move. You stand while the fiery eye 
looks you through and through, and the dread voice reads on, 
and on, and on, your every act, and word, and thought. I see 
you as the shameful crime is read, and men and angels hear. | 
see your horror as a nameless deed is told, in terms explicit, 
which none can misunderstand. 1 hear your thoughts brought 
out—-that lust, that murder which was in the thought, but never 
grew into the deed. And you are all this while astonished like 
Belshazzar, when he saw the writing on the wall and his loins 
were loose, and he was terribly afraid. So shall it be with 
you; and yet again, and again, and again, shall you send up 
that awful shriek, ‘Hide us! hide us from the face of him that 
sitteth upon the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb !” 

But then cometh the end. After death the judgment; after 
judgment the damnation. If it be a dreadful thing to live again, 
if it be a more dreadful thing still to spend the first day of that 


\ 


THE FIRST RESURRECTION. BY by] 


life in the grand assize of God, how much more awful shal. it be 
when the sentence is pronounced, and the terror of punishment 
shall begin! We believe that the souls of the wicked are al- 
ready tormented, but this judgment will cast both body and soul 
into the lake of fire. Men and women, ye who fear not God, 
and have no faith in Jesus, I cannot picture to you damnation. 
Across it let. me draw a curtain. But though we must not pic- 
ture it, I pray you realize it. When Martin has painted 
some of his sublime pictures, he has generally heightened the 
effect by masses of darkness. Surely, this is the way in which 
_ God has painted hell, rather by masses of darkness than by de- 
finiteness of light. This much we know, that hell is a place of 
absence from God—a place for tne developement of sin, where 
every passion is unbridled, every lust unrestrained—a place 
where God punishes night and day those who sin night and day 
—a place where there is never sicep, or rest, or hope—a place 
where a drop of water is denied, though thirst shall burn the 
tongue—a place where pleasure never breathed, where light 
never dawned, where anything like consolation was never heard - 
of—a place where the gospel is denied, where mercy droops her 
wings and dies—a place where vengeance reigns, shakes his 
chains, and brandishes his sword—a place of fury and of burning, 
a place the like of which imagination hath not pictured. May 
God grant it may be a place which you shall never see, and 
whose dread you shall never feel. Sinner, instead of preaching it 
thee, let me bid thee fly from it. Die, sinner, and flight from 
hell becomes impossible; thou art lost, then, eternally. Oh, 
while yet thou art on praying ground, I pray thee, think on thy 
end. Think! think! this warning may be the last you shall 
ever hear. You may never be spared to come to a place of 
worship again. Perhaps, while you sit here, the last sands are 
dropping from the hour glass ; and then, no more warning can be 
given, because redemption and escape shall be impossible to you. 

Soul, I lift up before thee, Christ the crucified one—“ Who- 
soever believeth on him shall never perish, but hath eternal life.” 
As Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, so this morn- 
ing the Son of Man is lifted up. Sinner, see his wounds. Look 
to his thorn-crowned head. See the nails of his hands and of his 


CA VERNE COLLEGE LIBRARY 
378 Loh nV REY Fender Al EQN 1A 


feet. Do you perceive him? Hark! while he cries, “ Why 
hast thou forsaken me?’ Listen again, while he says, “It is” 
finished! It is finished!” Salvation finished! And now, sal- 
vation is freely preached to thee. Believe on Christ and thou 
shalt be saved. Trust him, and all the horrors of the future 
shall have no power over you; but the splendors of this 
prophecy shall be fulfilled, be they what they may. Oh that this 
morning some of you may trust my Master for the first time in 
your lives; and this ione, you need not curiously enquire what 
the future shall be, but you may sit down calmly and say, 
“ Come when it will; my soul is on the rock of ages; it fears 
no ill; it fears no tempest; it defies all pain. Come quickly! 
tome quickly ! even go, come quickly, Lord Jesus.” Arsen. 


\ 








a 


~ 
zm 


Seeenien 





— 
abil 4 
_ 

a Se 


ie 


se 


aA 
¥ 


5 


4 
te 
ER 

c a 
sy. 


a4 


Fm 
~~ 


} 
m 
~ 


_ 
— Te 
x 


® 





BX 
63233 
st 


Sd 
L8qa 

).7 THEOLOGY LIBRARY 
OF THEOLOGY AT CLAREMONT 


SCHOOL 
MONT; CALIFORNIA 


CLARE 


mae! | 


